ഹ 
at 
- 
17 : 1 
t 
t 
' 3 
, 
. 
' 
ക് 
- 
. 
A 
. 
. . 
5 
. 
. 
' . 
1 
hr 
- kഷ് : : . . C . ಆಗಲ-ಭಾರತೀಯ ಮಹಾಕೋಣ ಅಥ 
= 
4. 
, is 
പ 
3 
: പി 
5: 
' ' 
- 
a 
ఆంగల భారతీయ మహాకోష ആ0ഗല-ഭാരതീയ) 
മഹാകോഷ 
ംാം-ഗാർക്കയ 
ම හා ଏଙ୍ଗଲ-ଭାରତୀୟ ମହାକୋଷ ਆਂਗਲ-ਭਾਰਤੀਯ ਮਹਾਕੇਸ਼ 
- 
: 
'', 
: 
सरस्वती-विहार-ग्रन्थाः 
--पञ्चनद-उत्तरप्रदेश-नेपाल-कामरूप-बंगोत्कल-गुर्जर-महाराष्ट्र-मध्यप्रदेश-कर्णाटक-लिंग-द्रमिल-केरल 
सिंहल-प्रभृतिदेशानां भाषासूपयुज्यमानं निखिल-विज्ञानानां परिपूर्ण शब्दभाण्डागारम् 
आचार्य रघुवीरोपज्ञातः 
संग्रहीत आङ्गल-भारतीयो महाकोषः 
विज्ञान-शासनादि-शब्दनिधिः 
विक्रमाबदा: २००६ 
प्रकाशयिता--नागपुरस्थः सरस्वती-विहारः 
Under the patronage of the Governments of Madhya Pradesh, Bombay and 
Jammu and Kashmir 
For use in the various Aryan and Dravidian languages of India and Ceylon 
THE CONSOLIDATED 
GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
OF 
TECHNICAL TERMS 
PERTAINING TO 
accounts and administration, anatomy, bacteriology, banking, biochemistry, botany, chemistry, civics, commerce and finance, constitution, dyes and colours, economics, education, engineer ing, insurance, law, mathematics, medicine, mineralogy, news papers, optics, parasitology, pharmacy, physics, physiology, 
politics, radio, railway, statistics, zoology, etc., etc. 
BY Prof. Dr. RAGHU VIRA, M.A., Ph.D., D.Litt. et Phil. 
with the collaboration of numerous scientists and scholars 
PUBLISHED BY 
THE SECRETARY The International Academy of Indian Culture 
NAGPUR 
Sarasvati Vihara Series 
EDITED BY 
RAGHU VIRA, M.A., Ph.D., D.Litt. et Phil., M.P. DIRECTOR, INTERNATIONAL ACADEMY OF INDIAN CULTURE, NAGPUR 
IN COLLABORATION WITH OTHER SCHOLARS 
VOLUME 19 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
BEING 
A Consolidated Volume 
OF 
Basic Terms 
of SCIENCE, COMMERCE AND ADMINISTRATION 
January, 1950 
PRINTED BY KRISHNA PRASAD DAR AT THE ALLAHABAD LAW JOURNAL PRESS 
ALLAHABAD 
THE CONSOLIDATED GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
By Prof. Dr. RAGHU VIRA, M.A., Ph.D. (London), D.Litt. et Phil. (Utrecht) 
WITH THE COLLABORATION OF R. Gopala Aiyar, M.A., M.Sc., Waltair. (Zoology) B. S. Guha, M.A., Ph.D. (Harvard), A.M., F.N.In Indra Deva Arya, M.Sc., LL.B., Nagpur. 
F.R.A.S.B., Calcutta. (-Anttiropology) (Chemistry) 
P. C. Guha, D.Sc., F.N.I., Bangalore. (Organic B. L. Atreya, M.A., D.Litt., Banaras. (Philosophy Chemistry) 
and Psychology) 
Hon'ble G. S. Gupta, Speaker, Legislative B. S. Audholia, B.Com., M.A., Jubbulpore. Asscmbly, Nagpur. (La and Administration) 
(Commerce and Economics) 
S. L. Hora, D.Sc. (Punjab et Edin.), F.L.S., F.Z.S., P. R. Awati, B.A. (Cantab.), D.I.C., R.N.I., I.E.S., F.R.S.E., F.N.I., F.R.A.S.B., Calcutta. (Fisbo 
Poona. (Zoology) 
cries) K. N. Bahl, D.Sc., D.Phil., D.Sc. (Oxon.), S. S. Joshi, M.Sc., D.Sc. (Lond.), Banaras. 
F.R.A.S.B., F.N.I., Lucknow. (Zoology) " (Chemistry) P. L. Baldua, B.Com., M.A., Wardha. (Commerce) Om Prakash Kahol, M.Sc. (Hons.), Hoshiatpur. A. C. Banerji, M.A. (Cantab.), M.Sc., F.R.A.S. 
(Physics) (Lond.), F.N.III.E.S., Allahabad. (Mathematics) D. D. Karve, M.Sc., Ph.D., A.I.I.Sc., Pooda S. K. Banerji, O.B.E., D.Sc., F.N.I., New Delhi. 
(Chemistry) (Meteorology, Geophysics) 
Irawati Karve, M.A., Ph.D., Poona. (Sociology) B. Bhattacharya, M.A., Ph.D., Baroda. (Sanserin S. M. Katre, M.A., Ph.D. (Lond.), Poona. (Sanskrit, 
Linguistics and Phonetics) Braj Mohan, M.A., Ph.D., Banaras. (Mathematics) N. N. Chatterjee, M.Sc., Calcutta. (Geology) 
A. N. Khosla, I.S.E., New Delhi. (Irrigation) S. P. Chatterjee, T.D., PL.D., Docteur de l'Univer 
M. S. Krishna, M.A., Ph.D., A.R.C.S., D.I.C., 
F.N.I., Madras. (Geology) sitc (Paris), F.G.S., Calcutta. (Geography) S. K. Chatterji, M.A., D.Litt., F.R.A.S.B., Calcutta. 
C. Kunhan Raja, M.A., D.Phil. (Oxon.), Persia. " 
(Sanskrit) (Linguistics and Phonetics) 
K. B. Lal, M.Sc., Ph.D. (Edin.), F.R.S.E., Cawa B. N. Chopra, D.Sc., F.N.J., Banaras. (200logy) 
pore. (Entomology) G. S. Chowdhary, M.B.B.S., F.R.C.S., Pratapgarh. Julius de Lanerolle, Colombo. (Singhalese) 
(Ophthalmology) V. M, Dabadghaon, M.Sc., Amraoti. (Plysier) 
V. N. Likhite, D.Sc., Baroda. (Agricultura) S. Datta, D.Sc. (Lond.), F.N.I., Rajshahi. (Pbysics 
S. D. Limaye, Ph.D., Poona, (Chemistry) and Optics) 
Lokesh Chandra, D.Litt. (Utrecht), Nagpur. K. N. Dave, Nagpur. (Ornitbology) 
(Sanskrit) M. L. Dewan, M.Sc.(Hons.), Ph.D.(Cornell), Delhi, De 
thi D. G. Londhe, M.A., Ph.D. (Leipzig), Nagpur. (Chemistry, Soil Science) 
(Login) V. R. Dnyangagar, M.Sc., Nagpur. (Botany) C. Mahadevan, M.A., D.Sc., F.A.Sc., Guntur. N. L. Dutt, M.Sc., Coimbatore. (Agriculture) 
(Geology) P. N. Ghosh, M.A., Ph.D., Sc.D., F. Inst, P. 
D. N. Majumdar, M.A., Ph.D. (Cantab.), F.N.I., (Lond.), F.N.I., Calcutta. (Applied Physics) 
F.R.A.L., Lucknow. (Anthropology) G. S. Ghurye, M.A., Ph.D. (Cantab.), Bombay. Go 
G. P. Majumdat, M.Sc., Ph.D. (Leeds), F.N.I. (Sociology) 
Calcutta. (Botany) Ram Gopal, M.A., New Delhi. (Statistics) Kamalakar Manobat, M.D., Ph.D., Baroda. (Basm B. C. Guha, Ph.D., D.Sc. (Lond.), Calcutta. 
teriology) (Applied Chemistry) 
M. V. Mirashi, M.Sc., Nagpur. (Botany) 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
A. B. Misra, D.Sc., D.Phil. (Oxon.), F.Z.S., H. L. Roy, A.B. (Harvard), Dr. Ing. (Berlin), 
F.R.S.E., Banaras. (Zoology) 
M.1.Ch.E., 24-Parganas, Bengal. (Chemical E1 M. L. Misra, Banaras. (Ceramics) 
gineering) Kalidas Mitra. MBE. M.B. D.PH.D.T.M. & M.R. Sahni, M.A. (Cantab.), Ph.D., D.Sc. (Lond.). 
H. (Eng.), F.S.S. (Lond.), New Delhi. (Nutri 
D.T.C., F.A.Sc., Calcutta. (Geology) tion and Public Health) 
C. R. Sankaran, M.A., Ph.D., Poona. (Linguistics H. K. Mookerjee, M.Sc., D.I.C., D.Sc. (Lond.). 
and Phonetics) Calcutta. (Zoology) 
P. Sen, M.Sc., Ph.D., D.I.C., Calcutta. (Lintomology) B. Mukerji, M.D., D.Sc., F.A.Ph.S., Calcutta. N. L. Sharma, M.Sc. (P.H.U. and Livipi), 
(Physiology and Pharmacology) 
F.G.M.S., A.M.G.I., Dhanbad. (Alinealogy) D. Mukerji, M.Sc., Calcutta. (Zoology) 
S. N. Shastri, M.Sc. (Lond.), Jubbulpore. (Aiathe V. V. Narlikar, B.Sc., B.A. (Cantab.), F.R.A.S., matics) 
T.N.I., Banaras. (Mathematics) 
R. C. Shenoy, B.A., B.E., Simla. (Irrigation) Raj Nath, M.Sc., D.I.C., Ph.D. (Lond.), F.N.I., A. P. Shrivastava, M.Sc., Nagpur. (Alathematics) 
Banatas. (Geology) 
V. B. Shukla, M.Sc., Ph.D., Nagpur. (Botany) G. R. Paranjpe, M.Sc., A.I.J.SC., I.E.S., F.N.I., 
sCo, Lobow F.Natoy B. N. Singh, D.SC., F.N.I., 1*.N.A.Sc., T.A.Sc., I.P., Poona. (Physics) 
Allahabad. (Agriculture and Plant Physiology) P. Parija, M.A. (Cantab.), F.N.I., I.E.S., Cuttack. Thakur Surajbhan Singh, M.Sc., Nagpur. 
(Botany) 
(Zoology) Baini Prashad, O.B.E., D.Sc., F.R.S.E., F.L.S., 
Maharaj Kumar Raghubir Sinh, M.A., D.Litt., F.Z..S., F.R.A.S.B., F.N.I., New Delhi. (Zoology) 
LL.B.. Sitamau. (1 listory, Politics and lucidy H. S. Pruthi, M.Sc., Ph.D. (Cantab.), Sc.D., 
F.R.A.S.B., F.N.I., New Delhi. (Entomology) 
* G. P. Shrivastara, M.Pharm., Banaras. (Pharmacy) K. Ramiah, M.B.E., M.Sc., Din, Agri. (Cantab.), V. N. Thatte, D.Sc., Nagpur. (Physics) 
L.Ag., Cuttack. (Agriculture and Genetics) A.C. Ukil, M.B., M.S.P.E. (Paris), F.S.M.F.KN.I., Shri Ranjan, M.Sc. (Cantab.), Doctcut-cs- Calcutti. (Tuberculosis and Chest Disrases) 
Sciences, F.A.Sc., Allahabad. (Botany) 
R. Vaidyanathaswamy, M.A., Ph.D., D.Sc., B. R. Rao, M.A., D.I.C., F.G.S., F.N.I., Bangalore, Madrās. (Mathematics) 
(Geology) 
P. S. Varma, M.Sc., Hanaras. (Chemistry) L. R. Rao, M.A., F.G.S.,A.Sc.,F.N.I., Bangalore. 
(Geology) 
S. Varma, M.A., D.Litt. (Leel.), Nagpur. (Sams. 
krit, Linguistics and Phonetics) M.D. Ratnasuriya, M.A.,Ph.D. (Lond.), Colombo. 
(Singhalese) 
N.C. Verma, M.Sc., Nagpur. (lintony) H. N. Ray, M.Sc., Ph.D. (Lond.), Kumaun. D. N. Wadia, M.A., B.Sc., 1.6.S., F.R.G.S., 
(Protozoology) 
F.R.A.S.B., F.N.I., New Delhi. (Alineralngy) 
MANAGING EDITOR Dr. LOKESH CHANDRA, D.Litt.﻿* 
دی 
* 
. 
* 
* 
. 
استفاده 
اور 
* 
التنمية 
و تمدن 
علاج 
- 
محمود 
"ه ما" 
* 
* 
دید 
هههه 
که ای 
** 
: 
بواریم 
. 
؟ 
وسيضمن 
می بینیم به به 
,شهد همدمنی جه هم نه ئه مه وه 
: 
: بابا ، ** 
تیره و سنت 
: 
و در 
NAGARJUNA Nagarjuna is our first lenown alchemist whose work has survived to the present day. He belongs to the same age which produced the famous nonrusting iron pillar of Delhi bearing the inscription of an unidentified king Chandra (the carbon content of iron is o.5 per cent). In his work Nagarjuna covers the whole gamut of ancient alchemic processes. He describes different types of crucibles and stills, cupellation, suhlimalion, colouring and alloying of metals, extraction of copper from pyrites.ga 1150 of metal oxides as medicines, etc., etc. 
Tbe curliest datable account of Nagarjuna is given by Kumarajiva in 405 A.D. Strange is it may seem, it is preserved in China and not in India. According to him, Nagarjuna was born under the Irjuna tree, whence the second part of his name. His instructions he obtained from the Nagas. llence the name Nagarjuna. Literally naga means a serpent. In the accompanying portrait one can see the heads of no less than five serpents emerging from behind the balo which forms the buckwround of the head. 
In Chinese he is known as Lung-Shu or Lung-Meng. The Chinese traveller I-Tsing places Nagurjunu in the first century 1.1). as the contemporary of king Kanishka, both of whom are said to have oppmerud four indres jours after the Nirruna of Buddha. Other Chinese sources of informa tion arc Cimabludru, Bodhiruchi and Shikshananda. 
Long accounts af Nagarjuna aro avilable in Tibetan literature. There he is shrouded in Krund and mystery. .ls a sorcerer he is glorified in Grub-thob brgyal-cu-rtsa-bshihi rnam-thar and dpag-vsum-Cion-bain of Sum-fu mkbun-po_ge-cus dpal-hlıyor. According to these he was born in the land of I 'idurhbu (modern Berar) as the son of a wealthy Brahmin who had remained childless for wwny, rouri. Itsin curly age, at the suggestion of the High Priest Shri Saraha Bhadra of the Univer sity of Nolondra in Mugdhu, he entered the Buddhist order and specialised in all the sciences of his they. w1f1rr the death of Saraha Bhadra be became the President of the University. Under him the University flourished to such an extent that it obscured the splendour of Vajrasana, namely Buddha. Ciaya. Several kings cume under his influence, b.fking Munja of Orissa and king Bhoja of Malava. 
The Tibetan tradition has preserved the name of his teacher, Rahula, while Hiuen-Tsiang mentions one of his pupils, Aryadeva, Nagarjuna's greut fame in Buddhist literature rests on his being one of the founders of Mahurana sistem of thought, which spread soon after him into Tibet, Chinu, Mongolia, Korea and Japan. 
Nagurjima is the discoverer of several eye medicines and of the elixir of life which strengthens the weakening forces of men in old age and prolongs life and happiness. He rescued starving humanity .from famines hy exchunging gold for grain in far off lands. The Tibetan historian Taranatha re cords that Nagarjuna had strong dykes built to save Buddha Gaya from inundations. " 
Nagarjuna is also the discoverer of several gold mines in South India. 
The portrait on the opposite page is from a Tibetan original in Tashi Lumpo Monastery. The work of reproduction in colour was undertaken by the Tibetan artist Dge-hdun-chos-phel and Phanindra Mookerjea for the late Shri R. S. Pandit. The copper plates were very kindly lent to me by Shrimati Vijaya Lakshmi Pandit. The portrait represents peace and plenty, power and serenity as the rewards of knowledge of the world in its material and spiritual aspects. Here is the maxim of Nagarjuma: 
"As long as the science of chemistry prerails, let hunger, pain and poverty not torment men." 
vii 
"The difficulties of language are not negligible. One's native speech is a closely fitting garment, and one never feels quite at ease when it is not immediately available and has to be replaced by another." 
ERWIN SCHROEDINGER Noble Prize Winner for Physics in 1933 
Our terms are from Sanskrit, the source-language of India. 
They are useable in Bengali, Gujarati, Hindi, Kannada, Malayalam, Marathi, Nepali, Oriya, Panjabi, Singhalese, Tamil, Telugu and allied languages. 
Most of them are solely of a technical character and will be common to all the languages of India. 
For popular and non-technical purposes every Indian language will naturally use the words current therein. 
INTRODUCTION* 
· * Four volumes of the Great English-Indian Dictionary had been published from 
our previous headquarters at Lahore, 1943-1946. The Indian words, therein, appeared in Devanagari, Bengali, Tamil and Kannada scripts. The introductions to volumes I and III, being of fundamental importance, are reproduced here with some alterations. There however, remains much more material which will be incorporated in a subse quent volume. 
सर्वं वा इदं नाम च रूपं च ॥ 
देवो रूपाणि चक्रे वयं नामानि कृण्मसि ।। The Dictionary is designed to contain Indian equivalents for every word of the English language, literary, technical and semi-technical, covering about six hundred special branches of knowledge. To name only a few: accounts, aeronautics, agriculture, animal husbandry, anatomy, angling, anthropology, architecture, art, astronomy, astrophysics, athletics and sports, aviation, bacteriology, banking, bio-chemistry, biology, botany, brewing, cartography, ceramics, chemistry, chess, commerce and finance, craniometry, dancing, dentistry, dramaturgy, economics, education, engineer ing, forestry, gambling, gems and jewelry, geography, geology, history, horology, horticulture, hunting and field sports, insurance, law, logic, ma chinery and tools, mathematics, medicine, metallurgy, meteorology, mining and ore-dressing, music, nautical and naval terms, newspapers, numismatics optics, painting, paleontology, paper-making, petrography, petrology, phar macy, philately, philology and linguistics, philosophy, photography and motion pictures, physics, physiology, politics, printing and engraving, psychology and psychiatry, radio, railways, sculpture, shipbuilding, socio logy, surgery, textiles, transportation (air, land and marine), veterinary science, warfare, zoology, 
The English Oxford Dictionary in thirteen volumes and Webster's New International Dictionary of the English Language in two volumes serve as the main sources for English vocabulary. For every special branch of knowledge their vocabulary is supplemented by drawing upon technical dictionaries. 
The Indian words are derived from Sanskrit roots and stems. The 
n the diverse literary languages of India and Ceylon, whether Aryan or Dravidian-Panjabi, Hindi, Nepali, Bengali, Oriya, Gujarati, Marathi, Telugu, Tamil, Kannada, Malayalam, Singhalese and allied languages. 
Since times immemorial, Sanskrit has been the fountain-head from which all languages of India have drawn their learned and technical voca 
XV﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
bulary, from elementary grammar and arithmetic up to logic and meta physics, embracing the entire sphere of human thought and activity, such as aesthetics, rhetorics, drama, dance, music, architecture, painting, sculp ture, history, political science, administration, law, astrology, astronomy, medicine, magic, ritual, atheism, archery and warfare. 
India has a long and rich past. She has contributed a good deal to the world's sum total of knowledge. Her contribution has not been duly recognised. It is not even fully known. Much of it has to be discovered. 
Our ancestors had made notable advances in several sciences, such as, alchemy, pharmacy, mathematics and metallurgy. We can be still proud of them. We would like to narrate them here, but their variety and vo 
ne forbid our doing so. There is much that has never been brought to light before. It is intended to publish a separate volume incorporating our researches in this direction. 
While studying English terminology we have found hundreds of Sanskrit words in Western guise. Anil (aniline) is our ft. So is lilac. Corundum is Fafars. Lemon and orange are fara and F. Kermes and crimson are from f. Camphor, pepper and costus are respectively कर्पूर, पिप्पली and कुष्ठ. Sapphire, opal and emerald are शनिप्रिय, उपल and 
72 (Prakrit UE, whence Greek smaragdos, maragdos). Talc (Mid Latin talcum) is from 1. 6 or vi has given to the English language agalloch (Greek agallochon), agalwood, agilawood, aguilawood, eaglewood (the last is an interesting case of anglicisation). Turpeth and turbith are both faqat (through Persian tirbid). Carbasus is $14, which is better preserved in Greek karpasos. Sulphur is Trafi (copper +af enemy). It is the articles, and not just names, which India gave as gifts to the rest of the world. Their number is legion, and their his tory has yet to be written. 
Let us take some more words, which are interesting because they are so common in scientific terminology and because they are so apparently our own. Para qat, epi of, ortho ja, hypo (here and in the following words y is originally u) 34, semi (hemi) Fif#, di (bi) fa, dis (bis) faz, peri qft, poly Te, cos (cosin) 394, erythros (erythrine) afat, dys , etc., etc. In the near future we will be issuing a volume on the nature and extent of the Sanskrit element in European and not only in English) scientific nomenclature. 
xvi 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
Our technical language is not separated by any distance from the general literary language. The common Sanskrit roots are not more than 600, and most of these are known, in one form or the other, to an Indian schoolboy of fifteen years of age who has done his Hindi or Kannada, Bengali or Malayalam, or any other Aryan or Dravidian language, for 10 years. These 600 roots also lie at the bottom of the most complicated and remote terms of science. Hence our boys and girls will grasp quicker and retain more than in any country of the West, because nowhere else do the two languages, those of literature and science, come so near to each other. 
Our terminology is a potent means of carrying forward the stream of knowledge which our ancestors had started, but which had got choked during the past few centuries. We are incorporating all that is useful in the old vocabulary. Thus we are making science our own. No longer shall it be foreign 
In the course of translating English words, certain confusions are discovered. These are not reproduced in our words. For example, the suffix -ite is used both in chemistry and mineralogy, designating a salt in 
one and a mineral or rock in the other. The Indian suffix is different in each case, -c in chemistry and my in mineralogy. See chlorite (a salt of chlorous acid) and chlorite (a monoclinic mineral). In naming colours we have brought order out of chaos (see further on). 
GENERAL PRINCIPLES 
ILL 
I One word conveys only one primary meaning. 
For every primary meaning there is a separate word. 2 Words are praef significant. They lead you in the direction in 
which the thing or idea denoted lies; they point to some salient feature. They may even be founded on the basis of an exclusive 
characteristic. 3 Simple English words are translated by simple words and not by 
compounds or phrases. 
In chemical terminology the translation proceeds normally through the channel of minute analysis of the, formative elements of a word. The prefix is translated by a prefix, the base or root by a base or root, the suffix by a suffix, the assemblage presenting an organic 
whole. 4 Phonetically every word is designed to fit in with the Indian genius. 
Harsh sounds and awkward consonant combinations are avoided. The length of a simple, uncompounded word is kept strictly within bounds. Two and three syllables form the norm; four is the limit. 
The limit is crossed only in unavoidable cases, such as ancient words and derivatives. Scientific colour names, incorporate within themselves the complete definition in terms of hue, saturation and brilliance. 
6 Wherever needed, a word is allowed a syncopated form, one or 
more abbreviations and a symbol, and these in accordance with the established usage, clear as well as easy of grasp and application. 
Provision is thus made for all the required combinations which highly developed sciences like mathematics, physics and chemistry demand-combinations of words in their full or abridged forms together with suffixes, prefixes, infixes, numerals and various symbols. 
xviu 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
Wt 
. 
The initial syllable of an element name in chemistry stands as its symbol. All symbols have to be distinct. Hence every element name 
begins with a different syllable. 7 No word is considered and translated individually. It is taken 
along with its derivatives (nouns, verbs, adjectives), related words and word compounds that may be said to form a linguistic group. For new ideas new suffixes have been devised. 
They originate in genuine words, whose first part is clipped off, allowing only one or two syllables to remain. Of the two syllables, the first is usually a vowel which coalesces naturally with a preceding vowel and constitutes a well-knit whole. Thus in chemistry: . 
-A19 is abridged from -argómetal. It is used as a suffix in forming the names of metals. Cf. English -ium, -um. . Fifa is abridged from afar 'gas". It is used as suffix in forming the names of gases. Cf. Eng. -on. 
-47 is abridged from facar (?) frare (earth)'. It is used as a suffix in forming the names of rare earth metals (atomic nos. 39, 57-60,62, 64-71). 
In mineralogy: -Ez is abridged from afar mineral' (afër mine' to 37 produced'). It is used as a suffix in forming the names of minerals. Cf. English -ite (abridged from -lite, which is equivalent to -lith, from French lithe, from Greek lithos stone). In case of ideas and objects that have existed from ancient times, old names are assiduously hunted out from the vast range of Sans krit, Pali and Prakrit literatures. Modern Indian languages are also consulted. 
Xix 
NAMES OF CHEMICAL ELEMENTS 
The following names are in use in India since ancient times: 
I vie stibium, 
It is an all-India word: Hindi, Panjabi, Nepali, Bengali, Marathi, Gujarati, Oriya, Kannada 757; Malayalam, Tamil 757; Telugu 
4. 2 BE ferrum. 
R is the forefather of Latin aes, German Eisen, English iron and scores of other words in ancient and modern European languages. English ore is also derived from 27. It is used in high literature in North India, particularly in Hindi and Bengali. In South India its use is commoner: Malayalam, Telugu #46; Kannada 4; Tamil . 3 तान cuprum. 
It is an all-India word: Kashmiri, Shina T; Kumaoni aut; Nepali ताम्र, तामो; Assamese ताम् ; Bengali ताम्र, तामा; Oriya ताम्र, तम्बा; Hindi ताम्र, तांबा; Panjabi ताम्बा; Sindhi ट्रामो; Gujarati बाँबु, ताँबु, ताम्र; Marathi तांबें, ताम्र; Malayalam ताम्रक, तानं; Kannada ताम्र, ताम्ब; Telugu ताम्रमु; Tamil 
anney, afty; Singhalese afat. 4 74 stannum. 
Like UT, NTST, THPT and $74, is as old as the Veda. It is derived from v#to be shy, on account of its low melting point. It is still 
used in South India: Malayalam and Kannada 79; Telugu 9. 5 नेपाली arsenic. 
et or Suśruta's 1977 is a most important word for a historical economic geography of the world in general and India in particular. 
YTETT OI #4769 produced in Nepal' is originally red arsenic, which is one of the chief sources of the element arsenic. We have specialized the word for arsenic, the element. For arsenic trioxide, which is a deadly poison, the modern languages of India use more than one word and in common, non-scientific usage these can be retained. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
6 पारद hydrargyrum. 
Te is an all-India word: Panjabi TRT; Bengali, Oriya, Hindi, Marathi पारद, पारा; Sindhi, Nepali पारो; Gujarati पारद, पारो; Malayalam पारतम्; 
Kannada पारद; Telugu पारदमु; Tamil पारदम् . 7 T argentum. 
From are derived Greek argyros, Latin argentum, Old Irish argat, etc. Bu is still widely used in India, although there are other words as well. Hindi, Bengali, Gujarati, Marathi, Oriya, Kannada रजत; Malayalam रजतं ; Telugu रजतमु; Tamil इरशिदम्. 8 शुल्बारि sulphur. 
Teatfe is the parent of Latin sulphur, sulpur, sulfur. This word has been borrowed from Latin by European languages. It is only in Sanskrit that it has a significance 'enemy of copper'. ___Another common word for sulphur in India is गन्ध, गन्धक. In our terminology we have used the for thio and for its derivatives and 
compounds. 9 सीस plumbum. 
सीस is an all-India word: Nepali सिसो; Kumaoni सीसो; Bengali सीस, सिसा; Oriya सीसा, सीसक; Hindi सीस, सीसा; Panjabi सीसा; Sindhi सीहो; Gujarati सीसुं; Marathi शिसें; Malayalam सीसं, सीसकं; Kannada सोस; Telugu सीसम्; 
Tamil TT. IO faut aurum. 
Faul is an all-India word: Kashmiri Fort; Western Pahari (Bhadrawahi) सुन्नो; Kumaoni सुनो; Bengali, Hindi स्वर्ण, सोना; Oriya सुवर्ण, सुना; Panjabi, Lahndi सोना; Sindhi सोनु; Gujarati सुवर्ण, सोनू; Marathi सुवर्ण, सोनें; Mala yalam स्वर्ण; Kannada स्वर्ण; Telugu स्वर्णमु; Tamil शुवर्णम्, शोन्नम् ; Singha lese 4. 
Fourteen ancient names of substances have been made the basis of forming such element names as are closely connected therewith: IT IT (charcoal) yields Siit [st 349] carbon (from Latin carbo coal, 
charcoal]. 
Cf. German Kohlen-stoff, Russian ugle-rod, Finnish hiili, Bengali face sime, Kannada and Malayalam SITE, ÉTTET. Similarly Japanese 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
tan-so charcoal-pure. It would not be out of place here to point out that Lithuanian angli-s, Russian ugolj, German Kohle, English coal, etc., are genetically related to Sanskrit अंगार. 
TTT is an all-India word: Kafiri (Ashkun) 46T; Dardic (Khovar) Fre, (Torwali) FT; Shina pirk; Nepali FT; Hindi, Bengali, Oriya, Kannada अङ्गार; Panjabi अँगार्; Sindhi अङरु; Gujarati अंगार, अंगारो; Marathi अंगार, अंगारा; Malayalam, Tamil अंगारम् ; Telugu अङ्गारमु; Sing 
halese अंगुरु. 12 FT (base metal, zinc) yields Faro (14+Era] zinc [from German 
Zink, of unknown origin]. 
Cf. EL Japanese a-en, Chinese ya-chéien next-to-lead; Chinese 
also s e pai-ch'ien white-lead. For is used in High Bengali, 
Kannada and Malayalam. : 13 8 (soda) yields erre [erre-+-re] sodium [New Latin, from soda]. 
The word ek is universally used in India, both in its pure form as well as in a slightly modified form: Sindhi ett; Kashmiri, Panjabi, Lahndi, Assamese, etc. eta; Hindi, Nepali, Gujarati, Marathi, Oriya क्षार, खार; Bengali क्षार; Kannada क्षार, कार; Tamil कारम्; Telugu क्षारमु, कारमुः 
Malayalam कारं, क्षारं; European Gypsy छार् 'ashes'. 14 THE (zircon) yields Tacia [Tatarg] zirconium [from zircon). 
7176 is an all-India word: Hindi, Bengali, Gujarati Tha; Malayalam, Tamil गोमेदकम् ; Kannada गोमेदक; Telugu गोमेधिकमु. 15 Hafnium resembles the previous element, zirconium, closely 
and is hence named trang [ Te from (#) related to go(meda) 
+37]. 16 noi (calcis, lime) yields quia [puit-arg] calcium [Latin calx, calcis 
lime]. 
Almost all languages of India and Ceylon, from Dardic in the extreme North-West up to Singhalese in Ceylon, derive their words for lime from Sanskrit qut, e. g., Hindi, Panjabi, Lahndi TFT; Nepali चुन्; Bengali चूर्ण, चुन; Marathi चूर्ण, चुना; Sindhi चुनु ; Gujarati चुनो; Assa 
mese सुन्; Oriya चूर्ण, चून; Telugu सुन्नमु; Kannada चूर्ण, सुण्ण; Tamil शण्णाम्बु, शुण्णम् ; Malayalam चूर्णं; Singhalese हु[. 
Xxii 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
17 2(borax) yields zinu boron (from borax). 
Cf. Al Japanese ho-so, Chinese peng-su borax-pure. 290 is widely used. It is also called to or ZHUTETT. Hindi, Kannada टंकण; Bengali टंकण, टंक; Gujarati टंकण-खार; Marathi टंकण, टांकण खार; Sindhi कंगड-कारु (cf. Sanskrit टंगर); Malayalam टंकणं; Telugu टंकणमु. Borax was exported from India to far-off lands in the East as well as in the West. In the Malay Peninsula it is still called tingkal. Persian and Arabic show tankar, tinkar, al-tinkar. The word reached England as early as 1635 A.D., when it is found spelt fyncall; other spellings 
of the word are tinkal, tincal, tinkar, tincar. 18 (silver) yields autem (nickel being nearly silver-white) nickel [abbre 
viated from German Kupfer-nickel copper-demon]. 
ay or star is an all-India word: European Gypsy, Shina, Assamese FT; Dardic (Kalasha) 69, (Gawarbati) ET; Kashmiri ; Western Pahari (Poguli) रूप्प्; Bengali रूप्य, रुपा, रूपा, रौप्य; Oriya. रुपा; Hindi रूप; Panjabi रुप्पा; Sindhi रुपो; Gujarati रूप; Marathi रु, रूप्य; Kannada रूप्य; Malayalam auzi; Telugu ; Tamil gefun. It is well-known through 
frupee' the silver coin of India. 1999 (salt) yields arent [arqur related to salt + f -ine; a rare element 
related to the halogens, halo- 'salt qui-] alabamine (from Alabama, a State in U. S. A. + -ine]. 
atau is one of the commonest Indian words: European and Syrian Gypsy att; Armenian Gypsy tet; Dardic (Tirahi, Pashai, Kalasha) TTTT; Kashmiri ; Western Pahari (Camcali) ; Kumaoni 7T; Nepali, Bengali aur, TT; Oriya mav, qur, TUT; Hindi que, aft, TT, 777, Panjabi लूण, नण; Sindhi लूणु ; Gujarati लवण, लुण; Marathi, Kannada लवण; Mala 
yalam लवणं; Telugu लवणमु; Tamil इलवणम् ; Singhalese लुणु. 20 € (iron) yields E# [so named on account of its resemblance to iron] 
manganese [from Italian manganese corrupted from Mid-Latin magnesia, from Greek he Magnesia lithos, properly, the stone of the city of Magnesia, loadstone). 
PATE is an all-India word: Nepali, Western Pahari (Curahi, Bhateali, Cameali), Panjabi, Lahndi 77€T; Kumaoni qar; Assamese at; Bengali, Hindi लोह, लोहा; Oriya लौह, लुहा; Sindhi लोहु; Gujarati, Marathi लोह; 
xxiii 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
Malayalam ; Kannada T; Telugu Tet; Tamil 30mą ‘metal'; Sin 
ghalese लोहो, लो 'metal'. 21 (tin) yields of [being of tin-white metallic lustre) tellurium 
[from Latin telluris the earth). 
at is used in Hindi, Bengali, Marathi, Oriya, Kannada, Telugu (aita), Tamil and Malayalam (757). The English word bangle is 
Hindi bangri which is from a. 22 Agri (beryl) yields fast beryllium (from beryl]. 
वैड्र्य is also called वैदूर्य, विड्रज, विदूरज-विडुरे भवं-वैडूर्य, विडूरे जायते-विरजं. det beryl' is a silicate of beryllium and aluminium Bez Alz (Si Oz ). far Fun (37) ___ वैडूर्य, Prakrit बेलूरिय has been borrowed from India by the major 
cultural languages of the world: Chinese pi-lit-li (abbreviated pi-liu or liu-li), Arabic and Persian bullur, Greek berullos, Latin beryllus, Old French beryl, beril, English beryl. Cf. D. Junius Juvenalis, a Latin poet of the 1st cent. A. D.: "A precious stone, of a sea-green colour, found in India." In China, Persia, Arabia the word was applied also to crystal, whence Mediaeval Latin berillus 'an eyeglass or spec tacles', whence German brille and Dutch bril 'spectacles'. English brilliant and brilliance are from the same source. 
at being the name of a precious stone is used in high literature more than in the common language: Hindi, Bengali, Oriya age; Malaya 
lam वैडूर्य ; Kannada, Marathi वैडूर्य ; Telugu वैडूर्यमु; Tamil वैरियम्. 23 सिकता (sand) yields सैकता [सैकत related to sand+ - -on; sand is impure 
silica) silicon (from Latin silicis a flint].. 
Silicon is also known as silicium (German Silizium), though it is a non-metallic element. Germans have their own name also Kiesel. stoff (Kiesel-erde silica), while the Russians call it kremnij. 
Frist is used in Hindi, Bengali, Gujarati, Marathi, Oriya, Kannada 
(faict, fod), Malayalam and Telugu (feriet). 24 सिकता (sand) also yields सिकातु [सिकता+धातु; it resembles silicon in some 
respects, and was formerly termed eka-silicon] germanium (from Latin 
Germania Germany) 25 सिक्ष्य (glass or crystal) yields सिक्ष्यातु सिक्ष्य+धातु; it is crystalline in 
structure. Its salts are used in making highly refractive glass) thallium [from Greek thallos a young shoot]. 
Xxiv 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
VA 
26 Fhet (alum) yields F429 [FFETT-ETE] aluminium (from Latin alumen 
alum). 
Frict, Fufcant, fiffs are all used as synonyms and denote (alum'. They are used all over India: Nepali फड़ किरि; Bengali स्फटिक, फटिक; Hindi FACT, 4€FITT, ferret; Panjabi $; Gujarati $6787; Marathi F4c7, 62367; Oriya स्फटिकारि; Malayalam स्फटिक; Kannada. स्फटिके; Telugu स्फटिक. 
III 
27 Free signifying foxidizing of metals' has been used in the 
Indian alchemic literature. Hence has been derived our word for oxygen Fr. The common Hindi word for rust and TTT 'to rusť, are from the Sanskrit VF, FECUT, TOUT. 
Oxygen is adapted from French oxygène, intended to mean faci difying (principle),' principe acidifiant (Lavoisier). It is derived from Greek oxus sharp+ -gen producing. Lavoisier's original term, proposed in 1777, was principe oxygine, changed 1785-6 to principe oxygène; thence in 1786 oxygène as substantive, spelt in Nomenclature of 1787 oxigéne; admitted in Dict. Acad. 1835 as oxygène. Lavoisier held it to be the essential principle in the formation of acids. This idea has been followed up in Japanese san-so acid-pure, German Sauer-stoff and Russian kislo-rod. Soon after it was felt that oxygen was not an appropriate term: “Opponents particularly object, that the base of vital air does not deserve the title of oxygen, as many combinations of it are far from being acids." Med. Jml. I. 373 (year 1799). 
IV 
28 Hydro-gen appears in our terminology in its Indian form 79-. 
Greek hudro, Latin unda, English wet, water; German Wasser, Russian voda, and similar words in European languages are from Sanskrit Vor, Vaar, 39. Greek -genes born, is Sanskrit V7. Hydrogen is so called because water is generated by its combustion. Cf. German Wasser-stoff, Russian vodo-rod, Japanese 7K sui-so water-pure. 
Ja or 56# is an all-India word: Dardic (Tirahi) yar, (Kalasha) 54,﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
. 
(Garvi, Torwali) 5; Hindi, Marathi 34%; Bengali, Gujarati Je, G#; 
Tamil 367; Malayalam 347; Telugu 54%; Kannada, Singhalese 36. 29 Phos-phorus is again a Greek word which has its exact literary 
equivalent in Indian Fa. Greek phos is Sanskrit HET 'light' and -phoros is Sanskrit - ** (from which is also derived English bear). Thus HT9-** would be the exact counterpart, but it is better sounding, yields the same sense and has been in use since times immemorial. The Telugu people have already used it (1769<) for phosphorus (vide P. Sankaranarayana, An English-Telugu Dictionary, Madras, 1928). 
ATFAK ‘shining, bright' is an all-India word: Hindi, Marathi, Bengali, Oriya भास्वर; Malayalam भासुरं; Telugu भास्वरमु. 
Five other words of Greek extraction, argon, bromine, chro mium, iodine and krypton, have been allowed to retain their 
original connotation in Indian words: 30 Argon (Greek argon, neuter of argos inactive, from a- nott-ergon 
work] - [ F slow, indifferent taifa gas). 
So named on account of its inertness. No compounds of it are known. 
मन्द is an all-India. word: Kashmiri मोन्दु; Hindi मन्द, माँद; Sindhi मन्दो; Bengali, Gujarati, Marathi, Oriya, Kannada Fra; Tamil, Malayalam 
मन्दम् ; Telugu मंदमु; Singhalese मन्द 'small'. 31 Bromine (from Greek bromos bad smell + -ine]-gerit (bad+TVET 
to smell att _ -ine]. 
Bromine emits an irritating vapour of disagreeable odour. Cf. Japanese shu-so stench-pure. 32 Chromium [from Greek chroma colour)-aug [auti colour targ). 
So called from the varied colours of its compounds. 
aput is an all-India word: Hindi, Bengali, Gujarati, Marathi, Kannada. वर्ण ; Oriya बर्ण; Tamil वरुणम् ; Telugu वर्णमु; Malayalam वर्ण. 33 Iodine [from Greek iodes violetlike+-ine]-jaanit (5744 having the 
colour of the rose-apple fruit+ -f-ine]. 
So called from the colour of its vapour. 
IN 
XXVi 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
जम्बु is an all-India word: Hindi जम्बु, जामुन ; Nepali जामु; Assamese जामु; Bengali जम्बु, जाम; Oriya जम्बु, जामु; Panjabi जम्मू ; Sindhi जानू; Gujarati FICE, FIT; Marathi , TT; Tamil, Kannada, Malayalam in Telugu 
FIT; Singhalese (79. 34 Krypton [Greek krupton, neuter of kruptos hidden]starifet [aftar hidden, 
taifa gas]. 
It is one of the inert gases occurring in air (one volume in about a million) and in gases from hot springs. 
pe is an all-India word: Hindi, Bengali, Nepali, Gujarati, Marathi, Oriya, Kannada TIF; Telugu ; Malayalam F. Tamil has the cognate $147. 
VI 
Fluorine, indium, radium and radon are of Latin origin. Their translations are very close: 35 Fluorine (from Latin fluere to flow, whence fluorite, which is one of 
the sources of fluorine) - ffant [reffant quick, violent, energetic to 
* -ine]. 
Fluorine is the most active element known. It is active even at very low temperatures. It cannot be prepared or kept in vessels of glass which it attacks freely. 
Teffant is found in several languages of India: Hindi Terent; Bengali creant; Telugu fra 'an express, a courier'; Malayalam cffe fan express, 
a runner", TFT 'velocity, speed'; Kannada afia 'swift'. . . 36 Indium (from Latin indicum indigo + -jumaa [ (from oftest 
indigo) + TE] 
It has two characteristic indigo-blue lines in its spectrum. 
pitant or pt indigo' is an all-India word: Panjabi, Hindi, Bengali frat; Sindhi नीरु; Nepali, Assamese निल; Oriya नील, नीली; Gujarati नील dark blue'; Marathi frod; Tamil 77, 17; Telugu, Kannada, Malayalam 
fitfm. 37 Radium (from Latin radius rayasig [ FUE light, energy + EXTE]. 
story is an all-India word: Hindi, Bengali, Nepali, Gujarati, Marathi, Oriya c; Tamil qat; Kannada dut; Telugu, Malayalam . 
xxvii 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
38 Radon [radium+-on, as in argon] -तेजसाति [जस (from तेजस् in तेजातु 
radium) + alfa gas). 
It is a gaseous element resembling argon but radio-active. 
VI 
Some names have been derived from the names of other ele ments, by adding prefixes to them. 39 Proto-actinium [from Greek proto- first+actinium]-प्रजातु [प्र (as in 
प्रपितामह)+एजातु actinium]. 
It is a radio-element which by disintegration yields actinium. 
Prefix 5 is used extensively in the Aryan and Dravidian languages of India and Ceylon. 
The sixteen rare earth metals have been given a special suffix -ला, abridged from विरला (मृद्) 'rare (earth). The full form विरला has 
however been retained in two words: 40 Europium [Europe + -ium]-किंविरला [किं what kind of + विरला (मृद्); 
of. किं-नर, किं-शक, कि-कराल. 
So named because nothing much about europium is known. fe as the first member of a compound is found used all over India: Hindi किंकर, किंकर्तव्य-विमूढ़, किंचित्, किंतु, किंपुरुष, किंवदंति, किंवा; Bengali किंकर्तव्य, किंवदन्ती, किंवा, किङ्कर, किञ्चित्, किन्तु, किन्नर, किम्पुरुष, किम्भूतकिमाकार; Marathi किं, किमर्थ, किनिमित्त, किंकर, किंचित्, किंचिद्दान, किंचिज्ज्ञ, किंचिज्ज्ञान, किंतु, किन्नर, किनिमित्त, किंबहुना, किमपि, किमर्थ, किंवा; Gujarati किंवा, किङ्कर, किङ्करी, किञ्चित, किन्तु, किन्नर, किन्नरी; Oriya किङ्कर, किङ्कर्त्तव्यविमूढ, किञ्चित्, किञ्चिन्मात्र, किन्तु, किन्नर, किम्बा; 
Telugu किंकरत्वमु, किंकरि, किंकरुडु, किंचित्तु, किंपुरुषमु, किंपुरुषुडु, किंवदंति, किन्नर, किन्नरेशुडु; Tamil किङ्करर्, किञ्चनन् or किञ्चन्, किञ्चितम् or किञ्चित्तु, किञ्चित्तुवम्, किम्पुरुडम्, किम्पुरुडखण्डम्, किम्पुरुडर्; Kannada. किं, किंवदन्ति, किंवाते, किंकर, किंकरत्व, किंकरि, किंकरे, किंकुर्वाणते, किंचन, किंचित्, किंचित्प्रौढे, किंचिद्भुतकाल, किन्नर, किन्नरपति, किन्नरि, किन्नरिक्रिये, किन्नरेश, किन्नरेश्वर, किम्पच, किम्पचान, किंम्पाक, किम्पुरुष; 
Malayalam किङ्करन्, किङ्किरि, किञ्च, किञ्चन, किञ्चनन्, किञ्चि (त्) ल्, किन्तु, किन्देवन् 'atheist', किन्नरप्पेट्टि 'music box', किन्नरि, किन्नरेशन्, किन्नु, किं, किमपि, किमु, किमुत, किम्पचं, किम्पुरुषन्, किंवदन्ति, किंवा, किंक्षणन्. 
विरल is an all-India word : Hindi विरल, बिरला; Bengali, Oriya, Kannada विरल; Nepali विरल, बिरल; Gujarati विरल, विरलं; Marathi विरल, विरळ; Telugu विरळमु; Malayalam विरळं. 
xxviii 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
MEM 
41 Illinium=florentium [from Illinois, a university in U.S.A. + -ium. 
Similarly florentium is from the name of the city Florence (Latin 
Florentia) fofacial [ ufo (contracted to fo) a variety oft-faceti (7) . 42 Terbium [from Ytterby in Sweden)- which is composed of 
(indeed, a variety of, as in ) and PTT yttrium. 43 Molybdenum (from Greek molubdos leadlaufe [ similar + aurre 
chromium). 
Molybdenum is a metallic element of the chromium group. 44 wiferent gadolinium (after J. Gadolin, a Finnish chemist] is derived from 
the name of a mineral, gadolinite, which being a chief source for for rare earths is termed fagot TifaT. __ योनि is an all-India word: Hindi योनि, जोन्; Panjabi जूण्; Nepali योनि, 
FT; Bengali, Oriya, Gujarati, Marathi, Tamil, Telugu, Kannada, Malayalam योनि; Singhalese योन्. 
VIII The colour of the element, the flame (its own or the test flame), its vapours, lines in the spectrum, its salts, oxides or com pounds, has served as the basis for the following names: 
A. COLOUR OF THE ELEMENT. 45 ATTESTI (ATOTT pale yellow + 7)--neodymium [Greek neo-new-t didumos 
twin+ -jum. Didymium was formerly supposed to be an element; it has been separated into the elements neodymium and praseodymium). 
It is so named from its yellow tinge. 
ta is an all-India word: Hindi, Bengali, Oriya, Gujarati, Marathi, Kannada Tra; Telugu Taquia; Tamil, Malayalam 7. Prefix 1 is used 
all over India. 46 STT [ehe gray+ -77).—-samarium (after Col. Samarski, a Russian mine 
official] 
It is a pale-grey rare metallic element. 
He is an all-India word: Hindi TT, TT; Bengali, Gujarati, Marathi, Oriya धूसर; Nepali धुस्रो; Assamese धुहर; Tamil तूशरम ; Telugu धूसरमु; Kannada. धूसर, दूसर; Malayalam धूसरं. 
B. COLOUR OF THE FLAME. 47 Hafta [ blue-t-of fire)-selenium (from Greek selene the moon; 
so called from its resemblance to tellurium (Latin tellus the earth)]. 
xxix 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
. 
.... 
It burns in air with a bluish flame. 
9# is a word of high literature: Hindi, Kannada #246; Telugu #91; Malayalam fi. 
afin is an all-India word: European Gypsy Fal; Syrian Gypsy ufit; Western Pahari (Pangwali) , Nepali afro, FT; Kumaoni ETT; Hindi, Gujarati, Marathi FIFT, ETT; Assamese TT; Panjabi, Lahndi W; Sindhi प्रागि; Bengali अग्नि, आगुन; Oriya, Malayalam अग्नि; Telugu, Kannada अग्नि, 
; Singhalese T. 48 hore (antur crimson+ste)---strontium [from Strontian, in Argyll Co., 
Scotland). 
Its compounds colour the test flame crimson. gttor is an all-India word: Hindi, Bengali, Kannada Tit; Marathi 
Tifora 'blood-coloured'; Tamil, Malayalam TOTH; Telugu TUTH.. 49 gute [ef green+ere)-barium (from Greek barus heavy]. 
It burns with a brilliant greenish flame when heated in air or oxygen. 
हरि or हरित is an all-India. word: Dardic (Kalasha) हरिलेक्; Hindi हरा, हरित; Bengali, Kannada हरि, हरित्, हरित; Panjabi हरा; Sindhi यों; Gujarati हरित, हाँ, हयु; Marathi हरित; Oriya हरित्; Tamil अरि; Telugu हरितमु; Malayalam हरि. 
C. COLOUR OF VAPOURS. fait See no. 33. 
D. COLOUR OF LINES IN THE SPECTRUM, fang See no. 36. 
E. COLOUR OF SALTS. 50 can [cat red+ --T]—erbium [from Ytterby in Sweden, where gadolinite 
is found). 
Its salts are reddish. 
FT is an all-India word: Hindi, Marathi TT, Trat; Kumaoni, Nepali रातो; Assamese रातुल ; Panjabi, Lahndi रत्ता; Sindhi रतो; Gujarati रक्त, रातुं; Bengali रक्त; Oriya. रक्तवर्ण; Tamil इरत्तम् ; Telugu रक्तम; Kannada रक्त, रकुत; Malayalam रक्तं; Singhalese रत्. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
N1 
LO 
51 SUTHFIT [TUTH green+ -5T)-praseodymium [from Greek prasios of a 
leekgreen+-didymium (Greek didumos twin)]. 
It is so called from the green colour of its salts. 241# is an all-India word: Hindi, Bengali, Nepali, Gujarati, Marathi, Oriya श्याम ; Telugu श्याममु; Kannada श्याम, शाम, साम; Malayalam श्याम; Singhalese साम्. 
F. COLOUR OF OXIDES. 52 fareuten [frequof colourless + --T]lutecium (from Latin Lutetia a town 
in Gaul, now Paris]. 
Its oxide is colourless. 
Prefix-farę is used all over India. For qui see no. 32. 53 NisaT [91€ pale-yellow -T]—holmium (from Holmia, Latinized form 
of Stockholm]. 
It forms a pale-yellow oxide, holmia, Ho, Os, and yellow or orange salts. 
ytue is an all-India word: Hindi, Bengali, Gujarati, Marathi, Oriya, 
Tamil, Kannada, Malayalam qtos; Telugu queq. 54 BETA [Teft greenish + -77)--thulium [from Greek Thule, the nor 
thern-most part of the habitable world]. 
Its oxide is a greenish white powder. 
The use of the prefixes fa and a extends all over India. For fi 'green' see no. 49. 55 gaan [sain white + -77}-ytterbium [from Ytterby in Sweden). 
Its oxide is a heavy white powder. 
pia is an all-India word: Shina (Kohistani) peit; Nepali mat; Hindi, Bengali, Gujarati, Marathi, Oriya mater; Tamil Taa; Telugu Ras a person with a white skin'; Kannada sea, f; Malayalam saat; Singhalese . 
'G. COLOUR OF COMPOUNDS. muig See no. 32. 
IX The bases for giving names to the rest of the elements are as follows: 
A. BRILLIANCE. $6 faire at brilliance+ at; from its brilliant lustrecolumbium= 
niobium (from Columbia, the United States. "Niobium is a later name, 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
from Greek Niobe, the daughter of Tantalus and wife of Amphion, King of Thebes]. 
पा-काश, प्र-काश, etc. are all-India words. 57 रोचातु [रोच bright+धातु]-vanadium [from.Old Norse Vanadis, a name 
of the goddess Freya). 
It is a bright grey metal which appears as lustrous, silver-white crystals under the microscope. ___Derivatives of V रुच् in the senses of 'to shine, to be splendid; to be agreeable to, please' are widely used throughout India: Bashgali रुच् 'light, illumination' (Bashgali Dictionary by Sten Konow, p. 242); Hindi रुक्म or रुकुम, रुच, रुचि, रुचना, रुचा, रुचिकर, रुचिकारक, रुचित, रुचिर, रुचिराई, रोचक, रोचकता, रोचन, रोचिस्, रोचिष्णु; Bengali रुचा, रुचि, रुचिकर, रुचिर, रुच्य, रुचिकारक, रोचक, रोच्य; Gujarati रुचक, रुचिकर, रुचवू, रुचि, रुचिर, रोचक, रोचन; Marathi रुचणे, रुचि, रुचिकर, रुचकर, रुचीक, रुचिर; Oriya रुचि, रुचिकर, रुचिबा, रुचिर, रोचक; 
Kannada रुक्म, रुक्मकारक 'goldsmith', रु, रुचक, रुचि, रुचिक, रुचिकर, रुचिकार, रुचित्व, रुचिर, रुचिसु, रुच्य, रोचक, रोचन, रोचमान, रोचिरोचिस्, रोचिष्णु; Telugu रुक्ममु, रुचकम, रुचि, रचिगल, रुचिययिन, रुचिरमु, रुच्यमु, रोचनमु, रोचमानमु, रोचिष्णव, रोचिस्सु; Tamil उरुक्कुमम्, उरुचि; Malayalam रुक्मं or रुम, रुचि, रुचिकर, रुचिक्कुक, रुचितं, 
रुचिरं, रुच्यं, रोचकं, रोचनं, रोचितं, रोचस्सु or रोचिस्सु. 58 मृज्यातु [मृज्य polishable+ धातु; V मृज् to polish] -cadmium [from Greek 
kadmia (ge) Cadmean (earth) + -ium]. 
Cadmium is capable of a high polish. 
मृज् is used all over India: Hindi माँजना, मार्जन; Bengali माजन, माजा; Gujarati मार्जन, माजवं, मांजवू; Nepali माज्नु, माँज्नु ; Oriya मार्जन, मार्जना, माजिबा; Panjabi माँज्णा; Sindhi मानणु; Marathi, Kannada. मार्जन; Tamil 
मार्चनम् ; Telugu' मार्जनमु; Malayalam माजन; Singhalese मदिनु 'to polish'. 59 भ्राजातु [Vभ्राज् to shine+धातु]-magnesium [from Greek he Magnesia lithos, properly the stone of the city of Magnesia, loadstone + -ium). 
It burns with the production of a dazzling strongly actinic light (magnesium light). 
Vभ्राज् is a word of high literature: Hindi भ्राजमान; Telugu भ्राजितमु; Kannada भ्राज्, भ्राजि; Malayalam भ्राजिष्णु. 
B. BURNING. 60 वहातु [Vदह, to burn+धातु]-potassium [from French potasse+-ium]. 
It oxydizes rapidly in air, and is hence kept under kerosene or other hydrocarbon liquid. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
Vदह, or दहन is an all-India word: Hindi दहन, दहना; Bengali दहन, दहा; Assamese दहिब; Oriya. दहन, दहिबा; Panjabi दहिणा; Sindhi डहण ; Gujarati दहवू, दहन; Marathi दहन, दाहणे; Tamil तगम्; Telugu दहनमु; Kannada दहन; 
Malayalam दहनं ; Singhalese दहन्. 61 atyre (Vaty to blaze, to fare+976)--rubidium [from Latin rubidus red; 
so named from its two prominent red lines). 
It inflames spontaneously in air. 
Derivatives of Vat are used all over India: Hindi ate, atun, ftat, fifia, atfer; Bengali ate 'lamp', 144, 149, afia, 71, GIFT, tahrt; Gujarati at or 197 'a lamp, a light, kindling, infiaming', eta or atura or fera 'to shine', afiat a lampstand, a small lamp', 15 kindled, blazing, luminous', aifa 'light, brilliancy, illumination'; Marathi 10 'lamp', sa 'kindled, blazing', afa 'light, lustre'; Oriya te 'lamp', alfaent a lamp, a light', fer 'light, brilliancy'; Tamil 21954 or 197 'lighted lamp, luminousness', 197 'a lamp', Telugu 2140 kindling, inflamin illuminating', 14 a light, lamp', 17 "lighted, illuminated', after light, lustre, brilliance'; Kannada ata orta a lamp, a light, 1976 ‘kindling, illuminating', *1977 'kindling', ara 'inflamed, kindled, blazing, radiant, afe brilliancy', stel ‘shining, brilliant, luminous'; Malayalam दीपक, दीपं 'a lamp', दीपिक, 'a. lamp', दीपिक्कुक 'to shine, to blaze', दीपितं "lighted', a radiant', sifat 'blaze, brilliancy', 397 'shining'. 
C. MELTING. 62 query [tos fierce, said of fire or sun+are)—tungsten [from Swedish 
tung heavy+-sten stone]. 
It has the highest melting point of any of the metals (melting at about 3370°C.). 
que is an all-India word: Hindi, Bengali, Gujarati, Marathi, Oriya, 
Kannada. चण्ड'; Tamil चण्डम् ; Telugu चण्डमु. 63 saty (melting+976)--gallium (probably from Latin Gallia Gaul, 
France) 
It is remarkable for its low melting point (29.7° C.). 
a is an all-India word: Hindi, Bengali, Gujarati, Marathi, Oriya, Kannada द्रव; Tamil तिरवम् ; Telugu द्रवमु; Malayalam द्रवं. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
D. OXIDIZATION. 67See no. 27. 64 garca (t easy+-oxidization + -]-lanthanum [from Greek 
lanthanein to be concealed]. 
Metallic lanthanum is easily oxidizable. 
I is an all-India prefix. E. RESISTANCE TO ACIDS. 65 TETE [VE, to resist +etry; from its high resistance to acids)—tantalum 
[from Greek mythology Tantalos a king; in reference to difficulties met in isolating it]. 
VE is used all over India: Kashmiri ET; Kumaoni wavit; Hindi 
, FEMT; Bengali EF, HET; Oriya eh, afgGT;. Panjabi fut; Sindhi HEUT; Gujarati ET, HET; Marathi , #TECT; Tamil T ; Telugu 967; Kannada, सह, सहन; Malayalam सह. 
F. INSOLUBILITY IN ACIDS. 66 Fire [not + VTT to melt, to solve to TC)-ruthenium (from 
Mid-Latin Ruthenia Russia). 
Ruthenium is very infusible and almost insoluble in acids. 
is an all-India word: European, Armenian and Syrian Gypsy, Kafiri (Ashkun), Dardic (Tirahi, Pashai, Garvi, Torwali), Shina (Kohistani), Hindi, Bengali, Gujarati, Marathi, Kumaoni, Assamese, Oriya, Sindhi, Tamil, Kannada 4; Kashmiri, Panjabi, Lahndi, Marathi, Singhalese 77. 
ve is widely used: Hindi, Bengali, Oriya 4757; Marathi 98, cut; Gujarati, Kannada ; Malayalam 70. The root is still better known 
through the word .. 67 FANTS [ not + FT (TCU) acid (dissolving) + erg lrhodium (from 
Greek rhodon rose). 
It is insoluble in acids. 
gran is an all-India word: Hindi, Bengali, Marathi, Oriya, Kannada अम्ल; Nepali अमिलो; Telugu अम्लमु; Malayalam अम्लं. 
G. NOBILITY. 68 ETS ( HET great, noble+ Eyrel--platinum (from Spanish platina, from 
plata silver, originally a thin plate of metal]. 
XXXIV 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
LT 
TTT 
Platinum is the best among the noble metals. Cf. a Japanese hak-kin, Chinese pai-chin white-metal. 
a is one of the commonest words in India, either as the first mem ber of a compound or as an independent word: Hindi, Bengali, Gujarati, Marathi, Nepali, Oriya, Tamil, Malayalam FET; Telugu Het (in com pounds only, e.g., FETAH gold, WET-afa, E7-567); Kannada #ET, #T. 
H. ELECTROPOSITIVITY. 69 yag [ (fa) a electricity +- €)-cesium (from Latin caesius bluish grey). 
It is the most electro-positive of all the elements. विद्युत् is an all-India. word: Hindi विद्युत्, बिजुली, बिजली; Bengali विद्युत्, farat, fayfa; Nepali faut, fanfar; Assamese farfet; Oriya fara, farsa; Panjabi बिज्ज्, विज्ली; Lahndi विज्ज्, विज्ली; Sindhi विजु; Gujarati विद्युत्, वीज, विजळी; Marathi विद्युत्, वीज; Telugu, Malayalam विद्युत् ; Kannada. विद्युत्, faat; Singhalese fag, fagieren. 
I. MAGNETIC QUALITY. 70 qrae [ a loadstone, a magnet+ -21)-dysprosium (from Greek 
dus-prositos hard to get at]. 
It is the most magnetic substance known. 
7** is an all-India word: Hindi, Bengali, Gujarati, Marathi, Nepali, Oriya, Kannada, Malayalam चुम्बक; Tamil चुम्बकम् . 
J. RADIOACTIVITY. 71 gare (from you to shake, to shine to stay |-~actinium [from Greek 
aktinos ray]. 
Actinium is a radio-active element. From it is derived proto actinium C. 72 feruire [Ferrur ray + sare 1-uranium (from Uranus the planet]. 
It is a radio-active element. 
fapierom is an all-India word: Hindi, Bengali, Gujarati, Marathi, Nepali, Oriya, Kannada fiat; Telugu fazura; Tamil, Malayalam ficut. agre See no. 37. 
enfet radon=niton (from Latin nitere to shine+ -on as in neon; so 
called because it glows in the dark] See no. 38.. 
1﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
K. DISINTEGRATION. 73 Fag (Vg to diminish + ETE)--thorium [from Old Norse, Thorr the 
god of thunder). 
It has been so named from its radio-active disintegration (with the emission of alpha, beta and gamma rays). 
Enter is an all-India word: Hindi, Bengali, Nepali, Gujarati, Marathi, Oriya, Kannada ह्रास; Malayalam ह्रासं. 
L. ACTIVITY. 74 atoare (acet activity + erg |--masurium [from Masuria, region in East 
Prussia). 
It is an active element. 
stem is an all-India word: Hindi, Bengali, Nepali, Gujarati, Marathi, Oriya #set; Telugu, Malayalam #60; Kannada ase. तरस्विनी See no. 35. 
M. INERTNESS. Fraile See no. 30. 75 farfaretfat ( Farfere slack to arfer gas)-neon (from Greek neos new]. 
Neon is an inert gaseous element. 
farfetet is an all-India word: Hindi, Bengali, Gujarati, Marathi, Oriya, Kannada fetfert; Telugu ferferat; Malayalam ferferri. 
N. VOLATILENESS, 76 atsarg [atsy vapour + g -rhenium (from Latin Rhenus the river 
Rhine to sium). 
Its oxide is volatile. 
1769 is an all-India word: Hindi, Gujarati 754, 075; Kumaoni, Nepali बाफ; Kashmiri बाह; Oriya बाष्प, बाम्फ; Sindhi बाफ; Marathi बाष्प, वाफ; Bengali 3769, 779; Kannada 0764; Telugu anat; Malayalam 270. 
0. HYDROLYSIS. 77 atau [774 water to $70 1polonium (from Polonia Poland; so named 
from the nationality of Mme. Curie). 
Compounds of polonium are readily hydrolyzed. att is an all-India word: Hindi, Bengali, Gujarati, Marathi, Oriya, Kannada तोय; Tamil, Malayalam तोयम् ; Telugu तोयमु. 
Xxxvi 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
P. OCCLUSION. 78 faqar [FT VT to suck inter -palladium [from the asteroid Pallas, 
from Pallas, the goddess). 
Palladium has remarkable power of occluding (fagot) gases, absorbing nearly a thousand volumes of hydrogen. 
Derivatives of v Te are used all over India: Hindi THT; Bengali चूषण, चोषा; Nepali चुस्नु; Kashmiri चहुन् ; Kumaoni चुस्णो; Assamese सोहिब; Oriya Theat, feat, TITUT; Panjabi HUT; Sindhi JEMT; Gujarati ; 
Marathi चोष्य; Telugu चूषणमु; Malayalam चूष्यं. 
O. WEIGHT. 79 Taty [ Te heavy + arg osmium [from Greek osme a smell; so named 
in allusion to the strong odour of osmium tetroxide). 
It is the heaviest substance known (specific gravity in crystalline form, 22.48). 
Te 'heavy' is an all-India word: Dardic (Kalasha) #777; Kashmiri गोरु 'solid'; Hindi गुरु, गरु, गरुआ; Nepali गरुको, गरुणो, गरौं'; Sindhi गरो; Gujarati Te, ste; Bengali, Oriya, Marathi, Tamil, Kannada, Malayalam 
Tē; Telugu Ten. 80 ming [ ** compact, solid, dense + att l-iridium (from Latin iridis the 
rainbow). 
It is one of the heaviest substances known, its specific gravity being 22.4. 
ETH is an all-India word: Dardic (Kalasha) TT, TT, (Pashai) Tuc (Tirahi) ETUT, TOT; Kashmiri TT; Kumaoni ut; Assamese, Bengali, Oriya, Kannada 7t; Hindi 77, ET; Panjabi, Lahndi sut; Sindhi Sul, Gujarati घन, घणुं; Marathi घन, घण; Tamil कनम् ; Telugu घनमु; Malayalam धनं; 
Singhalese गन. 81 at [ light targ lithium [from Greek lithos stone, from its 
having been discovered in a mineral]. 
It is the lightest metal known (specific gravity 0.53). Cf. Fafe (TY heavy to ] for osmium. 
99 is an all-India word: Gypsy plit; Shina org; Kashmiri , 'lightly', लूक 'small'; Western Pahari लौक्का 'small'; Hindi लघु, हरुघा, हल्का; Panjabi 
XXXVII 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
ETETT; Sindhi fast; Marathi , kos; Bengali, Oriya, Gujarati, Kannada, Malayalam 7a; Tamil gay 'minuteness, fineness'; Telugu wat; Singha lese लुहु. 
R. ABUNDANCE. 82 gopicat (909 abundant + -]-cerium [named by Berzelius in 1803 
from the asteroid Ceres (name of the Roman goddess of growing vege tation), then just discovered (1801)]. 
It is the most abundant of the rare-earth group. 
qocation is an all-India word: Hindi, Oriya, Kannada qotiret; Marathi पुष्कळ; Gujarati पुष्कळ; Tamil पुड्कळम् ; Telugu पुष्कलम; Malayalam पुष्कलं. 83 Hurfer [728 abundant-taifer gas)-nitrogen (from Greek nitro- niter+ 
-gen). 
It is a gaseous element constituting 78.03 per cent of the atmosphere by volume. Cf. German Salpeter-stoff, Stickluft, Russian celutro-rod. It is called azote gostarfa (from Greek a- - not+-70 fita life) by French chemists, because it is incapable of supporting life. Cf. Spanish azie, Italian and Portuguese azoto, Japanese c his-so stop-pure. 
are is used in several languages of India: Bengali, Hindi, Kannada भूयस्; Telugu भूयस्सु; Malayalam भूयः. 84 YTT [7T abundant + -PT]—yttrium (from Ytterby in Sweden]. 
It is the most abundant of the yttrium group. 
a is a word of high literature: Hindi, Kannada PT; Telugu a; Malayalam भृशं. 
S. MINUTENESS. 85 menifar [alfe (17) ten-million(th)+-alfagas)-xenon [Greek, neuter of 
Xenos strange). 
It is a gaseous element occurring in air, about one part in 170 millions by volume. 
opife is an all-India word: Hindi, Marathi, Gujarati, Bengali, Oriya, 
Tamil, Telugu, Kannada, Malayalam aplfc. 86 pars [sta minute, tiny, trifling+-+T7]—virginium[from the State Virginia]. 
It is reported as occurring in minute quantities in pollucite, sea-water, etc: 
XXXViii 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
SSC 
ALS. 
m2 
क्षुद्र occurs widely: European Gypsy खुर्दो; Assamese खूद्, खूदिया; Oriya s, qat; Hindi, Bengali, Nepali, Gujarati, Marathi, Kannada ; 
Telugu क्षुद्रमु; Malayalam क्षुद्र; Singhalese कुडा, कुदु. 87 Filming [Faip little+art)---scandium [from Latin Scandia Scandinavia + 
It is sparsely (though widely) distributed in association with the rare-earth metals. 
Tlfi and its descendants are widely distributed: Hindi, Bengali, Oriya, स्तोक, थोड़ा; Panjabi थोड़ा; Nepali थोर; Western Pahari (Bhadrawahi) थोड़ो, (Pangwali, Curahi) थोड़ा; Kumaoni थ्वाड़ा; Gujarati थोडु; Marathi थोडें; Lahndi थोला; Sindhi थोरो; Telugu स्तोकम ; Kannada स्तोक; Malayalam स्तोक. 
T. BRITTLENESS. 88 företg [ V fare to break (768 brittle)+-170)bismuth [German bismuth, 
wismut, of unknown origin). 
It is a brittle metal. Cf. Japanese reaso-en grey lead. 
Derivatives of fare are used all over India: Hindi faraat, ; Bengali भेदन; Gujarati भेद, भेदबुं; Marathi भेद, भेदणे; Oriya भेदन; Telugu भेदनमु; Kannada f#, #7; Malayalam ni. 
U. SPECIAL SOURCE. 89 Frete e meteor7)-cobalt (German Kobalt goblin). 
Cobalt occurs native in meteoric iron. 
page is an all-India word: Hindi, Bengali, Gujarati, Marathi, Oriya, Tamil, Kannada, Malayalam #q; Telugu aaa. 
V. SPECIAL USAGE. 90 Fireon [fire depriving of changed to oft before the following 5)+ VITE to colour + -ine)--chlorine [from Greek chloros pale-green + -ine]. 
It is used as a powerful bleaching agent. Cf. Japanese en-so, Chinese yen-su salt-pure. 
fare is an all-India prefix. For V (= V19) see under no. 92. 91 afar [(ark) aa (air)ship+arfa gas]-helium [from Greek helios the sun). 
It is used in balloons and airships. 
477 is an all-India word: Hindi, Beng:li, Oriya, Gujarati, Marathi, Kannada यान; Telugu यानमु; Malayalam यानं. 
he 
Xxxix 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
92 रंजातु [रंज colour+धातु]-titanium [from Greek Titanes the sons of earth]. 
Its compounds are used as pigments, mordants, dyes, etc. 
Derivatives of रंज (e.g. रंग, रंजक, रंजन) are used all over India: Hindi रंग, रंजक, रंजित; Bengali रङ्ग, रं, रञ्जक, रञ्जन, रञ्जित; Gujarati रंग, रंगवू; 
Marathi रंग, रंगणें ; Oriya रङ्ग, रङ्गा; Telugu रंगमु, रंगु, रंजकमु, रंजनमु; Kannada रंग, रंग, रंजक. रंजन, रंजित; Malayalam रंगं, रञ्जन, रञ्जनं. 
minimins 
The Periodic Table आवर्तन-सारणी Group II Group III T Group IV T Group V 7 Group VI 
Group 
| 
Group I 
| 
Group VIII 
वर्ग. 
Group VIII 
वर्ग 
पा 
वर्ग 
वर्ग 
o 
E0 तज 
EO 
1 
04 E, O; 
EO 
EO 
EO 
IC 
16 
HIGHEST OXIDE (V==ELEMENT) परम जारेय (तम् तत्त्व) HIGHEST HYDRIDE 
परम उदेय Farmila 
A 
E Hz 
a 
CO 
- 
Period | Series आदर्तन । माला 
१.७.०५८ उदजन 
Be Fan 
ra 
0 
Hea ४.००२ यानाति 
Liz ६.६४० लघ्वात 
६.०२ 
१०.१२ 
१४.००८ 
टोकण 
प्रांगार 
भूयाति 
जारक 
तरस्थिती 
ALफ 
३ 
Ne fat Nam २०.१.३ २२.१६७ शिविराति बारात 
प्राजातु 
स्फट्यातु 
संक्ता 
भास्वर 
३२.०६ शुरुवार 
नीरजी 
Tik ४७.६० 
३६.६४४ मंदाति 
३६.१० दहात 
SC77 ४५.१० स्तोकातु 
! ४०.०० 
Mon ५४.६३ लोहक 
Fem Co Ni ५५.८४ ५८.६४ ५८.६६ । अयस् त्वातु रूपक 
रंजातु 
रोचातु 
द्र 
Sel 
Ge far ३२.६० 
६३.५७ 
सिकातु 
नेपाली 
मेचाग्नि 
कुष्यातु 
17 
Kr 
Rb 
Sty 
४१ Ch 
Ma 
दुरात्री 
४४ ४५ ४६ ॥ Rul Rhना Pd नि | १०१.७ १०२.६१ १०६.७ नक्षरातु नाम्लातु निषातु 
- 
Z: गो ६१.२२ गोसेदातु 
५७.६३ 
लीनातिदीपातु 
संवर्णातु 
चेष्टातु 
४७ 
SnT! 
Sb 
Teri 
- 
१२७.६८० 
११४.७६ 
११८७० 
१२७.६१ 
तक । ... जंबुकी 
Xe को 
छु 
| Bat 
Taस 
Re @T" 
TOST IT 
Pta 
Rare-earth 
metals विरला-मृद धातु* 
Hf7T १७८.६ गावातु 
Wa १४.० चण्डातु 
कोट्याति बतातु 
आयात 
। गुवात 
बना 
महात 
Pb सी 
Po at 
Ab 1 
Au FT १९७२ 
TI सिक २०४.३६ 
२०७.२२ 
२०६.३० 
सिक्ष्यातु 
तोया 
__ लावणी 
Rat 
Vir 
|Rad 
10 कि 
तंजमाति । क्षत्रातु 
हमातु 
प्रजातु 
| किरपात 
___ * ५७ La सु १३८.६२ सुजाला ॥ ५८ Ce पु १४०.१३ पुष्कला ।। १६ Pr श्य १४०.६२ श्यामला ।। ६० Nd आ १४४.२७ प्रापीतला ॥ ६१ II पि (१४६ १) पिविरला ॥ ६२ S2 घ १५०.४३ घसरला ॥ 
३३ Ex किं १५२.० किंविरला ॥ ६४ Gd यो १५७.३ योनिला ॥ ६५ T! इ १५६.२ इन्भृशला ॥ ६६ Dy चु १६२.४६ चुम्बला ॥ ६७ Ho पां १६३.५ पांडुला ॥ ६८ र १६५.२० रक्तला ॥ 
ss Time १६९.४ व्या रिला ।। ७० Yh शव १७३.०४ श्वेतला ॥ ७१ L निर् १७५.० निर्वर्णला । 
COLOUR NAMES Colour may be regarded as a psychological category; it can be des cribed and specified in terms derivable from introspective analysis, without any reference whatever to wave lengths, to energy, or to any physical category; but it is also possible to state the physical correlates of the psy chologically determined attributes of colour and to draw up certain psy chophysical relations between them. All colours are divisible into two classes, the chromatic colours , as reds, greens, purples, browns and pinks; and the achromatic, or neutral colours, including black, white and the inter mediate series of greys. The latter are found to differ from each other only in their degree of resemblance to or difference from black or white). It is possible to form a series, ranging from black to white, with a median 
WHITE 
BRILLIANCE - 
TINTS 
BLUE 
scturation 
COOL 
WARM 
MEDIAN 
GREY 
GREEN 
YELLOW 
SHADES 
BLACK 
xli﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
grey at the centre differing equally from black and white, and with each other grey differing from its immediate neighbours by equal sense differ ences. This series can be made into a scale by assigning an ordinal number to each grey, either ascending toward the lighter greys from black as zero or ascending with positive numbers and descending with negative numbers from median grey as zero. That attribute which thus measures the varia tion of the greys is called brilliance; dark greys have low, median grey has medium, and light greys have high brilliance. 
Chromatic colours differ from each other not only in brilliance but also in hue and saturation. Hue is that attribute in respect to which colours may be described as red, yellow, green or blue, or as intermediate between two of these. Hues form a natural cyclic series (hue cycle, colour cycle or colour gamut). Colours of the same hue and equal brilliance may differ from each other in saturation, that is, in vividness of hue or in degree of difference from grey. In terms of these three attributes, colours can be arranged in a symbolic tridimensional space (colour solid) having the grey series as axis, with median grey at the centre and black and white at the extremities. Corresponding to each grey is a plane perpendicular to the axis, in which lie the points representing all colours of equal brilliance. In each plane, hue is represented cyclically in the order of the hue cycle, and saturation is represented radically, with the axial points (greys) as reference points of zero saturation. Thus any colour can be specified by giving three ordinal numbers (colour constants or dimensions) which are the co-ordi nates of the corresponding point in the colour solid. By the establishing of arbitrary division points on the scales of brilliance and saturation any colour can be described as having very low, low, medium, high or very high position on these scales. “Of very low brilliance" means closely resembling black; "of low brilliance," about half way between black and middle grey; "of medium brilliance," about as brilliant as middle grey; "of high brilliance," about half way between middle grey and white; "of very high brilliance," closely resembling white. Similarly, “of very low saturation" means almost grey; "of very high saturation" means very vivid. 
All hues may be described in terms of the four psychologically primary hues, red, yellow, green and blue, which are themselves indescribable in terms of other hues. Thus red-yellow denotes a hue equally resembling, and differing equally from, red and yellow. Between each consecutive pair of the psychologically primary hues many intermediates can be recognized. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
By the establishing of arbitrary points of division on the hue cycle, hues can be classified as yellowish-red, reddish red-yellow, red-yellow, yellow ish red-yellow, reddish-yellow, yellow, greenish-yellow, yellowish yellow green, etc. 
In the method of homo-hetero-analysis, or so-called mono-chromatic analysis hue is determined to a first approximation but not exactly) by dominant wave length, saturation by purity and brilliance by total light. The wave length of the spectral light required for match is called the do minant wave length. The ratio of the intensity of the spectral light to that of the total (spectral plus grey) light is the purity. The third measure is the total light, integral with respect to wave length. 
In the English tongue colours have been named not in a scientific but 
hanner. For example, opera pink, tea rose, germanium, cardinal, fuorite violet are reds with different grades of brilliance: very high, high, medium, low and very low respectively. Take another series of reds: peach, salmon, tile red, henna and plum similarly graded. These are known as common names of colours. They may be useful as containing standards for comparison, but every peach, plum and rose does not have the same hue, saturation and brilliance. For popular usage a number of these names have been retained in our translation, but it has been considered imperative to devise a system of scientific nomenclature, in which four hues, five intermediate grades between any two of them, five grades of saturation and five grades of brilliance have been made the basis of colour names. Every colour name specifies hue, saturation and brilliance, thus containing the complete definition within itself. Altogether, sixteen words have been employed, twelve prefixes and four nouns. They are familiar to every schoolboy. Only, he has to learn them in a new context. 
HUES 
To take the hues first. There are four primary hues: red, yellow, green and blue. Their common names are 347, ta, efe and fta. The inter mediate colours between red and yellow, yellow and green, green and blue, blue and red are given hereunder: 
red yellowish- reddish red yellowish reddish- yellow 
red red-yellow yellow red-yellow yellow 
रक्त 
रक्तापीत पीतातिरक्त रक्त-पीत 
रक्तातिपीत 
पीतारक्त 
पीत 
xliii 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
yellow greenish- yellowish yellow- 
I yellow yellow-green green 
greenish yellow-green 
yellowish- green 
green 
- 
- 
- 
- 
पीत 
पीताहरि 
हर्यतिपीत 
पीत-हरि 
पीतातिहरि 
र्यापीत 
green 
bluish- green 
greenish green-blue 
green blue 
blue 
bluish green-blue 
greenish- 
blue 
हरि 
हनिील नीलातिहरि हरि-नील 
हर्यतिनील 
नीलाहरि । 
नील 
blue 
red 
reddish blue 
bluish blue-red 
blue red 
reddish blue-red 
bluish red 
नील नीलारक्त रक्तातिनील नील-रक्त 
नीलातिरक्त 
रक्तानील 
रक्त 
Presides the for words standing ic 
Besides the four words standing for the four primary hues, two prefixes T 'slight' and अति "much' are all that are required to be learnt. 
SATURATION 
ITINE 
(VIVIDNESS OF HUE) 
विशदता (वर्ण-सम्पत्) 
Saturation is that attribute of chromatic colours which determines their degree of difference from a grey of the same brilliance; distinctness or vividness of hue. It is also called chroma, purity. 
Prefixes for denoting different grades of saturation very low low medium high very high 
grey 
vivid 
धुसर 
अप 
अव 
मध्य 
उत् 
अधि 
विशदतम 
Grades of saturation in terms of vividness. very low low medium high very high 
grey 
vivid 
धूसर 
अपविशद 
अवविशद मध्यविशद 
उद्विशद 
अधिविशद 
विशदतम 
xliv 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
BRILLIANCE 
Brilliance is that attribute of a colour without which it cannot exist (except that black is considered to have zero brilliance), and in respect of which it may be classed as equivalent to some member of the series of greys ranging from black (as the zero member) to white; roughly, the degree of resemblance to white or difference from black. It is also called value, luminosity, visual or subjective brightness. 
Prefixes for denoting different grades of brilliance black very low low medium high very high white 
HIGT 
सु 
श्वेत 
___ काल विनि 
मध्य प्र 
Grades of brilliance black very low low medium high 
very high 
white 
A 
NN 
काल 
विशुभ्र 
सुशुभ्र 
श्वेत 
निशुभ्र मध्यशुभ्र प्रशुभ्र Grades of greys 
grey 
black 
white 
Grades of greys in terms of black and white 
black 
white 
काल 
कालाश्वेत श्वेतातिकाल काल-श्वेत कालातिश्वेत श्वेताकाल 
श्वेत 
EXAMPLES Note 1. The order in our translations is brilliance, saturation, hue. Saturation is connected with 
bue. Every bue has a saturation. So in colour names saturation prefix always comes 
nearer to hue. 2. If either brilliance or saturation be medium, the word sy is left out; but when both 
brilliance and saturation be medium, one FETT serves for both. . 3. Prefixes for brilliance begin with consonants, those for saturation (excepting #) begin 
with vowels. 4. Prefixes for brilliance end in vowels, which naturally coalesce with the following vowel 
initials of saturation prefixes. That effects an economy of one syllable. 
xlv 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
cameo green (yellow-green, saturation low, brilliance high) प्राव-पीत-हरि. Dresden blue (blue, sat. medium, bril. medium) मध्य-नील. 
moss grey (yellow, sat. low, bril. medium) अव-पीत. murrey (red, sat. high, bril. low) न्युद-रक्त. pyrethrum yellow (yellow, sat. medium, bril. high) प्र-पीत. 
FURTHER SUBDIVISIONS 
T 
HUES 
पीतातिहरि Ordinarily it suffices to have five पीतकातिहरि grades between any two hues. When, यापीत however, two colours of the same हर्यापीतक hue have to be distinguished, one of higher than another, a further sub हर्यानीलक division becomes necessary. The हानील diminutive suffix क has been utilis- नीलकातिहरि ed to mark a lighter hue. 
नीलातिहरि रक्त 
हरिनीलक रक्तापीतक 
हरिनील रक्तापीत 
नीलहरिक पीतकातिरक्त 
हर्यतिनील पीतातिरक्त 
हरिकातिनील रक्तपीतक 
नीलाहरि रक्तपीत 
नीलाहरिक पीतरक्तक रक्तातिपीत 
नीलारक्तक रक्तकातिपीत 
नीलारक्त पीतारक्त 
रक्तकातिनील पीतारक्तक 
रक्तातिनील पीत 
नीलरक्तक पीताहरिक 
नीलरक्त पीताहरि 
रक्तनीलक हरिकातिपीत 
नीलातिरक्त हर्यतिपीत 
नीलकातिरक्त पीतहरिक 
रक्तानील पीतहरि 
रक्तानीलक हरिपीतक 
रक्त 
नील 
xlvi 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
SATURATION # 'slight' has been used to mark the intermediate grades: 
Note ut instead of st which would be confounded with s when it is joined on to saturation prefixes beginning with or 3. 
अप 
अपा अव 
अवा मध्य 
JGT 
अध्या अधि 
BRILLIANCE Here also a is similarly used: 
Example: Yellow ocher, buff and chamois, all the three are yelowish red-yellow in hue, of medium satu ration and high brilliance. But yellow ocher is yellower and of higher satu ration and lower brilliance than buff, while buff may be described as redder and of lower saturation and higher brilliance than yellow ocher Buff is also redder and of higher saturation than chamois. Yellow ocher and chamois are both Tafata, but buff is redder पीतरक्तक. In saturation buff 
is medium, yellow ocher is a bit higher 3GT, and chamois a little lower 991. In brilliance, buff and chamois are high st, but yellow ocher is slightly lower 9. Thus yellow ocher is आप्रोदारक्तातिपीत, buffis प्रपीतरक्तक and chamois stareastfarter. 
वि 
व्या 
'नि 
न्या 
आप 
स्वा 
in 
xlvii 
SYMBOLS AND ABBREVIATIONS 
In India abbreviations have been Abbreviations and symbols were used as names from the most ancient also made the basis of a mystic lan times. In the Vedic literature a guage, the language of Buddhist hymn, which is a collection of man- and Saiva Tantric ritual, magic and tras, is often designated by its open thought. These symbols spread over ing word of words. That of the entire length and breadth of the Rigveda is well-known (ar Ft India and from here they migrated 
that which begins with the two to the farthest limits of the East words ). Similarly 4141ATH Indies and beyond the Himalayas designates the mantra 48145t at sorted into Tibet, Central Asia, Mongolia, गिरागिरा च दक्षसे । प्रप्र वयममृतं जातवेदसं प्रियं China, Corea and Japan. In the मित्रं न शंसिषम्. 
Buddhist manuscripts recently ex ईशोपनिषत् and केनोपनिषत् are derived humed in Gilgit a धारणी runs as from the opening words fent and fast follows: quare fer present offt II respectively. The first chapter of Cha- TAPETERET I (Vol. I, p. 74). Ud raka Samhitā, the oldest Indian trea- dhārakosha, which is an ancient dic tise on medicine, begins with ata tionary of the secret monosyllabic Fifaah frater Heat 3911 and is code of the Saivas of North India, hence named ateiswilfaciran; so also provides many such instances: 5 many other chapters. 
(575), E (start), mi or (978), # In music the seven notes are ! 
(HUF), 3 (Eift, mark the deteriora (957, being popularly pronounced 
tion of a to in the popular as #), fo (TH, # is popularly pro 
speech), a (alfa), 5T OF 5 (#, phone nounced as fr or ). IT (FETTĪ, tically a most interesting instance of (#24H), 9 (4=**), (*28), fer (fragra). 
57 pronounced as a nasalised ). 
is a combination of sky+7 dark In prosody a light syllable is 
ness (757) denoting fine dust (“that known as at (7) and a heavy one darkens the sky'). The pure nasal as T (TE). 
Far is here and in many other Sanskrit manuscripts show te instances the counterpart of the mo gular abbreviations of the titles dern period (), which marks an which are repeated on every folio. abbreviation, though it would be 
xlviii 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
idle to dogmatise that the ancients (2T4THT, EFETT), 7 (947, Ch, ha), fa were as conscious as we of this par- (ott, áttet), 7 (FT, F4F4F71987). ticular value of the अनुस्वार. 
Pāņini, the greatest codifier of It is not only technical men who language, has employed a system used abbreviations, but even literary 
known as STEITET, composed of the men found occasion to use them; 
initial syllable and the final conso and among our lexicons a special 
nant of a series which is thus en genre known as 557272719 was de 
compassed and designated by it. Ac voted entirely to them. For exam- cording to Panini names can be ple: (49, maig), (BATERIHEUT, ţ shortened to as or T. GESTEET being the eleventh letter, so that is 
to षडिक, सुपर्याशीर्दत्त to सुपरिय. I), (wafat), # (774, 44151, 917, Fitt aft), 7 (FTT, used as a prefix), 7 Thus in following up the modern (9467, ate, arsa), (* clean, pure, scientific symbols and abbreviations ELETT), 5 (a, g, h, vulfat), (577- and providing for them in the Indian fact), 5 (57 fear, 5769, 076), GT (sifir), languages, we have at our back a 
(TT6, 6971, T6), 7 (973, pe, arc), a solid tradition which serves as our argarefaat', aracter 94.78), (9*t, foundation and leads us on smooth HTET), E (EF, ETC, ara, risafat, sir, ly. Not for a moment are we spremeft), 5 (E7, furt), a (afa), * allowed to feel that we are treading (***, Ta), (ares, 4), 3 (54), ? on foreign terrain. 
W 
. 
GREEK AND ROMAN ALPHABETS Letters of the alphabet are some- the Greek alphabet, not as Greek times used to indicate anyone or numerals), to express serial arrange anything arbitrarily or conveniently ment or position; to distinguish bet so designated; specifically with quasi- ween allotropic forms of certain numerical force (A meaning first, B elements (cf. alpha iron, beta iron, second, C third, etc., 2 last), as in gamma iron); to distinguish between distinguishing successive stages in isomers or modifications and to in the disintegration of radioactive ele- dicate the position of substituting ments. 
groups in certain compounds. Greek letters are even more fre- We have allotted two separate quently used with numerical signifi- sets of Indian letters to represent cance (in order of their sequence in the Greek and Roman alphabets. 
xlix 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
oy 
di 
e 
S 
I 
V 
9 
o 
ou 
Greek and Roman letters have names: alpha, gamma, etc. These are uniformly translatable by the addition of कार or -वर्ण-alpha प्रकार (Huf), gamma Fir (Tauf). a alpha B beta 
gamma delta epsilon Zeta eta theta iota 
kappa AA lambda 
mu 
o 
A 
a 
G 
A 
A 
A 
A 
开玩 »、«» 哥弟 寵可。对江,迁牙玩“苏苏可可紅可到g 
nu 
D 
omicron 
A 
G 
tho sigma tau upsilon 
phi 
chi psi 
omega. 
the lasti 
It should be noted that I, V and W are not always taken into account when consecutive numbers are marked with Roman letters. In that case, I and I both would be 7, and K to U would be represented by 5 to 7. X, Y, Z would remain unchanged. 
Many of the Greek and Roman letters stand as abbreviations and sym bols. The most important of these are given in the main vocabulary. 
Boto > 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
SYMBOLS USED IN MATHEMATICS 
TABLE I Serial groups of Greek letters serving as symbols unrelated to Roman Jetters. 
(3) B 
TABLE II SERIAL GROUPS OF CONSTANTS 
Roman letters 
Corresponding Greek letters Small letters Capital letters 
Small letters 
Capital letters 
4 
a 
feti 
(1) a 
b 
ख 
4 
I Ao 
4 
4 
4 
8 
4 
a 
4 
4 
4 
m﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
Roman letters 
. 
Corresponding Greek letters Small letters Capital letters 
Small letters 
Capital letters 
իջ 
2 3 6 
22 
Խ 
Ի 
Խ 
Ծ 
o bu 
: 
Է 
* 
Ծ 
Ե 
44 
यि 
Ի 
n 
for 
Ն 
Z 
FT 
}л 
लि 
(I) In the case of sides and angles of a triangle in plane and spherical trigonometry angles shall be denoted by 491277 consonants and the opposite or corresponding sides by the corresponding #TFTra letters. 
Sin A Sin B Sin C 
-- would be 
eigen 
ज्याक 
ज्या 
ख 
ज्या ग 
गा 
खा 
Where small letters and related capital letters occur together in English, the general arrangement should be followed.. 
6.3. ax + by +c=0 
T + 27 T = 0 Ax+By+ CEO ATT + 9 + T = 0 Pp+la+Rr=o 
TT + T 27 tag=0 (2) In naming figures, where capital letters are used in English, the points should be denoted by **T&Ta consonants, choosing groups from the above table as far as possible. 
lii 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
6) a, the first letter of fary, is recommended as the substitute for P, the point. 
(4) #, the first letter of wafarg, should be used for O, the origin. The radius vector OP will thus be represented by #. (5) The symbol for the number se equal to 3.1416....will be cut, since 
परिधि a = ***, the conjunct consonant ending in long at being necessary to give it a distinctive sound. 
(For small 1 =radius vector, 7 shall be used, being the significant consonant in (af ) FACEIT. 
(7) o will be represented by ft; being the first letter of falsat the radius of currature. 
(8) ", 0, $ coordinate system will be 7, 3, Q. (9) s, y pedal cocrdinates will be a, T. (10) 11 as any number will be represented by # of (*1fert) FEETT. (II) r or t used as a represented term will be 7 (fte fast an). (12) · as a running term will be et (afa 4). 
(13) e as the exponential will be represented by (abbreviated from ara) so that et is ama. 
(14) The Cartesian coordinates x, y, z will be 9, 7, 7. 
(15) The letter # does not come anywhere in the serial order (Table II). It is, therefore, available for being used as an unspecified general constant. 
(16) Other symbols required in mathematics will be abbreviations for which the general rule to be followed is to select the first consonant with the vowel or the first vowel, dropping the 57. In the case of a com pound word, the abbreviation is to be taken from the more significant member of the compound. 
(17) ** read as e to the power will be et घा घात य 
» » & raised to t 
घा उन्नीत य > > ex 
ETT, TT. (18) a=b will be = read as TH . 
2 
will be य 
read as योग ध सम शून्य यावत् ध सम स. 
79: :0 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
(20) In the above the letter 7 has been used as an abbreviation of OTT to represent summation for which is used in English. The written symbol य is to be read as योग. 
(21) x=loga will be t he fi read as 3 TH ET FATETT . 
(22) Napierian log will be at zat meaning CT SITT. ET and log will be at, for which the symbol will be a. 
(23) a=1+x loge+ **1080).. 4 (logo)" 
p=l+a #a++ **TF) .....+" 
(24) - will be read as la abbreviated from matfern). 12! will be स! read as स हत. 
(25) will be read as # urfstetten (a by 1), or #71*: a (a upon )). (26) axb will be #xæ read as # effora e (a into b). 
(27) at will be the read as # 7 # (a added to b) or after ta, FERAT (a plus b). 
(28) amb will be i n read as # faqa ta (a subtracted by b) or 57 a, FOUT (a minus b). 
(29) The positive sign will be called afara or 977, the negative sign or u. 
I will be read as ofertat, 
+ will be ऊनाधिक. (30) Lt limit n tending to infinity will be of read as PAT TASTEFATHT. 
(31) Arrow will be called arut (32) Rapidly convergent series fra WTT DET. 
Slowly divergent series मन्द अपसारी श्रेढी. (33) nth will be F-41 (in Hindi and Marathi) or 7-94 (according to 
Sanskrit). (18+1) th will be (+)41 (Hindi and Marathi) or (78)- 
(according to Sanskrit). Iooth 787-777. 
--00 
liv 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
mmandutam 
(34) Dot will be बिन्दुक, dash प्रास, and bar दण्ड. (35) Determinant A = नी (निश्चायक). 
A.- नी. read as नी शून्य. 
A' नी' read as नी प्रास. (36) Discriminant A = वे (विवेचक). (37) Q (quotient) = भा (भागफल). 
P (product) = फ (गुणनफल). 
R (remainder)= श (अवशेष). (38) Va will be Vp read as करणी-चिह्न क, or मूल क. 
"Va (nth root of a) स क (read as स-वां मूल क). 
3Va (3rd toot of a) क (तृतीय मूल क). (39) a>b will be क>ख read as क ज्यायस् ख. 
a<b will be क<ख read as क कनीयस् ख. (40) Round brackets will be called गोलाभिवार (), squate brackets कोणाभिवार [ ], and braces प्राभिवार { }, vinculum शिरोवार. 
(41) etc. is इत्यादि. 
(42) *P, will be denoted by क्रन and "C, by सचन, च and a being taken from संचय and क्रमचय. 
(43) In °C,="चन the superscript स will be called वाम मुर्धन्य and the subscript न will be called. दक्षिण पाद्य. 
(44) Superscript मूर्धाक्षर (letters written at the top). 
Subscript पादाक्षर (letters written at the foot). .. (45) Trigonometrical Symbols . . . . . . 
Sin @ FUT 
Cosec व्युज्या ऊ . Cos @ कोज्या ऊ (कोटिज्या) - Sece व्युत्कोज्या ऊ tan ® स्प ऊ (स्पर्शज्या) . . Cote कोस्प ऊ 
Inverse प्रतीप .. . .. . . Sin-1x will be ज्याय read as प्रतीप ज्या य. Radian measure आरीय कोण माप. Degree angle measure आंशिक कोण माप. . Sin r ==0 ज्या प्या = ० . Cos r =-1 कोज्या प्या ---१ Versed sin x=r-cosixi . उत्तम ज्या ग्र-उज्ज्याय 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
Hyperbolic अधीन्द्र (एकाद् अधिक उत्कन्द्रता) Sinh अज्या (A for अधीन्द्र) Cosh अकोज्या (46) Coordinates याम (47) Variable चल 
Variation चलन 
Inctement वर्धन (48) Differential अवकल 
Differential calculus बलन-कलन 
Differential coefficient अवकल गुणक (49) f () श्रि (य) from श्रित (य) 
F(s) श्रा (य) 
क (x) श्री (य) so that y==f) र=श्रि (य) 
y=F(c) र-श्रा (य) 
Jyad(s) र=श्री (य) (50) Operate करण 
Operation करण 
Operator कारक (51) Integration अनुकलन (52) The sign of integration will be a from अनुकलन 
(i) yde will be अ र च य read as अनुकल र च य (ii) Integral of y with respect to x between the limits a and b 
joyde will be अ रचय, read as अनुकल सीमे क ख रचय (र का अनुकल, य के प्रति, क और ख सीमाओं में) Integral ydx between the limits a and b अनुकल र च य सीमा क और ख के बीच में Integrallydir from a tob अनुकल र च य, क से ख तक Integral a to bydx अनुकल क से ख तक, र च य 
WELLL 
वर 
T 
(ity 
O 
fe, i asx diy ke 
Jora Jio Jap अपःख अरघ अजय शि जय-कभर गजल 
र, ल) चय चर चल 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
triple integral of a function of x, y, z with respect to x, y and between the limits of x from a to b, of y from c to d, of from p to 9 य, र और ल के प्रति श्रित य र ल का त्रिगुण अनुकल, य की सीमाएं क से ख तक, र की सीमाएं ग से घ तक, तथा ल की सीमाएं त से थ तक। 
(55) ake चय, dx चाय, &xe चिय, Dx चीय; 6 () चब श्री (य); * * (A) चा श्री (य); D$ (x) ची श्री (य); 86 (x) चि श्री (य); ".-" will be र चर read 
चाय as र, स, सम च घात सर, भाजित च य स. 
Ivii 
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES 
The Greeks had no numbers beyond the myriad “ten thousand" (104), while the Romans did not go beyond mille "one thousand" (103). The English word million is from Italian millione, augmentative from mille "thousand." In India our ancestors dealt freely with no less than eighteen denominations, and gave them specific names. In Lalita vistara, a biography of Lord Buddha, numbers go up to 1053! siiseftir, a period of time among the Jains, occupies 194 notational places!! 
As is well known, the decimal place value system is an Indian invention and it is from here that the system has spread to the whole world. Hence we are quite at home in dealing with the me tric system. TT, TT, WEW, 945*, and ma are single words and can be used simply and unambiguously. 
In weights and capacity measures we had great variety in the past. After long search we have been able to select out of these a series which can serve as the basis for the formation of modern English terminology. Even a cursory glance at the two sets, the ancient Indian and the modern English, will convince the reader that the English system is largely Indian, from the grain up to the ton. The weights are usually multiples of two (2, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26), with an occa sional multiple of three or five. The starting point is 4a, which is no more and no less than a grain. 180 was make one tola. The present day Indian Government or Railway seer is 80 tolas; one tola being exactly 180 grains (see also Webster's New International Dic tionary of the English Language, 1934, s.v. ser). 
77" is in use already. Hence it is not used. Tt, which is another Dame for Fret, is 15 as, just as one gram is 15 grains (15.432356). 
*EST-EF and 47-Te are the prevalent names nowadays. But 75 (10,000) and tum (million) are simpler and easier to use in compounds. Fortunately sea is one of those few higher numbers whose value is fairly constant right up from the years (17. 2), afastoffen (4.40. 11.4, 7. 2. 20. I), qafatey and TIET47879 down to Aryabhata I (499 A. D.), Sridhara (750 A. D.), Bhaskara II (1150 A. D.), etc. 
+ The goldsmith's #ty of 15 tas is slightly different, being 17 grains troy, 
Ivti 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
Hence for becomes the basis of the metric system of weights. 
per is our unit of capacity measures since times immemorial. It is the counterpart of the modern liter. In Webster its value has been worked out to be 1.03 liters. 
An inch is longer than an . Hence it is rendered by प्रांगुल. नल्व and क्रोश are shorter than furlong and league respectively. Hence furlong is use and league is a. A mile is less than a क्रोश, so it is rendered by कोशक. 
In liquid measures start is made with safe, our counterpart of gill. 
४ प्रसूति=शराव ८ शराव-पाठक ६४ आढक= खारी The same relationship is shown by the English measures: 
4 gills=pint 8 pints=gallon 63 gallons=hogshead 
(Note the slight variation in the last item). This gives us the following equivalents: 
pint=arta 
gallon=पाढक 
hogshead=खारी. 
The apothecaries' fluid measure name equations have been simi larly worked out: 
minim=farger fluid dram=तरल शाण fluid ounce=तरल शुक्ति pint=(TT) 77 
gallon=1977) 576. In dry measures the starting point is pe=pint. Sixty-four 7379s make a 14. So do 64 pints make one bushel. Hence bushel is T'. A barrel is much greater than a stuft. Hence it has been rendered by महाद्रोणी. 
In circular measures degree is well known. has been used for a minute and fapt* for a second. 
* काष्ठा is one-thirtieth of a कला. 
lix 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
Avoirdupois weights being the commonest in use are called TAFZI HTT. The starting point is 7=grain. The next weights are dram, ounce and pound. The dram and ounce are lighter than our TOT and that respectively. So they are termed 37701 and suff97. The pound is heavier than our gouft. Hence it is termed sister. The hundredweight approximates our ttust, which word we have re tained without the addition of a prefix or a suffix. 20 Trits make a statt. So do 20 hundredweights a ton. Hence ton is azi. 
The word ton has been used variously in the English language: 
short ton (ton) sati, na stadi long ton (2240 lbs.)=gross ton, shipper's ton taitaa metric ton=millier=tonneau $47-27TFT, Frf staat assay ton 187-99 commercial ton atfuprad (Cornish) mining ton (2352 Ibs.) aff-adi nautical ton नाविक प्रवर्त register ton (a unit of internal capacity for ships--100 c. ft.) 
94-stad. Troy weights are # #T (# gold). A troy grain is the same as an avoirdupois grain. Pennyweight (24 grains) is much bigger than out FTC (15 qas). So it is termed FrT. 480 tas make one afara So do 480 grains make one ounce troy. Thus an ounce is exactly a great. The pound troy (5760 grains) being smaller than the pound avoirdupois (7000 grains, visfat) is unfett. A carat (3.086 grains troy) would be sais (3 s make one is); and a carat grain (one-fourth of a carat) is 99. Crith (Gk, krithe "a barley corn") is spea. It is 
08987 gram=1.34805 grains=a liter of hydrogen at n. t. p. 
In apothecaries' weights grain and pound are the same as in the troy system. Scruple (20 grains) is same (HTT being 15 was). Dram (60 gr.) and ounce (480 gr.) are exactly trut ( 0 349) and fart (850 ). 
A consolidated series of ancient weights and cubic measures, from a sta to a radi, is attached below: 
१५ यव-माष 8 TTT २ शाण-कोल २ कोलकर्ष 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
२ कर्ष= शुक्ति (अष्टमिका) २ शुक्ति पल (प्रकुंच, मुष्टि) २ पल-प्रसृति २ प्रसृति-अंजलि (कुडव; ३८४० यव) २ अंजलि=शराव (मानिका; ७६८० यव) २ शराव=प्रस्थ (a seer) ४ प्रस्थ-पाठक ४ आढक-द्रोण २ द्रोण-शूर्प २ शूर्प-द्रोणी, गोणी (६६२,०४० यव; cwt.=700,000 gr.; long cwt. ___784,000 gr.) 
४ द्रोणी खारी ५ खारी-प्रवर्त (१९,८४०,८०० यव; ton--14,000,0co gr.; long ton= 
15,680,000 gr.; प्रवर्तः पञ्चखारिभिः सस्यमाने प्रकीर्तितः-भानुजीदीक्षितकृता 
अमरटीका व्याख्यासुधा, वैश्यवर्गे श्लोकः ८६) A word about the abbreviations. The first syllable usually serves the purpose, but in certain cases, for example when the word begins with an oft-used prefix like प्र, there are deviations. These should be carefully noted. 
hecto-meter (hectom., hm.) शत-मान 
(श. मा.; १० मा.) kilo-meter (kil., kilo., kilom., kl., 
km.) सहस्र-मान (स. मा.; १,००० मा.) myria-meter (mym.) अयुत-मान (अ. 
मा.; १०,००० मा.) mega-meter महा-मान, प्रयुत-मान (म. मा., प्र. मा.; १०,००,००० मा.) 
METRIC SYSTEM 
दशमिक मानक्रम 
I. Length आयाम micro-meter=micron (R) अणु-मान, प्रयुति-मान=अणुम (णु. मा., प्रि. मा.=णु.; ०.०००००१ मा.) milli-meter (mm.) सहनि-मान (सि. मा.; ०.००१ मा.) centi-meter (c., cent., cm.) शति-मान 
(शि. मा.; ०.०१ मा.) deci-meter (dec., decim., dm.) दशि- 
मान (दि. मा.; ०.१ मा.) meter, metre (m.)मान (मा.) deca-meter (dkm, dm.) दश-मान (द. 
मा.;. १०० मा.) 
2. Weight भार 
metric ton (M.T.)-millier=ton neau प्रयुत-धान्य (प्र. धा.; १०,००,००० धा.) quintal (q.) लक्ष-धान्य (ल. धा.; १,००,००० 
धा.) myria-gram (myg.) अयुत-धान्य (अ. धा.; १०,००० धा.) 
lxi﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
.. 
यष्टि ) 
kilo=kilo-gram (kg., kgm., kilo., yard (yd.) यष्टि (य., यष्.) 
kilog.) सहन्न-धान्य (स. धा.; १,००० धा.) rod (rd.)=pole (St yds.) वंश (वं.; ५.५ hecto-gram (hg.) शत-धान्य (श. धा.; 
१०० धा.) 
furlong (fur.; 40 rods) प्रणल्व (ण.; deca-gram (dkg) दश-धान्य (द. धा.; १० । 
२०४० वंश) धा.) 
mile (m., mi.) क्रोशक (को.) gram (g., gm., gr., grm.) धान्य (धा.) league (1., 3 miles) प्रक्रोश (प्रक्.; ३ deci-gram (dg.) दशि-धान्य (दि. धा.; ०.१ क्रोशक) 
धा.) centi-gram (cg., cgm.) शति-धान्य (शि. 5. Square Measure वर्ग-माप 
धा.; ०.०१ धा.) 
square (sq.) वर्ग (व.) milli-gram (mg., mgm., mgr., acre (A.; a measure of land, origi 
mgrm.) सहनि-धान्य (सि.धा.; ०.००१ धा.)। nally the amount ploughed by a micro-gram (u g.) अणु-धान्य, प्रयुति-धान्य yoke of oxen in a day; now 160 (णु. धा., प्रि. धा.; ०.०००००१ धा.) 
sq. rods) प्रहल (ह.; १६० व. वंश) 
township (36 sq. miles) पुर (३६ व. 3. Capacity fear 
क्रो.) kilo-liter (El.)=stere सहस्र-प्रस्थ (स. 
स्थ.; १००० स्थ.) 
6. Cubic Measure धन माप hecto-liter (hectol., hl.) शत-प्रस्थ cubic (cu.) धन (घ.) 
(श. स्थ.; १०० स्थ.) 
board foot (144 cu. inches) फलक पाद deca-liter (dki) दश-प्रस्थ (द. स्थ. १० (१४४ घ. प्रांगुल) 
cord (128 cu. feet) रज्जु (१२८ घ. पाद) liter, litre (1., lit.) प्रस्थ (स्थ.) deci-liter (dl.) दशि-प्रस्थ (दि. स्थ.; ०.१ 7. Chain Measure शृंखला-माप 
• स्थ.) 
Gunter's chain-surveyor's chain centi-liter (cl.) शति-प्रस्थ (शि. स्थ.; 
* भूमापन शृंखला (survey भूमिति) ०.०१ स्थ.) milli-liter (ml.) सहस्रि-प्रस्थ (सि.स्थ.; 
link (li.) कटी (क.) 
chain (ch.) शृंखला (शृ.) ०.००१ स्थ.) 
ENGLISH SYSTEM 
8. Nautical Measure नाविक माप 
आंगल क्रम 
fathom (6 ft.) धनु (ध.) 
cable's length संदाम (सं.) 4. Linear Measure रेखा-माप nautical mile सामुद्र (नाविक) क्रोशक inch (in.) प्रांगुल (प्रा.) 
(सा. को.) foot (ft.) पाद (पा.) 
marine league सामुद्र प्रक्रोश (सा. प्रक्) 
स्थ.) 
Ixii 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
9. Liquid Measure तरल माप cubic inches) महाद्रोणी (म. द्रो.; १०५ gill (gi.,gl.) प्रसृति (स.) 
प्रस्थ; ७०५६ धन प्रांगुल) pint (p., Pt.; 4 gills) शराव (श. ४ . Circular Measure चक्रीय माप 
प्रसृति) quart (q., qt.; 2 pints) तुर्य (तुः; २ second (") काष्ठिका (1) 
शराव) 
minute (') कला (') gallon (gal., gall.; 4 quarts) आढक degree (2) अंश (१) 
(द.; ४ तुर्य) 
quadrant तुरीय barrel (bar., bbl., bl., brl.; 31$ circle, circumference ( 4 qua 
gallons) अर्धखारी (अ. खा.; ३१.५ आढक) drants) चक्र, परिधि (४ तुरीय) hogshead (hhd.; 2 barrels) खारी 
(खा.; २ अर्घखारी) 
13. Avoirdupois Weight सामान्य भार 10. Apothecaries' Fluid Measure avoirdupois ("weight of goods”; 
भैषजिक तरल माप 
av., avdp., avoir.) सामान्य (सा.) 
grain (g., gr.) यव (य.) minim (m., min.) बिन्दुक (बि.) 
dram (dr.; 27 11/32 grains) 1974 fluid (or liquid) dram (h. dr.; 60 (शा.: २७११/३२ यव) 
minims) तरल शाण (त. शा.; ६० बिन्दुक) ounce (oz.; 16 drams) शुक्तिका (शु.; fluid (or liquid) ounce (6. oz.; १६ शाणका 
8 huid drams) तरल शुक्ति (त. शु.; ८ pound (1b.; 16 ounces) प्रांजलि (प्रां.; तरल शाण) 
१६ शुक्तिका) pint (O.; 16 or 20 fluid ounces) 
stone (st.; 14lbs.) प्रस्तर (स्त.; १४ प्रांजलि) तरल शराव (त. श.; १६, २० तरल शुक्ति) 
quarter (q.; 2 stones) तुरीय (तु.; २ प्रस्तर) gallon (C., 8 pints) तरल आढक (त. ढ.; hundredweight (cwt.; roo lbs.) 
८ तरल शराव) 
short hundredweight गोणी (गो.) 
लघु गोणी (ल. गो.; १०० प्रांजलि) II. Dry Measure शुष्क माप 
long hundredweight (1. cwt; pint (p., pt.) शराव (श.) 
112 lbs.) दीर्घ गोणी (दी. गो.; ११२ प्रांजलि) quart (q., qt.; 2 pints) तुर्य (तु.; २ ton (t., tn.; 20 cwts.; 2000 lbs.) - 
शराव) 
short ton प्रवर्त (वर्.; २० गोणी; २००० peck (pk.; 8 quarts) अर्धद्रोण (अ. द्रो.; ८ प्रांजलि)=लघु प्रवर्त (ल. वर्.) 
long ton (1. tn.; 2240 lbs.) =' bushel (bu., bush.; 4 pecks) शूर्प gross ton, shippers' ton दीर्घ प्रवर्त 
(शू.; ४ अर्धद्रोण) 
(दी. वर; २२४० प्रांजलि) barrel (bar., bbl., bl., brl.; for metric ton (M.T.; 1000 kilograms) fruits, etc.; 10quarts; 7016 मानिक प्रवर्त (मा. वर्.; १००० सहस्रधान्य) 
lxiii 
short for 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
14. Troy Weight हैम भार 
troy (t.) हैम (है.) grain (g., gr.) यव (य.) pennyweight (dwt.; 24 grains) 
महामाष (म. माष; २४ यव) ounce (oz.t.; 20 pennyweights) ounce (Ozat.m.20 Paumywguti) 
शुक्ति (शु.); हैम शुक्ति (है. शु.; २० महामाष) pound (1b. t.; 12 ounces; 5760 
grains) प्रांजलिका (प्रांजि.); हैम प्रांजलि (है. प्रां.; १२ शुक्ति; ५७६० यव) 
15. Apothecaries' Weight 
भैषजिक भार apothecary (ap.) भैषजिक (भै.) grain (g., gr.) यव (य.) scruple (s. ap.; 20 grains) प्रमाष 
(प्रमा.; २० यव) dram (dr. ap.; 3 scruples) शाण (शा., 
भै. शा.; ३ प्रमाष) ounce (oz.ap.; 8 drams) शुक्ति (शु.); । ___ भैषजिक शुक्ति (भै. शु.; ८ शाण) 
pound (1b. ap.; 12 ounces) प्रांजलिका 
(प्रांजि.); भैषजिक प्रांजलि (भै. प्रां.; १२ शुक्ति ) 
Ixiv 
SUFFIX -त्र The suffix - forms specialised nouns denoting an instrument or means, e.g. दात्र ( दो to cut) a sickle, अरित्र (Vऋ to move) an oar (that which moves a boat), सेक्त्र (ancient word) an instrument for sprinkling water. The very word for instrument ends in -- यन्त्र* (Vयम् to control). This suffix has been widely used to formulate names of instruments and machines: 
अनुलेखित्र (अनु लिख to transcribe) transcribing machine आसोत्र (आ सु to distill) still गणित्र (Vगण् to count) counter गन्त्र ( गम् to go) engine जनित्र (V जन् to generate) generator दलित्र (V दल to crush) crusher धवित्र (Vधू to shake) shaker ध्मात्र (Vध्मा to blow) blower निर्मात्र (निर्/मा to make) making machine 
परिवर्तित्र (परि/ वृत् to transform) transformer परीक्षित्र (परि / ईक्ष् to test) testing machine प्रतिलिपित्र (प्रतिलिपि duplicate) duplicating machine प्राणित्र (HV अन् to breathe) respirator बाष्पित्र (बाष्प steam) boiler भस्त्रा (V भस् to shine; that which makes the fire to shine; अग्निदीपक 
(चर्मनिर्मित) यन्त्रविशेषः --शब्दकल्पद्रुमें) bellows (cf. the adage स लोहकार-भस्त्रेव श्वसन्नपि न जीवति) 
*It is beautifully explained in the Samarānganasūtradhāra, an encyclopaedic work by Maharajadhiraja Sri Bhojadeva of Dhara (urth cent. A. D.): 
यदृच्छया प्रवृत्तानि भूतानि स्वेन वर्त्मना। नियम्यास्मिन् नयति यत् तद् यन्त्रमिति कीर्तितम् ।। ३ ॥ स्वरसेन प्रवृत्तानि भूतानि स्वमनीषया। 
कृतं यस्माद् यमयति तद्वा यन्त्रमिति स्मृतम् ॥ ४॥ “An instrument or machine is so called because it controls, in the manner one desires, the elements which have been moving in an accidental or self-ordained ways (chapter 31 on machines, verses 3, 4). 
1xV 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
#fera (V #4 to churn) centrifuge af (Vas to carry) motor (used in ancient literature for a boat) STI1NT (VTT to dry) desiccator श्वसित्र (Vश्वस् to breathe) aspirator 
f( VA to add) adding machine PEYTT (ET VEIT to enumerate) numbering machine FT (FVF to accumulate) accumulator 
fat (Vene to accomplish, to effect, to execute) apparatus 
Ixvi 
INDIAN TERMS Indian terms are, as a rule, transparent. It would be well to under stand their formation. Once they are explained, it should be eas grasp and remember them. Let us take a few old words: 
ofa (eye) mesh. The full word is Fre (Pāli graferer Jataka 
1.208) mesh of a net. -ATTERT (in TETTU mercury-reservoir) (TV ft to lie in)-reservoir. 
Cf. जलाशय water-reservoir. Similarly आमाशय, पक्वाशय, रक्ताशय (heart). #105-4€ (“rod-cloth," cloth hanging from a rod)- curtain. Cf. 
92-9TUS curtain-rod. 
(hollow).socket. Cf. afem (Pāli afere-9 Majjhima-Nikāya 1.80, etc.) eye-socket. ar (Và to weave)--textile (whence animate textile industry). FETT (FVET to weld)—foundry ( TTTT FT 7975:). 
HET (Pāli 7H) (F SEVE"going up together," sc. the lid)-box. ma (Va to flow, erit, drop)-spoon in Vedic times a wooden 
spoon). falfoq-EET work-shop (Halāyudha-kosha). Some ancient words are suggestive. We may particularly men tion two: *(crab) for compass, and 79-19TVE, 29-4pm (crane-vessel, crane-instrument) for retort. 
Only a few among the thousands of ancient terms are opaque: कन्द bulb, कन्दु oven, किण्व ferment, तूलिका ingot mould, पलिघ flask, बिम्ब disk. In sound, flask is not far from fe (Medini-kosha describes fra as Freimat); 'flagon' is still nearer. 
As to recent terms, they are designed to be transparent. The users of the Dictionary will, however, have to wait for some while before they get a complete account of their structure. 
A number of words have been constructed from (or based upon) modern Indian languages: 
fituft-trowel. It is found in Hindi, Panjabi, Nepali, Oriya, Marathi, Kannada, Tamil prvi and Bengali afure. The Bengali 
lxvii 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
. 
form #fore is also recorded by V.S. Apte in his Sanskrit English Dictionary, but that cannot be the original of Ruft in Hindi, etc. fuper would there be changed to aft, z dis appearing altogether. Fiut "an instrument" is well-known. fuit may be treated as the feminine thereof. झझरी-gratings. Hindi झांझर, Bengali झांजर, Nepali झिन्झीरि (Kilgour's Eng.-Nepali Dict., 1923). Cf. Sanskrit Hii "a strainer. 
erit (-0)--file (of papers). Hindi, Panjabi, Nepali fa, Bengali ft. Cf. Sanskrit a “nozzled," and FT "a hole bored through the septum of the nose” (now, figuratively, the hole bored at the corner of papers to be filed). Cf. also TRT "nosechord" (fig. a tag); RETENTA "nozzled' (fig. tagged). Fietsanvil. Hindi, Bengali FETE, Oriya fa, FETE, Bihari FETE. Monier Williams (Skt. -Eng. Dict.) knows fraifa in the sense of an iron club or hammer only. 
--file (a steel instrument used for abrading or smoothing surfaces). Hindi, Panjabi, Nepali, Bihari fa, tat, Gujarati रेती (from रेत sand-Sanskrit रेत्र). 
Ixviii 
EUROPEAN WORDS OF INDIAN ORIGIN 
Here, there, in every section of the Dictionary, will be found European words which are of Sanskrit parentage. After the lapse of long ages many are still recognizable: 
awl-TT. Dutch aal, German Ahle, Lithuanian yla. bottom . Dutch bodem, German Boden, Latin fundus, Greek 
puthmen. flat, plate- qe. Greek platus, German platt. hall, cell-19. Dutch hal, German Halle, Latin cella, Greek 
kalia. hone-TTT. primus H. Primus is the Latin superlative form, just as #is 
Sanskrit superlative from पर. sachcharo- T. Med. Latin saccharum, Latin saccharon, from 
Greek sakcharon, which is from Pali gat, from Sanskrit 1937. Our granulated sugar 12T, travelled to the West in days when Pali was the popular speech in India. English 'sugar and allied European words are from Med. Latin ‘succarum' (also‘zugurum), from Arabic 'sukkar, from Persian ‘shakar," from Prakrit *7*er," from Sanskrit TT. Sacchar-, saccharate, saccharic, saccharide, saccharify, saccharin, saccharize, saccharos, saccharoid, saccharonate, saccharonic, saccharose, sucre (French), sucro-, sucrose, 
etc., are of common use in modem scientific literature. tri-grip-FT-17. French, Latin, Greek tri-. For -grip compare 
Dutch grijpen, German greifen, Danish gribe, Lithuanian 
graibyti, griebti. tri-pod-f4-72. English foot, German Fuss, Swedish fot, Danish 
fod, Latin pes, Greek podos, pous. 
Ixix 
FORMS OF LETTERS 
Some shapes and forms derive their names in English from capital letters of the alphabet, e.g., A (A-tent), T (T-tube). Our own alphabets, from Hindi up to Singhalese, are too ornamental for the purpose. In our search for simpler forms that would be serviceable (and authentic), we have arrived at Brahmi, which in the days of Ashoka, the greatest of great emperors, prevailed from the Himachala to the Malayachala. It is a simple script, as simple as the sans-serif Roman (English) capitals. Brahmi, the Indian alphabet par excel lence, is the mother of all alphabets of India as well as of countries civilized by her, such as Ceylon to the south; Burma, Siam, Cambo dia (Talsi), Malay archipelago to the east and south-east; Tibet to the north. Brahmi is the mother of a myriad scripts that are now lost in the sands of Central Asia, Mongolia and elsewhere.* Brahmi has served the Aryans, the Dravidians, the Mongolians and the Turks for long periods and over wide expanses. It is the most scientific of the scripts of our globe, one symbol serving for one sound, every sound having a separate symbol, arranged and classified in a true phonetic system, musical and complete. In short, Brahmi is the pride and glory of India. 
We reproduce below some of the Brahmi forms. Devanagari letters are put above them. In cases of resemblance English letters are noted below. 
* Korea had its Brähmi derived script till recently. Traces of an Indian script have been discovered by Japanese scholars in Philippines. Sanskrit inscriptions are available as far as East Borneo. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
* (Eran) 
अ इ उ ए ए श्रो ओ क Ki. 
LADZ 2+ 
का के को ख ग घ +TINAL 
delta 
cross + 
cross 
(as A-tent) > 
ma 
om si 
h COP CIAO 
CO 
६ 
न 
प 
फ 
ब 
ब 
भ 
म 
य 
य 
र 
ल 
व 
स 
ह 
DILGODNO 
Ivodit 
( Bhattiprolu) 
We had occasion to use some of the Brahmi syllables, e.g. * for T in T-tube). 
It will be observed that Brahmi covers many more forms than does the Roman, and that they can be utilised with perfect ease. It is, of course, expected that every Indian student will familiarize himself with the script that is the progenitor of his own. 
At the end it is my great joy to be able to state that in the meander ing mazes of modern terminology there has been kept up so much affinity between old words and new that it is not always possible to tell the one from the other. 
RAGHU VIRA 
* For clarity the word se may be prefixed, e. g., T = SET IT. 
Ixxi﻿A,a (as a symbol used to denote or abbreviation संक्षेप m. ___indicate anyone or anything arbi- A.B.C. liniment (equal parts of the 
trarily) # (in case of distinction liniments of aconite sfat, bella being required between small and donna eft and chloroform capital letters-a. क. A का) 
नीरवम्रल) Pharm. प्र. के. नी. मद्य A. (acre) ह. (प्रल) 
abdomen Anat. उदर 1. A. (Actinobacillus) Bact. कि. (किरण- abdominal cavity Anat. उदर-गुहा f. 
दण्डाणु) 
abdominal pouch Anat. उदर-धान n. A. (Aerobacter) Bact. वा. वे. (वाति- abducent Physiol. अपचालक mfm. 
वेत्राणु) 
abducent muscle=rectus lateralis A. (Alcaligenes) Bact. क्षा. (क्षारकजन) Anat. अपचालक-पेंशी = अाभिपार्श्व A. (androecium) Bot. पु. (पुमङ्ग) 
ऋजुपेशी. A. (Argas) Zool. म. (मृदुवख्थ्याति) abducent nerve=sixth cerebral A (argon) Chem. मं (मंदाति) 
Anat. अपचालक-चेता-षष्ठी मास्तिष्की /. a (acceleration) Phys. त (त्वरण) । 
ab-duction Anat. अप-चालन . a (ana-) Chem. उद् 
('drawing away') a (alpha) 
abductor Anat. अपचालक mfn. a- अ-, निर्- (negative prefix) abductor muscle Anat. अपचालक Aacid Chem. क अम्ल १. 
पेशी. a (alpha) acid Chem. अअम्ल . abelite सौ-ति-स्फोट m. (an explosive Ab, Am (alabamine) Chem. ला (लावणी) स्फोट, consisting essentially of ab- अप- ('away, from'; Latin ab-, ammonium nitrate तिक्तातु भूयीय and 
Greek lapo- and English off are à nitro derivative of some aro from Sanskrit अप-) 
matic hydrocarbon सौरभिक उदांगार) abandon vb. परित्यजन n. (to give up aberration Astron., Biolk, Optics 
त्यजन absolutely परि) 
विपथन 2. (going astray') n. परित्याग m. 
Abies Bot. तालीशपत्रति f. (तालीशपत्र abandoned परित्यक्त mfn. 
Abies webbiana; -Fe for storfer abandonee परित्यक्ती (-इन्) m. (परि- genus) 
• त्यक्तमस्यास्तीति) 
abies (Lat. 'fir tree') Bot. भद्र, भद्रक m. abandoner परित्यक्ता (-त), परित्यागी abietate Chem. भद्रीय . 
abietene Chenn. भद्रेण्य ११. abandonment परित्याग m. 
abietic Chem. भद्रिक mfn. 
(-इन्) m... 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
अम्ल. 
abieticacid=sylvicacid Chem. भद्रिक abraum (German ab-raum rubbish) 
___ Chem. अपोह्यक १. (अपोह to remove) abietinic-abietic 
abraum salts Chem. अपोह्मक लवण . ab initio 1 (from first principles) of abrin Biochem. for f. (TIGT! Abrus 
-नियमत: 2 (from the beginning) precatorius) प्रारम्भतः । 
Abroma augusta=devil's cotton a-bio-genesis Biol. अ-जीव-जनन, अजी- Bot. रजोयूष M. (its juice यूष is 
वाज्जनन . (for अजीवात् जीवजनन serviceable in dysmenorrhea 55: 
· "origination of living organisms कृच्छ) " from lifeless matter') 
abruptly pinnate Bot. अपछिन्न-पक्षवत् a-bi-uret Chem. अ-द्वि-मिहेय mfn. (not mfn. 
giving the biuret reaction) Abrus Bot. Tofa f. (fa for sola ab-normal अ-सामान्य, अनुजु mfn. 
genus) abortin Pharm. Tatra f. 
abrus:=abri semina=jequirity= abortion Med. I गर्भस्राव M. (before jumble beads=prayer beads 
the seventh month; cf. miscar Pharm. (B. P. C.) गुजा f., गुंजा riage गर्भपात) 
बीज n. 2 गर्भपात m. (used in a general Abrus precatorius Bot. सामान्य गुंजा. 
sense, including miscarriage) abs. (absolute temperature) प्रके. above उपरि, अध्य 
(प्रकेवल ताप) above-mentioned प्रागुत, प्राग्लिखित abscess Med. विद्रधि f. (cf. दन्त-विद्रधि __ mfn. 
___in सुश्रुत) above par अध्यर्ह, अधिमूल्य (Hindi abscess of teeth दन्त-विद्रधि f. (from 
अधिमूल्य पर) 
सुश्रुत) aboveproof spirit=overproof spi- abscissa Geom. भुजm. 
rit (O.P.)Chem. अतिसुषवोद . (अ.सु.) absence अनुपस्थिति f., अभाव m. ab-raderab-rase vb. अप-घर्षण 1. absent अनुपस्थित mfn. 
(rub or wear घर्षण off अप) 
absinthium (absinth.)-old woman abrasion अपघर्षण . 
=worm-wood Pharm. (B. P. C.) abrasion testing machine अपघर्षण कृमि- 
pm. (कृमि worm+द्रु wood) परीक्षित्र (or -परीक्षणयंत्र). 
tinctura absinthii (tinct. absinth.) abrasive In. (any substance used ==tincture of absinthium Pharm. 
• for abrading) अपघृष m. 
(B. P. C.) कृमिद्रु-निष्कर्ष m. 2 adj. अपघर्षी (-इन्) mfn. 
absolute निरपेक्ष, परम, प्रकेवल mfn. abrastol Pharm. अ-ज्वर-व m. (a- not absolute acceleration Phys. निरपेक्ष 
अ-+Gk. brastos boiling up ज्वर+ त्वरण 1. -01 -4; used as an anti-pyretic अ- absolute alcohol Chem. परिशुद्ध सुषव ज्वर) 
m. (परिशुद्ध pure) 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
absorp. 
absolute boiling point Phys. 10 absorption blocks (compressed into 
बुद्बुदांकm. 
____cylindrical form) प्रचूषण-रम्भ m. absolute density प्रकेवल-धनता . absorption bulb Chem. प्रचूषण-कन्द m. absolute humidity प्रकेवल आक्लेद m. absorption law=Draper law Chem. absolute hypermetropia Ophthal- प्रचूषण-नियम m. ____mol. परम-पश्चनाभिता . 
absorption mat Chem. प्रचूषण-कट m. absolute motion Phys. निरपेक्ष-गति f. absorption pipette Chem. प्रचूषण absolute pressure Mech. प्रकेवल- नाडक . 
निपीडm. 
absorption tube Chen. प्रचूषण-नाल m. absolute scale-Kelvin scale absorptive region Bot. प्रचूषी (-इन्) 
प्रकेवल-श्रेणी . 
प्रदेश m. absolute temperature (T, abs.) abstract अमूर्त mfn. 
Physical Chem. प्रकेवल ताप M. (ता., abstract mathematics (pure mathe प्रके.) 
matics) शुद्ध गणित . absolute term=constant term Alg. abstract number Math. अमूर्त-संख्या . 
अचल पद . 
abundance प्रचुरता . absolute unit प्रकेवल एकक 1. Abutilon Bot. कंकतीति f. (-ति for absolute velocity Phys. निरपेक्ष प्रवेग m. प्रजाति genus) absolute zero Phys. प्रकेवल शून्य 1. A. indicum सामान्य कंकती . . absorb vb. प्रचूषण 1. (from Lat. abyssal life Zool. अगाध-वासी (-इन्) 
sorbere to suck चूषण; cf. adsorp- जीव m. tion अधिचूषण) 
a/c (account)Com. ले. (लेखा) absorbancy,-ency Phys. प्रचूषत्व n. Ac (acetyl) Chem. शुक् (शुक्तल) absorbed I प्रचूषित mfn. 
___Ac (actinium) Chem. ए (एजातु) 2 Com. संविलीन mfn. 
Ac., ac (alicyclic) Chem. स्नै. . (स्नै absorbent (a substance that absorbs) चक्रिक) 
प्रचूष m. 
ACA, AcB (actinium A, actinium absorbent cotton प्रचूष तूल N. 
B) Chem. ए क, ए ख M. (एजातु क, absorbent lint Pharm. प्रचूष तूलिपट . एजातु ख) . 
aca-catechin (aca- for acacia) Col. absorber प्रचूषक mfm. 
___Ind. बब्बूल-खदिरि . absorber, fume Chem. धूम-प्रचूषक m. aca-catechol Chem. बब्बूल-खदिरव' m. absorbing organ Bot. प्रचूषि अंग 1. aca-catechu Col. Ind. बब्बूल-खदिर m. absorptio-meter Phys. प्रचूषण-मान m. acacetin Chem. बब्बूल-शुक्ति /. (acacia absorption I प्रचूषण 1. 
बब्बूल+acetin शुक्ति; found in the ___2 Com. संविलयन . 
leaves of the common locust absorption apparatus प्रचूषण-साधित्र, tree कूट-बब्बूल ---- Robinia pseudo 
प्रचूषित्र . 
acacia) 
me 
, 100 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
Acacia Bot. बब्बूलति . (-ति for of prickly herbs; Gk, akanthos is 
प्रजाति genus) 
Sanskrit कण्ट) acacia (acac.)=acaciae gummi= Acarina (an order गण) Zool. एकवरूथि 
gum acacia Pharm. (B. P. C.) गण m., एकवरूथिन: m. pl. (they have बब्बूल-निर्यास m. 
a single shield Teet covering the Acacia arabica Bot. I बब्बूल m. head and the body; sg. एक-वरूथी) 
(popular name) 
accelerate vb. त्वरण, प्रावेजन (to 2 (in the binomial system) भारत quicken), वेगवर्धन (to increase the बब्बूल m. 
speed), गतिवर्धन १. (to increase Acacia catechu Bot. I खदिर m. the motion) 
(popular name) 
accelerated त्वरित mfn. 2 (in the binomial system) accelerated motion Mecb. त्वरित खदिर बब्बल 2. 
गति f. acaciin (acacia + -in) Chem. Haefat, accelerated velocity Phys. raita 
कूटबब्बाल J. (found in the leaves प्रवेग m. of the common locust tree कूट- acceleration त्वरण, प्रावेजन, वेगवर्धन, 
बब्बूल-Robinia pseudo-acacia) गतिवर्धन n. (see under accelerate) acacin=gum arabic बब्बूल-निर्यास m. acceleration due to gravity Phys. academic work विद्योचित कर्म १. 
भ्वाकृष्टि-त्वरण 1. Acanthaceae Bot. वासक-कुल १. (वासक accelerator Eng., Chem., Photog. 
Adhatoda vasika) 
प्रावेजक m. Acanthia-Cimex Parasitol. मत्कु- accelerator pedal Automobile प्रावेज 
णाति . (-आति in zoology for प्रजाति पादक m. (प्रावेज-प्रावेजक) genus) 
accept=adopt vb. स्वीकरण n. A. lectuloria = bedbug सामान्य acceptance=adoption स्वीकार m., 
मत्कुण m. 
स्वीकरण . . A. rotundata गोल मत्कुण m. acceptance Farfar f. Acanthocephala Zool. कण्ट-कपाल-वर्ग general a. Com. सामान्य-स्वीकृति . ___m. (वर्ग' class), कण्ट-कपाला: m. pl. qualified a.Com. विशेषित-स्वीकृति f. Acanthocheilonema (a genus; the acceptances (accepted bills) 
embryo does not possess a sheath) Com. स्वीकृत-विपत्र n. Parasitol. Aaraufar f. (es is the accepted Fateha mfn. 
membrane surrounding the accepting house Com. स्वीकारि-गृह .. embryo) 
acceptor Com. स्वीकर्ता (-४) m. Acanthopterygii (air bladder वाताशय accession Politics सम्मिलन . (joining) 
is closed संवत) Zool. संवतवाताशयाः accession of Indian States Politics _m.pl. (from संवृतवाताशय) 
देशीय-राज्य-सम्मिलन . Acanthus Bot. कण्टति f. (a. genus accession to a federation Politics 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
संधान-सम्मिलन . 
drawings a. आहरण-लेखा f. accessories उपसाधन ।. 
fixed deposit a. सावधि-निक्षेप-लेखा accessory factor (vitamin) Biochem. goods a. वस्तु-लेखा .. 
उप-कारक m. 
impersonal a. अवैयक्तिक-लेखा . accessory food Biochem. 3478 n. nominal a. अवास्तविक-लेखा . accessory food factor (vitamin) open an a. लेखा-उद्घाटन . 
Biochem. उपान्न-कारक m. 
personal a. वैयक्तिक-लेखा f. accessory gland Zool. उप-ग्रन्थि m. real a. = property a. संपत्ति-लेखा. accessory thymus Med. यौवनलुप्तोपांग render an a. लेखा-प्रेषण f. 
1. (an उपांग, separated portion, sales a. विक्रय-लेखा of the यौवनलुप्त thymus). 
suspense a. निलम्बित-लेखा . accidental host Biol. आकस्मिक पोषिता write off an a. लेखा-अपलेखन n. 
(-४) m. 
accountancy Com. लेखा-कर्म n. accomodation I व्यवस्थापन n. 
accountant Com. लेखापाल m. 2 (=dynamic refraction) चलाक्ष account book. Com. लेखा-पुस्त.. भुजायन n. 
account clerkCom. लेखा-लिपिक m. accomodation bill Com. अनुग्रह-विपत्र account current Com. चल-लेखा-विवरण 
n. (to oblige another) 
2. accomodation draft Com. अनुग्रह ___ account keeping Com. लेखा-पालन n. 
विकर्ष m. 
account payee (credit to the payee's accomodation note Com. अनुग्रह account) Com. आदातृ-लेखायाम् 
पन . 
account sales Com. विक्रय-विवरण n. accomplish vb. निष्पादन .. 
account sales book Com. familia accomplished निष्पादित mfn. 
विवरण-पुस्त . according as Math. GTETT (with the account sales guard book Com. 
reversion of related clauses) विक्रय-विवरण-रक्षि-पुस्त 1. account Com. लेखा . 
accrued income Com. उपार्जित आय m. adjustment a. समायोजन-लेखा f. accumulate संचयन ". balance an a. लेखा-समपावन, लेखा- accumulated संचित mfn. 
संतुलन n. 
accumulator Mech. संचेत्र n. (an ap capital a. पुंजी-लेखा . 
paratus for storing energy). clear an a. लेखा-शोधन 1. 
accuracy परिशुद्धता, सुसाधुता f. close an a. लेखा-संवरण 1. 
accurate I (proper) सम्यक cost a. परिव्यय-लेखा f. 
2 (very correct) परिशुद्ध, सुसाधु mfn. current a. चल-लेखा . 
(cf. exact तथ्य, यथार्थ; deficiency a. हीनता-लेखा, अपूर्णता- precise सुतथ्य, यथार्थतम; 
लेखा . 
correct शुद्ध, साधु) deposit a. निक्षेप-लेखा . accurately परिशुद्धतया, परिशुद्धरूपेण 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
accurately obeying qora: Ten n. tion) Chem. -FARE (FIFT; GT ace- (acetic) Chem. 792-(yfareret) 
Firafa) ace-ace- T-TT 
A. C. E. mixture (alcohol a I aceacenaphthene-pyracene Chem. part, chloroform art 2 parts, 
RETTAU n. 
ether दक्षु 3 parts) Med. सु. नी. द. ace-anthrene Chem. Ta uz n. 
FAST n. ace-anthrene green Col. Ind. - acenaphth- =acenaphtho 
TEC-aft m. 
acenaphthene Chem. शुगुत्तैरेण्य 1. ace-anthrene-quinone Chem. - acenaphthene-quinone Chem. T 
877#tz-fasett f. 
Toy-facast f. ace-caffine (obtained by treating acenaphthenyl Chem. TCUT n. 
caffoline 947 with acetic acenaphtho-, acenaphth- (a com anhydride...) Chem. T-9944712 bining form of acenaphthene or 
acenaphthylene) Chem. Tira ace-conitic (isomeric with aconitic acenaphthylene Chem. TTR 1. 
sfaturi acid) TF-Fifafasi mfn. -acene (from anthracene) Chem. - OLX ace-di-amine (acet-amidine) Chem. n. (from fa&TTÀUT) 
TT-FE-faanit f. 
-acene (-acet+- -ene) Chem. TUFTE 1. aceko black io B=acid blue black (-5|g\-(TH) aceko-black R=acid black W 
phthal-acene man-TTT 11. aceko bordeaux=acid bordeaux Acephala=Lamellibranchia Zool. aceko brilliant orange R=scarlet G -#976: m. pl., 799771-m. (Lat. aceko brilliant scarletzbrilliant a-cephalus is from Sanskrit - 
scarlet 
2477) aceko cyanine 3 R extra, R acer (Latin 'sharp, harsh") su mfn. 
extra=azocyanine 5 R 
acerdol (acerdese, old name of aceko dark brown RD=fast acid manganite--o!) Pharm. EFT m. 
brown 
acescence Chem. atat f. (the pro aceko fast blue 2 R-fast acid blue cess of acetic fermentation; a be 
RH 
coming acid or sour) aceko fast red A=fast red 
acescency Chem. शुस्तत्व . aceko fast red Erfast red E acescent Chem. I (turning sour) aceko orange II=acid orange II शुक्तन् mfn. (शुक्तन् is a present parti aceko phosphine G=resorcin ciple, so is acescent) 
brown 
2 (readily becoming tart or acid) aceko scarlet 2 R=acid scarlet 2 R AR-15 min. acellular Biol. अकोश, अकोशीय mfn. 3 (slightly sour) ईषच्छुक्त mm (ईषत् Ac-Em (actinon, or actinon emana +14) 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
n. 
% 3DEE 
कक 
acet-, aceto- (denotes acetic acid or acet-amido adj. Chem. शुक्त-तिक्तेय, 
acetyi) Chem. शुक्त 
-तिक्तेयक mfn. acet-brom-amide शुक्त-दुरा-तिक्तेय acet-amido-acetic acid Chem. शुक्त 
तिक्तेय-शुक्तिक अम्ल acet-hydr-azide शुक्तोदाजीवेय 2. 4-acet-amino-1 : 3 -dimethyl 
acet-naphthalide शुक्तोत्तैलेय . benzene Chem. ४-शुक्त-तिक्ती-१:३ _acet-oxy-phthalide शुक्त-जार- द्विप्रोदल-धूपन्य n. 
व्युत्तलेय. 
_____acet-ami-nol (p-acet-amido-benzoyl acet-phenetid (acet-phenol+ eugenol) Pharm. शुक्त-तिङ्गव m. 
-et+amido) शुक्त-दर्शदेय . [शुक्त- . (प-शुक्त-तिक्तेय-धूपूल-लवङ्गव) 
+दर्शव+-द-(-द- for दक्षु, -et- acet-anilide-phenyl-acet-amide for ether)-_- ] 
Chem. शुक्त-नीलेय-दर्शल-मुक्त-तिक्तेय . acet-toluide शुक्त-विरालेय .. acet-anion Chem. शुक्तोदयन 1. acetabulum I Aat. श्रोणि-उलूखल n. acet-aniside=acet-anisidide Chem. 
(cup-shaped socket in the hip शुक्त-शतपुष्पेय-शुक्त-शतपुष्पेयेय . bone) . 
ace-tannin=acetyl-tannic acid 2 चूष M. (a sucker) 
__Chem. शुक्-शल्कि f. =शुक्तल-शल्किक acet-al (acetic . शुक्तिक + aldehyde अम्ल . 
सुव्युद) Chem, शुक्त-सु m. 
acet-arsol=acet-arsone. Pharm. -acetal -शुक्तसु m. 
. शुक्त-नेपा f. acet-aldehydase. Biochem. शुक्त-सुव्युदेद acetate Chem. शुक्तीय 1. 
acetated Chem. शुक्तीयित mfn. acet-aldehyde Chem. शुक्त-सुव्युद m. acetate green शुक्तीय हरि m. acet-aldehyde-ammonia Chem. acetation=acetification , 
शुक्त-सुव्युद-तिक्ताति . 
acetato- =acetoxy- शुक्तजार- . acet-aldehyde sodium bi-sulphite acetenyl (acetylene to wyl) Chem. 
Chem. शुक्त-सुव्युद क्षारातु द्वि-शुल्बित शुक्तेन्यल . (शुक्तलेन्य + -ल) 
. 
acetic Chem. शुक्तिक mfn. ... acet-aldehydrase = acet-aldehy-. acetic acid=acetum concentra-. 
dase 
tum, acidum aceticum (acid. acet-ald-oxime Chem. शुक्त-सुवि- acet.) Pharm. शुक्तिक अम्ल . . 
जावि. 
glacial acetic acid हिम्य शुक्तिक acetalize (to convert, as an aldehyde, FT n. ___into an acetal) Chem. शुक्तसु-करण . acetic aldehyde Chem. शुक्तिक सुटयुद m. acet-amide Chem. शुक्त-तिक्तेय . acetic anhydride Chem. शुक्तिक acet-amidine Chem. शक्त-तिक्तेयी . अजलेय । acet-amido- (acet-amide) Chem. acetic ester or ether Chem. शुक्तिक 
शुक्त-तिक्तेय 
प्रलवण ., दक्षु m. 
m. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
acetic ferment Chem. शुक्तिक किण्व n. aceto-acetic ester Chem. शु-शुक्तिक acetic fermentation Chem. शुक्तिक प्रलवणn. 
किण्दन . 
aceto-acetic ether Chem. शु-शुक्तिक aceticnitrile Chem. शुक्तिक भूयिल m. दक्षु m. acetification Chem. I (production of aceto-amido-phenol Chem. शुक्त 
acetic acid) शुक्तीकरण n. 
तिक्तेय-दर्शव m. 2 (turning into vinegar) चुक्रकरण 1. aceto-o-anisidide (-m-, -p-) Chem. acetifier r (one who acetifies) चुक्र- शुक्त-ऊ-शतपुष्पेयेय .. (-सम-,-प-) 
कार m. 
aceto-arsenite Chem. शुक्त-नेपालित n. 2 (an apparatus in which wine, Acetobacter (they secure their ener cider or the like is converted into gy by the oxidation of alcohol vinegat) चुक्रयन्त्र n. 
to acetic acid शुक्तिक अम्ल) Bact. acetify I (to turn into acetic acid) शुक्त-वेत्राणु m. (शु. वे.) 
शुक्तीकरण n. 
A. aceti चुक्र शु. वे. (causes cider or 2 (to turn into vinegar) चुक्रकरण n. wine to change to vinegar चुक्र) aceti-meter=aceto-meter Chem. Acetobacteriaceae Bact. शुक्तवेत्राणु 
शुक्त-मान m. 
कुल 1. aceti-metry=aceto-metry Chem. aceto-benzoic Chem. शुक्त-धूपिक mfn. 
शुक्त-मिति f.. 
aceto-brom-anilide Pharm. शुक्त acetin (acetin + -in) Chem. शुक्ति . दुरा-नीलय 1. 
mono-acetin एक-शुक्ति f. aceto-chloral Chem. शुक्त-नीरसु M. di-acetin द्वि-शुक्ति . 
aceto-cinnamene Chem. शुक्त-दारु tri-acetin त्रि-शुक्ति f. 
सितेन्य । acet-induline Col. Ind. शुक्त-सुनीली f. aceto-dichlor-hydrin Chem. शुक्त acetine blue Col. Ind. शुक्ती-नील m. द्विनीरोदि f. acet-methyl-anilide=methyl-acet acetoin (acetic + benzoin) Chem. 
-anilide Pharm. शुक्त-प्रोदल-नीलेय= शुक्तूप m. (शुक्तिक + धूप) प्रोदल-शुक्त-नीलेय . 
acetol Chem. शुक्तव m. aceto-, acet- (acetic acid or acetyl) -acetolin Chem. -शुक्तवि . 
Chem. शुक्त 
acetolysis Cbem. शुक्तांशन 1. aceto-acet- शु-शुक्त 
acetolytic Chem. 196ifata mfn. aceto-acet-anilide शु-शुक्त-नीलेय . aceto-mesitylene Chem. शुक्त aceto-acetate Chem. शु-शुक्तीयn. 
मध्यलेन्य. aceto-acet-2-chloro-anilide Chem. aceto-meterzaceti-meter 
_ 'शु-शुक्त-२-नीर-नीलेय . 
aceto-metrical Chem. शुक्त-मितीय mfn. aceto-acet-2 : 5-di-chloro-anilide aceto-metry==aceti-metry 
Chem.' शु-शुक्त-२:५-द्वि-नीर-नीलेय. aceto-morphine-heroin Pharm. aceto-acetic Chem. शु-शुक्तिक mfn. शुक्त-प्रमीली f. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
-aceton-amine Chem. -शुक्ता-तिक्ती . presence of acetone in urine) aceto-a-naphthalide (a-acetyl-na Med. शुक्ता-मेह m. 
phthyl-amine) Chem. शुक्त-अ- aceton-uro-meter (an apparatus for 
उत्तैलेय . (अ-शक्तल-उत्तरल-तिक्ती/.) determining the presence of aceto-naphthone (naphthyl methyl acetone in urine) Med. शुक्ता-मान, 
_ketone) Chem. शुक्त-उत्तैला f. 
मेह-शुक्ता-मान m. acetonate (to combine with acetone) acetonyl Chem. गुक्ताल .. 
Chem. शुक्ता-योजन 1. 
acetonyl-acetone=2, S-hexane -acetonate Chem. -शुक्तायीय .. 
dione Chem. गुक्ताल-शक्ता=२, ५. acetone Chem. Ta f. 
षडीन्य-द्वया . acetone alcohol=acetol Chem. That acetonylidene (acetonyl + hydride 
सुषव-शुक्तव m. 
+ -ene) Chem. शुक्तालेयेन्य १. acetone body Biochem. शुक्ता-काय m. aceto-phenetide (aceto- + pheneti acetone chloroform (chloretone) dine) Chem. शुक्त-दर्शदेय . 
Chem. शुक्ता नीरवम्रल n. 
aceto-o-phenetidide (-m-,- P-) acetone-dicarb-oxylic ethyl ester _____Chem. शुक्त-ऊ-दर्शदेयेय 1. (-सम-,-प-) 
Chem. शुक्ता-द्वघंग-जारलिक दक्षुल प्रलवण aceto-phenine (aceto-pberone+-ine) 
. 
___Chem. शुक्त-दर्शी . aceton-emia (characterised by the aceto-phenone (aceto- + phenyl + 
presence of acetone शुक्ता in the -one)=hypnone Chem. शुक्त-दर्शा blood रवत) Med. शुक्ता-रक्तता f. 
=स्वप्ना. aceton-emic Med. शुक्ता-रक्तिक mfn. aceto-phen-oxime Chem. शुक्त-दर्श acetone oil Chem. शुक्ता-तैल . 
जावि. acetone phenyl-hydr-azone Chem, aceto-phenylene red F Col. Ind. 
शुक्ता दर्शल-उदाजीवा. 
शुक्त-दर्शलेन्य रक्त फ m. . acetone semi-carb-azone Chem. aceto-piperone Chem. शुक्त-मरिचा f. 
शुक्ता सामि-अंगाजीवा f. 
aceto-purpurine 8 B Col. Ind. शक्त acetone sodium bi-sulph 
___नीलोही ८ ब m. शुक्ता क्षारातु द्वि-शुल्बित n. 
aceto-pyrine (aceto- + antipyrine)== acetonic Chem. शुक्तायिक mfn. ____aco-pyrin Pharm. शुक्त-ज्वरघ्नी . acetonic acid Chem. शुक्तायिक अम्ल n. aceto-salicylic Chem. शुक्त-नम्रलिक aceto-nitrile (methyl cyanide) Chem. mfn. ____ शुक्त-भूयिल' m. (प्रोदल श्यामेय n.) acetose=acetous (sour like vinegar) 
acetonization Chem. शक्ता-योजन . चुक्रिय mfn. acetonize=acetonate 
acetose (acetate + cellulose) Chem. acetonum (aceton.)=acetone Pharm. शुक्त-धु .. 
(B. P. C.) शुक्ता . 
acetosity (the being sour like vine aceton-uria (characterised by the gar) चुक्रियता f.﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
aceto-soluble Chem. शुक्त-विलेय mfn. acet-uric Chem. शुक्त-मिहिक mfn. aceto-tartrate Chem. शुक्त-न्यासवीय n. acetyl (AC) Chem. शुक्तल . (शुक्) aceto-thienone (aceto- + thieryl + acetyl-acetonate Chem. शुक्तल-शुक्ता 
-one) Chem. शुक्त-गन्धेन्या. 
यीय ॥. aceto-toluide Chem. शुक्त-विरालय n. acetyl-acetone=2,4-pentane-dione -aceto-toluidide Chem. -शुक्त-विरालेय Chem. शुक्तल-शुक्ता=२, ४-पंचीन्य-द्वया. 
2. (toluidide=toluide) 
acetyl-amine Chem. शुक्तल-तिक्ती f. aceto-toluidine Chem. शुक्त-विरालयी . p-acetyl - amino - benzene acetous (sour, acid) चुत्रिय mfn. 
sulphon-amide Chem. प-शुक्तल acet-oxime (acetone + oxime) Chem. तिक्ती-धूपेन्य-शुल्बा-तिक्तेय . 
शुक्ता-जाविn. 
0-acetyl-amino-benzoic acid (ace acet-oxy- Chem. शुक्त-जार 
tyl-anthr-anilic acid) Chem. ऊ acet-oxyl Chem. शुक्त-जारला. 
शुक्तल-तिक्ती-धूपिक अम्ल n. (शुक्तल aceto-m-4-xylidide (4-acet-amino विक्ष-नीलिक अम्ल) 
1:3-dimethyl-benzene) Chem. acetyl-amino-phenol (o-,, m-, p-) शुक्त-सम-४-काष्ठेयेय (४-शुक्त-तिक्ती Chem. शुक्तल-तिक्ती-दर्शव m. (ऊ-, १:३-द्विप्रोदल-धूपेन्य). 
सम-, प-) acet-phenetidin=aceto-phenetide acetyl-anisidine Chem. शुक्तल-गतपुष्पेयी 
Chem. शुक्त-दर्शदेयि f=शुक्त-दर्शदेय . . acetract (acetic+extract) Pharm. शुक्- acetyl-anthr-anilic acid Chem. 
सार m. 
शुक्तल-विक्ष-नीलिक अम्ल 7. acetum (vinegar, a solution in acetylate vb. (to introduce one or ____vinegar) Pharm. चुक्र m. 
more acetyl groups into a com acetum cantharidis (vinegar of can pound; to become acetylated) ___ thatides) Pharm. हरिभृग-चुक्र m. Chem. शुक्तलन १. (शुवतल-प्रवेशन) acetum colchici Pharm. हिरण्यतुत्थ-चुक्र acetylated Chem. शुक्तलित mfn. __m. (हिरण्यतत्थ Colchicum luteum) acetylation Chem. शुक्तलन n. acetum concentratum=acetic acid acetylator (an acetylating apparatus) acetum gallicum (wine vinegar) शुक्तलित्र 1. (शुक्तलन-साधित्र) 
दाक्षिरा-चुक्र m. 
acetyl - benzene Chem. शुक्तल acetum ipecacuanhae (vinegar of धूपेन्य . ___ipecacuanha) Pharm. वममूल-चुक्र m. acetyl-benzoate Chem. शुक्तल-धूपीय 1. acetum opii (vinegar of opium) acetyl - benzoic Chem. शुक्तल-धूपिक 
Pharm. अहिफन-चुक्र m. acetum scillae (vinegar of squill) acetyl - benzoyi Chem. शुक्तल-धूपूल 1. 
Pharm. समुद्रपलांडु-चुक्र m. 
acetyl benzoyl pet-oxide Chem. -aceturia (in diaceturia द्विशुक्तमेह) शुक्तल धूपूल अति-जारेय n. 
Med. -शुक्तमेह m.. 
____acetyl-biuret Chem. शुक्तल-द्विमिहेय M. 
mfn. 
10 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
acetyl-bromide Chem. शुक्तल-दुरेय n. acetylene di-nitrile Chem. शुक्तलेन्य द्वि acetyl-2-butyl-aniline Chem. शुक्तल- भूयिल m. 
ऋ-घृतल-नीली . 
acetylene formation apparatus acetyl-catb-azole Chem. शुक्तलांगा Chem. शुक्तलेन्य-भावित्र 1. 
जवा f. 
acetylene gas Chem. शुक्तलेन्य वाति m. acetyl carbinol Chem. TFTCT Sifra m. acetylene gas burner Chemn. TF753eet -acetyl-chlor-anilide Chem. -शुक्तल वाति-दाहक m. 
नीर-नीलेय n. 
acetylene generator Chem. शुक्तलेन्य acetyl chloride Chem. शुक्तल नीरेय n. जनित्र . acetyl-choline bromide Chem. acetylene linkage Chem. शुक्तलेन्य 
शुक्तल-पित्ती दुरेय 1. 
ग्रथ m. acetyl-choline chloride Chem. acetylene pure blue Col. Ina. शुक्त 
शुक्तल-पित्ती नीरेय . 
लेन्य शुद्ध नील m. acetyl-choline iodide Chem. अक्तल- acetylene series Chem. शुक्तलेन्य- . 
पित्ती जम्बेय n. 
माला. acetyl-cyanide Chem. शुक्तल-श्यामेय n. acetylene sky blue Col. Ind. शुक्तलेन्य acetyl-diphenyl-amine Chem. आकाश-नील m. 
शुक्तल-द्विदर्शल-तिक्ती . 
acetylene tetra-bromide Chem. acetylenation (act or process of शुक्तलेन्य चतुर्दुरेय 1. 
combining, or state of being com- acetylene tetra-chloride Chem. bined, with acetylene) Chem. शुक्त- शुक्तलेन्य चतुर्नीरेय. लेन्य-योजन 7. (act of), शुक्तलेन्य-योजना f. acetylene torch Chem. शुक्तलेन्य-वर्ती . (process of), शुक्तलेन्य-युक्तता. (state acetylene urea Chem. शुक्तलेन्य-मिह m. of) 
acetylene welder Chem. शुक्तलेन्य acetylene Chem. शुक्तलेन्य ?. 
संधाता (-त) m. acetylene acid Chem. शुक्तलेन्य अम्ल n. acetylene welding Chem. शुक्तलेन्य acetylene alcohol Chem. शुक्तलेन्य संधान n. 
सुषव m. 
acetylenic Chem. शुक्तलेन्यिक mfn. acetylene black Col. Ind. शक्तलेन्य acetylenyl Chem. शुक्तलेन्यल ". 
काल m. 
N-acetyl-ethanol-amine Chem. भू acetylene blue BX Col. Ind. शुक्तलेन्य 
नील बक्ष m. 
acetyl-fiuoride Chem. शुक्तल-तरस्वेय. acetylene burner Chem. शुक्तलेन्य- acetyl-glycine Chem. शुक्तल-मध्वी : 
दाहक m. 
acetyl-hydr-azine Chem. शुक्तल acetylene di-bromide Chem. शुक्तलेन्य 
द्वि-दुरेय . 
acetylide Chem. शुक्तलेय . acetylene di-chloride Chem. Tramite acetyl index-acetyl value Chem. 
द्वि-नीरेय 
शुक्तल-देशना=शुक्तल-अह: f. 
II 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
acetyl-iodide Chem. शुक्तल-जम्बेय. acetyl-salicylate Chem. शुक्ताल acetylizable Chem. शुक्तल्य mfn. 
नम्रलीय. acetylization=acetylation 
acetyl-salicylic acid (aspirin) Chem. acetylize=acetylate 
शुक्तल-नम्रलिक अम्ल n. (शुनम्रि .) acetylizer=acetylator 
acetyl-salol Chem. शुक्तल-नम्रव m. acetyl-methyl-carbinol=acetoin acetyl-tannic acid Pharm. शुक्तल 
__Chem. शुक्तल-प्रोदलांगिव m. 
शल्किक अम्ल 12. acetyl-methyl-a-naphthyl-amine acetyl-thymol Chem. शुक्तल-पर्णासीवm. ___Chem. शुक्तल-प्रोदल-अ-उत्तरल-तिक्ती f. acetyl-tropeine Chem. शुक्तल-विकण्टा acetyl-methyl-toluidine Chem. 
लिन m. शुक्तल-प्रोदल-विरालेयी . 
acetyl-urea Chem. शुक्तल-मिह m. acetyl-methyl-urea Chem. शुक्तल- acetyl value Chem. शुक्तल-अ . 
प्रोदल-मिह m. 
achene (achenial fruit; indehiscent, acetyl-morphine hydro-chloride one-seeded) Bot. एकबीजास्फोटि n. 
Chem. शुक्तल-प्रमीली उद-नीरेय .. (-इन) acetyl-naphthyl-amine Chem. Achlamydeae (without a perianth) 
शुक्तल-उत्तरल-तिक्ती . 
Bot. अपरिपुष्पा: m. pl. acetyl number Chem. शुक्तल-संख्या f. achlamydeous (without a perianth) acetyl oxide=acetic anhydride Bot. अपरिपुष्प mfn. 
Chem. शुक्तल जारेय. 
achor (Gk. 'scurf') Med. TUT n. acetyl-peroxide Chem. शुक्तल-अति- Achorion (a genus of fungi causing 
जारेय. 
favus आदारुण ) Bact. आदारुणक n. acetyl-phenetidine Chem. शुक्तल- (क for कवक) (आदा.) 
दर्शदेयी . 
A. quinckeanum (causes mouse acetyl-phenol Chem. शुक्तल-दर्शव m. ___favus) भूष-आदा. acetyl-phenylene-di-amine Chem. A. schoenleinii (causes favus in 
शुक्तल-दर्शलेन्य-द्वि-तिक्ती . 
man) मानव-आदा. acetyl-phenyl-hydr-azine Chem, achroglobin (a- not+Gk. chroa co 
शुक्तल-दर्शल-उदाजीवी f. 
lour+globin) Biochem. अ-वर्ण-वर्तुलि B-acetyl-propionic acid Chem. 
आ-शुक्तल-प्रमेदिक अम्ल n. 
achromatic I Optics निर्वर्ण, अवर्णद mfn. acetyl-4-propyl-aniline Chem. 
2 Biol. अरंज्य mfm. शुक्तल-ऋ-प्रमेल-नीली f. 
achromatic lens Optics निर्वर्ण वीक्ष, acetyl red Col. Ind. शक्तल रक्त m. अवर्णद वीक्षm. acetyl-ros-aniline Chem. शुक्तल- achroo-, achro- अवर्ण 
पाटल-नीली . 
achroo-dextrin Biochem. अवर्ण-दक्षि . acetyl rose 2 BL Col. Ind. शक्तल achroo-dextrinase Biochem. अवर्ण 
पाटल २ ब ल m. 
दक्षियेद m. 
कला 
12 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
Achyranthes Bot. खरमंजरीति . acid alizarine black Col. Ind. अम्ल 
(prickly chaff-flower, rough chaff विमंजिष्ठी काल m. tree; translated from Sanskrit acid alizarine blue-black Col. Ind. खर-मंजरी Achyranthes aspera; -ति अम्ल विमंजिष्ठी नील-कृष्ण m. for प्रजाति genus) 
acid alizarine brown Col. Ind. aci-Chem. r (denotes presence of CO अम्ल विमंजिष्ठी बन m. 
s instead of CH2 in certain acid alizarine brown-black Col. Ind. heterocyclic compounds) प्रज 
अम्ल विमंजिष्ठी बभ्रु-काल m. di-aci-piper-azine द्वि-प्रज-मरिचा- acid alizarine dark blue Col. Ind. जीवी 
अम्ल विमंजिष्ठी असित नील m. 2 (now, usually, the true acid form acid alizarine flavine R Col. Ind. 
of a tautomeric substance) अम्ल- अम्ल विमंजिष्ठी पिंगी र m. aci-aceto-acetic ester Chem. अम्ल- acid alizarine garnet R Col. Ind. 
शु-शुक्तिक प्रलवण . 
अम्ल विमंजिष्ठी निरक्त र m. aci-chloride-acid chloride Chem. acid alizarine green Col. Ind. अम्ल 
अम्ल-नीरेय .. 
. विमंजिष्ठी हरि m. acicular Bot. सूचीवत् mfn. . 
acid alizarine grey Col. Ind. acicular leaf Bot. सूची-पत्र n. 
विमंजिष्ठी धूसर m. . acid (sour) अम्ल mfn. 
acid alizarine orange Col. Ind. acid vb. (to expose to the action of अम्ल विमंजिष्ठी नारंग m. ___acid) अम्लन , 
acid alizarine red Col. Ind. अम्ल acid Chem. अम्ल .. 
विमंजिष्ठी रक्त m. a. bath अम्ल-तापन 1. 
acid alizarine violet Col. Ind. अम्ल a. boiler अम्ल-बाष्पित्र 1. 
विमंजिष्ठी नीललोहित m. a. bronze अम्ल-कांस्य n. 
acid alizarine yellow Col. Ind. अम्ल a. burner अम्ल-दाहक m. 
विमंजिष्ठी पीत m. . a. concentrator अम्ल-संकेन्द्रक m. 
acid alizatin red Chem. अम्ल विमंजिष्ठि a. dipper अम्ल-गाहक m. 
रक्त m. a. kiln अम्ल-आपाक m. 
acid amaranth Col. Ind. अम्ल अम्लान a. purifier अम्ल-पावक m. 
m. a. sludge अम्ल-अवपंक m. 
acid amide Chem. अम्ल तिक्तेय ॥. a. worker अम्ल-कार m. 
acid amine blue Col. Ind. अम्ल a. works अम्ल-शाला f. 
तिक्ती नील m. . acid action अम्ल-क्रिया . . 
acid anhydride Chem. अम्ल अजलेय n. acid albumin, albuminate Biochem, acid anthracene blue Col. Ind. अम्ल 
अम्ल शिवति f., शिवतियीय n. 
विक्षामण्य नील' m. acid alizarin black Col. Ind. अम्ल ' acid anthracene brown Col. Ind. 
विमंजिष्ठि काल m. 
अम्ल विक्षामेण्य बभ्रु m. ___13 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
CON 
M 
acid anthracene red Col. Ind. Try acid carmoisine Col. Ind, अम्ल 
विक्षामण्य रक्ता . 
कमिजी. acid azide Chem. अम्ल अजीवेय. acid casein अम्ल किलाटि f. acid azo-fuchsine Col. Ind. अम्ल acid cell Anat., Physiol. अम्ल-कोशा f. 
अज-धूमली. 
acid centrifugal pump अम्ल केन्द्रापग acid azo-rubine Col. Ind. अम्ल उदंच m. 
अज-रक्ती 
acid cerise Col. Ind. अम्ल धूमलकी . acid Bessemer process Chenn. अम्ल- acid chrome black Col. Ind. अम्ल 
अपिधम-विधा. 
वर्णक काल m. acid-binding (having the capacity acid chrome blue Col. Ind. अम्ल वर्णक 
of uniting with acids) Chem. नील m. अम्ल-योज्य mfn. 
acid. chrome brown Col. Ind, अम्ल acid black Col. Ind. अम्ल काल m. वर्णक बभ्र m. acid blast Photoengr. अम्ल-ईमान 1. acid chrome green Col. Ind. acid blower Chem. अम्ल-माता (-त)m. वर्णक हरि m. acid blue Col. Ind. अम्ल नील m. acid chrome red Col. Ind. अम्ल वर्णक acid blue-black Col. Ind. अम्ल नील- रक्त m. 
कृष्ण m. 
acid chrome violet Col. Ind. अम्ल acid bordeaux Col. Ind. अम्ल वर्णक नीललोहित m. 
कपिशक m. 
acid chrome yellow Col. Ind. अम्ल acid brilliant blue Col. Ind. अम्ल वर्णक पीत m. 
भासुर नील m. 
acid claret Col. Ind. अम्ल रक्तिरा . acid brilliant green Col. Ind. अम्ल acid colour=acid dye Chem. अम्ल 
भासुर हरि m. 
रंग=अम्ल रंजक m. acid brilliant orange Col. Ind. acid concentrator अम्ल-संकेन्द्रक mm. 
अम्ल भासुर नारंग m. 
acid congoCol. Ind. अम्ल कंकंग m. acid brilliant red Col. Ind. अम्ल acid crimson Col. Ind. अम्ल कामिज m. ___ भासुर रक्त m. 
acid cyanine Col. Ind. अम्ल ख्यामी f. acid brilliant violet Col. Ind. अम्ल acid dark green Col. Ind. अम्ल असित 
भासुर नीललोहित m. 
हरि m. acid brown Col. Ind. अम्ल बच m. acid dish for desiccator शोषित्रार्थ acid carbonate Chem. अम्ल प्रांगारीय . अम्ल-शराव m. acid cardinal Col. Ind. अम्ल न्युद्रक्ता- acid dish, porcelain चीनमृत्सा अम्ल 
पीत m. 
शराव m. acid catmine Col. Ind. अम्ल कीट- acid dyspepsia Med. अम्ल-अजीर्ण 1. 
शोणी/. 
acid egg or elevator Chem. अम्लाण्ड n., acid carmine blue Col. Ind. अम्ल अम्लोत्थापक m. 
कीटशोणी नील m. 
acid-emia Med. अम्ल-रक्तता f. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
mfn. 
acider (a device for applying acid) acidiant=acidifying अम्लकर mfn. 
Chem. अम्लित्र 1. 
acidific Mineral. अम्लकर mfn. aciderio-glaucine (Greek erio- ऊर्ण- acidificans Bact, अम्लकर mfn. 
from erion Ff+glaukos TT) acidification अम्लन 1. अम्ल ऊर्ण-हर्यानीली. 
acidifier अम्लक m. (अम्लन-कर्ता) acid ester Chem. अम्ल प्रलवण'. 
acidify vb. अम्लन . (अम्लीभवन, अम्लीकरण) acid FCol. Ind. अम्ल फm. 
acidifying=acidifiant acid-fast अम्ल-दृढ, अम्लाधाव्य, अम्ल-स्थिर acidi-meter Chem. अम्ल-मान m. 
acidi-metric, acidi-metrical Chem. acid-fastness अम्ल-दृढता, अम्लाधाव्यता अम्ल-मितीय mfn. acid fast scarlet Col. Ind. अम्ल-स्थिर acidi-metry Chem. अम्ल-मिति.. 
शोण m. 
acidite Petrog. (any rock very rich acid fast violet Col. Ind. अम्ल-स्थिर in silica) अम्लाश्म, सेक्जाश्म m. 
नीललोहित m. 
acidity अम्लता . acid-forming अम्ल-कर mfn. 
acidity coefficient=oxygen ratio acid fuchsine Chem. अम्ल-धूमली . 
Petrog. अम्लता-गणक m.-जारक-निष्पत्ति acid funnel, gutta-percha Chem. 
निक्षीरेय-अम्ल-निवाप m. 
acid jug, stoneware काश्म-अम्ल-कुम्भी . acid funnel, stoneware (stoneware acid light blue Col. Ind. अम्ल लघु 
is a species of coarse potters 
नील m. ware, glazed and fired to den- acid light violet Col. Ind. अम्ल लघु sity) काश्म-अम्ल-निवाप m. 
नीललोहित m. acid gloss Stone cutting (a polish acid light yellow Col. Ind. अम्ल लघु 
produced with the aid of acids) पीत m. अम्ल-छवि . 
acid magenta Col. Ind. अम्ल धूम्रली. acid golden brown Col. Ind. अम्ल acid maroon Col. Ind. अम्ल नीचरक्त m. 
स्वर्ण-बभ्रु m. 
acid measurer अम्ल-मापक m.. acid green Col. Ind. अम्ल हरि m. acid meta-protein Biochem. अम्ल acid green bluish Col. Ind. अम्ल सम-प्रोभूजिन m. 
हरि पानीलm. 
acid milling (-fulling) black Col. acid halide Chem. अम्ल लवणेय n. ____ Ind. अम्ल संकोचन काल m. acid honey Pharm. अम्ल मधु . acid milling red Col. Ind. अम्ल संकोचन acid hydrolysis अम्ल जलांशन n. 
रक्त m. acidicr (acid forming) अम्ल-कर mfn. acid milling scarlet Col. Ind. अम्ल ___ 2 अम्लिक mfn. 
संकोचन शोण m. acidic chromatin-oxy-chromatin acid milling violet Col. Ind. अम्ल 
अम्ल-ज्यष्टिरंज्य. 
- संकोचन नीललोहित m. acidi-ferous अम्ल-भर mfn. 
acid-mordant अम्लस्थापक m. (short 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
for अम्ल-रंगस्थापक) 
acidol chrome blue Col. Ind. अम्लव acid-mordant dye अम्ल-स्थापक रंजक m. वर्णक नील m. acid navy blue Col. Ind. अम्ल नाविक acidol chrome bordeaux Col. Ind. 
नील m. 
अम्लव वर्णक कपिशक m. acidness अम्लत्व 1. 
acidol chrome. brown Col. Ind. acid nitrile Chem. अम्ल भूयिल m. 
अम्लव वर्णक बभ्रु m. acid number अम्ल-संख्या . 
acidol chrome green Col. Ind. acido blue Col. Ind. अम्लक नील m. 
अम्लव वर्णक हरि m. acid oil Chem. अम्ल-तैल १. 
acidol chrome leather black Col. acidol Chem. अम्लव m. 
Ind. अम्लव वर्णक चर्म-काल m. acidol amine black Col. Ind. ita acidol chrome orange Col. Ind. 
तिक्ती काल m. 
अम्लव वर्णक नारंग m. acidol azo blue Col. Ind. अम्लव अज acidol chrome red Col. Ind. अम्लव 
नील m. 
वर्णक रक्त m. acidol azo violet Col. Ind. अम्लव अज acidol chrome yellow Col. Ind. 
नीललोहित m. 
अम्लव वर्णक पीत m. acidol black violet Col. Ind. अम्लव acidol cloth red Col. Ind. अम्लव ' काल नीललोहित m. 
वस्त्र-रक्त m.. acidol blue Col. Ind. अम्लव नील m. acidol coccine Col. Ind. अम्लव इन्द्र acidol brilliant black Col. Ind. अम्लव गोपी. 
भासुर काल m. 
acidol fast blue Col. Ind. अम्लव स्थिर acidol brown Col. Ind. अम्लव बभ्र m. नील m. acidol carmine Col. Ind. अम्लव acidol fast red Col. Ind. अम्लव स्थिर 
कीटशोणी. 
रक्त m. acidol chromate brown Col. Ind. acidol green Col. Ind. .अम्लव हरि m. 
अम्लव वर्णीय बभ्रु m. 
acidol light blue Col. Ind. अम्लव लघु acidol chromate green Col. Ind. नील m. 
अम्लव वर्णीय हरि m. 
acidol navy blue Col. Ind. अम्लव acidol chromate grey Col. Ind. नाविक नील m. 
अम्लव वर्णीय धूसर m. 
acidol printing black Cal. Ind. acidol chromate orange Col. Ind. अम्लव मुद्गण काल m. . . अम्लव वर्णीय नारंग m. 
acidol red Col. Ind. अम्लब रक्त m. acidol chromate red Col. Ind. acido-phile, acido-philic, acido . अम्लव वर्णीय रक्त m. 
pliilous r Biol. (staining readily acidol chromate yellow Col. Ind. with acid stains) अम्लरंज्य mfn. 
अम्लव वर्णीय पीत m. 
2 Bact. (said of bacteria which acidol chrome black Col. Ind. can survive in distinctly acid 
अम्लव वर्णक काल m. 
mediums) अम्ल-प्रिय mfm. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
. 
...... 
... 
acidophilus milk अम्लप्रिय-दुग्ध n. acid sodium sulphite Chem. अम्ल acido-proteolytic Biochem. अम्ल क्षारातु शुल्बित 1. __ प्रोभूजांशिक mfn. 
acid steel अम्ल-वजायस. acid orange Col. Ind. अम्ल नारंग m. acid syphon अम्ल-निनाल m. acido-resistant अम्लाधाव्य mfn. acid taste अम्ल-स्वाद . acid patent black Col. Ind. अम्ल । acid test अम्ल-परीक्षा f. 
एकस्व काल m. 
acid tide Med. अम्ल-वेला ., अत्यम्लता f., acid peacock blue Col. Ind. अम्ल अत्यम्लता-काल m. (period or condi 
मयूर-नीलm. 
tion of increased acidity) acid phloxine Col. Ind. (Gk. phlox acid trap अम्ल-पंजर n. 
ज्वाला) अम्ल ज्वाली f. 
acid-treat vb. (to treat with acid) acid phosphate Chem. अम्ल भास्वीय n. अम्ल-साधन n. acid phosphine Col. Ind. अम्ल भास्वी f. acidulate vb. (to make acidulous) acid ponceau (a. dye) अम्ल अवि स्तोकाम्ल-करण, अम्लकायन . 
रक्तापीत m. 
acidulating tank अम्लकायन-तडाग M. acid process Metal. अम्ल-विधाf. acidulent ईषदम्ल mfn. acid-proof अम्ल-सह mfn. 
acidulous स्तोकाम्ल Mfa. acid-proof vb. (to render acid-proof) acidulous alkaline water FIFTET __अम्लसह-करण .. 
क्षारिय जल 1. acid prune Col. Ind. अम्ल वाताम-बदर m. acidulous chalybeate water (con acid radical Chem. अम्ल-मूल n. 
taining iron carbonate) स्तोकाम्ल acid reaction Physical Chem. अम्ल प्रयोगारीय जल n. 
प्रतिक्रिया f. 
acidulous mineral water स्तोकाम्ल acid red Col. Ind. अम्ल-रक्त m. 
खनिज जल 1. acid reserve Biochem. अम्ल-संचिति । acidum aceticum = acetic acid acid resist अम्ल-रोध m. 
Pharm. शुक्तिक अम्ल acid resistant अम्ल-रोधी (-इन्) mfn. acidum boricum=boric acid acid thod-amine Col. Ind. अम्ल Pharm. टांकिक अम्ल . 
पाटल-तिक्ती . 
acidum hydrobromicum dilutum acid ros-amine Col. Ind. अम्ल अरुण =dilute hydrobromic acid 
तिक्ती . 
Pharm. मन्द उददुरिक अम्ल 1. acid roseine Col. Ind. अम्ल मरुणी/. acidum hydrochloricum-hydro acid salt Chem. अम्ल-लवण .. 
chloric acid Pharm. उदनीरिक acid scarlet Col. Ind. अम्ल-शोण m. 
अम्ल . acid sodium carbonate Chem. acidum hydrochloricum dilutum 
अम्ल क्षारातु प्रांगारीय . 
dilute hydrochloric acid acid sodium sulphate Chem. अम्ल Pharm. मन्द उदनीरिक अम्ल . 
क्षारातु शुल्बीय .. 
acidum hydrocyanicum dilutum 
___x7 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
mfn. 
=dilute hydrocyanic acid Tata mfn. 
Pharm. Hra UGEUTHFI 967 n. acierage (coating with steel-like acidum nitricum-nitric acid iron; steeling) ateurt n. 
Pharm. fi tap n. 
Acier-al (acier auf steelt-alumi acidum nitricum dilutum=dilute n ium FCT ; an alloy) teo-m. 
nitric acid. Pharm. Here for an acierate vb. (to convert into steel) #77 n. 
TEUTET, 1977-227 n. nitrohydrochloricum acinus Anat. (sac-like termination dilutum = dilute nitrohydro of branched gland) for m. chloric acid Pharm. 
F arifa acknowledge, acknowledging F1 n. 
(making known) 377441 n. acidum phosphoricum=phospho- acknowledged (made known) sifaa 
ric acid Pharm. 1995 7 n. acidum phosphoricum dilutum= acknowledgment (making known) 
dilute phosphoric acid Pharm. 3f7f. मन्द भास्विक अम्ल n. 
acme brown Col. Ind. 35952 zo m. acidum sulphuricum=sulphuric acme screw thread section Mach. 
acid Pharm, traffa 7FT . 
7AFT HF-7 m. acidum sulphuricum aromati- acme yellow Col. Ind. Frente ata m. . cum=aromatic sulphuric acid aconate sfare n. 
Pharm. ffy Taifa Tnh. aconic Chem. (formed indirectly from acidum sulphuricum dilutum= aconitic acid) प्रवैषिक mfn. 
dilute sulphuric acid Pharm. aconine Chem. (obtained by hydro 
Tre Taifa n 
__lysis of aconitine) प्रवैषी f. acidum tannicum=tannic acid aconite=aconitum=aconite radix 
Pharm. शल्किक अम्ल n. 
=aconite root Pharm. gfac m., acid value Chem. #maet f. 
sfant no acid violet Col. Ind. #77 Taller m. aconitiasaconitine acid washed clippings Chem. Fit aconitic Chem. sfafora mfn. 
efter f. 
aconitina (aconitin.)=aconitine acid wood=chemical wood her Pharm. प्रविषी [. 
FOTOG n. 
aconitine Chem. stract f. (faqe acid wool black Col. Ind. et fa 'Aconitum ferox', Arabic bish, 
TT m. 
Persian bisb-nag, from Sanskrit acid yellow Col. Ind. TFT m. 
fau, faq- TT; cf. fart toxine) acid zephyr blue NB=wool blue raconitine -faut f. 
CB Col. Ind. Forf T am a conitum=aconite Pharm. (an ex acier-gray drab=Quaker grey tract or tincture from Aconitum 
I8 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
1. 
napellus) प्रविष m. 
acridine orange Col. Ind. Fut Aconitum Bot. fatfat f. (-fa for TOT m. 
प्रजाति genus) 
acridine red Col. Ind. sut Teem m. A. ferox सामान्य विषा. 
acridine scarlet Col. Ind. But TTT m. A. heterophyllum aflat f. acridine yellow Col. Ind. 3 ota m. aco-pyrin=aceto-pyrin 
acridinic Chem. ufufua mfor. acorin af f. (at 'sweet flag", acridinium (a hypothetical radical, 
Acorus calamus) 
related to acridine as ammonium Acorus Bot. वचाति f. (-ति for प्रजाति is to ammonia) Chem. उग्रयातु 
genus) A. calamus सामान्य वचा. 
acridity Chem. WAT f. acquainted of faa mfn. 
acridone Chem. 3 f. acquire vb. I 3475T, SITTU 17. 
acridonium=acridinium 2 Math. n. 
acridyl Chem. उग्रल n. acquisition 547587 .Harfe f. acri-flavine (acridine-tflavine) Pharm. acquisition of land 7f-9fcf. 
3w-forft f. . acquittance (full discharge) afir neutral acriflavine #cita-suferit f. 
ffat f. 
acr-indoline (acridine to indoline acr- (Lat. acer sharp) Chem. 39 
Chem. 39-768t f. act-aldehyde Chem. 3-aam. acrinyl Chem. funt n. Acrania (having no 7 skull prift) acritol Chem. ufania m. 
Zool. 97702T: m. pl. 
acrodont Zool. FICAI, faqat m. acre (A. ; a measure of land, ori (consolidated with the summit 
ginally the amount ploughed by of the alveolar ridge ape; without a yoke of oxen in a day; now 160 वि sockets कूप) 
sq. rods) ant m. (E.; 290 7. QT) acr-olein (Lat. acer sharptolere to acrid 34 min. 
smell) Chem. 34-tfrant m. acridan Chem. उग्निण्य n. 
acronol brilliant blue=glacier acridic Chem. उग्निक mfn. 
blue acridine Chem. 347 f. 
acronol indigo blue=safranine acridine brown Col. Ind. anm. blue R acridine dye Chem, gut 10 m. acronol yellow T=methylene acridine flavine R Col. Ind. But yellow H 
FYTIT m. 
acropetal succession Bot. Aufuaeft acridine golden yellow Col. Ind. 2 m. (developing gaf towards 
But Faut fra m. 
अभि the apex अग्न) acridine hydrochloride Chem. But acrose (from acrolein, the source of 
371. n. 
a-acrose) Chem. 34 n.﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
hom 
e 
- 
- 
- 
- 
acrosome (acro- from Sanskrit अग्न+ A. actinoides (found in epizootic 
-some काय ) Zool, अनकाय m. शुक्र pneumonia of calves) गो-क्लोम कोशाग्न n. (a minute body काय पाक कि. situated at the anterior # end of A. actinomycetum comitans a spermatozoon शुक्रकोशा) 
कवकसहचर कि. (short for किरणकवक acryl Chem. उगल 2. (acryl in carv सहचर कि.) 
acryl is, however, उग्रल) 
A. lignieresi (causes abscesses in acryl-, acrylo- (acrylic) Chem. उगल ___lymph nodes of cattle) गो-ग्रन्थि कि. 
' (from उग्र-गन्धिन+-ल) 
A. mallei=Malleomyces mallei acrylate Chem. उगलीय n. 
A. pseudomallei=Malleomy acrylic Chem. उगलिक mfn. 
ces pseudomallei acrylic acid Chem. उगलिक अम्ल . actinomorphic (flower)=radio acrylo-, acryl- (acrylic) Chem. उगल- symmetrical Bot. अर-संमितीय mfn. acrylo-nitrile Chem. उगल-भूयिल m. actinomorphic symmetry Bot. - acrylyl Chem. उगरल n. 
संमिति . Act=Ac (actinium) 
Actino-myces (Gk. aktis ray किरण act (of parliament) अधिनियम m. 
+makes fungus कवक) Bact. किरण legislative act विधायी अधिनियम m. कवक .. act vb. करण, क्रियाकरण 1. 
actinon Chem. एजाति m. Actaeae racemosae radix=Cimici- actinon emanation Chem. gefa 
fuga Pharm. atesta m. 
निस्सृति f. Act-Em.-Ac-Em. 
action I क्रिया f. acting force Math. कारक बल 1. ____ 2 (in wat) संघात m. actinic rays-chemical rays रसाय- action of the heart Physiol. हृदय 
निक रश्मि m. (they produce chemi क्रिया f. cal changes) 
activate vb. कर्मण्यन n. actini-ferous Chem. एज-भर mfn. active क्रियाशील, कर्मण्य, सक्रिय, क्षिप्र mfn. actinium (a. radio-active element) active amyl Chem. क्षिप्र मण्डल n. 
Cbem. एजातु m. (एज् to shine, to active carbon or charcoal क्षिप्र प्रांगार, shake) 
काष्ठांगार m. actinium X एजातु क्ष m. 
active force Phys. सक्रिय बल, क्रियाशील actinium A, B,C एजातु क, ख, ग m. बल n. actinium C' (actinium D) एजातु ग' active partner Com. सक्रिय भागी 
(एजातु घ) m. 
(-इन्) m. ....actinium 2 एजातु ह 
___activity क्रियाशीलता, सक्रियता, कर्मण्यता, Actino-bacillus (agenus of bacteria; चेष्टा .. 
Gk. aktis FERUT) Bact. Failur-GUSTU 'activity, extra-curricular Education .. m. (कि.) 
बहिःपाठ्य चेष्टा 
20 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
act of legislature विधायिवर्ग-अधिनियम, -ad (Lat. ad to, toward; a suffix used 
विधायिमण्डल-अधिनियम m. 
to form adverbs indicating direc actor=donor (in induced reaction) tion, toward, -ward, as dorsad, 
Physical Chem. कर्ता=दाता (-त)m. ventrad) अभि- (e.g. sternad अभ्यु actual वास्तविक mfn. 
रोस्थि, ulnad अभ्यरत्नि)। actually वस्तुतः 
adamantine (pure boron or diamond actual notice वास्तविक सूचना f. 
boron) Mineral. पविकी f. (from actual practice वास्तविक व्यवहार m. पवि thunderbolt) actual pressure वास्तविक निपीड m. Adam's apple Anat. कण्ठमणि m. actual weight यथाभूत भार, वास्तविक adaptation उपयोजन 1. 
भारm. 
adapter Chem. 344154 m. actuatial Insurance जीवनांकिक- mfn. adapter, condenser Chem. संधनक actuary Insurance (one who calcula- उपयोज m. 
tes insurance risks and premiums) adapter, rubber Chem. घृषि-उपयोजm. जीवनांकिक m. 
add Chem. मिश्रण n., Math. संकलन 2. acuity (acuteness) तीक्ष्णता f. 
adder Zool. I (any serpent) सर्पm. aculeata, Dioscorea=sweet yam 2 (viper) are m. (Vedic word) 
मध्वालु। 
adding संकलन . acute तीक्ष्ण mfn. 
adding machine संकलन यन्त्र, संकलित्र . acute (disease) Med. अतिपाती (-इन्) addition Math. संकलन n., योग m. 
mfn. (ancient word) 
additional अपर, समधिक mfn. acute angle Math. न्यून कोण, निकोण m. additional=extra अतिरिक्त, समधिक mfn. acute irritation Med. अतिपाती संताप m. additional invoice Com. अपर बीजक . acute vision तीक्ष्ण-दृष्टि f. 
additional judge अपर न्यायाधीश m. acyl (acid-+-2) अम्रल n. 
additional view अपर-दशा f. acyl-amido- अम्रल-तिक्तेय 
addition compound Chem. संकलन acylate vb. (to introduce acyl into) संयोग m. 
Chem. अम्रल-प्रवेशन n. 
additive I (tending to add) संकाली acylo- Chem. अम्रल 
(-इन्) mfn. acylogen Chem. अम्रलजन m. 
2 (added to) संकलित mfn. acyloin (aryl+ benzoin) Chem. अम्रलूप address (to direct speech to) अभि 
m. 
भाषण, संबोधन . acyloxy- Chem. अम्रलजार 
address (written on the outer sur Ad (aldebaranium) Chem. श्व (श्वेतला) face of a letter, etc.) बाह्यनाम n. ad- I अभि- (expressing motion, direc- addressing machine=addresso 
tion, etc.) 
graph बाह्यनाम-लिख m. 2 उप- (in the sense adjacent, adduction Anat. उपचालन n. proximity) 
adductor Anat. उपचालक m. 
21 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
adductor muscle Anat. उपचालक- adhatoda (adhat.)=adhatodae folia 
पेशी. 
=malabar nut leavės=vasaka Adel-arthra (Gk. adelo hidden) Zool. Pharm. वासक m. 
लीन-सन्धयः M.pl. 
Adhatoda Bot. athafa f. (-for for Adelo-chorda Zool. लीन-मेरवः m. प्रजाति genus) 
___A. vasika सामान्य वासक m. adelo-pod Zool. लीन-पाद m. 
adhesion अभिलाग m. -adelphous Bot. -संलाग 
adhesive अभिलागी (-इन्) mfn. aden-, adeno- (Gk. adenos gland) ad infinitum Math. यावदनन्ति 
निस्सृज-, ग्रन्थि 
adipate Chem. वपीय n. Aden-anthera Bot. ग्रंथ्याशयति . adipic Chem. वपिक mfn. 
(anthers are gland ग्रन्थि tipped; adipic acid Chem. वपिक अम्ल N. -ति for प्रजाति genus) 
adipic ketone = cyclo-pentanone adenase (adenine -t -ase) Biochem. Chem. वपिक-शौक्ता-चक्र-पंचीन्या . 
निस्सृजेद m. 
adipinic-adipic adenine Biochem. fifiait f. 
adipo-, adip- Med. 19T adenyl (adenine + -yl) Biochem. adipo-cellulose Biochem. वपा-कोशाधु १. 
निस्सृजल n. 
adipose tissue Anat. वपोति f. adenylic acid Biochem. निस्सृजलिक adipyi Chem. वपल 1. 
अम्ल n. 
adipyl chloride Chem. वपल नीरेय 1. adeps, adipis=lard Pharm. सूकर-वपा, adjacent I (contiguous, juxtaposed) 
वपा. 
संलग्न mfn. a. benzoatus (adeps. benz.)=1. 2 = consecutive = vicinal = 
benzoinatus = benzoinated neighbouring staatu mfn. lard धूपित-वपा f. 
adjacent angles संलग्न कोण m. a. lanae (wool fat, lanolin) ऊर्णा- adjoining आसन्न mfn. 
वपा . 
adjourn, adjournment FETT 11. a. lanae hydrosus (hydrous or adjourned स्थगित mfn. 
purified wool fat Tauf-a97 f. adjudge, adjudicate afferurent n. a. ovilus (sheep suet or tallow) adjudication of fruia m. ___ अवि-दपा . 
___order of a. अभिनिर्णयादेश m. a. praeparatus=lard (lard is the adjudicator of forferi m. 
purified internal fat of the hog, adjust rb. व्यवस्थापन, समायोजन ?. 
prepared from the omentum adjustable व्यवस्थाप्य, समायोज्य mfn. ' वपा) संस्कृत-वपा, सूकर-वपा, वपा. adjustable joint Mach. विविधयोज्य a. renis (fatty capsule of the freT m. ___kidney) वृक्क-वपा f. 
adjusted व्यवस्थापित, समायुक्त, समायोजित a. suilus (hog lard) सूकर-वपा f. mfn. 
22 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
- 
- 
aaraa 
adjusting व्यवस्थापन, समायोजन n. adrenaline = adrenalinum = ad adjustment व्यवस्थापन, समायोजन ., renalin=epinephrine=adrena - 
समायोजना 
lina Pharam. उपवृक्की f. (cf. गार्गी adjustment account Com. समायोजन from गार्य) 
लेखा . 
a. bi-tartrate Chem. उपवृक्की द्वि Adjutant Mil. सहायक, सहायक चमूपति न्यासवीय 1. 
m. 
a. hydrochloride solution Chem. Adjutant General Mil. महासहायक m. उपवृक्की उदनीरेय विलयन . (to) administer large doses अति- adrenalinum=adrenaline 
दान । 
adrenalize (to treat with adrenalin; administration प्रशासन . 
to subject to the influence of the a. of a medicine भेषज-अवचारण. hormone adrenaline) उपवृक्कीयन 1. (from काश्यपसंहिता) 
adrenalone (adrenalin for -one) Chem. a. of federal affairs संधानीय-कार्य- उपवक्क्या . प्रशासन 
adrenin=adrenaline a. of justice न्याय-दान . 
adreno- Chem. उपवृक्क a. of provincial affairs प्रान्तीय- adreno-caine (adrenaline उपवृक्की कार्य-प्रशासन . 
+ procaine अन्वचेतनी) Pharm. administrative power प्रशासि-शक्ति (a Lesco preparation) 348947 administrative relations प्रशासन चेतनी . 
सम्बन्ध m. 
adrenoleum (adrenalin in oil 1 :500) administrator प्रशासक m. 
Pharm. (a. Lesco preparation) admiral (of the Royal Navy) नावाधि उपक्कि -तैल 1. 
पति m. 
Adria blue (for wool and silk) admissible (value) Math. ग्राह्य mfn. Col. Ind. कौशेयोर्णा-नील M. admission प्रवेश m. 
Adrinople red=Turkey red Col. a. fee प्रवेश-शुल्क m. 
_Ind. तुरुष्क रक्त m. admixture संमिश्रण .. 
adsorb vb. Physical Chem. saus n. adnate Bot. अभिलग्न mfn. 
adsorbable अधिचूष्य afn. adopt=accept vb. Math. स्वीकरण 1. adsorbate (that which is adsorbed) adoption=acceptance Math. Fair ufafa mfn. 
m., स्वीकरण 1. 
adsorbed अधिचूषित mfn. ad-renal (ad- adjacent+renal) Anat. adsorbent अधिचूषक m. 
उप-वृक्क्य mfn. 
adsorption Physical Chem. अधिचूषण .. adrenalin Pharm., Biochem. उपवृक्कि f. .adsorptive अधिचूषी (-इन्) mfn. adrenalina=adrenaline 
adult sta mfn. adrenalin chloride Chem. उपवृक्कि adult bee प्रौढ-मधुमक्षी f. 
नीरेय ". 
adulterate vb. व्यामिश्रण, हीन-मिश्रण n. 
23 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
adulterated food व्यामिश्रित अन्न, हीन- advertise, advertisement, advertis 
मिश्रित अन्न . 
ing विज्ञापन n. adulteration व्यामिश्रण, हीन-मिश्रण n. advertised विज्ञापित mfn. adult size प्रौढ परिमाण १. 
advice Com. प्रज्ञप्ति f. (making known) ad valorem duty Com. अर्हा-कर m. 
a. note प्रज्ञप्ति-पत्र ।. advance vb. I (to bring forward) a. slip प्रज्ञप्ति-पर्णी /. 
अग्ने-नयन , 
advise vb. Com. प्रज्ञापन n. 2 (to make to go on) अग्ने-गमन n. advised Com. प्रज्ञापित mfn. (from causative गमयति) 
advisor Adminis. उपदेष्टा m. 3 (to accelerate the growth or advocacy अधिवाक m. (from ऋग्वेद) progress of) वृद्धि-त्वरण, गति advocate vb. अधिवचन ।. वर्धन । 
advocate अधिवक्ता (-तृ) m. (from 4 (to forward, to further) अग्ने ऋग्वेद) करण. 
a. general महाधिवक्ता (-तु) m. 5 (help on) साहाय्य-करण, उपकरण 1. a. general for federation संधानार्थ 6 (to raise to a higher rank, to महाधिवक्ता (-तृ) m. promote, to elevate) 3741461 n. a. general for province प्रान्तार्थ 7 (to hasten) त्वरण 1. 
महाधिवक्ता (-त) m. 8 (to raise in rate, as prices) मूल्य- adze वाशी (from ऋग्वेद), तक्षणी . वर्धन, मूल्योत्थापन . 
(ancient word; cf. Panjabi तेसा) 9 (to supply before hand, as Aedes (includes tiger-mosquitoes) 
money) अग्रतो-दान, पूर्वतो-दान 7. 
Parasitol. व्याघ्रमशकाति f. (in Zool. 10 (to place farther forward) अग्ने ___ -आति for प्रजाति genus) स्थापन n. 
Aegle Bot. facafe f. (in Bot. -Far for advance n. Com. अग्निम n. 
प्रजाति genus) advanced उच्च mfn. 
A. marmelos सामान्य बिल्व m. a. accountancy उच्च लेखाकर्म . aerated waters वाति-पेय . a. banking उच्चाधिकोषण . 
aerating roots=breathing roots advanceguard Mil. अग्रिम रक्षी (-इन) Bot. श्वास-मूल .. ____m., सेना-मुख n. (ancient word) aerial I adj, arra mfn. advantage लाभ, उपकार m. 
22. वायव्य n. adventitia=tunica externa=tu- aerial adventitious roots Bot. arys 
nica adventitia Anat. बाह्य चोल m. आगन्तुक मूल . adventitious Bot. आगन्तुक mfn. aerial bird Zool. आकाशचारी, आकाश adventitious root system Bot. पक्षी (-इन) m. 
आगन्तुक-मूल-संहति . 
aerial root Bot. वायव्य मूल, आकाश-मूल . adventure=enterprise=undertak- Aerobacter (A.; produces acid and .. ing=venture Com. उपक्रम m. 
gas वाति) Bact. वातिवेत्राणु m. (वा. वे.) 24 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
only 
Alle 
A. aerogenes=Bacterium aero Afghan yellow=sun yellow Col. genes, Bacillus lactis aero- Ind. m. genes afastar. a. 
Africa fractu m. aerobe Bact, 17-ta m. (lives African कालद्वीपीय nfn. 
in oxygen) 
African ammoniac Chem, prefarger for aerobic adi, Bact. 673-5ta mafu. 1. (a dar-ckoloured gum resin) aerobic respiration Bot. FTTF- African elephant Zool. 1984 
TRITT n. 
(- ) m. aerodrome=airport fanf-97T 1h. after 491 aero-dynamics af-afrit f. after-damp (an irrespirable gas after aerodyne (an aircraft heavier than an explosion of fire-damp in 
air; cf. aerostat T-878) ME m. mines) 497-faifa m. (Farfe damp) ( ar) 
after date Com. तिथ्यनन्तर aerolite (a stony meteorite) 3744 m. after image Psychol. 981 f. aeronaut ariqa m. 
after sight Com. दर्शनानन्तर aeronautical engineering वैमानिक afterswarm Beekeeping पश्चोत्पतन n. 
af mutf. 
Ag (argentum) Chem. * (THT) aeronautics वैमानिकी f. 
against stream Matb.प्रतिस्रोत aerophil, aerophilous Bact. 7agalloch=agallochum e m. 
प्रिय mfn. 
agalma black (Gk. agalma statue) aerophyte=epiphyte Bot. Then Col. Ind. HTH #TET (cf. agal 
(-) m. (which grows upon matolite, a stone carved into another) 
images by the Chinese) aeroplane विमान m. 
a. black-green fast -fm. aerostat (an aircraft lighter than air, a. green staa f m . 
cf. aerodyne 27-TE) 2-7 m. agalmatolite (agalmatos sfahrt (a=ar) 
-lite) Mineral. sfah1987 m. aestivation Bot. Carrangement of agar-agar-agar TRT 1. (short for 
floral or leaf parts in a bud) समुद्रघास्य a gelatinous substance firefo -FrT m. 
from certain sea-weeds) aether=ether ym. 
agar-agar HEEFT m. (popularly aethogen (Greek dithos fire, light+ T ERT) 
-gen) Chem. f.-56 m. 
agar-agar filter Chem. EE1F4 affair Fr 1. 
979 m. afferent Physiol. (conducting inwards Agaricaceae Bot. 19 . (91€ 
or towards) faaret (**) mfn. fungus) affinity are at f. 
AgaricalesHymenomycetes Bot. affirmation (oath) Law 74 m. छत्राकगोत्र ॥. (गोत्र order) 
25 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
Agaricus Bot. छत्राकति f. -ति for agglutinable I अभिश्लेष्य mfn. 
प्रजाति genus) 
. 2 Immunol. प्रसमूह्य nfn. Agasti Bot. अगस्तिति f. (Eng. word agglutinant=agglutinative Immu 
is from Sanskrit, -ति for प्रजाति nol. प्रसमूही (-इन्) mfn. genus) 
agglutinate vb. I to unite or cause A.grandiflora सामान्य अगस्ति m. to adhere as with glue or other agate पाल्यश्म (its colours are atranged viscous substance; to unite by ___in stripes or bands पालि) 
adhesion) अभिश्लेषण n. agate plane पाल्यश्म-तल n. 
2 Immunol. (collection into clumps agate ware पाल्यश्म-भांड n. 
of cells or bacteria) प्रसमूहन n. agathin (used to relieve neuralgia agglutinate adj. (united with glue 
वातशूल) Pharm. वातशूलघ्नि f. ____ or as with glue) अभिश्लिष्ट mfr. Agave Bot. वनकुमारीति f. (-ति for agglutinated I अभिश्लिष्ट mfn. 
Starfa genus) 
___2 Immunol. प्रसमूह min. A. americana सामान्य वन-कुमारी f. agglutination I अभिश्लेषण n. (cf. Gujarati jangali kanvar) 
2 Immumol. प्रसम्हन . ager वयस् । 
agglutination apparatus प्रसमूहन 2 Geol. युग n. 
साधित्र, प्रसमूहित्र . aged (ripened) पक्व mfn. 
agglutination rack प्रसमूहन-निलय m. aged black Col. Ind. पक्व काल m. agglutination tube (rimless) प्रसमूहन agency Com. अभिकर्तृत्व M. 
___ नाल m. (प्रान्तहीन) agenda कार्यावलि f. 
agglutination tube viewing lamp agent I Com. अभिकर्ता (-त) m. 
प्रसमूहन-नाल-दर्शन दीप m. commission a. वर्तनाभिकर्ता m. agglutinative I (adhesive) अभिश्लेषी del credere a. परिशोधी अभिकर्ता m. (-इन्) mfn. general a. सामान्य अभिकर्ता m. 
2 Immunol. प्रसमूही (-इन्) mfn. particular a. विशेष अभिकर्ता m. agglutinator Immumol. प्रसमूहक m. selling a. विक्रय-अभिकर्ता m. 
agglutinin Immunol. I प्रसमूहि. sole a. एकाभिकर्ता m. 
2 = agglutinator प्रसमूहक m. travelling a. यायी अभिकर्ता, यात्री अभि- agglutino-gen (agglutinin + -gen) कर्ताm. 
Immunol. प्रसमूहि-जन m. . 2 Chem. कर्ता (-तृ) m. 
agglutinogenic Immunol. प्रसमूहि age, stone पाषाण-युग n. 
जनिक mfn. agglomerate vb. (to form into a ball) agglutinoid Immunol. प्रसमूहाभ m. 
अभिपिंडन 7. (पिण्डते, पिण्डयति 'to toil agglutinoscope Med. (used to 
into a ball' is an ancient usage) observe agglutination) प्रसमहनेक्षm. agglutinability I अभिश्लेष्यता. aggregate fruit Bot. समूह-फल 1. 
2 Immunol. प्रसमूह्यता f. 
agitate b. भोभणn. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
agitation क्षोभ m. 
air वायु, वात . aglucone (a- not a+glucose मधुम+ air bacteria Bact. I (when exact 
___-one -आ) Biochem. अमध्दा. 
morphology is not mentioned, agmatine (formed from arginine might be coccus, fungus, bacil 
आवैष्ठेयी) Biochem. आवैष्ठेयकी . 
lus, etc.) वायु-शाकाणु m. (वा.शा.) Agnatha (no jaws') Zool. अहह्नवः 2 (only when they are gramnega 
m.pl. 
tive rod-shaped organisms) ari Agnotozoic (Gk. agnotos is Sanskrit __ वेत्राणु m. (वा. वे.) 
अज्ञात) Geol. अज्ञात-कल्प m. 
air bath (usually a small oven heated -agogue (dispelling) -उत्सारी (-इन्) from below) वायु-तापन 2. agree सम्मिलन (to be in accord), सम्मेलन air bladder Zool. वाताशय m. 
1. (to bring into accord, esp. air-borne radar विमानस्थ तेजोन्वेष m. accounts) 
air cell Anat. वायु-कोशा. agreeable काम्य, (as smell) रुचिकर mfn. air chamber Mach., Zool. वायु-वेश्म n. agreeable smell ge strane m. (from Air Chief Marshal (R. A. F.) __ अमरकोश) 
वाय्वधिपति m. agreement सम्मेल m., सम्मेलन, सम्मिलन n. Air Commodore (R. A. F.) उपवायु agreement (document) मंविदा . पति m. 
(ancient word) 
air condenser वायु-संघनक m. to enter into an agreement air content of soil Bot. उन्मृदान्तर्गत 
संविदा-करण 
__ वायु m. agricultural कृषि 
: air control=choke Aeronautics ar agricultural botany कुषि-ौद्भिदी f. रोधM. agricultural chemistry कृषि-रसायन . aircraft विमान m., वायु-वाहन ?. agricultural engineering कृषि- aircraft carrier विमान-बोढा () m. 
अभियन्त्रणा 
aircraft commander Civil Aviation agriculture कृषि f., कृषि-कर्मn. 
विमान-पति m. agropyrum=couch grass गायिघास. aircraft interception (AI) (short ai-three-toed sloth Zool. व्यंगुल range airborne radar sets used 
शाखालम्बी (-इन्) m. 
in interception of enemy air AI (aircraft interception) वि. अ. craft) विमान-अन्तारोधन n. (वि. अ.) 
(विमान-अन्तारोधन) (short range aircraft warning Radar विमान airborne radar sets used in inter- प्राबोधन 1. 
ception of enemy aircraft) aircrews Civil Aviation विमान-कारुक m. aid, first सद्यःसाहाय्य n., प्रथमोपचार m. air-drier वायु-शोषक m. Ailanthus Bot. महानिम्बति f. (-ति for air-dry वायु-शुष्क mfn. 
प्रजाति genus) 
air duct Zool. बात-प्रणाली . A. excelsa सामान्य महानिम्बm. air-field विमान-क्षेत्रा . 
27 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
air filter Automobile वाय-पाव m. air-travel Civil Aviation आकाश-यात्रा, air filter and silencer Automobile वायु-यात्रा.. 
वायु-पाव तथा मूककारी (-इन ) m. air-tubes-tracheae Zool. श्वास-नाल air force वायु-सेना, विमान-सेना . 
m. air holes (by which the insect Air Vice-Marshal (R. A. F.) वायु-पति ____ breathes) Zool. श्वास-छिद्र n. 
m. air-line I (system of transporta- airway Civil Aviation वायु-मार्ग m. 
tion by aircraft) वायु-पारवहण 1. Aitken's pill (iron अयम्, quinine 2 (a company owning such a sys sulphate विज्वरी शुल्बीय, strychnine tem) विमान-प्रमण्डल .. 
and arsenic trioxide) Pharm. अयो 3 (the route covered) वायु-मार्ग m. वि-शु-गुटिका . 4 (a straight line as through the Al, alum. (aluminium) Chem. स्फ, air) वायु-रेखा . 
स्फटी. (स्फटयातु) air-liner Civil Aviation वायु-पंक्तियान n. -al (aldehyde) Chem. -सु,-षु (सुव्युद: 
(liner पंक्तियान) 
-षु is a. Sandhi form, e.g., when Air Marshal (R. A. F.) महावायुपति m. preceded by any vowel except air oven वायु-कन्दु m. 
and आ) air oven and sterilizer वायु-कन्दु तथा al- (alcohol) Chem. सु-(सुषव) 
जीवाणुहा (-हन्) m. 
ala Anat., Zool. पक्ष m. air oxidation black Col. Ind. वायु alabamide Chem. लावणेय . 
जारण काल m. 
alabamine Chem. लावणी /. air pipe Automobile वायु-नाड 
n 
a labandite-mangan-blende Mine air port=aerodrome वायु-पत्तन- ral. लोहकान्धन m. 
विमान-पत्तन 1. 
alabaster Mineral. (a variety of air pump Phys., Steam Engine aruga gypsum or calcite, usually trans 
m. 
lucent) भासाचूर्ण m. (short for पार air reconnaissance Mil. वायु-अभि भास पाचूर्ण) 
दर्शन n. 
alacreatine (alanine आसुवी + creatine air route Civil Aviation वायु-पथ m. क्रव्यी) Chem. आसु-क्रव्योf. air service Civil Aviation वायु-चर्या . ala-creatinine Chem. प्रासु-ऋव्यियी . air-ship वायु-यान . 
alangine (found in the bark of air sinus Anat. वायु-कोटर . 
Alangium lamarckii अंकोल) Chem. air-tight वाताप्रवेश mfn. 
__ अंकोली . air to surface vessel Radar (for Alangium Bot. शोधनति f. (-ति for 
detecting objects on sea. surface; प्रजाति genus) used in aircraft) (ASV) समुद्र- A. hexapetalum सामान्य शोधन m. तलान्वेष. m. (स. त. अ.) वाताज्जलान्वेष A. lamarckii अंकोल m. 
m. (वा. ज. प.) 
alanine (aldehyde-- -ine. The -an 28 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
विती 
____ is an insertion) Chem. आसुवी f. albuminoid ammonia Chem. शिवत्याभ alanyl (alanine+ -1) Biochem. आसु- तिक्ताति m. 
वील. 
albumino-lysis श्वित्यंशन n. alarm clock प्रबोध घटक m. 
albumino-meter शिवति-मान m. albino bee Zool. विवर्ण-मधुमक्षी f. albumino-metry शिवति-मिति / albu-(albumin) Biochem. शिव- (शिवति) albuminorrhea शिवति-स्राव m. albugo=cystopus Bot. (causes white albuminoscope=albumoscope 
blisters on leaves) सितस्फोट m. 
शिवतीक्ष m. albumen (Lat., from albus white; albuminosis Med, aftfacftat f. 
the white of an egg) श्वेति . albuminous शिवतिय mfn. albumenization श्वेतीयन 1. 
albuminous (endospermous) Bot. albumenize vb. श्वेतीयन n.; (to शिवतिमत् mfn. 
cover or saturate with albumen; albuminousness feafarua na to coat or treat with an albumin tannate Chem. शिवति albuminous solution) श्वेत्यावरण, शल्कीय n. श्वेत्यनुवेधन, शिवतिय-लेपन, शिवतिय- albumin-uria शिवति-मेह m. साधन n 
albumin-uric शिवति-मेहिक mfn. albumenizer श्वेतीयक m. 
albumoscope factam. albumeno-meter श्वेति-मान m. 
albumose (from albumin) Biochem. albumi-शिवति 
श्वितधु.. -albumic -शिवतिक 
anti-albumoses प्रति-श्वितधु . ___tox-albumic विष-शिवतिक 
hemi-albumoses मामि-श्वितधुn. albumimeter, albuminimeter Bio- albumos-uria Med. शिवतधु-मेह m. 
___chem. शिवतिमान m. 
alburnum=sap wood Bot. रसकाष्ठ 1. albumin Biochem. शिवति . 
albu-tannin Pharm. शिव-शल्कि f. ___egg albumen अण्ड-श्वेति . alc- (alcohol) Chem. सुष-(सुषव) albumin- =albumino 
alc (alcohol) Chem. सुषु (सुषव) albuminate Chem. शिवतियीय . 
Alcaligenes (A., a genus) Bact. albuminat-uria Med. शिवतियीय-मेह m. क्षारक-जन m. (क्षा.) albumini. =albumino 
A. abortus=Brucella abortus. albumini-ferous शिवति-भर mfn. 
A. albus श्वेत क्षा. albuminimeter Biochem. frafahrt m. A. bronchisepticus-Bacillus albuminimetry शिवतिमिति . 
bronchisepticus=Bacterium albumino-, albumin- fafc 
bronchisepticum=Brucella albumino-fibrin शिवति-तन्त्वि . 
bronchiseptica क्लोमनाल क्षा. albumino-genous शिवति-जनक m. 
A. faecalis=Bacillus faecalis al albuminoid Biochem. श्वित्याभ mfn. 
caligenes=Bacterium alca albuminoidal श्वित्याभीय mfn. 
ligenes वैष्ठ क्षा.﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
yord) 
A. melitensis. See Brucella me chloral a. नीरसु सुषवीय . 
litensis 
sodium (ethyl) a. क्षारातु (दक्षुल) alcamine (alcoholtamine) Chem. 
सुषवीय. सुष-तिक्ती . 
sodium ethylate क्षारातु दक्षु alchemic, alchemical zaraferni mfn. लीय . alchemist रसविद् m. 
alcoholature (an alcoholic tincture alchemistic रसविदीय mfn. 
निष्कर्ष) सुषव-निष्कर्ष m. alchemize vb. (to change by, or as alcohol engine (using alcohol as 
by, alchemy; to transmute) रसवेधन fuel) सुषव-गन्त्र n. 
n. (ancient word) 
alcoholfast Bact. सुषवाधाव्य mfn. alchemy रसविद्या . (distinguished (अधाव्य unwashable) 
from hry chemistry) amistry) 
alcoholic I (of or pertaining to alco- (alcohol) सुष-(सुषव) 
alcohol) सुषविक mfn. alcogel (alcohol+gelatin) Chem. सुष- 2 (addicted to alcoholic liquors) 
शिल f. 
अतिपायी (-इन् ) m. alcogene (alcohol + -gene) Chem. alcoholicity I सुषविकता . 
सुष-जन M. 
2 अतिपायिता f. alcohol Chem. सुषव m. (सु great + alcoholism Med. अतिपानता f. 
सव stimulator) 
alcoholist पानात्ययी (-इन्) m. spirit of wine द्राक्षिरा-सारm. 
(पानात्यय a disease) ethyl a. दक्षुल सुषव m. 
alcoholization Chem. सुषवण . ethanol दक्षीण्यवm. 
alcoholize vb. सुषवण १ absolute a. परिशुद्ध सुषव m. 
I (to treat with alcohol) सुषव dehydrated a. विजलीयित सुषव m. साधन . diluted a. अवमिश्रित सुषव m. 
2 (to saturate with alcohol) सुषवानु industrial a. औद्योगिक सुषव m. 
वेधन n. methyl a. प्रोदल सुषव m. 
3 (to put under the influence of wood a. काष्ठ-सुषव m. 
alcoholic liquor) मदिरा-प्रभावन n. amyl a. मण्डल सुषव m. 
4 (to convert into alcohol) सुषव mono-hydroxy, mono-hydric करण. 
or mono-atomic a. एकोदजार, alcoholo- (alcohol) सुषव 
एकोदिक, एकपरमाण्विक सुषव m. alcohol of crystallization Chem. dihydroxy,dihydricor diatomic स्फटन-सुषव m. a. द्वधुदजार, द्वयुदिक, द्विपरमाण्विक सुषव m. alcoholomania मदिरा-तृष्णा f. 
primary, secondary, tertiary a. alcoholo-meter, alcohol-meter . प्राद्य, द्वितीयक, तृतीयक सुषव m. 
सुषव-मान m. alcohol acid Cbem. सुषव अम्ल n. alcoholometer, Cartier's (10°-459) alcoholate Chem. सूषवीय 1. 
दशादि सुषवमान m. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
alcoholometer, Gay Lussacor form-aldehyde or methanal वन 
Tralle's (0-100 per cent) CET .. सुव्युद, प्रोदीन्यसु M. सुषवमान m. 
aldehyde ammonia Chem. सुव्युद alcoholo-metric, -metrical Chem. तिक्ताति m. 
सुषव-मितीय mfn. 
aldehyde blue Col. Ind. सुव्युद नील m. alcoholo-metry Chem. a-fufa f. aldehyde collidine = aldehydine alcohol-uria Med. सुषद-मेह m. 
Chem. सुव्युद पास्थी. alcoholysis Chem. सुषवांशन 1. aldehyde green Col. Ind. सुव्युद हरि m. 
ethanolysis (alcoholysis with aldehyde group Chem. सुव्युद-वर्ग m. ethanol) दक्षीण्यांशन ". 
aldehyde resin Chem. सुव्युद-उद्यास m. methanolysis (alcoholysis with aldehydic Chem. सुव्युदिक mfn. 
methanol) प्रोदीन्यांशन . 
aldehydic group सुव्युदिक वर्ग m. alcoholytic सुषवांशिक mfn. 
aldehydine Chem. सुव्युदी . alco-sol (alcohol + solution) Chem. 5 ethyl - 2 - methyl - pyridine 
सुषव-लयन .. 
५ दक्षुल-२-प्रोदल-शुष्मेयी . Alcotate (used for denaturing alco- aldehydo- (aldehyde) Chem. सुव्युद ___hol) सुषव-विकारी (-इन्) m. 
ald-imine, ald - ime (aldehyde+ alco-vino-meter (alcohol to vino-t imino) Chem. 447-fa f. 
-meter; determines the alcoholic aldine (aldehyde+ -ine)=pyrazine 
strength of wine) द्राक्षिरा-सुषव-मान m. Chem. सुवियी = शुष्माजीवी f. ald., aldo- Chem. सुवि 
_aldo-, ald- (aldehyde) Chem. सुवि aldamine (aldehyde+ -amine) Chem. aldo-hexose सुवि-षड्धु . 
सुव्युद-तिक्ती f. 
aldol Chem. Efaa m. aldane (aldehyde af at anhydride aldolize vb. (to convert into an 
___ अजलेय) Chem. सुव्यजलेय . 
aldol), aldolization Chem. सुविव ald-azine Chem. Tositat f. 
करण. aldebaranium = ytterbium Chem. aldose (aldehyde+-ose) Chem. सुविध. 
स्वेतला . (श्वेत white; its oxide is ald-oxime Chem. सुवि-जावि . a heavy white powder; -ला from Aleppo gall=gall Pharm. द्रुस्फोट m. विरला मृद् rare earth; ytterbium (द्रु tree + स्फोट swelling) is a rare earth metal) 
Aleurites Bot. अक्षोटति f. (-ति for aldehol (aldehyde +- alcohol) Chem. प्रजाति genus) 
सुविषव m. 
A. triloba (walnut) सामान्य प्रक्षोट m. aldehydase Biochem. सुव्युदेद m. aleuro- (Gk, aleuron flour) Chem. aldehyde fabbreviated from alcohol समिता 
dehydrogenatum alcohol सु(षव) aleuro-meter Chem. समिता-मान m. deprived of fa its hydrogen 36- aleuronat Chem. (flour made of (जन)] Chem. सुव्युद m. 
aleurone) समिताया-क्षोद m. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
aleurone Bot., Biochem. समिताया. a. brilliant violet निक्षामेण्य भासुर aleurone grain Bot. समिताया-धान्य n. 
नीललोहित m. aleurone layer Bot. समिताया-स्तर m. a. brown निक्षामेण्य बभ्रु m. aleuronic Chem. समितायिक mfn. 
a. corinth निक्षामेण्य रोहित m. aleuroscope समितेक्ष m. 
a. dark green निक्षामेण्य असित Alexander (literally 'a defender of हरिm. 
men') नु-पाल.m. 
a. field grey निक्षामेण्य सेना धूसर m. Alexandra (f. of Alexander 'defen a. green foreTATUUT af m. ___der of men') नृ-पाला f. 
a. grey निक्षामण्य धुसर m. Alexandra 5 R Col. Ind. नृपाला a. olive निक्षामेण्य तैलबदर m. 
५ र.mm. 
a. orange निक्षामण्य नारंग m. alfalfa Bot. starfarsitat f. (survives a. pink निक्षामण्य प्रापद्म m. 
dry periods) 
a. red निक्षामेण्य रक्त m. Algae Bot. (comprising practically a. scarlet निक्षामण्य शोण m. 
all seaweeds and allied fresh a. violet निक्षामेण्य नीललोहित m. water or nonaquatic forms) प्राप्यकाः .. a. yellow निक्षामेण्य पीत m. 
m.pl. (प्राप्य 'living in water प्राप्') Algonkian Geol. प्रादिकल्प m. (कल्प algebra बीजगणित . . 
an era) algebraic, algebraical बीजीय mfn. algorithm Math. प्राचीन अंकगणित 7. 
a.geometry बीजीय-रैखिकी f. algosol Col. Ind. निक्ष-लयन n. a. sum (sum of positive and nega- ali- (aliphatic) स्नै-(स्नैहिक) 
tive. numbers or quantities) ali-cyclic (aliphatic+cyclic) Chem. धनर्ण-संकलन . 
स्नै-चक्रिक mfn. algebraically बीजीयविधिना .. 
align vb. एकरेखण n. (एक-रेखा स्थापन) algol (algol series is chemically re- alignment एकरेखण १. 
lated to indanthrene for ICTETUTE alimentary canal Anat. (from mouth colours) Col. Ind. निक्षामेण्य . 
to anus) अन्नस्रोतस् n. (cf. महास्रोतस् a. black निक्षामेण्य काल m. 
'bowels' in चरक) . . a. blue (indanthrene blue) निक्षा- alimentary tract Anat. अन्न-पथ m. 
मेण्य नील m. . 
aliphat black (for colouring oils a. bordeaux निक्षामेण्य कपिशक m. and fats) Col. Ind. स्नेह-काल m. 
a. brilliant blue निक्षामेण्य. भासुर aliphatic Chem. स्नेहिक mfn. (स्नेह fat) . . नील m. 
aliquant part Math. सशेष भाजक m. . a. brilliant orange निक्षामेण्य भासुर aliquot part Math. अशेष-भाजक m. 
नारंगm. 
aliter Math. (Lat. 'otherwise') अन्यथा . a. brilliant pink निक्षामेण्य भासुर alizadine blue (alizadine is a trade 
आपm. 
name) Col. Ind. अभिमंजिष्ठी नील m. a. brilliantred निक्षामेण्य भासुर रक्तm. a. brown अभिमंजिष्ठी बभ्रु m. 
32 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
a. chocolate अभिमंजिष्ठी न्यवरक्तपीत 
___m. 
a. brilliant violet विमंजिष्ठि भासुर 
नीललोहित m. a. brown विमंजिष्ठि बभ्र m. a. cardinal विमंजिष्ठि न्युक्तापीत m. a. carmine विमंजिष्ठि कीटशोणी. a. celestol विमंजिष्ठि वैहायस m. a. chrome black fanfitrios quiet TT 
m. 
. 
Hiit. 
a. dark brown अभिमंजिष्ठी असित बभ्र 
m. a. orange अभिमंजिष्ठी नारंग m. 
a. yellow अभिमंजिष्ठी पीत m. alizanthrene Col. Ind. FEHETETICET 11. 
a. black fauoret VTT ETT m. a. blue विमंजक्षामण्य नील m. a. brown विमंजक्षामेण्य बभ्रु m. a. dark blue विमजक्षामेण्य असित नील 
m. a. green विमंजक्षामण्य हरि m. a. grey विमंजक्षामेण्य धूसर m. a. olive विमंजक्षामेण्य तैलबदर m. a. orange विमंजक्षामेण्य नारंग m. a. violet विमंजक्षामण्य नीललोहित m. 
a. yellow विमंजक्षामेण्य पीत m. alizanthrol red Col. Ind. विमंजक्षव 
रक्त m. 
a. yellow विमंजक्षव पीत m. alizarate (alizarin + -ate) Chem. 
विमंजिष्ठीय. alizari (the madder of the Levant) 
विमंजिष्ठिका alizarin astrol Col. Ind: विमंजिष्ठि गगन 
m. a. black विमंजिष्ठि काल m. . a. blue fasilitas filet m. a. blue-black विमंजिष्ठि नील-कृष्ण m. a. blue-green विमंजिष्ठि नील-हरि 
a. chrome black-blue fatifsfoss 
वर्णक कृष्ण-नील m. a, chrome green faifoitss quiet 
हरिm. a. claret विमंजिष्टि रक्तिरा. a. cyanine विमंजिष्ठि श्यामी f. a. cyanine black faifoitos para 
काल m. a. cyanine blue-black faniffos __ श्यामी नील-कृष्ण m. 
a. cyanine green fagforfoz gurt 
हरिm. a. cyanol विमंजिष्ठि श्यामव m. a. cyanol violet. विमंजिष्ठि श्यामव 
नीललोहित m. a. cycleamine विमंजिष्ठि चक्रतिक्ती /. a. dark blue विमंजिष्ठि असित नील m. a.dark brown विमंजिष्ठि असित 
बm. a. darkgreen विमंजिष्ठि असित हरि m. a. delphinol B, BDN=alizarin 
brilliant blue B a. dephinoI SEN=alizarinlight 
blue SE a. direct blue fafarros ATPATET 
नील m. a. direct brown विमंजिष्ठि .अनाश्रित 
बज्र m. a. direct cyanine. विमंजिष्ठि अनाश्रित ___ श्यामी . 
m. 
a. bluish विमंजिष्ठि पानील m. . a. bordeaux विमंजिष्ठि कपिशक m. a. brilliant blue fazifefie TTK 
नील m. a. brilliant green विमंजिष्ठि भासुर 
हरि m. 
33 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
a. direct green fquiffos ATTESTAT a. irisol D=quinizarin blue 
हरि m. 
a. levelling violet faffi FTAETETET a. direct grey विमंजिष्ठि अनाश्रित नीललोहित m. 
धूसर m. 
a. light blue विमंजिष्ठि लघु नील m. a. direct violet विमंजिष्टि अनाश्रित a. light green विमंजिष्ठि लघु हरि m. 
नीललोहित m. 
a. light grey विमंजिष्ठि लघु धुसर m. a.emeraldol विमंजिष्ठि मरकतव m. a. maroon विमंजिष्ठि नीचरक्त m. a. fast black विमंजिष्ठि स्थिर काल m. a. navy blue विमंजिष्ठि नाविक नील m. a. fast red विमंजिष्ठि स्थिर रक्त M. 
a. orange विमंजिष्ठि नारग m. a. fast yellow विमंजिष्ठि स्थिर पीत m. a. pure blue विमंजिष्ठि शुद्ध नील m. a. field grey (field grey is a dark a. purpurin विमंजिष्ठि नीलोहिf. 
grey used for uniforms of sol a. red विमंजिष्ठि रक्त m. diers in the field) विमंजिष्ठि सेना-- a. red-brown विमंजिष्ठि रक्त-बभ्रु m. धूसर m. 
a. reddish SX extra farifstros ETTERT a. fuchsine विमंजिष्ठि धूमलीf. . 
स क्ष अतिरिक्त m. a. garnet विमंजिष्ठि निरक्त m. 
a. rubinol विमंजिष्ठि रक्तिव m. a.geranol B विमंजिष्टि नीलातिलोहित a. sapphire feciffos fifüz m. 
बm. 
a. sapphire blue विमंजिष्ठि शनिप्रिय a. green farifettos af n. 
नीलm. a.grey विमंजिष्ठि धूसर m. 
a. saphitol विमंजिष्ठि शनिप्रियव m. a. heliotrope विमंजिष्ठि निनीलातिरक्त . a. sky blue विमंजिष्ठि आकाश नील m. 
a. spirit blue विमंजिष्ठि निषेचन नील m. a. hexa-cyanine विमंजिष्ठि षट्श्यामी. a. spirit green faufiles frotan eft 
m. a. indigo faziferie fortat m. 
a. spirit violet विमंजिष्ठि निषेचन a. indigo blue विमंजिष्ठी निनील नील नीललोहित m. ____m. 
a. uranol विमंजिष्ठि अन्तरिक्षव m. . a. indigo-grey विमंजिष्ठी निनील a. viol-amine विमंजिष्ठि नीललोहित 
धूसर m. 
तिक्ती। a. indigo-green faiforos Forritate a. violet विमंजिष्ठि नीललोहित m. 
हरि m. 
a. viridine विमंजिष्ठि हरिती f. a. indigo-pink विमंजिष्ठि निनील 
a. yellow विमंजिष्ठि पीत m. प्रापद्म m. 
a. yellowish विमंजिष्ठि प्रापीत m. a. indigo-red विमंजिष्ठि निनील-रक्त a. yellow paste विमंजिष्ठि पीत लेपी ... m. . 
alizarin dye or colour Chem. fazifero a. indigo-violet विमंजिष्ठि निनील- रंजक, रंग m. ..', नीललोहित m. 
alizarol black Col. Ind. विमंजिष्ठव a. in lumps लोष्ठ-विमंजिष्ठि f. 
काल m. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
a. brown विमंजिष्ठव बन्नु m. a. orange विमंजिष्ठव नारंग m. a. saphirole विमंजिष्ठव शनिप्रियवा f. 
a. yellow विमंजिष्ठव पीत M. alizone blue Col. Ind. fafot et m. alizurol Col. Ind. farifoon m. 
a. blue-black=alizarin blue 
black NB a. cyanine green=alizarin cya 
nine green a. green Y=alizarin viridine 
DG a. purple=alizarin irisol D a, ruby=alizarin rubinol G a. sapphire B=alizarin sap 
phire blue B a, turquoisealizarin celestol B alkal- (alkali) ratin alkal-amide (alkali+-amide) Chem. 
<?i-Fate n. alkalemia (alkali+-emia) Med. 1<in 
Poat f. alkalescence, alkalescency Chem. 
EYTETIT, STRETCGT f. (rez alkalescent 
a. albuminates 9733-faafiate n. alkali azurine Col. Ind. 1758 71 
Frent f. a. black 151 m. a, blue 
m. a. blue base क्षारक नील पीठा. a. blue-black T - U m. a. bordeaux T5 Ffurre m. a. brilliant blue क्षारक भासुर नील m. a. brown T 1n. a. chrome blue क्षारक वर्णक नीलm. a. crimson 7 ST76 m. a. dark brown क्षारक असित बभ्रु m. a. deep black क्षारक गाढ काल m. a. fast green क्षारक स्थिर हरि m. a. fast red क्षारक स्थिर रक्त m. a. fast yellow क्षारक स्थिर पीत m. a. garnet क्षारक निरक्त m. a. green क्षारक हरि m. a. mode brown TF Steum. 
(mode is a colour of variable 
hue, of low or very low satura . tion is and medium or high 
brilliance ) a. new blue क्षारक नव नील m. a. new brown क्षारक नव बभ्रm. a. orange क्षारक नारंग m. a. pink क्षारक आपद्म m. a. purple red क्षारक नीलारुण रक्त m.. a. red क्षारक रक्त m. a. red brown क्षारक रक्त बभ्र m. a. rubine ** Tit f. . . a. violet क्षारक नीललोहित m. 
a. yellow 1fram. alkalic=alkaline alkali cellulose Chem. क्षारक कोशाधु . alkali chlorosis (a yellowing of the: 
foliage of a plant caused by an: 
alkalescent I (tending to the proper 
ties of an alkali) क्षारत् mfn. 
2 (slightly alkaline) sorer mfn.. alkali adj. Chem. fpic mfn. alkali Chem. ** m. 
mild a. मदु क्षारक m. caustica. दह क्षारक m. fixed (non-volatile) a. GETTT9m. volatile a. उत्पत क्षारक m. vegetable a=vegeto-a. fi 
T m. mineral a. खनिज क्षारक m. a. albumin Biochem. Era-fara f. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
excess of soluble salts in the soil) alkalization क्षारियण 1. 
Plant Pathol. अतिक्षार-पीतता. alkalize vb. (to render alkaline) alkali disease Veter. क्षारक-रोग m. 
क्षारियण . alkalifiable क्षारणीय, क्षारणयोग्य mfn. alkalizer (an alkalizing agent) alkalify vb. I (to convert or change क्षारियक m. 
into an alkali) क्षारण 1. 
alkalizing agent क्षारियण-कर्ता (-४) 2 (to make alkaline) क्षारिय-करण 1. alkali metal क्षारक-धातु m. 
alkaloid (alkali+ -oid) Chem. क्षाराभा . alkali-meter क्षारक-मान m. 
alkaloid, alkaloidal adj. क्षाराभीय alkali-metric,alkali-metrical क्षारक mfn. __ मितीय mfn. 
alkaloidal reagent Chem. क्षाराभीय alkalimetry क्षारकमिति f. 
प्रतिकर्ता (-तृ) m. alkaline क्षारिय mfa. 
alkalometry (alkaloid + -metry) alkaline cell Eler. क्षारिय-कोशा. 
Pharm. क्षाराभ-मिति. alkaline earth Chem. क्षारिय-मृत्. alkalosis (alkali to -osis) Med. fa alkaline-earth metal Chem. क्षारिय- क्षारता. 
मृद्-धातु m. 
alkane (alkyl + -ane) Chem. streven. alkaline hydroxide Chem. क्षारिय alkanet I (Alkanna tinctoria) रक्त 
उदजारेय. 
मूल m. alkaline metal=alkali metal 
2 (a red dyestuff prepared front alkaline poly-sulphide Chem. क्षारिय alkanet root) Col. Ind. मूलरक्त m. 
पुरु-शुल्बेय. 
alkannin Chem. (colouring matter alkaline reaction क्षारिय-प्रतिक्रिया . of alkanet) मूलरक्ति f. alkaline sky blue Col. Ind. क्षारिय alkarsin (alkali+arsenic+ -in) Chem. 
आकाश-नील m. 
क्षार-नेपिf. alkaline tide Physiol. (the period of alkene (alkyl+-ene) Chem. क्षारण्य ॥. 
_increased alkalinity) क्षारिय-वेला f alkenyl (alkene-+-)Chem. क्षारण्यल 7. alkaline water क्षारिय जल . 
alkermes (the colour kermes) कृमिज alkalinity क्षारियता. 
m. alkalinization क्षारियण 1. 
alkide (alkkyl + -ide) Cbem. क्षारेय n. alkalinize=alkalize 
alkine=alc-amine alkalin-uria Med. क्षारिय-मेह m. alkoxide (alkoxyl + -ide) Chem. alkali reserve क्षार-संचिति f. 
क्षार-जारेय . alkali waste क्षारक-क्षेप्य 1. (waste alkoxy adj. (of or pertaining to 
material from the manufacture of _alkoxyl) Chem. क्षार-जारल, -जारलक . alkali) 
mfn. alkalizable क्षारियण-योग्य mfn. 
alkoxyl [allayl, with -0x-(=0xy-jin alkalizate-alkalize 
serted] Chem. क्षारजारला . 
36 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
alkoxylate vb. (to introduce alkoxyl allantoxaidin (derived from allan 
into a compound) Chem. - toxanic acid) Chem. 347751FFETTU n. जारलन, क्षारजारल-प्रवेशन n. 
allantoxanic acid (allantoin + oxy alkyd Chem. I . (a resinous com gen) Chem. 346178-forest FT N. 
position) नवोद्यास m. 
=oxonic acid piiffi Etn. 2 adj. Faler mfn. 
allanturic (allantoin + -uric) Chem. alkyl (alkali+-yl) Chem. I n. Etteet n. 34616ffci mfn. 
2 adj. arca mfn. 
allay=alloy alkyl-amine Chem. 97761-faat f. allelomorph Biol. (either of a pair alkyl-amino- (alkyl-amine) 787 of differentiating characters) 
ferait 
fyri n. alkyl-amino C hem. Tre-fact, allelomorphic characters=allelo 
-fanita mfn. 
morphs Biol. (pairs of differentia alkylate (to introduce alkyl group ting characters) fueron n. 
into) Chem. 7957, 59-CT 1. allemontite (an arsenic 1977 anti alkylation Chem. TTTT 11., 1795aam. mony is compound) Mineral. alkyl cyanide Chem. ETTET U21 n. नेपांजनिज m. (-इज for खनिज mineral) alkylene Cbem. क्षारलेन्य १. 
allene (symmetrical allylene) Chem. alkyl halide Chem. क्षारल लवणेय n. 
que n. alkyl hydrosulphide Chem. क्षारल all glass syringe सकल-काच-उद्गारिका 
sarimau n. alkylic क्षारलिक mfm. 
alliance fast green 2 G paste = alkylidene Chem. क्षारलेयेन्य n. 
anthracyl chrome green A alkylize=alkylate 
allied series Math. Feit-slut f. alkylogen=alkyl halide 
alligation Math. F#-Ff. alkyne Chem. क्षारीण 1. 
alligator Zool. 7 m. all-, allo- 79T 
Allium Bot. पलाण्डुति f. (-ति for allamanda-naphthol yellow 
sifa genus) allanic acid (formed by the action A. cepa (onion) FATF 4106 m. 
of nitric acid on allantoin 39afer) allo-, all- Chem. 443 
• Chem. - 47 n. 
allo-caffeine Chem. 442- 
Fet f. allantoic 3477fe mfn. 
allocation Com. (distribution, as of allantoic acid Chem. उपनालिक अम्लn. shares) विभाजन n. allantoin (from allantois 34TTT) allo-cinnamic Chem. 49-grafafasta 
Biochem. उपनालि . 
mfn. allantoin-uria Med. 3471f-HE m. allo-crotonic Chem. 497-574TFTF allantois (a part of the umbilical man. 
chord नाल) Anat. उपनाल m. allo-cyanine Chem. 447-47f. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
allo-desmism (allo- +Gk. desmos allotropism=allotropy ___bond) Chem, अपर-बन्धता . 
allotropize vb. अपरावर्तन n. allo-isomer Chem. अपर-समाज m. allotropy=allotropism Chem. अपरा allo-isomeric Chem. अपर-सभाजिक mfn. वर्तना. allo-isomerism Chem. अपर-सभाजताf allottee Com. आवंटनी (-इन ) m. (आवंटनम allo-merism (allo--+-Gk. meros part) अस्यास्तीति one who receives the 
Chem., Mineral. 7T-FIAT f. 
allotment) allo-merous अपर-भागीय mfu. 
allowance I भक्त . (Hindi भत्ता) allomorph Mineral. अपर-रूप n. 
2 अधिदेय . (extra payment) allomorphic अपर-रूपीय mfn. 
3 मोक m. (remission) allomorphism अपर-रूपता f. 
allox- (alloxan) Chem. उपतिम् allomorphite Mineral. अपर-रूपिज m. alloxan (allantoin उपनालि +oxalic 
(-इज for खनिज mineral) . 
तिग्मिक) Chem. उपतिग्म n. allo-mucic acid Chem. अपर-नासिक alloxanate Chem. उपतिग्मीय 1. 
अम्ल 
alloxanic Chem. उपतिग्मिक mfn. allo-palladium Mineral. अपर-निचूषातु alloxantin Chem. उपतिग्मकि . 
alloxur-emia (alloxuric+-emia) Med. allo-phan-amide Chem. अपर-दृश् उपतिग्मिह-रक्तता . 
तिक्तेय . 
alloxuric Biochem. उपतिग्मिहिक mfn. allo-phanate Chem. अपर-दशीयn. alloxy- (allyl लाषणल + oxy- जार-) allophane Mineral. अपर-दशिज m. (its Chem. लाषण-जार 
appearance changes before the all-oxy-proteic (all- अपर-) Chem. 
blowpipe; -इज for खनिज mineral) अपर-जार-प्रोभूजिक mfn. allophanic acid Cbem. अपर-दृशिक alloy I 1. मिश्रातु m. (मिश्रधातु) 
अम्ल. 
2 . धातु-मिश्रण.. alloplasm Biol. उपघटन m. 
alloyage (act or art of alloying) allose (all- अपर-+-ose) Chem. अपरधु . धातु-मिश्रण n., धातुमिश्रणा f. allo-telluric acid Chem. अपर- alloy balance मिश्रातु-तुला f. 
वंगकिक अम्ल 1. 
alloy charge मिश्रातु-प्रभरण 1. allotment Com. आवंटन n. 
-alloyed -f#fea mfn. a. book आवंटन-पुस्त n. 
alloy steel मिश्रातु-वज्रायस n. allotrope=allotropic form Chem. All-Pullman Rly. सर्व-हवें n. 
अपरावर्त m. = अपरावतिक रूप. all-round defence=circular de allotropic,allotropical अपरावर्तिक mfn. fence Mil. वर्तुल-प्रतिरक्षा . allotropic form अपरावर्तिक रूप 7. allspice=pimento (odour and taste allotropicity अपरावर्तिकता . 
resemble cloves) Pharm. लवंग-बदर allotropic modification=allotro m., n. (the tree is m., the berry n.) 
pic form 
all-steel train Rly. सर्व-वज्रायस संयान n. 
38 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
- 
alluranic acid (formed by the union Alocasia Bot. Arafa f. (-fr for ' of alloxan and urea) Chem. 
प्रजाति genus) उपतिग्ममिहिक अम्ल . 
Aloe Bot. Tarifa f. (-fat for sofa genus) allyl (Lat. allium 'garlic'+-2) Chem. aloe=aloes Pharm. eta f. 
लाषुणल . 
aloes and myrrh pills=pilulae a. alcohol लाषुणल सुषव m. 
___ aloes et myrrhae (pil. aloes et a. aldehyderacrolein 
myrrh.)=Rufus pills-pilulae सुव्युद m. 
Rufi कुमारी-रसगंध-गुटिका f.. a. arsonic acid लाषुणल नेपायिक aloes green (a colour, yellow-green 
अम्ल 
पीतहरि in hue, of low saturation a. bromide लाषुणल दुरेय . 
अव and high brilliance प्र) कुमारी a. chloride.लाषुणल नीरेय . 
हरि, प्रावपीतहरि mfn.. a. ethyl ether लाषुणल दक्षुल दक्षु m. aloes-ol Chem. कुमारीव m. a. formate लाषुणल दम्रीय . 
aloes wine=vinum aloes (vin. a. iodide लाषुणल जम्बेय . 
aloes) Pharm. कुमारी द्राक्षिरा. . a. mustard oil लाषुणल सर्षप-तैल n. aloes wood=agalloch अगर m. a. sulphide लाषणल शल्बेय . 
aloetic कुमारिक mfn. a. thio-carb-amide = thio-sin- aloetic acid Chem. कुमारिक अम्ल 
amine CUTET TFTTT-free n.= aloetical=aloetic गन्ध-सर्ष-तिक्ती. 
aloin Chem., Pharm. कुमारिकि . allyl-amine Chem. लाषुणल-तिक्ती . along अनु 
allylate vb. Chem. (to introduce allyl along the width अनुप्रस्थ 
into) लाषुणल-प्रवेशन १. 
alopecia=baldness खलति m. allylation लाषुणल-प्रवेश m. 
alopecia areata Med. वर्तुल खलति m. allylene Chem. लाषुणलेन्य 11. 
(in circumscribed patches) allylic Chem. लाषुणलिक mfa. 
alorcic=alorcinic (aloe+orcin शेयि allyl-iodide-hex-amine Chem. + -ic) Chem. कुमारी-शेयिक mfn. 
लाषुणल-जम्बेय-षट्-तिक्ती . 
a (alpha) अ (use hyphen after अ, allyl-iso-thio-cyanate Chem. लाषुणल pronounce it as अवर्ण. or अकार 
स-गन्ध-श्यामीय 1. 
and thus avoid confusion with allyl-thio-urea Chem. लाषुणल-गन्ध negative prefix 7) 
मिह m. 
alpha (a) अवर्ण, अकार (अ) m. almirah धाय m. 
___alphabetical order वर्ण-क्रम m. almond any m., n. (the tree m., alpha-cellulose (beta-, gamma-) ___the fruit n.) 
अवर्ण-कोशाधु . (आवर्ण-, इवर्ण-) almost Math. - 879 (at the end of alpha drop testing machine (for 
compounds) 
cast iron संचायस) अकार पात-परीक्षित्र almost insoluble प्रायः अविलेय . 
n. (संचायसार्थ) 
39﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
alpha-eucaine Chem. अकार-स्वचेतनी f. A. scholaris सामान्य सप्तपर्ण m. alpha iron प्रकारायस n. 
alstonia (alston.)=Australian fever alpha-naphthol Chem.प्रकार-उत्तैलव m. bark-alstoniae cortex-dita alpha-naphthyl Chem. अकार-उत्तरल n. bark Pharm. सप्तपर्ण-वल्क m. alpha-naphthyl-amine Chem. अकार- alter vb. विकरण, परिवर्तन 1. 
उत्तरल-तिक्ती 
alteration of boundaries Politics alphanol black Col. Ind. अवर्णीन्यव सीमा-परिवर्तन n. 
काल m. 
alternando Math. एकान्तर-निष्पत्ति. a. blue अवर्णीन्यव नील m. 
alternate I (one following the other) a. brown अवर्णीन्यव बभ्रु m. 
एकान्वेक, एकान्तरिक mfn. (having the a. fast grey अवर्णीन्यव स्थिर धूसर distance of one) ___m. 
2 Bot. (not opposite, as leaves) a. yellow-brown अवर्णीन्यव पीत असंमुख mfn. 
ब< m. 
alternate vb. एकान्तरण, एकान्वेकन n. alpha particle Phys. अकार लव m. alternate = alternative n. fatica alpha (a) ray Phys., Chem. अकार m. 
(अ) रश्मि m. 
alternately एकान्तरतया, एकान्तरण alpha rebondimeter (for testing alternating function Math. चिह्न 
the height of the rebound) अकार परिवर्ति श्रित n. 
उत्प्लुति-मान m. 
alternation of generations Biol. alphatoluic Cbem. अकार-विरालिक mfn. एकान्तर-जनन ". alphazurine Col. Ind. अकार-नभोनीली. alternative In. विकल्प m. alphol (alpba + -01) Pharm. अकारव m. _2 adj. वैकल्पिक mfn. (optional) alphyl (alkyl + phenyl) Chem. क्षार- a. method वैकल्पिक-रीति f. 
दर्शल . 
a. proof Math. उपपत्त्यन्तर n., वैकल्पिक alphyl blue-black Col. Ind. क्षार उपपत्ति f. 
दर्शल नील-कृष्ण m. 
alternatively प्रकारान्तरेण Alpine blue Col. Ind. शिखरि-नील m. alternipinnate Bot. असंमुख-पक्षवत् Alpinia Bot. कुलजति f. (-ति for प्रजाति mfn. 
genus) 
'althionic (alcohol + thionic) Chem. A. galanga सामान्य कुलंज m. 
सुष-गन्धिक mfn. alpinine (Alpinia. galanga. कुलंज) although यद्यपि ___Chem. कुलंजी f. 
Altingia Bot. सिलकति f. (-ति for Alsace green=chlorine 
प्रजाति genus) Alsace gum=dextrin 
A. excelsa सामान्य सिलक m. also Math. अथ च 
altitude Math. उच्छाय m. Alstonia Bot. सप्तपर्णति f. (-ति for altitude bombing Mil. उच्चै : 
प्रजाति genus) 
प्रस्फोटन n. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
TET 
altitudinal I (along the altitude) alum carmine Micros. स्फटिका-कीटशोणी 
अनूच्छाय 2 (of or pertaining to a.) औच्छा- alum cochineal Micros. स्फटिकेन्द्रगोपm. यिक mfn., उच्छ्राय 
Alumel (aluminium+nickel) Metal. altogether सर्वशः 
स्फटीरूपक 1. (स्फटयातु+रूपक) altrose (Lat. alter other + -ose) Chem. alumen-alum Pharm. ___ अन्यधु n. 
alumen ustum (burnt alum'; Lat. aludel=udell Chem. अन्यग n. (a pot u stum is Sanskrit उष्टम् burnt) दग्ध 
open at both ends, the neck of स्फटिका . one fitting into the bottom of alum flower स्फटका-पुष्प n. another) 
alumin-, alumino- (aluminium) aludel furnace=bustamente fur- Chem. स्फटी- (स्फटयातु)। 
nace अन्यग-भ्राष्ट्र n. 
alumina=aluminium oxide Chem. alum स्फटिका f. (cf. स्फट crystal) स्फटीजा f. (-जा from जारेय oxide) 
ammonia or ammonium a. alumina cement Civ. Engin. Fue St 
तिक्ताति-, तिक्तातु-स्फटिका . 
वज्रचूर्ण m. chrome a. वर्णक-स्फटिका. 
alumina. cream Chem. स्फटीजा-शर m. iron a. अयस्-स्फटिका f. 
aluminate Chem. स्फटीय . manganese a. लोहक-स्फटिका f. aluminate vb. 1 स्फटिकायन . potassium a. दहातु-स्फटिकाf. 
a (to treat with alum) स्फटिका rubidium a. दीपातु-स्फटिका. 
साधन selenium a. मेचाग्नि-स्फटिका. 
b (to combine with alum) sodium a. क्षारातु-स्फटिका f. 
स्फटिका-योजन ॥. alum vb. स्फटिकायन n. 
2 स्फटीजायन . I (to steep in a solution of alum a (to treat with alumina) स्फटीजा 
or similar aluminium com 
साधन . pound) स्फटी-निमज्जन n. (here b (to combine with alumina) Flict stands for alum as well as स्फटीजा-योजन 1. aluminium) 
alumine alumina 2 (to impregnate with a solution aluminic Chem. स्फाटिक (cf. स्फटिक ___of....) स्फटी-व्यापन । 
quartz) 3 (to adulterate with a solution aluminide Chem. स्फट्येय . ___of....) स्फटी-व्यामिश्रण 1. 
alumini-ferous स्फटी-भर mfn. 4 (to treat with a solution of....) aluminiform (having the form of an 
स्फटी-साधन n. 
___alum) स्फटिका-रूप mfn. alum. (aluminium) Chem. स्फटी. aluminite (a hydrous aluminium 
(स्फटयातु) 
sulphate) Mineral. स्फटीयिज m. (-इज alum cake स्फटिका-पिड m. 
for afist mineral) 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
aluminium, aluminum स्फटयातु m. a. acetate (basic) स्फटयातु शुक्तीय . 
(पैठिक) a. aceto-tartrate (scales) स्फटयातु 
शुक्त-न्यासवीय 1. (शल्क) ac ammonium sulphate (am 
monium alum) स्फटयातु तिक्तातु शुल्बीय 1. (तिक्तातु स्फटिका f.) a. arsenate स्फटयातु नेपालीय... a. benzoate स्फटयातु धूपीय . a. borate स्फटयातु टांकीय n. a. bromide (hydrated or anhy 
drous) स्फटधातु दुरेय n. (जलीयित, अजल) a. bronze स्फटी-कांस्य M. a. carbide स्फटयातु प्रांगेय . a. chloride (hydrated or anhy 
drous) स्फटयातु नीरेय n. (जलीयित, 
अजल) a. chromate (technical) स्फटयातु 
वर्णीय . (परिभाषित) . a. ethoxide (ethoxyl+-ide) स्फटयातु 
दक्षु-जारलेय . a. family स्फटयातु-कुल n. a. filings (needles) स्फटयातु रेतीक्षेप __m. (सूची) 
a. fluoride (technical) स्फटयातु 
तरस्वेय N. (परिभाषित) a. foil स्फट्यातु-पर्ण 1. a.gold स्फटयातु-स्वर्ण इ. a. hydroxide (dry or moist) __ स्फटयातु उदजारेय . (शुष्क, आर्द्र) 
a. iodide (anhydrous) स्फटयातु ___ जम्बय . (अजल) 
a.iso-prop-oxide स्फटयातु स-प्रमेद 
जारेय . a. naphthol-sulphonate स्फटयातु 
उत्तैलव-शुल्बायीय n. 
a. nitrate स्फटयातु भूयीय . a. oleate (technical) स्फटयातु म्रक्षीय ___. (परिभाषित) 
a. oxide (calcined) स्फटयातु जारेय 7. 
(निश्चूर्णित) ___a. paint स्फटयातु-रंगलेप m. 
a. palmitate (technical) FUCITEL __ तालीय . (परिभाषित) 
a. phosphate स्फटयातु भास्वीय . a. potassium fluoride स्फटयातु ___ दहातु सरस्वेय . 
a. potassium selenate PACOTCI 
दहातु मेचीय. a. potassium sulphate (potas ___sium alum) स्फटयातु दहातु शुल्बीय n. 
(दहातु स्फटिका) _a. powder (coarse, fine) स्फटयातु ___ क्षोद M. (स्थूल, सूक्ष्म) 
a. resinate स्फटयातु उद्यासीय. a. salicylate स्फटयातु नम्रलीय 1. a. scoop स्फटयातु-प्रदर्वी f. a. selenide स्फटयातु मेचय M. a. sheet (thin) स्फटयातु-स्तार m.(तनु) a. silicate (precipitated) स्फटयातु ___सैकतीय 7. (निस्सादित) 
a. silico-fluoride (technical) ___ स्फटयातु सैकत-तरस्वेय n. (परिभाषित) a. sodium sulphate (sodium 
alum) स्फटयातु क्षारातु शुल्बीयn. 
(क्षारातु-स्फटिका) a. stearate (technical) स्फटयातु वसीय __१. (परिभाषित) 
a. sulphate स्फटयातु शुल्बीय 1. a. sulphide (technical) स्फटयातु 
शुल्बेय 2. (परिभाषित) a. tannate स्फटयातु शल्कीय n. a. tartrate स्फटयातु न्यासवीय . a. telluride स्फटयातु वंगकेय n. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
a. tert.-butoxide स्फटयातु तु.-धृतजारेय alumo-hydro-calcite (a hydrous 
calcium aluminium carbonate) a. tungstate स्फटयातु चंडीय 1. 
Mineral. स्फोदणिज m. (-इज for a. turnings स्फटयातु चक्रक्षेप m. 
खनिज mineral) aluminize vb. 1 स्फटीयन n. (from स्फटी alum rock=alunite Mineral. स्फाश्म m. 
• alum, aluminium) 
alum stone (an impure siliceous a (to treat with aluminium) alunite) Mineral. स्फटी-प्रस्तर m. 
स्फटयातु-साधन . 
alundum (aluminium+corundum) b (to coat with aluminium) 
Chem. स्फटी-विन्द m. (स्फटयातु+कुरु स्फटयातु-लेपन, स्फटयातु-रोपण . 
विन्द) 2 =aluminate 
alunite=alum rock alumino-, alumin-aluminium) स्फटी- alunogen (French alum alum+-gen) 
(स्फटयातु) 
Mineral. स्फटी-जन m. . alumino-ferric स्फटययसिक mfn. 
feather alum पत्र-स्फटी. alumino-graphic स्फटी-लैखिक mfn. hair salt केश-लवण n. alumino-graphy स्फटी-लिखा . 
alveolar theory=foam theory aluminon Chem. स्फटया . 
emulsion theory Biol. फेन-वाद m. aluminose, aluminous Chem. स्फाटय alveolus (an air cell of lungs) Anat. 
mfn. 
वायु-कोशा f. . alumino-silicate Chem., Mineral. always HET 
स्फटी-सैकतीय n. 
A.M. म. पू. (मध्याह्न-पूर्व) aluminosis Med. स्फटी-रुजा . (a. Am. (ammonium) Chem. ति (तिक्तातु) 
disease of the lungs caused by Am. (amyl) Chem. मण् (मण्ड-ल) inhalation of aluminum dust) Am, Ab (alabamine) Chem. ला (लावणी) aluminosity स्फाटयता. 
am- (ammonia, ammonium) Chem. alumino-thermic Chem. स्फटी-तापिक तिक्त-(तिक्ताति, तिक्तातु) 
mfn. 
-am (ammonia, ammonium) Chem. aluminothermics=aluminothermy -ति (तिक्ताति, तिक्तातु) 
Metal. स्फटी-तापना f. 
am-acid (amine-+- acid) azo yellow alumino-type (a printing plate) met Col. Ind. तिक्ताम्ल अज पीत m. 
पट्ट m. 
a. black तिक्ताम्ल काल m. aluminous-aluminose 
a. blue-black तिक्ताम्ल नील-कृष्ण m. aluminous cake=alum cake 
a. brilliant orange तिक्ताम्ल भासुर aluminum=aluminium 
नारंग m. aluminyl Cbem. स्फटील . 
a. chrome blue तिक्ताम्ल वर्णक नील alum meal Chem. स्फटिका-समिता. 
m. Alumnol (alumin-f-01) Pharm. Fiera a. chrome brown तिक्ताम्ल वर्णक 
m. 
बभ्रm. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
a. chrome green तिक्ताम्ल वर्णक amalic acid (Gk. amales soft, weak; 
हरिm. 
from its feeble acid reaction) a.eosine तिक्ताम्ल उषसी f. 
Chem. आमृदु अम्ल .. a. fast brown तिक्ताम्ल स्थिर बभ्र m. amalthion bordeaux Col. Ind. शुल्बारि a. fast red familia FETT TT m. कपिशक m. a. fuchsine तिक्ताम्ल धूमली f. amalthion brown R = sulphur a. orange तिक्ताम्ल नारंग m. 
yellow-brown a. phloxine तिक्ताम्ल ज्वाली f. amalthion green 2 G, 4 GV = a. red तिक्ताम्ल रक्त m. 
sulphur green T a. scarlet तिक्ताम्ल शोण m. amandin (French amande almond) a. yellow fantasy TCT m. 
Biochem. स्वादु-वातामि . (from amalgam संरस m. (it always con sweet almonds) 
tains mercury रस) 
am-anil (amino- + aniline) black copper a. ताम्र-संरस m. 
Col. Ind. तिक्तनील काल m. sodium a. क्षारातु-संरस m. 
a. blue तिक्तनील नील m. zinc a. कुप्यातु-संरस m. 
a. brilliant blue तिक्तनील भासुर amalgam=amalgamate vb. (to co नील m. 
ver with amalgam) संरसावरण 1. a. brown तिक्तनील बभ्र m. amalgam arc Elec. संरस-चाप m. 
a. chloramine yellow तिक्तनील amalgamate vb. I (to compound नीरतिक्ती पीत m. 
or mix, mercury, with another a. chrome brown तिक्तनील वर्णक metal) संरसन . 
बत्रु m. 2 (to mix so as to make a uni a. chrome dark brown तिक्तनील form compound) संमिश्रण 1. 
वर्णक असित बभ्रु m. amalgamate-amalgamated संरसित, a. fastorange तिक्तनील स्थिर नारंग m. 
संमिश्रित nfn. 
a. fast red तिक्तनील स्थिर रक्त m. amalgamation I (the act) संरसन, a. fast yellow तिक्तनील स्थिर पीत 
संमिश्रण n. 
m. 2 (the process) संरसना, संमिश्रणा f. garnet तिक्तनील निरक्त m. amalgamation process Ore Dress a.green तिक्तनील हरि m. 
ing संरसन-विधा f. 
a. rubine तिक्तनील रक्ती. amalgamator संरसक m., संरसित्र 1. a. sky blue तिक्तनील आकाश-नील m. 
(संरसन-यन्त्र) 
a. vat olive तिक्तनील वात तैलबदर m. amalgamist संरसयिता (-त) m. 
(when exposed to air वात, amalgamization=amalgamation the dye is reformed by oxida amalgamize=amalgamate 
tion) amalgam mortar संरस-उलखल . 
a. violet NC concentrated amalgam scoop संरस-प्रदर्दी f. 
तिक्तनील नीललोहित न स संकेन्द्रित m. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
mfn. 
Amanita Bot. अभिकवकति f. (-ति for and high brilliance st; cf. umber 
प्रजाति genus) 
बभ्रकी) प्रपीतारक्त m. amanita hemolysin Biochem. अभि- amber-coloured प्रपीतारक्त mfn. 
कवक-शोणांशिf. 
ambi- (Lat. ambo 'both' is Sanskrit amanita toxin Biochem. अभिकवक-विषि उभ) उभय amanous (Lat. manus hand) अ-हस्त ambiguous संदिग्ध, द्वयर्थक, अनियतरूप 
mfn. amaranth I Bot. (Gk. a- not + ambivalence, -valency वि-सं-युजता 
marainein to wither) अम्लान, प्रवास्तुक (वियुजता संयुजता च simultaneous 
attraction towards and repulsion 2 (a colour, reddish blue-red from an object) 
नीलातिरक्त in hue, of high satura- ambivalent वि-सं-युज mfn. tion उत् and low brilliance नि) ameba=amoeba कामरूपी (-इन ) m. न्युन्नीलातिरक्त mfn. 
ameboid movement कामरून्याभ-गति, Amaranthaceae Bot. खरमञ्जरी-कुल N. कामरूपि-गति. (movement of rhizo amaranth extra Col. Ind. अम्लान poda मूलपाद-गति .) 
अतिरिक्त m. 
amend vb. संशोधना. amaranth pink प्रोन्नीलातिरक्त mfn. amendment संशुद्धि, संशोधन ॥. amaranth purple न्यधिरक्तानील mfn. ament=catkin Bot. निलम्बशूकी. amaranth red Col. Ind. अम्लान रक्त m. America रजतद्वीप m. amarantile Mineral. अम्लानिज m. (-इज American रजतद्वीपीय mfn. 
for खनिज mineral; it is of American aloe वनकुमारी f. (cf. Guj.. amaranth colour) 
जंगली कंवार) amarine (Lat. amarus bitter; obtained American mandrakepodophyl 
from oil of bitter almonds) Chem. lum Pharm. प्रलघुपत्र m., n. (the कटुकी f. 
plant is m., the root n.) amaroid Pharm. कटुसार m. (a bitter American Society for Testing Ma 
vegetable extractive) 
terials रजतद्वीपीय द्रव्य-परीक्षण परिषत् / Amaryllidaceae (amaryllis family) American vermilion रजतद्वीप हिंगुल m. 
Bot. सुदर्शन-कुल 1. 
American yellow Col. Ind. रजतद्वीप -amate Chem. -तिक्तीय ?. 
पीत m. amateur प्रेमानुशीली (-इन्.) m. 
amethyst violet-iris violet amatol (ammonia feritif + toluene a-metropia Med. maafwat f. 
farerstat; an explosive) fa-za- amic=amidic Chem. Faradt fora mfn. स्फोट m. 
-amic, -amidic -fraaf mfn. amber तृणमणि m. 
amic acid Chem. तिक्तेयिक अम्ल .. amber colour (reddish yellow amicron (a- not+micron; one of 
पीतारक्त hue, of medium saturation the smallest particles detectable 
AS 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
mid- 
inchem . 
.. 
with the ultramicroscope, about a. fast black तिक्तेयी स्थिर काल m. IX TO-7 cm. in diameter) Physical a. fast brown तिक्तेयी स्थिर बच m. 
Chem. सप्तमाणु m. 
a. fast grey तिक्तेयी स्थिर सर m. amid- = amido 
a. fast orange तिक्तेयी स्थिर नारंग m. amidase Biochem. तिक्तेयेद m. 
a. fast red तिक्तेयी स्थिर रक्तm. amidate Chem. तिक्तेयीय . 
a. fast rose तिक्तेयी स्थिर पाटल m. amidate vb. Chem. I तिक्तेयन 1. 
a. fast scarlet तिक्तेयी स्थिर शोण m. (to convert into an amide) तिक्तेयः a. fast yellow तिक्तेयी स्थिर पीत m. करण. 
a. green तिक्तेयी हरि m. . 2=aminate 
a. orange तिक्तेयी नारंगm. amidation Chem. तिक्तेयन ॥. 
a. orange brown extra तिक्तेयी amidazol black Col. Ind. तिक्तेयाजव नारंग बघ्र अतिरिक्त m. 
काल m. 
a. scarlet farestat stor m. a. cachou, a. cutch तिक्तेयाजव a.sky blue तिक्तेयी आकाश-नीलm. 
गायत्री 
a. violet तिक्तेयी नीललोहित m. a. drabतिक्तेयाजव अवरक्तपीत m. amido-, amid- (amide) Chem, freda a. green तिक्तेयाजव हरिm. 
amido adi. Chen. तिक्तेय, तिक्तेयक min. amide (ammonia to -ide) Ch im. amido-acetal Chem. तिक्तेय-शक्तम m. . 
तिक्तेय .. 
amido-acetic Chem. तिक्तेय-शक्तिक afn: acid a. अम्ल तिक्तेय .. 
amido-aceto-phenone Chem. fada primary, secondary, tertiary a. शुक्त-दर्शा. 
आद्य, द्वितीयक, तृतीयक तिक्तेय .. amido acid black Ind. farda acet-amide शुक्त-तिक्तेय . 
अम्ल काल m. di-acet-amide द्वि-शक्त-तिक्तेय . amido-aldehyde Chem. तिक्तेय-सुव्यद tri-acet-amide त्रि-शुक्त-तिक्तेय . 
m. amide powder (an explosive) तिक्तेय amido-azo-benzene Chem. तिक्तेय 
क्षोद m. . 
अज-धूपन्य .. amidic Chem. तिक्तेयिक mfn. 
amido-azo-benzene red Col. Ind. amidin (French anmidon starch मण्ड) तिक्तेय-अज-धूपन्य रक्त m. 
Chem. मंडिf. 
a. azo-benzol तिक्तेय-अज-धूपव m. amidine (amide + -ine) Chem. feransit a.-azo-benzole sulphonate 
तिक्तेय-अज-धूपवा शुल्बायीय . amidine black Col. Ind. तिक्तेयी काल a. azo black तिक्तेय अज काल m. 
m : 
a.-azo-toluene hydrochloride a. blue तिक्तेयी नील m. 
तिक्तेय-अज-विरालेन्य उदनीरेय .. a..bordeaux तिक्तेयी कपिशक m. 
a.-azo-toluol तिक्तेय-अज-विरालव m. ai brown faqat m. 
a. black frente al m. a. dark green तिक्तेयी असित हरिm. a. black green तिक्तेय काल-हरि m. 
46 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
- 
- 
- 
m. 
a. blue तिक्तेय नील m. 
diminutive suffix -क + -in-इ) a. brilliant red तिक्तेय भासुर रक्त m. Chem. मण्डकि f. (soluble starch amido-caffeine Chem. तिक्तेय-म्लेच्छी f. विलेय मण्ड) amido-capric Chem. तिक्तेय-नारिकेलिक aminate [amin तिक्ति+य)+ -ate -ईय] 
mfn. 
Chem. तिक्तियीय n. amido discharge black Col. Ind. aminate vb. Chem. fetar n. 
तिक्तेय मोचन काल m. 
I to introduce the amino group a. discharge blue तिक्तेय मोचन नील into) तिक्तीक-प्रवेशन 1. 
2 (to convert into an amine) amido-fluoride Chem. तिक्तेय-तरस्वेय. तिक्ती-करण . 
a.-formic acid तिवतेय-वम्रिक अम्ल . amination Chem. तिक्तीयन M., तिक्तीक a.-gen तिक्तेय-जन m. 
प्रवेश m., तिक्तीकरण. a.-guaiacol तिक्तेय-आसिलव 12. amine (ammonia + -ine) Chem. a.-hexose तिक्तेय-षड्धु १. 
तिक्ती. a. ketone तिक्तेय शौक्ता/. 
amine black Col. Ind. तिक्ती काल m. amidol Col. Ind. तिक्तेयव m. 
amine black-green Col. Ind. facit amido-myelin Chem. तिक्तेय-विमज्जि. काल-हरि m. amido-naphthol black Col. Ind. aminic Chem, fafaeifaa mfn. 
तिक्तेय-उत्तलव काल m. 
aminity (aminic character) Chem. a. blue तिक्तेय-उत्तैलव नील m. 
तिक्तियिकता. a. blue-black तिक्तेय-उत्तैलव नील- amino (- NH.) Chem. तिक्तीक m. 
कृष्ण m. 
amino-Chem. fainit- (shortened from ४. red तिक्तेय-उत्तैलव रक्त m. 
तिक्तीक) amido-phenol Chem. तिक्तेय-दर्शव m. a.-acetal तिक्ती-शुक्तसुm. amido-phosphoric Chem. तिक्तेय a.-acet-anilide तिक्ती-शुक्त-नीलेय 
भास्विक mfn. armido-pyrine Pharm. तिक्तेय-ज्वरघ्नीf. m-a.-acet-anilide hydrochloride amido red Col. Ind. तिक्तेय रक्त m. 
सम-तिक्ती-शुक्त-नीलेय उदनीरेय ।. amido-succin-amic Chem, तिक्तेय-तृण a.-acetate तिक्ती-शुक्तीय n. 
तिक्तेयिक mfn. 
a.-acetic fact-tfarai mfn. amido-sulphonal तिक्तेय-शुल्बासु m. 
a.-acetic acid तिक्ती-शुक्तिक अम्ल .. amido-thiazole तिक्तेय-गन्धाजवा 
a.-acetone. तिक्ती-शुक्ता. amid-oxime Chem. तिक्तेय-जावि .. 
a.-aceto-phenetidine तिक्ती-शक्त amid-oxyl Chem. तिक्तेय-जारला. 
दर्शदेयी . amido yellow Col. Ind. Faracter fra m. a. aceto-phenone तिक्ती-शुक्त-दर्शा amidrazone (amidine + hydrazane) 
f. . Chem. तिक्तेयोदाजीवा. 
.p-a-aceto-phenone प-तिक्ती-शुक्त amidulin (amidon starch que + -ule wrff. 
47 
__n. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
a. acid तिक्ती अम्ल 1. a-a.-alizarin अ-तिक्ती-विमंजिष्ठि f. a.-anthra-quinone तिक्ती-विक्ष 
विज्वरा. r-a.-anthra-quinone १-तिक्ती-विक्षे 
विज्वरा . a.-azo-benzene तिक्ती-अज-धूपेन्य n. a.-azo-benzene hydrochloride 
तिक्ती-अज-धूपेन्य उदनीरेय .. a.-azo-benzene-sulphonic acid 
तिक्ती-अज-धूपेन्य-शुल्बायिक अम्ल n. a.azo-naphthalene तिक्ती-अज 
उत्तैलेन्या . a.-azo-toluene तिक्ती-अज-विरालेन्य. a.-batbituric तिक्ती-कोलमिहिक mfn. a.-benz-aldehyde तिक्ती-धूप-सुव्युद 
.m. a.-benz-amide तिक्ती-धूप-तिक्तेय . a.-benzene तिक्ती-धूपेन्य . p-a.-benzene-sulphon - amide 
प-तिक्ती-धूपेन्य-शुल्बा-तिक्तेय . m-a.-benzene-sulphonic acid 
सम-तिक्ती-धूपन्य-शुल्बायिक अम्ल .. 1-a.-benz-imidazole १-तिक्ती-धूप 
वितिक्तेयाजवा . a.-benzoic तिक्ती-धूपिक mfn. a.-benzoic acid तिक्ती-धूपिक अम्ल l-a.-benz-thiazole १-तिक्ती-धूप 
गन्धाजवा. a-a. -n-butyric acid अ-तिक्ती-ऋ 
घृतिक अम्ल . dl-8-a.-n-butyric acid द.वा.- प्रा 
तिक्ती-ऋ-घृतिक अम्ल . a.-caproic तिक्ती-गव्यिक mfn. dl. -2-a. -n-caproic acid. द. वा. 
२- तिक्ती-ऋ-गव्यिक अम्ल n. . dl-2-a. -caprylic acid द. वा. -२ 
तिक्ती-नारिकेरलिक अम्ल .. 
a. -chloride तिक्ती-नीरेय .. D-a.-cresol hydrochloride q 
तिक्ती-ऋविपव उदनीरेया. p-a.-dibutyl-aniline hydro ___chloride प-तिक्ती-द्विघृतल-नीली उद 
नीरेय . p-a.-diethyl-aniline प-तिक्ती 
द्विदक्षुल-नीली. p-a.-dimethyl-aniline q-fat 
द्विप्रोदल-नीली. a.-dimethyl-benzene तिक्ती 
द्विप्रोदल-धूपेन्य १. a.-di-phenyl तिक्ती-द्वि-दर्शल n. p-a.-diphenyl-amine प-तिक्ती 
द्विदर्शल-तिक्ती f. a. -ethionic तिक्ती-दक्षुगन्धिक mfn. pra.-ethyl-acet-anilide प-तिक्ती 
दक्षुल-शुक्त-नीलेय. a. -formic तिक्ती-वम्रिक mfn. a. -G-acid तिक्ती-छ-अम्ल n. a. -gall-amine blue तिक्ती-स्फोट 
तिक्ती नील m. a. -glutaric तिक्ती-आश्लेषासविक mfn. a. -G-salt तिक्ती -छ-लवण .. a. -guanidine तिक्ती-वैष्ठेयी f. a. -guanidine bicarbonate foarte ___ वैष्ठेयी द्वयङ्गारीय . 
a. -guanidine sulphate fatteita __ वैष्ठेयी शुल्बीय १. 
a. -J-acid तिक्ती-ज-अम्ल n. a.-ketone तिक्ती-शौक्ता. a.-lipin तिक्ती-विमेदि f. a.-malonic तिक्ती-उत्कोलायिक mfn. 
1.-methyl-acet-anilide प तिक्ती-प्रोदल-शक्त-नीलेय. dl.--a.-a-methyl-butyric acid 
द. वा.-अ- तिक्ती-अ-प्रोदल-तिक अम्ल 1. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
n. 
2-a. -4-methyl-thiazole hydro a.-phenyl-arsonic acid fact 
chloride २-तिक्ती-४-प्रोदल-गन्धाजवा दर्शल-नेपायिक अम्ल 
उदनीरेय . 
p-a.-phenyl -glycine -dihydro a.-myelin तिक्ती-विमज्जिf. 
chloride प-तिक्ती-दर्शल-मध्वी a.-naphthol तिक्ती-उत्तैलव m. 
द्वयुदनीरेय n. 1-a.-8-naphthol-3:6 -disulpho 0-a.-phthalic cyclic hydrazide 
nic acid (H acid) १-तिक्ती-८ ऊ-तिक्ती-व्युत्तैलिक चक्रिक उदाजीवेय. उत्तैलव-३:६-द्विशुल्बायिक अम्ल (ज अम्ल) a.-propionic तिक्ती-प्रमेदिक mfn. 
a-a.-propionic acid अ-तिक्ती 2-a.-8-naphthol-3: 6-disulpho प्रमेदिक अम्ल . 
nic acid (2 R acid) २-तिक्ती-८ a.-putine तिक्ती-मिहकी . उत्तैलव-३:६-द्विशुल्बायिक अम्ल (२ द अम्ल) a.-quinoline तिक्ती-विज्वरवी . 
M. 
a.-R-acid तिक्ती-द-अम्ल ?. a. -naphthol ether तिक्ती-उत्तैलव 2-a.-resorcinol hydrochloride 
दक्षु . 
२-तिक्ती-शेयास उदनीरेया.. I-a.-2-naphthol hydrochloride a.-succin-amic तिक्ती-तृण-तिक्तेयिक 
१-तिक्ती-२-उत्तैलव उदनीरेय 1. 
___mfn. 2-a.-5 naphthol-7-sulphonic a.-succinic acid तिक्ती-तुणिक अम्ल 
acid (J acid) २-तिक्ती-५उत्तैलव-७ 1. (aspartic acid आपीवरिक शुल्बायिक अम्ल ( अम्ल). 
अम्ल.) 2-a.-8 naphthol-6-sulphonic a .-sulphonic faeet-zeafaa mfn. 
acid (gamma. acid) २-तिक्ती-८ 2.-sulpho-salicylic acid faresite उत्तैलव-६-शुल्बायिक अम्ल (इकार अम्ल) शुल्ब-नलिक अम्ल .. n. 
a.-thiophen तिक्ती-गन्धदर्शेन्य. a. -nitrogen तिक्ती-भूयाति m. 
a.-toluene-sulphonic acid fauft a. -nitrogen apparatus fant विरालेन्य-शुल्बायिक अम्ल .. 
भूयाति साधित.. 
a.-valeric तिक्ती-बलिक mfn. 2-a. -n-octane २-तिक्ती-ऋ-अष्टीन्य . al-2-a-n-valeric acid द. वा.-२ a.-oxy-purin तिक्ती-जार-मिहकि f. 
तिक्ती-ऋ-बलिक अम्ल n. a.-phenol तिक्ती-दर्शव m. 
a.-xylol तिक्ती-काष्ठव m. a.-phenol hydrochloride तिक्ती- amino-gen Chem. तिक्ती-जन m. 
दर्शव उदनीरेय .. 
aminogene blue Col. Ind. तिक्तीजन p-a.-phenol - sulphate प-तिक्ती नील m. 
दर्शव-शुल्बीय. 
a. violet तिक्तीजन नीललोहित m. 0-a-phenol-p-sulphonic acid aminolysis Chem. तिक्त्यंशन .. __-तिक्ती-दर्शव-प-शुल्बायिक अम्ल n. aminolytic Chem. तिक्त्यंशिक am. al-a-a.-phenyl-acetic acid द. aminosis Med. अतितिक्तीता f. 
वा.-अ-तिक्ती-दर्शल-शुक्तिक अम्ल n. amitosis Biol. प्रसूत्रिभाजन 1. 
___49﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
Ammannia Bot, frauffa f. (-fa for ammoniac=gum ammoniac 
प्रजाति genus) 
I (Persian ammoniac) पीत-निर्यास A. baccifera सामान्य अग्निगर्भा। 
m. ammelide Chem. तैतिक्तेय . (from 2 (African ammoniac) काल-निर्यास 
ammeline) 
m. ammeline (anagram of melamine ammoniacal Chem. तिक्तातिय mfn. 
तितिक्ती) Chem. तैतिक्ती. 
ammoniacal cochineal Col. Ind. ammeter (ampere धुवहि + -meter) तिक्तातिय इन्द्रगोप m. 
Elec. बहिमान m. (short for युवहि- ammoniacal engine (the vapour मान) 
of ammonia supplies the motive ammeter and volt-meter (com force) तिक्ताति-गन्त्र 2. 
bined) वहिमान तथा धुशक्म-मान m. ammoniacal fermentation (a fer (संयुक्त) 
mentation process by which am ammine (ammonia + -ine; disting monia is formed) तिक्तातिय किण्वन n. 
uished from amine तिक्ती) Chem. ammoniacal liquor (impure am तिजी. 
monia water obtained as a by -amminic Chem. -तिजियिक mfn. 
product) तिक्ताति-रस m. ammino- (ammine) Chem. तिजी- ammoniacal nitrogen तिक्तातिय भूयाति ammino adi. Chem. तिजी, तिजीक mfn. ammino compound Chem. fast- ammonia condenser Refrig. farasitter 
संयोग M. 
संघनक m. amminolysis Chem. तिज्यंशन 1. ammoniacum=ammoniac (the amminolytic Chem. तिज्यंशिक mfn. gum-resin) Pharm. ammon-al (ammorium-+-aluminium) ammonia gelatin (an explosive) 
Chem. तिक्त-स्फ m. (an explosive) तिक्ताति श्लिषि . ammonatevb. Chem. तिक्तातीयन . ammonia liquor तिक्ताति-रस m. 
(to combine with ammonia) ammonia meter Chem.तिक्ताति-मान m. तिक्ताति-योजन . 
ammonia nitrogen Chem. faqatfer ammoni- = ammonio- (denoting भूयाति m. 
the presence of ammonia of ammonia soda, ammonia soda ammonium) Chem. तिक्त 
ash तिक्ताति-विक्षार m., तिक्ताति-विक्षार ammonia (a gas aife of extremely भस्म 1. 
pungent faire taste and smell) ammonia soda process, ammonia 
Cbem. तिक्ताति m. (-पाति for वाति) process तिक्ताति-विक्षार-विधा, तिक्ताति ammonia alum Chem. तिक्ताति-स्फटिका विधा . 
ammonia solution तिक्ताति-विलयन .. ammoniac, ammoniacal Chem. ammoniate Chem. Farancita n. 
तिक्तातिय mfn. 
ammoniate vb. I तिक्तातीयन n. 
f 
50 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
D 
(to combine or impregnate with (tinct. valerian ammon.)] Pharm. ammonia) faalfa-TEH, frafa fer RIG CTT-foot m. 
U n. 
ammoniation fentian, faqatfi 2=ammonify 
TH, facilfa-1977 n. ammoniated Chem. faecimefura mfu. ammonia turpeth (turpeth=tur ammoniated liniment of camphor bith; through Arabic turbad and 
[linimentum camphorae ammo Persian tirbid from Sanskrit त्रिवृत) piatum (lin, camph. ammon.)] Chem. fparfa força f. =compound liniment of cam- ammonia valve faqatf41-919 1. phor (linimentum camphorae ammonia water=aqua ammoniae compositum) Pharm. Farei mai fara facilfa-577 n. P E=TFT T-HT n. 
ammonic, ammoniacal (of or per ammoniated mercury Chem., taining to ammonia or the radi-, 
Pharm. fatta Ora m. 
cal ammonium) fafier mfn. ammoniated solution of quinine ammoni-emia Med. FFT-TFCT f. 
[liquor quininae ammoniatus (liq. ammonification तिक्तायन . quinin. ammon.)]=ammoniated ammonifier (a bacterium) Freatyø m. tincture of quinine (tinctura ammonify vb. FARETTIFT N.; (to subject quininae ammoniata) Pharm. to, or to produce or undergo तिक्तातीयित विज्वरी-विलयन 1.-तिक्ताती ammonification) 
- UT, fura farat-from. 
FORT-1907 n. ammoniated tincture of ergot (tinc- ammonii acetas=ammonium ace 
türa ergotae ammoniata (tinct. tate ergot. ammon.)] Pharm. Ferrafora ammonio-, ammoni- (denoting the 5412F-For Betap m. 
presence of ammonia or ammo ammoniated tincture of guaiacum nium) Chem. 1992 
(tinctura guaiaci ammoniata ammoniojarosite [तिक्त+दहाश्विजjara (tinct. guaiac. ammon.)] Pharm. site (potassium em sulphatet तिक्तातीयित आसिह-निष्कर्ष m. 
ferric sulphate शुल्बीय) but here ammoniated tincture of opium potash is replaced by ammonium 
[tinctura opii ammoniata (tinct. oxide; so T- is replaced by opii ammon.)] Pharm. fake fua fa-) Mineral, fast-fa5 m. 
FEAT-F m. 
ammon-ion (ionic ammonium, ammoniated tincture of quinine= NH4+) Chem. Finn. (4f 
ammoniated solution of quin freag, 38) ine 
ammonio-nitrate Chem. fa-019 n. ammoniated tincture of valerian ammonite (ammonia to -ite) faff ICT 
stinctura valerianae ammoniata 1. (a fertiliser) 
JI 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
ammonium Chem. तिक्तातु m. 
a. acetate = ammonii acetas 
(ammon, acet.) Pharm. FTETTEL 
शुक्तीय . a. alum तिक्तातु-स्फटिका . a.amalgam तिक्तातु संरस m. a. arsenate तिक्तातु नेपालीय .. a. arsenite तिक्तातु नेपालिता. a. base तिक्तातु-पीठ 1. a. benzoate तिक्तातु धूपीय ?. a. bicarbonate तिक्तातु चंगारीय. a. bichromate तिक्तातु द्विवर्णीय . a. bifluoride तिक्तातु द्वितरस्वेय. a. bisulphate तिक्तातु द्विशुल्बीय n. a. bisulphite तिक्तातु द्विशुल्बित . a. borate तिक्तातु टांकीय n. a. bromide तिक्तातु दुरेय 1. a. a-bromo-camphor-ji- sul phonate तिक्तातु अ-दुरा-कर्पूर-परि 
शुल्बायीय .. a. carb-amate तिक्तातू प्रांग-तिक्तीय 
a. hydrogen malate तिक्तातु उदजन 
उत्कोलीय . a. hydrogen oxalate तिक्तातु उदजन 
तिग्मीय ॥. a. hydrogen succinate तिक्तातु ___ उदजन तृणीय .. 
a. hydrogen-0-sulpho-benzoate 
तिक्तातु उदजन-ऊ-शुल्ब-धूपीय n. a. hydrogen tartrate तिक्तातु उदजन 
न्यासवीय . a. hydrosulphide तिक्तातु उदशुल्बेय 
__ 
n. 
___n. 
a. carbonate तिक्तातु प्रांगारीय. . a. chloride तिक्तातु नीरेय . 
a. chromate तिक्तातु वर्णीय n. a. chromium oxalate तिक्तातु वर्णातु 
तिग्मीय n. a. citrate तिक्तातु निम्बवीय. a. cyanate तिक्तातु श्यामीय n. a. dichromate तिक्तातु द्विवर्णीय N. 'a: dihydrogen phosphate तिक्तातु 
द्वयुदजन भास्वीय । a.embelate तिक्तातु विडंगीय n. a. ferro-cyanide तिक्तातु अयस्य ___ श्यामेय . 
a.fluoride तिक्तातु तरस्वेय . a. formate तिक्तातु वम्रीय .. a. hippurate तिक्तातु अश्वमेहीय . 
a. hydroxide तिक्तातु उदजारेय ?. a. hypo-phosphite तिक्तातु उप 
भास्वितn. a.iodate तिक्तातु जम्बीय 1. a.iodide तिक्तातु जम्बेय . a. lactate तिक्तातु दुग्धीय .. a. linoleate तिक्तातु प्रातसीय n. a. malate acid तिक्तातु उत्कोलीय 
अम्लn. a. molybdate तिक्तातु संवर्णीय n. a. nitrate तिक्तातु भूयीय n. a. nitrite तिक्तातु भूयित n. a. oxalate तिक्तातु तिग्मीय. a. oxalate acid तिक्तात तिग्मीय __ अम्ल' . 
a. perchlorate तिक्तातु अतिनीरीय .. a. persulphate तिक्तात अतिशल्बीय. a. phosphate (mono-, di-, tri-) 
तिक्तातु भास्वीय 1. (एक-, द्वि-, त्रि-) a. phospho-molybdate तिक्तातु 
भास्व-संवर्णीय।. a. picrate तिक्तातु कट्वीय . a. pyro-phosphate तिक्तातु अग्नि 
भास्वीय. a. salicylate तिक्तातु नम्रलीय . . a. salts तिक्तातु-लवण ॥. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
. 
L 
a. selenate तिक्तातु मेचीय n. 
a.-basic तिक्तक-पैठिक mfn. a. silico-fluoride तिक्तातु सैकत a.-carbonic acid तिक्तकांगारिक अम्ल 
तरस्वेय. 
n. a. stearate तिक्तातु वसीय 1. 
a.-carbonous acid तिक्तकांगार्य अम्ल a. succinate facile copter n. a. sulphamate तिक्तातु शुल्ब-तिक्तीय ammonolysis Chem. तिक्तात्यंशन . 
. 
(तिक्ताति+अंशन) a. sulphate तिक्तातु शुल्बीय 1. ammonolytic Chem. तिक्तात्यंशिक mfn. a. sulphide तिक्तातु शुल्बेय . ammonolyze vb. (to subject to am a. sulphite तिक्तातु शुल्बित १. ____monolysis) Chem. तिक्तात्यंशन-करण 1. a. sulpho-cyanide तिक्तातु शुल्ब- ammono salt Chem. तिक्तक लवण . __ श्यामेय. 
ammunition Mil. (projectiles a. sulpho-ricin-oleate तिक्तातु thrown against an enemy) प्रास्त्रक 
शुल्ब-एरंड-म्रक्षीय . 
(अस्त्राणां समूहः), अग्निचूर्णादि, अग्न्यस्त्र ., a. tartrate तिक्तातु न्यासवीय 1. 
स्फोट-वर्ग m. a. tartrate acid तिक्तातु न्यासवीय ammunition depot अग्न्यस्त्रागार .. 
अम्ल. 
amnion (the innermost foetal mem a. tellurate तिक्तातु वंगकीय n. 
brane) Anat. उल्ब.. a. thio-cyanate तिक्तातु गन्ध-श्यामीय amniotic fluid Anat. उल्ब्यापः f.pl. 
(from शतपथ ब्राह्मण) a. thio-molybdate तिक्तातु गन्ध- amoeba Zool. कामरूपी (-इन्) M. __ संवर्णीय n. 
Amoeba Zool. कामरूप्याति f. (-पाति for a. thio-sulphate तिक्तातु गन्ध-शुल्बीय प्रजाति genus) ___n. 
A. proteus सामान्य कामरूपीm. a. toluene-p-sulphonate तिक्तातु amoebi- कामरूपि 
विरालेन्य-प-शुल्बायीय . 
amoebic कामरूपीय mfn. a. tungstate तिक्तातु चंडीय 1. amoebicide कामरूपिघ्न m. a. uranate तिक्तातु किरणीयn. 
amoebiform=amoeboid कामरूप्याभ a. urate तिक्तातु मेहीय . 
amoeboid movement=ameboid m. a. valerate तिक्तातु बलीय. 
amoeboid stage Zool. कामरूप्यवस्था /. a. vanadate तिक्तातु रोचीय . amoebula Zool. कामरूपक m. ammoni-uria (ammania + -uria) Amomum Bot. बहदेलाति (-ति for प्रजाति 
Med. तिक्ताति-मेह m. 
genus) ammonization=ammonification amorphism Chem. अस्फटिता f. ammono-Chem. तिक्तक 
amorpho- (amorphous) Chem. अस्फटि ammono adj. तिक्तक mfn. 
Amorphophallus Bot. वनसूरणति f. (-ति a. acid तिक्तक अम्ल .. 
for प्रजाति genus) a. base तिक्तक पीठ 
A. campanulatus सामान्य वनसूरण m. 
153 
___n. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
f. 
nh. 
amorphous 1 (having no determined a. balance yafe-f. 
form) अनियतरूप mfn. 
a.-foot af.-97 m. 2 (shapeless, formless) 77, a.-hour qafe m. नीरूप mfn. 
ampere-meter, ampero-meter Elec. 3 (uncrystallized) 79fcft, #FFECT yafe-Ara m. (7) mfn. 
ampere-minute Elec. qafe-am f. amorphous phosphorus = red ampere-second Elec. Tafe-477857 
phosphorus amortisation fund Finance - amperometerzamperemeter 
stofa f. 
amph-, amphi-, ampho- i (both) amortise, amortisation Finance 
377 (creation of a sinking fund) 2 (on both sides, about, around) T1277301fa-4207 n. 
HCT: amount Math.(principal and interest) amphiarthrosis Anat. $q=26C- m. 
#2747 n. 
(articulation aft, admitting amount Book-keeping tft m. 
slight fa motion ) a. column TF-FFFT m. 
Amphibia Zool. 37TTT: m. pl. a. prepaid qata-tft m. amphibian (an airplane) 7-547-Fahrer amount (quantity) #777 f. amount of turning Math. आनति-मात्रा amphibious उभयचर mfn. 
amphi-creatinine Biochem. 37T amparo blue (a colour, reddish-blue #fout f. 
Tar in hue, of high saturation amphi-mixis Biol. 377-f2TUT 1). se and med. brilliance) seteran amphitene=zygotene Zool. TİM. mfn. 
amphitropous (or transverse ) Bot. amparo purple (a colour, bluish errazt mfn. 
blue-red alfatta in hue, of high ampho- Chem. 379 saturation band med. brilliance) ampholyte (amphoteric + electro 
Efallaritet mfn. 
Lyte) Chem. G U n. Ampelideae Bot. STETT-T n. 
ampho-peptone Biochem. 34-4797 f. ampelopsidin Biochem. Içgt f. amphophil, amphophilic, ampho ampelopsin Biochem. इद्दाक्षि . philous (staining with both acid Ampelopsis Bot. Egatifa f. (-far for and basic dyes) 574-144 mfn. 
प्रजाति genus) 
ampho-teric Chem. (reacting either ampere Elec. (a unit of intensity of as electropositive or as electro 
electric current) yafe m. (faget negative; reacting either as an + are current) 
acid or as a base) उभयविध, a. arc. qafe-79 m. 
3423fafu mfn. 
f 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
am 
amphoteric oxide Chem. उभयविध amyl-acetate lamp-Hefner lamp 
जारेय. 
Photom. मंडल-शक्तीय दीप m. amplexicaul Bot. (leaf base) परिस्तम्भ amyl alcohol Chem. मंडल सुषव m. 
__mfn. ('encircling परि stem स्तम्भ') iso-amyl alcohol स-मंडल सुषव amplitude I Phys. दोलनाङ्क m. 
2 Math. (angle of a complex normal amyl alcohol ऋजु मंडल number) कोणाङ्क m. 
सुषद . 3 (extent) विस्तार m. 
primary amyl alcohol आद्य मंडल ampoule Med. (a small bulbous 
सुषव ॥ ____glass vessel..) आकन्द m. 
secondary amyl alcohol द्वितीयक Amygdalaceae Bot. वाताम-कुल n. 
मंडल सुषव m. amygdalase (amygdalinfo -ase) tertiary amyl . alcohol तृतीयक 
Biochem. आवातामेद m. 
___ मंडल सुषव m. amygdalate I Chem. (a. salt of amylamine Chem. मंडल-तिक्ती f. 
amygdalic acid) आवातामीय .. amylan (amlam starch) Chem. 
2 Med. (milk of almonds) वाताम मंडिन्या . दुग्ध . 
amyl-aniline Chem. मंडल-नीली. amygdalic Chem. आवातामिक mfn. amylase ( amylum starch)=diastase amygdaliferous Petrog. वाताम-भर Biochem. मंडेद-विभेद m. : 
_mfn. 
amylate Chem. मंडलीय . amygdalin Chem. आवातामि . 
amyl benzene Chem. मंडल धूपन्य n. amygdo-nitrile Chem. आवाताम a. benzoate मंडल धूपीय n. 
___ भूयिल m. 
a. bromide मंडल दुरेय n. amygdo-phenin (amygdala + phenol a. butyrate मंडल घृतीय .. 
+ - in.) Pbarm. आवाताम-दर्शि f. 
a. caproate मंडल गव्यीय n. amygdule Petrog. वातामक . 
a. caprylate मंडल नारिकेरलीय 1. amyl-, amylo- Chem. I (amylum a. chloride मंडल नीरेय . 
starch) मण्ड- (cf. Bengali शुष्कमाड) a. cinnamate मंडल दारुसितीय n. 2 (amyl the radical ; amylum a. disulphide मंडल द्विशुल्बेय .. +-) मंडल 
amyl-emia Med. (presence of starch amyl (Lat. amylum 
.amvlum starch + -2) 
starch +-91) in blood) मंड-रक्तता.f. मंडल N. (मंड+-ल) 
amylene Chem. मंडलेन्य ॥. active amyl क्षिप्र मंडल 1. 
a. dichloride मंडलेन्य द्विनीरेय .. iso-amyl स-मंडल . 
a. hydrate मंडलेन्य जलीय. iso-amyl alcohol स-मंडल सुषव m. amylenol Chem. मंडलेन्यव m. 
tertiary amyl तृतीयक मंडल 1. amyl ether Chem. मंडल दक्षु m. amyl acetate = banana oil Chem. amyl formate .Cbem. मंडल वम्रीय . 
मंडल शुक्तीय . 
amylic Chem. मंडलिक mfn. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
amylic fermentation Chem. मण्डलिक amylo-phagia मंड-भक्षण . 
Feucot n. 
amylo-phosphate Chem. E-WETT amylidene=pentylidene Chem. n. 
मंडलेयेन्य-पंचलेयेन्य . 
amylo-phosphoric Chem. #5-41f4q4 amylin (amylum starch) Chem. Fift f. mfn. amyl iodide Chem. FT FT n. amylopsin (amylo + trypsin fifa) 
a. iso-valerate #CTF- T n. 
Biochem. 75-9ff. a. lactate मंडल दुग्धीय 1. 
n-amyl ortho-formate Chem. HET a. mercaptan ETT 77 m. 
aasta n. a. nitrite मंडल भूयित 1. 
amylose Chem, syn. amylo-, amyl- Chem. I (amyl the amylosis Med. 705-73 m. 
radical) 1997 
amylo-synthesis Chem, FECUT n. 2 (amylum starch) 5 
amyl oxide Chem. मंडल जारेय . amylo adj. (of, or pertaining to, a. phthalate मंडल व्युत्तैलीय . 
_starch) मंडिय mfn. 
a. propionate मंडल प्रमेदीय . amylo-cellulose=starch cellulose a. salicylate=amylenol 50 
Chem. 45-472178 n. 
79814 n. amylo-clastic Chem. 15- min. a. sulphide मंडल शल्बेय. amylo-coagulase 15- a m. amylum (starch) #em. amylo-dextrin - f. 
amyl-uria Med. 75 m. amylo-dyspepsia Ferritof n. 
amytal (iso-amyl-ethyl-barbituric amylo-gen e-T m. 
acid 57- afareti Ft) amylo-genesis HE-SAT n. 
Pharm. #ca n. amylo-genic मंड-जनक mfn. 
an- (not) - amylo-hydrolysis 55-5FIETAT . An (actinon) Chem. TGT (Perife) amylo-hydrolytic मंड-जलांशिक mfn. -an Chem. -7 n. amyloid Chem., Biochem. I n. FOST 13. ana- (on, up, upward) 5 
2 adj.=amyloidal #TY = FET ter anabolism Biol. (assimilation) m. mfn. 
Anacanthini Zool. (fish) : m.pl. amyloid degeneration=amyloido- Anacardiaceae Bot. 1C-n. 
sis=lardaceous degeneration anacardic acid Chem. 377 af 777 Med. Her m. 
n. (119€ Anacardium occiden amyloidosis Med. #5177-973 m. 
tale) amylolysis Chem. FELETT n. Anacardium Bot. anera f. (-fa for amylolytic Chem. Hifta mfn. 
प्रजाति genus) amylan (Gk. amylon, neuter of A. occidentale Tha 3119€ m. 
amylos)=maltose 
anaconda (attains a length of forty amylopectin Biochem. 45-75 for f. feet or more) Zool. Et m. 
56 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
1. 
anaerobation (anaerobic fermenta proximate a. प्रथम (संसक्त) विश्लेषण 
-tion) अवात-किण्वन . (short for अवात 
जीवकिण्वन) 
qualitative analysis तत्ता-विश्लेषण anaerobe Biol. (living without air 
. or free oxygen) अवातजीव, अजारकजीव quantitative a. इयत्ता-विश्लेषण क. 
ultimate a. अन्त्य विश्लेषण .. anaerobic Biol. अवातजीव, अवातजीवीय volumetrica. परिमामितीय विश्लेषण 1. 
mfn. 
analyst विश्लेषयिता (-तृ) m. anaerobic apparatus and acces- analytic, analytical वैश्लेषिक mfn. sories अवातजीव साधित्र तथा उपसाधन analytical balance वैश्लेषिक-तुला. 
analytical chemistry वैश्लेषिक रसायन anaerobic fermentation gargila . . 
किण्वन . 
analytical geometry वैश्लेषिक-रैखिकी . anaerobic respiration अजारक-श्वसन 1. analytically विश्लेषतः anaerobiosis अवात-जीवन, अजारक-जीवन १. analytical mechanics वैश्लेषिक-यांत्रिकी anaerophyte Bot. अवातोद्भिद . anaeroplasty Med. अवात-रोपण n. analytical mill वैश्लेषिक-पेषणी . 
('treatment of wounds रोपण by analytical reagent वैश्लेषिक प्रतिकर्ता (-त), exclusion of air वात') 
m. anaesthetic निश्चेत m. 
analytical section वैश्लेषिक विभाग m. anal aperture Anat. गुद-द्वार . analytical weight वैश्लेषिक भार m. analgen, analgene (Gk. analges analytic factor वैश्लेषिक खण्ड m. 
painless) Pharm. शूलधन m. 
analyze=analyse analogous I सदृश mfn. 
analyzer=analyser 2 Biol. कार्यसदृश mfn. 
anammonide Chem. (a compound analogue I सदृक्ष १. 
formed by abstraction of ammo 
· 2 Biol. (an organ similar in func nia) अतिक्तेय . tion. ...) कार्यसदृश . 
ananas Bot. आपनस m., n. (the plant analogy I सादृश्य 1. 
• is m., the fruit n.) 2 Biol. (resemblance in function) .Ananas Bot. आपनसति. (-ति for प्रजाति कार्यसादृश्य १. 
genus) anal segment Anat. गुद-वलय m. anaphase Biol. भाजनोत्तरा f. (a stage anal spot Anat. गुद-प्रदेश m. 
after उत्तरा division भाजन) analyse, analyze vb. faemoot n. anastomose vb. Zool. I जालकरण 1. analysed Farenica mfr. 
2 अन्तमिलन . (interjoin) analyser, analyzer विश्लेषक m. anastomosis Anat., Biol. (formation. analysis विश्लेष m., विश्लेषण . 
of a network) जालक्रिया f. gravimetric a. भारमितीय विश्लेषण 1. anatomical शारीर-, शारीरीय mfn. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
anatomical specimen शारीर प्रादर्श m. anemometer अनिलमान m. anatomist गारीरविद m. 
anemophilous Bot. ( to which pol anatomy शारीर n. (from सुश्रुत) 
len is carried by wind) 1-TICITET anatropous Bot. 3oradi m. 
mfn. anchusin=alkannin 
anemoscope अनिलेक्ष m. ancillary power Adminis. Eqətlæa f. aneroid (Gk. a not + neros wet Ancylostoma, Ancylostomum + -oid; containing no liquid)= 
Zool. (the typical genus of hook- aneroid barometer #1= worms) arella f. (+fa for 1976 m. प्रजाति genus) 
aneroidograph (an aneroid baro A. americanum=Necator ame meter with a mechanism for ___ricanus लघु अंकुशमुख m. 
recording atmospheric pressure) A. braziliense (its larvae pro frenta m. 
duce a dermatitis) चर्मकोप-अंकुश- anethi fructus=dill Pharm. शतपुष्पिका 
em. A. duodenale (they inhabit the anethole (anethum anise + -ole. It small intestine 77F) 477141427 is the para-propenyl derivative Ferm. 
of anisole शतपुष्पवा) Chem. शातपुष्पवा Ancylostomidae (a family) re- f. 
det m. 
anethum, anetum = dill Pharm. andicolum, Ceroxylon=wax palm Tagfoqat f. 
FT-TT m. 
aneurin (anti-neuritic) Biochem. 787 androecium (A) Bot. Tarn. () wife f. androgenous (producing males) Bot. angina Med. 1 (Lat. angere to choke) 
qha mfn. 
Jifritest f. (arfa suffocation) Andrographis Bot. faftafet f. (-Fe 2 (Lat. angere to distress) $4759 f. 
for worfe genus) 
3 (inflammatory affection) 714 m. A. paniculata=creat (from Sans- angina, cervical Med. Tartu m. 
krit førcrafat) FTAR after m. angiosperm Bot.: (having the seeds androgynous Bot. feferont (57) mfn. in a closed ovary) fiqaatit m. Andropogon Botrufer f. (-fa for Angiospermae Bot, : m.pl. 
Taifa genus) 
angle कोण m. -ane Chem. gry n. 
a. a (alpha) Ophthalmol.otos m. anemia Med. TETETAAT, 10 f, 
a. bar Mech. Toppen aus m. -anemia -अरक्तता f. 
(कोणायस angle iron) ___tox-anemia विषारक्तता f. 
a. centrifuge कोण-मथित्र n. anemic cases रक्तहीन रोगी (-इन्) m. a. centrifuge accessories कोण anemo-, anem 
Afri-3 na 58 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
- 
- 
a.Y (gamma) कोण इm. 
a. acceleration कौणिक त्वरण . a. iron कोणायस n. 
a. curvature Optics filfor-a7ST a. joint कोण-सन्धि, कोणायस-सन्धि m. a. r (kappa.) कोण लृ m. 
angularity = angular curvature a. of altitude=elevation angle Optics foran f. a. of azimuth क्षितिज-चाप-कोण m. angular magnification Optics कोणीय a. of depression Geod., Gun. . विशालन . 
अवनति-कोण m. 
a. mound Optics कोण-स्तूप m. a. of elevation Geod., Gum. a. play Engineer. कोणीय-क्रीडा . 
उन्नति-कोण m. 
a. point Matb. कोण-बिन्दु m. a. of emergence उन्मज्जन-कोण m. a. strain=sheer strain Phys. a. of friction Mech. संघर्ष-कोण m. 
कोण-विकार m. a. of helix Engineer. भ्रमिपथ-कोण m. a. velocity Mech., Elec. #lfora a. of incidence Aeronautics, Phys. प्रवेग m. 
आपात-कोण m. 
anhydr-, anhydro- Chem. अजल a. of level प्रवण-कोण m. 
anhydride Chem. अजलेय . a. of reflection Phys. परावर्तन-कोण anhydridization, anhydrization 
m. 
Chem. अजलेय-करण . a. of refraction Phys. भुजायन-कोण anhydridize, anhydrize vb. Chem. ____m. 
(to convert into an anhydride) a. of rotation=angle of wheel अजलेय-करण . ___rotation Phys. परिभ्राम-कोण m. anhydrite Mineral. अजलिज m. 
a. of squint Ophthalmol. टेरता-कोण anhydro-, anhydr-Chem., Med. अजल 
m. 
anhydro base Chem. अजल-पीठ 1. a. of torsion Math., Mech. विमोटन- anhydro-form-aldehyde-aniline 
कोण m. 
Chem. अजल-वम्र-सुव्युद-नीली /. a. of total reflection Optics अशेष- anhydro-glucose अजल-मधुम . . 
परावर्तन-कोण m. 
anhydrous Chem. अजल mfa. a. of wheel rotation=angle of a. calcium chloride अजल चतु 
rotation 
नीरेय . . anglo-vernacular middle school a. cuprous sulphate अजल ताम्रय 
आंगल-भारतीयभाषा-माध्यमिक पाठशाला f. शुल्बीय n. Anguillulidae Zool. (a family; a. ferric chloride अजल प्रयसिक 
mouth armed with a spine) सूची- नीरेय .. मुख-वंश m. 
a. salt अजल लवण n. angular कोणी (-इन्; in compounds anhydr-oxime Chem. अजल-जावि १. 
कोणि-), कोणीय, कौणिक mfn.. 
anil (from aniline, from Portuguese a. (stem) Bot. कोणी (-इन्) mfn. anil, from Arabic al-nil, from 
59﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
Sanskrit fatt indigo) Chem. fanitat a. dye विनीली रंजक m. m. 
a. grey faritent HT m. -anil -नील 
a. hydr-iodide Chem. विनीली उद -anil Chem. -नीलक 
जम्बेय. -anilate Chem. -नीलीय 1. 
a. hydro-bromide Chem. Fantant anilein Col. Ind. विनीलिन m. 
__ उद-दुरेय . anilic Chem. विनीलिक mfn. 
a. hydro-chloride Chem. facit -anilic Chem. -नीलिक 
__उद-नीरेय. anilic or anilidic acid Chem. Farifstoti, a. nitrate Chem. विनीली भूयीय n. 
विनीलेयिक अम्ल . 
a. orange विनीली नारंग m. anilid-, anilido- Chem. I (anilide) a. orange insoluble विनीली नारंग 
विनीलेय 
___ अविलेय m. 2 (aniline) विनीली 
a. oxalate Chem. विनीली तिग्मीय n. anilide Chem. विनीलेय.. 
a. phosphate Chem. faritent Fate -anilide Chem. -नीलेय. 
___n. anilidic Chem, fanta feci mfn. 
a. purple=mauve faritent IT FUT anilidic acid Chem. विनीलेयिक अम्ल . 
m. anilido-, anilid- Chem. I (anilide) 
a. red विनीली रक्त m. विनीलेय 
a. rose विनीली पाटल m. 2.(aniline) विनीली 
a. salt Com. विनीली लवण . anilid-oxime Chem. विनीलेय-जावि . a. scarlet faritaft TTT m. aniline. (Portuguese anil indigo) a. spirit Chem. विनीली निषेचन 1. 
Chem..विनीली/. 
____a. sulphate Chem. विनीली शुल्बीय n. -aniline Chem. -नीली. 
a. violet विनीली नीललोहित m. aniline adj. Chem. facilfera mfn. 
a. yellow विनीली पीत m. aniline acetate Chem. विनीली शक्तीय. anilinism Med. विनीली-रोग m. aniline azo-o-cresol Col. Ind. facitat anilino adj. Chem. Forritinu mfn. 
अज-ऊ-कविपव m. 
anilino- (aniline) Chem. faritent a. azo-dimethyl-aniline fartent anilino-acetic acid fanitat-tfalfi TEST 
अज-द्विप्रोदल-नीली f. 
.. a. azo-B-naphthyl-amine विनीली -anilo- -नील 
अज-पा-उत्तरल-तिक्ती . 
anilo- (anil) Chem. विनील a. black familieft opret m. 
anilo-pyrine (aniline + antipyrine) a. black paste विनीली काल लेपी f. Chem. विनील-ज्वरघ्नी f. a. blue farilant 77 m. 
-anilyl- नीलल a. blue spirit-soluble विनीली नील animal प्राणी (-इन् ) m. . . प्रासक-विलेय m. 
animal black प्राणि-काल, प्राणि-कालिमा m. a. brown विनीली बभ्र.m. 
animal cellulose प्राणि-कोशाधु १. 
60 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
animal charcoal STUUTTTT m. 
anise camphor=-anethole Chem. animal colour प्राणि-रंग m. (any dye शतपुष्पा-कर्पूर m. 
stuff derived from an animal) aniseed शतपुष्पा-बीज 2. animalcules I (as a fiy) क्षुद्र प्राणी aniseed oil=anise oil Chem. शतपुष्पा 
(-इन्) m. . 
तैल . 2 (m icroscopic) अणुप्राणी (-इन् ) m. anise fruit-anise animal dispersal प्राण्यपकिरण n. aniseikonia Ophthalmol. असमूर्तिता . 
a.dyestuff प्राणि-रंजक m. 
anise oil शतपुष्पा-तैल . a.evolution प्राणि-उद्विकास m. anise water-aqua anisi Pharm. a. fat प्राणि-स्नेह m., वसा. 
शतपुष्पा-वारि . a.kingdom प्राणि-सृष्टि . 
anisic acid Chem. शतपष्पिक अम्ल n. a. matter प्राणि-पदार्थ m. 
anisicaldehyde Chem. शतपुष्पिक सुव्युद a. oil प्राणि-तैल . . a. phosphate प्राणि-भास्वीय n. -aniside Chem. -शतपुष्पेय . a. psychology प्राणि-मनोविज्ञान . -anisidide Chem. -शतपुष्पेयेय n. a. rouge=carmine Chem. sirfor anisidine Chem. शतपुष्पेयी . 
शोण m.-कीटशोणी. 
o-anisidine Col. Ind. ऊ-शतपुष्पेयी . a. starch=glycogen Biochem. p-anisidine hydro-chloride प-शत __ प्राणि-मंड m. 
पुष्पेयी उद-नीरेय .. a. substance प्राणि-पदार्थ m. 
anisidine ponceau Col. Ind. शत anion (Gk. ana up + ion going) पुष्पेयी अधिरक्तापीत m. 
Physical Chem. उदयन १. (उद् up + anisidino-(anisidine) Chem. शतपुष्पेयी अयन going) 
anisidino adj. Chem. शतपुष्पेयी, शतपुष्पे anis-, aniso- (anise) Chem. शपु-(शत- यीक mfn. . पुष्पा) 
anisil Chem. शतपुष्पिल m. anisal Chem. शपुष m. 
anisilic Chem. शतपुष्पिलिक mfn. anis-alcohol Chem. शपु-सुषव m. 
anisor, anis- Chem. शपु- (शतपुष्पा) anis-aldehyde Chem. शपु-सुव्यद m. anisogamy Bot. विषमोद्वाह m. (conju anis-ald-oxime Chem. शप-सवि-जावि gation उद्वाह of unlike. विषम indi 
viduals) anis-amide Chem. शप-तिक्तेय. anisoin (anis- शपु- + -Din -ऊप) Chem. ' anis-anilide Chem. शपु-नीलेय. 
शपूप m. anisate Chem. शतपुष्पीय n. 
anisole Chem. शतपुष्पवा f. anisate.vb. Chem. (to impregnate anisole red Col. Ind. शतपुष्पवा रक्त ___with anise) शतंपुष्पायन । 
m. . anise=anisum (anis.)=aniseed= anisoline शतपुष्पवी f. 
anise fruit Pharm. शतपुष्पा f., शत- an-isomeric Chem. अ-सभाजिक mfn. पुष्पा बीज. 
an-isometric Petrog. अ-समितीय mfn. 61 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
Stipe 
anisometropia Ophthalmol. असनाभिता terminable a. praw-aforatiafa f. 
annular 1 (pertaining to) qafe mfn. anisotropal = anisotropic 
2 (of the form of) 714 TT mfn. an-isotrope Phys. 4-mfn. 
3 (forming) at First (-5T) mfn. anisotropic, anisotropical Phys., 4 (ringed) anfaa mfn. 
Plant Physiol., Zool. - Tafsiri mfn. 5 (cyclic) Chem. acfupi mfn. anisotropism=anisotropy 
annuli Zool. वलय m. anisotropoussanisotropic 
annulus Bot. (outer layer of the an-isotropy Chem. #-#rafaat f. sporangium au- 
s7-494) ater anisoyi Chem. ETYE457 
974 m. anisum=anise Pharm. 9789Tf. annulus (of a mushroom) Bot. anisyl Chem. शतपुष्पल n. 
Errenter m. (a ring round the anisyl chloride Chem. 2779097 U n. anisylidene Chem. शपुलेयेन्य n. anode उद्द्वार . ankle=tarsus Te5 m. 
· anodyne (allaying pain) 51€ M. anlage Biol. (commencement of a Anona (Anona is from Bengali FTTT 
developing part) TFT m. 
butter) Bot. etansara f. (-for for annabergite=nickel ocher Mineral. Fortfa genus) 
65465-ffin. 
Anonaceae Bot. सीताफल-कुल 1. annaline=gypsum (powdered cal- Anopheles (a genus of mosquitoes) 
cined gypsum) 
Zool. शबलपक्षाति f. (शबल spotted annatto a-ritt f. (used for colouring पक्ष wings; -आति for प्रजाति genus) 
oils) 
Anophelinae Zool. शबलपक्षानुवंश m. anneal vb. ufarqat n. 
(अनुवंश a subfamily) annealing cup अभितापन मल्लक m. anopl-, anoplo- (unarmed') Zool. Annelida Zool. qafas: m. pl. 
प्रशस्त्र annual anfaa mfn. 
Anoplura (unarmed tail,' an order a. financial statement af of wingless parasitic insects com 
· A faun. . 
prising the true lice) Zool. 481 a. report af sfaragot n. 
गण m. (यूका louse, गण order) a. return वार्षिक विवरण 1. 
anorexia Med. water f. (- lack of a. ring Bot. arfai 9999 m. 
qat appetite) .. a. summary वार्षिक संक्षेप m. anorthite [Gk. an- not # + antuals Bot. anfire m. . 
orthos 35 straight (sc. gonia annuitant atfer=1-ITET (-5T) m. 
‘right angle')] Mineral, fast m. annuity Com. arfer9-afer, atförgit.f. (-इज for खनिज mineral) . . 
a. system anfeafarefa f. anser (Lat. from Skt. ) Zool. m. life a. 757199-21f94afer f.; ; answer उत्तर .. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
- 
- 
ant Zool. पिपीलिका f. 
Anthemis nobilis = chamomile antarctic circle दक्षिणध्रुव-वृत्त ।. 
=camphor plant Bot. (flowers ante- प्राग 
have camphor like odour) ATHTRI. ant-eater Zool. 516 m. 
कर्पूरपुष्प m. antebranchium Anat. प्रबाहु m. (प्र- anther Bot. परागाशय m. 
___fore- बाहु arm) 
antheridiophore Bot. Kधानीवृन्त 1. antedated पूर्वतिथीय (post-dated उत्तर- antheridium Bot. Kधानी f. (short for 
तिथीय) 
पुंजन्यधानी) antedated cheque Com. qafarete antherozoid=spermatozoid Biol. (a 
धनादेश m. 
motile male gamete) चलपुंजन्यु m. antenna I Radar प्रातन्तु m. (wires तन्तु (here anther is not परागाशय) 
or transmission to and recep- Anthocephalus Bot. figreifer f. (-fa tion आदान) 
for stolta genus) 2 Zool. (organs of touch) स्पर्शसूत्र. anthocyan Col. Ind. पुष्पश्याम m. antenna and reflector Radar प्रातन्तु anthocyanidin Biochem. पुष्पश्यामेयि . 
तथा प्रतिक्षेपक m. 
anthocyanin Biochem. पुष्पश्यामि f. antenna housing Radar tretry-stare anthosine (Gk. anthos flower) Cola 
m. 
___Ind. पुष्पी f. antenna system Radar प्रातन्तु-संहति f. a. violet पुष्पी नीललोहित m. anterior अग्र, उत्तर mfn. 
___Anthozoa (Gk. antho- fr. anthos anterior chamber Ophthalmol. अग्रवेश्म flower)=Actinozoa Zool. 904577at: 
m.pl. anterior pituitary Anat. अन पोषग्रन्थि anthr-, anthra- (denoting the pre 
sence of anthracene विक्षामेण्य anterior principal point Ophthalmol. nucleus) Chem. far 
अग्र प्रधान बिंदु m. 
anthra bordeaux Col. Ind. विक्ष anterior vena cava=superior vena कपिशक m. 
cava=pre cava Zool. 3FT FETTET anthracene (Gk. anthrax coal) Chem. . 
f. (or when not blue महासिरा) विक्षामेण्य . (विक्षाम 'a.burnt out anterior wing Zool. अग्र-पक्ष m. 
coal' is from शांखायन-श्रौतसूत्र) antero-posterior अग्न-पश्च mfn. anthracene acid black Col. Ind. antero-posteriorly अग्र-पश्च, अग्र-पश्चतया विक्षामण्य अम्ल काल m. anthemidis flores = chamomile a. acid blue विक्षामण्य अम्ल नील m. 
Pharm. कर्पूर-पुष्प . 
a. acid. brown विक्षामण्य अम्ल Anthemis Bot. (flowers have cam-. बभ्र m. 
phor odor) कर्पूरपुष्पति f. (-ति for a. acid green विक्षामण्य अम्ल हरि m. प्रजाति genus) 
a. blue विक्षामण्य नील m, anthemis=chamomile कर्पूर-पुष्प . a. blue-black विक्षामेण्य नील-कृष्ण m.: 
mm. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
a. brown विक्षामण्य बभ्र m. 
anthrachromate bordeaux Col. Ind. a. chromate blue femrave quitet विक्षवर्णीय कपिशक m. 
नील m. 
a. brown faezauty ay m. a. chromate brown विक्षामण्य वर्णीय a.grey विक्षवर्णीय धूसर m. 
बm. 
a. olive-brown विक्षवर्णीय न्यवपीत m. a. chromate green FSITEVYT quite anthrachrome black Col. Ind. faut 
हरि m. 
वर्णक काल m. a. chromate grey विक्षामण्य वर्णीय a. blue विक्षवर्णक नील m. 
धूसर m. 
a. blue-black विक्षवर्णक नील-कृष्ण, .a. chromate violet विक्षामण्य वर्णीय 
नीललोहित m. 
a. bordeaux विक्षवर्णक कपिशक m. a. chrome black विक्षामण्य वर्णक a. brown विक्षवर्णक बभ्रु m. 
काल m. 
a. green विक्षवर्णक हरि m. a. chrome blue विक्षामण्य वर्णक a. orange विक्षवर्णक नारंग m. 
नील m. 
a. red विक्षवर्णक रक्त m. a. chrome brown विक्षामण्य वर्णक a. violet विक्षवर्णक नीललोहित m. 
बभ्रु m. 
anthra-chrysazin Col. Ind. विक्ष a. chrome field grey विक्षामेण्य हेमजिष्ठि f. 
वर्णक सेना धूसर m. 
anthra-chrysone Col. Ind. विक्ष-हेमा . a. chrome green विक्षामण्य वर्णक anthracic Med. प्रार्बुदीय mfn. (from 
हरिm. 
प्रार्बुद carbuncle) a. chrome red farger quis anthracin Chem. Faarf f. 
रक्त m. 
anthracine Chem. faerit f. a, chrome violet faery quietis anthracite (= anthracite coal) __नीललोहित m. 
Mineral. विक्षामिज m. (-इज for खनिज a. chrome yellow विक्षामण्य वर्णक mineral) 
पीत m. 
anthracite pb. विक्षामिज-करण 1. a.dark blue विक्षामण्य असित नील m. anthracite black Col. Ind. विक्षामिज a. direct green विक्षामण्य अनाश्रित काल m. 
हरि m. 
a. yellow विक्षामिज पीत m. a. green fachofa m. 
anthracitic विक्षामिजीय mfn. . a. orange विक्षामण्य नारंग m. anthracometer (an instrument for a. red विक्षामण्य रक्त m. 
measuring CO2 g in a gaseous a. violet विक्षामेण्य नीललोहित m. 
mixture) प्रजद्वे-मान m. a. yellow (paste and powder) anthracometric Chem. प्रजद्वे-मानीय 
विक्षामेण्य पीत m. (लेपी तथा क्षोद) 
mfn. a. yellow विक्षामण्य पीत m. anthra-cyanineChem. विक्ष-श्यामी f. anthracene oil Chem. विक्षामण्य तेल . anthracyanine brown Coi. Ind. 
64 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
विक्षश्यामी बभ्र m. 
anthr-anilate Chem. विक्ष-नीलीय n. a. green विक्षश्यामी हरि m. 
anthr-anil blue Col. Ind. विक्ष-नील a. grey विक्षश्यामी धूसर m. 
नील m. a. violet विक्षश्यामी नीललोहित m. anthr-anilic Chem. विक्ष-नीलिक mfn. anthra-cyanol Col. Ind. विक्ष-श्यामव m. a.acid विक्षनीलिक अम्ल 1. anthracyl-anthryl Chem. विक्षल n. anthranilo- Chem. विक्ष-नील anthracyl chrome blue Col. Ind. anthranol (anthracene falar UZT + -ol 
विक्षल वर्णक नील m. 
__-व) Chem. विक्षेण्यवm. a. chrome brown विक्षल वर्णक anthranol black Col. Ind. विक्षेण्यव 
बm. 
काल m. a. chrome green विक्षल वर्णक a. blue विक्षेण्यव नील m. 
हरि m. 
a. bordeaux विक्षेण्यव कपिशक m. a. chrome grey विक्षल वर्णक धूसर a. brown विक्षेण्यव बभ्रु m. 
m. 
a. green विक्षेण्यव हरि m. a. chrome olive विक्षल वर्णक तैलबदर a.grey विक्षेण्यव धूसर m. __ m. 
a. orange विक्षेण्यव नारंग m. a. chrome red विक्षल वर्णक रक्त m. a. red विक्षेण्यव रक्त m. a. fast red विक्षल स्थिर रक्त m. 
a. yellow विक्षेण्यव पीत m. a. orange विक्षल नारंग m. 
a. yellow-brown विक्षेण्यव पीत-बभ्र a. yellow विक्षल पीत m. 
a. yellow-brown विक्षल पीत-बभ्र m. anthranone=anthrone Chem.विक्षा. anthra-diol Chem. विक्ष-द्विव m. anthranoyl (anthrarilic विक्षनीलिक + anthra-diquinone Chem. विक्ष -by! -ऊल) Chem. विक्षनीरूल 1. 
द्विविज्वरा. 
anthranyl Chem. विक्षामल 1. anthra-flavic Chem. far-fyfirati mfn. anthra-phenone Chem. fast-warf f. anthra-flavic acid Chem. विक्ष-पिंगिक anthra-purpurin Chem. विक्ष-नीलोहि f. 
अम्ल n. 
anthra-pyridine Chem. विक्ष-शुष्मेयी f. anthra-flavone Col. Ind. विक्ष-पिंगा f. anthra-quinol Chem. विक्ष-विज्वरव m. anthra-gallol Col. Ind. विक्ष-द्रुस्फोटब m. anthra-quinone Chem. विक्ष-विज्वरा. anthra-hydro-quinone Chem. विक्षोद- anthraquinone black Col. Ind. 
विज्वरा . 
विक्षविज्वरा काल m. anthra-methane blue Col. Ind. fareyn a. blue विक्षविज्वरा नील m. 
प्रोदीन्य नील m. 
a. blue-green विक्षविज्वरा नील-हरि a. brown विक्षप्रोदीन्य बभ्र m. 
m. a. green विक्षप्रोदीन्य हरि m. 
a. green विक्षविज्वरा हरि m. a.grey विक्षप्रोदीन्य धूसर m. 
a. violet विक्षविज्वरा नीललोहित m. anthr-amine Chem. विक्ष-तिक्ती. anthraquinone-I-sulphonic acid anthr-anil Chem. विक्ष-नील m. 
Chem. विक्षविज्वरा-१-शुल्बायिक अम्ल .. 
m. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
n. 
m. 
anthra-quinonyl Cbem. विक्ष-विज्वराल a. yellow क्षामेण्य पीत m. 
anthroic Chem. विक्षिक mfn. anthra red Col. Ind. विक्ष रक्त m. anthrol Chem. विक्षव m. anthra-rubine Col. Ind. विक्ष-रक्ती f. anthrol blue Col. Ind. faepe tot m. anthrarufin (anthraquinone-t-Lat. -anthroline -faatat f. 
rufus reddish+- in; but the com- anthrone (anthr- + ketone) Chem. pound is yellow) विक्ष-पीति 
विक्षा f. = I, 5 - dihydroxy-anthra-quin- anthropoid Zool. IN. पुरुषाभ m. 
one १, ५ -ट्युदजार-विक्ष-विज्वरा . 2 adi. पुरुषाभ mfn. anthra scarlet Col. Ind. विक्ष शोण m. anthropology मानवशास्त्र N., मानविकी anthra-tetrol Chem. विक्ष-तुर्यव m. anthra-thio-phene Chem. विक्ष-गन्ध- Anthropozoic Geol. मानवकाल m. (not 
दर्शन्य n. 
fifq; here -zoic is 'time') anthra-triol Cbem. विक्ष-त्रिवm. anthroxan (anthrax-t-oxygentanil) anthra-verdone Col. Ind. विक्ष-हरिका. Chem. विक्ष-जा-नील m. anthra-viol Col. Ind. विक्ष-नीललोह m. anthroxanic Chem.विक्षजानीलिक mfn. anthra violet Col. Ind. विक्ष नीललोहित a. acid विक्षजानीलिक अम्ल N. 
anthryl Chem. factat n. anthrax (a red precious stone) 94- -anthus (Gk. anthos flower) Bot. 
रागकm. 
-पुष्प n. anthrax Med. 1 (splenic fever) anti- stfer 
प्लीहज्वर m. 
anti-abortion syringe प्रति-गर्भस्राव 2 कालस्फोटm, 
उद्गारिका f. 3 (a carbuncle, etc.) stala m. anti-abrin Immunol. प्रति-गुंजि . anthraxolite Petrog. विक्षामोपल m. anti-acrodynia प्रत्यग्रपीड.m. anthra yellow Col. Ind. विक्ष पीत m. anti-adulteration laws प्रति-हीनमिश्रण -anthr azine Chem. -विक्षाजीवीf. 
विधि m. anthr-azurineCol. Ind.विक्ष-नभोनीली. anti-aircraft gun Mil. विमानघ्नी . 
Col. Ind. (See under anti-aircraft radar प्रति-विमान तेजोन्वेष ... fast a.) विक्ष-नभोव, विक्ष-नभोनीलव m. . m. -anthrene (anthracene) Chem. -क्षामण्य anti-aircraft ship MIL. विमानघ्न पोत m. 
(विक्षामेण्य) 2. 
anti-albumid Biochem. प्रति-शिवतेय . phen-anthrene दर्श-क्षामण्य . anti-albumin Chem. प्रति-शिवति . anthrene blue Col. Ind. Thug fram. anti-albumose Chem. sfar-fETET n. 
a. brown क्षामेण्य बभ्रु m. 
anti-ald-oxime Chem. प्रति-सुवि-जाविn. .a. dark blue क्षामण्य असित नील m. anti-amylase Cbem. प्रति-मंडेद m. 
a. green क्षामग्य हरि m. 
anti-anaemic principle Med. प्रत्यरक्त a. jadegreen क्षामण्य अवपीतहरि m. तत्त्व 1. 
66 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
anti-autolysin Chem. प्रत्यात्मपचि. antigen vials, rack for Chem. प्रति anti-benz-ald-oxime Chem प्रति-धूप जन-कपिकार्थ निलय m. 
सुवि-जावि . 
anti-glyoxalase Chem. प्रति-मतिष्वेद m. antibody प्रतिकाय m., प्रतिद्रव्य 1. 
anti-grayhair factor Biochem. sqft anti-catalase Biochem. प्रति-वियोजेद m. पलितकेश कारक m. anti-chick dermatitis Med. प्रति- anti-hemoglobin Chem. प्रति-शोण 
कुक्कुट चर्मकोप m. 
___वर्तुलि . antichlor=antichlorine Chern. (any anti-hemolysin Chem. sf-Thrift f. 
substance used in removing the anti-heterolysin Chem.प्रतीतरशोणांशि. excess of chlorine or bleaching anti-hormone Chem. प्रति-न्यासर्गm. liquor) प्रतिनीर, नीरजीहर 
anti-infective Chem. प्रति-रोगसंचारी anti-chlorine Chem. प्रति-नीरजी/ 
(-इन्) mfn. anticipate vb. पूर्वावधारण 1. 
anti-isolysin Chem. प्रति-सशोणांशि. anti-clockwise = counter-clock- anti-kenotoxin Chem. sfer-safafo f. 
__wise प्रति-घटि, वामावर्त mfn. 
anti-lactase Chem. प्रति-दुग्धेद m. anti-coagulin Biochem. प्रति-मातंचि f. anti-lipase Chem. प्रति-विमेदेद m. anti-dermatitis प्रति-चर्मकोप m. 
anti-logarithm Math. प्रति-च्छेदा/. anti-diastase Chem. प्रति-विभेद m. anti-luetic Med. प्रत्युपदंशिक mfn. antidote प्रतिविष . 
antiluetin Med. प्रत्युपदंशि f. anti-endotoxin Chem. प्रत्यन्तविषि. anti-lysin Biochem. प्रति-व्यंशि. anti-filaria (plain, strong) Bact. sfat- anti-lysis Biochem. sfa-ZETT 1. 
· तनुसूत्र 2. (अमिश्रित, प्रवल) . antimere Zool. sferave m. anti-formin Chem. प्रति-वम्रि . 
antimonate Chem. अंजनीयn. anti-freeze प्रति-श्यान ॥. 
antimonial Chem. IN. प्रांजन m. anti-galactic Chem. प्रति-क्षीरिक 
2 adj. Fisin mfn. antigen (antibody+ -geng see Oxford antimonial lead=hard lead Cbem. 
Dictionary Supplement) Immunol. प्रांजन सीस-कठिन सीस . . 
प्रतिजन m. (short for प्रतिद्रव्यजन) antimonial powder=pulvis anti antigenic sfatfigi mfn. 
monialis (pulv. antim.) = antigenicity प्रतिजनिकत्व 1. 
James's powder Pharm. प्रांजन antigenophil=antigentophil प्रति क्षोद m. . 
जनप्रिय mfn. 
antimonial silver प्रांजन रजत 1. antigeno-therapy=antigento-the- antimonial vermilion Chem. आंजन ___ rapy प्रतिजन-चिकित्सा . 
हिंगल . . antigentophil=antigenophil antimonial wine=wine of anti antigento-therapy=antigeno-the- mony=vinum antimoniale 
rapy 
(vin. antim.) Pharm. प्रांजन-द्राक्षिरा. antigen vial Chem. प्रतिजन-कूपिका . antimoniate=antimonate . 
67 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
a., broken lump अंजन, खण्डित पिण्ड 
antimonjated Chem. I (combined 
with antimony) अंजन-युक्त mfn. 2 (prepared with antimony) अंजन 
कृत mfn. antimonic Chem. अंजनिक mfn. 
a. acid अंजनिक अम्ल N. a. anhydride अंजनिक अजलेय. a. chloride अंजनिक नीरेय 1. 
a. oxide अंजनिक जारेय. antimonide Chem. अंजनेय . antimoniferous Chem. (bearing 
antimony) अंजन-भर mfn. antimonious Chem. अंजन्य mfn. 
a. acid अंजन्य अम्ल 1. a. anhydride अंजन्य अजलेय. a. chloride अंजन्य नीरेय M. a. oxide अंजन्य जारेय n. 
a. sulphide अंजन्य शुल्बेय. antimonite Chem. अंजनित m. antimonite = stibnite Mineral. ____ अंजनिज m. (-इज from खनिज mineral) antimonium=antimony अंजनातु m.= 
अंजन . antimoniureted, antimoniuretted 
Chem. अंजनेयित mfn. antimoniureted hydrogen Chem. 
अंजनेयित उदजन m. anti-monkey pellagra factor 
Biochem. प्रति-वानर वल्कचर्म कारक 
a. bromide अंजन दुरेय n. a. chloride अंजन नीरेय . a. cinnabar=antimony vermi 
lion Mineral. अंजन हिंगुल n. a, crude=antimony sulphide ___Mining अंजनाम=अंजन शुल्बेय . 
a. fluoride (tri) अंजन तरस्वेय ॥. 
(त्रि) a. glance=stibnite Mineral.अंजन 
रुचा . =अंजनिज m. a. hydride अंजन उदेय . a. iodide (tri) sublimed अंजन 
जम्बेय 1. (त्रि) उत्सादित a. ocher Mineral. (native anti mony oxide, esp. cervantite) 
अंजन गैरिक n. a. orange Col. Ind. अंजन नारंग m. a. oxalate अंजन तिग्मीय ?. a. oxide अंजन जारेय n. a. penta-chloride अंजन पंच-नीरेय . a. penta-sulphide अंजन पंच-शुल्बेय n. a. pent-oxide अंजन पंच-जारेय. a. phosphate अंजन भास्वीय n. a. potassium tartrate अंजन दहातु ___न्यासवीय . 
a. powder अंजन क्षोद m. a. red अंजन रक्त m. a. regulus अंजन धातुकी/. a. rubber अंजन घृषि m. a. saffron=crocus of antimony 
अंजन कुंकुम n. a. salt Dyeing अंजन लवण .. a. sodium fluoride अंजन भारातु 
तरस्वेय. a. sodium tartrate अंजन क्षारातु 
न्यासवीय. 
m. 
antimony Chem. अंजन 1. 
a- antimony अ-अंजन 1. 8-antimony आ-अंजन 1. a. arsenate अंजन नेपालीय .. a. blende (German blenden to 
blind) Mineral. अंजनान्धन m. a. bloom-valentinite Mineral. 
अंजन-कुसुम .. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
a. sticks (technical or purified) anti-oxygenator Cbenm. प्रति-जारकयिता 
अंजन यष्टि f. (परिभाषित, पूत) 
(-) m. a. strontium tartrate अंजन शोणातु anti-pellagra Med. प्रति-वल्कच . 
न्यासवीय n. 
anti-pepsin Biochem. प्रति-पाचि f. a. sulphate अंजन शुल्बीय . 
anti-peptone Biochem. प्रति-पाचा . a. sulphide (native antimonite) antiperiodic tincture=tinctura ___ अंजन शुल्बेय 1. (प्राकृत अंजनिज) 
antiperiodica=tinctura war a. sulphide (black, orange) अंजन burgi-tincture of warburg, ___ शुल्बेय १. (काल, नारंग) 
Warburg's tincture Pharm. a. sulphide (kermes mineral) आवर्तघ्न निष्कर्ष m. 
अंजन शुल्बेय . (कपिश खनिज) antipodal cells Bot. प्रतिध्रुव-कोशा /. a. tetroxide अंजन चतुर्जारेय M. anti-precipitin Chem. प्रति-निस्सादि. a. trichloride अंजन त्रिनीरेय n. anti-protease Chem. प्रति-प्रोभूजेदm. a. trifluoride अंजन त्रितरस्वेय 1. anti-proteolysis Chem. प्रति-प्रोभूजांशन a. trioxide अंजन विजारेय 1. 
1. a. trisulphide अंजन त्रिशुल्बेय ॥. antipyonin (anti- +Gk. Pyon pus) a. vermilion Col. Ind. अंजन हिंगुल m. पूयनी f. a. white Col. Ind. अंजन श्वेत m. antipyrine ज्वरघ्नी f. a. yellow - Naple's yellow = antipyryl (antipyrine + -1) Chem. 
Merimee's yellow=daffodil ज्वरघ्नल. yellow=sunray अंजन पीत, प्र- anti-rachitic Med. प्रति-बालवक्र रक्तातिपीत m. 
anti-radar प्रति-तेजोन्वेष m. antimonyl (antimony to yl) Chem. anti - rat - dermatitis प्रति-मष-चर्मकोप 
अंजनल n. 
m. anti-neuritic प्रति चेताकोप mfn. 
anti-rennet Chem. प्रति-वत्सातंच m. anti-neuritis प्रति-चेताकोप m. 
anti-rennin Chem. प्रति-वत्सातंचि . anti-neuro-toxin Chem. प्रति-चेता-विषि Antirthinum Bot. (anti- like+rhinos 
nose) नासापुष्पति f. (-ति for प्रजाति anti-nicotine Chem. प्रति-ताम्रकूटी. genus) anti-oxidant Chem. प्रति-जारणकर्ता (-तृ) anti-scorbutic प्रति-प्रशीताद mfm. 
m. 
antiseptic I P. प्रतिपूय m. anti-oxidase Chem. प्रति-जारणेद m. 
2 adj. प्रतिपूयिक mfn. anti-oxidizer Chen. प्रति-जारयिता (-त) anti-serum Immunol. प्रति-लसी. 
anti-sterility Med. प्रति-वन्ध्य mfn. anti-oxidizing Chem. प्रति-जारण . anti-substance प्रति-द्रव्य. anti-oxygen Chem. प्रति-जारक M. anti-tank defence Mil. प्रति-विचक्र-रक्षा anti-oxygenating Chem. प्रति-जारकण 
anti-tank gun Mil. विचक्रघ्नी . . 
m. 
- 69﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
11. 
anti-tank mine Mil.fr-faqat FFESTE anvil i fremfor f. (cf. Hindi FETE) 
11. . 
=incus Anat. faerfa f. anti-tank weapon Mil. fa-fa27427 aorta Anat. Ta#Ft, Fercifuit f. 
aortic valve FETH-9TC, HETTIFUL? anti-tartaric Chem. stfel-Furafo mfn. 977 n. anti-tetanus (AT) Tf1-57F7FH (5..) ap. (apothecary) . (af ) 
mfn. 
apatite Mineral. (calcium phosphate anti-thermin Pharm. ff. 
fluoride) quaffatt m. (-558 from anti-thrombin Zool. sfererate f. 
first mineral) anti-toxin Immunol. sfi-fafa f. ape (any monkey) 1*, (esp. larger anti-trypsin Biochem. sf-f29f f. tailless form) faqz9-019 11. anti-tuberculin Chem. sfrufen f. aperiodic Phys. Tacia mfn. anti-tyrosinase Chem. Thatè m. aperiodic balance OFFTEINT-OMT f. anti-uratic Chem.gforefa mfn. aperture of a mirror Ophthalmol. anti-urease Chem. #fa-FHET m. 
दर्पणमुख 2. (here aperture does not anti-venin=anti-venene gfa-Fi ferry mean a hole) 
Apetalae Bot. (plants without petals) anti-vitamin fostafa f. 
GST: 1. Pla anti-xerophthalmic Med. fa-76ef1- apetalous dicotyledon Bot. 51 
fita mfn. 
feata m. anti-zymic प्रति-विकक mfn. 
apetalous fiower Bot. अदल पुष्प ?. anti-zymotic प्रति-विकारयितृक mfn. apex I Anat, (narrow end of the ant lion Zool. four-aty m. 
heart) UTW 1. -antoin (allantoin) - TFT/. 
2 Ophthalmol. 7 n. antox=antimony white 
3 Bot. (of a leaf) Tun. ant-proof (hives so constructed apex of orbit Ophthalmol. Tin 
that ants cannot reach them) e n. form- mfn. 
apex of the heart Anat. Cum n. Antwerp blue (a colour, greenish- aphaeresis (Gk. apo 49 to hairein 
blue in hue, of high saturation EU) 94FUT . and low brilliance) Tarefa m. aphanite Petrog. (separate grains are A. brown = Congo brown (a invisible to the naked eye) 562 
brown, red-yellow in hue, of UTO m. 
low saturation and low apheliotropic=negatively helio brilliance) न्यवरक्तपीत m. 
__ tropic Bot. अप्रकाशावर्तिक mfr. a number of Math. कतिपय 
aphid = plant louse Zool. 5-79 f. Anura (tail-less) Zool. fagot: m. pl. (they secrete honey-dew it f.) anus=anal aperture Anat. T5-TTn. aphidolysin (aphid+ lysin) 24 Tierf. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
aphis lion Zool. (any of numerous A. indica HTCTT HETT m. 
insect larvae that feed on aphids) Apium Bot. Hermafa f. (-fa from 41-42 m. 
utfor genus) apiarist मधुपाल m. 
A.graviolens सामान्य अजमोदा f. apiary 57 n. (ferat VIII. 3.106) Aplacophora (a-not to Gk. plakous apiator = apiarist 
flat cake + pherein to bear; the apical angle Ophthalmol. after-aitor m. body is without shelly plates) apical growth Biol. #wafa f. 
Zool. agt: m. pl. apiculture=bee-keeping HEITTATHT 1. aplanatic lens Ophthalmol. Teater ___scientific bee-keeping वैज्ञानिक वीक्षm. 
मधुपालन . 
aplo-=haplo apiculturist मधुपाल m. 
apo- (In chemistry it designates a scientific bee-keeper TFT compound formed from or FETYTT m. 
related to the compound to the apiin Chem. अजमोदि. (अजमोद Apium name of which it is prefixed) 
graviolens) 
पा- (not अप-) apiol Chem. अजमोदव M. 
apo-aconitine Chem. 47-5faat f. apiole Chem. SHEET f. 
apo-atropine Chem. The f. green or liquid apiol हरि, तरल apo-caffeine Chem. श्रा-म्लेच्छी f. 
UTFIGO m. 
apo-camphoric Chem. FT-faq mfn. yellow apiol fra GT m. apocarpous (pistil) Bot. PATITET apiolin Pharm. (only liquid obtained (qat + gust) mfn. 
from the oil of parsley seed) apo-cholic Chem. 7-f9f#mfn. 
#lafa f. (#6716 + - - ) apo-cinchonine Chem. w-fagnat f. apionol Chem. अजमोदान m. 
apo-codeine Chem. 7-pitsit f. apiose (apiin + -ose) Chem. wala Apocynaceae Bot. Feate-487 n. 
n. 
apocynum = Canadian hemp = Apis मधुकराति . (आति for प्रजाति Apocynumcannabinum Pharm. 
genus) 
SISTf. A. dorsata (big bee, builds large Apoda ('legless') Zool. 79781: m.pl. 
combs on branches of trees) apo-fenchene Chem. T-72UR47 n. TT (ancient word), rely apogamy (formation of sporophyte 
a m. 
without the formation of sexual A. florea (a stingless, small bee organs, the gametes) Bot. x 
of the size of a big mosquito, ayat f. builds small combs in bushes) apogeotropic=negatively geotro 
ferent (ancient word), 2487 pic Bot. 1774 , RTC mfn. FETT m. 
apogeotropism Bot. Faciat f. 71 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
apolar Zool. अध्रुव Mfn. 
rines (not radar) (ASDIC) Radar Apollo red Col. Ind. देव रक्त m. 
जलान्तन्वेिष M. (ज. अ.) Apolysin Pharm. आज्वरघ्नी f. apparent I = seeming Math. आभासी apo-morphia, apo-morphine (-इन्), आभासमान mfn. 
Pharm. प्रा-प्रमीली. 
2 (cleat) स्पष्ट mfr. apo-morphine hydro-chloride 3 (visible to the eye) प्रत्यक्ष mfn. 
Chem. आ-प्रमीली उद-नीरेय n. 
apparent weight Phys. आभास भार m. aponeurosis Anat. (fiat, thin ten true weight सत्य भार m. ____don) पृथुला . 
appeal Law पुनर्विचार-प्रार्थना . apophysis (lower part of the theca appearance रूप n. 
प्रावरक) Bot. निप्रावर m. 
appellate jurisdiction Law पुन -apophysis Zool. -as 
विचाराधिकारक्षेत्र n. apo-quin-amine (from quina 'cin- appendage=appendix Biol. (a 
chona विताप bark') Chem. प्रा-विताप- subordinate part or organ) उपांगा. तिक्ती. 
appendicitis Med. आन्त्रपुच्छकोप m. apo-quinine Chem. प्रा-विज्वरी f. appendicular Anat. उपांग aporphine (from apomorphine, the appendicular skeleton Anat. उपांग 
parent of morphine प्रमीली) Chem. कंकाल m. वृद्धमीली f. 
appendix=appendage apo-safranine Chem. आ-कुंकुमी . appendix परिशिष्ट n. apospory Bot. (formation of pro- appendix caeci = appendix ver ___thallus without spore-formation) miformis Anat. उण्डुक-पुच्छ, आन्त्र 
अबीजाणुता 
पुच्छ m. apothecaries' dram (dr. ap.) 775€ apple getite m., n. (tree is m., fruit is 
शाण m. (भै. शा.) 
___n.) (उत् superior + कोल jujube) apothecaries' fluid measure भैषजिक apple essence Chem. उत्कोल परिमल m. 
तरल माप m. 
apple green उत्कोल हरि m. apothecaries' weight भैषजिक भार m. apple oil उत्कोल तैल N. apothecary (ap.) भैषजिक m. (भै.) appliance-instrument उपकरण. apothesine Pharm. (used as a local applicability प्रयोज्यता f. 
anesthetic) अपवेदनी f. 
applicable प्रयोज्य mfn. apo-turmeric Chem. आ-हरिद्रिक mfn. application I प्रयोग m. apozem Pharm. (a decoction ) 2 व्यवहार m. 
क्वाथ m. 
3 प्रार्थना . apozemical Pharm. Farefter mir. 
a. and allotment book प्रार्थना apparatus साधित्र ?. 
तथा आवंटन पुस्त १. apparatus cupboard साधित्र आधरण m. a. book प्रार्थना पुस्त .. apparatus for detecting subma a. form प्रार्थना प्रपत्र 1. 
12. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
a. money प्रार्थना राशि m. 
a. account नियोजन-लेखा f. letter of a. प्रार्थना पत्र n. 
approval Com. अनुमोदन n. application of research अन्वषण-प्रयोग। approve vb. अनुमोदन n. 
___m. 
approved अनुमोदित mfn. applicators लागकm. 
approving अनुमोदन n. wood a. काष्ठ लागक m. 
approximate Math. उपसादित (brought appliedT प्रयुक्त mfn. 
___near), उपसन्न mfn. 2 व्यावहारिक mfn. 
approximate vb. उपसदन, उपसादन . a. anatomy व्यावहारिक शारीर n. approximated उपसादित mfn. a. botany-economic botany approximately उपसादनात्, उपसादनतः 
व्यावहारिक-औद्भिदी. 
approximation उपसादन (to bring a. chemistry व्यावहारिक रसायन .. near), 34867 n. (to come near) a.economics व्यावहारिक अर्थशास्त्र. approximator उपसादक m. a.geometry ब्यावहारिक-रैखिकी f. April चतुर्थ-मास m. a. mathematics व्यावहारिक गणितn. Aptera Zool. अपक्ष-गण m. (गण an a. mechanics व्यावहारिक-यांत्रिकी f. order), अपक्षा: m.pl. a. physics व्यावहारिक-भौतिकी f. Apterygota Z00. विपक्षानुवर्ग m. (अनुवर्ग 
a. statistics व्यावहारिक-सांख्यिकी f. a subclass of primitive insects appointment नियुक्ति f. 
which never develop wings....), appointment of governor शासक- विपक्षा: m.pl. 
नियुक्ति . 
aqua Pharm. वारि n. apportionment Com. अभिभाजन n. 
a. ammoniae or ammonia apposition (juxtaposition) Ophthal तिक्ताति-वारि । 
mol. उपसादन १., उपसाद m. 
a. anethindill water शतपुष्पिका appreciable (large enough to be वारि . 
estimated) उपागण्य mfn. 
a. anethi concentrata=concen appreciate (to esteem to the full trated dill water संकेन्द्रित शत 
the value of ) अधिमूल्यन 1. 
पुष्पिका-वारि . appreciated अधिमूलियत mfn. 
a. anisi-anise water शतपुष्पा-वारि appreciating, appreciation अधि 
. मूल्यन . 
a. anisi concentrata=concen apprentice शिशिक्षु m. 
trated anise water संकेन्द्रित apprenticeship fatfatetat f. 
गतपुष्पा-वारि. ___a. premium शिशिक्षुता-प्रव्याजि f. a. aromatica सौरभिक वारि. 
approach उपगमन, उपागमन 1. 
a. aurantii floris = orange appropriate समुपयुक्त, समुचित mfn. 
flower water नारंग-पुष्प-वारि n. appropriate scale समुपयुक्त-श्रेणी . 
a. bromata = bromine water appropriation Com. FESTTTT n. 
दुरानी-वारि n. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
n. 
a. camphorae=camphor water a. menthae piperitae concen 
कर्पूर-वारि n. 
trata=concentrated pepper a. camphorae concentrata = 
mint water संकेन्द्रित तीवा-वारि concentrated camphor water संकेन्द्रित कपुर-वारि . 
a. pimentae concentrata=con a. carui=caraway water प्रजीर 
centrated pimento water वारि। 
संकेन्द्रित लवंगबदर-वारि. a. carui concentrata=concen a. ptychotis यवानी-वारि n. 
trated caraway water संकेन्द्रित a. ptychotis conc. संकेन्द्रित यवानी प्रजीर-वारि. 
वारि . a. caryophylli concentrata= a. pura Chem. पूतं वारि . 
concentrated clove water a. regia Chem. अम्ल-राज m. संकेन्द्रित लवंग-वारि n. 
a. rosae = rose water पाटल-वारि a. chlorata=chlorine water ___ 
नीरजी-वारि . 
a. rosae concentratan=concen a. chloroformi=chloroform 
trated rose water संकेन्द्रित पाटल water नीरवम्रल-वारि, संमोहिनी-वारि 
बारिn. 
aquatic (plants) जलीय mfn. a. chloroformi concentrata aquatic animal जलचर m. 
concentrated chloroform aquatic habits जलचारी स्वभाव m. 
water संकेन्द्रित नीरवम्रल-वारि. aquatic life जल-जीवन n. a. cinnamomi=cinnamon aquatic roots Bot. जलीय मूल ।।. 
water दारुसिता-वारि. 
aqua-valent Chem. वारि-संयुज m. a. cinnamomi concentrata aqueduct of Sylvius=aqueductus 
concentrated cinnamon water cerebri Anat. प्रमस्तिष्क-मार्ग m. संकेन्द्रित दारुसिता-वारि n. 
aqueduct of the mid-brain मध्य a. destillata=distilled water मस्तिष्क-मार्ग m. 
आसुत वारि . 
aqueductus cereberi=aqueduct of a. foeniculi-fennel water मेथि Sylvius 
वारि n. 
aqueous जलीय mfn. a. foeniculi concentrata-con- aqueous ammonia जलीय तिक्तातिm. 
centrated fennel water संकेन्द्रित aqueous extract Pharm. जलीय निस्सार मेथि-वारि . 
m. a. fortis Chem. (nitric acid; espe- aqueous humor Ophthalmol. नेत्र-रस 
cially a weaker grade) भूयिक-वारि m., तेजोजल 1. (from सुश्रुत) 
aqueousness Chem. जलीयता. a. juniperi conc. संकेन्द्रित हपुषा- aqueous solution जलीय विलयन . 
वारिn. 
aqueous tension Chem. जलीय-आतति f. 
१. 
74 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
Aquilaria Bot. अगुरुति . (-ति for density घनता, etc.) धनणिज m. (-इज 
प्रजाति genus) (English word is for खनिज mineral) from Sanskrit) 
Arakan (in Burma) कर्कोटकनगर 1. Ar (argon) Chem. मं (मंदाति) 
aralkyl (aryl-t-alkyl) Chem. #1730 n. Ar. (argentum) Chem. र (रजत) Aranea Zool. (orb-weaving spiders) ar (aromatic) Chem. सौ (सौरभिक) गोलवाया: m. pl. (from गोलवाय), Arabian Sea पश्चिम पयोधि m. (Cf. पूर्व गोलवायाति f. (आति from प्रजाति 
पयोधि Bay of Bengal) 
genus) arabic acid Chem. वर्बुरिक अम्ल n. araroba-Goa powder गुहा-क्षोद m. arabin Chem. बर्बुरि . 
Aravali Geog. अर्बुद-पर्वत m., आदर्शावली arabinic acid=arabic acid arabinose=pectinose Chem. बर्बुरिधु arbiter=arbitrator मध्यस्थ, विवाचक m. 
arbitrary Math. स्वेच्छ mfn. arabinosic Chem. affeqe mfn. arbitration faaraa n. (ancient word, arabite Chem. बर्बुरित n. 
ऐतरेय-ब्राह्मण), मध्यस्थ-निर्णयन .. arabitol Chem. बर्बुरितव m. 
arbitrator=arbiter Araceae Bot. सूरण-कुल . 
arbor Bot. वृक्ष m. arachic, arachidic Chem. भूमगिक arboreal adj. Bot. वृक्ष-, वृक्षीय mfr. 
mfn. (भूमद्ग 'ground nut'; Cf. arboreal (animal) Zool. शाखाजीवी Hindi मंगफली, Marathi भुईमूग) 
(-इन् ) mfn. arachidic acid भूमुद्रिक अम्ल . arboreal area वृक्ष-क्षेत्र n. arachidonic acid (arachidic of wonic) arboreal civet Zool. शाखा-विडाल M. 
Biochem. भूमुद्गायिक अम्ल 1. 
(short for शाखा-कस्तूरीविडाल) arachin Chem. भूमुगि . 
arboreal life Zool. शाखा-जीवन n. Arachis Bot. भूमुद्गति f. (-ति for प्रजाति arborescence शाखिता f. 
genus) 
arborescent शाखी (-इन् ) mfn. A. hypogeae सामान्य भूमुद्ग m. arborescent Bot. वृक्षवत्, वृक्षसदृश mfn. arachis oil भूमुद्ग-तेल ?. 
arborescent crystallization शाखि Arachnida=Arachnoidea Zool. 96 
स्फटन. पादा: m. pl., अष्टपाद-वर्ग m. (वर्ग arborization Zool. Pमायण. class) 
arbor Saturni=lead tree Chemn. - arachnoid Anat. जालतानिका 
वृक्ष m. Arachnoidea=Arachnida 
arbu-sterol (arbutus strawberry Arachnoids Zool. अष्टपादा: m. pl. 
तृणबदर + phytosterol तरु-सान्द्रव) Bio arachno-pia=pia-arachnoid Anat. chem.u-199 m. 
मस्तिष्कछदm. 
arbutin Chem. (found in the aragonite Mineral. (it differs from leaves of the bear-berry ऋक्ष-बदर 
calcite चूर्णिज and is greater in and in other plants) ऋक्षबदरि. 
15 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
Arbutus Bot. quaefa f. (-fa for Archiannelida Zool. saafatat: m. pl. 
प्रजाति genus) 
(sg. प्रवलयी) arbutus (strawberry) तृणबदर m., n. archil-orchil शेपाल 7. arc Math. चाप m. 
archil (extract or powder) Col. Ind. arc-centunescentrad चाप-गतम m. शपाल m. (निस्सार, क्षोद) arch चाप m. 
a. red शेपाल-रक्त m. archæology quifaent f. 
a. substitute शेपाल-आदेश m. Archean, Archean era Geol. आद्य- architectural engineering वास्तू 
कल्प . 
अभियन्त्रणा Archean group of rocks Geol. प्राद्य- architectural perspective वास्तु 
कल्प-शैल-वर्ग m. 
नेत्रदृशा . arched Bot. चापरूप nfn. 
archoplasm Biol. (from which archegonial chamber Bot. आदियोनि _spindlesetc. are formed) तर्कुकर m. 
वेश्मn. 
arc lamp Elec. चाप-दीप M. Archegoniatae Bot. (a primary divi- Arcot Geog. FETTUC 12. 
sion of the vegetable kingdom, arctic circle उत्तरध्रुव-वृत्त ।. containing Bryophyta. and Pteri- arctic region उत्तरध्रुव-प्रदेश m. 
dophyta) आदियोनि-उद्भिद :f.pl. Arctostaphylos Bot. I ऋक्षबदरति f. archegoniate Bot. (bearing arche- (-fa for fufe genus) 
gonia) अादियोनि-मान् m. 
2 = bear-berry ऋक्षवदर m., . archegoniophore Bot. (stalk or base arc-tube Radar चाप-नाल m. 
of the archegonium)मादियोनिवन्तn. arcustarseusOphthalmol. वमपट्ट-धनु n. archegonium Bot. आदियोनि, पलिघ-योनि area प्रदेश m., क्षेत्रफल, क्षेत्र n. 
m., f. (flask-shaped) 
Areca Bot. पूगति f. (-ति for प्रजाति archelline 2 B=acid bordeaux genus) archenteron Zool. आद्यन्त्र ।. 
A. catechu=betelnut सामान्य पूग Archeozoic Geol. आदि-कल्प m. 
Proterozoic-Algonkian सुपुरा- Arecaceae Bot. पूग-कुल n. कल्प-प्रादि-कल्प m. 
arecaidine Chem. पूगेयी /. Paleozoic पुरा-कल्प m. 
arecaine Chem. qui f. Mesozoic मध्य-कल्प m. 
arecolidine Chem. पूगवेयी. Cenozoic=Neozoic नूतन-कल्प= arecoline Chem. पूगवी f. नव-कल्प m. 
arecoline hydro-bromide Chem. Psychozoic मानस-कल्प m. 
पूगवी उद-दुरेय . archespore, archesporium (gives areola I (an interstice) अन्तराल n. 
rise to the spore mother cells 2 (coloured ring around the बीजाणु-मातृ-कोशा) Bot. बीजाणु-मातामही nipple, or around a vesicle or 
pustule) वलय m. 
m. 
- 
1 
76 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
3 (that portion of the iris which argentation (coating with silver) borders the pupil of the eye) TTT 
9 m. asta m. 
argenti- = argento areolar tissue Anat. अन्तरालित-ऊति argentic Chem. रजतिक mfn. 
argenti-cyanide Chem. 5-FUTT . areole Bot. (a small pit or cavity) argentide Chem. Toto n. 
944 m. 
argenti-ferous Chem. 7610-#* mfn. arg. (argentum) Chem. T (2017) argenti-nitrate Chem. 5077- TOP n. Argas Zool. 90 Eurft f. (-:fa for argent-ion Chem. FunT n. (796 + 
Storfor genus) 
4) A. americanus, A. miniatus, argentite Mineral. (native silver 
A. persicus, adobe tick, blue sulphide) ofert m. (-58 for a first bug and tampan yere 45 mineral) het m. 
argento- रजत A. reflexus (found on pigeons) argentol Pharm. Tecra m. 
Ruta eft m. 
argento-meter Chem. 1987-ATT m. Argasidae Bact, arealet m. argento-metric coafata mfn. Argemone Bot. 114#vefa f. (-for for argento-metry toa-fifa f. 
Filmfe genus) 
argenton TUTTf. A. mexicana FTATET BE|992 m. argento-pyrite Mineral. T -Tefta n. argenol (argentum to ol -, a argentose Pharm. (a compound of 
ilver-albumin combination) silver and a nucleo-protein; - ose Chem. रूप्यव m. 
is not from glucose) T5614 m. argent হলর . 
argentous Chem. TTT mfn. argent (made of silver; white) argentum Chem. puta n. 
TH4, aa mfn. 
arginine (argentum + -ine; in allu argent-, argento. Chem. 1970 
sion to the silver salts which argental 1 (of or pertaining to were first discovered. It is a 
silvet) राजत mfn. 
derivative of guanidine वैष्ठेयी) 2 (resembling silver) Ha-TATT Biochem. praesent f. mfn. 
arginine-phosphoric acid Biochem. 3 (containing silver) W-mfn. आवेष्ठेयी-भास्विक अम्ल n. 4 (combined with silver) रजत-युक्त argol=crude tartar अाम न्यासव M. mfn. 
argon Chem. Prefa m. argental mercury Chem. 27ETT TTC Argonauta Zool. (the only known 
m. 
species is paper nautilus) 97a1fa argent-amide Chem. Toa-ferrata na 
PTFET f. argent-amine Chem. Fa-ferant f. argument I = reasoning to m. 
77 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
ग. 
2 Math. (that which fixes the Armenian earth=red chalk Col. direction of a complex quantity) Ind. रक्त-खटी. नियन्ता (-तु) m. 
Armenian red=acid crimson Argyreia Bot. वृद्धदारुति . (-ति for Armillifer Parasitol. कंकण्याति -प्राति 
प्रजाति genus) . 
for the genus ; individual A. speciosa सामान्य वृद्धदार m. 
would be कंकणी (-इन् ) m.] aricine Chem. (found in cusco bark, A. armillatus --- Porocephalous 
a variety of cinchona bark) ___armillatus रन्धशिर कंकणी m. प्रवितापी f. 
armistice-truce युद्ध-विश्रान्ति aril Bot. अधिचोल m. 
arm of a balance तुला-बाहु m. Aristolochia Bot. ईश्वरीति f. (-ति for atm of a couple Mech. मिथुन-बाहु m. .. प्रजाति genus) 
arm of a lever उद्याम-बाहु m. A. indica सामान्य ईश्वरी/ 
armoured = panzer Mil. कवचित Aristolochiaceae Bot. ईश्वरी-कुल. 
mfn. Aristolochiales Bot. ईश्वरी-गोत्र n. (गोत्र armoured concrete (with embedd 
order) 
ed steel)=reinforced concrete arithmetic अंकगणित, पाटी-गणित. 
अयस्संघा. arithmetical progression Matb. armoured vehicle Mil. कवचित वाहन 
समान्तर वृद्धि, समान्तर-श्रेढी . arithmetical sum (sum of positive armoury Mil. शस्त्रकोष m. 
numbers or quantities) धन-संकलन Armstrong and Wynne's a n 
naphthol sulphonic acid, a - arithmetic average Statistics समान्तर _naphthol-3-sulphonic acid 
माध्य. 
अपि-अ-उत्तैलव शुल्बायिक अम्ल, अ-उत्तैलव arithmetic mean Math. समान्तर-मध्यक ३-शुल्बायिक अम्ल 
m. 
Armstrong's formula (of benzene) arithmetico-geometric series Math. (6 free .valencies pointing in 
समान्तर-गुणोत्तर-श्रेढी. 
wards) नियुज-सूत्र . (नि inwards+ arjun Bot. अर्जुन m. 
संयुजता) Arkansas stone (a superior variety army I (in general) सेना /. 
of novaculite क्षुराश्म used as a 2 (group of 2 or 3 army corps) whetstone) क्षुराश्म-शाण m. 
अनीकिनी f. (ancient word) arm.बाहु m. (as in mathematics or a army co-operation aircraft-wings 
__microscope). 
___of the army सेना-सहाय वायुयान । armadillo Zool. वर्मी (-इन्) m. Army Council सेना-परिषत् / arm chair बाबासन्दी. 
Arnaudon's green Col. Ind. fatat armed tapeworm Zool. सांकुश पट्टकृमि वर्गीय (तिक्तातु भास्वीय+दहातु द्विवर्णीय) 
हरिm. 
78 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
1. 
arnica = arnica montana = leo- aromatization, aromatize 77777 Up 
pard's bane=mountain tobacco n. Pharm. fifa-1997 n. 
aromatizer सुरभीकर m. arnicae radix = arnicae rhizoma around of - 
(arnic. rhiz.)=arnica rhizome aroxyl (aryl + oxy- + -yl) Chem. arnica root Pharm. fifcata- TATO n. 
arquerite Mineral. (Ag 12 Hg) T arnica yellow=brilliant yellow Fm. Aroideae=Aracea Bot. To n. Arrah (in Behar) #TTFTTTT A. aromatic सुरभि, सौरभिक Mfn. (as in arrange vb. विन्यसन 1. 
chemistry) 
arranged विन्यस्त mfn. aromatic powder of chalkspulvis arrangement i fare m. 
cretae aromaticus (pulv. cret. 2 gary m. aromat.) Pharm. सुरभि खटी-क्षोद arrangement of sections Law धारा 
foruth m. aromatic powder of chalk with array i Math. #749 m. 
opium=pulvis cretae aromati- 2 Statistics (a series of observa cus cum opio (pulv. cret. tions arranged in classes in order aromat. c. opio) Pharm. rug of magnitude) farete m. (# Area TH CT-HT m. 
for *), safari n. aromatics सुरभिवर्ग m. 
array, battle ag, 14-17 m. aromatic species सुरभि-क्वाथक m. arrayed Statistics अनुविन्यस्त mfn. aromatic spirit of ammonia Pharm. arrears Accounts अवशिष्ट . . 
सरभि तिक्ताति-निषेचन । 
arrhenal Pharm. (disodium methyl aromatic sulphuric acid=acidum arsonate) 479rite n. 
sulphuricum aromaticum(acid. arrowroot (a nutritive starch sulph. aromat.) Pharm. FH obtained from root-stocks.., Tre FT 1. i 
valued as food for children and aromatic syrup of cascara invalids) fartust n. 
syrupus cascarae aromaticus arrowshape needle Biological Instru (syr. casc. aromat.) Pharm. Ef - ment amf. आरेचवल्क-मिष्टोद .. 
arrow-worms=Chæto-gnatha Zool. aromatic syrup of figs = com TW: m. pl. (from r #) 
pound syrup of figs Pharm. ars- Chem. I (arsenic) 99-(#9ret) संयुत प्रोदुंबर-मिष्टोद १. 
2 (arsonic) #97- (1977 ) aromatic vinegar Pharm. t** # ars-anilic (arsonic+aniline) Chem. 
19ifere mfn. aromatic water Pharm. alfH Fren. arsen-, arseno- arsenic) Chem. 79 
79﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY. 
arsenal Mil. (for manufacture, 
storage and issue of arms and all 
military equipments) शस्त्रशाला f. arsenate n. Chem. नेपालीय n. arsenate vb. Chem. नेपालन . 
(to introduce arsenic into a com-- 
pound) नेपाली-प्रवेशन n. arsenation नेपालन 1., नेपाली-प्रवेश m. arsen-fast=arsenic-fast (resisting ___ the poison arsenic) नेपाली-सह mfn. arseniate n=arsenate arsenic Chem. नेपाली/ 
a. bloom=arsenolite नेपाली-कुसुम ___ -नेपोपल m. 
a., broken lump नेपाली, खण्डित पिण्ड __ m. 
a. bromide नेपाली दुरेया. a. chloride नेपाली नीरेय 1. a. disulphide नेपाली द्विशल्बेय. a. estimation apparatus (distil lation method) नेपाली आगणन 
साधित्र n. (आसवन रीति f.) a. hydride नेपाली उदेय . a. iodide नेपाली जम्बेय . a. orange नेपाली नारंग m. a. oxide नेपाली जारेय. a. penta-sulphide नेपाली पंच-शुल्बेय 
1.-राज-पीत, नेपाली पीत m. a tube नेपाली-नाल m. 
a. yellow नेपाली पीत m. arsenic Chem. नेपालिक mfn. (In rea 
lity it is equal to arsenict - ic. In English it is confused with the noun arsenic. In our langu age the two words are distinct नेपाली, नेपालिक) 
a. acid नेपालिक अम्ल .. arsenic vb.arsenicate arsenical Chem. नैपालिक mfn. 
a. vapour नैपालिक बाष्प m. arsenical (a preparation containing 
arsenic) नैपालिक .. arsenical antimony=allemontite 
नेपालिक अंजन नेपांजनिज m. (-इज 
for खनिज mineral) arsenical nickel=niccolite Mineral. 
(essentially a nickel arsenide) नैपालिक रूपक रूपक-नेपिज m. (-इज for 
खनिज mineral) arsenical pyrite = arseno-pyrite 
नैपालिक माक्षीक-नेप-माक्षीकn. arsenical solution=liquor arseni 
calis (liq. 'arsen.)=solutio ar senicalis seu Fowleri = Fow ler's solution Pharm. नेपालिक विलयन 
. 
a. pent-oxide नेपाली पंच-जारेय n. a. powder नेपाली-क्षोद m. a. sulphide (precipitated) नेपाली ___ शुल्बेय 1. (निस्सादित) 
a. test strips नेपाली-परीक्षण-पट्टी. a. trichloride नेपाली विनीरेय . a. trihydride नेपाली व्युदेय . a. trioxide नेपाली विजारेय. a. trisulphide=king's yellow, 
arsenic yellow नेपाली त्रिशुल्बेय 
arsenicate vb. Chem. नेपालीयन n. 
I (to combine with arsenic) नेपाली-योजन . 2 (to treat with arsenic) नेपाली साधन .. 3 (to mix with arsenic) नेपाली-मिश्रण 
4 (to impregnate with नेपाली-व्यापन 1. 
arsenic) 
80 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
arsenic-fast=arsen-fast 
arseno-phen Chem. -aai m. arsenicize=arsenicate 
arseno-phenol 79-9pia m. arsenic magenta Col. Ind. 97 arseno-pyrite mispickel (Ger 
at f. 
man)=arsenical pyrite Mineral. arsenide Chem. नेपाल्येय n. 
#19- Et n. arseniferous Chem. FTST1-77T mfn. arseno-tungstic Chem. 9-erfus# mfn. arseniopleite Mineral, agafant m. arsen-oxide Chem. 59-57da n. 
(5 for afas mineral) 
arsenyl Chem. 47 n. arseniosiderite (arsenate + Gk. marsin, -arsine -97 f. 
siderites of iron Mineral, qreftet arsine Chem. TT f. 
m. (-इज for खनिज mineral) arsinic Chem. fffe mfn. arsenious Chem. 1964 mfn. arsino- (arsinic) fuft 
a. acid (ortho, meta, pyro) C arsonate Chem. rrr n. 
FT n. (558, 77, afir) 
arsonate vb. Chem. 195T 1. a. anhydride नेपाल्य अजलेय . 
I to introduce the arsono a. chloride नेपाल्य नीरेय . 
group into) #91- 
5T n. a. oxide नेपाल्य जारेय n. 
2 (to convert into an arsonic a. sulphide नेपाल्य शुल्बेय n. 
compound) 97-77 n. arsenite (ortho, meta, pyro) Ch m. arsonation Chem. Tas n. 
ATTFIT n. (350, #, #FF) 
-arsone नेपा. arsenium Chem. नेपाल्यात m. 
arsonic Chem. नेपायिक mfn. arseniuret=arsenide Chem, NEUT arsonium (arsenic mit-ammonium 
n. 
fait) Chem. 714-171 m. arseniureted, arseniuretted Chem. arsono- (arsonic) 791 
(combined with arsenic) i arsono adj. Chem. ii, ia mfn. mfn. 
ars-phen-amine Pharm. 19--farerit a. hydrogen नेपालीयुक्त उदजन m. arseno-, arsen-(arsenic) Chem. #4- arsyl (arsine #141 + -yl-co) Chem. 79767 arseno adj. Chem. 9, 19 min. arseno-benzene Chem. #qehret n. arsylene Chem. नेपीलेन्या . arseno-bismite Mineral. 79-füfcet m. art i ett f. 
(EUT for first mineral) 
2 FTCT n. -arsenol -49 m. 
art education T-TETUT 17. arsenolite Mineral. (arsenic tri- Artemesia Bot. Hela f. (-fer for 
oxide) qor fun m. (-for first tilfe genus) mineral ) 
A. absinthium = worm-wood arseno-molybdate Chem. 19-aquita TATRY -5 m. 
arterin Biochem. tfefur f. 
81 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
arteriole रोहिणिका, धमनिका f. 
2=device y feat f. artery रोहिणी, ('red one'), धमनी (as artificial कृत्रिम mfn. 
in frogs, where arteries are white a. antenna Radar कृत्रिम प्रातन्तु m. and not red) 
a. asphalt कृत्रिम धूम्रजतु ॥. artery of the heart=coronary a. butter कृत्रिम नवनीत १. 
. artery हृद्रोहिणी. 
a. camphor कृत्रिम कर्पूर m. artesian well (bored wells withpipe) a.gum=dextrin कृत्रिम निर्यास m. 
नलकूप m. 
-दक्षि arthriticine = piperazine Pharm. a. silk black Col. Ind. कृत्रिम कौशेय 
मरिचाजीवी 
काल m. arthritis Med. सन्धिकोप m. . 
a. silk brilliant black Col. Ind. arthrodia Anat. (a gliding joint; a कृत्रिम कौशेय भासुर काल m. 
diarthrosis....) प्रसर-सन्धि m. 
a. system (of classification) Bot. arthrodial joint=gliding joint कृत्रिम वर्गीकरण . 
Anat. प्रसर-सन्धि m. 
a. ventilation कृत्रिम संवातन 1. Arthropoda Zool. सन्धिपादाः m.pl. Artiodactyla Zool. समांगुलयः M. pl. arthrosis Anat. (any articulation or (sg. समांगुलि) 
suture uniting two bones) सन्धि m. artists' oil=Kakmi oil अक्षोट-तैल . article x वस्तु . 
Artocarpaceae Bot. पनस-कुल n. ___2 Math. अनुच्छेद m. 
Artocarpus Bot. पनसति f. (-ति for articles of association Law पार्षद् प्रजाति genus) 
अन्तनियमm. 
.. A. integrifolia सामान्य पनस M. articular Zool. (that which joins) art of war युद्ध-कला f. 
संधायी (-इन्) mfn. 
arts college (opp. science college) articulate vb. (I to join. 2 to unite साहित्य-विद्यालय m. (साहित्य साहित्यादि) 
by means of a joint) सन्धान, art-studio=studio कला-शाला f. सन्धियोजन n. 
Arum Bot. कचुति . (-ति for प्रजाति articulate=articulated Zool. (join genus) 
ted) सन्धिमान् mfn. 
A. colocasia सामान्य कचु m. articulated or mallet locomotive' aryl(aromatic सौरभिक +- -ल) Chem. 
Ry. Eng. (two or three separate सौल n. engines for heavy freight service) aryl-amine Chem. etas-faqat f. संहित चलित्र. 
aryl-amino- (aryl-amine) सौल-तिक्ती articulating . process = zygapo- arylate vb. Chem. (to introduce aryl 
physis Zool. योजिवध m. 
groups into) सौल-प्रवेशन n. articulorum (found in joints) सन्धिष्ठ arylido- सौलेय 
arylido-quinone Chem. सौलेय-विज्वरा artifice I=crafty device कूट-युक्ति . . 
any 
. 
82 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
arytenoid (Gk. arytainoeides shaped Ascaroidea (a superfamily ) 1188 
like a ladle) Anat, 691-TFT 1. 9a 11. As (arsenic) Chem. ( ET) 
ascend vb. ETTEV, STEM 1. . asafetida = asafoetida (asafoet.) ascendance आरोह m. 
Pharm. E n. 
ascendant=ascendent Ten mfn. as a matter of fact यथार्थभावम् 
ascender TTTF 117. as a whole समष्टिरूपेण 
ascending TTET, ETT (FT) mfn... as before यथापूर्वम् 
a. axis (shoot) Bot. ETT 98 m. asbestic (a fibrous sand; asbestos a. colon Anat. TTTT m m. 
to serpentine) E-f497 f. 
a. order Math. That #iF m. asbestic=asbestine 
a. reduction Math. ATTIE fragiat asbestiform अदह-रूप mfn. asbestine, asbestous I (of or per ascent teff. 
taining to asbestos) water mfn. ascent of sap Bot. रसारोहण . 
2 (incombustible) A1€ mfu. ascertain vb. ffaa n. asbestinize vb. (to render non- ascertained fifaa mfn. 
inflammable) #613- U n. ascertaining, ascertainment free asbestoid, asbestoidal #ETH mfn. asbestos, asbestus Mineral. E m. asci pl. of ascus asbestos adj. (made of or from ascidium (pl. ascidia) Bot. Çfant f. 
asbestos) अदह-मय mfn. 
ascites Med. 1 m. asbestos cord अदह-रज्जु 
Asclepiadaceae अर्क-कुल 1. asbestos fibres अदह-तन्तु m. 
Asclepias Bot. #tflusife f. (-fer is asbestous=asbestine 
for safa genus) asbestus, asbestos Mineral. He asclepidin=asclepin Pharm. #14 
fusff. asbolin (Gk. asbolos soot) Pharm. Ascomycetes Bot. (a large class of 
out for f. 
higher fungi distinguished by asbolite=earthy cobalt Mineral. having their spores formed in 
Ticaret m. 
asci) 1410ari m. Ascaridae Zool. (a family, charac- ‘A’ scope Radar far far m. 
terised by three oral papillae or a-scorbic=anti-scorbutic TTAK lips) >1080T m. 
= $fa-rata mfn. Ascaris Zool. व्योष्ठाति f. (-प्राति for scurvy प्रशीताद m. 
Eufe genus) 
scorbutic yatata mfn. A. lumbricoides TATT 51166 m. ascorbic acid=vitamin C 1999 A. megalocephala Helente suitos #9 n.=fftafe m. 
in. 
asco-spore Bot. tit-Stop m. 
M. 
boutin 
83 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
___mfn. 
ascus Bot. (a sporangium) धानी f. Asparagus Bot. शतावरीति /. (-ति for ASDIC ('apparatus for detecting प्रजाति genus) 
submarines', it is not radar) ज. अ. A. racemosus सामान्य शतावरी f. (जलान्तर्गान्वेष) 
asparagus (A. officinalis) आपीवर m. ase (from -ase -एद) Biochem. एद m. asparagyl Chem. (the univalent acid -ase (diastase) Biochem. -एद m. (विभेद) radical of asparagine) आपीवरील n. aseptate Biol. अपटीमत् mfn. 
aspartate Chem. आपीवरीय n. asexual I (having no sex) अलिंग mfn. aspartic Chem. अापीवरिक mfn. 2 (without sexual action) अमैथन a. acid आपीवरिक अम्ल n. 
aspartyl Chem. (the bivalent acid a. method Bot. अमैथुन-रीति f. 
radical of aspartic acid) आपीवरि a. reproduction Biol. अमैथुन कलn. 
प्रजनन . 
asper, asperatus Bot. खर m. a. spore Biol. अमैथुन बीजाणु m. as per contra Accounts यथान्यपार्वे as follows, in the following yet Aspergillus Bot. (a genus of fungi; 
निम्नलिखित, निम्नलिखित में 
with sterigmata projecting out of ash भस्म 1. 
the knob-like termination of the ___soda ash विक्षार-भस्म n. 
columella) गदाकवकति f. (-ति for ash (any tree of the genus Fraxinus प्रजाति genus) 
भूर्जति) प्रभूर्जm. 
asphalt, asphaltum ' I Mineral. ashless भस्महीन mfn. 
धूम्रजतु. ashless clippings Chem. भस्महीन 2 (the colour smoke brown) धूम्र 
क्लुप्ति . 
बm. ash-pan भस्म-धानी . 
asphalt vb. Chem. (to apply as a ashpan door Riy. Eng. भस्मधानी-द्वार ___covering) धूम्रजतु-लेपन . 
_n. 
(to impregnate with asphalt) धूम्र ashpan door operating lever Rly. जतुज्यापन .. 
. Eng. भस्मधानी-द्वार-उद्याम m. 
asphalt adj. (made of asphalt; im ash-pit भस्म-गर्त m. 
pregnated or coated with asphalt) 'ash tray भस्म-धानी f. 
धूम्रजतु-मय, -व्याप्त, -लिप्त mfn. Asia जम्बुमहाद्वीप m. 
asphalt-base adj. धूम्रजतु-पीठ mfn. Asiatic bronze = bronze brown asphalt brown Col. Ind. धूम्रजतुः वध्रु 
न्यवपीतारक्त, कांस्य बभ्र m. 
__m. 
.. .... . . Asoka Bot. अशोक m. 
asphalt cement धूम्रजतु-र्वत्रचूर्ण १. asparagic=aspartic 
asphaltene धूम्रजत्वेन्य ... : asparagihe (asparagus + -ine) Chem. asphalter=asphalt layer; asphalt 
“आपीवरीf. . 
. .pavior धूम्रजंतु-कर्मी (-इन्) m. asparaginiiet aspartie' 
asphalt grout धूम्रजतु-अभिपूर m. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
asphaltic (of or containing asphalt) assessee करदाता (-तृ) m. 
धूम्रजत्वीय, धूम्रजतु-युत mfn. 
assessment I अभिनिर्धारण, करनिर्धारण n. asphaltic bitumen धूम्र-जतुकी /. (short 2 निर्धारित कर m. 
for धूम्रजतु+जतुकी) 
assessor अभिनिर्धारक, करनिर्धारक m. 
• asphaltic bitumen distillation assets Com. सम्पत्ति, परिसम्पत् _flask धूम्रजतुकी-आसवन-पलिप m. 
circulating a. परिचल-सम्पत्ति asphaltic coal धूम्रजत्वंगार m. 
fictitious a. अवास्तविक-सम्पत्ति . asphaltic felt धूम्रजतु-नमत 1. 
fixed a. स्थायि-सम्पत्ति . . asphaltite=asphaltic 
floating a. चल-सम्पत्ति . asphalt lacquer=Brunswick black fluctuating a. उच्चावच-सम्पत्ति 
Col. Ind. धूम्रजतु प्रलाक्ष m. 
intangible a. अमूर्त-सम्पत्ति .. asphalt layer=asphalter 
liquid a. रोक-सम्पत्ति . asphalt mastic धूम्रजतु-लेपी f. 
tangible a. मूर्त-सम्पत्ति . asphalt oil धूम्रजतु-तैल 1. 
wasting a. क्षयि-सम्पत्ति .. asphalt rock or stone धूम्रजतु-शैल, Assia Range Geog. चतुष्पीठ पर्वत m. 
प्रस्तर m. 
assign vb. I Math. नियोजन .. asphaltum I=asphalt 
2 Law अभिहस्तांकन n. (to transfer 2=Congo brown न्यवरक्तपीत nfn. by signing Faiqr in favour of aspirator (a suction Tu apparatus) अभि someone) 
assigned I Math. नियुक्त, नियोजित Mfn. aspirator bottle चूषित्र-कूपी f. 
2 Lany अभिहस्तांकित mfn. aspirator pump चूषित्र-उदंच m. assignee Law अभिहस्तांकिती m. (-इन; aspirator stopcock चूषित्र-शिखिपिधा f. अभिहस्तांकितमस्यास्तीति) aspirin [acetyl शुक्तल+spireic acid assigning, assignment Law अभि 
(old name for salicylic acid)+ हस्तांकन . -in-5] Pharm. शननि. 
assignor Law अभिहस्तांकक m. aspirin tablet Pharm. शुननि-चक्रिका f. assimilaterb. परिपाचन . Assam Geog. कामरूप m. 
assimilating ' root Bot. परिपाचि मूल assault Mil. प्रहार m. assay परीक्षा . 
assimilation Physiol. (transforma assay anvil परीक्षा-निधाति. 
tion of food into living tissue, assay balance परीक्षा-तुला . 
anabolism) स्वीयकरण, परिपाचन . assay ton परीक्षा-प्रवर्त m. 
assimilation of food अन्न-परिपाक m. assemblage समवाय m. 
assimilation of sugar शर्करा-परिपाक assembly सभा. 
m. assent स्वीकृति, संमति . 
assistvb. साहाय्य करण... assent to bills विधेयक स्वीकृति f. assistance TETY Mh. assess अभिनिर्धारण, करनिर्धारण 1. 
assistant सहाय m. 
.85 
__चूषित्र .. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
asteris, Bioch. lant) 
assistant, lab. (laboratory) प्र. शा. astacine orange Col. Ind. उदलती नारंग ..' सहाय 2. (प्रयोगशाला-सहाय) 
m assistant professor उपाचार्य m. astacine red Col. Ind. उदलती रक्त m. assistant station master Ry. उपस्था- Astacus Zool. उदलूताति. (-आति for 
त्रिक, स्थात्रोपपति m. 
प्रजाति genus) as small as we please Math. यथाकाम astatic Pbys. अस्थैतिक mfn. 
अल्प Afn. 
-aster Bot., Paleontol., Zool. (a suffix associate vh. (Lat. ad + socius सखि) denoting diminutiveness, partial 
I आसखीयन 1. (सखीयति Rigveda) resemblance, inferiority, etc.) 2 (to join or connect things) अव- (note that अव- is a prefix) प्रायोजन, संयवन 2. 
aster I Zool. तारा.. association I आसखीयन .. 
2 Parasitol. ताराणु m. 2 आयोजन .. 
3 Bot. (a plant) तारक m. 3Math. संयवन । 
asterin Biochem. तारकि . association I Math. संयव m. 
asterisk तारा. 2 Statistics सम्बन्ध m. 
Asteroidea Zool. तारारूपा: m.pl., तारा 7. 3 साहचर्य 1. 
रूप-वर्ग m. (वर्ग class) association. I (a union of persons as the case may be यथा-स्थिति ____ in a society) पार्षद 
asthenia Med. ataca n. : 2 Ecology समाज m. 
asthma Med. श्वासरोग, श्वास-कास m. association of attributes गुण-सम्बन्ध astigmatic = astigmatical Med., :.'.m. .. 
___Optics निविन्दु mfn. (=निबिन्दु-नाभि) association of facts तथ्य-सम्बन्ध m. astigmatic lens Optics निबिन्दु वीक्ष m. associative law Math. संयवन नियम astigmatism = astigmia = astig 
m. 
_mism Optics निबिन्दुता, निबिन्दुनाभिता assume vb. Math. कल्पन । assumed Math. कल्पित mfn. 
astigmatizer Optics निबिन्दुकार m. (= assumed average Statistics कल्पित माध्य निबिन्दुनाभिकार) 
#. 
astigmia, astigmism = astigma assumption I.Com. कल्पना . 02 Math. धारणा f. 
astigmo-meter Optics निबिन्दुता-मान M. assurance प्रगोप m. 
A. S. T. M. creosote distillation life . जीवन-प्रगोप me . 
flask 7.9.9.9. (American Society 'assure vb. प्रगोपन 1. 
for Testing Materials रजतद्वीपीय assured प्रगोपित mfn. 
द्रव्य-परीक्षण-परिषत्) कव्यप आसवन पलिघ 'assurer प्रगोपक . . . . 
m. Astacidae Zool. उदलता-वंश . 
as to विषयक (provisions as to defence astacine उदलूती . . . . 
प्रतिरक्षा-विषयक प्रावधान) 
tish meter opties 
distillatio 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
Astragalus Bot. प्रवेत्रति f. (-ति for A.T. IO Zool. (anti-tetanous) प्र.ध. १० - प्रजाति genus) 
(प्रति-धनुस्तम्भ) astragalus Anat. (one of the proxi- Atabrin (a proprietory acridine उनी 
mal bones of the tarsus of the preparation) staf. 
higher vertebrates) अनुगुल्फास्थि n. at a discount Com. अवमूल्ये (Hindi astral figure Bot. तारा-रूप n. 
अवमूल्य पर) . astral rays Zool. तारा-रश्मि m. 
Atalantia Bot. अटवीजम्बीरति . ( -ति for astringent कषाय mfn. 
genus) astroalchemist रसदैवज्ञ m. 
A. monophylla सामान्य अटवीजम्बीर astro-chemist तारा-रसायज्ञ m. 
m. astro-chemistry तारा-रसायन . 
at an instant Math. क्षणे astrologer दैवज्ञ m. 
atavism == reversion Biol., Med. astronomer mutfarqi m. 
विपर्ययण n. astronomical sulfaata mfn. 
-ate Chem. -ईय.. astronomical telescope 'ज्योतिर्दूरेक्ष m. at infinity Math. अनन्ते, अनन्तिनि (Hindi astronomy rifar n. 
अनन्त पर) ASV ('air to surface vessel' used atisine (found in अतिविषा 'Aconitum 
in aircraft for detecting objects heterophyllum'; English atis and on the surface of the sea) स. त. अ. atees are from Sanskrit ufafaat) 
(समुद्रतलान्वेष), वा.ज.अ. (वाताज्जलान्वेष) Chem. अतिविषी . ( अतिविष 'Indian aswagandha Pharm. अश्वगन्धा . 
atees'; atisine is intensely bit asymmetric असंमितीय, असंमित mfn. 
ter but non-poisonous) . a. synthesis Chem. असंमितीय संश्ले- atlas orange=acid orange II 
षण n. 
atlas vertebra Anat. (the head tests asymmetrical असंमितिक, असंमितीय, on this vertebra) शिरोधर कीकस m. 
असंमित, विषम mfn. 
at least न्यूनातिन्यून . a. carbon atom Chem. असंमितिक atmo. (atmosphere) वायु. (वायुमंडल) 
प्रांगार-परमाणु m. 
atmometer=evaporimeter 58754 a. distribution Statisticsविषम वंटन मान m. . 
atmosphere वायुमण्डल, वातावरण १. a. flower Bot. असंमितिक पुष्प . atmosphericवायुमण्डल-,वायुमण्डलिक mfn. a. lens Ophthalmol. असंमितिक वीक्ष a.air वायुमण्डलीय वात m. 
a. moisture वातार्द्रता f. asymmetry असंमिति . 
a. nitrogen वायुमण्डल-भूयाति m. asymptote Math. I (a tangent line a. pressure वायुमण्डल-निपीड m. 
_at infinity) अनन्तेस्पर्शी (-इन्) m. atom परमाणु m. 
2 उपग ('going near') 
atomatic = atomic as you were Drill यथापूर्वम् 
atom-erg परमाणु-श्रम् m. 
n. 
__m. 
:81 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
- 
IC 
atomic परमाण्विक mfn., परमाण 
2 शीकरण . a. beam Phys. परमाणु-यष्टि m. atomize vb. I (to reduce to atoms) a. cohesion Physical Chem. (at परमाणूकरण. 
traction of atoms for one an- 2 (to reduce to fine particles, other) परमाणु-संलाग m. 
usually in a spray) शीकरण ।. a. covolume Physical Chem. atomizer=nebulizer परमाणकारक, 
परमाणु-संपरिमा f. 
शीकरक m. a.explosive परमाणु-उत्स्फोट m. atomology (the doctrine or science a. hydrogen torch परमाण्विक-उदजन- of atoms) परमाणु-शास्त्र । 
वर्ती . 
at once झटिति a. hydrogen welding परमाण्विक atoxyl (a-+ toxic+ -1) Pharm. 
उदजन-संधान .. 
अविषल. a. hypothesis Chem. परमाण्विक- at par I Com. सममूल्ये (Hindi सममूल्य पर) ___ उपकल्पना. 
2 Math. समाह a. mass Chem. परमाणु-पुंज m. at premium Com. अधिमूल्ये (Hindi a. model Chem. परमाण्विक निदर्शन, अधिमूल्य पर) 
परमाणु-निदर्शन . 
at right angles लम्बकोणे ha. number Chem. परमाणु-संख्या . atrium Anat. अलिन्द m. 
a. radius परमाण्विक पर m. . atrolactic ( atropine + lastic) Chem. a. ratio परमाणु-निष्पत्ति f. 
बाह-दुग्धिक mfn. a. ray Phys. परमाण्विक रश्मि m. Atropa belladonna = belladonna a. theory = Dalton's theory __कण्टालिका f. ___Chem., Phys. परमाणु-वाद m. atrophic rhinitis Med. अपीनस (from 
a. volume .Chem. परमाणु-परिमा. सुश्रुत) a. weight Chem. परमाणु-भार, परमा- atrophy (wasting away from want 
ण्विक भार m. 
_of nourishment) अपोषक्षय m. atomical परमाण्विक mfn., परमाणु 
atropia = atropine atomicity Chem. परमाण्विकता f. atropic Chem. बार्हतिक mfn. atomico- (atomic) Chem. . परमाण्विक- atropina = atropine atomics (the science of atoms) पारमा- atropinae sulphas = atropine sul 
विकी f.. 
phate :.: .. .., : .', atomi-ferous परमाणु-भर mfn.. 
atropinesatropina (atrop. Pharm... atomism Philos. परमाणु-वाद,m. 
(extracted from plants of the atomists परमाणुवादी (-इन्) m. 
family Solanaceae) fa (from atomistic == atomistical परमाणुवादीय बृहती. Solanums indicuary: बृहती is 
in literally, bigtratropine is used to atomistics पारमाण्विकी, परमाणु-विद्या f .dilate the pupid of the eye, etc.) atomization करमाशूकरण . . . . .: atropinexisulphater = atropinae 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
sulphas (atrop. sulph.) Pharm. auctioneer n. क्रोशविक्रेता (-तृ) m. बाहती शुल्बीय. 
auctioneer vb. क्रोशविक्रयण . atropinization Med. बाहतीयन . audibility sta46T f. atropinize vb. Med. (to bring under audible श्रव्य, श्रवणगोचर mfn. 
the influence of atropine) arestant audience (an assembly of hearers) 
श्रावकगण, श्रोतृगण m. atropism Med. अतिबाईतीता f. 
audio-frequency Radio (audible at sight Com. दर्शने 
sound-wave-frequency) श्रव्य attach vb. आसंजन, उपायोजन . 
वारंवारता . attache case सह-धान 1. 
audio-gram Acoustics श्रव्य-लेख m. attached आसक्त, प्रासंजित, उपायुक्त mfn. audio-meter Acoustics श्रव्यता-मान m. attachment आसंजन 1., उपायोजm. audio-metry Acoustics श्रव्यता-मिति . attack आक्रमण . 
audi-phone=dentiphone (an in attacking organism=intruding strument placed against the teeth ___organism Zool. आकामी जीवाणु m. so that thedeaf can hear) दन्त-श्रोत्रा. attendant=steward उपस्थापक m. audit n. Com. अंकेक्षा f. 
(ancient word) 
audit vb. अंकेक्षण . attention Drill सावधान 
audit and annual report अंकेक्षा तथा at the halt Drill विरामे 
वार्षिक प्रतिवेदन । at the same time Math. समकालम् auditing अंकेक्षण n. attorney Lapp प्राभिकर्ता (-त) m. 
auditor अंकेक्षक m. ___a.general महा-प्राभिकर्ता m. 
a. general महांकेक्षक m. attract vb. पाकर्षण 1. 
a.-general of India भारत-महांकेक्षक attraction आकर्षण n. 
m. attraction sphere Biol. आकर्षण प्रदेश a. of Indian Home Accounts 
m. 
___ भारत-गृहलेखा-अंकेक्षक m. attribute vb. उपारोपण . 
___ auditorium श्रोतशालाf. attribute गुण, (inherent quality) सहज auditory canal Anat. कर्ण-गुहा f. 
auditory epithelium Zool. Forma at will Com. यथेच्छ 
अधिच्छद m. partnership at will यथेच्छ-भागिता . auditory hair Zool. कर्ण-रोम n. Atwood's machine Phys. (a machine auditory meatus Anat. कर्ण-मार्ग m. 
for determining the acceleration auditory nerve Anat. श्रवण-चेता. 
due to gravity भ्वाकृष्टि-त्वरण-मापित्र) auditory passage Anat. कर्ण-रंध्र . भू-त्वरण-यन्त्र R. .। 
(from भावप्रकाश) . Au, aur. (aurum) Chem. स्व (स्वर्ण) audit report अंकेक्षण-प्रतिवेदन . auction Com. क्रोशविक्रय m. (from Auerbach's plexus Anat. अन्तःपेशि 
लौटल्य अर्थशास्त्र) 
. प्रतान m. ...89 
गुण m.﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
augment ob. प्रावधन n. 
. कर्ण, बाह्य-कर्ण m. augmentative=augmentive praeff 2 (atrium) fara m. 
(-इन्) mfn. 
3 (auricular appendix or append augmented पावधित mfn. 
age) अलिन्द-कर्ण m. augmenter आवर्धक m. 
auricle of heart हृदयालिन्द m. augmenting आवर्धन n. 
auricular appendix or appendage augmentive=augmentative 
(ear-shaped pouch projecting August अष्टम-मास m. 
from the atrium of the heart) aur. (aurum) Chem. स्व (स्वर्ण) 
अलिन्द-कर्णm. auracine-aurazine 
auriculo-ventricular aperture अलिन्द auramine (Lat. aurum + English प्रवेश्म-मुख n. 
amine) Chem. स्वर्ण-तिक्ती f. 
auriculo-ventricular valve Zool. Aurangabad Geog. जनस्थान 1. (of the अलिन्द-प्रवेश्म-कपाट n. 
रामायण) 
auride Chem. स्वर्णेया. Aurangabad Hills Geog. प्रस्रवण-गिरि auri-ferous Chem. स्वर्ण-भर mfn. 
aurin, aurine Chem. स्वणि, स्वर्णी. aurantia (N. Lat. aurantium orange) 
aurine-tri-carb-oxylic acid Fauf-Faf 
aurine-tri-carb-oxylic aci ___Col. Ind. नारंग m. 
प्रांग-जारलिक अम्ल n. Aurantiaceae Bot. नारंग-कुल n. aurite Chem. स्वर्णित 7. aurantii floris=orange flower auro- (aurous) Chem. Faut 
Pharm. नारंग-पुष्प १. 
auro-auric Chem. Faoziwafupi mfn. aurate Chem. स्वर्णीय 1. 
auro-bromide Chem. स्वर्ण्य-दुरेय . aurazine Col. Ind. Faufeftat f. 
auro-cyanide Chem. स्वर्ण्य-श्यामेय . -auteine -स्वपिन m. 
auro-diamine Chem. स्वर्ण्य-द्वितिक्ती. aureolin=cobalt yellow Col. Ind. auro-flavine Col. Ind. Equi-funt f. 
सूत्पीतारक्त, केत्वातु पीत m. 
auronal black (auronal dyes are aureoline=sulphine A 
sulphide dyes) Col. Ind. anteau aureosine Col. Ind. स्वर्णोषसी f. 
काल m. auri- (auric) Chem. स्वर्णि- (स्वर्णिक) a. black-brown शौल्बेय काल-बभ्र m. auri-chloro-hydric स्वणि-नीरोदिक a. black-brown paste शौल्बेय काल 
mfn. 
_बभ्रु लेपी. auri-cyan-hydric स्वर्णि-श्यामोदिक . a. black paste शौल्बेय काल लेपी /. __min. 
a. blue शौल्बेय नील m. . auri-iodide स्वर्णि-जम्बेय . 
a. blue paste शौल्बेय नील लेपी/. auric Chem. Fafuta mfn. 
a. brown शौल्बेय बभ्रु m. a. acid स्वर्णिक अम्ल n. 
a. brown paste शौल्बेय बभ्रु लेपी f. a. chloride स्वणिक नीरेय . 
a. corinth शौल्बेय रोहित m. auricle Anat. I (ear, external ear) a. dark brown शौल्बेय असित बभ्र m. 
90 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
a. field grey शौल्बय सेना धुसर m. auro-thio-sulphuric acid Chem. a. green शौल्वेय हरि m. 
स्वर्ण-गन्ध-शुल्बारिक अम्ल . a. green paste गोल्बेय हरि लेपी. aurotine Col. Ind. Faufait f. a. olive शौल्बेय तैलबदर m. 
aurous Chem. Fari mfn. a. orange शौल्बेय नारंग m. . 
a. acid स्वर्ण्य अम्ल ?. a. printing black शोल्बेय मुद्रण काल a. chloride Fauze to n. 
aurum = gold Faun. a. printing black paste शौल्वेय auryl Chem. स्वर्णल 1. ___ मुद्रण काल लेपी . 
australene = dextro-pinene दक्ष a. printing blue सौल्वेय मुद्रण नील निसरलेन्यn. 
Australia (Lat. 'southern') दक्षिण-द्वीप a. printing blue paste शौल्वेय 22. ___ मुद्रण नील लेपी . 
Australian badger = wombat (a a. printing brown शौल्बेय मुद्रण बभ्रु marsupial faratant resembling a ___m. 
small bear in general form) Zool. a. printing brown paste शौल्बेय शिशुधान-ऋक्ष m. ___ मुद्रण बभ्रु लेपी . 
Australian fever bark Pharm. सप्तपर्ण a. printing green शौल्बेय मुद्रण हरि वल्क m. ___m. 
Austrian vermilion=chrome red a. printing green paste शौल्बेय autacoid = autocoid (aut- +Gk. __मुद्रण हरि लेपी . 
· akos remedy + -oid) Physiol. a. printing orange paste strat प्रात्मागद m. __मुद्रण नारंग लेपी . 
autacoid=chemical messenger a. printing yellow शौल्बेय मुद्रण पीत रसायनिक प्रयm. ___m. 
author ग्रंथकर्ता (-) m. a. printing yellow paste शौल्बेय authorise vb. प्राधिकार-अर्पण 1. ___ मुद्रण पीत लेपी . 
authorised प्राधिकृत Mfn. a. yellow शौल्य पीत m. 
authorised capital Com. प्राधिकृत-पुंजी a. yellow paste tider ofte at f. aurophenine Col. Ind. Forgaff f. authorised expenditure प्राधिकृत व्यय aurophosphine Col. Ind. स्वर्णभास्वी f. m. aurora उषस् . 
authorities प्राधिकारि-वर्ग, प्राधिकारिणः aurorium (aurora) उषसातु m. (उषस्) . m.pl. auro-tellurite= sylvanite Mineral. authority I प्राधिकार m. 
स्वर्ण-वंगजारेयिजm. (-इज for खनिज 2 प्राधिकारी (-इन् ) m. mineral) 
auto- आत्म auto-thio-sulphate Chem. स्वर्ण-गन्ध- auto-agglutination Immunol. प्रात्म 
शुल्बीय n. 
प्रसमूहन . 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
auto-bacteriophage Bact. आत्म a. red अात्मव रक्त m. 
रोगाणुभक्ष m. 
autolysate Biochem. (the liquid pro autochrome blue Col. Ind. आत्मवर्ण duct of autolysis) आत्मपाचित . 
नील m. 
autolysate-precipitate reaction a. brown आत्मवर्ण ब- m. 
Biochem. आत्मपाचित-निस्साद-प्रतिक्रिया a. green आत्मवर्ण हरि m. 
autolysin (the substance which pro a. grey आत्मवर्ण धूसर m. 
duces autolysis) आत्मपाचि f. a. olive आत्मवर्ण तैलबदर m. 
autolysis Biochem. (the process of a. olive-brown आत्मवर्ण तैलबदर- self-digestion) आत्म-पचना. 
बभ्रु m. 
autolytic आत्मपचनीय mfn. a. orange आत्मवर्ण नारंग M. 
autolyzevb. Biochem. आत्मपाचन, आत्मपचन a. ied आत्मवर्ण रक्त m. 
n. a. yellow आत्मवर्ण पीत m. 
automatic आत्मग mfn., आत्म autoclave I (pressure cooker) निपीड a. burette Chem. आत्मग द्रवमि m. 
पत्र 2. 
a. distributor आत्म-वंटक m. 2 (pressure heater) निपीड-तापक m. a. earth closet Hygiene प्रात्मग a. and accessories निपीडतापक तथा धुलि-शौचकुंड n. 
उपसाधन . 
a. machine आत्मग यन्त्र n. a. container निपीडतापक प्राधान 1. a. machine-gun Mil. आत्मग यंत्र horizontal a. क्षैतिज निपीडतापक m. __ शतघ्नी f. pharmaceutical a. भेषज-निपीड a. pipette Chem. आत्मग नाडकn. 
तापक m. 
a. rifle Mil. आत्मग-नालिका f. vertical a. उदग्न निपीडतापक m. 
a. warfare आत्मग-योधन 1. autocoid=autacoid 
automaticism Zool.आत्मगता .,आत्मगत्व autodigestion Zool. (digestion of the 
walls of the stomach) स्वांग-पचन, automatic movement Zool. आत्मना उदरभित्त्यादिपचन n. 
गति f. autogene Col. Ind. आत्मजन m. 
automatin Biochem. (a hormone a. black आत्मजन काल m. 
which stimulates the heartbeat) a. grey आत्मजन धूसर m. 
हृन्नुदि. autograph स्वाक्षर m. (ancient word) automobile आत्मवह m. 
_signature हस्ताक्षर m. 
automotive engineering प्रात्मग auto-hemo-therapy Med. प्रात्म-शोण अभियन्त्रणा. 
चिकित्सा. 
autonomic nervous system Anata autol fast orange Col. Ind. आत्मव स्वायत्त-चेता-संहति. 
स्थिर नारंग m. 
autosome=eu-chromosome (a a. orange आत्मव नारंग m. 
typical chromosome, as opposed a. purple आत्मव नीलारुण m. 
___to a sex-chromosome) अलिंगसूत्र . 
92 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
autotomy Biol. आत्म-छेद m. 
___avdp. (avoirdupois) सा. (सामान्य) autotrophic Plant Physiol. (capable Avena Bat. यविकाति f. (-ति for प्रजाति 
of self-nourishment) आत्म-पोषी genus) (-इन्) mfn. 
avenalin (Lat. avena oats, a crys autotrophic bacteria आत्मपोषी शाकाणु talline globulin qr contained 
in oat kernels) Biochem. यविकावर्तुलि autovaccine Med. प्रात्मलस m. (short 
for आत्मरक्षाणुलस) 
avenin (Lat. avena oats + -in) aut-oxidator Biochem. आत्म-जारयिता Biochem, sfarsi f. 
aventurine धातुकाच m. aut-oxidize vb. Biochem. आत्म-जारण .. gold a. सुवर्ण धातुकाच m. autumn crocus=meadow saffron green a. हरि धातुकाच m. 
शरत-कुंकुम-क्षेत्र केसर . 
average I ATE 1. autumn wood Bot. शारद काष्ठ 1. 
2 (mean value) मध्यका f. auxesis Physiol. (proliferation or in on an average माध्यतः 
crease in size of cells; growth) average deviation Statistics माध्य वर्धा f. 
विचलन 1. auxetic Biochem. (an auxetic agent) average diameter of particles लव 
वर्धयिता (-त) m. 
माध्य-व्यास m. auxiliary सहाय mfn. 
average dispersion Statistics माध्य a. circle Math. सहाय वृत्त ।. 
अपकिरण. a. dome (=safety valve) Rly. average distance Phys. माध्य-दूरत्व M. ___Eng. सहाय छाद m. 
average due date Accounting माध्य a. scale सहाय-श्रेणी f. 
दातव्य-तिथि f. auxo-action (accelerating action) average error Statistics माध्य-विभ्रम m. 
वर्धन-क्रिया . 
average of ratios Statistics मूल्यानुपात auxo-amylase Biochem. (that which माध्य. 
stimulates the action of amylase) average price Com. माध्य-मूल्य 1. मंडेद-वर्ष m. 
average resistance Phys. रोध-माध्य. auxo-chrome Chem. वर्ण-वर्ध m. 
(note that is can be used as the auxo-chromic, -chromous Chem. second word) 
वर्ण-वर्षीय mfn. 
average tare Com. माध्य-भारमोक m. auxo-flore (ance- + luorescence) average value Phys. माध्य-अर्हा . ' 
Chem. भ्राश-वध m. 
Averrhoa Bot. कर्म रङ्गति f. (-ति for auxo-tox Biochem., Pharm. विष-वध m. प्रजाति genus) av. (avoirdupois) सा. (सामान्य) 
A. carambola सामान्य कर्मरंग m. available प्राप्य, (usable) उपयोज्य mfn. Avertin=tri-brom-ethanol त्रि-दुरा 
a. assets प्राप्य-संपत्ति 
दक्षीण्यवm. 
93 
ar 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
Aves Zool. oferit: m. pl. ( sg. caft) axial hypermetropia Ophthalmol. aviation geht, FaATT-TTTT n. 
7T87-968acritat f. (operating heavier-than-air air- axial myopia Ophthalmol. T-SH craft) 
नाभिता . Avicennia Bot. शेफालिबन्धुति f. (be- axial skeleton Zool. आक्ष कंकाल, पृष्ठवंश 
longs to the same family as Fram m. 
Forret; -fa for storfe genus) axil Bot. (angle between leaf stalk avidity Chem. su f. 
and stem) 81 m. Avignon berries=yellow berries axile (placentation) Bot, 90 min. 
Col. Ind. 4-aget f. 
axillary bud Bot. #fait f. Avogadro's law Chem. TET-FEUT- . axillary flower Bot, -76T 17. 
FTTH n. 
axiom Math., Logic Fafhen. avoid vb. Math. Of TERUT n. 
axiomatic Math. Fafta mfn. avoir. (avoirdupois) #T. (HTTP). axiopodium=axopodium avoirdupois ('weight of goods”; av., axipetal (going towards the axis) 
aydp., avoir.) *7774 (Fr.) 
ETY mfn. avoirdupois dram सामान्य शाणक m. axis अक्ष m. avoirdupois weight THTET HTT m. a. cylinder Anat., Physiol. 1987 awakened Eric mfn. 
77 m. award' n. ffure m. 
a. of a cylinder रम्भाक्ष m. awaruite Mineral. (Fe Nig) FEETTAT a. of ordinates Math. #1f-m. ,' n. 
a. of rotation परिभ्रमण-अक्ष m. awi (Eng, word is from Sanskrit a. of symmetry Math. FHCT m. 
T) art f. (Hindi ara) 
a. vertebra Anat. 417 m. awl-shaped beak Zool. Art-qu5 m. axle Phys. Cus m. awn Bot. Tai mi 
axle box Rly. Eng. -ETF n. (short ___spike शूकी f. 
for US-ETT) axe qort m. (Hindi FETET) 
axle box horns Rly. Eng. T-ST-BIET axes of reference Math. TTT m. n. . axi-90 
axle half-shaft Automobile seus axial 1 (of or pertaining to an axis) 
: f. -, ten mfn. 
axo-meter=axono-meter Optics - 2. (resembling an axis) wa mfn. ATT m. 3: (around an axis) quia mfn. axon Anat. (axis of the vertebrate 4 (along the axis; in a direction body, or skeleton) TESTET . 
from pole to pole) Aratat min. axon, axone Physiol., Anat. (a nerve axial filament (of a spermatozoon) cell process which is typically 
· Zool. Wait m. 
single and long ....) are n. 94 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
axoneme Zool. (axial thread of the a. carbon at FTIR m. 
chromosome) =chromoneme= a. congo अजीवेयी कुंकुंग m. genoneme 192TET m. (short for a. corinth aut fa m. 1974-77TT) 
a. dark brown अजीवेयी असित बभ्रm. axono- axo-778 
a. dark green अजीवेयी असित हरि M. axono-meter=axo-meter 
a. direct black अजीवेयी अनानित axoplasm अक्षरस M. 
at in. axopodium=axiopodium (a pseu a. fast black अजीवेयी स्थिर काल M. 
dopodium with an axial filament) a. fast blue अजीवेयी स्थिर नीलm. Zool. अक्षपाद m. 
a. fast orange अजीवेयी स्थिर नारंग m. axostyle Zool. (central supporting a. fast red अजीवेयी स्थिर रक्त m. 
structure of an axopodium) - a. fast scarlet अजीवेयी स्थिर शोण m. que m. (short for 9916-US) 
a, fast yellow aut fet quam. Az (azote) Chem. (Foteft) 
a. green अजीवेयी हरि m. az-, azo- (azote) Chem, 
a. orange अजीवेयी नारंग m. azalein=erythrobenzin 
a. pink अजीवेयी आपद्मा . azamine Col. Ind. For at f. 
a. purpurine अजीवेयी नीलोही . -azane Chem. 2010 n. 
a. red अजीवेयी रक्त m. azarine Col. Ind. (very similar to a. scarlet 79T ETT m. ____alizarine in appearance) मंजिष्ठकी. a. sky blue अजीवेयी आकाश नील m. az-elaic Chem, * ferai infn. 
a. steel blue अजीवेयी वज्रायस नील a. acid अजतैलिक अम्ल n: 
17. az-elate Chem. 5-ciu n. 
a. violet अजीवेयी नीललोहित m.. azi-(azote) Chem. 45-(watafa) 
a. wool blue अजीवेयी ऊर्णा नील m. . -azic -अजीविक mfn. 
a. yellow अजीवेयी पीत m. azide Chem. Jau n. 
azidol fast orange Col. Ind. iga azidine black Col. Ind. Flaaf FTT FETT TTT m... 
m. , 
azi-ethane Chem. 2011-eta n. a. black-blue silat Fu-19 m. azi-methylene = di-azo-methane a. black-green aut af m. Chem. 45-51G3FH="6-CIFE n. a. blue अजीवेयी नील m. 
az-imine Chem. #w-fafandt f. a. bordeaux aut fyrreti m. az-imino- Chem, qe-fafarit a. brilliant blue अजीवेयी भासूर नील ..a.-benzene अजवितिक्ती-धूपेन्या . 
m. . 
az-imino adj. Chem. #s-fafart, 2010 a. brilliant red अजीवेयी भासुर रक्त वितिक्तीक mfa. 
m. 
azimuth Optics faftum. a: bronze Totaeft in m. 
I a. antenna Radar feite TT-STEET a. brown naut . 
m. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
a. oscilloscope Radar क्षितिजचाप 
प्रदोलेक्ष m. a. receiver Radar क्षितिजचाप-यादाता 
(-तृ) m. azindone blue (soluble induline 
dyes) Col. Ind. अजनीला नील m. (विलेय 
सुनीली रंजक) azine Chem. अजीवी f. 
aldazine सुव्यजीवी . diazine द्वयजीवी /. ketazine शावजीवी . monazine एकाजीवी f. para-diazine परा-धजीवी f. 
triazine त्र्यजीवी f. azine blue paste Col. Ind. अजीवी नील 
लेपी. a. blue spirit-soluble अजीवी नील 
प्रासव-विलेय m. a. green strat af m. 
a. scarlet अजीवी शोण m. azino- (azine) Chem. अजीवी az-lactone Chem. अज-दुग्धा f. azo- (azote) Chem. अज-(अजीवाति) azo adj. Chem. अज, अजक mfn. 
disazo द्विरज, द्विरजक mfn. 
trisazo त्रिरज, बिरजक mfn. azo acid black Col. Ind. अज अम्ल काल 
m. a. acid blue अज अम्ल नील m. a. acid brown अज अम्ल बभ्रु m. a. acid cardinal अज अम्ल न्युद्रक्तापीत 
m. a. acid carmineअज अम्ल कीटशोणी. a. acid fuchsine अज अम्ल धूमली. a. acid red अज अम्ल रक्त m. a. acid rubine अज अम्ल रक्ती. A. acid violet अज अम्ल नीललोहित m. a. acid yellow अज अम्ल पीत m. 
a. alizarine black अज विमंजिष्ठी 
काल m. a.alizarine bordeaux अज विमंजिष्ठी 
कपिशक m. a. alizarine brown y farfrost 
बभ्रm. a. alizarine carmoisine 45 
विमंजिष्ठी कृमिजी . a. alizarine corinth अज विमंजिष्ठी ___ रोहित m. a. alizarine orange अज विमंजिष्ठी 
नारंग m. a. alizarine red अज विमंजिष्ठी रक्त __ m. a.alizarine yellow अज विमंजिष्ठी 
पीत m. -azoate -अजीवीय . azo-benzene Chem. अज-धूपेन्य n. azo-benzil Chem. अज-धूपिल m. azo-benzoic Chem. अज-धूपिक mfn. azo-benzol Chem. अज-धूप m. azo black Col. Ind. अज काल m. 
a. black-blue अज कृष्ण-नील m. a. blue अज नील m. a. bordeaux अज कपिशक m. a. brilliant carmine अज भासुर ___कीटशोणी . 
a. brown अज बभ्र m. a. cardinal अज न्युद्रक्तापीत m. a. carmine अज कीटशोणी f. a. cerise अज धूमलकी f. a.chrome black अज वर्णक काल m. 
a. chrome blue अज वर्णक नील m. azochromine, concentrated pow 
der Col. Ind. अज- वर्णकी f., संकेन्द्रित 
क्षोद m. azo cloth scarlet Col. Ind. अज वस्त्र 
शोण m. 
96 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
azococcine Col. Ind. YESTAT f. azo-formic Chem, wafaa mfn. azocochineal Col. Ind. Trata m. azo-fuchsine Col. Ind. 5-f. azocoralline Col. Ind. अजप्रवाली. azofy vb. Chem. Ta n. azocorinth Col. Ind. Trifos m. azo-gallein, azo-galleine fer azo crimson Col. Ind. 
m. m. azo-cyanide Chem. 451-24TT N. azogen brown Col. Ind. 75015 anm. azo-cyanine Col. Ind. 46-4197 f. azogene fast blue Col. Ind. azo-cyclic Chem. 45-affi mfn. 
FRITT m. azo dark blue Col. Ind. अज असित नील a. fast corinth STT FETT Tifa m. 
m. 
a. fast dark blue अजजन स्थिर असित azo dark green Col. Ind. T HET mam. 
fem. 
a. fast garnet अजजन स्थिर निरक्त m. azodermin Col. Ind. 7fi f. 
2. fast orange 4 for FriT m. azodiamine yellow Col. Ind. e . , fast red अजजन स्थिर रक्त m. 
fait ta m. 
a. fast scarlet 59 FETT TOE azo-di-carb-oxylic Chem. 45-fe-*i* 
m. जारलिक Mfn. 
a. red 79 T m. azo-di-phenyl Chem. 95-fa-sia n. azogeranine B, 
G acid carmine azodiphenyl blue Col. Ind. अजद्विदर्शल azo-green अज-हरि m. 
15 m. 
azo green paste Col. Ind. 45 afe tahanin Chan azo-di-sulphonic Chem. 4-fe-Trat 
f . 
417. 
. fe mfn. 
azogrenadinezazo crimson azodol (pellidol + iodol) Col. Ind. azo-humic 4-stafuta mfn. 
76-677 nm 
azoic Chem. अजीविक mfn. azo-dye' 45-vyeti m. . 
azo-imide Chem. 4-falante n. azoeosine Col. Ind. at f. ' azo-iso-butyro-nitrile Fafe azo-erythrin -efefef. 
Ha m. , . azo fast blue Col. Ind. forsattet m. azol Col. Ind. 49 m. azo fast violet Col Ind. अज स्थिर नील -azol Chem. -m. 
fed m. .. . 
azole Chem. f. azofication (from azote) (non-sym- azo leather brown Col. Ind. 9 
biotic fixation of atmospheric 
m.' nitrogen in soil by' bacteria azoline Chem. - f. 
piratat 1. (from Foarfer) 
azo-litmin Chem..99-7af f. azofier अजीवातक m. 
azo mauve Col. Ind. PATETIT m. azo-flavine Col. Ind. T-förfti azo - methine = methylen -imine azo-form-amide Chem. 45-5-fatnio Chem. 45-6T="legir-fafarat f. 
2. compounds #51516-m. 
.no 
97 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
a. group अजमोदी-वर्गm. 
azophloxine Col. Ind. valet f. azo milling orange Col. Ind. अज azophor black Col. Ind, अजभर काल 
संकोचन नारंग m. 
m. azo milling red Col. Ind. अज संकोचन a. blue अजभर नील m. 
रक्त m. 
a. orange अजभर नारंग m. azo milling yellow Col. Ind. अज a. pink अजभर आपद्म m. 
संकोचन पीत m. 
a. red अजभर रक्त m. azomine fast pink Col. Ind. अजक- azo-phosphin अज-भास्वि. 
तिक्ती स्थिर प्रापद्म m. 
___azophosphine Col. Ind. अजभास्वी. a. fast red अजकतिक्ती स्थिर रक्त m. azo pink Col. Ind. अज आपम m. a. fast yellow अजकतिक्ती स्थिर पीत a. red अज रक्त m. 
a. rhodine अज पाटलकी. azo-naphthalene Chem. अजोत्तैलेन्य .. a.-rubine अज-रक्ती . azo-naphtharene red G = azo - azo-sulph-amide = neo-prontosil ___naphthol redJCol. Ind. अजोत्तैलव अज-शुल्ब-तिक्तेय . 
रक्त जm. 
azo-sulphine Chem. अज-शुल्बी. azo naphthone blue अजोत्तैला नील m. azo-sulphonicChem. अज-शुल्बायिक mfn. azo navy blue अज नाविक नील m. azot-, azoto- (azote) अजीवाति -azone Chem. -अजीवा. 
azotate Chem. अजीवातीय 2. azonium Chem. अज-तातु m. 
azote (Gk. a not trazoe life) Chem. a. bases अजतातु. पीठ 1. 
अजीवाति m. (अजीब+ -आति for वाति a. salts अजतातु लवण . 
gas; so named because it is in azo orange Col. Ind. अज नारंग m. 
capable of supporting life) a. orange yellow अज नारंग पीत m. azoted Chem. अजीवातिय mfn. azo-orchil Chem. अज-शेपाल m. 
1 (nitrogenised-combined or azo orseille Col. Ind. अज शैपाल m. 
impregnated with nitrogen or its azo-orseilline.Chem. अज-शैपाली 
compounds) अजीवाति-योजित, -व्यापित azo-paraffin Chem. अज-मृद्वसा f. 
mfn. azo patent black.Col. Ind. अज एकस्व 2 (nitrogenous- of, pertaining 
काल m. 
to, or containing nitrogen) azo-phen Chem. अज-दर्श m. 
अजीवातिय, अजीवाति-युत mfn. azo-phenetole प्रज-दर्शदवा f. 
azo-tetrazole Chem. अज-चतुरजवा f. azo-phenine Chem. अज-दर्शी f. azo-thionium Chem. अज-गन्धतातु m. azophenine blue Col. Ind. अजदर्शी azotic (pertaining to azote) अजीवातिय 
"नील m. 
mfn. azo-phenol Chem. अज-दर्शव m. 
___I (nitrogenous) अजीवात्य Mfr. azo-phenyl Chem. अज-दर्शल . 
2 (nitric) अजीवातिक mfn. ao-phenylene Chem. अज-दर्शलेन्य 1. azotic acid Chem. अजीवातिक अम्ल.. 
Ind. अज ना 
m. azumitrogen 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
..... 
. 
... 
mfn. 
azotine Chem. अजीवाती 
azoxy-naphthalene Chem. अजजार azotite Chem. अजीवातित. 
उत्तैलेन्य. azotize vb.Cbem. अजीवातीयन 1. azoxy-phenetole Chem. अजजार-दर्शदवा 
(to combine with nitrogen) अजीवाति-योजन n. 
azoxy-toluene Chem. अजजास्-विरालेन्य azoto-,azot- अजीवाति Azoto-bacter Bact. भयाति-शाकाणु m. azoxy-toluidine Chem. अजजार-विरालेयी azotolC=ice black azo-toluene Cbem. अज-विरालेन्य. p-azoxy-o-toluidine Chem. प-अजजार azoto-meter Chem. (a nitrometer) ऊ-विरालेयी. 
अजीवाति-मान m. 
azo yellow Col. Ind. अज पीत m. azotous Chem. (nitrous) अजीवात्य arthine अजगन्धी . 
az-thionium=azo-thionium azo Turkish red Col. Ind. अंज तुरुष्क azulene (Spanish arul blue + -ene; a 
रक्त m. 
liquid hydrocarbon of intense a. violet अज नीललोहित m. 
blue colour) Chem. अभिनीलेन्य n. a. wool blue अज ऊर्णा नील m. azuline Col. Ind. अभिनीली. 
a. wool violet अज ऊर्णा नीललोहित m. az-ulmic acid Chem. अज-धुमिक अम्ल az-ox-अज-जा az-oxine=ox-azine Chem. जाजीवी azure नभोनील mfn. 
(जा-+ अजीवी) 
azure blue नभोनील mfn. az-oxonium Chem. अज-जातातु m. azure copper ore नभोनील ताम्रायस्क ?. az-oxy- अज-जार 
azurine Col. Ind. नभोनीलीf.. azoxy-anisole Chem. अजजार-शतपुष्पवा azurite नीलतानिज m. (-इज for खनिज 
mineral) azoxy-benzene Chem. अजजार-धूपेन्य 1. azurite blue==copper blue मध्य azoxy-benzoicChem.अजजार-धूपिक mfn. नीलाहरि-ताम्र नील mfn. . azoxy group Chem. अजजार-वर्ग m. azurol blue Col. Ind. नभोव नील m. azo xylol azo B-naphthol Col. Ind. azygospore Bot. अयुक्तबीजाणु m. 
अज काष्ठव अजा -उत्तैलव m. 
razylic -अजीवलिक mfn. 
. 
99﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
B, b (as a symbol used to denote UfGUsTuSTT F., queroser m. 
or indicate anyone or anything bacill-uria Med, custom. arbitrarily) e (in case of distinc bacillus (Lat. bacillum, dim. of tion being required between baculum staff; rod-shaped, gram 
small and capital letters ba, B ET) positive body) Bact. quarum. (C.) B. Bact. I (Bacillus) a. (austur) 
Abel's b.-Klebsiella ozaenae 2 (Bartonella) . (697) 
abortion b. = B. abortivo B Chem. I (benzene) (FT) 
· equinus. See Salmonella 2 (boron) = (219VT) 
abortivoequina Ba (barium) Chem. (f) 
B. abortus. See Brucella baboon Zool. (having a doglike abortus 
muzzle) श्व-वानर m. 
B. accidentalis-tetani (from Babylon Geog. ata m. (of the wounds of inoculation te 
Buddhist Jātakas) 
tanus; causes septicemia with B-acid 6-74FT 17. 
edema in mice, guinea pigs, bacillary (Lat. bacillum little staff) and rabbits) 777FIFTTT. 
gustuata mfn. 
B. aceti = B. aceticus = Ace bacill-emia दण्डाणु-रक्तता . 
tobacter acetus bacilli-=bacillo- (bacillus) TugTO Achalme's b. See Clostridium bacillicidal, bacillicidic qUSTOLE, 
perfringens QUETTETU mfn. 
acid-fast b. = acid-resisting bacillicide दण्डाणुन m. ... 
b. ETT bacillicidic, bacillicidal quetur, B. acidi lactici. See Streptococ 
GUETTE mfn. 
cus lactis bacilliform I (rod-shaped). ZUETTE B. acidificans longissimus 
mfn. ... 
दीर्घतम अम्लकर द. ż (bacillary) que para mfn. 
B. acidiformans अम्लकर द. bacilli-genic, bacillo-genic (caus B. acidophilus. See Lactobacil 
ed by bacilli) TIETO-a mfn. 
lus acidophilus bacilli-parous (producing bacilli) B. acnes. See Corynebacterium 
FUET-E mfn. 
acnes bacillite Petrog. (a rod-like crystal B. acnes contagiosae af959a. 
• lite) दण्डोपल m. 
B. actinobacter. See Clostri bacillo- = bacilli 
dium butyricum bacille-phobia qust-HT f. . 
B. actinomycetum comitans. bacillosis Med. (infection, esp. gene 
See Actinobacillus actino .. ralised infection, with bacilli) 
mycetum comitans 
100 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
B. aegyptiacus. See Hemophi- . and guinea pigs) HYTTE. 
lus of Koch-Weeks 
B. ambiguus Shigella am B. aerofetidus. See Clostridium bigua 
· aerofetidum 
B. aminophilus intestinalis B. aerogenes. See Aerobacter. (found in the cecum and pro 
aerogenes 
ducing histamine) Ferrarifafsu B. aerogenes capsulatus=Clos-. 305ci . 
tridium perfringens 
B. amylobacter. See Clostridi B. aerogenes meningitidis= um butyricum 
Escherichia coli 
B. amyloclasticus intestinalis B. aerophilus जारकप्रिय द. 
safe14 a. B. aertrycke. See Salmonella B. amylolyticus (a manure bacil 
aertrycke 
lus which hydrolyzes starch) B. aeruginosus=Pseudomonas मण्डांशन द. 
aeruginosa 
B. amylozyma (ferments sugar B. albicans pateriformis (white and yeast) fevereitt f. 
saucer-shaped colony) TUTE B. anaerobicus alkaligenes श्वेत द. 
. 575E 75F556 B. albolactis (occurring in soil . B. anatum=-Saltnonella ana 
and in milk) far-978 a. 
tum B. albuminis (a nonpathogenic B. annulatus (a motile form 
form from feces) facer fara . 
from river water) Theft GT 2. B, albus=Alcaligenes albus B. anthracis = milzbrand b., B. albus aerobioscens arrastot the b. of splenic fever 
(causes anthrax) कालस्फोट द. B. albus cadaveris (a pathogenic B. anthracis similis (resembles 
form from the blood of a B. anthracis) antenne . cadaver) Toa. 
B. anthracis symptomatici See B. albus putidus पूतिश्वेत द. 
Clostridium chauvoei B. alkalescens=Shigella alka B. anthracoides (a species from 
lescens 
soil, resembling that of an b. of allantiasis. See Clostri thrax) ATTEICTI . 
dium botulinum 
B. aphthosus (causes ulceration B. allii (a nonpathogenic form of mouth and nose in cattle) _from decaying onions) पलाण्डु द. area T.. b. of alopecia areata = Bac B. apium (causes disease of 
terium decalvans 
___.bees) मधुमक्षिघ्न द. B. alvei (pathogenic for mice · B. aquatilis 577 . 
to 
IOI 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
om 
B. aquatilis graveolens (from 
well water) कूपजल द. B. arborescens nonliquefaciens 
492997 meta B. arthritidischronicae चिरसन्धि 
979. B. asiaticus = Proteus asia 
ticus B. asthenogenes Part . B. aterrimus (produces black ____pigment) काल द. 
B. aurantiacus (forms a yellow ___ pigment) स्वर्ण द. 
B. aurescens (produces an ___ orange pigment) नारंग द. 
B. aureus (a golden-yellow ____species from water) स्वर्णपीत द. 
B. aureus foetidus दुर्गन्धि पीत द. B, avisepticus. See Pasteurella 
aviseptica B. baccarinii (causes the disease 
gummosis in grapevines) 
5799TET I Bang's abortion b.=Brucella 
· abortus. Bang's necrosis b. Actinomy : ces necrophorus RTC 
किरणकवक Barton's b.=Bartonella bacilli 
formis B. bellonensis. See Clostridium 
oedematiens B. beribericus (found in per sons affected with beriberi) 
ETETT B. bernensis (causes the odour 
of the cheese) fapt B. berolinensis indicus (pro 
duces an indigo-blue colour) 
Fransa B. bienstockii (a pathogenic 
species (Eberthella) from hu 
man feces] #TAT. va. B. bifermentans. See Clostri 
dium bifermentans B. bifidus. See Lactobacillus 
bifidus B. bipolaris bubalisepticus 
(the species cause barhone) 
महिषघ्न द. B. bipolaris septicus feza . B. of black leg. See Clostridium 
chauvoei Boas-Kaufmann b. (found in 
the stomach in carcinoma of 
that organ) F-16 a. Boas-Oppler b. See Lacto 
bacillus bulgaricus B. boocopricus (a zymogenic 
species from cow-dung. 
गोमय द. Bordet's b., Bordet-Gengou b. 
See Hemophilus pertussis B. botulinus. See Clostridium 
botulinum B. of Bovet (from the intestine 
of a woman who died of choleraic enteritis) किंवैषूचिक 
B. bovisepticus. See Pasteu 
rella boviseptica B. brevis ह्रस्व द. Brieger's b. = B. cavicidus B. bronchicanis, B. bronchi 
septicus. See Brucella bron chiseptica 
IO2 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
B. bronchitidis putridae (the 
bacillus of putrid bronchitis) 
क्लोमनाल पूति द. B. buccalis. See Leptotrichia 
buccalis B. buccalis maximus (a sapro 
phytic species from the 
mouth) FRIHETTA . B. buccalis minutus (a spe . cies from saliva) मुखस्थ लघुतम द. B. buccalis mucifer = Kleb 
siella pneumoniae B. bulgaricus. See Lacto 
bacillus bulgaricus butter b. See Mycobacterium 
butyricum buttersauer b. See Clostridium 
butyricum B. butylicus (found on cereals) 
B. capsulatus. See Klebsiella 
capsulatus B. capsulatus mucosus. See 
Klebsiella pneumoniae B. capsulatus septicus (resem 
bles B. pneumoniae) afla 
97F ST. a. B. capsulatus smithii (from the 
intestines of pigs) सूकरान्त्र द. B. carabiformis (trom the sto 
mach of a meat-fed dog) 
श्वामाशय द. B. carbonis. See Clostridium 
chauvoei B. carnicolor (produces a flesh ____coloured pigment) मांसवर्ण द. 
B. carotarum (from boiled car 
tots and beets) गर्जर द. catgut b. (a species from 
catgut) raar B. caucasicus. See Lactobacil 
Ius caucasicus B. caulivorus (produces a dis 
ease in potatoes) रुग्णालु द. B. caviae fortuitus (from gui 
nea pigs inoculated with yel 
low fever) 2709 . B. caviae septicus. See Bru 
cella bronchiseptica B. cavicidus (a species of Pas 
teurella from human feces) 
वंटमूषघ्न द्वि. B. cavicidus havaniensis [a 
species (Pasteurella) from the intestine of a yellow-fever 
patient] #997 €74 . B. cereus (a water microbe) 
सिक्थ जल-द. 
B. butyricus. See Clostridium 
butyricum b. "C" (found on hailstones) __वर्षोपल द. 
B. cadaveris=Clostridium per 
fringens Calmette-Guerin b. (a strain of 
tubercle bacillus deprived of its virulence by a series of cultures in glycerinated oxgall) 
अतिमन्दयक्ष्म द. B. canalis capsulatus = Kleb 
siella pneumoniae B. canalis parvus (from sewer 
water) Haag H . B. candicans आश्वेत द. B. capitovale = Clostridium , 
capitovalis 
103 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
B. cloacae=Aerobacter cloacae 
TET at. & B. cochlearius. See Clostri 
dium cochlearium B. coli प्रान्त्र द. B. coli communis. See 
Escherichia coli B. coli concentricus (from the 
alimentary canal in yellow 
fever cases) Taranta 977 a. B. coli dysentericus (a form of 
Escherichia coli found in 
dysentery) farita T. B. coli icteroides (from yellow 
fever corpse) lavar ta . B. coli immobilis FT. B. coli similis = Escherichia 
. . 
coli 
- B. chauvoei. See Clostridium 
chauvoei B. chlorhydrici (found in the 
stomach in chlorhydria and 
hyperchlorhydria) नीरोदीय द. B. cholerae asiaticae. See Vi 
brio comma B. cholerae avium. See Pas 
· teurella avicida B. cholerae gallinarum. See 
Pasteurella avicida B. choleroides विषूची कुन्तलाभ द. B. chologenus = Escherichia 
coli B. chovoei. See Clostridium 
chauvoei B. chromoaromaticus (odorous 
species from the carcass of a diseased dog or hog) quiet 
TE . b. of chyluria (found in chy 
lous urine) THERE IS B. cinctus (a zymogenic spe 
·cies from soil) fouquet 7.-FT. B. circulans (a zymogenic spe 
cies from water) flash 476-2T. B. circumscriptus (a species 
from the normal conjunctiva, producing orange-yellow cul 
tures) JETREE. B. citreus cadaveris (produces 
a yellow pigment and an odour of hydrogen sulphide 
H,S) and TEE . Class's b. = Diplococcus 
scarlatinae B. clavatus.' See Corynebac 
terium hoffmani 
comma b. See Vibrio comma B. conjunctivitidis, B. con 
junctivitidis subtiliformis Hemophilus of Morax 
Axenfeld B. constrictus तनुमध्य द. B. coprogenes fætidus (from 
intestines of pigs with hog 
cholera) -faqarte a B. coprogenes parvus=B. pseu 
domurisepticus CHE . B. coryzae segmentosus (iso 
lated from. nasal secretions in cases of common cold) sfa 
श्यायीय द. B. cuneatus sit B. cuniculi pneumonicus, B. 
cuniculi septicus, B. cuni culicida, B. cuniculicidus immobilis, B. cuniculici 
104 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
dus mobilis, B. cuniculici dus thermophilus = Pas 
teurella cuniculicida B. cuticularis (a species from 
water, producing a yellow ____pigment) शरपीत जल-द. B. cuticularis alba (a sapro 
phytic species from water) 
शरश्वत जल द. B. cyaneophosphorescens After 
भास्वर द. B. cyanogenes. See Pseudo 
monas syncyanea B. cystiformis (from the urine 
of patients with cystitis) 
वस्तिकोपीय द. Czaplewski's. b. (it stains deeply 
at the poles, and is known as 
pole bacterium) Fortu. Damman's b. = Actinomyces 
necrophorus 39 77 F777194 b. of Dantec (produces the 
red colour in salted codfish) 
लवणमत्स्य द.. Davaine's b. = B. anthracis b. of Demme (from blood in ___erythema nodosum) रक्तपिटक द. B. dendriticus (colonies have 
a dendritic, or tree-like, 
appearance) शाखिमंडल द. B. denitrificans - Achromo ____bacter agile विभूयक द. 
B. dentalis viridans=Pseudo 
monas aeruginosa B. diphtheriae. See Coryne 
bacterium diphtheriae B. diphtheriae avium fer 
Ca. 
B, diphtheriae columbarum 
कपोत प्रबलास द. B. diphtheriae cuniculi causes 
a necrosis of intestinal mucous membrane in rabbits) 
FRITZ914 a. B. diphtheriae vitulorum = 
Actinomyces necrophorus 
ऊतिम र किरणकवक B. distortus (from 'milk and 
cheese) gafata B. doderleini (bacillus of the 
vagina) of. drumstick b. (a term applied 
to Clostridium tetani and C. 
putrificum) at a Ducrey's b. See Hemophilus of 
Ducrey B. duodenale = B. acidi lactici B. duplex. See Hemophilus of 
Morax-Axenfeld B. dysenteriae. See Shigella 
dysenteriae Eberth's b. See Eberthella 
typhosa B. egens=Clostridium egens B. ellenbachiensis (having the 
power of fixing free nitrogen) ____ भूयाति-निवेशक द. 
B. emphysematosus = Clostri 
dium perfringens B. endocarditidis capsulatus= 
Klebsiella pneumoniae B. endocarditidis griseus (from 
the heart in ulcerative endo carditis) 7: EiT ( mottled colour of colonies) 
. 
IOS 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
cite into acetic and succinic 
acids) TrustFT 2. B. ethaceticus (a zymogenic 
species from sheep-dung) Afg. 
forfs 
. 
B. enteritidis. See Salmonella 
enteritidis B. enteritidis mucosus (caused 
an epidemic of toxemia with 
depression) Het aanta . B. enteritidis sporogenes 
Clostridium perfringens B. entomotoxicon (produces 
disease in squash-bugs) 5791 
ca. B. enzymicus. See Coryne 
bacterium enzymicum B. epidermidis (from the spaces ____ between the toes) अंगुलिजाल द. 
B. epilepticus अपस्मारीय द. B. equi intestinalis (from the 
intestine of a horse) अश्वान्त्र द. B. equirulis (cause of joint ill ___of foals) अश्वसंधि द. 
B. equisepticus (causes in 
fluenza in horses) waasfee477 
B. exanthematicus (from a 
hemorrhagic infection with brown discoloration of the 
skin) बभ्रुत्वग् द. B. exilis (found in the feces) 
पुरीष द. b. "F" (obtained from the blood 
of a case of epidemic diarrhea) 
अतिसारीय द. B. facultatus (from nonmali 
gnant mycosis of the pha 
Tynx) taita. B. faecalis alcaligenes. See 
. Alcaligenes faecalis B. felis septicus. See Pasteu 
rella cuniculicida b. of Feseri. See Clostridium 
chauvoei b. of Fick. See Bacterium 
vulgare B. figurans (from air and water) 
1979TT. filamentary b. See Lactoba 
cillus bulgaricus B. filamentosus (appears as yel 
low or reddish grains) 
B. erodiens (used in tanning 
leather) शल्कन द. B. erysipelatos leporis = Pas 
teurella cuniculicida B. erysipelatos suis = Erysi 
pelothrix rhusiopathiae B. of erythema nodosum - 
f90F . . B. esterificans (develops the ___ odour of fresh apples) उत्कोल 
गन्ध द. B. esthaceticus (decomposes 
glycerin into acetic acid and 
alcohol) THE T. ..B, esthacetosuccinicus (de composes mannite and dul 
106 
B. filiformis. See B. necro 
phorus Finkler-Prior b. See Vibrio 
proteus b. of Fiocca (from the saliva of 
cats) facT-TT . 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
Mr 
B. gingivitidis (found in scurvy) 
प्रशीतादीय द. Glasser's b. (resembling Escheri 
chia coli except that it does not ferment glucose) मधुमाकिण्व 
1.a. : B. glaucus (from water, in slen 
der, nonmotile rods) FT GET-SIT. B. glischrogenres (renders urine, 
milk and saliva viscid) - 
a. 
B. fitzianus (from infusions of 
hay) 77491 b. of Flexner. See Shigella 
paradysenteriae B. fluorescens. See Pseudo 
monas fluorescens B. foetidus (from the sweat 
of the feet; the cultures have a highly unpleasane odour) 
स्वेदगंध द. B. foetidus ozaenae=Escheri 
'chia foetida b. of fowl typhoid. See Shigella 
gallinarum b. fragilis भंगुर द. B. friedenbergensis = Sal 
monella enteritidis Friedlander's b. See Kleb 
siella pneumoniae B. fulvus (from hydrant water; it forms a yellowish pigment) 
41 97-T. B. fuscus limbatus (from rotten 
eggs) que a. B. fusiformis neien . B. gallinarum. See Shigella 
gallinarum Gartner's b. See Salmonella 
enteritidis gas b. See Clostridium per-, 
fringens B, gastrophilus oftet . B. gaytoni (producing disease ___ in honey bees) मधुमक्षि द. 
B. geniculatus (from the sto 
mach) THE C. Ghon-Sachs b. See Clostridium 
septicum 
B. gracilis (from water) 667 
37T-RT. B. granulobacter pectino 
vorum (ferments starch with the production of acetone and 
butyl alcohol) शुक्ताजन द. grass b. ETH . B. graveolens (from between 
the toes) -GTT. Grawitz's b. (from acne con 
tagiosa. of horses) अश्व युव 
पिडक द. b. of green diarrhea हरितातिसारद. b. of green pus. See Pseudo 
monas aeruginosa Grigoroff's b. (from Bulgarian ___ fermented milk) दुग्धकिण्व द. b. of grouse disease (from the 
lungs of grouse with septic 
emic disease) fafafcata a. b. of Guadeloupe cattle-farcy 
(from the pus of a local speci 
fic contagion of domestic 'animals) tufa. b. of Guillebeau (from ropy 
milk and inflamed udders of Cows) T219 . 
107 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
B. gummosus (converts cane 
sugar, with the formation of mannite, glucose and fatty 
acids) 7 Telefiue . : B. haemorrhagicus nephritidis 
(from hemorrhagic. nephritis) 
अधिकरक्त वृक्ककोप द. B. havaniensis liquefaciens 
(produces a blood-red pig 
ment) afro-TIT. Havelburg's b. (found in 
the stomach and intestines of yellow-fever patients) 949927 
rabbits, dogs, fish and frogs) 
दर्दुरघ्न द. B. ianthinus (produces a dark ___violet pigment) नीललोहित द. 
B. icteroides. See Salmonella 
icteroides . B. implexus जटिल द. B. indicans (produces indigo) 
Haverhill b. FICT. hay b. = B. subtilis 
B, heminecrobiophilus [a 
pathogenic form (Flavobac terium) from cheesy lymph 
glands] tertattafor fo. at. B. hessii (converts milk and 
bouillon into a mucilaginous 
substance) 427 097 7. Hirschfeld's b. = Salmonella 
hirschfeldi B. histolyticus. See Clostri- 
dium histolyticum B. hueppei (from milk and 
butter, which forms butyric 
acid from milk sugar) 
· SEPTEZETT B. hyacinthi (causes disease of ___the leaves of hyacinths) राहुरल 
B. indigoferus (produces a blue 
pigment) 7 . B. indigogenes (from the ma 
cerated leaves of indigo 
plants) faite . B. infantilis (found in the in 
testines of cases of infantilism) 
चिरशैशवीय द. B. of infectious abortion. See 
Brucella abortus B. influenzae. See Hemo 
philus influenzae B. influenzae motilis fraTT 
चल द. B. influenzae similis (from a 
case of rectal ulcer) गुदवणीय द. B, intestinus motilis (from 
the intestine of yellow-fever cadavers) 
. B. of Jeffries - Escherichia 
coli b. of jequirity ophthalmia 
गुजाक्षिकोप द.. b. of Johnes=Mycobacterium 
paratuberculosis Karlinski's nasal secretion b. 
नासास्रावीय द. b. of Kartueis, Hemophilus 
of Koch-Weeks 
B. hyalinus (reduces nitrates - to nitrites) CF . B. hydrophilus fuscus (pro duces septicemia in mice, 
108 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
Kedrowski's b. THETFI a. Kitasato's b. See Pasteurella 
pestis Klebs-Loffler b. See Coryne 
bacterium diphtheriae Klein's b. = B. enteritidis 
sporogenes Koch's b. See I Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis 
2 Vibrio comma Koch-Weeks b. See Hemo 
philus of Koch-Weeks Koplik's b. (from the sputum in 
whooping cough) अतिकासीय द. Koubasoff's b. (from carcinoma 
of the stomach) Horeana . Kutscher's b. (resembles the 
glanders bacillus) quify. B. lacmus (from water, afford 
ing a blue pigment) शेवल द. B. lacticolus fribergensis (re 
sembles Mycobacterium tuber culosis, found in nodules in the liver produced by in 
jecting butter) 78 7971ta I. B. lacticus, lactic acid b.=Lac 
tobacillus acidophilus B. lactimorbi causes disease 
'trembles' in animals) 1979... B. lactis aerogenes. See Aero 
bacter aerogenes B. lactis albus - Alcaligenes 
albus B. lactis cyanogenes. See Pseu 
domonas syncyanea B. lactis peptonans दुग्ध पाचाकर द. B. lactis pituitosi (from ropy 
milk) augustus 
109 
B. lactis saponacei (from soapy 
milk) 59976# a. B. lactis viscosi = Alcaligenes ___viscosus आलग दुग्ध द. 
B. lactoprophylbutyricus 
दुग्धप्रमेलतिक द. B. lactorubefaciens [a bacillus 
(Serratia) which causes milk to become red and slimy] 
EVICE T. B. lacunatus=Hemophilus of 
Morax-Axenfeld B. larvae (the cause of Ameri 
can foul brood in bees) 
HEEFT. B. latericeus' [a species (Ser 
ratia) from water, produces 
brick-red pigment) $62AT77. B. lepisepticus = Pasteurella 
cuniculicida B. leporis lethalis (from the 
intestines of yellow-fever 
cadavers) T5a7-79 .. B. leprae. See Mycobacterium 
leprae Lesage's b. (from the green, 
alvine discharges of infants) 
हरितातिसार द. B. lethalis (from the spleen 
and lungs of patients dying ____of septicemia) मृत्युकर द. 
Letzerich's b. (from the urine 
in nephritis) 294819-457to a. B. leucaemiae canis (from dogs 
dead of leukemia) श्वातिश्वेतरक्त 
fermented 
B. levans (from 
dough) fretty﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
b. of lichen ruber TURISTI a. B. liodermos (peptonizes the 
casein of milk) ffintfc-973747 . B. liquefaciens communis 
(from yellow-fever feces) ata 
ज्वरमल द. B. liquefaciens magnus ET 
TTM . B. liquefaciens parvus (forms ___crooked filaments) वक्र तरलक द. 
B. liquidus TET C. B, litoralis (from seaweed) 75 
घास द. b. of Loeb = capsule bacillus 
of Loeb (from a case of ke ratomalacia infantum) मृदुस्वच्छा 
B. maidis (from the stools of 
patients with pellagra) artin 
चर्मीय द. B. malariae हिमज्वरीय द. B, mallei. See Malleomyces 
mallei b. of Martinez (from the liver 
in yellow fever) tavanu b. of Massol. See Lactobacillus 
bulgaricus B. maximus buccalis The . B. mazun - Lactobacillus 
caucasicus B. of measles (from the blood ___ in cases of measles) मसूरीय द. 
b. of meat poisoning. See 
Salmonella enteritidis b. of meconium hafa sta. B. megatherium (produces a 
brown pigment) बभ्रु द. B. melanosporus (a species 
from air producing a black 
pigment) TT TT TT, TT. B. melitensis. See Brucella me 
litensis B. melochloros (from the dem 
jections of an insect larva 
found in apples) उत्कोलकीट द. B. membranaceus amethy 
stinus (from water: produces a deep violet pigment) नीलारण 
Loffler's b. See Corynebacte 
rium diphtheriae B. lubinskii (resembles Clos ____tridium tetani) धनुस्तम्भाभ द. 
Lucet's b. = Pasteurella cuni 
culicida B. lupuliperda (from ferment ____ing hops) यव्यकटुघ्न द. 
Lustgarten's b. (discovered in ____ syphilis) उपदंशीय द. 
B. luteus (from carious teeth, 
produces a yellow pigment) 
अशितदंतीय पीत द. B. luteus suis (from the serous 
fluids of swine; produces a yellowish-red pigment) *** 
रक्तापीत द. B. lymphangitidis ulcerosa 
Corynebacterium pseudo *. tuberculosis B. lyssae, orang 
7. TT. 
B. meningitidis purulentae 
Klebsiella pneumoniae B. mesentericus fuscus effort 
HET T. TT. B. mesentericus ruber I HEM 
97. T. 
TIO 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
B. mesentericus vulgatus acts 
vigorously upon milk and 
sugar) grahajfasual 97. T. b. of Metchnikoff=Vibrio me 
tchnikovii b. of Miller (from carious teeth) 
afera a. B. minimus. See Erysipelo 
thrix rhusiopathiae B. mirabilis. See Proteus mira 
bilis mist b. See Mycobacterium 
stercoris B. mollusci (from molluscum 
contagiosum) चर्मकीलीय द. b. of Morax-Axenfeld. See 
Hemophilus of Morax 
Axenfeld Morgan's b. See Proteus mor 
gani B. mortiferus (an anaerobic b. 
found in hepatic abscess in 
man) 6-faget TRIE C. Much's b. See Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis B. mucosus capsulatus. See 
Klebsiella pneumoniae B. mucosus Ozaenae = Kleb 
siella ozaenae B. multifermentans. See Clos. 
tridium multifermentans B. multiformis trichorrhexidis 
(from hairs affected with tri chorrhexis nodosa barbae) T 
HTT. B. multipediculosus बहुपादिक द. B. muripestifer [a pathogenic 
species (Eberthella) causing a 
peculiar disease in field-mice 
TEHT 91. 59. B. murisepticus = Erysipelo 
thrix rhusiopathiae B. murisepticus pleomorphus 
मूषघ्न नैकरूप द. B. mycoides (from water, earth, 
bail, etc.) antistas B, neapolitanus = Escherichia 
neapolitana necrophorus=Actinomyces 
necrophorus ऊतिमारक किरणकवक B. nephritidis interstitialis 
(from the urine of children with primary interstitial 
nephritis) atawi1974 2. Neumann's b. Klebsiella 
pneumoniae Nicolaier's b. See Clostridium 
tetani Nocard's b. See Salmonella • 
psittacosis B. nodosus parvus (from the 
healthy urethra) F . B. nomae (from noma) AFU 
f#1974 . B. novyi = Clostridium novyi B. oedematiens. See Clostri 
dium oedematiens B. oedematis aerobicus 1914 : Grafstų . B. oedematis maligni que 119 
& 
B. oedematis thermophilus 
(very resistant to heat) 79 350T 
Ogata's b. See Shigella dy 
senteriae 
III 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
B. oogenes fluorescens (from 
Totten eggs: produces pale green pigment) पूत्यण्ड आहरि 
B. oogenes hydrosulphuricus 
(from rotten eggs) 954us 
उदशुल्बेय द. B. oolytịcus (decomposes egg 
albumen and is capable of causing gastric fermentation) 
शिवतिकिण्व वे. b. of Oppler and Boas. See 
Lactobacillus bulgaricus B. Orchiticus. See Malleomyces 
mallei B. orthobutylicus ऊर्ध्वधृतल द. B. ovatus minutissimus ETATE 
B. ozaenae: See Klebsiella 
ozaenae paracolon b. (a group of micro 
organisms intermediate in form between the colon and the typhoid group) अन्वन्त्र द. B. paradoxus a species (Eber 
thella) from acute tropical 
dysentery] Afar var paradysenteric b. See Shigella 
paradysenteriae 
· B. paralyticus (from cases of 
general paralysis) F it4 . paratyphoid b., B. para 
typhosus yanvaar. Park-Williams b. (a strain of 
the Corynebacterium diph theriae used in preparing 
antitaxin) frame afera. B. paryus ovatus (from one 
II 2 
form of swine plague) afurgare 
मारी वे. B. pasteurianus. See Clostri 
dium butyricum B. pedunculatus (from the ___urine of cystitis) वस्तिकोप द. 
B. peptofaciens पाचाकर द. Perez's b. See Escherichia 
foetida B. perfringens. See Clostri 
dium perfringens B. pertussis. See Hemophi 
Ius pertussis B. pestis bubonicae. See Pas-. 
teurella pestis' 
· Pfeiffer's b. = Hemophilus 
influenzae B. phasiani septicus. See 
Shigella gallinarum B. phlegmonis emphy i sematosae. See Clostridium 
perfringens B. phosphorescens sarkaç a. B. phosphorescens gelidus 
(from phosphorescent fish) 
भास्वन्मीन द. B. phosphorescens indicus 
(from luminous sea fish and 
from sea water) TTT 1754 T. B. phosphorescens indigenus . (from sea water and from 
herrings) 7745 779€ . B. phosphoreus (from sea water 
and from fish) Aug 77777. B. pigmentophagus (said to 
cause the hair to turn gray by devouring the pigment) farer 
T. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
b. of pink-eye. See Hemophi-, 
lus of Koch-Weeks plague b. See Pasteurella pes. 
tis 
Plasencia's b. See B. influen 
zae motilis Plotz's b. 75in . B. pluton (the cause of Euro 
pean foul brood in bees) 
अलिशावघ्न द. B. pneumoniae. See Klebsiella 
pneumoniae pneumoniae caviarum. See 
Alcaligenes bronchisepticus B. pneumonicus agilis (from 
the vagus pneumonia of rab 
bits) TIAGTHYTE . B. pneumonicus liquefaciens 
(Achromobacter from lungs of cattle which died of con tagious pneumonia) 1145117 
T* . B. pneumosepticus. See Kleb 
siella pneumoniae pole b. = Czaplewski's b. B. porri (said to be the specific 
cause of warts) ata a. b. of potato-rot that . b. of Preisz, Preisz-Nocard 
b. = B. pseudotuberculosis B. prodigiosus इष्टकारक्त द. 
IS. See Proteus vul garis B. proteus lethalis (from gan ___grenous lungs) क्लोमकोथीय द. B. proteus septicus (from septic 
gangrene of the colon) आन्त्र 
terra . 
B. proteus vulgaris. See Pro 
teus vulgaris B. proteus X 19 (an organism 
at one time thought to cause 
typhus fever) 99559 DT 77. 8€ B. pseudoanthracis (a bacillus 
resembling that of anthrax) 
कूटकालस्फोट द. B. pseudobutyricus (a bacillus 
from milk, turning the latter 
bitter) C-TES. pseudodiphtheria b. See Cory 
nebacterium pseudodiph 
theriticum b. of pseudoedema कूटशोफ द. B. pseudomallei = Malleo 
myces pseudomallei B. pseudopneumonicus E 
लोमपाक द. b. of pseudorabies (from the 
cerebral fluid of a rabbit that died from inoculations of 
a rabid wolf) peter T. B. pseudosepticus (from mice 
inoculated with feces) 19a 
पूयजन द. B. pseudotetani. See Clos 
tridium tetanomorphum B. pseudotuberculosis. See 
Corynebacterium pseudom 
tuberculosis B. pseudotuberculosis mu 
rium (resembles Coryne bacterium diphtheriae, patho genic for mice and guinea 
pigs) Te Pue . B. pseudotuberculosis ovis 
Corynebacterium ovis 
I13 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
B. pseudotuberculosissimi 
lis (resembles B. pseudo 
tuberculosis) संकूटयक्ष्म द. B. psittacosis. See Salmo 
nella typhimurium B. puerperalis (from cases of ___puerperal sepsis) प्रसूतिज्वरीय द. B. pullorum. See Salmonella 
pullorum B. pulpae pyogenes [A patho 
genic germ (Flavobacterium) from gangrenous tooth pulp] 
Gost-fagre . B. putrificus. See Clostridium 
leutoputrescens B. pyelonephritidis bovis 
(causes pyelonephritis in cows) 
गोवृक्ककोप द. B. pyocinnabareus [a bacillus 
(Serratia) from red pus] 
fer17-977. B. pyocyaneus. See Pseudo 
monas aeruginosa B. pyocyaneus foetidus riteye 
grifet B. pyogenes = Corynebac 
terium pyogenes B, pyogenes anaerobicus GT 
भीरु पूयजन द. B. pyogenes bovis = Coryne 
bacterium pseudotuber 
culosis B. pyogenes cloacinus (from 
sewage) 94567 HATE a. pyogenes crasus. See Kleb 
siella pneumoniae B. pyogenes foetidus. See 
Eberthella pyogenes 
B. pyogenes minutissimus 
पूयजन क्षुद्र द. B. pyogenes soli (from rats 
inoculated with garden soil) 
मूष पूय द. B. famosus (forms long chains ___ and filaments) शाखितन्तु द. 
Rauschbrand b. See Clostri 
dium chauvoei Reed's b. = B. epilepticus 
B. renalis bovis गोवृक्क द. B. rheumatarthritidis सन्धिवात द. B, rhinoscleromatis. See Kleb 
siella rhinoscleromatis B. rhusiopathiae suis. See Ery 
sipelothrix rhusiopathiae Roger's b. (found in certain 
cases of dysentery-like enteri 
tis) arata. Rosenbach's b. = B, sapro 
genes B. rubellus (produces a pale 
red pigment) a. B. rubidus (produces a brown 
ish-red pigment) TTT. B. rudensis (causes the rusty 
spots on American cheddar 
cheese) मण्डूर द. B. saccharobutyricus (a zymo 
genic form from certain _kinds of cheese) मधुर दधिक द. B. saccharobutyricus immobi 
lis. See Clostridium per 
fringens B. salivarius septicus. See 
Diplococcus pneumoniae Sanarellis b. See Salmonella 
icteroides 
114 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
1 
. 
B. septicus keratomalaciae 
Escherichia coli B. septicus putidus (from the 
cadaver of cholera) faqat-ta. 
B. sanguinarium. See Shi 
gella gallinarum B. saprogenes (from the sweat 
of the feet) File . B. saprogenes vini (found in 
putrefying wine) e HET. B. sarcemphysematis bovis. 
See Clostridium chauvoei B. satellitus (supposed by some 
to be the cause of typhoid ulcers of the intestine) आन्त्र 
व्रणीय द. B. scarlatinae (obtained from 
the tonsillar exudate in scarlet 
fever) 746 . b. of scarlet fever (from the 
throat in anginose scarlatina) 
Schaudinn's b. = Treponema 
pallidum b. of Scheurlen (from the heal ___thy mammary gland) स्तन द. 
Schmorl's b. = Actinomyces 
necrophorus ऊतिमारक किरणकवक Schron's b. (found in tuber 
culosis) et C. b. of seborrhea [a form (Ser 
ratia) from the hair and 
scalp in seborrhea] aftefferier. B. segmentosus. See Coryne 
bacterium segmentosum B. septicaemiae haemorrha 
gicae. See Pasteurella cun . iculicida B. septicus acuminatus = 
Pasteurella cuniculicida B. septicus agrigenus = 
Pasteurella cuniculicida 
B. septicus sputigenus. See 
Diplococcus pneumoniae B. septicus vesicae (from the 
urine of cystitis) afturat a. B. septus=B.coryzae segmen 
tosus B. sessilis (from the blood 
of neat cattle) गोरक्त द. B. shigae, Shiga's b. See Shi 
gella dysenteriae B. similis (from human feces) 
79€ . B. similis typhus (resembles ___Eberthella typhosa) वान्त्रज्वर द. B. smaraginus foetidus I= 
Pseudomonas smaragdina 
2 = Klebsiela ozaenae B. sordellii (found in cases of 
icterohemoglobinuria in 
cattle) qehETT . B. sphenoides. See Clostri 
dium sphenoides B. spiniferus a species from 
the skin in seborrhea) afa 
त्वकस्नेह द. B. spinosus (from fluids of 
guinea pigs that died after being inoculated with garden 
soil) SETTE C. B. sporogenes. See Clostri 
dium sporogenes B. sputigenus. See Vibrio 
sputigenus 
115 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
B. tardigradus (slow-moving) 
Faufa . B. tartaricus न्यासवीय द. B. tenuis sputigenus. See Kleb 
siella pneumoniae B. termo. See Bacterium vul 
gare B. terrigenus (a zymogenic spe 
cies from the soil) मृत्तिका 
Feriva . B. tertius. See Clostridium 
tertium B. tetani. See Clostridium 
tetani B. tetanomorphus. See Clos 
tridium tetanomorphum B. thalassophilus (a saprophytic 
form from seaweed) समुद्रघास 
B. sputigenus crassus (from 
the coating of the tongue) 
fEETHET. B. sputigenus tenuis (from 
sputum of catarrhal pneumo 
nia and phthisis) 7&# Tata I. Sternberg's b. = Diplococcus 
pneumoniae FTTHYTTT. TTT.. B. striatus albus the act . B. striatus flavus tas fört a. B. striatus viridis रेखित हरित द. B. subtilis (from air, water, 
and soil) TTT . B. sucinacius (from conjunc 
tival secretions of a case of granular conjunctivitis) afor 
युजाकोपीय द. B. suicidus. See Pasteurella 
suiseptica B. suis, B. suisepticus. See 
Pasteurella cholerae suis b. of swine erysipelas. See 
Erysipelothrix rhusiopa 
thiae b. sycosiferus foetidus (from 
the beard of patients affected 
with sycosis) 222f9cm a. b. of symptomatic anthrax. 
See Clostridium chauvoei B. syncyanus = Pseudo 
monas syncyanea , B. synxanthus = Pseudomo 
nas synxantha B. syphilidis' (from, syphilitic 
tissues) 34481tes Bytachyctonus (from feces 
of cholera morbus), faqeita a. 
B. thermophilus stuffset a. b. III of von Hibler. See Clos : tridium septicum 
timothy b. See Timothy myco ; bacterium 
B. tremulus 1797 a. : b. of trichorrhexis nodosa 
(from hair affected with tri 
chorrhexis nodosa) केशग्रन्था द. B. tuberculophilus यक्ष्मसहचर द. B. tuberculosis. See -Myco 
bacterium tuberculosis B. tuberculosis gallinarum. 
See Mycobacterium avium B. tuberculosis piscium. See 
Mycobacterium piscium B. tuberigenus (found in the 
nodules of roots of plants) . . 
- 116 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
B. tularensis = Pasteurella 
tularensis B. tumescens (obtained by ex 
posing slices of boiled carrot 
to the air of a room) TUT. B, tussis convulsivae. See 
Hemophilus pertussis B. typhi=B. typhosus puerta. B. typhi exanthematici. See 
Fusiformis typhi exanthe 
matici B. typhi murium. See Sal 
monella typhimurium B. typhosus=B. typhi B. ubiquitus (probably a variety 
of B. candicans) at a. B, ulceris cancrosi, B. ulce 
ris mollis. See Hemophilus 
of Ducrey B. ulna (from the healthy 
mouth: in straight rods, fre 
quently paired) rica. B. ureae [a zymogenic species 
(Achromobacter) from soil, 
urine, etc.] fe fepius b. of Utpadel (a Flavobac 
terium often arranged in 
twos or threes) f&f=# fq. a. B. vacuolosus शून्यकी द. Vallon-Zaber b. See Clos 
tridium perfringens van Ermengen's b. See Clos 
tridium botulinum van Niessen's b. (cultivated 
from the blood of syphilitic 
patients) 3952T-TTOT a B. varicosus conjunctivae (from the healthy conjunctiva: in 
117 
nonmotile rods, the smaller ones frequently varicose) 
युजामुद्गर द. B. vascularis (from the vis 
cera of a yellow fever cadaver) 
पीतज्वरान्तरंग द. veil b. (resembles Escherichia 
coli and Aerobacter aero 
genes) TFT a. B. venenosus fanita. B. venenosus brevis लस्व विषी द. B. venenosus invisibilis TEGY 
fart . B. venenosus liquefaciens 
(produces liquefaction of ge 
latin) Fafe-7397 . B. ventriculi. (peptonizes albu 
înin) rafa- . B. vermiculosis कृम्याभ द. B. verticillatus (a zymogenic __species from soil) मृत् किण्व द. 
Vignal's b. See Leptotrichia 
buccalis b. of Vincent's angina. See 
Fusiformis dentium B. virens (from water, produc ___ing a green pigment) हरि जल-द. B. virescens. (from green spu 
tum) frosta a. B. yirgula (causes an albumi 
noid fermentation in casein) किलाटि-किण्व द. B. viridans हरि द. B. viridis flavus (from water, 
producing a yellowish-green 
pigment) f<font 1757-. B. viridis pallescens (2. zymo 
genic variety from air and 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
pestis 
water, producing a yellowish Yersisn's b. See Pasteurella 
green pigment) zufota fauer z. B. viscosus. See Pseudo Yzquierdo's b. (the probable 
monas fluorescens 
cause of verruca peruana or B. viscosus cerevisiae (from Carrion's disease) foretara 
ropy beer and milk) - यविरा द. 
zeae (causes a bacterial dis B. viscosus lactis (renders milk ease of Indian corn) HECTE À. 
viscid) TTT GHETTO 
B. zenkeri, B. zopfii=Kurthia B. viscosus sacchari (from ropy zopfii ____saccharine fluids) पालग मधूदक zur-Nedden's b. (seen in 
ulceration of the cornea) B. viscosus vini (from ropy F958Tquirt a. 
wine) 5 STATTTT. 
B. zurnianus [a nonpathogenic B. vitulorum (from the diph. form (Achromobacter) from 
theria of calves) 267-55TH . ___water] अवर्णजन द. 
· B. vulgaris. See Bacterium back I adv. FICT 
vulgare 
21. 977 n. Week's b. See Hemophilus of back axle Automobile rase m. 
Koch-Weeks 
(974 to 79GUE) Weigmann's b. (a zymogenic background of#, 977fH f. 
____species from bitter milk) कटुदुग्ध backing- सहाय 
backing TETT M., TTT n. Weil-Felix b. (a bacillus of the backing pump TETITE 57 m. 
proteus group isolated from backlash विचाल m. (cf. Panjabi चाल, the urine and feces of typhus Kannada. हिंचलने) patients) qarata at. 
back of the surface = surface of Welch's b. See Clostridium the back Ophthalmol. 9784 n. 
perfringens 
back plate Automobile 5998 m. white b. (a saprophytic bacillus back pressure (pressure in a back ___ from water) श्वेत जल शा. 
ward direction or opposite to B. whitmori = Malleomyces the normal one) e fate m. 
pseudomallei 
back-pressure valve पश्च-निपीड कपाट b. "X". See Salmonella icteroi- n. 
des 
back-titrate vb. Chem. qos-guetatur . B. xanthogenus. See Pseudo- back-titration Chem. 465-4fter f. 
monas synxantha 
backward I पश्चात् yellow bata 
2. Drill पश्चात् 
E 
II8 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
backward and forward Math. पश्चात्, bacterioid, bacterioidal शाकाण्वाभ 
अग्ने 
mfn. backward movement पश्च-गति f. bacteriologic शाकाणु backward reaction Chem. पश्चगा क्रिया, bacteriologic, bacteriological 
पश्च-प्रतिक्रिया . 
शाकाण्विकीय mfn. Bact. (Bacterium) वे. (वेत्राणु) 
bacteriological incubator शाकाण्वि -bacter -शाकाणु m. 
कीय डिम्बोषक m. bacter-emia = bacteri-emia Med. bacteriologist शाकाणुविद्, शाकाण्विक m. 
शाकाणु-रक्तता . . 
bacteriology zafuerant f. bacteri- = bacterio 
bacteriolysin Immunol. शाकाण्वंशि. bacteriar (microorganism in gene- bacteriolysis शाकाण्वंशन 1. 
ral) शाकाणव: m.pl. (from शाकाणु) bacteriolytic शाकाण्वंशिक mfn. 2 (rod-shaped) वेत्राणवः m.pl. bacteriolyze vb. शाकाण्वंशन 1. (from वेत्राणु) 
bacteriophagen. Bact. शाकाणुभक्ष, 3 (pathogenic) रोगाणवः m.pl. (from रोगाणुभक्ष m. 
रोगाणु) 
-bacteriophage -अणुभक्ष Bacteriaceae शाकाणु-वंश m. 
bacteriophagic, bacteriophagous bacterial शाकाण्वीय mfn.; (consisting शाकाणुभक्ष Mfm. 
of, resulting from, caused by) bacterio-phagy शाकाण-भक्षण n. शाकाणु-युत, जात, ०कृत mfn. 
bacterio-phobia शाकाणु-भी. bacterial colony शाकाणु-मण्डल n. bacterio-precipitin शाकाणु-निस्सादि f. bacterial nodule = root tubercle bacterio-protein Biochem. शाकाणु ___ Bot. शाकाण्वीय-ग्रंथा f. 
प्रोभूजिन m. bacterian, bacteric = bacterial bacterio-purpurin Biochem. शाकाणु bactericidal शाकाणुघ्नीय, शाकाणुघ्न नीलोहि . 
min. 
bacterioscopic, bacterioscopical bactericide शाकाणुध्न m. 
शाकाण्वीक्षीय mfn. bactericidin (bactericide -+-in) Im- bacterioscopist शाकाण्वीक्षक m. __munol. शाकाणुनि f. 
bacterioscopy ifuatat f. bacteriemia = bacteremia 
bacteriosis Plant Pathol. (any bac bacterin Immunol. शाकाण्वि . 
terial disease of plants)*777T0LEGIT f. bacterio. = bacteri- 3779701 
bacterio-solvent शाकाणु-विलायक m. bacterio-agglutinin शाकाणु-प्रसमूहि f. bacterio-stasis Bact. शाकाणु-स्थाय m. bacterio-fiuorescin Biochem. शाकाणु- bacterio-stat शाकाणु-स्थाप m. 
भ्राशि . 
bacterio-static शाकाणु-स्थाप mfn. bacterio-genic, bacterio-genous bacterio-toxin शाकाणु-विषि 
__ शाकाणु-कृत mfn. 
bacteriotropic Bact., Chem. शाकाण्वा bacterio-hemolysin शाकाणु-शोणांशि f. वर्तिक mfn. 
119 
पाया.﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
a. 
bacteriotropic titer trail arafara followed by septicemia) afe 
3487227 n. 
कोप वे. bacteriotropin Biochem. शाकाण्वावर्ति Bact. aurantiacum margt a. 
Bact. aureoflavum (produces a bacterious, bacteritic sata, golden-yellow pigment) Fauferat . ETTSTO- mfn. Bacterium (Bact.) I (rod-shaped, Bact. bovisepticum = Past 
gram-negative microorganism) eurella boviseptica att (a.) 
Bact. breslaviense (from diseas. 2 (pl. bacteria-used in the ed meat) fit à. general sense of vegetable micro Bact, bristolense, Bristol bact. organisms) 311811912: m.pl. (from (found in dead rats on a ship 371770) 
at Bristol) 999 . Bact. abortus. See Brucella Bact. bronchisepticum. See 
abortus 
Brucella bronchiseptica Bact. abortus equi. See Salmo Bact. brunneoflavum (produces 
nella abortivo-equina 
a brownish-orange pigment) Bact. accidentalis tetani (from 
27-rd . pus in tetanus) Frafra ã. Bact. brunneum qua. Bact. aceti. See Acetobacter Bact. bucculae fortuitum (from ___acetus सामान्य शुक्तवेत्राणु 
normal saliva) T . Bact. acidi lactici. See Strepto Bact. bucculae minutum (from 
coccus lactis 
healthy saliva, producing a Bact. aegyptiacum. See He bright-yellow pigment) fatet 
mophilus of Koch-Weeks 
toa. Bact. aeris minutissimum bact. of buffalo plague #fearrêt 
(produces à canary-yellow à. pigment) ya fara a 
Bact, butyri colloideum ante Bact. aerogenes = Aerobacter 
aerogenes 
Bact. capsulatum = Klebsiella Bact. aertryke = Salmonella 
capsulatus aertryke 
Bact. catenula (from spoiled Bact. alkalescens. See Shigella - wine) face a. 
alkalescens 
Bact. cholerae columbarum Bact. allii qarus a. 
(from cholera of wild pigeons) Bact. anthracoides #M ery . कपोत-विषची वे. Bäct. anthroposepticum (found Bact. cholerae gallinarum 
in cases of osteomyelitis. 
कुक्कुट-विषची वे. IŽO 
TA 
THE 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
TIONARY 
. 
. 
... 
Bact. icterogenes (from liver 
and blood in acute yellow 
atrophy of the liver) कामल वे. Bact. icteroides. See Salmon 
ella icteroides Bact. lactis viscosum Frete 
a. 
Bact. lepisepticum. See Past 
eurella cuniculicida Bact. levans पिष्टोत्थाप वे. Bact. luminosum F1 . Bact. luteum' (produces an __ orange pigment) नारंग वे. Bact. maddoxii (a zymogenic 
species from fermenting urine) 
Bact. cholerae suis. See Sal. 
monella cholerae suis Bact. chologenes 1979 a. Bact. cloacae, See Aerobacter 
cloacae Bact. coli, Bact. coli commune 
सामान्य प्रान्त्र वे. Bact. cuniculicida. See Past 
eurella cuniculicida Bact. danysz (one of the para 
typhoid group of organisms which has been used for kill 
ing rats) 7 a . Bact. decalvans (said to cause 
alopecia areata) खलति वे. Bact. diphtheriae = Coryne 
bacterium diphtheriae Bact. dubium pneumoniae 
(from the rusty sputum of 
pneumonia) ir itt a. Bact. dysenteriae अतिसार वे. Bact. dysenteriae vitulorum 
(from the dysentery of calves) 
वत्सातिसार वे. Bact. enteritidis = Salmonella 
enteritidis Bact. faecalis alcaligenes 
क्षारकजन वे. Bact. friedbergense. See Sal 
monella enteritidis Bact. gallinarum ca. Bact. glischrogenes (from 
viscid urine) FORT À Bact. gummis (causes the 
gummy disease of orange, fig 
and almond trees) fut a Bact. hessii (causes the ropy 
state of milk) रज्जदग्ध वे. 
Bact. martinezii (from the liver 
of the yellow-fever cadaver) पीतज्वर-यकृत् वे. Bact. melaninogenicum TFT 
Bact, melitense-Brucella me 
litensis Bact. merismopoedioides 
(from sewage mud) a. mesophilic bact. it surfster a. Bact. monocytogenes Taus 
त्यष्टिजन वे. Bact. morbilli (found in the urine of patients with measles) 
मसूरीय वे. ' Bact. morgani. See Proteus 
morgani Bact. mucosum capsulatum 
श्लेष्मप्रावर वे. " Bact. neapolitanum. See Esch 
erichia neapolitana nitrifying bact, (converts am 
I 21 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
monia into nitrous or nitric bacterization शाकाणूयन 1. acid) 775 IT. . 
bacterize vb. ftup n. Bact. oleae (causes a disease of bacterized Totfuqa mfn. 
olive trees) amaga. 
bacteroid = bacteroidal 179TUTTH Bact. ozaenae अपीनस वे. 
mfn. Bact. paratyphosum A Tort- bad fanta mfn. 
Badami Geog. aratfage n. (the ancient Bact. paratyphosum Ba - capital of Mahārāșțra) 
rat a. 
bad conductor कु-संवाहक m. Bact..paratyphosum C yr- bad debt Com. HATTET UT N. 
ज्वर वे. 
bad debts reserve Com. HTET PEUT pole bact. See Czaplewski's 
fifafar f. bacillus 
Badrinath Geog. af 978 m. [on Bact. psittacosis. See Salmon 
the bank of the Bishengangā ella typhimurium 
(Alakanandā) in Garhwal ] psychrophilic bact. strafster at 
bad ventilation कु-वातन 1. Bact. pullorum. See Salmon 
bael Pharm. Fara m., n. ella pullorum 
Baeyer strain theory Chem. अपिविकार Bact. pyogenes foetidum. See 
वाद m. (विकार strain) Eberthella pyogenes 
baffle n. Mech. a le m. Bact. rhinoscleromatis. See 
Klebsiella rhinoscleromatis 
bag स्यून m. Bact. sanguinarium=Shigella 
Bagdad (from TTG) #1677 n. gallinarum 
baggage car Rly. सम्भार-यान n. Bact. 'tholoideum. See Aero 
bagpipe 9977-aw m. bacter aerogenes 
bailgari (TST) T1-792 n. Bact. tularense. See Pasteurella 
baisen brown = alizarin brown tularensis 
bake vb. n. Bact. typhi, Bact. typhosum. bakelite (phenol formaldehyde resin 
See Eberthella typhosa 
asta aruana GEITA) GERITE m. Bact. typhi murium. See Sal- bakelite capped bottle Chem. 
monella typhi murium 
aureth-79 f. Bact. vulgare = Proteus vul- bakelize vb. aiement n. 
garis = Bacillus vulgaris bakelizer RTF m. HTHEFT a. 
baker's yeast H ufpua 1. Bacte, whitmori. See Malleo- baking powder #ofatenta m. 1 mycęs pseudomallei 
baking soda (sodium bicarbonate) bacterisuria Med. शाकाणु-मेह m. 
in far m.' 
. 
I.22 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
- 
- 
Baku Geog. A town on the west b. sheet स्थिति-विवरण 1. 
coast of the Caspian Sea, famous closing b. संवरण अन्तर . for its naphtha springs and credit b. समाकलन आधिक्य . mud volcanoes. It is also called debit b. विकलन आधिक्य n. Badku, the Sanskrit form of opening b. प्रारंभिक अन्तर ?. which is asar, mentioned in the outstanding b. अदत्त शेष M. Puranas. It appears to have been trial b. परीक्षा सूची . a place of Hindu pilgrimage and balance vb. तोलन . 
was called महाज्वालामुखी /. (Asiatic balance vb.Com. संतुलन, समपार्श्वन १. 
Researches, Vol. V, p. 41) ___b. the accounts लेखा-समपार्श्वन, लेखा balance तुला . 
__ संतुलन n. b. case तुला-धान n. 
. b. the books पुस्त-संतुलन 1. b. room तुला-कोष्ठ m. 
balance vb. Chem. (to complete an chain drum b. शृंखला-भेरी-तुला . equation so that the same num chain drum b., attachments for ber of atoms of each kind appears 
शृंखला-भेरी-तुलार्थ उपायोजm. 
on each side) तुल्यन 1. chainomatic b. शृंखलाग-तुला f. balanced Physiol. तुलित mfn. decimal b. (single pan) दशमिक-तुला balanced diet Biochem. तुलित आहार m. 
f. (एकभाजन) 
balanced ration तुलित समभक्त . heavy capacity b. गुरु-धारिता तुला/. balanced reaction तुलित-प्रतिक्रिया f. plummet for specific gravity balance of salts लवण-संतोल m. 
b. आपेक्षिक-भार-तुलार्थ सीसक n. balance of trade=trade balance O.I mg. sensitivity b. (milli- पण्य-अन्तर, निराकाम्य अन्तर १. 
gram सहस्रि-धान्य) ०.१ सि.धा. हृषता balanitis Med. मणिकोप M. तुला. 
____Balantidium Zool. गभीरमुखाति f. sliding weight b. सुप-भार-तुला . (प्राति for प्रजाति genus) specific gravity b.अापेक्षिक-भार-तुला B. coli = Holophrya coli, 
Leucophrya coli, Parame spring b. स्कन्द-तुला . 
cium coli, Plagiotoma coli spring b. on pedestal पीठस्थ-स्कन्द मलाशय गभीरमुख m. 
तुला. 
balausta Bot. दाडिमक .. weightless spring b. भारहीन-स्कन्द- bald इन्द्रलुप्त mfn. 
baldness-alopecia. Med. खलतिm. balance (domestic scales) गृह्य उत्तुला . bale ग्रन्थि M. (Hindi गाँठ) balance n. Com. शेष m., आधिक्य, baleen Zool. I (whale) तिमि m. 
अन्तर .. 
2 (a horny substance, called b. in hand हस्तस्थ शेष m. 
whale-bone) foreife n. b. of payment शोधनाधिक्य . Balkh Geog. बाल्हीक m. 
तुला. 
123 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
n. 
ball गटी., कन्द्रक, पिण्ड, गोल m. 
उद्यास, benzoic धूपिक or cinnamic ball-and-socket joint=enarthrosis acid) धूपियास m. 
Anat. कन्दुक-उलूखल-सन्धि-उलूखल-सन्धि balsam vb. धूपियासन ; धूपियास-साधन,-लेपन 
m. ball bearing Macb. गुटी-भारु m. balsam bottle धूपियास-कूपी f. ball, clay मृत्तिका-कन्दुक, मत्तिका-पिण्ड m. balsam, Canada धूपियास-तैल n. ball condenser Chem. कन्दुक संघनक m. Balsamodendron Bot. गुग्गुलति /. (-ति balling of the queen (covering of for the genus) 
the queen by bees in order to kill B. agallocha सामान्य गुग्गुल m. her. It is a cluster of bees of the balsam of Copaiba = Copaiba 
shape of a ball) राज्ञी-कन्दुकवेष्टन 1. Pharm. श्लेष्मयास m. ballistic अस्त्रक्षेप 
. balsam of Tolu == balsamum ballistic curve अस्त्रमार्ग-वक्र n. 
tolutanum (bals. tolu.) = tolu ballistic galvanometer (sudden Pharm. विराल-धूपियास m. 
flow of electricity) सहसा-धुवाहमान balsamum = balsam 
m. 
balsamum tolutanum = balsam ballistic pendulum अस्त्रक्षेप-निदोल m. of Tolu ballistics I (science of hurling m is- Baltimore bark = bark-extract 
siles) प्रास्त्रक्षेपिकी . 
Baltimore red = mineral red 2 (science of the motion of pro- Baltimore yellow = chrome jectiles) प्रास्त्रगतिकी f. 
yellow ballistics of bombs Mil. प्रस्फोट-गतिकी Baltistan = Little Tibet Geog. 
लघुभोट m. Ballistite Chem. (a smokeless pow. Bambusa Bot. aufa f. (-fa for yofa 
der consisting essentially of solu- genus) ble cellulose nitrates and nitro- banana fly=Drosophila melano glycerin) कोशोट m. (कोशाधु cellulose ___gaster कदली-मक्षी f. + स्फोट explosive) 
band पट्टी. ball mill कन्दुक-पेषणी . 
bandage पट्टी . balloon वा-गोल m. (वा=वायु) 
bandicoot = Nesokia bandicota balloon, collodion श्लेषेव बागोल m. Zool. (a. rat of large size) महाखु balloon fish = globe fish = puffer m. ___Zool. गोलमत्स्य, वागोलमत्स्य m. 
Bangkok Geog. aradt f. (MW. ap balloon, rubber घृषि-वागोल m. 
pendix) ball tap गोलक-विवरी f. (Hindi गोल bank Com. अधिकोष m. - टोंटी) 
b. account अधिकोष-लेखा : balsam (a resinous substance that b. bill अधिकोष-विपत्र n. 
contains, in addition to resin b. charges अधिकोष-शुल्क, -व्यय M. 
124 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
b. column अधिकोष-स्कम्भ M. bar Math. शिरोवार m. b. credit अधिकोष-प्रत्यय m. 
bar. (barrel) 1 (31 gallons-~-liquid b. discount अधिकोष-अपहार ". 
measure) अ.खा. (अर्ध-खारी) b. draft अधिकोष-विकर्ष. 
2 (105 quarts--dry measure) 7.1. b. note अधिकोष-पत्र 1. 
(महा-द्रोणी) b. of England आगलाधिकोष m. bar दण्ड m. b. of issue Econ. अर्थपत्राधिकोष m. Barabar Hills Geog. प्रवरगिरि m. b. overdraft अधिकोष-अधिविकर्ष M. 
Iraft अधिकोष-अधिविकर्ष m. Baramula Geog. वराहमलn. b. pass book अधिकोष-ग्राहकपुस्तिका f. barb Bot. (a hair or bristle ending in b. reconciliation statement a double hook)द्वयंकुश m. 
अधिकोष-समाधान-विवरण 1. 
barbed wire Mil. कण्टक-तन्तु . b. statement अधिकोष-विवरण 1. barbed wire entanglements कण्टक commercial b. वाणिज्य-अधिकोष M. तन्तु-संपाश. cooperative b. सहकारी अधिकोष m. barber chair नापितासन्दी f. exchange b. विनिमय-अधिकोष m. barberry bark=berberidis cortex indigenous b. स्वदेशीय अधिकोष m. (berber. cort.) (from Berberis vul industrial b. औद्योगिक अधिकोष m. garis पदारहरिद्रा) Pharm. आदाहरिद्रा joint stock b. संयुक्त-स्कन्ध-अधिकोष वल्क m.. 
barberry extract = berberine land mortgage b. भू-प्राधि-अधिकोष barbital Chem. (diethyl-barbitutic 
m. 
acid) कोलसु m. savings b. संचय-अधिकोष m. barbitalism Med. अतिकोलसुता f. banker Com. अधिकोष-पति, प्राधिकौषिक m. barbital sodium = soluble barbi banking अधिकोषण n., अधिकोष-व्यापार m. tal Pharm. कोलसु क्षारातु-विलेय कोलसु bank operation Econ. अधिकोषण-कर्म n. m. bankrupt नष्टनिधि m. 
barbitone = barbital bankruptcy नष्टनिधिता f., नष्टनिधित्व n. barbitone soluble (sodium barbi bannana = banana कदली f. 
tone) = barbital sodium Bannu Geog. वर्गु m. (from पाणिनि) barbituric Chem. (....a mixture banyan Bot. वटm. 
of malonic acid and urea) tat baptisia (baptis.) = wild indigo मिहिक mfn. 
root Pharm. वननील . 
b. acid कोलमिहिक अम्ल . Baptisia Bot. Paritala f. (-fa for yourfa barb of a feather = ramus Zool. 
genus) 
पत्रवाल m. B. tinctoria सामान्य वननील m. bar diagram दण्डचित्र. baptisin Chem. (found in the root of bargain vb. Com. विपणन .. 
wild indigo-Baptisia tinctoria bargain 1. Com, faquer n. वननीलि f. 
baria = baryta 
125 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
b. formate हर्यातु वम्रीय ॥. b. hydroxide यातु उदजारेय n. b. hypo-phosphite हर्यातु उप-भास्वित 
n. 
baric Chem. हर्यात्विक mfn. barita = baryta barite=heavy spar Mineral. (native 
barium sulphate) हरिशुल्बिज m. == 
गुरु-धात्विया . barium Chem. हर्यातु M. 
b. acetate हातु शुक्तीय . b. arsenate hतु नेपालीय. b. arsenite हर्यातु नेपालित n. b. benzene-sulphonate care 
धूपेन्य-शुल्बायीय .. b. benzoate हातु धूपीय .. b. bicarbonate हातु द्वचंगारीय . b. borate हात टांकीय n. b. bromate हर्यातु दुरीय ". b. bromide हर्यातु दुरेयn. b. carbonate हर्यात प्रांगारीय ॥. b. chlorate हर्यात नीरीय . b. chloride हर्यातु नीरेय 1. b. chromate (lemon chrome, 
lemon yellow, permanent yellow, yellow ultramarine) हर्यातु वर्णीय n. (निम्बु-वर्णक, निम्बु पीत, 
ध्रुव पीत, पीत पारसमुद्रिक) b. chrome Col. Ind. Eete aquie m. b. citrate हातु निम्बवीय n. . b. dichromate हर्यात द्विवर्णीय 1. 
b. dioxide हातु द्विजारेय. b.di-phenyl - amine -sulpho ___nate हर्यातु द्वि-दर्शल-तिक्ती-शुल्बायीय n. 
b. dithionate हर्यातु द्विगन्धीय n. b. ethane-sulphonate wife getu ___ शुल्बायीय n. 
b. ethyl sulphate हर्यातु दक्षुल 
शुल्बीय . b. ferro-cyanide हर्यातु अयस्य-श्यामेय 
b. iodate हर्यातु जम्बीय n. b. iodide हातु जम्बेय ". b. iso-valerate र्यात स-बलीय ?. b. lactate हर्यात दुग्धीय 1. b. mercuric iodide solution 
हर्यात पारदिक जम्बेय विलयन . b. meta-borate हर्यातु सम-टांकीय 1. b. methane-sulphonate हर्यात 
प्रोदीन्य-शुल्बायीय ॥. b. methyl sulphate हर्यात प्रोदल ___ शुल्बीय . 
b. monoxide हर्यातु एकजारेय 1. b. nitrate र्यात भूयीय १. b. m-nitro-benzene sulphonate ___ हातु सम-भूय-धूपेन्य शुल्बायीय n. b. oleate (technical) gufe efte ___n. (परिभाषित) 
b. oxalate हर्यातु तिग्मीय n. b. oxide (anhydrous) हातु जारेय ___n. (अजल) 
b. per-chlorate (dried) हर्यात अति 
नीरीय 1. (शुष्क) b. per-iodate हर्यातु अति-जम्बीय. b. per-manganate हर्यात अति 
लोहकीय . b. per-oxide हर्यात अति-जारेय 1. b. phenol sulphonate हर्यातु दर्शव __शुल्बायीय n. 
b. phosphate (precipitated) हर्यातु 
भास्वीय n. (निस्सादित) b. phosphate diacid gute Areasta 
द्वयम्ल ... b. phosphate monoacid हर्यात 
भास्वीय एकाम्ल n. 
b fluoride हर्यात तरस्वेय. 
126 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
- 
b. phosphite हात भास्वित १. barograph Meteorol. वापीडलिख m. b. platino-cyanide हर्यात मह-श्यामेय barometer वापीडमान m.(वायु+निपीडमान) 
b. gauge वापीडमानामान m. (gauge b. potassium ferro-cyanide muita आमान) 
दहातु अयस्य-श्यामेय . 
cup b. कर्पर-बापीडमान m. b. propionate हर्यात प्रमेदीय N. barometric वापीडमान-, वापीडमानीय mfn. b. silicate हर्यात सैकतीय n. 
barometric pressure वापीडमानीय निपीड b. silico-flouride (technical) m. ___ हर्यातु सैकत-तरस्वेय n. (परिभाषित) barometric pressure, temperature 
b. succinate तु तृणीय 1. 
and humidity recorder वापीड b. sulphate gure Teater n. 
ताप-आक्लेद-उल्लेखक m. b. sulphide र्यात शुल्बेय 1. 
barometric tube = Torricellian b. sulphite र्यातु शुल्बित १. 
tube Phys. वापीडमान-नाल m. b. tartrate हर्यात न्यासवीय n. 
barometry वापीड-मिति . b. thio-cyanate हर्यातु गन्ध-श्यामीय 1. baron Eng. Hist. सामन्तक m. b. thio-sulphate हर्यातु गन्ध-शुल्बीय n. baronage सामन्तकवर्ग M., सामन्तक-पद N., b. toluene-p-sulphonate हर्यातु सामन्तकता 
विरालेन्य-प-शुल्बायीय n. 
baroness सामन्तकी . b. yellow ातु पीत m., (a. colour, baronet उपसामन्तक m. 
reddish-yellow in hue, of baronet vb. उपसामन्तक-करण .. 
medium saturation and very baronetage उपसामन्तकवर्ग m., उपसामन्तक 
high brilliance) सुपीतारक्त m. ता., उपसामन्तक-वंशावली. bark atrofi m. 
baronetcy उपसामन्तक-पदn. bark beetle Zool. वल्क-भङ्ग m. . baronetical उपसामन्तकीय min. bark cork वल्क-त्वक्षा. 
baronial सामन्तकीय mfn. bark, cuprea ताम्र-वल्क m. 
baronty = barony . सामन्तकविषय m., batk-extract वल्क-निस्सार m. 
सामन्तकपंद n., सामन्तकता . barking deer=Cervulus muntjac barosma (Gk. barys heavy + osme 
-muntjac Zool. भष-मृग m. ____ smell) = buchu Bot. गुरुगन्ध m. bark liquor Dyeing वल्क-रस m. baro-thermo-hygro-graph amis 'barko-meter = tanno-meter वल्क- ताप-उन्द-लिख m. 
मान-शल्क-मान m. 
barred Com. अवष्टब्ध, तिरोहित mfn. Barleria Bot. कुरण्टति f. (-ति for प्रजाति ____time b. काल-तिरोहित nfm. from 
genus) 
कौटल्य' अर्थशास्त्र) B. prionitis सामान्य कुरण्ट m. barrel I (bar., bbl., bl., brl., 313 barley यव m. 
gallons) अर्ध-खारी. (अ. खा.) Baroach Geog. भृगुकच्छ n. 
2 (bar., bbl., bl., brl.; for fruits, Baroda Geog. वटपद्रपुर ।. 
etc.; 105 quarts; 7056 cubic 127 
Stime 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
inches) महा द्रोणी f. (म.द्रो.) baryto-calcite Mineral. हरिजा-चूणिज 3 (of a gun) नाल m. 
m. (-इज for खनिज mineral) barrel-shaped नालाकार Mfp. 
baryto-celestite Mineral. हरिजा-शो barrier reef Zool. परातट-प्रवाली f. - शुल्बिज श. (-इज for खनिज mineral) Barringtonia Bot. हिज्जलति f. (-ति for basal 1 पैठिक mfn. 
प्रजाति genus) 
2 Bot. आधारलग्न mfn. B.acutangula सामान्य हिज्जल m. basal disc Zool. अधो-बिम्ब m. barter भाण्ड-प्रतिभाण्ड . (ancient word) basal metabolism Biochem., Physiol. Bartlett white lead = basic sul- आधार चयापचय m. 
phate white lead 
basal metabolism rate (B. M. R.) Bartonella (B.) Bact. ज्वराण (ज्व.) 
आधार-चयापचय-अर्घm. (आ.च.अ.) B. bacilliformis चर्मकील ज्व. B. A. screw thread section Eng, bary-biotite Miveral. (a. variety of ४७.५° भ्रमि सूत्र छेद m. 
biotite containing barium oxide) base आधार m. हरि-मलाभ्रक 1. 
base=end Math. आधार m. barylite Mineral. हरिसैकिज m. (-इज for base=basis पीठ N., आधार m. 
खनिज mineral) . 
base Chem. (a compound capable bary-silite Mineral. (a. rare lead of reacting with acids to form 
siicate) नाग-सैकिज m. (-इज for खनिज salts) पीठ . mineral) 
base coin Econ. नीच टंक m. baryta Chem. (barium monoxide) base exchange process Chem. 978 
हरिजा f. 
विनिमय-विधा. b. feldspak हरिजा स्फतीय . base line Math. आधार-रेखा [. b. paper (here baryta = barium) basement membrane Anat. (form ___ Photog. र्यात पत्र 1. 
_ing a substratum) अधःस्तृत-कला f. b. water Chem. (barium hydr- base metal (opp. to noble metal 
oxide) हरिजा-जल . (हातु उदजारेय) अकुप्य-धातु) कुप्य-धातु m. b. white Chem. (barium sulphate) base of a cylinder रम्भाधार m. 
हर्यात शुल्बीय.. 
base of the heart Anat. हृदय-मूल b. yellow Chem. (barium yellow) 
w) हर्यातु पीत m. 
..Basham's mixture Pharm. (an aro barytes=barite हरिशुल्बिज M. (-इज for matic solution of iron ry and 
खनिज mineral) 
ammohium तिक्तातु acetate शुक्तीय) barytes white Col. Ind. हरिशल्बिज श्वेत अ-ति-शु-मिश्र n. ' m. 
basi- (from basis, denoting base) पीठ barytine=barite 
basic I आधारभूत mfr. baryto- Mineral. (denoting barytic 2 Chem. 9f8# mfn. (from 1to base) ... - and) हरिजा 
basic art आधार-कला. 
128 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY. 
basic Bessemer process Chem. पैठिक basic period, Statistics आधार-काल m. 
अपिधम विधा 
basic process Metal. पैठिक-विधा. basic black Col. Ind. पैठिक काल m. basic research आधारान्वेषण ". 
b. blue पैठिक नील m. 
basic salt Chem. पैठिक लवणn. b. brown पैठिक बा . 
basic scarlet Col. Ind. A fost attos m. basic colour पैठिक रंग m. 
basic school आधार-पाठशाला basic (prime) cost Com. प्रधान परिव्यय basic slag पैठिक धातुमल n. 
m. .. 
basic steel पैठिक वज्रायसा . basic craft आधार-शिल्प 1. 
basic sulphate white lead Col. Ind. basic dye पैठिक रंजक M. 
पैठिक शुल्बीय श्वेत सीस 1. basic education आधार-शिक्षण ?. basidia pl. of basidium basi-chromatic Biol. 
Basidiomycetes Bot. प्रकणि-कवकवर्गm. I (capable of being stained with basidiophore Bot. (bearing basidia basic dres) पीठरंज्य mm. 
प्रकणिधर) प्रकणिधरी (-इन् ) m. 2 (composed of basi-chromatin) basidiospore Bot. प्रकणी (-इन् ) m. पीठाभिवर्णीय mfn. 
basidium Bot. प्रकणिधर m. basi-chromatin Biol. tothrafür f. basification Chem. TOT n. basi-chromatinic Biol. पीठाभिवणिय basifier Cbem. पीठकार, . ___Mfr. 
basifixed anther आधारलग्न परागाशय m. basic hydroxide Chem. पैठिक उदजारेय basify vb. Chem. (to convert into a 
base) पीठन ।, basic industry=key industry Com. basilar membrane Anat. आधार-कला 
आधारोद्योग m. 
f. basic iron पैठिक अयस् n... 
basilene fast blue B=fast.blue B basicity Chem. I (quality, state, or basilicon= basilicon. ointment= .degree of being a base) पीठता . resin cerate Pharm. राजलेप m. 
2 (power of an acid to react with basil thyme तुलसी [.. ' one or more equivalents of a basin qraft f. base) पैठिकता . 
b. guard पात्री-रक्ष m. . basic lead chromate पैठिक सीस वर्णीय b. holder पात्री-धर m. :.. , . . 
aluminium b. स्फटयात-पात्री basic-lined Metal. पैठिक-अन्तःस्तृत mfn. cast iron b. संचायस-पात्री . : basic magenta Col. Ind. पैठिक-धूम्रली copper b. ताम्र-पात्री .. 
enarmelled steel b. आकाचित basic needs Biochem. आधारभूत वजायस-पात्री . 
आवश्यकता 
glass b. काच-पात्री . basic nitrogen Chem . पैठिक भूयाति m. lead b. सीस-पात्री f. basic oxide Chem. पैठिक जारेय n. 
nickel b. रूपक-पानी.. 
n. 
129﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
porcelain b. चीनमृत्सा-पात्री. 
acid b. अम्ल-तापन 1. silica b. सैकजा-पात्री 
air-b. (usually a small oven stainless steel b. अकलुष-बवायस 
heated from below) वायु-तापन 1. पात्री 
embedding b. न्यावेश सापन 1. sugar estimation b. शर्करा-आगणन hot air b. उष्ण-वायु-तापन n. 
पात्री. 
hot water b. उष्ण-जल-तापन . basiphil - basophil 
hot water b. and oven (com basiphil cell Zool. पीठरज्य-कोशा f. 
bined) उष्ण-जल-तापन तथा कन्दु m. basis = base आधार m., पीठ .. 
(संयुक्त) basket, wire तन्तु-पिटक .. 
inactivating b. and rack अकर्मण्यन Basle green = mineral green 
तापन तथा निलय m. baso-phil, baso-phile Biol. (stain radium b. तेजातु-तापन n. 
only with basic dyes) पीठ-रंज्य mfn. sand b. सिकता-तापन 1. baso-philic, baso-philous Biol. पीठ vaccine b. मसूरी-तापन n. - रज्य mfn. 
water b. (a copper or iron vessel) basophilic adenoma पीठरंज्य ग्रंथि . जल-तापन . 
अर्बुद m. 
bath mustard (a powder) Pharm. Bassia Bot. मधूकति f. (-ति for प्रजाति स्नान-सर्षप . 
genus) 
batho- (Gk. bathos depth) अधस् B. latifolia सामान्य मधूक m. 
batho-chromatic अघो-वर्णीय mfn. bast = phloem Bot. (forms the batho-chromatism, batho-chromy 
downward passage for food Chem. अधो-वर्णता . 
material manufactured by leaves) batho-chrome= bathy-chrome अघोवाही (-इन्) m. 
___Cbem., Dyes अधो-वर्ण m. bastard विजात mfn. 
batho-chrome, batho-chromic, bastard file विजात-रेत्री 
batho-chromatic -auffer mfn. bastard saffron विजात केसर, विजात कुंकुम batho-chromy अधो-वर्णता f. 
batho-flore Org. Chem. (an atom or bast fibre Bot. प्रतन्तु m. 
group which reduces fluores batallion Mil. (4 companies) गण m. cence) अधो-भ्राश m. 
(=३ गुल्म ; ancient word) batho-floric Org. Chem. अधो-भ्राशिक bath स्नान . 
mfn. 2(bathroom) स्नानागार .. 
batholite-batholith नीचोपल m. bath Chem. I (a medium, as water, batholithic, batholitic नीचोपलीय 
air, sand or oil, for regulating mfn. temperature) तापन n. 
bathometer गाम्भीर्यमान m. 2 (a vessel containing such me- bathroom FIFTIT 12. dium) तापन-पात्र. 
bath salts स्नान-लवण'n. 
n. 
130 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
bath sponge स्नान-छिद्रिष्ठ . 
bawdy कुट्टिनी . bathychrome=bathochrome bawdy-house कुट्टिनी-गृह n. bathylite, bathylith=batholite bay Geog. (an inlet of the sea) bathymeter गाम्भीर्यमान M. 
____ कुक्षि, समुद्रकुक्षि m. bathymetric, bathymetrical गाम्भीर्य- Bayer's acid (2.8-, or 2.7- naph 
मितीय mfn. 
thylamine sulphonic acid; 8 bathymetrical distribution Zool. naphthol sulphonic acid) 378 
समुद्रगाम्भीर्य-वंटन १. 
ल्बायिक अम्ल .. bathymetry गाम्भीर्य-मिति, समुद्रगाम्भीर्य- Bay of Bengal पूर्व-पयोधि m. 
मिति . 
bay salt कुक्षि-लवण १. (समुद्रकुक्षि bay) baton लगुड m. 
bbl. I (barrel, 105 quarts) म.द्रो. (महा batonette Zool. लगुडी /. 
द्रोणी) Batrachia=Amphibia 
2 (barrel, 31 gallons) अ.खा. (अर्ध battery समूहा. 
खारी) battle संग्राम m. 
Be (Baume hydrometer) पि (पिसमांश battle above clouds मेघोपरि-संग्राम m. तरलमान) battle array संग्राम-व्यूहरचना f. 
Be (beryllium) Chem. वि (विडूर) battle cruiser Mil. सुयोधन m. beacon Radar उज्ज्ञप्ति f. battle dress संग्राम-वेष m. 
bead गुटिका . battle drill संग्राम-योग्या. 
beaded Bot. मणिमय, मणिरूप mfn. battle field संग्राम-क्षेत्र n. 
bead, glass काच-गुटिका . battle formation संग्राम-रचना 
beaker Chem. चंचुकी (-इन्) m. battle front संग्रामाग्र, संग्राम-मुख n. 
b. cover चंचुकि-आवरण 1. battleship रण-पोत m. 
b. flask चंचु-पलिघm. (a flask with battle zone Mil. संग्राम-परिधि m. 
a चंचु) Baudouin reagent Chem. अपितिल porcelain b. चीनमृत्सा-चंचुकी m. 
प्रतिकर्ता (-तृ) m. 
pyrex b. अग्निराज-चंचुकी m. Baudouin test or reaction Chem. schola b. (students' quality) छात्र 
(a test for sesame oil) अपितिल चंचुकी m. परीक्षा, प्रतिक्रिया . 
steel analysis b. वजायस-विश्लेषण Bauhinia Bot. काञ्चनारति . (-ति for ___ चंचुकीm. 
प्रजाति genus) 
beam x यष्टि . B. variegata सामान्य काञ्चनार m. 2 Ophthalmol. रश्मि-माला f., रश्मि Baume hydrometer (incorrectly दण्ड m. 
Beaume, all the degrees on a 3 (of wood, Urdu शहतीर) धरणी Baumé scale are equal in length) f. (ancient word) पिसमांश तरलमान m. 
beam of raysOphthalmol.रश्मि-दण्ड m., Bavarian blue DBF = ink blue रश्मि-माला . 
II 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
beam of the balance तुला-दण्ड m. bean-shaped राजमाषाकार mfn. bear=ursus Z00!. ऋक्ष m. bear Econ. मूल्यपाती 12. (H. मंदीवाला) bear a ratiovb. Math. निष्पत्ति-धारण 1. bear-berry-uva-ursi Pharm. ऋक्ष- .:: बदर M., R. (the plant is m., the ___fruit is n.) 
bearded #8757 mfn. (ancient word) bearded vulture = lammergeier . Zepl. जटायु m. bearer प्रेष्य m. . -lab. b. प्र.शा. प्रेष्य m. bearer Com. वाहक m. 
, .b. cheque वाहक-धनादेश m. 
b. debenture वाहक-ऋणपत्र n. 
___b. security वाहक-प्रतिभूति . bearing I Macb. भारु m. 
2 Muth. दिस्थिति f. bearing pressure Mach. भारु-निपीड m. bearish tendency Econ. मूल्यपात प्रवृत्ति 
f. Beas (river) विपाशा f. beast of prey श्वापद, हिंस्र m. beat vb. STEFT nh.. beat n. Poys. स्पन्द m. beating of the heart Anat. हत्स्पन्दन 
beat of drum डिडिम-अाहनन n. (Gilgit 
___MSS.) beaufighter Mil. (British long . range fighter) सुयोधक, दूरयोधक m. 
Beaufort's scale (a scale in which the strength of the wind is indicated 
by numbers from o to 12) द्वादशवातवेगश्रेणी f. 
No. 
m. p. h. 
- 
2 3. 4 
- 
calm . Light air , light breeze gentle breeze moderate breeze fresh breeze . strong breeze . . . moderate gale | fresh gale . 
strong gale. whole gale storm (hurricane 
निति, शान्त 
अतिमन्द समीर मन्द समीर धीर समीर . . . समीर मलयानिल.. प्रवात ।। .. अतिवात महावात । चंडवात प्रचंड वात . प्रकम्पन সমকাল 
. 
I-3 4-7 8-12 13-18 19-24 , 25-31 . . 32-38 
30-46 __47-54 
55-63 
.64-75 above 75, mean 92 
.' '; 
32-38 
. 
महावात 
. 
. 
. 
..' 
.,, .... 
.132 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
beaver Zool. (remarkable for con- beef fat गोमांस-स्नेह M., गो-बसा . . ..... 
structing its houses and dams beef-tapeworm == fat-tapeworm= across streams) सेतूद्रm. 
Taenia saginata गोमांस पट्टकृमिला. bebeerine, beberine Chem. (it has beefwood Bot. (hard red wood) 
been used as a substitute for . ताम्रद्रु. - quinine विज्वरी) प्रतिज्वरी f. bee-gloves मधुकर-हस्तप m. bebeeru = green-heart (an ever- bee glue=propolis (glue collected 
green tree) हरिहृदु, प्रतिज्वर m. (its by bees to fill cracks in the hive) bark yields bebeerine) 
' छत्रश्लेष m. beberine = bebeerine 
bee-gum (a hollow gum tree in beberine sulphate Chem. sferant which wild bees hive...) मधुकर-वृक्ष 
शुल्बीय n. 
m. (to) be capable of Math. समर्थ bee hawk == honey buzzard मधुकर because यतः 
श्येन m. Beckmann rearrangement, reac- bee hero = bee-keeper 
tion or transposition Chem. beehive I मधछत्र n. (a rearrangement by which a 2 (Wooden box for sheltering ketoxime शौजावि changes into bees) मधुकर-समुद्ग m. an amide derivative) अपिशौजावि beehive shelf Chem. मधुछत्र-निधाय m. 
पुनर्विन्यास m., प्रतिक्रिया f., व्यत्यय m. bee house=apiary मधुष्ठान 7. (from Beckmann's apparatus Chem. (de- काशिका VIII. 3. 106) 
termines the molecular weight bee-keeper मधुपाल, मधुकर-पाल m. by the lowering of the freezing bee-keeping = apiculture मधुपालन, point श्यानांक-निम्तन, or raising of मधुकर-पालन n. the boiling point बुद्दांक-उत्थापन) bee-killer मधुकर-हन्ता (-) m. 
श्या-नि-बू-साधित. 
bee kite=honey buzzard मधुकर Beckmann thermometer Physical चिल्ल m. 
Chem. अपिसूक्ष्म तापमान m. 
bee-larva मधु-डिम्भ m. become vb. भवन . 
beeline (shortest line to a place, as bed शय्या . 
that of a bee, when laden with bedbug खट्वामल, मत्कुण 7. 
honey, to its hive) मधुकर-रेखा f: bed frame Rly. Eng. अधःकङ्काल m. (मार्ग) bee मधुमक्षी f., मधुकर m. 
bee louse=Braula coeca मधुकर-यूका bee-bread (consists of pollen) मधुकर 
रजोन्न. 
beeman=beekeeper' bee colony मधुकर-मंडल . 
bee martin (the kingbird, which oc bee eater मधुकराश m. . 
____casionally eats bees) मधुकर-ग्रह m. bee-escape मधुकर-निर्गम m. 
beemaster मधुकरपति m. 
133 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
- 
2. 
m. 
bee milk-royal jelly (the special Belgian earth = green earth Col. 
foodon which the bees feed larve Ind. हरिमत् / to produce queen bees) राज्ञी-भोजन bell घंटा f. 
belladonnae folium = belladonna bee moth=wax moth=Galleria leaf 
mellonella (its larvae destroy belladonna leaf = deadly night the combs) सिक्थ-शलम m. 
shade leaf = belladonnae foli bee pasture मधुकर-चरm. 
um (bellad. fol.) Pharm. कंटालिका beer यवसुरा (ancient word), यविरा f. पत्र n. 
(यव + मदिरा) 
belladonna plaster = emplastrum beer flask यविरा-पलिघm. 
belladonnae Pharm. कंटालिका-लेप bee space मधुकरान्तर .. beeswax मक्षी-सिक्थ 1. 
bell animalcule Zool. घण्टाणुप्राणी beet, beetroot पालंक m. (पालंक 'Beta (-इन् ) m. 
bengalensis' MW. In Bengali Bellary Geog. बलहरि (south of the beet is पालंक) 
river Tungabhadrā) m. beetle Fङ्ग m. 
bellflower Bot. घण्टा-पुष्प ?. beetroot पालंक-मूल .. 
belligerence = belligerency bee veil (worn as a protection belligerency, belligerence युध्यमानता 
against bee-sting) मधुकर-जालिका f. f., योधन, युद्धकरण .. beeway मधुकर-मार्ग m. 
belligerent (present participle of begin vb. प्रारम्भण . 
Lat. belligerare to wage war) beginning आदि 
I (carrying on war) युद्धकारी (-इन्) beginning organ Ophthalmol. आद्यंग mfn. 
2 (engaged in war) युद्धरत mfn. behave vh. आचरण 1. 
belligerent right युध्यमान अधिकार m. behaviour आचरण 1. 
bell jar घंटा-कलश m. behaviour pattern Zool. आचरण प्रकार bell metal Chem. कांस्य 1. '. m. 
bellows भस्त्रा. behen शैग्रव m. 
b. table Chem. भस्त्रा-पटल 1. behenate Chem. शैनवीय . 
spray b. शीकर-भस्त्रा . . . behenic Chem. stufaa mfn. bell-shaped curve Statistics घंटाकार ____b. acid शैविक अम्ल .. 
वक्रा . behen oil शैव-तैल . 
bell-shaped measure घंटाकार माप m. behenolic acid Chem. Farifa for h. belltail=rattle snake Zool. auicqa68 Beilstein's test Chem. (a test for the m . 
halogens, using a copper ताम्र bell-trap Hygiene घंटा-रुध m. 
wire) अपिता-परीक्षा 
below par : Math. अवाह mfn. 134 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
2. 
___ 2 Com. अवमूल्ये (Hindi अवमूल्य पर) benzal-aceto-phenone Chem. धूपसु 
belt I = strap Mach. पट्टक m. 
शुक्त-दर्शा. 2 (of a sphere) Matb. मेखला f. benzal-aniline Chem. धूपसु-नीली . belt fork Mach. पट्टक-शाखी (-इन् ) m. benzal-azine Chem. धूपसु-अजीवी f. bench फलकी . 
benzal chloride Chem. धूपमु नीरेय . bench Lami (the seat where the benz-alcohol Chem. धप-सषव m. 
judges sit in court) धर्मासन 1. benzal-cyan-hydrin Chem. धूपसु 2 (judges collectively) न्यायाधीश-गण श्यामोदि f. 
benz-aldehyde Chem. धूप-सुव्युद m. 3 (the court) न्यायालय m. benz-aldehyde sodium bisulphite bench, vacuum Chem. शून्यक- फलकी f. Chem. धूप-सुव्युद क्षारातु द्विशुल्बित n. bend n. Mach. नति f. 
benzal-di-phenyl Chem. धूपसु-द्वि-दर्शल bend vb. नमन . beneficiary Com. उपकृत, उपकारग्राही benz-ald-oxime (bengaldehyde + 
(-इन) m. 
Oxime) Chem. धूप-सुवि-जावि . benefit Com. उपकार m., उपकृति . benzal-ethyl-amine Chem. धूपसु Bengal वंग m. 
____ दक्षुल-तिक्ती . Bengal blue Col. Ind. वंग नील m. benzal green crystals Col. Ind. 
B. catechu वंग खदिर m. 
धूपसुहरि स्फटm. B. green बंग हरि m. 
benzal-hydrazine Chem. धूपसु Bengaline blue Col. Ind. वंगी नील m. उदाजीवी benign tertian malaria Med. He benzal-methyl ethyl ketone Chem. 
तृतीयक हिमज्वर m. 
(styryl ethyl ketone) धूपसु-प्रोदल Benincasa Bat. कुष्माण्डति f. (-ति for दक्षुल शौक्ता f. (सिहल दक्षुल शौक्ता) 
प्रजाति genus) 
___benzal-phenyl-hydrazone धूपसु B..cerifera सामान्य कुष्माण्ड m. 
दर्शल-उदाजीवा f. bent r = curved नत mfn. 
benzal-phthalide Cbem. धूपसु-व्युत्तैलेय 21. नमन .. benthos (fauna and iora of the sea benzal-o-toluidine Chem. धूपसु-ऊ 
bottom) Biol. नितलवासी (-इन्) m. विरालेयी . bentonite (a. soft rock composed benzal violet Col. Ind. धूपसु नीललोहित 
essentially of clayey minerals) m. . Petrog. मदरम।. 
benz-amide Chem. धूप-तिक्तेय . benz-, benzo- (benzene) Chem. धूप- benz-amido- Chem. (benzamide) benz-acridine Chem. धूपोग्री f. 
धूप-तिक्तेय benzal (bent - + aldehyde) Chem. benz-amido Chem. धूप-तिक्तेय, धूप 
धूपसु . 
तिक्तेयक mfn. benzal-acetone Chem. धूपसु-शुक्ता f. benz-amine Chem. धूप-तिक्ती . 
-135 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
. 
. 
benzamine azo black Col. Ind. benz-di-furan Chem. 4-fa-affre, n. 
धूपतिक्ती अज काल m. 
benz-di-ox-azine Cbem. धूप-द्वि-जाजीवी b. azo blue धूपतिक्ती अज नील m. f. b. azo brown धूपतिक्ती अज बV m benz-di-ox-di-azine Chen. धूप-द्वि-जा b. azo red धूपतिक्ती अज रक्त m. द्वयजीवी . b. azo violet धूपतिक्ती अज नीललोहित benz-di-ox-tri-azineChem. धूप-द्वि-जा 
त्र्यजीवी . b. blue धूपतिक्ती नील m. 
benzein Chem. धूपिन M. b. brown धूपतिक्ती बब्रु m. benzene Chem. धूपेन्य 1. b. fast orange धूपतिक्ती स्थिर नारंग benzene-azo-o-cresol (-212-) Chem. 
. धूपेन्य-अज-ऊ-ऋविपव m. (-सम-) b. fast red धुपतिक्ती स्थिर रक्त m. benzene-azo-di-phenyl-amine b. fast yellow quartet fett TOT Chem. धूपेन्य-अज-द्वि-दर्शल-तिक्ती f. 
m. . 
benzene-azo-8-naphthol Chem. b, sky blue धूपतिक्ती आकाश नील m. धूपेन्य-अज-आ-उत्तैलव M. b. violet धूपतिक्ती नीललोहित m. benzene - azo-4 - naphthyl-amine 
b. yellow धूपतिक्ती पीत m. ___Chem. धूपेन्य-अज-अ-उत्तरल-तिक्ती f. benz-amine borate Chem. धूपतिक्ती benzene-azo-resorcinol Chem. धूपेन्य 
टांकीय . 
अज-शेयास m. benz-amine-hydro-chloride Chem. benzene-azo-salicylic acid Chem. 
धूप-तिक्ती-उद-नीरेय . 
. धूपेन्य-अज-नम्रलिक अम्ल 2. benz-amine lactate Chem. धूप-तिक्ती benzene-diazonium Chem. धूपेन्य 
दुग्धीय . 
द्वयजतातुm. benz-aminic Chem. 99-faferafutai mfn. benzene-disulphonic acid Chem. benz-amino Chem. धूप-तिक्तीक mfn. धूपेन्य-द्विशुल्बायिक अम्ल n. benz-analgen Chem. धूप-शूलधन m. benzene-hexa-bromide Chem धूपेन्य benz-anilide Chem. धूप-नीलेय. 
षड्-दुरेय . benz-anthrone Chem. धूप-विक्षा. benzene-hexa-chloride Chem. धूपेन्य benz-anti-ald-oxime Chem. धूप-प्रति षण-नीरेय ॥ 
सुवि-जावि.. 
benzene-penta-carb-oxylic acid benz-arsine Cbem. धूप-नेपी f. 
Chem. धूपेन्य-पंचांग-जारलिक अम्ल 7. benz-azide Chem. धूपाजीवेय. benzene ring or nucleus Chem. benz-az-imide Chem. धूपाज-वितिक्तेय . धूपन्य वलय m., न्यष्टि f. benz-azine Chem. धूपाजीवी f. benzene series Chem. धूपेन्य माला f. benz-azole Chem. धूपाजवा f. benzene sulphinic acid Chem. धूपेन्य benz-bi-tri-azole धूप-द्वि-त्र्यजवा शौल्बिक अम्ल . 
benzene-sulphon-amide Chem. benz-diazine Chem. धूप-द्यजीवी f. धूपेन्य-शुल्बा-तिक्तेय . 
136 
UE 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
benzene-sulphon-chloride Chem. benziminazole = benzimidazole ____ धूपेन्य-शुल्बा-नीरेय N. 
-benzin -efa f. benzene-sulphonic acid Chem. benz-ind-amine. Col. Ind. धूप-निनील 
धूपेन्य-शुल्बायिक अम्ल n. 
तिक्ती . benzene-I-sulphonic acid-(4-azo- benz-induline Chem. धूप-सुनीली f. 
5)-8-hydroxy-quinoline Chem. benzine Chem. erat f. धूपेन्य-१-शुल्बायिक अम्ल- (४-अज-५)-८- benzinum == benzine उदजार-विज्वरवी. 
benzo-, benz- (benzene) Chem. धूप benzenoid Chem. धूपेन्याभ mfn. benzo Chem. धूप, धूपक mfn. benzenyl Chem. धूपेन्यल N. 
benzoate Chem. धूपीय . benz-hydrol=benzo-hydrol Chem. benzoated Chem. धूपीयित mfn. 
धूपोदव M. 
benzo-azurine Col. Ind. धूप-नभोनीली benz-hydr-ox-amic Chem. धूपोद-जा 
तिक्तिक min. 
benzo-bis (benzo-+-bismuth) Pharm. -benzide -धूपेय N. 
धूप-भिद m. benzidine (fr. benzine) Chem. धूपेयी/. benzo black Col. Ind. धूप काल m. 
b. acetate धूपेयी शुक्तीय . 
___b. black-blue धूप कृष्ण-नील m. b. colours and dyes धूपेयी रंग तथा b. black-brown धूप काल-बभ्रु m. 
रंजक m. 
b. blue धूप नील m. b.-di-sulphonic acid धूपेयी-द्वि b. bordeaux धूप कपिशक m. ___ शुल्बायिक अम्ल .. 
b. bronze धूप कांस्य m. b. hydro-chloride धूपेयी उद-नीरेय n. b. brown धूप बभ्रु m. b. puce Col. Ind. धपेयी न्यवरक्त m. b. catechin धप खदिर f. b. rearrangement et gafarma benzo-caine (benzo- + cocaine) 
m. 
Pharm. धूपाचेतनी /. b. sulphate spent trata n. benzo chrome black Col. Ind. धूप benzidino- (benzidine) Chem. धूपेयी वर्णक काल m. benzidino Chem. धूपेयी, धूपेयीक mfn. b. chrome black-blue धूप वर्णक benzil Chem. धूपिल m. 
कृष्ण-नील m.. a-benzil-dioxime (a-diphenyl-gly b. chrome brown धूप वर्णक बभ्रु m. __oxime) Cbem. अ-धूपिल-द्विजावि . b. chrome navy blue धूप वर्णक 
(अ-द्विदर्शल-मजावि .) 
नाविक नील m. benzilic Chem. धूपिलिक mfr. 
b. copper blue धूप ताम्र नील m. b. acid धूपिलिक अम्ल १. 
b. cyanine धूप श्यामी.. a-benzil-monoxime Chem. अ-धूपिल b. dark brown extra धूप असित बभ्रु __ एकजावि.n. 
अतिरिक्त m. benz-imidazole Chem. धूप-वितिक्तेया- , b. dark green धूप असित हरि m. ' 
जवा. 
b.deep black धूप गाढ काल m. .. 
137 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
. 
benzo-coumaran Chem. धूपानन्तमूलिन्य benzo-furo - quin - oxaline Chem. 
धूप-बुसिन्य-विज्वर-तिग्मी f. benzodiazine Chem. धूप-द्वयजीवी f. benzo-furyl Chem. धूप-बुसिन्यल n. benzo-diazole Chem. धूप-दृयजवा f. benzo-glycolic Chem. धूप-मधुविक mfn. benzo fast black Col. Ind. धूप स्थिर benzo-glyoxaline Chem. धूप-मतिष्वी 
काल m. b. fast blue धूप स्थिर नील m. benzo green Col. Ind. धूप हरि m. b. fast bordeaux धूप स्थिर कपिशक b. grey धूप धूसर m. __ m. 
benzo-hydrol=benz-hydrol Chem. b. fast brown धूप स्थिर बभ्र m. 
धूपोदवm. b. fast eosine धूप स्थिर उषसीf. benzoic Chem. धूपिक mfn. b. fast green धूप स्थिर हरि m. __b. acid धूपिक अम्ल n. b. fast grey धूप स्थिर धूसर m. ___b. aldehyde धूपिक सुव्युद m. b. fast heliotrope धूप स्थिर . b. anhydride धूपिक अजलेय n. 
निनीलातिरक्त m. 
b. sulphinide xf9# futeau n. b. fast orange धूप स्थिर नारंग m. benzoid=benzenoid b. fast pink धूप स्थिर आप m. benzoin Chem. देवधुप, धूप M. b. fast red धूप स्थिर रक्त m. benzoin = benzoinum (benzoin.) b. fast rubine sa fie mai f. =gum benzoin Pharm. धूप m. b. fast scarlet धूप स्थिर शोण m. benzoinated Pharm. धूपित min. b. fast scarlet 4BA, 4BS धूप स्थिर benzoinated lard=adeps benzoi 
शोण ४ बम, ४ ब स m. 
. natus (adeps benz.) Pharm. धूपित b. fast violet धूप स्थिर नीललोहित m. वपाf b. fast yellow धूप स्थिर पीत m. benzoin blue Col. Ind. धूप नील m. b. flavine धूप-पिंगी. 
b. brown धूप बत्रुm. benzo-fluorene Chem. धूप-भ्राशेन्य n. b. dark green धूप असित हरिm. benzo-form blue Col. Ind.धूप-बम्र नील b. fast red धूप स्थिर रक्त m. 
m. 
b. sky blue धूप आकाश नील m. b. bordeaux धूपवम्र कपिशक m. b. yellow धूप पीत m. b. brown धूपवम्र बभ्र m. ' benzo indigo blue Col. Ind. धूप निनील b. green धूपवन हरि m. 
नील m. b. orange धूपवन नारंग m. a-benzoin-oxime Chem. अ-धूप-जावि . . b. red धूपवम्र रक्त m. 
benzoinum=benzoin b. scarlet धूपवन शोण m. 
benzo-iodo-hydrin Chem.धूप-जम्बूदि. b. violet धूपवन नीललोहित m. benzol Chem. धूप m. b. yellow धूपवन पीत m. 
benzolate vb. Chem. धूपीयन, धूपवीयन 1. benzo-fulvene Chem. धूप-आपिंगैन्य १. benzol extractor Chem. धूपव-निस्सारक benzo-furan Chem. धूप-बुसिन्य १. 
m. 
138 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
benzo light blue Col. Ind. धूप लधु b. orange धूप नारंग m. 
नील m. 
benzo-para-diazine Chem. धूप-परा b. light bordeaux धूप लघु कपिशक m. द्वयजीवी . b. light brown धूप लघु बभ्रु m. benzo par-oxazine Chem. धूप परा b. light eosine धूप लघु उषसी f. जाजीवी f. b. light green धूप लघु हरि m. benzo-per-oxide Chem. धूपातिजारेय . b. light grey धूप लघु धूसर m. 
benzo-phen-anthr-azine Chem. धूप b. light orange धूप लघु नारंग m. दर्श-विक्षाजीवी f. b. light red धूप लधु रक्त M. benzo-phen-anthroline धूप-दर्श-विक्षवी b. light rubine धूप लघु रक्ती f. b. light scarlet धूप लघु शोण m. 
benzo-phen-azine Chem. 49-gafsirat b. light yellow धूप लघु पीत m. benzoline blowlamp धूपवी धमदीप m. benzo-phenol Chem. धूप-दर्शव m. benzolize vb. धूपवीयन 1. 
benzo-phenone Chem. धूप-दर्शाf. (to mix, treat, or combine with benzo-pheno-thi-azine Chem. धूप benzol or benzene, or some दर्शनान्धाजावा. derivative thereof) धूप-, धूपव- मिश्रण, benzo-phen-ox-azine Chem. धूप-दर्श -साधन,योजन . 
जाजीवी . benzolized धूपवीयित nfn. 
benzo-phen-oxime Chem. धूप-दर्श benzolized oil Chem. धूपवीयित तैल 1. जावि . benzo-morpholine Chem. धूप-प्रमीलवी benzo-phloro-glucinol Chem. धूप 
शिफ-मध्विव m. benzo-a-naphthalide Chem. धूप-अ- benzo-phosphinic Chem. धूप 
उतैलेय. 
भास्वियिक mfn. benzo-naphthol Chem. धूपोत्तैलव m. benzo-phthalazine Chem. धूप benzo navy blue Col. Ind. धूप नाविक व्युत्तलाजीवी . 
नील m. 
benzo-pinacone Chem. धूपाशौक्ता f. b. new blue धूप नव नील m. benzo pure blue Col. Ind. धूप शुद्ध 
b. new red धूप नव रक्त m. 
नील m. benzo-nitrile Chem. धूप-भूयिल m. ___b. pure yellow धूप शुद्ध पीत m. benzo nitrol Col. Ind. धूप भूयव m.. b.-purpurine धूप-नीलोही /. 
b. nitrol black धूप भूयव काल m. benzo-pyran Chem. धूपाग्निन्या . b. nitrol bordeaux धूप भूयव कपिशक benzo-pyranyl Cbem. धूपाग्निन्यल 1. 
m. 
benzo-pyrazolone Chem. धूप-शुष्माजला b. nitrol brown धूप भूयव बभ्रु m. b. nitrol dark brown धूप भूयव benzo-pyrylium Chem. धूपाग्निलातु m. 
असित बभ्रु m. 
benzo-quinoline Chem. धूप-विज्वरवी f. b. olive धूप तैलबदर m. 
benzo-quinone Chem. धूप-विज्वरा . 
..139﻿HL TV 
TALA 
H-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
HC 
benzo-quin-oxaline Chem. धूप- benz-ox-diazole Chem. धूप-जा-दृश्यजका - विज्वर-तिग्मी. 
benzo red Col. Ind. धूप रक्त m. . benz-ox-tetrazine Chem. धूप-जा 
b. red-blue धूप रक्त-नील m. 
चतुरजीवी /. b.-rhod-amine धूप-पाटल-तिक्ती. benz-oxy-Chem. धूप-जार b. rubine धूप रक्ती . 
benzoxy Chem. धूप-जार mfn. b. scarlet धूप शोण m. 
benzoyl (Bz) Cbem, धूपूल (धूप) b. sky blue धूप आकाश नील m. benzoyl-acetone Chem. धूपूल-शुक्ता f. Benzo-sol Pharm. धूप-लयन . benzoyl acetyl peroxide Chem. benzo steel blue G extra Col. धूपूल शक्तल अतिजारेय n. ___Ind. धूप वज्रायस नील ग अतिरिक्त m. dl-benzoyl-alanine Chem. द.वा.-धूपूल benzo-sulph-imide Chem. धूप-शुल्ब- आसुवी. 
वितिक्तेय 
I-benzoyl-amino-anthra-quinone benzo-tetrazine Chem. धूप-चतुरजीवी f Chem. १-धूपल-तिक्ती-विक्ष-विज्वरा. benzo-tetrazole Chem. धूप-चतुरजवा f. benzoylate vb. Chem. धूपूलीयन . benzo-thiazine Chem. धूप-गन्धाजीवी f. (to introduce benzoyl into, to benzo-thiazolineChem. धूप-गन्धाजवी . combine with benzoyl) धूपूल-प्रवेशन, benzo-thio-di-azole Chem. धूप-गन्ध 
धूपूल-योजन . द्वयजवा. . 
benzoylation Chenm. धूपलीयन n. benzo-thio-furan Chem. धूप-गन्ध- benzoyl-aur-amine Chem. धूपूल-स्वर्ण - बसिन्य 1. 
तिक्ती. benzo-thio-phene Chem. धूप-गन्ध- o-benzoyl-benzoic acid Chem. 
दर्शन्य . . 
___ऊ-धूपूल-धूपिक अम्ल . benzo-thio-pyran Chem. धूप- benzoyi chloride (technical) Chem. - गन्धाग्निन्य . 
धूपूल नीरेय . (परिभाषित) benzo-toluide Chem..धूप-विरालेय n. benzoyl-formic Chem. धूपूल-वम्रिक benzo-o-toluidide Chem. धूप-ऊ- mfn. 
विरालयेय . 
benzoyl-glycine Chem. धूपूल-मध्वी f. benzo-triazine Chem. धूप-व्यजीवी f. benzoyl green Col. Ind. धूपुल हरि m. benzo-triazole Chem. धूप-त्र्यजवा f. benzoyl hydride Cbem. धूपूल उदेय 1. benzo-trichlorideChem.धूप-त्रिनीरेय . benzoyl peroxide Chem. धूपूल benzo-trifuran Chem. धूप-त्रिबुसिन्य 1. अतिजारेय 1. benzo violet Cob. Ind.धूप नीललोहित m. benzoyl pink Col. Ind. धूपूल आपद्म benz-ox-Chem. धूप-जा benzoxate Chem. 495114 n. 
benz-pinacone Chem. धूप-आशौक्ता f. benz-ox-azine Cbem. धूप-जाजीवी f. benz-sulph-hydroxamic Chem. धूप benz-ox-diazine Chem. धूप-जा-द्वयजीवी , शुल्ब-उदजातिक्तेयिक mfn. 
benz-thiazole Chem. धूप-गन्धाजवा f. 140 
m. 
HTTम.. 
IN 
REAT ENGLISH-INDIANI 
BY 
n. 
I-benz-thi-azyl-hydrazine Chem... b. ethyl ether धूपल दक्षुल दक्षु m. 
१-धूप-गन्धाजीवल-उदाजीवी f. 
b. formate धूपल वम्रीय . benz-thio-phen Chem. धूप-गन्ध-दर्शेन्य . b. fumarate धूपल धूम्रीय १. 
b. green Col. Ind. धूपल हरि m. benz-triazole Chem. धूप-त्र्यजवा . b. -p-hydroxy-benzoate धूपल-प benz-tri-oxazine Chem. धूप-त्रि-जाजीवी उदजार-धूपीय n. 
b.-imido-di-(p-methoxy-phe benzyl Chem. 27967 n. (cf. benzoyl nyl)-methane (Schoenberg's 
reagent) Chem. धूपल-वितिक्तेय-द्वि b. acetate धूपल शुक्तीय n. 
(प-प्रोदजार-दर्शल)-प्रोदीन्य n. (धप्रो b. acid black Col. Ind. धपल अम्ल प्रतिकर्ता) ___ काल m. 
b. laurate धूपल जयपत्रीय . b. alcohol धूपल सुषव m. 
b.-malonic acid धूपल-उत्कोलायिक b.-amine धूपल-तिक्ती/. 
अम्ल n. b.-amine hydro-chloride धूपल b. mercaptan धूपल रसंग्रभm. 
तिक्ती उद-नीरेय १. 
b.-methyl-aniline धूपल-प्रोदल-नीली p-b.-amino-phenol hydro 
chloride प-धूपल-तिक्ती-दर्शव उद . b.-methyl ether धूपल-प्रोदल दक्षु m. नीरेय . 
b. methyl ketone धूपल प्रोदल शौक्ता b.-aniline धूपल-नीली . b.-aniline - azo-benzene-p-sul b. oleate quat serta n. 
phonic acid धूपल-नीली-अज-धूपेन्य b.-phenyl-acetate धूपल-दर्शल-शुक्तीय 
प-शुल्बायिक अम्ल . b. benzoate धूपल धूपीय .. 
: b.-phenyl-carb-amate धूपल-दर्शल b. black Col. Ind. धूपल काल m. 
अंग-तिक्तीय n. b. blue Col. Ind. धूपल नील m. b. phthalate धूपल व्युत्तैलीय . . b. bordeaux Cal. Ind. धूपल कपिशक . b. propionate धूपल. प्रमेदीय .. 
m. 
b. red Col. Ind. धूपल रक्त m... b. bromide धूपल दुरेय n. 
b. salicylate धूपल: ननलीय. b. butyrate धूपल घृतीय n. 
b. stearate धूपल वसीय 1.. b. chloride धूपल नीरेय n. . .. b. succinate धूपल तृणीय . b. cinnamate धूपल दारुसितीय n. b. sulphide धूपल शुल्बेय 1. b. cyanide धूपल श्यामेय . 
b. -iso-thiourea hydrochloride b.-diazo-amino-benzene धूपल ___ धूपल-स-गन्धमिह उदनीरेय n. ___ द्वयज-तिक्ती-धूपेन्य .. 
b. valerate धूपल बलीय .. b. disulphide धूपल द्विशुल्बेय 1. b. violet Col. Ind. धूपल नीललोहित m. b. ether धूपल दक्षु m. . benzylic Chem. qaferen mfn. b.-ethyl-aniline धूपल-दक्षुल-नीली f. benzylidene Chem. धूपलेयेन्य १. 
141 
n. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
n. 
m. 
b. compounds gater TT m. Berthelot's apparatus Phys. (accu beone (B,) Pharm. m m. (2) 
rate latent heat apparatus) परिशुद्ध bequest that which is left by will, TATTO Ffez n. 
esp. personal property) sfat Berthelot's calorimeter Phys. (for 
measuring latent heat of vapouri Berar Geog. विदर्भ m. 
sation of liquids) scarya-3YHTET berbamine (berberinefamine) Chem. 
दारुतिक्ती . 
berth-reservation Rly, stofu FTTEOT n. Berber बर्बरm. 
beryl (Lat. beryllus from Gk, berullos, Berberidaceae Bot. TERIET-n. from Prakrit aneta, from Sanskrit berberidis cortex=barberry bark c) Mineral, acon. berberine Chem. दारुहरिद्री . 
(a colour bluish green-blue in b. sulphate दारहरिद्री शुल्बीय 1. hue, of medium saturation and Berberis Bot. TESTIFT f. (-fa for medium brilliance) मध्ययं तिनील m. 
प्रजाति genus) 
beryl blue (a colour, bluish green B. aristata सामान्य दारुहरिद्रा . 
blue in hue, of low saturation B. vulgaris हिमालय दारुहरिद्रा f. and high brilliance) प्रावयतिनील m. 
(met with in the Himalayas) beryl green (a colour, bluish-green berberonic acid Chem. दारुहरिद्रायिक in hue, of medium saturation 
TFF 1. 
and high brilliance) प्रर्यानील M. Bergera Bot. fuferrafat f. (-fa for beryllate (beryllia + -ate) Chem. 
fer genus) 
facuta n. B. koenigii Thi hafta m. beryllia=glucina Chem. (beryllium Bergius process Chem. afya19a-fa oxide) facut f. 
berylline Chem. Aque, asal-auf mfn. beriaceous Bot. aasta mfn. beryllium = glucinum Chem. fase beriberi बलहारी (-इन्) m. (short for 
1. 
b. carbonate विडूर प्रांगारीय n. dry b. कदन्न शूल m. 
b. chloride विडूर नीरेय . wet b. कदन्न जलन्धर m. 
b. nitrate विडूर भूयीय n. Berkefeld filter Bact, Flamurta a m. b. oxide विडूर जारेय . Berlin blue=steel blue 
b. potassium fluoride fagt Berlin red=mineral red 
archa the Berlin white-white lead 
b. sulphate face trata n. berry Botnet f. 
berylloid Cryst. वैडूर्याकार m. -berry -बदर n. (straw-berry तृण-बदर) beryllonite Mineral. विडूरिज m. (-इज berry-bug Zool, aadi-mile m. 
for efter mineral) berth Rly. ifeet f. 
Bessemer, bessemer fra# m. 
142 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
Bessemer converter (furnace used beta-naphthyl Chem. 790-STICIT 1. 
in the Bessemer process) प्रापधम 
rocess) अपिधम b. benzoate आवर्ण-उत्तरल धूपीय . भ्राष्ट्र .. 
b. salicylate आवर्ण-उत्तरल नम्रलीय . . Bessemer copper अपिधम ताम्र n. beta-orcin Chem. आवर्ण-शेयि .. Bessemer iron or pig अपिधम अयस् .. beta-orcinol Chem. आवर्ण-शेव m. Bessemerize, bessemerize vb. अपि- beta ray Physical Chem. पा रश्मि m. 
धमन . 
Beta vulgaris Bot. सामान्य पालंक m. Bessemer process अपिधम-विधा f. betel nut पूग . Bessemer steel अपिधम वज्रायस 1. Betulaceae Bot. भूर्जकुल N. best brilliant India dye = benzyl betulin (Lat. betula birch) Chem. 
violet 
आभूजि . best magenta Col. Ind. श्रेष्ठ-धूम्रली f. betulinamaric (betulinol + Lat. best talker Zool. उत्तम पुरुषवाक्, उत्तम amarus bitter कट) Chem. कट्वा 
वाणीवाद m. 
भूर्जियिक mfn. best violet Col. Ind. श्रेष्ठ नीललोहित m. betulinic Chem. आभर्जियिक mfn. B- प्रा- (pronounce आवर्ण, no sandhi) betulino1 Chem. आभूजिव m. beta (B) आवर्ण (प्रा) 
twa (rivet) Geog. वेत्रवती f. (in Beta Bot. पालंकति f. (-ति for प्रजाति Malwa) 
genus) 
between Math. मध्ये B. vulgaris सामान्य पालंक m. between-brain = thalamence Bacid आ अम्ल 1. 
phalon=diencephalon=inter B-antimony आ-अंजन n. 
brain, 'tween brain Anat. 787 beta brass आवर्ण पित्तल ॥. 
मस्तिष्क . beta dash (B) सप्रास आवर्ण m. (प्रास bevel (angle) प्रवण (कोण) 
dash) 
bevel=bevel wheel प्रवण-चक्र . beta-eucaine Chem. Top-Farat f. bevel=bevelling machine gafurt n. beta-glucose Chem. आवर्ण-मधुमn. bevel vb. (to cut or shape to a bevel betaine Cbem. पालंकी f. (पालंक beta angle) प्रवणन n. 
beet, beetroot; in Bengali beet bevel adj., n. sam m. is पालंक) 
bevel angle प्रवण-कोण m. b. hydrochloride पालंकी उदनीरेय . bevelled प्रवणित, प्रवणीकृत, प्रवणीभूत mfn. betainogen Biochem. पालंकीजन m. bevelled edge प्रवणित तट m. beta iron आवर्ण अयस् ।. 
bevelled pinions Automobile betamine blue Col. Ind. आवर्ण-तिक्ती प्रवणित-दन्तिका f. 
" नील m. 
bevelling machine=bevel safoen. beta-naphthol Chem. आवर्ण-उत्तैलव m. bevel wheel=bevel beta-naphthol orange Col. Ind. beverage पेय 1. 
आवर्ण-उत्तैलव नारंगm. . 
beyond पार 
143 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
Beyt Island Geog. (situated at the biceps muscle Anat. fafari-cart f. ___south-western extremity of the bi-cetyl = di-cetyl = dotriacon .. Gulf of Cutch) शंखोद्धार m. 
tane द्वि-तिमिल =द्वात्रिंशोत्या . Bhilsa Geog. (in Malwa) fafcant f. bi-chloride = di-chloride Chem. Bhopal Glog. भोजपाल m. 
द्वि-नीरेय . Bhutan Geog. भोटांग, भोटान्त m. bi-chromate n. Chem. द्वि-वर्णीय . Bi (bismuth) Chem. भि (भिदातु) bi-chromate vb. Chem. द्वि-वर्णीयन n. bir,di-द्वि 
bi-chromate cell Elec. द्वि-वर्णीय-कोशा. bi-Chem. अर्ध 
bi-chromate filter Photog. द्वि-वर्णीय bi-=acid-Chem. अम्ल- (for explana- पाव m. 
tion of bi-, translated as fe-, when bi-chromatize - bi-chromate vb. 
it means acid see under bi-saltbi-chrome Chem. (potassium dichro bi-acetyl Chem. द्वि-शक्तला . 
__mate) द्वि-वर्णक m. bi-acetylene Cbem. द्वि-शक्तन्या . 
bichrome violet Col. Ind. fequiti bi-allyl Chem. द्वि-लाषुणल N. 
नीललोहित m. bi-anisidine Chem. द्वि-शतपुष्पेयी. bi-chromic Chem. (pertaining to bi-arsine Chem. द्वि-नेपी f. 
___ bichromate) द्वि-वर्णीयिक mfn. bias Statistics अभिनति f. 
bichromine blue Col. Ind. fequit biassed Statistics अभिनत mfn. 
नील m. biassed error Statistics अभिनत विभ्रम m. b. green द्विवर्णी हरि m. biassed sampling Statistics अभिनत biciliate Biol. द्वि-पक्ष्म fn. .. निदर्शन .. .. 
bi-collateral bundle Bot. (alike on biaxial joint Anat. द्वयक्ष-सन्धि m. 
both sides) उभयपार्श्वस्थ पूल 1. bi-basic Chem. द्विपैदिक mfn. 
bi-concave=concavo-concave fer bi-benzyl Chem. द्वि-धूपल . 
___ न्युब्ज=निन्युब्ज mfn. bi-bivalent Physical Chem. द्वि-द्विसंयुज bi-convex-convexo-convex द्वि 
___ उदुन्ज उदुदुब्ज mfn. bi-borate Chem. द्वि-टांकीय ॥ 
bicuspid tooth Anat. द्विकूट दन्त m. ____b. of soda विक्षार द्विटांकीय . bicuspid valve-mitral valve Anat. bicarb. (sodium bicarbonate) द्वचङ्ग. द्विदल कपाट. 
. (क्षारातु द्वघङ्गारीय) . . . 
___bi-cycle-cycle द्विचक्र .. bi-carbonate Chem. व्यङ्गारीय, अर्ध- bi-cyclic Chem. द्वि-चक्रिक mfn. 
प्रांगारीय. 
bi-cyclo-Chem. (bicyclic) द्वि-चक्र-. bi-carbonate = acid...carbonate bi-cyclo adj. Chem. द्वि-चक्र mfr. .. Chem. अम्ल प्रांगारीय . 
bi-cyclo-heptane-nor-camphane' bi-carbonate of soda Chem. विक्षार . Chem. द्वि-चक्र-सप्तीन्य=ऋजु-कर्पूरीण्य . । द्वचङ्गारीय . 
Bidar Gaog. विदर्भपुर ।. bi-cellular Biol. द्वि-कोशावान mfn. bidder Com. प्रतिकोष्टा m. 
144 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
Bidder's organ Zool. [CTIETOTT 17.. the oxidation of cholic acid foferi Biebrich acid red = azs acid . अम्ल) पापित्तिक अम्ल 1. 
red B 
biliary Physiol. पैत्त mfa. Biebrich patent black 6BO=wool biliary canal Anat. पैत्त-कुल्या . 
black 
biliary fever पैत्त ज्वर m. Biebrich scarlet = old scarlet biliate vb. पित्तीयन 1. biennials Bot. द्वैवार्षिक 
(to treat with bile) पित्त-साधन n. bifacial द्वचनीक mfn. 
biliated bacteria पित्तीयित-शाकाणवः bifid Bot. द्विदर mfn. 
___m.pl. bifluoride Chem. द्वितरस्वेय. 
biliation पित्तीयन । bifluoride = acid fluoride Chem. bilic int mfn. 
अम्ल तरस्वेय. 
bilic acid=bilianic acid bifocal द्विनाभि mfn. 
bili-cyanin Biochem. पित्त-श्यामि . bifoliate Bot. द्विपर्ण mfn. 
bilification (formation and excretion bifurcation (division into two of bile) पित्तन n. 
. branches) द्विशाखन.. 
bili-fuscin(Lat. fuscus dark) Biochem. big end Mach. बृहदन्त m. 
(a brown pigment found in Bignonia Bot. शुकति f. (-ति for प्रजाति .human gallstones and in old bile) 
genus) 
. पित्त-कपिशि. Bignoniaceae Bot. शुक-कुल n. 
bili-humin Biochem. पित्त-धरणकि. bi-guanide (bi--+ guaridine --- -ide) -bilin -पित्ति . , Chem. द्वि-वैष्ठेय 1. 
___uro-bilin मूत्र-पित्ति .. Bihar Geog. मगध m. 
bili-nigrin fortfafar f. bi-hydrazine = tetrazane. Chem. bilious 1 (of or pertaining to the 
द्वयुदाजीवी f-चतुरजीवीन्य 1. 
.bile) पैत्त mfn. , bi-indyl युग्मनिनीलल n. 
2 (suffering from disordered bikh-aconitine (bikh Skt..विष) Chem. functioning of liver...). पित्तातुर 
विष-प्रविषी. bilaterally symmetrical animal biliousness पैत्तता, पित्तातुरता. 
Zool. द्विपार्व-सम्मित प्राणी (-इन् ) m. bili-prasin Biochem. पित्त-शादि f. bilateral symmetry Bot. द्विपार्व- bili-purpurin = phyllo-erythrin 
सम्मिति .. 
पित्त-नीलोहि f.. bile पित्त . 
bili-pyrrhin font-füzifir f. bile acid Biochem. पित्त-अम्ल n. 
bili-rubin Biochem. पित्त-रक्ति f. bile pigment Biochem. पित्त रङ्गा/. bili-rubin-emia पित्त-रक्ति-रक्तता. bile salt Biochem. पित्त लवण . 
bili-rubinic पित्त-रक्तियिक mfn. bili-पित्त 
bilirubin-uria Med. पिस-रक्ति-मेह m. bilianic acid Chem. (obtained by bili-verdic पित्त-हरिकिक mfn. 
145 
mfn. 
IO 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
- 
- 
___n. 
bili-verdin Biochem. पित्त-हरिकि f. 2 (English) द्वादशख (ख zero), महापद्म bili-xanthin=choletelin fyy-fffa f. bill I Politics (proposed law) विधेयक bills payable Com. देय विपत्रा . 
b. payable book देयविपत्र-पुस्तक. 2 (of payment) देयक n. 
b. receivable प्राप्य विपत्र 1. 3 (of exchange)विपत्र. (विनिमय-पत्र) b. receivable book प्राप्यविपत्र-पुस्त b. book विपत्र-पुस्त. b. broker विपत्र-वणिक् m. (one who bills reserved for consideration ___deals in bills) 
विचारार्थ प्रारक्षित विधेयक n. b. buying विपत्र-क्रयण 1. 
bilocular Bot. द्विगह्वर mfn. b. of exchange विनिमय-पत्र. bimerous Bot. द्वयवयव mfn. accept a b. विपत्र-स्वीकरण 1. bimetallic द्विधात्वीय mfn. accomodation b. अनुग्रह-विपत्र ॥. bimetallic regulator Chem. fastrata blank b. निरङ्क विपत्र । 
यामक m. clean b. सामान्य विपत्र . 
bimetric tube Chem. द्वैमानिक नाल m. discount a b.विपत्र-पूर्वप्रापण 1. bi-molecular Chem. fa-anauata mfn. dishonour a b. विपत्र-अनादरण. bin-fa documentary b. yet efter faqat n. bi-naphthyl, di-naphthyl Chem. duplicate of a b. विपत्र-प्रतिलिपि f. द्वयुत्तरल n. foreign b. विदेश-विपत्र 1. 
binary Matb., Chem. द्विमय, दायि-(यिन् honour a b. विपत्र-मादरण. ___ 'composed of two'), द्वि inland b. स्वदेश-विपत्र. 
binary compound Chem. द्वयि-संयोग m. lost b. लुप्त विपत्र । 
binary fission Biol. द्वि-खण्डन . negotiate a b. विपत्र-परक्रामण n. binary saltsChem. द्वयि-लवणn. noting of a b. विपत्र-आलोकन . binary theory Chem. द्वयि-वाद m. protesting a b. विपत्र-अनादरप्रमाणन bin-iodide-di-iodide Chem. द्वि 
जम्बेय. rebate on a b. विपत्र-अपहार m. binocular उभयाक्ष, द्विनेत्रीय mfn. renewab. विपत्र-नवकरण 1. 
binoculars n. युग्मदरेक्षिका f. tenor of a b.-term of a b. binomial Alg. द्विपद n. 
विपत्रावधि m. 
b. distribution द्विपद वंटन . trade b. व्यापार-विपत्र. 
b. theorem द्विपद प्रमेय .. usance of a b. विपत्र-प्रचलित-अवधि, binoxalate Chem. द्वितिग्मीय. 
विपत्रावधि m. 
binoxalate=acid oxalate=bioxa billet 978 n. 
lateChem. अम्ल-तिग्मीय. bill form देयक-प्रपत्र n. 
bin-oxide-di-oxide Chem. द्वि-जारेय billion T (American) नवख (ख zero), . 
अर्बुद . 
bio- जीव 146 
2. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
- 
- 
m. 
bioblast=bioplast 
bio-phore Biol. (smallest body of biocatalyst Biochem. जीवावेजक m. 
matter capable of life) Frarfursa bio-chemic, bio-chemical जीव 
रसायनिक mfn. 
___bio-plasm Biol. (protoplasm in a biochemical preparations जीव living, forming, or germinal 
रसायनिक औषध . 
state) जीव-प्ररस m. biochemical speciality arefie bioplast Biol. (a tiny mass of 
विशेषता . 
bioplasm, nearly equal to a cell) biochemical special preparation जीव-प्र-कोशा f. (short for जीव-प्ररस 
विशेष जीवरसायनिक निर्मिति . 
कोशा) biochemics=biochemistry bios I Biol. (animal and plant life; biochemist जीवरसायज्ञ m. 
organic nature) जीवजगत् १. biochemistry जीवरसायन . 
2 Biochem. (a vitamin-like sub biochemy=biochemistry 
stance discovered in yeast प्रकिण्व) bio-gen Biochem., Biol. जीव-जन m. कैण्वक n. biogenase Biochem. जीवजनेद m. 
bioscope जीवेक्ष m. bio-genesis Biol. जीव-जनन 7. 
bioscopic जीवेक्षीय mfn. biogenetic view Biol. जीवाज्जीवजनन- bioscopy Med. जीवेक्षा. 
वाद m. 
biose Chem. द्विधु n. biologic, biological, biotic i sifati bio-sterin (bio- +- cholesterol + -in) 
mfn. 
Biochem. जीव-पैत्तवि f. 2 जैविकीय mfn. 
bio-sterol (bio- + cholesterol+-01) biological apparatus जैविकीय साधित्र n. जीव-पैत्तव m. biological assay जैविकीय-परीक्षा f. biotic Biol. I जैविक mfn. biological control जैविक वशीकरण 1. 2 जैविकीय mfn. biologically standardized जीव- biotic factor जैविक कारक m. 
प्रमापित mfn. 
biotite Mineral. (a species of mica, biological optics जीव-काशिकी f. 
generally black or dark green) biological statistics = biometry मलाभ्रक n. 
जीव-सांख्यिकी . 
bioxalate=binoxalate biological vector (in which the bi-oxalate अर्ध-तिग्मीय .. 
disease germ undergoes an bioxalate = binoxalate = acid essential phase of its life cycle) oxalate अम्ल-तिग्मीय . जैवप्रसारक m. 
bioxide=binoxide biology जीवशास्त्र n., जैविकी f. bi-parous Bot. द्वि-सृट् mfn. biometry (biological statistics) जीव- bi-phenol Chem. द्वि-दर्शव m. 
सांख्यिकी f. 
bi-phenyl Chem. द्वि-दर्शल .. bionomics जैववासिकी. 
bi-phenylene Chem. द्वि-दर्शलेन्य. 
147 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
bi-phenyl rearrangement Chem. Bismarck (a colour, reddish red 
द्वि-दर्शल पुनविन्यास m. 
yellow in hue, of medium satur bi-pinnate Bot. द्वि-पक्षवत् mfn. 
ration and low brilliance) falar bi-plane (an airplane) द्वि-तल m. 
तिरक्त m. bi-polar Zool. द्विलाङ्गल mfn. 
Bismarck brown (a colour, yellow bi-propargyl (bi - + propinyl + ish red-yellow in hue, of low 
argyros + -yl, because a hydro saturation and medium brilli gen atom may be replaced by ance) अवरक्तातिपीत m. silver) द्वि-प्रमेदरल n. 
Bismarck lake-bronze lake bi-pyridyl, bi-pyridine Chem. द्वि- bismite Mineral. भिदजारेयिज M. (-इज 
• शुष्मेयल 1., द्वि-शुप्मेयी. 
for खनिज tnineral) biquadratic equation Math. चतुर्धात Bismosol (Bismuth + sol) Pharm. 
समीकार m. 
भिदलयन ॥. biradial symmetry द्वघर-संमिति / bismuth Chem. भिदातु m. birch भूर्ज m. 
b. ammonio-citrate (scales) birch camphor=betulinol Chem. मिदातु तिक्ताति-निम्बवीय 1. (शल्क) ___ भूर्ज कर्पूर m. 
b. and ammonium citrate=bis bird of prey Zool. प्रसह पक्षी (-इन् ) m. muthi et ammonii citras bird's eye-view विहङ्गम-दृष्टि f. 
(bism. et ammon. cit.)=bis birth rate जन्म-अर्घm. 
muth-ammonium citrate bis-, dis- द्विः- (in sandhi द्विर्, द्विश्, द्विष्, Pharm. भिदातु तथा तिक्तातु निम्बवीय ___-द्विस्) 
n. bi-salt=acid salt Chem. (an acid b. benzoate (oxy) भिदातु धूपीय . 
salt with two equivalents of acid (जार) 
to one of base) अम्ललवण, द्विलवण . b. blende Mineral. भिदात्वन्धन m. bi-salt Chem. द्वि-लवण, अर्ध-लवण . . b. carbonate (oxy, tri) भिदातु biscuit शुष्का f. (short for शुष्कापूपिका) प्राङ्गारीय n. (जार, त्रि) bis-dimethyl-amino Chem. द्विद्धि b. chloride (oxy, tri) भिदातु नीरेय 
प्रोदल-तिक्ती/. 
___. (जार, त्रि) bisect rb. अर्धन (अर्धच्छेदन), द्विभाजन, b. chromate भिदात वर्णीय n. 
द्विच्छेदन n. 
b. citrate = bismuthi citras bisection अर्धन, द्विच्छेदन ।. 
(bism. cit.) Pharm.f#cig fittareita bisector Geom. अर्धक m. bisexual Biol. द्विलिङ्ग mfn. 
b. glance = bismuthinite bis-glyoxalineChem. द्विर्मतिष्वी f. ___Mineral. भिदातु-रुचा . bi-silicate Mineral, Chem. द्वि-सैकतीय . b. hydroxide भिदातु उद-जारेय. 
b. lactate (oxy) भिदातु दुग्धीय 1. bisimine Chem. द्विवितिक्ती . 
m. 
148 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
b.p-naphtholate (oxy) भिदातु bismuthi-ferous Chem. भिदातु-भर mfn. 
आ-उत्तैलवीय n. (जार) 
bismuthine I (tri-methyl-bismuth b. nitrate (crystals) भिदातु भूयीय n. ine, aliphatic bismuthine) Chem. 
(स्फटात्मक) 
भिदी f. (त्रि-प्रोदल-भिदी, स्नैहिक-भिदी f.) b, ocher=bismite Mineral. fHETET 2 Mineral.=bismuthinite 
गैरिक n. 
bismuthinite Mineral. I (bismuth b. oleate भिदातु नक्षीय . 
trisulphide) भिदशिज m. (-इज for b. oxalate भिदातु तिग्मीय .. 
खनिज mineral) b. oxide भिदातु जारेय ?. 
2 (an ore of bismuth) भिदात्विज m. b. oxy-chloride भिदातु जार-नीरेय 1. (-इज for खनिज mineral) b. oxy-nitrate भिदातु जार-भूयीय n. bismuthite I भिदित १. b. phenate भिदातु दर्शीय. 
2=bismutite b. phosphate भिदातु भास्त्रीय .. bismutho- =bismuto b. potassium iodide भिदातु दहातु bismuthous Chem. भिद्य mfn. 
जम्बेय. 
bismuthyl Chem. भिदल .. b. salicylate (oxy) भिदातु नम्रलीय 1. b. chloride भिदल नीरेय . 
(जार) 
bismutite Mineral. (a basic bismuth b. sodium tartrate (neutral) carbonate) भिदांगीयिज m. (-इज for 
भिदातु क्षारातु न्यासवीय . (क्लीब) खनिज mineral) b. spar Mineral. भिदातु धात्विया f. bismuto-, bismutho- (bismuth) भिद b. sub-chloride भिदातु अनु-नीरेय n. bismuto-plagionite Mineral.(5 PbS. b. sub-gallate भिदातु अनु-द्रुस्फोटीय n. 4Bi2S3) सीभिशिज m. (-इज for खनिज b. sub-nitrate भिदातु अनु-भूयीय 1 mineral) b. sulphate भिदातु शुल्बीय n. bismuto-smaltite Mineral. भिद-केतु b. sulphide भिदात शल्बेय 7. 
नेपिज m. (-इज for खनिज mineral) b. tannate भिंदातु शल्कीय . 
bismuto-sphaerite Mineral. भिद b. tri-brom-phenate Pharm. गोलिज M. (-इज for खनिज mineral) 
भिदातु त्रि-दुरा-दीय . 
bison Zool. गवल m. b. valerate भिदातु बलीय 1. 
bistetrazole Chem. द्विश्चतुरजवा . b. white Col. Ind. भिदातु श्वेत m. Bistr-amine brown Col. Ind. कज्जल 
b. yellow Col. Ind. भिदातु पीत m. तिक्ती बभ्रु m. bismuthal (of or pertaining to bis- bistre=soot brown Col. Ind. कज्जल= 
muth) भैदातुक mfn. 
कज्जल ब<m. bismuthate Chem. भिदीय n. 
bistriazole Chem. द्विस्त्र्यजवा. bismuthic Chem. भिदिक, भिदात-युत nfn. bi-substitute द्वयादिष्ट n. bismuthic acid Chem. भिदिक अम्ल n. bi-substituted द्वयादिष्ट mfn. bismuthi citras-bismuth citrate bi-subtitution = di-substitution bismuthide Chem. भिदेय 1. 
Chem. द्वचादेश ४. 
_149 
तिक्ती﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
bi-sulphate अर्ध-शुल्बीय 1. 
bituminize vb. Chem. जतुकीयन, जतुकी bi-sulphate-acid sulphate Chem. साधन n. 
अम्ल शुल्बीय. 
bituminoid Cbem. जतुक्याभ mfn. bi-sulphide Cbem. द्वि-शुल्बेय ". 
bituminous Chem. I जतुक्य mfn. bi-sulphite अर्ध-शुल्बित 7. 
2 (having the odour of bitumen) bi-sulphite=acid sulphite Chem. जतुकी-गन्ध mfn. 
अम्ल शुल्बित. 
bituminous coal जतुक्य अंगार m. bisulphite of lime Chen. चूर्णक- bituminous grout जतुक्य अभिपूर m. ___ अर्धशुल्बित n. 
bi-urate Chem. अर्ध-मेहीय. bi-symmetrical, bi-symmetric द्वि- bi-urate=acid urate Chem. अम्ल मेहीय 
संमित, वि-संमितीय mfr. 
. bi-symmetrical animal Zool. द्वि- bi-urea-di-urea Chem. द्वि-मिह m. 
संमित प्राणी (-इन्) m. 
bi-uret Chem. द्वि-मिहेय n. bi-symmetry द्वि-संमिति f. 
b. reaction द्विमिहेय-प्रतिक्रिया / bi-tartrate Chem. अर्ध-न्यासवीय 2. 
b. test Chen. द्विमिहेय-परीक्षा . bi-tartrate-acid tartrate Chem. अम्ल bi-valence, bi-valency Chem. द्वि 
न्यासवीय .. 
संयुजता. bi-tolyl Chem. द्वि-विरारला. 
bi-valent I Chem. द्वि-संयुज nfn. bits, carpenter's वर्धकि-फल .. 
2 (double) Biol. द्विगुण, युग्म mfn. bitter कट mfn. 
bivalve Zool. द्वि-पुट mfn. bitter almond oil green कटु वाताम तैल Bivalvia Zool. द्विपुटा: m. pl. 
हरि m. 
bivinyl द्विद्राक्ष्यल 1. bitter apple = colocynth Pharm. biweekly=semiweekly अर्धसाप्ताहिक 
इन्द्रवारुणी . 
mfn. bitter salt=Epsom salts Chem. कटु Bixa Bot. सिन्दूरकति f. (-ति for प्रजाति 
लवण . 
genus) bittersweet (a plant tasting at first bl. I (barrel, 31 gallons) अ. खा. 
sweetish ग्रामधु and then bitter कट) (अर्ध-खारी) 
Bot. कट्वामधु m. 
2 (barrel, IOS quarts) म. द्रो. (महा bitter taste कटु स्वाद m. 
द्रोणी) bitumen (ultimately from Skt. जतु) black I adj. काल mfn. 
जतुकी . 
21. कालिमा (-मन्) m. bitumen-Congo brown न्यवरक्तपीत black alkali काल क्षारक m. ___m. 
black ash काल भस्म .. bitumen process Photog. जतुकी-विधा black bear काल ऋक्ष m. 
black-blue कृष्ण-नील mfn. bitumini ferous Chem. जतुकी-भर mfn. black-board कृष्ण-फलक bituminization Chem. जतुकीयन 1. black-brown Col. Ind. काल-बभ्र m. 
150 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
Blackburns double pendulum black manganese oxide at STES 
Phys. qT FETT m. 
ETO N. black chalk # cf. 
black mica=biotite Tv Hpi n. black chebulic myrobalans = black mustard = sinapis nigra 
myrobalan Pharm. atait f. 
Pharm. कृष्ण सर्षपm. black cohosh=cimicifuga Pharm. black oxide Col. Ind. FTCT GTRT n. 
Teata m. 
black oxide of copper cupric black copper काल ताम्र 1. 
oxide Cà em. [T TH-TTg 2, blackdamp = chokedamp Mining black oxide of iron = ferroso 
(a non-explosive mine gas; essen- ferric oxide Chem. 21-TTT na tially carbon dioxide) ROTHteit, black oxide of manganese-man 
Tafafa m. 
ganese dioxide Chem. Pret EF black diamond काल हीर m. 
Ta n. black fish (any of several small black oxide of mercury=mercur 
toothed whalcs) Zool. FTT fafy ous oxide Chem. TT TTG-STTTT n. m. 
black pepper = Piper nigrum black gold=maldonite fet qui n. (piper nig.) = piper Pharm. 
black-green काल-हरि mfn. 
#fitf. black haw I= Viburnum pruni- black plum=Eugenia jambolana 
folium (used in uterine diseases) ==jambula Falat m., the 
tram. 
black powder काल क्षोद m. 2=viburnum Pharm. 11. blackroot=colic root TT-TFT f. black-headed gull Z00l. गङ्गाचिल्ली f. black salt काल लवण .. 
(ancient word) 
black sand Petrog. Tn-furahat f. black henbane=henbane mefan black sassafras = oliver's bark 
m. 
Pharm. (used in Australia as a black iron liquor= iron liquor substitute for cinnamon) गन्धवल्क 
काल अयोरस-अयोरस m. blackish Att mfn. 
black silver=stephanite Mineral. black lead TT TT 1. 
TG n. blackleg I (a disease) 300-FET f. black snakeroot cimicifuga 
2 (a swindler, etc.) i m. 
Pharm. fitcara m. Blackley scarlet=paper scarlet 
black-stick Pharm. (quinoidine black liquor काल रस m. 
moulded into sticks) Fafee f. black lotion=black wash #TT HAFTET black tellurium=nagyagite Mine 
ral. TT 11F 16. black manganese = pyrolusite black tongue in dogs) Veter. 
Chem. #TET E n. 
Taflat f. 
m, 
ISI 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
black vitriol Com. काल काचर. blast and vacuum pump (combin black wash=black lotion=lotio e d) अभिधमन तथा शुन्यक उदंच m. (संयुक्त) 
nigra = aqua phagedaenica blasted अभिध्मात, -ध्मात 
• nigra Pharm. काल अवनेग m. 
sand blasted सिकता-मात mfn. black water = hemoglobinuria blast furnace अभिधमन भ्राष्ट. 
कालमेह m. 
-blastic Biol. -कृत् black water fever Med. कालमेह ज्वर -blastic (sprouting, germinating) 
m. 
-रुहिक mfn. bladder Anat. आशय m. 
crystallo-blastic स्फट-रुहिक mfn. blade I 994479 n. 
blastid Embryol. (site of the nucleus) 2 (razor blade) क्षुर-फल 1. 
न्यष्टि-देश m. 3 = vane (of a windmill) फल n. blasting (rending by means of explo 
4 (of an electric fan) फल . ___sives) उत्स्फोटन n. blanc de fard=bismuth white blasting gelatin a variety of explo blanc fixe paste=fast white ____sive gelatin) उत्स्फोटन-श्लिषि f. blank i firiei mfn. 
blasting method Mil. उत्स्फोटन-रीति . ___2 शून्य, रिक्त nfn. 
blasting oil=nitroglycerin उत्स्फोटन blank bill Com. निरंक विपत्र. 
तैल . b. cheque निरंक धनादेश M. 
blasting powder उत्स्फोटन क्षोद m. b. credit=open credit निरंक प्रत्यय A powder क क्षोद m. 
B powder ख क्षोद m. b. endorsement=general en- blast lamp अभिधमन दीप m. 
dorsement सामान्य-पृष्ठाङ्कना . blast nozzle Rly. Eng. अभिधमन प्रोथ b. form निरंक प्रपत्र n. blank determination Anul. Chem. blasto-chyle Embryol. (fluid that 
(a determination made as nearly fills the blasto-coele) युग्गुहा-लसी f. as possible under the same con- blasto-coele Embryol. TT-ET f. ditions as a true determination, blasto-colla Bot. कड़मल-निर्यास m. but with omission fa: of the blasto-cyst Embryol. (blastodermic Substance to be tested परीक्ष्य) निष्परीक्ष्य . ____vesicle) युक्कोष्ठ m. (युक्=युक्ता-खण्ड) निश्चयन . 
__blasto-cyte Anat. युक्-कोशा f. (युक्= blank table Statistics निरंक-सारणी f. युक्ता-खण्ड) blast vb. अभिधमन 1. 
___blasto-derm Embryol. युक्-स्तर m. -blast =.-plast Biol. (formative 
(युक-युक्ता-खण्ड) ..cell)-घट, -कृत् 
blasto-dermatic= blasto - dermic -blast (Gk. blastos a sprout, a germ) Embryol. युक्स्त रीय mfn. (युक्=युक्ता 
खण्ड) blast, acid अम्ल-ध्मान 1. 
blastodermic vesicle युक्स्तर-कोष्ठ m. 152 
m. 
m. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
- 
- 
- 
-- 
- 
blasto-disc = germinal disk Em प्राश्वेतन 1., आश्वेतना f., नीरंजन n. 
bryol. युग-बिम्ब m. 
नीरंजना f. blast of air वाताभिधम M. 
b. apparatus श्वेतन साधित्र n. blastomere Embryol. (cells resulting b. clay or earth श्वेतन-मृत . 
from the early division of the b. croft श्वेतन निष्कुट m. ___zygote युक्ता) युक्ताखण्ड m. 
b. engine श्वेतन गन्त्र ॥. blasto-pore Embryol. (opening into b. field श्वेतन क्षेत्र १. ___the arch-enteron) आद्यन्त्र-मुख . b. ground श्वेतन भूमि f. 
blastosphere = blastula Embryol. b. powder श्वेतन क्षोद m. ___ युग-गोल M. (युक्=युक्ता-खण्ड) 
b. tank श्वेतन तडाग m. blast pump अभिधमन उदंच m. bleach liquor (e.g. eau de Javelle) blastula=blastosphere 
श्वेतन रस m. blastula Embryol. (a hollow sphere, bleach-man श्वेतन पुरुष m. ___with single layer wall) एकभित्तिक m. bleach process Photog. श्वेतन-विधा . 
blastule-blastula 
bleach wax श्वेतन सिक्थn. blauholz Col. Ind. नीलम m. bleach-works श्वेतन-शाला f. blazing star-colic-root शूल-शिफाf. bleach-yard श्वेतनांगन M. bleach vb. श्वेतन, नीरंजन . 
blende (from German blenden to bleach (act or process of bleaching) blind', alluding to its dazzling ___ श्वेतन 1., श्वेतना f., नोरंजन 1., नीरंजना . lustre)=sphalerite अन्धन m. 
bleached श्वेतित mfn. 
blepharoplast Biol. (the centro bleacher श्वेतक m. 
some functioning over the kinetic I (a machine) श्वेतन-यन्त्र . 
activity) गतिवशी (-इन् ) m. 2 (a vessel) श्वेतन-पात्र n. 
blight Bot. (colour is taken off) 3 (a worker) श्वेतायता (-) m. bone b. अस्थि-श्वेतक m. 
blind (as of a window) अन्धक m. feather b. पत्र-श्वेतक m. 
blind spot Anat. अन्ध बिन्दु,m. ginger b. आर्द्रक-श्वेतक m. 
blip (American) = pip (English; hair b. लोम-श्वेतक m. 
visual signal on the scope) Radar rag b. चीवर-श्वेतक m. 
ककुद् . wax b. सिक्थ-श्वेतक m. 
blister 1 Med. उदस्फोट, विस्फोट m. bleachery श्वेतन-गृह 1. 
2 = radome (antenna. housing) bleach-field श्वेतन-क्षेत्र १. 
Radar प्रावार m. (प्रातन्तु-प्रावार) bleach-ground श्वेतन-भूमि . 
blister beetle उदस्फोट भङ्ग m. bleach-house श्वेतन-गृह n. 
blistering beetle = cantharides bleaching (act or process of whiten- Pharm. हरिभङ्ग m. 
ing or making whiter or lighter blistering cerate = cantharides in colour) श्वेतन n., श्वेतना f, cerate Pbarm. हरिभृग्य-सिक्थ n. 
नीरजा . 
___133 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
- 
blitz-krieg Mil. तडिद-युद्ध । bloodsucking bat Zool. रुधिर-चूष-जतू . bloated Zool. उत्पीन mfn. 
blood transfer=blood transfusion block इष्टका f. 
रक्त-संक्रामणn. block (a. combination of groups) blood vessel रक्त-वाहिनी, रुधिर-वाहिनी 
संवर्ग m. 
bloom (a mineral that is frequently block and tackle इष्टका तथा संभार m. found as an efflorescence) कुसुमn. block diagram Statistics इष्टका-चित्र. blotches Med. सिध्म n. (ancient word) block system (of signalling) Rail- blotchy सिध्मवत् mfn. ___roads इष्टका-संहति . 
blotter मसीचूष m., चूषपत्र n. blood रुधिर, रक्त .. 
blotting pad मसीचूष-चय M. blood albumin रुधिर-शिवति . 
blotting paper=blotter blood analysis reagent रुधिर-विश्लेषण blow vb. धमन . 
प्रतिकर्ता (-तृ) m. 
blown. प्रहार m. blood capillary रुधिर-केशाल m. blower I ETT n. (a machine) blood-charcoal Chem. रुधिरागार m. 2 ध्माता (-त) m. (a person) blood-circulation रुधिर-परिवहण 1., acid b. अम्ल-ध्माता M. 
रुधिर-परिवाह m. 
bottle b. कूपी-ध्माता m. blood corpuscle रुधिर-कोशा. 
glass b. काच-माता m. blood crystals Physiol. रुधिर-स्फट m. powerdriven b. शक्तिचालित ध्मात्र. blood flow=blood stream रुधिर-प्रवाह sand b. सिकता-माता m. 
m. 
water b. जल-मात्र blood gland रुधिर-ग्रन्थि m. 
blower valve Rly. Eng. ध्मात्र-कपाट 1. blood glue रधिर-श्लेष m. 
blowing धमन 1. blood group रक्त-वर्ग m. 
blowing balls Chem. धमन कन्दुक n. bloodhound (used in tracking cri- blowing furnace = glory hole 
minals... remarkable for acute- धमन-भ्राष्ट्र. 
ness of smell) गन्धानुसारी (-इन्) m. blowing machine धमन यन्त्र .. blood-letting रक्त-मोक्ष m., रक्त-मोक्षण ?. blowing pipe, blow-pipe = blow 
(ancient word) 
tube Glass Mfg. TF-T5 n. blood-lye salt = potassium ferro- blowlamp धमदीप m. 
_cyanide Chem. रुधिर-पल्पूलन लवण n. blowpipe धमनाडn. blood pressure Physiol. रुधिर-निपीड m. ___b. analysis धमनाड-विश्लेषण .. blood red-para red रुधिर-रक्त, अधि b. bench धमनाड-फलकी. 
रक्तापीत m. 
b. charcoals धमताड-अंगार m. blood sinus Zool. रक्त-कोटर m. 
b. flame धमनाड-ज्वाला bloodstone=heliotrope, hematite b. reaction धमनाड-प्रतिक्रिया 
रुधिर-प्रस्तर m. 
b. trough धमनाड-द्रोणी . blood stream=blood flow 
blowtorch धमवर्ती / 
154 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
61, 
112. 
blowtube Glass Mfg. STARTE 1. blue pill=pill of mercury Pharm. blue नील mfn. 
Fita-fefT=4798-fet f. blue asbestos=crocidolite Mineral blue piston syringe to GT 
m. 
Etfiat f. blue base Col. Ind. Tro TS n. 
blue powder Metal. नील क्षोद m. blue-bell Bot. 75-E0CT f. 
blue print=cyanotype faz m. blue black नील-कृष्ण mfn. 
blue red Col. Ind. et m. bluebottle fly free:47-77897 f. 
blue reddish Col. Ind. TATTET M. blue CB water-soluble Col. Ind. blue salt Col. Ind. 17 agus n. 
FEST 5-fase m. 
blue shark i UTE, TTC NTE M. (one blue copper ore=azurite tem ata of the commonest man-eating 
ren. 
sharks) blue developer Col. Ind. for fastest bluestone Petrog. TETETT m. 
blue verdigris Col. Ind. Taff. blue fire platform. 
blue-verditer = mineral blue blue galls=gall Pharm. gente m. (artificial) blue gas (uncarbureted water gas, blue vitriol Chem. They (ancient 
blue water gas) Tatha m. 
word), TT TTT na blue glass Col. Ind. fire m. blue water gas Chem. 07-fem. 
blue glass slip Chem. नील काच-खण्ड m. bluish आनील mfn. blue-green नील-हरि mfn. 
bluish-green gufaa mfn. blue-greenish Col. Ind. T TEFE bluish violet rritet nga mfn. 
m. 
Blumea Bot. 49 fa f. (-fa for surfa blue gum Bot. (a kind of Eucalyp- genus) 
tus) Traffe . 
B. balsamifera सामान्य कुक्कुरद्रु m. blue heat नील ऊष्मा m. 
blurred in mfn. blue iron earth=earthy vivianite Blythe process (a wood-preser 
the f. 
vative process by which phenol blue lead Mining नील सीस. 
is injected into the dried timber) blue light=blue fire ittifa m. 
fogaia-faet f. blue litmus paper in 1987-951. B. M. R. (basal metabolism rate) blue mass=blue pill, mass of T. 9. #. (HTETT 7|1977 HP) 
mercury Pharm. 1793, 97G-4T m. boa Zool. # m. blue meldola M=metamine blue boa constrictor Zool. (hangs from 
trees) शाखाजगर m. blue metal fat ETC m. 
boar Zool. blue orchil Col. Ind. FTIST RITM. I (uncastrated male of swine) blue paste Col. Ind. 17-247 f. 
199 m. 
M 
ISS 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
2 (wild hog) बनसूकर . 
body louse Zool. काय-यूका f. 3 (male of any of various mam-- body machine शरीर-यन्त्र 1. mals) वृष m. 
body of legislators = legislature board (as of wood) Tereti n. 
=legislative body facerent af m., board Com. गण m. 
विधायि मण्डल . b. meeting गणाधिवेशन n. 
body surface काय-तल . b. of directors संचालक-गण m. body tube काय-नाल M. b. of trade व्यापार-विभाग m. (French body wall Zool. काय-भित्ति . 
department du commerce) Boerhavia Bot. gariafa f. (-fôr for tariff b. निराकाम्य-गण M. 
__ प्रजाति genus) board or conference table परिषत्- B. diffusa सामान्य पुनर्नवा . 
पटल . 
bog (plants) Ecology (mud with board foot (144 cu. inches) फलक-पाद acids) अम्लि -पंक M. 
M. (१४४ घ. प्रांगुल) 
bogie (a low cart) निशकट . Board of Trade afumatut m. 
bogie wheel Rly. निशकट-चक्र . Board of Trade salinometer वणिग्- bogpeat (mosses) Bot. हरिता-जीर्णकm. 
गण-लवणमान m. 
Bohemian bole पीतविमद् . boarhound Zool. सूकराखेटिक m. Bohemian earth=green earth boat hunter सौकरिक m. (ancient. boil vb. बुबुदन 1. 
___word) 
boil=furuncule Med. Fuite m. (Hindi boat नौका . 
फोड़ा) boat train Rly. नौप्रापि संयान M. boiled oil बुद्बुदित तैल 1. bob (of a pendulum)=knob मुण्ड mm. boiler Steam Engine वाष्पित्र, प्रबाष्पित्र. bobbin बलिता . 
b. casing R/y. Eng. बाष्पित्र-आवरण 1. bodily adv. साङ्गोपाङ्ग 
b. pressure Rly. बाष्पित्र-निपीड m. body I काय m. 
b. salinometer बाष्पित्र-लवणमान m. 2 (of a bone) Anat. (अस्थि -) काय m. b. steam pressure gauge Rly. 3 (material object) भौतिक पदार्थ m. 
Eng. बाष्पित्र-प्रबाष्प-निपीडामान M. body at rest विश्रामस्थ पदार्थ m. (cf. b. tubes Rly. Eng. बाष्पित्र नाल M. 
in motion' गतिमान्, not गतिस्थ) flask b. पलिघ-बाष्पित्र n. body building काय-निर्माण 
iron b. अयो-बाधिपत्र । body cell=somatic cell Biol. काय- boiling बुद्धदन 1. 
कोशा तनु कोशा f. 
boiling plate:hot plate पोषण-पट्टm. body coelom देह-गुहा . 
boiling plate, electric विद्युद्-अोषण-पट्ट body green=chrome green 
m. body guard अंगरक्षक m. 
boiling point बुबुदांक m. body in motion गतिमान् पदार्थ m. (cf. boiling point apparatus बुद्बुदांक 
'at rest' विश्रामस्थ, not विश्रामवान्) 
साधित्र . 
156 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
genus) 
boiling point tube बुद्बुदांक-नाल m. Bombax Bot. शाल्मलीति f. (-ति for प्रजाति bois jaune = gelbholz Col. Ind. 
genus) पीतद्रुम m. 
B. malabaricum AITAIFLE TEHDİT Bokhara Geog. नवविहार m. (Bokhara ___is from Skt. विहार) 
bomb calorimeter प्रस्फोट-उषमान m. boldine=boldoine Chem. स्वापपर्णी f. bomber (plane) Mil. प्रस्फोटक्षेपक m., bold line उन्नत-रेखा . 
प्रस्फोटक (विमान) -boldo=boldo folia=boldo leaves bomb furnace Chem. प्रस्फोट-भ्राष्ट्र. 
Pharm. स्वापपर्णी. 
bombing प्रस्फोटक्षेपण, प्रस्फोटवर्षण, प्रस्फोटन boldoine-boldine boldo leavesboldo 
bombing through overcast (BTO) Boldu Bot. (its dried leaves are hyp- Radar मेघान्तरा-प्रस्फोटन M. (मे. प्र.) 
notic) स्वापपर्णाति f. (-ति for प्रजाति bomb-proof प्रस्फोट-सह mfn. 
bona vacantia Law अस्वामिक bole (Gk. bolos clod of earth) विमद . bond Chem. बन्ध m. bole (a brown, reddish red-yellow in bond Com. बंध m., बंधपत्र .. 
hue, of medium saturation and b. creditor बंध-उत्तमर्णm medium brilliance) मध्यपीतातिरक्त b. debtor बंध-अधमर्ण m. m. 
b. note बंध-पत्र . boletic = fumaric Chem. धूनिक mfr. indemnity b. क्षतिपूर बंध m. Bologna phosphorus (a phospho- bonded goods Com. करदेय वस्तु .. ... rescent sulphide of barium) भासद् b. laboratory करदेय रसशाला f. 
हर्यात शुल्बेय . 
b. warehouses करदेय वस्तुगह . bolometer Phys. रोधविकिरणमान m. bone अस्थि । bolt अर्गली. 
bone ash अस्थि-भस्म 1. bolted together सहार्गलित mfn. bone black=animal black, animal bolt from the blue अनभ्र-बज्रपात m. charcoal, bone char, bone char bolt-head flask Chem. अर्गली-शिर पलिघ coal Chem. अस्थि-कालिमा (-मन), 
m. 
अस्थ्यंगार m. . bolt-head flask, pyrex Chem. bone bleacher,अस्थि-श्वेतक m. 
अग्निराज अर्गली-शिर पलिघm. 
bone brown.Col. Ind. अस्थि- 
ब m. bolt hole अर्गली-छिद्र . . 
bone cell%3Dbone corpuscle Zool. bolts and nuts अर्गली तथा नह m. ____ अस्थि-कोशा. bolus कवल m. 
bone char अस्थ्यंगार m. bomb प्रस्फोट, गोल m. 
bone corpuscle=bone cell bomb vb. प्रस्फोटन, गोलक्षेपण . bone-dry ofer-z] mfn. bombard vb. गोलक्षेपण . 
bonelet=ossicle=ossicule Anat. bombardment गोलक्षेप m:, गोलक्षेपण . . अस्थिका 
157 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
bone marrow compound Pharm. bought b. क्रीत-पुस्त।. 
अस्थि-मज्जा-संयोग m. 
cash b. रोक-पुस्तक. bone marrow extract Pharm. अस्थि financial b. अर्थ-पुस्त ।. 
मज्जा-निस्सार m. 
invoice b. बीजक-पुस्त. bone marrow principle Pharm. main b. मुख्य पुस्त 1. 
अस्थि-मज्जा-तत्त्व . 
petty cash b. क्षुद्र-रोक-पुस्त . bone oil=Dippel's oil, animal purchases b. क्रय-पुस्त.. ___ oil अस्थि -तैल . 
returns inward b. विक्रय-प्रत्याय bone phosphate अस्थि-भास्वीय . 
पुस्त". bone precipitate अस्थि-निस्साद m. 
returns outward b. क्रय-प्रत्याय bonus Com. अधिलाभांश m. 
पुस्त .. b. shares अधिलाभांश अंश m. 
sales b. विक्रय-पुस्त 2. reversionary b. प्रतिवर्ती अधिलाभांश statistical b. सांख्यिकीय पुस्त.. 
statutory b. परिनियत पुस्तn. bon voyage शिवास्ते पन्थान: 
subsidiary b. सहाय पुस्त . bony I (consisting of bones) अस्थिमय bookcase पुस्तधान 1., पुस्तकधाय m. (धाय 
mfn. 
almirah) 2 (like bone or bones) अस्थिवत् book keeping machine अंकपालिन १. 
mfn. 
(अंकपाल-यन्त्र) 3 (full of bones) afequi mfn. book lung Zool. Tento n. 4 (pertaining to bones)आस्थ्य mfn. bookrack पुस्तक-निलय m. 5 (having large and prominent bookstall पुस्त-विक्रयिणी f., पुस्त-स्थाम 1. bones) उदस्थिमत् mfn. 
bookstand पुस्तकस्थाम . bony fishes अस्थि-मत्स्या: m.pl. bookworm पापठक m. (ancient word) bony labyrinth (in the ear) Anat, Boolian algebra (algebra of logical 
अस्थि -गहन . 
__propositions) तर्क-बीजगणित 1. bony palate अस्थि-तालु। 
boom अभिवृद्धि book पुस्तक.. 
boom period अभिवृद्धि-काल m. book Com. पुस्त. 
booster Rly. (an auxiliary engine) b. debt पुस्त-ऋण .. 
उपगन्त्र. b.-keeper पुस्त-पाल m. 
booster throttle Rly. Eng. उपगन्त्र b.-keeping पुस्त-पालन n. 
प्ररोध m. b. of accounts लेखा-पुस्तn. 
Bor. (Borrelia) विकु. (विकुन्तलाणु) b. of original entry मौलिक प्रविष्टि- bor-, boro- (boron) Chem. टांक 
पुस्तn. 
boracic=boric ciftiei mfn. account b. लेखा-पुस्त।. 
boracic acid=boric acid bills payable b. देय-विपत्र-पुस्त . boraci-ferous (containing or yield bills receivable b. प्राप्य-विपत्र-पुस्त।. ing borar) टंकण भर mfn. 
158 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
boracite Mineral. (a borate and chlo- bore छिद्र, संछिद्रा. 
ride of magnesium) टांकिज m. (-इज bore vb. संछिद्रण. for खनिज mineral) 
bored fifofen mfn. boracous (of, or relating to, or from borer छिद्रक M. ____borax) टंकण्य mfn. 
cork b. त्वक्षा-छिद्रक m. Boraginaceae Bot. श्रीहस्तिनी-कुल 1. glass b. काच-छिद्रक M. Boraginineae Bot. श्रीहस्तिनी-अनुगोत्र १. boric (of, pertaining to, or contain boral (borate टांकीय + aluminium ing, boron) Chem. टांकिक mfn. 
स्फटयातु) Pharm. टांकस्फm. 
boric acid--boracic acid-acidum Borassus Bot. तालीति f. (-ति for प्रजाति boricum (acid. boric.) Pharm. 
genus) 
टांकिक अम्ल . B. flabelliformis सामान्य ताली. boric anhydride टांकिक अजलेय. borate (from boric) Chem. टांकीय 1. boride Cbem. टांकेय . borate vb.Chem. टंकीयन . 
borine Chem. टांकी. I (to mix or impregnate with boring छिद्रण, संछिद्रण .. borax) टंक-मिश्रण, टंक-व्यापन 1 
boring shell Zool. निखन-शुक्ति f.. 2 (to mix or impregnate with borize vb. Chem. टांकीयन n. boric acid) टांकीयन (टांकिकाम्ल-मिश्रण, (to treat with, or to subject to the -व्यापन). 
action of, boric acid) zif**1* borax (crystals or powder) टंकण m. साधन, -प्रभावन .. 
(स्फट ; क्षोद) 
Borneo camphor=d-Borneol द.-कर्पूव borax=borax purificatus=purified m. 
borax = sodium borate = so- borneol=camphol, bornyl alcohol dium pyroborate Pharm. टंकण m. Chem. कर्पूव m. b. bead टंकण-गुटिका f. 
d-Borneol = Borneo camphor, b. carmine Micros. टंकण-कीटशोणी f. Malay camphor, Sumatra cam b. glass (powder) टंकण-काच m. phor द.-कर्पूव m. 
(क्षोद) 
L-Borneol=ngai camphorवा.-कर्पव m. b. honey Pharm. टंकण-मधु .. bornyl (borneol+ -yl) Chem, operant n. b. purificatus Pharm. पूत टंकण, b. acetate कर्पूवल शुक्तीय . 
(borax) टंकण m. 
b. salicylate कर्पूवल नम्रलीय n. b. usta टंकण-शृतक m. 
b. valerate कर्पूवल बलीय . bordeaux Col. Ind. कपिशक m. 
boro-, bor- (boron) Chem. टांक b. brown कपिशक बभ्र m. 
Borocaine (boro- + procaine अन्व. ____b.developer कपिशक विकासक m. चेतनी) Pharm. टांकाचेतनी . border तट m. 
boro-calcite Mineral. टांक-चूणिज m. bordered pit Bot. प्रान्ती गर्त m. 
(-इज for खनिज mineral) borderland प्रान्त-भू. 
boro-carbide Chem. टांकांगेय . 
159﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
boro-citrate टांक-निम्बवीय n. 
. Bor. carteri (causes the relapsing boro-fluo-hydric टांक-तरस्वोदिक mfn. ... fever of India) भारत विकु. boro-fluoric = fluo-boric Chem. Bor. duttonii (causes the relaps 
टांक-तरस्विक mfn. 
ing fever of Central Africa) boro-fluoride=fluo-borate, fluo 
कालद्वीप विकु. boride Chem. टांक-तरस्वेय. 
Bor. gallinarum (causes tick-bite boro-fluorine Chem. टांक-तरस्विनी f. ___fever in fowls) कुक्कुट विकु. boro-glycerate Pharm. टांक-मधुरीय 2. Bor. hyos (found in the tissues boro-glyceride Pharm. टांक-मधुरेय ___in hog cholera) सूकरविषचीय विकु. 
Bor. muris (found in the lesions boro-glycerine Pharm. टांक-मधुरी. of rat-bite fever and in the boron (from borax) Chem. Tiefiut m. __blood of mice) मूष विकु. _____diamond b. वन-टांकण m. 
Bor. recurrentis (causes Euro-- boro-natro-calcite=ulexite Chem. 
pean relapsing fever) श्वेतद्वीप टांक-क्षार-चूर्णिज m. (-इज for खनिज 
विक. mineral) 
Bor. theileri (from the relapsing boron carbide Chem. टांकण प्रांगेय n. __ fever of cattle) पशुज्वरीय विकु. boronic ciafurari mfn. 
___borreliotosis विकुन्तलाणुरुजा f. (विकु boronic alloy टांकणिक मिश्रातु m. 
रुजा) boron nitride टांकण भूयेय .. 
borrow vb. उद्धारग्रहण . boron trichloride टांकण त्रिनीरेय . borrower उद्धारग्रहीता (-1), उद्धारी (-इन्) boro-phenol टांक-दर्शव m. boro-phenylic टांक-दर्शलिक mfn. borrowing उद्धार m., उद्धारग्रहण 1. boro-salicylate Cbem. टांक-नम्रलीय 1. boryl Chem. टांकल 7. boro-salicylic Chem. टांक नम्रलिक mfn. Bos grunniens==yak Zool. चमर गोm. boro-silicate Chem. टांक-सैकतीय 1. boss उत्थ m. boro-silicic acid Chem. टांक-सैकतिक boss अधिपुरुष m. . . अम्ल... 
chief प्रमुख m. boro-tungstate Chem. टांक-चंडीय. head मुख्य m.. boro-tungstic Chem. ci-fusai mfn. proprietor स्वामी (-इन् ) m. . boro-wolframic Chem. cipima fustim bosshead उत्थशिर n. 
Borrelia.(Bor.) विकुन्तलाणु m. (विकु. 
quickfix b. आशुलग उत्थशिर . asunder; loose irregular coils) botan-, botano- उद्भिद् - Bor. anserinum (causes a dis- botanic = botanical 1 (of or per 
ease of geese) e face. 
taining to plants) alfige mfn. .Bor. berbera (causes the re- 2 (relating to botany) औद्भिदीय 
lapsing fever of Arab regions mfn. of N. Africa) बर्बर विकु. 
botanical garden प्रौद्भिदीय उद्यान . 
160 
__ 
m. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
botanist औद्धिदिक, औद्धिदीविद् m. bottoming Dyeing बुध्नन .. botano-, botan- उद्भिद् 
bottoming black for cotton Col. botany ौद्भिदी, उद्भिद्-विद्या f. (ancient Ind. तूलार्थ बुध्नन काल m. 
word) 
bottom tank Automobile अधस्तडाग m. Bothriocephaloidea (two gutters bought Com, ma mfn. 
on the head) नालशिर-प्रवंश (a super b. book क्रीत-पुस्त. family) 
b.ledger क्रीत-प्रपंजी/. bottle पी. 
bound Math. (a point or number b. blower कू पी-ध्माता (-तृ) m. taken as a limit, as of a point b. brush कूपी-कूर्च m. 
set) परिबन्ध, सीमाबन्ध m. b. cap कूपी-टोपी. 
boundary सीमा ., परिबन्ध m. b. label कूपी-नामपत्र . 
boundary guard अन्तपाल m. b. neck कूपी-ग्रीवा . 
bounded Math. सीमित, सीमाबद्ध mfn. b. rack कूपी-निलय m. 
bouts Violin afer m flat b. चिपिट-कपी/. 
bow Violin धनुष्. flatsided b. चिपिटपार्श्व-कूपी . bow vb. Phys. धन्वन n. guttapercha b. निक्षीरेय-कूपी . bowed Phys. sfrast mfn. 
media b. संवर्धाश-कूपी . 
bowel==intestine Anat. अन्त्र n. pyrex b. अग्निराज-कूपी /. 
bowels कोष्ठ m. sample oil b. न्यादर्श-तैल-कूपी . bowl कटोर m. sample tubeform b. न्यादर्श- Bowman's capsule आदि-प्रावर m. 
नालाकार-कूपी f.. 
bow-string Violin ज्या=धनुर्ध्या f. shaking b. धूनन-कूपी . 
box मञ्जूषा f., समुद्ग M. specific gravity b. आपेक्षिक-भार- box coupling समुद्ग-मिथुनक n. 
कूपी. 
____box, plate sterilizing Chem. पट्ट spouted b. तुण्ड-कूपी f. 
जीवाणुघ्न-समुद्ग m. stoneware b. काश्म-कूपी. 
box wood scale (inches and centi stoppered b. पिधित-कूपी . 
meters) समुद्गकाष्ठ-श्रेणी f. (प्रांगुल तथा wash b. धाव-कूपी f. 
शतिमान) washing b. धावन-कूपी f. 
boy बटु m. weighing b. तोलन-कूपी f. 
Boyles or Marioette's law Phys. bottlenose dolphin. Zool. ' कूपीनस समताप-वाति-संपीडन नियम m. (स.वा.सं. 
नियम) bottom (the English word is from b.p. (boiling point) बु. (बुद्बुदांक) 
Sanskrit बुध्न) बुधन m., नितल n. Br pencil Engineer. का, अंकनी .. bottom corner Math. अधः कोण m. 
B2 B3 B4 कार का का . bottom gear Automobile अधो-दन्ती B.P.quality (British pharmacopoeia 
(-इन्) m. 
आंगल-भेषजसंहिता) मा.मे. प्रमाप M. 
तिमिक . 
161 
IT 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
(here quality=standard प्रमाप) Bradley's aberration method sulfate Br (bromine) Chem. दु (दुरानी) 
विपथन रीति. Br. (Bracella) अपिगो. (अपिगोलाणु) brady-pepsia मन्द-पचन . brace Mach. भुज M. 
Brahmany kite Zool. क्षेमङ्करी (-इन् ) m. brace (carpenter's) and bits (वर्धकि-) (ancient word) 
भुज तथा फल. 
Brahmaputra Geog. लोहित्या. braces {} प्राभिवार m. 
Brahmas press=hydraulic press brachial region Zool. बाहु-प्रदेश m. 
Phys. आम्भस पीड m. brachial swelling Zool. बाहु-गंड m. Brahmi Pharm. ब्राह्मी /. brachial vein उद्घाहु-सिरा . 
brain jar मस्तिष्क कलश m. brachium Anat. उद्बाहु m. 
brake Mil., Automobile आरोध m. brachy-cephalic-cephalous (short- b. block Rly. Eng. arctarcat f. 
headed or broad-headed) पृथुकपाल b. drum Automobile (drum=re mfn. 
___volving cylinder) आरोध-रम्भ m. brachydome Cryst. (the planes are b. handle Rly. Eng. आरोध हस्तक m. 
parallel to the shorter axis) b. lining Automobile आरोधास्तरm. ह्रस्वच्छाद n. 
b. pedal Automobile आरोध-पादक m. Brachyura Zool. ह्रस्वपुच्छा :m.pl. 
b. rod Ry. Eng. आरोध-दण्ड m. brachyure Zool. ह्रस्वपुच्छ m. 
b. shoe Ry. Eng. आरोध-मुष्टि f. bracket (ceiling, wall) विवध m. (छद, ___b. van Rly. आरोध-यान n. 
भित्ति) 
bran बुस . bracket अभिवार m. 
branch rar f. round brackets ()=parantheses b. account Com. शाखा-लेखा . 
गोलाभिवार m. 
_foreign b. Com. विदेश-शाखा f. square brackets []=crotchets branch = subkingdom = phylum ___ कोणाभिवार m. 
____ Biol. सृष्टिशाखा=अनुसृष्टि f. braces {}प्राभिवार m. 
branch Zool. arrat f. brackets अभिवारौ m. dx., अभिवारयुग्म branched Bot. शाखी (-इन्) mfn. 
branched chain Chem. शाखि-शृङ्खला. bracket, wall भित्ति-विवध m. 
branchial cleft Zool. जलक्लोमदरी f. brackish पालवण mfn. 
branching Bot. I शाखाविन्यास m. brackish water पालवणाम्बु. 
2 (putting forth branches) trata bract=bractea Bot. निपत्र n. 
द्गमन n. bracteate Bot. (having a bract) निपत्री Branchiostoma Zool. क्लोममुखाति f. 
(-इन्) mfn. 
(-आति for प्रजाति genus) (क्लोम abbr. bracteate flower Bot. निपत्रि पुष्प .. from जलक्लोम gill) bracteole=bractlet Bot. निपत्रक 1. branchlet=ramulus शाखिका f. bradawl प्रार-टंक m. 
branch of artery रोहिणी-शाखा f. 162 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
branch trace Bot. शाखा-प्रदाय. breaker (a wave breaking into foam brand n. चिह्न n. (Hindi छाप) 
against the shore, against a sand branding (an oil) चिह्नन n. 
bank, or against a rock or reef brandy(distilled from wine) प्रद्राक्षिरा near the surface) वेलावीचि f. 
breakfast कल्यवर्त m., प्रातरशन., प्रातराश brass पित्तल n. brasses Macb. (in a bearing) द्रोणक n. break in अन्तःप्रवेश m. brass filings Chem. पित्तल-रेत्रीक्षेप M. breaking point Phys. त्रोटन बिन्दु m. brass gratings पित्तल-झरी f. breaking stress Phys. त्रोटन प्रत्याबल .. Brassica Bot. राजिकाति . (-ति for break-through Mal. पारवेधन n. 
stifer genus). 
breakup-value Com. त्रोट-मूल्य 1. brass-like पित्तलोपम mfn. 
breast drill (pressed by the breast) brass-sheet पित्तल-स्तार m. 
. उरसा-व्यधm. brassware पित्तल-भाण्ड 1. 
breast tea==pectoral species Pharm. Braula coeca=bee louse मधुकर-यूका उर:क्वाथक m. 
breathing root = pneumatophore Brauns's liquid Petrog. (methylene Bot. श्वसन-मूल . ___ iodide) अपिप्रोदलेन्य जम्बेय 1. 
=aerating root श्वास-मूल .. brava (pareira brava = pareira) breed अभिजाति f., प्रसाव m. 
वन-वल्ली f. (Portuguese Parreira breeder अभिजनक m. vine + brava wild) 
breeding प्रसवन, प्रसावन, अभिजनन n. braze vb. पित्तलन . 
breeding bulls अभिजनन वृष m. brazed पित्तलित Mfn. 
breeding farms अभिजनन प्रक्षेत्र . brazed oven पित्तलित कन्दु m. 
breeding season प्रसवन ऋतु m. brazil = brazilwood (Uraise glow- breeze समीर m. 
ing coals', named from its colour) breezefly-tabanus Zool. रंगाक्ष m. 
अभिशोण m. 
Bremen blue=mineral blue brazilein Chem. afurfurat m. 
Bremen green=malachite green Brazilian elemi araTSTHETH m. brenthol AS=napthol AS brazilin Chem. अभिशोणि. 
brew vb. यवासवन n. brazilwood Col. Ind. (chips and brewer's graduated flask qaruah 
extract) अभिशोण काष्ठ 1. (खण्ड तथा अंकित पलिप m. निस्सार) 
brewer's saccharometer यवासवन brazilwood paper अभिशोणकाष्ठ-पत्र . शर्करामान m. bread (डबलरोटी) अधिमंड . 
brewer's yeast यवासवन-प्रकिण्व . breadth विस्तार m. 
brewery यवासवनी f. break ob. त्रोटन 1. 
brewing यवासवन . breakage Com. त्रोटन n. (Hindi टूट फूट) brick इष्टका f. 
163 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
brick arch इष्टका-चाप M. brick clay इष्टका-मृत्तिका f. brick red=lateritious=latericeous 
इष्टका-रक्त, अवपीतातिरक्त mfn. (a colour, reddish red-yellow in hue, of low saturation and me 
dium brilliance) bridge Violin सेतु m. bridge of boats नौक्रम m. (from 
दिव्यावदान) brigade Mil. (3 or 4 batallions) arfet 
f. (=३ गण; ancient word) brigadier Mil. उपचमूपति, वाहिनीपति m. bright (colour) दीप्त mfn. bright flash दीप्त स्फुरण 1. bright red दीप्त रक्त mfn. brilliance शुभ्रता f. brilliant भासुर mfn. brilliant acid black Col. Ind. भासुर 
अम्ल काल m. .b. acid blue भासुर अम्ल नील m. 
b.acid carmine भासुर अम्ल कीटशोणी 
b. alizarin bordeaux R paste __ भासुर विमंजिष्ठि कपिशक र लेपी f. b. alizarin cyanine भासुर विमंजिष्ठि 
श्यामी. b. alizarin garnet R paste भासुर 
विमंजिष्ठि निरक्त र लेपी f. b. alizarin green Hier fatiforfoss 
हरि m. . b. alizarin viridine भासुर विमंजिष्ठि 
हरिती . b. anthr-azurol भासुर विक्ष-नभोनीलव 
m. b. archil भासुर शेपाल m. b. azo acid blue भासुर अज अम्ल 
नील m. b. azo-fuchsine भासुर अज-धूमली f. b. azurine भासुर नभोनीली f. b. benzo blue भासुर धूप नील m. b. benzo fast violet भासुर धूप स्थिर 
नीललोहित m. b. benzo fast yellow भासुर धूप स्थिर 
पीत m. b. benzo green भासुर धूप हरि m. b. benzo violet भासुर धूप नीललोहित 
m. b. black भासुर काल m. b. blue-black भासुर नील-कृष्ण m. b. blue fat colour भासुर नील स्नेह रंग 
m. b. bordeaux भासुर कपिशक m. b. carmine भासुर कीटशोणी . b. carmoisine भासुर कृमिजी . b. chrome blue भासुर वर्णक नील m. b. chrome red paste भासुर वर्णक 
रक्त लेपी. b. chrome violet भासुर वर्णक नील 
लोहित m. b. cloth blue भासुर वस्त्र नील m. 
b. acid green भासुर अम्ल हरि m. b. acid grey भासुर अम्ल धूसर m. b. acid maroon भासुर अम्ल नीचरक्त 
m. b. acid red भासुर अम्ल रक्त m. b. acid rosamine भासुर अम्ल अरुण 
तिक्ती. b. acid.rubine भासुर अम्ल रक्ती . b. acid scarlet भासुर अम्ल शोण m. b. acridine orange भासुर उग्री नारंग 
m. 
b. alizarin black paste भासुर 
विमंजिष्ठि काल लेपी f.. b. alizarin blue भासूर विमंजिष्टि 
नील m. 
— 164 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
- 
- 
b. fuchsine भासर धूमली f. b. gallo-cyanine भासुर गुस्फोट-श्यामी 
७ 
b. cochineal भासूर इन्द्रगोप m. ' b.Congo भासुर कुंकुंग m. b. Congo blue भासुर कुंकुंग नील m. b. Congo red भासुर कुंकुग रक्त m. b. Congo violet भासुर बुकंग नील 
लोहित m. b. copper blue भासुर ताम्र नील m. b. cotton blue extra greenish 
भासुर तूल नील अतिरिक्त आहार m. b. cotton yellow भासुर तूल पीतं M. b. cresyl blue भासुर ऋविपल नील m. b. cresyl violet भासूर ऋविपल नील 
लोहितm. b. crimson भासुर कामिज m. b. croceine भासुर प्रकुंकुमी f. b. delphine blue B, 3G= 
chrome blue GD b. dianil blue भासुर द्विनील नील m. b.dianil green भासुर द्विनील हरिm. b. dianil red भासुर द्विनील रक्त m. b. dianil scarlet भासुर द्विनील शोण m. b. diazine blue भासुर इयजीवी नील m. b.diazol orange. भासुर द्वयजव 
नारंग m. b. direct orange भासुर अनाश्रित 
नारंग m. b. direct red भासुर अनाधित रक्त m. b. double scarlet भासुर हिश्शोण m. b. fast blue भासुर स्थिर नील m. b. fast oil (or spirit) orange भासुर 
स्थिर तैल (प्रासव)नारंग m. b. fast oil (or spirit) yellow भासुर 
स्थिर तैल (प्रासव) पीत m. b. fast red भासुर स्थिर रक्त m. , b. fat black भासुर स्नेह काल m. b. fat brown भासुर स्नेह बभ्रु m. b. fat scarlet भासुर स्नेह शोण m. b. fat yellow भासुर स्नेह पीत m. 
165 
b. glacier blue भासुर हिमनदी नील 
m. b.green भासुर हरि m. b. green fat colour भासुर हरि स्नेह 
रंग m. b. heliopurpurin भासुर सूर्यनीलोहि f. b. heliotrope भासुर निनीलातिरक्त M. b. India dye भासुर भारत रंजक m. b. indigo भासुर निनील m. b. induline भासुर सुनीली. b. kiton red B=xylene red B b. lake red भासुर लाक्षक रक्त m. b. lanafuchsine 2 G= brilliant 
acid carmine 2 G b. light scarlet भासुर लघु शोण m. b. metamine blue भासुर समतिक्ती 
नीलm. b. milling blue भासुर संकोचन नील 
m. 
b. milling green भासुर संकोचन हरि 
m. b. milling orange भासुर संकोचन 
नारंग M. b. milling red भासुर संकोचन रक्त m. b. milling violet भासुर संकोचन नील 
लोहित m. b. naphthol blue भासुर उत्तैलव नील 
m. b. oil black base भासुर तैल काल 
पाठ. 
b. oil yellow base भासुर तैल पीत . पीठ . 
b. orange भासुर नारंग m. b. palatine red भासुर प्रासाद रक्त m. b. paper yellow भासुर पत्र पीत m. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
b. patent blue भासुर एकस्व नील m. Brin's process (for manufacturing b. patent carmine blue भासुर oxygen, by heating barium oxide 
एकस्व कीटशोणी नील m. 
हातु जारेय) हजा-विधा . b. phosphine भासुर भास्वी f. bristle == seeker (a blunt needle) b. pink fat colour भासुर आपद्म कुण्ट-सूची . ____स्नेह रंग m. 
bristle Bot. दृढलोम n. b. ponceau special भासुर अधिरक्ता- Britannic, British बुटेन- बूटेनीय mfr. 
पीत विशेष m. 
British empire बृटेनीय साम्राज्य . b. pure blue भासुर शुद्ध नील m. British Pharmaceutical Codex b. pure green भासुर शुद्ध हरि m. बृटेनीय-भैषजिक-संहिता . b. pure yellow भासुर शुद्ध पीत m. British pharmacopoeia बुटेनीय भेषज b. purple fat colour भासुर नीलारुण संहिता f. ___स्नेह रंग m. 
British standard keys (B. S. K.) b. purpurine HTETT STARTET f. 
बृटेनीय प्रमाप कीला f. (बृ. प्र. की.) b. red भासुर रक्त m. 
British standard whitworth (B. S. b. rhoduline red भासुर अभिपाटली W.) बृटेनीय प्रमाप ५५° (बृ. प्र. प.) 
रक्त m. 
British subjects बृटेनीय-प्रजा f. b. safranine भासुर कंकमी. 
brittle भिदुर mfn. b. scarlet भासुर शोण M. 
brittle mica Mineral. भिदुर अनका . b. silk blue भासुर कौशेय नील m. brittle silver ore-stephanite भिदुर b. sky blue भासुर आकाश नील m. रजत अयस्क .. b. spirit black भासुर निषेचन काल m. Brixe's hydrometer पिभार तरलमान m. b. sulphon azurine भासुर शुल्बा brl. (barrel) I (Brm gallons) अ. खा. ___ नभोनीली . 
(अर्ध-खारी) b. sulphon red भासुर शुल्बा रक्त 2 (105 quarts) म. द्रो. (महा-द्रोणी) 
m. 
broad---latum विस्तृत, पy mfn. b. titan scarlet भासुर दस्यु शोण m. broadcast, broadcasting नभो-भाषण b. violet भासुर नीललोहित m. _n., नभोवाणी, परिसारण n. b. wool blue भासुर ऊर्णा नील m. broadcasting programme नभोवाणी b. wool red भासुर ऊर्णा रक्त m. __ कार्यक्रम m. b. wool scarlet भासुर ऊर्णा शोण m. broadcasting station नभोवाणी-स्थात्र 
b. yellow भासुर पीत m. brimstone Chem. गन्धक m. 
broad flame burner Chem. Tasart brine लवणाम्बु, समुद्राम्बु. 
दाहक m. brineo-meter Chem. लवणाम्बु-मान m. broadside-on-position Phys. (tan bring into play उद्भावन n. 
gent 'B' position in magnetism) brought into play उद्भत, उद्भावित प्रायामाभिमुख-स्थिति . 
broken खण्डित mfn. 166 
1. 
mfn. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
IFE 
Pr 
TARY ANALAL 
broken circuit Phys. खण्डित परिपथ m. brom-benzene Chem. दुरा-धूपेन्य n. broken lump afisa fque . 
brom-benzyl Chem. दुरा-धूपल n. broker Com. मध्यग m. 
brom-camphor Chem. दुरा-कर्पूर m. ___bill b. विपत्र-वणिक् m. 
brom-cresol Chem. दुरा-ऋविपवm. brokerage Com. (the commission of brom-eikon Pharm. दुरा-प्रतिमा. 
a broker) मध्यग-वर्तन 1. 
Bromelia Bot. आपनसबन्धुति f. (-ति for broker's bought note Com. मध्यग 
क्रीत-पत्र, मध्यग-संविदा-पत्र . 
Bromeliaceae Bot. आपनस-कुल n. broker's contract note Com. मध्यग- bromelin Biochem. आपनसि f. 
संविदा-पत्र n. 
bromellite Mineral. (a beryllium broker's sold note Com. मध्यग oxide) विडूरजारिज m. (-इज for खनिज 
विक्रीत-पत्र . 
mineral) brom-, bromo- (bromine) Chem .दुरा- brom-ethyl Chem. दुरा-दक्षुल 1. brom-acet-anilide Chem. दुरा-शुक्त- brom-ethylene Chem. दुरा-दक्षुलेन्य 1. 
नीलेय ॥ 
brom-gelatin Chem. दुरा-श्लिषि . brom-acetate Chem. दुरा-शुक्तीय 1. bromhydrate Chem. दुरोदीय . brom-acetic Chem. दुरा-शुक्तिक mfn. bromhydric Chem. दुरोदिक mfr. brom-acetone Chem. दुरा-शुक्ता f. bromhydrin (epi) Chem. दुरोदि f. bromal (German brom bromine + (अपि) ___alkobol alcohol) Chem. दुरासु m. bromic Chem. दुरिक mfn. brom-albumin Chem. दुरा-शिवति. b. acid दुरिक अम्ल . brom-amide Pharm. दुरा-तिक्तेय . bromide Chem. दुरेय . brom-anil Chem. दुरा-नीलक. bromidic Chem. gefurahi mfn. brom-argyrite=bromyrite दुरारूप्यिज brominate vb. Chem. दुरात्रीयण n. __m. (-इज for खनिज mineral) ____(to combine with bromine) bromate Chem. दुरीय n. 
दुराप्री-योजन 1. bromate vh. Pharm. दुरायण .. 
2 (to subject to the action of I (to treat with bromine) दुरात्री ___bromine) दुराप्री-प्रभावन n. साधन 1. 
brominated metanil yellow Col. 2 (to combine with bromine) ___Ind, दुराघ्रीयित समनील पीत m. दुराञी-योजन .. 
bromination Chem. दुराघ्रीयण 1. 3=brominate 
bromindigo Col. Ind. दुरानिनील m. bromated दुरायित mfn. 
bromine Chem. gerait f. bromated camphor दुरायित कर्पूर m. . b. solution दुराञी-विलयन . brom-aurate Chem. दुरा-स्वर्णीय n. 
b. water दुराप्री-जल 1. brom-auric Chem. दुरा-स्वर्णिक mfr. brominize = bromate brom-benz-amide Chem. दुरा-धूप- brom-iodide Chem. दुरा-जम्बेय 1. 
तिक्तेय . 
bromism Med. अतिदुराघ्रीता f. 167 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
bromite Chem. दुरित .. 
bromo-benzoic acid (ortho, meta, bromization Chem. दुरेयण 1. 
para) Chem. दुरा-धूपिक अम्ल . (ऊर्ध्व, bromize vb. Chem. दुरेयण 1. 
सम, परा) I. (to treat with bromine or a bro- m-bromo-benzoyl bromide Chem. 
mide) दुरानी-साधन, दुरेय-साधन .. 
सम-दुरा-धूपूल दुरेय. 2 (to administer. large doses of bromo-benzoyl chloride (ortho, bromides to) दुरेयातिदान 1. 
para) Chem. दुरा-धूपल नीरेय . bromizer Chem. दुरेयक m. 
(ऊर्ध्व, परा) bromo-, brom- (bromine) Chem. bromo-benzyl cyanide Chem. दुरा 
दुरा 
धूपल श्यामेय . bromo- (bad smell') पूति 
a-bromo-n-butyricacid Chem. अ-दुरा p-bromo-acet-anilide Chem. प-दुरा- ऋ-धृतिक अम्ल n. 
शुक्त-नीलेय . 
a-bromo-iso-butyric acid Chem. - bromo-acetic acid (mono) Chem. दुरा-स-घृतिक अम्ल .. 
दुरा-शुक्तिक अम्ल . (एक) 
bromo-camphor Chem. दुरा-कर्पूर m. bromo-acetone Chem. दुरा-शुक्ता f. 2-bromo-n-caproic acid Chem. २-दुरा p-bromo-aceto-phenone Chem. प- ऋ-गव्यिक अम्ल १. 
दुरा-शुक्त-दर्शा. 
bromo-chloro-phenol Chem. दुरा-नीर m-bromo-p-aceto-toluidide Chem. दर्शव m. 
सम-दुरा-प-शुक्त-विरालय n. 
bromo-cresol Chem. दुरा-ऋविपद m. 3-bromo-4 acetyl-amino-toluene bromo-cresol purple Chem. दुरा 
Chem. ३-दुरा-४ शुक्तल-तिक्ती-विरालेन्या . ऋविपद नीलारुण m. bromo-acetyl-bromide Chem. दुरा- bromo-cyanidation दुरा-श्यामेयन 1. 
शुक्तल-दुरेय . 
bromo-cyanide = cyanogen bro 3bromo-4-amino-toluene Chem. mide Metal. दुरा-श्यामेय:-श्यामजन दुरेय 
३दुरा-४-तिक्ती-विरालेन्या . bromo-aniline (ortho, meta, para) bromo-cyanogen दुरा-श्यामजन m. 
Chem. दुरा-नीली . (ऊर्ध्व, सम, परा) bromo-di-ethyl-acetyl urea Chem. p-bromo-aniline hydro-chloride दुरा-द्वि-दक्षुल-शुक्तल मिह m. 
Chem. प-दुरा-नीली उद-नीरेय .. 
p-bromo-di-methyl-aniline Chem. bromo-anisole (ortho, para) Chem. प-दुरा-द्वि-प्रोदल-नीली. . 
__ दुरा-शतपुष्पवा . (ऊवं, परा) 
Ibromo - 2:4-di-nitro - benzene bromo-aurate Chem. दुरा-स्वर्णीय 1. Chem. १ दुरा-२:४-द्वि-भय-धपेन्य . bromo-auric acid Chem. दुरा-स्वर्णिक bromo-ethylene Chem. दुरा-दक्षुलेन्य n. 
अम्ल. 
B-bromo-ethyl ethyl ether Chem. bromo-benzene Chem. दुरा-धूपन्य 1. आ-दुरा-दक्षुल दक्षुल दक्षु m. p-bromo-benzene-sulphonyl chlo-8-bromo-ethyl phenyl ether Chem. .. ride Chem. प-दुरा-धूपेन्य-शुल्बाल नीरेय . आ-दुरा-दक्षुल दर्शल दक्षु m. 
168 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
bromofiuorescein Col. Ind. दुराभ्राशिन 9-bromo - phen - anthrene Chem. 
६-दुरा-दर्श-क्षामेण्य .. bromoform (bromo- + formyl) Chem. B-bromo - phenetole Chem. प्रा-दुरा 
दुरावम्रल . 
दर्शदवा. bromo-gelatin = silver-bromide bromo - phenol (ortho,para) Chenn. 
gelatin Chem. दुरा-श्लिषि i. 
दुरा-दर्शव m. (ऊर्व, परा) bromohydrate Chem. दुरोदीय . bromo-phenol blue Chem. दुरा-दर्शव bromohydrin Chem. दुरोदि . 
नील m. bromo-hydro-quinone Cbem. दुरोद- p-bromo-phenyl-hydrazine hydro 
विज्वरा. 
chloride Chem. प-दरा-दर्शल-उदाजीवी brom-oil दुरा-तैल n. 
उदनीरेय . bromoil process Photog. gertat faut f. bromo - picrin, brom - picrin, bromo-iodide Chem. दुरा-जम्बेय 7. -pikrin Chem. दुरा-कट्वि . bromoiodism Med. अतिदुराजम्बुता f. bromo-pnea पूति-श्वास M. bromo-iodized Photog. (containing a-bromo - propionic acid Chem. 
bromides and iodides) दुरा-जम्बेयित अ-दुरा-प्रमेदिक अम्ल n. mfn. 
B-bromo - propionic acid Chem. bromo-iodo-benzene (ortho, para) प्रा-दुरा-प्रमेदिक अम्ल n. _____Chem. दुरा-जम्बु-धूपेन्य n. (ऊर्ध्व, परा) abromo-propionyl bromide Chem. 
bromo-ketone Chem. दुरा-शौक्ता 
अ-दुरा-प्रमेदल दुरेय . bromol (abridged from tribromo- bromo-protein Biochem. दुरा-प्रोभूजिन m. ___ phenol) Chem. दुराव m. (त्रिदुरा-दर्शव) 2 - bromo - pyridine Chem. २-दुरा bromomania Med. दुरोन्माद m. ___ शुष्मेयी . bromo-menorrhea पूति-रजः 1. w-bromo-styrene Chem. ह-दुरा-सिद्भेन्य bromo-methane Chem. दुरा-प्रोदीन्य . . bromometric, bromometrical Anal. bromo-thymol, brom-thymolChem. 
Chem. दुरामितीय mfn. 
दुरा-पर्णासीव m. bromometry Anal. Chem. दुरामिति f. bromo - thymol blue Chem. दुरा bromonaphthalene Chem. दुरोत्तैलेन्य पर्णासीव नील m. (a dye) 
2. 
bromo-toluene (ortho, meta, para) bromo-nitro-benzene (ortho,meta, Chem. दुरा-विरालेन्य १. (ऊर्ध्व, सम, परा) 
para) Chem. दुरा-भूय-धूपेन्य n. (ऊर्ध्व, m-bromo-p-toluidine Chem. सम-दुरा सम, परा) 
प-विरालेयी. 2-bromo-3-nitro-benzoic acid bromous Chem. दुर्य mfn. 
Chem. २-दुरा-३-भूय-धूपिक अम्ल 1. a-bromo-n-valeric acid (iso-) 2bromo-octane Chem. २दुरा-अष्टीन्य n. Chem. अ-दुरा-ऋ-बलिक अम्ल n. (-स-) p-bromo-phenacyl bromide Chem. 2-bromo-p-xylene Chem. २-दुरा-प 
प-दुरा-दर्शशुक्तल दुरेय . 
काष्ठेन्य. 169﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
w-bromo-p-xylene Chem. 3 7-4- bronze green Col. Ind. Hier form. 
POŠTI N. 
bronze lake Col. Ind. siRT 778777 m. brom-phenol Chem. a m. bronze liquor (any liquor used in brom-phenol blue=bromo-phe bronzing) कांस्यन रस m. 
nol blue 
bronze ochre Col. Ind. Fifat if m. brom-picrin Chem. 27-40fa f. bronze paint Col. Ind. apier Toq m. bromstone=brimstone 
bronze powder कांस्य क्षोद m. brom-thymol Chem. Ficofeta in. bronzer firefUGT () m. brom-thymol blues bromo- bronze red pepper red pier TAT, 
thymol blue 
Falta mfn. bromuret=bromide Chem. दुरेय . bronze steel कांस्य वज्रायस ?. bromyrite Mineral. (silver bromide) bronze yellow free on, sailanta 
रजतदुरेयिज m.(-इज for खनिज mineral) mfn. bronchiole = bronchiolus (pl. bronzing (act or art of imparting 
bronchioli) Anat, 414F777 f. 
a bronze appearance; material bronchitis Med. क्लोमनालकोप m. 
for bronzing) iTeTot 1h., FieraTUTT bronchus Anat. FTTHET m. 
Bronner's acid (2-naphthyl-amine- bronzite Mineral. (ferriferous variety 
6-sulphonic acid) Chem. Forcall of enstatite) Herrifys m. (-$for fucs FT n. 
खनिज mineral) bronze Fift n. 
bronzy कांस्यवर्ण mfn. bronze vb. (to give the appearance brood Zool. I (youngs produced 
of bronze to, by coating with from eggs) TCFT:, Trafiti, qus bronze powder; to make of 277997: m. pl. 
bronze colour) AT FITT, Fictequr n. 2 (youngs hatched at one time) bronze blue Chem, ate att m. 
FEGIATT: m. pl., FETT 11. bronze blue B lumps Col. Ind. FİFT 
3 119 11., 11a Fitut m. ita a la m. 
4 Apiary (hees in the pupa or bronze brown = Asiatic bronze larva state not yet emerged from 
FİFT 71, na tara mfn. 
their cells; eggs, and young of bronzed (of a bronze appearance the bee) 71941, queen4 m. 
or colour; browned, sunburned) brood chamber Beekeeping (that 
TET-, Fifa-auf, ayat, nefara mfn. part of the hive in which brood bronzed skin=Addisons disease combs are housed) 1799-TT m. 
- melasma suprarenale Zool. brood comb Beekeeping 1795-77 m. (disturbing the action of the broom मार्जनी f. suprarenal glands) quiloftei autfen broom tops=scoparium Pharm. 
सम्मार्जनी f. 
m. 
170 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
brought Com. Tita mfn. 
brown ocher r Mineral. बभ्रु गैरिक b. forward na mfn. b. down arrita mfn. 
2=doubloon, Roman ocher brought into play उद्भत, उद्भावित mfn. GAYIT mfn. brown बभ्रु, कपिश mfn. 
brown powder=cocoa powder an brown base Col. Ind. aus n. 
7 m. brown bear बभ्रु ऋक्ष m. 
brown salt Col. Ind. a tau n. brown-black au-ribu mfn. 
brown stonezascot tan, coconut, brown catechu Chem. a afer m. kermanshah Chem. q STET m. brown coal-lignite UT FIT m. brown sugar Chem. 21-T f. brown cutch Col. Ind. 972-47it f. Fantaret mfn. brown extra Col. Ind. ay ufafcat Brucella (Br.) Bact. (resembles co 
ccus) a fost m. (nfaat.) brown fat colour Col. Ind. a FE Br. abortus=Bang's bacillus 
auf m. 
(cause of contagious abortion Brownian movement or motion in cattle, etc.) Triata afysit. 
(movement exhibited by the Br. bronchiseptica क्लोमनाल अपिगो. microscopic particles when sus Br. melitensis = Bacillus pended in water or other fluids) melitensis = Micrococcus कणिकापिगति . 
melitensis = Alcaligenes browning solution (a solution for melitensis (cause of undulant 
browning steel) ay tie faster n. 
fever in man, usually trans brownish arau mfn. 
mitted by goat's milk) -50 brownish black आबभ्रु काल mfn. 
ofernt. brownish-red c a mfn. 
Br. paraabortus अपिगर्भपात अपिगो. brownish-yellow 69 fra mfn. 
Br. paramelitensis अप्यजाज्वर brown lamp-black Col. Ind. ay foi. 
19-TFTAT (- ) m. 
Br. parasuis अपिसूकरज्वर अपिगो. brown madder=Castilian brown, Br. suis (causes abortion in 
old cedar, Tanagra ay Fiftos, swine) #-T*977 fot. Faqater mfn. 
Br. tularensis कलन्दक-मारी अपिगो. brown mica=phlogopite a brucia, brucina=brucine 
brucine Pbarm. आकुलकी f. (कुलक brown mixture Pharm. and fast n. Nux vomica brown mustard=black mustard brucine sulphate it reale n. 
Y=FoU m. 
brucite Mineral. (native magnesium brown oak=Quercus semecarpi- hydroxide) after m. 1-T for 
folia Bot. बभ्रु वजु m. 
er fra mineral) 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
12 
m. 
Bruckner furnace (a round, revolv- bubbler qe m. (short for sangat). 
ing roasting furnace) अपिभ्रम भ्राष्ट्र bubonic plague Med. ग्रन्थि-मारी f. 
buccal cavity Tf. Brugere powder (a smokeless buccal groove Tastat f. 
powder) y a ta m. 
bucco camphor = diosphenol Brunner's gland Anat. (certain ra- Chem. TEVF87-**=aegria m. 
cemose glands in the submucous Buchanania Bot. frrrafa f. (fr for layer of duodenum) Teut-u fret sofa genus) 
B. latifolia सामान्य प्रियाल m. Brunswick black=asphalt lacquer Buchner funnel Chem. 4 fata m. Brunswick blue=mineral blue Buchner funnel, hot water jacket Brunswick green=mineral green for Chem. qe farangrep groupement frater brush कर्च m. 
m. camel hair b. 364114-2 m. buchu buchu folia = buchu centrifuge tube cleaning b. leaves Pharm. [VFX m. 
f87-777-HIT m. 
buchu=barosma Tavez m. tube b. 779-7 m. 
buchu camphor = diosphenol bryonia=bryony 
· Chem. TF1776-487=eaneraria m. bryony=bryonia (bryon.)=Eng- buchu leaves=buchu Pharm. TETE 
lish mandrake Pharm. (large m. 
roots having a wrinkled bucket att m. .appearance) वलिमूल . 
centrifuge b. Chem. After m. Bryophyta (mósses fic and liver- buckthorn berries=yellow berries 
worts) Bot. fiatrisa: f. pl. (from Amt f. 
fatis) 
bud Bot. 9844 m., eft f. Bryozoa Zool. (moss animals") bud (vascular) Ophthalmol. 44 m. 
I Polyzoa हरिता-जीवाः m.pl. bud Biol. (a protuberance in plants 2 Ectoprocta aferjat: m.pl. 
and animals...) a m. 'B' scope Radar $07 m. 
budding Bot. (a method of repro B. S. K. (British standard keys) . duction) 57 n. 
T. . (qarty #79 FIAT) 
budget Com. 414-642 1. B. S. W. (British standard whit- budgetary control #7904a-firia n. 
worth) . 57. 9. (a fi aTT 440) bud scale Bot. -779 n. BTO (bombing through over- buff stütar 19, que mfn. 
cast) Radar #. 7. (HTTCT-TFSICHT) buffalo Afew m. Bu (butyl) Chem. & (East) 
buffalo black Col. Ind. eg $77 m. bu. (bushel) T. (T) 
b. brown fer am. bubble 1. cele m. 
b. cardinal महिष न्युद्रक्तापीत m. 172 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
b. chrome black महिष वर्णक काल'm. 3 (bulblike in form) कन्दाकार mfn. b. flamine G= amacid eosine bulbous aorta कन्द-महारोहिणी. b. garnet महिष निरक्त m. 
bulb, potash Chem. सजि-कन्द m. b. rubine महिष रक्ती . 
bulb, rubber Chem. घृषि-कन्द m. b. violet महिष नीललोहित m. bulb, temperature Chem. 279-afira m. b. yellow महिष पीत m. 
bulge Automobile उदुब्ज m. . buffer vb. प्रत्यारोधन . 
bulging in front Ophthalmol. अग्रतो buffer n. (from buff to strike) 
वर्धन . I Macb. ताडोपबह m. 
bulging on posterior surface पश्चाद् 2 Chem. प्रत्यारोध m. 
वर्धन . (पश्चाद् adv., पश्च adi.; buffer vb. Chem. (to treat with a bulk (the main mass or body) प्रकाय, 
buffer) प्रत्यारोध-साधन । 
प्रपुंज m. buffered प्रत्यारोधित mfn. 
bull-dog Zool. वृष-कुक्कुर, वृषमुख m. buffering प्रत्यारोधक mfn. 
bullet गोली . bug= bedbugZool.मत्कुण खट्वा-मल m. bull-frog Zool. वृष-मण्डूक m. bugbane = Cimicifuga racemosa bull terrier महाबिलखन m. (ordinary 
, Bot. (supposed to be distasteful to terriers are much smaller) 
insects) कीटद्राव m. 
bump vb. Chem. (to give off vapour, building वास्तु, भवन, गृह .. 
____often violently) व्युदबाष्पन N. land and b. भू-गृहादि . 
bumper Automobile घट्ट-सहm. building material निर्माण-द्रव्य n. Bundelkhand Geog. चेदिदेश m. bulb कन्द m. 
bundle पूल, पोटल m. 'bulb = medulla oblongata=bulb bundle of rays Geom. रश्मि-पूल m., 
of the spinal cord Anat. मेरुकन्द रश्मि-पूलिका . 
m. 
bundle sheath Bot. पूल-कञ्चुक m. bulbar conjunctiva गोलास्तर m. bung, rubber घृषि-पिधाय m. . bulb, condensation Chem. संघनन कन्द bunker Rly. कोष्ठ m. . 
m.. 
___Bunsen burner Chem. पिनाल दाहक m. bulbil I Bat. प्रकलिका f. (प्रजनन-कलिका) B. burner with bypass उपमार्ग : 2 Anat. कन्दक m. 
सहित पिनाल दाहक m. bulb, nitrogen Chem. भूयाति-कन्द m. broad flame B. burner पृथुज्वाल bulb of the spinal cord = medulla पिनाल दाहक m. . 
oblongata=bulb Zool, #art m. flame-steadier for B. burner bulb of the urethra Zool. मूत्रप्रसेक-कन्द . पिनालदाहकार्थ ज्वाला-स्थिरक M. 
m. 
micro B. burner अणुं-पिनाल-दाहक bulbous I (having bulbs) कन्दी (-इन्) 
• min., 
tubing for B. burner पिनालदाहकार्थ 2 (growing from bulbs) कन्दज mfn. नाल m. . 
m. 
___173 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
4 
. 
Bunsen Hame पिनाल-ज्वाला 
paraffin b. मृहसा-दाहक m. Bunsen's cell Elec. (carbon in petrol gas b. मात्तैल-वाति-दाहक m. 
chromic acid; e.m.f. 2.0 volts) rose b. (with rose top) 759955 पिद्विबिन्दुख (कुप्यवर्णिकांगार) कोशाf. 
दाहक m. Bunsen's cell (carbon in nitric acid; burning taste दाही स्वाद m. 
e.m.f. I.9 volts) प्येकबिन्दुनव (कुप्य- burnt दग्ध mfn. भूयिकांगार) कोशा. 
b. alum = dried alum Pharm. Bunsens grease spot photometer दग्ध-स्फटिका-शुष्क-स्फटिका f. 
स्नेहबिम्ब-भामान m. 
b. brass (copper sulphate, blue buoy Naut. उत्प्लव m. 
____vitriol) दग्ध कांस्य ?. buoyancy उत्प्लाविता f., उत्प्लावित्व n. b. gypsum Col. Ind. दग्धाचूर्ण 1. buoyant उत्प्लावी (-इन्) mfn. 
b. iron Metal. दग्ध अयस् n. bureau I (department) विभाग m. b. lime (quicklime) दग्ध चूर्णक M. 
2 (office) कार्यालय m. 
b. ocher दग्ध गैरिक 1. burette Chem. द्रवमि m. (measuring b. odour, b. smell दग्ध-गन्ध m. 
fluid द्रव) 
b. steel Metal. दग्ध वज्रायस ॥. b. and accessories द्रवमि तथा . b. umber Col. Ind. दग्ध-बभ्रकी 
उपसाधन 1. 
burst vb. स्फुटन : and filter stand (combined) burying beetle - sexton beetle द्रवमि तथा पाव-स्थाम. (संयुक्त) 
Zool. (it buries the carcass of b. brush द्रवमि-कूर्च m. 
animals on which it feeds) b. cap द्रवमि-टोपी.. 
निखन-भृङ्गm. b. clamp द्रवमि-संधर m. 
bushel (bu., bush:; 4 pecks) शूर्प n. b. clip द्रवमि-स्वज m. 
(श.; ४ अर्धद्रोण) b. float द्रवमि-प्लव m. 
business (business of a house) कार्य, b. jet द्रवमि-क्षिपm. 
कर्म ., व्यापार m. b. reader द्रवमि-वाचक m. 
business Com. व्यापार m. b. stand द्रवमि-स्थामा. 
b. activity व्यापार-कर्मण्यता. . b. stopcock द्रवमि-शिखिपिधा f. 
b. budget व्यापार-आयव्ययक। gas b. वाति-द्रवमि m. 
b. cycle=trade cycle व्यापार-चक्र Burgundy mixture (a fungicide) 
अपिकवकन्न m. 
b. forecasting व्यापार-पूर्वानुमान n. 
· Burgundy pitch (a resin used in b. house व्यापार-गृह . 
__medicinal plasters) अपिलेपोद्यास m. b. index व्यापार-देशना f. .Burma Geog. ब्रह्मदेश m. 
b. letter व्यापार-पत्र n. burn vb. दहन . 
b.-like व्यापार-अनुरूप mfn. burner दाहक m. 
b.-man-dealer व्यापारी (-इन् ) m. gas b. वाति-दाहक m. 
b. methods व्यापार-पद्धति . 
10. 
174 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
b. name व्यापार-नाम 1. 
buttercup yellow=zinc yellow b. organization व्यापार संघटन n. butter-fat नवनीत-स्नेह m. b. research व्यापार-अन्वेषण n. butter flower=buttercup 1. Bot. b. statistics व्यापार-समंक m. 
नवनीत-पुष्प-नवनीत-चष. bustamente furnacesaludel fur- butterfly चित्रपतंग m. 
nace अन्यग-भ्राष्ट्र . 
butterfly valve Mach. (a. valve con but- Chem. घृत 
sisting of a disc) बिम्ब-कपाट. butadiene (butane + di - + - ene) butterine Chem. नवनीती। 
घृतद्वयेन्या . 
butter of tin=stannic or stannous butadiyne, butadiine= biacetylene chloride त्रपु नीरेय n. ___Chem. द्विशुक्तलेन्य . 
butter oil नवनीत-तैल ॥. butanal घृतीन्यसु m. 
butter yellow Col. Ind. नवनीत पीत m. butane (Lat. butyram butter) Chem. butt joint Structural Engin. समन्त-सन्धि 
घृतीन्य 1. 
m. butanol Chem. घृतीन्यव m. 
button कुड्म . butanolide=butyrolactone Chem. buttress screw thread section 4 
घृतीन्यवेय. 
भ्रमि सूत्र छेद m. butanone=methyl ethyl ketone butyl Chem. घृतल .. 
Chem. घृतीन्या. 
normalb.orn-b.ऋजु घृतल, ऋ-घृतला. butcherbird Zool. लटूषक m. (ancient secondary b. or sec-b. द्वितीयक ___word) 
घृतल, द्वित.-धृतल n. Butea Bot. किंशुकति 1. (ति from प्रजाति । tertiary b. or tert-b. तृतीयक घृतल, 
genus) 
तृ.-घृतल n. B. frondosa सामान्य किंशुक m. 
iso-b. स-घृतल. butein (Butea किंशुक + - in) Chem. n-b.-acet-anilide ऋ-घृतल-शुक्त-नीलेय 
किंशुकि . butene Chem. धृतेन्य 1. 
b. acetate (n-, iso-, sec.-)घृतल शुक्तीय butenyl Chem. घृतेन्यल . 
__n. (ऋ- स-, द्वित..) butine=butyne Chem. Enit f. 
b. alcohol (n-, iso-, sec.-, tert.-) -butol Chem. -घृतव m. 
घृतल सुषव m. (ऋ-,स-द्वित-, तृ-) -butoxide Chem. -घृतजारेय. 
b.-amine (butyric+-+amine) butoxy- (butoxyl) Chem. घृतजार __ घृतल-तिक्ती f. butoxy Chem. घृतजार mfn. 
b.-aniline घृतल-नीली . butoxyl Chem. घृतजारल 1. 
b. benzene धुतल-धूपेन्य 1. butter नवनीत n. 
b.-benzoate घृतल-धूपीय 1. butter colour Col. Ind. नवनीत-वर्ण m. b. bromide घृतल दुरेय n. butter-cup=butter-flower Bot. b. butyrate घृतल घृतीय n. 
नवनीत-चष-नवनीत-पुष्प .. 
b. carbonate घृतल प्रांगारीय .. 175 
n. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
b.-chloral hydrate Pharm. घृतल iso-b. स-धृतलेन्या . 
नीरसु जलीय . 
b. dibromide घृतलेन्य द्विदुरेय n. b. chloride घृतल नीरेय . 
2:3-b. glycol २:३-घृतलेन्य मधुव M. n-b. o-cresyl ether ऋ-घृतल ऊ- butylic Chem. घृतलिक mfn. 
ऋविपल दक्षु m. 
butyr- = butyro- (butyric) Chem. b. disulphide घृतल द्विशुल्बेय . घृति- (घृतिक) b. formate घृतल वम्रीय .. 
butyr-aldehyde Chem. धृति-सुव्युद m. b. hydrogen phthalate घृतल उदजन butyr-amide Chem. घृति-तिक्तेय . 
व्युत्तैलीय . 
butyrate Chem. घृतीय .. b. hydrogen succinate घृतल उदजन butyric Chem. घृतिक mfn. 
तणीय n. . 
n-b. ऋ-धृतिक mfn. (ऋ=ऋजु nor b. iodide घृतल जम्बेय 1. 
mal) b. lactate घृतल दुग्धीयn. 
b. acid धतिक अम्ल 2. b.-malonic acid घृतल-उत्कोलायिक iso-b. acid स-धृतिक अम्ल M. 
अम्ल 
normal b. acid ऋजु घृतिक अम्ल N. b. mercaptan घृतल रसंग्रभm. 
b. aldehyde घृतिक स्व्युद m. b. nitrite घृतल भूयित .. 
b. anhydride धतिक अजलेय . b. oleate धूतल नक्षीय . 
b. ester or ether घृतिक प्रलवण ., b. ortho-formate घृतल ऊर्ध्व-वम्रीय . दक्षु m. b. oxalate धृतल तिग्मीय . 
b. fermentation aforer for vant n. b. phenyl ether घृतल दर्शल दक्षु m. butyrin Chem. घृति f. b. phthalate घृतल व्युत्तैलीय .. 
mono-b. एक-धृति. b. propionate घृतल प्रमेदीय n. 
di-b. द्वि-घृति . b. salicylate धूतल नम्रलीय.. 
tri-b. त्रि-वृति. b. stearate धृतल वसीय. 
butyrinase Biochem. धृत्येद m. b. sulphate घृतल शुल्बीय n. butyro-, butyr- (butyric) Chem. çfar b. sulphide घृतल शुल्बेय .. b. tartrate घृतल न्यासलीय. . butyro-chloral hydrate = butyl b. valerate घृतल बलीय n. 
chloral hydrate Chem. घृति-नीरसु Butyn Pharm. rent f. 
जलीय . butyne=butine Chem. qat f. butyro-lactone Chem. &fa-grert f. butylation Chem.. (introduction of butyro-meter घृत-मान m. ___butyl) घृतल-प्रवेश m. 
butyro-metric घृत-मानीय mfn. butylene.Chem. घृतलेन्य n. 
butyrone Chem. घृता . a-b. or I-butene अ-धृतलेन्य, १-घृतेन्य butyro-nitrile घृति-भूयिल m. 
.. . 
butyryl Chem. (radical of butyric B-b. or 2 - butene प्रा-घृतलेन्य, २- acid) धृतिकल n. 
घृतेन्य। 
b. chloride घृतिकल नीरेय . 
. 
(घृतिक) 
116 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
b.-choline chloride घतिकल-पित्ती प्राद्यकि; present in barley malt) 
नीरेय . . 
Biochem. यव्याकि : . buy, buying क्रयण . 
bynin (Gk. byne : malt; a • protein buyer = purchaser Com. क्रेता (-त) contained in barley malt) Chain. 
m. 
यव्यकि. buzane (butane + arote) Chem. by numbers Drill अङ्क: - घृताजीन्य n. 
by-pass उपमार्ग m. . buzylene (butylene + arote) Chem. by-product उपसृष्ट N., उपोत्पाद m. 
घृताजलेन्य 1. 
by-product oven उपसृष्ट-कन्दु m. buzz bombs=robot-bombs Radar by the left Drill वामम् . . 
गुञ्ज-प्रस्फोट m. 
by the right Drill afaut buzzing sound गुंजन-ध्वनि m. 
by trial Math. अन्वीक्षया (Hindi अन्वीक्षा by- उप by (e. g. in combination by volume) by trial and error अन्वीक्षया विभ्रमेण च 
अनुसार 
. (Hindi अन्वीक्षा और विभ्रम से) by Com: प्रति . 
byzantium purple=purple of the by inspection दृष्टया 
ancients Col. Ind. pero taneu m. by instalments Com. प्रभागशः Bz. (benzene) Chem. धू (धूपेन्य) bynedestin (Gk. byne malt+edestin Bz (benzoyl) Chem. धूप् (धूपूल) 
C (carbon) Chem. प्र (प्रांगार) 
- English c. प्रांगल-मन्त्रिसभा f. C. (gallon) त. ढ. (तरल आढक) 
cabinet (a case, a cupboard) प्रमंजूषा C (corolla) Bat. द (दली) C. (centigrade) श. (शतिक) 
cabinet councilor मन्त्रिसभ्य m. C. (centimeter) शि.मा. (शति-मान) cabinet-maker मन्त्रिसभा-कृत् m. C. (Corynebacterium) मु. (मुद्गराणु) cable संदाम 1. . Ca (calcium) Chem. चू (चूर्णातु) cable railway संदाम-यान n. cab (of a locomotive, the patt that cable's length संदाम 1. (सं.) 
serves as a shelter for engineer cab seat चालकासन .. and fireman; on a motor truck, cachou Col. Ind. गायत्री . the driver's compartment) चालक- c. brown गायत्री-बभ्र m. वेश्म . 
c. de laval R=sulphur brown cabbage कपिशाक m. (ancient word) . N (the first sulphide dye) cabin कोष्ठिका f. 
___ आदि शुल्बेय . cabi मन्त्रिसभा 
Cacid ग अम्ल 
177 12 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
caco- (Gk. kakos bad) कु 
cadmide Chem. मृज्येय . cacodyl (Gk. karkid is ill-smelling) cadmi-ferous Chem. मज्य-भर mfn. 
Chem. कुगन्धल N. 
cadmium Chem. मज्यातु m. cacodylate Chem. कुगन्धलीय . 
c. acetate मृज्यातु शुक्तीय . cacodylic acid=dimethyl-arsinic c. arsenate मृज्यातु नेपालीय. 
acid Chem. कुगन्धलिक अम्ल द्विप्रोदल c. blende=greenockite Mine नेपियिक अम्ल n. 
___ral. मज्यातु अन्धन m. cacodyl oxide Chemm. कुगन्धल जारेय . c. borate मज्यातु टांकीय . cacotheline Chem. (nitro-bruci-qui c. boro-tungstate solution मज्यातु 
none hydrate भूय-याकुलक-विज्वरा ___टांक-चंडीय विलयन . जलीय, obtained by heating bru c. bromide मृज्यातु दुरेय 1. cine आकुलकी with nitric acid c. carbonate मज्यातु प्रांगारीय n. भूयिकाम्ल) भ्वाकुलकी . 
c. carmine मृज्यातु शोण m. (कीट Cactaceae Bot. विदर-कुल 7. 
__ शोणी) cactus Bot. (a prickly plant) PUERT c. cell Phys. Chem. मज्यातु कोशा f. 
c. chloride (hydrated or dried) Cactus Bat. कंटालति f. (-ति for प्रजाति ___ मृज्यातु नीरेय n. (जलीयित ; शुष्क) 
genus) 
c. chromate मृज्यातु वर्णीय n. C. grandiflorus=cereus HETYST c. chrome yellow Col. Ind. मृज्यातु 
कंटाल m.. 
वर्णक पीत m. cadalene (cadinene पाहपुषेण्य +naph c. fluoride मृज्यातु तरस्वेय. 
thalene उत्तैलेन्य) Chem. आहेलेन्य।. c. green मृज्यातु हरि, उत्पीतातिहरि mfn. cadaver=corpse शव m. 
c. hydr-oxide मृज्यातु उद-जारेय M. cadaveric alkaloid (cadaver corpse) c. iodide मृज्यातु जम्बेय 1. 
=ptomaine शविक क्षाराभ m. 
c. lactate मृज्यातु दुग्धीय ॥. cadaverine= penta-methylene-di-. c. lemon मृज्यातु निम्बु, सूत्पीत Mfn. 
amine Chem. शवी = पंच-प्रोदलेन्य c. nitrate मृज्यातु भूयीय . द्वितिक्ती 
c. ocher=greenockite Mineral. caddis fly (caddes a kind of wool __ मृज्यातु गैरिक 1. ___len cloth') Zool. कम्बल-पतंग m. 
c. orange मृज्यातु नारंग, प्राधिरक्तपीत cadet नौछात्र, सेनाछात्र, बालवीर m. 
__mfn. cadetship बालवीरपद, नौछात्रपद, सेनाछात्रपद c. oxalate मृज्यातु तिग्मीय .. 
. 
c. oxide मृज्यातु जारेय. cadinene (Lat. cadinum juniper हपुषा) c. phosphate मृज्यातु भास्वीय n. 
Chem. पाहपुषेण्य . 
c. potassium iodide मृज्यातु दहातु cadm-, cadmi-, cadmo- (cadmium) जम्बेय . . ____Chem. मृज्य-(मृज्यातु) 
c. purple मृज्यातु नीला रुण, न्युद्रक्तापीत' cadmic Chem. मृज्यिक mfn. 
mfn. 178 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
- 
c. red Col. Ind. मज्यातु रक्त m. caffeinic Chem. म्लेच्छियिक mfn. c. sticks मृज्यातु यष्टि . 
caffeinism == caffeism Med. अति c. sulphate मृज्यातु शुल्बीय n. 
म्लेच्छीता. c. sulphide मृज्यातु शुल्बेय 1. caffein sodium benzoate म्लच्छि' c. thio-cyanate मृज्यातु गन्ध-श्यामीय क्षारातु धूपीय n. 
. 
caffeism=caffeinism C. vermilion=blood red=para caffeol Chem. (a fragrant oil deve 
red मृज्यातु हिंगुल= रुधिर रक्त ___loped by roasting coffee) म्लेच्छैल 1. 
अधिरक्तापीत mfn. 
caffe-tannic acid Chem. म्लेच्छ-शल्किक c. yellow मृज्यातु पीत, प्रोद्रक्तपीत mfn. अम्ल १. ___granulated c. कणात्मक मृज्यातु m. caffe-tannin Chem. म्लेच्छ-शल्कि f. cadmo-, cadm- (cadmium) Chem. caffoline Chem. (a degradation pro 
मृज्य- (मृज्यातु) 
duct of caffeine) अपम्लेच्छी . caducous Bot. आशुपाती (-इन्) mfn. cage पञ्जर १. caecum Anat. उण्डुक m. (ancient cage bird पञ्जर-पक्षी (-इन ) m. 
word) 
Cagniard de la Tour's tube Phys. caeruleus (Lat.) नभोवर्ण mfn. 
काष्ठाताप नाल m. Caesalpinia Bot. लताकरंजति f. (-ति for caine (cocaine) -अचेतनी . 
प्रजाति genus) 
caisson disease=divers' paralysis C. bonduc सामान्य लताकरज m. = tunnel disease=compress caesar- राज 
ed-air disease (bubbles of gas: caesium=cesium Chem. धुतातु m. form in the blood) वाति-बुबुद-रोग caesura lake-mineral red . 
m. caffeate Chem. म्लेच्छीय . 
Cajanus Bot. तुबरीति f. (-ति for प्रजाति caffeic Chem. म्लेच्छिक mfn. 
genus) caffeina et sodii benzoas (caffein. C. indicus सामान्य तुबरी. 
et sod. benz.) = caffeine and cajeputene=cajuputene sodium benzoate Pharm. म्लेच्छी cajeputol Chem. धवलव m. तथा क्षारातु धूपीय n. 
cajuput धवलद्रुम m. caffein aspirin tablets Falls-gars cajuputene = cajeputene (Malay 
चक्रिका . 
kaya द्रुम+putib धवल)=dipentene: caffeine-caffeina (caffein.) Pharm. Chem. धवलेन्यः द्विपंचेन्य n. 
। म्लेच्छी . 
____cajuputol, cajeputol=cineole धवलव caffeinecitrateChem. म्लेच्छी निम्बवीय n. m. caffeine di-iodo hydr-iodide Chem. cake फुल्लपूर (cf. Nepali फुलौरो, Skt. पूर, __ म्लेच्छी द्वि-जम्बु उद-जम्बय . 
____cake), अपूप m. caffeine sodium salicylate Foot cake fque m.. 
क्षारातु नम्रलीय. 
caked lac पिण्ड-लाक्षा, पिण्डित-लाक्षा. 
179.﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
ride 
caking coal (any bituminous coal calci-clase=anorthite quiero m. 
that softens......when heated) calcicole (plants) Bot. qui- 
Fm. Freit m. 
calcidine (calcium gluconate with cal. (calorie) 54 
iodine) Pharm. qui-straatit f. Calabar's swellings = wandering calciferol Chem. (it regulates the 
oedema (an oedema which calcium metabolism) quiafera m. slowly creeps into different parts calci-ferous uf-77 mfn. of the body) 7f9-8175 m. 
calcific=calci-ferous quia mfn. calamine (a crystalline alkaloid) calcification I fort n. 
faara f. (am Acorus calamus) . 2 (a calcified structure or part) Calamus draco = rattan palm = forfra n. 
dragon's blood saa m. 
calcified forfest mfn. Calamus rotang वेत्र m. 
calci-fuge (plants) Bot. vietą m. calcaneum Zool. प्रगुल्फास्थि ॥. 
calcify vb. FOTea n. calc-aphanite (calcium + aphanite) calcii chloridum=calcium chlo ___Petrog. चूर्णादृष्टाश्म m. calcar=prehallux=spur (in frog) c. gluconas=calcium gluco 
39178 m. 
nate Calcarea Zool, qui-zulfefit: m.pl. (hav- c. hypophosphis=calcium hy 
ing calcareous spicules 777) 
pophosphite calcareo- (calcareous) qförra calcimeter Chem. चूर्णमान m. calcareo-bituminous चूर्णिय-जतुक्य calcinable निश्चूर्ण्य mfn. 
mfn. 
calcinate=calcine calcareo-corneous före-arra mfn. calcination (act or process of cal calcareo-siliceous fóra #Fier mfn. сining) frequft n., fare mujer f., forfatte calcareo-sulphurous fort-Trani mfn. 1977 n., FETETT m. calcareous (of the nature of calcite calcinatory i adj. faire quinta, 
or calcium carbonate..) fort mfn. 2. n. (a vessel used in calcination) calcareous needles (of a sponge) firar 177-77 n. 
Zool. qui- f. 
calcinatory furnace Chem. निश्चूर्णन calcareousness aforast f. 
STE 1. calcareous sinter Mineral. aforet ama çalcine n. Chem. (a product of cal 
m. 
cination) fequi, fiffia, flitet n. calcareous skeleton afure #71137, m. calcine vb. I [to reduce to a powder, calcareous spar=calcite Mineral. or to a friable state, by the action 
afört-efiam f. 
of heat; to heat so as to expel calci- (calcium) Chem. aut (qafe) volatile matter from, as carbon calcic Chem, före : mfn. 
dioxide from limestone, and thus 
180 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
(usually) disintegrate; to oxidize, as by the action of heat; to con vert to a calx] निश्चूर्णन . 
2 ( to ignite a ceramic substance or mixture; to frit) निस्तापन n. 3 (to undergo calcination) निश्चूर्णन, 
निस्तपन . calcined falsafura mfn. calcined magnesia निश्चूणित-भ्राजा f. calciner (a worker or machine that 
calcines) निश्चूर्णक m. arsenic c. नेपाली-निश्चर्णक m. furnace c. भ्राष्ट्र-निश्चूर्णक m. nickel c. रूपक-निश्चूर्णक m. sand c. सिकता-निश्चूर्णक m. spelter c. कुप्या-निश्चूर्णक m. 
tin c. पु-निश्चूर्णक m. calcinize=calcine calcino-(calcium) Chem. चूर्ण-(चूर्णातु) calcio- Mineral. quia calcio-biotite Mineral. चूर्ण-मलाभ्रक 
__n. calcio-carnotite Mineral. चूर्ण-किरोतिज ____m. (-इज for खनिज mineral) calcio-ferrite Mineral.. चूर्णायसिज m. 
(-इज for खनिज mineral) calcio-scheelite Mineral. च-चूर्णचंडिज 
m. (-इज for खनिज mineral) (चूर्ण . calcio- has been abbreviated to च 
being a reduplication of the 
following चूर्ण) calcio-volborthite Mineral. चूर्ण 
हरिरोचिज m. (-इज for खनिज mineral) calcite Mineral. चूणिज m. (-इज for 
खनिज mineral) calcitic Mineral. चूणिजिक mfn. calcium Chem. चूर्णातु m. 
c. acetate चूर्णातु शुक्तीय n. 
c. acetyl-salicylate चूर्णातु शुक्तल 
नम्रलीय . c. aluminium fluoride चूर्णातु 
स्फटयातु तरस्वेय n. c. arsenate चूर्णातु नेपालीय n. c. arsenite चूर्णातु नेपालित 1. c. benzene-sulphonate . चूर्णातु 
धूपेन्य-शुल्बायीय n. c. benzilate चूर्णातु धूपिलीय 1. c. benzoate चूर्णातु धूपीय n. c. bicarbonate चूर्णातु द्वचंगारीय 7. c. bisulphite चूर्णातु द्विशुल्बित १. c. bisulphite solution qurfa fa ___ शुल्बित विलयन n. 
c. borate चूर्णातु टांकीय १. c. bromide चूर्णातु दुरेय . c. n-butyrate चूर्णातु ऋ-घृतीय 1. 
c. iso-butyrate चूर्णातु स-धृतीय : . c. carbide चूर्णातु प्रांगेय n. 
c. carbonate (precipitated) चूर्णातु 
प्रांगारीय n. (निस्सादित) c. chlorate चूर्णातु नीरीय . c. chloride=calcii chloridum ___ (calc. chlorid.) Pharm. चूर्णातु 
नीरेय . c. chloride tower चूर्णातु नीरेय प्रस्थाणु 
m. 
c. chloride tubeचर्णात नीरेय नाल m. c. chloride tubes and towers 
चूर्णातु नीरय नाल तथा प्रस्थाणु m. c. chromate चूर्णातु वर्णीय n. c. citrate चूर्णातु निम्बवीय .. c. creosotate Pharm. चूर्णातु ऋव्यपीय 
. 
c. cyan-amide (the commercial 
product is called also lime nitro gen and nitro-lime) चूर्णातु श्याम तिक्तेय n. (चूर्णक भूयाति, भूय-चूर्णक) 
181 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
- 
c. cyanide चूतु श्यामेय n. c. deposit चूर्णातु निक्षेप m. 'c. di-bromo-behenate चूर्णातु द्वि 
दुरा-शैनवीय 1. c. dichromate चूर्णातु द्विवर्णीय n. c. ferro-cyanide चूर्णातु अयस्य-श्यामेय 
c. fluoride चूर्णातु तरस्वेय . c. formate चूर्णातु वम्रीय 1. c. gluconate=calcii gluconas _Pharm. चूर्णातु मधुमीय n. c.glycero-phosphate चूर्णातु मधुर 
भास्वीय n. c. hippurate चूर्णातु अश्वमेहीय . c. hydrate चूर्णातु उदीय . c. hydro-sulphide चूर्णातु उद-शुल्बेय 
c. meta-borate चूर्णातु सम-टांकीय n. c. meta-phosphate चूर्णातु सम 
भास्वीय .. c. mono - iodo - behenate चूर्णातु 
एक-जम्बु-शैग्रवीय . c. naphthol - sulphonate चूर्णातु 
उत्तैलव-शुल्बायीय n. c. nitrate (hydrated or anhydr ___ous) चूर्णातु भूयीय n. (जलीयित; अजल) 
c. nucleinate चूर्णातु न्यष्टियीय n. c. oleate (technical) चूर्णातु म्रक्षीय १. 
(परिभाषित) c. oxalate चूर्णातु तिग्मीय . c. oxide=quicklime चूर्णातु जारेय n. ___-जीव चूर्णक m. 
c. oxy-chloride चूर्णातु जार-नीरेय n. c. permanganate चूर्णातु अतिलोहकीय 
___n. 
c. hydr-oxide = slaked lime ___ चूर्णातु उद-जारेय 1. = शान्त चूर्णक M. c. hypochlorite चूर्णातु उपनीरित n. c. hypophosphite = calcii hy 
pophosphis (calc. hypo phosph.) Pharm. चूर्णातु उपभास्वित 
M. c. iodate चूर्णातु जम्बीय 7. c. iodide चूर्णातु जम्बेय. c. iodo-behenate चूर्णातु जम्बु-शैग्नवीय 
c. lactate चूर्णातु दुग्धीय 1. c. lacto-phosphate चूर्णातु दुग्ध 
भास्वीय n. c. levulinate चूर्णातु मिष्टियीय . c. light=lime-light चूर्णातु प्रकाश 
चूर्ण-प्रकाश m. c. linoleate que apareita n. c. malate चूर्णातु उत्कोलीय . c. malonate चूर्णातु उत्कोलायीय n. c. mandelate चूर्णातु वातामीय . 
c. peroxide चूर्णातु अतिजारेय . c. phenol-sulphonate चूर्णातु दर्शव __शुल्बायीय . 
c. phosphate (precipitated) चूर्णातु 
भास्वीय . (निस्सादित) c. phosphate diació que narrater 
द्वयम्ल n. c. phosphate monoacid quia 
भास्वीय एकाम्ल . _c. phosphide चूर्णातु भास्वेय . 
c. phospho-tungstate चूर्णातु भास्व 
चंडीय 1. c. potassium ferro-cyanide चूर्णातु 
दहातु अयस्य-श्यामेय . c. propionate चूर्णातु प्रमेदीय . c. pyro-borate चूर्णातु अग्नि-टांकीय 1. c. Pyro-phosphate que afrater 
भास्वीयn. c. salicylate चूर्णातु नम्रलीय . c. silicate चूर्णातु सैकतीय n. 
182 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
c. silico-fluoride (techn 
7-3764 1. (froa) c. soap चूर्णातु स्वफेन m. C. stearate (technical) que anter 
n. (EFTATO) c. succinate चूर्णातु तृणीय n. c. sulphate चूर्णातु शुल्बीय . c. sulphide curfer Tamu n. c. sulphite चूर्णातु शुल्बित . C. sulpho-carbolate Tic Tool 
प्रांगवीय n. c. tannate curier rapide the c. tartrate चूर्णातु न्यासवीय . c. thio-cyanate Turkey T urta n. c. thio-sulphate Furie 18-Festa 16. 
c. tungstate चूर्णातु चंडीय 1. calcrete (calcium + -crete as in con- 
Crete) quieren f. calc-sinter=calcareous sinter calc-spar=calcite stof-enfatur f. calc-tufa = calcareous tufa cal 
careous sinter calculate vb. Com. TUFFT, FOTOFET n. calculated Com. fura mfn. calculating machine-calculator 
comptometer TUG-1777 1h., TUTE 
11 
C. blue=indanthrene blue C. brilliant purple=indanth 
rene violet C. brilliant violet=indanth 
rene brilliant violet C. brown=indanthrene brown C. dark blue = indanthrene 
dark blue C. green=indanthrene green C. jade green=anthrene jade 
green C. pink=C. red C. purple=indanthrene violet C. red=indanthrene red C. violet=indanthrene violet 
C. yellow=indanthrene yellow Caledonian brown = mineral 
brown calendar fafet-9377 f. 
c. month पत्री-मास m. (तिथिपत्री 
shortened to wait) c. year=legal year=civil year 
qat-q=aa90 m. calender (corrupt. from Lat. cylin 
drus) 77 m. calendula (calend.) = marigold= 
marigold flowers Pharm. sirgti n. 
(Hindi Tar) caliber (diameter of bullet, tube, 
etc.) Te m. caliber compass = calipers craf 
m. . calibrate vb. I (ascertain the caliber 
of a tube) 417-Farafor n. 2 (rectify graduations....) - 
1195, Fann. calibrated arif taieti, Faferia mfn. 
m. 
calculation or n., TuffT f. calculator गणक m. . calculus कलन . 
c. of finite differences Math, 
qfflt-PART 1 c. of observations 79614117-n. c. of variations Math. fagpup-4577 
n. 
Calcutta Geog. FTTETT m. Caledon black B=alizanthrene 
black B 
183 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
for 
calibration (act of checking the Calliphora Zool. (a genus of large 
accuracy of a set of graduations blue-bottle flies) नीलमक्ष्याति. (-आति 
marked to indicate values) स्वंकन, for youfe genus) अंकशोधन 2. 
callistephin Col. Ind. सुमुकुटि f. calibration bridge स्वंकन-सेतु m. Callistephus (calli-सु- + Gk. stephos calibrator 1 (a worker) अंकशोधक, crown) Bot. सुमुकुटति . (-ति for 
स्वंकयिता (तृ) m., (an instrument) प्रजाति genus) स्वकिरा. 
call option क्रय-विकल्प M. (option to 2 व्यास-निर्धारक m. 
buy) calico कालिकट m. 
callose (Lat. callum thick skin, Sans Calico flavine Col. Ind. #fanc fruit f. krit किण + -ose as in cellulose) calico printer कालिकट-मुद्रक m. 
Bot., Biochem. किणधु . calico printing कालिकट-मुद्रण 1. 
callosity facut m. (ancient word) Calico yellow Col. Ind. कालिकट पीत m. callus Bot. (a deposit of callose, a Calicut Geog. धर्मपत्तन, कालिकट . . hard substance) किणक m. California buckthorn=Rhamnus calombo=calumbo= colombo= 
_putshiana=chittam आरेच m. columbo (root of Jateorhiza caliper व्यासमि m. 
columba, moonseed family चन्द्र inside c. प्रान्तर व्यासमि m. 
बीज-कुल) इन्दुमूल.. outside c. बाह्य व्यासमिm. 
calomel=horn quicksilver पानीरेय 1. slidec. सृप व्यासमि m. 
. (पा for पारद्य mercurous + नीरेय caliper guage व्यासामान m. 
chloride) calix=calyx 
calomel electrode Physical Chem. call Com. याचना f. (प्रभाग-याचना) 
पानीरेय विद्युहार . c. book याचना-पुस्त .. 
calomel electrode stand पानीरेय विद्युद् c. in arrear अथित अदत्त प्रभाग m. द्वार स्थाम 1. 
(प्रभाग instalment) 
calomel ointment = ointment of c. money याचना-राशि m. 
mercurous chloride Pharm. TE c. paid in advance अनेदत्त प्रभाग नीरेय स्नेहलेपm. __ m. 
Calophyllum Bot. पुन्नागति . (-ति for c. unpaid अदत्त प्रभाग m. 
प्रजाति genus) called up capital Com. आहूत-पुंजी . C. apetalum सामान्य पुन्नाग m. Callendar's apparatus (mechanical calori- उष 
equivalent apparatus with fric- caloric Old Chem. (the principal of tion of ribbon wrapped round heat) aferi na adrum) वेष्टघर्षण साधित्र n. 
caloric adj. (of or pertaining to calo Callendar's method प्रकेवल विस्तरण, . ric) उषिक, उषिकीय mfn. 
परिशुद्ध-रीति. 
caloric engine उषिक गन्त्र . 184 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
caloric fluid Phys. 39-49 m. 
iron or steel, with aluminium) caloricity (ability to develop and Co (79129Tg-zout) . 
maintain animal heat) 39991 f. calorizer=calorisator caloric paradox Phys. उषिक असद्भास calory उष m. 
m. 
Calotropis Bot. Heifer f. (fa for calorie, calory Phys. (a unit of heat) Stellfe genus) 
39 m. 
C.gigenta सामान्य अर्क m. calorifacient Physiol. 30 min. calumba (calumb.) = calumbae calorific, calorifical I 304mfn. radix=calumba root Pharm. 
calorific rays उषंकर रश्मि m. 
7947 n. 2 (of or pertaining to heat) for calx Chem. Het f. mfn. 
calycanthine Chem, (from seeds of calorification (production of heat) the strawberry shrub, Calycan 
Buofa f. 
___thus fertilis) तृणबदरी. calorific capacity Phys. som et enfeat calyptra Bot. i (any caplike cover 
ing) aferace m. calorific power 30t TFFET f. 
2 (covering of the capsule) star calorific rays उषंकर रश्मि m. 
ac m. calorifics Phys. औषिकी . 
calyx 1 (K) Bot. gouetzt m. (*) (cf. calorific value उषंकरी अहीं/. 
98127er calyx of a lotus) calorific wool=capsicum wool 2 Anat. Frana m. ___ Pharm. उषंकरी ऊर्णा f. 
cam Mach.. (used to give complica calorifier पोषक m. 
ted and exactly timed move calorify vb. (to render hot) to ments) गाम m. 
camber Mach. (slight convexity) calorigenic (generating heat) 396 Alham f. 
mfn. 
camber vb. Mach. (to give convexity calori-meter Phys. 39-m. 
to) TT 1. calorimeter bomb=bomb calori. cambered Mach. Fafora mfn. 
meter sesta-34777 m. 
cambium Bot. एधा. calorimetric, calorimetrical cambium ring Bot. TET-2977 m. 
pertaining to calorimetry) उषमितीय Cambodia कम्बोज m. mfn. 
camboge=gamboge (ultimately calorimetry Phys. उषमिति . 
from Cambodia, Sanskrit Falls) calorisator प्रोषित्र .. 
Telts M. calorist 39-arat (ET) m. 
cambogia=camboge calorize Metal. (to treat by a pro- camel poem. 
cess for coating metal, usually camel hair Jeenaa n. 
185 
: 
n. 
On 
t Of 
com 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
camelia=aniline brown ___camphine कर्पूरी. camellia Col. Ind. (a colour, red in campho-, camph-(camphor) - 
hue, of very high saturation and campho adj. Chem. *-, #102€ mfn. 
medium brilliance) अधिरक्त m. camphocarboxylic Chem. PRITA Camellia Bot. gafar f. (-F for yourfa frfota mfn. 
genus) 
camphoid Pharm. कर्पूराभ m. C. theifera सामान्य चैन m. 
camphol=borneol Chem. Feca m. camellin (found in tea seeds) चैनि f. campholic acid कर्पूरविक अम्ल . camelopard Zool. Fontos m. 
campholide au n. camera रूपित्र n. 
campholytic acid (campho- *elec camera gun Mil. (used as aim gun) trolytic) Chem. Fyrifera *** n. 
fra RITEIT f. 
camphor 4 m. cam-opening valve Automobile TT dextro c. 47-anya m. 
Seefe-416 n. 
levo c. or matricaria c. 4TH-44€ campaign Mil. संख्य 1. 
m. Campanulaceae Bot, uztat 1 
inactive or racemic c. f, campanulate=bell-shaped sett, 
Tf=503 m. atau mfn. 
synthetic c. संश्लिष्ट कपर m. Campanulates Bot. (bell-shaped artificial c. = pinene hydro 
flowers) TUT-177 n 
chloride af fe m. campanuline (Lat. campanula sifat) gum c.=c. gum farafa-** m. 
Col. Ind. sfait f. . 
camphor = camphora (camph.) campbelline oil orange = oil Pharm. a m. 
orange 
camphor vb.camphorate campbelline oil yellow N supra= Camphora Bot. for f. (-fat for 
butter yellow 
forfa genus) campeachy black=deep black C. officinarum per m. campeachy wood=blauholz c amphoraceous wifey mfn. camph-, campho- (camphor) **- camphorate Chem. (a salt or ester) camphane = 1, 7, 7-trimethyl-nor pyetu n. 
_camphane Chem. कर्पूरीण्य . camphorate vb. (to impregnate or. camphane group Chem. Par toerani m. treat with camphor) pecut n. ( camphanic Chem. कर्पूरीण्यिक mfn. 
व्यापन, कर्पूर-साधन) camphanone Chem. कर्पूरीण्या f. camphorated affia mfn. camphanyl Chem. 2007 1 
camphorated oil=camphor lini camphene = 2, 2 -dimethyl-3- ment Pharm. Afcat sist n. 
methylene-norcamphane Chem. camphor flowers (natural) of goy 
porn. 
the (97) 
186 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
camphor gum==gum camphor camphor salicylate Chem. कर्पूर नम्र 
कर्पूर-निर्यास m. 
लीय . camphoric कर्पूरिक mfn. 
d-camphor-10-sulphonic acid camphoric acid Cbem. कर्पूरिक अम्ल Chem. द-कर्पूर-१०-शुल्बायिक अम्ल n. 
camphor tree कर्पूर-वृक्ष m. dextro- or ordinary c. acid दक्ष-, camphor water-aqua camphorae 
साधारण कर्पूरिक अम्ल . 
कर्पूर-वारि . levo-c. acid वाम-कपरिक अम्ल .. camphory=camphoraceous racemicc. acid गुच्छिक कर्पूरिक अम्ल camphoryl Chem. कर्पूरल .. 
camphyl-amine Chem. कर्पूल-तिक्ती dextro-, levo- and racemic iso 
c. acid दक्ष-, वाम-, गुच्छिक स-कर्पूरिक camphylene=naphthalene Com. अम्लn. 
कर्पूलेन्य ?. camphoric anhydride #fique campylotropous (or curved) Bot. 
. 
वक्रावर्त mfn. camphor ice कर्पूर-हिम . 
camshaft Mach. गामेषा . camphor in oil Pharm. तैले कर्पूर m. can वपनी f. camphorize=camphorate 
Canada balsam=Canada turpen camphor laurel=camphor tree tine (turpentine yielded by the 
कर्पूर-वृक्ष m. 
balsam धूपियास fir) धूपियास-तैल १. camphor liniment=camphorated Canada balsam bottle Chem. धूपियास 
oil 
तैल-कूपी . camphor mono-bromide mer - Canada turpentine=Canada bal 
दुरेय . 
sam camphorodyne Pharm. कर्पूरापीड m. Canadian hemp = apocynum camphor oil कर्पूर-तैल . 
Pharm. प्रगंजा. white, brown, blue, light, canadol (used for extracting oils) 
heavy camphor oil श्वेत, बभ्रु, तैलनिस्सारव m. नील, लघु, गुरु कर्पूर-तैल 1. 
canal 1 कुल्या. camphorone = camphor-phorone 2 Anat. कुल्या . 
___Cbenz. कपरा. 
canalicule Zooh ofertat f. camphoronic acid कर्पूरायिक अम्ल 1. canal of Schlemm Anat. (it goes camphor-oxime Chem. कर्पूर-जाविn. round the limbus) परिकुल्यां f.. camphoroyl Chem. कर्पूरूल . 
canal rays-Kanal-strahlen Phys. camphorphorone=camphorone कुल्या-रश्मि m. camphor plant-Anthemis nobilis Canarium Bot. यववातामति f. (-ति for 
=chamomile (flowers have cam प्रजाति genus) (यव for यवद्वीप Java) phor-like odour) कर्पूरपुष्प m. canary bird पीत-चटकी f. 
187 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
canary glass (glass coloured with cancellated bone-spongy bone 
oxide of uranium) पीतारक्त काच छिद्रिष्ठ अस्थि . 
cancellation i famil97 n. canary yellow प्रपीतारक्त m. 
2 Math. अपवर्तन 1. canavalin Biochem. आकलाय. (आकलाय cancelled familia mfn. 
=Canavalia “jack beans of the cancelling facilitar n. pea कलाय family) 
cancellous Anat. (having a spongy cancel vb. विलोपन १. 
or porous structure) छिद्रिष्ठ mfn. I (to strike out with lines drawn cancel out vb. fagitant n. 
lattice-wise) रेखोच्छेदन ". cancer Med. यमार्बुद m. 2 (to mark for omission with cancrum oris Med. प्रास्य-शोथ m. 
lines drawn lattice-wise) लोप- candle I (wax candle) सिक्थ-वति . रेखांकन .. 
2 (a unit of light) afa f. 3 (to cross out with a line or candle black Col. Ind. सिक्थवर्ति काल 
lines) अप-रेखण १. 
m. 4 (to strike out) उच्छेदन n. candle, disinfecting रोगाणुनाश-वति . 5 (to delete) अपमार्जन, बहिष्करण १. candle, filter पाव-सिक्थवति । 6 (to erase) उद्घर्षण .. 
candle power वर्ति-शक्ति. 7(to annul) अभिशून्यन n. 
candy (from Sanskrit aus, which is 8 (to make void) शून्यन 1. 
___the parent of Persian कन्द) खाण्डक . 9 (to destroy) नाशन n. 
candy = sugar candy = mishri 10 (to revoke or recall) निरसन, (मिश्री) सितोपल m. (सिता white 
प्रत्याहान, प्रत्यावर्तन 1. 
sugar+उपल) II (ro abolish) उत्सादन .. 
cane I यष्टि. 12 (to obliterate) अभिलोपन n. 
2 इक्षु m. 13 (to blot out) परालोपन 1. 
cane brimstone = roll sulphur = 14 (to neutralise) क्लीबन 1. 
stick sulphur यष्टि-गन्धक-वेल्लन 15 (to counterbalance) प्रतितोलन n. गन्धक m. 16 (to compensate for) हानिपूरण . canelle=aniline brown 17 (to cross or mark with a line cane mill इक्षु-पीडनी f. 
or lines) EU n. 
cane sugar इक्षु-शर्करा . 18 Math. (to remove a common canine-single cuspid Anat. एककूट 
divisor, etc.) अपवर्तन 1. (ancient दन्त m. word) 
canine incisors दंष्ट्र m. (from काश्यप 19 Music (to counteract the effect संहिता-द्वौ उत्तरौ, द्वौ अधरौ) ____of previous sharps, flats, etc..) canine tooth श्वदन्त m. 
प्रतिकरण . 
Canis familiaris = domestic dog 20 Print. (to dele) बहिष्करण 1. 
Zool. गृह्य कुक्कुर m. 188 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
Canna Bot. सर्वजयाति f. (-ति for प्रजाति canonical form प्रामाणिक रूप n. 
genus) 
canons of taxation Econ. करप्रनियम m. C. indica सामान्य सर्वजया . 
Canscora Bot. शंखपुष्पीति f. (-ति for cannabene विजयेन्य. (from विजया प्रजाति genus) 
Cannabis indica) 
C. decussata सामान्य शंखपुष्पी . cannabin विजयि . 
cantharidal (pertaining to or con Cannabinaceae Bot. विजया-कुल .. taining cantharides हरिभृग्य) हरि cannabinine fastfuit f. 
भुंग्य-, हारिमुंग्य Mfn. cannabinol festfira m. 
cantharidal plaster हरि ग्य-लेप M. cannabinon विजयिया. 
cantharidate vb. (to treat or Cannabis Bot, fastarfa f. (-fa for impregnate with cantharides) 
प्रजाति genus) 
हरिभुंग्य-साधन, हरिभंग्य-व्यापन . C. indica सामान्य विजया /. 
cantharides I pl. of cantharis cannabis (cannab.)=Indian hemp 2 (a preparation of dried blister 
=ganjah=guaza Pharm. गंजा beetles or green Spanish flies विजया . 
हरिभृग) Pharm. हरिग्य . . canned food वपनीयित अन्न 1. 
China c. चीन-हरि गn. cannel, cannel coal (corrupted from cantharides cerate=blistering ce 
candle coal, a. coal of fine texture, rate हरिभंग्य-सिक्थ्य . burning with a bright flame) cantharidian,-ridean . (composed वत्यंगार m. 
of, or of the nature of, cantha cannibal (eating it's own kind) rides) हरि ग्य-युत, -मय, -वत् mfn. 
स्वजातिभक्ष m. . 
cantharidin = cantharidinum canning वपनीयन n. (can वपनी) . Pharm. (the active principle of Cannizzaro reaction Chem. (a reac- the cantharis or Spanish fly aft 
tion of aldehydes with caustic मुंग) हरि गि... . alkali, whereby one molecule of cantharidism Med. अतिहरि ग्यता. aldehyde iş reduced to alcohol canatharidize vb. (to treat with can सुषव and another to acid अम्ल) tharides), हरिभंग्य-साधन . . अपिस्वम्लकर प्रतिक्रिया f. . 
cantharis=Spanish fly = blister cannon Mil. I शतघ्नी, प्रशतघ्नी f. 
ing beetle हरिभृग m. 2=gun शतघ्नी . 
cantharis=cantharides . cannon metal=gun metal शतघ्नी- canthus Anat. अपांग . .. . 
धातु m. . 
canvas गाढक n. (cf. Hindi गाढ़ा) . cannula = drainage tube Surg. canvass vb. (to solicit votes) छन्दार्थन, 
शोषनाली f. 
मतार्थन .. .. canon (established rule sfarsit facra) caoutchouc I sefer m. 
प्रनियम m. 
___2 (pure rubber) शुद्ध घृषि m. . 
189﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
cap टोपी 
C. reserve qift-rifafer f. capacity I (cubic content) धारिता. authorised c. प्राधिकृत-पुंजी f. 
___ 2 सामर्थ्य 1., क्षमता f. 
called up c. आहूत-पुंजी f. cap-bolt Macb. टोपी-अर्गली. 
circulating c. परिचल-पुंजी f. cap-cell Bot. टोपी-कोशा. 
fixed c. स्थिर-पुंजी . capillarimeter केशाल-मान m. 
floating c. चल-पुंजी . capillariness=capillarity 
issued c. निर्गमित-पुंजी . capillarity केशालत्व . 
paid up c. परिदत्त-पुंजी, प्राप्त-पुंजी . capillary adj. (pertaining to capillary reduction of c. पुंजी-प्रह्रास m. 
tubes or vessels, or to the reserved c. संचित-पुंजी / phenomena of surface tension, share c. अंश-पुंजी . as capillary action) केशाल-, केशालीय subscribed c. प्रार्थित-पुंजी. 
mfn. 
trading c. व्यापार-पुंजी . capillary (Lat. capillaris from capi unpaid c. अदत्त-पुंजी . 
llus hair) केशाल m. (केश+ नाल) watered c. तरलित-पुंजी, अधिपुंजी . c. analysis Chem. केशाल-विश्लेषण . (watering अधिपुंजीयन) c. attraction केशाल-आकर्षण 1. 
working c. कर्मवाहक-पुंजी, सक्रिय-पुंजी c. chemistry केशाल-रसायन . c. electrometer Phys. केशाल- capitalism I (state of having capi 
विद्युन्मान m. 
tal) पुंजीमत्ता . c. permeability control केशाल 2 (system in which capital and . प्रतिवेध्यता-वशीकरण ।. 
capitalist play an important c. repulsion केशाल-अपकर्षण n. 
part) पुंजीतन्त्र c. stopcock केशाल-शिखिपिधा. 
3 (concentration of capital power; c. tube, c. tubing केशनाल m. (not influence of capital) पुंजी-संकेन्द्रण n., 
केशाल-नाल; केशाल, itself is from जी-शक्ति f., पुंजी-प्रभाव m. केश-नाल) . 
capitalist पुंजीपति M. (H. पूंजीपति) capital मूलधन N., पुंजी f. (H. पूंजी) capitalistic पुंजीतन्त्रीय mfn. 
c. account पुंजी-लेखा f. (H. पूंजी capitalistic production पुंजीप्रधान 
खाता) 
उत्पादना. C. expenditure, c. expenses capitalistic system पुंजी-तन्त्र 1. 
पुंजी-व्यय m. 
capitalization पुंजीकरण . c. levy पुंजी-कर m. 
capitalized Com. पुंजीकृत mfn. c. loss पुंजी-हानि . 
c. profit पुंजीकृत लाभ m. c. market पुंजी-विपणि f. 
c. value पुंजीकृत-अरे . c. profit पुंजी-लाभ m. ___capitate hair Bot. (hair with a knob) c. redemption fund: पुंजी-निष्क्रयण. समुण्ड रोम १. 
प्रणीवि... 
capitation tax प्रतिव्यक्ति कर m. 
190. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
capitulation Mil. उपनमन . capitulum (Lat. 'a small head') Bot., 
Anat. मुण्डक n. cappagh brown=mineral brown Capparidaceae Bot, aty n. Capparis Bot. करीरति . (-ति for प्रजाति 
genus) 
C. aphylla सामान्य करीर m. capped #clfq, atita mfn. caprate Chem. नारिकेलीय . Capri (from the Blue Grotto, Capri; 
a colour bluish green-blue in hue, of high saturation and low brilliance) Col. Ind. et f., hai fania m. 
C. blue TIET-RITT, Tritet m. 
· C. green tiet-Eft m. capric acid Chem. नारिकेलिक अम्ल n. caprilic=caprylic caprin Chem. (any of the esters of 
glycerol and capricacid) afsfer f. caprine = nor-leucine (a-amino 
caproic acid) Chem. Toft f. caprinic नारिकेलियिक .mfn. capro- (caproic) Chem. 784 capro-amide Chem. Tou-faeda n. caproate Chem. गव्यीय . caproic Chem. (this acid is found 
in cow's milk also) foi mfn. caproic acid Chem. Tfatti FT n. n-caproic anhydride ऋ-गव्यिक अजलेय 
capronyl (caprone + -yl) = caproyl 
Chem. IT n. caproyl (capro- + -y) Chem. Tout n. 
c. chloride 74 pia n. capryl (capric to -y) Chem. 7if737 n. 
c. acetate नारिकेरल शुक्तीय . c. alcohol i n 1999 m. 
C.-amine 1955-fatt f. caprylate Chem. The City n. caprylene (caprylic + ethylene) = 
octylene Chem, irritatea n. caprylic Chem. Iffat mfn. 
c. acid नारिकेरलिक अम्ल caprylin=glyceryl caprylate Chem. 
fta eft f. caprylone Chens. नारिकेरला . caprylyl Chem. Alfat n. capsaicin (from Capsicum; the pun 
gent principle of Cayenne pepper) 
Chem. #fefe f. capsicin (from Capsicum; a highly 
pungent extract from Cayenne 
pepper) Pharm. **aefa f. capsicum (the dried ripe fruit of 
Capsicum fructescens) (capsic.)= capsici fructus = capsicum 
fruit Pharm. H n . Capsicum Bot. Tifafa f. (-far for 
starfa genus) capsicum fructus . capsicum 
fruit=capsicum capsicum wool = calorific wool 
Pharm. T fa-off. capsize=overturn vb. 3 ATC n. (cf. 
शकटोच्चाटन 'overturning of a cart' MW.) capstan EGETEIT, JEE m.:(594 verti 
cal axle) 
cal 
n. 
caproin=glyceryl caproate Chem. 
for f. caprone (capric + -one) Irfa f. capronic=caproic n-capro-nitrile=n-amyl cyanide 
Chem. #-Ta-pferat m. 
191 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
capsul- $75 
ing matter for food and beve capsular I प्रावरीय mfn. 
rages, etc.) T-RTI< n. 2 4793-YET mfn. 
carane (carone + -ane ) = 4,7,7, 3=capsulate 
trimethyl - norcarane Chem. capsular fruit Bot. (dry dehiscent, FERUT n. 
many seeded) a paistesile Feet n. carapace (of the back) Zool. (a shield capsulate=capsular (enclosed in covering the back or part of the 
a capsule) yea mfr. 
back.of an animal) qosa na 
carat 1 (3.086 grains troy) sajt m. ( capsule=theca Bot, tak m. capsule Bot. प्रावर m. 
ge=$14) seta quet f. ' 
2 (a proportion of gold) auf m. foot पाद m. 
(ancient word) capsule vb. (to furnish with; or 
20 carat poquim. ' enclose in, a capsule) STTC-TITUT, 
carate=pinto 9999# n. STTT-GEOT 1. 
carat grain ( 1 of a carat) arti m. 
caraway=carum Pharm, it m. capsule Chem. प्रावर m. 
nickel c. 44-Tak m. 
caraway water-aqua carui Pharm. 
feitarf n . regulator c. 148-8797 m. silica c. ÅRST-STER m. 
carb-, carbo-Chem. (carbon, carbo 
nic, carbonyl, carboxyl) STİTT capsuler (one that puts on capsules) 
-carb-, -carbo- - - 
· ST-71991 . 
carb-acido-meter iFT-7 m. capsuli-, capsulo-sat 
carb-amate Chem. Fir-faatata n. capsulo-genous 1797-mfn. 
carb-amic Chem, stir-faenfica mfn. capsumin (Capsicum + - in; a red carb-amide sir-faqda n. 
pigment in Guinea pepper) Bio 
carb-amido-Chem. (carbamide) STT chem. After f. 
fandam . captain I (Army) FETTUfa m. 
carb-amido Chem. styr-fradu, faadae : 2 (Royal Navy) Helferli m. 
mfn. 3 (of a merchant vessel) TaTETET cathoomine Chem virr forment of m. 
carb-amine reaction = carbamino caput mortuum=iron red . reaction car (a vehicle moved on wheels carb-amino Chem. sir-fait, -ferrari : a. carriage, cart, wagon, truck, mfn. " etc.) 917 1h., (- ).m. 
carb-amino reaction Biochem. SIIT carafe , Fiat f. 
farasit,-farariteti spfaf f. caramel (a substance obtained by carbamyl (carbamic to-yl) Chem. 
heating sugar. .used as colour- Stufftar n. 
192 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
carb-anil (carbonyl to aniline) = c. violet Chem. प्रांगिव नीललोहित 
phenyl iso-cyanate Chem. प्रांग 
m. नील-दर्शल स-श्यामीय n. . 
carbinyl Chem. प्रांगिलn. b-anilic=phenyl - carb - amic . c. chloride STIFTET ATT n. Chem. प्रांग-नीलिक = दर्शलांग-तिक्तेयिक tri-phenyl-c. त्रि-दर्शल-प्रांगिल .. mfn. 
carbo I Pharm. (charcoal) कृष्णांगार m. carb-anilide Chem. प्रांग-नीलेय . 
2 (a carbonaceous residue from carbazic Chem. प्रांगाजीविक mfn. 
petroleum distillation; oil-retort carbazide Cbem. प्रांगाजीवेय. 
carbon) प्रांग-किट्ट. carbazine Chem. प्रांगाजीवी /. 
carbor, carb- Chem. प्रांग carbazole Chem. प्रांगाजवा f. 
carboazotine Chem. प्रांगाजीवाती/. c. developer Col. Ind. प्रांगाजवा carbocinchomeronic acid (carbo 
विकासक m. 
प्रांग- + cincbonine वितापी + Gk. c. indo-phenol Col. Ind. प्रांगाजवा meros part अवयव) Chem. प्रांगताप्यव 
निनील-दर्शव m. 
यविक अम्ल . carbazolwoolgreen Col. Ind. प्रांगाजव carbo-cyclic Chem. प्रांग-चक्रिक mfn. 
ऊर्णा हरि m. 
carbo-di-imide Chem. प्रांग-द्वि-वितिक्तेय c. yellow प्रांगाजव पीत M. carbazotic acid. Col. Ind. प्रांगाजीवातिक carbo-gelatin प्रांग-शिलषि . 
अम्ल . . 
carbogene Col. Ind. STIVITET m. carbazylic Chem. प्रांगाजीवलिक mfn. carbo-hemo-globin (carbo-thematin carbene Chem, प्रांगण्य 1. 
+ globin) Biochem. प्रांग-शोण-वर्तुलि f. carb-eth-oxy- Chem. (carbethoxyl) carbohydrase Biochem. (carbohydrate 
प्रांग-द-जार 
+ -ase) प्रांगोदीयेद m. carb-eth-oxy adj. प्रांग-द-जार mfn. carbo-hydrate, Chem. प्रांगोदीय n. carb-eth-oxyl (carb-easyi प्रांग-जारल carbohydrate. indigestion प्रांगोदीय 
with ethyl e inserted) Chem. अजीर्ण. प्रांग-द-जारला . 
carbohydrat-uria प्रांगोदीय-मेह m. , carbid=carbide 
carbohydrazide Siricista n. . carbide Chem. प्रांगेय । 
carbohydride Chem. प्रांगोदेय .. carbide black Col. Ind. प्रांगेय काल m. carbohydrogen Chem. प्रांगोदजन m. ___c. fast black प्रांगेय स्थिर काल m. carbol- (carbolic) Chem. sira carb-imide=iso-cyanic acid Chem. carbolate Chem. SİTEIT n. 
प्रांग-वितिक्तेय-स-श्यामिक अम्ल . carbolated stiifaa mfn.. carbinado=carbonado 
carbol-fuchsin Micros. प्रांगव-धूमलि. carbinol Chem. प्रांगिव m. . 
carbolic Chem. प्रांगविक mfn. carbinol blue Col. Ind. stifire fret m. c. acid strane pret n. 
c. fast green sifira feriefm. c. oil प्रांगविक तैल 1. 
प्रजा 
193 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
- 
C 
carbo ligni Pharm. (used as an 
absorbent) चूषांगार m. carbolineate vb. (to treat or im 
pregnate with carbolineum) faar 
मैलन, विक्षामैल-साधन, विक्षामैल-व्यापन n. carbolineum (anthracene fetare oil 
तैल treated with zinc chloride...) 
विक्षामैल 1. carbolize vb. प्रांगवण .. 
I to mix with carbolic acid or add carbolic acid to) प्रांगविक-अम्ल मिश्रण . 
.2 (to treat by the use of carbolic 
• acid) प्रांगविक-अम्ल-साधन 1. carboloy (carbide + 0.4+ alloy) sit 
मिश्रातु m. (मिश्रधातु) carbol-uria प्रांगव-मेह m carbol-xylol (carbol- to xylenet -ol) 
प्रांगव-काष्ठव m. (प्रांगव-+काष्ठेन्य-- -ब) carbo-methene-ketene Chem. प्रांग-. . प्रोदेन्य 1. carbo-methoxy- Chem. (carbo 
• methoxyl) प्रांग-प्रोदजार carbo-methoxy Chem.प्रांग-प्रोदजार mfn. carbon. Chem. अंगार m. - c-assimilation Bot. प्रांगार-परिपचन 
___ 
c. black अंगार-कालिमा, प्रांगार-काल m. c. copy प्रांगार-प्रतिलिपि . c. diamond=blackdiamond . . carbonado काल-हीर m. c. dichloride = tetra-chloro 
ethyleneप्रांगार द्विनीरेय-चतुर्-नीर 
'दक्षुलेन्या . 
• . dioxide (CO.) प्रांगार द्विजारेय. 
(प्रजद्वे). c. dioxideapparatus प्रांगार द्विजारेय 
साधित्र, प्रजद्वे सचित्र . 
C.-dioxide extinguisher SITE द्विजारेय शामयिता, प्रजद्वे शामयिता (-त) 
m. c. dioxide snow=dry ice प्रांगार 
द्विजारेय शीन, प्रजद्वेशीन.-शुष्कहिम . c. disulphide प्रागार द्विशुल्बेय. c. electrode प्रांगार विद्युवार ?. c. flame प्रांगार-ज्वालाf. c.-imide = iso-cyanic acid 
प्रांगार-वितिक्तेय-स-श्यामिक अम्ल . c. knock प्रांगार अभिघात m. c. lamp प्रांगार-दीप m. c. light प्रांगार-प्रकाश m. c. microphone Elec. प्रांगार-अणुभाष 
m. c. monoxide प्रांगार एकजारेय. c. monoxide haemoglobino 
meter प्रजैक (प्रांगार एकजारेय), शोण वर्तुलिमान m. c. oxide प्रांगार जारेय. c. oxy-chloride प्रांगार जार-नीरेय n. c. paper प्रांगार-पत्र . c. pencil प्रांगार-अंकनी f. c. point Elec. प्रांगार-अन.. c. pole प्रांगार-ध्रुव m. c. process Photog. प्रांगार-विधाf. c. rod प्रांगार-शलाका . c..silicide=silicon catbideप्रांगार 
सैकतेय-सैकता प्रांगेय. c. spar Mineral. प्रांगार-धात्विया f. c.spot काल लांछन ।. c. star प्रांगार-तारा. c. steel प्रांगार-वज्रायस. c. sulpho-chloride=thio-phos 
gene प्रांगार शुल्ब-नीरेय -गन्ध-भाज 
. c. telephone प्रांगार-दूरभाष m. 
c. tetrabromide प्रांगार चतुर्दुरेय .. 
194 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
c. tetrachloride प्रांगार चतुर्नीरेय .. I (to convert into a carbonate) c. tetrachloride extinguisher STTTTTTTT n. 
STTTT itu 774FUETT (1) m. 
2 (to impregnate with carbonic c. tissue=carbon paper 
acid or carbon dioxide) प्रांगारिक c. transfer Photog. SÍTTETTHUT n. . 71-647971, SITTE-FETT27-0471 967 n. c. transmitter Phys. प्रांगार-पारेषक carbonated water प्रांगारीयित जल . 
m. 
carbonate of lime=calcium car c. trichloride = hexa-chloro bonate aufT SITT n. 
ethane प्रांगार त्रिनीरेय = षण्णीर- carbonate of potash=potassium Gofort n. 
carbonate GETE SITTIT na c. tube Anal. Chem. TTT-TT m. carbonate of soda=sodium car c-uria प्रांगार-मेह 7. 
bonate TT Tinta n. carbon Mineral. (a carbon diamond) carbonation (act or process of cará 
SIT-Im. 
bonating; specif., Sugar Mfg., the carbon adj. 1 (of or pertaining to saturation of clarified saccharine 
carbon) प्रांगारिय mfr. 
juice with carbon dioxide to 2 (resembling carbon) si**-gera precipitate the lime) immerToT 1. mfn. 
(act), siirtout f. (process) 3 (treated with carbon) TTTTTTTTTTT carbonatization=carbonation mfn. 
carbonato- Chem. (carbonate) ir carbon vb. SÍTTETT 17. 
carbonator Chem. (one that car I (to become coated with carbon) bonates; specif. I a worker who FITTE-727 n. 
runs carbon dioxide into beer; 2 (to deposit carbon upon cylind 2 an apparatus in which car ers) XIT-TITUT n. 
. bonation is conducted) प्रांगारीयक m2 carbona Mining (an irregular deposit carbon-emia Med. (presence of ex 
of tin ore; a stock-work) 77977 f. cessive carbon dioxide in the carbonaceous I (coaly) sinifu mfn. blood) See-TFITT f. 
2 (pertaining to, containing, or carboni- FINITS-, WITT composed of, carbon) imea, carbonic Chem. simf mfn. . प्रांगार-युत, प्रांगारमय mfn. 
c. acid प्रांगारिक अम्ल n. carbonado=carbon diamond 
c. acid gas = carbon dioxide carbonatation=carbonation 
प्रांगारिक-अम्ल वाति m.-प्रांगार द्विजारेय carbonate IChem. प्रांगारीय . 
2. Mining (any ore containing c. anhydride simfea wote n. a large proportion of lead car- c. oxide = carbon monoxide 
bonate) siirtan. (tira-wierciform.) . Tilfe easile G het ni: carbonate vb. Chem. STTTTTT n. carbonide=carbide iria n. 
9. 
195 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
१.. 
carboni-ferous (containing coal or carbonizes fabrics or who charges 
carbon) अंगार-भर, प्रांगार-भर mfn. 
retorts) प्रांगायिता (-त) M. Carboniferous age Geol. अंगार-युग n. carbon-less प्रांगार-हीन mfn. Carboniferous limestone Geol. (a carbonometer प्रांगार-मान m. 
limestone of the Lower Carboni- carbono-metry STTT-fufa f. ferous period)-mountain lime- carbonous Chem. प्रांगार्य mfn. stone अंगार-युग चूर्णप्रस्तर m. 
carbonyl Chem. प्रांगारल . . Carboniferous period Geol. अंगार-युग c. azide प्रांगारल अजीवेय. 
___c. chloride = phosgene प्रांगारल carbonification Geod. (conversion नीरेय . ___ of vegetable matter to coal) carbonylene Chem. प्रांगारलेन्य ?. 
अंगारीभाव 2. 
carbonylic Cbem. प्रांगालिक min. carbonify=carbonize 
carbophilous Phys. Chem. प्रांग-प्रिय carbonigenous अंगार-जन mfn. 
mfn. carbonimeter=carbonometer carbo-rundum (carbon + corundum) carbonite I (a blasting explosive, प्रांग-विन्द m. (प्रांगार+कुरुविन्द) 
containing a carbonaceous sub c.cloth or paper प्रांगविन्द वस्त्र, पत्र. stance) अंगारोट m. 
c. powder प्रांगविन्द-क्षोद m. . 2 (a mineral coke) खनिज न्यंगार m. carbo-silicate Chem. प्रांग-सैकतीय 1. carbo-nitride Chem. प्रांग-भूयेय . carbo-styril (carbo-+styrene) Chem. carbonium Chem. प्रांगारातु m. 
प्रांग-सिहिल m. carbonizable Chem. प्रांगारणीय mfn. carboxide Chem. प्रांग-जारेय n. carbonization (act or process of car- carb-oxy- Chem. (carboxyl) S111-877 ___bonizing) प्रांगारण N., प्रांगारणा f. carb-oxy प्रांग-जार mfn. carbonization process Textile Mfg. p-carboxy-benzene - sulphon-ami 
प्रांगारण-विधा f. 
___de Chem. प-प्रांगजार-धूपेन्य-शुल्बा-तिक्तेय carbonize vb. प्रांगारण 1. 
M. I (to convert into a residue of p-carboxy-benzene-sulphon-di carbon by the action of fire or . chlor-amide Chem. प-प्रांगजार some corrosive agent; to char) . धूपेन्य-शुल्बा-द्वि-नीर-तिक्तेय . प्रांगार-करण, अंगार-करण . . carboxy-hemoglobin Biochem. sir 2 (to impregnate, cover, or com जार-शोणवर्तुलि f. bine with carbon) प्रांगार-व्यापन, carb-oxyl Chem. प्रांग-जारल . -आवरण, योजन . 
carboxylase Biochem. प्रांगजारलेद m. 3. (to become carbonized; to char) carboxylate Chem. प्रांगजारलीय . प्रांगार-भवन, अंगार-भवन . 
carboxylate vb. प्रांगजारलन . carbonizer (one who or that which . (to introduce carboxyl into) प्रांग 
carbonizes; specif., a worker who जारल-प्रवेशन. १. 
196 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
T 
IE GREAT ENGLISH INDIAN DICTIONARY 
carboxylation Chem. प्रांगजारलन n., carburization प्रांगायण ।. 
STİTSE-Saat m. 
carburize vb. SITTUUT 11. carb-oxylic Chem. Tf7-57T3F19. mfn. I (to combine or impregnate with carboy (a large glass bottle enclosed carbon) TTTT-37577, SITT-021967 n. 
in a box......) Faset f. (7797 2=carburet understood) 
carburizer प्रांगायक m. carboy syphon FaceT- 
FICT m.. carbyl Chem. SİVİST N. carbro Photog. (carbon-f-bromide) e carbyl-amine=iso-nitrile siia-fterit 
n. 
f.= TFT IN. carbromal (carb- + bromine to-al) carbyl-oxime S1119-77fa n. 
Pharm. 5-6-7 m. 
-carcareous, -calcareous fora mfn. carbuncle Med. प्रार्बुद m. 
carcass शव m. carburant=carburetant 
carcerulus (fruit) Bot. (generally carburate=carburet vb. 
four mericarps, but also more) carburation प्रांगेयण .. 
agerfear (0) carburator प्रांगेयक m. 
carcinogen TT&c=747 m. carbure=carbide . 
carcinogenic यमार्बुद-जन nfn. carburet+carbide 
carcinology (study of prawns) for carburet vb. Chem. (to combine che- fexit, fegure-faen f. 
mically with carbon; to impreg- carcinoma Med. (cancer of epithe 
nate or charge with volatile lium अधिछद) अध्यर्बुद m. carbon compounds, as water gas card 479 n. by passing it over or through cardamom = cardamomum (car 
benzene) प्रांगेयण 1. 
dam.)=cardamom seeds=car carburetant (a carbureting agent; damomi semina Pharm. FT-19 
· any material used for carbureting gas) silti m. 
cardboard पत्रपट्टm. carbureted प्रांगेयित mfn. 
c. rule पत्रपट्ट-रेखक m. carbureted-hydrogen gas Old Chem. c. scale 9748-soft f.. 
FTF-GGHF-aft m. 
cardi-, cardio- G carbureted water gas staferet 561-afe cardia Anat. 1 (cardiac end of the 
stomach) उपहृदन्त . carbureter=carburetor 
2 (opening of the esophagus carburetion (act or process of car into the stomach) उपहृवार ।. 
bureting; carburation) ATTU 11., cardiac Anat. I (of or pertaining 
MUUT f. 
to the heart) हृद्य mfr. carburetor, carburettor stiifuat (T), 2 (situated near the heart) 39€! 
siya m. 
N. 
m. 
mfn. 
197 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
ma 
.... 
.. 
cardiac contraction हृत्संकोचन . 
c. of teeth दन्तादना. cardiac cycle Physiol. हृद्य चक्र n. carina=keel Bot. Terus n. cardiac muscle हृत्पेशी f. 
carious Med. अशित mfn. cardiac plexus Anat. हृदय-प्रतान m. c. bone अशितास्थि n. Cardiazol = pentamethylene tetr c. teeth अशित-दन्त m. 
azole Pharm. हृदजव m. 
Carius furnace Chem. भाशनी भ्राष्ट्र. cardin हृदि. 
C. method (a method for for cardinal=cardinal red=cardinal __determining halogens नीकुल्य, ____scarlet Col. Ind. न्यद्रक्तापीत m. 
sulphur Taifs and phosphorus cardinal point आधार-बिन्दु, दिग्-बिन्दु m. भास्वर) भा-शु-नी रीति f. cardinal points (of the compass) Farra C. tube, C. tubing raat 717 m. 
बिन्दु M. 
carminamide Col. Ind. कीटशोणितिक्तेय cardinal red=cardinal 
___n. card index पत्रक-देशना f. 
carminaph=oil orange c. i. cabinet पत्रक-देशना-प्रमंजूषा . carminaph garnet=oil red ___c. i. clerk पत्रक-देशना-लिपिक m. carminative वायुनाशी (-इन्) mfn. 
c. i. drawer पत्रक-देशना-उदाकर्ष m. carmine शोण mfn. cardio-, cardi- हृद् 
carmine Col. Ind. aitcetluit f. cardio-arthritidis सन्धि-हृत्कोप m. 
c. blue कीटशोणी नीला. Cardiospermum Bot. कर्णस्फोटाति f. c. lake कीटशोणी लाक्षक M. 
(-ति for प्रजाति genus) 
c. vermilion कीटशोणी हिंगल m. C. helicacabum सामान्य कर्णस्फोटा f. carminette शोणक m. cardo Zool. (basal joint of the maxilla carminic aceitfuefi mfn. . : in insects) अधोवृन्त N. 
carminic acid Chem. कीटशोणिक अम्ल n. card rack पत्रक-निलय m. 
carminite Mineral. (a carmine arsen careful सावधान mfn. 
ate of lead and iron) शोणिज m. (-इज carefully सावधानं, सावधानतया (H. सावधानी खनिज mineral) 
carminogen Col. Ind. कीटशोणि-जन M. caret काकपद . 
carmoisine (also cramoisy from cargo नौपण्यक . . 
कृमिज) Col. Ind. कृमिजी f. cargo steamer भाण्ड-जलयान n. 
carnallite Mineral. (chlorine 38.3, Carica Bot. एरकटीति . (-ति for प्रजाति potassium 14. I, magnesium 8.7, 
genus) 
water 39.0 = 100) दभ्रनीजलिज , C. papaya सामान्य एरकटी f. (short . (-इज for खनिज mineral) '. for एरण्डकर्कटी) 
Carnatic Geog. Frufe m. caries Med. अर्शना, अदना f. 
carnauba = Copernicia cerifera= c. of bone अस्थ्यशना . 
... wax palm सिक्थताल m. c. of spines पृष्ठवंशादना f. 
carnauba wax ताल-सिक्थ । 
198 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
carnaubic acid Chem. (found in car- carotin-emia Med. गर्जरि-रक्तता 
nauba wax) तालसिक्थिक अम्ल 1. carotinoid Biochem. गर्जर्याभ m. carnaubyl Chem. तालसिक्थल . carpal Anat. (of or pertaining to the 
c. alcohol तालसिक्थल सुषव m. 
carpus, or wrist) मणिबन्धीय mfn. carnelian Mineral. (agem) इन्द्रगोप m. carpal=wrist bone = carpal bone carnic acid Biochem. ऋव्यिक अम्ल .. 
Anat. #fu n. carni-ferrin (Lat. carnis flesh ऋव्य-+ carpel Bot. अण्डप m. (a receptacle for 
ferram iron) Biochem. ऋव्यायसि / the ovules अण्डं पाति रक्षति) Carnivora Zool. (an order) मांसभुजः carpenter तक्षक, वर्धकि m. . 
m.pl. (sg. मांसभुक्) 
carpenter's bits वर्धकि-फल. carnosine Chem.(obtained from meat carpholite (Gk, karphos rice straw 
extracts ऋव्यसार) ऋव्यसारी 
बुस+- lite) Mineral. (a fibrous min carnotine = thiochromogene 
eral occurring in straw-yellow carnotite Mineral. किरोतिज m. (mined बुस tufts) बुसिज m. (-इज for खनिज 
for uranium FRUITSI, vanadium mineral) रोचातु and radium तेजातु) 
carpo-phore Bot. अण्डप-भर m. (sup Carnoy's fluid or mixture Micros. porting the carpel) 
(a fluid consisting of glacial feret carpora allata Zool. (whitish endo acetic शुक्तिक acid and absolute crine glands in insects) पांडुर-ग्रंथि m. alcohol) हिम्य-शु तरल, मिश्र 
carpospore Bot. प्रावर-बीजाणु m. Carolina jessamine = yellow jas carpus=wrist Anat. मणिबन्ध m. 
mine पीत-जाति : 
Carrel-Dakin solution पिक्षारोद विलयन carone (from carvone) = 3 - keto . 
carane Chem. प्राजीरा. 
carriage Ry. पथिक-वाहन 1. caronic acid Chem. प्राजीरायिक अम्ल १. carriage Com. वाहन . . Caro's acid or reagent=permono c. account वाहन-लेखा . 
sulphuric acid Cbem.अत्येकशुल्बारिक ___c.charges वाहन-व्यय m. अम्ल . 
c. inward आगत-वाहन-व्यय m. carotene Chem. गर्जरेण्य .. 
c. outward निर्गत-वाहन-व्यय m. carotid Anat. e f. 
carriage release lever वाहक-मोक-उद्याम carotid artery = carotid Anat. 19- m. 
रोहिणी-प्रैवी . 
carried Com. नीत mfn. carotid canal Anat. ओवी-कुल्या. 
c.down अधो-नीत mfn. carotid gland Zool. प्रैवी-ग्रन्थि m. 
c. forward अग्रे-नीत mm. carotid labyrinth Zool. अवी-गहन n. carrier वाहक, वोढा 'm.. . . carotid plexus |वी-प्रतान m. 
common c.=public c. लोक-वाहक carotid trunk Zopl. अवी-स्कंध m. 
m. carotin गर्जरि. 
carrier flies Bot. वाहक-मक्षी . 199.﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
carrier pigeon (a pigeon carrying carvacrol (F. Carvi caraway spritet 
messages) 1987-3976 m. 
Lat. acer sharp 34 to col; a thick carrot Tn. 
oil) Chem. SERTÉST . carrotene, carrotin=carotene, caro carvacryl (carvacrol+ -y/) SITIVE n. 
tin 
carvene=dextro-limonene Chem. carry, carrying out the 
Fortiva n. c. down अधो-नयनn. 
carvestrene (carvone got to sylves c. forward अने-नयन n. 
____trene वनसरलेन्य) Chem. प्रजीरा-सरलेन्य १. cart शकट n. , 
carvol Chem. (an oily liquid) ter na cartage शकटभति. (Hindi गाड़ी-भाड़ा) carvone Chem. प्रजीरा . cartel Econ. मूल्य-संघm. 
carvyl (carvone+-yl) Chem. TTTT 1. Cartesian coordinates (rectangu. caryl (carane +-y) Chem. SIST 1. 
lar) Math. 7749-m. 
Caryophyllaceae Bot. पञ्चनखरकुल .. carthame Chem.=carthamin caryophyllaceous Bot. [64anter mfn. carthame Col. Ind.=bastard saffron (five claws embedded) carthamic acid=carthamin caryophyllene (Gk. karyophyllon carthamin Chem. कुसुम्भि f. 
clove tree) Chem. Fatira n. (clovene carthamine Col. Ind. facienti f. Train is obtained from caryo carthamite fra 1. 
phyllene) Carthamus Bot. कुसुम्भति f. (-ति for caryophyllic लवंगिक mfn. 
Swifa genus) 
caryophyllic acid gratis *7 n. C. tinctorius सामान्य कुसुम्भ m. caryophyllin लवंगि f. Carthamus red कुसुम्भ रक्त, अधिरक्तापीत caryophyllum==clove Pharm. लवंग. 
caryopsis (fruit) Bot. (pericarp Cartier's alcoholometer (10°-459) fafer and testa atata are fused 
दशादि सुषवमान m. 
together) संचोलभित्ति .. cartilage=gristle Anat. कास्थि, तरुणा- Caryota Bat. गुडतालति f. (-ति for प्रजाति 
fra na 
genus) cartilage bone #fear offTn.. C. urens=jaggery palm HT cartilaginous Zool. feb 
TECT m. cartilaginous fishes=Chondrich- casalis green = chrome oxide 
thyes Zool. offee PERT: m. pl. green cartoon (satirical caricature) et casan, pink=pyronine G 
cascade system Elec. 896-Efat f. cartridge गोलीकोश m. 
cascara-cascara sagrada (sacted carum = caraway Pharm. The bark)=chittam or chittem bark 
(a milk laxative) Pharm. 1996 caruncle Bot. अग्रचोल m. 
m. 
1. 
11. 
' 
ateT m. 
m. 
, 200 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
cascara sagrada (casc. sagr.) c.-book रोक-पुस्त n. 
sacred bark Pharm, पुण्य-वल्क c. credit रोक-ऋण n. पारेच-वल्क m. 
c. crops रोक-सस्य n. cascarilla (cascaril.) = cascarilla c. discount रोक-अपहार m. 
bark Pharm. आरेच-बल्क m. 
c. in hand हस्तस्थ रोक m. case दशा , प्रकार m., अवस्था f., धान M., c. memo रोक-स्मारm. 
धानी /., आवरण 1. (glass case काचा c. purchase रोक-क्रय m. वरण) 
c. sales रोक-विक्रय m. Trutem' thermometer case c. transactions रोक-व्यवहार m. Chem. 'सत्य' तापमान धानी. 
petty c. लघु रोक m. casease Biochem. किलाटयेद m. 
petty c. book लधुरोक-पुस्तn. caseate Biochem. (a salt of casein) cashew lake-mahogany lake 
किलाटीय . 
cashew nut Bot. (kidney-shaped case-harden vb. बाह्म-वृंहण 1. 
fruit of the cashew) वृक्कफलn. case-hardened Mach. बाह्य-दहित mfn. cashier रोकपाल, रौकिक m. caseic किलाटिक mfn. 
cash memo रोक-स्मार m. caseic acid किलाटिक अम्ल N. 
Cashmire black Col. Ind. काश्मीर काल casein=caseinogen Biochem. किलाटि 
C. blue काश्मीर नील m. acid c. अम्ल-किलाटि. 
C. brown काश्मीर बभ्रु m. para-c. परा-किलाटि. 
C. green काश्मीर हरि m. rennet c. वत्सातंच-किलाटि f. 
casparian band Bot. (suberin strip) caseinate=caseate 
त्वक्षिपट्टी. casein cement किलाटि युजलेप m. Caspian Sea Geog. वारुण ह्रद m. casein glue or cement=cold-water Cassegrainian telescope (best for ___glue किलाटि श्लेष, युजलेप m. 
___ celestial photography) खचित्र-दूरेक्ष caseinogen Biochem. (specific protein m. 
प्रोभूजिन of milk पयः) पयोभूजिन m. Cassel brown Col. Ind. खनिज बभ्रु m. caseo- (casein) किलाटि 
Cassel green (barium manganate, caseolysis Chem. किलाट्यंशन 1. 
used as a pigment) = mineral caseose Biochem. किलाटिधु .. 
green caseum=casein 
Casselmann's green (a basic copper cash रोक m. (रोक and रोकड़ are used all sulphate, used as a pigment)= 
over north India. रोकड़ in some mineral green places signifies, besides cash, a Cassel yellow-mineral yellow cashbook also) 
casserole Chem. 1967 m. c. account रोक-लेखा f. 
nickel c. रूपक-पिठर m. c. at bank अधिकोषस्थ रोक m. 
porcelain c. चीनमत्सा-पिठर m. 
ALC 
201 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
Cassia Bot. Anaefa f. (-fè for safe catabolism (dissimilation) Biol., Phy 
genus) 
siol. 924 m. C. occidentalis FTATET AT76 m. catalase (Gk. katallassein to ex cassia oil=Chinese cinnamon oil change; an enzyme decomposing 
चीनीय दारुसिता-तैल 1. 
hydrogen peroxide into water cassiopeium = lutecium Chem. and gaseous oxygen) Chem. falva, 
formuret f. 
Gram. cassiterite Mineral. (tin oxide) - catalogue ri f. 
Fréfus m. (-59 for efter mineral) catalysis Physical Chem. (acceleration 
tin stone 79-478 m., 97-4477 n. of a reaction) att n. cast vb. (to pour into a mould) catalyst=catalytic agent=cataly 
fa947 n. (7 941) 
zator=catalyzer Physical Chem. Castilian brown = brown madder gravi m. casting (made in a mould) a catalyte, catalytic 1. = catalyst cast iron que n. 
catalytic, catalytical grasfora mfn. cast iron basin 179-9777 f. 
catalytic agent=catalyst cast iron chairs Farh at f. catalytically prana: castle nut Mach. item. 
catalyzator=catalyst castor एरंड m., n. 
catalyze vb. (to subject to catalysis; castor bean=castor seed 
to accelerate a reaction) आवेजन castor cake=castor pomace vis-efo n . 
catalyzer=catalyst auferat (), castor oil = ricinus oil = oleum piaci m. 
ricini (ol. ricin.) Pharm. gruetan. cataphyll Bot. (any rudimentary scale castor oil seed=ricini semen (ricin. - like leaf) Troyut 7. 
sem.) Pharm. Fis-te n. 
cataplasm=poultice Med. 345€ m. castor pomace=castor cake 
(from सुश्रुत) castor seed=castor bean praator cataplasm of kaolin Pharm. - : n. 
3YE m. castration Zool. अण्डाकर्षण 1. (ancient. cataract मुक्ताबिंदु m. (Hindi मोतिया 
word) cast steel CTTH nh. 
catarrh Med. पीनस m. (from सुश्रुत) casual आकस्मिक min. 
catarrhal पैनस mfn. Casuarinaceae Bot. ताम्र-कुल 7. 
catechin Chem. खदिरि . Casuarinales Bot. 159-T 16. catechol (catechu + -ol) Chem. efera cat Araf, fasts m. 
m. cat-, cata- Fran 
c. diethyl ether खदिरव द्विदाल दक्षु catabolic अपचयिक mfn. 
. 
m. 
m 
202 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m 
catechu (catech.)- pale catechut catodont (a whale) Zool. अधोदन्त m. 
gambir Pharm. खदिर m. 
catoptric प्रतिबिम्ब, प्रतिबिम्बित mfn. catechu Col. Ind. खदिर m. 
catoptric light प्रतिबिम्ब-प्रकाश m. (दर्पण c. brown खदिर बभ्रm. 
प्रतिबिम्बित प्रकाश) catechuic acid Chem. खदिरिक अम्ल . catoptrics (deals with reflection catechu red खदिर रक्त m. 
परावर्तन) परावर्तिकी f. catechu-tannic acid Chem. खदिर- cattle पशm. 
शल्किक अम्ल . 
cattle breeding पश्वभिजनन . category निकाय, प्रवर्ग, वर्ग m. 
cattle census पशु-गणना . caterpillar Zool. (a larva. moving on cattle class R/y. पशु-वर्ग m. 
feet) पदातिजातक, पदातिक m. 
cattle farms पशु-प्रक्षेत्र . cat-fish Zool. विडाल-मत्स्य m. 
cattle loading dock Ry. पशूद्भरण-वाट catgut आन्त्रतन्ति । 
m. cath-, cat-, cata-, kata-ft 
cattle pen Rly. गो-वज m. (ancient cathartic रेचक mfn. 
___word) cathartic acid Chem. रेचक अम्ल. cattle shed 96 m. cathartolinum, catharticum Bot. cattle wagon R/y. पशु-वाहन . .. अतसिका. 
cattu Italiano=sulphine brown cathetometer (Gk, kathetos vertical cauda equina Zool. Hayto n. 
height) उत्सेधमान m. 
Caudata Zool. पुच्छिन : m. pl. sg. cathode Phys., Chem. निद्वार . 
पुच्छी (-इन्)] c. luminescence निद्वार-चकासा f. cauline Bot. (generally) स्तम्भ पत्र ., 
particle-electron निद्वार-लव m. (specif.) स्तम्भारपत्र, स्तम्भरह, स्तम्भाग्रह c. ray निद्वार-रश्मि m. 
. c. ray eye =radar निद्वार-रश्मि-नेत्र causal relationship Statistics कारण 
सम्बन्ध m. c.-ray tube Elec. निद्वार-रश्मि-नाल m. causation कारणा f. c.-ray tube indicator Radar निद्वार- cause. and fact Statistics कारण तथा 
रश्मि-नाल-देशक m. 
तथ्य. c.-ray tube screen Radar निद्वार- caustic, caustical दह mfn. " रश्मि-नाल-पट m. 
caustic alcohol Chem. दह सुषवm. cathodo-fluorescence Phys. fer caustic alkali Chem. दह क्षारक m. . भ्राशा. 
caustic ammonia Chem. दह तिक्ताति cat-ion Physical Chem. न्ययन n. 
m. catkin Bot. (pendulous spike)= caustic baryta = barium hydr ___ament निलम्ब-शूकी f. 
___oxide दह हरिजा f. cato- अधस् 
caustic curve Phys. खरान वक्रा . catodon अधोदन्त m. 
causticity दहत्व . 
TO 
m. 
203 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
causticization दह-करण n.. 
Ce (cerium) Chem. पु (पुष्कला) causticize vb. दह-करण 2. 
cearin Pharm. (an ointment base causticizer दह-कर्ता (-त)m. 
capable of taking up a large pro caustic lime दह-चूर्णक M. 
portion of water) उदन्य-सिक्थ n. caustic liquor Soda Mfg. दह रस M. cease fire Mil. शस्त्र-पात m. caustic magnesia = magnesium cedarwood देवदारु m. ___hydroxide दह-नाजा. 
cedarwood oil bottle Chem..देवदार caustic potash=potassium hydr ___oxide दह-सजि . 
Cedrela Bot. कुबेरकति f. (-ति for प्रजाति caustic silver=silver nitrate दह रजत genus) 
.. 
C. toona सामान्य कुबेरक m. caustic soda=sodium hydroxide cedrene (from cedar दारु=देवदारु) 
दह विक्षार m. 
Chem. दाण्य . caustic surface Optics खरान तल .. cedrin (the active principle of caustification दह-करण n. 
cedron प्रतिसर्प) प्रतिसर्पि . caustify vb. दह-करण 1. 
cedrine देवदारुक mfn. (of or pert. to cautery मांसदाह m. 
देवदारु) caution अवधान n. 
cedriret (cedrium दारु+Lat. rete जाल) cautious सावधान mfn. 
=Cerulignone cave tiger Zool. गुहा-व्याघ्र m. 
cedrium दास्तला. Cavia cobaya=guinea pig feiem. cedrol = sesquiterpene alcohol 
. (ate tailless) 
Chem. दारुव m. Cavicornia (hollow-horned”) Zool. cedon gian m.. 
सुषिर-शृंगिण : m. pl. sg. सुषिरशृंगी Cedrus Bot. देवदारुति f. (-ति for प्रजाति (-इन्)] 
genus). cavity कूपm., रन्ध्र n. 
C. deodara सामान्य देवदारु m. cavity=ventricle गुहा f. 
ceiling अन्तश्छद, छद m. cavity of larynx=laryngeal cavity celadon green Col. Ind. अवपीताहरि m. 
कण्ठ-कपm. 
celadonite=green earth (a silicate cavum aorticum Anat. महारोहिणी-गुहा of iron, magnesium and potas 
sium) अलोदसैकिज m. (-इज for खनिज cavum pulmocutaneum Anat. Fit mineral)=हरिमृद् . 
त्वग-गुहा. 
celatene blue (direct dye for acetyl Cayenne incense=conima 
cellulose) Col. Ind. शुक्तलकोशाधु नील Cb (columbium) Chem. क (काशातु) 
m. c.c. (cubic centimeter) घ.शि.मा. (घन c. brilliant violet शुक्तलकोशाधु भासुर 
शतिमान) 
नीललोहितm. Cd (cadmium) Cbem. मृ (मृज्यातु) c. green शुक्तलकोशाधु हरि m. 
204 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
c. orange शुक्तलकोशाधु नारंग m. few-c. अल्प-कोशावान् mfn. c. red शुक्तलकोशाधु रक्त m. 
full-c. पूर्ण-कोशावान् mfn. c. red-violet शुक्तलकोशाधु रक्त-नील large-c. बृहत्-कोशावान् mfn. ___ लोहित m. 
long-c. दीर्घ-कोशावान् mfn. c. yellow शुक्तलकोशाधु पीत m. 
many-c. भूरि-कोशावान् mfn. celery seed Pharm. प्रयवानी-बीजn. 
narrow-c. संकीर्ण-कोशावान् mfn. celestial खगोलीय mfn. 
one-c. एक-कोशावान् mfn. celestial sphere ख-गोल m. 
round-c. गोल-कोशावान् mfn. celestine blue Col. Ind. गगन नील m. short-c. क्षुद्र-कोशावान् mfn. celestite=celestine Mineral. (stron single-c. एकल-कोशावान् mfn. 
tium sulphate) शोशुल्बिज m. (-इज small-c. ह्रस्व-कोशावान् mfn. for खनिज mineral) . 
three-c. त्रि-कोशावान् mfn. celi-, coeli-, coelio- उदर 
two-c. द्वि-कोशावान् mfn. cell Biol., Elec. कोशा f. 
cell-mouth=cytostome Biol. कोशामुख Bunsen's c. (carbon in chromic 
acid; e. m. f. 2.0 volts) पिद्वि- cello- (cellulose) Chem. कोशा-(कोशाधु) बिन्दुख (कुप्यवर्णिकांगार) कोशा f. cello-biose Chem. कोशा-द्विधु १. Bunsen's c. (carbon in nitric celloid (cell-like) Frih mfn. 
acid; e. .m. f. I.9 volts) प्येक- celloidin कोशाभि f. बिन्दुनव (कुप्यभूयिकांगार) कोशा f. Cellophane काचाभ-पत्र n. (transparent, Clark's c. (e. m.f. I.4322 volts) waterproof) ___प्येकबिन्दुचतु : (पारद-कुप्य) कोशा f. cellose (cellulose+ -ose) Chem. कोशाधुम Daniell's cell (e. m..f. I-I volts) . [कोशाध+म(धु)] 
प्येकबिन्द्रुक (ताम्र-कुप्य) कोशाf cell plate method Biol. कोशा-पट्ट-रीति. Grove's c. (e. m. f. 2.0 volts) cell protoplasm Biochem. कोशा-प्ररस m. 
पिद्विबिन्दुशून्य (महातु-कुप्य) कोशा f. cell sap Bot. कोशा-तरल, धानी-रस m. Leclanche's c. (e. m. f. I.j volts) (रसधानी-रस) 
प्येकबिन्दुपञ्च (कुप्यातु-अंगार) कोशा f. cell theory कोशा-वाद m. Weston's c. (e. m. f. 1.0186 cellu-cotton (a cellulose composi 
volts) प्येकबिन्दुख (मृज्यातु-पारद) कोशा ___tion resembling cotton) कोशातूल १. 
cellular : (consisting of cells) सकोश, zinc-copper-acid c. कुप्य-ताम्राम्ल कोशावान्, कोशामय mfn. 
कोशा. 
2 (pertaining to cells) ateita mfn. cell-content Bot. कोशान्तर्वस्तु . 
bi-cellular द्वि-कोशावान् mfm. celled r (having or containing a cell cellularity कोशावत्ता, कोशीयता. 
, or cells) कोशावान् mfn. . cellulase (cellulose -+-ase) कोशाध्वेद m. 
2 (contained or enclosed in a cellule (a small cell) कोशिका f.. cell).कोशास्थ mfn. 
cellulin=cellulose '' 
205 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
n. 
2. 
cellulitis (inflammation of cellular celtium Chem. I (a supposed rare 
tissue) कोशोतिकोप M. 
earth element announced in 1911) celluloid (cellulose -+-oid) कोशाध्वाभ, नूतनला. 
87188724 in. (it is the chief part of 2 [a supposed element (possibly the cell walls of plants, of ordi ___indentical with hafnium), spec nary wood, etc. Camphor is its tral lines of which were obser essential constituent. .Its older ved by Dauvillier] नूतनातु m. 
name is lignose from lignum wood) cement n. युजलेप, वज्रलेप m., वज्रचूर्ण 1. celluloided (coated with..) कोशाध्वाभ- cement vb. युजलेपन, लेपयोजन, लेप-वज्रण n. 
आवृत mfn. 
I (to unite or cause to adhere by cellulose Chem. कोशाधु n. (from कोशा __means of a cement) वज्रचूर्ण-योजन, 
cell) 
___ -श्लेषण n. adipo-celluloses वपा-कोशाधु n. ___2 (to overlay with cement) वज्रलेपन alpha-cellulose (beta, gamma) 
अवर्ण-कोशाधु n. (आवर्ण, इवर्ण) cement adj. 1 (of or pertaining to compound celluloses संयुत कोशाधु . cement) वज्रचूर्णिय, वज्रलेपिय mfn. 
2 (pertaining to, or made by, ligno-celluloses लगुड-कोशाधु . cementation; as cement steel) pecto-celluloses. (pectic + cel- . वज्रणा-सम्बद्ध, -कृत nfm. _lulose) आश्लेषि-कोशाधु n. 
cemental वज्रचूर्णिय mfn. cellulose vb. (to coat or treat with cementation I (act) वज्रण., (process) . ....) कोशाधु-रोपण, कोशाधु-साधन n. वज्रणा f., (state of being cemented) cellulose acetate Chem. कोशाधु शुक्तीय वजितत्व । . . 
2 Metal. (impregnation of the cellulose flour कोशाधु-समिता f. 
surface of a metal by another cellulose nitrate Chem. कोशाधु भूयीय substance) संव्यापन n. 
3 (the process of obtaining a cellulose paint कोशाधु-रंगलेप M. 
metal by precipitation with an cellulose tissue Chem. कोशाध-ऊति other metal from a solution) अभि 
सादना. cellulose xanthate Chem. कोशाधु पीतीय cementation process संव्यापन-विधा . 
. 
cement black Col. Ind. वज्रचूर्ण काल m. cellulosic Frenfees mfn. . cement copper अभिसादना-ताम्र 1. cellulosity कोशाधुता . 
cement mortar वज्रचूर्ण संमृद m. Cell-vibrio Bact. (a genus of bacteria cement plaster=hard wall plaster 
• • oxidizing cellulose) कोशाजारति f. =patent plaster भित्ति-वज्रलेप m. 
(-ति for प्रजाति genus) 
cement steel संव्यापन-वज्रायस ॥. cell wall Biol. कोशा-भित्ति 
. cement stone वज्रचूर्ण-प्रस्तर m. 206 
- 
- 
- 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
बावनn. 
Cenozoic=Neozoic Geol. नूतनकल्प= central canal Anat. मध्य-कुल्या f. 
नवकल्पm. 
central conic (having centres) Math. censer mechanism Bot. समुच्छल रचना 
केन्द्रि शांकवा. f. (समुच्छल jerk) 
central fixation Ophthalmol. मध्य-लक्ष census संगणना, -गणना . 
बन्धन n. census inquiry, census investiga- central fruit scheme Agriculture 
tion संगणना अनुसंधान . 
केन्द्रीय-फल-योजना f. census of population जन-गणना f. 
central incisors राजदन्त (two) (from census of production Statistics उत्पाद काश्यप-संहिताद्वौ उत्तरौ द्वौ अधरौ) 
- गणना . 
centraline black=amidine black cent. (centimeter) शि.मा. (शतिमान) c. blue=: benzo blue center=centre 
c. bordeaux=alkali bordeaux centering केन्द्रण . 
c. brown=trisulphon brown centering lens Ophthalmol. केन्द्रण c. green=alkali green , 
वीक्षकेन्द्रसूचक वीक्ष m. 
c. orange=azidine orange centesimal system Math. शतिक क्रम m. . . scarlet 3 B=oxamine scarlet centi- (a combining form denoting 
B hundredth part) anfert 
... c. violet=benzamine violet centigrade शतिक . . 
centralization केन्द्रीयण, केन्द्रीकरण, केन्द्रीय centigradethermometer(here centi-. करणn. 
means Too, not I/100 as in the centralize vb. केन्द्रीयण, केन्द्रीकरण, केन्द्रीय metric system) शतिक तापमान m. 
करण . centi-gram (cg., cgm.) शति-धान्य n. centralized केन्द्रीकृत, केन्द्रीयकृत, केन्द्रीयित 
(शि. धा.) 
__mfn. centi-liter (cl.) शति-प्रस्थ m. (शिः स्थ.) central leg (in spherometer) Phys. centi-meter (c., cent.,cm.) शति-मान m. . केन्द्रीय पाद m. . (शि. मा.) 
central line Math. केन्द्रीय-रेखा . centi-molar शति-वैयूह mfn. 
centrally adv. (along the centre, e.g. centi-normal शति-ऋजु mfn. .. 
.... in a cylinder) अनुकेन्द्र centipede Zool. शतपाद m. 
central nervous system Anat, centrad=arc centune (angle subten- केन्द्रीय-चेता-संहति f. 
..ded by I crm. arc at I meter central.organisation केन्द्रीय संघटन । 
1/Too of radian) Ophthalmol. चाप- central strand Bot. मध्य-पट्टी f. 
शतम . . . 
central vein Bot. मध्य-नाडी . . central मध्य, केन्द्रीय mfn. 
centre I केन्द्र .. central axial filament Zook केन्द्रीय 2 मध्य m.. .. 
अक्षांशु m. 
centre of buoyancy उत्प्लाविता केन्द्र . central board Com..केन्द्रीय गण m. centre of curvature Geom. वक्रता केन्द्र 
207 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
n. 
m. 
centre of gravity Mech. भ्वाकृष्टि-केन्द्र n. suspended electric c. fraffera centre of mass Mech. -5 n. 
fanfan. centre of mean position Math. universal electric c. वैश्व विद्युन्मथित्र 
7529-feifer-eterise n. 
n. centre of parallel forces Phys. water c. 4-697 n. 
WATC-7 n. 
centring lens Phys. केन्द्रण-वीक्षm. centre of pressure Hydros. निपीड-केन्द्र centriole Biol. केन्द्रिका f. 
centripetal केन्द्राभिग mfn. centre of reflection Phys. per anar centro-acinar cell Anat. (found in 
the central part of the pancreatic centre of similarity=homothetic acene) stafanusz 12 f. 
centre Math. HTETYTTEBE Se n. 
centroid प्रकेन्द्र .. centre of similitude Matb. अनुरूपता- centrolecithal Biol. केन्द्रपीती (-इन्) 
tors n. 
mfn. centrifugal CTTT, #EZTTT mfn. centromere Zool. (the neck region centrifugal force Mech. केन्द्रापग- बल of the spermatozoon) ग्रीवा-प्रदेश 
nh. centrifugaller (one who operates a centromere = spindle attachment 
centrifugal machine) मथित्र-चालक =kineto-chore Biol. 19-25 m. m. 
centrosome Biol. (often surrounded centrifugal pump Masb. केन्द्रापग उदंच by aster) तारा केन्द्र n. 
centrosphere Biol. तारा-नाभि . centrifugate n. (that which has been centrum Anat. (body of a vertebra) 
centrifuged) forfra 1. . 
Tu m. centrifugate.vb.=centrifuge 
centune शतम .. centrifugation (the process of cen- cephal-=cephalo 
trifuging) मथित्रणा. 
Cephal-aspis Paleontol. (head cover centrifuge vb. (to whirl in a cen- ed by a shield) farurfor f. (-9fa 
trifuge afer) farto n. (fer for yoifa genus) 
155) 
Cephalata (those having a head') centrifuge afert nu i 
Zool. dan: m. pl. (sg. atteart) C. and shaker #ferry 727 sfat n. cephalic 1 (of or pertaining to the 
(from ana shaking) 
head) to mfn. c. tube 474-.m. 
2 (directed towards head) faite angle electric c. tur-ferrufat n. mfn. 
electric c. विद्युन्मथित्र.., . 
3 (situated near the head) 39817 hand c. -HTPTT n. . 
mfn. milk c. - the 
cephalic eye staffer 11. 208 
m. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
cephalic index Craniom. Filmfe cerebellar ventricle = epicoelia 
देशना . 
___Zool. निमस्तिष्क-गुहा .. cephalin Biochem. (obtained from cerebellum Anat. निमस्तिष्क m. 
___brain tissue) मास्तिष्कि . 
cerebral cortex Anat. Faren. (short cephalisation Biol. (tendency to for प्रमस्तिष्क-बाह्यक) 
domination of the head in animal cerebral ganglion Zool. मस्तिष्क-प्रगण्ड life) शीर्षप्राधान्य ॥. 
m. cephalism Antbropol. (form or de- cerebral hemisphere Zool. प्रमस्तिष्क 
velopment of the skull) कपालरूप ., गोलार्ध . कपाल-वृद्धि . 
cerebral nerve मस्तिष्क-चेता. cephalo-, cephal- शीर्ष 
cerebral, sixth 667 #TFT f. cephalogram (an outline of the head) cerebral, third तृतीया मास्तिष्की f.. 
शीर्ष-बहीरेखा. 
cerebral ventricle=lateral ventri cephalograph शीर्षलिख m. 
cleप्रमस्तिष्क-गुहा f., (in man)त्रिशंग-गुहा cephalon Zool. I (head) arte n. 
f. (three-horned ventricle) - 2 (skull) कपाल 1. 
cerebrose Biochem. (galactose obtain cephalophorous Zool. (having a ed from cerebrosides) FRETE n. 
___head) शीर्षवान् mfn. 
cerebroside Biochem. मस्तध्वेय . Cephalo-poda Zool. शीर्ष-पादा: m.pl. cerebro-spinal (pert. to the brain cephalo-thorax Zool. शीर्षोरस् . . and spinal chord) मस्तिष्क-मैरव mfn. -cephalous Anthropom., Zool. -शीर्ष, cerebro - spinal axis Anat. मस्तिष्क __ -शिरस् (macro-cephalous महाशिरस्) . मेरु-अक्ष m. ceracine-cardinal red 
cerebro-spinal fluid Physiol. मस्तिष्कोद cerasine=claret red 
..., मस्तिष्क-मेरु-तरल m. cerasine orange G=fat yellow cerebro-spinal nerve Zool. मस्तिष्क cerasine red=oil scarlet 
मेरु-चेता. cerate Pbarm. सिक्थ्य १. 
cerebrum Anat. प्रमस्तिष्क m. Ceratophyllus (a genus of fleas) ceres black (for the manufacture of __ एककंकताति . (प्राति for प्रजाति genus) lakes) Col. Ind. लाक्षक काल m. 
C.fasciatus रेखी एककंकत m. 
c. blue लाक्षक नील : cercaria Zool. पुच्छिडिम्भ m. 
c. brown लाक्षक बभ्रm. cerci anales Zool. पुच्छयुग्म n. 
green लाक्षक हरि m. cereal धान्य .. 
c. orange लाक्षक नारंग m: cerealin=aleurone Biochem. धान्य c. red लाक्षक रक्त.m. 
c. violet लाक्षक नीललोहित m. . cerealose=maltose धान्यधु १. 
c. yellow लाक्षक पीत m. cerebellar cortex Anat. निबाह्यक n. ceresin (used as a substitute for 
(short for निमस्तिष्क-बाह्यक) 
beeswax मक्षी-सिक्थ) आसिक्थ । 
209 14﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
mfn. 
cereus=night-blooming cereus ___cerotate Chem. सिक्थकीयn. 
=Cactus grandiflorus Pharm. cerotene Chem. fuertain n. HET 904 DFUETET m. 
cerotic Chem. सिक्थकिक mfn. ceria Chem. (cerium dioxide, ceric cerotin Chem. सिक्थकि . ___oxide) पुष्कलजा. 
cerotine सिक्थकी f. ceric Chem. पुष्कलिक mfn. 
cerotine brown Col. Ind. fra Ty ceride Biochem. सिक्थेय ?. 
m. ceri-ferous (producing wax) fears c. orange सिक्थकी नारंग m. 
c. ponceau सिक्थकी अधिरक्तापीत m. cerin Chem. सिक्थि f. 
C. scarlet furent stop m. cerise Col. Ind. impure fuchsine c. yellow सिक्थकी पीत' m. 
dyes) धूमलकी f. 
cero-type (a printing process of en cerite Mineral. (a hydrous silicate graving on wax..) 6724-HEUTT f. 
of cerium and allied metals) 704789- cerous Chem. yopisu mfn. 
सैकिज m. (-इज for खनिज mineral) ceroxyle=palm wax ताल-सिक्थ ॥. cerium Chem. Yopit f. 
Ceroxylon Bot. सिक्थतालति f. (-ति for c. acetate (-us) sport tu n. : Ife genus) C. ammonium nitrate (-ic) gofreni Candicolum = wax palm 
तिक्तातु भूयीय 
The feet art m. C. ammonium sulphate (-ous) certain rent Com. Fafere 7778 m. 
पुष्कल्य तिक्तातु शुल्बीय 
certificate Com. प्रमाणपत्र n. c. carbonate(-ous) 967764 Min. c. of incorporation TĦETT c. chloride (-ous) sau đó : c. citrate (ous) gather for at n. certify vb. STUFF n. c. dioxide goot fera n. ceru-lignol (an oil) Chem. 7-TEST c. fluoride (-us) go in ta n. c. hydr-oxide (-ic) goefte ha ceru-lignone (Lat. caeruleus mutauit 
oran. 
lignum are+Eng. quinone) Chem. c.'metals पुष्कला-धातु m. 
THISTLET f. c. nitrate (-ous) gegen utan. cerussite=lead spar Mineral. (lead C. Oxalate (-ous) 969 cu forta n. carbonate) - intl M. (-597 c. oxide (-ic) of n. 
for खनिज mineral)=सीस धात्विया f.. C, salicylate (-ous) 96764 14n. cervic- 69 C. sulphate (-ic) goafeff rate . cervical Anat. ta mfn. 
C. sulphate (-ous) gotice Trajta n. cervical rib Anat. 1a rafm. cero- funt 
cervical triangles Anat. ta frutar 11. cerol' garnet N No. 10 = fat bor. cervico- cervic- 99 
deaux : 
cervix Anat. ग्रीवा f. 
2IO 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
Cervulus muntjac=barking deer C. G. S. system (centimetre-gram 
-muntjac Zool. भष-मग m. ___ second system) Phys. शि. धा. का. Cervus Zool. महामृगाति f. (आति for पद्धति f. (शतिमान-धान्य-काष्ठिका पद्धति) _प्रजाति genus) 
ch. (chain) श. (शृङ्खला) ceryl Chem. सिक्थल .. 
chadar (चादर)=cover अवच्छद m. ceryl alcohol=pseudoceryl alco- (ancient word, Hindi औछाड़) 
hol Chem. सिक्थल सुषव m. 
chaeta=seta Zool. (bristles encir cesium, caesium Chem. धुतातु m. cling the middle of each segment) 
c. bromide द्युतातु दुरेय .. 
दृढरोमn. c. chloride द्युतातु नीरेय 1. 
chaeta sac=setigerous sac दृढरोम c. eosinate द्युतातु उषसीय . 
स्यून m. c. iodide यतातु जम्बेय. 
Chaeto-gnatha = arrow-worms c. sulphate द्युतातु शुल्बीय . 
Zool. शरकृमय : m. pl. (from शरकृमि) cess उपकर m. 
chaff Radar तुष m. cess-pool गूथ-कूप (Pali), उच्चार-कूप chaff-flower=prickly chaff-flower 
m. 
Bot. खरमंजरी f. (Eng. is translated Cestoda Zool. (no intestines) अनान्त्राः from Sanskrit) 
• m. pl., अनान्त्र-वर्ग m. 
chain r शृंखला f. cestoda worm अनान्त्र-कृमि m. 
2 Chem. श्रृंखला Cetacea Zool. तिमयः m. pl. (from तिमि branched c. शाखि शृंखला . 
whale) 
closed c. संवृत शृंखल. cetene (Lat. cetus whale fafi) = I open c. विवृत्त शृंखल N. 
__hexadecene Chem. तिम्येन्यn. 
straight c. ऋजु शृंखल ?. cetin Chem.तिमियि / 
3 Sury. (ch.) शृंखला /. (शृ.) cetyl Chem. तिमिल 1. 
chain base Statistics शृंखला-आधार m. c. alcohol-ethal तिमिल सुषव M. chain isomerism Chein. शृंखल-सभाजता c. bromide तिमिल दुरेय .. c. chloride तिमिल नीरेय .. 
chain line श्रृंखला-रेखा c. iodide तिमिल जम्बेय 1. 
chain measure शृंखला-माप m. cetylene Chem. तिमिलेन्या . 
chainomatic balance शृंखलाग-तुला . cetylic Chem. (of or pertaining to chain reaction Physical Chem. शृंखल ____cetyl) तिमिलीय mfn. 
प्रतिक्रिया . Ceylon सिंहल m., लंका, रत्नद्वीप m. chain relatives = link relatives 
___Statistics शृंखला-मूल्यानुपात m. Ceylon cinnamon oil सिंहल-दारुसिता- chain rule Arith. श्रृंखला-नियम m. 
तैल . 
chair आसन्दी. cg., cgm. (centi-gram) FT. ET. (afd- chalaza Bot. (base of the nucellus) 
धान्य) 
निभाग m. 
2 II 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
PIOUS 
chalazogamic fertilization Bot. chalk-stone Ech-TFT m. 
HTTIETE-FTO n. 
challenge shield staa n. chalazogamy Bot. FATTIGTE m. chalybeaten. अयोलवणित n. chalc-anthite Mineral. (hydrous cup- chalybeate I (impregnated with 
ric sulphate)=blue vitriol Fratre salts of iron) mittafora mfn. 1., जलताशुल्बिज m. (-इज for खनिज . 2 (having a taste due to iron) mineral) 
अयस्स्वाद min. chalcocite Mineral. (native cuprous Chambal (river) Geog. quaat f. 
sulphide)=redruthite Tufirst m. chamber Com. arh, ES n. (-इज for खनिज mineral) 
c. of commerce वाणिज्य-मंडल. chalcolite=torbernite (copper ura- chamber acid Chem. -TFCT N. 
nite) ताम्रकिरणिज m. (-इज for खनिज chamber crystals Chem. वेश्म-स्फट 
mineral) chalcone (Gk. chalkos coppert chamber process Chem. aah-faat f. 
-one; a ketone made by the con- chameleon Zool. 546TH m. (ancient densation of benzaldehyde and word) acetophenone) afiset f. (afers chamfer vb. (to cut off corners or copper) 
edges (of timber, columns and copperone=cupferron (a-ben- beams) 48/747 Mh. zoin-oxime) द्वयष्टा . वयष्ट copper chamfer n. अवलुम्प m. (द्वे सुवर्णरजते प्रश्नुते व्याप्नोति)] chamfered अवलुम्पित mfn. cupron TET f. 
chamois=chamois skin=chamois chalcophyllite Mineral. ताशुनेपिज m. yellow (colour) star fara mfn. 
(-55 for at mineral) 
chamois (a goatlike antelope) TT chalcopyrite -- copper pyrites m. i Mineral. 757-HTE1 The 
chamois skin अजमृगाजिन n. . chalice cell=goblet cell Zool. 745 chamois skin=chamois (colour) 
en f. 
chamois yellow=chamois (colour) chalk खटी. 
chamomile=Anthemis nobilis= chalkscreta (cret.)=creta praepa camphor plant 404 m. 
rata=prepared chalk Pharm. (flowers have a, camphor-like 
odour) : : chalk crayon et, e-afa f. 
chamomile anthemis (anthem.)= chalk dust eateret f. 
santhemidis flores = chamo chalk lime act-us m. 
..^- mile flowers=Roman chamo chalk mixture eet-fft n. 
mile Pharm. कर्पूरपुष्प .. chalk pit ettim. 
champacol(from Skt. 974+5)=guaiol chalk quarry ac-97 m. 
Chem. 78999 m. 
212 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
champagne (white effervescent character of the roots Math. मूल 
wine) बुद्दाक्षिरा f. (for प्रबुद्बुद्-द्राक्षिरा) प्रकृति f. Champaran Geog. चम्पारण्य n. charbon sulphurique = garancine Chance-Claus process Chem. (a (obtained by heating madder with 
process of recovering sulphur) sulphuric acid) Col. Ind. शुल्बारि अपिगन्धाप-विधा. 
मंजिष्ठा=प्रमंजिष्ठी. Claus kiln अपिगन्धाप-आपाक m. charcoal अंगार, काष्ठांगार m. Claus reaction Chem. अपिगन्धाप- charcoal black Col. Ind. अंगार-कालिमा 
प्रतिक्रिया . 
(-मन्) m. Chancellor of the Exchequer अर्थ- charcoal block Chem. अंगार-इष्टका f. 
महामात्र m. 
charcoal borer अंगार-छिद्रक m. chance sampling = random sam- charcoal, coconut shell Chem. करकां 
pling Statistics दैव-निदर्शन १. 
गार m. chance selection Statistics दैव-प्रवरण' charcoal iron अंगारायस 1. 
charcoal plate अंगार-पट्टm. chancre Med. उपस्थवण m. 
charcoal powder अंगार-क्षोद m. chancroid = soft chancre Med. charcoal saw अंगार-क्रकच 1. 
मृदूपस्थव्रण m. 
charcoal, sugar शर्करा-अंगार m. change परिवर्तन . 
charcoal, wood काष्ठांगार m. change vb. (convert) परिवर्तन 1. charge n. I Com. प्रभार, व्यय m. change of base Statistics आधार- 2 Elec. (amount of electricity) 
परिवर्तन 1. 
प्रभार m. change of temperature ताप-परिवर्तन n. charge ob. प्रभरण 2. change of unit एकक-परिवर्तन . charge, alloy मिश्रातु-निक्षेप m. change step Drill पाद-व्यत्यास m. charged Com., Elec. stata mfn. chaniko = kharo saf (in Sindhi charges Com. प्रभार, व्यय m. 
language “pure soda') शुद्ध विक्षार bank c. अधिकोष-व्यय, अधिकोष-शुल्क 
m. 
m. 
channel Engin. कुल्या f. 
clearing c. निष्कासन-व्यय m. channel section कुल्या-छेद m. 
direct c. प्रत्यक्ष व्यय m. chapter अध्याय m. 
indirect c. परोक्ष व्यय m. char r (to burn incompletely) आदहन . loading c. भरण व्यय m. 
2=carbonize प्रांगारणn. 
overhead c. उपरि-व्यय m.. character I गुण m. 
charging प्रभरण 1. ___2 (nature) प्रकृति f. 
charitable institution staff-PFT f. characteristic लक्षण ?.. 
charkaolin अंगार-मृद् . characteristic of a logarithm Math. Charle's and Gay-Lussac's law, 
छेदा-पूर्णाश m., छेदा-लक्षण n. 
वाति-परिमा-नियम m. 
213 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
(इन्) me 
chelate nelate अन 
Charle's law=Charle's and Gay- check ligaments Anat. रोध-स्नाय . 
Lussac's law 
cheek कपोल m. charlton white=enamel white cheekbone=zygoma Anat. Tusfy n. charred Chem. I (incompletely cheese afara n. 
burnt) प्रादग्ध mfn. 
cheese bacteria दधिक-बेत्राणु m. (द. वे.) 2 (carbonized) प्रांगारित mfn. cheilitis Med. (inflammation of the charring प्रांगारभवन, प्रांगारकरण ?. 
lipओष्ठकोप m. chart रेखाचित्र, चित्र । 
cheirolin Chem. (cheir wallflower charter शासन n. (ancient word) 
भित्तिपुष्प) भित्तिपुष्पवि. chartered Com. शासन-प्राप्त mfn. chela (claw) Zool. नखर m. ___c. accountant शासन-प्राप्त प्रांकिक m. chelate adj. Zool. नखरी (-इन्) mfn. charterer Com. भाटके-ग्राही (-इन्) m. non-chelate अनखरि mfn. charter party Com. नौ-भाटक-पत्र n. chelate vb. नखरीयण . chassis Automobile FTTETT m. 
chelate group, ring नखरि-वर्ग, वलय m. chattel Lapp अस्थावर-सम्पत्ति 
chelation नखरीयण ". chaulmoogra पिमुद्गर m. 
Chelicerae (they are small and are chaulmoogra oil=oleum chaul- helpful in holding the prey) ग्राहिका 
moograe (ol. chaulmoog.) Pharm. पिमुद्गर-तैल 1. 
chelide Chem. (a chelate group or chaulmoograte Chem. पिमुद्गरीय n. compound) नखरिक m. chaulmoogric Cbem. पिमुद्गरिक mfr. Chelonia Zool. (completely enclosed chavibetol Chetm. (an oily liquid in in a shell) परिवर्मिणः m.pl. [sg. परिवर्मी . 
the essential oil from the leaves (-इन्)] 
of the betel pepper) प्राताम्बूरैल n. Chelonia imbricata = hawksbill chavicine Chem. (obtained from turtle Zool. श्येनचंचु कश्यप m. . black pepper) कालमरिची f. Chelonia mydas = green turtle 
chavicol Chem. (an oil found in the Zool. हरि कश्यप m. 
oil from the leaves of the betel chem- = chemo ___ pepper) प्रताम्बूरैल 1. 
chem-asthenia रासाय-दौर्बल्या . chebule, chebulic myrobalan chem-esthesis रासाय वेदनn. 
('chebule' from Hindi Kabuli of chemi- रसाय or from Kabul' = Terminalia chemic, chemick (dilute solution chebala) हरीतकी /. 
____of bleaching powder) श्वेतनोद .. chebulinic or chebulic acid Chem. chemic, chemick vb. (to treat with 
हरीतकिक अम्ल 
chemick) श्वेतनोदन 1. check n. रोध, अवरोध m., परीक्षा f. chemic adj. रसायनिक mfn. check. vb. रोधन, अवरोधन, परीक्षण 1. chemical adj.=alchemical=iatro 
(Hindi जांचना, रोकना) 
chemical रसायनिक रसविधिक mfr. 
214 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
m. 
chemical n. रासायन 1. 
chemical equilibrium रसायनिक समतोल heavy chemicals स्थल (or गुरु) m. 
रासायन . 
chemical equivalent रसायनिक समाह fine chemicals सूक्ष्म रासायन ॥. chemical vb. रासायनन, रासायन-साधन . chemical extinguisher-fire ex chemical action रसायनिक-क्रिया. ____tinguisher रसायनिक शामयिता (-तृ) m. chemical affinity, attraction or chemical fire engine रसायनिक अग्नि 
avidity Chem. रसायनिक-बन्धुता , शमित्र . 
आकर्षण n., तृष्णा f. 
chemical food=compound syrup chemical analysis रसायनिक विश्लेषण N. of ferrous phosphate Pharm. chemical antidote रसायनिक प्रतिविष ।. रसायनिक अन्न-संयुत अयस्यभास्वीय मिष्टोद chemical balance रसायनिक-तुला. 
M. chemical behaviour रसायनिक प्रावरण. chemical forest रसायनिक वन n. chemical black Dying रसायनिक chemical individual रसायनिक व्यक्ति 
कालिमा ( मन्) m. chemical calculation रसायनिक गणन . chemical intensity रसायनिक-चंडता . chemical change रसायनिक परिवर्तन 1. chemical isomerism रसायनिक-सभाजता chemical cleaning=dry cleaning f. - रसायनिक धावन शुष्क धावन . . chemicalization रासायनन n. chemical combination of chemicalize vb. (to treat with che 
संयोजन 1. 
micals) रासायनन . chemical compound रसायनिक संयोग chemicalized रासायनित mfn. 
chemicalized paper रासायनित पत्र n. chemical constitution रसायनिक- chemical laboratory रसशाला. __संस्थापना. 
chemical lead रसायनिक सीस . chemical .coordination रसायनिक chemically रसायनतः __ आसंजन । 
chemically pure Thinta: Ta mfn. chemical dynamics रसायनिक-प्रवैगिकी chemical messenger = autacoid 
Physiol. रसायनिक प्रहेय m. chemical energy Physical Chem. chemical nature रसायनिक स्वरूप 1. 
रसायनिक-ऊर्जा f. 
. chemical paper रसायनिक पत्र १. chemical engine, chemical fire chemical pneumonia Med. रसायनिक 
• engine रसायनिक गन्त्र, रसायनिक अग्नि- क्लोमपाक m. शमित्र . 
chemical potential रसायनिक शक्म .. chemical engineer रसायनिक अभियन्ता chemical property रसायनिक गुण m. 
(तृ) m.. 
chemical rays = actinic rays chemical engineering रसायनिक- chemical reaction रसायनिक प्रतिक्रिया 
अभियन्त्रणा 
215 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
chemical red Col. Ind. रसायनिक रक्त chemigraph रसायोल्लेख m. 
m. 
chemigraphic रसायोल्लैखिक mfn. chemical sense Physiol. रसायनिक chemigraphy रसायोल्लिखा . 
अनुभूति . 
chemio- = chemo common chemical sense ETCUT chemio-tactic chemio-taxic 
रसायनिक-अनुभूति f. 
रासाय-ऋमिक mfn. chemical tank रसायनिक तडाग . chemio-taxis रासाय-क्रम m. chemical telegraph रसायनिक दूरलिख chemiotropic रासायावर्तिक mfn. 
m. 
chemiotropism रासायावर्तना. chemical telephone रसायनिक दूरभाष m. chemi-photic Phys. Chem, रसाय-भायिक chemical warfare रसायनिक युद्ध. 
mfn. chemical wood रसायनिक काष्ठ 1. chemism रसायता . chemic blue - indigo carmine chemist 1 (one versed in chemistry) 
रसायनिक नील m. 
रसायज्ञ, रसायनज्ञ m. chemic green=Bremen blue रसाय ___2 (a druggist) भैषजिक m. 
निक हरि m. 
chemist and druggist = pharma chemick=chemic 
ceutical chemist chemist chemicker (one who treats with che भैषजिक m. 
mick, a dilute solution of bleach- chemistry रसायन . (cf. alchemy ing powder) श्वेतनोद-साधक m. 
रसविद्या) chemic mixer (a worker who mixes agricultural c. कृषि-रसायन ।. 
bleaching powder with water) analytical c. वैश्लेषिक रसायन ।.. श्वेतनोद-मिश्रक M. 
applied c. व्यावहारिक रसायन n. chemico- (chemistry) रसाय 
bio-c. जीव-रसायन n. chemico-biologic रसाय-जैविक mfn. colloid c. श्लेषाभ-रसायन .. chemico-biology रसाय-जैविकी f. 
electro-c. विद्युद्-रसायन n. chemico-cautery रासायन-मांसदाह m. engineering c. अभियन्त्रणा-रसायन . chemico-engineering रसाय-अभियन्त्रणा । general c. सामान्य रसायन n. 
geological c. भौमिक रसायन chemico-mineralogical रसाय-खानिज industrial c. औद्योगिक रसायन . __mfr. 
inorganic c. अपांगार-रसायन n., chemico-physical रसाय-भौतिक mfn. ___ अप्रांगारिकी . chemico-physics रसाय-भौतिकी f. 
metallurgical c. धातुकार्मिक रसायन chemico-physiological रसाय-दैहिक __ mfn. 
. . mineralogical c. खानिज रसायन 1. chemico-vital (relating to the chem organic c. प्रांगार-रसायन ., प्रांगारिकी ., istry of living things) जीवद्रसायनिक 
pathological c. नैदानिक रसायन M. 
10. 
mfr. 
216 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
pharmaceutical c. भेषज-रसायन chemo-synthesis Physiol. रासाय 
संश्लेषण . photo-c. भा-रसायन . 
chemo-synthetic रासाय-सांश्लेषिक mfn. physical c. भौतिक रसायन n. chemo-tactic Biol. रासाय-क्रमिक mfn. physiological c. दैहिक रसायन' 1. chemo-taxis, chemo-taxy Biol. phyto-c. (c. of plants) उद्भिद्-रसायन रासाय-क्रम m. 
n. 
chemo-therapeutic Med. रासाय pute c. शुद्ध रसायन . 
चिकित्सीय mfn. sanitary c. स्वास्थ्य-रसायन . 
chemo-therapeutics Med. रासाय technical c.-industrial c. 
चिकित्सा.. theoretical c. (dealing with the chemo-therapist Med. रासाय-चिकित्सक 
laws of chemical phenomena) m. सैद्धान्तिक रसायन . 
chemo-therapy = chemo-thera thermo-c. ताप-रसायन . 
peutics 200-c. प्राणि-रसायन 1. 
chemo-tropic Biol. रासायावर्तिक mfn. chemi-type=chemi-typy Engrav- chemo-tropism Biol. रासायावर्तना f. ____ing रसाय-मुद्रणा. 
chemo-vaccine रासाय-लस m. chemo-, chem- (denotes relation Chenab (rivet) Geog. चन्द्रभागा f. 
to chemical action or to chemi- cheno-deoxy-cholic (or -desoxy-) cals) रासाय 
acid (Gk. chenos from Skt. हंस) chemo-asthenia रासाय-दौर्बल्य n. 
Biochem. हंस-विजार-पित्तिक अम्ल . chemo-ceptor=chemo-receptor Chenopodiaceae Bot, ar- n. chemo-esthesis रासाय-वेदन . Chenopodium Bot. वास्तुति f. (-ति for chemo-kinesis रासाय-गति . 
प्रजाति genus) chemo-kinetic रासाय-गतिक mfn. 
C. album श्वेत वास्तु m. chemolysis रासायांशन N. 
cheque Banking (an order to pay chemolytic रासायांशिंक mfn. . 
money) धनादेश m. (cf. money chemolyze vb. रासायांशन 1. 
order धन-प्रेष) chemo-plast रासाय-घटन m. 
• c. book धनादेश-पुस्त 1. chemo-receptor = chemo-ceptor c. issued निर्गमित धनादेश m. 
Physiol. रासाय-बादाता (-तृ) m. 
c. received प्राप्त धनादेश m. chemo-reflex रासाय-प्रतिक्षेप m. 
ante-dated c. पूर्वतिथीय धनादेश chemo-sero-therapy Med. (chemo 
therapy combined with treat bearer c. वाहक-धनादेश m. . 
ment with immune serum) लसी blank c. निरंक धनादेश m. रासाय-चिकित्सा f. 
crossed c. रेखित धनादेश m. chem-osmosis रासायासृति f. 
lost c. लुप्त धनादेश m. chem-osmotic रासायासृतीय-mfn. 
mutilated c. विकृत धनादेश m. 
217 
m. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
open c.-not crossed c. अरेखित C. blue 4R=diamine blue 
धनादेश m. 
CAR order c. आदिष्ट धनादेशm. 
C. blue RW=diamine blue RW post-dated c. उत्तरतिथीय धनादेश C.orangeG=direct fastorange 
BGL stale c. काल-तिरोहित धनादेश m. .: C. red=rosophenine io B cherry प्रबदर m.,n. 
chick (a screen of bamboo slips for cherry red प्रबदर रक्त m. 
a doorway) शलाकिनी . Chertier's copper Chem. (copper chick Zool. (a young chicken) 
chlorate and potash ताम्र नीरीय तथा कुक्कुटशावक m. सजि) तानीसजि . 
chicken Zool. कुक्कुटशाव m. chessylite=azurite 
chief प्रमुख m. chest I वक्षस् । 
head मुख्य m. 2 धान .. 
boss अधिपुरुष m. chest disease वक्षोरोग m. 
proprietor स्वामी (-इन् ) m. chestnut brown (red-yellow in hue, chief clerk=head clerk Feu fanfaat 
of low saturation and low brilli- m. 
ance) Col. Ind. न्यवरक्तपीत m. chief commissioner मुख्यायुक्त m. chevron Zool. (V-shaped bones) chief commissioner's province 
द्विवेणी . 
__ मुख्यायुक्त-प्रान्त m. chevrotain=mouse deer Zool. मूष- chief court मुख्य न्यायालय m. 
हरिण . 
chief justice Law मुख्य न्यायाधीश chhakra (छकड़ा) शकट । Chian turpentine=terebinth for the chiefly albuminous feraiat feafaret ____m. (Pistacia terebinthus) 
___mfn. chiasma Cytol. (a crosswise fusion) chief of Imperial General Staff ___व्यत्यास-सायुज्य . 
साम्राजिक सर्वाधिकारिगण अधिपति m. chiasma Anat. स्वस्तिक m. 
chief rent Com. मुख्य भाटक m. chiasmata pl. of chiasma __chief secretary मख्य सचिव m. Chicago blue-chlorazol sky blue chief tax-collector मुख्य करपाल m. 
C. blue Badiamine blue CB (करपाल is an ancient word) C. blue 4B=diamine pure childbed fever प्रसूति-ज्वर m. 
blue C4B 
child labour employment of a C. blue 6 B=diamine sky blue child as a labourer) बाल-नियोजन, 
FF 
बाल-श्रमिक-नियोजन 1., बाल-श्रमिक m. C. blue R=diamine blue CR children's school बाल-पाठशाला C. blue 2R=diamine blue. children's size बाल-परिमाण . ' . C2R 
child welfate शिशु-कल्याण ॥. 
m. 
218 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
- 
Chilean nitrate, Chile niter, Chile Chinese gelatin=agar-agar चीनीय 
saltpeter, soda niter, cubic Factor f. niter उपक्षारm. 
Chinese green-lokao चीनीय हरि m. chill vb. अभिशीतन 1. 
Chinese indigo चीनीय निनील m. chill n. अभिशीत .. 
Chinese ink चीनीय-मसी f. chilled (as steel) fortfara mfn. Chinese mustard=Indian mus chiller अभिशीतक m. 
_tard चीनीय सर्षप-भारतीय सर्षप.. chilling I (making chilly) अभिशीतक Chinese red Col. Ind. चीनीय रक्त m. 
mfn. 
Chinese rouge=Carthamus red 2 (act of chilling) अभिशीतन 1. 
(yellowish-red in hue, of very Chilomastix Zool. (there is a pro high saturation and medium 
minent cytostome) ओष्ठ्याति f. brilliance) चीनीय शोण-कुसुम्भरक्त, (-आति for प्रजाति genus) 
अधिरक्तापीत m. chimney धूममार्ग m. 
Chinese vermilion Col. Ind. चीनीय chimpanzee मेध्य-वानर m. 
हिंगुल m. chin-, chino- (Mod. Lat. chinium C. white चीनीय श्वेत m. ___quinine) विज्वर 
C. yellow=yellow ocher चीनीय chin चिबुक n. 
पीत m. China चीन m. 
chin-hydrone = quin-hydrone China blue (crystals, powder) Col. Chem. विज्वरोदा f. . Ind. चीन नील m. (स्फट, क्षोद) chinic, chinidine=quinic, quini 
C. blue (yellowish lumps) fa d ine Chem. facafea mfn., favazat f. ___ नील m. (पापीत लोष्ट) 
chino-, chin- (Mod. Lat. chinium C. clay चीन-मृत् . 
__quinine) विज्वर chinagraph pencil iafera jaft f. chinoidine = quinoidine Chem. China green Col. Ind. चीन हरि m. 
विज्वराभी. chinaphthol (chin- +naphthol) favarata chinoline=quinoline Chem. Favarat 
तैलव m. China root=smilax Bot. चीन-मूल . chinonezquinone Chem. farat f. China silver चीन-रजत . 
chino-toxine=quinicine chinaware चीनभाण्ड . 
chinovic, chinovin = quinovic, China yellow Col. Ind. चीन पीत m. quinovin' Chinese चीनीय mfn. 
chinovose-quinovose . Chinese blue Col. Ind. चीनीय नील chinoxaline=quinoxaline . m. 
chips खण्ड m. Chinese cinnamon चीनीय-दारुसिता f. chirata (chirat.) = chirayta = chi Chinese cinnamon oil=cassia oil . retta Pharm. चिरतिक्त m. 
चीनीय-दारुसिता-तैल 1. 
chiratin चिरतिक्ति f. 
219﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
genus) 
chirayta, chiretta=chirata 
Chlamydomonas Bot. (unicellular Chiroptera Zool. 8: m. pl., algae, having a cup-shaped chlo 
TH9C8-Tu m. (tror order) 
roplast ac-tfcten) ufa f. (74 chisel टंक m. 
cup-+प्राप्य alga + -ति for प्रजाति chisel point deth n. chitin Biochem. (forms the harder chlamydospore Bot. 49-tom. 
part of the outer integument of Chlamydozoa Biol. ciuitat: m. pl. insects....) #folet f. 
chlamydozoan Biol. 74-3119 m. chitinization 1 (process of becom- chlor Psychophys. Efa m. 
ing chitinous) कठिनियना f. 
chlor- (green' and not chlorine) IT 2 (state of being chitinous) chlor-, chloro- (chlorine) Chem. fite #foran f. 
(fruit) chitinized कठिनियित mfn. 
chlor-acetate=chloro-acetate chitino- (chitinous) #forzy 
chlor-aceto-phenone=chloro-ace chitinogenous (producing chitin) to-phenone 
apofan mfn. 
chloral (chlorine + alcohol) Chem. chitinoid foruri mfn. 
Ty m. chitinous कठिनिय mfn. 
c. alcoholate नीरस सषवीय n. chitinous cover Zool. formato c. ammonia नीरसु तिक्ताति m. 
c. ammonium नीरसु तिक्तातु m. chitosamine (chitin + osamine) Bio c. form-amide Pharm, CE 5 
chem. #fofas farmait f. 
free n. chitosan (from chitin) Biochem. c. hydrate free 37879 n. 
afoferred the 
chloralideChem. नीरस्वेयn. chitose (chitin + -ose) Chem. #fofare chloralism Med. ufafterwat f. 
12. 
chloralization TT 1. - chittam or. chittem bark (a mild chloralize vb. ITAFT 1. . 
laxative) आरेच वल्क m. 
I to subject to the influence of Chladni's figures=sonorous fig chloral) 74-77967 n. 
ures==acoustic figures Phys. 2 (to treat with chloral) <-*FT संस्वनन-प्राकृति. 
n. chlamydo- (cloak”) piletin 
chloralose frien. chlamydo-bacteria Bact. 24-297 chlor-alum (chlor- + aluminium) fts 
m. 
FPact f. Chlamydobacteriaceae. 417427770-' chloralum (New Lat.) Pharm. = - . (Fe family) 
chloral Chlamydobacteriales कंचुकवेत्राणु-गोत्र chloramanil black Col. Ind. नीरतिक्त 
1. (TFT order) 
I 
T7 m. 
n. 
220 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
c. blue नीरतिक्तनील नील m. 
c. yellow GG=chlorazol fast c. green नीरतिक्तनील हरिm. 
yellow FG chlor-amide Chem, ifto-face n. chlor-apatite Mineral. FunTFCT m. chloramine नीरतिक्ती . 
(-इज for खनिज mineral) chloramine black Col. Ind. itfaract chlor-astrolite Mineral. 1-TTTTTT 
att m. 
m. c. blue नीरतिक्ती नीलm. 
chlorate Chem. नीरीय ॥. c. brilliant red ft fatit HR TT chlorate of potash = potassium 
m. 
chlorate Chem. Gergen. c. brown नीरतिक्ती बm. 
chlor-aurate=chloro-aurate c. dark green fraait fan afm. chlor-auric=chloro-auric c. fast blue नीरतिक्ती स्थिर नील m. chlor-aurite=chloro-aurite c. fast red नीरतिक्ती स्थिर रक्त m. chlor-azide Chem. teria n. c. fast scarlet at farmit fet TOT m. chlorazol black Col. Ind. 1752 FTET c. fast yellow नीरतिक्ती स्थिर पीत m. c. green नीरतिक्ती हरि m. 
c. blue नीराजव नील m. c. orange नीरतिक्ती नारंग m. 
c. brilliant black नीराजव भासुर काल c. red नीरतिक्ती रक्त m. 
m. c. sky blue नीरतिक्ती आकाश नील c. brilliant blue नीराजव भासुर नील 
m. c. violet नीरतिक्ती नीललोहित m. 
c. brilliant sky blue TITS HTC c. yellow fat ora m. 
FTTT m. chlor-anemia = chlorosis Med. c. brown नीराजव बभ्रm. 
पीतारक्तता . 
c.dark blue नीराजव असित नील m. chlor-anemic stare fefla mfn. 
c. dark green नीराजव असित हरिm. chlor-anhydride Chem. iterte n. c. diazo blue नीराजव द्वयज नील m. chlor-anil Chem. (tetra-chloro-qui- .. c. drab नीराजव अवरक्तपीत m. 
none) - m. (acara-faract) c. fast black नीराज़व स्थिर काल m. chlor anisidine Col. Ind. at tayoqat c. fast blue नीराजव स्थिर नील m. 
c. fast brown fira ATT aum. . c. anisidine salt नीर शतपुष्पेयी लवण c. fast eosine नीराजव स्थिर उषसी f. 
n. 
c. fast helio BK=brilliant fast c. anisidine scarlet नीर शतपुष्पेयी blue B 
To m. 
c. fast orange नीराजव स्थिर नारंग M. chlorantine orange TR =chlor c. fast pink नीराजव स्थिर आप M. 
azolfast orange D, 
c. fast red नीराजव स्थिर रक्त m. C. red 8B, 8BN=chloramine c. fast scarlet नीराजव स्थिर शोण m. 
brilliant red 8B 
c. fast yellow नीराजव स्थिर पीत m. 
m. 
221 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
___m. 
c. green नीराजव हरि m. 
chloride vb. (to mine, esp. chlorides) c. orange नीराजव नारंग m. 
नीरेय-खनन । c. orange-brown नीराजव नारंग-बV chloride of baryta=barium chlo 
ride c. pink नीराजव आपद्मm. 
chloride of lime Chem. चूर्णक-नीरेय . c. sky blue नीराजव आकाश नील m. chloride paper Photog. नीरेय पत्र n. c. violet नीराजव नीललोहित m. chlorider नीरेय-खनक m. c. yellow नीराजव पीत m. 
chloridize vb. नीरेयण ". chlor-benzene-chloro-benzene 1 (to treat with chlorine or with chlor-butol (trichloro - tert. - butyl a.chloride) नीरजी-साधन, नीरेय-साधन n. 
alcohol) Chem. नीर-घृतव m. (त्रिनीर 2 (to convert the metal of ore into तृ.-घृतल-सुषव) 
chloride) नीरेय-करण 1. chlor-cosane Pharm. नीर-विशीन्या . chlori-meter=chloro-meter chlore vb. = chlorinate 
chlori-metric=chloro-metric chlor-emia=chlor-aemia, chloro chlori-metry=chloro-metry 
sis Med. पीतरक्तता. 
chlorinate vb. Chem. नीरजन n. chlorenchyma Bot. (chlorophyll- I (to treat, or cause to combine, ___containing tissue) पर्णशादी (-इन्) m. with chlorine, as for the pur chloretone = acetone chloroform pose of bleaching) नीरजी-साधन, 
शुक्ता नीरवम्रल n. 
नीरजी-योजन. chlor-hydrate (hydro-chloride) 2 [to chloridize; specif., to apply 
नीरोदीय n. 
chlorine to (water or sewage) -chlor-hydria (chlor-hydric + -ia) for purposes of sterilization, 
Chem. (combining form denoting oxidation of organic matter, presence of hydrochloric acid) or retardation of putrefaction] -नीरोद 
नीरजीयन 1. chlor-hydric=hydro-chloric Chem. chlorinate (a chlorinated product) 
नीरोदिक mfn. 
नीरजित n. chlor-hydrin (di-, epi) Chem. sitella chlorinated lime Pharm. (bleaching 
· · f. (द्वि-, अपि) 
powder, or chloride of lime) a-chlorhydrin (mono) (technical) नीरजित चूर्णक, श्वेतन क्षोद m., चूर्णक-नीरेय 
Chem. अ-नीरोदि f. (एक) (परिभाषित). chloric Chem. नीरिक mfn. 
• chlorination (act or process of chlo ___c. acid नीरिक अम्ल . 
rinating) नीरजन 1., नीरजना c. ether नीरिक दक्षु m. 
chlorinator (one that chlorinates) chloridateschloridize 
नीरजक m. chloridation नीरेयण. 
chlorine (colour) नीरजी-वर्ण, घास-वर्ण, chlokiae: Chem. नीरेय . 
__ मध्ययतिपीत mfn. 
1. 
222 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
chlorine Chem. नीरजी . 
chloro-acetone (mono) (used as a c. azide नीरजी अजीवेय. 
___tear-gas) Chem. नीर-शुक्ता f. (एक) c. dioxide नीरजी द्विजारेय n. 
chloro-aceto-phenone Chem. नीर c. family नीरजी-कुल n. 
शुक्त-दर्शा. c. peroxide नीरजी अतिजारेय. chloro-acetyl chloride Chem. नीर c. water नीरजी-जल n. 
शुक्तल नीरेय . chlorinize=chlorinate vb. 
chloro-amide Chem. नीर-तिक्तेय . chlorinous नीरजीय mfn. 
chloro-amine Chem. (any chloro chlor-iodide नीर-जम्बेय. 
derivative of an amine) नीरक chlorite I Chem. (chlorous t-ite) fendt f. 
(a salt of chlorous acid) नीरित chloro-anemia=chlor-anemia 
n. 
chloro-aniline (ortho, meta, para) 2 Mineral. हरितिजm. (-इज for खनिज Chem. नीर-नीली f. (ऊर्ध्व, सम, परा) mineral) 
chloro-aniline hydro-chloride chloritic नीरितिक mfn. 
Chem. नीर-नीली उद-नीरेय . chloritization Mineral. (production chloro-anisole (ortho, para) Chem. 
of, or convertion into, chlorite) नीर-शतपुष्पवा . (ऊर्ध्व, परा) हरितिजन n. 
chloro-anthra-quinone Chem. Fire chloritize vb. (to introduce chlorite विक्ष-विज्वरा 
in, to alter into mineral chlorite) chloro-aurate Chem. नीर-स्वर्णीय . हरितिजन, हरितिज-प्रवेशन n. 
chloro-auric Chem. नीर-स्वणिक mfn. chloritoid Mineral. हरितिजाभ 
chloro-aurite Chem. नीर-स्वर्णित . chlorize-chlorinate vb. 
chloro-benz-aldehyde (ortho, meta, chlor-methane-chloro-methane para) Chem. नीर-धूप-सुव्युद m. (ऊर्ध्व, chloro-, chlor- (chlorine) Chem. नीर- सम, परा) 
(नीरजी) 
chloro-benz-anthrone Chem. नीर-धूप chloro adj. नीर, नीरक mfn. 
विक्षा f. chloro-acetal Chem. नीर-शुक्तसु m. chloro-benzene (mono, di) Chem. chloro-acet-amide (ortho, para) . नीर-धूपेन्य 1. (एक, द्वि) 
Chem. नीर-शुक्त-तिक्तेय 1. (ऊर्ध्व, परा) p-chloro-benzene-sulphonic acid chloro-acetate Chem. नीर-शुक्तीय n. 
ल्बायिक अम्ल n.. chloro-acetic Chem. नीर-शुक्तिक mfn. chloro-benzoic acid (ortho, meta, chloro-acetic acid (mono, di, tri) para) Chem. नीर-धूपिक अम्ल १. (ऊर्ध्व, ___Chem. नीर-शुक्तिक अम्ल n. (एक, द्वि, त्रि) सम, परा) chloro-acetic anhydride Chem. chloro-benzoyl chloride (ortho, 
नीर-शुक्तिक अजलेय . 
_meta, para) Chem. नीर-धूपूल नीरेय 1. 2-chloro-aceto-acet-anilide Chem. (ऊर्ध्व, सम, परा) 
. २-नीर-शुक्त-शुक्त-नीलय . 
_chloro-bromide Cbem. नीर-दुरेय .. ' 
223 
Llaunanataterham नीरसातीय 
n 
h em पनीर 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
chloro-bromo-benzene (meta, para) chloroform water = aqua chloro 
__ Chem. नीर-दुरा-धूपेन्य 7. (सम, परा) 
formi नीरव म्रल-वारि, संमोहिनी-वारि n. chloro-calcite=hydrophilite Mine- chlorogenin Col. Ind. नीरजनि . 
ral. नीर-चूणिज m. (-इज for खनिज chloro-hydrate=chlor-hydrate mineral) 
chloro-hydric=chlor-hydric chloro-carbonate Chem. नीरांगारीय .. chloro-hydrin Chem. नीरोदि . chloro-carbonicacid Chem. नीरांगारिक chloro-hydro-carbon Chem. नीरोदां 
अम्ल . 
गार m. chloro-chromate Chem. fiti-cuitat n. chloro-hydro-quinone Chem, fitta chloro-chromic Chem. नीर-वणिक mfn. विज्वरा. 
c. acid नीरवणिक अम्ल . 
chloro - hydroxy - toluene Chem. chloro-cresol Chem. नीर-क्रविपवm. नीरोदजार-विरालेन्य . chloro-cruorin Biochem. (a greenish chloro-imide Chem. f-falaraq n. 
pigment found in the blood of chloro-iodide Chem. नीर-जम्बया . _certain marine worms) रुधिर-शादिf. chloro-iodo-benzene (ortho, meta, chlorodize=chloridize 
____para) Chem. नीर-जम्बु-धूपेन्य १. (ऊर्ध्व, chlorodyne (cbloroform + anodyne) 
सम, परा) नीरापीड m. 
chloro-meter Chem. नीर-मान M. chloroform (chloro- + formyl) Chem. chloro-methane Chem. Etsitatea n. 
नीरवम्रल 1., संमोहिनी f. 
chloro-methyl ethyl ether Chem. chloroform vb. नीरवम्रण, संमोहन . 
नीर-प्रोदल दक्षुल दक्षु m. I (to treat with chloroform) chloro-methylmethylether Chem. संमोहिनी-साधन, नीरवम्रल-साधन . 
नीर-प्रोदल. प्रोदल दक्षु m. 2 (to place under the influence of chloro-metricChem. नीर-मितीय mfre.. chloroform, esp. so as to pro- chloro-metry Chem. नीर-मिति f. duce insensibility or anesthesia) chloro-napthalene Chem. नोरोत्तैलेन्य संमोहिनी-प्रभावन . 3 (to kill with chloroform; as to a-chloro 8-naphthol Chem. अ-नीर 
chloroform a cat) संमोहिनी-मारण 1. प्रा-उत्तैलव m. chloroformate Chem. नीरवम्रीय n chloro-nitrate Chem. नीर-भूयीय . chloroformic Chem. नीरवम्रिक mfn. 2-chloro-4-nitro-aniline Chem. २ chloroformism Med. संमोहिनीरुजा. . नीर-४-भूय-नीली f. chloroformist Chem. संमोहक, संमोहिनी- chloro-nitro-benzene (ortho, meta, 
दाता (तू) m. 
_para) Chem . नीर-भूय-धूपेन्य n. (ऊर्ध्व, chloroformization Chem. नीरवम्रण, . सम, परा) 
संमोहन 1. 
I-chloro-4-nitro - benzene-2-sul 'chloroformize=chloroform vb. phonic acid Chem. १-नीर-४-भूय 
chloroformum=chloroform n. 
धूपेन्य-२-शुल्बायिक अम्ल .. 
224 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
6-chloro-5-nitro - toluene-3-sul c. a, b पर्णशादेय क, ख m. 
phonic acid Chem. ६-नीर-५-भूय methyl c.a, b प्रोदल पर्णशादेय क, ख 
विरालेन्य-३-शुल्बायिक अम्ल .. chloropal = nontronite Mineral. chlorophylli-ferous पर्णशाद-भर mfn. 
(a hydrated silicate of ferric iron) chlorophylli-genous पर्णशाद-जन mfn. 
जलायस्सिजm. (-इज for खनिज mineral) chlorophylli-gerous पर्णशाद-भृत् mfn. chloro-palladic Chem. नीर-निचूषिक chlorophyllin Biochem. पर्णशादि f. 
mfn. 
c.a, b पर्णशादि क, ख m. chloro-pentane Chem. नीर-पंचीत्य . iso-c. a, b स-पर्णशादि क, ख m. chlorophane Mineral. TIEGT m. chlorophyllite Mineral. (a green chlorophenine Col. Ind. ar gaiff. foliated alteration product of 
c. orange नीरदर्शी नारंग m. 
iolite) शादपणिज m. (-इज for खनिज chloro-phenol (ortho, meta, para) mineral) 
Chem. नीर-दर्शवm. (ऊर्व, सम, परा) chlorophylloid पर्णशादाभ mfn. 4-chloro-phenol-2-sulphonic acid chlorophyllose = chlorophyllous 
Cbem. ४-नीर-दर्शव-२-शुल्बायिक अम्ल . पर्णशादिय mfn. 2-chloro-o-phenyl-phenol Chem. chlorophyll technical Col. Ind. 
२-नीर-ऊ-दर्शल-दर्शव m. 
पर्णशाद परिभाषित m. chlorophosphine Col. Ind. नीरभास्वी chloro-picrin,chlor-picrin, chlor 
pikrin=vomiting gas Chem. 4-chloro-phthalic acid Chem. ४. नीर-कट्वि f-वमन-वाति m. 
नीर-व्युत्तैलिक अम्ल 1. 
chloro-plast = chloro-plastid Chlorophyceae Bot. (green and Biol. (a plastid sont containing 
yellow green algae) शादाप्यकाः chlorophyll पर्णशादिन्) शादि-घटन n. 
m.pl. 
chloroplatinate Chem. नीरमहीय . chloro-phyll (green colouring chloroplatinic Chem. नीरमहिक mfn. 
matter of plants) पर्ण-शाद, शाद m. ___c. acid नीरमहिक अम्ल n. . chlorophyll a पर्णशाद क m. chloro-platinite Chem. नीर-महित 1. 
chlorophyll b पर्णशाद ख m. chloro-platinous Chem. नीर-मह्य mfn. chlorophyllaceous = chlorophyl- a-chloro-propionic acid (B-) Chem. 
lose quiefcu mfn. 
अ-नीर-प्रमेदिक अम्ल .. (प्रा.) । chlorophyllan puistfort n. 
2-chloro-quinoline Chem. २-नीर chlorophyllase Biochem. पर्णशादेद m. विज्वरवी. chlorophyll body, corpuscle or chloro-silicate Chem., Mineral. नीर 
granule पर्णशाद काय, देहाणु m., कणिका सैकतीय .. 
chlorosis Med. पीतरक्तता, पीतारक्तता.. chlorophyllian=chlorophyllose chloro-sulphonic Chem. नीर-शुल्बायिक chlorophyllide Biochem. पर्णशादेय. mfn. 
225 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
- 
c. acid (technical) catfit C. orange R=paramine orange 
ET n. (9fHTOT) 
R=Nippon orange R chlorotic condition Bok. पीतता f. c. red=Congo red chloro-toluene (ortho, meta, para) c. yellow G=azidine yellow G 
Chem. Its-facrata n. (3580, T4, TRT) chol-, cholo- 1991 2-chloro - toluene - 4 - sulphonic cholagogue Med. FTIGTET (-) mfn. 
acid Chem. P-pre-facrarut-x-[catfif cholalic (chol- + alkali to sic) = TRG N. 
cholic chlorous Chem. Efri mfn. 
cholane Chem. पित्तीन्य . 4-chloro-3:5-xylen-I-ol Chem. So c . series for tea #TOT f. 
777-3:4-757-8-m. 
cholanic acid Biochem. पित्तीन्यिक अम्ल chloro-zincate Chem. tata n. nh. chlor-phenol=chloro-phenol cholate Biochem. पित्तीय .. chlor-salol Pharm. 1779 m. chole- पित्त chlor - sulphonic = chloro-sul- choleate (a salt of choleic fafafua 
phonic . 
acid) fofereita n. chloryl Pharm. नीरल. 
cholecyst gall bladder Anat. choanocyte (funnel-shaped) = col- furrera m. : lared cell Zool. Farameter f. cholecystitis Med. (inflammation of chocolate (red-yellow in hue, of the gall bladder) FUFITT4-774 m. 
low saturation and low brilli- cholecystokinin Med. (causes con ance) Factota m. 
traction of gall bladder) पित्ताशय choice वरण 1., इच्छा . 
fef. choke=air control Automobile ara- chole-hematin=phyllo-erythrin 
TTT m. 
Biochem. fit-tiforfor f. choke control Automobile arata choleic acid=choleinic acid=de 
m. 
oxy-cholic acid Biochem. fufirfarandi choke-damp=black damp Mining 
=fa-FT-fyfer hat n. 
• (a non-explosive mine gas con- choleine=choline 
sisting essentially of carbon di- choleinic acid=choleic acid 
oxide) zareztat (-5), praftarlet m. cholera Med. fagfent, faqat f. choke-tube Automobile वायुरोध-नाल'm. c. bacteriophage विषूची रोगाणुभक्ष chokusetsu black W conc., extra= 
m. . ..chloramine black EC extra. c. vaccine fay c. blue 2 B=chloramine blue cholestane (cholesterol + - ane) Bio 
2 B 
chem. Eft n. c. green B=chloramine green cholestanol (cholestane t-01) Bio 
DB 
· chem. I trua m. 
226 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
cholestene (cholesterol to - ene) Bio- chondriosome Biol. (minute semi ____cbem. पत्तेन्य 1. 
fluid bodies) 2017 m. cholesterate Biochem. (a salt of cho chondrite TUT m. (a meteoric 
lesteric acid) पैत्तवीय n. 
stone) cholesteric Biochem. (pertaining to chondrocyte Zool. 7f4atat f. 
cholesterol, or obtained from chondrodite Mineral, farafeer m. it) पैत्तविक mfn. 
(-इज for खनिज mineral) cholesterin=cholesterol 
choose vb. ac n. cholesterinic=cholesteric 
chord I रज्जु . cholesterinuria=cholesteroluria 2 Math.sitat f. cholesterol (Gk. chole bile + stereos 3 Music (combination of tones 
stiff) Biochem. Ga, FTTT-fira m. ....) n. cholesterol-emia Med. 4979-TFCT f. 4 (of a musical instrument) 277 n. cholesterol-uria Med. 1772-hem. chordae tendineae = tendinous cholesterosis Med. अतिपैत्तवता. 
cords Anat. हृद्रज्जु . cholesteryl Fant n. 
Chordata Zool, #FFT: m. pl. (sg. c. acetate पैत्तवल शुक्तीय n. 
*TT) c. oleate पैत्तवल म्रक्षीय n. 
chord of contact Math. E-tat f. c. stearate पैत्तवल वसीय 1. 
chorion Embryol. (outermost en choletelin (chole - to Gk. telos com velop of the embryo) TTT n. 
pletion; it is the end product in Choripetalae = Polypetalae Bot. Gmelin's test for bile pigments eran: m. pl. with nitric acid) Biochem. form choroid=chorioid Anat, ferm. 
choroid plexus Zool. (a delicate cholic Biochem. पित्तिक, पित्तिय mfa. fringe like process) झल्लरी-प्रतान m. 
c.acid पित्तिक अम्ल 
chose Law i (a thing) 728 n. choline=sincaline, amanitine Bio 2 (a piece of personal property) 
_chem. पित्ती . 
F-9€ 16. c. bromide पित्ती दुरेय . 
chose in action (obtainable by suit c. chloride पित्ती नीरेय । 
• at law) fararston Fa961 n. cholinic=cholic 
chose in possession Law धृत वस्तु cholo-,chol- font 
chose jugee Lan fruntar att n. : cholo-cyanin = bili-cyanin · Bio- chose local Law (a thing annexed 
chem. fF-UTFF f... 
to a place) FITTEE 976 n. Chondrichthyes =. cartilaginous chose transitory Lay (a movable) 
fishes Zool. Affen-FFFYT: m. pl. - Ta TFT n. chondrin Biochem. (obtained from chroia (denoting discoloration) 
cartilage atfer) atfeeffi f. 
-faquar f. 2257 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
cyano-chroia zuri-faquiat f. 2 (of or pertaining to colour) -chroic= -chroous (an adj. suffix, 'वर्णीय, वणिक mfn. 
denoting coloured) -रंगिक mfn. chromatic aberration Optics वर्ण 
cyano-chroic zuri-zforf mfn. विपथन M. chrom-, chromo 
chromatic lens वर्णी वीक्ष m. I Chem. (chromium) वर्ण 
chromatics वर्ण-विद्या . _2 (colour, pigment) वर्ग-, वार्ण chromatid Biol. (a univalent chro chroma वर्णकी f. 
___mosome) एकलसूत्र . chromacetine blue Col. Ind. वर्ण- chromatin Biol. (a deeply staining 
शुक्ती नील m. 
protoplasmic material occurring chromaffin Zool. I वर्णातिरंज्य mfn.(वर्ण- in the nucleus of cells) अभिवणि 
for quit, staining deeply with f. chromium salts) 
chromatin granule अभिवणि-कणिका . 2 (pert. to or made up of pig- chromatinic afarafora mfn. ___mented cells) रंगाकोशीय mfn. chromatin mass अभिवणि पुंज m. chromal blue Col. Ind. वर्णसू नीलm. chromatin nucleolus=karyosome 
c. fast brown (azo mordant dye Zool, afwata ruffT f. 
.. with chromium acetate) chromatize=chromate वर्णसु स्थिर बm. 
chromatophore Zool. (bearing pig chrom-ammine वर्ण-तिजी. 
ment) रंगाभर, वर्णभर m. . chromanil black Col. Ind. वर्णनील chrom-aventurine Col. Ind. वर्ण 
काल m. 
धातुकाच m. c. blue वर्णनील नील m. 
chromazine blue Col. Ind. autoritat c. brown वर्णनील बभ्रु m. 
नीलm. chromanthrenegreen Col. Ind. वर्ण- chromazol violet paste Col. Ind. 
क्षामेण्य हरि m. 
वर्णाजव नीललोहित लेपी . chromate Chem. वर्णीय . 
c. yellow वर्णाजव पीत m. chromate vb. Chem. वर्णीयन 1. chromazone blue Col. Ind. वर्णाजीवा 
(to treat or impregnate with a नील m. 
chromate or dichromate, esp. c. brown qurtiram a m . 
• with potassium dichromate) c. red वर्णाजीवा रक्त m. वर्णोय-साधन, वर्णीय-व्यापन . 
chrom-azurine Col. Ind. qui-HTETETT 'chromate black Col. Ind. वर्णीय काल 
m. 
chrome Chem. वर्णक m. ...c. blue-black वर्णीय नील-कृष्ण m. -chrome Chem. -वर्णक 
c. fast brown वर्णीय स्थिर बभ्रु m. chrome vb. वर्णकायन ?. chromatic I (consisting of colour) (to acquire or increase in chro 
वर्णी (-इन्) mfn. 
ma) वर्णकी-प्रापण,-वर्धन n. 
228 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
chrome acid orange Col. Ind. quien 
अम्ल नारंग m. c. azurol वर्णक नभोव m. c. bistre वर्णक कज्जल n. c. black वर्णक काल m. c. blue वर्णक नील m. c. blue-black वर्णक नील-कृष्ण m. c. bordeaux paste वर्णक कपिशक लेपी 
c. brilliant black वर्णक भासुर काल ___m. 
c. brilliant scarlet वर्णक भासुर शोण 
m. c. brilliant violet वर्णक भासुर नील 
लोहित m. c. brown quit ym. c. carmine वर्णक कीटशोणी f. c. cloth blue वर्णक वस्त्र नील m. c. cloth red वर्णक वस्त्र रक्त m. c. cyanine वर्णक श्यामी f. c. dark green वर्णक असित हरिm. c. deep black वर्णक गाढ काल m. c. deep brown वर्णक गाढ बनु m. c. deep cotton brown वर्णक गाढ 
तूल बभ्रु m. c. fast black वर्णक स्थिर काल m. c. fast blue वर्णक स्थिर नील m. c. fast bordeaux वर्णक स्थिर कपिशक ___m. 
c. fast brown वर्णक स्थिर बभ्र m. c. fast cyanine वर्णक स्थिर श्यामी . c. fast garnet quiet for foreact m. c. fast green वर्णक स्थिर हरि m. c. fast orange वर्णक स्थिर नारंग M. c. fast phosphine वर्णक स्थिर भास्वी 
c. fast violet वर्णक स्थिर नीललोहित m. c. fast yellow auia fiert ota m. c. field grey वर्णक सेना धूसर m. c. garnet वर्णक निरक्त m. c. green वर्णक हरि m. c. leather black वर्णक चर्म काल m. c. leather blue वर्णक चर्म नीलm. c. leather brown वर्णक चर्म बन m. c. leather deep black वर्णक चर्म 
गाढ कालं m. c. leather fast black वर्णक चर्म स्थिर 
काल m. c. leather fast brown वर्णक चर्म 
स्थिर बभ्रु m. c. leather fast yellow वर्णक चर्म 
स्थिर पीत m. c. leather jet black वर्णक चर्म धन 
काल m. c. leather orange वर्णक चर्म नारंग m. c. leather red वर्णक चर्म रक्त m. c. leather yellow वर्णक चर्म पीत m. c. milling yellow वर्णक संकोचन पीत ____m. 
c. mordant वर्णक स्थापक m. c. navy blue वर्णक नाविक नील m. c. olive वर्णक तैलबदर m. C. orange वर्णक नारंग m. c. oxide green वर्णक जारेय हरि m, c. patent black वर्णक एकस्व काल m. c. patent green वर्णक एकस्व हरि m. c. printing black वर्णक मुद्रण काल 
m. 
c. printing orange वर्णक मुद्रण नारंग 
c. printing yellow वर्णक मुद्रण पीत 
m. c. prune वर्णक वातामबदर m. c. red वर्णक रक्त m. 
c. fast red वर्णक स्थिर रक्त m. c. fast scarlet वर्णक स्थिर शोण m. 
229﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
c. red-brown वर्णक रक्त-बभ्रुm. 
c. acid वणिक अम्ल n. c. rubine वर्णक रक्ती/. 
c. anhydride वणिक अजलेय . c. turquoise वर्णक प्रनीलातिहरि m. c. iron=chromite वर्णिकायस. = c. vermilion वर्णक हिंगुल m. 
वणिज m. c. violet वर्णक नीललोहित m. 
c. oxide वणिक जारेय. c. worsted blue वर्णक समूर्णा नील m. chromicize vb. (cbromic + -२९) (to c. yellow वर्णक पीत m. 
treat or impregnate with chromic chrome alum Chem. वर्णक स्फटिका f. acid or a. chromate) वणिकायन n. chrome aventurine वर्णक धातुकाच m. (वणिक-, वर्णीय- साधन, -व्यापन) chrome brick वर्णक इष्टका f. 
chromidia (extra-nuclear aggrega chrome iron-iron ore Chem. वर्णक tion of chromatin granules) for at 
अयस्अयोयस्क । chrome leather वर्णक चर्मn. 
chromidial budding Zool. रंज्यिका chrome lemon वर्णक निम्बु, सुपीतारक्त m. अंकुरण n. chrome liquor (a solution of a chromi-ferous Mineral. वर्णभर mfn. 
chromium compound) auf#-faque chromine Col. Ind. aut f. ' . 
c. violet paste वर्णी नीललोहित लेपी. chromene Cbem. वर्णन्य . 
chromite Chem. I (a. salt of chro chrome-nickel adj. वर्णक-रूपक mfn. 
mous acid) वणित .. chrome-nickel steel वर्णक-रूपक बज्रायस 2 Mineral. वणिज m., (chromium 
sesquioxide 68.0, iron protoxide chrome primrose Chem. वर्णक 32.0=100) वर्णजारेयिज m. (-इज for 
पीतसेवती f., सुपीत m. 
खनिज mineral) chrome scarlet वर्णक शोण, अधिपीतातिरक्त chromitite Mineral. (composed of 
. 
iron, chromium and oxygen) chrome spinel = magnesiochro अयोवर्णजारिज m. (-इज for खनिज 
mite=picotite Mineral. (con mineral) rains chromium and also has the chromium Chem. वर्णात् m. magnesium largely replaced by c. acetate वर्णातु शुक्तीय n. iron) भ्राजवणिज m. (-इज for खनिज c. ammonium oxalate वर्णातु mineral) 
तिक्तातु तिग्मीय n. chrome (or chromium) steel वर्णक c. ammonium sulphate वर्णातु 
वर्णातु) वज्रायस . . 
. तिक्तातु शुल्बीय . chrome-vanadium steel वर्णक-रोचातु . c. carbonate वर्णातु प्रांगारीय . ... वज्रायस. 
c. chloride (basic, normal) वर्णातु chromi-(chromium, chromic) Chem. नीरेय n. (पैठिक, ऋजु) । वर्ण- .: 
c. chromate वर्णातु वर्णीय .. chromic Chem. afura mfn. 
c. citrate वर्णातु निम्बवीय . 
. 
230 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
c. family वर्णातु कुल 7. 
chromoglaucine BMJ = brilliant c. fluoride (technical) aute asteaed gallocyanine ___n. (परिभाषित) 
chromo-isomer Chem. वर्ण-समाज m. c. formate वर्णातु वम्रीय n. 
chromo-isomeric Chem. वर्ण-सभाजिक c. green वर्णातु हरि, मध्यहर्यतिपीत m. mfn. c. hydroxide वर्णातु उदजारेय . . chromo-isomerism Chem. वर्ण-सभाजता c. nitrate वर्णातु भूयीय . c. oxalate वर्णातु तिग्मीय n. chromo-lipoid Biochem. (a lipo c. oxide (green, tri) वर्णातु जारेय. chrome) वर्ण-विमेदाभ m. 
(हरि, त्रि) 
___chromo-lithography = litho-chro c. phosphate वर्णातु भास्वीय n. 
matics c. potassium oxalate वर्णातु दहातु chromomere Biol. पित्र्यकणिका f. (short 
तिग्मीय n. 
_for पित्र्यसूत्रकणिका) c. potassium sulphate (chrome chromo-meter=colori-meter auf 
alum) वर्णातु दहातु शुल्बीय 1. (वर्णक मान m. स्फटिका) 
chromone Chem. (a ketone derived c. salt वर्णातु लवण १. 
from chromene) वर्णेन्या f. c. sesqui-oxide वर्णातु सार्ध-जारेय. chromone blue Col. Ind. वर्णेन्या नील c. sodium oxalate वर्णातु क्षारातु m. 
तिग्मीय. 
c. blue-black वर्णन्या नील-कृष्ण m. c. steel वर्णातु वज्रायस . 
c. brown वर्णेन्या बत्रु m. c. sulphate (basic, normal) वर्णातु c.green वर्णेन्या हरि m. ___ शुल्बीय 1. (पैठिक, ऋजु) । 
c. orange वर्णेन्या नारंग m. c. trioxide वर्णातु विजारेय 1. 
c. red वर्णन्या रक्त m. c. yellow वर्णातु पीत m. 
c. violet वर्णेन्या नीललोहित m. chromo-, chrom- 1 (chromium) qui c. yellow current atat m. ___2 (colour, pigment) वर्ण-, वार्ण- chromoneme पित्र्याक्ष m. (short for chromo-arsenate Chem. वर्ण-नेपालीय . पित्र्यसूत्राक्ष) chromochlorine Col. Ind. quiafton f. chromophenine Col. Ind. qufcaff.f. chromo-citronine Col. Ind. वर्ण-निम्बवी chromophil, chromophile Biol. I. 
अभिरञ्ज्य (staining deeply) . chromocyanine Col. Ind. auzatait f. 2=chromophilic (staining read chromogen Biochem. वर्णजन m. .ily) आशुरंज्य mfn.. . chromogen black Col. Ind. quota chromophobe = chromophobic 
काल m. 
Zool. अनाशुरंज्य mfn. c. blue वर्णजन नील m. 
chromophore Chem. qurfus m. c. red वर्णजन रक्त m. 
chromophoric Chem. वर्णाण्विक mfn. c. violet वर्णजन नीललोहित m. chromo-phyll Biochem. पलाशवर्ण m. 
231 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
chromo-plast Biol. वणि-घटन m. chronic deficiency Zool. चिरस्थ-हीनता chromo-protein Biochem. वर्ण-प्रोभूजिन 
m. 
chronograph Phys. काल-लिख m. chromorhodine Col. Ind. aupareat f. chronometer Phys. I (a time-keeper) chromoscope quiet m. 
कालमान m. chromoscopic वर्णेक्षीय mfn. 
2 (an instrument for measuring chromoscopy quiet f. 
fractions of a second) निमेषमान m. chromosome Biol. (inheritance -chroous (an adj. suffix denoting 
thread) पित्र्यसूत्र .. 
___coloured) -रंगिक mfn. chromosphere Astron. वर्णगोल m. chrys-, chryso- हेम chromotrope qui faci m. 
chrysalis Zool. कोशशायी (-इन् ) m. c. 2 R वर्णावर्त २ र m. 
chrysamine Col. Ind. हेमतिक्ती . c. blue वर्णावर्त नील m. 
chrys-ammic, chrys - amminic c. red वर्णावर्त रक्त m. 
Chem. हेम-तिजियिक mfn. chromotropic acid Chem. वर्णावर्तिक chrys-aniline Col. Ind. हेम-नीली . 
अम्ल. 
chrys-anisic Chem. हेम-शतपुष्पिकmfn. chromo-tropism = chromo-tropy chrysanthemin Col. Ind. हेमपुष्पि f. ___Chem. वर्णावर्तना . 
chrysanthemum हेमपुष्प n. chromous Chem. वर्ण्य mfn. 
Chrysanthemum हेमपुष्पति f. (-ति for c. acid वर्ण्य अम्ल n. 
प्रजाति genus) chromoxal green Col. Ind. वर्णतिग्म chrysarobin (chrys- हेम-+ araroba 
हरिm. . 
Goa. powder गुहाक्षोद + -in -इ) chromoxan blue Col. Ind. वर्णजिन्य chrysarobinun (chrysarob.) 
नील m. 
Pharm. हेमगुहि f. c. brilliant violet वर्णजिन्य भासुर chrys-atropic (chrys-+Atropa bella 
नीललोहित m. 
donna) acid=scopoletin Chem. c. brown वर्णजिन्य बभ्रु m. 
हेम-बाहतिक अम्ल c. green वर्णजिन्य हरि m. . chrys-aureine Col. Ind. #-Fafür m. . c. violet वर्णजिन्य नीललोहित m. chrys-azin (chrysammic हेम-तिजियिक+ chromoxanthine=chrome orange alizarin विमंजिष्ठि) Chem. हेम-जिष्ठि f. -chromy -वर्णता . (batho-chromy chrys-azol. Chem. हेम-जिष्ठव m. ___ अधो-वर्णता) 
chrysene हेमेन्य n. -chromy -आलेखना f. (litho-chromy chrysenic acid Chem. हेमेन्यिक अम्ल n. 
पाषाण-आलेखना) 
chryseoline=gold yellow chromyl Chem. वर्णल n. . 
chrysin Chem. हेमि . c. chloride वर्णल नीरेय . 
chryso-, chrys- हेम chronic Med. चिरपाती, चिरकालिक, दीर्घ- chrysobarine=chrysophenine कालानुबन्धी mfn. (ancient word) chryso-beryl Mineral. हेम-वैडूर्य . 
232 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
chryso-gen Chem. 4-5757 m. 
chyliform = chylous = chyloid chrysoidine Chem. हेमाभी . 
___Physiol. पयोलसाभ mfn. chrysoine=gold yellow 
chylify vb. Physiol. 94/TTTT n. chrysoine insol=oil orange chylo-, chyl- TUTTE chrysoline=fast yellow 
chyloid=chyliform chrysolite = olivine, peridot chylology greterferant f. 
Mineral. हरितोपल m. 
chylo-poiesis Physiol. TUTTISITE m. Chrysomyia Zool. (a genus of green chylosus ascites Med. Intet m. 
flies with black stripes on the chylo-thorax Med. 5f-QUIETET . thorax) treifa f. (rife for sofer ("chyle in the thoracic cavity) genus) 
chylous Physiol. I (consisting of c.) -chrysone HT f. 
que ET () mfn. anthra-chrysone faepehr f. 
2 (resembling c.) POTCHTH mfn. Chrysopa Zool. (having golden chyluria Med.CUE M. (from TUTTE) 
coloured eyes) सुवर्णाक्षाति f. (-प्राति chymase=rennin Biochem. वत्सातंचि . for wolfer genus) 
chyme Physiol. 41499 m. chrys-opal Mineral. I = chryso- chymification Physiol. (conversion 
beryl 
of food into chyme) 97487 Rus n. 2 (an opalescent variety of chry- chymosin=rennin apareife f. solite) H1937 m. 
chymosino - gen = rennino - gen chryso-phan Chem. HET m. 
Biochem. ashrifa- m. chryso-phanic Chem. #fara mfn. chymous (of or pertaining to chyme) chryso-phenin hefat f. 
1999tu mfn. chrysophenine Col. Ind. haft f. ciba blue 2 B=brom-indigo Chrysops Zool. 24urfa f. (-yifa for c. blue 2 B, 2 BD=dianthrene 
seifa genus) 
blue 2 B chrysotoluidine Col. Ind. #facritet f. c. bordeaux B=brominate chyl-, chylo- TUTTET 
thioindigo red B chylaceous Physiol. YRITTH, quiet c. green G paste=thioindone 
(-37) mfn. 
green G chyl-aqueous पयोलस-जलीय mfn. c. pink B=thioindigo red B chyle Physiol. qutate m. 
c. red G=thioindigo scarlet G chylemia Tutti-Roperat f. 
c. scarlet=thioindigo scarlet chylifaction=chylification 
2G chylifactive Physiol. Ta mfn. c. violet 3 B = thioindigo chyliferous vessel Physiol. te violet K. 
anferit f. 
cibanone blue G anthrene blue chylification Physiol. पयोलसन 1. 
GC 
233 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
c. violet R=indanthrene bril- Cimex Zool. (the genus containing 
liant violet RR powder 
the bedbug) मत्कुणाति f. (-प्राति for Cicada Zool. शरभाति f. (-आति for प्रजाति genus) 
Stettfer genus) 
Cimicidae Zool, #670 m. cicada a locust Zool, TT m. cimicifuga (Lat. cimex bug + fugare Cicer Bot. चषकति f. (-ति for प्रजाति to drive away) (cimicif.) = acta 
genus) 
eae racemosae radix = black -cida, -cidal, -cide -ET 
snakeroot = black cohosh cider Stilforet f. 
Pharm. ficata m. c. hydrometer frTTarm. Cimicifuga racemosa=bugbane -cidic -enta mfn. 
black cohosh Bot. (supposed to cilia (sg. cilium) Anat. q&# n. 
be distasteful to insects 78) Te ciliary Anat. पाक्ष्म mfn. 
sra m. ciliary artery Anat. af7974-7feut f. cincho- faalit-, faata ciliary body Anat. (bearing the cincho-loipon (cinchonine + Gk. 
ciliary processes वलि) वलिकाय loipon remainder) Chem. वितापी-शेष m. 
m. ciliary ganglion Anat. ETETT STUE M. cincho-loiponic Chem. faarit-zifesi 
(afata is not comprehensive, mfn. because it supplies to the whole cincho-meronic acid = 3, 4-pyri 
eyeball) 
dine-dicarboxylic acid Chem. ciliary movement TEH-Yam. 
factozaufaepi F n. ciliary muscle Anat. f7414-48ft f. cinchona (cinchon.) = cinchonae ciliary nerve Anat, af19114-a f. rubrae cortex = red cinchona ciliary processes Anat. (vascular bark=Jesuits' bark=Peruvian 
folds) aft, af tot f. 
bark Pharm. विताप m. Ciliata Zool. (a subclass or order Cinchona Bot. fancyfer f. (-for for 
of Infusoria having cilia both प्रजाति genus) when young and adult) TEHIT: cinchona bark=Peruvian bark m.pl. 
Jesuit's bark Pharm. fagit9-404 ciliate i n. Zool. (one of the Ciliata) 
TETT m. 
cinchonae rubrae cortex = cin 2 adj. Bot., Zool. (provided with chona cilia) पक्ष्मल mfr. 
Cinchona ledgeriana (contains ciliated पक्ष्मल mfn. 
more sulphate of quinine than c. cell q$77-ETETT f. 
· any other species) presenta faara. it. C. epithelium et fag m. 
m. Ciliophora Zool. TEHETT: m.pl.. cinchon-amine faara-ftet f. 
234 
m. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
Cinchona succirubra Bot.रक्तरस विताप pictures) चल-रूपित्र 1. (short for 
m. 
चलचित्र-रूपित्र) cinchonate Chem. वितापीय 1. 
cinematographer (cameraman) चल cinchonia=cinchonine 
रूपित्रिक 2. cinchonic वितापिक mfn. 
cinematography चलचित्रणा f. cinchonic acid वितापिक अम्ल 1. cinema van चलचित्र-यान n. cinchonicine Chem. वितापिकी . cinene (from cinecole)=dipentene cinchonidia=cinchonidine 
Chem. कृमिवेण्य .. cinchonidine Chem. वितापेयी. cineole Chem. (contained in oleum 
c. hydrochloride faaraat gettie cinae oil of wormwood कृमिp, etc.) 
. 
कृमिद्रुवा. c. sulphate वितापेयी शुल्बीय 1. _cineolic acid Chem. कृमिद्रुविक अम्ल cinchonine Chem. वितापी f. 
_ n. ___c. hydrochloride वितापी उदनीरेय n. cine orange Col. Ind. (for tinting 
c. sulphate वितापी शुल्बीय n. 
cinematograph films) चलचित्र नारंग cinchoninic acid Cbem. वितापियिक m. 
अम्ल . 
c. orange-red (for tinting cine cinchonism Med. अतिवितापता. 
matograph films) चलचित्र नारंग cinchonization वितापायन . 
रक्त m. cinchonize vb. वितापायन (विताप-व्यापन, c. red (for tinting cinematograph 
विताप-साधन) n. 
films) चलचित्र रक्त m. cinchonology वैतापिकी f. 
c. scarlet (for tinting cinemato cincho-phen (phenyl - cinchoninic ___graph films) चलचित्र शोण m. 
acid) Chem. विताप-दर्श m. (दर्शल c. yellow (for tinting cinemato वितापियिक अम्ल) 
graph films) चलचित्र पीत m. cinchotine Chem. वितापकी f. cinereine=neutral grey cincho-toxine (cinchona. + toxine) = cingulum = clitellum Zool. मेखला, 
cinchonicine 
प्रमेखला. cine blue Col. Ind. (for tinting cine- cinnabar हिंगुल . (cinnabat is the 
matograph films) चलचित्र नील m. mineral, vermilion is the pigment . c. green (for tinting cinemato derived therefrom) . 
graph ilms) चलचित्र हरि m. cinnabar green Chem. हिंगुल हरि m. cinema (a. motion picture) चलचित्र . cinnabaric=cinnabarine ima mfm. cinema house चलचित्र-गृह n. 
cinnabar red Col. Ind. हिंगुल रक्त m. cinema theatre चलचित्र-भवन १. 
c. scarlet हिंगुल शोण m. cinematograph I (a motion-picture cinnam-=cinnamo 
projector) चलक्षेपित्र... 
cinnamal (cinnamaldehyde) Chem. 2 (a camera for taking motion दारुसितासु m. 
235 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
cinnam-aldehyde Chem. दारुसिता- cinnamyl = cinnamoyl = styryl 
सुव्युद m. 
Chem. दारुसितल . cinnamate Chem. दारुसितीय n. 
c. alcohol=cinnamic alcohol cinnamein = benzyl cinnamate दारुसितल सुषव m. ___ दारुसितिन m. 
c. chloride दारुसितल नीरेय . cinnamene=styrene Chem. दारुसितेन्य cinnamylidene=cinnamal Chem. 
दारुसितलेयेन्य 1. cinnamenyl=styryl Chem. araferarena cinnoline (cinnamic + quinoline) 
___n. 
___Chem. दारुज्वरवी. cinnamic Chem. दारुसितिक mfn. cinnyl=cinnamyl 
c. acid दारुसितिक अम्ल . ___cipher r=cypher Math. शून्य 1. c. acid dibromide दारूसितिक अम्ल 2 (secret writing) गूढलेख, m. 
द्विदुरेय . 
cipher code गूढलेख-संहिता, गूढलेख-पद्धति f. c. alcohol दारुसितिक सुषव m. circinalis Bot. (curled like a snail) c. aldehyde=cinnam-aldehyde घोंघवलित, घोंघ 
दारसितिक सुव्युदm. 
circinate Bot. अग्रवलित mfn. cinnamo- == cinnam- (cinnamon) circle I Math. वृत्त ।. 
दारुसित 
2 Com. वृत्त, चक्र, मण्डल M. cinnamol=styrene Chem. दारुसितव m. circle, circumference (4 quadrants) Cinnamomum Bot. दारसिताति f. (-ति चक्र ., परिधि m. (४ तुरीय) 
for प्रजाति genus) 
circuit I परिधि m. cinnamon = cinnamomum (cin 2 Elec. (the complete path of an 
nam.) = cinnamomi cortex = electric current) f297 m. _cinnamon bark Pbarm. दारुसिता f. 3 (going round) परीत्या . cinnamon गुडत्वक, दारुसिता f. 
circular adj. वलय-, मंडल-, वर्तुल, वृत्ताकार cinnamon aldehyde Pharm. दारुसिता mfn. - सुब्युद m. 
_circular n. (circular letter) परिपत्र . cinnamon-bark oil=cinnamon oil _circular cone Math. वर्तुल शंकु m. 
दारुसिता-वल्क-तैल .. 
circular cylinder Math. वर्तुल रम्भ m. cinnamon bear Zool. बदर-वर्ण ऋक्ष m. circular defence = defence in cinnamon brown Col. Ind. दारुसिता ___depth=all-round defence Mil. 
बभ्रु, मध्यरक्तपीत m. 
वर्तुल-प्रतिरक्षा f. cinnamonic दारुसितीय mfn. 
circular diagram Statistics वर्तुल चित्र cinnamon-leaf oil दारुसिता-पत्र-तैल 1. cinnamon oil दारुसिता-तैल 1. 
circular fibre वलय तन्तु m. cinnamon water=aquacinnamomi circular function Math. वर्तल श्रितn. 
• क्षरुसिता-वारि, दारुसिता-जल n. 
circular letter परिपत्र . cinnamoyl=cinnamyl 
circular measure Math. वर्तुल माप m. 236 
1. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
. 
circular muscle Zool. वर्तुल-पेशी f. citra-, cis- अवार circular window गवाक्ष m., वर्तुल वातायन' citr-aconate Chem. निम्बु-प्रविषीय . 
citr-aconic (citric + aconitic) = me circulate b. परिवहण ।. 
thyl-maleic Chem. निम्बु-प्रविषिक circulating Com. परिचल mfn. 
mfn. c. assets परिचल-संपत्ति . 
c. acid निम्बुप्रविषिक अम्ल 1. c. capital परिचल-पुंजी . 
c. anhydride निम्बुप्रविषिक अजलेय. circulation (of blood) परिवहण 2., citral (citron+aldehyde)=geranial 
परिवाह m. 
Chem. निम्बुषु m. circumambient परिव्राजी (-इन्) mfn. citr-amide निम्बु-तिक्तेय . circumambulate vb. परिव्रजन n. citrate Chem. निम्बवीय . circumambulation परिवजन 1. citrate vb. निम्बवीयन, निम्बधीय-साधन . circumambulatory परिव्राजी (-इन्) citrated निम्बवीयित mfn. 
mfn. 
citrated caffeine Pharm. (incorrectly circumcentre Math. aretirsen n. 
called caffeine citrate) निम्बवीयित circumcircle Matb. परिवृत्त ।. 
म्लेच्छी circumduction Physiol. परिचालन . citrean=citrine नम्बव mfn. circumference ofera m. 
citrene=dextro-limonene fragran. circum-radius Math. qfeffout f. citreous निम्बुवर्ण mfn. circumscribe Geom. afstaa n. (to citric Chem. fitafeti mfn. (forfat- will 
draw round) 
change to निम्बव- before certain circumscribed Geom. परिलिखित mfn. suffixes to distinguish it from circumscription Math. परिलेखन M. the derivatives of निम्ब) circumstance परिस्थिति f. 
c. acid निम्बविक अम्ल N. circumvallate papillae.Anat. प्राकारां- citrine I निम्बुवर्ण mfn. 
कुर m. 
2=citrean faa mfn. cis- (Lat. 'on this side', opposed to citrine-thubarb (reddish-yellow in __ trans- or ultra- पार-) अवार 
hue, of medium saturation and cistern जलाशय m. (water tank or 
HTTA m. (water tank of medium brilliance) मध्यपीतारक्त m. ___ reservoir) 
citrine ointment Pharm. निम्बु-लेप m. cisterna magna Anat. महाकुण्ड n. citro-, citr- (citric) Chem. farale cis-trans Chem. पारावार mfn. 
(निम्बविक) c. isomerism पारावार-सभाजता. citro-meter निम्बु-मान m. cite, citation प्रोद्धरण 1. (प्रमाणोद्धरण) citron निम्बु, जम्बीर. citizen जानपद, नगरजन, नागर, नागरक m. citronade=lemonade निम्बुपानक . citizenship जानपदता. 
citronella निम्बुकी . citr-, citro- (citric) Chem. निम्बु- citronellal (citronella + aldehyde) 
(निम्बविक) 
निम्बुकीषु m. 237 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
citronella oil निम्बकी-तैल . 
c. affairs नागर कार्य.. citronellicacid Chem. निम्बुकिक अम्ल n. c. disorder (disturbance of citronellol Chem. निम्बुकीव m. 
peace and order within a city) citronellyl Chem. निम्बुकील . 
नगर-शान्तिभंग m. c. acetate निम्बुकील शुक्तीयn. 
c. duty जानपद कर्तव्य.. c. formate निम्बुकील वम्रीय n. 
c. rights जानपद अधिकार m. citron green निम्बु हरि m. 
civil जानपद nfm. citronin=curcumin Chem. निम्बविf. 2 असैनिक mfn. citronine Col. Ind. निम्बवी 
3 नागरिक mfn. citron water निम्बु-जल . 
4 सामाजिक mfn. citron yellow = mimosa, zinc 5 सभ्य mfn. 
chrome निम्बु पीत m. 
c. aircraft जानपद वायुवाहन 1. Citrullus Bot. कालिन्दति (-ति for प्रजाति c. aviation जानपद विमानचालन, जानपद 
genus) 
उड्डयन . C. vulgaris सामान्य कालिन्द m. 
c. contract Law (a contract of Citrus Bot. जम्बीरति f. (-ति for प्रजाति marriage without religious 
genus) 
sanction) विवाह-प्रसंविदा C. acida निम्बु जम्बीर m. 
c. death Law (loss of civil rights citrylidene == citral Chem. निम्बुलेयेन्य and status जानपदत्व-हानि) जानपद 
n. 
• मृत्यु m. city नगर. 
c. defence जानपद-प्रतिरक्षा . city council नगर-परिषद् /.. 
c. disabilities (disqualifications city elder नगर-वृद्ध m. 
created by law) वैध-अयोग्यता f. city father (member of a city coun c. disorder जानपद-अशान्ति . ____cil) नगर पारिषद m. 
c. employment जानपद-सेवायुक्ति . city manager नगर-प्रबन्धक m. 
c. engineering जानपद-अभियन्त्रणा f. civet I (a substance of a strong c. justice व्यवहार न्याय m. 
musky odour, found in true civet c. law व्यवहार-विधि m. (व्यवहार civil cats) बिडाल-कस्तूरी 
suit) 2==civet cat Zool. कस्तूरी-बिडाल m. c. liberty जानपद-स्वतन्त्रता f. civetane Chem. fasteita n. (short for c. members जानपद सदस्य m. 
बिडालकस्तूरीण्य) 
c. procedure code व्यवहार-प्रक्रिया civet cat Zood. कस्तूरी-बिडाल m. . संहिता civetone Chem. (an odourous ketone c. rights Law जानपद अधिकार m. 
• found in civet बिडाल-कस्तूरी) बिडाल c. services जानपद-सेवा f., जानपद शौक्ता . . 
सेवकवर्गm: (civic (pertaining to a citizen) नागरीय, . c. society सभ्य समाज m. 
नागर, जानपद mfn. 
c. suit व्यवहार, व्यवहाराभियोग m. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
c. war प्रजा-युद्ध, गृह-युद्धा . 
claret red रक्तिरा रक्त, न्युद्रक्त m. c. year=legal year= calendar clarified juice Chem. विमलीकृत रस M. ___year वैध वर्ष m. 
clarify, clarification विमलीकरण, स्वच्छन, civilian=civil servant जानपद-सेवक स्पष्टीकरण. 
m. 
Clark cell (e. m. f. I.4322 volts) civilization सभ्यता. 
Elec. प्येकबिन्दुचतुः कोशा, पारदकुप्य-कोशा civilize vb. सभ्यकरण 2. 
f. (the elements are mercury and civilized सभ्य, सभ्यकृत mfn. 
zinc) civilizer सभ्य-कर्ता (-त)m. 
Clark process (for softening water cl. (centi-liter) शि-स्थ. (शति-प्रस्थ) __by adding slaked lime) चूर्ण-विधा f. C1 (chlorine) Chem. नी (नीरजी) -clase Mineral. -दल् Cl. (clostridium) Bast. ग (गदाणु) clash Mil. प्रतिघट्टन . cladode I (phylloclade of one collision संघट्टन . 
internode) पर्णेकपर्व ।. 
clasmatocyte (Gk. klasmatos frag 2 Bot. पर्णकार्यस्तम्भ m. 
ment) (branched cells which claim vb.अध्यर्थन . (अधिकारार्थन to ask detach portions of their pro ___ for as a right) 
_cesses) वण्डिकोशा . claimant अध्यर्थक m. 
clasp=clip claimed अध्यथित mfn. 
class Bot., Zool. aut m. Claisen reaction Chem. अपिसुवि प्रति- class A Rly. वर्ग क m. 
क्रिया . 
class frequency Statistics संभाग-वारंवा clamp (a device that holds together) रता. 
संधर m. 
classical (established) प्रतिष्ठित mfn. double jawed c. द्विजम्भ संधर m. classical economics प्रतिष्ठित अर्थशास्त्र inclinable c. प्रवण्य संधर m. 
n. malleable iron condenser c. classical music शास्त्रीय संगीत, प्रतिष्ठित 
कुट्टयायस-संघनक-संधर m. 
संगीत .. nitrometer c. भूयमान-संधर m. classical physics प्रतिष्ठित-भौतिकी . pressed steel condenser c. classification वर्गीकरण n. 
पीडित-वज्रायस-संघनक-संधर m. classification according to attri rubber tubingc. घृषि-नाल-संधर m. butes Statistics गुणानुसार वर्गीकरण. trigrip c. त्रिग्रम संधर m. 
classification according to class watch glass c. घटी-काच-संधर m. intervals Statistics संभागान्तर अनुसार clan गोत्र. 
वर्गीकरण : clarain (Lat. clarus bright) Geol. #TATE classification according to dicho 
tomy Statistics द्वंद्वभाजन वर्गीकरण 1. claret 1 (a red wine) tranet f. classification of data Statistics सामग्री 
2=claret red न्युद्रक्त m. 
वर्गीकरण 239 
m.﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
classified वर्गीकृत mfn. 
clay (yellowish red-yellow in hue, classify, classifying वर्गीकरण 2. 
of medium saturation and medi class interval Statistics संभाग-अन्तर 7. um brilliance) मध्यरक्तातिपीत m. class limits Statistics संभाग-सीमा / Clayton cloth red=cloth red class magnitude Statistics संभाग C. cloth scarlet=thiazine red 
विस्तार m. 
GN class war वर्ग-युद्ध. 
C. cotton brown=terracotta F -clastic Biochem. -दलिक 
C. yellow=cotton yellow Claude process Chem. (for synthesis clay triangle मृत्-त्रिकोण ?. 
of ammonia, at 900 atmospheres) clay trough fit-tuit f. नवशत-विधा . 
clayware मृत्तिका-भाण्ड १. Claude's method Chem. वा-तरलन-रीति clean acceptance-general accep 
f. (liquefaction of air') 
tance Finance सामान्य-स्वीकृति f. Claus formula (of benzene) Chem. clean bill Finance सामान्य विपत्रा . 
(having three diagonals) विकर्णत्रय clean draft Com. सामान्य विकर्ष m. सूत्र 
cleaner शोधक m. Claus kiln Chem. अपिगन्धाप आपाक cleaner, rubber, test tube Chem. 
m. 
परीक्षण नाल घृषि शोधक m. Claus reaction Chem. अपिगन्धाप cleaning मार्जन, शोधन, धावन n. 
प्रतिक्रिया . 
cleaning apparatus, mercury clavate papillae=fungiform pa- Chem. पारद-शोधन साधित्र . ___pillae Anat. छत्रांकुर m. 
cleanse vb. मार्जन . Claviceps Bot. (a. genus of sac clear स्पष्ट, स्वच्छ, विमल mfa. 
fungi) गदाशिरति f. (-ति for प्रजाति clear an account लेखा-शोधन ?. 
genus) 
clearance Macb. अवकाश m. C. paspali उपकंगु गदाशिर m. 
clearance fit Mach. अवकाशान्वायुक्ति f. C. purpurea (the ergot of rye) clearing Com. निष्कासन . 
नीवारिका गदाशिर m. 
c. charges निष्कासन-व्यय m. clavicle=collar-bone अक्षक m. (from c. house समाशोधन-गृह . (to pay 
after mutual adjustment समा clavicular Anat. weiter mfn. 
योज्य शोधन, abbreviated to claviculate Zool. (having clavicles) समाशोधन) 
अक्षकी (-इन्) mfn. 
clearly स्पष्टतया, स्पष्ट claviculo-(denotes 'clayicular and') 'clear' signal Ry. निर्बाध-संज्ञप्ति. 
आक्षक 
cleavage Biol., Embryol. भाजन n. claw नखर m. 
cleft Bot. दीर्ण mfn. claw coupling Macb. नखर-मिथुनक n. cleistogamous Bot. संवृतपुष्प ('closed clay मृत्तिका, मृत् . 
flowers'), स्वयंपरागी (-इन्) mfn. 240 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
cleistogamy Bc संवृतपुष्पत्व 1., स्वयंपरा- di-clinic द्वि-प्रवणिक mfn. 
गिता. 
clinical action (Hindi रोगी पर प्रभाव) cleistogene Bot. I (a plant producing रूणे-प्रभाव m. 
cleistogamous flowers) संवृतपुष्पी, clinical thermometer Med. रुग्ण स्वयंपरागी (-इन ) m. 
तापमान m. 2 (a. cleistogamous flower) स्वयंपरागि clino-chlore Mineral. भ्रासैकिज m. पुष्प 
(-इज for खनिज mineral) clematine=brilliant heliotrope 2 clinoclasite=aphanese Mineral. far 
R conc. 
___ जारेयिज m. (-इज for खनिज mineral) Clematis Bot. लघुकर्णीति/- (-ति for प्रजाति clinodome Cryst. [parallel to the 
genus) 
____ inclined (clino) axis] प्रवणछाद m. C. triloba सामान्य लघुकर्णी /. 
clinometer Geol., Sury. प्रावण्यमान m. . clerical error लिपिक-विभ्रम m. 
clinostat प्रावण्ययन्त्र . Clerici solution Chem. (thallium clip स्वज m. 
formate सिक्ष्यातु वम्रीय and thallium pocket c. गोह-स्वज m. 
malonate उत्कोलायीय) सिग्वो-लयन n. clip, basin or crucible Chem. पात्री, "clerk लिपिक m. 
__ मूषा-स्वज m. clerk of the house (assembly) सभा- clipping Econ. (to cut off the edges 
लिपिक m. 
of coins) आकर्तन n. Cleve's acid Chem. (used as an clippings wa f. 
_intermediate in making azo dyes) clippings, paper पत्र-क्लप्ति f. . अप्यजान्तःस्थ अम्ल . 
clip, rubber tubing Chem. घृषिनाल Cleve'se-acid अप्यजान्तस्थ ऋ-अम्ल .. स्वज m. Clichy white (a variety of white clip, watch glass Cbem. घटीकाच-स्वज 
lead) अपिश्वेत सीस 1. climate जलवायु, वायुजलादि m. 
clitellum=cingulum Zool. प्रमेखला. climatic conditions वायुजलादि-परिस्थिति Clitoria Bot. अपराजिताति (-ति for प्रजाति 
genus) climatic factors वायुजलादि-कारक m. 
C. ternatia सामान्य अपराजिता climber r (feet of parrot) आरोही (पाद) clitoris Anat. भगशेफ (a part of the 
m. 
vulva TT, homologous to the 2 Bot. (a climbing plant) प्रतानी penis शेफ in the male), भगांकुरm. (-इन् ) m. (ancient word) 
(ancient word) climbers प्रतान-m. 
cloaca Zool. उच्चार-मार्ग m. . climbing plants Bot. प्रतानी पादप m. cloacal aperture Zool. उच्चार-द्वार. clinging roots Bot. वलक मूल 1. (वलक cloak कंचुक m. 
surrounding) 
cloak-room Rly: सम्भार-कोष्ठ m. -clinic-प्रवणिक 
clock घटक m., घटी. 
m. 
241 
16 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
clock glass घटक-काच m. 
closing Com. संवरण clockwise घटीवत्, दक्षिणावर्त 
c. balance संवरण-अन्तर . clog In. (a block of wood, a weight c. entry संवरण-प्रविष्टि f. 
.... to hinder motion) उपारोध m. c. stock संवरण-स्कन्ध m. 20b. उपारोधन . 
___closing side (of a polygon) संवारी Clonorchis (Gk. klon a branch + भज m. 
orchis a testicle, a genus having Clostridium (Cl.) Bact. TGTU (ST.) branching testes) शाखिवृषणाति f. Cl. aerofetidum पूतिगन्धि ग. (-पाति for प्रजाति genus) 
Cl.aerogenes capsulatum=Cl. C. endemicus, c. sinensis (in 
perfringens festing the liver of man) = 
Cl. bifermentans fafeica 1: Distoma sinensis, D. japoni Cl. botulinum कृप्यन्त्र ग. cum, Apisthorchis sinensis 
Cl. butyricum (the cultures याकृत शाखिवृषण m. 
smell strongly of butyric acid) close fricatie 
=Bacillus actinobacter, B. close vb. संवरण . 
amylobacter, B. butyricus, close an account लेखा-संवरण 1. 
mobile buttersauer bacillus, close cooperation Mil. समीप-सहकारिता 
Cl. pasteurianum घृतिकाम्ल ग. 
Cl. capitovalis अण्डशीर्ष ग. closed संवृत mfn. 
Cl. chauvoei (causes sympto closed bundle Bot. अनेधावी पूल m. 
matic anthrax in cattle) कृष्णजंघा closed chain संवत श्रृंखल m. 
ग. closed chamber संवृत वेश्म ?. 
Cl. cochlearium = closed circuit Elec., Magnetism संवृत 
Bacillus 
__cochlearius शंख ग.. परिपथ m. closed community Bot. संवृत समुदाय 
Cl. egens (possibly the cause 
of a form of gas gangrene) 
•m. closed iron furnace Chem. संवृत आयस 
किंवातिकोथ ग. 
Cl. hemolyticum (seems to be भ्राष्ट्र, संवृत अयोभ्राष्ट्र. closed spaces संवृत अवकाश m. 
the cause of bacillary hemo closely approximate निकट उपसन्न mfn. globinuria of cattle) गोकालमेह ग. closely fitting that which fits 
Cl. histolyticum (in conjunc ___closely) गाढ अन्वायोजी (-इन्) mfn. 
tion with other organisms it close march Drill संहत-प्रयाणम् 
___digests living tissues) ऊत्यंशक ग. close ranks march Drill संहत-प्रयाणम् 
Cl. lentoputrescens पूयक ग. closet I (a room) शौचागार n. 
Cl. lucilliae falfruta . .2 (a receptacle) शौचकुण्ड १. 
Cl. multifermentans बहकिण्व ग. close to समीप .. . 
Cl. novyi प्रयोगपशु ग. 
242 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
Cl. oedematis, Cl. oedematiens c. fast orange वस्त्र स्थिर नारंग m. 
शोफ ग. 
c. fast red वस्त्र स्थिर रक्त m. Cl. oedematis maligni चण्डशोफ c. fast violet वस्त्र स्थिर नीललोहित . 
ग. 
c. fast yellow वस्त्र स्थिर पीत m. Cl. paludis अविज्वर ग. 
c. orange वस्त्र नारंग m. Cl. pasteurianum. See Cl. buty c. red वस्त्र रक्त m. 
ricum 
c. scarlet वस्त्र शोण m. Cl. perfringens वातिजन प्रावर ग. c. yellow वस्त्र पीत m. Cl. putrificum. See Cl. lento- clothes louse = Pediculus vesti 
putrescens 
menti Zool. वस्त्र-यूका [. Cl. "Reading bacillus" (wounds cloth merchant वस्त्र-वणिक् m. 
infected with this organism cloth mill 457-fit fort f. heal rapidly) व्रणरोपण ग. 
clotted आतंचित mfn. Cl. sphenoides स्फानाभ ग, clotting of blood रुधिरातंचन . Cl. sporogenes बीजकर ग. cloud अभ्र, मेघm. Cl. tertium (the third most fre- cloud chamber Phys. अभ्र-वेश्म ॥. 
quently found anaerobe in war cloud point Anal. Chem. (the tem wounds) तृतीयक ग. 
perature at which an oil begins Cl. tetani (produces a powerful to cloud) मेघन-ताप m. 
toxin which causes tetanus) cloudy 1 (cloudlike) #9TH mfn. धनुस्तम्भ ग. 
___ 2 मेघायमान mfn. Cl. tetanomorphum, Cl. tetan- cloudy amber=golden green प्रपीत, 
oides (greatly resembles Cl. स्वर्ण-हरि m. tetani, but does not form cloudy liquid मेघ-तरल, मेधित तरल, tetanus toxin) धनुस्तम्भरूप ग. 
मेघायित तरल M. (मघयति to make Cl. welchii = Cl. perfringens cloudy; मेघायते to become cloudy, closure संवरण 1., संवरणा. 
to resemble clouds) closure by compartment wifi clove=caryophyllum (caryoph.) 
द्वारा संवरण, समयसीमन द्वारा संवरण 1. _Pharm. लवंग . clot पातञ्च m. 
clovene (obtained from caryophyl cloth वस्त्र .. 
____ lene लवंगेन्य) लावंगेन्य n. cloth, asbestos Chem. अदह-वस्त्र n. clove oil लवंग-तैल n. cloth blue Col. Ind. वस्त्र नील n. club गोष्ठी f., गोष्ठीगृह n. . c. brown वस्त्र बभ्रु m. 
clubmoss Bot. मुद्गर-हरिता'f. . c. fast black वस्त्र स्थिर काल m. clubmosses=Lycopodiales 
c. fast blue वस्त्र स्थिर नील m. clump पुञ्जक, पुंज, गुच्छ, पिण्ड m. c. fast brown वस्त्र स्थिर बभ्रु m. clump together संपुंजन 1. (to mass c. fast green वस्त्र स्थिर हरि m. ____ together) 
243 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
- 
m. 
cluster I (of trees) गुल्म m. 
coagulative आतंची (-इन्) mfn. 2 (of flowers) गुच्छ, स्तबक m. coagulator आतंचक m. clutch Automobile ग्राभ m. 
coagulin=precipitin Biochem. Acifer c. housing (housing = that 
which holds in place) TTH-FYTT coagulo-meter पातंच-मान m. 
coagulum (a coagulated mass) आतं c. in vb. निग्राभण ?. 
चित पिण्ड m. c. out vb. उद्ग्राभण n. 
coal अंगार m. c. pedal ग्राभ-पादक M. 
c. ash estimation basin अंगार c. plate ग्राभ-पट्टm. 
भस्म-आगणन-पात्री . clypeus Zool. (bears the labrum) c. blende अंगार-अन्धन m. 
उदोष्ठधर m. 
c. brass अंगार-पित्तल n. cm. (centi-meter) शि. मा. (शति-मान) c. bunker Rly. अंगार-कोष्ठ m. 
C. N. cycle प्र भू. चक्र n. 
c. field अंगार-क्षेत्र n. cnida = nematocyst Zool. दंशांग n. c. gas अंगार-वाति m. 
(stinging organs) 
c. grinding mill अंगार-पेषणीf. cnido-blast Zool. (develops nemato c. industry अंगारोद्योग m. 
cysts) दंशघट m. 
c. mine अंगार-खनि m. cnidocil Zool. देशोद्गामी (-इन् ) m. (it. c. office Ry. अंगार-कार्यालय m.. 
causes the sting at to project; c. oil अंगार तैल. उद्गामयति causes to come out) 
c.-pit Chem. अंगार-गर्त m. Co (cobalt) Chem. के (केत्वातु) 
c. tar=pix carbonis (pix car Co. (company) Com. प्रम. (प्रमण्डल) ___bon.) Pharm. अंगार-राल m. Co. (compound) Pharm. सं. (संयोग) C.-tar crude अंगार-राल आम m. co- सं-, सह 
coalesce I (to grow together) संरोहण coach Ry. पथिकयान 1. 
m. coach-passenger car Rly. स्यन्दन 1 2 एकीभवन ?. coach siding R/y. स्यन्दन-पावक m. coalification Geol. अंगारण n. coagulability आतंच्यता. 
coalify vb. अंगारण 1. coagulable आराच्य mfn. 
coarctate Biol. I (pressed together, coagulant आतंचक m. 
closely connected) समापीडित mfn. coagulase Biochem. आतंचेद m. 
2. Zool. (having the abdomen coagulate vb. आतंचन 1. 
separated from the thorax by coagulated आतंचित mfn. 
a constriction only) प्रतनुमध्य mfn. coagulated mass आतंचित पिण्ड m. 
coarctate pupa (shrunken pupa; the coagulation आतंचन . 
larva shrinks, but remains sur coagulation (clotting of blood) rounded by its old wrinkled skin) 
• आतंचन । 
Zool. शुष्ककोशित m. 244 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
coarse EST, FETET mfn. 
c. adjustment स्थूल व्यवस्थापन 1. c. food रुक्ष अन्न n. 
c. powder स्थूल क्षोद m. coast r (seashore) वेला f., समुद्रतट m. 
2 (seaboard, sea margin) वेलाप्रान्त 
m. 
3 (land immediately abutting the 
sea) वेलाभूमि f. coastal region=littoral region 
वेलाभ . coastal trade समुद्रतटीय व्यापार m. coat vb. लेपन, रोपण, आवरण 1. coat (a metal) vh. रोपण .. coat Ophthalmol. पटल १. coated रोपित, आवृत mfn. coating रोपण . coaxal=coaxial Math. (having the ___same radical axis) समाक्ष mfn. 
coaxal (coaxial) system Math. 
समाक्ष-संहति . coaxial=coaxal cobalt Chem. केत्वातु M. 
c. acetate केत्वातु शुक्तीय 1. c.-ammine केत्वातु-तिजी. c.-ammine salts केत्वातु-तिजी लवण 
. c. ammonium chloride eficare 
तिक्तातु नीरेय . c. ammonium phosphate केत्वातु 
तिक्तातु भास्वीय . c. ammonium sulphate केत्वातु 
तिक्तातु शुल्बीय. c. bloom=erythrite Mineral. 
केत्वातु कुसुम . c. blue Col. Ind. केत्वातु नील, उन्नीला 
हरि m. c. borate केत्वातु टांकीय n. 
c. bromide केत्वातु दुरेय . c. bronze केत्वातु कांस्य 1. c. carbonate केत्वातु प्रांगारीय . c. chloride केत्वातु नीरेय 1. c. chromate केत्वातु वर्णीय . c. crust (earthy arsenate of ___cobalt) केत्वातु पर्पटी f. 
c. cyanide केत्वातु श्यामेय 1. c. formate केत्वातु वम्रीय n. c. glance = cobaltite Mineral. __ केल्वातु रुचा . 
c. glass Col. Ind. केत्वातु काच m. c.green Col. Ind. केत्वातु हरि, 
मध्यपीतहरि m. c. hydroxide केत्वातु उदजारेय . c. iodide केत्वातु जम्बेय. c. lactate केत्वातु दुग्धीय n. c. mercuri-thio-cyanate केत्वातु 
पारदि-गन्ध-श्यामीयn. c.-molybdate केत्वातु-संवर्णीय n. c. nitrate केत्वातु भूयीय .. c. ocher = erythrite Mineral. ___ केत्वातु गैरिक . 
c. oxalate केत्वातु तिग्मीय ". c. oxide (black, grey) केत्वातु जारेय ___n. (काल, धूसर) 
c. phosphate केत्वातु भास्वीय . c. potassium sulphate केत्वातु 
दहातु शुल्बीय. c. pyrites == linnaeite Mineral. 
केत्वातु माक्षीक n. c. red केत्वातु रक्त, उद्रक्तानील m. c. silicate केत्वातु सैकतीय. c. sulphate केत्वातु शुल्बीय 1. c. sulphide केत्वातु शुल्बेय n. c. thio-cyanate केत्वातु गन्ध-श्यामीय 1. c. tungstate केत्वातु चंडीय n. c. ultramarine=c. blue 
245 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m 
c. violet केत्वातु नीललोहित, मध्यनीलरक्त bacteria) गोलाणु-कुल n. 
cocceine 3B, 3BN=carmoisine c. vitriol=c. sulphate 
cocceine 7B=erythrine 7B c. yellow = aureolin Col. Ind. coccerin (Gk. kokkos kermes+ keros 
केत्वातु पीत, सूत्पीतारक्त m. 
wax+ - in, a wax found in co cobalti- (cobaltic)Chem. केत्वि-(केत्विक) chineal) Chem. कृमि-सिक्थि. cobaltic Chem. केत्विक mfn. 
cocci Bact. गोलाणव: m.pl. (from गोलाणु) cobalti-cyanicChem.केत्वि-श्यामिक mfn. Coccidia=Coccidiidea Zool. बदराणु cobalti-cyanide केत्वि-श्यामेय 7. 
गण M. (गण order) cobalti-ferous केत्वातु-भर mfn. 
Coccidioides Biol. अपिबदरति f. cobaltine=cobaltite 
(-ति for प्रजाति genus) cobalti-nitrite केत्वि-भूयित M. 
coccidium Zool. (one of the Cocci cobaltite Mineral. (sulpharsenide of dia) बदराणु m. 
cobalt) केतुशुल्बनेपिज m. (-इज for Coccidium बदराति f. (-प्राति for प्रजाति खनिज mineral) 
genus) cobalto- (cobaltous) Chem. केत्य coccine इन्द्रगोपी . ____c.-cyanic केत्य-श्यामिक mfn. 
coccinella=cochineal ' c.-cyanide केत्य-श्यामेय n. 
coccinic acid Chem. इन्द्रगोपिक अम्ल c.-thio-cyanate केत्य-गंध-श्यामीय n. coccionella = cochineal insect cobaltous Chem. केत्य mfn. 
इन्द्रगोप m. c. chloride केत्य नीरेय . 
Cocculus Bot. गुडूचीति f. (-ति for C. sulphate et Trata n. 
प्रजाति genus) cobra कृष्णसर्प, फणी (-इन् ) m. . 
C. cordifolius FIFTH LEFT f. cobra's saffron Bot. नागकेसर n. (Eng. coccus I (cochineal) इन्द्रगोप m. . 'word is translated from Sanskrit) 2 Bact. (a spherical cell) TTETTE m., cobweb सन्तानिका f., लता-जाल n. 
गोल-कोशा. coca (its leaves contain cocaine 3 Bot. (fruit) (a dehiscent meri 
प्राचेतनी) अचेतन m. 
carp) स्फोटिवेश्म ?. cocaine Chem. (it acts as a local coccus cacti=cochineal Pharm. Srs . . anesthetic) प्राचेतनी f. 
गोपm. c. family = Erythroxylaceae coccyg- = coccygo 
प्राचेतनी-कुल 1. 
coccygeal Anat. (of or pertaining to c. hydrochloride प्राचेतनी उदनीरेय n. the coccyx) गुदास्थिक mfn. cocainize vb. प्राचेतनन १. 
coccygeal gland Zool. Taufer m. (to anesthetize with cocaine, to coccygeal nerve Zool. गुदास्थि-चेता f. .. treat with cocaine) प्राचेतनी-साधन n. coccygeo- (from coccygeal) गुदास्थि coca leaves अचेतन-पत्र १, 
coccyges pl. of coccyx . Coccaceae Bact. (a family of spherical coccygo-, coccyg- Med. गुदास्थि 
246 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
coccyx Anat. गुदास्थि .. coceine Col. Ind. Frantat f. cochenille=cochineal cochineal=coccus cacti=coccus 
(cocc.) Pharm. इन्द्रगोप m. cochineal fig=nopal इन्द्रगोपद्रु m. (a 
cactus cultivated as food for इन्द्र- 
गोप; द्रु plant) cochineal insect=coccionella cochineal red Col. Ind. इन्द्रगोप रक्त m. 
c. scarlet इन्द्रगोप शोण m. 
c. substitute इन्द्रगोप आदेश m. cochlea (of the ear) Anat. कम्बु, शंख 
m. 
cochlear joint=spiral joint Anat. 
शंख-सन्धि m. cock शिखी (-इन्), कुक्कुट m. cockgas शिखिवाति m. cockle Zool. हृदयशुक्ति f. (heart-like 
shape) cockroach Zool. तैलचोर m. cocliaco-mesenteric (artery) देह 
गुहान्त्रयुज m. cocoanut नारिकेल m.n. cocoa powder = brown powder coconut नारिकेल m.n. coconut hair. oil नारिकेल-केश-तला . coconut shell charcoal करकांगार m. Cocos Bot. नारिकेलति . (-ति for प्रजाति 
genus) 
C. nucifera सामान्य नारिकेल m. cod (Gadus morthua) स्नेहमीन m. codamine (codeine + amine) Chem. 
मीलतिक्ती . code संहिता . . . codeia=codeine codeinae phosphas codeine 
. phosphate: ... 
codeine (Gk. kodeia poppy head) 
Chem. (associated in opium with morphine plat and similar to the latter, but feebler, in action)= 
codeia मीली . codeine phosphate = codeinae 
phosphas (codein. phosph.) 
Pbarm. मीली भास्वीय n. code of criminal procedure दण्ड 
प्रक्रिया संहिता codex Pharm. (a collection of me 
dical formulas) Ffeat f. -codide -मीलेय. 
di-codide द्वि-मीलेय. codified संहिताबद्ध, संहिताकृत Mfn. codifier संहिता-बन्धक, संहिताकारm. codify vb. संहिता-बन्धन, संहिता-करण 1. cod liver oil Pharm. स्नेहमीन-यकृत्-तैल n. coefficient=multiplier Math. गुणक 
m. c. of association सम्बन्ध-गुणक m. c. of concurrent deviation संगामि 
विचलन-गुणक m. c. of contingency संभावना-गुणक m. c. of correlation सहसम्बन्ध-गुणक m. c. of deviation विचलन-गुणक m. 
c. of dispersion अपकिरण-गुणक m. . c. of distribution वंटन-गुणक m. 
c. of elasticity Phys. प्रत्यास्थता-गुणक 
c. of friction Mech. संघर्ष-गुणक m. c..of mean deviation मध्यक 
विचलन-गुणक m. c. of quartile deviation चतुर्थक 
.विचलन-गुणक m. . .c. of regression प्रतीपगमन-गुणक m, 
c. of skewness विषमता-गुणक m. c. of standard deviation प्रमाप 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
विचलन-गणक m. 
coercibility=coercibleness संपीड्यता c. of variation Statistics विचरण 
गुणक m. 
coercible I विधियम्य, बलप्रयोज्य mfn. c. of viscosity Phys.ालगत्व-गुणक m. 2==compressible (as a liquid) -coele Zool. --गुहा . 
संपीड्य mfn. . hoemeo-coele शोण-गुहा. 
coercion I विधियमन, प्राधिकारयमन । Coelenterata Zool. (corals, etc.) 2 बलप्रवर्तन 1., बलात्कार m. 
प्रवालादयः, आन्तरगुहिनः m. pl. (sg. 3 बलप्रयोग m. 
आन्तरगुही) 
coercive I विधियामी, प्राधिकारयामी (-इन) coelenteron Zool. (internal cavity) mfn. . आन्तरगुहा. 
2 बलप्रवर्ती, बलात्कारी (-इन्) mfn. coelia Anat. प्रगुहा. 
3 बलप्रयोजी (-इन्) mfn. cpeliac (pertaining to the cavity of 4 परिपीडक mfn. ___ the abdomen) उदरगुहीय mfn. coercive force Magnetism प्रसाहि बल n. coeliaco-mesenteric (artery) देहगुहा- coerulein Col. Ind. आकाशहरितिन m. 
न्त्रयुज m. 
coeruleum=sky blue coeliac plexus Anat. देहगुहा-प्रतान m. coerulignol=cerulignol coelico-mesenteric Zool. 3927Feito coerulignone=cerulignone : min. 
coeruline Col. Ind. आकाशहरिती . coeline=coelestin blue-sky blue coexisting question सहवर्ती प्रश्न m. coelio-, coeli-, coli- 36 
cofactor Math. सहखण्ड m. coelome Zool., Anat. (body coe- co-ferment Biochem. सह-किण्व m. 
__lome) देह-गुहा . 
co-fermentation सह-किण्वन 1. coelomic epithelium देहगुहीय अधिच्छद Coffea Bot. म्लेच्छति . (-ति for प्रजाति 
m. 
genus) coelomoduct Zool. देहगुहा-प्रणाली 
C. arabica सामान्य म्लेच्छफल M. coelomostome Zool. देहगुहा-मुख .. coffee म्लेच्छफल . coenocyte Biol. (multinucleate) coffee-brown adj. म्लेच्छफल-बभ्रु mfn. 
बहुन्यष्टिक m. 
CO, flask, schola Chem. 317 *TE coenogamete Bot. (multinucleate पलिघm. ____gamete) बहुन्यष्टिजन्यु m. 
cog Automobile दन्त m. co-enzyme Biochem. सह-विकर m. cognition संज्ञान . coerce vb. I (to constrain or res- cognitive संज्ञानी (-इन्) mfn. 
train by law or authority)विधियमन, cognizability संज्ञेयता f. प्राधिकारयमन . 
cognizable संज्ञेय.mfn. 2 (to compel to any action) बल- cognizable offence संज्ञेय अपराध m. . प्रवर्तन, बलात्कारण 1. (from कारयति) cognizance संज्ञान 1. 
(to use force) वल-प्रयोजन 1. cognizant-cognizer संज्ञाता (-त) m. 
248. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
- 
cognize vb. संज्ञान . 
colchicine, colchicia Chem. हिरण्य cogwheels Automobile (a wheel with तुत्थी f. 
___cogs or teeth) दन्त-चक्र . 
colchicine salicylate Chem. fe muret cohere Phys. संसंजन n. 
नम्रलीय. coherence Phys. संसक्ति f., संसंजन n. colchici semen=colchicum seed coherence समनुगति f. 
Colchicum Bot. हिरण्यतुत्थति f. (-ति for coherent समनुगत (ancient word) mfn. प्रजाति genus) coherent Phys. संसक्त mfn. 
C. luteum सामान्य हिरण्यतुत्थ m. cohesion संलाग m. 
colchicum autumnale = meadow cohesive संलागी (-इन्) mfn. 
saffron = autumn crocus शरत् Cohnheim's areas Anat. असित क्षेत्रा . 
कुंकुम = क्षेत्र केसर . cohobation Chem. (repeated distil c. seed=colchici semen Pharm. - lation......) पुनःपुनरासवन . 
हिरण्यतुत्थ-बीजn. cohort प्रसमूह m. (Bot. गोत्र; Zool. गण) c. wine=vinum colchici (vin. coil Elec. कुण्डल n. 
___colch.) Pharm. हिरण्यतुत्थ-द्राक्षिरा. coil vb. कुण्डलन n. 
Colcothar Chem. (an oxide of iron coiled कुण्डलित mfn.. 
left as a residue....) अयोजारेयक . coin टंक m., टंकमुद्रा . 
cold I adj. शीत mfn. coin vb. (act of coining, minting) 2 n. Med. sfarcuri m. (catarrh; from 
टंकन . 
सुश्रुत, Marathi पडसें) coinage I (coins collectively) संटंक, cold black Col. Ind. शीत काल m. 
टंकवर्ग m. 
cold-blooded (animals) शीतास्र, शीत 2 (coin) टंक n. 
__रुधिर mfn. 3 (act of coining) टंकन 1. 
cold chisel शीत टंक m. coincide vb. संपतन ।. 
cold point शीतांक m. coincidence संपात m. 
cold process Soap Mfg. शीत-विधा f. coincident संपाती (-इन्) mfm. 
cold storage शीत-संग्रहण .. coin money टंक-मुद्रा 
cold test शीत-परीक्षा. coitus मैथुन . 
cold water शीत जल n. coke न्यंगार m. 
cold - water glue = casein glue c. black Col. Ind. न्यंगार काल m. ___ शीताम्बु श्लेष m. . c. dust=powdered coke न्यंगार- -cole=-colous __ धूलि . 
colemanite (a. hydrous calcium bo c. iron न्यंगार-अयस . 
rate) चूर्णटांकीयिज m. (-इज for खनिज c. oven न्यंगार-कन्दु m. 
mineral) c. plate=coke tin न्यंगार-पट्ट m. Coleo-ptera (Gk. koleos sheath+ col. (colloid) Pharm. श्लेष- (श्लेषाभ) pteron wing) Zool. (the anterior colchiceine हिरण्यतुत्थिन m. . 
wings serve as covering for the - 249﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
posterior pair) कंचुक-पक्षा: m.pl. collective security सामूहिक-निश्शंकता f. coleoptile Bot. भ्रूणाग्रचोल m. 
collectivism Ecom. समूह-वाद m. coleorhiza Bot. भ्रूणमूलचोल m. collectivist Econ. समूहवादी (-इन्) m. Coleus Bot. अश्मान्तकति f. (-ति for प्रजाति collectivistic Econ. समुहवादीय mfn. 
genus) 
collectivization समूहन n. C. aromaticus सामान्य अश्मान्तक m. college महाविद्यालय, विद्यालय m. colic-root=star grass=black-root collenchyma Bot. (a tissue compo 
=blazing star=unicorn root sed of cells, with the walls thick शूल-शिफा. 
___ened at the angles) स्थूल-कोण m. colitis Med. स्थूलान्त्रकोप, मलाशयकोप m. colleterial glands=colleterium coll-, collo- Chem. श्लेष 
colleterium Zool. (a gland which -coll (Gk. kolla glue) Chem., Med. secretes a cement by which the 
-श्लेष m. 
eggs are glued together) श्लेष-अन्थि collaborating cells Zool. TEATRE-ATETT m. 
collide vb. संघट्टन n. colla-gen Biochem. श्लेष-जन m. collidine Chem. Theft f. collapse (fall together abruptly) colliery अंगार-खनि f. 
समवसदन 1., समवसाद m. 
collimate vb. Phys. (to render paral collapsed समवसन्न mfn. 
lel) समान्तरण . collar (for shafting) अवेय n. 
collimator Optics समान्तरित्रn. collarbone=clavicle अक्षक .. 
collin Chem. श्लेषि. collared cell=choanocyte 
collinear संरेख mfn. (lying in the collateral सामपाश्विक mfn. 
___same सं straight line रेखा) _c. bundle Bot. एकपार्श्वस्थ पूल m. collinearity संरेखता . 
c. security सामपाश्विक-प्रतिभूति f.. collinsonia (collinson.)=stone root collect ub. संग्रहण . . 
=knob root (the thizome occurs collected संग्रहीत mfn. 
in very hard pieces) Pharm. collecting संग्रहण ॥. 
अश्ममूल n. collecting bank संग्राही अधिकोष m. collision संघट्टन n. collection समुच्चय, संग्रह m., संग्रहण . collision Mil. संघटन .. collection charges संग्रहण-व्यय, संग्रहण clash प्रतिघट्टन . 
शुल्क m. 
collo-, coll- श्लेष collection of data सामग्री-संग्रहण ., -संग्रह collodio- (collodion) श्लेषेव ' m. 
collodio-chloride Photog. श्लेषेव-नीरेय collection of statistics समंक-संग्रहण . collective Econ. सामूहिक mfn. (charac- collodion (Gk. kolla glue + eidos .. teristic of a group), समूह्य-(collect form) Chem. श्लेषेव m. 11, ing together) 
c. balloon श्लेषेव-वागोल m. 250 
. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
C. cotton=pyroxylin pa 99-17 n. colocynth=colocynthis=colocyn c. flexible श्लेषेव-आनम्य m. 
thidis pulpa=colocynth pulp collodionization श्लेषेवन 1. 
=bitter apple Pharm. $75 arauit f. collodionize vb. (to treat with col- colocynthin Chem. [the active prin 
lodion) 590197 n. (99-HTTTT) ciple of colocynth (Citrullus co collodion process Photog. Moa-faatf. locynthis, bitter apple, bitter 
wet-plate process ati-gg-faut f. cucumber, bitter gourd) 554Teuit] collodio-type Photog. (a picture ob- les arafor f. 
tained by the collodion process) colocynthis=colocynth 
9a-fa7 n. 
colocynthitin इन्द्रवारुणिति f. (-ति for collodium=collodion 
प्रजाति genus) collogen (produces gelatin on boil- colocynth pulp=colocynth 
ing) fafara m. 
Cologne earth, Cologne umber= colloid श्लेषाभ m. 
cassel brown -colloid -श्लेषाभ 
Cologne, eau de (composed of colloidal श्लेषाभीय mfn. 
alcoholand certain aromatic oils) colloidal fuel auta Spa n. 
are for at n. (ar perfume-t - colloidal gold test=Lange's test alcohol) 
Med. 
S Faut-patent f. Cologne yellow=chrome yellow colloidality aaruituat f. 
Colombian bark Pharm. (an inferi colloidal solution para-faqen n. or Peruvian bark yielded by colloid-bismuth Pharm. FTH-TETT Cinchona pitayensis, C. lancifolia, 
m. 
and C. cordifolia) वितापिका-वल्क colloid chemistry TH-TATYA n. colloid goitre Zool. TT-TTTT m. colombo=calumba = columbo= colloid-iodine Pharm. 9rH-5744 calombo (root of Jateorhiza 
columba, moonseed family 775 colloidize vb. (to change into a col a t) $54m na 
loid) 9THT n. (597-420T) colon Anat, I PIATT 1. colloid-mercury sulphide Pharm. 2 61T m. . 973-976 Yeau n. 
colonel (Army) metamfarafa m. colloido 2017 
colonial algae Bot. Hugaret: m. pl. colloido-chemical श्लेषाम-रसायनिक Colonial Stock Acts उपनिवेश स्कन्धाधि 
mfn. 
FETTH m. colloid preparations Pharm. TTH- colonization syftare n. 
te n. 
colony I उपनिवेश m. colloid-sulphur Pharm. -fearfi 2 Bact. Huset n. 
m. : 
colophene Chem. 3GTATAPUT n, 2514 
m. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
c. blue (blue in hue, of medium 
saturation and medium bril liance) मध्यनील m. c. blue G=diamine blue LG c. blue R=diamine blue LR c. brown=diamine brown c. fast red=direct fast red c. fast scarlet=diamine fast 
scarlet c. green=direct green 
c. orange R=chlorazol orange 
• brown X 
c. violet=direct violet 
c. yellow=direct fast yellow B columbic Chem, eftforeni mfn. ___c. acid काशिक अम्ल 
columbi-ferous Chem. TTT mfn. columbine blue Y FTA, FATTTTTT 
m. 
colophenic acid Chem. उदायासेन्यिक 
TFT 1. colophonate Chem, Jatetta n. colophonic acid Chem. उदायासिक 
F7 n. colophonium=colophony colophony=colophonium=rosin 
3GTUTE m. color, colour it, qui m. color bar aufaseft, qui-fatta m. colorifics, colourifics tifaent f. colorimeter रंगमान m. colorimetric रंगमितीय mfn. 
c. method Bot. Tif#cita-cifa f. c. photometer TTFEST TATT m. c. purity रंगमितीय-पूतता . 
c. quality रंगमितीय गुण m. colorimetrics fufcit f. colorimetrist रंगमितिज्ञ m. colori-metry T-fafa f. color index t-eart f. color ribbon Tafçont f. color spectrum qui-titrafor f. colour=color -coloured au mfn. colourifics=colorifics -colous=-cole I (inhabiting, living 
in, on or among) - 
2 (growing in, on or among) - columbate=niobate Chem. Filtru n. columbia black B=direct blue- 
black c. black EAW extra=direct 
deep black EW extra c. black F extra=direct black 
EL c. black FB, FF extra=direct 
black FF extra 
columbite Mineral, an iron colum 
bate) अयःकाशीयिज m. (-इज for 
खनिज mineral) columbium=niobium Chem. #rang 
m. 
c. pentoxide frang -514 n. columbo=colombo columbo- (columbium) Chem. opit 
(FTRITT) columbo-tantalate Mineral. Chem. 
ATRT-vrt n. columbo-titanate Mineral. Chem. 
FTTT-TTT n. columella (small column') Anat., 
Zool. Fift, Fariffar f. columella auris tui-sifat f. column FTFF, FAFT, 41 m. columnae carneae papillary 
muscle Anat. HTT-ETF f. 
252 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
mfr. 
m. 
. 
columnar (cells) स्तंभाकार, स्कम्भाकार c. operation संयुक्त-क्रिया f. 
combiner = combinator संयोजक columnar book-keeping स्कम्भीय 
पुस्तपालन .. 
combining संयोजन-, संयोजक mfn. column, fractional distillation 
c. capacity संयोजन-क्षमता f. Chem. प्रभागशः आसवन वंश m. 
c. power संयोजन-शक्ति f. column of water जल-स्कम्भm. 
c. weight=equivalent weight colunar Math. Hergei mfn. 
___Chem. संयोजक भार m. colunar triangle Math. सहेन्दुक त्रिकोण Combretaceae Bot. हरीतकी-कुल . 
comburent adj. दहत् mfn. coma Med. अधिमूर्छा. 
comburent n. Chem. (a substance Comanchean period Geol. सपि that burns or that aids combus 
विस्तार-युग 1. 
tion) दह, दाहोपकर m. combat vb. संयोधन 1. 
comburimeter (used for determin ___. संयोधm. 
ing the proportion of air requir combination संयोजन 1., संयोग, संचय m. 
ed for the ideal combustion of a combinational संयोज्य, संयोजनीय mfn. gas) दहानिलमान m. combination by volume Chem. comburimetry दहानिलमिति . 
परिमानुसार संयोजन 1. 
combustibility, combustibleness combination by weight Chem. दाह्यता f. 
भारानुसार संयोजन n. 
combustible दाह्य, सुदाह्य mfn. combination fuse संयोजन ज्वाल m. combustibleness, combustibility combination nucleus (zygote दाह्यता f. ___nucleus) Zool. युक्त-न्यष्टि f. combustion दहन ॥. 
combination of groups संवर्ग m. 
c. boat दहन-नौ f. combination of lenses Ophthalmol. c. cell Elec. दहन-कोशा. 
बीक्ष-योजन M. (against संयोजन, where c. chamber Mach. दहन वेश्म 1. lenses are compounded insepa . c. engine दहन गन्त्र ।. rably) 
c. engineering दहन-अभियन्त्रणा f. combinative संयोजक, संयोजनीय, संयुक्त c. furnace दहन भ्राष्ट्र n. 
mfn. 
c. hood दहन-छदिका /. combinator=combiner 
c. method Chem. दहन-रीति f. combine vb. संयोजन . 
c. motor दहन वहिन . combined संयोजित, संयुक्त mfn. 
c. spoon-defiagration spoon c. carbon संयोजित प्रांगार m. 
Chem. दहन स्रुव m. c. lime संयोजित चूर्णक m. 
c.test tube दहन-परीक्षण-नाल m. c. nitrogen and carbon cycle c. train (the entire set up) 
संयुक्त भूयाति-प्रांगार-चक्र .. 
दहन-संहित n. 
253 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
c. bank वाणिज्य-अधिकोष m. c. correspondence वाणिज्य-पत्राचार 
m. c. development वाणिज्य-विकास m. c. dust वाणिज्यिक-धूलि f. c. engineering वाणिज्यिक-अभियन्त्रणा 
c. tube दहन नाल m. come of age प्राप्तवयस्क comfort सुख. coming to or toward अभिगमन 1. comma I () पुच्छबिन्दु m. 
2=sine condition 54T-GOTT f. command समादेशन n., समादेश m. Commandant चमूपति m. Commandant General महाचमूपति m. commander I समादेष्टा (-त) m. 
2 सेनापति m. 
3 Royal Navy ferat fra m. Commander-in-chief महासेनापति m. .Commander-in-Chief in India 
भारतस्थ महासेनापति m. commence vb. प्रारम्भणn. commencement प्रारम्भ m. commend vb. संस्तवन .. commendable para mfn. commendation संस्ताव m. commendator संस्तावक m. commendatory संस्तावी (-इन्) mfn. commensal Biol. सहभोजी (-इन्) m. commensalism Biol. EHITETET f. commensals Biol. सहभोजिन: m. pl. 
(og. सहभोजी) commensurable Math. संमेय mfn. comment In. टीका-टिप्पणी, आलोचना f. 
2vb.आलोचन, टीका-करण, टीकन ?. commentary टीका f. commentator आलोचक, टीकाकार m. commerce वाणिज्य , commerce district वाणिज्य-मण्डल N. commercial वाणिज्यिक mfn., वाणिज्य 
c. affair वाणिज्य-कार्य n. c. agent वाणिज्य-अभिकर्ता (-त)m. c."alizarin Col. Ind: वाणिज्य-विमंजिष्ठि 
c. enterprise वाणिज्य-उपक्रम m. c. fertilizer वाणिज्यिक उर्वरक m. c. house वाणिज्य-ग्रह . c. nation वाणिज्य-राष्ट्र . c. ton वाणिज्य-प्रवर्त m. c. transaction वाणिज्य-व्यवहार m. c. traveller वाणिज्य-यात्री, अभियात्रीm. 
(short for अभिकर्ता-यात्री) c. world वाणिज्य-संसार m. commercialism वाणिज्यता. commerciality वाणिज्यत्व . commercialization वाणिज्यनn. commercially in commerce) arfurie commissar (in Russian constitution) 
प्राध्यक्ष m. commissariat I (army) सेना-प्रदाय-विभाग 
m. 2 (Russian constitution-any of the departments of government) 
विभाग m. commission आयोग m. (ancient 
word), आयुक्त-पद . commission Com. वर्तन . (Cf. the 
ancient word महावर्तन, Hindi बट्टा, Bengali वर्तन 'allowance') c. account वर्तन-लेखा . ' 
c. agent वर्तन-अभिकर्ता (-तृ) m. commissioned officer आयुक्ताधिकारी 
(-इन्) m. commissoned warrant officer 
(Royal Navy) उपपोतिक m. 
254 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
commissioner आयुक्त m. 
common carrier=public carrier commissioners of treasury FFET Lal लोक-वाहक m. 
आयुक्त m. 
common chemical sense साधारण commission in army सेना-आयोग m. रसायनिक अनुभूति f. commission of enquiry परिपृच्छा- common difference Math. प्रचय m. 
आयोग m. 
(from लीलावती), सर्वान्तर . commisural vessel Zool. समामिल- common factor=common mea 
वाहिनी 
sure Math. समापवर्तक m. commisure Anat., Zonl., Bot. समामिल common form सामान्य-आकृति . 
common good सर्व-कल्याण n. commit, committal उपार्पण n. 
common ion-effect सामान्य अयन-प्रभाव committal of bills विधेयक-उपार्पण 1. m. committee समिति f. 
common kite सामान्य चिल्ल m. c. of appropriation नियोजन समिति common logarithm Math. दशच्छेदा 
f. 
common maina Zool. सामान्य-सारिका c. of enquiry परिपृच्छा-समिति f. common measure = common c. of privilege विशेषाधिकार-समिति factor 
common multiple Math. समापवर्त्य m. c. of public works लोक-कर्म-समिति common ratio Math. साधारण-निष्पत्ति . 
common roundworm मलसर्प m. c. of ways and means मार्मोपाय (Punjabi मल्हप्प) ___ समिति . 
common salt सामान्य लवण n. c. of whole house सकल-सभा-समिति common seal साधारण-नाममुद्रा . 
common tangent Math. उभयस्पर्शी ad hoc c. एतदर्थ समिति f. 
(-इन्) m. commit to memory कंठस्थ करणn. common to all सर्वसाधारण mfn. commodity पण्यद्रव्य 1., पदार्थ m. common to both उभयसाधारण mfn. commodity committee पण्यद्रव्य-समिति commonwealth समधिराज्य 1. (अधिराज्य 
dominion) commodity market पदार्थ-विपणि f. communal I साम्प्रदायिक mfn. commodore (Royal Navy) उपनौपति ___2 सामुदायिक mfn. 
m. 
communicate, communication common सामान्य, सार्व, (general) साधारण संचारण 1., संचार . 
communication engineering c. to all सर्वसाधारण mfn. 
विद्युत्संदेश-अभियन्त्रणा. c. to both उभयसाधारण mfn. communications संचार m. common carotid artery Zool. साधारण communism I (theory) साम्य-वाद m. 
प्रैवी रोहिणी f. 
(short for स्वत्वसाम्य-वाद) 255. 
mfn. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
2 (system) साम्य-तन्त्र १. (short for commutator subgroup Math. स्वत्वसाम्य-तन्त्र) 
व्यत्ययक अनुसमूह m. communist Econ. साम्यवादी, साम्यतन्त्री commute vb. I (exchange) विनिमयन . 
(-इन्) m. 
2 (interchange) निमयन 1. communistic साम्यवादीय, साम्यतन्त्रीय 3 (substitute) TORTT Mh. ___mfn. 
4 (substitute for another that is Communist party साम्यवादी पक्ष m. lighter or less) न्यादेशन, लघ्वादेशन ॥. community समुदाय m. 
5 (to pay in gross, instead of part community Bot. समुदाय m., सहवासिनः by part) एकराशि-दान, संराशि-दान .. 
m.pl. (sg. सहवासी) 
Comorin Geog. कुमारी f. association समाजm. 
compact adj. निबिड, संघन mfn. (cf. consociation उपसमाज m. 
Panjabi संघणा) society संघ m. 
compact n. (an agreement) संविद्, community I (a body of people) परिसंविद् . 
समुदाय m. 
compact pb. निबिडन, संघनन n. 2 (joint ownership) falfira n. compact gland Zool, falfae vify m. commutability, commutableness compact group Bot. निबिड समूह m. 
विनिमेयता f., etc. 
companion cell Bot. सखि-कोशा f. commutable विनिमेय, निमेय, आदेश्य, companion series सह-श्रेढीf. 
न्यादेश्य, लध्वादेश्य, एकराशिदेय, संराशिदेय company I Com. (an association for mfn. 
ajoint purpose....)प्रमण्डल .. commutate vb. Elec. OUKITTT nh. 
2 (a band of musical or dramatic commutation विनिमय, निमय, आदेश, performers) मण्डली. 
न्यादेश, लध्वादेश m., एकराशिदान, संराशि- , 3(a. body of soldiers, two or 
1. दान 
more platoons) गुल्म m. (ancient commutation Elec. व्यत्यय m. 
word) commutative Math. व्यत्यय 
c. account प्रमण्डल-लेखा f. commutative addition Math. व्यत्यय c. law प्रमण्डल-विधि m. 
संकलन . 
c. limited (co. Itd.) सीमित प्रमण्डल commutative group Math. व्यत्यय 
n. (सी. प्रम.) समूह m. 
guaranteeingc. प्रत्याभूति-प्रमण्डल .. commutative law Math. व्यत्यय-नियम holding c. सूत्रधारि प्रमण्डल n. 
joint stock c. संयुक्त-स्कन्ध-प्रमण्डल 1. commutative multiplication limited c. सीमित प्रमण्डल . 
Math. व्यत्यय-गुणन .. 
private c. अलोक-प्रमण्डल . commutative substitution Math. public c. लोक-प्रमण्डल .. 
व्यत्यय-आदेशm. 
unlimited c. असीमित प्रमण्डल 1. commutator. Math. व्यत्ययक m. comparability तुलनीयता . 
m. 
236 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
comparability of data Statistics c. examination संस्पधि-परीक्षा f. 
सामग्री-तुलनीयता. 
competitor Econ. स्पर्धक, संस्पर्धक m. comparative तुलनात्मक mfn. 
compilation of data Statistics सामग्री comparative anatomy तुलनात्मक शारीर संकलन N. 
complemental air = complemen comparative histogram Statistics tary air Physiol. पूरक वायु m. 
तुलनात्मक वारंवारताचित्र. 
complementary संपूरक, पूरक mfn. comparative statistics TETETTCH*- complementary air=complemen 
सांख्यिकी f. 
. tal air comparator Phys. उपमात्र n. 
complementary angle Math. लम्बपूर compare vb. तुलना-करण . 
कोण m.. comparison उपमा, तुलना ., संतोलन . complementary combination comparison and contrast 34#T Math. पूरक संचय M. 
व्यतिरेक m. 
complementary function Math. compartment I कोष्ठ, विभाग m. 
पूरक श्रित . 2 Bot. संविभाग m. 
complete 1 (flower) Bot. Figufi mfn. compass I (pair of compasses) कर्कट 2 Math. qui mfn. 
complete cleayage=total cleav 2 दिग्घटी f. 
age = holoblastic 'cleavage compass pencil pictaiat f. 
Zool. पूर्ण भाजन . compatible-consistent संगत mfn. complete combustion पूर्ण दहन । compel vb. संबाधन' n. 
completed पूरित, सम्पूरित nfn. compelled atfera mfn. 
complete flower Bot. Figui qou thing compel to any action बलप्रवर्तन, बलात्- complete loss संपूर्ण-हानि f. 
कारण 1: (from कारयति) 
completeness of data Statistics compensate हानिपूरण, समतोलन, पूरण, सामग्री-पूर्णता. ... 
समकरण, प्रतिफलन .. 
complete product Math. पूर्ण गुणनफल compensated पूरितहानि, समतोलित mfn. compensating errors=equalising complete reaction संपूर्ण-प्रतिक्रिया 
errors Accounts समकारी विभ्रम m. complete remainder पूर्ण शेष m. compensation प्रतिफल N., हानिपूर्ति f., complete renewal पूर्ण नवकरण M. .. समतोलन, हानिपूरण n. 
complete revolution Math. पूर्ण परि compensator I Chem. समतोलक m. • भ्रमणn. 
2 Com. समतोलक, हानिपूरक m. 
complete solution Matb. पूर्ण साधन . compensatory Com. पूरक mfm. complex जटिल, संकर mfn. competition स्पर्धा, प्रतियोगिता, संस्पर्धा f. complex algebra (from complex competitive Econ. स्पर्धी, संस्पर्धी (-इन) quantity संकरराशि)=double alge 
mfn. 
bra. संकर बीजगणित ॥ 
____257 
. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
composition निबन्ध m., संरचना f. composition formula Chem. निबन्ध 
सूत्र .. composition metal (between brass 
and bronze) आकांस्य 1. compound Chem. संयोग m. compound adj. संयुत, मिश्रmfn. 
c. addition Math. मिश्र संकलन ___n., मिश्र योग m. ___c. arbitrage Econ. अनेकान्तर-पणन 
_n. 
complex analysis Math. संकर विश्लेषण 
n. complex derivatives Statistics संकर 
व्युत्पन्न 2. complex ether=mixed ether Chem. 
जटिल दक्षु m. complex fraction Math. जटिल भिन्न m. complexity संकरता, जटिलता f. complex number Math. संकर-संख्या f. complex quantity Math. संकर राशि m. complex salt जटिल लवण . complex substances जटिल पदार्थ m. complex tabulation Statistics जटिल 
सारणीयन .. complicated संजटिल mfn. compliments समादरm. comply vb. अनुविधान . 
admit अंगीकार m. submit अनुवर्तन । 
yield अनुनमन n. componendo Matb. योगनिष्पत्ति. componendo et dividendo Math, 
योगान्तरनिष्पत्ति . component संघटक M., अंग n. component bar diagram Statistics 
संघटक-दण्ड-चित्र. component of a force Matb. बल 
संघटक m. component part संघटक भाग m. Compositae Bot. (aggregation of ___flowers in heads) संग्रथित-कुल 1. composite संग्रथित, मिश्र mfn. composite bar diagram Statistics 
. संग्रथित दण्ड-चित्र . composite fruit Bot. संग्रथित फल n. composite number Math. भाज्य-संख्या 
c. cellulose संयुत कोशाधु . c. cinnamon powder = pulvis 
cinnamomi compositus (pulv. cinnam. co.) संयुत दारुसिता 
क्षोद m. c. circuit Elec. संयुत पोरपथ m. c. decoction of sarsaparillas 
decoctum sarsae composi tum (dec. sars. co.) Pharm. संयुत 
आसारिवा-क्वाथ m. c. division Math. मिश्र भाग m., 
मिश्र भाजन n. c. engine Macb. संयुत गन्त्र ।. c. ether Chem. संयुत दक्षु M. c. eye Zool, संयुताक्षि n. c. eye stalk Zoot. संयुताक्षि-वृन्त 
c. fraction Math. प्रभिन्न m. c. fruit Bot. संयुत फल ". c. girder संयुत धरण m. c. inflorescence संयुत-पुष्पता f. c. interest Math. चक्रवृद्धि f. c. joint Anat. (consisting of se ___veral bones) बह्वस्थि सन्धि m. 
c. leaf Bot. संयुत पर्ण . c. lens styret after m. c. lever संयुत उद्याम m. 
composite units Math. संग्रथित एकक 1. 
258 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
c. liniment of camphor=am 
moniated liniment of cam phor Pharm. Firma T-= तिक्तातीयित कर्पूर-मृद्य n. c. lobelia powder = pulvis lo 
beliae compositus (pulv. lobel. co.) Pharm, ya q#ETH 
als m. c. locomotive fun afn. c. machine Phys. HYT 15 n. c. magnet = magnetic battery 
40 Testim. c. mercury ointment = Scott's 
dressing = unguentum hy drargyri compositum (ung. hydrarg. co.) = compound ointment of mercury FAST 
TG- 
vega m.' c. meter संयुत मान m. c. microscope संयुत अण्वीक्षm. c. multiplication Math. FAST TUTA 
jalap. co.) Pharm. sata 
m. c. powder of kino = pulvis 
kino compositus (pulv, kino 
co.) Pharm. a facefcente m. c. powder of liquorice = pul 
vis glycyrrhizae composi tus (pulv. glycyrrh. co.) 
Pharm. Hy heure-eta m. c. powder of opium=pulvis 
opii compositus (pulv, opii 
co.) Pharm. FT 4-ste m. C. powder of rhubarb=pulvis 
rhei compositus (pulv. thei co.) = Gregory's powder 
Pharm. 1977-m. c. powder of tragacanth=pul 
vis tragacanthae compositus (pulv. trag: co.) Pharm. Para 
Jaafafaat m. c. practice Math. fHT 49€TC-TfUST 
16. 
C. partnership faq#f7-477fiat f. C. pill of rhubarb=pilula rhei 
composita (pil. rhei co.) = compound rhubarb pill 
Pharm. Y-779-11fait f. c. pills of colocynth = pil. 
cochia = pilulae colocyn thidis compositae (pil. colo cynth co.) Pharm. atout 
for f. c. powder of catechu=pulvis 
catechu compositus (pulv. catech.co.) Pharm. fiue aferente 
c. proportion Math. TTTTTT m. c. protein=conjugate protein 
ist stuf m. c. quantity Alg., Arith. f#ETEET 
m. c. radical Chem. FST FET 1h. c. ratio Math. fun-fioufet f. c. reaction time pyet sifarf*T- 11 
m. c. rhubarb pill = c. pill of 
rhubarb c. solution of ferrous phos 
phate-liquor ferri phos phatis compositus (liq. ferr. phosph. co.) Pharm. 14T 4259 
Tratu fa apat na 
m. 
c. powder of jalap = pulvis 
jalapae compositus (pulv. 
259﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
. 
c. spike Bot. F -tat f. 
posita (tinct. chlorof. co.) c. spirit of ether=spiritus aeth- , Pharm. FTTT -fir sapne m. 
eris compositus (sp. aether. c. tincture of chloroform and co.) = Hoffmann's anodyne morphine=tinctura chloro Pharm. +48 44-999 m. 
formi et morphinae compo c. squill pills=pilulae scillae sita (tinct. chlorof. et morph. 
compositae (pil. scill. co.) co.) Pharm. a ota TeT Pharm. PEET-FH696715-feat f. 
staisit froient m. C. steel=alloy steel fra TETT c, tincture of cinchonatinc 
tura cinchonae composita c. stramonium powder=pul 
(tinct. cinchon. co.) Pharm. vis stramonii compositus Ha faaly-f16 m. (pulv. stramon. co.) Pharm. c. tincture of cinnamon=tinc HITT TRE-PE m. 
tura cinnamomi composita c. subtraction Math. fast 9419420T (tinct. cinnam. co.) Pharm. HYT 
11., F#4 faut m. 
Grefrat-fono m. c. surd Math. F#-Feuit f. 
c. tincture of gentian=tinctura C. syrup of figs=syrupus fico gentianae composita (tinct. 
rum compositus (syr. fic. gent. co.) Pharm. Pese fefera co.)=syrup ficorum aro Featum. maticus=aromatic syrup of c. tincture of jalap=tinctura figs Pharm. YTT STEFAR-FASTT= jalapae composita (tinct. सुरभि प्रोदुम्बर-मिष्टोद . 
jalap. co.) Pharm. W t ra c. tincture of aloes=tinctura faroeiim. 
aloes composita (tinct. aloes c. tincture of rhubarb=tinc co.) Pharm. read #re7-France tura rhei composita (tinct. m. 
rhei co.) Pharm. TTT c. tincture of benzoin=tinc from m. 
tura benzoini composita , c. tincture of senna=tinctura (tinct. benzoin. co.)=friar's sennae composita (tinct. senn. balsam Pharm. Teta-foto co.) Pharm. FT TTTTT-foot m. m. 
c. umbel Bot. 307 . c. tincture of cardamom= compoundable parou, para mfn. _tinctura cardamomi compo- compounded संयुत, संयुक्त mfn. 
sita (tinct. cardam. co.) compounder of medicines) $4797, Pharm. in gett-from, a m. 
45471 m. .c. tincture of chloroform= compounding (with creditors) 
tinctura , chloroformi com- gitarat n. 
260 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
mfn. 
compoundness संयुतता. 
conceivable farct min. comprehensive व्यापक, परिग्राही (-इन्) concentrate vb. संकेन्द्रण . 
concentrate n. संकेन्द्रित .. comprehensiveness of data Statis- concentrated in front mfn. 
tics सामग्री-व्यापकता f. 
c. acid infusion of cinchona= compress vb. संपीडन १. 
infusum cinchonae acidum compressed संपीडित mfn. 
concentratum (inf. cinchon. c. air संपीडित वायु m. 
acid. conc.) Pharm. संकेन्द्रित c. air disease=caisson disease वितापाम्ल-आक्वाथ m. 
= divers' paralysis=tunnel c. acid infusion of roses-in disease (bubbles of gas formed fusum rosae acidum concen in the blood) वातिबुद्वद्रोग m. 
tratum (inf. ros. acid. conc.) c.-air locomotive संपीडित-वायु चलित्र Pharm. संकेन्द्रित पाटलाम्ल-आक्वाथ __n. 
m. c. cork संपीडित-त्वक्षा/. 
c. alum = aluminum sulphate c. cork mat संपीडित-त्वक्षा-कट m. 
संकेन्द्रित-स्फटिका f. c. cork ring संपीडित-त्वक्षा-वलय, इण्ड्व c. anise water = aqua anisi 
n. 
concentrata (aq. anis. conc.) compressing संपीडन . 
Pharm. संकेन्द्रित शतपुष्पा-वारि . compression संपीडन . 
c. camphor water-aqua cam compression pump संपीडन उदंच m. phorae concentrata (aq. compressor संपीडक m. 
camph. conc.) Pharm. संकेन्द्रित compromise मध्यमार्ग m. (Hindi कर्पूर-वारि n. 
समझौता) 
c. chloroform water = aqua comptometer = calculating ma chloroformi concentrata (aq. 
chine 
chlorof. conc.) Pharm. संकेन्द्रित compulsory संबाधी, आवश्यक, अनिवार्य नीरव म्रल-वारि n. 
mfn. 
c. cinnamon water = aqua compulsory winding up Com. cinnamomi concentrata (aq. 
अनिवार्य समापन n. 
• cinnam. conc.) Pharm. संकेन्द्रित computation संगणन n. 
दारुसिता-वारि compute vb. संगणन n. 
c. clove water = aqua caryo con- सम्-, अभि 
phylli concentrata (aq. car concave you mfn. 
yoph. conc.) Pharm. संकेन्द्रित concavo-concave firewa mfn. 
लवंग-वारि . concavo-convex न्युदुब्ज mfn. 
c. compound decoction of conceal vb. संगोपन . 
aloes=decoctum aloes com concealment संगुप्ति . 
positum concentratum (dec. 26r 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
aloes co, conc.) Pharm. portret (inf. quass. conc.) Pharm. FITT F#77-7952T m. 
Fafant 7976787-97Tater m. c. compound infusion of gen c. infusion of rhubarb=infu 
tian = infusum gentianae sum rhei concentratum (inf. compositum concentratum rhei conc.) Pharm. Friset (inf. gent. co. conc.) Pharm. 
1972-97997 m. संकेन्द्रित संयुत किरात-आक्वाथ m. 
c. infusion of scoparium= c. dill water = aqua anethi infusum scoparii concentra 
concentrata (aq, aneth. conc.) tum (inf. scopar. conc.)= Pharm. Tas Tayf04f-a7f n. 
concentrated infusion of c. effort Mil. a 497 m. 
broom Pharm. FT FT c. fennel water = aqua foeni 
1997 m. culi concentrata (aq. foe c. infusion of senega = infu nic. conc.) Pharm. Fffect #feta sum senegae concentratum a n. 
(inf. seneg. conc.) Pharm. First c. infusion of bearberry = in FTTF44657-19179TT m. 
fusum uvae ursi concentra c. infusion of senna=infusum tum (inf. uvae ursi conc.) sennae concentratum (inf. Pharm. Afisa TESTCGT-449787 senn. conc.) Pharm. Fabrica m. 
TIFICT-H1997 m. c. infusion of buchu.= infu c. infusion of serpentary=in 
sum buchu concentratum 
fusum serpentariae concen (inf. buchu conc.) Pharm. tratum (inf. serpent. conc.) संकेन्द्रित गुरुगन्ध-आक्वाथ m. 
Pharm. Parecen - Tate m. c. infusion of calumba = in c. load संकेन्द्रित भारm. 
fusum calumbae concentra c. peppermint water aqua tum (inf. calumb.conc.) Pharm. menthae piperitae concen संकेन्द्रित इन्दुमूल-आक्वाथ m. 
trata (aq. menth. pip. conc.) c. infusion of cascarilla=in 
Pharm. fra tan-af n. fusum cascarillae concen c. pimento water = aqua pi tratum (inf. cascaril. conc.) mentae concentrata (aq. pi 
Pharm. Feta FAST 80-taart m. ment. conc.) Pharm. e sist c. infusion of orange peel= 
BOTTEE-aif n. infusum aurantii concentra c. solution संकेन्द्रित विलयन 1. tum (inf. aurant. conc.) Pharm. concentration Forgot 1., YHTETT m. संकेन्द्रित नारंगशल्क-पाक्वाथ m. 
concentration of authority प्राधिकार c infusion of quassia = infu- got n. ' sum quassiae concentratum concentrator संकेन्द्रक, समाहारक m. 
262 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY. 
concentric Math. संकेन्द्र mfn. 
concrete number Math. मूर्त-संख्या f. conceptacle Bot. (a cavity contain- concrete quantity Math. मूर्त राशि m. 
ing reproductive cells) जनन-गुहा concur संमनन, संगमन . 
concurrence I Math. संगामित्व, संगमन conception अवधारणा. concern I सम्बन्ध m. 
2 (agreement) संमति f. .. 2 Com. व्यापारिक संस्था 
concurrent Geom. संगामी (-इन) mfn. conch शंख m., n. 
concurrent deviation Math. संगामि concha Anat. (outer end of the विचलन . 
auditory passage) कर्णपीठ 1. (from concurrent jurisdiction संगामि अधि सुश्रुत) 
कारक्षेत्र n. Conchifera Zool. शंखिनः m. pl. (sg. concurrent legislative list संगामि 
शंखी) 
विधायि-सूची . conchinine (by transposition from concurrent powers U. S. Hist. 
cinchonine=quinidine) Chem. संगामि-शक्ति. विज्वरेयी. 
concyclic (here cycle means a circle) conchiolin (Lat. concha from gjet Geom. siapita mfn. 
-ole +-in) Biochem. शंखवि . condensability संधन्यता / conchology शंख विद्या, शांखिकी f. condensable संघन्य mfn. conciliation संराधना . 
condensate vb. संघनन ।. conciliation board Econ. संराधन-समिति condensaten.Cbem. संघनित. 
condensate adj. संघनित mfr. conciliation commission संराधन condensation संघनन ।. 
आयोग m. 
condensation bulb संघनन कन्द m. conclude vb. उपसंहरण, परिणमन 1. condensation chamber संघनन वेश्म 1. conclude a treaty सन्धिकरण, सन्धि- condensation tube संघनन नाल m. 
अनुष्ठान, सन्धि-उपसंहरण .. 
condensator=condenser conclusion परिणाम m. 
condense vb. संघनन ॥. conclusive निश्चायक, निर्णायक । condensed संघनित mfn. 
(ancient word) 
condenser संघनकm. conclusively=decisively निश्चितरूपेण distillation c. Chem. आसवन-संघनक concord संवाद M., ऐक्य N., अन्वय m. 
m. concrete - flor-essence Pharm. jackets for c. Chem. संघनकार्थ 
पुष्पवास m. 
निचोल m. concrete (cement, sand and gravel) spray tube for c. Chem. संघनकार्थ 
संघा. 
शीकर-नाल m. concrete Statistics मूर्त, यथार्थ mfn. condensery संघनन-गृह १. concrete economics मूर्त अर्थशास्त्र . condensing संघनन n. 
263 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
c. chamber संघनन वेश्म n. 
conduplicate Bot. (folded along the c. funnel संघनन निवाप m. 
midrib) मध्यनाडीवलित mfn. c. pump संघनन उदञ्च m. 
condyle Med. महार्बुद .. condensity संघनता f. 
condyloid joint Anat. वायसतुण्ड (from con-distillation Chem. (distillation सुश्रुत ), अण्डगुहासन्धि m. 
with substances other than steam) cone Geom. sig m. समासवन, अबाष्पासवन . 
cone of unburnt gases अदग्ध-वाति-शंकु condition परिस्थिति, दशा, प्रतिबन्ध m. conditional सप्रतिबन्ध mfn. 
cone, rubber Chem. घृषि-शंकु m. conditional equation Math. sferarait confection = confectio ( conf.) 
समीकार m. 
___Pharm. पाक m. conditioned प्रसीमित mfn. 
c. of pepper=confectio piperis condition series Matb. अवस्था-माला f. (conf. piper.) मरिची-पाक m. condonance मार्जना, संक्षमा. 
c. of roses== confectio rosae condone दोषमार्जन, मार्जन, संक्षमण . 
gallicae (conf. ros. gall.) पाटल condoner मार्जक, संक्षन्ता (-तृ) m. 
पाक-रक्तपाटल-पाक m. conduct vb. संवाहन, संचालन . 
c. of senna=confectio sennae conductance I संवाहन क. 
(conf. senn.) रंगलता-पाक m. ___2 संवाहन-शक्ति f. 
c. of sulphur = confectio sul conducting strand Bot. संवाहि स्रोत phuris (conf. sulphur.) गन्धक 
पाक m. conduction संवाहन । 
confectionery I खण्डखाद्य m. (anci conduction current Elec. संवाहन-वाह ent word) 
m. 
2 खण्डखाद्य-कला. conduction of nourishment Biol, 3 खण्डखाद्य-गृह . 
पोषाहार-संवाहन . 
confectio piperis = confection of conductivity संवाहिता f. 
pepper conduct of business कार्य-संचालन, c. rosae gallicae=confection of 
व्यापार-संचालन, कार्य-चालन . 
roses conduct of business of Federal c. sennae=confection of senna 
Government संधानीय-शासन-कार्य c. sulphuris=confection of संचालन .. 
. sulphur conductometer Phys. संवाहमान m. confederacy I (a league or compact conductor Phys., Elec. संवाहक m. 
between states....) प्रसन्धि m. conductorial संवाहकीय mfn. 
2 (body of states united by a conductorless संवाहकहीन mfn. 
league....) प्रसन्धिवर्ग m. . . conductorship संवाहकता f. 
confederal प्रसंधानीय mfn. conductress संवाहिकाf. 
confederated प्रसंधानित mfn. 264 
2. 
7 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
tion) 
confederation प्रसंधान 1. 
confiscatory समपहारी (-इन्) mfn. confer vb. I प्रदान . 
conflict, strife Mil. संप्रहार m. 2 संभाषण n. 
conflict of laws Law विधि-विरोध m. 3 संमन्त्रण. 
conform vb. समनुरूपण, संरूपणा . conference I (a meeting) संमेलन 1., conformation समनुरूप m., समनुरूपण .., 
परिषद् /. 
संरूप m., संरूपण .. 2 (consultation) संमन्त्रणा f. conforming to discipline farrapat 3 (a meeting for consultation) conformity समनुरूपता, संरूपता f. संमन्त्रणाधिवेश m. 
confront vb. संमुखन, संमुखीकरण, संमुख confide vb. विश्रम्भण 1. 
स्थापन, (to compare) तुलनाकरण .. confidence विश्रम्भ m. 
confront with witness साक्षि-संमुखन ।. confident विश्रब्ध mfn. 
confusion संभ्रम m. confidential सवित्रम्भ, गोपनीय mfn. congenital सहज mfn. . configuration I Chem. संरूपण n. congestion=hyperemia Med. अधि 
2 Math. अनुन्यास m. (relative posi रक्तता . 
conglobate (collected or formed configurational formula Chem. into a ball) hifaa mfn. 
संरूपण-सूत्र n. 
conglobate gland संगोलित ग्रन्थि m. confine vb. संसीमन . 
conglobation संगोलन n. I (to imprison) बन्दीकरण . conglomerate संपिंडन n. 2 (to restrain) Farragut n. 
con-glutin Biochem. समाश्लिषि f. confinement संसीमा f., संसीमन, बन्दी- Congo (Spanish, from Uiva. langu 
· करण, नियन्त्रण n. 
___age KUNKUN) कुंकुंग m. confines संसीमा f., (the region about Congo blue कुंकुंग नील m. ___a boundary) सीमा-प्रदेश m. 
C. brown=asphaltum, bitu confirm vb. पुष्टिकरण, स्थिरीकरण, संदहण men, Antwerp brown कुंकुंग 
बभ्रु, न्यवरक्तपीत m. confirmation पुष्टिकरण N., पुष्टि f., स्थिरी C. corinth कुंकुंगं रोहित m. 
करण, संदृहण . 
C. cyanine Col. Ind. कुंकुंग श्यामी f. confirmatory पुष्टिकारी (-इन्) mfn. C.dye or colour कुंकुंग रंजक, रंग m. confirmatory test Chem. पुष्टिकारि C. extra.Col. Ind. कुंकुंग अतिरिक्त m. 
परीक्षा f. 
C. fast blue Col. Ind. कंकंग स्थिर नील confirmed पुष्टिकृत, संदृढ, स्थिरीकृत mfn. 
__ m. confiscable = confiscatable समपहार्य C. orange Col. Ind. कुंकुंग नारंग M. 
mfn. 
C. paper कुंकुंग पत्र . confiscate vb. समपहरण १. 
C. pink मध्यपीतातिरक्त m. confiscation समपहार m. 
C. red कुंकुंग रक्त m. confiscator समपहर्ता (-तृ) m. 
C. red paper कुंकुंग रक्त पत्र n. __265 
. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
C. rubber कुंकुंग घृषि m. 
conidiophore=gonidiophore Bot. C. rubine or rubin कुंकुंग रक्ती, रक्ति कणि-धर m. 
conidiospore=conidium C. sky blue Col. Ind. कुंकुंग आकाश conidium (Gk. konis dust)=coni 
नील m. 
____diospore Bot., Bact. कणी (-इन्) m. C. violet Col. Ind. कुकंग नीललोहित m. conifer Bot. शंकुधर m. congress HETTAT f. 
Coniferae Bot. शंकुधरा: m.pl. congressman महासभ्य, महासभाजन m. coniferin Chem. शंकुधरि . congruent Math. (identically equal, coniferyl Chem. शंकुधरला . 
equal in all respects) सर्वाङ्गसम coniferylic alcohol Chem. शंकुधरलिक 
mfn. 
सुषव m. conhydrine (conine-+-bydra m. conii fructus=conium fruit 
विषगर्जरोदी. 
coniine=conine Chem. faqerie f. conic Math. In. शांकवा. 
coniine hydrobromide Chem. far 2 adj. sritia mfn. 
गर्जरी उददुरेय . conical (as a taproot) Bot. शंकु-, शंकुरूप, conima= Brazilian elemi=Cay ___ शुण्डाकार mfn. 
enne incense वनवाताम, वनवाता conical I (of or pertaining to a मोद्यास, वनोद्यास M. 
cone) Math. शांकव्य mfn. 
conimene (from conima) Chem. 2 (having the shape of a cone) वनोद्यासेन्य . शंक्वाकार mfn. 
conine=coniine 3 (tapering) गर्जरवत् ॥fn. 
Conium ('hemlock') (poisonous conical beaker Chem. शंक्वाकार चंचुकी herbs of the carrot family) Bot. 
(-इन्) m. 
विषगर्जरति f. (-ति for प्रजाति genus) conical crucibleChen.शंक्वाकार-मुषा conium विषगर्जर m. conical culture flask Chem. Teatar conium fruit=conii fructus (conii 
संवर्ध-पलिघm. 
fruct.)=hemlock fruit Pharm. conical end शंक्वन्त ।. 
विषगर्जर-फल .. conical flask Chem. sitater fra m. Conjeeveram Geog. Fifaye n. conical head Mach. शंक-शिरा. 
conjoint bundle Bot. सहस्थ पूल m. conical measure Chem. शंक्वाकार माप conjugants Biol. (those which con , m. 
jugate, e.g. Paramecium) संयुग्मी conical pulley Macb. शंकु-प्राकृषि m. (-इन् ) m. coniceine (now named conine) Chem. conjugate Math., Biol. संयुग्मी (-इन्), 
विषगजेरिन m. 
अनुबद्ध mfn. conicine-coniine 
conjugated (two parameciums be conics Math. (geometry of conics) come one after conjugation) Zool. 
शांकव-गणित ., शांकविकी f. 
संयुग्मित mfn. 266 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
conjugated संयुग्म, संयुग्मित mfn. connector, rubber, tubing नाल-घृषि conjugate diameter Math. अनुबद्ध योजक m. 
व्यास m. 
connectors = connection (that conjugated protein = conjugate which connects) युज, योजक m. 
protein Chem. संयुग्म प्रोभूजिन m. Conocarpus Bot. बकवृक्षति f. (-ति for conjugate foci अन्योन्य-, अनबद्ध-नाभि 
प्रजाति genus) conjugate integer Math. अनुगामी C. latifolius सामान्य बकवृक्ष M. 
पूीक m. 
Conorhinus (cone-nosed)=Lamus conjugate lines Math. अनुबद्ध-रेखा f. शंकुतुण्डाति f. (-आति for प्रजाति genus) conjugate point Math. अनुबद्ध बिन्दु m. conquer vb. संजयन, देशजयन 1. conjugation tubes Bot.अनुबन्ध-नाल m. conqueror संजता, देशजंता (तृ) m. conjunction Astron. युति f. (from conquest संजय m., संजिति , देशजय m. 
सूर्यसिद्धान्त) (as against opposition conscience अन्तःकरण . of stars वियुति) 
conscientious I (a person) अन्तः conjunctiva Anat. युजा f. 
करणानुयायी (-इन्) m. conjunctival Anat. युजा 
2 (an act) अन्तःकरणानुकूल mfn. conjunctival concretions वर्त्म-शर्करा conscientious objector अन्तःकरण 
f. (from सुश्रुत) 
__ आपत्तिकारी, धर्महेतु असैन्यसेवी (-इन्) m. conjunctival sac Anat. युजा-स्यून .m, 
conscious Zool. चेतन mfa. conjunctive tissue Bot. संयोजि-ति f. consciousness चैतन्य 7., चेतना f. conjunctivitis Med. युजाकोप m. consciousness of sound Zool. safat connate Biol. (congenitally united; चेतना 
जनि birth) जनियुक्त mfn. 
conscious sampling = deliberate connate sessile Bot. जनियुक्त अवृन्त mfn. sampling Statistics सविचार निदर्शन connect vb. I योजन 1. 
2 संबन्धकरण, संबन्धन 1. 
conscript vb. बलसैन्यन M. (Hindi अनि connected सम्बद्ध min. 
वार्य भरती; सैन्यन to enroll in an connected series of operations army, to raise an army) 
कर्म-परम्परा. 
conscripted बलसैन्यित mfn. connecting rod Macb. योजि-शलाका f., conscription वलसैन्यन ॥ 
योजि-दण्ड m. 
consecutive अनुगामी (-इन्) mfn. connection योजन 1., योग, संबन्ध, संपर्क m. 2=vicinal = adjacent=neigh connection=connector (that which bouring प्रातिवेश्य mfn. . connects) युज'm. 
consecutive integer Math. अनुगामी connection, rubber, tubing Chem. पूर्णाङ्क m. 
नाल-घृषि-युज m. 
consent सहमति . connection, tube नाल-युज m. 
consequence I संविपाक m., फल.., उदक, connective Bot. योजी (-इन्) mfn. 
परिणाम m. 267 
. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
2 (importance) गुरुत्व . 
c. received प्राप्त परेषण. consequent समनुवर्ती, अनुवर्ती, संविपाकी c. sent out निर्गमित परेषण . 
(-इन्) mfn. 
consignor Com. परेषक m. consequent change Matb. परिणामि consistency I Math. संगति f. 
परिवर्तन . 
2 अविरोध m. consequential legislation समनुवर्ति 3 गाढता f. (as of syrup) 
विधान . 
consistent=compatible संगत mfn. consequently परिणामत : 
consociation Ecology उपसमाज m. (cf. conservancy मलवाहन ॥. 
community समाज) conservancy system मलवाहन-पद्धति f. consolidate vb. संपिण्डन, समेकन, संसांद्रण, conservation संरक्षण n. 
संदहण 1. conservation of energy Phys. ऊर्जा- Consolidated Fund संपिंडित-प्रणीवि f 
स्थिरता 
consolidation of debts ऋण-संपिंडन conservation of forest वन-संरक्षण . conservation of mass=conserva consolidation of holdings Econ. 
tion of matter Phys., Chem. पुंज क्षेत्र-संघनन . स्थिरता. 
consols (consolidated stocks) Com. conservation of momentum Phys. संघनित स्कन्ध m. 
गमता-स्थिरता. 
consolute Physical Chem. संविलेय mfn: conservative forces संरक्षि बल n. consonance Phys. संस्वनता. conservative organs Bot. संरक्षि अंगn. consonant Grammar व्यञ्जन . conservative system of forces conspicuous flowers Bot. अभिदृश्य पुष्प 
_Math. संरक्षि-बल-संहति f. conserve vb. संरक्षण n. 
constancy Phys. स्थिरताn. consider vb. विमर्शन, विचारण 1. 
constant Phys. स्थिर mfn. considerable बहु mfn. 
constant (K) Chem. स्थिरांक m. (थ) consideration I विचार, विमर्श, परिमर्श constant अचल, स्थिर, स्थायी, अपरिवर्ती, 
अविराम afn. 2 प्रतिफल N. (in consideration of constantan (alloy of nickel 40 p.c. 
=as compensation for) 
and copper 60 p. c.) रू-ताम्र .. consign Com. TiTo n. 
constant boiling mixture स्थिर बुद् consigned Com. परेषित mfn. 
बुदन मिश्र . consignee Com. परेषणी (-इन्) m. constant composition fra Forever m. consignment Com. परेषण. 
constant immersion hydrometer c. account परेषण-लेखा/ 
=Nicholson's hydrometer feTT c. inward अंतःपरेषण . 
निमज्जन-तरलमान m. ___c. note परेषण-पत्र. 
constant proportion Math. स्थिर अनु c. outward बहिःपरेषण ।. 
पात m. 
0. 
m. 
268 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
- 
- 
m. 
constant temperature and humi- constitution of federal legislature 
dity oven Chem. स्थिर ताप तथा संघानीय विधानमंडल का संघटना. आक्लेद कन्दु m. 
constitution of High Courts उच्च constant temperature regulator न्यायालय-संघटन n. 
Chem. स्थिर ताप यामक m. 
constrain vb. निबाधन, संरोधन n. constant term = absolute term constrained motion Math. संरुद्ध-गति. 
Math. अचल पद १. 
constraint निबाध m. constant water supply अविरत जल constriction उपसंकोच m. 
प्रदाय m. 
construct vb. रचन 1. (Hindi रचना constellation नक्षत्र n. 
करना) constipation मलावरोध, बद्धकोष्ठ, पानाह, constructed रचित, निर्मित mfn. 
मलरोध m. 
construction frafos n., Math. f. constituency Pol. I प्रतिमण्डल . (प्रति construction and reconstruction 
for प्रतिनिधि, प्रतिनिहित), निर्वाचनक्षेत्र, of railways संयानों का निर्माण तथा निर्वाचनमण्डल . (electoral district) पुननिर्माण . 
2 (body of voters) मत-दातृ-वर्ग construction of diagram Math. चित्र 
___रचना . 3 (the district represented) प्रति- construction of index numbers निहित मण्डल . 
Statistics देशनांक-रचना 4 (residents in a representative construction of laws farfet-EEFT f. 
district) प्रतिनिहितमण्डल-वासिनः m. pl. construction of tables Statistics constituent संघटक m. 
सारणी-रचना f. constituent संविधायी (-इन्) mfn. constructive रचनात्मक mfn. . Constituent Assembly संविधान-सभा constructive work रचनात्मक कार्य, 
निर्माण-कर्मn. constituents of a system Phys. संहति construe vb. अन्वयन 1. 
संघटक m. 
construed अन्वित mfn. constitute vb. I संस्थापन . 
consul वाणिज्य-दूत m. , 2 संविधान n. 
consular agent वाणिज्यदूताभिकर्ता (तृ)) constitution I संविधान n. 
m. 2 संघटन 1. 
consular organisation aforrageite 3 संस्थापन n., संस्थापना f. 
संघटन . 4 Zool. शरीररचना 
consular representative arforum constitutional संविधानीय mfn. 
प्रतिनिधि m. constitutional formula Chem. संस्था- consulate वाणिज्यदूत-पद 1., वाणिज्य 
पना-सूत्र. 
दूतावास m., वाणिज्यदूत-कार्यालय m., constitutional machinery संविधा- वाणिज्यदूत-क्षेत्र n. (jurisdiction) 
नीय तन्त्र 
consul general महा-वाणिज्यदूत m. 269 
Pujn.﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
consult vb. संपृच्छन, संमन्त्रण n. 
contempt of court Lav न्यायालय consultation संपृच्छा, संमन्त्रणा f. 
अपमान .. consumed उपभुक्त nfn. 
contention विवाद, कलह m. consumer Econ. उपभोक्ता (-तृ) m. contents अन्तर्वस्तु, आधेय 1. consumer's goods Econ. उपभोक्तृ-वस्तु context प्रसंग m. 
continent Geog. महाद्वीप . consumer's surplus Econ. उपभोक्त्रा- contingencies Com. संभावना f. (cf. 
धिक्य .. 
Germ. Möglichkeitsfälle) consumption Econ. (using up) उपभोग contingency Math. संभावना f. 
contingent Com. संभाव्य mfn. contact संस्पर्श m. 
c. liability संभाव्य देय. contact action Physical Chem. संस्पर्श- continue सन्ततन 1. 
क्रिया. 
continued सन्तत mm. contact agent Physical Chem. संस्पर्श- continued product Math.संतत गणनफल 
कर्ता (-1) m. contact catalysis Physical Chem. continued proportion Matb. संतत 
संस्पर्श-आवजन . 
अनुपात m. contact glasses Ophthalmol. संलग्न- continuous संतत, संतानी (-इन्) mfn. 
उपनेत्र. 
continuous lever=perpetual lever contact process Chem. संस्पर्श-विधा f. शाश्वत उद्याम M. contact ring Chem. संस्पर्श-वलय m. continuously संतत contagion Med. संस्पर्श m. (cf. inva- continuous series Matb. संतत-माला 
sion by an organism आक्रमण, in fection संसर्ग) 
continuous variation Biol. संतत contagious Med. सांस्पर्शिक mfa. 
विभेदन contain vb. धारण, अन्तर्धारण 1. 
continuous waves Radio संतत तरंग container धारक m., प्राधान।. container, autoclave Chem, निपीड़- Contortae=Gentianales Bot. (over 
तापक-आधान .. 
lapping petals) दलातिछादिनः m.pl. container, gas Chem. वाति-आधान . (sg. दलातिछादी) container, sterilizingChem. जीवाणुघ्न contorted = twisted Bot. (one 
आधान ॥. 
margin of each leaf is directed contamination दूषण १. 
inwards and the other outwards) contamination of bacteria शाकाणु- न्युद्वेष्टित mfn. ". . दूषण 1.. 
___contour रूपरेखा, बाह्यरेखा (outline), contemplate vb. अनुध्यान ॥. 
बहीरेखा. contemporary समकालीन, अस्मत्कालीन contour ploughing Agriculture 
प्रान्त-कर्षण 1. 
m. 
mfr. .. 
270 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
contraband विनिषिद्ध (short for विधि- contravariant Math. प्रतिचल m. 
निषिद्ध), चौर्यानीत mfn. (smuggled) contribute vb. अंशदान . 
• contract vb. I संकोचन, संकुचन, संक्षेपण . contributed अंशदत्त mfn. 
2 Law प्रसंवेदन १. 
contribution अंशदान n. contract n. Lav प्रसंविदा 
contribution from the revenues of c. account प्रसंविदा-लेखा . 
the Federation संधानके आगमों में से c. cost प्रसंविदा-परिव्यय m. 
अंशदान। c. note :संविदा-पत्र .. 
contributor अंशदाता (तृ) m. c. rent प्रसंविदा-भाटक m. 
contributory अंशदायी (-इन्) fn. Contract Act प्रसंविदा-अधिनियम m. contrivance प्रकल्पना f. contracted संक्षिप्त, संकोचित, संकुचित mfn. contrive vb. (devise) प्रकल्पन . contractee प्रसंविदी (-इन्) m. 
control वशीकरण, यमन, नियंत्रण ?. contractile Zool. संकोची (-इन्) mfn. controller वशी (-इन्) m. contractile vacuole Biol. संकोचि- controller, temperature, electric 
रसधानी. 
furnace विद्युभ्राष्ट्र-ताप-वशीm. contractility Physiol. संकोचिता f. control of sex Zool. स्त्रीपुंस्त्व-नियंत्रण 1. contraction संकोचन, संक्षेपण 1.,संकोच m. control of water content Zool. contractional संकोचीय mfn. 
अन्तःस्थ-जल-यमन .. contractive संकोची (-इन्) mfn. 
control panel वशि-पट्टm. contract of marriage (without reli- control panel, furnace भ्राष्ट्र-वशि-पट्ट 
gious sanction) विवाह-प्रसंविदा f. 
m. contractor r संकोचक m. 
controversy वाद-प्रतिवाद m. 2 प्रसंवेदक m. 
conus arteriosus Zool., Anat, tfuft contradict vb. परावचन . 
मूल .. contradicted परोक्त mfr. (from शतपथ- convalescent Med. उल्लाध mfn. 
ब्राह्मण) 
(ancient word) contradiction परावाक m. (from अथर्व- convallamarin (Comvallaria lily of 
वेद) 
the valley दरी-नलिनी+Lat, amarus contra-entry. Com. प्रति-प्रविष्टि f. 
bitter कटु) Chem. दरी-कट्वि . contra-indicated Med. प्रति-दिष्ट mfn. convallaria (convallar.)= conval contrary विरुद्ध mfn. 
laria flowers=lily of the valley contrast व्यतिरेक m. 
flowers Pharm. दरी-नलिनी. comparison and c. उपमा-व्यतिरेक convallarin Chem. दरी-नलिनिकि. 
m. 
convect vb. (to transfer heat by contrasted कृत-व्यतिरेक mfn. 
convection) न्युद्वहन 1. contrasting व्यतिरेचन n. 
convection I Phys. (transmission contravalence, contravalency ____of heat through fluids) न्यु न 
Physical Cbem. विसंयुजता. 
(नि down-+-उद् up) 
271 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
2 Meteorol. (upward or down- convert=change परिवर्तन 1. ward movement of a limited convert=transform रूपान्तरण M. portion of the atmosphere) न्युद्वहन converted रूपान्तरित, परिवर्तित mfn. 
n. 
converter Elec. (for changing A.C. convectional न्यौवह mfn. 
to D.C. etc.) परिवर्तित्र. convection current Elec. (motion convertible Com. परिवर्त्य mfn. 
of electrically charged particles c. securities परिवर्त्य-प्रतिभूति . or of a charge....) प्रसंवाह m. converting रूपान्तरण, परिवर्तन 1. (not न्युद्वाह) 
convex उदुब्ज mfa. convective discharge Elec. (a convexo-concave forefat mfn. 
continuous discharge of a convexo-convex 38 st mfn. current , at high tension across conveyance वाहन 1., प्रापणी /. 
a spark gap) प्रसंवाही मोच m. conviction संप्रत्यय m. convector प्रसंवाहक m. 
convince vb. संप्रत्ययन 1. convene vb. समाह्वान M. 
convolute (rolled from one margin convened समाहूत mfn. 
to other) परिवलित mfn. convener समाहायक m. 
convolution संवेल्ल m. convenience सुविधा f. 
convolverb. संवेल्लन 1. convenient सकर, सविधायक्त, सुविध min. Convolvulaceae Bot. कालपर्णी-कल' .. conveniently सुविधया (Hindi सुविधा से) (twining vines) संवेल्लिकाःf.pl. convention I (an assembly of Convolvulales Bot. कालपर्णी-गोत्र ॥. 
persons met for some common convolvulic or conyolvulinic acid purpose) प्रसभा . 
Chem. संवेल्लिक अम्ल १. 2 (an agreement) संप्रतिज्ञा f.. convolvulin Chem. संवेल्लि. . .3 (usage) रूढि . 
convolvulinic acid Chem. संवेल्लिक converge vb. अभिसरण 1. 
अम्ल.. convergence अभिसार m., अभिसरण n. convolvulinolicacid Chem. संवेल्लिविक ' (=केन्द्राभिसरण) 
अम्ल . converging adj. अभिसारी (-इन्) mfn. Convolvulus Bot, संवेल्लिकाति f. (-ति for converging rays.Optics अभिसारी रश्मि . प्रजाति genus) 
conydrine=conhydrine conversant fas m. 
conyrine (fr. coniine; a decomposi converse (acting.oppositely) विलोम , tion product of coniine विषगर्जरी) conversely==vice versa विलोमक्रमेण, =2-propyl-pyridine वैषगर्जरी. 
विलोमतः ... 
cooker (an apparatus for cooking) conversion रूपान्तरण, परिवर्तन । 
पत्र. conversion of partnership Com. cool शीत mfn. 
भागिता-रूपान्तरण ". 
cooler शीतक m. 
272 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
cool incubator Chem. ita fecalea m. coordination number Chem. FTESAT coolness aftEST f., STT n. 
en f. coomassie acid blue RL=fast coordination of muscle tal-TETETT 
acid blue RH c. blue-black = acid blue- coordination theory Chem. TT 
black 
at m. c. fast black = acid milling Coorg (on the Malabar coast) ataforfe 
black 
m. c. milling scarlet = acid an coowner HEFTAT (-) m. 
thracene red 
coownership सहस्वामित्व ?. c. navy blue = cyanine navy copaiba (copaib.)=balsam of co 
blue 
paiba Pharm. (an oleoresin tal c. scarlet 9012 K = brilliant UTF; has action on mucous mem 
scarlet 
branes TI SHT) BIHURT m. (short c. violet Av=acid violet 4BS for # TT-TIETTETTT) 
c. wool black D=acid black D copartner Com. Fart (-) m. cooperation werf n., Epifcat f. copartnership Com. EHIAT f. cooperative bank Com. E t copellidine=collidine hexa 
att m. 
hydride Chem. (copellidine is cooperative marketing Entf from collidine; -pe- is added to 
faqura n. 
show the same relation as bet cooperative society सहकारी समाज m. ween piperidine and pyridine; coordinate vb. I (to harmonize, etc.) - piperidine is hexa-hydro-pyri 
समन्वयन .. 
dine; similarly copellidine is 2 Chem. (to attach directly to a hexa-hydro-collidine 76-56-TFTT) central atom) आसंजन . . 
agar eft f. coordinate 1. Math. TTH m. 
Copernicia cerifera=carnauba coordinate covalence Chem. Aris coplanar Math. FTHETETT (FTI), THEFT, 
FESTSAT f. 
Hata mfn. coordinate derivatives Statistics copper adj. afst, ansauf mfn.. 
WATT . (coordinate=of copper vb. Chem. #n. cqual value ) 
I (to cover, coat or sheathe coordinated salts Chem. प्रासंजित लवण with or as with copper) 719-7765T 
.th. 
' 
nu coordinate geometry on-trean f. 2 (to treat with copper or a coordination Fraer m., TUG n. 
copper compound) ताम्र-साधन n. coordination formula Chem. YHT 3 [to produce a metallic appea 
$the . 
rance in a tissue, as cloth) 
273 
18 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
covering it with a very thin layer 
of metallic sulphide] ताम्र-रूपण .. copper Chem. 2757 n. 
c. acetate ताम्र शुक्तीय . c. acetate (oxy) (verdigris) ताम्र ___शुक्तीय n. (जार) (हरिकी) 
c. aceto-arsenite (Paris green) 
ताम्र शुक्त-नेपालित १. (अतिहरिकी) c. acetyl-acetonate. ताम्र शुक्तल 
शुक्तायीय . c. aged black Col. Ind. ताम्र पक्व ' काल m. c.-alloyed ताम्र-मिश्रित mfn. c. amalgam तान-संरस m. c. amino-acetate ताम्र तिक्ती-शुक्तीय । 
c. carbonate ताम्र प्रांगारीय .. c. chlorate ताम्र नीरीय n. c. chloride ताम्र नीरेय 1. c. chloride (ic) ताम्रिक नीरेय n. c. chloride (ous) ताम्य नीरेय n. c. chromate ताम्र वर्णीय .. c. citrate ताम्र निम्बवीय . c. cyanide (technical) ताम्र श्यामेय __n. (परिभाषित) 
c. ferro-cyanate ताम्र अयस्य-श्यामेय 
. 
c. ammonio-carbonate ताम्र 
तिक्तांगारीय. c. ammonio-chloride att faran. 
नीरेय . c. ammonio-sulphate ताम्र तिक्त - शुल्बीय . c. ammonium chloride ताम्र 
तिक्तातु नीरेय . c. ammonium sulphate ताम्र 
तिक्तातु शुल्बीय .. c. arsenate तान्न नेपालीय. c. arsenite ताम्र नेपालितn. c. benzoate ताम्र पीय . c. black Col. Ind. ताम्र काल m. c. blue=azurite blue ताम्र नील, ___ मध्यनीलाहरि m. 
c. borate तान टांकीय ॥. 
c. bromide (ic) ताम्रिक दुरेय . "f. bromide (ous) ताम्य दुरेय . .::Cr bronze ताम्र कांस्य ॥. 
Sen brown= Armenian red Col. 
Tad लान बन्न, न्यावापीतातिरक्त m. 
c. filings (needles) ताम्र-रेत्रीक्षेप M. 
(सूची) c. foil ताम्र-पर्ण.. c. formate ताम्र वम्रीय १. c.gauze ताम्र-जाली f. c. gauze roller ताम्र जाली वेल्लन . c. glance = chalcocite Mineral. 
ताम्र रुचा. c.glycine ताम्र मध्वी f. Cm, granular FUTHAT En. c. green= Bremen green, iris 
green, malachite green, mineral green, mountain green, Olympian green, verditer green ताम्र हरि, मध्य पीतातिहरि m. c. hemi-oxide ताम्र सामि-जारेय . . c. hydroxide ताम्र उदजारेय. c. index=c. number c.iodate ताम्र जम्बीय. c. iodide (ous) ताम्य जम्बेय n. c. lactate ताम्र दुग्धीय . c. loss Elec. ताम्र-हानि . c. mercuric iodide ताम्र पारदिक 
जम्बेय. c. monoxide तान्न एकजारेय.. : c. nickel (niccolite) ताम्र. रूपक n. 
274 
THE GREAT ENGLISH INDIAN DICTIONARY 
. 
c. nitrate ताम्र भूयीय . 
c. sulphide (-ic) ताम्रिक शुल्बेय . c. number = copper index, c. sulphite (-ous) ताभ्य शुल्बित .. 
copper value Anal. Chem. c. tartrate ताम्र न्यासवीय n. ताम्र-संख्या f. 
c. thio-cyanate (-ous) ताम्रय गन्ध c. oleate (technical) als Freita n. श्यामीय . 
(परिभाषित) 
c. turnings ताम्र-खंड, ताम्र-चक्रक्षेप m. c. oxalate ताम्र तिग्मीय . 
c. value=c. number c. oxide तान जारेय 1. 
c. vanadate ताम्र रोचीय n. c. paint Col. Ind. ताम्र रंगलेप m. c. vitriol = copper sulphate c. phenol-sulphonate ताम्र दर्शव- . ताम्र काचर-ताम्र शुल्बीय n. 
शुल्बायीय n. 
c. wire ताम्र-तन्तु m. c. phosphate ताम्र भास्वीय ॥. 
c. wire roller ताम्र-तन्तु-वेल्लन १. c. phosphide ताम्र भास्वेय . 
c. yellow-canary yellow ताम्र C.-plate n. ताम्र-पट्टm. 
पीत, प्रपीतारक्त m. C.-plate vb. (to make a copper- copperas=vitriol = green vitriol 
plate engraving of) ताम्र-पट्टन कासीस n. 
c. black कासीस-कालिमा (-मन्) m. c. potassium chloride # erg coppering Chem. (envelope or 
नीरेय. 
covering of copper) ताम्रावरण ?. c. potassium sulphate ताम्र दहातु copperization Chem. ताम्रायण, ताम्र 
शुल्बीया. 
___रोपण १. c. powder ताम्र-क्षोद m. 
copperize vb. Chem. (to impregnate c., precipitated निस्सादित ताम्रा . or plate with copper) ताम्र-व्यापन, c. propionate ताम्र प्रमेदीय . 
ताम्र-रोपण n. c. pyrites = chalcopyrite ताम्र copperleaf (a plant) ताम्रपत्र m. 
माक्षीक.. 
copperone=cupferron (a-benzoin c. red Col. Ind. ताम्र रक्त, मध्यपीताति-... oxime) द्वयष्टा f. [द्वयष्ट' copper (द्वे __ रक्त m. 
_सुवर्णरजते अश्नुते व्याप्नोति )] c. rust ताम्र-मंडूर. 
coppersmith ताम्रकार m. c. salicylate ताम्र नम्रलीय 1. copperware TEHTUS n. c. selenate ताम्र मेचीय ॥. 
copperworks ताम्रशाला f. c. silicate ताम्र सैकतीय n. 
coppery (mixed with copper;. con c. silico-fluoride (technical) taining copper; made of copper; 
ताम्र सकत-तरस्वेय 1. (परिभाषित) 
like copper, as in colour of taste) C. sodium cyanide (technical) ताम्र-मिश्रित, ताम्र-युत, ताम्र-मय, ताम्र-सदृश, ___ ताम्र क्षारातु श्यामेय 1. (परिभाषित) ताम्र-वर्ण, ताम्र-स्वाद mfn. 
c.. sub-oxide तान अनु-जारेय. copra नारिकेल .. c. sulphate ताम्र शुल्बीय . . __copra oil नारिकेल-तैल n 
273 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
पद 
GAR 
co-precipitate vb. Chem. सह-निस्सादन Corallium nobile=C. rubrum= 
red coral Zool. राज-प्रवाल रक्त copro- शकृत 
प्रवाल m. copro-sterol, copro-sterin=ster- coral reef Phys. Geog. प्रवाल-शृंखला f. 
corol Biochem. (it is a choles- coral tree, Indian पारिजात m. tanol, a. product of cholesterol Corchorus Bot. शणति f. (-ति for प्रजाति 
present in feces), शकृत्-पैत्तव m. genus) coprozoic Biol. शकृज्जीवी (-इन्) mfn. C. capsularis सामान्य शण m. copulate vb. Chem. (to couple) cord I रज्जु f. 
मिथुनीकरण, मिथुनीभवन . 
2 (128 cu. feet) रज्जु copulation Chem. मिथुनीकरण, मिथुनी- (vocal) (घोष-तन्त्री f. 
भवन 1. 
cordate Bot. हृद्वत् mfn. copulative Chem. मिथुनीय mfn. corda tympani Anat. पटह-रज्जु f. copy प्रतिलिपि, अनुकृति f. 
Cordia Bat. श्लेष्मातकति f. (-ति for copy-hold Law पट्ट-लेख m., पट्ट-भूमि . प्रजाति genus) copy-holder I प्रतिलिपि-धर m. 
C. myxa सामान्य श्लेष्मातक m. 2 Lal पट्टलेख-धारी (-इन् ) m. 
cordite Mil. (a smokeless powder.. copying of drawings Engineering .. pressed out into cords) wente 
उद्रेखानुकरण . 
m. copying press (letter press) प्रतिलिपि- cordite basin रज्जुस्फोट-पात्री f. 
पीड m. (पत्र-पीड) 
Cordylobia anthropophaga=tum copy-right Com. प्रतिलिपि-अधिकार m. bu fly=ver du cayor मानव मुद्गर coquettishly हावभावेन 
मक्षी f.. coraco-clavicular branch Zool. core आन्तरक. 
उरोंस्याक्षक-शाखा . 
c. area प्रान्तरक क्षेत्रफल 1. coraco-clavicular fenestra Zool. coreine-celestine blue 
उरोंस्याक्षक गवाक्ष m. 
coreopsine pour cuir=phosphine coracoid Anat. (extends from the Corethra Zool. लघुशुंडाति f. (-प्राति for 
_scapula to the sternum) उरोंस्या f. प्रजाति genus) coracoid bone Zool. उरोंस्यास्थि .. . C. cinctipes रशनापाद लघुशुण्ड M. coracoid process Zool. उरोंस्या-प्रवर्ष Corethrinae (a sub-family of mos 
quitoes having a short probo coral प्रवाल m. 
scis) लघुशुंडानुवंश m. coral fish Zool. प्रवाल-मत्स्य m. 
coriaceous Bot. चर्मल mfn. coralline प्रवाली f. 
coriander धान्यक n. coralline roots Bot. प्रवालरूप मूल . coriander oil धान्यक-तैल 1. Corallium Zool. प्रवालाति f. (-प्राति for coriandrol (coriander +-ol). Chem. 
प्रजाति genus), ... 
धान्यवm. 276 
. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
Coriandrum Bot. धान्यकति f. (-ति for corneal reflex (image of light re 
प्रजाति genus) 
___ffected from cornea) स्वाच्छक C. sativum सामान्य धान्यक m. 
प्रतिबिम्ब m. cori-in (Lat. corium hide) Biochem. cornein Chem. (it constitutes the 
चमि.. 
organic basis of corals विद्रुम) विद्रुमि corindon=corundum (taken from f. 
Sanskrit कुरुविन्द, through Tamil corneitis=keratitis स्वच्छाकोप M. 
कुरुन्दम्) Mineral. कुरुविन्द M. . corneo- I Bot. (corneous) शृंग्य corinth brown Col. Ind. रोहित बभ्रु 2 Ophthalmol. स्वच्छा 
corneo-blepharon Ophthalmol. (ad corioflavine Col. Ind. (used for hesion between the eyelid and ___dying leather) चर्मपिंगी. 
cornea) वर्त्म-स्वच्छा-बन्ध m. coriphosphine Col. Ind. चर्मभास्वी /. corneo-iritis Ophthalmol. स्वच्छा-कृष्णा corium=derma चर्म . 
कोपm. cork=phellem 
corneo-sclera Ophthalmol. स्वच्छा-शुक्ला cork=periderm Bot. (outer bark) f. 
त्वक्षा f= बाह्यवल्क m. 
corneo-scleral स्वच्छा-शुक्ला cork त्वक्षा. (त्वक्ष cortex) 
corneo-scleral junction स्वच्छा-शुक्ला cork black Col. Ind. त्वक्षा काल m. सन्धि m. (सन्धि is from सुश्रुत) ___c. blue त्वक्षा नील m. 
corneous शृंग्य mfn. cork borer त्वक्षा-छिद्रक m. 
corner कोण m. corkcambium = phellogen Bot. corner vb. हस्तेकरण .. 
त्वधा . 
corner clip कोण-स्वज m. cork formation त्वक्षा- 
निर्माण . 
cornering the market Econ. farfur cork press Chem. त्वक्षा-पीड m. 
हस्तेकरण . cork-screw rule Phys. त्वक्षा-भ्रमि-नियम corner point=critical point अश्रिबिंदु 
m. 
द्रु m. (trees corner shelf कोण-निधाय m. द्रु having corky wood) 
cornfield धान्यक्षेत्र n. corm Bot. (short bulblike fleshy cornin (cornus dogwood) Chem. _stem) कन्दिका . 
श्वकाष्ठि. cormorant Zool. जलकाक m. (Hindi Cornish mining ton (2352 1bs.; 21 
पनकौआ) . 
___cwts., II2 lbs. each; 16,464,000 corn धान्य n. 
grains) खनि-प्रवर्त m. cornea Anat. (transparent part of corn oil मर्कटान्न-तैल 1. 
the outer coat) स्वच्छा f. 
corn syrup = liquid glucose corneal Anat. स्वच्छा-, स्वाच्छक, स्वच्छीय Pharm. तरल मधुमn. 
mfn. 
• cornu Anat. शृंगा . 
277 
__ 
m. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
cornus=dogwood 599167 n. 
3 (not having an error) अभ्रान्त cornutine Chem. (it may be impure mfn. 
ergotoxine ग्विषी) प्रारुग्विषी f. accurate परिशुद्ध, सुसाधु afn. corolla (C) Bot. (petals of a flower exact तथ्य, यथार्थ mfn. 
collectively) दली m. (दलानां समूहः) precise सुतथ्य, यथार्थतम mfn. 
correct vb. शोधन, संशोधन 1. corollary Math. (to a theorem, pro- corrected aifan, xattiera mfn. 
blem or proposition) उपप्रमेय, उप- corrected death-rate संशोधित मृत्यु-अर्घ निर्मय, उपसाध्य . 
m. Coromandel Geog. चोलमण्डल . corrected integral Math. शोधित corona Bot. मुकुट n. 
अनुकल m. corona ciliaris-zona ciliaris afa- corrected pressure Chem. Tifer 
काय-वलय-वलिक वलय M. (a belt of निपीडm. ciliary processes) 
correcting शोधन, संशोधन . coronary artery Anat. वलय-रोहिणी correcting for index error देशना 
f. 
विभ्रम-शोधन . Iोष्ठवलय-रोहिणी . 
correcting for zero error Phys. 2 आमाशयवलय-रोहिणी . 
शून्य-विभ्रम-शोधन .. 3 (artery of the heart) हृद्रोहिणी f. correction शोधन, संशोधन 1., शुद्धि f. coronary process Zool. (upward correction tables शोधन-सारणी f. 
process of the angulo-splenial correctness साधुता, शुद्धता . bone of the frog) ककुत्-प्रवर्ध m. correctness of data Statistics सामग्नी 
(ककुत् humplike) corpora adiposa Zool. स्नेह-काय m. correct position Phys. शुद्ध-स्थिति . corporate Econ. समामेलित mfn. correlation सह-संबन्ध, परस्पर-सम्बन्ध m. corporation Com. निगम m. (ancient correspondence पत्र-व्यवहार, पत्राचार m. 
word) 
commercial c. वाणिज्य-पत्राचार m. corporation tax निगम-कर m. 
'correspondence clerk पत्र-लिपिक m. corps निकाय m. 
corresponding तद्विध, तदनुरूप, “संवादी, corpse=cadaver शव m. 
तत्संवादी (-इन्) mfn. corpuscle Anat. I (composite cell corresponding entries Com. संवादि ____ body) देहाणु m. 
__ प्रविष्टि f. . 2 (a cell, a blood-cell) कोशा, रुधिर- corresponding limitations तत्सम्बद्ध कोशा. 
परिसीमा . corpus luteum extract Pharm. नारंग- corresponding part संवादि अंग n. . 
कायं-निःसार m. 
corresponding points = identical correct 1 TE, are mfn. 
.points Physiol. tatet farg m. 2 (accurate, proper) सम्यक् afm. . corridor संपथ m. 
शुद्धता . 
278 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
corridor cars Rly. संपथ-यान 1. cortical secretion Zool. बाह्यक-उदासर्ग corrode vb. (cor- सं- +rodere V रद्) m. 
(to gnaw away; used of strong corticotropin Zool. बाह्यकपोषि f. acid, caustic alkali or other cortin (cortex + -in) Biochem. त्वक्षि chemical) संरदन, संक्षारण .. erode अपक्षारण . 
Corti's canal=Corti's tunnel corroding संक्षारण .. 
Corti's rods Anat. आ-शलाका. (मा corroding lead संक्षारण सीस.. 
short for आधारकला basilar mem corrosion संक्षारण 1. 
brane) corrosional 1 (resulting from cor- Corti's tunnel=Corti's canal Anat. 
rosion) संक्षारित mfn. 
प्रा-सुरंगा. (आ short for आधारकला 2 (pertaining to corrosion) basilar membrane) संक्षारणिय mfn. 
corundophilite Mineral. (a.chlorite corrosive संक्षारक, संक्षारी (-इन्) mfn. ferater occurring with corundum) corrosive action Chem. संक्षारण-क्रिया कुरुहरितिजm. (-इज for खनिज mine 
ral) 
corrosive sublimate Chem. संक्षारक 
उत्साद m. corrugate vb. (to form into wrin. 
kles वलि) वलीयन 1. corrugated वलिमत् mfn. corrugated iron वलिमद् अयस् । corrugator I (that which corru- 
gates) वलीयक m. 2 (an implement for furrowing 
land) सीताकर m. corrupt practice or custom कुव्यवहार, 
कदाचार m. cortex r (Lat. bark') त्वक्षm. 
2 Anat. (outer layer of an organ) बाह्यक.. 3 (of lens) Ophthalmol. गोर्द n. (soft 
corundum, corindon Mineral. 
(taken from Sanskrit कुरुविन्द, 
through Tamil कुरुन्दम्) कुरुविन्द m. coryl Pharm. (a. solution of methyl 
प्रोदल chloride in ethyl दक्षुल chlo 
ride नीरेय) प्रोदक्षुलेय m. corymb Bot. faf9c5 n. Corynebacterium (C.) Bact. (orga 
nisms with a tendency to form clubshaped and pointed forms) मुद्गराणु m. (मु.) 
C. acnes (found in the lesions ___ of acne) युवपिडक मु. . C. diphtheriae (the cause of 
diphtheria in man)=diph theria bacillus - LoffHer's bacillus = Klebs-Loffler bacillus = Mycobacterium 
diphtheriae प्रबलास मु. C. enzymicum fiua 7. C. equi अश्व मु. C. flavidum पीत मु. 
part) 
cortex cerebri Anat. प्रमस्तिष्क-बाह्यक .. cortical extract बाह्यक-निस्सार m. cortical labyrinth (in the kidney) 
बाह्यक-गहन .. cortical layer बाह्यक-स्तर m. 
279﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
C. hoffmannii. See C. pseudo- cosec (cosecant) Trig. व्युज्ज्या f. 
diphtheriae 
(व्युत्क्रम-ज्या) C. lymphae vaccinalis (dis. cosecant Trig. व्युत्क्रम-ज्या f. 
covered in lymph of calves) co-sharer Econ. सहांशभागी (-इन्) m. वत्सलसीका मु. 
cosine (cos) Trig. कोटिज्या f. (कोज्या) C. lymphophilum लसीकाप्रिय मु. cosmetic white=bismuth white C. mallei-Malleomyces mal- cosmic ब्रह्माण्ड 
lei 
cosmic ray ब्रह्माण्ड-रश्मि M. C. murium मूष मु. 
cosmopolitan 1 (distributed all the C. ovis = C. pseudotubercu world over) विश्वव्यापी (-इन्') mfn. 
losis ovis 
2 Econ. सार्वभौम mfn. C. pseudo-diphtheriae (much cosmopolitan economics सार्वभौम 
resembles C. diphtheriae)- अर्थशास्त्र n. Bacillus clavatus=Bacillus cosmos Fauve n. pseudodiphthericus=Bacil- cosmos red extra=Congo red lus Hoffmannii = Hoff- cost Com. परिव्यय, व्यय m. (ancient 
mann's bacillus कूट-प्रबलास मु. words) C. pseudotuberculosis कूटयक्ष्म मु. c. account परिव्यय-लेखा.. C. pseudotuberculosis. mur c. ledger परिव्यय-प्रपंजी. 
ium=C.kutscheri मूष-कूटयक्ष्म मु. c. of living निर्वाह-व्यय m. C. pseudotuberculosis ovis fa c. of living index number 
कूटयक्ष्म मु. 
निर्वाह-व्यय-देशनांक m. C. pyogenes पूयजन मु. 
c. of maintenance भरणपोषण C. renale (causes pyelitis in परिव्यय m. 
cattle) गोवृक्क मु. (short for c. of production उत्पादन-परिव्यय m. गोवृक्कनिवापकोप मु.) 
c. of reproduction पुनरुत्पाद-व्यय m. C. segmentosum (found in the c. price परिव्यय-मूल्य, ऋय-मूल्य ?. _nose) नास मु. 
basic c.prime c. Corypha Bot. श्रीतालति f. (-ति for प्रजाति contract c. प्रसंविदा-परिव्यय m. 
departmental c. वैभागिक परिव्यय m. C. umbraculifera सामान्य श्रीताल factory c. निर्माणी-परिव्यय m. 
flat c. (prime, basic)प्रधान परिव्यय m. cos (cosine) Trig. कोज्या f. (कोटिज्या) gross c. सकल परिव्यय m. -Cosane (from Gk. eikosi twenty) multiple c. बहुविध परिव्यय m. 
-विशीत्य . 
office c. कार्यालय परिव्यय m. Coscinium Bot. वनहरिद्राति । 
operating c. चालन-परिव्यय m. प्रजाति genus) 
prime c. प्रधान परिव्यय m. Cf. Berberis दारुहरिद्राति . . 
process c. विधा-परिव्यय m. 280 
genus) 
, 
m. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
- 
- 
m. 
selling c. विक्रय-परिव्यय m. 
c. light blue तूल लघु नील m. single c. एकविध परिव्यय m. 
c. milling black तूल संकोचन काल terminal c. (of each separate ____m. 
contract or job) एकैक परिव्यय M. 
c. orange तूल नारंग m. total c. (gross c., selling c.) समस्त 
c. ponceau तूल अधिरक्तापीत m. परिव्यय m. 
c. pure blue तूल शुद्ध नील m. working c. कर्मवाहक परिव्यय m. c. purple तूल नीलारुण m. works c. (cost of production, C. red TT TT m. 
factory cost, manufacturing c. rhodine तूल पाटली f. cost) निर्माण-परिव्यय m. 
c. rubine तूल रक्ती f. costa Bot. प्रनाडीf. 
c. scarlet तूल शोण m. costal 1 (pertaining to a rib) ani _c. yellow तूल पीत m 
2 (pertaining to the sides of the cotton cake तूल-खलिm. body) पार्श्व 
cotton powder तूल-क्षोद m. costal cartilage Arat. पशु-कास्थि. cotton rock Mineral. तूल-शैल m. Costus Bot. कुष्ठति f. (-ति for प्रजाति cotton-root bark Pharm. तूल-मूल-वल्क 
genus) 
C. speciosus सामान्य कुष्ठ m. cottonseed तूल-बीजn. cot (cotangent) Trig. कोस्प (कोटि-स्पर्शी) cottonseed cake तलबीज-खलि m. cotangent Trig. कोटि-स्पर्शी (-इन् ) m. cottonseed oil तूलबीज-तैल .. cotarnine (from narcotine by trans- cotton spinner तूल-कर्तक m. 
position of letters) Chem. i f. cotton spinners' hygrometer pet c. hydrochloride नद्री उदनीरेय . कर्तक उन्दमान m. 
c. phthalate नैद्री व्युत्तैलीय . cotton spirits Dyeing (a mordant coterminous Math. सहावसान mfn. for cotton) तूल-निषेचन १. coto Pharm. (bark of a tree, used cotton sugar = raffinose Chem. 
in diarrheas and intestinal trou तूल-शर्करा . 
bles)=paracoto 1979 m. cotton wax तूल-सिक्थ n. cotter Mach. n. स्फाणी f. ' 
cotton wool=raw cotton fa m. cotter Mach. vb. स्फाणीयन . 
cotyledon=seed leaf Bot. बीज-पत्र. cottered joint स्फाणीयित सन्धि m. cotyledonary stalk Bot. बीजपत्र-वृन्त cotton तूल 1., कर्पास m. 
1. cotton black Col. Ind. तुल काल m. couch तल्पm. 
c. blue तूल नील m. 
couch grass=agropyrum (agro c. brown तूल ब« m. 
pyr.)-triticum = triticum re c. corinth तुल रोहित m. 
pens Pharm. शायिघास m: . c. dark brown तूल असित बभ्रु m. cough कास m. 
c. fast scarlet तूल स्थिर शोण m. coulomb Pbys. धुभर m. 
281 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
- 
- 
- 
coumalic acid (coumarin + malic) table or board where money is 
Chem. अनन्तकोलिक अम्ल 
counted) गणित्र .. coumalin=1,2-pyrone Chem. अनन्त- 2. विरोधी (-इन्) mfn. 
कोलि. 
counter- (denoting opposite, con coumaran, coumarane अनन्तमूलिन्य n. trary, etc.) प्रति-, वि coumatate Chem. अनन्तमूलीय . 
counteract pb. I प्रतिविधान . coumaric Chem. अनन्तमूलिक mfn. 
2 Music (the effect of previous 0-coumaric acid Chem. ऊ-अनन्तमूलिक sharps, flats, etc.) sfatur n. 
अम्ल n. 
counteracted ufafafa mfn. coumarilic acid Chem. अनन्तमूरिलिक counteraction प्रतिविधान n. 
अम्ल. 
counterbalance = counterweigh coumarin Chem. अनन्तमूलि f. 
____b. प्रतितोलन. coumarinic acid Chem. अनन्तमूलियिक counterclockwise = anti-clock 
अम्ल n. 
___wise प्रतिघटि, वामावर्त coumarone = benzo-furan Chem. countercurrent प्रतिवाहm. 
अनन्तमूला . 
counter-foil afa-qoi n. coumarone resin = cumar=cu countermand (contrary order) 
mar gum or resin अनन्तमूला-उद्यास विप्रत्यादेश m. m. 
countermeasure प्रत्युपाय m. council परिषद् 
counterpoisen. प्रतिभार m. council board or table परिषत्-पटल 1. counterpoise vb. (counterbalance) councillor परिषद्य m. 
प्रतितोलन . councillorship fuerat f. 
counterpoising balance प्रतिभार-तुला councilman परिषत्पुरुष m. Council of Ministers मंत्रि-परिषद् . counter-radar measures (CRM) Council of State राज्य-परिषद् . 
प्रति-तेजोन्वेष-उपाय m. (प्र. ते. उ.) council of war युद्ध-परिषद् . 
counter-reaction Chem. वि-प्रतिक्रिया . councilwoman परिषद्या, परिषन्महिला. countersink vb. Mach. शंकुखनन ।. counsel I मन्त्रण N., मन्त्रणा f. 
countersink n. (of adrill) शंकुखन m. 2 समुपदेशी (-इन्) M. 
countersunk शंकुखात mfn. counselled मन्त्रित mfn. 
countersunk head (of a rivet) counsellor समुपदेष्टा m. 
शंकुखात शिर.. count I vb. गणन' 1. (गणन is a general countervailing duty Econ. प्रति-कर 
· · word for ' count, enumerate, m. 
compute and calculate) , counterweigh=counterbalance vb. "20. (a nobleman) सामन्त m. 
प्रतितोलन ॥. Heast c. Phys. अल्पिष्ठ माप m. counter-weight equivalent counter 'T (a counting machine; a weight प्रति-भार=सम-भार m.. 
282 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
. 
. 
,countess #mtf. 
glass jar c. Chem. काचकलश-आवरण counting गणन . counting house (for keeping books, covered wagon Rly. छादित वाहन . 
accounts, letters, etc.) पुस्तादि-गृह covering आवरण 1. 
cover note Com. प्रावरण-पत्र . country देश m. 
coversed sine Math. उत्क्रम-कोटिज्या Coupier's blue=induline Coupier's spirit blue=brilliant coversine=coversed sine Math. 
oil black base 
उत्को उत्क्रम-कोटिज्या . couple Phys. मिथुन 1. 
cover slip Micros. आवरण खण्ड m. couple vb. Chem. मिथुनन, मिथुनीकरण, co-volume Physical Chem. FiqfEat f. - मिथुनीभवन . 
cowcatcher Ry. Eng. पशुक्षिप m. coupled wheels RY. मिथुनित चक्र n. cowpox=vaccinia Med. गोमसूरिका. coupler Rly. Eng. मिथुनक m. cowrie, cowry कपर्द m. coupling n. Mach. मिथुनक m. coxa (from Sanskrit कक्ष) Zool. (the coupling orange extra conc. first segment of the leg of an 
direct orange R 
insect) कक्षांग n. . coupling rod Macb. मिथुनन' दण्ड m. cr. (credit) समा. (समाकलन) coupon Com. पर्णिका . 
Cr (chromium) Chem. व (वर्णातु) course of lectures व्याख्यान-माला f. crab कर्कट m. course of studies पाठ-चर्या f. 
crab louse कर्कट-यूका . court न्यायालय m. 
crack vb. पटन, पाटन 1. court of appeal पुनर्विचारालय m. crack n. पाटm. court of justice न्यायालय m., धर्माधिकरण cracking Chem. (breaking up by heat 
and pressure of complex hydro court of law-law court व्यवहारालय carbons) अपदलन . 
crackle vb. (decrepitate) चटचटन १. co-variant Math. सह-चल m. 
crackling चटचटन . co-variation Math. सह-विचरण n. crack-proof अपाटी (-इन्) mfn. covenant Law (promise of legal va- cradle = receiver rest (of a 
lidity, the document or writing telephone) आश्रय=आदातृ-आश्रय m. containing the terms of the (आदात्राशय) 
agreement or promise) संश्राव m. craft शिल्प m. covenanted संश्रुत mfn. 
craft guild Econ. fereastruit f. cover (sheet) = chadar अवच्छद m. crafty device=artifice कूट-युक्ति . 
(ancient word; cf. modern औछाड़) cramp Zool. अपतान m. (ancient word cover आवरण . 
अपतानक) burette c. Chem. द्रवमि-आवरण 1. crane I (a bird) बक m. 
283 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
2 (machine for moving heavy word) Zool. ferre m. (cf. Hindi, weights) m. 
Marathi भिंगा) crane tree 271947 m. (Eng. is trans- crayfish=crawfish=sea crayfish 
lated from Sanskrit) 
spring lobster Zool, uffata m. cranial=cranic pri mfn. 
crayon, glass marking praiairt f. cranial bone Anat, utfe n.. cream I tm., Fatfat f. (both are Craniata Zool. #ferim.pl. (sg.ust) ancient words) craniate Zool. 976 (-E) m. 
2 (colour) Faqatalat m. cranic=cranial 
cream beige (the colour sandstone) cranio- I (cranium) *** 
$95779T m. 2 (cranial and) #787 
cream buff स्ववपीतारक्त m. craniology (the science dealing with cream caustic (an impure form of 
variations in size, shape and pro solid caustic soda) TT m. portions of the cranium) कर्पर- cream cheese शर-दधिक n. Hift f. 
cream of lime चूर्णक-शरm. craniometer कर्परमान m. 
cream of tartar Chem. न्यासव-शर m. craniometry ufafa f. 
creamo-meter TFT m. cranium (Gk. kranion, kara head cream tube-creamometer 
from Sanskrit शिरस्) Anat. कर्पर crease भंजरेखा f. m. 
creasol=creosol 7949 m. skull Filfe f. 
creasote=creosote piata m. head शिर.. 
creatine Biochem. Faut f. cephalon , Tn. 
c. phosphoric acid fierft anffa crank Mach. (a bent portion of an FT n. 
axle; an arm; an elbow-shaped creatinine (from creatine Haft) brace, etc.) mit m. ('elbow") 
Biochem. Fifoit f. crank case 94-97 n. 
c. hydrochloride ऋव्यियी उदनीरेय crank pin Mach. (the cylindrical n. 
piece which forms the handle, __c.zinc chloride ऋव्यियी कुप्यातु नीरेय or to which the connecting rod is attached) miranin. 
credit n. Com. 5979 m. (H. pra, ta; TTT crank-shaft 
92 +$ 
is derived from Sanskrit प्रत्यय) crank web (the portion of a crank credit Com. 3 m., 141ETT 1. 
between the crankpin and the __c. balance समाकलन-आधिक्य . shaft, or between adjacent crank c. entry #1747-5fafoa f. pins) ***-*m. 
c. note समाकलन-पत्र . crawfish=crayfish 
C. sale barc- 
f m . crayfish, shrimp, prawn (a 
C. slip YHTET-Puff f. 
284 
11. 
general 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
c. transaction उद्धार-व्यवहारm. cres-egol ऋविप-तुल्यव m. cash c. रोक-ऋण "., रोक-उद्धार m. . cresol (from creosote #f94, a variant letter of c. प्रत्यय-पत्र . 
of क्रव्यप) Chem. ऋविपव m. credited Com. समाकलित mfn. 
ortho-c. ऊर्ध्व-ऋविपव m. crediting Com. समाकलन 1. 
meta-c. सम-ऋविपद m. creditor Com. उत्तमर्ण, धनी (-इन्) m. para-c. परा-ऋविपवm. creditor's ledger = supplier's. cresol black Col. Ind. ऋविपव काल m. ___ledger Com. उत्तमर्ण प्रपंजी f. 
___c. blue-black ऋविपव नील-कृष्ण m. creep vb. सर्पण . 
cresolin ऋविपवि. creeper Bot. वल्लरी. 
cresol iodide=iodo-cresol Chem. creeping stem Bot. सी स्तम्भ m. 
ऋविपव जम्बेय n. cremocarp (fruit) Bot. युग्मवेश्म n. m-cresol sulphonic acid Chem. सम 
(two-celled) 
ऋविपव शुल्बायिक अम्ल n. crenate Bot. (having the margin cut cresorcin शेक्रविप m. 
into rounded scallops) Tarsu cresorcinol, cresorcin (cresol + mfn. 
orcin) = 4-methyl-resorcinol crenation Anat. (in blood corpu- Chem. शेऋविप m. ___scles) दन्तुरता f. 
cresotate==cresotinate *fagter n. creolin (a preparation of creosol cresotic.Chem. ऋविपिक mfn. 
• and resin soap) ऋव्यपि . 
___c. acid ऋविपिक अम्ल N. creos-, creoso- (creosote) क्रव्यप ciesotinate fara n. creosol, creasol (crees-+-ol) Chem. cresotine yellow Col. Ind. ऋविपी पीत 
क्रव्यपव m. . creosotate ऋव्यपीयn. 
cresotinic=cresotic creosote (Gk. kreos from xa flesh cres-oxide (cresol + oxide) Chem. 
+ soyein to preserve पा)=creo- ऋविप-जारेय. sotum . (creosot.) = creasote cres-oxy- (cresol + oxy -)=toloxy Pharm. ऋव्यप m. 
ऋविप-जार creosote vb. ऋव्यप-व्यापन 1. 
crest I (in bones) शिखर . ' creosote carbonate Pharm. Fanny 2 (of birds) चूडा, शिखा f. 
प्रांगारीय . 
crest angle (of the bridge of spec creosote oil क्रव्यप-तैलn. 
tacles) शिखर-कोण m. creosotic ऋव्यपिय mfn. 
cresyl (cresol+ -yl) Chem. ऋविपल . creosotum=creosote 
cresylate=cresoxide Chem. ऋविपलीय cres- ऋविप- : cres-amine Pharm. (a mixture of tri- cresyl blue Col. Ind. ऋविपल नील m. 
cresol and ethylenediamine) *faq- cresyl carbonate (o-, m-, p-) Chem. तिक्ती f.. 
ऋविपल प्रांगारीय . (ऊ-, सम-, प-) 285. 
m. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
cresylene-tolylene Chem. ऋविपलेन्य Sanskrit कृमि-ज 'produced by 
worms') कामिज m. cresylene brown Col. Ind. ऋविपलेन्य crimson lake कामिज लाक्षक m. 
बर्घm. 
crimson red कामिज रक्त m. 0- cresyl ethyl ether Chem. ऊ-ऋविपल Crinum Bat. सुदर्शनति f. (-ति for प्रजाति 
दक्षुल दक्षु m. 
genus) cresyl fast violet Col. Ind. ऋविपल स्थिर C. defiexum सामान्य सुदर्शन m. 
नीललोहित M. 
crisis Com. संकट 1. cresylic Chem. ऋविपलिक mfn. 
crista=acoustic spot Zool. श्रवणबिंदु ___c. acid ऋविपलिक अम्ल n. 
___m. cresylite (an explosive) ऋविपलोट m. Cristispira (a membrane is wound cresyl methyl ether (o-, m-, p-) round परि an axis) परिकुन्तलाणु m. 
Chem. विपल प्रोदल दक्षु m. (ऊ-, सम-, प.) (परिकु.) cresyl printing blue Col. Ind. afaust cristobalite (silica in white octa 
मुद्रण नील m. 
___hedrons) धवलसैकजा.. creta (cret.)=chalk Pharm. खटी f. criterion निकष m. ' creta camphorata Pharm. कर्पूर-खटीf. crith (Gk. krithe a. barley corn) Cretaceous period Geol. ei-yot n. Physical Chem. (a small weight) creta praeparata = chalk Pharm. प्रयव m. 
खटी. 
Crithidia. (a genus, having half an -crete (concrete) -संघा f. (concrete undulating membrane) Zool. अर्ध 
संघा) 
. शीताति. (-पाति for प्रजाति genus%B cretin अ-जाम्बुक-बाल m. 
शीत a sail) cretinism Med. अ-जाम्बुक-बाल्य 1. (बाल्य critical संकट mfn. 
caused by lack of iodine praait critical angle Optics, Aeronautics in drinking water) 
काष्ठा-कोण m. crevice face m. (ancient word) critical concentration Physical crew कारक m. 
Chem. काष्ठा-संकेन्द्रण 1. cricket Zool. मिल्लीक. m. 
critical point=corner point Engi cricoid Anat. (it is shaped like a neering offers m. - signet ring मुद्रा) मुद्रा . 
critical situation Mil.प्रान्त-परिस्थिति cricoid cartilage Anat. 76T-TFF n. (critical=border line) crime अपराध, दोष m., पातक .. 
critical stage Mil. प्रान्त-अवस्था f eriminal पातकी (-इन ) m. 
(critical=border line) criminal law दंड-विधि, साहस-विधि.m. critical temperature Physical Chem. criminology आपराधिकी f... 
.. काष्ठा-ताप m. Saritison (from Spanish • Cremesin, CRM . (counter-radat measures) प्र. 
rrabic girmir, ultimately from ते. उ. (प्रति-तेजोन्वेष उपाय) 
286 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
croak vb. OCTEUT n. 
crocus antimonii=crocus of anti croceic acid Chem. प्रकुंकुमिक अम्ल 7. mony crocein (Lat. croceus from Sanskrit crocus of antimony=crocus anti 
) Chem. sayfa f. 
monii = crocus metallorum croceine Chem. प्रकुंकुमी . 
1977-94 n. croceine acid Chem. 1944 m. croft (a small enclosed field, esp. croceine scarlet Col. Ind. anat TOT one adjoining a house) firspre m. 
mn. 
crooked-legged terrrier Zool. 97474 crocein orange Col. Ind. sgfa HTETI fagea m. 
Crooke's dark space Phys. fiera c. yellow Yorf fram. 
faftitat m. croceo- (croceous) Chem. Full Crookes glasses अपिश्रेयस् काच m. croceo-cobaltic sulphate Chem. Crooke's layer=Crooke's dark ___ कुंकुम्य-केत्विक शुल्बीय n. 
space, croceous (of the colour saffron Crooke's space=Crooke's dark ___yellow) कुंकुम्य mfn. 
space crocetin Chem. (obtained by hydro- crop 1 (harvest) FFT n. 
lyzing crocin) agafa f. 
2 Zool. (receptacle for food) # crocidolite=blue asbestos ATT UGE . em. 
crop-producing soil सस्योत्पादि-उन्मृदा crocin (Gk krokos from Sanskrit 
9) Chem. faf f. 
crop rotation Agric. FRI-ITAT, FT crocodile मकर m. 
Tai 7. Crocodilia Zool. मकर-गण m. 
cross (+) m. Crocodilus Zool. #perfa f. (-51fa for cross vb. te n. (as, to cross a 
Stefa genus) C. niloticus (of river Nile) stand cross (horizontal) LEFT 
Hopper m. 
crossbill Zool. i 1957 (2) m. C. palustris (of India) TTT 4** m. crossbreed Econ. #45 m. croconate Chem. इत्कुंकुमीय . 
crossbreeding Zool. #FRWN. croconic (Gk. krokos from ) cross-country' (race) #-TT (-5) 
Chem. Errefu mfn. 
mfn. crocus कुंकुम . 
cross-dye gaite-109 m. Crocus (Gk. krokos, Hebrew karkom, cross-dye black Col. Ind. (cross dye 
Arabic kurkum--all from Sans- ing is the application, successive krit 3 ) Bot. quafor f. (-fa for ly, to one cloth woven of dif 
fa genus) 
ferent fibres, of dyes suited to Ci sativus #Thirt # m. 
those fibres) qafq-17F Filet m's 
287 
m. 
cheque) 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
- 
m. 
c. brilliant green पूर्वापर-रंजक cross-pollination Bot. अपर-परागण ।. ___ भासुर हरिm. 
cross-section अनुप्रस्थ-छेद m. c. brown पूर्वापर-रंजक बभ्रु m. 
cross-sectional elevation तिर्यक्छेदीय c. deep brown पूर्वापर-रंजक गाढ बभ्रु उद्विक्षेप m. (transverse) 
cross stripes अनुप्रस्थ-राजि f. c. green पूर्वापर-रंजक हरि m. cross totals Math. addition of a c. sulphon black पूर्वापर-रंजक शुल्बा , series of numbers in the same 
काल m. 
___line) अनुप्रस्थ योग m. c. yellow पूर्वापर-रंजक पीत m. cross ventilation संमुख-वातन ॥. cross-dyeing (successive applica crosswise fusion Zool. व्यत्यास-सायुज्य १. 
tion of dyes) पूर्वापर-रंजन 1. Crotalaria Bot. शणपट्टति f. (-ति for crossed Com. tres mfn. 
प्रजाति genus) c. cheque रेखित धनादेश m. 
C. juncea सामान्य शणपट्ट m. crossed (x) शृंगाटित mfn. 
crotchets [ ]=square brackets cross entry = contra entry Com. कोणाभिवार m. 
प्रति-प्रविष्टि. 
crotin (Croton + - in) Biochem. crosshead Macb. (in a steam-engine, जयपालि f. 
a block serving as a connection croton जयपाल m. between the piston rod and the Croton Bot. जयपालति f. (-ति for प्रजाति connecting rod) समिष्टका f. (संयोजि- genus) इष्टका) 
C. tiglium सामान्य जयपाल m. crosshead guide Ry. Eng, समिष्टका- croton-aldehyde Chem. जयपाल-सुव्युद 
नेत्र n. crossing (a. cheque) Com. रेखण .. crotonate Chem. जयपालीयn. 
" general c. सामान्य रेखण n. 
croton-chloral hydrate = butyl not negotiablec. अ-परक्राम्य रेखण 1. chloral hydrate जयपाल-नीरसु जलीय special c. विशेष रेखण n. 
=घृतल-नीरसु जलीय . crossing n. Zool. व्यत्यसन 2. 
crotonic Chem. 4749769 mfn. . crossing over Zool. व्यत्यसन । 
c. acid जयपालिक अम्ल . cross mark (x) शृंगाट-चिह्न 1. 
c. aldehyde = croton-aldehyde cross multiplication Math. वज्रगुणन __ जयपालिक सुव्युद m. 
., वज्राभ्यास m. (ancient word) crotonization Chem. जयपालन 2. cross out vb..शृंगाटन .(x). 
croton oil जयपाल-तैल . Cross out (with a line or lines) अप- crotonol जयपालव m. ... रेखण .. 
croton-oleic acid जयपाल-म्रक्षिक अम्ल . oress.over Zool. (of genes from one croton seeds जयपाल-बीज n. 
chromosome to another) परोपगमन crotonyl Chem. जयपारल 1. (जयपाल+ 
want; when two TS come together, 288 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
the first may be changed to c. steel #99-20TR n. . T- 7 :) 
C. support TTT m. crotonyl chloride Chem. 27973 c. tongs AT-TGT m. 
n. 
c. triangles मूषा-त्रिकोण 1. crotonylene Chem. जयपारलेन्य. Cruciferae Bot. 7f847-0987 n. crotyl Chem, un n. 
cruciform काकार, ब्राह्म-कांकार mfn. (the crow Zool. 414, 4149 m. 
of of Brahmi script of Asoka is crow-bar DETE, EEUE m. (3€ from exactly a cross +. This form is 
उद्याम lever) 
the patent of # in every Indian Crowe process Chem. (process of script) 
removing air....) fiaTatiaTf. cruciform flower Bot. FT TT 999 1. crowfoot काकपद m. 
crude , e mfn. (unrefined) crowfoot=buttercup 7 n. ten crudes (benzene, toluene, crown I मुकुट m. 
etc.) T TH n. 2 (the dome of a fumace, a brick crude antimony=antimony sul kiln, etc.) af f. 
phide T T Tratt n. 3 (with capital) ne m. 
crude death rate ifta 6 m. 4 Anat. (the part of a tooth above crude naphtha # BRICT 16. the gum) उपरिदन्तं M., (the top of a crude opium Pharm. आम अहिफेन ।. tooth) TTT m. 
crude protein Biochem. आम प्रोभुजिन M. 5 Automobile उद्दन्त m. 
crude rubber आम घृषि m. crown and pinion wheels Auto crude tartar=argol # FETTE m. 
mobile 39- 7-. 
cruiser Mil. 1977 n.' Crown and the Indian States ATC Crum Brown-Gibson rule, Crum 
तथा भारत-देशीयराज्य n. 
Brown rule Chem. (an empirical crown glass Ophthalmol. (alkali-lime rule regarding the directive effect 
glass containing no lead, as of a group attached to an arom against flint which contains lead) atic ring upon the position of an farar m. 
entering group) sfagfrafa-forth in. crown prince युवराज m. 
Crumpsall brown M = chlorazot crown wheel Mach. van 7* 11. 
brown B crucible vb. 1 (to melt in a crucible) C. direct fast red R = direct 
191-1000 n. 
bordeaux TV : 2 (to test in a crucible) 797- . C. fast blue=chrome blue GD 
C. yellow=superchrome yel crucible Chem. TTf. 
'low RN c. furnace 197-971 n.. . crura cerebelli Anat. Fehf75f-reports c. plate support मूषा-पट्टाधार m. 
m. 
289﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
,m. 
crura cerebri Anat. प्रमस्तिष्क-वृन्तयोज cryolite glass शास्फतिज-काच m. 
m. 
cryo-meter Phys. SETIT-HIT m. crural 1 (pertaining to shank) i cryoscope Physical Chem. (for deter 
mfn... 
__mining freezing points) श्यानेam. 2=femoral tea mfn. 
cryoscopic श्यानेक्षीय mfn. crural canal ऊरु-कुल्या f. 
cryoscopic method frienta-zfer f. crural nerve of 
cryoscopy श्यानेक्षा . crus जंघा . . 
cryo-sel (French sel salt)=cryo crush vb. 977, HOT n. 
hydrate crushed aftst, pafaa mfn. 
cryo-stase Physical Chem. 47-TYTU crushed steel af ETTU n. crusher दलित्र n.. 
cryo-stat Physical Chem, UTETETT m. crushing machine दलन-यन्त्र.. crypt-, crypto- 1997 crushing mill दलनी f. (cf. . पेषणी crypt Anat. गर्त m. 
- grinding mill) 
Cryptococcus (C.) (crypto-hidden TT crust Med. पर्पटी. 
+ Coccus गोल) Bot. गुप्तगोलति . crust (the hardened exterior) पर्पटी f. (-ति for प्रजाति genus) (गु. गो.) Crustacea Zool: #fiftat: m. pl. (sg. C. gilchristi (it produces der 
font). 
____matitis) चर्मकोप गुप्तगोल m. cry-=cryo-:. 
C. linguae pilosae formate TIETTET, cryo-, cry- (Gk, kryos icy cold) 
TYTT-, TUIT 
cryptogam, Bot. souligt f. cryo-conite (cryo--+ Gk. konis dust; Cryptogamia Bot. gysylfige: f. pl. 
grey dust found on.ice in Green- crypton=krypton Chem. a m.. land) feh-fa f. 
cryptopine (crypt- to opium, ob cryo-gen (freezing mixture) gure-Fat t ainable in small quantities from 
* m. 
: opium) Chem, Tirana f. cryogenics, cryogeny (the subject crypto-pyrrole Chem. 77-ECHT H. 
of refrigeration saiat) strafreit f. cryptorchidism = cryptorchism cryo-hydrate Chem. (obtained by Med. aquuat f. . . . . 
lowering the temperature of a crypts of Lieberkuhņ = glands 3", solution of some substance in of Lieberkuhn = Lieberkuhn's. 
water) TT-Gry n., , 
glands Anat. (glands opening on cryo-hydric :fff;" cryohydrate) - the surface of the intestinal 
Frifu mfn." . .. 
mucous membrane) 97119316H cryolite Mineral. (a fluoride of so- Porifet m. :: 
eum and aluminjum) 9734fca -cryst (crystal).- m. (=w for fits mineral) 
crystal 1. them. 299, 
m. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
2 (quartz) Ffc m. 
crystallizability स्फटन-योग्यता crystal adj. F87649, F4CHGAT mfn. crystallizable 49-721 min. crystal vb. 2017 m. 
crystallization fhent n. (act), FETT f. crystal carbonate FE FITTEL n. 
(process) crystal form 42-997 m. 
crystallize vb. I STICHT 1. (F%2Frut, crystal glass=flint glass F*2- F4 F42-797) 
2 (to coat with crystals, to depo crystal gray स्फट धूसर m. 
sit crystals) 792-TTT 1. crystall-=crystallo- (crystal) 592 crystallized enfaa mfn. crystallic I (pertaining to crystals) crystallizer 1 (one who or that which 
18 mfn. 
crystallizes, 2 reagent) 141047, 2 (pertaining to crystallization) ficferat (1) m. 
of mfn. 
2 (a vessel) 125T-977 n. crystalliferous Ficha mfn. 
crystallizing स्फटन n. crystalliform स्फटाकार mfr: 
crystallo-, crystall- 792 crystalli-gerous (containing a crys- crystallo-blastic Mineral. 7912-Efecte 
tal or crystals) 790-80 mfn. 
mfn. crystallin Biochem. (a globulin oc- crystallo-chemical F42-CHAFF mfn. 
curring in the crystalline lens) crystallo-chemistry F C-CF197 n. Fufc f. 
crystallo-genesis FE-T n. crystalline स्फाट, स्फटय mfn. 
crystallo-genic, crystallo-genical, I (consisting or made of crystals) crystallo-genetic 92-9795 mfn. , 
#4 mfn. 
crystallogeny (branch of crystallo 2 (containing c.) स्फटयुत mfn. logy) स्फाटजनिकी f. 3 (composed of c.) 4727548 mfn. . crystallo-gram (a photographic re 4 (resembling c.) cac mfn. . cord of crystal structure) F9c-fans s (pure like c.) F973, 92703 mfn. 1. 6 (transparent like c.) स्फटपारदर्श crystallographer. स्फटरूपज्ञ, स्फटरूपाध्येता mfn. 
(7): m. crystalline cone føre sig m.. crystallographic, crystallographi crystalline face स्फटवत् पार्श्व n. 
cal : (pertaining to crystallo crystalline lens स्फट-वीक्ष m. . ., graphy) स्फाटरूपिकीय mfn. crystallinity. स्फाटता f., स्फटनत्व 1. (deg- 2 (pertaining to crystals) स्फाटिक, 
ree of crystallization) 
mfn. crystallite Mineral. (marks. the first crystallography (the science of crys 
step in crystallisation process) tallization, treating of the system afersfeema (-Fe for afu mines of forms among crystals....) 
ral) 
Fircetat f. 
291: 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
crystalloid स्फटाभ mfr. 
Heas) द्विकंकताति f. (-आति for प्रजाति crystalloidal स्फटाभीय mfn. 
genus) crystallology स्फट-विद्या, स्फाटिकी, स्फाट- Ctenophora Zool. कंकतिन: m. pl. (sg. 
रूपिकी . 
___ कंकती) crystallo-luminescence स्फट-चकासा/. Cu (cupram) Chem. ता (ताम्र) crystallo-magnetic स्फट-चुम्बिक mfn. cu. (cubic) घ. (धन) । crystallo-metric स्फट-मितीय mfn. cuba black=dianil black PR crystallo-metry स्फट-मिति f. ' cuba wood=fustic Col. Ind. TİCE m. crystallo-phyllian Geol. स्फट-पलाशीय cube Geom. धन m. 
mfn. 
cubeb=cubeba (cubeb.)=cubebae crystallose स्फटधु . 
fructus=tailed pepper (dried crystal malt Brewing स्फट-यव्य n. 
unripe fruit of Piper cubeba) crystal orange Col. Ind. स्फट नारंग m. Pharm, गंधमरिच 1. crystal-palace blue water m. Cubeba Bot. affer f. (-for for crystal-palacegreen न्यवपीतहरि m. प्रजाति genus) crystal ponceau Col. Ind. स्फट अधि C. officinalis सामान्य गन्धमरिच m. 
रक्तापीत m. 
cubebae fructus=cubeb crystal sand स्फट-सिकता f. 
cubeb camphor Cbem. गन्धमरिच-कपुर crystal scarlet Col. Ind. स्फट शोण m. crystals of tartar=cream of tartar cubeb oil गन्धमरिच-तैल 1. ___ न्यासव-स्फट-न्यासव-शर m. 
cube cutch Col. Ind. धन गायत्री crystal violet Col. Ind. स्फट नीललोहित 6cubed,63, is equal to 216 ६ घन सम 
(है)२१६ (के), ६ (की) घात ३ (बार) crystal vision स्फट-दृष्टि f. 
सम (है) २१६ (के) crystal water Cbem. स्फट-जल . . cubelet धनक m. crystic Geol. (of, pertaining to, or cube ore=pharmacosiderite धना 
treating of, ice and ice pheno यस्क n. 
mena) हैमिक mfa. 
6cube root 3,6/3, is equal to crystograph (a picture or writing ....६ घनमूल ३ सम (है)....(के) __on glass) काचालेख m. (काच आलेख) 6 third root of 3 is equal to Crystolon (a trade-mark applied to .... ६ तृतीयमूल ३ सम (है)....(के) 
silicon carbide) स्फटसैप्रा . cube root Matb. घनमूल n. crysto-sphene (Gk. krystallos clear cube-shaped घनाकार afn. 
· ice+ sphen wedge; a buried sheet cubi-, cubo- (cube) धन- . 'of ice) अघो-हिमानी 
cubic (cu.) धन (प.) Csrfcesium).Cbem. धु (धुतातु) . . cubic, cubical धन-, धनाकार Mfa. Ce.cekkium) Chem. नू (नूतनला, नूतनातु) cubical atom Physical Chem. घन Ctenocephalus Zool. (a genus of परमाणु m. 
292 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
cubical catechu=gambier=terra cullet Glass Mfg: (broken or refuse 
japonica धन-खदिर m. 
___glass) त्रोट m. cubical epithelium Anat. घनाकार culm Bot. (jointed stem) सन्धिस्तम्भ m. 
अधिच्छद m. 
cultivable कृष्य, कृषियोग्य mfn. cubical expansion = volume ex- cultivated land कृष्ट-भूमि . 
pansion धन-विस्तरण-परिमा-विस्तरण culture I संस्कृति f. 
2 Biol. संवर्धM. cubical form घनाकार m. 
c. bottle संवर्ध-कूपी. cubic alum धन-स्फटिका. 
c. flask संवर्ध-पलिघm. cubic niter=sodium nitrate धन c. medium=medium संवर्धाशm. 
पाक्य m. 
cum- =cumo- (cumic) Chem. जीर cubiform घनाकार mfn. 
(जीरिक) cubo- (cube) धन 
cum Com. -सहित cuboid Math. आयतजn. 
c. dividend लाभांश-सहित cuckoolike (birds) कोकिलाकृति, कोकिल c. interest वृद्धि-सहित 
जातीय mfr. 
cumal (cumaldehyde) Chem. जीरसु m. cucumber कर्कटी. 
cum-aldehyde (cumin+aldehyde) = Cucumis Bot. कर्कटीति f. (-ति for प्रजाति para-isopropyl-benzaldehyde 
genus) 
Chem. जीर-सुव्युदm. C. sativus सामान्य कर्कटी.. cumalic-coumalic cucurbit Chem. (a gourd-shaped cumalin=coumalin 
___vessel for distillation) कूष्माण्ड N. cumar=cumar gum or resin=cou Cucurbita Bot. कूष्माण्डति .. (-ति for marone resin 
प्रजाति genus) 
cumaric अनन्तमूलिक mfn. C. maxima सामान्य कुष्मांड m. cumarin=coumarin Cucurbitaceae Bot. कूष्माण्ड-कुल. cumarone=coumarone Cucurbitales Bot. कुष्माण्ड-गोत्र. cumar resin=cumar cucurbitine कूष्माण्डी f. 
cumene Chem. जीरेण्य .. cudbear I (a dyestuff, a form of cumenyl Chem. जीरेण्यल 1. 
archil) शेपालरंग m.. 
cumic Chem. जीरिक mfn. 2 (the lichen yielding this sub c. alcohol = para-isopropyl stance) रंगशेपाल m. 
benzyl alcohol जीरिक सुषव m. cuff मणिबन्ध, मणि m. 
c. aldehyde जीरिक सुव्युद m. cuff protector #fuarea m. 
cumidine = para-isopropyl - ani Culex Zool. मशकाति f. (-आति for . line Chem. जीरेयी. 
प्रजाति genus) 
cumidine ponceau Col. Ind. जीरेयी 
• Culicidae Zool. मशक-वंश m. 
...अधिरक्तापीत m. Culicinae मशकानुवंश m. 
. c. red जीरेयी रक्त M. 293 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
LTS 
c. scarlet जीरेयी शोण m. 
cup (cocoanut shell used as a cup) cumin, cummin-Cuminum cy करक m. . . minum जीरक m. 
cup I मल्लक, चषक m. cuminal=cumal 
2 Anat. खात n. (in bones), कटोर m. cuminic=cumic 
cup barometer कटोर-वापीडमान m. cumin oil जीरक-तैल 1. 
cupboard 1 (a board or shelf for cuminoin (cumin+benzoin) Chem. cups) चषफलक.. 
जीप m. (जीरक+धूप) 
2 आधरण 1. cuminol, cuminole=cumaldehy- cupel Chem. खर्पर m. 
de Chem. जीरकव m. 
cupel vb. Chem. (to refine by means cumin-seed जीरक-बीज .. 
of a cupel) खर्परण 1. (खर्पर-संस्करण) cum interest Com. वृद्धि-सहित 
cupellation Chem. खपरणा . Cuminum Bot. जीरति 1. (ति for प्रजाति cupeller Chem. खपरण-कर्ता (-त).m. 
genus) 
cupferron (a -benzoin-oxime) = C. cyminum सामान्य जीरm. . copperone यष्टा f. [यष्ट copper cuminyl=cumyll 
(द्वे स्वर्णरजते अश्नुते व्याप्नोति)] cummin=cumin 
cuphead Macb. कटोरशिर N. cumor (cumic) Chem. जीर-(जीरिक) 
cupr-, cupro- (cuprum) Chem. ताम्र cumol Chem. जीरव m. 
cupramine brilliant blue Col. Ind. cumulative संचयी (-इन्).mfn. 
ताम्रतिक्ती भासुर नील m. c. error Statistics संचयी विभ्रम m. cuprammine compounds Chem. c. frequency Statistics संचयि- ताम्रतिजी संयोग m. 
वारंवारता 
cupr-ammonia ताम्र-तिक्ताति m. c. frequency curve = ogive" cupr-ammonium = Schweizer's 
curve Statistics संचयि-वारंवारता 
reagent cupr-ammonium वक्रn. 
rayon Chem. ताम्र-तिक्तातु m. . c. frequency table Statistics cupranil brown Col. Ind. ताम्रनील बभ्रु __ संचयि-वारंवारता-सारणी . 
c. histogram Statistics संचयि- cuprea bark Pharm. ताम्र-वल्क m. 
वारंवारताचित्र. 
cupreine (from cuprea bark) Chem. c. preference shares Com. संचयी . ताम्रवल्की. ... पूर्वाधिकार अंश m. 
cuprene Chem.,ताम्रेण्य 1. ___c. share Com. संचयी अंश m. . cupreous=coppery afsta mfn. Camyl (cumic + -y) Chem. जीरल n. cupri- I (cupric) Chem. ताम्रि-(ताम्रिक) cumylic acid=durylic acid जीरलिक · · 2 (cuprum) ताम्र- .. 
सम्ल . . . . . . . . . cupric Chem. arfe mfn. ., cuneate Bot. (wedge-shaped) स्फानवत्, c. ammonia ion. ताम्रिक तिक्ताति । 
...स्फानाकार, mfne : . . . . . . 
अयन .. .. 
___m. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
: c oxide ताम्रिक जारेय.. 
C. longa सामान्य हरिद्रा . cupride Chem. तानेय . 
curcuma paper=turmeric paper cupri-ferous ताम्र-भर mfn. 
हरिद्रा-पत्र. cuprite Mineral. (cuprous oxide) curcuma starchstikor हरिद्रा-मण्ड.. 
ताम्रिज m. (-इज for खनिज mineral) curcurmeine Col.. Ind. हरिद्रिण m. cupro-, cupr- (cuprum) ताम्र- curcumin (curcumd, from Arabic cupro-ammonium = cupr-ammo- kurkum,fromSanskrit कुंकुम) Chem. ___nium Cbem. ताम्र-तिक्तातु M. 
(the colouring principle of tur cupro-cyanide Chem. ताम्र-श्यामेय .. meric हरिद्रा) हरिदि 
___c. ion ताम्रश्यामय अयन . 
curcumine Col. Ind. हरिद्री f. cupro-manganese ताम्र-लोहक n. curcuphenine Col. Ind. कुंकुमदर्शी f. . 
cupron ehf. i , ___c. yellow कुंकुमदर्शी पीत m. cupro-nickel Metal. ताम्र-रूपक .. cure vb. आरोग्यकरण 1. cupro-plumbite Mineral. ताम्र-सीसिज curine (curate) Chem. पातनी f.. 
__m. (-इज for खनिज mineral) curious fafa mfn. cupro-silicon ताम्र-सैकता f. . curium (element no. 96) षण्णवातु m. 'cuprous Chem. ताम्य mfn. 
c. sulphate ताम्य शुल्बीय n. currency Com. चलार्थ m. . c. sulphide ताभ्य शुल्बेय n. 
c. note चलार्थपत्र. cuprum Chem. Thn. 
current Elec. वाह m. cup-shaped depression कटोर-निम्न . celectricity वाह-विद्युत् . 
(कटोराकार निम्न) 
.current Com. वर्तमान, प्रचलित, चल mfa. cupule Bot. चषकी . 
। . c. account चल-लेखा . curare, curari (Pg., from Tupi ur c. deposit चल निक्षेपm. . ar-y he, to whom it comes, falls; . .c. liability चल देय n. 
extract of Strychnos toxifera, . c. market price वर्तमान विपणि-मूल्य।. 
used as an arrow poison) पातन m. c. price वर्तमान मूल्य . curarine आपातनी f. 
. account c. चल-लेखा-विवरण 1. .' . curine पातनी . 
price c. प्रचलित मूल्य १. . . . curative आरोग्यकारी (-इन्) mfn. current coordinate Math. धावी याम curb Chem. Mfg. (the walls of a m. 
chamber in which sulphuric acid curriculum (whole body of courses , . 'is manufactured) शुभित्ति f. . of study) पाठ-चारिका., पाठ्य . 
Curculigo Bot. मुसलीति f.(-ति for प्रजाति Cursoria ("that run') Zool. धाविनः 
genus) 
__m.pl. (sg. धावी) .. C. orchioides सामान्य मुसली f. cursorial Orthoptera Zool. धावि Curcuma Bot. हरिद्राति .(-ति for प्रजाति ऋजुपक्षाः.m.pl. . 
cursory glance क्षिप्र दृष्टि f. 295 
genus), .. 
न 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
curtain (cloth hanging from a rod) custom duties (on imports) प्रवेश्य-कर 
काण्डपट m., यवनिका., पट m. curtain rod पट-काण्ड 1. 
customer ग्राहक m. curvature नति, वक्रता f. 
customers' handwriting Com. ग्राहक curvature hypermetropia गौल-पश्च- हस्तलेख m. . 
नाभिता. (गौल as opposed to आक्ष c. ledger ग्राहक-प्रपंजी. . axial) 
customs Com. प्रवेश्य-कर, निराकाम्य-कर curven. वक्र . 
m. curved=bent वक्र mfn. 
c. duty निराकाम्य-कर (on imports curved line Matb. वक्र-रेखा f. 
___and exports) m. curved surface Math. वक्र तल, वक्र पृष्ठ c. house निराकाम्यकर-गह 1. 
cut vb., n. कर्तन . curve fitting Math. वक्र अन्वायोजन . cutaneous gland Anat. चर्म-ग्रन्थि m. curve of intersection मिथश्छेद-वक्रn. curve of normal error Statistics cutch Col. Ind. गायत्री 
सामान्य विभ्रम-बक्र. 
c. brown trait ym. curvilinear correlation Statistics cuticle Anat. (external coat of the 
वक्ररेखीय सहसंबन्ध m.. 
skinउच्च . curvilinear perspective वक्रतल-नेत्रदशा cutin Biochem. उच्चमि f. (fr. cuticle). 
cutinization Bot. 3 ffor n. curving=bending नमन, वक्रण 1. cutinized उच्चर्मीयित mfn. cusco bark-cusco china. Pharm. cut-motion कर्तन-प्रस्ताव m. (Hindi 
. (from Cinchona. pubescens) कटौती-प्रस्ताव) 
प्रविताप-वल्क m. 
cuto-cellulose Biochem. (a combin cusco-hygrine Chem.प्रविताप-न्यचेतनी /. ation of cutin and cellulose) cusconine Chem.curatet f. (distingui उच्चमि कोशाधु . ___shed from aricine प्रवितापी) cut off n. रोध m., अपकर्तन 1. Cuscuta Bot. अमरवल्लिति f. (-ति for cutter कर्तक m. 
प्रजाति genus) . 
cut-throat competition Econ. कण्ठछेदि C. reflexa सामान्य अमरवल्लि f. 
स्पर्धा f. cuscutine अमरीf. 
cutting कर्तन 1. cushion उपबह m. 
c. blowpipe कर्तन-धमनाङ ।. cusp I (of a valve) दल .. 
c. compound Macb. कर्तन-संयोग m. . . Mati. खराय. 
c. lubricant कर्तन-उपस्नेह m. cusp of a valve कपाट-दल 1. 
c. oil कर्तन-तैल 1. Customary रून्ड mfn. 
c. sand कर्तन-सिकता ..Cr discount रूढ अपहार m. 
c. torch कर्तन-वर्ती f. c.tare. रूटु भारमोक m. . ... cuttlefish Zool. (it is not a fish; dis 
296 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
charges ink at its assailants) -cyanic Chem. -श्यामिक mfr. .. मसीक्षेपी (-इन्) m. 
Cyanic acid Chem. श्यामिक अम्ल .. cwt. (hundredweight) गो. (गोणी) cyanicide (Gyanide + -cide) Metal. Cy (cyanogen) Chem. श्या (श्यामजन) श्यामेय-घ्न m. cyamelide (cyano- +melam तिग + cyanidation (act or process of cya 
' -ide) Chem. श्यामतिगेय n. 
niding; cyanide process) श्यामेयन cyan (a hue between green and blue) ., श्यामेयना f. 
हरिनील, प्राश्याम m. 
cyanide Chem. श्यामेय . cyan-, cyano- Chem. श्याम 
cyanide vb. श्यामेयन 1. -cyan Biochem. -4TH 
-cyanide Chem. -श्यामेय .. cyan-acet-amide Cbem. श्याम-शुक्त- cyanide process Metal. श्यामेय-विधा f. 
तिक्तेय n. 
cyanidin Biochem. श्यामेयि f. cyan-acetic Chem. श्याम-शक्तिक mfn. cyanidine श्यामेयी . 
c. acid श्यामशुक्तिक अम्ल n. 
cyan-idrosis=cyan-hidrosis cyan-amide Chem. श्याम-तिक्तेय n. cyan-imide Chem. श्याम-वितिक्तेय . 
c. process श्यामतिक्तेय विधा . cyanin Biochem. श्यामि . cyan-anthrene Col. Ind. श्याम-क्षामण्य Cyanine Col. Ind, श्यामी . 
M. 
c. acid blue श्यामी अम्ल नील m. cyan-anthrol Col. Ind. श्याम-विक्षव m. c.green श्यामी हरि m. 
c. fast green श्यामविक्षव स्थिर हरिm. c. navy blue श्यामी नाविक नील m. 
c. fast grey श्यामविक्षव स्थिर धूसर m. cyanine blue I = Leitch's blue cyanate Chem. श्यामीय n. 
Chem. श्यामी नील m. cyan-aurate Chem. श्याम-स्वर्णीय .. 
2 निनीलारक्त m. cyan-auric Chem. श्याम-स्वर्णिक mfn. cyanite = kyanite, disthene Mine cyanazurine Col. Ind. 29THTHtalet f. ral. (aluminium silicate, occurr cyan-benzyl Chem. श्याम-धूपल n. 
ing in blue crystals) नीलस्फसैकिज cyan blue अवहरिनील m. 
m. (-इज for खनिज mineral) cyan-carbonic Chem. श्यामांगारिक mfn. cyanize vb. (to convert into cyanide) cyan-emia श्याम-रक्तता f. 
श्यामेय-करण n. cyan-ephidrosis श्यामाभिस्वेद m. cyan-met-hemoglobin श्याम-सम cyan-formate Chem. श्याम-वनीय ॥. ____शोणवर्तुलि. cyan-formic Chem. श्याम-वम्रिक mfn. cyano-, cyan- (cyanogen) Chem. cyan-hidrosis Chem. श्याम-स्वेद m. 
श्याम- . cyan-hydrate श्याम-जलीय ... . cyano-acetate Chem. श्याम-शुक्तीय n. cyan-hydric = hydrocyanic Chem. cyano-acetic Chem. श्याम-शुक्तिक mfn.. 
श्यामोदिक mfr. 
cyano-aurate Chem. श्याम-स्वर्णीय n. cyan-hydrin Chem. श्यामोदि . cyano-auric Chem. 577H-fafupi mfn. cyanic श्यामिक mfn. 
cyano-benzene Chem. श्याम-धूपेन्य 1. 297 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
cyanocarbonic Chem. 41ATIF mfn. cyano-platinite=platino-cyanide cyano-chlorous (Gk chloros green) Chem. 2214-# fem no 
=bluish green gufitat mfn.: cyano-platinous = platino-cyanic cyano-chroia श्याम-विवर्णता f. 
Chem. श्याम-मह्य mfn. . cyano-chroic sur-fort" mfn. 
çyan-opsia Chem. T-90 f.. cyano-crystallin Biochem. 24T4-F4fc cyanosine Col. Ind. (eosine blue 
i shade) urlat f. cyano-derma 341#-cat f. 
cyanosis=cyanopathy cyano-gen Chem. 24TH-FTTT m. cyano-trichite (Gk. thrix hair; hav 
mono-C. 55-414657 m. 
ing bright-blue fibrous forms) di-c. feUTHEFT m. 
..' Mineral. नीलकेशिज m. (-इज for खनिज c. bromide श्यामजन दुरेय 1. 
mineral) c. chloride श्यामजन नीरेय . 
cyan-ur-amide (cyan-turic+amide) C. condensation tube FATHER =melamine. Chem. YA-T-fier 
Many arm. 
n. cyano-genesis श्याम-जनन n. 
cyan-urate Chem. #HMT n. cyano-genic (producing a colour of cyanuret=cyanide Chem. The n. 
the hue blue) -57TF mfn. cyan-uric = tricarbimide . Chem. cyano-guanidine Chem. Fah-dosent f. 1947-#FEF mfn. cyano-hydrin Chem. fa fa 
c. acid श्याममेहिक अम्ल . cyanol, cyanole Col. Ind. 4789 m. cyanurine=cyanidine 
c. fast green turha feta fem. cya-phenine (cyanot-phenyl to mine) c. green 149 af m. . 
Chem, puto-geit f. C. navy blue 4142 Fifar aftam. cyathium inflorescence (cup-shap 
c. silk blue zuraa alata efter m. ed') Bot. 29*-769at f. cyano-meter 44- TTT m. 
Cycadaceae Bot. aprila 14-a na : cyano-met - hemoglobin Biochem. Cycadales Bot, AFPICTEATTE n. 
#-F-lyrajfer f. 
Cycadeoidea=Bennettites 20-metric Chem. 414-fisita mfn. Cycadofilicales intermediate bet cyano-metry zur#-ffar fr .. ween the Cycadales and Filicales. cyanopathy=cyanosis Med. aprila T hey resemble fetos but bear 
i cycad-like true seeds) froitat: cyano-phile, cyano-philous. Biol. m.pl. .. 
BUTARI mfn. ... 11, s. Cycads Bot. FLETISIT: m. pl. . Cyano-phoric श्याम-भर mfr. Cycas Bot. Figarrafat f. (fer for pallet Cyanophyceae (blue-green algae) 
Botmaakt: m. pti 
C. circinalis अग्रवलिल' कंगुताल m. :: cyanopia putereat f.. 
C. revoluta बहिर्वलित कंगुताल... 
C. 264 
genus) 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
cycl- = cyclo- ' 
hexa-hydro-benzene Chem. im cycl-amine Chem. #fcant f. 
Siru n. 'cycl-ammonium Chem. *- 
fit m. cyclo-hexane-carb-oxylic acid = cyclane Chem. Firuer n. 
hexa-hydro-benzoic acid Chem. cycle I चक्र . 
*-4872-8117-5772f947 67 n. 2 (bicycle). 
fin. 
cyclo-hexanol=hexa-hydro-phen 3 (used as a general term for ol Chem. 77- m. bicycle, tricycle, motorbicycle) cyclo-hexanone=keto-hexa-hydro 
* (PET) m. 
· benzene Chem. 7-ETAT f. , cycle-flower Bot. off-yoq n. 
cyclo-hexene tetra-hydro-ben cyclene Chem, 70916. 
zene Chem. -56 n. cycle pump (pump for a bicycle) cyclo-hexyl Chem. 27-461 n. 
1959 m. ... 
c. acetate चक्रषड्ल शुक्तीय n. cyclic (quadrilateral) Math. atitu, C.-amine -ferrit f. .mfn. . 
c. bromide Tage Anh. cyclic Chem. afsta mfn. 
c. formate चक्रषड्ल वनीया. -cyclic Chem. affiti mfn. 
cyclo-olefin Chem. 2 opf f. cyclical fluctuation Econ., Statistics cyclo-paraffin E f. 
74 37197 ni . 
cyclo-pentadiene Chem. 4#-daletrar cyclical order Math, 7*7 m. 
1. , cyclic diazoanhydride = diazo- cyclo-pentane Chem. et n. 
oxide Chem, afrit a n. cyclo-pentanone Chem. 232-estrut f. cyclic order Math. * m. cyclo-pentene Chem. 7-Gant n. cyclic salt Chem., Geol. afin que n. cyclophoria Med. fafiret for cyclization Chem. (ring formation) cycloplegia Med. (paralysis ATENT OF 
U n. 
the ciliary muscle वलिकायपेशी of the cyclize vb. n. 
eye) EUTETT m. . .cyclo, cycl 
cyclo-propane Chem. 93-CIRI . cyclo-alkane = cyclo-paraffin Cyclops (having a large median eye) 
Chem. ' eriton n. is 
. tarfa f. ( fa for stetica genus) cyclo-butane = tetra-methylene Cyclostomata Zool. ('distinguished 
Chem. #eatru n., .. 
from all other living Craniata by cyclo-di-olefin Chem:* temfe f. the possession of a suctorial cyclo-heptane=suberane=hepta mouth' Haswell) TheT: m. pl. 
methylene. Chem. 77 nm 'cyclotron Phys. (which accelerates cyclo-heptanone=suberone Chem. deuterons) fartuar m. 
cetat f. : : : : 'cylinder TH m. . cyclo-hexane=hexa-methylene= cylinder block Engin. THAT f. 
299﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
.. 
cylinder bore Automobile रम्भ-छिद्र C.dactylon सामान्य दूर्वा f. 
Cyperaceae Bot. मुस्ता-कुल .. cylinder front cover Mach. रम्भ-पुर- Cyperus Bot. मुस्ताति f. (-ति for प्रजाति 
आवरण . 
genus) cylinder head Automobile रम्भ-शीर्ष . C. pertenuis THTU HESIT f. cylinder metal रम्भ-धातु m. 
cypher=cipher Math. शून्य 1. cylinder oil रम्भ-तैल .. 
Cyprus green प्रोत्पीतहरि m. cylindrical Bot. (as a stem) गोल cyst Med., Biol. कोष्ठ m. 
mfn. 
cysteine Biochem. (found in horn, 2 (having the shape of a cylinder) etc.) faqatfora m. रम्भ-, रम्भाकार mfn. 
c. hydrochloride विषाणिन उदनीरेय 3 (of, or pertaining to, a cylin 
. der) रम्भ-, रम्भीय mfn. 
cysteinic faerförfalfi mfn. cylindrical body Math., TFHTATT SITT cystic canal=cystic duct 
cystic duct Zool. (duct from the cylindrical frustum Math. रम्भ-छिन्नक gall-bladder) पित्ताशय-प्रणाली /. 
cysticercus Zopl. कोष्ठडिम्भ m. cylindrical helix Math. Frite of 144 cystine Biochem. (found in horn, 
m. 
___etc.) विषाणी f.. cylindrical lens Ophthalmol. रम्भ-वीक्ष cystin-uria विषाणी-मेह m. 
cystitis Med. बस्तिकोप m. cylindrical stem Bot. गोल स्तम्भ m. cystolith Bot. कोशाश्म m. cylindro-metric रम्भ-मितीय mfn. 
cystopus=albugo Bot. (cause white cyme Bot. (having many growing blisters on leaves) सितस्फोट m. 
secondary axes) बहुवर्ध्यक्ष m. cyst wall Zool. कोष्ठ-भित्ति. cymene Chem. निजीरेण्य 1. 
cyt-, cyto- कोशा para-c. परा-निजीरेण्य 1. 
cytase Biochem. कोशेद m. meta-c. सम-निजीरेण्य n. 
cyto-blastema=mother liquid Biol. ortho-c. ऊर्ध्व-निजीरेण्य 1. 
कोशाकर m. . cymo-gene (cymene -+ -gene) Chem. cyto-chemistry कोशा-रसायन 1. 
निजीर-जन m. 
cyto-chrome Biochem. कोशा-वर्ण m. cymol निजीरव m. 
cyto-globin Biochem. कोशा-वर्तुलिf. cymo-phenol = carvacrol Chem. cyto - kinesis Biol. (cytoplasmic 
निजीर-दर्शव m. 
___changes....) रस-विकार m. cymose adj. Bot. बहुवर्ध्यक्ष-, बहुवर्ध्यक्षीय cytology f कौशिकी f. ::mfn. 
2 कौशिक संरचना f. Cynodon Bot. दूर्वाति f. (-ति for प्रजाति cytolysin Biochem. कोशांशिf. 
genas. i 
Cytolysis Physiol. कोशांशन ...' 300 
m. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
. 
cytolytic Physiol., Biochem. कोशांशिक cyto-reticulum Biol. कोशा-जालिका f. 
mfn. 
cytosine (cyto-, Gk. kytos to Line) cyto-meter Physiol. कोशा-मान m. ___Biochem. कोशायी f. Cytomycetes कोशाकवक-वर्ग m., कोशा- cytostome (cell mouth) कोशामुख __ कवकानि 1.pl. cytoplasm Biol. कोशारस m. 
cyto-zymase = invertase Filett-famioane cytoplasmic body Zool. कोशारस-काय m. m. 
(short for कोशारसस्थ काय bodies cyto-zyme = thrombokinase Bio found in cytoplasm') 
chem. कोशा-किण्व . 
. 
d., d-(dextro-) Chem. द., द-(दक्ष-) dairy गव्यशाला f. (गव्य is milk product) 
d - tartaric द-न्यासविक mfn. dairy butter शाला-नवनीत १. (गव्यशाला D. (Diplococcus) यु. गो. (युग्मगोलाणु) ____shortened to शाला) D (D-shaped) अर्धचन्द्र m. 
dairy cheese शाला-दधिक 1. bal roti (डबल-रोटी) अधिमण्ड 1. dairy house गव्यशाला f. dabber (onomatopoetic) थप्थप m. dairy milk शाला-दुग्ध . Dacid | अम्ल . 
dairy product शाला-गव्य n. dactylozooid Zool. मण्डलरक्षी (-इन्) m. dairy salt (used in making butter daddy longlegs = harvest man= and cheese) गव्य-लवण . ____shepherdspider Zool. उरुजंघ-लता. Dakin method Surg. क्षारोद रीति. 
daffodil, daffodil yellow I (anti-. Dakin's solution Pharm. (faintly 
mony yellow) प्ररक्तातिपीत m. 
alkaline o.5 per cent solution 2 (cadmium yellow) प्रोद्रक्तपीत m. of sodium hypochlorite in water) dag (short for 'deflocculated Ache क्षारोद विलयन 1. ____son graphite'; it is colloidal ____Carrel-Dakin solution पिक्षारोद . श्लेषाभीy graphite लिखिज) श्लेलि. 
विलयन . dahlia (colour) मध्यनीलरक्त m. Dalbergia Bot. शिशपाति f. (-ति for dahlia carmine forepellitet m. 
प्रजाति genus) dahlia purple विरक्तानीलm. 
__D. sissoo सामान्य शिशपा.. Dahl's acid=2-naphthyl-amine. Dalla (manufactured from the . 5-sulphonicacid Dyes द्वधुत्तिपञ्चशु waters of Lonar lake in Berat. 
अम्ल-२-उत्तरल-तिक्ती-५-शुल्बायिक अम्ल It has the composition of natural daily fra mfn. 
. mineral urao) विदर्भ-क्षार m. d. register=journal दैनिक-पंजीf Dalmatian insect flower=pyre d. work अहरहःकर्म .. (from शतपथ thrum flower Pharm. micqoq 
ब्राह्मण) 
301 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
dalton Phys. (a unit of mass, being force 1.1 volts) stafargini (TFT 
T'ath of the mass of an oxygen at) #tet f. atom) Gry m. 
Daniell's hygrometer (dew point Dalton's law i=Law of multiple hygrometer) #57 ARATATE FEEHF 
proportions TF14TT-foret m. 
m. 2=Law of partial pressures Danish steel yard Phys. FFFFHT afo gifirf-FOTET- 
fh m. 
f. (TWTF is understood, 'ful-. Dalton's theory=atomic theory crum FFHT not fixed') dam n. (ancient word) 
daphnin=eosine scarlet damage vb. उपहनन 1. (Hindi क्षति Dardistan Geog. दरद-देश m. 
TSETAT) 
dark (used with colours, e. g. blue, damage n. उपघात m. 
: green, brown) HT mfn. damaged उपहत mfn. 
dark band spectrum tuyet-tafet f. damiana (damian.)=turnera Pharm. dark blind of Arap m. , 
(leaves of Turnera diffusa, used dark blue fa air mfn. ___ as an aphrodisiac वाजकर) वाजपत्र m. dark blue liquid Col. Ind. असित नील, damp Mining (a gas or mixture of a m. 
gases occurring esp. in coal mines) dark bodies Zool. afHT atu m. . farfar m. (fi down, i.e. in the dark brown Col. Ind. A mai 
· mines) 
d. brown salt af a tau n., damp = vapourous 
dark catechu असित खदिर m. damp vb. FTHEGET 1. 
dark green Col. Ind. afera eft m. damped परिमन्दित mfn. 
dark ground method Micros. 219-: damper i Rly. Eng. (a valve or mov- Yos-efer f. ..able plate in the flue or other dark line spectrum hortat-trafor f. 
part of a stove, furnace, etc., dark plaster fet ham. : 'used to check or regulate the dark reaction Chem. (a reaction in 
draft) atau m. 
the absence of light; as contrasted .. 2.964 m. ; 
with a photochemical reaction, damper controls Rly. Eng. araua-aert Terufo-afafaat) fafire-afafar f. 
(-) m. 
dark red असित रक्त mm. . damper doors Rly. Eng. argu-46918' dark yellow extra fat-soluble Cole 
•;. Ind. After a ufafita fierastu m. dana (Hindi art 'grain") STET f. Darwinism (evolution of new spe dandelion root=taraxacum Pharm. cies by natural selection Set 
a FA... . ...!!! TUMETU 7-51fa-afectate) flashtu m. dandmuff auf., it dash 1 (---) Punctuation feruif. . Daniell's cell Elec. (electromotive 2(o) se m. 
394. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
dashboard=instrument board Ax-day-duty दिन-कृत्य . ___tomobile घटी-फलक ॥. 
days after .date Com. तिथ्यनन्तर दिवस. dashmul Pharm. दशमूल . data न्यास m., सामग्री /. 
d. after sight दर्शनानन्तर दिवस m. date Com. तिथि f., दिनांक m. 
d. of grace अनुग्रह-दिवस m. . d. of drawing आहरण-तिथि f.. de- वि-, निस् 
d. of maturity परिपक्वता-तिथि, परि- deacetylate vb. Chem. विशुक्तलन 1. 
पाक-तिथि . 
deacetylation Chem. विशुक्तलन . . d. stamp=dater तिथि-मुद्रा f. deacidification व्यम्लन n. Datisca Bot. वज्रभंगाति f. (-ति for प्रजाति deacidify vb. व्यम्लन . ' 
genus) 
: 
Deacon process (of obtaining chlo .: D..cannabina .सामान्य वज्रभंगा. rine gas....) न्याप-विधा f. (नी for datiscetin Chem. वाघ्रभंगि. ' 
' नीरजी chlorine + आप obtaining) datiscin=datiscoside वज्रभंगि. deactivate vb. विकर्मण्यन . datura धत्तुर m. . . : 
deactivation विकर्मण्यनn. Datura Bot. धत्तूरति f. (-ति for प्रजाति dead account Com. मृत-लेखा ... . 
genus) 
d. loss.परिपूर्ण-हानि f. D. alba सामान्य धत्तूर m... ..d..rent मृत भाटक, मृत खनिभाटक m. . daturine Pharm. धत्तूरी. 
d. stock मृत स्कन्ध, अविक्रेय स्कन्ध m: . . Daucus Bot: गर्जरति f. (-ति for प्रजाति dead-burn vb. Metal. (to roast or : genus) 
___ calcine completely) परिदहन . D. carota सामान्य गर्जर m. . dead centre -Mach. I (the position. daughter axis Bot. उपाक्ष m. - of a crank when the turning mo daughter cell Zool. दुहितृ-कोशा f.. ment exerted on it.is zero) शून्य daughter chromosomes Biol. दुहित स्थिति 
पित्र्यसूत्र. . 
2 (in a • machine tool, a centre daughter cyst.दुहित-कोष्ठ m. . 
that does not revolve)=statio- . daughter radia दुहितृ-शालाक m. 
nary centre frete para n. '. Davainea Zool. अंकुशिचूषाति f. (आति dead heat (in which the contestants.. 
for fifa genus).' ' .; reach the goal at the same ins Davaineidae (hooklets round suck. tant) सहप्रापण . . . .: .. । __ers) अंकुचिचूष-वंश m... . ., deadly घातक mfa. 
Davy's safety. lamp Mining खनि-, deadly nightshade leaf = bella 
अभय-दीप.. , . . 
donna. leaf . Pharm. ' कंटालिका-पत्र day दिवस m., दिन.... ... . . . . . . . . . . 
d. book=journal Com. दैनिक-पंज़ी: deadly poison घातक विष . ... . . 
f. . . . . . .. .. 
'.. .. deafness बधिरता.f. . . . . . day cat दिवस-यान . 
dealbuminize vb. विश्वेतीयनः ... 
393 
a 
. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
dealcoholization निस्-सुषवण . dealcoholize vb. निस्-सुषवण .. dealer I पणिता (-त) m. 
2=businessman व्यापारी (-इन्) m. 3-seller विक्रेता (-1) m. grain d. धान्य-विक्रेता m. retail d. अल्पशो-विक्रेता m. 
wholesale d. बहुशो-विक्रेता m. dealing Com. पणन ., व्यवहार m. 
double d. द्विमुख व्यवहार m. 
fair d. सत्य व्यवहार m. deamidase.Biochem. निस्तिक्तेयेद m. deamidate vb. Chem. निस्तिक्तेयीयन 1. deamidation Chem. निस्तिक्तेयीयन 1. deamidization=deamidation deamidize=deamidate deaminase Biochem. निस्तिक्त्येद m. deaminate vb. Chem. farfFIFTAT . deamination Chem. निस्तिक्तीयन . deaminization=deamination deaminize=deaminate deammonation Cbem. निस्तिक्तातीयन n. .deaquation=dehydration विजलीयन n. 
de-aromatizevb. निस्-सुरभीकरण ।. dearsenicate vb. विनेपालीयन 1. deatsenicator विनेपालीयक m. dearsenicize=dearsenicate death मृत्यु m. death of partner Com. भागि-मृत्यु m. death rate मृत्यु-अर्घm. death sentence मृत्यु-दण्ड m, debate वादविवाद m. 
dispute विवाद m. ...controversy वाद-प्रतिवाद m.' , discussion पर्यालोचन . debenture Com. ऋष्ण पत्र.. 
d: bond ऋण-बन्ध, m. . . . . . d. capital ऋणपत्र-पुंजी ... ... . 
d: holder ऋणपत्र-धारी (-इन्) m. d. interest ऋणपत्र-वृद्धि . d. loan ऋणपत्र-उद्धार m. d. redemption fund ऋणपत्र 
निष्क्रयण-प्रणीवि f. d. stock ऋण-स्कन्ध m. bearer d. वाहक-ऋणपत्र n. irredeemabled. अशोध्य ऋणपत्र. issue of d. ऋणपत्र-निर्गमन 1. issue of d. at discount अवमूल्ये 
ऋणपत्र-निर्गमन । issue of d. at pas 
निर्गमन .. issue of d. at premium अधिमूल्ये 
ऋणपत्र-निर्गमन . mortgaged. प्राधि-ऋणपत्र n. perpetual d. शाश्वत ऋणपत्र 1. redeemabled. शोध्य ऋणपत्र . . redemption of d. ऋणपत्र-निष्क्रयण .. registered d. पंजीयित ऋणपत्र.. simple d. (naked debenture) 
अनावृत ऋणपत्र, अप्रतिभूति-ऋणपत्र n. 
(without security) terminabled. सावधि ऋणपत्र n. debit n. Com. विकलन 1.. 
d. balance विकलनाधिक्य . d. entry विकलन-प्रविष्टि f. d. note विकलन-पत्र n. 
d. side विकलन-पार्व. debit vb. विकलन .. debitable Com. विकलनीय mfn. debited Com. विकलित min. debiting Com. विकलन . debituminization विजतुकीयन 1. debituminize vb. विजतुकीयन M. debrominate vb. विराधीयण n. debromination विदुराघ्रीयण 1. debt ऋण . .. 
304 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
debtor अधमर्ण, ऋणी (-इन्) m. 
decarbonize vb. व्यंगारण १. d. on open account विवृतलेखी decarbonized व्यंगारित mfn. 
(-इन्) अधमर्ण m. 
decarbonized iron=wrought iron, sundry d. विविध अधमर्ण m. ____ingot iron व्यंगारित अयस् ॥. trade d. पण्याधमर्ण m. 
decarbonized steel व्यंगारित वज्रायस . debtor's ledger Com. अधमर्ण-प्रपंजी. decarbonizer व्यंगारयिता (-तु) m. debt service ऋणव्यय m. 
decarboxylate vb. व्यंगजारलन ।. dec. (deci-meter) दि.मा. (दशि-मान) decarboxylation व्यंगजारलन 1. deca- दश 
decarboxylization = decarboxyla decaffeinate=decaffeinize vb. fa tion ___म्लेच्छीयन . 
decarboxylize=decarboxylate deca-gon Geom. दशभुज m. 
decarburation=decarbonization deca-gram (dkg) दश-धान्य 1. (द. धा.) decarburization=decarbonization deca-hedron Geom. दशानीक m. decarburize-decarbonize deca-hydrate दश-जलीय . 
decatoic=decoicChem. दशिक mfn. deca-hydrated दश-जलीयित mfn. decatyl=decyl Chem. FRIST 1. deca-hydro-naphthalene दशोदोत्तैलेन्य decay अपक्षय m. 
December द्वादशमास m. .. Decalin Chem. (deca-hydro - naph- decene Chem. care n. 
_thalene) दशलेन्या . 
decentralization विकेन्द्रीकरण. decaliter (dki) दश-प्रस्थ M. (द. स्थ.) decentralize vb. विकेन्द्रीकरण . deca - meter, deca - metre (dkm, decentration fadirailagur n. 
_dm.) दश-मान m. (द. मा.) 
decentre vb. (to place out of centre) decane Chem. दशीन्य 1. 
विकेन्द्रण . decant vb. (to pour off from the decenyl Chem. दशेन्यल. 
edge of a vessel, de t - canthus) dechemicalization facTETETT n. निकण्ठन 1. (to lower down नि the dechemicalizevb. विरासायनन .. 
कण्ठ) 
dechlore vb. विनीरजन . decantate (the liquid decanted) नि- dechlorination विनीरजन .. 
कण्ठित . 
decide vb. निर्णयन 1. decantation निकण्ठन 1. (act), निकण्ठना f. 
नाf. decided निर्णीत mfn. (process) 
deciding vote निर्णायक मत. decanter निकण्ठक m. 
deciduous Zool., Bot. प्रपाती (-इन्) decaploid Zool. दशगुण mfn. 
mfn. Decapoda.Zool. दश-पादा: m.pl. deci-gram (dg.) दशि-धान्य 1. (दि. धा.) decarbonate vb. व्यंगारीयण ॥. 
decile Statistics दशमक . . decarbonator व्यंगारीयक m. 
deci-liter (dI.) दशि-प्रस्थ m. (दि. स्थ.) decarbonization व्यंगारण 1. 
decim. (deci-metet) दि. मा. (दशि-मान) 
305 
20 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
decimal arifini mfn. 
decoctum=decoction Pharm. Farer d. balance (single pan) caffein m. 
get f. (5#-#7577) 
d. agropyri = decoction of d. coinage af 77 m. 
couch grass d. fraction Arith, GRIFFF FFT m. d. agropyri conc. संकेन्द्रित शायिघास d. place दशमिक स्थान 1. 
fatet m. decimalization gaf heint n. 
d. aloes compositum concen deci-meter (dec., decim., dm.) far tratum=concentrated com 
• TT m. (f. FT.) 
pound decoction of aloes deci-molar Chem. Efatara mfn. 
HET ATT SAT-Tet m. centi-molar fa mfn. 
d. cinchonae rub. Terim facitq-eater mole व्यूह m. molal व्यूहीय mfn. 
d. hemidesmi conc. paran decine=decyne Chem. Fant f. 
afar-fare m. (Lesco) deci-normal **** mfn. 
d. kurchi 40-4914 m. (Lesco) decision free, frufe m. 
d. sarsae compositum com decisive fartfel, farsfeeret (-57), pound decoction of sarsa 
firfeara, Freeriti mfn. 
parilla i arhi 
m. decisively=conclusively FRETTETUT d. scoparii=decoction of sco declaration of war युद्ध-घोषणा f. 
parium declination fanno n. 
d. sennae TTCTT-PaT4 m. (Lesco) decocainize vb. fataan n. 
d. taraxaci grafazar - oare m. decoct vb. 797 n. 
(Lesco) decoction I क्वाथन 1. 
d. uvae ursi Tage - are m. 2-decoctum (dec.) Pharm. FATT (Lesco) m. infusum=infusion 974 ) decoic Chem. afişi mfn. d. of broom=d. of scoparium d. acid afers 77 n. d. of couch grass = decoctum decolor, decolour = decolorize 
agropyri (dec. agropyr.)=de- decolorant fais mfn. 
coction of triticum far- decolorate adj. (deprived of colour) #974 m. 
. विरंजित mfn. d. of scoparium = decoction of decolorate vb.=decolorize 
broom decoctum scoparii decoloration=decolorization 
(dec. scopar.) #FAT -T4 m. decolori - meter (for measuring d. of triticum=d. of couch the power of a decolorant for 
grass, 
fag- TT m. dw process #ater-fast f. 
decolorization, decolourization decoctive #alea mfn. 
faton n. 
306 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
. 
decolorize, decolourize vb. विरंजन decrepitate vb. (to roast or calcine 
so as to cause crackling; as, to decolorizer, decolourizer I विरंजयिता decrepitate salt) चटचट-भर्जन, चटचटन 
(-तृ) m. 
- n. 2 (an apparatus) विरंजिन १. decrepitate I (to crackle) चटचटन ॥. decolour=decolorize 
___2 (to roast a moist material) आर्द्र decolourization=decolorization भर्जन . decolourize=decolorize 
decrepitation I (property of crys decolourizer=decolorizer 
tals, when heated, of flying apart decomposable विबंध्य mfn. 
with a crackling sound) चटचटोत्प decompose vb. विबन्धन M. 
तन . decomposed विबद्ध mfn. 
2 (a crackling noise made by salt decomposer विबन्धक m. 
when roasting) चटचटन ॥. decomposition विबन्धन n. 
decrystallization विस्फटन १. decomposition of ammonia ap- decurrent leaf Bot. अधोगामि पत्र . 
paratus तिक्ताति-विबन्धन साधित्र n. decussation Ophthalmol. व्यत्यास m., decompound vb. विसंयोजन 1. 
स्वस्तिक n. I (to compound with a com- decyl Chem. दशल ?. pound, to compound a second decylene Chem. दशलेन्या . time) भूयः-संयोजन . 
decylenic Chem. दशलेन्यिक mfn. 2 (to decompose) विबन्धन १. . decylic Chem. दशलिक mfn. decompoundable विसंयोज्य mfn. decyne, decine Chem, aut f. decompress vb. विसंपीडन . 
deduce vb. अनुमनन ॥. decompressing विसंपीडन . 
deducible अनुमेय mfn. decompression विसंपीडन ।. 
deduction सामान्यादनुमान 2. (सामान्याद् decompression chamber विसंपीडन विशेषस्य अनुमानम्) 
वेश्म . . 
deduction अनुमान n. decompressive विसंपीडक mfn. 
___2 Com. अपवाह m., अपवहन 1. deconcentrate vb. विसंकेन्द्रण .. Dee Phys. (a D-shaped chamber) deconcentration विसं केन्द्रण ॥. 
अर्धचन्द्र वेश्म .. deconcentrator विसंकेन्द्रकm. 
deed Com. संलेख m. (short for संविदा decopperization विताम्रायण n... 
लेख) decopperize vb. विताम्रायण. 
, d. of agreement संविदा-लेख m. decrease ह्रास m., न्यूनता . 
- d. of assignment अभिहस्तांकन-लेख decrease vb. हसन, हासन . 
__m. . decrease Com. I vb. न्यूनकरण n. 
d. of lease पट्ट-लेख m. 2 न्यूनता.. 
d. of mortgage प्राधि-लेख m. decree प्रादेश m. 
d. of partnership भागिता-लेख m. 
307 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
de-emanate vb. Phys., Chem. (to 
deprive of emanation) निस्सृति-यापन 
de-emanation Phys., Chem. forrefat 
यापन 1. de-emulsibility, de-emulsivity= 
demulsibility de-emulsify=demulsify de-emulsivity=demulsibility deep गभीर mfn. deep (colour) गाढ mfn. deep black Col. Ind. गाढ काल m. 
d. blue गाढ नील m. d. chrome brown गाढ वर्णक बचm. d. lemon yellow गाढ निम्बु पीत 
m. 
defensive enzyme Biochem. sfather 
किण्व . defensive protein Biochem. प्रतिरक्षी 
प्रोभूजिन m. defensive war Mil. प्रतिरक्षि युद्धा . deferred Com. atetfra mfn. 
d. annuity आस्थगित-वार्षिकी f. d. bond आस्थगित बन्ध m. d. creditors आस्थगित उत्तमर्ण m. d. expenditure आस्थगित व्यय m. d. rebate आस्थगित अवहार m. d. revenue expenditure prefira 
आगम-व्यय m. d. shares स्थगित अंश m. 
d. stock आस्थगित स्कन्ध m. defibrinated blood वितन्त्वि -रक्त । de ficiency Com. हीनता, अपूर्णता f. 
d. account हीनता-लेखा, अपूर्णता-लेखा 
f. (H. घटती खाता) d. of capital पुंजी-अपूर्णता . deficiency disease Med. हीनान-रोग m. deficiency food हीनान 1. deficient हीन, अपूर्ण mfn. definable परिभाष्य mfn. define vb. परिभाषण . defined परिभाषित mfn. definite निश्चित, विनिश्चित, नियत nfn. definite characters Bot. निश्चित गण m. definite inflorescence Bot. नियत 
पुष्पता . definite integral Math. निश्चित अनुकल 
deep-sea fish गभीर-समुद्र-मत्स्य m. deer हरिण m. deer Ay Zool. मृग-मक्षी f. deerhound मृगाखेटिक m. defacto वस्तुतः defaecation मलोत्सर्ग m. defalcation Com. व्यपहरण ।. defect I दोष m. ___ 2 (opp. to excess) न्यूनता f. defective सदोष mfn. defective fixation=point wander- ____ing Ophthalmol. सदोष लक्षबन्धन 1. 
defence I Mil. प्रतिरक्षा f. 
2 Law प्रतिवाद m. defence appointments प्रतिरक्षा-नियुक्ति 
m. 
defence committee प्रतिरक्षा-समिति f. defence in depth = circular de- ____fence Mil. वर्तुल-प्रतिरक्षा f. defence services प्रतिरक्षा-सेवकवर्ग m. defend wb.प्रतिरक्षण n. defendant Law प्रतिवादी (-इन्) m. 
definite proportions law-law of 
definite proportions fifer 
अनुपात-नियम m. definition परिभाषा f., लक्षण है. defiagrability उद्दाह्यता f.. . deflagrable उद्दाह्य mfn. . . . 
30& 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
defiagrate vb. Chem. (burn up) उद्दहन' defunct निश्चेष्ट mfn. 
degas, degasify vb. faaraitaa n. deflagrating globe उद्दहन-गोलक m. degasification विवातीयन ।. deflagrating jar उद्दहन-कलश m. degasifier विवातीयक m. deflagrating or deflagration spoon degasify=degas 
Cbem. उद्दहन-नुव m. 
degenerating corpuscle Zool. fa enfef deflagration उद्दहन 1. 
__ रुधिरकोशा f. deflagration spoon Chem. JEEST ETD degenerating fibres Zool. fa greit ___m. 
तन्तु m. deflagrator Chem. उदाहक m. 
degeneration विह्रास m. defiate vb. विधमान 7. 
Degener's indicator=phenaceto deflation विध्मान . 
___lin Chem. दर्शशुक्तविf. deflator विध्मायक m. 
deglaze vb. विकाचन n. deflect vb. व्याकंचन, व्याकोचन ।. 
deglutinate vb. व्याश्लेषण . deflected व्याकुंचित, व्याकोचित mfn. deglutination व्याश्लेषण . deflection I व्याकुंचन, व्याकोचन . degradation Chem. (reduction of a 
2 Mil. (of a projectile) व्याकोच m. complex compound to one less (see drift) . 
complex) अपचयन । deflecto-meter व्याकंच-मान m. 
degradational Chem. अपचयनीय mfn. deflector Mach. व्याकोचक m. 
degradation constant Chem. अपचयन deflector dome Ry. Eng. व्याकोचक छाद स्थिर m. 
degradation energy Chem. अपचयन deflex vb. (to bend or curve down- ऊर्जा f. 
ward) निकोचन . 
degradation product i Zool. ZETT deflexion, deflexure=deflection . सृष्टn. deflocculant, deflocculent (that 2 Chem. अपचयन सृष्ट .. 
which defiocculates) विलोष्टकर, degradative Chem. अपचयोन्मुख mfn. व्यूर्णीकर m. 
degrade vb. Chem. अपचयन . deflocculate vb. विलोष्टन, व्यूर्णीकरण. degraded Chem. अपचित mfn. deflocculator विलोष्टयिता (-त), व्यूर्णी- degras Chem. (grease from sheep 
कर m. 
अवि wocl ऊर्णा ) अव्यूर्णा-स्नेह m. deflocculent=deflocculant 
degrease vb. विस्नेहन . deform vb. विरूपण . 
degreaser विस्नेहक m. deformability faciat f. 
degreer (१) अंश m. (१) deformable विरूप्य mfn. 
2 Math. (of an expression) घात m. deformation विरूपण, विरूप. 
3 मात्रा. defrayable शोध्य mfn. 
4 (of a university) उपाधि, विद्यो defrother Chem. विफेनक M. 
पाधि m. 
309﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
mm. 
m. 
degree of accuracy Statistics परि- dehiscent (fruits) Bot. (when ripe, ___ शुद्धता मात्रा . 
___ they open) स्फोटी (-इन्) mfn. degree of association Chem. zate dehydr-= dehydro 
dehydracetic acid=dehydroacetic degree of dissociation Chem. वियवांश acid 
dehydrant विजलीयक m. degree of freedom Mech., Phys., dehydrase=dehydrogenase . 
Chem. स्वातन्त्र्यांश m. 
dehydrate vb. Chem. विजलीयन ।. degree of hardness Chem. काठिन्यांश dehydrated Chem. विजलीयित mfn. 
m., काठिन्य-मात्रा . 
dehydrated alcohol Chem. विजलीयित degree of hydrolysis Chem. जलाशन 
मात्रा. 
dehydrated food विजलीयित अन्न . degree of ionization Chem. अयननांश dehydrating agent विजलीयन-कर्ता (-त) ___m. degree of latitude अक्षांश m. 
dehydration Chem. विजलीयन . degree of longitude teist m. dehydration apparatus विजलीयन degree of saturation Phys. अनुवेधनांश 
dehydrator Chem. विजलीयिता (-) degree of symmetry Chem. संमित्यंश m. 
m., सम्मिति-माना. 
dehydro-, dehydr- 1 (dehydrated, degree of temperature तापांश dehydrogenated) व्युद 
m. - 
2 (dehydrated) factant degree value Chem. Ef f. 
dehydroacetic acid Chem. व्युदशुक्तिक deguelin Chem. (a fish poison) अम्ल n. ____ मीनवेडि f. 
7-dehydro-cholesterol Chem. ७-व्युद degum vb. विनिर्यासन 7. 
पैत्तव m. degummer विनिर्यासक m. 
dehydrocholic acid Chem. ayafaffiti deHaen salt Chem. (a double salt अम्ल 1. 
of antimony trifluoride अंजन त्रितर- dehydrogenase Biochem, व्युदजनेद m. स्वेय and ammonium sulphate) dehydrogenate vb. व्युदजनन n. अप्यंत्रित लवण . 
dehydrogenation व्युदजनन 1. dehair vb. (to remove the hair of dehydrogenize=dehydrogenate ____wool from hides or skins) विरोमण' dehydrogenizer व्युदजनयिता (-1) m. 
dehydro - isodesoxycholic acid dehisce vb. Bot. स्फोटन n. 
___Chem. व्युद-सविजारपित्तिक अम्ल N. dehiscence Bot. स्फोटना. 
dehydrolysis Chem. विजलांशन 1. d..by pores रन्ध्र-स्फोटना f. 
dehydrolyzing agent Chem. fa d. by teeth दन्त-स्फोटना . 
जलाशन-कर्ता (-तृ) m. 
n. 
310 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
dehydromucic acid Chem. विजलनर्या 2 Bot. (ramifying into many bran 
सिक अम्ल 1. 
ches बहुशाखीयन) बहुशाखी (-इन्) mfn. dehydrothiotoluidine Chem. व्युद- deliriant Med. चित्तविभ्रान्त mfn. 
गन्धविरालेयी. 
delirium चित्तविभ्रम m. dehydrothioxylidene Chem. व्युदगन्ध- delivery Com. प्रदान, अर्पण . 
काष्ठेयेन्य . 
d. book प्रदान-पुस्त. deionize vb. व्ययनन ?. 
d. order प्रदान-आदेश m. dekakilogram (dkg.) दशसहस्रधान्य n. delivery tube प्रदान-नाल m. 
(द.स.धा.) 
delivery tube, Kjeldahl Chem. 19 dekalin-decalin 
भू-ति प्रदान-नाल m. dekaliter (dkl.) दश-प्रस्थm. (द.स्थ.) delivery van RJy. प्रदान-शकट n. dekameter (dkm.) दश-मान m. (द.मा.) delouse vb. युकानाशन 1. delay=postpone vb. विलंबन 1. delousing यूकानाशन . del credere agent Mercantile Law delphine blue=chrome blue GD 
परिशोधी अभिकर्ता (त) m. 
delphinic acid Chem. निविषियिक अम्ल del credere commission Mercantile . 
LV परिशोधि वर्तन n. 
delphinidin Chem. निविष्येय . dele Printing बहिष्करण. 
delphinin Chem. निविषिकि. deleter Math. अपमार्जन 2. 
delphinine Chem. falaferit f. 2 बहिष्करण . 
Delphinium Bot. fafaelfa f. (-fat for deleted अपमाजित, बहिष्कृत nfn. 
प्रजाति genus) deletion अपमार्जन 1., बहिष्कार m. 
D. denudatum सामान्य निविषी . deliberate sampling = conscious delphinoidine Chem. fifquerit f. 
sampling Statistics afara fiesta delta i (anything having the shape 
of the capitalGreek letter delta A) deliberate selection Statistics सविचार त्र्यस्त्र ., ब्राह्म ए, त्रिभुज m., त्रिकोण . 
प्रवरण . 
2 (fourth; as a carbon atom in delicate सुकुमार mfn. 
a chain) ई delicate balance capable of mea 38 (deviation) Statistics वि 
suring to a minute degree) (विचलन) सुकुमार-, सूक्ष्म-तुला. 
4A (difference) Statistics अ delignification (removal of lignin (अन्तर) 
from woody tissue) लगुड्यपगमन 1. SA (depression of freezing deliquesce vb. क्लेदक्षरण n. 
point) नि (श्यानांक-निम्नन) deliquescence (liquifying by absor 6 A (elevation of boiling point) 
_ption of moisture from the air) उ (बुबुदांक-उत्थापन) . 
क्लेदक्षरता. 
delta acid Chem. ई अम्ल N. deliquescent I क्लेदक्षर mfn. 
delta metal Chem. ई धातु m. 
. 
311 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
- 
deltapurpurine 5 B= cotton pur- Demodex Zool. Frestarfa f. (short for 
ple 5 B 
त्वक्स्नेहकीटाति; आति for प्रजाति genus) deltapurpurine 7 B=diamine red Demodicidae Zool. (found in fatty 
3B 
sebaceous material त्वक्स्नेह of acne) delta rays Chem. ई रश्मि m. 
स्नेहकीटवंश m. deltate leaf Bot. त्रिभुज पत्र 1. 
demolish vb. (throw or pull down) deltohedron Cryst. श्यस्त्रानीक m. 
अवासन' १. (अव down+असन throw deltoiditis Med. अंसवेष्टकोप m. 
ing) deltoid muscle Zool. अंसवेष्ट-पेशी, demolization Chem. (dispersion of 
त्रिकोण-पेशी. 
__ a molecular system) नियूहन . deltoid ridge Zool. त्रिकोण कूट 1. demonstrability निरूप्यता f. deluminize vb. चकासापगमन n. 
demonstrable निरूप्य mfn. demagnetization विचुम्बकन ॥. 
demonstration निरूपण, प्रदर्शन n. demagnetize vb. विचुम्बकन 1. 
demonstration rod प्रदर्शन शलाका f. demagnetized विचुम्बकित mfn. 
demonstrator प्रदर्शक m. demagnetizer विचुम्बकयिता (तु) m. demulcent शमन mfn. demal adi. Physical Chem. (having demulsibility Physical Chem. वि. 
one gram in a cubic decimeter; तैलोद्यता, विप्रनिलंब्यता. litrescubic decimeter) TTT demulsify = de-emulsify Physical 
mfn. 
_____Chem. वितैलोदीयन, विप्रनिलम्बन n. demand Com. अभियाचन 1. 
demurrage Law विलम्बशुल्क m. d. bill अभियाचन-विपत्रा . 
denary Math. I (involving ten vari 
•d. deposit अभियाचन-निक्षेप m. ___ables) दशमय mfn. _____d. draft अभियाचन-विकर्ष m. 
2 (tenfold) दशगुण, (decimal) दशमिक demarcation line भेद-रेखा, सीमा-रेखा . 3 (a group of ten) दशती f. demargarinate vb. (to remove the denature vb. (to change the nature 
solid portion from an oil) of) विकरण, विप्रकरण . सान्द्रापगमन 1. 
denatured (as alcohol, fats) वि-प्रकृत demethylate vb. Chem. fastestery n. demethylation Chem. विप्रोदलीयन 1. denaturization वि-प्रकरण. demi- अर्ध-, अंश- (demi-god अंशावतार) denaturizer वि-प्रकर्ता (-तु) m. demigod अंशावतार m. 
dendr-, dendro- वृक्ष democracy लोकतन्त्र . (लोकायत्त-तन्त्र) dendrite= dendron Anat. (small democratic constitution (sovereign processes of a nerve cell) चेता-लोम .. power vested in the people) 1. 
लोकतन्त्रीय संविधान . 
dendrite Mineral. tifex n. (an arbo democratic party लोकतन्त्रवादी पक्ष Lescent form; a mineral of stone 
m. . 
bearing a branching figure; a ri 
mfn. ' 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
crystallised arborescent form, as dense fog 97-9f497 f. of gold or silver) 
densification saitasur, artan n. dendro-, dendr 
densifier धनीकर m. Dendrobium Bot. जीवन्तीति f. (Dendro densify vb. घनीकरण, घनीभवन . 
+ bios 'tree +- life' is from Skt.) densimeter Physical Chem. SamATET (-ति for प्रजाति genus) 
m. dendrology I (study of trees) वृक्षविद्या densimetric घनतामान-, धनतामानीय mfn. 
densimetry धनतामिति f. 2 (dating trees from their growth densi-tensi-meter Chem. 41-afa rings) वृक्षायुविद्या . 
ATT m. dendron=dendrite 
densitometer i=densimeter denebium=thulium 
2 (an instrument for measuring dengue = breakbone fever Med. 
photographic density) चित्रघनतामान fyra m. 
m. denicotine, denicotinize vb. faals- density war f. 
SPECT n. 
d. bottle धनता-कूपी . denier (a unit of silk and rayon d. hydrometer TAT-TESTART m. ____yarn size) सूत्रक n. 
d. pipette धनता-नाडक . denitrate vb. Chem. fatetea n. 
d. tube EETSTYTTET m. denitration Chem. Faureitaa n. dental cara mfn. denitrator Chem. विभूयीयक M. dental alloy दन्त्य मिश्रातु m. denitrification Chem. विभयन . dental caries GTIGETT f. denitrificator, denitrifier Chem. dentary i creu mfn. 
fay7 m. 
2 =dentary bone denitrify vb. Chem. fawaa n. dentary bone=dentary Anat. FRETT denitrifying bacteria विभूयक वेत्राणु m. feet n. denitrifying tower Chem. fatent- dentate Biol. ange mfn. 
STATUT m. 
dentated Biol. Trafic mfn. denitrize=denitrate, denitrify: dented=dentate Dennstedt furnace (a combustion dentifrice (tooth powder) CHERTTUT M. 
furnace for elementary organic (ancient word) analysis) free n. 
dentine Anat. Greit f. denomination Com. अभिधान 1. dentiphone=audiphone (an ins denominator Arith., Alg. m. trument placed against the teeth denote vb. a 1. 
so that the deaf can hear) rasta de novo s tage (Hindi tre for de novo (arising) Bot. स्वयंभू, अपूर्वात् dentist दन्तवैद्य m. dense min. 
dentistry crafa FAST, afreit f. 313 
D 
. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
dentist's amalgam दन्त्य संरस m. 
d. bookkeeping वैभागिक पुस्तपालन dentition दन्तविन्यास m. 
. dentrite-dendrite Mineral. . 
d. column वैभागिक स्कम्भ m. denudate, denude vb. नग्नीकरण . 
d. cost वैभागिक परिव्यय m. denudation नग्नीकरण । 
d. store बहुविभागी भाण्डागार. denude vb. नग्नीकरण 1. 
dependent परतन्त्र mfn. Deobund (in the Saharanpur dis- dependent variable परतन्त्र चल m. 
trict) Geog. द्वैत-वन ॥. 
depend upon आश्रयण, अवलम्बन 1. (H. deodorant दुर्गन्धहर, गन्धहर m. 
निर्भर होना) deodorization दुर्गन्धहरण . . 
dephlegm, dephlegmate vb. Chem. deodorize vb. दुर्गन्धहरण 1. 
(to rectify by distillation) Farhan deodorizer=deodorant 
11. deoxidant=deoxidizer 
dephlegmation Chemm. स्वासवन १. deoxidate=deoxidize 
dephlegrmator स्वासवक m. deoxidater=deoxidizer 
.dephosphorize vb. Chem. भास्वाराप deoxidation=deoxidization 
गमन . deoxidator=deoxidizer 
depict vb. चित्रण deoxidization Chem. विजारण 1. depigment = depigmentize vb. deoxidize vb. Cbem, विजारण 1. 
Chem. रंगा-विगमन n. (to cause to deoxidizer Chem. विजारयिता (-त) m. lose pigment, to decolorize) deoxy- =desoxy 
depigmentate vb. (to destroy pig. deoxycholic acid Biochem. विजार- ment in tissue) रंगा-नाशन 1. 
पित्तिक अम्ल . 
depigmentation रंगानाशन . deoxygenate vb. Chem. factoT n. depigmentize=depigment deoxygenated विजारकित mfn. 
depilate vb. विलोमन .. deoxygenated water Chem. विजार- depilation विलोमन 1. 
कित जल .. 
depilator विलोमक m. deoxygenation, deoxygenization depilatory n. विलोमयिता (-त) m. . विजारकण .. 
_____depilitant Leather Mfg. (an agent deoxygenize vb. Chem. विजारकण .. to loosen hair before depilating) deozonization Chem. प्रजारकापगमन 1. लोमश्लथ m. deozonize vb. Chem. (to deprive of deplete=empty vb. Ta th. 
• ozone) प्रजारकापगमन 1. 
depolarize=dipolarize vb. विध्रुवीयण, deozonizer Chem. प्रजारकापगमक m. व्यभि स्पन्दन . department विभाग m. 
depolymerization Chem. विपुरुभाजन . ____d. of statistics समंक-विभाग m. depolymerize vb.Chem. विपुरुभाजन . departmental वैभागिक mfn. 
deposit vb. I (to let fall as sedi d.account वैभागिक-लेखा f. 
ment) अवसादन .. 
314 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
2 (to let accumulate as precipi- depot ship=supply ship Nav. tate) निस्सादन 1. 
भाण्ड-पोत-प्रदाय-पोत m. 3 (to place, to put) निक्षेपण n. depreciation Accounting . अवमूल्यन, 4 (to coat a. metal) रोपण m. 
अवक्षयण deposit n. I अवसाद m. 
d. account अवमूल्यन-लेखा . ___ 2 निस्साद m. 
d. fund अवमूल्यन-प्रणीवि . 3 निक्षेप m. 
d. table अवमूल्यन-सारणी f. 4 रोप m. 
depressant प्रावसादक mfn. deposit Com. निक्षेप m. 
depression I निम्नन . d. account निक्षेप-लेखा 
2 निम्न . d. bill निक्षेप-विपत्र 7. 
3 Statistics अवसाद m. (cf. slump d. book निक्षेप-पुस्त १. 
अवपात) d. receipt निक्षेप-प्राप्ति f. 
depression constant (K) Fastitate d. warrant निक्षेप-अधिपत्र. 
स्थिरांक m. (थ) current d. चल निक्षेप m. 
depression of the freezing point fixed d. सावधि निक्षेप m. 
(A) श्यानांक-निम्नन .. (नि) savings d. संचय-निक्षेप m. 
depressive अवसादी, प्रावसादी (-इन्) mfn. time d. सावधि निक्षेप m. 
depressor I Chem. (that which re deposit a ballot मतपत्र-निक्षेप m. 
tards of prevents a reaction) deposited I अवसन्न, अवसादित mfn. 
प्रावसादयिता (-तु) m. 2 निस्सन्न, निस्सादित mfn. 
2 Physiol. पावसादक m. 3 निक्षिप्त mfn. 
depside Chem. (obtained from 4 रोपित mfn. 
____lichens) शैपलेय n. deposition I अवसादन n. 
depsiphore Chem. (a structural 2 निस्सादन. 
arrangement of atoms that is 3 निक्षेपण .. 
common to many substances 4 रोपण. 
having the property of tapning deposition of lead sulphate सीस agents) शल्कव्यूह m. 
शुल्बीय-रोपण . 
depth गाम्भीर्य n., गभीरता , विस्तार m. depositor I (one who makes a depth of focus Optics नाभि-गाम्भीर्य . 
deposit) निक्षेपक m. 
depth of nut नहगाम्भीर्य . , 2 (an electroplater) रोपित्र n. . deputy director प्रति-संचालक m. 
3 (a worker who deposits coat- deputy regent=vice-regent 34 ings of metal) रोपक m. 
प्रतिशास्ता (-४) m. depot I Physiol. संग्रहागार n. 
deputy secretary प्रति-सचिव m. 2 Com. आगार n. 
under secretary उप-सचिव m. book d. पुस्तकागार n. 
assistant secretary सहायक सचिव m. sales d. विक्रयागार n. 
chief secretary मुख्य सचिव m. 
35 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
joint secretary संयुक्त सचिव m. 
flies whose larvae live under the additional secretary अपर सचिव skin) चमौजीवाति f. (-आति for प्रजाति 
genus) derbylite (an antimonio-titanate of dermatogen Bot. (giving rise to the 
iron) अयोजरंजीयिज m. (-इज for खनिज ___epidermis) अधिचर्मजन M. mineral) 
dermatograph pencil चौकनी f. derby red=Chinese red 
dermatol = bismuth subgallate Derbyshire neck Med. गंडग्रीवा ___ Chem. भिदातु अनुद्रुस्फोटीय n. deresinate, deresinify, deresinize dermato-plasty चर्म-घटना f. 
vb. (to remove the resin from) dermatoscope चर्मेक्ष m. व्युद्यासन .. 
dermic चर्मिक mfn. dericin Chem. (an oil derived from dermis Anat. (below the epidermis) 
_caster oil) ऐरंडिf. 
निचर्मn. derivant, derivate=derivative dermitis=dermatiti Med. चर्मकोप derivation Chem. (preparation of an m. 
organic substance from another dermo- चर्म ___ compound) व्युत्पत्ति f., व्युत्पादन n. dermol Pharm. चर्मव m. derivative (derived) Chem., Statistics dermo-plasty चर्म-घटना. 
व्युत्पन्न, व्युत्पादित ॥. 
Dermo-ptera Zool. चर्म-पक्षाः m.pl. derivative data Statistics व्युत्पन्न-सामग्री des- (used before vowels), de 
Chem. fa derive vb. व्युत्पादन . 
desamidase=deamidase derived व्युत्पादित, व्युत्पन्न mfn. 
desamidization=deamidization derived protein Biochem. व्युत्पादित descend vb. अवरोहण . . 
प्रोभूजिन m. 
descending अवरोही (-इन्) mfr. derived unit व्युत्पादित एकक 1. descending axis Bot. अवरोही अक्ष m. derm-, dermo-, dermato- चर्म descending colon Anat. अवरोही -derm -छद 
मलाशय m. derma Anat. चर्मn. 
descending order Statistics अवरोही Dermanyssus (a. genus of ticks क्रम m. 
having a hard leathery body) descending reduction अवरोहि प्रहसन चर्मकायाति f. (-पाति for प्रजाति genus) 
. dermatitant Chem. (that which irri- describe vb, aurr n. 
tates or inflames the skin) चर्मकोपक descriptive वर्णनात्मक mfn. 
descriptive anatomy वर्णनात्मक शारीर dermatitis Med. चर्मकोपm. .dermato- चर्म 
descriptive average Statistics avia Dermatobia Zool. (a genus of bot नात्मक माध्य... 
m. 
316 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
descriptive characteristics वर्णनात्मक fied) असैकजाभित्ति f. (अ-सैकजायित-कोशा 
लक्षण.. 
भिति) descriptive economics वर्णनात्मक अर्थ- desmine=stilbite Mineral. पूलिज m. 
शास्त्र . 
(पूल bundle; -इज for खनिज mineral) • deshydro- Chem. (containing less -desmism -बन्धता. ____hydrogen) व्युद 
desmo-, desm- बन्ध deshydroxy- Chem. (containing less desmotrope Chem. बन्धावर्त m. 
_hydroxyl) व्युदजार 
desmotropism Chem. बन्धावर्तना. desiccant adj. शोष mfn. 
desorption (de- + adsorption) afer desiccate vb. शोषण .. 
चूषण .. desiccate, desiccated Tof, alferes desoxalate Fafariter n. 
___mfn. 
desoxalic acid Chem. वितिग्मिक अम्ल . desiccated gland product शोषित desoxy-=deoxy- Chem.विजार 
ग्रंथि-सृष्ट . 
desoxy-alizarin Chem. विजार-विमंजिष्ठि desiccation qui n. desiccative शोषयिता (-1) mfn. desoxy-anisoin Chem. विजार-शपूप m. desiccator Chem. ( an apparatus) desoxy-benzoin Chem. विजार-धुप m. 
शोषित्र १. 
desoxy-cholic acid Chem. fahree glazed metal d. काचित धातु-शोषित्र पित्तिक अम्ल n. 
desoxy-cinchonine Chem. fastre desiccatory, desiccative शोषिता, शोष- वितापी f. . 
यिता (-तृ) mfr. 
desoxy-codeine Chem. विजार-मीली. desideratum इष्ट.. 
desoxydation Chem. विजारण 1. design Engin. समनुविधान M. 
desoxy-morphine Chem. विजार-प्रमीली design Phys. प्ररचन १., प्ररचना f. designer समनुविधाता, प्ररचयिता (-त) m. desoxy-quinine Cbem.विजार-विज्वरी. desilicate vb. Chem. विसकतीयन 1. despatch Com. प्रेषण ?. desilicify vb. Chem. (to deprive of d. book प्रेषण-पुस्त ?. 
siliceous matter) faticart 1. 
d. clerk प्रेषण-लिपिक m. desiliconize vb. Chem. (to deprive d . note प्रेषण-पत्र । ____of silicon) विसकतायन .. . 
despatcher Com. प्रेषक m. desilver, desilverize vb. विरजतीयन . despitalization Zool. विकुन्तलन ". desiodo- Chem. विजम्बु 
dessertspoon (2 fluid drams) कोल, desiodo - thyroxine Chem. विजम्ब कोल-नुव m. . 
गलतिग्मी f. 
destillata Pharm. आसुत mfn. desk वलभि f. ('sloping roof') 
destination गम्य-स्थान 1. desm- बन्ध 
destroy vb. नाशन ॥ desmid Bot. (cell wall not silici- destroyer नाशक m. 
317 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
destructive नाशक, नाशी (-इन्) mfn. determinant Math. निश्चायक m. destructive distillation नाशक पासवन 
indistillation नाशक आसवन determination निश्चयन n. 
determination apparatus निश्चेत्र n. desucration (depriving of sugar) determine vb. निश्चयन N. 
विशर्करण 1. 
_determinism निश्चयता desugar vb. (to remove sugar from) detin vb. (to remove or recover tin 
शर्करापगमन . 
____from) अप्वपगमन . desulphur, desulphurate = de- detonable अधिस्फोटय mfn. 
sulphurize 
detonate vb. अधिस्फोटन . . desulphuration = desulphuriza- detonating अधिस्फोटन. ___tion Chem. विशुल्बारीयण . 
d. fuse अधिस्फोटन ज्वाल m. desulphurize vb. Chem. FaceTITUT n. d. gas अधिस्फोटन वाति m. de-superheater (a device to cool d. powder अधिस्फोटन क्षोद m. . superheated steam) अधितप्तशम m. d. tube अधिस्फोटन नाल m. desyl (desoxybenzoin + - ) Chem. detonation अधिस्फोटन 1. 
विल १. (विजारधूप + -ल) 
detonative अधिस्फोटी (-इन्) mfn. detach vb. पृथक्करण १. 
detonator अधिस्फोटित्र., अधिस्फोटक m. detached पृथक्कृत mfn. 
detonize=detonate detached coefficient Math. पृथक्कृत detoxicant विषापगम m. __गुणक m. 
detoxicatevb. Med. विषापगमन 1. detail I (a small and subordinate _detoxicator विषापगमक m. . part) भागक m. 
detrimental हानिकर mfn. 2 विस्तर, विस्तार m. 
deuter- =deutero detailed सविस्तर mfn. 
deuterate Chem. उद्वेकीय n. detain vb. अवरोधन 1. 
deuteric acid Chem. उद्वेकिक अम्लn. detained अवरुद्ध mfn. 
deuterio - (deuterium) Chem. उद्वे detect, detecting उपलम्भन .. detecting error Com. विभ्रम-उपलम्भन' deuterium Chem. (heavy hydrogen, 
_ H2) उद्वेक m. (उ.) detection उपलम्भ m., उपलम्भन 1. deutero-, deuter- Chem. I (second detection by radar तेजोन्वेष-उपलम्भन . _in order) द्वितीय detector Chem. उपलम्भक m. 
2 (containing deuterium) उद्वे detention अवरोध m. 
d.-aceticacid द्वितीय-शुक्तिक अम्ल . deterge vb. अपक्षालन . 
d.-albumose द्वितीय-श्वितधु १. detergence = detergency (clean d.-ammonia द्वितीय-तिक्ताति m. 
sing quality or power) अपक्षालिता d.-ammonium द्वितीय-तिक्तातु m. 
d.-benzoic acid द्वितीय-धूपिक अम्ल . detergent अपक्षालक mfn.. 
d.-chloroform द्वितीय-नीरवम्रल .. 
(उद्वेक) 
318 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
om 
d.-fibrinose द्वितीय-तन्त्विधु n. deviation Statistics विचलन .. 
d.-proteose द्वितीय-प्रोभूजधु १. device=artifice fact f. Deuteromycetes Bot. (Fungi Im- devil's apple = stramonium= 
• perfecti; no sexual stage) अपूर्ण- thornapple धत्तूरक . कवकानि 1. pl. 
devil's cotton=Abroma augusta deuteron=deuton, diplon 
Pharm. (its juice is serviceable deuteronium=deuterium 
in dysmenorrhea) रजोयूष m. (short deuter-oxyl Chem. द्वितीय-जारला . _ for रजःकृच्छयूष) deuto- Chem, fent 
devise=contrive vb. प्रकल्पनn. d.-bromide द्वित-दुरेय 1. 
devitaminize vb. विजीवतीयन . d.-carbonate द्वितांगारीय n. 
devitrifaction, devitrification Petrog. d.-chloride द्वित-नीरेय 1. 
विकाचरण 7. d.-iodide द्वित-जम्बेय. 
devitrify vb. विकाचरण n. d.-sulphide द्वित-शुल्बेय. 
Devonian period Geol. मत्स्य-युग. deuton द्विताणु m. 
Devonshire clay=China clay deutoplasm Biol. (food matter in devotion offer f. ___the cytoplasm of an egg) रसान्न .. dew अवश्याय m. (Hindi प्रोस is from 
(short for कोशारसान्नद्रव्य) 
अवश्याय) Devarda's alloy (Cu 50% Al 45%, Dewar bulb युग्मभित्ति कन्द m. 
Zn 5%; strong reducing agent) Dewar flask युग्मभित्ति पलिघm. ताम्रस्फातु m. 
Dewar's formula (of benzene) Chem. develop vb. विकासन, विकसन 1. 
(having two double bonds) fa developable faptei mfn. 
बन्धद्वय सूत्र . developed विकसित, विकासित mfn. Dewar tube युग्मभित्ति नाल m. developed black Col. Ind. विकासित Dewar vessel यग्मभित्ति पात्र n. 
काल m. 
dewax vb. विसिक्थन 1. developed dyes विकासित रंजक m. deweylite = gymnite Mineral. 51 developer Dyeing facilitati m. 
भ्रासिज m. (-इज for खनिज mineral) developing विकासन M. 
dewlap सास्ना f., गलकम्बल m. developing bath विकासन स्नान । dew point Physical Chem. अवश्यायांक m. development विकास m. 
dexterity दक्षता . ___d. expenses विकास-व्यय m. 
dextr-, dextro- दक्ष d. officer विकासाधिकारी (-इन् ) m. dextran, dextrane = fermentation developmental anatomy भ्रूणवृद्धि gum Chem. दक्षिणिन्य, दक्षिणीन्य 1. (Cf. 
शारीर. 
ethane दक्षीण्य) developmental education fatfacit dextrin, dextrine = British gum, 
शिक्षा. 
starch gum, gommelin Chem. development of a view दृशा-विकास m. दक्षि, दक्षी f. 
319﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
achroodextrin अवर्णदक्षिf. 
D, H2 (deuterium; hydrogen of ato erythrodextrin रुधिरदक्षिf. 
mic weight or mass 2) Chem. द्व, maltodextrin यव्यदक्षिf. 
उ' (उद्वेक) dextrinase Chem. दक्षियेद m. 
Dhar (in Malwa, the capital of Raja dextrinate Chem. (any compound of Bhoja)Geog. धारानगर 1. 
dextrin) दक्षियीय ॥. 
Di (didymium) Chem. पी (पीतश्यामला) dextrinate vb. (to convert into, or di- fa 
impregnate with, dextrin) दक्षीयण dia- पार-, समया-, हिरुग्- विषु ___n. . 
diabetes Med. बहुमूत्रता f. (ancient dextrine Chem. eft f. 
word), मधुमेह m. dextrinize=dextrinate 
d. mellitus मधुमेह m. dextrinous Chem. दाक्ष्य mfn. 
d.insipidus मूत्रातिसार m. (ancient dextro-, dextr- (d., d-) Chem. 29 word), अमधुमेह M. 
diabetic patient मधुमेह-रोगी (-इन् ) m. dextrocarvol = carvone Chem. दक्ष- diacetamide Chem. द्विशुक्ततिक्तेय . 
प्रजीरैल . 
diacetanilide Chem. द्विशुक्तनीलेय . dextro-compound Chem. दक्ष-संयोग m. diacetate Chem. द्विशक्तीय।. dextrogyric=dextrorotatory Chem. diacetenyl Chem. द्विशुक्तेन्यल 1. 
दक्षवलयिक mfm. 
diacetic acid Chem. द्विशुक्तिक अम्लn. dextro-levo-Chem. दक्ष-वाम 
diacetin Chem. द्विशुक्ति f. dextro-limonenecitrene fortaleset n. diacetonamine Chem. द्विशक्तातिक्ती। dextronic acid Chem. (an acid diacetone Chem, fareTT f. 
derived from dextrose) दक्षध्विक d . alcohol द्विशक्ता सुषव m. अम्ल 
diacetonuria द्विशुक्तामेह m. dextro- or levo- compound दक्ष-, diacetoxydiethyl ether Chem. द्वि 
वाम-संयोग m. 
शुक्तजारद्विदक्षुल दक्षु m. dextro-pinene - australene दक्ष- diaceturia Med. द्विशक्तमेह m. 
निसरलेन्य. 
diacetyl.Chem. द्विशुक्तल. dextro-rotation Chem. दक्षावर्तन 1. diacetyl-amino-azo-toluene Chem. dextro-rotatory rad mfn. 
द्विशक्तल-तिक्ती-अज-विरालेन्या. dextrosan-glucosan Chem. दक्षध्विन्य N-diacetyl-p-aminophenol Chem. 
भू-द्विशुक्तल-प-तिक्तीदर्शव m. dextrosazone (dextrose to osazone) diacetyl-dioxime Chem. façanet 
Chem. दक्षध्वजीवाf. 
द्विजावि . dextrose Chem. दक्षधु ।. 
diacetylene Chem. द्विशुक्तलेन्या . DF (direction finding') Radar fa. . diachylon = diachylon plaster = . (दिंग-अन्वेषण) 
plaster of lead Pharm. सीस-पटलेप dg. (deci-gram) दि. धा. (दशि-धान्य) .m.. 
. 
320 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
d. barein. द्विलाकालिक ad 
diacid Chem. द्वयम्ल 1. 
dial Chem. I (dialdehyde) द्विसु m. di-aci-piper-azine द्वि-प्रज-मरिचाजीवी. (द्विसुव्युद) diacoele=diacoelia=third ven 2 (diallyl barbituric acid) for f. ____tricle Zool. तृतीय-गुहा f. 
(द्विलाषुणल कोलमिहिक अम्ल) diad=dyad 
dialcohol Chem. द्विसुषव m. diadelphous Bot. द्वि-संलाग mfn. dialdehyde Chem. द्विसुव्युद M. diadem chrome black Col. Ind. मुकुट dialin (dihydro- + naphthalin उत्तलि) 
वर्णक काल m. 
Chem. द्विलि . d. chrome blue मुकुट वर्णक नील m. dialkene Chem. द्विक्षारण्य . d. chrome blue-black मुकुट वर्णक dialkyl Chem. द्विक्षारला . 
नील-कृष्ण m. 
dialkylamine Chem. द्विक्षारलतिक्ती। d. chrome brown मुकुट वर्णक बभ्रु m. dialkylene Chem. द्विक्षारलेन्या . d. chrome garnet मुकुट वर्णक निरक्त dialkylic Chem. द्विक्षारलिक mfn. 
m. 
diallyl Chem. द्विलाषुणला . d. chromegreen मुकुट वर्णक हरि m. d. barbituric acid द्विलाषुणल कोल d. chrome red सुकुट वर्णक रक्त m. 
मिहिक अम्ल n. . diagnose vb. (to make a diagnosis) dialogue aratata n. (ancient word) 
निदान करण .. 
dial telephone चक्री दूरभाष m. diagnosis Med. निदान 1. 
dialuramide = uramil Chem. द्वयुप diagnostic Med. नैदानिक mfn. 
मूत्रतिक्तेय . diagnosticate vb. निदान-अन्वेषण n. dialurate Chem. द्वथुपमूत्रीय . diagnostician निदान-पंडित m. 
dialuricacid (di+alloxantin उपतिग्मकि diagonal Geom. falciuft m. 
+ uric) Chem. द्वथुपमूत्रिक अम्ल diagonal bore विकर्ण-छिद्र. 
1. diagonally opposite Math. fabula: Dialypetalae (dialy- separated) 
सम्मुख mfn. 
वियुक्तदला: m.pl. diagonal scale Math. fauf-Afrit f. dialysable=dialyzable diagram (any line drawing) रेखी (-इन्) dialyse=dialyze 
m., रेखि-चित्र, चित्र. 
dialyser=dialyzer diagrammatic representation रेखि- dialysis Chem. व्याश्लेषण 1. 
चित्र निरूपण .. 
dialytic Cbem. व्याश्लेषिक mfn. diagrammatic sketch रेखिचित्र-प्रारूप dialyzable व्याश्लेष्य mfn. 
dialyzate Physical Chem. (product dia-kinesis (chromosomes travel to of dialysis) व्याश्लेषण-जात. 
the periphery of the nucleus) dialyzation=dialysis उपपरिणाह m. 
dialyzator=dialyzer dial (a graduated face) अंकानीक, dialyze vb. Chem. व्याश्लेषण .. 
घटयनीक . 
dialyzed Chem. व्याश्लिष्ट mfn. . 
n. 
321 
21 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
dialyzer Physical Chem. (an appara 
tus) व्याश्लेषित्र, व्याश्लेषणपात्र. dialyzer basin व्याश्लेष-पात्री. diamagnetic Magnetism (having a 
magnetic permeability less than unity) एकोनचुम्बिक mfn. 
paramagnetic एकाधिचुम्बिक mfn. diamantine Chem. हीरकी f. 
I (adamantine or crystalline boron, used as a polishing 
powder) स्फट-टांकण m. 2 (an artifical corundum, used 
as an abrasive) कुरुविन्दक m. diamantine black PV=diamond 
black EA diameter व्यास m. diametrically adv. (along the dia 
meter) अनुव्यास diamide Chem. द्वितिक्तेय . diamidine Chem. द्वितिक्तेयी diamido-Chem. द्वितिक्तेय diamidogen Chem, द्वितिक्तेयजन m. diamine Chem. द्वितिक्ती। diamine Col. Ind. Referat f. 
d. aldehyde black faferat gece 
काल m. d. aldehyde blue द्वितिक्ती सुव्युद 
नील m. d. aldehyde brown ffaraît nous 
बभ्रु m. d. aldehyde orange farenitore __नारंग m. 
d. aldehyde scarlet fafarft ang 
शोण m. d. azo black द्वितिक्ती अज काल m. d. azo blue द्वितिक्ती अज नील m. d. azo,bordeaux द्वितिक्ती.अज कपिशक 
d. azo brown द्वितिक्ती अज बज्र m. d. azo fast bordeaux द्वितिक्ती अज 
स्थिर कपिशक m. d. azo fast green द्वितिक्ती अज स्थिर 
हरिm. d. azo fast red fefaent yet feet 
रक्त m. d. azo fast violet fafarct us FESTT 
नीललोहित m. d. azo olive द्वितिक्ती अज तैलबदर m. d. azo orange द्वितिक्ती अज नारंग m. d. azo scarlet द्वितिक्ती अज शोण m. d. azo yellow द्वितिक्ती अज पीत m. d. Bengal blue द्वितिक्ती वंग नील m. d. beta black द्वितिक्ती आवर्ण काल m. d. black fafarit FTT m. d. black-blue द्वितिक्ती कृष्ण-नील m. d. black-green द्वितिक्ती काल-हरि m. d. black-violet द्वितिक्ती काल-नील 
लोहित m. . d. blue falcat te m. d. blue-black द्वितिक्ती नील-कृष्ण m. d. bordeaux द्वितिक्ती कपिशक m. d. brilliant blue falafat HK 
नील m. d. brilliant bordeaux fafciat 
भासुर कपिशक . d. brilliant orange द्वितिक्ती भासुर 
नारंग m. d. brilliant rubine द्वितिक्ती भासुर 
रक्ती . d. brilliant scarlet द्वितिक्ती भासुर 
शोण m. d. brilliant violet द्वितिक्ती भासुर 
नीललोहित m. d. bronze fefaent partner m. d. bronze-brown falamit mif7-477 
m. 
'in. 
. 
322 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
d. neron द्वितिक्ती कृष्ण m. d. new blue द्वितिक्ती नव नील m. d. nitrazol द्वितिक्ती भूयाजव m. d. nitrazol black द्वितिक्ती भूयाजव 
काल m. d. nitrazol blue द्वितिक्ती भूयाजव नील 
___m. 
d. brown fefast an. d. catechine fafaqat eft f. d. cutch द्वितिक्ती गायत्री d. cyanine fafarit att f. d. dark blue द्वितिक्ती असित नीलm. d. dark green द्वितिक्ती असित हरि m. d. deep black द्वितिक्ती गाढ काल m. d. fast black fafceat FETT 2117 m. d. fast blue fara ait FETE Fita m. d. fast bordeaux द्वितिक्ती स्थिर 
कपिशक m. d. fast brilliant blue feferzeit feTT 
भासुर नील m. d. fast brown fafciat fett a m. d. fast grey falaisit from them. d. fast khaki द्वितिक्ती स्थिर धूलि m. d. fast orange द्वितिक्ती स्थिर नारंग m. d. fast pink द्वितिक्ती स्थिर प्रापद्म m. d. fast red fafcat feTT TT m. d. fast red-violet द्वितिक्ती स्थिर रक्त 
नीललोहित m. d. fast rose द्वितिक्ती स्थिर पाटलm. d. fast rubine fafcat far it f. d. fast scarlet fefacit fer stor m. d. fast violet द्वितिक्ती स्थिर नील 
लोहित m. d. fast yellow fafarat FETT OCT m. d. field grey हितिक्ती सेना धूसर m. d. gold द्वितिक्ती स्वर्ण . d. green द्वितिक्ती हरि m. d. grey द्वितिक्ती धूसर m. d. heliotrope द्वितिक्ती निनीलातिरकर, 
m. d. indigo blue fafererat foarte trek ___m. 
d. jet black द्वितिक्ती घन काल m. d. milling black द्वितिक्ती संकोचन 
काल m. 
d. nitrazol bordeaux fafarerit 737 
जव कपिशक m. d. nitrazol brown द्वितिक्ती भूयाजव 
बभ्रु m. d. nitrazol green farfront area 
हरि m. d. nitrazol orange fafaraft para 
नारंग m. d. nitrazol scarlet fafaict 79756CT 
शोण m. d. nitrazol violet द्वितिक्ती भूयाजव 
नीललोहित m. d. orange द्वितिक्ती नारंग m. d. pink द्वितिक्ती आपद्मm. d. pure blue द्वितिक्ती शुद्ध नील m. d. purpurine fafaqat tot f. d. red द्वितिक्ती रक्त m. d. rose द्वितिक्ती पाटल m. d. scarlet द्वितिक्ती शोण m. d. sky blue द्वितिक्ती आकाश नील m. d. steel blue द्वितिक्ती बज्रायस नील m. d. violet द्वितिक्ती नीललोहित m. d. violet-red द्वितिक्ती नीललोहित-रक्त 
d. yellow द्वितिक्ती पीत m. diamine dye द्वितिक्ती-रंजक m. diamino-acridine sulphate Chem. 
द्वितिक्ती-उग्री शुल्बीय इ. diamino-acridinium methyl chlo 
ride Chem. द्वितिक्ती-उग्यातु प्रोदल नीरेय 
n. 
323 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
M 
- 
diamino-anthra-chrysone disul- diammino-nitrate Chem. द्वितिजी-भूयीय 
phonic acid Col. Ind. द्वितिक्ती- n. विक्ष-हेमा द्विशुल्बायिक अम्ल n. 
diammonium Chem. द्वितिक्तातु M. 1:5-diamino-anthraquinone Chem. _d. phosphate द्वितिक्तातु भास्वीय n. 
१:५-द्वितिक्ती-विक्षविज्वरा f. 
diamond हीर m. 2:4-diamino - azobenzene Chem. diamond black Col. Ind. हीर काल m. 
२ : ४-द्वितिक्ती-अजधूपेन्य n. 
d. blue हीर नील m. p-diamino - benzene - sulphonic d. blue-black हीर नील-कृष्ण m. 
acid Chem. प-द्वितिक्ती-धूपेन्य-शुल्बायिक d. bordeaux हीर कपिशक m. अम्ल .. 
d. brown हीर बभ्रु m. 3:5-diamino-benzoic acid di d. chrome black हीर वर्णक काल m. 
hydrochloride Chem. ३:५-द्वितिक्ती d. flavine हीर पिङ्गी f. धूपिक अम्ल द्वयुदनीरेय . 
d. fuchsine (large crystals, small pp'-diamino - diphenyl - methane _needles) हीर धूमली f. (बृहत् स्फट, 
Chem. प प'-द्वितिक्ती-द्विदर्शल-प्रोदीन्य 1. 
क्षुद् सूची) diaminogen Col. Ind. द्वितिक्तीजन m. d. green हीर हरि m. 
d. blue द्वितिक्तीजन नील m. 
d. grey हीर धूसर m. d. dark blue द्वितिक्तीजन असित नील d. orange (paste, powder) हीर ___m. 
नारंग m. (लेपी, क्षोद) d. orange द्वितिक्तीजन नारंग M. 
d. phosphine हीर भास्वी f. d. purpurine द्वितिक्तीजन नीलोही d. red हीर रक्त m. 
d. rubine हीर रक्ती . d. sky blue द्वितिक्तीजन आकाश नील d. yellow हीर पीत m. 
m. 
diamond boron Chem. हीर टांकण m. 22:4-diamino- phenol hydrochlo- diamond cement हीर वज्रलेप m. 
rideChem. २:४-द्वितिक्ती-दर्शव उदनीरेय diamond file हीर-रेत्री . 
diamond, glass cutting काचकर्तन-हीर diamino-phosphatide Chem. द्वितिक्ती 
भास्वीयेय . 
diamond mortar हीर-उलूखल n. diamino-stilbene - disulphonic diamond plate हीर-पट्टm. 
acid Chem. द्वितिक्ती-विरालिलेन्य-द्विशुल्बा diamorphine (diacetyl + morphine) यिक अम्ल 
द्विशुप्रमीली/. diamino-toluene Chem. द्वितिक्ती-विरा- diamyl Chem. द्विमण्डल N. ___ लेन्य 1. 
di-n-amylamine Chem. द्वि-ऋ-मण्डल diammine Chem. fafavit f. 
तिक्ती. diammino- Chem. द्वितिजी 
di-iso-amylamine Chem. द्वि-स-मण्डल diammino-bromide Chem. द्वितिजी- ' तिक्ती . 
दुरेय . 
_____diamylene Chem. द्विमण्डलेन्य n. 
324 
१. 
m. . 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
di-n-amyl ketone Chem. द्वि-ऋ-मण्डल d. Japonin द्विनील निप्पोनि f. 
शौक्ता. 
d. light red द्विनील लघु रक्त m. diamylose Chem. द्विमण्डधु १. 
d. new black द्विनील नव काल m. diandrous Bot. द्वि-पुंकेसर mfn. 
d. orange ferite artit 17. dianil द्विनील m. 
d. pink द्विनील आप m. dianil azurine Col. Ind. द्विनील नभोनीली 
d. ponceau fentat afrTFITTT m. 
d. pure yellow द्विनील शुद्ध पीत m. d. black द्विनील काल m. 
d. red failer TRT m. d. blue द्विनील नील m. 
d. sky blue द्विनील आकाश नील m. d. bordeaux विनील कपिशक m. 
d. violet द्विनील नीललोहित m. d. brown द्विनील बभ्रm. 
d. yellow द्विनील पीत m. d. chrome blue fanitat quia o m . dianilide fantata n. d. chrome brown fanitat quiai 7 dianiline Chem. fritatt f. 
m. 
dianisidine Chem. द्विशतपुष्पेयी. d. copper brown द्विनील ताम्र बज्र dianisidine base Col. Ind. द्विशतपुष्पेयी 
m. 
पीठm. d. dark blue द्विनील असित नील m. d. blue द्विशतपुष्पेयी नील m. d. dark green द्विनील असित हरि m. dianol black Col. Ind. द्वीन्यव काल m. d. deep black द्विनील गाढ काल m. d. brilliant blue द्वीन्यव भासुर नील d. direct yellow ferita arfta fter ___m. 
d. brilliant red द्वीन्यव भासुर रक्त m. d. earth brown द्विनील मृद् बभ्र m. d. fast claret द्वीन्यव स्थिर रक्तिरा/. d. fast black द्विनील स्थिर काल m. d. fast red द्वीन्यव स्थिर रक्त m. d. fast blue द्विनील स्थिर नील m. 
d. green द्वीन्यव हरि m. d. fast brown द्विनील स्थिर बभ्रm. d. red द्वीन्यव रक्त m. d. fast green द्विनील स्थिर हरि m. d. violet atrera ftaalfest m. d. fast grey द्विनील स्थिर धूसर m. dianthine=cotton red S d. fast olive द्विनील स्थिर तैलबदर m. dianthrafurane Chem. द्विविक्षबसीन्य . d. fast orange द्विनील स्थिर नारंग m. dianthrene blue Col. Ind. द्विक्षामण्य नील d. fast red द्विनील स्थिर रक्त m. 
m. d. fast scarlet द्विनील स्थिर शोण m. dianthryl Chem. द्विविक्षल. d. fast violet द्विनील स्थिर नीललोहित Dianthus Bot. आपद्मति . (-ति for प्रजाति 
genus) d. field grey द्विनील सेना धूसर m. dia-phane adj. पार-दृश्वन mfn. .d. fuchsine द्विनील धूमली. diaphaneity पारदृश्वता f. 
d.garnet द्विनील निरक्त m. 
diaphanometer पारदृश्वतामान m. d.green द्विनील हरि m. 
diaphanoscope पारदृश्वेक्ष m. d. indigo faritat fits m. 
diaphanous पार-दश्वन mfn. 
m. 
m. 
328 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
ess 
diaphoretic Fashi mfn. 
diastasic action fact-fi f. diaphragm I Anat. प्राचीर, उरःप्राचीर diastasimetry Biochem. विभेदमिति f. 
m. 
diastatic-diastasic 2 (a partition) qafe m. 
diastatic action=diastasic action diaphragm current afecare m. diastole Physiol. हृत्स्फार m. diaphragm process Electrochem. diastolic 59TT 
aft-faat f. 
diastolic pressure Med. (blood pres diaphtherin (Gk. diaphtheirein to sure during diastole of the heart) 
destroy utterly)=oxyquinasep ERST Finta m. tol Pharm. fuftf. 
diathermy Med. (local elevation of diaphysis Anat. (shaft of a long temperature in tissues beneath 
bone) अस्थिदण्ड m. 
the surface of the skin) अतितापन M. diapophysis Anat., Zool. 794-em. endothermy FETT467" 11. 
(987--ae process of neural arch) diathesin Chem. (salicyl - alcohol) diarabinose Chem. द्विबर्बुरिधु n. 
59997 m. diarch Bot. (having two strands) diatol = diethylcarbonate Chem. 
figa mfn. 
149 m. diarrhea Med. (flow through') diatom Bot. (Any of the microscopic 
fanta m. 
unicellular or colonial algae. diarsenate Chem. द्विनेपालीया. 
Each cell of a diatom is com diarsenide Chem. f&rieztet n. 
posed of two halves. They form diarsenious acid = pyroarsenic kieselguhr) युक्ताप्य m. ___acid Cbem. द्विनेपाल्य अम्ल .. 
Diatoma Bot. युक्ताप्यति f. (-ति for diarsenite Chem. fa TTTTTT n. 
प्रजाति genus) diarsenol Chem. faqa m. 
diatomaceous earth=kieselguhr diarsine=biarsine Chem. feriat f. =infusorial earth=diatomite diarsonium=cacodyl Chem. f 9000 Aarth f. 
diatomic Chem. द्विपरमाण्विक mfn. diarsyl=biarsine Chem. fantaran. diatomic alcohol Chem, FETEhtfuqa diarthrosis Anat. (freely movable 997 m. 
joint)=diarthrodial joint परिचेष्ट diatomicity द्विपरमाण्विकता f. Fifer m. 
diatomite=diatomaceous earth diary f*977 f. 
diatomous Mineral. (having a sin diascope Med. पारेक्ष M. . 
.gle distinct diagonal cleavage; diaspirin Pharm. द्विशुनम्रि . 
_said of crystals) विकर्णे-दर mfn. diastase Biochem. विभेद m. 
diatonic scale Music (consonance diastasic-diastatic Biochem. Fausto scale) FAITH m. 
mfn. 
diaz-, djazo 326 
m. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
diazamine black Col. Ind. a nt. d. brilliant blue Y HTTE TTT 
m. 
m. d. blue द्वयजतिक्ती नील m. 
d. brilliant green द्वयज भासुर हरि d. fast yellow द्वयजतिक्ती स्थिर पीत 
m. 
d. brilliant orange GT HTTTTTTT diazanil black Col. Ind. TTT TET 
11. 
m. 
d. brilliant scarlet द्वयज भासुर शोण d. blue द्वयजनील नील m. 
m. d. bordeaux TTT asftatea m. d. brown 
m m . d. pink TT 9744 m. 
d. dark blue 4 HETE ra m. d. pure blue care a pret m. d. deep black द्वयज गाढ काल m. d. scarlet द्वयजनील शोण m. 
d. direct black arcaFSTOFTET m. diazide Chem, ayaq n. 
d. ethyl black cars TT 915 m. diazine Chem. uitat f. 
d. fast black द्वयज स्थिर काल m. diazine black Col. Ind. manat ret d, fast blue me fee of m. . 
m. 
d. fast bordeaux द्वयज स्थिर कपिशक d. blue aviat it m. 
m. d. brown cyfiat a m. 
d. fast green to FATT&fm. d. dark green द्वयजीवी असित हरि m. . d. fast red द्वयज स्थिर रक्त m. d. direct black द्वयजीवी अनाश्रित काल d. fast scarlet द्वचज स्थिर शोण m. 
m. 
d. fast violet was first m. d. green द्वयजीवी हरि m. 
d. fast yellow a fer fram. d. red द्वयजीवी रक्त m. 
d. indigo blue द्वयज निनील नील m. d. yellow at ota m. 
d. light bordeaux द्वयज लघु कपिशक diazo-, diaz- Chem. 4 
m. diazoacetate Chem. RTSH n. d. light green द्वयज लघु हरि . diazoacetic acid Chem. द्वयजशक्तिक d. light red द्वयज लघु रक्त m. 
777 n. . . 
d. light scarlet Tetor m. diazoamine Chem. astferit f. 
d. light violet द्वयज लधु नीललोहितm. diazoanhydride Chem. व्यजाजलेय .. d. light yellow cua ta m. diazoate Chem. द्वयजीवीय 1. 
d. navy blue द्वयज नाविक नील m. diazobenzene Chem. 24urat n. d. olive द्वयज तैलबदर m. diazo black Col. Ind. at FireT m... d. orange et fi m. 
d. blue द्वयज नील M. 
d. red-blue To TT-TTCT m. . d. blue-black t-mous m. ..d. rubine द्वयज रक्ती/ 
d. bordeaux #ferrari m. 
d. sky blue द्वयज आकाश नील m. d. brilliant black द्वयज भासुर काल d. violet द्वयज नीललोहित m. . 
· m. 
d. yellow 46 m. 
327 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
d. light orange यजव लघु नारंग m. d. light red व्यजब लघु रक्त m. d. light rubine यजव लघु रक्ती f. d. light violet यजव लघु नीललोहित 
m. 
diazodinitrophenol Chem. व्यजद्विभूय 
दर्शव m. diazo dye द्वयज रंजक m. diazoethane Chem. यजदक्षीण्य . diazogen black Col. Ind. द्वधजजन काल 
m. d. blue द्वचजजन नील m. d. bordeaux द्वयजजन कपिशक m. d. brown द्वयजजन बज्र m. d. corinth यजजन रोहित m. d. green व्यजजन हरि m. d. orange यजजन नारंग m. d. red यजजन रक्त m. 
d. scarlet द्वयजजन शोण m. diazohydrate Chem. यजोदीय . diazohydroxide Chem. व्यजोदजारेय. diazoic acid Chem. व्यजीविक अम्ल, diazoimide Chem. यजवितिक्तेय . diazol black Col. Ind. यजव काल m. 
d. blue यजव नील m. d. bordeaux द्वयजव कपिशक m. d. brilliant orange द्वयजव भासुर 
नारंग m. d. bronze द्वयजव कांस्य m. d. brown यजव बभ्रु m. d. catechine 4459 afast f. d. chrome blue द्वयजव वर्णक नील m. 
d. chrome brown द्वयजव वर्णक बभ्र ' m. 
d. fast grey व्यजव स्थिर धूसर m. d. fast purpurine यजव स्थिर 
नीलोही . d. fast red यजव स्थिर रक्त m. d. fast scarlet द्वयजव स्थिर शोण m. d. fast yellow यजव स्थिर पीत m. d. green यजव हरि m. d. light blue यजव लघु नील m. d. light brown व्यजव लघु बभ्रु m. 
d. light yellow यजव लघु पीत . d. orange द्वयजव नारंग m. d. pink द्वधजव आपद्मm. d. pure blue द्वचजव शुद्ध नील M. d. purpurine द्वचजव नीलोही. 
d. violet द्वयजव नीललोहित m. diazole Chem. यजवा . diazomethane Chem. यजमोदीन्य n. diazonium Cbem. यजतातु m. diazo-oxide Chem. यज-जारेय. diazo-oxyamido Chem. यज-जारतिक्तेय 
. diazoparaffin Chem. यजमुद्वसा. diazophenol Chem. यजदर्शव m. diazophenyl black Col. Ind.द्वयजदर्शल 
काल m. 
d. blue द्वयजदर्शल नील m. diazo reaction Chem. द्वयज-प्रतिक्रिया 
diazosalt Chem. यजलवण १. diazosplit (decomposition of a di 
azosalt and formation of an atyl ___ compound) यजभंग M. 
diazosulphide Chem. यजशुल्बेय . diazotate Chem. व्यजीवातीय n. diazotetrazole Chem. यजचतुरजवा f. diazotic Chem. द्वयजीवातिक mfn. diazotizable Chem. इयजीवातीय्य mfn. diazotization Chem. व्यजीवातीयन .. diazotize vb. Chem. (to convert 
into a diazo compound) द्वयजी 
वातीयन. diazotizing (a method used in the 
328 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
manufacture of aniline dyes) d.-thiophen द्विधूप-गन्धदर्शन्य 7. द्वयजीवातीयना. 
d.-thioxine द्विधूप-गन्धतिग्मी f. p-diazo-toluene-anilide Chem. q. d.-xanthene fasa-fant n. 
द्वयज-विरालेन्य-नीलेय n. 
dibenzoyl Chem. द्विधूपूल . diazotype Photog. द्वयजमुद्रण N. 
d. catechol द्विधूपूल खदिरव m. diazotype process यजमुद्रण-विधा f. d. ethane द्विधूपूल दक्षीण्य 1. diazoxy Chem. द्वयजजार m. 
d. furazane द्विधूपूल बुसिन्याजीवीन्य n. diazthine=thiodiazine Chem. 257 d.glucoxylose द्विधूपूल मधुकाष्ठधु . 
गन्धी गन्धद्वयजीवी . 
d. ketone द्विधूपूल शौक्ता f. diazutine Col. Ind. द्विनभोनीली f. 
d. malonitrile द्विधूपूल उत्कोलभूयिल dibase Chem. द्विपीठ . 
m. dibasic Chem. द्विपैठिक mfn. 
d. methane द्विधूपूल प्रोदीन्य १. dibasicity Chem. द्विपंठिकता. 
d. peroxide द्विधूपूल अतिजारेय n. dibenz-, dibenzo- Chem. द्विधूप 
d. styrene farger for at n. dibenzacridine Chem. द्विधूपोनी. dibenzyl Chem. द्विधूपल 1. dibenzalacetone Chem. द्विधूपसुशुक्ता f. d. amine द्विधूपल तिक्ती. dibenzamide Chem, feefaca n. ____d. diethyl stannane द्विधूपल द्विदक्षुल 
d. diethyl stannane faya dibenzanthracene Chem. द्विधूपविक्षामेण्य त्रप्वीन्य . 
0. 
d. ethane द्विधूपल दक्षीण्य . dibenzenyl Chem. द्विधूपेन्यल 1. 
d. glycollic acid द्विधूपल मधुविक dibenzo-, dibenz- Chem. द्विधूप 
अम्ल . d.-arsenole द्विधूप-नेपवा. 
d. hydrazine festat garsitat f. d.-diazine द्विधूप-द्वयजीवी f. 
d. hydroxylamine द्विधूपल उदजारल d.-dioxin द्विधूप-द्वितिग्मि . 
__ तिक्ती . d.-fluorene द्विधूप-भ्राशेन्य .. 
d. ketone द्विधूपल शौक्ता f. d.-furane द्विधूप-बुसिन्य १. 
d. mercury द्विधूपल पारद m. d.-furane-p-oxazine द्विधूप-बुसिन्य- dibenzylidene Chem. द्विधूपलेयेन्य n. 
प-जाजीवी f. 
'd.-acetone द्विधूपलेयेन्य-शुक्ता . d.-furfurane=d.-furane diborane diphosphine Chem. f - d.-phenanthrene द्विधूप-दर्शक्षामेण्य टांकीन्य द्विभास्वी. 
_ n. 
Dibranchia Zool. (having two gills) d.-phenazine ferq-afsitat f. द्विक्लोमाः m.pl. d.-pyran द्विधूप-अग्निन्य 1. 
dibrom-, dibromo- Chem. fegir d.-pyrene द्विधूप-अग्न्येन्य n. 
d.-acetaldehyde द्विदुरा-शुक्तसुव्युद m. d.-pyrone द्विधूप-अग्न्या. 
d.-acetic acid द्विदुरा-शुक्तिक अम्ल n. d.-pyrrole द्विधूप-शुष्मैल . 
d.-anthracene द्विदुरा-विक्षामण्य 1. d.-quinoline द्विधूप-विज्वरवी f. d. anthraquinone द्विदुरा - विक्ष d.-selenophene द्विधूप-मेचदर्श m. 
विज्वरा. 
329﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
d.-barbituric acid द्विदुरा-कोलमिहिक _d. acetone द्विनीर-शुक्ता f. 
अम्ल'. 
d.-acetyl - chloranilide द्विनीर d.-benzene द्विदुरा-धूपेन्य. 
शुक्तल-नीरनीलेय . d.-indigo द्विदुरा-निनील m. 
d.-aldehyde द्विनीर-सुव्युद m. d.-quinone chloroimide द्विदुरा d.-amide द्विनीर-तिक्तेय .. 
विज्वरा नीरवितिक्तेय . 
d.-aniline द्विनीर-नीली f. . d.-thymol-sulphon-phthalein d. anthracene द्विनीर-विक्षामेण्य. 
द्विदुरा-पर्णासीव-शुल्बा-व्युत्तैलिन m. 
d.-benzene द्विनीर-धूपेन्या . dibromide Chem. द्विदुरेय .. 
d.-diethyl ether द्विनीर-द्विदक्षुल दक्षु dibromine Chem. Fagetet f. dibromo-, dibrom- Chem. द्विदुरा 
d.-diethyl sulphide द्विनीर-द्विदक्षुल dibutyl Chem. द्वितल . 
__ शुल्बेय. d. amino-propanol faqaat farent d.-difluoromethane द्विनीर-द्वितरस्व 
प्रमेदीन्यव m. 
प्रोदीन्य 1. d. beryllium द्विघृतल विडूर .. 
d.-ethylene द्विनीर-दक्षुलेन्य n. d. cadmium द्विधतल मज्यातु m. 
d.-ethyl ether द्विनीर-दक्षुल दक्षु m. d. ditinbromide द्विघृतल द्वित्रपुदुरेय 1. d.-hydrin द्विनीर-उदि. d. phthalate द्विघृतल व्युत्तैलीय . 
d.-methane द्विनीर-मोदीन्य n. d. tinchloride द्विधतल त्रपुनीरेय . d.-naphthalene द्विनीर-उत्तलेन्य. di-i-butyl- द्वि-स-घतल 
d.-nitrohydrin द्विनीर-भूयोदि f. d.-cadmium द्वि-स-घतल-मज्यात m. 
d.-phenolindo-o-cresol fürfte d.-mercury द्वि-स-घृतल-पारद m. 
दर्शवनिनील-ऊ-ऋविपद m. dibutyrin Chem. द्विति f. 
d.-phenolindophenol द्विनीर-दर्शव dicacodyl Chem. द्विकुगन्धला . 
निनीलदर्शव m. dicarbazyl Chem. यंगाजीवल n. 
d.-phenosulphonphthalein dicarbonate Chem. यंगारीय n. 
द्विनीर-दर्शशुल्बाव्युत्तैलिन m. dicarbonic Chem. व्यंगारिक mfn. 
d.-quinone chloroimide facilis dicarboxylate Chem. द्वयंगजारलीय. विज्वरा नीरवितिक्तेय . dicarboxylic Chem. व्यंगजारलिक mfn. dichloricide=p-dichlorobenzene ____d. acid यंगजारलिक अम्ल N. 
dichloride Chem. द्विनीरेय . dicetyl Chem. द्वितिमिल n. 
dichloro-, dichlor- Chem. farita dichasial Bot. द्विशाखी (-इन्) mfn. dichogamy Bot. (maturation of dichasium Bot. द्विशाख m. 
stamens and pistils at different dichlamydeous Bot. द्विपरिपुष्प mfn. ___ periods) पृथक्पक्वता . dichlor-, dichloro- Chem. Farita dichotomous Bot. युग्मशाखी (-इन्) mfn. 
d.-acetal द्विनीर-शुक्तसु m. 
dichotomously branched thallus 
•d.-acetamide द्विनीर-शक्ततिक्तेय . युग्मशाखित सूकाय m. 
d.-acetic acid द्विनीर-शुक्तिक अम्ल n. dichotomy I Bot. युग्मशाखिता f. 
330 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
. 
2 Statistics द्वंद्व-भाजन . 
Dicrocoeliidae (a family having 3 Logic (division of a class into branching intestine) शाख्यन्त्रवंश m. two subclasses, esp.two opposed Dicrocoelium (Gk, dikroos forked by contradiction, as white and not +koilia bowel) शाख्यन्त्राति. (-आति white) द्वंद्व-भाजन . 
for worfa genus) dichroism I Cryst. (property of pre- D. lanceatum प्रास शाख्यन्त्र m. 
senting different colours.. when dictate vb. लेखापन १. viewed in two different direc dictation श्रुतलेख m. tions) द्विदिङ्नानावर्णता . 
dictyostele Bot. जाल-मध्यरम्भ m. 2 Phys. (differing in colour with dicyan Chem. fecurh . the thickness of the transmitting d. acetylene द्विश्याम शुक्तलेन्य 2. layer) नानावर्णता . 
d. diamide facere fartente n. 3 (dichromatism) द्विवर्णता, नानावर्णता d. diamidine faratæ fafaaduit f. 
dicyanide Chem. द्विश्यामेय . dichromate Chem. द्विवर्णीय 2. 
d. imide द्विश्यामेय वितिक्तेय . dichromatic द्विवर्ण, नानावर्ण mfn. dicyanin द्विश्यामि . dichromatism Optics द्विवर्णता, नाना- dicyanine Col. Ind. द्विश्यामी . 
वर्णता/. 
dicyanodiamide Chem. Fasarafefaenter dichromic fagfore mfn. dichromic acid Chem. द्विवणिक अम्ल 1. dicyanogen Chem. द्विश्यामजन m. dichrooscope नानावणेक्ष m. 
dicyclic Chem. द्विवक्रिक mfn. dicinchonine Chem. द्विवितापी . dicyclopentadiene Chem. द्विचक्रपंच dick=ethyl dichlorarsine 
येन्या . diclinic Cryst, festa fue mfn. 
didial Chem. (a combination of diclinous=unisexual Bot, gabizt (for d iallyl-barbituric acid ferIQUE-. 
एकजननांग) mr. 
कोलमिहिक अम्ल and ethylmorphine monoclinous उभयांग (for उभय दक्षुलप्रमीली) द्विद्विला.(di-द्वि-+dial द्विला) 
जननांग) mfn. 
didiphenylamine- Chem. द्विद्विदर्शल dicliny Bot. एकांगता . 
तिक्ती dicodeine द्विमीली f. 
d.-fluosilicate द्विद्विदर्शलतिक्ती-तरसैक decodide Chem. द्विमीलेय . 
तीय n. diconchinine=diquinidine Chem. didiphenylene ethylene Chem. 
द्विविज्वरेयी. 
द्विद्विदर्शलेन्य दक्षुलेन्य 1. dicotyl द्वयष्टल . 
didym=didymium dicotyledon Bot. (having two seed- didymia Chem. (didymium oxide) ___leaves) द्विबीजपत्र m. 
पीतश्यामजा. dicotyledonous seeds Bot. fedtstof didymium=didym Chem. Phaser 61 
or द्विपति बीज ॥. . 
331 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
d. carbonate पीतश्यामला प्रांगारीय 7. Dientamoeba द्वयन्तःकामरूप्याति f. (-आति d. chloride (technical) पीतश्यामला for प्रजाति genus) 
नीरेय 1. (परिभाषित) 
Diesel cycle Thermodyn. पीडज्वाल चक्र d. manganese nitrate (technical) n. 
पीतश्यामला लोहक भूयीय n. Diesel-electric (of or pertaining to (परिभाषित) 
the combination of a Diesel d. nitrate (technical) पीतश्यामला engine driving an electric gene ___ भूयीय 7. (परिभाषित) 
rator) पीडज्वाल-विद्युत् mfr. d. oxalate (technical) पीतश्यामला Diesel engine पीडज्वाल गन्त्र 1. __ तिग्मीय 2. (परिभाषित)। 
Diesel fuel (heavy fuel oil in which d. oxide पीतश्यामला जारेय. 
combustion is started by spon d. salicylate पीतश्यामला नम्रलीय. taneous ignition govart due to d. sulphate (technical) Chem. compression संपीडन instead of by 
पीतश्यामला शुल्बीय ॥. (परिभाषित) spark plugs) पीडज्वाल इन्धन n. didynamous Bot. (having two long Diesel motor पीडज्वाल वहिन . 
and two short stamens) द्विदीर्घ mfn. Diesel oil पीडज्वाल तैल 1. die Mach. vb. (forming screw threads Diesel train Rly. पीडज्वाल संयान . 
on bolts) बहिःसूत्रण . 
diet आहार, नियमित आहार m. M. (a tool for forming screw dietary standard आहार-प्रमाप m. threads) बहिःसूत्रक m. 
dietetics आहारिकी, आहार-विद्या. die=matrix रूपपुट M. (cf. punch diethacetic acid Chem. द्विदशुक्तिक अम्ल 
रूपधन) 
___n. dielectric n. (dia-t electric) Elec. (a diethanolamine Chem. focegovaraat 
nonconducting material, so-called because the lines of force of diethoxalic acid Chem. द्विदतिग्मिक an electrostatic field will pass fronte n. through it, thereby making it diethyl- Chem. द्विदक्षल the seat of the strain) पारद्युतिक d. acetal द्विदक्षुल-शुक्तसु m. 
d.-aldehyde द्विदक्षुल-सुव्युद m. dielectric constant Elec. पारद्युतिक d.-amine द्विदक्षुल-तिक्ती . 
स्थिरांक m. 
d.-aminophenol द्विदक्षुल-तिक्तीदर्शव dieline Chem. (dichloroethylene) ___m. 
द्विनीरदक्षुलेन्य। 
d.-aniline द्विदक्षुल-नीली. d. diene द्विनीरदक्षुलेन्य व्येन्य 1. 
d.-arsine द्विदक्षुल-नेपी. d. series द्विनीरदक्षुलेन्य मालाf. 
d.-arsinic acid द्विदक्षल-नेपियिक अम्ल diencephalon=thalamencephalon ___n. 
, -between brain-inter brain= d.-barbituric acid द्विदाल-कोल 
'tween brain Zool. मध्यमस्तिष्क n. 
मिहिक अम्ल 1. 
n. 
332 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
- 
- 
- 
d.-benzene द्विदक्षुल-धूपेन्या . 
d.-sulphone diethyl-methane d.-beryllium द्विदक्षुल-विडूर १. 
द्विदक्षुल-शुल्बा द्विदक्षुल-प्रोदीन्य 1. d.-cadmium द्विदक्षुल-मृज्यातु m. 
d.-sulphone dimethylmethane d. carbinol द्विदक्षुलांगिव १. 
द्विदक्षुल-शुल्बा द्विप्रोदलप्रोदीन्य 1. d.-carbonate FEGETETİTORI N. 
d.-sulphone ethylmethyl d.-carbonic ether द्विदक्षुलांगारिक __methane द्विदक्षुल-शुल्बा दक्षुलप्रोदल 
दक्षु m. 
प्रोदीन्य . d.-cyanamide द्विदक्षुल-श्यामतिक्तेय n. d.-tartrate द्विदक्षुल-न्यासवीय n. d.-dioxide द्विदक्षुल-द्विजारेय. 
d.-telluride द्विदक्षुल-वंगकेय .. d.-disulphide द्विदक्षुल-द्विशुल्बेय 1. d.-thiurea द्विदक्षुल-गन्धमिह m. d.-ether द्विदक्षुल-दक्षु m. 
d.-tin dibromide द्विदक्षुल-पु द्विदुरेय d.-ethylene द्विदक्षल-दक्षलेन्य n. d..glycerol द्विदक्षुल-मधुरव m. 
d.-tin dichloride द्विदक्षल-त्रप d.-glycol ether द्विदक्षुल-मधुव दक्षु द्विनीरेय. __m. 
d.-tin difluoride द्विदक्षुल-त्रपु द्वि d.-hydrine द्विदक्षुल-उदी /. 
तरस्वेय. d.-ketone द्विदक्षल-शौक्ता f. 
d.-tindiiodide द्विदक्षुल-त्रपु द्विजम्बेय 1. d.-malate द्विदक्षुल-उत्कोलीय ?. 
d.-tin oxide द्विदक्षुल-त्रपु जारेय .. d.-malonic acid द्विदक्षुल-उत्कोलायिक d.-toluene द्विदाल-विरालेन्य।. 
अम्ल . 
d.-toluidine द्विदक्षुल-विरालेयी . d.-malonylurea=veronal fa d.-urea द्विदक्षुल-मिह m. ___ दक्षुल उत्कोलालमिह m. 
d.-zinc द्विदक्षुल-कुप्यातु m. , d.-mercury द्विदक्षुल-पारद m. diethylene Chem. द्विदक्षुलेन्य 1. d.-nitramine द्विदक्षुल-भूयतिक्ती . d. diamine facada fafaat f. d.-nitrosamine द्विदक्षुल-भूय्यतिक्ती. . d. dioxide द्विदक्षुलेन्य द्विजारेय .. d.-oxamide द्विदक्षुल-तिम्मतिक्तेय n. d. disulphide द्विदक्षुलेन्य द्विशुल्बेय. . d.-peroxide द्विदक्षुल-अतिजारेय . d.glycol butyl ether द्विदक्षुलेन्य d.-phosphate द्विदक्षुल-भास्वीय . ___ मधुव घृतल दक्षु m. d.-phosphine द्विदक्षुल-भास्वी f. 
d.glycol ethyl ether द्विदक्षुलेन्य d.-phosphoric acid द्विदक्षुल-भास्विक मधुव दक्षुल दक्षु m. 
अम्ल n. 
d. oxide=dioxan द्विदक्षुलेन्य जारेय . di-phthalate द्विदक्षुल-व्युत्तैलीय . diethylidene Chem. द्विदक्षुलेयेन्य १. d.-propylcarbinol द्विदक्षुल-प्रमे- diethylin Chem. द्विदा लि . 
लांगिव m. 
diethyline Chem. द्विदक्षुली . d.-sulphate द्विदक्षुल-शुल्बीय n. dietics-dietetics d.-sulphide द्विदक्षुल-शुल्बेय 1. diferrion (di- द्वि- + ferrum iron d.-sulphine द्विदक्षुल-शुल्बी f. 
अयो- +ion अयन; the ferrous ion, d.-sulphone द्विदक्षुल-शुल्बा f. 
Fe+ +) Chem. द्वि-अयोयन । 
333 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
-- 
- 
--- 
difference भेद m., अन्तरा . 
dicating difference in tempera difference in size परिमाण-भेद m. 
ture) तापभेदमान m. differences of temperatures तापान्तर differentiate vb. I भिन्नन, वेचन n. 
. 
___ 2 Math. अवकलन . different भिन्न, अन्य mfm. 
differentiated भिनित mfn. different fraction अन्य भिन्न m. difficultly soluble Chem. cfacta mfn. differentiable Math. अवकलनीय mfn. diffraction Phys. I व्याभंग m. differential I Macb. भिन्नक m. 
2 (bending TFT of a ray of 2 Math. अवकल m. 
light as it strikes the edge of an 3 भेद-, भिन्न-, वृत्वा 
object) तटेनमन १. (तटे at the edge) differential adsorption (selective ad- diffraction formula व्याभंग-सूत्र n. ____sorption of dyestuffs) वत्वाधिचूषण 1. d. grating व्याभंग भरी f. differential cage Automobile भिन्नक d . spectroscope Phys. व्याभंग रंगा 
पञ्जर n: 
वलीक्ष m. differential calculus Math. चलन d. spectrum व्याभंग रंगावलि /. 
कलन . 
diffractive (that produces diffrac differential casing Automobile भिन्नक ___tion) व्याभंगकर mfn. 
आवरण. 
diffractiveness व्याभंगकरता f. differential chain block=differen diffractometer Phys. व्याभंगमान 
tial pulley Mach. भिन्न घर्घरीक diffusate Chem. प्रसत. differential coefficient Math. अवकल diffuse Chem. प्रसर-, प्रसार ____ गुणक m. 
____d. series प्रसर-माला . differential equation Math. अवकल- diffuse vb. Chem. प्रसरण, प्रसारण 1. 
समीकार m. 
diffused प्रसृत, प्रसारित mfn. differential geometry अवकल-रैखिकी / diffuser, diffusor प्रसारक m. differential gradient Zool. भेद-प्रवणक diffuse reflection=scattering of 
rays प्रसृत परावर्तन .-रश्मि-विक्षेप m. differential pulley = differential diffusiometer प्रसृतिमान m. 
chain block 
diffusion I (in a general sense) differential reduction (selective re प्रसरण, प्रसारण. 
duction by metals of one com 2 Phys., Chem. प्रसृति . ponent in a mixture) वृत्वा-प्रह्रासन d. air pump प्रसृति-वायूदंच m. 
d. analysis प्रसृति-विश्लेषण n. differential staining वृत्वाभिरंजन d. battery Sugar Mfg. प्रसृति-समूहा 
differential steam calorimeter प्रबाष्प 
. भेदोषमान m. differential thermometer (for in- 
334 . 
d. bulb प्रसृति-कन्द m. d. cell प्रसृति-कोशा. d. circles प्रसृति-चक्र . 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
d. constant प्रसति-स्थिरांक m. 
digestive tract Anat. पचन-पथ m. d. law प्रसति-नियम m. 
digifolin Chem. (a solution of glu d. of gas apparatus वाति-प्रसूति ___cosides from digitalis leaves) अंगुपणि 
साधित्र n. d. process प्रसृति-विधा f. digipoten Chem. (a mixture of glu d. shell प्रसृति-पाकोश . 
cosides from digitalis leaves) diffusive प्रसारी (-इन्) mfn. 
अंगुमिश्र. diffusivity Physical Chem. sefeat f. digit 1 Math. (figure) #m. diffusor-diffuser 
____2 (three-fourths of an inch) अंगुल difluor-, difluoro- Chem. द्वितरस्व 
m. d.-benzene द्वितरस्व-धूपेन्य . digitalein Pharm. अंगुलकिन m. d.-dichloromethane द्वितरस्व- digitaligenin Chem. अंगुलकजनि. 
द्विनीरप्रोदीन्य . 
digitalin Chem. अंगुलकि f. difluorene Chem. द्विभ्राशेन्य. 
amorphous d. अनाकार-अंगुलकि. difluorenylene Chem. द्विभ्राशेन्यलेन्य।. cruded. आम-अंगुलकि. difluoride Chem. द्वितरस्वेय. 
crystalline d. स्फटमय-अंगुलकि . difluoror, difluor-Chem. द्वितरस्व 
true d. सत्य-अंगुलकि. diformyl=glyoxal Chem. द्विवम्रल . digitalis (so named from its finger digallic acid Chem. द्विद्रुस्फोटिक अम्ल .. shaped corolla)=digitalis foli digest vb. Chem. (to soften by heat um (digit. fol.)=digitalis leaf= ____ and moisture) पचन, पाचन । 
foxglove leaf Pharm. अंगुलक . digester I (that aids digestion) पाचक digitalose Chem. अंगुलकधु ?. 
m. 
digitato-pinnate Bot. सांगुल-पक्षवत् 2 (a strong closed vessel in mfn. which substances may be heated digitogenin अंगुलजनि. 
under pressure..) पाचित्र n. digitonin Chem. (a glucoside found digestibility पाच्यता . 
_in digitalis) अंगुध्वि .. digestible पाच्य mfn. 
digitoxigenin Chem. अंगुविषिजनि f. digesting shelf Chem. पाचन निधाय m. digitoxin (digitalis + toxin) Chem. digestion पाचन . 
अंगुविषि . digestion apparatus, Kjeldahl digitoxose (digitoxin + -ose) Chem. 
Chem. अपि-भू-ति (for determining अंगुविषिधु १. 
· the amount of nitrogen भूयाति or diglucoside Chem. द्विमधुमेय. 
ammonia तिक्ताति) पाचन-साधित्र n. diglyceride Chem. द्विमधुरेय । digestive=peptic 
diglycerin Chem. द्विमधुरि . digestive organ पचनांग . 
diglycol Chem. द्विमधुव m. digestive system पचनांग-संहति, पचन- diglycollamic acid Chem. द्विमधुव 
संहति . 
तिक्तेयिक अम्ल n. 
335 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
diglycollamide anhydride Chem. 
द्विमधुवतिक्तेय अजलेय . diglycollic acid Chem. द्विमधुविक अम्ल 
d.-quinoline e-facacat f. 
d.-resorcinol युद-शेयास m. dihydrogen Chem. युदजन M. . ___d. sodium phosphate युदजन 
क्षारातु भास्वीय. dihydrol Chem. द्वयुदव m, dihydrotachysterol Zool. द्वयुद-प्राशु 
विपत्तव m. dihydroximic acid Chem. युदजावियिक 
अम्लn. . dihydroxy- Chem. युदजार 
d.-acetic acid युदजार-शुक्तिक अम्ल 
d.-acetone युदजार-शुक्ता f. d. anthraquinone युदजार-विक्ष 
विज्वरा f. d.-benzoic acid युदजार-धूपिक अम्ल 
__. . d.-benzophenone युदजार-धूपदर्शा 
H 
___d. anhydride द्विमधुविक अजलेय 1. diglycollide Chem. द्विमधुवेय . digoxigenin Chem. अंगुतिग्मजनि f. digoxin Chem. अंगुतिमि . dihalide Chem. द्विनीक ल्येय. dihalo- Chem. द्विनीकुल्य dihalogen Chem. Fantas no m. dihedral angle Math. faster tos m. dihexyi Chem. द्विषड्ल 1. dihydr-, dihydro- Chem. युद dihydracrylamicacid Chem. द्वयदोगल 
तिक्तेयिक अम्ल १. dihydracrylic acid Chem. द्वयुदोगलिक 
अम्ल.. dihydranol Chem. द्वयुदीन्यव m. dihydrate Chem. द्विजलीय . dihydrated fevrontiera mfn. dihydrazone Chem. द्वधंदाजीवा. dihydric चुदिक mfn. dihydride Chem. द्वयुदेय . dihydro- Chem. द्वयुद- . 
d.-anthracene युद-विक्षामेण्य . d.-benzene द्वयुद-धूपेन्या . d.-bromide युद-दुरेय . d.-butene युद-घृतेन्य . d.-carvone द्वयुद-अजीरा d.-cholesterol युद-पैत्तव m. . . d.-cymene युद-निजीरेण्य n. d.-lutidine द्वयुद-शुष्मरालेयी . d.-naphthalene द्वयुद-उत्तैलेन्य. d.-nicotine द्वयुद-ताम्रकूटी. d.-pentine युद-पंची . Hd-propene युद-प्रमेदेन्य 1. 
d.-quinazoline द्वयुद-विज्वराजवी. 
d.-cinnamic acid युदजार-दारु 
सितिक अम्ल 1. d.-disulphonic acid युदजार-द्वि 
शुल्बायिक अम्ल .. d.-fluorescein युदजार-भ्राशिन m. d.-naphthalene (alpha-, amphi-, 
ana-, beta-, epi-, kata-, peri-, pros-) द्वयदजार-उत्तैलेन्य. (अवर्ण-, उभय-, उद्-, आवर्ण-, अपि-, नि-, परि, 
अभि-) d.-palmitic acid युदजार-तालिक 
अम्ल... d.-phthalophenone युदजार 
व्युत्तैलदर्शा f. d.-propionic acid युदजार-प्रमेदिक 
अम्ल ... । d.-stearic acid. युदजार-वसिक अम्ल 
336 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
d.-succinic acid Erfura 
अम्ल . d.-uracil (ur-+-lacid+-il) युदजार- 
मूत्रानिल M. dihydroxyl Chem. युदजारल .. 
d.-amine युदजारल-तिक्ती।. 
d.-nicotine द्वयुदजारल-ताम्रकूटी. diimide Chem. द्विवितिक्तेय . diimine Chem. द्विवितिक्ती/. diimino-Chem. द्विवितिक्ती 
d.-hydrazine द्विवितिक्ती-उदाजीवी /. diindogen = indigotin Chem. fa- 
निनीलजन m. diindyl=dindyl Chem. fafciatat n. 
___biindyl युग्मनिनीलल. diine Chem. द्वियी. diiod, diiodo- Chem. द्विजम्बु 
d.-acetic acid द्विजम्बु-शुक्तिक अम्ल n. d.-acetylene द्विजम्बु-शुक्तलेन्या . d.-hydrine द्विजम्बु-उदी . 
d.-tyrosine द्विजम्बु-दधिकी. diiodide Chem. द्विजम्बेय. diiodo-, diiod- fast diiodobenzene Chem. द्विजम्बुधूपेन्य. diiodoeosin Chem. द्विजम्बूषसि f. diiodoform Pharm. द्विजम्बुवम्रल .. diiodotartaric acid Cbem. द्विजम्बु 
न्यासविक अम्ल n. diisatogen Chem. द्विनैनीलजन m. ___d.-ketone द्विनैनीलजन-शौक्ता. di-iso-amyl Chem. द्वि-स-मण्डल n. 
d. amine द्वि-स-मण्डल तिक्ती। 
d. ketone द्वि-स-मण्डल शौक्ता . di-iso-butyl Chem. द्वि-स-घतला . ___d. amine द्वि-स-घतल तिक्ती . ___d. ketone द्वि-स-घतल शौक्ता. 
diisoindolo-quin-oxaline Chem.द्वि- 
सनिनीलव-विज्वर-तिग्मी/ 
diisonitrosoanetholperoxide Chem, 
द्विसभूय्यशातपुष्पवातिजारेय. diisopropenyl Chem. द्विसप्रमेदेन्यल . diisopropyl Chem. द्विसप्रमेल . diketo- Chem. (denotes the pre 
sence of two ketone groups) fest d.-hexamethylene द्विशौ-षट्प्रोदलेन्य 
d.-hydrindene द्विशौ-उदनिनीलेन्य . diketone Chem. द्विशौक्ता.. diketopenthiazoline Chem, faRit 
पञ्चगन्धाजवी. diketopurine=xanthine Chem. Fait 
मिहकी. diketotriazolidine=urazole Chem. 
द्विशौत्र्यजवेयी . diketotrimethylpurine = caffeine 
Chem. द्विशौत्रिप्रोदलमिहकी. dilactamic acid Chem. द्विदुग्धतिक्तिक 
अम्ल .. dilactic acid Chem. द्विदुग्धिक अम्ल . dilatant n. Phys. I अभिस्तार m. (Auid 
in a dilatometer) 2 (capable of expansion) अभिस्तार्य 
. dilatant adj. अभिस्तारक, अभिस्तारी (-इन्) __mfn. dilatate=dilated dilatation=dilation अभिस्तरण, अभि 
स्तारण, विस्फारण n. (as of the eye) dilate adj.=dilated dilate vb. अभिस्तरण, अभिस्तारण 1. dilated अभिस्तीर्ण mfn. dilater-dilator अभिस्तारक m. dilation=dilatation dilative अभिस्तारी (-इन्) mfn. dilatometer Phys. अभिस्तरणमान m. dilatometric method अभिस्तरणमितीय 
रीति. 
337 
22 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
.dilatometry Phys. Chem. अभिस्तरणमिति . (acid. hydrocyan. dil.) मन्द 
उदश्यामिक अम्ल.. dilator=dilater Med., Anat. FTFITTE d, nitric acid=acidum nitri 
cum dilutum (acid. nit. dil.) dilator - pupillae Ophthalmol. तारा मन्द भूयिक अम्ल n. 
विस्फारक m. 
d. nitrohydrochloric acid = dilaudide Chem. द्विसर्पफेनेय . 
. acidum nitrohydrochlori dilevulinic acid Chem. faferfecfurt cum dilutum (acid. nitro 
अम्ल .. 
hydrochlor. dil.) मन्द भूयोदनीरिक -diligence कर्मिष्ठता f. 
अम्ल n. diligent कर्मिष्ठ mfn. 
d. phosphoric acid = acidum dilituric acid (di- t- lithic + uric) phosphoricum dilutum 
Chem. द्विलघुमिहिक अम्ल .. 
(acid. phosph. dil.) मन्द भास्विक 
• dill-anethum (aneth.) = anethi अम्लn. 
fructus-dill fruit Pharm, शत d. solution मन्द विलयन . पुष्पिका. 
d. solution of ammonium d. oil शतपुष्पिका-तैल 1. 
acetate = liquor ammonii Dillenia भव्याति f. (-ति for प्रजाति acetatis dilutus (liq. ammon. 
acet. dil.) = liquor ammonii . D. indica सामान्य भव्या. 
acetatis=solution of ammo dill water=aqua anethi शतपुष्पिका nium acetate = mindererus 
वारिn. 
spirit मन्द तिक्तातु शुक्तीय विलयन ।. diluent मन्दक, मन्दकर्ता (-त), अवमिश्रक d. sulphuric acid = acidum 
m. 
. sulphuricum dilutum (acid. dilute adj. Chem. मन्द mfn. 
• sulph. dil.) मन्द शुल्बारिक अम्ल 1. d. acid मन्द अम्ल . 
dilute acid मन्द अम्लn. dilute vb. मन्दन, अवमिश्रण ". 
dilute culture Bot. मन्द संवर्ध m. dilute=dilutum Pharm. मन्द mfn. diluted Chem. अवमिश्रित, मन्दित mfn. d. hydrobromic acid=acidum d. alcohol अवमिश्रित सुषव m. 
hydrobromicum dilutum dilution Chem. मन्दन, अवमिश्रण 1. (acid. hydrobrom. dil.) मन्द d. law अवमिश्रण-नियम m. उददुरिक अम्ल . 
d. ratio अवमिश्रण-अनुपात m. . d. hydrochloric acid=acidum d. rule अवमिश्रण-नियम m. . 
hydrochloricum dilutum d. tube अवमिश्रण-नाल M. 
(acid. . hydrochlor. dil.) मन्द heat of d. अवमिश्रण-ऊष्मा m. ..... उदनीरिक अम्ल . 
dilutor Chem. मन्दयिता, अवमिश्रयिता (-त) d. hydrocyanic acid-acidum . .m. 
hydrocyanicum dilutum dilutum=dilute Pharm. Ha mfn. 
genus) 
338 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
dimethoxalic acid Chem. द्विप्रोद 
तिग्मिक अम्ल 1. dimethoxy- Chem, festcut 
d.-catechol=veratrol विनोदजार 
खदिरव m. d.-ethane द्विप्रोदजार-दक्षीण्य 1. d.-phthalaldehydic acid=opia 
nic acid द्विप्रोदजार-व्युत्तैलसुव्युदिक 
अम्ल . dimethyl Chem. द्विप्रोदल .. 
d.-acetal द्विप्रोदल-शुक्तसु m. d.-acetic acid द्विप्रोदल-शुक्तिक अम्ल 
___n. 
dimalonic acid Chem. द्वयुत्कोलायिक 
अम्ल . dimension i fant f. (as dimensions 
of a room) 2 Alg. घात m. four dimensions Chem. चतुर-विमा 
f., विमा-चतुष्टय 1., दिक्काल m. three dimensions Chem. F-FEHT 
f., विमा-त्रय . dimensional विमा-, वैम mfn. dimensional diagram Statistics 
विमा-चित्र. dimensional equation Chem. fata 
समीकार, वैम समीकार m. dimension line Engin. विमा-रेखा / dimer Chem. द्विभाजm. 
d. chloride द्विभाज नीरेय. 
d. oxide द्विभाज जारेय. . dimercurammonium Chem. द्विपारद 
तिक्तातु m. 
d. chloride द्विपारदतिक्तातु नीरेय . 
d. oxide द्विपारदतिक्तातु जारेय. dimercuriammonium=dimercur 
ammonium dimercurion Chem. द्विपारदायन 1. dimercurousammonium Chem. 
द्विपारद्यतिक्तातु m. dimeric Chem. द्विभाजिक mfr. . dimerization Chem. द्विभाजन . di-meso- द्वि-मध्य dimeso - per - iodic acid Chem. 
द्विमध्यातिजम्बिक अम्ल n. dimetallic Chem. द्विधात्विक mfn. dimethacetic acid=dimethylace 
tic acid dimethano- Chem. द्विपोदीन्य 
d. anthracene द्विपोदीन्य-विक्षामण्य .. d.-naphthalene द्विप्रोदीन्य-उत्तैलेन्या . 
d. acetylene विप्रोदल-शुक्तलेन्य n. d.-allylene द्विप्रोदल-लाषणलेन्य 1. d.-amine द्विप्रोदल-तिक्ती. d.-aminoazobenzene fastest 
तिक्त्यजधूपेन्य. d.-aminoazobenzenesulphonic 
acid द्विप्रोदल-तिक्त्यजधूपेन्यशुल्बायिक अम्लn. d.-aminobenzal rhodanine fe 
प्रोदल-तिक्तीधूपसु पाटली. d.-aminobenzene द्विप्रोदल-तिक्ती 
धूपेन्य.. d.-aniline द्विप्रोदल-नीली. d.-anilinesulphonic acid द्विप्रोदल 
नीलीशुल्बायिक अम्ल n. d.-anthracene द्विप्रोदल-विक्षामेण्य. d.-arsenic acid द्विप्रोदल-नेपालिक अम्ल 
d.-arsine द्विप्रोदल-नेपी. d.-benzene द्विप्रोदल-धूपेन्य n. d.-benzoic acid विप्रोदल-धूपिक अम्ल 
. 
d.-beryllium द्विप्रोदल-विडूर १. d.-cadmium द्विप्रोदल-मृज्यातु m. d.-carbinol festestifira m. 
339﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
d.-carbonate द्विप्रोदल-अंगारीय . 
d.-phosphinic acid द्विप्रोदल-भास्वि d.-cyclooctadiene द्विप्रोदल-चक्राष्ट यिक अम्ल 
द्वयेन्य.. 
d.-phosphoric acid द्विप्रोदल d.-diamidotoluphenazine fac भास्विक अम्ल .. 
प्रोदल-द्वितिक्तेयबिरालदीजीवी /. 
d.-piperazzintartrate द्विप्रोदल-मरि d.-diethyl tin द्विप्रोदल-द्विदक्षुल अपु. 
चाजीविन्यासवीयn. d. ether द्विप्रोदल दक्षुm. 
d.-propylcarbinol द्विप्रोदल-प्रमे d. ethylamine द्विप्रोदल दक्षुलतिक्ती . लांगिव m. d.-ethylcarbinol द्विप्रोदल-दक्षुलांगिव d.-propylmethane द्विप्रोदल-प्रमेल 
m. 
__ प्रोदीन्य . d.-ethylene द्विप्रोदल-दक्षुलेन्य 2. 
d.-pyrazine द्विप्रोदल-शुष्माजीवी f. d.-ethylmethane द्विप्रोदल-दक्षुल d.-pyrazole द्विप्रोदल-शुष्माजेल n. 
प्रोदीन्य . 
d.-pyrrole द्विप्रोदल-शुष्मैल . d.-glyoxime द्विप्रोदल-मजावि . 
d.-silicane द्विप्रोदल-सैकतीन्य n. d.-hexane द्विप्रोदल-षडीन्य १. 
d. sulphate द्विप्रोदल शुल्बीय n. d.-hydantoin द्विप्रोदल-उदनालि. d.-sulphine द्विप्रोदल-शुल्बी . d.-hydrazine द्विप्रोदल-उदाजीवी/. d.-sulphinic acid द्विप्रोदल-शौल्बिक d.-hydrazone द्विप्रोदल-उदाजीवा. 
अम्ल .. d.-hydroxy benzene sulphon d.-sulphone द्विप्रोदल-शुल्बा f. 
phthalein द्विप्रोदल-उदजार धूपेन्य d.-sulphourea द्विप्रोदल-शुल्बमिह m. शुल्बा-व्यतैलिन m. 
d.-thetine (a blend of thio and d. ketone FGTGT TIEFEIT f. 
betaine) द्विप्रोदल-गन्धपालंकी d.-mercury द्विप्रोदल-पारद m. 
d.-thiophen द्विप्रोदल-गन्धदर्शन्य ॥. d.-naphthalene द्विप्रोदल-उत्तैलेन्य .. d.-urea द्विप्रोदल-मिह m. d.-nitrosamine द्विप्रोदल-भूय्यतिक्ती /. d.-xanthine द्विप्रोदल-पीती. d.-octane द्विप्रोदल-अष्टीन्य n. 
d.-yellow द्विप्रोदल-पीत m. . d.-oxalate द्विप्रोदल-तिग्मीय n. dimethylaniline orange Col. Ind. d.-oxamide द्विप्रोदल-तिग्मतिक्तेय . द्विप्रोदलनीली नांरग m. d.-oxyquinizine=antipyrine dimethylene Chem. द्विप्रोदलेन्या . d.-phenol द्विप्रोदल-दर्शव m. 
d.-diamine द्विप्रोदलेन्य-द्वितिक्ती f. d.-phenylenediamine द्विप्रोदल d.-imine द्विप्रोदलेन्य-वितिक्ती/.. 
दर्शलेन्यद्वितिक्ती. 
d.-oxide द्विप्रोदलेन्य-जारेय 1. d.-phenylenediamine hydro d.-sulphide द्विप्रोदलेन्य-शुल्बेय .. 
chloride द्विप्रोदल-दर्शलेन्यद्वितिक्ती d.-trisulphide द्विप्रोदलेन्य-त्रिशुल्बेय n. उदनीरेय . 
dimethyline Chem. द्विप्रोदली f. d.,phenylenediamine sulphate nitroso-d. भूथ्य-द्विप्रोदली f. 
.द्विप्रोदल-दर्शलेन्यद्वितिक्ती शुल्बीय.. dimethyl orange Col. Ind. द्विप्रोदल d.-phosphine द्विप्रोदल-भास्वी f. 
नारंग m. 
340 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
dimetric=tetragonal Cryst. चतुष्कोण d.-thiophen द्वघुत्तरलेन्य-गन्धदर्शन्य 1. 
mfn. 
dindyl-diindyl diminish vb. I आह्रासन, आह्रसन, ह्रासन, dineric (di - + Gk. neros liquid) 
हसन . 
Phys, dar fara mfn. 2 (as a disease) उपशमन n. 
Dine's hygrometer Phys. हिमजल अव diminished ह्रासित, ह्रसित mfn. 
श्यायांक उन्दमान m. diminished image हासित or ह्रसित-प्रति- Dingler's green Col. Ind. (a mixture 
__ मूर्ति [. 
of chromium phosphate and cal diminution आह्रासन, आह्रसन, ह्रसन N., cium phosphate) वर्णचूर्णभास्वीय हरि 
आह्रास, ह्रास m. dimorphic द्वैरूपिक afn. 
dinicotinic acid Chem. द्विताम्रकूटियिक dimorphism Biol. द्विरूपता f. 
अम्ल n. polymorphism पुरुरूपता. 
dining car Ry. पाथेय-यान, भोजन-यान .. di-n-amylamine Chem. द्वि-ऋ-मण्डल- dinitramido-benzoic acid Chem. 
तिक्ती . 
द्विभूयतिक्तेय-धूपिक अम्ल .. dinaphth-, dinaphtha-, dinaphtho dinitraniline Chem. द्विभूयतीली . ___Chem. व्यत्तैल 
dinitrate Chem. द्विभूयीय . dinaphthacridine Chem. द्वयुत्तैलोग्नी f. dinitrile Chem. द्विभूयिल m. dinaphthacridone Chem. द्वधुत्तैलोना f. dinitro- Chem. द्विभूय dinaphthanthracene Cbem. द्वथुत्तैल- d.-amido-benzene द्विभूय - तिक्तेय 
विक्षामेण्य 7. 
धूपेन्य .. dinaphthazine Chem. द्वयुत्तैलाजीवी . d.-aniline द्विभूय-नीली. dinaphtho-, dinaphtha-, dinaphth d.-aniline fluosilicate far-fet 
Chem. द्वघुत्तैल 
तरसैकतीय 1. dinaphthofluorene Chem. द्वयुत्तैल d.-anthraquinone द्विभूय-विक्षविज्वरा 
भ्राशेन्या . dinaphthol Chem. द्वयुत्तैलव m. 
d.-benzaldehyde द्विभूय-धूपसुव्युद m. dinaphthothianthrene Chem. द्वयुत्तैल d.-benzene द्विभूय-धूपेन्य 1. 
गन्धक्षामेण्य.. 
d.-benzoic acid द्विभूय-धूपिक अम्ल 1. dinaphthoxanthene Chem. द्वधुत्तैल d.-chlorobenzene द्विभूय-नीरधूपेन्य 
पीतेन्य 1. 
dinaphthyl Chem. द्वयुत्तरल 1. 
d.-mercury द्वयुत्तरल-पारद m. d.-methane द्वयुत्तरल-प्रोदीन्य n. 
d.-sulphone द्वयुत्तैरल-शुल्बा f. . d.-tin चुत्तरल-त्रपु . 
dinaphthylene Chem. द्वयुत्तरलेन्य . 
d.-methane द्वयुत्तरलेन्य-प्रोदीन्य 1. 
d.-cresol द्विभूय-ऋविपव m. d.-glycerin द्विभूय-मधुरि f. d.-glycerol द्विभूय-मधुरव m. d.-naphthalene द्विभूय-उत्तैलेन्य . d.-naphthol द्विभूय-उत्तैलव m. d.-phenamic acid द्विभूय-दर्शतिक्तिक 
अम्ल . 
341 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
9. 
d.-phenol 4-yia m. 
-dione Chem. - f. d.-phenylhydrazine 
श- dionine Chem. द्वयायी whatstat f. 
diopter, dioptre Optics (unit of d.-resorcinol द्विभूय-शेयास m. ___power of a lens) वीक्षणा f. d.-salicylic acid fart2-75ff dioptricity=refractivity 
#FT 1. 
dioptric media=refracting media d.-toluene f22-facrore n. 
Ophthalmol. 1918-caTi m. d.-xylene fe4a-FTOFT n. 
dioptrics (deals with refraction dinitroanthrachrysone disulpho- PETITT) at f. 
nic acid Col. Ind. fcufTEHT catoptrics (deals with reflection fecerfra kan n. 
परावर्तन) परावर्तिकी . dinitroso- Chem. f&*7227 
dioptric system=refractive sys d.-resorcin Col. Ind. fen24-ITATHM. tem 
d.-resorcinol f&#241-91974 m. diorsellinic acid=lecaronic acid Dinocerata Zool. (they have three Chem. FasTFF 777 n. 
pairs of bony horn cores-Parker dioscin (from the roots of Dioscorea and Haswell)=Uintatheria षट्- japonica निप्पोनालु) Chem. निप्पोनाल्वि 
TTT: m. pl. dinosaurus Zool. HTFT m. 
dioscorea=yam dinucleotide Chem. ferafete n. Dioscorea na f. (fæ for tofa Dioctophyme fitonte f. (trêt for genus) 
Storfe genus) 
D. aculeata=sweet yam ETT Dioctophymidae (a family) #1497 m. (Beng. BATT) 
T m. 
D. globosa = globose yam Dioctophymoidae (a super-family fouett m. 
having a muscular umbrella-like D. hirsuta (from Java) Tante bursa) F13-at m. 
m. dioctyl Chem, 1965 n. 
D. japonica facutart m. d. acetic acid 969 TFERTET TFT n. D. purpurea = red yam I dioecious Bot. (male and female on 
different individuals) Tant (-) D. villosa = wild yam qarT mfn. (cf. monoecious factift) 
m. dioform-acetylene dichloride dioscorine Chem. (from the rhizome diol=glycol 
of Dioscorea hirsuta aam) 79 -diol Chem. fae m. 
द्वीपाल्वी f. diolefine Chem. faststiet (3) m. dioscoroid (from the root of Dios diolein Chem. fa fer f. 
_corea villosa वन्यालु) Chem. वन्याल्वि f. diondiacid Chem. I TRI N. diose Chem. n. (cf. biose face) 
m. 
342 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
diosma (Gk. dios divine + osme. d.-ethylene = d.-dioxan द्विजार 
odour)=buchu Pharm. देवगन्ध m. . दक्षुलेन्य 1. diosmeleoptene (from Diosma betv- d.-phenyl - alanine द्विजार-दर्शल ___lina) Chem. देवगन्धोत्पतैलेन्या . 
आसुवी f. diosmin (from Diosma crenata) Chem. d.-phthalaldehydic acid = 
देवगन्धि f. 
d.-noropianic acid द्विजार diosphenol (Diosma + phenol) = व्युत्तैलसुव्युदिक अम्ल . 
bucco camphor, buchu cam d.-quinoline द्विजार-विज्वरवी f. phor, Barosma camphor Chem. d. rubin Col. Ind. द्विजार-रक्ति . देवगन्धदर्शव m. 
d.-tetrazotic acid द्विजार-चतुर Diospyros Bot. तिन्दुति . (-ति for ___ जीवातिक अम्ल . 
प्रजाति genus) 
d.-xanthone द्विजार-पीता f. D. embryopteris सामान्य तिन्दु m. dip vb. गाहन, निमज्जन n. diothane (piperidino - propanediol dip=dip of the needle Phys. अभिनति 
diphenyl-urethane) Chem. मरिच- . क्षीण्य १. (मरिचेयी..मिक्षीण्य) 
dipalmitate Chem. द्वितालीय . dioxadiene = p - dioxin Chem. dipalmitin Chem. faaifor f. 
द्विज द्वन्य . 
dip angle = inclination angle dioxan Chem. द्विजिन्य 1. 
Phys. अभिनति-कोण m. dioxazine Chem. द्विजाजीवी f. 
dipentene=terpene Chem. feqaret 11. dioxazole Chem. द्विजाजवा f. 
___d.-glycol=terpine द्विपंचेन्य-मधुवm. dioxdiazine Chem. द्विजाद्वयजीवी. dipeptide Chem. द्विपाचेय n. dioxdiazole Chem. द्विजायजवा . diphenamic acid Chem. द्विदर्शतिक्तिक dioxide Chem. द्विजारेय. 
अम्ल dioxime Chem. द्विजावि . 
diphenanthracridine Chem. द्विदर्श -dioxin Chem. -द्वितिमि . 
विक्षोनी. dioxindole Chem. द्विजानीलवा. diphenate Chem. द्विदर्शीय 1. dioxine Col. Ind. द्वितिग्मी/. 
diphenazyl = dibenzoylethane dioxogen Chem. (a brand of hy Chem. fegertsitaat n. 
drogen peroxide) प्युदजनातिजारेय diphene blue base Col. Ind. द्विदर्शन्य 
नील पीठ m. dioxolan Chem. द्विजाविन्य 1.. diphenic acid Chem. द्विदर्शन्यिक अम्ल n. dioxole Chem. द्विजावा. 
d. anhydride द्विदर्शन्यिक अजलेय .. dioxtriazine Chem. द्विजान्यजीवी. diphenide Chem. द्विदर्शय 1. dioxy- Chem. द्विजार 
diphenimide Chem. द्विदर्शवितिक्तेय 1. d.-anthracene द्विजार-विक्षामेण्य n. diphenol Chem. द्विदर्शव m. . d.-anthranol = d.-anthrarobin diphenoquinone Chem: facrifaveret f. 
द्विजार-विक्षेण्यवm. 
diphenyl. Chem. fecsint n. 343 
. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
d.-acetic acid द्विदर्शल-शुक्तिक अम्ल . d.-acetonitrile द्विदर्शल-शुक्तभूयिल m. d.-acetylene == tolane द्विदर्शल __शुक्तलेन्या . 
d.-amine द्विदर्शल-तिक्ती f. d.-amine chlorarsine द्विदर्शल 
तिक्ती नीरनेपी. d.-amine hydrobromide faceret 
तिक्ती उददुरेय . d.-amine hydrochloride Fagarat 
तिक्ती उदनीरेय. d.-amine sulphate द्विदर्शल-तिक्ती 
शुल्बीय. d.-aniline द्विदर्शल-नीली. d.-anthrone द्विदर्शल-विक्षा/. d.-benzene द्विदर्शल-धूपेन्य.. d.-benzidine द्विदर्शल-धूपेयी d.-benzylsultam द्विदर्शल-धूपल ___ शुल्धति . 
d.-carbamyl chloride द्विदर्शल ___ अंगतिक्तल नीरेय . 
d.-carbazide द्विदर्शल-अंगाजीवेय. d.-carbazone द्विदर्शल-अंगाजीवा. d.-carbinol द्विदर्शल-अंगिव m. d.-chlorarsine = blue-cross fe 
दर्शल-नीरनेपी f. d.-cyanarsine द्विदर्शल-श्यामनेपी f.. d. diacetylene द्विदर्शल-द्विशक्तलेन्या . d. dicarboxylic acid द्विदर्शल ___ द्वंगजारलिक अम्ल .. d.-diethylene द्विदर्शल-द्विदक्षुलेन्य .. d.-diketone द्विदर्शल-द्विशौक्ता d.-dimethylethane द्विदल-द्वि 
प्रोदलदक्षीण्य १. . d.-endoanilodihydro - triazole 
=d. nitron द्विदर्शल-अन्तर्नालद्वयुद ::. यजवा . . 
d.-ethane द्विदर्शल-दक्षीण्य , 
d.-ether द्विदर्शल-दक्षु m. d.-ethylene द्विदर्शल-दक्षुलेन्या . d.-guanidine = d. melaniline 
द्विदर्शल-बैष्ठेयी. d.-hydrazine द्विदर्शल-उदाजीवी f. d.-hydrazone=osazone द्विदर्शल 
उदाजीवा f. d.-imide द्विदर्शल-वितिक्तेय . d.-ketone द्विदर्शल-शौक्ता f. d.-methane = d. ditan द्विदर्शल 
प्रोदीन्या. d. nitrogen द्विदर्शल-भूयाति m. d.-octan-2.7-dione द्विदर्शल-अष्टिन्य 
२.७-या . d.-oxide द्विदर्शल-जारेय ?. d.-pentadienone = styryl ket 
one द्विदर्शल-पंचद्वचेन्या / d.-phosphine द्विदर्शल-भास्वी . d.-sulphide द्विदर्शल-शुल्बेय .. d.-sulphone द्विदर्शल-शुल्बा f. d. tetraketone द्विदर्शल-चतुश्शौक्ता. d.-tetraketoxime द्विदर्शल-चतुश्शौ 
जावि. d.-tetrazine द्विदर्शल-चतुरजीवी f. d.-thiocatbazone द्विदर्शल-गंधांगा ___ जीवा f. 
d.-thiourea द्विदर्शल-गन्धमिह m. d.-triazole द्विदर्शल-त्र्यजवा f. d.-triketone द्विदर्शल-त्रिशोक्ता . 
d.-urea द्विदर्शल-मिह m. diphenylamine Chem. द्विदर्शलतिक्ती 
d.-sulphoxide द्विदर्शलतिक्ती-शुल्ब 
जारेय. seleno-d, मेच-द्विदर्शलतिक्ती f. 
thio-d. गन्ध-द्विदर्शल तिक्ती f. diphenylamine black Col. Ind. 
द्विदर्शलतिक्ती काल m. 
344 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
- 
. 
d. blue spirit-soluble द्विदर्शलतिक्ती diphenylene Chem. द्विदर्शलेन्य .. 
नील प्रासव-विलेय m. 
d. acetic acid द्विदर्शलेन्य शक्तिक अम्ल d. orange fagriafacit aliT m. diphenylate Chem. द्विदलीय n. 
d. dimethylene द्विदर्शलेन्य द्विप्रोदलेन्य diphenyl black base Col. Ind. द्विदर्शल 
काल पीठ m. 
d. dioxide द्विदर्शलेन्य द्विजारेय 1. d. black oil द्विदर्शल काल तैल n. d. diphenyl-ethylene द्विदर्शलेन्य d. blue द्विदर्शल नील m. 
द्विदर्शल-दक्षुलेन्य n. d. blue-black द्विदर्शल नील-कृष्ण m. d. ether द्विदर्शलेन्य दक्षु m. d. brilliant blue द्विदर्शल भासुर नील d. glycollic acid द्विदर्शलेन्य मधुविक 
अम्ल . d. brown द्विदर्शल बभ्रु m. 
d. imide द्विदर्शलेन्य वितिक्तेय . d. catechine द्विदर्शल खदिरी f. 
d. ketone=fluorenone PEGRISTEN d. chlorine yellow द्विदर्शल नीरजी शौक्ता. 
पीत m. 
d. methane-fiuorene द्विदर्शलेन्य d. chrysoine द्विदर्शल हेमी. 
प्रोदीन्य n. d. citronine fagstar faraat f. 
d. oxide द्विदर्शलन्य जारेय . d. deep black द्विदर्शल गाढ काल m. d. oxycarbinol = xanthydrol d. deep blue द्विदर्शल गाढ नील m. 
द्विदर्शलेन्य जारांगिव m. d. fast black द्विदर्शल स्थिर काल m. d. phenylmethane = msphen d. fast blue द्विदल स्थिर नील m. 
yl-fluorene द्विदर्शलेन्य दर्शलपोदीन्य d. fast bordeaux द्विदर्शल स्थिर कपि 
.. शक m. 
___d. sulphide द्विदर्शलेन्य शुल्बेय . d. fast brown द्विदर्शल स्थिर बभ्रु m. diphenylenimide Chem. द्विदर्शलेन्य d. fast grey द्विदर्शल स्थिर धूसर m. वितिक्तेय .. d. fast red द्विदर्शल स्थिर रक्त m. diphosgene Chem. द्विभाज m. d. fast violet द्विदर्शल स्थिर नीललोहित diphosphate Chem. द्विभास्वीय 1. 
m. 
diphosphenyl Chem. द्विभास्वदर्शल n. d. fast yellow द्विदर्शल स्थिर पीत m. diphosphide Chem. द्विभास्वेय. d. green द्विदर्शल हरि m. 
diphospho glyceric acid Chem. d. indigo blue fagata frattet item द्विभास्व मधुरिक अम्ल 1. 
m. 
diphosphoric acid Chem. FEHfE9 d. orange द्विदर्शल नारंग m. 
अम्ल . d. phosphine द्विदर्शल भास्वी f. anhydrooxy-methylene-d. acid d. purpurine द्विदर्शल नीलोही f. 
अजलजार-प्रोदलेन्य-द्विभास्विक अम्ल . d. red द्विदर्शल रक्त m. 
diphthalyl Chem. द्विव्युत्तैरल 1. d. red-brown द्विदर्शल रक्त-ब<m. ____diphtheria Med. प्रबलास m. (प्रकृष्टः d. violet द्विदर्शल नीललोहित m. 
बलास:) 
345 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
n. 
Diphylidiidae (a family having Chem. Falu = 7 94 URT 
bilateral genital pores)Zool. 374€ Wiferaet m. 
diplostemonous Bot. द्विसंख्यपुंकेसर mfn. Diphylidium Zool. उभयतोयोन्याति f. diplotene Biol. व्यंशु mfn. 
(आति for प्रजाति genus) 
dip of the needle=dip angle Phys. Diphyllabothriidae Zool. Enfa - HTT-TT ta. . a m. 
dipolar fega mfn. Diphyllobothrium Zool. fermercafè dipolarize=depolarize 
f. (आति for प्रजाति genus) 
dipole Physical Chem. युग्मध्रुव m. D. latum विस्तृत द्विनालशिर m. Dippel's animal oil=Dippel's oil diphyodont Zool. द्विदन्त m. 
=bone oil (distillation product dipicolinic acid Chem. fafircrafafua of bones and other animal 
FT 1. 
matter, chiefly containing pyri dipicrate Chem. द्विकट्वीय . 
dine and pyridine bases) Chem. dipicrylamine Chem. द्विकटुलतिक्ती fars Fin, 
dipper, acid Ft-team. dipipetidyl Chem. fa fa48 . dipping refractometer Chem. TTE diplo- (when differentiated from STATHTT m. 
di-, bi-) feu 
diprimary=doubly primary Chem. Diplococcus (D.) THIETTO (ET. -T.) FETTET mfn. 
D. pneumoniae #174479 4. STI. diprismatic = doubly prismatic 
D. scarlatinae TOEFT T. TT. diploe Anat. (cancellous bony tissue dipropargyl = bipropargyl (di-+ between the tables of the skull propinyl + argyros + -yl, be 
Ifa) fasta f. (5 is head) cause a hydrogen atom may diplogen=deuterium 
be replaced by silver ) Chem. Diplogonoporus (two complete sets fegHGCT n. 
of genital organs) Zool. femaat dipropyl Chem. Fexhat n. f. (आति for प्रजाति genus) 
. d. amine fast fast f. diploid द्विगुण Mfn. 
d. beryllium द्विप्रमेल विडूर १. diploid number (of chromosome) d. cadmium FSHET PUIT 1. 
Zool. fator-FETT f. 
d. carbinol fata sifiram. diploma 39TTET, FIT51997 n. 
d. ether द्विप्रमेल दक्षु m. diplomacy retrifa f. 
d. ketone द्विप्रमेल शौक्ता f.' diplomethane Chem. ferotgRT 7. d. mercury द्विप्रमेल पारद m. diplon = deuteron Chem. in d. tin FETT 74 n. 
m. 
d. tin dibromide द्विप्रमेल त्रपु द्विदुरेय diplosal = salicylosalicylic acid n. 
346 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
d. tin dichloride द्विप्रमेल अपु द्विनीरेय 
d. arbitrage Econ. ऋजु अन्तर-पणन 
___n. 
. 
diprotocatechuic acid Chem. fa d. charges प्रत्यक्ष व्यय m. 
प्रखदिरिक अम्ल n. 
d. cost ऋजु परिव्यय m. dip stick Automobile निमज्जन-यष्टि f. d. expenses ऋजु व्यय, प्रत्यक्ष व्यय m. dipstone मग्नाश्म m. 
d. inquiry Statistics प्रत्यक्ष अनुसंधान . d. trap मग्नाश्म-रुघm. Diptera Zool. ftat: m. pl., FETETTOT M. 'd. labour ऋजु श्रम M. 
(गण order) 
d. material ऋजु-सामग्री f. Dipteraceae Bot. कर्पूर-कुल . 
d. tax Econ. प्रत्यक्ष कर m. Dipterocarpaceae Bot. द्विपक्षफल-कुल d. wages ऋजु-भृति . 
__m. 
direct application Phys. अव्यवहित Dipterocarpus Bot. द्विपक्षफलति f. (-ति प्रयोग m. 
for प्रजाति genus) 
direct benzoazurine Col. Ind. अना Dipteryx प्रानन्तमूलति (ति for प्रजाति श्रित धूपनभोनीली. 
genus) 
d. black अनाश्रित काल m. D. odorata सामान्य प्रानन्तमूल m. 
d. blue अनाश्रित नील m. dipyranodioxin Chem. Etfirrafafafa d. blue-black अनाश्रित नील-कृष्ण m. 
d. bordeaux अनाश्रित कपिशक m. dipyrazolone Chemm. द्विशुष्माजैला f. . d. bright fast blue अनाश्रित दीप्त dipyridine = nicotyrine Chem. स्थिर नील m. 
द्विशुष्मेयी. 
d. brilliant blue अनाश्रित भासुर नील dipyridyl” (beta, gamma) Chem. 
द्विशुष्मेयल N. (आवर्ण, इवर्ण) 
d. brilliant bordeaux अनाश्रित dipyrrole Chem. द्विशुष्मैल N. 
भासुर कपिशक m. diquinidine द्विविज्वरेयी f. 
d. brilliant flavine अनाश्रित भासुर diquinoline . (alpha, beta) Chem. पिंगी. 
द्विविज्वरवी f. (अवर्ण, आवर्ण) 
d. brilliant orange अनाश्रित भासुर diquinolopyridine Chem. द्विविज्वरव नारंग m. 
शुष्मेयी . 
d. brilliant rose अनाश्रित भासुर diquinone Chem. द्विविज्वरा f. 
पाटल m. direct vb. निदेशन, संचालन n. 
d. brilliant violet अनाश्रित भासुर direct adj. I अजिह्म (indirect जिह्म) . नीललोहित m. 
2 प्रत्यक्ष 
d. brilliant yellow अनाश्रित भासुर 3 अव्यवधान 
पीतm. 4 ऋजु mfn. 
d. bronze-brown अनाश्रित कांस्य 5 Dyeing अनाश्रित mfn. 
बभ्रु m. . direct Com. ऋजु, प्रत्यक्ष mfn. 
.. d. brown अनाश्रित बभ्रुm. 347 
___m. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
d. catechine अनाश्रित-खदिरी/. 
d. fast brown अनाश्रित स्थिर बभ्र m. direct cell division Biol. अव्यवहित d. fast copper अनाश्रित स्थिर ताम्रm. 
कोशा-भाजन 1. 
d. fast orange अनाश्रित स्थिर नारंग m. direct chrome black Col. Ind. अनाश्रित d. fast pink अनाश्रित स्थिर आपm. 
वर्णक काल m. 
d. fast red. अनाश्रित स्थिर रक्त m. d. chrome brown अनाश्रित वर्णक बभ्रु d. fast rose अनाश्रित स्थिर पाटल m. 
m. 
d. fast scarlet अनाश्रित स्थिर शोण m. d. chrysamine अनाश्रित-हेमतिक्ती/ d. fast violet अनाश्रित स्थिर नीललोहित d.chrysophenine अनाश्रित-हेमदर्शीf. 
m. direct combustion Biochem. अव्यव d. fast yellow अनाश्रित स्थिर पीत m. 
हित दहन n. 
d. field grey अनाश्रित सेना धूसर m. direct common tangent Math. Tapinta d. garnet अनाश्रित निरक्त m. 
उभयस्पर्शी (-इन्) m. 
direct germination Bot. अव्यवहित direct Congo red Col. Ind. अनाश्रित उद्धेदन . 
कुंकुंग रक्त m. 
direct gold yellow Col. Ind. अनाश्रित d. crimson अनाश्रित कामिज m. 
स्वर्ण पीत m. d. dark blue अनाश्रित असित नील m. d. green अनाश्रित हरि m. d. dark brown अनाश्रित असित बभ्र d. grey अनाश्रित धूसर m. 
m. 
d. heliotrope अनाश्रित निनीलातिरक्त d. dark green अनाश्रित असित हरि m. d. deep black अनाश्रित गाढ काल m. d. indamine अनाश्रित-निनीलतिक्ती. d. diazo black अनाश्रित द्वयज काल d. indigo blueअनाश्रित निनील नील m. ___m. 
d. indone blue FTSETT FELTETT TTET direct correlation=positive corre ____lation Statistics अनुलोम सहसम्बन्ध m. directing संचालन 1. 
direct dyes (not requiring the aid direction : दिक्, दिशा f. 
of a mordant substantive) अनाश्रित __ 2 Adminis. संचालन .. रंजक m. 
3 निदेश m. directed देशित, दिष्ट mfn. 
directional antenna Radar अनुदिक् directed away पराङ्मुख mfn. 
प्रातन्तु m. directed line Geom. देशित-रेखा f. direction finding (DF) Radar directed towards अभिमुख mfn. 
दिगन्वेषण 1. (दि. अ.) directed towards the centre Phys. directions and principles निदेश तथा 
केन्द्राभिमुख mfn. 
प्रनियम m. direct fast acid red Col. Ind. TTT directive antenna system Radar 
स्थिर अम्ल रक्त m. 
अनुदिक् प्रातन्तु-संहति . d. fast black अनाश्रित स्थिर काल m. direct laying Mil. (alignment of a d. fast bronze अनाश्रित स्थिर कांस्य m. gun when line of sight is directed 
__m. 
m. 
348 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
m. 
on the target) दृष्ट-लध्य-स्थापना, d. pure blue अनानित शुद्ध नील m. प्रत्यक्ष-स्थापना. 
___d. purple अनाश्रित नीलारुणm. directly प्रत्यक्षरूपेण, प्रत्यक्षरीत्या, प्रत्यक्षतः direct process अव्यवधान-विधा f. 
vary directly vb. अनूप-विचरण 1. direct proportion अनुलोमानुपात, अनू directly in front संमुखान 
पानुपात m. directly proportional अनूपानुपाती direct red Col. Ind. अनाश्रित रक्त m. 
(-इन्) mfn. (cf. प्रतीपानुपाती) 
directrix Geom. नियता . (रेखा) direct maroon red Col. Ind. अनाश्रित direct rose Col. Ind. अनाश्रित पाटलm. 
नीचरक्त रक्त m. 
d. safranine अनाश्रित-कुंकुमी f. direct method Physiol. अव्यवहित-रीति. ___d. salmon red अनाश्रित प्रपीतातिरक्त direct olive Col. Ind. अनाश्रित तैलबदर 
m. 
m. 
d. scarlet अनाश्रित शोण m. director निदेष्टा m. 
d. sky blue अनाश्रित आकाश नील m. 2 (head of a department) अध्यक्ष m. d. steel blue अनाश्रित वज्रायस नील 3 संचालक m. 
m. ex-officio d. पद-कारणात संचालक m. d. sulpho black अनाश्रित शुल्ब काल 
managing d. प्रबन्ध-संचालक m. 
officiating d. स्थानापन्न संचालक m. d. sulpho brown अनाश्रित शुल्ब बभ्रु directoral-directorial संचालकीय mfn. direct orange Col. Ind. अनाश्रित नारंग direct variation Math. अनूप विचरण . 
m. 
direct violet Col. Ind. अनाश्रित नील directorate संचालकपद n., संचालकवर्ग, लोहित m. __ संचालकप्रबन्ध m. 
d. yellow अनाश्रित पीत m. director circle Geom. नियत वृत्त ।. d..yellow-brown अनाश्रित पीत-बभ्र 
(directrix नियता रेखा) directorial=directoral 
diresorcinol Chem. द्विशेयास m. . directors Com. संचालक m. 
diresorcylic acid Chem. द्विशेयासलिक d. fees संचालक-शुल्क n. 
अम्ल m. d. meeting संचालक-अधिवेशन 1. dirigent Radar प्रदेशक m. d. remuneration संचालक-परितोषण dirigible Radar प्रदेश्य, संचाल्य mfn. 
d. balloon प्रदेश्य वागोल m. d. report संचालक-वृत्तलेख m. ___d. torpedo प्रदेश्य-नौनी . board of d. संचालक-गण m. 
dirty मलिन mfn. . directorship संचालकता f., संचालक-पद n. d. green मलिन हरि m. directory संचालकवर्ग m. 
_d. red मलिन रक्त m. direct personal investigation Sta- d. red colour मलिन रक्त रंग m. 
_tistics प्रत्यक्ष स्वयम् अनुसंधान n. . . dis-, bis- द्विस्-(by sandhi द्विर्-, द्वि:-, etc.) direct pink Col. Ind. अनाश्रित प्रापद्म m. disability अयोग्यता, निर्योग्यता f. 
___ 
n. 
349﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
11. 
disaccharide Chem. द्विशर्करेय . 
3 विप्रभरण 2. (charge vb. प्रभरण, n. disaccharose Chem. द्विशर्कराधु . 
प्रभार) disacidify vb. (to free from acid) discharge Com. उन्मोचन ।. ___अम्लापगमन 1. 
d. of a bill विपत्र-उन्मोचन 1. disagio Econ. न्यन्तर n. 
d. of a contract संविदा-उन्मोचन . disagreevb. विमिलन . 
d. of a debtor अधमर्ण-उन्मोचन 1. disagreeable smell अरुचिकर गन्ध, अन ___d. of a liability देय-उन्मोचन .. 
भिमत गन्ध m. 
d. of a loan ऋण-उन्मोचन 2. disagreeing fafHTT tha 
discharge Chem. मोच m., मोचन 1. disagreement विमिलिन M., विमेल m. d. tube मोचन-नाल m. disalicylic acid Chem. द्विनम्रलिक अम्ल disruptive d. प्रविदारि मोचन . 
silent d. मूक मोचन ।. disalicylidesalosalicylide Chem. discharge Dyeing a composition 
द्विनम्रलेय . 
for removing a mordant or a disallow vb. अस्वीकरण .. 
dye....) मोचन 1. disappear-vanish vb. I Math. तिरो- discharge black Col. Ind. मोचन काल m. 
भवन । 
d. blue मोचन नील m. 2 Cbem. लोपन (अदर्शन) n. 
d. bordeaux मोचन कपिशक m. disapprove vb. अननुमोदन, प्रतिनिन्दन m. d. brown मोचन बत्रु m. disassociation (dis tu ad - to socius d. green मोचन हरि m. 
सखि) Chem. निरासखीयन, निरायोजन 1. d. lake मोचन लाक्षक m. electrical d. वैद्युत निरायोजन n. 
d. navy blue मोचन नाविक नील m. photo-d. भा-निरायोजन ?. 
d. orange मोचन नारंग m. thermal d. तापीय निरायोजन 2. 
d. red मोचन रक्त m. disazo द्विरज, द्विरजक mfm. 
d. salt मोचन लवण . d. compound द्विरज संयोग m. discharged Com. उन्मुक्त mfn. disbenzoldisazo -a- naphthol Col. d. bankrupt उन्मुक्त नष्टनिधि m. 
Ind. द्विधूपवद्विरज-अ-उत्तैलव M. discharge of electricity विद्युन्मोचन n. disbursement व्यय m., रेचन 1. 
discharge of functions प्रकार्य-पालन . disc, disk I (a. flat circular plate; disciplinable अनुशास्य mfn. 
a. circular structure) बिम्ब m. disciplinarian अनुशास्ता (-तृ) m. 2 Bot. (inside portion of the disciplinary आनुशासिक mfn. bulb) कन्दगर्भ m. 
d. action आनुशासिक कर्म । disc crank Mach. बिम्ब कूपर m. discipline अनुशासन 1., विनय M. (ancient disc floret Bot. बिम्ब-पुष्पक . 
___Buddhist word) discharge I (of pus, blood, etc.) disciplined अनुशिष्ट, अनुशासित mfn. ... साव m. 
disclose vb. उद्घाटन 1. 2 nervous, systolic) उत्सर्ग m. disc of packing Macb. संवेष्टन-बिम्ब m. 
३३० 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
Discoglossidae Zool. (having a disc- trade d. पण्य-अपहार m. ____ like tongue) बिम्बजिह्व-वंश m. 
discounted Com. पूर्वप्रापित afn. discoglossus Zool. fegefst m. discounting Com. पूर्वप्रापण . discoid Zool. बिम्बाभ mfn. 
discover vb. आविष्करण. discoidal Zool. Faratiile mfn. 
discoverer आविष्कर्ता (-त) m. discol (an internal combustion fuel, discovery utform 
50% alcohol सुषव, 25% benzol discrepancy विभेद m. धूपव and 25% of hydrocarbons discrepant विभेदी (-इन्) mfn. उदांगार) Chem. सुधूव m. 
discrete I पृथक discolour vb. विवर्णन 1. 
2==broken Statistics खण्डित mfn. discolouration विवर्णता . 
discrete series=broken series Sta Discomyces बिम्ब-कवकानिn.pl. ___tistics *खण्डित-माला f. disconnect vb. अपयोजन 1. 
discrete shells Phys. पृथक्-कर्पर m. discontinuous असंतानी (-इन्), असंतत discriminant Math. विवेचक m. 
mfn. 
discrimination विवेचन . d. series Statistics असंतत-माला. discuss vb. पर्यालोचन 1. d. variation Evolution असंतत विभेदन discussion पर्यालोचन । 
.. 
debate वाद-विवाद m. discord Phys. विसंवाद m. 
dispute विवाद m. discount vb. Com. पूर्वप्रापण . 
controversy वादप्रतिवाद m. discount n. Com. पूर्वप्राप, अपहार m. disdiazo- Chem. द्वियज 
d. a bill विपत्र पूर्वप्रापण .. 
disease रोग m. d. allowed दत्त अपहार m. 
diselenide Chem. द्विमेचेय . . d. column अपहार स्कंभ m. 
disengage Chem. निरभियोजन n. d. off purchases ऋये अपहार m. अभियोजन engage) d. off sales विक्रये अपहार m. . disfigure vb. faetot n. d. on issue of debentures ऋणपत्र dish Chem. शराव 1. 
निर्गमने अपहार m. 
acid d. अम्ल शराव . d. on issue of shares अंश निर्गमने aluminium d. स्फटयातु-शराव . 
अपहार m. 
alundumd. स्फटीविन्द-शराव । d. rate अपहार अर्घm. 
crystallizing d. स्फटन-शराव : d. received प्राप्त अपहार m. 
cultured. संवर्ध-शराव १. cash d. रोक अपहार m. 
filtering d. पावन-शराव . customary d. रूढ अपहार m. 
incineration d. भस्मीकरण-शराव n. reserve for d. on creditors moistured. आर्द्रता-शराव । 
उत्तमर्ण-अपहार-संचिति . . 
nickel d. रूपक-शराव n. reserve for d. on debtors अधमर्ण petri d. अपिवर्ध-शराव . 
. अपहार-संचिति. 
silicad. सैकजा-शराव 
351 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
weighing d. तोलन-शरावा. 
disintegrative=disintegratory dishonour Com. अनादरण 2. 
वियोजी (-इन्) mfn. d. by nonacceptance अस्वीकृति disintegrator वियोजक m. 
अनादरण 2. 
disintegratory=disintegrative d. by nonpayment प्रशोधन अनादरण disintoxicate=detoxicate 
n. 
disk=disc fara m. d. of a bill,d. a bill विपत्र-अनादरण dislocate vb. I (as joints) विसंधान n. ___n. 
2 (displace) facerraa n. d. of a cheque धनादेश-अनादरण .. dislodge vb. विस्थापन । 
notice of d. अनादरण-सूचना f. dismiss Drill उत्सर्ग: m. dishonoured Com. अनादृत mfr. dismutation Biochem. (simultaneous 
d. bill अनादृत विपत्र . 
oxidation strot and reduction d. cheque अनादृत धनादेश m. 
प्रह्रासन in which one group of disilane Chem. द्विसकीन्य. 
molecule of a compound is ____ hexafluoro-d. षट्तरस्व-द्विसकीन्य. oxidized and another reduced) disilicane Chem. द्विसकतीन्य 1. 
जारहास m. disilicate Chem. द्विसकतीय .. 
disodic Chem. द्विक्षारिक mfn. disilicic acid Chem. Fastafari F4n. disodium Chem. द्विक्षारातु m. . . disilicide Chem. द्विसकतेय .. 
d. hydrogen phosphate द्विक्षारातु disiloxane Chem. द्विसैजिन्य . 
उदजन भास्वीय . disinfect vb. रोगाणुनाशन 1. 
d. phosphate द्विक्षारात भास्वीय . disinfectant रोगाणुनाशक mfn. 
disorder दोष, विकार m. d. testing apparatus रोगाणुनाशक disorganization I विघटन, विसंघटन . 
परीक्षण साधित्र n. 
2 Mil. व्यंगीकरण . disinfecting रोगाणुनाश mfn. 
disorganize vb. I विघटन, विसंघटन . ___d. candle Pharm. रोगाणुनाश-वति . 
ति. 2 Mil. व्यंगीकरण . disinfection रोगाणुनाशन . 
disorganized I विघटित, विसंघटित mfn. disinfective रोगाणुनाशी (-इन्) mfn. 2 Mil. व्यंगीकृत mfn. disinfector I (one who disinfects) disoxidate=deoxidize 
रोगाणुनाशयिता (-त) m. 
disoxidation=deoxidation 2 (an apparatus for applying dis disoxygenate=deoxidize _infectants) रोगाणुनाशिक n. 
disoxygenation=deoxidization disintegrable वियोज्य mf. 
disozonize vb. Cbem. निष्प्रजारण n. disintegrant वियोजक m. 
disparate असंवादी (-इन्) mfn. disintegrate vb. वियोजन 1. 
d. points Ophthalmol. water forre disintegration fautetat n. 
__m. ('non-corresponding') artificial d. कृत्रिम वियोजन . disparity Matb. असमाहता f. atomic d. परमाण्विक वियोजन.. dispatcher of news वृत्त-प्रेषक m. 
352 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
dispensary औषधालय M. 
d. reaction विस्थापन-प्रतिक्रिया f. dispensatory औषधनिकाय m. (निकाय= d. series विस्थापन-माला f. 
संहिता is well known in Buddhist d. ton विस्थापन-प्रवर्त m. scriptures e.g. दीघनिकाय, संयुत्तनिकाय) electron d. विद्युदणु-विस्थापन ?. formulary योगसंहिता . 
displacer I (a person) विस्थापक m. pharmacopoeia भेषजसंहिता . 
2 (an apparatus) fartenfe n. dispenser औषधयोजक m. 
disproportion व्यनुपात m. dispensing (act of compounding disproportion vb. व्यनुपातन . 
medicines) औषधयोजन n. 
disproportional=disproportionate dispensing balance औषध-तुला. 
व्यनुपाती (-इन्) mfn. dispergate Physical Chem.=disperse disproportionate I vb. व्यनुपातन 1. 
(a colloid) 
2 adj. व्यनुपाती (-इन्) mfn. dispersal of fruits Bot. फलापकिरण . disproportionation Chem. (trans disperse vb. Phys. अपकिरण ।. 
formation of a substance into dispersed Chem. अपकीर्ण mfn. 
two dissimilar compounds; dis ___d. phase Physical Chem. अपकीर्ण द्विर-) द्विरनुपातन n. 
प्रावस्था. 
dispute faqte m. (See discussion) dispersion अपकिरण .. 
disqualify vb. अयोग्यकरण, अपात्रकरण 2. d. curve अपकिरण-वक्र. 
disrupt vb. अविदारणn. d. of light प्रकाशापकिरण n. 
disrupter प्रविदारक m. d. theory अपकिरण-वाद m. 
disruption प्रविदारण . coefficient of d. अपकिरण-गुणक m. disruptive प्रविदारी (-इन्) mfn. ___degree of d. अपकिरणांश m. 
d. discharge प्रविदारि मोचन . dispersity Physical Chem. (degree of disrupture=disruption 
_dispersion) अपकिरता f. 
dissect 1 (to divide into separate dispersive power Optics अपकिरण-शक्ति parts) विभाजन .. 
___2 (to cut in pieces) विच्छेदन N. dispersoid Physical Chem. (matter dissecting microscope fargent 
which has undergone dispersion) अण्वीक्ष m. अपकीर्ण. 
dissemination = dispersion (e.g. dispersoidology=colloid chem of gases) Chem. fast ett n. 
istry अपकीर्ण-विद्या . 
dissimilar असदृश mfn. displace vb. विस्थापन, निरसन 1. dissimilation Biol. (catabolism) displaced विस्थापित, निरस्त mfn. 
अपचय m. displacement विस्थापन, निरसन 1. dissipate vb. Thermodyn. I (to 
d. current Elec. विस्थापन-वाह m. 
allow heat to pass from a region d. law विस्थापन-नियम m. 
of higher temperature to one d. pump Macb. विस्थापन-उदञ्च m. of lower temperature) निप्रथन .. 
353 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
1. 
2 (to change mechanical or elec- dissolver Chem. प्रविलायक m. trical energy into heat) 369 FRUT n. dissonance Music fafarat f. 3 Phys. अपाकिरण. 
dissonant Music विस्वन mfn. dissipated निप्रथित, ऊष्मकृत, अपाकीर्ण mfn. dissymmetric, dissymmetrical वि dissipation constant ऊष्मकरण स्थिरांक संमितीय mfn. 
dissymmetry r विसंमिति dissociable Chem. वियाव्य mfn. ___ 2 Statistics विसंमिति f., वैषम्य . dissociant Chem. (producing dis- distal Anat. दूरस्थ mfm. ____sociation) वियावक mfn. 
distal end दूरान्त m. (दूरस्थ अन्त) dissociate vb. वियवन n. 
distance I दूरता . dissociated वियुत mfn. 
2 अन्तर. dissociation वियवन n. 
d. across corners Engin. अध्यंतर. d. coefficient Physical Chem. d. across flats = distance ac 
वियवन गुणक m. 
ross faces (of a nut) Engin. d. constant वियवन स्थिरांक m. 
चिपिटान्तर 1. d. electrolytic facant fagfele mfn. d. at which objects are dis d. photo वियवन-भा. 
tinguished वस्तु-अभिज्ञानान्तर n. d. pressure वियवन निपीड m. distance glasses Ophthalmol. दूरोपनेत्र d. thermal faqat 1974 mfn. degree of d. वियवांश m. 
distannic Chem. fazfia mfn. dissolubility Chem. प्रविलेयता. distant cooperation Mil. दूर-सहकारिता dissoluble Chem. प्रविलेय mfn. dissolubleness Chem. प्रविलेयत्व n. distant signal Rly. दूर-संज्ञप्ति . dissolution Chem., Com. प्रविलयन n. distearin Chem. द्विवसि f. ___d. of partnership भागिता-प्रविलयन distemper समाराग m. 
disthene=cyanite Mineral. नीलस्फ dissolutional = dissolutive (of or सैकिज M. (-इज for खनिज mineral) 
pertaining to dissolution) प्रविलय- distichous Nat. Hist. द्वि-पंक्तिक mfn. निक mfn. 
distill vb. आसवन ।. dissolution of the legislature विधान- distillable Chem. आसाव्य mfn. 
मंडल-विलयन 1. 
distilland Chem. (that which is dissolutive=dissolutional 
undergoing distillation) TEHTFT dissolvability Chem. प्रविलेयता f. distillate n. Chem. Prys n. dissolvable Chem. प्रविलेय .mfn. distillation Chem. आसवन n. dissolvableness Chem. प्रविलेयत्व . cold d. शीत आसवन 1. dissolve vb. Chem., Com. प्रविलयन n. con-distillation (distillation dissolved sfarsita mfn. 
with substances other than dissolvent.Chem. sfantu m. 
steam) समासवन, अबाष्पासवन 1. 
354 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
dry d.=destructive d. शुष्क पासवन 
. fractional d. प्रभागशः पासवन n. isothermal d. सतापीय आसवन n. repeated d. = cohobation पुन:- 
पुनरासवन n. steam d. प्रबाष्प-आसवन ॥. distillation apparatus Chem. आसवन 
साधित्र n. arsenic d. a. नेपाली-आसवन-साधित्र n fractional d. a. प्रभागशः-आसवन- 
साधित्र . 
mercury d. a. पारद-पासवन-साधित्र n. distillation flask Chem. आसवन-पलिघ 
m. distillation flask with ground on 
condenser Chem. संघनकोपरि घृष्ट 
सहित आसवन-पलिघm. distillation tube पासवन-नाल m. distillation value आसवन-अहाँ distilled Chem. atya mfn. 
d. charcoal आसुत अंगार m. d. green = verdigris green 
मासुत हरि m. d. liquors आसुत-मदिरा . d. oil of vitriol आसुत काचर-तैल . d. verdigris आसुत-हरिकी f. d. water=aqua destillata (aq. 
• dest.) Pharm. आसुत जल-आसुत 
वारि. doubled. water द्विरासुत जल .. distiller I (one who distills) आसवक 
tar d. विराल-आसोत्र n. 
wood d. काष्ठ-आसोत्र 1. distiller's saccharometer Chem. 
आसवक-शर्करामान M. distillery आसवनी f. (आसवनशाला,-गृह) ___d. waste आसवनी-क्षय m. distilling (process of separating 
solid from liquid or liquid from liquid by distillation) gryfa f., 
आसवन. distilling flask Chem. (a flask for 
holding a substance to be dis 
tilled) आसवन-पलिघm. distilling tube आसवन-नाल m. distillment I (distillation) आसवन . 
2 (substance obtained by distil 
lation) आसुत .. distinction Math. भेद m. distinguish vb. आवेचन, भेदकरण 2. distort vb. व्याकर्षण N. distorted व्याकृष्ट mfn. distortion factor n. distribute vb. I विभाजन 2. ___2 Com. वंटन n. distributed Com. afca mfn. 
d. load Engin. वंटित भार m. distributing वंटन n. distribution वंटन n. 
d. coefficient=partition coeffi 
cient वंटन-गुणक m. d. law वंटन-नियम m. d. method वंटन-रीति. d. of assets सम्पत्ति-वंटन 1. d. of dividends लाभांश-वंटन 1. d. ratio Physical Chens. वंटन-अनुपात 
m. distribution of life in time Zool. 
(Hindi युगयुगान्तरों में जीवों का अस्तित्व) 
m. 
2 (a distilling apparatus) आसोत्र ॥. benzol d. धूपव-पासोत्र n. naphtha d. उत्तैल-आसोत्र. oil d. तैल-आसोत्र n. resind. उद्यास-पासोत्र n. 
355 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
Play 
स्वा 
. 
distribution of powers Adminis. d.-metholic acid द्विशुल्ब-प्रोदविक 
शक्ति-विभाजन . 
अम्ल n. distributive adj. Com. वंटक, वंटन 
d.-naphtholic acid द्विशुल्ब-उत्तैल distributive law Math. वंटन-नियम m. 
विक अम्ल n. distributor 1 वंटक m. 
disulphole=dithiole Chem. Farisaat 2 Automobile वंटक m. 
f. automatic d. आत्म-वंटक m. disulphonate Chem. द्विशुल्बायीय 1. district मण्डल . 
disulphone Chem. faceat f. district judge मंडल-न्यायाधीश m. disulphonic acid Chem. द्विशुल्बायिक district represented stafileTT HUETT अम्ल . 
disulphonide Chem. द्विशुल्बायेय . distrust of statistics समंक-अविश्वास m. disulphoxide Chem. द्विशुल्बजारेय . disturb Math. विक्षोभणn. 
disulphuret=disulphide disturbance Phys. विक्षोभ m. 
disulphuric Chem. द्विशुल्बारिक mfn. distyrene Chem. द्विसिलॅन्य 1. 
disxylol disazo-a-naphthol Col. disubstituted Chem. द्वयादिष्ट mfn. ___ Ind. द्विःकाष्ठव द्विरज-अ-उत्तैलव m. . disubstitution = bi-substitution dita bark=alstonia Pharm. (bark ___Cbem. द्वयादेश m. 
of Alstonia scholaris) सप्तपर्ण-वल्क disulphate Chem. युग्मशुल्बीय n. 
m. disulphide = bisulphide Chem. ditaine Cbem. सप्तपर्णवल्की. 
द्विशुल्बेय . 
____d. sulphate सप्तपर्णवल्की शुल्बीयn. alkyl d. क्षारल द्विशुल्बेय. 
ditamine Chem. सप्तपर्णतिक्ती f. ethyl d. दक्षुल द्विशुल्बेय n. 
ditan=diphenyl methane FEGRİST methyl d. प्रोदल द्विशुल्बेय n. 
प्रोदीन्या. disulphine blue Col. Ind. द्विशल्बी नील ditch खातक . 
diterpene Chem. द्विसरलेन्य १. d. green द्विशुल्बी हरि m. 
ditertiary Chem. (doubly tertiary) disulpho- * Chem. द्विशुल्ब-; द्विशुल्बा- द्विस्तृतीयक mfn. 
(when the presence of two sul- dithi-, dithio- Chem. द्विगन्ध phonic acid groups is to be dithiane Chem. ferreftre n. specifically indicated) 
dithiazine Chem. द्विगन्धाजीवी f. d.-acid द्विशुल्ब-अम्ल n. 
· dithiazol Chem. द्विगन्धाजव m. d.-benzoic acid द्विशुल्ब-धूपिक अम्ल dithiene Chem. द्विगन्धेन्या . 
n. 
dithienyl Chem. द्विगन्धेन्यलn. d.-chloride द्विशुल्ब-नीरेय n. 
alpha d. अवर्ण द्विगन्धेन्यल. _d.-cyanate द्विशुल्ब-श्यामीय .. 
beta d. आवर्ण द्विगन्धेन्यल 1. .d.-cyanic acid द्विशल्ब-श्यामिक अम्ल d. ketone द्विगन्धेन्यल शौक्ता f. 
. . 
d. methane द्विगन्धेन्यल प्रोदीन्य n. 
m. 
356 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
d. phenylmethane द्विगन्धेन्यल दर्शल meta-d. सम-द्विविरारल . _प्रोदीन्य n. 
para-d. परा-द्विविरारल . dithio-, dithi-Chem. द्विगन्ध 
ditto तदेव d.-benzoic acid द्विगन्ध-पिक अम्ल M. Diu (in Guzerat) Geog. देवपत्तन . d.-bisalanine=cystine feront f. diuranate (di - t uranium) Chem. d.-catbamic acid द्विगन्धांगतिक्तेयिक द्विकिरणीय . 
अम्ल n. 
diuranic acid (di- to uranium) Chem. d.-carbonic acid द्विगन्धांगारिक अम्ल द्विकिरणिक अम्ल 7. 
diurea-biurea Chem. द्विमिह m. d.-diazole द्विगन्ध-द्वयजवा . 
____d. acetylene द्विमिह शुक्तलेन्या . d.-ethidene द्विगन्ध-दक्ष्वेयन्य n. diureide Chem. द्विमिहेय 1. dithioic Chem. द्वैगन्धिक mfn. 
diuretic Med. मूत्रल (from सुश्रुत), मूत्र dithionic द्विगन्धिक 
वर्ध mfn. dithiol carbonic acid Chem. द्वि- d. salt मूत्रवर्ध लवण . 
गन्धवांगारिक अम्ल n. 
___diurnal (as birds) दिवाचर mfn. dithiole द्विगन्धवा. 
divalent Chem. युग्मसंयुज mfn. dithion Pharm. (a mixture of dithio 
salicylates used in veterinary dive निमज्जन n. 
medicines) द्वैगन्ध ।. 
dive bombing Mil. निमज्ज्य प्रस्फोटन M. dithionate Chem. द्विगन्धीय n. 
diverge vb. अपसरण 1. dithionic Chem. द्विगन्धिक mfn. . divergence Phys. अपसार M., अपसरण 1. 
d. acid द्विगन्धिक अम्ल ?. 
(=केन्द्रापसरण) dithioic द्वैगन्धिक 
divergency अपसारिता f., अपसार m. dithionite = hyposulphite Chem. divergent अपसारी (-इन्) mfn. 
(a salt of the type M.S.OR) diverging=divergent द्विगन्धित . 
diverging rays Phys. अपसारी रश्मि m. dithionous acid Chem. द्विगन्ध्य अम्ल n. diver's paralysis-caisson disease dithiosalicylate Chem. द्विगन्धनम्रलीय. =tunnel disease=compressed dithiosalicylic acid Chem. RETTFET air disease (bubbles of gases 
नम्रलिक अम्ल n. 
form in the blood) वातिबुद्बुदरोग m. dithiourazole Chem. द्विगन्धमूत्राजवा f. diverticulum (a blind pouch, tube, dithiourethane Chem. द्विगन्धमिक्षीण्य 1. or sac) Zool. अंधधान 1., अंधनाल, dithiozone-dithizone Chem. द्विगन्ध अंधस्यून m. 
प्रजारक m. 
divide I-intersectub. छेदन .. (मिथश dithymol Chem. द्विपर्णासीव m. 
छेदन) ditolyl=bitolyl Chem. fefacto n. 2 विभाजन . 
d. amine द्विविरारल तिक्ती / 
divided विभक्त, विभाजित mfn. d. tin द्विविरारल त्रपु. 
divided Math. भाजित mfn. [6 divided 
357 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
by 2 is equal to 3 ६ भाजित २ (से) dkg. (deka-kilogram) द. स. धा. (दश सम (है) ३ (के) ] 
सहन-धान्य) dividend Math. भाज्य, भाज्यक n. dkg (deca-gram) द. धा. (दश-धान्य) dividend Com. लाभांश m. 
dki (deka-liter) द. स्थ. (दश-प्रस्थ) d. equalization fund लाभांश-सम- dkm (deka-meter) द. मा. (दश-मान) ___ कारि-प्रणीवि . 
dl. (deci-liter) दि. स्थ. (दशि-प्रस्थ) d. warrant लाभांश-अधिपत्र n. 
dl- (a dextro- and levo- compound) cum d. लाभांश-सहित 
Cbem. द. वा.-(दक्ष-तथा वाम- संयोग) ex d. लाभांश-रहित 
d (1) - (a dextro- or levo- compound) final d. अंतिम लाभांश m. 
द.(वा.)- (दक्ष-अथवा वाम-संयोग) interim d. मध्ये-लाभांश m. 
dl,d-1, d+1 (dextro-levo) द. वा., unclaimed d. अनध्यथित लाभांश m. द.-बा, द.+वा. (दक्ष- वाम) dividendo Math. अन्तरनिष्पत्ति / dm. I (deca-meter) द. मा. (दश-मान) dividers (a pair of dividers) Math. 2 (deci-meter) दि. मा. (दशि-मान) 
विभाजक m. 
D. M. (diphenylamine chlorarsine) dividing machine विभाजन-यन्त्र ।. 
Chem. द्विद. नी. (द्विदर्शलतिक्ती नीरनेपी) divine law दैव नियम m. 
DNT, D. N. T. (di-nitro-toluene) diving bell निमज्जन-कोष्ठ m. 
Chem. द्विभूवि, द्वि. भू. वि (द्वि-भूय diving brake Mil. निमज्जन आरोध m. विरालेन्य) divinyl=bivinyl Chem. द्विद्राक्ष्यल r. Doab Geog. अन्तर्वेदी f. 
d. acetylene द्विद्राक्ष्यल शुक्तलेन्य n. __do away with vb. अपाकरण 1. (अप d. benzene द्विद्राक्ष्यल धूपेन्य N. 
away) d. ether द्विद्राक्ष्यल दक्षु m. 
Dobell's solution Pharm. (an aqu d. ketone द्विद्राक्ष्यल शौक्ता. 
eous solution of carbolic acid, divisibility भाज्यता. 
borax, sodium bicarbonate and division I भाग m., भाजन . 
glycerin) प्राम (प्रांगविक अम्ल....मधुरि) 2 Biol.=subphylum विभाग m. विलयन . 3Mil. (2 or : brigades) पतना f. Dobereiner's matchbox or lamp 
(=३ वाहिनी ; ancient word) 
[producing a flame alat by 4 (territorial division) fara m. passing hydrogen उ(दजन) gas division by factors Math. खण्ड-भाग over platinum म(हातु) sponge in 
m., खण्ड-भाजन ॥ 
contact with air] उमज्वाल दीप m. division of labour श्रम-भाजन 1. Dobereiner's triads Chem. (certain divisions (on a scale) Math. भाग m., groups of three closely related __ भागचिह्न 
elements, the atomic weight of divisor Math. भाजक m. 
one of which is the mean of dixanthylureaCbem. द्विपीतलमिह m. those of the other two) भारानुपाति dixylyl Chem: द्विकाष्ठलn. 
त्रिक. 
388 . 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
Dobner's violet = aminofuchsin =lauric acid Chem. Teata TKI 
iminochloride (a triphenyl fer दर्शल methane प्रोदीन्य dyestuff) त्रिप्रो hydroxy-dodecanic acid=sabi 
mirea m. 
nic acid sort-Egzil fra HFT n. dock I नौस्थात्र 1. 
dodecanol द्वादशीन्यव m. 2 Rly. (an enclosure) afa, ata m. dodecatoic acid (any fatty acid of dock dues Com. FTT-TF n. 
the formula C12H2402) Chem. docosane Chem. द्वाविंशीन्य n. 
द्वादशीयिक अम्ल . docosanoic acid=behenic acid dodecatyldodecyl 
Chem. afaritra FT n. 
dodecenal (dodecene + aldehyde) docosanol Chem. afasitrea m. 
Chem. द्वादशेन्यसु m. docosoic acid = behenic acid dodecene=dodecylene Chem. etapie 
Chem. ufaf HFT n. doctor I 21, 1794 m. 
dodecoaldehyde-lauric aldehyde 2 (an academic title) HEITSYTE Chem. द्वादशसुव्युद M. 
dodecoic acid=lauric acid Chem. doctor solution Chem. (sodium TTT anche FT na 
plumbite ühe solution contain dodecyl (dodecane to-yl) Chem. ing flowers of sulphur) ETETT QTGRICT 1. faarin. 
d. alcohol Gert ya m. doctrine i=theory are m. 
d. amine द्वादशल तिक्ती. 2 fHerr m. 
dodecylene Chem. द्वादशलेन्य n. document प्रलेख m. 
dogbush Bot. 1944 m. (Eng. is documentary Com. eta mfn. 
translated from Skt.) d. bill प्रलेखीय विपत्र .. 
doggrass श्वघास m. d. credit Econ. statele stray m. Dog Star=Sirius a m. (ancient d. draft प्रलेखीय विकर्ष m. 
word) dodder #itat f. 
dogwood=cornus 481765 m. dodec-, dodeca- - 
dolerophanite Mineral. (basic copper dodecagon Math. GTGTLE m. 
sulphate in volcanic sublimates) dodecahedron Geom. GTGRTC14 m. ताम्रशिज m. (-इज for खनिज mineral) dodecahydrate Chem. ESTIVE 1. dolicho-cephalic, dolicho-cepha dodecahydrated Chem. BERIMIEHET __lous दीर्घ-कपाल mfn. (not शीर्ष; See 
mfn. 
cephalic index) dodecanal=lauric aldehyde Chem. Dolichos Bot. Gyufa f. (-far for storfer 
Cortina m. 
genus) dodecane Chem. Eft 1. 
dolomite = magnesian limestone dodecanic acid=dodecanoic acid TUSI m. 
359﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
dolomol (magnesium stearate, con- domicile अधिवास m., अधिवसन 1. 
taining small amounts of the domiciled fra mfn. oleate and 7% MgO; used as a domiciled bill Com. शोधनस्थानि विपत्र dusting powder) Chem. भ्रावसीयक . 
m. 
domicile of a bill Com. विपत्र-शोधन dolphin शिंशुमार m. 
स्थान .. domain Math. मण्डल n., प्रदेश m. dominance sunt f. dome (upper part of a furnace) dominant प्रभवत् mfn. 
छाद m. 
dominant character Biol. प्रभवद् गुण 7. dome-face Cryst. (a roof-shaped dominant species Bot. sharoitla f. 
crystal face) छादानीक 1. 
domingite=warrenite (a lead sul bracydome (the plane parallel phostibate) सीश्वं जिज m. (-इज for 
to the shorter axis) ह्रस्वच्छाद m. खनिज mineral) clinodome (parallel to the in- domingo violet A = azo wool 
clined axis) प्रवणच्छाद m. 
violet 4 B_Col. Ind. (domingo macrodome (parallel to the dyes are azo mordant dyes for 
longer axis) दीर्घच्छाद m. 
wool; azo acid dyes of good orthodome (parallel to the ortho fastness to light, etc. अज रंजक, 
axis) लम्बच्छाद m. 
अजोर्णा रंजक, अजाम्ल रंजक) domestic गृह- गृह्य mfn. 
donation दान . domestic animal गृह्य पशु m. 
donaxine=gramine Chem. (a pro domestic dog=Canis familiaris tein, m. 133, from barley) suit f. 
गृह-कुक्कुर m. 
donee दान-ग्रहीता (-तृ) m. domestic duck Zool. ग्राम-कारण्ड m. donor दाता (-त) m. domestic economy पारिवारिक अर्थ- donor-actor (in induced reaction) 
व्यवस्था 
Physical Chem. दाता=कर्ता (-तृ) m. domestic fowl Zool. गृह-कुक्कुट, ग्राम- Donovan's solution Pharm. (a solu 
कुक्कुट m. 
tion of arsenious and mercuric domesticine Chem. (an alkaloid iodides) ने-प-जम्बेय विलयन . 
from NANDIN the sacred bam- doob grass Bot. af f. boo of Japan, Nandina domestica) Doonagiri Geog. द्रोणाचल m. नन्दिनी / 
door द्वार n. domestic pigeon Zool. गृह-कपोत m. door curtain द्वारपट m. 
(ancient word) 
dopa Biochem. (di-oxy-phenyl-ala domestic scale (balance) गृह-तुला f. nine द्वि-जार-दर्शल-सुवी) द्विजादा . domeykite Mineral. (copper arse- Doppler effect Phys. वारं-विपाक m. 
nide) ताम्रनेपिज m. (-इज for खनिज (वारंवारता-परिवर्तन)। 
mineral) 
dormant Bot. सुषुप्त min., स्वपत् 360, 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
M 
1 निष्क्रिय पु 
(-इन्) Mom 
double sice) द्विस 
m. 
d. bud स्वपत् कुड्मल 1., स्वपत्-कलिका f. dot बिन्दुक m. d. embryo सुषुप्त भ्रूण n. 
dotriacontane Chem. द्वात्रिशीन्य n. dormant Com. निष्क्रिय mfn. 
dotted fargferia mfn. d. capital निष्क्रिय-पुंजी f. 
dotted line Engin. त्रुटित-रेखा f. (dots d. partner निष्क्रिय भागी (-इन्) m. or oftener dashes) dormiol (used as a hypnotic) Chem. double 1 (two) fan 
निद्राप m. dorsad=dorsally Zool. (toward the 3 (twofold) द्विगुण mfn. 
dorsum or back) अभिपृष्ठ, अभ्युत्तर 4 (pair) युग्म 1. dorsal 1 (back) 755 
double account Com. द्वि-लेखा . ____2 (upper) उत्तर 
d. column द्वि-स्कम्भm. dorsal aorta पृष्ठ-महारोहिणी . 
d. dealing द्विमुख व्यवहार m. dorsal blood vessel Zool. पृष्ठ-रुधिर d. effect द्वि-प्रभाव m. 
वाहिनी 
d. endowment f&-STTT 17. dorsal fissure Zool. उत्तर विदर m. 
d. entry द्वि-प्रविष्टि . dorsal pore Zool. पृष्ठ-रन्ध्र १. 
d. entry system of book-keep dorsal surface Zool. पृष्ठ-तल . 
____ing पुस्तपालन-द्विप्रविष्टि-पद्धति f. dorsal vessel Zool. पृष्ठ-वाहिनी . 
d. option क्रय-विक्रय-विकल्प, उभय-विकल्प dorsifixed anther Bot. पृष्ठलग्न परा 
गाशय m. 
double algebra=complex algebra dorsiventral Bot. उत्तराधर, उत्तराधरिक (from complex quantity संकरराशि) dorso-intestinal vessel Zool. पृष्ठान्त्र संकर बीजगणित . 
वाहिनी. 
double arm (crank) Macb. द्विबाहु dorso-lumbar vein Zool. पृष्ठ-कटि- double bond A Chem. द्विबन्ध , M. 
सिरा . 
(Sis the Brahmi द, the parent of dose (the measured quantity of a all Indian scripts) 
medicine to be taken at one time double - bond isomerism Chem. or in a given period of time) द्विबन्ध-समाजता . मात्रा 
double brilliant scarlet Col. Ind. daily d. दैनिक-मात्रा f. 
द्विगुण भासुर शोण m. fatal d.-lethal d. घातक-मात्रा double dash प्रास-द्वय ।. 
maximum d. भूयिष्ठ-मात्रा . double decomposition = meta minimum d. अल्पिष्ठ-मात्रा 
____ thesis Chem. द्विगुण विबन्धन . poisonous d.=toxic d. विषालु- double distilled द्विरासुत mfn. 
double distilled water Chem. द्विरासुत safed. अभय-मात्रा . 
जल 1. single d. (given only once) double expansion Macb. द्विविस्तरण n. 
सकृन्मात्रा f. 
double fertilization Bot. द्विनिषेचन , 
मात्रा. 
361 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
double green Col. Ind. fargur aft m. double tabulation Statistics forgot double linkage = double bond h ulen n. 
Chem. fam m. 
double-threaded Engin. Fanfara mfn. double march Drill अधिप्रयाणम् double transfer fer-HERTHUT n. double ordinate Math. falfc f. double union = double bond double pane Hygiene युग्म काचपट्टm. Chem. fahm m. double ponceau Col. Ind. द्विगुण अधि- double vitriol Chem. युग्म काचर ।. 
TITUTET m. 
double-walled belljar fafufprei PET double refined iron हिस्संस्कृत अयस् FeT m. 
double weighing -- transposition double refraction Optics (refraction method, method of Gauss 
_in two directions) द्विभुजायन n. 
FG FTTETT N. double-riveted द्विपंक्ति-लवंगित mfn. doubloon, Roman ocher प्रोद्रक्तपीत 
triple-riveted त्रिपंक्ति-लवंगित mfm. m. double rule of three (rule of five) doubly ionized Chem. kyufa mfn. 
___Math. पञ्चराशिक m. 
singly ionized एकायनित mfn. double salt Chem. द्विलवण 1. 
doubly primary=diprimary complex salt offee 7901 n. doubly prismatic-diprismatic double samara Bot. नैक-सपक्ष n. doubtful संदिग्ध mfn. 
(many have two or more than d. debts Com. Pret Fus n. two winged seeds) 
reserve for d. debts Com. Fiftet double scarlet Col. Ind. FETOT TTT m. EU-pfafa f. double shear Mech. द्विकल्पन n. 
douche प्रसेक m., प्रसेचन 1. (ancient double-sheaved (having two groo word), ETA n. 
ves) Phys. fase () mfn. dough face n. double strap Mach. उपपट्ट-द्वय n. Doulton filter Hygiene (see Pas double-surface condenser Chem. teur-Chamberland filter) starojuma 
Facet FF m. 
S T m. doublet=duplet 1 (a pair of elec- dourine Veter. (a disease caused 
trons which is shared by two by Trypanosoma equiperdum) atoms and corresponds with a zatfe-TTT m. single nonpolar bond; a system D. 0. V. Chem. (double oil of of two equal and oppositely vitriol, sulphuric acid) at (T. electrified particles placed near 7.Tati TFT) together; two lenses of different D. O. V. Chem. (distilled oil of focal lengths, combined....) vitriol) AT. FT. . (Arga #7TR-RIFT) mn. 
dove Zool. #1189 m. (dove is synony . 2 (one of a pait) yra n. 
mous with pigeon; but pigeon 
362 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
is a somewhat broader term; dracoalban (a white substance from 
doves are smaller species) ___dragon's blood) प्रवेत्रश्वेती. Dover's powder Pharm. अप्यहिफेनी-क्षोद draconic acid=anisic acid Chem. 
m. 
प्रवेत्रिक अम्ल n. dove-tailed Macb. कपोतपुच्छित mfn. draconis sanguis=dragon's blood dove-tailing Mach. कपोतपच्छन 1 draconyl Chem. प्रवेत्रल n. dovetail into each other परस्परानु- draconylic acid=anisic acid Chem. 
बन्धन, कपोतपुच्छन . 
प्रवेत्रलिक अम्ल n. dowel Mach. (a pin, usually of dracoresene, dracoresin प्रवेत्रोद्यास m. 
___circular section) समाणि f. 
Dracunculidae Bot. नागरूप-कुल 1. Dowlatabad Geog. देवगिरि m. 
(cf. Marathi and Gujarati नारू) down, downward अध: 
Dracunculus Bot. नागरूपति 1. (-ति for down-stroke Phys. न्याघात m. 
प्रजाति genus) down the stream = with the D. medinensis सामान्य नागरूप m. 
stream अनुस्रोत 
draft I Com. विकर्ष m. downward, down अध: 
bank d. अधिकोष-विकर्ष m. downward displacement Chem. clean d. सामान्य विकर्ष m. 
अधो-निरसन . 
documentary d. प्रलेखीय विकर्ष m. downward force अधोमुख बल, अधोग बल 2 प्रारूप 
drafting Com. विकर्षण १. downy mildew Bot. तूलासिता . drag (wind resistance to an aero dozen द्वादशक n. (from याज्ञवल्क्य) plane) वायुरोध m. dr. Com. I (debit) वि. (विकलन) draglink Automobile (a rod connec ____2 (debtor) अध. (अधमर्ण) 
ting the steering-gear lever to dr. (dram) शा. (शाण, शाणक) 
the steering knuckle) संयष्टि f. ap. dr. (apothecaries' dram) भै. dragonfiy Zool. व्याध-पतंग m. __ शा. (भैषजिक शाण) 
dragon's blood=sanguis draconis av. dr. (avoirdupois dram) शा. Pharm. प्रवेत्र-यास m. 
(शाणको 
dragon tree = Dracaena draco fi. dr. (fluid dram) त. शा. (तरल शाण) प्रनागवृक्ष m. drab (colour) अवरक्तपीत m. 
drain Hygiene प्रणाल m. Dracaena draco = dragon tree drainage जलोत्सारण 1. 
प्रनाग वृक्ष m. 
drainage of soil भूजलोत्सारण 1. dracaenic acid Chem. (from Dra drainage tube=cannula शोषनाली f. 
caena draco, the dragon tree drain air Hygiene प्रणाल-वायु m. 
प्रनागवक्ष) प्रनागिक अम्ल n. 
drain cock Mach. स्राव-शिखी (-इन् ) m. drachm=dram 
drainer arqefi m. Draco Astron. परिध्रुवनाग m. 
drain off vb. अपवहन n. 363 
M. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
dram I (dr. ap.; 3 scruples) शाण m. ___2 (the art of delineation) औद्रैखिकी 
(शा., भै. शा.; ३ प्रमाष) 2 (dr.; 27 11/32 grains) शाणक m. 3 (outlining a figure) उद्रेख m., (शा.; २७ ११/३२ यव) 
उद्रेखण 1. dr. ap. (apothecaries' dram) भै. शा. d. board उद्रेख-फलक n. 
(भैषजिक शाण) 
d. pen उद्रेख-लेखनी . Draper effect=photochemical in d. pencil उद्रेख-अंकनी f. 
duction भा-रसायनिक प्ररोचन 1. 
d. pin उद्रेख-सूची /. Draper law = absorption law drawings account Com. आहरण-लेखा . 
प्रचूषण-नियम m. 
drawings of reference Engin. अभ्युद्देश drastic Chem. Freue mfn. 
उद्रेख m. draught (current of air, gas, etc.) drawn at full strength Engin. पूर्णबलेन 
वहति । 
उद्रेखित nfn. d. guage TECUTATT m. 
drawn heavily Engin. गुरु-उद्रेखित,गुरुतया d. tube वहति-नाल m. 
___ उद्रेखित mfn. draught animal वाह-प्राणी (-इन्), भार- drawn lightly Engin. लघु-उद्रेखित, लघुतया ___ वाही पशु m. 
. उद्रेखित mfn. draughtsman प्रारूपकार m. 
draw of the cotter Mach. स्फानी-कर्ष draughtsman-ship प्रारूप-कर्म 1. dr. av. (avoirdupois dram) शा. draw-tube आकर्ष-नाल, उदाकर्ष नाल m. 
(शाणक) 
dreadnought Mil. अभीत m. draw I Math. कर्षण 1. 
Dresden blue मध्य-नील m. 2 (as a cheque) लेखन १. 
dress n. वेष m. 3 Com. आहरण . 
dress vb. Mil. (to arrange troops d. a bill विपत्र-लेखन :. 
in an evenly interspaced straight d. a cheque धनादेश-लेखन n. 
_line) संरेखण . d.- back (the sum paid back by dressing Med. I (cotton lint, etc.) 
government upon certain बंधनसंभार m. classes of goods exported on 2 (materials for protecting a which duty has already been wound) वणगोप m. paid) प्रत्याहृत 1. 
dr. 4. (Huid dram) त. शा. (तरल शाण) drawee Com. आहार्टी (-इन् ) m. (आहार्य- dried शुष्क, शोषित mfn. 
मस्यास्तीति) 
dried milk शोषित दुग्ध n. d. in case of need प्रयोजन-आहार्यो drier शोषक m. 
(-इन्) m. 
drift 1 (uncertain motion of a drawer Com. पाहा (-) m. 
galvanometer needle when re drawers (of a cabinet) उदाकर्ष m. 
gistering a false e. m. f., the drawing I Com. आहरण 1. 
passage of an electron from its 
ATLal 
L 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
-- 
normal position without com- driven shaft Mach. चालित-ईषा /. plete transference) अपवहन . driven tightly Mach. दृढ-चालित nfn. 2 Aeronautics ( lateral velocity of driver चालक m. an aircraft, due to air currents, driving shaft Mach. चालक-ईषा f. 
etc.) पार्श्ववेग m., पार्श्वगति . 
driving wheel चालक चक्र n. 3 Mil. (deflection of a projectile) dromedary (one-humped camel) व्याकोच m. 
एकककुद् उष्ट्र m. 4 (of wind) अपवहन 1. 
drop I पात m. drift copper Geol. अपोढ ताम्र. 
2 बिन्दु, द्रप्स m. drikold=dry ice Chem. शुष्क हिम n. drop arm Automobile पाति-बाह m. drill 1 (an instrument for making drop black (so called because the 
holes) व्यध m. 
commercial product is moulded breast d. उरसा-व्यध m. 
with a little glue-water into workshop d. शिल्पिशाला-व्यध m. pear-shaped drops) Col. Ind. द्रप्स 2 (military exercise) योग्या f. (an काल m. cient word) 
drop-forged Macb. पात-कुट्टित mfn. battle drill संग्राम-योग्या . . 
(short for पातघन-तापकुट्टित)। drilled Mach, afaa mfn. 
drophammer Macb. पात-घन m. drilling Macb. व्यधन 1. (from व्यध drophammer-man Macb. पातपनिक m. 
drill) 
drop-measure bulb Chem, fare-HTT drimin (from Drimys winteri=win- ig m. 
ter's bark शिशिरवल्क) शिशिरवल्कि f. dropper बिन्दुपाती (-इन्) m. Drimys winteri = winter's bark dropping बिन्दुपातन 1., बिन्दुपाती (-इन्) 
शिशिर-वल्क m. 
d. bottle fargyrfa-7797 f. drinking glass पान-काचक . 
d. funnel बिन्दुपाती निवाप m. drinking water पेय जल n. 
d. phial बिन्दुपाति-कूपिका f. drip Mach. द्रप्स m. 
d. pipette Chem. बिन्दुपाति नाडक n. drip vb. (to let fall or to fall in drop reaction = spot test Chem. ____drops द्रप्स) द्रप्सन . 
बिन्दु-प्रतिक्रिया . drip, dripping I द्रप्सन 1. 
drop reaction paper Chem. førg 2 (a vessel) द्रप्सपात्र 
। प्रतिक्रिया पत्र n. drip feed Mach. द्रप्स-प्रदाय m. drop weight Physical Chem. बिन्दु-भार dripper Chem. द्रप्सक m. 
m. drip pipe Chem. द्रप्स-नाड. 
drop zinc बिन्दु-कुप्यातु m. drive vb. चालन n. 
Drosera Bot. (a genus of insecti drive fit=driving fit Macb. चालन vorous herbs) कीटाशति f. (-ति for 
अन्वायुक्ति 
प्रजाति genus) driven Fifaa mfn. 
drosera=sundew कीटाश m. 365 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
Droseraceae Bot. कीटाश-कुल 1. 
dry concentration शुष्क संकेन्द्रण 1. drosophila Zool. कदली-मक्षी f. ___dry distillation Chem. शुष्क आसवन n. Drosophila Zoal. (a genus contain- dry-dye vb. अजल-रंजन' 1. 
ing the common fruit fly or dry earth system Hygiene sfat-499 banana fiy) कदलीमक्ष्याति f. (प्राति for पद्धति प्रजाति genus) 
dryer शोषक m. D. melanogaster=banana fly dry fruit शुष्क फल n. 
Zool. सामान्य कदली-मक्षी . dry gangrene शुष्क कोथ m. Drosophilidae Zool. कदलीमक्षी-वंश m. dry gas शुष्क वाति m. dross Chem. सिंहाणकm. 
dry ice शुष्क हिम .. drought Bot. I (dryness) शोष m. drying Chem. शोषण 1. 
2 ( no rain) अवृष्टि f. 
d. agent शोषण-कर्ता (1) m. drug (any substance used as a me d. apparatus शोषण-साधित्र, शोषित्र 
dicine) भेषज.. cruded. (unrefined) असंस्कृत भेषज d. apparatus, mercury पारद-शोषण 
साधित्र n. inorganicd. अप्रांगारिक भेषज.. 
d. chamber शोषण-वेश्म n. organic d. प्रांगारिक भेषज १. 
d. cloth शोषण-वस्त्र n. druggery (a place of sale for drugs) d. oil शोषण-तैल 1. 
भेषजापण m. 
d. oven शोषण-कन्दु m. druggist=chemist and druggist= d. rate meter शोषण-गति-मान m. 
pharmaceutical chemist भैषजिक d. tower शोषण-प्रस्थाणु m. 
d. tube शोषण-नाल m. druggist = pharmaceutist भेषजविद् dryish आशुष्क mfn. ___m.. 
dry kiln शुष्क आपाक m. drug grinding mill भेषज-पेषणी . dry measure शुष्क माप m. drum डिडिम m., भेरी f. 
dry meter शुष्क मान m. drupe (fruit) Bot. अष्ठिफल ? 
dry method शुष्क-रीति f. dry शुष्क mfn. 
dryness शुष्कता . dry-air pump शुष्क-वायु उदञ्च m. Dryopteris Bot. (a very large cosmo dry battery Elec. शुष्क-समूहा . 
politan genus of ferns) FETTUiTurfer dry beriberi Med. कदन्न-शूल m. 
f. (-fa for stopfer genus) dry-bulb thermometer Phys. शुष्क- dry period (of a cow), शुष्क काल m. ___कन्द तापमान m. 
dry pipe शुष्क नाडn. dry. cell Elec. शुष्क-कोशा. 
dry plate Photog. शुष्क पट्ट m. dry clean, dry cleaning अजल धावन, drypophantin Chem. (colouring 
शुष्क धावन . 
matter of red pea. gall) रक्तकलाय dry coal शुष्क अंगार . 
स्फोटि 
m. 
366 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
AAAAAAAMA 
- 
- 
dry powder शुष्क क्षोद m. 
d. hydrochloride पित्वक्षाद्रुवी उद dry-powder extinguisher शुष्क-क्षोद नीरेय . __ शामयिता (-तृ) m. 
d. sulphate पित्वक्षाद्रुवी शुल्बीय. dry steam शुष्क प्रबाष्प m. 
ducal राजकीय mfn. dry steel शुष्क वज्रायस . 
ducal coronet राजक-मुकुटिका f. dry sulphuric acid शुष्क शुल्बारिक अम्ल duchess राजकी. __n. 
duck Zool. कारंडm. dry test शुष्क-परीक्षा . 
duckbill = platypus = duckmole Ds, Dy (dysprosium) Chem. चु(चुम्बला) Zool. (a mammal having a bill D-trap Hygiene ब्राह्म-ध-रुध m. 
resembling that of a duck) कारण्ड dual Chem. द्वैत । 
चञ्चुm. dualin (an explosive, 50% nitro- duck blue=indigo carmine Forest 
glycerin भूयमधुरि and 50% nitrated तिनील mfn. 
sawdust काष्ठधूलि) भूमधूलि . duckling Zool. कारण्डक M. (from dualism Chem. (dualistic system ot कारण्ड duck) ____ theory) द्वैतवाद m. 
duckmole=duckbill dualistic formula Chem. aditu 7 n. duco (a trade name for lacquer) dualistic system or theory द्वैत वाद m. अभिलाक्ष m. . duatol black (azo direct dye for duct Anat. प्रणाली . 
unions)Col. Ind. मेल काल m. ductile प्रतन्य mfn. 
d. blue (azo direct dye for ductili-meter प्रतन्यता-मान m. a unions) मेल नील m. 
ductility प्रतन्यता. d. bordeaux (azo direct dye d. machine प्रतन्यता-यंत्र n. ____ for unions) मेल कपिशक m. 
d. mould प्रतन्यता-संचक m. d. brilliant blue (azo direct dye ductilize vb. (to make ductile) Tarta 
for unions) मेल भासुर नील m. 
करण 1. d. brown (azo direct dye for ductless gland Anat. अप्रणाल ग्रन्थि m. 
unions) मेल बभ्र m. 
ductule Anat. प्रणालिका d. scarlet (azo direct dye for ductus deferens रेतः-प्रणाली /.. 
unions) TT TTCT m. 
ductus ejaculatorius-ejaculatory dubhium=ytterbium 
_duct Zool. निषेचन-प्रणाली . Duboisia Bot. (shrubs having ductus endolymphaticus Zool. अन्त 
___ corky wood त्वक्षा-द्रु) पित्वक्षागृति (-ति लसीका-प्रणाली. 
for प्रजाति genus) 
Dudley apparatus Chem. (for the duboisine (from Duboisia myoporoi determination of sulphur in 
des) Chem. पित्वक्षाद्रुवी f. 
iron and steel by the bromine d. hydrobromide पित्वक्षाद्रुवी उददुरेय method) दुरायसि-गन्धनिश्चेत्र . 
due date Com. दातव्य-तिथि. 
367 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
average due date माध्य दातव्य तिथि dull red न्यवरक्त m. 
dull red heat न्यवरक्त ऊष्मा m. due east सम्यक्पूर्व 
Dulong's and Petit's law Phys. dues Com. दातव्य, प्राप्य M. 
परमाणूष-नियम m. dugong I (an aquatic herbivorous Dulong's and Petit's method 
mammal) जलगो f., m. 
(absolute expansion of liquids) 2=sea-cow समुद्रगो f., M. 
Phys. प्रकेवलतरल-विस्तरण-रीति f. dugong oil (from sea-cow) Chem. Dumas bulb (a thin, blown glass __ समुद्रगो-तैल . 
bulb drawn out to a fine open duke राजक m. 
ing) चञ्चु-कन्द m. duke vb. राजक-करण.. 
Dumas method (for the estima dukedom राजक-विषय m., राजक-पद 1., tion of nitrogen in organic com 
राजकता. 
pounds from its volume) Chem. dukeling राजकपुत्र, उपराजक m. 
भू-परिमा रीति . dukely राजकीय, राजकोचित mfn. 
Dumas's method Phys. Chem. कन्द dukery राजकता /., राजक-विषय m., राजक- रीति . 
भवन n. 
dumbbell famus n. dulcamara [the bittersweet कट्वामधु Dumont's blue=azure blue 
(sweetish आमधु and bitter) Solanum dump I vb. (to let fall in a mass; dalcamara कट्वामधु(Lat. dulcis sweet to unload, as from a cart by + amarus bitter) 
tilting it) राशिपातन 1. dulcamarin Chem. कट्वामध्वि f. 
21. राशिपात m. dulcigen Chem. आमधुजन M. dung करीष m. dulcin Chem. प्रामवि . 
dung bacteria कारीष शाकाणु m. dulcine Cbem. आमध्वी f. 
Dunning colorimeter (especially dulcitol Chem. आमधुव m. 
adapted to the estimation of dulcose Chem. प्रामधुम १. 
phenolsulphonephthalein which Dulin rotarex (a centrifuge, used ___is excreted with the urine) Chem. 
for determining the mineral मूत्रे-दर्शवादि-मान m. matter in asphalts, etc.) Chem. duodecimal = duodenary द्वादशमय धूम्रजतौ-खनिज निश्चेत्र १. 
mfn. dull I (lacking brilliance) प्रभासुर, मन्द, duodenary (containing twelve) 
निष्प्रभ Mfm. 
द्वादशमय mfn. 2 (of low saturation and low duodenum Anat. ग्रहणी f. (from सुश्रुत) brilliance) न्यव 
duplet यमक . dull blue न्यवनील m. 
duplex Chem., Zool. je mfn. dull colour Phys. निष्प्रभ वर्ण m. duplex vb. द्वैधीकरण . dull green न्यवहरि m. . 
___d. process द्वैध-विधा f. 368 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
n. 
d. pump 365 m. 
fusain (containing po volatile d. slide rule 9-779-10 m. 
ETT matter) 764 m. d. steel Metal. a 291176 n. 
vitrain (Lat. vitrum glass) 797 m. duplicable feque mfn. 
duralium (an alloy of 93-95% Al.) duplicate I adj. feto mfn. 
5675 m. 2 n. (a copy, a transcript) ufarfalfa f. duralumin (durable + aluminium) d. bill Com. faqat-tfafarfo f. 
FRETE, M. d. copy ufafaft, faci-fateft f. dura mater Anat. दृढ़-तानिका f. 
d. of a bill Com. fayz-ufaff f. duramen=heart-wood Bot. 1756 duplicate vb. i (to double) FESTUTTT n. m. 
2 (to make a copy) ufafafanuT n. duranthrene blue Col. Ind. FITFT duplicate Math. afira mfn. 
TOT to m. d. ratio afia-fogfer f. 
d. brilliant violet HUTTETTHULE duplicating machine = duplica 
Ta framfer m. tor (hecto-graph) stafafa-t =sfat d. brown स्थायिक्षामेण्य बm. fafaa n. (118-Fate) 
d. claret स्थायिक्षामण्य रक्तिरा. duplicator प्रतिलिपित्र . 
d. dark blue स्थायिक्षामेण्य असित नील duplicity an. duplo- Chem. Faktor 
d. golden orange PIITATTÀCT sauf Du Pont nitrometer (for the deter 
IT m. mination of nitrogen in ex d. green स्थायिक्षामण्य हरि m. 
plosives) Chem. 36419-F an. d. olive स्थायिक्षामण्य तैलबदर m.. Du Pont oil yellow=fast oil or d. red स्थायिक्षामण्य रक्त m. 
spirit yellow 
d. red-violet स्थायिक्षामेण्य रक्त-नील Du Pont orange RO=orange RO stiller m. , Du Pont purpurine io B=benzo d. violet स्थायिक्षामेश्य नीललोहित m. 
purpurine io B 
d. yellow स्थायिक्षामण्य पीत m. Du Pont tartrazine O = tartar durasol acid blue=alizarin bril 
yellow 
liant blue durability Com. स्थास्नुता f. 
d. fast blue=helio fast blue durable Com. स्थास्न min. ancient duration अवधि, स्थितिकाल, कालावधि m., 
word) 
1917TT J. durain (Lat. durus hard; composed duration of collision Physical Chem. 
of lenses or layers of finely com- -FT-HITT . 
· minuted woody debris) TTT m. durene (Lat. durus hard; because 
(ar hard+ C). 
solid ur at ordinary tempera clarain (Lat. clarus bright) #TER. tures) Chem. Pirate n. 
durenol Chem, guya m. 
m. 
3699 
24﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
duridine Chem. सान्द्रयी f. 
duster धूलिमार्जm. durindone blue Col. Ind. स्थायि-निनीला dusting धूलन .. 
नील m. 
d. powder धूलन क्षोद m. . d. red स्थायिनिनीला रक्त m. 
cotton d. कसि-धूलन । d. scarlet स्थायिनिनीला शोण m. 
forest d. वन-धूलन 1. during अन्तरे (H. में) 
Dutch foil, leaf, gold (tombac) duriron (a resistant alloy of 84.5% Chem. ताम्रकुप्यातु पर्ण, पत्र, सुवर्ण n. ____Fe) दृढायस . 
Dutch liquid=ethylene chloride durite (a phenol-formaldehyde Dutch metal=tombac ताम्रकुप्यातु m., __plastic) Chem. दव्युद m. 
चतुस्ताम्रकुप्यातु (80% copper, 20% durium (a synthetic resin used par- zinc) 
ticularly for phonograph records) Dutch oil=ethylene chloride Chem. स्थिरोद्यास m. 
Dutch pink=flavine lake durochrome yellow Col. Ind. स्थायि- Dutch process (pots are stacked)= 
वर्णक पीत m. 
_stack process घटचयन-विधा. duro ink (for writing on glass). Dutch white (a pigment consisting 
काच-मसी f.. 
of one part of white lead to three durol Chem. सान्द्रव m. 
of permanent white) तुरीय-श्वेतक m. durol black = sulphonine black Dutch white lead=white lead durometer काठिन्यमान m. 
Dutch yellow = mordant yellow durophenine brown Col, Ind. स्थायि GRO 
दर्शी बभ्रुm. 
duties of citizens जानपद-कर्तव्य n., duroquinone (durene + quinone) जानपद-धर्म m. ____Chem. सान्द्रेण्यविज्वरा f. 
duty I कर्तव्य 1., धर्म m. duryl (durene + -y! Chem. Free n. 2 Com. बलि, कर m. durylene Chem. सान्द्रलेन्य। 
ad valorem d. अर्हा-कर m. durylic acid Chem. सान्द्रलिक अम्ल n. customs d. निराकाम्य-कर m. dust धूलि f. 
excised. उत्पाद-कर m. d. bin धूलि-भाण्ड 1. 
export d. निष्काम्य-कर m. d. catcher Chem. धूलि-ग्राह m. import d. प्रवेश्य-कर m. d. chamber धूलि-वेश्म n. 
octroid. द्वारादेय-कर m. (from राज d. pan धूलि-भाजन १. 
तरंगिणी) d. precipitator धूलि-निस्सादक m. revenue d. आगम-कर m. d. proof धूलि-रुध् mfn. 
specific d. (chargeable on num cosmic d. (floating in the outer b er, weight or measure) qft _layers of atmosphere) औद्भौम- . माण-कर m. 
धूलि . 
dvi-, dwi- (from Sanskrit fa-) Chem. industrial d. औद्योगिक-धूलि f. 
370 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
AAA 
C0 
dvicesium = virginium, verium, 
russium Chem. द्विद्युतातुक्षुद्रातु m. dvimanganese = rhenium Chem. 
द्विलोहक n=बाष्पातु m. dvitellurium = polonium Chem. 
द्विवंगक 1.-तोयातु m. dwarf Bot. वामन m. dwarfism Zool. वामनता. dwarf males Bot. वामन पुमान् m. dwarf shoots Bot. वामन प्ररोह m. dwi-=dvi dwt. (pennyweight) म. माष (महामाष) dy चर (differential coefficient) Home (partial differential coeffi 
चाय 
cient) 8. चिर (incremental ratio) 
Dy (dysprosium) Chem. चु (चुम्बला) dyad n. Chem. (a bivalent element, 
atom or radical) द्विसंयुज m. 
monad (monovalent) एकसंयुज m. polyad (with a valency greater ___than two) पुरुसंयुज m. 
triad (trivalent) त्रिसंयुज M. dye (a colouring stuff ) रंजक m. 
d. bath (a solution of a dye) 
रंजक-विलयन n. d. pot रंजक-पात्र n. 
d.-stuff रंजक-द्रव्य . dyeing रंजन . ___d. agent रंजन-कर्ता (-तृ) m. 
dyer's oak = gall oak = Quercus 
_infectoria Bot. रंगद वऋm. dyes Chem. रंजक m. 
acid d. अम्ल रंजक m. acid-mordantd.अम्ल-स्थापक रंजक m. 
acridine d. उग्री रंजक m. adjective d.=mordant d. artificial d. कृत्रिम रंजक m. azined. अजीवी रंजक m. azod. अज रंजक m. bacteriologic d. शाकाणु-रंजक M. basic d. पैठिक रंजक M. direct d. अनाश्रित रंजक m. leucord.=vat d. सित रंजक m. 
mineral d. खनिज रंजक m. 
mixed d. मिश्रित रंजक m. monogenetic (yielding but one 
shade)d. एकच्छाय रंजक m. mordant d. स्थापक रंजक . natural d. प्राकृत रंजक m. neutral d. क्लीब रंजक m. nitro d. भूय रंजक m. nitroso d. भूय्य रंजक m. oxyazined. जाराजीवी रंजक m. oxyazod. जाराज रंजक m. oxyketoned. जारशौक्ता रंजक m. polygenetic d. पुरुच्छाय रंजक m. pyronined. अग्न्यायी रंजक m. specific d. विशेष रंजक m. substantive d.=direct d. sulphited. शुल्बित रंजक m. thiazine d. गन्धाजीवी रंजक m. triphenylmethane d. fargelangte 
रंजक m. vat d. (the dye is reformed when 
exposed to the air) वात रंजक, 
कुण्ड रंजक m. __ vegetable d. उद्भिद् रंजक m. ' dyestuff रंजक m., रंजक-द्रव्य . dyeware=dyestuff dyke धरण (ancient word), जलधरण m. dymal = didymium salicylate 
Chem. पीलीय-पीतश्यामला नम्रलीय. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
dynad Chem. (the intra-atomic field dyne Phys. 97 n. (Ef gram, 
of force) for the 
unit of force; cf. Stan poundal) dynalkol (a mixture of gasoline, megadyne (one million) peer 
alcohol and benzene; used as a 
11. motor fuel) Chem. aega m. (arit i centimeter d. TTHET ETTE 1. , wa-ol) 
d. seven (107 dynes) TOT 17 dynamic safios mfn. 
dypnone (di -+ hypnone) Chem. dynamic allotropy = tautomerism ferauit f. 
प्रावर्तना (short for प्रवैगिक अपरावर्तना) dys- दुर्-, दुस्- (opp. of eu- सु-) dynamic economics गतिशील अर्थशास्त्र dysalbumose Chem. दु:श्वितधु n. 
1. 
dyscrasite = antimonial silver dynamic formula प्रवैगिक सूत्र 
(a native compound of antimony dynamic friction = sliding fric and silver) अजरूपियज m. (-इज for 
tion Phys. gå fra pe=179 m. after mineral) dynamic isomerism प्रवैगिक सभाजता. dysentery आमातिसार.m. dynamic refraction चलाक्ष-भुजायन n. dysentery bacteriophage आमातिसार dynamics प्रवैगिकी . 
TTTTT47 m. 1 (kinematics) susait f. 
dyslysin Biochem. gift f. 2 (kinetics) fit f. 
dysmenorrhea Med. (painful mens -dynamics a firepit f. (from safrait) truation) 2:35 n. dynamite (a class of explosives dysoxidize vb. Biochem. geftu n. 
Grene, usually a mixture of trinit- dyspepsia Med. 7510 ., 91 m. roglycerin TNG FY with an ab- dyspnea Med. (difficult breathing) sorbing inert material) af te m. 
n. dynamo=dynamo-electric genera- dysprosia Chem. (dysprosium oxide) 
tor=dynamo-electric machine 
=electric generator fael FT m., dysprosium Chem. FETT f. 
· faan. 
d. acetate चुम्बला शुक्तीय .. dynamo-electric motor = motor d. chloride चुम्बला नीरेय . 
face-ame=aft n. 
d. nitrate चुम्बला भूयीय ". dynamo - meter (for measuring d. oxalate चुम्बला तिग्मीय .. 
power) शक्तिमान m . 
d. oxide चुम्बला जारेय 2. -dynamous Bot. 
d. sulphate चुम्बला शुल्बीय . Dynastinae (rhinoceros beetle) dystectic Physical Chem. gegus mfn. 
Zool. 15-7trat m. (a subfamily) eutectic au mfn. -ayne (fr. anodyne पीडाहर) Chem. अपीड dystectic mixture दुईवण मिश्रा .... 
FLUTT f. 
312 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
E (element) Chem. त (तत्त्व) 
earldom सामन्त-विषय m., सामन्त-पद ., E. (Eberthella) आ. ज्व. (प्रान्त्रज्वराणु) सामन्तता . E. (Erwinia) पा. रो. (पादप-रोगाणु) earlship सामन्तता, सामन्त-पद 8. E (symbol for electromotive force, early stage पूर्व प्रक्रम m. 
and electrode potential) धु 
ear-marked Com. प्रयोजन-विशिष्ट mfn. E. (generalized exponential function) earn vb. अर्जन । ___Math. घा (from घातांक) 
earned income अजित पाय m. e. (exponential function) घ (from earnest money सत्यकार m. (ancient 
घातांक) 
word) e. (eccentricity) Math. उ (उत्केन्द्रता) earning Com. प्राय M., अर्जन 1. Eo (electro-affinity) धु० 
earpieces (of spectacles) कर्ण-शलाका f. e (the elementary electrical charge; ear practice (of a physician) कर्ण-वृत्ति 
the charge on an electron, etc.) f. em (the ratio of charge to mass of ear-stone=otolith Anat. Fuit m. ___ an electron) धपु 
earth भू, भूमि, मृद्, पृथ्वी . € (the Greek letter epsilon) 1 (an earth vb. Elec., Radio Hatta n. 
ergon or quantum)श्र 
earth alkali metals Chem. मृत् क्षारक 2 (symbol of dielectric constant धातु m. पारद्युतिक स्थिरांक) द्या 
earth black Col. Ind. मृत् काल m. 3 (electrode fariçare potential, ec earth closet Hygiene effa-77995 n. to normal calomal पानीरेय elec- earth coal = mineral coal भूमि trode, en to a normal hydrogen अंगार=खनिज-अंगार m. electrode) द्व, द प, द्व 
earth colour (any coloured mine n (the Greek letter eta; symbol for ral used as a pigment) खनिज रंग 
viscosity आलगत्व) ल । E, Eb, Er (erbium) Chem. रक् (रक्तला) earthed Elec., Radio भूयुक्त, भूयोजित each प्रत्येक 
mfn. ___e. partner Com. प्रत्येक भागी (-इन्) m. earthenwate मृद्भाण्ड 7. eagle Zool. महाश्येन m. 
earth metal Chem. मुद्धातु m. E. & O. E. (errors and omissions earthnut oil=peanut oil भूमुद्ग-तैल 1. 
excepted) Com. लो. वि. शो. (लोप- earthquake भूकम्प m. विभ्रमौ शोध्यो) 
earth wax=Dozocerite भूसिक्थ ।. ear कर्णm. 
earthworm गण्डूपद m. . ear-drum कर्ण-पटह m. 
earthy #ra mfn. eared seal Zool. कर्णी जलव्याघ्र m. earthy cobalt=asboite Mineral. मात earl सामन्त m. 
केत्वातु m. 
373 
. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
earthy vivianite=blue iron earth E. alcaligenes == Alcaligenes ear trumpet कर्ण-श्रृंग n. 
____faecalis क्षारकजन प्रा. ज्व. easily (with ease) अनायास, सुगमतया, E. belfastiensis (resembles E. 
सरलतया 
typhi, found in a disease in easily decomposable Chem. सुख Belfast resembling typhoid 
विबन्ध्य Mfn. 
fever) आन्त्रज्वराम आ. ज्व. easily fusible Chem. सुख-द्राव्य Mfn. 
E. betotensis (causes a. disease Eastern Ghats Geog. महेन्द्र-पर्वत m. 
with typhoid-like symptoms) East Indian kino = kino Pharm. 
उपान्त्रज्वर प्रा. ज्व. विखदिर M. 
E. dysenteriae = Shigella dy East Indian oil Chem. पूर्व भारत-तैल 2. senteriae East India root Pharm. पूर्व भारत-भूल E. enteria (from intestinal dis 
___charges) मल आ. ज्व. Eastman yellow=filter yellow K E. pyogenes पूयजन आ. ज्व. Easton's syrup==syrup of ferrous E. talavensis (found in intes 
phosphate with quinine and tinal discharges in typhoid strychnine Pharm. अयोभावि-मिष्टोद fever) विष्ठा प्रा.ज्व. 
-विज्वरी तथा विषतिन्दुकी सहित अयस्य E. typhosa = Eberth's bacil 'भास्वीय मिष्टोद . 
lus, E. typhi, Bacterium easy सुगम, सुकर, सुबोध, सुख, mfn. 
typhi, Bact. typhosum, Ba easy chair सुखासन्दी/. 
cillus typhosus (the cause of eau Chem. सलिल 1. 
typhoid fever in man) सामान्य e. de Cologne (composed of आ. ज्व. 
alcohol and certain aromatic eblanin = paraxanthine Chem. oils) वासव सलिल . (वास perfume परापीती. 
+ - alcohol) 
eboli blue 4 B - diamine blue e. de Javelle (a solution of po- 3 B 
tassium hypoch lorite) GETT 9- 
TTT9- eboli new blue 2B=diamine blue 
eboli nev नीरित सलिल . 
BX e.de Labarraque (a solution of ebonite कुदार m. 
sodium hypochlorite) Chem. e. indicator parc-aferat the क्षारातूपनीरित सलिल .. 
ebony (difficult to split) कुदार, कुदारवृक्ष Eb (erbium) रक् (रक्तला) 
m. Ebenaceae Bot. तिन्दु-कुल 1. __ ebracteate Bot. (without . bracts) Ebenales Bot. fare-Tan. 
अनिपत्र mp. Eberthella (E.) (its type genus is ebullient बुद्रुदत् mfn. 
typhoid germ) आन्त्रज्वराणु m. (आ. ebulliometer=ebullioscope बुद्बुदेव 
ज्व.) 
m. 
ebot! 
374 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
89 
Echipane 
ebullioscopic equation बुद्भुदेक्षीय समी- echicerin (from dita bark सप्तपर्ण 
कार m. 
शल्क) Chem. सप्तपर्णशल्कि f. (cf. ebullioscopic method बुद्धदेक्षीय-रीति ditaine सप्तपर्णवल्की) ebullioscopy बुद्रुदेक्षा . 
Echinococcus (a genus in which ebullition बुद्रुदन n. 
La cyst is characterized by the ec- उत् 
presence of daughter cysts) Zool. eccentric I (deviating from the . कोष्ठपुंजाति f. (-आति for प्रजाति genus) 
centre) उन्मध्य, उत्केन्द्र mfr. 
E. granulosus कणी कोष्ठपुंज m. 2 (opp. to concentric संकेन्द्र) असंकेन्द्र Echino-dermata (the surface is be 
mfn. (not having the same centre) set with spines-Parker and Has eccentrically Zool. बहिष्केन्द्रतया, बहिष्केन्द्र, well) शल्य-पृष्ठाः m.pl. 
उत्केन्द्रतया 
Echinops Bot. उष्ट्रकण्टति 1. (-ति for eccentric angle retour de contos m. 
प्रजाति genus) eccentric crank Rly. Eng. उत्केन्द्र कूपर Echinostoma Zool. शल्यशिराति (आति 
m. 
- for storfa genus) eccentric fixation उन्मध्य लक्षबन्धन .. E. ilocanum श्वान्त्र शल्यशिरm. eccentricity उत्केन्द्रता, असंकेन्द्रता f. Echinostomatidae (a family having eccentric sheave Mach. उन्मध्य-प्रसीती a ring of spines at the anterior 
end) शल्यशिर-वंश m. eccentric strap Mach. उन्मध्य पट्टक m. echitamine-ditaine ecdysis Zool. त्वक्पातन, त्वक्पतन . echitenine (a brown powder from ecgonidine Chem. व्याचेतनेयी f. . ___dita batk) सप्तपर्णबभ्रुवी. ecgonine (obtained by decompo- echitin Chem. (an acid from dita 
sition of cocaine प्राचतनी) Chem. bark) सप्तपर्णवल्काम्लn. व्याचेतनी . 
echo (sound of visual indication ethylbenzoyl e. दक्षुलधूपूल व्याचेतनी caused by a reflected radio wave 
or radio signal) Radar ufafaqat hydrochloridee. उदनीरेय व्याचेतनी . . 
echo pulse Radar प्रतिस्पन्द m. (=प्रति methylbenzoyl e. प्रोदलधूपूल व्या क्षिप्त स्पन्द) __ चेतनी . 
eclipse black (sulphide dye) Col. echelon Mil., Optics निश्रेणी f. 
Ind. शुल्बेय काल m. echelon lens Optics निश्रेणी-वीक्ष m. e. blue (sulphide dye) शुल्बेय नील echicaoutchin (a resin-like subs 
m. tance from dita bark सप्तपर्ण-वल्क) ____e. bronze (sulphide dye) शुल्बेय 
Chem. सप्तपर्णोद्यासि . 
कांस्य m. echicericacid Chem. सप्तपर्णशल्किक अम्ल e. brown (sulphide dye) शुल्बेय बभ्रु 
m. 
m. 
375 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
e. corinth (sulphide dye) शुल्बेय e. activity आर्थिक-कर्मण्यता, आर्थिक क्रिया 
रोहित m. e. dark blue (sulphide dye) शुल्बेय e. botany = applied botany ___असित नील m. 
व्यावहारिक-ौद्भिदी . e. dark brown (sulphide dye) e. cycle-business cycle अर्थ-चक्र 
शुल्बेय असित बभ्रm. 
- व्यापार-चक्र n. e. fast brown (sulphide dye) e. freedom आर्थिक स्वातंत्र्य 1. 
शुल्बेय स्थिर बभ्रु m. 
e. friction आर्थिक संघर्ष m. e. fast green (sulphide dye) e.geography आर्थिक भूवृत्त ।. ___शुल्बेय स्थिर हरि m. 
e. goods आर्थिक वस्तु, उपयोगि वस्तु . e: fast olive (sulphide dye) शुल्बेय e. imperialism आर्थिक साम्राज्यनीति 
स्थिर तैलबदर m. e. fast red-brown (sulphide dye) e. laws आर्थिक नियम m. 
शुल्बेय स्थिर रक्त-बभ्रु m. 
e. man अर्थपरायण पुरुष m. e. green (sulphide dye) शुल्बेय हरि e. phenomena आर्थिक-घटना. 
e. rent आर्थिक भाटक . e. olive (sulphide dye) शुल्बेय e. tendency आर्थिक-प्रवृत्ति . 
तैलबदर m. 
economical adj. मितव्यय, मितव्ययी, मित e. phosphine (sulphide dye) economics अर्थशास्त्र ११. 
शुल्बेय भास्वी f. 
e. of consumption उपभोग-अर्थशास्त्र e. red=fast scarlet e. violet (sulphide dye) शुल्बेय e. of distribution वंटन-अर्थशास्त्र n. ____नीललोहित m. 
e. of production उत्पादन-अर्थशास्त्र e. yellow (sulphide dye) शुल्बेय. . __ 'पीत m. 
economy I मितव्यय m., मितव्ययिता. Eclipta Bot. भंगराजति /. (-ति for प्रजाति 2 अर्थव्यवस्था . 
genius) 
-ectasia (Gk. ek out उत् + teinein to E. erecta or prostrata TATRY stretch तन्)-उत्तन 
भंगराज m. 
ectethmoid bone Zool, afefficafer the ecliptine मुंगराजी . 
(external to the ethmoid) ecological factors Bot. पारिस्थिक कारक ectoderm Z001. बहिःस्तर m. 
ectomy उच्छेद m.. :ecology (relationship between orga- ectoplasm Biol. (the outer compact 
nisms and their environment). hyaline layer of protoplasm in .... पारिस्थिकी f. (from परिस्था) 
a cell) बहिःप्ररस m. economic adj. I आर्थिक mfn. 
ectoplasmic बहिःप्ररसीय mfn. ०१.. 2 (of or pertaining to the science Ectoprocta=Bryozoa Zool. (anus 
of economics) Parteita mfn. opening outside) afejat: m.pl. 
376 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
eczema प्रपामा (-मन्) m. 
E. E. (errors excepted) Com. वि. शो. edaphic factors (Gk. edaphos soil (विभ्रमः शोध्यः) 
उन्मृदा) Bot. औन्मृद कारक n. 
eel Zool. सर्पमीन m. eddy भ्रमर m. 
effect I प्रभाव m. eddy current Elec. भ्रमर-वाह m. 
2 विपाक m., फल . edema स्फाय m. 
effective विपाकी, प्रभावी (इन्), साधक -edema -स्फाय m. 
mfn. Edentata Zool. (front teeth absent) effective acid Chem. विपाकि अम्ल n. 
अनग्रदन्ताः m. pl. 
effective horsepower विपाकि-अश्वशक्ति Eder's solution Chem. (a solution 
of mercuric chloride पारदिक नीरेय effective length Mach. विपाकी प्रआयाम and ammonium oxalate तिक्तातु 
m. तिग्मीय) पातिमीय विलयन . 
effective resistance Elec. विपाकी रोध edestan Biochem. (the protean deriv- m. 
ed from edestin) raffined n. effective value=root-mean-square edestin (Gk.edestos eatable + -in%3; volts or amperes विपाकि-अर्हा f. 
formerly, a globulin found in effective volts or amperes Elec. many edible seeds) Biochem. आद्यकि विपाकि द्यशक्म M., विपाकी युवहि m. . 
effective wave length विपांकी तरंग edge I तट m., अधि. 
आयाम m. 2 (of a knife) ETET f. 
effector (region) Bot. प्रभावित (प्रदेश) edge filtration = stream line filt- effector organ Physiol. कार्यकारि अंग . ___ration Chem. अश्रि-पावन १. 
effects I सम्पत्ति , द्रव्य क. edge of a prism संक्षेत्र-तट m. 
___ 2 (proceeds) उदय m. . edge of eyelid वर्त्म-तट m. 
effects not cleared=no effects edible भक्ष्य mfn. 
Com. द्रव्यं नास्ति edible earth भक्ष्य-मृत्तिका f. 
efferent Physiol. अपवाही (-इन्) mfn. edible syrups (syrups of edibles, efferent arch Zool. अपव.ही चाप m. 
like banana, oranges, lemon, effervesce vb. प्रबुद्दन . etc.) भक्ष्य मिष्टोद ?.. 
effervescence yaaa n. education शिक्षा, शिक्षण n. 
effervescent Chem. प्रबुद्बुद mfu. . educational grants शिक्षानुदान . 
e. mixture प्रबदद मिश्रा educe (Lat. e out + ducere to lead) 
e. salt प्रबुद्बुद लवण . . . . . Chem. उन्नयन 1. 
efficiency I Mech. (the ratio of educt n. Chem. उन्नीत . 
. useful work done by a machine eduction Steam Engines उन्नयन 1. 
to the energy supplied) FTUTTOTT eductor Macb. ( a steam ejector) . f. 
उन्नायक, प्रबाष्पोन्नायक m. 
___ 2 दक्षता f., कर्मकौशल n. 377 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
efficient de CT, FFGH, ATİ-7, 694 eiconogen (a photographic deve 
imfn. 
loper, sodium salt of 1-amino e. bookkeeping दक्ष पुस्तपालन . 2-naphthol-6-sulphonic acid) efficiently दक्षतया (Hindi दक्षता से), Col. Ind. चित्रविकासी (-इन्) m. 
दक्षतापूर्वक 
eighteen pounder (fieldgun) Mil. effloresce vb. (Lat. ex + florescere) HETG2T-51757 for f. (999-TEET) 
Chem. 3692T na 
eight-sided 96-972a7 mfn. efflorescence Chem. उत्फुल्लन 1. eight-wheeled locomotive 6-757 efflorescent Chem. Grunnet mfn. 
fat n. effluence Chem. उत्प्रवहण १. 
Eimeria Zool. (a genus found in effluent Chem. Jeanet () mfn. intestines and organs connected efflux Chem. BESETE m. 
with it FT) atlatfef. - TFT effort i=exertion ath m. 
for the genus) 2 Mech. a n. (as in tractive -ein, eine Chem. - m. effort) 
ejaculatory duct=ductus ejacula effuse vb. Phys. (to flow out through torius Anat, FTTTT-TOTTET f. 
· an aperture) B EGGT . 
ejector Rly. Eng. JH 11. effusio-meter Erkara-HTT m. 
e. air valve Bar TT-TTC n. eft=newt 
ekka (one horse conveyance) 1944 eft=Triturus vulgaris Zool. THEY 1. (H. FT) 
सरटिका. 
elaborate परिष्कृत, जटिल, सूक्ष्म, निपुणकृत egestion Physiol. (as of food) afsToT mfn. 
e. arrangement जटिल विन्यास m. egg 912. 
elaborated food material Bot. frequent egg albumen Biochem. quo-palet f. 991-04 n. egg apparatus = germinal appa. Elaeodendron Bot. 1967 for f. (-fe 
ratus Bot. अण्ड-साधित. 
for sofer genus) egg. cell=Ovum Biol. 405-TIT f. E. glaucum सामान्य भूतफल m. egg-eater (snake) Zool. Tusta m. elaeoptene=eleoptene egg yellow Col. Ind. 15-4ta m. -elaic -तैलिक . egol(F. egal equal+phenol) Pharm. elaidate Chem. antitu n. 
Trya m. 
elaidic acid Chem. (obtained from egress vb. farafor no 
oleic acid) तैलेयिक अम्ल 1. Egyptain blue.= Vestorian blue elaidin Chem. Anitat f. . . ' (used for ancient Egyptian mural elastic SuIFE mfn. (Surfwoofer) 
paintings and in Pompeii; pre- e. fibre Anat. SeaT Pro m. pared now only in France). Col. e. limit Mech. StarpTeHT f. Ind. steint Pet m. 
elastica externa Zool. TE STEUTET - 378 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
___e. interna आन्तर प्रत्यास्थ 
e. power विद्युत्-शक्ति . elasticity I Mech. प्रत्यास्थता f. 
e. railway train विद्युत्-संयान n. 2 Econ. उदवनम्यता f. 
e. spark विद्युत्-स्फुलिंग m. e. of bulk प्रकाय-प्रत्यास्थता f. 
e. thermo-regulator विद्युत्-ताप e. of rubber apparatus घृषि- . यामक m. 
प्रत्यास्थता साधित्र n. 
electrical वैद्युत nfr. e. of shape #1917-SRITFETT f. ___e. engineering वैद्युत-अभियन्त्रणा f. elastic membrane Anat. प्रत्यास्थ-कला e. equipment वैद्युत-संभार m. 
electricity I विद्युत् . elastin Biochem. प्रत्यास्थकि f. (fr. प्रत्यास्थ 2 (science) वैद्युती . 
___elastic) 
___e. schemes विद्युद्-योजना f. -elate -तैलीय 
electrification विद्युतन .. elater (of a liverwoot) Bot. अंशुका f. electrified fagfast mfn. elected member निर्वाचित सदस्य m. electrify vb. विद्युतन 2. election निर्वाचन 7. (H. चुनाव) electro- विद्युत् elective localization Parasitol. इष्ट- electro-chemistry विद्युद्-रसायन . 
स्थान-वसन 1. 
electrode Elec. विद्युद्-द्वार n. electoral constituency निर्वाचन-क्षेत्र n. electro-dynamic Phys. विद्युद्-वैगिक electoral district निर्वाचन मण्डल n. 
mfn. electric विद्युद्-, वैद्यत mfn. 
electro-dynamometer विद्युत्-शक्तिमान e. arc furnace विद्युच्चाप-भ्राष्ट्र n. e. battery विद्युत्-समूहा f. 
electrolysis Phys. विद्युदंशन 1. e. centrifuge foregrafera n. ____e. stand विद्युदंशन स्थाम 7. e. charge Elec. वैद्युत प्रभार m. electrolyte Phys. विद्युदंश्य . e. charges विद्युद्-व्यय m. 
electrolytic arsenic estimation e. company विद्युत्-प्रमण्डल . 
apparatus Chem. विद्युदंशिक नेपाली e. current विद्युद्-वाह m. 
आगणन-साधिन . e. discharge वैद्युत मोच, विद्युन्मोच m. electrolytic cell Phys. विद्युदंशिक-कोशा e. fan विद्युद्-व्यजन . e. fittings विद्युद्-अन्वायुक्ति f. electrolytic dissociation विद्युदंशिक e. furnace विद्युद्-भ्राष्ट्र 1. 
वियवन n. e. gas lighter विद्युद्-वाति-ज्वालक m. electromagnetic विधुच्चुम्बिक mfn. e. generator fagurfarar m. electromagnetic ore separator e. hot plate विद्युद्-उष्ण-पट्ट m. - विद्युच्चुम्बिक अयस्क-वेचक m. e. light विद्युत्-प्रकाश m. 
electrometer विद्युन्मान m. e. locomotive विद्युच्चलित्र . electromotive force- विद्युद्गामक बल .. e. motor विद्युद्-वहिन . 
electron Phys., Chem. विद्युदणु m. e. oven विद्युत्-कन्दु m. . 
electron bomb विद्युदणु-प्रस्फोट m. 
379 
m.﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
electron capture विद्युदणु-परिग्रहण . oil+ptenos winged) Chem. 37989 electro-negative निद्युतीय mfn. 
लेन्य. electronic Phys., Chem. विद्युदणु elephant हस्ती (-इन्) m. electronics वैद्युदण्विकी. 
elephantiasis Med. श्लीपद 1. electronic state Zool. विद्युदणु-अवस्था f. Elephantopus Bot. गोजिह्वाति f. (-ति electron-tube=triode विद्युदणु-नाल m. for प्रजाति genus) 
= त्रिद्वार .. 
E. scaber सामान्य गोजिह्वा /. electron volt Phys. FabL n. (short elephant seal=Mirounga leonina ___ for विद्युदणु-धुशक्म) 
(a very large seal) HET STETOITET electrophorus Phys. विद्युद्भर m. . 
m. electropositive उद्युतीय mfn. Elephas asiaticus=Indian ele electrostatic विद्युत्स्थैतिक mfn. 
phant भारत-हस्ती (-इन् ) m. electrostatics विद्युत्स्थैतिकी f. 
Elettaria Bot. (NL. from Sanskrit electrotype विद्युन्मुद्र m. 
एला cardamon) क्षुद्रलाति f. (-ति for electrotyping विद्युन्मुद्रण 1. 
प्रजाति genus) electrovalence विद्युदणु-संयुजता 
eleuthero- ('free') मुक्त electrum Mineral. (argentiferous Eleutherozoa Zool. (devoid of 
gold) राजत-सुवर्ण १. 
stalk, and always freely locomo element I (a part) अंशक m. 
tive---Parker and Haswell) अवन्ताः 2 Math. (a constituent of a deter m. pl. minant) अवयव M. 
elevation I उत्सेध m. 3 (of coordinate geometry) मूलतत्त्व 2 Drawing उद्विक्षेप m. (उदन-तल-विक्षेप 
projection on a vertical plane) 4. Chem., Statistics To n. 
3 Gun. (the movement of the elementary I प्रारम्भिक mfn. 
axis of a piece in a vertical __2 (area) Math. अल्पघटक mfn.. plane) प्रक्षोत्थापन . elementary algebra = ordinary elevation angle-angle of altitude 
algebra प्रारम्भिक बीजगणित . 
Ophthalmol. उत्सेध-कोण m. elementary geometry प्रारम्भिक-रैखिकी elevation antenna Radar उत्सेध-भातन्तु 
. 
m. elementary school प्रारम्भिक पाठशाला elevation constant (K) Chem. उत्थापन 
स्थिरांक m, (थ) elementary stage प्रारम्भिक-प्रावस्था f. elevation of boiling point (deltaA) elements Math. (of coordinate geo- Chem. बुद्बुदांकोत्थापन 1. (उ) 
metry) मूलतत्त्व . 
elevation oscilloscope Radar 36919 elements of a triangle Math. त्रिकोणा- प्रदोलेक्ष m. 
____elevation receiver Radar उत्सेध Eleoptene=elaeoptene (Gk. elaion आदाता (-तृ) m. 
380 
वयव m. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
ing निरस निरसन .. 
rinc• 
elevator I उत्थापक m. 
elongated athara mfn. 2 Gan. अक्षोत्थापक m. 
elongated rectangular cells Bot. eligibility ग्राह्यता, योग्यता 
दीपित आयताकार कोशा f. eligible योग्य, ग्राह्य mfn. 
elongating दीर्घभावी (-इन्) mfn. eliminable निरसनीय mfn. 
elongating region Bot. दीर्घभावी प्रदेश eliminandn. निरस्य n. 
m. eliminant Math. निरासफल, निरसनफल1. Elsie (popular name) = SLC eliminate vb. निरसन 1. 
('search-light control' radar set) eliminated निरस्त, निरसित mfn. 
प्रकाशवशोm.-अ. प्र. व. (अन्वेषि-प्रकाश eliminating निरसन n. 
वश-तेजोन्वेष) elimination Math. निरसन n. 
elucidate vb. विशदन, विशदीकरणn. elixir Pharm. (a compound tinc- elute pb. (to wash out) प्रोद्धावन 1. 
ture with more than one base, elution process Chem. प्रोद्धावन-विधा . composed of various substances) elutor Chem. प्रोद्धावक m., प्रोद्धावन-पात्र m. संनिष्कर्ष m. 
(one of the vessels used in the e. of papain = elixir papaini elution process) 
(elix. papain.) एरटि-संनिष्कर्ष m. elutriate vb. प्रोद्धावन . e. proprietatis = tincture of elutriator sieraat m. ___aloes and myrrh कुमारी तथा elytra (pl.) Zool. (wing cover) पक्षवर्म 1. 
रसगंध संनिष्कर्ष m. 
elytrum, elytron sg. of elytra 
· e. simplex = simple elixir Em. (emanation) Chem. Fare (frezafar) 
सरल संनिष्कर्ष m. 
emaciation Zool. कृशता ellagic acid = alizarin yellow emanate vb. facicut n. (cf. extract 
paste (ellagic is from gallic, FRITTUT) 
· French ellagique from galle gall emanation Chem. frafa f. 
with the letters reversed) Chem. emarginate Bot. (having a depres विद्रुस्फोटिक अम्ल 
sion) गर्ती (-इन्) mfn. ellipse Geom. दीर्घवृत्त, ऊनेन्द्र 1. (short Embadomonas Zool. (agenus with 
for एकस्माद् ऊना less than one + two unequal flagella) असमकशाति. 
उत्केन्द्रता eccentricity) 
(-आति for प्रजाति genus) ellipsoid Geom. दीर्घवृत्ताभ, ऊनेन्द्रज n. E. intestinalis प्रान्त्र असमकश m. ellipsoidal ऊनेन्द्रजीय mfn. 
embark v.i, नौरोहण n. elliptical ऊनेन्द्रीय mfr. . 
. .. नौरोपण n. elliptical leaf Bot. उपांड-पत्र 1. embassy 1 (function or position Ellisons air brick Hygiene विवरेष्टका of an ambassador) राजदौत्य, राज 
दूतपद n.. Elodes=Triadenum Bot. त्रिग्रन्थिति . 2 (message) सजदूत-संदेश m. 
(-fa for yatfer genus) 
- 3 (charge, business) राजदूत-कर्म 7. 
381 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
4 (persons sent as ambassadors ragdos, from Prakrit fra, from or envoys) राजदूत-वर्ग m. 
Skt. मरकत) मरकत n. 5 (residence or office of an emerald green Col. Ind. मरकत-हरि m. ambassador) राजदूतावास, राजदूत emeraldine Col. Ind. मरकती . कार्यालय m. 
emeraldol मरकतव m. embed vb. खचन, न्यावेशन 2. 
emerge vb. उन्मज्जन n. embedded खचित, न्याविष्ट mfn. emerged उन्मग्न mfn. embedding mould न्यावेशन संचक m. e. ray Ophthalmol. उन्मग्न रश्मि m. embedding oven न्यावेशन कन्दु m. emergence Phys. उन्मज्जन n. embedding trough न्यावेशन-द्रोणी / emergency सद्यस्कृत्यता, सद्यस्कृत्य-स्थिति, embelate विडंगीय. 
उदापद् . Embelia Bot. विडंगति . (-ति for प्रजाति emergent I Phys. उन्मज्जत् mfn. 
genus) 
_e. ray उन्मज्जद्-रश्मि m. E. ribes सामान्य विडंग m. 
2 सद्यस्कृत्य mfn. 
•embelic acid Chem. (found in the emergent meeting सद्यस्कृत्य अधिवेशन 
fruit of Embelia ribes विडंग) विडं- . गिक अम्ल 
. emery कौरव m. (from कुरुविन्द corun embezzle vb. छलहरण, मोषण 2. 
dum) embezzlement Com. छलहरण, मोषण n. emery wheel कौरव-चक्र . Embioptera Zool. (live in silken emesis Med. वमन . 
tunnels) कौशेयसुरंगिणः m.pl. 
emetic weed=lobelia=Indian to Emblica Bot.आम्लकति /. (-ति for प्रजाति bacco (leaves and tops of 
. genus) 
Lobelia inflata) THETF m. E. officinalis सामान्य प्राम्लक m. emetina=emetine embryo to the 
emetine=emetina (emet.) Pharm. embryology fast f. 
वमी. embryonal mass भ्रौण पुजm. 
e. hydrochloride a emetinae embryonal tissue भ्रौण-ऊति . . 
hydrochloridum (emet. embryonic (of or pertaining to . hydrochlor.) वमी उदनीरेय . ___ an embryo) भ्रौण mfn. 
__-emia -रक्तता . embryonic development भ्रूण-विकास -emic -रक्तिक 
m. 
eminence कूट, तुंगक 1. embryonic midgut Zool. भ्रूण-मध्यान्त्र emissive power Phys. उगिरण-शक्ति . 
n. 
emit vb. Phys. उत्सारण, उदगिरण embryophore Zool. भ्रूणभर m. emmenagogue Med. आर्तवोत्सारी (-इन्) embryo sac Bot. भ्रूण-स्यून . emendation संशुद्धि 
emmenin Zool. (obtained from the emerald (from Gk. smaragdos, ma- human placenta) Treff f. 
382 
mfn. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
emmetropia Ophthalmol. सुनाभिता f. व्यवसाय-युक्ति f. (employment in a emperor सम्राट् M. 
profession) empire साम्राज्य n. 
e. bureau सेवायोजनालय m. empire acid black = acid blue- empty adj. femer mfn. 
black 
empty vb.-deplete आरेचन 1. empire fast orange = fast acid empty glume Bot. अपुष्प बुसपत्र । 
orange G 
empty passenger train Rly. ficat empire fast red=fast acid red A पथिक-संयान ॥. empirical आनुभविक mfr. 
empty or unfilled place शून्य, रिक्त empirical formula Chem. मात्रिक सूत्र स्थान .. 
em tube Phys. विपु नाल m. empirical law Logic art fap fT4x emulsifiability = emulsibility 
m. 
Physical Chem. (ability to be emul empirical psychology आनुभविक मनो- sified) प्रनिलम्ब्यता. 
विज्ञान 1. 
emulsifiable-emulsible प्रनिलम्ब्य emplacement Mil. स्थाय m. 
mfn. emplastrum=plaster Pharm. पटलेप emulsification प्रनिलम्बन । 
emulsifier प्रनिलम्बक m. e. belladonnae = plaster of emulsify प्रनिलम्बन 1. ___ belladonna कंटालिका-पटलेप m. emulsin Chem. (in almonds specially e. cantharidis हरिभृग-पटलेप m. . विशेषतः) विवातामि . e. picis=plaster of pitch अंगार- emulsion I (any of various milky ___ राल-पटलेप m. 
liquids) पायस n. e. plumbi=plaster of lead सीस- , 2 (milky fluid made by rubbing 
पटलेप M. 
almonds or other seeds with e. resinae= resin plaster उद्यास water) वातामदुग्ध . 
पटलेप m. 
3 (oil in water or water in oil) e. saponis = plaster of soap तैलोद . 
स्वफेन-पटलेप m. 
4 Physical Chem. (a suspension of employ vb. I सेवायोजन, नियोजन n. 
fine particles or globules of a 2 प्रयोजन .. 
liquid in another) प्रनिलम्ब m. employed I सेवायुक्त, नियुक्त mfn. emulsion colloid प्रनिलम्ब श्लेषाभ m. 
2 प्रयुक्त mfn. 
emulsive I (of the nature of an employee सेवायुक्त, नियुक्त m. 
emulsion) प्रनिलम्बीय mfn. employer सेवायोजक m. 
2 (yielding emulsion) प्रनिलम्ब-जन employer's liability insurance mfn. 
Com. स्वामि-देय-धागोप m. 
3 (emulsifying) प्रनिलम्बयिता (-त) employment सेवायुक्ति, वृत्ति, नियुक्ति, Afn. 
383 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
4 (emulsifiable) sfiora mfn. enbico chrome black F = aci emulsoid (a suspension of the nature dol chrome black F F (enbico 
of an emulsion) fra Fa# m. 
is en-bi-co, North British Che enable vb. try-TUT, 721-FTUT n. · mical Co., Manchester) enact vb. Law afferunt n. 
enbico direct black E extra= enactment Law FETA (Gilgit chlorazol black E extra 
MSS.), fefpera m. 
enbico direct green B = chlorazol enamel n. 1919 m. . 
green BN enamel vb. (to inlay or cover with enbico direct yellow G=direct 
enamel) $TT . (1977-TT, : yellow GG 
19791920) 
encampment Mil. (a locality con enameler आकाचक m. 
taining a body of troops quar enameling आकाचना f. (process of...) tered in tents) शिबिर-निवेश, निवेश m. enamel kiln Ceramics पाकाच-पापाक m. encephalitis मस्तिष्ककोप m. enamelled पाकाचित mfn. 
encephalitis lethargica. Med. मन्दक enamel organs Anat. 979199 Tn. Affronta m. (Hrsg=#FFT from enamelware 1979-HIVE n. 
· Hreyfer) enamel white Col. Ind. 1972 saat m. encephalon Anat. #fETE n. , enantiomorph Chem., Cryst. sfareq n. enchyma Zool. (the formative juice enantiomorphic, enantiomorph of the tissues) fait m. 
ous Chem., Cryst, sferata mfn. -enchyma= -enchyme Zool. -zafatetit enantiomorphism . Chem., Cryst. -enchyme = -enchyma 
STEYETT f. 
. 
encircle vb. Phys, at n. enantiomorphous = enantiomor- encircled qafuta mfn. 
enclose vb. समावरण' .. (cf. संवरण enantiomorphy STEGT 11. 
close) enantiotropic Physical Chem. Te enclosed Haa min. 
afara mfn. 
enclosure #1971, (as to a letter) enantiotropy Physical Chem. प्रत्यावर्तना 
#Ha n. 
encompass vb. flat ni enarthrodial joint=enarthrosis 
encompassed परिवलयित'mfr. ... 39-affe m. 
encounter Mil: प्रतियुध् . enarthrosis=ball-and-socket joint encouragement BATEA; JHTETET 16. 
Anat. FeaTEE-E forget-5€-free encouragement of trade and in-' 
dustry TTTTTTT FETT-SETET N.' enate (growing out) Jota mfn.... encrustzincrust vb, qu&t=316t, quat enation Bot. (any outgrowth from a n. 
the surface of an organ) 561TFT 1. encumber vb. Com. HR-ITET the . . 
384. . 
phic 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
m. 
m. 
encumbered Com. भाररुद्ध fn. 
2 adj. (secreting internally) encumbrance Com. भार, भाररोध m. __ अन्तरासर्गी (-इन्) mfn. encyst vb. Zool. परिकोष्ठन 1. 
endocrinegland Anat. अन्तरासर्गी प्रन्थि encysted Zool. परिकोष्ठित nfn. encystment Zool. परिकोष्ठन ॥. 
endocrinology अन्तरासगिकी . end I अन्त m. 
endoderm=entoderm Zool. अन्तःस्तर 2 कोटि . (Hindi सिरा) 3 अन.. 
endodermal epithelium Zool. अन्त: Endamoeba = Entamoeba अन्त:- स्तरीय अधिच्छद m. 
कामरूप्याति (आति for प्रजाति genus) endodermis Bot. अन्तःस्तर m. 
E. coli मलाशय अन्तःकामरूपी m. Endodermophyton (a genus of E.gingivalis दन्तमांस अन्तःकामरूपी fungi which attacks the skin) 
अन्तश्चर्मकति . (-ति for प्रजाति genus) E. histolytica आमकारी अन्तःकामरूपी endo-ectothrix (a ringworm fungus 
m. 
which produces spores both on endarch Bot. (beginning from in the interior and exterior of the 
side) अन्तरारम्भ mfn. 
hairs) बहिरन्तःकेशकवक. end-brain = telencephalon Anat. endogenous (roots) Bot. आन्तरजात 
अन्त्य-मस्तिष्क .. 
__mfn. end-bulb Anat. अन्त्य-कन्द M. 
endogenous origin Bot. आन्तरजात end cell-wall Bot. अन्त्य-कोशाभित्ति. उद्भवm. endeavour प्रयत्न m. 
Endolimax nana Parasitol. (it has a endemic एकप्रदेशीय, स्थानिक mfn. 
distinctivenucleus) वामन विन्यष्टिक. endemic disease स्थानिक रोग, एकप्रदेशीय endolymph Anat. अन्तर्लसीका f. 
रोग m. 
endomitosis Zool. अन्तर्भाजन 1. endive blue=iris-iris blue Endomyces (endo- for endospore endless अन्तहीन, अनन्त Mfn. 
अन्तर्बीजाणु) अन्तर्बीजकति f. (-ति for 'endo- अन्तर् 
प्रजाति genus) . endocarditis Med. हृदन्तःकोप m. endomysium Anat. अन्तःपेशीय . endocardium Anat. (a membrane endoneurium Anat. चेतातन्तुयुज m. 
lining the cavities of the heart) end-on-position Phys. (tangent हृदन्तश्छद m. 
'A' position in magnetism) endocarp (fruit) Bot. अन्तभित्ति n. 
अग्राभिमुख-स्थिति f. endochondral Zool. अन्तःकास्थिn. endoparasite Zool. अंतःपरजीवी (-इन)m. endochondral ossification = in- endoplasm Biol. अन्तःप्ररस m. 
tercartilaginous ossification endopodite Zool. अन्तरुपांग 1. 
Physiol. अन्तःकास्थि-अस्थीयन . .Endoprocta Zool. (anus opening endocrine Physiol. I १. अन्तरासर्ग m. inside....) अन्तर्गुदा: m. pl. 
385 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
Endopterygota Zool. (wings deve- 2 (central region of the oospore 
lop for a time inside the body) of Bryophyta) अण्डबीजाणु-गर्भ m. अन्तर्विकासिपक्षा: m.pl. 
endotheli-, endothelio- अन्तश्छद end organ Physiol अन्तांग n. (but in endothelial अन्तश्छदीय mfn. 
sensory structures, आद्यंग begin- endothelio-, endotheli- अन्तश्छद ning organ, where sensations endotheliocyte Anat. अन्तश्छदकोशा f. begin; only in motor structures endotheliolysin अन्तश्छदांशि . अन्तांग) 
endothelium Anat. अन्तश्छद m. endorse vb. Com. (Lat. to write on endothermic = endothermous 
the back') पृष्ठांकन 1. 
Chem. (a reaction occurring with e. a bill विपत्र-पृष्ठांकन । 
absorption of heat) तापचूषी (-इन्) e.acheque धनादेश-पृष्ठांकन .. 
mfn. endorsed Com. पृष्ठांकित mfn. 
endothermy (surgical production endorsee Com. पृष्ठांकिती (-इन्) m. of heat within the tissues...) endorsement Com. पृष्ठांकना f. 
अन्तस्तापन 1. blank e. सामान्य-पृष्ठांकना f. Endothrix (found within the hair facultative e. ऐच्छिक-पृष्ठांकना . ___shaft) अन्तःकेशकानि n.pl. general e. सामान्य-पृष्ठांकना f. endotoxin Immunol. rafafo f. qualified e. विशेषित-पृष्ठांकना f. endowment Com. प्राभृत 1., नीवि f. sans recourse e. दायित्वरहित-पृष्ठांकना 
e. assurance प्राभूत-प्रगोप m. 
e. policy प्राभृत-गोपलेख m. special e. विशेष-पृष्ठांकना . 
single e. एक-प्राभृत इ. endorser Com. पृष्ठांकक m. 
double e. द्वि-प्राभृत n. endorsing Com. पृष्ठांकन . 
end point I (that stage in titration endoskeleton Zool. अन्तष्कंकाल m. 
at which the reaction is com endosmosis Physical Chem., Physiol. plete) अन्तिम बिन्दु m. ___ अन्तरासृति . 
2=equivalence point समार्हता endosperm Bot. भ्रूणपोष m. 
बिन्दु m. endospermic Bot. भ्रूणपोषी (-इन्) mfn. end terms==extremes Math. अन्त-पद endospermous Bot. भ्रूणपोषी (इन्) mfn. . endospore Biol. अन्तर्बीजाणु m. end view Engin., Automobile अन्त endosporium=intine endosteum Anat. अन्तरस्थ 7. (अस्थ्नो - -ene Chem. (substitute of -ane indi ..' जत:) 
cating the presence of one double endostyle Zool. (precursor of thy- bond)-एन्य 1. .::. roid gland) पूर्वगलग्रंथि m. 
enema वस्तिकर्म n. . Endothecism Bot. I (dehiscent lin- - energetically ऊर्जया . . 
ring of the anther) स्फोटास्तर m. energy Phys. ऊर्जा f. 
दृशा. 
ITR 
386 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
energy radiation Phys. ऊर्जा-विकिरण 1, -enol (-ene+ - 01) -एत्यवm. energy release ऊर्जोन्मोक m. 
enol एन्यव m. enervated Zool. चेताप्रदत्त mfn. 
enolate Chem. एन्यवीय .. enervation of an organ Zool. अंग-चेता- enolic Chem. एन्यविक mfn. 
प्रदाय m. 
enolizable Chem. एन्यवन-योग्य, एन्यवनीय engage vb. Mil., Com. अभियोजन N. mfm. engaged Com. अभियुक्त, अभियोजित mfn. enolization Chem. एन्यवन 1. engaged in war युद्धरत mfn. 
enolize vb. Chem. (to convert into engagement Mil., Com. संयुध् f., an enol ; to become enolized) 
अभियोग M., अभियुक्ति f. 
एन्यवन । (एन्यव-करण, एन्यव-भवन) engine गन्त्र . 
enormous अतिमात्र mfn. engine driver गन्त्र-चालक m. 
enquiry = investigation Statistics engineer अभियन्ता (-त) m. 
अनुसंधान ॥. engineering I अभियन्त्रणा . 
enroll in an army सेना-प्रवेशन M. 2 (as a science) आभियान्त्रिकी . en route #TIT e. chemistry अभियन्त्रणा-रसायन n. Entamoeba-Endamoeba e. company अभियन्त्रणा-प्रमण्डल 1. entanglement Mil. संपाशा . 
details अभियन्त्रणा-भागक m. enteric fever = typhoid fever e. feats अभियन्त्रणा-आश्चर्य 1. 
आन्त्र-ज्वर m. e. standards committee अभि- (to) enter into an agreement Com. 
यन्त्रणामाप-समिति .. 
संविदाकरण . engine shed Ry. गन्त्र-छादक m. enteritis Med. आन्त्रकोप m. English आंगल mfa. 
Enterobius Zool. आन्त्रजीवाति . (आति English mandrake=bryony Pharm. for efet genus) 
(large roots, having a wrinkled enteroceptor Zool. आन्त्रादाता (-तृ) m. 
appearance) Pharm. वलिमूलn. enterococcus Bact. प्रान्त्रगोलाणु m. English red Col. Ind. आंगल रक्त m. enterocrinin Zool. आन्त्रन्यासगि. English system आंगल-पद्धति 
entero-kinase Biochem. आन्त्र-प्रविकर English verdigris Col. Ind. प्रांगल 
हरिकी . 
enterokinin Zool. आन्त्रप्रविकरि . English yellow Col. Ind. आंगल पीत enteron Anat. I (intestine) अंत्र. ___m. 
2 (alimentary canal) अन्नस्रोतस् ॥. engrave vb. उकिरण 1. 
(ancient word) engraved उत्कीर्ण mfn. 
enterprise Com. उपक्रम m. engraving उत्किरण 1. 
enter up Com. प्रवेशन . enkisel brown=golden brown enter upon an office पदारोहण' n., enlargement Photog. azia n. 
पद-प्रवेशm., पद-ग्रहण ॥. enneaploid Zool. नवगुण mfn. 
entire Bot. (margin of a leaf-not 
387 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m 
broken by divisions, teeth, or envelop vb. Phys. वेष्टन n. serrations') अभिन्न mfn. 
envelopen. वेष्टन, आवरण 1. entoderm=endoderm 
envelope opener वेष्टन-उद्घाटक m. entomology कीट-विद्या, कैटिकी . envelopment Mil. वेष्टन . entomophilous Bot. (pollinated by environ vb. Phys. पर्यावरण n. _____insects) कीट-परागित mfn. 
environment Biol. पर्यावरण M. entrance प्रवेशm. 
environs Phys. पर्यावरण n. entrap vb. पाशन . 
envoy दूत m. entrapped पाशित mfn. 
-enyl (-ene+ -yl) Chem. -एन्यल n. entrenchment Mil. afa f. 
enzyme Biochem. विकर m. entrepot (aforeign intermediate port Eocene Geol. प्रादिनूतन-युग. 
or warehouse) मध्यपत्तन, मध्यागार .. Oligocene आदिनूतन-युग n. entrepot trade मध्यपत्तन-व्यापार m. 
Miocene मध्यनूतन-युग 1. entropy Phys. उत्क्रम-माप m. ('measure Pliocene अतिनूतन-युग n. 
of disorder') 
Pleistocene प्रातिनूतन-युग 1. entry Com. pfafce f. 
cosamine Col. Ind. safiracit f. adjusting e. समायोजन-प्रविष्टि. eosate (a. salt of eosin) उषीय n. closing e. संवरण-प्रविष्टि . eosin (Gk. eos 'dawn', from Sanskrit contra e-cross e. प्रति-प्रविष्टि . उषस्) Chem. उषसि . credit e. समाकलन-प्रविष्टि. 
eosinate उषसीय . cross e.=contra e. 
eosine Chem. उषसी/.. debit e. विकलन-प्रविष्टि f. 
eosine blue Col. Ind. उषसी नील m. double e. द्वि-प्रविष्टि . 
e. blue shade No. 55 उषसी नील journalge. पंजी-प्रविष्टि . 
छाया सं० ५५m. . ledger e. प्रपंजी-प्रविष्टि f. 
e. bluish उषसी आनील m. opening e. प्रारंभिक प्रविष्टि f. 
e. crimson उषसी कामिज m. original e. मौलिक-प्रविष्टि f. 
e. scarlet उषसी शोण m. ' . ' rectifying e. संशोधन-प्रविष्टि f. eosinophil (staining readily with 
singlee. एक-प्रविष्टि . 
• cosin) उपसि-रंज्य mfn. transfer e. स्थानान्तर-प्रविष्टि . Eozoic Geol. उषःकल्प m. . enumerate vb. I एकैकगणन 1. (to Ephedra Bot. सोमति f. (-ति for प्रजाति 1 count one after another) 
genus) 2 Statistics प्रगणन 1. 
E. vulgaris सामान्य सोम m. .enumeration Statistics प्रगणना f. ephedrina=ephedrine 
enumerator Statistics प्रगणक m. ephedrinae hydrochloridum = ,enunciate xb. Math. प्रतिज्ञापन n: 
ephedrine hydrochloride enunciated Math. प्रतिज्ञापित mfn. ephedrine: = ephedrina (ephed.) perunciation Math. sfat fi ___Pharm. अपत्रकी f. 
'388 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
1 
pl. 
ephedrine hydrochloride=ephed- epicranium Zool. (dorsal wall of the 
rinae hydrochloridum (ephed. head of insects) fortaffifer f. hydrochlor.) Pharm. अपत्रकी उदनीरेय epidemic disease Med. व्यापक रोग m. 
epidermal अधिचर्मीय mfn. ephedro-adrenalin (ephedrine hy- epidermal peeling Bot. afrTT-TE 
drochloride+adrenalin) Pharm. m. अपत्रकोपवृक्कि . 
epidermis I Anat. अधिचर्म 1. ephemeral Bot. Fansitat (existing 2 Bot, ofertaie m. 
only a day), vleft (-5) m. Epidermophyton Bot. (a genus of ephemeran=ephemerid 
fungi) safarhafar f. (-fer for en fer ephemerid = ephemeran Zool. genus) . 
sfera m. 
epidiascope GT2T-91977 n. Ephemeroptera Zool. अचिरपक्षा: m. epigastric उपरिजठर 
epigeal (germination) Bot. gyferface ephidrosis (epi+hidrosis) Med. (ex- mfn. ___cessive perspiration) अभिस्वेद m. epiglottis Anat. कण्ठपिधान n. epi-(Gk., from Sanskrit aft) Chem. epigynous Bot. gyfeira mfn. 
FT 
epigyny Bot. उपरिजायता(cf. उपरिभूमि epibasal Bot. 396 mfn. 
above ground") epiblast=ectoderm Biol. (outer epilepsy Med. 7967 m. 
layer of the blastoderm) बहिःस्तर epileptic अपस्मारी (-इन्) mfn. 
epimysium Anat. (external sheath epiblema Bot. (superficial layer of of a muscle) afuata n. 
roots) Farfetare m. 
epinephrine=adrenaline उपवृक्की . epibole=epiboly 
epineurium Zool. (sheath of a nerve epiboly=epibole Embryol. grafa ____trunk) चेतास्कन्धावरण. 
epi-petalous Bot, 2-EE, 971-7 mfn. epicalyx Bot. after m. 
(stamens fused with petals) epicardium Anat. 35 m. epiphysial affer- . epicarp Bot. afeffe f. 
epiphysis I Anat. अस्थिशिर n. epichordal Zool. मेरूपरिक mfn. 
2=pineal body=pineal gland epicoelia = cerebellar ventricle =epiphysis cerebri Zool. yata 
Zool. FH -TET f. 
TTT m. epicoracoid Zool. (element at the epiphyte qete (T) m. 
sternal end of the coracoid) =aerophyte Bot. #tralig f. 397 IT mfn. 
epispasticuo liquor (used as a blis epicotyl Bot. 341-375797 n. 
tering liquid) Tr eat f. epicranial plate Zool. farctafa-hem. episternum Zool. (anterior plate of 
389 
17.﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
cartilage in amphibians) पूर्वोरःकास्थि 
e. two sides (balancing) समपार्श्वन 
M. 
m. 
_mfn. 
epistomatous Bot. उपरिमुख mfn. equalizing coefficient Math. समकर epitheli- =epithelio- अधिच्छद 
गुणक M. epithelial afecycra mfn. 
equally spaced समान्तरालित mfn. epithelial layer Bot. अधिच्छदीय स्तर equate vb. समीकरण n. 
equation समीकार m. epithelio-, epitheli- - 
equational representation समीकारीय epithelioid=epitheloid 
निरूपण . epitheliosis Med. (excessive but equation of the second degree= 
benign growth of epithelium) __quadratic equation द्विघात अधिच्छदवृद्धि . 
समीकार = वर्ग-समीकार m. epithelium Anat. अधिच्छद m. equator विषुववृत्त, विषुवन्मण्डल n. (from epithelize vb. I (to cover with सूर्यसिद्धान्त) 
epithelium) अधिच्छदन n. . equatorial Phys. मध्यवर्ती, विषुववृत्तीय 2 (to convert into epithelium) अधिच्छदकरण . 
equatorial plane Biol. मध्यतल N. epitheloid Anat. अधिच्छदाभ mfn. equatorial plate Biol. (of the spindle) epoch Geol. अनुयुग . 
मध्यपट्टm. Epsom salt अपिकटु लवण . . equatorial region विषुवत्प्रदेश, विषुवद्देश equal तुल्य 
___m. (ancient word) equal (=) Math. सम 6+3=१६ युत equi- सम-, समान 
३ सम (है) ६ (के) 
equiangular समानकोणिक, समानकोण mfn. equal angle Math. समान कोण m. equiconjugate diameter समानुबद्ध equal in all respects=identically व्यास m. 
equal=congruent सर्वाङ्गसम mfn. equidistant Math. समदूर mfn. equal in magnitude but opposite equilateral Matb. समभुजीय mfn. 
in sign महत्ता में समान, किन्तु चिह्न में equilateral hyperbola Geom. सम विरुद्ध mfn. 
अधीन्द्र . equality समता . 
equilateral triangle=regular tri equalize vb. समकरण . 
angle Geom. सम त्रिभुज m. equalizer Rly. (a straight arm crank equilibrium समतोल M., साम्य n. 
__used in interlocking) समकार m. equilibrium position समतोल-स्थिति equalizing Com. समकर, समकारी (-इन्) f. 
.mfn. 
equimolecular Chem. समव्यूहाणु e. errors=compensating er- equipment सज्जा f., संभार m. ... .rors समकारी विभ्रम m. 
equipment for hostile action योधन fandसमकारि-प्रणीवि f. 
सज्जा . 
390 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
in. 
Equisetales Bot. Har ta n. (Ta dyes are used in calico printing) 
order) 
ofTe efter 7. Equisetum Bot. अश्ववारति 1. (-ति for e. grey #7f9cm . 
stifa genus) 
___e. violet कालिकट नीललोहित m. equitable Com. Fillou mfn. 
e. yellow कालिकट पीत m. e. mortgage fata ste m. 
ergobasine=ergotocin = ergoste equivalence Chem. FARREICT f. 
trine=ergometrine Biochem. equivalence point = end point प्रधान्यरुजी . 
TEAT-fag m. 
ergometrine-ergobasine equivalent I समाह mfn. (सम equal, ergon Phys. TT m. 
wef value) 
ergo-sterol (ergot + sterol) Biochem. 2 *17, mfn. 
TRT77-7952 . 3 Chem. Whiyo mfn. 
ergostetrine=ergobasine equivalent proportion Fine 1918 ergot 1 (a fungus disease of cereals) 
धान्यरुक equivalent weight Chem. समसंयुज 2 (the fungus causing the dis 
HTT, 7 YTT, TTSTE HTT m. (com ease) 47795 n. bining weight) 
3=ergota (ergot.)=secale cor Er (erbium) Chem. (TRTSTT) 
nutum Pharm. (dried sclerotial era Geol. कल्प m. 
bodies of the fungus consti era black F, era chrome black ) tuting a drug) 691-70 m. (shorten 
conc.=chrome fast black FW ed from 74-144-706) era chrome dark blue B=chrome ergotamine Chem. 897-fandt f. 
blue N 
ergotin Pharm. (an extract of ergot) erase vb. 3890 n. 
Frafra f. eraser उद्धर्षक m. 
ergotinine 47047 f. erasing उद्घर्षण 1. 
ergotism (ergot poisoning) aria erasing knife spate10 f. 
te m. erbia Chem. (erbium oxide) 75T f. ergotocin=ergobasine erbium Chem. रक्तला. 
ergotoxine (ergot to toxine) Chem. erect 1 (upright) zegtet mfn. 
ffrant f. (59909fast) 2 Fea mfn. 
ergot poisoning=ergotism erect aerial Bot, Jee (or 350r) aan. erie black GX0O=direct black erect image Ophthalmol. 57887d-pfaf. 
MS erepsin Biochem. (an enzyme of the e. brown CCN=direct brown 
intestinal juice) for f. erg Phys. $# m. 
e. cardinal 7B=direct red 10B erganone blue Col. Ind. (erganone e . congo 4B=direct congo red 
391 
SG 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
en 
e. direct black GX=direct eriochrome azurol Col. Ind. Furquoi 
black MS 
717 m. e. direct green ET, erie green e. black gurquieti FTT m. 
WT=direct dark green 
e. blue अर्णवर्णक नील m. e. fast brown GR=direct fast e. blue-black suf quiti fit-378UT m. 
brown G 
e. bordeaux Furquia afyarah m. e. fast orange A=direct fast e. brilliant blue ऊर्णवर्णक भासुर नील 
orange SE 
m. e. fast red FD=direct fast red e. brown ऊर्णवर्णक बभ्रु m. 
e. cyanine ऊर्णवर्णक श्यामी f. e. fast scarlet YA=direct fast e. dark blue ऊर्णवर्णक असित नील m. 
scarlet SE 
e.dark brown ऊर्णवर्णक असित बभ्र e. fast yellow WB=cotton yel 
m. low 
e. deep brown suaviar Tray m. e. garnet B=direct garnet R e. flavine zufquia fuaft f. e. green WT=direct dark gre e.gatnet ऊर्णवर्णक निरक्त m. 
e. geranol ऊर्णवर्णक नीलातिलोहित 7. e. orange R=direct orange R e. green ऊर्णवर्णक हरि m. e. pink 2 B=direct brilliant e. grey ऊर्गवर्णक धूसर m. 
rose B extra 
e. indigo sui quia ferritet m. e. red 4 B=direct red 4B 
'e. navy blue ऊर्णवर्णक नाविक नील m. e. scarlet B=direct scarlet B e. olive ऊर्णवर्णक तैलबदर m. e, violet BW=direct violet R e. orange ऊर्णवर्णक नारंग m. e, yellow Y=direct brilliant e. phosphine ऊर्णवर्णक भास्वी f. 
yellow C 
e. red ऊर्णवर्णक रक्त m. erika BB extra=direct pink B 
e. verdone ऊर्णवर्णक हरिका f. erio- ऊर्ण 
e. violet ऊर्णवर्णक नीललोहित m. erio alizarine blue Col. Ind. 30f e. yellow ऊर्णवर्णक पीत m. 
farfoot TTT m. 
eriocyanine Col. Ind. 3quizamH7 f. e. azurine ऊर्ण नभोनीली. 
eriodictyol Chem. ऊर्णाजालव m. e. black ऊर्ण काल m. 
Eriodictyon (Gk erio surf+-diktyon e. blue ऊर्ण नील m. 
FTTET) Bot. 3ofortfa f. (-fa for stafar 
• e: carmine ऊर्ण कीटशोणी f. 
genus) eriochlorine guteoft f. 
erio fast blue Col. Ind. ऊर्ण स्थिर नील erio-chromal bordeaux Col. Ind. suf 
qui ff981 m. 
e. fast brilliant blue o fere e. brown ujquiem . 
HTT TT m. er grey surauit mm. 
e. fast fuchsine ऊर्ण स्थिर धूमली f. . 
e 
indigo Focul pulauano Tile 
m. 
392 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
e. fast purple ऊर्ण स्थिर नीलारुण m. errors excepted विभ्रमाः शोध्या: e. fast red ऊर्ण स्थिर रक्त m. 
eruption Zool. उद्भेदन, उद्गमन n. e. fast violet ऊर्ण स्थिर नीललोहित m. Erweco acid alizarin blue Col. Ind. e. fiavine ऊर्ण पिगी. 
[Erweco is German er(R)-we e. floxine 6 B, 6 BI=amido (W)-co (company)=R. Wedekind ___naphthol red 6B 
and Co.] र. व. अम्ल विमंजिष्ठि नील m. e. green gut fem. 
E. alizarin acid red र. व. विमंजिष्ठि e. navy blue ऊर्ण नाविक नील m. 
अम्ल रक्त m. e. violet ऊर्ण नीललोहित m. 
E. alizatin black र. व. विमंजिष्ठि erioglaucine Col. Ind. ऊर्णानीली f. 
काल m. _____e. supra ऊर्णानीली वरिष्ठ m. 
E. alizarin brown र. व. विमंजिष्ठि eriorubine Col. Ind. ऊर्णरक्ती . 
बभ्रुm. erioviridine Col. Ind. suterea f. 
E. vat yellow र. व. वात पीत m. Erlanger blue=washing blue 
E. yellow र. व. गीत M. Erlenmeyer flask (it allows its con- Erwinia (E.) (a genus pathogenic for 
tents to be shaken laterally with plants) पादपरोगाणु m. (पा.रो) out danger of spilling) अप्यस्कन्द E . amylophila (causes apple पलिघm. 
___and pear blight) उत्कोल पा. रो. erode vb. अपक्षारण, अपरदन . 
erysipelas Med. अरुणचर्म n. erosion Mil. (wearing away of the Erysipelothrix Bact. (a genus of 
barrel of a gun or rifle) TG7 n. Actinomycetaceae) अरुणचर्मकति f. err vb. विभ्रमण ?. 
(-ति for प्रजाति genus) erring विभ्रमण n. . 
Ery. rhusiopathiae (causes swine error विभ्रम m. 
___erysipelas) सूकर अरुणचर्मक n. e. of commission लेख-विभ्रम m. Erysiphaceae Bot. (a family of e. of inadequacy Statistics अ- powdery mildews) क्षोदासिता-कुल n. __पर्याप्तता-विभ्रम m. 
Erysiphe Bot. (a genus of powdery e. of manipulation Statistics mildews) क्षोदासिताति . (-ति for 
ग्रहस्तन-विभ्रम m. 
प्रजाति genus) e. of omission लोप-विभ्रम m. ervthema Med. (abnormal redness of e. of origin Statistics मूल-विभ्रम m. the skin) अतिरक्तिमा (-मन्) m. e. of principle प्रनियम-विभ्रम m. erythema nodosum Med. रक्त पिटक n. e. to be avoided परिहार्य-विभ्रम m. erythrin (Gk. erythros, Skt. रुधिर red) clerical e. लिपिक-विभ्रम m. 
Chem. रुधिरि . compensating e. समकारी विभ्रम m. Erythrina Bot. पारिजातति /. (-ति for 
rectification of e. विभ्रम-संशोधन ?. Starfar genus) errors and omissions excepted E. indica = Indian coral tree 
Com. लोप-विभ्रमौ शोध्यौ 
सामान्य पारिजात m. 
393 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
n. 
erythrine I Chem. रुधिरी f. 
terium coli commune (found 2 Mineral.=erythrite. 
abundantly in the intestines of erythrite Izerythritol Chem. Efafa man) TATRY 67. a. 
Esch. coli mutabile fuaefcast 2 Mineral. Efafcat, alhaalfout m. WT. a. (-इज for खनिज mineral) 
Esch. colofoetida TT. . erythritic (pertaining to, derived Esch, communior (from the 
from, or containing, erythrite or healthy intestinal tract) FOREST erythritol) रुधिरितिक mfn. 
.. e. acid रुधिरितिक अम्ल .. 
Esch. foetida (occurs in the sec erythritol Chem. afera m. 
retions in chronic rhinitis and erythrobenzin Col. Ind. Efertfa f. 
ozena TTT) JETTATTET T. . erythro-blast Anat., Med. FFTTT Esch. galactophila क्षीरधु आ. वे. 
ETC m. 
Esch. gastrica आमाशय प्रा. वे. erythrocyte=red cell रक्तकोशाf. Esch. grunthali (found in some erythrodextrin afaratet f. 
cases of food poisoning) erythropsia Med. (when the eye 
faq T. . sees red) স্বৰহিলা f. 
Esch. iliaca stat . a. erythrosin Chem. Efertat f. 
Esch. khartoumense (found in erythrosine Chen. रुविरोषसी. 
___typhoidal disease) आन्त्रज्वराभ Erythroxylaceae=cocaine family 97. . 
Freio n. 
Esch, neapolitana (found in the Eryx Zool. archyffe f. (-91fT for ETF stools of cholera patients in 
genus) 
Naples) à off 1. a. escalator=moving staircase - Esch. paragruhali (from certain 
Froztuit fi 
cases of food poisoning) som Esch. (Escherichia) 1. a. ( ET) ferent , # escheat=reversion 74TACİT . 
Esch. pseudodysenteriae piet Escherichia (a genus of the family FLOTT 97. a. 
Enterobacteriaceae, found in the escort Mil. Tet () m. 
intestinal canal of normal animals) escort vessel Mil. TT TT 1. (Esch.) Fanu m. (9. a.) escribe vb. Math. area n. Esch. acidi lactici = Bacillus escribed circle Math. are n. 
acidi lactici=Streptococcus esculent, esculentus Bot. (fit lactis 91.9. 
for human food; eatable). ET Esch, alcalescens TT TT.a. 
mfn. Esch, coli=colon bacillus, Ba- esophoria Med. surfaafaret f. 
cillus coli communis, Bac- esotropia Ophthalmol. (movement of 
394 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
the eye towards the medial line) estimate vb., 1. HTTTTT n. उपावर्तिता . 
estimated FTTFUTET mfn. essay निबन्ध m. 
estimated tare Com. आगणित भारमोक essence I सारm. 
__2 (of flowers) परिमल 7., वासा. estimation आगणन . essence of camphor Pharm. कर्पूर estuary Geog. (where the tide meets 
सार. 
the river current) वेलासंगम m. essence of chireta Pbarm. चिरतिक्त- Et, et (ethyl) Chem. दक् (दक्षुल) 
सार m. 
-et- (ethyl) Chem. -द-(दाल) essence of neem Pharm. निम्ब-सार m. etaerio=aggregate fruit Bot. समूह essential आवश्यक, सारभूत mfn. 
फल. essential constituents सारभूत संघटक etch vb. निरेखण 1. 
m. 
etched निरेखित mfn. essential oil Chem. I (volatile) etching निरेखण n. 
उत्पत तैल . 
eth- (ethyl) Chem. द-(दक्षुल) . 2 (odiferous) सुगन्ध तैल 1. 
-eth- (ethyl) Chem. -द-(दक्षुल) establish vb. I Math. प्रतिपादन n. ethal=cetyl alcohol 
2 प्रतिष्ठापन, स्थापन ॥. 
ethanal Chem. (ethane+aldehyde) established प्रतिष्ठापित, स्थापित mfn. दक्षीण्यसु m. establishing प्रतिष्ठापन, स्थापन ?.. ethane (from ether) Chem. दक्षीण्य . establishment Com. स्थापना f., ethane-sulphonate Cbem. दक्षीण्य 
प्रतिष्ठापन । 
शुल्बायीय. e. charges स्थापना-व्यय, स्थापना-प्रभार ethano- Chem. दक्षीण्य 
ethanol Chem. दक्षीण्यव m. establishment of federation संधान- ethanolysis Chem. दक्षीण्यांशन n. 
स्थापना 
ethene Cbem. दक्षेण्य ॥. estate I भूसम्पत्ति f. 
ethenyl Chem. दक्षेण्यला . ___2 (state) राज्यक. 
ether=aether I Chem. दक्षु 7. ('burn ester Chem. (an organic salt प्रांगारिक . ing' from ऋग्वेद from दह; being 
लवण) प्रलवण .. 
a highly inflammable liquid) esterification Chem. प्रलवणन, प्रलवण 2 Phys. व्योम m. 
भवन, प्रलवण-करण 2. 
ether bottle Chem. दक्षु-कूपी . esterify vb. प्रलवणन, प्रलवण-भवन, प्रलवण- ethereal (from ether दक्षु) Chem. दक्षु-, 
करणn. 
दाभव mfn. esterization=esterification 
e. odour दक्षु-गन्ध m. esterize=esterify 
e. oil दाक्षव तैलn. -esthesis -वेदन 
e. salt दाक्षव लवण n. chem-esthesis रासाय-वेदन . 
e. smell=e. odour 
395 
m. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
e. solution दाक्षव विलयन ।. 
ethoxide (ethoxyl Ce077777 + -ide-94) e. tincture दाक्षव निष्कर्ष m. 
Chem. GTGT 14 , e, tincture of lobelia=tinctura -ethoxy- Chem. -GT 
lobeliae aetherea (tinct. lobel. ethoxy- Chem. (a combining form aether.) Pharm. WHETH 27879 for ethoxyl) ET faroeie m. 
ethoxyl Chem. 2-TCT n. ethereal wave Radio 477-7777 m. ethyl Chem. दक्षुल n. etherification Chem. Gelatinut n. 
e. acid blue Col. Ind. C #71 etherify tb, Chen, GhT 1. 
fram. ethide Chem. (a binary compound of e. acid violet Col. Ind. a 9 FT 
ethyl ) n. 
trer m. ethidene Chem. दक्ष्वयेन्या . 
e. alcohol दक्षुल सुषव m. ethine Chem. दक्ष्वी f. 
ethylate Chem. दक्षुलीय ?. cthionic (ethyl cert+thionic for ethyl black Col. Ind. TT TT m. 
Chem. दक्षुगन्धिक mfn. 
e. blue दक्षुल नील m. e.acid दक्षुगन्धिक अम्ल . 
e, carbazole indo-phenol 42 ethmoid 1. (Gk. ethmos sieve+eidos SITTEET FAIT-aria m. 
form) Anat, fastafra n. (fasts sieve e.cyanine दक्षुल श्यामी . 
tafer) 
e.eosine दक्षुल उषसी f. ethmoid = ethmoidal Anat. tara ergreen दक्षुल हरि m. 
mfn. 
e. purple दक्षुल नीलारुण m. ethmoid plate Zool. तैतव पट्टm. 
e. red दक्षुल रक्त m. ethonic brilliant blue 2G=azo e. violet दक्षुल नीललोहित m. 
acid blue 2G 
ethylene Chem. दक्षुलेन्य .. e. fast blue BR conc.=azo fast e. blue Col. Ind. FT TTT m. 
blue BR conc. 
e. chloride दक्षुलेन्य नीरेय . e. fast carmine B=azo rhodine e.-diamine Haft-fafafrit f. 
_e. dichloride दक्षुलेन्य द्विनीरेय . e. fast fuchsineramidonaph _e. gas दक्षुलेन्य वाति m. 
thol red 2B 
ethylic Chem. दक्षुलिक mfn. e. fast green B=acid green S ethylidene Chem. Tentuna n. e. fast orange G=acid orange etiolated Bot. groefa mfn. 
eu- (Gk. eu 'well, good' from Sans e. fast red Gracid carmine krit D) 7-(dys- 7-) e. fast violet 2 RL=azo fast Eu. (europium) Chem. Fifi (Farfarest) 
violet 2R 
Eubacteriales (the unbranched bac e. fast yellow Y=acid yellow teria) mattorit . (777 order) 
eubacterium F latus . 396 
6B 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
eucaine ( 14- + cocaine) Pharm., eunuch me n. 
Chem. स्वचेतनी . 
eunuchism क्लीबताई. eucalypti folium=eucalyptus eunuchoid Med. क्लीबाभ mfn. 
Eucalyptus Bot. अनुकर्पूरति f. (-ति for eunuchoidism Med. क्लीबाभता. 
प्रजाति genus) 
euonymus (euonym.)=wahoo bark eucalyptus अनुकर्पूर m. (Telugu कपुर, Pharm. सुनामवल्क m. 
Tamil you, Egypt kafur; See eupepsia Med. 7497 n. 
Sino-Indian Studies II, p. 70) eupeptic 9979# mfn. eucalyptus (eucalyp.) = eucalypti Euphorbia Bot. graftfa f. (-fa for itfa 
folium=eucalyptus leaf Pharm. genus) 
7997-97 n. 
E. tirucalli #147met greit f. euchrome (eu - 5-) Col. Ind.gquit m. Euphorbiaceae Bot. given. eu-chromosome=autosome afat Euphrates Geog. TTT m. (ancient 
77 n. 
Persian name) euchrysine Col. Ind. Tef. 
eupittone Chem. (Gk. eu- - + pitta eudiometer Chem. (for the volumet- pitch; an orange-coloured acid 
ric measurement and analysis of occurring in beechwood tar) gases) affHTHTT m. 
TIETTE gasometer वातिमान m. 
eupittone black Col. Ind. TTT ATT euflavine Col. Ind. unit f. 
m. Eugenia जम्बुलति.(-ति for प्रजाति genus) eupittonic acid Chem. सुरालिक अम्ल n. 
E. jambolana=-jambul-black Euplectella (having a basket-like ___plum सामान्य जम्बुल 2. 
skeleton, as Venus's flower eugenics afaET, shif. 
basket) पुष्पदलाति f. (वैदल wicker eugenol Chem. (found esp. in oil of work) 
cloves) लवङ्गव m. 
Euplexoptera =Dermaptera Zool. eugenolate Chem. a atun. 
THET: m.pl., Euglena (ex- from Skt. 1- + glena euploid Biol. To mfn. 
art pupil of the eye, eyespot) Europe aanta, farm. 
aterfa f. (-urfa for safet genus) European Faetura mfn. Euglenidae TTT m. 
European frog=Rana temporaria Euglenoidea Zool, gatzt: m.pl. 
Zool. fa-87 m. euglenoid movement Bat. सुतारा-गति europium Chem. किंविरला . 
Eurotium (a genus of moulds or Euler's theorem (E + Z=F+V) fungus, blue-green) Tagfafar f. 
Math. FiraT-SÀI n. (aftet 16+ 4719) (-ft for fortfar genus) . eulytite Mineral. (a bismuth silicate) Euspongia Zool. felesa f. (-urfer 
भिदसैकिज m. (-इज for खनिज mineral) for प्रजाति genus) 
397 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
Eustachian tube Anat. पटहपूर नाल m. event वृत्त N., घटना/. eutectic IN. (an alloy) सुद्रवणातु m. eventoed ungulates युग्माङ्गल-शफिनः 
2 adj. सुद्रवण mfn. 
m. pl. (sg. शफी) e. alloy सुद्रवण मिश्रातु M. 
eventually FRETET: e. mixture सुद्रवण मिश्र n. 
Everest Geog. गौरीशिखर m. (in Nepal) e. temperature सुद्रवण ताप m. evidence साक्ष्य 1. Eutheria Zool. (placental mammals) evident=obvious 746 mfn. 
जरायु-मृगाः m.pl. 
evolution I उद्भव m. euxanthic acid=purreic acid 2 Math. मूलक्रिया f., मूलन 1. 
सुपीतिक अम्ल .. 
3 Biol. (evolution of new species euxanthone=purrone erat f. 
by natural selection) उद्विकास m. . evacuate vb. I (to make empty) शून्यन, evolutionary tendency Bot. उद्विकास 
रिक्त-करण . 
प्रवृत्ति 2 (to produce a vacuum) शून्यकन ?. evolution of new species by na evacuated Chem.(in which a. vacuum tural selection प्रकृत्या वरण द्वारा 
has been produced) शून्यकित mfn. नवजाति-उद्विकासm. evacuating pump=vacuum pump evolve vb. उद्विकासन, उद्विकसन १. 
शून्यक-उदंच m. 
evolved उद्विकसित, उद्विकासित mfn. evaginate ob. बहिर्वलन n. (to turn Evolvulus Bot. विष्णुक्रान्ताति f. (-ति for 
inside out) 
प्रजाति genus) evagination Zool. बहिर्वलन n. 
E. alsinoides सामान्य विष्णुकान्ता. evaluate vb. अपिण 1. ( अहीं + आपन Evonymus Bot. सुनाम f. (-ति for ___ finding the value') 
प्रजाति genus) evaporate vb. उद्वाष्पन 1. 
evonymus Pharm. (root-bark. of evaporating apparatus उद्वाष्पन-साधित्र Evonymus atropurpureus) सुनाम 
वल्क m. e. basin उद्वाष्पन-पात्री . 
ex- बहिर् e. bath उद्वाष्प-तापन n. 
exact तथ्य, यथार्थ mfn. (See accurate) e. surface Bot. उद्वाष्पन तलn. exact differential Math. तथ्यावकल evaporation उद्बाष्पन 1. 
m. evaporation apparatus उद्बाष्पन-साधित्र exactitude=exactness यथार्थता, तथ्यता 
2. , 
evaporator उत्पातक, उद्बाष्पक m. evaporimeter, evaporometer 36164 
मांन m. even युग्म, सम mfn. even distribution सम वण्टन 1. evening meal सायमशन .. 
exactly यथार्थ, यथार्थतः, तथ्यतः exactness तथ्यता, यथार्थता. exact number (whole number) पूर्ण: 
संख्या . exact science तथ्य-विज्ञान .. exaggerated Zool. aferareqa mfn. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
ex-albuminous अश्वितिमत्, शिवतिरहित excess आधिक्य 1., अतिरेक m. 
__mfn. 
_____e.-profits tax अतिरिक्त-लाभ-कर m. ex. all (excluding all) सर्व-रहित • e. water अतिरेक-जल 7. examinant परीक्षिता (-तु) m. 
excessive अत्यधिक, अतिमात्र mfn. examinate=-examine 
e. bail अतिमात्र लग्नक . examination परीक्षा, परीक्षण 1. excess of the acid Chem. अम्ल-अवशेष examinational=examinative परीक्षा- m. examinator परीक्षिता (-त) m. 
exchange vb. विनिमयन 7. examinatorial - examinatory exchange Com. विनिमय m. 
परीक्षकीय, परीक्षीय mfm. 
e. bank विनिमय-अधिकोष m. examine = examinate vb. परीक्षण 1. e. broker विनिमय-मध्यग M. examinee परीक्षार्थी (-इन) m. 
e. house (telephone) विनिमय-गृह . examiner परीक्षक 2. 
(दूरभाष) examinership परीक्षकता. 
e. jobber विनिमय-वणिक m example उदाहरण 1. 
bill of e. विनिमय-पत्र . exarch Bot. ('beginning from out- exchanger (telephone) विनिमायक 
side') बहिरारम्भ mfm. excavate vb. उत्खनन ". 
excise Com. उत्पाद-करा . exceed, exceeding अतिशयन ". 
___e. department उत्पादकर-विभाग, excel b. अतिशयन n. 
___ क्लृप्ति-विभाग m. excelled अतिशयित nfn. 
e. duty (tas on production of excellence siroat f. 
articles in the country) क्लुप्ति excellent श्रेष्ठ mfn. 
f., उत्पादकर . excellent visibility प्रशस्त-दृश्यता. excision उच्छेदन । excelling अतिशायी (-इन्) mr. 
excite vb. प्रदीपन । excelsior (Lat. comparative of excel- excitement (of public feeling) प्रदीपन, 
Sus elevated) उच्चतर mfn. 
आन्दोलन 1., क्षोभ m. excelsior brown Col. Ind. उच्चतर बभ्र excitory stimulus Zool. उद्दीपन, प्रोद्दीपन 
m. e. lake ponceau उच्चतर लाक्षक exclude vb. अपवर्जन 1. 
अधिरक्तापीत m. 
excluded अपवजित mfn. e. scarlet उच्चतर शोण m. 
e. area अपवर्जित प्रदेश m. . excentre Math. बहिष्केन्द्र 
excluding I अपवर्जन । except vb. वर्जन ॥ . 
2==exclusive of=without विना except अतिरिक्त,वजित्वा (Hindiवर्जन करके) exclusion अपवर्जन n. excepted afsta mfn. 
exclusive अपवर्जी (-इन्), केवलमात्र, अनन्य exception, exceptional case अपवाद mfn. 
m. 
exclusively केवल (exclusively one's 
399﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
of 
own, not common to others' exemption from taxation कर-मुक्ति f. 
V.), अन्यापवर्जम, अपवजितया exendospermous Bot. भुक्त-भ्रूणपोष exclusiveness अपवर्जिता f. (from अप 
mfn. वजिन्) 
exercise n. I अभ्यास m. exclusive of=excluding=without 2 प्रयोग m. 
विना 
3 Math. प्रश्नावलि exclusivism अपवर्जिता f. (from अप 4 व्यायाम m. 
वजिन्) 
e. book अभ्यास-पुस्त । ex-conjugant Zoob. पूर्व-संयुग्मित m. e. of authority प्राधिकार-प्रयोग m. 
(which were formerly united) exert force vb. Phys. बल-पातन 1. excreta Physiol. उच्चार, उत्सर्ग m. exertion=effort प्रयास m. excrete vb. उत्सर्जन n. 
exhale vb. उच्छ्व सन n. excreted उत्सृष्ट mfn. 
exhaust vb. उत्स्रावण . excretion मलोत्सर्ग, उत्सर्ग m. 
exhausted उत्स्रावित, निश्शेषित mfn. e. of water जलोत्सर्जन 
exhausted space Phys. उत्सावित परिमा excretory duct उत्सर्ग-प्रणाली. 
(-मन्) m. e. pore उत्सर्ग-रन्ध्रा . 
exhausting निःशेषक mfn. e. system उत्सर्जन-संहति f. 
exhausting pump उत्स्रावांच m. ex dividend Com. लाभांश-रहित 
foote.p. पाद-उत्स्रावांच' m. execute vb. I निष्पादन 1. 
hand e.p. हस्त-उत्स्रावांच m. 2 रिक्थसाधन . (रिक्थपत्र-साधन) exhaustive निःशेषी (-इन्) mfn. execution निष्पादन 1. 
exhaust pipe उत्स्राव-नाड n. executive I निष्पादी (-इन्) mfn. exhaust valve Automobile उत्साव-कपाट 
2 अधिशासी, अधिशासक, अधिशासि-वर्ग . 
m. . 
exhibit vb. प्रदर्शन 1. e. authority अधिशासी प्राधिकार, अधि- exile vb. निर्वासन n. ___ शासी प्राधिकारी (-इन् ) m. 
exine Bot. ('outer coat') बाह्यकवच m. e. council अधिशासि-परिषत् / existence अस्तित्व ., सत्ता. e. department अधिशासी विभाग m. existence theorem सत्ता-प्रमेय . e. government अधिशासि शासन existing वर्तमान mfr. e. officer अधिशासी अधिकारी (-इन 
e. accounts वर्तमान-लेखा/. m 
e. funds वर्तमान-प्रणीवि . e. power अधिशासि-शक्ति . 
e. law वर्तमान विधि m. executor Law रिक्थ-साधक m. 
e. staff वर्तमान कर्मचारि-वर्ग m. executorship Lami रिक्थ-साधकता f. exit tube निष्क्रम-नाल m. । exempt मुक्त mfn. 
exoccipital Anat. (pert. to a bone exempt from tax कर-मुक्त 
or region on each side of the exemption मुक्ति . 
foramen magnum) आभिमहाछिद्र mfn. 
400 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
22. 
e. bone (a process of occipital expanse facafar f. ___bone) उत्पश्चकपाल-अस्थि .. 
expansibility=expansibleness exocrine बहिरासर्गी (-इन्) mfn. 
विस्तार्यता . exodermis Bot. बहिःस्तर m. 
expansible विस्तार्य mfn. ex-officio पदकारणात् 
expansibleness=expansibility e. director पदकारणात् संचालक m. expansion विस्तार m. exogenous Bot. बाह्यजात mfn. 
expansional विस्तारीय mfn. ___e. origin बाह्यजात उद्भव m. 
expansion of currency चलार्थ-विस्तार exophoria Med. अपाविवतिषा. exophthalmic goitre = Graves' expansion valve Mach. विस्तारण-कपाट 
disease उदक्षिगलगंड M. (short for . उदक्षिगोल-गलगंड) 
expansive विस्तारी (-इन्) mfr. éxophthalmos = exophthalmus expansiveness = expansivity ____Med. (abnormal protrusion of the विस्तारिता /. 
eye-ball) उदक्षिगोल m. 
expectation प्रत्याशा, आशंसा f. exopodite Zool. बहिरुपांग . 
___e. of life जीवन-आशंसा f. Exopterygota Zool. बहिर्विकासिपक्षाः expected आशंसित mfn. 
m.pl. 
expel vb. निष्कासन, उद्वासन, निर्यापन n. exoskeleton Zool. afectiilet m. expend, expending Com. व्ययन n. exosmosis बहिरासृति. 
expenditure (expenditure of money) exospore Bot. बहिर्बीजाणु m. 
अर्थव्यय (ancient word), व्यय m. exosporium=exine 
capital e. पुंजी-व्यय m. exothermal = exothermic = exo deferred e. प्रास्थगित व्यय m. 
thermous Chem. (characterized revenue e. आगम-व्यय m. by evolution of heat).mfaqet expenditure connected with post (-इन्) afn. 
war planning and development exoto-spore Biol. (foreign spore') युद्धोत्तर योजना तथा विकास व्यय m. ___अभ्यागतबीजाणु m. 
expenses Com. व्यय m. , exotropia Med. (movement of the direct e. प्रत्यक्ष व्यय m. 
eye away from the medial line) indirect e. परोक्ष व्यय m. . अपावर्तिता. 
productive e. उत्पादी व्यय m. Exp. (expression) Math. पदसं.(पदसंहति) trade e. पण्य-व्यय m. . expand vb. विस्तारण, विस्तरण 1. 
unproductive e. अनुत्पादी व्यय m. expanded विस्तृत, विस्तारित mfn. expenses of Public Service Com expander विस्तारक m. 
missions लोकसेवायोग-व्यय m. expanding विस्तरत्, विस्तारी (-इन्) mfn. experience अनुभव M. . expanding file विस्तारि-नस्ती (-इन्) m. experiment n. संपरीक्षा , प्रयोग m. expanding universe विस्तारि विश्व १. experiment vb. संपरीक्षण N. 
401 
26 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
experimental सांपरीक्ष, संपरीक्षा-, संपरी- exported Com. निष्क्रान्त mfn. 
क्षीय mfn. 
exportet Com. निष्क्रामक m. experimental details संपरीक्षा-विस्तार, exporting Com. निष्क्रामण 7. __ सांपरीक्ष विस्तार m. 
e. agent निष्क्रामण अभिकर्ता (-त) m. experimental farm संपरीक्षा-प्रक्षेत्र n. e. house निष्क्रामण गृह n. experimentally संपरीक्षया 
exports and imports Com. निष्काम्य expert विशारद m. 
तथा प्रवेश्य M. expertness वैशारद्य । 
expose vb. विगोपन, उद्घाटन n. expiration उच्छ्व सन, बहिश्श्वसन' M. (res- exposition विवृति . ____piration श्वसन) 
exposure Photog. fanta m. (ancient expire vb. Com. अवसान ॥. 
word) expired Com. अवसित mfn. 
e. time विगोप-काल m. expired air Hygiene उच्छ्व सित वायु m. express vb. (in words) व्य ञ्जन n. explanation व्याख्या, स्पष्टीकरण 1. express train) Rly, TTTTTT n. explicit Math. Free mfn. 
e. goods आशु भाण्डसंयान 1. explicit function Math. स्पष्ट श्रित . 
e. passenger आशु पथिकसंयान । exploit vb. विदोहन 1. 
e. train = mail train ATT HITT, explosion उत्स्फोटन . 
___ प्राशुग n. explosive n. उत्स्फोट m. 
expressed व्यक्त mfn. explosive adj. उत्स्फोटी (-इन्) mfn. _expression (Exp.) Math. पदसंहति f. 
e. bullet उत्स्फोटि-गोलिका 
(पदसं.) e. compound उत्स्फोटी संयोग m. expression of disapproval प्रतिनिन्दन e. dispersal उत्स्फोटि अपकिरण . . . e. gelatin उत्स्फोटि-शिलषि f. (blast expulsion Chem. निर्यापन, प्रनिष्कासन n. ___ing gelatin उत्स्फोटन रिलषि) exsert vb. बहिःक्षेपण . 
e. power उत्स्फोटि-शक्ति / 
exsiccate vb. उच्छोषण . exponent (of a theory) व्याख्याता (-त) exstipulate Bot. अननु पत्र . 
m. 
extend vb. वितनन n. exponential series Math. घाताङ्क-श्रेढी extended I वितत mfn. 
2 Mil. असंहत mfn. exponent of the power Math. Ele extended order Mil., Nav. (arrange 
ment of troops or ships in line export vb. निष्क्रामण . 
with greater intervals between export n. निष्काम्य . (from कौटल्य units than in regular formation) 
अर्थशास्त्र) 
असंहत क्रम m. (असंहत from शुक्रनीति) e. duty निष्काम्य-कर m. 
extender=extensor Math. वितानकm. e. merchant निष्क्रामण वणिक m. extensibility = extensibleness e. trade निष्काम्य-व्यापार m. 
Math. वितान्यता f. 
m. 
402 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
बा 
mfn. 
extensible = extensile Math. विता-य external rectus Zool. बाह्य-ऋजुपेशी f. 
mfn. 
external use (of medicines) Pharm. extensimeter=extensometer Math. बाह्य प्रयोग M., बाह्य सेवन 2. 
वितानमान' M. 
extero-ceptor Anat. बाह्यादाता (-४) m. extension 1 प्रसरण, प्रसारण n., प्रसार M. extinct Bot. परिमृत mfn. 
2 Math. वितान 1. 
extine Bot. बाह्यकवच 1. extension staff प्रसार-कर्मचारिवर्गm. extinguisher शामयिता (-त) M. extensive विस्तृत, विस्तीर्ण, वितानी (-इन) extra-additional अतिरिक्त-समधिक 
infn. extensive agriculture Econ. विस्तीर्ण extra additional judge अतिरिक्त अपर 
कृषि m. 
न्यायाधीश m. extensive investigation Matb. विस्तृत extracambial (tissue) Bot. एधा-बाह्य 
अनुसंधान . 
mfn. extensometer=extensimeter extracellular Zool. कोशाबहिस्थ, कोशा extensor i=extender Math. fae17% बाह्य Mfn. 
m. . 
extract=extractum (ext.) Pharm. 2 Anat. प्रसारक m. 
निस्सार m. extent I Math. वितति. 
extract vb. निस्सारण. 2 Com. मात्रा . 
extracting निस्सारण, निस्सारक mfn. extent of executive authority अधि- e. liquid निस्सारक तरल m. 
शासी प्राधिकार की मात्रा . 
e. temperature FETTTT SITT m. exterior angle Geom. बहिष्कोण m. extraction FIFATTOT . external बाह्य afn. 
e. apparatus=extractor FTFATTOT external affairs बहिर्देशीय कार्यn. 
साधित्र-निस्सारित्र । external and oral use Pharm. बाह्य e. flask निस्सारण पलिघm. 
तथा आभ्यन्तर सेवन . 
e. of square roots Math. वर्गमूल external bisector Math. बाह्यार्धक m. 
निस्सारण n. external ear Anat. बाह्य कर्ण m. 
e. tank निस्सारण-तडाग. external economics बाह्य-अर्थव्यवस्था . extractor I निस्सारक m. external features बाह्य स्वरूप 1. 
2 (extraction apparatus) निस्सा external form बहीरूप. 
रित्र n. external jugular vein Zool. बहिर्मातृका extractum=extract Pharm.निस्सारm. 
e. abroma augusta liquidum externally बाह्यतः 
तरल रजोयूष-निस्सार-m. externally in the inverse ratio e. aconiti liquidum तरल प्रविष 
बाह्यतः प्रतीपनिष्पत्ती 
निस्सार M. (Lesco) external morphology बाह्य रचनाकार . e. adhatodae liquidum तरल 
वासक-निस्सार m. 
m. 
403 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
e. agropyri liquidum=liquid 
extract of couch grass तरल 
शायिघास-निस्सार m. e.alstonia सप्तपर्ण-निस्सार m. e. apocyni cannab. liquidum 
तरल प्रगंजा-निस्सार m. e. arjun अर्जुन-निस्सार m. (Lesco) e. arnicae (rad.) liquidum तरल 
गिरिताम्रकूटमूल-निस्सार m. e. asoka अशोक-निस्सार M. (Lesco) e. aswagandha अश्वगंधा-निस्सार m. 
(Lesco) e. aurantii liquidum=liquid 
extract of orange तरल नारंग निस्सार m. e. bael बिल्व-निस्सार m. (I.esco) e. bael et inderjab बिल्व तथा 
इन्द्रयव-निस्सार m. e. belladonnae liquidum तरल 
कंटालिका-निस्सार m. e. berberidis liquidum तरल 
प्रादारुहरिद्रा-निस्सार m. e. buchu liquidum=liquid 
extract of buchu तरल गुरुगन्ध 
निस्सार m. e. calumbae liquidum तरल इन्दु 
मूल-निस्सार m. (Lesco) e. cascarae sagradae liquidum 
=liquid extract of cascara 
sagrada तरल पुण्यवल्क-निस्सार m. e. cimicifugael iquidum तरल 
कीटद्राव-निस्सार m. e. cinchonae rub. liquidum 
तरल रक्तविताप-निस्सार m. e. coto liquidum=liquid ex __tract of coto तरल आन्त्रवल्क- 
निस्सार m. e. cubebae liquidum=liquid 
extract of cubeb तरल गन्धमरिच निस्सार m. e. damianae liquidum=liquid 
extract of damiana तरल बाजपत्र निस्सार m. e. dashmul दशमूल-निस्सार m. 
(Lesco) : e. digitalis liquidum तरल अंगुलक 
निस्सार M. (Lesco) e. ergotae liquidum=liquid 
extract of ergot तरल रुग्धान्य निस्सार m. e. ergot. ammon. liquidum तरल 
तिक्त. रुधान्य-निस्सार m. e.euonymi liquidum तरल सुनाम 
वल्क-निस्सार m. e. gelsemii liquidum तरल पीत 
जाति-निस्सार m. e.gentianae liquidum तरल किरात 
निस्सार m. (Lesco) e.glycyrrhizae liquidum = 
liquid extract of liquorice " तरल मधुयष्टि-निस्सार m. e.gokhru liquidum तरल गोक्षुर 
निस्सार m. (Lesco) e. grindeliae liquidum=liquid 
extract of grindelia तरल कासपत्र निस्सार m. e. gulancha co. liquidum तरल __संयुत गुडूची-निस्सार m. (Lesco) 
e. hamamelidis liquidum == 
liquid extract of hamamelis तरल शोणस्थाप-निस्सार m. e. hemidesmus liquidum तरल 
सारिवा-निस्सार m. (Lesco) e. hemidesmus siccum शुष्क 
सारिवा-निस्सार m. e. hydrastis liquidum=liquid 
- 
i 
. 
404 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
extract of hydrastis तरल पीतमूल e. picrorhizae liquidum तरल निस्सार m. 
कटुक-निस्सार m. (Lesco) e. hyoscyami liquidum = e. podophylli liquidum तरल 
liquid extract of hyoscyamus प्रलघुपत्र-निस्सार m. तरल कुक्कुटविष-निस्सार m. 
e. pulsatillae liquidum=liquid e. ipecacuanhae liquidum== extract of pulsatilla तरल अदल 
liquid extract of ipecacuanha पुष्प-निस्सार m. तरल वममूल-निस्सार m. 
e. punarnava liquidum तरल e. jaborandi liquidum=liquid पुनर्नवा-निस्सार m. (Lesco) 
extract of jaborandi तरल स्वेदन e. rhei liquidum=liquid ex निस्सार m. 
tract of thubarb तरल चीनरेच e. jambolan liquidum तरल जम्बुल निस्सार m. 
निस्सार m. (Lesco) 
e. sarsae co. siccum शुष्क संयुत e. kalamegha liquidum तरल प्रासारिवा-निस्सार m.(Lesco) ___ कालमेघ-निस्सार m. (Lesco) 
e. sarsae liq. comp. संयुत तरल e. kamala liquidum तरल कमला 
प्रासारिवा-निस्सार m. (Lesco) निस्सार m. (Lesco) 
e. senegae liquidum=liquid e.kantikari liquidum तरल कण्ट 
extract of senega तरल ___ कारि-निस्सार m. (Lesco) 
क्लोम्यमूल-निस्सार m. e. kavae liquidum=liquid ex 
e. sennae liquidum=liquid tract of kava तरल मदमरिच-निस्सार 
extract of senna तरल रंगलता 'm. 
निस्सार m. e.khetpapra liquidum तरल 
e. stillingiae liquidum तरल क्षेत्रपर्पट-निस्सार M. (Lesco) 
लालामूल-निस्सार m. e.kurchi liquidum तरल कुटज 
निस्सार M. (Lesco) 
e. taraxaci liquidum = liquid e. kuth liquidum तरल कुष्ठ-निस्सार 
extract of taraxacum तरल 
दुग्धतिक्ता-निस्सार m. __m. (Lesco) 
e.lodh. liquidum तरल लोध्र-निस्सार 
e. valerianae liquidum=liquid 
extract of valerian तरल जटिला m. e. nucis vomicae liquidum = 
निस्सार m. liquid extract of nux vomica e. viburni prunifol. liquidum तरल कुलक-निस्सार m. 
तरल योन्य-निस्सार m. (Lesco) e. opii liquidum = liquid ex- extra-curricular activity afe:1762 
tract of opium तरल अहिफेन- चेष्टा f. निस्सार m. 
extra-fascicular (cambium) Bot. पूल e. pareirae liquidum तरल वनवल्ली- बाह्य mfn. 
निस्सार m. (Lesco) 
extra-floral Bot. पुष्प-बाह्य mfn. 
405 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
- 
प्रत्य 
extra-gear wheel Automobile अधि- section Geom. मध्यकान्त निष्पत्ति f. 
दन्ति-चक्र. 
=मध्यकी छेद m. extra London blue-soluble blue extreme left नितान्त वामवर्ती (-इन्) extra-molecular Chenm. व्यूहाणु-बाह्य extremely नितान्त, अत्यन्त 
mfn. 
extremely fine powder अत्यन्त सूक्ष्म extraneous बाह्य, असंगत Mfn. 
क्षोद m. extra-nuclear न्यष्टि-बाह्य mfn. 
extremes=end terms Matb. अन्तपद extraordinary असाधारण mfn. 
m. e. charges असाधारण प्रभार m. extreme values Math. उभयान्त-अर्हा f. e. expenditure असाधारण व्यय m. extremity I Math. अनn. e. item असाधारण पद n. 
2Com. चरमसीमा. e. meeting असाधारण अधिवेशन .. 3 Statistics अग्र, अन्तपद n. 
e. resolution असाधारण संकल्प m. extrorse lobes Bot. बहिर्मुख-पालिf. extra payment अधि-देय n. 
exudations (include resins and extrapolation Statistics बाह्य-गणन ?. gums) निरुद्यास m. 
interpolation प्रान्तर-गणन . 
eye नेत्र, अक्षिा . (from अक्षि are derived extrapolation Math. बहिर्वेश m. 
Gk, okkos, Lat. oculus, German ___interpolation अन्तर्वेश m. 
Auge, Russ, oko, Lith. akis, Eng. extra-provincial jurisdiction प्रान्त 
eye) बाह्य अधिकारक्षेत्र n. 
___eyeball अक्षि-गोल m. extra xylem ring Bot, बाह्य दारु वलय eye-bolt Macb. नेत्रार्गली f. ___m. 
eyelash पक्ष्म n. extreme n. चरम-सीमा । 
eyelid वर्त्म n. (from सुश्रुत), नेत्रछद m. extreme I (utmost) नितान्त, अत्यन्त, eye-piece Microscope नेत्र-वीक्षm. 
प्रत्यर्थ mfn. 
eye-protector नेत्रप, नेत्र-गोप m. 2 (at the utmost point, edge or eyes front Drill पुरोनेत्रम् । border) TTHATHTFT mfn. 
eye socket=orbit अक्षिकूप m. (from 3 (outermost) बाह्यतम mfn. 
Pali) 4 (farthest, most remote) दूरतम, eye-specialist नेत्र-विशेषज्ञ m. दविष्ठ mf. 
eye-spot = stigma (of an Euglena) 5 (last, final) चरम, अन्तिम mfn. ___ Biol. अक्षिलांछन M., अक्षितारा, तारा. 6 (in the greatest degree) परम eye-strain नेत्रायास M. (प्रायास=weari mfn. 
___ness+pain) extreme and mean ratio=medial eye-tooth Anat. अक्षि-दन्त m. 
. 
406 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
F. (Fusiformis) त. (तर्कुरूप) 
factory Com. निर्माणी, निर्माणशाला f. F, FI Chem. (Auorine) त (तरस्विनी) f. act निर्माणी-अधिनियम m. F, Zool. (first filial generation) HA f. cost निर्माणी-परिव्यय m. 
(प्रथम-सन्तति) 
f. expense निर्माणी-व्यय m. F, Zool. (second filial generation) f. oncost (factory expenses) 
स, (द्वितीय-सन्तति) 
निर्माणी-अधिव्यय m. Fs Zool. (third filial generation) स: _f. wages निर्माणी-भृति f. 
(तृतीय-सन्तति) 
facts and figures Statistics तथ्य तथा fabric तन्तु m. 
अंक m. face vb. Engin. अनीकन, अनीककरण n. facultative Bot. ऐच्छिक, वैकल्पिक mfn. face r मुख n. 
facultative endorsement Com. 2 Math. अनीकn. 
ऐच्छिक-पृष्ठांकना . 3 (of a crystal) अनीक, पार्श्व ?. facultative hypermetropia Ophthal face angle Math. अनीक-कोण m. 
mol. (hypermetropia that can be faced Engin. अनीकित, कृतानीक mfn. entirely corrected by the unaided face powder मुख-क्षोद m. 
accommodative power of the face powder white Col. Ind. मुख- eye) स्वशोध्य-पश्चनाभिता f. 
क्षोद-श्वेत . 
_facultative parasite वैकल्पिक परजीवी facet Phys. अनीक n. 
(-इन्) m. face value=nominal value Com. faeces गूथ M., विष्ठा f., मल, शकृत् . ____ अभिहित-अरे . 
Fahrenheit (thermometer scale 32° facial nerve Anat. अनीक-चेता. 
F - 212° F.) द्वात्रिंशादि (३२° द्व. -faciens Bact कर 
२१२° द्व.) -facient -कर 
Fahrenheit thermometer द्वात्रिंशादि facilitate vb. सुकर-करण . 
तापमान m. facility सुविधा . 
failed (in exam.) अनुत्तीर्ण, असफल mfn. fact तथ्य . 
failure विफलता, असफलता f., अभाव m. factor I (-reactant) प्रतिकारक m. faint मन्द mfn. (Hindi धीमी) 
2 Bot. कारक m. 
faint smell मन्द गन्ध m. 3 Math. (a factor of multiplica- fair Com. न्याय्य, उचित, सत्य mfn. tion) खण्ड m. (गुणन-खण्ड) 
f. dealing सत्य व्यवहार m. 4Com. मध्यग वणिक् m. 
"f. prices उचित मूल्य १. factorial Matb. हत mfn. (short for f. rent उचित भाटक 1. 
एकादिहत) 
__ fairy finger अप्सरोंगुलि f. factors of production Econ. उत्पाद- falcon Zool. लघुश्येन m. 
कारक 1. 
fallacious भ्रान्तिकारी (-इन्) mfn. 
407 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
f. conclusion भ्रान्तिकारी परिणाम 3 Zool. वंश m. 
family budget परिवार-आयव्ययक . fallacy भ्रान्ति . 
family of circles Math. वृत्त-कुल n. fall in Drill पंक्तिबद्धाः 
family pension funds कुटुम्ब-उत्तरवेतन falling leaf Mil. (a series of side- प्रणीवि . 
slips of an aircraft first to one famine expenditure दुर्भिक्ष-व्यय m. side and then to the opposite famine relief दुर्भिक्ष-सहायता side) पतत्पर्ण 1. 
fan व्यजन n. fall of bullet Mil. गोलिका-पात m. 
electric f. विद्युद्-व्यजन . fall of leaves पत्र-पात m. 
fan-belt Automobile व्यजन-पट्टी. Fallopian tube = uterine tube fan coral Zool. व्यजन-प्रवाल m. 
गर्भाशय-नाल m. 
fang Zool. I दंष्ट्रा f. fallow land अप्रदा भूमि f. (अप्रदा is an 2 (poisonous teeth) विषदन्त M. ___ancient word) 
fan palm=talipot Bot, stratat m. false Com. मिथ्या, कूट mfn. 
fan-shaped flame व्यजनाचि m. false balance Phys. कूट-तुला. fantole 2 R=fur grey B false baseline Statistics कूट-आधार-रेखा far दूर 
farad Elec. (unit of electrical capa false dichotomy Bot. कूट-युग्मशाखिता city) धुक्षम m. 
Faraday laws (of electrolysis) Chem. false fruit=pseudocarp Bot. कूट फल विद्युदंशन-नियम m. 
Faraday's dark space (first dark false image Ophthalmol. मिथ्या-मति f. space) प्रथम तिमिर-प्रदेश m. false indusium Bot. कट बीधागोप m. farcy=glanders अश्वग्रन्थि m. false netwings Zool. कूट जालपक्षा: fare Com. भाटक n. 
___m.pl. 
railway f. संयान-भाटक n. false ribs Anat. सहयुत पशु m. 
farina मण्ड m. false signal कूट-संज्ञप्ति f. 
farm वाट (Hindi बाड़ा), प्रक्षेत्र . false vocal cords कूट-घोषतन्त्री f. farm breed प्रक्षेत्र-अभिजात . false weight Math. कूट भार m. far point Ophthalmol. दूर-बिन्दु m. familial कुलागत mfn. 
fascia स्तरीf. familiar परिचित mfn. 
f. bulbi = Tenon's capsule familiar example परिचित उदाहरण . 
Ophthalmol..अक्षिगोल-प्रावर m. family I (in a general sense) कुल, fascicular cambium Bot. पूलीय-एधा 
कुटुम्ब n. joint Hindu f. हिन्दु संयुक्त कुल, हिन्दु fascicular zone (layer of columnar 
सम्मिलित कुटुम्ब. 
cells) = zona fasiculata Zool. 2 Bot., Chem. कुल 1. 
स्तंभकोशा-स्तर m. 
. 
408 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
f. acid phloxine स्थिर अम्ल ज्वाली 
fasciculated bladder सूत्रिकला-बस्ति m. fasciculus Anat. तन्तुपूल m. Fasciola Zool. एकतश्चूषाति f. (-प्राति for 
प्रजाति genus) 
F. hepatica. याकृत एकतश्चूष m. Fasciolidae एकतश्चूषवंश m. Fascioloidea (a superfamily प्रवंश) 
एकतश्चूष-प्रवंश m. Fasciolopsis एकतरचूषाभाति f. (आति 
for tfa genus) F.buski (largest intestinal fluke) 
महत्तम एकतश्चूषाभ m. fast 1 दृढ mfm. 
2 (resisting) Bact. अधाव्य mfn. (not washable) acid-fast अम्लाधाव्य mfn. alcohol-fast सुषवाधाव्य mfn. 
3 (colours) स्थिर mfn. fast acid black Col. Ind. स्थिर अम्ल 
काल . f. acid blue स्थिर अम्ल नील m. f. acid bordeaux स्थिर अम्ल कपिशक 
m. f. acid brilliant green स्थिर अम्ल 
भासुर हरि m. f. acid brown स्थिर अम्ल बभ्रm. f. acid cerise स्थिर अम्ल धूमलकी f. f. acid cochineal स्थिर अम्ल इन्द्रगोप 
m. f. acid cyanine स्थिर अम्ल श्यामी 
f. acid purple स्थिर अम्ल नीलारुण 
m. f. acid red स्थिर अम्ल रक्त M. f. acid rosamine स्थिर अम्ल पाटल 
तिक्ती। f. acid violet स्थिर अम्ल नीललोहित 
m. f. acid yellow स्थिर अम्ल पीत M. f. anthrazurol स्थिर विक्षनभोव m. f. azo garnet base स्थिर अज निरक्त 
पीठ m. f. black स्थिर काल m. f. blue स्थिर नील m. f. blue-black paste स्थिर नील-कृष्ण 
लेपी. f. blue developer स्थिर नील विकासक 
m. f. bluish grey स्थिर आनील धूसर 
m. f. bordeaux स्थिर कपिशक M. f. brilliant red स्थिर भासुर रक्त m. f. brown स्थिर बभ्रm. f. chrome black स्थिर वर्णक काल 
__ 
m. 
f. acid eosine स्थिर अम्ल उषसी. f. acid fuchsine स्थिर अम्ल धूमली. f. acid green स्थिर अम्ल हरि m. f. acid magenta स्थिर अम्ल धूम्रली. f. acid navy blue स्थिर अम्ल नाविक 
नील m. f. acid orange स्थिर अम्ल नारंग m. 
f. chrome blue fere quiti fitt m. f. chrome cyanine स्थिर वर्णक 
श्यामी. f. chrome yellow स्थिर वर्णक पीत 
m. f. corinth स्थिर रोहित m. f. cotton blue स्थिर तूल नील m. f. cotton brown स्थिर तल बभ्रm. f. cotton red स्थिर तूल रक्त m. f. crimson स्थिर कामिज m. f. cyanine blue स्थिर श्यामी नील 
m. 
409﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
f. cyanine brown स्थिर श्यामी बभ्र 
. f. cyanine dark blue स्थिर श्यामी 
असित नील m. f. cyanine field grey स्थिर श्यामी 
सेना धूसर m. f. cyanine green स्थिर श्यामी हरि 
11. 
f. cyanine grey स्थिर श्यामी धूसर m. f. cyanine navy blue स्थिर श्यामी 
नाविक नीलm. f. dark blue स्थिर असित नील M. f. direct violet स्थिर अनाश्रित नील 
लोहित m. f. fuchsine स्थिर धूमली f. f. garnet frete fare a m. f. green स्थिर हरिm. f.grey स्थिर धूसर m. f. indigo blue स्थिर निनील नील m. f. lake bordeaux स्थिर लाक्षक 
कपिशक m. f. lake red स्थिर लाक्षक रक्त m. f. leather brown स्थिर चर्म बभ्रु 
m. f. light blue स्थिर लघु नील m. f. light green स्थिर लघु हरि M. f. light orange स्थिर लघु नारंग m. f: light red स्थिर लघु रक्त m. f. light yellow स्थिर लघु पीत m. f. milling red स्थिर संकोचन रक्त m. f. mordant black स्थिर स्थापक काल 
m. f. mordant blue स्थिर स्थापक नील 
m. f..mordant yellow स्थिर स्थापक 
पीत M. .f. myrtle green=dark green f. navy blue स्थिर नाविक नील m. 
410 
f. navy grey स्थिर नाविक धूसर m. f. neutral blue FETT Fora ITCT m. f. neutral violet स्थिर क्लीब नील 
लोहित m. f. new blue स्थिर नव नील m. f. oil brown स्थिर तैल बभ्र m. f. oil orange स्थिर तैल नारंग m. f. oil red स्थिर तैल रक्त m. f. oil scarlet स्थिर तैल शोण m. f. oil yellow स्थिर तैल पीत m. f. orange स्थिर नारंग m. f. phosphine स्थिर भास्वी f. f. pink स्थिर पापद्म m. f. ponceau स्थिर अधिरक्तापीत m. f. printing brown स्थिर मुद्रण बभ्रु 
__m. f. printing green स्थिर मुद्रण हरि m. f. red स्थिर रक्त m. f. rubine स्थिर रक्ती f. f. scarlet स्थिर शोण m. f. silk grey स्थिर कौशेय धूसर . f. silk red स्थिर कौशेय रक्त m. f. silk yellow स्थिर कौशेय पीत m. f. spirit yellow स्थिर प्रासव पीत m. f. steam green स्थिर प्रबाष्प हरि m. f. sulphon black स्थिर शुल्बा काल m. f. sulphon blue स्थिर शुल्बा नील m. f. sulphon violet स्थिर शुल्बा नील __लोहित m. 
f. to light yellow प्रकाश-स्थिर पीत 
m. f. union black स्थिर मेल काल m. f. violet स्थिर नीललोहित m. f. white स्थिर श्वेत m. f. wool blue स्थिर ऊर्णा नील m. f. wool cyanone स्थिर ऊर्णा श्यामा 
f. wool green स्थिर ऊर्णा हरि m. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
f. wool violet स्थिर ऊर्णा नीललोहित fathom (6 ft.) धनु M. (ध) 
fatigue श्रान्ति m. f. wool yellow स्थिर ऊर्णा पीत m. fatigued श्रान्त Mfn. f. yellow स्थिर पीत m. 
fat-soluble Biochem. स्नेह-विलेय mfn. f. yellow greenish स्थिर पीत आहरि fat-tapeworm स्नेह-पट्टकृमि M. . . 
fatty वसा-, स्नेहीय mfn. fast colour स्थिर रंग m. 
fatty acid Chem. स्नेहाम्ल 1. fastened to mfn. 
fatty adipose tissue Anat. वसिनी वपोति fastener बन्धक m. fastness स्थिरता, दृढता . 
fatty oil Chem. (not volatile) अनुत्पत fast pulley Mach. (a pulley pinned तैल 1. ____to a shaft)बद्ध आकृषि m. 
fatty substance स्नेही पदार्थ m. fast to light प्रकाश-स्थिर mfn. 
fatty tissue Anat. वसोति f. fast to soap स्वफेन-स्थिर mfn. 
fault अपराध, दोष m. fat n. वसा f. (animal fat), स्नेह m. (it fauna प्राणिजात . 
includes both animal as wel as favourable con mfn. vegetable fats) 
favourite वल्लभ m. beef f. गोमांस-स्नेह M., गो-वसाf. favus Med. आदारुण ॥. butter f. नवनीत-स्नेह m. 
fawn=fawn brown (a brown बभ्रु, fatal (lethal) घातक mfn. (प्राणहर) 
red-yellow in hue, of low satu fat black Col. Ind. स्नेह काल M. 
ration 79 and medium brilliance) f. blue स्नेह नील m. 
अवब m. f. bordeaux स्नेह कपिशक m. Fe (ferrum) Chen. अ (अयस्) f. brown स्नेह बभ्रु m. 
feasible Math. शक्य, योग्य, साध्य, संभाव्य f. induline स्नेह सुनीली f. 
mfn. f. nigrosine स्नेह असिती . 
feather Zool. पतत्र, पत्र, पक्षि-पत्र ।. f. orange स्नेह नारंग m. 
feather alum Mineral. पत्र-स्फटी . f. ponceau स्नेह अधिरक्तापीत m. feather and guinea experiment (of f. red स्नेह रक्त m. 
Newton) Phys. पक्ष-सुवर्ण-संपरीक्षा f. f. violet स्नेह नीललोहित m. 
(सुवर्ण a gold coin) f. yellow स्नेह पीत m. 
feather key = sliding key Mach. fat body Zool. स्नेह-काय M. 
___ सर्पि-कीला=सृप-कुञ्ची f. fat-colour स्नेह-रंग m. 
feather white Col. Ind. पक्ष श्वेत M. fat deposition Zool. मेद-निक्षेप m. feathery crystal लघुक स्फट m. fat extraction apparatus स्नेह-निस्सा- feathery outgrowth Zool. पक्षवद् उद्वर्ध 
रण-साधित्रा. 
__ m. fat-formation Bot. स्नेह-निर्माण . febrile jaundice ज्वरि-कामला. fat-free strips अस्नेह-पट्टी . 
February द्वितीयमास m. 
411 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
feces=faeces 
felt black Col. Ind. नमत काल m. federal संघानीय mfn. 
felt disc नमत बिम्ब m. f. animal husbandry tesearch female cone Bot. स्त्री-शंकु m. 
institute संघानीय पशुपालन अन्वेषालय female genital aperture Zool. स्त्री 
12. 
जनन-विवर. f. constitution संघानीय संविधान n. female pronucleus Biol. स्त्री-पूर्वन्यष्टि f. court संधानीय न्यायालय m. f. executive संघानीय अधिशासिवर्गm. female sex gland Zool. स्त्री-लिंग-ग्रंथि f. laws संधानीय विधि m. f. legislature संधानीय विधान-मण्डल n. female spider स्त्री-लूता. f. purposes संधानीय प्रयोजन n. ___male spider लूता-नरm. f. railway authority संघानीय संयान femoral n. Anat., Zool. (a femoral 
प्राधिकार m. 
____shield) ऊरुक m. f. revenues संधानीय पागम m. femoral=crural Anat. ऊरु-, औरव mfn. f. states संहित राज्य . 
f. artery ऊरु-रोहिणी /. f. units PETIT N. 
f. triangle अरु-त्रिकोण m. federation संधान 1. 
femoro- अरु-, औरव ___f. of India भारत-संधान 1. 
femur=thigh bone Anat, gepfe n. fee Com. शुल्क 1. 
fenchene Chem. मेथ्येन्य. ___directors' f. संचालक-शुल्क 1. fenchone Chem. मेथ्या f. feed Mach. प्रदाय M. 
fenchyl Chem. मेथिल n. feed heater Steam Engine (a vessel fenestra Anat. गवाक्ष m. 
in which the feed water for the f. cochleae=f. rotunda boiler is heated, usually by ex f. hypophyseos=anterior basi 
haust steam) देयजल तापक M. 
cranial f. Zool. TUTETETUT TETET feeding of infants शिशु-प्राशन ॥. 
m. feeding tube प्राशन-नाल m. 
f. ovalis = f. vestibuli अण्डाकार feeler Zool. अभिमर्श m. 
गवाक्ष m. Fehling solution Chem. facer fan art f. rotunda=f. cochleae वर्तुल गवाक्ष 
m. feldspar Mineral. (all of them are f. vestibuli=f. ovalis 
aluminium silicates स्फटयातु सैकतीय) fennel = foeniculum (foenic.) स्फतीय . 
Pharm, मेथि . Felidae Zool. विडालवंश m. (वंश family) f.water-aqua foeniculi मेथि-वारि Felis Zood. विडालाति (-पाति for प्रजाति 
genus) 
ferment faica 1. F. tigris व्याघ्र विडाल m. . 
fermentation Biochem. fafvaht n. felt नमत 1. 
f. tube Bact. किण्वन-नाल m. 
. 
412 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
mone 
fern Bot. (a plant with feathery f. phosphas=iron phosphate 
leaves) पर्णाङ्ग M. 
अयो-भास्वीयn. fern allies Bot. पर्णाङ्ग-बन्धु M. 
ferri-prussiate=ferri-cyanide Feronia Bot. कपित्थति . (-ति for प्रजाति ferri-prussic=ferri-cyanic 
genus) 
ferrite I Petrog. अयोश्म M. F. elephantum सामान्य कपित्थ . 2 (pure metallic iron) धात्वयस -ferous I (Lat. fero, Gk. pbero, from 2. 
Sanskrit भ) I Chem. -भर Mfn. 3Chem. अयसित .. 2 (producing) -जन mfn. 
ferri-tungstite Mineral. (a hydrous 3 (yielding) -द mfn. 
ferric tungstate) अयसि-चंडिज m. Ferozabad Geog. चन्द्रपुर . (near Agra) (-इज for खनिज mineral) ferrate Chem. अयसीय 1. 
ferro- I (ferrum) अयस्- (by sandhi ferri- (ferric) Chem. अयसि- (अयसिक) अयः-, अयष्-, अयश्-, अयो-) ferric Chem. अयसिक Mfn. 
2 (ferrous) अयस्य f. acetate Pharm. अयसिक शुक्तीय n. ferro-alloy अयो-मिश्रातु m. f. acid अयसिक अम्ल 7. 
ferro-aluminium अयस्-स्फटयातु m. f. chloride अयसिक नीरेय . ferro-boron अयष्टांकण m. f. hydrate अयसिक जलीय . 
ferro-calcite Mineral. (calcite con f. hydroxide अयसिक उदजारेय.. taining ferrous carbonate) अयस्य f. oxide अयसिक जारेय ॥. 
चूर्णिज m. (-इज for खनिज mineral) f. salt अयसिक लवण 1. 
ferro-carbon-titanium अयोगार-रंजातु f. sulphate अयसिक शुल्बीय 1. 
m. f. thio-cyanate अयसिक गन्ध-श्यामीय ferro-cerium अयः-पुष्कला. ___n. 
ferro-chrome अयोवर्णक m. ferri-chloride Chem. अयसि-नीरेय . ferro-chrome silk black Col. Ind. ferri-cyanic Chem. अयसि-श्यामिक mfn. अयोवर्णक कौशेय काल m. ferri-cyanide Chem. अयसि-श्यामेय 1. ferro-chromium अयो-वर्णातु m. 
rricyanide black Col. Ind. अयसि- ferro-cyanic Chem. अयस्य-श्यामिक mfa. 
श्यामेय काल m. 
ferro-cyanide Chem. अयस्य-श्यामेय .. ferri-cyanogen Chem. अयसि-श्यामजन ferro-cyanogen Chem. अयस्य-श्यामजन 
m. 
m. ferri-ferous Chem. अयो-भर mfr. ferroferricyanide Chem. अयस्यायसि ferri-hydro-cyanic Chem. अयसि-उद- श्यामेय . 
श्यामिक mfn. 
ferro-goslarite Mineral. (goslarite ferri iodidum=iron iodide Pharm. containing ferrous sulphate) अयस्य 
अयो-जम्बेय. 
कुप्यशुल्बिज M. (-इज for खनिज mineral) f. perchloridum=ferric chlo- ferro-green Col. Ind. (for printing) . 
ride अयसिक नीरेय . 
अयो-हरि M. (मुद्रणार्थ) 
413 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
ferro-magnesian Mineral. अयो-भ्राजिय fertile Bot. अवन्ध्य nfn. 
mfn. 
fertilization Biol. निषेचन n. ferro-manganese अयो-लोहक.. 
pollination TTITUT n. ferro-molybdenum अयस्-संवर्णातु m. fertilize vb. निषेचन ॥. ferro-natrite Mineral. (sodium ferric fertilized fofuran mfn. 
_iron double sulphate) अय:-क्षारिज f. egg-cell निषिक्त-अण्डकोशा । 
m. (-इज for खनिज mineral) 
fertilizer (agricultural) उर्वरक m. ferro-nickel अयो-रूपक n. 
fertilizers and manures उर्वरक तथा ferro-paper Engin. अयस्य-पत्र 1. 
खाद m. ferro-phosphorus अयो-भास्वर m. Ferula Bot. हिंगुति f. (-ति for प्रजाति ferro-prussiate=ferro-cyanide 
genus) ferro-silicon अयस्-सैकता. 
F. asafoetida सामान्य हिंगु m. ___f. process अयस्सैकता विधा f. ferulic acid Chem. (obtained from ferroso- Chem. (ferrous) अयस्य ___asafoetida, etc.) हिंग्विक अम्ल . ferroso-ferric oxide अयस्यायसिक जारेय fervanite (ferrum+varadium +-ite) 
Mineral. अयोरोचिज m. (-इज for ferro-titanium अयो-रंजातु m. 
खनिज mineral) ferro-tungsten अयश्चण्डातु m. fescue Bot. अवितृण M. (अवि sheep) ferro-type (a positive photograph Festuca Bot. (a genus of grasses) 
....made on a thin iron plate) अवितृणति f. (-ति for प्रजाति genus) अयापट्टचित्र .. 
F. duriuscula=hard fescue pote 
• ferro-uranium अयः-किरणातु m. 
अवितृण m. ferrous Chem. अयस्य mfn. 
F.elatior=tall fescue प्रांशु अवितृण f. carbonate अयस्य प्रांगारीयn. 
m. f. chloride अयस्य नीरेय .. 
F. ovina=sheep's fescue सामान्य f. compound अयस्य संयोग m. 
अवितृण M. f. hydroxide अयस्य उदजारेय .. F. scabrella=great bunch f. oxalate अयस्य तिग्मीय n. 
grass महागुच्छ अवितृण M. f. oxide अयस्य जारेय.. 
fetidus Pharm. (containing the vo f. salt अयस्य लवण .. 
·latile constituents of asafoetida) f. sulphate अयस्य शुल्बीय. 
हिंगुगन्ध m. f. sulphide अयस्य शुल्बेय n. 
fever ज्वर m. ferro-vanadium अयो-रोचातु m. few अल्प, कतिपय mfn. (many बहु) । ferro-zirconium अयो-गोमेदातु m. 
f.-celled 489- TaTa mfn. ferruginous अयसिय mfr. 
fibre तन्तु m. ferrum (Fe)=iron Chem. अयस् ।. (अ) fibres of Sharpey Anat. (that join .ferry=ferryboat तरणी f. (ancient together the lamellae of bones) 
word) 
दलीयुज तन्तु . 
4.14 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
1 
fibril=-fibrilla Anat. तन्तुक m. fictitious Com. अवास्तविक mfm. fibrilla=fibril 
f. account अवास्तविक-लेखा . fibrillar I (of, pertaining to) तान्तुक f. assets अवास्तविक-सम्पत्ति f. 
mfn. 
f. payee अवास्तविक आदाता (-1) m. 2 (like) तन्तुकवत् 
Ficus वटति. (-ति for प्रजाति genus) fibrillat theory Zool. तन्तुक-वाद, तन्तु- F. indica सामान्य वट . 
वाद m. 
ficus=fig Pharm. प्रोदुम्बर n. fibrillary=fibrillar 
-fid Bot. -दर fibrillate adj. तन्तुकमय, तान्तुक mfn. field 77 n. fibrillate vb. Med. ( to undergo or field contour bunds क्षेत्र-प्रान्त-बन्ध m. ____exhibit fibrillation, as the heart) field cricket = Gryllus campestris 
• तन्तुकन 1. 
Zool. क्षेत्र-झिल्लीक M. fibrillated=fibrillate adi. 
field glass क्षेत्र-दूरेक्षिका, दूरेक्षिका . fibrillation I (act or process of field gray सेना-धूसर m. 
forming of fibrils) तन्तुकन ., field gun Mil. क्षेत्र-शतघ्नी . तन्तुकना f., तन्तुकभवन n. 
field investigation Statistics क्षेत्र 2 Zool. (quivering of muscle अनुसन्धान n. fibres) पेशीतन्तुकम्प m. 
Field Marshal (of Army) महाचम्वधि fibrilled=fibrillate adj. 
पति m. fibrilliform तन्तुकरूप mfn. 
field of force Phys. बल-क्षेत्र .. fibrillose Bot. तन्तुकयुत nfn. 
fifth cerebral Anat. पंचमी मास्तिष्की. fibrillous तान्तुक, तन्तुकमय mfn. fig=ficus (fic.) Pharm. प्रोदुम्बर १. fibrin Biochem. तन्त्वि f. 
fight Mil. युद्ध, रण. fibrinogen Biochem. तन्त्विजन m. fighter (plane) Mil. योधक (विमान) m. fibrinose तन्त्विधु . 
figure r = digit Math. अंक m. fibroglia Anat. तन्तु-श्लेषm. 
2 चित्र, प्रतिरूप 8., आकृति . fibrous तान्तव mfn. 
figuring Com. (writing of figures) I तन्तुयुत, तन्तुमत् mfr. 
- अंक-लेखन . 2 तन्तुमय mfn. 
filament Bot., Elec. अंशु m. 3 तन्तुवत्, तन्तुसदृश mfr. 
filament transformer Radar अंशु fibrous root Bot. तन्तुमय मूल n. 
परिवर्तक m. fibrous tap root तन्तुमय अधिमूल 1. Filaria Zool., Med. तनुसूत्राति . (-प्राति fibula Anat. अनुजंघास्थि ।. 
for staifa genus) fibulak Anat. अनुजंघास्थिक mfn. filaria तनुसूत्र. fibulo- अनुजंघास्थि 
filariasis Med. तनुसूत्र-रजा f. -ficans -कर mfr. 
Filariidae तनुसूत्र-वंश m. ____acidi-ficans अम्ल-कर mfn. 
Filaroidea तनुसूत्र-प्रवंश (प्रवंश super Ficoideae Bot. पर्पट-कुल .. 
family) 
415 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
SILI 
file n. I Macb. (used for abrading or dopodium) सूत्रपाद m. 
smoothing......) tat f., OTTET Filosa Zool.(having filopodia) atar: 
m. (Hindi कानस) 
__m.pl., सूत्रपादगण m. 2 ( a contrivance by means of filose Zool. I (threadlike) सूत्रवत् which papers are put and kept in 2 (terminating in a threadlike order) नस्ती (-इन्) m. (Hindi नत्थी)। process) सूत्रावसान mfn. 3 Drill राजिः 
filter I b. पावन । file vb. नास्तिकरण, नास्तिबन्धन . 
2 m. पावm. filed I रेत्रीकृत nfm. 
f. and burette stand पाव तथा द्रवमि 2 नस्तित nfn. 
स्थाम.. file-fish Zool. रेत्री-मत्स्य m. 
f. bed पाव-तल्प m. files cover Drill समान्तम् 
f. bottle पाव-कूपी. file-shelves नस्ति-निधाय m. 
f. candle पाव-सिक्थवति । filial generation Biol. सन्तति /. 
f. cone पाव-शंकु m. Filicales Bot. (an order, embracing f.disc पाव-बिम्ब M. 
all the true ferns and containing f. drainer पाव-स्रावक m. a vast majority of pteridophytes) f. Hask पाव-पलिघm. पर्णाङ्ग गोत्र n. (गोत्र order) 
f. funnel पाव-निवाप m. filiform Zool. 9764 mfn. 
f.paper पाव-पत्र M. filiform papillae Anat. सूत्रांकुर f. pulp पाव गोद . 
m. 
f. pump पाव-उदंच m. filing I रेत्रीकरण . 
f. stand पाव-स्थामn. 2 (a fragment or particle rubbed f. tube पाव-नाल m. off in filing) रेनीक्षेप m. 
f. yellow Col. Ind. पाव पीत m. 3 नस्तिबन्धन, नस्तिकरण .. 
glass mantlefor f. पावार्थ काच-प्रावार filler पूर, पूरक m. 
m. filler for paper पत्र-पूर m. 
filterable=filtrable filling पूरण n. 
filterer पावयिता (-तृ) m. f. apparatus पूरक साधित्र .. filtering पावन । f. lever पूरण-उद्याम m. 
filtrable पाव्य mfm. f. up Col. Ind. (so called on f.tumor virus Med. पाव्य अर्बुद 
account of its great covering विषाणु m. power) उत्पूरण. 
f. virus पाव्य विषाणु m. film 1 (membrane) first f. 
filtrate n. पावित 2. . ___ 2 (celluloid film) चित्रपट्टी. filtrate vb. पावन n. filoplume Zool. (a threadlike fea- filtrate factor Biochem. पावित कारक m. ' ' ther) सूत्रपत्र 1. 
filtrate jar पावित कलश m. filopodium Zool. (a threadlike pseu-. filtration पावन .. 
416 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
f. angle पावन-कोण m. 
f. bills आर्थिक विपत्र n. f. apparatus पावन-साधिन ।।. 
f. book अर्थ-पुस्त . filum terminale Zool. अवसान-सूत्र n. f. matters आर्थिक विषय m. fin (of a fish) पक्ष, मीनपक्षm. 
f.obligations आर्थिक देय 1. final सर्वान्त्य, अन्त्य, अन्तिम mfn. 
f. records oferei fare m. final Com. अन्तिम afm. 
f. statement आर्थिक विवरण 1. f. call अन्तिम-याचना . (याचना=प्रभाग f. year आर्थिक वर्ष m. __याचना) 
financier Com. अर्थप्रबन्धक, अर्थदाता, अर्थ f. call account अन्तिम-याचना-लेखा विनियोक्ता (-त) m. (investor) f. call money अन्तिम-याचना-राशि m. financing partner Com. अर्थदायी भागी f. call register अन्तिम-याचना-पंजी . (-इन् ) m. f. dividend अन्तिम लाभांश m. fine n. दण्ड, अर्थदण्ड m. f. product Math. अन्तिम गुणनफल 1. fine चार, सूक्ष्म mfn. f. total अन्तिम योग m. 
fine adjustment सूक्ष्म व्यवस्थापन ।. final decision अन्तिम निर्णय m. 
fine blue Col. Ind. चारु नील m. final host अन्तिम पोषिता (-) m. fine chemicals सूक्ष्म रासायन .. finally अन्तराः 
fine coarse powder अस्थूल क्षोद m. finance अर्थ m., वित्त .. 
fine grained सूक्ष्मकण, सूक्ष्मकणात्मक mfn. finance vb. I अर्थ-प्रबन्धन . 
finely सूक्ष्मतः, सूक्ष्म 2 व्यय-करण, व्यय-दान 1. 
finely divided सूक्ष्म-भाजित mfn. finance bill I Banking अर्थ-विपत्र. finely powdered substance सूक्ष्म 
2 Parliament अर्थ-विधेयक m. 
क्षुण्ण पदार्थ m. finances अर्थसंपद् , अर्थसाधन . fine magenta crystals Col. Ind. चारु financial आर्थिक, वैत्तिक mfn. 
धूम्रली स्फट m. f. adviser अर्थोपदेष्टा (-1) m. fine muslin विरलिका f. (Gilgit MSS.) f.affair आर्थिक कार्य. 
fineness सूक्ष्मता . 
average diameter sieve no. 
fineness सूक्ष्मता 
of particles कणिका चालनी-संख्या 
माध्य-व्यास 
100 
60 
extremely fine powder अत्यन्त सूक्ष्म क्षोद very fine powder अति सूक्ष्म क्षोद , fine powder सूक्ष्म क्षोद .. 
moderately fine powder पासूक्ष्म क्षोद .. fine coarse powder अस्थूल क्षोद 
moderately coarse powder आस्थूल क्षोद.. coarse powder स्थूल क्षोद .. very coarse powder अतिस्थूल क्षोद granular powder कणी क्षोद .. 
०.१४ सि. मा. ०. १७ सि. मा. ०. २३ सि. मा. ०.२८ सि. मा. ०.३८ सि. मा. ०. ५४ सि. मा. ०.८५ सि. मा. १..४७ सि. मा. ३. ०० सि. मा. 
417. 
27 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
- 
- 
. 
fine outline सूक्ष्म-बहीरेखा f. 
fire-polish vb. Glass Mfg. अग्नि-प्रमार्जन fine powder सुक्ष्म क्षोद m. fine violet चारु नीललोहित m. 
fire-polishing अग्नि-प्रमार्जन n. finger अंगुलि, हस्तांगुलि f. (toe पादांगुलि f.) fireproof अग्निसह mfn. finger board अंगुलि-फलक १. 
fire tube Ry. Eng. अग्नि-नाल m. finger-flower=fairyfinger 
fire-tube boiler अग्नि-नाल बाष्पित्र . fingerling (small fish) आंगुलिक m. fireworks अग्नि-क्रीडनक m. finger ring मुद्रिका f. (signet ring); firing tube Chem. ज्वालन-नाल M. ____ अंगुलीयक १. 
firm n. Com. सार्थ m. finish vb. समापन n. 
f. name सार्थ-नाम n. finished समापित, सिद्ध, पूर्ण mfn. 
partnership f. भागिता-सार्थ m. finished Com. कृत mfn. 
firm vb. देहण . f.goods कृत वस्तु . 
firmly fixed दृढबद्ध mfn partly f. goods अर्धकृत वस्तु n. firm offer Com. निश्चित प्रस्ताव m. finished glue सिद्ध श्लेष m. 
first प्रथम, आद्य mfn. finite Math. परिमित mfn. 
first aid प्रथमोपचार m., सद्यःसाहाय्य. finite differences Statistics परिमित first aidequipment सद्यःसाहाय्य-संभारm. 
अन्तर . 
first call Com. प्रथम-याचना . (याचना fire vb. Mil. गोलन 1. 
प्रभाग-याचना) fire n. अग्नि m. 
f. call account प्रथम-याचना-लेखा . fire bars Rly. Eng. अग्नि-शलाका f. 
f. call money प्रथम-याचना-राशि m. fire beetle=firefly 
f. call register प्रथम-याचना-पंजी f. fire-box R/y. Eng. अग्नि-धान . 
(in the) first case प्रथमतः f. crown अग्निधान-मर्धा m. 
first class प्रथम वर्ग m. firebrick अग्नीष्टका f. 
f. class paper प्रथम वर्ग पत्र n. fire clay Petrog. अग्नि-मृत्तिका. 
f. class security प्रथम वर्ग प्रतिभूति . fire-control radar शतघ्नीवशी तेजोन्वेष m. first division (on a scale) प्रथम विभाग firedamp Mining (a combustible gas m. ___formed in mines) दाह्य-निवाति m. first filial generation (Fy) Zool. fire door Ry. Eng. अग्निद्वार. 
प्रथम-सन्तति f. (स.) fire-engine अग्नि-शमित्र . 
first generation प्रथम-सन्तति. fire extinguisher अग्नि-शामयिता (Tn. first law of motion=Newton's firefly=fire beetle aantal m. 
first law of motion Phys. प्रथम गति firehole door Ry. Eng. अग्निछिद्र कपाट नियम m. 
10. . 
firstly प्रथमतः fire insurance अग्नि-आगोप m. 
first maxilla प्रथम-उत्तरहनु . fireman आग्निक, अग्नीध् m. 
first meiotic division Anat. अर्धसूत्रणा fire policy Com. अग्नि-गोपलेख m. 
418. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
first moment of dispersion Statistics fit Mach: (coincidence of parts in 
प्रथम अपकिरण-घात M. 
contact) अन्वायुक्ति. first mortgage प्रथम प्राधि m. 
fit vb. अन्वायोजन 1. first of exchange विपत्र-प्रथमक 1. fitted अन्वायोजित, अन्वायुक्त mfn. 
second of exchange विपत्र-द्वितीयक fitter अन्वायोज m. 
third of exchange विपत्र-ततीयक fittest Zool. बलिष्ठ mfr. first polar body Zool. प्रथम-लोपिका Fittig's reaction Chem. (formation first principle Math. आदि सिद्धान्त, आदि of an aromatic hydrocarbon 
प्रनियम m. 
सौरभिक उदांगार) सावंगार-प्रतिक्रिया. first quartile = lower quartile Sta- fitting Statistics Ararter n. 
tistics प्रथम चतुर्थक= अधर चतुर्थक n. fittings अन्वायुक्ति f.. first swarms Aphary प्रथमोत्पतन n. furniture and f. उपस्कर तथा अन्वायक्ति 
(Hindi पहली उडान) first system (of pulleys) Phys. प्रथम- f. in cab Rly. Eng. चालकवेश्म-अन्वा 
संहति . 
युक्ति . first via Com. प्रथम-प्रतिलिपि f. fitting shop अन्वायोज-शाला f. 
Fischer's salt=cobalt yellow five percent पञ्चकशत (from मन), पंच fisetholz=young fustic Col. Ind. TESTET 
तरुण पांडुद्र m. 
fixable 1 Biol. हत्वारक्ष्य mfn. (preserv fisetin Chem. पांडुद्रुवि . 
able रक्ष्य after killing हत्वा) fish मत्स्य, मीन m. 
.. 2 (tissue) स्थिरणशक्य mfn. fisheries मात्सिकी /. (from मत्स=मत्स्य) fixate (the eye) लक्षबन्धन n. 
f. development officer मात्सिकी- fixated लक्षबद्ध mfn. 
विकास अधिकारी (-इन्) m. 
fixation I लक्षबन्धन .. fisheye view मीनाक्षि-दृशा f. 
2 Biol. हत्वारक्षण N. (preserving after. fish meal मत्स्य-चूर्णn. 
killing) fish moth-silverfish Zool. मीन-शलभ fixation axis लक्षाक्ष m. 
fixation of atmospheric nitrogen fish oil मत्स्य-तैल . 
वात-भूयाति-स्थिरीकरण .. fish plates= steel plates RJy. मीन-पट्ट, fixed I स्थिर, स्थिरीकृत, बद्ध, स्थायी (-इन्) 
- वज्रायस पट्टm. fishtail Ry. मीन-च्छ m. 
2 युक्त, योजित mfn. fishtail burner (forming a fanshaped 3 Chem. (non-volatile) अनुत्पत mfn. ___flame) मत्स्यपुच्छ दाहक, व्यजनाचिm. 4 Biol. हत्वा-रक्षित mfn. . . fission Biol. विखण्डन ।. 
5 निश्चित mfn. fission fungi=Schizophyta 
6सावधि mfn. fissures (in orbit) Ophthalmol. face m. fixed (end) Math. fere, qa mfn. (alem fistula Bot. नाल m. (pipe or tube) when it is hinged) 
419 
m. 
mfn.﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
fixed air=carbon dioxide old Fizeau's method Phys. दन्तुरचक्र-रीति 
Chem. (it exists in a fixed state 
in the carbonates) स्थायी वायु m. Fl.. (Flavo-bacterium) पि. वे. (पिंग fixed assets Com. स्थायि-सम्पत्ति . 
वेत्राणु) f. capital स्थायि-पुंजी, स्थिर-पुंजी . F1 (fluorine) Chem. त (तरस्विनी) f. deposit सावधि निक्षेप m. flabby mass श्लथ पुंज m. f. deposit account सावधि-निक्षेप- flaccid=flabby श्लथ mfn. 
लेखा . 
flag पताका. f. instalment FETT STATT m. Flagellata Zool. I = Mastigophora f. line स्थिर-रेखा . 
कशांगा: m.pl. f. price निश्चित मूल्य १. (one price 2 (an order top of Mastigophora) __shop एकमूल्य प्रापण) 
कशांग-गण m. f. rent fett TOT 17. 
flagellate adj. 1 (bearing flagella) f. sum निश्चित राशि m. 
कशावान् mfn. fixed base स्थिर आधार m. 
2 (pertaining to the Flagellata) fixed breaker point Automobile कशांगीय mfn. 
• . स्थिर-त्रोटन-बिन्दु m. 
flagellate n. कशांग M. fixed oil Chem. (non-volatile flagellate chamber कशा-वेश्म n. - ' स्थायि तैल.. 
flagellum Biol. कशा f. fixed pin निखात-सूची . 
flag red Col. Ind. पताका रक्त m. fixed point Ophthalmol. fere fare m. flake शल्कल . fixed pulley स्थिर-धर्धरी f. 
flame ज्वाला . fixed rabies virus-fixed virus flame black Col. Ind. ज्वाला काल m. 
स्थिरालर्क विषाणु स्थिर विषाणु m. flame cell Zool. ज्वाला-कोशा f. fixed relatives Statistics feet FCAT798 flame projector = flame thrower 
m. 
Mil. ज्वाला-क्षेपक m. fixed virus=fixed rabies virus flame shield ज्वाला-वर्मn. fixer Photog. स्थिरक m. 
flame spreader ज्वाला-प्रथक m. fixing I स्थिरीकरण n. 
flame steadier ज्वाला-स्थिरक m. . 2. Biol. हत्वा-रक्षण n. (preserving flame test Cbem. ज्वाला-परीक्षा f. ___ after killing) 
flame thrower=flame projector fixing agent Zool. स्थिर-कर्ता, हत्वारक्षण flamingo Zool. *1'm. 
कर्ता (-४) m. 
flaming onions Mil. ज्वाला-कन्द m. fixity forcat f.. 
flange Engin. स्फार m. . fixity of life Zool. जीवन-स्थिरता f. fange bend Macb. स्फार-नति f. fixture=fittings Com. अन्वायुक्ति f. flange coupling Mach. स्फार-मिथुनक १. 
furniture. and f. उपस्कर तथा. fiahged Masb. स्फारी, (-इन्) mfn. - अन्वायुक्ति f. 
fonut स्फारी नह.m... 
426 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
flank guard Mil. पाव-रक्षी (-इन्) m. flavine Chem. पिंगी f.. Hannel प्रोणक 1. 
flavine lake Col. Ind. forrit 77977 m. fHap Zool. पल्लव n. (Hindi पल्ला) 
f. red shade förit FTOTT f. flap plate Rly. Eng. पट्ट-पल्लव १. f. yellow shade पिंगी पीत छाया . flash vb. स्फुरण n. 
flavo- पिंग flash point स्फुरांक m. 
Flavo-bacterium (Fl.) (a genus flash point apparatus स्फुरांक साधिन ।. of Bacteriaceae, forming yellow flask पलिघm. 
to orange pigment) fanaator m. f. guard पलिघ-रक्ष m. 
(पि. वे.) f. heater पलिघ-तापक m. 
F1. estero-aromaticum सौरभिक flat fefae mfn. 
प्रलवण पि. वे. flat bone Anat. खर्पर m., कपाल .. 
Fl. fecale (isolated from the intes flat-bottomed पथ-बध्न mfn. (English tinal contents of a man) मल पि.वे. 
words flat and bottom are from Fl. morbificans (found in bovine Sanskrit पृथु and बुध्न respectively) ___ septicemia) गोजैवाणुता पि. वे. f. flask पृथबुध्न पलिघm. 
Fl. pseudomallei=Malleomy fiat cost (prime, basic) Com. प्रधान ces pseudomallei 
परिव्यय m. 
flavone Chem. fatt f. flat face Smithing चिपिट पार्श्व . flavophenine Col. Ind. पिंगदर्शी f. flat-sided चिपिट-पार्श्व mfn. 
flavophosphine Col. Ind. fathreat flat-sided bottle चिपिटपार्श्व-कपी f. flat surface Math. चिपिट तल n. 
flavopurpurin Chem. पिंगनीलोहि f. flatten vb. चिपिटन . 
lavour vb. वासन, स्वादन . flattened fefefca mfn. 
flavour n. I वास, सुवास m. flattened seed चिपिट बीजn. 
2 स्वाद, सुस्वाद m. flat tissue Bot. चिपिट-जति . 
3 रस, सुरस m. flat weight चिपिट भार m. 
4-flavouring वाससार, स्वादसार, fHatworm चिपिट-कृमि m. 
रससार m. flavaniline Chem., Dyeing पिंगनीली f. flavoured वासित, सुवासित, स्वादित, सुस्वा flavanthrene Col. Ind. पिंगक्षामेण्य. दित mfn. flavanthrone Chem. पिंगविक्षा. flavouring = flavour स्वादसार, वास flavaurin Col. Ind. foreafór f. . सार, रससार m. flavazine Col. Ind. पिंगाजीवी . 
flavouring extract स्वादन-सार, वासन flavazol Col. Ind. friera m. 
सारm. flavic ffira mfn. 
flavourous = flavoursome = flavid (golden yellow) सुवर्ण-पीत nfr. . . flavoury सुवास, सुस्वाद, सुरस mfn. flavin पिगि 
flax 5ft f. flavinduline Col. Ind. पिंगसुनीली f. i. dr. (fluid dram) त. शा. (तरल शाण) 
- 
42-1 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
flca Zool. fart m. (from fart to hew f. policy चल गोपलेख m. ___out Hindi पिस्त) 
floating body प्लावी काय m. flection-fiexion आकुंचन । 
floating mine Mil. प्लावी निस्फोट m. . Heet नौगण m. 
floating ribs Anat. अयुत पशु m. Meeting pain क्षणिक-पीडा /. 
floating root प्लव-मूल . Mesh fiy मांस-मक्षी. 
float needle Automobile प्लव-सूची . fleshy मांसल mfn. 
floc (short for floccule) Physical fleshy axis Bot. गोर्दमय अक्ष m. 
Chem. Suff f. fieshy scales Bot. मांसल शल्क m. flocculable (capable of being floc flexible आनम्य mfn. 
___culated) लोष्ट्य, आणकाय्य mfn. flexible constitution Politics TFT flocculant n. (that which produces - संविधान n. 
floccules or aggregates) लोष्टकर, flexible joint Mach. वर्य सन्धि m. 
ऊर्णीकर m. flexible spatula अानम्य प्रथm. flocculate n. (that which has floc flexion=flection आकुंचन 1. (cf. culated) लोष्टित, णिकायित n. .deflexion व्याकुंचन)। 
flocculate vb. I to aggregate into flexor Anat. आकोचक m. 
small lumps) लोष्टन . flexor muscle Anat. आकोचक-पेशी f. 2 (to collect into flocculent flexure पाकोच m. 
masses) ऊर्णिकायन . flicker vb. Phys. फरफरणn. 
flocculation लोष्टन, ऊणिकायन . flight उड्डयन, उत्पतन . 
flocculator लोष्टयिता (-४), ऊणिकायक m. flint glass Glass Mfg. (a heavy brilli- floccule sföret f. 
ant glass containing lead) 14-19 flocculence (state of being floccu 
m.=crystal glass स्फट-काच m. ___lent) ऊर्णीमत्ता.. flint stone वह्नयश्म m. 
flocculent adj. I (of the appea float n. प्लव m. 
rance of wool, woolly) Friçet mfn. float vb. प्लवन . 
2 (containing flocci or soft floatation=flotation प्लवन .. 
flakes) ऊर्गीमत् mfn. floatation of a company Com. 3 (consisting of flocci or soft 
प्रमण्डल-प्रारम्भण. 
flakes) ऊर्णीमय mfn. float chamber Automobile प्लव-वेश्म n. flocculent n. (a. flocculating agent) floating प्लावी (-इन्) mfn. 
__णिकायक m. floating Com. चल, अस्थायी (-इन्) mfn. fiocculent precipitate ऊर्णीमय निस्साद 
f. assets अस्थायि-सम्पत्ति, चल-सम्पत्ति f. m. . : f. capital प्रस्थायि-पुंजी, चल-पुंजी f. flock (a lock of wool) ऊर्णा-स्तुक m. 
f. debt (short term loan) अल्पकाल flood Radar प्राप्लाव m. 
ऋण . 
flood-lighting प्रकाशाप्लावन, प्रोध-प्रकाशन f. mortgage चल प्राधि m. 
422 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
f. 
floor कुट्टिम m., भूमि . 
fluctuating assets उच्चावचन-सम्पत्ति . floor of orbit Ophthalmol. अक्षिकूप-भूमि f. fluctuation Com. उच्चावचन . floor polish कुट्टिम-प्रमार्ज m. 
___f. in price मूल्य-उच्चावचन n. flora उद्भिज्जात. 
fluctuations of speed Macb. वेग floral Bot. 964 
उच्चावचन . , f. axis पुष्पाक्ष m. 
flue (an enclosed passage for air, ___f. formula पुष्प-सूत्र n. 
flame, gases, etc.) atfert f. f. leaf पुष्प-पत्र n. 
f.gas वाहिनी-वाति m. . f. organs पुष्पांग . 
f.gas thermometer वाहिनी-वाति Florentine lake (a cochineal इन्द्रगोप तापमान m. 
lake containing an excess of fluid प्रवाही (-इन्), तरल, द्रव m. 
alumina स्फटीजा) स्फटीन्द्र लाक्षक m. fuid assets Com. रोक-सम्पत्ति f. . florentium=illinium Chem. पिविरला fluid dram (4. dr.) तरल शाण m. 
(त. शा.) fior-essence Pharm. पुष्पवास m. fluid extract of cascara sagrada = fioret Bot. पुष्पक n. 
liquid extract of cascara sag Florida red R=fast acid red B 
rada Pharm. तरल पुण्यवल्क-निस्सार m. flotation=floatation 
fluid friction Phys. प्रवाहि-संघर्ष m. flour mill Com. धान्य-पेषणी. 
fluid ounce (A. Oz.) तरल-शुक्ति f.(त.शु.) flow प्रवाह m. 
fluid thrust तरल-वितोद f. flower पुष्प n. 
fluke छिद्रिपत्र m. flowering glume Bot. पुष्पि बुसपत्र n. fiuo adj. Chem. तर, तरक mfn. flowering plant पुष्पी पादप m. fiuo- (Auorine) Chem. तर-(तरस्विनी) flowerless Bot. पुष्पहीन mfn. 
fluo-aluminate Chem. तर-स्फटीय . flowers of barytes Col. Ind. हरिशुल्बिज- fiuo-aluminic acid Chem. तर-स्फाटिक 
पुष्प . . 
अम्ल . flowers of hops यव्यकटु-पुष्प n. fluo-arsenate Mineral. तर नेपालीय. flowers of madder Col. Ind. मंजिष्ठ- fiuo-borate Chem. तर-टांकीय n. 
पुष्प १. 
fluo-boric Chem. तर-टांकिक mfn. flowers of phosphorus भास्वर-पुष्प . fluo-boride Chem. तर-टांकेय . flowers of sulphur शुल्बारि-पुष्प . fluo-borite (fiuoborate t-ite) Mineral. flowers of zinc कुप्यातु-पुष्प . 
तर-टांकिज m. (-इज for खनिज mineral) flower stalk, flower stock Bot. पुष्प- fiuo-bromide Cbem. तर-दुरेय ॥. 
वृन्त n. 
fluo-carbonate Chem. तरांगारीय n. flowmeter प्रवाहमान m. 
fluo-cerine=fluo-cerite i. oz. (fluid ounce) त. शु. (तरल शुक्ति ) fiuo-cerite (fluo-+-cerium)=tysonite Huctuate, fluctuating Com. उच्चावचन Mineral. तर-पुष्कलिज m. (-इज for 
खनिज mineral) • . 
. 
423 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
fluo-chloride Chem. तर-नीरेय .. fluoride Chem. तरस्तेय . fiuo-hydric Chem. तरोदिक mfn. fluorinate vb. Chem. तरस्वीयन n. 
luo-phosphate Chem. तर-भास्वीय n. I (to combine with fluorine) fiuor=fiuorite Mineral. तरस्व m. 
तरस्विनीयोजन . fluor-, fluoro- (fiuorine) Chem. तरस्व 2 (to treat with fluorine) affarita 
(तरस्विनी) 
साधन . fluoran (fluorescence & -an) Chem. fluorination Chem. arcatat 1. 
भ्राशिन्य। 
fluorine Chem. तरस्विनी . fluoranthene Auorene TTFT tanth fluorite Mineral. (calcium fluoride) 
racene विक्षामेण्य) भ्राशमेण्य n. 
चूर्णतरस्विज m. (-इज for खनिज mineral) fluor-apatite Maneral. तरस्व-चूर्णभास्विज Muor-meter Chem. तरस्व-मान m. ____m. (-इज for खनिज mineral) 
fiuoro-, fluor- (fluorine) Chem. तरस्व fiuorate n. Chem. तरस्वीय 1. 
(तरस्विनी) fluorate vb. Chem. तरस्वायन n. I (top-fluoro-aniline Chem. प-तरस्व-नीली f. 
combine with fluorine or hydro- fluoro-benzene Chem. तरस्व-धूपेन्या . fluoric acid) तरस्विनी-योजन, उदतर- p-fiuoro-benzoic acid Chem. प-तरस्व स्विकाम्ल-योजन 1. 
धूपिक अम्ल . 2 (to treat with fluorine or hydro- Moro-borate Chem. तरस्व-टांकीय ". fluoric acid) तरस्विनी-साधन, उदतर- fluoro-form (fluoro+formyl) Chem. स्विकाम्ल-साधन . 
तरस्व-वम्रल . fluorene (fluorescence + -ene) Chem. fluoro-toluene (ortho, meta, para) 
। भ्राशेन्य. 
Chem. तरस्व-विरालेन्य. (ऊर्व, सम, परा) fruorenone Chem. भ्राशेन्या / 
fiuor spar-fluorite Mineral. तरस्व fluorenylene भ्राशेन्यलेन्य n. 
____ धात्विया . fluoresce vb. भ्राशन 1. 
fluo-silicate Chem. तर-सैकतीय . fluorescein Chem. भ्राशिन' m. 
Auo-silicic acid Chem. तर-सैकतिक fluorescence Phys. TTT F. (from 5777 अम्ल 1. 
to emit rays, to shine) 
fiuo-tantalic Chem. तर-सहिक mfn. fluorescent भ्राशमान mfn. 
fluo-titanic acid Cbem. तर-रजिक अम्ल f. blue Col. Ind. भ्राशमान नील m. 
. f. lamp भ्राशमान दीप m. 
fiuo-zirconic acid Chem. तर-गोमेदिक f. violet भ्राशमान नीललोहित m. 
अम्ल 1. fluoresci- भ्राश 
flush उद्धावना f. fluorescin Chem. भ्राशि . 
automatic f. प्रात्म-उखावना. fluorescing भ्राशन . 
flushing (system) Hygiene उद्धावन १. fluor-hydric Chem. तरस्वोदिक mfn. (संहति, पद्धति) fluoric Chem. तरस्विक mfn. 
flushing tank Phys. उद्धावन-जलाशय fluoric acid Chem. तरस्विक अम्ल n. 
m. 
424 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
fluted (channeled, grooved) नालीमत् f. distance नाभ्यन्तर . 
__mfn. 
f. illumination=oblique illu flux स्यन्द m. 
mination नाभ्य प्रभासन - तिरः fly=flying insect (that which flies) प्रभासन .. 
पतंग m. 
f. interval नाभ्यन्तराल n. fly मक्षी f., पतंग m. 
f. length नाभ्यायाम m. bluebottlef. नीलकपी-मक्षी / 
focalization नाभीयन 1. deer f. मृग-मक्षी . 
f. line नाभि-रेखा. flesh f. मांस-मक्षी 
f. plane Optics नाभ्य तल 1. gad f.=horse f. eft f. (ancient f. point Math. नाभि-बिन्दु m. 
word; Marathi गोमाशी) 
f. power or strength 4722-TFRT f. greenbottle f. हरिकूपी-मक्षी f. 
f. range नाभि-गोचर m. horse f.=gad f. 
focalize-focus vb. नाभीयन । stable f. गोष्ठ-मक्षी f. 
foci pl. of focus. tsetse f. काल-मक्षी . (short for काल- focimeter=focometer Optics नाभि 
• द्वीप-मारीमक्षी) 
मान m. tumbu f. मुद्गर-मक्षी f. 
focimetry=focometry arfaffer f. flycatcher Zool. cat m. (ancient focometer=focimeter 
word) 
focometry=focimetry fly flowers Bot. मक्षी-परागित पुष्प .. focus I Phys. नाभि f., प्रतिस्वर (from flying उड्डयी (-इन्) mfn. 
निरुक्त ७.२३-उदीचि प्रथमसमावृत्त आदित्ये f. boat Mil. उड्डयि-नौका f. 
कंसं वा मणि वा परिमृज्य प्रतिस्वरै यत्र शुष्क f. bomb Mil. उड्डयी प्रस्फोट m. 
गोमयम् असंस्पर्शयन् धारयति तत् प्रदीप्यते) f. fish Zool. उड्डयी मत्स्य m. 
not in f. अनाभित f. fox Zool. उड्डयी लोमश m. 
2 (focal distance or length) नाभ्या f. insect=fly Zool. (that which याम m. ___flies) पतंग m. 
3 (focal interval) नाभ्यन्तराल . f. lieutenant (R.A.F.) महाविमानिक focus vb. नाभीयन 1. 
m. 
focuser नाभीयक . f. lizard Zool. उड्डयि-गोधिका f. focusing नाभीयन n. f. machine Aeronautics eft 477 n. foeniculum=fennel Pharm. Afa f. 
f. officer (R. A. F.) विमानिक m. foctal membrane Med. उल्बn. fly-wheel Mach. (a heavy wheel...) foetal period Zool. tate m. . प्रचक्र . (cf. Panjabi चक्का ) 
fog धूमिका f. foam (from Sanskrit फेन, Old Slavo fogman Rly. धौमिक m. . 
nic pena) फेन m. 
fogman's hut Ry. धौमिक-कुटी f. froth फेनक m. 
fog of war युद्ध-धूमिका f. focal नाभि-, नाभ्य mfn. 
fog signal धूमिका-संज्ञप्ति . 
425 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
RAM 
foil Chem., Radar qui n. 
food material अन्न द्रव्य 7. silver foil रजत-पर्ण ।. 
food storage tissue Bot. अन्न-संग्रह-ऊति silver leaf रजत-पत्र । foil b. पर्णायन । 
food vacuole Zool. अन्न-धानी /. foiler पर्णायक m. 
foot x आधार m. fold I n. भंजm. 
2 Zool. पद n. (leg प 2 (plica) वलि . 
3 Bot. पदn. 3 (layer) स्तर m. 
seta दण्डी., दृढरोम १. fold I vb. भंजन 1. (cf. Panjabi भांजना) capsule प्रावर m. 
2 पुटीकरण 1. 
4 (ft., 12 inches) पाद m. (पा.) -fold -गुण (two-fold द्वि-गुण) 
foot-and-mouth disease Veter. folded भंजित Mfn. 
पदास्य-रोग m. folded filter paper भंजित पाव-पत्र . foot-ball पाद-कन्दुक m. folding भजन n. 
foot-blower पाद-मात्र . folding chair भंज्य-आसन्दी f. 
foot-board पाद-फलक. folding spatula भंज्य प्रथm.. 
foot-bridge संक्रमण 1., पाद-सेतु, मानव-सेतु folding watertap भंज्य-जल-विवरी f. foliage leaf Bot. सत्य पत्र. 
foot cells=nurse cells=sustenta foliar gap=leaf gap Bot. पर्ण-अवकाश cular cells=Sertoli's cells=tre 
m. 
phocytes diferiter f. Folin's fume absorber अपिधूम-प्रचूषक foot of the perpendicular Math. 
लम्ब-पाद m. Folin's fume absorption tube अपि- foot-pound Mech. (fp., FP., f. p.) 
धूमप्रचूषक नाल m. 
पाद-प्रांजलि M. (पा. प्रां.) folio Bookkeeping (page in an account foot-poundal Phys. पाद-प्राबल . ____ book) पृष्ठ 1. 
foot-stalk Bot. पाद-वृन्त . follicle I Bot. एकसेवनीक N. (fruits.. foot-stool पाद-पीठ m. 
only one suture). 
foramen Anat. (hole in a bone) छिद्र 2 Anat. कूप M., स्यूनिका f. follicular cell Zool. -स्य निका-कोशा f. foramen of Monro Zool. तृतीयगुहा-द्वार ___f. hormone स्यूनिका-न्यासर्ग m. 
. following पश्चात्तन, आगामी, अनुवर्ती, उत्तर- Foraminifera Zool. (an order having 
वर्ती (-इन्) mfn. . 
a calcareous shell which in many. Fontana's stain (a silver stain) forms is perforated with minute 
रजताभिरंजन 1. 
holes for protrusion of slender food अन्न 
, pseudopodia) पादछिद्रि-गण m. food-factor Biochem. अन्न-कारक m. . forbidob. निषेधन ॥. food manufacture अन्न-निर्माण n. . forbiddal=forbiddance 
m. 
. 
1426 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
forbiddance-forbiddal निषेध m. forest conservator वन-संरक्षक m. forbidden farge mfn. 
fotest department बन-विभाग m. force Phys. n. (power Three f.) forest peat=wood peat वृक्ष-जीर्णक n. forced (produced by force) बलोत्पादित forestry वानिकी, वनविद्या . __mfn. 
___fore-wing Zool. अग्र-पक्ष m. forced expiration बलाद्-उच्छवास m. forfeit vb. Com. हरण . force fit Engin. बलान्वायुक्ति . 
forfeited shares Com. हत अंश m. force of gravity भ्वाकृष्टि-बल 7. 
forfeiture Com. हरण 1. forceps संदंशिका . 
forge vb. I (to form by heating force pump=forcing pump antena _and hammering) तापकुट्टन n. 
m. 
2 Law कूटकरण.. forcing pump=force pump forged I Mach. ताप-कुट्टित fn. for daily purposes दैनिक प्रयोजनार्थ 2 Law pe mfn. forearm प्रबाहु m. 
forger I Masb. तापकुट्टक m. forebrain=prosencephalon Anat, 2 Law कूटकर्ता (-) m. . 
अग्र-मस्तिष्क . 
forgerer Law कूटकर्ता (तृ) m. forecast Matb. पूर्वानुमान m. 
forgering Law कूटकरण n. foregoing पूर्वगामी, पूर्ववर्ती (-इन्) mfn. forgery Com. कूटकरण, कूटकर्म, कूट 1. fore-ground अन-भूमि, पुरो-भूमि . for immediate purposes सद्यस्क foreign विदेशीय, बाह्य mfn. 
प्रयोजनार्थ foreign Com. वैदेशिक mfn. 
for instance तद्यथा, दृष्टान्तार्थ f. bill वैदेशिक विपत्र, विदेश-विपत्र 1. fork विशाख, शाखी m. (having two or f. branch वैदेशिक-शाखा, विदेश-शाखा f. more शाखाs) f. currency वैदेशिक चलार्थ m. forked tail Zool. द्विशाख पुच्छ n. 
f. jurisdiction बाह्य-अधिकारक्षेत्र १. forked tailed Zool. द्विपुच्छ mfn. (short ' f. trade वैदेशिक व्यापार m. 
for द्विशाख-पुच्छ) foreign affairs committee विदेश-कार्य- forked tongue (of a snake) द्विशाख 
समिति . 
. जिह्वा. foreign state विदेशीय राज्य 1. 
form I आकृति f., आकार m., रूप . fore-limb I पूर्वाङ्ग, अनांग .. 
2 (a document, as an applica 2 अग्न-पाद m. 
tion form) प्रपत्र forensic chemistry=legalchemis- -form (having the form or. appea ___try वैध रसायन n. 
rance of) -रूप, आकार forensic medicine=medical juris- form- Chem. (formic, formyl) 15 
prudence=legal medicine e formal 1 (in accordance with form) 
आयुर्वेद m. 
यथारूप, यथाकार, यथावेश mfn. forest वन . 
2 (in accordance with rules) यथा-- forest botany वनौद्भिदी . 
नियम mfn. 
427 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
3 यथारीति, यथाचार mfn. 
former पूर्व mfn. 4 बाह्यरूपिक, उपरिक mfn. 
former and latter पूर्व-अपर formal black Col. Ind. वम्रसु काल m. form fours Drill चतुश्शो-घटनम् 
f. blue वनसुनील m. 
formic Chem. वम्रिक mfn. (formic is f. bordeaux वम्रसु कपिशक m. 
from Sanskrit वम्रिक) f. brown वनसु बभ्रु m. 
f. acid वम्रिक अम्ल N. f. fast black वम्रसु स्थिर काल m. f. black Col. Ind. वम्रिक काल m. f. olive वनसु तैलबदर m. 
formidable Mil. भीषण mfn. f. orange वम्रसु नारंग M. 
formin Chom. af f. f. red वम्रसु रक्त m. 
formo- = form f. violet वम्रसु नीललोहित m. 
form of declaration घोषणा-प्रपत्र 1. f. yellow वनसु पीत m. 
form of judgement निर्णय-रूप n. form-aldehyde बम्र-सुव्युद m. 
form of oath or affirmation शपथ-रूप Formalin (form+aldehyde+ - in) . 
वम्रस्वि [. 
form two deep Drill द्विशो-घटनम् formanil black Col. Ind. वम्रनील काल formula सूत्र n. 
formulary योगसंहिता . f. red वम्रनील रक्त m. 
formulate vb. (to put in a systema formate Chem. वम्रीय . 
tized statement or expression) formation i fare for n. 
संविन्यसन 1. 2 रचना. 
formulation संविन्यास m. formation = plant formation= formyl Chem. aga n. 
plant association Ecology पादप- formyl blue Col. Ind. वम्रल नील m. समाज m. 
f. violet extra वम्रल नीललोहित अति formation apparatus, acetylene 
रिक्त m. ___ शुक्तलेन्य-भावित्र n. 
for practical purposes व्यावहारिक formation, battle संग्राम-रचना 
प्रयोजनार्थ, व्यवहारे formation expenses Com. निर्माण-व्यय for shortness संक्षेपार्थ 
for the first time प्रथम वार formation of bone (ossification) for the nth time Math. स-वार 
अस्थिकरण N., अस्थिकृति f. 
Fortin's barometer Phys. (having formation of equation समीकार-निर्माण a leather bottom) दृति-वापीडमान 
. formative Bot. निर्मायी (-इन्) mfn. fortnightly पाक्षिक mfn. formative region Bot. निर्मायी प्रदेश m. forward अग्रे, अग्र, पुरः .. formazone fast yellow Col. Ind. f. movement अग्र-गति, पुरोगति .. वम्राजीवा स्थिर पीत m. 
f. reaction Chem. अग्रगा क्रिया f. formed निर्मित mfn. 
carried f. अग्रेनीत mfn. 
m. 
m. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
fossa Anat. खात m. 
fovea Anat. गर्त m. fossil निखातक . 
f. centralis मध्य गर्त m. f. history निखातक इतिवृत्त ।. fowl कुक्कुट m. fossilized निखातक-भूत nfm. 
Fowler's solution=arsenical solu Foucault's method Pbys. परिभ्रामिदर्पण tion Pharm. नैपालिक विलयन । 
रीति 
fox लोमश m. foul-smelling पूतिगन्ध mfn. 
foxglove=fairy finger= foundation I Zool. नेम m. 
___flower अप्सरोंगुलिf. 2 आधार m. 
foxglove blue Col. Ind. अप्सरोंगुलि नील foundation ring Rly. Eng. आधार m. 
वलय m. 
foxglove leaf=digitalis Pharm. founder Com. प्रवर्तक m. 
अंगुलक . founders' shares Finance प्रवर्तक-अंश m. fox-hound Zool. लोमश-पाखटिक m. foundling वातपुत्र m. (Gilgit MSS.), fox terrier Zool. (formerly used to 
लब्धक m. 
dig foxes) लोमश-खन m. foundry संधानी . 
F.P. (foot-pound) Phys. पा. प्रां. (पाद fountain उत्स, निर्भर m. 
प्रांजलि) fountain pen मसीगर्भm. 
F.P.S. system (foot-pound-second fouramine D, fourrine D=para system) पा. प्रां. का. पद्धति . (पाद 
mine Col. Ind. परातिक्ती. 
प्रांजलि-काष्ठिका पद्धति) four-coupled locomotive Ry. Eng. fraction I प्रभाग m. 
(with two pairs of driving 2 Math. fem. (from staraat), wheels) चतुमिथुनित चलित्र . 
अपूर्णाक m. four dimensions चतुर्-विमा f., दिक्-काल fractional I Math. भिन्नात्मक, भिन्नीय 
___m. 
mfn: four figure table Math. चतुरंक-सारणी. 2 प्रभागशः four-rayed Zool. चतूरश्मि mfn. 
3 प्राभागिक mfn. fours Drill चतुश्शः 
f. coefficient भिन्नात्मक गुणक m. fours cover Drill चतुष्टयं समान्तम् 
f. combustion, प्रभागशः दहन 1. fourteen-sided cell Zool. चतुर्दशभुज f. crystallization प्रभागशः स्फटन n. 
कोशा. 
f. distillation प्रभागशः आसवन ।. fourth cerebral चतुर्थी मास्तिष्की . 
f. distillation column = frac fourth dimension चतुर्थ-विमा f. 
tionating column प्रभागशःपासवन fourth proportional Matb. चतुर्थानुपाती . वंश-प्रभाजक वंश m. 
(-इन्) m. 
f. distillation triangle प्रभागशः fourth root Math. चतुर्थ मूल 1. 
, पासवन त्रिकोण ?. fourth ventricle Anat. प्राण-गहा, चतुर्थ- f. number Math. भिन्नांक m. 
गुहा . 
f. oxidation प्रभागशः जारण : . 
429:.﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
0. 
f. weights प्राभागिक भार m. 
freedom स्वातंत्र्य 1. fractionate vb. Chem. प्रभाजन 1. 
f. of choice Math. वरण-स्वातन्त्र्य n. fractionating column or tube प्रभा- free end Math. मुक्त अन्त m., मुक्त अग्न 
जक बंश M. (cf. पृष्ठवंश) fractionation प्रभाजन . 
free filament Bot. विरक्त अंश m. fractionator प्रभाजयिता (तू) m. free from imperfection 5 min. fraction with surd denominator free from limit na mfn. 
Math. करणी-हर भिन्न m. 
free from mixture अमिश्रित mfn. fracture Surg. FETHIT m. 
free from restriction अबाध mfn. fragile भंगुर mfr. 
free-hand मुक्त-हस्त mfn. fragmentation Biol. (separation into freehand sketch मुक्तहस्त प्रारूप n. ___fragments or parts) विखण्डन n. freehold n. Law प्रात्मधृत . frambesia=yaws Med. न्युपदंश m. f. property आत्मघृत-सम्पत्ति . frame I (of a picture) चतुष्काष्ठ N. free-living स्वतन्त्र-जीवी (-इन्) mfn. 
(Hindi चौखटा, Marathi चौकट) freely स्वतन्त्ररूपेण, मुक्तरूपेण 2 Ry. Eng. कंकाल m. 
f. movable joint (diarthrosis) 3 Automobile आधारी (-इन ) m. 
परिचष्ट सन्धि m. framework I Automobile आधार-कंकाल f. soluble अत्यन्त विलेय mfn. 
m. 
Freeman's non-poisonous white 2 संधार m. 
lead Col. Ind. अविष पिश्वेत सीस m. franchise मताधिकार m. 
freemartin Zool. (a sterile female calf franker==franking machine (free twinborn with a male) वन्ध्य-यमजा 
stamp matking machine) मुधा-मुद्रा- . यन्त्र n. 
_free nuclear division Biol. उन्मुक्त Frankfort black=drop black Col. न्यष्टि-भाजन 7. ___ Ind. द्रप्स-काल m. 
free nucleus (from which other franking machinefranker ___parts have disappeared) केवल-न्यष्टि Frasch process (of extracting sul ___phur) Chem. भूछिद्र-विधा . free of tax कर-मुक्त 
Fraxinus भूर्जति f. (-ति for प्रजाति genus) free oxygen उन्मुक्त जारक, असंयुत जारक -free -रहित । 
m. free अबाध, मुक्त, स्वतन्त्र mfn. 
free stamp marking machine मुधा free acid स्वतन्त्र अम्ल 1. 
मुद्रा-यन्त्र n. free cell formation Bot. उन्मुक्त-कोशा- free state Chem. मुक्तावस्था . :, निर्माण 1. 
free surface Phys. उन्मुक्त पृष्ठतल . free central placentation Bot. अलग्न free trade Com. अबाध व्यापार m. .., केन्द्रस्थ जरायुन्यास m.. 
free ventilation Hygiene अबाध वातन 1. freed मक्त mfn : 
free-wheel मुक्त-चक्र 1. 430 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
freezing FUTT na 
f. apparatus श्यान-साधिन . f. mixture 41-T n. f. point Physical Chem. TTTT m. f. point thermometer ETTİF 
JT9H7T m. freight Com. Hr* m., 3696 f., HTCFI 
inward f. अन्तर्भाटका . outward f. बहिर्भाटक n. railway f. 177-197CR n. 
shipping f. T1- TERi 17. freight Rly. Tentofa, get f., TET1749. freight. car भाण्ड-यान n. freight locomotive=goods loco 
motive HT4Eaf9 n. French blue =ultramarine 
2=azure blue referitstift m. French chalk (natural hydrated 
magnesium silicate=talc, face- powder white, feather white, glossy white, shale white Col. 
Ind. TTT-ect f. French ocher=yellow ocher French red=rouge Col. Ind. TIT 
597 m. French screw thread section FETETTU 
६०° भ्रमिसूत्र छेद m. (crest is double 
of trough) French verdigris Col. Ind. SEITET 
fait f. frenzelite=guanajuatite=seleno 
bismutite (bismuth selenide) Mineral. fa#fas M. (-34 for a first 
mineral) frequency ataTTGT, FETT, THOUT f. 
(number of items) f. curve artareat in. 
f. diagram वारंवारता चित्रn. f. distribution वारंवारता वंटन 1. f. of cycles TF-FIT f. f. of motion गति-संख्या f. f. of vibrations 129HEIT f. f. polygon arata m. 
f. table arattat-HTEUTT f. frequently atTaTT, PET: fresh अभिनव mfn. fresh breeze (19-24 m.p.h.) 
PETITFT m. (See Beaufort's Wind 
Scale) fresh gale Naut. (39-46 m.p.h.) 
HETETT m. (See Beaufort's Wind 
Scale) fresh liver fra 197 11. fresh-water 97901-57 mfn. fresh-water polyp Zool. 790-511 
genia m. Freundlich adsorption law Physical 
Chem. (the law that the amount of a substance which can be ad sorbed from solution per unit of adsorbing medium is directly pro portional to the concentration of the substance in the solution; commonly expressed by the Freundlich equation =KCH. A graphic representation of the equation is called a Freundlich isotherm) firara Firen m. 
F. equation अपिचूष्यानुपात समीकार 
m. F. isotherm अपिचूष्यानुपात समताप m. friar's balsam Pharm. Sthut aftaler m. friction Phys.. sfatter, pero m. frictional प्रतिरोधात्मक mfn. 
431 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
4AM 
frictional electricity संघर्षज-विद्युत front axle Automobile पुरो-अक्षदण्ड m. frictional force Phys. प्रतिरोध बल ? front elevation Engin. अग्र-उद्विक्षेप m. frictionless Phys. संघर्षहीन mfn. . front lens thermometer पुरोवीक्ष ताप friction match (ignites by friction मान m. 
_on any surface)=Lucifer match fronto-parietal bone Zool. ललाट 
घर्षण-इषीका f. 
पास्थि । friction tester संघर्ष-परीक्षित्र n. 
front scale Geom. पुरस्थ-श्रेणी /. Friedel-Craft's reaction Chem. (us- front tender buffer Rly. Eng. जलांगारि 
ing anhydrous aluminium chlo अग्रोपबह 7. (जलांगारि- tender; उपबह ride as a catalytic agent) अपिस्फनी short for ताडोपबह) प्रतिक्रिया. 
front truck Ry. Eng. अग्रोद्वाही (-इन्) m. friend of the court न्यायालय-मित्र . front truck wheel Rly. Eng. HUTEIRE 
Frigid Zone Geog. प्रशीत कटिबन्ध m.. चक्र.. frilled lip भल्लरौष्ठ m. 
frost n. तुहिन ।. fringer Anat. झल्लरी f. 
frostvb. (to cover with frost) तुहिनाच्छा 2 Bot. झल्लर m. (Hindi झालर) 
दन . f. joint. Anat. झल्लरी-सन्धि m. frosted तुहिनाच्छादित mfn. 
f. wing (an insect) झल्लरी-पक्ष m. froth फेनक m. (foam फेन m.) fringing reef Geol. (bordering land) fructo-furanose Chem. फल-बुसिन्यधु n. 
अनुतट-प्रवाली . 
fructo-pyranose Chem. फलाग्लिन्यधु. frock (dress of children, etc.) arar f. fructosate Chem. 4ety n. frog मण्डक m. 
fructose Chem. फलधु . from above Math. उपरिष्टात 
fruit development adviser फल-विका from below Math. अधस्तात् 
___ सोपदेष्टा (-तृ) m. from the beginning प्रारम्भतः fruit development board फल-विकास from the right Drill afTta: 
गण m. frond (leaf) Bot. TETIT n. 
fruiting Bot. फलन . front I (battle front) संग्रामाग्र, संग्राममुख f. body फलन-काय m. 
f. time फलन-काल m. 2 Macb. पुरः 
fruitlet लघु-फल .. frontal Anat. I n. ललाट ?. 
fruit preservers' association 4 2 adi. ललाट-, ललाटय mfn. (पाणिनि परिरक्षक पार्षद् f. ४.३.५५ काशिका) 
fruit sugar फल-शर्करा .. frontal bone Anat. ललाटास्थि. fruit technology फल-प्रौद्योगिकी / frontalis muscle Anat. ललाट-पेशी. fruity odour, fruity smell फल-गन्ध m. frontal nerve Anat. ललाट-चेता f. . frustum Geom. छिनक n.. frontal ridge (supra-orbital ridge) f. of a prism संक्षेत्र-छिन्नक . - Anat. भूकट . .. 
f. of a pyramid स्तूप-छिन्नक .. '. 
. 
432.. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
____m. 
f. of a sphere गोल-छिन्नक.. 
fulminic acid (Lat. fulmenlightning) ft. (foot) पा. (पाद) 
Chem. चंचलिक अम्ल n. (a strong Fucaceae Bot. शैलघास-कुल . 
poisonous unstable acid) fuchsia Col. Ind. अधिनीलातिरक्त, धूमल fulvene Chem. आर्पिगन्य . 
m. 
fumarate Chem. धूम्रीय ॥ fuchsin धूमलि. 
fumaric धूम्रिक afn. fuchsine Col. Ind. धूमली f. 
fumaric acid धूम्रिक अम्ल . f. ponceau धूमली अधिरक्तापीत m. fume धूम M. f. scarlet धूमली शोण m. 
f. absorber धूम-प्रचूषक m. fuchsinophile tissue Zool. धुमलिरंज्य f. absorption tube धूम-प्रचूषण नाल 
ऊति . Fucus Bot. (the rockweeds) शैलधासति. fuming धूमन 1., धूमायमान' mfn. 
(-ति for प्रजाति genus). 
f. cupboard धूमन माधरण 1. F. platycarpus पृथुफल शैलघास m. f. nitric acid धूमायमान भूयिक अम्ल 7. F. serratus क्रकच शैलघास m. 
f. sulphuric acid धूमायमान शुल्बारिक F. vesiculosus वाताशय-शैलघास m. अम्ल . 
(bladders filled with air) Funaria Bot. (usually having a fuel इन्धन n. 
double peristome of sixteen teeth) fulcrum Mach. FFHTf. 
षोडशदन्तति f. (-ति for प्रजाति genus) fulfil a condition प्रतिबन्ध-पालन M. Funariaceae Bot. षोडशदन्तकुल 1. full पूर्ण mfn. 
function I (specific duty) धर्म m., vb. (to thicken by moistening, प्रकार्य. heating and pressing, as cloth) 2 Math. श्रित ॥. संकोचन . 
functional I Math. श्रत mfn. full black D conc. = wool black 2 Zool. (as a sperm) कार्यशील mfm. 
ND 
functional activity कार्य-शीलता, प्रकार्य full-celled पूर्ण-कोशावान् mfn. 
शीलता, स्वधर्म-कर्मण्यता. fuller's earth (so called from its use functional calculus Math. श्रिति-कलन ____in fulling cloth) संकोचक-मृत्तिका f. fullingn. संकोचन... 
functionality Math. fsha f. fulling black संकोचन काल m. 
functional megaspore Bot. (per full line Engin. पूर्ण-रेखा, सन्तत-रेखा . forming its regular function) full size पूर्ण परिमाण. 
__कार्यकारी महाबीजाणु m. full time पूर्ण काल m. 
functionless Bot. अकार्य, विनाकार्य mfm. fully Com. पूर्ण-, पूर्णत: 
functions प्रकार्य n. f. paid shares पूर्णदत्त अंश M. 
f. of crown सम्राट्-प्रकार्य 1. f. secured पूर्ण प्रतिभूत mfn. 
f. of Governor General महाशासक fulminate.Chem. चंचलीय .. 
प्रकार्य .. 
433. 
28 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
f. of Public Service Commis- 2 Zool. ('small rope') रज्जुका 
___sions लोकसेवायोग-प्रकार्य 1. fund Com. प्रणीवि. 
funicular railway रज्जु-संयान 1. capital redemption f. पुंजी-निष्क्रयण- funiculus=spermatic cord Anat. 
प्रणीवि . 
मुष्कस्रोतस् n. (ancient word) debenture redemption f. ऋणपत्र- funis Anat. रज्जु f. 
निष्क्रयण-प्रणीवि f. 
funnel fetare m. depreciation f. अवक्षयण-प्रणीवि f. f.-shaped निवापाकार mfn. dividend equalization f. लाभांश f. stand निवाप-स्थाम. 
समकारि-प्रणीवि f. 
enamelled f. आकाचित निवाप m. insurance f. गोप-प्रणीवि . (गोप in guttapercha f. निक्षीरेय निवाप m. ___cludes आगोप and प्रगोप) 
fur. (furlong) ण. (प्रणल्व) investment fluctuation f. fur 1 Furffstat n. 
विनियोग-उच्चावचन-प्रणीवि . 
2 मृदुलोमा. reserve f. संचिति-प्रणीविf. 
furan=furfuran sinking f. I (for replacement furane बुसीन्य n. 
. of assets) प्रतिस्थापन-प्रणीवि f. furazane Chem. बुसिन्याजीविन्य n. 2 (for payment of liabilities) fur base ऊर्णाजिन पीठ m. शोधन-प्रणीवि . 
f. black ऊर्णाजिन काल m. fundamental I 1. (fundamental f. brown ऊर्णाजिन बभ्रु m. 
principle) मूलनियम m. 
f. grey ऊर्णाजिन धूसर m. 2 adj. मूल, आधारभूत mfn. 
furcula (forked structure) =furcu f. principles मूल प्रनियम m. 
lum Zool. विशाखक 1. f. right Law मूल अधिकार m. furfur- बुस f. root आधार-मूल .. 
furfural (Lat. furfur bran बुस) Chem. f. tissue=ground tissue Bot. बुससुm. ____ आधारोति f. (ऊति tissue) 
furfur-alcohol बुस-सुषव m. f. unit आधारभूत एकक 1. 
furfur-aldehyde बुस-सुव्युद m. funded debt Com. अनिश्चितकाल ऋण ?. furfur-amide Cbem. बुस-तिक्तेय. fundus I Anat. बुध्न m. 
furfuran=furan Chem. afeFET n. 2 (swollen part of a flask-shaped furfurane=furane Chem. बुसीन्य 1. gland, etc.) पीनक .. 
furfurine Chem. बुसी f. Fungi कवकानि 1.pl. 
furfuroid (furfural + -oid) n. Chem. fungiform Zool. कवक-रूप mfn. 
बुसाभ m. fungiform papillae=clavate pa- furfurol, furfurole=furfural 
-pillae, Anat: छत्रांकर-m. 
furfuryl Chem. बुसल n. fromrus. कक्क., छत्र m. ., 
f.alcohol बुसल सुषव m. . funicle. I Bot. पर्यण्डवृन्त n. 
fulfurylidene Chem. बुसलेयेन्य 1. 
434. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
furil (furfural + benzil) Chem. afect fusain (containing no volatile eta 
m. . 
- matter) ETT m. (See durain) furlong (fur.; 40 rods) sua m..(.; fuscamine Col. Ind. #forfaqat f. 
80 ) 
fuscanthrene Col. Ind. 149TRUTT 1. furnace on. 
- fuscin Biochem. ffet f. f. house 776E-TE n. 
fuscus (Lat.) #furt mfn. gas-heated f. af 
n. fuse 1. Fant m. ignition f. 3714-1776 n. 
fuse vb. I snur, atau n. furnish vb. I (supply) TTT n. 
2 Biol. (to grow into one) TYP n. 2 545FTIT 1. 
fused I मिलित Mfn. furnished 34 min. (ancient word) 2 Biol. TT mfn. furnishing 397 n. (ancient word) 3 fara mfn. furniture उपस्कर M., शयनासन n. (an- fused silica द्रवित-संकजा. 
cient word) . 
fusel oil apparatus गन्धैल-साधित. f. and fittings=f. and fixture fusible et mfn. 
उपस्कर तथा अन्वायुक्ति. 
fusiform Bot. 77-, - mfn. furo- Chem. (furan) afert 
Fusiformis (F.) (a genus of bac furo-diazole Chem: f44-49tf. teria) aq m. (7.) furoid Chem. (resembling furan; F. acnes = Corynebacterium 
containing a furan ring) afry 
acnes युवपिडक त. 
. F. dentium (found in stoma furoin (furfural + benzoin) Chem. titis) Fe919 r. 
794 m. 
f. fragilis=Bacillus fragilis furol, furole=furfural 
Tg. furo-methyl (furyl + methyl) at F. furcosus (found in appendi 
577 n. 
____citis) उण्डकपुन्छ त. furo-monazole Chem. fra starfa F. fusiformis=F. dentium furrein D=paramine 
F. necrophorus = Actinomy furrier अजिन-सन्ध m. (from यजुर्वेद) 
ces necrophorus furrole B,S, SB=fursols=fur grey F. nucleatus (found in the 
mouth) मुख त. furrow flat f. 
F. typhi exanthematici=Plotz's furrowing सीताकरण 1. 
bacillus पृषज्ज्व रीय त. further 75: TT, TTT: 
F. vincenti. See Fusobacterium furuncle-boil Med. Futa m. (Hindi plauti-vincenti 
) 
fusiform papillae Anat. 792 m. furunculosis Med. स्फोटरुजा f. fusion I Ophthalmol. एकीभाव M., एकी furyl ( furan: rts - yl) Chem. aferunt n. FTTEN. 
1435 
mfn. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
2 Biol. सायुज्य n. (growing into one) 
3==melting द्राव m., द्रवण, द्रावण . fusion mixture द्राव-मिश्र n. 
fusion nucleus Zool. (formed by the 
union of male and female pro 
nuclei) युत-न्यष्टि . fusion of images मूर्ति-एकीभाव m. Fusobacterium (F.) (a genus of 
bacteria) तर्कुवेत्राणु'm. (त. वे.) 
F. biacutum द्विवक्र त. दे. ___F. plauti-vincenti (isolated from 
adeposit on teeth) दन्तशर्करा त.वे. 
F. polymorphum पुरुरूप त. वे. fustic पांडुद्रु m. fustic (chips, extract) Col. Ind. पाण्डुद्र 
m. (खण्ड, सार) 
G. (synoecium) Bot. जा (जायांग) g. I (gram) धा. (धान्य) 
2 (grain) य. (यव) g., 'g' Phys. (acceleration due to 
gravity) भू, भू' (भ्वाकृष्टि-त्वरण) Ga (gallium) Chem. द्र (द्रवातु) Gacid छ अम्ल . gadfly गोमक्षी f. (ancient word; Mara- 
thi गोमाशी) gadolinite Mineral, fac-TTFT f. (it is ____a source of rare earths विरला मद) gadolinium Chem. योनिला. Gadus morrhua=cod gahnite=zinc spinel कुप्य-स्फटीयिज m. 
(-इज for खनिज mineral) Gaillard tower Chem. (a tower into ____ the top of which a very fine spray 
of the acid to be concentrated is 
introduced) शीकर-प्रस्थाणु m. gain Com. अधिगम, लाभ m. . g.and loss लाभ तथा हानि f., लाभालाभ 
m. . . . gal. (gallon) ढ. (आढक) galactic क्षीरिक mfn. gakactia s mammotropin = sian lactins स्तन्यपोषि. . 
galactonic Chem. क्षीरायिक mfu.. 
g. acid क्षीरायिक अम्ल १. galactopoiesis Physiol. क्षीरोत्पाद m. galactose Chem. क्षीरधु ॥. galalith (artificial horn prepared 
by the action of formaldehyde on 
casein किलाटि) किलाटिशृंग १. galangin कुलंजनि f. (कुलंजन Alpinia 
galanga) galea Zool. Sously m. galeate Bot. (helmet-shaped) FATE TUT 
वत् min. galena=lead glance सीस-रुचा /. Galilean telescope (eyeglass is con 
cave न्युज-नेत्रवीक्ष-दूरेक्ष) निद्रेक्ष m. gall. (gallon) ढ. (आढक) gall-gallnut द्रुस्फोट n. gall=galla-aleppo galls=blue 
galls = gallae ceruleae Pharm. 
द्रुस्फोट m. . gall-amic acid 'द्रुस्फोट-तिक्तिक अम्ल 
n. gall-amide द्रुस्फोट-तिक्तेय . gall-amine द्रुस्फोट-तिक्ती. ' gallamine blue Col. Ind. ruite fait 
नील m. gall and opium ointment = un .. guentum gallae cum opio (ung. 
1436 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
gall. c. opio) द्रुस्फोट तथा अहिफेन स्नेहलेप gallo blue Col. Ind. द्रुस्फोट नील m. m. 
g. chrome blue द्रुस्फोट वर्णक नील M. gallanil blue Col. Ind. द्रुस्फोटनील नील g. corinth द्रुस्फोट रोहित m. 
g. fast black paste Pस्फोट स्थिर काल g.green द्रुस्फोटनील हरि m. 
लेगी। g. indigo द्रुस्फोटनील निनील m. 
g. fast green द्रुस्फोट स्थिर हरि m. g. violet द्रुस्फोटनील नीललोहित m. g. grey द्रुस्फोट धूसर m. gall-anilic द्रुस्फोट-नीलिक Mfn. 
g. heliotrope द्रुस्फोट निनीलातिरक्त M. gall-anilide Pharm. द्रुस्फोट-नीलेय . g. indigo blue द्रुस्फोट निनील नील m. gallate Chem. दुस्फोटीय n. 
g. navy blue द्रुस्फोट नाविक नील M. gallazine Col. Ind. द्रुस्फोटाजीवी . 
g. violet दुस्फोट नीललोहित m. gallazol blue Col. Ind. द्रुस्फोटाजव नील gallo-cyanine Col. Ind. अस्फोट-श्यामी . 
m. 
g. bisulphite द्रुस्फोटश्यामी द्विशुल्बित gall bladder = cholecyst Anat. 
n. पित्ताशय m. 
g. liquid द्रुस्फोटश्यामी तरल m. gallein (gallo- + phthalein) Chem. galloflavine Col. Ind. द्रुस्फोटपिंगी . 
द्रुस्फोटिन m. 
gall ointment=unguentum gallae Galleria mellonella=bee moth= (ung. gall.) Pharm. स्फोट-स्नेहलेपm. 
wax moth सिक्थशलभ m. 
-gallol -द्रुस्फोटव M. gallery दीर्घा f. 
gallon I (gal., gall., 4 quarts) आढक gallfly Zool. (an insect causing galls m. (ढ., ४ तुर्य) 
in plants) द्रुस्फोटमक्षी f. 
2 (C., 8 pints) तरल आढक m. (त. ढ., gallic Chem. I (from gallium द्रवात) ८ तरल शराव) 
द्रविक mfn. 
gallo-phenine Col. Ind. दुस्फोट-दर्शी [. 2 द्रुस्फोटिक mfn. 
gallo-thionine Col. Ind. द्रुस्फोट-गन्धी . gallic acid द्रुस्फोटिक अम्ल n. 
gallo-viridine Col. Ind. द्रुस्फोट-हरिती. gallinaceous bird Zool. Farizi Te galloxine blue Col. Ind. estefart 
(-इन्) m. 
नील m. gall insect Zool. द्रुस्फोट-कीट m. 
Galton's whistle Acous. चल-तार-शीटी gallipot I कुंभिका . 
f. (high variable pitch) ____ 2 (crude turpentine oleoresin) galvanize See zinc, zincify 
सरलोद्यास m. 
galvanometer Elec. धुवाहमान m. gallium (eka-aluminium) Chem. द्रवातु galvanoscope Elec. धुवाहेक्ष m. 
'm. (एक-स्फटयातु) 
galvanotaxy धुवाहक्रम m. gallnut=gall 
galvanotropism Biol. धुवाहावर्तनाf. gallo- द्रुस्फोट 
gambier catechu=cubical catechu gall oak = Quercus infectoria== Col. Ind. घन-खदिर m. 
dyer's oak Bot, रंगद वज़ु M. gambine-sulfamine 
437 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
gambir=catechu Pharm. afat n. . . g. bacteria 12-14To m.. gamboge=camboge 
septic g. satu tem m. . games of skill 312-FIET f. 
gangue Mining faare m. gametangium Bot. जन्युधानी 
ganjah=cannabis Pharm. 17515 gamete Biol. m. 
astat gametic Biol. Tra mfn. 
Ganoidei (so named from their hard gametocyte Biol. (mother-cell of enameled scales) Zool. 1979#FIT: - a gamete) FLATSIT (-a) f. . m.pl gametogenesis Biol. 1997 n. ganoid scale Zool. 519199216 m. gametogonium Biol. जन्युयोनि f. ganoin Zool.. (enamellike covering gametophore Bot. जन्युधर m. 
of a ganoid scale) 1979 m. gametophyte, gametophyte gene- Gantt chart Engin. (showing the ration=sexual generation or relation between the actual, per, 
7791 11. (opp. sporophyte api5TU- formance and the expected per 7795) 
formance) 11FT-TYTTY37-F7* n. gamma squi, 57 m. 
gap TT, TTT 11., 5798T3T, face gamma acid ATT SET 1. 
' 112. gamma draconis Phys. परिध्रुवनाग इ gape Zool. मुखव्यादान 1. 
m. 
garage वहित्रगृह 7. (short for वत्रिरथगृह) gamma ray Phys. T TH m. 
garance (common European mad gamo- Bot. (union or fusion of parts). der) Foros m. 
युक्त 
garanceux Col. Ind. (a lower quality Gamopetalae Bat. युक्तदला: m. pl. of garancine) sifat f. gamopetalous Bot. 177699 mfn. garancine=charbon sulphurique -gamy JETE, 
Col. Ind. shifrost f. Ganahl yellow=golden yellow garble Econ. fa927 11. (to pick out) ganglia pl. of ganglion , 
garbled coins faraa.m. ganglion I Anat., Zool. (nerve gan Garcinia रक्ताम्रति f. (-ति for प्रजाति 
glion) saus m. 
genys) 2 Bact. tak m. 
G. indica = red mango FART ganglionate Zool. TITUERT 1h. 
CT m. ganglionated Zoot. प्रगंडयुक्त, प्रगडित Gardenia Bot. नाडीहिंगुति . (-ति for 
mfn. 
प्रजाति genus) . gangosa=thinopharyngitis muti- G. gummifera THTETT TISTFET M. 
lans (destructive ulceration of gardenin (Gardinia + -in) Chem. the nose and face) af:m., Foffra f. 
.. Gangotri Geog. गंगोद्धदm., गंगावतरीf garden lizard Zool. उद्यानगोधिका f.. gangrene Medtanta indossata in garden spider Zool. SET-TETT f. 
38 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
Garhwal Geog. बदरीक्षेत्र n. 
g. ring वाति-वलय m. garlic odour लषण-गन्ध M. 
. g. sylvestre वन-वाति m. garment black Col. Ind. वसन काल m. g. tubing, metallic, flexible 
g. blue बसन नील m. 
आनम्य धातुमय वाति-नाल m. g. bordeaux वसन कपिशक m. 
g. volumeter वाति-परिमामान m. g. brown वसन बभ्रु m. 
g. washing bottle बाति-धावन-कूपी . g.green वसन हरि m. 
g.-works वाति-शाला f. garnet निरक्त m. 
gaseous वातिय mfn. garnet lake Col. Ind. निरक्त लाक्षक m. . g.excretory product Zool. वातिय garnishee Law प्राधमर्ण m. (अधमर्णस्य उत्सर्ग सृष्ट . 
अधमर्णः) 
g. hydride बातिय उदेय. g. order प्राधमर्ण आदेश m. 
gaso- वाति garnishment Law (a notice given gaso-genic वाति-जन mfn. __to garnishees) प्राधमर्ण-सूचना f. gasoline-petrol (made by therefin garter पाद्याबन्धक m. 
____ing of petroleum मृत्तल) मात्तैल . gas वाति m. (in chemistry the suffix gasoline locomotive मार्तेल चलित्रn. 
for gas is -याति) 
gasometer वातिमान M. g. absorption apparatus वाति- gasometric apparatus वातिमितीय 
प्रचूषण-साधित. 
___ साधित्र n. g. and electricity co. arfa any Gasserian ganglion=semilunar 
विद्युत् प्रम. 
ganglion Anat. अर्धचन्द्र प्रगंड M. g. black वाति काल m. 
gastri, gastro- Anat. जठर g. bubbler वाति-उद्बुद M. 
gastric Anat. जठर-, जाठर mfr. g. carbon वाति-प्रांगार m. 
g. artery जठर-रोहिणी. g. co. वाति प्रम. 
g. fever Med. जठर-ज्वर m. g. cock वाति-शिखी (-इन् ) m. 
g. glands जठर-ग्रन्थि m. g. container वाति-आधान 1., वाति- g. juice Physiol. जठर-रस m. 
धारक m. 
g. tentacles Zool. जठरांगका . g. cylinder वाति-रम्भ.m. 
gastro-, gastr-Anat. जठर g. engineering वाति-अभियन्त्रणा f. gastrocnemius Anat.. जंघापिंडी f., g. furnace वाति-भ्राष्ट्र. 
प्रजघm. g. gangrene Med. वाति-कोथ m. Gastrodiscidae Zool. जठरबिम्ब-वंशा . g. generator वाति-जनित्र.. 
Gastrodiscus Zool. जठरबिम्बाति f. g.-holder afate m. 
(आति for प्रजाति genus) g.jar and cover वाति कलश तथा gastrology जाठरिकी, जठरविद्या . 
• आवरण . 
Gastropoda Zool. उदरपादाः m.pl. g. plant वाति-संयन्त्र . . 
gastrula (sac-shaped embryo) स्यूति g. regulator वाति-यामक m. . 
भ्रूण . 
439﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
gastrulate Embryol. (to become or gazo-gene arrastet m. 
form a gastrula) स्यूतिभ्रूणन, स्यूति- GCI (ground controlof interception) भ्रूणभवन, स्यूतिभ्रूण-निर्माण १. 
Radar अ. भू. व. (अन्तारोध-भू-वश) gastrulation (formation of gas- GCI station Radar 7. 7. 9. SITT 7. 
trula) स्यूतिभ्रूणन, स्यूतिभ्रूण-निर्माण 1. G.C.M. (H.C.F., H.C.D.) Arithmetic Gatton graph Math. (showing the महत्तम समापवर्तक M. 
ratio of variation) विचरणानुपात-चित्र Gd (gadolinium) Chem. यो (योनिला) 
Ge (germanium) Chem. सि (सिकातु) rauche-skew Geom. विषमतली (-इन्), gear Macb. I (an accessory mechan 
वितलैय (वि not + तल plane+ एय ism) उपयान्त्र . passable) 
2 (a. toothed wheel) दन्तिचक्र, दन्ति n. gauche quadrilateral skew g. box दन्ति-धान . 
quadrilateral Math. fawwarett g. case दन्ति-कोश m. चतुर्भुज . 
g. lever दन्ति-उद्याम m. gaude=gelbkraut 
g. wheel Mach. दन्ति-चक्र . gauge I अामान M. 
Geiger counter Phys. (a tube with draughtg. वहत्यामान m. 
a needle like electrode) गणन 2 Rly. (distance between rails) सूचिनाल m. प्रान्तर ।. 
Geiger-Muller counter (containing Gauhati Geog. प्राग्ज्योतिषपुर n., कामाक्षी a slender axial wire) गणन-तन्तुनाल 
m. gauss Elec. (c.g. s. unit of magnetic Geissler bulbs Chem. अपिसजिकन्द m. 
intensity चुम्बिक-चण्डता) चुचण्ड m. (a form of potash bulbs) Gauss, method of द्विस्तोलन n. 
Geissler tube Elec. विद्यु द्विभा नाल m. gauze जाली . 
Geissler vacuum Phys. विमानाल शुन्यक copper g. ताम्र-जाली. 
___n. (short for विद्य द्विभानाल....) wireg. तन्तु-जाली. 
gel Physical Chem. श्लिषक m. gavial . (corrupted from Hindi -gel -श्लि,-श्लिषक 
घड़ियाल) = Gavialis gangeticus gelatin शिलषि f. गंगामकर m. 
gelatinous शिलषीय mfn. Gay-Lussac or Tralle's alcoholo- I (of the nature and consis 
meter (6-100 per cent) शतान्त tence of gelatin) श्लिषिवत् सुषवमान m. 
2 (containing gelatin) farfare Gay-Lussac's law वाति-परिमा-नियम m. Gay-Lussac tower (to absorboxides gelatinous mass शिलषिवत् पुंज m. __of nitrogen) भू-ज-चूष प्रस्थाणु m. gelbholz Col. Ind. पीतद्रुम m.. 
tabbreviated from भूयाति-जारेय- gelbin Col. Ind. (obtained by pre प्रचूप प्रस्थाणु) 
cipitating a boiling solution 449 
genali 
mfn. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
gianatomy #TATT TTTTT n. g. application सामान्य प्रयोग m. g. balance sheet Com. सामान्य 
स्थिति-विवरण 1. g. charges Com. सामान्य प्रभार m. g. chemical apparatus सामान्य 
रसायनिक साधिन . g. chemistry सामान्य रसायन .. g. consideration सामान्य विमर्श m. g. constituency सामान्य प्रतिमंडल 
। 
of calcium chloride with pota ssium chromate or bichromate, and is used mainly for mixing 
with other yellows) संपीति f. gelbkraut Col. Ind. पीततर m. gelbwurz Col. Ind. पीतमूल n. Gellert green Col. Ind. (a kind of 
· cobalt green) पिकत्वातु हरि m. gelsemii radixagelsemium gelsemine Chem. पीतजातियी. gelseminine Chem. पीतजातिकी. gelsemium I=Gelsemium sem 
pervirens = yellow jasmine =Carolina jessamine fractifa f. 2 Pharm. (gelsem:) = gelsemii radix=yellow jasmine root 
पीतजाति-मूल 1. gem रत्न . gem engraving = litho-glyptics ___रत्नोत्किरण . gemma Bot. रुहा, कुड्मली f. gemma cup Bot. सहा-गत m. gemmae pl. of gemma gemmation Bot. कुड्मलीयन ". -gen -जन gena (cheek) Zool. कपोल m. -genase -जनेद m. -gene = -gen -जन gene Biol. (inheritance unit) पित्र्यैक 
g. crossing Com. सामान्य रेखण n. g. death rate सामान्य मृत्यु-अर्घm. g. discussion सामान्य पर्यालोचन n. g. endorsement==blank en _dorsement Com. सामान्य-पृष्ठांकना 
g. enunciation Math. साधारण 
प्रतिज्ञा.. g. equipment सामान्य-सज्जा f. g. expenses Com. सामान्य व्यय M. g. law-generality सामान्य नियम 
_m. 
General (Army) Frafrafer m. general सामान्य mfn. (opp. विशेष) 
g. acceptance=clear accep 
tance Com. सामान्य-स्वीकृति g. act. Pol. सामान्य अधिनियम m. g. administration FATE ETTFTT N. g. agent Law सामान्य अभिकर्ता (-त) 
12. 
g. ledger Com. सामान्य-प्रपंजी f. g. ledger adjustment account 
सामान्य प्रपंजी समायोजन लेखा f. g. lien Law (a legal right to 
detain; Germ. Pfandrecht 
'right to seize') ग्रहणाधिकार M. g. meeting सामान्य अधिवेशन 1. g. merchant सामान्य वणिक् m. g. partner .Com. सामान्य भागी (-इन) 
m. g. property सामान्य गुण m. g. public जनसाधारण, सर्वसाधारण, 
सामान्य-जनता. . g. rule सामान्य नियम, उत्सर्गm.i g. staff Mil. (representatives of 
441. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
all the army departments) 3 (adj. from -gen -जन) -जनिक (with सर्वाधिकारि-गण m. 
आदिवृद्धि) g. term Logic साधारण पद १. 
-genics -जनिकी generality I=general law TATR geniculate Zool. (bent at an angle 
नियम m. 
like a knee) भुग्न mfn. 2 सामान्यभाव m. 
geniculate ganglion Anat. अनीकचेता generalization सामान्यन, सामान्यकरण 1. 
प्रगंड=भुग्न प्रगण्ड m. generalize vb. सामान्यन 1. 
genital Zool. जनन generalized सामान्यित mfn. 
genital papillae Zool. जननाकुंर m. generalized ovum Zool. सामान्यित अंड 
genital pore जनन-रन्ध्र n. 
genital ridge Zool. जनन-कूट n. generalizer सामान्यक m. 
genitals उपस्थ m. generally सामान्यतः (opp. विशेषतः) 
genoneme == axoneme पित्र्याक्ष generate vb. जनन ॥. 
m. (short for पित्र्यसूत्राक्ष) generating line Math. जनन-रेखा . 
genotype Biol. (different in genes) generating nucleus Zool. जनन-न्यष्टि । 
भिन्नपित्र्यैक n. 
-genous I -जन mfn. generation I Math. जनन M. 
2 (caused by) -कृत mfn. 2 Zool. संतति /. . first g. प्रथम-संतति . 
3 (-gen+ -OAS) -जनक mfn. generative cell Biol. जनन-कोशा . 
genthite=nickel gymnite Mineral. generative nucleus जनन-न्यष्टि . 
रूपक-जलभ्रासिज m. (gymnite is a micro-nucleus अण-न्यष्टि f. 
hydrous magnesium silicate) generator I Mach. जनित्र n. 
gentian=gentiana=gentianae ra 2 Geom. जनक m. 
dix-gentian root Pharm. किरात generatory nucleus Zool. जनन-न्यष्टि मूल. 
Gentiana Bot. fifcrafer f. (-fær for -genesia= -genesis 
प्रजाति genus) -genesis -जनन । 
G. kurooa सामान्य किरात m, -genesy -जनिकी (a science of...) gentiana blue 6B=opal blue 
litho-genesey शैल-जनिकी/. Gentianaceae Bot. किरातकुल . (कुल -genetic affani mfn. . 
family) genetics जननविद्या, पैत्रागतिकी, पित्रागति- gentianae radix-gentian 
विद्या .. 
Gentianales Bot. किरातगोत्र. (गोत्र genetic spiral Bot. पर्णविकास-कुन्तल, order) 
विकास-कुन्तल m. 
gentianine Col. Ind. लोहनीली f.. -genic I -जन । 
gentianose Chem. किरातधु . . . : a caused by) कृत .... gentian root Pharm. किरात-मूल . 
442 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
... 
. 
. 
... 
m. 
. 
m. 
gentian violet Col. Ind. पिलोहनील ground) अधोभूज mfn. 
geo-physics 7-rifarsit f. gentle breeze (8-12 m.p.h.) धीर समीर geotaxis, geotaxy Biol. भ्वाकृष्टि-क्रम 
m. (See Beaufort's Wind Scale) genuine विशुद्ध, प्रामाणिक mfn. 
geotropism i=geotropy Biol. mai genuine violet Col. Ind. विशुद्ध नील कृष्टि-आवर्तना. (tropism आवर्तना in - लोहित M. 
which gravitational attraction genus Biol. प्रजाति f. (suffix in Zool. भ्वाकृष्टि is the orienting factor, as ___ आति, in Bot. -ति) 
in roots growing down, shoots geo- भू 
growing upward...) geodesic geometry=geodesy Math. 2 भूम्यावर्तना. (movement towards 
ज्यामिति . 
. the earth) geographical distribution Biol. Gephyrea Zool. (exhibit no appear 
भौगोलिक वंटन 1. 
ance of segmentation when adult) geography भूगोल m., भूवृत्त ।. 
प्रौढाखंडिनः m.pl. geological भौमिक, भौमिकीय mfn. Geraniaceae Bot. कषायमूल-कुल 1. ___g. chemistry भौमिक रसायन ". geranial-citral Chenz. निम्बष . geologically भौमिकी-अनुसार 
Geraniales. Bot. कषायमुल-गोत्र 1. (गोत्र geologist भौमिकीविद् m. 
· order) geology भौमिकी f. 
geranine Col. Ind. fotot f. geomancy भू-शकुन 1. 
Geranium Bat. कषायमूलति . (-ति for geometric रैखिकीय mfn. 
__प्रजाति genus) g. average गुणोत्तर माध्य n. geranium (a colour) oferecitata g. mean गुणोत्तर मध्यक n. 
g. progression गुणोत्तर-श्रेढी . geranium GN Col. Ind. sferatatata geometrical रैखिकीय mfn. 
. गन m. g. construction रैखिकीय-रचना . geranol नीलातिलोहित m. g. drawing रैखिकीय उद्रैखिकी f. germ I जीवाणु m. (a small mass of g. form fferata FT n. 
living substance...). g. models रैखिकीय-प्रतिकृति . 
2 Bot. बीजाणु m. g. optics रैखिकीय-काशिकी. 
3 (pathogenic) रोगाणु m. . g. set रेखागणित-कुलक . 
germanate Chem. सिकतीय .. geometric spider = orb weaver German black=Frankfort black 
(weaving a circular web) गोलवाय Col. Ind. द्रप्स काल M. 
G. orange=gold orange geometry रैखिकी f., रेखागणित .. :. G. verdigris = green verdigris 
geodesy ज्यामिति . 
germanic Chem. सिकतिक mfr. geophilous Bot. (growing under- g.acid सिकतिक अम्ल N. 
m. 
m. 
443 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
germanite Mineral. (a copper iron germinant Zool. 31 min. (present 
germanium sulphide) fft m. active participle) (-59 for efter mineral) 
germinate vb. I Zool. Te n. germanium (eka - silicon) Chem. 2 Bot. TN 
feita m. (F-FISTT 1.) 
germinated (as seeds) Bot. sfer g. oxide or dioxide सिकातु जारेय, - mfn. 
द्विजारेय. 
germinating seed Bot. उद्भेदि बीज germanous Chem. सिकत्य mfn. 
M. German silver=nickel silver germination Bot. Sa n. 
(copper+-nickel+zinc) 775-69€ germinative Zool. TT (50) mfn. 
germinogony = polyembryony germanyl (GeO) Chem. fed h. Zool. Eu n. 
(Fe ) 
germ layer 1 Embryol. fifa- m. germ cell Bot. बीजाणु कोशा f. 2 Zool. (primary layer) TE FTT 
2 Zool. EfE-FTRIT f. 
m. germ gland=gonad Zool. Fut-off germ nucleus=germinai nucleus 
m. 
ats-refoc f. germicide n. Fatocent m. 
germ plasm or plasma Biol. (the germinal apparatus - egg appa- . substance contained in the germ 
ratus Bot. 4E-1 n. 
cells, hy which hereditary charac g. area Embryol. TF-8 n. 
ters are transmitted) पित्र्यद्रव्या . g. corpuscle = oosphere Bot. germ pore Bot. 1 -TFET 16. 
TUETT m. 
germ theory 1 (of diseases) Med. g. disk=blasto-disc Embryol. TTTTTTT m. 
Tfa-fa F= Tr-farar m.. 
2 (of reproduction) Biol. (repro g. epithelium Embryol., Anat. duction of living organism from : Tife-f= m. 
parent living organism) जीवाज्जीव g. layer=stratum=germ layer atc m. 
Zool. TF-FIT, ETT FTK m. (pri- germ track Biol. (line of ontogenic mary layer) 
descent of the germ cells) fq5u g. membrane Embryol. Tree IT m. 
-gerous (bearing, producing, con g. nucleus=germ nucleus taining) -मृत् g. spot Zool. The m, 
gersdorffite = nickel glance Mine g. stratum=g. layer 
ral. Fyrafton m. (- for afts g. vesicle 1 Embryol. -7165 mineral) 
M. 
get=obtain vb. Tu n. 2 Botzoosphere 
ghost Radar (a secondary image in 444. 
mine 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
television caused by reflection) (radial plate') प्रतिछाया. 
Gill kiln (Gill regenerative sulphur gi. (gill) सृ. (प्रसृति) 
___ furnace) पुनस्तापी आपाक m. giallolino = Naples yellow Col. gill pouch Zool. जलक्लोम-धान n. ___Ind. अपि-पीत m. 
gilt-edged security Com. (security giant n. Zool. अतिकाय m. 
___of the highest class) परम-प्रतिभूति ___ adj. महा giant cell Anat. महाकोशा. gin हपुषिरा . (हपुषा juniper) giant newt=Triturus torosus Zool. ginger=zingiber (zingib.) Pharm. 
महा-सरटिका . 
शृंगवेर m., आर्द्रक . giant tortoise महाकूर्म m. 
g. bleacher आर्द्रक-श्वेतक m. giant whale महातिमि m. 
gingerin Pharm. आर्द्रकि f. Giardia उलूकमुखाति . (-आति for प्रजाति gingerol Chem. (an oil) आर्द्रकल n. 
genus) 
ginglymus joint = hinge joint G.lamblia=G.intestinalis,Cer- Anat. कोरसन्धि m. (from सुश्रत) 
comonas intestinalis, Dicer- Ginkgo Bot. (fan-shaped leaves) comonas muris, Lamblia in- 049777quifa f. (-fa for hfa genus) testinalis, Megastoma. enteri Ginkgoaceae Bot. व्यजनपर्ण-कुल १. (कुल cum सामान्य उलूकमुख m. 
___family) gib Mach. धारिपट्टm. 
giraffe Zool. महाग्रीवm. gib and cotter Steam Engine धारिपट्ट girder धरण 1. (ancient word) 
तथा स्फाणी. 
girdle r मेखला. gibbon (most perfectly arboreal in 2 Anat. चक्र . 
habits; will hang for hours from girdle bone-sphenethmoid bone the branch of a tree) शाखा-वानर Zool. (surrounds the anterior end 
of the brain case in the frog) gift परिदान ॥ 
मस्तिष्कार अस्थि gigantic अतिकाय mfm. 
Girnar Geog. गिरिनगर।. gigantism Zool. fara n. 
girth परिधि m. gigantocyte Anat. सुमहाकोशा f. give a blow vb. प्रहरण 1. Gigantorhynchidae Zool. बृहत्तण्ड-वंश give an account लेखा-दान ॥. 
m. (वंश family) 
givea right of entrance प्रवेशाधिकार gilder's whiting=pearl white दान . gill I Zool. (an organ for respira- give authority to प्राधिकार-दान 1. 
__tion under water) जलक्लोम n. give effect प्रभावि-करण . 
2 (a small liquid measure)(gi.,gl.) give entrance प्रवेश-दान . प्रसृति . (स.) 
given दत्त, न्यस्त mfn. 3 Bot. (of a mushroom) अर-पट्टm. given off (as gas) मुक्त mfr: (मोचन) 
445 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
gizzard Zool, foot f. 
glandular compounds Pharm. affet GL Radar (gun-laying radar sets, to संयोग m. 
direct guns and control their glandular sucker Zool. ग्रन्थिमय चूषक 
fire) श. प्र. (शतघ्नी -प्रदेशक) gl. (gill) सृ. (प्रसृति) 
glandular tubule Zool. ग्रन्थिमय-नालिका GI (glucinum) Chem. वि (विडर) glabrous Bot. चिक्कण mfn. 
glans==glans penis Anat. मणि m. glacial हिम्य mfr. . 
(from सुश्रुत) g. acetic acid हिम्य शुक्तिक अम्ल . .glass I काच m. g. epoch Geol. हिम्य अनुयुग ॥. . 2 (drinking glass) काचक १. (पान g. phenol Chem. हिम्य दर्शव m. 
काचक) g. phosphoric acid हिम्य भास्विक glass blower काच-धम m. 
अम्ल .. 
__ glassblower's blowpipe काचधम g. sulphuric acid हिम्य शुल्बारिक धमनाड . 
अम्ल 2. 
g. knife काचधम-क्षुरी . glacier हिमनदी . 
g. table काचधम-पटल n. glacier blue Col. Ind. हिमनदी नील .glass boring outfit काच-छिद्रण-संभार __ m. 
. . glacio-lacustrine Geol. , हिम्य-सरस्य glass case काचावरण. 
mfn. 
glass cutting knife काच-कर्तन-क्षुरी. glance I (a brief or hasty look) glass cutting machine काच-कर्तन-यन्त्र 
दृक्पात m. 
. 2 (German glanz brightness) Min glass disc काच-बिम्ब m. ing, Mineral. (any of several sul-glasses उपनेत्र 1. phides) रुचा. 
'glass-lined tank wagons R/y. काचा gland I Anat. ग्रन्थि m. 
स्तर तडाग-वाहन 1. 2 Mach. निषादक m. 
glass-lining Rly. काचास्तर m. . . gland=node.ग्रन्थि m. 
glass-maker काचकार m. glanders-farcy Veter. अश्वग्रन्थि m. glassmaker's soap Col. Ind. काचकार gland extract ग्रन्थि-निस्सार m. 
स्वफेन m. glandotone ग्रन्थिबल्य 1. 
glass marking crayon #rajørt f. g. compound Pharm. . ग्रन्थिबल्य glass marking ink काचांकन-मसी 
संयोग m. 
glass marking pencil काचांकनी . glands, of Lieberkuhn=Lieber- glass rod काच-शलाका. 
kuhn's glands-crypts of Lie- glass rope sponge- Zoobs काच-रज्जु berkuhn Anat. प्रांत्रश्लेष्मकलाग्रन्थि छिद्रिष्ठ 1. 
glass sponge Zool. कात्र-छिद्रिष्ठ 1. : grandular cell Zool. अन्थि-कोशा f. . .glass tube काच-नाल.m.. .... 
446 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
glass-tubing काच-नाल m. 
make up the white chalk and the ___g. cutter काच-नाल-कर्तक M. 
• soft mud, globigerina ooze) glass vessel काच-पात्र n. 
globigerina ooze Zool. खटीगोल-कर्दम glassware काचभाण्ड .. 
m. glass wool ref f. 
Globigerinidae Zool. खटीगोल-वंश m. glassy #19197 mfn. 
globin Biochem. वर्तुलि. Glauber's salt (khari earth)=mira- globoid (rounded mineral body) 
bilite क्षारमृत् f. = जलक्षारशुल्बिज m. खनिज-गुलिका . (-इज for खनिज mineral) 
globose yam=Dioscorea globosa glaucous feugiat mfn. 
पिण्डाल m. glaze vb. काचन . 
globular वर्तुल, गोल mfn. . glaze n. काचना . . 
g. eye Zool. गोलाक्षिा . glazed काचित nfn. 
___g. flask वर्तुल पलिघm. g. tile काचित-खपरी /. 
globule गोलिका f. g. weighing paper काचित तोलन- globulin Biochem. आवर्तुलि. 
पत्रn. 
glochidium Bot. प्रलोम 1. glenoid cavity Anat. (cavity of -gloea Zool. -Emer ____shoulder joint) अंस-सन्धि-कूप m. glomerular layer Zool. केशिकाजूट 
-glia (Gk.glue') -श्लेषण. 
स्तर m. glia cells श्लेष-कोशा. 
glomerule r Bot. (consists of a head glide vb. विसर्पण 1. 
like cyme) 177 n. (from farza) glider (a form of aircraft similar 
to an airplane, but without any glomerulus Anat. (a small convo engine) अगन्त्र, अगन्त्रविमान, विसर्पक _luted mass of capillaries) केशिका 
जूट m. gliding joint Anat. प्रसर-सन्धि m. Gloriosa Bot. अग्निशिखाति f. (ति for glistening प्रभासी (-इन्) mfn. 
प्रजाति genus) global परिभूमि-, सार्वभौम mfa. 
G. superba स.मान्य अग्निशिखा . global air routes परिभूमि-वायु पथ m. glory श्री . globe I गोलक m. 
glory hole=blowing furnace Glass ___ 2 भूमिगोल m. 
___Mfg. धमन-भ्राष्ट्र . globe animalcule=Volvox per- gloss 1 छवि f. 
globator=rolling alga Zool. acid g. अम्ल-छवि . . गोलाणुप्राणी (-इन्) m. 
2 टिप्पणिका globefish = balloon-fish = puffer Glossina Zool. (wings cross Over one 
_Zool. फुल्लमत्स्य m. 
another like blades of scissors); Globigerina Zool. खटींगोलाति f: (-आति कर्तरीपक्षाति . (आति for प्रजाति genus) 
for geta geriųs; their dead shells G. morsitans : (it transmits na 
447 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
gana and other trypanosome glucosate मधुमीय .. diseases in animals) पशुमारी कर्तरी- gluc-osazone = glucose osazone पक्ष m. 
मधुध्वजीवा=मधुम ध्वजीवा f. G. palpalis सुषुप्ति कर्तरीपक्ष m. 
glucose Chem. मधुम .. glosso-pharyngeal nerve = ninth glucose solution मधम विलयन n. 
cranial nerve Zool. जिह्वा-ग्रसनी चेता 
glucoside Chem. मधुमेय n. 
glucosone Chem. (osone eart of glossy स्निग्ध mfn. 
____glucose मधुम) मधुध्वा f. glossy black स्निग्ध कृष्ण mfm. 
glucosum liquidum==liquid glu glossy-leaved स्निग्ध-पत्र mfn. 
cose Pharm: तरल मधुमn. glossy silk उज्ज्वल कौशेयn. 
glucovit (vitamin B in glucose glossy white स्निग्ध श्वेत mfn. 
___solution) Pharm. मधुजीवति . glottis Anat. कण्ठद्वार . 
-glucoxylose -मधुकाष्ठधु glove हस्तप . Glover's tower = denitrifying 
gluctose (found in cane molasses) tower Chem. विभूयन प्रस्थाणु m. 
इक्षुधु . glowing विभायी (-इन्) mfn. 
glue श्लेष m. glow lamp विभा-दीप m. 
glue-pot श्लेष-पात्र n. glowworm (luminous insects) दीप- glume Bot. (chaffy bract) बुस-पत्र, तुष 
कीट m. 
निपत्र n. glucide Chem. मध्वेय .. 
Glumiferae Bot. बुसपत्रगोत्र १., बसपत्राः -glucidol -मध्वेयव m. glucin Chem. मध्वि . . 
glutamic (gluten आश्लेष + anic - glucina=beryllia Chem. facsit f. amidic तिक्तेयिक) Chem. आश्लेष-तिक्ते glucinic Chem. faefe mfu. 
यिक mfn. '-glucinol -मध्विव 
glutamine Chem. पाश्लेषतिक्ती . glucinium, glucinum, beryllium glutaminic=glutamic 
विडूर . 
glutaric (glutamic आश्लेषतिक्तेयिक + glucinum salts Chem. विडर-लवणn. tartaric न्यासविक) Chem. प्राश्लेषासविक gluco- = glyco- मधु 
mfn. gluco-furanose, मधु-बुसिन्यधु n, gluta-thione (glutamic + thione) gluconate Chem. (a salt of gluconic Biochem. आश्लेषगन्धा f. 
मधुमिक acid) मधुमीय . 
gluteal Anat. नितम्ब gluconic = glyconic. मधुमिक mfn. g. artery=sciatic artery नितम्ब 
(fr. glucose मधुम) . 
रोहिणी f. '.gluco-pyranose Chem. मध्वग्निन्यधु n. g. region नितम्ब-देश m. . 
glucosandextrosan Chem. quarut glutelin (gluten olen - lin, an arbi 
trary ending) Biochem. (any of a 
m.pl. 
448 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
class of simple proteins stafett) g. acidi borici=glycerin of 
rafert m. 
boric acid gluten आश्लेषm. 
g. acidi carbolici प्रांगविक-अम्ल glutenin Biochem. Arif f. 
Fyff. gluteus maximus Anat. FACTFT-FET g. acidi tannici = glycerin of 
eart f. 
tannic acid g. medius fir -retat f. 
g. belladonnae = glycerin of g. minimus fraen-pertant f. 
belladonna glutin Biochen, Fitfosfor f. 
g. boracis=glycerin of borax glutinate vb. TUT n. 
g. pepsini-glycerin of pepsin glutinous आश्लिषिमत् Mfn. 
glycero- Chem. #* glycerate Chem. मधुरीय . 
glycerol Chem. Faza m. glyceride Chem. मधुरेय 1. 
glycerose (glycerin t - ose) Chem. glycerin=glycerine 
FETCF 11. glycerin = glycerinum (glycer.) glyceryl Chem. TETET 11. 
Pharm, eff. 
glycine Chem. मध्वी . ' g. of belladonna=glycerinum glycine blue Col. Ind. Feat frem 
belladonnae (glycer. bellad.) m. कंटालिका-मधुरि 
g. corinth मध्वी रोहित M. g. of borax-glycerinum bora g. red मध्वी रक्त m. ___cis (glycer. borac.) टंकण-मधुरि Glyciphagus मधुमक्षाति f. (-प्राति for 
प्रजाति genus) g. of boric acid=glycerinum G. domesticus (G. prunorum) TE 
acidi borici (glycer. acid. HELHET m. 
boric.) cif * Hoff. glyco- = gluco . g. of pepsin=glycerinum pep- glyco - cholate Biochem. FTT-focita 
'sini (glycer. pepsin.) 9f9- ". 
af f. 
glyco-coll=glycine et f. g. of tannic acid=glycerinum glycogen Biochem. 'Het m. 
acidi tannici (glycer. acid. glycol Chem. Ta m. 
tann.) 789-+-heft f. glycolate Chem. Receta n. g. suppository मधुरि-वर्ती f. glycolic Chem. मधुविक mfn. glycerine (Gk. gixkeros sweet) मधुरी glycolide Cbem. मधुवेय 7. 
-glycollamic - heraforafati mfn. g. lye -n.. 
glycollate=glycolate g. speed indicator (centrifuge) glycollic=glycolic 
Fit-a-24 m. (fera) glycollide=glycolide glycerinum=glycerin: " glyconic=gluconic 
449 
29﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
000 
glycyrrhiza=liquorice Pharm. Fel- goblet cell = chalice cell Anat. 
यष्टि . 
चषक-कोशा . Glycyrrhiza Bot. मधुयष्टिति f. (-ति for god-daughter धर्म-दुहिता (-४) f. 
प्रजाति genus) 
god-father धर्म-पिता (-1) m. G. glabra सामान्य मधुयष्टि f. god-mother धर्म-माता (-त) f. glycyrrhizae radix = liquorice godown=warehouse Com. TUETTTT 
_Pharm. मधुयष्टि f., मधुयष्टिमूल 1. ___.. glycyrrhizin Chem. मधुकि f. (मधुक, goggles महोपाक्ष n. 
मधुयष्टि Glycyrrhiza. glabra) going concern Com. चलद्-व्यापार m. glyoxal (glycol मधुव + Oxalic तिग्मिक goitre Med. गलगण्ड m. (from सुश्रुत) 
+ aldehyde सुव्युद) मतिषु m. gokhru गोक्षुर . glyoxalase Biochem. मतिष्वेद m. gold=aurum Chem. Fqui n. glyoxaline Cbem. मतिष्वी /. 
g. beryl=chryso-beryl स्वर्ण-वैडूर्य glyoxime (glyoxal fattoxime 
जावि) Chem. मजावि . 
g. bronze स्वर्ण-कांस्य ॥.,न्यवरक्तातिपीत glyph उत्कीर्णा . 
m. -glypher See litho-glypher 
g. brown i=golden brown faut glyptics (art of engraving on hard बज्र m. ___and fine stones) समुत्किरणा f. 
2-Bismarck brown अवरक्ता gm. (gram) धा. (धान्य) 
तिपीत m. gnathopod Zool. हनुपाद m. 
g.chloride स्वर्ण नीरेय 1. Gnathopoda=Xiphosura 
g. chloride (brown) स्वर्ण नीरेय n. gnathopodite=maxillipede Zool. 
हनुपाद 8. 
g. dust स्वर्ण-धूलि . Gnatho-stomata Zool. सहनवः m. pl. g. foil स्वर्ण-पर्ण .. Gnatho-stomidae (a family) सहनुवंश g. leaf स्वर्ण-पत्र . 
m. 
.g. monochloride स्वर्ण एकनीरेय . gnaw vb. रदन .. 
g. nib स्वर्ण-चंचु m. Goa Geog. गोपकवन 1. . 
g. orange Col. Ind. स्वर्ण नारंग Goa powder Pharm. (found in the 
m. interspaces of the wood of g. point Finance Farries m. Andira araroba. It is the chief g. potassium bromide स्वर्ण दहातु source of chrysarobin) गुहा-क्षोद m. 
दुरेय . (=वृक्षगुहा-क्षोद) 
g. purple = purple of Cassius goat fever अजा-ज्वर m. .. 
स्वर्ण नीलारुण m. goat's bladder अजा-प्राशय m. , 
g. satinobre=red lead geat-sucker=nightjar Zool, : नप्तक g. sodium chloride स्वर्ण क्षारातु 
m. (ancient word) ... . 
नीरेय n. 
4581 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
g. yellow=golden yellow gomphos ('nail') Anat. कील m. golden स्वर्ण 
gomphosis joint Anat. (in which golden-backed woodpecker Zool. a spike of bone fits into a 
स्वर्णपृष्ठ काष्ठकुट्टा. 
_socket) कील-उलूखल सन्धि m. golden brown = gold brown Col. gon -कोण । 
Ind. स्वर्ण बनू m. . 
gonad=germ gland Zool. प्रजन-ग्रन्थि g. cachou Fauf TTTET f. 
m. g.ochre स्वर्ण गैरिक m. 
gonad nucleus प्रजन-न्यष्टि . g. orange स्वर्ण नारंग m. 
gonadotrophin Zool. प्रजन-पोषि. golden green=cloudy amber Faup gon-apophysis Zool. (a projection 
हरि, प्रपीत M.' 
of the anal. region) गुद-प्रक्षेप goldenseal 1 (a plant with yellow m. 
rootstock) = Hydrastis cana- gondou (goundou) नासागण्ड m. (गण्ड densis पीतमूल m. 
general swelling) 2 Pharm. = hydrastis पीतमूल 1. Gondwana Geog. दक्षिण-कोशल m.. . golden sulphide of antimony = Gondwana Hills Geog. ऋक्षपर्वत m. 
antimony penta-sulphide Chem. gonidangium Bot. Futerat f. अंजन पंच-शुल्बेय. 
gonidiophore=conidiophore golden yellow स्वर्ण-पीत m. 
gonidium Bat. (asexual spore) कणी I = gold yellow, Spanish yel . low प्रोद्रक्तातिपीत m. 
gonococcal antigen=gonogen 2 - Martius yellow सुपीत m. प्रमेहाणु प्रतिजन-प्रमेहनतिजन m. goldfish Zool. सुवर्ण-मत्स्य M. 
gonococcus Bact. प्रमेहाण m. gold-plate vb. (to plate with gold) gonogen = gonococcal antigen 
स्वर्ण-पट्टन n. 
प्रमेहप्रतिजन m. goldplated सुवर्ण-पट्टित min. 
gono-iodine (plain) प्रमेह-जम्बुकी f. Goldschmidt's process=alumino- (अमिश्रित) 
thermic process Chcm. स्फ-ताप- gonorrhea Med. प्रमेह m. विधा f. 
. 
Gooch crucible Chem. पिच्छिद्र-भूषा f. Golgi apparatus = Golgi net = good (for balance) साधु (when the 
Golgi system Anāt. विमेदाभ-जाल balance is true, sensitive and n., विमेदाभ-संहति . 
stable) ...G. body विमेदाभ काय m. (a lipoidal good conductor सुसंवाहक m. 
body) 
goods I Com. वस्तु, भाण्ड n. G. material विमेदाभ-द्रव्य ।. 
g. account वस्तु-लेखा f. G. net विमेदाभ-जाल . 
g. in transit मार्गस्थ वस्तु .. ___G. system विमेदाभ-संहति . . -g. on approval अनुमोदनार्थ वस्तु . gommelin-dextrin .... 
2 Rly. भाण्ड . 
451 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
. 
g. clerk भाण्ड-लिपिक m. 
government शासन, राज्य n. g. locomotive = freight loco 
g. note राज्यपत्र n. (पत्र-अर्थपत्र) motive भाण्ड-चलित्र 1. 
g. security राज्य-प्रतिभूति f. g. shed भाण्ड-छादक m. 
governmental machinery राज्यतन्त्र, g. siding भाण्ड-पार्श्वक m. 
शासनतन्त्र 1. g. train भाण्ड-संयान n. 
Government of India भारत-शासन g. waggon 1 (freight car) HTUS 
यान । 
Government of India Act 1935 2 (truck) भाण्ड-वाहन n. 
भारत-शासन-अधिनियम १९३५ m. good visibility सुदृश्यता. 
governor I शासक m. good will I Com. ख्याति f. 
2. Mach. (for controlling speed) 2 सद्भाव m. 
वेगवशित्र. goose हंस m. 
governorate=governorship Gordiidae Zool. वालकृमिवंशm. Gordius Zool. (a genus of round 
Governor-general महाशासक m. worms, almost like horsehairs) 
Governor-general of India भारत 
महाशासक m. वालकृम्याति (आति for प्रजाति genus) gorilla Zool. भीमवानर m. 
governor's box शासक-प्रकोष्ठ m. goslarite Mineral. (native zinc sul 
governorship==governorate शासकता phate) कुप्यशुल्बिज m. (-इज for खनिज 
mineral) 
Governor's province शासक-प्रान्त m. Gossypium कर्पासति f. (ति for प्रजाति gr. I (gram) धा. (धान्य) 
genus) 
___ 2 (grain) य. (यव) G. indicum सामान्य कपास m. 
Graafian follicle Anat. अंडस्युनिका gossypol Chem. 49fha m. gossypose (Gossypium to - ose; grade 
gradation Bot. क्रमबन्ध m. because obtained from cotton gradation in distribution Zool. seeds) = raffinose Chem. कसिध 
वंटन-क्रम m. 
grade 1 Math. (Too of a right angle) gouge उब्जक . 
अंशक m. Goulard's extract = strong solu- 2 (sometimes equal to class) and 
tion of lead subacetate Pharm. m. 
प्रबल सीस अनुशक्तीय-विलयन . . 3 Zool. (grade of a. class वर्ग) वर्गक govern ob. शासन । governance शासित्व, शासन . 
grade vb. Bot. क्रमबन्धन . governess (a female governor) grade = gradient (a sloping way) 
मासिका. 
___Rly. प्रवणक . governing body शासी वर्ग me 
gradient प्रवणक, प्रावण्य n. 
m. 
452 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
of 
gradually क्रमशः 
gram atom (atomic weight ex graduate vb. Math. (smoothin 
pressed in grams) धान्य-परमाणु m. a curve) प्रसरलन . 
gram equivalent Cbem. धान्य-समसंयुज graduate (of a university) स्नातक 
m. m. 
Graminaceae Bot. घास-कुल . graduated Math. प्रसरलित mfn. gramine=donaxine (a protein, m. graduated अंकित mfn. 
___133, from barley) प्रयवी f. g. cylinder अंकित रम्भ m. 
Gramineae Bot. घास-कुल 1. g. flask sifat ofte m. 
gram-negative Bact. (alcohol wash g. glassware Fifi FTTHIS N. 
___able) सुषव-धाव्य Mfn. g. scale अंकित-श्रेणी . 
gramophone रेखभाष, सीताभाष m. (रेख g. separator funnel अंकित पृथक् 
scratched lines, atat grooves) कारक M. g. test tube अंकित परीक्षण-नाल m. 
gram-positive Bact. (alcohol-fast) graduated doses उत्तरोत्तर-मात्रा . 
सुषवाधाव्य mfn. (अधाव्य not wash graduation Math. 1 (smoothing of 
___ able) statistical data; smoothing of a 
bacteria सुषवाधाव्य grampositive 
8 curve) प्रसरलन . 
'शाकाणु m. 2 (degree) अंक m. 
grampus Zool.=killer हन्ता (-तृ) m. grafting Bot. रोपण n. 
=killer whale हन्ता तिमि m. Graham's law of diffusion प्रसति- granddaughter cyst दौहित्री-कोष्ठ m. 
नियम m. 
granddaughter radia दौहित्री-शालाक grain I (fibre or yarn) सूत्र n. 
m. 2 (g., gr.) यव m. (य.) 
grand strategy = art of war Mil. 3 कण m. 
युद्ध-कला f. grain dealer धान्य-विक्रेता (-त) m. 
Grand Trunk Express Rly. FETTET grained lac (it is the product free 
आशुग m. from twigs, stick lac शाखि-लाक्षा 
Grand Trunk Road महास्कन्धपथ, being the crude product contain 
___ महापथ m. ing the twigs upon which it is granite कणाश्म m. formed, while caked lac पिंड-लाक्षा granite black Col. Ind. कणाश्म काल is grained lac fused and cast into m. 
moulds) कणि-लाक्षा. 
granite-ware कणाश्म-भाण्ड 1. gram (g., gm., gr., grm.) धान्य n. grant अनुदान 1. 
(धा.) 
granted अनुदत्त mfm. -gram (something drawn or Grantia Zool. (a genus of small ____written) -लेख,-चित्र 
cylindrical sponges) अंगुष्ठकाति gram Bot. चणक m. 
f. (-97fa for stattfa genus) : 43 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
Grantiidae Zool. अंगष्ठकवंशा . graphite crucible लिखिज-मूषा . grant-in-aid सहायक अनुदान n. 
graphitite = silver graphite Col. granular=granulose कणिकावत्, कणी Ind. रजत लिखिज m. 
(-इन्), कणात्मक mfn. 
'graphitol fast red Col. Ind. लिखिजव granular powder कणी क्षोद m. 
स्थिर रक्त m. granulat theory Zool. कणिका-वाद m. g. fast yellow लिखिजव स्थिर पीत m. granulated कणात्मक mfn. 
g. orange लिखिजव नारंग M. granulated zinc कणात्मक कुप्यातु m. g. red लिखिजव रक्त m. granule कणिका 
g. yellow farquarra m. granulocyte Anat. कणि-कोशा f. 
graph paper बिन्दुरेख-पत्र n. granulose I = amylose कणिकाधु = -graphy -रूपिकी,-उल्लिखा,-मुद्रण,-चित्रणा 
मण्डधु . 
grass घास m. 2=granular 
grasshopper=Locusta viridissima grape af. 
Zool. पतम (ancient word), घास-वल्गी grape black Col. Ind. द्राक्षा काल m. (-इन् ) m. . grape sugar द्राक्षा-शर्करा . 
grass juice factor Biochem. ETH-TT graph Math. बिन्दुरेख m., चित्र .. 
कारक .. -graph -लिख, चित्र,-मुद्रित, लेख,-उल्लेख grate-grating झझरी f. -graph vb. -मुद्रण 
grate rockers Ry. Eng. झझरी-दोलक M. -graphee -चित्रित (in photographee grating=grate झझरी. (back-forma 
"one who is photographed' tion from Hindi, Bengali झांझरी) भाचित्रित) 
gratis मुधा (Pali; Prakrit मुधाजीविन् -grapher -चित्रक-मुद्रक m. 
_ living on भिक्षा', मुधादायिन् ‘giving -grapher (a combining form in alms', मुधालब्ध 'obtained gratis') 
agent nouns, corresponding to Graves' disease = exophthalmic nouns ending in -graph and -gra- goitre उदक्षि-गलगंड •m. (short for phy, denoting one who writes) उदक्षिगोल-गलगड) : -लेखक m. 
grave's white = enamel white graphic Math. बिन्दुरेखीय mfn. 
gravimeter भारमान m. (for determin graphic algebra बिन्दुरेख-बीजगणित . : ing specific gravity) graphical illustration Math. बिन्दु- gravimetric Chen. भारमितीय mfn. . 
रेखीय निदर्शन, 
g. analysis भारमितीय विश्लेषण 1. graphic formula Chem. चित्र-सूत्र n. . g. density भारमितीय-घनता f. graphic method Math. बिन्दुरेखीय विधि ... g. factor भारमितीय खण्ड m. 
___gravimetry भारमिति, (measurerment graphic representation रेखा-चित्र m. by weight) भारेण-मिति f. graphite=plumbago Mineral: लिखिज gravis उन mfn. . . . 
'm. (-इज for खनिज mineral) . gravitate vb. अभ्याकर्षण . . 
__454. 
___m. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
greatest common measure=high 
est common factor = highest common divisor Matb. महत्तम 
समापवर्तक m. great gross = twelve gross Math. 
HETSIGTE379 n. great kangarooZool. महा-धानीकुरंग m. grebe Zool. (very expert divers) 
परिमज्जूक m. green हरित, हरि mfr. 
g.-blue हरि-नील Mfa. g.-bottle fly हरि-कूपी-मक्षी . g. chromium salt हरि वर्णातु लवण 
. 
gravitation अभ्यावृष्टि . gravitational अभ्याकृष्टीय mfn. gravitational unit Phys. अभ्याकृष्टि 
एकक ... gravitative अभ्याकर्षी (-इन्) mfn. gravitometer (for measuring specific ___gravity) आपेक्षिकभार-मान m. gravity Phys. भ्वाकृष्टि f. (भू earth+ 
__ आकृष्टि attraction) gray=grey धूसर mfn. gray antimony Mineral. धूसर अंजन M. gray crescent Zool. धूसर बालेन्दुा . gray drab = Quaker gray = acier 
प्रावपीतm. grayhound=greyhound gray hump धूसर-ककद् . grayish-greyish आधूसर mfm. grayish white आधूसर श्वेत M. gray manganese ore=manganite 
लोहकिज m. (-इज for खनिज mineral) gray-necked crow Zool, afarase m. gray oak=grey oak grease आवसा ., स्नेह m. grease cup Engin. स्नेह-कटोर M. grease pencil स्नेहांकनी . grease spot photometer Phys. __ स्नेहबिब भामान m. great महान् mfr. 
___small क्षुद्र mfs. Great Britain महाबृटेन great bunch grass=Festuca scab 
rella Bot. महागुच्छ अवितृण m. great calorie = large calorie Phys. 
महोष M. (महा+उष) great circle Math, बृहद् वृत्त ।. great cobra Z00l. महाफणी (-इन्) m. Great Desert Geog. महामरुस्थली . greater Math. ज्यायस् 
g. crab Zool. हरि-कर्कट n. g. diarrhea हरित अतिसार Mm. g. earth हरि-मृद्. g. flag Rly. हरित-पताका f. g. manure Agric. हरित खाद m. g. oak=Quercus dilatata Bot. 
हरि वञ्ज m. g. of earth मद्धरि ॥. g. oil हरि तैल 1. g. pigeon Zool. हरित कपोत M. g. sand marl हरि सिकतावमृद्. g. tree snake Zool. हरि वृक्ष सर्प M. g. turtle = Chelonia mydas . Zool. हरि कश्यप M. g. vitriol Chem. कासीस, हरिकाचर 7. g. woodpecker Zool. हरित काष्ठकुट्ट 
m. green Col. Ind. हरि m. 
g. alizarin हरि विमंजिष्ठि. g. base हरि पीठ m. g. cinnabar हरि हिंगुल M. g. crystals हरि स्फट m. 
g. earth हरि मृत् । .g. liquid हरि तरल m. 
455 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
g. powder af 17. 
G. red 7. a m. g. salt हरि लवण . 
G. yellow 4. TT m. g. sand हरि सिकता f. 
grenade Mil. afinatfe#, TEST n. g. solution हरि विलयन 1. 
grenadine Col. Ind. (an impure g. stone हरि प्रस्तर m. 
variety of fuchsine) कळूमली f. g. ultramarine हरि पारसामुद्रिक m. 
g. bluish chet ota m. g. verdigris हरि हरिकी f. 
g. yellowish कद्धमली पारीत m. g, verditer (from French vert-de 
Gressoria Zool. qatfout: m. pl. terre green of earth Teft) of 
gressorial adj. qaert (-) mfn. Taft 1n. greenheart हरिहत् m. 
gressorial feet चारी पाद m. greenish reft mfn. 
gressorial Orthoptera Zool. पदचारि g.-blue gref mfn. 
EFTOHT: m. pl. g.green-blue ftatief mfn. 
Grewia Bot. qeyfer f. (för for stfel g.-yellow farefa mfn. 
genus) g. yellow-green fatfaeft mfn. 
G. asiatica सामान्य परूष M. greenockite = cadmium ocher grey gray e mjr. 
Mineral. मज्यशिज m. (-इज for खनिज 
grey antimony=gray antimony mineral) 
grey crescent=gray crescent Gregarina Zool. Settarfar f. '(-TFT 
grey drab-gray drab for forfa genus) 
greyhound Zool. (tall, slender... Gregarinida Zool. (the adult is 
of a very swift, keen-sighted extra-cellular) I tat: m. pl. 
breed) कृशाखेटिक m. gregarious Zool. 791-70 (-37) grey hump T-79f. 
(from TTT), T-aret (ET) min. greyish-grayish gregarious habit Zool. TET-TTTT greyish 
greyish white=grayish white (herd-habit), TET-TECT f. 
grey oak=Quercus incana Bot. gregarious tendency Zool. यूथचारि THE 9551 m. 
stare f. 
grid झर्भर m. Gregory's powder = compound gridiron 1 m. 
powder of rhubarb Pharm. in g. pendulum Horol. 1997 Wag m. 
fagre m. grelanone yellow Col. Ind. TOUT Griffith's white=enamel white 
fra m. 
eet m... Grela orange (Grela is derived from Grignard reaction (magnesium 
the name of the firm, Chemis- alkyl-condensation ST 16 che Fabrik Griesheim-Elektron, YETT) Chem. Trafarm.f.. Frankfurt) Col. Ind. T. TTT m. grind vb. Engin. THOTTT 1. ' ! '; 
. 456 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
grindelia (grindel.) = grindelia g. level Phys. भूम्या-समतल, भूमि-तल 7. 
robusta=gum plant Pharm. g. radar भौम तेजोन्वेष M. . कासपत्र 1. 
g. rent Com. भू-भाटक M. grinders Anat. हानव्य m. (from g. station Radar भू-स्थान . ___ काश्यपसंहिता) 
g. straffing Mil. (punishing those grinding mill acuit f. 
___ on land) भूमिस्थ-दण्डन M. grinding wheel शाण-चक्र . 
g. tissue = fundamental tissue -grip -प्रभ 
____Bot. आधारोति . grisaille (from gris grey) Col. Ind. g. water भूतल-वारि n. 
विधूसर m. 
g. wave Radio भूमि-तरंग M. gristle=cartilage Zool. #rfpy n. ground adj. घृष्ट mfn. grm. (gram) धा. (धान्य) 
ground-glass disc घृष्ट-काच-बिम्ब m. grocer Com. व्यंजनिक m. 
groundnut भूमुद्ग m. groove Anat. SHIETE. 
group n. I समूह, वर्गm. grooved प्रसीती (-इन्) mfn. 
2 Chem., Com., Math. aut m. g. tooth Zool. प्रसीती दन्तm. 
group vb. वर्ग-बन्धन . gross Com. सकल mfn. 
group captain (R.A.F.) महाधिविमानिक g. cost सकल परिव्यय m. 
m. g. income सकल प्राय m. 
grouped वर्गित, वर्गबद्ध mfn. g. loss सकल-हानि . 
grouped series Matb. वगित-माला f. g. profit सकल लाभ m. 
grouping I Com. वर्गबंधन । g. weight सकल भारm. 
2 Math. वर्गण 1. g. yield सकल-प्राप्ति 
group of armies Mil. अक्षौहिणी f. gross (144) प्रद्वादशक n. (cf. प्रपौत्र), (ancient word) 
चतुर्बहती (बृहती-३६), त्रिजगती (जगती groups Math. वर्ग m. 
=४८), षड्गायत्री. (गायत्री--२४) grouse fafaf m. gross anatomy स्थूल शारीर .. grout अभिपूर m. . gross structure Zool. स्थूल-संरचना. Grove's cell (e.m.f. 2.0 volts) पिद्वि gross ton=long ton दीर्घ-प्रवर्तm. बिन्दुशून्य (महातु-कुप्य) कोशा. ground भूमि . 
Grove's process Chem. (preparing g.air भूमि-वायु M. 
• esters, using zinc chloride, hyd g.-bird Zool. स्थलपक्षी, स्थलचारी rogen chloride gas as dehydrat 
(-इन्) m. 
ing agents) अपिकुनी विधा f. (कुनी= g. control of interception कुप्यातु नीरेय) . . (GCI) Radar अन्तारोध-भू-वश m. growing point Bot. वधि अग्न.. . (अ. भू. व.) 
growing region Bot. रोही प्रदेश, वीं ' .g. dove Zool. भूमि-कपोतक m. 
प्रदेश m. g. itch Med. भूमि-खर्जू.. 
growth afa f. *457 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
g. of crystals स्फट-वृद्धि . g. phase Zool. वृद्धि-प्रावस्था f. 
g. stimulating वृद्धि-उद्दीपक mfn. grub मक्षिजातक m. grub screw Engin. (without head 
or nut) रुण्ड-भ्रमि m. grude black=coke black 
Gryllidae Zool. झिल्ली-वंश m. (झिल्ली ___cricket) Gryllotalpa ('mole-crickets') Zool. 
भूझिल्लीकाति f. (आति for प्रजाति 
genus) Gryllus ('crickets') Zool, fittarfa f. 
(आति for प्रजाति genus) G. campestris field cricket 
क्षेत्र-भिल्लीकm. G.domesticus = house cricket 
गृह-झिल्लीक m. G salt छ लवण . guaiac (pertaining to or resembl- 
ing guaiacum) atfefe mfn. guaiaci resina = guaiacum resin guaiacol Chem. आसिलव m. 
g. benzoate Pharm.आसिलव धूपीयn. g. carbonate Pharm. आसिलव प्रांगा 
रीय . guaiacolize vb. Pharm. (to.. mix or 
impregnate withguaiacol) आसिलव 
मिश्रण, व्यापन 1. guaiaconic acid आसिलायिक अम्ल 1. guaiac reaction आसिलिय-प्रतिक्रिया guaiac test आसिलिय-परीक्षा f. guaiacum (a, resin with a faint 
balsamic odour. Styrax benzoin ___is सिह-लोबान) मासिल.m. guatacum resin = guaiaci resina 
(guaiac. res.) Pharm. आसिल-उद्यास 
guaiasanol Pharm. (guaiacol, with 
san inserted to indicate its heal 
ing property) शमासिलव m. guaiol (guaracum + - 01) आसैलव m. guanajuatite = frenzelite = sele 
nobismutite Mineral. (bismuth selenide) भिदमेचिज M. (-इज for खनिज 
mineral) -guanide -वैष्ठेय . 
bi-g. (bi- + guanidine + -ide) 
द्वि-वैष्ठेय 1. guanidine Chem. वैष्ठेयी f. guanine Chem. dost f. guanon. वैष्ठ m. guanophore Zool. वैष्ठीभर m. guanosine gogoat f. guanyl Chem. वैष्ठल. guanylic acid Biochem. वैष्ठलिक अम्ल 1. guarantee vb. (to be a guarantee; 
to give a guaranty) प्रत्याभवन 2. guarantee=guaranty I (a person) 
प्रत्याभू m. 2 (an agreement or undertaking) प्रत्याभूति . 
g. company प्रत्याभूति-प्रमण्डल. guaranteed SCATHT mfn. . 
g. purity प्रत्याभूत-शुद्धता . g. reagent (G.R.) प्रत्याभूत प्रतिकर्ता 
(-तृ) m. (प्र. प्र.) g. shares प्रत्याभूत अंश m. . 
g. stock प्रत्याभूत स्कन्ध m. guaranteeing company प्रत्याभूति 
प्रमण्डल . guarantor Law (one who gives a 
guaranty, one who enters into 
a guaranty) TATHFACT (1) m. guaranty=guarantee I (a person) 
प्रत्याभू m., 
. 
458 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
2 (an agreement or undertaking) gular pouch Zool. गलधानी . प्रत्याभूति . . 
Guldberg and Waage law=law guard I Ry., Mil. रक्षी (-इन्) M. 
of mass.action Chem. पुजक्रिया 2 Chem. रक्ष m. 
नियम m. guard vb. TeToT n. 
gull Zool. चिल्ली [.. -guard -रक्ष 
gullet = oesophagus (the tube by guard against vb. प्रतिरक्षण N. 
which food passes from the guard book Com. रक्षि पुस्त ". 
pharynx to the stomach) Fiforce guard cell Bot. रक्षि-कोशा. 
m. guard of glasses नासापीड m. 
gully जलदरी. guard's van R/y. रक्षि-यान . 
gully-plugging जलदरी-संमुद्रण 1. guard tube Chem. रक्षि-नाल M. 
gully trap Hygiene (a siphon trap guava प्रियाक n. (cf. Marathi पेरु, to receive yard drainage) अंगन 
Bengali पेयारा) 
जल-पाश m. guaza=cannabis Pharm. Th=facut gulonic (gulose +- -one * -ic) Chem. - f. 
गुडायिक mfr. guidance पथप्रदर्शन n. 
gulose (the word is formed from direction fergait 1. 
glucose) गुडधु १. (fr. गुड + मधु) guide नेता (-त), नेत्र, पथदर्शक, प्रदर्शक m gum I निर्यास m. guide vb. नयन, पथप्रदर्शन 1. 
2 (of teeth) दन्तमांस 7. (from सुश्रुत) guide bars Rly. Eng. नेत-दण्ड m. 
g. ammoniac-ammoniac guide card नेत्र-पत्रक n. (cf. त्वनेत्र g. arabic बब्बूल-निर्यास m. . ___ having you as a.guide') 
g. benzoin = benzoin Pharm. guide chain Rly. Eng. नेतृ-शृंखला f. निर्यास-धूप-धूप m. guiding curve Math. नेत्र-वक्र n. 
g. camphor = camphor gum Guignet's green निर्यानील m. 
निर्यास कर्पूर n. . guild Com. suit f. (ancient word) g. dragon = tragacanth प्रवेत्र guillotine Parliamentary Practice मुख निर्यास M. 
बंध m. 
g. mastic=mastic चर्व-निर्यास m. guilt अपराध m. 
g. plant = grindelia Pharm. Guinea bordeaux = benzyl bor 
कासपत्र . . . . . . deaux 
g. powder दन्तमांस-क्षोद m. guinea fowl Zool. वृक्ष-क क्कुट M. gummed सश्लेष mfn. Guinea green Col. Ind. उद्धर्यानील m. gummite (it occurs in pieces which guinea pig (it is neither a pig, look like gum) feruffes, m. (-34 for 
nor has it any relation with a first mineral) . . . 
guinea) वण्टमूष m, ( वण्ट tailless) Gumti (river) Geog. गोमती f. gulancha गुडूची . 
gun=cannon Mil. शतघ्नी. f.' 
459﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
g.-boat शतघ्नी-नौका . 
Gymnoascaceae Bot. नग्नधानी-कुल n. g.-cotton शतघ्नी-तूल N. 
Gymnoascales Bot. नग्नधानी-गोत्र n. g. metal=cannon metal शतघ्नी- (गोत्र order) 
धातु m. 
gymnosperm Bot. नग्नबीज m. g.-powder शतघ्नी-क्षोद m. 
gynaecium (G) Bot. जायांग 1. (जा) gunlaying radar sets (GL) (to di- gynaecophoric canal Fantara-Pur f. 
rect guns and control their fire) gynandrophore-androgynophore शतघ्नी-प्रदेशक m. (श. प्र.) 
Bot. पुंजायांगभर m. gunner Tafenfim. 
gyn-androus Bot. स्त्री-पुंस्क mfn. gunnery I (collection of guns) TTTET gynobase Bot. EFTEİTTETTT . 
gynobasic Bot. जायांगाधारिक mfn. 2 (science of gunnery) शतघ्नी-विद्या, gynocardate आमुद्गरीय .. शातनिकी. 
gynocardia oil=chaulmoogra oil, Gunter's chain=surveyor's chain ____hydnocarpus oil आमुद्गर तैल 
भूमापन-शृंखला f. gustatory bud = taste bud Zool. gynocardic=chaulmoogric Chem. 
स्वाद-कुड्म M. 
आमुद्गरिक mfn. gut Anat. प्रान्त्र-कुल्या f. (intestinal gynoecium=gynaecium 
canal') 
gynophore Bot. जायांगभर m. gutta निक्षीर 1. 
gynostegium Bot. (covering of the gutta-percha निक्षीरेय 1. 
gynoecium) जायांगछद m. g. acid funnel निक्षीरेय-अम्ल-निवाप gypso- (gypsum) आचूर्ण 
gypso-plast आचूर्ण-घटित ?. gutter नाली f. 
gypsum Mineral. (hydrous calcium Guttiferae Bot. नागकेसर-कल 1. 
चूर्णातु sulphate) प्राचूर्ण 1., जलचूर्ण Guttiferales Bot. नागकेसर-गोत्र n. 
__शुल्बिज m. (-इज for खनिज mineral) guvacine (the English word is from gyrate adj. वलयित mfn. . 
___Sanskrit गुवाक 'betel nut') गुवाकी f. gyrate vb. वलयन n. guvacoline गुवाकवी/. 
gyration वलयन . Guzerat Geog. सुराष्ट्र m. 
gyrator वलयक m. Gwalior Geog. गोपाद्रि m. 
gyratory वलयन Gymnema Bot. मेषशृंगीति f. (-ति for gyre n. वलय m. 
प्रजाति genus) 
gyre = gyrate vb. G. sylvestre सामान्य मेषशृंगी. gyro I=gyroscope "gymnemic acid मेषशशृंगिक अम्ल n. 2=gyrocompass 
gymnite=deweylite Mineral. (hyd- gyro- वलय 
arous magnesium silicate) जलभ्रासिज gyro-compass वलय-कर्कट m. "m. (-इजा for खनिज mineral) 
gyro-graph (for recording revolu 
m. 
460 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
tions, as of a wheel) 7770T-fTe m. gyro-meter (a rotary speed indica- 
tor) -TATT m. gyroscope que m. 
H (heat) 3 (3,647) 
haemato-chrome = hemato H Chem. 1 (hydrogen) 3 (546) chrome 
2 (hydride) 3 (524) 
haematocrite=hematocrite H (Haemophilus) TT (TOTESTATO) haematogen = haemogen Pharm. hv=quantum fapien 
alfa-TIGT m. Haber process Chem. (for synthesis haematoxylin=hematoxylin 
of ammonia at 200 atmospheres) Haematoxylon Bot. Tlfora es fa f. fata-fen f. 
(-fa for safa genus) habit Bot. (as of herb, shrub of haematuria=hematuria 
tree) FEET 1. 
haemocoele=hemocoele habitat Zool. Trofara ah, ah m. haemoglobin=hemoglobin 
(natural abode) 
haemoglobinometer - hemoglo H acid FT n. (cf. FTF oxacid) binometer hacksaw (for cutting metal) TS-2 haemoglobinuria = hemoglobin 
11. 
uria Hadley's sextant Phys. 960€ n. Haemonchus (onchus "mass'; appears hadrocentric Bot. (having xylem in like a mass of blood) intors for f. 
the centre)=amphicribral (hav- (-pfa for fifa genus) ing the phloem surrounding the Haemophilus=Hemophilus xylem) मध्यदारुक mfn. 
haemopoietic substance = hemo Haemadipsa tarfa f. (-7fa for poietic substance 
afa genus) 
haemopoietone Pharm. This n. Haemadipsidae शोणप-वंश m. 
haemopoietone compound (with haemal arch=hemal arch 
iron) Pharm. Tone TCASH per m. haemal canal=hemal canal 
(4-FET) haemal spine=hemal spine haemorrhage=hemorrhage haemapophysis = hemapophy- haemorrhoideal plexus=hemorr 
sis 
hoideal plexus haemat- =hemat 
Haemosporidia Zool. शोणबीजाणुगण M. haematein=hematein 
(गण order), शोणबीजाणव: m.pl. haematite=hematite 
hafnium Chem. गावातु M. haemato-=hemato 
hainyl Chem. गावल . haematocele-hematocele 
hagfish=slime eel 
OIS 
461 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
hagfishes=hags 
_halide (halogen + -ide) Chem. hags Zool. (marine cyclostomes नीकल्येय . 
which feed upon fishes, boring halite Mineral. (native salt) सैन्धव . into their bodies and devouring (प्रकृत लवण) their viscera and flesh) मीनवेधिनः halivitorange Pharm. पृथुजीवनारंग .. 
m.pl. 
hall (from Sanskrit शाला) प्रशाल M. hailstone वर्षोपल m. 
hallux Anat., Zool. I (in man, the hair केशm., लोम .. 
great toe) पादांगुष्ठ m. hair cell Anat. सरोम-कोशाf. 
2 (in birds, the hind toe) पश्चांगुष्ठ hair curl कुन्तल m. 
m. hair distribution Zool, रोम-बंटन . halo-Chem. (halogen) नीकुल्य hair follicle Anat, रोम-कूप m. halo प्रभामण्डल .. hairless विकेश; केशहोन mfn. 
halogen Chem. (any element of the hair oil केश-तैल . 
' chlorine नीरजी family. कुल) नीकुल्य n. hair salt Mineralकेश-लवण .. 
__ halogens नीकल n. (नीरजी-कुल) hair seal (it has short and coarse halogenate vb. (to combine with 
. hair) रोमश जलव्याघ्र m. 
halogen....) नीकुल्यन 1. hair-stand-on-end Zool. रोमहर्षण n. halogenation नीकुल्यन . hair trigger Firearms सूक्ष्म घोट m. halogens नीकुल 1. (नीरजी-कुल) hairworm वालकृमि m. 
halohydrin नीकुल्योदि Hal. (halogen), Chem. नीक (नीकुल, haloid Chem. I adj. (resembling salt) . नीकुल्य), 
लवणाभ mfr. halcyon=kingfisher Zool. मत्स्यरंक m. 2n. (halide) नीकुल्येय . half अर्ध mfn. 
haloid acid नीकल्यय अम्ल n. half beak (fish) Zool. अर्धचंचु m. halophyte Bot. लवणोद्भिद् [. half imperial size (of paper) द्वाविंश- halt Drill विरम्यताम् । 
. पंचदश (२२"x १५") 
halteres Zool. (sg. halter) = balan half-life period (of an atom) Physical cers=poisers.Zool. संतोलक m. .. 
. Chem. अर्धायु-काल m., 
halzoun (a disease due to the attach half-silk black. Col. Ind. अर्ध-कौशय काल ment of the fasciola in the throat) 
m. , 
गलेचूषरोग m. (short for गले-एकतश्चूष half-silvered Photog. अर्ध-रजतित mfn. . रोग) half transparent अर्ध-पारदर्श mfn. . Hamamelidae Bot. सिलक-कुल n.. half-yearly अर्धवार्षिक, पाण्मासिक mfn. hamamelidis folia = hamamelis halibut (largest species of flatfish) hamamelis (hamam,)=hamameli 
महापृथुमीन m.:.:. : .. 
dis folia=hamamelis leaves=. h. liver oil Pharm. महापृथुमीन यकृत्- witch-hazel, . leaves . Pharm. 
सिलक-पत्र 
462... 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
Hamburg blue = washing blue hang vb. लम्बन 1. Hamburg white (composed of two hangar (shelter for aircraft) विमान 
parts of barium sulphate to one शाला /. 
of white lead) भिद-श्वेत सीस , hanger आलम्ब m. Hamburg white lead Col. Ind. भिद- hansa green (hansar-banse 'trading 
श्वेत सीस m. 
association' वणिग्गण) Col. Ind. वणिग hammer I अयोधन m. 
हरिm. 2 Anat. = malleus (inside the h. red वणिग रक्त m. ear) मुद्गर m. 
h. rubin afort fra f. hammer-headed shark Zool. अयोधन h. yellow वणिक् पीत m. 
शिर ग्राह m. 
haphazard n. I (chance) दैवयोग m. hand I हस्त m. 
2 (random) अक्रम m. 2 (of a clock) सूची f. (घटक-सूची) haphazard adj. I (determined by hand bill हस्त-विज्ञप्ति. 
chance) देवायत्त mfn. hand brake हस्तारोध m. 
2 (accidental) आकस्मिक mfn. handcart हस्त-शकट .. 
haphazard=haphazardly adv. (in hand exhausting pump हस्त-उत्स्त्रावाच a hapnazara 
haplo- एकल hand grenade Mil. हस्त-दाडिम N. haploid I (single in appearance or handkerchief कर-पट m. . 
___arrangement) एकी (-इन्) mfn. handle Ivb. हस्तन . 
2 Biol. अर्धक (having half the 21. हस्तक M., वृन्त 7. 
number in the somatic cells) 3-lever हस्तक m. 
haploid nucleus I (with half the hand lens हस्त-वीक्षm. 
number of chromosomes) अर्ध hand levers Automobile हस्तोद्याम m.. न्यष्टि f. hand microphone हस्ताणुभाष, हस्त 
2 (in cancer) ऊन-न्यष्टि f. ग्राह्य अणुभाष m. 
haploid number (of chromos hand microtome हस्त-अणुच्छिद m. 
Zool. अर्ध-संख्या hand of a clock घटक-सूची . __Haplosporidia Bact. एकलबीजाणुगण handrail हस्त-वंशक m. 
(गण order) handsaw हस्त-क्रकचm. 
. happening (phenomenon) वृत्त ।, hand-spike (as in a windlass) हस्त- harbour porpoise Zool. पत्तन-शिंशुमार 
शंकु m. 
. 
___m. handwheel हस्त-चक्र .. 
hard तीव्र, दृढ, कठोर mfn. handwheel for operating power hard and fast rule कठोर बन्धक नियम m. ___reverse gear Ry. Eng. शक्ति-पश्चाद्- hard bast Bot. कठिन अधोवाही (-इन्) m. 
दन्ति-चालनार्थ हस्तचक्र . 
hard cash = ready money Com. handwriting हस्तलेख m. 
सद्योरोक m. . 
463 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
. 
hard cold तीव्र प्रतिश्याय m. 
2 Math. हरात्मक mfn. harden, hardening दहण 7. 
h. average हरात्मक माध्य. hardening कठिन-भवन, कठिन-करण n. h. mean हरात्मक मध्यक . hardening of oils Chem. तैल-घनीकरण h. progression हरात्मक-श्रेढी . 
harmonium Music I पेटी-वाद्य 1. harder कठिनतर mfn. 
(Marathi पेटी) Harderian gland Zool. (accessory 2 (reed organ) धम-वाघn. ____lachrymal gland) उपाश्रु ग्रंथि m. harmony Music संध्वनि m. hard fescue=Festuca duriuscula harp पुरुतन्त्री f. 
Bot. कठोर अवितृण m. 
harsh कर्कश mfn. hard glass कठोर काच m. 
harvest fly कृषिघ्न, सस्यपतंग M. hard glass tube कठिन काच नाल m. harvestman=daddy long-legs= hard lead कठिन सीसn. 
_shepherd spider Zool. ऊरुजंघ-लूता hardness काठिन्य, काठोर्य 1. hardness tester काठिन्य-परीक्षक m. harvest mite=Leptus autumnalis hard palate Anat. कठोर तालु m. 
Parasitol. शारद इन्द्रगोप m. hard pencil कठोराङ्कनी f. 
hastate Bot. कुन्तवत् mfn. hard steel Engin. कठोर वज्रायस. hastate margin Bot. कुन्त-प्रान्त M. (for hard wall plaster=cement plaster कुन्तवत् प्रान्त) hardware लोहभाण्ड n. (ware made of hat टोपी, टोप m. 
metal) 
hat black Col. Ind. टोप काल m. hard water कठोर जल, अफेनद जल n. hatch vb. अण्डाज्जनन, अण्डादुद्गमन 1. hare Zool. शश m. (rabbit शशक m.) hatchability Zool. अण्डाज्जन्यता hare-lip Med. (a congenitally divi- hatchet coret f. . 
ded lip, commonly an upper Hatchett's brown = Vandyke . one) कृत्तौष्ठ m. . 
brown Col. Ind. (used as artist's Hare's apparatus Phys. wentang ATET ___water and oil colour) चित्रकार बभ्रु 
m. 
m. harmaline = harmeline Chem. hat chrome black Col. Ind. टोप वर्णक 
(the strong-scented seeds of काल m. harmel yield harmaline) atafarat Hatteria=Sphenodon Zool. (genus 
having third eye) तृतीयनेत्राति f. harmel तीब्रशिंघm. 
(-आति for प्रजाति genus) harmeline=harmaline 
hat yellow Col. Ind. टोप पीत m. harmine Chem. (found' in harmel hauling Rly. Preto n. 
seeds) शिंधतीवी/. . 
haustorium Bot. (absorbing organ) hariminic acid शिंघतीत्रिक अम्ल n. 
प्रचूषांग . . . . harmonic 1 Phys. misaftr min.: Havana brown=Bismarck brown 
464 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
Haverhillia=Haverhill b. मालादण्डाणु to be housed in the thickness 
m. 
of a wing like an automobile Haversian canal Anat. निकल्या. 
headlight) पक्षपातन्तु m. Haversian lamellae Anat. निदली. head louse Zool. शिरो-यूका 
(short for निकुल्यादली) 
head of a university कुलपति m. Haversian system Anat. निकुल्या- head office मुख्य कार्यालय m. 
संहति । 
head of liquid Hydrostatics (verti havildar Mil. अधिनायक M. 
cal height of a column) FTIT 7. havildar major महाधिनायकm. 
head of the family कुल-प्रधान m. having the force of law विधि-समवल headquarters मुख्यालय m. 
(H. विधि के समान बल वाले, विधि के head-rent मुख्य भाटक. समबल) 
heads of revenue आगम-शीर्षक n. hawk श्येन m. 
head translator मुख्य अनुवादक m. hawk moth श्येन-शलभ m. 
healing (of a wound) रोपण . hawksbill turtle=Chelonia imbri- health care n. ____ cata Zool. श्येनचंचु कश्यप m. 
h. insurance स्वास्थ्य-आगोप m. Hazara Geog. उरग, उरस m. (as identi- hearing श्रवण 1. 
fied by Sir Aurel Stein) 
heart हृदय . haze कही. 
hearth चुल्ली. H Bpencil क का अंकनी (H B hard heart of the radar system तेजोन्वेष 
black' कठोर काल) 
- संहति-हृदय 1. He (helium) Chem. य (यानाति) 
heartwood=duramen Bot. हत्काष्ठ 1. head n. I शिर 
heat I (H.) Phys. ऊमा (-मन्) m. (अ.) 2 मुख्य m. (See chief) 
2 (science) औष्मिकी f. head adj. मुख्य, प्रधान mfn. 
h. energy smsf f. headache शिरःपीडा/. 
h. of adsorption अधिचूषण-ऊष्मा m. head cell Zool. far-TaTT f. 
h. of combustion दहन-ऊष्मा m. head clerk मुख्य लिपिक m. 
h. of condensation संघनन-ऊष्मा m. header Rly. Eng. शीर्षणी (-इन्) m. h. of decomposition विबन्धन-ऊष्मा header tank Automobile उपरि-तडाग 
m. 
h. of dilution मन्दन-ऊष्मा m. heading (as of a chapter) शीर्षक ॥ h. of dissociation वियवन-ऊष्मा m. head lamp Automobile अग्रदीप, शीर्षदीप h. of formation 5901-36T m. 
h. of fusion द्रवण-ऊष्मा m. headless mollusc Zool. शिरोहीन h. of hydration जलीयन-ऊष्मा M. 
चूर्णप्रावार m. 
h. of ionization अयनन-ऊष्मा m. . theadlight I अग्रदीप, अग्रप्रकाश m. 
h. of liquefaction तरलन-ऊष्मा m. 2 Radar (antennas small enough h. of neutralization क्लीबन-ऊष्मा m. 
m. 
m. 
45, 
30 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
८ 
h. of oxidation जारण-ऊष्मा . h. of reaction प्रतिक्रिया-ऊष्मा M. h. of solution विलयन-ऊष्मा m. 
h. of sublimation उत्सादन-ऊष्मा m. ___h. of vapourization बाष्पन-ऊष्मा M. heat vb. तापन . heated तप्त, तापित nfn. heater तापक m. heating तापन . heatstroke Med. ऊष्माघात m. heat strongly vb. चण्ड-तापन n. heat test tube ऊष्म-परीक्षण-नाल M. heavier-than-air वाताद्गुरु mfn. heavier-than-air flying machines 
वाताद्गुरु उड्डयन-यन्त्र . heavily (drawn) Engin. गुरु, गुरुतया heaviness गुरता .. heavy I गुरु (light लघु) 
2 स्थूल mfn. h. bomber गुरु-प्रस्फोटक m. h. built Zool. भारी काय M. h. camphor oil गुरु कपूर-तैल 1. h. chemical industry स्थूल रासाय 
निक उद्योग M. h. chemicals स्थूल रासायन M. h. cork गुरु-त्वक्षा f. h. gun Mil. गुरु-शतघ्नी . h. metal गुरु धातु M. h. oil गुरु तैल 1. 
h. spar गुरु-धात्विया . hecto-gram (hg.) शत-धान्य 1. (श. धा.) hecto-graph शत-लिख m. hectol. (hecto-liter) श. स्थ. (शत-प्रस्थ) hecto-liter (hectol., hl.) शत-प्रस्थ 1. 
(शः स्थ.) hectom. (hecto-meter) श. मा. (शत-मान) recto-meter (hectom., hm.) शत-मान 
hedgehog कण्टमूष m. -hedron -अनीक 
Hedysarum Bot. शालपर्णीति . (-ति for 
Torfa genus) 
H. gangeticum सामान्य शालपर्णी . heel foot f. Hefner lamp=amyl-acetate lamp 
मंडल-शुक्तीय दीप M. height उच्चत्व.. held धृत mfn. held in position Mach. स्थानधृत, स्थिति 
धृत mfn. held on ears कर्ण-धृत mfn. helianthine = dimethyl orange 
Col. Ind. सूर्यपुष्पी . Helianthus Bot. सूर्यमुखीति f. (-ति for __ प्रजाति genus) helianthus=sunflower Bot. सूर्यमुखी/. helical coil Engin. भ्रमिपथ कुण्डल N. helicoid Bot. (successive daughter 
axes develop on the same side, in a uniparous cymose branching) 
एकतोविकासी (-इन्) m. helicopter (designed for vertical ___ascent) उदग्ररोही m. (विमान) 
Helictereae Bot. कणिकारकुल n. (कुल ____family) helide Chem. यानेय, 2. helindone black Col. Ind. सूर्यनितीला 
काल m. h. blue सूर्यनिनीला नील m. h. blue-green सूर्यनिनीला नील-हरि m. h. bordeaux सूर्यनिनीला कपिशक m. h. brown सूर्यनिनीला बभ्रु m. . h. dark blue सूर्यनिनीला असित नोल 
m. h. fast scarlet सूर्यनिनीला स्थिर शोण 
M. (श. मा.) 
466 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
h. golden orange सूर्यनिनीला स्वर्ण helio-meter Astron. (for measuring 
नारंग m. 
any short arch of the celestial h. green सूर्यनिनीला हरि . 
sphere) खाणु-चाप-मान m. h. grey सूर्यनिनीला धूसर m. _helio-micro-meter Astron. सूर्य-कलंक h. orange सूर्यनिनीला नारंग M. 
मानm. h. pink=thioindigo pink सूर्य- Heliopora Zool. (includes the still 
निनीला आपद्मm. 
existing blue coral) नीलप्रवालाति f. h. printing black सूर्यनिनीला मुद्रण (प्राति for प्रजाति genus) 
काल M. 
Helioporidae Zool. नीलप्रवाल-वंश M. h. red B = thioindigo red BG heliopurpurine Col. Ind. सूर्यनीलोही 
सूर्यनिनीला रक्त बm. h. scarlet = thioindigo scarlet helio-stat (sunbeam is made sta 
सूर्यनिनीला शोण m. 
tionary) शूयाशु-स्थाप m. h. violet B == thioindigo violet heliotrope I सूर्यावर्त m. 
2 B सर्यनिनीला नीललोहित व m. 
2 (a colour) निनीलातिरक्त M. h. yellow CG = thioindigo heliotropic=phototropic Bot. सूर्या 
yellow GW सर्यनिनीला पीत सगm. वतिक-प्रकाशावर्तिक mfn. helio acid black Col. Ind. सर्य अम्ल heliotropism Biol. सूर्यावर्तना. 
काल m. 
phototropism प्रकाशावर्तना . h. bordeaux सूर्य कपिशक M. Heliotropium Bot. सूर्यावर्तति .(-ति for h, brilliant blue सर्य भासर नील m. प्रजाति genus) h. brilliant gteen सूर्य भासुर हरि m. Heliozoa-sun animalcules Zool. h. chrome yellow सर्य वर्णक पीत m. सूर्याणुप्राणिनः M.pl., सूर्याणुप्राणि-गण m. h. fast blue सूर्य स्थिर नील m. helium Chem. यानाति M. 
fast carmine सर्य स्थिर कीटशोणी helium group Chem. यानाति-वर्गm. 
helix Engin. भ्रमिपथ m. h. fast orange सूर्य स्थिर नारंग m. helleborein Chem. वक्राग्रिन m. h. fast pink सूर्य स्थिर आप M. helleborin Chem. वक्रानि h. fast red RL=light red A सूर्य helleborine वक्रानी . 
स्थिर रक्त र लm. 
Helleborus Bot. वाग्रति ई. (-ति for h. fast rubine सूर्य स्थिर रक्ती. प्रजाति genus) h. fast violet सूर्य स्थिर नीललोहित M. H. niger सामान्य वनार m. . h. fast yellow सुर्य स्थिर पीत m. helm Naut. नौकर्ण m. (ancient word) h. orange सूर्य नारंगm. 
helmet-shaped FATTFITTEET h. red RL=light red A मूर्य रक्त र helminth-vermis=worm कृमि m. 
लm. 
helminth-agogue कृमि-उत्सारी (-इन्) .. h. violet सूर्य नीललोहित m. 
mfn. heliochrysin Col. Ind. सूर्यहेमि . helminth-emesis कृमि-वमन . 
467 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
Helminthes Zool. 944: m. pl. (from hematochrome Bot. (a red colouring 
कृमि) 
matter in some unicellular algae) helminthiasis Med. कृमिरोग m. 
प्राप्य-रक्तिमा (-मन्) m. helminthic I कृम्य mfn. 
hemato-crit (Gk. krites judge) Phy ___2 कृम्युत्सारी (-इन्) mfn. 
siol. (an instrument for determin helminthicide कृमिघ्न m. 
ing the relative amounts of helminthism-helminthiasis कृमि plasma and corpuscles in blood) 
रोग m. 
शोणित-वेक्त्र . (विचिर् पृथग्भावे) helmintho- कृमि 
hematopoiesis=hemopoiesis Med. helminthoid कृम्याभ mfn. 
शोणोत्पाद m. helminthology कृमिविद्या, कार्मिकी . Hematopota Bact. शोणितपाति 1. (-पाति helminthoma कृम्यर्बुद M. 
___ for प्रजाति genus) helminthophobia कृमिभी. 
H. italica=H. pluvialis sterf helminthous Med. कृमिल mfn. 
शोणितप m. helmsman नोकर्णधार, कर्णधार m. hematoxylin I Chem. शोणितजारलि. help cells=synergidae Bot. सहाय- 2 Bot. शोणितकाष्ठि/. 
कोशा. 
hematuria शोणमेह M. Helvetia blue standard No. I (Lat. hemi- = semi- सामि 
Helvetii the modern Swiss)=ink hemi-albumoses #rf4-face n. blue Col. Ind. मसी नील m. 
hemi-cellulose Chem. सामि-कोशाधु ।. H. brown J=golden brown Hemi-chordata Zool. सामि-मेरव:m.pl. H. green=acid green 
Hemidesmus Bot. सारिवाति . (-ति hemal arch Anat. रक्त-चाप m. 
for the genus) hemal canal Anat. रक्त-कुल्या . 
H. indicus=Indian sarsaparilla hemal spine Anat. रक्तचाप-शल्य m. 
सामान्य सारिवा . hemapophysis Zool. रक्तचाप-वर्ष m. hemidesmus (hemides.) Pharm. hemat-, hemato-=haemat-, hae- ficar f. 
mato- शोणित 
Hemimetabola Zool. सामिरचनान्तरणा: hematein Chem. शोणितिन m. 
____m.pl. hematin Chem. शोणिति. 
hemi-metabolism Zool. सामिरचना hematine Chem. शोणिती. 
न्तरण hematine crystals, paste, powder hemi-metamorphosis=hemi-me 
Col. Ind. शोणिती स्फट m., लेपी, क्षोद tabolism 
hemi-oxide सामि-जारेय ". hematite Mineral. अयोजारेयिज m. (-इज hemi-plegia Med. पक्षाघात m. (ancient **** for fi mineral) ... 
word) hemator, hemat- शोणित- . Hemiptera Zool. मत्कुण-गण m.. (गण hematodeker fed. शोणितगुहा. 
order)... 
1. 
m. 
468 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
hemisphere 1 Math. a m. 
of cats) fasta T. 2. Zool. TIHTE 1. 
H. haemolyticus VTECT ATT. hemi-terpene सामि-सरलेन्य 1. 
H. hemoglobinophilus = H. hermlock, विषगर्जर m. 
canis hemlock fruit=conium fruit H. influenzae-influenza bacil 
Pharm. विषमर्जरी 
lus, Pfeiffer's bacillus (found hemo- T 
in cases of influenza) प्रतिश्यायशो. hemocoele TUTUT f. 
H.of Koch-Weeks=H. duplex, hemo-cyanin Biochem. gitur-FTF f. 
Bacillus aegyptiacus, bacil hemoglobin Biochem. (a compound lus of pink-eye, Week's ba 
of hematin rofa and globin) cillus, Bacterium aegyptia __ शोगवर्तुलि f. 
cum (closely resembles H. hemoglobinometer शोणवर्तुलिमान M. influenzae which is found in hemoglobinuria=black water stur conjunctival sac and probably 
T HEO The m. (ancient word) causes an acute contagious hemolysin Biochem, Tori f. 
conjunctivitis known as pink hemolysis Immunol. शोगांशन n. 
eye) 7795 T. hemolytic शोणांशिक mfn. 
H. lacunatus. See H. of Morax hemolyze vb. (to produce hemo 
Axenfeld lysis) TTUTT27-*TUT, Trier n. . 
H. of Morax-Axenfeld-Bacil hemophilia Med. अधिरक्तस्राव M. 
lus duplex, B. lacunatus, B. hemophilic tendency अधिरक्तस्राव of Morax-Axenfeld (found in 
safer f.. 
cases of subacute conjuncti Hemophilus (H.) Bact. (a genus, vitis) TTFIT UT. 
grow best or only in the pre H. pertussis=Bordet's bacil sence of hemoglobin) शोगप्रियाणु lus, Bordet-Gengou b., B. m. (Tt.) 
pertussis, B. tussis convul H. canis (from the smegma of sivae (resembles H. influenzae 
dogs) . TT. 
which is found in cases of H. conjunctivitidis. See H. of pertussis) fate . 
Koch-Weeks 
H. suis causes swine influenza) H. of Ducrey=Ducrey's bacil 
lus=Bacillus ulceris mollis hemopoiesis-hematopoiesis Titt (found in the lesions of chan. 1976 m. croid and probably causing the hemopoietic substance Pharm. same) GEOT TI. 
TUTTETTGE 07h. . H. duplex=H. of Koch-Weeks hemo-pyrroles crypto-pyrrole H. felis (found in the throat Chem. 527-5FSHET ME 
469﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
AAR 
hemorrhage Med. रक्तस्राव M. (ancient hepatitis Med. यकृत्कोप m. 
word) 
hepta- सप्त hemorrhoidal artery Zool. गुद-रोहिणी heptadecane Chem. सप्तदशीन्य n. 
heptagon Geom. सप्तभुज m. hemorrhoidal plexus Zool. गुद-प्रतान heptane Chem. सप्तीन्य n. 
m. 
heptanone Chem. सप्तीन्या : Hemosporidia=Haemosporidia heptaploid Biol. सप्तगुण mfn. hemp गंजा f., शण m. 
hepta-valent Chem. सप्त-संयुज mfu. Hempel column Chem. गुटिका-वंश m. hept-oxide Chem. सप्त-जारेय . Hempel tube Chem. गुटिका-नाल m. herbaceous (stems) Bot. शाकीय mfn. hempseed शण-बीज N. 
herbivorous Zool. शाकभुक् mfn. henbane=Hyoscyamus niger= hercogamy Bot. (a. state in which 
__black henbane कुक्कुटविष m. 
self-pollination is made impos henbane leaves = hyoscyamus sible) अनात्मपरागणता . ___Pharm. कुक्कुटविष m. 
hercynite (iron spinel) Mineral. hence Math. इतः (therefore अतः) 
अयःस्फटीयिज m. (-इज for खनिज Henning's tube method Phys. mineral) 
सैकजा-नाल-रीति f. 
Herdmania Zool. (Indian genus of henry Phys. (unit of inductance stein Ascidian) भारत-जलोद्गार्याति f. (-श्राति 
चन) धु-प्ररोच m. 
for प्रजाति genus) Henry's law Chem. (gas dissolved hereditary foarra mfn. 
in a liquid is proportional to heredity I पित्रागति f. the pressure of the gas) विलीन- 2 (science)=genetics पित्रागति-विद्या, वात्यनुपात नियम m. 
पैत्रागतिकी Hensen's line-line of Hensen hermaphrodite Biol. उभयलिंग m. 
सित-रेखा. 
hermelin=harmaline hepar=liver 75T 1. 
hermetically sealed अवात (वाताप्रवेश) hepar-biligen Pharm. यकृत्-पित्तजन m. संमुद्रित mfn. 
(Lesco) 
hermetic seal अवात-मुद्रा heparin Pharm. शुक्ता-याकृति f. (ace- hermit crab Zool. शंखवासी कर्कट m. ___tone+liver extract) . 
hernia Med. वर्म (-मन्) m. hepatic Anat. याकृत mfn., यकृत् . . inguinal hernia अन्त्रवृद्धि . . 
h. artery यकृद्रोहिणी f. ___. . heroin=aceto-morphine शुक्त-प्रमीली h. caeca Zool. याकृत उण्डुक m. . h. duct यकृत्प्रणाली.f. . 
herpes (fr. सप्) सी m. h. portal system याकृत केशिकामाजि- Herpestis Bot. श्वेतकामिनीति f. (-ति 
for starfa genus) Hepaticae. Bot, a muffi m.pl. 
H. monniera सामान्य श्वेतकामिनीf. 
470 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
What 
herpetology (it relates to reptiles) metamorphosis) TTTTTU 11. 
Fett, fer f. 
heterophoria Med. इतराविवतिषा telian telescope पानतदर्पण दुरेक्ष Heterophyes चूषयोन्याति f. (-पाति for m. 
starfa genus) hesperidium Bot. 57672 . 
__H. heterophyes सामान्य चूषयोनि M. Hessian earth=green earth 
Heterophyidae (a family having a Hessian fast red F=azidine fast large sucker-like genital pore) 
red F Hessian purple N=direct purple hetero-plasia az-affa f. 
146 
heteroploid Zool. faqasi mfn. hessite Mineral. (telluric silver a heteropolar (having unlike poles) 
TOIT) waafist m. (6 for at fara mfn. mineral) 
Heteroptera Zool. (two pairs of hetero- (Gk. héteros other) at-, f77; wings, one horny, the other 
faq 
__membranous) भिन्नपक्षाः m.pl. hetero-blastic Biol. 57-bfeci mfn. heteropycnosis Biol. विषमसंघनता . heterocercal Zool. (having the upper heteroside Chem. E n. 
lobe larger than the lower) fag heterosporic heterosporous Bot. पालि mfn. 
HEIGT mfn. hetero-chromia Anat. 3775-quiet f. heterosporous Bot. (spores of un hetero-chromosome=allosome = equal size) fagnarfi, fatta 
sex chromosome Biol. FT-TT 11. mfn. Heterocoela Zool. (the internal heterostvly Bot. #festaraftan f. 
lining is not the same) विषमास्तरिण: hetero-thallic Bot. इतर-सूकाय, भिन्न m.pl. 
जालिक mfn. heterodont Zool. fagharen mfn. hetero-thallism Bot. (having two heterogamete Biol. fq449TIN. 
distinct types of mycelium) heterogametic Zool. faqura mfn. FETICCT f. heterogamy Biol. ATTEE m. 
heterotropia Med. aetatea f. heterogeneous इतरजातीय, विजातीय, heterotrophic bacteria इतरपुष्ट 
भिन्नांग mfn. . 
TFT m. heterolysin pakituifet.f. 
heterozygote Biol. ##ZITUTT (-5F) m. heterolysis Biochem. 7-11 . heterozygous Biol. TEHTITUT mfn. heterolytic इतरनाशिक mfn. 
H. E. the Governor TH1758 179 m. Heterometabola Zool. Aquitarat: hex-, hexa- - 
m.pl 
hexa-bromide Chem. 5-7 n. heterometabolism Zool. (develop- hexacanthous Zool. (having six 
ment with incomplete or direct hooks) Eget mfn. 
471 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
hexa-chloride Chem. षण्-नीरेय 2. hibernate vb. शीतस्वपन . hexa-chloro-ethane Chem. षण्णीर- hibernation शीतस्वाप m. 
दक्षीण्य 1. 
Hibiscus Bot. भृण्डीति . (-ति for प्रजाति hexacontane=hexecontane 
genus) Hexacoralla Zool, saufan: m.pl. hiccough Physiol. fat f. Hexactinellida Zool. (having six- hiddenite=lithia emerald Mineral. ___rayed spicules) षड्रश्मिशू किका: m.pl. लघुजा मरकत . hexadecane Chem. षोडशीन्य 1. 
hidden part Engin. अदृष्ट भाग m. 1-hexadecane=cetene frFUTET . hide (of an animal) खल्ल .m. hexagon षड्भुज, षट्कोण m. 
hidrosis Fae m. hexagonal 1 Bot. (stem) (six-sided) high 57 mfn. (low rite) 
षदाव mfn. 
high I (in brilliance) प्र, प्रशुभ्र mfn. 2 षड्भुज, षड्भुजीय mfn. 
___2 (in saturation) उत्, उद्विशद mfn. hexagonal prism षड्भुज-संक्षेत्र n.. 'high acidity उच्च-अम्लता . hexamerous Bot. षडवयव mfn. high altitude fighter Mil. उच्चर्योधक hexamine=hexamina (hexamin.) ___Pharm. षट्तिक्ती. 
high commissioner महायुक्त m. hexamine brown Col. Ind. acfit high commissioner for India 
बभ्रु m. 
भारतार्थ महायुक्त m. hexamineral black-blue Col. Ind. High Court उच्च न्यायालय m. 
षट्खनिज कृष्ण-नील m. 
higher उच्च, उच्चतर mfn. hexane Chem. षडीन्य 1. 
h. algebra उच्च बीजगणित n. 2, 5-hexane-dione Cbem. २, ५-षडीन्य h. animals उच्च प्राणी (-इन) m. 
द्वया . 
h. oxides उच्च जारेय. . -hexanol -षडीन्यव | 
h. plants उच्चतर पादप m. -hexanone -षडीन्या. 
h. powers उच्चतर घात m. hexaploid Biol. षड्गुण mfn. 
h. powers of ten दश उच्चधात hexarch Bot. षट्स्त्र mfn. hexa-valent Chem. षट्-संयुज mfn. highest परम, उच्चतम, महत्तम mfn. hexecontane (Gk, hexekonta sixty) h. common divisor = greatest 
Chem. षष्टीन्य . 
common measure=highest hexene Chem. षडेन्य. 
common factor Math. महत्तम hexose Cbem. षड्धु . 
समापवर्तक m. hexyi Chem. षड्ल n. 
h. dimension Math. उच्चतम घात Hf (hafnium) Chem. गा (गावातु) 
m. . hg. (hectogram) श. पा. (शत-धान्य) 
h. hydride Chem. परम उदेय n. Hg faydrargyrum) Chem. प (पारद) h. oxide Chem. परम जारेय . . hhd. (hogshead) खा. (खारी) । 
h. point उच्चतम बिन्दु m. ।' 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
high-frequency current उच्च-बारं- hinge कोर m. (from सुश्रुत) 
वारता-वाह m. 
hinge joint=ginglymus joint high functionary (of a state) रत्नी Anat. कोरसन्धि M. (from सुश्रुत) 
(-इन्) M. 
Hinglaj Geog. (situated at the highly concentrated अति-संकेन्द्रित Mfn. extremity of the Hingula range highly evolved Bot. अति-उद्विकसित mfn. on the coast of Makran in Balu highly inflammable afar aftrarea chistan. It is one of the pithas) 
mfn. 
हिंगला. high power उच्च-शक्ति f. 
hint संकेत M. high pressure (h. p.) Mach. उच्च hints r-points Math. उद्देशक m. 
निपीड m. (उ. नि.) 
2 संकेतm. high pressure system of heating hip fiara m. 
Hygiene उच्च-निपीड-तापन-विधि M. hipbone-innominate bone= high school उच्च-पाठशाला f. 
___innominatum नितम्बास्थि १. high speed Engin. उच्च वेग m. hippopotamus Zool. जलहस्ती (-इन्) high table उच्च पटल 1. 
__ m. high temperature चण्ड ताप, उच्च ताप hippurate Chem. अश्वमेहीय n. 
m. 
hippuric Chem. अश्वमेहिक mfn. high temperature furnace चण्ड-ताप- hire Com. अवश्य m. 
भ्राष्ट्र n. 
h. purchase क्रयावक्रय m. high temperature thermometer hirudin Pharm. wallet f. 
चण्डताप-मान m. (short for चण्डताप- Hirudinea Zool. जलौकावर्ग m. (वर्ग तापमान) 
___class) high vacuum pump उच्च शून्यकोदञ्च hirudiniculture Zool. जलौकापालन n. 
Hirudinidae Zool. जलौकावंश m. highway engineering राजपथ-अभि- Hirudo Zool. जलौकाति . (-आति for 
यंत्रणा 
प्रजाति genus) hilum I=hilus Anat. वन्तय m. H. medicinalis वैद्य जलौका.. 
(where the stalk', viz., blood His Excellency परमश्रेष्ठ m vessels and nerves enter) 
His Honour तन-भवान् m. 2 Bot. (point of connection hislopite (calcite, coloured by green between funicle and ovule) वन्तय earth; also includes crystals of 
heulandite. The name is still hilus=hilum 
without specific value) अभिचूर्णिज hindbrain Anat. पश्च-मस्तिष्क 1. 
m. (-इज for खनिज mineral) hindgut Zool. पश्चान्त्र . 
His Majesty देवपाद m. hind-limb 2001. पश्चांग 1., पश्च-पाद m. His Majesty in Council परिस्थित hind-wing Zool. पश्च-पक्ष m. 
सम्राट् m. 
m. 
m. 
473 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
His Majesty's representative f. (दुरातिक्तेय bromamide) ___ सम्राट-प्रतिनिधि M. 
Hofmann's violet Col. Ind. (any of hissing sound Phys. सीत्कार . 
several violet dyes, all of them histamine Zool. ऊतितिक्ती /. 
alkylated fuchsines क्षारल-धूमली) क्षा. histidine Biochem. ऊत्ययी. 
धू. नीललोहित m. histiocyte, histocyte=clasmato- hog I (domestic swine) गृहय सूकर m. ___cyte Zool. प्रोति-कोशा f. 
___2 (pig) सूकर m. histogram Statistics (frequency hoglard=adeps suilus सूकर-वपा. 
diagrams) वारंवारता-चित्र . 
hogshead (hhg.) खारी f. (खा.) histologically speaking Zool. hol-, holo- पूर्ण 
औतिकीदृष्टया 
Holarrhena Bot. कुटजति f. (-ति for histology I (science) wtfatitj. (from stifa genus) 
ऊति tissue) 
___ H. antidysenterica (kurchi) 2 (tissue structure) ौतिक-संरचना सामान्य कुटज m. 
holarrhenine कुटजी f. histone Biochem. (globin of hemo hold I (for an anchor) लांगल-धान n. 
globin) वर्तुलिका f. 
___2 (of a ship) नावोदर n. historical Statistics कालिक mfn. hold b. Com. संधारण, धारण n. 
h. analysis कालिक विश्लेषण n. 
lease-h. पट्टधृत n. . h. series कालिक-माला f. 
holder 1 Chem. -धर m. (gas holder h. variation कालिक विचरण 1. 
वातिधर) historigram Math. कालिक-चित्र . 
2 Com. संधारक, धारी (-इन् ) m. history ticket (of a prisoner) इतिवृत्त h. for value water ret m. 
पत्रक.. 
_h. in due course यथाविधि धारी m. hl. (hecto-liter) श. स्थ. (शत-प्रस्थ) 
h. of a bill विपत्र-धारी m. Ha. line Phys. उ रेखा. 
h. of a cheque धनादेश-धारी m. HB line Phys. उमा रेखा f. 
holdfast Bot. दृढग्रह m. Hy line Phys. उइ रेखा f. 
hold for an anchor लाङ्गल-धान 1. hm. (hecto-meter) श. मा. (शत-मान) hold good vb. (to remain valid) सत्य 
Ho (holmium) Chem. पां (पांडुला) 
भवन . Hofmann pinchcock (controlled holding company Finance rate 
by a screw) भ्रमि-शिखिपीड m. 
प्रमण्डल. Hofmann's anodyne=compound hold of a ship qatat n. 
, spirit of ether संयुत दक्षु-निषेचन n. hole छिद्र, विवर।. Hofmann's : method Chem. (for holed छिद्रित mfa. . . vapour density) (reduced pressure holiday अवकाश, अनध्याय m. 
'. 'method) प्रह्लासित-निपीड-विधा f. hollow सुषिर mfn. 
Hofmann's reaction अपिदुक्तेय-प्रतिक्रिया holly green अवयंतिपीत m. 
474 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
hollow cylinder सुषिर रम्भ m. 
home guard Mil. गृह-रक्षी (-इन्) m. hollow-horned Zool. सुषिर-शृंगी (-इन्) home signal=stop signal Riy. 
mfn. 
विराम-संज्ञप्ति hollow square Math. सुषिर वर्ग m. home trade स्वदेशीय व्यापार M. hollow square three deep Math. homing pigeon Zool. (carrier 
त्रिगंभीर सुषिर वर्गm. 
pigeon) गृहगामी कपोत m. (संदेश hollow stalk instrument नाली-यन्त्र . 
कपोत) holmia Chem. (holmium oxide) TİETT homo- I 9H 
2 Chem. समान holmic Chem. mitfach nufn. 
homocentric=coaxial Ophthalmol. holmium Chem. पांडुला f. 
(whose centres lie on the same holo-, hol- (Gk. holos complete, axis) एकाक्षकेन्द्री (-इन) mfn. 
entire, whole) gui 
homocercal Zool. (having two lobes holoblastic cleavage=total clear equal) समपालि mfn. 
vage=complete cleavage Em- Homocoela Zool. (having a uni bryol. पूर्ण-भाजन . 
form internal lining) समास्तरिणः holocrine (glands) Anat. (the com- afn. 
plete cells disintegrate to form homocol=ethyl red the secretion) पूर्णकोशासी (-इन्) homodont Z001. समदन्त Mn. mfn. 
homogametic Zool. समजन्युक mfn. hologamete Zool. प्रौढजन्यु m. 
homogeneity Statistics oferat f. hologamy Bot. Niclag m. 
h. of data सामग्री-सजातिता. Holometabola Zool. पूर्णरचनान्तरणा: homogeneous I समांग, सजातीय mfn. __m. pl. 
2 Math. (having like parts) समाङ्ग holometabolism Zool(complete mfn. __metamorphosis) पूर्णरचनान्तरण 2. 
3 Math. (of the same degree) holophyte nutrition Bot. 31: FHCRT समघात min. 
पोषणn. 
homologous I सधर्म mfn. holoside Biochem. पूर्णध्वेय. 
. 2 Biol. रचनासदृश mfn. HolothuriaZool. समुद्रकर्कटयाति. (आति homologous series सधर्म-मालाj. 
for प्रजाति genus) 
homologue सधर्मी (-इन्) m. Holothurioidea Zool. समुद्रकर्कटी-वर्गm. homology I सधर्मता, साधर्म्य . holozoic nutrition Bot. प्राणिसदृश 2 Biol. (resemblance in structure) 
पोषण . 
रचनासादृश्य . homaxial Biol. (having the axes all homo-lysin=iso-lysin FH-TTTTTT). 
equal) समाक्ष mfn.. 
homophosphine Col. Ind. सम-भास्वी home economics = household f. 
economics गार्हस्थ्य-विज्ञान 1. . Homoptera Zook. समपक्षा: m.pl. 
475 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
homosporous Bot. (spores are all of h. a cheque धनादेश-आदरण 1. ____one size) समबीजाणुक mfn. 
acceptance for h. आदरार्थ स्वीकरण homothallic Bot. सम-सकाय, समजालिक 
. mfn. 
payment for h. आदरार्थ शोधन n. homo-thallism Bot. सम-जालता. honourable माननीय mfn. homothetic Math. समरूप nfn. homothetic centre=centre of honoured bill Com. आदत विपत्र n. 
similarity Matb. समरूपता केन्द्र n. hood छदिका. homozygote n. Biol. (a homozy- hook Bot. अंकुश m. 
gous individual) युग्मैकगुणी (-इन्) hook climber Bot. अंकुश-प्रतानी (-इन्) 
m. homozygous Biol. युग्मैकगुण mfn. hooked सांकुश Mfn. hone (from Sanskrit शाण) शाण m. Hooke's law Mech. प्रत्याबल-विकार-नियम honey मधु n. 
m. honey buzzard=bee hawk=bee hooklet अंक शक m. 
kite Zool. मधुकर-श्येन M. 
hook-wings Zool. अंकुश-पक्षा: m.pl. honeycomb I मधुजालक M. (ancient hookworm अंकुशकृमि m. 
word) 
hooppe Zool. पुत्रप्रिय m. (from रामायण) 2 Automobile मधुजालक । 
hooting owl Zool. घूक m. Hon. Minister for Agriculture Hoplopsyllus अर्धकंकताति f. (आति for 
(H.M.A.) मान. कृषि मंत्री m.(मा.कृ.म.) प्रजाति genus) Hon. Minister for Development hopper (a trough, box or recep 
(H.M.D.) मान. विकास मंत्री m. (मा. tacle, usually funnel-shaped with वि.म.) 
an opening at the lower part) Hon. Minister for Education अधोवाप m. 
(H.M.E.) मान. शिक्षा मंत्री m. (मा. hopper vaive Hygiene अधोवाप-कपाट n. शि. म.) 
hopsælupulus Pharm. (makes malt Hon. Minister for Finance (H. liquors bitter). Fouce n. 
M.F.) मान. अर्थ-मंत्री m. (मा.अ.म.) Horace Vernet's blue-oil blr Hon. Minister for Food (H.M. Hordeum Bot. यवति f. (ति for ___Food) मान. अन्न-मंत्री m. (मा. अन्न म.) प्रजाति genus) 
Hon. Minister for Public Health H. vulgare सामान्य यव m. ___ मान. लोकस्वास्थ्य-मंत्रीm. (मा. स्वा. म.) horizon क्षितिज M. (from. सूर्यसिद्धान्त) 
Hon. Minister for P.W.D. मान. horizontal क्षैतिज, अनुप्रस्थ mfn. 
लोककर्म-मंत्री m. (मा. लो. म.) 
h. angle क्षैतिज कोण m. honorarium मानदेय, पूजावेतन 1. 
h. axis क्षैतिज अक्ष m. honour vb. Com. TGT n. 
h. bar क्षैतिज दण्ड m. . h. abill विषत्र-मादरणn. 
h. boiler अनुप्रस्थ बाष्पित्र .. 
476 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
h. distribution अनुप्रस्थ वंटन n h. line Projection sifa street f. h. plane Projection क्षैतिज तल ॥. h. position अनुप्रस्थ-स्थिति. 
h. scale क्षैतिज-मापश्रेणी/. horizontally अनुप्रस्थ hormonal न्यासर्गीय mfn. hormone Physiol. न्यासर्ग m. ___h. administration न्यासर्ग-उपचार m. hormonicनयासर्गिक mfn. hormono- न्यासर्ग hormono-genesis FITAT-TFAT n. hormono-genic न्यासर्ग-जनक mfn. hormonology नैयासर्गिकी f. hormonopoiesis न्यासर्गोत्पाद m. horn शृंग ॥. hornbill Zool. धनेश m. horned ruminant Zool. शृंगी रोमंथी 
(-इन्) m. horn quicksilver-=calomel Mineral. 
पानीरेय . horridus (bristly) Bot. दृढलोमी (-इन्) m. horse अश्व m. horsefly Tihat f. (ancient word) 
horsehair अश्ववाल m. horsepower Mech. अश्वशक्ति . horseshoe magnet खुरप-चुम्बक m. horseshoe-shaped खुरप-आकार mfn. horsetail Bat. अश्ववार m. horticultural औद्यानिक mfn. 
h. hygrometer औद्यानिक उन्दमान m. 
h. scheme औद्यानिक-योजना f. horticulture औद्यानिकी . hose (a flexible pipe as of India 
__rubber) नम्यनाल m. hose-tops पाद्यावरण 1. hosier (a dealer in hosiery) पाद्यादि- 
वणिक् m. 
hosiery I (business of a hosier) 
पाद्यादि-वाणिज्य 1. 2 (hose and goods woven like hose) पाद्यादि 2. 3 (a factory where hosiery is 
made) पाद्यादि-निर्माणी. hosiery brown Col. Ind. पाद्या बभ्रm. hospital रुग्णालय, चिकित्सालय m. hospital ship रुग्णालय-पोत m. host पोषिता (-तु) M. hostage समाधि m. (from Kautalya's 
Arthaśāstra) hostel छात्रावास m. hostilities विग्रह M., शत्रुता f., विरोधभाव 
___m. host plant Bot. पोषिता पादप M. hot उष्ण mfn. hot-air oven उष्णवायु कन्दु m. hot-air sterilizer उष्णवायु जीवाणुहा 
(-इन) m. hotel आवासगृह . 
restaurant भोजनगृह, विश्रामगृह . 
hostel छात्रावास m. hotness उष्णता hot plate उष्ण पट्ट M. 
gas hot plate वाति उष्ण पट्टm. hot water JETT 5777 17. hot water bath उष्गजल-तापन ?. hot water drying oven उष्णजल-शोषण 
कन्दु m. hot water funnel उष्णजल-निवाप m. hot water jacket उषगजल-चोल m. hound आखेटिक M. (ancient word) hour suam. ___h. rate घण्टाघm. hour hand (of a timepiece) घण्ट-सूची 
f. house Com. गृह.. 
+ 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
business h. व्यापार-गह 1. 
humeral r. Anat. (a large bone clearing h. समाशोधन-गृह .. 
forming part of the shoulder ware-h. भांडागार, कोष्ठागार, वस्तु-गह .. girdle of certain fishes, not work h. कर्म-गृही . 
homologous with the humerus) house सभा ., आगार १. 
अंस्यक १. -house -शाला. 
humeral 1 (of or pertaining to the house cricket=Grvllus domesti shoulder) affai mfn. 
cus Zool. गह-झिल्लीक ". 
2 (of or pertaining to the hu house dog Zool. गृह-कुक्कुर m. 
merus) बाह्वस्थिक mfn. housefiy Zool. गृह-मक्षी f. 
humero- (humerus) atafit household economics=home eco humerus Anat., Zool. afry th. 
nomics गार्हस्थ्य-विज्ञान n. 
humic acid Chem. (derived from house-lizard Zool. पल्ली, गह-गोधिका f. humus धरण) धरणिक अम्ल. House of Commons प्रजा-संसद् humid आक्लिन्न mfn. House of Lords श्रीपति-संसद् . humidate=humidify आक्लेदन . House of Parliament संसद-आगार 1. humidity आक्लेद m house sparrow Zool. गृह-चटक, ग्राम- h. oven आक्लेंद-कन्दु m. 
चटक m. 
humin Biochem. धरणकि f. (धरणि would house spider Zool. गृह-लूता . 
be the regular form from धरण however तथापि 
humus, but stoff is to distinguish however small यावदपि लघु, अल्प; कियदपि it from धरणि earth) 
लघु, अल्प mfn. 
hump=pip Radar ककुद् . howitzer Ordn. (high angle gun) humulus=lupulus Pharm. यव्यकटु ।. 
उच्चकोण-शतघ्नी, उच्चशतघ्नी f. 
humus (organic portion of soil) धरण howling Zool. उत्क्रन्दन ।. 
__m. ('which sustains life') h. p. (high pressure) Mach. 3. fr. hundi Com, gust f. 
(उच्च निपीड) 
hundredweight (cwt) = short H pencil (H from German barta hundredweight गोणी (गो.) लघु ___ hard) क अंकनी f. (क= कठोर) 
गोणी f. (ल. गो.) 2H pencil २ क अंकनी . (3H, 4H ३क, hunting dog Zool. मृगदंश m. (ancient 
word) hub-cap Automobile नाभिक-टोपी f. hunting forest आखेटाटवी f. (ancient 
(नाभिक 'hub' frou? महाभारत) 
___word), अ.खेट-वन . human मानुष mfn. 
hunting ground आखेट-भूमि f. (ancient human anatomy मानुष शारीर . 
word) human pellagra मानव बल्कचर्मn. hurricane (above 75 m.p.h., mean 92) human soul #TTA TEHT m. 
प्रभञ्जन m. (See Beanfort's Wind human welfare मानव कल्याण n. 
Scale) 
478 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
___ 
. 
hurricane Mil. (low altitude British hyd-antoin (bydrogen + allantoin) 
fighter) प्रभंजन, नीचर्योधक M. 
Chem. उद-नालि. hush x n. (quiet) नीरव m. 
hydathode Bot. (for the excretion 2 adi. नीरव, शान्त, निश्शब्द mfn. 
of water) जलोत्सर्गी (-इन्) M. 3vb. नीरवण, शमन . 
Hyderabad (Dn.) Geog. भागनगर 1. hushed sound Phys. नीरव ध्वनि M. hydnocarpus oil=chaulmoogra husk Bot. तुषा . 
oil पिमुद्गर-तैल १. hut कुटी . 
hydr-, hydro- 1 (hydrogen, water) hv (quantum) त्रिवे (b_is Planck's उद 
constant, v is the frequency of 2 (water) FATA vibration आवेप) 
hydra Z00l. जलीयक M. hyacinth राहुरत्न 1. 
Hydra Zool. जलीयकाति . (आति for hyaena तरक्षु M. 
stattfa genus) Hyaena crocuta=spotted hyena H. fusca बभ्रु जलीयक M. 
__7001. पृषत्-तरक्षु M. 
H. viridis हरि जलीयक m. Hyaena striata=striped hyena H. vulgaris निवर्ण जलीयक M. 
Zool. राजीव तरक्षा . 
hydr-acid (opposed to oxacid) Chem. hyaline cartilage Anat. काबर कास्थि उदाम्ल. (जाम्ल) 
hydr-acrylate Chem. उदोगलीय n. hyaloid artery काचर-धमनी / 
hydr-acrylic Chem. उदोगलिक mfn. hyaloid canal काचर-कुल्या . 
Hydra fusca (brown) Zool. बभ्रु hyaloid fossa काचर खाता . 
जलीयक m. Hyalonema (glassrope sponge #17- hydr-amine (hydroxyl-tramine) Chem. 
रज्जु छिद्रिष्ठ) Zool. काचरज्ज्वाति . उद-तिक्ती f. (-आति for प्रजाति genus) 
-hydranol -उदीन्यव m. hyalo-plasm (liquid part of pro- hydranthrene black paste Col. Ind. ____toplasm प्ररस-तरल) प्रतरल m. 
उदक्षामण्य काल लेपी. Hyalospongia Zool. काचछिद्रिष्ठा: m.pl. h. blue उदक्षामण्य नील m. hybrid (cross between different h. brilliant copper उदक्षामण्य भासुर 
species, genus प्रजाति, etc.) प्रसंकर m. 
ताम्रm. cross-breed (cross between h. brown उदक्षामण्य बनू m. 
varieties of the same species) h. dark blue उदक्षामण्य असित नील संकर, संकरजm. 
m. hybridization प्रसंकरण n. 
h. olive उदक्षामण्य तैलबदर m. h. of seeds बीज-प्रसंकरण ।. 
h. violet उदक्षामण्य नीललोहित m. hyd- (hydrogen) Chem. उद- (उदजन) h. yellow उदक्षामण्य पीत m. hyd-antoate Chem. उद-नालीय 1. hydrargyric Chem. पारदिक mfn. hyd-antoic Chem. उद-नालिक mfn. hydrargyri chloridum corrosivum 
479﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
-mercuric chloride Pharm. h. salt जलीयित लवण . पारदिक नीरेय 1. 
h. soap जलीयित स्वफेन M. h. oxidum flavum = yellow hydration Chem. 4797 n. 
mercuric oxide Pharm. पीत hydrator (one that hydrates) जलीयक पारदिक जारेय. 
m. h. oxidum rubrum=red mer- hydr-atropic acid Chem. उद-बाहतिक 
curic oxide Pharm. रक्त पारदिक अम्ल n. जारेय. 
hydraulic आम्भस mfn. h. perchloridum = mercuric h. brakes Phys. प्राम्भस प्रारोध m. 
___chloride Pharm. पारदिक नीरेय . h. cement आम्भस वज्रचूर्ण.. hydrargyrum=mercury = quick h. elevator Mach. प्राम्भस उत्थापक m. 
silver Chem. पारद m. 
h. engineering आम्भस-अभियन्त्रगा. hydrastine Chem. (found in the h. gypsum Col. Ind. आम्भस प्राचूर्ण 
rootstock of the golden seal) पीत मूली . 
h. press=Bramah press Mach. hydrastis (hydrast.)=golden seal= 
आम्भस पीडm. yellow root=hydrastic rhizo- hydraulics optat f. 
me Pharm. पीतमूल N. 
Hydra viridis (green) Zool. हरि hydrate n. Chem. (a compound जलीयक . 
formed by the union of water Hydra vulgaris (colourless) Zool. with some other substance) जलीय निर्वर्ण जलीयक m. n. 
hydrazi- Chem. उदाजी hydrate vb. Chem. जलीयन . 
hydrazide Chem. उदाजीवेय. I (to cause to become a hydrate) hydrazidine Chem. उदाजीवेयी. जलीय करण 1. 
hydrazi-methylene Chem. उदाजी 2 (to become a hydrate) जलीय- प्रोदलेन्य ॥ भवन 1. 
hydrazine Chem. उदाजीवी /. 3 (in general, to combine with h. hydrate उदाजीवी जलीय. water of the elements of water) h. hydro-bromide उदाजीवी उद जल-योजन . 
दुरेय . hydrated Chem. जलीयित mfn. 
h..hydro-chloride उदाजीवी उद h. acidic oxide जलीयित अम्लकर नीरेय .. 
जारेय. 
h. nitrate उदाजीवी भूयीय . h. crystal जलीयित स्फट m. 
h. sulphate उदाजीवी शल्बीय.. h. lime (slaked lime) जलीयित चूर्णक h. yellowCol. Ind. उदाजीवी पीत m. ... m. (शान्त चूर्णक) 
hydrazino- (hydrazine) Chem. उदा h. manganese dioxide जलीयित जीवी 
लोहक द्विजारेय. 
__hydrazo- Chem. उदाज 480 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
n. 
hydrazo adj. उदाज, उदाजक mfn. 
h. acid उददुरिक अम्ल n. hydr-azoate Chem. Jersitate n. 
h. ether उददुरिक दक्षु . hydrazo-benzene Chem. 36749ra hydro-bromide Chem. 3-n. 
hydro-carbon Chem. EGITT m. hydrazo-di-form-amide (dicarbon- hydro-carbonaceous Chem. GTITS 
amide) Chem. 3676f-a-fra n. auffer mfn. (fa-Jits-fadu) 
hydro-carbonate Chem. SGTTTT n. hydrazoic Chem. Ja sifati mfn. hydro-carbonic Chem. GETTTF mfn. hydrazone (hydrazine + ketone) hydro-carbonous Chem. Gati mfn. 
Chem. grietar f. 
hydrocele Med. 76afa f. hydr-azo-toluene Chem. 3674-facrae hydro-cellulose Chem. 39-*TTą n. 
11. 
hydro-chemistry 4-TATT 16. hydric (from hydrogen) Chem. Ef hydro-chlorate Chem. Garitata n. 
mfn. 
hydro-chloric Chem. 39-8ff mfn. h. dioxide उदिक द्विजारेय. 
hydrochloric acid=acidum hydro h. nitrate उदिक भूयीय . 
chloricum (acid. hydrochlor.) h. oxide उदिक जारेय. 
Pharm. Bertran. hydride Chem. उदेय 1. 
hydro-chloride Chem. 56-7 n. hydrin Chem. f f. 
hydro-chlorous acid Chem. 9-17 hydrindene Chem. उदनिनीलेन्य।. 
STERN. hydr-iodate Chem. 56- 
5ta n. -hydrocholic -Jeff hydr-iodic Chem. 36-57fFq7 mfn. hydro-cinchonine Chem. ge-factor f. 
h. acid catfiso FT . 
hydro-cinnamic Chem. FG-greffe hydr-iodide Chem. 56-5Fay n. 
mfn. hydro- I (hydrogen, water) 36 _h. acid उददारुसितिक अम्ल . 
2 (water) -a7f 
hydro-collidine Chem, grí f. hydro-acetic Chem. 59-aferiti mfn. hydro-cotarnine Chem. Se f. hydro-alcoholic Chem. paraf hydro-coumaric, hydro-cumaric 
mfn. 
Chem. उदानन्तमूलिक mfn. hydro-aromatic Chem. JG-Tef hydro-cupreine Chem. 39-775794t 
mfn. hydro-benz-amide Chem. 39-89- hydro-cyanate Chem. 39-5 ta n. 
fada n. 
hydro-cyanic Chem. 36-JUTFF mfn. hydro-benzoin Chem. 36-99 m. 
h, acid=prussic acid gorff hydro-bili-rubin Biochem, 56-1977 
FT n. Effer f. 
hydro-cyanide Chem. 36-54TH n. hydro-bromate Chem. Je-gaten. hydro-cyclic Chem. 39-raffiti mfn. hydro-bromic Chem. ge-efiæ mfn. hydro-dynamics falfe-afirah f. 
481 31 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
hydro-electric जल-विद्युत्-, ( as dams) hydrogenate vb. Chem. उदजनन ?. 
जल-वैद्यतmfn. 
I (to combine with hydrogen) hydro-electricity जल-विद्यत f. 
उदजन-योजन n. hydroelectric plant जलविद्युत्-संयन्त्र 1. 2 (to treat with hydrogen) उदजन hydroelectric works जलविद्युत्-शाला f. साधन 1. hydro-ergotinine Chem. उद-रुक्कवकी/ 3 [to expose to (to subject to the hydro-fluoric Chem. उद-तरस्विक mfn. influence or action of) hydrogen] 
h. acid उदतरस्विक अम्ल. 
उदजन-प्रभावन . h. acid basin उदतरस्विक अम्ल पात्री / hydrogenate an oil Chem. तैल-उदजनन 
h. acid bottle उदतरस्विक अम्ल कूपी. hydro-fluoride Chem. उद-तरस्वेयn. hydrogenation Chem. उदजनन ।. hydro-fluo-silicic acid Chem. उद-तर- hydrogenator Chem. (one who or 
संकतिक अम्ल . 
_that which hydrogenates) उदजनक hydro-gen Chem. उद-जन m. 
m. h. arsenide उदजन नेपाल्येय 1. hydrogenic Phys. (similar to hydro h. bromide उदजन दुरेय १. 
gen) उदजनिक, उदजन-सदृश mfn. h.,chloride उदजन नीरेय 1. 
hydrogenic atom Chem. उदजनिक h. cyanide उदजन श्यामेय . 
परमाणु m. h. dioxide उदजन द्विजारेय n. hydrogenide (hydride) Chem. उदजनेय h. disodium phosphate उदजन . (उदेय) 
द्विक्षारातु भास्वीय n. 
hydrogenite Chem. उदजनक m. (short h. electrode उदजन विधुवार n. 
for उदजन-जनक; a mixture of Si, Na h. fiuoride उदजन तरस्वेय n. 
OH and slaked lime, which igni h. iodide उदजन जम्बेय. 
tes on burning to give 270-370 h. ion उदजन अयन 1. 
liters of hydrogen gas per kg) h.-ion concentration Physical hydrogenization = hydrogenation 
Chem. उदजन-अयन संकेन्द्रण १. hydrogenize=hydrogenate h. nitrate उदजन भूयीय. 
hydrogenous उदजन्य mfn. h. oxide उदजन जारेय. 
hydro-halide (hydro- to halogen + h. peroxide उदजन अतिजारेय. 
-ide) Chem. उद-नीकुल्येय 1. h. selenide उदजन मेचेय. hydroid Zool. (of or pertaining to h. silicide उदजन सैकतेय . 
Hydrozoa or Hydroidea) जलीयक h. sulphide उदजन शुल्बेय . 
गणीय, जलीयकवर्गीय mfn. h. sulphide generator 4 Hydroidea Zool. (an order contain , शुल्बेय जनित्र .. 
ing Hydra) जलीयक-गण M. h, telluride उदजन वंगकेय . hydrol Chem. उदव m.. hydrogenase (reductase) Biochem. hydrolase Biochem. (a hydrolytic en 
उदजनेंद m. 
zyme) जलांशेद m. 
482 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
hydrolith Chem. (calcium hydride h. orange उदा नारंग M. __ चूर्णातु उदेय) चूर्णोदेय 1. 
h. pink 39 91964 11. hydrolysis Chem. जलांशन . 
h. scarlet उदा शोण m. hydrolyst Chem. जलांशयिता (-त) M. h. violet उंदा नीललोहित m. hydrolyte Chem. जलांश्य १. 
h. wool brown उदा ऊर्णा बभ्रु M. hydrolytic जलांशिक mfn. 
h. wool olive उदा ऊर्णा तैलबदर M. hydrolyzate Chem. (the product re h. wool red उदा ऊर्णा रक्त m. 
sulting from hydrolysis) जलांशन h. wool yellow उदा ऊर्णा पीत m. जात . 
__h. yellow उदा पीत m. hydrolyzation Chem. जलांशन .. hydrone Physical Chem. EGTf. hydrolyze vb. Chem. (to subject to, hydro-nitric Chem. उद-भूयिक mfn. ___or undergo, hydrolysis) जलांशन 1. hydroperoxide Chem. उदातिजारेय n. hydro-mechanics तरल-गामिकी 
hydrophile जलप्रिय mfn. hydro-mellitic acid Cbem. उद-क्षौद्रिक hydrophilite Mineral. (calcium chlo 
अम्ल. 
ride) चूर्णनीरेयिज m. (-इज for खनिज hydrometer तरलमान m. 
mineral) h. jar तरलमान-कलश m. 
hydrophilous Bot. (pollinated by the Brixe'sh. पिभार तरलमान m. 
agency of water) जल-परागित mfn. Nicholson's h.-constant im- hydrophobia Med. जलभी ., पालर्क 
mersion h. स्थिर निमज्जन तरलमान m. m. 
hydrophyte Biogeog. Falfsen f. Twaddell's h. पिगुरु तरलमान m. hydroplane जलविमान . . urine h. मूत्र-तरलमान m. 
hydro-quinine Chem. उद-विज्वरी f. hydrometric I (of or pertaining hydro-quinol Chem. उद-विज्वरव m. 
to hydrometry) तरलमितीय mfn. hydro-quinone Chem. उद-विज्वरा . 2 (of or pertaining to the hydro h. di-acetate उदविज्वरा द्वि-शक्तीय n. 
meter) तरलमान-, तरलमानीय mfn. ___h.di-ethyl ether उदविज्वरा द्वि-दक्षुल hydrometry तरलमिति . 
दक्ष m. hydron black Col. Ind. उदा काल m. h.di-methyl ether उदविज्वरा द्वि 
h. black-blue उदा कृष्ण-नील m. 
- प्रोदल दक्षु m. h. blue उदा नील m. 
h. mono-methyl ether उदविज्वरा h. bordeaux उदा कपिशक m. 
एक-प्रोदल दक्षु m. h. brown उदा बभ्रं m. 
hydro-rubber Chem. उद-धषि m. h. dark blue उदा असित नील m. hydro-salt Chem. उद-लवण n. h. green उदा हरि m. 
hydro-selenide Chem. उद-मेचेय 1. h. navy blue उदा नाविक नील m. hydro-silicate Chem. उद-सकतीय n. h. olive उदा तैलबदर m. 
hydro-silicon Chem. उद-सैकता f. h. olive-green उदा तैलबदर-हरि m. hydro-sol Chem. जल-लयन ". 
483 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
Jin. 
M. 
us 
m. 
hydro-sorbic Chem. उद-गिरिप्रभूजिक hydrous सजल mfn. 
___Mfn. 
anhydrous 757 mfn. hydrosphere वारिमण्डल n. 
hydrous wool fat=adeps lanac hydro-stat जल-स्थाप्m . 
__hydrosus Pharm. शुद्धोर्णा-वपा f. hydrostatic तरलस्थैतिक mfn. 
(purified wool fat) h. balance (a balance for weigh- hydrox-armic (bydroxyl + amine + 
ing substances in water to -icChem. उदजा-तिक्तिक mfn. ascertain their specific gravi- hydrox-amino- Chem. GGETT-fagat ties) उत्प्लवनतुला f., तरलस्थैतिक-तुला hydrox-amino adj. Chem. उदजा-तिक्ती, 
उदजा-तिक्तीक mfn. h. head Hydraul. (vertical height hydr-oxide Chem. उद-जारेय n. of a column) तरलस्थैतिक उत्सेध hydroximic-hydroxamic 
hydroxine yellow L=amacid h. paradox तरलस्थिति-विरोधाभास m. yellow T h. pressure Phys. तरलस्थैतिक निपीड hydroxy adj. Chem. उदजार mfn. 
hydroxy- Chem.. (hydroxyl) उदजार hydro-statics तरल-स्थैतिकी. 
h.-aceto-phenone (ortho, para) hydro-sulphate Chem. उद-शुल्बीय ?. 
उदजार-शुक्त-दर्शा. (ऊर्व, परा) hydro-sulphide Chem. उद-शुल्बेय. h. acid उदजार अम्ल hydro-sulphite Chem. उद-शुल्बित n. h.-anthra-quinone उदजार-विक्ष hydrosulphite discharge green विज्वरा. 
Col. Ind. उदशल्बित मोचन हरि m. 
h.-benz-aldehyde (ortho, meta, h. discharge orange उदशुल्बित मोचन para) उदजार-धूप-सुव्युद m. (ऊर्ध्व, 
नारंगm. 
सम, परा) h. discharge pink उदशुल्बित मोचन' । h.-benzoic acid (ortho, meta, 
आप M. 
para) उदजार-धूपिक अम्ल १. (ऊर्व, hydro-sulpho-cyanic Chem. उद-शुल्ब सम, परा) 
श्यामिक mfn. 
0-h.-benzyl alcohol ऊ-उदजार-धूपल hydro-sulphurated = hydro-sul सुषव m. 
phureted Chem. ge-trafia mfn. B-h.-butyric acid आ-उदजार-घृतिक hydro-sulphurous Chem. उद-शुल्बार्य अम्ल 1. 
h.-di-methyl-benzene उदजार-द्वि hydro-sulphuryl Chem. उद-शुल्बारिल प्रोदल-धूपेन्या . 
0-h.-di-phenyl (o-phenyl-phenol) hydro-telluric acid Chem. उद-बंगकिक ऊ-उदजार-द्वि-दर्शल n. (ऊ-दर्शल-दर्शव) 
__ अम्ल . 
p-h.-di-phenyl (p-phenyl-phe hydro-terpene Chem. उद-सरलेन्य .. nol) प-उदजार-द्वि-दर्शल n. (प-दर्शल hydrotropism Biol. जलावर्तना f. 
दर्शव) 
484 
__mfn. 
TATA दार 
.. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
h-dodecanic acid - sabinic phate ८उदजार-विज्वरवी दहातु शुल्बीय ____acid उदजार-द्वादशीन्यिक अम्ल N. 
h.-eth-oxy-ethyl ethyl ether 8h.-quinoline-5-sulphonic 
उदजार-द-जार-दक्षुल दक्षुल दक्षु m. 
___acid उदजार-विज्वरवी-५-शुल्बायिक 2-h-ethyl-amine २-उदजार-दक्षुल 
अम्ल n. तिक्ती . 
hydroxyl Chem. उदजारला. h.-hydro-quinone triacetate hydroxylamineChem. उदजारल-तिक्ती/. 
उदजार-उद-विज्वरा त्रिशुक्तीय १. 
h. hydro-chloride उदजारलतिक्ती h.-ketone उदजार-शौक्ता . 
उद-नीरेय .. h.-lactone उदजार-दुग्धा f. 
h. sulphate उदजारलतिक्ती शुल्बीय . h.-malonic acid (tartronic acid) hydroxylate vb. Chem. (to intro 
उदजार-उत्कोलायिक अम्ल . (न्यास duce hydroxyl into a compound वायिक अम्ल) 
or radical, usually by replace h.-methyl-glyoxaline hydro ment of hydrogen) उदजारलन n. 
chloride उदजार-प्रोदल-मतिष्वी उद- hydroxylation Chem. उदजारलन .. नीरेय . 
hydroxylic Cbem. उदजारलिक mfn. 2 h.-naphthionic acid २-उदजार- hydroxylization = hydroxylation 
उत्तरलगन्धिक अम्ल n. 
hydroxylize=hydroxylate vb. 2h.-3-naphthoic acid २-उदजार- Hydrozoa Z00l. (a class contain 
३-उत्तैलिक अम्ल . . 
___ing hydra) जलीयक-वर्ग m. h.-oleic उदजार-म्रक्षिक mfn. -hydryl -उदल p-h.-phenyl-mercuric chloride hyd-urilate Chem. उद-मिहीय . 
प-उदजार-दर्शल-पारदिक नीरेय . hyd-urilic Chen. उद-मिहिक mfn. p-h-propenyl-benzene प-उदजार- hyena-hyaena तरक्षु m. (ancient 
प्रमेदेन्यल-धूपेन्य. 
____word) 8-h.-propio-nitrile आ-उदजार-प्रमेद- hyetograph वर्षालिख m. 
भूयिल m. 
hygiene स्वास्थ्य-विद्या, स्वास्थिकी (from h.-propio-phenone (ortho, स्वस्थ healthy), स्वास्थ्य-रक्षा f. 
para) उदजार-प्रमेद-दर्शाf.(ऊर्व, परा) hygienic स्वास्थ्य-, स्वास्थ्यकर min. 2-h-quinoline २-उदजार-विज्वरवी h. condition स्वास्थ्यकारि-अवस्था. 
hygrine Chem. (obtained from coca 8 h.-quinoline (oxine) उदजार leaves) त्यचेतनी . __ विज्वरवी . (तिग्मी) 
hygro- उन्द 8h.-quinoline -5-azo-4-ben- hygro-deik Phys. उन्द-दर्श m. 
Zene-sulphonic acid उदजार- hygro-graph उन्द-लिख m. विज्वरवी-५-अज-४-धूपेन्य-शुल्बायिक अम्ल hygro-meter उन्द-मान m. 
hair h. केशोन्दमान m. 8h.-quinoline potassium sul- kiln h. आपाकोन्दमान m. 
here 
1. 
485 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
paper h. पत्रोन्दमान m. 
black henbane (a deadly poison hygrophyte Biogeog. उन्दोद्भिद्. 
for fowls) कुक्कुटविष m. hygroscope Phys. Bra m. 
hyper-acidity TELEMAT f. hygroscopic I greitu mfn. - hyper-activity Zool. afafurarietat f. 
2 (absorbing moisture) उन्दचूष hyperaemia अधिरक्तता . mfn. 
hyperalgebra=linear algebra pin Hyla Zool. q atfat f. (sarfe for eta atturotan. 
eta genus) 
hyperbola Math. Fatra n. (fat Hylidae Zool. HF-T m. 
gratis, shortened from #ra afat hymenium Bot. TaT m. ( T* 
more than onetsi sir eccentri 'membranous cover) 
.city) Hymenolepididae (the genital hyperbolic function Math. Terasa 
pores cannot be made out by feta n. ordinary examination) गूढयोनि-वंश hyperboloid Geom. अधीन्द्रज n. m. 
hyperboloidal Geom. getrauta mfn. Hymenolepis [attaatfa f. (Erfa for hypercalcemia Med. arquiafcat f. 
प्रजाति genus) 
hyperfunction Zool. अतिकार्यता. H. diminuta लघु गूढयोनि m. hypergenesis अतिवृद्धि f. 
H. nana वामन गूढयोनि m. hypergenitalism Zool. अतिजननग्रंथि Hymenomycetes=Agaricales Bot. funt f. 
1917 n. (FTTT order) 
hyperglycemia #fahercatat f. Hymenoptera Zool. (having mem Hypericales=Parietales 
branous wings) F ar: m. pl. hyperisotonic=hypertonic Physiol. hyo- (hyoid) fan 
fara mfn. hyoid Anat. Part 11. 
___hypermetropia Med. पश्चनाभिता f. hyoidean arch Zool, fact-279 m. hyperoxide=peroxide Chem. af hyoideus nerve Zool. faze f. 
Ta n. hyomandibular Anat., Zool. i (per- hyper-parasite Biol. 59-4201tat (-*FT) 
taining to the hyoid arch and m. 
mandible) द्विताधरहानव्य mfn. hyper-parasiticism (a parasite of 2 (pertaining to the dorsal seg- another parasite) geetfauftfahr, ment of the hyoid arch in 59-Teofaat f. fishes) द्वितोत्तरखण्डीय mfn. 
hyperphoria Med. उपर्याविवतिषा. hyoscyamus (hyoscy.)=hyoscyami hyperthyroidism Med. favetuiferar f. 
folia=hyoscyamus leaves= hypertonic=hyperisotonic Physiol. henbane leaves Pharm. Fericfaq- aferarea mfn. 
497 n. 
hyper-trophy Bot. (a condition of Hyoscyamus niget=henbane= overgrowth) ofaqfeat f. 
486 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
n. 
hypertrophy vb. afarasta n. 
hypodermis Bot. 2:7T m. hypertropia Med. 3qufafaat f. hypofunction Zool. हीनकार्यता f. hyper-vitaminosis Med. अधि-जीवतिता hypogaeic acid Chem. भूचणिक अम्ल ". 
(भूचण=Hindi मूंगफली Arachis hy hypha Bot. (thread-like element of pogeae) 
the mycelium of a fungus) *99477 hypogastric Anat. Etoe mfn. 
h. region OT See m.. hyphen (German Bindestrich) Therf. hypogeal (germination) Bot. #f44 hypho- 
mfn. Hypho-mycetes Bot. 479-9490 hypogenesis Zool. tare f. 
n. pl., 2017 at m. (af class) hypogenitalism Zool. हीनजननग्रंथिक्रिय hypnone Pharm. FETT f. 
of hypnotic स्वापक mfn. 
hypoglossal nerve Zool. अधोजिह्व-चेता hypnotic barbital=veronal F919- f. 
5 m. 
hypogynous Bot. अधोजाय mfn. hypo-Chem. 34 
hypogyny Bat. अधोजायता f. hypo Photog. (sodium hyposulphite) hypo-iodite Chem. 54-5f7aa n. 
Tefaa 11. 
hypoisotonic=hypotonic Zool. 377 hypo-antimonate Chem. 3415ft n. बल्य mfn. hypobasal Bot, wafa mfn. 
hypo-nitrite Chem. 59-fua n. hypo-blast Embryol., Zool. (inner hypo-nitrous acid Chem. 39-77227 471 
or lower layer) TFT m. 
n. hypo-blast Zool. EFTER 
hypoparathyroidism हीनपरागलग्रंथिता hypo-bromite Chem. 34-efia n. hypo-chlorite Chem. 39-4fer n. hypo-pepsinia उप-पाचियता. hypo-chlorous Chem. 39-4f7of mfn. hypo-pharynx=lingua Zool. fortf. hypocotyl Bat. (the portion below hypophosphite of sodium Chem. 
the cotyledons) stats 97 n. 
TEE-3477faa n. hypocrateriform = hypocrateri- hypophysis 1 Anat.=hypophysis 
morphous Bot. TARTET mfn. cerebri=pituitary body quity 
(united claws' of the gamopeta lous corolla enclosed in the 2 Bot. Hatalm. calyx tube) 
hypophysis cerebri=pituitary Hypoderma Bot. अधश्चर्मकति f. (-ति body Anat. पोषकाय m. 
for wife genus) 
hypostomatous Zool. petua mfn. H.diana सामान्य अधश्चर्मक m. hypostome Zool. अधोमुख . hypodermal=subcutaneous Zool. hypotenuse Math. of m. 
777 mfn. 
hypothec Law उपप्राधि m. 
487 
m. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
hypothecary (right) Law उपप्राधीय mfn. tion of the thyroid body) हीनगल hypothecate vb. उपप्राधीयन M. 
ग्रंथिता f. hypothecated sustatua mfn. hypotonic=hypoisotonic Physiol. hypothecation La उपप्राधीयन 1. ____ ऊन-बल्य mfn. ___ letter of h. उपप्राधीयन-पत्र . hypoxanthin Biochem. उपपीति . hypothecatory=hypothecary 34- Hyracoidea Zool. farfarerest:, (they are 
प्राधीय mfn. 
___very timid) भीरुकाः M.pl. hypothesis उपकल्पना 
hyrax Zool. भीरुक m. hypothetical औपकाल्पनिक, उपकल्पित mfn. hysteresis Phys. मन्दायन . hypothetical construction औपकाल्प- hysteresis testing machine मन्दायन 
निक-रचना . 
परीक्षित्र n. hypothetical proposition औपकाल्पनिक hysteretic Elec. मन्दायन-, मन्दायनीय mfn. 
प्रस्थाप्य . 
hy-vac Phys. (high vacuum) अतिशून्यक hypothyroidism Med. (deficient ac- 11. 
m. 
I Chem. I (iodine) जं (जम्बुकी) 
i. pink Col. Ind. हिम आपद्म m. 2 (iso-) स 
i.-proof हिम-सह mfn. i-=iso- Chem. स 
Iceland spar Mineral. हिमवर्ष-धात्विया. -ia Chem. (added to names of ele- ichneumon fiy Zool. पाखटिपतंग m. 
__ments, for forming names of Ichneumonidae Zool. आखेटिपतंगवंश ___oxides)-जा. -iasis -रोग m., -रुजा. 
-ichthyes Zool. -मत्स्याः iatro- अगद 
ichthyol Pharm. मत्स्यैल 1. (मत्स्य+तैल iatro-chemist अगद-रसायज्ञ m. ____oleum) iatro-chemistry अगद-रसायन . 
ichthyolate Chem. मत्स्यैलीय . -ic Chem. (denoting a higher valency -ichthyolic -मत्स्य लिक mfn. ___than -ous) -इक 
ichthyology मत्स्य-विद्या, मात्सिकी. ice हिम 1. (snow शीन n.) 
ichthyosaurus Paleontol. मत्स्य-सरट m. i. black Col. Ind. हिम काल m. iconoscope मूर्तीक्षm. i. bordeaux Col. Ind. हिम कपिशक icosahedron Geom. विशानीक M. 
m. 
-ics (a science or system)-विद्या, इकी i. calorimeter हिम-उषमान m. 
(with výddhi in the first syllable i. chamber हिम-वेश्म . 
as in अान्वीक्षिकी) i-cold adi. हिम-शीत mfn. 
-ide Chem. (used in names of com i. factory हिम-निर्माणी . 
· pounds, specif. in naming binary i.-making machine हिम-निर्मात्र,n. compounds) -एय . 
488 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
ideal n. आदर्श m. 
friend or foe) मि. अ. अ. (मित्रामित्रा adj. 164fe mfn. 
भिज्ञान .. ideal gas=perfect gas Physical if possible यदि शक्य __Chem. आदर्श-वाति M. 
-igerous=-gerous -भृत् ideal wine tonic Pharm. आदर्श दाक्षिरा ignite vb. I (to set on fire) उज्ज्वालन 
बल्य 2. 
n. idem तदेव 
2 (to heat strongly) उत्तापन 1. -idene Chem. -एयेन्य 7. 
ignition I उज्ज्वालन n. identical एकसम mfn. 
2 उत्तापन . 
i. furnace उत्तापन-भ्राष्ट्र . identically एकात्म्येन 
i. point उत्तापांक m. identically equal=equal in all 
i. point tester उत्तापांक-परीक्षित्र n. respects-congruent Math. सर्वा 
i. spoon उत्ताप-नुवm. ङ्गसम Mfn. 
i. stand उत्ताप-स्थामn. identification अभिज्ञान 1. 
i. switch Automobile GEITUT #faza i. card अभिज्ञान-पत्रक 1. 
m. i. mark अभिज्ञान-चिह्न n. 
ignorance ITT 11. i. of friend or foe (I.F.F.) Radar 
ignore vb. उपेक्षण 1. मित्रामित्र-अभिज्ञान 1. (मि.अ.प्र.) 
ignored उपेक्षित mfn. identify vb. अभिज्ञान n. 
ignoring उपेक्षण . identity I अभिज्ञान n. 
ilkka (इक्का)=ekka 2 ऐकात्म्य. 
I1 (illinium) Chem. पि (पिविरला) -idine (-ide + -ine) Chem.-reftf. 
-il, -ile Chem. -इल idioblast Biol. (hypothetical struc- ileum Anat. शेषान्त्रक 1. 
___tural unit of the cell) कोशाघट m. ilia Anat. p. of ilium idioplasm-germ plasm Biol. बीजरस iliac artery Anat. पृष्ठनिनम्ब-रोहिणी . 
m. 
iliac bone=ilium idiosome=idioblast Biol. कोशाकाय ilio-hypogastricnerve Zool. पृष्ठनितंब 
अधोजठरचेता .(may be shortened to idonic acid (Lat. idem a the same नितंब-अधोजठरचेता) 
+gulonic) Chem. तद्-गुडायिक अम्ल ilium=iliac bone Anat. पृष्ठनितम्बास्थि 
m. 
m. 
idose (idonic+ - ose) तद्-गुडधु n. illegal अवैध mfn. idrosis=hidrosis स्वेद m. 
illicit x (improper) अनु चित mfn. i.e.(that is) अर्थात् 
2 (not permitted) अननुज्ञात mfn. I.F. (insufficient funds) रा. अ. (राशिर् illinium=florentium Chem. पिविरला 
अपर्याप्तः) I.F.F. Radar (indentification of illuminant-luminous 
489﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
illuminate=luminate 
imbrication=imbricating Zool. illuminated fountain Phys. प्रभासित प्रान्तछादन, खपरीछादन . 
उत्सn. 
imbricative=imbricate illumination प्रभासन, चकासन . imide Chem. वितिक्तेय ?. ill-use दुष्प्रयोग m. 
imidic Chem. वितिक्तेयिक mfn. illusion भ्रम m. 
imido- Chem. वितिक्तेय illustrate vb. निदर्शन. 
imido adj. fafafeli mfn. illustrated frafarct min. 
imine Chem. वितिक्ती। illustration I चित्र n. 
imino- Chem. वितिक्ती 2 (sample) निदर्शन 1. 
imino adj. fafaqalai mfn. illustrative निदर्शनात्मक, निदर्शी (-इन) imitation अनुकृति f. 
mfn. 
imitation cinnabar Col. Ind. अनुकृति i. election निशि निर्वाचन n. 
हिंगुल m. ilmenite-titanic iron ore Mineral. immature अप्रौढ, अपरिपक्व mfn. 
अयोरंजजारिज m. (-इज for खनिज i. stage कुमारावस्था f., कौमार n. mineral) 
immeasurable अमेय mfn. image I मूर्ति, प्रतिमूर्ति . 
immedial Dyes अनान्तर mfn. 2 (reflection) प्रतिबिम्ब n. 
immedial black Col, Ind. अनान्तर image on the retina दृमूर्ति f. 
काल m. image space Optics प्रतिमूर्ति-वरिमा i. blue अनान्तर नील m. 
m. 
i. blue-grey अनान्तर नील-धूसर m. imaginary (unreal, impossible) #799 i. bordeaux अनान्तर कपिशक m. 
निक mfn. 
i. brilliant black अनान्तर भासुर imagination कल्पना f. 
काल m. imagine vb. I कल्पन. (Hindi कल्पना i. brilliant carbon अनान्तर भासर 
करना) 
प्रांगार m. 2 Math. परिकल्पन . 
i. brilliant green अनान्तर भासुर हरि imagoZool. पूर्ण .. 
m. imbibe pb. अन्तश्चूषण n. 
i. bronze अनान्तर कांस्य m. imbibition theory अन्तश्चूषण-वाद m. i. brown अनान्तर बभ्र m. imbricate vb. Zool. प्रान्तछादन, खर्परी i. carbon अनान्तर प्रांगार M. 
___ छादन n. 
i. cutch अनान्तर-गायत्री f. imbricate Bot. (irregularly over i. dark blue अनान्तर असित नील m. 
lapping) अनियमछादी (-इन्) mfn. i. dark brown अनान्तर असित बघ् m. imbricate=imbricated=imbrica i. dark green अनान्तर असित हरि m. 
tive Zool. छन्नप्रान्त, खपरीछन्न mfn. i. deep green अनान्तर गाढ हरि m. (खरी tile) 
i.direct blue अनान्तर अनाश्रित नील imbricated Bat. अनियमछन्न mfn. 
m. 
490 
ARE 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
i. fast field grey अनान्तर स्थिर सेना immune I (resistant to) प्रतीकारी (-इन्) 
धूसर m. 
mfn. i. field grey अनान्तर सेना धूसर m. 2 (protected against) sfatarea mfn. i. green अनान्तर हरि m. 
immunifacient (producing immu i. green-blue अनान्तर हरि-नील m. nity: said of diseases, which pro i. indogen अनान्तर निनीलजन M. duce immunity against themsel i. indone अनान्तर निनीला f. 
ves) आत्मप्रतीकारी (-इन्) mfn. i. indone violet अनान्तर निनीला immunification प्रतीकारिजनन । 
नीललोहित m. 
immunity I Med. प्रतीकारिता. i. khaki अनान्तर धूलि. 
2 Adminis. विमुक्ति . i. maroon अनान्तर नीचरक्त m. immunization (rendering immune) i. new blue अनान्तर नव नील m. प्रतीकारि-जनन । i. olive अनान्तर तलबदर m. 
immunizator (that which renders i. orange अनान्तर नारंग m. 
immune) प्रतीकारिजन m. i. orange brown अनान्तर नारंग बभ्र immunize vb. प्रतीकारिजनन n. 
m. 
immuno- (immunity) प्रतीकार i. prune अनान्तर वातामबदर m. immunogen (a bacterial extract or i. pure blue अनान्तर शुद्ध नील m. cell free from toxin) अविषप्रतीकारजन i. purple अनान्तर नीलारुण m. 
m. i. red-brown अनान्तर रक्त-बभ्रm. immunogenic (producing immu i. skyblue अनान्तर आकाश-नील m. nity) प्रतीकारजन mfn. i. violet अनान्तर नीललोहित m. immunology starfait f. i. yellow अनान्तर पीत m. 
immuno-reaction (the reaction that i. yellow-brown अनान्तर पीत-बभ्र takes place between an antigen 
m. 
and its antibody) प्रातीकारिक-प्रति i. yellow-olive अनान्तर पीत-तैलबदर क्रिया, प्रतिप्रतिक्रिया 
m. 
immuno-therapy (treatment by the immediate सद्यस्क mfn. 
production of immunity) प्रतीकार immediately तत्काल 
चिकित्सा . immediately before सद्यः पूर्व immunotoxin (an antitoxin) sfafaa immersion निमज्जन 1. 
2. immiscible=unmixable अमिश्य mfn. impact Math. अभिघट्टन . immobile अचलिष्णु mfn. 
impari-pinnate Bot. असम-पक्षवत् mfn. immortal अमर mfn. 
impenetrable = imperviable=im immovable अचल mfn. 
pervious अवेध्य, अप्रवेश्य mfn. immovable joint=synarthrosis imperceptibility अतीन्द्रियता f. 
स्थिर सन्धि m. 
imperceptible अतीन्द्रिय, असंलक्ष्य mfn. immovable property अचल-सम्पति . (ancient word) 
491 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
पुष्प n. 
imperceptibly अलक्षित 
imports Com. प्रवेश्य n. imperfect अपूर्ण mfn. 
impose vb. आरोपण . imperfect joint-immovable joint imposed आरोपित min. ___Zool. अचल सन्धि, स्थिर सन्धि m. imposition आरोग्णn. imperfect flower Bot. अपूर्ण पुष्प, एककेसर . of costs (upon a party litigant 
___ in the suit) व्ययारोपण . imperial blue Col. Ind. सम्राड़ नील m. i. of disability अयोग्यता-आरोपण n. 
i. dark blue सम्राइ असित नील m. impossible अशक्य mfn. i. green सम्राड् हरि m. 
impossible=unreal = imaginary i. red सम्रा रक्त m. 
काल्पनिक mfr. i. red violet सम्राड रक्त नीललोहित m. impost Com. I कर m. i. scarlet सम्राट् शोग M. 
2 प्रवेश्य-कर m. (especially levied i. yellow सम्राट् पीत m. 
on imports) imperial yard सम्राड यष्टि f. 
impregnate vb. व्यापन . impermeable अनतिवेध्य mfn. 
impregnated व्याप्त, व्यापित mfn. impersonal Com. अवैयक्तिक min. impregnation Chem. व्यापन ।. 
i. account अवैयक्तिक-लेखा 
impress vb. Phys. (impress a force i. ledger अवैयक्तिक-प्रपंजी. 
or velocity upon) प्रारोपण 1. imperviable=impervious = impe- impressed force Phys. पारोपित बल N. 
netrable अवेध्य, अप्रवेश्य mfn. impressed velocity आरोपित प्रवेग m. impinge vb. I Phys. अभिहनन ।. impression of the thumb अंगुष्ठ-पद. ____2Math. आघट्टन n. (collide संघट्टन) (Pali अंग टु-पद) implement I साधन 1. 
imprest Com. अग्रदाय m. 2-instrument उपकरण 1. 
i. system of petty cash क्षुद्र रोक implication उपलक्षगा f. 
अग्रदाय पद्धति implicit function Math. अस्पष्ट श्रित imprison rb. बन्दीकरण, कारावासन . 
improper fraction Math. (whose implied ध्वनित mfn. 
numerator is greater than the imply ob. उपलक्षण, ध्वनन 1. (ध्वनति denominator) महांश भिन्न m. 
___ ancient word) 
impulse I (of a nerve) Physiol. प्रेरणा import vb. Com. statt 1. (from 
causative प्रवेशयति) 
2 Phys. प्रणोद m. import n. Com. प्रवेश्य 1. 
impulsive Phys. प्रणोदी (-इन्) mfn. __i. duty प्रवेश्य-कर m. 
i. force one n. i. merchant प्रवेश्य-वणिक् m. impure अशुद्ध, अपवित्र mfn. importance महत्त्व, गुरुत्व n. 
impurity अशुद्धि, अशुद्धता f., मल n. important गुर्वर्थ, महत्त्वपूर्ण mfn. imputation अभ्यारोप m. 
imported Com. safarei mfn. in. (inch) प्रा. (प्रांगुल) 
492 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
In (indium) Chem. ने (नैलातु) 
i. of taxation करापात m. -in Chem. -इ. 
incident I adi. Statistics आयातित mfn. in abeyance prefira mfn. 
___ 2 2. आपात 12., (event) घटना f. in accordance with -अनुसार incident Phys. आपाती (-इन्) mfn. in accordance with law विध्यनुसार i. ray आपाती रश्मि ॥. inaccuracy अयथार्थता, अपरिशुद्धता . incidental I आपाति-,आपाती (-इन्) mfn. inaccurate अयथार्थ, अपरिशुद्ध fu. 
2 प्रानुषङ्गिक Mfn. inactivate vb. अकर्मण्यन . 
i. charges आनुषङ्गिक व्यय m. inactivating bath and rack अकर्मण्यन incinerate vb. भस्मीकरण . 
तापन तथा निलय m. 
incinerating burner भस्मीकारी दाहक inactive अक्षिप्र, अकर्मण्य, अक्रिय mfn. 
i. partner Com. अकर्मण्य भागी (-इन्) incineration भस्मीकरण , 
m. 
incinerator HEHET n. inadmissible (value) Math. The incipient ITHATOT mfn. (present 
Min. 
active participle) in advance अग्रे 
in-circle Math. #reaat n. inanimate निर्जीव, अचेतन mfn. incision Surg. भेदन N. (from सुश्रुत) inanimate object अचेतन पदार्थ m. incisor Zool. कर्तनदन्त m. inattentive अनवधानी (-इन), शून्यमनस्क inclinable clamp प्रवण्य संघरm. 
mfn. 
inclination I Ophthalmol. अभिनमन । in-between #FITT 
2 Matb. नति. in bond Com. बन्धयुक्त 
inclination angle=dip angle Phys. incandesce vb. उत्तापदीपन 1. 
अभिनति-कोण M. incandescence उत्तापदीप्ति । 
inclination joint Micros. अभिनति-सन्धि incandescent उत्तापदीप्त mfn. 
m. i. electric lamp उत्ताप विधु द्दीप m. inclined अभिनत mfn. i. lamp उत्ताप दीप m. 
i. away परानत mfn. i. mantle उत्ताप-प्रावार m. 
i. mirror Phys. अभिनत दर्पण m. incanus Bot. धूसर mfn. 
___i. plane Mech. अभिनत समतल . incendiary Mil. (sets fire to sur- inclining to the right Drill afferata: 
rounding objects) दाही (-इन्) mfr. include vb. अन्तरावेशन 1. incentre Math. अन्तःकेन्द्र n. (as of a included अन्तविष्ट, अन्तराविष्ट mfn. 
circle inscribed in a triangle) included angle Math. मध्यस्थ कोण, inch (in.) प्रांगुल m. (प्रा.) 
अन्तर्गत कोण m. in-charge Adminis. प्रभारी (-इन्) m. including=inclusive of=together inchoate instrument Com. असम्पूर्ण with समेत 
विलेख m. 
inclusion अन्तरावेश m. incidence Econ. आपात m. 
inclusion body Biol. I अन्तर्भूत काय m. 
493 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
2 (granule in a cell infected with increase and decrease Math. वृद्धि virus विषाण) वैषाणव कण m. 
ह्रास m. inclusions Bot. अन्तर्वस्तु . 
increment afa f. inclusive method Statistics समावेशि- incremental ratio Math. वृद्धि-निष्पत्ति 
रीति. incombustible अदाह्य mfn. 
incrust=encrust vb. पर्पटीछादन, पर्पटी income Com. आय m. 
भवन ॥. i. and expenditure आय-व्यय m. incrustation=crust quat f. i. tax प्राय-कर m. 
incrustations of salt Bot. लवण-पपंटी earned i. अजित प्राय m. unearned i. अनजित पाय m. 
incubation feratpro n. incommensurable Math. असंमेय mfn. incubation period Zool. डिम्बोषण incompatible I असंगत mfn. 
अवधि m. 2 Pharm., Med. (incapable of be. incubator डिम्बौषक m. 
ing put or used together) अ- incumbent of an office पदधारी (-इन्) संयोज्य mfn. 
m. incomplete अपूर्ण, असंपूर्ण mfn. incus=anvil Anat. निघाति 
i. cleavage=partial cleavage ind- Chem. feraitan 
=meroblastic cleavage Zool. indalizarine Col. Ind. frafa forest 
अपूर्ण भाजन. i. combustion अपूर्ण दहन n. 
i. green facterfaxifoot fe m. i. flower Bot. असंपूर्ण पुष्प . indamine (indigo+amine) Col. Ind. incompressible असंपीड्य mfn. 
निनीलतिक्ती . inconceivable अचिन्त्य mfn. 
i. blue निनीलतिक्ती नील m. inconsistency विरोध m., अंसगति, विरो- indanthrene (indigo+anthracene) 
धिता 
Col. Ind. निलीलक्षामेण्य ॥. inconsistent असंगत, विरोधी (-इन्)। i. black निनीलक्षामेण्य काल m. inconspicuous अनभिदृश्य mfn. 
i. blue निनीलक्षामेण्य नील m. in contact संस्पृष्ट mfn. 
i. blue-green निनीलक्षामेण्य नील-हरि incontravention of -प्रतिकूल 
m. incoordination Zool. असहकारिता /. i. bordeaux निनीलक्षामेण्य कपिशक m. incoordination of muscles afi i. brilliant green FFT TTTETTHUTT ___ असहकारिता f.. 
. भासुर हरि m. incorporate vb. समामेलन n. 
____i. brilliant violet निनीलक्षामेण्य incorporated समामेलित mfn. 
• भासुर नीललोहित m. incorrect अशुद्ध mfn. 
i. brown निनीलक्षामेण्य बभ्र m. incorrectly अशुद्धतया, अशुद्ध 
i. copper निनीलक्षामण्य ताम्र m. increase pb. वर्धन.. 
i. corinth निनीलक्षामण्य रोहित m. 
f. 
ko 
. 
494 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
m. 
___n. 
i. dark blue निनीलक्षामण्य असित नील indefinitely close to Math. अनियत 
समीप i. field grey निनीलक्षामेण्य सेना धूसर indefinitely close to one another 
Math. परस्पर अनियत समीप i. golden orange निनीलक्षामेण्य स्वर्ण indehiscent (fruits) Bot. अस्फोटी (-इन्) 
नारंग m. 
mfn. i. green निनीलक्षामेण्य हरि m. -indein (fr. indigo) -नीलिन (See i. grey निनीलक्षामेण्य धूसर m. ___xylindein) i. maroon निनीलक्षामेण्य नीचरक्त m. indemnification Com. क्षतिपूरण १., i. olive निनीलक्षामण्य तैलबदर m. क्षतिपूर्ति . i. orange निनीलक्षामण्य नारंग m. indemnifier Com. क्षतिपूरक m. i. pink निनीलक्षामण्य आपद्मm. indemnify vb. Com. क्षतिपूरग . i. printing black निनीलक्षामेण्य मुद्रण indemnifying Com. क्षतिपूरण 1. 
काल m. 
indemnity Com. क्षतिपूर्ति ., क्षतिपूर m., i. red निनीलक्षामेव्य रक्त m. 
क्षतिपूरण . i. red-brown निनीलक्षामेण्य रक्त-ब i. bond क्षतिपूर बंध m. 
m. 
i. insurance क्षतिपूर आगोप m. i. red violet निनीलक्षामेण्य रक्त नील- indene (indole + ene) Chem. निनीलेन्य ___ लोहित m. 
i. scarlet निनीलक्षामण्य शोग m. indentation n. Bot. दन्त m. i. violet निनीलक्षामेण्य नीललोहित m. independence day स्वतन्त्रता-दिवस .. 
i. yellow निनीलक्षामेण्य पीत m. independent Phys. (of arbitrary indazine Col. Ind. fratat f. : standards of measurement) F907, ind-azurine Col. Ind. निनील-नभोनीली प्रकेवल mfn. 
independent स्वतन्त्र mfn. inde = indigo colour=inde blue i. establishment स्वतन्त्र स्थापना f. 
=Indian blue न्यावनीलारक्त m. i. party Pol. स्वतन्त्र पक्ष m. (navy blue न्यवनीलारक्त) 
i. quantity Phys. स्वतन्त्र राशिm. inde blue=inde 
i. unit Phys. स्वतन्त्र एकक . . indebted ऋणी (-इन्) mfn. 
i. unit characters Zool. Fora indebtedness ऋण n., ऋणिता. 
एकक गुण m. indefinite अनिश्चित, अनियत mfn. 
i. variable Math. स्वतन्त्र चल m. i. infiorescence Bot. अनियत-पुष्पता independently स्वतन्त्र, स्वतन्त्ररूपेण 
inderjab. Pharm. इन्द्रयव . i. integral Math. अनिश्चित अनुकल indestructibility अनाश्यता, अविनाश्यता 
m. , . indefinitely अनिश्चित, अनिश्चितरूपेण, indeterminate = undeterminate 
अनियत, अनियतरूपेण, अमर्यादितरूपेण ___अनिर्धत mfn. 
495 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
index देशना . 
Indian podophyllum=Podophyl index correction Phys. देशना-शुद्धि f. ___lum emodi Bot. लघुपत्र m. indexed देशनाबद्ध mfn. 
Indian Railway Company भारत index error Phys. देशना-विभ्रम m. 
संयान-प्रमण्डल n. index historigram Statistics Indian red Col. Ind. भारतीय रक्त m. 
देशना कालिकचित्र 1. 
Indian squill=Urginea indica index hypermetropia देशन-पश्चनाभि- वन-पलांडm. 
ता. 
Indian states देशीय राज्य 1. index number Statistics देशनांक m. Indian Succession Act भारतीय index number of prices मूल्य-देशनांक उत्तराधिकार अधिनियम m. 
Indian tobacco=lobelia=emetic index of refraction Optics भुजायन weed Pharm. वमघास m. 
देशना . 
Indian vernacular middle school index of the power Math. घातांक भारतीय-भाषा-माध्यमिक पाठशाला f. 
m. 
Indian wagtail (large pied) Zool. . indi-(a combining form, from Latin कालकण्ठ खञ्जन m. 
indicum denoting indigo) निनील- Indian yellow Col. Ind. भारतीय पीत India भारत, भारतवर्ष m. 
m. India ink भारतीय-मसी f. 
India-rubber भारत-घृषि m. Indian भारतीय mfr. 
indican Chem. (a glucoside from Indian Academy of Sciences indigo....) faith that n. 
भारतीय विज्ञान-विहार m. 
indicate vb. देशन n. Indian blue=inde 
indicating calorimeter देशन-उषमान Indian coral tree Bot. पारिजात M. 
m. Indian elephant = Elephas asiati- indication Radar देशन M. ____cus Zool. भारत-हस्ती (इन) M. indication on face or screen Radar Indian Forces भारत-सेना . 
अनीक अथवा पट पर देशन 1. (Hindi) Indian hemp=cannabis गंजा = indicator=scope Radar देशक M.,देशित्र 
विजया . Indian Home Accounts भारत-गृह- indicator Mach. देशिता . ___ लेखा . 
i. diagram देशित्र-चित्र Indian ink Col. Ind. भारतीय-मसी f.. centrifuge speed i. मथित्र-वेग-देशक Indian Institute of Fruit Tech m. 
nology भारतीय फल-प्रौद्योगिकी-विद्यालय indicator dyes देशक रजक m. 
indices Statistics (index numbers) Indian Medical Service भारतीय देशनांक m. 
भैषजिक सेवा f. 
i. of business conditions व्यापार Indian mustard भारतीय सर्षप m. 
अवस्था-देशनांक m. 
m. 
496 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
i. of employment सेवायोजन-देशनांक i. new blue Col. Ind. निनील नव __ m. 
नील M. i. of industrial activity उद्योग i.-pink निनील-आपद्म m. ___ कर्मण्यता-देशनांक m. 
i. pure Col. Ind. निनील शुद्ध m. i. of production उत्पाद-देशनांक m. i. red Col. Ind. निनील रक्त m. indicial Math. घातीय mfn.. 
i. reduced Col. Ind. निनील प्रह्रासित indicial equation Math.घातीय समीकार 
m. m. 
i. salt Col. Ind. निनील लवण .. indigen D, F=induline 
i. solution Col. Ind. निनील विलयन indigenous देशीय, स्वदेशीय mfn. 
___ i. bank Com. स्वदेशीय अधिकोष m. i.substitute Col. Ind. निनील आदेश indigestible gayreu mfn. 
m. indigestion of top n. 
i. synthetic powder Col. Ind. indigo 1 Bot. नीली . 
निनील संश्लिष्ट क्षोद m. 2 Chem. निनील m. 
i. vat 60% Col. Ind. frater FUE 3 (reddish-blue, low saturation ६०% m. and low brilliance) न्यावनीलारक्त m. i. violet farefter aftaler m. (cf. navy blue न्यवनीलारक्त) 
___i. white Col. Ind. निनील श्वेत m. i, auxiliary=zinc dust Dyeing i. yellow Col. Ind. निनील पीत m. 
कुप्यातु-धूलि . 
Indigofera Bot. नीलीति f. (-ति for i. blue Col. Ind. निनील नील m. 
Forfa genus) i. brown Col. Ind. निनील बभ्रु m. I. tinctoria सामान्य नीली f. i. carmine I Col. Ind. निनील indigoferous निनीलभर mfn. 
कीटशोणी 
_indigoid निनीलाभ mfn. 2=duck blue नियंतिनील m. indigosol Col. Ind. निनीललयन n. i. carmine-blue Col. Ind. निनील indigotate निनीलीय . 
कीटशोणी-नील m. 
indigotic निनीलिक, निनील-वर्णीय mfn. i. colour=inde 
indigotin, indigotine Chem. निनीली i. copper Mineral. निनील ताम्रा . i. disulphonate Col. Ind. निनील indiguria निनीलमेह m. . 
द्विशुल्बायीय . 
indine blue 2RD= Bengal blue R i. extra Col. Ind. निनील अतिरिक्त indipurpurin (indigo + purpurin) 
m. 
Col. Ind. निनील-नीलोहि . i. extract powder, pasteCol. Ind. indirect अप्रत्यक्ष, व्यवहित, परोक्ष, अनुज 
निनील सार क्षोद, लेपी f. 
(not straight), जिह्म (crooked) i.gluten Col. Ind. निनील आश्लेषm. mfn. i. green faritet af m. 
i. arbitrage Econ. अनुजु अन्तरपणन i. grey निनील धूसर m. 
७ 
497 
32 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
i. cell division व्यवहित कोशा-भाजन indochromine Col. Ind. निनीलवर्णी. ___n. 
indochromogen Col. Ind. निनीलवर्ण i. charges Com. अन्जु प्रभार, परोक्ष जन m. 
व्यय m. 
indocyanine Col. Ind. निनीलश्यामी f. i. expenses अनृजु व्यय, परोक्ष व्यय m. indogen (indigo + - gen) Chem. i. germination Bot. व्यवहित उद्धेदन निनीलजन m. 
indogenine (indigo + - gen + i. inquiry Statistics परोक्ष अनुसन्धान -ine) Col. Ind. निनीलजनी . 
. 
indoine powder B, 2B, R, 2R= i. laying Mil. (laying of a gun indoine blue R, BB, BR pdr. 
when the objective is not and paste=indogenine visible) अदृष्ट-लक्ष्य-स्थापना, परोक्ष- indol (indigo + - 01) Chem. निनीलव M. स्थापना . 
indole Chem. निनीलवा. i. material अनुजु-सामग्री f. indole blue Col. Ind. निनीलवा नील m. i. oral investigation Statistics indoline Chem. Fariterat f. 
अप्रत्यक्ष मौखिक अनुसन्धान n. indolo- (indole) Chem. fataat i. oral method Statistics अप्रत्यक्ष indoloid निनीलवाभ mfn. . मौखिक विधि m. 
indomarine Col. Ind. निनीलसामुद्रिक m. i. tax परोक्ष कर m. 
indone blue Col. Ind. निनीला नील m. i. wages अनजु-भूति . 
indophene blue Col. Ind. निनीलदर्श indirectly परोक्षतः 
नील m. indirubin (indigo + rubin) Chem. indophenin (indigo + thiophene + 
निनीलरक्ति . 
- ine) Chem. निनीलदशि . indiscriminate slaughter अविवेक- indophenol Col. Ind. निनीलदर्शव m. 
वध M. 
i. white निनीलदर्शव श्वत M. indispensable अनिवार्य, अपरिहार्य mfn. indophor Col. Ind. निनीलभर m. 
(cf. unavoidable अनिवार्य) 
indoxyl Chem. निनीलजारल n. indium Chem. Istra m. 
indoxyl blue Col. Ind. निनीलजारल नील individual ofera m. 
m. individualistic वैयक्तिक mfn. 
i. violet निनीलजारल नीललोहित' m. individual judgment वैयक्तिक निर्णय indoxylic acid Chem. निनीलजारलिक 
m. 
अम्ल . individual letter Math. एकैक वर्ण m. induction I Logic विशेषादनुमान . individual treatment व्यक्ति-उपचार (विशेषात् सामान्यस्य अनुमानम्) ... m. 
__ 2 Automobile अन्तश्चूषण १. indivisible अभाज्य mfn. 
3 Phys. प्ररोचन 1. rinde-निनील 
i. coil Elec. प्ररोचन कुंडल . indocarbon Col. Ind. निनीलांगार m. induline Col. Ind. सुनीली f. 
498 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
i. black सुनीली काल m. 
industry department उद्योग-विभाग m. i. fat-soluble सुनीली स्नेह-विलेय m. indyl निनीलल . i. greenish सुनीली आहरिM. indylic निनीललिक Mfn. i. scarlet सुनीली शोग M. 
-ine Chem. - f. i. spirit-soluble सुनीली प्रासव-विलेय inefficiency अदक्षता f. 
m. 
inelastic अप्रत्यास्थ mfn. i. water-soluble सुनीली जल-विलेय ineligible अयोग्य, अग्राह्य fu. 
inequality असमता . indurated जरठ mfn. 
inequality of wealth Statistics off induration जारठचा. 
असमता. indusium Bot. (protecting sporan- inert अगतिक, अक्रिय, जड mfn. 
gia. बीजाणु-धानी) बीधा-गोप m. inert gas Chem. (chemically inactive industrial प्रौद्योगिक, व्यावसायिक Mfn. gas) अक्रिय वातिm. 
i. area औद्योगिक क्षेत्र n. 
inertia Math., Phys. great f. i. bank औद्योगिक अधिकोष m. 
inertia of large numbers Statistics i. chemistry प्रौद्योगिक रसायन ". महांक-जडता . i. dispute औद्योगिक विवाद m. inexact अतथ्य mfn. i. education = technical edu inexactitude अतथ्यता 
cation प्रौद्योगिक-शिक्षा - प्रौद्योगिक- inexactly अतथ्यतया, अतथ्य शिक्षा . 
inextensible Matb. अवितान्य mfn. i. engineering औद्योगिक-अभियन्त्रगा in fact वस्तुतः 
infant शिशु m. i. school = technical school infantile myxoedema शैशव श्लेष्मस्फाय 
औद्योगिक पाठशाला - प्रौद्योगिक-पाठ- m. शाला 
infantilism Med. चिरशैशव n. industrialist उद्योगपति m. 
infant mortality Statistics शिशु-मरण industrializationvb. औद्योगीकरण, उद्योग- n. 
' विकासन 1. 
infantry Mil. पत्तिसैन्य M., पदाति-सेना. industrialize vb. औद्योगीकरण, उद्योग- infant school शिश-पाठशाला, लिपि-शाला 
विकासन 1. 
f. (ancient word) industrialized औद्योगीकृत, उद्योगविकसित infection संसर्ग, संचार m. (रोगसंचार) 
__mfn. 
infection of corpuscle रुधिरकोशा-प्रवेश industrially (in industry') उद्योगे, ____ उद्योग में (Hindi) 
infectious सांसर्गिक mfn.. industrially developed उद्योग-विकसित, infectious disease संसर्ग-रोग, संसर्गज 
उद्योगे विकसित mfn. 
रोग m. industrially used उद्योग-प्रयुक्त mfn. infectorius Bot. (dye-yielding) रंग-द industry उद्योग m. 
mfn. 
499﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
inference अध्याहार m., अनमान . 
infiated I प्राध्मात mfn. inferior अधर, अवर, अधोवर्ती (-इन्) mfn. 2 Econ. स्फीत mfn. inferior calyx Bot. 497 764979 m. inflation Econ. Feilfa f. inferior oblique = obliquus in- i. of currency चलार्थ-स्फीति . 
ferior Anat. (qualifying पेशी) i. period स्फीति-काल m. अधर-तिरश्ची. 
i. tendency स्फीति-प्रवृत्ति . inferior rectus Zool. अधर-ऋजुपेशी . infiationary Econ. स्फीतिकारी, स्फायी inferior vena cava = postcava (-इन्) mfn. 
Anat. अधर-महानीला f. 
i. tendency स्फीतिकारि-प्रवृत्ति f. infiltration Mil. निपावन ॥. 
inflationist Econ. स्फीतिवादी (-इन ) m. infinite अनन्त, (unlimited number) inflorescence Bot. पुष्पन N., पुष्पता f., 
असंख्य mfn. 
पुष्पप्रदेश m. (floral region) i. geometric series गुणोत्तर अनन्त I (general arrangement of flowers 
श्रेढी 
on an axis) पुष्पविन्यास m. i. number अनन्तसंख्या / 
2 (mode of development of i. series Matb. अनन्तश्रेढी . the flowers) पुष्प-रोहणा . infinitely great अतिमहत् mfn. 
3 (flowers collectively, a flower infinitely small अत्यणु mfn. 
cluster) पुष्प-स्तबक m. infiniteness Math. आनन्त्य ., अनन्तता influence प्रभाव m. 
influential प्रभावी (-इन्) mfm. infinitesimal calculus Matb. अत्यणु influenza Med. प्रतिश्याय m. (Marathi 
कलन. 
पड़सें) infinitesimality = infinitesimal i. tablets Pharm. प्रतिश्याय-चक्रिका . 
_ness Math. अत्यणुता . 
in focus नाभित infinitesimally Math. अत्यणतया in force प्रवृत्त 
i. close अत्यणु समीप 
informal अविधिक (cf. formal सविधिक), infinitesimalness = infinitesima अरीतिक, यथारूप, यथाकार, यथावेष, यथा 
lity अत्यणुता f. 
नियम infinity I मानन्त्य 1. 
information सूचना, संसूचना f. ___2 Math. अनन्त, अनन्ती (-इन् ) m. information bureau सूचनालय m. inflammable ofisateu mfn. 
infra- अध: inflammable vapour and gas de- infraduction निचालन n. 
tector अभिज्वाल्य बाष्प तथा वाति infra-orbital plate Ophthalmol. उपलम्भक m.. 
अक्ष्यधः-पट्ट m. infiammation Med. शोथ, पाक m. infra-red Phys. (they lie just beyond inflate vb. I आध्मान 1. 
___ the red) अधोरक्त mfn. 2 Econ. स्फायन, स्फीत-करण . (ancient in front अग्रतः 
word) 
infundibuliform Bot. निवाप-रूप mfn. 
500 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
infundibulum Anat. (funnel-shap-- 
ed) निवापn. infusible (not fusible) अद्राव्य mfn. infusion=infusum (inf.) Pharm. 
(an aqueous solution obtained by steeping vegetable drugs in water below its boiling-point, and straining. Cf decoction, which is boiling and straining) आक्वाथ 
m. 
Infusoria Zool. पाक्वाथजवर्ग M. (वर्ग 
class) infusorial earth=diatomite-di 
atomaceous earth=kieselguhr 
Chem. युक्ताप्यमृद् (युक्ताप्य diatom) infusum=infusion Pharm. praty 
2. 
i. aurantii concentratum=con 
centrated infusion of orange 
peel संकेन्द्रित नारंग-शल्क-आक्वाथ m. i. buchu concentratum=con 
centrated infusion of bạchu 
संकेन्द्रित गुरुगंध-आक्वाथ m. i. calumbae concentratum = 
concentrated infusion of cal 
umba संकेन्द्रित इन्दुमूल-पाक्वाथ m. i. cascarillae concentratum = 
concentrated infusion of cas carilla संकेन्द्रित पारेचवल्क-आक्वाथ 
m. i. chiratae . concentratum = 
concentrated infusion. . of chiretta संकेन्द्रित चिरतिक्त-आक्वाथ 
m. i. cinchonae acidum concen 
tratum= concentrated acid infusion of cinchona. संकेन्द्रित विताप-अम्ल-पाक्वाथ m. 
i.digitalis concentratum संकेन्द्रित __ अंगुलक-पाक्वाथ m. i. gentianae (simple)किरात-आक्वाथ ___i. (अमिश्रित) 
i. gentianae compositum con centratum = concentrated compound infusion of gent ian संकेन्द्रित संयुक्त किरात-आक्वाथ m. i. hemidesmi concentratum - 
केन्द्रित सारिवा-पाक्वाथ m. i. quassiae concentratum == 
concentrated infusion of quassia संकेन्द्रित सूत्रकृमिघ्न-पाक्वाथ 
m. i. rhei concentratum=concen 
trated infusion of rhubarb 
संकेन्द्रित चीनरेच-पाक्वाथ m. i. rosae acidum पाटल-अम्ल-पाक्वाथ 
m. i. rosae acidum concentratum 
=concentrated acid infusion of roses संकेन्द्रित पाटल-अम्ल-आक्वाथ 
m. i. scoparii concentratum=con 
centrated infusion of scopa 
rium संकेन्द्रित संमार्जनी-क्वाथ m. i. senegae concentratum = con 
centrated infusion of senega संकेन्द्रित क्लोम्यमूल-आक्वाथ m. i. sennae concentratum=con 
centrated infusion of senna 
संकेन्द्रित रंगलता-आक्वाथ m. . i. serpentariae concentratum 
concentrated infusion of ser pentary संकेन्द्रित अहिमूल-पाक्वाथ 
m. i. uvae ursi concentratum = 
concentrated infusion of 
SOI 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
bearberry संकेन्द्रित ऋक्षबदर-आक्वाथ inguinal hernia अन्त्रवृद्धि . 
m. 
inhabit vb. संनिवसन 1. in future भविष्ये, पुरतः, अग्ने (Hindi आगे) inhalation निश्वास, श्वास m. in gear Automobile दन्तादन्ति 
inhale vb. निश्वसन, श्वसन । ingenious उपज्ञातिन् (उपज्ञा invention) inhaled निश्वसित, श्वसित nfn. 
_mfn. 
inhaler (an apparatus) aft7 n. ingenious invention चतुरोपज्ञा f. inherent सहज mfn. ingest vb. (take in for digestion) inherited पित्र्य, पित्रागत mfn. 
अन्तर्ग्रहण 
hereditary पित्रागत nfn. ingestion अन्तर्ग्रहण . 
i. character पित्र्य गुण m. ingot Mach. IN. पिण्डक n. 
inhibit vb. निरोधी 1. 2 vb. (to turn into ingots) fque inhibitable Zool. Fyrsta mfn. ' करणn. 
inhibition Zool. निरोध m., निरोधन . ingot iron = decarbonized iron inhibitive=inhibitory ____ व्यंगारित अयस् 1. 
inhibitor Zool. निरोधक m. ingot mould तूलिका . 
inhibitory=inhibitive निरोधी (-इन) ingrain (carpet) (carpet dyed in the mfn. 
grain, or before manufacture) inhibitory stimulus Zool. Farettat f. रंजितसूत्र (grain=yatn) 
-inic Chem. -इयिक mfa. (-ine+-ic; ingrain vb. I (dye with grain = not ईयिक which is -ate ईय+ -1c 
kermes) कृमिज-रंजना. 2 (to dye before manufacture) initial आदिम, प्रारम्भिक, प्राध, प्रारम्भिक सूत्ररंजन n. (grain=yarn) 
mfn., आदि ingrain adj. I (dyed with grain = i. development Civil Aviation 
kermes) कृमिज-रंजित mfn. 
__आद्य विकास m. 2 (dyed in the fibre or yarn be i. line Math. आदि-रेखा . fore being woven) सूत्ररंजित mfn. i. pulse Radar ota-pura m. (grain=yarn) 
injectableform Pharm.अन्तःक्षेप्य रूप n. ingrain black Col. Ind. सूत्रकाल m. injection 1 अन्तःक्षेप, सूच्यानिक्षेप m. (सूच्या ingrain colours (for dying yarns with a needlet fra putting in) ___ before manufacture, grain==yarn) 2 (enema) वस्तिकर्म . 
सूत्र-रंजक m. 
injurious trade Hygiene हानिकर व्यापार in (the) greatest अधिकादधिक 
m. ingredient (member of a compo- ink at f. . . und) = component संयोगांग = i. bag Zool. (of a. cuttle-fish) ... संघटक m. 
मसी-प्राशय m. ingress Phys. अन्तर्याण n. 
i. black Col. Ind. मसी काल m. ingrowth Bot. अन्तर्वर्ध'm. 
i. blue Col. Ind. मसी नील m. 
3 
302 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
- 
- 
i. pad मसी-तल्प m. 
innominatum=innominate bone i.-pot मसी-पात्र . 
नितम्बास्थि . i.-stand मसी-स्थामा . 
-inol Chem. -इव m. i.-well मसी-कप m. 
-inone Chem. -इया / inky night अंजन-तमिस्रा (cf. वर्षती- in opposite order Phys. विपरीत क्रम 
वाञ्जनं नमः) 
À (Hindi) (triangle law) inland Com. rn. स्वदेश, देशाभ्यन्तर in order यथाक्रम (Hindi क्रम में, क्रम से) 
2 adi.स्वदेशीय, देशाभ्यन्तरीय, देशस्थ mfn. inorganic chemistry अप्रांगार-रसायन i. bill स्वदेश-विपत्र, स्वदेशीय विपत्र. ., अप्रांगारिकी. i. trade स्वदेशीय व्यापार m. 
(taken) in pairs Math. fant: e) least न्यूनान्यून, ऊनादून in particular विशेषतः, विशेषरूपेण inlet hole Automobile प्रवेश-विवर। in perspective Engin. नेत्रदशात्मक inlet for ventilation Hygiene संवातन- in place of -स्थाने (Hindi के स्थान में) 
प्रवेश m. 
in practice Math. व्यवहारे (Hindi) inlet valve Atomobile प्रवेश-कपाट .. व्यवहार में in matters of विषये (Hindi के विषय में) in-put Phys. आ-दा f. innate I अन्तरजmfn. 
input is equal to output आदा-प्रदे 2 प्राकृत nfn. 
समे (प्रदा आदा के सम होती है Hindi) 3 सहज Mfm. 
inquire vb. परिपृच्छन n. inner प्रान्तर mfn. 
inquiry I परिपृच्छा . i. column Com. आन्तर स्कंभ m. 2 = investigation Statistics अनु i. end (of a scale) प्रान्तर अन्तn. संधान . i. limiting membrane Zool. inscribable Geom. अन्तलेख्य mfn. 
आन्तर सीमा-कला. 
inscribe vb. Geom. अन्तलेखन 1. i. lining अन्तरास्तर m. 
inscribed Geom. अन्तलिखित mfn. i. molecular layer Zool. आन्तर inscribed security Com. अन्तलिखित 
जालिका-स्तर m. 
प्रतिभूति . i. vascular supply Bot. आन्तर inscribed stock Com. अन्तलिखित स्कन्ध 
वाहिनी-प्रदाय m. 
m. innermost आन्तरतम mfn. 
inscription अन्तलेख m., अन्तर्लेखन 1., i. bracket Math. प्रान्तरतम अभिवार शिलालेख m. 
m. 
insect कीट m. (Hindi कीड़ा) i. layer आन्तरतम् स्तर m. 
___worm कृमि m. innervate vb. Zool. चेताप्रदान ?. Insecta Zool. alet: m.pl. innominate artery Anat. अघोग्रीव- insect flowers-pyrethrum flower 
रोहिणी 
Pharm. (pyrethrum Aower in i. bone=hipbone frafatfe n. powder is used to keep away i. vein अधोग्रीव-नीला. 
insects) कीटपुष्प . 
503 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
insecticide कीटन m. 
inspectability निरीक्ष्यता f. insection 1 (cutting in) ArmaT n. inspectable facteu mfn. 
2 (incision) भेदन . 
inspected for atfera mfn. Insectivora Zool. कीट-भुज: m.pl. inspection for CTETUT n. insectivorous plant कीटाश पादप M. i. of motor vehicles वहित्रयान insect powder कीट-क्षोद m. 
निरीक्षण .. insert vb. निवेशन 7. 
inspectional निरीक्षण inserted frage mfn. 
inspector निरीक्षक m. insertion निवेशm. 
inspectoral निरीक्षकीय mfn. i. of balance Com. अन्तर-निवेश m. inspectorate निरीक्षक-वर्ग m., निरीक्षक insertion of a muscle Ophthalmol. पद, निरीक्षक-कर्म 1., निरीक्षक-विषय m. 
पेशी-निवेश m. 
inspector general महा-निरीक्षक m, inside adj. प्रान्तर mfn. 
inspectorial adj. निरीक्षग-, निरीक्षक inside caliper आन्तर व्यासमि m. inspectress निरीक्षिका . inside-cylinder locomotive अन्ता- inspiration अन्तःश्वसन 1. 
रम्भ चलित्र n. 
inspite of सत्यपि (cf. Bengali सत्वे प्रो, in so far as यावत् (Hindi जहाँ तक, Hindi) के होते हुए भी 
जितनी मात्रा तक) 
installation अधिष्ठापन n. insoluble अविलेय mfn. 
instalment Com. प्रभाग m. almost insoluble प्रायः अविलेय instance n. दृष्टान्त m. 
mfn. 
instant क्षण m. insoluble brown Col. Ind. अविलेय instantaneous सद्यः, तात्क्षणिक mfn. 
बभ्रुm. 
instantaneously तत्क्षण i. deep blue अविलेय गाढ नील m. instantaneous water heater सद्यो-जल i. garnet अविलेय निरक्त m. 
तापक m. i. gold yellow अविलेय स्वर्ण पीत m. instar Zool. रूपा . i. orange अविलेय नारंग m. instinct नैसगिक-प्रा i. orange yellow अविलेय नारंग पीत institute संस्था, विद्यालय m. ___m. 
institute vb. संस्थापन n. i. ponceau अविलेय अधिरक्तापीत m. institution संस्था f., विद्यालय m. i. red wood अविलेय रक्त काष्ठ n. instruction निदेश m., शिक्षण n. i. xylidine ponceau अविलेय instructor शिक्षक, निदेशक m. 
काष्ठेयी अधिरक्तापीत m. 
instrument i=implement=appli i. yellow अविलेय पीत m. 
ance उपकरण n. insolvency शोधाक्षमता f: 
2 यन्त्र insolvent Law शोधाक्षम mfn. 
3 Law faca m. insomnia अनिद्रा 
4 साधन । inspect निरीक्षण . 
instrument of.... -पत्र. 
504 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
i. of instructions निदेश-पत्र n. integrable Math. अनुकलनीय mfn. instruments of war युद्ध-साधन n. 
integrand city n. in succession पूर्वानुपर 
integral Math. अनुकल m. insufficient funds Com. राशि अपर्याप्तः integral calculus Math. अनुकल कलन, insulate vb. I=isolate एकलन n.. 
चलराशि कलन . 2 पृथक्करण १. 
integral equation Math. अनु कल 3 Elec. विसंवाहन १. (संवाह-रोधन) समीकार m. non-conduction अ-संवाहन 1. integral multiple पूर्णाङ्क-अपवर्त्य .. conduction संवाहन n. 
integral number=integer=whole insulation विसंवाहन . 
___number Math. पूर्णाङ्कm. insulation resistance Elec. fariamente integrand Math. 977784 n. 
रोध m. 
integrate vb. Math. अनुकलन n. insulator विसंवाहक m. 
integration by parts Math. खण्डानु insulin Med. मधु वशि. 
कलन n. insurance आगोप m. 
integrity I (state of being complete, i. fund आगोप-प्रणीवि f. 
entirety) साकल्य 1., पूर्णता . i. policy पागोप-लेख m. 
? (state of being undivided or i. premium आगोप-प्रव्याजि m. 
unbroken) अखण्डता f. i. reserve आगोप-संचिति /. 
integument=tegument Zool. IST accident i. दुर्घटना-आगोप m. 
f., आच्छद m. employer'sliability i.स्वामि-देयता- integumentary vessel Zool. चोला 
आगोप m. 
वाहिनी f. . fire i. अग्नि -आगोप m. 
in telephonic communication health i. स्वास्थ्य-आगोप m. 
Physiol. दूरभाषवत् सम्बद्ध, दूरभाषवत् life i. जीवन-पागोप m. 
संदेशी (-इन्) marine i. सामुद्र-आगोप m. 
intelligible meaning Math. अधिगम्य social i. सामाजिक प्रागोप m. 
__अर्थ m. unemployment i. अवृत्ति-आगोप m. intense bombardment Mil, प्रचण्ड workman's compensation i. गोलक्षेपण n. 
कर्मकार-हानिपूरण आगोप m. 
intensity Phys. चंडता insure vb. आगोपन . 
intensity of gravity Phys. भ्वाकृष्टि insured आगोपित mfn. 
___ चण्डता.. insurer TT149 m. 
intensity of illumination Phys. intake vb. ग्रहण, अन्तर्ग्रहण n. 
. प्रभासन-चण्डता f. intangible अमूर्त mfn. 
intensive agriculture गहन-कृषि m. intangible assets Com. अमूर्त-सम्पत्ति . intensive blue Col. Ind. नितान्त नील m. integer=integral number Math. intensive investigation Statistics 
पूर्णाङ्कm. 
गहन अनुसंधान n. 505 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
n. 
inter- I अन्तरा- (in between two or interdependent अन्योन्याश्रित mfn. 
more things; अन्तराशृङ्गम् between interdorsal Zool. (it is posterior) the horns, अन्तरांस between पश्चोत्तर mfn. shoulders, the breast), अन्त: interest I Math. वृद्धि f., कुसीद, कलान्तर 
2 मिथ:- (mutual) inter-action मिथ:-क्रिया f. 
2 स्वार्थ m., हित १., अभिरुचि f. interauricular septum Zool. ARIKET i. column Com. वृद्धि-स्कम्भ m. 
लिन्द-पटी. 
i. suspense account Com. ff interbrain = diencephalon = tha __ लम्बित वृद्धि-लेखा . 
lamencephalon=betweenbrain compound i. चक्रवृद्धि f. 
='tweenbrain Zool. मध्य-मस्तिष्क simple i. सरल-वृद्धि . 
interface I अन्तरनीक 1. interbreeding अन्तराभिजनन 7. 
2 Physical Chem. (the boundary intercalary अन्तर्विष्ट mfn. 
between two phases) प्रावस्थान्त: intercalary growth (in a hypha) सीमा, अन्तःसीमा . 
Biol. अधिवृद्धि f. 
interfacial अन्तःसीमीय mfn., अन्तःसीमा intercartilaginous ossification interfascicular Bot. (between 
endo-chondral ossification Zool. bundles') अन्तरापूल mfn. अन्तराकास्थि अस्थीयन 1. 
interfascicular cambium Bot. intercellular channels Zool. अन्तरा- अन्तरापूल-एधा. 
कोशा-प्रणाली . 
interfere vb. I बाधन 1. (Hindi बाधा intercellular space Biol. अन्तराकोशा डालना) 
अवकाश m. 
2 Phys. मिथोघट्टन 1. intercept n. Math. अन्तःखण्ड 1. 
3 विघ्नकरण . intercept vb. Mil. अन्तारोधन . interference I बाधा f. interception Mil. अन्तारोधन . 
2 मिथोघट्टन . interceptor Mil. अन्तारोधी (-इन्) m. 3 विघ्नकरण 1., विघ्न m. ___i. fighter अन्तारोधी योधक m. interference with water supplies 
i. plane अन्तरोधि विमान 1. . जलप्रदाय-बाधा . interchange व्यतिहार m., व्यतिहरण . interfering Phy. I मिथोघट्टक mfn. 
(ancient word), निमय m. 
2 विघ्नकर mfn. interchange vb. निमयन ।. 
interim Com. मध्ये interchangeable निमेय mfn. 
i. dividend मध्ये-लाभांश m. interchanger I (an apparatus) निमात्र interior अन्तर्य mfr., अन्तर् 
. 
interior angle Geom. अन्तःकोण m. .. 2 (a person) निमाता (-तृ) m. 
interkinesis मध्यावस्था f. inter class Rly. मध्य वर्ग m. 
interlace = interweave vb. अन्तर्वयन interclavicle Zool. अन्तराक्षक m. 
2. 
506 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
interlinear gloss #rete far fevyforft f. internally in the inverse ratio Phys. interlocking system Rly. T:TTET अन्तरतः प्रतीपनिष्पत्तौ ___संहति . 
internasal gland Zool. अन्तरानास ग्रंथि intermediate अन्तःस्थ mfn. 
i. cooperation Mil. मध्य-सहकारिता internasal septum Zool. अन्तरानास 
___ पटी. i. host == secondary host Zool. international अन्ताराष्ट्रिय mfn. - द्वितीय पोषिता (-1) m. 
i. agreement अन्ताराष्ट्रिय संविदा f. i. layer Zool. अन्तःस्थ स्तर m. 
i. candle = standard candle i. pressure (i. p.) Macb. मध्यम ___Illum. अन्ताराष्ट्रिय-वति -प्रमाप-वति । 
निपीड m. (म. नि.) 
i. law=law of nations अन्ताराष्ट्रिय i. space अन्तराल . 
विधि m. i. stage I Com. अन्तःस्थ पद n. 
i. method Pharm. अन्ताराष्ट्रिय रीति 2 Zool. अन्तःस्थ अवस्था . intermedius Anat. मध्य 
i. trade अन्ताराष्ट्रिय व्यापार m. intermittent सविराम mfn. 
i. units Elec. Eng. अन्ताराष्ट्रिय एकक intermittent water supply Hygiene 
___n. सविराम जलप्रदाय m. 
internode Bot. पर्व. intermolecular Chem. अन्तराव्यूहाणु interpalpebral space Ophthalmol. in terms of Math. इन पदों में (Hindi) अन्तर्वमविकाश m., वर्त्मद्वार n. internal आभ्यंतर, प्रान्तर mfn., अन्तर्- interpapillary portion Zool. अन्तरांकुर 
i. bisector Math. प्रान्तरार्धक m. भाग m. i. carotid Zool. आन्तर-प्रैवी . interpetiolar Bot. (situated between i. check Com. आभ्यन्तर अवरोध m. two petioles) वृन्तमध्यस्थ mfn. i. ear आन्तर कर्ण, अन्तः-कर्ण m. ___interphase Biol. भाजनमध्या f. i. economics आन्तर-अर्थव्यवस्था . interpolation अन्तर्वेश m. i. indicator Chem. आन्तर देशक m. 2 Statistics आन्तरगणन 1. i. jugular vein Zool. अन्तर्मातृका f. interpolator अन्तर्वेशक m. i. management Com. प्राभ्यन्तर interpose vb. अन्तरास्थापन 
प्रबन्ध m. 
interpretation निर्वचन . i. nostril Zool. अन्तर्नासाविवर m. i. of data Statistics सामग्री-निर्वचन ।. i. structure Bot. प्रान्तर-रचना interpreter द्विभाषी (-इन्) m. (Hindi i. thymus Med. आभ्यन्तर यौवनलुप्त दुभाषिया) 
interprovincial अन्तःप्रान्तीय mfn. i. trade आभ्यन्तर व्यापार m. 
i. cooperation अन्तःप्रान्तीय-सहकारिता i. use Pharm. अन्तःप्रयोग m., अन्त: 
सेवन n. 
____i. council अन्तःप्रान्तीय-परिषद् internally अन्तरतः 
interradius axis Zool. मध्यार-अक्ष m. 
507 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
interrenal body Zool. वृक्कान्तर-काय, i. foramina. Anat. अन्तराकीकस छिद्र 
वृक्कान्त:-काय m. 
_n. inter-ring Zool. पश्च-वलय m. 
interweave=interlace interrupt vb. व्याहनन . 
intestinal bacteriophage प्रान्त्र-रोगाणु interrupted अन्तरित mfn. 
भक्ष m. interruption व्याघात m., व्याहनन n. 
i. caeca Zool. प्रान्त्रीय उण्डक m. intersect vb. मिथश्छेदन 1. 
i. canal प्रान्त्र-कुल्या . intersect = divide pb. छेदन . ___i. infection Med. प्रान्त्र-संसर्ग, प्रान्त्र 
(मिथश्छेदन) 
रोगसंचार m. intersecting lines Math. मिथश्छेदि-रेखा i. tract Anat. प्रान्त्र-स्रोत . 
intestine=bowel Anat. अन्त्र, प्रान्त्र intersecting species मिथश्छेदि-जाति f. intersection Math. मिथश्छेद m. in the first case प्रथमतः intersection of a line रेखा-मिथश्छेद in the following निम्नलिखित में 
m. 
in the greatest अधिकादधिक 
• intersegmental Zool. अन्तराखंडीय mfn., in the least न्यूनान्न्यून, ऊनादून , 
अन्तराखण्ड 
in theory सिद्धान्ते . interspace=interstice अन्तर्वरिमा (-मन्) intimate गाढ mfn. 
m.-अन्तराल. 
intimate contact गाढ संस्पर्श m., निकट interspersed अन्तःकीर्ण mfn. 
संस्पर्श m. interstice अन्तराल 1. 
intine Bot. आन्तरकवच n. interstitial Zool. (situated in the into Math. TfurTT 
interstices of a tissue) अन्तरालीय, (i) two into two (2X2) अन्तरालस्थ mfn., अन्तराल 
. २ गुणित २ i. cell अन्तरालीय-कोशा. . 
(ii) 6 into fourth root of 3 6V3 i. lamellae अन्तराल-दलीf 
६ गुणित चतुर्थमूल ३ interval अन्तराल ?., अवकाश m., अन्तर n. (iii)6 into a plus b plus G, interval of space Rly. स्थानान्तराल n. whole under the radical sign interval of time Ry. समयान्तराल. 
6Va+b+६६ गुणित क युत ख युत ग intervene vb. अन्तरयण n. 
समस्त करणीगत intervened अन्तरित mfn. 
intolerable smell असहय गन्ध m. intervention अन्तराय m., अन्तरयण ., intoxicating मादक mfn. ___अन्तरय m. 
intoxicating drug मादक द्रव्य ?. interventral Zool. (it is posterior) intra- (within) -अन्तर् (generally अन्तर् 
पश्चाधर mfn. . . 
will be treated as a suffix and not interventricular foramen Zool. as a prefix in order to distinguish 
गुहान्तार . 
it from inter- अन्तर्-, अन्तरा-) intervertebral Zool, अन्तराकीकुस mfn. intracambial (tissue) Bot..एधान्तर 
508 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
intracardiac injection हृदन्तःक्षेप m. Inula Bot. (with radiate heads) अर 
(-क्षेप for सूच्यानिक्षेप) 
शीर्षति । (-ति for प्रजाति genus) intracellular Biol. कोशान्तःस्थ mfn. 
I. helenium सामान्य अरशीर्ष m. intradermic injection चन्तिःक्षेप m. inulin (Inula + - in) अरशोषि . intrafascicular Bot. (inside the inulose अरशीर्षध . ___bundle') पूलान्तर् 
inunction Med. (applying an oint intrafascicular cambium Bot. पूलान्त ment with friction) लेपाभ्यंजन है. 
रेधा . (एधा cambium) 
invaginate vh. (to cause to infold so intramembranous Zool. कलान्तर्य Mfn. that an outer becomes an inner intramembranous ossification Zool. surface) अन्तर्वलन . 
अन्तःकल अस्थीयन n. 
invaginating edge Zool. अन्तर्वली तट intramolecular(within the molecule) m. 
Chem. व्यूहाण्वन्तर् 
_invalid I रोगदुर्बल, दुर्बल mfm. intramuscular पेश्यन्त:-- 
2 Law विधिहीन, विधिरहित, अमान्य, intramuscular injection पेश्यन्तःक्षेप m. असमर्थ min. intranuclear (mitosis) Zool. अन्तयष्टि, invariant Math. निश्चल m. 
न्यष्टयन्तर 
invasion आक्रमण. intravascular वाहिन्यन्तर 
invent vb. 3457 n. (ancient word) intravascular injection वाहिन्यन्तःक्षेप discover vb. आविष्करण 2. 
12. 
invented उपज्ञात mfn. (ancient word) intravenous सिरान्तर् 
invention उपज्ञा . intravenous injection सिरान्तःक्षेप, inventor उपज्ञाता (-त) M. 
नीलान्तःक्षेप m. 
inventory तालिका f. intricate. details Engin. दुर्गम भागक inversable प्रतीप्य mfn. 
inverse Math. प्रतीप mfn. intrinsic value Math. निजारे. inverse correlation=negative cor introduce vb. I (as a bill) पुरःस्थापन . relation Statistics विलोम सहसम्बंध 
(I beg leave to introduce bill no. मैं विधेयक सं......को पुरःस्थापन करने inversely प्रतीपक्रमेण 
की अनुमति चाहता हूं) 
vary i. प्रतीप-विचरण 1. 2 Chem. प्रवेशन n. 
inversely proportional Math. प्रती introduction 1 Parliamentary Practice पानुपाती (-इन्) mfn. 
पुरःस्थापना . 
inverse order=reverse order Math. 2 प्रवेश m. 
उत्क्रम, विलोम क्रम m. 3 भूमिका f. 
inverse proportion Statistics प्रतीप introrse lobe Bot. अन्तर्मुख-पालि. 
अनुपात m. intruding organism = attacking inverse-square law Phys. प्रतीप-वर्ग 
organism Zool. आक्रामी जीवाणु m. नियम m. 
m. 
m. 
509﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
inversion I Math. प्रतीपन 1. 
investigator's tintometer अनुसंधात 2 Chem. अपवर्तन M. 
पारागमान m. 3Statistics विलोमता f. 
investing bone=membrane bone inversion point (temperature at Zool. Sinistraties n. 
which inversion takes place) अप- investment I Com. विनियोग m. 
वर्ताङ्का . (short for अपवर्तन-तापांक) i. fluctuation fund विनियोग-उच्चाव inversive प्रतीपी (-इन् ) mfn. 
__ चन-प्रणीवि . invert ub. I प्रतीपन 1. 
i. of fund प्रणीवि-विनियोग m. 2 अधोवर्तन 
2 Zool. आवरण . invert adj. Chem. अपवृत्त mfn. invigilate vb. अभिजागरण n. 
i. sugar अपवत्त-शर्करा 
invigilator अभिजागर, अभिजागरूक, जागरूक invertase Biochem. अपवर्तेद m. 
m. Invertebrata अपृष्ठवंशिनः m.pl. 
invisible अदृश्य mfn. invertebrate अपृष्ठवंशी (-इन्) mfn. i. bifocals Ophthalmol. अदृश्य द्विनाभि inverted I प्रतीपित mfn. 
2 Statistics प्रतीपित, विलोमकृत mfn. invoice Com. बीजक n. (from हेमचन्द्र 
3 (head downwards) निशीर्ष mfn. परिशिष्ट) inverted order (reverse order) Math. i. book बीजक-पुस्त.. 
उत्क्रम, प्रतीपित क्रम m. 
inward i. आगत बीजक . inverted U-tube Phys. ब्राह्म-ग-नाल, outward i. निर्गामि बीजक. 
अघोबाहु नाल m. 
proforma i. दर्शनार्थ बीजक . inverted U-tube apparatus = involucel Bot. (a secondary in 
Hare's apparatus Phys. अधोबाहु- volucre) निवेष्टिका. नाल साधित. 
involucre Bot. निवेष्ट m., निपत्र-चक्र . inverted Y-tube Phys. ब्राह्म-त-नाल m. involuntary nervous system अनिच्छा inverted Y - tube apparatus = यत्त-चेता-संहति . 
Hare's apparatus ब्राह्म-त-नाल साधित्र involute अन्तर्वलित mfn. .. 
involution Math. घातक्रिया f., धातन . invertin-invertase Biochem अपवति . involved अन्तर्गत, अन्तर्भूत, अन्तर्धत, अन्तर्धा 
=अपवर्तेद m. 
रित, गभित mfn. inverting I प्रतीपन n. 
Io (ionium) Chem. अय् (अयनातु) 2 अपवर्तन 1. 
io- (iodine) Pharm. जम्-(जंबुकी) invert sugar अपवृत्त-शर्करा . 
iod-, iodo- (iodine) Chem. जम्बु invest vb. Com. विनियोजन n. 
iodal Chem. जम्बुषु m. investigate vb. अनुसंधान । 
Iodamoeba Zool. जम्बुकामरूप्याति f. ' research अन्वेषण 1. 
(प्रति for प्रजाति genus) 'investigation अनुसंधान . 
: I. buetschlii or williamsi= investigator अनुसंधाता (-तृ) m. 
Endolimax williamsi, Ent 
510 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
amoeba buetschlii, E. will- 2 Mineral.=iodyrite iamsi, iodine cysts आन्त्र जम्बू- iodization Chem. जम्बयन 1. 
कामरूपी (-इन् ) m. 
iodize vb. Chem. जम्बयन 1. iodate Chem. जम्बीय ॥. 
(to treat with iodine or an iodate vb. Chem. जम्बूयन n. 
iodide, as a photographic plate) I (to impregnate with iodine) जम्बुकी-साधन, जम्बेय-साधन 1. जम्बुकी-व्यापन . 
iodized जम्बेयित mfn. 2 (to treat with iodine) जम्बुकी- iodizer जम्बेयक m. साधन ॥. 
iodo-, iod- (iodine) Chem. जम्बु iodation Chem. जम्बूयन n. 
, - iodo - acet - anilide (mono) iodeosine Col. Ind. जम्बषसी / 
Chem. प-जम्बु-शुक्त-नीलेय . (एक) iodic Chem. जम्बिक mfn. 
iodo-acetic acid Chem. जम्बु-शुक्तिक i. acid जम्बिक अम्ल N. 
अम्ल. i. anhydride जम्बिक अजलेय 1. iodo-behenate Chem. जम्बु-शैग्रवीय n. iodide Chem. जम्बेय.. 
iodo-behenic acid Chem. जम्बु-शैविक iodinate vb. Chem. जम्बुकीयन 1. 
अम्ल n. I (to treat with iodine) जम्बुकी- iodo-benzene Chem. जम्बु-धूपेन्य 1. साधन . 
iodo-benzoic acid (ortho, meta, 2 (to combine with iodine) जम्बुकी- para) Chem. जम्बु-धूपिक अम्ल १. (ऊर्ध्व, योजन . 
सम, परा) iodination Chem. जम्बकीयन 1. 
iodo-bromite Mineral. जम्बु-दुरिज m. iodine I=iodum (iod.) Pharm. (इज for खनिज mineral) 
जम्बुकी . 
iodo-chloride Chem, जम्बु-तीरेय ।. 2 Chem. जम्बुकी . 
iodo-chromate Chem. जम्बु-वर्णीय 1. i. bromide (mono) जम्बुकी दुरेय iodo-eosin (erythrosin B) Chem. 
(एक) . 
जम्बूषसि. (रुधिरोषसि ख) i. chloride जम्बुकी नीरेय . 
iodo-ethane Chem. जम्बु-दक्षीण्य 1. i. green Col. Ind. oraait efe m. iodo-form (iodo - + formyl) Chem. i. number Anal. Chem. जम्बुको जम्बु-बम्रल १. ___ संख्या. 
iodohydrin Chem. जम्बूदि f. i. pent-oxide जम्बुकी पंच-जारेय. iodol (iod- + pyrrole) जम्बल n. i. scarlet जम्बुकी शोण m. 
iodo-mercurate, iodo-mercuriate i. solution जम्बुकी विलयन n. __Chem. जम्बु-पारदीय n. i. value or number Anal. Chem. iodo-methane Chem. जम्बु-प्रोदीत्य .. 
जम्बुकी-संख्या . 
iodo-metric, -metrical Anal. Chem. i. violet Col. Ind. जम्बुकी नीललोहित जम्बु-मितीय mfn. ___m. 
iodo-metry Anal. Chem. जम्बु-मिति iodite I Chem. जम्बित .. 
SII 
f. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
Ana 
a-iodo-naphthalene Chem. अ-जम्बु- ionamine Col. Ind. अयनतिक्ती . 
उत्तैलेन्या . 
ionic अयनिक mfn. D-iodo-nitro-benzene Cbem. प-जम्बु- i. hydrogen अयनिक उदजन m. 
भूय-धूपेन्य N. 
i. strontium अयनिक शोणातु m. iodonium (iodine+ammonium) Chem. ionium Chem. अयनातु m. 
जम्बुतातु m. 
___ ionization अयनन 1. iodo-phenol (ortho, para) Chem. degree of i. अयननांश m. 
जम्बु-दर्शव m. (ऊर्ध्व, परा) 
ionize vb. अयनन 2. (अयन-करण, अयन iodo-phthalein Chem. जम्बु-व्युत्त लिन M. भवन) Biodo-propionic acid Chem. प्रा- ionized अयनित mfn. 
जम्बु-प्रमेदिक अम्ल n. 
ionizing अयनकर्ता (-त) m. iodoso- (iod - + - ose+-) Chem. (de- I.O.U. (T owe you) धा. ते. (धारयामि ते) _noting the presence of the uni- i. p. (intermediate pressure) Mach. 
valent radical I O, esp. replacing म. नि. (मध्यम निपीड) hydrogen) जंज 
ipecacuanha (ipecac.) = ipecacu iodoso Chem. जंज, जंजक mfn. 
anhae radix=ipecacuanha root iodoso-benzene Chem. जंज-धूपेन्य n. Pharm. वममल . iodo-tannic acid Pharm. जम्बु-शल्किक ipecacuanha pills with squill = 
अम्ल .. 
pilulae ipecacuanhae cum scilla iodo-toluene (ortho, para) Chem. (pil. ipecac.; c. scill.) Pharm. 
जम्बु-विरालेन्य 1. (ऊर्ध्व, परा) 
समुद्रपलांडु सहित वममूल-गुटिका f. iodo-tyrosine acetate Chem. जम्बु- ipecacuanha root = ipecacuanha 
दधिकी शक्तीय n. 
Ipomoea त्रिवृताति f. (-ति for प्रजाति iodous Chem. जम्ब्य mfn. 
genus) iod-oxy- Chem. जम्बु-जार 
I. turpethum सामान्य त्रिवृता f. iodoxy Chem. जम्बुजार mfn. ___Ipomoea nil कालधान्य 1. (note that nil iod-oxy-benzene Chem. जम्बु-जार-धूपेन्य is here 'black'; Hindi, Bengali, 
. 
Marathi काला दाना) iodum=iodine Pharm. जम्बुकी . Ir (iridium) Chem. घ (धनातु) iodyrite (iodarg yrite) Mineral. रजत- irga black Col. Ind. (irga brands 
जम्बे यिज m. (-इज for खनिज mineral) are solutions of basic dyes con iolite Mineral. (an orthorhombic taining a fixing agent, and do 
mineral of various shades of not require steaming) faafaqat blue) नीलिज m. (-इज for खनिज काल m. mineral) 
i. brown निर्बाष्पन बभ्र m. ion Phys., Chem. 44T 1. 
i. cyanine निर्बाष्पन श्यामी . . -ion Chem. (a combining form of i. green fara faqat Eft m. : ' ion)-अयन .. 
i. red निर्बाष्पन रक्त m. 
512 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
i. rose निर्बाष्पन पाटल M. i. turquoise blue निर्बाष्पन प्रनीलाति 
हरि m. i. violet निष्पिन नीललोहित m. 
i. yellow निर्वाष्पन पीत M. Iridaceae Bot. केसर-कुल 7. iridiate Chem. घनीय ॥. iridic Chem. घनिक mfn. 
i. acid घनिक अम्ल n. iridico- (iridic) Chem. धनिक iridio- (iridium) Chem. धन iridio-platinum Chem. घन-महातु m. iridious Chein. Erre mfn. 
i. acid घन्य अम्ल ॥. iridite Chem. घनित ॥. iridium Chem. धनातु m. 
i. black बनातु काल m. iridocyclectomy (removal of the 
iris and of the ciliary body रंग्यग्न) 
रंग्यग्रोच्छेद . iridocyclitis Ophthalmol. (inflamma 
tion of the iris and of the 
ciliary body रंग्यग्र) रंग्यग्रकोप M. iridosmine-osmiridium Mineral. 
धनगुर्वातु-गुरु-घनातु m. iris कृष्णा . (cf. कृष्णमण्डल in सुश्रुत) iris=iris blue irisamine Col. Ind. इन्द्रधनुस्तिक्ती। iris and ciliary body Ophthalmol. 
रंग्यन iris blue (Gk. iris rainbow) Col. ____Ind. प्रावनीलारक्त, इन्द्रधनुर्नील m. iris diaphragm Optics प्रकाश-यम m. iris green मध्यपीतातिहरि m. iris violet Col. Ind. इन्द्रधनुर्नीललोहित m. iron (for smoothing clothes) स्तरी. iron Chem. अयस् M. (Hindi लोहा) 
i. acetate (ferric) अयसिक शक्तीय n. 
513 33 
i. alum अयस् स्फटिका f. i. ammonium chloride (ferric) __अयसिक तिक्तातु नीरेय ?. 
i. ammonium citrate (brown or 
green) अयस् तिक्तातु निम्बवीय n. 
(वभ्रु, हरि) i. ammonium oxalate (ferric) 
अयसिक तिक्तातु तिग्मीय . i. ammonium sulphate (ferric) ___अयसिक तिक्तातु शुल्बीय n. 
i. ammonium sulphate (ferrous) ___ अयस्य तिक्तातु शुल्बीय n. 
i. ammonium tartrate (ferric) 
अयसिक तिक्तातु न्यासवीय. i. and steel अयस् तथा बज्रायस .. i. arsenate अयो-नेपालीय 1. i. arsenite अयो-नेपालित 1. i. benzoate (ferric) अयसिक धूपीय n. i. black अयःकाल m. i. blue अयोनील m. i. bromide (ferrous) अयस्य दुरेय 1. i. brown अयो-ब<m. i. buff Col. Ind. अय:-पाण्डm. i. cacodylate Pharm. अयः-कुगन्धलीय 
__n. 
i. carbide अयः-प्रांगेय. i. carbonate अयः-प्रांगारीय n. i. carbonyl अयः-प्रांगार.1 1. i. chloride अयो-नीरेय . i. chloride (ferric, hydrated, __technical) अयसिक नीरेय n. (जली 
यित, परिभाषित) i. chloride (ferric, anhydrous) __ अयसिक नीरेय १. (अजल) . 
i. chloride (ferrous, technical) 
अयस्य नीरेय १. (परिभाषित) i. chloride solution (ferric) 
प्रयसिक नीरेय विलयन.. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
i. citrate Pharm. अयो-निम्बवीय .. i. oxide (precipitated, brown, red, i. citrate (ferric, scales) अयसिक calcined) अयो-जारेय. (निस्सादित, 
निम्बवीय . (शल्क) 
बभ्रु, रक्त, निश्चूर्णित) i. ferro-cyanide अयो-अयस्य-श्यामेय n. i. oxide black Col. Ind. अयोजारेय i. filings (coarse, fine) अयश्चूर्ण 1. काल m. 
(स्थूल, सूक्ष्म) 
i. phosphate (ferric) अयसिक भास्वीय i. fluoride अयस् तरस्वेय n. i. formate (ferric) अयसिक वभ्रीय . i. phosphate (ferrous) अयस्य भास्वीय 
i. glance = hematite Mineral. __अयो-रुचा. 
i. phosphate=ferri phosphas= i. glycero-phosphate (ferric) (ferr. phosph.) Pharm. FutureTA 
अयसिक मधुर-भास्वीय n. 
n. i. grey अयो-धूसर m. 
i. potassium oxalate (ferric) i. hydroxide अय उदजारेय. 
__ अयसिक दहातु तिग्मीय 1. i. hypo-phosphite (ferric) अयसिक i. potassium sulphate (ferrous) __उप-भास्वित . 
अयस्य दहातु शुल्बीय n. i. iodate (ferric) अयसिक जम्बीय n. i. potassium tartrate (ferric) i. iodide=ferri iodidum (ferr. अयसिक दहातु न्यासवीय n. ____iod.) Pharm. अयो-जम्बेय . 
i. powder अयःक्षोद m. i. iodide (ferrous) अयस्य जम्बेय n. i. process अयो-विधा . i. lactate (ferrous) अयस्य दुग्धीय .. i. pyrites Mineral. अयो-माक्षीक, सुवर्ण i. lacquer अयः प्रलाक्ष m. 
माक्षीक. i. liquor अयोरस m. 
i. quinine citrate (scales) अयो i. malate (ferric) अयसिक उत्कोलीय. विज्वरी निम्बवीय. (शल्क) i. manganese citrate (scales) अयो i.red Col. Ind. अयो-रक्त m. ___ लोहक निम्बवीय 7. (शल्क) 
i. retort अयो-वकमांड 1. i. meteorite आयसोल्का 
i. saffron Col. Ind. अयः कुंकुम m. i. minium अयो-हिंगुल, न्यवरक्तापीत m. i. salicylate (ferric) अयसिक नम्रलीय i. nitrate (ferric) अयसिक भूयीय . i. nitrate solution (ferric) अयसिक i. sand अयस्-सिकता . __ भूयीय विलयन . 
i. selenide अयो-मेचेय. i. ochre Col. Ind. अयो-गरिक m. __i. shot adj. Mineral. (shot with i. oleate (ferric, technical), अयसिक iron; having markings due to __ म्रक्षीय 7. (परिभाषित) 
iron) अयोङ्कmfn. i. orange Col. Ind. अयो-नारंग m. i.-silicate अयस् सैकतीय n. i. ore अयोयस्क, प्रायस अयस्क :. 
i. sodium oxalate (ferric) अयसिक i. pxalate (ferric, ferrous) अयसिक, क्षारातु तिग्मीय. . अयस्य तिग्मीय:: 
i. spinel=hercynite 514 
. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
i. succinate (ferric) अयसिक तृणीय irrigation engineering भूसेचन-अभि 
यंत्रणा. i. sulphate अयश्-शुल्बीय n. irritability I Physiol. उद्दीप्यता f. i. sulphate (ferrous, dried or 2= sensitivity Zool. हृषता . ___basic) अयस्य शुल्बीय १. (शुष्क, पैठिक) irritable Physiol. उद्दीप्य mfn. 
i. sulphate solution (ferric) अय- irritate I=stimulate vb. उद्दीपन 1. 
सिक शुल्बीय विलयन n. 
2 Pathol. संतापन n. i. sulphide अयश-शुल्बेय. 
irritating कोपी (-इन्) mfn. i. tartrate (ferric) अयसिक न्यासवीय irritating odour कोपी गन्ध m. 
. 
irritation i Pathol. FTT 17. i. valerate (ferric) अयसिक बलीय . 2 = stimulation Physiol. उद्दीपन i. weight अयो-वट्टक m. 
__., उद्दीपना f. i. yellow अयः पीत M. 
irritative, irritatory Pathol. संतापक ironbark Bot. (a kind of eucalyptus) mfn. 
__ अयोवल्क m. 
irritator Patbol. संतापकm. iron-ware अयोभाण्ड n. 
irritatory=irritative irradiate प्रविकिरण ?. 
is-, iso- (isomeric) स- (सभाजिक) irradiation I Zool. प्रविकिरण .. isamine blue Col. Ind. सतिक्ती नील m. 
2 उद्विकिरण, किरण-स्नान, विभासन . isat-, isato- नैनील irrational अपरिमेय mfn. 
isatate Chem. नैनीलीय . irrational number Math. अपरिमेय अंक isatic Chem. नैनीलिक mfn. 
m. 
isatide Chem. नैनीलेय 1. irrecoverable अप्रत्यादेय Mfn. 
isatin Chem. (obtained by oxida irredeemable Com. अशोध्य min. __tion of indigotin निनीलि) नैनीलि. 
i.debentures अशोध्य ऋणपत्र n. isator, isat- नैनील ___i. preference share अशोध्य पूर्वाधि- isatogen Chem. नैनीलजन m. 
__ कार अंश m. 
ischia pl. of ischium irreducible अहास्य mfn. 
ischial callosities Anat. प्रासन-किण m. irregular अनियमी (इन्), अनियमित mfn. ischio-coccygeal plexus Zool. अासन irregular fluctuations Statistics गुदास्थि प्रतान m.. 
अनियमि उच्चावचन ।. 
ischium=seat bone Anat. आसनास्थि irregularity अनियमिता, अनियमता. irregularly अनियमितरूपेण, अनियमतः I section Mach. ब्राह्मण-छेद 1. irrespective of असम्बद्ध, अनाश्रित iseikonia Ophthalmol. farf. irreversible अप्रतिवर्त्य, अपरिवर्त्य mfr i seikonic lens Ophthalmol. मूर्तिसमक irrevocable Econ. अप्रत्यादेश्य mfn.. वीक्ष M. irrigation भूसेचन, सेचन 1., भगीरथविद्या . island of Langerhans = islets of 
Langethans Anat: मधुवशि-ग्रंथि m: 
___n. 
- 
- 
. 
SIS 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
-ism I at f. (abstract noun) 
2 -777 m. (a theory) iso-, is- (Webster-prob. akin to 
Sanskrit faq) 1 Chem. (isomeric) 
- ( 69) 
2 (equal, alike) #-, # iso-bilateral Bot. TH-fartea mfn. iso-butane Chem. Entra . iso-chromatic Optics qui mfn. ____i glasses सवर्ण उपनेत्र . 
i. lens सवर्ण वीक्ष m. isochrome green Col. Ind. Hau af 
m. isochronal, isochronous Phys. (re 
curring.at regular intervals) - 
F7517aaf (FT) mfn. isochrysamine Col. Ind. faqat f. isoclinic Phys. (having the same ____dip) समाभिनत mfn. isocol=ethyl red isocyanate Chem. सश्यामीय . iso-cyanic acid 7-541 769 h iso-cyanide Chem. -STÈT N. iso-cyanine Col. Ind. -4T f. iso-diametric Bot. #-# mfn. isodiphenyl black Col. Ind. 4-faciat 
m. iso-electric adj. #-FELT mfn. iso-electric point Ffges-ferg m. iso-entropic changes Phys. FIFA : 819-7faca n. iso-flavaniline Col. Ind. -fou atat f. isogamete Biol. 51FT m. isogametic Zool. 97687F mfn. isogamy. Biol. 
F E m. isogonic Phys. (having the same dec- 15 bination) #faha mfn. isokate insulate vb. TTTT n. ' 
isolated एकलित mfn. isolation 72447RUT, 50 n. iso-lysin Biochem. (a variety of hemo 
lysin Tarifet, if the other animal 
is of the same species) 7-STTUTİFAT f. isomer Chem. 775 m. isomeric Chem. सभाजिक mfn. isomeride Chem. T n. isomerism Chem. Firar f. isometric (regular in form) fiata 
infn. i. drawing Engin, farcitet hem. i. projection Engin. affrete faraty 
m. isometropia Ophthalmol. tftat f. isomorph सरूपी (-इन्) m. isomorphic=isomorphous सरूप 
mfn. isomorphism सरूपता f. 
isomorphous=isomorphic isonitroso- Chem. 4727 iso-oleic acid Chem. -5f7h TFT n. isoprene Chem. (a volatile liquid 
hemiterpene, Cg H, I, 7.) saate 
n. (5+8=act) Isoptera Zool. (consisting of the 
termites) TCHTOT m. (Tror order) isopurpurin Col. Ind. e f. isoquinoline red Col. Ind. Afavarat 
10 m. isorubine Col. Ind. facit f. isosantalin Col. Ind. TrafT f. isosceles triangle Geom. द्विसम त्रिभुज 
m. . isosmotic सासृतीय mfn. Isospora (a genus having two .. spores), द्विबीजाति .. (-आति for 
afa genus) 
$16 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
I. hominis=Coccidium bige- i. at premium afheà ftaiface mfn. 
minum, C. hominis, C. per i. capital fraffitas f. forans, Cytospermium hom- issue of debenture Com. * inis, Eimeria stiedae, Iso- fart 17. 
spora bigemina #Tae fais m. issue of debenture at discount isostemonous Bot. (having an equal Com. #94720797-FTTHT 11. 
number of stamens) ET issue of debenture at par Com. mfn. 
सममूल्ये ऋणपत्र-निर्गमन N. isotherm 1 (an expression of equal issue of debenture at premium 
temperature for a number of Com. अधिमूल्ये ऋणपत्र-निर्गमन 1. equal points, systems, or phases) issue register (of a library) frfFp5 FHEIT m. 
2=isothermal process paty- issuing gases Chem. Fitut atfr . faut f. 
is to Math. sfa 2:5:6 Pfer 4 STATE 3=isothermal line ACTY-TET f. Italian azoflavine=Indian yellow isothermal n.=isothermal line Italian earth=Roman earth Col. isothermal=isothermic adj. #ara, Ind. 71-77 f. 
THGTTT mfn. 
Italian pink=flavine lake i. change Phys. #619-f9d 12. Italian umber=raw umber i. curve समताप-बक्र . 
-ite i Chem. - n. i. line=isotherm=isothermal 2 Mineral. = 11. (from first 
FESTY-TETT f. 
mineral) i. process=isotherm #419-FATT 3 Petrog. -* m. 
4 (explosives) HC, -29570 m. i. region=stratosphere समताप- item पद (from पद 'a step'), वस्तु 1. 
#055 n. 
item on the agenda Frufafice n.. i. volume elasticity समताप-परिमा- iter Anat. मार्ग m. . 
प्रत्यास्थता f. 
iter a tertio ad quartum ventri isothermic=isothermal 
culum Zool. Tate-mi-TN-HIT m. isotonic (solution) Zool. Ar mfn. -itis Med.-m. (pain, heat, redness, isotope Chem. art (-E) m. 
swelling) isotropic, isotropical frafagi mfn. I.U. (international units) Pharm. isotropy wafat f. 
so go (TTTTFEU Tait) issue Com. I n. fiera m. 
-ium (-um) Chem. - ra m. (from are 2 vb. FTI FT N. 
metal) issued Com. fifia mfn. 
ivory TCT, TTTET m. i. at discount अवमूल्ये निर्गमित mfn. ivory black नागदन्त काल m. i. at par सममूल्ये निर्गमित mfn. Ixodidae Zool. (a family having a 
517 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
scutum वख्य or shield-like chiti- nous structure on the dorsal surface; includes hard ticks) 
दढवरूथिवंश m. Ixora (from Sanskrit fra) Bot. 
Baarifa f. (-for for atfer genus) 
jaborandi (jaborand.)=pilocarpus Jambool=jambul=Java plum 
=jaborandi leaves Pharm, Fach- a m. 971. 
jambula=Eugenia jambolana= jacaranda brown न्यवरक्तातिपीत m. black plum जम्बुल m. I acid ল স্কুল , 
jambuline=jamboline jack Mech., Mach. T m. 
James's powder=antimonial pow screw j. 54-3649 m. 
der in G m. jacket fa m. 
jamming Radar introduction of condenser nonflam (nonmois false radiation to confuse enemy 
ture) j. 197% TE Fait m. radio and radar devices) विमोहक, jacketed निचोलित mfn. 
stafi m. j. kettle fartha-self. 
Jamunotri Geog. THAT-SHT m., 7T jackshaft Automobile दन्तिकेषा. (shaft वतरी. 
ईषा for pinions दन्तिका) 
January प्रथममास m. jaggery गुड m. 
Janus black=diazine black jaggery palm Bot. TEGT m. 
1. blue G R=indole blue B, R jails and convict settlements J. brown=union brown ___ कारागार तथा बन्दी-वसति . 
J. dark blue B, R = union Jalalabad Geog. TTTETT m. 
blue H Jalandhar-Doab Geog. 2014 m. J. green B, G=union green B jalap Pharm. (purgative tuberous J. red B=union red 
root of Exogonium jalapa) J. yellow G, R=union yellow A đó là, 
japan (a varnish) from m. (Ft from jam फलपाक m. 
FCTTTT) Jamaica pepper=pimento Pharm. Japan earth=yellow cutch 
(odour and taste resemble clove) japanic acid Chem. seuafe FT 1.' 
paita n. 
Japan lacquer=iron lacquer jambo=rose apple=Java plum Japan wax 594au-feet n. 
=Malay apple F 18. 
jar জলহা 2. Jambolan = jambolana = Java anaerobic j. angufta em. 
plum जम्बुलn. 
bell j, -m. jamboline जम्बुली. 
glass j. 472-74 m.. $18 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
. 
. 
genus) 
glass cover for j. कलशार्थ काचावरण 2 vो. समुच्छलन ?. ___n. 
knee j. जानु-क्षेप M. museum j. कौतुकालय-कलश m. jeromite Mineral. (a sulphide of jarosite Mineral. (potassium sulphate arsenic containing some selenium) 
+ferric sulphate) दहायश्शुल्बिज m. मेच-हरिताल n. (-इज for खनिज mineral) 
Jesuits' bark=cinchona farat 17. jarring (putting in a jar, as pre- jet Automobile fe mn. 
___serves) कलशाधान ॥. 
jet black Col. Ind. धन काल m. jasmine-citronine 
jeweller भणिकार m. Jasminum Bot. मालतीति f. (-ति for Jhelum (river) Geog. वितस्ता . 
stattfa genus) 
jibantic acid जीवन्तिक अम्ल . J. augustifolium सामान्य मालती f. jibantine जीवन्तिकी f. Jateorhiza वैद्यमूलति . (-ति for प्रजाति Jimson weed धत्तूरक m. 
job Com. कृत्यक ? J. columba सामान्य वैद्यमूल . 
j. account कृत्यक-लेखा f. Jatropha Bot. वनैरण्डति (-ति for प्रजातिj.ledger कृत्यक-प्रपंजी . 
genus) 
jobber 1 (stock dealer) fra afure J. curcas सामान्य वरण्ड m. jaundice Med. कामलां f. (from सुश्रुत) 2 (piece-worker) कृत्यकी (-इन्) m. ____febrile i. ज्वरि-कामला. 
3 (one who provides labour in jaune d'orient=iodeosine G 
mills) कर्मकारि-योजक m. jaune tartrique-tartrine yellowo Tohne's disease Veter. अपिगोयक्ष्मा . Jaunpur Geog. (near Benares) यवनपुर join ub. I योजन . 
. 
2 कार्यग्रहण 1. Java Geog. यवद्वीप M. 
joined after mfn. Java almond (tree) यवद्वीप-वाताम m. joining line Math. योजक-रेखा f. Java plum = jambo = roseapple joint 11. affer m. ____=Malay apple जम्बु m. 
ground glass j. &-879-fret m. Javelle, eau de दहातूपनीरित सलिल n. joint adj. संयुक्त nfn. jaw apparatus Zool. हनु-साधित्र n. j. account Banking संयुक्त-लेखा . 
Jaxartes Geog. uitat f. 
j. adventure संयुक्त उपक्रम m. jejunum Anat. मध्यान्त्रक . 
j. and several responsibility jelly श्लेष्यक . 
Lany संयुक्त तथा पृथग् दायित्व n. jellyfish-medusa Zool. छत्रिक m. j. capital संयुक्त-पुंजी . jellylike connective tissue Zool. j. consignment account संयुक्त ___ श्लेष्यकवद् योजि-ऊति . 
परेषण-लेखा . Jena glass अनल-काच m. 
j. director संयुक्ताध्यक्ष m. jerk In. क्षेप, समुच्छल m. 
j. estate संयुक्त-भूसम्पत्ति . 519﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
j. Hindu family हिन्दू मंयुक्त कुल, यांत्रिक समाई संपरीक्षा f. 
हिन्दू मम्मिलित कुटुम्ब 1. 
Joule-Thomson effect Heat (cool j. life policy संयुक्त-जीवन-गोपलेख m. ing by release of pressure) निपीड j. membrane सन्धि-कला f. 
मोच-शीतन प्रभाव m. j. ownership संयुक्त स्वामित्व, संस्वा- journal Macb. (that portion which 
मित्व 1. 
turns in a bearing) निभ्रमिm. j. promissory note संयुक्त प्रतिज्ञा-पत्र j. box निभ्रमि-धान 1. ___ 
2=day book = daily register j. secretary संयुक्त सचिव M. 
Com. दैनिकपंजी. j. services and posts संयुक्त सेवाएं j.entry दैनिक प्रविष्टि, पंजी-प्रविष्टि . 
तथा पद .. 
purchases j. क्रय-पंजी f. j. sittings संयुक्त अधिवेशन . 
purchases return j. क्रय-प्रत्याय-पंजी j.-stock bank संयुक्त-स्कंध अधिकोष 
salesj. विक्रय-पंजी. J.-stock company Lian संयुक्त-स्कंध sales returns j. विक्रय-प्रत्याय-पंजी. 
प्रमण्डलn. 
journalize vb. Com. पञ्जीयन .. j. tenant Law. संयुक्त भाटकी (-इन्) Jshape curve Statistics विषमबाह वक्र 
m. 
. j. variation Math. सह-विचरण 1. Jubbulpore Giog. जाबालिपुर. j. venture=j. adventure संयुक्त judge vb. विवेचन, आनिर्णयन ॥. 
उपक्रम m. 
judge न्यायाधिकारी (-इन्), न्यायाधीश m. jointed Zool. (having joints) संधिमान् judge-made law=judicial law 
(-मत्) mfn. 
न्यायाधीश-कृत विधि m. joist (Hindi piet) safutetat f. (beam uit judgement=judgment 
judge of the Federal Court संघानीय jolt 1. Phys. 56477f. 
न्यायालय-न्यायाधीश m. jolting Phys. उद्धक्कन n. 
judge of the High Court उच्च Joly's steam calorimeter प्रबाष्प-उषमान न्यायालय-न्यायाधीश m. 
m. 
judging the time Drill अनुतालम् josephinite (FeNi3) Mineral. त्रिरूपायस judgment निर्णय, न्यायनिर्णय M. (short 
for न्यायालय-निर्णय) joule Phys. कोटिश्रम् m. 
___j. creditor न्यायनिर्णीत उत्तमर्ण m. Joule-Kelvin effect=Joule-Thom-- j.debtor न्यायनिर्णीत अधमर्ण m. 
soneffect Heat निपीड-मोच-शीतन प्रभाव judicate=judge vb. विवेचन N. 
m. 
judicative (having power to judge) Joule's experiment Phys. (the first विवेकी (-इन्) mfn. 
experimental determination of judicator विवेचक, विवेक्ता 
• mechanical equivalent of heat) judicatory निर्णयात्मक, विवेचनात्मक mfn. 
520 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
Judicature Act Law न्यायाधिनियम m. junction I Anat. सन्धि m. judicial न्याय-,न्यायाधीश-न्यायालय-, न्यायिक 2 (of lines) Ry. संगम m. 
mfn. 
junction box Elec., Radar सन्धि-समुद्ग judicial act Law न्यायाधीश-कर्म . 
m. judicial cognizance (requiring no June षष्ठमास m. 
proof ) प्रमाण-अनपेक्ष संज्ञान n. jungle fowl वन-कुक्कुट m. judicial decision न्यायिक निर्णय m. jungle maina झुण्ट-सारिका judicial law=judge-made law 31- junior 98 mfn. 
याधीश-विधि m. 
___j. basic school अवर प्राधार पाठशाला judicial mind विवेचक-बुद्धि. judicial officer न्यायाधिकारी (-इन्) m. ____j. laboratory अवर-प्रयोगशाला f. judicial power न्यायिक-शक्ति . 
j. school अवर-पाठशालाf! judiciary I (that branch of govern j. technical school अवर प्रौद्योगिक 
ment in which judicial power is पाठशाला . vested) न्याय-विभाग m.. 
juniper=juniperus (junip.) = juni 2 (system of courts of justice in a peri fructus=juniper berry country) न्यायालय-संहति . 
Pharm. हपुषा f. 3 (judges, taken collectively) न्या- juniperic acid Chem. हपुषिक अम्ल N. याधीश-वर्ग m. 
juniperin पुषि . jug कुम्भी . 
Juniperus Bot. हपुषाति . (-ति for प्रजाति jugal n. Zool. TEIFFT 1. 
genus) jugal bone Anat. युगास्थि ?. 
J. communis सामान्य ह्पुषा f. Juglandaceae Bot. अक्षोट-कुल 1. juniperus=juniper Juglandales Bot. अक्षोट-गोत्र .. Jurassic period Geol. महासरट-युग . Juglans Bot. अक्षोटति . (ति for प्रजाति jurisdiction अधिकारक्षेत्र 1., क्षेत्राधिकार m. 
genus) 
j. of an admiral नावाधिपति-क्षेत्र 1. jugular 1.=jugular vein 
just I न्याय्य afn. jugular foramen Anat. मातृका-छिद्र 2 स्तोकम्, केवल 
justice I न्याय m. jugular ganglion Anat. मातृका-गुच्छ 2 न्यायाधीश m. 
__m. 
Justicia Bot. अटरूषति f. (-ति for प्रजाति jugular vein Anat., Zool. मातृका f. genus) juice (Eng. word is from Skt. यूष) J. bivalvis सामान्य अटरूष m. 
I रस m. 
justify vb. समर्थन 1. __2=succus (succ.) Pharm. यूष m. jute पट्टशण m. (Hindi पटसण, Bengali juice extractor रस-निस्सारक m. 
पाट) July सप्तममास m. 
jute black Col. Ind. शण काल m. jumping spider Zool. कूर्द-लूता . ___j. blue शण नील m. 
521 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
j. brown शण बभ्र m. j. carbon black TT TT-TT TT m. j. deep black zu TTC #17 m. j. green शण हरि m. j. olive शण तैलबदर m. 
j. orange शण नारंग M. j. scarlet TT TTT m. 
j. yellow any ria m. juvenile condition Zool, 279-GOTT f. juxtaposition Zool. HifTez, feta n. 
K 
K (calyx) Bot. I (969773) 
kaliophilite Mineral, (a potassium K (kalium=potassium) Chem. a (CET) aluminium silicate) fou m. K (depression or elevation constant) (-$37 for efter mineral) 
Physical Chem. थ (निम्नन, उत्थापन kalium=potassium Chem. दहातु m. feria) 
kamala (kamal.) Pharm. (Mallotus K (constant) 4 (Fitria) 
philippinensis) FH5TT f. K. (Klebsiella) T. a. (Sradar) kanal-strahlen=canal rays Phys. Kabul (river) Geog. **f. (of the 1927-28 m. 
Vedas) 
kangaroo Zool. skrattarit m. (short kabure (skin erruption due to bur- for FTETETF-TF) 
rowing of the cercariae) Tron Kangra Geog. format m. f6cht m. 
Kanouj Geog. कान्यकुब्ज n. K-acid Chem. 2-n. 
kanthosine = brilliant direct Kafiristan Geog. उद्यानक m. 
orange Kahn's test Med. (precipitation test kantikari Pharm. Folf m. 
of syphilis) FRETTE-39&TT-TT&TT f. kaolin ag f. Kaithal Geog. (in the Karnal district, kaolinate thata n. ___Punjab) कपिस्थल n. 
kaolinic Mineral. प्रमदिक mfn. Kakmi oil or artist's oil 11- n, kaolinic acid Chem, saf n . kakos- (Gk. “bad') in 
kaolinite Mineral. प्रमदिज m. (-इज for kaladana (kalad.) = pharbitis cafist mineral) 
seeds Pharm. Terut the 
kaolinize vb. $7213FRUT M. kaleidoscope (Gk. kalos beautiful+ karyokinesis Biol. EfTHTSFT n. 
eidos form; exhibits an endless karyophyllon (Gk.) . variety of varicoloured forms) karyosome=chromatin nucleolus FATETET m. 
Kashgar Geog. खरोष्ट्र m. kali स्रुघ्न m. (=क्षार alkali) 
kata-, cata-, cats, cath- fajn kali bottle Ettet f. 
katanol Col. Ind. (possesses a direct kalinite Mineral.(common, of potash affinity for cotton) 9 m. 
alum found in nature) Fafe fit f. katathermometer Med. (for mea 
522 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
suring the cooling effects) अधस्ताप- . k. yellow गन्धेय पीत m. मान m. 
Katmandu Geog. (the capital of kath=areca catechu 
Nepal) काष्ठमंडप n. Kathiawar Geog. सुराष्ट्र, सौराष्ट्र m. kava 1 (a species of pepper, from katigen azurine Col. Ind. (katigens which an intoxicating beverage 
are sulphide dyes) गन्धेय नभोनीली / is made)=मदमरिच . 
k. black गन्धेय कालं M. 
2=kavae rhizoma=kava-kava k. black-brown गन्धेय काल-वq m. Pharm. मदमरिच 12. k. blue गन्धय नील m. 
kava acid मदमरिच-अम्ल 2. 
• k. blue-black गन्धेय नील-कृष्ण . kava gum मदमरिच-निर्यास M. 
k. bordeaux गन्धेय कपिशक m. kavaine मदमरिची. k. brilliant black Free ATECT FATET kava-kava=kava 
kavae rhizoma=kava k. brilliant green गन्धेय भासुर हरि keel r = carina Bot. निधरण 2. 
2 (of a ship) निधरण १. k. bronze गन्धेय कांस्य m. 
3 Zool. उरःकट n. (for उरोस्थिकट k. brown गन्धेय बभ्र m. 
the median ridge on the breast k. chrome blue गन्धेय वर्णक नील m. bone of most birds) k. chrome brown गन्धेय वर्णक बभ्रु m. Keene's cement = hydraulic gyp k. cutch गन्धेय गायत्री f. 
sum प्राम्भस प्राचूर्ण 1. k. dark blue गन्धेय असित नील m. keeper Phys. रक्षक,पालक m. k. dark brown गन्धेय असित बभ्रु m. kefir दुग्धिरा . (a liquor made from k. deep black गन्धेय गाढ काल m. fermented milk) k. deep blue गन्धेय गाढ नील m. Kekule's formula (of benzene) Chem. k. deep green गन्धेय गाढ हरि m. (three alternate double bonds) k. direct blue गन्धेय अनाश्रित नील m. द्विबन्धत्रय सूत्र. k. direct fast grey गन्धेय अनाश्रित kelp I Bot. कपिलाप्यक m. 
स्थिर धूसर m. 
2 (ashes of seaweed) वरुणघास-भस्म 1. k. fast grey गन्धेय स्थिर धूसर m. 
3 (large seaweeds) वरुणघास m. k. field grey गन्धेय सेना सर m. keno-toxin Biochem. श्रम-विषि. k. green गन्धेय हरि m. 
keratectasia Ophthalmol. स्वच्छोत्तन m. k. grey गन्धेय धूसर m. 
keratin (Gk. karatos horn) Biochem. k. indigo गन्धेय निनील m. 
शृंगि. k. khaki गन्धेय धूलि . 
keratinization शाङ्गण, शाङ्ग भवन, शार्ङ्ग k. navy blue गन्धेय नाविक नील M. करण 1. k. olive गन्धेय तैलबदर m. 
keratinized (become, or rendered k. red-brown गन्धेय रक्त-बभ्रm. keratinous) शाङ्गित, शाङ्गकृत, शाङ्गभूत k. violet गन्धेय नीललोहित m. 
mfn. 
523 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
keratinose Biochem. (a proteose from ketazine Chem. Trauitat f. 
keratin) शृंगिधु . 
ketene Chem. (hetone-+ -ene) शौक्तन्य 1. keratinous=horny शार्षmfn. keto-, ket- Chem. (ketone) शौ- (शौक्ता) keratitis=corneitis 
ketogen Zool. Teata m. keratogenic (capable of inducing ketogenic Zool. शौक्ताजन mfn. ____growth of skin, hair, or horny keto-hexose Chem. शौ-षड्धु n. 
tissues) त्वग्जन, रोमजन, शृंगोतिजन mfn. ketol Chem. शौक्तव m. keratogenous (producing horn) ketone (from acetic शुक्तिक + -one 
शृंगजन mfn. 
आ) Chem. शौक्ता. keratolysis Biochem. शृंग्यंशन . ketone blue Col. Ind. शौक्ता नील m. keratomalacia Ophthalmol. मृदुस्वच्छा/. ketone group Chem. शौक्ता-वर्ग m. Keratosa=Ceratosa Zool. (having ketonic Chem. शौक्तिक mfu. 
the skeleton of horny fibres) शाङ्ग- k.group Chem. शौक्तिक वर्ग M. तन्तव: m.pl. 
ketose Chem. शौक्ताधु . Kermanshah=brown stone 
ketoxime गौ-जाविn. kermes व कृमि M. (found on Quer- kettle Phys. उखा f. ____cus coccifera) । 
jacketed k. निचोलित-उखा. kermesin orange Col. Ind. वञ्जकृमियि key I=solution Math. कंची. 
नारंगm. 
2 कीला, कुञ्ची . kermesite = pyrostibite Mineral. 3 Com. कुञ्ची , आधार m. 
(antimony oxysulphide) अंजन 4%=wood wedge Rly. स्फान-काष्ठ जारशिज. (-इज for खनिज mineral) 
स्फान n. kermes mineral कपिश खनिज m. 
5 Mach. कीला. kernel fef. 
key-bar (in a typewriter) कुंची-शलाका kernel black = drop black kern-plasm relationship Zool. key board (of a typewriter) कुंची 
न्यष्टि-प्ररस सम्बन्ध m. 
गण m. kerosene (a mixture of hydrocar- keyhole कुंची-विवर ". 
bons which vary with its source) key industry= basic industry आधा समुप्र-तैल (सम् together+उ H+ रोद्योग m. प्रC), मृदा-तैल n. 
keying unit Radar कुंचीयन अंग 1. Kessler's apparatus Chem. उत्कटोर key lever कुंची-उद्याम m. 
साधित्र । 
keynote Music मूलस्वर m. Kessler's process Chem. (of con- key on flat Engin. (resting on a 
centrating sulphuric acid) उत्कटोर- lattened surface) चिपिटस्थ-कीलाf. 
विधा /- (उत्कटोर inverted cup) keyswitch कुंची-संवियु त् m. ket-, keto- Cbem. (ketone).शौ-, शौक्त-, keyway I Mach. कीला-मार्ग m. 
शौक्ता 
2 कुंची-मार्ग m. 
524 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
kg.,kgm. (kilogram) स. धा. (सहस्र- kilowatt Elec. सहस्रौज . 
धान्य) 
__k.-hour सहलौज घण्ट m. khaki Col. Ind. धूलि f. 
kinase Biochem. प्रविकर m. k. green धूलि हरि m. 
kind प्रकार _k. milling yellow धूलि संकोचन पीत in kind (in produce or commo 
. 
dity, not in value or money) k. yellow धूलि पीत m. 
वस्तुरूप में khari=khari earth = Glauber's kinematics (treats of motions con 
salt (crude sodium sulphate) sidered in themselves) प्रगतिकी . . क्षारमृद्. 
kinetics गतिकी . kharo lunial (salty trona) लवणिय -kinesis -गति . 
विक्षार m. 
kinetic Phys. गतिक mfn. kharo saf (Sindhi) शुद्ध विक्षार M. kinetic energy owing to motion khet-papra Pharm. क्षेत्रपर्पट m. 
गति) गतिक-ऊर्जा f. Khotan Geog. कुस्तन m. 
kineticmolecular hypothesis गतिक kick . पादप्रहार m. 
___व्यहाण्वीय उपकल्पना. kidney-nephros Anat. वृक्क m. kinetics गतिकी . kidney corpuscle Zool. वृक्काणु m. kinetic theory of gases Phys. वाति kidney-shaped वृक्काकार mfn. 
____ गतिक-वाद m. kieselguhren infusorial earth= kineto-chore=centromere = spin 
diatomite = diatomaceous dle attachment Biol. तर्क-युज m. earth युक्ताप्यमद् [. 
kineto-nucleus = motion nucleus kil. (kilo-meter) स. मा. (सहस्र-मान) Biol. गति-न्यष्टि . kill vb. मारण . 
kingbolt=kingpin Mach. राजार्गली f. killer = grampus = killer whale king cobra Zool. फणिराज m. 
Zool. हन्ता (-त) हन्ता तिमि m. king crabZool. I राज-कर्कट, खड्गपुच्छ m. killer whale हन्ता-तिमि m. 
2=horseshoe crab खुरप कर्कट m. kiln n. आपाक m. 
kingdom Nat. Hist. सृष्टि f. kilo I=kilogram 
k. of animals प्राणि-सष्टि ___ 2=kilometer 
k. of minerals खनिज-सृष्टि . kilog. (kilogram) स. धा. (सहस्र-धान्य) k. of plants उद्भित्-सृष्टि kilo-gram (kg., kgm., kilo., kilog.) kingfisher=halcyon Zool. Arteria m. 
सहस्र-धान्य 7. (स. धा.) 
kingmaker राजकृत् m. kilo-liter (kl.)=stere सहस्र-प्रस्थ m. kingmaking राजकरण १. 
(स. स्थ.) 
kingpin = kingbolt Mash. राजार्गली kilom. (kilo-meter) स. मा. (सहस्र-मान) . kilo-meter (kil., kilo., kilom., kl., King's blue Col. Ind. राज-नील m. 
km.) सहस्र-मान m. (स. मा.) 
King's yellow Col. Ind. राज-पीत m. 
525 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
.. 
..... 
..... 
..... 
. 
kinin Biochem. प्रविकरि . 
Kjeldahl apparatus Anal. Chem. kino = malabar kino = Madras (for determining nitrogen utfa 
kino = Cochin kino = East or ammonia fafitfer) 9f9-4-far-rifer Indian kino Pharm. (a product 1. similar to catechu, obtained from K.digestion apparatus अपिभूति various tropical trees) Faefer m. 
797 n. kinsman सम्बन्धु m. (from पप्पलादसंहिता) K. distillation apparatus foafer Kipp apparatus (in Germany Kipps 
THTn. cher apparat, by error, as if from K. flask #f9fa-4fae m. a proper name Kipp. It is from K: stand अपिभूति-स्थामn. kippen 'to tip over, tilt') = Kipp K. method ufuff-zifa f. 
gas generator foarfa-FTTT n. kjeldahlize vb. Chem.ufuatu n. Kipp gas generator foarfer-377 n. kl. I (kilo-liter) . FT. ( ET) Kipp generator foarfastfera n. 
2 (kilo-meter) 7. #T. (EF-HTET) Kirchoff's law Phys. faec fett-fly# m. Klebsiella (K.) Bact. (a genus; kitchen रसवती f. (H. रसोई) 
capsulated bacteria) प्रावरवेत्राणु m. ___k. balance रसवती-तुला . 
(ST. a.) kite 1 Zool. (common Indian kite) K. capsulatus THTPUT ST. a. 
fart m. 
K. friedlanderi = K pneu 2 m. (made of paper) 
moniae 3 Aeronautics Fecsfa TT 1. 
K. ozaenae=Bacillus mucosus 4 Com. (accomodation bill) fart, ozaenae (causes ozena) 1 Faraf 97 n. 
$7. a.. kite-flying Com. farefa471-3914 1. K. pneumoniae = Friedlan kiton blue N=disulphine blue A der's bacillus (found in certain 
k. fast blue V disulphine cases of pneumonia) क्लोमपाक 
blue V 
57. a. k. fast green V = naphthalene K, rhinoscleromatis (causes rhi 
green V. 
noscleroma) hafa . a. k. fast orange G = orange G Klein - Gumprecht nucleus (un k. fast violet ro B = fast acid stainable nuclei of lymphocytes) 
violet Io B 
=shadow nucleus Anat. it k. red 6 B brilliant acid Furse f. 
carmine 6 B 
km. (kilo-meter) 7. HT. (HEF HTT:) k. yellow S, SR = pyrazine knee Fran. 
yellow S 
k:-hole table जानु-विवर पटल . kiwi Zool (imitative of its cry) aifa, k.-jerk 5179 m. (99 is from, 
UPTET) . 526. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
kneecap=kneepan = patella Er- krameria (kramer.) = krameriae 
FART n. 
radix = krameria root rha knife क्षुरी . (Hindi छुरी) 
tany root Pharm. (used for in k. and spatula (combined) Têt flamed throats) T4H*Tn. (Teu good 
797 TT m. (44) 
for throat TT) k.-edge T1-ett f. 
krapp=madder knight's white = enamel white Kremnitz white - krems white knob = bob (as of a pendulum) (a pure white lead used in fine 
Phys. TUE 11. 
painting) विश्वेत सीस 1.. knob root = collinsonia = stone kresol=cresol 
root Pharm. (the rhizome occurs kresol blue-black Col. Ind. #faya 
in very hard pieces) H-HT 1., 157-376UT m. knock अभिघात m. 
kreuzbeeren=Persian berries Col. knot of blood vessel Zool. TPISTETTE- Ind. TTH-260 f. 
T25 m. 
kromeko brown B paste=chrome know vb. T n. 
brown knuckle joint Mach. जानु-सन्धिm. k. fast blue 4 B = chrome fast Kochin kino = kino Pharm. faeft blue R 
k. fast bordeaux =chrome red koel Zool. FunT m. koenigin सुरभिनिम्बि f. (सुरभिनिम्ब Ber k. fast green D = anthracyl 
gera koenigii) 
chrome green A, D Koh-Mari (in E. Turkistan) Geog. green B = anthracene chro 
TYTT-Taia m. 
mate green B kola nut (an American nut) 197 n. k. yellow SW=chrome yellow Kolbe's process Chem. (heating dry D 
sodium phenate TTT GIRL in kryogene black (kryogene=cryo carbon dioxide Siirt FEETTT under gene) तुषारजन काल m.. pressure) af9-87--fazt f. 
k. blue तुषारजन नील m. Kolhapur Geog. करवीरपुर . 
k. brown T FT a m. kombe strophanthin=strophan k. cutch 0125 TTT TT f. 
thin Pharm. graagisa f. 
k. direct blue तुषारजन अनाश्रित नील kongsbergite Mineral. (Ag32 Hg or ___Ags Hg) त्रिंशत्-संरस m. 
k. field grey तुषारजन सेना धूसर m. kosa (inferior silk produced in the k. green तुषारजन हरि m. 
TE) *18147 n. (Hindi FT) 
k. khaki तुषारजन धूलि f.. koumiss दुग्धासव m... 
k. olive तुषारजन तैलबदर m. Kr (krypton) Chem. it (attrfa) k. pure blue I Te ft m... 
527 
Р 
7. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
k. red-brown तुषारजन रक्त-बभ्रुm. Kumaun Geog. चिल m. 
k. violet तुषारजन नीललोहित m. Kumbhaconum Geog. कुंभघोणम् ।. _k. yellow तुषारजन पीत m. 
Kundt's tube Phys. पात-प्रतिपात नाल m. kryptocyanine Photog. गुप्तश्यामी f. (पा. प्र. नाल) kryptok Ophthalmol. (a bifocal kurchi (Holarrhena antidysenterica) 
ground out of one piece, joint Bot. कुटज m. invisible) असन्धिद्विनाभि n. 
Kurram (river) Geog. कुमु . (from krypton=crypton Chem. लीनाति m. ऋग्वेद) K. Sp. (solubility product constant Kurthia Bact. पर्वाण m. (पर्वदण्डाणु chains 
विलेयता-गुणनफल-स्थिरांक) वि. गु. स्थि. ___ of long bacilli) K-strophanthin = strophanthin K. zopfii गलित पर्वाणु m. 
Pharm. कुंचितपुष्पि . 
kuth Pharm. कुष्ठ m. Kuhimann's green=basic copper kyanite=cyanite नीलस्फसैकिज m. (-इज 
chloride 
for efter mineral) 
I. (litre) स्थ. (प्रस्थ) 
label of a bottle कपी-नामपत्र 1. 1. (league) प्रक्. (प्रक्रोश) 
lab. fittings प्र. शा. अन्वाय क्ति. L. I (Lactobacillus) दु. (दुग्धाणु) labial palp Zool. अोष्ठ-मृश m. 
2 (Leptospira) अतिकु. (अतिकुन्तलाणु) labial tentacle Zool. ओष्ठानक n. 1-, 1. (levo-) Chem. वा., बा. (वाम-) Labiatae Bot. तुलसी-कुल 1. L. (limit) Matb. सी. (सीमा) 
labiate Bot. प्रोष्ठी (-इन् ) mfn. La (lanthanum) Chem. सु (सुजारला) laboratory कर्मशाला, विज्ञानशाला, प्रयोग LAB (low altitude bombsight) Radar शालाf. 
नी. उ. प्र. (नीचोच्छाय-प्रस्फोटदृष्टि) laboratory, chemical रसशाला f. lab. (laboratory) प्र. शा. (प्रयोग-शाला) laboratory method प्रयोगशाला-रीति f. lab. asst. प्र.शा. सहाय m. 
labour Com. श्रम, श्रमिक m. lab. bearer प्र.शा. प्रेष्य m. 
productive 1. उत्पादी श्रम . label n. नामपत्र n. 
unproductive 1. अनुत्पादी श्रम m. gummed 1. सश्लेष नामपत्र. labour caucus श्रमिक प्रसम्मिलन . 
microscopic slide 1. अण्व क्ष-सृप- labourer श्रमिक m. . 
नामपत्र. 
labrum Zool. (upper lip of insects) ' plain 1. अलिखित नामपत्र. 
उदोष्ठ m. ungummed 1. अश्लेष नामपत्र . lab. shaker प्र. शा. धवित्र . labelvb. नामकरण. (Hindi नामपत्र लगाना) labyrinth Anat. गहन 1. labelled नामपत्रित mfn. 
lac (from Sanskrit लाक्षा) लाक्षा f. labelled bottle नामपत्रित-कूपी f. lac dye Col. Ind. लाक्षा रंजक m. 
528 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
Lacertilia=Autosauria=Autosauri lactic acid Chem. fra 7 n. 
Zool. गोधिकानुगण m. 
lacto- T lacewing flies Zool. 571-TTTT m. Lactobacillus (L.) a n. () lachryma n. 
L. acidophil-aerogenes T lachrymal-lacrimal adj. 
arfa lachrymal = lacrimal 11. Anat. L. acidophilus (produces acid 
Teatfe n. 
____ in milk) अम्लजन दु. lacinia Zool. (inner glossa) Hasta L. bifidus (shows terminal bifur 
____cation) द्विभिद् दु. lac-insect Zool. 7TGT-RE m. 
L. of Boas-Oppler (occurs in lacitin (a colour lake) Col. Ind. The 
stomach contents in gastric 
cancer) Forreta. lack TT m. 
L. bulgaricus = Bacillus bul lackmoid=lacmoid (lacmus litmus garicus, B. gastrophilus, b. 
196) Col. Ind. diary m. 
of Massol, Boas - Oppler lacmus=litmus 19 n. 
bacillus, filamentary baci lacquer प्रलाक्षu. 
llus (found in Bulgarian yog lac research TTTT n. 
hurt, ferments milk and pro lacrima=lachryma 
duces a high degree of acidity) lacrimal = lachrymal n. 
of T. lacrimal adj. -, স্বাগৰ 1fz2. 
L. caucasicus (found in kefir 1. apparatus TTC ETFETT . 
___grains) दुग्धिरा दु. 1. bone atfe n. 
L. helveticus (occurs in Swiss 1. gland -fft m. 
cheese) af . 1. nerve #zat f. 
L. odontolyticus (credited with 1. sac 8-977 17. 
being one of the agents in lactam (lactone get in amino fanat) decay of teeth) GRETA 
Chem. grafa f. 
L. panis (occurs in sour dough) lactase Biochem. दुग्धेद m. 
__ अम्लपिष्ट दु. lactate Chem. (salt of ester of lactic lactoflavin=riboflavin grafufai f. 
acid) ata 1. 
lactometer gir-HIT m. lactation control factor Biochem. lactone Chem. et f. 
FTFT-aft T** n. 
lacto-phosphate Pharm. #777772 lactation period Zool. FFF-ETT, 
Firarafe m. 
lactose Chem. an. lacteals = lacteal vessels Anat. lacunae Zool, at f. 
पयोलसिनी, पयोलस-वाहिनी . 
lacustral=lacustrine lactic दुग्धिक mfn. 
lacustrian=lacustrine 
529 34﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
lacustrine = lacustral = lacus- lamina I Anat. (in case of bone) 
trian सरस्य mfn. (from सरस् lake) दलn. ladder निःश्रेणी 
2 Bot. (blade of expanded part of Ladenburg's distillation flask= a. foliage leaf) फलक n. 
Ladenburg flask Chem. (with 3 (a thin scale) sfeepair f. several bulbs in its long neck) lamina cribrosa Ophthalmol. चालनी 
कन्दग्रीव पासवन पलिप-कन्दग्रीव पलिघm. दलn. Ladenburg's formula (of benzene) Laminaria Bot. कपिशाप्यकति. (-ति for 
Chem. (prismatic formula) सांक्षेत्र प्रजाति genus) सूत्र n. 
Laminariaceae Bot. (a family of ladle दर्वीf. 
brown algae) कपिशाप्यक-कुल 1. ladling cup वपन-मल्लक m. 
laminate vb. Zool. I (to divide into 1. jug वपन-कुम्भी. 
laminae) दलभाजन 1. lady bookkeeper पुस्त-पालिका. 
2 (to cover with laminae)दलावरण . laevulinate=levulinate 
3 (to construct with laminae) दल laevuline मिष्टी [. 
निर्माण . laevuline blue Col. Ind. मिष्टी नील laminated Zool. I (consisting of 
m. 
laminae) दलमय afn. laevulose मिष्टधु . 
2 (shaped like laminae) दलरूप mfn. lagn. I परिवेष्ट m., पश्चायन । 
3 (bearing laminae) दली (-इन्) mfn. 2 Statistics facranT f. 
4 (covered with laminae) दलावृत lag vb. परिवेष्टन, पश्चायन . 
mfn. Lagenaria तुम्बीति f. (-ति for प्रजाति lammergeier = bearded vulture 
genus) 
Zool. जटायु m. L. vulgaris कटु तुम्बी f. 
lamp दीप m. lake (a pigment) लाक्षक m. 
1. black दीप-काल, दीप-कलिमा (-मन) m. lake black Col. Ind. लाक्षक काल m. 1. codes Ry. दीप-संकेत, दीप कालिमा 
1. bordeaux लाक्षक कपिशक m. 
(मन्) m. . 1. green लाक्षक हरि m. 
1. house दीप-गृह . 1. orange लाक्षक नारंग m. 
1. room Ry. दीप-कोष्ठ M. 1. ponceau लाक्षक अधिरक्तापीत m. paraffin 1. मृद्वसा-दीप m. 1. purple लाक्षक नीलारुण m. 
spirit 1. प्रासव-दीपm. 1. red लाक्षक रक्त m. 
lamp and scale arrangement Phys. 1. Scarlet लाक्षक शोण m. 
दीप-मापश्रेणी-विन्यास m. lamella r Bot. (like a leaf) दलक n. lamprey Zool. मीनलागी (-इन् ) m. 
2 Ophthalmol. दली. 
Lamus=Conorhinus (cone-nosed) Lamellibranchiata Zool. फलकक्लोमाः Zool. शंकुतुण्डाति f. (प्राति for प्रजाति 
genus) 
m.pl. 
530 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
lanacyl blue BB=fast wool blue land tortoise Zool. 777 TH m. 
N2B 
Lane's process Chem. (called also lanacyl violet B=fast wool violet iron process) अयोविधा 
NB 
Lange's test = colloidal gold lanafuchsine SB-wool red SB 
chloride test-gold-sol test:= lanasol brown Col. Ind. प्रोर्णालयन बन gold number method Parasitol. 
श्लेषाभ-सुवर्ण-परीक्षा 1. green प्रोर्णालयन हरि m. 
lano-ceric acid Cbem. ऊ-वसिक अम्ल 1. orange प्रोर्णालयन नारंग m. 
_n. I. red प्रोर्णालयन रक्त m. 
lanoglaucine W=marine blue NO lanazurine Col. Ind. प्रोर्णानभोनीली. lanolin, lanoline (wool fat) ऊर्णा-वपा lance कुन्त, प्रास M. lancelet Zool. प्रासिका. 
lantern वादीप, वातदीप m. lance naik कुन्त-नायक, उप-नायक m. 
magic 1. माया-दीप, चित्र-दीपm. lanceolate Bot. प्रासवत् 
lanthana, lanthania Chem. (lantha land भूमि . 
num oxide) सुजारजा. land and building भू-गृहादि . lanthanide Chem. सुजारेय 2. land breeze स्थल-समीर m. 
lanthanite Mineral. (hydrous lan land chain भू-शृङ्खला. 
thanum carbonate) सुजारांगिज m. land for building purposes वास्तु-भूमि (-इज for खनिज mineral) 
f. (ancient word) 
lanthanum Chem. सुजारला. landlord भस्वामी (-इन), भमिपति m. 
1. acetate सुजारला शुक्तीय n. land mammal Zool. भौम स्तनी (-इन्) m. 1. chloride सुजारला नीरेय . land mine Mil. भू-निस्फोट m. 
1. nitrate सुजारला भूयीय 1. land mortgage भू-प्राधि m. 
__ 1. oxide सुजारला जारेय .. land mortgage bank भू-प्राधि अधिकोष 1. sulphate सुजारला शुल्बीय 1. 
m. 
lap dog Zool. अंक-कुक्कुर m. Landolt's flask Chem. युग्म-पलिघ me lapis lazuli नीलोपल M. landplane भूविमान .. 
lap joint Mach. छादन सन्धि m. land revenue भू-आगम m. 
lapse P. व्यपगम, भ्रंश m. . Landsberger's apparatus Chem. (the lapse vb. व्यपगमन 1. 
elevation of the boiling point lapsed policy व्यपगत गोपलेख m. 
बुद्धदांक-उत्थापन) बुदुत्थ-साधिन . lapse of .policy Com. गोपलेख-व्यपगम, landscape भू-दृश्य n. 
__-_श m. land snail Zool. भौम मन्थर m. 
lard=adeps=adeps praeparatus= land surface भूतल . 
prepared lard Pharm. सकरवपा, वपा land survey भू-मापन ॥., भू-मिति. 
=संस्कृत-वपा. land surveying भू-मिति f. 
large बृहत्, महत् mfn. 
531 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
large bowel Anat. स्थूलान्त्र 1. large calorie-great calorie Bio- 
_cbem. महोष m. (महा-+उष) large-ceiled बृहत्-कोशावान् mfn. large crystal बृहत् स्फट M. 
latent गुप्त nfa. latent heat गुप्त ऊष्मा (-मन्) m. latent hypermetropia Ophthalmol. 
गुप्त-पश्चनाभिता . lateral Zool. (toward the side) 
large poodle dog Zool. महाकाय मानी lateral appendage Bot. पार्श्व-उपांगn. 
(-इन्) m. 
lateral bud Bot. पार्श्व-कलिका . larger image Ophthalmol. Futust the lateral displacement Phys. qram 
विस्थापन n. large-scale महानुमाप mfn. 
lateral fossa Anat. आभिपाव खात M. ___l. industry महानुमाप उद्योग M. lateral incisor Anat. वस्व (from 
1. production महानुमाप उत्पादन । काश्यपसंहिता-द्वौ उत्तरौ द्वौ अधरौ) large surface बृहत् तल n. 
lateral inversion Television पाव large toe अंगुष्ठ m. 
अपवर्तन . lark = skylark Zool. भारद्वाज m. lateralis = nervus lateralis Zool. 
(ancient word) 
(a nerve supplying a lateral line larva I (as a general word, cover- organ) 47-zat f. 
ing all stages between egg and lateral line Zool. पार्श्व-रेखा f. the adult) डिम्भ m. 
lateral lips Zool. पार्श्व-ओष्ठ m. 2 (the little one that is born) laterally symmetrical Zool. raat जातकm. 
संमित mfn. laryngeal Zool. घोषित्र 
lateral outgrowth Zool. पाव-उद्वर्ध m. laryngeal cavity Anat. कण्ठ-कूप m. lateral play Engin. पार्वीय-चाल m. laryngo-tracheal chamber (cham- lateral sheet of tissue Zool. पार्श्व 
ber above the lungs) क्लोमोत्तर वेश्म ऊति-स्तार m. 
lateral surface पार्श्व-तलn. larynx I घोषित्र . 
lateral veins I Zool. पार्श्व-सिरा f. 2 (in birds it does not function * 2 Bot. पाव-नाडी f. as a घोषित्र) अघोषित्र. 
lateral velocity (of an aircraft due -lase -अंशेद 
to air current) पार्श्व-वेग M., पार्श्व Lassaigne's test Chem. अपिक्षा-परीक्षा गति. 
f. (क्षा-क्षारातु) 
lateral ventricle I Anat. (three lasso-cell Zool. (an adhesive cell, hormed ventricle) = cerebral 
with a long anchoring filament) ventricle त्रिशृंग-गुहा f. लांगल-कोशा .. 
2 Zool. पार्श्व-गुहा, आभिपार्श्व-गुहा /. last अन्तिम mfn. 
lateral wall Ophthalmol. पार्श्व-भित्ति. last stage अन्तिम प्रक्रम m. 
latericeous=brick red इष्टका-रक्त m. 32 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
lateritious==brick red 
Laurent's acid (1-naphthylamine-s latero-posterior Zool. पार्श्व-पश्च mfn. sulphonic acid) Chem. Vantagealfit latex Bot. आक्षीर . 
अम्ल (१-उत्तरलतिक्ती-५-शुल्वायिक अम्ल) lathe Mach. वर्तनी f., कन्द m. (ancient Laurer's canal = Laurer-Stieda 
___word) 
canal Zool. (leading away from Lathyrus Bot. (leaves ending in trifid the junction of the oviduct and 
tendrils) त्रिपुटति f. (-ति for प्रजाति the vitelline duct) अप-संगम-कुल्या f. genus) 
lauric Chem. (laurel is Bengali जयपत्र) laticiferous Bot. (containing, bear जयपत्रिक mfn. 
ing, or secreting latex) आक्षीरी 1. acid जयपत्रिक अम्ल १. 
(-इन् ) mfn. 
lauric aldehyde=dodecoaldehyde Latimeria Zool. (internal nares ab- Chem. द्वादशसुव्यद m. 
sent) अनन्त साति. (-पाति for प्रजाति Lauth's violet-thionine genus) 
lava भराल m. latitude Math. अक्षरेखा ., अक्षवृत्त n. Lavandula Bot. आमोहनति (-ति for 
(ancient word) 
प्रजाति genus) latter अपर, उत्तर mfn. 
lavandula=lavender Pharm. प्रामोहन lattice प्रजाल, जाल 7. 
m. latum=broad fatia mfn. 
lavatory धावनी . latus rectum Conic Sections GETTT n. lavender I lavandula Pharm. laudanidine Chem. सर्पफेनेयी 
आमोहन m. laudanine Chem. सर्पफेनी . 
2 (bluish blue-red in hue, of low laudanosine Chem. सार्पफेनी. 
saturation and medium brilliance) laudanum = tincture of opium अवरक्तातिनील m. ___Pharm. अहिफेन-निष्कर्ष, सर्पफेन m. lavender colour = lavender अव laudanum poisoning Hygiene अहिफेन रक्तातिनील m. 
विषिता. 
law I Phys., Math.,etc. (rule)नियम m. laudide सर्पफेनेय . 
2 (body of laws collectively) laughing gas Chem. हसन-बाति m. 
संनियम m. Launaea Bot.तटपत्रीति. (-ति for प्रजाति 3(legal) विधि, धर्म m. 
genus) 
4 (an established rule) सिद्धान्त m. L. pinnatifida सामान्य तटपत्री /.(met (observed regularity in nature) 
with on the the sandy coasts of ऋत ., नियम m. 
India from Bengal to Ceylon) law faft m. laundry blue धावन नील m. 
1.-abiding विधि-चारी (-इन्) mfn. Lauraceae Bot. जयपत्र-कुल 1. 
1.-book विधि-पुस्तक .. laurate Chem. जयपत्रीय ॥. 
1.-breaker विधि-लोपक m. (ancient laurel जयपत्र. 
word) 
533 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
1. code विधि-संहिता, धर्म-संहिता . 1. of constant composition 
(ancient word) 
Chem. स्थिर-निबन्ध-नियम m. 1. court=court of law व्यवहारालय 1. of dominance प्रभुता-नियम m. 
12. (ancient word) 
1. of equivalent proportions 1.-giver-legislator विधायक m. 
Chem. समसंयुज-अनुपात नियम . 1.-maker-legislator विधिकर्ता 1. of floatation Phys. प्लवन-नियम m. 
(-तृ) m. 
1. of friction Phys. प्रतिरोध-नियम M. 1. member विधि-सदस्य M. 
1. of gravitation Phys. अभ्याकृष्टि 1. officer विधि-अधिकारी (-इन्) m. 
नियम m. 1. of the land देश-विधि m. 
1. of indices Math. घातांक-नियम m. 1. of nations=international law 1. of inertia Phys. जडता-नियम m. 
अन्ताराष्ट्रिय विधि m. 
1. of inertia of large numbers 1.-suit व्यवहार m. (ancient word) . Statistics महांक-जडता-नियम m. lawful विधिवत्, विध्यनुकूल, विध्यनुसार, वैध 1. of mass action Chem. पुंज-क्रिया 
Mfn. 
नियम m. lawful act विधिवत् कर्म n. 
1. of multiple proportions (Dal lawful age व्यवहार-वयस् m. 
ton's law) Chem. बहुगुणानुपात-नियम lawfully fafeast 
m. lawful money (which is legal 1. of nature प्रकृति-नियम m. 
tender) वैध धन 1. 
1. of parallelogram=parallelo lawful owner वैध स्वामी, धर्म-स्वामी ___gram law समान्तरभुज-नियम m. 
(-इन्) m. 
1. of probability Statistics संभा lawful wife धर्मपत्नी . 
विता-नियम m. lawless विधिहीन, विधिविरुद्ध min. 
1. of reciprocal proportions lawlessly विधिहीन, विधिविरुद्ध 
Chem. मिथोऽनुपात-नियम m. lawlessness विधिहीनता, विधिविरुद्धता 1. of signs Matb. चिह्न-नियम m. lawmaking n. विधिकरण 1. 
1. of triangle = triangle law lawmaking adj. (as a lawmaking ___Phys. त्रिभुज-नियम M. 
body) विधिकर, विधिकारी (-इन्) 1. of war युद्ध-नियम m. mfn. 
. Lawsonia Bot. रक्तगर्भति f. (-ति for legislative विधायी (-इन्) mfn. 
प्रजाति genus) lawmaking body विधिकारी वर्ग m. 
L. alba सामान्य रक्तगर्भm. . law of combination by volume lawsuit Et m. (ancient word) 
Chem. परिमया निबन्ध-नियम m. lawyer (practitioner of law) व्यवहारज्ञ, (Hindi परिमा के अनुसार निबन्ध का विधिविद्, व्यवहारवृत्ति m. नियम) 
lawyer-like (like, or becoming, a 1. of conservation of mass Phys. lawyer) 49ercafea mfn. 
पुंज-स्थिरता-नियम m. 
lax farfera mfn. 
534 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
laxative species रेच क्वाथक m. laydays Com.(days allowed for load 
ing and unloading ships) भरणरेचन 
दिवस .. layer-table (in bones) Anat. स्तरm. lay on the table पटले स्थापन M. (Hindi 
पटल पर रखना) layout अभिन्यास m. 1b. (pound) प्रां. (प्रांजलि) lb.ap. भै. प्रां. (भैषजिक प्रांजलि) lbs. per sq. inch. Mach. प्रांजलि प्रति ___ वर्ग प्रांगुल m. lb. t. (pound) है. प्रां. (हम प्रांजलि) 
L.C.D. Math. ल. स. ह. (लघुतम समहर) L.C.M. Math. ल. स.अ. (लघुतम समापर्वत्य) lead Chem. सीस . 
1. acetate = plumbi acetas (plumb. acet.)-sugar of lead 
Pharm. सीस शुक्तीय . 1. acetate (basic) सीस शुक्तीय n. 
(पैठिक) 1. acetate (basic) solution सीस । 
शुक्तीय (पैठिक) विलयन . 1. acetate paper सीस शुक्तीय पत्र ।. 1. acid cell सीस अम्ल कोशा f. I. arsenate सीस नेपालीय . 1. arsenate (technical, 
नेपालीय. (परिभाषित लेपी) 1. arsenate (technical powder) 
सीस नेपालीय. (परिभाषित क्षोद) 1. arsenite सीस नेपालित n. 1. azide सीस अजीवेय. 1. benzoate सीस धूपीय 1. 1. borate सीस टांकीया. 1. bromide सीस दुरेय ". 1. carbonate (precipitated) सीस 
प्रांगारीय n. (निस्सादित) 1. chamber सीस-वेश्मा . 
1. chromate (precipitated) सीस 
वर्णीय 1. (निस्सादित) 1. citrate सीस निम्बवीय .. 1. colour सीस-रंग M. 1. cyanide सीस श्यामेय . 1. dioxide सीस द्विजारेय. 1. ferro-cyanide सीस अयस्य-श्यामेय 
. 1. luoride सीस तरस्वेय. 1. foil सीस-पर्ण 1. 1. formate सीस वम्रीय n. 1. glance-galena Mineral. सीस __रुचा. 
1. glass सीच-काच m. 1. grain सीस-कण m. 1. gray सीस धूसर, प्रावपीत m. 1. hipputate सीस अश्वमेहीय . 1. iodate सीस जम्बीया. 1: iodide (crystalline, precipitated _powder) सीस जम्बेय n. (स्फटात्मक, 
निस्सादित क्षोद) 1. lactate सीस दुग्धीयn. 1. marcasite Mineral. सीस विमाक्षीक 
. 1. monoxide सीस एकजारेय. 1. nitrate सीस भूयीय n. 1. nitrite सीस भूयित .. . 1. ocher==massicot Mineral. सीस 
गरिक 1. oleate (technical) सीस म्रक्षीय n. 
(परिभाषित) 1. oxalate सीस तिग्मीय . 1. oxide सीस जारेय. 1. oxy-chloride सीस जार-नीरेय . 1. oxy-iodide सीस जार-जम्बेय. 1. pencil (pencil) सीसांकनी . (अंकनी) 1. per-oxide सीस अति-जारेय 1. 1. phosphate सीस भास्वीय M. 
535 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
10. 
1. plaster = plaster of lead leadhillite Mineral. (consists of sul 
Pharm. सीस-पटलेप m. (पटलेप is लेप phate and carbonate of lead) on पट cloth) 
सीसशुल्बांगिज m. (-इज for खनिज 1. poisoning Med. सीस-विषिता. mineral) 1. potassium iodide सीस दहातु leading difference Statistics प्रमुख 
जम्बेय. 
अन्तर. 1. powder सीस क्षोद m. 
leading screw नेतृ-भ्रमि m. 1. precipitated सीस निस्सादित m. leady (containing, or resembling, 1. salicylate सीस नम्रलीय n. ___ lead) सीसयुत, सीसदृश min. 1. seals सीस-मुद्रा . 
leaf Chem. 99 n. (as distinguished 1. sheet सीस-स्तार m. 
from foil पर्ण) 1. shot सीस-गोलिका f. 
silver 1.रजत-पत्र । 1. silicate सीस सैकतीय n. 
silver foil रजत-पर्णा . 1. silico-fluoride सीस सैकत-तरस्वेय 2 Bot., Com. पत्र, पर्णn. 
leaf-base Bot. पत्राधार m. 1. soap सीस-स्वफेन m. 
leaf bud पर्ण-कलिका. 1. spar=cerussite Mineral. सीस- leaf clasp पत्र-स्वज m. 
धात्विया . 
leaf gap = foliar gap पर्ण-अवकाश m. 1. stearate सीस-वसीय n. 
leaf green Col. Ind. पत्र हरि m. 1. sticks सीस-यष्टि f. 
leaflet Com., Bot. पर्णक . 1. succinate सीस तणीय n. 
leaf mosaic Bot. पर्ण-कुट्टिम . 1. sulphate सीस शुल्बीय . 
leaf-nest Zool. पलाश-नीड m. 1. sulphide सीस शुल्बेय .. 
leafnosed bat Zool. पुष्पनास चर्मचटक m. 1. tartrate सीस न्यासवीय n. 
leaf of gold स्वर्ण-पत्र . 1. tetra=ethyl सीस चतुर्दक्षुल n. leaf scar पत्र-किण m. 1. thio-cyanate सीस गन्ध-श्यामीय n. leaf skin Bot. पत्र-चर्मn. 1. thio-sulphate सीस गन्ध-शुल्बीय .. leafstalk Bot. पर्ण-वृन्त ॥. 1. tree=arbor Saturni सीस-वृक्ष m. leaf tendril Bot. पर्ण-संजनी /. 1. tungstate सीस चंडीय 1. 
leaf trace Bot. (vascular supply of 1. vitriol सीस-काचर।. 
___ the leaf) पत्र-प्रदाय M. 1. wire सीस-तन्तु m. 
leafy vegetables पत्र-शाक n. leaden I (made of lead) सीसमय mfn. leak vb. च्यवन १. (Hindi चूना) 
___2 (like lead) सीसवत् 
leakage I Mil. च्यावm. leaden chamber सीस-वेश्म 1. 
2 (allowance made for loss of leader of the House सभा-नेता (-1), liquids) च्यवन ., मोक m. 
सभागणी . 
___leak-proof अच्यावी (-इन्) mfn. leader of the opposition प्रतिपक्ष-नेता leaning tower Phys. नमत्प्रस्थाणु m. 
(-त) m. 
leap vb. कूर्दन 1. (Hindi कूदना) 
536 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
leap day Matb. अधिदिन' . 
lacanoric acid=diorsellinic acid leap year Math. अधिदिन वर्ष m. lecithin Biochem. (commercial leci lease In. Com. पट्टm. 
thin is obtained from egg yolk) 2 vb. पट्टदान . 
अण्डपीति /. lease-hold Com. पट्टधृत mfn. 
Leclanche cell (e. m. f. I.5 volts) least अल्पतम, अल्पिष्ठ, लघुतम mfn. 
प्येकबिन्दुपञ्च (कुप्यातु-अंगार) कोशा f. least common denominator Math. lecture व्याख्यान . 
लघुतम सम हर m. 
1. room व्याख्यान-कोष्ठ m. least common multiple Math. लघुतम 1. theatre व्याख्यान-मण्डप n. 
समापवर्त्य . 
lecturer व्याख्याता (-तृ) m. least count Phys. (of a measuring ledger (account book) Com. प्रपंजी . 
instrument) अल्पिष्ठ माप m. 
1. account प्रपंजी-लेखा . least distance (of distinct vision) 1. entry प्रपंजी-प्रविष्टिf. 
Optics अल्पिष्ठ-दूरता. 
bought 1. क्रीत-प्रपंजी . least squares Math. अल्पतम वर्ग m. cost 1. परिव्यय-प्रपंजी f. leather चर्म 1. 
creditor's 1.=suppliers 1. उत्तमर्ण leather bag चर्म-स्यून m. 
प्रपंजी. leather black Col. Ind. चर्म काल m. 
customers' 1. ग्राहक-प्रपंजी. 1. brown चर्म बभ्र m. 
debtors' 1. अधमर्ण-प्रपंजी. 1. lake चर्म लाक्षक m. 
general 1. सामान्य-प्रपंजी. 1. orange चर्म नारंग m. 
impersonal 1. अवैयक्तिक-प्रपंजी. 1. red-brown चर्म रक्त बभ्रु m. 
nominal 1. अभिहित-प्रपंजी. 1. yellow चर्म पीत m. 
personal 1. वैयक्तिक-प्रपंजी leathern bottle चर्म-कूपी f. (cf. the 
purchases 1. क्रय-प्रपंजी . 
sales 1. विक्रय-प्रपंजी . ancient word चर्म-कूप) 
sold 1. विक्रीत-प्रपंजी . leatherware चर्म-भाण्ड n. 
ledger bark Med. (derived from leaven (Lat. levare to raise) उत्थाप m. 
Cinchona ledgeriana; it contains __ (more specif. पिष्टोत्थाप) 
more sulphate of quinine than leave of absence अनुपस्थिति-अनमति f.. 
any other species) भूयोशुल्वीय वल्क leave out vb. उन्मोचन ॥. leave to withdraw motion प्रस्ताव को leek green अवयंतिपीत m. 
लौटा लेने की अनुमति f. (Hindi) left वाम mfn. leaving out उन्मोचन ॥. 
left close march Drill वामं संहत Leblanc soda process Chem. (manu- प्रयाणम् 
facture of sodium carbonate by left dress Drill बामर्जवः (वाम-+-ऋजवः) treatment of the salt-cake) पिविक्षार- left flank guard Mil. वामपार्श्व रक्षी विधा. 
(-इन) m. 
m. 
537 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
left-hand rule Elec. वाम-हस्त नियम legal rights) वैध पुरुष, विध्यधिकार 
प्राप्त पुरुष m. left-hand screw बाम-हस्त भ्रमि m. 
1. practitioner व्यवहार-वृत्ति m. left incline Drill अर्धवामम् 
1. procedure व्यवहार-मार्ग m. (anci left lobby Parliament वाम कक्ष m. 
___ent word) left out उन्मुक्त mfn. 
1. process वैध-प्रक्रिया, वैध-प्रणाली . left side I (of an equation) Math. 1. profession व्यवहाराजीविका f. 
वाम पक्ष m. 
1. representative वैध प्रतिनिधि m. 2 वाम पार्वn. 
1. residence वैध निवास m. left to itself स्वतः 
1. right वैध अधिकार m. left turn Drill वामावर्त: 
1. secretary विधि-सचिव m. left wheel Drill परिवामम् 
1. summons = summons आह्वान leg I टंग m. (Hindi टांग) 
_n. (ancient word) 2 Zool. पाद m. 
1. tender (such money as a credi legacy Law (property left to one by tor is compelled by law to 
will) qaft n. (abbreviated from accept) विधिग्राह्य .. रिक्थपत्र will+रिक्थ property left at 1. terms वैध पद n. death) 
1. theory वैध वाद m. 1. duty पत्ररिक्थ-कर m. 
__l. year=calendar year = civil legal 1 (of or pertaining to law) वैध । __year वैध वर्ष m. 
mfn. 
legalism विधिपरायणता f. 2 (based upon law) विधि, विधिविहित, legalist विधिपरायण m. विध्यनुकूल, विध्यनुसार min. 
legalize vb. विध्यनुकूलन, विध्यनुसारण, 1. action वैध क्रिया f. 
विध्यनुमोदन 1. 1. chemistry = forensic che legalize vb.=legitimatize = legi __mistry वैध रसायन ।. 
timize=legitimate vb. fqaz TFT 1. holiday वैध अवकाश m. 1. interpretation विध्यनुसार निर्वचन legibility पाठ्यता, वाच्यता... 
. 
legible पाठ्य, वाच्य mfn. 1. knowledge विधि-ज्ञान . 
legislate vb. विधिकरण, विधान n. 1. literature विधि-साहित्य . 
legislation विधान n. 1. medicine = forensic medi- legislative = lawmaking faeft, 
cine=medical jurisprudence विधानकारी (-इन्) Mfn. वैध आयुर्वेद m. 
legislative act विधायी अधिनियम m. 1. mortgage वैध प्राधि m. 
legislative assembly विधान-सभा, 1. name = legally recognized विधायिनी सभा f.. ___name वैध नाम विध्यभिज्ञात नाम n. legislative body (legislature, a body 
1. person (a person having full of legislators) faereft auf m. 
138 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
१. 
legislative business विधान-कर्म १. lemma I Math. (auxiliary proposi legislative council विधान परिषद् . tion) उपसाध्य .. legislative power विधायि-शक्ति . 
2 Statistics मान्यक 1. legislative procedure विधान-प्रक्रिया. Lemnos earth-red chalk legislator = law-giver विधायक = lemon निम्बु m.,n. (tree ism., fruit isn.) 
विधिकर्ता (-तृ) m. 
lemonade=citronade निम्बु-पानक . legislatorial विधायकीय mfn. 
lemon peel = limonis cortex legislature (legislative body) faunt- (limon. cort.) Pharm. fire-te m. 
मंडल . 
lemon yellow Col. Ind. निम्बु पीत m. legitimate adj. 1 (born in wedlock) lemur (Lat. Lemures nocturnal spirits; 
धर्मजात, धर्मज mfn. 
so named from its nocturnal 2 (real, genuine) यथार्थ mfn. 
habits) Zool. Fratrafo m. 3 (accordant with law) न्याय्य, न्यायो- lender Com. उद्धारदाता (-त), उद्धारद m. चित, यथायोग्य mfn. 
length पायाम m. (Hindi लम्बाई) legitimate vb. = legalize = legiti- length, cable's संदाम (सं). 
matize=legitimize vb. विध्यनुकूलन lens वीक्ष m. 
Lens Bot. मसूरति f. (-ति for प्रजाति legitimately न्याय्यतः, यथोचित, यथायोग्य genus) legitimate monarch (ruling by L.esculenta सामान्य मसूर.m. 
virtue of hereditary rights) न्याय्य lens lock Ophthalmol. वीक्ष-पाश m. एकराज, पित्रागत एकराज m. 
lens margin Zool. वीक्ष-तट m. legitimatize-legitimate vb. विध्यन- lens measure Ophthalmol. वीक्ष-माप m. 
कूलन . 
lens of orthoscope ऋज्वीक्ष-वीक्ष m. legitimize = legitimate ob. विध्यनु- lenticel Bot. (ventilating pore) वातन 
कूलन १. 
रन्छ । legume Bot. I शमीधान्य .. 
lenzine Col. Ind. (finely powdered 2=pod शिम्बि . 
____hydrated gypsum) प्राचूर्ण m. Leguminosae Bot. शिम्बि-कुल. leopard's-bane = Arnica montana leguminous (plants) Bot. शिम्बिमत्, = arnica = mountain tobacco 
शिम्बिकुल्य mfn. 
Pharm. गिरि-ताम्रकट m. Leipzig yellow=chrome yellow __lepidene (tetra-phenyl-furan)चतुर्दर्शल Leishmania सकशाति . (-आति for बसिन्य 1. 
प्रजाति genus) 
___lepidine Chem. (obtained by the L. braziliensis नासभक्षी सकश m. distillation of cinchonine facut) 1. donovani कालज्वर सकश m. 
वैतापी. L. infantum बाल सकश m. 
Lepidium Bot. Prefer f. (-fa for Leitch's blue न्यधिनील m. 
प्रजाति genus) Leithner blue=cobalt ultramarine L. sativum सामान्य चन्द्रशर m. 
539﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
lepidolite-lithia mica लघुजाभ्रक . 
cases of seven-day fever) सप्ताह Lepidoptera Zool. (wings having ज्वर अतिकु. 
small scales) शल्किपक्षाः m.pl. 
L. icterohaemorrhagiae (causes Lepidosiren Zool. अनुदरछिद्राति f. (-आति spirochetal jaundice) ज्वरिकामला 
for samfa genus) 
अतिकु. Lepisma Zool. रजतमीनाति (आति for L. icteroides (found in some 
Forfa genus) 
cases of yellow fever) ptavatar Lepismatidae = Lepismidae Zool. अतिकु. 
रजतमीन-वंश m. 
L. pyogenes (causes jaundice leprosy Med. HET 79165 1. (from fever in Java and Sumatra) 
सुश्रुत) 
सुवर्णद्वीप अतिकु. Leptadenia Bot. महामेदति . (-ति for leptospirosis Med. अतिकुन्तलाणुरुजा . 
प्रजाति genus) 
leptotene Biol. सूक्ष्मांशु mfn. L. sparturm सामान्य महामेद m. Leptothrix Bact. (a. genus of fungi) leptocentric Bot. (having phloem in तनुसूत्रकति f. (-ति for प्रजाति genus) 
the centre) Hematarferi mfn. 
L. innominata अनामिक तन सत्रक m. Leptopsylla Zool. fpirafa f. (-aft Leptotrichia (a genus growing in 
for प्रजाति genus) 
long unbranched threads) अशाखि Leptospira (a genus of spirochetes कति f. (-ति for प्रजाति genus) 
characterized by minute elemen- L. buccalis (found in the healthy tary spirals running through the mouth) मुख प्रशाखिक m. body) अतिकुन्तलाणु m. (अतिक.) (अति Leptus autumnalis=harvest mite because of close-set and numerous शारद इन्द्रगोपm. spirals कुन्तल) 
less, less than Math. कनीयस्, अल्पीयस् L. autumnalis (found in autumn mfn. (Hindi..से छोटा) ___ fever) शरज्ज्वर अतिक. 
-less अ-, -हीन L. bataviae (causes rice-field less accurately स्थूलरूपेण ___ fever) शालिज्वर अतिकु. 
lessen vb. ह्रसन, न्यूनभवन, ह्रासन, न्यूनकर L. biflexa द्विनत अतिकु. 
. L. canicola (produces an infec- less space Printing अल्पान्तर 
tious jaundice of dogs) श्वकामल less than See less अतिकु. 
lethal प्राणहर, घातक mfn. L. dentium (found in the dental letter पत्र n., चीठिका (ancient word), ____deposits of normal persons) चीठी f. 
दन्त अतिकु. 
1. balance 4T-IGT f. L. grippotyphosa (causes mud- 1. basket पत्र-पिटक n. ____ fever) कर्दमज्वर अतिकु. 
1. box==post box पत्र-पेटिका f. L. hebdomadis (found in the 1. of administration प्रशासन-पत्र १. 
540 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
. 
m. 
1. of allotment आवंटन-पत्र. leuco-quinizarin Col. Ind. fecta 1. of application प्रार्थना-पत्र n. 
विज्वरजिष्ठि. 1. of credit Com. प्रत्यय-पत्र n. ___leucorrhea Med. श्वेतस्राव M. 1. of hypothecation उपप्राधीयन-पत्र Leucus द्रोणपुष्पति . (-ति for प्रजाति 
genus) 1. of introduction परिचय-पत्र n. ___L. cephalotes सामान्य द्रोणपुष्प m. 1. of regret खेद-पत्र n. 
leukocyte=leucocyte 1.-sorter पत्र-पृथक्कर m. 
Levaditi's stain (silver staining of l. weight=paperweight पत्र-भार tissues) ऊतिरजताभिरंजक m. 
Levant umber-raw umber Col. letters patent एकस्व-पत्र 1. 
Ind. आम-बभ्रकी . lettuce (so called on account of levator bulbi Zool. कन्दोन्नम m. (पेशी) 
its milky juice) TTTF 11. 
levator palpebrae superioris Oph leucadendron, Melaleuca=caju thalmol. उत्तर वर्मोनम m.= उन्मीलक-पेशी 
put धवलद्रुम m. leucaemia Med. अतिश्वेतरक्तता. level n. संतल, समतल n. leuchtenbergite Mineral. (a variety level vb. (to impart colour evenly or 
of clinochlore faut containing of a uniform shade—said of a little or no iron अनयस्) अनयो- dye) समतलन n. 
भ्रासैकिज m. (-इज for खनिज mineral) level crossings Ry. समतल पारण.. leucine (Gk, leukos white) Biochem. level ground Rly. ##-# f. 
विश्विती. 
levelling समतलन n. albumin शिवति . 
1. bulb समतलन कन्द m. leuco- सित-, श्वेत 
mercury 1. bulb पारद समतलन कन्द m. leuco-blast Anat. सितकोशा-कृत् m., 1. table समतलन पटल n. 
बालसितकोशा f. (an immature levelling red Col. Ind. समतलन रक्त m. leucocyte) 
lever I उद्याम m. leucocyte Anat. सितकोशाf. 
2 (handle) हस्तक m. leuco dyes=vat dyes सित रंजक m. 1. key उद्याम-कुञ्ची . leuco-gallo-thionine Col. Ind. fast 1. mechanism Bot. उद्याम-रचना. 
द्रुस्फोट-गन्धी 
1. switch उद्याम-संवियुत् m. leuco-indanthrene blue Col. Ind. levigated chalk = precipitated 
सित-निनील-क्षामेण्य नील m. 
___chalk निस्सादित-खटी. leucol brown Col. Ind. सितव बभ्रु levitation उत्थापन १. 
m. 
levo- (11) Chem. वाम- (वा.) 1. dark green सितव असित हरि m. levo camphor = matricaria cam 1. yellow सितव पीत m. 
phor Chem. वाम कर्पूर m. leuco-plast Bot. सित-घट m. 
levo-compound वाम-संयोग m. 
541 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
levopinene वाम-निसरलेन्य 1. 
consisting of a fungus 94 and levo-rotatory Phys., Chem. arata mfn. an alga. प्राप्यक) कवाप्य m. levulin Chem. fafce f. 
lichen ruber (red-coloured scaly levulinate Chem. मिष्टियीय .. 
skin eruption) अरुणशल्क m. levulinic Chem. मिष्टियिक mfa. licorice=liquorice levulose (Lat. laevus left + -ule a lid 1 fra 1. 
diminutive suffix+ose) वामधु, मिष्टधु 2 (of the eye) वर्त्म ?. n. (the sweetest sugar known. 1. cell Bot. पिधान-कोशा. It occurs in honey. It is obtain serrated crucible 1. कचवत् मूषा ed by inversion of sucrose) 
पिधान. Lewis white lead=basic sulphate Lieberkuhn's glands = crypts of 
white lead 
Lieberkuhn=glands of Lieber Leyden blue=cobalt ultramarine kuhn Anat. प्रान्त्रश्लेष्मकला-ग्रंथि m. Leydig's cell Anat. (an interstitial Liebermann reaction Chem. (nitro 
cell of the testis) वृषणिजनकोशा, so reaction for phenols) दर्शवार्थ वृषणान्तरालकोशा. 
भूय्य-प्रतिक्रिया . Li (lithium) Chem. ल (लघ्वातु) Liebermann's test (for proteins; a liability Com. देयता f., देय, देयधन, ऋण precipitate is made from urine 
with alcohol....) प्रोभूजिनार्थ liability for pensions उत्तरवेतनार्थ देयता मूत्रादि-परीक्षा . . 
Liebig condenser Chem. (consist liable धर्मबद्ध, उत्तरदायी (-इन्) mfn. 
ing of two tubes one inside liaison (link) प्रथन । 
the other, with space between liana, liane Bot. (any climbing plant अन्तरा for circulation of water) 
....) आरोही (-इन्) m. 
अन्तरोद संघनक m. libel Law अपमानलेख m. 
lien Law ग्रहणाधिकार m. liberate vb. विमोचन ।.. 
lieutenant I (Army) बलपति m. liberated विमुक्त mfn. 
2 (Royal Navy) महापोतिक m. liberation fantaa n. 
lieutenant colonel (Army) बलाधिपति library पुस्तकालय m. 
m. 1. committee पुस्तकालय-समिति . lieutenant commander (Royal 1. science पुस्तकालय-विज्ञान n. 
Navy) उपाधिपोतिक m. license I अनुज्ञा f. (ancient word) lieutenant general (Army) महाचमूपति 
2 अनुज्ञापत्र licensee अनुज्ञाधारी (-इन्) m. (short for life I जीवन . _ अनुज्ञापत्रधारी) 
2 (quality of being a living being) licensor अनुज्ञाता (-तृ) m. 
जीवत्व १., जीविता f. lichen Bot. (a composite organism, 3 (duration of life) जीवनकाल m. 
_m. 
542 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
4 (a living being) ofta m. 
1. fast red for lakes लाक्षकार्थ लघु 5 आयु. 
स्थिर रक्त m. life annuity आजीवन वार्षिकी . 
1. fast yellow=wool fast yellow 1. assurance जीवन-प्रगोपm. 
1. green लघु हरि m. 1. assurance policy जीवन-प्रगोपलेख 1. grey लघु धूसर m. 
1. orange लघु नारंग M. 1. estate Lawn आजीवन सम्पत्ति 
1. red लघु रक्त m. 1. insurance जीवन-आगोप m. light-coloured plumage Zool. qiGT 1. of an asset सम्पत्ति-जीवनकाल m. तनु . 1. policy जीवन-गोपलेख m. 
light cork लघु-त्वक्षा : 1. tenant आजीवन भाटकी (-इन) m. lighten vb. लघुकरण 1. life cycle Biol. जीवन-चक्र .. 
light engine Rly. लघु गन्त्र . life history I जीवन-कथा . 
lighter ज्वालक m. 2 (of an animal) Zool. जीवनवृत्त ।. __electric gas 1. विद्युद्-वाति-ज्वालक m. life of gun Mil. शतघ्नी-पायु.. 
lighter-than-air flying machines life of rifle Mil. नालिका-पाय . 
Phys. वाताल्लघु उड्डयन-यन्त्र n. life statistics जीवन-समंक M. 
light gun Mal. लघु-शतघ्नी . life structure Biochem. जीव-शरीर .. lighthouse दीप-स्तम्भ m. lift (of aeroplanes) उद्वहन ., उद्वाह m. lighthouse chrome blue Col. Ind. lift n. Phys. उद्वाहन 1. 
दीपस्तम्भ वर्णक नील m. ___1. pump Mach. उद्वाही उदंच m. 
1. chrome brown दीपस्तम्भ वर्णक lifting power Phys. उद्वहन-शक्ति . 
बभ्रुm. lifting pump=lift pump 
1. chrome cyanine दीपस्तम्भ वर्णक ligament Anat. स्नायु, अस्थिरज्जु ।. 
श्यामी. ligamentum nuchae Zool. घाटा-स्नायु 1. chrome orange दीपस्तम्भ वर्णक 
नारंगm. light (science) प्राकाशिकी . 
1. chrome red दीपस्तम्भ वर्णक रक्त light n. प्रकाश m. 
1. charges प्रकाश-व्यय m. 
1. chrome yellow दीपस्तम्भ वर्णक 1. intensity Phys. प्रकाश-चण्डता. 
पीत m. 1. quantum Phys. प्रकाश-ऊर्जाणु m. lighthouse tube Radar (so called 
1. radiation Phys. प्रकाश-विकिरण . because of its shape) दीपस्तम्भ नाल light adj. लघु mfn. (opp. heavy गुरु) m. light air (1-3 m.p.h.) अतिमन्द समीर m. lighting प्रकाश m., प्रकाशन 1. 
(See Beaufort's Wind Scale) 
1. and heating charges प्रकाशन light breeze (4-7 m.p.h.) मन्द समीर m. तथा तापन-व्यय m. 
(See Beaufort's Wind Scale) 1. charges प्रकाशन-व्यय m. light blue Col. Ind. लघु नील m. lightly Engin. लघु, लघुतया 
543 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
2. 
light magnesia Chem. लघु-भ्राजा f. 2 (attributively, delicately white) light oil Chem. लघु तैल n. 
नलिनी-श्वेत (as hand) light petroleum लघु मृत्तल n. 
3 (pallid) पांडुर mfn. light refreshment लध्वाश m., जलपान lily-of-the - valley - convallaria 
दरी-नलिनी . (दरी valley) light tank Mil. लघु विचक्र 7. 
lily-of-the-valley flowers=conval light-year Astron. प्रकाशवर्ष m., (when laria Pharm. दरीनलिनी-पुष्प . 
expressed in miles, approxima- Lima wood Col. Ind. (a soluble red tely) षण्महापद्मक्रोशक m. (6X1012 wood) foreactor m. 
miles ; महापद्म is To12 acc. to लीला- limb I अवयव m. aat); (when expressed in metres) 2 बाहु, पाद m. उपान्त्य-मान m. (७.१XIoli meters; limber-neck शिथिल-ग्रीव m. 
अन्त्य is rob acc. to लीलावती) limbus Ophthalmol. (corneo-scleral lignification Bot. लगुडीयन 1. 
junction) स्वच्छान्त m. lignin Bot., Chem. लगुडि f. 
lime I चूर्ण, चूर्णक m. (Hindi चूना) lignite. = brown coal Mineral. बभ्रु burnt 1. दग्ध चूर्णक m. 
अंगारm. 
quick 1. जीव चूर्णक m. ligno- लगुड 
slaked 1. शान्त चूर्णक m. ligno - cellulose Bot., Chem. लगुड 2 Bot.=linden वासच्छाय m. 
कोशाधू .. 
lime blue Col. Ind. चुर्णक नील m. ligulate Bot. जिबित mfn. 
limelight = calcium light चूर्ण ligule Bot. forfait f. 
प्रकाश-चूर्णातु-प्रकाश m. ligylate=ligulate 
lime pit चूर्णक-गर्त m. like=similar सजातीय, सदृश, समरूप mfr. limestone Petrog. चूर्णप्रस्तर m. like charges Phys. सजातीय प्रभार m. 
limewater चूर्णक-जल .. likeness==similarity समरूपता, सादृश्य 
limit Math. सीमा f. 
method of limits सीमा-रीति . like parallel forces Phys. सजातीय 
limitation Math. परिसीमा f. समान्तर बल n. like poles Phys. सजातीय ध्रुव n. 
limitation of life in space Zool. lilac I प्ररक्तातिनील m. 
पृथिवी पर जीवन की परिसीमा /. (Hindi) 2 प्रावरक्त m. 
limitations of statistics fferait Liliaceae Bot. पलाण्डुकुल . 
परिसीमा f. Lilium Bot. नलिनीति . (-ति for प्रजाति limited I Math. परिमित mfr. 
genus) . 
2 Com. सीमित mfn. . L. bulbiferum fire afferat f. 
1. company सीमित प्रमण्डल n. lily I (plants bearing large showy 1. guarantee company सीमित 
flowers on tall slender stem fratf. प्रत्याभूति-प्रमण्डल .. 
544 
. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
1. liability Law सीमित देय 1. _Limulus Zool. खड्गपुच्छाति f. (आति for 1. -liability company सीमित-देय प्रजाति genus) 
प्रमण्डल n. 
Linde-Caro process Chem. (hydror 1. partner सीमित भागी (-इन) m. gen from water gas by freezing 1. partnership सीमित-भागिता 
CO) श्यान-विधा . limiting सीमा-वन्धन 1. 
Linde's process Chem. (Linde intro. limiting factor Bot. सीमा-कारक ।. 
duced a scrubber उद्धावक) उद्धावक limiting form Matb. भीमा-रूप 1. 
विधा. limiting friction=maximum fric- line I JET f.. 
tion Mech. सीमा-संघर्ष = भूयिष्ठ संघर्ष 2 Eler. तन्तुपथ m. 
m. 
linea alba Anat. श्वेत-रेखा . limiting layer Bot. सीमा-स्तर ॥ Lineae Bot. अतसी-कुल .. limiting membrane = membrana linear I रेखीय mfn. (cf. रैखिक geomet 
limitans Zool. सीमा-कला. 
rical) limiting point Math. सीमा-बिन्दु . 2 (along the line) अनुरेख nfo. limiting value fath. सीमा /. 
3 Bot. रेखाबद्ध mfn. limit of magnification विशालन-सीमा 4 Math. एकघात 
linear acceleration Phys. अनुरेख त्वरण Limnatis Zool. नासजलौकाति f. (आति . 
for प्रजाति genus) 
linear algebra = hyper algebra L. nilotica सामान्य नासजलौका f. एकघात बीजगणित . . limnetic adj. (Gk. limne pool) Zool. linear correlation Statistics center 
कासारीय mfm. 
सहसम्बंधM. limnimeter=limnometer कासार-तल- linear defence Mil. रेखीय-प्रतिरक्षा /. 
मानm. 
linear diagram Statistics रेस्त्रीय चित्र limno-biology कासार-जैविकी 
n. limno-bios Biol. कासार-जीवाःm.pl. linear equation Math. एकघात समीकार limnology कासारिकी, कासार-विद्या . . m. limnometer = limnimeter कासार- linear expansion Phys. अनुरेख विस्तरण 
तलमान m. 
. limnophilous ZOOL. कासारप्रिय mfn. linear expression Math. एकघात limonene Chem. निम्बुकेन्या . 
पदसंहति . limonin Chen: निम्बुकि. 
linear factor Math. एकधात खण्ड m. limoniscortex-lemon peel Pharm. linear leaf Bot. रेखापत्र । 
निम्बु-शल्क m. 
linear magnification Phys. अनरेख limonite=brown hematite Mineral. विशालन ।. 
कपिशिजm. (-इज for खनिज mine- linear measure रेखा-माप m. 
linear motion Phys. अनुरेख-गति f. 
545 35 
ral) 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
res 
linear propagation Phys. अनुरेख (roads, railways, waterways, tele 
प्रचरण, अनुरेख प्रचारण ?. 
graphs, telephone, airways, radio) linear strain=longitudinal strain संचारपथm. 
Phys. अन्वायाम-विकार m. 
line space lever पंक्ति-अन्तर-उद्यामm. linear unit Matb. रेखीय एकक . lingua=hypo-pharynx Zool. for at f. linear velocity Phys. अनुरेख प्रवेग m. lingual artery Anat. जिह्वा-रोहिणी /. line at infinity Math. अनन्ति-रेखा f. Linguatula Zool. जिह्वाभाति . (आति lined I अन्तःस्तृत mfn. 
for starfa genus) 2 Zool. आस्तरित mfn. 
L. serrata दन्तुर जिह्वाभm. line diagram Mach. रेखा-चित्र n. Linguatulida foramat: m. pl. line focus Ophthalmol. रेखा-नाभि . Linguatulidae (a family) जिह्वाभ-वंश linen I क्षुमा . 
m. 2 (cloth) क्षौम १. (made of भुमा linguistics=philology=linguistic linen) 
sciences science of language line of action Mach. क्रिया-रेखा, कार्य भाषा-विज्ञान . 
रेखा 
linifolius Bot. (leaves like flax) line of centres Math. केन्द्र-रेखा. 
उमापत्र । line of collinearity Math. संरेखता-रेखा liniment Pharm. मद्य . 
1. of aconite = linimentum line of communications Mal. संचार aconiti (lin. aconit.) प्रविष-मृद्य १. 
पथ m. . 
1. of ammonia = linimentum line of equal proportional varia ammoniae (lin. ammon.) ___tion Statistics समानुपाति-विचरण-रेखा 
तिक्तातु-मृद्य . line of Hensen=mesophragma= 1. of belladonna == linimentum 
M band or disk Zool. सित-रेखा 
belladonnae (lin. bellad.) कंटा line of intersection Math. मिथश्छेद लिका-मृद्य . 
रेखा . 
l. of capsicum = linimentum line of regression प्रतीपगमन-रेखा . 
capsici (lin. capsic.) रक्तमरिच line of section Math. छेद-रेखा f. 
मृद्य . line of supply Mil. प्रदाय-पथ m. 
1. of chloroform=linimentum line of the greatest slope महत्तम-प्रवण chloroformi (lin. chlorof.) नीर 
रेखा. 
वम्रल-मृद्य . liner 1 Aviation (one of a number of 1. of croton oil = linimentum 
airships under one management, crotonis (lin. croton.) जयपाल plying regularly over a route) मृद्य . पंक्तियान 1. 
1. of mercury = linimentum 2 Macb. आस्तर m. 
hydrargyri (lin. hydrarg.) TG lines of communication Mil. मृद्य . 
146 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
cum 
1. menulis salond linit 
1. of mustard linimentum 1. camphorae compositum = 
sinapis (lin. sinap.) *9-75 17. compound liniment of cam 1. of opium=linimentum opii phor 1977-23 11. 
(lin, opil) f57-6 1. 
1. capsici=liniment of capsi 1. of potassium iodide = lini 
mentum potassii iodidi (lin. 1. chloroformi = liniment of pot. iod.) ETE FUT 11. 
chloroform 1. of potassium iodide with 1. crotonis=liniment of croton 
soap=linimentum potassii oil iodidi cum sapone (lin. pot. 1. hydrargyrizliniment of mer iod.c.sap.) स्वफेनसहित दहातु जम्बेय cury Ha n. 
1. iodi saat-6 11. 1. of soap=linimentum sapo 
1. iodi meth, E. 27271-HET 11. nis (lin. sap.) F461-493 n. 
1. menthol qu149-721h. 1. of turpentine = linimentum 1. methylis salicylatis compo 
terebinthinae (lin. terebinth.) situm=compound liniment fag ST-HTET N. 
of methyl salicylate संयुत linimentum=liniment Pharm. 79 प्रोदल नम्रलीय-मृद्य .. 
1. opii=liniment of opium 1. A.B.C. 5.. . E n. equal 1. opii ammon. rect. Ta Ferrat. 
parts of the liniments of aco HET n. 
nite प्रविष, belladonna कंटालिका 1. opii meth. St. 49-77 n. and chloroform नीरवम्रल) 
1. potassii iodidi=liniment of 1. A.B.C. meth. . . . . HET potassium iodide 
n. 
1. potassii iodidi cum sapone 1. aconiti-liniment of aconite 
liniment of potassium 1. aconiti meth. sia, sf&qet n. iodide with soap 1. ammoniae=liniment of am 1. saponis=liniment of soap 
monia 
1. saponis meth.ste. 794-7 n. 1. belladonnae = liniment of 1, sinapisaliniment of mustard 
belladonna 
1. sinapis meth. t. 789-FET N. 1. belladonnae meth. FG. FICT 1. terebinthinae=liniment of 
f19T-n. 
turpentine 1. camphorae ammoniatum= 1. terebinthinae acetic effi 
ammoniated liniment of face-HET . 
camphor तिक्तातीयित कपूर-मृद्य 2. linin Chem. अतसिकि . (derived from 1. camphorae ammon. meth. afat Cathartolinum catharti 
16. feffet. Ha n. 
547 
cum) 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
lining I पास्तर M. 
linolein Chem. आतसिन m. 2 (covering the inside) 77:Tun. linolenate Chem. #tarctente n. link n. I Mach. (a short connec- linolenic acid Chem. (a colourless 
ting rod with a hole or pin at oil of fishy odour accompanying each end; specif., in steam linoleic acid in drying oils) - engines, the slotted bar to the after 74 11. opposite ends of which the linolenin Chem. Fatale f. eccentric rods in a link motion linoleum TTT n. (fr. a linseed are jointed) Tum. 
oil) 2 (a measure of length) (li.) Fct linoxyn, linoxin (linoleic+ oxygen; f. (F.) 
an elastic resinous solid formed 3 कटी. (Hindi कड़ी) 
when linseed oil is oxidized) 4=linkage, union, bond Chem. FUTTE m. (a mechanism by means of which lint Pharm, af9 m. atoms are held together in a Linum अतसीति . (-ति for प्रजाति molecule) 74 m. 
genus) link vb. Chem. Te n. 
L. usitatissimum सामान्य अतसी linkage 1 (system of links) Fet-nefa 
lipo m. (also in bones) 2 Zool. tendency of genes to lip-, lipo- fata remain associated in inheritance) lipar-, liparo- fah संयाविता . 
liparoid Med. fa * mfn. link motion Mach. €19a-fa f. liparous Med. fahét (-5F), 194614 mfn. link relatives = chain relatives lipase Biochem. faham. 
Statistics (the ratio between the lipide Biochem. fataa n. price of the current year and lipin (Gk, lipos fat + - in) Biochem." that of a standard year) sem fara f. 
7474a 11. 
lipo-, lip-(Gk. lipos fat) Fac linnaeite Mineral. (essentially a co- lipo-blast Anat. 247-82 m. 
balt sulphide) - fragt m. (-54 lipo-chrome Biochem. Fakamquf m. for afi mineral) 
lipochromogen Biochem. falcaui-stat linolate=linoleate linoleate Chem. प्रातसीय . 
lipoid Biochem. विमेदाभ mfm. linoleic Chem. (Lat. "linum-toleum lipolytic lipase Biochem. #atarnfahaa 
oil + - ic) Tafaf mfn. 
m. 1. acid (found as a glyceride in lipophore Zool. (a pigment cell con linseed and other oils) at t aining a lipochrome pigment) 
FT 1. 
विमेद-वर्णकोशा f. 
m. 
548 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
T 
. 
. 
. 
liquefaciens, liquefacient तरलक 1. e. of grindelia = extractum 
mfn. 
grindeliae liquidum (ext. liquefication तरलन M. 
grindel. liq.) तरल कासपत्र-निस्सार liquefied तरलित mfn. liquefy vb. द्रवीकरण, तरलन n. 
1. e. of hamamelis=extractum liquid तरल M. 
hamamelidis liquidum (ext. liquid Com. तरल, रोक M. 
hamam. liq.) तरल सिलक-निस्सार ___ 1. assets रोक-सम्पनि. 
m. liquidate vb. Law निस्तारण, अवसायन ". 1. e. of hydrastis = extractum liquidated Law निस्तीर्ण, अवसायित nfr. hydrastis liquidum (ext. hy liquidation Law निस्तारण, अवसायन 1. drast. liq.) तरल पीतमूल-निम्मार m. liquidator Law निस्तारक, अवसायक m. 1. e. of hyoscyamus = extrac liquid extract Pharm. तरल निस्सार tum hyoscyami liquidum 
m. 
(ext. hyoscy. liq.) तरल कुक्कुटविष 1. e. of buchii = extractum निस्सारm. 
buchu liquidum (ext. buchu 1. e. of ipecacuanha = extrac liq.) तरल गुरुगन्ध-निस्सार m.. 
tum ipecacuanhae liquidum 1. e. of cascara sagrada = ex (ext. ipecac. liq.) तरल वममूल 
tractum cascarae sagradae निस्सार m. liquidum (ext. casc. sagr. liq.) 1. e. of jaborandi = extractum ==fluid extract of cascara sag. jaborandi liquidum (ext. ja rada तरल पुण्यवल्क-निस्सार m. 
borand. liq.) तरल स्वेदन-निस्सार m. 1. e. of coto = extractum coto 1. e. of kava=extractum kavae liquidum (ext. coto liq.) तरल • liquidum (ext. kavae liq.) तरल 
प्रान्त्रवल्क-निस्सार m. 
मदमरिच-निस्सारm. 1. e, of couch grass = extrac 1. e. of liquorice = extractum 
tum agropyri liquidum (ext. glycyrrhizae liquidum (ext. agropyr.liq.) तरल शायिघास-निस्सार ____glycyrrh. liq.) तरल मधुयष्टि-निस्सार 
m. 1. e. of cubeb=extractum cube 1. e. of nux vomica=extractum 
bae liquidum (ext. cubeb. liq.) nucis vomicae liquidum (ext. तरल गन्धमरिच-निस्सार m. 
nuc. vom. liq.) तरल कुलक-निस्सार 1. e. of damiana = extractum 
m. damianae liquidum (ext. da 1. e. of opium=extractum opii 
mian. liq.) तरल वाजपत्र-निस्सार m. liquidum (ext. opii liq.) तरल - 1. e. of ergot-extractumergo 
अहिफेन-निस्सार m. tae liquidum (ext. ergot. liq.) . 1.e. of pulsatilla = extractum तरल रुक्कवक-निस्सार m. 
pulsatillae liquidum (ext. 
m. 
549﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
pulsat. liq.) तरल अदलपुष्प-निस्सार 
मा. 
1. e. of rhubarb = extractum 
rhei liquidum (ext. rhei liq.) 
तरल चीनरेच-निस्सार m. 1. e. of senega=extractum se 
negae liquidum (ext. seneg. 
liq.) तरल क्लोम्यमूल-निस्सार M. 1. e. of senna=extractum sen 
nae liquidum (ext. senn. liq.) 
तरल रंगलता-निस्सार m. 1. e. of taraxacum = extractum 
taraxaci liquidum (ext. tarax. 
liq.) तरल दुग्धतिक्ता-निस्सार m. 1. e, of valerian=extractum va 
lerianae liquidum (ext. va lerian. liq.) तरल जटिला-निस्सार 
m. 
liquid glucose = glucosum liqui 
dum (glucos. liq.)=corn syrup 
Pharm. तरल मधुमn. liquid measure तरल माप m. liquid paraffin=paraffinum liqui 
dum (paraff. liq.) Pharm. तरल 
मृद्वसा. liquid sulphur black Col. Ind. तरल 
शुल्बारि काल m. liquor I मदिरा 
2 रस m. 3 Pharm. (Lat. 'liquid', an aqu 
eous solution; not obtained by 
distillation) तरली., विलयन . 1. ammon. acetatis conc. संकेन्द्रित 
तिक्त. शुक्तीय विलयन 1. 1. ammon. citratis conc. संकेन्द्रित 
तिक्त. निम्बवीय विलयन 1. 1. ammon. citratis dil. मन्द तिक्त. . निम्बवीय विलयन n. 
1. ammoniae fortis = strong 
solution of ammonia प्रबल तिक्ताति-विलयन .. 1. ammonii acetatis dilutus = 
dilute solution of ammo nium acetate मन्द तिक्तातु शवतीय विलयन . 1. arsenicalis=arsenical solu __tion नैपालिक विलयन . 
1. arsenic hydrochloride नेपाली 
उदनीरेय विलयन 1. 1. arseni et hydrargyri iodidi= 
solution of arsenous and mer curic iodides नेपपारदिक जम्बेय विलयन n. 1. bismuthi et ammonii citra.. 
tis=solution of bismuth and ammonium citrate fHETT TIT 
तिक्तातु निम्बवीय विलयन . 1. calci चूर्णातु-विलयन ॥. 1. copaibae et buchu cum cu 
beb गंधमरिच सहित श्लेष्मयास तथा 
गुरुगंध विलयन . 1. epispasticus = blistering ___liquid उदस्फोट-विलयन n. 
1. ferri perchloridi = solution ___of ferric chloride अयसिक नीरेय 
विलयन n. 1. ferri phosphatis = solution 
of ferrous phosphate अयस्य 
भास्वीय विलयन . 1. ferri phosphatis compositus 
==compound solution of fer rous phosphate संयुत अयस्य भास्वीय विलयन 1. 1. hydrargyri perchloridi = so . lution of mercuric chloride 
पारदिक नीरेय विलयन . 
550 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
MA 
- 
m. 
1. iodi fortis = strong solution 1. red 6 B = azorhodine 6 B 
of iodine प्रबल जम्बुकी-विलयन n. 1. yellow T = fast yellow 1. iodi mitis=weak solution of list Fat f. 
iodine दुर्बल जम्बुकी-विलयन M. 1. of business Parliamentary 1. morphinae hydrochloridi = Practice कार्य-सूची . 
solution of morphine hydro- price 1. मूल्य-सूची. 
chloride प्रमीली उदनीरेय विलयन n. lit. (liter) स्थ. (प्रस्थ) 1. opii sedativus=sedative so- -lite (a combining form denoting a 
lution of opium शमक अहिफेन- rock, fossil in stone, etc.)-उपल विलयन . 
liter, litre (1., lit.) प्रस्थ M. (स्थ.) 1. picis carbonis = solution of literal coefficient Math वर्णात्मक गुणक 
coal tar अंगारराल-विलयन . 1. plumbi fortis=strong solu- literature साहित्य n. 
tion of lead subacetate प्रबल liter bottle प्रस्थ-कपी. सीस अनुशक्तीय विलयन 1. 
_-lith -उपल 1. potassii hydroxidi = solu- litharge (Gk. lithargyros foam of 
tion of potassium hydroxide silver) रजतफेन m. दहातु उदजारेय विलयन .. 
lithia Chem. (lithium oxide) लघुजा 1. quininae ammoniatus=am- f. 
moniated solution of qui 1. chlorite लघुजा हरितिज m. 
nine तिक्तातीयित विज्वरी-विलयन . 1. emerald-hiddenite Mineral. 1. sarsae co. conc. संकेन्द्रित संयुत लघुजा-मरकत .. 
प्रासारिवा-विलयन 1. 
1. mica = lepidolite Mineral. 1. strychninae hydrochloridi= लघुजाभ्रक १. 
solution of strychnine hy- 1. water Chem. लधुजा-जल .. drochloride विषतिन्द्रकी उदनीरेय lithiate vb. Chem. लघुजायन .. विलयन ॥ 
I. (to combine with lithia) ECETT 1. taraxaci दुग्धतिक्ता-विलयन ।. 
योजन 1. 1. tolutanus == solution of tolu 2 (to impregnate with lithia) लघुजा 
विरालधूपियास विलयन 1. 
व्यापन .. liquorice=glycyrrhiza (glycyrrh.) lithic Chem. feqe mfn. 
=liquorice root=glycyrrhizae 1. acid लध्विक अम्ल . radix Pharm. Faarfoe f. 
lithio- (lithium) लघु liquorice root = liquorice 
lithio-philite Mineral. (a phosphate Lissajous figures Phys. युगलसंध्वनिक of iron, manganese, and lithium) 
प्राकृति. 
__ अलोलभिज m. (-इज for खनिज mine lissamine green V conc. = alkali ral) 
fast green V 
lithite=statolith Zool. (a calcareous 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
concretion in the lithocyst) स्थित्यु- litho-chromatics = litho-chro पल m. 
mics=chromo-lithography quie lithium Chem. लध्वातु m. 
शिलामुद्रण .. 1. acetate लध्वातु शुक्तीय. 
litho-chromy (art of painting on 1. acetyl-salicylate लघ्वातु शुक्तल _stone) पाषाण-आलेखना. 
नम्रलीय. 
litho-culture=Stone Age culture 1. benzoate लघ्वातु धूपीय .. 
पाषाणयुग-संस्कृति . 1. borate लघ्वातु टांकीय ". 
lithocyst=statocyst=otocyst Zool. 1. bromide (hydrated, dried) स्थितिकोष्ठ m. ___ लध्वातु दुरेय १. (जलीयित, शुष्क) litho-fracteur (a blasting explo 
1. carbonate लघ्वातु प्रांगारीय . ____sive..) शैलस्फोटक m. 1. chloride (hydrated, dried) litho-genesis=litho-genesy=pet ___लध्वातु नीरेय . (जलीयित, शुष्क) 
ro-genesis शैल-जनिकी. 1. citrate लघ्वातु निम्बवीय. 
litho-glyph (an engraving on stone, 1. dichromate लघ्वातु द्विवर्णीय 1. on a gem; an engraved stone) 1. fluoride लघ्वातु तरस्वेय .. 
अश्मोकिरणा, रत्नोत्किरणा f., उत्कीणश्मि 1. formate लघ्वातु वम्रीय 1. 
m., उत्कीर्णरत्न . 1. hippurate लघ्वातु अश्वमेहीय. litho-glypher अश्मोत्किरक m. 1. hydrogen tartrate लध्वातु उदजन litho-glyptics = gem engraving 
ज्यासवीय .. 
रत्नोत्किरण N. 1. hydroxide लध्वातु उदजारेय .. litho-graph (a print made by litho 1. iodate लघ्वातु जम्बीय n. 
graphy) शिलामुद्रित . 1. iodide लघ्वातु जम्बेय. 
lithograph vb. शिलामुद्रण . 1. lactate लध्वातु दुग्धीय n. 
lithographer शिलामुद्रक m. 1. nitrate लध्वातु भूयीय. 
lithographic शिलामुद्रण 1. oxalate लघ्वातु तिग्मीय . 
1. art शिलामुद्रण-कला. 1. phosphate लघ्वातु भास्वीयn. 1. crayon or chalk शिलामुद्रण-खटी. 1. pyro-borate लघ्वातु अग्नि-टांकीय . 1. ink शिलामुद्रण-ममी . 1. salicylate लघ्वातु नम्रलीय. 
1. picture शिलामुद्रित चित्र . 1. succinate लध्वातु तृणीय 1. 
1. stone मुद्रण-शिला f. 1. sulphate लघ्वातु शुल्बीय 1. lithography शिला-मुद्रणा f. 1. tartrate acid लघ्वातु न्यासनीय अम्ल lithol fast scarlet NRN=lightred 
. 
A 
1. tetraborate water arsciante n. lithology (study of rocks) diferent f. 
1. thio-cyanate लघ्वातु गन्ध-श्यामीय lithol.red R = lake red R . .. 
lithol rubin B=pigment rubin R litho-chemistry (chemistry of rocks) lithomarge Mineral. चिक्कण प्रमृद्. 
शैल-रसायन n. 
lithophone=lithopone 
552 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
lithophotography = photolitho 1. farms पशु-प्रक्षेत्र, पशुधन-प्रक्षेत्र n. 
graphy भाश्मचित्रणा. 
1. inspector पशुधन-निरीक्षक m. lithophyl, lithophyll farar6-97 1. 1. officer पशुधन-अधिकारी (-इन् ) m. 
(a fossil leaf) 
1. supervisor पशुधन-पर्यवेक्षक m. lithophyte Bot. शैलोद्भिद् .. 
living being sita m. lithopone=zinc white=unilith= living cell Bot. जीवित-कोशा. 
Orr's white=Chariton white= living matter Biol. जीवसृष्टि , सजीव Griffith's white Chem. (Bennets au n. 
dish) कुप्य-श्वेत m. 
living tissue Bot. जीवित-ऊति . lithosol scarlet base M=fast scar- living wage Econ. निर्वाह-भृति . 
let base L 
livoglobin Pharm. यकृद्ध लि . lithosphere (the solid part of the livotone Pbarm. यकृबल्य १. 
earth) सान्द्रमण्डल 1. 
lixiviate, lixiviating धाववेचन 1. lithoxyl, lithoxyle, lithoxylite lixiviation (to separate by washing) 
(petrified wood) 3959166 n. 
धाववेचन. -litmin -शेवलि . 
lixiviator धाववेचक m. litmus=lacmus 197 n. 
lixivium धावविक्त । . paper शेवल-पत्र . 
lizard Zool. TifaTf. litre, liter (1., lit.) प्रस्थ M. (स्थ.) llama Zool. (allied to the camel, but little अल्प Mfa. (much बह) 
smaller) उष्ट्रक M. little cell Bot. aforat f. 
Loa (their anterior end is like a little owl=Owlet Zoo 1. भदोलक m. 
truncated cone) विच्छिन्नानाति f. Little Tibet Geog. लघुभोट m. 
(-पाति for प्रजाति genus) littoral I adj. बेला-, समुद्रतट-जीवी (-इन्) L. loa सामान्य विच्छिन्नान M. 
2 N. (coastal region) वेलाभू . load भार M., उद्वाह्य 1. (when distin littoral fish Zool. समुद्रतट-मत्स्य m. 
guished from TT weight) littoral region = coastal region loading Ry. उद्धरण 7. __ वेला-भु . 
loading charges Com. उद्भरण-व्यय, livelihood जीविका, आजीविका f. 
भरण-व्यय m. liver यकृत . 
loading gauge Rly. उद्भरण-आमान m. liver extract यकृन्निस्सार 2. 
loadstone अयस्कान्त M. liver fluke Zool. याकृत छिद्रिपत्र m. loam Bot. प्रमृदा f. liver of sulphur Chem. शल्बारि-सजि f. loan Com. उद्धार m., ऋण ?. liver principle Pharm. यकृत्-तत्त्व . 1. at call and short notice याचना liverwort Bot. प्रहरिता. 
तथा अल्पसूचना देय उद्धार m. live steam Eng. पूर्णशक्ति बाष्पm. 
1. on mortgage प्राधि-ऋण. livestock (domestic animals...... capital 1. पुंजी-ऋण . 
esp. those kept for profit) पशुधन .. private 1. वैयक्तिक ऋण 1. 
553 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
public 1. राज्य ऋण n. 
local value = place value Arith. loans and advances ऋण तथा अग्रिम स्थानाf. 
location स्थिति f. lobate, lobated Bot. पालिमत् mfn. lock I ताल m., तालक . 
(lobe is पालि, from कर्णपालि lobe 2 (small) यन्त्रिका . (cf. Panjabi of the eat) 
जन्द्रा) lobe I पालि . 
locknut Mech. तालकनह m. ___ 2 (e. g. of brain, lungs, etc.) lock-out द्वारताल m. 
Anat. खण्ड m. 
___strike हट्टताल m. (Hindi हड़ताल, lobed anther Bot. सपालि परागाशय m. Marathi हरताळ) lobelia (lobel.)=Indian tobacco locomobile प्रचाली (-इन्) mfn. 
Pharm. (leaves and tops of Lo- locomobile crane प्रचालि-बक m. belia inflata) वमघास m. 
locomobility प्रचालिता . Lobelia Bat. वमघासति f. (-ति for प्रजाति locomotion (moving from place to 
genus) 
place; progressive movement; L. inflata=emetic weed ATHINA travel) प्रचलन .. 
बमघास m. 
locomotive I adj. प्रचल fn. Lobosa=Amoebina (having thick 21. चलित्र. 
irregular pseudopodia) स्थूलपादगण 1. animal प्रचल प्राणी (-इन् ) m. _m., स्थूलपादाः m.pl. (fr. स्थूलकुटपादाः) 1. boiler Rly. चलित्र बाष्पित्र n. lobster Zool. महाचिंगट m. 
1. engine (an engine which moves lobulated Zool. खंडिकामय afn. 
from one place to another) lobule Anat, afusefit f. 
चलगन्त्र ? local स्थानीय min. 
1.-man (driver of a locomotive) 1. administration स्थानीय प्रशासन ". चलित्र-मनुष्य, चालित्रिक, चलित्र-चालक 1. authorities स्थानीय प्राधिकारी, 
m. स्थानीय प्राधिकार, स्थानीय प्राधिकारिवर्ग 1. organs (of an animal) starctior n. 
m. 
1. power प्रचलन-शक्ति f. 1. bodies स्थानीय निकाय m. 
locomotor Elec. (a travelling motor, 1. firm स्थानीय सार्थ m. 
as distinguished from a stationary 1. government स्थानीय शासन . 
motor) चलवनि । 1. partner स्थानीय भागी (-इन् ) m. locomotor organ Zool. प्रचलांग ॥. 1. self-government स्थानीय स्व- loco workshop चलित्र-निर्माणी . 
शासन. 
locular गह्वर - 1. tax (rate) स्थानीय कर m. 
loculicidal dehiscence Bot. गह्वर localization स्थानसीमन . 
स्फोटना. localizerb. Zool. स्थानसीमन 1. 
loculus गह्वर m. localized Bot., Zool. स्थानसीमित mfn. locus Math. पथ m. 
584 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
locust=pachytylus = cicada Zool. lomentum (fruit) Bot. (transverse 
शरभ m. 
____septa) अनुप्रस्थपटीक n. locust (any species of Robinia - London chrome blue-black B = 
द्रुमति) शलभद्रुम m. 
fast chrome blue B lodestone-loadstone अयस्कान्त ॥ London chrome yellow A = dia lodh Pharm. लोध्र M. 
• mond yellow R paste lodicule Bot. (representing a peri- long atei mfn. (short ) ____anth in Gramineae) परिघुप्पक 1. long beak Zool. दीर्घ-चञ्चु M. Loganiaceae Bot. विषतिन्दुकुल 1. (कुल long-celled दीर्घ-कोशावान् mfn. 
family) 
___long ciliary nerve Ophthalmol. दीर्घ logarithm Math. छेदा . (the ancient वलिकाय-चेता. 
word is छेद, which has been ex- long division Math. दीर्घ भाजन . tended to छेदा in order to avoid long-eared bat Zool. दीर्घकर्ण-जत . confusion with छेद section. For long hand (of a clock) दीर्घ-सूची . छेद "logarithm' see गणिततिलक, In- long hopper closet Hygiene दीर्घ-अधो 
troduction, xxv, note :) ___वाप-कुण्ड ११. logarithmic छेदा 
___long hundredweight (l. cwt.) दीर्घ logarithmic scale छेदा-मापश्रेणी . गोणी . (दी. गो.) logarithmic series I Matb. छेदा-श्रेढी longissimus दीर्घतम mfn. 
longitude Matb. देशान्तर-रेखा , देशान्तर 2 Statistics छेदा-माला. 
वृत्त ।. logarithmic theorem घाताङ्कप्रमेय. longitudinal अन्वायाम, पायाम logic तर्कशास्त्र ., तर्क m. 
1. axis अन्वायाम अक्षm. logwood black Col. Ind. Tiforata TT 1. band Anat. आयाम-पट्टी. 
12. 
1. collecting duct Zool. 97474 1., chips and extract शोणितीगु,खण्ड संग्रह-प्रणाली . 
तथा सार m. (hematine crystals 1. doubling Biol. अन्वायाम द्विगुणन . are obtained by evaporating 1.duct Zool. आयाम-प्रणाली . logwood extract) 
1. fibres आयाम-तन्तु m. 1. liquor शोणितीद्रु-रस M. 
1. or meridional fibre Ophthal loin कटिf. 
__mol. आयाम-तन्तु m. lakao=Chinese green चीनीय हरि m. 1. muscle आयाम-पेशी, अन्वायाम-पेशी/. -loma -प्रान्त (lysi-loma. व्यंश-प्रान्त) 
1. pitch Engin. अन्वायाम अन्तराल. loment=lomentum Bot. अनुप्रस्थभेदी 1. section Biol. अन्वायाम छेद m. 
(-इन्) m. 
1. strain, linear strain Phys. #rar lomentaceous (pod) Bot. अनुप्रस्थभेदी __याम विकार, पायाम-विकार m. 
(इन्) mfn. 
long oval glasses Ophthalmol. srafus lomentum=loment 
उपनेत्र. 
555 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
long-period trend Statistics दीर्घकालीन lordship श्रीपतिता . 
उपनति (प्रवृत्ति). 
My Lord, Your Lordship sitaat long-range bomber Mil. दूर-प्रस्फोटक Lorenz curve Statistics (showing 
m. 
___dispersion) अपकिरण-वक्र . long-range fighter Mil. दूर-योधक m. lorgnettes (an eyeglass with a long long-range heavy bomber Mil. दूर- handle) वृन्तकाच . 
गुरु-प्रस्फोटक M. 
loss Com. अलाभ M., हानि . long-term fluctuations Statistics gross 1. सकल-हानि . 
दीर्घकालीन उच्चावचन n. 
____net 1. वास्तविक-हानि, शुद्ध-हानि f. long-term oscillations Statistics aten total 1. समस्त-हानि . 
___ कालीन प्रदोल m. 
1. sustained उदूढ-हानि, प्रसोढ-हानि f. long-time changes Statistics दीर्घ- loss of citizenship जानपदता-हानि f., 
कालीन परिवर्तन n. 
____-लोप m. long ton (1. tn.; 2240 lbs.)=gross loss of weight Phys. भार-हानि . 
ton, shipper's ton दीर्घ प्रवर्त m. (दी. lost bill Com. लुप्त विपत्र . वर्.; २२४० प्रांजलि) 
lost cheque Com. लुप्त धनादेश m. long totals (long tots) Math. (addi- lotion अवनेग M. 
tion of long columns of figures) lotio nigra=black lotion=black दीर्घ-योग, स्तम्भ-योग m. 
wash = aqua phagedaenica loop पाशी. 
nigra Pharm. काल अवनेग m. looper = measuring worm Zool. lottery method of sampling=ran 
उत्कुब्जग m. (उत्कुब्जं गच्छति) 
dom sampling Statistics दैव निदर्शन looping movement pricomafar f. loose Com. अबद्ध min. 
lotus कमल n. 1.-leaf ledger अबद्धपत्र-प्रपंजी . loudness=volume Acous, & qru n. 1. leaves अबद्ध पत्र । 
loud note उत्ताल-स्वर m. 1. tools अबद्ध उपकरण .. 
loud-speaker Eler. विपुल-भाष m. looseness of teeth Med. दन्त-चाल m. lounge सुतल्प m. 
(from सुश्रुत) 
louse यूका . loose pulley Mach. (not pinned to body 1. काय-यूका f. 
the shaft) अबद्ध प्राकृषि m. 
crab 1. कर्कट-यूका . loose wooly hair Bot. farferat Fauti-zte Louvre ventilator Hygiene (strips of 
n. 
glass slant upwards from out loran (long-range radar navigation side) तिर्यक्काच संवातक m. 
system) दूरान्वेष m.(दुर-गोचर-तेजोन्वेषण- low I नीच mfn. (high उच्च) संहति) 
2 मन्द mfn. lord श्रीपतिm. 
3 (in names of colours) i (brilli lording=lordling stafete m. 
ance) नि-, निशुभ्र 556 
". 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
- 
- 
i(saturation) अव-, अवविशद __ low pressure (I. p.) Macb. नीच निपीड low altitude bombsight (LAB) m. (नी. नि.) 
Radar नीचोच्छाय-प्रस्फोटदृष्टि f. (नी. उ. low relief=basso-rilievo=bas 
__relief Art निम्न उद्भत 1. low-altitude fighter Mil. नीचर्योधक low-sided wagon RH. नीचभित्ति वाहन 
m. 
.. low-bombing Mil. नीचैः प्रस्फोटन . low temperature मन्द ताप M. lower अवर, अधर mfa. 
loyalty भक्ति, राजभक्ति f. lower chordates Zool. अधर मेरुमन्तः 1. p. (low pressure) Mach. नी. नि. 
m.pl. 
(नीच निपीड) lower epidermis अधर अधिचर्म n., अधर L salt ठ लवण 1. 
अधिस्तर m. 
___Lu (lutecium) Chem. निर (निर्वर्णला) lower house अधर आगारा. 
lubb-dupp Physiol. (sounds of the lowering of concentration अवसंकेन्द्रण heart, one long, another short) 
. 
धा-धक् lower lid=palpebra inferior=p. lubricant r. उपस्नेह m. 
malaris=lower eyelid Ophthal-_lubricate vb. उपस्नेहन, अभ्यंजन 1. (from mol. अधरवर्त्म . 
: Pali) lower lip=ventral lip Zool. अधरौष्ठ lubricating oil उपस्नेहन-तैल 1. 
m. 
lubricator उपस्नेहक M. lower maxillary plate Zool. अधर हनु- lucifer matches=friction matches 
पट्टm. 
(ignite on friction on any surface) lower oxide नीच जारेय. 
घर्षण-इषीका. lower plants अवर पादप m. 
Lucilia (green-bottle fly) Zool. lower quartile.Statistics अधर चतुर्थक. हरिमक्ष्याति /.(-पाति for प्रजाति genus) lower school अधर-पाठशाला . ___L. caesar राज हरिमक्षी f. lower skin Zool. अधर चर्म ॥. 
Lucknow Geog: लक्ष्मणपुर ।. lower surface Phys. अधर पृष्ठतला . ludigol-nitro-anthraquinonesul lowest I अवम, अधम Mfn. 
phonic acid Col. Ind. भूय-विक्ष ___2 Math. लघुतम mfn. 
विज्वरा शल्बायिक अम्ल n. lowest common denominator luetic Med. Jafra mfn. 
Math. लघुतम सम हरm. 
luetin उपदंशि. lowest common multiple Math. Luffa Bot, tetraatfat f. (-fe for the 
लघुतम समापवर्त्य । 
genus) lowest term Math. लघुतम पद 1. 
L. acutangula झिंगाक कोशातकी, low-frequency current नीचसंख्यक वाह अश्रिमती कोशातकी /. 
L. aegyptica सामान्य कोशातकी low power Ophthalmol. नीच-शक्ति . luffein झिगाकिन m. 
m.. 
557 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
Luft-waffe Mil. I (air weapon, air lune Geom. इन्दुक m. 
attack) वायवास्त्र, वायवाक्रमण .. lung क्लोम १., फुप्फुस m. 2 (air force of the Third German lung-book Zool. क्लोम-पुस्त।. Reich) वायुसेना . 
lungfish Zool. क्लोममत्स्य, उभयश्वसन m. luggage compartment Aviation lung fluke Zool. F1497 n. (short for 
सम्भार-कोष्ठ 2. 
क्लोम-छिद्रिपत्र) luggage van Rly. सम्भार-यान ॥. Lun-Nadi Geog. (the river also lukewarm कोष्ण mfn. 
called Nunnadi) aut f. lumbar=lumbar vertebra उदर-कीकस lupulus (lupul.)=hops=humulus 
=strobili lupuli Pharm. 46196, n. lumbar arteries Anat. कटि-रोहिणी . lustre द्युति . lumbar vertebra उदर-कीकस m. lute Chem. I N. (Lat. 'mud') पंक M. lumbo-sacral plexus Zool. कटि-त्रिक- 2 vb. (to seal with lute) संपंकन 1. 
प्रतान m. 
lute शा8 f. lumen I (unit of light) चकास M. lutecia Chem. (lutecium oxide) निर्वर्णजा 
2 Anat., Zool: (in a blood vessel f. ____ or gland, etc.) सुषिरक n. 
lutecienne=French red luminal=pheno-barbital Pharm. lutecium= cassiopeium Chem. नि 
दर्शकोलसु m. 
वर्णला. luminance चकासा f. 
luteolin (Lat. luteolus yellowish luminant=luminous 
आपीत) Chem. आपीति /. luminary (a heavenly body that gives lutidine (fr. toluidine by transpo ___light) ज्योतिस् ।. 
sition) Chem. (a group of pyridine luminate-illuminate vb. चकासन . derivatives) शुष्मरालेयी . luminescence Phys. चकासा f. Luvunga (from Sanskrit) Bot. लवङ्ग luminescent Phys. चकासत् mfn. 
लताति f. (-ति for प्रजाति genus) luminescing चकासन . 
L. scandens सामान्य लवंगलता. luminosity feat f. (fr. luminous lux Photom. (10, boo of phot) TT m. 
चकासी) 
(अयुति-शिचकास) luminous-luminant-illuminant luxurious coaches Rly. fa7a-4GHT n. 
चकासी (-इन्) mfn. 
___Lycopersicon Bot. रागालुति (-ति for luminous fiux Illum. चकासी स्यन्द m. प्रजाति genus) lump पिण्ड, लोष्ट m. 
___Lycopodiales == clubmosses Bok. lump sum Com. पिण्ड-राशि m. ___मुद्गरहरिता-गोत्र •n. (मुद्गरहरिता club lunar Geom. (pertaining to lune) इन्दु moss) 
कीय mfn. 
Lycopodium Bot. (club-mosses) lunar चन्द्र-, चान्द्र mfn. 
मुद्गरहरिताति f. (-ति for प्रजाति genus) 1. month चान्द्र मास m. 
lye पल्पूलन १. 
558 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
lymph Anat., Physiol. TFT 
f 
l ysi-meter 54-m. lymphatic 1. Anat. affirit, IT- lysin Biochem. cuft f. 
afe f. 
-lysin -qf (auto-lysin), -ft-aifa lymphatic gland Anat. T1-fm. lysine Biochem. auf. lymphatic system Anat. लसीका-संहति lysis व्यंशता . 
-lysis -7Tt (in heterolysis) lymph gland Anat. 719T-7 m. ** (in acetolysis, albuminolysis, lymph node=lymph gland 
sulpholysis) lympho-blast Anat, qala 
i in antilysis) lymphocyte Anat. 1- f. (short -4771 (in autolysis) 
for 197912TT) 
Ty (in plasmolysis) lymphoid tissue Anat, pa-sfa f. lysogen (Lysin to-gen) sifarena m. lymphoma Med. लसीकार्बुद M. 
lysogenesis व्यंशजनन . lymph space Zool. लसीकाशय M. lysogenetic a fiti mfn. Lyons blue (= silk blue 
lysogenic fisi mfn. lyrate वीणावत् mfn. 
lysol Pharm. (compound solution of lyre bird Zool. चन्द्रपुच्छ m. 
___cresol) संक्रव्यपवm. lys-, lysi- cular 
lyssa=hydrophobia Med. 7ft f., lysate zaitu n. 
m. -lyse (forming transitive verbs cor- -lyst - aifant (in hydrolyst) 
responding to nouns ending in -lyte Physical Chem. -104 -lysis) TTT 1. 
Lythraceae Bot. 7f54-477 11. lyse vb. Bact., Physiol. (to cause to -lytic-fr? (in acetolytic, hydrolytic) 
undergo lysis; to undergo lysis) TTTFRIE (in heterolytic) art 1h. 
ETA (in plasmolytic) lysi-, lys- air 
Lytta vesicatoria = Spanish fly lysidine Chem, atat f. 
blister beetle उदस्फोट. भृङ्ग m., (a lysigenic=lysigenous Bot. (formed brilliant green blister beetle) 
by the breaking down of adjoin- fy m. ing cells) visa mfn. 
-lyze== -lyse 
M M. 1 (Malleomyces) 424. 5. (uraufer- m. (mile) #. (farm) 
997) 
m. (meter, metre) #T. (+18) 2 (Micrococcus) T. 117. (T235-Tentu) m. (minim) for. (Fargt) M. (molar) & (TE) 
M (molecular weight) 4. (ET-HT) M. in formulae, metal) Chem. Et. (TT) m-, met-, meta- Chem. 74 
559﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
Ma (masurium) Chem. चे (चेष्टातु) Macaca Zool. कोशमुखाति S. (आति for __ प्रजाति genus) 
macerate vb. मृदुभावन . maceration मृदुभावन १. (to soften by ___steeping in a liquid भावना) 
macerator 1 (a person) मृदुभावक m. ___2 (an apparatus) मृदुभावित्र . machinasmachine machinal यन्त्रीय mfn. machinate षड्यन्त्र-रचना machination षड्यन्त्र ।. machinator षाड्यन्त्रिक m. machine यन्त्र n. 
m. age यन्त्र-युग M. m. gun Mil. यन्त्र-शतघ्नी. m. hout rate यन्त्र-घण्टाघ m. m.-man यन्त्र-पुरुष m. m. parts यन्त्र-भाग M., यन्त्राङ्ग. m. room यन्त्र-कोष्ठ m. m. shop यन्त्र-शाला . 
m. tool यन्त्र-उपकरण 2. machine vb. (to subject to the action 
of machinery) यन्त्रण .. machiner-machinist यान्त्रिक m. machinery Adminis. तन्त्र . machinery I (machines in general 
or collectively) यान्त्र (तस्य समूहः), यन्त्रजात. 2 (parts of a machine) यन्त्रकला f. (cf. Hindi कल) 
plant and m. सांग संयंत्र । machinist=machiner 
I यान्त्रिक m. 2 (constructor of ....) यन्त्रकार m. 3 (one versed in the principles of:...) यन्त्रविज्ञ m. 4 (one. who works or runs a 
....) यन्त्रचालक m. machino- (machine) यन्त्र -machy -युद्ध 
M-acid ड-अम्ल . mackerel Zool. (it is green above) 
हरि-पृष्ठा . McKinnel's ventilator Hygiene (there 
are two concentric tubes, the inner is the outlet, the outer tube is the 
inlet) द्विनाल-वातन . McLeod gauge Phys. (low pressure 
gauge) नीचनिपीड प्रामान m. maclutin (Maclura = Chlorofora) 
Chem. (found in fustic Chloro 
phora tinctoria पाण्डुदु) पाण्डुद्रुवि . macro- (Gk. long')r (long) दीर्घ 
2 (great, large) बृहत्-, महा 3 (visible to the naked eye) 
केवलाक्षिदृश्य Macrocanthorhynchus बृहत्तुण्डाति . 
(आति for प्रजाति genus) macrocephalous महाकपाल, महाशीर्ष 
mfn. macrocyte Med. महाकोशा f. macrodome Cryst. (parallel to the ___ longer axis) दीर्घछाद M. 
macromere Embryol. महाखण्ड m. macronucleus Zool. बृहन्-न्यष्टि. macro-plasia Med. frafa f. 
macroscopic anatomy केवलाक्षिदृश्य 
शारीर . macrosporophyll = megasporo ____phyll Bot. महाबीजाणुपर्ण n. macula. Anat, farg m. 
macula lutea Anat. (yellow spot 
of the retina) fafare m., (point 
of clearest vision) ETTE fore m. maculatus Bot. चित्रित mfn. 
560 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
madder मंजिष्ठा . ___m. lake मंजिष्ठा-लाक्षक M. 
Madras चेन्नपुरी . Madras kino=kino Pharm. विखदिर 
M. 
Madrepora=Acropora Zool. (of 
stony corals) दृषत्-प्रवालाति . (-आति 
for प्रजाति genus) madreporite Zool. (a porous, 
grooved plate) रंध्रसीती (-इन्) M. Madura Geog. दक्षिण मधुरा Madurella (a genus having septate 
mycelia) qelfarafa f. (-fart for 
प्रजाति genus) magazine Mil. अस्त्रादि-कोश m. Magdala pink, Magdala red= 
naphthylamine pink magenstrasse Anat. (portion of the 
lesser curvature of the stomach) 
प्राम-महास्रोतस् । magenta I धूम्रली. 
2 न्यधिनीलातिरक्त m. maggot-grub मक्षिजातक m. magic lantern माया-दीप, चित्र-दीप m. magnesia Chem. (magnesium oxide) 
भ्राजा. 
m. alba Pharm. श्वेत-भ्राजा. m. mixture भ्राजा-मिश्र n. m. usta (Lat. usta is from Sans 
krit उष्ट "burnt') उष्टा भाजा. magnesian Chem. भ्राजिय mfn. magnesian limestone=dolomite 
Mineral. भ्राजिय चूर्णप्रस्तर m. magnesii sulphas=magnesium 
sulphate magnesio-ferrite = magnoferrite 
Mineral. भाजायसिज m. (-इज for खनिज mineral) 
magnesite Alineral. (native mag 
nesium carbonate) भ्राजांगीयिज m. 
(-इज for खनिज mineral) magnesium Chem. भाजातु m. 
m. acetate भ्राजातु शुक्तीय 1. m. alkyl halides भ्राजात क्षारल 
नीकुल्येय. m. ammonium arsenate भ्राजात 
तिक्तातु नेपालीय. m. ammonium chloride भ्राजातु 
तिक्तातु नीरेय . m. ammonium phosphate ___भ्राजातु तिक्तातु भास्वीय n. 
m. ammonium sulphate भ्राजातु 
तिक्तातु शुल्बीय .. m. arsenate भ्राजातु नेपालीय. m. benzoate भ्राजातु धूपीय .. m. borate भ्राजातु टांकीय. m. bromide भ्राजात दुरेय .. m. carbonate भ्राजातु प्रांगारीय .. m. chlorate भ्राजातु नीरीय . m. chloride भ्राजातु नीरेय .. m. chromate भ्राजात वर्णीया. m. citrate भ्राजातु निम्बवीय ॥. m. ethyl sulphate भ्राजातु दक्षुल __ शुल्बीय . 
m. ferro-cyanide भ्राजातु अयस्य __श्यामेय n. 
m. fluoride (technical) TTT 
तरस्वेय. (परिभाषित) . m. formate भ्राजातु वम्रीय n. m. glycero-phosphate भ्राजातु 
मधुर-भास्वीय । m. hydr-oxide भ्राजातु उद-जारेय n. 
• m. hypo-phosphite भ्राजातु उप 
भास्वित. m. iodide भ्राजातु जम्बेय . . m. lactate नाजातु दुग्धीय . 
561 
36 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. light भ्राजातु-प्रकाश m. 
magnet चुम्बक m. m. lime TSITE TUT FI 17. 
magnetic चुम्बिक, चुम्बकीय, चौम्बिक mfn. m. nitrate भ्राजात भूयीय .. 
m. balance चुम्बिक-तुला . m. oleate (technical) ब्राजातु नक्षीय m. battery==compound magnet ___n. (परिभाषित) 
संयुत चुम्बक m. m. oxalate भ्राजात तिग्मीय n. 
m. equator चुम्बविषुववृत्त 1., अप्रवण m. oxide भ्राजातु जारेय 1. 
___ रेखा f. (aclinic line) m. perchlorate (hydrated, dried) m. iron चुम्बायस n. । भ्राजातु अतिनीरीय . (जलीयित, शुष्क) m.iron-ore Mineral. चौम्बिक अयोयस्क 
m. peroxide भ्राजातु अतिजारेय 1. 
n. m. phosphate (dibasic, tribasic) m. mine Mil. चुम्बक-निस्फोट m. 
आजात भास्वीय n. (द्विपैठिक, त्रिपैठिक) m. moment Phys. चौम्बिक-विभ्रमिषा m. potassium chloride भ्राजातु 
दहातु नीरेय . 
m. ore चुम्बायस्क . m. potassium sulphate भ्राजातु m. ore separator चुम्बायस्क-पृथक्कारक 
दहातु शुल्बीय. 
m. m. powder भ्राजातु क्षोद M. 
m. oxide = ferrosoferric oxide m. pyro-phosphate भ्राजातु अग्नि 
चम्बिक जारेय = अयस्यायसिक जारेय भास्वीय. m. ribbon भ्राजातु पट्टिका f. 
m. platinum Mineral. चुम्ब-महात् m. m. salicylate भ्राजातु नम्रलीय n. m. pyrite = pyrrhotite Mineral. m. silicate (precipitated) भ्राजातु चुम्बमाक्षीक. 
सैकतीय 1. (निस्सादित) 
__magnetism I Phys. चुम्बकत्व 1. m. silico-fluoride (technical) 2 (science) affragit f. 
भ्राजातु सैकत-तरस्वय 1. (परिभाषित) magnetite (an iron oxide strongly m. stearate भ्राजातु वसीयn. 
attracted by a magnet) चुम्बिज m. m. succinate भ्राजातु तणीय . 
(-इज' for खनिज mineral) m. sulphate-magnesii sul- magnetization चुम्बकन n. phas (mag. sulph.) Pharm. magnetize vb. चुम्बकन n. भ्राजातु शुल्बीय. 
magnetized चुम्बकित mfn. m. sulphite भ्राजातु शुल्बित . magnetizer चुम्बकयिता (-तृ) m. m. tartrate भ्राजातु न्यासवीय. 
magneto- चुम्बक m. thio-cyanate भ्राजातु गन्ध-श्यामीय magnetomotive force Elec. चुम्बक 
गामक बल . m. thio-sulphate भ्राजातु गन्ध-शुल्बीय magnetron (magnet-+electron) Thernm ___n. 
ionics चुम्बाणु m. m, turnings भ्राजातु चक्रक्षेप m. magnification विशालन 1. m. wire भ्राजातु तन्तु m. . . magnified विशालित mfn. 
. 
362 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
magnified image Ophthalmol. Farett- main shaft Automobile Telf: (Ten+ 
लित-मूर्ति . 
ईषा) magnifier विशालक M. 
• main shelf मुख्य निधाय m. magnify vb. विशालन ?. 
maintain rb. i Phys. PETRUT 17. magnifying glass विशालन-काचा . 2 संधारण, भरण-पोषण.. 
m. lens विशालन-वीक्षा . 
maintained संघृत, भूतपुष्ट mfn. m. power विशालन-शक्ति /. 
maintenance Com. भरणपोषण 1. magnitude I (size) परिमाण 1. 
m. charges भरणपोषण-व्यय m. 2 (quantity) मात्रा. 
m. reserve भरणपोषण-संचिति । 3 (extension) वितान 1. 
cost of m. भरणपोषण-परिव्यय M. 4 (expansion) विस्तार m. 
main valve Macb. मुख्य कपाटा. 5 महत्ता, विशालता . 
maize I (Indian corn) मर्कक (parent m. of class interval Statistics of मक्का etc.), शल्किधान्य, मर्कटान्न . 
संभागान्तर-विस्तार m. 
(Nepali) Magnoliaceae Bot. चम्पक-कुल 1. 
Cf. a children's rhyme mahogany Col. Ind. महार्घm. 
नश्यतां लुप्यतां शल्किधान्यं यथा । m. brown महार्थ बभ्रु m. 
भूपस्य पुत्री आगता ए॥ m. lake महाघ लाक्षक m. 
corresponding to Punjabi maida (मैदा) समिता f. (from दिव्यावदान, लुक्क छिप्प जाणा मकई दा दाणा । 
भावप्रकाश) 
राजे दी बेटी आई जे ॥ Maidenhair ferns=Adiantum Bot. 2 (a colour) प्ररक्तातिपीत m. 
कन्याकेशति /- (-ति for प्रजाति genus) major I Larp (one who has attained maiden's hair Radar कन्या केश m. lawful age) व्यवहारप्राप्त M. (ancient mail प्रेष्य . (Hindi डाक) 
word) mailbag प्रेष्य स्यून M. (Hindi डाक की 2 (Army) उपबलाधिपति m. 
थैली) 
major arcMath. दीर्घ चाप m. main 1 Feu mfn. 
major axis प्रधान अक्ष, ज्यायोऽक्ष m. __2 (a principal pipe) प्रनाड . major chord Music ज्यायस् संतन्त्र 1. maina Zool. सारिका f. (ancient word) major general (Army) चमूपति m. main bearing Automobile मुख्य-भार majority बहुसंख्या . 
m. vote बहुमत 1., बहुच्छन्द m. (छन्द is main book. Com. मुख्य पुस्त 1. 
from Buddhist literature) main driving rod Ry. Eng. मुख्य चालन- major scale Music ज्यायो-ग्राम m. 
दण्ड m. 
major triad Music ज्यायस्-त्रिक 1. mainly प्रधानतया, मुख्यतया 
make करण . main observation प्रधान विचारm.,प्रधान- make authentic प्रामाणिक-करण, प्रामा 
उक्ति . 
णिकन .. main scale Phys. मुख्य-श्रेणी . make corrupt or impure gaur 13. 
563 
m. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
make firm अभिपोषण, अभिदहण 1. malbery blue=methyl violet base make null, void शन्य-करण n. 
mal de los pintos-pinto Med. make of no effect निष्प्रभावन ॥. 
(variegated spots on the skin) make oneself familiar परिचित होना, पृषच्चर्मn. 
परिचित करना (Hindi) 
maldonite=black gold Mineral. make or render of no value, FTOFTCUT n. 
consequence, efficacy मोघीकरण, male पुमान् m., पुं- (in compounds) 
व्यर्थ-करण, निष्फल-करण, निष्प्रभावन ।. male behaviour Zool. पुम्-आचरण N. -maker -कार . 
male cone Bot. पु-शंकु M. make rational=rationalize परिमेय- male gamete Bot. पुं-जन्यु M. ___ करण . 
male genital aperture Zool. पुं-जनन make void शून्य-करण, शून्यन .. 
विवर . making machine निर्माण-यन्त्र, निर्मात्र n. male pronucleus पुं-पूर्वन्यष्टि . Malabar coast Geog. केरल-तट m. male sex gland Zool. पुंल्लिग-ग्रंथि m. Malabar Ghats Geog. मलयगिरि m. male spider Zool. पुं-लूत m. Malabar Hill (in Bombay) Geog. malformation कुनिर्माण . 
बालकेश्वर 12. 
malfunctioning असम्यककार्यता. Malabar kino=kino Pharm. विखदिर malic acid उत्कोलिक अम्ल N. 
m. 
malignant edema Med., Veter. चण्ड Malabar nut leaves=adhatoda शोफ M. 
Pharm. वासक . 
malignant tertian malaria Med, malachite green=Bremen green, दुष्ट तृतीयक हिमज्वर m. 
copper green, iris green, mine- malleable कुट्ट य mfn. ral green, mountain green, malleable iron कुट्ट यायस .. Olympian green, verditer green malleable iron condenser clamp मध्यपीतातिहरि . 
कुट्ट यायस संघनक संधर m. -malacia -मृदुता . 
Malleomyces (malleus glanders अश्व malar bone=zygoma 
ग्रंथि-+-myces fungus) (a genus of malaria femrat m. (from Marathi bacteria) Haufenqfar f. (-fa for 
हिवताप) 
प्रजाति genus) (अश्व. क.) Malassezia (a genus of fungi; shaped M. mallei (causes glanders) #THEFT 
like a bottle) कूपीकति f. (-ति for ____ अश्व. क. startfa genus) 
M. pseudomallei कूट अश्व. क. malate Chem. उत्कोलीय . 
mallet द्रुघण m. Malay apple=jamborose apple mallet or articulated locomotive 
=Java plum जम्बु .. 
Rly. Eng. (two or three separate Malay camphor=d-borneol द-कर्पूव engines, for heavy freight service) 
m.. 
संहित चलित्र . 
564 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
malleus I Veter. (glanders) अश्वग्रंथि Malvaceae Bot. भृण्डीकुल 1. (भृण्डी okra. 
m. 
=Hindi fugi) 2 Anat. (hammer) मुद्गर M. (in- Malvales Bot. भृण्डी-गोत्र ।. side the ear) 
Malwa Geog. मालव M. Mallophaga Zool. T&TTATTU 11. Mammalia (a class) Zool. 77: 11.pl. 
Mallotus Bot. काम्पिल्यति f. (-ति for mammalogy स्तनि-विद्या . 
प्रजाति genus) 
mammary compound Pharm. स्तन M. philippinensis सामान्य काम्पिल्य संयोग M. 
mammary gland extract Pbarın. malnutrition कुपोषण, अपर्याप्त पोषण 1. स्तन ग्रंथि-निस्सार m. malo- Chem. उत्कोल 
mammoth (any extinct elephant of malonate Chem. उत्कोलायीय 1. ____ several genera) पुराहस्ती (-इन्) m. malonic Chem. उत्कोलायिक mfn. (cf mammotrophin= prolactin = ga 
उत्कोलिक malic) 
lactin Zool. F ully f. malonitrile Chem. उत्कोलभूरि 
man पुरुष m. malony! उत्कोलाल . 
manage vb. प्रबन्धकरण, प्रवन्धन ।. malo-urea उत्कोल-मेह M. 
manageability aromat f. Malpighian body, corpuscle Anat. manageable area mfn. 
I (a kidney corpuscle) वृक्काणु manageableness प्रबन्ध्यता. 
managed प्रबद्ध Mfn. 2 (a small mass of adenoid tissue management प्रबन्ध m., प्रबन्धन .., ....in the spleen) प्लीहाणु M. 
प्रबन्धक-वर्गm. Malpighian layer=stratum malpi m. share Finance प्रबन्धक-ग्रंशा . 
ghii Anat. (basal cell layer, the managemental varefta mfn. lowest layer of epidermis) न्यधिचर्म manager प्रबन्धक M. 
manageress प्रबन्धिका f. Malpighian tubes Zool. वृक्क-नाल, managerial प्रबन्धक 
निसर्गनाल m. 
managership प्रबन्धकता . malt यव्य . 
managing Com. प्रबन्धन 1., प्रबन्ध . Malta grey=dried grey B powder m. agent प्रबन्ध-अभिकर्ता (त) M. 
maltase Biochem. यव्येद m. 
m. committee प्रबन्ध समिति . maltha Col. Ind. (mineral tar) EFTETET m. director प्रबन्ध-संचालक m. 
m. (खनिज विराल) 
manatee Zool. (differs from the malto- यव्य 
dugong in having the tail broad malto-dextrin Chem. यव्य-दक्षि 
and rounded) पृथुपुच्छ m. maltose Chem. यव्यधु १. 
-mancer -शकुनज्ञ Malva Bot. मृदुपत्रति f. (soft leaves) (-ति Manchester brown = golden 
for प्रजाति genus) 
brown 565 
m. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. brown Col. Ind. लोहक बभ्र 
9 
M. yellow = golden yellow -mancy -शकुन mandarin I = mandarin orange 
अधिरक्तपीत M. 
2=mandarin red अधिषीतातिरक्त m. mandarin orange अधिरक्तपीत m. mandarin red अधिपीतातिरक्त m. mandelate वातामीय n. mandelic Chem. वातामिक mfn. mandible Anat. अधोहनु . mandibular अधोहनु 
m. bone अधोहन्वस्थि ।. m. nerve = maxillary inferior ___ अधोहन-चेता. 
m. palp Zool. अधोहनु-मृश M. mandibularis internus Zool. अधोहन 
अन्तश्चेता f. mangan-apatite Mineral. लोचूर्णभातिज 
m. (-इज for खनिज mineral) manganate Chem. लोहकीय .. mangan-blende=alabandite Mine 
ral. लोहकान्धन m. mangan-brucite Mineral. लोभ्राजलिज 
m. (-इज for खनिज mineral) mangan-chlorite लोहरितिजm. mangan-eisen Metal. लोहकायस n. manganese Chem. लोहक . 
m. acetate लोहक शक्तीय n. m. ammonium phosphate लोहक 
तिक्तातु भास्वीय n. . m. ammonium sulphate लोहक 
तिक्तातु शुल्बीय n. m. arsenate लोहक नेपालीय. m. bistre=m. brown 
m. black Col. Ind. लोहक काल m. m. borate लोहक टांकीय 1. m. bromide लोहक दुरेय . m. bronze Metal. लोहक कांस्य .. 
m. carbonate लोहक प्रांगारीय ?. m. chloride लोहक नीरेय . m. chromate लोहक वर्णीय . m. citrate लोहक निम्बवीय n. m. dioxide लोहक द्विजारेय n. m. fluoride लोहक तरस्वेय . m. formate लोहक बम्रीय n. m.glycero-phosphate लोहक मधुर 
भास्वीय 1. m. green Col. Ind. लोहक हरि m. m. hept-oxide लोहक सप्त-जारेय. m. hydrate Mineral. लोहक उदीय . m. hypo-phosphite लोहक उप 
भास्वित .. m.iodide लोहक जम्बेय. m. lactate लोहक दुग्धीय n. m. nitrate लोहक भूयीय n. m. nucleinate लोहक न्यष्टियीय . m. oxalate लोहक-तिग्मीय n. m. oxide लोहक जारेय n. m. oxide, black (dioxide) काल 
लोहक जारेय. (द्विजारेय) m. phosphate लोहक भास्वीय ". m. pyro-phosphate लोहक अग्नि 
भास्वीयn. m. resinate (technical) लोहक उद्या 
सीय 1. (परिभाषित) m. sesqui-oxide लोहक सार्ध-जारेय 
m. spar लोहक धात्विया . m. steel लोहक वज्रायस . m. sulphate लोहक शुल्बीय . m. sulphide लोहक शुल्बे य . m. sulphite लोहक शुल्बित .. m. tetroxide लोहक चतुर्जारेय n. m. velvet brown-burntumber 
566 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
लोहक मृदुक बभ्रु M. = दग्ध-वभ्रुकी /., m.-phyllite Mineral. (a mangani निरक्तपीत m. 
ferous biotite) लोहक-मलाभ्रक 2. m. violet लोहक नीललोहित,मध्यरक्ताति m.-stibiite Mineral. (a basic 
नील m. 
manganese antimonate and manganesian Chem. लोहकिय, लोहकयुत arsenate) लोहकांजनिज m. (-इज for 
mfn. 
खनिज mineral) mangani- (manganic) Chem. लोहकि m. tantalite Mineral. लोहक-सहिज 
(लोहकिक) 
___M. (-इज for खनिज mineral) manganic Chem. लोहकिक mfn. 
manganosite Mineral. (native man m. acid लोहकिक अम्ल 7. 
ganous oxide) लोहनजारेयिज . (-इज m. hydroxide लोहकिक उदजारेय. for खनिज mineral) m. oxide लोहकिक जारेय. 
manganous Chenn. लोहक्य mfn. m. sulphate लोहकिक शुल्वीय n. 
m. acid लोहक्य अम्ल 1. mangani-ferous Chem. लोहक-भर m. hydroxide लोहक्य उदजारेय 1. 
mfn. 
m. oxide लोहत्य जारेय. mangani-ferous biotite लोहक-मलाभ्रक m. sulphate लोहक्य शुल्बीय n. 
_m. sulphide लोहक्य शुल्बेय. manganin (Mn लोहक 12 p. c., copper Mangifera Bot. आम्रति 1. (-ति for 
84 p. c., nickel रुपक 4 p. c.) रू-लो प्रजाति genus) ताम्र . 
M. indica सामान्य आम्र m. manganite I Chem. लोहकित . 
mango-fly आम्र-मक्षी f. 2 Mineral.=gray manganese ore mangrove Bot. (having numerous 
लोहकिज m. (-इज for खनिज mineral) aerial prop roots) वायु-शिफm. manganium Chem. लोहकातु m. 
-mania -उन्माद m. manganize vb. लोहकायन n. 
manifest प्रव्यञ्जन 1., प्रव्यक्त, व्यक्त mfn. (to alloy with manganese) EF- manifest hypermetropia Ophthal मिश्रण n. 
mol. व्यक्त-पश्चनाभिता . manganized steel Chem. लोहकायित manifestly impossible व्यक्त अशक्य, 
वज्रायस . 
स्पष्ट अशक्य mangano- I Chem. (manganous) manifold Statistics Elu mfn. 
लोहक्य 
m. classification बहुगुण वर्गीकरण M. 2 Mineral. (manganese) लोहक 
m. tabulation बहुगुण सारणीयन . m.-calcite Mineral. लोहक-चूणिजm. Manila paper अपिशण पत्र। 
(-इज for खनिज mineral) 
manipulatable प्रहस्त्य mfn. m.-columbite Mineral. लोहकाय: manipulate vb. प्रहस्तन n. 
काशीयिजm.(-इज for खनिज mineral) Trans. I (to treat, work, or m.-manganic oxide Chem. TERT operate with the hands) हस्त-साधन, 
लोहकिक जारेय. 
हस्त-करण, हस्त-विधान n. 567 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
2 (to handle with skill or dex- mannitol (manmite + - ol) Chem. terity) कुशल-हस्तन n. 
झावितव m. 3 (to treat, work, or operate by mannitose Chem. झावितधु n. 
mechanical means) यन्त्र-साधन, यन्त्र mannose Chem. भावुधु ॥. करण, यन्त्र-विधान . 
mano-meter बाष्प-मान M. 4 (to treat or manage with the manormeter-tubing बाष्पमान-नाल m. mind or intellect) बुद्धि-साधन, बुद्धि- manometric बाष्पमितीय mfn. प्रबन्धन 
manometric Hame Acous. वा-स्पन्द 5 (to manage with skill or dex- ज्वाला . (वा=वायु; स्पन्द pulsation) terity) कुशल-प्रबन्धन . 
manometry बाष्पमिति / 6 (to control the action of....by -mantic -शकुनीय. 
management) प्रबन्ध-नियन्त्रण . Mantidae Zool. बद्धहस्तवंश m. 7 (to manage or treat artfully or Mantis Zool. aGEFITFT f. (-47fa for fraudulently) चातुर्य-साधन, चातुर्य- प्रजाति genus) प्रबन्धन, छल-साधन, छल-प्रबन्धन । 
mantissa Math. (decimal part of Intrans. I to use the hands in _.common logarithms) दशमिकांशm. dexterous operations) कुशल-हस्तन 
m. of alogarithm छेदा-दशमिकांश m. (कुशलकर्म-हस्तप्रयोजन) 
mantle प्रावार m. 2 (to manage or handle apppara- mantle cavity Zool. प्रावार-गुहा . tus or instruments) साधित्र-प्रबन्धन, manual art हस्त-कला. उपकरण-प्रबन्धन, साधित्र-हस्तन, उपकरण manual labour हस्त-श्रम m. हस्तन . 
manual work हस्त-कर्म । manipulation प्रहस्तन 1., दक्षप्रयोग m., manufactory=factory 
छलसाधन 2. (further see manipulate) manufactureकल्पन (from कौटल्य), निर्माण 
m. of accounts लेखा-प्रहस्तन n. m. of statistics समंक-प्रहस्तन n. ___m. of food अन्न- 
निर्माण manipulative=manipulatory प्रह- m. on a large scale महानु माप-कल्पन 
स्तनीय mfn. (further see manipulate) . . manipulator प्रहस्तयिता (-तृ) m. (fur- manufactured निर्मित, क्लुप्त mfn. 
ther see manipulate) 
m. food Bot. निर्मित अन्न ". manipulatory=manipulative 
m. goods Com. निर्मित वस्तु n. manna झाबु m. 
m. on a large scale महानुमाप-निर्मित manna of bamboo fa&itat f. (from 
mfn. सुश्रुत) 
manufacturing Com. Piegat (from manna sugar #ra-TART f. 
कौटल्य), निर्माण Manneheim process Chem. (using m. account= working account 
ferric oxide) अयसिजा-विधा. .. निर्माण-लेखा . mannite fact n. 
m. charges निर्माण-व्यय m. 
568 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
३ 
m. goods वस्तु-निर्माण 1. 
margin I सीमा [.. m. process निर्माण-विधा . 
2 तट, प्रान्त m. m. wages निर्माण-भूति . 
3 Com. (the difference between manuren. खादm. 
loan and security) उद्धारप्रतिभूति manure vb. खाद-वपन 1. 
अन्तर. manurer खाद-वप्ता (-४) m. 
m. of profit लाभ-मात्रा f. manure-salts खाद-लवण 1. 
marginal प्रान्तीय nfn. manus Zool. हस्त m. 
m. focus प्रान्तीय-नाभि f. manuscript हस्तलिपि . 
m. gloss प्रान्त-टिप्पणिका . many बहु (few अल्प), अनेक mfn. 
m. notes प्रान्त-टिप्पणी, पाव-टिप्पणी/. many-celled बहु-कोशावान् Mn. 
__m. zone Embryol. प्रान्त-प्रदेश m. many-valued अनेकाह nfn. 
margin stop प्रान्त विराम m. many-valued function Math. अनेकाह marigold = calendula Pharm. गेन्दुक 
श्रित n. 
n. (Hindi गेंदा) map मानचित्र 
marigold flowers-calendula map of formative region=Vogt's marine समुद्र-, सामुद्र mfn. ___maps Zool. निर्मायिप्रदेश-मानचित्र 1. 
m. animalcule सामुद्र अणुप्राणी (-इन्) marble राजाश्म m. 
m. marble white Col. Ind. राजाश्म श्वेत m. m. blue Col. Ind. सामुद्र नील M. marcasite 
m. engineering सामुद्र-अभियन्त्रणा =white iron श्वेतायसा . 
m. insurance सामुद्र आगोप. =white iron pyrites श्वेत-माक्षीक । m. insurance fund सामुद्र-आगोप 
n. 
प्रणीवि f. ==radiated pyrites विकीर्ण माक्षोक . m. insurance policy सामुद्र-अागोप March तृतीयमास m. 
लेखM. march Drill प्रयाणम्, अधिप्रयाणम् 
m. league सामुद्र प्रक्रोश M. (सा. प्रक्.) Marchantia Bot. (thallus having m. losses सामुद्र-हानि . 
special erect reproductive bran m. map समुद्र-मानचित्र n. ches उत्थ-प्रजनि-शाख-सकाय) उत्पशायति marinol acid blue Col. Ind. f. (-for for wayfa genus) 
अम्ल नील m. marchioness = marquise महासामन्ती Mariotte's law= Boyle's law Phys. 
समताप-वाति-संपीडन नियम m. (स. वा. सं. mare वडवा . 
नियम) mare black Col. Ind. ETT FTET m. maritime सामुद्रिक mfn. 
margaric acid Chem. उपम्रक्षिक अम्ल maritime law नाविक विधि, नौ-विधि m. margarin Chem. उपम्रक्षि. 
maritime plant Bot. सामुद्रिक उद्भिद्. margarine 39578 f. 
mark I n. चिह्न १. margaron (Gk.) मंजरी f. 
20b. अंकन, चिह्नन ॥. 
569﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
marked अंकित, चिह्नित mfn. 
marrow Anat. Fou f. marked cheque Banking चिह्नित धनादेश Mars मंगल m. 
m. 
Mars brown Col. Ind. मंगल बनm. market Com. विपणि. 
M. orange मंगल नारंग m. m. fluctuation विपणि-उच्चावचन . M. red मंगल रक्त M. m. place farfur-FTTTT . 
M. yellow मंगल पीत m. m. price विपणि-मूल्य ५. 
marsh कच्छ m. m. rate विपणि-अर्घm. 
marshal vb. Com., Law क्रमबन्धन n. m. report विपणि-वृत्त ।. 
marshalled & mfn. m. value Econ. विपणि-अर्हा f. . Marshal of the Royal Air Force capital m. जो-विपणि . 
महावाय्वधिपति m. commodity m. पदार्थ-विपणि । marsh gas Chem. कच्छ-वाति m. marketable Com. faquer mfn. 
Marsh test Anal. Chem. (it depends m. security विपण्य-प्रतिभूति . 
on the formation of arsine) नेप्या marketing Com. fagurt n. 
परीक्षा f. (नेप्या=नेपी-द्वारा) (Mellor's marking अंकन, चिह्नन n. 
Modern Inorg. Chem., 1943, p. 747) marksman Mil. लक्ष्यवेधी (-इन) m. marsupial Zool. I (having a pouch mark time Drill तालघात: 
for carrying the young) शिशुधान marl अवमृद्. 
2 n. शिशुधानी (-इन्) m.. Marmosa Zool. मूषयुग्माशयाति . (आति m. bones शिशुधानास्थि ।. ___ for प्रजाति genus) 
m. frog-pouched frog शिशुधान marmoset Zool. (except the great मण्डूक m. 
toe, the digits have claws instead m. mole शिशुधानी पाखनक m. of nails) नखरकपि m. 
m. wolf-pouched wolf=Tas maroon I निरक्तापीत m. 
___manian wolf शिशुधान-वृकm. 2 (by extension, any colour of Marsupialia=Metatheria Zool. FERT low brilliance, and of low or धान-मृगाः, शिशुधानिन: m.pl. medium saturation, of a hue marsupium Zool. FTTETT n. 
varying from reddish blue to martial law सेना-शासन . 
reddish red-yellow) नीचरक्त m. Martius yellow I =golden yellow marquis महासामन्त m. 
Col. Ind. स्वर्ण-पीत m. marquisal महासामन्तीय mfn. 
2 सुपीत M. marquisate= marquisdom महा- martyr आत्मबलि, आत्मबलिदाता (-त.) m. ___ सामन्तता f., महासामन्तविषय m. 
Marwar Geog. मरु-देश, मरु-धन्व m. marquisdom=marquisate 
masculine characters Zool. पुरुष-लक्षण marquise=marchioness HETT Hret f. 
marquisship महासामन्तता f. 
mask अवगुण्ठ m. . marriage rate Statistics विवाह अर्घ m. masked Bot. अवगुण्ठित mfn. 
570 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m 
mason's trap = dipstone trap = 2==stuff (of which bodies are 
midfeather trap Hygiene मग्नाश्म composed) सामग्री . रुघm. 
material adi. भौतिक, भौतद्रव्य fn. mass I Phys., Mil., Com. पुंज, समूह m. material Com. सामग्री ., द्रव्य १. 
2 मात्रा . 
direct m. ऋजु-सामग्री m. treatment समूहोपचार m. 
indirect m. अनुज-सामग्री. masseter (muscle) Anat. चर्वणपेशी. raw m. प्राम-सामग्री , अपक्व द्रव्य 1. massicot=lead ocher सीस गैरिक 1. material objects-physical objects massive I (having a large mass) भौतिक पदार्थ m. 
महाकाय, महापुंज Mfn. 
materials consumed Com. उपभुक्त 2 (having a solid bulky form) सामग्री. महास्थूल, महाधन (महाश्चासौ धनश्च) mfr. material system Statistics वस्तु-संहति . 
3 (weighty) भारी, महाभार Mfn. materia medica भेषज-द्रव्य १. massy Zool. महापुंज mfn. 
mathematical instruments गणित mast (of a ship) कूपदण्ड m. (from दश उपकरण 1. 
कुमारचरित) 
mathematically गणितानुसार mast cell Anat. (a large leucocyte) mathematician गणितज्ञ m. 
प्रसितकोशा. 
mathematics fura n. master vb. (to be master) पतीयन . -matic -T (e. g. automatic आत्म-ग, 
(ancient usage) 
___ chainomatic शृंखला-ग) master उपाध्याय M. (Seel rofessor) matica=matico Pharm. रक्तरुध m. master general of the ordnance maticae folia=matico leaves 
Mal. महायुधागारिक m. 
___Pharm. रक्तरुध-पत्र .. mastic I लेपी . 
matico=matica (matic.)-matico 2 = gum mastic चर्व-निर्यास m. leaves==maticae folia रक्तरुध m. 
m. tree चर्वनिर्यास वृक्ष m. 
matico leaves=maticae folia mastication चर्वण १. (Hindi चबाना) mating season Zool. संवेशन-ऋतु m. Mastigophora == Flagellata. Zool. matricaria. camphor=levo cam 
कशांगा: m.pl., कशांगवर्ग m. (वर्ग class) phor Chem. वाम-कर्पूर m. mastitis Med. स्तनकोप m. 
matrix I=die रूपपुट m. (cf. punch masurium (eka-manganese) Chem. रूपचन) __ चेष्टातु m. (एक-लोहक) 
2 Math. व्यूह m. mat कट m. (Hindi चटाई) 
3 Bot. आधारक m. match इषीका, दीपेषीका f. (Hindi दिया 4 Anat., Biol. (intercellular sub 
सलाई) 
stance of a tissue) कोशान्तर्द्रव्य, अन्त m.-box इषीका-धान 1. 
द्रव्य .. m. stick दीयेषिका 
matter I भूतद्रव्य, द्रव्य 1. material n. I द्रव्य 1. 
2-material objects = physical 
571 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
objects भौतिक पदार्थ m. 
m. palpus Zool. उत्तरहनु-मृश m. matter of fact I (an actual occu m. sinus==maxillary antrum 
rrence)वास्तविक-घटना . 
उत्तरहनु-कोटर . 2 (a matter that is or appertains m. superior उत्तरहनु-चेता. to fact) तथ्य, तथ्यात्मक 
m. teeth उत्तरहन-दन्त m. matter of fact adj. I (adhering to, maxillipede=gnathopodite Zool. 
or concerned with, fact) तथ्यात्मक हनुपाद m. mfn. 
maxillo-mandibular Zool. उत्तराधर 2 (commonplace) साधारण mfn. हानव्य mfn. matter of fact statement यथार्थ-कथन . maximal पराय॑ mfn. maturation Biol. प्रौढन, परिपचनn __maximum I भूयिष्ठ min maturation division Biol. प्रौढनार्थ 2 पराओं mfn. 
भाजन, परिपक्वता-भाजन . 
3 अध्यधिक mfn. (अधि+अधिक), अधिकतम maturation phase Zool. परिपक्वता- maximum and minimum thermo 
अवस्था . 
meter Meteorol. भूयिष्ठ तथा अल्पिष्ठ mature x adj. पक्व mfn. 
तापमान m, 2vb. Zool. प्रौढन, परिपचन. 
maximum friction=limiting fric matute, matured Com. परिपक्व mfn. tion भूयिष्ठ संघर्ष, सीमा-संघर्ष m. mature region Bot. प्रौढ प्रदेश m. maximum temperature भूयिष्ठ ताप m. mature root Bot. प्रौढ मूल 1. 
May पञ्चममास. mature stage युवावस्था f., यौवन ॥., May apple root = podophyllum 
प्रौढावस्था, परिपक्वावस्था । 
___Pharm. प्रलघुपत्र-मूल n. maturity Com. परिपक्वता ., परिपाक m. May fiy Zool. वसंत-पतंग m. 
m. of a bill विपत्र-परिपाक m. 
mayor पुरपाल m. (ancient word) date of m. परिपाक-तिथि, परिपक्वता- M band or disc-mesophragma 
तिथि. 
___ line of Hensen Zool. सितरेखा f. mauve Col. Ind. नीलशोण m. 
Me (methyl) Chem. प्रो (प्रोदल) m. dye नीलशोण रंजक m. 
meadow peat (from grasses) Bot. mauveine Col. Ind. नीलशोणी 
घास-जीर्णक m. maxilla I Anat. उत्तरहन, हनु . meadow saffron = Colchicum au 
2 Zool. उपजम्भ m. (in arthropods... tumnalesautumn crocus क्षेत्र serving as accessory jaw) 
केसर-शरत्-कुंकुम .. maxillary उत्तरहनु 
meal, meal flour afhat f. (from Ta m. antrum=maxillary sinus प्रकाश) (Hindi मैदा) 
m. bone उत्तरहन्वस्थि . 
meals अशन.. m. inferior=mandibular nerve mean Math, 787€ n. (average HTETT n.) __ अधर-हनु-चेता . 
m. deviation Statistics मध्यक-विच m. nerve Anat. उत्तरहनु-चेता f. 
लन .. 
572 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. distance Astron. मध्यक-अन्तर. m. error Statistics मध्यक-विभ्रम m. m. logarithm Math. मध्यक-छेदा . 
(middle section मध्यच्छेद) m. position Phys. मध्यक-स्थिति . m. proportional Math. मध्यानुपाती 
(इन्) m. meaning अर्थ m. means-middle terms Math. मध्य पद 
1. means of communication संचार-साधन 
acid m. अम्ल-मापक m. measuring मापन 1., माप 
m. cylinder मापन रम्भm. m. flask मापन पलिघm. m. jar माप-कलशm. . m. rod माप-दंड m. 
m. scale माप-श्रेणी measuring worm = looper Zool. 
उत्कुब्जग m. meat extract मांस-निस्सार. 
m. juice extractor मांस-रस-निस्सारक 
m. m. press मांस-पीडm. meatus Anat. I (passage) मार्ग m. 
2 (opening) मुख . 
m. auditorius कर्ण-मार्ग m. m. of the nose नासा-मार्ग m. m. urinarius (external orifice of 
the urethra) प्रसेक-मुख .. mechanical Phys. यांत्रिक mfn. 
m. advantage Mech. यांत्रिक लाभ 
m. m. condition यांत्रिक-दशा. m. construction Math. यांत्रिक-रचना 
mean value मध्याहीं. measles Med. मसूरी. measly pork (containing Cysticercus 
cellulosae) कोष्ठडिम्भ-सकरमांस 7. measurable Math. मेय, माप्य mfn. 
m. characteristics मेय लक्षण . measure n. I माप m., मापन 1. 
2 (a measuring vessel) माप m. 3 Matb. (submultiple) अपवर्तक m. enamelled steel m. आकाचित वज्रा 
यस माप m. minim m. बिन्दुक-माप m. measure vb. मापन 1. measured मापित mfn. measurement मापन 1., माप m. 
m. of skewness Statistics विषमता 
माप m. measure of damages Com. क्षति-माप 
m. measure of dispersion Statistics अप 
किरण-माप m. measure of numbers Matb. संख्या-माप 
m. measure of skewness Statistics 
विषमता-माप m. measurer मापक m. 
m. defect यांत्रिक दोष m. m. device यांत्रिक-युक्ति f. m. energy यांत्रिक-ऊर्जा f. m. engineering यांत्रिक-अभियन्त्रणा . m. equivalent यांत्रिक समाई m. m. means यांत्रिक साधन 1. m. principle संधारी प्रनियम m. m. strength (from mechanical tis ___sues) संधारि-शक्ति . 
m. system Ry. यांत्रिक-संहति. m. tabulation यांत्रिक सारणीयन. m. tissue Bot. (supporting frame ____work) संधारि-ऊति . 
573 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. vector Parasitol. केवल प्रसारक m. extreme and mean ratio Math. 
(against biological vector जैव अन्त-मध्यक-निष्पत्ति f. प्रसारक) 
_medial wall Ophthalmol. अभिमध्य-भित्ति mechanics 1 (German Machinen- f. 
lebre) यांत्रिकी . 
median Math. मध्यगा. 2 (German Bewegungs-lebre) गामिकी median eye=pineal eye Biol. मध्यनेत्र, 
तुतीयनेत्र. mechanism I कलाविन्यास 2. (cf. Hindi median outgrowth Zool. मध्य-उद्वर्ध m. 
कल machine) 
medical भैषजिक, भेषज-, आयुर्वेदिक mfn. 2 Bot. रचना. 
m. centrifuge भैषजिक मथित्र . mechanism of a reaction Chem. m. college आयुविद्यालय m. 
(manner in which a reaction pro m. department चिकित्सा-विभाग m. ceeds) प्रतिक्रिया-प्रक्रिया . 
m. expenses चिकित्सा-व्यय m. mechanistic school (of thought) m. jurisprudence = forensic - यन्त्रवादी संप्रदाय m. 
medicine = legal medicine mechanistic universe यन्त्रवद् विश्व . 
वैध आयुर्वेद m. mechanistic view of life यन्त्रवज् m. literature आयुर्वेद-साहित्य ?. 
जीवन-वाद m. 
m. man भिषक् m. Meckel'scartilageZool.चिबुक-कास्थि. m. practice भेषज-वृत्ति . meconium Med. (the first discharge m. practitioner भेषजवृत्तिक m. 
from the intestines of a new-born m. qualification भैषजिक-योग्यता infant) जातविष्ठा f. 
medicament अगद m. Mecoptera Zool. (having a biting medicinal भेषजीय, अगदीय mfn. _beak) दशनचंचु-गण m.. 
medicinal speciality भेषजीय-विशेषता media pl. of medium 
medicine I भषेज, औषध . media bottle संवर्धाश कपीf. 
____ 2 (science) आयुर्वेद m. medial adj. प्रान्तर, आभिमध्य mfn. mediumn. I पदार्थ m., साधन ., वाहक 
adv. (towards the median line or m. plane of an animal) अभिमध्य 
2 = culture medium संवर्धाश m. media lecithal Zool. मध्यपीती (-इन)m. 3 Phys. माध्यम . medially situated अभिमध्य-स्थित mfn. 4 Com. माध्यम, साधना. medial section Math. मध्यकी छेद m. medium adi. मध्य mfn. 
(मध्यकित 'having मध्यक mean') medium bomber Mil. मध्य प्रस्फोटक m. 
M 
medulla I Anat. (of any organ) 
BAB मज्जक .. is divided in medial at M, if AM is 2 Bot. मध्यक. the geometric mean between AB and medulla oblongata I Anat. fitosan BM. 
पुच्छ. 
574 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
2 Zool. = bulb = bulb of the mega-meter, mega-metre महा-मान spinal chord भेरुकन्द m. 
(म. मा.), प्रयुत-मान m. (प्र. मा.) medullary ray IAnat. मज्जक-किरण m. mega-nucleus Zool. महा-न्यष्टि f. 
2 Bot. मध्यक-किरण m. 
mega-sporangium Bot. महा-बीजाणुधानी medullary sheath=myelin sheath 
Zool. विमज्जि-कंचुक .. 
mega-spore Bot. महा-बीजाणु m. medullated Anat. (having a medul- mega-sporophyll = macro-sporo ___lary sheath) विमज्जि-कंचुकी (-इन्) nfn. phyll Bot. महा-बीजाणुपर्ण १. medullated nerve Zool. विमज्जि-कंच कि- meibomian gland = tarsal gland 
चेता. 
meiosis-reduction division-first medusa = jelly fish Zool. ya m. meiotic division Biol. अर्धसत्रणा 
meet vb. मिलन n. 
meiotic division Zool. अर्धसत्र-भाजन ॥. meet at infinity Math. अनन्ती पर मिलना Meissner'splexus Anat. अपिता-प्रतान 
(Hindi) 
m. meeting अधिवेशन . 
MEK (methyl ethyl ketone) प्रो. द. शौ. m. of shareholders अंशधारि-अधि- Meker burner = Mekker burner 
वेशन 1. 
Mekker burner (containing in its annual general m. वार्षिक सामान्य enlarged opening a metal screen) 
अधिवेशन .. 
धातुजाल दाहक m. board m. गणाधिवेशन . 
Melaleuca Bot. धवलनुमति . (-ति for emergent m. आपन्नाधिवेशन, सद्यस्कत्य प्रजाति genus) 
अधिवेशन . 
M.leucadendron (cajuput) सामान्य extra-ordinary m. असाधारण अधि धवलद्रुम . ' वेशन 1. 
melam (arbitrarily formed) Chem. ordinary m. साधारण अधिवेशन 7. (obtained by heating ammonium special m. विशेष अधिवेशन n. 
तिक्तातु thiocyanate गन्धश्यामीय) तिगn. statutory m. परिनियत अधिवेशन 1. melamine (melam fast + amine farat) mega- I महा 
Chem. तितिक्ती. 2 प्रयुत 
melanin (Gk. melanes black) Bio mega-cycle Radar महा-चक्र, प्रयुत-चक्र . chem. कालि . mega-dyne Phys. महा-धाबल, प्रयुत-धाबल melanogen Biochem. (yields melanin) 
कालि-जन m. megalecithal Zool. अतिशयपीती (-इन्) m. blue Col. Ind. कालिजन नील m. 
mfn. 
melanophore Biol. कालि-भर m. megalo-, megal- महा 
melantherine BH = chlorazol Megaloptera Zool. FET984T: m.pl. black BH 
Megalosporon महाबीजाणु m. 
melasma Med. व्याधि m. megamere महाखण्ड m. 
melasma suprarenale=Addison's 
575 
__n. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
disease=bronzed skin (disturb mily, as an in a family of ing the action of the suprarenal acids) glands) वृक्कोपरिक-व्याधि m. 
__m. of a series माला-एकक (unit), meldoline blue = naphthol blue माला-पद . 
3R 
m. of assembly सभा सदस्य, सभ्य m. meli- मधु 
m. of committee समिति सदस्य, Melia Bot. निम्बति 1. (-ति for प्रजाति ___समित्य m. 
genus) 
m. of legislature विधानमंडल-सदस्य M. azadirachta. सामान्य निम्ब m. 
m. Meliaceae Bot. निम्बकुल ?. 
m. of parliament (संसद्) = par melissic acid Chem. (found in bees 
liamenter संसद्य, संसत्-सदस्य m. wax) सैक्थिक अम्ल . 
m. of the Government शासन-परुष mellitic Chem. क्षौद्रिक mfn. 
m. mellone Chem. (named after melam) membership सदस्यता . 
आतिगा. 
membrana limitans = limiting mellonide Chem. पातिगेय. 
membrane सीमा-कला. melo-Med. कपोल 
membrane Anat. कला/. melody Music मूर्छना f. 
synovial m. सन्धि-कला f. melogene blue BH=diamine beta tympanic m. पटह-कला. 
black B 
membrane bone-investing bone melo-plasty Surg. कपोल-घटना. 
Anat. (arising from a membrane) melt vb. द्रावण, द्रवण ?. 
कलाजात अस्थि. melting-fusion द्राव m., द्रवण, द्रावण membrane of Krause = Krause's 
___membrane Anat. असित-कला/. m. furnace द्रावण भ्राष्ट्र n. 
membrane-winged animal चर्मपक्षी m. ice द्रावि हिम 1. 
(-इन्) m. m. point द्रावांक m. 
membranous Bot., Med. कलावत mfn. point apparatus द्रावांक साधित्र . membranous labyrinth Anat., Zool. m. point of ice हिम-द्रावांक m. 
कला-गहन । m. point tube द्रावांक नाल m. 
membranous tube Zool. कला-नाल m. m. pot f. (Hindi Fratt) membranous valve Zool. कला-कपाटn. member I अंगा, एकक, पद 1. 
memo Com. स्मारm. 2 सदस्य, सभासद्, सभ्य, पुरुष m. . memoir (a record of investigations) 3 Engin. (of structure) SiT . 
अनुसंधान-लेख m. m. in charge प्रभारी सदस्य m. memorandum स्मारक. m. of a family part m. (member I (a reminder) FFTRYT n. 
can be translated by the name 2 (informal communication) उपपत्र of the objects forming the fa 
576 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
3 (instrument drawn up in a brief mensurational formula Math. मा or compendious form) संक्षेपलेख m. पिकीय सूत्र . 4 सीमानियम m. 
Mentha piperita = peppermint m. book स्मारक पुस्त . 
Bot. तीन पर्णास m. = तीवा. m. explanatory of the budget menthol पर्णासव m. 
प्रायव्ययक-व्याख्या . 
mento-meckelian Zool. (a cartilage m. of association Law पार्षत्-सीमा bone or cartilage at the ante नियम M. (outside the limits of rior extremity of the mandible) 
memorandum a company हन्वनास्थि, चिबुकास्थि १. cannot go) 
mentum=chin Anat. facra m. m. calender स्मारक-तिथिपत्री. mepacrine Med. प्रोग्रकी. memorial आस्मारक m. (as in Victoria -mer Chem. -भाज ____memorial) 
di-mer द्वि-भाजm. mengel=mineral yellow 
iso-mer स-भाज m. menial staff परिचारक-वर्ग m. (परिचारक mercantile agent वाणिज्य-अभिकर्ता (-त) 
ancient word) meninges Anat. मस्तिष्कछद m. 
mercantile marine वाणिज्य पोत piamater मृदु-तानिका. duramater दृढ-तानिका f. 
mercaptal Chem. रसंग्रभसु m. arachnoid जाल-तानिका . 
mercaptan Chem. रसंग्रभm. meningitis Med. मस्तिष्कछदकोप m. mercapto- Chem. रसंग्रभ meningococcus Bact. मस्तिष्काणु m. mercaptole Chem. रसंग्रभवा. 
(abbreviated from मस्तिष्कच्छद mercerization दहविक्षारण n. गोलाणु) 
mercerized cotton treated with meninx sg. of meninges 
caustic soda) दहविक्षारित तूल . meniscus Ophthalmob. इन्दुकला. merchandise भाण्ड, वाणिज्य, वाणिज्यद्रव्य Menispermaceae Bot. गुडूची-कुल. menispermine Chem. काकफली . (काक- merchant Com. वणिक् m. 
फल Cocculus indicus) 
export m. निष्कामण वणिक् m. menopause Physiol. रजोनिवृत्ति . 
general m. सामान्य वणिक् m. menorrhagia Med. प्रदर m. (ancient import m. प्रवेश्य-वणिक m. ___word) 
retail m. अल्पशो-वणिक m. menorrhea रजःस्राव m. 
wholesale m. बहुशो-वणिक् m. menstruation Physiol. ऋतुस्त्राव m. merchant-vessel वणिक्योत m. Mens-ura Zool. चन्द्रपुच्छाति f. (-आति for mercur-, mercuro- (mercury) Chem. 
प्रजाति genus) 
'पारद mensuration (a branch of applied -mercurate -पारदीय . 
geometty) मापिकी f. 
mercurate vb. पारदीयन n. 577 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
I (to combine with mercury or a mercurification पारदायन, पारद-निष्कासन 
mercury salt) पारद-योजन 1. 2 (to treat with mercury or a mercurify vb. पारदायन n. 
mercury salt) पारद-साधन . 
I (to obtain mercury from ores) mercuri - (mercuric) Chem. पारदि पारद-निष्कासन . 
(पारदिक) 
2 (to combine mercury with) पारद mercurial Chem. पारदयुत, पारदिय mfa. योजन 1. 
m. telescope पारद-दूरेक्ष m. 
3 (to mingle mercury with) पारद mercurialization I Chem. पारदियन मेलन 1. 
12. 
4 = mercurialize 2 पारद-साधन . 
mercurius = mercury पारद m. mercurialize vb. I Chem. (to make mercurization Chem. TTTTTT n. 
mercurial) पारदियन 1. 
mercurize=mercurate vb. 2 (Med., to treat with mercury to mercuro-, mercur-mercury) Chem. the point of securing its desired 
पारद effect; in Photog., to treat with mercuro-chrome Pharm. पारद-वर्णकm. 
mercury) पारद-साधन .. 
mercurous Chem. पारद्य mfn mercurialness Chem. पारद-युतता, m. chloride = hydrargyri sub 
पारदि-यता 
chloridum (hydrarg. subch mercuri-amines Chem. arfa-facecit lor.)=calomel=subchloride 
of mercury Pharm. पारद्य नीरेय mercuri-ammonium Chem. पारदि 
तिक्तातु .m. 
m. chloride ointment = oint m. compounds पारीद-तिक्तातु संयोग ment of mercurous chloride 'm. 
Pharm. पारध नीरेय स्नेहलप m. mercuriate Chem. पारदीय.. 
m. oxide (black) TTET ETTT n. mercuriate=mercurate vb. 
(काल) mercuric Chem. पारदिक mfn. 'mercury-hydratgyrum = quick 
m. chloride - hydrargyri per- silver Chem. पारद m. 
chloridum (hydrarg. perch m. acet-amide (ic) पारदिक शुक्त lor.)=perchloride of mer 
तिक्तेय . cury=hydrargyri chloridum m. acetate (ic) पारदिक शुक्तीय 1. corrosivum=corrosive sub m. acetate (ous) पारद्य शुक्तीय n. limate Pharm. पारदिक नीरेय . m. ammonio-chloride पारद तिक्त m. iodide पारदिक जम्बेय 1. 
नीरेय . m. oxide (red, yellow) पारदिक m. arsenate (ic) पारदिक नेपालीय. 
जारेय. (रक्त, पीत) 
m. barium iodide (ic)पारदिक हर्यातु mercuride Chem. पारदेय 1. 
जम्बेय. 
n. 
578 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. benzoate (ic) पारदिक धूपीय .. m. bromide (ic) पारदिक दुरेय ?. m. bromide (ous) पारद्य दुरेय . m. chloride पारद नीरेय n. m. chromate (ic) पारदिक वर्णीय 7. m. chromate (ous) पारद्य वर्णीय. m. copper iodide (ic) पारदिक ताम्र 
जम्बेय. m. cyanide (ic) पारदिक श्यामेय 2. m. cyanide (oxy) (ic)पारदिक श्यामेय 
(जार). m. din-butyl पारद द्वि-ऋ-तल 1. m. dichromate (ic) पारदिक द्विवर्णीय 
m. diffusion-pump पारद-प्रसृति 
उदञ्च m. m. diethyl पारद द्विदक्षुल 1. m. diphenyl पारद द्विदर्शल .. m. di-p-tolyl पारद द्वि-प-विरारल . m. ethyl chloride पारद दक्षल नीरेय 
. m. fiuoride (ous) पारद्य तरस्वेय 
. m. Auoride (oxy) (ic) पारदिक तरस्वेय ____N. (जार) 
m. fulminate पारद चंचलीय . m. iodide पारद जम्बेय 1. m. iodide green (ous) पारद्य जम्बेय 
हरि m. m. iodidered (ic) पारदिक जम्बेय रक्त __m. m. iodideyellow (ous) पारद्य जम्बेय 
पीत m. m. nitrate पारद भूयीय 1. m. nitrate (ic) पारदिक भूयीय . m. nitrate (ous) पारद्य भूयीय . m. ointment = ointment of mercury=unguentum hyd 
579 
rargyri (ung. hydrarg.) पारद 
स्नेहलेप m. m. oxide पारद जारेय.. m. oxide (ic) (red, yellow) पारदिक 
जारेय 1. (रक्त, पीत) m. phosphate (ic) पारदिक भास्वीय n. m. pill=pill of mercury पारद 
गुटिका . m. pipette पारद नाडक m. m. potassium cyanide (ic) पार 
दिक दहातु श्यामेय . m. potassium iodide (ic) पारदिक 
दहातु जम्बेय. m. potassium thio-cyanate (ic) 
पारदिक दहातु गन्ध-श्यामीयn. m. red पारद रक्त m. m. regulator पारद-यामक m. m. reservoir पारदाशय m. (cf. जला 
शय) _m. salicylate (ic) पारदिक नम्रलोय 
1. m. silver iodide (ic) पारदिक रजत 
जम्बेय. m. still पारद आसोत्र n. m. sub-chloride पारद अनु-नीरेय । m. succinate पारद तणीय 1. m. succin-imide (ic) पारदिक तृण 
वितिक्तेय . m. sulphate (ic) पारदिकं शुल्बीय n. m. sulphate (ous) पारद्य शुल्बीया. m. sulphide पारद शुल्बेय n. m. sulphide, black काल पारद 
शुल्बेय . m. tannate (ous) पारद्य शल्कीय .. m. thermometer पारद-तापमान m. m. thio-cyanate, mercury sul 
phocyanate (ic) पारदिक गन्ध श्यामीयn.﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. tolueneregulator पारद विरालेन्य: merogamete Zool. क्षुद्रजन्यु m. 
TH 2. 
mero-gamy - micro -gamy Bot. m. zinc cyanide (ic)<fF FCTE STEIGE m. 
TTT n. 
-merous - mfn. -mere Embryol. -ers 
merozoite (mero - + Sporozoa) Zool. merely 19T, ÆTT 
(a spore produced by segmenta -meric Chem. - TFT 
tion of the schizonts of certain isomeric सभाजिक mfn. 
Sporozoa) preus m. (short for mericarp Bot. Vacceuifcash, 5#1- Tota-903) 
Fift 1. 
Merseburg earth=raw umber meridian Astron., Geom. (circle mesarch Bot. FTF# mfn. 
passing through the poles) stana mesenchymatal = mesenchyma 
tic=mesenchymatous trufaa meridional furrow Zool, (a longitu- mesenchyme Embryol. (it gives rise 
dinal furrow extending from pole to connective tissues) rufaa to pole) ध्रुवायाम-सीता f. (may be m. abbr. to आयाम-सीता) 
mesenteron=midgut Zool, Felin. Merimee's yellow=antimony yel mesentery Zool. (a membrane con 
low Col. Ind. ETT PICT m. 
necting intestines with bodywall) -merism -HIST f. 
74 m. meri-stele Bot. TEE m. 
mesethmoid Zool. (in the middle of meristem n. Bot. sfarsit (FT) m. the ethmoid region) amores meristematic Bot, ferrat (EET) min. 
m. tissue yarat-sifa f. 
mesh (of a net) afat n. (cf. Pali affet) -merization - TTT 11. 
mesh, meshwork=net, network mermaid (upper part like that of Zool, gran. 
a woman and the lower like the mesial Zool. 754 mfn. tail of a fish; a sea nymph) 4 mesityl (Gk. mesites mediator) Chem. 
FUT f. 
FEITET n. meroblastic cleavage = partial mesitylene Chem. Feat n. 
cleavage = incomplete clea- mesitylenic acid Chem. starten vage Embryol. qui-HTT 11. 
ART N. merocrine (glands in which the sec- meso- #84 
retion is formed by the disinteg- meso-blast Embryol., Zool. HEUTE ration of the free ends of the m. cells) FTTT m. 
mesocaecum Anat. Juga m. merocyte (supernumerary sperm mesocardium Embryol. (connecting 
nucleus) ufrufe f. 
the embryonic heart with the 
mfn. 
$80 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
___body wall and intestine) हृद्युज m. message संदेश m. mesocarp (fruit) Bot. Feufufa f. message dropping and picking mesocolon Anat. (joining the co up Mil. सन्देशपातन तथा उच्चयन . 
___lon) मलाशययुज m. 
messenger प्रहेय, संदेश-हर m. mesocoracoid Zool. (a median ele- Messerschmitt Mil. (German long 
____ment of the coracoid arch) उरोस्या- tange fighter) दूरहन्ता (-४) m. 
मध्या . 
Mesua Bot. नागकेसरति f. (-ति for प्रजाति mesoderm Embryol., Zool. मध्यस्तरm. ___genus) mesodermal supplement Zool. M. ferrea सामान्य नागकेसर m. 
मध्यस्तरानुपूरक m. 
met-, meta- Chem. सम mesogloea Zool. मध्यश्लेष m. 
Metabola Zool. (which undergo a mesolite Mineral. मध्यमिज M. (-इज metamorphosis) रचनान्तरणा: m.pl. 
for खनिज mineral) 
metabolism I Biol., Physiol. चयापचय mesomerism=desmotropism बन्धा m. 
वर्तना. 
2=metamorphosis Zool. परिवर्त mesonephros=Wolffian body Em 
bryol. मध्यवृक्क m. 
meta-borate Chem. सम-टांकीयn. mesophragma=M band or disc metacarpal=metacarpal bone fup ___ line of Hensen Zool. सितरेखा . शलाका . 
mesophyll Bot. मध्यपर्णोति f. metacarpal (of or pertaining to mesophyte Phytogeog. मध्योद्भिद् . the metacarpus) शालाकीय mfn. mesopodium Bot. मध्यपादक m. 
metacarpal bone Anat. पाणिशलाका. mesorchium Embryol., Zool. (atta- metacarpus Anat. 17917 m. 
ches the testis to the dorsal hand m. पाणि-शालाक m. wall) वृषणयुज m. 
foot m. पाद-शालाक m. mesorectum Embryol. (attached to metacentre (meta. 'changing'. See __ the rectum) गुदयुज m. 
Great Oxford Dictionary) Hydros. mesosternum Anat. (middle por- चलकेन्द्र ।. 
tion of the sternum) मध्योरोस्थिn. metachrome black Col. Ind. समवर्णक meso-tartrate Chem. मध्य-न्यासवीय. काल m. mesothorax Zool. उरोमध्य 1. 
m. blue समवर्णक नील m. meso-thorium Chem. मध्य-ह्रसातु m. 
m. blue-black समवर्णक नील-कृष्ण m. mesotomy-resolution प्रवेचन n. 
m. bordeaux समवर्णक कपिशक m. mesovarium Zool. अंडाशययुज m. 
m. brilliant blue समवर्णक भासर नील mesoxalyl-urea. Chem. मध्य-तिग्मल-मेह m. 
m. 
m. brown समवर्णक बभ्रु m. Mesozoic Geol. मध्यकल्प m. 
m. field grey समवर्णक सेना धूसर m. mess भोजनशाला f. 
m. olive समवर्णक तैलबदर m. 
bor 
581 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. olive brown समवर्णक तैलबदर metal white Col. Ind. धातु श्वेत m. 
बब्रुm. 
metamer Chenm. सम-भाजm. m. orange paste समवर्णक नारंग लेपी metameral-metameric Zool. सम 
खण्डीय mfn. m. red समवर्णक रक्त m. 
metamere Zool. I समखण्ड m. m. violet समवर्णक नीललोहित m. 
2=annuli वलय m. m. yellow समवर्णक पीत m. 
metameric i Zool. (of or pertaining metacoele (the lower part of the to a metamere) समखण्डीय mfn. 
fourth ventricle) चतुर्थगुहा-अधर m. 2 Chem. समभाजिक min. metacromion Zool. (a process from m. segment समखण्ड m. 
the acromion) उपोत्फलकान 
metamerically Zool. (in a metameric Metagonimus (acetabulum dis manner) समखण्डशः 
placed to one side) पावचूषाति f. metamerism I Chenn. समभाजता . (-आति for प्रजाति genus) 
2 Z00!. समखंडता . M. ovatus or yokogawai (found metamerization Zool. (formation or 
in Japan) निप्पोन पावचूष m. 
differentiation of metameres) सम metal धातु m. 
खंड-निर्माण 1., समखंड-भेद m. metal casing Automobile धात्वावरणn. metamerized Zool. (divided into metallic धात्वीय, धात्विक mfr. 
metametes) समखंडभाजित, समखंडित m. grey Col. Ind. धात्वीय धूसरm. mfn. m. lustre धात्विक-युति [. 
metamerousmetameric m. white Col. Ind. धात्वीय श्वेत m. metamine blue Col. Ind. समतिक्ती नील metallize vh. धात्वीयन n. 
m. metallized paper Radar धात्वीयित पत्र m. grey समतिक्ती धूसर m. 
metamorphosed Zool. परिवर्तित mfn. metallized paper strips Radar metamorphosis=metabolism परि 
धात्वीयित पत्र-खण्ड m. 
वर्त m. metallo- धातु 
metamorphosis Zool. (change of metallographical धात्विकीय mfn. 
form or structure) रूपान्तरण, रच metallography धात्विकी, धातु-विद्या . नान्तरण n. metalloid Chem. धात्वाभ। 
metanephros Embryol. उत्तरवृक्क m. metallurgical धातुकार्मिक mfn. 
metanil orange Col. Ind. समनील नारंग m. chemistry धातुकार्मिक रसायन . . m. engineering धातुकर्म-अभियन्त्रणा m. red समनील रक्त- m. 
m. yellow समनील पीत m. m. microscope धातुकण्विीam. met-anilate Chem. सम-नीलीय . metallurgy धातुकर्म . 
metanilic acid Chem. समनीलिक अम्ल metalware धातुभाण्ड n. 
. 
meta 
. 
582 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
metanitrorange Col. Ind. समभूयनारंग meteor केतु M. 
meteoric iron Mineral. उल्कायस.. metantimonate समांजनीय . 
meteorite=aerolite (a stony or me metaphase Biol. TOT f. 
tallic body that has fallen to the metaphenylene Chem. समदर्शलेन्या . earth from outer space) उल्कापिंड metaphenylene blue Col. Ind. सम m. (उल्काश्म, उल्काधातु) 
दर्शलेन्य नील m. 
meteorology धनवातिकी /. metaphloem Bot. अन्वधोवाही (-इन्) m. meter , metre (m.) मान m. (मा.) metaphosphoric acid Chem. सम 
-meter -मान भास्विक अम्ल n. 
meter angle Physiol., Optics मान metaplasm (Gk. meta beyond, over) कोण m. 
Zool. अतिघटन 1. 
meter bridge=metre bridge metapophysis Anat. अग्र-वध m. meth- (methyl) प्रोद metaprotein Biochem. सम-प्रोभूजिन m. methanal (methane-t-aldehyde) Chem. meta-stannic acid Chem. सम-अप्विक प्रोदीन्यसूm. 
अम्ल . 
methane (methyl + -ane) Chem. metasternum=xiphisternum पश्चो प्रोदीन्य 1. 
रोस्थि . 
methane black Col. Ind. प्रोदीन्य काल m. meta-stibnite Mineral. (a brick-red methano- Chem. प्रोदीन्य 
deposit) रक्तांजनिज m. (-इज for खनिज methanol Chem. प्रोदीन्यवm. mineral) 
methanolysis Chem. पोदीन्यांशन 1. Metastrongylidae (a family) समछत्र- met-hermoglobin Biochem. सम-शोण 
वंश m. (short for समछत्रनरवंश) 
वर्तुलि f. Metastrongylus समछत्राति f. (short methene Chem. प्रोदेन्या . 
for समछत्रनराति) (-प्राति for प्रजाति methenyl (methere +-) Chem. genus) 
प्रोदेन्यल. metatarsal bone पादशलाका f. 
methide Chem. प्रोदेय .. metatarsus (the part of the foot bet- methine Chem. Stet f. 
ween the tarsus and phalanges) • metho-, meth-(methyl) Chem. प्रोद पादशालाक m. . 
method रीति [. Metatheria = Marsupialia Zool. method employed प्रयुक्त-रीति f. 
शिशुधान-मृगाः, शिशुधानिनः m.pl. methodical यथारीति, रीत्यनुसार metathesis व्यत्यास M. 
method of Gauss=double weigh metathesize व्यत्यासन, व्यत्यास-करण 2. ing द्विस्तोलन . metathorax ZOOL. उरःपश्च m. 
method of least squares Statistics metaxylem Bot. महा-वाहिनी (large अल्पतम-वर्ग-रीति . . vessels), अनु-दारु (अनु formed after) method of limits Math. सीमा-रीति f. 
Metazoa 2001. नैककोशिनः m.pl. 
method of pr ocedure प्रक्रिया-रीति. 
583 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
method of reproduction प्रजनन-रीति m. violet प्रोदलनीली नीललोहित m. 
methylate I vb. प्रोदलीयन n. metholic stefani mfn. 
22. प्रोदलीय. meth-oxide Chem. प्रोद-जारेय. 
methylated प्रोदलीयित mfn. nethyl Chem. प्रोदल . ( for प्रांगार m. spirit burnet प्रोदलीयित प्रासव 
carbon + 36 for Guff hydrogen . दाहक m. + - ल for मूल radical) 
methylation Chem. प्रोदलीयन 2. m. alcohol प्रोदल सुषव m. 
methylene Chem. प्रोदलेन्या . m. aldehyde प्रोदल सुव्युद m. 
methylene azure Col. Ind. प्रोदलेन्य m.-amine प्रोदल-तिक्ती। 
नभोनील m. m.-aniline प्रोदल-नीली . 
m. blue प्रोदलेन्य नील m. m. ester प्रोदल प्रलवण n. 
m. brown प्रोदलेन्य बभ्र m. m. ether प्रोदल दक्षु m. 
m. dark blue stammer fra fret m. m. radical प्रोदल मूल 1. 
m. green प्रोदलेन्य हरि m. m. salicylate = methylis sali m. grey प्रोदलेन्य धूसर m. ___cylas (methyl. salicyl.) Pharm. m. heliotrope प्रोदलेन्य निनीलातिरक्त 
प्रोदल नम्रलीय . m.-urea प्रोदल-मिह.m. 
m. indigo प्रोदलेन्य निनील m. m.-urethane प्रोदल-मिक्षीण्य । 
m. red प्रोदलेन्य रक्त m. methyl alkali blue Col. Ind. प्रोदल m. violet प्रोदलेन्य नीललोहित m. 
क्षारक नील m. 
m. yellow = acronal yellow m. blue प्रोदल नील m. 
प्रोदलेन्य पीत m. m. cotton blue प्रोदल तूल नील m. methylen-imine Chem. प्रोदलेन्य m. eosine प्रोदल उषसी. 
वितिक्ती . m. green प्रोदल हरि m. 
methylic Chem. प्रोदलिक mfn. m. heliotrope प्रोदल निनीलातिरक्त m. methylis salicylas=methyl sali m. indigo प्रोदल निनील m. 
cylate m. indone प्रोदल निनीला f. 
metre मान m. m. orange प्रोदल नारंग m. 
-metre -ATTT m. red प्रोदल रक्त m. 
metre angle मान-कोण m. m. violet प्रोदल नीललोहित m. metre bridge Phys. मान-सेतु m. m. violet bluish प्रोदल नीललोहित metric दशमिक mfun. 
आनील m. 
-metric,-metrical 1 (from -meter) m. violet reddish प्रोदल नीललोहित -मानिक,-मानीय mfn. - आरक्त m. 
2 (from -metry) -मितीय mfr. m. water blue प्रोदल जल नील m. metric system = decimal metric methylaniline green. Col. Ind. प्रोदल 
ine green. Col. and. प्रोदल- system दशमिक मानक्रम m. नीली हरि m.. 
metric.ton (M. T.)=millier=ton 584 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
neau प्रयुत-धान्य 7. (प्र.धा.; १०,००,००० 
धा.), मानिक प्रवर्त m. (मा.वर.) -metrist -मितिज्ञ,-मितिक m. -metry -मिति . Metternich's green=night green mezzo relievo = half relief Art 
अर्ध उद्भुत . ug. (micro-gram) णु. धा., प्रि. धा. 
(अणु-धान्य, प्रयुति-धान्य) mg. (milli-gram) सि. धा. (सहस्त्रि-धान्य) Mg (magnesium) Chem. भ्र (भ्राजात) mgm., mgr., mgrm. (milli-gram) 
सि. धा. (सहनि-धान्य) mho Elec. (a unit of conductance) 
धुसंवह m. mi. (mile) क्रो. (क्रोशक) mica अभ्रक . Michelia Bot. चम्पकति 1. (-ति for प्रजाति 
genus) 
M. champaca सामान्य चम्पक m. Mickey (radar set used by planes 
in bombing through overcast) 
मेघान्वेष m. (मेघान्तरा-प्रस्फोटन-तेजोल्वेष) mickey mouse-radar height 
finder Radar उच्छायान्वेष m. micro अणु micro- अणु microbe अणुजीव m. 
germ जीवाणु m. 
organism जीव m. microbicide अणुजीवघ्न mfn. micro Bunsen burner un forten 
दाहक m. micro burette अणु द्रवमि m. micro burner अणु दाहक m. 
micro clamp अणु संधर m. micrococcus (a minute bacterial 
coccus or cell form) अणुगोल m. 
Micrococcus (AI.) (a genus. The 
cells are arranged in irregular masses) गुच्छगोलाणु (गु.गो.) M. acidi lactici (a coccus of 
fresh milk causing lactic acid 
fermentation) दुग्धिकाम्ल गु. गो. M. acidi lactici liquefaciens 
(from cheesy butter) दधिक 
नवनीत गु. गो. M. aerogenes वातिजन गु. गो. M.agilis=Rhodococcus agilis M. albus liquefaciens तरलक श्वेत 
गु. गो. M. amylovorus = Erwinia 
amylophila M. aquatilis (found in fresh 
water) जल गु. गो. M. ascoformans (found in the diseased pelvic tissues of the 
horse) अश्व गु. गो. M. aurantiacus (produces yel __low, slimy, knob-shaped cul 
tures) स्वर्ण गु. गो. M. aureus = Staphylococcus 
aureus M. billrothii (its cultures give off a cheesy odour) दधिकगन्ध गु. गो. M. biskra (produces oriental . ___sore in animals) पशुव्रण गु. गो. 
M. botryogenus=M. ascofor . mans 
M. buccalis (occurs in the ___mouth) मुख गु. गो. 
M. candicans=Staphylococcus 
candicans M. capillorum (changes the 
colour of the hair) केश गु. गो 
585 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
M. caprinus (said to be the 
cause of a disease of goats 
called takosis) TTA T. TT. M. carneus (produces a red 
pigment) 247 qui T. opt. M. caseolyticus (occurs on the 
udders of cows) TT T. TT. M. catarrhalis पैनस गु. गो. M. cerasinus siccus (produces 
a dull-red pigment) FuaCT T. TT. M. cereus = Staphylococcus 
cereus M. chlorinus (produces a yel 
lowish-green pigment) affa 
T. TT. M. cinnabareus (forms a brick 
red pigment) 562127 T. TT. M. citreus (produces a dingy yellowish pigment) निम्बुपीत 
T. TT. M. concentricus संकेन्द्र गु.गो. M. cremoides (named from its 
creamy pigment) rcqui T. TT. M. cremoris viscosi (causes ___ropiness in milk) दुग्धरज्जु गु. गो. M. crepusculum (from putre 
fying liquids) facer T. TT. M. cumulatus tenuis (seen in 
spherical masses of oblong, 
immotile cocci) a T. TT. M. cyaneus (forms a blue pig 
ment on potato) TT TT. TTT. M. diffluens (found in air, dust 
and feces) TT T. TT. M. endocarditidis rugatus 
(found on the vulvular vegeta 
tions of ulcerative endocar :ditis) aftuar :19 T. TT. 
M. epidermidis अधिचर्म गु. गो M. fioccii (found in the conjunc 
tival sac) TETETT T. TTT. M. flavescens (found in Swiss 
cheese) afrafa *I. ST. M. flavus conjunctivae (from ___ the human conjunctiva) युजापिंग 
T. ATT. M. flavus desidens (produces 
a brownish pigment) wa 
T. TI. M. flavus liquefaciens 1999 Ft 
I. TI. M. flavus tardigradus #earfer TT 
T. TT. M. foetidus (from rotting teeth) 
• FACRT TT. ITT. M. freudenreichii (occurs in 
milk) yra T. TT. M. fuscus (produces a dark 
brown pigment) 27 T. TT. M. gazogenes = Veillonella 
gazogenes atfert T. TT. M. gelatinosus (coagulates 
milk) gata T. TT. M. ghidiallii (said to be des 
tructive to the enteric fever 
germ) FIMET T. *71. M. gingivae pyogenes (from al 
veolar abscesses) TAHİT TUT I. TT. M. gonorrhoeae. See Neisse 
ria gonorrhoeae M. haematodes (from the hair 
of persons with red sweat) 
रक्तस्वेद गु. गो. M. intracellularis meningi 
tidis. See Neisseria meningi 
tidis 
586 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
M. lanceolatus प्रास गु. गो. M. leucochromagenes श्वेतवर्ण 
गु. गो. M. liquefaciens conjunctivae 
(from the normal human con junctiva) युजातरल गु. गो. M. loewenbergii (from the nose ___in ozena) अपीनसीय गुं. गो. 
M. luteolus (found in cheese) 
दधिक गु. गो. M. luteus (forms yellow colo _nies) पीत गु. गो. 
M.lysodeikticus (very suscepti ble to the lytic action of lyso 
zyme) शीघ्राश्य गु. गो. M. mastitidis (produces masti ___tis in cows) गोस्तनकोप गु. गो. 
M. mastobius (from the milk 
of sheep with gangrenous 
mastitis) अविस्तनकोथ गु. गो. M. melitensis See Brucella me 
litensis M. meningitidis. See Neisseria 
intracellularis meningitidis M. micheli (found in the fol _licles of trachoma) कणि-युजा गु.गो. M. myceticus (resembles the 
lesions caused by fungus in fection) कावकाभ गु. गो. (fr. कावक विधि-आभ) M. nasalis नासा गु. गो. 
M. neoformans (from cancer) ___ यमार्बुदीय गु.गो. 
M. nitrificans (forms nitrates) 
भूयीय गु. गो. Nocard's.m. See M. mastobius Nuzum's m. (from cancer of 
the breast) स्तनाबूंद गु.गो. 
M. ochroleucus (cultures pro 
duce a yellow pigment and give off a sulphurous odour) गान्धपीत गु.गो. M. of osteomyelitis अस्थिकोप गु.गो. 
M. ovis (from gangrenous mas ___titis in sheep) अविस्तन गु. गो. 
M. paratetragenus अपिचतुष्क गु. गो. M. pasteuri (resembles the bacillus of Friedlander; Fried 
lander's b. is a capsulated bac _illus प्रावरवेत्राणु) प्रावरवेत्राभ गु. गो. M. pflugeri (from decaying __potatoes) गलितालु गु. गो. 
M. pharyngis siccus (often found in the normal pharynx) शुष्क ग्रसनी गु. गो. M. phosphorescens भास्वद् गु. गो. M. pneumoniae See Pneumo 
coocus M. porcellorum (from swine __with hepatitis) सूकरयकृद् गु. गो. m. of progressive lymphoma 
(from the progressive lympho ____ma. of animals) लसीकार्बुद गु. गो. 
M. pyogenes tenuis पूयजन तनु 
ग. गो. M. radiatus (in slightly motile ___cocci) आचल गु. गो. 
M. restituens (changes pep ___tones into albumin) शिवतिकर गु.गो. 
M. rheumaticus सन्धिज्वरीय गु. गो. M. rosenbachii (from the pus ___of abscesses) विद्रधिपूय गु. गो. 
M. rosetaceus (forms clusters) 
स्तबक गु. गो. .. M. roseus See Rhodococcus 
roseus 
587 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
M. saccatus (found on the microcosmic salt=sal microcos 
nasal mucosa) नासाश्लेष्म ग. गो. micum=phosphor salt Chem. M. salivarius septicus (from भास्वर लवण . 
the sputum of puerperal septic- micro crucible अणु-मूषा f. ___emia) ष्ठीव गु. गो. 
microcyte Anat. अणु-कोशा f. M. subflavus अनुपिंग गु. गो. 
micro-gamy = mero-gamy Biol. M. subgranulatus (found in the क्षुद्रोद्वाह m. __mouth) आस्य गु. गो. 
micro-gram (ug.) अणु-धान्य, प्रयुति M. tetragenus चतुष्क गु. गो. 
धान्य .. (णु.धा., प्रि. धा.) M. tetragenus mobilis ven- micrography I (description of mic 
triculi (from the stomach) roscopic objects) अणुवर्णना f. 
आमाशय चतुष्क गु. गो. 
2 (study or examination with the M. tetragenus subflavu 
microscope) अण्वीक्ष-प्रयोग m. ped in fours) चतुष्क अनुपिंग गु. गो. micromere Embryol. लघु खण्ड m. M. urae, ureae (found in stale micrometer Phys. अणुमान M. ___urine) मूत्र गु. गो. 
m. microscope अणुमान-अण्वीक्षm. M. urinae albus (from theurine m. screw gauge अणुमान भ्रम्यामान M. ___of cystitis) बस्तिकोप श्वेत गु. गो. micrometer = micron (1) अणु-मान, 
M. urinae flavus (from the urine प्रयुति-मान = अणुम m. (णु. मा., प्रि. मा. ____of cystitis) बस्तिकोप पिंग गु. गो. =णु, ०.०००००१ मा.) 
M. urinae major (from theurine micron=micro-meter (u) अणुम m. ____of cystitis) बस्तिकोप महा गु. गो. (णु.) 
M. urinalbus मूत्रश्वेत ग. गो. 
micro-nucleus = generative nuc M. versatilis (found in yellow leus अणु-न्यष्टि जनन-न्यष्टि f. ___ fever cadaver) पीतज्वर-शव गु. गो. micro-organism Biol. अणु-जीव m. M. versicolor (produces a yel- micro oxidation flask अणु जारण पलिघ 
lowish-green pigment) afatia m. ___ गु. गो. 
microphone Phys. अणुभाष m. M. viniperda (found in spoiled micro-photograph अणु-भाचित्र 1. ___wine) दुष्टद्राक्षिरा गु. गो. 
micro-preparation Bot. (slide con M. virdis flavescens हरि पिंग गु.गो. taining microscopic object) M. viscosus (isolated from अण्वीक्ष-निर्मिति . ____diseased wine) रुममद्य गु. गो. micropyle Bot. अण्डद्वार . 
M.. viticulosus (the cocci are microscope अण्वीक्षm. ____ovoid) अण्डरूप गु. गो. 
microscope slide अण्वीक्ष-सृप m. M. xanthogenicus. (from yellow microscopicअण्वीक्ष-, अण्वीक्षदृश्य (visible '... • fever patients) पीतज्वरीय गु, गो. through a microscope), आण्वीक्ष, 
M. zymogenes किण्वजन गु. गो. 
अण्वीक्ष्य min. 
588 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
n. 
m. anatomy अण्वीक्ष्य शारीर, अण्वीक्ष- midden system Hygiene मलकूट-पद्धति . 
दृश्य शारीर.. 
middle मध्य m. bodies अण्वीक्ष्य काय, पदार्थ m. middle driving wheel Rly. Eng. m. dye अण्वीक्ष रजक m. 
मध्य चालन चक्र m. examination Biol. अण्वीक्ष-द्वारा middle ear Anat. मध्य कर्ण. 
परीक्षा 
middleman Com. मध्य जन m. m. section छेदाणु m. 
middle oil मध्य तैल n. micro-seconds Radar अणु-काष्ठिका f. middle piece (of a spermatozoon) micro sedimentation tube अणु-अव- Zoof. मध्य भाग, मध्य खण्ड m. 
सादन नाल m. 
middle point Math. मध्य बिन्दुm. micro slide Bot. अण्वीक्ष-सप m. 
middle school माध्यमिक पाठशाला micro-some Zool. अणु-काय m. 
middle section Math. मध्य छेद m. micro-sporangium Bot. लघु-बीजाणु mean logarithm मध्यक-छेदा. 
धानी /. 
middle terms-means Math. मध्य पद micro-spore Bot. लघु-बीजाणु m. Microsporoides raisoaraft f. (for midfeather trap = dipstone trap 
for प्रजाति genus) 
___Hygiene मग्नाश्म रुध m. micro-sporophyll Bot. लघुबीजाणुपत्र n. midgut=mesenteron Zool. मध्यान्त्र Microsporum Bot. लघुबीजाणुकति /- (-ति . 
for प्रजाति genus) 
mid-pupillary point मध्यतारा-बिन्दु M. M. audouini (causes ringworm mid-rib Bot. मध्य-नाडी . 
on scalp in cold countries) migraine headache Med. अर्धशिरःपीडा 
शीतदेशदद्रु लघुबीजाणुक m. microstat अण्वीक्ष-स्थाप् m. 
migratory bird Zool. Farsit or eraras microtome अणुतक्ष m. 
पक्षीm. microttombidium अण्विन्द्रगोप m. migratory locust = Pachytylus 
otrombidium akamushi - migratorius Zool. प्रव्राजी शरभ. Trombicula akamushi निप्पोन Mikado brown अवरक्तपीत m. अण्विन्द्रगोप m. 
M. brown B = direct brown micro-wave Radar अणु-तरंगm. 
m. transmission अणुतरङ्ग-पारेषण. M. gold yellow 2 G= direct 
m. transmitter अणुतरङ्ग-पारेषक m. yellow R mid- मध्य 
M. orange प्राधिरक्तपीत m. mid-brain Anat. , Embryol. मध्य M. orange G=direct orange 
मस्तिष्क 1. 
2 R midday meal मध्याह्न भोजन 1. 
M. yellow G-direct yellow R midden closet = privy Hygiene mild yg mfn. 
संग्रहि मलकुंड . 
mild alkali मदु क्षारक m. 589 
%3D﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
-- 
- 
. 
. 
mildew Bot. आसिता . (whitish) milk tooth क्षीर-दन्त m. mild smell मृदु गन्ध M. 
milk-white दुग्ध-श्वेत mfn. mild steel Engin. मदु वज्रायस n. milkwort (Polygala) पुरुदुग्ध m. mile (m., mi.) क्रोशक m. (को.) 
milky दुग्धवत् । mileage I क्रोशक-संख्या f. 
mill 1 (a manufactory) frivit f. 2 (allowance per mile) क्रोशकाधिदेय 2 (a grinding mill) पेषणी. 
cloth m. वस्त्र-निर्माणी. mileometer Automobile क्रोशक-मान m. flour m. धान्य-पेषणी / milepost क्रोशक-स्थूण 1. 
rice m. तण्डुल-निर्माणी f. (तण्डुल hus military n. (troops, army) सेना f. ___ked rice) 
adj. I (of or pertaining to sol m. machine पेषण-यंत्र n. diers) सैनिक mfn. 
mill vb. (to cut fine grooves or 2(ofor pertaining to arms) प्रायुध-, indentations across the cylindri 
आयुधिक mfn. 
cal surface as of a coin) आक्षुरण . 3 (of or pertaining to war) युद्ध-, (आ 'समन्तात+क्षुर् to scratch, to सांनामिक mfm. 
cut lines or grooves) m. attache सैनिक सहचारी (-इन् ) m. millboard पत्रपट्टm. m. base सैनिक प्रास्थान n. 
___asbestos m. अदह पत्रपट्टm. m. brush सैनिक कुर्च m. 
milled (coin) आक्षुरित nfm. m. chest (funds of an army) m. edge (of a coin) aria at n. 
सैनिक कोश m. 
m. head प्रार्धारित शिर n. m. college सैनिक विद्यालय m. 
Millepedes Zool. सहस्रपादा: m.pl M. Cross सैनिक-स्वस्तिका [. 
millepore Zool. शतरन्ध्री (-इन) m. m. government सैनिक शासन . millet oil प्रकंगु-तैल' . . m. hospital सैनिक रुग्णालय m. millier=metric ton m.-man सैनिक m. 
milli-gram (mg., mgm., mgr., m. necessity Law सांग्रामिक-आवश्य- mgrm.) सहस्नि-धान्य 1. (सि. धा.) 
कता f. 
milli-liter (ml.) सहस्रि-प्रस्थ m. (सि. स्थ.) m. school सैनिक-पाठशाला f. 
milli-meter (mm.) सहस्त्रि-मान m. (सि. milk analysis basin दुग्ध-विश्लेषण 
पात्री. 
milling I पेषण . milk centrifuge दुग्ध-मथित्र n. 
2 (as the edge of a coin) प्राक्षुरण n. milk-fat Zool. दुग्ध-स्नेह m. 
3 (fulling) संकोचन . milk of lime चूर्णक-दुग्ध 1. 
milling blue Col. Irid. संकोचन नील m. milk of sulphur = precipitated m. blue-black संकोचन नील-कृष्ण m. . : sulphur गन्धक-दुग्ध . 
m. brilliant violet संकोचन भासुर milk-protein दुग्ध-प्रोभूजिन M. (abbre- नीललोहित m. 
viated to दुग्धिन) 
m. brown संकोचन बभ्र m. 390 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. cyanine संकोचन श्यामी f. mine n. 'Mil. निस्फोट m. m. green संकोचन हरि m. 
m. exploding निस्फोट-उत्स्फोटन 1. m. orange संकोचन नारंग m. 
m. field निस्फोट-क्षेत्र । m. red संकोचन रक्त m. 
m. layer निस्फोट-वापm. m. scarlet संकोचन शोण m. 
m. laying निस्फोट-वपन । m. violet संकोचन नीललोहित m. 
m. sweeper निस्फोट-अपोहक m. m. yellow संकोचन पीत m. 
m. sweeping निस्फोट-अपोहन n. milling machine पेषण-यन्त्र . 
mineral खनिज m. milling, mixing and sheeting m. ash खनिज भस्म 1. 
machine पेषण, मिश्रण तथा स्तारण m. body Bot. खनिज-काय m. यन्त्र १. . 
m. coal खनिज-अंगार m. million प्रयुत n., षट्ख M. (6 zeros) 
m. crystal खनिज-स्फटm. millipede Zool. सहस्रपाद m. 
m. food Hygiene खनिजान्न .. milliphot Ophthalmol. सहस्रि-शिचकास m. green = copper green ताम्र 
m. 
हरि, मध्यपीतातिहरि m. millivolt Elec. सहस्रिधुशक्म n. 
m. spring खनिज-स्रोत 1. millivolt-meter सहस्रिद्युशक्म-मान m. 
m. tar खनिज-विराल M. milori blue=steel blue 
m. water खनिज-जल . milori green=silk green 
m. wool खनिज-ऊर्णा . Mimosa Bot. लज्जालुति /- (-ति for प्रजाति mineral bistre Col. Ind. खनिज कज्जल 
genus) 
m. M. pudica सामान्य लज्जालु m. 
m. black खनिज काल m. mimosa=citron yellow निम्बु-पीत m. m. blue खनिज नील m. Mimosae Bot. (a subfamily 4979757 m. brown खनिज बभ्रु m. 
having an indefinite number of m. green खनिज हरि m. stamens) बहुकेसरानुकुल १. 
m. grey खनिज धूसर m. mimosa Z-thiazol yellow 
m. orange खनिज नारंगm. Mimusops Bot. agafar f. (-for for m. pitch खनिज निराल m. 
प्रजाति genus) 
m. red खनिज रक्त . M. elengi सामान्य बकुल m. 
m. white खनिज श्वेतm. min. (minim) बि. (बिन्दुक) 
m. yellow खनिज पीत m. mindererus spirit=dilute solu- mineral blue = azurite (blue 
ion of ammonium acetate copper ore) नीलताम्रिज m. (-इज for 
Pharm. मन्द तिक्तातु शुक्तीय विलयन . खनिज mineral) minen, खनि 
mineralization (deposition of m. account खनि-लेखा . 
____minerals) खनिजायन n. m. engineering खनि-अभियन्त्रणा f. mineralogical खानिजिक, खानिजीय mfm. mine vb. खनन ।. 
.m. chemistry खानिजिक रसायन ।. 
591 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
mineralogy खानिजी f., खनिज-शास्त्र 1 minister plenipotentiary पूर्णाधिकार mingle vb. मेलन . 
मन्त्री (-इन् ) m. miniature लघुरूप.., वामन m. 
ministry मन्त्रिवर्ग m., मन्त्रिता miniature poodle dog Zool. वामन minium हिंगुल, सीसजारिज m. (-इज for 
मानी (-इन् ) m. 
खनिज mineral) miniature railways वामन संयान. minor Law अवयस्क m. minim (m., min.) farger m. (fq.) minor Math. उपनिश्चायक m. (निश्चायक 
m. measure बिन्दुक-माय m. 
determinant) minima Bot. (very small) क्षुद्र mfn. minor arc Math. ह्रस्व चाप m. minimal अवराय mfn. 
minor axis Math. कनीयोक्ष, गौण अक्ष m. minimize vb. अल्पिष्ठन 1. 
minor chord Music कनीयस् संतन्त्र . minimum Com. निन्यन, अल्पिष्ठ, अवराध minor curve Math., Engin. गौण वक्र . 
mfn. 
minor scale Music कनीयो-ग्राम m. m. amount निन्यून राशि m. 
minor still लघु पासोत्र n. m. balance निन्यून अन्तर n. 
mint I (an aromatic plant) पर्णास m. m. rent निन्यन भाटक m. 
2 टंकशाला. m. subscription अल्पिष्ठ अभिदान- minuend Math. वियोज्य 1. 
राशिm. 
minus Math.वियुत, ऋण __m. wage निन्यून-भृति f. . 
6 minus 2 is equal to 4 ६ वियुत २ minimum deviation Light अल्पिष्ठ (से) सम (है) चार (के) 
विचलन 2. 
minus strain Bot. ऋण अं minimum separable angle Ophe minute adj. 7* mfn. 
thalmol. अल्पिष्ठ वियोज्य कोण m. minute I (sh of an hour) कला f. (वियोज्य-वियोज्य वस्तु) 
____ 2 (note) टिप्पण. mining खनिकर्म, खनन 1. 
3 क्षण m. mining theodolite खनिज-विकोणमान minute hand कला-सूची 
minute of dissent == note of dis mining ton (Cornish) खनि-प्रवर्त m. ____sent विमति-टिप्पण .. minister मन्त्री (-इन्) m. (for the minutes (of a meeting) वृत्त ?. 
various ministers see s. v. Hon. m. book वृत्त-पुस्ता . 
Minister) 
Miocene Geol. मध्यनूतन-युगा . ministerial मन्त्रि-, मन्त्रिवर्गीय mfn. miolecithal Zool. अल्पपीती (-इन्) 
m. benches मन्त्रिपक्ष m. 
Mirabilis Bot. सन्ध्यारागति f. (-ति for m. party मंत्रिपक्ष m. 
प्रजाति genus) ministerialist मंत्रिपक्ष्य m. 
M. jalapa सामान्य सन्ध्यारागm. minister-in-charge प्रभारी मंत्री (-इन्) miracidium Zool. (larva of fluke *", m. 
छिद्रिपत्र) पत्रजातक m. minister of war युद्ध-मंत्री (-इन्) m. mirage मृगजल N., मृगतृष्णा f. 
m. 
592 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
mires प्रारोहणी. mirror दर्पण m. mirror scales दर्पण-श्रेणी misappropriation Com. ' अपाहरण 
अणा. 
m. of goods वस्तु-अपाहरण 1. 
m. of money रोक-अपाहरण 1. miscarriage गर्भपात M. (after the 
seventh month) 
abortion गर्भस्त्राव M. miscellaneous प्रकीर्ण, विविध Min. miscellaneous and general प्रकीर्ण 
तथा सामान्य miscibility मिथ्यता f. miscible-mixable मिश्य mfn. mishri (मिश्री)=candy misnomer x Com. मिथ्यानाम 1. 
2 Zool. अपनाम, अपार्थनाम . (as 
against अन्वर्थनाम) mispickel (German) = arseno ___pyrite Mineral. नेप-माक्षीक ". 
missile अस्त्र n. Mississippian period = Lower 
Carboniferous Period mist कूहा. mistura=mixture Pharm. fast n. 
misuse vb. कुप्रयोग-करण ।. mite वरूथीm. mitis=mild #ra mfn. Mitis green=Paris green, eme 
rald green . mitochondria Biol. कणाभसूत्र. mitosis=karyokinesis Biol. सूत्रि- 
भाजना. mitral valve=bicuspid 
Anat. द्विदल कपाट mitten (a glove without having a 
separate sheath for each finger 
but having a division for the 
thumb) निरंगुल हस्तपा . Mittler's green=permanent green 
mixvb. मिश्रण . mixable=miscible f#sya mafn. 
mixed मिश्रित mfn. 
m. gonococcus fHFATA STETUT m. m. infection vaccine Pharm. 
मिश्रित संसर्ग-लस m. . m. intestinal infection Pharm. मिश्रित प्रान्त्र रोगसंचार, मिश्रित प्रान्त्र संसर्ग m. m. melting point method मिश्रित 
द्रावांक-रीति. m. nerve Physiol. मिश्र-चेता f. m. number Matb. सभिन्न-संख्या f. m. prophylactic vaccines (polyvalent) Pharm. मिश्रित 
रोगरोधक लस M. (प्रतिबहु) m. sampling Statistics मिश्रित 
निदर्शन . m. special disease vaccine 
Pharm. मिश्रित विशेष-रोग-लस m. ____m. xylidine मिश्रित-काष्ठेयी 
mixing मिश्रण . mixing machine मिश्रण-यन्त्र n. mixture i fustus n. 
2 Phys., Chem. मिश्र .. 3=mistura Pharm. मिश्र n. 
m. of gases वाति-मिश्र . m. of liquids तरल-मिश्र. 
m. of solids सान्द्र-मिश्र ". ml. (milli-liter) सि. स्थ. (सहस्त्रि-प्रस्थ) M.L.A. (member of the legislative 
assembly) वि. स. स. (विधान-सभा सदस्य, more accurate would be 
विधानसभ्य, abbr. वि. स.) mm. (milli-meter) सि. मा. (सहस्रि-मान) 
593 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
Mm. 
Mn (manganese) Chem. लो (लोहक) moderately concentrated solution Mo (molybdenum) Chem. सं (संवर्णातु) आसंकेन्द्रित विलयन .. moa Zool. विधावी (-इन्) M. 
moderately dilute solution आमन्द moat परिखा. 
विलयन 2. mobile चलिष्णु mfn. 
moderately fine powder आसूक्ष्म क्षोद mobile liquid चलिष्णु तरल m. 
mobile radar installation Radar moderately soluble अनति-विलेय, मध्यम ___ चलिष्णु तेजोन्वेष अधिष्ठापन 1. 
विलेय mfn. mobility चलिष्णुता . 
moderate speed अनति-वेग, मध्यम वेग m. modal Statistics भूयिष्ठ 
moderate visibility मध्यम-दृश्यता . __m. group भयिष्ठ वर्ग m. 
modern आधुनिक, नूतन mfn. m. output भूयिष्ठ उत्पाद m. modern azurine Col. Ind. नूतन नभो mode (a colour of variable hue, नीली. 
of low or very low saturation m. blue नूतन नील M. and of medium or high bril m. cyanine नूतन श्यामी . liance) प्रनीच m. (प्र high brilliance 
m. grey नूतन धूसर m. +नीच low saturation) 
m. heliotrope नूतन निनीलातिरक्त m. 2 रीति 
m. olive-green नूतन तैलबदर-हरि m. model Math. प्रतिकृति /., निदर्शन . 
m. royal blue नतन नप नील m. benzene m. Chem. धूपन्य निदर्शन 1. m. violet नूतन नीललोहित m. model for illustrating atomic 
m. yellow नूतन पीत m. theory परमाणुवाद-निदर्शन 
modification Bot. संपरिवर्तन 1. models and patterns Com. प्रतिकृति modified form Math., Phys. संपरिवर्तित 
तथा आदर्शm. 
रूप । mode of life जीवन-रीति f. 
modified xylem Bot. संपरिवर्तित दारु. mode of payment Com. शोधन-रीति f. modify vb. संपरिवर्तन 1. mode of proof उपपत्ति-रीति 
modulator I =synchronizer Radar moderate breeze (13-18 m. p. h.) संकालक m. 
समीर m. (See Beaufort's Wind 
2 Phys, आपरिवर्तक m. Scale) 
modulus I Math. मापांक m. moderate fog अल्प-धूमिका . 
2 Statistics धनक m. moderate gale (32-38 m. p. h.) modulus of elasticity Phys. TEATETET 
अतिवात m. (See Beaufort's Wind मापांक m. Scale) 
Mohawk brown = buffalo brown moderately coarse powder आस्थूल 53 
क्षोद m. (See fineness) 
Mohawk orange=cotton orange moderately concentrated fat Mohr pinchcock (operating by a 
संकेन्द्रित, आसंकेन्द्रित mfn. 
spring) स्कन्द-शिखिपीड m. 594 
mode Same (13-18 
Hd 
2 Phys, आपापांक m. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
co 
molar Chem. The maintien m. (one of motybdena 1 (any of the Mineral. 
Mohr's burette (a small burette with molecular laver Anat. HTFTTETT 1. 
tap, used as a pipette) faqasafi 11. molecule (Lat. moles mass) Chem. moissanite (CSI) Mineral. sir fout m. 7 STUT m. 
ETT m. (-इज for खनिज mineral) 
Mollugo Bot. Tafa f. (-fa for for moist as mfn. 
genus) moist gangrene Med. (oedema + M. cerviana Tara TOE 317. 
gangrene) शोफकोथ m. 
Mollusca Zool. (calcareous, or lime moisture आर्द्रता . 
secreting mantle) चूर्णप्राबाराः m.pl. m, determination apparatus molt=moult 
F at-Fi ga n. 
molten द्रुत nfn. m. test flask J -PETETUP-47 m. m. metal sa T m. 
m. testing oven आर्द्रता-परीक्षण-कन्दु m. metal thermometer द्रुत धातु 
m. 
| THTT m. molal Chem. व्यूहीय mfm. 
molybd-, molybdo- (molybdous) 
Chem. Fiquen molar Anat. I पश्चहानव्य m. (one of molybdate Chem. संवर्णीय . 
back teeth, three on each side molybdena I (any of various lead in both jaws) 
ores or compounds) Mineral. Cf. premolar पुरोहानव्य m. 
FTTT467 12. 2 हानव्य m. (from काश्यपसंहिता, cheek 2 (molybdenum) संवर्णातु m. teeth, including the premolars molybdenic=molybdic पुरोहानव्य) 
molybdeni-ferous Chem. quifq- molasses for f. 
mfri. mole=gram molecule Chem. uz molybdenite Mineral. (molybdenum 
=RRETTI m. 
disulphide) Hafursy m. (-59 for eft mole Zool. (a general term for bur- mineral) 
rowing mammals, chiefly of the molybdenum Chem. quia m. family Talpidae) Frane m., gyro m. steel anfy CETRT 11. 
m. trioxide संवर्णातु विजारेय. ' mole cricket (excavates subterra- molybdic Chem. Fatura mfn. 
nean galleries) Zool. भू-झिल्लीक m. m. acid संवणिक अम्ल 7. (short for T-fil) 
m. anhydride संवर्णिक अजलेय. molecular Chem. qeruata mfn., Em m . ocher safüą if* n. 
m. depression auto-femmän molybdite Mineral. (hydrous ferric m. formula T-TT th. 
molybdate) संवर्णीयिज m. (-इज for . m. structure FET"#2997 f. 
afis mineral) m. weight(M.) TEN-777 m. (7.) molybdo-, molybd - (molybdous) molecularity Chem. Statutuar f. 
Chem. quuf 
505 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
molybdomenite Mineral. (native Monel metal Chem. (very resistant 
lead selenite) सीसमेचिज m. (-इज for to corrosion) क्षारसह धातु m. खनिज mineral) 
monetary = pecuniary #f, atfer molybdophyllite Mineral. (a hyd mfn. 
Tous lead magnesium silicate) m. system Erfts-gefer f. सीभ्रासकिजा .(-इज for खनिज mineral) m. transactions = pecuniary molybdous संवर्ण्य mfm. 
transactions taart m. moment (of force) Mech. (tendency money war, gaat f. (in contra 
to produce motion about a point distinction to नाममुद्रा 'seal') or axis) fa7497 f. 
m. at call TFT m. m. of a couple fre7-faat f. m. at short notice ETHETTİ TTEET m. of a force gafa FACT f. 
m. (Hindi 749167 TITT TET) m. of a magnet -forwyn f. m. bill Law Hat-famfi n. m. of dispersion (moment = m. column ter-**7 m. 
power घात) Statistics अपकिरण-धात m. material 2 504 n., c# dit m. 
m. order धन-प्रेषण. (cheque धनादेश, m. of inertia जडता-बिभ्रमिषा 
postal order 9-9TGT) momentarily क्षणमात्र 
m. transaction धन-व्यवहार m. momentum Mech. (quantity of mon Monghyr Geog. Heraffe m. 
tion) गमता. 
Monilia (characterized by ferment Momordica Bot. #reatestfer f. (-fer for i ng sugar with the production of 
प्रजाति genus) 
gas) matarfafa f. (-fa for forfa mon-, mono- Chem. 
genus) monad Chem. (monovalent) # Moniliformidae (Lat. monile neck 
lace is Skt. #f) #FUTET-ast m. monadelphous Bot. T-BTTTT mfn. Moniliformis fuertfa f. (MTF for 
monandrous Bot. एक-पुंकेसर mfn. Forfa genus) monarch एकराज M. 
M, moniliformis THEFT ATUTET Monas Zool. fararfa f. fer for sale 
genus) 
monkey #f. m. -monas (used in many names of mono- - 
Protozoa) -7*7 (-5T) ('consisting mono-acid TFTFT mfn. of one') 
mono-adelphous Bot. *TETT mfn. monatomic Chem. T#qlarfoqa mfn. mono-basic Chem. 5-foi mfn. 
monazine एकाजीवी/. 
mono-branchiate Zool. TF-FETTA mfn. monazite Mineral. (a phosphate of monocarpous (pistil) Bot. TATUET (riiethe cerium metals) 46+#fffq5 m. mfn. 
(-इज for खनिज mineral) . 
monochasial Bot. Gestet (-56) mfn. 
m, 
In. 
596 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
mfn. 
monochasium Bot. TERITE m. monoecious Bot. (having both male Monochlamydeae Bot. (having no and female reproductive organs 
petals) :, 544feqor: m.pl. on the same individual) fafatit monochlamydeous Bot. एकपरिपुष्प (-57) mfn. 
mono-hydrate Chem. T-7114 n. monochord Music एकतन्त्रीf. 
mono-hydric Chem. #lff mfn. monochromatic एकवर्णिक mfn. 
m. alcohol एकोदिक सुषव m. monochrome एकवर्ण 
mono-hydroxy- Chem. FitST monochrome black Col. Ind. Teiauf mono-hydroxy alcohol Chem. Trata 
Fita m. 
TT 92 m. m. black-blue au 80-fram, monolite fast scarlet Col. Ind. 
m. blue एकवर्ण नीलm. 
Page FE TU m. m. brown Taavi a m. 
m. red=permanent red a m. green एकवर्ण हरि m. 
577 m. m. grey एकवर्ण धूसर m.. 
m. yellow=hansa yellow pit m. orange 5 qui TT m. 
qar fram. m. red एकवर्ण रक्त m. 
monomial, mononomial Math. m. violet एकवर्ण नीललोहित m. 
T=14€ 11. m. yellow gaut fra m. 
mononuclear n, Physiol. 90-afie monocle Ophthalmol. 519797 n. mono-clinic Cryst. T-Bafureti infn. mononuclear leucocyte Physiol. 
m. system 548 aurrera f. 
Haugeifist far f. (opp. poly monoclinous Bot. उभयांग mfn. 
morphonuclear leucocyte) monocotyledon Bot, T0497 m. monophyodont Zool. सकृदन्त nfn. monocotyledonous seed Bot. Te m. dentition NET & n. 
बीजपत्रि बीज, एकपत्रि बीजn. 
monoplane एकतल m. mono-cyanogen 5-TWFT m. monoplegia Med. GATTI ETT m. Monocystis Zool. (a genus in which monoploid=haploid Cytol. Tur 
the protoplasm is not divided mfn. into segments by septa) palosifat monopodial Bot. gareft (-) mfn. f. (याति for प्रजाति genus) 
monopodium Bot. एकाक्ष m. monocyte Anat. (mononuclear monopolar = unipolor Zool. 
leucocyte) teus-fiz f. 
(having one process) #-epiTTET Monodelphia Zool. (so named from mfn. 
their more or less unified uterus) monopolist #fetaret (-57) m. gf at fart: m.pl. 
monopolistic एकाधिकृत mfn. monodelphian, monodelphic, mo- monopolize gareAT-FUE, gaf 
nodelphous एकितगर्भाशयिक mfn. .. 
197 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
- 
- 
2. 
mfn. 
monopoly एकाधिकार m. 
Montpellier yellow = mineral m. price एकाधिकार-मूल्य 1. 
yellow m. value Econ. एकाधिकार अाँ . monument आस्मारक m. mono-saccharoses Chem. एक-शर्कराधु । moonseed (any plant of the Meni 
spermaceae) चन्द्रबीज m. mono-stele Bot. एक-मध्यरम्भ m. 
m. family चन्द्रबीज-कुल 7. monostelic condition Bot. एकमध्य- moratorium Law विलम्बकाल, शोध 
रम्भावस्था . 
विलम्बकाल m. mono-sulphone Chem. एक-शुल्बा f. morbid विकृत mfn. mono-symmetric Bot. एक-संमितीय morbid anatomy=pathological 
anatomy विकृत शारीर n. m. flower एकसंमितीय पुष्प . 
morbid condition विकृत-दशा, अस्वस्थ monotony I अवैचित्र्य 1., अभिन्नता 
दशा. 2 Music एकश्रुति f. (ancient word), mordant Dyeing (which by com एकतति f. 
bining with a dyestuff produces Monotremata=Monotremes Zool. a fixed colour) रंग-स्थापक m. 
अण्डजस्तनिनः m.pl. 
-mordant -स्थापक (short for रंग-स्थापक) monotropic एकातिक mfn. 
mordant blue paste Col. Ind. स्थापक monotropy एकावर्तना, एकातिता . नील लेपी. mono-ureides एक-मिहेय . . 
m. yellow स्थापक पीत m. mono-valent Chem. एक-संय 
more अधिक mfn. mon-oxide Chem. एक-जारेय. 
more accurately सूक्ष्मरूपेण monoxylic Bot. एकदारुक mfu. 
more briefly अधिकसंक्षेपेण monsoon कालवात्त (cf. अकालवात in Pali more complex fasta mfn. 
शरिकजातक), वर्षावायु m. 
more convenient अधिक सुकर, सुगम mfn. montana brown Col. Ind. गिरि बभ्र more insoluble अविलेयतर mfn. 
m. 
moreover अथापि, अथ च montanic acid Chem. चण्डसिक्थिक अम्ल more soluble अधिक विलेय, विलेयतर mfn. 
more space Printing भूयोऽन्तर, अधिक montan wax (a kind of high-mel अन्तर. 
__ting wax) चण्डसिक्थ ॥. 
morin Col. Ind. (chief colouring monte-jus (apparatus for raising principle of fustic)=tetra-hy ____a liquid) तरलोत्थाप m. 
droxy-flavonol पांडुदुकि-चतुरुदजार monthly मासिक mfn. 
पिंगाव m. Montoyella [having both slender Moringa Bot. शोभांजनति f. (-ति for 
and thick mycelial (=hypha) प्रजाति genus) JPar threads] तनुस्थूलसूत्रति f. (-ति for M.pterygosperma सामान्य शोभांजन 
प्रजाति genus) 
11.... 
- 
meraman 
14 . 
. 
' 
m. 
598 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
-- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Moringae Bot. शोभांजन-कुल 7. 
m. debenture are 720797 11. morning sa: 
m. deed प्राधि-लेख m. . morning-glory Sta:ft f. 
equitable m. न्याय्य प्राधि m. morning meal प्रातरशन 1. 
first m. प्रथम प्राधि m. -morph -रूप 
land m. bank भू-प्राधि अधिकोष m. morphia=morphine प्रमीली, अहिफेनी legal m. वैध प्राधि m. 
second m. द्वितीय प्राधि m. morphia assay bottle अहिफेनी-परीक्षा usufructuary m. फलोपभोग प्राधि m. ___ कूपी . 
(usufruct फलोपभोग) -morphic -रूपीय, -रूपिक 
mortgagee Law STATT m. morphin=morphine 
mortgagor Law प्राधायक m. morphinae hydrochloridum= morula Zool. I तूत, युक्तत m. 
morphine hydrochloride 
2=polyplast Targer m. morphine=morphina = morphia Morus Bot. Tafer f. (fa for senifer 
(morph.) Pharm. प्रमीली f. (प्रमीलिका genus) sleepiness) 
M. alba श्वेत तूद m. m. hydrochloride-morphinae mosaic चित्रकुट्टिम 1. ___ hydrochloridum (morph. hy- mosaic gold Col. Ind. (for guil 
____drochlor.) प्रमीली उदनीरेय .. ___ding wood) काष्ठ-स्वर्ण m. -morphism -51967 f. 
mosaic pattern Bot. चित्रकुट्टिम आदर्श m. morpholine Chem. प्रमीलवी . 
moschus=musk Pharm. कस्तूरी f. morphology Biol. रूपवर्णना, आकारिकी, Moschus Zool. कस्तूरीमृगाति f. (-आति 
रचनाकारिकी f., रचनाकार m. (form for प्रजाति genus) and structure) 
M. moschiferus (musk deer) morrhua cod स्नेहमीन M. 
सामान्य कस्तूरीमृग m. morthuic स्नेहमीनिक mfn. __ mosquito Mil. (versatile British mortality rate Statistics मरण-अर्घ M. aircraft) मशक m. mortar I (a plastic building material) moss Bot. Eftat f. 
संमृद m. 
mosses=Musci 2 (in which substances are moss green मध्यपीताहरि m. pounded or rubbed with apestle) moss grey अवपीत m. उलूखल . 
most general सामान्यतम mfn. Mil. (a canon used to throw moth शलभ m. projectiles) शतघ्निका. 
mother liquor (residual saturated mortar and pestle उलूखल तथा मुशल .. liquid) मातृतरल m. mortgage Law प्राधि, स्थावराधि m. motile Biol. चर mfn. 
(आधि is an ancient word) 
motion Parliamentary Practice प्रस्ताव m. bank प्राधि अधिकोष m. 
m. 
599﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
motion Phys. गति f. 
moti orange R = aniline orange I, First law of motion: A body insoluble 
will continue in its state of moti red G oil soluble red GG rest or of uniform motion in motive 77#mfn. a straight line unless acted m. force मामक बल M. upon by an external force m. power गामक-शक्ति . पिण्ड विधामावस्थायां एकरूप ऋजुरेखगतौ motor वहिनी. वा प्रवर्तते यदि बाह्यबलाभिभूतं न भवति -motor -चालक . (Hindi जब तक बाह्य बल न लगे तब motor bicycle वहिन द्विचक्र n. तक पदार्थ विश्राम अवस्था में अथवा एक- motor car वहित्र-रथ, वहिब-यान .. रूप ऋजुरेख गति में रहेगा) 
motor-driven वहिन-चालित mfn. 2. Second law of motion: The motor nerve Zool. प्रेरक-चेता. 
rate of change of momen- motor root of trigeminal Ophthal tum is proportional to the mol. त्रिशाख चालक मूल n. impressed force and takes motor starter Eler. वहित्र-प्रबोध m. 
place in the direction of the motor torpedo boat Mil. बहिन नौनी impressed force गमतापरिवर्तनार्घ नौका. पारोपितबलानुपाती तद्दिशानुवर्ती च motor vehicle वहिन-यान 7. (Hindi गमता के परिवर्तन का अर्घ motor vehicle rules वहित्र-यान-नियम 
आरोपित बल का अनुपाती होता है और 
आरोपित बल की दिशा में ही होता है) mottled कर्बुर, कर्बुरित mfn. 3. Third law of motion: Ac- mould संचक m. 
tion and reaction are equal mould vb. (to form a mould of, as and opposite क्रिया-प्रतिक्रिये समे in sand) संचक-करण 1. प्रतिगामिन्यौ च (Hindi क्रिया और moulding संचकन 1. 
प्रतिक्रिया सम और प्राति गामिनी होती हैं) moult n. (act or process of moult motion for consideration विचारार्थ ing; the castoff covering) निर्मोक 
प्रस्ताव m. 
m. (ancient word) motion moved fra Trga HT moult vb. I (to cast off and renew 
(Hindi) 
___by moulting) निर्मोचन . motion nucleus = kinetonucleus 2 (to shed or cast off the hair, 
Zool. गति-न्यष्टि . 
feathers, outer layer of the skin, motion of closure संवरण-प्रस्ताव m. horns, or the like, the castoff motion of translation=translatory parts being replaced by new 
__motion Phys. स्थानेतर-गति f. 
growth) रोममोचन, पत्रमोचन, त्वङ्मोचन, motion picture चलचित्र . 
शृंगमोचन, रोम-पतन, -पातन; पत्र-पतन, motion picture projector चलक्षेपित्र, -पातन; त्वक्-पतन, पातन; शृंग-पतन, 
चलचित्र-क्षेपित्र. 
-पातन . . 600 
m. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
mfn. 
moulter Zool. (a bird that is moult- moved Parliamentary Practice FTTT 
ing) निर्मोचक m. moulting season Zool. निर्मोक ऋतु m. movement I Phys. गति f. mound स्तूप m. 
2 (of the heart) Forg m. mountain पर्वत, गिरिM. 
movement by pseudopodia कूटपाद m. ash गिरि-प्रभूर्जm. 
गति . m. balsam गिरि-धूपियास m. 
movement of prices Statistics मूल्य m. blue Col. Ind. पर्वत नील m. 
गति . m. green Col. Ind. पर्वत हरि m. move perpendicular to Math. लम्ब m. green = copper green मध्य- तया गमन 1. 
पीतातिहरि m. 
moving गतिशील, गतिमान् Mfm. m. limestone = Carboniferous moving along the line Math. रेखानु 
limestone (a limestone of the गमन, अनुरेख-गमन 1. Carboniferous period) अंगार-युग moving average Statistics चल माध्य . चूर्णप्रस्तर m. 
moving hospital चल रुग्णालय m. m, tobacco=Arnica montana moving screw Phys. चल-भ्रमि m. 
= leopard's-bane - arnica moving staircase = escalator चल गिरि-ताम्रकूट n. 
निश्श्रेणी . mounting Bot. भारोपण n. 
moving stock Com. चल स्कन्ध m. mourning dove Zool. विलापी कपोत m. m.p. (melting point) द्रा. (द्रावांक) mouse मूषक m. 
Mr. Speaker Parliamentary Practice rat m. 
___ अध्यक्ष महोदय mousebird=coly Zool. मूषपक्षी (-इन्) ms., meso- Chem. मध्य 
m. 
Ms-Th (meso-thorium) mouse deerschevrotain vषहरिण m. मध्य-ह (मध्य-हसातु) mouse grey Col. Ind. मूष धूसर m. M.T. (metric ton) प्र. धा. (प्रयुत-धान्य), mouse opossum Zool. मूषयुग्माशय m. मा. वर्. (मानिक प्रवर्त) mouth आस्य, मुख n. 
Mu (murium) Chem. विड् (विडातु) mouth blowpipe मुख-धमनाड m. much बहु min. (little अल्प) mouth-part Zool. मुख-भाग m. mucic Chem. iufferati mfn. movablejoint=perfectjoint Anat. m. acid नासिक अम्ल . __चेष्टावत् सन्धि m. (from सुश्रुत) mucilage (a paste prepared from 
movable property Com. चल-सम्पत्ति f. gum; an aqueous solution of movable pulley Phys. चल-घर्घरी. gum) निर्यासलेपी f., निर्यासोद ?. move vb. I गमन . 
mucilaginous fafciata mfn. 2 Parliamentary Practice प्रस्तवन, mucin (fr. mucus) Biochem. श्लेष्मि f. प्रस्तावन' 1. (cause to move) mucor Bot. श्वेता f. (Hindi फुइ, फफूंद, move bodily Phys. साङ्गोपाङ्ग-गमन 1. उल्ली ) 
Chem. 
6or 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
moss हरिता. 
multiple n. Math. अपवर्त्य ॥ Mucor Bot. श्वेताति . (-ति for प्रजाति multiple adj. बहुगुण, बहुविध, बहु- nfm. 
genus) 
m. bar Statistics बहुगुण दण्ड m. M. corymbifer farge paar f. 
m. cost Com. बहुविध परिव्यय m. M. mucedo सामान्य श्वेता. 
m. cost account Com. बहुविध Mucoraceae Bot. श्वेता-कुल n. (कुल परिव्यय लेखा 
family) 
m. fission Biol. बहुविखण्डन . Mucorales Bot. श्वेता-गोत्र n. (गोत्र order) m. nature Zool. बहुस्वरूप 1. mucor filament Bot. श्वेता-अंशुm. 
m. proportion बहुगुण अनुपात m. mucosa Anat. श्लेष्मकला. 
m. reflection Phys. बहुगुण परावर्तन mucous श्लेष्मल mfn. mucous membrane Anat. श्लेष्म-कला m. shop system Com. बहुविध 
विक्रयशाला-पद्धति mucro Bot. रुण्डोद्वर्ध m., रुण्डान. 
m.valued=many valued Math. mucronate Bot. रुण्डोद्वर्धी (-इन्) mfn. बहुगुणाह, अनेकाई mfn. Mucuna Bot. कपिकच्छति । (-ति for multiplicand Math. गुण्य n. 
प्रजाति genus) 
multiplication Math. गुणन . M. pruriens सामान्य कपिकच्छु m. multiplication of plants पादप-गुणन mud fever Vet. कर्दम-ज्वर m. mudguard पंकरक्षी (-इन् ) m. 
multiplication table Matb. गुणन muffle अवगुण्ठ m. 
सारणी. muffle furnace अवगुण्ठ-भ्राष्ट्र, सावगुण्ठ multiplicative phase Zool. गुणन 
भ्राष्ट्र 7. 
प्रावस्था . mulhouse green=sulphamine multiplicity बाहुल्य n. mulhouse white=milk white multiplier=coefficient Matb. गुणक 
Mullerian duct = Muller's duct m. 
Embryol. (they give rise to the multi-polar I Zool. बहु-लाङ्ग ल mfm. oviducts) पूर्वांडप्रणाली . 
2 Elec. बहु-ध्रुव mfr. multi- बहु 
multipurpose society Com. बहु multiaxial joint = polyaxial joint प्रयोजन मण्डली. ___Anat. बह्वक्ष सन्धि'm. 
Multituberculata बहुदन्तार्बुदाः m.pl. multicostate Bot. बहुप्रनाडीक mfn. multivalent Biol. बहुयुक्त mfn. multifocal बहुनाभि mfm. 
mummy I चिरशव m. multifocal lens aerif after m. ..2 Col. Ind. (obtained by grinding 
multilocular Bot. बहुगह्वर mfn. 
the bones of Egyptian mummies) .multinomial Math. बहुपद mfh.. • शवास्थि-रंग m. 
maltipatous Bot. बहु-सूट mfn. Munich lake = crimsom lake multiped Zool. बहुपाद mfn. 
municipal committee नगर-समिति. .602 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
Jam 
municipality नगर-समिति f. 
m. fibre Physiol. पेशी-तन्तु m. munitions=ammunitions TFTF n. m. power पेशी-शक्ति । 
(अस्त्राणां समूहः) 
m. sense-muscle sense munjistin Chem. (obtained from m, sheath Ophthalmol. मांसधरा 
the Indian madder) मंजिष्ठि. 
कला. muntjac=barking deer = Cervu m. tone Zool. पेशी-तान m. 
___lus muntjak Zool. भष-मृग m. 
m. twitching Zool. पेशी-स्फुरण 1. Muntz metal=yellow brass fra muscularis mucosae Zool. (the mus 
cular layer in the sub-mucosa) murex=purple fish Zool. (it is not श्लेष्मक-पेशी f. (short for अधःश्लेष्मक 
a fish; it is a snail) जम्बु-मन्थर m. पेशीस्तर) murexide Chem. (ammonium salt musculo-epithelial cells Zool. पेश्य ____of purpuric acid) नीलोहेय 1. 
धिच्छदीय-कोशा f. muriate Chem. विडीय 1. 
museum कौतुकालय m. muriated fastract min. 
museum jar कौतुकालय कलश m. muriatic Chem. fastfua mfn. 
mushroom Bot. छत्रा f. m. acid fastfuqi #77 n. 
mushroom-shaped gland Zool. 39T murium Chem. विडातु m. 
ग्रंथि m. murrey न्युद्रक्त m. 
mushroom valve Automobile छत्रा Musa Bot. कदलीति f. (-ति for प्रजाति कपाट ?. 
genus) 
musical scale Phys. स्वर-ग्राम m. M. paradisiaca = M. sapien- musical studio Phys. संगीत-शाला f. 
tum सामान्य कदली. 
musical time Phys. ताल m. Musca Zool. मक्ष्याति . (-प्राति for प्रजाति musk = moschus (mosch.) Pharm. 
genus) 
कस्तूरी . muscarine-campanuline 
musk deer (Moschus moschiferus) Musci=mosses Bot. हरिताःf.pl. कस्तूरीमृग m. (ancient word) Muscidae मक्षी-वंश m. 
musket Mil. aferet f. (ancient word) muscle पेशी. 
muskrat Zool. गन्धाखु m. (ancient m. column = sarcostyle Anat. word) 
पेशी-स्कम्भ m. 
musk root=sumbul Pharm. जटामांसी m. sense=muscular sense Phy 
siol. (faculty by which muscu- muslin अंशुक 1. (Sino-Indian Studies, lar movements are perceived) Vol. II, p. 86) पेशीगतिबोध m. 
fine muslin farfal#f. (Gilgit muscular पेशी-, पैशिक mfn. 
MSS.) m. activity Zool. पेशी-क्रिया, पैशिक- mussel Zool. शम्बुक m. . 
क्रियाशीलता 
mustard Bot. सर्षप m. 
603 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
m. gas सर्षप-वाति m. 
mycetological काविकीय, कवकशास्त्रीय m. oil सर्षप-तैल 1. 
mfn. mutase Biochem. जा-हासेद. (जा=जारण mycetology कवकशास्त्र 1., काविकी 
oxidization, it accelerates oxi- mycetous-mycetic atu mfn. 
dation-reduction reactions) Mycetozoa Zool. कवकजीवा: m.pl. mutation (sudden change) उत्परिवर्तन myco-, myc- कवक 
. 
Myco. (Myco-bacterium) क. वे. (कवक mute swan Zool. मूक हंस, मूक मराल वेत्राणु) 
m. 
___Mycobacterium (Myco.) कवकवेत्राणु mutilated bill Com. विकृत विपत्र n. 
m. (क. वे.) m. cheque विकृत धनादेश m. 
Myco. aluvialum (isolated from mutiny Pol. सैन्यद्रोह m. 
____soil) उर्वरा क. वे. mutton अवि-मांस . 
Myco. avium (resembles the or mutton tallow अवि-वपा [. 
ganism of bovine tuberculosis mutual adi., adv. परस्पर 
which causes tuberculosis of m. help society परस्पर-साहाय्य-समाज birds) पक्षियक्ष्म क. वे. 
Myco. berolinensis : (isolated m. life assurance परस्पर-जीवन-प्रगोप __from butter) नवनीत क. वे. 
m. 
Myco. bovis (a bovine strain of m. traffic facilities परस्पर-याता Myco. tuberculosis) गोयक्ष्म क. वे. 
यातसुविधा . 
Myco. butyricum घृत क. वे. mutualism Biol. (symbiosis benefi Myco. chelonei (pathogenic for 
cial to each party) पारस्पर्य .. 
turtles and cold-blooded ani mutually परस्पर 
mals) कश्यपयक्ष्म क. वे. M. W. (molecular weight) व्यू. भा. - Myco. friburgensis (found in 
(ब्यूहाणु-भार) 
butter) पिघृत क. वे. myc-, myco- कवक 
Myco. graminis, Myco. "grass mycelial Bot. कवकजाल-, कवकजालीय bacillus" (found on grass) घास __mfn. 
क. वे. mycelium Bot. (a network of hy Myco. leprae (resembles Myco. ____phae) कवकजाल . 
tuberculosis which is found Mycetes कवकानि n.pl. 
in cases of leprosy) महाकुष्ठ क. mycetic=mycetous #a9ta mfn. 
myceto- कवक 
Myco. marinum सामुद्र क. वे. myceto-genesis कवक-जनन ।. 
Myco. “Much's granules" (gra myceto - genic, myceto-genous nular forms of Myco. tubercu 
कवक-जन mfn. 
losis) यक्ष्मकण के. वे. mycetoid कवकाभ, कवकीय mfn. 
Myco. paratuberculosis (causes 
604 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
- 
- 
Johne's disease in cattle) अपि- myelino- (myelin) विमज्जि गोयक्ष्म क. दे. 
myeloma Med. मज्जार्बुद m. Myco. phlei See Myco. “Timo- myelo-plax Anat. मज्जा -प्रकोशा. ___thy bacillus" 
myg. (myria-gram) अ. धा. (अयुत-धान्य) Myco. piscium (causes tuber- mylohyoid muscle Anat. (forms ____culosis of fishes) मत्स्य यक्ष्म क.वे. the floor of the mouths) मुखभूपेशी 
Myco. ranae (causes tuberculosis f. ___ in frogs) मण्ड कयक्ष्म क. वे. 
My lord श्रीपते Myco. stercoris=mist bacillus mym. (myria-meter) अ. मा. (अयुत-मान) 
(occurs in the manure of cows) myoblast Zool. पेशी-घट m. गोमय क. वे. 
myocardium Anat. हृद्भित्तिपेशी f. Myco,"timothy bacillus" (iso (cardiac muscle हृत्पेशी) 
lated from timothy grass) fra myocoele Embryol. (cavity of a myo क.वे. 
_tome) पेशीखण्डकगुहा . Myco. tropidonatum (isolated myocomma Zool. I = myotome ____ from a snake) सर्प क. वे. 
पेशीखंडक m. Myco. tuberculosis = Bacillus 2 (a septum between myotomes) 
tuberculosis, Koch's bacillus -myoseptum पेशीपटी f. (causes tuberculosis in man and Myofibrillae Zool. graiterrakot: m.pl. 
in many animals) यक्ष्म क. वे. myology पैशिकी, पेशी-विद्या. myco-derm छद-कवकn. 
myomere Zool. carreus m. myco-derma कवक-छद m. (membrane myoneme Zool. (a specialized musc 
formed by a fungus on wine) . . le-like fibril) पेशीवतन्तुक 2.(पेशी+इव) mycoid=fungoid कवकाभ, कवकीय mfn. myoneural junction Zool. पेशी-चेता mycology कवकशास्त्र N., काविकी f. . संगम m. Myco-mycetes Bot. 54977fat n.pl. myopia Ophthalmol. (rays are focus mycorhiza Bot. (symbiotic associa sed before they reach the retina) 
tion of fungus......)कवकसहजीविता प्राङ्नाभिता. 
myoseptum Z001. पेशीपटी. mycothizal Bot. कवकसहजीवी (-इन्) mfn. myotome Zool. पेशीखंडक m. mycose कवकधु M. 
myomere Tairaus m. mycosis Med. कवकरुजा f. 
myria- अयुत myel-, myelo- (bone marrow) मज्ज- myria-gram (myg.)अयुत-धान्य १. (अ.धा.) myelin (Gk. myelos marrow) विमज्जि myria-meter (mym.) अयुत-मान m. (. 
मा.) m. sheath = medullary sheath Myriapoda अयुतपादाः M.pl. 
Zool. विमज्जि-कंचुक n. 
Myrica Bot. कटफलति f. (-ति for प्रजाति myelinic faufis fupi mfn. 
genus) 
605 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
- 
- 
- 
M. nagi सामान्य कट्फल M. 
by ants) पिपीली-परागित mfn. myricin Chen.. (forms the less solu- myrmeco-phily Bot. पिपीली-परागण ?. 
ble part of beeswax) माधु सिक्थि f. myrobalan=myrobalanum (myro myricyl (myricin + - y) Chem. bal.)=black chebulic myroba 
माधुसिक्थिल .. 
lans हरीतकी. m. alcohol माधुसिक्थिल सुषव m. myrrh=myrrha (myrrh.) रसगन्ध M. myristate जातीय n. 
myrrhic रसगन्धिक mfn. myristic Chem. Fyrfatati mfn. 
myrrhic acid Chem. रसगन्धिक अम्ल 1. Myristica Bot. जातिफलति f. (-ति for myrrhin रसगन्धि f. 
प्रजाति genus) 
myrrhol Chem. रसगन्धव m. M. fragrans सामान्य जातिफल m. Myrsinaceae Bot. विडङ्ग-कुल n. myristica (myrist.)=nutmeg Pharm. Myrtaceae Bot. जम्बु-कुल 1. 
जातिफल . 
__Myrtiflorae Bot. जम्बु-गोत्र n. Myristicaceae Bot. जातिफल-कुल n. myrtle green=olive green myristic acid Chem. जातिक अम्ल N. Myrtus Bot. लवङ्गति f. (-ति for प्रजाति myristicae semen=nutmeg जाति genus) 
फल. 
M. caryophyllus सामान्य लवंग m. myristicene TreurT n. 
Mysore Geog. महिषासुर (ancient name) myristicol (an oxygenated oil in Myxinoidei Zool. मीनवेधि-गण m. ___nutmeg) जात्यैल . 
myxo- श्लेष्मल myristin Chem. जातिकि. 
Myxobacteria श्लेष्मवेत्राणु-गोत्र. . myristone Chem. जात्या f. 
myxoedema Med. श्लेष्मस्फाय m. myrmeco-philous Bot. (pollinated . Myxophyta Bot. श्लेष्मलोद्भिदःf.pl. 
N 
N (nitrogen) Chem. भू (भूयाति) nadir अधोबिन्दु, पादबिन्दु m. N (number) I Chem. सं (संख्या) nagyagite Mineral. (a sulphotelluride 
2 Phys. सा 
___of lead and gold) सुसोशवंगिज m. N. (Neisseria) अर्धगो. (अर्धगोलाणु) (-इज for खनिज mineral) 2. (normal) Chem. ऋ (ऋजु) 
naik Mil. नायक m. n/ro Chem. ऋ/१० 
nail कील, नखर m. (short for नखरकील) n Math. (any numb (कापि संख्या) naked नग्न mfn. 
Na (natrium=sodium) Chem. क्ष naked debenture=simple deben 
(क्षारातु) 
ture Com. अनावृत ऋणपत्र, अप्रतिभूत nacaratzgeranium lake 
ऋणपत्र n. (without security, un nacreous sulphur मौक्तिक शुल्बारि m. secured) 
606 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
naked eye नग्नाक्षि, केवलाक्षि n. naked eye appearance केवलाक्षिरूप, 
नेत्रदृश्य रूप . naked eye examination Biol. 
विनाण्वीक्ष परीक्षण n. naked slug Zool. नग्न मृदुमन्थर m. name नाम 1. namely (viz.) अर्थात् Nankin cakes=leather brown 
napelline वत्सनाभी f. (a constituent ___of Aconitum ferox वत्सनाभ) naphtha (petroleum, specially the 
more volatile varieties) उत्तल ॥. naphtha-cyanole Col. Ind. उत्तैल 
श्यामवा. naphthalate Chem. उत्तैलीय . naphthalene Chem. उत्तलेन्य 1. ___naphthene उत्तरेण्य . naphthalene acid black Col. Ind. 
उत्तैलेन्य अम्ल काल m. n. acid green उत्तैलेन्य अम्ल हरि m. n. black उत्तैलेन्य काल m. n. blue उत्तैलेन्य नील M. n. dark blue उत्तैलेन्य असित नील m. n. green उत्तैलेन्य हरि m. n. pink उत्तैलेन्य आपद्म m. n. red उत्तैलेन्य रक्त m. n. scarlet उत्तैलेन्य शोण m. 
n. yellow उत्तैलेन्य पीत m. -naphthalide Chem. -उत्तलेय n. naphthalin Chem. उत्तैलि. naphthal yellow RS brilliant 
yellow naphthamine उत्तैलतिक्ती f. naphthamine azo black Col. Ind. 
उत्तैलतिक्ती अज काल m. n. black उत्तैलतिक्ती काल m. n. blue उत्तैलतिक्ती नील m. 
607 
n. brilliant blue उत्तैलतिक्ती भासुर 
नील m. n. brilliant bordeaux उत्तैलतिक्ती 
भासुर कपिशक m. n. brown उत्तैलतिक्ती बभ्रु m. n. chrome blue उत्तैलतिक्ती वर्णक 
नील m. n. dark green उत्तैलतिक्ती असित हरि 
m. n. deep black उत्तैलतिक्ती गाढकाल m. n. deep blue उत्तैलतिक्ती गाढ नील m. n. direct black उत्तैलतिक्ती अनाश्रित 
काल m. n. direct brown उत्तलतिक्ती अनाश्रित 
बभ्रुm. n. fast black उत्तैलतिक्ती स्थिर काल 
m. n. fast bordeaux उत्तैलतिक्ती स्थिर 
कपिशक m. n. fast grey उत्तैलतिक्ती स्थिर धूसर m. n. fast red उत्तैलतिक्ती स्थिर रक्त m. n. fast scarlet उत्तलतिक्ती स्थिर शोण 
m. 
n. fast violet उत्तैलतिक्ती स्थिर नील 
लोहित m. n. green उत्तैलतिक्ती हरि m. n. heliotrope उत्तलतिक्ती निनीलातिरक्त 
___ 
m. 
n. indigo उत्तैलतिक्ती निनील m. n. light blue उत्तैलतिक्ती लघु नील m. n. olive उत्तैलतिक्ती तैलबदर m. n. orange उत्तैलतिक्ती नारंग m. n. pink उत्तै लतिक्ती आपद्मm. n. pure yellow उत्तैलतिक्ती शुद्ध पीत 
m. 
n. red उत्तलतिक्ती रक्त m. n. scarlet उत्तैलतिक्ती शोण m. n.skyblue उत्तलतिक्ती आकाशनील m. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
n. violet उत्तैलतिक्ती नीललोहित m. naphthochrome blue Col. Ind. JFIT n. yellow उत्तैलतिक्ती पीत m. 
au tam. naphthanil Col. Ind. Try m. 
n. violet उत्तैलवर्ण नीललोहित m. n. blue उत्तैलनील नील m. 
naphthocyanine blue Col. Ind. 5779 n. garnet उत्तैलनील निरक्त m. 
THT 117 m. n. orange उत्तैलनील नारंग m. 
naphthoform black Col. Ind. (azo n. red उत्तैलनील रक्त m. 
direct dye for after-treatment with n. scarlet उत्तैलनील शोण m. 
formaldehyde) उत्तैलवन काल m. naphtharene acid black Col. Ind. n. colours उत्तलवन रंग m. 
to FT FT TT m. 
naphthogene blue Col. Ind. TEST n. acid scarlet औतैलेन्य अम्ल शोण m. fra m. n. orange the prim. 
n. indigo blue उत्तैलजन निनील नील n. scarlet औत्तेलेन्य शोण m. 
m. naphtha thermometer उत्तैल तापमान n. pure blue उत्तैलजन शुद्ध नील m. 
naphthoic Chem, safti mfn. naphthazarin S =alizarin black S naphthol Chem. TTTT m. naphthazine restat f. 
naphthol Col. Ind. 1979 m. naphthazine blue Col. Ind. Tiatsitat ___n. acid black उत्तैलव अम्ल काल m. 
at m. 
n. black उत्तैलव काल m. n. blue-black startat -cut n. blue उत्तैलव नील m. 
n. blue-black Tag 17-hour m. n. violet उत्तैलाजीवी नीललोहित m. n. brown उत्तैलव बभ्रु m. naphthazurin Col. Ind. उत्तैलनभोनीलि n. garnet ta fram. 
n. green उत्तैलव हरि m. naphthene Chem. उत्तरेण्य . 
n. orange उत्तैलव नारंग m. ___naphthalene उत्तैलेन्य 1. 
n. pink उत्तैलव प्रापद्म m. naphthenyl Chem. Ba n. 
n. red उत्तैलव रक्त m. naphthindone Col. Ind. eta Fratat f. n. yellow riga qa m. naphthine Col. Ind. Triat f. 
naphtholate Chem. उत्तैलवीय 1. n. brown Junam. 
-naphtholic Chem. w ala naphthionic (naphthylamine + thio- naphthol-sulphonate Chem, Brita 
nic) उत्तरलगन्धिक mfn. 
Tratta n. n. red Col. Ind. T ree TFT m. naphthomelan SB=naphtho-pur naphthion red Col. Ind. TWITTET AT purin . 
m. 
naphthone Chem. उत्तैला f. naphtho adj. ia mfn. 
naphtho-purpurin Col. Ind. tit naphtho acid black Col. Ind. TIET T STtfa f. 
14-16 m. 
naphthorubine Col. Ind. g aat.f. 608 
m. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
naphthyl (naphthalene side to wyl narcotine Chem. (found inopium) 
FT) STICT n. (TTTTTTT:) 
Heft f. naphthylamine Col. Ind. उत्तरलतिक्ती/. Nardostachys Bot. जटामांसीति f. (-ति 
n. black Jatait fram. 
for swife genus) n. blue-black tissfait 11-TT N. jatamansi सामान्य जटामांसी f. 
m. 
nares (opening of the nose) # n. bordeaux fait Ff979 m. faq m. n. brown ricefait au m. narration Com. (reason for, or ex n. claret उत्तरलतिक्ती रक्तिरा f. 
planation of, an entry) satear f. n. diazo black उत्तरलतिक्ती द्वधज काल' narrow poluf mfn. 
m. 
n.-celled संकीर्ण-कोशावान् mfn. n. ether उत्तरलतिक्ती दक्षु m. 
n. neck संकीर्ण-ग्रीवा . n. green उत्तरलतिक्ती हरिm. 
narwhal=Monodon monoceros n. pink उत्तरलतिक्ती आपन m. 
Zool. (an Arctic cetacean of the n. red उत्तरलतिक्ती रक्त m. 
family Delphinidae; the male has n. salt उत्तरलतिक्ती लवण .. 
a long pointed tusk projecting n. yellow start fram. 
forward like a Tat) FTTETT m. naphthyl-amine-sulphonic acid nasal adj. Fifa mfn. 
Chem. 3 9-fait-Teatre *71. nasal n. Anat, TIETET N. naphthyl blue Col. Ind. TİC. The nasal bone Anat, the n. 
m. 
nascence=nascent state=status n. blue-black 2019-cu m. nascendi FTTY#T- Fy f. n. red उत्तैरल रक्त m. 
nascent जायमान mfn. n. violet उत्तैरल नीललोहित m. nascent state=nascence=status naphthylene Chem. Ta n. 
nascendi FTTHTETETT f. naphthylene blue Col. Ind. spikar nasi-corn Zool.-IF-szint mfn. 
Fits m. 
Nasi-cornia Zool. TT-BTTT: m.pl. n. red उत्तरलेन्य रक्त m. 
naso- -FIFT, TFT n. violet उत्तरलेन्य नीललोहित m. naso-ciliary nerve Anat. (it goes Napierian logarithm Math. T not only to the ciliary ganglion 
f. (a=transcendental ) 
but also to other parts of the eye) napiform Bot. Eft-, Friieq mfn. TEATEAT f. . Naples green=chrome green' naso-lachrymal duct, naso-lacri Naples yellow=antimony yellow mal duct Anat. TTT-STUTT f. narceine Chem. निशायी 
nassovia scarlet ( acid · fast narco-hypnia Med. Far9-4571 f. 
scarlet narcosis fogar f., RT . 
nation 7 n. narcotic प्रमीलक Mfn.. 
national orfica mfn. 
60g 39﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
n. black. Col. Ind. राष्ट्रिय काल m. n. fractions Statistics प्राकृत भिन्न m. n. constitution राष्ट्रिय संविधान 1. n. gas stream atfe m. n. debt राष्ट्रिय ऋण 1. 
n. green Col. Ind. प्राकृत हरि m. n. dividend-n. income 
n. historian प्रकृतिवृत्तज्ञ m. n. economy राष्ट्रिय अर्थव्यवस्था । 
n. history प्रकृति-वृत्त ।. N. Formulary (N.F.) Pharm. n. host स्वाभाविक पोषिता (-तृ) m. ___राष्ट्रिय-योगसंहिता . (रा. यो.) 
n. order=family Bot. कुल 2. n. income राष्ट्रिय आय m. 
n. numbers प्राकृत-संख्या . n. wealth राष्ट्रिय धन . 
n. place (of Aristotle) Phys. नैसर्गिक nationalism राष्ट्रियता f. 
स्थान . nationalist राष्ट्रवादी (-इन् ) m. 
n. scale Statistics प्राकृत-मापश्रेणी f. nationalization राष्ट्रियकरण 1. 
n. science प्रकृति-विज्ञान .. nationalize vb. राष्ट्रियकरण n. 
n. selection Biol. प्राकृतिक वरण, nationalized राष्ट्रियकृत mfn. 
प्रकृत्या वरण .. native प्राकृत, देशज min. 
n. system (of classification) Bot. n. antimonite प्राकृत अंजनिज m. (-इज प्राकृतिक-पद्धति f. 
for खनिज mineral) 
_n. water प्राकृत जल. n. platinum प्राकृत महातु m. 
naturalist strupfat m. n. potassium chloride प्राकृत दहातु naturalization जानपदन, जानपद-भवन, 
नीरेय 1. 
जानपद-करण.. n. sulphur प्राकृत शुल्बारिm. 
naturalized जानपदित, जानपद-भूत, जानपद natrium=sodium Chem. क्षारातु m. कृत mfn. natro-Chem. क्षार 
nature I प्रकृति f. n.-chalcite Mineral. क्षार-ताम्रिज m. 2 (as of light; of stem-flat, 
(-इज for खनिज mineral) 
cylindrical, etc.) स्वरूप 1. natrolite Mineral. (sodium aluminium Nauclea Bot. धराकदम्बति f. (-ति for 
silicate) शास्फसकिज m. (-इज for खनिज प्रजाति genus) mineral) 
N. cadamba सामान्य धराकदम्ब m. natron Mineral. (native sodium car- naught Math. शून्य .. 
bonate) क्षारा, जलक्षांगिज m. (-इज Nausari Geog. नवराष्ट्र . (in the for खनिज mineral) 
Baroach district, Bombay) natron- Petrog. (rich in sodium) क्षार- nauseating smell वामी गन्ध, वमनकारी natron-granite Mineral. क्षार-कणाश्म m. गन्ध m. natural प्राकृत, प्राकृतिक, नैसर्गिक, ऐन्द्र mfn., nautical Mil. नावीय, नाविक mfn. 
इन्द्र- (as in इन्द्रनता शाखा), देव- (as in n. measure नाविक माप m. देवखात तडाग) 
___n. mile सामुद्र (नाविक) क्रोशक m. n. classification Bot. प्राकृतिक वर्गी- (सा.क्रो.) 
करण . . . 
_n.ton नाविक प्रवर्त m. 6ro 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
nautics (science or art of navigation) neater निकटतर, समीपतर mfn. 
नाविकी . 
nearest निकटतम, नेदिष्ठ, समीपतम mfn. Nautilus Zool. नाविकाति f. (प्राति for near glasses Ophthalmol. निकटोपनत्र . 
प्रजाति genus) 
near point Physiol. firtic fare m. nautilus Zool. नाविक m. 
neat copy Com. स्वच्छ-प्रतिलिपि f. naval नाविक, नौसेना-, नौसैनिक, नावीय mfn. neatness स्वच्छता, निर्मलता. 
n. attache नाविक सहचारी (-इन् ) m. nebula (it is Sanskrit नभस्) Astron. n. base नाविक आस्थान 1. 
नाभस ॥. N. Discipline Act नाविक अनुशासन nebular नाभसीय nfm. . अधिनियम m. 
nebulizeratomizer शीकरकm. n. engineering नाविक-अभियन्त्रणा f. Necator Zool. हनाति. (-माति for प्रजाति n. forces नाविक बल 1., नाविक-सेना genus) n. gun नौशतघ्नी . 
N. americanus (it has cutting navigable नौतार्य mfn. 
plates in place of teeth) पट्टदन्त navigate नौतरण १. (नावातरण) 
हन m. navigation नौतरण 1. 
necessary आवश्यक Mfn. navigator नाविक, नौतरm. 
neck fra f. navy नौसेना, जलसेना. 
neck canal cell Bot. ग्रीवा-कुल्या-कोशा f. navy=navy blue नाविक नील m. 
neck cells Bot. ग्रीवा-कोशा. navy blue नाविक नील m. 
necked -ग्रीव I (reddish-blue in hue, of low neck of tooth Anat. दन्त-ग्रीवा . saturation and low brilliance) neck-plate Violin ग्रीवा-पट्टm. न्यवनीलारक्त m. 
__necrosis ऊतिमृत्यु m. 2 (by extension; any colour of nectar (of flowers) मकरन्द, पुष्परस m. low or very low brilliance, of nectariferous disk Bot. मकरन्द-बिम्ब low or medium saturation, and m. 
of a hue varying from reddish- nectary Bot. मकरन्द-ग्रन्थि m. blue to greenish-blue) नीचनील m. necton Zool. (actively swimming 
n. gteen नाविक हरि m. 
pelagic organism) वेगि-प्लवाणु m. n, grey नाविक धूसर m. 
needle सूची . N.B., .b. (nota bene) अवधेय. 
n. point सूचो-अन... Nb (niobium==columbium) Cbem. __n.-shaped सूच्याकार mfn. ___क (काशातु) 
n. sharpener सूची-उत्तिज, सूची-शाण M. Nd (neodymium) Cbem. आ (आपीतला) n. sharpening stone सूची-उत्तेजन N-diacetyl-p-aminophenol भू-द्वि प्रस्तर, सूची-शाण m. 
शुक्तल-प-तिक्तीदर्शव m. 
negative In., adi. Math. ऋण Ne (neon) Chem. शि (शिथिराति) 
2 adj. Chem. नास्त्यात्मक mfn. (if this near निकट, समीप 
test be negative..यदि यह परीक्षा 
611 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
नास्त्यात्मक हो), नास्ति 
n. instrument परक्राम्य विलेख m. 3 Elec. नि 
negotiate vb. Com. परक्रामण . 4 विलोम 
___na bill विपत्र-परक्रामण.. n. association Statistics विलोम negotiation Com. परक्रामण . 
सम्बन्ध m. 
n. of a bill विपत्र-परक्रामण 1. n. attributes Statistics नास्ति-गुण neighbour प्रतिवेशी (-इन् ) m. (Hindi 
m. 
पड़ोसो) n. catalysis Chem. ऋण आवेजन . neighbourhood प्रतिवेश m. n. characters नास्ति-लक्षण 2. ___neighbouring प्रतिवेशी (-इन्), प्रातिवेश्य n. correlation=inverse correla- . mfn. 
tion Statistics विलोम सहसम्बन्ध m. Neisseria (agenus of cocci, hemi n. electricity (it has a lower spherical in shape) SETETIT m. 
नि potential) नि-द्युत् [. 
(अर्धगो.) n. heteropycnosis Zool. (conden N. catarrhalis (has occurred as a Sation is slower) मन्दविषमसंघनना secondary invader in influenza) 
प्रतिश्याय अर्धगो. n. number Math. ऋण-संख्या . 
N. discoides बिम्ब अर्धगो. n. plate Elec. नि-पट्टm. (नि-निधुत्) N. fiava पिंग अर्धगो. n. pole Elec. नि-ध्रुव M. 
N. flavescens आपिंग अर्धगो. n. pressure ऋण निपीड m. 
N. gonorrhoeae=Micrococcus n. print Photog. प्रतिच्छाया . 
gonorrhoeae, gonococcus, n. skewness Statistics विलोम-विष 
Diplococcus of Neisser, Dip मता f. 
lococcus gonorrhoeae (the n. test नास्ति-परीक्षा. 
specific cause of gonorrhea) n. vote नकारात्मक मत n. 
प्रमेह अर्धगो. n. work Phys. ऋण कर्म 1. 
N. intracellularis = meningo negatively geotropic = apogeotro coccus, Diplococcus intra 
pic Bot. अभूम्याकृष्ट wfn. (अभूमि cellularis-meningitidis,Mic 
आकृष्ट) 
rococcus meningitidis, Mic negatively heliotropic = aphelio rococcus weichselbaumii, 
tropic Bot. अप्रकाशावर्तिक mfn. 
Streptococcus meningitidis negatron न्यणु m. (short for निद्युदणु) 
(causes epidemic cerebrospinal neglect . उपेक्षा f. 
meningitis) मास्तिष्क अर्धगो. neglect vb. उपेक्षण .. 
N. meningitidis = N. intracel neglige (Fr.)=slacks श्लथक n. 
lularis . negligibility steal f. 
N. orbiculata.(found in the feces negligible उपेक्ष्य, नगण्य, उपेक्षणीय nfn. 
of children) बालविष्ठा अर्धगो. . negotiable. Com. परक्राम्य mfn. 
N. perflava अतिपिंग अर्धगो. . ., 
ба 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
WWW 
N. reniformis TATT FETT. neonatus नवजात N. sicca TCF FT. 
neoplasm Med. नवघटन 1. N. subflava अनुपिंग अर्धगो. 
neo-prontosil = azosulphamide N. tardissima अतिमन्द अर्धगो. 
FrTeafa de n. N. weichselbaumii = N. intra- Neornithes Zool. Fafana 
cellularis 
Neosporidia Zool. (Sporozoa in Nelumbium Bot. Fift f. (-far for which the adult is usually multi 
प्रजाति genus) 
nuclear) बहुन्यष्टिप्रौढा: m.pl. N. speciosum सामान्य पंकज ॥. neotolyl black Col. Ind. Tafacts 7 nemathelminth सुत्रकृमिm. 
m. Nemathelminthes (a phylum) 74- neo-ytterbium=ytterbium=alde 
4: m. pl. 
baranium Chem. श्वेतला. nematocyst Zool. (one of the sting- Neozoic Geol. Farmy m. 
ing organs) et n. 
nephelometer I (for measuring Nematoda=Nematoidea (a class) cloudiness) मेघतामान M. 
Zool. frati m. 
2 (for determining the amount nematode 758 m. 
of suspended matter in a solu neo-777 
tion) प्राविलमान M. neochrome black Col. Ind. aqui att turbidimeter आविलमान m. 
nephelorometer (for observing n, blue-black aqui 19-ASUT m. speed and direction of motion of n. fast blue नववर्ण स्थिर नील m. clouds) FTHAT mn. n. fast yellow aqui FETT a m. nepho- n. orange नववर्ण नारंग m. 
nephogram 1 (a photograph of neodidymium=neodymium Chem. clouds) #7797 n. 
#1992 f. 
nephograph (an instrument for neoform bordeaux Col. Ind. (azo- photographing clouds) haferi 
direct dye for aftertreatment with m, formaldehyde) नववम्र कपिशक m. nephology fferat, #x-fast f. 
n. brown नववम्र बभ्र m. 
nephoscope मेघेक्ष m. n. green नववम्र हरि m. 
nephridial duct Zool, Higurat f. n. red नववम्र रक्त m. 
nephridiopore Zool. 56419-TFET . n. violet नववम्र नीललोहित m. nephridium Zool. (excretory organ n. yellow a fia m. . 
of an earthworm, etc.) FATET N., Neognathae Zool. (birds in which affat f. 
the palate is modernized) नवतालुका: nephritis Med. वृक्ककोप m. 
nephrocoele Zool. (cavity of a neph neon Chem. शिथिराति m. 
rotome) questivalet f. 
m. 
m.pl 
613 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
nephrocoelomostome Zool. वृक्कगुहा n. eminence=neuromast Zool. 
मुख. 
चेता-तुंगकm. nephromere Embryol. वृक्कखंड m. n. ending Anat. चेतान्त m. 
_nephrotome वृक्कखण्डक m. 
n. foramina Zool. चेता-छिद्र. nephromixium Zool. (a. compound n. ganglion=ganglion ___excretory tubule) समुत्सर्जनी f. 
n. impulse चेता-प्रेरणा. nephron Anat. वृक्काणु m. 
n. layer चेता-स्तर m. nephros=kidney Anat. 944 m. n. net Zool. चेता-जाल n. 
nephrostome I वृक्कमुख . 
n. trunk Anat. चेता-स्कन्ध m. 2 उत्सर्गद्वार n. 
nervi-, nervo- चेता nephrotome Embryol. वृक्कखंडक m. nervous Anat. I (full of nerves) 
(nephromere वृक्कखण्ड) 
चेतामय mfn. Neptune blue Col. Ind. वरुण नील 2 (of or pertaining to nerves) 
चैत mfn., चेता N. brown वरुण बभ्रु m. 
n. coat Zool. चैत पटल . N.green वरुण हरि m. 
n. fluid Physiol. चैत रस m. N. navy blue वरुण नाविक नील m. n. matter Zool. चेता-द्रव्य . neptunium (Np) Phys. (synthetic n. storm Zool. चैत प्रकम्पन n. 
_element from uranium 235%3 .n. system चेता-संहति f. 
elem. no. 93) त्रिनवातु m. (त्रि) n. tension चैत-आतति . Nerbuda (rivet) Geog. नर्मदा . 
n. tissue Biochem. चैत-ऊति f. Nereidae Zool. वरुणकृमिवंश m. 
nervule Anat. चेतिका f. Nereis Zool. (from Greek Nereis, nervure Zool. (in the wings of in 
daughter of an ancient seagod) sects) Tr5Frf. 
वरुणकृम्याति. (-आति for प्रजाति genus) nervus lateralis = lateralis Zool. Nerium Bot. करवीरति . (-ति for प्रजाति (a nerve supplying a lateral line 
genus) 
organ) पार्श्व-चेता. N. oleander सामान्य करवीर m. Nesokia Zool. महाख्वाति f. (आति for neron कृष्ण 
Storfor genus) nerve Anat. चेता. 
N. bandicota (bandicoot, a rat (नाडी is really tube'; popularly of large size) सामान्य महाखुm. 'pulse' which is an artery. स्नायु in -ness -ता f., -त्व . सुश्रुत is 'sinew' as well as 
Nessler cylinder Chem. अपिक्षार रम्भ "स्नायवः सूत्रवत्सूक्ष्माः शुभ्रा निखिलदेहगाः। m. कारणानि चेतनानां सदा चैतन्यसाधने । 
N.glass अपिक्षार काच m. सुखदुःखबोधे च प्रवृत्तौ च निवर्तने ॥" 
N. jar अपिक्षार कलश m. ana cell Anat. चेता-कोशा/. 
N. reaction अपिक्षार प्रतिक्रिया f. ne chord Zool. चेता-रज्ज 
N. reagent अपिक्षार प्रतिकर्ता (-) m. 
614 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
N. solution अपिक्षार विलयन 1. 
_n. tube चेता-नाल M. N. test अपिक्षार परीक्षा 
neuralgia Med. वातशली . N. tube अपिक्षार नाल m. 
neuraxis Anat. चेताक्षm. N. tube and stand अपिक्षारनाल तथा neuraxon=axon, axone Anat. चेता 
स्थाम 1. 
लांगूल लांगूल 1. nest नीड m. (Hidi घोंसला) 
neurenteric canal Zool. चेतान्त्र-कुल्या net जाल .. net, network-mesh, meshwork neurilemma = neurolemma = 
Zool. जाल. 
nucleated sheath = sheath of net Com. शुद्ध, वास्तविक mfn. 
Schwann Anat. चेतावरण 1. n. assets शुद्ध-सम्पत्ति, वास्तविक-सम्पत्ति neurite Anat. (the axon of a nerve 
cell) लांगल. n. earnings शुद्ध अर्जन १. 
neuritis Med. चेताकोप m. n. income शुद्ध प्राय m. 
neuro- चेता n. interest शुद्ध-वृद्धि . 
neurocoele Zool. चेता-गुहा . n. loss शुद्ध-हानि, वास्तविक-हानि f. neuro-fibril Biol. चेता-तन्तुक m. n. price शुद्ध मूल्य १. 
neuroglia Anat. (tissue supporting n. proceeds शुद्ध प्राय, शुद्ध उदय M. the nerves) चेताधारी (-इन् ) m. 
(उदय ancient word) 
__n. cell चेताधारि-कोशा . n. profit शुद्ध लाभ M. 
neuro-lemma = neuri-lemma n. rent शुद्ध भाटक m. 
neurology चैतिकी f., चेता-शास्त्र n. n. revenue शुद्ध पागम m. 
neuromast=nerve eminence Zool. n. value शुद्ध-अरे . 
चेता-तुंगक n. n. weight शुद्ध भार m. 
neuron Anat. चेताकोशा f. (a nerve n. yield शुद्ध-प्राप्ति f. 
cell), màfi n. (a structural unit of net-layer (vessel) Mil. जाल-प्रसारक m. the nervous system) netwing Zool. जाल-पक्ष m. 
Neuro-ptera Zool. जाल-पक्षा: m.pl. network जाल. 
neuro-toxin चेता-विषि. network of entrenchments=sys- neutral I sorta mfn. 
tem of trenches Mil. खाति-जाल . 2 तटस्थ, उदासीन mfn. neural (of or pertaining to a nerve n. axis Ophthalmol. क्लीब अक्षm. 
or to the nervous system) चैत n. equilibrium Mechanics faire mfn., चेता 
समतोल m. n. arch Zool. चेता-चाप m. 
n. forms Bot. क्लीब रूप n. n. canal चेता-कुल्या f. 
n. gear Automobile क्लीब दन्ती (-इन)) n. plate चेता-पट्टm. 
m. n. ridge चेता-कूट . 
n. litmus paper क्लीब शेवल पत्र n. n. spine चेता-शल्य m. 
n. oxide Chem. क्लीब जारेय 1. 615 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
NA 
m. 
m. 
n. point Elec. Fapta fare m. 
n. bordeaux 7a #fairi m. neutral black Col. Ind. eta fort m. n. brilliant cotton yellow TTT 
n. blue Ferra fra m. 
TETT qram. n. fast red क्लीब स्थिर रक्त m. 
n. catechu 79 EFET m. n. grey क्लीब धूसर m. 
n. coccine नव इन्द्रगोपी. n. nigrosine minta ofitat f. 
n. direct pink नव अनाश्रित आपन . n. red क्लीब रक्त m. 
n. discharge blue नव मोचन नील n. tint black क्लीब पाराग काल m. n. verdigris क्लीब हरिकी. 
n. ethyl blue 79 TTT FIT m. n. violet क्लीब नीललोहित m. 
n. fast green नव स्थिर हरि m. n. wool black क्लीब ऊर्णा काल m. n. fast grey नव स्थिर धूसर m. n. wool blue opta surf m. 
n. fast yellow 779T Fete a m. neutralization क्लीबन 1. 
n. gallophenine नव द्रुस्फोटदर्शी f neutralization of lenses Ophthal n. green नव हरि m. 
mol. ste-Fitert n. 
n. grey नव धूसर m. neutralize vb. I FIQHT na 
n. indigo blue नव निनील नील m. 2 front n. 
n. magenta नव धूम्रली. neutralized error Com. समतुलित विभ्रम n. metamine blue 79 fait pret 
in. neutrino peftatu n. 
n. methylene blue नव प्रोदलेन्य नील neutron Chem. Famu m. neutrophil (staining readily with __n. paper red नव पत्र रक्त m. 
neutral dyes) Fritaisu mfn. 
n. paper yellow नव पत्र पीत m. neuwied blue Col. Ind (lime blue n. patent black ta Taifa 977 m. 
in the form of rectangular lumps) n. patent blue 79 776 77 m. fus qui fram. 
n. phosphine नव भास्वी . neuwied green = mountain green n. pink नव आपद्म m. nevyanskite Mineral. (iridium and n. ponceau नव अधिरक्तापीत m. 
osmium; occurs in tin white n. printing black नव मुद्रण काल m. scales) शल्किघनगुर्विज m. (-इज for n. red To TT m. 
first mineral) 
n. roseine नव अरुणी. new नव, नवीन mfn. 
n. sulphon brown 7a TaTTm. new acid green Col. Ind. नव अम्ल हरि n. sulphon dark brown 7a Teat 
m. 
fra m. n. acridine orange नव उग्री नारंग n. thiolene brown नव गन्धवेन्य बभ्र 
m. 
m. n. azoflavine Ta qoförut f. 
n. toluylene blue नव विरारिलेन्य ne blue नव वील'm. 
FICT m.. 616 
7. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH INDIAN DICTIONARY 
n. toluylene brown नव विरारिलेन्य N.F. (National Formulary) रा. यो. 
बभ्रु m. 
(राष्ट्रिय योगसंहिता) n. victoria black B=new vic- ngai camphor =1 - borneol वा-कर्पूव 
toria blue-black = phenol m. black SG 
Ni (nickel) Chem. रू (रूपक) n. victoria green = new fast Niagara blue 2B = direct blue 
green 2 B 
2B n. white नव श्वेत m. 
Niagara sky blue=direct sky blue n. yellow नव पीत M. 
nib चंचु m. new expenditure नवीन व्यय m. niccolite Mineral. रूपकनेपिज M. (-इज new ledger Com. नव-प्रपंजी. 
for at first mineral) new partner Com. नव भागी (-इन् ) m. newspaper समाचारपत्र, वृत्तपत्र . nicely सूक्ष्मतया, सूक्ष्मरूपेण newt=eft Zool. (a small salamander nicety THAT f. 
सरटक) सरटिका 
Nicholson blue=alkali blue Newth's apparatus Chem. (for Nicholson's hydrometer (constant 
determining the composition of immersion hydrometer) Phys. ozone) प्रजारक-निबन्ध-साधित्र, प्रजा. नि. स्थिर निमज्जन-तरलमान m. साधित्र n. 
_nichrome (nickel 80-90 p.c., chro Newtonian telescope Phys. प्रदर्पण mium TO-20 p.c.) रूपवर्णातु m. 
दूरेक्ष m. 
nickel Chem. IN. रूपक n. Newton's first law of motion=first 2 adj. (pertaining to, made of, 
law of motion Phys. गत्यपरिवर्तन or containing nickel) रूपकिय, नियम-प्रथम गति-नियम m. 
रूपकमय, रूपक-युत mfn. Newton's formula (lens) नाभिमितान्तर 30b. रूपकायण . 
सूत्र 
(to plate with nickel) रूपक-रोपण . Newton's law of cooling Phys. शीतन n. acetate रूपक शुक्तीय 1. 
नियम M. 
n. ammonio-iodide रूपक तिक्त Newton's second law of motion जम्बेय. 
=second law of motion Phys. n. ammonio-nitrate रूपक तिक्त बल-गमता-नियम द्वितीय गति-नियम m. 
भूयीय .. Newton's third law of motion = n. ammonio-sulphate रूपक तिक्त 
third law of motion Phys. क्रिया शुल्बीय. प्रतिक्रिया-नियम-ततीय गति-नियम m. 
n. ammonium nitrate रूपक तिक्तातु Newton's universal law of gravi भूयीय .. . ' tation Phys. वैश्व अभ्यावृष्टि नियम n. ammonium sulphate रूपक 
तिक्तातु शुल्वीय ". next to the last term उपान्त पदn. 
n. arsenite रूपक नेपालित .. 
m. 
617 
THE GREAT ENGLISH INDIAN DICTIONARY 
n. benzoate रूपक धूपीय 1. 
n. sulphate रूपक शुल्बीय n. n. bloom Mineral. रूपक कुसुम 1. n. sulphide रूपक शुल्बेय. n. borate रूपक टांकीय 2. 
n. tartrate रूपक न्यासवीय n. n. boro-fluoride रूपक टांक-तरस्वेय nickelic Chem. रूपकिक mfn. 
nickeli-ferous Chem. रूपक-भर mfn. n. bromide रूपक दुरेय 1. 
nickeline Chem. I n. Eat m. n. carbonate रूपक प्रांगारीयn. ___- 2 adj. रूपकिय mfn. n. carbonyl रूपक प्रांगारला. 
nickelization Chem. रूपकायण, रूपक n. chloride रूपक नीरेय. 
रोपण . n. chromate रूपक वर्णीयn. 
nickelize==nickel vb. n. chrome रूप-वर्णक m. 
nickelous Chem. रूपक्य mfn. n. citrate 595 farraatu n. 
n. hydroxide रूपक्य उदजारेय . n. fluoride रूपक तरस्वेय. 
n. oxide रूपक्य जारेय. n. formate रूपक वम्रीया . 
nickel-plate vb. Chem. (to electro n. glance-gersdorffite Mineral plate with nickel) रूपक-पट्टन ।. 
रूपक-रुचा. 
Nicobar island Geog. नारिकेल-द्वीप m. n. gray रूपक धूसर m. 
(Sino-Indian Studies Vol. II n. green रूपक हरि, न्यवहर्यापीत m. 
p.87), नग्नद्वीप m. (See Sylvain Lévi n. gymnite = genthite Mineral. 'Sanskrit Texts from Bali' p. x) 
रूपक-जलभ्रासिज m. (-इज for खनिज nicoteine ताम्रकटिन m. mineral) 
Nicotiana Bot. ताम्रकूटति . (-ति for n. hydroxide रूपक उदजारेय. 
प्रजाति genus) n. iodide रूपक जम्बेय . 
N. tabacum सामान्य ताम्रकूट m. n. lactate रूपक दुग्धीय . 
nicotina=nicotine n. nitrate रूपक भूयीय n. 
nicotine=nicotina (nicotin.) Pharm. n. ocher=annabergite Mineral. 
C annabergite Mineral 
wat f. रूपक गैरिक . 
nicotinic (nicotine + -ic)Chem. ताम्र n. oleate रूपक नक्षीयn. 
___कुटियिक mfn. n. oxalate रूपक तिग्मीय.. 
nicotyrine=dipyridine faasaait f. n. oxide (black, green, grey) रूपक nictitating membrane= palpebra ___ जारेय 1. (काल, हरि, धूसर) 
___tertia निमीलक छद M. n. phosphate रूपक भास्वीय 
Nigella Bot. कृष्णजीरति (-ति for प्रजाति n. potassium sulphate रूपक दहातु genus) __शुल्बीय n. 
N. Sativa सामान्य कृष्णजीर M. n.silver=German silver ताम्ररूपक night रात्रि . 
P. (copper 60% + nickel 30% n.-blindness निशान्धता, रात्र्यन्धता f. . +zinc 30%) 
(Hindi रतौंधी) n, steel रूपक वज्रायस .. 
n.-blooming cereus = cereus= 618 
THE GREAT ENGLISH INDIAN DICTIONARY 
12. 
7. 
PX 
Cactus grandiflorus ETT59 niobic=columbic Chem. Tha mfn. Petr m. 
niobite - columbite अयःकाशीयिज m. n. blue Col. Ind. TFT fra m. 
( 7 for a fru mineral) n, duty TF-ETT 11. 
niobium=columbium Chem, FTRITT n. flower Bot. 1-709 n. 
n, green Col. Ind. tft af m. niobous Chem. 2794 mfn. nightjar=goatsucker Zool. 757€ m. nipple 777 n. 
(ancient word) 
Nippon=Japan Geog. Sauer, Fera nigramine Col. Ind. frafra f. nigraniline Col. Ind. Treat f. Nippon chrome brown Col. Ind. -nigrin -असिति. 
facuta que a m. nigrisine B=methylene grey 
N. direct blue निप्पोन अनाश्रित नील nigrogen B Col. Ind. for a m. 
m. nigrosine Col. Ind. afhat f. 
N. orange निप्पोन नारंग M. n. base असिती पीठ . 
N. skyblue ficata 9777-m. n. blackish water-soluble oft Nissen blue R = sulphur blue L 
TATT 071-faktor m. 
N. green = sulphur green T n. bluish water-soluble FACT N. indigo = thionol sky blue 
ATTITT TTT-m. n. crystals #feat Fem. 
N. vat orange = indanthrene n. fat-colour ft FT-TT m. 
golden orange G paste fat-soluble FT FAB-fago m. Nissl's body, Nissl's granule, n, oil-soluble affat sofasia m. Nissl's corpuscle Anat. (stain n. spirit-soluble असिती प्रासव-विलेय ing deeply with methylene blue 
m. 
प्रोदलेन्य नील) प्रोदकणिका f. n. water-soluble असिती जल-विलेय nit लिक्षाf. 
m. 
niter, nitre vb. Chem. fat977 n. n. yellowish असिती आपीत m. 
(to treat with nitric acid) Ffoartete nihilism नाशवाद m. 
ETT 1. nihilist TTTETET (FT) m. 
niter, nitre n. Chem. There m. Nile blue Col. Ind. 77 77 m. 
potassium nitrate, salt peter nilpotent algebra (an associative ETT TT 1., 76 m. 
algebra that deals with numbers sodium nitrate, Chile saltpeter each of which becomes zero when क्षारातु भूयीय 1., उपक्षारm. raised to some power) pa niter-blue vb. Mach. (to make steel TEHTFUTTT n. 
blue by immersing in a molten nine-point circle Math, 79-fare an. niter mixture) पाक्य-नीलन . niobate=columbate Chem. Terra 1. niter cake T-fous m. 
619﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
- 
- 
nitered, nitred Chem. क्षारित mfn. nitrato- (nitrate) Chem. भूयीय niton-radon Chem. तेजसाति m. nitrator 1 (one who or that which nitr-, nitro- (nitrogen) Chem. भूय nitrates; specif., an acidproof 
(भूयाति) 
vessel with cooling equipment, nitramine Chem. भूयतिक्ती. 
used for the nitration of organic ___nitroamine भूयकतिक्ती. 
substances) भूयीयक m. nitramine brown Col. Ind. भूयतिक्ती 2 (one who makes guncotton or 
बनु m. 
nitroglycerin) भूयीयिता (-1) M. nitramino-(nitramine) Chem. भूयतिक्ती- nitrazineyellow Col. Ind. भूयाजीवी पीत nitramino adj. Chem. भूयतिक्ती, भूय 
तिक्तीक mfn. 
nitrazogene black Col. Ind. भूयाजजन nitranil black Col. Ind. भूयनील काल m. काल m. 
n. bordeaux भूयनील कपिशक m. n. blue भूयाजजन नील m. n. brown भूयनील बभ्रु m. 
n. bordeaux भूयाजजन कपिशक m. n. green भूयनील हरि m. 
n. brown भूयाजजन बज्र m. n. orange भूयनील नारंग m. 
• n. green भूयाजजन हरि m. . n. yellow भूयनील पीत m. 
nitrazol Col. Ind. भूयाजव m. nitr-anilic Chem. भूय-नीलिक mfn. nitre=niter nitrate Chem. भूयीय n. 
nitred, nitered क्षारित mfn. I saltpeter=potassium nitrate nitriary ruff. यवक्षार m.=दहातु भूयीय . 
nitric Chem. भूयिक mfn. 2 Chile saltpeter=sodium nit n. acid=acidum nitricum (acid. rate उपक्षार m.=क्षारातु भूयीय . 
nit.) Pharm. भूयिक अम्ल . n. of iron अयो-भूयीय . 
_n. anhydride भूयिक अजलेय . n. of silver रजत-भूयीय . 
n. oxide भूयिक जारेय . n. of soda, n. of sodium विक्षार- nitride Chem. भूयेय n. 
भूयीय, क्षारातु-भूयीय १. 
nitride vb. भूये nitrate vb. Chem. भूयीयन १. 
I Chem. (to convert into a nitride) I (to treat with nitric acid or a भूयेय-करणn. nitrate) भूयिकाम्ल-साधन, भूयीय-साधन 2 Metal. (to treat by the process 
_of nitriding) भूयेयना-साधन n. 2 (to combine with.....) योजन 1. nitride of magnesium Chem. भ्राजातु 3 Urg. Chem. (to convert into a भयेय. nitro, compound or a nitrate) nitriding (a process of caseharden भूय-करण, भूयीय-करण .. 
ing steel by causing the surface nitratine भूयीयी. 
to absorb nitrogen) भूयेयना f., भूय nitration Chem. (act or process of . दृहण . 
_nitrating) भूयीयन 1., भूयीयना f..... nitridization Chem. भूयातन .. 
620 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
101 
H 
nitridize vb. Chem. [to change (a nitro-, nitr- (nitrogen) Chem. - 
compound) by increasing the nitro adj. Chera. भूय, भूयक mfn. proportion of the electro-negative nitro=nitro powder Chem. भूय-क्षोद part, or to deprive (an atom or . ion) of electrons, by means of nitro-ace-naphthene Chem. भूय-शुग 
nitrogen] भूयातन . 
उत्तरेण्य . (to combine with nitrogen) nitro-acet-anilide Chem. (0, m, p) भूयाति-योजन . 
भूय-शुक्त-नीलेय 1. (ऊ, सम, प) nitrifaction Chem. (formation of m-nitro-aceto-phenone Chem. FH 
niter) पाक्यन, पाक्य-भवन n. 
भूय-शुक्त-दर्शा f. nitri-ferous क्षार-भर mfr. 
a-nitro-alizarin Col. Ind. #-79 nitrifiable Chem. (capable of nitri निमंजिष्ठि 
fication) भूयना-योग्य mfn. 
nitroamine Chem. भूयकतिक्ती . nitrification Chem., Bact. (act or nitramine Haferacit f. 
process of nitrifying; specif., I-nitro-4-amino-anthra-quinone the oxidation, esp. by bacteria, Chem. १-भय-४-तिक्ती-विक्ष-विज्वरा of ammonium salts to nitrites p-nitro-o-amino-phenol Chem. q and the further oxidation of भूय-ऊ-तिक्ती-दर्शव m. 
nitrites to nitrates) भूयन ॥., भयना f. nitro-amino-salicylic acid Chem. nitrifier Chem. भूयनकर्ता (-त) m. 
__ भय-तिक्ती-नम्रलिक अम्ल nitrify vb. Chem. भूयन .. 
nitro-aniline Chem. भूय-नीली . I (to combine or impregnate n. hydro-chloride (m, p) भूय with nitrogen or a nitrogen com 
नीली उद-नीरेय 1. (सम, प) pound) भूयाति-योजन, भूयाति-व्यापन . m-nitroaniline orange Col. Ind. 2 (to convert, by oxidation, into सम-भूयनीली नारंग m. nitrous or nitric acid or their p-nitroaniline-o-sulphonic acid salts) भूय्याम्ल-करण, भूयिकाम्ल-करण 1. Chem. प-भूयनीली-ऊ-शुल्बायिक अम्ल 1. 3 (to subject to nitrification) nitro-anisidine Col. Ind. भूय-शतयुष्पेयी भूयना-प्रभावन .. 4 (to produce by nitrification) nitro-anisole Chem. (o, m, p) भूय भयना-जनन । 
शतपुष्पवा. (ऊ, सम, प) nitrifying bacteria भूयन-शाकाणु m. I- nitro-anthra-quinone Chem. f nitrile Chem. भूयिल m. 
भूय-विक्ष-विज्वरा ___n. base भूयिल पीठ . 
I-nitro-anthra-quinone sulphonic nitrilo- (nitrile) Chem. first 
acid Chem. १-भूय-विक्ष-विज्वरा शुल्बा nitr-imide भूय-वितिक्तेय . 
यिक अम्ल . . nitrite Chem. भूयित 1. 
Nitrobacter भूयीय-शाकाणु m. nitrito-(nitrite) Chem. भूयित 
nitro-barite Mineral. (native barium 
621 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
nitrate) हरिभूयिज M. (-इज for खनिज 0 -nitro-benzyl iodide Chem. ऊ-भूय mineral) 
धूपल जम्बेय. h-nitro-benzal-bromide Chem. प- nitro-bromo-benzene Chem. भय-दुरा 
भूय-धूपसु-दुरेय . 
धूपेन्य. m-nitro-benzal-chloride Chem. सम- nitro-calcite Mineral. (native calcium ___ भूय-धूपसु-नीरेय . 
nitrate) चूर्ण-भूयिज m. (-इज for खनिज nitro-benz-aldehyde (o, m, p) mineral) 
Chem. भूय-धूप-सुव्युद 7. (ऊ, सम, प) nitro-cellulose Chem. भूय-कोशाधु १. o-nitro-benz-aldehyde-phenyl-hy- nitro-cellulosic Chem. 
drazone Chem. ऊ-भूय-धूप-सुव्युद- mfn. दर्शल-उदाजीवा f. 
nitro-chloro-aniline Chem. भूय-नीर p-nitro-benzal diacetate Chem. प- नीलीf. 
भूय-धूपसु द्विशक्तीय . 
nitro-chloro-benzene Chem. भूय-नीर p-nitro-benz-amide Chem. प-भूय-धूप धूपेन्य n. 
तिक्तेय . 
nitro-cinnamic acid Chem. (0,m, nitro-benzene Cher न्य.. 
क) भूय-दारुसितिक अम्ल १. (ऊ, सम, प) p-nitro-benzene - azo - resorcinol nitro-cotton भूय-तूल n. 
Chem. प-मय-धपेन्य-अज-शेयास m. 
0-nitro-p-cresol Chem. ऊ-भय-प-ऋविपव nitro-benzene magenta Col. Ind. m. 
भूय-धूपन्य धूम्रली. 
nitro-di-chloro-benzene Chem. भूय m-nitro-benzene-sulphon - chlo- द्वि-नीर-धन्य.n. ___ ride Chem. सम-भूय-धूपेन्य-शुल्बा-नीरेय 1.0 -nitro-diethyl-aniline Chem. ऊ 
m-nitro-benzene-sulphonic acid भूय-द्विदक्षुल-नीली f. 
Chem. सम-भय-धूपन्य-शुल्बायिक अम्ल n. nitro-p-dimethoxy-benzene Chem. nitro-benz-hydrazide Chem. (o,m, भूय-प-द्विप्रोदजार-धूपेन्य . 
की भय-प-उदाजीवेय n. (ऊ, सम, प) nitro-di-methyl-aniline (m, p) nitro-benzoic acid Chem. (o,m,p) __Chem. भूय-द्वि-प्रोदल-नीली . (सम, प) 
भूय-धूपिक अम्ल N. (ऊ, सम, प) 
2-nitro - 1:4 dimethyl - benzene nitro-benzoyl chloride (o, m, P) Chem. २ भूय-१:४ द्विनोदल-धपेन्य . 
Chem. भय-धपल नीरेय . (ऊ, सम, प) 5-nitro - I:3 dimethyl - benzene nitro-benzyl alcohol (m, P) Chem. Chem. ५-भूय-१ : ३ द्विप्रोदल-धूपेन्य 
भूय-धूपल सुषव m. (सम, प) p-nitro-benzyl . bromide Chem. 2-nitro-diphenyl Chem. २-भूय-द्विदर्शल 
प-भूय-धूपल दुरेय. nitro-benzyl chloride Chem. (o, m, 4-nitro-diphenyl Chem. ४-भूय-द्विदर्शल 
P) भूय-धूपल नीरेय 1. (ऊ, सम, प) 
. P -nitro-benzyl cyanide . Chem. 2 nitro-di-phenyl-amine Chem. R 
प-भूय-धूपल श्यामेय .. 
___ भूय-द्वि-दर्शल-तिक्ती. 622 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
1. 
1zene 
m. 
4 nitro-di-phenyl -amine-2-sul- 2 (to impregnate with nitrogen 
phonic acid Chem. ४भूय-द्वि-दर्शल- or its compounds) भूयाति-व्यापन 
तिक्ती-२-शुल्बायिक अम्ल . 0-nitro-ethyl-benzene Chem. ऊ-भूय nitrogenous Chem. भूयात्य mfn. 
दक्षुल-धूपेन्य n. 
nitrogenous equilibrium Biochem. p-nitro-ethyl-benzene Chem. प-भूय- (equilibrium of the animal body ___दक्षुल-धूपेन्य १. 
characterized by equality of in B-nitroflavopurpurin Col. Ind. 1 come and output of nitrogen) ___भूयपिंगनीलोहि . 
भूयात्य आय-व्यय-समता. 2-nitro-fluorene Chem.२-भूय-भ्राशेन्य 7. nitroglycerin भूयमधुरि . nitro-form (nitro- + formy.) Chem. nitro group Chem. भूय-वर्ग m. 
भूय-वनला . 
-nitrohydrin Chem. -भूयोदि f. nitro-gelatin Chem. भूय-शिलषि f. nitro-hydro-carbon Chem. भूयोदांगार nitrogen Chem. भूयाति m. 
n. chloride भूयाति नीरेय . 3-nitro-4 hydroxyphenyl-arsonic n. cycle Bat. भूयाति-चक्र n. 
acid Chem. ३-भूय-४उदजारदर्शल n. determination apparatus नेपायिक अम्ल 1. ___ भूयाति-निश्चेत्र . 
-nitrol Chem. -भूयव m. n. dioxide भूयाति द्विजारेय. nitrolamine (nitroso- to hydroxyl n. family भूयाति कुल 1. 
_amine) Chem. भूय्यजारलतिक्ती. n.-fixing bacteria भूयाति-स्थिरक nitrolic Chem. भूयविक mfn. 
शाकाणु m. 
nitro-lime भूय-चूर्णक m. n. iodide भूयाति जम्बेय 7. 
nitro-magnesite Mineral. (native n. monoxide भूयाति एकजारेय 1. magnesium nitrate) भ्राजभूयिजm. n. oxide भूयाति जारेय. 
(-इज for खनिज mineral) n. pentoxide भूयाति पंचजारेय. nitrometer Chem. भूयमान M. 
n. peroxide भूयाति अतिजारेय ॥. n. clamp भूयमान-संधर m. . n. tetroxide भूयाति चतुर्जारेय १. 
n. stand भूयमान-स्थामn. n. trioxide भूयाति विजारेय . nitro-methane Chem. भूय-प्रोदीन्य .. nitrogenate vb. Chem. भूयातीयन . nitro-methyl-aniline (mp) Chem. 
I (to combine with nitrogen) भूय-प्रोदल-नीली /. (सम, प) भूयाति-योजन n. 
nitro-muriate Chem. भूय-विडीयn. 2=nitrogenize 
nitronaphthalene Chem. TUTTISIRT n. nitrogenation Chem. भूयातीयन 1. 4-nitro-naphthalene-diazo-amino nitrogenization Chem. भूयातयन । ___azo-benzene Chem. ४-भूयोत्तैलेन्य nitrogenize vb. Chem. भूयातयन . द्वयज-तिक्त्यज-धूपेन्या . . I (to combine with nitrogen or I-nitro-2-naphthyl-amine Chem. १ 
its compounds) भूयाति-योजन . 
भूय-२-उत्तरल-तिक्ती. 
p. 
623 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
nitron black Col. Ind. भूया काल m. nitrorange भूयनारंग m. ___n. yellow भूया पीत M. 
nitro-salicylic acid Chem. भूय-नम्रलिक nitro-paraffin Chem. भूय-मुद्वसा. 
अम्ल . nitro-phen-amine brown Col. Ind. nitros-amine Chem. 784-fareast f. 
- भूय-दर्श-तिक्ती बभ्रु M. 
nitrosamine pink Col. Ind. भूय्यतिक्ती nitro-phenetidine red Col. Ind. भूय- आप m. 
दर्शदेयी रक्त 2. 
n. red भूय्यतिक्ती रक्त m. nitro-phenetol (o, D) Chem. भूय-दर्शदव nitrosate (Ger. nitrosat, contracted 
m. (ऊ, प) 
from nitrosonitrat भूय्यभूयीय) Chem. nitro-phenine Col. Ind. भूय-दर्शी f. ___ भूय्यीय . nitro-phenol-disulphonic acid nitrosification Chem. भूय्यन . 
Chem. भूय-दर्शव-द्विशुल्बायिक अम्ल . nitrosify vb. Chem. (to convert, p-nitro-phenyl-acetic acid Chem. by oxidation, into nitrous acid 
प-भूय-दर्शल-शुक्तिक अम्ल n. 
____ or nitrites) भूय्यन 1. p-nitro-phenyl-aceto-nitrile Chem. nitrosine Col. Ind. भूय्यी. 
प-भूय-दर्शल-शुक्त-भूयिल m. 
nitrosite (Ger. nitrosit, contracted 0-nitro-phenyl-arsonic acid Chem. __from nitrosonitrit भूय्यभूयित) Chem. 
ऊ-भूय-दर्शल-नेपायिक अम्ल . 
भूय्यित . nitrophenyl black Col. Ind. भूयदर्शल nitroso- (nitrous) Chem. भूय्य 
काल m. 
nitroso Chem. भूथ्य, भूय्यक mfn. n. brown भूयदर्शल बभ्रु m.. 
iso-nitroso-aceto-phenone Chem. F p-nitro-phenyl-hydrazine Chem. भूय्य-भाक्त-दर्शा. 
प-भूय-दर्शल-उदाजीवी f. 
nitroso base Col. Ind. भूथ्य पीठ . m-nitro-phenyl-hydrazine hydro ____n. beta-naphthol भूय्य आवर्ण-उत्तैलव 
chloride Cbem. सम-भूय-दर्शल-उदाजीवी 
m. उदनीरेय . 
n. blue भूय्य नील m. p-nitro-phenyl- isocyanate Chem. n. fast green भूय्य स्थिर हरिm. 
प-भूय-दर्शल-सश्यामीय .. 
nitroso-benzene Chem. भूय्य-धूपन्य 1. 3-nitro-phthalic acid Chem. ३-भूय- iso-nitroso-camphor Chem. स-भूय्य । व्युत्तैलिक अम्ल . 
कपूर m. 3-nitro-phthalic anhydride Chem. nitroso-chloride Chem. भूय्य नीरेय 
३-भूय-व्युत्तैलिक अजलेय . 3-nitro-phthal-imide Chem. ३-भूय- nitroso-o-cresol (-m-) Chem. भूय्य-ऊ 
व्युत्तल-वितिक्तेय . 
ऋविपव m. (-सम-) nitro powder भूय-क्षोद m. 
p-nitrosordi-ethyl-aniline Chen. nitro-prussiate Chem. भूयोदश्यामीय 1. प-भूय्य-द्वि-दक्षुल-नीली f. nitror prussic Cber दश्यामिक mfm. nitroso-di-methyl-amine Chem. nitro-prusside Chem. भूयोदश्यामेय 8. भूय्य-द्वि-प्रोदल-तिक्ती f. 
624 
n. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
n. 
. 
p-nitroso-di-methyl-aniline Chem. n. orange base HufactITT ETETT TTS 
प-भूय्य-द्वि-प्रोदल-नीली. p-nitroso-di-methyl-aniline hy- nitrous Chem. 74 mfn.' 
drochloride Chem. प-भूय्य-द्वि-प्रोदल n. acid भूय्य अम्ल 1. नीली उदनीरेय . 
n. anhydride भू य्य अजलेय. nitroso-di-phenyl-amine Chem. n. ether भूय्य दक्षु m. 
भूय्य-द्वि-दर्शल-तिक्ती. 
_n. oxide भूय्य जारेय. nitroso-4-ethyl-urethane Chem. n. vitriol भूय्य काचर . 
भूय्य-ऋ-दक्षुल-मिक्षीण्य . 
nitroxyl Chem. भूयजारल . nitroso-n-methyl-urethane Chem. 2-nitro-p-xyleneChem. २-भूय-प-काष्ठेन्य 
भूय्य-ऋ-प्रोदल-मिक्षीण्य ?. Nitrosomonas Bact. भूयित-शाकाणु m. nitryl Chem. भूयल n. . (they oxidize ammonia to nitrites) Nizam State Geog. (between the nitroso-naphthol Chem. भूय्य-उत्तैलव Godavari and Krishna) त्रिकलिंग m. 
m. . 
Nobel's oil=nitroglycerin भूयमधुरि a-nitroso 8-naphthol अ-भूय्य 
श्रा-उत्तैलव m. 
nobiliary अभिजात्य afri. nitrosone Col. Ind. भूय्या f. 
nobility अभिजातवर्ग m., अभिजातता. nitrosonitrat (German) भूय्यभूयीय .. noble अभिजात mfn. nitrosonitrit (German) भूय्यभूयित . nobleman अभिजात, अभिजात पुरुष m. nitroso-phenol Chem. भूय्य-दर्शव m. noblemanly अभिजात्य mfn. 
-nitroso-styrene Chem. प्रा-भूय्य- noble metal अकुप्य धातु, महान् धातु m. 
सिङ्गैन्य 1. 
base metal कुप्य धातु m. nitro-starch भूय-मण्ड m. 
noblewoman अभिजाता,अभिजात-महिला. nitro-sulphate Chem. भूय-शुल्बीय. Nocardia (resemble both molds and ____n. of iron अयो-भूयशुल्बीय . 
bacteria)=Streptothrix मालावेत्राणु nitro-sulpho-salicylic acid Chem. m. 
भूय-शुल्ब-नम्नलिक अम्ल . 
no confidence motion (motion ex nitrosyi Chem. भूय्यल .. 
pressing want of confidence) n. chloride भूय्यल नीरेय .. 
अविनम्भ-प्रस्ताव, अविश्वास प्रस्तावm. lphuric acid भय्यल-शल्बारिक Noctiluca Zool. नक्तकाशाति f. (आति अम्ल n. 
for stufa genus) nitro-toluene (ortho, meta, para) Noctilucidae Zool. नक्तकाश-वंशm. 
Chem. भूय-विरालेन्या . (ऊर्ध्व, सम, परा) nocturnal रात्रिचर mfn. p-nitro-toluene-sulphonic acid nocturnal bird रात्रिचर पक्षी (-इन) m. ... Chem. प-भूय-विरालेन्य-शुल्बायिक अम्ल n. nodal points Optics पात-बिन्दु m. (पात 
nitrotoluidine Col. Ind. Hufakistat f. node) 
n. base भूयविरालेयी पीठ 1. 
node 1 (gland) ift m. (as in lymph 625 
CHA 
40 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
node = lymphatic gland लसीका- nonane नवीन्य १. ग्रंथि) 
nonary Math. नवमय mfn. 2 (a swelling) ग्रन्था f. 
nonchelate Zool. अनखरी (-इन्) m. 3 Bot. पर्वसन्धि m. 
noncollinear Math. असंरेख mfn. 4Astron. पात m. (from सूर्यसिद्धान्त) noncombatant Mil. असंयोधी (-इन्) node of Ranvier Anat. (in a. medul m. 
lated nerve fiber, a constriction nonconduction असंवाहन ।. 
in the medullary sheath) तनकी f. nonconductor Phys. असंवाहक m. nodule I Anat. ग्रंथिका f. 
nonconservative Math. असंरक्षी (-इन) 2 Bot. ग्रन्था . 
m. no effects=effects not cleared noncoplanar Math. असमतली (-इन), 
Comm. द्रव्यं नास्ति 
असमतलस्थ mfn. noes Parliamentary Practice नो-पक्ष m. noncorresponding असंवादी (-इन्), noma Med. प्रास्याभिपाक m. 
अतत्संबद्ध mfn. no man's land Mil. अराजक-भूमि f. noncrystalline अस्फटात्मक mfn. nomenclature नामावलि, नामपद्धति f. noncumulative Com. असंचयी (-इन्) 
(a system of names) 
mfn. nominal Com. अभिहित, नाममात्र mfn. nondivisible expenditure अभाज्य 
n.accounts, fictitious account, व्यय m. 
proprietory account अभिहित nondrying अशोषी (-इन्) mfn. लेखा, अवास्तविक-लेखा . 
nondrying oil paller dat n. n. capital अभिहित-पुंजी f. 
nonelectrolyte अविद्युदंश्य n. n. ledger अभिहित-अपंजी f. 
nonendospermic Bot. अभ्रूणपोषी (-इन्) n. partner नाममात्र भागी (-इन्) m. mfn. n. price नाममात्र मूल्य 1. 
nonessential असारभूत mfm. n. value = face value (value nongranular अकणिक mfn. ___named or stated) अभिहित-अर्हा nonhomologous Biol. अरचनासदृश fr. 
f., अभिहित मूल्य n. 
noninflammable 461 min. _n. wages रोक-भृति f. 
nonintegral Math. अपूर्णांक m. nominated मनोनीत, नामनिर्दिष्ट mfn. nonintersecting Math. अमिथश्छेदी nomination मनोनयन, नामनिर्देशन 1. 
(-इन्) mfn. ____n. paper नामनिर्देश-पत्र .. 
nonintersecting species Math. nominee मनोनीत व्यक्ति, निर्दिष्टनामा m. अमिथरछेदि-जाति . non-प्र 
nonionized अनयनित mfn. . non-acceptance Com. अस्वीकृति f. nonliving अजीव, निर्जीव nfm. nonagon Math. नवभुज m. 
nonliving matter निर्जीव पदार्थ. m., nonalcoholic beverage Hygiene निर्जीव भूतद्रव्य .. 
असुषव पेय ॥.. 
nonluminous अचकासी (-इन्) mfn. 626 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
nonmagnetic platinum Mineral. nor- (normal) Chem. ऋजु 
अचुम्बकीय महातु m. 
nor-camphane-bi-cyclo-heptane nonmedullary sheath Zool. अविमज्जि Chem. ऋजु-कपुरीण्य द्वि-चक्र-सप्तीन्या . 
कंचुक .. 
Nordhausen acid = oleum Chem. nonmetal Chem. अधातु m. 
शुतैल . nonmordant cotton blue Col. Ind. norgine (made from seaweeds) समुद्र ___ अस्थापक तूल नील m. 
घासी . nonmotile Biol. अचर fn. 
norm Statistics सामान्यक . nonnitrogenous substance Zool. normal r प्रसामान्य, सामान्य mfn. 
अभूयात्य पदार्थ m. 
2 (occurring naturally)प्राकृतिक mfn. nonnucleated अन्यष्टि, अन्यष्टित mfn. 3Chem. ऋजु mfn. nonofficial विराजकीय, अशासकीय, अ 41. Geom. अभिलम्ब m. 
शासनिक mfn. 
5. Anal. Chem. प्रमाप m. nonofficial member प्रशासनिक सदस्य n. acceleration Phys. अभिलम्ब-त्वरण 
m. 
nonpayment Com. अशोधन 1. nonrecurring अनावर्ती (-इन्) mfn. nonrecurring expenditure paraat 
व्यय m. nonrepeated root Math. अनादंडित मूल 
n. axis Phys. अभिलम्ब-अक्ष m. n. balance Com. प्रसामान्य अन्तर ।. n. changes Statistics प्रसामान्य 
परिवर्तन 1. n. conditions ऋजु, सामान्य परिस्थिति 
Nonruminantia = nonruminants n. demand Com. असामान्य अभियाचन 
Zool. अरोमन्थिनः M.DI. 
. nonspecific अविशेष mfn. 
n. distribution Statistics TATHTETT nonsugar अशर्करा . 
वंटन n. nonsupporter Chem. अपोषक m. 
n. epithelium प्राकृतिक अधिच्छद m. nonuniform असमरूप mfn. 
n. form Math. अभिलम्ब-रूप.. nonuniform convergence Math. n. frequency curve Statistics 
असमरूप अभिसरण 1. 
प्रसामान्य वारंवारता-वक्र. nonvenomous ofaa mfn. 
n. interest Com. प्रसामान्य-वृद्धि nonvolatile Chem. अनुत्पत mfr. 
n. law of error Statistics प्रसामान्य nonvotable expenditure अमतदेय विभ्रम-नियम m. 
व्यय m. 
n. orbit Phys. ऋजु-कक्षा. nopal=cochineal fig इन्द्रगोपद्रु m. n. reaction (in friction) Phys. nopaline Col. Ind. इन्द्रगोपद्रुवी f. 
अभिलम्ब-प्रतिक्रिया f. nopalry (a plantation of the nopal n. saline = physiological salt 
for raising the cochineal insect) . solution देह-लवण-जल 7. इन्द्रगोपद्रु-वन । 
_n. salt Chem. ऋजु लवण n. 
627 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
n. salt solution Chem. au notation and terminology Statistics 
विलयन 7. 
संकेतना तथा परिभाषा f. n. sodium phosphate Chem. ऋजु notch काकपद .. 
क्षारातु भास्वीय. 
_not-crossed cheque=open cheque n. thermometer TATHTETT T1447 Com. अरेखित धनादेश m. 
m. 
note I टिप्पणी., अवधेय, टिप्पण., आलोक n. trend Statistics प्रसामान्य-प्रवृत्ति . 
(उपनति) 
2==musical note (as distinguish n. value Com. प्रसामान्य-अहीं . 
ed from vowel) गानस्वर, स्वरm. n. variation Statistics प्रसामान्य 3 (paper money) अर्थपत्र n. (पत्रमुद्रा) 
विचरण 1. 
bank n. अधिकोष-पत्र n. (पत्र-अर्थपत्र) n. wages Com. प्रसामान्य-भूति . 
promissory n. प्रतिज्ञा-पत्र n. (पत्रः n. yellow Col. Ind. असामान्य पीत m. अर्थपत्र) normal=straight chain Chem. ऋजु note vb. आलोकन n. 
श्रृंखल m. 
___note book आलोक-पुस्तिका f. normally सामान्यतः, प्रसामान्यतः 
note of dissent=minute of dissent noropianic acid = dioxy-phthal- विमति-टिप्पण. 
aldehydic acid द्विजार-व्युत्तैल-सुव्युदिक note paper आलोक-पत्र n. 'अम्ल n. 
not existing अविद्यमान, अभाव North America उत्तर पाताल ., उत्तर notice सूचना f., विज्ञापन 1. 
रजतद्वीप m. 
notice vb. अवलोकन 1. Northern Circars Geog. कलिंग m. notice board विज्ञापन-फलक n. north-seeking उत्तरोन्मुख mfn. 
notice of dishonour Com. अनादरण nose नासा. 
सूचना . nose glasses नासोपनेत्र, नासाधृत उपनेत्र. notice office सूचनालय m. nose leaf (of a bat) नासपुष्प n. 
notice of motion Parl. Practice noseleaved bat = leafnosed bat 
पुष्पनास चर्मचटक m. 
notification (published in the official nose-piece Micros. वीक्षधर m. 
gazette) अधिसूचना f. No.6 scarlet Col. Ind. सं. ६ शोण m. noting of a bill Com. विपत्र-आलोकन n. no space Printing अनन्तरम् 
(H. निकराई) nostrils नासाविवर m., नासारन्ध्र . (both notion भाव, विचार m. (e.g., mass and 
are ancient words) 
weight are two different notions) notaty public Com. विपत्रालोकी (-इन) not negotiable Com. अ-परक्राम्य mfn. 
not negotiable crossing Com. अ notation (act, process or system of परक्राम्य रेखण n. 
marks, signs, notes, symbols, etc. notochord=chorda dorsalis Zool. collectively) संकेतना 
पृष्ठ-मेरु m. 628 . 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
Notochordata Zool. पृष्ठमेरव: m.pl. nucleated सन्यष्टि, न्यष्टीयित, न्यष्टित mfn. not present अवर्तमान, अनुपस्थित mfn. nucleated sheath=neuri-lemma not relative निरपेक्ष mfn. 
-neuro-lemma Zool. चेतावरण 1. not subject to अनधीन mfn. 
nucleation न्यष्टीयन, न्यष्टि-भवन, न्यष्टि not transferable Com. असंक्राम्य mfn. करण. nought TFT n. 
nuclei- (nucleus) Fafee novaculite (Lat. novacula razor) Pet- nucleic acid Biochem. Fufc #FI N. 
rog. क्षुराश्म m. 
nucleiferous न्यष्टिभर mfn. November एकादशमास m. 
nucleiform न्यष्टिरूप mfn. novice नवक m. (ancient word) nuclein Biochem. न्यष्टिकि. novo- नव 
nucleinase Biochem. न्यष्टियेद m. novocaine (novo-+cocaine) Pharm. नवा nucleinate Chem. न्यष्टियीय n. 
चेतनी. 
nucleo-, nucle- (nucleus) न्यष्टि nozzle प्रोथ m. 
nucleo-albumin Biochem. Fitfoc-fiafer N/S (not sufficient) Com. रा. अ. (राशिर् 
अपर्याप्तः) 
nucleoid न्यष्टचाभ mfn. Nt (niton=radon) Chem. ते (तैजसाति) nucleolar Biol. निन्याष्ट mfn. nth root सं मूल, सं वार मूल ?. 
nucleolated (having a nucleus or N.T.P. Chem. (normal temperature nucleoli) न्यष्टित, निन्यष्टित min. (तदस्य 
and pressure)=S. T. P. ऋ. ता. नि. संजातं तारकादिभ्य इतच् Panini 5.2.36, (ऋजु ताप निपीड)=प्र. ता. नि. 
e.g. व्याधित from व्याधि प्राकृतिगणो nucellat beak Bot. प्रदेह-चंचु . 
ऽयम्) nucellus Bot. (chief part of ovule) nucleole=nucleolus 
प्रदेह m. 
nucleolinus Biol. (a body contained nucle-, nucleo- (nucleus) न्यष्टि ___within a nucleolus) निन्यष्टि-कण m. nucleal=nuclear FTST mfn. 
nucleolo- (nucleolus) Flerfed nuclear fission न्यष्टि-विखण्डन . ___nucleoloid निन्यष्टयाम mfn. nuclear membrane Biol, न्यष्टि-कला f. nucleolus (a rounded body found nuclear structure Zool. न्यष्टि-रचना 
in the nucleus of most cells) nucleary न्याष्ट mfn. 
निन्यष्टि f. nuclease Biochem. न्यष्टचेद m. 
nucleolysis Med. न्यष्ट्यं शन 1. nucleate n. Biochem, FETECTE n. nucleone Biochem. Foi f. 
nucleate adj. न्यष्टिमत् mfn. 
Nucleophaga (parasitic organisms nucleate vb. न्यष्टीयन . 
which destroy the nucleus of I (to form into a nucleus) Faroe amoebae) Fafoche: m. pl. भवन n. 
nucleoplasm Biol. न्यष्टिरस m. 2 (to gather as a nucleus) न्यष्टि- nucleo-protein Biochem. न्यष्टि-प्रोभूजिन करण. 
m. 629﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
nucleoside (nucleo- + -ide) Biochem. number of trips=services (as of 
न्यष्टियेय. 
_an aeroplane) याथ-संख्या=चर्या . nucleo-spindle न्यष्टि-त' m. 
number of ways Math. प्रकार-संख्या nucleotide Biochem. (the unit atomic f. 
groups of nucleic acids) न्यष्टिकेय numbers Drill अंका: 
numeral Math. I (a figure or charac nucleus न्यष्टि f. (नि within---अष्टि । ter used to express a number) 
kernel) 
संख्याङ्कm. Nuddea (in Bengal) Geog. नवद्वीप । 2 (a word expressing a number) 
संख्या-शब्द m., संख्या-पद . null शून्य n. 
numeration Math. I (act, process null and void (of no force) प्रवृत्तिहीन or art of numbering) संख्यान n. __mfr. 
2 (act, process or art of reading nullification शून्यन, शून्यकरण १. 
numbers) संख्या-वाचन . nullify vb. शून्यन . 
numeration table Math., Statistics I (to make null or void) शून्यकरण संख्यान-सारणी, संख्या-सारणी f. 
numerator Math. अंश m. 2 (to annul) अभिशन्यन M. 
numerical संख्यात्मक, संख्यावाचक, सांख्य 3 (to make or render of no value, mfn., अंक consequence, or efficacy) मोधीकरण, n. characteristics Statistics सांख्य व्यर्थकरण; निष्फल-करण, निष्प्रभावन n. 
लक्षण.. 4 (to destroy) नाशन १. 
n. data Statistics अंक-सामग्रीf. null method Phys. अभिशून्यन-रीति f. numerically संख्यया 
(annulment अभिशून्यन) 
numerically greater Math. संख्यया zero method शून्य-रीति f. 
ज्यायस् null point Phys. (annulment)अभिशून्यन numerical prefix संख्यावाचक उपसर्गm. 
बिन्दु, शून्य बिन्दु m. 
nuptial flight Zool. विवाहोड्डयन ?. null set Math. ख-कुलक n. (ख null) nuptial pad Zool. विवाहोपबह M. number I संख्या 
Nurnberg green permanent ___2 (serial number) क्रमांक m. 
green numbered संख्यांकित, क्रमांकित mfn. nurse cellssustentacular cells 
n. paragraph संख्यांकित-कण्डिका f. Sertoli's cells = foot cells = numberer numbering machine trephocytes Zool. पोषिकोशाf. *. संख्यात्र, संख्यान-यन्त्र n. 
nut r (pericap hard and woody)इफल numbering FİETT 1. 
(the word is used for cocoanut), numbering stamp = numbering काष्ठफल n. 
machine = numberer संख्यान-मुद्रा 2 Mach. नह m. f., संख्यान-यन्त्र, संख्यात्र n. 
nut brown Col. Ind. दृढफल बभ्रm. 630 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
nut-cracker वाताम-भंजक, वाताम-त्रोटक a lake or river') Col. Ind. रोधोवती 
काल m. nutgall-gall द्रुस्फोट m. 
Nyctanthes Bot. शेफालिकाति. (-ति for nutmeg = Nux moschata = प्रजाति genus) 
myristicae semen = myristica N. arbortristis सामान्य शेफालिका. (myrist.) Pharm. जातिफल 1. 
nyctanthine शेफालिकी. nutrient पोषक mfn., पोष- (when fol- nyctitropic movement = sleep 
lowed by another word) 
movement Bot. स्वपन-गति. nutrition आहार-पोषण, पोषण n. 
Nyctotherus Zool. वृक्करूपाति f. (-आति nutrition nucleustrophonucleus ___ for प्रजाति genus) (being kidney 
पोषण-न्यष्टि 
shaped) nutritious पोषद min. 
N. faba सामान्य वृक्करूप m. nutritive पोषक, पौषिक mfn. 
nylon (strong filaments) बलांशुक 1. Nux moschata=nutmeg 
nymph 1 अप्सरस् . nux vomica (nux vom.) Pharm. कुलक 2 Zool. शिशु m. 
m. 
Nymphaea Bot. उत्पलति f. (-ति for Nyanza black (Bantu nyanza, nyanja, afa genus) 
Nyasa any large body of water, Nymphaeaceae Bot. उत्पल-कुल 1. 
0 (oxygen) Chem. ज (जारक) obey vb. अनुवर्तन, आज्ञापालन . 0 (pint) त. श. (तरल शराव) 
obey the condition vb. प्रतिबन्ध-पालन 0- (Gk. orthos, Sanskrit ऊर्ध्व) Chem. 
ऊ- (ऊर्ध्व) 
object I वस्तु., पदार्थ m. oak Bot. वञ्जु m. (Cf. Nepali बांज्) 2 प्रयोजन . oat यविका. 
object-clause प्रयोजन-वाक्य । oath शपथ m. 
object glass=objective o. of allegiance अनुषक्ति-शपथ m. objectiven. I (of a lens nearest the o. of members सदस्य-शपथ m. 
object) उपपदार्थक n. ob- (from Sanskrit अभि-) Bot. अभि 
2 उद्देश्य 1. ob-cordate Bot. अभिहृद्वत् min. objective adj. I (as knowledge) वैषयिक obelia Zool. सुकुमार m. 
__mfn. (विषय is object, as opposed Obelia Zool. (a delicate furlike to subject) 
growth on sea-weeds, etc.) 2 (real) वास्तविक mfn. 
सुकुमाराति f. (आति for प्रजाति genus) object space Phys. पदार्थ-वरिमा m. obese मेदुर mfn. 
ob-lanceolate Bot. अभि-प्रासवत् mfn. obesity मेदुरता. 
obligate Bot. सदा 631 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
m. 
0. patasite सदा-परजीवी (-इन ) m. observer I Statistics ईक्षक m. obliged to answer उत्तरण-बाध्य 
___ 2 अवलोकक m. oblique तिर:-,तिर्यक 
obsolescence Com. अप्रचलन, अप्रचल o. axis निर्यग् अक्ष m. 
नोन्मुखता f. o. common tangent = trans- obsolescent Com. अप्रचलनोन्मुख mfn. 
verse common tangent Math. obsolete अप्रचलित, गतप्रयोग mfn. तिर्यगुभयस्पर्शी (-इन्) m. 
obstacle बाधा f. o. coordinates Math. तिर्यग याम m. obstetrical toad Zool. पादांडवाही भेक 0. frustum Math. तिर्यक् छिन्नक .. o. illumination = focal illumi- obtain ub. प्रापण . ___nation तिर:-प्रभासन=नाभ्य प्रभासन obtainable प्राप्य, सुलभ mfn. 
0. by suit at law farsi-stat mfn. o. multiplication Math. तिर्यग् गुणन obtained प्राप्त mfr. ___n. (ancient word) 
obtuse angle Math. अधिकोण, अधिक कोण o. prism Math. तिर्यक् संक्षेत्र । 
o. pyramids Math. तिर्यक् स्तूप m. obtuse angle thermometer अधिकोण obliquely तिर्यग्रूपेण 
तापमान m. obliquus Anat. (an oblique muscle) obvious = evident 1992 mfn. 
तिर्य पेशी, तिरश्ची 
occasion अवसर m. o. inferior = inferior oblique occasional कादाचनिक, कादाचित्क, क्वाचित्क, 
अधरतिर्यपेशी, अधर-तिरश्ची f. (पेशी आकस्मिक mfn. understood) 
occipital Anat. पश्चकपाल o. superior = superior oblique o. artery पश्चकपाल-रोहिणी f. 
उत्तर-तिर्यक्रपेशी, उत्तर-तिरश्ची. 
o. condyle पश्चकपाल-महाबुद m. obliterate vb. अभिलोपन 1. (ob-is from occipito-vertebral artery Zool. पश्च 
अभि-) 
कपाल-कीकस-रोहिणी . oblong Bot. (broadly elliptical) दीर्घवृत्त occlude vb. Chem. fara que n. ____mfn. 
occlusion Chem. निचूषण . obovate Bot. अभ्यण्डवत् mfn. 
occupation वृत्ति . observation अवलोकन 1., अवलोक M. occurrence Chem. प्राप्तिस्थान n. observation tube अवलोकन-नाल M. ocellus Ophthalmol. अक्षिका . observatory वेधशाला . .(from ancient ocher, ochre गैरिक n. 
word aa 'fixing the position of ochrea=ocrea the sun or stars .in वराहमिहिर--- ochreate=ocreate 
बृहत्संहिता) 
Ocimum Bot. तुलसीति । (-ति for प्रजाति observe vb. I पालन 1. 
genus) 2 अवलोकन, ईक्षण . 
O. sanctum कृष्ण तुलसी . . observed ईक्षित mfn. . 
ocrea=ochrea Bot. नालचोल m. . 
632 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
ocreate=ochreate Bot. नालचोली (-इन्) oculistics (treatment of diseases of 
mfn. 
the eye) अक्षिचिकित्सा . octagon Math. अष्टभुज m. 
oculo-, ocul- (Lat. oculus eye) अक्षि octahedral अष्टानीक-, अष्टानीकीय mfn. oculo-metro-scope अक्षिमानेक्ष m. octahedron Geom. अष्टानीक m. oculo-motor Anat. अक्षिचालक mfn. octane Chem. अष्टीन्य.. 
___o. nerve अक्षिचालक-चेता. octant I Phys. अष्टमक . 
oculus अक्षि . ___ 2 Bot. अष्टम . 
odd अयुग्म, विषम mfn. octave (unit of the musical scale) odd-pinnate Bot. अयुग्म-पक्षवत् mfn. ___European अष्टक N., Indian सप्तक n. odd-places Zool. गुह्येन्द्रिय n. October दशममास m. 
odd-toed (as ungulates) Zool. अयुग्मां Octocorallia Zool. अष्टावयवि-अनुवर्ग m. गुल mfn. octonary Math. अष्टमय mfn. 
-ode (from Gk. bodos way, path) -द्वार octoploid Zool. अष्टगुण mfn. 
(as in cathode, anode) octopus Zool. (an eight-armed cepha- Odina Bot. föroraftfa f. (-for for stofa ___lopod) अष्टबाहु m. 
genus) Octopus Zool. अष्टबाह्वाति f. (-आति for O.evodier सामान्य जिंगिनी f. 
प्रजाति genus) 
Odonata Zood. व्याधपतंगगण m. octroi duty Com. द्वारादेय कर m. (from odonto- दन्त 
राजतरंगिणी) 
odonto-blast दन्तकृत् octyl अष्टल. 
odonto-plast दन्त-घट octylene = caprylene Chem. नारि- odoratissimus Bot. (very sweet 
__ केरलेन्य . 
____ odour) मधुरगन्धि mfn. ocul- =oculo 
odoratus Bot. सुगन्ध mfn. ocular I adj. नैत्रिक mfn. (axial आक्ष) odour गन्ध m. 
2n. Optics (the eyepiece of an odourless forripet mfn. optical instrument) नैत्रिक m. (= odourless Hs apparatus Chem. नैत्रिक वीक्ष) 
निर्गन्ध उ, शु साधित्र . ocularist (a maker of artificial eyes) -odynia Med. -पीडा f. 
अक्षिकार . 
___oedema=edema Med, शोफ, स्फाय m. oculentum (an eye ointment) FEÍSAT Oedogonium Bot. (the oogonium 
m. (ointment is greasy and it is cell swells up) Taulfafar f. (-for for used for the eyes particularly; प्रजाति genus) hence स्नेहांजन) 
oeil-de-boeuf (eye of an ox', a oculin Ophthalmol. (a preparation circular window, 17th and 18th 
for the eyes) अक्षिक . 
centuries) गवाक्ष m. oculist (a specialist in diseases of the oenanth- TAT 
eye) अक्षिज्ञ, अक्षिवैद्य m. 
oenanthaldehyde Chem. द्राक्षा-सुव्युद m. 633 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
oenanthicChem.(fr. vine) दाक्षिक mfn. office पद . oenanthine=acid crimson 
0. of an admiral नावाधिपति-पद n. oenanthyl Chem. द्राक्षलn. 
o. of profit लाभ-पद ?. oenanthylate Chem. द्राक्षलीय . 
o. of trust विश्वास-पद . oenidin (obtained by the hydrolysis o. under state राज्याधीन पद 1. 
of oenin) नीलद्राक्षेयि . 
officer अधिकारी, पदधारी (-इन ) m. oenin Biochem. (obtained from the officers (as of chambers) अधिकारिगण ___blue grape) नीलद्रांक्षि f. 
m. oesophagus = esophagus Anat. official n. I (occupying subordi 
निगल m. 
nate offices) उपाधिकारी (-इन् ) m. Desterreich प्राच्य-राज्य n. 
2-officer अधिकारी (-इन्) m. oestrin = Destrone = theelin Bio- official adj. अधिकारीय, अधिकारि-राजकीय, ___chem. स्त्रीमदि. 
राजनियुक्त mfn. oestrus Zool. F am. 
officialbenches=treasury benches of equal length Math. समायामmfn. मंत्रि-वर्ग m. off (as a brake) Automobile पृथक official business राजकीय कार्य . offence अपराध, दोष m. 
official class अधिकारि-वर्ग m. offensive Mil. समाक्रमण N. 
official directors राजनियुक्त संचालक m. offensive expressions आक्षेप-वचन । official gazette राजकीय सूचनापत्र, शासकीय offensive language आक्षेप-भाषा. 
राजपत्र n. offensive remarks प्राक्षेप-अभ्युक्ति officially connected अधिकारिरूपेण offensive war Mil. समाक्रमण युद्ध n. सम्बद्ध Mfn. offensive words आक्षेप-शब्द m. 
official member राजकीय सदस्य m. offer vb. (propose) Com. प्रस्तवन । official party राजकीय पक्ष m. offer n. Com. (proposal) प्रस्ताव m. official receiver Com. राजकीय 
firm o. निश्चित प्रस्ताव m. 
प्रापक m. .offered-proposed Com. प्रस्तुत mfm. officials of courts न्यायालयों के उपाधि 
(to have it proposed by some one कारी (-इन्) m. 
else is प्रस्तावित) 
official statistics राजकीय समंक m. offerer-proposer Com. प्रस्तावक m. officiating director Com. स्थानापन्न . offer resistance=resist 
संचालक . office कार्यालय m. 
officinal=officinalis (Lat.) Pharm. 0. boy कार्यालय-वटु m. 
(regularly kept for sale in the o. cost कार्यालय-परिव्यय m. ' shops of druggists) आपण 0. expenses कार्यालय-व्यय m. offset Matb. अनुलम्ब (अनु=subordi o. furniture कार्यालय-उपस्कर m. ___nate) 0. oncost कार्यालय-अधिव्यय m. offset Bot. भूस्तारिका f. private : आत्मीय कार्यालय m. offspring अपत्य ., सन्तान m. 
HTTHA 
634 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
HER 
of itself स्वयं often प्रायः, Ogive curve-cumulative fre-- 
quency curve Statistics संचयि 
वारंवारता-वक्र . Ohm Elec. (unit of electrical resis 
tance) ग्रु-रोध m. -oic (fr. benzoic) Chem. (used in 
naming acids and related com 
pounds, as in caproic) -इक mfn. -oid -आभ, आकार mfn. (वैडूर्याकार beryl 
___loid) -oidal -आभीय mfn. (crystalloidal स्फटा 
भीय) oidium Bot. (conidial stage of mil 
___dews) कण्यवस्था . oikopleura Zool. (its house is com 
paratively large structure) प्रोको- 
डिम्भm. oil=oleum (o1.) Pharm. तैल 1. oil तैलn. 
o. box Macb. तैल-धान 1. 0.-can तैल-वपनी . o. cup Mach. तैल-कटोर m. 0.-dag तैल-श्लेलि . 0.-dealer तैलिक m. (Hindi तेली) o. filler Automobile तैल-परक m. o.gland Zool. तैल-ग्रन्थि m. 0. mill तैल-निस्सारणी f. o. of turpentine सरल-तैल 1. 0. of vitriol Chem. काचर-तैल.. 0. pressure gauge Automobile 
तैल-निपीड-आमान m. 0. pump Automobile तैलोदञ्च m. 0.-seed तैल-बीज . 0.-soluble sta-famia mfn. o.-stone तैल-प्रस्तर m. o. sump Automobile तैल-निगर्त m. 
o. tank Rly. तैल-तडाग m. 
o. wiper तैल-प्रोञ्छ m. oil black Col. Ind. तैल काल m. 
o. blue तैल नील m. 0. brown तैल बभ्रु m. o. chrysoidine तैल हेमाभी f. o. crimson तैल कामिज m. o. green तैल हरि m. 0. orange तैल नारंग m. 0. ponceau तेल अधिरक्तापीत m. o. red तैल रक्त m. o. scarlet तैल शोण m. 0.-soluble red तैल-विलेय रक्त m. 0.-soluble scarlet तैल-विलेय शोण m. 0. vermilion तैल हिंगुल m. 0. wine colour तैल द्राक्षिरा रंग m. 
0. yellow Set ofta m. oiled तैलित mfn. oiling तैलन . -oin (benzoin) Chem. ऊप (धूप) 
(cuminoin site) ointment=unguentum Pharm. स्नेह 
लेप m. o. base स्नेहलेप-आधार m. 0. of boric acid = unguentum ___acidi borici (ung. acid. boric.) 
टांकिकाम्ल-स्नेहलेप m. o. of chrysarobin-unguentum 
chrysarobini (ung. chrys 
arob.) हेमगुहि-स्नेहलेप m. o. of mercurous chloride=un 
guentum hydrargyri sub chloridi (ung. hydrarg. sub chlor.)=mercurous chloride ointment = calomel oint 
ment पारधनीरेय-स्नेहलेप.m. o. of mercury=mercury oint 
ment पारद-स्नेहलेप m. 
635 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
o. of salicylic acid = unguen- olefiant (oilmaking') Chem. तैलकर 
tum acidi salicylici (ung. mfn. acid. salicyl.) नम्रलिकाम्ल-स्नेहलेप ०.gas तैलकर वाति m. 
m. 
olefin Chem. तैलकरि. o. of zinc oxide=unguentum olefine series Chem. तैलकरि-मालाt. 
zinci oxidi (ung. zinc. oxid.) oleic Chem. म्रक्षिक mfn. कुप्यातु जारेय स्नेहलेप m. 
olein Chem. म्रक्षि. okapi (Olkapia johnstoni) Zool. (neck oleo- तैल 
shorter than that of giraffe) fonta oleomargarine = artificial butter 
m. 
कृत्रिम नवनीत n. Okapia Zool. प्रग्रीवाति f. (-आति for oleometer तैल-मान m. 
प्रजाति genus) 
oleo-resin तैलोद्यास m. 0. johnstoni सामान्य प्रग्रीव m. olesol black Col. Ind. (for colouring -ol I (from alcohol सुषव, denoting varnishes) लाक्ष्यर्थ काल m. 
that the substance is an alcohol oleum Chem. (fuming sulphuric acid) or phenol; a variant of -ole) शु-तेल n. (धूमायमान शुल्बारिक अम्ल) Chem. -वm. 
oleum = oil Pharm. तैल 1. 2 (fr. oleum oil) -ऐल १. (तैल) 
o. chaulmoograe = chaulmoo old पुराण, पूर्वतन mfn. 
gra oil पिमुद्गर-तैल . old cedar=brown madder न्यवरक्ता- o. jatamansi जटामांसी-तैल n. 
पीत m. 
_o. olivae-olive oil तैलबदर-तैल . Oldenlandia Bot. क्षेत्रपपर्टति . (-ति for o. ricini=castor oil एरण्ड-तैल 1. 
प्रजाति genus) 
olfactory गन्ध O. corymbosa सामान्य क्षेत्रपर्पट m. o. capsule Zool. गन्ध-प्रावर m. old-fashioned machine पुराविध यंत्र n. o. cell गन्ध-कोशा f. old fustic Col. Ind. पुराण पाण्डुदु m. 0. lobe Zool. गन्ध-पालिf. 
o. red पुराण रक्त m. 
o. sac Zoob. गन्ध-स्यून m. _o. scarlet पुराण शोण m. 
oligo- अल्प old region Bot. पूर्वतन भाग m. 
Oligocene Geol. आदिनूतनयुग n. -ole (-ol) (denoting the presence of Oligochaeta Zool. अल्परोमिणः m.pl. 
a five-membered ring; or certain oligoplasmia 74TFIAT . . ethers and aldehydes) Chem. -वा f. Oligotoma Zool. (the female is 
oleate Chem. म्रक्षीय . 
___ always wingless) अपक्षस्त्रीकाति f. oleate green Col. Ind. म्रक्षीय हरि m. (प्राति for प्रजाति genus) olecranon Anat. (elbow point) -olin (oil + -in) -effer f. 
कफोप्यन. 
olivanthrene Col. Ind. तैलबदरक्षामेण्य olecranon process Zool. कफोण्यग्र-प्रवर्ध m . 
olive I तैलबदर. 636 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
2 (a. colour)न्यवपीताहरि m. 
omitting 147 n. 0. brown तैलबदर बभ्रु m. 
ommatidium Zool. नेत्रिका . 0. green तैलबदर हरि m. 
omnibus credit Econ. सार्वत्रिक प्रत्यय 0. oil=oleum olivae (ol. oliv.) m. 
Pharm. तैलबदर-ल. 
omnivorous सर्वभुक्, सर्वभोजी (-इन्) Oliver's bark = oliveri cortex 
(oliver. cort.)== black sassafras omo-sternum Zool. (anterior bony 
Pharm. गन्धवल्क m. 
___ rod of amphibians) पूर्वोरोस्थि . olivine=chrysolite 
on (as a brake) Automobile लग्न Olympian green=malachitegreen off पृथक 
मध्यपीतातिहरि m. 
-on (-one) (Gk. -one signifying -oma Med. (tumor, swelling) -अर्बुद female descendant. It indicates 
that the substance is a ketone) -ome (group, mass, stem, abstract Chem. -आ. 
entity) -77 f. 
Onagraceae Bot. शृंगाट-कुल 1. omega ह, हकार, हवर्ण, दीर्घ अओm. on approval अनुमोदनार्थ omega chrome black Col. Ind. ह वर्णक -onate (-on-+ -ate) Chem. -आयीय 1. 
काल m. 
oncost Com. अधिव्यय m. (additional o. chrome blue ह वर्णक नील m. 
cost; See Pitman's Business o. chrome brown ह वर्णक बभ्रm. Encyclopedia, pp. 1299-1300) o. chrome corinth ह वर्णक रोहित factory o. निर्माणी-अधिव्यय m. 
office o. कार्यालय-अधिव्यय m. o. chrome cyanine ह वर्णक श्यामी selling o. विक्रयण-अधिव्यय m. 
works 0.=factory o.' o.chromegreen ह वर्णक हरिm. on demand Com. अधियाचने O. chrome red ह वर्णक रक्त M. -one = -on Chem. - f. o. chrome yellow ह वर्णक पीत m. one-celled एक-कोशावान् mfn. o. mordant claret ह रंगस्थापक ___one-cell thick Bot. एक-कोशा-स्थूल min. 
रक्तिरा. 
one-man company Com. एकजन omentum वपा f, वपाजाल . (वपा a 
Vedic word; जाल from भावप्रकाश; one of a pair युग्मैक m. . both mean omentum) 
one percent एकक-शत 1. (ancient omissibility लोप्यता . . 
word), एक प्रतिशत omissible लोप्य mfn. 
one-price shop Com. एकमूल्य आपण m. omission लोपन 1., लोप m. 
one-valued function Math. एकाई error of o. Com. लोप-विभ्रम m. श्रित .. omitab. लोपन 1. 
one who has breakfasted प्रातरशित omitted लोपित mfn. 
637 
m. 
Mfn. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
on ground of के आधार पर, के हेतु से 0omycetes Biol. अण्डकवकानि n.pl. 
(Hindi) 
ooplasm अण्डरस m. -onic Chem. I -प्रायिक mfn. 
ooplasmic अंडरसीय mfn. 2 (used in naming certain acids ooplasmic material अंडरसीय द्रव्य । esp. certain monoacids obtained ooplast Bot. I (egg) अंडा . by oxidation of sugars)-धिवक,-मिक 2 (oosphere) अंडगोल m. 
mfn. 
. oosphere I Biol. अंडगोल m. onion taus m. 
2 Bot. = ooplast-egg-ovum -onium (ammonium) Chena. -तातु m. अंडा . 
(तिक्तातु) 
oospore Bot. (the spore resulting onium compounds तातु-संयोग m. 
from fertilization of an egg cell) on reference to the tables Math. अण्डबीजाणु m. 
सारणी-दर्शनानन्तर 
ootheca = ovicapsule on the left Drill वामे 
ootype Zool. अण्डकवची (इन्) m. ontogeny Biol. (life history of an opal (agem) रत्नोपल m. 
individual organism) व्यक्तिचरित n. opal blue Col. Ind. रत्नोपल नील m. ontology. तात्त्विकी f. 
o. blue bluish रत्नोपल नील पानील Onychophora = Prototracheata 
Protracheata Zool. नखरिण:-आदि- opalescence उपलभासा. स्वासनालिन: m.pl. 
opalescent उपलभासी (-इन्) mfn. oocyte Zool. अण्डकोशा. 
Opalina Zool. (they have many oogamete Biol. स्त्रीजन्यु m. 
nucleated ciliata) बहुन्यष्टिपक्ष्माति . oogamous Biol. लिंगजन्यु m. (having (-पाति for प्रजाति genus) 
gametes exhibiting distinctions opaline (like opal) रत्नोपलीय mfm. of sex) 
o. scarlet Col. Ind. रत्नोपल शोण m. oogenesis (formation of eggs) = opaque पारान्ध, पारादर्श, अपारदर्श, प्रकाशा 
oogeny अण्डजनन । 
भेद्य mfn. ooglea Zool. अण्डश्लेषm. 
open faqa mfn. oogonial Biol. (pertaining to the o. account Com. विवृत-लेखा f. 
oogonium योनि) यौन Mfn. 
0. an account Com. लेखा-उद्घाटन, oogoniophore Bot. (a cell or stalk लेखा-प्रारम्भण 1. 
supporting an oogonium) alfiere o. bundle Bot. (containing cam 
m. 
___bium एधा) एधावी पूल m. oogonium I Bot. योनि. 
o. chain Chem. विवृत श्रृंखल m. ____ 2 Embryol. प्रांडकोशा. 
0.-chain compound Chem. ookinete Zool. (a motile stage of विवृत-शृंखल संयोग m. 
. : the.zygote in Plasmodium) चल 0.-chain hydrocarbons Chem. 
युक्ता . .. 
विवृत-शृंखल उदांगार m. 638 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
o. cheque Banking (not crossed opercular chamber Zool. पिधान-वेश्म ___cheque) विवृत धनादेश, अरेखित धनादेश 
. m. 
opercular fold Zool. पिधान-मंजm. o. circuit Phys. विवृत परिपथ M. operculated fafen mfn. o. community Bot. विवृत समुदाय m. operculum Biol. (lid of the theca) o. credit Com. I विवृत प्रत्यय m. पिधान . 
2=blank credit निरंक प्रत्यय m. Ophidia Zool. अहयः m.pl. opener उद्घाटक m. 
ophiopluteus Zool. (the pluteus, or opening I विवरm., छिद्र n., मार्ग m., मुख।. larva, of a brittle star) भिदुरडिम्भ m. 
2 उद्घाटन, प्रारम्भण". 
(short for भिदुरतारकडिम्भ) opening balance Com. प्रारंभिक अंतर . OphiothrixZool. तारकाति/. (-पाति for opening entry Com. प्रारम्भण-प्रविष्टि, प्रजाति genus) 
प्रारम्भिक प्रविष्टि f. 
Ophiurida Zool. (with simple non openings (in orbit) Ophthalmol. विवर branched arms) अशाखिबाहवः m.pl. 
m. 
Ophiuroidea Zool. भिदुरतारका: m.pl., opening stock. Com. प्रारम्भण-स्कन्ध m. भिदुरतारकवर्गm. open ranks march Drill असंहत-प्रयाणम् ophthalm-, ophthalmo- (Gk. oph open to the influence of प्रभाव्य, thalmus eye) चक्षुः-, रूपेन्द्रिय 
विवृतमनस्क 
ophthalmia = ophthalmitis open wagon Ry. अछादित वाहन . ophthalmiac (one having ophthal opera संगीत नाटक, संगीत नाटय 1. 
__mia) कुपिताक्षm. opera glass नाटच-दूरेक्षिका, दूरेक्षिका f. ophthalmic चक्षुः-, चाक्षुष mfn. operand Math. करणीय . 
0. artery Anat. चाक्षुष-रोहिणी /. operate vb. करण, क्रियाकरण, कर्मकरण, 0. branch चाक्षुषी शाखा f. 
चालन 
0. practice चक्षुर्वृत्ति f. operating costs Com. चालन व्यय, चालन 0. surgeon (surgeon specialized 
परिव्यय m. 
in all the three branches operating voltage Phys. क्रियाशील medicine, surgery, refractive 
धुशक्मता . 
errors) चक्षुः-शालाकी (-इन्), चक्षुर्वैद्य operation I क्रिया f., क्रियाकरण n. 
2 (surgical) शल्यकर्म n. 
ophthalmious कुपिताक्ष mfn. 3 कर्म n. (in Chem. कर्म should be ophthalmitis=ophthalmia अक्षिकोप preferred to four "action") 
_m. operational कर्मात्मक mfn. 
ophthalmo-, ophthalm- रूपेन्द्रिय-, operation of law विधि-प्रवर्तन ॥. 
चक्षु: operation table शल्यकर्म-पटला . ophthalmologist चाक्षुषिक m. operator I Com. कर्ता, चालक m. ophthalmology चाक्षुषी f. 
2 Math. कर्ता (-४) m. 
-opia = -opsia -अक्षिता= नेत्रता 639 
दा 
2.﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
opii sedativus Pharm. शमक अहिफेन optic adj. I (of or pertaining to 
vision) दृक्-, दृष्टि-, दाष्टिक mafn. opinion विचार M., मत .. 
2 (of or pertaining to the eye) opisth- = opistho 
चाक्षुष mfn. opisthocoelous Zool. (concave be- 3 (relating to optics) काशिक, काशि __ hind) पश्चन्युज mfn. 
कीय mfn. _o. vertebra पश्चन्युब्ज कीकस m. optical adj. I (relating to the science opisthonephros Zook. पश्चवृक्क m. of optics) arfareita mfn. opistho-, opisth- (Gk. opisthen at 2 (relating to light) #rfarei mfn., 
or on the back from Sanskrit 
प्रकाश पृष्ठ) पश्च 
3 (relating to vision) दृष्टि-, दाष्टिक, Opisthorchiidae (a family having चाक्षुष mfn. 
the testes at the posterior end 0. accessories Phys. काशिक उपसाधन of the body) पश्चवृषण-वंशm. 
, .. Opisthorchis Zool. पश्चवृषणाति f. (आति 0. activity = opticity Phys., 
for प्रजाति genus) 
Chem. काशिता f. O. felineus विडाल पश्चवृषण m. 
0. axis चाक्षुष अक्ष m. O. sinensis (found in liver) यकृत 0. bench (essentially a horizon 
पश्चवृषण m. 
___tal rod) काशिक दण्ड m. opium अहिफेन । 
0. centre काशिक बिन्दु m. opossum Zool. युग्मगर्भाशय, युग्माशय m. o. commissure=opticchiasma opotherapy = organotherapy रस o. constants Cryst. काशिक स्थिरांक 
चिकित्सा, अंगरसचिकित्सा f. 
___m. opposing couple Zool. विरोधि युग्म १. o. convention काशिक-रूढिf. opposite I अभिमुख, सम्मुख nfm. 
0. defects काशिक दोष m. 2 विपरीत, विरुद्ध mfn. 
o. density प्रकाश-धनता. 3 (going in the opposite direc o. illusion दृष्टि-भ्रम M. . tion) प्रतिगामी (-इन्) mfn. 
o. instrument चाक्षुष उपकरण, काशित्र opposite effect विरुद्ध प्रभाव m. 
. oppositely charged Phys. विपरीत प्रभत ०. lantern चाक्षुष वादीप... 
mfn. 
o. medium:प्रकाश-माध्यम n. . opposite sense Matb. विपरीत-अभिदिशा 
o. phenomenon दृष्टि-भ्रम. m. 
o. properties प्रकाशीय गुण M. opposite side Math. सम्मुख-भुजा. 
o. section प्रकाश-मार्गm. opposition I Adminis. प्रतिपक्ष m. o. set काशित्र-कुलक 1. 
2 (of stars) fayfa f. (as against 0. system #fert-eręfar f (combina conjunction युति) 
___tion of काशित्र) -opsia -नेत्रता, -दर्शिता 
. optically active . (possessed of 640 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
optical activity or opticity काशिता) (/काश् to 'shine) काशितावान् mfn. 
· biological- 0. जीव-काशिकी . o. dense काशार्थ धन mfn. 
geometrical o. रैखिक-काशिकी. o. inactive अकाशितावान् mfn.(काशिता - physical o..भौतिक-काशिकी f. ___opticity=optical activity) 
physiological o. नेत्र-काशिकी f. 0. rare Fettet farct min. 
optic stalk Zool. दृग्वृन्त ।. optic axis I Mineral. काशिक अक्ष m. optic thalamus:=thalamus Anat. 
2 (of the eyeball) = optical axis दृक्-पिंड m. चाक्षुष अक्ष m. , 
optic tract Anat. दृक्पथ m. optic capsule Zool. दृक्-प्रावर m. optic ventricle=optocoele Zool. optic chiasma = optical commi- दुग्गुहा . 
ssure Ophthalmol. दृग्व्यत्यास (दृष्टि- optigraph दृष्टलिख m. मार्गव्यत्यास), दृक्स्वस्तिक m. 
__optimism आशावत्त्व., श्रेष्ठतावाद M.(fr. opticcup Zool. दृक्कटोर 2. 
Latin optimus the best) optic disc=optic entrance=optic optimist आशावान्, श्रेष्ठतावादी (-इन् ) m. 
papilla प्रबिम्ब 1. (not दृष्टिबिम्ब be- optimum Phys. प्रशस्त, अनुकूलतम mfn. 
cause it is a spot devoid of light) o. temperature अनुकूलतम ताप m. optic fibre दृष्टि-तन्तु m. 
option. Com. विकल्प m. optic foramen Zool. दृक्-छिद्र n. 
call o. (option to buy) क्रय-विकल्प optician I (one who deals in opti m. 
cal instruments) काशित्रिक m. 
double o. उभय-विकल्प m. (क्रय-विक्रय 2 (one who makes ...) काशित्रकार m. विकल्प) 3 (one who makes spectacles) put o. (option to sell) विक्रय-विकल्प उपनेत्रकार m. 
m. 
. 4 (one skilled in optics) काशिकीज्ञ, single o. एकल विकल्प m. काशविज्ञ m. 
opto- दृष्ट-, दृक् opticist (a. specialist in optics) opto- (optic, denoting vision) दृष्टि 
काशविज्ञ m. 
optocoele=optic ventricle Zool. opticity Phys., Chem.(optical activity TET f. . 
or rotatory power) Aferat f. opto-gram Physiol. (the. image on optic lobe Zool. दृक्-पालि f. . ____ the retina) दृङ्-मूर्ति f. (दृक्पट-मूर्ति optic nerve Anat. दृक्-चेता. 
optological औपनैत्रिकीय mfn. optico- (optic) दृष्टि- - 
optologist औपनैत्रिक m. optico-chemical.दृष्टि-रसायनिक mfn. optology औपनैत्रिकी f. optic papilla=optic disc optometer Physiol. दृष्टिमान :m. optic radiations Anat. दृष्टि-तन्तुविकिरण optometrical दृष्टिमितीय mfn. ____n. 
optometrist दृष्टिमितिज्ञ m. : optics (science of light) #farait f. optometry procraft f. 
641 
41 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
opto-phone दृष्ट-भाष m. 
2 (eyesocket) अक्षिकप m. (from opto-type Med. (sight-testing types) Pali) 
दृष्टि-मुद्र M. 
orbital pad of fat Ophthalmol. परिगोल Opuntia Bot. नागफणति f. (-ति for वसापर m. (pad that which fills 
प्रजाति genus) 
up unoccupied space', परिगोल Opuntiales Bot. नागफण-गोत्र n. 
'round the eyeball') or अथवा 
orbital plate Ophthalmol. अक्षि-पट्ट m. oral Pharm. I भक्ष्य, पेय mfn. (as a medi- orb weaver = geometric spider 
cine for oral use) 
Zool. गोल-वाय m. 2 मौखिक mfn. (as an examination) orcein (Italian orcello archil शेपाल, oral arm Zool. (one of the armlike abbreviated to शे) Chem. शेयिन m. 
or streamerlike prolongations of orcelline Col. Ind. शेपाली / the distal end of the manubrium) orchella moss-orchil मुखध्वज m. 
orchella weed-archil=orchil oral surface Zool. मुखतल . 
Orchidaceae Bot. पीनशिफकुल . orange नारंग m., . 
orchil-archil Col. Ind. शेपाल m. o. brown नारंग बभ्रm. 
o. brown शेपाल बभ्रु m. o. developer Col. Ind. नारंग 0. liquor शेपाल रस m. 
विकासक m. 
o. paste शेपाल लेपी. o. flower नारंग-पुष्प n. 
0. red शेपाल रक्त m. 0. -flower watet=aqua aurantii Orchis Bot. (fleshy tubers or root 
fioris Pharm. नारंग-पुष्प-वारिn. stocks) पीनशिफति . (-ति for प्रजाति o. juice नारंग-रस m. 
genus) o. lead Col. Ind. नारंग सीसm. orcin शेय. o. peel.Pharm. नारंग-शल्क m. orcine शेयी. 
o. red Col. Ind. नारंग रक्त m. orcinol (It. orcello archil शेपाल, orang-outang, orangutan Zool. ___abbreviated to शे) शेव m. 
वन-मानुष m. 
order I Bot. गोत्र. . ora serrata Anat. दन्तुर-वलय m. 
2Zool. गण m. orbicular वलयाकार, वर्तुल mfn. 
order प्रादेश, ऋम m., शान्ति, व्यवस्था orbicularis ani गुद-पेशीवलय m. 
__o. book आदेश-पुस्तn. orbicularis oculi वर्मद्वार-संकोचक-पेशी, o. cheque प्रादिष्ट धनादेश m.. 
निमीलक-पेशी. 
0. supplier आदेश-पूरक m. orbicularis oris Anat. मुख-पेशीवलय m. orderly क्रमबद्ध mfn. orbiculus ciliaris' = pars plana orderly imagination क्रमबद्ध-कल्पना. 
वलिकाय वलय m. 
order of adjudication Com. af orbit (of.planets) कक्ष्या f. (from निर्णयादेश m. . आर्यभळ) . . . 
___ order of a surd Matb. करणी-वर्ग m. 642 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
Order ! Order !! Parl. Practice 
सावधान सावधान orders in council परिषत्-स्थित आदेश 
m. 
orders of levers Phys. उद्याम-भेद m. ordinance अध्यादेशm. ordinarily साधारणतः ordinary साधारण mfr. 
o.algebracelementaryalgebra 
प्रारम्भिक बीजगणित 1. o. amalgam Mineral. साधारण संरस 
A 
am. 
0. debt Com. साधारण ऋण n. o. meeting Com. साधारण अधिवेशन ___n. 
o. partner Com. साधारण भागी (इन्) 
o. passenger Ry. साधारण पथिक- 
संयान n. 0. resolution साधारण संकल्प m. 0. scale Statistics सामान्य-मापश्रेणी /. o. shares Com. साधारण अंश m. 0. stock Com. #TETUT FIT m. o. temperature साधारण ताप m. 
o. term Math. सामान्य पद. ordinate n. Math. कोटिf. ordnance = ordnance stores Mil. 
आयुध-संभार m.. ordnance department Mil. आयुध- 
विभाग m. ordnance depot Mil. ATITIT 1. 
(ancient word) ordnance stores = ordnance ore (from Sanskrit अयस्) अयस्क n. ore crusher अयस्क-दलित्र n. ore-grinding mill अयस्क-पेषणी f. ore separator अयस्क-पृथक्कारक m. organ I Anat. अंगn. 
2 Music (the largest and most powerful musical instrument) 
वाद्यराज m. organella Zool. अंगाणु m. organelle Zool. अंगिका. organ-forming material Zool. अंग 
निर्मायि द्रव्य ॥. organic Chem, प्रांगार-, प्रांगारिक mfn. 
0. arsenic solution प्रांगारिक नेपाली 
विलयन n. o. catalyst प्रांगारिक आवेजक m. 0. chemistry प्रांगार-रसायन 1., प्रांगा 
रिकी . o. iodine solution प्रांगारिक जम्बुकी 
विलयन . . o. matter प्रांगारिक पदार्थ m. 
o. solvent प्रांगारिक विलायक m. organic evolution Biol. जीवोद्विकास 
m. organism r (a living being) जीव, जीवी 
(-इन्) m. 2 = microbe जीवाणु m. 3 (anything composed of diffe 
rent parts) अंगी (-इन् ) m. organism causing caries of teeth 
दन्ताद m. (from सुश्रुत) organization I संघटन । 
2 समंगीकार m., समंगीकरणn. organize vb. I संघटन n. 
2 समंगीकरण . (to arrange or constitute in interdependent 
parts) organized r संघटित mfn. 
2 समंगीकृत mfn. o. matter Zool. संघटित भूतद्रव्य 1. o. society संघटित समाज m. 
0. structure Zool. संघटित-संरचना organizer I संघटनकर्ता () m. 
• 643 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
2 Zool. अंगकर्ता (-1) m. 
o. vote मूल मत ". 3 समंगीकारक, समंगीकर्ता (-तृ) m. originated उद्भ त mfn. organizing संघटन n. 
origin of a muscle पेशी-उद्भव M. organ magic period Zool. अंग-माया origin of species Zool. जाति-उद्भव 
काल m. 
m. organ of Corti Anat. (the main oriol yellow = alkali yellow 
structure of hearing) श्रवण-चित्य n. orion black EW extra = direct organ of speech वागिन्द्रिय 1 
black MS , organography Biol. अंगवर्णना. 
0. blue A = cotton blue N organotherapy-opotherapy Med. 0. bronzeG=diamine brown G 
अंगरसचिकित्सा . 
0. brown G=benzo brown G organ pipe Phys. वाद्य-नाल m. 
0. dark green ET = direct organs of defence Zool. प्रतिरक्षा-अंग. dark green organs of offence Zool. अाक्रमण-अंग . 0. fast red D = direct bor organs of perennation=perenna 
deaux TV ting organs Bot. चिरजीवांग . ___o. green B=diazine green B organs of special sense Zool. fagta 
0. sky blue = benzo sky blue संवेदांग, विशेष इन्द्रिय . 
oris Anat. प्रास्य, मुख n. orient v. Phys. (placing along a Orissa Geog. उद्रदेश, उत्कल. m. 
certain direction) अनुस्थापन . orlean = annatto oriental प्राच्य mfm. . . 
-ornithes Zool. -पक्षिणः oriental blue प्राच्य नील m. 
ornithic Zool, aäftpi mfn. orientation 1 अनुस्थितिज्ञान 1. (अनु with Ornithodorus Z00l. (having a skin 
respect to sutroundings) 
with many irregular tubercles) 2 अनुस्थिति f. 
अदचर्माति . (-आति for प्रजाति genus) 3 अनुस्थापन . 
O. savignyi (has two pairs of orifice Anat., Phys. faqe m. 
eyes) चतुरक्ष अर्बुदचर्म m. origin I उद्भव m. 
ornithology पक्षि-विद्या, वैहंगिकी f. 2 Math. मूलबिन्दु m. 
ornithophilous flowers Bot. fer original Filforefi mfn. . 
परागित पुष्प . O..entry Com. मूल-प्रविष्टि, मौलिक- .ornithopter . Aeronautics चलपक्षविमान 
प्रविष्टि. 0. figure Com. मूल-अंक m. 
Oroya fever Med. (warts appear on o. inquiry Statistics मौलिक अनुसंधान . the skin) चर्मकील-ज्वर m. 
orpiment हरिताल . 0. jurisdiction Lal मौलिक अधि- Orr's white Chem. कुप्य-श्वेत m. '. "कारक्षेत्र... ' 
orseille Col, Ind. शैपाल m, 6. position, मूल-स्थिति.. 
orseilline Col.. Ind. शैपाली . 
m. 
. 
.. 
644 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
orsellinate Chem. शैपालीय. 
orthostichy Bot. (a vertical row) orsellinic Chem. 197fpi mfn. 
3wifT f. Ortho- Chem. 5 
orthotropous Bot. Euani mfn. ortho black Col. Ind. Free FireT m. Oryza Bot. pregler f. (fe for starfa orthocentre Math. n. 
genus) ortho cerise Col. Ind. Feat a t f. os Anat, ale n. orthochrome Col. Ind. Joaquia m. Os (osmium) Chem. T (Tata) orthoclase Mineral. 2795fefio m. (-50 osamine (-osetamine) Chem. ferait 
for efast mineral) orthoclastic Cryst. (cleaving in osazone (-ose - + hydrazone set 
directions at right angles to each oftar) Chem. equirat f. other) लम्बकोणदल mfn. 
oscillate vb. Phys. satan n. orthocyanine Col. Ind. ऊर्ध्वश्यामी f. vibrate TTTT n. orthodome (parallel to the ortho oscillated Phys. saltaa mfn. 
axis) TFT SETE m. 
oscillating wave Phys. प्रदोल-तरंग m. orthogonal Math. fafitoft (-6) oscillation 1 Phys. CT n., Saham. 
mfn. 
2 Phys. (single swing from one orthogonal circle Math. लम्बकोणेवृत्त extreme limit to the other) 
n. (circle at right angle) (not antalet m. (it is not a verb in 
Featujt qa (a circle cannot pos- this sense) 
sess a right angle)] : 3 Statistics Start m. orthogonal projection=orthogra- oscillation number Elec. TatsATF 
phic projection magtut fasa, TFT opintot-fam . 
oscillator Phys. 1977 m. orthography Engin, (a drawing in oscillatory Phys. walent (47) mfn. 
correct projection) सुविक्षेपोद्रेख m. oscillatory circuit Radio प्रदोली परिपथ orthophoria Med. Farfaafatat f. (WT m. 
normal, आ towards, विवतिषा oscillograph Elec. प्रदोललिख m. tending to turn) 
oscillometer Phys. TITAT m. orthophosphoric acid Chem. Jen oscilloscope Elec. satta m. 
भास्विक अम्ल . 
osculum Zool. FTF n. Orthoptera Zool. (“straight-wings”) -ose (glucose) Chem. -], -- n. 
PEUT TETT: m. pl. 
(म in a few cases, मधुम and मधुरम) orthoscope Ophthalmol. (for seeing ose Chem. (simple sugar) n. 
straight) Prater m. 
Osfachrome bordeaux B (osfa is orthoscopic lens Ophthalmol. an abbreviated trade-mark from 
Get are m. (but lens of ortho the manufacturer's name Oester scope vara-ate 
reichischer Verein für Chemi 6450 
n. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
sche u. Metallurgische Produk-. osmotic pressure frysta forte m. tion) 
osone Chem, sat f. =azo alizarine bordeaux W -Osone (-ose + - one) Chem. -Ear f. osfachrome orange D-acid aliza- ossa pl. of os 
rine orange GR 
ossein=ostein Biochem. ferrari f. osfanil orange BRN = direct osseo- I (bone) #Fete 
orange R 
2 (bony) FETT -oside Chem. -4 n. 
osseous (Gk. Osteon from Sanskrit -osis i (a morbid condition due to FT) Anat. I (composed of bone) 
the excessive increase of....) free mfn. 
falf. 
2 (resembling bone) ofera mfn. 2 (any disease) - f. 
ossi- ET 3 (infection)-part (as in bacillosis) ossicle=ossicule Anat. afar f. osmic Chem. Tfai mfn. 
ossiferous fra mfn. osmio-(osmium) Chem. TE 
ossification Physiol. (formation of osmiophilzosmiophile Zool. (that bone) FRÍTT, FTH97, fou 
which is readily stained by osmic n., aftrefa f. acid) गुर्विकरंज्य mfn. 
ossified Anat. HifT, AFTET, ETT osmiophilelipin Zool. prealfa-farfa mfn. 
ossifier 1144, f ief (T) m. osmiophobe = osmiophobic Zool. ossifluence Med. feet-factaat n. 
(not readily stained by osmic ossifluent Med. feefacitua mfn. acid) अगुर्विकरंज्य nfm. 
ossify vb. Physiol. TFTIUFT, AETATUT n. osmious Chem. Tef mfn. 
Ossivorous Anat. atreye mfn. osmiridium iridosmine Mineral. ossuary अस्थिधानी । 
TEUTETTarg m. 
-ost-pun. osmium Chem. गुर्वातु m. 
ost-, oste-, osteo- 764 o. oxide गुर्वातु जारेय . 
osteal ofera mfn. osmo- (osmious) Chem. Ter 
Osteichthyes Zool. AFETA FEIT: m.pl. osmo-regulation Zool. or -347 n. ostein=ossein uffiffi f. 
(control of water content अन्तःस्थ osteitis Med. अस्थिकोप m. 577-#T) 
ostensible partner Law TR TTT osmose vb. Chem. (to 'subject to (-5T) m. 
osmosis, to diffuse by osmosis) osteo- affer I TATU 11. 
osteoblast Zool, T m. osmosis arfa f. 
osteo-clast Zool. T-7* m. -osmosis -आसति. 
osteogenic fibres Zool. अस्थिजन तन्तु osmotic aitatu mfn... 
646 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
•m. 
osteography (descriptive osteology) outbreak of war Mil. युद्धोद्भद, युद्धारम्भ 
अस्थिवर्णना. osteoid अस्थिरूप, अस्थ्याभ mfn. 
outer बाह्य mfn. Osteology आस्थिकी . 
outer border Zool. बहिःसीमा . osteo-malacia Med. अस्थि-मृदुता .. outer end (of a scale) बाह्य अन्त m. Osteometry अस्थिमिति . 
outer layer=cortex बाह्यक., बाह्य osteomyelitis=osteitis Med. अस्थि 
स्तर m. __कोप m. 
outer leg (in spherometer) Phys. बाह्य -osteon -अस्थि . 
पाद m. osteo-pathy Med. अस्थि-चिकित्सा . outer limiting membrane Zool. osteo-plasty Surg. अस्थि-घटना . 
बाह्य सीमा-कला. -osteum -अस्थ 
outer molecular layer Zool. बाह्य ostiolate Zool. रंध्रकी, रंध्रकवान् mfn. 
जालिका स्तर m. ostiole I Bot. द्वार. 
outer nuclear layer Zool. बाह्य न्यष्टि 2 Zool. रंध्रक . 
स्तर m. ostium Zool. I (pl. ostia; pores of outfit संभार m. 
a sponge) रन्ध्र n. 
outflanking Mil. उत्पावन n. 2 मुखिका. (mouthlike opening) outgrow vb. उद्वर्धन n. Ostrich Zool. उष्ट्रपक्षी (-इन्) m. 
outgrowth उद्वर्धm., उद्वर्धन n. other अन्य 
outlay Com. उद्व्यय m. otherwise अन्यथा 
outlets for ventilation Hygiene arcata otitis Med. कर्णकोप m. 
निष्क्रम m. otoconia=earsand Anat. कर्ण-बाल m. outline In. बहीरेखा f. otocyst=statocyst-lithocyst Zool. 2 vb. बहीरेखण . 
स्थितिकोष्ठ m. 
outline map बहीरेख मानचित्र . . . otolith=earstone Fufsm. 
outlive vb. अतिजीवन 1. otorrhoea Med. कर्णास्त्राव m. 
out-of-date गत-काल mfn. otter (from Sanskrit उद्र; Lithuanian out of focus Phys. अनाभित min. (not 
udra) उद्र, जलविडाल m. 
____in focus) Oudh Geog. अयोध्या, कोशल m. out of gear Automobile getrare ouncer (oz.; 16 drams) शुक्तिका f. (शु.; out of line Engin. रेखा-बहिः, रेखा-बाह्य 
१६ शाणक) 
out of stock Com. स्कन्ध-निर्गत mfn. 2 (oz. t.; 20 pennyweights) शुक्ति out-pocketings Zool. उद्गोहन . (शु.); हैम-शुक्ति f. (है. शु.; २० महामाष) output प्रदा f., उत्पाद m. (production) 3 (oz. ap.; 8 drams) शुक्ति (शु.); o. cost account Com. प्रदा-परिव्यय भैषजिक-शुक्ति . (भै. शु.; ८ शाण) 
लेखा f. -ous Chem. (denoting a valence outside बहिष्टात् (Hindi बाहर), बाह्य lower than that denoted by-ic)-य outside caliper बाह्य व्यासमि m. . 
647 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
outside cylinder locomotive Rly. over-capitalized familia mfn. 
Eng. बहीरम्भ चलित्रा . 
overcome vb. अभिभवन १. outside steam pipe Rly. Eng. बाह्य overcome अभिभूत mfn. 
बाष्प-नाडm. 
overcome resistance vb. रोधाभिभवन outstanding Com. अदत्त, अप्राप्त mfn. 
o. balance अदत्त शेष m. 
over-correction Ophthalmol. अतिशोधन o. claims I देय अध्यर्थन n. 
1. 2 प्राप्य अध्यर्थन .. 
overdose अतिमात्रा f. o. debts अप्राप्त ऋण 1. 
over-draft अधिविकर्ष m. o. expenses अदत्त व्यय m. 
over-drawn अधिकृष्ट mfn. o. income अप्राप्त आय m. 
over-due कालातीत, वीतकाल mfn. o. liability अदत्त देय . 
overfeeding अतिभक्षण, अतिप्राशन 1. outward Com. निर्गामी (-इन्) mfn. overflow ob. प्राप्लाव m. 
o. consignment निर्गामि परेषण. overflow pipe प्राप्लाव-नाड m. 0. freight बहिर्भाटक m. 
over-head charges उपरि-व्यय m. o. invoice निर्गामि बीजक .. 
over-head expenses = overhead outward pressure बहिर्मुख निपीड m. charges oval अण्ड-, अण्डाकार mfn. 
overhead valves Automobile ferstar oval glasses अण्डोपनेत्र. 
कपाटn. oval window गवाक्ष m. 
over-irradiation Zool. अति-प्रविकिरण ovarian artery Zool. अण्डाकार-रोहिणी : ovarian compound Pharm. अण्डाशय- overlapvb. अतिछादन 1. 
संयोग m. 
overlapping अतिछादी (-इन्) mfn. ovarianextract Pharm. अण्डाशय-निःसार overlying अधिशायी (-इन्) mfn. 
overproduction I Com. अध्युत्पादन . ovarian follicule Zool. अण्ड-स्य निकाf. 2 Zool. अत्युत्पादन 1. ovarian hormone अण्डाशय-न्यासर्ग m. over-proof spirit (o. p.) = above ovariotomy=spaying Zool. (female p roof spirit अतिसुषवोद (अ. सु.) 
castration to remove ovaries) oversee vb. अधिदर्शन n. अण्डाशयाकर्षण . 
overseer अधिदर्शक m. ovary Bat. अण्डाशय m. 
over-stimulation Zool. अत्युद्दीपन 1. ovate Bot. अण्डवत् mfn. 
over-stock अधिस्कन्ध m. oven single m. 
over-subscribed capital अधिप्राथित 
• glycerine o. मधुरी-कन्दुm. 
पुंजी . oven thermostat कन्दु-तापस्थाप् m. over-supply अधिदाय m., अधिपूर्ति . ovenware कन्दुभाण्डn. 
over-time अधिसमय m. over-I अति 
overtone Music उपरि-तान m. . ... 2 Com. अधि..:; 
over-trading अधिपणन . 648 
m. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
overturn=capsize vb. उच्चाटन .. of oxygen replacing carbon, esp. 
(शकटोच्चाटन 'overturning a cart in a ring) ज 
from भागवत-पुराण; Hindi उलटना) oxacid Chem. जाम्ल.. over-work अधिकर्म n. 
oxacid red Col. Ind. जाम्ल रक्त m. ovicapsule Zool. अण्डप्रावर m. 
oxa-diazol, ox-diazole Chem. जू oviduct Zool. अण्ड-प्रणाली 
द्वयजवा, जा-द्वयजवा. oviparous Zool. अण्डज mfn., अण्डसू. oxal-, oxalo- (oxalic) Chem. तिग्म 
(ancient word) 
(तिग्मिक) oviposit vb. अण्डनिधान ।. 
oxalate Chem, ferrate 12. ovipositor Zool. (an organ for depo- oxalic Chem. तिम्मिक mfn. 
siting eggs) अण्डनिधाता (-1) m., o.acid तिग्मिक अम्ल M. अण्डनिधानांग . 
-oxaline Chem. - 
ffit f. ovisac Zool. अण्डस्यून m. 
Oxalis Bot. अम्ललोणीति . (-ति for प्रजाति ovoid अण्डरूप, अण्डाकार mfn. 
genus) ovule Bot. x पर्यण्ड n. 
0. corniculata #THEFT FTstoft f. 2 (unfertilized seed) Bot. पूर्वबीज n. oxalo-, oxal- (oxalic) Chem. तिग्म (अनिषिक्त बीज) 
(तिग्मिक) ovum I Anat. (a female germ cell) oxalyl Chem. तिग्मल 1. 
स्त्रीबीज 
oxamate (from oxamic) Chem. færre 2 Parasitol. अण्डैक 7. (a single cell तिक्तीय n. from which the embryo deve- oxamic acid (oxalict-amide) Chem. lops; not अण्ड) 
तिग्मतिक्तेयिक अम्ल n. 3=eggcell Bot. अण्डकोशा f. ox-amide (oxalic + amido) Chem. 45egg=oosphere Bof. que n. 
तिग्म-तिक्तेय . owe vb. Com. धारण करना, ऋणी होना, ox-amidine (oxygen+amido) Chem. 
__ ऋणबद्ध होना (Hindi) 
जा-तिक्तेयी. owl उलक m. 
oxamine black Col. Ind. जातिक्ती काल owl clip उलू क-स्वज m. 
m.. owlet = little owl Zool. क्षुद्रोलूक m. o. blue जातिक्ती नील m. owner स्वामी (-इन) M. 
o. bordeaux जातिक्ती कपिशक m. ownership Fatfaca n. 
o. brilliant light green जातिक्ती ox वृषभ . 
भासुर लघु हरि m. ox-, oxal- (oxalic)Chem. तिग्म- (तिग्मिक) o. brilliant ted जातिक्ती भासुर रक्त ox- (oxygen) Cbem. जा 
m. oxa-ज- . 
o. brilliant violet जातिक्ती भासुर oxo- जर 
___ नीललोहित m. oxy- जार 
o. brown जातिक्ती बn. oxa- Chem. (denoting the presence o. copper-blue जातिक्तीताम्र-नील m. 
649﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
0. dark blue strierent after fram. ox-azole (oxygen t azole) Chem. 0. dark brown FIFTAT FETT m. Feat f. 0. dark green graffi AfaT eft m. ox-blood red Col. Ind. 297-ETT TFT o. developer rferrini far* m. m. 0. fast bordeaux faecat fett fq- ox-diazole Chem. 5-guar f. 
T4 m. 
Oxford chrome=yellow ocher 0. fast pink Firat FPT TTT* m. Oxford ocher=yellow ocher o. fast red feat fete TFT m. oxidant (an oxidizing agent) Fremaaf o. field grey जातिक्ती सेना धूसर m. (T) m. o. garnet जातिक्ती निरक्त m. 
oxidase (oxidation + -ase) Biochem. 0. green rfaraft fm. 
FITRUS . 0. light blue fait par m. oxidate=oxidize o. light brown ffagit team. oxidation Chem. (act or process o. light green जातिवती लघु हरिm. of oxidizing) orzu n., STRUTT f. 0. maroon fact 1797 m. 
0. black Col. Ind. TRUT TOT m. 0. Orange Fiat Frer m. 
0. centre Zool. FITUT F n. o. red जातिक्ती रक्त m. 
0. reduction जारण प्रह्रासन । 0. scarlet fait TTT m. 
oxidator (an oxidizer; a contrivance 0. sky-blue ifrat TT-TT m. for causing a current of air to 0. violet जातिक्ती नीललोहित m.. 
impinge on the flame of Argand ox-ammite (oxalictammonium of lamp) TTT (-) m. 
-ite) Mineral. farfafeer m. (-35% oxide Chem. TTT n. , for efter mineral) 
0. blue=cobalt blue to a oxan, oxane [oxy (oxygen) for 
care TT, ef m. -an] Chem. Forey 7., 973 m. (CNO) 0. brown FTĪT TI, FRETRAIT m. a- oxan -für 17., H-TH37 m. 
0. of iron 4-TTT n. B-oxan r-foret n., 1-57T3T m. 
o. of nitrogen parfa-tria n. oxanate Chem. Forutzt, spirt n. 
0. purple Trga TOTEUT, fara fir FOT Oxanesoxan oxanic acid Chem. for free, T## FT 0. red TT TT m. 
0. yellow = yellow ocher Col. ox-anilate Chem. farHTE N. 
Ind. जारेय पीत m. ox-anilic (oxalic to aniline) Chem. oxidic Chem, refera infr. 
fr-festi mfn. 
0. oxides orifeSTÈT n. o, acid तिग्मनीलिक अम्ल . 
oxidimetric Chem, arcurfiau mfn. ox-anilide Chem. faria n. oxidimetry Chem. Juffer f. ox-azine foxygen-t-azine =azoxine oxidizability stuftat f. 
oxidizable जारणीय mfm. 650, 
m. 
n." 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
1. 
oxidization Chem, EITTUT 1h. 
catalyst) for m., fast f. oxidize vb. Chem. TCUT n. 
(from ETE FATTU) oxidized Chem. जारित mfn. 
oxonic (oxygen 77*- carbonic SİTT 0. oil (specif. a blown oil) stream fp) Chem. Fifta mfn. 
anh. 
0. acid siit 7 n. 0. silver (silver darkened with a oxonium (oxygen t-ammonium) Chem. 
coating of sulphide) etfa 27 Targ m. 
ox-ozone (oxy- to ozone) Chem. 317 oxidizer Chem. (one who or that TF m. 
which oxidizes; specif. an oxidi- ox-ozonide Chem. 47-TTU 17. zing agent, as nitric acid, chro- Oxus Geog. a4 m. (Oxus is from Skt. 
mic acid) जारयिता (-त.) m. 
2) oxidizing Chem. FTITUT N. 
oxy- (oxygen) Chem. FT 0. action TRUT-FAT f. 
oxy adj. Chem. Fra mfn. 0. agent Turf () m. oxy-acetylene Chem. 517- oxido- (oxide) Chem. FT24 
mfn. oxido adj. Chem. TT, TTTF mfn. o. blowpipe जारशक्तलेन्य धमनाड . oxim=oxime 
oxy-acid Chem. FTIGTET 1. oximate vb. Chem. FTITUT N. 
oxy acid blue Col. Ind. ETT FT TTT (to convert into an oxime) fa- m. 
TUT 1. 
oxy acid violet Col. Ind. ETT # oximation Chem. जावीयन 1. 
famifen m. oxime, oxim (oxygentimide) Chem. oxy-aldehyde Chem. Er-toqa m. 
ftfa n. (57*+fafarena) 
oxy-amine Chem, stra-farrêt f.' 0. group fifa-anim. 
oxy-anthracene Chem. art-famThu2 n. -oximic Chem. -5fafisi 
oxyazine- Chem. Erritat oximido-, oximino-Chem. (denoting oxyazo- Chem. ETTST 
presence of the oxime group oxy-azo adj. ETTTTTT, STRETCF mfn. :NOH; isonitroso-) 751 
oxy-benz-aldehyde Chem. ET-79 moxin Chem. -fatih 
ayam. ox-indole Chem. Ett-Fratreat f.. oxy-benzyl Chem. FTT-TTTET 16. oxine (oxal for oxalict: -ine) Chem. oxy-bromide Chem, pre-seen. 
fertief 
oxy-calcium adj. Stra-aurig mfn. oxo-(oxygen) Chem. - (distingui- oxy-calorimeter ihr m. 
shed from oxy-57-) 
oxy-camphor Chem. TTT m. -oxolan Chem. - Tfaru n. . 
oxy-caproic Chem. HT-foi mfn. oxone Chem. (fused sodium per- oxy-carbonate Chem. EITTIUTTO n. oxide with traces of CuO as oxy-cellulose Chem. TTT-TTT? n. 
691 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
oxy-chlorate Chem. जार-नीरीय 
n 
o . yellow जारद्वितिक्ती पीत m. oxy-chloric, oxy-chlorine adj. oxydiaminogen Col. Ind. जारद्वि-- 
Chem. जार-नीरिक, जार-नीरजी mfn. तिक्तीजन m. oxy-chloride Chem. जार-नीरेय n. oxydianil yellow Col. Ind. जारद्विनील oxy-cholesterol जार-पैत्तव m. 
पीत m. oxy-cholic जार-पित्तिक mfn. 
oxydiazol black Col. Ind. जारद्वयजव oxy-chromatin (which stains with 
काल m. acid dyes; acidic chromatin) FT o. blue जारद्वयजव नील m. भिवणि . 
o. brown जारद्वयजव बभ्रु m. oxychrome black Col. Ind. जारवर्णक o. red-brown जारद्वयजव रक्त-बघ्र m. 
काल m. 
o. yellow-brown जारद्वचजव पीत-बभ्र o. blue जारवर्णक नील m. 
m. o. blue-black जारवर्णक नील-कृष्ण m. oxyether adj. जार-दक्षु mfn. 0. brown जारवर्णक बभ्रु m. 
oxy-ethyl Chem. जार-दक्षुल n. o. dark green जारवर्णक असित हरि m. oxy-fatty acid जार-स्नेहीय अम्ल n. o. garnet जारवर्णक निरक्त m. . oxy-fluoride Chem. जार-तरस्वेय . o. orange जारवर्णक नारंग m. . oxy-gas adj. जार-वाति mfn. 0. violet जारवर्णक नीललोहित m. oxygen Chem. जारक m. o. yellow जारवर्णक पीत m. 
0.-acetylene cutting जारक-शुक्तलेन्य oxy-chromine Col. Ind. जार-वर्णी /. 
कर्तन n. oxy-cinnamic Chem. जार-दारुसितिक 0.-acetylene welding जारक-शुक्त 
लेन्य संधान . oxy-cobalt-ammineChem. जार-केत्वातु 0. acid जारक अम्ल n. 
तिजी. 
o. consumption Zool. जारकोपभोग oxy-coumarin Chem. जार-अनन्तमूलि f. m. oxy-cyanide-Chem. जार-श्यामेय .. 
o. cubes जारक-धन m. oxycyanine Col. Ind. जारश्यामी f. oxygenant (an oxidizing agent) 
o. black जारश्यामी काल m. 
जारणकर्ता (-) m. oxy-diacetic acid Chem. जार-द्विशुक्तिक oxygenate vb. Chem. जारकण 2. (from 
अम्ल . 
जारकयति) oxydiamine black Col. Ind. जार I (to. impregnate with oxygen) 
द्वितिक्ती काल m. 
जारक-व्यापन .. 0. blue जारद्वितिक्ती नील . 
2 (to combine with oxygen) o. brown जारद्वितिक्ती बभ्रु m. 
जारक-योजन n. o. carbon जारद्वितिक्ती प्रांगार m. 3 (to treat with oxygen) जारक porange जारद्वितिक्ती नारंग m. 
साधन .. ared जारद्वितिक्ती रक्त m. 
4=Oxidize Reviolet जारद्वितिक्ती नीललोहित m. oxygenated जारकित mfn. 
mfn. 
652 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
0. water (water impregnated -oxylase Chem. -FRE m. 
with oxygen gas) GT280 Tn. -oxylate Chem. -5764 n. oxygenation Chem. TTFUT n. 
-oxylic Chem. -rfa mfn. oxygenator (something which oxy- oxy-mandelic Chem. ste-ataf* mfn. genates, as a lung) Tafutar (-) oxymel (Gk. Oxus sour-t-meli ) 
Pharm. (a medicated syrup of =oxidizer refunT (-) m. 
vinegar and honey) z n. oxygenerator (a machine for mak- o. of squill = oxymel scillae 
_ing oxygen) जारक-जनित्र . 
(oxymel scill.) 2454715-7#. oxygen-hydrogen welding #1 oxy-methylene Chem. FTT-BTCF n. 
COTT-FETTT n. 
oxy-morphine Chem. TT- TT f. oxygenic Chem. mfn. 
oxy-muriate Chem. Tri-fasi n. oxygenicity Chem. Erfitat f. oxy-muriatic Chem. -facha mfn. oxygenium Pharm. (Latinized form oxy-naphthoic Chem. FT- 17 
of oxygen) 474 m. 
mfn. oxygenize=oxidize, oxygenate oxy-naphtho-quinone Chem. Fit oxygenizer Chem. arcu af (-7) m. -farart f. . oxygen-mixture Chem. ETT#-F#7 n. oxy-narcotine artist f. oxygenous Chem. 3744 min. oxy-nitrate Chem. 5772-unite n. oxygen ratio=acidity coefficient oxy-nitrite Chem. ST-4fea n. 
जारक-निष्पत्ति 
oxy-phenine Col. Ind. Te-af f. oxy-halide Chem. GTE-TTTT n. 
0. gold Tigaif Fauf m. oxy-hemoglobin Fr-zturact for f. oxy-phenol Chem. Wrt-eria m. oxy-hydrate Chem. FITOTT n. oxy-phenyl Chem. TRAGERET 1. oxy-hydric otrafi mfn. 
oxyphil=eosinophil (stains hav oxy-hydrogen adj. Chem. FTIGUA ing affinity for acid dyes) Ft 
FUmfn. oxy-hydrogen blowpipe or torch oxyphilic aftenen mfn. 
ETTIGUET 044-775 1... cat f. 
oxy-phosphate Chem. Er-Hitrate n. oxy-hydrogen flame Phys. ETTIGUA- oxy-phthalic Chem. Typifaa mfn. 
Falaf. 
oxy-picric Chem. 51T-Fęfaa mfn. oxy-hydrogen light ETTIGHT-TATT I. oxy-proline Chem. 5TTE-THETt f. oxy-hydrogen microscope TTTTGGET oxy-propionic Chem. FTT-HF mfn. 
quater m. 
oxy-purine Chem. Art-fetit f. oxy-iodide adj. Chem. 51- 
54 mfn. oxyquinaseptol = diaphtherin oxy-ketone Chem. FT-711977 f. oxy-quinoline Chem, stre-favarait f. oxyl (oxy- $75-to-yl -zy) Chem. FTTTET O. sulphate refavetat Teata n. 
• oxy-quinone Chem, pre-farger f. 653 
mfn. 
n. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
oxy-salicylic Chem. जार-नम्रलिक mfn. oz. ap. ( apothecaries' ounce) भै. शु. oxy-salt Chem. जार-लवण 1. 
(भैषजिक शुक्ति) oxy-stearic Chem. जार-वसिक mfn. ozena Med. अपीनस M. (from सुश्रुत) Oxystelma Bot. Fareni gratfat f. (-fa for ozocerite = earth wax Mineral. 
प्रजाति genus) 
भूसिक्थ. O. esculentum सामान्य तिक्तदुग्धा . ozone [ Great Oxford Dictionary: oxy-sulphate Chem. जार-शुल्बीय. Gk. ozein to smell nfun -one (here oxy-sulphide Chem. जार-शुल्बेय .. 
-one is not from ketone)] Chem. oxy-terpene Chem. जार-सरलेन्या . 
प्रजारक m. (it is a much more oxy-Tobias acid Chem. जाराप्युत्तिशु powerful oxidizer than oxygen 
अम्ल . 
gas) oxy-toluene Chem. जार-विरालेन्या . 
o. cage प्रजारक-पञ्जर n. Oxyuroidea (a superfamily; oeso- ozonide Chem. Sopraat n. 
phagus with a bulb) कन्दनिगल-प्रवंश ozonized oxygen प्रजारकित जारक 
m. 
m. -o-y1 ऊल (from मूल) 
ozonizer Chem. प्रजारक-साधित्र . ___xyloyl काष्ठूलn. 
ozono-meter प्रजारक-मान m. oyster शुक्ति, खाद्य-शुक्ति f. 
oz. t. (ounce troy; 20 pennyweights) oz. (ounce) शु. (शुक्तिका) 
___ शु. (शुक्ति), है. शु. (हैम शुक्ति) 
P(perianth) Bot. 4 (परिपुष्प) p. (pint) श. (शराव) P (phosphorus) Chem. भ (भास्वर) pr, para- Chem. प-, परा P. (Proteus) ना. (नानारूप) Pa (protoactinium) Chem. 4 (प्रजातु) pacco direct black (Pacco is 
abbreviated from Palatine Ani line and Chemical Corp. प्रासाद विनीली तथा रसायनिक निगम, New York) Col. Ind. प्रा. वि. नि. अनाश्रित काल m. p. direct brown प्रा.वि.नि.अनाश्रित . बभ्रु m. 
• p.direct fastred प्रा. वि. नि. अनाश्रित '' - स्थिर रक्त m. 
pi green प्रा. वि. नि. हरि m. 
pace x गति f. 
2 Drill पद n. pachytene Biol. स्थूलांशु m. Pachytylus (a genus of locusts) 
Zool. शरभाति f. (-प्राति for प्रजाति genus) P. migratorius = migratory 
locust प्रव्राजी शरभ m. Pacific blue Col. Ind. प्रशान्त नील m. Pacinian corpuscle or body Anat. 
प्रस्पर्श देहाणु m. pack vb. (to envelope) संवेष्टन n. package संवेष्टन N., संवेष्ट m. pack animal भार-पशु, भारवाही पशु m. packcloth संवेष्टन-वस्त्र ।. packer संवेष्टक m., संवेष्टित्र n. (machine) packet (a small package) ja focopil f. 
654 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
packing संवेष्टन' 1., संवेष्टी (-इन् ) m. 
p. charges Com. संवेष्टन-व्यय m. p. material संवेष्टन-सामग्री 
p. paper संवेष्टि पत्र, संवेष्टन-पत्र 2. packing pieces Mach. भरण-खण्ड m. packing ring Mach. संवेष्टन-वलय m. pad r (as a writing pad) चयm. 
2 (ink-pad) मसी-तल्प m. 3 Anat. पूर m. 
4 Zool. उपबह m. paddle क्षेपणी. Paederia Bot. ThrUIFE f. (-for for 
प्रजाति genus) 
P. foetida सामान्य प्रसारणी. paedogenesis Zool. (production of 
offspring by larval forms) डिम्भा- 
ज्जनन . paeonine=aurine R paid in full Com. पूर्णदत्त, परिदत्त mfn. paid-up capital.Com. परिदत्त-पुंजी,प्राप्त- 
पुंजी. 
p. up shares परिदत्त अंश m. pail system Hygiene शौचपात्र-पद्धति f. 
(here pail stands for शौचपात्र only) pain पीडा. paint n. रंगलेप m. paint vb. आलेपन, रंगलेपन, लेपचित्रण M. (to 
portray with paints) paint and varnish apparatus TET 
तथा लाक्षी-साधित्र n. painter चित्रकार m. painter's mussel Zool. चित्रकार शम्बक 
m. painting T लेपचित्र, चित्रण n. 
2 रंगलेपन . pair युग्म, द्वय. pair of compasses कर्कट m. . pair of dividers विभाजक m. 
pair of even numbers Math. युग्म 
संख्या-द्वय . pair of lungs Zool. क्लोम-युग्म n. pair of odd numbers Math. अयुग्म 
संख्या-द्वय n. pair of values Math. अर्हा-युग्म n. palace प्रासाद m. palace car Ry. प्रासाद-यान 1. palachrome blue Col. Ind. (pala-is 
short for Palatine Aniline and Chemical Corp., New York) प्रासा.-वर्णक नील m. 
p. orange प्रासा.-वर्णक नारंग m. p. red प्रासा.-वर्णक रक्त m. 
p. yellow प्रासा.-वर्णक पीत m. Palaemon Zool. प्रचिंगटाति f. (आति for 
प्रजाति genus) Palaemonidae Zool. प्रचिंगटवंश m. Palaeognathae Zool. (birds having a 
primitive type of palate) आद्यतालुकाः 
m.pl. palaside blue GS=fast fuchsineG palatable आस्वाद्य mafn. palatal Anat. तालव्य mfn. palate Anat. तालु। palate bone Anat. तालु-अस्थि ।. palatine (palace) प्रासाद (in names of 
colours) palatine Anat. To mfn. palatine palatine bone Anat, 
तालव्य अस्थि . palatine artery Anat. तालव्य-रोहिणी. palatine black Col. Ind. प्रासाद काल 
m. p. chromate brown प्रासाद वर्णीय बभ्रु 
m. p. chrome black प्रासाद वर्णक काल 
m. 
655 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
¢ ¢ ÅÅÅ 
ag) 
p. chrome blue प्रासाद वर्णक नील m. palisade cells स्कम्भ-कोशा. p. chrome bordeaux प्रासाद वर्णक p. parenchyma स्कम्भ जीवितक m. 
#fara m. 
p. tissue F ifa f. p. chrome brown प्रासाद वर्णक बभ्रु pallad-ammine Chem. निचूष-तिजी. 
palladic Chem. निचूषिक mfn. chrome claret प्रासाद वर्णक रक्तिरा palladi-ferous Chem. निचूष-भर mfre. 
palladio- (palladium) Chem. Fan p. chromegreen प्रासाद वर्णक हरिm. (i 
chrome red yiere quiet atm. palladious=palladous Chem. FEST p. chrome violet FTTTC quia ofisi mfn. 
sifat m. 
palladium Chem. feqa. m. p. light yellow STETT TT ota m. p. chloride निचूषातु नीरेय . p. red प्रासाद रक्त m. 
p. foil fanary-cofin. p. scarlet प्रासाद शोण m. 
p. nitrate निचूषातु भूयीय 1. palatine bone Anat. 1964 FT N. p. sponge farqara-falsos n. 
p. canal 715704-Prer f. 
p. tube निचूषातु-नाल M. p. nerve art-war f. 
p. wire निचूषातु-तन्तु m. . palato-pterygo-quadrate bar Zool. pallado- Chem. For 
तालु-त्रिवेणी-चतुष्क-दण्ड m. 
pallado-di-ammine Chem. Firaq-fa palato-quadrate Zool. ar-caterfest fesat f. 
1. 
pallados-fareast pale पांडुर mfn. 
pallados-ammine Chem. For 64-fact p. blue fick titer mfn. p. yellow Tie fra mfn. 
palladous, palladious Chem. Faraon palea Bot. $997 m. 
mfn. pale blue mantle पांडुर नील प्रावार m. pallid पाण्डुर mfn. pale catechu=catechu afar m. palm লাল . paleo-biology 987-5facit f. 
Palmaceae Bot. 77T-ST 11. paleo-botany getrigat f. 
palmate (venation) Bot. aforata mfn. paleontology (deals with the life palmated newt = Triturus palmi 
of past geological periods) 927 pes Zool. (the feet are webbed) .. fragt f., 
37759966 #efefit f. Paleozoic. Geol. 777-4704 n. 
palmately cleft Bot. afforae etui mfn. paleo-zoology ET-Tfuren f. , 
p.compounded at foran siya mfn. paletteknife=spatula रंगमिश्रण-क्षुरीf. p. divided पाणिवद् विभक्त mfn. 
=wm. 
palmatifid Bot. पाणिवद्-दर mfn. 'pale-yellow पांडुर-पीत mfn. 
palmati-form Bot. 97fu-Ha mfn. pale-yellowish rose TTECTIE TOTn. palmation Bot. Orforaat f. 
1 
m 
p. dividounded on flores as stoi mfn. 
656 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
palm cat = palm civet = toddy Pampur Geog. 48177 n. (it is celebrat 
cat Zool. -faciat m. 
ed for its cultivation of saffron) palmella stage Bot. (in which the pan 7759 1. 
single cells are held together in p. still 777- 1 n. similar gelatinous masses) - Panama bark = quillaia Pharm. para f. 
594979cm. palmitate Chem. तालीय. 
Panama black F-chlorazol black palmitic Chem. arfoi mfn. 
FFH palmitin Chem. The f. 
PanchayatsHUSTI f. (Sanchi Stone palmitoleic acid Chem. -fetei, Inscr. of Chandragupta II of the 
F -STUTE F7 n. (an acid found Gupta year 93), TUTT in marine animal oils) 
pancreas Anat. (a gland possessing palmitolic Chem. Fa mfn. 
all ferments) affuet () m. palm-lobate Bot. TT-TTHET mfn. pancreatic diverticulum Zool. - palm wax=ceroxyle ताल-सिक्थ. feruat TETETT N. palpapalpus Zool. मृश m. (/मृश् top.duct सर्वकिण्वि-प्रणाली . 
touch) 
p. juice affia-m. palpal organ Zool. (conveys sperms Pandanus Bot. Barfa f. (fa for 
to the genital orifice of the fe- Tottfa genus) male) T T (-) m. 
P. odoratissimus सामान्य केतकी f. palpebra Anat. वम .. 
pandemic diseases सार्वदेशिक रोग m. p. frontalis=upper eyelid Pandorina Bot. (16 cells, forming p. inferior=lower eyelid 
a sphere) -TISFET f (-fa for p. malaris=lower eyelid 
The genus) p. superior=upper eyelid panel तालिका f. p. tertia=nictitating membrane p. of chairmen सभापति-तालिका f. 
fra 3 m. . 
panel 4€, 99 m. palpebral ari mfn. 
control p. afrua m. p. conjunctiva ac m. (the panęs=glass panes #79-487 11. 
membrane that lines the eye- pangolin = scaly anteater Zool. 
· lids 
Team TSG m. p. fascia वर्म-स्तरी. 
Pangonius Parasitol. सूचिशुण्डाति f. p. vessels ar arferit f. (not 6-) (आति for प्रजाति genus) palpus=palp Zool. Tum. 
pan-head Mach. OCTE-FET na paludrine Pharm. (more effective panicle=compound raceme Bot. 
than quinine) sfararet f. 
4-9993 m. Pamirs Geog. 96 m. (Sino-Indian Panicum Bot. PUT#T# fa f (-for for 
Studies II, p. 92) 
attfa genus) 657 
42 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
P. italicum सामान्य श्यामाक m. 
p. red पत्र रक्त m. Panipat Geog. पाणिप्रस्थ 1. 
p. scarlet पत्र शोण m. Panjab Geog. पंचनद .. 
p. yellow पत्र पीत m. Pannetier's green=emerald green paper clips पत्र-स्वज m. Pantodonta Zool.('teeth are present paper fastener पत्र-बन्धक m. 
in fall series'-Parker and Has paper fish Zool.पत्र-मीन m. 
well) सर्वदन्ता: m.pl. 
paper industry पत्र-उद्योग m. pantoscopic सर्वेक्ष mfm. 
paper money पत्र-मुद्रा . p. glasses सर्वेक्ष उपनेत्र . 
paper nautilus Zool. (so called p. lens सर्वेक्ष वीक्ष m. 
from the delicate shell) मदु नाविक pantothemic acid Chem. (Gk. m. 
panto-themikos from 
paper release lever (in a type where) सर्वस्थानिक अम्ल .. 
writet) पत्र-मोक उद्याम m. Pantotheria Paleontol. भूरिदन्ताः m.pl. paper rupee पत्र-रूप्य n. pantry अन्नधानी ., अन्नकोष्ठ m. 
paper stand पत्र-स्थाम 1. panzer = armoured Mil. कवचित paper strips पत्र-पट्टी. 
mfn. 
paper-weight=letter-weight 97 papain=papainum gefe f. (short भार m. __ for एरंडकर्कटी) 
Papilio Zool. प्रजापत्याति f. (-आति for Papaver Bot. अहिफेनति f. (ति for प्रजाति storfa genus) 
genus) 
Papilionaceae Bot. प्रजापति-कुल 1. . P. somniferum सामान्य अहिफेन m. papilionaceous Bot. प्रजापतिरूप mfn. Papaveraceae Bot. अहिफेन-कुल 1. 
(प्रजापति butterfiy) Papaverales Bot. अहिफेन-गोत्र . Papilionidae Zool. (family of but papaverine अहिफेनकी f. 
terflies) प्रजापति-वंश m. papaya-papaw एरंडकर्कटी f. Papilioninae Zool. (a subfamily of paper पत्र, चीरक . 
____Papilionidae) प्रजापत्यनुवंश m. asbestos p. अदह पत्र n. 
papillar Anat. .अंकुर m., पिडिका f. paper black Col. Ind. पत्र काल m. _renal papillae वृक्क-पिंडिका f., 
p. blue पत्र नील m. 
वृक्क-अंकुर m. p. brilliant scarlet पत्र भासुर शोण 2 Bot. (a. small hair) रोमिका f. ____m. 
papillary border Ophthalmol. sfars p. brown पत्र बभ्रुm. 
तट m. p. deep black पत्र गाढकाल m. papillary. muscles columnae p. fast blue पत्र स्थिर नील m. 
carneae Anat. मांस-स्तम्भी. p. fast bordeaux पत्र स्थिर कपिशक papillate hair Bot. रोमिका. 
papilloma. Med. f (of the skin) "p. fast green पत्र स्थिर हरि m.. 
चर्मकील m. . . . 
658 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
2 (of the mucous membrane) 
अन्तश्चमकील m. pappus Bot. (a tuft crowning the 
ovary or fruit) रोमचूडा f. par Com. सम 
above p. अधिमूल्ये (Hindi अधिमूल्य 
पर) at p. सममूल्ये (Hindi सममूल्य पर) below p. अवमूल्ये (Hindi अवमूल्य पर) p. of exchange विनिमय-समार्च M. 
p. value सम मूल्य 1. para- Chem. परा parabasal apparatus Zool. FRITETT- 
साधिन .. parabasal body Zool. (body asso- 
iated with the base of the 
flagella) कशाधार-काय m. para black Col. Ind. परा काल m. 
p. blue परा नील m. p. brilliant orange परा भासुर 
नारंग m. p. bronze परा कांस्य m. p. brown परा बज्र m. p.dark green परा अंसित हरि m. p. fast blue परा स्थिर नील m. p. fast brown परा स्थिर बभ्रु m. p. fast green परा स्थिर हरिना. p. garnet परा निरक्त m. p. green परा हरिm. p. indigo blue परा निनील नील m. p. magenta परा धूम्रली f. p. olive परा तैलबदर m. p. orange परा नारंग m. p. red परा रक्त m. p. rosaniline base परा पाटलनीली 
पीठ .. p. roseine परा अरुणी p. scarlet परा शोण m. 
p. violet परा नीललोहित m. 
p. yellow परा पीत m. parabola Geon. एकेन्द्र १. (shortened 
from एक one+ उत्केन्द्रता eccentri 
city) parabolic Geom. एकेन्द्रीय mfn. parabolic curve Statistics Tears-27 n. paraboloid Geom. (surface generat 
ed by the rotation of a para 
bola. about its axis) एकेन्द्रज . paraboloidal एकेन्द्रजीय mfn. paracasein पराकिलाटिf. paracentral Anat. (lying near the 
centre) 347* mfn. parachordal Embryol. (situated on 
each side of the notochord) 
उभयतोमेरु nfn. parachute Mil. वायुछत्र 1. parachute mechanism Bot. वायुछत्र 
रचना. parachutist Mil. वायुछत्री (-इन्) m. paracolon Bact, fara n. paracoto=coto Pharm. प्रान्त्रवल्क M. para-cymene Chem. परा-निजीरेण्य . paradiamine black Col. Ind. परा 
द्वितिक्ती काल m. paradiazine Chem. पराधजीवी. paradiazol brown Col. Ind. पराद्वयजव 
बभ्रुm. paradox असद्भास, विरोधाभास m. paradurol=azoguard paradysentery अप्यतिसार m. (adiar 
thea resembling mild dysentery) paraffin (a waxy substance occuri 
ing in the earth as a constituent of petroleum or as a solid de posit) मृदसा f. (cf. मृत्तैल) p. blowlamp मद्वसा-धमदीप m. 
659﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
- 
- 
m. 
p. burner मृद्वसा-दाहक m. 
p. law Mech. समान्तरचतुर्भुज-नियम m. p. hydrocarbon मृद्वसा-उदांगार m. p. of forces Phys. बल-समान्तरचतुर्भुज p. lamp मृद्वसा-दीप m. 
m. p. oil मृद्वसा-तैल . 
p. of velocities Phys. प्रवेग-समान्तर paraffinum liquidum = liquid __ चतुर्भुज m. 
paraffin Pharm. तरल-मृदसा f. parallelopipe, parallelopiped paragene black Col. Ind. पराजन काल Geom. समान्तरानीक mfn. 
m. 
parallels of latitude Math. अक्षांश p. bordeaux पराजन कपिशक m. 
समान्तर । p. brown पराजन बभ्रु 2. 
parallel transverse line समान्तर-तिर्यग् p. corinth पराजन रोहित m. 
रेखा paraglossa (outer) Zool. बहिजिह्वा . parallel tubes समदिश नाल m. Paragonimus (ovary displaced to parallel venation Bot. समदिश नाडी 
one side)पाण्डिाशयाति. (-पाति for विन्यास m. प्रजाति genus) 
parallel vise समान्तर संग्रभm. P. ringeri (human lung Huke) paralysis Med. स्तम्भ, स्तम्भरोग, संस्तम्भ 
क्लोम पाण्डिाशय m. P. westermani-Distoma west- paramagnetic Phys. Teirfere frati mfn. 
ermani, D. ringeri, D. pul- Paramecium Zool. सृप्रिकाति f. (आति monale (causes parasitic or for प्रजाति genus) 
oriental hemoptysis) रक्तष्ठीव 2 (any individual of the genus) पाण्डिाशय m. 
सृप्रिका . paragraph कण्डिका f. 
P.caudatum=slipper animal paralactic acid=sarcolactic acid _cule सामान्य सृप्रिका f=सृप्र अणुप्राणी 
Chem. परादुग्धिक अम्ल = पेशी-दुग्धिक (-इन्) m. अम्ल n. 
para-menispermine परा-काकफली . paraldehyde black Col. Ind. परासुव्युद parameter Math. प्राचल m. 
काल m. 
p. of a diameter serat f. , parallax Phys. भेदाभास m. 
p. of distribution वंटन-प्राचल m. parallel 1 (keeping at the same dis- parametric equation Math. प्राचल 
tance at all parts) समान्तर mfn. 
समीकार m. 2 (with like direction) समदिश mfn. paramine Col. Ind. परातिक्ती . p. venation Bot. समदिश नाडीविन्यास p. black परातिक्ती काल m. 
m. 
p. blue परातिक्ती नील m. 'parallelism Math. समान्तरता . 
p. brown परातिक्ती बm. -parallel key Macb. समान्तर-कीला f. 
p. fast bordeaux परातिक्ती स्थिर parallelogram, Math. समान्तर-चतुर्भुज कपिशक m. 
p. fast brown परातिक्ती स्थिर बन m. 660 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
p. fast orange परातिकती स्थिर नारंग paraplasm (additional material emr 
m. 
bedded in the protoplasm) अधि p. fast red articlarie FESTT TT m. घटन n. p. fast violet परातिक्ती स्थिर नीललोहित paraplegia Med. अधराघात m. 
parapodium Zool. अभितश्चरण, अभिचरण p. fast yellow परातिक्ती स्थिर पीत M. p. green परातिक्ती हरि m. 
parapophysis Zool. काय-वर्ष m. (from p. orange परातिकती नारंग m. 
कीकसकाय-वर्ध process arising from p. sky blue परातिक्ती आकाश नील m. the vertebral centrum) p. violet परातिक्ती नीललोहित m. para red = blood red अधिरक्तापीत, p. yellow परातिक्ती पीत m. 
रुधिर रक्त M. Paramphistomidae (a family) उभ- para-rosaniline Chem. परा-पाटलनीली. 
यतश्चूष-वंश m. 
p. base Fetele marir fra n. Paramphistomoidea (a superfamily pararoseine Chem. Tevit f. 
having two suckers situated at pararosolic acid Chem. परापाटलविक 
either extremity) उभयतश्चूष-प्रवंशm. अम्ल n. paramylum Bot. (a carbohydrate parasite परजीवी (-इन् ) m. ____allied to starch) परामण्ड n. 
parasitic पारजैविक mfn. paranil Col. Ind. परानीलm. 
parasitical cuckoo Zool. परभृत, अन्य p. black परानील काल m. 
पुष्ट m. p. bordeaux परानील कपिशक m. parasiticide परजीविघ्न m. p. brown परानील बभ्रु m. 
parasitic roots Bot. परजीवि मूल . p. green परानील हरि m. 
parasitidae Zool. (a family) परजीवि p. olive परानील तैलबदर m. 
वंश m. p. yellow परानील पीत m. 
parasitifer परजीविभर m. paranitraniline Col. Ind. पराभूयनीली. parasitiferism (a. delusion of har 
p. red पराभूयनीली रक्त m. 
bouring worms) परजीविभ्रम m. paraphenine yellow Col. Ind. quiaf parasitism I (state of being a para 
पीत m. 
site) परजीविता . paraphenylene Chem. परादर्शलेन्यn. 2 (infestation with parasites) पर paraphenylene blue Col. Ind. परादर्श जीविसंचार m. 
लेन्य नील m. 
parasitization (invasion by para p.-diamine परादर्शलेन्य-द्वितिक्ती f. 
sites) परजीव्याक्रमण 1. p. grey परादर्शलेन्य धूसर m. 
parasitocidal (destructive to para p. violet परादर्शलेन्य नीललोहित,m. 
sites) परजीविहा (-हन्) mfn. paraphosphine Col. Ind. पराभास्वीf. parasitogenic (caused by parasites) paraphysis Bot. (a sterile filament) परजीविज mfn. 
वन्ध्य, वन्ध्यांशु m. 
parasitoid परजीव्याभ mfn. 
661 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
parasitologist परजीविज्ञ m. 
p.-office पोटली-कार्यालय m. parasitology पारजैविकी . परजीवि-शास्त्र railway p. office संयान-पोटली 
. 
कार्यालय m. parasitophobia परजीविभी . 
parchment चर्मपत्र. parasitosis Med. (infestation with parchment paper चर्मपत्र, चर्मचीरक . ___parasites) परजीवि-संचार m. 
pardon vb. क्षमण . parasitotrope परजीव्यावर्त mfn. pareira brava (Port. parreira vine parasitotropic=parasitotrope परजी + brava wild)=pareira वनवल्ली f. 
व्यावर्त mfn. 
parenchyma I Anat., Bot., Zool. parasitotropism = parasitotropy (in all senses) संप्रोति . 
परजीव्यावर्तना f. 
2 Bot. (living tissue) जीवितक m. parasphenoid bone Zool. (T-shaped parenchymatous cell Bot. जीवितक 
___bone) रोस्थि । (T-ब्राह्म रो, i.e. रो कोशा. 
as written in the Brahmi script) parenchymatous tissue Bot. जीवितक parasulphon bronze Col. Ind. परा- ऊति . 
शुल्बा कांस्य M. 
parent (sg.) माता, पिता, जनक m. p. brown पराशुल्बा बभ्रुm. 
parental पैतृक mfn. parasympathetic nervous system parental care पैलक पालन-पोषण n. 
(the second autonomic nervous parental characters Biol. पैतक लक्षण ।. system) द्वितीय स्वायत्त-चेता-संहति, parenteral Anat. व्यान्त्रिक mfn. 
कर्परत्रिक-चेता-संहति . (cranio-sacral) p. digestion व्यान्त्रिक पाचन ॥. parathyrin उपगलग्रंथिकि. 
parentheses=round brackets () parathyroid = parathyroid gland गोलाभिवार m. 
__Zool. उपगलग्रंथि m. 
parents माता पिता (Hindi), पितरौ parathyroid tetany Zool. उपगल ग्रन्थिग्रह (Hindi,Marathi, etc. पितर), जनक m. 
m. 
parent tree Bot. पितृवृक्ष m. paratroops Mil. छत्रसेना f. 
paries=parietes Anat, strait m. paratyphoid Med. अप्यान्त्रज्वर m. parietal n. Anat. पार्श्वकपाल 1. paraxanthine ceraian f. 
parietal=parietical adj. I Bot. (as paraxial उपाक्ष mfn. 
placentation) farferaat mfn. paraxial focus Optics (in the imme 2 Anat. प्राचीर 
diate neighbourhood of the p. layer = somatic layer Zool. optical axis) उपाक्ष-नाभि . 
प्राचीर-स्तर m. Parazoa==Porifera. 
p. membrane प्राचीर कला/. parazol Col. Ind. पराजवm. 
p. pericardium प्राचीर-परिहृत् m. p. brown पराजव बभ्र m. 
p. peritoneum प्राचीरोदरच्छद m. parcel Com. पोटली, पोटलिका 
p. placenta Bot. भित्तिलग्न जराय।. p.-clerk पोटली-लिपिक m. 
p. pleura प्राचीर परिक्लोम m. 662 
aan 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
Parietales Bot. भित्तिजरायुगोत्र n. (parie- parotid gland=parotis Anat. उपकर्ण 
tal placenta भित्तिलग्न जरायु) 
ग्रन्थि m. parietes Anat. प्राचीर m. 
-parous -सृट् (fr. Vसृज्) parietical=parietal 
Parrish's food=chemical food pari-pinnate Bot. सम-पक्षवत् mfn. ____Pharm. रसायनिक अन्न . Paris black=bone black 
Parrish's syrup=compound syrup P. blue=Chinese blue 
of ferrous phosphate Pharm. P. green=light green 
संयत अयस्य भास्वीय मिष्टोद n. . P. ochre=golden ochre 
parrot green Col. Ind. शुक हरि m. P, red=Indian red 
pars anterior Zool. अग्र भाग m. P. violet-methyl violet 
pars intermedia Zool. अन्तःस्थ भाग m. P. white=pearl white 
patsley प्राजमोदा .(प्र-अजमोदा) P. yellow=new yellow 
pats nervosa Zool. चेता-भाग m. parity Math. समाहता 
pars plana=orbiculus ciliaris Oph Parliament (the English Parliament) thalmol. अवलि-भाग m. 
आंगल-संसद् . 
pars plicata=corona ciliaris Oph parliament संसद् . 
thalmol. वलि-भाग m. p. house संसद्-भवन ।. 
pars tuberalis Zool. ककद-भाग m. p. man संसज्जन m. 
part अंग ., अवयव, भाग m. (Bot.) parliamentarian I संसत्पक्ष्य m. 
parthenocarpy Bot. (production of 2 संसत्पंडित m. 
fruits without pollination) अपराग parliamentarianism संसद्राजता. 
फलन ।. parliamentarily संसद्वत् 
parthenogenesis Biol. (reproduc parliamentarism I संसदा-शासन (संसदा tion by an unfertilized egg) 
"by संसद्'), संसद्-शासन 1. 
अनिषिक्त-जनन . 2 संसद्राजता f. 
parthenogonidium Bot. अनिषिक्तजनक parliamentary संसदीय mfn. 
m. p. government संसदीय शासन n. parthenospore Bot. अनिषिक्तजबीजाणु p. oath संसदीय शपथ m. 
m. p. secretary संसत्-सचिव m. 
partial आंशिक, अपूर्ण mfn., खण्ड-, किंचित् parliamenter=member of parlia p. association Statistics आंशिक 
ment संसद्य m. 
सम्बन्ध m. Parmelia Bot. Faretta afat f. (-fa for p. cleavage = incomplete 
प्रजाति genus) 
cleavage = meroblastic P. perlata सामान्य शिलावल्क m. ___cleavage Zool. अपूर्ण भाजन 2. parotid Anat. उपकर्ण mfy. 
p. correlation आशिक सहसम्बन्ध m. parotid duct Anat. उपकर्ण-प्रणाली . p. eclipse Astron. अांशिक ग्रहण . parotidean Anat. औपकर्णिक afn. 
p. endorsement आंशिक-पृष्ठांकना f. 663 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
MARAM 
MAR 
A 
infm. 
p. fraction Math. आंशिक भिन्न m. financing p. अर्थदायी भागीm. partially bad debts Com. अंशतः अप्राप्य limited p. सीमित भागी m. 
ऋण .. 
nominal p. नाममात्र भागीm. partially evacuated अंशतः शून्यकित quasi p. आभास भागी, भागिकल्प m. 
imfn. (from शून्यक vacuum) partnership Com. भागिता f. partially excluded areas अंशतः p. account भागिता-लेखा. 
अपवजित प्रदेश m. 
p. at will यथेच्छ-भागिता partially soluble förfez-faca mfn. p. deed भागिता-संलेख m. partial product Matb. आंशिक गुणन p. firm भागिता-सार्थ m. 
फल n. 
conversion of p. भागिता-रूपान्तरण 2. partial skewness Statistics ifTE dissolution of p. भागिता-प्रविलयन । 
विषमता 
part-payment Com. अंशतः शोधन 1. particle लव m. 
part-time In. अंश काल m. particular I विशिष्ट, विशेष (special) 2 adj. अंशकालिक mfn. 
part-time courses अंशकाल पाठचर्या. p. agent विशेष अभिकर्ता (-त) m. part-time worker अंशकाल कर्मी (-इन) p. class faster af m. 
m. p. enunciation Math. विशिष्ट-प्रतिज्ञा party पक्ष m. 
party in power अधिकारारुढ पक्ष m. p. lien Com. विशिष्ट ग्रहणाधिकार m. (current in Marathi) parting flask पृथक्कर पलिघm. 
Pascal's law Phys. (a fluid transmits partite Bot. (incision) विदर m. 
pressures equally in all direc partition I Math. भागीकरण । 
tions) प्रवाहि-निपीड-नियम m. 2 Law वंटन .. 
Paspalum Bot. (a kind of millet) 3 व्यवधान . 
उपकंगुति . (-ति for प्रजाति genus) partition coefficient = distribu- pasque flower = pulsatilla Pharm. 
tion coefficient Chem. वंटन-गुणक (apetalous flowers) अदल-पुष्प १. .. m. 
pass n. प्रवेशपत्र n. partition wall Bot. व्यवधान-भित्ति pass vb. I गमन'. partly Com. अंशतः 
2 पारण. p. finished goods अर्धकृत वस्तु . p. into अन्तर्नयन । p. paid shares अंशतोदत्त अंश m. 
p. over उपरिष्टात्पारण. p. renewed अंशतो नवकृत mfn. 
p. through मध्यात्पारण.. partner Com. भागी (-इन् ) m. 
passage मार्ग, पथ m., यात्रा f., पारण.. active p. सक्रिय भागीm.. 
passage allowance यात्रा-अधिदेय. 
• admission of p. भागि-प्रवेशm. 
passage cell Bot. मार्ग-कोशा f. . death of p. भागि-मृत्यु m. 
passage of light Ophthalmol. प्रकाश . dormant p. निष्क्रिय भागी m. 
गमन . . . 664 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
FE. 
pass-book Com. Tre#-featfr f. 
Past. bollingeri, Past. bovi. passed उत्तीर्ण mfn. 
septica (from the blood and passenger utal, afeta m. 
fluids of animals dying of passenger cabin Civil Aviation form European cattle plague) पशुघ्न द्वि. 
#tfiskt f. 
Past. boviseptica 977 passenger car Rly. I qf24-TIT 1. 
Past. bubaliseptica (causes bar 2=coach Fact n. 
bone in water buffalos) महिषघ्न passenger express locomotive Rly. 
arerai #727 7777 n. 
Past. cholerae gallinarum. See passenger locomotive Ry. पथिक Past. aviseptica 
aft n. 
Past. cholerae suis सूकर-विषची द्वि. passenger train Ry. पथिक संयान ?. 
Past. cuniculicida (causes snu Passifloraceae Bot. FOUTF#51-7 n. 
ffles and hemorrhagic septic passing (of a bill) YTCUT n. 
emia in rabbits) ERTER FE. pass into I अन्तर्नयन . 
Past, equiseptica (found in con 2 (as into an act) TCUT n. 
tagious pleuropneumonia in passive faza, uz mfn. 
horses) 89tiña fa. ___active सचेष्ट mfr. 
Past. lepiseptica (found in passive force Math. *** n. 
rabbits) शश द्वि. pass over vb. FETETT n. 
Past. oviseptica (causes pneu pass through मध्यात्पारण. 
___moenteritis in sheep) अविघ्न द्वि. pass through a line vb. Math. Leta Past. pestis = Bacillus pestis, HELTAT TAFT (78Ta through); Tat # Yersin's bacillus (causes bub 
7777, FTTET (Hindi) 
___onic plague in man) मारी द्वि. pass-word Mil. T4-a767 f. 
Past. pseudotuberculosis ye# Past. (Pasteurella) F. (fefert ) 
fa. paste लेपीf.(cf. Hindi लेई, Panjabi लेवी) Past, suilla, Past. suiseptica Pasteur-Chamberland filter Hygiene Bacillus suicida, B. suisep 
097utta mm. 
tica (found in cases of swine Berkefeld filter TrataTaTa m. 
plague) TTT FE. Doulton filter जीवाणुपाव ग m. 
Past. tularensis (causes tular Pasteurella (Past.) Bact. (a genus of emia) *7776qHTO fa. 
bacteria characterized by bipolar Past. vituliseptica =Past. bol staining) fafercie (FE.) 
lingeri (causes çalf pneumonia) Past. avicida, Past. aviseptica वत्सक्लोम द्वि. 
(found in the blood of fowls pasteurization. (destruction of suffering from chicken cholera, pathogenic bacteria) TTTT n. (cf. which it causes) Picen fa. 
Hindi, Panjabi FTTTT) 665 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
pasteurize vb. नीरोगन . 
p. yellow TFT fra m. pasteurized aittiita mfn. 
patented Com. एकस्व-कृत min. pastry पिष्टक m. (ancient word) patentee Com. एकस्वी (-इन् ) m. pasture चरm. 
patent hypermetropia Ophthalmol. ___bee pasture मधुकर-चर m. 
प्रकट-पश्चनाभिता. pasty mass लेपी-पुंज m. 
patent medicine एकस्व भेषजn. patagium Zool. (expanded skin) patent office एकस्व-कार्यालय m. 
चर्मस्तार m. 
patent plaster = cement plaster patch = blotch Zool. (differing in भित्ति-बज्रलेप m. 
colour and texture from the sur- paternal पैतृक mfn. rounding surface) सिध्म . 
path पथ m. patch of thickening Zool. स्थूलना- pathetic nerve=trochlear nerve 
सिध्म n. 
Zool. प्राकृषि-चेता. patella-kneecap==kneepan अष्ठीवत् path-finder Radar मार्ग-अन्वेषक m. 
m. . 
pathogen, pathogene व्याधिजन M. patellar adj. अष्ठीवत् 
pathogenesis = pathogeny Med. patellar fossa Ophthalmol. काचर खात व्याधिजनन ।. 
m. 
pathogenetic Med. व्याधिजनीय mfn. patent n. एकस्व . 
pathogenic व्याधिजन mfn. patent adj. प्रकट mfn. 
pathogenic bacteria रोगाणु, व्याधि patent vb. एकस्व-करण .. 
___शाक.णु m. patent bark Col. Ind. एकस्व वल्क m. pathogenicity व्याधिजनत्व 1. 
p. black एकस्व काल m. 
pathogenic organism TTTTT m. p. blue एकस्व नील m. 
pathogenous व्याधिजन mfn. p. carmine blue resta F luft pathogeny=pathogenesis 
नील m. 
pathological 1 (of or pertaining to p. chrome leather black. एकस्व pathology) व्याधिकीय mfn. __वर्णक चर्म काल m. 
2 (morbid) रुग्ण, विकृत mfn. p. cutch एकस्व गायत्री/. 
pathological anatomy = morbid p. dianil black एकस्व द्विनील काल m. anatomy विकृत शारीर . p. fustin GO=wood yellow pathological changes व्याधिकृत परिवर्तन p. green एकस्व हरि m. p. navy blue एकस्व नाविक नील m. pathological chemistry विकृतदेह p. orange एकस्व नारंग m. 
___रसायन, नैदानिक रसायन . p. phosphine एकस्व भास्वी . pathological histologyविकृत-ौतिकी/. p. rock scarlet एकस्व शैल शोण m. pathological physiology विकृत देह p.sky blue एकस्व आकाश नील m. व्यापारिकी f. p. wool blue एकस्व ऊर्णा नील m. pathologist व्याधिकीविद् m. 
666 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
2. 
pathology I व्याधिविद्या, व्याधिकी, वैकारिकी, Pd (palladium) Chem. नि (निचूषातु) 
देहवैकारिकी f. 
pea कलाय m. (Hindi मटर) 2 विकार m. 
peace-time शान्ति-समय m. plant pathology उद्भिद्-वैकारिकी f. peacock मयूर m. patient रोगो (-इन् ) m. 
peacock-blue मयूर-नील, मेचक m. pattern आदर्श m. 
peacock-blue glasses Ophthalmol. patterns and models Com. sferala मयूर-नील (मेचक) उपनेत्र १. 
तथा आदर्श m. 
'pea' crystals कलाय स्फट m. Paurometabola Zool. अल्परचनान्तरणा: peak power Radar शिखर-शक्ति f. ___m.pl. 
peanut oil भूमुद्ग-तैल 2. paurometabolism Zool. अल्परचनान्तरण pear रुचिफल N. (from Guha's English 
Bengali Dict.) pavement epithelium=tessellated pearl मुक्ता f. 
epithelium 
pearl hardening, pearl hardner pawn Law wife m. (ancient word) Paper Mfg. (calcium sulphate, pawnee Law #TTTT m. 
used as a filler for paper) EFTIÇENT pawner Law आधायक 7. 
n. . pay=salary वेतन 1. 
pearl oyster Zool. मुक्ता-शुक्ति . p.-day वेतन-दिवस . 
pearl white Col. Ind. Het gaat m. p. roll वेतन-नामावलि 
pearly nautilus (the inner layer of payable Com. mfn. 
_ the shell is pearly) मुक्ता -नाविक m. p. at sight दर्शने-देय mfn. 
pear-shaped रुचिफलाकार afn. p. to bearer वाहक-देय mfn. 
Pearsonian coefficient of correla p. to order आदेश-देय mfn. ___tion Statistics सहसम्बन्ध-प्रगुणक M. payee Com. आदाता (त) m. 
peasoup = peasoup fog (a heavy account p. आदात लेखायाम् ____dull yellow fog) न्यवपीत-धूमिका . paying Com. शोधन 1. 
peasoup fog=pea soup p. banker शोधन प्राधिकीषिक m. peat (vegetable matter decomposed p.-in-slip निक्षेप-पर्णी f. 
in water, semicarbonised) जीर्णक p. off शोध-परिपूरण 1. pay in gross (instead of part by peaty soil Bot. जीर्णकि-उन्मृदा . 
part) एकराशि-दान, संराशि-दान ।. pebble अष्ठीला. (ancient word) payment Com. शोधन n. 
pebbleware Ceramics अष्ठीलाभाण्ड n. p. by instalments प्रभागशः शोधन n. peck (pk.; 8quarts) अर्धद्रोण m. (अ. द्रो., p. for honour आदरार्थ शोधन 7. ८ प्रस्थ) p. in advance अग्रिम शोधन, अग्ने शोधन pectic Chem. आश्लेषिक mfn. 
pectin Biochem. (pectins are very Pb (plumbum==lead) Chem. सी (सीस) complex gelatinizing com 
667 
n. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
pounds, found esp. in fruit P. ventricosus (lives on wheat) jellies) आश्लेषि. 
गोधूम यकाभ m. pecto-cellulose (pectic + cellulose) Pediculoididae (a family) यूकाभ-वंश 
Chem. आश्लेषि-कोशाधु . 
__m. pectolite (Gk. pektos compacted) Pediculus यूकाति f. (आति for प्रजाति 
Mineral. (a mineral in crystal agg. genus) regates or fibrous masses) पुंज- P.capitis=head-louse शिरो-यू का f. 
स्फटिज m. (-इज for खनिज mineral) P. humanus मानव-यूका f. pectoral arch = shoulder girdle P. vestimenti = clothes-louse 
Anat. अंस-चक्र n. 
___Zool. वस्त्र-यूका f. pectoralis muscle Anat. अंसचक्र-पेशी f. pedigree अभिजाति f. pectoral species = breast tea उर: pedigree seeds अभिजात बीज 1. 
क्वाथक m. 
pedipalpus Zool. (non-chelate, act-- peculiar प्रविशेष, विशेष, विशिष्ट mfn. _ing as feelers) पाद-मृश m.. pecuniary= monetary Com. arfera pedogenesis-paedogenesis foFHT-- . mfn. 
ज्जनन । p. transactions=monetary tran- peduncle I (Hower stalk) पुष्प-वृन्त . ____sactions अर्थ-व्यवहार m. 
2 (stem or stalk) ar n. pedagogy आध्यापिकी, अध्यापन-विद्या . peel शल्क m., त्वक् . pedal I Geom. पदिक' M. 
peer श्रीश m. 2 Mach. (a foot lever) पादक m. peer b. श्रीश-करण . . Pedalineae Bot. तिल'-कुल 1. 
peerage श्रीश-वर्ग m., श्रीश-पदn. pedal line = Simson line Geom. peerdom श्रीशता f. __ पदिक-रेखा f. 
___peeress श्रीशा. pedal triangle Math. पदिक-त्रिभुज m. peg Music नागदन्त m. pedate I पादी (-इन्) mfn. 
peg-box Music (the open part of 2 Bot. (cleft lobes) stuinfot mfn. the head in which the pegs are pedestal पादपीठ, पीठ १.| 
set) नागदन्त-प्रदेश m. on pedestal 11544 
Pegu (in Burma) Geog. हंसावती f. pedicel Bot. (one of the ultimate (ancient name-See 'Pali Lit. of 
divisions of a common peduncle) Burma' by M.H. Bode, London, उपवृन्त . 
1909, p. 49) pedicle Bot. उपवृन्त ।. 
Pegu brown Col. Ind. हंसावती बभ्रु M. pedicule पादिका f. 
P. catechu हंसावती खदिर m. Pediculidae Zool. (a family) यूका-वंश pelagic (life) (floating on sea sur 
___face) तलप्लावी (-इन्) mfn. Pediculoides Zool. यूकाभाति f. (आति pelagic fish Zool. (open sea fish) " for प्रजाति genus) 
विवृतसमुद्र-मत्स्य m. 668 
lar 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
pelargonic Chem. (prepared by oxi- p. girdle==p. arch 
dation of the oil of rue ब्राह्मी) pelvis Anat. श्रोणि f. ब्राह्मिक mfn. 
I (basin-like structure) श्रोणि-पात्र 2. pelargonidin Biochem. ब्राह्मेयि . 
2 (cavity of the pelvis) श्रोणि-खात 1. pelargonin Biochem. ब्राह्मि f. 
pelvis of the kidney Anat. वृक्क-निवाप pelargonyl Chem. ब्राह्मल .. 
m. Pelecypoda (Gk. pelekus hatchet, pensant f. ___ from Sanskrit परशु) परशुपादाः m.pl. pen-==pent- पंच pelican बृहच्चंचु m. 
penal code Lan दण्ड-संहिता . pelican blue=laevuline blue penalty दण्ड m., शास्ति . Pelimatozoa=Pelmatozoa 
pencil x अंकनी pellagra Med. (skin becomes like B1, Ba, B. Bap. का,,. का., का, का. 
tree bark) बल्कचर्म n. 
अंकनी . pellagra preventing factor (p. p.) diamond p. हीराकंनी . 
Biochem. वल्कचर्म-प्रतिवन्ध-कारक m. (व. glass marking p. काचांकनी 
HB pencil क का अंकनो. Pellia Bot. (bearing unicellular rhiz- . lead p. सीसांकनी . 
oids) एकशि (short for एककोश-शिफाभ) skin-marking p. चर्म कनी pellicle Zool. (a thin skin or film 2 (as of lines, of rays) सूची. 
on liquid, etc.) छादि m. 
pencil drawing अंकनी उद्रेखM. pellitory root = pyrethrum root pencil of lines Math. रेखा-सूची / 
Pharm. (tincture used in tooth- pencil of rays Geom. रश्मि-सूची ache) दन्तमूल . 
pencil point अंकनी-अग्र. Pelmatozoa Zool. (its members are pencil point protector अंकनी-अग्रप m. __mostly attached to the bottom by pencil sharpener (pocket) अंकनी 
a stem or stalk) सवृन्ताः M.pl. 
उत्तिज m. (गोह) peltate attachment Bot. छत्रीय आसंजन pencil stone अंकनी प्रस्तर m. 
m. 
Pendanaceae Bot. केतकी-कुल 1. pelt black (for dyeing furs) Col. Ind. pending 1 (awaiting decision) faart 
लोमाजिन काल m. 
धोन mfn. , p. brown (for dyeing furs) लोमा- 2 (as in "pending the decision 
जिन बm. 
of the court") -पर्यन्त Peltier effect Elec. संध्यष्म-प्रभाव m. pendulous निलम्बी (-इन) mfn. peltol BL=fur grey. B 
pendulum Phys. निदोल m. pelvic Anat. श्रौण mfn., श्रोणि 
penetrate I अन्तःप्रवेशन, प्रवेशन . . p. arch=p. girdle श्रोणि-चक्र. 2 वेधन . . . p. colon stop #STRITT m. - penetrating अन्तःप्रवेशी, प्रवेशी, वेधी (-इन्) . p. diaphragm श्रोणि-प्राचीरm. 
mfn. 669﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
penetration Mil. वेध M., वेधन १. Pentapetes Bot. बन्धुकति f. (-ति for penguin Zool. ऊर्ध्वस्थायी (-इन) m. 
प्रजाति genus) pen-holder लेखनी-धर m. 
P. phoenicea स.म.न्य बन्धुवा m. penicillin कूर्चकि 
pentaphylla Bot. पंचपर्ण m. Penicillium कूर्चकति f. (-ति for प्रजाति pentaploid Biol. पंचगुण mfr. 
genus) 
penta-valent पंच-संयुज mfn. P. notatum (Lat. notatus known) pentene Chem. cert n. । प्रज्ञात कूर्चक . 
pentine Chem.qai f. penis शिश्न 1. 
pentosan Chem. पंचध्विन्या . pen-knife लेखनी-क्षुरी . 
pentose Chem. पंचधा . Pennatula Zool.(agenus of sea. pens) pent-oxide Chem. पंच-जारेय. 
तूलिकाति f. (आति for प्रजाति genus) pen tray लेखनी-धान 1. Pennatulidae Zool. तूलिका-वंश m. pentyl Chem. पंचल N. Pennsylvanian period = Upper pentylene Chem. पंचलेन्य 1. 
Carboniferous period = Car- pentylidine Chem. पंचलेयेन्य. 
boniferous proper period penultimate उपान्त, उपान्तिम mfn. pennyweight (dwt.; 24 grains) महा- penumbra Ophthalmol. आच्छाया / __ म.ष m. (म. माष) 
People's Commissar (in Russia) pension उत्तरवेतन, पूर्वसेवावेतन 1. 
लोक-प्राध्यक्ष m. p. fund उत्तरवेतन प्रणीवि f. 
pepini-ferous पाचि-भर mfn. pent-, penta-पंच 
pepo Bot. अलाबुक n. (of the अलाबु type) pentachloride Chem. पंच-नीरेय . 
Peponiferae Bot. अलाबु-गोत्र n. Pentacyclicae Bot. (five fioral peppermint = mentha piperita 
whorls) 475HT: m.pl. 
(menth. pip.) Pharm. तीव्रपर्णास m. Pentadactyla Zool. TaiTo: m.pl. 
तीवा . pentadecane Chem. पंचदशीन्य'. pepper red उद्रक्तापीत m. pentadecyl Chem. पंचदशल n. 
Pepper's ghost Phys. मायामूर्ति . pentadecylic Chem. पंचदशलिक mfn. 
-pepsia -पचन . pentadiene Chem. पंचद्वधन्य 1. 
pepsic पाचिक' mfe. pentadienone Chem. पंचद्वयेन्या . pepsin (Gk. pepsis digestion) Bio pentagon Geom. पंचभुज m. 
_chem. पाचि . penta-locular Bot. पंच-गह्वर mfn. pepsinate vb. (to treat, mix, or pentamerous Bot. पंचावयव mfn. 
impregnate with pepsin) पाचीयन penta-methylene-diamine Chem. 1. (पाचि-साधन, -मिश्रण, -व्यापन) 
पंच-प्रोदलेन्य-द्वितिक्ती. 
-pepsinia -पाचिमत्ता . pentane Chem. पंचीन्य . 
pepsino- पाचि mp.lamp Phys. पंचीन्य दीप m. pepsino-gen Biochem. पाचि-जन 2. pentanone Chem. पंचीन्या , pepsinum=pepsin Pharm. पाचि . 
670 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
. 
+ 
- 
+ 
m. 
pepsin wine=vinum pepsini (vin. per द्वारा, प्रति 
pepsin.) Pharm. पाचि-द्राक्षिरा f. as p. contra Com. यथान्यपार्वे, जैसा pepsis Med. आपचन n. 
दूसरे पार्श्व में (Hindi) peptase पाचेद m. 
perambulator = pram शिशुयान, शिशु peptic I (digestive) आपाचक mfn. 
वाहन .. 2 (of, pertaining to, or resem- per annum प्रतिवर्ष, वार्षिक bling pepsin; containing pepsin) per capita प्रतिव्यक्ति, प्रतिपुरुष पाचियिक mfn. 
• per cent प्रतिशत peptical=peptic 
percentage Statistics प्रतिशतता f. pepticity (eupeptic condition) सुपचन p. bat प्रतिशतता-दण्ड m. 
p. deviation प्रतिशतता-विचलन n. peptidase Biochem. पाचेयेद m. 
p. distribution प्रतिशतता-वण्टन n. peptide (peptone * -ide) Biochem. p. error प्रतिशतता-विभ्रम, प्रतिशत विभ्रम 
पाचेय 1. peptization आपाचन 1. 
p. histogram प्रतिशतता-वारंवारताचित्र peptize vb. आपाचन 1. peptizer आपाचयिता (-त) m. 
percentile (ido part) Statistics शत pepto- (peptone) पाचा 
तमक . pepto-hydrochloric Biochem. पाचा- perceptible संलक्ष्य' mfn. (ancient 
उदनीरिक mfn. 
___word) pepto-lysis पाचांशन n. . 
perception (of light) दर्शन ?. pepton- (peptone) पाचा 
perception of sound ध्वनि-ग्रहण . peptonaemia. पाचा-रक्तता f. 
percher Zool. (feet of sparrow) यष्टि peptonate (peptone-- - ate) Biochem. . सादी (पद) . 
पाचायीय ". 
perchloride, of mercury=mercuric peptone Biochem. पाचा. 
____chloride Chem. पारदिक नीरेय .. peptonic पाचायिक mfn. 
perchromic acid Chem. fra fort peptonization पाचा-करण, पाचायन . अम्ल . . peptonize vb. I (to convert into percolate vb. पारच्यवन, अतिच्यवन . 
peptone) पाचा-करण n. 
percolation frauta m. 2 (to digest or dissolve by a per contra Com. (on the other side) 
proteolytic ferment) पाचायन . अन्य-पावें (Hindi दूसरे पार्श्व में) peptonizer पाचायिता (-त.) m. 
percussion अभिताडन n. peptonoid m. पाचाभ m. 
percussion testing machine अभि pepton-uria पाचामेह m. 
ताडन परीक्षित्र 1. pepto-toxine (peptone-ttoxic) Chem. per diem safer 
पाचा-विषी. 
pereion (Sanskrit पर्ययण) Zool. पादोरस per- Chem. Oft 
671 
.. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
pereiopod Zool. (a thoracic limb) perforation निच्छिद्र, छिद्र, निच्छिद्रण 1. 
उरःपाद m. 
perforator == punch निच्छिद्रक, छिद्रक perennate vb. Bot. चिरजीवन, बहुवर्षजीवन, m. 
बहुऋतुजीवन, वर्षानुवर्षजीवन . 
performance निष्पादन 1. perennation Bot. चिरजीविता, बहुवर्ष- perfume परिमल, वास M. 
जीविता, बहुऋतुजीविता, वर्षानुवर्षजीविता f. perfumer गान्धिक M. perennial Bot. (continuing to live perfumery I परिमल-गृह n. 
from year to year) चिरजीवी, बहु- 2 परिमल-कला f. वार्षिक, बहुवर्षजीवी, बहुऋतुजीवी, वर्षानुवर्ष- perfuming वासन n. जीवी (-इन्) Mfn. 
peri- (Gk. peri from Sanskrit परि) perfect=complete सम्पूर्ण, परिपूर्ण mfn. Chem. परि 
p. correlation Statistics परिपूर्ण सह- perianth (P) Bot. परिपुष्प n. (प) 
सम्बन्ध m. 
periblem Bot. (gives rise to cortex) p. flower Bot. (both staminate बाह्यक-जन m. 
and pistillate) 599 9991. periblue B=neutral blue B p. gas=ideal gas Physical Chem. pericardium Anat. परिहत्, परिहृच्छद m. 
आदर्श वाति m. . 
pericardium membrane परिहृच्छद m. p. joint=moveable joint Anat. pericarp (fruit-wall) Bot. फल-भित्ति . 
चेष्टावत् सन्धि M. (from सुश्रुत), peticentral परिमध्य mfr. चल सन्धि m. 
perichaetium Bot. (enveloping p. leaf Bot. सकल पत्र. 
_sheath) परिकला f. p. machine Phys. परिनिष्पन्न यन्त्र n. perichondrium Anat. कास्थ्यावरण . 
(परिनिष्पन्न is an ancient word) pericol == ethyl red p. square Math. परिनिष्पन्न वर्ग m. peticycle Bot. (surrounding the perfection परिनिष्पत्ति f. (from वज्र- stele) मध्यरम्भ-वेष्ट m. 
च्छेदिका) 
periderm (outer bark) qi1904 m. perfectly black body Phys. पूर्ण कृष्ण __ =cork त्वक्षा f. 
काय, पूर्ण काल-काय m. 
peridot (a deep yellowish-green perfectly elastic पूर्णतया प्रत्यास्थ mfn. variety of chrysolite) प्रहरितोपल m. perflation (blow through) अन्तरावहन n. perigonium Bot. (cluster of bracts 
=free ventilation अबाध वातन . surrounding the antheridia) परि perfoliate leaf Bot. (base of the पुंधानी . 
leaf is united around the stem perigynous Bot Fevra mfn. , स्तम्भ-परिगत) परिपर्ण .. 
perigyny Bot. परिजायता perfoliate sessile Bot. अवृन्त परिपर्ण n. perilenticular space Ophthalmol. perforate vb. निच्छिद्रण 1. 
. परिवीक्ष अन्तराल. perforated membrane Zool. निच्छि- perilymph Anat. परिलसीका. . द्रित कला f. 
perimeter Geom. परिमाप m. 672 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
___m. 
mfn. 
perimysium Anat. (sheathing the perisperm Bot. (remaining part of 
bundles of muscle fibres) परिपूल the nucellus) प्रदेहशेष m. 
m. 
Perisporiaceae (a family) 199 perineurium Anat. चेताकंचुक m. 
धानोकुल 1. . period 1 water m. (as in period of perisporium = perithecium Bot. 
one year') 
(covering of बीजाणुधानी sporan 2 (a class hour) Equet f. 
gium) धान्यावरण . . . 3 Geol. युग. 
Perissodactyla Zool. famigy: m.pl. 4 Math. (a cycle) आवर्त, आवर्तकाल peristalsis Physiol. क्रमसंकोच m., (waves 
of contraction) संकोचन-तरंग M., तरंग per-iodic Chem. अति-जम्बिक mfn. 
गति . . p. acid अतिजम्बिक अम्ल 1. 
peristalticmovementZool.तरंग-गति. periodic आवर्तीय, आवतिक, आवर्ती (-इन्) peristome Bot. दन्तबिम्ब M. 
peristome apparatus Bot. दन्तबिम्ब periodical अ.वतिक mfn. 
साधिन .. periodical statement Statistics peristomium Zool. (the first ting 
नियतकालिक विवरण 1. 
into which opens the mouth) periodicity Phys., Statistics प्रावर्तिता . मुखवलय m. periodic table Chem. आवर्तन-सारणी f. perithecium = perisporium धान्या period of the decimal Math: दशमिक वरण. 
आवर्तनांक m. 
peritoneal sac Anat. उदर-गुहा f. peri-oesophageal commissure peritoneal tumor Anat. उदराबुद m. 
Zook. परिनिगल समामिल m. 
peritoneum Anat. उदरच्छद m. periosteal पर्यस्थ 
perotonitis Mad. उदरच्छदकोप m. periosteal lamallae Zool. पर्यस्थ-दलौ petivisceral portion Zool. पर्यन्तस्त्य 
भाग m. . periosteum Anat. पर्यस्थ M. (अस्थनः परि) Perkin's reaction Chem. (formation Peripatus Zool. Fauffa f. (fer for of unsaturated acids of the 
प्रजाति genus) 
___ cinnamic type) अपिदारुसितिक प्रतिक्रिया peripheral fixation Ophthalmol. f. 
पारिणाह लक्षबन्धन . . 
Perkin's violet = mauve periphery Anat. परिणाह M. 
permanent अक्षय, ध्रुव, स्थायी (-इन्) mfn. periscope Ophthalmol. af gaf m. 
p. endowment Com. अक्षय-नीवि . periscopic lens Ophthalmol. परितो-वीक्ष (ancient word) 
p. hardness (of water) स्थायि periscopic vision Ophthalmol: परितो __कठोरता, स्थायि-अफेनदता . 
दृष्टि . . 
p. mouth capsule Parasitol. प्रौढ perishable goods Ry. नाशि वस्तु .. मुख-प्रावर m. 
673 43 
m. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
p. tooth Anat. स्थायी दन्त m. peroneal artery Zool. अनुजंधा-रोहिणी p. Under-Secretary of State . (a deeply seated artexy running for War युद्धार्थ स्थायी राज्योपसचिव along the back part of the fibular im. 
side of the leg to the heel) permanent bordeaux Col. Ind. ध्रुव peroneal nerve Anat. जंघा-चेता f. (a.. 
कपिशक M. 
nerve of the leg) p. green ध्रुव हरि m. 
peroxide = hyperoxide Chem. p. orange ध्रुव नारंग m. 
अतिजारेय . p. ponceau ध्रुव अधिरक्तापीत m. perpendicular Math. लम्ब m. p. red ध्रुव रक्त m. 
p. bisector लम्बार्धक m. p. white ध्रुव श्वेत m. 
p. distance लम्बान्तर . p. yellow ध्रुव पीत m. 
p. position लम्बोर्ध्व-स्थिति . per-manganate Chem. अति-लोहकीय n. p. to each other अन्योन्यस्मिन् लम्ब, permeability अतिवेध्यताf. 
परस्पर लम्ब Mfn. permeable प्रतिवेध्य mfr. 
perpendicularity Math. लम्बता. permeameter Elec. अतिवेध्यता-मान m. perpetual Com. शाश्वत mfn. permeate b. प्रतिवेधन १. (to pass p. annuity शाश्वत-वार्षिकी . ___through) 
p. bond शाश्वत बंध m. per mensem प्रतिमास 
... p. debenture शाश्वत ऋणपत्र n. Permian period Geol. (mountains p.ledger शाश्वत-प्रपंजी. 
were formed during this period) p. loan शाश्वत ऋण 2. गिरि-युग . 
perpetual lever = continuous per milli प्रतिसहस्र 
lever Phys. शाश्वत उद्याम m. permissible pressure Macb. अनुज्ञेय per procurationem (p.p., per pro.) 
निपीड 'm. 
__Law अधिकारम् अनु (अ. अ., अधि. अनु) permission अनुमति . 
per radius axis Zool. मुख्यार अक्ष m. permit I vb. अनुमनन, अनुमतिदान . (Ses per-ruthenate Chem. अति-नक्षरीय ?. 
allow) 
per-ruthenic acid Chem, अति-नक्षरिक 21. अनुमति f., अनुमतिक, अनुमति-पत्र । अम्ल . permitted अनुमत Mfn. 
Persia Geog. पारसदेश, पारसीक m. permonosulphuric acid अत्यकशुल्बा- Persian पारस, पारसीक mfn. 
रिक अम्ल n. 
Persian ammoniac पीत-निर्यास M. permutation Math. क्रमचय m. 
Persian berries Col. Ind. पारस बदरी. permutite Chem. (water-softener) P. berry carmine पारस बदरी कीट 
जलम्रद m. 
शोणी. permutite process (water-soften P. berry lake पारस बदरी लाक्षक m. 
ing process) जलम्रद-विधा. 
P. berry substitute पारस बदरी pernicious प्रणाशी (-इन्) mfm. 
आदेश m. 
674 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
C 
life) 
P. red पारस रक्त m. 
Ind. अतिशल्बश्यामजन पीत m. P. yellow पारस पीत m. 
pertinent संगत mfn. persis (a mass of drier character, pertussis=whooping cough Med. 
as compared to archil proper, अतिकास कुक्कुरकास' m. (Hindi कूकर a pasty mass) शेपालपिंड m. 
खांसी) persist vb. विलम्बन 1. 
per unit प्रति-एकक 1. persistence विलम्बन .. 
Peruvian bark=cinchona bark persistence of vision दृष्टि-विलम्बना . Pharm. विताप-वल्क M. persistent Bot. I (remaining long Peruvian yellow उत्पीतातिरक्त m. 
attached) चिरलग्न mfn. 
per week प्रति-सप्ताह 2 (as a disease) अतिस्थायी (-इन्) pes Zool. चरण m. mfm. 
Peshawar Geog. पुरुषपुर . persistent thymus = thymus pessimism (Lat. pessimus worst) 
persistens hyperplastica Med. I पापिष्ठता-वाद m. (the doctrine that utantele n. (it persists into adult reality is essentially evil, com 
pletely evil or as evil as it con person व्यक्ति m. 
ceivably could be) personal वैयक्तिक mfn. 
2 निराशावृत्ति (agloomy or despair p. account वैयक्तिक-लेखा f. 
ing temperament) p. expenses वैयक्तिक व्यय m. pessimist I पापिष्ठता-वादी (-इन्) m. p. hygiene वैयक्तिक-स्वास्थ्यरक्षा . 2 निराशावृत्तिक m. p. ledger = private ledger pessimistic, pessimistical FESTETT 
वैयक्तिक-प्रपंजी. 
वृत्तिक mfn. p. security वैयक्तिक प्रतिभूति . pest (any particularly injurious or personality व्यक्तित्व 1. 
destructive insect) fagreit te me personate Bot. संवृत mfn. 
pestle मुशल m. personnel सेवि-वर्ग m. 
pestle and mortar मुशल तथा उलूखल . Personospora (having branching petal Bot. दल 1. 
conidiophores शाखि-कणीधर) शाकणी/. petaloid Bot. (like a petal) दलाभ mfn. perspective n. नेत्रदृशा f. ("eye-view") petiolate Bat. पर्णवृन्ती (-इन्), सवृन्त mfn. perspective plane Engin. नेत्रदृशीय तल p. leaf Bot. सवृन्त पत्र . 
petiole=leatstalk पर्णवृन्त, पत्रवृन्त' 1.. perspective projection Engin. नेत्र =mesopodium मध्यपादक. (पादक 
दृशीय विक्षेप m. 
podium) perspiration स्वेद m., स्वेदन . 
petrel Zool. (breeding usually on persulphate Chem. अतिशुल्बीय . islands) द्वीपपक्षी (-इन्) m. persulphide Cbem. अतिशुल्य १. petri dish Bast. (used for plate cul persulphocyanogen yellow Col. tures संवर्ध) संवर्ध शराव 1. 
675 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
S 
pet 
petro- शैल 
petty Com. क्षुद्र, लघु mfn. petrogenesis I शैल-जनन n. 
p. cash क्षुद्र रोक, लघु रोक m. 2=lithogenesis शैल-जनिकी f. 
p. cash account क्षुद्र रोक लेखा, लघु petrol (made by the refining of 
petroleum मृत्तैल) मात्रैल 1. · p. cash book क्षुद्र रोक पुस्त, लघु रोक p. blowlamp मातल धमदीप m. 
पुस्तn. p. container Automobile मातल-धानी p. cashier लघु-रौकिक m. 
p. expenses क्षुद्र व्यय m. p. filler Automobile मात्तैल-पूरक m. Pfeifferella-Malleomyces अश्वग्रन्थि p. gas plant मात्रैल-वाति-संयन्त्र n. 
कवक (अश्व. क.) p. gauge Antomobile मात्तैल-आमान Pfund's goldplated glasses Oph 
m. 
thalmol. अपिसुवर्णपट्टित उपनेत्र n. p. pipe Automobile मातैल-नाड ". pH Chem. (denoting the negative p. pump मात्तेल उदंच m. 
logarithm of the concentration of p. spray jet Automobile मातेल the bydrogen ion. This scale = 
शीकर-क्षिप m. 
Sorensen scale) समु (संकेन्द्रण + उ p. tank Automobile HEPAT-TETT, hydrogen) 
मातल-आशय 12. 
Sorensen scale समु-श्रेणी f. petrolatum == petroleum jelly === transition pH परीवर्त समु । 
soft paraffin मृदु-मृद्वसा. 
Ph (phenyl) Chem. दर् (दर्शल) petroleum Then. 
Phaeophyceae Bot. (brown algae) p. benzine मृत्तैल धूपी . 
___ बभ्रु-प्राप्यका: m.pl. p. furnace मृत्तल भ्राष्ट्र . 
phage = bacteriophage भक्ष=रोगाणु p. jelly=petrolatum 
भक्ष m. Petromyzon Zool. मीनलाग्याति f. (आति phagedena Med. (gangrenous ulcer) ___ for प्रजाति genus) 
कोथवण m. Petromyzonidae = Petromyzon- -phagia = -phagy -भक्षण 1. 
tidae Zool. मीनलागि-वंशm. 
-phagic-भक्ष Petromyzontes Zool. मीनलागि-गण m. -phagism भक्षिता. Petromyzontidae = Petromyzo- -phagist -भक्षी m. 
nidae 
phagocyte Biol. भक्षिकोशा f. petroselinic acid Chem. अविप्रियिक phagocyticformation Zool. भक्षिकोशीय 
अम्ल । 
निर्माण n. petroselinolic Chem. अविप्रिय लिक mfn. -phagous -भक्ष mfn. 'Petroselinum Bot. (containing the -phagy -भक्षण' . 
commmon garden parsley) अवि- phalangal = phalangeal Artat. "प्रियाति f. (ति for प्रजाति genus) अंगुलिपर्वीय Mfr.; अंगुलिपर्व petrous portion Anat. प्रस्तर-भाग m. phalange=phalanx Anat. अंगुलिप . 
66 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
phalangeal = phalangal pharmacolite Mineral. जलचूर्णनेपिज m. phalangeal bone = phalanx Anat. (-इज for खनिज mineral) 
अंगुलिपर्वास्थि n. 
pharmacological भैषजिकीय mfn. phalangeal formula Zool. अंगुलिपर्व pharmacologist भैषजिकीविद् m. 
सूत्र 
pharmacology भैषजिकी f. phalanges pl. of phalanx 
pharmacopia, pharmacopoeia -phalangia -अंगुलिपर्वता . 
___भेषजसंहिता . Phalangida Zool. उरुजंघा: m.pl. pharmaco-siderite = cube ore phalanx (pl. phalanxes, phalanges) नेपायोजलिज m. (-इज for खनिज mine _ अंगुलिपर्व . 
ral)-घनायस्क 2. -phan-amide -दृश्-तिक्तेय ॥. 
pharmacy=pharmaceutics भैषजिकी -phanate -दृशीय -phane ('to appear') Chem. -दृश् pharmal = pharmaceutic-phar phanerogam Bot. सपुष्पोद्भिद् [. __maceutical भैषजिक mfn. -phanic -दृशिक 
pharyng-, pharyngo- Anat. ग्रसनी pharbitis seeds=kaladana Pharm. pharyngeal Anat. ग्रसनी 
कालधान्य. 
pharyngeal endoderm Zool. mait pharmaceutic = pharmaceutical अन्तःस्तर m. 
भैषजिक mfn. 
pharyngeal nephridia Zool. ग्रसनी pharmaceutical (pertaining to SEHIFT n. ___drugs) भेषजीय, भैषजिक mfn. pharyngeal ulcer गल-व्रण m. 
pharmaceutical chemist-druggist pharyngitis Med. ग्रसनी-कोप m. 
=chemist and druggist भैषजिक pharyngo-, pharyng- Anat. ग्रसनी 
pharyngology ग्रासनिकी, ग्रसनी-विद्या . p. chemistry भेषज-रसायन . pharyngoscope Med. ग्रसनीक्ष m. p. equipment भैषजिक संभार m. pharynx Anat. प्रसनी f. p. oven भेषज-कन्दु m. 
phase प्रावस्था . pharmaceutics=pharmacy भैषजिकी Phaseolus Bot. मुद्गति/. (-ति for प्रजाति 
genus) pharmaceutist=druggist भेषजविद् m. P. mungo सामान्य मुद्ग M. pharmacist=pharmaceutist 'भेषज- pheasant Zool. वीजन, जीवंजीव m. 
विद्, भैषजिक m. 
-phein = -pyrrhin -forifer pharmacite (any mineral employed phellem=cork ____in medicine) भेषज-खनिज m. phelloderm Bot. उपत्वक्षा f. pharmaco- (drug, medicine) भेषज- phellogen = cork cambium Bot. pharmacognosist भेषजज्ञानी (-इन्) m. त्वधा . pharmacognostical . भेषजज्ञानीय mfn. -phen (a combining form for phene) pharmacognosy भेषजज्ञान M. 
Chem. -दर्श 
677, 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
phen-, pheno- (phenyl) Chem. af- pheno-barbital = luminal Pharm. phenacetolin Chem, ar la f. 
2-71977 m. phen-acetyl chloride Chem. etappe phenochrome brown Col. Ind. Tri 
174 n. 
quia au m. phenacyl (phenyl with acetyl inserted) p. violet qatauia fiscalfen 112. 
. Chem. quia(9789n. 
phenocyanine Col. Ind. CRITETET f. phenameine=mauve 
phenoflavine Col. Ind. aafaiti f. phenamine blue Col. Ind. दर्शतिक्ती नील phenol दर्शव m. 
phenol black Col. Ind. ara tu m. phen-anthrene Chem. 277#OUT n. p. blue-black gara 117-FCUT n. 
. p. red Col. Ind. T#UT TETT m. p. salt दर्शव लवण .. phenate Chem. gitt 11. 
phenolic smell दर्शविक गन्ध m. phenazine Chem. quitrat f. 
-phenoline Chem. -cetat phene Chem. दर्शन्य 1. 
phenolphthalein Col. Ind. zpra. phene (Gk. phainein to show) Chem. Taft m. 
=benzene 
phenol - phthalein solution gaia -phene Chem. Gaire n. 
व्युत्तैलिन विलयन 1. phen-egol gira m. 
phenomenon 7 16., Frf. phenene Chem. दर्शन्य 1. 
-phenone Chem. -af f. -phenetid,-phenetide Chem. antee phenoresin Col. Ind. PTFETE m. 
n. 
phenosafranine Col. Ind. entert f. -phenetidide Chem, ita n. phenotype Biol. (different in appcarn -phenetidin Chem. -GRITFT f. 
ance) 64 mfn. phenetidine (phenol t - et + phenoxide Chem. STORT 11. 
amido) Chem, calamt f. 
-phen-oxime Chem. -I-Ife n. phenetidine red Col. Ind. Riadit T7 phenyl Chem, hic n. 
12. 
phenyl black Col. Ind. EITT ATT 7. phenetol Chem. maica m. 
p. blue-black cara-cu m. phenetole (phenyl + -et- (ethyl) + p. brilliant orange दर्शल भासुर नारंग 
- ole] Chem. Citif. 
m. phenetole red Col. Ind. Gigar TFT m. p. brilliant violet #TEX - -phenic Chem. marta 
Miren m. -phenide Chem. -TU 
p. brown दर्शल बभ्रm. -phenin Chem. -afat 
p. fast blue दर्शल' स्थिर नील m. phenine Chem. att f. 
p. fast red दर्शल स्थिर रक्त m. phenine yellow Col. Ind. mit The p. violet दर्शल नीललोहित m. 
phenylamine black Col. Ind. CRIS pheno- Chem, wat 
faat T7 m. 678 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
phenylate Chem. दर्शलीय n. 
P. papatasii (found in Balkans) phenyle caiet Mh 
. 499 GİTTET m. phenylene Chem. Right n. 
phloem = bast Bot. (forms the phenylene black Col. Ind. Faicin downward passage for food 
10 m. 
material manufactured by leaves) p. blue दर्शलेन्य नील m. 
TETTET (-ET) m. p. brown GİRT a m. 
phlogiston (0) Old Chem, TENET n. phenylic Chem. Geirra mfn. phenylrosinduline Col. Ind. siete phlogopite=brown mica a ** 
• TESTETIST f. 
the phial =vial (small bottle) #fem f. phlor- (phlorizin) fer -phil, -phile, -philic -fisper 
phloretic acid Chem. strapcanet FT 1. Philadelphia yellow G = pure phloretin Chem. (from phlorizin) 
yellow 
151afcenf. Philander Zool. (the pouch is not phlorhizin=phlorizin 
well developed, the young are phlorhizinize=phlorizinize carried on mother's back) apparet- phloridzin=phlorizin 
Elifa f. (+fa for safer genus) phloridzinize=phlorizinize -philic -fsta 
phlorizin (phloios bark + rhiza philology i=linguistics=linguis root) flytarea f. 
tic science=science of langu- phlorizinize, phlorhizinize, phlo age 79T-FETA n. 
ridzinize vb. ferhranila n. 2 (ʻlove of literature --study of phloro--f814 literature in a wide sense) FTECH- phloro-glucide Chem. fra det nha fasta n. 
phloro-glucidol Chem, FT4- 
702 m. philosopher greift m. 
phloro-glucin Chem. Protarea f. philosophy aia n. 
phloro-glucine Chem. f£r4-475a7 f.. Philotria=Elodea 
phloro-glucinol Chem. f4-4f8a m. -philous, -philus -Fister 
phlorol (phloretic acid+ -01) Chem. -philus - 
Farya m. Phlebotomus (a genus having phlox (Gk. 'flame') barat f. 
wings like those of a butterfly) phloxine Col. Ind. Faren f. पतंगपक्षाति f. (आति for प्रजाति genus) -phobia -भी (The English word is inaccurate. Phocaena Zool. (a genus of harbour The sand fiy ' is an ordinary porpoises) पत्तनशिंशुमाराति f. (-आति biting fly. It does not puncture for stífar genus) a vein as is implied in its name phocenic acid Chem.(obtained from "phlebo-tomus" vein-cutter) ___ porpoise oil) शैशुमारिक अम्ल 1. 
679﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
. 
phoenix अमर-पक्षी ( -इन् ) m. 
phosphate Chem, भास्वीय n. Phoenix Bot. खजूरति f. (-ति for प्रजाति acid p. अम्ल भास्वीय 1. 
genus) 
meta-p. सम-भास्वीय n. P.dactylifera सामान्य खजूर m. 
neutral p. क्लीब भास्वीयn. phoenix black Col. Ind. अमरपक्षी काल normal p. ऋजु भास्वीय n. 
primary p. आद्य भास्वीयn. p. brown अमरपक्षी बभ्रु m. 
reverted p. प्रतिवतित भास्वीय . p. red अमरपक्षी रक्त' M. 
secondary p. द्वितीयक भास्वीय 1. Pholidota Zool. (scaly anteaters) super-p. अधि-भास्वीय n. 
शल्किवनादा: m. pl. (शल्किन् having tertiary p. तृतीयक भास्वीय n. scales) 
phosphated (containing phosphates, -phone -स्वन, भाष 
phosphatic) भास्वीयित, भास्वीयिक mfn. phonetics शिक्षा-शास्त्र 2. (ancient word) phosphaterock Petrog. भास्वीय शैल m. phonograph ध्वनिलिख m. 
phosphatic Cbem. भास्वीयिक mfn. -phor, -phore -भर, -घर 
phosphatide Biochem. भास्वीयेय 1. -phoria -otfafier f. 
phosphation, phosphatization -phoric -भर, -घर 
Chem. भास्वीयन .. phorochrome orange R = neo- phosphatize vb. Chem. भास्वीयन n. 
chrome orange R 
I (to change to a phosphate or -phoros -भर 
phosphates) भास्वीय-करण १. phos, phoss (phosphorus) भास्वर m. 2 (to treat with phosphoric acid phosgene (Gk. phos light + -gene) or a. phosphate) भास्विकाम्ल-साधन, 
(produced -7 under the influence भास्वीय-साधन M. 
of light भा) भाज M. (cf. द्विज) phosphato-(phosphate)Chem. भास्वीय phosph-, phospho- (phosphorus) phosphat-uria Med. भास्वीय-मेह m. 
Cbem. भास्व 
phosphazo- Chem. (denoting the phosphagen (phosphate भास्वीय + presence of the bivalent group 
glycogen मधुजन) Biochem. भास्वीयजन ___ -N:P- भास्वाज-, भूभास्व- (-N:P-) 
m. 
phos-phenyl (phosph - + phenyl) phospham (phosphorus + ammonia) Chem. भास्व-दर्शल' . 
Chem. भास्वति m. 
phosphide Chem. भास्वेय. phosph - amic, phosph - amidic phosphin Chem. Fifa f. ___Chem. भास्व-तिक्तेयिक mfn. 
phosphinate (phosphinic #feafter to phosph-amide Chem. भास्व-तिक्तेय . rate) Chem. भास्वियीय. phosph-amidic Chem. भास्व-तिक्तेयिक phosphine Chem. भास्वी . 
mfn. 
p. oxide भास्वी जारेय. phosphatase Biochem. भास्वीयेद m. 
p. substitute Col. Ind. भास्वी आदेश phosphate=phosphatize 
m. 
680 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
1. 
phosphinic Chem. भास्वियिक mfn. phosphorated भास्वरित mfn. phosphite Chem. भास्वित ।. 
p. hydrogen भास्वरित उदजन M. phospho-, phosph- (phosphorus) p. oil Pharm. #tafest n. 
Chem. 9764 
phosphore=phosphor phospho-ferrite Mineral. (a ferrous phosphoreal Chem. (of, pertaining 
acid phosphate) अयोम्लभास्विज m. 
to, or like that of, phosphorus). (-इज for खनिज mineral) 
भास्वरिय, भास्वर-समान mfn. phospho-glycerate Chem. भास्व-मधुरीय phosphorescence भासा f. 
phosphorescent भासमान nfn. phospho-lipin 71fa-faafa f. 
phosphoreted Chem. Fapta mfn. phospho-molybdate Chem. PFA 
I (impregnated with phosphorus) auta n. 
भास्वर-व्यापित nfn. phospho - molybdic Chem. Tria 
2 (combined with p Fafús mfn. 
HIFF-Tifa mfn. . p. acid भास्वसंवणिक अम्ल n. phosphonate Chem. भास्वायीय . 
phosphoric Chem. Hiffa# mfn. phosphonic (phospho- of sulphonic) 
p. acid (ortho-, meta-, pyro-) - Chem. भास्वायिक infn. 
HTf64# FT m. (, FH-, af) phosphonium (phospho- to ammo 
p. acid = acidum phosphori 
nium) Chem. TIFTTIE 1 
cum (acid. phosph.) Pharm. p. iodide भास्वतातु जम्बेय. 
HTfF95 F n. phospho-phyllite Mineral. (essen- phosphorical=phosphoric 
tially a zinc phosphate) en phosphori-ferous 7749-** mfn. भास्विज M. (-इज for खनिज mineral) 
phosphorite Mineral. Arai foret m. phosphor (phosphorus) Chem. Hier 
(-इज for खनिज mineral) 
m. 
phosphorize=phosphorate" 
phosphoro-, p. copper TEFT TE n. 
phosphor- Chem. phosphor, phosphore (a phospho 
(phosphorus, phosphoric) TFTT rescent substance) Fan 12. phosphoros=phosphorus 777* m. phosphor-, phosphoro- (phospho- phosphoroscope Phys. Hy m. (ITAT 
tus, phosphoric) Chem. HFPR- phosphorescence) phosphorate vb. Chem. HfFqcUT 1. phosphorous adj. Chem. (com 
1 (to impregnate with phospho- pounds in which phosphorus has rus or a compound of phospho- a valence lower than in phospho rus) FR-571967 n. 
___ ric compounds) भास्व्य mfn. 2 (to combine with..)#FAT-TTTH n. p. acid (crystalline) 775 7 n. 3. (to make phosphorescent) TT- (F ETHF) HTTF- U n. 
p. anhydride भास्व्य अजलेय 1. 681 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
phosphor salt = sal microcos- phot Photom. (one lumen per sq. 
micum = microcosmic salt cm.) शि-चकास m. (शि short for भास्वर लवण . 
शतिमान cm.) phosphorus Chem. भास्वर m. 
photo- भा p. chloride भास्वर नीरेय 1. photo-album भाचित्र-पुस्त 1. (picture p. iodide भास्वर जम्बेय. 
___album चित्रपुस्त) p. oxide भास्वर जारेय. 
photochemical भारसायनिक mfn. p. oxy-chloride भास्वर जार-नीरेय n. p. induction भारसायनिक प्ररोचन । p. pentachloride भास्वर पंचनीरेय 1. p. reaction भारसायनिक प्रतिक्रिया. p. pentoxidedrying tube भास्वर photo-chemistry भा-रसायन 1. 
पंचजारेय शोषण नाल m. 
photo-electric भा-विद्युतीय mfn., भा. p. sesqui-sulphide भास्वर सार्ध विद्युत् 
शुल्बेय. 
photoelectric haemoglobinome p. sulphide भास्वर शुल्बेय 1. ____ter भाविद्युतीय शोणवर्तुलिमान m. p. trichloride भास्वर बिनीरेय 1. photo-electricity (as a. science) भा p. trioxide भास्वर विजारेय 1. 
वैद्युती . phosphoryl Chem. भास्वरल 1. photograph भाचि phosphorylation Chem. (act or pro- photographed भाचित्रित mfn. 
cess of converting into a com- photographee (one who is photo pound of phosphorus, as a sugar graphed) arfafta m. into a phosphoric acid ester) photographer भाचित्रक M. भास्वरलन 2. (act), भास्वरलना f. photographic भाचित्रीय mfn. (process) 
__p. camera भाचित्रीय रूपित्र, भारूपित्र .. phosphoryl chloride Chem. भास्वरल p. plate भाचित्रीय पट्ट, भा-पट्टm. 
नीरेय . 
। photography भाचित्रणा f. phospho-silicate #TFT-Hacitet 16. photo-lithography = lithophoto phospho-tartaric भास्व-न्यासविक mfn. 
ic भास्व-न्यासविक mfn. graphy phospho-tungstate Chem. भास्व-चंडीय photom = footcandle Ophthalmol. 
n. 
(one lumen per sq. ft.) पाद-चकास'. phospho-tungstic Chem. भास्व-चंडिक m. 
mfn. 
photo-meter Phys. भा-मान m, . p. acid भास्वचंडिक अम्ल .. 
photometric test Phys. भामितीय-परीक्षा phosph-uranyl-ite Mineral. (a ura- f.. 
nyl phosphate) किरणलभास्विज m. photo-metry भा-मिति f. ..(-इज. for खनिज mineral) 
photomicrograph=micro - photo phosphuret = phosphide भास्वेय n. graph भाणुचित्रअणुभाचित्र n. phosphyl Chem. भास्वल n. 
photo-microscope भाचित्राण्वीक्ष m. phoss (phosphorus) भास्वर m. photon I Phys. भाणु m. 
682 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
- 
2 Optics (unit of illumination of phuli (in Sindh soft powder effio retina, containing numberless rescence of natural soda) फुल्लिका 
photons भाणु of physics) भैक n. photo-printing भा-मुद्रण . 
Phycomycetes Bot. शेवलकवक-वर्ग m. photo-receptive भा-प्राही (-इन्) mfn. phyl- पत्र, पर्ण-, पलाश photo-receptor भा-ग्राही (-इन्) m. Phyllanthus Bot. भूम्यामलीति . (-ति 
p. organ Zool. भाग्राहि अंग. 
for प्रजाति genus) photosphere भागोल' m. 
__P. niruri सामान्य भूम्यामली . photo-synthesis Bot. भा-संश्लेषण 1. -phyllian -पलाशीय phototaxis=phototaxy Biol. 977 phylloclade Bot. (flattened stem per 
forming the functions of leaves) phototropic = heliotropic प्रकाशा पर्णकार्यस्तम्भ m. 
वर्तिकः-सूर्यावर्तिक mfa. 
phyllode Bot. वृन्तफलक, पत्राभ-वृन्त 1. photo-tropism Biol. भावर्तना f. (भा- (वृन्त=पत्रवृन्त) 
आवर्तना) 
___phyllo-taxis, phyllo-taxy Bot. पर्ण phthal-, phthalo- Chem. व्युत्तैल- न्यास m. phthalacene (phthal- + aret- शुग्-+ phylo-geny जाति-चरित . 
__-ene -एन्य) Chem. व्युत्तैलशुगेन्य' . phylum Biol. प्रसृष्टि f. phthalan Chem. व्युत्तैलिन्य .. 
sub-kingdom अनु-सृष्टि f. phthalate Chem. व्युत्तैलीय n. 
physalia Zool. बृहत्प्लव m. phthalazine Chem. व्युत्तलाजीवी f. Physalia Zool. (has a big pneumato phthalein Chem. व्युत्तैलिन M. 
_cyst) बृहत्प्लवाति f. (आति for प्रजाति phthaleinometer व्युत्तैलिनमान m. ____genus) phthalic Chem. व्युत्तैलिक mfn. 
Physaliidae Zool. बृहत्प्लव-वंशn. p. anhydride व्युत्तैलिक अजलेय . Physalis Bot. टंकारीति f. (-ति for प्रजाति phthalide Chem. व्युत्तलेय N. 
genus) phthal-imide Chem. व्युत्तैल-वितिक्तेय १. P. minima सामान्य टंकारी । phthalin Chem. व्युत्तैलि. 
Physaloptera (mouth with two phthalo- Chem, auttat 
equal laterally placed flat lips) -phthalone Chem. -व्युत्तला f. 
'पत्रौष्ठाति . (आति for प्रजाति genus) phthalyl Chem. व्युत्तरल १. (व्युत्तैल+ल) P. caucasica सामान्य पत्रौष्ठ m. -phthene Chem. -उत्तैलेन्य 
Physeter महावसाति f. (प्राति for प्रजाति — thio-phthene गन्धोत्तैलेन्य 1. . genus) Phthirius (a genus to which the physical 1 (of or pertaining to phy 
crab louse belongs) कर्कटयूकाति. sics) #tfa# mfn. . (-urfa for warfar genus) 
2 (of or pertaining to the body) P. pubis सामान्य कर्कटयूका f. 
शारीरिक mfn. phthisis Med. यक्ष्मा m. (यक्ष्मन्) 
p. balance भौतिक-तुला:/. 
683 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
p. basis (of life) भौतिक आधार m. physiologically standardized देह p. change Chem. भौतिक परिवर्तन . प्रमापित mfn. p. chemistry भौतिक रसायन 1. physiologist दैहिकीविद् m. p. function ift-Ffit f. 
physiology I देहव्यापारिकी, दैहिकी, p. independence (of forces) व्यापारिकी ____Phys. भौतिक-निराश्रयता. 
2 देहव्यापार, व्यापार, अंगव्यापार m. p. optics भौतिक-काशिकी 
physiology of the eye नेत्र-व्यापारिकी . p. process भौतिक-विधा . 
Physostomi Zool. (air bladders are physically (according to physics). provided with an air-duct) विवृत 
भौतिक्या 
वाताशयाः m.pl. physician भिषक्, चिकित्सक m. 
phyto- (plant, trce) उद्भिद् physicist भौतिकीविद् m. 
phyto-chemistry (chemistry of physico-chemical भौत-रसायनिक mfn. 
plants) उद्भिद्-रसायन n. physics भौतिकी. 
phytolacca (phytolacc.)=poke root physio- शरीर-, भौत 
(contains a very bitter resin) physiographic factors Bot. (slope, 
Pharm. कटूयास m. altitude and exposure) प्रवणोच्छायादि 
" Phytomastigina Zool. (Mastigo कारक m. 
phora having chromatophores 
containing chlorophyll) qurang physiography = geomorphology 
कशांगा: m.pl. भूम्याकारिकी . physiological I दैहिक, दैहिकीय mfn. 
phytomer=phyton 
-phyton -उद्भिद् 2 व्यापारीय, व्यापारिकीय mfn. 
phyton Bot. पादपाणु m. p. chemistry दैहिक रसायन ". 
phytonic theory पादपाणु-वाद m. p. condition of the body शरीर की 
phytosterol तरु-सान्द्रव m. व्यापार-दशा (H.) 
pir I Math. (r = circumference/ p. cup Ophthalmol. प्रबिम्ब खात m. 
diameter) प्या (प्या-परिधि व्यास) p. division of labout Zool. 
2 (In organic chemistry it is व्यापारीय श्रम-भाजन 1. 
abbreviated from peri परि) परि p. drought Bot. व्यापारीय शोष m. pia-arachnoid = arachno-pia (a p. effect Biochem. दैहिक प्रभाव m. 
membrane investing the brain p. experiment Zool. व्यापारिकीय 
and spinal chord) मेरुमस्तिष्क-छद m. __संपरीक्षा . 
pia mater Anat. मृदु-तानिका . p. optics नेत्र-काशिकी f. 
pian=yaws Med. न्युपदंश m. p. process दैहिक-विधा, देहव्यापार-विधा pic = picis (Lat.) = pick=pitch 
निराल m. . . p. salt solution=normal saline Picea Bot. ('the pitch pine') राल 
देह लवण जल... 
सरलति. (-ति for प्रजाति genus) 684 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
ma 
picis (Lat.)=pic=pick=pitch picture vb. Fu 1. picis carbonis=coal tar TTT-TT m. picture-n. E m., Fant . pick=pitch FATTTT m. 
piece que n. pickles सन्धित . (Hindi अचार) 
p. goods ant n. pickling (to clean by immersion p. wages Econ. 1996 har f. 
into sulphuric or nitric acid) p. work as in. अम्लमार्जन 1. 
pied woodpecker Zool. f 1966 picnometer = pycnometer = 
pyknometer FTESTATT M. pier 1 (a pillar) S H. M. picoline (Lat. picis pitch + obt 2 (a landing place) aacuit f. 
-ine) firmat f. 
(Hindi उतरना is from Skt. अवतरण) picolinic Chem. Fettfafta mfn. pierce vb. aetat n... picotite=chrome spinel=magne pierced through refera mfn. 
siochromite Mineral. भ्राजवणिज pierce through vb. पारवेधन । 
m. (-55 for af mineral) piercing mouth parts Zool. वेधी मुख pict- - picr-amate कटु-तिक्तीय n. 
pig 1 (a swine of any age, wild or picramic Chem. कटु-तिक्तिक mfn. 
domestic) सूकर m. ___p. acid कटुतिक्तिक अम्ल 
2 (a young swine of either sex picr-amide Chem. afic-frente no 
that has not reached sexual ma Picramnia = Tariri Bot. strafar f. turity) सूकर-शाव m. 
(-fa for sale genus) 
pigeon #412, arraa m. picrate Chem. कट्वीय . 
pigeon's milk 9976-et n. picric Chem. Hepati mfn. 
pigment रंगा . p. acid Ferace FT 16. 
pigment bordeaux Col. Ind. TT -picrin- era f. 
FORTE m. Picrorhiza कटुकति f. (-ति for प्रजाति p. brown रंगा बभ्रु m. . 
genus) 
p. carmine रंगा कीटशोणी 
· P. kurrooa FTATUT Fei m. 
__p. chlorine रंगा नीरजी . picrorhiza (picrorh.) Pharm. aficant n. p. chrome yellow it qui me m. picryl Chem. 41577 n. 
p. fast orange रंगा स्थिर नारंग m. picrylamine Chem. Picafortat f. . p. fast red रंगा स्थिर रक्त m. ' 'pictogram Statistics चित्रलेख m. 
p. fast scarlet रंगा स्थिर शोण m. picryl orange Col. Ind. Picat m. p. fast yellow it fere pa m. 
p. yellow piccant fa m. 
p. orange TT TTTT mi, pictorial चित्रीय mfn. 
p. purple रंगा नीलारुणm. pictorial representation चित्रीय नि p. red रंगा रक्त m. . 
11401, fat frequ n. 
p. rubin TTI TT f.. 
685 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
p. scarlet रंगा शोण m. 
pilot I (in a general sense) कर्णधार m. p. violet रंगा नीललोहित m. 
2 Rly. (the cowcatcher of a loco pigmentation रंगायण . . 
motive in U.S.A.) पशक्षिप m. pigmentation meter रंगा-मान m. pilot officer (R.A.F.) उपविमानिक m. pigment cell layer Zool. रंगा-कोशा-स्तर pilula=pill Pharm. गुटिका f. 
m. 
p. aloes et asafoetidae=pill of pigment granule रंगा-कणिका f. 
aloes and asafetida pigment layer TTI-FIT m. 
p. aloes et ferri=pill of aloes pikrin कवि . 
and iron Pila Zool. मुष्टिशंखाति (-पाति for प्रजाति p. aloes et myrrhae=aloes and 
genus) 
___myrrh pills कुमारी तथा रसगंध pileus Bot. 97 n. 
गुटिका f. pilferage Com. लघुचौर्य 1. 
p. colocynthidis compositae== piliferous layer Bot, रोमि-स्तर m. 
compound pills of colocynth · pill=pilula Pharm. Theft f. 
संयुत इन्द्रवारुणी-गुटिका f. p. of aloes and asafetida = pi p. colocynthidis et hyoscyami lula aloes et asafoetidae (pil. =pill of colocynth and aloes et asafoet.) कुमारी तथा हिंगु hyoscyamus 
गुटिका . 
p. hydrargyri=pill of mercury p, of aloes and iron pilula p. ipecacuanhae cum scilla = ___aloes et ferri (pill. aloes et ipecacuanha pills with squ 
ferr.) कुमारी तथा अयो-गुटिका f. 
ill समुद्रपलांडु सहित' वममूल-गुटिका f. p. of colocynth and hyoscya p. rhei composita=compound mus = pilula colocynthidis pill of thubarb संयुत चीनरेच 
et hyoscyami (pil. colocynth. गुटिका f. et hyoscy.) इन्द्रवारुणी तथा कुक्कुट p. rufi = aloes and myrrh pills विष-गुटिका . 
कुमारी तथा रसगंध-गुटिका f. p. of mercury = pilula hydrar p. scillae compositae = com 
gyri (pil, hydrarg.)=mercury ___pound squill pills संयुत समुद्र . pill=blue pill पारद-गुटिका . 
पलांडु गुटिका f. pillar. I स्तम्भ m. 
pimaric acid Chem. सरलोद्यासिक अम्ल . 2 Macb. स्थूण 1. 
pimelic Chem. मैदिक mfn. pilacarpidine Chem, नमतफलेयी . 
pimento=pimenta (piment.) =all pilocarpine Chem. नमतफली f. 
spice=Jamaica pepper (odour pilocarpus=jaborandi नमतफल 1. and taste resemble cloves) लवङ्ग Pilocarpus (Gk. pilos felt नमत + बदर n. 
carpus फल) नमतफलति f. (-ति for Pimpinella Bot. शतपुष्पाति /- (-ति for प्रजाति genus), 
प्रजाति genus) 686 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
P. anisum सामान्य शतपुष्पा . pimple Med. पिटिका . pin I अन्धसूची . __2 Mach. अणि m. Pinaceae Bot. सरल-कुल n. pinachrome (pina- tablet, picture) 
Col. Ind. छविवर्णक m. p. blue छविवर्णक नीलm. 
p. violet छविवर्णक नीललोहित m. pinacol Chem. आशौक्तव M. pinacolate Chere. आशौक्तवीय . pinacolin (Dinacone-+-Lat. oleum oil) 
Chem. आशौक्तवि. (आशौक्तायैल) pinacone Chem. आशौक्ता. pinacyanol Photog. छविश्यामव m. 
p. blue छविश्यामव नील m, pinaflavol Col. Ind. sfafuta m. 
pinaverdol Photog. छविहरिकव . pincenez glasses Ophthalmol. नासाग्रह 
उपनेन ।. . . pincers संदंशी pincer for drawing teeth दन्त-शंकु १. 
(from सुश्रुत) pinchcock शिखि-पीड m. pincoffin=commercial alizarin pin-cushion सूची-तल्प m. pineal=pineal body=pineal gland 
Anat. तृतीय-नेत्र-ग्रन्थि m. pineal eye=median eye Anat. FPEUT 
नेत्र, तृतीय नेत्र . pineal gland=pineal pinene Chem. निसरलेन्य n. 
a-p. अ-निसरलेन्य 
8-p. आ-निसरलेन्य 1. pine soot=oil black pinhole Photog. सूचीछिद्र. 
p. camera Tros 1977 Mh. pinion Mach, दन्तिका f. 
p. wheel Automobile दन्तिका-चक्र . pink आपद्म mfn. 
p. liquid आपद्म तरल m. pinnar Bot. पक्षक m. 
2 Anat. कर्ण-पल्लव m. pinna-lobate Bot. पक्ष-पालिमत् mfn. pinnate (venation) Bot. (pinna. 'fea ___ther') पक्षवत् mfn. pinnately Bat. (in a pinnate manner) __ . पक्षवत् 
। pinnati-fid Bot. पक्षवद्-दर mfn. pinnati-lo bate Bot. पक्ष-पलिमद mfn. pinnato-dentate Bot. पक्ष-दन्तुर mfn. pinnule I Bot. पक्षकी, पल्लवी f. (a 
secondary pinna) 
2 Zool. पक्षकी f. (a small fin) . pint I (p., Pt.) शराव m. (श.) 
2 (0; 16 or 20 fluid ounces) TTT 
शराव m. (त. श. १६, २० तरल' शुक्ति) pinta, pinto (Sp. painted)=mal de 
los pintos = carate = spotted sickness Med. (coloured spots on 
the skin) पृषच्चर्म . Pinus Bot. Forfa f. (-fil for unla 
genus) 
P. longifolia सामान्य सरल m. pinworm सूचिकृमि m. pioneer पथिकृत् m. (from ऋग्वेद) pioury=Indian yellow pip (American) = blip (British) = 
hump Radar (visual signal on 
the scope) ककुद् .. pipali पिप्पली. pipe नाड . 
p.-clay (used in making pipes) _ नाड-मृत् . 
p-clay triangle नाडमृत्-त्रिकोण 1. pipefish Zool. नाडमत्स्य m. 
687 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
Piper Bot. पिप्ललीति f. (-ति for प्रजाति pisang wax प्रकदली-सिक्थ .. 
genus) 
Pistacia Bot. विसरलति (-ति for प्रजाति P.cubeba गन्ध पिप्पली., गन्धमरिच m. genus) P. longum सामान्य पिप्पली f. 
P. terebinthus=terebinth= P. nigrum मरिच पिप्पली f. 
Chian turpentine सामान्य विसरल m. piper=black pepper 
. Pistia Bot. कुम्भिकाति f. (-ति for प्रजाति Piperaceae Bot. पिप्पली-कुल 1. 
genus) Piperales Bot. पिप्पली-गोत्र n. 
P. stratiotes सामान्य कुम्भिका f. piperate Chem. मरिचीय n. 
pistil Bot. स्त्रीकेसर 1. piperazine (piperidine+arote+ -ine) pistillate flower Bot. स्त्रीकेसरि पुष्प 1. ___Chem. मरिचाजीवीf. 
piston Mach. मुषली . piperic acid Chem. मरिचिक अम्ल' . p. ring मुषली-वलय M. piperide Chem. मरिचय।. 
p. rod मुषली-शलाका f. piperideine (piperidine+ -eine) Chem. p. type pump मुषलीयुत उदञ्च m. 
मरिचेयिन m. 
p. valve मुषली-कपाट n. piperidide ( piperidinet -ide) Chem. Pisum Bot, parafa f. (-fær for stotila 
__ मरिचयेय . 
genus) piperidine Chem. मरिचेयी . 
P. arvense सामान्य कालाय m. (Ben piperidyl Chem. मरिचेयल 1. 
___gali also कलाय) piperine Chem. मरिची . 
P. sativum स्वादु कलाय m. piperonal मरिचासु m. 
pit गर्त m. -piperone -मरिचा f: 
pitch I (a. viscous substance ob _aceto-p. शुक्त-मरिचा. 
tained as a residue in distilling piperonyl (piperonal + y) Chem. coal tar, etc.) निराल m. 
मरिचाल. 
2 Mech., Mach. (distance apart of p. alcohol मरिचाल सुषव m. . 
two things, such as distance piperylene (piperidine + acetylene) from any point on a thread of a 
Chem. मरिचलेन्य। 
screw to the corresponding point pipes and cisterns नाड तथा जलाशय m. on an adjacent thread) अन्तराल. pipette नाडक १. 
3 Music तारता . . , p. brush नाडक-कर्च m. 
pitcher plant Bot: कलश पादप m. p. clip नाडक-स्वज m. 
pitch pine'T रालसरल m. p. electrode नाडक-विद्युद्द्वार .. ____ 2 (colour) न्यवर्यापीत m. . p. rest नाडकाश्रय 
pith Bot. मज्जक m. . __p. stand नाडक-स्थाम". 
pith vb. Zool. पृष्ठरज्जुवेधन, अपवेधन n. pisang (a plantain Musa paradisiaca) pithed अपविद्ध, विद्धरज्जु, विद्धपृष्ठरज्जु mfn. ___ + प्रकदली.. 
pithed frog अपविद्ध मण्डूक m. pisang-cerylic sferturiti mfn. pit ochre Col: Ind. गर्त गैरिक m. 
688 
141 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
Pitot tube Hydraulics (to measure the various sense organs) आधारस्थूलक 
___velocity of the fluid) वेगम नाल m. m. - (वेग-म measuring वेग) 
placoid scales Zool. (scales resembl pittacal=eupittonic acid 
_ing teeth) दन्ताभ शल्क m. pitted Bot. गर्ती (-इन्) mfn. . . Placophora (plate-bearing')=Poly pitting Bot. (formation of pits) गर्तन, placophora (eight calcified plates) 
गर्तकरण, गर्तभवन n. 
Zool. अष्टपट्टाः m.pl. pituitary body=hypophysis पोषकाय plagionite Mineral. पंचस्यंजशिज m. (-इज 
for खनिज mineral) p. extract पोषग्रंथि-निस्सार m. 
plague मारी, महामारी. p. gland पोष-ग्रंथि m. 
plain n. (an extensive open field) piuri (from Hindi, from Skt. पीत) प्रस्थ m., स्थली . . 
Indian yellow 
plain I अलिखित, अमुद्रित mfn.(unwrittén, pivot विवर्तनी . 
unprinted, as paper) pivotjoint = trochoid joint-rotary 2 Pharm. अमिश्रित mfn. ___joint Anāt. विवर्त-सन्धि m. 
plain label अलिखित नामपत्र . pix carbonis. (pix carbon.)=coal tar plain muscle = unstriated muscle 
_Pharm. अंगार-राल m. 
Anat. अरेख-पेशी . . pk. (peck) अ. द्रो. (अर्ध-द्रोण) 
plain prophylactic Pharm. अमिश्रित place vb. स्थापन १. 
रोगरोधक m. place for anchoring लांगलन-स्थान 1. plain scale साधारण-श्रेणी placenta I Med. गर्भपोषm. . 
plaint Law are m. . 2 Bot. जरायु . 
plaintiff Law वादी (इन्) m. (ancient placental जरायु 
word) placental hormone जराय-न्यासर्ग m. plain vaccines अमिश्रित लस m. . placentation Bot. जराय-न्यास m. plait (a flat fold) 5ft m." place of birth जन्म-स्थान 1. 
plaited filter paper Chem. सोमि पाव-पत्र place of public amusement लोक m. 
विनोद-स्थान N. (विनोदस्थान ancient plan I Engin. .(projection on a hori word) 
zontal plane अनुप्रस्थतल-विक्षेप) अनु place of public entertainment प्रेक्षा- विक्षेप m. 
स्थान, आमोद-स्थान n. place of public resort लोक-समागम-स्थान p. of a laboratory प्रयोगशाला-उपक्रमा 
1. (resortoir) place value = local value Math. planarian Zool. (leaf-shaped flat 
स्थानाही . 
___worms) पर्णचिपिट m. placode Zool. (a thickening of the Planck's constant Phys. क्रिया-ऊर्जाणु 
ectoderm forming the anlage of स्थिरांक m, 
... 2 उपक्रमा f. 
689 
44﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
। 
m. 
plane adj. I अनुच्चावच mfn. 
plan of a laboratory प्रयोगशाला-उपक्रमा 2 (level) समतल, सम mfn. 3 (flat) Faroe mfn. 
plant I Bot. (in its most general 4 Bot. (leaf ptyxis) अवलित 'mfn. sense) उद्भिद् . (not folded) 
2 Bot. पादप m. plane n. I (surface) पृष्ठ 1. 
3 (machinery, fixtures, etc.) संयन्त्र, 2 समपृष्ठ, समतल, सम .. 
स्थिरयन्त्र १. (fixed machinery) 3 (a block or plate used as a stan p. and machinery सर्वांग संयन्त्र . dard of flatness) # 17. 
p. association Ecology उद्धित्समाज 4 (two-dimensional extent) तल n. plane n. (a tool for smoothing sur p. body Bot. उद्भित्काय m. 
faces) समित्र. 
p. breeding उद्भित्प्रसावन n. plane vb. समन, समकरण, चिक्कणकरण .. , classification उद्भिद-वर्गीकरण 1. planed समित्रित mfn. 
p. community Ecology (living plane figure Math. समतल-आकृति . 
under similar conditions in a plane glass सम काच, समतल काच m. 
common habitat) सहवासि-उद्भिद् planeglass sheet समतल काच स्तार m. f., उद्भित्-समुदाय m. plane linear perspective समतल नेत्रदृशा p. consociation उद्भिद्-उपसमाज m. 
p. kingdom उद्भित्-सृष्टि f. plane mirror Ophthalmol. समतल दर्पण p. lice Zool. पादप-यूका . . 
m. 
p. pathology उद्भिद्-वैकारिकी f. plane of fiotation प्लवन-तल n. 
p. physiology उद्भिद्-व्यापारिकी /. plane of symmetry Zool. संमिति-तल .. p. society Ecology उद्भित्संघm. planer (that which planes) समक, समकर Plantaginaceae Bot. स्निग्धजीर-कुल 1. 
Plantaginales Bot. स्निग्धजीर-गोत्र plane section Math. समतल छेद, सम छेद Plantago Bot. स्निग्धजीरति f. (-ति for 
प्रजाति genus) plane surface Phys. समपृष्ठ, समतल n. P. ispagula सामान्य स्निग्धजीर m. planet ग्रह m. 
planula Zool. चिपिटक m. plane table सम पटल 1. 
-plasia,-plasis,-plasy -EEFT 1. (deno 
• planetary ग्रहीय mfr. 
ting development, formation) plane trigonometry समतल-त्रिकोणमिति. -plasm -अम्बु, -रस, -प्ररस plankton Biol. (minute organism -plasm, -plasma (a plastic formative __floating passively) मन्दप्लवक m. material) -घट, -घटन planning n. उपक्रमण. . 
plasmar Biol. (protoplasm) प्ररस m. 'plano- सम 
2 Physiol. (plasma is the precursor planoconcave समन्युज nfn. . . of serum लसी) प्रलसी f. (cf. प्रपितामह), planoconvex समोदुब्ज mfn. ' 
(fluid part of blood) असाम्बु m. 690 
m. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
2W 
3 Pharm. (a mixture of starch P. gallenicum 792 FEHET m. Hus and glycerol #tra) FEHTC m. P. malariae चातुष्क हिमज्वरी m. p. body अनाम्बु-काय m. 
P. praecox पक्षि हिमज्वरीm. p. cell Zool. Taka-Pilan f. 
P. vivax (causes benign tertian plasmapheresis Med. 791FERTE . fever) मृदुतृतीयक हिमज्वरी m. plasmatic I (protoplasmic) site plasmo-gen (essential substance of 
mfn. 
protoplasm) TWTT m. 2 (pertaining to, or of the nature plasmolysis Physiol. (contraction of 
of, plasma) a ti mfn. ___ the cytoplasm) रसकोच m. plasmato- 771FEL-, **** 
plasmolytic रसकोचीय mfn. plasmatoparous Bot. (discharging plasmolyze vb. 74959 . 
the protoplasmic contents) plasmoma Med. (a tumor composed द्भावक mfn. 
of plasma. cells) अस्रोदार्बुद m. plasmatorrhexis Biol. (disruption of (HETE=WEF) 
a cell) 12-an n. 
plasmophagouse , HalfHT -plasmia 1 - Fant f. 
mfn. 2 (from -plasm) -cat f. 
plasmophagy ***HETUT, STEUET 1. plasmic 1 (plasmatic) marfa mfn. plasmoptysis Biol. series n. 
2 (protoplasmic) sete mfn. plasmoquine = plasmochin (a pre -plasmic (from -plasm) -BIT 
paration of quinoline faracat for plasmochin=plasmoquine svarat treatment of malaria) ávacat f. 
plasmosome=true nucleolus Zool. plasmo-cyte (a white blood cor PRE-famafee f. 
puscle) F iat f. 
-plast - blast (formative cell) -5€, plasmo-cytoma HETET-Flateia m. 
ETETT plasmo-desm Biol. #T-SFT m. -plast (an organised particle, gran plasmodesmus plasmodesm ule, cell)-etett f. (abridged from plasmodial Zool. RAIT mfn. 
प्ररस-कोशा, as in जीवप्रकोशा bioplast) plasmodium=syncytium Zool. in plastein Biochem. (a protein-like subs 
The f. 
tance) fasterfont m. plasmodium fem m. ( for -ode plaster si m. 
like') 
plaster=emplastrum Pharm. TCTTT Plasmodium (a genus containing m . (distinguished from ointment 
the malaria parasites) tensauffa F. PETIT) (आति for प्रजाति genus) 
p. of belladonnaemplastrum P. falciparum दुष्टतृतीयक हिमज्वरी belladonnae (emp. bellad.) PICT 
m. (causes malignant tertian f297-4014 m. fever) 
p. of lead=lead plaster=emp бут 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
lastrumplumbi (emp. plumb.) 3 अभिघटना . 
=diachylon plaster=diachy- plastid -घटन .. lon सीस-पटलेप m. 
-plastid -घटन p.of soap=emplastrum saponis plastidium=plastid घटन 1. 
(emp. sap.) स्वफेन-पटलेप m. plastidome Biol. (total plastid-con plaster cast पाचूर्ण-संच m. 
___tent of a cell) घटनता. plaster of Paris = burnt gypsum plastidule Biol. घटनक . 
दग्धाचूर्ण 1. 
plastify=plasticize plastic i Biol., Surg.(capable of under- plastin (an oxyphilic substance in 
going metabolic transformation) cells) अम्लरंज्यि f. अभिक्टय mfn. 
plastinoid Biol. अम्लरंज्यिवत् 2 (characterized by modeling) plastogamy Biol. (cytoplasmic अभिघटितmfn. 
___union) कोशारसोद्वाह, कोशारससंगम m. p. art अभिघटन-कला f. 
plasto-meter (for measuring plasti p. deformation Mech. अभिघटन ___city) अभिघटिति-मान m. 
वैरूप्य . . 
plastron=ventral shield Zool. उदरवर्म p. force Physiol. अभिघटन-शक्ति . . p. operation (an operation in -plasty (act or process of forming, ____plastic surgery) अभिघटन-कर्म n. development, growth) -घटना 
p. sulphur अभिघटय गन्धक m. -plasy = -plasia 
p. surgery अभिघटन शल्य n. plate n. I (a flat piece of metal, -plastic I (developing, forming, etc.) पट्टm. 
growing)-घटक 
2 (adish) शराव M. 2 (from -plasty -घटना) -घटनीय 
3 (a sheet of paper, etc.) FTTT m. 3 (from -plasm -घट) -घटीय plate vb. पट्टन, रोपण 1. plastici-meter अभिघटिति-भान m. plateau उत्थली (उत्+स्थली), उच्च-स्थली . plasticine अभिघटनी . 
plated पट्टित mfn. plasticism (theory or practice of plate glass पट्ट-काच m. ___plastic art) अभिघटना. 
platelayer Rly. पट्ट-धायक m. plasticity अभिघटिति, अभिघटवता f. platelayer's hut Rly. पट्टधायक-कुटी f. plasticize. vb. (to render plastic) platelet Anat, faratus m. 
अभिघटघ-भावन, करण; अभिघटित-भावन, plater पट्टनकर्ता (-तृ) m. करण ... 
plate, silica सैकजा-शराव m. plasticizer अभिघटक m. 
plate support (a thing to put the plastics r (plastic surgery) अभिघटन- plate on) पट्टाधार m. 
शल्य, 
platform afa f. (elevated piece of 2 (plastic materials) अभिघटय (द्रव्य) ground), मंचक m. (from महाभारत) 
platin- = platino 692 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
platina Chem. (platinum, esp. crude p. black महातु काल m. ___native platinum) प्राकृत महातु m. p. chloride FETET PRET n. platin-ammine Chem. मह-तिजी. 
p. chloride solution महातु नीरेय platinate vb.=platinize 
विलयन n. platinate n. Chem. महीय . 
p. foil महातु-पर्ण'. plating रोपण . 
p. gray महातु धूसर m. ___ silver p. रजत-रोपण 2. 
p. lamp महातु-दीप m. platini- (platinum) Chem. मह-(महातु) p. metals महातु धातु m. platinic Chem. महिक mfn. 
p. nib महातु-चंचु . p. acid महिक अम्ल .. 
p. paper Photog. महातु-पत्र . platinichloride मह-नीरेय ". 
p. plate महातु-पट्ट m. platini-ferous Chem. महातु-भर mfn. p. resistance thermometer महातु platin-iridium Chem. मह-धनातु m. 
रोध-तापमान m. -platinite Chem. -महित 
p. sponge महातु-छिद्रिष्ठ 1. platinization Chem. महातयन .. 
p. thermometer महातु-तापमान M. platinize vb. Chem. HETTUAT m. 
p. wire महातु-तंत m. I (to cover, treat, or combine platoon Mil. (3 or 4 sections)गुल्मक m. 
with platinum) महा-आवरण,-साधन, . p. commander गुल्म-पति m. -योजन . 
platycarpous Bot. पृथुफल mfn. 2 (to deposit platinum upon by Platyhelminthes Zool. पथकृमयः m.pl. simple immersion) महातु-निमज्जन n. (platy is from Sanskrit पृथु Mat) 3 (to coat with platinum black by platypus = duckbill = duckmole electro-deposition or by chemical Zool. (a mammal having a bill precipitation) महातु-रोपण n. 
resembling that of a duck) कारण्ड platinized asbestos महातयित अदह m. चञ्चु m. platino-, platin- (platinum, plati- Platyrrhina Zool. FTFTCHTHT: m. pl. 
nous) Chem. मह- (not महा which is play n. I क्रीडा 
confusable with महा great), मह्य- 2 Engin. चाल, क्रीडा . platino-chloride Chem. मह्य-नीरेय . pleasant smell प्रिय गन्ध m. platinoid (resembling platinum) Plecoptera Zool. (an order of stone 
महात्वाभ mfn. 
fiies) अश्मपतंग-गण m. platinous Chem. Het mfn. 
pledge Com. बंधक M. (ancient word) platinum adj. Chem. (pertaining to or pledgee Com. बंधकी (-इन् ) m. 
made of platinum; of the colour pledger Com. बंधक दाता (-तु) m. platinum) महात्विय, महातु-मय, महातु-वर्ण -plegia = -plegy Med. -आधात m. mfn. 
(stroke) platinum n. Chem. महातु m. 
pleiad Chem. (a group of isotopes) p. ammine महातु तिजी f. 
सस्थानि-वर्ग m. 693 
+ 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
Pleistocene Geol. sfera n. pliers (pincers with long jaws) HET plenipotentiary n. gorffer973 (-20m. m. plenipotentiary adj. 1 (containing Pliocene Geol. fragaest n. 
or conferring full power) quriferare- -ploid -TIOT (hexa-ploid OS-TTU) 2 (of or pertaining to a pleni- -ploidy Zool. -TUTI, --TUTTI f. potentiary) quifitfe 
plot vb. (to mark the position of on a pleomorphic 9 mfn. 
plan) sifiut, vt . pleon (Gk. pleon to swim, from plot the locus vb. Math. 927=t n. _Sanskrit प्लवन) Zool. प्लवन . plotting of points Math. बिन्दु-अंकन pleopod = pleopodite = swim- . . 
meret Zool. प्लवपाद m. 
plotting the data Statistics FTH plerocercoid Zool. (encysted tape 
n. worm larva in the muscle of a ploughshare bone = vomer Zool. fish) पट्ट-कोशित m. (here कोशित refers हलास्थि । to the encysted stage) 
pluck vb. n. plerome Bot. (gives rise to the plug Fifor m. (FET PARTIE TOEFT) 
vascular cylinder) रम्भजन m. plumage Zool. 9793 m., 96717cut n. Plesio-saurus Paleontol. 66RCT f. plumbagin चित्रकि . 
(-आति for प्रजाति genus) 
Plumbaginaceae Bot. चित्रक-कुल' n. plesio-saurus 76772 in. 
Plumbaginales Bot. fa -Ta n. pleura Anat. परिक्लोम m. 
Plumbago Bot. Forgafa f. (-fa for Terfet pleurapophysis Zool. (lateral verteb- genus) 
ral process or true rib) पशुवध m., P. rosea रक्त चित्रक m. TREET f. 
P. zeylanica सामान्य चित्रक m. Pleurococcus (pleuro- 'side”; algae plumbago=graphite Mineral. forfest 
ATT growing on 'sides of trees, 11. (-507 for efter mineral) walls, etc.) Bot. tafarla f. (-for p. crucible ferfester f. for storfa gepus) 
plumbate Chem. Frio n. pleurodont Zool. (on the inner edge plumbean t-AÇet mfn. 
of the jaw) Cea m. 
plumbeous T, TA-HGT mfn. plexus Anat. Sana m. (from TecT) plumbi-(plumbic) Chem. Tfa- (af) pliable antea mfn. 
plumbi acetas=lead acetate Pharm. plica=fold afer m. 
Tarfa na plica lacrimalis Ophthalmol. wafat plumbic Chem. fitfei mfn. 1 m. 
p. acid (ortho, meta) fra FT plicate Bot. (having longitudinal n. (sed, ETH) 
folds) #-OPETET mfn. 
plumbi-ferous Chem. -77 mfn. plier (fr. ply to bend),49 m. plumbite Chem. Hift n. 
694 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
plumb line (a line or chord) सीस-रेखा, pneumatic tyre वाति-पविm. 
सीस-रज्जु. 
pneumatocyst = pneumatophore plumbo- (plumbous) Chem. सीस्य- Zool. (air cavity serving as a float) plumbo-niobate Mineral. सीस-काशीय . वातप्लव m. plumbous Chem. सीस्य mfn. 
pneumatophore I = breathing plumbum Chem. सीस .. 
roots Bot. श्वसन मूल 1. plumed seed Bot. (having a hairy z=pneumatocyst Zool. 
.tuft') शिखि-बीज 1. 
pneumococcus Bact. क्लोमगोलाणु m. Plumeria Bot. क्षीरचम्पकति f. (-ति for pneumogastric ganglia Zool. क्लो 
प्रजाति genus) 
मोदर प्रगण्ड m. ____P. acuminata. सामान्य क्षीरचम्पक m. pneumogastric nerve Zool. क्लोमोदर plummet सीसक . 
चेता . plumule Bot. (the apical portion of pneumonia Med. (from Gk. pleumon ___ the embryo axis) भ्रूणाग्र n. ___ from Sanskrit क्लोमन्) क्लोमपाक m. plunger मज्जक m. 
Po (polonium) Chem. तो (तोयातु) plus Math. धन, युत 
Poa Bot. Fatifa f. (-fa for sarfa genus) plus strain Bot. धन अंशुm. 
P. cyanosuriodes ART FAIT f. pluteus Zool. (having anteriorly pron pocket गोह m. 
jecting processes) अग्रतोवर्ध (वर्ध for p. battleship Mil. लघु रणपोत m. प्रवर्ध), डिम्भ m. 
p.-clip गोह-स्वज m. Pluto black Col. Ind. यम काल m. -p.-knife = penknife गोह-क्षुरी = 
P. brown यम बभ्रm. 
- लेखनी-क्षुरी . P. milling black यम संकोचन काल p.-lens गोह-वीक्ष m. 
p. radar गोह-तेजोन्वेष m. P. orange यम नारंग m. 
p. spatula (folding) गोह-प्रथ m. Plutoform black Col. Ind. यम वम्र काल 
(भंज्य) m. 
p. spectroscope Phys. गोह-रंगावलीक्ष P. colours (azo direct dyes ren 
dered fast to washing by p. stopwatch गोह-विरामघटी f.. 
after-treatment with formalde- pod=legume Bot. farffa f. __ hyde) यमवन रंग m. 
-pod, -poda -पाद plutonium (Pu) (element no. 94) podetium Bot. (a. stalklike body) __ चतुर्नवातु m. (चौ) 
वृन्तकी . plywood स्तरकाष्ठ N. 
podite Zool. 391T 17. P.M. म. प. (मध्याह्न पश्चात्) 
podium पादक m. -pnea -श्वास m. 
podophyllin लघुपत्रि f. pneumatics वातिकी f. . 
podophyllum (podoph.). = podo pneumatic trough Chem. alfa-atent f. phylli rhizoma=podophyllum 
m. 
695 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
__m. 
rhizome = Mayapple root= p. of order Parl. Practice औचित्य American mandrake Pharm. 
प्रश्न m. लघुपत्र-मूल . 
p. of reflection Ophthalmol. 987 Podophyllum Bot. लघुपति f. (-ति for वर्तन-बिन्दु m. 
प्रजाति genus) 
p. of refraction .Phys. भुजायन-बिन्दु P. emodi = Indian podophyl ____lum सामान्य लघुपत्र m. 
p. of regard=p. of fixation -poiesis Med. -उत्पाद 
p. of release Mach. उन्मोक-पद 2. -poietic Med. -उत्पादक 
p. of reversal विपर्यय-बिन्दु m. Poinciane Bot. (ornamental .flowers) p. of rotation परिभ्रमण-बिन्दु m. 
प्राभरणति f. (-ति for प्रजाति genus) . p. of sperm entry Zool. शुक्रकोशा P. regia राज पाभरण m. 
प्रवेश-बिन्दु, शुक्र-प्रवेश-बिन्दु m. Poinsettia Bot. (coloured bracts) p. of support Phys. आधार-बिन्दु 
वणिनिपत्रति f. (-ति for प्रजाति genus) 
P. pulcherrima शोभन वणिनिपत्र m. p. of suspension Phys. निलम्बन point I Macb. पद n. (as in p. of ad बिन्दु m. 
mission) . 
p. of wandering बिन्दु-भ्राम m. 2 Math. बिन्दु m. (as in . 43) pointed कण्टाग्र mfn. 3 अंक m., अन., अणि . . 
p. legs कंटान पाद m. p. of admission Macb. प्रवेश-पद . p. tip अणि m. p. of compression Macb. संपीड- pointer I सूची., देष्टा (1) m. 
पद १. 
2 (dog) Zool. (it hunts by scent) p. of concurrence Math. संगम-बिन्दु गन्धाखेटिक m. (पाखेटिक ancient 
word for hound) p. of contact Math. peuzi-fare m. point focus Ophthalmol. Fargarfar f. p. of convergence Ophthalmol. points=hints Math. उद्देशक m. 
अभिसार-बिन्दु, अभिसरण-बिन्दु m. poiser=halter = balancer Zool. p. of cut off Macb. रोध-पद N. 
संतोलक m. p. of divergence Ophthalmol. 94- poison faq n. ___ सार-बिन्दु, अपसरण-बिन्दु m. poison vb. Physical Chem. दूषण 1. p. of emergence Ophthalmol. poison bulb. Bot. सुदर्शन m. (a plant, 
उन्मज्जन-बिन्दु m. . . . 
Crinum deflexum) p. of fixation = p. of regard poisoned विषकृत mfn. . 
Ophthalmol. लक्ष-बिन्दु m. . poisoned food faeta n. p. of incidence Ophthalmol. आपात- poison glands.Zool. विष-ग्रंथि m. . बिन्दु m. . . 
poison hemlock विषगर्जर m. . puof intersection मिथश्छेद-बिन्दु, poisoning (of catalyst) दूषण .. 
सिंबलोदन बिन्दु m. 
poker तुदm. 696 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
pokeroot=phytolacca Pharm. (con- police आरक्षी (-इन्) m. (ancient 
_tains a very bitter resin) कटूद्यास m. .word) -polar Zool. -लांगूल (axon) 
p. department आरक्षि-विभाग m. polar ध्रुवी (-इन्), ध्रुवीय mfn. 
p. rules प्रारक्षि-नियम m. . p. bear=Ursus maritimus Zool. policeman (an instrument, as a 
ध्रुवीय ऋक्ष=सामुद्र ऋक्ष m. 
flat piece of rubber on the end p. body I Bact. ध्रुव-काय M. 
of a glass rod, for removing 2=polar cell=polar globule solids from a beaker or other Biol. (a minute cell which vessel) अपघर्ष m. separates from the egg during policy Insurance गोपलेख (गोप stands its maturation; finally dis.. both for आगोप and प्रगोप) appearing) लोपिका . 
accident p. दुर्घटना गोपलेख m. p. caps Cytol. ध्रुव-टोपी f 
endowment p. प्राभूत गोपलेख m. p. cell=p. body 
fire p. अग्नि-गोपलेख m. p. distance Math. ध्रुवीय दूरत्व १. lapsed p. व्यपगत गोपलेख m. p. globute=p. body 
life p. जीवन-गोपलेख m. p. line Math. ध्रुवीय रेखा . 
running p. चल गोपलेख m. p. orange Col. Ind. ध्रुवीय नारंग m. unvalued p. अनहित गोपलेख m. p. plane Math. ध्रुवि समतल . whole life p. आजीवन गोपलेख M. p. red Col. Ind. ध्रुवीय रक्त m. 
p. holder गोपले ख-धारी (इन्) m. p. seas ध्रुवीय समुद्र m. 
p. loan गोपलख-ऋण n. p. yellow Col. Ind. ध्रुवीय पीत m. p. year गोपलेख-वर्ष m. polarimeter Optics (for measuring poliment=red chalk . ___polarisation) अभिस्पन्द-मान m. polish n. प्रमार्जm. polariscope Optics अभिस्पन्देक्ष m. polish vb. प्रमार्जन . . polarisespolarize 
polishable प्रमृज्य nfr. . polarity Zool. (the quality of polished प्रमार्जित, प्रमृष्ट nfr. ___ having poles) ध्रुविता f. 
polished surface. Phys. प्रमार्जित तल .. polarization अभिस्पन्दन . 
polishing cloth प्रमार्जन-वस्त्र. polarize vb. अभिस्पन्दन । 
polishing red Col. Ind. प्रमार्जन रक्त m. polarized light अभिस्पन्दित प्रकाश m. polishings (rice) Biochem. प्रमार्ज m. polarizer अभिस्पन्दक m. 
political department राजनैतिक विभाग, pole I Rly. वलक m. 
देशीयराज्य-विभाग m. 2 ध्रुव m. 
political economy राज्यार्थव्यवस्था f., 3 (of polar coordinates) Math. अर्थशास्त्र . . 
आदि बिन्दु m. 
political members राजनैतिक सदस्य m. 4 ( 
5 yds.) = rod वंश m. politics राजनीति . . .. polecat ध्रुवविडाल m. 
poll : (casting of votes) मतदान n. 697 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
2 (recording of votes) मतलेखन : polyembryony = germinogony 3 (number of vote cast) दत्तमत- Zool. बहुभ्रूणन . संख्या, मतसंख्या . 
Polygala पुरुदुग्धति f. (-ति for प्रजाति 4 (place where the votes are cast) genus) मतदानस्थान, मतस्थान 1. 
P. senega क्लोम्य पुरुदुग्ध m. pollen chamber Bot. पराग-वेश्म .. Polygallaceae Bot. (the milkworts) pollen grain Bot. पराग-कण m. 
पुरुदुग्ध-कुल n. pollen sac Bot. पराग-कोष m. 
polygamous Bot. सर्वलिंग (पं-, स्त्र pollination Bot. (transference of pol- उभय-लिंग) mfn. 
len-grains) पराग-संक्रमण, पराग-संक्रामण, polygenetic पुरुच्छाय mfr. परागण .. 
polyglandular compound (male, pollinium Bot. (pollen mass) परागपिण्ड female) Pharm. पुरुग्रन्थिसंयोग m. (पुरुष, 
स्त्री) pollinodium = antheridium Kधानी polygon Math. बहुभुज M. 
p. law Phys. बहुभुज नियम m. polluted water Hygiene दूषित जल n. p. of forces Mech. बल-बहुभुज m. pollution of air Hygiene वायु-दूषण १. p. of velocities Phys. प्रवेग-बहुभुज m. polonjum Chem. तोयातुm. 
Polygonaceae Bot. अम्लवेतस-कुल .. poly- (Greek polz from Sanskrit पुरु) polygonal Math. बहुभुज 
I Cbem. पुरु- . 
p. prism बहुभुज संक्षेत्र n. ___ 2 बहु 
p. pyramid Math. बहुभुज स्तूप m. polyad (with a valency greater than. Polygonales Bot. अम्लवेतस-गोत्र n. ___two) पुरुसंयुज mfn. 
Polygonum Bot. पुरुसन्धिति / (-ति for polyadelphous Bot. पुरु-संलाग mfa. प्रजाति genus) polyandrous Bot..पृथक्पुंकेसर mfn. Polygordius Zool. (genus of Archi Polyanthus Bot. पुरुपुष्पति f. (-ति for annellida) प्रवलय्याति f. (आति for 
प्रजाति genus) 
प्रजाति genus) P. tuberosa सामान्य पुरुपुष्प m. polyhedral angleMath. बहुतल कोण m. polyarch Bot. पुरुसूत्र mfn. 
polyhedron Geom. बह्वनीक m. polyatomic पुरुपरमाण्विक mfn. polyhydric (poly + hydroxyl + -ic) polyaxial joint=multiaxial joint Chem. qera mfn. . Anat. बह्वक्ष सन्धि m. 
polyhydroxy adj. Chem. पुरूदजार mfn.' Polychaeta Zool. gerifiut: m. pl. polyhydroxyl Chem. पुरूदजारल . polychasial Bot. पुरुशाखी (-इन्) mfn. polymer Chem. पुरुभाज m. ' polychasium Bat. पुरुशाख m. polymeric Chem. पुरुभाजिक mfn. polychromine Col. Ind. पुरुवर्णी . polymerism Chem. पुरुभाजता f. polycythaemia Med. (excess of red polymerization Chem. पुरुभाजन . 
. bloodle colls प्रतिखतकोशता 
_____p. flask पुरुभाजन-पलिघm. 
698 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
polymerize vb. Tea n. 
plates)=Placophora Zool. 464€T: polymorph Biol. 1 (a polymorphous m. pl. 
organism) पुरुरूप m. 
polyplast=morula Zool: Tanat m. 2 (one of the several forms of polyploid Zool. ETU, TETOT mfn. 
such an organism) qanuni m. polyploidy Zool. peluat, GUTTET f. polymorphic nucleus 9569-rzfce f. polypuspolyp polymorphism पुरुरूपता f. 
polysaccharide Chem. पुरुशर्करेय . polymorphonuclear (leucocyte) ge- polysaccharose Chem. gearetra n. 
ausrufca mfn. (Ferachtet) 
polysepalous Bot. quefirent mfn. poly-neuritis Med. qua199 n. polystele Bot. 764FH m. poly-nucleated Zool. acufen mfn. Polystomata Zool. TEHET: m.pl. polyp = polype = polypus Zool. Polystomatidae Zool. (a family of 
(mouth surrounded by tentacles) worms having a group of strong qara n. 
suckers) TT-cer m. polypeptide Biochem. qeyren. Polystomella Zool. Telegrifa f. (-ofa Polypetalae = Choripetalae Bot. for woufar genus) 
CATETT: m.pl. (petals are not polysulphide Chem. TERLET n. united) 
polyvalent i Bact. (containing anti polypetalous Bot. (having the petals bodies specific for, or antigens of, 
separate) qurica mifa. 
more than one species or strain of polyphasic Zoo (98-1999), microorganism) प्रतिबहु mfn. 
gestart mfn. . 
2 Chem, qerine mfn. polyphasic system Zool. पुरुषावस्थ polyxylic stems Bot. पुरुदारुक स्तम्भ m. 
संहति . 
Polyzoa = Bryozoa Zool. 'moss polyphenyl black Col. Ind. TEIC animals”) carotta: m.pl. 
To m. 
pome Bot. उत्कोलक n. p. blue पुरुदर्शल नील m. 
pomeranian (a dog with a foxlike p. blue-black TOGETT 11-Fitur m. head) HET m. p. fast grey पुरुदर्शल स्थिर धूसर m. Pomona green=night green p. fast red qegria FETT TT m. ponceau=poppy red Col. Ind. There p. green पुरुदर्शल हरि m. 
SIT IST m. p. orange TEGRIET ATTT m. 
p. d'Orient To FITFITTITT m. p. pure blue पुरुदर्शल शुद्ध नील m. pond तडाग m. p. yellow पुरुदर्शल पीत m. 
p. snail Zool. 751T-F275 m. . polyphyodont Zool. abarcara, TEATTGR p. tortoise Zool. qer*** m. 
mfn. 
Pongamia Bot. g ufa f. (-fat for p. dentition agai-eri n. 
Taifa genus) . Polyplacophora (eight calcified P. glabra Emp 3 m. 
699 
2 
M.﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
pongamia oil करञ्ज-तैल n. 
p. fast yellow Y=fast yellow Ponolith=enamel white 
p. flavine FF=Indian yellow pons (a bridge) Anat. Et m. 
FF=azoflavine FF ponsol black B paste = alizan p. green B=acid green G 
threne black B 
p. light green SF yellowish = p. blue BCS powder=indan light green SF yellowish 
threne BCS 
p. light yellow GG=fast light p. dark blue BR paste=aliz 
yellow anthrene dark blue BO 
p. ruby G=ruby red A p. green B=alizanthrene green p. scarlet RR=rainbow scarlet 
в 
. 4R p. violet RR paste = alizan p. sulfon black BB=sulphon 
threne violet RR extra 
cyanine black BA p. yellow G paste = alizanth p. sulfon blue B=sulphon acid 
rene yellow G 
blue BA pontachrome black A = chrome 
p. sulphon violet R=fast wool black A (ponta- is an abbre 
violet NB viation of the name of the p. violet 6BN = acid violet manufacturers “Du Pont de 
6B Nemours & Co.) 
pontamine black EX=direct black p. blue R=chrome blue 2 R MS p. blue-black R conc.chrome p. blue AX=direct blue Gextra 
blue-black R 
p. brown CG=direct brown p. brown MW=chrome brown GXR p. red B-superchrome red B p. catechu B= diamine cate p. violet SW=chrome violet 
chine B pontacyl amaranth = amaranth 
p. copper-blue RRX=Oxamine p. blue-black SX=acid blue copper-blue 2R 
black 
p. diazo black BH conc. = p. brilliant blue A = brilliant direct fast black BH 
acid blue A 
p. diazo bordeaux B=diazo p. carmine 2 Gracid carmine bordeaux 7B p. cloth red 3 G= cloth red p. diazo orange=rosanthrene 
3 GA 
orange R p. dark green T=agalma black p. diazo scarlet A = rosan 
green T . . 
threne A p. fast violet IoB=fast acid p. fast black FF=direct black 
violet Id B 
FF extra 200 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
p. fast pink BL=chlorazol fast porogamy Bot. (entry of the pollen 
pink BK 
tube through the micropyle) p. fast red F=direct fast red F ETTETE m. (usat abbreviated to p. fast scarlet 4BA=direct fast TT) 
scarlet SE 
porometer (to measure the size of p. green BX=direct green B fine pores) FETHET m. p. light yellow 5GX=chlorazol 
poroscope रन्ध्रेक्ष m. fast yellow 5GK 
poroscopic रन्ध्रेक्षीय mfn. p. orange R=direct orange R poroscopy FI f. p. scarlet B=direct scarlet B porose=porous TETT () mfn. p. sky blue $BX = direct sky poroseness (fra f. 
blue 
porosimeter (porosity-t-meter) Phy p. violet N=direct violet N 
sical Chem. FEATHTET m. p. yellow SX=direct yellow porosity fat f... poodle (dog) Zool. (proud looking) porous FETT (-) mfn. 
Frit () m. 
p. battery jar रन्ध्री समूहा-कलश m. pool ras n. 
p. diaphragm Frent are m. poor visibility अल्प-दृश्यता 
p. plate रन्ध्रि शराव . poppy fansa n. (from f4+964) p. saucer रन्नि शरावक .. popular name=trivial name Avi p. tile The 4 f. 
fauna 71-74 n. 
porpezite Mineral. (gold containing population 1 Statistics (entire group) palladium upto 10%) fotografuf 
समग्न 
m. (-इज for खनिज mineral) 2 FAIENT F. 
porpoise=dolphin Zool. (aragare m. porcelain FTTHCHT f. 
porpoise oil Chem. Paralar<*n. p. acid dish TFT. ETTa n. port 1 (sea port) 47 n. (749-977) p. dish FITT-TTT the 
2 (a fortified wine of rich taste porcupine 4 (-) m. - 
and aroma) Efert f. pore रन्ध्र . . 
3 Mach. n. Porifera = Spongiae = Spongida portable are mfn. (ancient word) 
Zool. ftu: m. pl. - 
portal system Zool, केशिकाभाजि-संहति f. pork tapeworm = Taenia solium portal vein · Anat. #FFFETTIST f. 
Zool. F.Tafers m. 
(being a large vein), TaTT poro- रन्ध्र 
faret f. (breaks up into capillaries) Porocephalus armillatus aut porter 75 m. 
Falem. 
port-folio CETER M. porogamic method: Bot.. द्वारोद्वाह रीति portrait आलेख्य n., छवि ., जीवालेख्य n. 
fi 
(from life जीव) 701 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
portray vb. आलेखन M. 
positively charged Elec. उद्युत् -प्रभृत Portulaca Bot. लोणीति f. (-ति for positively charged body Phys. 
प्रजाति genus) 
उद्युत्-प्रभृत काय m. P. oleracea सामान्य लोणी f. 
positively geotropic Bot. भूम्यावर्तिक, Portulacaceae Bot. लोणी-कुल.. 
भूम्याकृष्ट mfn. position स्थिति . 
positively heliotropic Bot. प्रकाशा position ratio Math. स्थिति-निष्पत्ति f. 
वर्तिक mfn. -positive (gram-positive) Bact. -579754 
positively hydrotropic Bot. जलावतिक (सुषवाधाव्य) 
mfn. positive r Statistics अनुलोम, धन 
positron Phys., Chem. उदणु mm. (short 2 Math. n., adj. धन 
for उद्युदणु) 3Chem. अस्त्यात्मक mfn. (if this test 
be positive....यदि यह परीक्षा posology I Math. (doctrine of bure 
quantity) शुद्धमात्रिकी f. अस्त्यात्मक हो....) p. association Statistics सहसम्बन्ध 
2=dosology Med. (science of 
doses) मात्रिकी m. p. attributes Statistics अस्ति -गुण m. 
posses vb. धारण n. p. catalysis Chem धन प्रावेजn possessory lien Com. धारक ग्रहणा p. charge Phys. उद्युत्-प्रभार m. 
धिकार m. p. check Econ. प्राकृतिक अवरोध m. possibility शक्यता . p. correlation = direct corre- possible शक्य mfn. 
lation Statistics अनुलोम सहसम्बन्ध 
possibly शक्यतया 
post I दण्ड, स्थूण m. p. electricity (it has a higher 
2 Adminis. पद 1. उद् potential) उद्-द्युत् . 
3 प्रेष १. (Hindi डाक) p. heteropycnosis Zool. पाशविषम post vb. प्रेषण . 
संघनना . 
postage प्रेष-शुल्क 1. p. integral index Math. धन पूर्णाङ्क postage stamp प्रेष-मुद्रांक m. 
घाताकm. 
Postal प्रेषालय-, प्रेष min. p. ion उद्युदयन, धन अयन 1. 
p. and telegraph service प्रेष p. number धन-संख्या f. 
तथा दूरलेख सेवा . . p. plate Elec. उत्-पट्टm. (उद्=उद्युत्) p. cash certificate tष रोक-पत्र n. p. pole Elec. उद्धृव m. (उद= p. order tष आदेश m. __उद्युत्), धन ध्रुव m. 
postanal gut Zool. पश्चगुदान्त्र n. p. print Photog. अनुच्छाया f. postaxial (side) Zool. (behind the p. skewness . .Statistics अनुलोम- axis of the body) पश्चाक्ष mfn. ... विषमता . ।' . _post-bag पत्र-स्यून M. (Hindi डाक की थैली) 
p. test अस्ति-परीक्षा : 
post-box-letter-box पत्र-पेटिका f. 
m. 
.702 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY. 
post-boy पत्र-बटुm. 
Engin. (a wheatstone bridge in post card प्रेष-पत्रक n. 
which the resistances making up postcava=inferior vena cava Zool., the arms are contained in a box 
Anat. अधर-महानीला f. 
and varied by means of plugs) postcaval vein Zool. अधर-महाशिरा. रोधमाप-पेटी. postdated Com. उत्तरतिथीय mfn. post orbital Anat., Zool. (situated 
p. cheque उत्तरतिथीय धनादेश m. ____ behind the orbit) अक्षिकूप-पश्च Mfm. poster विज्ञप्ति, हस्तविज्ञप्ति ., विज्ञापनपत्र n. post partum प्रसवोत्तर mfn. posterior Anat., Zool. पश्च 
postpone-delay vb. विलम्बन 1. p. cardinal=p. cardinal veins post-sacral Zool. पश्च-त्रिक , 
Zool. पश्च-मुख्या. 
post-script पश्च-लेख m., पश्चात् स्फुरित 1, p. chamber (in the heart)= post-scutellum Zool. पश्च-वरूथिका ___ventricle पश्च-वेश्म . 
postulate उपधारण, उपग्रहण 1. p. choroid plexus पश्च झल्लरी-प्रतान postulation उपधारणा f., उपनाह m. 
m. 
post-war development scheme p. cornua. पश्च-श्रृंगn. 
युद्धोत्तर-विकास-योजना p. end पश्च-अन्त n. 
post yellow = new yellow p. lobe पश्च-पालि. 
post zygapophysis Zool. पश्च-योजिवर्ष p. mesentery पश्चान्त्रयुज m. p. part Anat. पश्च-भाग m. 
pot घट m., पात्र n. p. pituitary Pharm. पश्च-पोष m. potarite Mineral. (a mercury-palla p. principal point Ophthalmol. ____dium amalgam) निषूच-संरस m. 
पश्च-प्रधान-बिन्दु m. 
potash Chem. ff. p. wall Anat. पश्च-भित्ति f. 
p. alum सजि-स्फटिका f. posteriorly Zool. अभिपश्च 
p. bulbs सजि-कन्द m. post fertilization पश्च-निषेचन n. 
p. by alcohol (caustic potash post-free प्रेषशुल्क-मुक्त mfn. 
purified by dissolving in post-graduate स्नातकोत्तर mfn. 
absolute alcohol) सुषव-पूत-सजि . posting Com. प्रेषण, रोपण, प्रवेशन, प्रपंजी p. feldspar Mineral. सजि-स्फतीय . 
प्रवेशन 1. 
p. glass सर्जि-काच m. . p. a letter पत्र-प्रेषण 1. 
p. granite Petrog. सजि-कणाश्म m. p. the entires प्रविष्टि-रोपण, प्रपंजीयन p. niter potassium nitrate 
n. 
सजि-पाक्य-दहातु भूयीय ॥. postman पत्रवाह M. (ancient word), p. soap सजि-स्वफेन m. 
पत्रवाहक m. (Hindi डाकिया) 
p. sulphurated = sulphurated post office प्रेषालय m. (Hindi डाकघर) potassa = liver of sulphur post office box प्रेषालय-पेटीf. 
शुल्बारि-सजि . post office box or bridge Elec. potash vb. Chem. सर्जीयन n. 
703 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
- 
- 
(to treat with potash; specif. to caseharden with potassium 
ferrocyanide) सजि-साधन, -दहण n. potashery सजि-गृह n. potass (potash, potassium) सजि f., 
दहातु m. potassa (potash) सजि . potass-amide Chem. दह-तिक्तेय n. potassic Chemm. दहिक mfn. potassi-ferous Chem. दह-भर mfn. potassii hydroxidum = potassium 
hydroxide potassii iodidum=potassium 
iodide potassio- (potassium) Chem. दह 
(दहातु) potassio-mercuric iodide Pharm. 
दह-पारदिक जम्बेय . potassium Chem. दहातु m. 
p. acetate दहातु शुक्तीय .. p. acid oxalate दहातु अम्ल तिग्मीय. p. acid sulphate दहातु अम्ल शुल्बीय 
. p. acid tartrate दहातु अम्ल न्यासवीय 
p. bicarbonate दहातु द्वचंगारीय n. p. bichromate दहातु द्विवर्णीय 1. p. bifluoride दहातु द्वितरस्वेय . p. biiodate दहातु द्विजम्बीय n. p. binoxalate दहातु द्वितिग्मीय n. p. bioxalate दहातु द्वितिग्मीय . p. bismuth iodide दहातु भिदातु 
जम्बय n. p. bisulphate दहातु द्विशुल्बीय N. p. bisulphite दहातु द्विशुल्बित N. p. bitartrate दहातु द्विन्यासवीय. p. borate दहातु टांकीय १. p. boro-fiuoride दहातु टांक-तरस्वेय . p. bromate दहातु दुरीय n. p. bromide दहातु दुरेय , p.-n-butyl-dithiocarbonate दहातु 
ऋ-घृतल-द्विगंधांगारीय . p.-iso-butyrate दहातु-स-घृतीय n. p. carbonate दहातु प्रांगारीय n. p. chlorate दहातु नीरीय n. p. chloride दहातु नीरेय n. p. chloro-chromate दहातु नीर-वर्णीय 
p. chloro-platinite दहातु नीर-महित 
p. alum दहातु स्फटिका f. p. amide दहातु तिक्तेय n. p. ammonium chromate दहातु 
तिक्तातु वर्णीय 1. p. amyl-di-thiocarbonate दहातु ___मंडल-द्वि-गन्धांगारीय . 
p. antimonate.दहातु अंजनीय 1. p. antimonate tartrate दहातु अंज 
नीय न्यासवीय n. . p. arsenate दहातु नेपालीय 1. १. p. benzene sulphonate दहातु धूपेन्य 
शुल्बायीय . p. benzeate दहातु धूपेय . 
. 704 
p. chromate दहातु वर्णीय n. p. chromium oxalate दहातु वर्गातु 
तिग्मीय n. p. citrate दहातु निम्बवीय n. p. cobalti-cyanide दहातु केत्वि 
श्यामेय. p. cobalti-nitrite दहातु केत्वि-भूयित १. p. cobalto-thio-cyanate दहातु केत्व 
गन्ध-श्यामीय . p. cupri-tartrate दहातु तानि-न्यासवीय 
. . p. cyanate दहातु श्यामीय . p. cyanide दहातु श्यामेय 1. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
___p. hydroxide = potassii hydr 
oxidum (pot, hydrox.) Pharm. दहातु उदजारेय . p. hypoantimonate दहातु उपांजनीय 
1. 
p. hypo-chlorite दहातु उप-नीरित . p. hypo-phosphite दहातु उप-भास्वित 
n. 
p. dichromate (powdered) दहातु 
द्विवर्णीय 1. (क्षुण्ण) p. dihydrogen-citrate दहातु द्वयुद 
जन-निम्बवीय. p. dihydrogen-phosphates दहातु 
द्वयुदजन-भास्वीय n. p. di-nitro-o-cresylate दहातु द्वि 
भूय-ऊ-ऋविपलीय . p. di-thio-oxalate दहातु द्वि-गन्ध 
तिग्मीय 1. p. ethyl malonate दहातु दक्षुल - उत्कोलायीय . p. ethyl-sulphate दहातु दक्षुल-शुल्बीय __n. 
p. ethyl-xanthate (technical) दहातु 
दक्षुल-पीतीय 1. (परिभाषित) p. ferric-oxalate दहातु प्रयसिक 
तिग्मीय. p. ferri-cyanide दहातु अयसि-श्यामेय. p. ferro-cyanide दहातु अयस्य-श्यामेय 
p. iodate दहातु जम्बीय . p. iodide = potassii iodidum 
(pot. iod.) Pharm. दहातु जम्बेय. p. lactate दहातु दुग्धीय . p. lead iodide दहातु सीस जम्बेय .. p. malate दहातु उत्कोलीय . . p. malonate दहातु उत्कोलायीय . 
, manganate दहातु लोहकीय . p. mercuric cyanide दहातु पारदिक 
श्यामेय 1. p. mercuric iodide दहातु पारदिक 
जम्बेय. p. meta-bi-sulphite दहातु सम-द्वि 
शुल्बित n. p. meta-borate दहातु सम-टांकीय . p. metantimonate दहातु समांजनीय 
n. 
p. fluoride (anhydrous) दहातु तरस्वेय ___n. (अजल) 
p. formate दहातु वम्रीय n. p. glycero-phosphates दहातु मधुर 
भास्वीय n. p. hippurate दहातु अश्वमेहीय . p. hydrate दहातु जलीय n. p. hydrogen oxalate दहातु उदजन 
तिग्मीय. p. hydrogen phthalate दहातु उद 
जन व्युत्तैलीय . p. hydrogen saccharate दहातु उद 
जन शर्करीय. p. hydrogen sulphate दहातु उदजन 
शुल्बीयn. p. hydrogen tartrate दहातु उदजन . न्यासवीय . 
705 45 
p. meta-phosphate दहातु सम - भास्वीय 1. p. methyl-dithiocarbonate दहातु 
प्रोदल-द्विगन्धांगारीय .. p. methyl sulphate दहातु प्रोदल 
शुल्बीय. p. molybdate दहातु संवर्णीय।. 
• mono-borate दहातु एक-टांकीय 
- Åų Å Á Á 
p. nitrate दहातु भूयीय n. p. nitrite दहातु भूयित . p. 3:nitro-phthal-imide दहातु ३: 
भूय-व्युत्तैल-वितिक्तेय . 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
p. nitro-prusside दहातु भूयोदश्यामेय 
. 
p. salicylate दहातु नम्रलीय. p. selenate दहातु मेचीय . p. seleno-cyanate दहातु मेच्य-श्यामीय 
p. oleate (technical) दहातु नक्षीय n. 
(परिभाषित) p. oxalate दहातु तिग्मीय . p. oxalate (tetra) दहातु तिग्मीय n. 
(चतुर्) p. oxalate acid दहातु तिग्मीय अम्ल ___n. 
p. palmitate दहातु तालीय n. p. perchlorate दहातु अतिनीरीय n. p. periodate दहातु अतिजम्बीय .. p. permanganate दहातु अतिलोहकीय 
p. silicate दहातु सैकतीय 7. p. silico-fluoride (technical) दहातु 
सैकत-तरस्वेय 1. (परिभाषित) p. silico-tungstate दहातु सैकत 
चण्डीय 1. p. silver-cyanide दहातु रजत-श्यामेय 
p. persulphate दहातु अतिशुल्बीय . p. phenol-sulphonate दहातु दर्शव 
शुल्बायीय. p. phosphate दहातु भास्वीय. p. phosphate acid दहातु भास्वीय 
अम्ल .. p. phthalate acid दहातु व्युत्तैलीय 
अम्ल .. p. phthal-imide दहातु व्युत्तैल 
वितिक्तेय . p. platino-cyanide दहातु मह्य-श्यामेय ___n. 
p. propionate दहातु प्रमेदीय .. p.n - propyl-dithiocarbonate 
दहातु ऋ-प्रमेल-द्विगन्धांगारीय. p. pyro-antimonate (soluble) ETEI __अग्न्यंजनीय 1. (विलेय) 
p. pyro-borate दहातु अग्नि-टांकीय 7. p. pyro-phosphate दहातु अग्नि 
भास्वीय n. p. pyro-sulphate दहातु अग्नि-शुल्बीय 
। p. saccharate acid दहातु शर्करीय अम्ल' 
p. sodium tartrate (Rochelle salt) 
दहातु क्षारातु न्यासवीय. (अपिक्षाद लवण) p. stearate (technical) दहातु वसीय 1. 
(परिभाषित) p. succinate दहातु तणीया . p. sulph-anilate दहातु शुल्ब-नीलीय. p. sulphate (powder, crystals) 
दहातु शुल्बीय n. (क्षोद, स्फट) p. sulphide (mono) दहातु शुल्बेय . 
(एक) p. sulphide (poly) दहातु शुल्बेय 1. 
(पुरु) p. sulphite दहातु शुल्बित १. p. sulphocarbolate दहातु शुल्बांग 
वीय .. p. sulphocarbonate दहातु शुल्बांगा 
रीय. p. sulpho-cyanide दहातु शुल्ब 
श्यामेय . p. tannate दहातु शल्कीय. p. tartrate दहातु न्यासवीय . p. tartrate acid दहातु न्यासवीय अम्ल 
. p. tellurate दहातु वंगकीय 1. p. tellurite दहातु वंगकित 1. p. tetraborate दहातु चतुष्टांकीय n. p. tetroxalate दहातु चतुस्तिग्मीय ॥. 
766 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
12. 
p. thio-carbonate (technical) दहातु pound I (1b. ; 16 ounces) प्रांजलि m. ____गन्धांगारीय n. (परिभाषित) 
(प्रां.; १६ शुक्तिका) thio-cyanate दहातु गन्ध-श्यामीय 2 (1b. t.; 12 ounces; 5760 grains) 
प्रांजलिका f. (प्रांजि.); हम प्रांजलि m. (है. p. thio-sulphate दहातु गन्ध-शुल्बीय 1. प्रां.; १२ शुक्ति ; ५७६० यव) p. tungstate दहातु चण्डीय 1. 
3 (1b. ap.; 12 ounces) प्रांजलिका f. p. urate दहातु मेहीय .. 
(प्रांजि.); भैषजिक प्रांजलि M. (म. प्रां.; p. xanthate दहातु पीतीय n. 
१२ शुक्ति) potato पालुm. 
poundal Phys. Flat 1. (safar pound pote=Indian red Col. Ind. 
+बल; a unit of force in the F.P.S. potency शक्ति . 
system) potent शक्तिशाली (-इन्) mfn. 
pounder (one who or that which potential adj. गुप्त, संभावी (-इन्), शक्य mfn. pounds or pulverises) क्षोदक n. potential n. Phys. शक्म 1. 
pourpre francaise=orchili potential energy (owing to position powder r क्षोद M., चूर्ण १. 
स्थिति) Phys. स्थितिक-ऊर्जा f. 
2= pulvis (pulv.) Pharm. क्षोद m. potentiality Mil. संभाविता, शक्यता, शक्ति powder blue Col. Ind. क्षोद नील 
m. potentiometer (potential + - meter) p. fuchsine sriegatait f. 
Elec. शक्ममान 8. 
p. green क्षोद हरि m. potometer Bot. (for measuring the powdered quo mfn. 
rate of transpiration in plants) powdered charcoal = charcoal उत्स्वेदमान m. 
powder pot still घट-पासोत्र. 
powdered coke = coke dust न्यंगार pottery clay कौलाल-मृत्तिका 
धूलि. pouch Zool. ForTETT 11. 
powdered gypsum क्षुण्ण आचूर्ण 1. pouched Zool. शिशुधान 
powder of ipecacuanha and opium p. animal शिशुधान-मृग, शिशुधान-प्राणी = Dover's powder = pulvis 
(-इन्) m. 
ipecacuanhae et opii (pulv. p. frog=marsupial frog शिशुधान- ipecac. et opii) Pharm. वममूल तथा 
मण्डूक m. 
अहिफेन क्षोद m. p. wolf=marsupial wolf=Tas- powdery क्षोदरूप, क्षोदमय mm. ___manian wolf शिशुधान-वृक m. powdery mildew Bot. क्षोदासिता f. poultice=cataplasm ' 
power I Phys. शक्ति . poultry कुक्कुटादि, गृह्यान्नपक्षी m. (any do- 2 Math. घात m. . 
mesticated birds which serve as a p. applied Phys. प्रयुक्त-शक्ति f. 'source of food, either eggs or p. driven blower QIFTETIEST 17 
meat) 
. . . . 
707 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
1. 
p. of attorney Law प्राभिकर्तृ-पत्र N., praying cricket, praying insect, 
प्राभिकर्त अधिकार m. 
praying locust, praying mantis p. reverse gear Rhy. Eng. शक्ति- Zool. बद्धहस्त कीट m. 
पश्चाद्-दन्ती m. 
pre- पुरस्- पूर्व-, अग्र P-P (pellagra preventing factor) Bio- preaxial (side) Anat. (in front of 
_chem. व-प्र (वल्कचर्म-प्रतिबन्ध-कारक) the axis of the body) पुरोक्ष mfn. ppt. (precipitate) Chem. निस् (निस्साद) preaxial side Zool. पुरोक्ष-पार्श्व n. Pr r (praseodymium) Chem. श्य (श्यामला) prebasic school पूर्वाधार-पाठशाला f. - 2 (propyl) Chem. प्रम् (प्रमेल) Precambrian period = Archean practical प्रानुष्ठानिक, व्यावहारिक mfn. period आद्य-युग . 
p. advantage व्यावहारिक लाभ m. precaution पूर्वावधान n., पूर्वोपाय m. p. application व्यावहारिक प्रयोग m. precava = superior vena cava = p. chemistry अनुष्ठान-रसायन . 
anterior vena cava Zool. उत्तर p. mechanics अनुष्ठान-यांत्रिकी, व्यव महानीला. 
हार-यान्त्रिकी 
precaval vein Zool. उत्तर-महासिरा f. 
· p. record व्यावहारिक अभिलेख m. precedence पूर्वता, पूर्वभाविता, पूर्ववर्तिता . - p. shape व्यावहारिक रूप १. 
precedent पूर्वभावी (-इन्) mfn. (See p. work अनुष्ठान-कर्म, व्यावहारिक कर्म a ntecedent) 
. preceding पूर्ववर्ती (-इन्) mfn. practically व्यवहारे (Hindi व्यवहार में), preceptor गुरु m. 
अनुष्ठाने (Hindi अनुष्ठान में) 
prechordal Embryol. (anterior to practicals अनुष्ठान n. 
___ the notochord) मेरु-पूर्व Mfn. practice I वृत्ति . 
precipitant Chem. निस्सादक m. 2 Arith. व्यवहारगणित 1. 
precipitate n. FIFANTE 11. 3 अभ्यास, व्यवहार m. 
precipitate vb. निस्सादन १. 4 Adminis. समभ्यास' m. (ancient precipitated निस्सादित mfn. word) 
precipitated chalk = prepared 5 आचरण .. 
chalk निस्सादित-खटी. pragonite=soda mica 
p. copper निस्सादित ताम्र 2. Prague ice black=ice black 
p. sulphur=milk of sulphur pram=perambulator faraluna n. 
निस्सादित शुल्बारि m.-गन्धक-दुग्धा . praseodymia Chem. (praseodymium precipitation FARITAT n. 
oxide) श्यामजा. 
precipitin Immunol. निस्सादि. praseodymium Chem. श्यामला f. precise सुतथ्य, यथार्थतम mfn. (See accu -prasin (Lat. prasinus leek green शाद) fate) 
शादि (in bili-prasin) 
precisely सुतथ्यतः prawn Zool. I प्रचिंगट m. 
precisely expressed सुतथ्यतः अभिव्यक्त 2=crayfish, shrimp firiem. 
708 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
preciseness=precision 79724EIT f. prehensile Zool. परिग्राही (-इन) mfn. precocious अकाल-पक्व, काल-पूर्व min. prehensile tail Zool. परिग्राहि पुच्छ । precocious sexual development preliminary s 4 min. 
Zool. कालपूर्व लैंगिक विकास M. preliminary expenses Com. प्रारम्भिक precoracoid Zool. (in front of the व्यय m. 
coracoid) पुरोस्या mfn. (fr. पुरः + premaxilla Anat., Zool. (in front उरोंस्था) 
____ of the maxillae) अग्रहनु . predaceous (living by preying on premier महामन्त्री (-इन् ) m. ___ other animals) हिंसाजीवी (-इन्) mfr. premises परिसर m., भू-गृहादि . predatory हिंस्र mfn. 
premiss प्रतिज्ञा . predictor Mil. पूर्वसूचक m. 
premium Com. प्रव्याजि m. predominant Zool. (found in large apprenticeship p. शिशिक्षा-प्रव्याजि 
number, abundant) प्रचुर mfn. ____m. (apprentice शिशिक्षु) predominate Phys. अधिभवन ॥ 
at p. अधिमूल्ये (Hindi अधिमूल्य पर) preexisting पूर्ववर्ती (-इन्) mfn. 
insurance p. गोप-प्रव्याजि m. prefer vb. I अधिमनन 1. 
p. on debentures ऋणलेख-प्रव्याजि 2 (bring, put or set forward) 
__ m. पुरोभरण, पुरोधान . 
p. on lease पट्ट-प्रव्याजि m. preferable अधिमान्य mfn. 
p. on shares अंश-प्रव्याजि m. preference अधिमान, पुरोभरण, पुरोधान n., Premna Bot. अरणिति f. (-ति for प्रजाति 
पूर्वाधिकार m. 
genus) preference bond Com. पूर्वाधिकार बंध m. P. integrifolia सामान्य अरणि m. 
p. creditors पूर्वाधिकार उत्तमर्ण m. premolar = bicuspid p. dividend पूर्वाधिकार लाभांश m. premolar Anat., Zool. पुरोहानव्य m. (पुरः p. share पूर्वाधिकार अंश m. 
_ in front,' हानव्य from काश्यपसंहिता) p. stock पूर्वाधिकार स्कन्ध m. prenatal जन्मपूर्व mfn. preferential अधिमान्य mfn. 
preoccupied अन्यमनस्क mfn. preferred अधिमत mfn. 
prepaid Com. पूर्वदत्त mfn. prefix vb. पूर्वस्थापन 1. 
p. calls पूर्वदत्त-याचना f. (राशि) prefix n. I पूर्वस्थित n. 
p. expenses पूर्वदत्त व्यय m. 2 उपसर्ग m. 
p. premium पूर्वदत्त प्रव्याजि m. prefoliation Bot. कलिकान्तविन्यास m. 
preparation I Pharm.औषध ।., निर्मिति f. preganglionic Anat. प्रगंडपूर्व mfn. 2 विरचन 1., विरचना, सज्जा. pregnancy गर्भावस्था f., गर्भधारण n., prepared (as gas) विरचित mfn. 
गर्भिणीभाव m. 
evolved उद्विकसित mfm. prehallux Zool. (rudiment of toe on formed निर्मित mfn. 
the preaxial side of the hallux) manufactured क्लुप्त mfr. उपांगुष्ठ m. 
obtained प्राप्त mfn. 
709﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
1. 
produced उत्पन्न, उत्पादित mfn. 
p. court महाप्रान्त-न्यायालय m. prepared by निर्माता (-तृ) m. 
president I प्रधान m. prepared lard Pharm. संस्कृत-वपा f. 2 अध्यास्ता, अध्यासक, अधिष्ठायक, सभापति, prepayment Com. पूर्वशोधन n. 
सभाध्यक्ष, सभाधीश m. preponderance प्राधिक्य, भाराधिक्य n., president of---पति M. 
प्रचुरता . . 
president of council परिषत्पति, परिषत presbyopia Ophthalmol. जराक्षिदोष m. प्रधान m. prescribe (a medicine) अगदनिर्देशन, president's vote प्रधान-मत, सभापति-मत 
विनिधान n. prescriber (of a medicine) अगद-निर्देशक presidium of rulers राजन्य-पंचक m. 
m. 
presphenoid = presphenoid bone prescription Med. योग m. (ancient Zool. जतुकानास्थि . 
word), विनिधान . 
press n. I पीड m. prescutum Zool. प्राग्वस्थ . 
2 Printing मुद्रणालय m. presence उपस्थिति, विद्यमानता, विद्यमानत्व press vb. दमन, पीडन 1. 
१., वर्तमानता f., वर्तमानत्व १. (from pressed पीडित mfn. शंकराचार्य) 
presser पीडक M. present विद्यमान, वर्तमान, उपस्थित mfn. pressing machine पीडन-यन्त्र, पीडित्र . present n. उपहार m. 
press plunger Phys. पीड-मज्जक M. present vb. उपस्थापन, 
pressure निपीड m. presentation उपस्थापन 2., उपस्थापना 
p. cooker निपीड-पत्र n. presentation of a bill Com. विपत्र- p. filter निपीड-पाव m. 
उपस्थापन n. 
p. gauge निपीड-आमान M. presentation of a cheque धनादेश p. gauge, autoclave तापक (short 
उपस्थापन ॥ 
___ for निपीडतापक) निपीड प्रामान M. presentation of data Statistics सामग्री p. heater निपीड-तापक m. 
उपस्थापन .. 
p. plate Automobile निपीड-पट्ट m. presented उपस्थापित mfn. 
p. pump, stirrup पदाधान-निपीड preservable परिरक्ष्य afn. 
उदंच m. preservation परिरक्षण n. 
p. transmission Phys. निपीड पारे preservation of order शान्ति-परिरक्षण 1. षण 1. preservative परिरक्षी (-इन्) m. 
p. tube Chem., Phys. निपीड-नाल m. preservator परिरक्षक m. 
presumption (to take to be true) preserve vb. परिरक्षण . 
धारणा preserver परिरक्षक m. 
presumptive region Zool. संभावी प्रदेश preside I अध्यासन, अधिष्ठान 1. 
m. . 2 सभापतीयन . 
pretarsus (in insects) Zool. T478 n. presidency महाप्रान्त m. 
previous पूर्वतन, गत nfn. 70 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
prey आखेट, बलि m. 
primary ossification centre Zool. prezygapophysis. Anat. अनयोजिवध m. प्रथम अस्थीयन केन्द्र १. Priapuloidea (from priapus the phal- primary phosphate Chem. आद्य 
lus) Zool. (sausage-shaped worms) भास्वीय. गदारूपिणः m. pl. 
primary root Bot. प्रथम मूल 1. priapulus Zool. गदारूप m. 
primary school प्राथमिक पाठशाला . price Com. मूल्य . 
primary, secondary, tertiary alco p. list मूल्य-सूची . 
___hols पाद्य, द्वितीयक, तृतीयक सुषव m. p. relations=relatives Statistics primary spermatocytes Zool. प्रथम 
मूल्यानुपात m. 
पूर्वशुक्रकोशा. actual p. वास्तविक मूल्य 1. 
Primates Zool. (consists of man and average p. माध्य मूल्य n. 
and the apes, monkeys, marmo cost p. परिव्यय मूल्य ?. 
sets, and lemurs) नरवानराः m.pl. current p. वर्तमान मूल्य 1. 
primazine orange Col. Ind. परमाजीवी market p. विपणि-मूल्य १. 
नारंग m. net p. शुद्ध मूल्य 1. 
p. yellow परमाजीवी पीत m. purchase p. ऋय-मूल्य .. 
prime मुख्य, प्रधान mfn. selling p. विक्रय-मूल्य 1. 
prime-accent=dash (asa) प्रासm. prices current Com. वर्तमान विपणि-मूल्य prime cost Com. मुख्य परिव्यय m. 
(वर्तमान विपणि-मूल्य-सूची), प्रचलित मूल्य Prime Minister I प्रधान मन्त्री (-इन्) m. n. 
2 (as in Germany) महामात्र m. prickle Bot. शितान .. 
(Chancellor) prickly chaff flower=chaff flower prime number Math. अभाज्य संख्या prima black Col. Ind. परम काल m. primitive पूर्वज mfn. primarily मुख्यतः 
primordial आदि, आदिजात mfn. primarily the concern of the Pro- primordial germ cell Zool. आद्य रोहि 
__vincial Govt. मुख्यतः प्रान्तीय शासन कोशा . 
का विषय (Hindi) 
primrose Bot. पीतसेवती . primary प्राथमिक, प्रधान, आद्य mfn. Primulaceae Bot. (primrose family) primary agent Zool. आद्य कर्ता (-तृ) m. __ पीतसेवतीकुल 1. primary alcohol Chem. आद्य सुषव m. primula R water-soluble = fed primary axis Bot. मुख्य अक्ष m. 
violet primary data Statistics sof4465-4743 primuline = primuline yellow= 
sulphine A. primary host प्रधान पोषिता (-तृ) m. primus परम mfn. primary meristem Bot. आद्य प्रविभाजी 
p. blast pump परम अभिधमन उदंच m. 
p. filter pump परम पाव उदंच m. primary oocyte Zool. प्रथमाण्डकोशा f. p. stove परम-परितापनी . 
711 
m. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
prince राजन्य m. 
2 Pharm. तत्त्व . p. consort राज्ञीपति m. 
principle of Archimedes Phys. (law p. regent शासद्राजन्य m. (short for of buoyancy) उत्प्लाविता-नियम m. 
प्रतिशासद्राजन्य) 
principle of cooperation Econ. सह p. royal ज्येष्ठ राजकुमार m. 
कारिता-नियम m. princedom राजन्यविषय m., राजन्यपद N., principle of kite Phys. पतंग-प्रनियम m. 
राजन्यता. 
principle of proportional parts अनु princehood राजन्यत्व .. 
पाति-भाग-प्रनियमm. princekin राजन्यक m. 
principle of Vernier Phys. अनुश्रेणी princelet राजन्यक m. 
प्रनियम m. prince-like-princely राजन्यवत् principle of work Phys. कर्म-प्रनियम m. princeling राजन्यक m. 
principles of book-keeping Com. princely-prince-like राजन्यवत् 
पुस्तपालन-सिद्धान्त m. princely adj. राजन्य-, राजन्योचित, राजन्य- principles of policy नीति-सिद्धान्त m. 
सदृश mfn. 
principles of projection Engin. विक्षेप princeship राजन्यता. 
नियम m. princess राजकुमारी, राजन्या f. 
principles of proportional repre p. regent शासद्राजन्या f. 
·sentation by means of the single p. royal ज्येष्ट-राजकुमारी f. 
transferable vote एकल संक्राम्य मत prince violet=iodine violet 
द्वारा अनुपाती प्रतिनिधान का प्रनियम m. princify राजन्यकरण n. 
print vb. मुद्रण 1. principal (of the presidium) Pol. printed form मुद्रित प्रपत्र 1. 
प्रधान-राजन्य m. 
• printer's ink मुद्रण-मसी f. principal Math. मूलधन 1. 
printing मुद्रण N. principal adj. मुख्य, प्रधान mfn. printing and publication मुद्रण तथा 
p. axis प्रधान अक्ष m. 
प्रकाशन n. p. book Com. प्रधान पुस्त 7. printing and stationery मुद्रण तथा p. focus=stellar focus Ophthal. लेखनसामग्री 
mol. प्रधान-नाभि f. (समान्तरकिरण printing black Col. Ind. मुद्रण काल m. नाभि) 
p. blue मुद्रण नील m. . p. parameter Math. मुख्य प्राचल m. . p. brown मुद्रण बज्र m. p. point Optics start fare m. 
p. green मुद्रण हरि m. p. reaction Chem. मुख्य प्रतिक्रिया f. p. induline मुद्रण सुनीली f. p. section Phys. प्रधान छेद m. 
p. violet मुद्रण नीललोहित m. p. security Com. मुख्य प्रतिभूति f. printing frame Photog. मुद्रण-आधारी m. principle I (a comprehensive law or print orange R paste = chrome 
doctrine, from which others are printing orange R derived) प्रनियम, नियम, सिद्धान्त m. prior पूर्व, पौर्विक, प्राग्वर्ती (-इन्) mfn. 
712 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
priority पूर्वता, पौविकता f., पौळ, प्राथम्य १. privy councillor परम परिषद्य, मतिसचिव priority list पूर्वता-सूची, पौविकता-सूची . m. (ancient word) prior sanction पूर्वानुमोदन n. 
prize पारितोषिक १. prism संक्षेत्र । 
pro- अनु-, प्र-, पूर्व prismatic सांक्षेत्रिक mfn. 
probability I संभाविता f. prismatic compass Sury. सांक्षेत्रिक कर्कट 2 (science) सांभाविकी . 
m. 
probable संभावी (-इन्), संभाव्य mfn. prismatic glass=prism glass 
p. error Statistics संभाव्य विभ्रम m. prism binocular संक्षेत्र दूरेक्षिका. (संक्षेत्र probably सम्भावितया 
युग्मदूरेक्षिका) 
probate Law रिक्थपत्र-प्रमाण 1. (proof prism glass संक्षेत्र काच m. 
of a will) prismoid Math. संक्षेत्राभ n. 
problem I समस्या , प्रश्न m. prismoidal Math. संक्षेत्राभ-, संक्षेत्राभीय 2 Math. निर्मेय. ___fn. 
Proboscidea Zool. fus: m.pl. prisoner बन्दी, कारावासी (-इन्) m. procainae hydrochloridum = pro 
p. of war रण-बन्दी m. 
caine hydrochloride private आत्मीय, वैयक्तिक mfn., निज-, अलोक procaine (pro- + colaine) Pharm. 
p. account वैयक्तिक-लेखा, निज-लेखा . अन्वचेतनी. p. bank अलोक अधिकोष m. 
p. hydrochloride = procainae p. company अलोक प्रमण्डल ?. 
hydrochloridum (procain. hy concern अलोक व्यापारसंस्था । ___drochlor.) अन्वचेतनी उदनीरेय 1. p. expense निज व्यय m. 
procambial strand Bot. वाहिकर गुण m. p. gain निज लाभ m. 
procambium Bot. (forms vascular p. ledger : निज-प्रपंजी. 
____ tissue) वाहिकर m. 2==personal ledger वैयक्तिक- procedure I प्रक्रिया f. प्रपंजी. 
2 कार्यरीति, कार्यप्रणाली . p. loan वैयक्तिक ऋण .. 
p. generally सामान्यतः प्रक्रिया f. p. office आत्मीय कार्यालय m. 
proceedings कार्यवाह m. (H. कार्यवाही) p. property वैयक्तिक-सम्पत्ति, निज- proceedsCom. उदयm.(ancient word), 
सम्पत्ति . 
आय m. p. secretary प्रात्मीय सचिव m. 
net p. शुद्ध उदय m. privilege विशेषाधिकार m. 
procercoid Zool. geselfarar (short for .p. motion विशेषाधिकार-प्रस्ताव m. पूर्वपट्टकोशित being an early stage of privileged विशेषाधिकारी (-इन्), विशेषाधि plerocercoid) __कृत mfn. 
procerous Bot. (tall, slender) प्रांशु privy=midden closet Hygiene संग्रहि ___mfn. 
मलकुण्ड . 
process I (as,of manufacturing) Com. privy council परम-परिषत् . 
विधा . 
713 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
p. cost विधा-परिव्यय m. 
professing a particular religion 2 Chem., Phys. विधा. 
विशेषधर्मानुयायी (-इन्) m. 3 Anat. प्रवर्ध m. 
profession व्यवसाय m. 4 Law आदेशक m. 
professional = technical व्यावसायिक process vb. (to subject to some special mfn. 
process) विधायन . 
p. qualification व्यावसायिक योग्यता process white=new white prochlorite Mineral. प्रहरितिज m. (-इज professor प्राध्यापक m. 
for efter mineral) 
assistant p. सहायक प्राध्यापक m. proclamation उद्घोषणा. 
demonstrator प्रदर्शक m. declaration घोषणा. 
instructor शिक्षक m. procoelous vertebra Zool. (anterior lecturer व्याख्याता (-) m. 
end of the centrum is concave) master उपाध्याय m. अग्रन्युब्ज कीकस m. 
preceptor गुरु m. pro-consul प्रति-वाणिज्यदूत m. 
reader प्रवाचक m. (cf. प्रवचनकर्ता) proctodaeum Zool. भ्रूणगुद m. 
teacher अध्यापक m. proctoscope Med. गुदेक्ष m. 
tutor अवबोधक m. procumbent Bot. शयान mfn. 
profit = gain Com. लाभ m. produce vb. उत्पादन n. 
p. and loss account लाभालाभ-लेखा produce a line Math. रेखा-वर्धन M. produced I उत्पन्न, उत्पादित mfn. 
p. and loss adjustment account 2 Math, afara mfn. 
___ लाभालाभ-समायोजन-लेखा. producer Com. उत्पादक m. 
p. and loss appropriation ac producer gas Chem. सर्जक वाति m. 
count लाभालाभ-नियोजन-लेखा f. gas producer वाति-सर्जक m. 
capital p. पुंजी-लाभ m. producing उत्पादन . 
capitalized p. पुंजीकृत लाभ m. product I सृष्ट .. 
gross p. सकल लाभ m. । 2 Math. गुणनफल 2. 
net p. शुद्ध लाभ m. . 3 Com. उत्पत्ति ., उत्पादन 1., उत्पाद m., revenue p. आगम-लाभ m. 
सृष्ट. 
profitable लाभदायक, लाभप्रद mfn. production उत्पत्ति f., उत्पादन 1. profit or loss on realization Com. productive Com. उत्पादक, उत्पादी (-इन्) रोकीकरण पर लाभालाभ (H.) ' mfn. 
pro forma account Com. दर्शनार्थ-लेखा p. expenses उत्पादी व्यय m. . . p. labour उत्पादी श्रम m.. 
p. invoice दर्शनार्थ-बीजक . p. wages उत्पादि-भूति f. 
proglottid=proglottis productivity Com. Geirfaat f. proglottis Zool. (segment of a tape pro-embryo Bot. पूर्वभ्रूण . . . . worm containing both male and 
714 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
female reproductive organs) जनन- projection of light Ophthalmol. प्रकाश 
खंडn. 
स्थितिज्ञान . program, programme कार्यक्रम m. projection mici 
ope प्रक्षेप-अण्वीक्ष progression Math. sia f. 
arithmetical p. समान्तर-श्रेढी. projective प्रक्षेपी (-इन्) afn. arithmetico-geometric p. समान्तर- projective geometry विक्षेप-रैखिकी . __ गुणोत्तर-श्रेढी . 
projector प्रक्षेपक m. geometric p. गुणोत्तर-श्रेढी . prolactin = galactin = mammo. 
hormonic p. हरात्मक-श्रेढी . __trophin Zool. स्तन्यपोषि f. progressive average Statistics set proliferation Biol. (rapid and re 
माध्य. 
peated production of new parts, progressive phase Zool. प्रगामि-प्रावस्था as cells, or offspring) प्रगुणन . 
proline (fr. pyrrolidin) Biochem. progressive reduction Zool. उत्तरोत्तर शौष्मली. 
प्रहसन 1. 
prolongation Bot. दीर्घण 1., दीप्रिंत भाग prohibition प्रतिषेध m. 
p. of discrimination भेद करने का prolongation of the axis Bot. अक्ष- . 
प्रतिषेध (Hindi) 
दीर्घण n., अक्ष का दीधित भाग (H.) project vb. विक्षेपण ।. 
prolonged area mfn. projected Phys. (stone or shot) प्रक्षिप्त prolonged action Chem. दीर्घित-क्रिया f. . __mfn. 
promeristem Bot. (the meristem of projectile n. I Math. (a body pro the growing point and of all 
jected) प्रक्षिप्तक, प्रक्षिप्त 1. 
embryonic radiments) बाल-प्रविभाजी 2 (a missile) अस्त्र . 
m. projectile adj. I (projecting or im- prometaphase Zool. भाजनापूर्वा . 
pelling forward) प्रक्षेपी (-इन्) mfr. prominence Zool. प्रकूट, प्रतुंगक 1. 2 (capable of being projected) p. of the eyeball अक्षिगोल-प्रतुंगक n. प्रक्षेप्य afn. 
promise प्रतिज्ञा projectile force Phys. प्रक्षेपि बल . promissory note Law प्रतिज्ञा-अर्थपत्र, projecting Phys. प्रक्षेपी (-इन्), प्रक्षिप्त प्रतिज्ञा-पत्र (पत्र-अर्थपत्र) n. 
mfn. 
promontory Anat. प्राग्न १. p. at right angles लम्बकोणे-प्रक्षिप्त promote vb. I Com. प्रवर्तन .. __mfn. 
2 Educ. संपारण. p. lantern प्रक्षेपी दीप m. 
3 पदोन्नति, पदवृद्धि . p. lens प्रक्षेपी वीक्ष, प्रक्षेप-वीक्ष m. promoted Educ. (to another class) projection I Geom. विक्षेप m. 
संपारित mfn. 2 Dynamics प्रक्षेप m. 
promoter Com. प्रवर्तक m. 3Ophthalmol. क्वस्थितिज्ञान, स्थितिज्ञान 1. promoter's share Com. प्रवर्तक-अंश m. 
715 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
promotion I Com. प्रवर्तन 1. 
प्रमेदीन्य 1. प्रमेद the first of the 2 Educ. सम्पारण n. 
series to manifest fatty properties' p. examination सम्पारण-परीक्षा. Webster. Cf. propionic (Gk. Proto 
p. expenses Com. प्रवर्तन-व्यय m. first, pion fat)] prompt Teata mfn. 
propanol (propane + -ol) Chem. promulgation प्रसारण n. 
प्रमेदीन्यव m. p. of ordinance अध्यादेश-प्रसारण. propanone (propane + -one) Chem. pronephric duct Zool. प्रवृक्क-प्रणाली f. प्रमेदीन्या / pronephros Zool. प्रवृक्क m. 
propargyl Chem. प्रमेदरल. prong Phys. शाखा 
propeller Mach, suitge m. pronounce free मुक्त-उच्चारण, मुक्त p. blade प्रणोदक फल . 
उदीरण, मुक्त-निर्णयन .. 
___p. boss प्रणोदक उत्थ m. prontosil (the American name is p. shaft Automobile Suiteta f. 
neo-prontosil and azosulphamide) (प्रणोदि+ईषा) अप्यजशुल्बतिक्तेय . 
propelling organ Zool. प्रणोदि अंग M. pro-nucleus Biol. पूर्व-न्यष्टि f. (before propelling pencil प्रणोद्य-अंकनी . 
segmentation) 
propene Chem. प्रमेदेन्य. proof I प्रमाण 
propenoic (propenyl + -oic) Chem. 2 Math. उपपत्ति. 
प्रमेदेन्यिक Mfn. 3 Printing ईक्ष्य.. 
propenyl Chem. प्रमेदेन्यल. -proof -सह, रुध् 
propenylic sphereffe mfn. proof by exhaustion नि:शेषेण उपपत्ति . proper (accurate, correct) सम्यक्, समी proof correcting, proof-correction चीन 
Printing ईक्ष्य-शोधन 1. 
proper choice सम्यग-वरण 1. proof of accuracy Com. परिशुद्धता- proper fraction Math. (whose nume 
प्रमाण n. 
rator is less than the denomina proof plane Phys. परीक्षण बिम्ब m. tot) लध्वंश भिन्न m. proof-reader Printing ईक्ष्य-वाचक m. property I Chem. गुण m. (Marathi proof-reading Printing ईक्ष्य-वाचन 7. गुणधर्म) proof-sheet Printing $84-971). 
2 Statistics प्रगुण m. proof spirit सुषवोद . 
3 सम्पत्ति . prootic n. Zool. पुरःकर्णास्थि ।. 
immovable p. अचल सम्पत्ति . prop- (propionic) प्रमेद 
movable p. चल-सम्पत्ति propagated Zool. Tafata mfn. 
private p. वैयक्तिक-सम्पत्ति, निज-सम्पत्ति propagation I Phys. प्रचरण, प्रचारण, 
प्रसारण. 
publicp. सार्वजनिक-सम्पत्ति, लोक-सम्पत्ति 2 Zool. प्रजनन propane (propyl-+-methane) Chem. . p. account I सम्पत्ति-लेखा f. 
En 
716 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
2=real account वास्तविक-लेखा . property of crenation Zool. दन्तुरता-गुण 
p. representation अनुपाति प्रतिनिधान 
m. 
prophase Biol. प्रथम-भाजना f. prometaphse भाजनापूर्वी 
_metaphase भाजना . prophylactic Med. रोगरोधक mfn. prophylaxis iMed. रोगरोध m. propine (propyl प्रमेल + ethine दक्ष्वी) 
Chem. प्रमेलदक्ष्वी . propinoic (propine + -oic) Chem. 
प्रमेदियिक mfn. propio-Chem. प्रमेद propiol-aldehyde (propiolic+alde 
byde) Chem. प्रमेदव-सुव्युदm. propiolate Chem. प्रमेदवीयn. propiolic (propionic प्रमेदिक+tetrolic 
तुर्यविक) प्रमेदविक mfn. 
p. acid प्रमेदविक अम्लn. propion-, propiono- (propionic) 
Chem. प्रमेद propionate Chem. प्रमेदीय n. 
proportionality अनुपातिता. proposal x=offer Com. प्रस्ताव m. 
2 Adminis. प्रस्थापना f. 
resolution संकल्प m. propose I प्रन्यसन, प्रस्तावन, प्रस्तवन : 
2 प्रस्थापन 1. propose=offer Com. प्रस्ताव 7. (to 
make some one propose is प्रस्तावन from causative प्रस्तावयति) proposed=offered Com. प्रस्तुत min. 
(to have it proposed by some 
one is प्रस्तावित) proposed law प्रस्थापित विधि m. proposer==offerer Com. प्रस्तावक m. proposition I Math. साध्य . 
2 प्रस्थाप्य "., प्रस्थापना f. -prop-oxide Chem. -प्रमेद-जारेय n. propoxy- Chem. प्रमेद-जार propoxyl (propyl प्रमेल+ -exxy! -जारल) 
Chem. प्रमेजारल . proprietor स्वामी (-इन्) m. (See boss) proprietory account = fictitious 
account = nominal account अवास्तविक-लेखा, अभिहित-लेखा f. p. right स्वामित्व, स्वत्व 1., स्वत्वाधिकार 
propione Chem. 
_m.. 
propionic (Gk, proto first t+pion # 
fat) Chem. प्रमेदिक mfn. propiono-, propion- Chem. प्रमेद propionyl Chem. प्रमेदल n. propolis=bee glue छत्र-श्लेष m. proportion Math. अनुपात m. proportion vb. अनुपातन n. proportionable अनुपात्य mfn. proportional आनुपातिक, अनुपाती (-इन्) 
mfn. p. change Statistics oerfer aferaciet 
. p. division Math. यथानुपात भाजन .. p. numbers Statistics अनुपाती अंक 
proprioceptor Physiol. (an internal 
receptor) न्यादाता (-तृ) m. prop root Bot. स्कम्भ-मूल 1. propyi Chem. प्रमेल 7. (प्रमेद +-ल) 
propionyl प्रमेदल .. propylation Chem. (introduction of ___propyl) प्रमेल-प्रवेश m. propylcarbinol Chem. प्रमेलांगिव m. propylene Chem. प्रमेलेन्य. propylic Chem. प्रमेलिक mfn. 
m. 
717 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
propylidene (propyl + ethylidene) 
Chem. प्रमेलेयेन्य. propyne Chem. प्रमेदीन m. propynoic (propyne + -oic) Chem. ____=propiolic 
pro rata (in proportion) अनुपाततः prorogation सत्त्रावसान n. (ending of ___the session) 
prorogation of legislature विधान 
मंडल-अवसान . prorogation of the session HEITEHTIT 
pros- Chem. अभि prosecution Law अभियोग-चालन 1. (अभि 
योग चलाना), प्राभियोजन . prosencephalon=fore-brain Zool. 
अन-मस्तिष्क . prosenchyma Bot. (a tissue) दीर्घितक 
.. 
prosenchymatous cell Bot. दीर्घितक 
कोशा . proseptasine Med. (proprietary name 
for benzylamino-benzene sul phonamide for streptococcal the 
rapy) मालागोलघ्नी / Prosopis Bot. शमीति f. (-ति for प्रजाति 
genus) 
P. spicigera सामान्य शमी f. prospectus प्रविवरण n. prostategland Anat. पुरःस्थ अन्थि m. prostomium Zool. मुखाम . prostrate (fr. प्रस्तृत) Bot. भूस्तृत, भूशायी 
(-इन्) afn. prostration Zool. (complete exhaus- 
tion) परिक्लान्ति f. protandrous Bot. पूर्वपक्व mfn. protandry Bat. पूर्वपुंपक्वता f. prote-, proteo- Chem. प्रोभूज 
protease (protein+ -ase) Biochem. 
प्रोभूजेद m. protection TETUT n. protective glasses रक्षोपनेत्र n. protective trade Com. रक्षित व्यापार m. protectol agfa (used to protect 
wool and silk fibres, agfa is formed from the initial letters of the name of the manufac turers: Aktien-Gesellschaft für Anilin-Fabrikation, Berlin) Col. 
Ind. ऊणाकौशेय-रक्षm. -protector -प,-गोप proteic Chem. प्रोभूजिक mfn. proteid,-ide Chem. प्रोभूजेय . ____p. matter प्रोभूजेय द्रव्य n. protein Biochem. प्रोभूजिन m. (all pro 
teins contain carbon , hydrogen उ, nitrogen भू and oxygen ज; -ein -इन) p. crystal I Bot. प्रोभूजिन स्फट M. ___2=crystalloid स्फटाभ m. 
p. formation Bot. प्रोभूजिन-निर्माण 1. p. histone with iron Zool. अयोयुक्त 
प्रोभूजिन-वर्तुलिका . p. therapy Med. प्रोभूजिन-चिकित्सा /. proteinate प्रोभूजीय .. proteo-, prote- (protein) प्रोभूज- (प्रोभू 
जिन) proteolysis Biochem. प्रोभूजांशन 1. proteolytic Biochem. stuhifera mfn. proteose Biochem. प्रोभूजधु ?. proteose tube प्रोभूजधु-नाल m. proteos-uria Med. प्रोभूजधु-मेह m. Proterozoic Geol. सुपुराकल्प m. protesting a bill Com. विपत्रानादर 
प्रमाणन . Proteus (P.) (a genus of bacteria, 
718 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
ना. 
highly pleomorphic, produces prothorax Zool. अग्रोरस, उरोग्न n. ameboid colonies) नानारूप (ना.) prothrombin पूर्वधनानि . 
P. americanus (found in cases of pro-thrombogen Zool. पूर्व-घनास्रजन 
liver abcess) यकृत्स्फोटीय ना. 
n. P. ammoniae तिक्ताति ना. 
proto- प्र-, आद्य P. asiaticus (found in a typhoid proto-actinium (eka-tantalum Chem. _like disease) कूटान्त्रज्वरीय ना. प्रजातु m. (एक-सहातु) P. fluorescens, Jager's p. (the protogynous Bot. पूर्वस्त्रीपक्व mfn. 
proteus of acute infectious protogyny Bot. पूर्वस्त्रीपक्वता . jaundice) कामल ना. 
proton Chem. प्राणु m. P. hominis (the specific cause of protonema Bot. प्रांकुर m. _rag-sorters disease) चरिक ना. protophloem Bat. आद्यधोवाही (-इन्) m. P. hydrophilus (causes septic- protoplasm Biol. प्ररस m. _emia in fish) मत्स्यघ्न न. protoplasmic plasmatic P. melanovogenes (causes black protoplast Biol. I (protoplasmic cell 
contents) प्ररसक m. (-collection) _rot in eggs) अण्डकलंक ना. P. mirabilis (from 
2 = plastid putrefying 
3 Zool. (a unicellular ot substances and water) मलप्रवाह 
एककोशांगी (-इन्) m. 
m ill. protopodite Zool. Createnint n. P. morganii=Morgan's bacillus 
Protopterus Zool. (having a single (occurs in the intestinal canal) 
abdominal pore) एकोदरछिद्राति f. प्रान्त्रकुल्या ना. 
(-आति for प्रजाति genus) P. panamericanus (from the 
proto-stele Bot. प्राद्य-मध्यरम्भ, धन-मध्यरम्भ blood serum of a case of otitis 
m. (solid) media) कर्णकोपीय ना. 
Prototheria=monotremes=Mono P. pseudovaleriei (found in tremata Zool. (they lay eggs). 
cases of a fever resembling 
अण्डजस्तनिनः m.pl. typhoid fever) arriveraite PT. Prototracheata = Protracheata = P. sulfureus (produces hydrogen Onychophora Zool. नखरिणः=आदि 
sulphide) उदजन-शुल्बेय ना. 
श्वासनालिनः m.pl. P. valerici (found in cases of prototype Chem. आद्यरूप १. 
fever of the paratyphoid group) proto-xyem IF-ETE n. (the first अप्यान्त्रज्वरीय ना. 
___formed xylem) P. vulgaris सामान्य ना. 
Protozoa_Zool. एककोशिनः, प्रजीवाः P.X2 पृषज्ज्वरीय ना. २ 
m.pl. P. Xr9 पृषज्ज्वरीय ना. १६ 
protozoan parasite Zool, suita- 
citat. prothalus Bot. सूकायक 1. 
(-इन्) m. 719﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
CL 
n. 
protozoology (study of the Pro- p. legislature प्रान्तीय विधानमण्डलn. 
___tozoa) प्राजीविकी . 
p. staff प्रान्तीय कर्मचारिवर्गm. Protracheata=Prototracheata provision I (atrangement) प्रबन्ध m. protractor Math. कोणमापक m. 
to make p. प्रबन्ध-करण 2. protuberance Bot. प्रोद्वर्ध m. 
2 Law प्रावधान . Protura Zool. अन्धक-गण m. 
provisional expenditure अस्थायी व्यय prove vb. उपपादन, प्रमाणन 2. (Hindi प्रमाण m. 
देना, सिद्ध करना) 
provisional formula कार्यनिर्वाहक सूत्र n. proved प्रमाणित min. 
provisions खाद्यपदार्थ m. provide vb. (Lat. pro+videre to see p. stores खाद्यागार m. 
before) I (foresee) पूर्वदर्शन . provisions as to defence प्रतिरक्षा 2 (to look out for in advance) विषयक प्रावधान 2. पूर्वविधान 1. 
provitamin Biochem. (precursor of 3 (to procure beforehand) पूर्वसंग्रहण vitamin) प्राग्जीवति f. 
Prowazekella=Prowazekia 4 (to prepare) सज्जीकरण, सज्जीभवन n. Prowazekia Zool. (a genus with two 5 (to supply) दान, प्रदान, खाद्यदान . fiagella and two nuclei) द्विकशाति. 6 (to take precautionary measures, (आति for प्रजाति genus) to make provision) पूर्वोपाय-करण, पूर्व P. asiatica सामान्य द्विकश m. सज्जाकरण, पूर्व-प्रबन्धन . 
proximal Zool. नेदिष्ठ, समीप-तम, समीप 7 (to supply what is needed for mfn. 
sustenance or support) भरण-पोषण 2. proximal end समीपान्त m. provided (as a conjunction, if) यदि, proximate analysis Chem. प्रथम (संसक्त) 
अथ यदि 
विश्लेषण 1. provided adj. I (ready) सज्ज mfn. proxy Com. प्रतिपुरुष m. . 
2 (supplied) प्रदत्त mfn. 
p. form प्रतिपुरुष प्रपत्र n. provided that यदि, अथ यदि 
vote by p. प्रतिपुरुष-मतदान n. providentfund नीविका, प्रावधायि-प्रणीवि. proxy vb. प्रतिपुरुषायण .. provider भरणपोषणकर्ता (तृ) m. prozygapophysis Zool. अग्रयोजिवध m. province stret (in Hindi usage) prune वातामबदर n. provincial प्रान्तीय mfn. 
p. pure Col. Ind. वातामबदर शुद्ध m. p. affairs प्रान्तीय कार्यn. 
prunicyanin Col. Ind. वातामबदरश्यामि p. Auditor-General streita FET- f. 
वेक्षक m. 
pruning कृन्तन . p. constitution प्रान्तीय संविधान . Prunus Bot. वातामति f. (ति for प्रजाति 
p. executive प्रान्तीय अधिशासिवर्ग m. genus) .. p. government प्रान्तीय शासन n. 
P. amygdalus सामान्य वाताम M. p. laws प्रान्तीय विधि m. 
prunus serotina = prunus virgini 
720 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
क. 
.. 
ana-wild cherry bark Pharm. Ps. fluorescens longus(produces प्रबदर वाताम, वन प्रबदर . 
a yellow pigment) पीतजन क. Prussian blue I अयश्श्यामनील m. 
Ps. pyocyanea = Ps. aeruginosa 2 (blue, high saturation, low bril Ps. smaragdina (occurs in the liance) न्युन्नील m. 
nasal secretion in ozena) अपीनसीय Prussian red=iron red 
prussiate Chem. उदश्यामीय 2. 
Ps. syncyanea (causes epidemics prussic=hydrocyanic Chem. 39 ___ of blue milk) सनीलदुग्ध क. 
श्यामिक mfn. 
Ps. synxantha (the bacillus of p. acid=hydrocyanic acid उद ___yellow milk) दुग्धपीतीय क. 
श्यामिक अम्ल 1. 
pseudopodium कूटपाद m. -prusside Chem. -उदश्यामेय . 
pseudopurpurin Chem. कूटनीलोहि f. ps- (pseudo-) Chem. कू-(कूट-) 
pseudo-stratified epithelium Zool. Ps. (Pseudomonas) क. (कशांगाणु) 
कूट-स्तृत अधिच्छद m. pseudo- कूट 
psilomelane (a hydrous manganese pseudoacacia कूटबब्बूल m. 
oxide) .Mineral. लोहजारिज m. (-इज pseudo-aconitine Chem. कूट-प्रविषी for खनिज mineral) 
Psocoptera Zool. (booklice and their pseudo-carp==false fruit Bot. कूट-फल allies; an order) पुस्तयूका-गण m. 
... 
Psoralea Bot. वाकुचीति . (-ति for प्रजाति pseudo-cumidine कूट-जीरेयी . 
.genus) pseudo-dicyanine Col. Ind. कूट-द्विश्यामी P. corylifolia सामान्य वाकुची f. 
psycho- मन: Pseudomonas (Ps.) कशगाणुति . (-ति Psychodidae (a family having moth 
for starfa genus) 
_like wings) पतंगपक्ष-वंश m. Ps. aeruginosa = Bacillus pyo- psychologic, psychological मानसिक, 
cyaneus (produces blue pus) मनोवैज्ञानिक, मानसिकीय mfn. ' 
नीलपूय क. (क. stands for कशांगाण) psychology I मानसिकी.., मनोविज्ञान n: Ps. caviae (pathogenic for guinea- 2 मनोवृत्ति . ___pigs) बंटमूष क. . . Psychozoic Geol. मानसकल्प m. Ps. cyanogenes=Bacillus lactis psychrograph arafeter m.' - 
cyanogenes (the bacillus of psychrometer (for: measuring the blue milk) नीलदुग्ध क. 
aqueous vápour in the atmo Ps. denitrificans (reduces nitrates sphere) वायूदमान m. _to nitrogen) विभूयक क. 
psychrophyte Bot. शीतोद्भिद्. Ps. fiuorescens (produces a solu- Pt (platinum) Chem. म (महातु) 'ble pigment of different colours) pt. (pint) श. (शराव) 
रंगजन क. 
Pteraspis Paleontol. (a genus, in 
721 46 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
¢ 
n. 
Ã 
which the dorsal armour is made pubis Zool. (anterior part of hipbone) up of seven large plates) सप्तपट्टाति पुरोनितम्बास्थि. f. (-आति for प्रजाति genus) 
public In. जनता f., लोक, जनसाधारण m. Pteridophyta Bot. confortfel: m.pl. 2 adj. सार्वजनिक, लोक-, राज्य-, राष्ट्र pteridophyte queria m. 
p. accountant लोक-लेखापाल m. pterocarpin रक्तचन्दनि f. 
p. accounts लोक-लेखा f. Pterocarpus Bot. रक्तचन्दनति f. (-ति for p. accounts committee लोक-लेखा 
प्रजाति genus) 
समिति . P. santalinus सामान्य रक्तचन्दन m. 
p. affairs लोक-कार्य n. pterosaurus Paleontol. पक्षि-सरट m. 
p. aircraft (government service) Pterospermum Bot. कर्णिकारति f. (-ति 
राज्य-वायुवाहन n. for प्रजाति genus) 
p. bill लोक-विधेयक . P. acerifolium सामान्य कणिकार m. p. carrier=common carrier लोक P. suberifolium मुचुकुन्द कर्णिकार m. 
वाहक m. Pterygogenea = Pteryogota Zool. 
, company लोक-प्रमण्डल . सपक्षाः m.pl., सपक्षानुवर्ग m. 
p. concern लोक-संबन्ध, लोक-विषय m. pterygoid boneZool.(Y-shaped bone) credit राष्ट्र-प्रत्यय m. 
त्रिवेण्यस्थि . 
p. debt राज्य-ऋण, राष्ट्र-ऋण, लोक-ऋण pterygoid muscle Anat. (muscle of 
__ the lower jaw) अधरहनु-पेशी f. 
p. debts act लोक-ऋण-अधिनियम m. Pterygota Zool. सपक्षाः m.pl., सपक्षानुवर्ग p. employment = employment 
m. 
__under state राज्याधीन-नियुक्ति ptomaine=cadaveric alkaloid yani p. finance लोक-अर्थ m. 
क्षाराम m. 
p. health जनता-स्वास्थ्य, लोक-स्वास्थ्य ptyalin Biochem. anft f. ptyalinogen Physiol. लालिजन m. 
p. health department लोक-स्वास्थ्य ptyalo- लाला 
विभाग m. Ptychotis Bot. यवानीति f. (-ति for प्रजाति p. improvement लोक-सुधार M. 
genus) 
p. loan राज्य-ऋण .. P. ajowan सामान्य यवानी . 
p. meeting सार्वजनिक-सभा . -ptysis ~ष्ठीवन .. 
p. money लोक-धन 1. ptyxis Bot. (Gk. 'folding', the way 
p. property लोक-सम्पत्ति, सार्वजनिक a leaf is folded in a bud) वलना सम्पत्ति . 
p. restaurant सार्वजनिक विश्रान्तिगह puberty तारुण्य . 
पाहारगृह . pubes pl. of pubis 
p. servant लोक-सेवक m. pubescent Bot. (covered with soft p. service commission लोक सेवा 
- fine hair) रोमकावृत mfn. 
आयोग m. 722 
Å 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
AAR 
m. 
p. works department लोक-कर्म- pulmoauricular aperture Zool. 
विभाग m. 
___ क्लोमालिन्द-मुख . p. works establishment लोक- pulmo-cutaneous Zool. त्वक्क्लोमीय 
कर्म-स्थापना f. 
mfn. published मुद्रित, प्रकाशित 
pulmonary arch Embryol. क्लोम-चाप p. data मुद्रित-सामग्री . 
m. p. statistics मुद्रित समंक m. 
pulmonary artery Anat. क्लोम-रोहिणी puce (a. colour) न्यवरक्त m. pudenda (external genitals) उपस्थ pulmonary nerve Zool. क्लोम-चेता f. 
pulmonary sac Z001. क्लोम-स्यून m. pudicus Bot. TEENSHTET 
pulmonary vein Zool. क्लोम-सिरा. puerperal fever Med. प्रसूति-ज्वर m. pulp गोर्द ., मज्जक m. puerperal septicaemia Med. प्रसूति- pulp cavity Zool. गोर्द-गुहा f. 
ज्वरीय-पूयारक्तता . 
pulp filter मज्जक-पाव m. puffer = globe-fish=swellfish = pulpy गोर्दमय nfn. 
balloonfish Zool. फुल्लमत्स्य m. pulsate vb. f4r667 . puffy फुल्ल mfn. 
pulsatile स्पन्दक mfn. pug Zool. (dog having button ears) pulsatilla (pulsat.)=pasque flower ___ कुड्म-कर्ण M. (कुक्कर) 
____Pharm. अदलपुष्प . (apetalous puisne judge अवर न्यायाधीश m. 
flowers) pulcher, pulcer, pulcra, pulcrumpulsating activity Bot. स्पन्दन-क्रिया f. 
_Bat. शोभन mfn. 
pulsation partit 11. pulcherrimus Bot. (most beautiful) pulsative = pulsatory स्पन्दी (-इन्) 
अतिशोभन mfn. Pulfrich refractometer Chem. अपि- pulse I=pulse-beat रोहिणी-स्पन्दन 1. 
काष्ठा-भुजायमान m. 
• (popularly नाडी) pull n. I Math. कर्ष m. 
2 Radar, Radio fyre m. 2 Macb. अभ्याकर्षण 1. 
p.generator Zool. स्पन्द-जनित्रा . pulley Phys. आकृषि m., घ 
p. radar स्पन्द-तेजोन्वेष m. pulley=trochlea Ophthalmol. प्राकृषि p. rate Med. नाडी-गति . 
m. 
p. system Radar स्पन्द-संहति . pulley block = block and tackle pulvillus Zool. (adhesive pad) 
घर्घरीष्टका f. 
__ उपहिका . Pullman car Riy. (a palace car) हर्म्य- pulvinar rostralis Zool. तुण्डोपबह m. 
यान.. 
pulvinus Bot. (cushionlike leaf base) Pullman saloon car Rly. Eri Fanni पीनाधार m. 
यान . 
pulvis (pul.)=powder Pbarm.क्षोदm., pull-out slide उदाकृष्य सप m. 
चूर्ण. 
__mfn. 
723 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
- 
- 
- 
p. antimonialis -- antimonial pound powder of rhubarb संयुत ____powder प्रांजन क्षोद m. 
चीनरेच-क्षोद m. p. catechu compositus-com p. thei radix चीनरेच-मूल-क्षोद m. 
pound powder of catechu p. stramonii compositus==com संयुत खदिर-क्षोद m. 
pound stramonium powder p. cinnamomi compositus = संयुत धत्तूरकपत्र-क्षोद m. 
compound cinnamon powder p. tragacanthae compositus= 'संयुत दारसिता-क्षोद m. 
compound powder of traga p. cretae aromaticus=aromatic canth संयुत प्रवेत्रनिर्यास-क्षोद m. 
powder of chalk सुरभि खटी-क्षोद p. zinci oxidi compositus संयुत 
m. 
___ कुप्यातुजारेय-क्षोद m. p. cretae aromaticus cum opio p. zingiberis Pharm. शृंगवेर-क्षोद m. 
=aromatic powder of chalk pumice झामक n. with opium अहिफेन-सहित सुरभि pumice stone झामक . खटी-क्षोद m. 
pump Y. I (raises, transfers, propels, p. glycyrrhizae compositus = ejects) उदञ्च m. ___ compound. powder of liquo- 2 (compresses fluids) न्यञ्च m. 
rice संयुत मधुयष्टि-क्षोद m. 
p. plunger Phys. उदंच-मज्जक m. p. ipecacuanhae et opii=pow foot p. पाद-उदंच m. 
der of ipecacuanha and hand p. हस्त-उदंच m. 
opium वमसूल तथा अहिफेन-क्षोद M. pressure p. निपीड-उदंच m. p. jalapae compositus == com vacuum p. शून्यक-उदंच m. 
pound powder of jalap संयुत pump vb. उदञ्चन n. रेचकन्द-क्षोद m. 
pumping उदञ्चन n. . p. jalap radix रेचकन्द-मूल-क्षोद m. punarnavine पुर्नवो . p. kaladanae compositus संयुत punch छिद्रक m. . 
कालधान्य-क्षोद m. 
puncta lacrimalia Ophthalmal. अश्रु p. kino compositus=compound FET 1. . 
powder of kino संयुत विखदिर- puncture वेध m. (from सुश्रुत) क्षोद m. 
pungent तिक्त mfn. p. lobeliae compositus = com p. smell fart TreT m. pound lobelia powder संयुत . p. taste तिक्त स्वाद m. 
मन वाट 
. वमघास-क्षोद m. 
_Punica Bot. दाडिमति f. (-ति for प्रजाति 
•p. nucis vomicae कुलक-क्षोद m. . genus) : ... p. opii compositus = com- P.granatum सामान्य दाडिम m. 
pound powder of opium Hya punicin Biochem. (an anthocyanin हित-क्षोद... 
obtained from the pomegranate) p. thei compositus = com- दाडिमि . 
724 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
punico-tannic acid Chem. दाडिम- purgative रेचक mfn. 
शल्किक अम्ल n. 
purification शोधन, पावन ।. punishable दंडनीय mfn. 
purified पूत, शोधित nfn. pupa (quiescent larva) कोशित . purified borax Pharm. पूत टंकण m. pupal instar Z00l. कोशित रूप . 
purifier I पावक m. pupation Zool. कोशित-भवन n., कोशिता 2 (an apparatus for purifying 
वस्था f. 
coal gas) शोधित्र 1. pupil (of the eye) are f. 
purify vb. शोधन, पावन 1. pupillary ait 
purine (Lat. purum pure to uricum pupillary margin Ophthalmol. OTT a uric acid + - ine) Chem. मिहकी . 
तट m. 
purity शुद्धता, पूतता. purchase (buy) Com. ऋयm., ऋयण n. purity of gametes Zool. जन्यु-शुद्धता f. 
p. book क्रय-पुस्त . 
purple नीलारुण mfn. p. journal क्रय-पजी f. 
purple lake Col. Ind. नीलारुण लाक्षक m. p. ledger क्रय-प्रपंजी f. 
purple of Cassius = gold purple p. money क्रय-राशि m. 
स्वर्ण नीलारुण m. p. price क्रय-मूल्य n. 
purple of the ancients Col. Ind. पुराण p. transaction क्रय-व्यवहार m. 
नीलारुण m. purchased (bought) क्रीत nfn. 
purplish पानीलारुण mfn. purchaser=buyer क्रेता (-) m. purplish red आनीलारुण रक्त mfr. purchases account Com. क्रय-लेखा f. purpose प्रयोजन 7. 
p. day took क्रय-दिन-पुस्त ।. 
purpose of motion प्रस्ताव-प्रयोजन n. p. ledger adjustment account purpurate Chem. नीलोहीय . 
क्रय प्रपंजी समायोजन लेखा . 
purpuric acid Chem. नीलोहिक अम्ल . p. requisition क्रय-अधियाचन n. 
(नील+लोह shortened to नीलोह) । p. returns ऋय-प्रत्याय m. 
purpurin Chem. नीलोहि f. p. returns journal क्रय-प्रत्याय-पंजी f. purpurite Mineral. नीलोहिज m. (-इज for pure ra mfn. 
खनिज mineral) pure blue Col. Ind. शुद्ध नील m. 
purpuro- नीलोह p. chrysoidine शुद्ध हेमाभी f. 
purpuro-xanthin Chem. नीलोह-पीति f. ___p. soluble blue शुद्ध विलेय नील m. purree=Indian yellow 
p. yellow शुद्ध पीत m. 
purreic acid=euxanthic acid सुपीतिक pure chemistry शुद्ध रसायन n. 
अम्ल.. pure culture Bot. शुद्ध संवर्ध m. purrone=euxanthone सुपीता f. pure economics शुद्ध अर्थशास्त्र n. pus Med. पूय. pure mathematics शुद्ध गणित .. push n. आधक्क m. (Hindi धक्का) pure soda शुद्ध विक्षार m. 
push vb. प्राधक्कन 1. (Hindi धक्का देना) pure surd Math. शुद्ध-करणी. 
push fit Mach. आधक्कान्वायुक्ति 
725 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
19 1911 till 
put an end to अन्तकरण n. 
pyramine orange 2 G = amidine put option Com. (option to sell) family orange GG 
factory in. 
pyramine yellow G=direct bri Putranjiva (from Sanskrit) Bot. gea l liant yellow C 
जीवति । (-ति for प्रजाति genus) pyran Chem. अग्निन्य ॥. 
P. roxburghii सामान्य पुत्रंजीव M. -pyranodioxin fierufefafia f. putrefaction पूयन n. 
pyranyl Chem. अग्निन्यल n. putrefactive bacteria पूयकारी शाकाणु m. pyrazine (pyridine शुष्मेयी + avine putrescin Biochem. qfarefret f. 
51197) Chem, Tsilivítat f. putting to a wrong use gegetet m., p. yellow Col. Ind. prettet eta 
ge4379777 n. Py (pyridyl, pyridine) Chem. TT (TG- pyrazino- (pyrazine) Chem. Eshillata 
49, Tat) 
pyrazo- (pyrazole) Chem. TOHTET .pyaemia Med. पूयरक्तता . 
pyrazol anthrone yellow Col. Ind. pycnosis Med. संघनना . 
शुष्माजैल विक्षा पीत m. pyelitis (inflammation of the pelvis p. orange Tan PT FTTT m. 
of the kidney) वृक्कनिवापकोप m. pyrazole (Pyrrol शुष्मैल + 40- अज-) pyemia=pyaemia 
Chem. qfohet n. pyknometer=pycnometer=picno- pyrazoline Chem. Thrift f. 
__meter सान्द्रतामान m. 
pyrazolone Chem. शुष्माजैला f. pylangium Zool. &T-971 n. 
pyrazolyl Chem. TCH THIRST N. pyloric Anat. Fitote, bi mfn. pyrazotol yellow 2 GL=fast light 
p. artery factor-ttfaut f. 
yellow . p. sphincter Zool. Foot-197919 m. pyrene Chem, n. pylorus i Zool. Ferito* n. (ʻlower part pyrenoid Biol. (a proteid body) s 54 
of the जठर') 
m. 2 Anat. (opening) FTSTOT-OT n. pyrethri flos = pyrethrum flower pyorrhea, pyorrhoea feg m. (from pyrethri radix = pyrethrum root 
TaTT), frage n. 
pyrethrum=insect powder Pharm. pyracene = ace-ace-naphthene T 10-15 m. 
शुगुत्तरेण्य . 
pyrethrum flower = pyrethri flos pyramid 1 F4 m. 
(pyreth. flos)=insect flowers = 2 (angular mound) xury m. Dalmatian insect flowers Pharm. pyramidal 7974, 79T mfn. 
(pyrethrum flower in powder is "pyramid” filter press "TT" 972-1te used to keep away insects) कीट-पुष्प 
m. pyramidol brown Col. Ind. 1948 a pyrethrum root = pyrethri radix 
1. 
(pyreth. rad.) = pellitory root= 
17. 
726 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
Spanish pellitory Pharm. कीटपुष्प- 
मूल n. pyrethrum yellow प्रपीत M. ( high 
brilliance) pyrex (Gk. pyr fire + Lat. rex king) 
अग्निराज (अग्नौ राजते) p. beaker अग्निराज-चंचुकीm. 
p. glass अग्निराज-काच m. pyr-heliometer (instrument for mea 
suring sun's heat and energy 
सूर्याग्नि) सूर्याग्निमान m. pyridine (pyrrol + - idine as in 
toluidine) Chem. शुष्मेयी . (शुष्म fire) pyrid-oxin==adermin शुष्मेय-तिग्मि f. pyridyl Chem. शुष्मेयल n. -pyrin,-pyrine Pharm. (a combining . form of antipyrine ज्वरघ्नी) -ज्वरघ्नी 
p. cyanine अग्निजन श्यामी . p. dark brown अग्निजन असित बभ्रु 
m. p. dark green अग्निजन असित हरिm. p. deep black अग्निजन गाढ काल m. p. deep blue अग्निजन गाढ नील m. p. direct blue अग्निजन अनाश्रित नील 
m. p. direct blue green shade 
अग्निजन अनाश्रित नील हरि छाया . p. green अग्निजन हरि m. p. grey अग्निजन धूसर m. 
indigo अग्निजन निनील m.. , olive अग्निजन तैलबदरm. . orange अग्निजन नारङ्गm. p. violet अग्निजन नीललोहित m. p. violet-brown अग्निजन नीललोहित 
बभ्रm p. yellow अग्निजन पीत m. p. yellow-brown अग्निजन पीत-बभ्र 
m. 
pyrite Mineral. माक्षीक n. pyro- Chem. अग्नि pyro-antimonate Chem. अग्न्यंजनीय n. pyro-catechol Chem. अग्नि-खदिरव m. pyro dark brown Col. Ind. for fra 
बm. pyro-gallol Chem. अग्नि-द्रुस्फोटव m. pyro-gallol-cyanine sulphonic acid 
Col. Ind. अग्नि-द्रुस्फोटव-श्यामी शुल्बायिक 
अम्ल . pyrogen I Chem. अग्निजन m. 
2 Med. ज्वरजन, ज्वरकारी (-इन्) m. pyrogene black Col. Ind. अग्निजन काल 
m. (pyrogene dyes are sulphur dyes) p. black-brown अग्निजन काल-बभ्र m. p. blue अग्निजन नील m. 
. blue-green अग्निजन नील-हरि m. p. brown अग्निजन बभ्रु m. p. cutch अग्निजन गायत्री . 
pyrogen-free Pharm. ज्वरजन-रहित mfn. pyrol black Col. Ind. (here and in the 
following words pyrol = pyrrol) शुष्मैल काल m. p. black-brown शुष्मैल काल-बभ्रु m. p. blue शुष्मैल नील m. p. blue-black शुष्मैल नील-कृष्ण m. p. brilliant black शुष्मैल भासुर काल __m. 
p. bronze शुष्मैल कांस्य m.. p. brown शुष्मैल ब« m. p. brown-olive शुष्मैल बभ्रु-तैलबदर ___m. 
p. carbon शुष्मैल प्रांगार m. p. dark brown शुष्मैल असित बच m. p. dark green शुष्मैल असित हरि m. p. deep black शुष्मल गाढ काल m. 
727 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
p. direct blue pot fa fa m. pyroxonium Chem, arsing m. p. field grey शुष्मैल सेना धूसर M. pyro-Xylin (xylon wood) fipfos f. p. green शुष्मैल हरि m. 
-pyrrhin=-phein -faaifir f. p. navy blue TÅTT TT faoi citat m. pyrrhotite=magnetic pyrites (it is p. olive शुष्मैल तैलबदर m. 
an iron sulphide and is attracted p. orange शुष्मैल नारंग m. 
by the magnet) अयस्यशिज M. (-इज p. violet-brown TÅTT Elfetta for after mineral) 
anum. 
pyrrol-, pyrrolo- Chem. 70499 p. yellow Thota m. 
pyrrole (Ger. pyrrol, from Gk. pyrros p. yellow-brown chat -2 m. fiery+Lat. oleum oil) Chem. TSST pyroligneous acid Chem. काष्ठासुत 1. (ETCH fire tit; it is the parent 
HEAT 12. 
of many important compounds) pyrolusite = black manganese pyrrolidine Chem. HTUT . 
Mineral. Erret m. (-50 for pyrrolidone (pyrrolidine + -one) af mineral)=AAMTE 1. 
Chem. The f. pyrolysis Chem. mirat n. 
pyrrolidyi (pyrrolidine + -yl) Chem. . p. furnace quart SC n. 
शुष्मैलेयल n. p. tube अग्न्यंशन नाल m. 
pyrroline Chem. शुष्मैली f. pyrometer Phys. m m. 
pyrrolo-, pyrrol-Chem. est pyronal brown Col. Ind. Fry a pyrroyl (pyrrole + yl, C4 H4 NCO, 
M. 
-oyl as in benzoyl) Chem. That n. p. orange FUTT ATT m. 
(ऊल as in धूपूल benzoyl) p. red अग्न्यासु रक्त m. 
pyrryl (pyrrole to wyl C H2N) Chem. p. yellow अग्न्यासु पीत m. 
15457 n. pyrone (-one, see Oxford Dictionary) pyrrylene (pyrrole+ -ylene) Tamara 
. ruf.. pyronine Col. Ind. f. Pyrus Bot. Effet f. (-fer for stafar 
p. orange spurt TT m. i 
genus; 1947 'pear is from Ben pýrophyllite=pencil stone arayforat gali) 
m. (-57 for afir mineral)= - pyruvaldehyde (pyruvic + aldehyde) TFT m. , ,. 
Chem, aitona m. pyrosine Col. Ind. Han f. 
pyruvate Chem. 77034 n. pyrotechny (production and manu- pyruvic acid Chem. (obtained by the 
facture of fireworks) अग्निक्रीडनकी [. dry distillation of facemic acid.. pyrotin orange=brilliant orange ....) TIF HFCT n. pyroxene Mineral.- (a metasilicate, pyruvil Chem. otrogen m. 
Chiefly of calcium and magnesium) pyruvo-nitrile Chem. Peyft m. समसकिज (इज for खनिज mineral) pyruvyl Chem. गोच्छल . 
7281 
* 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
pyrylium Chem. अग्निलातु m. 
Pythium Bot. पूयकति f. (-ति for प्रजाति Pythagoras theorem Math. चिति-प्रमेय genus) 
1. (first used in Vedic fire-altars P. debaryanum सामान्य पूयक m. चिति; Pythagoras got it from India) python अजगर m. 
q. (quintal) ल. धा. (लक्ष-धान्य) 
q. pyramid चतुर्भुज स्तूप M. q. (quarter) तु. (तुरीय) 
quadrillion Math. I (English) चतु q. (quart) स्थ. (प्रस्थ) 
विंशतिख m. (a unit with 24 zeros Q. E. D. (quod erat demonstrandum) ___Math. इति सिद्धम् 
2 (French and American) पञ्चदशख Q.E.F. (quod erat faciendum) Math. m. (a unit with Is zeros ख) 
इति कृतम् 
quadrivalent I Chem. चतुःसंयुज mfn. qt. (quart) स्थ. (प्रस्थ) 
2 Biol. चतुर्युक्त mfr. quadrangle Geom. चतुष्कोण m. quadrupod stand चतुष्पाद स्थाम 7. quadrangulus Bot. चतुष्कोण 
quail Zool. वर्तक m. . quadrant I Math. चरण m. 
quake (earthquake) कम्प m. (भूकम्प) 2 Sury. (an instrument for measur- quake-proof कम्पसह mfn. ing angle) तुर्यक n. (cf. sextant Quaker gray=acier प्रावपीत m. षष्ठक) 
qualification पात्रता f., गुण m., योग्यता f., 3 Bot. तुरीय n. 
विशेषण . quadrate (square, rectangular) चतुष्कोण qualified Com. विशेषित, योग्य mfr. 
mfn. 
q. acceptance विशेषित-स्वीकृति f. quadrate = quadrate bone Zool. q. endorsement farifast-9081971 f. 
(quadrate=square = rectangular) qualify vb. योग्यकरण, विशेषण, पात्रकरण, चतुष्कोणास्थि . 
योग्यभवन, पात्रभवन १. quadratic equation=equation of qualifying विशेषण, विशेषक mfn. 
the second degree Math. द्विघात- qualitative तत्ता-, गुणात्मक mfn. समीकार, वर्ग-समीकार m. 
· q. analysis Chem. तत्ता-विश्लेषण n. quadratic surd वर्ग-करणी . 
q. variation Zool. तत्तात्मक विभेदन, quadrato-jugal Zool. (connecting गुणात्मक विभेदन 1. 
the quadrate and jugal bones) quality लक्षण ., गुण m., तत्ता f. । चतुष्क-युगीय mfn. 
quality=timber Acoustics लक्षण n. quadriceps (muscle) Anat. चतुश्शिरपेशी quantitative I Chem. इयत्ता-, इयत्तात्मक 
mfn. 
quadrilateral Geom. चतुर्भुज m. ... q. prism चतुर्भुज संक्षेत्र . 
2 Statistics इयत्तात्मक, परिमाणात्मक mfn. ' q. analysis इयत्ता-विश्लेषण n. 
' 
729﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
q. composition इयत्तात्मक निबन्ध m. q. data Statistics इयत्ता-सामग्री q. variation Zool. इयत्तात्मक विभेदन 
quartz स्फटिक m. quasi-Com. आभास 
q. contract Law भाभास-प्रसंविदा . q. partner आभास-भागी (-इन्), भागि 
कल्पm.. q. rent Econ. आभास भाटक. quassia (quass.)=quassiae lignum 
==quassia wood Pharm. (a remedy for threadworms सूत्रकृमि 
in children) सूत्रकृमिघ्न m. quaternary Geol. तुरीय queen's root = queen root ==stil . lingia Pharm. (promotes flow of 
saliva) लालामूल .. quench vb. ferafqur 11. Quercus Bot. वजृति (ति for प्रजाति 
genus) Q.dilatata = green oak हरि वञ्जु 
m. 
q. way इयत्तात्मक-रीति . quantitatively इयत्तया, मात्रया quantity Math. राशि m., मात्रा, इयत्ता . quantity of matter Mecb. भूतद्रव्य-राशि 
m. quantum I Com. प्रमात्रा . (विशेष मात्रा 
a. specified quantity or amount, esp. that allotted to one) 2 Phys. ऊर्जाणु M. (unit of energy) hv fra (h is Planck's constant, and v is the frequency of vibrations 
आवेप) q. number ऊर्जाणु-संख्या f. 
q. theory ऊर्जाणु-वाद m. quarantine n. Hygiene निरोधा f. quarantine vb. Hygiene fortement n. quarried उत्खात mfn. quarry आकर, पाषाण-खनि m. quarry vb. उत्खनन ॥. quart (q., qt.; 2 pints) प्रस्थ m. (स्थ.; २ 
शराव) quarter (q.; 2 stones) तुरीय 1. (तु.; २ 
प्रस्तर) quarter चतुर्थांश m. quarterly त्रैमासिक mfn. quarter-master general Mil. महा- 
भक्त-यात्रिक m. (भक्त 'maintenance+ यात्रा 'movement'; he is inchatge of movements and maintenance 
of armies) quartile Statistics चतुर्थक . 
q.coefficient of dispersion agua . .. अपकिरण-गुणक m. 
rq.deviation चतुर्थक विचलन . . 
Q. incana-grey oak धूसर वञ्जm. Q. infectoria=gall oak=dyer's 
oak रंगद वञ्जु m. Q. semicarpifolia = brown oak 
बभ्रु वञ्जु m. question प्रश्न m. questionnaire Statistics प्रश्नावली . questions and answers प्रश्नोत्तर n. quickest descent Math. क्षिप्रतम अवरोह 
m. quick-fix bosshead "पाशुलग" उत्थशिर 
n. quicklime जीव-चूर्णक m. quick march Drill दूत-प्रयाणम् quicksand (deep mass of loose sand ___mixed with water . . . . .) वालुपंक m. quicksilver=hydrargyrum =- mer ___ cury Chem. पारद m. quillaia (quill.) = quillaiae cortex 
730 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
- 
=quillaia bark = soap bark = quinizarin (hydroquinone Jefasert 
panama bark Pharm. स्वफेन-वल्क m. +alizarin विमंजिष्ठि) Chem. विज्वर quilt तूलवती, तूलिका f. (ancient word) जिष्ठि f. 
(cf. Hindi तुलाई, दुलाई) 
q. blue Col. Ind. fasaforos a quin-, quino- विज्वर 
m. quina विज्वरक, विज्वरत्वक् f. 
___q.green Col. Ind. विज्वरजिष्ठि हरि m. quinaldic=quinaldinic Chem. Favar quino-, quin- facere 
स्विक mfn. 
quinoidine = chinoidine Pharm. quinaldine (quinoline favazattalde fargerit f. 
hyde सुव्युद-+aniline विनीली) विज्वस्वी/ quinol Chem. विज्वरव m. q. blue Col. Ind. faverat iT m. quinoline=chinoline Faracat f. q. yellow favqeat ora m. 
quinoline blue Col. Ind. विज्वरवी नील quinaldinic = quinaldic 
m. quinaldinium Chem. विज्वस्वातु m. 
q. green faverat af m. quinaldyl Chem. विज्वसुल 1. 
q. red facaat ett m. quinalizarin Col. Ind. विज्वरविमंजिष्ठि. q.yellow विज्वरवी पीत m. quin-amine विज्वर-तिक्ती. 
-quinolopyridine -विज्वरवशुष्मेयी f. quinary Math. पञ्चमय mfn. 
quinone Chem. विज्वरा. quinazol yellow Col. Ind. विज्वराजवपीत . diazide विज्वरा यजीवेय M. 
quinonyl Chem. विज्वराल n.. Quincke's tube (interference tubule) quinophthalone Col. Ind. विज्वरव्युत्तैला 
मिथोघट्टन नाल m. quindecagon Geom. पञ्चदशभुज m. quinovic=chinovic निर्वरिक mfn. quin - hydrone = chin-hydrone quinovin=chinovin fraft f. 
Chem. विज्वरोदा . 
quinovose=chinovose five te n. quinic fasafiri mfn. 
quinoxaline=chinoxaline fara frit q. acid विज्वरिक अम्ल .. quinicine = chino-toxine विज्वर- quinquevalent Chem. पंचसंयुज mfn. 
विषी . 
quintal (q.) लक्षधान्य n. (ल. धा.) quinidine विज्वरेयी . 
quintile Statistics पंचमक n. quinine=quir 
quire (of paper) हस्तक m. (Cf. Urdu विज्वरी f. 
दस्ता, from Persian दस्त, which itself q. bihydrochloride विज्वरी द्वयुदनीरेय is from Sanskrit हस्त) _n. 
quisling शत्रुपोषी (-इन्) m. q. ferro-arsenate विज्वरी अयो-नेपालीय quisqueite Mineral. (composed 
chiefly of carbon and sulphur) q. tonic विज्वरी-बल्य 1. 
प्रांगशिज m. (-इज for खनिज mineral) quininic विज्वरियिक mfn. 
quit Com. I (to set free) उन्मोचन n. 
m. 
1. 
731 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
2 (to meet and satisfy a debt) quorum कार्यवाह-संख्या, पूरक संख्या, गणपूरक निस्तारण .. 
संख्या ., गणपूरक m. q. rent उन्मोचन शुल्क m. 
quota. Com. अभ्यंश m. quittance Com. उन्मोचन,निस्तारण, (docu- quote, quotation उद्धरण 1. 
ment evidencing such discharge) quotient Math. f f ., भागफल 
उन्मोचन-पत्र n. 
r. (racemic) Chem. गु. (गुच्छिक) 
rack (for placing things in) निलय m. R (radical) Chem. मू (मूल) 
rack and pinion-mountain rail R. (Rhodococcus) र. गो. (रक्तगोलाणु) ways निलय-दन्तिका-पर्वत-संयान n. Ra (radium) Chem. ते (तेजातु) rack rent Com. अत्यधिक भाटक n. Ra-A, Ra-B (radium A, radium B) racon Radar (land radar beacon' 
Chem. ते-क, ते-ख (तेजातु क, तेजातु ख) used for blind landing of Ra-Ac, Ra-Act. (radio-actinium) planes) तेजोज्ञप्ति f. 
Chem. ते-ए (तेजजातु) 
radar (range and direction and re rabbit शशक m. (bare शश) 
cognition) तेजोन्वेष m. (Japanese rabies (from Sanskrit रभस्)-hydro dempa-tanchiki electric searchi'), 
phobia Med., Vet.जलभी, आलर्क 7. सर्वदर्शित्र n. (सर्वं दर्शयति 'the all race I (running) धावन . 
seeing') 2 प्रजाति f. (caste जाति) 
radar antennas तेजोवेष-प्रातन्तु m. race-course धावन-पथ m. 
radar height finder = mickey racemate Chem. गुच्छीय. 
mouse Radar उच्छायान्वेष m. . raceme Bot. एकवर्ध्यक्ष m. ('having one raddle=red chalk 
growing axis') 
radia (an elongated cylindrical larva racemic (Lat. racemus a bunch of the flukes) TTT m. (f577) 
of berries or grapes) Chem. गुच्छिक radial अरीय mfn. mfn. 
r. artery Anat. अन्वरनि रोहिणी /. r. acid गुच्छिक अम्ल .. 
r. bundle Bot. पृथस्थित पूल m. racemose Bot. एकवध्यक्ष-, एकवयंक्षीय mfn. r. fibres = radiating fibres अर-तंतु races of mankind (Hindi) मानव 
m. जातियाँ 
r. nerve Anat. अन्वरलि चेता f.. rachilla Bot. (axis of a spikelet) शूकि r. pressure अरीय निपीड m. 
काक्ष m. . 
r. rib Mach. अर-पशु m. rachis Bot. (main axis of a leaf) प्राक्ष r. symmetry Biol. अरीय-संमिति f. " m. (प्रधान+अक्ष) 
. 
radially adv. Phys. (along the radius) Rad: द अम्ल, र अम्ल . . . . . . अन्वर 
732 
ra 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
radian 1. Math. T 11. (from yt ra- radical leaf Bot. TFT 47 na 
dius), संचापारकोण m. (सं equal---चाप radical sign Math. करणी-चिह्न n. arct radius--an angle subten- radicel Bot. fant f. ded by an arc equal in length to rootlet 799 n. the radius) 
radicle I Anat. any one of the radian adj. Math. urta mfir. (from smallest branches of a vessel or 
radian n.) 
nerve) 1997 f. r. measure पारीय माप m. 
2 Bot. (that part of the embryo radiant, radiating Fit, failui, farafii which goes to make the root) 
mfn. 
qat 11. 1, energy Phys. fa fuff f., sem r. pocket 44-TE m. 
112. 
radi-ferous Chem. 24-7* mfn. r. flux Photom. (rate of energy radio- I - 
radiation) विकिरण-स्यन्द m. 
2 (by means of radium, e.g. r. yellow = cadmium yellow radiosurgery) av Radiata Zool. (having parts arranged. 3. Med. (from or by means of radi 
radially) TUTO, PUNTTT: m.pl. ant energy, as in radio-diagnosis) (fXMAREFUFTIT:) 
- - radiate vb. I fafegur n. (asi-faren cut radioactinium Chem. Nusret m. 
2 Zool. ifaç fare ut n. 
radioactivate vb. (to make radio 3 Ophthalmol. (to expose for radia- active) TERRUT . tion of ultraviolet rays) पारजम्बु- radioactive Chem. तेजोद्गर mfm 
fan-fafxut n. . 
t. bismuth Chem. aset POTETET m. radiating, radiant faffi mfn. 
1. transformation Chem. asigura f. fibres=radial fibres 
fad m. radiation Phys. विकिरण n. 
radioactivity Chem. a fircut 1h. r. of energy wi-fafa aut n. radio black Col. Ind. act: TT m. : 1. of heat 3CH-farkut n. 
- 1. brown am. r. of light #ter-faut 1h. 
__r. red तेजोरक्त m. radiator विकिरक m. 
. 1. yellow at: m. 1. thermometer fafari CTTHET m. radio-chemistry a 7477 n.. radical i Chem. 11. 
radiode (radium-tu mode etc; a metal 2 Bot. मूलरुह m. (rootleaf मूलपत्र) container.for radium) asetz, derg 3 Bot. (one of the ultimate divi ETT n. sions of a growing root) Tu radiodirection.finding (RDF) Radar m. . 
STT far out n. fr. f. 9.) radical axis Geum. HET m. 
radio-element Chem. Ta nh. radical centre Geom. F orse n. Radiolaria Zool. (having radiating 
733 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
- 
threadlike pseudopodia) अरसूत्रपादाः 1. bath (a bath the water of 
m.pl., अरसूत्रपादगण m. 
which is impregnated with a radio-lead Chem. तेज-सीस . 
radioactive substance) तेजातु radio-location-radar तेजसा-स्थित्यन्वेषण स्नान M. 
1.-तेजोन्वेष m. 
r.emanation=radon तेजातु-निस्सृति radiolucent आपार-रश्मि mfn. [X rays f-तैजसातिm. 
or other forms of radiation can r.G (radiums2) तेजातु छ (तेजातु ह) get through partly (आ ईषदर्थे) or r. lead-radio-lead तेजात सीस wholly (मा समन्तात्)] 
तेज-सीस . radio-man=radio operator वितन्तु r. vermilion तेजातु हिंगुल n. 
पुरुष m. 
radiumization Chem. तेजायन . radio-micrometer Phys. विकिरण-अणुमान radiumize pb. Chem. तेजायन n., (to 
m. (for measuring intensity of subject to the action of radium) radiation) 
तेजातु-प्रभावन . radiopaque नपार-रश्मि min. (X rays radius Anat. अन्वरलि m. 
and other torms of radiation can- radius Math. अर ., त्रिज्या f., अर्धव्यास 
not get through) 
m. radioparent पार-रश्मि mfn. 
radius of curvature Math. वक्रता-अर radiophone वितन्तुभाष m. 
m., वक्रता-त्रिज्या . radio pulse तेज-स्पन्द m. 
radius vector Math. सदिश-त्रिज्या f radio reflections तेज-परावर्तन 1. 
radix I Math. मूलाङ्क m. radioscope तेजोद्गरेक्ष m. (for detecting 2=root Pharm. मूल . 
a radioactive ang substance) radix aortae Zool. महारोहिणी-मूल n. radioscopy तेजेक्षा f. (observation by radix fraction Math. मूलाङ्क भिन्न m. ___ radiant energy) 
radome = blister Radar (antenna radio signal तेज-संज्ञप्ति . 
_housing) प्रावार m. (प्रातन्तु-प्रावार) radio-surgery तेज-शल्य. 
radon Chem. तेजसाति m. radio-symmetrical Bot. अर-संमित mfn. raffinose-cotton sugar तूल-शर्करा . 
t. flower अरसंमित पुष्प 1. 
rag चीर n. radio-thallium=radium C" Chem. 1.-bleacher चीर-श्वेतक m. 
तेज-सिक्ष्यातु-तेजातु ग" m. 
___r.-sorter चैरिक m. radio-thorium Chem. तेज-हसातु m. rail (iron bars) Ry. अयोवंश, वंशक m. . radio wave वितन्तु-तरंग m. 
(Hindi पटड़ी) radish Bot. मूलक १. 
2 अयोयान . radium Chem. तेजातु m. 
railroad अयोमार्गm. . I. A, B,C, D, E, F तेजातु क, ख, ग, railroad car अयोमार्ग यान .. 
घ, ङ, च 
railway अयोमार्ग (iron way), लोहमार्ग r.C" तेजातु ग" 
संयान . (train, a series of 
. 
734 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
. 
. 
carriages) 
ramenta Bot. hairlike covering of r. authority संयान-प्राधिकारी (इन् young leaves) रोमावरण . 
संयान-प्राधिकारि-वर्ग m. 
ramentum of scales Bot. शल्कावरण .. r. bookstall संयान-पुस्तस्थाम 7. . ramification Bot. TTETT n. (from the f. company संयान-प्रमण्डल . 
ancient word) r. engine संयान-गंत्र 1. 
ramified trachea Zool. ret FATHETET r. engineering संयान-अभियन्त्रणा 
m. t. fare संयान-भाटक 1. 
ramify Bot. शाख्यन . r. freight संयान-भाटक 1. 
rami gastrici Anat. जठरोपचेता, जठरगा r. guard संयान-रक्षी (-इन्) m. 
उच्छाखा . r. parcel office संयान पोटली-कार्यालय rami pulmonales Anat. क्लोमगा उच्छा 
खा. t. receipt (R.R.) संयान-प्राप्ति (स.प्रा.) Ramtek Geog. (North of Nagpur) t. saloon संयान-विलासकोष्ठ m. 
रामगिरि (of मेघदूत) m. r. system संयान-संहति . 
ramulus=branchlet शाखिका f. t. ticket=ticket संयान-पत्रक .. ramus Anat. I =cornu शृंगn. r. track संयान-पथ m. 
2 Anat., Zool. (the posterior or r. train अयोयान, अयोमार्ग संयान, बाष्पयान more or less vertical or ascending 
• n. (for steam railway trains) part of the lower jaw) हनूच्छाखा f. ___r. tribunal संयान-धर्माधिकरण n. 
3 (branch of a nerve) उपचेता . rain auf f. 
4 (a branch; a projecting part or rainbow इन्द्रधनु. 
elongated process) उच्छाखा / rainbow orange Col. Ind. इन्द्रधनु नारंग 5 (barb of a feather) पत्रवाल m. 
m. 
t. cardiac हृदयोपचेता. r. red इन्द्रधनु रक्त m. 
r. cardiacus (goes to the heart) t. scarlet इन्द्रधनु शोण m. 
हृदयगा उच्छाखा . rainfall वर्षा f., वर्षापात m. 
r. communicans (connecting rain gauge वर्षमान m. (from अर्थशास्त्र of nerve bundle) योजि-चेतापूल m. 
कौटल्य II. 5) 
1. laryngeus (ends in the larynx) rain-proof वर्षा-रुध, वर्षा-सह fn. 
घोषिनगा उच्छाखा, घोषित्रोपचेता. raise vb. उन्नयन . 
___Rana Zool. (a genus including frogs) raised tension Ophthalmol. उच्च-प्रातति. मण्डूकाति f. (प्राति for प्रजाति genus) 
R. esculenta भक्ष्य मण्डूक m. raising उन्नयन . 
R. fusca कपिश मण्डक m. raising of the boiling point बुबुदांक- R. temporaria=European frog 
उन्नयन 1. 
हरिवर्ष मण्डूक m. Rajputana Geog. मरुधन्व m. 
R. tigrina चित्र मंडूक m. Rajshahi Geog. वरेन्द्र m. 
Ranales Bot. SIITITE n. 
735 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
- 
m. 
rancid दुर्वास mfn. 
Rangoon Geog. पुष्करवती-नगर n. rancidity दुर्वासता . 
rani- Zool. मंडूक Randia Bot. मदनति f. (-ति for प्रजाति Ranidae Zool. मंडूक-वंश m. 
genus) 
raniform Zool. मंडूकरूप mfn. ___R. dumetorium सामान्य मदन m. Raninae Zool. (a. subfamily) मंडकानुवंश random यदृच्छा-, यादृच्छिक mfn. 
m. random recombination Zool. Ugressi ranine Zool. Hİsta mfn. 
पुनःसंयोजन n. 
ranivorous Zool. मंडूकभुक् mfn. random sampling=chance samp- rank I Drill पंक्तिः । 
ling Statistics दैव निदर्शन n. 
2 Statistics अनस्थिति f. random selection Statistics दैव प्रवरण Ranunculaceae Bot. जीर-कुल n. 
Raoult's law Physical Chem. (lower range I गोचर m. (field क्षेत्र) 
ing of the freezing point or of the 2. Statistics ferrit m. 
vapour pressure of a solution is 3 Phys. गोचर, परास m., क्षेत्र n. 
proportional to the amount of 4 Math. गोचर (as of values), परास substance dissolved in the so 
m. (as of projection) 
lution बाष्पनिपीडनिम्नन-विलीनानुपात) r. finder Gum. (used to determine अपिनिम्नन-अनुपात-नियम m. 
the distance of an object to be Raoult's method Physical Chem. . hit) परास-सूचक m. 
(the method of determining the r. of gun Mil. शतघ्नी-गोचर, शतघ्नी molecular weight of a dissolved 
परास M. 
substance by the extent to which r. of mountains पर्वत-माला . 
it depresses the freezing point of r. of points Math. बिन्दु-माला f. the solvent) अपिश्यान-निम्नन-रीति /. r. of projection Math. प्रक्षेप-परास m. Raphanus Bot. मूलकति 1. (-ति for प्रजाति r. of values Math. अर्हा-गोचर m. genus). 'r. of variation Statistics विचरण- R. sativus सामान्य मूलक :m. 
, विस्तार m. 
raphe=suture .. range-oscilloscope Radar T -SEITET raphides Bot. (needlelike crystals of 
___calcium oxalate) स्फटसूची f. Rangifer Zool. वाहमृगाति f. (-आति for rapic=oleic 
प्रजाति genus) - 
. rapid द्रुत.mfn. . R. tarandus (reindeer) सामान्य rapid fast blue Col. Ind. द्रुत स्थिर नील 7. ___वाहमृग 1. (वाहमग) - 
___r. fast brown द्रुत स्थिर बभ्रु ४. ranging Radar (finding out the ranige) f. fast orange द्रुत स्थिर नारंग M. 
गोचरान्वेषण n. . 
r. fast red द्रुत स्थिर रक्त m. . ranging and detection (by radar) .. fast yellow द्रुत. स्थिर पीत m. : 
गोचरान्वेषण तथा उपलम्भन । 
. rapid letter file द्रुत पत्र-नस्ती M. 
m. 
736 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
Raptores Zool. प्रसहपक्षि-गण m. 
ratio I Math: निष्पत्ति rare विरल mfn. 
2 Statistics, Com. अनुपात m. rare earth Chem. विरला मृद्. 
3-price relatives Statistics मूल्य rare-earth metal Chem. विरला-मद्-धातु अनुपात m. 
t. arm Elec. निष्पत्ति-बाहु m., ० भुजा . rat भूष, पाखु m. 
r. chart Statistics निष्पत्ति-चित्र, अनुपात mouse मूषक m. 
चित्र . ratbite fever Med. ATCERT 5* m. r. of equality Math. समता-निष्पत्ति . rate I अर्घm. (Hindi दर) 
t. of exchange विनिमय-अनुपात m, 2 प्रत्यक (प्रतिशत, प्रतिसहस्र, etc. + अंक) r. of greater inequality Math. 3(local tax) स्थानीय करा . 
एकाधिक-निष्पत्ति rateable Com. आनुपातिक, यथानुपात, करयोग्य r. of less inequality Matb. एकोन 
mfn. 
निष्पत्ति . r.distribution आनुपातिक वंटन . r.of regression प्रतीपगमन-अनुपात m. r. value करयोग्य-अर्हा . 
r. of variation विचरण-अनुपात m. rate of change परिवर्तन-अर्घ m. 
r. scale अनुपात-श्रेणी /. rate of change of acceleration saeur ration I (fixed allowance of food) 
परिवर्तन-अर्घm. 
भक्त (Hindi भात), समभक्त . rate of change of momentum गमता 2 Agric. (the amount of food. 
परिवर्तन-अर्घ m. 
supplied to an animal for a defi rate of change of position frifi nite period) अन्नमात्रा f., अन्न, खाद्य .. . परिवर्तन-अर्घm. 
rational Math. परिमेय mfn. rate of change of velocity प्रवेग-परि- rational integral index Math. परिमेय ___ वर्तन-अर्घm. 
पूर्णाक-धात m. rate of depreciation Com. अवमूल्यन-अर्घ rationalize vb. Math. (make rational) 
m. 
परिमेय-करण . rate of exchange विनिमय-अर्घ m. . rationalizing factor Math. करणीहार rate of exhaustion उत्स्रावण-अर्घm. 
गुणक, परिमेयकारक खंड m. rate of respiration श्वसन-अर्घ m.. rational number Math. परिमेय अंक m. rates and fares Com. अर्घ तथा भादक n. Ratitae Zool. (birds without carina) rates and taxes Com. स्थानीय तथा अन्य कर अकूटिका: m.pl. . 
m. 
rat snake मूषभक्षी सर्प .m. . Rates Committee अर्घ-समिति/ 
rattan palm प्रवेत्र.m. . rates of variation Statistics विचरण-अर्घ rattlesnake-belltail क्वणत्पुच्छ m. 
m.. 
rauracienne=fast red . . . . . . Ra-Th (radio-thorium) Chem. ते-ह raven कृष्णकाक m. (ancient word) . 
(तेज-हसातु) 
Ravi (river) Geog. इरावती [. ratify vb., JH1TTT n. (ancient word) raw आम, अपक्व mfr. (Hindi कच्चा ) 
737 
47 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
k.decomposed सरलतया विबद्ध mfn. r. soluble सरलतया विलेय mfn. r. soluble in water सरलतया जल 
विलेय mfn. reading are n. 
r. a drawing Engin. उद्रेख-वाचन' 7. r. lamp वाचन-दीप M. r. lens वाचन-बीक्ष m. _r. microscope वाचन-अण्वीक्ष m. 
r. of motion Legislation प्रस्ताव-वाचन 
t. cotton=cotton wool कर्पास 1. r. material आम-सामनी f., आम द्रव्य, 
अपक्व द्रव्य .. r. materials Com. अनिर्मित द्रव्य . r. spirit आम प्रासव m. 
r. umber आम-बभ्रुकी. ray Phys. रश्मि m. ray floret Bot. रश्मि-पुष्पक 1. rayon (a silk-like fabric made from 
cellulose कोशाधु) कौशाधव . razor क्षुर m. 
microtomer. अणुच्छिद क्षुर m. 
r. strop क्षुर-पट्टी. Rb (rubidium) Chem. दी (दीपातु) R.C. phial (rubber-capped phial) 
धृषिटोपी-कूपिका. R/D (refer to drawer) Banking आ. 
निर्. (आहर्ता निर्देष्टव्यः) Rd (radium) Chem. ते (तेजातु) rd. (rod)=pole (styds.) वं. (वंश) 
Rd-Ac (radio-actinium) Chem. ते-ए 
(तेजैजातु) RDF Radar (radio direction finding) 
ते. दि. अ (तेजसा दिगन्वेषण) Rd-Th (radio-thorium) Chem. ते-ह 
(तेज-ह्रसातु) re- पुनः-, प्रति Re (rhenium)Cbem. बा (बाष्पातु) reactant-factor Chem. प्रतिकारक 
कारक m. reacting gases प्रतिकारी वाति m. reaction IChem. प्रतिक्रिया .. 
2=response Zool. प्रतिचार m. reader r (as the title of a teacher) 
प्रवाचक m. (cf. प्रवचन-कर्ता) 
2 वाचक m. reader for burette द्रवमि-वाचक m. . readily सरलतया (Hindi सरलता से) 
r. telescope वाचन-दूरेक्ष m. ready-made निष्पन्न, पूर्वनिष्पन्न mfm. ready money=hard cash सद्योरोक m. reagent Chem. प्रतिकर्ता (-तृ) m. 
_r. bottle प्रतिकर्त-कूपी . 
.. bottle stand प्रतिकर्तृ-कूपी-स्थाम n. 
r. label प्रतिकर्त-नामपत्र. real वास्तव, वास्तविक mfn. 
r. account = property account 
वास्तविक-लेखा, संपत्ति-लेखा .. 1. analysis Math. arenfati farmour 
. r. assets Law वास्तविक-सम्पत्ति 1. cost वास्तविक परिव्यय m. 1. estate=r. property r. focus Phys. वास्तव-नाभि f. t. income वास्तविक पाय m. r. property स्थावर-सम्पत्ति f. r. value वास्तविक-अहीं 
r. wages Econ. वास्तविक-भृति . realgar I Mineral. मनःशिल m. 
2-arsenic disulphide नेपाली 
द्विशुल्बेय. realizable Com. रोककरणीय, प्राप्य mfn. realization Com. रोककरण 1. (to con 
vert into money), प्राप्ति /. r. account रोककरण-लेखा f. 
738 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
r. of property सम्पत्ति-रोककरण n. receiver आदाता (-तृ) m. . .. of taxes कर-ग्रहण 1. (ancient fractional distillation r, प्रभागशः 
word) 
पासवन प्रादाता m. r. statement रोककरण विवरण 1. 
r. rest=cradle Telephone आदात realize vb. Com. रोककरण, प्रापणn. 
प्राश्रय-आश्रय m. realized Com. रोककृत, प्राप्त mfn. receiving Conm. प्रापण .. realizing Com. रोककरण, प्रापण . 
t. note प्रापण-आलोक m. rear admiral (Royal Navy) नौपति m. r. order Law प्रापण-मादेश m. rear files cover Drill पृष्ठतः समान्तम् recent अभिनव mfn. rear fours cover Drill पृष्ठतश्-चतुष्टयं recent occurrence अभिनव-घटना. 
समान्तम् 
receptacle Bot. I=torus पीनाक्ष m. rear guard Mil. पाष्णि-रक्षी (-इन्) m. 2 (an intercellular cavity contain reatrange vb. पुनर्विन्यसन 1. 
ing oil, resin, or other secretion rearranged पुनर्विन्यस्त mfa. 
products) ग्रह m. rearrangement पुनर्विन्यास m. 
receptaculum seminis Zool. रेतःसंचयी rearranging पुनविन्यसन 1. 
(-इन) m. reasoning=argument तर्क m. receptive spot Bot. आदान-प्रदेश m. reassurance Insurance पुनरागोप m. receptive surface Bot., Zool. GIFT Reaumur Phys. (thermometer scale तल n. 
०°R-80°R) अशीतिक m. (०°अ.-८०°अ.) receptor Zool. आदाता (-तृ) m. 
R. scale अशीतिक-श्रेणी . 
r. organ आदातृ-अंग 1. • R. thermometer अशीतिक-तापमान m. r. patches आदात-सिध्म ॥. rebate Tn. Com. अवहार m. 
r. region Bot. आदाता प्रदेश m. ___2 vb. Com. अवहरण. 
recess I Mach. गुहा . rebate on a bill Com. विपत्र-अवहार m.. ___ 2 विश्रान्ति f., विश्रामकाल m. (as, of rebellion विद्रोह m. 
_legislature) rebondimeter उत्प्लुतिमान.m. 
recessive character Zool. पश्चापसारी rebound b. उत्प्लवन ॥. 
गुण m. recall vb. प्रत्याह्वान, प्रत्यावर्तन, प्रत्यानयन n. Rechna-Doab Geog. (between the recede vb. पश्चापसरण, प्रतिसरण 1. 
Chenab and the Ravi in the receipt Com. प्राप्ति 
Punjab) मद्रदेश m. r. and issues आगम तथा निर्गम m. reciprocal n. Math. ( is r. of r. and payments आगम तथा शोधन i.e. inverted) व्युत्क्रम m. . ' 
reciprocal proportion Matb. व्युत्क्रम receive vb. प्रापण, (r. a thing offered) अनुपात m. 
प्रतिग्रहण, प्रादान, उपादान . 
reciprocal treatment प्रतिव्यवहार, मिथो receiver Com. प्रापक m. 
व्यवहार m. official r. राजकीय प्रापक m. 
reciprocating engine Mach. (piston 739﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
moves to and fro) पश्चानमुषली गन्त्र . recorder, barometric pressure, r. motion (motion to and fro) temperature and humidity ___ पश्चाग्न-गति f.. 
वापीड-ताप-पाक्लेद-अभिलेखक m. reclamation (to bring waste land recorder, temperature and hu 
under cultivation) कृष्यकरण . 
midity ताप तथा आक्लेद अभिलेखक m. recognize vb. प्रस्वीकरण 1. 
recording of sound ध्वनि-अभिलेखन . recognized I अभिज्ञात mfn. 
records book अभिलेख-पुस्त 1. 2 प्रस्वीकृत Mfr. 
records room अभिलेख-कोष्ठ m. r. by law विधि-प्रस्वीकृत mfn. recourse उपाश्रयण 1., उपाश्रय m. 
r. language प्रस्वीकृत-भाषा f. recover vb. I प्रत्यादान 1. recoil (of a gun) Mil. प्रत्याधक्का. 
2 रोगमोचन, समुत्थान, आरोग्यलंभन .. recoil vb. I प्रत्याधक्कन । 
recoverable setau mfn. 2 Bot. प्रतिकुण्डलन n.. 
recovered I Com. प्रत्यादत्त mfn. (taken recoiled (as a gun) प्रत्याधक्कित mfn. back) recombination पुनःसंयोजन 1. 
2 रोगमुक्त, लब्धारोग्य, समुत्थित mfn. recommend vb. अभिस्तवन . 
recoveries Adminis. SCITCTT 1. recommendation अभिस्ताव m. recovery r Com. प्रत्यादान . reconcilevb. समाधान ? 
2 रोगमुक्ति f., समुत्थान N., आरोग्यलाभ, reconciled समाहित mfn. 
उल्लाघm.(ancient.word) reconciliation समाधान 1. 
recrystallization पुनःस्फटन n. r. board समाधान-समिति f: 
rectal gill Zool. गुद-क्लोम M. (क्लोम for r.of debt ऋण-समाधान . . 
. जलक्लोम) bank r. statement अधिकोष समाधान rectangle. Geom. आयत m. 
विवरण 1. 
rectangular Math. आयताकार, आयत - reconnaissance Mil. अभिदर्शन ... . .. block Phys. आयत-इष्टका f. reconstitute vb. पुनःसंस्थापन . 
r. coordinates आयत-याम m. reconstruction पुननिर्माण . 
r. diagram आयत-चित्र. ___t.of a.company प्रमण्डल-पुननिर्माण n. r. hyperbola आयत अधीन्द्र . recontrol Econ. पुननियन्त्रण 1. 
.t. solid अायत सान्द्र .. reconversion - पुनारूपान्तरण 1. (by rectification संशोधन n. 
Sandhi पुनर् changes to पुना before t. of errors विनम-संशोधन 1. 
rectified संशोधित. mfn. record n. अभिलेख m. (cf. अभिलेखित 'a rectified spirit संशोधित सुषव m. | written document' in याज्ञवल्क्यस्मृति) rectify vb. संशोधन 1. recorded अभिलिखित mfr. . 
rectifying Com. संशोधन, ... recorder I (one who records) 1. entry. संशोधन-प्रविष्टि f. 
अभिलेखक m. 
____rectilineal = rectilineat ऋजुरेख, frecordkeeper). ufcienter . 
___ ऋजुरेखीय afr. 
140 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
____r. figure ऋजुरेखा प्राकृति f. 
r. lead रक्त सीस m. rectilinear I ऋजुरेख, ऋजुरेखीय mfn. t. oil-soluble रक्त तैल-विलेय m. 
2 (along the straight line) r. orchil रक्त शेपाल m. अन्वृजुरेख 
r. oxide of iron रक्त अयो-जारेय. 
• r. propagation ऋजुरेखा-गमन, ऋजुरेख r. violet रक्त नीललोहित M. 
प्रचरण, ऋजुरेख प्रचारण n. 
r. woodlakes रक्त काष्ठ-लाक्षक m. - r. propagation of light प्रकाश- red ant तैल-पिपीलिका f. (ancient word) 
ऋजुरेखा-गमन . 
red blood corpuscle रक्त रुधिरकोशा f. rectum Anat. गुद m. 
red-blue रक्त-नील afn. rectus Anat. ऋजुपेशी. 
red-cellerythrocyte रक्त-कोशा f. r. inferior अधर-ऋजुपेशी. 
red cinchona bark = cinchona r. lateralis पाभिपाव-ऋजुपेशी f. ___Pharm. रक्त-विताप-बल्क-विताप m. r. medialis आभिमध्य-ऋजुपेशी /. red coral=Corallium nobile Zool. r. superior उत्तर-ऋजुपेशी f. 
रक्त प्रवाल-राज-प्रवाल m. recuperate vb. पुनरापण n. 
red deer रोहित, रोहित मृग m. recuperation पुनराप्ति . 
reddichromate रक्त द्विवर्णीय n. recuperator = regenerator Mach. reddish areal mfn. 
पुनराप्त्र पुनर्जनित्र . 
r. blue नीलारक्त mfn. recurrent Anat. (turning back in r. blue-red नीलातिरक्त mfn.' 
a direction opposite to its former r. brown प्रारक्त-बभ्रु mfn. course) प्रत्यावर्ती (-इन) m. 
r. red-yellow.itsfarefnt mfn. recurrent nerve Zool. प्रत्यावर्ति-चेता . r. violet आरक्त नीललोहित mfn. recurring आवर्ती (-इन्) mfn. 
r. yellow पीतारक्त mfn. r. charges आवर्ती व्यय m. 
redeem vb. Com. निष्क्रयण 1. (from r. continued fraction Math. अथर्ववेद), शोधन 1. ___ आवर्ती सन्तत भिन्न m. 
redeemable Com. शोध्य mfm. f. decimal Math. आवर्ती दशमिक m. r. debentures शोध्य ऋणपत्र n. 1. expenditure आवर्ती व्यय m. redeeming Com. निष्क्रयण n. (from r. income आवर्ती प्राय m. 
अथर्ववेद) 1. period आवर्ती काल m. 
red eft=Triturus viridescens Zool. red रक्त mfn. 
रक्त-सरटिका . red bole = red chalk 
redemption Com. निष्क्रयण . t. brown रक्त बभ्रुm. 
, r. fund निष्क्रयण-प्रणीवि f. r. chalk रक्त-खटी. 
. of debentures ऋणपत्र-निष्क्रयण ॥ r. cinnabar रक्त हिंगुल m. 
t. of mortgage प्राधि-निष्क्रयण 1. r. clay रक्त-मृत्. 
red grapes पथिका (ancient word), r. coralline रक्त प्रवाली. 
अरुण-द्राक्षा. r. kaolin रक्त-प्रमृत् . 
red haematite रक्त-अयोरुचा f. 741 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
red-hot रक्तोष्ण mfn. 
reduced प्रहासित, प्रह्रसित fn. red ink interest Com. रक्त मसी वृद्धि . 1. annuity shifra arftare f. rediscount vb. Com. पुनः-पूर्वप्रापण १. r. price प्रह्लासित मूल्य .. red-letter day मंगल-दिवस m. 
reduced (to) परिणत (the relation re red litmus paper Chem. रक्त शेवल-पत्र duces to....सम्बन्ध निम्नलिखित रूप में . 
. 
परिणत हो जाता है) red mango रक्तान . 
reduced indigopaste Col. Ind.प्रहासित red marrow Zool. रक्त-मज्जा. 
निनील लेपी . red mercuric oxide = hydrargyri reducer प्रह्रासक m. 
rubrum (hydrarg. oxid. reduce to rub.) = red precipitate = red reducibility TERRITT f. oxide of mercury Pharm. रक्त reducible प्रहास्य, प्रहसनीय, प्रह्रासनीय mfn. पारदिक जारेय . 
reducing प्रह्रासन . red mercuric oxide ointment=un- r. agent प्रह्रासक, प्रह्रासनकर्ता (-त)m. 
guentum hydrargyri oxidi rubri 1. area प्रह्रासन-क्षेत्र १. (ung. hydrarg. oxid. rub.) = red reduction प्रह्रासन, प्रहसन 1. precipitate ointment Pharm. रक्त r. division Biol. प्रहास-भाजन n. पारदिक जारेय स्नेहलेप m. 
t. formula Math. प्रह्रास-सूत्र n. red oxide of copper Chem. रक्त ताम्र t. in price Math. मूल्य-प्रह्रास m. 
जारेय . 
t. of capital पुंजी-प्रहास m. red oxideof mercury Chem. रक्त पारद r. of share capital अंश-पुंजी-प्रह्रासन 
जारेय . . red phosphorus Chem. रक्त भास्वर 1. tube Cbem. प्रहासन नाल m. 
mm. 
reductor Anal. Chem. Starfa n. red precipitate=red mercuricoxide redundant tooth Anat. अधिदन्त m. redprecipitate ointment Pharm. रक्त (ancient word) 
निस्साद स्नेहलेप m. 
Reduviidae (Lat. reduvia hangnail) redraft n. Com. (a second draft or Zool. (a family, the proboscis is 
copy) विकर्ष-द्वितीयक m. 
curved back in repose) अंकुशशुण्ड-वंश red rattlesnake Zool. रक्त क्वणत्पुच्छ m. Red River snakeroot == serpentary red-violet रक्त-नीललोहित mfr. 
Pharm. अहिमूल 7. 
red vitriol रक्त काचर 1. red-rose petals=rosae petalum (ros. red yam=Dioscorea purpurea Bot. 
. pet.) rosae gallicae petala रक्तालु m. 
Pharm. रक्त-पाटल-दला . 
red-yellow रक्त-पीत nfm. red spirit रक्त निषेचन n. (a tin spirit xeed I Bot. नड m. 
used in dyeing red) 
2 Phys. Fant f. (a thin elastic tongue reduce vb: प्रह्रासन, प्रहसन 1. 
of cane, wood or metal....set in 
m. 
742 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
vibration by an air current; विपाr. sound Radar परावृत्त ध्वनि m. is from fay to vibrate) 
r. wave Radar परावृत्त तरंग m. reed organ Music विपा-वाच 1. 
reflecting telescope परावर्ती दूरक्ष m. reef Zool. (coral reef) प्रवाली. reflection I परावर्तन 1. reel वेल्ल m. 
___2 (image) प्रतिबिम्ब 2. re-exchange Com. पुनर्विनिमय m. reflector I प्रतिबिम्बक m. re-export Com. पुननिष्कामण . 
2 Radio परावर्तक m. refer vb. निर्देशन, प्रेषण, प्रतिप्रेषण. (send reflex प्रतिक्षेप M. 
back) 
reflex action Physiol. प्रतिक्षेप-क्रिया f. 1. to drawer (R/D) 
reflex angle Math. बृहत् कोण m. आहर्ता निर्देष्टव्यः (आ. निर.) 
reflex arc Physiol. प्रतिक्षेप-चाप m. refer (to) ob. Adminis. अभ्युद्देशन n. reflex chain Zool, प्रतिक्षेप-शृंखला 
(Hindi भेजना) 
reflexed margin Bot. sfare strat referee Com. निर्देश्यपुरुष m. 
m. reference निर्देश, अभ्युद्देश m.,प्रेषण ,प्रेष्टि, reflex image = reflected image 
प्रतिप्रेषण . 
reflow-reflux n. पश्चवाह m. reference solution (used as a stan- reflux adj. पश्चवाही (-इन्) mfn. ___dard of comparison उपमान) उपमान- reflux vb. पश्चवहन n. 
विलयन . 
reflux condenser Chem. पश्चवाही संघनक referred अभ्युद्दिष्ट, निर्दिष्ट mfn. refill n. पुनःपूर m. 
refluxed 9316 mfn. refill lead for pencil पुनःपूर अंकनी-सीस . reflux valve पश्चवाह कपाट n. refills for gas lighter वातिज्वालक-पुनः refract vb. भुजायन 1. 
पूरm. 
refracted भुजायित mfn. refine vb. संस्करण, परिष्करण 1. 
. .. ray भुजायित रश्मि m. refined संस्कृत, परिष्कृत mfr. 
refracting Phys: भुजायी (-इन्) mfn. refinerment Com. संस्कार, परिष्कार m. refracting angle (of a prism) Optics refiner परिष्कारी (-इन्) m. 
भुजाय-कोण m. refinery परिष्करणी. 
refracting edge Phys. भुजाय-तट n. reflated Econ. संस्फीत mfn. 
refracting media=dioptric media reflation Econ. संस्फायन ., संस्फीति . भुजाय-पदार्थ m. reflationary Econ. संस्फायी, संस्फीतिकारी refraction भुजायन 2. 
(-इन्) mfr. 
refractionist भौजायनिक m. reflationist Econ. संस्फीतिवादी (-इन) m. refractive index Optics भुजाय-देशना. reffected प्रतिबिम्बित, परावृत्त mfn. refractive system=dioptric system 
1. image = reflex image te refractivity = dioptricity Optics 
मूर्ति, प्रतिबिम्बित-मूर्ति ., प्रतिबिम्ब १. भुजायिता f. t. ray परावृत्त रश्मि m. 
refractometer Phys. भुजायमान m. 
743 
m. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
श्यान . 
refractory (resisting the action of register n. Com. poft f. 
heat) ऊष्मसह mfn. 
t. of calls याचना-पंजी refrangement = refracting Phys. 1. of directors and managers 
भुजायी (-इन्) m. 
___ संचालक तथा प्रबन्धक-पंजी. refrangibility = refrangibleness r. of members सदस्य-पंजी/. 
भुजेयता. 
1. of mortgages and charges refrangible भुजेय mfn. 
प्राधि तथा प्रभार-पंजी f. refrangibleness भुजेयता. 
r. of transfer स्थानान्तरण-पंजी, संक्रामण refreezing = regelation Phys. पुन: पंजी. 
__ registered Com. पंजीयित, पंजीलिखित mfn. refreshment room Ry.जलपान कोष्ठ m. .. bond पंजीयित बंध m. refrigerate vb. प्रशीतन . 
r. capital पंजीयित-पुंजी f. refrigeration प्रशीतन n. 
r. debenture पंजीयित ऋणपत्र n. refrigerator प्रशीतक m. 
r. letter पंजीयित पत्र. refrigerator van Ry. प्रशीतन-यान 2. r. office पंजीयित कार्यालय m. refuge TUT 11. 
r. security पंजीयित-प्रतिभू ति/. refugee शरणागत, शरणार्थी (-इन्) m. 
t. stock पंजीयित स्कन्ध m. refugee rehabilitation शरणाथि-पुनः register ton (a unit of international 
प्रतिष्ठापन 1. 
capacity for ships--100 c.ft.) * refund Com. प्रत्यर्पण ।. 
प्रवर्तm. ___t. of capital पुंजी-प्रत्यर्पण 1. 
registrar I पंजीयक m. refused flank Mil. प्रतिक्षिप्त पावं . 2 (of a university) कुल-सचिव M. regelation (refreezing) पुनःश्यान . 
(cf. chancellor कुल-पति) regenerative furnace पुनर्जनन-भ्राष्ट्र .. registration पंजीयन . regenerator = recuperator Mach. regma (fruit) Bot. स्फोटिवेश्मी (-इन्) m. 
पुनर्जनित्र=पुनराप्त. 
Regnault's apparatus Phys. (specific regent शास्ता, प्रतिशास्ता (-४) m. (प्रति in heat of a gas at constant pressure) ___place of) 
स्थिरनिपीडोष्म-साधित. regina mit f. (Hindi Trot) 
Regnault's hygrometer Meteorol. regina purple Col. Ind. राज्ञी नीलारुण m. परिशुद्ध अवश्यायांक उन्दमान m. ___r. violet राज्ञी नीललोहित m. 
Regnault's law Phys. (specific heat region देश, प्रदेश m. 
of a gas is invariable at constant region about a boundary सीमा-प्रदेश m. pressure) स्थिरनिपीडोष्म नियम m. regional प्रादेशिक mfn. 
. regression Statistics प्रतीपगमन 1. ___t. anatomy प्रादेशिक शारीर n. 
r. coefficient प्रतीप्रगमन गुणक m. . ....... branches प्रादेशिक-शाखा . 
r. equation प्रतीपगमन-समीकार m. __t stations प्रादेशिक स्थात्र n. 
r. line प्रतीपगमन-रेखा . register pb. पंजीलेखन, पंजीयन 1. 
r. ratios प्रतीपगमन अनुपात m. 744 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
regular I नियमी (-इन्) mfn. - reinfection Med. पुनःसंसर्ग m. 
2 (as a figure) सम mfn. 
reinforced concrete = armoured 3 (as a stream of bubbles) सन्तत concrete (with embedded steel) ____mfn. 
अयस्संघा .(अयस् iron+संघा concrete) f. distribution Statistics for Reinsch's test Chen, (forms black 
वंटन .. 
___stain on copper) ताम्रण-परीक्षा . r. figure सम-प्राकृति. 
reinsurance पुनरागोप m. . fluctuation Statistics नियमि उच्चा- reissue of shares Com. अंश-पुनर्निर्गमन 
वचन . r. form नियमित-आकृति /. 
rejuvenation पुनर्योवन 1., कायाकल्प m. t. in form=isometric affiti mfn. garantie f. r. polyhedron Math. सम बह्वनीक m. relapsing fever Med. त्यावर्ती ज्वर m. r. prism सम संक्षेत्र n. 
related सम्बद्ध mfn. r. triangle-equilateral triangle relation सम्बन्ध m. 
Math. सम त्रिभुज m. 
relationship Statistics सम्बन्ध m. regularity नियमिता f. 
relativen. Statistics ("ratio between regulate vb. यमन, नियमन, आनियमन n. price of the current year and that regulation (the same as bye-law) of a standard year'-Connor) 
आनियम m. 
मूल्यानुपात m. regulation Adminis. x आनियम m. relative adi. सापेक्ष, आपेक्षिक m 
2 (rule) नियम m. 
r. acceleration Phys. सापेक्ष त्वरण 3 नियमन, आनियमन ". 
0. regulator यामक m. 
I. change Statistics FIT&T ofaciat n. autoclave gas r. निपीडतापक वाति r. density Chem. सापेक्ष-धनता. 
यामक m. 
t. deviation Statistics सापेक्ष विचलन gas and electric r. वाति-विधु-यामक ___n. 
r. dispersion Statistics सापेक्ष अप 'r. rod Rly. Eng. यामक-दण्ड m. 
किरण . . r. valve यामक कपाट 1. 
t. error Math. सापेक्ष विभ्रम m. regulus I Chem., Metal. (coarse r. hypermetropia Ophthalmol. 
metal) धातुको [. 
सापेक्ष-पश्चनाभिता f. 2 Astr. मघा . 
r. motion Phys. सापेक्ष-गति f. rehabilitation पुनःप्रतिष्ठापन 1. 
t. order Math. सापेक्ष क्रम m. re-imburse vb. (repayment) प्रतिशोधन r. position Math. सापेक्ष-स्थिति . 
r. velocity Phys. सापेक्ष प्रवेग m. reindeer (Rangifer tarandus; it is the r. weight Phys. सापेक्ष भार m. . 
draught animal of the Eski- relatively अपेक्षया, सापेक्षतया 
moes) वाहमृग m. 
. inactive अपेक्षया अकर्मण्य mfn. 
745 
__n. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
करना) 
relatives =price relatives Statistics remission I Com. परिहार m. (from 
मूल्यानुपात m. 
कौटल्य अर्थशास्त्र) relative to अपेक्षया 
2 मोक m. relativity Math. सापेक्षता . 
remit vb. Com. विप्रेषण n. relax vb. शिथिलन ।. 
remittance Com. विप्रेषण 1. relaxation शिथिलन ? 
t. in transit मार्गस्थ विप्रेषण n. release I Mach. उन्मोक m. 
remittancer Com. विप्रेष्टा (-तु) m. 2 Com. मोक m., मोचन M., मक्ति rermitted Com. विप्रेषित mfn. r. of debtors Com. अधमर्ण ऋणमुक्ति remittee Com. विप्रेषिती (-इन्) m. 
remitter Com. विप्रेषक m. r. of trustees Com. प्रन्यासि-मोचन remoulding पुनस्संचकन 1. . .. 
removability अपनेयता f. reliability of data Statistics सामग्री 
removable अपनेय mfn. विश्वसनीयता . 
removal अपनयन, निष्कासन .. relief Scalpture उद्भत .. 
removal expenses Com. अपनयन-व्यय r. image उद्धृत-मूर्ति f. 
m. relieve लघुकरण, लघूयन 1. (Hindi हलका removal of brackets Math. अभिवार 
अपनयन . religion धर्म m., मत . 
removal of excreta Hygiene मल religious institution धार्मिक-संस्था /. अपनयन n. reluct ob. Phys. प्रतियसन १. 
remove vb. I अपनयन, निष्कासन . reluctance Phys. प्रतियास m. 
2 Math. ('a. common divisor, reluctant Phys. प्रतियासी (-इन्) mfn. etc.') अपवर्तन 1. reluctivity Phys. प्रतियासिता . 
removed अपनीत mfn. remainder Matb. शेष m. 
remunerate vb. परितोषण . remainder theorem Math. शेषफल प्रमेय । remunerated fatica mfn. 
_n. 
remuneration परितोषग . remaining शेषी, अवशेषी (-इन्) mfn. remunerative परितोषद, लाभकारी (-इन) remains (residue) Math, Hai m. mfn. remain valid = hold good vb. renal Anat. 1974, 94 
सत्य-भवन . 
r. artery वृक्क-रोहिणी f. remark ob. अभिवचन, पालोचन. . 
r. calculus वृक्कोपल m. remarkable अद्भत, असाधारण, विलक्षण, r. papillae वृक्क-पिंडिका f. 
विचित्र, मालक्षणीय mfn. 
r. pyramid वृक्क-स्तूप m. remarks अभ्युक्ति . 
r. vein वृक्क-नीला f. remedy प्रतिकार, उपचारm. 
render an account Com. लेखा-प्रेषण ।. remember vb. स्मरण 1. 
rendering soluble विलेय-करण 1. reminder अनुस्मारक m. 
renew vb. नवकरण .. 746 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
r. a bill विपत्र-नवकरण 1. 
1. light blue = direct sky blue renewal Com. नवकरण 1., नवकार m. r. orange G = direct. orange renewal of bill Com. विपत्र-नवकरण n. renewals and repairs Com. नवकार 
1. rubine extra=cotton rubine तथा जीर्णोद्धार m. 
r. skyblue-direct skyblue renewals and replacements Com, r. yellow G-direct yellow R 
नवकार तथा प्रतिस्थापन 1. 
renounce Com. स्वत्व-त्याग-घोषणा f., renewed Com. नवकृत Mfn. 
अनङ्गीकार, अस्वीकार M. r. bill नवकृत विपत्र । 
renovate vb. नवीकरण n. reniform leaf Bot. वृक्कपत्र 2. (वृक्क rent Com. भाटक m. (from कौटल्य अर्थ 
kidney) 
शास्त्र) (Hindi भाड़ा-लगान) Renilla (sea. kidneys) Zool. समुद्र certain r. निश्चित भाटक m. 
वृक्काति. (-आति for प्रजाति genus) chief r. मुख्य भाटक m. Renillidae Zool. समुद्रवृक्कवंश m. 
contract r. प्रसंविदा-भाटक m. renin (Lat. renis kidney; present dead r. मृत भाटक M. 
in fresh kidneys after intra economic r. आर्थिक भाटक m. venous injection of saline extract) fair t. उचित भाटक m. बृविक . 
fixed r. स्थिर भाटक m. Cf. rennini वत्सातंचिf. 
ground r. भू-भाटक m. rennet-runnet वत्सातंच m. 
head t. मुख्य भाटक m. rennet casein Biochem. वत्सातंच-किलाटि minimum r. निन्यून भाटक m. 
quit r. उन्मोचन-शुल्क m. (it is not a rennin Biochem. (from the fourth भाटक) 
stomach of calves ach; it coagula rack t. अत्यधिक भाटक m. tes milk; आतंचन coagulation) sleeping r. सुप्त भाटक m. वत्सातंचि . 
surface 1. भूतल-भाटक m. rennino-gen Biochem. वत्सातंचि-जन m. rental (sum total of rents) Com. renolamine black BH, BHN = भाटक-राशि m. 
direct black BH 
1. Value भाटक-राशि, वार्षिक भाटक renol black G=direct black MS राशि m. 
1. blue B = cotton blue N renteetenant t. brilliant yellow conc. = renter=tenant 
brilliant yellow 
rent-roll भाटक-सूची 
repaid प्रतिदत्त, प्रतिशोधित mfr. brown 
repair vb. जीर्णोद्धरण, प्रतिसंस्करणn. r. corinth B=cotton corinth B repair n. जीर्णोद्धार... r.green B == cotton corinth B repairs and renewals Com.. जीर्णोद्धार r. green B extra=direct green B तथा नवकार m. 
747 
T 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
1. and renewals fund TGT represent vb. I (graphically, geo 
तथा नवकार-प्रणीवि . 
metrically) निरूपण, प्रतिरूपण 2. r. equalization fund जीर्णोद्धार सम 2 प्रतिनिधान .. 
कारि-प्रणीवि. 
representation 1 (act of exhibiting repay b.Com. प्रतिदान, प्रतिशोधन १. or setting forth by a statement T repayment प्रतिदान, प्रतिशोधन . 
वेदन, account, or the like, especially repeal vb. विखण्डन 1. 
with a view to affecting action; I (to recall) प्रत्याह्वान, प्रत्यावर्तन, प्रत्या a statement or argument against नयन n. 
something; a protest) अभ्यावेदन । 2 (to rescind) अपखण्डन ।. 
2 निरूपण . 3 (to abrogate) निराकरण .. 
3 प्रतिनिधान n. repeat vb. पुनरावर्तन, आवर्तन 1. 
representation in writing fafest repeated आवृत्त, पुनरावृत्त mfn. 
अभ्यावेदन . repeated distillation=cohobation representative stafafer m 
पुनःपुनरासवन . 
representative data Statistics stafafe repeated root Math. प्रामेडित मुल. सामग्री repel vb. I अपासन, अपसारण .. 
represented in the services under 2 (opposed to attract) अपकर्षण n. state राज्याधीन सेवाओं में प्रतिनिहित repellent प्रत्यपसारी (-इन्) mfn. 
mfn. (Hindi) repetitive inquiry Statistics पुनरावर्ति reproduction प्रजनन, सन्तानजनन, जनन, ___ अनुसंधान 1. 
पुनरुत्पादन ॥. replace vb. I प्रतिस्थापन 7. (प्रति substi- reproductive प्रजनन 
tute) 
r.nucleus-gonadnucleus प्रजनन 2 पुनःस्थापन . (पुनः again) 
न्यष्टि f. replaceable प्रतिस्थाप्य, पुनःस्थाप्य mfn. r. organ जननेन्द्रिय n. replaced (substituted) प्रतिस्थापित, पुनः- r. stage प्रजनन-अवस्था f. 
स्थापित mfn. 
t. system प्रजनन-संहति . replacement प्रतिस्थापन, पुनःस्थापन - Reptilia Zool. सरीसृपाः m.pl. replum Bot. I (placental framework) repudiate vb. (to refuse to pay, or to 
जरायु-कंकाल m. 
___ acknowledge) प्रत्याख्यान 1. 2 (false septum) कूटपटी f. repugnant Law प्रतिकूल, विरुद्ध mfn. report n. sferacat f. (ancient word), repulsion Phys. अपकर्षण, अपासन 1. 
प्रतिवेदन, विवरण n. 
_ request प्रार्थना . report vb. प्रतिवेदन N. (ancient word) required अपेक्षित mfn. reportable प्रतिवेद्य afn. 
required direction Phys. अपेक्षित-दिशा reported प्रतिवेदित mfn. reporter प्रतिवेदक m. 
requirement अपेक्षा. repose ob. शयन, अभिशयन ? 
requiring no proof प्रमाण-अनपेक्ष :. 748 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
requisites (as, of a good balance) r. for discount on creditors उत्तमर्ण 
अपेक्षित गुण m. 
अपहार संचिति. requisition (demanding as of right r. for discount on debtors अधमर्ण 
अधिकार) अधियाचन ।. 
अपहार संचिति . rescind vb. अपखण्डन . 
r. for doubtful debts संदिग्ध ऋणार्थ I (to cut off) अपकर्तन 1. 
संचिति . 2 (to remove) अपनयन, निष्कासन ". r. fund संचिति-प्रणीवि . 3 (to abrogate) निराकरण है. 
t. liability आरक्षित देय 2. 4 (to annul) अभिशून्यन ।. 
r. price Auctions आरक्षित मूल्य 1. 5 (to cancel) विलोपन 1. 
r. products संचय सृष्ट 1. 6 (to make void) शून्य-करण n. 
Reserve Bank of India भारतीय संचिति .. 7 (to repeal) विखण्डन n. 
अधिकोष m. research अन्वेषण 1. 
reserved संचित, प्रारक्षित mfn. r. assistant अन्वेषण-सहाय m. 
r. capital संचित-पुंजी . r. guide अन्वेषण नेता (-त)m. 
t. posts आरक्षित पद . r. institute अन्वेषणालय m. 
reservoir I आशय m. r. laboratory अन्वेषण-प्रयोगशाला f. 2 जलाशय m. (ancient word) r. scholar अन्वेषणाध्येता (-1), अन्वेष्टा, gas . वाति-प्राशय m. 
अन्वेषण-छात्रm. 
1. of mercury पारदाशय m. r. section अन्वेषण विभाग m. 
residence निवास m. r. station अन्वेषण-स्थात्र 
residence of an ambassador राजदूत r. student अन्वेषण-छात्रm. 
आवास m. re-seeding पुनर्बीजन . 
residents in a representative dis resembling -सदृश, -दृश, नीकाश .. trict प्रतिनिहित-मण्डल के वासी (Hindi) resenol orange no. 3=oil orange E residual safetce mfn. reservation I Com. संचयन ।., संचय m. residual air Physiol. अवशिष्ट वायm. ___ 2 Rly. पूर्वरक्षण, आरक्षण . 
residual equation Math. अवशेष समीकार t. of appointments नियुक्ति-आरक्षण .m. .... 
residual powers (as, of legislation) r. of posts पद-आरक्षण ?. 
अवशिष्ट शक्ति reserve Com. संचिति f. 
residual value Com. अवशिष्ट मूल्य n. r. account संचिति-लेखा . 
residuary. account Com. अवशिष्ट-लेखा r. bank संचिति-अधिकोष, कोषाधिकोष f. 
residue अवशेष m. r. capital संचित-पुंजी . 
resign vb. त्यजन n. r.for bad debts अशोध्य ऋणार्थ संचिति resignation त्याग m., त्यागपत्र ... 
resin उद्यास M. (analogous to निर्यास) r. for discount अपहारार्थ संचिति f. r. canal Bot. उद्यास-कुल्या . 
749 
____m.﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
r.duct-r. canal 
resolved part=resolute Math.facenti, resinate Chem. उद्यासीय n. 
विघटित भाग m. resin cerate=basilicon राजलेप m. resolved that संकल्पितं यत् (Hindi resin plaster Pharm. उद्यास-लेप m. 
संकल्प किया गया कि) resist I vb. रोधन । 
resolving power Photog. (producing 2. रोध m. 
_fine details) सूक्ष्मदर्शिता f. resistance रोध m. 
resonance Phys. प्रतिस्वनता . r. box Elec. रोध-समुद्गm., रोध-मंजूषा resonate vb. प्रतिस्वनन ।. 
resonator Phys. प्रतिस्वनक m. r. bridge रोध-सेतु m. 
resorcin=resorcinol r. cell रोध-कोशा. 
resorcin brown Col. Ind. शेयास बचm. r. lamp रोध-दीप m. 
r. dark brown शेयास असित बत्रु m. r. overcome अभिभूत रोध m. 
r. green शेयास हरि m. r. to motion due to friction resorcine blue Col. Ind. शेयास नील m. 
संघर्षज गतिरोध m. 
r. violet शेयास नीललोहित m. t. to penetration अन्तःप्रवेश-रोध m. 
t. yellow शेयास पीत m. -resistant Bact. -अधाव्य mfn. 
resorcinol (resin उद्यास + Orcinol शेव) acid-resistant अम्लाधाव्य mfn. 
Chem. शेयास, शेयासव m. resistant cyst Zool. रोधी कोष्ठ m. resorcylic (resorcinol शेयास + - y + resistant varieties Agric. रोधि विभेद, ___-ic) Chem. शेयासलिक mfn. 
रोगरोधि विभेद m. 
respective homes (they went to resnatron Radar (an electron tube their respective homes) स्वस्वगृह . 
used in a superpower transmitter r. order स्वस्वक्रम m. operating on micro waves-अणु- respectively क्रमश: 
तरंग विद्युदणु-नाल) अणुतरंग-नाल m. respiralization Zool. पुनःकुन्तलन 1. resolute-resolved part Math. विघटक respiration श्वसन 1., श्वास m. 
respirator श्वसित्र, प्राणित्र . resolution r =mesotomy प्रवेचन . respiratory aperture श्वास-रन्ध्र . 
2 Phys. (of forces or velocities) r. centre Physiol. श्वसन-केन्द्र १. विघटन 1. 
____t. organ Zool. श्वसनांग n. , 3 संकल्प m.(motion प्रस्ताव) 
r. system Physiol. श्वसन-संहति/. extra-ordinary t.असाधारण संकल्प m. response=reaction Zool. प्रतिचार m. ordinary r. साधारण संकल्प M. ___t. phenomenon प्रतिचार-घटना. special r. विशेष संकल्प m. 
responsibility उत्तरदायित्व n., उत्तरदायिता resolution into factors Math. खण्डन, 
खण्ड-करण .. 
responsible उत्तरदायी (-इन्) mfn. . resolverb. संकल्पन 1. 
responsive Zool. प्रतिचारी (-इन्) mfn. resolved.संकल्पित mfan. 
rest (a support) आश्रय m. 750 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
restaurant आहारगृह, जलपान-गह . 
r. price index numbers अल्पशो restaurant car आहार-यान n. 
मूल्य देशनांक m. rest house विश्राम-गृह n. 
r. sale अल्पशो विक्रय m. resting nucleus Zool. विश्रामि-न्यष्टि. r. trader अल्पशो-व्यापारी (-इन् ) m. resting stage विश्राम-अवस्था 
retailer स्तोकविक्रेता (-तृ) m. restitution I = restoration Phys. retailment स्तोकविक्रय m. 
प्रत्यास्थापन n. 
retain vb. (keep back) प्रतिधारण ॥. 2 Math. प्रत्यवस्थान 1. 
(ancient word) restoration=restitution 
retard I (to make slow) विमन्दन 1. restore to use प्रत्युपयोजन, पुनरुपयोजन । 2 (to delay) विलम्बन ". restrain vb. नियन्त्रण .. 
3 (to keep back, detain) विधारण n. restraint नियंत्रण 
retarded velocity Phys. विमन्दित प्रवेग m. restrict. vb. आयन्त्रण . 
retention money Com. प्रत्यारक्षण राशि restriction 1 Math. ftare m. 
m. 2 आयन्त्रण N., बाधा . 
reticular cells Zool, जालिका-कोशा. 
• restrictions on discussion in legis- reticular layer Anat. जालिका-स्तर m. . 
lature विधानमंडल में वादविवाद पर आयंत्रण reticular theory Bot. प्ररसजाल-वाद, (Hindi) 
जालिका-वाद m. result n. परिणाम m., फल .. 
reticular zone = zona reticu resultant परिणमत, परिणामी (-इन्), परिणाम- laris Zool. जाल-स्तर m. 
स्वरूप mfn. 
reticulo-endothelial system Anat. r. force परिणामि बल 1. 
जालिका-अन्तश्छदीय-संहति . r. thrust परिणामी वितोद m. 
reticulum जालिका. r. velocity परिणामी प्रवेग m. retina Anat. मूर्तिपट m. result in Math. परिणत mfn. 
retire vb. सेवानिवर्तन 1. resulting परिणामी (-इन्) mfn. . retired सेवानिवृत्त, निवृत्त mfn. resulting moisture Chem. परिणामि- retirement सेवानिवृत्ति . 
आर्द्रता 
retiring of a bill Com. विपत्र-निवर्तन 1. resulting view परिणामि-दृशा . retort Chem. वकभांड . (ancient word resume seat पुनर्-आसनग्रहण , 
वकयन्त्र) retail x vb. स्तोकविक्रयण . 
r. ring वकभांड-वलय m. 20. स्तोकविक्रय m. (Hindi फुटकर बिक्री) . .. stand वकभाण्ड-स्थाम .. retail Com. अल्पशः . 
retract vb. Zool.प्रत्याकर्षण . t. dealer अल्पशो-व्यापारी (Hindi फुट- retractor bulbi (muscle) Zool. कन्द ___ कर व्यापारी), अल्पशो-विक्रेता (-) m. प्रत्याकर्षक (पेशी) 
t. merchant अल्पशो-वणिक m... retreading (to make the tread new; r. price अल्पशो-मूल्य . (Hindi फुटकर as.in motor-cars) पुनश्चारण, चारनवन 
मूल्य) 
. . 751 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
- 
- 
retrogression प्रतीपगमन 0. 
reversal उत्क्रमण, उत्क्रामणn., विपर्यय m. retrogressive प्रतीपगामी (-इन्) mfn. 
r. of direction दिग्विपर्यय, दिशा-विपर्यय ____regressive प्रतिगामी (-इन्) mfn. 
m. retrogressive phase प्रतीपगामि-प्रावस्था . reverse n. उत्क्रम m. retroperitoneal Zool. उदरछद-पृष्ठीय mfm. reverse adj. विपरीत mfm. return x vb. Com. प्रत्यावर्तन n. reverse vb. प्रतिवर्तन, विपर्ययण n. 
28. Com. प्रत्याय m. 
I (to turn upside down, to r. book प्रत्यावृत्त-पुस्तक. 
invert) अधोवर्तन 1. r. day book प्रत्यावृत्त-दिन-पुस्त. 2 (to turn completely about) r. inward विक्रय-प्रत्याय m. 
विपर्ययण 1. r. of capital पुंजी-प्रत्याय m. 
3 (to change to the opposite) r. outward book क्रय-प्रत्याय-पुस्त n. प्रतिपरिवर्तन n. returning officer (in elections) 4 (to transpose) पक्षान्तरण, स्थानान्तरण 
निर्वाचन अधिकारी (-इन्) m. returns Statistics faacut n. 
5 (to revoke) निरसन n. returns inward book Com. विक्रय 6 (to annul) अभिशून्यन 1. 
प्रत्याय-पुस्त .. 
7 (to change to the contrary) retuse Bot. गर्तकी (-इन्) mfn. 
विपर्यसन n. revaluation Com. पुनर्मूल्यन . 
8 (to cause to go or move in t. of assets सम्पत्ति-पुनर्मूल्यन n. the opposite direction) प्रतिक्रामण, revenue आगम, भू-आगम m. (आगम प्रतिदिक्क्रामण 1. 
ancient word) 
9 (to do in the opposite way) t. account आगम-लेखा 
प्रतिकरण, प्रतिलोमकरण. t. duty आगम-कर m. . 
reversed विपरीत, विपर्ययित mfn. r. expenditure आगम-व्यय m. reverse gear Automobile पश्चाद्-दन्ती m. r. expenses आगम-व्यय m. 
reverse order उत्क्रम, विलोम क्रम m. r. matters आगम-विषय m. 
reverse shaft crank Rly. Eng. पश्चाद् ... of Federation संधान-आगम m. ईषा-कूपर m. 
r. of province प्रान्त-आगम m. reversibility Statistics उत्क्राम्यता f. r. of state राज्य-आगम m. 
t. of path of light Phys. प्रकाश r. profit आगम-लाभ m. 
मार्ग-उत्क्राम्यता f. . r. receipt प्रागम-प्राप्ति / 
reversible परिवर्त्य, उत्काम्य, प्रतिवर्ती (-इन), reverberate vb. I प्रतिध्वनन, प्रतिक्षेपण 1. प्रतिवQ mfn. . - 2 Phys. प्रतिनिनदन . 
___r.glasses परिवर्त्य उपनेत्र 1. : ' ... reverberation प्रतिध्वनन, प्रतिक्षेपण . . r. process Thermodyn. प्रतिवर्त्य-विधा, 
22 Phys. प्रतिनिनाद m. 
__ प्रतिवर्तिनी विधा . ..:' .. reverberatory प्रतिक्षेपी (-इन्) mfn. . .. reaction Chem. प्रतिवर्त्य-प्रतिक्रिया, 
... furnace प्रतिक्षेपि भ्राष्ट्र n. .. 
प्रतिवर्तिनी प्रतिक्रिया . 712 
THE GREAT ENGLISH -INDIAN DICTIONARY 
mfn. 
m. 
reversing gear handle Rly. Eng. revolt facta m. 
पश्चाद्-दन्ति-हस्तक m. 
___ revolute Bot. बहिर्वलित mfn. reversing handle Rly. Eng. sferatif revolution 1 Falfet f., festes m. 
हस्तक m. 
2 परिक्रमण 1. (cf. rotation परिभ्रमण) reversion r (escheat) Lav प्रत्यावर्तन n. revolution counter परिक्रमण-गणित्र n. 
2 (atavism) Zool. विपर्ययण 1. revolutionist क्रान्तिवादी (-इन) M. 3 उत्क्रमण, उत्क्रामण n. 
revolutions per minute (r. p. m.) reversionary Com. प्रतिवर्ती (-इन्) Engin. प्रति-कला-परिक्रमण.. (प्र. क. प.) 
उत्तरभोग्य afn. 
revolutus Bot. (rolled back from r. annuity उत्तरभोग्य-वार्षिकवृत्ति . 
margin or apex of a leaf) बहिर्वलित r. bonus प्रतिवर्ती अधिलाभांश m. r. interest उत्तरभोग्य-वृद्धि . 
revolve vb. परिक्रमण, भ्रमण . revert vb. Com. प्रतिवर्तन 1. 
revolver Mil. परिक्राम m. reverted Com. प्रतिवर्तित, प्रतिवृत्त mfn. revolving भ्राम्यत्, भ्रमत् mfn. 
r. phosphate प्रतिवृत्त भास्वीय . revolving bookshelf भ्राम्यत् पुस्तनिधाय revise vb. पुनरावर्तन, पुनरीक्षण . . 
m. revised पुनरावृत्त, पुनरीक्षित mfn. 
revolving credit Finance आवर्ती प्रत्यय t. estimate पुनरीक्षित आगणन 1. revision n. पुनरावृत्ति, पुनरीक्षण n. revolving line Math. परिक्रामि-रेखा . revive vb. पुनर्जीवन ॥. 
rotating line परिभ्रामि-रेखा . revocable Econ. प्रत्यादेश्य mfn. 
revolving stool भ्रमत्पीठ revocation Com. निरसन, खण्डन n. Rh (rhodium) Chem. ना (नाम्लातु) revoke vb. निरसन, खण्डन . 
Rhabdiasidae द्वैधजनवंश m. (वंश family) I (to bring back) प्रत्यानयन . Rhabdiasoidea (a. superfamily प्रवंश 2 (to recall) प्रत्याहान, प्रत्यावर्तन 2. having heterogenic generations, 3 (to call back to. mind or me one is parthenogenic, the other 
mory) प्रत्यास्मरण . 
is sexual) द्वैधजनप्रवंश m. 4 (to restore to use) प्रत्युपयोजन, thabditiform larya (having an oeso पुनरुपयोजन n. 
phageal bulb) कन्द-निगल जातक m, S (to revive) पुनर्जीवन 1. (fr. causa- Rhabdopleura Zool. (without gill tive पुनर्जीवयति) . . 
'. pores) अक्लोमरन्ध्राति f. (आति for 6 (to annul by recalling or tak प्रजाति genus) ing back) अभिशून्यन । 
Rhamnaceae Bot. बदर-कुल 7. 7.(to repeal) विखण्डन n. 
Rhamnales Bot. बदर-गोत्र : 8 (to rescind) अपखण्डन . . thatany. root == krameria Pharm. .9 (to cancel) विलोपन . 
(used for sore throats) गलमूल n. To (to. reverse) विपर्ययण 1. 
Rhea Zool: उष्ट्रपत्र्याति f. (-आति for प्रजाति revoke n. निरास M. 
genus) 
1753 
48 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
-thea, -rrhea, -rrhoea Med. -स्राव m. rhizome Bot. शिफावृन्तn. rhei rhizoma = rhubarb Pharm. Rhizomucor wiferediate f. (-for for 
चीनरेच m. 
प्रजाति genus) Rhenish earth=green earth 
R. parasiticus परजीवि मूलांघ्रिश्वेता rhenium (dvi-manganese) Chem. __बाष्पातु m. (द्वि-लोहक) 
thizophore Bot. (a shoot bearing rheonine A=fast phosphine NAL ___roots at the apex) मूलद m. rheostat Elec. स्रोतस्थाप्m . 
rhizoplast Zool. (root of the rheotaxy Zool. 77977 m. 
flagellum extending upto the rheotropism Biol. लावावर्तना . 
nucleus) कशामूल . Rheum Bot. अम्लवेतसति f. (-ति for प्रजाति Rhizopoda Zool. मूलपादाः m.pl. 
genus) . 
__Rhizopus Bot. मूलांघ्रिति f. (-ति for R. emodi सामान्य अम्लबेतस m. । प्रजाति genus) rheumathubarb चीनरेच m. 
R. niger असित मूलांघ्रि m. rheumatic fever Med. सन्धि-ज्वर m. rhodamine Col. Ind. qcarrerit f. rheumatism Med. Fifaara m. 
r. ponceau पाटलतिक्ती अधिरक्तापीत m. Rhinacanthus Bot. यूथिकापर्णीति . (- 
तिr. scarlet पाटलतिक्ती शोण m. ___ for प्रजाति genus) 
rhodanate Chem. पाटलीय. ___R. communis सामान्य यूथिकापर्णी f thodanic acid Chem. पाटलिक अम्ल Rhine blue=chromocyanine V rhodanine Chem. पाटली. thinencephalon (olfactory lobe) thodine Col. Ind. पाटलकी . 
Arat. गन्धपालि. 
rhodinol पाटलव m. thinoceros (Gk. keras horm) Zool. rhodite Mineral. (a native alloy of 
गण्डक, नासिश्रृंग m. 
rhodium and gold) नाम्लस्वणिज m. rhinoceros beetle Zool. गण्ड-भुङ्ग m. (-इज for खनिज mineral) rhino-coele Zool. गंध-गुहा f. (abridged thodium Chem. नाम्लातु m. 
from गंधपालिगुहा) 
- rhodizonate अभिरक्तीय . Rhinolophus Zool. पर्णमुखाति . (आति thodizonic Chem. अभिरक्तिक mfn. 
for प्रजाति genus) 
r. acid (forms brilliant red, rhinopharyngitis mutilans = yellow and purple salts) of# 
ogo = gangosa मुखनासारि m. (a रक्तिक अम्ल . disease) 
rhodochrosite = dialogite (con Rhinosporidium नासाबीजाणुति f. (-ति sisting essentially of manganese 
for प्रजाति genus) 
protocarbonate) लोप्रजारिज.. (-इज . R. seeberi सामान्य नासाबीजाणु m. for खनिज mineral) rhizoid Bot. शिफाभ n. 
Rhodococcus (R.) (produces Ied hizomatous Bot. (like a rhizome) pigment) रक्तगोलाणु (र. गो.) 
शिफावृन्त-सदृश mfn. 
R.agilis चंचल र. गो. , 
754 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
प 
R. roseus पाटल र. गो. 
R. succedanea सामान्य कर्कटशृंगी. rhodonite = manganese spar Rhynchocephalia Zool. (resem 
(consisting essentially of man bling lizards) पल्ल्याभ-गण M. (पल्ली २ ganese metasilicate) लोसैकिज m. (-इज । houselizard; tu an order) for खनिज mineral) 
Rhynchota (Gk. rhynchos snout) Rhodophyceae Bot. (red algae) रक्ता- Zool. तुण्डिगण M. (गण order), तुण्डिनः 
प्यका: m.pl. 
__m.pl. rhoduline blue Col. Ind. अभिपाटली ____-rhynchus Zool. -तुंड 
नील m. 
rhythm Music लय m. r. heliotrope अभिपाटली निनीलातिरक्त rhythmic Phys. लयबद्ध, तालबद्ध mfn. 
m. 
rhythmic movement ताल-ति. r. orange अभिपाटली नारंग m. rib पशु m. 1. pink अभिपाटली आपद्मm. 
ribbon पट्टिका . r. pure blue अभिपाटली शुद्ध नील m. r. spool पट्टिका-वल M. (from वल् to 
. red अभिपाटली रक्त m. 
turn round) t. violet अभिपाटली नीललोहित m. ribbon-like पट्टिकावत्, पट्टिकासदृश mfr. . r. yellow अभिपाटली पीत M. 
rib-cartilage Zool. पशु-कास्थि . rhodyle 4G = rhodamine 6G riboflavin=lactoflavin qrafiyfir f. 
Rhoeadales = Papaverales Bot. rice-field fever Med. शालिज्वर m. .. 
अहिफेन-गोत्र n. 
rice grain तण्डुल-धान्य 2. thomb = rhombus 
rice-mill तण्डुल-निर्माणी f. (तण्डुल husked rhombic तिर्यग्वर्गिक, तिर्यग्वर्गीय, तिर्यग्वर्गरूप rice) 
mfn. 
rice polish तण्डुल-प्रमाण m. r. crystals तिर्यग्वर्ग-स्फट m. 
rice polishings तण्डुल-प्रमार्जन ?. thombohedral तिर्यगनीक mfn. 
rice-straw तण्डुल-बुस ।. thombohedron तिर्यगायत-षडनीक, तिर्यग- rich समृद्ध nfm. 
नीक m. 
riches समृद्धि xhomboid Geom. तिर्यगायत m. ricin Chem. एरंडि . 
r. leaf scars Bot. तिर्यगायत पत्र-किण -ricinate (in sulpho-ricinate) -एरंडीय . 
m. 
. Thomboidal तिर्यगायताकार mfn. 
ricinic Chem. एरंडिक mfn. Thombus Geom. चतुःसमभुज, तिर्यग्वर्ग m. r. acid एरण्डिक अम्ल . 
('oblique square') 
ricinine Chem. एरंडी f. rhubarb = rheum = rhei rhizoma ricininic Chem, Fifsfacti mfn. 
= Turkey rhubarb Pharm. ricini semen = castor oil seed चीनरेच m. 
Pharm. एरंड-तैल-बीज, एरंड-बीज.. Rhus Bot. कर्कटशृंगीति f. (-ति for प्रजाति ricin-oleate एरण्ड-म्रक्षीय n. 
genus) 
ricin-oleic Chem. एरंड-म्रक्षिक mfn. 755 
Fuary 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
ricin-stearolic Chem. एरंड-वसम्रक्षिक right-hand screw दक्षिण-हस्त भ्रमि m. 
mfn. 
right-hand side दक्षिण पार्श्व . Ricinus Bot. एरंडति . (-ति for प्रजाति Right Honourable Correspondence 
genus) 
संमाननीय mfn. R. communis सामान्य एरण्ड m. right incline Drill अर्ध-दक्षिणा ricinus oil = castor oil एरण्ड-तैल n. right of appeal पनर्विचारप्रार्थना Rickenberg's phenomenon 
m. (bacteria sticking on to a spiro- right of reply उत्तरदानाधिकार M. (Hindi chaete) शाकाणुलाग M. 
उत्तर देने का अधिकार) rickets Med. बालवक्र m. (short for right prism Matb. लम्ब-संक्षेत्र n. 
बालवक्रास्थि) 
right prism on a regular base fauftet rickshaw नरयान 2. 
लम्ब-संक्षेत्र . rider आरोहक m. 
right pyramid Math. लम्ब-स्तूप m. . balance t. तुला-आरोहक m. right pyramid on a regular base ridge Anat. कूट n. 
नियमित लम्ब-स्तूप m. rifle Mil. नालिका f. (ancient word) rights and liabilities Com. स्वत्व तथा rifle grenade Mil. नालिका-दाडिमn. 
देय . right n. अधिकार m. 
rights and obligations are a right angle Math. लम्ब-कोण m. 
कर्तव्य. right-angled triangle Math. लम्बकोण right section Math. समच्छेद m. 
, त्रिभुज 
right side दक्षिण पक्ष m. right-angle gauge Mach. लम्बकोणामान rights of citizens जानपद-अधिकार m. 
. rights of equality समताधिकार m. right circular cone Math. लम्बी वर्तुल right subclavion दक्ष अधोक्षक m. . 
शंकु . 
right turn Drill दक्षिणावर्तः right circular cylinder लम्बी वर्तुल right wheel Drill परिदक्षिणम् 
रम्भ m. 
rigid I (not pliant, not flexible) अनाम्य right close march Drill दक्षिणा संहत .: प्रयाणम् 
2 परिदृढ mfn. right cylinder लम्बी रम्भ m. 
rigid constitution अनाम्य संविधान . right dress Drill afegurstai (aferont rigidify vb.(to make or become rigid) ____ऋजवः) . 
अनाम्यकरण,अनाम्यभवन.. right flankguard. Mil. दक्षिणपार्श्व-रक्षी rigidity=rigidness अनाम्यता f. 
(-इन्) M. . 
rigidly Math. परिदढतया, अनाम्यतया right form Drill दक्षिणा घट्यताम् .. rigid rod Math. परिदृढ-शलाका f. right frustum Math. लम्ब छिन्नक m. rim प्रधि m. (ancient word) . right-hand rule Elec. दक्षिण-हस्त नियम rimless अप्रधि, प्रान्तहीन mfn.. 
ring वलय m. 
m. 
756 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTI ONARY 
red 
r. clip वलय-स्वज m. 
road-making वर्म-कर्म n. (from रामायण) r. hydrocarbons Chem. वलय उदांगार (Hindi सड़क बनाना) 
m. 
road toll पथि-देय 1. (ancient word) r. test Chem. वलय-परीक्षा f. 
roast vb. भर्जन 1. ringent Bot. विवृत mfn. 
roasting dish भर्जन-शराव n. ringlike वलयसदृश mfn. 
Robinia Bot. शलभद्रुमति . (-ति for ringworm Med. दद्रु 
प्रजाति genus) Rinmann's green = cobalt green R. pseudoacacia सामान्य शलभद्रुम m. 
I (a permanent green pigment robot bomb=buzz bomb Radar consisting essentially of cobalt गुञ्ज-प्रस्फोट m. केत्वातु and zinc कुप्यातु oxides जारेय) roccelline=orcelline no. 4-fast केकुजारेय. 2 मध्यपीतहरि m. 
Rochelle salt=sodium potassium rinse vb. उद-क्षालन .. 
tartarate अपिक्षाद लवण-क्षारातु दहातु rip cord Aeronautics (for freeing the न्यासवीय. ___packed parachute) उद्घाटन-रज्जु . rock ub. दोलन 1. ripidolite (Gk. ripidos fan) Mineral. rock n. शैल m. 
व्यजनोपल m. 
rock boring शैल-छिद्रण . ripple अमिका . 
rocker blotter दोल-मसीचूष m. rise and fall Com. उच्चावचन 1. (H. rocket प्रोल्का . 
चढ़ाव उतार) 
rocket bomb प्रोल्का-प्रस्फोट m. rising front bifocal glasses Ophthal- rocking दोलन १., दोली (इन्) 
mol. उत्थाप्य द्विनाभि उपनेत्र. 
. microtome दोली अणुतक्ष m. risk Com. हानिमयः।. 
rock pigeon Zool. नील कपोत m. risk a battle Mil. संग्राम-साहस ?. rock rabbit Zool. गिरि-शशक m. 
Ritchie's apparatus Phys. (to show rock salt सैन्धव, शैल-लवण n. 
equality of emmisive and absorp- rocks and minerals शैल तथा खनिज m. tive powers) विकिर-प्रचूष-समता-साधित्र rock scarlet BS=cotton red s 
rock snake Zool. शैल-अगजरm. river-craft नदी-वाहन n. 
rockweed Bot. शैल-घास m. river gunboat Mil. नदी-शतघ्नी-नौका f. rod शलाका . river-turtle Zool. नदी-कश्यप m. 
glass r. काच-शलाका f. rivet Ivb. लवङ्गन 8. 
silica r. सैकजा-शलाका f. 
• 2n. लवंग M. (short for लवंगकील) stirring r. विचालन-शलाकाf. riveted joint लवंगित सन्धि m. . . 
r. of cells Zool. कोशा-दंड m. Rn (radon) Chem. ते (तैजसाति) 
rod (rd.)=pole (syards) azt m. road रथ्या . (Hindi सड़क) 
... (वं.; ५.५ यष्टि) road-bound रथ्या-गामी (-इन्) mfn. rodent कृन्तक m. 
737 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
Rodentia Zool. कृन्तक-गण m. 
Romer's method गुरु-भा-वेग-रीति (गुरु is and cones layer Zoob. शलाका तथा उपग्रह-ग्रहण-प्रकाश-प्रवेग रीति) 
शंकु स्तर . 
Rontgen rays=X-rays धनवेधी रश्मि - Rohtak Geog. रोहितक m. 
क्ष-रश्मि m. roll ob. वेल्लन, लोठन . 
roof छदि . toll n. नामावलि . 
roof of mouth Zool. मुख-छदि १. rolled वेल्लित, लुठित mfn. 
roof of orbit Ophthalmol. अक्षिकूप-छदि . r.glass वेल्लित काच M. 
roof-tiles छदि-खर्परी. r. gold वेल्लित स्वर्ण .. 
room कोष्ठ m. r. steel rails Rly. वेल्लित वजायस roosting (of birds) Zool. शयन, निलयन 1. 
वंशक m. 
root I Bot., Matb. मूल . roller वेल्लन . 
2-radix Pharm. मूल . r. bearing Macb. वेल्लन-भारु m. r.-cap Bat. मूलगोप, मूलाग्रगोप m. r. mill वेल्लन-पेषणी f. 
r. climber Bot. मूल-प्रतानी (-इन्) m. r. rod वेल्लन-शलाका. 
r. hair Bot. मूल-रोम n. r. wheels वेल्लन-चक्र . 
r. hair region Bot. मूल-रोम-प्रदेश m. rolling alga = globe animalcule= r. leaf Bot. मूल-पत्र 1. 
Volvox perglobator Zool. भ्रमाप्यक r. of orbit Ophthalmol. अक्षिकूप-मूल 
=गोलाणुप्राणी (-इन्) m. rolling friction Phys. लोठन-प्रतिरोध m. t. of the tooth Anat. दन्त-मूल . rolling motion Math. वेल्लन-गति f. r. pressure Bot. मूल-निपीड M. rolling stock I Ry. गन्त्रयानादि 1. 
r.-stalk-rootstock Bot. भूल-वृन्त ।. 2 Com. पूर्ण स्कन्ध m. 
r. tubercle Bot. मूल-आकन्दिका . moving stock चल स्कन्ध m. 
rootlet Bot. मूलक . roll shutter बेल्लन-संवारक m. 
rope रज्जु f. (Hindi रस्सी) roll shutter cabinet वेल्लन-संवारक- rope pulley Mach. रज्जु-आकृषि m. 
प्रमंजूषा . 
ropeway रज्जुमार्गm. roll sulphur (cast into sticks) वेल्लन- - Rosa Bot. पाटलति f. (ति for प्रजाति 
गन्धक m. 
genus) roll-top cabinet वेल्लन-छद-प्रमंजूषा . Rosaceae Bot. पाटल-कुल . 
Roman chamomile = chamomile rosaceous Bot. पाटलीय mfn. (like a ____Pharm. कर्पूरगंधि. 
rose) Roman earth Col. Ind. रोमा-मृत्. 
rosae gallicae petala-rosae peta Roman ocher=brown ochet प्रोद्रक्त- lum=red rose petal Pharm. रक्त 
पीत m. 
पाटल-दल . Roman steelyard Phys. (fulcrum Rosales Bot. पाटल-गोत्र . 
fixed) स्थिरस्कम्भा यष्टि . (वजायस rosamine Col. Ind. अरुणतिक्ती . (not 'steel is understood) 
पाटल-) 
758 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
rosaniline (rose + aniline) Chem. rosolane paste Col. Ind. पाटलवीन्य लेपी 
(obtained in red-coloured salts) पाटलनीली. 
rosolic (rosaniline + - ol + - ic) rosaniline base Col. Ind. पाटलनीली पाटलविक mfn. 
पीठ . 
r. acid पाटलविक अम्लn. rosanol 4B=cotton reds 
rosol red Col. Ind. पाटलव रक्त m. rosanthrene Col. Ind. पाटलक्षामण्य 1. rosophenine Col. Ind. पाटलदर्शी. 
r. bordeaux पाटलक्षामण्य कपिशक m. r. geranine पाटलदर्शी पिपीती. r. fast bordeaux पाटलक्षामेण्य स्थिर t. pink पाटलदर्शी आपद्म m. 
कपिशक m. 
rosophenoline Col. Ind. पाटलदर्शवी . r. fast red पाटलक्षामेण्य स्थिर रक्त m. rostellum (small rostrum) तुंडका . 
. orange पाटलक्षामेण्य नारंग m. rostrum of shrimp Zool. चिंगट-तुंड १. r. pink पाटलक्षामेण्य प्रापद्य m. 
rot ob. गलन 2. r. violet पाटलक्षामण्य नीललोहित m. rot=rotten गलित min. rosazeine G brilliant pink G rosazine Col. Ind. पाटलाजीवी . 
r. joint Anat. आवर्त-सन्धि M. (from rosazurine Col. Ind. पाटलनभोनीली f. सुश्रुत) rose (flower) सेवती f., पाटलपुष्प 1. 
r. microtome परिभ्रामी अणुतक्षm. rose apple-jambo=Java. plum == r. motion, rotatory motion Phys. ___Malay apple जम्बु. 
परिभ्रम-गति / rose Bengale Col. Ind. बंग-पाटलm. ___r. oil pump Phys. परिभ्रामी तैलोदञ्च tose, Bunsen burner पिनाल-दाहक-पुष्प 
rotate vb. परिभ्रामण, परिभ्रमण ?. roseine Col. Ind. aunt f. 
rotate Bot. चक्रित mfn. rose madder पाटल-मंजिष्ठा . 
rotating परिभ्रमण, परिम्रामी (-इन्) rosemary (a fragrant shrub; used in t. coil परिभ्रमण-कुंडल . 
hair lotions, for its odour and for t.furnace Chem. परिभ्रामि भ्राष्ट its supposed effect in stimulating ___r. line Math. परिभ्रामि-रेखा. growth of hair) केशवास m. 
rotation Math. भ्रान्ति f. (=स्वाक्षभ्रान्ति), Rosenstiehl green = manganese परिभ्रमण n., परिभ्राम m. 
, green 
r. of crops Bot. सस्यावर्तन 1. rosette Bot. पाटलक ?. 
rotational displacement Math. परि rose-water पाटल-वारि. 
भ्रमण-विस्थापन, परिभ्रमणकृत विस्थापन, rosin=colophony उदायास m. 
परिभ्रमणाद् विस्थापन । ' rosindamine Col. Ind. पाटलनिनीलतिक्ती rotator परिभ्रमिता (-त)m. 
-rotatory -मावर्त rosinduline Col. Ind. पाटलसुनीली f. levo-r. वामावर्त 
r. scarlet पाटलव शोण m. 
dextro-t.दक्षावर्त 759 
m. 
.﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
rotatory microtome परिभ्रामी अणुतक्ष m. r.-topped गोल-शीर्ष mfn. rotatory motion परिभ्रम-गति f. 
r.-topped tripod गोल-शीर्ष त्रिपाद m: Rotifera Zool. किरीटिन: m.pl. 
rounded गोल mfn. rotor (short for rotator परिभ्रमिता) भ्रमिता .. corner गोलाथि, गोल कोण m. 
(d) m. 
roundworm मलसर्प m. (Panjabi. मल्हप) rotor plane (support in the air is route पथ m. 
derived by rotating aerofoils) routine नैत्यकn. परिभ्रम-विमान .. 
row पंक्ति rotten-rot गलित mfn. 
Rowland's method Phys.. (accurate rouge I कुंकुम . 
determination of mechanical equi 2-French red श्रृंगार-रक्त m. 
valent of heat) परिशुद्ध यांत्रिक समाई 3=polishing red 
रीति /.. rough I (uneven) असम mfn. 
rows of rivets Engin. लवंग-पंक्ति . 2 (harsh) कर्कश mfn. 
royal jelly=bee milk राजी-भोजन . 3 (crude, unfinished). असंस्कृत mfm. royal mint राज-टंकशाला. 4 (coarse) रूक्ष mfn. 
_royal observatory राज-वेधशाला . 5 खर mfn. 
royalties paid-in-advance Com. अग्रदत्त 6 स्थूल mfn. 
अधिकार-शुल्क n. r. account स्थूल-लेखा f. 
royalties suspense account Com. r. calculation स्थूल-गणना . __निलम्बित अधिकारशुल्क-लेखा f. r. estimate स्थूल आगणन n. 
royalty अधिकारशुल्क। r. ledger Com. क्षेप्य-प्रपंजी. (क्षेप्य r.p.m.(revolutions per minute).Engin. ____to be thrown) 
प्र. क. प. (प्रति-कला-परिक्रमण) r. measurement स्थूल माप m. R.R. (railway receipt) सं.प्रा. (संयान-प्राप्ति) roughage (coarse food, high in fibre) -rrhea, -rrhoea, -rhea (How, dis 
तन्त्वन्न 1. (तन्तु-अन्न) . 
charge) Med. -59 m. roughly स्थूलरूपेण 
-rrhexis Med. -वर्म (ancient word) rough vacuum Phys. अल्पशून्यक. -Irhoea= -rrhea round I Math. adv. परितः 
R salt द लवण, र लवण ॥. . 2 adj. गोल mfn. 
Ru (ruthenium) Chem. न (नक्षरातु) r. bottomed गोल-बुध्न mfn. 
rubber घृषि m. 'r. bottomed flask गोलबुध्न पलिघm. r. band घुषि-पट्टी 
t. bracket Math. गोलाभिवार m. _r. cap घुषि-टोपी. r. celled गोल-कोशावान् mfn. 
r. cork घृषि-त्वक्षा f. r. glasses गोलोपनेत्र n. 
r.-pressure tube घृषि-निपीड-नाल m. r. oval glasses Ophthalmol. गोलांड 
r. ring घृषि-वलय m. ___ उपनेत्र १. 
r. stamp घृषि-मुद्रा . r: pointed pencil गोलान-अंकनी f. r. stopper घृषि-पिधा . 
1.760 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
r. teat घृषि-चूचुक 1. r. tube धूषि-नाल m. r. tubing Pbys. घृषि-नाल m. 
r. tyre घृषि-पविm. rubbing surface Mach. संघर्ष-पृष्ठ 2 Ruben's brown=cassel brown Ruben's tube Phys. बचि नाल m. ruberythric acid (Lat. rubia madder ____ मंजिष्ठ) Chem. मंजिष्ठरुधिरिक अम्ल . rubesine-rubianite=harmaline 
Rubia Bot. मंजिष्ठाति (-ति for प्रजाति 
genus) 
R. cordifolia सामान्य मंजिष्ठा /. Rubiaceae Bot. मंजिष्ठा-कुल 1. Rubiales Bot. मंजिष्ठा-गोत्र.. rubichloric acid = chlorogenin rubidic Chem. दीपिक mfn. rubidium Chem. दीपातु m. 
r. alum दीपातु स्फटिका/ r. ammonium bromide दीपातु 
तिक्तातु दुरेय . r. bromide दीपातु दुरेय .. r. carbonate दीपातु प्रांगारीय n. r. chloride दीपातु नीरेय n. r. iodide दीपातु जम्बेय 1. 
r. sulphate दीपातु शुल्बीय n. rubin रक्ति. rubine रक्ती. -rubin-emia -रक्तिरक्तता . -rubinic-रक्तियिक . rubinol ferie m. rubr-, rubro- (red) TE rubramine Col. Ind. लोहतिक्ती f. rubro-, rubr- लोह ruby I पद्मराग m. 
2 (a colour, red, high saturation, 
low brilliance) न्युद्रक्त m. ruby glass पद्मराग-काच m. 
ruby red पद्मराग रक्त m. rudiment Biol. अल्पविकस . . . rudimentary Biol. अल्पविकसित, अवशेषक 
mfn. 
r. bud अल्पविकसित कुड्मल . rue गन्धशाक . . rufi-, rufo- आरक्त rufigallic acid Chem. 91599-56fcopi 
अम्ल. rufigallol Chem. प्रारक्त-दुस्फोटव m. rufo-, rufi- आरक्त rufus pills=aloes and myrrh pills ____Pharm. कुमारी तथा रसगन्ध-गुटिका f. 
ruga (fold, wrinkle) afar m. rugate=rugatus (Lat.) वलिमत् mfn. rugose-rugate वलिमत्m fn. . rule I (law) Math. नियम m. 
2 (foot-rule, ruler) रेखक m. ruled Com. रेखित mfn. 
r. book रेखित पुस्तn. 
r. paper रेखित पत्र । rule of signs Math. चिह्न-नियम m. rule of three Math. नैराशिक नियम m. ruler (rule, as in foot-rule) रेखक m. ruler of Indian State देशीय-राज्य-नरेश m. rules of court न्यायालय-नियम m. rules of procedure प्रक्रिया-नियम. m. ruling Law व्यवस्था f. rum (from fermented molasses).फाणिरा 
rumbatron Phys. (which accelerates 
electrons) facae m.(shortened from 
विद्युदणुत्वर) Rumex Bot. चुक्रिकाति f. (-ति for प्रजाति 
genus) 
R. acetosella सामान्य चुक्रिका f. Rumford's photometer Phys. qus 
छाया-भामान m. 
761 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
Ruminantia=ruminants Zool. रोम- Russian green अवपीतातिहरि m. 
न्थिनः m. pl. 
Russia red = Russia red bluish ruminate vb. रोमन्थन n. 
=Russia red yellowish-ani runcinate Bot. (pinnately cut with line brown 
the lobes pointing downwards) russium=virginium,. verium क्षुद्रातु अधःपालि mfn. (Lat. Tuncinatus 
planed off' is inaccurate) rust मंडूर n. Runn (of cutch) Geog. इरणि १. rust fungus Bot. मण्डूर-कवक . runner I Zool. (feet of ostrich) धावक rut Zool. स्त्रीमद m. 
Rutaceae Bot. निम्बु-कुल 1. 2 Bot. भूस्तारी (-इन्) m. 
Rutales Bot. निम्बु-गोत्र ॥. runnet=rennet (found in the ruthenic Chem. नक्षरिक mfn. 
stomach of calves) वत्सातंच m. 
I. acid नक्षरिक अम्ल n. running board (a footboard) पादफलक r. oxide नक्षरिक जारेय ?. 
ruthenio- (ruthenious) Chem. नक्षर्य running board steps Ry. Eng. पाद- ruthenious Chem. नक्षयं mfn. 
फलक-क्रम m. 
ruthenium Chem. नक्षरातु m. running fit Engin. धावन-अन्वायुक्ति . r. dioxide नक्षरातु द्विजारेय. running path धावन-मार्ग m. 
r. oxide नक्षरातु जारेय. running policy Com. चलद्-गोपलेख m. x. red नक्षरातु रक्त m. run off vb. अपधावन 1. 
r. sesqui-oxide नक्षरातु साध-जारेय. run-way Aeronautics (a hard horizon 
tal rectangular strip of ground rutheno-=ruthenio for the landing and take-off of ruthenous=ruthenious 
airplanes) विमानभूमि f., धावनक्षेत्र rye नीवारिका . rupture विदारण., विदार m. 
rye grass नीवारिका-घास m. ruptured factui mfn. 
ryegrass staggers नीवारिका-घास-विहारी. rural credit ग्राम-ऋण n. 
ryuka black B=sulphur black rural development ग्राम-विकास m. t. green=sulphur green T 
Ruscus Bot. (greenish flowers) आहरि r. indigo=thionol sky blue PX 
पुष्पति . (-ति for प्रजाति genus) r. yellow=sulphur orange G 
S Bact. x (Salmonella) अ. वि. (अन्नविषाणु) 
2 (Serratia) इ (इष्टकारक्त) . : 3 (Shigella) अ. पा. (अचलान्त्राणु) 
4-(Spirillum) अधिकु. (अधिकुन्तलाणु) 
5 (Spirochaeta = Spirochaetae) कु. (कुन्तलाणु) 
6 (Streptothrix) मा. वे. (मालावेत्राणु) s (sulphur) Chem. शु (शुल्बारि) 
762 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
12. 
s. (second) का. (काष्ठिका) 
s. solution शर्कराधु विलयन n. s. (secondary) Chem. द्वि (द्वितीयक) Saccharum Bot. इक्षुति . (-ति for प्रजाति S,s (symmetrical) Chem. सं (संमितीय) genus) S. (distance) Phys. दू (दूरत्व) 
S. officinarum सामान्य इक्षु m. 6 (standard deviation) Statistics मा saccular स्यूनाकार mfm. 
(प्रमाप विचलन) 
saccule Zool. (a little sac) FIT f. Sa (samarium) Chem. धू (धूसरला) sacculus Zool. स्यूनिका f. Saalfeld earth=umber 
saccus endolymphaticus Zool. saba phosphine G==brilliant phos- अन्तर्लसीका-स्यून m. 
phine G 
sac fungus Bot. स्यून-कवक १. Sabarmati (river) साभ्रमती/. 
sacr-, sacro- (sacrum) ferti sabina (sabin.) = savin Pharm. sacral adj. Anat. (pertaining to, or 
विहपुषा f. (हपुषा juniper) 
in the region of sacrum) त्रिक-, त्रैक sabinae cacumina=sabina 
mfn. sabinae herba=sabina 
sacral n. (sacral vertebra) त्रिक-कीकस sabinic acid Chem. विहपुषिक अम्ल sac Anat. स्यून m., धान N., गुहा f., कोश sacral canal त्रिक-कुल्या f. 
m. 
sacral vertebra त्रिक-कीकस m. saccate Bot. (resembling a sack) sacred bamboo (Japanese nandin is 
स्यूनाकार mfn. 
from Sanskrit) नन्दिन M. 
• saccharate Chem. शर्करीयn. 
sacred bark = cascara sagrada saccharide Chem. शर्करेय ". 
Pharm. पुण्य-वल्क, आरेच-वल्क m. saccharine Chem. शर्करी. 
sacred beetle of the Egyptians) saccharo-meter शर्करा-मान m. 
Zool. पुण्य-भृङ्ग m. Saccharomyces Bot. शर्कराकवकति . sacro-, sacr- (sacrum) Free 
(-ति for प्रजाति genus) 
sacrum = sacral bone = os S. anginae (found in a case of sacrum fi 1. __tonsillitis with suffocation तान्ति) saddle Anat. पल्याण 2. 
तान्तीय शर्कराकवक 1. 
s. joint पल्याण-सन्धि m. S. blanchardi (found in a peri- s. key Mach. पल्याण-कीला f. 
toneal tumor) उदराबुंदीय शर्करा- safe adj. अभय (free from danger), कवक n. 
क्षेम, सुरक्षित mfn. S. cerevisiae यविरा शर्कराकवक n. safe n. (a chest) सुरक्ष m. (मंजूषा under _(यविरा beer) 
stood) (Hindi fattet) S. tumefaciens (found in tumor safety अभय, क्षेम . ____of thigh) अर्बुदकर शर्कराकवक ?. s. bolt अभय-अर्गली f. Saccharomycetaceae शर्कराकवक-कुल 1. s. funnel अभय-निवाप m. saccharose Chem. शर्कराधु १. 
s. fuse अभय-ज्वाल m. 763 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
s. glasses Ophthalmol. अभय-उपनेत्र n. s. match अभय-इषीका (= अभय- 
दीपेषिका) s. razor अभय क्षुर m. s. tube Chem. अभय-नाल m. s. valve Rly. Eng. अभय-कपाट, क्षेम 
कपाट. s. valve, autoclave निपीडतापक अभय 
__ कपाट ?. safflor = safflower Bot. कुसुम्भ n. saffron कुंकुम । saffrosine = eosine BS safran d'inde = turmeric safraniline Col. Ind. कुंकुमनीली. safranine Col. Ind. कुंकुमी f. 
s. blue कुंकुमी नील m. 
s. prima=carthamine 
•s. scarlet कुंकुमी शोण m. safranoline FG = brilliant pink 
s. axis अग्रपश्चग अक्ष m. sagittate Bot. बाणवत् mfn. 
_s. leaf Bot. बाण-पत्र n. (बाण for 
बाणवत्) sago ताल-कंगु . sago palm कंगु-ताल m. sail शीत (पोतपटविशेष, the word occurs 
in the सुपारगजातक of जातकमाला and Pali Jatakas IV, 21 ed. Fausboll; 
cf. Marathi शीड sail) sailor नाविक m. sail-plane Aeronautics शीत-विमान n. sal-, salo- (for salicylic नम्रलिक) नम्र -sal -नम्र salad प्रशाकn. salamander Zool. (resembles a lizard) 
सरटक m. Salamandridae Zool. सरटक-वंशm. salaries and wages Com. वेतन तथा 
. 5G 
भृति f. 
safrol, safrole (an oil occurring in salary वेतन . ___ the camphor tree) कर्पूरैल 1. saleable stock Com. विक्रेय स्कन्ध m. 
sag (of rope) Mach. पाश्लथ m. sale deed विक्रय-लेख, क्रय-लेख m. sage Bot. तुलसी-बन्धु m. 
sales Com. विक्रय m. sage green अवयंतिपीत m. 
cash S. रोक-विक्रय m. sagging Mach. पाश्लथन 1. 
credit s. उद्धार-विक्रय m. sagittal Zool. I (pertaining to the s. account विक्रय-लेखा . 
suture between the parietal bones s. book विक्रय-पुस्त . of the skull) प्राचीर-सेवन्य mfn. 
s. by auction क्रोश-विक्रय m.. 2 (situated in or pert. to the s. commission विक्रय-वर्तन 1.. 
median plane of the body) मध्यतल्य s. depot विक्रयागार n. mfn. 
s. journal विक्रय-पंजी. 3 (running in an anteroposteriori s. ledger विक्रय-प्रपंजी. direction) अनपश्चग mfn. (Dorland's s. on commission वर्तन-विक्रय m. Medical Dictionary) 
s. returns विक्रय-प्रत्याय m. 4 (situated in any pla ne parallel s. returns journal विक्रय-प्रत्याय-पंजी. to the median plane of the body) .. s. tax विक्रय-कर m. **'मध्यसमान्तर, मध्यसमान्तरतल्य mfn. 
s. transaction विक्रय-व्यवहार M. 
764 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
s. warrant विक्रय-अधिपत्र. 
salivary gland Anat, grafiy m. Salicaceae Bot. 777-1. 
salivary receptacle लाला-ग्रह m. Salicales नम्रा-गोत्र n. 
Salix Bot. नम्राति / (-ति for प्रजाति salicine Chem. नम्री/. 
genus) salicine black Col. Ind. 77 757 m. sal microcosmicum micro 
s. blue नम्री नील m. 
cosmic salt = phosphor salt s. blue-black T 175-AOUT . 
Old Chem. The aur 1. s. bordeaux TEŤ for m. Salmonella Bact, qafqerus m. (. fa.) s. brown 75 m. 
S. abortivo-equinas, S. abor s. chrome blue tot quiei fit m. tus equi (causes infectious S. chrome brown 7 aus m. abortion in mares) अश्वागर्भपात s. dark green नम्री असित हरि m. 
7. fa. s. fast green नम्री स्थिर हरिm. 
S. abortus ovis (isolated from s. grey नम्री धूसर m. 
cases of abortion in sheep) s. indigo blue नम्री निनील नील m. wanita 77. fe. S. orange 75 aritm. 
S. aertrycke (found in cases of s. red नम्री रक्त m. 
meat poisoning) y 9. fq. s. red-brown 75 t 776-77 m., 
S. ammoniae (it changes urea s. violet नम्री नीललोहित m. 
into ammonia) fafalfa . . S. yellow s ta m. 
S. anatis (causes keel in duck salicyl Chem. नम्रल 1. 
lings) Puea . fq. salicyl-alcohol Chem. 951-799 m. S. bovi-morbificans (isolated salicyl-aldoxime Chem. 47571-afarulla from both humans and animals) 
TYT . fa. salicylate Chem. Tentun. 
S. danysii (causes septicemia in salicylic Chem. (from Lat. salix . rats) 79 9. fq. .' willow 771) fati mfn. 
-, S. derby isolated from pork) s. acid नम्रलिक अम्ल.. 
CHİH . fa... salicylide Chem. The n. 
S. enteritidis = Bacillus en salicylo-salicylic acid Chem. T 
teritidis = Gartner's baci-. .. **T 11. , , , 
llus (causes food poisoning saline au mfn. 
which is marked by violent saline dropping apparatus लवण-, gastro-intestinal disturbance) 
forgyi fer-ETIT, qu-ferg-T n. 
M7419 9. fq. . . salino-meter 70-TT m. 
S. gallinarum = Shigella gal saliva लाला.. 
linarum faet. . FT. salivary calculus (pl. calculi) S. Glasser-Yoldaysen (produces, 
167924 m. 
swine typhoid. in , suckling 765 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
pigs) बालसूकर अ. वि. 
saltness लवणत्व M. S. hirschfeldii (occurs in type C saltpeter (potassium nitrate) यवक्षार, _paratyphoid fever) ग अप्यान्त्रज्वर पाक्य m. 
अ. वि. 
salt taste लवण-स्वाद m. S. icteroides (associated with salutation Correspondence अभिवादन ... 
• yellow fever) पीतज्वरीय अ. वि. 
प्रणाम m. s. morgani = Proteus mor- salute, by nos. Drill प्रणम्यताम्, अंकैः 
ganii 
salute, judging the time Drill S. pestis cavae (causes an epi- प्रणम्यताम्, अनुतालम् ___demic disease of guinea. pigs) saluting to the front Drill पुरः प्रणामः 
बंटमूष अ. वि. 
Salvadora Bot. पीलुति . (-ति for प्रजाति S. psittacosis=S. typhimurium genus) S. pullorum (causes white dia S. persica सामान्य पीलु m. 
rrhea in young chicks) कुक्कुटशाब Salvadoraceae Bot. पीलु-कुल 1. अ. वि. 
salvage Com. नाश-रक्षण, नाश-रक्षित, S. suipestifer=S. cholerae suis नाश-रक्षण-शुल्क n. 
सूकर-विषूची अ. वि. 
salvarsan (Lat. salvus save + Germ. s. typhimurium (causes disease arsen arsenic) Pharm. (a trade 
• in mice, etc.) मूषक अ. वि. 
mark applied to arsphenamine) salmon red प्रपीतातिरक्त m. 
नेपदर्शतिक्ती . salo-, sal- नम्र 
Salvia Bot. तुलसीबन्धुति f. (-ति for प्रजाति salol नम्रव m. 
genus) saloon car विलास-यान 1. 
salvo Mil. (naval guns firing to salosalicylide = disalicylide Chem. gether) युगपद्गोलन १. 
द्विनम्रलेय . 
samara (fruits) Bot. सपक्ष n. (having Salpa Zool. (muscular bands not wings) 
forming complete rings) अपूर्ण- samaria Chem. (samarium sesqui 
वलयाति f. (-आति for प्रजाति genus) oxide) धूसरजा f. Salpidae Zool. अपूर्णवलय-वंश m. samarium Chem. धूसरला. salt Chem. लवण 1. 
samarskite=urano-tantalite Mine salt vb. (to season with salt) लवणन ral. किरण-सहिज m. (-इज for खनिज 
1. 
mineral) Saltatoria Zoo!. प्रवल्गिन: m.pl. Sambhara (lake in Rajputana) salt cake लवण-पिण्ड m.. . 
शाकम्भरी. salt duty लवण-कर m. 
same sense Math. एक-अभिदिशा. salted लवणित mfn. 
sample = illustration निदर्शन n. salting.Chem. लवणन . 
___s. inquiry Statistics निदर्शन अनुसंधान saliish.लवण-mfn. 
766. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
_ 
n. 
s. survey Statistics निदर्शन प्रापरीक्षण sanguis draconis Pharm. प्रवेत्र-यास m. 
sanitary आरोग्यकारी (-इन्) mfn. sample न्यादर्श m. 
sanitary chemistry स्वास्थ्य-रसायन . s. bottle न्यादर्श-कूपी . 
sanitary engineering स्वास्थ्य अभियन्त्रणा . s. outfit न्यादर्श-संभार m. 
s. tube न्यादर्श-नाल m. 
sansei blue-black = acid blue sampler (for extracting samples, as black 
from a quantity of ore) न्यादर्शक s. Orange G = oil orange 
m. 
s. red A = fast acid red A sampling Statistics निदर्शन, न्यादर्श-वरण Sansevieria Bot. मूर्वाति f. (-ति for 
प्रजाति genus) s. of attributes गुण-निदर्शन .. 
S. roxburghiana #THEFT Haf f. s. of variables चल-निदर्शन . sans recours endorsement Com. sanatorium आरोग्यशाला . (from राज दायित्व-रहित पृष्ठांकना f. 
तरंगिणी) 
santal रक्तचन्दन n. sanction संमोदन 1. 
Santalaceae Bot. चन्दन-कुल. sand सिकता f., बालु m. 
Santalales Bot. चन्दन-गोत्र ". sandal चन्दन ।. 
santalic acid रक्तचन्दनिक अम्ल 2. sandalwood = sanderswood चन्दन santalin Chem. रक्तचन्दनि । 
काष्ठ 1. 
santalol (a-, 8-) Chem. रक्तचन्दनव m. sand bath Chem. सिकता-तापन .. 
(अ-, आ-) sandblast सिकता-धम ॥. 
Santalum Bot. चन्दनति f. (-ति for प्रजाति sandblasted सिकताध्मात mfn. 
genus) sandblasted bottle सिकताध्मात-कूपी. santalum = sandalwood fraft 11. sandbox Ry. Eng. बालु-धानी f. santonin = santoninum Pharm. 
s. operating handle बालुधानी-हस्तक कृमिद्रावि . . 
m. 
santoninic acid कृमिद्राविक अम्ल 1. sand calciner सिकता-निश्चूर्णक m. santoninum Pharm. कृमिद्रावि f. sand crab Zool. सिकता-कर्कट m. s. ap. (scruple) प्रमा. (प्रमाष) sanderswood = sandalwood sapanwood=sappanwood sanding gear levers Rly. Eng. ar- saphirol afafstua m. 
दन्त्युद्याम m. 
saphirole शनिप्रियवा. sandix=Saturn red 
Sapindaceae Bot. अरिष्ट-कुल . sandpaper सिकता-पत्र n. 
Sapindales Bot. अरिष्ट-गोत्र ... sand pipe बालु-नाड ". 
Sapindus Bot. अरिष्टति. (-ति for प्रजाति sand snake सिकता-सर्प, बालु-सर्प m. sandstone (colour )=cream beige S. trifoliatus सामान्य अरिष्ट m. 
अवरक्तपीत m. 
saponifiable स्वफेन्य mfn. 
genus) 
761 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
saponification I स्वफेनभवन, स्वफेनकरण, sarcolactic acid-paralactic acid 
स्वफेनन . 
Chem. पेशीदुग्धिक अम्ल . 2 Chem. (hydrolysis of any ester sarcolemma Anat. पेशी-चोल m. into the corresponding alcohol sarcomere Anat. (a transverse seg and acid) प्रजलांशन n. 
ment of a sarcostyle) पेशीपर्व . saponifier I (a reagent) स्वफेनकारी (पेशी-स्कम्भपर्व) 
(-इन्) m. 
Sarcophaga Zool. मांसमक्ष्याति f. (आति 2 (an apparatus) स्वफेनित्र n. . .. for प्रजाति genus) saponify (to convert into soap) स्वफेन- S. carnaria सामान्य मांसमक्षी . 
· करण, स्वफेनन n. . 
Sarcophagidae (a family of flesh saponin Chem. स्वफेनि. 
Aies) मांसमक्षी-वंश m. saponite स्वफेनिज m. (-इज for खनिज sarcoplasm = sarcoplasma Anat. : mineral) 
पेशी-रस m. Sapotaceae Bat. मधूक-कुल 1. 
Sarcoptes Zool. मांसवेधाति f. (-प्राति for sappan (wood) पतंग (काष्ठ) n. 
stofa genus) sappan red पतंग-रक्त m. 
S. scabiei खर्जु मांसवेध m. sappanwood पतंग-काष्ठ.n. 
Sarcoptidae Zool. मांसवेध-वंश m. (वंश sapphire (English , word sapphire is family) 
from शनिप्रिय) शनिप्रिय 1., नीलमणि Sarco-sporidia Zool. (parasitic in 
m. . 
the muscle fibres of mammals) sapphirol शनिप्रियव m. 
पेशी-बीजाणवः m. pl., पेशीबीजाणु-गण sapping Mil. अधःखनन . 
m. sapraermia=toxaemia विषरक्तता sarco-style = muscle column पेशी saprophyte Biol. (living on dead . स्कम्भ m. . matter) मृतोपजीवी (-इन ) m. 
sarcous element Anat. (dark seg saprophytic life Zool. मृतोपजीविता ., ment of sarcostyle) असितपर्व n. 
मृतोपजीवन n. 
Sarnath Geog. मृगदाव, ऋषिपतन m. saprophytism Biol. मृतोपजीविता f. . Sarraceniaceae Bot. कलशपर्ण-कुल 1. Saprospira प्रकुन्तलाणु m. (x large sized). Sarraceniales Bot. कलशपर्ण-गोत्र n. sapwood=alburnum Bot. रसकाष्ठ 1. sarsasarsae radix=sarsaparilla Saraca Bot. अशोकति f. (-ति for प्रजाति. sarsaparilla-sarsa (sars.)=sarsae 
genus) 
. radix प्रासारिवा . . . . . . S. indica सामान्य प्रशोक. m. 
___sartorius Anat. अन्तःकोचि-पेशी.. Sarcina धनगोलाणु m. 
. sateen (a cotton fabric, with glossy. Sarcacystis.: मांसकोष्ठ्याति f. (आति for surface resembling satin) तूल-काशुक. 
sanfer genus) 
. . (from काश् to shine) . . S.,tenella तन्तु, मांसकोष्ठी (-इन्) m. satin, काशुक n. (a silk fabric with Sarcowglia Anat..मांस-श्लेष m. 
glossy surface) 
768 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
satinite=powdered gypsum Col. savings I परित्राण 1., अपवाद m. 
_Ind. क्षुण्णाचूर्णn. 
2 संचय M. satinobre=satin ochre = golden savings bank Com. संचय-अधिकोष m. 
ocher 
savings clause परित्राण-वाक्य . satin white Col. Ind. काशक श्वेत m. savings deposit संचय-निक्षेप m. satisfaction संतोष m. 
savin tops-savin satisfactory संतोषजनक, संतोषप्रद, संतोषद mfn. saw ऋकच m. satisfy vb. I संतोषण N. 
sawdust Bot. काष्ठ-धूलि, क्रकच-धूलि. 2 (a debt) निस्तारण 1. 
saw-fish ऋकच-मत्स्य m. satisfy an equation समीकार-समाधान 1. Saxe blue अवनीलाहरि m. 
(सम-पा-+धान putting together Saxon earth=green earth well, adjust) 
Saxony blue=Saxe blue satisfy conditions प्रतिबन्ध-पालन n. Sb (stibium = antimony) Chem. अं saturability अनुवेध्यता. 
(अंजन) saturable अनुवेध्य mfn. 
Sc (scandium) Chem. स्त (स्तोकातु) saturant अनुवेधक m. 
scabies खर्जु /. saturate vb. Chem. अनुवेधन . 
scaffolding समाधार m. saturated Chem. अनुविद्ध mfn. 
scalar Math., Phys. (an undirected s. acid अनुविद्ध अम्ल . 
___quantity) अदिश m. (राशि) s. compound अनुविद्ध संयोग m. scalariform Bot. निःश्रेणीरूप, सोपानवत saturation I Chem. अनुवेधन 2. 
(like a ladder) 2=chroma, purity (distinctness scale I (relative measure अनुमाप m. 
or vividness of hue) faacat f. (as on a small scale) Saturn शनैश्चर m. 
2 (lit. 'ladder,' anything gradua Saturn red Col. Ind. शनैश्चर रक्त •m. ted,' a measure or rule) 1198 Tuft, saucer (a small dish) शरावक .. 
अंकश्रेणी, श्रेणी . saucerlike Zool. शरावकवत् mfn. 
3 शल्क m. Sauria Zool. सरटा: m. pl. 
scale division Phys. श्रेणी-भाजन 1. -Saurus Zool. -सरट 
scale drawing Engin, sunce m. sausage मांस-कर्कटीf. 
scale leaves==scaly leaves Bot. शल्क sausage-shaped कर्कटी-रूप mfn. 
पत्र.. Saussurea Bot. कुष्ठति f. (-ति for प्रजाति scalene triangle Matb. विषम त्रिभुज 
genus) S. lappa. सामान्य कुष्ठ m. 
scale of doses=dosage मात्रा-श्रेणी . savin = sabina (sabin.) = sabinae scale of drawing उद्रेख-श्रेणी, उद्रेख-मापनी 
cacumina=savin . tops = sabi- f. nae herba Pharm. विहपुषा f. (हपुषा scale of notation Math.संकेतना-पद्धति juniper) 
scale of visibility दृश्यता-मापश्रेणी. 
769 49 
m.﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
no. संख्या 
objects distingui- | objects indistingui 
shable at 
shable at वस्तु-अभिज्ञानान्तर वस्तु-अनभिज्ञानान्तर 
less than so 
meters 
. 
. 
५० मान . 
२०० मान 
२०० मान 
५०० मान 
description 
वर्णन dense fog 
घन धूमिका thick fog __गहन धूमिका 
fog 
धूमिका moderate fog 
अल्प धूमिका mist or haze 
कूहा .. poor visibility 
अल्प-दृश्यता moderate visibility ___ मध्यम-दृश्यता .. 
good visibility 
सु-दृश्यता very good visibility _ अति-सु-दृश्यता 
५०० मान 
१ सहस्रमान 
.. 
१ सहस्रमान 
२ सहस्रमान 
२ सहस्रमान 
४ सहस्रमान 
४ सहनमान 
१० सहस्रमान 
१० सहस्रमान 
२० सहस्रमान 
२० सहस्रमान 
५० सहस्रमान 
excellent visibility 
प्रशस्त-दृश्यता 
more than 50,000 meters 
1 
scalepan तुला-पात्रn. 
nia around or up and down to scales (a balance: scales usually em direct the radar beam in the 
body a system of multiplying desired direction) परिलोकन . 
levers उद्याम) उत्तुला f. (=उद्यामतुला) (ancient word--to look round) scalewing (butterfly) Zool. 7898987 m. Scaphopoda Zool. (having spade fita scalpel Surg. विच्छेदनी f. 
like foot) खनित्रपादाः m.pl. scaly anteater Zool. शल्की वम्राद m. scapul-=scapulo- (scapula) अंसफलक scaly bulb Bot. सशल्क कन्द m. . . scapula = shoulder blade Anat. scaly leaves=scale leaves Bot. शल्क- .. अंसफलक १. 
पत्र । 
scapular r (of or pert. to the shoulder) standia.Cbem. (scandium oxide) स्तोक- अंसीय mfn. 
.... 2 (of or pert. to the scapula) अंस scandium (eka-boron) Chem. स्तोकातु फलकीय mfn. मोक डांकण). .!!., . . . . . .scapulor ==scapul- अंसफलक scanning Radar (swinging the anten- scarlet thu mfn. 
o 
पर 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
1. 
mfn. 
scarlet fever = scarletina शोणत्वगज्वर schizocarp Bot. वेश्मस्फोटि . . 
m. 
schizocarpic fruit Bot. वेश्मस्फोटि फलn. scatter diagram Statistics प्रविक्षेप-चित्र schizogarmy Zool. खण्ड-प्रजनन n. 
schizo-genesis Biol. खण्ड-जनन ॥. scattering प्रविक्षेपण n. 
schizogenous Bot. (formed by the scattering of rays रश्मि-प्रविक्षेप m. splitting of cell walls) स्फोटन-जात schedule I n. सूची, अनुमची . 
2 (as of trains) समयावलि f. . schizogony Biol. खण्ड-गुणन . 3 सारणी. 
schizont (stage of development giv schedulevb. अनुसूचन n. 
ing rise to isospores) Turaya m. scheduled अनुसूचित, अनुसूचीबद्ध mfn. Schizophyta (multiply by fission)== ___s. bank अनुसूचित अधिकोष m. 
fission fungi खण्डोद्भिदःf.pl. schedule of authorized expendi- Schizotrypanum - Trypanosoma 
___ture प्राधिकृत व्यय-अनुसूची f. 
असिकायाति (आति for प्रजाति genus) schedule of trains संयान-समयावलि. S. cruzi (this affects the heart) Scheele's green मध्यपीतहरि m. 
हृदाकामी असिकाय m. scheelite (native calcium tungstate Schoenberg's reagent धूप्रो-प्रतिकर्ता (-त) 
चूर्णचंडिज m. (-इज for खनिज mineral) m. scheme योजना 
schola छात्र m. Scherringham's valve = hopper s. beaker (student's quality) छात्र 
valve Hygiene अधोवाप कपाट.. 
चंचुकी (-इन्) m. Schiff reaction or test Chem. (a test s.glass छात्र-काच m. 
for aldehydes) अपिसुव्युद-प्रतिक्रिया, scholar छात्र, अध्येता (तृ) m. --परीक्षा . 
scholarship छात्रवृत्ति Schiff reagent Chem. (a solution of school शिक्षालय m., पाठशाला f. 
fuchsine) अपिधूमली-प्रतिकर्ता (-त) m. Schroeder-Grillo process Chem. Schiff's base Chem. [any of a series (contact process using Pt. de 
of bases (azomethine sta com posited on MgSO4) भ्राशुमहविधा 
pounds)] अप्यजप्रोदी पीठ 1. schindylesis joint Anat. (where a Schuffner's granules or punctation 
bone fits into the slit of another) हिमज्वर-कणिका f. छेदग सन्धि m. 
Schuttgelb = Persian berry lake Schistosoma स्त्रीपुंसाति f. (-आति for Schweitzer's reagent Chem. (copper 
प्रजाति genus) 
ता ammonium ति hydroxide : उ) Schistosomatidae (a family) स्त्रीपुंस-वंश तोति प्रतिकर्ता (-तृ) m. . m. 
scia-machy छाया-युद्ध n. Schistosomatoidea (a superfamily) sciatic Zool. (pertaining to the hip:) ''. स्त्रीपुंस-प्रवंश m. 
" नितम्ब-, नैतम्ब mfn. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
न 
sciatica Med. राजचेता-शूल m. 
scler-, sclero- 7417 sciatic artery=gluteal artery Anat. sclera (white of the eye) शुक्ला /. 
नितम्ब-रोहिणी . 
scleral=sclerotic sciatic foramen Anat. नितम्ब-छिद्र n. scleral Ophthalmol. शुक्ला -, शुक्लीय mfn. sciatic nerve (largest nerve in the s. incision शुक्ला -भेदन N. 
body) राज-चेता. 
s.puncture शुक्ला -वेध m. (वेध is from sciatic notch Anat. नितम्ब-काकपद . 
सुश्रुत) sciatic plexus Zool. नितम्ब-प्रतान M. sclere Zool. (spicule of a sponge) दृढा sciatic swelling Zool. नितम्ब-गंड 'm. sciatic vein Zool. नितम्ब-सिरा. scler-ectasia Med. शुक्लोत्तन m. science विज्ञान n. 
scler-ectomy Opbthalmol. शुक्लोच्छेद m. s. of language = philology - sclerema Med. ऊति-जारठय . . 
linguistics = linguistic sci- sclerema neonatorum नवजात ऊति ence भाषा-विज्ञान 1. 
जारठ्य. s. of life Zool. जीवन-विज्ञान . sclerenchyma Bot. (a tissue with 
s. of numbers Math. Hift f., cell walls thickened and lignified) 
• अंक-विज्ञान 1. 
दृढ-कोशा-भित्ति, दृढकोशाभित्तिक १. s. of road-making वर्त्म-कर्म n. scleriasis Ophthalmol. (induration of 
(from रामायण) 
_the edge of the eyelid) वम॑तटजारठय - s. of war युद्ध-विज्ञान .. scientific वैज्ञानिक mfn. 
sclerite Zool. दृढक . . scientific and industries depart scleritis शुक्लाकोप m. 
ment विज्ञान तथा उद्योग-विभाग m. sclero-, scler- Torel scientific department विज्ञान-विभाग m. scleroderma Ophthalmol. चर्मज़ारठ्य . scientific marketing वैज्ञानिक विपणन 1. sclerosed (affected with sclerosis) scientific storage वैज्ञानिक संग्रहण .. जारठ्यग्रस्त nfr. scientist वैज्ञानिक, विज्ञानविद् m. 
sclerosis जारठ्य । scilla=squill Pharm. समुद्रपलांडुm. sclerotic I = scleral (hard, indurat Scindapsus Bot. गजपिप्पलीति . (-ति for ed) दृढ, जरठ mfn. 
Staifa genus) 
2=sclerosed Bot., Med. जारठयग्रस्त S. officinalis सामान्य गजपिप्पली . 
mfn. scintillate vb. उत्स्फुलिंगन १. . sclerotic coat (of the eyeball) = 'scio-mancy छाया-शकुन . 
. : sclera 7991469 1. (from TEIT) Scirpus Bot. कशेरुति f. (-ति for प्रजाति sclerotitis=scleritis 
genus) . . , , . . sclerotium Bot. (a hardened myce 
S. grossus सामान्य कशेरु m. . . lium) जालाश्म m. (hard like stone (spissets a f. . . . . . 
अश्म) , Scitamineae Bot. हरिद्रा-कुल 1. Sclerotium (a form.genus of sterile 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
fungi) जालाश्मति f. (-ति for प्रजाति cury ointment Pharm. संयुत पारद 
genus) 
स्नेहलेप m. sclerotome Zool. (skeletogenous so- scrap Com. क्षेप्य १. . __mite) कंकालजन खण्डकm. 
S.-book क्षेप्य-पुस्त ॥. sclerotomy शुक्ला-छेद m. 
s. value क्षेप्य-अही. scolex Med. मर्धा m. (मर्धन) 
scraper अपोद्घर्षक m. Scoliodon Zool. (Indian dogfish) scratch vb. आखुरण.n. (खुर् to scratch,; 
भारत-ग्राहाति f. (-प्राति for प्रजाति Dhatupātha 28.52; cf. Hindi खरो-' genus) 
चना, Punjabi खुरकना) scoop I (ladle) प्रदर्वी f. 
scratcher Zool. (feet of hen) faftie ___2 (a shovel) कठिन 1. (ancient word) (पद) 
arii cacumina = scoparium screen Radar qe n. scoparin Cbem. सम्मार्जनीयि. 
screw भ्रमिm. scoparium (scopar.)=broomtops= _t. cap भ्रमि-टोपी . 
scoparii cacumina Pharm. संमार्जनी S.-capped bottle भ्रमि-टोपित-कूपी f.. 
s. clip भ्रमि-स्वज m. scoparius = Cytisus scoparius= । s. coupling Ry. Eng. भ्रमि-मिथुनन ॥. 
broom संमार्जनी 
s.-cutting lathe. Macb. भ्रमि-कर्तन -scope -ईक्ष m. 
वर्तनी scope r (as of chemistry) क्षेत्र १. 
S.-driver भ्रमि-चालक m. 2 (as for production) अवकाश m. s. gauge Phys. भ्रम्यामान m. 
3=indicator Radar ईक्ष-देशक m. s.-head भ्रमि-शिर ॥. -scopic-ईक्षीय 
s. jack भ्रमि-उत्थाप m..(jack उत्थाप) -scopical -ईक्षीय 
s. out-unscrew.vb.निर्धेमीयण n. -scopist -ईक्षक m. 
. s. thread Mach. भ्रमि-सूत्र । scopoletin = chrysatropic acid हेम- s. up संभ्रमीयण . 
बाहतिक अम्ल . . 
screwing भ्रमीयण.n. -scopy -ईक्षा 
screwtop bottle भ्रमिशीर्ष-कूपी. -scorbic -प्रशीताद 
scribbling pad=scribbling tablet scorbutic Med. प्रशीतादीय mfm. 
=scratch pad विरेखन चय.m. score विंशक . 
-scribe -लेखन .. score vb. Engin. निर्लेखन 1. 
scrip Com. (provisional certificate) scorpioid Bot. (developing right and अपक्व प्रमाणपत्र 
left alternately) उभयतोविकासी (-इन्) scroll Violin शंख m. 
mfn.' . 
Scrophulariaceae Bot. अन्थिमूल-कुल N. scorpion वृश्चिक m. 
___scrotal sac Zool. मुष्क-स्यून m. scorpion fly Zool. वृश्चिक-पतंग m. scrotum मुष्क m, Scott's dressing=compound mer- scrub vb. I Chem. उद्धावन . . 
IT 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
2 घर्षधावन ॥. scrubber Chem. उद्धावक m... scrubbing brush उद्धावन-कूर्च m. scruple (s.ap; 20 grains) प्रमाष m. 
(प्रमा.; २० यव) scrutinize vb. परिनिरीक्षण . . scrutiny परिनिरीक्षा f. sculpture, sculptuting I मूर्तिकर्म n., 
मूर्तिकला f. 
2 Bot., Zool. चित्रण n. scum (extraneous matter or im 
purities risen to, or formed on, 
the surface) मलफेन m. scurf = achor दारुण 1. scurvy प्रशीताद m. scute Zool. I (scutum) वरूथ n. . 
2 (large scales) प्रशल्क m. scutellum वरूथिका scuttle rb. (to cut or explode a 
hole in or remove a plug from a ship's bottom so that water enters and sinks the vessel) 
छिद्रबोडन . scutum वरूथ ॥. Scyphozoa Zool. (including jelly- 
_fishes) छत्रिकवर्ग m. Se (selenium) Chem: मे (मेचाग्नि) sea समुद्र m. 
s. anemone Zool. कुसुमाभ m. s. bivalve Zool. समुद्र द्विपुट m. 
· s. board = sea margin (coast) 
वेलाप्रान्त m. s.-borne trade सामुद्रिक व्यापार m. 
s. breeze समुद्र-समीर m. . 
•is. cow=dugong Zool. समुद्रगो f. s. crayfish = . crawfish =. 
crayfish=spiny lobster Zool. 
s. cucumber Zool. समुद्र-कर्कटी f. s. duck Zool. समुद्र-कारण्ड m. s. gull Zool. समुद्र-चिल्ली f., समुद्र-काक 
m. s. horse Zool. (a small fish, the 
head and fore part of the body suggestive of the head and neck 
of a horse) अश्वमत्स्यक m. s. kidney (an alcyonarian of the ___genus Renilla) समुद्र-वृक्क m. s. level Zool. समुद्र-तल १. (short ___ for समुद्र-समतल) s. lion जलसिंह m. s. margin - seaboard (coast) 
वेलाप्रान्त m. s. mine Mil. समुद्र-निस्फोट m. s. mussel Zool. समुद्र-शम्बुक m. s. nautilus समुद्र-नाविक m. s. nymph समुद्र-अप्सरस् . s. onion = squill = Urginea 
scilla समुद्र-पलाण्डु m. .. s. pen Zool. समुद्र-तूलिका [. 
s.-plane समुद्र-विमान M.. s. port समुद्र-द्वार, समुद्र-पत्तन 1. s. return Radar (a radar echo 
reflected by the ocean waves) 
समुद्र-प्रतिक्षिप्त .. .. s. search radar समद्र-तेजोन्वेष m. . s. shore (coast) वेला f. s. snail Zool. समुद्र-मन्थर m. s. snake Zool. समुद्र-नाग m. (the. _most poisonous) 
s. squirt सामुद्रोद्गारी (-इन् ) m. s. turtle Zool. समुद्रं कश्यप m. . s. urchin Zool. शल्य-गोल m. 
s.-weed समुद्र-धास m. seal Com. नाममुद्रा, मुद्रा f. - commons. साधारण-नाममुद्रा f... 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
s. register नाममुद्रा-पंजी f. 
seat of government शासनाधिष्ठान 1. seal vb. I (close) संमुद्रण 1. 
sebaceous स्नेह 2 मुद्रांकन . 
sebaceous gland Anat. स्नेह-ग्रंथि M. seal Zool. जलव्याघ्र m. 
sebaceous glands of the skin sealed I (closed) संमुद्रित nfn. 
त्वक्-स्नेह-ग्रन्थि m. 2 मद्रांकित mfn. (where an actual Sebeck effect Phys, सन्धि-विद्यत-प्रभाव m. seal at has been affixed) 
Seborrhea (excessive discharge of sealed tube furnace संमुद्रित-नाल-भ्राष्ट्र n. sebum त्वकस्नेह) स्वस्नेह-स्राव m. sealer मुद्रांकयिता (-त) m. 
sebum Anat. त्वक्स्नेह m. sealing wax (contains no wax) sec. (secondary) द्वित. ___ संमुद्रण-लाक्षा 
sec. (secant) Trig. व्युत्कोज्या, व्युको sealing with a seal मुद्रा-संमुद्रण 1. Secale cornutum = ergot Pharm. seam I (a stratum, layer or bed of रुक्कण m. 
a mineral or ore) स्तर m. 
secant I Geom. (a. line that cuts 2 (a line of junctions, etc.) सीवन another; esp. a straight line cut n. 
ting a curve in one or more seamless स्तरहीन, असीवन mfn. 
points) छेदिका .. seatch ob. अन्वेषण 1. 
2 Trig. व्युत्क्रमकोटिज्या, व्युत्कोज्या . searched fracz mfn. 
second (1/6o of a minute) काष्ठिका f. searching fire Mil. अन्वेषि गोलन 1. second (in order) द्वितीय mfn. search-light अन्वेषि-प्रकाश m.. second vb. समर्थन 1. search-light control radar set secondarily गौणरूपेण 
(SLC) = Elsie (popular name) secondary I Bot. (developed sub 
अन्वेषि-प्रकाश-वश-तेजोन्वेष m. (अ.प्र. व.) sequently) उत्तरजात, उत्तर search pin Phys. अन्वेषण-सूची . 
2 गौण, द्वितीयक, द्वित, द्वितीय mfn. Searle's apparatus Phys. (for measu s. axis Optics गौण अक्ष m. 
ring Young's modulus) SEATPTNT s. branches Bot. उत्तरज-शाखा f. मापित्र, तति-प्रत्यास्थ-साधित्र n. 
s. data Statistics द्वितीयक-सामग्री seasonal Statistics आर्तव mfn. 
s. foci समायाम-नाभि . s. fluctuations आर्तव उच्चावचन । s. glomeruli Zool. द्वितीयक-गोलिका s. trend आर्तव-प्रवृत्ति f. (उपनति) 
s. variations आर्तव विचरण 1. ___s. growth Bat. द्वितीय-वृद्धि, उत्तर-वृद्धि sea swallow Zool. समुद्र-भांडीक m. seat स्थान, आसन, अधिष्ठान n. 
s. host intermediate host facite seat bone-=ischium Zool. आसनास्थि. पोषिता (-तृ) m. seating=seat n. आसन 1. 
s. infection गौण संसर्ग m. . seat of Federal Court संघानीय s. nucleus द्वितीय-न्यष्टि f. 
न्यायालय-अधिष्ठान . 
___s. oocyte Zool. द्वितीय-अण्डकोशा f. 15.. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
s. root Bot. द्वितीय मूल, उत्तरज मूल .. S. writing गूढ लेख m. s. sex character Biol. गौण लैंगिक secretarial staff सचिवादि कर्मचारी (-इन) . लक्षण . 
m. s. spermatocyte Zool. द्वितीय-पूर्वशुक्र- secretariat I सचिवालय M. 
कोशा. 
2 सचिववर्ग m. s. thickening Bot. द्वितीय स्थौल्य n. secretary I सचिव ' S. tissue Bot. द्वितीय-ऊति . 
___2 मन्त्री (-इन्) m. second call Com. द्वितीय-प्रभागयाचना . Secretary of State राज्य-सचिव m. second class द्वितीय वर्ग m. 
Secretary of State tor India भारतार्थ second filial generation (F2) Zool. राज्य-सचिव, भारत-सचिव m. 
द्वितीय-संतति /. (स.) 
Secretary of State for War युद्धार्थ second gear Automobile द्वितीय दन्ती राज्य-सचिव M. 
(-इन्) m. 
Secretary of State in council परि second hand (in a watch) काष्ठिका-सूची पत्स्थित राज्य-सचिव, परिषदि राज्य-सचिव 
m. second lieutenant (of Army) उप- Secretary of War युद्ध-सचिव M. 
बलपति m. 
secrete vb. Bot. उदासर्जन 1. second maxilla Zool. द्वितीय-उत्तरहनु . secretin Biochem. उदासर्गि f. second meiotic division द्वितीय अर्ध- secretion उदासर्ग m. 
सूत्रणा, पुनरर्धसूत्रणा . 
secretory उदासर्ग-, उदासर्जक Mfn. second moment of dispersion secretory granules Zool. उदासर्ग-कणिका 
Statistics द्वितीय अपकिरण-घात m. second mortgage fata sfer m. -sect -छेदन second next to the last term अन्ताद् sect Bot. (incision) निदर m. 
द्वितीय (Hindi अन्तसे दसरा) 
section 1 Math.. Bial. वेद. काण्ड m second of exchange Com. विपत्र-द्वितीयक 2 Lan धारा. 
. 3 (division of a department) उप second pilot द्वितीय कर्णधार m. 
विभाग, अनुविभाग m. second polar body Zool. द्वितीय-लोपिका 4 (a division) प्रभाग m. 
5 (department) विभाग M. second power Math. वर्ग, द्विघात m. 6 Mil. (the smallest division of second security Com. द्वितीय-प्रतिभूति f. an army) पत्ति . second's pendulum Phys. काष्टिका- section छेदन . " निदोल. m. 
_sectional I Com. अनुविभागीय mfn. second via Com. द्वितीय-प्रतिलिपि . .. s. balancing अनुविभागीय संतोलन secret गूढ, गुह्य mfn. 
n. s. caucus गूढ सम्मिलन .. 
s. ledger अनुविभाग-प्रपंजी .. . SReserves गृह्य-संचिति . 
2 छेदीय nfm. 
n. 
776 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
Vel 
s. elevation Engin. छेदीय उद्विक्षेप m. Sedentaria Zool. I (an order of s. paper (specially ruled for accu- Polychaeta) निलग्न-गण m. ___ rate work)=graph paper 2 (a group of spiders those which s. plan Engin. छेदीय अनुविक्षेप m. spin a web and lie in wait for their s. view Engin. छेदीय-दृशा f. 
prey to become entangled) निषादिनः section figure छेद-चित्र . 
m.pl section plane Engin. छेद-तल .. sedentary Zool. निषादी (-इन्) afn. sector Math., Mil. शकल N. (abbr. fr. 2 (permanently attached) निलग्न 
त्रिज्योद्भत शकल) 
mfn. secular r लौकिक mfn. 
sedentary soil Bot. (formed from Statistics (extending over a long underlying strata) तत्रत्य-उन्मृदा . period) सुदीर्घकालीन mfn. 
sediment अवसाद . s. changes सुदीर्घकालीन परिवर्तन 1. glasss. काच-अवसाद m. S. trend सुदीर्घकालीन-प्रवृत्ति . (उपनति) ___s. tester अवसाद-परीक्षित्र . 
s. variation सुदीर्घकालीन विचरण . sedimentation अवसादन । secured Com. प्रतिभूत nfn. 
sedition राजद्रोह M. s. creditors प्रतिभूत उत्तमर्ण m. seed बीज". s. debtors प्रतिभूत अधमर्ण m. 
s. blower बीज-मात्र security 1 Mil. (as against attack and s. coat-testa Bot. बीजचोल m. 
surprise) निश्शंकता f. 
s. germination Bot. बीजोद्धेदन . 2 क्षेम m. 
s. heads बीज-मुंडn. 3 Com. प्रतिभूति. 
s. leaf Bot. बीज-पत्र 1. bearer s. वाहक-प्रतिभूति f. 
s. plant Bot. बीजी पादप, बीज-पादप collateral s. समपाश्विक प्रतिभूति . 
m.. first class s. प्रथमवर्ग-प्रतिभूति . s. storehouse बीज-संग्रहागार m. 
gilt-edged s. परम-प्रतिभूति f. seeding बीजन 1. government s. 1784-9faufa f. seedling i Hort. (a plant grown inscribed s. अन्तलिखित-प्रतिभूति f. from seed) बीजजात m. 
marketable s. विपण्य-प्रतिभूति . 2 Forestry (any young tree) नवजात personal s. वैयक्तिक-प्रतिभूति f. .. पादप m. registered s. पंजीयित-प्रतिभूति . 3 (small seed) क्षुद्रबीज-2. . second s. द्वितीय-प्रतिभूति /. 
4 Bot. बीजांकुर m. third s. तृतीय-प्रतिभूति 
seeker = bristle Zool. (a blunt sedative Pharm. शमक mfn. ____needle) कुंठसूची . 
s. solution of opium=liquor seeming=apparent आभासी (-इन्), 
opii sedativus (liq. opii sed.) आभासमान mfn. शमक अहिफेन-विलयन . 
seemingly arbitrary constants sedativus=sedative शमक mfn. 
Math. स्वेच्छाभासी अचल m. 777 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
see-saw नीचोपरिग, आन्दोलक m. (ancient seismographer भूकम्पलेखक m. 
word) 
seismographic, seismographical Seger cone (used in determining भूकम्पलिखीय mfn. 
high temperatures) उच्चताप-शंकु m. seismography I (description of segment i Biol., Math. aus m. 
earthquakes) भूकम्प-वर्णना. 2 Phys. (of a vibrating string or 2 (art of registering earthquakes) 
of the string of a pulley) खण्ड m. भूकम्प-लिखा f. segmental arrangement खण्डयुत 3=seismology 
विन्यास, खण्डशो-विन्यास m. 
seismologic, seismological भौकम्पि segmental cap Math. खण्डीय-टोपी. कीय mfn. segmental in arrangement Zool. seismologist भूकम्पज्ञ m. 
खण्डशो विन्यस्त mfn. 
seismology भौकम्पिकी f., भूकम्प-विज्ञान 1. segmentation खण्डविन्यास m. 
seismometer भूकम्पमान M. segmentation cavity Embryol. fant- seismometric, seismometrical 
जन-गुहा . 
भूकम्पमानीय, भूकम्पमितीय nfn. segmentation nucleus fauftufce f. seismometry ufafar f. segmented खण्डयुत, विभाजित mfa. seismomicrophone भूकम्पाणुस्वन m. segmented blastula Zool. विभाजित- Seismoscope भूकम्पेक्ष m. 
एकभित्तिका f. 
seismotic=seismic segment of a line Math. रेखा-खण्ड m. Seistan Geog. शकस्थान . segment of a sphere Math. गोलीय seizer Zool. (feet of eagle) ग्राहक (पद) 
खण्ड m. 
Selaginella Bot. (has four rows of segregation=separation पृथक्करणn. leaves on the stem) चतुःपर्णपालिति f. segregation of characters गुण (-ति for प्रजाति genus) . 
पृथक्करण . 
seldom farest mfn. seigniorage Econ. टंकण-प्रलाभ m. select committee प्रवर-समिति/. 
(प्रलाभ प्रभार+लाभ) . 
selection (discriminating choice) seism=earthquake भूकम्प m. 
प्रवरण . seismal भूकम्पीय mfn. 
selective प्रवृत्य mfn. seismatical भौकम्पिक mfn. . 
selective absorption Phys. प्रवृत्य प्रचूषण seismetic=seismal 
.. seismic=seismal 
selective excretion Zool. प्रवृत्य उत्सर्जन seismicity भूकम्पीयता . seismism भूकम्पता . 
selen-, seleni-, seleno- (selenium) seismogram Phys. भूकम्पलेख m. (the . Chem. मेच- (मेचाग्नि) .. .... 
record of an earth tremour) selenate Chen. मेचीय . .. Seismograph. Phys. भूकम्पलिख m. (the seleni- (selenium) Chem. मेच- (मचाग्नि) 
apparatus) . . 
seleniate=selenate 
77& 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
selenic Chem. मेचिक mfn. 
self- आत्म-, स्वयं-, स्व ___s. acid मेचिक अम्ल . 
self-adjusting स्वयं-व्यवस्थापी (-इन्) fn. selenide Chem. मेचेय. 
self-adjusting force Math. स्वयं-व्यव-- seleni-ferous Chem. मेच-भर afn. 
स्थापि बल . selenin Chem. मेचि f. 
self-balancing ledger Com. स्वयं s. acid मेचि अम्ल n. 
___ संतोलि-प्रपंजी/ selenio- (selenious) Chem. मेच्य self-conjugate Geom. स्वानुबद्ध mfn. selenion=selenium 
self-conjugate point Phys. स्वानुबद्ध selenious Chem. मेच्य mfn. 
बिन्दु m. s. acid मेच्य अम्ल . 
self-filling burette आत्म-पूरक द्रवमि m. selenite Mineral. (a variety of gypsum self-interest Farei m. 
आचूर्ण, occurring in transparent self-lubricating pedestal Engin. स्वय crystals or crystalline masses) स्फटा- मुपस्नेहक पादपीठ 1. चूर्णn. 
self-luminous स्वयं-चकासी (-इन्) mfn. selenite Chem. Afaa n. (a salt or. self-pollination Bot. स्वयं-परागण . 
ester of selenious acid) 
: self-propelled Mil. आत्म-नोद्य mfn. selenium Chem. मेचाग्नि m. 
self-sterility Bot. स्वयं-वन्ध्यता. s. alum मेचाग्नि-स्फटिका 
sell vb. विक्रयण n. s. cell Elec. मेचाग्नि-कोशा f. sellar Anat. (of or pertaining to the s. dioxide मेचाग्नि द्विजारेय. 
. . sella turkica) पल्याणीय mfn. s. mono-bromide मेचाग्नि एक-दुरेय . sella turcica Anat. पल्याण १. . s. mono-chloride मेचाग्नि एक नीरेय seller=dealer विक्रेता (-त) m. 
. 
Sellers' screw thread section Engin, s. oxy-chloride मेचाग्नि जार-नीरेय . , समान ६०° भ्रमिसूत्र-छेद M. (the thread s. powder मेचाग्नि-क्षोद m. 
. crest is equal to thread trough) s. precipitated मेचाग्नि निस्सादित mfn. selling विक्रयण "., विक्रय m. 
s. tetrachloride मेचाग्नि चतुर्नीरेय 1. s. agent विक्रय-अभिकर्ता (-) m. seleniuret=selenide #e9 n. 
s. cost विक्रयण-परिव्यय m. seleno-, selen- (selenious, selenium) , s. expenses विक्रयण-व्यय m. 
मेच्य-, मेच 
s. on-cost विक्रयण-अधिव्यय m.. . selenobismuthite= guanajuatite= ..s. price विक्रयण-मूल्य, विक्रय-मूल्य.. 
frenzelite (bismuth selenide) Semaeostomae = Semaeostomata 
Mineral. भिदमेचिज m. (-इज for खनिज Semaeostomata Zool. (having a large mineral) 
mouth with four long grooved seleno-cyanate Chem. मेच्य-श्यामीय 1. and often tuberculated free lips) selen-silver (German Selensilber) मेच- . “चतुरोष्ठमुखाः m.pl. 
रजत n. 
___semaphore (Gk. sema sign) संज्ञापित्र selen-sulphur Mineral. मेच-शुल्बारि m. . 
779﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
semaphore signal Rly. संज्ञापित्र-संज्ञप्ति semi-micro- अर्धाणु 
semiminor axis Math. सामि गौण अक्ष Semecarpus Bot. भल्लातकति f. (-ति for m. 
प्रजाति genus) 
seminal fluid Zool. रेतस्त्राव m. S. anacardium सामान्य भल्लातक m. seminal funnel Zool. alfany m. semen रेतस् १. 
seminal vesicle Zool. रेतोधान n., शुक्रा semi- I (half) अर्ध 
शयक m. 2 (imperfect, incomplete) सामि-, seminiferous tubule Zool. रेतो-नालिका 
अपूर्ण semi-amplexicaul Bot. अर्ध-परिस्तम्भ semi-normal Chem. अर्ध-ऋजु mfn. 
mfn. 
semi-permeable सामि-अतिवेध्य, अर्धा semi averages Statistics अर्ध-माध्यn. तिवेध्य mfn. semi-axis Math. अर्धाक्ष m. 
semi-permeable membrane अर्धाति semi-circle Math. अर्ध-वृत्त. 
वेध्य-कला f. semi-circular अर्ध-वर्तुल fn. 
semi-rigid अर्धानास्य mfn. semi-circular canal Zool. अर्धवर्तुल-- semi-tendinosus अर्ध-स्नायुपेशी. 
कुल्या . 
semi-transparent अर्ध-पारदर्श mfn. semi-conjugate axis Math. सामि- semi-transverse axis सामि-अनुप्रस्थ अक्ष 
अनुबद्ध अक्ष m. semi-continuous Math. सामि-संतानी semi-vertical अर्धोदन, साम्युदन mfn. 
(सामि incompletely), अर्ध-संतानी (-इन्) semi-vertical angle Math. साम्युदन 
कोण m. semi cylinder Zool. अर्ध रम्भ m. semi-weekly=biweekly अर्धसाप्ताहिक semi cylindrical hole अर्धरम्भीय छिद्र . mfn. semi-definite Math. सामि-निश्चित mfn. senary Math. षण्मय mfn. 
(सामि incompletely) . 
senate=senat (Fr.) =senato (It.) = semi-diameter Math. अर्ध-व्यास m. . Senatul (Rumania) = senatus semi-fluid अर्ध-द्रव m. . 
(Brit. Univ.) अधिसभा, वृद्धसभा f. semi interquartile range Statistics Senate house अधिसभा-भवन . 
चतुर्थकान्तर अर्धविस्तार m. 
senato (It.)=senate semilatus rectum Math. सामि-उत्थान n. senator अधिसभ्य m. semi-logatithmic charts Math. अर्ध- senatorial-senatorian = senatori 
छेदा-चित्र n. 
____cal प्राधिसभ्य mfm. semilunar ganglion Anat. अर्धचन्द्र senatorship अधिसभ्यत्व n. 
प्रगण्ड M. 
senatress अधिसभ्याf.(a female senator) semilunar valve Anat. अर्धचन्द्र कपाट n. senatrix अधिसभ्या f. (a female senator) sent major axis Math.' सामि प्रधान अक्ष: Senatul (Rumania)=senate । 
m. 
senatus (Brit. Univ.)-senates ... 
mfn. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
mfn. 
senega Pharm. (the root of Poly- sensitive receiver Radar हृष-प्रादाता 
gala senega; used mainly in later (-a) m. stages of pneumonia, asthma, etc.) sensitive to touch Bot. स्पर्श-हर्षी (-इन्) (seneg.)=senega radix-senega root क्लोम्यमूल 1. 
sensitivity=irritability Zool. हृषता . senegin Chem. क्लोम्यमूलि . 
sensitize vb. हृष-करण . senile gangrene वार्धक्य कोथ m. sensitol green-ethyl red (in Webs senility जरा. 
ter sensitol green = pinnaverdol) senior उच्च, ज्यायस्, उपरि- (Hindi बड़ा) sensitol red=pinacyanol 
s. basic school उपरि आधार-पाठशाला sensitometer Optics हृषतामान m. 
sensitometric हृषतामितीय mfn. s. laboratory उच्च (ज्यायस) प्रयोगशाला sensitometry हृषतामिति 
sensorium Physiol. संवेदित्र .. junior laboratory अवर (कनीयस्) I (any sensory nerve centre) संवेदना 
प्रयोगशाला. 
केन्द्र n. s. school उपरि-पाठशाला 
2 (the whole sensory apparatus s. technical school उपरि औद्योगिक of the body) संवेदना-संहृति . 
पाठशाला f.. 
sensory I (conveying nerve impul senna रंगलताई. 
ses) संवेदक mr. sennae folium=senna leaf 
2 (pertaining to sensations) संवेदना senna leaf = sennae folium (senn. 3 (pertaining to the senses) ऐन्द्रिय 
fol.) Pharm. रंगलता-पत्र 7. 
mfn. sensation संवेदना. 
4 संवेदी (-इन्) mfn. sense I Math. अभिदिशा . 
s. apparatus.Zool. संवेदि साधित्र . 2 Physiol. संवेद, बोध m. (as in muscle s. cell Anat. संवेदक-कोशा. _sense पेशी-गति -बोध) 
s. hair Zool. संवेदि रोम .. . 3 अनुभूति f., अभिप्राय M. 
s. nerve Zool. संवेदि-चेता. . sense cell Zool. संवेद-कोशा.. 
s. papillae Zool. संवेदी अंकुर m. sense of balance Zool. संतुलन-संवेद s. tract संवेदना-पथ m. 
m. 
sentence दंड m.. sense of the Assembly सभा-अभिप्राय sentry (a soldier placed on guard) 
m. 
. रक्षिभट m. (from कंसवहो) sense organ Physiol. संवेदांग . sepal Bot. निदल १. senses इन्द्रिय n. 
separable वियोज्य, पृथक्कार्य mfn. sensibility संवेद्यता, इन्द्रियग्राह्यता . , _separate vb. वियोजन, पृथक्करण n. sensible संवेद्य, इन्द्रियग्राह्य mfn. separate पृथक् sensitive.हृष mfn. 
s. account पृथग्-लेखा . sensitiveness हृषता f., हृषत्व n. .': s.. effects Com. पृथक्-सम्पत्ति f. 
787 
THE GREAT. ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
.. s. strain Bot. पृथग् अंशु m. septo-intestinal vessel Zool. पटयन्त्र 
s. sum पृथग-राशि m. . 
वाहिनी . separating funnel Chem. पृथक्कारी निवाप septum Anat. पटी f. 
m. 
s. transversum अनुप्रस्थ-पटी f. separation I=segregation पृथक्करण १. sequence अनुक्रम m. 
___ 2 Math. अपगमन n. (from causative ser-=sero- लसी 
अपगमयति) . 
seri-=serici- (silk) ter separator पृथक्कारक m. 
__serial homology Biol. मालाबद्ध रचना SepiaZool, मसीमीनाति f.(-आति for प्रजाति सादृश्य N. 
genus) 
serial repetition Zool. मालाबद्ध-आवृत्ति . sepia I (inky secretion of the cuttle- serichrome blue Col. Ind. कौशवर्ण नील 
fish) मीनमसी / 
m. 2 (a. cuttlefish, caught for its black s . green कौशवर्ण हरि m. pigment) मसीमीन m. 
serici-=seri-(silk) कौश 3 (a pigment of rich brown colour sericin=silk gelatin = silk glue prepared from the ink of cuttle Biochem. कौश-श्लेष m. fishes) मीनबभ्रु m. 
series I Math. soit f. 4 न्यवरक्तातिपीत m. 
2 Chem. माला. sepsis I पूया . (fr..पूय putrefaction) 3 (of rocks) Geol. माला f. . 2 (bacterial infection) रोगाणुता f. series of changes Math. परिवर्तन-माला septal nephridia Zool. पंटी-उत्सर्गनालिका . 
series of steps पद-माला f. septate Bot. पटीमत् mfn. . . 
serine (Lat. sericus silken) Chem.atest September नवममास m. septenary Math. सप्तमय mfn. 
serious error Math. गंभीर विभ्रम m. septic पूयिक mfn. (putrefactive; pro- sero-, ser- लसी 
duced by putrefaction or morbid serolin (serum +-01 +-in) Biochem. germs) . 
लसीवि . septicaemia (a morbid condition of • serologist लसीविद् m. 
blood, characterised by the pre- serology लसी-विद्या f. sence . of pathogenic bacteria) serositis Med. लसीकला-कोप m. रोगाणुरक्तता... . :: serosity TRIAT F. cf. pyaemia पूयरक्ता f.. 
serotherapeutics लसी-चिकित्सा /. septic gangrene पूयिक कोथ m. serous Physiol. I (like serum) लसीवत्: septicidal dehiscence Bot. पटी-स्फोटना 2 (of or pertaining to serum) 
लस्य mfn. . septifragal dehiscence Bot.. (the s. cell Zool. लस्य-कोशा f. 
Seistar ibeakपटी-भंग स्फोटना-f... 
s. coat Zool. लस्य चोल me 
782 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
s. fluid लस्य तरल m.' 
serum albumin Biochem. Art-feafer f. s. gland लसी-ग्रन्थि m. 
serum bottle pet- f. s. layer Tat-fac m. 
serum globulin Biochem. weit-praefar s. membrane t-ot f. Serpeck's process Chem. (alumini- service Civil Aviation auf f. 
um nitride process) Fary fast f. service pipe Hygiene (pipes which serpentaria=serpentary 
run from the mains to houses) serpentariae rhizoma=serpentary TTCT-75 n. serpentary = serpentaria (serpent.) services=number of trips out=474 
=serpentariae rhizoma = ser PET f. pentary rhizome = Red River services of the Crown 5TG-TETT snakeroot = Texan snakeroot 90-anim. Pharm. A n. 
services per week sfatate eraf f. serpentine Mineral. (magnesium sili- sesamin faret f. 
cate) HAST, YET m. (-55 for sesamoid bone Zool. (bone deve खनिज mineral) 
· loped in a tendon) FIT4EITT AFFT n. serrate=serrated 
sesamol ferata m. serrated Bot, *, Paar 
Sesamum Bot, farafa f. (-fa for sifa serrated crucible lid 7997 797 genus) . 
fert n. 
i S. indicum Thru fram. serrate leaf कच-पत्र n. (ancient Sesbania Bot. जयन्तीति /. (-ति for प्रजाति 
word) 
genus) Serratia (S.) (a genus of the Bacteria- S. aegyptica #rhiret styrett f. 
ceae, producing a red or pink S. grandiflora Erroq turit f. pigment) septFT (5.) 
sesqui- Chem. HS S. marcescens=Erythrobacillus sesqui-oxide TT&FITA n. 
prodigiosus (produces a bright sessile Bot. (“seated, not raised __red pigment) भासुर इष्टकारक्त m.. . upon a stalk) अवृन्त, निषण्ण mfn. 
scatora (forms abscesses con- session 7 n. (ancient word; from taining red pus in workers in the to sit) sardine factories) धीवर इष्टकारक्त sessional committee सात्रिक-समिति f. 
m. (धीवर a fisherman) 
sessions of the legislature विधानमंडल serrato-dentate Bot. **-ra mfn. 
n. . . serratus Bot. 52 m. . .. set (a number of things of the same. Sertoli's cells=sustentacular cells kind) 9 n. 
=nurse cells = footcells = tre- seta Bot. aust m.. phocytes Zool. पोषिकोशा . 
foot rem.. serum f. 
capsule प्रावर m. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
seta=chaeta Zool. दृढरोम . 
sex ratio Statistics स्त्री-पुरुष-अनुपात .m. setal sac Zool. दृढ़रोम-स्यून m. 
sex reversal Zool. लिंग-विपर्यय m. setigerous . sac=chaeta - sac दृढरोम- sex-stimulating Zool. कामोद्दीपक mfm. 
स्यून m. 
sex-stimulating hormone Zool. set of anchors लाङ्गल-कुलक . 
कामोद्दीपक न्यासर्गm. set of circles वृत्त-कुलक.. 
sextant षष्ठक n. set off vb. Com. प्रतिसादन (set against), sexton beetle=burying beetle (it 
प्रति-अध्यर्थन 2. (counterclaim) 
buries the carcass of animals on set of values अर्हा-कुलक.. 
. which it feeds) Zool. निखन-भङ्ग m. set of weights वट्टक-कुलक n.. 
sexual I (having sex) लिंगी (-इन्), setoglaucine=new fast green 3 B लिंगवान् mfn. setscrew Engin. स्थाप-भ्रमि m.. . 
2 (pertaining to sex) लैंगिक mfn. sets of readings वाचन-कुलक .. 
3 (pertaining to sexual inter setsquare Math. रामास्त्र . (राम three course) मैथुन 
+अस्त्र corner) 
s. generation Biol. मैथुन-जनन . setter (of examination papers) प्राश्निक s. individual जनिष्णु व्यक्ति, लिंगी 
m. 
व्यक्ति m. (Cf. प्रजनिष्णु in शतपथ settle down vb. संनिवेशन . 
ब्राह्मण) settling day परिशोधन-दिवस M. 
s. instinct नैसर्गिक कामप्रवृत्ति . settling.of accounts लेखा-परिशोधन . s. literature काम साहित्य.. seven day fever सप्ताह-ज्वर m. 
s. method Bot. मैथुन-रीति f. severally equal पृथक् पृथक् सम 
s. reproduction मैथुन-प्रजनन . sewage Hygiene मलप्रवाह m., मल n. 
s. spore मैथुन-बीजाणु m. sewage bacteria मलप्रवाह-शाकाणु m. s. tonic वाजीकरण 2. (ancient word) sever I मलप्रणाल m.. , 
s. union मैथुन n. 2 महाप्रणाल m. 
sexuality लिगिता sex I स्त्री-पुरुष-भेद m. 
sexually neutral काम-क्लीब mfn.' 2 लिंग... (गुणिषु न च लिंगं न च वयः) shade छाया f. 3 काम m. 
tint आराग m. sexagesimal system Math. 'षाष्टिक colour रंग m. 
. क्रम m. 
shadow छाया , छायारूप . . sex..call Zool. काम-आह्वान .. 
shadow nucleus Biol. (an sex character Zool. लक्षण 1. 
mented unstainable nucleus) अरंज्य . sex chromosome=allosome · Zool. Fufc f. 
लिंग-सूत्र. ... ... ... .. 
shaft x ईषा. sex function Zool, लिंग-कार्य . . 2- (of a bone) Zool. अस्थिदंड:m. sex instinct नैसर्गिक-काम-प्रवृत्ति 
3 (of a mine) कूपक m. (a well-like sex linkage Biol::लिंगप्रथन । 
passage) 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
shaft couplings Engin. ईषा-मिथुनक n. s. register अंश-पंजी. shafting Mach. I (material for shafts) s. transfer अंश संक्रमण . 
ईषा-धातु m. (धातु metal) 
s. warrant अंश-अधिपत्र n. 2 (a system of shafts) ईषा-संहति . shark ग्राहm. shaft of bone अस्थि-दंड m. 
sharp I तीव्र, उग्र mfn. shake vb. धूनन . . 
2 (as an image). fafaat mfn. shaker .धवित्र N. (trom धूनन shaking), sharp chisel point तीक्ष्ण टंकाय ?. 
कम्पक m. 
sharpend points तीव्र अन्तिम बिन्दु m. shaking धूनन ॥.. 
sharpener उत्तिज m. s. apparatus धूनन-साधित्र n. 
sharpener for cork-borer त्वक्षा-छिद्रक s. bottle धूनन-कूपी . 
उत्तिज m. shale (a rock formed by the con- sharpening उत्तेजन 1. 
solidation of mud or silt; जम्ब s. stone उत्तेजन-प्रस्तर m. 
mud) जम्बशिला, मृच्छिलिका f. (मृत् sharp line विविक्त-रेखा . clay-+-शिलिका slate) 
sharply defined विविक्त परिभाषित mfn. shale white=French chalk 
sharp melting point विविक्त द्रावांक m. shall be void (Hindi) प्रवृत्तिहीन (void), sharp-shooter Mil. (skilled, long 
लागू न होंगे 
_ranged marksman) तीव्रलक्ष्य, दूरलक्ष्य shall have effect (Hindi) लागू होंगे m.. , . . shallow te mfn. 
shave vb. क्षुरण n. shama (bird) श्यामा . . 
shaving blade क्षौर फल n.. shank जंघा . 
shaving soap श्मश्रु-फेन, क्षौर-फेन m. shank of pin Mach. आणि-जङ्का. shear vb. Mach. Prynt na shape आकार m. 
shear force, shearing force Mech. -shaped - TAT 
कल्पन-बल . . share vb. Com. भाजन 2. 
sheats कल्पनी share n. I Com. अंशm. 
shear strain=angular strain Mech. 2 भागm. 
कोण-विकार m. cumulative s. संचयी अंश m. sheatfish (a large catfish) महाविडाल deferred s. आस्थगित अंश m. 
मत्स्य m. ordinary s. साधारण अंश m. 
sheath आवरण, कंचुक... , preference s. पूर्वाधिकार-अंश m. ,sheathe vb. आवरण 1. . promotor's s. प्रवर्तक-अंश m. sheathing आवरक m. 
s. capital अंश-पुंजी f. 
sheath-winged (Coleoptera) Zool. s, certificate अंश-प्रमाणपत्र n. . कञ्चुक-पक्ष m. S.-holder अंश-धारी (इन्) m. sheave Mach., . Phys., (a wheel or s. ledger अंश-प्रपंजी. . . . ____pulley having grooves) प्रसीती (-इन्) s. market. अंश-विपणि m. 
__m. 785 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
sheaved प्रसीतिक, प्रसीतिमत 
shift lock Typewriters (it locks the double-sheaved fakulteta mfn. typebars in the raised position) sheaveman प्रसीतिपुरुष m. 
उद्धृत-ताल . shed छादक m. 
Shigella (S.) (a non-motile genus shed ova Zool, fafiria n.. 
containing dysentery bacilli) sheep dog Zool. अवि-कुक्कुर 1. 
अचलान्त्राणु m. (अ.प्रा.) sheep's fescue = Festuca ovina S. alkalescens क्षारकजन अ. प्रा. 
. सामान्य अवितृण . 
S. ambigua संदिग्ध अ. पा. sheep suet or tallow अवि-वपा. 
S. dispar (lactose-fermenting sheet स्तारm. 
___ organism) दुग्धम अ. आ. sheeting FATCUT n. (act or process of S. dysenteriae = Shiga's 
forming into, disposing in or bacillus = Bacillus dysen covering with sheets) 
teriae, Bacterium dysenteriae sheet iron स्तारायस .. 
प्रामातिसार अ. आ. sheet of iron यस स्तार m. 
S. gallinarum पक्षिघ्न अ. भा. sheet of paper पत्र-स्तार . 
S. minutissima क्षुद्र अ. भा. Sheet platinum स्तार-महातु. 
S. paradysenteriae (cause epi shelf निधाय m. 
demics of dysentery and of shelf clamp निधाय-संघर m. 
summer diarrhea) अप्यतिसार अ.आ. shell Zool. कपर (ancient word), S. pfaffi (causes diarrhea in 
प्रकवच m. . 
birds) पक्ष्यतिसार अ. आ. c(esp.in thin layers)शल्क-लाक्षा. S. retteeri (causes fowl typhoid shelled animals Zool. (having a and diarrhea in birds) कुक्कुट ____shell) कर्पर-प्राणी (-इन्) m. 
- अ. पा. shell-fish (any aquatic invertebrate S. shigae = S. dysenteriae , 
animal having a shell, esp 
S. viscosa (causes joint-ill in mollusk शंख) शंख-जीव m. 
___ horses) अश्वसंधि अ. भा. shepherd spider = daddy long- shining surface काशमान तल n. 
legs=harvestman Zoal. उरुजंघ- ship नौ f., प्रवहण, जलयान N., पोत m. लूता. 
ship-borne radar नौ-तेजोन्वेष m. sheriff strefatarek m. (ancient word) ship captain=ship master Tapeze sherry (not effervescent) अबुद्-द्राक्षिरा f. m. 
(short for अप्रबुबुद्-द्राक्षिरा) 
shipment 1 (goods sent and received shield वर्मn. 
___by the ship) नौ-भाण्ड ?. shift In. (turn) पर्याय m. 
2 (loading a ship) नौ-भरण ... .: 20b. विवर्तन, पर्ययण, स्थानान्तरण 1. 3 (consignment through a ship) 
shift key Typewriters (causes the नावा-पारेषण . . 
typebars to rise) उद्धर-कुञ्ची . shipowner. पोत-स्वामी (-इन्) m. 
Chaक्षा 
( 
ush Cी 
786 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
shipper Com. पौतिक m. 
shorthand आशुलिपि f. I (one who sends goods by short hand (of a clock) ह्रस्व-सूची f. ships) पोतवणिक् m. 
short period अल्पावधि, अल्प काल m. 2 (one who loads on a ship) short period trend Statistics अल्प नौभारिक m. 
कालीन प्रवृत्ति . (उपनति) shipper's ton नाविक-प्रवर्त m. 
short price Com. अल्पकालीन मूल्य n. shipping Con, नौ-परिवहण (transpor- short pulses Radar ह्रस्व स्पन्द m. 
tation by a ship), नौ-भरण-रेचन . short range navigation Radar अदूर (loading and unloading a ship) तेजोन्वेषण n. s. bill नौ-विपत्र . 
short-tailed crab हस्व-पुच्छ कर्कट m. s. freight नौ-भाटक n. 
short-term fluctuations Statistics shipwreck प्रवहण-भंग, नौ-भंग M. 
अल्पकालीन उच्चावचन n. shock action Mil. (sudden action) short-term oscillations Statistics 
सहसाक्रमण . 
अल्पकालीन प्रदोल m. shoot = sprout Bot. प्ररोह-अंकुर m. short-time अल्प-काल shop Com. आपण m., विक्रयशाला f., विक्रय- short-time changes अल्पकालीन परिवर्तन 
गृह १. 
m. s.-keeper आपणिक m. 
short-time fluctuations Statistics shoran Radar(short range navigation अल्पकालीन उच्चावचन 1. 
अदूर-तेजोन्वेषण) अदूरान्वेष m. 
short-time variations Statistics अल्प Shorea Bot. शालति f. (-ति for प्रजाति कालीन विचरण .. 
genus) 
short title संक्षिप्त नाम 2. S. robusta सामान्य शाल m. 
short ton (ton) प्रवर्त, लघु प्रवर्त m. shore crab Zool. तट-कर्कट m. 
short wave length ह्रस्व तरंगायाम m. short I ह्रस्व mfn. (long दीर्घ) 
short workings Com. न्यून खननराशि M. 2 लघु, क्षुद्र, अल्प mr. 
shot Tift f. (Hindi Trent) short bill Com. अल्पकाल विपत्र n. 
lead shot सीस-गोलिका . short-celled क्षुद्र-कोशावान् mfn. 
shoulder Anat. अंस m. short ciliary nerve Ophthalmol. ह्रस्व s. blade अंस-फलक .. 
वलिकाय-चेता. 
s. girdle=pectoral arch अंस-चक्र short cut method Statistics लघु-रीति /. short dash लघु प्रास m. 
shovel (used to lift and throw short distance अल्पान्तर. 
___earth, coal, etc.) परावप M., कठिन 7. short division Math. ह्रस्व भाजन n. (ancient word) shorter ह्रस्वतर mfn. 
show (that) vb. Math. $507977 n. shortest हसिष्ठ, अल्पतम nfn. 
shower वर्षा-पात m. shortest distance अल्पतम अन्तर n. shrew Zool. छुछुन्दर m. short exchange अल्पकालीन विनिमय m. shrike लटूषक m. (Hindi लटोरा, किरौला) 
. 
. 
787 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
shrill उत्तीब mfn.. 
side reaction गौण-प्रतिक्रिया . shrimp चिंगट M. (a general word) siderin yellow (sider from Gk. side shrinkage आसंकोचन n. 
. ros iron; consists of a basic iron shrivel Bot. वलिकुञ्चन (wrinkled and chromate) प्रायस पीत M. ____shrunk), परिम्लान n. 
___siderite Mineral. I (Fe CO) अप्रजारिज shrub क्षुप m. 
m. (-इज for खनिज mineral) shrubby क्षुपीय, क्षुपवत्, क्षुपमय, क्षुपाकीर्ण 2= sapphire-quartz (of indigo 
__mfn. 
or Berlin-blue colour) नीलस्फट M. shunting Rly. पाश्र्वायन n. 
side rod Mach. पाव-दण्ड m. s. engine पाश्र्वायन-गन्त्र n. 
side-shelf पार्श्व-निधाय m. s. locomotive पायिन-चलित्र 2. side-to-side पाश्वत्पिार्श्व mfn. shunt wire Phys. पाश्र्वायन-तंतु m. ___s. movement पात्पिाव-गति /. shut संवत mfm. 
side-track (siding) Ry. पार्श्व-पथ m. shutter संवारक m. . 
side-tube पाव-नाल M. Si (silicon) Chem. सै (सैकता) 
side valves Automobile पार्श्व-कपाटn. Sialidae Zool. प्रजालपक्षवंशा . 
side view Automobile पाव-दर्शन . Sialis Zool. प्रजालपक्षाति f. (आति for siding Rly. पार्श्वक 1. 
प्रजाति genus) 
Siemen's ozonizer Chem. (coated sialogogue Pharm. लालोत्सारी (-इन्) mfn. with tin foil) त्रपुपर्ण-प्रजारकजनित्र . Sicilian 'brown raw umber sienna=Roman earth sickle-shaped claws Zool. दात्र-नखर sieve तितउ m. (ancient word), (30,60 
....mesh) चालनी /. (३०,६० . . . .अक्षि) Sida Bot. बलाति. f. (-ति for प्रजाति sieve tube Bot. चालनी-नाल m. 
genus) 
sight Com. दर्शन n. S. acuta सामान्य ब 
after s. दर्शनान्तर side I (of an equation, of a ques- s. bill दर्शने-विपत्र . 
tion) पक्ष m. 
s. draft दर्शन-विकर्ष m. 2 (of a triangle) भुजाf.(from आर्यभट) s. entry=bill of sight दर्शन-प्रविष्टि 3Com. पावं .. 
पत्र । side-by-side पाश्र्वानपाव min. 
sighted दृष्ट mfn. side chain Chem. पाव-श्रृंखला/. sight-testing types दृष्टि-परीक्षण मुद्रm. side edge Math. पार्श्व-धारा. 
Z (sigma) Statistics य (read as योग) side elevation Engin. पार्श्व उद्विक्षेप m. sigmoid अवग्रहाभ m. (curved in two side face Math. Trafita m. 
___directions like the sigma, resem side lamp Automobile पार्श्व-दीप m. bling our अवग्रह ) . side light पार्श्व-प्रकाश m... . 
sigmoid colon sigmoid flexure side.observation गौण विचार m., गौण - Anat. अवग्रहाभ मलाशय M. 
sign In. चिह्न , संकेत m. 
m. 
788 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
Super 
2 vb. हस्ताक्षरण 1. 
s. figure Math. सार्थक अंक m. s. of addition (+) योग-चिह्न n. signification सार्थकता . s. of difference (-) अन्तर-चिह्न 1. signing हस्ताक्षरण. s. of division (:) भाग-चिह्न n. silane Chem. सैकीन्य n. s. of equality (-) समता-चिह्न 1. silencer Antomobile मुककारी (-इन ) m. s. of greater than' (>)ज्यायश्चिह्न 1. silent मूक mfn. s. of less than' (<) कनीयश्चिह्न 1. silent electric discharge मूक वैद्युत मोच s. of multiplication (x) गुणन-चिह्न M. 
silent partner Com. मूक भागी (-इन्) m. s. of since.or because (:::) यतश्चिह्न silex Chem. सैजा . 
. 
___I (silica) सैकजा. s. of subtraction (-)वियोजन-चिह्न 1. 2 (quattz) स्फटिक m. s.of summation (E) योग-चिह्न 1. silic- (silicon) सैकत 
silica Chem. (silicon dioxide) सैकजा. s. of therefore (.:.) अतश्चिह्न . __s. gel सैकजा-श्लिषक m. signal Rly. संज्ञप्ति . 
s. rod सैकजा-शलाका s. box संज्ञपन-पल्ली. 
s. tubing सैकजा-नाल m. s.-man संज्ञापक m. 
s. vessels सैकजा-पात्र. s. wires संज्ञपन-तन्तु m. 
silicam (German, shortened from signalled संज्ञप्त mfn. 
___ silicium-stickastoff-imid; the ending signalling FTTT 11. 
-am is due to its analogy with signal red i Col. Ind. = monolite phospham) = silicon nitrimide 
red R 
Chem. (a. compound of silicon सै, 2=colour vermilion 
nitrogen भू and hydrogen उ ) संभू signatory हस्ताक्षरी (-इन्) m. 
m. s. to the memorandum स्मारक- silicane सैकतीन्य 1. . हस्ताक्षरीm. 
silicate (mono, ortho, meta, poly) signature ERITTT m. 
Chem. सैकतीय 1. (एक, ऊर्ध्व, सम, पुरु) autograph स्वाक्षर m. 
silicate vb. Chem. सैकतीयन n. initials प्रथमाक्षर m. 
I (to combine with silica or sili signature blotting book हस्ताक्षर cates) सैकजा-योजन, सैकतीय-योजन , ... . मसीचूष-पुस्तिका f. 
2 (to coat or impregnate with signed हस्ताक्षरित nfm. 
silica or silicates) सैकजा-रोपण, सैकजा signet ring मुद्रिका [. 
व्यापन, सैकतीय-रोपण, सैकतीय-व्यापन । . . finger-ring अंगुलीयक n. 
silicate-cotton-mineral woo1 सैक signet ring stage (of malarial para- तीय तूल N. खनिज ऊर्णा f. 
___site) मुद्रिकावस्था . 
silicated soap सैकत-स्वफेन m. (contains significant सार्थक mfn. 
sodium silicate) 
789﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
silicate of soda = sodium silicate silicious=siliceous 
क्षारातु सैकतीय . 
Silicispongiae Zool. #sttFEST: m.pl. silication Chem. सैकतीयन 1. 
silicium=silicon silicatization=silicification 
silicium bronze=silicon bronze siliceo- (siliceous) Chem. सैकत्य 
siliciuretted Chem, सैकतित min., (com s.-calcareous सैकत्य-चूर्णिय Mfn. 
bined or impregnated with sili s.-fluoric सैकत्य-तरस्विक mfn. 
con) सैकता-युक्त,योजित, व्यापित mfn. siliceous=silicious सैकत्य mfn. siliciuretted hydrogen सैकतित उदजन silici-Chem. I (combining form for m. 
siler or silica) सैजा 
silicize vb. Chem. सैकायन 1. silici-ferous सैजा-भर Mfn. 
(to treat with silicon or silica) __2 (used for siliceous and).सैकत्य सैकता-साधन, सैकजा-साधन . silicic Chem. सैकतिक mfn. 
silico-, silic- (silicon) Chem. सैकत s. acid (mono,di, tri, ortho, meta, silico adj. Chem. सैकत, सैकतक mfn. 
poly)सैकतिक अम्ल 7. (एक, द्वि, त्रि, ऊर्व, silico-acetic acid Chem. सैकत-शुक्तिक सम, पुरु) 
* अम्ल s. anhydride सैकतिक अजलेय n. silico-alkaline Chem. सैकत-क्षारिय mfn. silici-calcareous Chem. सैकत्य-चूर्णिय silico-arsenide Chem. सैकत-नेपाल्येय. 
mfn. 
silico-calcareous = silici-calcare silicide Chem. सैकतेय 1. 
ous silicidize vb. Chem. सैकतेयन . silico-chloroform Chem. सैकत-नीर 
(to convert into a silicide) सकतेय- वनल 1. करण 1. 
silico-ethane Chem. सैकत-दक्षीण्य n. silici-ferous Chem. सैजा-भर mfn. silico-ferruginous Cbem. सैकत-अयसिय silicification Chem. (act or process of mfn. . 
silicifying, state of being silici- silico-fiuoride सैकत-तरस्वेय. fied) सैकजायन .., सैकजायना f., सैक- silico-hydrocarbon Chem. सैकत-उदांगार 
जायितत्व . silicified सैकजायित nfm. .. 
silicol Chem. (a compound) सैकव m. s. wood सैकजायित काष्ठ n. 
silicol process Chem. (ferro-silicon silici-fluoric Chem. सैकत्य-तरस्विक mfn. ___process) अयस्सैकता विधा. silicify vb. Chem. सैकजायन . 
silico-magnesian Chem. सैकत-भ्राजिय I (to convert into silica) सैकजा-करण mfn. ... 
silico-manganese Chem. सैकत-लोहक 1. . 2 (to impregnate with silica) सैकजा- silico-manganese steel सैकत-लोहक 
व्यापन 1. 
वज्रायस ". sign(to become silicified) सैकजायित- silicon Chem. सैकता f. 
भवन ".. 
____s. bronze सैकता कांस्य .. 790 
m. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
__s. acetate रजत शुक्तीय 1. . 
s. arsenate रजत नेपालीय n. s. arsenite रजत नेपालित n. s. benzoate रजत धूपीय . s. bromide रजत दुरेय . s. bromide gelatin रजत दरेय शिलषि 
s. carbide सैकता प्रांगेय 1. s. copper Metal. सैकता ताम्र .. s. dioxide Chem. सैकता द्विजारेय. s. fluoride सैकता तरस्वेय. s. hydride सैकता उदेय 1. s. nitr-irmide (silicam) सैकता भय- 
वितिक्तेय n. s. spiegel सैकता दपणायस .. s. steel सैकता वज्रायस n. s. tetrachloride (technical) सैकता ___ चतुर्नीरेय 1. (परिभाषित) 
s. tetraethyl सैकता चतुर्दक्षुल 1. siliconize vb. Chem.(to cause to com 
bine with silicon) सैकतायन M. silico-propane Chem. सैकत-प्रमेदीन्या . silico-talcose Chem. सैकत-खटिकिय mfn. silico-titanate Chem. सैकत-रंजीय 7. silico-tungstate Chen. सैकत-चंडीय 1. silico-tungstic Chen. सैकत-चण्डिक mfn. 
_s. acid सैकत-चण्डिक अम्ल 1. silicula Bot. (a short siliqua) कूटपटीका 
silicyl Chem. सैकतल .. siliqua Bot. (having a false septum 
=replum कूटपटी) कूटपटीक m. silk कौशेय. silk black Col. Ind. कौशेय काल m. 
s. blue कौशेय नील m. s. green कौशेय हरि m. s. grey कौशेय धूसर m. s. ponceau कौशेय अधिरक्तापीत m. s. red कौशेय रक्त m. s, scarlet कौशेय शोण m. 
s. wool black कौशेय ऊर्णा काल m. -siloxane -सैजिन्य . Silurian period Geol. (coral-reef ___ building began) प्रवालादि-युग . silver Chem, रजत ॥ 
791 
s. carbonate रजत प्रांगारीयn. s. chloride रजत नीरेय . s. chromate रजत वर्णीय n. s. citrate रजत निम्बवीय ॥. s. cyanide रजत श्यामेय . s. di-chromate रजत द्वि-वर्णीय.. s. foil रजत पर्ण s. gray रजत धूसर m. s. green रजत हरि, अवपीताहरि ॥. s. halide रजत नीकुल्येय ॥. s. iodate रजत जम्बीय n. s. iodide रजत जम्बेय. s. lactate Pharm. रजत दुग्धीय 1. s.-lead रजत-सीसिय mfn. s. leaf रजत पत्र . s. litharge रजत चन्द्रफेन M. s. mercuric iodide रजत पारदिक 
जम्बेय. s. mirror रजत दर्पण . s. nitrate रजत भूयीय n. s. nitrite रजत भूयित ।. s. oxide रजत जारेय. s. phosphate रजत भास्वीय 1. s. potassium cyanide रजत · दहातु 
श्यामेया. s. powder रजत क्षोद m. S. protein (strong, mild) रजत प्रो 
भूजिन M. (तीद्र, मृदु) s. salt Com. रजत लवण . s. sulphate रजत शुल्बीय ?. s. sulphide रजत शुल्बेय , 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
s. thiocyanate रजत गन्ध-श्यामीय . 
s. wool रजत ऊर्णा . silver-copper glance==stromeyerite 
Mineral. रजत-ताम्र रुचा. silver fir तालीशपत्र m. silverfish=fish moth रजत-मीन-मीन 
शलभ m. silver gauze toller रजत-जाली-वेल्लन 2. silver glance = argentite Mineral. 
रजत-रुचा. silver graphite Col. Ind. रजत-लिखिज m. ___s. grey रजत-धूसर m. 
s. white रजत-श्वेत m. silvering Photog. रजतन 1. silverize vb. Chem. रजतन 1. 
I (to cover or treat with silver) रजतावरण, रजत-साधन ।।. 
2 (to make silvery) राजत-करण 1. silverizer रजतक m. silver-plating रजत-रोपण 1. silver standard रजत-प्रमाप m. silver-ware रजत-भाण्ड .. silvery राजत nfn. 
s. iron Metal. राजत अयस् n. Simaroubaceae Bot. महानिम्ब-कुल 1. similar सदृश, समरूप, समान mfr. similarity=likeness समरूपता f., सादृश्य 
2 Bot. एकी (-इन्) Mfm. 3 असंयुक्त, साधारण, सरल, शुद्ध, केवल mfn. 's. arbitrage Econ. एकान्तर पणन . S. arithmetic average Statistics 
सरल समान्तर माध्य M. s. bar Statistics एकी दण्ड M. s. bar diagram Statistics सरल दण्ड 
चित्र . s. calculation सरल गणन ॥. s. cellulose शुद्ध (or केवल) कोशाधु ॥ s. chart Statistics सरल चित्र ?. s. classification Statistics सरल ___ वर्गीकरण 1. 
s. compound Zool. सरल संयोग m. s. debenture (naked debenture) 
अनावृत ऋणपत्र, (without security) 
अप्रतिभूत ऋणपत्र n. s. derivatives Statistics सरल व्युत्पन्न 
___ 
n. 
. 
similarly तथैव similarly described as a circle) 
__Math. समरूपतः उल्लेखित mfr. similarly situated समरूपतः स्थित mfn. similar surd Math. समरूप-करणी . similar treatment सदृश व्यवहार M. 
reciprocal treatment मिथो व्यवहार 
s. details Engin. सरल भागक m. s. equation Alg. सरल समीकार M. s. equivalent pendulum Math. ___ सरल समान निदोल m. 
s. formula सरल सूत्र n. s. fruit Bot. एकि फल ?. s. gland extract Pharm. असंयुत 
ग्रन्थि-निस्सार m. s.goitre Zool. साधारण गलगंड m. s. inflorescence Bot. एकि-पुष्पता/. s. interest Math. सरल-वृद्धि s. joint Anat. (a joint between ___ two bones) द्वयस्थि-सन्धि m. 
s. leaf Bot. (here simple means 
'having only one') एकि पत्र n. 
(एकिन् 'consisting of one' is ___ from लाटयायन-श्रौतसूत्र) . 
S.. lens Ophthalmol. असंयुक्त वीक्षm. s. machine Macb. सरल यन्त्र . .. 
similitude समरूपता, अनुरूपता f. simple 1. Pharm. niye mfn. 
. 
792 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
m. 
s. numerical relation सरल गुणन- Simuliidae Zool. (a. family) अपिमक्षीवंश 
सम्बन्ध m. s. ointment = unguentum Simulium Zool. अपिमक्ष्याति f. (आति 
simplex (ung. simp.) Pharm. for प्रजाति genus) असंयुत स्नेहलेप m. 
S. reptans सर्पि अपिमक्षी /. s. partnership Math. समकाल-भागिता simultaneous equations Ailg. युगपत् 
समीकार m. s. pits Bot. अप्रान्ती गर्त m. 
simultaneously युगपद् s. practice Math. सरल व्यवहारगणित simultaneous reaction Chem. युगपत् 
प्रतिक्रिया. s. proportion Math. सरल अनुपात m. sin. (sine) Math. ज्या s. quantity Math. अमित्र राशि, सरल sinix (sine inverse x) Math. ज्या-' य 
राशि m. 
(ज्या प्रतीप य) s. scale Statistics सरल-मापश्रेणी / sin-albin (Lat. sinapis mustard + s. solid सरल सान्द्र n. 
alba white) Chem. सित-सर्षपि . s. substitution सरल आदेश m. sin-amine Chem. सर्ष-तिक्ती। s. surd Math. सरल-करणी f. 
sinapate (sinapic + -ate) सर्षपीय n. s. tabulation Statistics सरल सारणी- sinapic सर्षपिक min. 
यन. 
sinapin Chem. सर्षपिf. s. tincture of valerian = tinc sinapine Chem. सर्षपी . 
tura valerianae simplex sinapinic diffu mfn. (tinct. valerian. simp.)=tinc- Sinapis Bot. सर्षपति f. (-ति for प्रजाति tura valerianae Pharm. असंयुत genus) जटिला-निष्कर्ष m. . 
S. alba = white mustard श्वेत s. umbel Bot. एकि उच्छत्र n. 
सर्षप M. . s. unit Statistics सरल एकक 1. 
S. juncea राजिका सर्षप m. simplest सरलतम mfn. 
S. nigra = black mustard कृष्ण __s. form सरलतम रूप.. 
सर्षपm. simplification सरलन n. 
sinapoline (sinapis + oleum) Chem. simplification of a fraction Math. सर्षतैली. 
भिन्न-सरलन . 
sincaline = choline Chem. fotit f. simplified सरलितmfn. 
since यतः simplify vb. सरलन, सरली-करण, सरली-भवन sincerely yours = yours sincerely 
___ भवदीय सद्भावी (-इन्) m. simply . pinnate = once pinnate Sindh Geog. सिन्धुदेश m. . ____ Bot. सकृत्पक्षवत् mfn. 
sine Math. Fur f. Simson line = pedal line Geom. sine condition Math. ज्या-दशा f. 
पदिक-रेखा . 
sinew स्नायु... 
:793 
. 
+ THRIRAL LIVE 
REAT ENGLISH INDIAN DI 
· THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
TOL 
RY 
IIX 
singing bird = song bird Zool. single dose (given only once) 
सुस्वर पक्षी (-इन्) m. 
सकृन्मात्रा . singing flame Acoustics गुंजत्-ज्वाला f. single driver locomotive Rly. single सकृत् (once), एक, एकल, एकी (-इन्) Eng. (driver = driving wheels) 
mfn. 
द्विमिथुनित चलित्र १. (two driving single account Com. एकि-लेखा f. 
wheels coupled) single account system एकि-लेखा-पद्धति single endowment एक प्राभूत n. 
single entry एक-प्रविष्टि f. single arm Mach. (crank) एकबाहु m. single entry system एक-प्रविष्टि-पद्धति single bath black Col. Ind. सकृत् स्नान single file Drill एकैकशो राज्या (राज्या by 
काल m. 
line) s. bath chrome black सकृत् स्नान ____single lens एकल वीक्ष m. 
वर्णक काल m. 
single option एकल विकल्प m. s. bath chrome blue सकृत् स्नान single pan एक भाजन 1. __ वर्णक नील m. 
single polished brass weights एकैक s. bath chrome bordeaux सकृत् 
प्रमृष्ट पित्तल वट्टक m. स्नान वर्णक कपिशक m. 
single pulley Math. एकल-धर्धरी . s. bath chrome brown ST FITR single-riveted (having a single row 
वर्णक बभ्रु m. . 
of rivets) एकपंक्ति -लवंगित mfn. s. bath chrome green सकृत् स्नान single row एकल-पंक्ति f. 
वर्णक हरि m. . 
single shear Mach. एक कल्पनी . s. bath chrome. grey सकृत् स्नान single strap Macb. एक पट्टक m. ___ वर्णक धूसर m. 
single tabulation Statistics एकगुण s. bath chrome orange सकृत् स्नान सारणीयन 1. 
वर्णक नारंग m. 
single-threaded Engin. एक-सूत्रित mfn. s. bath chrome red सकृत् स्नान single transfer सकृत-संक्रामण . 
वर्णक रक्त m. 
single-valued Math. एकाह mfn. s. bath chrome scarlet सकृत् स्नान singly एकशः, एकल-, एक 
वर्णक शोण m. 
singly ionized एकायनित Mfn. s. bath chrome yellow. सकृत् स्नान sink vb. बोडन, निमज्जन . 
वर्णक पीत m. 
sink I (a cesspool, a basin, a dep single bond एक बंध m. 
ression, etc.) कुण्ड 1. single-celled एकल-कोशावान् mfn. 
2 निमज्ज m. single cost एकविध परिव्यय m. . . sinker Phys. (in measurement of single cost accounts, एकि-परिव्यय-लेखा ' specific gravity) बोडक M. 
sinker method Phys. (in measure single cuspid tooth = eyetooth ment of specific gravity) बोडक 
Anat. एककूट दन्त=अक्षिदन्तः m. 
रीति. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
sinking fund Com. I (for payment sinus venosus sceleri = canal of 
of liabilities) शोधन-प्रणीवि 
Schlemn Ophthalmol. परिकुल्या . 2 (for replacement of assets) प्रति- siphon == syphon निनाल M. स्थापन-प्रणीविj. (when==replacement Siphonaptera Zool. (an order con fund) 
sisting of the fleas) अपक्षशुण्डि-गण । s. fund insurance policy शोधन- m. 
प्रणीवि गोपलेख m. 
siphon barometer निनाल-वापीडमान m. s. fund investment account siphonoglyph Zool. (a special 
शोधन-प्रणीवि-विनियोग-लेखा 
groove from a corner of the s. fund tables शोधन-प्रणीवि-सारणी mouth) मुखसीता. 
Siphonophora Zool. निनालघर-गण M. s. fund to repay liability देय- Siphonopoda Zool. निनालपादाः m.pl. 
शोधन-प्रणीवि . 
siphonostele Bot. सुषिरमध्यरम्भ m. s. fund to replace assets सम्पत्ति- siphon trap Hygiene निनाल-रुध m. 
प्रतिस्थापन-प्रणीवि . 
siphon-wick-lubricator sinter n. I Geol. (a deposit formed by निनाल-वर्ति-उपस्नेहक m. . 
evaporation of .spring or lake siphuncle Zool. निनालिका f. water) साद m. 
siphuncled = siphunculate = 2 (product of sintering) संपुंजित n. siphunculated Zool. निनालिकावान् sinter vb. I (to become or cause to mfn. . 
become a coherent solid mass siphuncular Zool. fataa mfn. said of powdered or earthly Siphunculata=Sipunculata Zool. substances) संपुंजन n. 
निनालीमन्तः m.pl. 2 (to vitrify by heating, as in siphunculate, siphunculated Zool. sintering) ताप-काचरण 1. 
निनालिकावान mfn. sintering संपुंजन 1. 
Sipunculata=Siphunculata sinuate = sinuated Bot. तरंगी (-इन्) Sipunculoidea Zool. निनालिनः m.pl. 
mf. (wavy) 
Sipunculus Zool. निनाल्याति f. (आति sinuate-dentate Bot. तरंगि-दन्तुर mfn. . for प्रजाति genus) .. sinu-auricular aperture Zool. sir Correspondence श्रीमन्, आर्य 
कोटरालिन्द मुख n. 
Sir-Daraya=-Jaxartes (river) citat f. sinu-auricular valves Zool, कोटरा- siren Acoustics प्रशृंगा।. . 
लिन्द कपाट . 
Sirenia Zool. (aquatic herbivorous sinus I Anat. कोटर . 
mammals, including steller's • sea 2 Ophthalmol. HTETETUT m. (not cow) समुद्रगो-गण m. नाडीव्रण) 
Sirius=Dog Star लुब्धक m. (ancient sinus venosus Zool. सिरा-कोटर n. (in word) 
lower vertebrates) 
_Sirius yellow. Col. Ind. लुब्धक पीत m. 795 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
siserskite Mineral. (iridium and osmi ___2 विषम-तली (-इन्), विषमतलस्थ, विषम 
um) धनगुर्विज m. (-इज for खनिज mfn. mineral) 
skew=gauche Math. वितलैय mfn. (वि sitara fast red RL=pigment fast ____not, तल plane, एय passable) 
red HL 
skewed distribution Statistics वैषम्य sitara red R = fast lake rèd R वंटन 7. situated स्थित mfn. 
s. series वैषम्य-माला f. situated in space वरिम-स्थित nfn. skewness Statistics (non-symmetry) situation स्थिति, वस्तुस्थिति f. 
विषमता f., वैषम्य 12. six-coupled locomotive Rly. Eng. skew quadrilateral=gauche quad 
षण्मिथुनित चलित्र । 
rilateral Math. विषमतली चतुर्भुज m. six-pounder (gun) Mil. षट्-प्रांजलि f. skew-symmetrical determinant 
(शतघ्नी) 
Math. (skew here means that the six-rayed Zool. षड्रश्मि mfn. 
conjugate elements are equal in sixth cerebral (abducent nerve) magnitude but opposite in sign) 
Anat. षष्ठी मास्तिष्की f. (अपचालक ऋण-संमितीय निश्चायक 2. चेता) 
ski In. धाव-फलक । sixty-pounder (heavy gun) Mil. 2vb. फलकधावन 1. 
. षष्टि-प्रांजलि f. (गुरु शतघ्नी) 
skill दक्षता size (as a general word) F ATT n. skilled labour दक्ष श्रम M. . sizing (the dressing and preparation skilled worker दक्ष कर्मी (-इन्) M. 
of textiles for printing) सज्जन, skin चर्म . सज्जीकरण 1. (ancient word) skink Zool. मरुगोधिका . s. material सज्जक द्रव्य ". 
skin marking pencil चौकनी skate rn. धावुका /. (cf. पादुका) 
skins and hides चर्म तथा खल्ल M. 2 vb. (to glide along on skates) skirmish Mil. खण्डयुद्ध 1. धावुका-सर्पण, धावुकन ॥. 
skirmisher Mil. ausulat m. skeletal adj. कंकाल 
skull Anat. करोटि f.. s. element कंकाल-अंग 1. 
sky-blue नभो नील, आकाश-नील nfn, s. muscles Anat. कंकाल-पेशी f. 
skylark Zool. भारद्वाज M. skeletogenous कंकालजन nfn. 
skylight काशायन n. (काश light; cf. skeleton कंकाल M.. 
वातायन) sketch In. आरूप ॥. 
. slacken=loosen vb. श्लथन n. .. 2vb. प्रारूपण .. 
slacks = pyjama == neglige (Fr.) sketching board आरूपण-फलक.. ' श्लथक n. (Hindi पाजामा) skew r विषमतलय mfn. (1 वि not + सम- slack season शिथिल काल M. . . . 
तलैय passable by a plane; 2 विषमतल slag धातुमल .. Curyed.surface + एय passable) slaked lime शान्त चूर्णक m. 
796 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
slander अपमान-वचन . 
_____s. weight balance सृप भारतुला . slant Math. प्रवण m. 
slightly soluble ईषद्-विलेय mfn. s. height Geom. प्रवण-उच्चत्व M. slightly soluble in water ईषद् जल s. surface प्रवण-तल n. 
विलेय mfr. slate शिलिका [., शिलापट्ट m. 
slime I (mud) पंक M. slate black Col. Ind. शिलापट्ट काल m. 2 (mucous or mucus-like secre 
s. grey शिलापट्ट धूसर m. 
tion) आश्लेष्म n. s. white शिलापट्ट श्वेत m. 
3 (oremud) अयस्क-पंक m. (which SLC (search-light control radar set) may be shortened to पंक)। 
=Elsie (popular name) अ. प्र. व. slime eel=hagfish मीनवेधी (-इन्) m. (अन्वेषि-प्रकाश-वश तेजोन्वेष) 
slimy PRETOHET mfn. sledge हिमगा f., हिम-शकट, विचक्र-शकट n. slip I खण्ड m. sleep सुप्ति . 
2 Mach. (of a belt) सर्पण n. sleeper Rly. शायी (-इन्), धरण m. slip Com. पर्णी f. sleepiness प्रमीलिका . 
___s. system पर्णी-पद्धति f. sleeping car Rly. स्वाप-यान 1. 
slipper animalcule (Paramecium sleeping partner Com. निष्क्रिय भागी caudatum) Zool. सुप्र-अणुप्राणी (-इन्) 
(-इन्) m. sleeping rent Com. सुप्त भाटक m. slippers सुप्र m. sleeping sickness Med. सुषुप्ति-रोग m. slippery सुप्रmfn. sleep movement = nyctitropic slips of glass काच-खण्ड m. 
moverment Bot. स्वपन-गति f. slit दरी. sleeve or cuff protector बाहुप, मणिबन्धप s..lamp Ophthalmol. दरी-दीप m. 
m. . 
sloeline - nigrosine slice छिद्म . 
slope प्रवण m. slide Ivb. सर्पण n. 
sloping way = gradient = grade 2 n. (as of a microscope) 79 m. Ry. प्रवणक m. s. bar Mach. सृप शलाका f. 
slot (aperture) Phys. बिल n. . s. caliper सृप व्यासमि m. 
sloth Zool. (they habitually hang s. gauge सृप आमान m. 
from the branches back down s. valve Mach. सृप कपाट.. 
ward) शाखालम्बी (-इन् ) m. sliding 'सर्पण, सृप 
sloth bear Zool. (the common bear s. calipers सर्पण व्यासमि m. 
of India and Ceylon) TTT PEST m. s. friction = dynamic friction slot machine बिल-यन्त्र n. __सृप संघर्ष=प्रावैगिक संघर्ष M. 
slotted nut Mach. सीता-नह m. . s. key=feather key सृप-कुंची, सपि- slotted weights Phys. कृत्त वट्टक m. 
कीला . 
(कृत्त cut) s. scale Com. सी अनुमाप M. slough vb., n. निर्मोचन ॥., निर्मोक m. 
797 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
slow मन्थर mfn. 
smell गन्ध m. s. evaporation मन्थर उद्वाष्पन n. 
agreeable s. रुचिकर, अभिमत गन्ध m. s. motion screw Phys. मन्थर-गति burnt s. दग्ध गन्ध m. 
भ्रमि m. 
disagreeables. अरुचिकर, अनभिमत s. oxidization मन्थर जारण n. 
गन्ध m. slow march Drill मन्द-प्रयाणम् 
ether s. दक्षु-गन्ध m. sludge अवपंक m. 
faint s. मन्द गन्ध m. slug (an unshapely mass of metal) fruity s. फल-गन्ध m. 
लोष्टक m. 
intolerable s. असह्य गन्ध m. slug Zool. (shell-less snail) मृदु मन्थर m. mild s. मृदु गन्ध m. sluggish मन्द-ग, मन्द-गामी (-इन्), मन्दर nauseating s. वामी गन्ध m. . 
mfn. (ancient word) 
phenolics. दर्शविक गन्ध m. sluggishness Zool. मन्दरता f. 
pleasant s. प्रिय गन्ध m. sluice gate जल-द्वार . 
pungent s. तिक्त गन्ध m. slump Com. अवपात m. (cf. depression strong s. तीव्र गन्ध m. 
अवसाद), मन्दता f. 
unpleasant s. अप्रिय गन्ध m. Sm (samarium) Chenz. धू (धूसरला) smelt vb. प्रद्रावण १. (अयस्क-द्रावण, अयस्क small क्षुद्र, ह्रस्व, लघु, अल्प mfn. 
शोधन, धातु-पृथक्करण) (great महान्) 
smelter I प्रद्रावक m. small-celled हस्व-कोशावान् nfr. 
2 प्रद्रावणशाला . small circle Math. लघु वृत्त ।. smeltery प्रद्रावणी, प्रद्रावणशाला. small cog wheels Automobile लघु- smilax - China root Bot: चीन-मूल . 
दन्त-चक्र n. 
Smilax Bot. चीनमूलति . (-ति for प्रजाति smaller image Ophthalmol. prieiterent 
genus) मूर्ति . 
S. chinensis सामान्य चीनमूल m. smallest हसिष्ठ min. 
smithsonite I (native zinc carbo small intestine Anat. प्रान्त्रक, क्षुद्रान्त्र nate) कुप्यांगीयिज M. (-इज for खनिज 
mineral) small scale लघु-अनुमाप m. 
2 =='calamine = hemimorphite small scale industry लघु-अनुमाप उद्योग (hydrous zinc silicate) thgfast 
m. (-इज for खनिज mineral) smalt (prepared by fusing together smoke धूम, धूम्र m. .. silica सैकजा, potash सजि, and cobalt smokebox Rly. Eng. धूम्र-धान ". 
oxide केत्वातु जारेय) सैसकेजा. ____s. door धूम्रधान-द्वार n. smaltite Mineral. (a. cobalt di- smokeglasses Ophthalmol. धूमोपनेत्र n. ... arsenide) केतुनोषिज m. (-इज fot खनिज smoke grenade Mil. धूम-दाडिम. , 
mineral) 
smoke-stack (a chimney; esp. a pipe smega Physiol. शेफमल .. 
serving as a chimney) धूम्र-नाड . 
m. 
798 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
smoking car Rly. धूम्रपान-यान ?. so also एवं च smooth मसृण, चिक्कण mfn. 
so and so अमुक mfn. rough खर min. 
soap स्वफेन M. smooth vb. Statistics सरलन 1. 
s. bark=quillaia Pharm. स्वफेन smoothed Statistics सरलित mfn. 
वल्क m. s. curve सरलित वक्र n. 
s. case स्वफेन-धानी . s. histogram सरलित वारंवारताचित्र . s. lye स्वफेन-पल्पूलन n. smoothing Statistics सरलन ". 
soapstone Petrog. शैलखटी . (cf. s. of curves वक्र-सरलन . 
Hindi सेलखड़ी), स्वफेनाश्म m. smooth newt=spotted newt=Tri- social सामाजिक mfn. 
turus punctatus Zool. पृषत् s. economics सामाजिक अर्थशास्त्र n. 
सरटिका f. 
s. economy सामाजिक-अर्थव्यवस्था . smooth pulley Math. मसृण-धर्धरी 
s. insect Zool. संघचारी कीट M. smooth surface मसूण तल . . 
s. insurance Com. सामाजिक आगोप smother vb. वायुरोधन, वायुरोध-मारण . 
m. smothering fire वायुरोधाद् अग्निनिर्वापण n. socialism समाज-वाद m. smoulder vb. प्रधूमन n. (प्रधूमित-रघुवंशे) socialist समाज-वादी (-इन्) m. smuggling Com. I (importing society I समाज M., परिषत्, मण्डली f. 
foreign goods secretly) चौर्यानयन 1. 2. Ecology संघm. 2 (clandestine trade in prohibited socio- समाज goods) चौर्यपणन n. . 
sociology सामाजिकी f., समाजशास्त्र .. Sn (stannum=tin) Chem. T (TE) socket x कूप M. (eyesocket अक्षिकूप) snail मन्थर m. 
2 Macb. उलूखल . snap-shot Photog. I vb. क्षण-चित्रण. soda Chem. विक्षार m. 
21.. क्षण-चित्र n.. 
s. alum=sodium alum विक्षार snipe Zool. पंककीर m. (ancient word) स्फटिकाक्षारातु स्फटिका f. snooperscope (enables one to sees. ash विक्षार भस्म 2. , 
even in dark; a recent invention) s. crystals विक्षार स्फट m. तिमिरेक्षm.. 
s. feldspar Mineral. विक्षार स्फतीय 1. snout que n. 
s.-granite-natron-granite विक्षार snow शीन .., हिम m. (when distinc कणाश्म m. 
tion is needed between snow and s. lime विक्षार चूर्णक .m. ice then snow शीन, ice हिम) 
s. limeglass विक्षार चूर्ण काच m. snow-fall हिमपात, शीनपात m. 
s. mica-pragonite विक्षाराभ्रक . snow white Col. Ind. शीन श्वेत m. 
s. nitet (sodium. nitrate) Chem. snug Mach. (prevents rotation in . . उपक्षार, विक्षार पाक्य m. (क्षारातु भूयीय) 
___screwing up the nut) रोधा.... s.-potash feldspar विक्षार-सर्जि soak vb. पाचूषण .. 
स्फतीय... 
799﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
s. aluminate क्षारातु स्फटीय . s. amalgam क्षारातु संरस m. s. amide (sod-amide) क्षारातु तिक्तेय 
n. 
s. water विक्षार-जल n. sodaclase विक्षारदल M. sodaic विक्षारिक mfn. sodalite Mineral. क्षारिज m. (-इज for ___खनिज mineral) sodalite-syenite Petrog. क्षारिज-क्षाती 
याश्म m. sodalithite Petrog. (a rock composed 
almost exclusively of sodalite) 
क्षारिजाश्म m. soda mesolite = natrolite Mineral. विक्षारमध्यमिज M. (-इज for खनिज 
mineral) sodamide (sodium + amide) Chem. 
क्षार-तिक्तेय, sodic (sodium) Chem. क्षारिक mfn. sodii chloridum = sodium chlo 
ride s. morrhuas=sodium morrhu 
क्षारातु 
ate 
8. salicylas=sodium salicylate s. thiosulphas = sodium thio 
sulphate sodio adj. Chem. क्षार, क्षारिक mfn. sodio-Chem. (denotes sodic and, the 
whole compound being an adjec tive) क्षारि s. aluminicक्षारि-स्फाटिक mfn. s.-aurous क्षारि-स्वयं mfn. s.-citrate क्षारि-निम्बवीय n. s.-hydric क्षायुदिक mfn. s.-platinic क्षारि-महिक mfn. 
s.-tartrate क्षारि-न्यासवीय n. sodium. Chem. क्षारातु m. 
sr acetate क्षारातु शुक्तीय ". $. alizarin-sulphonate क्षारातु 
विमंजिष्ठि-शुल्बायीय 1. salum क्षारातु स्फटिका f. 
800 
s. ammonium phosphate क्षारातु 
तिक्तातु भास्वीय . s. ammonium sulphate ETSTEI 
तिक्तातु शुल्बीय. s. ammonium tartrate क्षारातु 
तिक्तातु न्यासवीय n. s. antimonite क्षारातु अंजनित .. s. antimony tartrate क्षारातु अंजन 
न्यासवीय n. s. arsenate क्षारातु नेपालीय. s. arsenite क्षारातु नेपालित . s. azide क्षारातु अजीवेय. s. benzene-sulphinate 
धूपेन्य-शोल्बीय ॥. s. benzene-sulphonate क्षारातु 
धूपेन्य-शुल्बायीय 1. s. benzoate क्षारातु धूपीय n. s. biborate क्षारातु विटांकीय n. s. bicarbonate क्षारातु द्वचंगारीय .. s. bichromate क्षारातु द्विवर्णीय n. s. bifluoride क्षारातु.द्वितरस्वेय.. s. biselenite क्षारातु द्विमेचित n. s. bismuthaté क्षारातु भिदीय . s. bisulphate क्षारातु द्विशुल्बीय 1. s. bisulphite क्षारातु द्विशुल्बित . s. borate क्षारातु टांकीय n. . s. boro-benzoate क्षारातु टांक-धूपीय ___n. 
s. boro-citrate क्षारातु टांक-निम्बवीय n. s. boro-fluoride क्षारातु टांक-तरस्वेय n. s. bromate क्षारातु दुरीय.n. s. bromide क्षारातु दुरेय ।. s. butyrate क्षारातु घृतीय n. . S.-iso-butyrate क्षारातु-स-घृतीय .. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
. 
s. cacodylate (dimethyl arso s. ethoxide क्षारातु दक्षुजारलेय ॥. 
nate) क्षारातु कुगन्धलीय . (द्विप्रोदल s. ethylate क्षारातु दक्षुलीय n. नेपायीय) 
s. ethyl oxal-acetate क्षारातु दक्षुल s. caprylate क्षारातु नारिकेरलीय ॥. 
तिग्म-शुक्तीय . s. carbonate क्षारातु प्रांगारीय .. s. ethyl sulphate क्षारातु दक्षुल शुल्बीय s. chaulmoograte क्षारातु पिमुद्गरीय 
. 
s. ferricoxalate क्षारातु प्रयसिक तिग्मीय s. chlorate क्षारातु नीरीय ". 
n. s. chloride = sodii chloridum s. ferro-cyanide क्षारातु अयस्य-श्यामेय 
(sod.chlorid.) Pharm. क्षारातु नीरेय . 
s. fiuoride क्षारातु तरस्य । s. chloro-acetate क्षारातु नीर-शुक्तीय s. form-aldehyde-sulphoxylate _ n. 
क्षारातु वन-सुव्युद-शुल्बजारलीय. s. p-chloro-benzoate क्षारातु प-नीर s. formate क्षारातु वम्रीय .. 
धूपीय 1. 
s. fumarate क्षारातु धूम्रीय 1. 5.-4-chloro-phenol-2-sulphonate s. glycero-phosphate Pharm. 
क्षारातु-४-नीर-दर्शव-२-शुल्बायीय 1. 
क्षारातु मधुर-भास्वीय ?. s. chromate क्षारातु वर्णीय . 
s. gynocardate क्षारातु प्रामुद्गरीय .. s. cinnamate क्षारातु दारुसितीय.. s. halide क्षारातु नीकुल्येय ". s. citrate क्षारातु निम्बवीय ?. 
s. hexa-meta-phosphate (tech s. cobalti-nitrite क्षारातु केत्वि-भूयित - nical) क्षारातु षट्-सम-भास्वीय .. 
(परिभाषित) s. cupri-tartrateक्षारातु ताम्रि-न्यासवीय s. hippurate क्षारातु अश्वमेहीय. 
s. hydrate क्षारातु जलीय . s. cyanide क्षारातु श्यामेय 2. 
s. hydrochloride क्षारातु उदनीरेय s. dicarbonate=s. bicarbonate s. dichromate क्षारातु द्वि-वर्णीय n. s. hydrogen carbonate क्षारातु s. dihydrogen citrate क्षारातु द्वयुद उदजन प्रांगारीय n. 
जन निम्बवीय n. 
s. hydrogen citrate क्षारातु उदजन s. dihydrogen phosphate क्षारातु निम्बवीय 1. 
द्वयुदजन भास्वीय . 
s. hydrogen malate क्षारातु उदजन s. dihydroxy-tattrate क्षारातु द्वयुद उत्कोलीय . 
जारल्यासवीयn. 
s. hydrogen oxalate क्षारातु उदजन S.-2:4-di-nitro-phenate क्षारातु-२ : तिग्मीयn. 
४-द्वि-भूय-दीय . 
s. hydrogen phthalate क्षारातु उदजन s. dioxide क्षारातु द्विजारेय. 
___ व्युत्तैलीय .. s. dithionate क्षारातु द्विगन्धीय .. s. hydrogen pyro-phosphate s. diuranate क्षारातु द्विकिरणीय . 
क्षारातु उदजन अग्नि-भास्वीय. 801 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
s. hydrogen sulphate क्षारातु उदजन ___ शुल्बीय. 
s. hydrogen tartrate क्षारातु उदजन ___ न्यासवीय 2. 
s. hydro-sulphide क्षारातु उद-शुल्बेय 
. s. hydro-sulphite क्षारातु उद-शुल्बित ___n. 
s. hydroxide क्षारातु उदजारेय n. s. hypo-bromite solution क्षारातु 
उप-दुरित विलयन .. s. hypo-chlorite solution क्षारातु 
उप-नीरित विलयन .. s. hypo-phosphite क्षारातु उप-भास्वित 
s. hypo-sulphate क्षारातु उप-शुल्बीय. s. hypo-sulphite क्षारातु उप-शुल्बित ॥. s. iodate क्षारातु जम्बीय ॥. s. iodide क्षारातु जम्बेय . s. lactate क्षारातु दुग्धीय n. s. laevulinate क्षारातु मिष्टियीय . s. lautate क्षारातु जयपत्रीय n. s. light Phys. क्षारातु प्रकाश m. s. malate acid क्षारातु उत्कोलीय अम्ल 
. s. malonate क्षारातु उत्कोलायीय. s. malo-urea क्षारातु उत्कोल-मिह m. s. mandelate क्षारातु वातामीय 1. s. meso-tartrate क्षारातु मध्य-न्यासवीय 
. s. meta-bi-sulphite क्षारातु सम-द्वि 
शुल्बित . s. meta-borate क्षारातु सम-टांकीय .. s. met-anilate क्षारातु सम-नीलीय n. .s. meta-phosphate क्षारातु सम 
भास्वीय. is meta-silicate क्षारातु सम-सैकतीय 
s. meth-oxide solution क्षारातु 
प्रोद-जारेय विलयन ॥. s. methyl-arsonate क्षारातु प्रोदल 
नेपायीय 1. s. methyl sulphate क्षारातु प्रोदल 
शुल्बीय . s. molybdate क्षारातु संवर्णीय. s. mono-borate क्षारातु एक-टांकीय n. 
s. monoxide क्षारातु एकजारेय. 
· S. morrhuate=sodii morrhuas 
(sod. morrh.) Pharm. क्षारातु स्नेह 
मीनीया. s. myristate क्षारातु जातीय ?. S. B-naphtho-quinone-sulphon 
ate क्षारातु पा-उत्तैल-विज्वरा-शुल्बायीय । s. nitrate क्षारातु भूयीय . s. nitrite क्षारातु भूयित १. s. m-nitro-benzene-sulphonate 
क्षारातु सम-भूय-धूपेन्य-शुल्बायीय n. S. -4-nitro-diphenyl-amine-2 ___ sulphonate क्षारातु-४-भूय-द्विदर्शल 
तिक्ती-२-शुल्बायीय . s. -0-nitro-phenate क्षारातु-ऊ-भूय 
दर्शीय n. s. nitroprusside क्षारातु भूयोदश्यामेय 
2. s. -1-nitroso-2-naphtholate क्षारातु 
१-भूय्य-२-उत्तैलवीय .. s.p-nitro-toluene sulphonate 
क्षारातु प-भूय-विरालेन्य शुल्बायीय 1. s. nucleinate क्षारातु न्यष्टियीय .. s. oleate क्षारातु नक्षीय n. s, oxalate क्षारातु तिग्मीयn. s. oxide क्षारातु जारेय n. s. palmitate क्षारातु तालीय .. s. per-borate क्षारातु अति-टांकीय 7. s. per-chlorate क्षारातु अति-नीरीय .. s. per-iodate क्षारातु अति-जम्बीय.. 
802 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
___n. 
s. per-oxide क्षारातु अति-जारेयn. ___s. pyro-sulphate क्षारातु अग्नि-शुल्बीय s. per-sulphate क्षारातु अति-शुल्बीय ॥. s. phenate क्षारातु दर्शीय . 
s. racemate क्षारातु गुच्छीयn. s. phenol-sulphonate sterg caia s. ricin-aleate क्षारातु एरण्ड-म्रक्षीय 1. ___ शुल्बायीय n. 
s. salicylate क्षारातु नम्रलीय. S. phenyl-acetate क्षारातु दर्शल-शुक्तीय । s. selenate क्षारातु मेचीय ॥ ____n. 
s. selenite क्षारातु मेचित 7. s. phenyl-hydrazine-p-sulpho s. silicate क्षारातु सैकतीय n. __nate क्षारातु दर्शल-उदाजीवी-प-शुल्बायीय s . silico-fiuoride क्षारातु सैकत-तरस्वेय 
n. s. o-phenyl-phenate क्षारातु ऊ-दर्शल s. silico-tungstate क्षारातु सैकत __दर्शीय . 
चण्डीय. s. phenyl phosphate क्षारातु दर्शल s. spoon क्षारातु खुव m. 
भास्वीय n. 
s. stannate क्षारात अप्वीय 2. s. phosphate क्षारातु भास्वीय 1. s. stanni-chloride क्षारातु त्रप्वि-नीरेय 
(pea crystals, feathery crystals कलाय स्फट, लघुक स्फट)। 
s. stearate क्षारातु वसीय M. s. phosphate acid (meta, pyro) s. succinate क्षारातु तृणीय .. 
क्षारातु भास्वीय अम्ल N. (सम, अग्नि) s. sulph-anilate क्षारातु शुल्ब-नीलीय .. s. phosphite क्षारातु भास्वित n. 
s. sulph-anilyl-sulph-anilate s. phospho-molybdate क्षारातु क्षारातु शुल्ब-नीलल-शुल्ब-नीलीय 1. __ भास्व-संवर्गीय 1. 
s. sulphate (pea' crystals, fea s. phospho-tungstate TCTET T69 _thery' crystals, hydrated, an 
चंडीय 1. 
hydrous) क्षारातु शुल्बीय 1. ('कलाय' s. phthalate क्षारातु व्युत्तैलीय 1. 
स्फट, ‘लघुक' स्फट, जलीयित, अजल) s. picr-amate क्षारातु कटु-तिक्तीय .. s. sulphide क्षारातु शुल्बेय ?. s. potassium tartrate (Rochelle s. sulphite क्षारातु शुल्बित . 
salt) क्षारातु दहातु न्यासवीय 2. (अपि 8. sulphocarbolate क्षारातु शुल्बांग क्षाद लवण) 
वीय. s. propionate रातु प्रमेदीय n. 
s.,sulpho-cyanide क्षारातु शुल्ब s. pyro-antimonate क्षारातु अग्न्यं __ श्यामेय. 
जनीयn. 
s. sulpho-ricin-oleate क्षारातु शुल्बै s. pyro-borate क्षारातु अग्नि-टांकीय ___रण्ड-म्रक्षीय . 
s. sulpho-salicylate क्षारातु शुल्ब s. pyro-phosphate क्षारातु अग्नि नम्रलीय. ___ भास्वीय. 
s. sulphydrate क्षारातु शुल्बोदीय ॥ s. pyro-phosphate acid क्षारातु s. tannate क्षारातु शल्कीय 7. 
अग्नि-भास्वीय अम्ल.. 
s. tartrate क्षारातु न्यासवीयn. 
803 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
. 
s. tartrate acid क्षारातु न्यासवीय अम्ल soft sore organism Bact. मृदूपस्थन्त्रण 
जीवाणु m. s. tellutate क्षारातु वंगकीय n. 
soft water मृदु जल, फेनद जल n. s. tellurite क्षारातु वंगकित 1. 
soil (the surface material of the earth s. tetraborate क्षारातु चतुष्टांकीय . ___ in which plants grow) उन्मृदा, मृदा s. tetrathionate क्षारातु चतुर्गन्धीय n. f. s. tetroxalate क्षारातु चतुस्तिग्मीय. soil acidity उन्मृदा-अम्लता . s. thioantimonate (Schlippes' soil bacteria भू-शाकाणु (भू.शा.), उन्मृदा 
salt) क्षारातु गन्धांजनीय 1. 
शाकाणु m. s. thio-cyanate क्षारातु गन्ध-श्यामीय soil pipe Hygiene मल-नाड N. 
m. 
soil science उन्मृदा-विज्ञान ?., औन्मृदी f. s. thio-sulphate=sodii thiosul- (उन्मृदा soil) 
phas (sod. thiosulph.) Pharm. -sol (solution) Chem. -लयन 1. (विलयन) क्षारातु गन्ध-शुल्बीयn. 
_sol. (soluble, solution) Chem. विलेय s.p-toluene-sulphinate क्षारातु प विलयन . 
विरालेन्य-शौल्बीय n. 
solamine blue FF = diamine fast s.p-toluene-sulphonate क्षारातु प- blue FFB __विरालेन्य-शुल्बायीय . 
Solanaceae Bot. धत्तर-कुल n. s.p-toluene - thio - sulphonate Solanineae Bot. धत्तुरानुगोत्र n. 
क्षारातु प-विरालेन्य-गन्ध-शुल्बायीय n. Solanum Bot. वृन्ताकति f. (-ति for प्रजाति s. tungstate क्षारातु चंडीय 1. 
____genus) s. urate क्षारातु मेहीयn. 
solanum Pharm. (Solanum indicum) s. iso-valerate क्षारातु स-बलीय . 
बृहती f. (ancient name) s. vanadate (ortho, meta, pyro, solar सौर mfn. ___tetra) क्षारातु रोचीय १. (ऊर्ध्व,सम, अग्नि, s. day सौर दिन १. 
चतुर्) 
s. month सौर मास m. s.xylene-sulphonate क्षारातु काष्ठेन्य s. plexus सूर्य-प्रतान m. 
शुल्बायीय. 
s. radiation सौर विकिरण 1. sofa प्रतल्प m., सुखासन n. 
s. system Astron. सौर-संहति f. soft मृदु nfn. 
___s. year सौर वर्ष m. soft bast Bot. मृदु अधोवाही (-इन्) m. Solaster Zool. सूर्यतारकाति f. (आति for soft chancre=soft sore मृदूपस्थवण m. प्रजाति genus) soften vb. मृदुभवन, मृदुकरण .. 
sold Com. विक्रीत mfn. softening मृदुकरण १., मृदुभाव m. 
s. book विक्रीत-पुस्तक. soft glass मृदु काच M. 
s. ledger बिक्रीत-प्रपंजी . soft palate Anat. मांस-ताल, मृदु तालु . s. ledger adjustment account 
(as contrasted with ARTATSI) 
विक्रीत-प्रपंजी-समायोजन-लेखा f. soft soxe (chanchroid) मृदूपस्थव्रण m. solder संधा f.. 
804 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
solder bath thermometer संधा तापन solid cylinder सान्द्र रम्म m. 
तापमान m. 
solid geometry सान्द्र-रैखिकी. sole एकल mfn., एक 
solidification सान्द्रीभाव m., सान्द्रीभवन, sole agent एकाभिकर्ता (-1) m. 
सान्द्रीभावन, सान्द्रीकरण 1. solely केवल, केवलमात्र 
solidifying point (freezing point) solemn declaration (made under the सान्द्रीभावांक m. 
penalties of perjury by a person solid mass Bot. (not hollow) असुषिर who conscientiously declines tak- पुंज m. (hollow सुषिर) ing an oath) सत्योक्ति . 
solid oedema कठिन शोफ m. solemnly गंभीरतापूर्वक 
solid of revolution Math. परिभ्रमण solen-, soleno- नाल 
सान्द्र, क्रान्ति-सान्द्र n. Solenogastres Zool. (straight intes- solid particles सान्द्र लव m. 
tine devoid of coils) ऋज्वन्त्र- solid square Mil. सान्द्र समायत m. गण m. 
solidungulate Zool. एकशफmfn. solenoid (tubular) नालाभ mfn. 
(from जैमिनीय-ब्राह्मण) soleno-stele Bot. (having internal and solid wheel सान्द्र चक्र n. 
external phloem) द्वचधोवाहिक m. solitary एकल mfn., एक soleplate=bedplate Macb. आधार-पट्ट solitary flower Bot. एकल पुष्प .. 
solitary inflorescence Bot. एक-पुष्पता sole trader Com. एकल व्यापारी (-इन्) m. f. soleus (muscle) Anat. जंघापिंडिका f. solochrome black Col. Ind. एकलवर्णक 
(पेशी) 
काल m. solfatara Geol. (a volcanic area or s. brown एकलवर्णक बm. 
vent which yields only hot va s. red एकलवर्णक रक्त m. pours and gases, in part sul s. violet एकलवर्णक नीललोहित m. 
phurous) शुबाष्प m. (शुल्बारि+बाष्प) s. yellow एकलवर्णक पीत m. solfataric origin शुबाष्पीय उद्भव m. sol state विलयन-अवस्था । solferine=erythrobenzin 
gel state श्लिषक-अवस्था . solid सान्द्र mfn. (धन cube, cubical) solubility विलेयता f. 
(Hindi ठोस) 
s. apparatus विलेयता-साधिन . solid angle Math. सान्द्र कोण m. 
s. product constant (K.. solid blue base Col. Ind. सान्द्र नील पीठ विलेयता-गुणनफल-स्थिरांक m. (वि. गु. 
स्थि.) 8. brown सान्द्र बभ्रुm. 
soluble विलेय mfn. s. green सान्द्र हरि m. 
almost insoluble प्राय:-अविलेय mfn. s. printing brown सान्द्र मुद्रण बत्रु difficultly s. granta mfn. (Hindi 
m. 
कठिनाई से विलय) s. yellow सान्द्र पीत m. 
freely s. अत्यन्त विलेय mfn. 805 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
moderately s. अनति-विलेय, मध्यम 
विलेय mfn. more s. अधिक-विलेय mfn. partially s. किंचिद्-विलेय mfn. readily s. सरलतया विलेय mfn. readily s. in water सरलतया जल- 
विलेय mfn. slightly s. ईषद्-विलेय mfn. slightly s. in water ईषद् जल-विलेय 
mfn. sparingly s. अल्पशो विलेय, अल्प-विलेय 
mfn. sparingly s. in water अल्प जल 
विलेय mfn. very s. अतिविलेय mfn. very s. in water अति जल-विलेय mfn. very sparingly s. अत्यल्प-विलय mfn. very sparinglys.in water अत्यल्प 
जल-विलेय mfn. s. in cold water शीतलजल-विलेय mfn. 
s. in water जल-विलेय mfn. soluble blue Col. Ind. विलेय नील m. 
s. cotton blue विलेय तूल नील m. s. induline विलेय सुनीली. s. methyl blue विलेय प्रोदल नील 
arsenical solution Pharm. नैपालिक 
विलयन . solution Math. 1 (method) TTT n. 
2 (key) कुंचिका . 3 (result) फल. s. of an equation समीकार-साधन . s. of a problem I समस्या-पूर्ति . 
2 Math. प्रश्न-साधन 1. s. of triangles त्रिभुज-निर्धारण 1. solution I Chem. विलयन . 
concentrated s. संकेन्द्रित विलयन । dilute s, मन्द विलयन n. 
moderately dilute s. आमन्द विलयन 
s. nigrosine विलेय असिती. 8. pure blue विलेय शुद्ध नील m. s. red woods विलेय रक्त काष्ठ m. s. silk blue विलेय कौशेय नील m. 
s. sky blue विलेय आकाश नील m. _s. violet विलेय नीललोहित m. 
s. yellow विलेय पीत m. solubleness facture n. solute adj. (soluble) विलेय mfn. - 1h. Physical Chem. (a dissolved ___ substance) विलीन n. solutio arsenicalis seu Fowleri= 
806 
moderately concentrated s. - 
संकेन्द्रित विलयन . strong s. प्रबल विलयन n. weak s. दुर्बल बिलयन .. 2 Pharm. विलयन M. s. of ammonium acetate-di 
lute solution of ammonium 
acetate मन्द तिक्तातु शक्तीय विलयन । s. of arsenous and mercuric 
iodides=liquor arseni et hydrargyri iodidi (liq. arsen. et hydrarg. iod.)=Donovan's 
solution नेपपारदिक जम्बेय विलयन 1. s. of bismuth anda mmonium 
citrate=liquor bismuthi et ammonii citratis (liq. bism. et ammon. cit.) भिदातु तथा तिक्तातु निम्बवीय विलयन n. s. of coal tar-liquor picis car 
bonis (liq. pic. carbon.) अंगारराल विलयन. s. of ferric chloride = liquor 
ferri perchloridi (liq. ferr. perchlor.) अयसिक नीरेय विलयन 1. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
s. of ferrous phosphate=liquor S. green EF = alizarin bril 
ferri phosphatis (liq. ferr. liant green EF 
phosph.) 444 Htetet famua n. S. purple=alizurol purple s. of mercuric chloride=liquor S. violet=anthraquinone violet 
hydrargyri perchloridi (liq. soma Bot. f. hydrarg. perchlor.) fat somatic cell=body cell Bot. - विलयन n. 
TET=#TIFTETT f. S. of morphine hydrochloride somatic layer=parietal layer Zool. 
= liquor morphinae hydro- 
T m. chloridi (liq. morph. hydro- somatic nucleus=trophonucleus 
chlor.) THIET OFTA fastest 1. quaff. s. of potassium hydroxide = somatopleure Zool. Tyre m. 
liquor potassii hydroxidi somatopleuric Zool. 
T F mfn. (liq. pot. hydrox.) दहातु उदजारेय somatotrophin Zool. तनुपोषि . fament n. 
somite Zool. Tres m. S. of strychnine hydrochloride sonar Radar (underwater sound 
Eliquor strychninae hydro- detection,....and listening devi chloridi (liq. strych. hydro- ces employing supersonic fre 
chlor.) fagfelegait serilla factual the quencies, it is in effect underwater S. of tolu = liquor tolutanus radar) fariinae m. 
(liq, tolu.) facraafuri fant 1. Sonepat Geog. UTAFA, TURE m. solution of an equation Math. # song bird=singing bird an et 
· FR-ETTTT n. 
(-7).m. solution of a problem I समस्या-पूर्ति f. sonometer Phys. ध्वनिमान m. 
2. Math. TT-ETETT 11. 
sonorous figures Phys. संस्वनन प्राकृति solution of triangles Math. frest f. 
fateur n. 
soot brown up at 7. solve vb. Math. n. 
sooty (soot-producing) are solved example Math. साधित उदाहरण (-) mfor. 
s. flame #68-barst f. (short for solvent Com. 878-4# mfn. (short for Piret Thu Farm) 
PEUT-1927) 
Sopara Geog. शूर्पारक m. solvent Chem. विलायक m. 
soporific आस्वापक mfn. -solvent (dissolving) -fagrasti soralium Bot. (a group of soredia) solving an equation Math, Freita- 
- m. #1977 n 
sorbic Chem. गिरिप्रभूर्जिक mfn. solway blue-black B, 3B= aliza- S. acid firfest=f **n. 
rin blue-black NB 
sorbine red=azo acid red L 
. 
i 
71. 
807 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
sorbus==mountain ash गिरि-प्रभूज m. s. of light प्रकाश-प्रभव m. soredium (of lichen) Bot. (specialized sources of water Hygiene जल-प्राप्तिस्थान 
___ reproductive bodies) प्रजनी . 
. Sorensen scale समुश्रेणी f. 
sour dough अम्ल पिष्ट . Sorensen's salt अपिक्षामा लवण n. South America afeTUT TETT N. sorosis Bot. (the flower axis be Southern Konkan Geog. गोप-राष्ट्र . 
comes fleshy, e.g., in mulbery) south gallery दक्षिण-दीर्घा f. सरसाक्ष m. 
sow . सूकरी. sort, sorting पृथक्करण n. 
Soxhlet's condenser Chem. अपिस्नेह sorter पृथक्कर m. 
संघनक m. sorus Bot. (clusters of sporangia S. extraction apparatus fuerte 
बीजाणुधानीगुच्छ) बीधागुच्छ m. 
निस्सारण साधित्र n. so that यथा (H. जैसे कि) 
S. filter tube अपिस्नेह पाव नाल m. soufrogene black NB conc.=sul- soyabean चीनकलाय M. 
phur black 
space I Phys. वरिमा (-मन्) m. soufrogene blue NC=immedial 2 (distance, interval) अन्तर, अन्तराल 
blue C 
१., अवकाश m. sound Phys. I ध्वनि m. 
3 (place) स्थान 1., देश m. 2 (science) afiat f. 
space bar or key Mach. अन्तर-दण्ड m. soundboard = sounding board (as in a typewriter) 
Phys. ध्वनि-फलक ?. 
space-lattice Physical Chem. वरिम-जाल sounded ध्वनित mfn. 
n. (not वरिमा-जाल, in compound sound energy Math. ध्वनि-ऊर्जा f. 
वरिमन् would be बरिम- while stand sounder i Phys. (that which soun ing alone it would be af at mas 
ध्वनिता (-४) m.. 
culine nominative sg.) 2 (an instrument) ध्वनित्र n. spacer अन्तरक m. sound hole Music ध्वनि-छिद्र.. space structure (of the carbon atom) sounding ध्वनन . 
Chem. वरिम-विन्यास m. sounding board=soundboard spade खनित्र 1. soundless ध्वनिहीन, अध्वनिक mfn. spadix Bot. (a spike with a fleshy sound locator Acoustics ध्वनिमूल-निर्देशक axis मृवृक्षा शूकी, usually subtended 
____by, or enclosed in, a spathe sound post Music ध्वनि-स्थूण n. 
शूकीछद) छदशूकी f. soundproof ध्वनिरुध् mfn. 
span vb. (reach across) पारायण 1. (पार sound ranging Mil. ध्वनि-गोचरान्वेषण . across+अयन going) sound track ध्वनि-पथ m. 
span Ry. चाप-विस्तार m.=वितस्ति . sour अम्ल mfn. (Hindi खट्टा) 
Spanish black=mineral black source प्रभव m. 
Spanish brown=mineral brown 
m. 
808 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
Cash 
Spanish fly i=blister beetle for spatulate leaf Bot. (shaped like a 
= उदस्फोट भृङ्ग m. (a.green fly) 
spoon) स्रुव-पर्णn. 2 Pharm. (when dried and pow- spawn vb.Zool. अण्डजनन, अण्डौघजनन ।. dered)=cantharides उदस्फोट-भंग spawn n. अण्डौघm. m. (for raising blisters) 
spaying=ovariotomy Zool. (female Spanish pellitory=pyrethrum root castration to remove ovaries) 
Pharm. दन्तमूल 7. (tincture used in अण्डाशयाकर्षण n. toothache) 
speaker (of a legislative body) अध्यक्ष Spanish white=pearl white __m. (short for विधान-सभाध्यक्ष) Spanish yellow=golden yellow spear शक्ति f., कुन्त m. 
प्रोद्रक्तातिपीत m. 
spearhead कुन्ताग्रा. spanner (adjustable wrench) विकुंच m. special विशेष mfn. spanning the world by air वायु द्वारा s. act (of Parliament) विशेष अधिनियम 
पृथिवी-पारायण . 
___m. (private act वैयक्तिक अधिनियम) spar (connected with metallic ore) s. anatomy विशेष शारीर n. __ धात्विया . 
s. arrangement विशेष प्रबन्ध m. sparingly अल्प-, अल्पशः 
s. bill (in Parliament) विशेष विधेयक s. soluble Chem. अल्प-विलेय, अल्पशो 
विलेय mfn. 
s. business विशेष कार्य 1. s. soluble in water अल्प जल-विलेय s. constituency विशेष प्रतिमंडल 1. 
s. crossing Com. विशेष रेखण 2. very s. soluble in water अत्यल्प s. disease विशेष रोग m. 
जल-विलय mm. 
s. endorsement Law विशेष-पृष्ठांकना spark स्फुलिंग m. spark (etincelle) green = ethyl s. gland preparation Pharm. 
green 
विशेष ग्रंथि-निर्मिति . sparking plug स्फलिंग-निग M. 
s. gonorrhoea vaccine विशेष प्रमेह sparkle vb. उत्स्फुरण 1. 
लस m. sparrow चटक, कुलिंग m. 
s. goods account Com. विशेष वस्तु sparteine (spartium+ - ine) attemitent f. लेखा Spartium (Gk. spartos broom) etterfer s. meeting विशेष अधिवेशन . 
f. (-fa for safer genus) 
s. ponceau Col. Ind. विशेष अधिरक्ता. spasm Med. अंगग्रह M. (from सुश्रुत) 
पीत m. spathe Bot. शूकीछद m. 
s. provisions विशेष प्रावधान . spatial series Statistics देशमाला f. s. rates विशेष अर्घm. spatula (a knife-shaped instrument s. resolution विशेष संकल्प m. 
for spreading paints, etc.) spet s. responsibility विशेष उत्तरदायित्व 
__mfn. 
FEAT 
रजत 
809﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
. 
S. sense Physiol. (any one of the s.g.hydrometer आपेक्षिकभार-तरलमान 
five senses of seeing, feeling, m. 
hearing, taste and smell) ज्ञानेन्द्रिय s.g. tube आपेक्षिकभार-नाल m. 
specific legacy Lap विशिष्ट परिक्थn. s. wagons Rly. विशेष वाहन n. specific name Bot. जाति-नाम 1. specialist विशेषज्ञ m. 
specific recommendation fafane speciality विशेषता . 
अभिस्ताव m. specialization I Com. विशषोपयोजन n. specimen प्रादर्श m. 
2 Biol. विशेषीकरण ।. 
specimen jar प्रादर्श कलश m. specialize vb. विशेषोपयोजन M. 
spectacle अधिदृश्य 1. specialized विशेषित, विशेषोपयुक्त mfn. spectacled eye Zool. वलयित नेत्र 1. 
(fitted for some special thing) eye enclosed in circular (marking) specialized band of cells Bot. विशेषित- spectacled eye factor वलयित नेत्र कारक ___ कोशा-पट्टी. specialized organ Zool. विशेषितांग n. spectacles held on ears कर्ण-धृत उपनेत्र specie I टंक m. (coin) 
2 (bullion=gold or silver) अकुप्य n. spectacular अधिदर्शनीय mfn. (not a base metal) 
spectro- रंगावलि s. point टंकांक, स्वर्णाक M. 
spectrogram Phys. रंगावलि-चित्र . species I Biol. जाति . 
spectrograph Phys. रंगावलि-चित्रक m. 2 Pharm. (a mixture of chopped spectroheliogram (a photograph or coarsely powdered vegetable of the sun made by monochro drugs, esp. one to prepare an aro matic light) एकरंग-सूर्यचित्र . 
matic tea or tisane; as, a pectoral spectrology रंगावलिकी f. species; an emollient speci spectrometer Phys. रंगावलि-मान M. क्वाथक m. 
spectrophotometer Optics रंगावलि specific I विशिष्ट, निश्चित, विशेष mfn.(op- भामान' M. 
posed to 1979 general) 
spectroscope Phys. रंगावलीम M. 2 Biol. (pertaining to species) spectroscopy रंगावलीक्षा f. 
जातीय, जाति 
spectrum I Phys. रंगावलि f. specific characteristics Bot. जाति- 2 (series of images) मूर्तिमाला . 
लक्षण . 
s. cell रंगावलि-कोशा. specific duty Econ. (chargeable on s. chart रंगावलि-रेखाचित्र n. 
number, weight, or measure) s. tube रंगावलि-नाल m. परिमाण-कर m. 
specular reflection Ophthalmol.दार्पण specific gravity आपेक्षिक भारm. 
प्रतिबिम्बन १. (दार्पण caused by a .s.g. balance आपेक्षिक-भार-तुला. 
mirror) s.g. bottle आपेक्षिक-घनता-कूपी . ___speculate wb. Com. परिकल्पन N. 
810 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
speculated Com. परिकल्पित mfn. spermatid Zool. उपशुक्रकोशा f. speculation Com. परिकल्पना. 
spermatocyte Zool. (a cell giving speculative Com. परिकल्पी (-इन्) mfn. rise to sperm cells) पूर्वशुक्रकोशा /. speculator Com. परिकल्पक m. 
spermatogenesis Zool. शुक्रजनन । speculum I Phys. (a reflector of spermatogonium Zool. (one of the 
polished metal) प्रदर्पण M. (प्रमार्जित primitive male germ cells, from धातु-दर्पण) 
which spermatocytes develop) 2 (an alloy used for making mir- प्रशुक्रकोशा f. rors) दर्पणातु m. 
Spermatophyta Bot. (seed plants) speech भाषण 1. 
बीजोद्भिदः f.pl. speed Phys. att m. (velocity savi) spermatozoid Bot. (a motile male 
s. counter Mach. वेग-गणित्र . 
gamete) चलपुंजन्यु, पुंजन्यु m. s. indicator वेग-देशक m. 
spermatozoon Zool. शुक्र-कोशा f. speedo-meter वेग-मान m. 
sperm cell Zool. शुक्र-कोशा f. spelling वर्णयोग, वर्णन्यास m. 
sperm gland = spermary = testis spelter कुप्यक . 
___Zool. शुक्र-ग्रंथि m. spelter calciner कुप्यक-निश्चूर्णंक m. sperm oil (from sperm whale) जनंगिर spent वीत, प्रयुक्त nfr. 
तैल 2. s. acid Chem. प्रयुक्त अम्ल . sperm path Zool. शुक्र-पथ m. s. lye प्रयुक्त पल्पूलन . 
sperm whale ('the only whale having S. oxide (iron oxide that has a throat large enough to admit a 
been used in purifying coal man' Webster) जनंगिर तिमि m. gas....) प्रयुक्त जारेय. 
sp.gr. (specificgravity) प्रा. भा. (आपेक्षिक sperm Biol. शुक्र n. 
भार) spermaceti (solid fat from the head Sphaeranthus Bot. guelfa f. (-fa for 
of the sperm whale जनंगिरतिमि) प्रजाति genus) जनंगिर-वसा f. (abbreviated from S. hirtus सामान्य. मुण्डी f. जनंगिर-शिरोवसा) 
sphaeraphides Bot. (crystalline ag Spermaphyta Bot. (seed plants) gregates) स्फट-पिण्ड m. 
बीजोद्भिदः f.pl. 
Sphaeriales Bot. आवृतधानी-गोत्र 1. (गोत्र spermary = testis = sperm gland order) 
Zool. शुक्र-प्रन्थि m. 
sphaerite Mineral. (in globular con spermatheca Zool. (sperm-sac) शुक्र cretions) गोलिज M. (-इज for खनिज 
धान 1. 
mineral) spermathecal pores Zool. शुक्रधान-रन्ध्र sphalerite (blende) कुप्यशिज m. (-इज for 
खनिज mineral) spermatic cord Anat. मुष्कस्रोतस् n. sphenethmoid = sphenethmoid 
(ancient word) 
bone 
811 
. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
sphenethmoid bone=girdle bone spheroidal clump Zool. गोलाभ पुंज M. 
Z00l. (surrounds the anterior end spheroid joint गोल संधि m. of the brain case in the frog) spherometer Phys. (for measuring मस्तिष्काग्र-अस्थि n. 
____curvature) गोलत्वमान m. Sphenodon=Hatteria Zool. (a genus spherule Ophthalmol. 1999 m. 
having third eye) तृतीयनेत्राति f. sphincter muscle Ophthalmol. संकोचक (-आति for प्रजाति genus) 
पेशी f. sphenoid adj. Anat. जातुक mfn., जतुक- sphincter oculi=orbicularis oculi sphenoid bone Anat. (it is shaped निमीलक-पेशी वर्त्मद्वार-संकोचक-पेशी . ___like a bat) जतुकास्थिn. 
spicule I शूका f. -sphere -मण्डल . 
2 (of a. sponge) दृढा . sphere गोल m. 
spider लूता f. spherical I (of the shape of a Spiderworts = Tradescantia Bot. 
sphere) गोलाकार, गोल 
(having slender hairy stamens) 2 (of or pertaining to a sphere) तनुकेसरति 1. (-ति for प्रजाति genus) गोलीय mfm., गोल 
spiegel, spiegeleisen (German s. aberration (caused by curva Spiegel दर्पण 'mirror' + Eisen अयस् 
ture of refracting or reflecting 'iron') दर्पणायस. (at the end of the surface) गोलज विपथन । 
compound अयस् changed to अयस s. cap Math. गोलीय-टोपी f. 
as in the ancient words कृष्णायस, s. curvature Math. गोलीय-वक्रता, लोहायस) 
गोलता . 
spigot Mach. प्रनिग, निग, मुषल m.(निग plug) s. defect Math. गोलीय-न्यूनता f. spigot and socket joint Mach. s. distance Math. गोलीय दूरत्व .. मुषल-उलूखल-सन्धि m. s. excess Math. गोलीय आधिक्य 2. spike I Bot. शूकी f. (awn शूक) s. frustum Math. गोलीय समच्छिन्नक, 2 Phys. शंकु m. 
गोलीय छिन्नक : 
s. cover Bot. शूकी-आवरण 1. s. head Bot. गोल शीर्ष 7. 
s. inflorescence शूकी-पुष्पता f. s. lens गोलीय वीक्षm. 
s. leaf शूकी-पर्ण 1. s. perspective Engin. गोलीय-नेत्र- spikelet शूकिका f.. 
दृशा. 
spin ub. आभ्रमण, पाभ्रामण .. s. sector Math. गोलीय शकल n. spin n. Phys. आनाम m. s. surface Phys. गोल तल n. spinal मैरवं mfn. (from मेरु) 
s, symmetry Zool. गोलीय-संमिति f. spinal canal=vertebral canal कीकस sphero- गोल sphero-cylindrical गोल-रम्भीय mfn. _spinal cord Anat. पृष्ठ-रज्जु . spheroid n. Phys. गोलाभ m. 
spinal nerve Zool. भैरव-चेताf. spheroidal Phys. गोलाभ-, गोलाभीय mfn. spinal reflex Zool. मैरव प्रतिक्षेप m. 
कुल्या . 
812 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
spindle त° m. 
S. attenuatum (from sea water) s. attachment = centromere समुद्र अधिकु. 
= kinetochore Biol. तर्कु-युजm. S.aureum स्वर्ण अधिक. s. fibre Biol. त'-तन्तु m. 
S. buccale (from the tartar of s. shaped तर्क-आकार mfn. 
___ the teeth) दन्तशर्करा अधिक. spine Anat., Bot. शल्य m. (a stiff S. concentricum (from putrid 
___sharp process) 
blood) पूतिरक्त अधिकु. spinel Mineral. भ्राजास्फटीयिजm. (-इज Deneke's s. See Vibrio tyro ___ for खनिज mineral) 
genus spinneret Zool. (a spinning organ) S. denticola (from the teeth and 
___ कर्तनांग . 
___mouth) दन्तास्य अधिकु. spinners (of a spider) कर्तक m. 
S. desulphuricans गन्धकापहर अधिकु. spinning electron Phys. आभ्रामी विद्युदणु S. duttoni = Borrelia duttoni 
s. of Finkler-Prior See Vibrio spinning tube Zool. कर्तन-नाल M. 
proteus spiny Bot. शल्यावृत mfn. 
S. flavescens, S. flavum für spiny lobster शल्य-महाचिंगट m. 
अधिकु. spiracle Zool. श्वासरन्ध्र, प्रश्वासरन्ध्र n. (a 
S. gallinarum (causes a fatal breathing hole) 
_disease in chickens) कुक्कुट अधिकु. spiral n. कुन्तल m. 
s. of Gamaleia 
Vibrio ___glass spiral काच-कुन्तल m. 
metchnikovii spiral adj. कुन्तल 
S. gindha See Vibrio gindha spiralization Zool. कुन्तलन . 
S. helcogenes (from the stools spiralized Zool. कुन्तलित mfn. 
___of diarrhea) अतिसार अधिकु. spiral joint=cochlear joint Anat. S. leukomelaenum (from the 
शंख-सन्धि m. 
tongue of a mouse) मूषक-जिह्वा spirally coiled Zool. कुन्तल-वलयित nfn. अधिकु. spirally striated Zool. कुन्तल-रेखित mfr. S. marinum (from sea water) spiral valve Zool. कुन्तल-कपाट . 
सागर अधिकु. spireme Biol. पित्र्यकुन्तल m. 
S. metchnikovii कुक्कुट-विषूची अधिकु. spirilla pl. of spirillum 
S. milleri, Vibrio milleri अशित Spirillum अधिकुन्तलाणु (अधिकु.) (अधि, दन्तीय अधिकु. 
being the most abundant of 
s. minus=Spirochaeta morsus the Spirochaetae) 
muris (causes rat-bite fever) S. anserum (from geese affected आखुदंशज्वर अधिकु. 
with septicemia) हंस अधिकु. S. nasale नासा अधिकु. S. aquatilis (from river water) S. obermeieri, = Obermeier's 
नदी अधिकु. 
S., Borrelia recurrentis 813 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
S. phosphorescens, S. plicatile spirit lamp प्रासव-दीप m. 
भासमान अधिकु. 
spirit level प्रासव-तल (short for प्रासव S. of pseudocholera epefacent समतल) ___ अधिक. 
_spirit of ammonia तिक्ताति-निषेचन S. roseum पाटल अधिक. 
___ S. rubrum (produces a wine- spirit of camphor=spiritus cam ___red pigment) मद्यरक्त अधिकु. phorae (sp. camph.) Pharm. कर्पूर 
S. Saprophiles कर्दम अधिक. 
प्रासवm. S. smithii (from thei ntestines spirit of chloroform spiritus ___ of swine) सूकरान्त्रम धिकु. 
chloroformi(sp. chlorof.) Pharm. S. sputigenum (found in the नीरवम्रल-प्रासव m. ___ saliva) लाला अधिकु. 
spirit of ether = spiritus aetheris S. tenue तनु अधिकु. 
(sp. aether.) Pharm. दक्षु-प्रासव m. S. terrigenum (from soil) उन्मृदा spirit of hartshorn (ammonium hy 
अधिक. 
droxide) मृगशृंग-प्रासव M. S. theileri (found in a benign spirit of salt=hydrochloric acid 
affection of cattle in South spirit of wine प्राक्षिरा-सार m. Africa) पशुमन्दरोग अधिकु. 
spirit-soluble प्रासव-विलेय mfn. spirit (obtained by distillation spiritus=spirit Pharm. (any volatile 
from petroleum, etc.) प्रासव M. _or distilled liquid) प्रासव M. 2 Dyeing निषेचन 1. 
s. aetheris=spirit of ether दक्षु spirit black Col. Ind. निषेचन काल M. प्रासव m. 
s. blue निषेचन नील m. 
s. aetheris compositus=com s. eosine निषेचन उषसी . 
pound spirit of ether संयुत s. green निषेचन हरि m. 
दक्षु-प्रासव m. s. induline निषेचन सुनीली /. 
s. aetheris nitrosi = spirit of s. nigrosine निषेचन असिती. 
nitrous ether भूय्य दक्षु-प्रासव m. s. orange निषेचन नारंग m. 
s. ammoniae aromaticus=aro s. red निषेचन रक्त m. 
matic spirit of ammonia. सुरभि s. rosaniline blue निषेचन पाटल तिक्ताति-प्रासव m. __नीली नील M. 
s. ammoniae fetidus = fetid s. rose निषेचन पाटल m. 
spirit of ammonia faFTfT FET s. scarlet निषेचन शोण m. 
प्रासव m. s, sky-blue निषेचन आकाश-नील M. s. anethi शतपुष्पिका-प्रासव m. s. violet निषेचन नीललोहित m. 
s. anisi=spirit of anise शतपुष्पा s. yellow निषेचन पीत m. 
प्रासव m. spirit burner प्रासव-दाहक m. 
$. cajuputi=spirit of cajuput. spirit hydrometer भासव-तरलमान m. 
धवलद्रुम-प्रासव m. 
814 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
s. camphorae=spirit of cam 
phor pya-wra m. s. chloroformi-spirit of chloro 
form freq519-4TH m. s. cinnamomi=spirit of cinna 
mon gefHAT-ST49 m. s. juniperi=spirit of juniper 
491-5749 m. s. lavandulae spirit of laven 
der SHTETASITTE m. s, menthae piperitae=spirit of 
peppermint 19-TFT m. s. menthae piperitae viridis 
fra aran-9749 m. s. myristicae=spirit of nutmeg 
1974-5TH m. S. rosmarini = spirit of rose 
mary anh-4149 m. s. terebinth rect. FUTETT face 
Th9 m. spirit volatility testing disc प्रासव 
369887-tau fara m. Spirochaeta, Spirochaete (a genus) 
prantu () S. anodontae (found in mussels 
*7**19) Travel S. anserina (found in geese) E. S. balanitidis (found in balanitis) __ शेफत्वक्कोपीय कु. 
S. balbianii (occurs in oysters ___ खाद्यशुक्ति) खाद्यशुक्ति कु. 
S. berbera (cause of the relapsing 
fever in N. Africa) ei S. bilio-hemoglobinuriae (found 
in the blood in black-water 
fever) HERE S. bronchialis causes broncho 
spirochetosis) #1491979 
S. buccalie (found in the human ___mouth) मुख कु. 
S. carteri=Borrelia carteri 
S. cohnii (found on the teeth and ___ in the mouth) दन्तानन कु. 
S. denticola, S. dentium (from ___carious teeth) दन्त कु. 
S. duttoni See Borrelia duttoni S. gallinarum See Borrelia gal 
linarum S. hyos (isolated from hog 
cholera) aefacator de S. icterohaemorrhagiae = Lep 
tospira icterohaemorrhagiae S. icteroides=Leptospira icter 
oides S. interrogans (found in the kid 
ney in a case of yellow fever) 
पीतज्वरवृक्क कु. S. morsus muris = Spirillum 
minus S. muris (found in mice) 9. S. novyi See Borrelia novyi S. Obermeieri See Borrelia re 
currentis S. orientalis (found in ulcerating 
granuloma of the pudenda) 
उपस्थवणीय कु. S. pallida=Treponema palli 
dum S. pertenuis=Treponema per 
tenue S. phagedenis obtained from a 
case of phagedenic ulcer on the external genitals of a 
woman) afriquita S. recurrentis = Borrelia re 
currentis 
815 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
s. refringens (found on the splinter अवतश्च m. (ancient word) ___healthy genital organs) उपस्थ कु. splinterable भग्नोत्पाती (-इन्) mfn. 
S. schaudinni (found in tropical split vb. FAITET 1. 
ulcer of the leg) लत्तावणीय कु. . split n. I (in diazo split) भंग m. S. theileri (found in cattle suffer- 2 विपाटn. 
ing from a disease marked by split adj. Faarfaa mfn. fever, etc.) पशुज्वरीय कु. 
split brass nut Mach. विपाटित पित्तल S. vincenti Borrelia vincenti नह m. 
गलशोफ कु. 
split cotter विपाटित-स्फानो . S. zeimanni (found in owl's split glass bifocals Ophthalmol. ___blood) उलूक कु. 
(consisting of two equal seg Spirogyra (spiro- कुन्तल-+Gk. Pyres ments) अर्धा द्विनाभि M. 
वलय; having spiral chlorophyll split nut Mach. विपाटित नह m. bands) Bot. कुन्तलवलयति f. (-ति for split pin Mach. विपाटित आणि m. प्रजाति genus) 
split pulley Mach. विपाटित आकृषि m. Spiruridae (a family) द्वयोष्ठ-वंश m. splits Com. खण्डितक n. (shares split up Spiruroidea (a superfamily with two into stocks of two denomina ___lips) द्वयोष्ठ-प्रवंशm. 
tions) spit-fire Mil. अग्नि-वर्षी (-इन्) m. split second काष्ठिका-लव M., विपाटित splanchnic=visceral अन्तस्त्य mfn. ___ काष्ठिका f. splanchnic layer=visceral layer split valency Cbem. विपाटित-संयुजता . 
Zool. अन्तस्त्य स्तर m. 
spluttering फड़फड़ाना (Hindi), प्रस्फुरण splanchnocoele Zool. अन्तस्त्यगुहा f. spluttering flame फड़फड़ाती ज्वाला splanchnopleure Embryol. अन्तःपाव . (Hindi), प्रस्फुरन्ती ज्वाला f. 
(अन्तः for अन्तस्त्य) 
spodium=bone black spleen प्लीहा m. 
spoiled दूषित, दुष्ट mfn. s. pulp Anat. प्लीह-गो 1. 
.spoke अरm. splenial=splenial bone Anat. (in s. wheel अर-चक्र n. ___side the mandible) निहानव . Spondias Bot. आम्रातति f. (-ति for splenial bone Anat. FETEICIET n. प्रजाति genus) splenic प्लैह, प्लीह- (from प्लीहन्) 
S. mangifera सामान्य आम्रात. m. splenic artery Anat. प्लीह-रोहिणी f. sponge छिद्रिष्ठ १. spline vb. Macb. (to cut a keyway) s. bowl छिद्रिष्ठ-कटोर m. 
सीताकरण ? 
s. gold Mineral. (it is the purest spline i Mach. (a keyway for a gold 99.91 per cent gold, .09 
_feathered key) सीता f. 
per cent silver) tyqui th. .. 2 (a thin wood strip) काष्ठपट्टी . s. zooids Zool. छिद्रिष्ठ संजीव m. spline shaft Mach. सीतेषा . 
Spongiae = Porifera = Spongida 816 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
.Spongida Zool. छिद्रिण: m.pl. sporidium Bot. (a small spore) 
Spongiidae Zool. सुछिद्रिष्ठ-वंश M. 
बीजाण्वी. Spongilla Zool. छिद्रिष्ठाति f. (-आति for sporiferous (bearing or producing 
प्रजाति genus) 
spores) बीजाणुजन, बीजाणुभर mfn. Spongillidae Zool. छिद्रिष्ठ-वंश m. sporoblast Zool. बीजाणु-घट m. spongin Biochem. Perfectos f. 
sporocarp Bot. बीजाणु-प्रावर m. spongiose Zool. छिद्रिष्ठ Mfn. (full of sporocyst बीजाणुकोष्ठ m. 
small cavities like sponge; sporoduct Zool. बीजाणुप्रणाली f. spongy) 
sporogonium Bot. बीजाणुजनिका f. spongy bone = cancellated bone sporogony Zool. (reproduction by 
Zool. छिद्रिष्ठ अस्थि . 
_spores) बीजाणु-जनन .. s. cell Bot. शिथिल-कोशा f. 
sporophyll Bot. बीजाणुपर्ण . s. parenchyma Bot. शिथिल जीवितक sporophyte (producing spores) = 
m. 
asexual generation = sporo s. texture Zool. छिद्रिष्ठ वयन n. 
phyte generation Bot. बीजाणु-जनक s. tissue Bot. शिथिल-ऊति f. spontaneous स्वतः 
gametophyte जन्यु-जनक m. s. combustion स्वतो-दहन । 
sporophyte generation = sporo s. movement Zool. स्वतो-गति f. phyte spool वल m. (from Vवल to turn Sporotrichum (spores cover the 
___round; cf. Punjabi वलना) 
whole filament of fungus) परिसूत्रति spoon नुव m. 
f. (-ति for प्रजाति genus) spoon ended spatula सुवान प्रथ m. Sporozoa Zool. (reproduction by sporadic disease Med. क्वाचित्क रोग sporulation) बीजाणुज-वर्ग m. 
m. 
sporozoite (shaped like a sickle दात्र) sporangiophore Bot. बीधाभर m. (a दाबीज n. 
stalk or receptacle bearing भर sporular बैजाणुक mfn. sporangia. बीजाणु-धानी) 
sporulate vb. बीजाणु-भवन, बीजाणु-करण sporangium Bot. बीजाणुधानी f. 
n. . spore (minute primitive reproduc- sporulation Biol. (formation of 
tive bodies typically unicellular) spores) बीजाणु-भवन 1. बीजाणु m. 
sporule Biol. बीजाणुक m. .spore formation Biol. बीजाणु-निर्माण n. sporuliferous (producing sporules) 
spore mother cell Bot. बीजाणु-मातृ बीजाणुकजन mfn. . 
कोशा f. 
.spot Chem. लांछन . . . spoten-rest बीजाणु-शेष m... 
spot plate लांछन पट्टm. spore sac Bot. बीजाणु-धान 1. 
spot price Com. तत्स्थान मूल्य, तत्क्षण मूल्य sporicidal = sporicide afterust mfn. 11. 
817 
52 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
spotted deer (Corvus axis) Zool. spring balance on pedestal for 
पृषत m. 
स्कन्द-तुला. spotted dove Zool. चित्र कपोतक m. spring catarrh of eyes Med. वासन्त spotted fever = typhus fever Med. युजाकोप m. 
पृषज्ज्वर. 
spring clip स्कन्द स्वज m. spotted hyena (Hyaena crocuta) spring hanger Fairgreta m. ____Zool. पृषत्-तरक्षु m. 
spring lobster=crayfish=crawfish spotted newt = smooth newt = =sea crayfish Zool. अभिचिंगट m. 
Triturus punctatus Zool. पृषत्- spring of a clock घटक-स्कन्द m. सरटिका. 
spring of glasses उपनेत्र-स्कन्द m. spotted sickness = pinta Med. spring-shutting valve Automobile 
पृषच्चम . 
स्कन्द-संवारि कपाट.. spotted white Zool. पुष्पित, श्वेतपुष्पित spring tail Zool. स्कन्द-पुच्छ m. 
mfr. 
spring washer Engin. स्कन्द-वलयक m. spotter Mil. स्थित्यन्वेषक m. (स्थिति-अन्वेषक) springwood Bot. वासन्त-काष्ठ 1. spot test = drop reaction लांछन sprinkle vb. सेचन . 
परीक्षा=बिन्दु प्रतिक्रिया f. 
sprinkler I (a person who sprinkles) spotting Mil. स्थित्यन्वेषण 1. (स्थिति- सेचक m. 
अन्वेषण) 
2 (a device for spraying) #97 n. spotting errors Com. विभ्रम-चिह्नन, sprout अंकुर m. 
विभ्रम-अन्वेषण 
spun (shaped into threadlike form) spout I QUE n. 
तन्तुकृत, कृत्त mfn. ___ 2 (a discharging lip) ओष्ठ m. spun (sheet metal shaped into a spouted bottle तुण्ड-कूपी . 
hollow form by pressing, while spoutlike opening Zool. aut fe 11. the metal revolves in a lathe) spray I Vb. शीकन .. 
_पीडकृत mfn. 2 7. (water flying in small drops) spun glass (see s. gold) तन्तुकृत काच m. शीकर m. 
spun gold (threads formed by wind s. bellows शीकर-भस्त्रा f 
ing slender ribbons of gold or s. tube शीकर-नाल m. 
silver around fiber threads) sprayed शीकित mfn. 
तन्तुकृत स्वर्ण । sprayer शीकरो (-इन्) m. 
spun iron crucible पीडकृत अयोमूषा. spreader प्रथक m. 
spun silver (See s. gold) तन्तुकृत रजत १. spring I वसन्त श. 
spur I=prehallux Zool. (of a frog) 2 उत्स m. (a. water spring) (H. उपांगुष्ठ m. झरना) 
2 Zool. (a stiff, sharp spine, as on You 3 Mach. Firar m. 
the wings and legs of certain spring balance स्कन्द-तुला f. 
birds, on the legs of insects, etc.--- 
818 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
Pleas 
m. 
used in fighting) पक्षायुध, पादायुध. squash borer-squash vine borer 3 Bot. मधुदीर्घा f. 
कूष्माण्ड-बेधी (-इन्) m. spurge Bot. स्नुहा f. (ancient word) squash bug कूष्माण्ड-कीट M. spurred Bot. शंकुमत् mfn. 
squash vine कूष्माण्ड-लता f. sputum ष्ठीव m. 
squeeze vb. निष्पीडन . sq. (square) व. (वर्ग) 
squeezer निष्पीडक m. squad Mil. वृन्द .. 
squill 1 = Urginea scilla = sea squadron leader (R.A.F.) उपाधिविमा ___ onion समुद्र-पलांडु सामान्य समुद्र-पलाण्डु 
निक m. 
m. squama=scale Ophthalmol. Tapi m. ____2=scilla (scill.) Pharm. समुद्र-पलांडु Squamata Zool.(covered with scales) 
शल्किनः m.pl. 
squint टेरता . squamosa=squamosal bone squint-eyed टेर, टेराक्ष nfn. squamosal n. Zool. अग्नगंडास्थि । squinting eye टेर-नेत्र n. squamosal bone Zool. (upper and squirrel कलन्दक m. (ancient word) 
anterior part of the temporal Sr (strontium) Chem. 7 (TUTTE) bone) अग्नगंडास्थि n. 
s.s. (sum of squares) Statistics व. य. squamous epithelium=pavement (वर्ग-योग) 
epithelium Anat. शल्काधिच्छद m. 'S' shaped अवग्रहचिह्नाकार,अवग्रहाकार mfn. square Math. I (a. figure) समायत m. st. (stone; I4 lbs.) स्त. (प्रस्तर) 
(सम+आयत rectangle) | 
stability स्थायित्व . 2 (power) (sq.) वर्ग m. (व.) stability of data Statistics सामग्री square bracket = crotchet [ ] स्थायित्व १. 
कोणाभिवार m. 
stabilizerb. स्थायिकरण 1. squated वर्गकोष्ठित mfn. 
stable स्थायी (-इन्) mfn. square diagram Statistics वर्ग चित्र n. ___s. equilibrium Phys. स्थायी समतोल squared paper वर्गकोष्ठित पत्र, वर्ग-पत्र n. square of the radius अर-वर्ग m. stable fiy गोष्ठ-मक्षी . square prism वर्ग-संक्षेत्र । 
stactometer Pharm. पाश्चुति-मान m. square root Math. वर्ग-मूल । 
stactos (Gk.) आश्चुति . square thread Mach. वर्ग-सूत्र n. staff कर्मचारि-वर्ग, कर्मचारी (-इन्) m. . squaring Math. द्विघातन n. 
stag beetle Zool. (having branched squarish (stem) Bot. चतुःपार्श्व mfn. __mandibles) शाखि-हनु भृङ्गm. squash n. I (any species of Cucur- stage I अवस्था f. 
bita) कूष्माण्ड' m. 
2 Microscopy मंच m. 2 फल-पानक 1. 
3 प्रक्रम m. squash vb. न्यापीडन n. 
stage micrometer Microscopy मंच squash beetle कूष्माण्ड-भृङ्ग m. 
अणुमान m. 
__ 
m. 
819﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
stand स्थाम 1. standard n. I प्रमाप m. 
2 = vexillum Bot. ध्वज m. s. candle-international candle s. chamfer Engin. प्रमाप-अवलुम्प 
m. 
s. clock Phys. प्रमाप घटक m. s. conditions प्रमाप-परिस्थिति f. s. configuration Math. प्रमापानुन्यास 
m. 
s. deviation Statistics प्रमाप विचलन 
__n. 
stages of the bill Parliament विधेयक- 
प्रक्रम M. stagger विह्वरण 1., विहार m. (ancient 
word having only this meaning) stain (colouring material) अभिरंजक 
m. staining अभिरंजन 7. 
s. box अभिरंजन-समुद्ग m. stainless अकलुष mfn. 
s. steel अकलुष वज्रायस n. 
s. steel basin अकलुष वज्रायस-पात्री . staircase सोपान 1., सोपानपंक्ति stalactite Geol. आश्चुताश्म m. stalagmite Geol. निश्चुताश्म m. stalagmometer निश्चुतिमान m. stalagmos (Gk.) निश्चुति f. stalaktos (Gk.) आश्चुति . stale Com. पर्युषित, काल-तिरोहित mfn. 
s. cheque Com. काल-तिरोहित धनादेश 
__ m. stalk Bot. वृन्तn. stalk-like वृन्त-सदृश mfn. stamen Bot. पुंकेसर m. staminal Bot. I (pert. to stamens) 
पुंकेसरीय mfn. 2 (consisting of stamens) पुंकेसरी 
(-इन्) mfn. staminate flowers Bot. पुंकेसरि पुष्प n. staminode (sterile stamen) वन्ध्यकेसर 
s. error Statistics प्रमाप विभ्रम m. s. fast red Col. Ind. प्रमाप स्थिर रक्त 
m. s. for comparison Statistics 
तुलना-प्रमाप m. s. form Math. प्रमाप रूप n. s. gold Math. प्रमाप स्वर्णn. s. lake red Col. Ind. प्रमाप लाक्षक 
रक्त m. s. masses प्रमाप पुञ्ज m. s. nut प्रमाप नह m. s. of accuracy Statistics परिशुद्धता 
प्रमाप m. s. of living निर्वाह-प्रमाप, जीवन-स्तर 
m. s. position Math. प्रमाप-स्थिति f. S. red Col. Ind. प्रमाप रक्त m. s. substance प्रमाप पदार्थ m. s. thermometer प्रमाप तापमान m. 
s. weights प्रमाप वट्टक m. standardization प्रमापण n. standardize vb. प्रमापण 1. standardized death rate Statistics 
प्रमापित मृत्यु-अर्घm. . . . : standardized fruit products प्रमापित 
फल-निर्मिति f... 
m. 
stamp vb. मुद्रांकन . stamp n. प्रमुद्रा f., मुद्रांक m. 
s. duty मुद्रांक-कर m. 
S. rack मुद्रा-निलय m. stamping machine मुद्रांकन-यन्त्र, मुद्रांकित्र 
n. 
Adminis. 
"stamps and other taxes 
मुद्रांक तथा अन्य कर m. . 
5.820 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
standards office Phys. (office where stannyl Chem. त्रयुल 7. 
_standards are kept) प्रमापालय m. stapedial plate Anat. पदाधान-पट्ट m. stand at ease Drill स्थीयतां सुखम् stapes I Anat.=stirrup bone पदाधान, stand easy Drill यथासुखम्' 
पदाधानास्थि ।. stand for vb. प्रतिनिधान, प्रतिनिधि 
2=stirrup TETETT n. standing I Com. स्थायी (-इन्) mfn. Staph. (Staphylococcus) पु. गो. (पुंज 
s. committee स्थायि-समिति/. __गोलाणु) s. expenses स्थायी व्यय m. 
staphylococcal antigen=staphylo 2 n. सेवाकाल m. 
. gen पुंजगोलाणु-प्रतिजन=पुंजप्रतिजन m. 3 (position) स्थिति f. 
Staphylococcus (Staph.) (a genus of standing level Ophthalmol. (when bacteria made up of spherical 
angle is obtuse) अधिप्रवण 
cells arranged in irregular groups) stand on the arc Math. चाप पर स्थित पुंजगोलाणु (पु. गो.) 
होना (Hindi) 
Staph. albus श्वेत पु. गो... Stanley red=cloth red 
Staph. aureus (forms golden yel stann-, stanno- (stannum) Chem. त्रपु ___ low cultures) स्वर्ण पु. गो. stannane (stann - + methane) Chem. Staph. candicans (from air and 
अप्वीन्य. 
___water) जलवायु पु. गो. stannary (a tin mine, tinworks, a Staph. cereus सिक्थ पु. गो. 
region containing tinworks) त्रपुष्ठ Staph. cereus albus सिक्थ श्वेत पु. 
m. (cf. गोष्ठ) stannate Chem. अप्वीय । 
Staph, cereus aureus सिक्थ स्वर्ण stanni- (stannic) Chem. त्रप्वि-(अप्विक) stannic Chem. frati mfn. 
Staph. cereus flavus (from ab s. acid fia HFT n. 
scesses producing a yellow pig s. chloride अप्विक नीरेय .. 
ment) सिक्थ पिंग पु. गो. s. oxide प्विक जारेय. 
Staph. citreus (gives a yellowish s. sulphide प्विक शुल्बेय . 
____colour in cultures) निम्बुवर्ण पु. गो. stannide Chem. अप्वेय. 
Staph. delendae muscae See stanni-ferous Chem. त्रपु-भर mfn. 
Staph. muscae stannite I Chem. ऋवित . 
Staph. epidermidis (a microbe 2 Mineral. अप्विज m. (-इज for खनिज that always inhabits the skin 
mineral) 
and the hair follicles) चर्म पु. गो. stanno- = stann 
Staph. fulvus (produces a rose stannous Chem. अप्य mfn. 
___red pigment) अरुण पु. गो. s. chloride प्य नीरेय . 
Staph. manfredii (from the spu s. oxide प्य जारेय 1. 
tum of lobar pneumonia) क्लोम stannum Chem. T4 n. 
पाकीय पु. गो. 
821 
___ गो. 
पु. गो. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
पु. गो. 
stonian. 
Staph. muscae (causes a fatal in- starfish Zool. (an echinoderm) शल्य 
fection in house fiies) मलिहा तारक m. 
star grass=colic root शूल-शिफा f. Staph. passetii (from pus, pro- start vb. प्रारम्भण . 
ducing a yellow pigment) perut starter i Bact. (that which start पु. गो. 
fermentation) आरम्भक, किण्वारम्भी Staph. pharyngis (found in acute (-इन्) m. 
nasal catarrh) पीनस पु. गो. 
2 Automobile प्रबोध m. Staph.plicatilis (associated with . motor-s. वहिन-प्रबोध m. 
perleche which is a disease of starter motor Automobile प्रबोध-वहिन n. 
सुक्क corner of mouth) सक्क पु. गो. starter signal Ry. प्रारम्भ-संज्ञप्ति f. Staph. pyogenes albus-Staph. starter switch Automobile प्रबोध-संवियुत् 
albus 
m. Staph. pyogenes aureus=Staph. starting entry Com. प्रारम्भण-प्रविष्टि f. 
aureus 
starting friction=static friction Staph. pyogenes citreus (a form Mech. भारम्भण संघर्ष-स्थैतिक संघर्ष m. 
with citron-yellow cultures) starting point प्रस्थान-बिन्दुm. निम्बु-पीत पु. गो. 
starting post (in a race) प्रस्थान-दण्ड m. Staph. salivarius pyogenes लाला- -stase (in cryo-stase) -स्थाय __ पूय पु. गो. 
stasi- (stasis) स्थाय Staph. tetragenus = Gaffkya -stasia, -stasis -स्थाय __tetragena चतुष्क पु. गो. 
-stat -FITT Staph. ureae मिह पु. गो. 
state vb. (to express the particulars Staph. viridis flavescens (pro- of) आवेदन 1. _duces a yellowish-green pig. state N. I (condition) अवस्था, अवस्थिति, 
ment) हर्यापीत पु. गो. 
स्थिति staphylogen=staphylococcal anti 2 राज्य, संस्थान 1. 
gen पुंजप्रतिजन-पुंजगोलाणु-प्रतिजन m. state laws राज्य-विधि m. star (crystals) तारा . 
statement आवेदन, कथन, वक्तव्य, विवरण 1. star burner तारा-दाहक m. 
s. in lieu of prospectus प्रविवरण starch Chem. मंड m. 
स्थानी (-इन्) m. s. and potassium iodide paper s. of accounts लेखा-विवरण 1. ___मंड तथा दहातु जम्बेय पत्र . 
s. of affairs अवस्था-विवरण 1. $. gum=dextrin aff. 
s. of fact तथ्य-कथन n. s. iodide paper मंड-जम्बय-पत्र. state of matter भूतद्रव्य-अवस्था . .s. paper मंड-पत्र 1. 
s. of momentary rest Math. s. paste मंड-लेपी f. 
क्षणिक विश्राम-अवस्था f. starchy food Zool. मंडान्न . 
s. of rest Phys. विश्राम-अवस्था . 822 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
s. of tension Mil. आतति-अवस्था f. 
s. groups सांख्यिकीय वर्गm. s. of uniform motion Phys. एक s. law सांख्यिकीय नियम m. 
रूप-गति-अवस्था । 
s. mechanics सांख्यिकीय-यान्त्रिकी state policy राज्य-नीति f. 
s. memoirs सांख्यिकीय विवरण 1. -static (adj. from -stasis -स्थाय) -स्थायीय s. methods सांख्यिकीय-रीति . 
_mfn. 
s. regularity सांख्यिकीय-नियमिता static adj. स्थैतिक mfn. 
s. sampling सांख्यिकीय-निदर्शन 1. S. friction rifere are m. 
s. series सांख्यिकीय-माला. s. refraction स्थिराक्ष भुजायन . 
s. signs सांख्यिकीय चिह्न.. statics स्थैतिकी f. 
s. unit सांख्यिकीय एकक . hydro-statics तरल-स्थैतिकी /. statistician wifeui m. station Rly. FITT n. (ancient word) statistics I (science) wifeuit f. stationary स्थावर, स्थिर mfn. 
2 (collection of figures) समंक .. s. air स्थिर वायु m. 
s. of attributes गुण-समंक 1. s. boiler स्थावर बाष्पित्र. 
s. of variations चल-समंक 1. s. centre-dead centre Mach. (in statocyst=lithocyst Zool. स्थितिकोष्ठ 
a machine tool a centre that m. 
does not revolve) स्थिर केन्द्र n. statolith=lithite Zool. (a calcareous s. engine Phys. स्थावर गंत्र . . . concretion in a lithocyst) स्थित्युपल s. wave Phys. स्थावर तरंग m. 
m. stationet लेखनिक m. 
stator Phys. RIITT m. stationery लेखन-सामग्री . 
statue प्रतिमा . stationery and printing लेखनसामग्री status I स्थिति, प्रस्थिति f. 
तथा मुद्रण n. 
2 अवस्था . stationery case लेखन-धान n. 
status nascendi-nascence = nas stationery rack लेखन-निलय m. 
cent state जायमान-अवस्था station-master Ry. स्थात्रपति, स्थानिक m. statute Lanm परिनियम m. station platform Ry. स्थात्र-मंचक m. s.-barred debt परिनियम-तिरोहित ऋण statistic n. (any statistical element; 
. estimate of a number or numbers s. of limitations परिसीमा-परिनियम describing a numerical property 
__ m. of an assemblage......) संख्याति f. statutory Com. परिनियत mfn. statistical (pertaining to statistics) s. books परिनियत पुस्तn. 
सांख्यिकीय mfr. . 
s. company परिनियत प्रमंडल n. s. abstract सांख्यिकीय संक्षेप m. 
s. meeting परिनियत अधिवेशन n. s. book सांख्यिकीय पुस्त, गणना-पुस्तक n. s. report परिनियत वृत्त ।. s. bureau wifeata fairt m. stay Mach. I स्थाप m. s. data सांख्यिकीय-सामग्री .. 
2 (a tie piece to contribute stiff 
823 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
ness) प्राततिक . 
s. chocolate प्रबाष्प न्यवरक्तपीत m. St. Denis direct red=St. Denis red s. green प्रबाष्प हरि m. 
=cotton red S. 
s. indigo blue प्रबाष्प निनील नील m. steadier स्थिरक m. 
steapsin (stearin + pepsin Biochem. flames. ज्वाला-स्थिरक m. 
मेदःपाचि f. steadily धीरतया 
stearate Chem. quite n. steadily increasing धीरतया वर्धमान (H. stearic Chem. वसिक mfn. 
धीरे धीरे बढ़ता हुआ) 
s. acid वसिक अम्ल .. steam प्रबाष्प, बाष्प m. (vapour बाष्प) stearin Chena. वसि f. 
s. bath प्रबाष्प-तापन n. 
stearolic acid (stearic + oleic + s. box-steam chest प्रबाष्प-धान 1. -ic) Chem. वसम्रक्षिक अम्लn. s. chamber Phys. प्रबाष्प-वेश्म ". stearyl Chem. वसाल n. s. chest-s. box 
steatite=soapstone s. chest cover Mach. प्रबाष्प-धान आ- steel वजायस. 
वरण. 
s. bat वज्रायस-दण्ड m. s. distillation प्रबाष्प आसवन n. 
s. blue Col. Ind. बजायस नील m. s. dome Rly. Eng. (vertical cham s. grey Col. Ind. वज्रायस धूसर m. ber on the top of a steam s. knife edge वज्रायस-क्षुरधारा. boiler) प्रबाष्प-छाद m. . 
s. plates=fish plates Rly. वज्रायस .s. engine प्रबाष्प-गन्त्र n. 
s. -heated vats प्रबाष्प-तप्त कुण्ड . 
s. rule वज्रायस-रेखक m.. s. heating pressure gauge Rly. s. spring tape वज्रायस-स्कन्द पट्टिका. 
Eng. प्रबाष्प-तापन-निपीड-प्रामान m. s. tyre Phys. वजायस-पवि m. s.-jacketed Mach. प्रबाष्प-चोलित mfn. s. wheel वज्रायस-चक्र n. s. locomotive प्रबाष्प-चलित्र n. 
s.-wire ropes वज्रायस-रज्जु ... s. oven प्रबाष्प-कन्दु m. 
s. yard वज्रायस-यष्टि f. s. pipe Rly. Eng. प्रबाष्प-नाड n. steep vb. Chem. निमज्जन 1. s. sterilizer प्रबाष्प-रोगाणुहा (-हन्) m. steep adj. प्रपाती (-इन्) mfn. s. sterilizer, pressure निपीड प्रबाष्प steer vb. अरित्र-चालन, अरित्रण .. 
रोगाणुहा (हन्) m. 
steering column Automobile अरित्र-दण्ड s.-tight (not permitting the leak 
ing through of steam) अबाष्प s.gear अरित्र-दन्ती (-इन्) m. च्यावी (-इन्) mfn. ( बाष्प short for s, gear box अरित्र-दन्ति-धान n. प्रबाष्प) 
s. wheel अरित्र-चक्र । s, turbinelocomotiveप्रबाष्प-वरीवर्त- steering committee Politics कर्णधार 
चलित्र 7. 
समिति s. vehicle Rly. प्रबाष्प-वाहन n. Steinach's operation Zool. रेतःप्रणाली steam. black Col. Ind. प्रबाष्प काल m. बन्धन ., . 
पट्टm. 
m. 
824 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
Steinbuhl yellow=permanent yel- stepped pulley Mach. क्रमाकृषि m. 
low 
steps ऋम m. stelar system Bot. मध्यरम्भ-संहति step short Drill ह्रस्व-पदम् stele Bot. (the central cylinder in the steradian Math. (angle subtended 
stems and roots) मध्यरम्भ m. 
by the square of the radius) stellachrome black Col. Ind. उडुवर्णक अर-वर्ग-कोण m. 
काल m. 
stercorol=coprosterol s. blue-black उडुवर्णक नील-कृष्ण m. Sterculia Bot. वनवातामति . (-ति for प्रजाति s. brown उडुवर्णक बभ्रु m. . 
genus) stellar focus=principal focus 
S. foetida सामान्य वनवातामm. stellar spectrum तारा-रंगावलि f. stere I (kilo-liter) सहस्र-प्रस्थ m. stellate Bot. ताराकृति mfm. 
2 (cubic meter) धन-मान m. stellate cells Zool. ताराकार-कोशा, तारा deca-stere दश- घनमान m. 
वत् कोशा . 
stereid bundle Bot. (bundle of scle stellate red pigment Zool. ताराबद् रक्त renchymatous fibres) gayet m. __ रंगा. 
stereo- (three dimensions) Farfahl stem Bot. I (the main axis, trunk) stereo- (spatial) वरिम 
काण्ड, स्कन्ध m. 
stereo-chemistry वरिम-रसायन .. ('spa 2 (a stalk supporting leaves and tial chemistry') flowers) वृन्त । 
stereoscope त्रिविमेक्ष m. (त्रिविमा three 3 any axis which develops buds dimensions) and shoots in place of roots) stereotropism Biol. furfaciat f. स्तम्भ m. 
sterigma Bot. (conidia-bearing stalk) s. body Zool. स्तम्भ-काय-त'मध्य 2. कणीवृन्त १. s. climber Bot. स्तम्भ-प्रतान m. Sterigmatocystis, Sterigmocystis s. tendril Bot. स्तम्भ-संजनी / 
वृन्तकोष्ठकति f. (क for कवक fungus, stencil निकृन्त m. 
-ति for प्रजाति genus) stencil-punch निकृन्त-छिद्रक m. 
steriler (not producing young) वन्ध्या stenographer आशुलिपिक m. stenopaic slit Ophthalmol. संकुचित-दरी 2 Bact, (free from micro-organ 
isms) अजीवाणु mfn. step पाद m., पद 1., क्रम m. 
sterile milk अजीवाणु दुग्ध n. step back Drill पृष्ठतः पदम् 
sterility अजीवाणुता. stephanite Mineral. पंचरांशिज m. (-इज sterilization जीवाणुधात m. . for खनिज mineral) 
sterilize vb. जीवाणुहनन ॥. black silver काल रजत 1. 
sterilized हतजीवाणु mfn. brittle silver ore भिदुर रजत-अयस्क n. sterilized chemical solution Pharm. step out Drill अतिपादम 
हतजीवाणु रसायनिक विलयन n. 
825 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
sterilizer FANET (-) m. 
stibiconite (stibium+Gk. konis dust) sterilizing जीवाणुन mfn. 
Mineral. उदांजजारिज m. (-इज' for S. agent queat (-) m. 
खनिज mineral) s. bath जीवाणुध्न तापन । 
stibine Chem. अंजनी s. box जीवाणुध्न समुद्गm. 
stibio-palladinite Mineral. defe $. container vitaTULET ETETT N. 
m. (-इज for खनिज mineral) sterin Chem. infa f. 
stibium Chem. Yun n. sterling 1 Tf. 
stibnite-antimonite Mineral, of sterling loans आङ्गलमुद्रा उद्धार M. 
. (-इज for खनिज mineral) sterna pl. of sternum 
stibonium Chem. अंजतातु m. sternad adv. Anat. (toward the stick ofte f. 
sternum) rifet n. 
stick insect Zool. U-te m. sternal 1 m. = sternum gifte 1. stick lac Col. Ind. (crude product 
2 adj. (pertaining to the sternum) containing the twigs upon which उरोस्थिक mfn. 
it is formed) fa-ater f. sternal rib= true rib seiya m. stick sulphur-cane brimstone= 
(orifere nat) 
___roll sulphur यष्टि गन्धक m. sternite Zool. (ventral plate) Hrinę m. stiff your mfn. sternum I = breast bone Fifa 1. stiffened Engin. o mfn. 
2 Zool. (ventral plate) 74 m. stiffener Engin. Fi*** m. steroid Chem. FTIGT mfn. 
stiffening plate Engin. स्तम्भन पट्ट m. sterol Biochem. (any of a class of solid stiff rod of cells Zool. 7 F12T-5 m. 
higher alcohols) सान्द्रव m. 
stigma 1 (receptive spot) Bot. form. stetho- 327 
2 eye spot (of a protozoan) stethometer Physiol. 5TTT m. 
ETTİETT 11., Afwatt, att f. stethoscope 1 n. 5778 m. 
stigmata (ple of stigma)=airholes 2 vb. aus n. 
Zool. (by which the insect brea steward = attendant 345 m. thes) 577-Fee n. 
(ancient word) 
stilbeneविरालिलेन्य 1. (toluylene विरारि stewardess Juefit f. sthenic Med. yara mfn. 
stilbene dye विरालिलेन्य रंजक m. -sthenic - catat 
stilbene orange Col. Ind. fruftra stiacciato = very low relief Art TTTT 1. 
fra Tn. 
s. yellow factfararu fram. stib- (stibium) Chem. t, 
stilbite=desmine Mineral, y m. stibial-antimonial Chem. His mfn. (-59 for aftos mineral) stibiated (combined with or contain- stilbosterol (a ne for women) Fit 
* ing antimony) 5-e mfn. 
Sa m. 
1826 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
still तदापि 
stirrup pressure pump पदाधान निपीड still-distiller आसोत्र n. 
उदंच m. stillingia (stilling.)=queen's root, stock Com. I (general) स्कन्ध m. 
queen root=yaw root Pharm. In the English language it has (promotes flow of saliva) लाला-मूल 37 senses (see Webster), all con 
nected at the base with trunk of stilt root Bot. जटा-मूल n. 
a. tree'. In the commercial world stilus=stylus Phys. (as in a phono it is the share (or help). First 
graph) सूची . 
(Hindi prat) is useable literally as stimulant उद्दीपक m. 
'trunk of a tree', or figuratively ___s. beverage उद्दीपक पेय . 
as "help, assistance' (कन्धा लगाना) stimulate vb. I उद्दीपन 1. 
2 (national debt)=public debt ___ 2 Physiol. (irritate) उद्दीपन M. 
राष्ट्र-ऋण . stimulation I उद्दीपन n. 
3 (capital raised in shares by a 2 Physiol. (irritation) 561467 than public company) अंशपुंजी f. (short उद्दीपना f. 
for प्रमंडल-अंशपुंजी) stimulus उद्दीपक M., उद्दीपना f. 
4 (goods unsold) अविक्रीतक .. sting I . दंश m. 
closing s. संवरण स्कन्ध m. 20b. दंशन . 
deads. मृत स्कन्ध, अविक्रेय स्कन्ध m. stinging fly Zool. 59-eft f. (cf. Mai deferreds. प्रास्थगित स्कन्ध m. ___ thili डांस) 
inscribed s. अन्तलिखित स्कन्ध m. stipe Bot. I (a. short stalk or support) opening s. प्रारंभण स्कन्ध m. 
वृन्तक n. 
s. account स्कन्ध-लेखा . 2 (in mycology, the stem sup s. and shares स्कन्ध तथा अंशm. 
porting the cap or pileus) छत्रवृन्त n. ' s. and shares broker स्कन्ध तथा stipes Zool. उद्वन्त 1. 
__ अंश मध्यग m. stipulate leaf Bot. अनुपनि पत्र । 
s. book स्कन्ध-पुस्त . stipule Bot. (an appendage at the S.-broker स्कन्ध-मध्यग m. 
base of the leaf) 7937 . 
s, certificate स्कन्ध-प्रमाणपत्र । stir vb. विचालन . 
s, exchange-s. market स्कन्ध stirrer विचालक m. 
विपणि m. stirring विचालन . 
s.-holder स्कन्ध-भागी, स्कन्ध-धारी (-इन) s. apparatus विचालन-साधित. 
m. s. rod विचालन-शलाका 
s. in trade पण्य-स्कन्ध m. stirrup I पदाधान . 
s.-jobber स्कन्ध-वणिक् m. 2-stapes Anat. पदाधान . 
s. market स्कन्ध-विपणि m. 3 Phys. (of a balance, etc. or of s. receipt स्कन्ध-प्राप्ति f. vibration magnetometer) 4TETT 11. s. register स्कन्ध-पंजी. 
827 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
mfn. 
s.-taking स्कन्ध-मूल्यन, स्कन्ध-गणन n. Stone Age culture पाषाण-युग-संस्कृति s. warrant स्कन्ध-अधिपत्र n. 
stone cell Bot. (thick-walled cell) stock-breeding farm पश-अभिजनन-प्रक्षेत्र स्थूलभित्ति-कोशा . 
.. 
stone fly Zool. अश्म-पतंग m. stockman पशुधनपाल, पशुधनिक m. stone green Col. Ind. प्रस्तर हरि m. stock-owner पशुधनी, पशुधन-स्वामी, पशु- s. grey प्रस्तर धूसर m. 
स्वामी (-इन्) m. 
stoneroot = collinsonia (the stoichiology (that part of physio- rhizome occurs in very hard 
logy which treats of elements pieces) अश्ममूल . or principles composing animal stoneware (a species of coarse tissues) देहतात्त्विकी. 
potter's ware) काश्म m. (कुत्सितोऽश्मा) stoichiometric, -metrical तारवयौगिक s. acid funnel काश्म अम्ल निवाप m. 
s. acid jug काश्म अम्ल कुम्भी . stoichiometry Chem. (treating of s. funnel काश्म निवापm. 
the laws of chemical combina s. jar काश्म कलश M. tions; calculating combining stony (as the endocarp) पाषाणवत् 
weights etc. of the elements) stony coral Zool. शिला-प्रवाल m. तात्त्वयौगिकी. 
stony layer Bot. अश्म-स्तर m. stoker Ry. Eng. इन्धनदाता (-तु) m. stool पीठ . stolon Bot. विरोह m. 
stop I Com. विराम m., रोधन . stoma Bot. मुख. 
2 Phys. संवार m. stomach आमाशय m. (जठर- for gastro-) stop clock विराम-घटक m. stomach cancer जठरार्बुद m. 
stopcock शिखिपिधा. stomadaeum=stomoadaeum 
brass s. पित्तल-शिखिपिधा. stomata Bot. pl. of stoma 
glass capillary s. काच-केशाल-शिखि stomatal aperture Bot. मुख-छिद्र . 
पिधा. stomium Boi. मुख n. 
vulcanite s. गन्धधुषि-शिखिपिधा. stomodeum Zool. (oral part of ali- stoppage Com. रोध m. 
mentary tract) मुखपथ m. . s. in transit मार्गे-रोध m. Stomoxys Zool. तीक्ष्णमुखाति f. (-आति for stopper पिधा f. 
प्रजाति genus) 
lid पिधान 1. $. calcitrans = stable fly tisk stoppered fafeter mfn. 
तीक्ष्णमुख m. 
____s. bottle पिधित-कूपी . stone I अश्म, प्रस्तर, पाषाण m., शिला. stopping Com. Trant n. 
2 (of a fruit) Bot. अष्ठि f. 
__s. payment शोधन-रोध M. 3 (st.; 14 lbs.) SETT m. (FT.; 88 stop signal=home signal Rly. प्रांजलि) . . 
विराम-संज्ञप्ति Stone Age पाषाण युग .. 
stop valve Mach. विराम कपाट .. 
bron 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
.. 
stop watch विराम-घटी. 
stove परितापनी . storage I संग्रह M. 
stove black Col. Ind. परितापनी काल m. 2 भाण्डागार-भाटक m. 
S. T. P. (standard temperature and 
• storage battery Elec. संग्रह-समूहा . ___pressure) प्र. ता. नि. (प्रमाप-ताप-निपीड) storage jar संग्रह-कलश m. 
Str. (Streptococcus) मा. गो. (माला storage products Bot. HVETT FEE N. गोलाणु) storage roots संग्रह-मूल 1. 
strafing Mil. दण्डन 2. storage tank संग्रह-तडाग m. 
straight e mfn. store rub. संग्रहण n. 
s. angle Math. ऋजु कोण m. 22. भाण्डागार १. (H. भण्डार) 
s. chain Chem. ऋजु शृंखल m. s.-house भाण्डागार, कोष्ठागार n. 
s. line Math. सरल-रेखा, ऋजु-रेखा f. s.-keeper भाण्डागारिक, कोष्ठागारिक m. s.-line motion Mach. ऋजुरेखा-गति 
s.-room भाण्ड-कोष्ठ m. stored food Bot. संचित अन्न . 
straightwinged ऋजुपक्ष mfn. stored up संचित, संगृहीत. fn. 
strain I (progeny) Frailer f. stores Com. (goods in store) आगार- 2 (hereditary character) पित्र्यगुण m. 
भाण्डn. 
3 (a trace, a streak) रेखा f. stores Com. कोष्ठागार 1. (from मनुस्मृति, 4 (tendency) प्रवृत्ति . 
वाल्मीकि रामायण) 
5 (sort, kind) प्रकार m. departmental s. बहुविभागी भाण्डागार 6 (having a common lineage but 
not constituting a breed) समजनि m, s. account कोष्ठागार-लेखा . 
strain I प्रायास m. (as in नेत्रायास eye s. issued निर्गमित वस्तु . 
strain) s. ledger कोष्ठागार प्रपंजी . 
2 (in elasticity) Mech. (deforma s. received book प्राप्त-वस्तु-पुस्त ". tion due to force) विकार m. s. sheet भाण्डागार-स्तार m. . 
3 Bot. अंश. (See separate strain) storey भूमि f., तल 7. (Bengali, Gujarati strained (in elasticity) Phys. विकृत 
तल) 
mfn. (deformed) stork Zool. महाबक m. 
stramonium I=devil's apple धत्तूरक storm प्रकम्पन m. (64-75 m. p. h. in 
Beaufort's Wind Scale) 
2 (stramon.)=stramonii folia= stormy petrel Zool. (any of certain stramonium leaves = thorn ___small petrels) दीपपक्षिका . 
apple leaves Pharm. (dried leaves stout I Phys. (strong) दृढ wfn. 
of the Jimson weed) धत्तूरकपत्र . 
• 2 (corpulent) स्थूल mfn. 
stramony=stramonium stovaine Chem. (much less toxic than strand (fibre) Bot. गुण m., पट्टी f. 
• cocaine प्राचेतनी) आचेतनी f. (आ little strap Marh. उपपट्ट m. +अचेतनी) 
2=belt पट्टक m. 829﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
strategic योधननैतिक mfn. 
streaming movement Zool. (inside strategist योधननीतिज्ञ m. 
the endoplasm) प्रवाहि-गति. strategy Mil. योधननीति f. 
stream-line (the resistance to flow stratification स्तरण . (स्तरकरण, स्तरभवन, __is least possible) अवाहरोधी, अवात 
स्तरनिर्माण, स्तरविन्यसन) 
रोधी (as a railway engine), सुवाही stratified (arranged in, or composed (-इन) mfn. 
of strata स्तृत or layers स्तर) स्तृत, streamline filtration=edge filtra स्तृतमय, स्तरित mfn. 
___tion अनि-पावन n. stratified epithelium Zool. स्तृताधिच्छद streamline locomotive Rly. सुवाहि 
चलित्र, अवातरोधि चलित्र n. stratify vb. स्तरण n. (स्तर-करण, स्तर-निर्माण, streamliner Riy. सुवाही (-इन्) m. 
स्तर-विन्यसन, स्तर-भवन) 
Streblus = Trophis Bot. शाखोटति . stratosphere = isothermal region (-ति for प्रजाति genus) 
समताप मण्डल n. 
S. asper=Trophis aspera सामान्य stratum (from Sanskrit स्तृत) स्तृत .. शाखोट m. (Cf. Bengali seora, 
2 Anat..स्तृत 1., स्तर m. . 
Hindi sabora, Marathi sahor) s. compactum निबिड स्तृत 1. street-car = tram-car रथ्या-यान . s. corneum उपर्यधिचर्म, शाङ्ग-स्तर m. street rabies virus = street virus. s. germinativum (consisting of अस्थिरालर्क विषाणुः अस्थिर विषाणु m. 
cells which continually divide, strength शक्ति f., बल, प्राबल्य 1. to replace the rest of the epi- strengthening tissue Bot. बलद-ऊति. dermis as it wears away) रोहि- strength testing machine बल-परीक्षित्र 
स्तर m. s. granulosum (a layer of granu- Strepsiptera Zool. (anterior wings _lar cells) कणि-स्तर m. 
modified into halteres) संतोलामपक्षाः s. lucidum (above उत् the कणिस्तर) m.pl. 
उत्कणि-स्तर m. 
Streptococcus (Str.) (a. genus of s. Malpighii - Malpighian micro-organisms including those 
layer of the epidermis 
spherical bacteria whose cells. s. spongiosum छिद्रिष्ठ स्तृत ॥. 
occur in chains) माला-गोलाणु straw I तृण 2. 
(मा. गो.) 2 Agriculture बुस . (H. भूसा) 
Str. acidi lactici (produces lactic strawberry तृणबदर m., . 
acid) दुग्धिकाम्ल मा. गो. strawberry Hy तृणबदर-मक्षी . 
Str. albus श्वेत मा. गो. straw blue Col. Ind. तण नील m. 
alpha s. = Str. haemolyticus. straw hat तृण-टोपी f. 
प्रकार मा. गो. stray field Phys. आगन्तुक क्षेत्र 1. 
anhemolytic str. (any streptococ stream स्रोत . . 
cus which does not hemolyze: 
830 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
red blood corpuscles) yaiturifera 
मा. गो. Str. aphthicola आस्यस्फोट मा. गो. Str. articulorum (produces a _fatal joint disease) संधि मा. गो. 
Bargen'ss.=Str. bovis (found 
in cases of chronic ulcerative 
colitis) मलाशयकोप मा. गो. Str. bombycis (causes flacherie ___ in silkworms) कौशेय मा. गो. 
Str. bovis गो मा. गो. Str. brevis (occurs in short chains) 
ह्रस्व मा. गो. Str. cadaveris शव मा. गो. Str. cardioarthritidis सन्धि-हृत्कोप 
मा. गो. Str. cinnabareus (produces a ___reddish pigment) हिंगुल मा. गो. Str. citrovorus (found in sour ___milk and starters') दधिपूर्व मा. गो. 
Clarke's str. See Str. mutans Str. coli gracilis (from meconium - जातविष्टा) जातविष्ठा मा. गो. 
Str. conglomeratus (from pati 
ents with scarlatinaशोणत्वग-ज्वर) 
शोणत्वग् मा. गो. Str. coronatus वलय मा. गो. Str. coryzae contagiosae equo rum-Str. equi सांसर्गिक अश्वनास 
मा. गो. Str. diffusus (causes a clouding 
of the fluid when cultivated on ___bouillon) अन्न मा. गो. 
Str. dissei (from the blood of a 
Japanese affected with syphilis) निप्पोन मा. गो. Str.endocarditicus हदन्तःकोप मा. गो. Str. enteritis आन्त्रकोप मा. गो. 
Str. equi (from the contagious 
coryza. of horses) अश्वनासा मा. गो. Str. equinus (found in the intes 
tines of horses) अश्वान्त्र मा. गो. Str. erysipelatis अरुणचर्म मा. गो. Str. faecalis मल मा. गो. Fehleisen's str.=Str. erysipela 
tis Str. fermenti (producing the ropy 
condition of wine) मद्यरज्ज मा. गो. Str. flexuosus (in serpentine cha 
ins of oval or spherical cells) 
सर्परूप मा. गो. Stt. gallinatum कक्कुट मा. गो. gamma s.=anhemolytics. इकार 
मा.गो. Str. giganteus urethrae (from the healthy urethra and from 
urine) मूत्र अतिकाय मा. गो. Str. havaniensis (from the vomit 
of yellow fever) पीतज्वरवमि मा. गो. hemolytic str., Str. haemoly 
ticus (any streptococcus which is capable of hemolyzing red _blood corpuscles) शोणांशन मा. गो. Str. hollandicus (from ropy 
milk) दुग्धरज्जु मा. गो. Str. hydrophoborum आलीय मा. 
गो. Str. impetiginis (from the vesic 
les of impetigo contagiosa) 
पिटिका मा. गो. Str. insectorum (from diseased 
insects) कीट मा. गो. Str. involutus (found in cattle affected with foot and mouth 
disease) पादास्यरोगीय मा. गो. Str. lactis, Str. lacticus (found in 
.. 833 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
naturally soured milk) दुग्धाम्ल Str. nomae (from cases of noma) मा. गो. 
आस्याभिपाक मा. गो. . Str. laughlini (from cases of Str. ochroleucus (chromogenic 
dengue) शूलास्थिज्वरीय मा. गो. 
_species from the urine) वर्णजन Str. lebinis = Str. acidi lac 
मा. गो. tici 
str. of Ostertag (causes vaginitis Str. longus दीर्घ मा. गो. 
verrucosa in cattle) कणियोनि मा.गो. Str. lucae=Bacillus ulceris can Str. perniciosi psittacorum, Str. 
crosi (from soft chancre) मुटूपस्थ 
psittaci (from disease of gray व्रणीय मा. गो. 
parrots) शुक मा. गो. Str. mastitidis == Str.agalactiae Str. pneumoniae क्लोमपाक मा. गो. 
(breast disease) स्तनकोपीय मा. गो. Str. puerperalis प्रसूतिज्वर मा. गो. Str. meningitidis = Neisseria Str. pyogenes पूयजन मा. गो. 
meningitidis मास्तिष्क मा. गो. 
Str. pyogenes malignus पूय मा. गो. Str. mesenterioides (causes the Str. rheumaticus (a variety which 
dextrin fermentation of cane appears to be associated with sugar) दक्षिजन मा. गो. 
rheumatic fever) सन्धिज्वरीय मा. गो. Str. mirabilis (from sewage) मल Str. salivarius (found in the sa __ प्रवाह मा. गो. 
___liva) लाला मा. गो. Str. mitior (found in endocarditis .. Str. saprophyticus (occurs in the ___lenta मन्द हृदन्तःकोष) मन्दहृत्कोप मा.गो. . vagina) योनि मा. गो. 
Str. mixtos-Str. haemolyticus Str. scarlatinae (found in the Str. monomorphus (from pha throat in cases of scarlet fever 
ryngeal ulcers) गलवणीय मा. गो. 
शोणत्वग्ज्वर) शोणज्वर मा. गो. Str. morbilli, Str. morbillosus Str. septicus liquefaciens (from 
(from measles) मसूरीय मा. गो. 
blood of septic poisoning after Str. mucosus (causes mucous scarlatina) अनुशोणज्वर मा. गो. ___exudations in animals) श्लेष्मल Str. singultus (claimed to be the 
मा. गो. 
cause of post-operative hiccup) Str. muris ratti (found in some हिक्कीय मा. गो. . 
cases of rat bite fever) मषज्वरीय Str. stenos (occurs in various in मा. गो. 
flammatory conditions) . कोपीय Str. mutans (isolated from car मा. गो.. 
ious teeth) दन्ताद मा. गो. 
Str. suspectus (from blood and .Str. nocardi (from cows and spleen of cattle affected with 
goats affected with chronic in hermaturia) शोणमेहीय मा. गो. fectious, inflammation of the ... Str. tropicalis (found in derma rudder) ऊक्स्कोपीय मा. गो. 
titis cupoliformis) चर्मकोपीय मा.गो. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
Str. ureae (from stale urine) strife, conflict 1 Mil. er m. 
TT. TT. 
2 96846T, ETT m. Str. varians (from water; pro- strike Com. facra ., are n. 
duces a green pigment) efeat (originally “shops locked'; H. FT. TI. 
ESTETIST) Str. viridans (produces green strike vb. ATENTAT n. 
colour; from blood) शोण हरित strike off उच्छेदन n. HT. . . 
strike out tean n. Str. weissii (from the lungs of striking head Mil. wer-77 n. 
cattle with infectious pneumo- striking of balance Com. nia) at FT. TT. 
निकालना (Hindi) Str. wiesneri (suspected as a pos- string if n. (Hindi sic) 
sible cause of lethargic en- strip Math. #nave n., Tet f. 
cephalitis) fraselte HT. TI. fatfree s. Het f. Str. zymogenes fuasin HT. TT. striped hyena=Hyaena striata Streptothrix (S.) (a genus) HTATGETUI Zool. 7ta ym. 
m. (77.a.) 
striped muscle=striated muscle stress Phys. (the force per unit area. Anal. 7rautat f. 
called into play in an elastic body strip off अपवेष्टन १. subjected to stretching force) strobila Zool. afuse n. (fr. que seg FEATTET n. (short for year ) 
ment) stretch n. Phys. afar f. 
strobilate vb. Zool. afsnit. n. stretched तत mfn. 
strobilation=strobilization stretched spring Phys. तत स्कन्द m. strobile-strobilus Bot. (a conelike stretcher (litter) it m. (ancient aggregation of sporophylls bear 
word for litter) 
_ing sporangia) संबीजाणुपत्र . stretching force Phys. gift . strobili lupuli = lupulus Pharm. stretch modulus = modulus of : 1235 n. 
elasticity Phys. तति-मापांक = strobilization खण्डिलन n. TEUTETT-TT1 m. 
strobilus=strobile stria Med. रेखा 
stroboscope अन्तरितेक्ष m. (अन्तरित in striated=striatus Anat. then mfn. terrupted) striated muscle Anat, f ett f. stroke Phy. T m. (ancient word) striation that f. 
stroma I Bot. घनकाय m. striatus=striated. 
2 Anat. (supporting framework strictly relevant सर्वथा सुसंगत nfn. 
of an organ) FaT m. strictly speaking (precisely speak- stromal cell Anat. FETT- TT f. 
ing) uniqe 
stromeyerite (Ag, Cu), S = silver 833 
53 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
coppek glance Mineral. रताशिज M. (-इज for खनिज mineral)=रजत 
ताम्र-रुचा. strong I प्रबल mfn. 
2 (as an acid) Chem. तीव्र mfn. strong acid Chem. तीव्र अम्ल . strong affinity प्रबल-बन्धुता . strong breeze (25-31 m. p. h.) प्रवात 
m. (See Beauforts' Wind Scale) strong gale (47-54 m. p. h.) चंडवात 
m. (See Beauforts' Wind Scale) strong smell तीव्र गन्ध m. strong solution प्रबल विलयन .. strong solution of iodine == liquor 
iodi fortis (liq.iod.fort.) Pharm. 
प्रबल जम्बुकी-विलयन n. strong solution of lead subacetate 
=liquor plumbi subacetatis fortis (liq. plumb. subacet. fort.) 
-Goulards' extract - liquor plumbi fortis Pharm. प्रबल सीस 
अनुशक्तीय विलयन . strong tincture of ginger=tinctura 
zingiberis fortis (tinct. zingib. 
fort.) Pharm. प्रबल शृंगवेर-निष्कर्ष m. strong tincture of iodine = tinc 
tura iodi fortis Pharm. प्रबल जम्बुकी 
निष्कर्ष m. Strongylidae (a family) छत्रनर-वंश m. Strongyloidea (a superfamily; males 
have an umbrella-like copulatory 
bursa) छत्रनर-प्रवंश m. Strongyloides छत्रनराति f. (आति for 
प्रजाति genus) 
S. stercoralis facet GETTE m. strontia Chem. (strontium mon 
oxide, strontium hydroxide) शोणजा 
strontian Chem. (strontium, esp. in 
the form of some compound) शोणक m. s. white शोणक श्वेत m. 
s. yellow शोणक पीत, सूत्पीत m. strontiani-ferous (containing or ___yielding strontian) शोणक-भर mfn. strontianite Mineral. शोणांगीयिज m. 
(-इज for खनिज mineral) strontic Cbem. शोणिक mfn. stront-ion Chem. (ionic strontium) 
शोणायन .. (अयनिक शोणातु) strontitic=strontic strontium Chem. शोणातु m. 
s. acetate शोणातु शुक्तीय . s. antimony tartrate शोणातु अंजन 
न्यासवीय .. s. arsenate शोणातु नेपालीय 1. s. arsenite शोणातु नेपालित M. s. borate शोणातु टांकीय 7. s. bromide शोणातु दुरेय 1. s. carbonate शोणातु प्रांगारीय .. s. chlorate शोणातु नीरीय . s. chloride शोणातु नीरेय . Š. chromate autre quity n. s. citrate शोणातु निम्बवीय 1. 
s. fiuoride शोणातु तरस्वेय . _s. formate शोणातु वम्रीय n. 
s. hydroxide शोणातु उदजारेय 1. s. iodide शोणातु जम्बेय n. s. lactate शोणातु दुग्धीय n. s. nitrate शोणातु भूयीय n. s. oxalate शोणातु तिग्मीय n. S. oxide शोणातु जारेय . s. phosphate शोणातु भास्वीय . 
s. process शोणातु विधा f. . s. salicylate शोणातु नम्रलीय n. 
s. silicate शोणातु सैकतीय n. 
884 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
___m. 
s. sulphate शोणातु शुल्बीय 1. 
hydrochloridum (strych. s. sulphide शोणातु शुल्बेय . 
hydrochlor.) विषतिन्दुको उदनीरेय n. s. sulphite शोणातु शुल्बित 1. 
Strychnos Bot. Facfargfa f. (-fæ for s. tartrate शोणातु न्यासवीय n. 
प्रजाति genus) s. thio-cyanate शोणातु गन्ध-श्यामीय n. S. nux-vomica सामान्य विषतिन्दु s. white Col. Ind. TUTE EFT m. 
S. yellow Col. Ind. शोणातु पीत m. stubaxle (supports only one wheel) strop पट्टी . 
एकचक्र-अक्षदण्ड, अक्षदण्डिका f. ('small stroph-, stropho- कुंचित 
axle') strophanthin=strophanthinum = stud bolt Mach. अर्गलीवृष m. 
Kombe strophanthin=k-stro- student छात्र, विद्यार्थी (-इन्) m. 
phanthin Pharm. कुंचितपुष्पि f. stud farm पशुजनन प्रक्षेत्र १. strophanthus कुञ्चितपुष्प .. (flowers studio==art studio कला-शाला f. 
have twisted lobes) 
stuff (of which bodies are com stropho-, stroph- कुंचित 
posed) सामग्री f., द्रव्य . struck आहत mfn. 
stuffing box Mach. संकुलक-धान . struck off forgat mfn. 
stunted Bat. (dwarfed) वामन, वामनित, structural engineering संरचना-अभि- . रुद्धविकास, रुद्धवृद्धि Mfm.. 
यंत्रणा f. 
stylar canal Bot. कुक्षिवृन्त-कुल्या f. structural formula Chem. विन्यास-सूत्र n. style I शैली. structural resistance काय-रोध m. . 2 Bot. कुक्षिवृन्त n. 
(resistance due to the body of the 3 Zool. कण्टिका f. airplane, excepting the wings and Stylopidae Zool. क्षीणनेत्र-वंश m. 
other lift-producing surfaces) Stylops Zool. (eyes atrophied) क्षीण structure I संरचना, रचिति f. 
नेत्राति f. (आति for प्रजाति genus) 2 Chem. विन्यास m. 
stylus=stilus s. of the artery Anat. रोहिणी-संरचना .styptic (stopping bleeding) रक्तरोधी 
(इन्) mfn. 
•struggle Mil. संघर्ष m. 
Styracaceae Bot. सिल-कुल n. struggle for existence जीवन-संघर्ष m. Styrax Bot. सिलति f. (-ति for प्रजाति strut Engin. अनम m. 
genus) strychnic acid विषतिन्दुकिक अम्ल ?. styrax सिल m. strychnina=strychnine 
styrene Chem. सिलॆन्य n. strychninae hydrochloridum = styryl Chem. सिहल n. 
strychnine hydrochloride sub-I Chem. अनु strychnine = strychnina (strych.) . 2 Anat. (situated below) अधः 
Pharm, विषतिन्दुकी f. 
3 उप s. hydrochloride = strychninae subagent Com. अन्वभिकर्ता (-तृ) m. 
.835 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
. 
sub-algebra उप-बीजगणित. 
suberized Bot. त्वक्षीयित mfn. subcase अनुप्रकार m. 
suberone त्वक्षाया f. subcaste अनुजाति . 
sub-family I Zool. अनु-वंश m. subchloride of mercury = mer 2 Bot. अनु-कुल 1. 
curous chloride पारद अनुनीरेय= subgallate Chem. अनुगुस्फोटीय n. पारद्य नीरेय 1. 
sub-genus Biol. अनु-प्रजाति . subclass Biol. अनुवर्ग m. 
subgroup अनुसमूह, अनुवर्ग m. subclause अनुखण्ड 1. 
subhead अनु-शीर्षक, उप-शीर्षक . subclavian artery Anat. अधोक्षक-रोहिणी sub-heading उप-शीर्षक . 
sub-hymenium Bot. अधःकलावर m. subcutaneous=hypodermal अधश्चर्म, subhyoideus Zool. द्विताधश्चता f. 
चौधः 
subhyoideus muscle Zool. द्विताधःपेशी subcutaneous lymph sinus Zool. 
चौधो-लसीका-कोटर . 
subinspector उपनिरीक्षक m. subcutaneous sinuses Zool. चौध:- subinterval Math. उपान्तराल. 
कोटर n. 
subject विषय M., उद्देश्य n. (predicate subdivide vb. अन्तर्भाजन, अनुभाजन n. 
विधेय) subdivided अन्तविभक्त mfn. 
subjected to अधीनकृत, अधीनित mfn. s. bar Statistics अन्तर्विभक्त दण्ड m. subjective knowledge प्रातीतिक ज्ञान 1. s. bar diagram Statistics अन्तर्विभक्त .subject matter विषय m. 
दण्डचित्र n. 
subjects प्रजा. s. diagram Statistics अन्तर्विभक्त चित्र subject to vb. अधीनकरण, अधीनन । 
. 
subject to a force agreftast n. subdivision I अन्तविभाग M., अतविभाजन, subject to gravity भ्वाकृष्टि-अधीनन n. 
अन्तर्भाजन n. 
_subjoined example Math. अधोदत्त 2 (a territorial division) उपविषय m. उदाहरण n. subduplicate ratio Math. वर्गमुलित- sub-kingdom Biol. अनु-सृष्टि f. 
निष्पत्ति f. 
___phylum प्रसृष्टि . subendothelial layer Zool. अधोन्तश्छद- subkindgom of plants Bot. उद्भिद् 
स्तर m. 
अनुसृष्टि . suber (cork tissue; outer bark of sub-lease n. Lan) अनु-पट्ट m. 
the cork oak) त्वक्षा.. 
sublet vb. Com. अनुभाटकन 1. suberane त्वक्षीण्य . 
sub-let adj. Com. अनुभाटकित mfn. (गृह) suberate Chem. त्वक्षीय n. 
sub-lieutenant (Royal Navy) atfern suberic acid Chem. त्वक्षिक अम्ल n. 
m. suberin Biochem. त्वक्षि . .(from त्वक्षा sublimant Chem. उत्सादक m. 
___core) 
sublimate n. Chem. (a product ob Suberitation Bot. त्वक्षीयण ... ___tained by sublimation) उत्साद m. 
836 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
sublimate vb. उत्सादन, उत्सदन ... ___sub-process Zool. अनु-विधा f. sublimate=sublimated 
sub-proprietor Com. उप-स्वामी (-इन) sublimated उत्सादित mfn. 
m. sublimated white lead Col. Ind. subregional branch अनुप्रादेशिक शाखा. 
उत्सादित श्वेत सीस m. 
subrostral fossa Zool. FETETUS ETT m. sublimation Chem. I (act of sub sub-scapular Zool. अधोंऽसफलक .. 
liming) उत्सदन, उत्सादन 7. 
subscriberb.Com. अभिदान,अधोंकन, हस्ता 2 (process of......) उत्सादना, क्षरण, अधोहस्ताक्षरण, अनुहस्ताक्षरण 1. (sub उत्सदना . 
अनु) s. apparatus उत्सादन-साधिन . subscribed capital Com. प्रार्थित-पुंजी . sublime=sublimate 
subscriber अभिदाता (-तु) m. sub-lingual Anat. अधो-जिह्व mfn. subscript पादांक M., पादाक्षर submarine n. जलान्तर्गा . (H. पनडुबी) subscription अभिदान . submarine mine=torpedo 
subsection I (as of a book) अनुकाण्ड, submaxillary Anat. अधोहनु 
उपकाण्ड m. submentum Zool. अधश्चिबुक N. 
2 (in law codes) उपधारा, अनुधारा . submit vb. अनुवर्तन, अनेस्थापन 7. (H. प्रागे subsequent अनुवर्ती, उत्तरवर्ती (-इन) mfn. 
रखना) 
subside vb. अधोगमन, शमन, प्रशमन .. submucosa Anat. (the layer under subsided अधोगत, शान्त mfm. 
a. mucous membrane) अधःश्लेष्मक subsidiary उप-, सहाय, गौण mfn. 
m. 
s. angle उपकोण m. submucous Anat. अधःश्लेष्म 
s. book Com. सहाय पुस्त १. submultiple-measure Math. अप s. cell गौण-कोशाf. 
वर्तक m. 
s. company Com. सहाय प्रमण्डल .. sub-neural blood vessel Zool. चेताधो s. tissue गौण-ऊति f. 
रधिर-वाहिनी 
subsidy सहायता f., साहाय्य (राजकीय), subnormal अधःसामान्य mfn. 
अर्थसाहाय्य n. subnormal n. Geom. अधोलम्ब m. subsistence उपजीविका . suborder Bot. अनुगोत्र ॥. 
sub-species Biol. अनु-जाति f. subordinate I अधरिक mfn. 
substance द्रव्य ., पदार्थ m., वस्तु .. s. service अधरिक-सेवा . 
substantive dyes (not requiring the s. species Bot. अधरिक-जाति f. 
aid of mordants) अनाश्रित रंजक m. s. staff अधरिक कर्मचारिवर्ग m. 
sub-station उप-स्थात्र n. 2 Statistics ett mfn. 
substituent Chem. आदेशी (-इन) m. s. derivatives अधीन व्युत्पन्न । substitute i. I स्थानापन्न 1. sub-oxide Chem. अनु-जारेय. 
2Chem. प्रादेश m. sub-phylum Zool. अनु-प्रसृष्टि . substitute vb. आदेशन, स्थानापादन . 
(division विभाग) 
substituted प्रादिष्ट mfn. 
837 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
substitution I स्थानापत्ति. 
succeeding उत्तरवर्ती (-इन्) mfn. 2 आदेश m. 
success सफलता . s. cipher आदेश गढलेख m. 
succession Law उत्तराधिकारिता . s. compound Chem. आदेश संयोग m. succession duty उत्तराधिकार-कर m. substrate Biochem. (a substance acted succession of life Zool. जीव-पूर्वानुपरता 
upon, as by an enzyme) farsitul n. f. substratum Biol. जीवाधार m. 
successive पित्रागत, पूर्वापर, पूर्वानुपर, subtangent Geom. अधःस्पर्शी (-इन्) m. उत्तरोत्तर mfn. subtenant उपभाटकी (-इन् ) m. 
successive cell division Zool. उत्त subtend vb. I Math. आपातन 1. 
रोत्तर कोशा-भाजन .. 2 Bot. (enclose in its axil) कक्षावरण successive differentiation Math. .. 
उत्तरोत्तर अवकलन 1. s. an angle कोण-आपातन . 
successively पूर्वानुपर, उत्तरोत्तर, पूर्वानुसार s. an arc चाप-आपातन । 
successive points Ophthalmol. पूर्वानुपर subtended I Math. पापातित mfn. 
बिन्दु m. 2 Bot. Fentaa mfn. 
successive reflection Phys. पूर्वापर परा subtending I Math. आपातन .. 
वर्तन 2 Bot. कक्षावरण .. 
successive stage उत्तरोत्तर प्रक्रम m. subtending leaf Bot. कक्षावरक पत्र 1. successor उत्तराधिकारी (-इन्) m. subterminal nerve Zool. अधोवसानिक- succin-Chem. तृण 
चेता. 
succinate Chem. quite n. subterranean प्रान्तीम mfn. 
succinic (Lat. succinum amber quafor) subtitle अनुशीर्षक, उपशीर्षक n. 
Chem. तृणिक mfn. subtract ob. Math. व्यवकलन 1. (from s. acid तृणिक अम्ल . 
लीलावती), वियोजन 
succin-imide Chem. तुण-वितिक्तेय . subtraction वियोग m., व्यवकलन, वियोजन succinite Mineral. (amber; amber 
. 
____coloured grossularite) तृणमणि m. subtraction formula वियोजन-सूत्र । succino-, succin- Chem. qura subtrahend Math. वियोजक m. 
succinous Chem. que mfn. subtriplicate ratio Math. धनमूलित- succinyl (succinic + - 2) Chem. तृणल 
· निष्पत्ति . suburb शाखानगर, उपनगर 1., नगर-शाखा f. succulent (as fruits) Bot. सरस, रसी 
(suburb of Ayodhya अयोध्या-शाखा) (-इन्) mfn. sub-variety अनु-भेद m. 
succus==juice Pharm. यूष m. subventral 2001. अधःपृष्ठवंश 
succus entericus Physiol. आन्त्र-रस m. Subvertebral Zool. अधःपृष्ठवंशीय mfn. such and such अमुक subvertebral lymph sinus Zool. अध:- such as, such that यथा 
वृष्ठवंश-लसीका कोटर .. 
suck vb. चूषण . 838 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
sucker I चूषक m. 
s. beaker शर्करा-चंचुकी (-इन) m. 2 Bot. (it does not suck; an under s. candy=candy=mishri (मिश्री) 
ground runner) अधोभूस्तारी (-इन्) M. सितोपल m. (सिता white sugar+ sucking louse Zool. चूष-यूका f. 
उपल) sucking mouth parts Zool. चूषी । s. cane इक्षु, इक्षुदण्ड m. 
मुख-भाग m. 
s. content (of blood) शर्करा-मात्रा. suckling period स्तन्य-काल m. (स्तन्य s. flask शर्करा-पलिघm. 
for स्तन्य-पान and स्तन्य-पायन) 
s. hydrometer शर्करा-तरलमान m. sucrase aus m. 
s. metabolism Zool. शर्करा-चयापचय sucrose Chem. खंडधु . 
m. ____s. pipette खंडधु-नाडकी . 
. s. mill शर्करा-निर्माणी f. suction चूषण 1. 
s. of lead = lead acetate सीस _s. pump चूषोदंच m. 
शुक्तीय . Suctoria Zool. चूषिणः m.pl. 
s. tongs शर्करा-संदंश m. suctorial tentacle Zool. चूषि अंगक 1. suggestion उपक्षेप m. (H. सुझाव) Sudan=spirit orange 
suit Law व्यवहार m. (ancient word) Sudan brown-oil brown D suitable उपयुक्त mfn. Sudan red=naphthalene red suitable solvent उपयुक्त विलायक m. suddenness सहसात्व n. 
sul- (sulphonic, sulphur) शुल् sudoriferous glands=sudoripa- sulcus Anat. सीता f. 
rousglands=sweat glands Zool. sulcus marginalis Zool. प्रान्त-सीता f. स्वेद-प्रन्थि m. 
sulph-, sulf- I (sulphur;'designating suffer vb. (to allow, permit) समनुज्ञान . compounds in which sulphur to sufferance (permission for shipment some extent replaces oxygen) 
___of goods) समनुज्ञा . 
शुल्ब- (शुल्बारि) sufficient पर्याप्त mfn. 
2 (denoting the presence of the sufficiently पर्याप्त 
- sulphonyl or the sulphonic acid sufficiently accurate Phys. पर्याप्त group) शुल्बा 
सुसाधु mfn. 
sulpha-Chem. (for sulphanil-amide) suffix ob. पश्चस्थापन n. 
शुल्बनी suffix x पश्चस्थित . 
sulph-acid Cbem. शुल्बाम्ल n. 2 Math. पादांक m. (e.g. च,) 
I (thio acid) Tratky n. 3 Gram. प्रत्यय m. 
2 (sulphonic acid) शुल्बायिक अम्ल 1. suffocate vb. श्वासरोधन 1. 
sulph-aldehyde शुल्ब-सुव्युद m. . suffocation श्वासरोध m., तान्ति f. (आपस्तम्ब sulph-amate Chem. शुल्ब-तिक्तीय n. । श्रौतसूत्र १२.११.८,६) 
sulph-amic Chem. Era-facrifice mfn. sugar 1 (white, refined sugar) ferat f. s. acid rafaefert 7 in. 
2 शर्करा 
sulph-amidate शुल्ब-तिक्तेयीय .. 839﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
TOTALA 
NGLISH INDIAN DI 
TONARI 
RY 
sulph-amide Chem. शुल्ब-तिक्तेय . sulph-arsenious शुल्बा-नेपाल्य mfn. (शुल्बा sulph-amidic=sulph-amic Chem. denotes the presence of the sul 
शुल्ब-तिक्तेयिक Mfn. 
phonic acid group) sulph-amine Chem. शुल्ब-तिक्ती 
sulphatase Biochem. शुल्बीयेद m. sulphamine blue Col. Ind. Trafatait sulphate Chem. Trefter na 
नील m. 
s.green शुल्बीय हरि, मध्यहरि m. s. brown Teafait ay m. 
_s. paper शुल्बीय-पत्र . sulph-aminic Chem. शुल्ब-तिक्तियिक S. process Trera-faent f. 
mfn. 
sulphate rb. शुल्बीयन 1. sulph-amino शुल्ब-तिक्ती 
I (to treat or impregnate with p-sulph-amino-benzoic acid Chem. sulphuric acid or a sulphate) yrat 
प-शुल्ब-तिक्ती-धूपिक अम्ल.. 
रिकाम्ल-साधन,-व्यापन, शुल्बीय-साधन, -व्यापन sulph-ammonium शुल्ब-तिक्तातु m. sulph-amyl Chem. शुल्ब-तिक्तल 1. 
2 (to convert into sulphate) Tropia sulphanilamide Chem. शुल्ब-नील 
करण. तिक्तेय . 
3 Elec. (to form a deposit of a sulph-anilate Chem. शुल्ब-नीलीय . whitish scale of lead sulphate on sulphanil black Col. Ind. Trafita the plates of a storage battery) 
काल m. 
सीसशुल्बीय-रोपण . sulph-anilic Chem. शुल्ब-नीलिक mfn. 4 (to become sulphated) शुल्बीयित 
s. acid शुल्ब-नीलिक अम्ल . 
भवन . sulphaniline brown Col. Ind. शुल्बनीली sulphated शुल्बीयित mfn. 
ब< m. 
sulphathiazole Chem. शुल्बनी-गन्धाजवा sulphantimonate Chem. शुल्बांजनीय .. f. (a in sulpha for anil : ft in sulphantimonial शल्बांजन mfn. 
शल्बनी for नील) sulphantimonic Chem. शुल्बजनिक mfn. sulphatic (of, pertaining to, resembl sulphantimonide Chem. शुल्बांजनेय . ing, or containing a sulphate or sulphantimonious Chem. शुल्बांजन्य sulphates) yritfirea mfn. 
_sulphation शुल्बीयन 1. sulpha-pyridine (sulpha- is for sul- sulphatization Chem. शुल्बीयन, शुल्बीय 
phanilamide शुल्बनीलतिक्तेय) शुल्बनी करण n. शुष्मेयी . 
sulphatize vb. (to convert into sul sulph-arsenate शुल्बा-नेपालीय १. (शुल्बा phate, as sulphide ores by roast 
denotes the presence of the sul ing) शुल्बीयन, शुल्बीय-करण . phonic acid group) 
sulphato- (sulphate) Chem. शुल्बीय sulph-arsenic शुल्बा-नेपाली f. (शुल्बा- sulphato adj.Chem. शुल्बीय, शुल्बीयक mfn. 
denotes the presence of the sul- sulphato-acetic Chem. शुल्बीय-शुक्तिक phonic acid group) 
mfn. 840 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
sulphatocarbonic Chem. शुल्बीयांगारिक sulphino- (sulphinic) Chem. शौल्ब 
mfn. 
sulphinyl Chem. शुल्बिल 1. sulphazide Chem. शुल्बाजीवेय. 
sulphiten. Chem. शुल्बित n. sulphenol blue Col. Ind. शुल्बेन्यव नील sulphite adj. (of or pertaining to 
___sulphite pulp) शुल्बित-गोर्दीय mfn. s. navy blue शुल्बेन्यव नाविक नील m. sulphite vb. शुल्बितन . sulph-ethylate Chem. ftra-garita n. (to treat with sulphur dioxide, sulph-ethylic Chem. शुल्ब-दक्षुलिक mfn. sulphurous acid, or a sulphite) sulph-hemoglobin Chem. शुल्ब-शोण- शुल्बारि-द्विजारेय-साधन, शुल्बार्यम्ल-साधन, ___ वर्तुलि . 
शुल्बित-साधन M. sulph-ichthyolate शुल्ब-मत्स्यैलीय .. sulphite-pulp शुल्बित-गो 1. sulphidation Chem. शुल्बेयन n. sulphitic Chem. शुल्बितिक mfn. sulphide n. Cbem. शुल्बेय. 
sulphito- (sulphite) Chem. efecte sulphide vb. Chem. शुल्बेयन n. 
sulphito adj. शुल्बित, शुल्बितक mfn. I (to treat with a sulphide) शुल्बेय- sulpho-Chem. I (sulphur) शुल्ब साधन ॥. 
2 (sulphonic, sulphonyl) Teadla 2 (to convert into a sulphide) 3 (designating compounds in शुल्बेय-करण 1. 
which sulphur to some extent sulphide dye शुल्बेय-रंजक m. 
replaces oxygen; in this sense sulphidic Chem. शुल्बेयिक mfn. 
better thio- गन्ध-) शुल्ब sulphidize=sulphide vb. 
4 (denoting the presence of sul sulph-imide Chem. शुल्बा-वितिक्तेय . phuric acid) शुल्ब 
(शुल्बा- denotes the presence of the sulpho adj. शुल्ब, शुल्बक mfn. sulphonyl group) 
sulpho-acetic Chem. शुल्बा-शुक्तिक mfn. sulphinate Chem. (a salt or ester (शुल्बा- stands for sulphonic) 
of a sulphinic acid) शौल्बीय N. sulpho-antimonate शुल्बांजनीय 1. sulph-indigotic acid शुल्ब-निनीलिक sulpho-antimonic शुल्बांजनिक mfr. 
अम्ल . 
sulpho-antimonious Traista mfn. sulphine Col. Ind. Treft f. 
sulpho-antimonite शुल्बांजनित n. s. black शुल्बी काल m. 
sulpho-arsenious शुल्ब-नेपाल्य mfn. s. blue शुल्बी नील m. 
sulpho - benzene - azo-di-phenyl s. brown शुल्बी बभ्रु m. 
amine Chem. शुल्ब-धूपेन्य-अज-द्वि-दर्शल s. yellow शुल्बी पीत, प्रपीतारक्त m. तिक्ती. sulphinic Chem. sufeep mfn. 
sulpho-benzide Chem. शुल्बा-धूपेय n. sulphinide (arbitrarily formed from sulpho-benzoic Chem. शुल्बा-धूपिक mfn. 
anhydro - ortho-salph-amine-ben- s. acid शुल्बा-धूपिक अम्ल n. zoic acid t-amide or imide) Chem. sulpho-bismuthite Mineral. Tea-fri पिशोल्बेय . 
गीयिज m. (-इज for खनिज mineral) 
841 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
nfm 
सकारात 
sulpho black Col. Ind. शुल्ब काल m. शुल्ब-जन m. 
s. green शुल्ब हरि m. 
s. black शुल्बजन काल m. s. thodamine शुल्ब पाटलतिक्ती. s. bordeaux शुल्बजन कपिशक m. sulpho-borite Mineral. (a hydrous 8. brilliant green शुल्बजन भासुर हरि 
magnesium sulphate and borate) शुल्ब-टांकीयिज m. (-इज for खनिज s. brown शुल्बजन बभ्रु m. mineral) 
s. carbon शुल्बजन प्रांगार m. sulpho-butyric Chem. शुल्बा-घृतिक mfn. s. cutch शुल्बजन गायत्री f. 
(शुल्बा- stands for sulphonic) 
s. dark brown शुल्बजन असित बभ्रुm. sulphocarbamic Chem. शुल्बांगतिक्तेयिक s. golden-brown शुल्बजन स्वर्ण-बभ्रुm. 
mfn. 
s. green शुल्बजन हरि m. sulphocarbamide Chem. शुल्बांग-तिक्तेय s. indigo blue शुल्बजन निनील नील m. 
12. 
s. navy blue शुल्बजन नाविक नील m. sulphocarbanilide C lem. शुल्बांग नीलेय s. ocher शुल्बजन गैरिक m. ____n. 
__s. yellow शुल्बजन पीत m. sulphocarbimide Chem. शुल्बांग- sulpho-germanate Chem. शुल्ब-सिकतीय 
वितिक्तेय . sulphocarbolate. Chem. deaitteita n. sulpho-germanic acid Chem. Ica sulphocarbolic Chem. शुल्बांगविक mfn. सिकतिक अम्ल . 
_s. acid शुल्बांगविक अम्ल . 
sulpho group Chem. (the sulphonic sulphocarbonate Chem. शुल्बांगारीय n. group) शुल्बा-वर्ग m. sulphocarbonic Chem. शल्बांगारिक mfn. sulpho-halite Mineral. (a sodium sulphocarbon oil Chem. शुल्बांगार तैल . sulphate and chloride) शुल्ब-लवणिज . . 
m. (-इज़ for खनिज mineral) sulpho-chloride Chem. शुल्ब-नीरेय n. sulpho-ichthyolic acid Pharm. शुल्ब sulpho-cinnamicChem. शुल्बा-दारुसितिक मत्स्यैलिक अम्ल . ___Mfn. (शुल्बा- stands for sulphonic) sulphol black Col. Ind. शुल्बव काल m.. sulpho-cyan Chem. शुल्ब-श्याम m. 
s. bordeaux शुल्बव कपिशक. m. sulpho-cyanate Chem. शुल्ब-श्यामीय n. s. brown शुल्बव बभ्रु m. sulpho-cyanic Chem. शुल्ब-श्यामिक mfn. s. cutch शुल्बव गायत्री . sulpho-cyanide Chem. शुल्ब-श्यामेय 1. s. green शुल्बव हरि m. sulpho-cyanogen Chem. शुल्ब-श्यामजन s. maroon शुल्बव नीचरक्त m. ... __ m. 
s. navy blue शुल्बव नाविक नील m. sulpho-di-chlor-amine Chem. Trata s. orange शुल्बव नारंग m. 
द्वि-नीर-तिक्ती. (शुल्बा- stands for sul 
s. prune शुल्बव वातामबदर m. phonyl) 
____s. red-brown शुल्बव रक्त-बभ्रु m. Sulpho-gel Chem. शुल्ब-श्लिषक m. s. yellow शुल्बव पीत m. sulphogene = sulfogene Col. Ind. sulph-oleate Chem. Tee-reita n. 
842 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
sulph-oleic acid Chem. शुल्ब-म्रक्षिक sulphonate vb. शुल्बायन . 
अम्ल . 
I (to introduce the sulphonic sulpho-lipin Chem. शुल्ब-विमेदि. 
group into) शुल्बायिक-वर्ग-प्रवेशन 1. sulpholysis Chem. शुल्बांशन n. 
2 (to convert into a sulphonic sulphon- Chem. That 
acid) शुल्बायिकाम्ल-करण १. I (derivation from a. sulphonic sulphonated oil शुल्बायित तैल .. acid) sulphon-cyanine शुल्बा-श्यामी sulphonation शुल्बायन १. 2 (presence of the sulphonyl sulphonator Chem. शुल्बायक m. (an group) sulphon-amido शुल्बा- acid-proof vessel used for the तिक्तेय 
sulphonation of organic sub sulphon acid black Col. Ind. Tret stances) शुल्बायन-पात्र 1. 
अम्ल काल m. 
sulphoncyan Col. Ind. शुल्बा-श्याम m. s. acid blue शुल्बा अम्ल नील m. sulphon-cyanine शुल्बा-श्यामी . s. acid brown शुल्बा अम्ल बभ्रु m. sulphone Chem. शुल्बा f. s. acid green शुल्बा अम्ल हरि m. mono-sulphones generat f. s. azurine शुल्बा नभोनीली . 
___di-sulphones द्वि-शुल्बा f. s. black शुल्बा काल M. 
sulphone-phthalein Chem. शुल्बा-व्युत्तै s. blue शुल्बा नील m. 
लिन m. s. blue-black शुल्बा नील-कृष्ण m. sulphon-ethyl-methane Pharm. s. brown शुल्बा बभ्रु m. 
__ शुल्बा-दक्षुल-प्रोदीन्या . s. carmine शुल्बा कीटशोणी . sulphonic Chem. शुल्बायिक mfn. s. cyanine शुल्बा श्यामी f. 
sulphonic acid शुल्बायिक अम्ल N. . s. cyanine black शुल्बा श्यामी काल m. -sulphonide Chem. -शुल्बायेयn. ___s. dark blue शुल्बा असित नील m. sulphonine black Col. Ind. शुल्बायी काल 
- S. dark brown शुल्बा असित बभ्रु m. s. fast black शुल्बा स्थिर काल m. 
s. blue Tramit fram m. s. navy blue शुल्बा नाविक नील m. sulphonium (sulphur + ammonium) s. orange शुल्बा नारंग m. 
· Chem. शुल्बतातु m. s. violet शुल्बा नीललोहित m. . sulphon-methane Pharm. शुल्बा-प्रोदीन्य s. yellow.शुल्बा पीत m. 
n. 
. sulphonal=sulphon-methane sulphonyl Cbem. शुल्बाल. -sulphonal -शुल्बासु 
sulpho-par-aldehyde Chem. शुल्ब-परा sulphon-amide Chem. शुल्बा-तिक्तेय . , सुव्युद m. sulphon-amido Chem. शुल्बा-तिक्तेय sulpho-phenyl Chem. शुल्बा-दर्शल n. sulphon-amine Chem. शुल्बा-तिक्ती . . (शुल्बा- stands for sulphonic) sulpho-naphthoic Chem. शुल्बोत्तैलिक sulpho-phosphate शुल्ब-भास्वीय n. 
__mfn. 
sulpho-phosphite शुल्ब-भास्वित १. sulphonate N. शुल्बायीय १. 
sulpho-phosphoric शुल्ब-भास्विक nfm. . 843 
m. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
- 
- 
-- 
- 
- 
. 
sulpho-phosphorous शुल्ब-भास्व्य mfn. sulpho-urea शुल्ब-मिह m. sulpho-phthalein (sulphonephthal- sulpho-vanadate शुल्ब-रोचीय . 
ein) Chem. शुल्बा-व्युत्तैलिन m. 
sulpho-vinate Chem. शुल्ब-मद्यीय . sulpho-phthalic Chem. शुल्बा-व्युत्तैलिक sulpho-vinic Chem. शुल्ब-मधिक mfn. __mfn. (शुल्बा- stands for sulphonic) sulpho-wolframic Chem. शुल्ब-चंडिक sulpho-propionic Chem. शुल्बा-अमेदिक mfn. __mfn. (शुल्बा- stands for sulphonic) sulph-oxide Chem. शुल्ब-जारेय . sulpho-purpurate Chem. शुल्बा-नीलोहीय sulph-oxylic Cbem. शुल्ब-जारलिक mfn. 
sulph-oxy-phosphate Chem. शुल्ब-जार sulpho-purpuric acid Chem. शुल्बा भास्वीय n. 
नीलोहिक अम्ल 
sulpho-zincate शुल्ब-कुप्यीय . sulpho-ricin-oleate Chem. शुल्बरण्ड- sulphur (derived from Sanskrit शुल्बा 
नक्षीय 1. 
रि) Chem. शुल्बारि m. (in general sulpho-ricin-oleic Chem. शुल्बरण्ड language गन्धक) 
sfera mfn. 
s. acid शुल्बारि अम्ल 1. s. acid शुल्बैरण्ड-मक्षिक अम्ल . 
s. alcohol शुल्बारि सुषव m. sulpho-salicylic Chem. शुल्बा-नम्रलिक s. black शुल्बारि काल m. 
mfn. 
s. chloride शुल्बारि नीरेय n. s. acid शुल्बा-नम्रलिक अम्ल . 
s. di-chloride शुल्बारि द्वि-नीरेय . sulpho salt Chem. शुल्ब-लवण . 
s. di-oxide शुल्बारि द्वि-जारेय. sulpho-selenide Chem. शुल्ब-मेचेय. s. ether शुल्बारि दक्षु m. sulpho-selenium Chem. शुल्ब-मेचाग्नि m. s. family शुल्बारि-कुल 1. sulpho-silicide Chem. शुल्ब-सैकतेय . s. granule गन्धक-कणिका, शुल्बारि sulpho-sol Chem. शुल्ब-लयन १. 
कणिका sulpho-stannate शुल्ब-त्रप्वीय n. 
s. iodide शुल्बारि जम्बेय n. sulpho-stannic शुल्ब-अप्विक mfn. 
s. lime शुल्बारि-चूर्णक m. sulpho-stannide Chem. शुल्ब-त्रप्वेय. •s. match गन्धक-इषीका f. sulpho-succinic Chem. शुल्बा-तृणिक s. mono-chloride शुल्बारिएक-नीरेय. ___fn. (शुल्बा- stands for sulphonic) s. oil शुल्बारि-तैल 1. 
sulpho-sulphurous शुल्ब-शुल्बार्य mfn. s. ore शुल्बारि-अयस्क 1. sulpho-tannic Chem. शुल्बा-शल्किक mfn. s. oxide शुल्बारि जारेय .. 
(Traf- stands for sulphonic) 
s. salt शुल्बारि-लवण . sulpho-telluride Chem. शुल्ब-वंगकेय . s. sub-chloride शुल्बारि अनु-नीरेय . sulpho-thionyl शुल्ब-गन्धल . 
s. tri-oxide शुल्बारि त्रि-जारेय. sulpho-toluicChem. शुल्बा-विरालिक mfn. s. water शुल्बारि-जल . . 
(शुल्बा- stands for sulphonic) sulphur adi. शुल्बारि, शुल्बारिय mfn. sulpho-tungstate शुल्ब-चण्डीय 1. sulphur vb. Chem. शुल्बारीयण n. sulphortungstic शुल्ब-चण्डिक mfn. 
(to treat with sulphur of, as in 844 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
fumigating and bleaching, with s. green-blue शुल्बारि हरि-नील m. sulphur fumes) शुल्बारि-साधन, शुल्बारि s. grey शुल्बारि धूसर m. धूमन . 
s. indigo शुल्बारि निनील m. sulphuran Chem. शुल्बारिण्य 7. 
s. khaki शुल्बारि धूलि f. sulphurate = sulphureous Chem. s. navy blue शुल्वारि नाविक नील m. ___ शुल्बारिय mfn. 
s. olive शुल्बारि तैलबदर M. sulphurate=sulphurize 
s. olive brown शुल्बारि तैलबदर बभ्रुm. sulphurated yearfifua mfn. 
s. olive green शुल्बारि तैलबदर हरि m. sulphurated hydrogen apparatus s. orange शुल्बारि नारंग m. 
Chem. शुल्बारीयित उदजन साधित्र n. s. purple शुल्बारि नीलारण m. sulphurated potash=potassa sul s. red-brown शुल्बारि रक्त-बभ्रु M. 
phurat (potass. sulphur.)=liver s. violet शुल्बारि नीललोहित m. of sulphur शुल्बारि-सर्जि f. 
s. yellow शुल्बारि पीत, सुपीत m. sulphuration Chem. शुल्बारीयण .. 
s. yellow-brown शुल्बारि पीत-बभ्रु m. sulphurator Chem. (an apparatus sulph-urea Chem. शुल्ब-मिह m. 
used in sulphurizing) शुल्बारीयित्र, sulphured Chem. शुल्बारीयित mfn. शुल्बारीयण-साधित्र n. 
sulphured matches Chem. शुल्बारीयित sulphur bacteria=Thiobacteria ____ इषीका (दीपेषीका) f. sulphur black Col. Ind. शुल्बारि काल sulphurein Col. Ind. शुल्बारिन m. 
sulphureity Chem. शुल्बारियता, गन्धकियता s. blue शुल्बारि नील m. s. blue-black शुल्बारि नील-कृष्ण m. sulphureous I=sulphurous शुल्बार्य s. brilliant black शल्वारि भासुर काल 
2 (in general language) गन्धकिय s. brilliant blue शुल्बारि भासुर नील mfn. 
(consisting of sulphut) . गन्धक-युत brilliant green शुल्बारि भासुर हरि 
(having the qualities of sulphur s. brown शुल्बारि बभ्रु m. 
or brimstone) गन्धक-गुण mfm. s. cachou शुल्बारि गायत्री f. 
(impregnated with sulphur) गन्धक s. catechu शुल्बारि खदिर m. 
व्यापित mfn. s. corinth शुल्बारि रोहित m. 
(sulphur-coloured) गन्धक-वर्ण mfn. s. dark brown शुल्बारि असित बभ्र m. sulphureousness शुल्बारियत्व, गन्धकियत्व s. dark green शुल्बारि असित हरि m. . s. direct blue शुल्बारि अमाश्रित नील sulphuret=sulphide शुल्बेय . 
m. 
sulphuret vb. शुल्बारीयण M. s. field grey शुल्बारि सेना धूसर m. I (to combine with sulphur) s. green शुल्बारि हरि m. 
शुल्बारि-योजन . 
m. 
mfn. 
m. 
mfn. 
m. 
845 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
2 (to impregnate with sulphur) s. anhydride शुल्बार्य अजलेय .. शुल्बारि-व्यापन . 
s. salt शुल्बार्य लवण . sulphuretted Chem. शुल्बेयित mfn. 
s. tetradymte सगन्धक भिदवंगिज m. s. hydrogen शुल्बेयित उदजन m. (-इज for खनिज mineral) s. hydrogen apparatus Trafic sulphur rain or shower (a shower 
उदजन साधित्र n. 
of yellow pollen often seen in sulphuric Chem. शुल्बारिक mfn. 
spring) पराग-वर्षा f. s. acid=acidum sulphuricum sulphuryl Chem. शुल्बारिल n. 
(acid. sulph.) Pharm. शुल्बारिक s. chloride शुल्बारिल नीरेय n. अम्ल .. 
sulphydrate Chem. शुल्बोदीय 7. s. anhydride शुल्बारिक अजलेय. sulphydric acid Chem. शुल्बोदिक अम्ल s. ether शुल्बारिक दक्षु m. s. iodide शुल्बारिक जम्बेय. 
sulphydryl Chem. शुल्बोदल .. S. oxide शुल्बारिक जारेय . 
sultam (sul- शुल-+- lactam दुग्धति) शुल्धति sulphurization Chem. शुल्बारीयण 1. sulphurizerb. Chem. शुल्बारीयण. sultan 4 B=direct red 4 B 
(to combine or impregnate with sultan yellow G direct yellow sulphur or any of its compounds; CH specif., to fumigate or bleach with sultone (sal- शुल्- + lactone दुग्धा), sulphur fumes) शुल्बारि-योजन, व्यापन, Chem. शुल्धा . -धूमन . 
sum vb. Matb. आकलन .. sulphurol black Col. Ind. शुल्बारिव sum : (amount of money) धनमात्रा f., 
काल m. 
धनराशि m. s. brown शुल्बारिव बभ्रु m. 
2 (total) योग m. s. dark brown शुल्बारिव असित बभ्रु 3 (amount) राशि m. ___m. 
sumach (a colour) मध्यरक्तातिपीत m. s. direct blue शुल्बारिख अनाश्रित नील Sumatra camphor = d-borneol द __ m. 
कर्पूव m. s. fast blue शुल्बारिव स्थिर नीला. sumbul (sumb.)=sumbul root= s. field grey शुल्बारिव सेना धूसर m. musk root Pharm. जटामांसी f. s. green शुल्बारिव हरि m. 
sumbul root-sumbul जटामांसी-मूल n. . s. indigo blue शुल्बारिव निनील नील summable Math. आकलनीय mfn. 
m. . 
summand Math. प्राकल्या . S. orange शुल्बारिव नारंग m. 
summarily dealt with Lawn संक्षेपत: s. yellow शुल्बारिव पीत m.. 
निर्णीत mfn. . sulphurosyl=thionyl गन्धल N. summary संक्षेप m. sulphiurous Chem. Teeni mfn. summate vb. Math. आकलन ॥ 
s. acid शुल्बार्य अम्ल..: . .. . 
summation Math. प्राकलन n. 846 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
__ 
m. 
s. of series श्रेणी-आकलन ., श्रेणी-योग sunglasses आतप-उपनेत्र n. 
m. 
sun gold Col. Ind. सूर्य स्वर्ण m. summed Math. आकलित mfn. 
sunk capital Econ. निमग्न-पुंजी . summer sleep Zool. ग्रीष्म-सुप्ति. sunken emplacements Mil. अधःस्थायः summing Math. आकलन . summoned आहत mfn. 
sunken stomata Bot. (sunken == summons = legal summons Law deeply seated) FATE TE B. 
आह्वान P. (ancient word) 
sunk key Mach. निखात-कोला . sum of squares Statistics वर्ग-योग m. sunray I सूर्यरश्मि m. sump=sump pit Automobile (a pit 2 (a colour) प्ररक्तातिपीत m. ___ at the lowest point) निगत m. sunshine recorder आतप-अभिलेखक m. sump pit=sump ferarsi m. 
sunspot सूर्य-कलंक m. sum to infinity Math. यावदनन्ति-योग m. sunstroke Med. पातपाघात m. 
(Hindi अनन्त तक योग) 
sun visor Automobile (a sun shield). sum total समस्त योग m. 
__ प्रातपत्र, आतप वर्म 1. sum up, to समासतः, संक्षेपतः 
sun yellow सुर्य पीत m. sun animalcule Zool. सूर्याणुप्राणी (-इन्) Supara Geog. शूरिक m. 
m. 
super- अधि sunburnt सूर्यातप्त mfn. 
superannuation अधिवार्षिकी. sunchromine black Col. Ind. सूर्यवर्णी superannuation allowance अधिवार्षिक 
काल m. 
अधिदेय n. s. green सूर्यवर्णी हरि m. 
superannuation fund format s. yellow सूर्यवर्णी पीत m. 
प्रणीवि f. sundries प्रकीर्णक n. 
superbine लांगलिकी /. (लांगलिका 'Meth sundry adi. Com. अनेक, विविध mfn. onia superba' MW., 'Georiosa 
s. assets विविध-सम्पत्ति . 
superba' Nadkarni) s. creditors विविध उत्तमर्ण m. super cargo (short for 'superintend s. debtors विविध अधमर्ण m. 
ent of cargo") 14uranter m. (car s. expenses विविध व्यय m. 
go नौपण्यक) s. liabilities विविध देयधन, विविध ऋण superchrome black Col. Ind. अधिवर्ण 
2. 
. काल m. S. outstanding liabilities fafay s. blue अधिवर्ण नील m. 
अदत्त देयधन, विविध प्रदत्त ऋण .. 
s. garnet अधिवर्ण निरक्त m. sun-drying सूर्य-शोषण 1. 
s. red अधिवर्ण रक्त m. sunfish Zool. सूर्यमत्स्य m. 
s. violet अधिवर्ण नीललोहित m. .sunflower=helianthus Bot. सूर्यमुखी ___s. yellow अधिवर्ण पीत m. 
superfamily Zool. प्रवंश m. . sunflower grain Bat. सूर्यमुखी-धान्य n. superficial तलोपरिक, उपरिष्ठ nfn. 
847 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
superficial cells Z00l. उपरिष्ठ-कोशाf. superior calyx Bot. उत्तर पु superficial expansion Phys. तल- superiority श्रेयस्त्व 1. 
विस्तरण n. 
superior maxilla Anat. उत्तरहनु . superficial part Zool. तलोपरिक भाग m. superior oblique=trochlear mus superficial placentation Bot. तल-लग्न cle Ophthalmol.=obliquus supe 
जरायु न्यास m. 
rior Zool. उत्तर-तिरश्ची (पेशी)f. superfine अधिचार mfn. 
superior ovary Bot. उत्तर अण्डाशय m. superfine magenta crystals Col. ___superior rectus Zool. उत्तर-ऋजुपेशी. 
Ind. अधिचारु धूम्रली स्फट m. 
superior service Adminis. उपरिक सेवा s. violet अधिचारु नीललोहिता . superheated अधितप्त mfn. 
superior vena cava=anterior vena _s. steam अधितप्त प्रबाष्पm. 
cavapre cava Zool. 5777-FETTET superheater Rly. Eng. अधितापक m. 
s.flue tubes अधितापक-वाहिनी-नाल m. superior violet Col. Ind. उत्तम नीललोहित s. header अधितापक-शीर्षणी . 
m. s. pipes अधितापक-नाड 2. 
supernatant (floating on the sur superheavy gun Mil. अतिगुरु-शतघ्नी f. face) पृष्ठे-प्लव min. superimpose vb. अध्यारोपण . 
superposable पाच्छाद्य, अध्यारोप्य mfn. superimposed अध्यारोपित mfn. 
superpose I b. अधिरोपण 1. superincumbent उपरिशायी (-इन्) mfn. 2 Bot. आच्छादन . 
s. liquid उपरिशायी तरल m. 
3=superimpose अध्यारोपण . superintendob. अधीक्षण .. 
superposed I अध्यारोपित mfn. superintendence अधीक्षण 1. 
2 Bot. आच्छादित mfn. superintendency अधीक्षण, अध्यक्ष-पद, superposition आच्छादन, अध्यारोपण n. 
अधीक्षक-पद n., अध्यक्ष-विषय, अधीक्षक- superradar अधितेजोन्वेष m. विषय m. 
supersaturated अध्यनुविद्ध fn. superintendent अधीक्षक, अध्यक्ष m. (अध्यक्ष super-script Math. मूर्धाक m., मूर्धाक्षर n. 
head of adept.; अधीक्षक one who super-secret अधि-गुह्य, परम गुह्य n. superintends) 
supersonic Radar, Pbys. प्राधिस्वनिक superintendent adj. अधीक्षमान mfn. mfn. superintendent of works कौन्तिक m. supersonics=ultrasonics Phys. प्राधि ' (ancient word) 
. स्वनिकी. superintendentship अधीक्षकता, अध्यक्षता super-tare अधि-भारमोकm. . . 
f. 
super-tax अधि-कर m. superintender अधीक्षिता (-तू) m. supertone Phys. ferary m. superior उपरिक, उत्तर, उत्तम, वरीयस्, श्रेयस् supervisal=supervision i. mfne . 
supervisance=supervision Bots उत्तरवर्ती (-इन्) m. 
supervision=supervisal=supervi 848 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
. Sance-supervisure पर्यवेक्षण . supplied प्रदत्त mfn. 
s. charges Com. पर्यवेक्षण-व्यय m. supplied with vessels वाहिनी-युत nfn. supervisionary = supervisory a suppliers ledger=creditors ledger 
. क्षण 
Com. उत्तमर्ण-अपंजी. supervisor पर्यवेक्षक m. 
supply n. प्रदाय m. supervisorial पर्यवेक्षकीय mfn. 
supply base प्रदाय-आस्थान . supervisory = supervisionary पर्यवे. supply of nerves चेता-प्रदाय m. 
क्षण 
supply ship=depot ship Mil. प्रदाय supervisure=supervision 
पोत, भाण्ड-पोत m. supplement vb. आपुरण, अनुपूरण 2. supply what is wanting vb. न्यूनतापूरण supplement n. आपूर, अनुपूर m. supplemental = supplementary ___ support आधार m. ___Statistics आपूरक mfn. 
crucibles. मूषा-आधार m. supplemental अनुपूरक, प्रापूरक mfn. supported आधृत mfn. . supplemental air = supplemen supporter पोषक, आधारक m. 
tary air Physiol. रेचक वायु m. supporter of combustion दहन-पोषक supplemental chords Matb. आपूरक 
जीवा. 
supporting आधारी (-इन्) supplementary अनुपूरक, आपूरक mfn. s. frame Zool. आधारी कंकाल m. supplementary Com. न्यूनतापूरक mfn. s. rod आधार-शलाका f. 
s. cost न्यूनतापूरक परिव्यय m. 
suppose Math. अथ यदि (Hindi मान लो) s. earning न्यूनतापूरक अर्जन n.. supposition I Math. कल्पना f. (Hindi s. estimate न्यूनतापूरक आगणन . 
मानना) s. grant न्यूनतापूरक अनुदान . 
• 2 पक्ष m. . s. industry न्यूनतापूरक उद्योग m. suppository Med. वर्ती f. 
s. invoice न्यूनतापूरक बीजक . suppress vb. निग्रहण ..(नि down+ग्रहण supplementary air=supplemental holding) 
suppression Biol. विलोपन 1. supplementary angle Math. ऋजुपूर suppressive (drug) Med. संनिरोधी (-इन्) 
कोण m. 
mfn. supplementary budget अनुपूरक प्राय- supra I उत्-, उपरि-, -उपरि (while supra 
व्ययक.. 
is prefixed, sqft may either be put supplementary demand Parl. Prace before or after the main word) 
_tice अनुपूरक अभियाचन n. 
2 (superior) वर- .. supplementary question Parl. Pral- supraduction उच्चालन M. . 
tice अनुपूरक प्रश्न m. . . 
supra-intestinal ratifi supplementary statement (as of supra-intestinal excretory ducts 
expenditute) अनुपूरक विवरण 1. ___Zool. श्रान्त्रोपरि-उत्सर्ग-प्रणाली /. 
air 
849 
54﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
supra-intestinal vessel Zool.आन्त्रोपरि nal forms and markings) बहीरूप 
वाहिनी f. 
शारीर. supra light yellow Col. Ind. वर लघु surface density Phys. तल-घनता f. 
पीत m. 
surface of revolution Math. परिभ्रमण supramine black Col. Ind. वरतिक्ती काल तल . 
m. 
surface of separation पृथक्करण-तल 1. s. blue वरतिक्ती नील m. 
surface of the back = back of the s. bordeaux वरतिक्ती कपिशक m. ___surface तल-पृष्ठ 1. s. brown वरतिक्ती बभ्रु m. 
surface rent भू-भाटक, भूतल-भाटक m. s. green वरतिक्ती हरिm. 
surface strain Mech. पृष्ठ-विकार m. s. red वरतिक्ती रक्त m. 
surface tension Phys. तल-आतति. s. yellow वरतिक्ती पीत m. 
surface tension apparatus Phys. supraorbital plate Ophthalmol. अक्ष्यु- तलातति-साधित्र n. 
परि-पट्टm. 
surface water भूतल-वारि. supraorbital ridge = frontal ridge surgeon शालाकी (इन्), शस्त्रवैद्य, शल्यवैद्य m. supraprotest (after Italian sopra surgery शल्य n., शल्यचिकित्सा . 
protesto upon protest) Law surgical anatomy शल्योपयोगि शारीर. अनादर-प्रमाणने 
surgical cotton व्रण-तूल .. s. acceptance अनादरप्रमाणने स्वीकरण surgical dressings Med. (cotton, 
lint, etc.) व्रण-बन्धनसंभार m. s. payment अनादरप्रमाणने शोधन .. surgical means शल्य-साधन n. suprarenal Anat. qartyfs 
surname कुलनाम 1. s. body वृक्कोपरि-काय m. 
surplus Com. अतिरेक m., आधिक्या . s. cortex Pharm. वृक्कोपरि बाह्यक. surprise I b. विस्मापन 1. s. gland वृक्कोपरि-ग्रन्थि m. . 
2 n. विस्मय m. supra-scapula Zool. उदंसफलक .. 
s. attack विस्मय आक्रमण, विस्मापक supremacy अतिसर्वता, परमेष्ठिता/. 
आक्रमण . supreme अतिसर्व, परमेष्ठ Mr. 
surprised fafcua mfn. surcharge Com. अधिभारm. 
surrender vb. समर्पण 2. surd Math. करणी f. (ancient word) surrender Com. I vb. अध्यर्पण 1. surety Com. I प्रतिभूति f. 
2 n. अध्यर्पणा. 2 (one who makes a surety) प्रतिभू s. value अध्यर्पण-अर्हा f. 
surrendered Com. अध्यर्पित mfn. surface I तल . 
surrenderee Com. अध्यापिती (-इन्) m. 2 पृष्ठ 1. (as distinguished from surrenderer Com. अध्यर्पक m. ' . plane तल) . 
surround vb. परिवारण (earth surface) भूतल n. 
surrounded परिवारित min. surface anatomy (treating of exter- surrounding परिवारक, परिवारी (-इन्) mfn. 
850 
m. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
surroundings परिपार्श्व N., परिवृति f. योज M. (lower jaw निहनु, upper jaw sur-tax उपरि-कर 7. 
उद्धनु) survey I भूमिति ., भूमापन . 
suspensory ligament निलम्बन-स्नायु . 2 आपरीक्षण 1. 
suspensory ligament of lens = surveying भूमिति f., आपरीक्षण ... zonula ciliaris surveyor भूमापक, प्रापरीक्षक m. 
sustained on temples (glasses) शंखधृत surveyor's chain=Gunter's chain sustentacular cells I=Sertoli's cells 
भूमापन-शृंखला f. 
Zool. पोषि-कोशा f. survival I उत्तरजीवन . 
2 = supporting cells Anat. 2 Biol. अतिजीविता. 
आलम्बन-कोशा. __s. of the fittest Biol. बलिष्ठ-अतिजी- Sutlej (river) Geog. शत . 
विता . 
suture-raphe Anat. सेवनी . survive vb. I उत्तरजीवन n. 
suture joint Anat. सेवनी-संधि m. 2 Biol. अतिजीवन . 
swab शोषमृज m. survived उत्तरजीवित mfn. 
swallow r. (a bird) भाण्डीक m. surviving adj. Com. उत्तरजीवी (-इन्) swallow vb. निगिरण 1. 
mfn. 
swamp महापंक m. survivor उत्तरजीवक m. 
swarm spore Biol. वृन्दबीजाणु m. susceptibility अनुहुषता f. 
Swat River Geog. gary f. susceptible अनुहुष mfn. 
Swat valley Geog. उद्यान n. suspend vb. स्थगन, निलम्बन . 
sweat gland Anat. स्वेद-ग्रन्थि m. suspended electric centrifuge fan Swedish green=new green 
लम्बित विद्युन्मथित्र n. 
Swedish verdigris=green verdig suspense Com. निलम्बन 1. 
ris s. account निलम्बित-लेखा, अवर्गित sweepvb. अपोहन, अपवहन, अपमार्जन.. __ लेखा f. (nonclassified account) sweeper Mil. अपोहक m. (See mine s.) 
s. ledger निलम्बित-प्रपंजी. 
sweeping Mil. अपोहन . (See mine s.) suspension निलम्बन, स्थगन n. 
sweet मधु, मधुर, मिष्ट mfn. suspension colloid = suspensoid sweet flag (a plant) वचा f. 
Physical Chem. निलम्बन श्लेषाभ- sweetish आमधु mfn. निलम्बाम m. . 
sweetmeat खण्डखाद्य (from वात्स्यायन), suspension of payment Com. antata मिष्टखाद्य . 
स्थगन . 
sweets मिष्टान्न n. suspension wire Phys. निलम्बन-तन्तु m. sweet smell मधुर गन्ध m. suspensoid = suspension colloid sweet taste मधुर स्वाद m. suspensor Bot. निलम्ब m. 
sweet yam = Dioscorea aculeata suspensorium Zool. (connects the 
ECLs the मध्वालु m. lower jaw with the cranium) निहनु- swellfish=puffet फुल्लमत्स्य m. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
1. 
112. 
swelling in general) Tus m. 
fafatifa f. ( fa for fer genus) Swertia Bot. भूनिम्बति f. (-ति for प्रजाति Syconaria=Sycones Zool. बिम्बकाः 
genus) 
m. pl. S. chirata #THEFT fram. 
Sycones Zool. Foto: m.pl. swift Zool. cat, cam m. 
Syconidae Zool. बिम्बक-वंशm. swim bladderair bladder Zool. Syconium Bot. (a collective flesh 
ECHTET, ATOETU m. 
fruit, as the fig) Highst n. swimmer Zool. (feet of duck) of any syconus=syconium ; (96) 
sycosis Med. (eruption round the swimmeret=pleopodite=pleopod hair roots of the beard) ***1f924 
Zool. m. swimming bird Zool. tareft (97) syenite Petrog. (composed of domi 
nant alkaline क्षारिय feldspar स्फतीय) swimming spore Bot, Centar STETT m. Gritare m. swine i (hog) ** m. 
syllable अक्षर १. 2 (hogs collectively) ikut m. syllabus I (a compendium contain 3 (domestic hog) TER m. 
ing the heads of a discourse, swing I vb. pau na 
treatise, course of study of the 2 n. sie m. 
like) 78-741 f., 47894f-9679 n. swing hygrometer je- 
GĦTT m. 
2 Law (the headnote of a case) Swiss blue=methylene blue 
107 n. switch efaya m. ( fa makes connec- sylvanite = auro-tellurite Mineral. 
tion, faulfa 7 breaks or changes qui-istifa m. (-59 for first connection) 
mineral) s. board sifat n. 
sylvestrene Chem. वनसरलेन्य।. swivel 1. Engin. (a bearing) 7 n. sylvestris QTTT m. swivel chain Engin. 777-BİETT f. sylvic acid=abietic acid fit FT swivel stool (revolving stool) WHETTE 11. 
f. 
sylvine-sylvite Mineral. Certifus m. sword खड्ग m. 
(-इज for खनिज mineral) swordfish Zool. खड्गमत्स्य m. 
sylvite=sylvine' swordfish liver oil Zool. M y sym, sym. (symmetrical) Chem. . 
TET-1 n. 
(rifHatu) Sx Statistics (standard deviation of x symbiont Biol. Heritat (FT) m. 
calculated from the sample) f symbiosis Biol. Etant than i (4419-476) 
symbiotic Biol. meriai (-5T) mfn. Sycon Zool. (a genus of sponges symbiotic bacteria weiter fitu m. 
looking somewhat like a fruit) symbol i de ni. (the first letter or 
852 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
letters of a word) 
Synantherias Bot. वज्रकन्दति . (-ति for 2 चिह्न 1. 
प्रजाति genus) symmetric, symmetrical संमित, सं- S. sylvatica सामान्य वज्रकन्द m. 
मितीय mfn. 
synantherous = syngenesious Bot. symmetrical Statistics संमितीय, संमित (anthers fused) संपरागाशय mfn. 
mfn. 
synapse Physiol. चतोपागम m. s. distribution संमित वंटन n. Synapsida Zool. युक्तछिद्रकरोटिनः m.pl. s. series संमित-माला f. 
synapsid skull Zool. युक्तछिद्र करोटि f. s. stage Zool. संमिति-अवस्था । synapsis I Biol. (conjugation of symmetrically equal Math. संमिति-सम pairs) युग्मानुबंध m. 
mfn. 
2==synapse Physiol. चेतोपागम m. symmetrically opposite Math. Fifefat- synaptase = emulsin (an enzyme 
संमुख mfn. 
contained, specially fasiga in Symmetrodonta Zool. (teeth are cha- almonds वाताम) विवातामेद m. 
racteristic in being triangular) synaptic nervous system Zool. ant त्रिकोणदन्ताः m.pl. 
पागम-संहति symmetry संमिति . 
synarchy (joint rule) सहराज्य १. sympathetic ganglion Zool. Juh- synarthrosis Anat. (immovable 
स्वायत्त प्रगंड m. (shortfrom प्रथमस्वायत्त- joint) स्थिरसन्धि m. (from सुश्रुत) 
चेतासंहति प्रगंड) 
syncarpous (pistil) Bot. युताण्डप mfn. sympathetic nervous system Anat. synchondrosis Anat. कास्थि-सन्धिm. 
(first autonomic nervous system) synchronization संकालन 1. प्रथम-स्वायत्त-चेता-संहति . 
synchronizer = modulator Radar sympathetic vibration Phys. अनुचारि संकालक m. 
आवेपन । 
synchronous movement Zool. - sympathin Zool. प्रथम-स्वायत्ति f. 
लीय-गति . Sympetalae Bot. संयुक्तदला: m.pl. syncytial layer Zool. संकोश-स्तर m. 
(petals united) 
syncytioma Med. संकोशार्बुद m. symphysis संगम m. 
syncytium=plasonodium (a tissue Symplocos Bot. लोध्रति /- (-ति for प्रजाति ऊति) संकोशोति . 
genus) 
. syndesmosis Anat. (an articulation S. racemosa सामान्य लोध्र m. 
in which the bones are bound to sympodial Bot. संयुक्ताक्षी (-इन्) mfn. gether by a ligament) स्नायु-सन्धि M. sympodium Bot. संयुक्ताक्षm. 
syndiazo Chem. संद्वयज symptoms (of a disease) लक्षण n. syndicate अभिषद् /. synangium Zool. (in lower verteb- syndrome Med. (a group of signs 
rates the terminal part of an arte and symptoms occur together) rial trunk) रोहिणी-स्कन्धान्त m. 
सहलक्षण. 
853 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
synergidae = help cells Bot. सहाय- syrup Pharm. मिष्टोद १. 
कोशा. 
s. of balsam of tolu विराल-धूपियास syngamy (cell union) Bot. समुद्राहm. 
मिष्टोदाn. syngenesious Bot. I (having sta s. of calcium hypophosphite= 
mens united) युक्तकेसर mfn. 
syrupus calcii hypophosphi 2=synantherous (anthers fused) tis (syr. calc. hypophosph.) संपरागाशय mfn. 
चूर्णातु-उपभास्वित-मिष्टोद .. synizesis Biol. (massing of the chro S. of chloral=syrupus chloralis 
matin of the nucleus) 145-5777 na (syr. chloral.) नीरसु-मिष्टोद १. synkinesis Med. सहगति 
s. of codeine phosphate=syru synkinetic सहगामी (-इन्) mfn. 
pus codeinae phosphatis (syr. synkinetic movement forfa f. 
codein. phosph.) मीली-भास्वीय synonym पर्याय m. 
मिष्टोद . synopsis रूपरेखा ., संक्षेप m. 
s. of ferrous iodide = syrupus synovia Anat. FETTET m. 
ferri iodidi (syr. ferr. iod.) synovial fluid=synovia 
अयस्य-जम्बेय-मिष्टोद n. synovial membrane Anat. सन्धिकला. s. of ferrous phosphate=syrup synovitis Med. सन्धिकलाकोप m. 
us ferri phosphatis (syr. ferr. synthesis संश्लेषण . 
phosph.) अयस्य-भास्वीय-मिष्टोद .. synthesized संश्लेषित nfn. 
s. of ferrous phosphate with qui synthetic संश्लिष्ट mfn., संश्लेष 
nine and strychnine=syrupus synthetical सांश्लेषिक mfn. 
ferri phosphatis cum quinina synthetically संश्लेषतः, संश्लेष्य 
et strychnina (syr. ferr. phosph. synthetically prepared संश्लेष्य विरचित c. quinin. et strych.)=Easton's synthetic product संश्लेषण-सृष्ट ।. 
syrup विज्वरी तथा विषतिन्दुकी सहित syphilis=French disease Med. उपदंश अयस्य-भास्वीय-मिष्टोद = अपिविज्वरी 
m. (short tot उपस्थदंश. उपदंश occurs मिष्टोद n. in सुश्रुत) 
s. of ipecacuanha=syrupus ipe syphilitic (person) उपदंशी (-इन्) mfn. cacuanhae (syr. ipecac.) बममूल 
(ancient word) 
मिष्टोद . syphon=siphon निनाल m. 
S. of lemon=syrupus limonis syphon trap Hygiene निनाल-रुध m. 
(syr. limon.) निम्बु-मिष्टोद .. syringe उद्गारिका . 
s. of orange=syrupus aurantii s. needle उद्गारिका-सूची . 
(syr. aurant.) नारंग-मिष्टोद . s. needle sharpener उद्गारिका-सूची- s. of rhubarb = syrupus thei 
उत्तिजm. 
(syr. rhei) चीनरेच-मिष्टोद . Syrinx Zook (vocal organ of birds) s. of rose=syrupus rosae (syr. 
कृजित 
ros.) पाटल-मिष्टोद . 
854 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
(STI. quillo 
nte 
toluit 
s, of senna = syrupus sennae matic syrup of figs af sigaar 
(syr. senn.) tranfetan. 
free n. s. of squill = syrupus scillae S. ficorum compositus = com 
(syr. scill.) ETKİE-FACete n. 
pound syrup of figs संयुत प्रोदुम्बर s. of tolu = syrupus tolutanus FACTS n. 
(syr. tolu.) factar-firecte n. 
s. glucosi = syrup of glucose s. of wild cherry=syrupus pruni Hea-ficcta n. 
virginianae = syrupus pruni s. glycerophosphatum compo serotinae anar-feta n. 
| situs HT TỊCHIM-HG . s. simplex सरल मिष्टोद n. 
s. glycyrrhizae faufic-facta n. s. vasaka वासक-मिष्टोद .. 
s. hemidesmi tat-Fete n. syrupus Pharm. forseta n. 
s. ipecacuanhae=syrup of ipe s. aromaticus सुरभि मिष्टोद . 
cacuanha S. aurantii=syrup of orange s. limonis=syrup of lemon S. aurantii floris syrup of s. picis liquidae तरल अंगाराल-मिष्टोद 
orange flower 07909-fHata 
s. pruni serotinae = syrup of s. calcii hypophosphitis=syrup wild cherry 
of calcium hypophosphite s. pruni virgininae = syrup of s. cascarae aromaticus=aroma 
wild cherry tic syrup of cascara yfHT! S. rhei = syrup of rhubarb 9 -FFECTS n. 
8. rosae = syrup of rose s. chloralis = syrup of chloral s. sarsaecompositus संयुत प्रासारिवा s. codeinae phosphatis=syrup faceta n. 
of codeine phosphate 
S. scillae = syrup of squill s. ferri iodidi=syrup of ferrous s. sennae = syrup of senna 
iodide 
s. tolutanus = syrup of tolu s. ferri phosphatis = syrup of syrupy 1 (like syrup) Facete #TT, 
ferrous phosphate 
मिष्टोद-रूप mfn., मिष्टोदवत् s. ferri phosphatis compositus 2 (having a syrup) feta (-) 
=compound syrup of ferrous mfn. phosphate spent quFq-h71 syrupy liquid felget 2007 m. FASCE the 
system th. I an aggregate or assem s. ferri phosphatis cum quini- blage of objects united by some na et strychnina-syrup of form of regular interaction or ferrous phosphate with qui- interdependence) Fefet f., FTT, TT 
nine and strychnine S. ficorum aromaticus = aro 2 (the universe) faca n. 
855 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
H 
3 (the body) देह, शरीर n. 4 (a methodically arranged कम m. . 5 (a. theory) वाद m. 6 (a formal scheme, method, 
mode) प्रणाली, पद्धति . 
7 (of rocks) Geol. तन्त्र 1. systematic ऋमिक, क्रमबद्ध mfn. systematic botany वर्गीकर-औद्भिदी. systematics (the science of classi- 
fication) वर्गीकारिकी f. systematic square Statistics ऋमिक 
समायतm. systematic zoology avfife-sforait 
systemic arteries Zool. देह-रोहिणी f. 
(for the body as a whole) systemic trunk Zool. देह-महारोहिणी . system of bodies काय-संहति, पदार्थ 
संहति. system of circles Math. वृत्त-संहति. system of forces बल-संहति. system of levers Phys. उद्याम-संहति f. system of lines रेखा-संहति . system of pullies Phys, stairietat f. system of trenches = network of 
entrenchments Mil. खाति-जाल n. systems of measurement Phys. माप 
पद्धति systole Physiol., Biol. हृत्कुंचन 1. systolic adj. हृत्कुंचन systolic pressure हृत्कुंचन-निपीड m. systolo-meter हत्कुंचन-मान M. syzygy सम्मेल m. 
systematization क्रमबन्धन . systematize pb. क्रमबन्धन .. systematized क्रमबद्ध mfn. systemic arch Zool. देह-चाप m. 
T (tantalum) Chem. स (सहातु) 
T. A. B. Pharm. आ. क. ख.(See typhoid t (temperature) Phys. त (ताप) 
paratyphoid) T (absolute temperature) Phys. ता tab. aloes et asafoetidae Pharm. 
(प्रकेवल ताप) 
___ कुमारी-हिंगु-चक्रिका f. t, (initial temperature) Phys. त, (आदिम tab. aloes et ferri Pharm. कुमारी-अयश् 
ताप) 
. चक्रिका . te (final temperature) Phys.. त. (अंतिम tab. aloes et myrrh Pharm. कुमारी 
ताप) 
___रसगन्ध-चक्रिका f. t (time) Phys. क (काल) . . Tabanidae (eyes are very brilliant t1 (initial time) Phys. क, (आदिम काल) . in colours) रंगाक्ष-वंश m. to (final time) Phys. क. (अन्तिम काल) Tabanus Zool. रंगाक्षाति f. (-पाति for T. (Treponema) सुकु. (सुकुन्तलाणु) । प्रजाति genus) t. (troy) है. (हैम) 
T. autumnalis शरद् रंगाक्ष m. to ftom) व., वर्. (प्रवर्त)। 
tabashir (used in Persian and T (in T-tube) (ब्राह्म) रो 
Arabic also, from Sanskrit तवक्षीर, Ta (tantalum). Chem. स (सहातु) .. . त्वक्षीरा) त्वक्क्षीरा . 
836, 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
T. A. B. C. Pharm. आ. क. ख. वि. (See t. logarithm Math. सारणी-छेदा . ___typhoid-paratyphoid cholera) t. method सारणी-रीति tab. colocynth co. संयुत-इन्द्रवारुणी-चक्रिका t. petty cash-book सारणी-क्षुद्ररोक 
पुस्तn. tab. colocynth et hyoscyamus t. purchases book सारणी-क्रयपुस्त ।. 
Pharm. इन्द्रवारुणी-कुक्कुटविष-चक्रिका . t. sales book सारणी-विक्रय-पुस्त n. Tabernaemontana Bot. तगरति f. (-ति tabular key=tabulator key सारणीयक 
for प्रजाति genus) 
कुञ्ची . T. coronaria सामान्य तगर m. tabulate vb. सारणीकरण, सारणीयन 1. tab. hydrarg. Pharm. पारद-चक्रिका f. tabulation सारणीयन, सारणीकरण 7. tab. ipecac. cum scillae Pharm. tabulator सारणीयक m. ___ वममूल-समुद्रपलाण्डु-चक्रिका . 
tabulator key=tabular key table I (a tabulated statement) सारणी Tacca Bot. सूरणति f. (-ति for प्रजाति 
genus) 2 (a. piece of furniture) पटल n. 
T. aspera सामान्य सूरण m. 3=layet (of bones) Anat. स्तर m. tachogram जवलेख m. table arm-chair पटल-बाह्वासन्दी. tachograph जवलिख m. (जव speed) table, blowpipe धमनाइ-पटल. 
tachometer (a speed counter) जवमान table calendar (memorandum. calen m. 
dar) पटल-तिथिपत्री f. (स्मारक-तिथिपत्री) tachometry जवमिति . table clock पटल-घटक m. 
tachoscope=tachymeter tableland Geog. गिरि-प्रस्थ m. 
tachymeter=tachoscope Surveying table of contents विषय-सूची f. 
(for determining quickly the table support पटल-आधार m. 
distances, bearings, and elevations tablet चक्रिका f. (Hindi टिकिया) 
of distant objects) आशुमान M. pill=pilula fcat f. 
tachysterol Zool. आशुविपत्तव' m. table telephone पटल-दूरभाष m. tacit acceptance मौन स्वीकरण 1. 
hand microphone हस्तग्राह्य अणुभाष tacit assent मौन-सम्मति f. . table water bottle (carafe) पटल- -tactic -ऋमिक 
___ जल-कूपी . 
tactician Mil. व्यूहकुशल M. (from tab. rhei co. Pharm. संयुत-चीनरेच चक्रिका शुक्रनीति 4.7.11) 
_tactics Mil. व्यूहकौशल n. tab. scillae co. संयुत-समुद्रपलाण्डु-चक्रिका f. tactile corpuscle=touch corpuscle tabular सारणी-, सारणीय mfn. 
___Anat. स्पर्श-देहाणु m. t. book-keeping सारणीय पुस्त-पालन tadpole I भेकशिशु m. 
. 
2 (the minute tadpole-shaped t. journal सारणी-दैनिकपंजी. 
larva of an ascidian) भेकशिशुक t. ledger सारणी-प्रपंजी f. 
m. 
857 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
Taenia Zool. चूषशिराति f. (-आति for take by choice बृत्वा-ग्रहण १. 
प्रजाति genus) 
take effect प्रभावि-भवन . (Hindi प्रभावी T. saginata (beef-tapeworm) गो होना) 
चूषशिर m. 
take off (purchases) Com. क्रय m., T. solium (pork-tapeworm) सूकर क्रीतभाण्ड, क्रीतवस्तु 1. 
चूषशिर . 
takosis Veter. (wasting disease of taenia coli Anat. प्रान्त्र-पट्टी/. (a muscle goats) अजक्षय m. 
band of large intestine) 
talc, talcum (from Sanskrit तालक, a Taeniidae Zool. (a family) चूषशिर-वंश fragrant earth) खटिका f., तालक n. 
talcose खटिकिय mfn. Taenioidea Zool. (a superfamily) talcum powder तालक-क्षोद m. 
चूषशिर-प्रवंश m. 
talipot=fan palm श्रीताल m. taffeta Pharm. (a. yellow greaseproof talker (a parrot) पुरुषवाक्, वाणीवाद m. 
film of cellulose used to cover talking machine Phys. भाषि यन्त्र greased areas, moist surgical talking maina पुरुषवाक् सारिका f. 
dressings, etc.) अस्नेहपीता. ___ talking picture भाषि चित्र n. tag नस्या. 
tall fescue=Festuca elatior प्रांशु Tagetes Bot. गेन्दुकति f. (-ति for प्रजाति अवितृण m. 
genus) 
tallied अनुमिलित, अनुमेलित mfn. T. erecta सामान्य गेन्दुक m. (Cf. tally vb. अनुमिलन, अनुमेलन 1. 
Hindi, Bengali genda) 
tallying अनुमिलन, अनुमेलन n. T. patula प्रास्तारी गेन्दुक m. tallying results I अनुमिलित फल 1. tagged नस्यित mfn. 
2 Statistics अनुमेलन फल 1. tail पुच्छ m. 
talon Stock Exchange अनुषक्तक 7. (a tailed सपुच्छ mfn. 
certificate attached to certain tailed pepper == cubeb Pharm. गन्ध- ' bonds) 
talonic acid Chem. क्षैरिक अम्ल n. tail feather बह m., पुच्छ-पत्र . 
(formed by heating galactonic acid tail lamp Automobile पश्च-दीप m. 
with pyridine) tailless पुच्छहीन, वंट mfn. 
talose (German, from talon fr. ga tailpiece = appendage Violin Jui l actonsäure; formed by reduc 
tion of talonic acid) Chem. क्षरधु tail-warning radar sets (T.W.S.) 
. Radar पुच्छ-प्राबोधन-तेजोन्वेष (पु. प्रा. ते.) Talpa Zool. पाखनकाति (आति for प्रजाति take rub. ग्रहण n. 
genus) प्रारम्भण 1. (as in to take the Talpidae Zool. पाखनक-वंश m. erofensive) 
-tam (lactam in sultam) -धति (शुल्धति) take away b. अपहरण .. 
tamarind अम्लिका. 
मरिच . 
818 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
Tamarindus Bot. अम्लिकाति . (-ति for tannate Chem. शल्कीय n. 
प्रजाति genus) 
tannate fast green Col. Ind. शल्कीय T. indica. भारत अम्लिका . 
स्थिर हरि m. 'Tamarix Bot. झावुति f. (-ति for प्रजाति t. fast red शल्कीय स्थिर रक्त m. 
___genus) 
t. fast scarlet शल्कीय स्थिर शोण m. tamtam (a tom-tom or chinese gong) t. ruby-red शल्कीय पद्मराग-रक्त m. 
टमटम m. 
tannery चर्मसंस्करणी tan (tangent) Math. स्प (स्पज्या) tannic Chem. शल्किक mfn. 
Tanagra (a. colout)न्यवरक्तापीत tannic acid = acidum tannicum tanbark (any bark rich in tannin) (acid. tann.) Pharm. शल्किक अम्ल . 
शल्कि-वल्क, संस्कार-वल्क m. (संस्कार abbr. tannin Chem. शल्कि f. (cf. Punjabi सक्क from चर्म-संस्कार) 
from 17, the bark of kikar used tangent Math. I (ratio) qurf. (short for tanning) 
for स्पर्शज्या) 
arabin बब्बूलि f. 2 (tangent line) स्पर्शी (-इन्) m., tannin brown Col. Ind. शल्कि बभ्रु m. स्पर्श-रेखा f.. 
t. discharge blue शल्कि मोचन tangent centune Ophthalmol. (angle नील m. 
subtended by a tangent, I cm. t. heliotrope शल्कि तिनीलातिरक्त m. long, I meter away) स्प. शतम 1. t. indigo blue शल्कि निनील नील m. (स्प-स्पर्शरेखा) 
___t. orange शल्कि नारंग m. tangent galvanometer Phys. typur t. pink feat 91964 m. 
धुवाहमान m. 
tanning शल्कन 1., चर्मसंस्कार m. tangential स्पर्शरेखीय mfn. 
tanning expert चर्मसंस्कार-विशारद m. tangentially अनुस्पर्शि 
tanno-(for tannin and tannic) शल्क tangential point Ophthalmol. स्पर्शरेखीय tannoflavine Col. Ind. शल्कपिगी f. 
बिन्दु m. 
tannometer-barkometer शल्कमान m. tangent line-tangent Math. स्पर्श-रेखा tannoxydophenol Col. Ind. शल्कजारेय 
स्पर्शी (-इन्) m. 
दर्शव m. tangent plane Math. स्पर्श समतल, tannyl Chem. शल्कल . 
स्पर्शि-समतल n. 
tantalate Chem. सहीय . tangent screw Mach. स्पर्शी भ्रमि m. tantali- (tantalum) Chem. सह tangible Com. मूर्त mfn. 
tantalic Chem. सहिक mfn. t. assets मूर्त-सम्पत्ति . 
t. acid सहिक अम्ल . t. goods मूर्त वस्तु . 
t.ocher Mineral. सहिक गैरिक 1. tank I तडाग m. 
tantali-ferous Chem. सह-भर mfn. 2Mil. विचक्र . 
tantali-fluoride, tantalo-fluoride tank-cum-air-theory Mil. विमान-विचक्र Chem. सह-तरस्वेय . 
साहचर्य-वाद m. 
tantalite (essentially iron tantalate) 
859﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
Mineral. अयस्सहिज m. (-इज for खनिज tap key टाप-कुञ्ची f. mineral) 
taproot Bot. अधिमूल 1. tantalo- सह 
taproot system Bot. अधिमूल-संहति f. tantalum Chem. सहातु m. 
tar विराल m. tantalum lamp Elec. सहातु-दीप m. taraxaci radix=taraxacum tant-copper सह-ताम्र n. 
taraxacum (tarax.) = taraxacum tant-iron सहायसn. 
root=taraxaci radix=dande tant-nickel सह-रूपक . 
___lion root Pharm. दुग्धतिक्ता . tap Mach. I vb. निसूत्रण 1. 
Taraxacum Bot. दुग्धतिक्ताति /. (-ति for 21. निसूत्रक m. 
प्रजाति genus) tap विवरी. (विवर hole, विवियत इति that T. officinale=dandelion सामान्य 
which is opened), aife f. (Hindi दुग्धतिक्ता. टोंटी) 
taraxacum root=taraxacum brass t. पित्तल-विवरी . 
tare Com. भारमोक m. (short for धारक vulcanite t. गन्धघृषि-विवरी . 
भारमोक; धारक container) tape पट्टिका f. 
actual t. वास्तविक भारमोक m. asbestos t. अदह-पट्टिका . 
average t. माध्य भारमोक m. tape grass==wild celery Bot. कुंतल customary t. रूढ भारमोक m. 
पट्टिका. 
estimated t. प्रागणित भारमोक m. taper vb. Macb. स्फानन 2. 
super t. अधि भारमोकm. tapering = conical गर्जरवत्, शुण्डाकार, target लक्ष्य n. ___गोपुच्छाकार mfn. 
tariff Com. प्रशुल्क, निराकाम्य-शुल्क, (a sche taper key Macb. स्फान-कीला f. (स्फान= dule of duties) प्रशुल्क-सूची, (a system 
स्फानवत्) 
of duties) प्रशुल्क-पद्धति f. taper pin Mach. स्फान-आणि m. 
t, board प्रशुल्क मंडल, निराकाम्यशुल्क tapetum Bot. (nutritive tissue) qtaifa मण्डल m. 
f. (ऊति tissue) 
t. wall प्रशुल्क भित्ति . tapeworm पट्टकृमि m. 
Tarim Geog. (a river in Central Asia) armed t. सांकुश पट्टकृमि m. 
सीता (Sino-Indian Studies, Vol. II beef t. गोमांस-पट्टकृमि m. 
p.93) fat t. स्नेह-पट्टकृमि m. 
Tariri=Picramnia Bot. sfatrafet f. unarmed t. अनंकुश पट्टकृमि m. 
(-fa for sufet genus) tap funnel Chem. विवरी-निवाप m. tariricataririnic tapioca प्रकण m. (a granular prepa- taririnic Cbem. प्रनिम्बिक mfn. 
ration of cassava starch) 
tarred road विरालित-रथ्या. tapir Zool. जलतुरग m. (ancient word) tarry विरालवत्, विरालसदृश 
Tapirus Zool. जलतुरगाति f. (-आति for t. liquid विरालवत् तरल, विरालसदृश 
जाति agemus). 
तरल m. 860 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
tarsal bone-tarsus कूर्च m. 
acid t. अम्ल-स्वाद m. tarsal gland=Meibomian gland bitter t. कटु स्वाद m. 
वर्मपट्ट-ग्रन्थि m. 
burning t. दाही स्वाद m. tarsal plate वर्म-पट्ट m. 
pungent t. तिक्त स्वाद m. tarsus I=ankle गुल्फ m. 
salt t. लवण-स्वाद m. 2=tarsal bone कूर्च m. 
sweet t. मधुर स्वाद m. 3-tarsal plate वर्त्म-पट्टm. 
taste bud Anat. स्वाद-कुड्म m. tartar I (of teeth) Med. दन्तशर्करा f. taste hair Zool. स्वाद-रोम . 
(from सुश्रुत) 
taste papillae Zool. स्वादांकुर m. 2 Chem. (a substance deposited tatezome ushio blue RS-anthrene नि in wine casks) न्यासव m. 
blue RS tartar emetic वम न्यासव m. 
taurocholate Biochem. वषपित्तीय 1. tartaric न्यासविक mfn. 
tauro-cholic Biochem. वृष-पित्तिक mfn. tartaric acid Chem. न्यासविक अम्ल . taut affert mfn. tartar of teeth दन्त-शर्करा . (from tauto- (tautomeric) Chem. प्रावर्त 
सुश्रुत) 
tautomer Chem, प्रावर्तिता (-४) m. tartar yellow Col. Ind. न्यासव पीत m. tautomeric Chem. प्रावर्तिक mfn. tartrabarins=tartar yellow 
tautomerism=dynamic allotropy tartrachromine Col. Ind. -urhauff f. Chem. प्रावर्तना . (short for प्रवैगिक tartraphenine Col. Ind. न्यासवदर्शी f. अपरावर्तना) tartrate Chem. न्यासवीय 1. 
tautomerize vb. Chem. प्रावर्तकरण . tartratol yellow Col. Ind. न्यासवीयव पीत tax Com. कर m. 
m. 
direct t. प्रत्यक्ष कर tartrazine yellow Col. Ind. Fararsitat income t. आय-कर m. 
पीत m. 
indirect t. परोक्ष कर m.. tartrine yellow Col. Ind. न्यासवी पीत t. free कर-मुक्त mfn. 
m. 
t. payer करद (ancient word), कर-दाता tartro- न्यासव 
(-तु) m. tartronic (tartro- न्यासव- + malonic t. system कर-पद्धति f. 
उत्कोलायिक) Chem. न्यासवायिक mfn. taxable करग्राह्य, करदेय mfn. tartronyl (tartronic न्यासवायिक----y-ल) t. capacity करदेय-क्षमता, करदान-क्षमता 
Chem. न्यासवाल.. tartryl न्यासवल 2. 
t. income करदेय आय m. . task कार्यभार m. 
taxation r कर, कर-वर्गm. (covers every Tasmanian wolf-pouched wolf conceivable exaction by a 
marsupial wolf Zool. शिशुधान वृक government) 
2 करवर्गारोपण, करारोपण 1. (H. कर taste स्वाद m. 
लगाना) 861 
• 
m. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
tax-collector करग्राही (-इन्) m. (ancient 4 Chem. परिभाषित mfn. 
word) 
5 (industrial) औद्योगिक mfn. tax-free कर-मुक्त mfn. 
t. application प्रावैधिक प्रयोग m. -taxic -ऋमिक 
t. chemistry = industrial che taxine Chem. (contained in तालीशपत्र) mistry 
तालीशी . 
t. development Mil. प्रावैधिक विकास -taxis Bot. -क्रम m. taxism-tropism Zool. आवर्तना f. 
t. education=industrial educa taxonomy (classification) वर्गीकरण n., tion प्रावैधिक-शिक्षा, प्रौद्योगिक-शिक्षा 
वर्गीकृति . 
प्रौद्योगिक-शिक्षा f. tax-payer करद, कर-दाता (-तृ) m. 
t. high school प्रौद्योगिक उच्च-पाठ tax-system कर-पद्धति 
शाला. Taylor's process Chem. (electrical t. qualification व्यावसायिक योग्यता, 
विद्युत् method for manufacturing प्रावैधिक योग्यता f. 
CS प्रशु.) विद्युत्प्रशु विधा .. 
t. school industrial school Tb (terbium) Chem. इ (इद्भुशला) 
प्रौद्योगिक-पाठशाला - औद्योगिक-पाठशाला T2 distribution Statistics T is from ____ttest आग. समन्वीक्षा) आग वंटन 7. technically प्रविध्यनुसार, प्रविधिना Te (tellurium) Chem. व (बंगक) technique (expert method) प्रविधि m. tea चैन।. (from चीन China) (Hindi चाय) technological I प्रौद्योगिकीय mfn. teacher अध्यापक m. 
2 प्रौद्योगिक mfn. teamwork समूह्यकर्म ?. 
technologist प्रोद्योगविद् m. tear vb. दारण . 
technology industrial science or tear n. अश्रु. 
the systematic knowledge of the tear-gas अश्रु-वाति m. 
industrial arts) प्रौद्योगिकी f. tearing दारण . 
rectona Bot. शाकति. (-ति for प्रजाति tearing tester दारण-परीक्षित्र 
genus) tear-off calendar पाट्य-तिथिपत्री. 
T. grandis सामान्य शाक m. tease wb. Zool. (to separate tissues tedious क्लान्तिकर nfn. 
with a. needle) सूचीवेचन . tee (tee-square) Engin. (ब्राह्म) रो-रेखक, tea-spoon चैन-सुवm. 
बाहु-रेखक m. teaspoonful चैनस्रुव, चैनस्रुव-मात्रा f. teething Z002. दन्तोद्भेद m., दन्तोद्भेदन . teat चूचुक n. 
teeth in mandible Anat. अधरदन्त m. technical ! (as words) पारिभाषिक (ancient word) ., mfm. 
teeth in maxilla Anat. उत्तरदन्त m. __2 (as education) प्रावैधिक, प्रौद्योगिक (ancient word) 
tegmen I Zool. (a tegument pr 5 (professional) व्यावसायिक mfn. covering) आच्छद . 
mfn. 
( 
N 
862 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
2 Bot. (inner seed coat) अन्तश्चोल m. television I दूरदृष्टि m. tegmina pl. of tegmen 
2 दूरदर्श f. tegument-integument Zool. पाच्छद televisor (an apparatus) दूरदर्शित्र n. 
m. 
Telfairia Bot. प्रालाबुति f. (-ति for प्रजाति tehsil भुक्ति . 
genus) district मंडल . 
telfairic acid Chem. प्रालाब्दिक अम्ल division विषय m. telegram दूरलेख m. (H. तार) 
Telingana. Geog. आन्ध्र, त्रिकलिंग m. telegraph gefore m. (the apparatus) teller Com. गणक m. (one who counts) 
t. office दूरलिख-कार्यालय m. 
tellur- (tellutium) Chem. वंगक _t. poles दूरलिख-वलक 
tellurate Chem. वंगकीयn. telegrapher (one who sends tele tellurettelluride 
graphic messages) दूरसंदेशक m. tellureted, telluretted adj. बंगकेयित telegraphic Com. दूरलिख-, दूरलेख 
mfn. telegraphic parts Bot. (conducting tellur-ethyl Chem. बंगक-दक्षुल n. ____parts) संवाही भाग m.. 
tellur-hydric Chem. बंगकोदिक mfn. telegraphist दूरलेखक m. 
t. acid availfoto 67 n. telencephalon = endbrain Zool. telluri- (telluric) Chem. बंगकि-(बंगकिक) 
अन्त्यमस्तिष्क . 
telluric Chem. वंगकिक mfn. Teleostei (teleo-perfect') Zool. प्रौढा t. acid वंगकिक अम्ल 2. 
स्थयः M. pl. 
t. bismuth-tetradymite bony fish अस्थि-मत्स्य M. 
t. silver-hessite Mineral. वंगकिक telephone दूरभाष M. 
रजत. telephone exchange दूरभाष-विनिमय m. telluride=telluret Chem. वंगकेय ?. telephoto-lens Phys. दूरभा-वीक्ष m. telluri-ferous Chem. बंगक-भर mfn. teleran (a. complete system of air telluriter Chem. वंगकित . 
navigation featuring a combina- 2 Mineral. बंगजारेयिज m. (-इज for tion of television and radar tech खनिज mineral) 
niques) वायावन्वेष m. (वायौ+ अन्वेष) tellurium Cbem. वंगक n. telescope I n. m. 
t. glance = nagyagite Mineral. 2 vb. (to slide or pass one within वंगक-रुचा . another) निसर्पण, निप्रवेशन n. 
t. oxide वंगक जारेय. telescope and scale arrangement t. tetrachloride वंगक चतुर्नीरेय . ____ Phys. दूरेक्ष-मापश्रेणी-विन्यास m. tellurize vb. Chem. वंगकायन . telescopic दूरेक्षीय mfn. 
I (to combine with tellurium), telescopic glasses दरेक्षीय उपनेत्र । 
वंगक-योजन . televise vb. (transmit or receive by 2 (to impregnate with tellurium). 
television) दूरदर्शन .. 
वंगक-व्यापन . 863 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
. 
m. 
3 (to treat with tellurium) वंगक t. hardness Chem. अस्थायि-कठोरता, साधन . 
अस्थायि-फेनदता. tellurized ores Chem. वंगकायित अयस्क t. judges अस्थायी न्यायाधीश m. 
t. mouth capsule शैशव मुख प्रावर telluro- (tellurous) Chem. बंगक्य telluronium Chem. वंगकतातु m. tenacious दृढ mfn. tellurous Chem. बंगक्य mfn. 
tenant 1 (one who pays rent for any ____t. acid बंगक्य अम्ल n. 
holding) भाटकी (-इन्) m. telolecithal Embryol. एकत:पीती (-इन्) 2 (a. farmer tenant) कृषक, कृषक 
mfn. 
___ भाटकी (-इन्) m. telophase Biol. भाजनान्तिमा. 
Tenasserim Geog. तनुश्री Telosporidia Zool. (sporozoa in ten crudes (benzene, toluene, etc.) 
which the adult is uninuclear) दश आमn. एकन्यष्टिप्रौढाः m.pl. 
. tendency प्रवृत्ति, उपनति . temperate region मन्दताप प्रदेश m. tendency to bend Mach. उपनमन-प्रवृत्ति Temperate Zone मन्द कटिबन्ध m. 
. temperature ताप m. 
tender I Com. निविदा . (Cf. निवेदन to t. and humidity recorder ताप- . offer) 
आक्लेद-अभिलेखक m. 
2 Rly. (a vehicle attached to a t. bulb ताप-कन्द m. 
locomotive, for carrying a supply t. chart ताप-रेखाचित्रा. 
of fuel and water) जलांगारी (-इन्) t.-controller तापवशी (-इन).m. 
m. t. gradient ताप-प्रवणक ?. 
t.frame जलांगारि-कंकाल m. t. of combustion दहन-ताप m. 
t. wheel spring जलांगारि-चक्र-स्कन्द t. of ignition उत्तापन-ताप m. 'tempered scale Music समान्तर ग्राम m. tending to abrogate निराकरणोन्मुख 
temple (on either side of the head tendinous cords = chordae ten 
of man and some other mammals) dineae हृद्रज्जु f. शंख m. 
tendon कंडरा, मांसरज्जु f. (from सुश्रुत) temporal bone Anat. शंखक, n. sinew स्नायु . 
(ancient word) 
tendril Bot. (a means of attachment) temporal muscle Anat. शंख-पेशी. संजनी /., प्रतान m. (ancient word) temporary (opposed to permanent, -tene (filament) Zool. -अंशु 
stable) अस्थायी (-इन् ), अल्पकाल, अचिर tenement Com.. भाटकित .. (भाटक-भू, mfn. 
भाटक-गृह, भाटक-क्षेत्र) . t. annuity Com. अस्थायि-वार्षिकी . Tenon's capsule-fascia bulbi t appointment अस्थायि-नियुक्ति tenor-term Com. अवधि m. . t. bond Com. अस्थायी. बंध m.. 
t. of a bill विपत्रावधि m. 864 
शसul. 
. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
tense anara mfn. 
tergum=tergite tenseness=tensity आततत्व 1. 
term I Math. पद .. tensibility=tensibleness-tensility 2=tenure Com. अवधि m. 
=tensileness आतन्यता f. 
t. of a bill विपत्रावधि m. tensible=tensile आतन्य mfn. 
terminable Com. सावधि, अवसेय mfn. tensibleness=tensibility 
t. annuity सावधि-वार्षिकवृत्ति . tensile=tensible 
t. debenture सावधि ऋणपत्र 1. tensileness=tensibility . 
terminal I अवसान, अवसानीय, आवसानिक, tensile strength Phys. अातनन-बल 1. सावधि mfa. 
_t. stress Mach. आतनन-प्रत्याबल 7. 
2 सीमा t. tester प्रातनन-परीक्षित्र. 
3 Bot. अग्न tensility=tensibility 
t. accounts सावधि-लेखा. tension प्रातति. 
t. annuity सावधि-वार्षिकवृत्ति. tension apparatus प्रातति-साधित्र .. 
t. arborization Anat. अवसान-द्रुमायण tensity=tenseness आततत्व ". 
t. bud Bot. अग्र-कलिका f. tensive आतानी (इन्) mfn. 
t. cost (of each separate contract tensor आतानक m. 
____or job) एकैक-परिव्यय m. tentacle Zool. अंगक.. 
t. examination अवसान-परीक्षा, अन्तिम Tentaculata Zool. सांगकाः m.pl. (hav परीक्षा . 
ing tentacles) 
t. filament (of a spermatozoon) tentaculocyst Zool. (a greatly reduced Zool. अवसानांशु m. 
and modified tentacle containing t. flower Bot. अग्न-पुष्प ?. 
a cavity with lithites) गुहांगका . t. loan सावधि उद्धार m. tenth cranial nerve ZOOL. दशमी कार्पर t. part Bot. अग्र-भाग m. 
चेता 
t. tax सीमा-कर m. tenure Com. धारण 1., धारणावधि m., Terminalia Bot. अर्जुनति f. (ति for 
धारणत्व ., धारणाधिकार, धारण-प्रकार m. प्रजाति genus) t. of land भूधारण १., भूधारणाधिकार m. ____T. arjuna सामान्य अर्जुन m. 
t. of office कार्य-काल, अधिकार-काल, termination of citizenship जानपदत्व . पदधारण-काल, पद-काल, पदावधि m. 
अवसान . t. of service #91-757 m. 
term independent of x Math. य-रहित terbia (terbium oxide) Chem. CHRIST पद n. 
terminology परिभाषा, पारिभाषिक शब्दा terbium Chem. इद्भशला. 
वलि . terebinth=Chian turpentine (Pis- termite-white ant Zool. वल्म m. 
.. tacia terebinthus) विसरल m. 
(Hindi दीमक) terebinthina=turpentine 
term of a bill = tenor of a bill tergite Zool. (dorsal plate) पृष्ठपट्टm. . Com. विपत्रावधि m. 
865 55 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
- 
- 
- 
- 
2. 
terms अभिसमय m. (terms and condi ......or to drive the quarry out 
tions) 
of its hole) बिल-खन m. terms of motion प्रस्ताव-पद 1. 
territorial प्रादेशिक.mfn. tern Zool. कुररी. 
territorial constituency भौम प्रतिमण्डल ternary Math. त्रिमय mfn. Ternidens Zool. त्रिदन्ताति .(-आति for territorial sea-marine belt=mar 
प्रजाति genus) 
ginal sea International Law प्रान्त T. diminutus लघु त्रिदन्त m. 
समुद्र m. terpane Chem. सरलीन्य 2. 
territorial waters International Law terpene [terpentin (old form of ter- राज्यक्षेत्रीय जलधि m. 
pentine) सरल+ - ene] Chem. सरलेन्य territory I (region) प्रदेश m. . 
2 राज्य-क्षेत्र terpenylic (terpene सरलेन्य+ - y + tert. (tertiary) तृ. 
-ic) सरलेल्यलिक mfn. 
tertiary तृतीयक, तृत, तृतीय mfn. t. acid सरलेन्यलिक अम्ल n. 
tertiary roots Bot. तृतीय मूल 1. terra cotta पक्व-मृत् . 
tervalent Chem. त्रिसंयुज mfn. terra di Sienna = Roman earth tessellated Zool. कुटिमचित्र mfn. ( terra japonica = cubical catechu sembling mosaic work) 
घन खदिर n. 
t. epithelium कुट्टिमचित्र अधिच्छद m. terra ombre=Roman earth 
test I परीक्षा, परीक्षण . terra pinguis Old Chem. (“sfatty 2 (decisive trial) समन्वीक्षा/. ____earth") स्नेह-मृत्तिका . 
testa=seed coat Bot. बीज-चोल m. terra sigillatared chalk 
testament Lany मृत्यूत्तरपत्र, रिक्थपत्र n. terre मृद् 
testamentary Law रिक्थपत्रीय, रिक्थ terrestrial पार्थिव, भौम mfn. 
पत्रोक्त, रिक्थपत्रदत्त mfn. terrestrial animal Zool. स्थलचर प्राणी testator Law रिक्थपत्र-कर्ता (-त) m. 
(-इन्) m. 
test examination Education उप-परीक्षा terrestrial iron Mineral. (found in 
masses occasionally of great size) test glass Chem. परीक्षण-काच m. पार्थिवायस . 
testicle=testis (pl. testes) Anat. quum terrestrial method भौम-रीति. 
m. . terrestrial plant Bot. भौम पादप m. testicular extract Pharm. वृषण-निस्सार terrestrial radiation पार्थिव विकिरण m. 
. 
testicular hormone Pharm. वृषण-न्यासर्ग terrestrial sphere भूमि-गोल m. 
m. terre verte=green earth हरि-मृद् . testicular transplantation Zool. वृषण Farrier Zool. (originally used by hun- प्रतिरोपण . 
ters to dig for small furred game testing परीक्षण 1. 
and int. 
866 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
-- 
testing apparatus परीक्षण-साधित्र . short, a fourfold table is involv testing machine परीक्षण-य त्र, परीक्षित्र .. ed) चतु:कोष्ठिक mfn. testis=testicle (pl. testes) Anat. वृषण tetracosane Chem. चतुर्विशीन्य १. 
m. 
tetracyanol Coi. Ind. चतुःश्यामव m. testis = spermary = sperm gland Tetracyclicae Bot. चतुर्धमयः M. pl. 
___Zool. शुक्र-ग्रन्थि m. 
(flowers with four whorls) testis-sac Z001. वृषण-कोश, वृषण-स्यून m. ____tetrad चतुष्टय, चतुष्टयाणु testosterone Zool. वृषणि f. 
tetradecane Chem. चतुर्दशीन्य n. test paper परीक्षण-पत्र । 
tetradymite Mineral. (consists of bis test solution Chem. परीक्षण-विलयन . muth and tellurium) भिदवंगिज m. test tube Chem. परीक्षण-नाल m. 
(-इज for खनिज mineral) t.t. brush परीक्षणनाल-कूर्च m. tetradynamous Bot. (four long and t.t. drainer परीक्षणनाल-स्रावक m. two short stamens) चतुर्दीर्घ mfn. 
t.t. holder परीक्षणनाल-धर m. tetraethyl- Cbem. चतुर्दक्षुल Testudinata=Chelonia 
Tetragenous (designating bacteria Testudo Zool. (they comprise the growing in square groups of 
typical land tortoises) भूकूर्माति . four) चतुष्काणु m. (when used alone, (आति for प्रजाति genus) 
but Talk when used with another T. elegans (showing yellow name containing अणु) 
streaks on black shells) पीतराजि tetragonal Math. चतुष्कोण mfn. भूकर्म m. 
tetrahedron Geom. चतुरनीक m. tetanus Med. धनुस्तम्भ m. (tetanus is tetrahydroxyflavone Chem. चतुरुद ___ fromVतन् to stretch) 
जारपिंगा. tetany Zool. प्रांगग्रह m. (spasm अंगग्रह) tetrahydroxyflavonol Chem. चतुरुद tetra-, tetra- चतु:-, चतुर, चतुस्-, चतुष्-, जारपिंगाव m. 
चतुश् 
___ tetralocular Bot. चतुर्गह्वर mfn. tetraborate Chem. चतुष्टांकीय . tetramerous Bot. चतुरवयव mfn. Tetrabranchia Zool. चतुःक्लोमाः m.pl. tetramethyl - diamino - diphenyl tetrabromfluorescein (acid) चतु 
methane Chem. चतुःप्रोदल-द्वितिक्ती भ्राशिन m. (अम्ल) 
द्विदर्शल-प्रोदीन्य tetrabromide Chem. चतुर्दुरेय .. tetramine Chem, चतुस्तिक्ती. tetrachloride Chem. चतुर्नीरेय . tetramine blue Col. Ind. चतुस्तिक्ती नील tetrachoric Statistics (of, pertaining m. 
to, or designating a method of cor- tetra-phenyl-furan Chem. चतुर्दर्शल relation between variables which बुसिन्य n. do not admit of exact measure- tetraploid Biol. चतुर्गुण mfn. 
ment, when each variable admits tetrarch Bot. चतु:सूत्र mfn. only two categories, as tall and tetraspores Bot. बीजाणुचतुष्क.. 
GST 
VN 
867 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
tetrathionate Chem. चतुर्गन्धीय 1. thalamus=optic thalamus=thala tetravalent Chem. चतुःसंयुज mfn. 
mus nervi optici Zool. दृक्चेता-पिण्ड tetrazane Chem. चतुरजीवीन्य . tetrazo black Col. Ind. चतुरज काल m. Thallacea Zool. पूर्णापूर्णवलय-गण m. tetrazole Chen. चतुरजवा . 
thallic Chem. सिक्ष्यिक mfn. tetric तुयिक mfn. 
thalli-ferous Chem. सिक्ष्य-भर mfn. tetric, tetrinic acid तुर्यिक अम्ल .. thalliform (thallus + -form) Bot. tetrinic तुर्थिक mfn. 
सूकायरूप mfn. tetrode Elec. चतुर्द्वार 
thalline Bot. सूकायवत् tetrol Chem. तुर्यव m. 
I (consisting of a thallus) 9174ft tetrole Chem. तुर्यवा. 
(-इन्) mfr. tetrolic Chem. quifax mfn. 
2 (of the nature of a thallus) tetronic quifupi mfn. 
सूकायसदृश mfn. tetrose Chem. तुर्यधु . 
thallium Chem. सिक्ष्यात m. tetroxalate Chem. चतुस्तिग्मीय n. 
t. acetate (ous) Civem. सैक्ष्य शुक्तीय n. tetroxide Chem. चतुर्जारेय . 
t. acetyl-acetonate (ous) Chem. tetryl Chem. तुर्यल 1. 
सैक्ष्य शुक्तल-शुक्तायीय . texan snake root = serpentary t. carbonate (ous) Chem. संक्ष्य 
Pharm. अहिमूल .. 
प्रांगारीय. text-book पाठ्य-पुस्तक n. 
t. chloride (ous) सैक्ष्य नीरेय 1. textile वान 1. 
t. formate (ous) सैक्ष्य वम्रीय n. ___t. control board वानोद्योग नियंत्रक गण t. iodide (ous) सैक्ष्य जम्बेय . 
t. malonate सिक्ष्यातु उत्कोलायीय n. .t. industry वानोद्याग, वस्त्रोद्योग m. t. nitrate (ous) सैक्ष्य भूयीय . 
t. mill वस्त्र-निर्माणी, वानी. 
t. oxide (ic) सिक्ष्यिक जारेय . texture वयन . 
t. sulphate (ous) सैक्ष्य शुल्बीय n. Th (thorium) Chem. ह (हसातु) 
t. sulphide (ous) सैक्ष्य शुल्बेय . Th-A, Th-B (thorium A, thorium ___t. thio-cyanate (ous) सैक्ष्य गन्ध 
B)Cbem. ह्र-क, ह्र-ख (ह्रसातु क, ह्रसातु श्यामीयn. 
thalloid Bot. I (pertaining to a thag=thug स्थग m. (Hindi ठग) thallus) सूकायिक mfn. thalamencephalon=diencephalon 2 (resembling a thallus) सूकायसदृश 
=between-brain = inter-brain mfn. 
='tween brain Zool. मध्य-मस्तिष्क n. 3 (consisting of a thallus) greit thalamus=receptacle, torus Bot. (-इन्) mfn. 
दल्यक्ष m. (दलिन्+अक्ष axis bearing Thallophyta Bot. (algae, fungi, bac fioral leaves'), पीनाक्ष m. (swollen teria) सूत्रोद्भिदः f.pl. 
thallous Chem. सैक्ष्य mfn. 868 
m. 
axis) . . . . 
. . 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
thallus Bot. (the plant body charac- theobromine Chem. देवानी f. 
teristic of the Thallophyta सूत्रोद्भिदः) theobromose देवान्नधु १. 
सूकाय m. (short for सूत्रोद्भित्काय) theodolite Sury. (for measuring hori Thames Geog. तमसा (Cf. Spanish zontal and vertical angles) faqiture 
Tamesis) 
मान m. (वि विविध) Thana Geog. (in the province of theorem Math. प्रमेय . ' 
Bombay) श्रीस्थानक n. 
theorem of the three perpendicu Thanesat Geog. स्थाण्वीश्वर .. 
___lars Math. त्रिलम्ब-प्रमेय ॥. Thapsia Bot. विषशाकति f. (-ति for theoretical सैद्धान्तिक mfn. 
प्रजाति genus) 
t. chemistry सैद्धान्तिक रसायन ". T. garganica (the deadly carrot) t. mechanics = analytical me 
सामान्य विषशाक m. 
chanics वैश्लेषिक-यांत्रिकी . thapsic acid Chem. विषशाकिक अम्ल n. t. method सैद्धान्तिक-रीति f. that is (i.e.), that is to say अर्थात् t. planes सैद्धान्तिक तल . Thatun Geog. (in Pegu, on the theoretically सिद्धान्तरूपेण, सिद्धान्ततः 
Sitang river, north of Martaban) theory वाद (doctrine), सिद्धान्त, नियम m. सुधर्मनगर. 
t. of distribution = theory of Thea Bat. चैनति 1. (-ति for प्रजाति groups Math. वंटन-सिद्धान्त, भागी 
genus) 
करण-सिद्धान्त m. T. sinensis सामान्य चैन m. 
t. of equations Math. समीकार Theaceae Bot. चैन-कुल 1. 
सिद्धान्त m. theatre रंगमंडप M. (Cf. Punjabi मंडुवा) t. of groups = 'theory of dis theatre of war Mil. युद्ध-रंगभूमि f. 
tribution Math. भागीकरण-सिद्धान्त theca-capsule Bot. प्रावरक m. theelin-oestrone-oestrin Biochem. t. of indices Math. घाताङ्क-सिद्धान्त 
स्त्रीमदि. theine Chem. चैनी 
t. of numbers (as a science) Th-Em (thorium emanation) Chem. Math. नांकिकी . 
ह-निस् (ह्रसातु-निस्सृति) 
t. of probability Statistics संभाविता then अथ (Hindi तब) 
वाद m. Thenard's blue I=azure blue t. of sampling Statistics निदर्शन 
2 (consists of cobalt albuminate) सिद्धान्त m. केतुस्फटीय नील m. 
t. of smoothing Statistics सरलन Theobroma (theo-t-broma 'food of सिद्धान्त m. 
gods') Bot. देवान्नति f. (-ति for therapeutic चिकित्सीय mfn. प्रजाति genus) 
therapeutics=therapy चिकित्सा f. theobroma oil देवान्न-तैल 1. 
-therapeutics -चिकित्सा . theobromic देवानिक mfn. 
therapeutist=therapist faferich m. 869 
m.﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
therapy चिकित्सा -therapy -चिकित्सा . therefore अतः thereof तद् thermal तापीय mfn. 
t. dissociation after fauch n. t. radiation ऊष्म-विकिरण 1. _t. region ताप-परिवर्त-प्रदेश m. thermic तापिक mfn. thermion Phys. तापायन M. thermite (aluminium and oxide) स्फ 
जारेय. thermite process = Goldschmidt's 
process=alumino-thermic pro 
cess Cbem. स्फ-ताप-विधा. thermo-ताप thermo-chemistry ताप-रसायन ।. thermocouple Elec. ताप-मिथुन n. 
t. thermometer तापमिथुन-तापमान m. thermoelectric ताप-विद्युतीय mfn. 
t. pytometer ताप-विद्युतीय' अग्निमान 
m. thermo-galvanometer Elec. ताप-धुवाह ___ मान m. thermogram Phys. तापलेख m. thermo-graph ताप-लिख m. ___t. chart तापलिख-चित्र n. thermo-hydro-graph atyrafata m.' thermolabile Biochem. ऊष्महत mfn. thermometer तापमान m. 
angle t. कोण-तापमान m. 
Beckmann t. अपिसूक्ष्म-तापमान m. boiling point t. बुबुदांक-तापमान 1. brewer's t. यवासवक-तापमान m. centigrade t. शतिक-तापमान m. clinical t. रुण-तापमान m. 
dairy t. गव्य-तापमान m. idial t..घटी तापमान m. 
870 
embedding bath t. न्यावेश-तापन 
तापमान m. enamelling oven t. आकाचन-कन्दु 
तापमान m. factory wall t. निर्माणी भित्ति-तापमान 
m. Fahrenheit t. द्वात्रिंशादि तापमान m. fiue gas t. वाहिनी-वाति-तापमान m. freezing point t. श्यानांक-तापमान M. front lens t. पुरो-बीक्ष-तापमान m. 
gas main t. वाति-मुख्य-तापमान m. high temperature t. चण्डतापमान m. 
(short for चण्ड-ताप-तापमान) hot bed t. उष्ण-शय्या-तापमान m. incubator bent t. डिम्बोषक-नत-ताप 
मान m. industrial t. औद्योगिक तापमान m. lead bath t. सीस-तापन-तापमान m. low temperature t. मन्द-तापमान m. 
(short for भन्द-ताप-तापमान) malt kiln t. यव्य-पापाक-तापमान m. maximum and minimum t. 
भूयिष्ठ-अल्पिष्ठ-तापमान m. milk t. दुग्ध-तापमान m. molten metal t. द्रुत-धातु-तापमान n. obtuse angle t. अधिकोण-तापमान m. oven t. कन्दु-तापमान m. physical t. भौतिक तापमान m. 
pipe t. नाड-तापमान m. plating bath t. पट्ट-तापन-तापमान m. platinum t, महातु-तापमान m. pocket t. गोह-तापमान m. . radiator t. विकिरक तापमान m. . reader for t. तापमानार्थ वाचक m. 
Reaumur t. अशीतिक तापमान m. recording t. अभिलेखन-तापमान m. refrigerator t. प्रशीतक-तापमान m. room t. कोष्ठ-तापमान m. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
wn 
solder bath t. संधा-तापन-तापमान m. thia-diazole Chem. गान्ध-द्वयजवा . standard t. प्रमाप-तापमान m. 
-thial (thio-aldehyde) Chem. TETE sugar boiler t. शर्करा-बाष्पित्र-तापमान thi-aldine (thi- + aldehyder-ine) 
m. 
Chem. गन्धसुवियी. tar t. विराल-तापमान n. 
thi-amide Chem. गन्ध-तिक्तेय 2. varnish t. लाक्षी-तापमान 2. 
thiamine Chem. गन्धतिक्ती . wall t. भित्ति-तापमान M. 
t. chloride Trafan pria n. wet and dry bulb t. आर्द्र-शुष्क-कन्द t. yellow Col. Ind. गन्धतिक्ती पीत M. 
तापमान m. 
-thiane -गन्धीन्य , t. magnifier तापमान-विशालक m. thi-anthrene Chem. गन्ध-क्षामण्य n. 
t. plummet for specific gravity thi-azine Chem. mitat f. 
balance आपेक्षिक-भार-तुलार्थ तापमान- thiazine brown Col. Ind. गन्धाजीवी बभ्रु सीसक . 
m. thermometry anfofer f. 
t. red Transit CT m. thermomilliammeter Phys. तापसहस्त्रि- thi-azole Chem. गन्धाजवा . 
बहिमान m. 
thi-azoline Chem. गन्धाजवी f. thermopile Phys. तापचिति f. 
thiazol yellow Col. Ind. TETETT ota m. thermoplastic तापाभिघटन mfn. thick धन, स्थूल mfn. thermoreduction Chem., Metal. (re thick chamber स्थूलभित्ति वेश्म .. 
duction at high temperatures) thicken vb. स्थूलन . उत्तापे-ह्रासन n. (short for उच्चतापे- thickened स्थूलित, स्थूलकृत nfm. प्रह्रासन) 
thickening I (act of making or be thermo-regulator Phys. 219-277491 m. coming thick) स्थूलन n. thermoscope Phys. तापेक्ष m. . 
2 (that which is thickened) referat thermostable ऊष्मस्थायी (-इन्) mfn. thermostat तापस्थाप् m. 
3 (something used to thicken) thermostat oven and sterilizer ताप स्थूलन, स्थूलक n. 
स्थाप् कन्दु तथा जीवाणुहा (-हन्) m. 
4 (thickness) स्थौल्य n. thermotaxy Zool. तापक्रम m. 
5 Bot. स्थूलना . thermotropism Biol. तापावर्तना f. thick fog गहन-धूमिका f. -thermy -तापना 
thick lens स्थूल वीक्ष m. thetine Cbem. (a blend of thio and thick line Engin. स्थूल-रेखा f. 
____betaine) गन्धपालंकी . 
thickness स्थौल्य १., स्थूलता f. (Hindi this, thio- Chem. गन्ध-- 
मोटाई) thia adi. Chem. गान्ध, गान्धक mfn. thickness and width (of a nut) स्थौल्य thia- Chem. (denoting the presence of तथा विस्तार m. 
sulphur replacing carbon, especi- thickness gauge Macb. स्थौल्य-आमान ally in a ring) गान्ध 
m. 
. 
871 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
this 
thick-walled tube Chem. स्थूल-भित्ति thio acid Chem. गन्ध अम्ल n. 
नाल m. 
thio-alcohols Cbem. गन्ध-सुषव m. thief ant Zool. चौर-पिपीलिका 
thio-aldehyde Chem. गन्ध-सुव्युद m. thief tube चौर नाल m. 
thio-amide Chem. गन्ध-तिक्तेय . Thiele apparatus = Thiele tube thioantimonate Chem. गन्धांजनीय 1. 
Chem. ब्राह्म-च-साधित्र = ब्राह्म-च-नाल thioantimonic acid Chem. गन्धांजनिक m. 
अम्ल. Thiele formula (of benzene) Chem. thioantimonious acid Chem. गन्धांजन्य 
(six partial valencies represented अम्ल .. outside) उद्युज-सूत्र 7. (उद् outside-+ thioantimonite Chem. गन्धांजनित 1. संयुजता) 
thio-arsenate Chem. गन्ध-नेपालीय. Thiele tube = Thiele apparatus thio-arsenic acid Chem. गन्ध-नेपालिक -thiene -गन्धेन्य 
अम्ल . thienone (thienyl + ketone) Chem. thio-arsenite Chem. गन्ध-नेपालित १. 
गन्धेन्या . 
Thiobacteria = sulphur bacteria thienyl (thiophene + - yl) Chem. गन्धशाकाणु m. 
गन्धेन्यल 1. 
thio-barbituric acid Chem. गन्ध-कोल thigh bone ऊर्वस्थि ।. 
मिहिक अम्ल . thigmotropism (Gk. thigma touch) thio-bismuthite Chem. Tra-fufca n. ___=stereotropism Biol. स्पर्शावर्तना f. thio-carb-amic Chem. गन्धांग-तिक्तेयिक thimble अंगुलित्र .. 
mfn. extraction t. निस्सारण अंगुलिना . thio-carb-anilide Chem. गन्धांग-नीलेय . thin सूक्ष्म, तनु mfn. 
thio-carb-imide Chem. गन्धांग-वितिक्तेय thin aluminium sheet तनु स्फटयातु ... 
स्तार m. 
thio-carbo- (a combining form thin full line तन्वी पूर्ण रेखा f. 
denoting the presence of thio thing वस्तु n. 
____carbonyl) Chem. गन्धांगारल thin lens तनु वीक्षm. 
thio-carbonate Chem. गन्धांगारीयn. thin line Engin. तन्वी रेखा f. 
thio-carbonic Chem. गन्धांगारिक mfn. thin red line Com. सूक्ष्म रक्त रेखा thio-carbonyl Chem. गन्धांगारल . thin springy corrugated top तनु thio-carmine Col. Ind. गन्ध-कीटशोणी f. 
स्कन्दी वलिमान् छद m. 
thio-catechine Col. Ind. गन्ध-खदिरी. thio-, thi-Chem. गन्ध-- 
thiochem black Col. Ind. गन्धरासाय thio-acet-amide Chem. गन्ध-शुक्त-तिक्तेय काल m. 
t. deep brown गन्धरासाय गाढ बभ्रु thio-acet-anilide Chem. गन्ध-शुक्त-नीलेय 
t. sulphur black गन्धरासाय शुल्बारि thio-acetic Chem. गन्ध-शुक्तिक wfn. काल m. 
1872 . 
1. 
__-n. 
1872 . 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARI 
__m. 
नाम 
t. sulphur brown गन्धरासाय शुल्वारि t. bronze गन्धजन कांस्य M. 
बभ्रु m. 
t. brown गन्धजन ब m. t. sulphur green गन्धरासाय शुल्बारि t. carbon black गन्धजन प्रांगार काल m. 
हरि m. 
t. catechu गन्धजन खदिर m. t. sulphur yellow TTEETHT2 Traife t. corinth गन्धजन रोहित m. 
पीत m. 
t. cyanine गन्धजन श्यामी. thiochromogene Col. Ind. गन्धवर्णजन t. dark blue गन्धजन असित नील m. 
t. deep blue गन्धजन गाढ नील m. thio-cotton black Col. Ind. गन्ध-तुल t. diamond black गन्धजन हीर काल'm. 
काल m. 
t. direct blue गन्धजन अनाश्रित नील m. thio-cresol Chem. गन्ध-ऋविपव m. 
t. fast green गन्धजन स्थिर हरि m. thiocyan- = thiocyano 
t. field grey गन्धजन सेना धूसर m. thio-cyanate Chem. गन्ध-श्यामीय n. 
t. gold yellow गन्धजन स्वर्ण पीत m. thio-cyanic=sulpho-cyanic Chem. t. green गन्धजन हरि m. 
गन्ध-श्यामिक mfn. 
t. grey गन्धजन धूसर m. thio-cyanide Chem. गन्ध-श्यामेय . 
t. heliotrope गन्धजन निनीलातिरक्त m. thio-cyano-, thio-cyan- Chem. गन्ध t. khaki गन्धजन धूलि f. 
श्याम 
t. navy blue गन्धजन नाविक नील m. thio-cyano adi. Chem. गन्धश्याम, गन्ध t. new blue गन्धजन नव नील m. 
श्यामक mfn. 
t. olive गन्धजन तैलबदर m. thio-cyanogen (CNS) Chem. गन्ध-श्याम t. orange गन्धजन नारंग m. ___ जन (प्र भू शु) 
t. purple गन्धजन नीलारुण m. thiocyanosine Col. Ind. गन्धश्यामोषसी. t. rubine गन्धजन रक्ती . thiodiazine गन्धद्वयजीवा. 
t. violet गन्धजन नीललोहित m. thio-di-glycol Chem. गन्ध-द्वि-मधुव m. t. yellow गन्धजन पीत m. thio-di-glycollic acid Chem. There t. yellow-brown गन्धजन पीत-बभ्रु m. 
द्वि-मधुविक अम्ल 
thio-glycollic acid Chem. गन्ध-मधुविक thio-di-phenyl-amine Chem. गन्ध अम्लn. 
द्वि-दर्शल-तिक्ती . 
thiohydantoin (pseudo) Chem. Tretta thio ether Chem. गन्ध दक्षु m. 
नालि. (कूट) thioflavine Col. Ind. Traforrit f. thiohydrate Chem. Trentata n. (a com thiofluorescein Col. Ind. गन्धभ्राशिन m. pound with hydrogen sulphide, thiogallein Col. Ind. गन्धद्रुफोटिन m. analogous to a hydrate) thiogene azurine Col. Ind. गन्धजन thio-hydrolysis Chem. गन्ध-जलांशन .. 
नभोनीली. 
thiohydroxy- Chem. गन्धोद-जार t. black गन्धजन काल m. 
thioindigo black Col. Ind. गन्धनिनील t. blue गन्धजन नील m. 
काल m. t. blue-grey गन्धजन नील-धूसर m. 
t. blue गन्धनिनील नील m. 
813 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
m. 
t. brown गन्धनिनील बर्घm. 
thion Col. Ind. गन्धक M. t. grey गन्धनिनील धूसर m. 
t. black गन्धक काल m. t. orange गन्धनिनील नारंग m. 
t. blue गन्धक नील m. t. pink गन्धनिनील आपला . 
t. blue-black गन्धक नील-कृष्ण m. t. printing black गन्धनिनील मुद्रण t. brilliant black गन्धक भासुर काल 
काल m. 
m. t. red गन्धनिनील रक्त m. 
t. brilliant green गन्धक भासुर हरि m. t. scarlet गन्धनितील शोण m. 
t. brown गन्धक बभ्रु m. t. violet गन्धनिनील नीललोहित m. 
t. catechu गन्धक खदिर M. t. yellow गन्धनिनील पीत m. 
t. dark violet गन्धक असित नीललोहित thioindone black Col. Ind. गन्धनिनीला 
काल m. 
t. direct blue गन्धक अनाश्रित नील m. t. blue गन्धनिनीला नील m. 
t. field grey गन्धक सेना धूसर m. t. brown गन्धनिनीला बm. 
t. green गन्धक हरि m. t. green गन्धनिनीला हरि m. 
t. indigo blue गन्धक निनील नील m. t. olive गन्धनितीला तैलबदर m. 
t. navy blue गन्धक नाविक नील m. t. pure blue गन्धनिनीला शुद्ध नील t. olive गन्धक तैलबदर m. 
t. orange गन्धक नारंग m. t. red गन्धनिनीला रक्त m. 
t. violet गन्धक नीललोहित m. t. scarlet गन्धनिनीला शोण m. 
t. violet-black गन्धक नीललोहित काल t. yellow गन्धनिनीला पीत m. thio-ketone Chem. गन्ध-शौक्ता. 
t. violet-brown गन्धक नीललोहित-ब thiol Chem. गन्धव m. 
m. thiol- Chem. गन्धव 
t. yellow गन्धक पीत m. thiol-acetic Chem. गन्धव-शुक्तिक mfn. thional black Col. Ind. गन्धसु काल m. 
___t. acid गन्धव-शुक्तिक अम्ल . 
t. black-brown गन्धसु काल-बभ्रु m. thio-lactic acid Chem. गन्धव-दुग्धिक t. blue गन्धसु नील m. 
अम्ल. 
t. blue-green गन्धसुनील-हरि m. thiol-amino-methyl-glyoxaline hy t. brilliant blue गन्धसु भासुर नील m. 
drochloride Chem. गन्धव-तिक्ती t. brilliant green गन्धसु भासुर हरि 
प्रोदल-मतिष्वी उदनीरेय . .0-thiol-benzoic acid ऊ-गन्धव-धुपिक अम्ल t. bronze गन्धसु कांस्य m. 
t. brown गन्धसु बभ्रु m. thiole गन्धवा . 
t. carbon गन्धसु प्रांगार. thiolene गन्धवेन्य n. 
t. dark blue गन्धसु असित नील m. thion- (sulphur) Chem. Then 
t. dark brown गन्धसु असित बभ्रु m. thion-, thiono- (thi- + -one+ -0-) t. dark green गन्धसु असित हरि m. 
• Chem. गन्धा 
___t. deep blue गन्धसु गाढ नील m. 
874 
m. 
m. 
n. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
t. green गन्धसु हरि m. 
t. brilliant claret Treat HTETE t. indigo गन्धसु निनील M. 
Ferner f. t. indigo blue TERI FRETET Pret m. t. brilliant green गन्धका भासुर हरि t. indone blue गन्धसु निनीला नील m. m. t. orange गन्धसु नारंग m. 
t. brown ETAIT 97 m. t. yellow गन्धसु पीत m. 
t. corinth Text dia m. thionamic acid Chem. गन्ध-तिक्तेयिक t. cutch गन्धका गायत्री . 
Et n. 
t. drab गन्धका अवरक्तपीत m. thio-naphthene (thiophene-t-naphth t. indigo गन्धका निनील m. 
alene) Chem. Trata coz nik 
t. khaki गन्धका धूलि. thionate n. Chem. TTFELIET n. 
t. orange गन्धका नारंग M. thionate vb. Chem. TTTTT n. 
t. orange-brown 1789T E-T m. (to combine with sulphur, as in t. printing black गन्धका मुद्रण काल M. 
making sulphur dyes) गन्धक-योजन .. t. prune गन्धका वातामबदर m. thionation Chem. गन्धायन n. 
t. red-brown FETIT 57-77 m. -thione Chem. -TTFET 
t. sky blue गन्धका आकाश नील m. -thionic Chem, tapi 
t. yellow गन्धका पीत m. thionic Chem. Therefi mfn. 
thionous Trey mfn. - t. acid गन्धिक अम्ल . 
thionyl (sulphinyl) Chem. Trett . thionine Chem. Feft f. 
t.- amine Tree-Fereit f. t. blue Col. Ind. Tretton m. 
t. chloride TTFETT TTTT 1. thio-nitrite Chem. F#-#FATT n. thiophen=thiophene thionjum Chem. गन्धतातु m. 
thiophene (thio- + phenyl + -ene) thiono, thion- (thi-t-one +-6-) Chem. teicari n. 
Chem. TFT 
thiophenic Chem, tagaifupi mfn. thiono-benzoic acid Chem. TT-efy thio-phenol Chem, Travesia m. 
at n. 
thiophenol black Col. Ind. TriQ thionol black Col. Ind. Tag eitt m. fort m. 
t. blue गन्धव नील m. 
thiophloxine Col. Ind. Tavalit f. t. brown गन्धव बभ्रु m. 
thiophor black Col. Ind. गन्धभर काल t. corinth गन्धव रोहित m. t. printing black Tea HEUT ETT m. t. black-brown The $71-31.. t. purple गन्धव नीलारुण m. 
t. blue गन्धभर नील m. t. sky blue गन्धव आकाश नील m. t. blue-black TFTH 179-uy m. t. yellow गन्धव पीत m. 
t. brilliant black गधभर भासुर काल thionone black Col. Ind. FEATTET 
m. 
m. 
t. brilliant carbon गन्धभर भासुर .t. brilliant blue गन्धका भासुर नील m. STTTT m. 
875 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
t. bronze गन्धभर कांस्य m. 
thio-phthene (thio-naphtbene)गन्धोत्तैलेन्य t. brown गन्धभर बभ्रुm. t. carbon गन्धभर प्रांगार m. 
thio-pyran Chem. गन्धाग्निन्य n. t. catechu गन्धभर खदिर m. 
thiopyronine Col. Ind. Tretirement f. t. corinth गन्धभर रोहित m. 
thio-resorcinol, thio-resorcin Chem. t. cyanine गन्धभर श्यामी. 
गन्ध-शेयास m. t. dark blue गधभर प्रसित नील m. thiorubine Col. Ind. गन्धरक्ती. t. dark brown गन्धभर असित बभ्रु m. thio-salicylic acid Chem. गन्ध-नम्रलिक t. dark green गन्धभर असित हरि m. अम्ल n. t. deep black गन्धभर गाढ काल m. thio-semicarbazide Chem. Preto t. deep green गन्धभर गाढ हरि m. 
साम्यंगाजीवेय. t. field grey गन्धभर सेना धूसर m. thiosinamine = allyl-thio-urea t. green गन्धभर हरि m. 
Chem. गन्धसर्षतिक्ती f=लाषुणल-गन्ध-मिह t. indigo गन्धभर निनील m. 
m. t. khaki गन्धभर धूलि f. 
t. ethyl iodide गन्धसर्षतिक्ती दक्षल t. navy blue गधभर नाविक नील m. 
जम्बेय. t. olive गन्धभर तैलबदर m.. 
thio-stannate Chem. गन्ध-त्रप्वीय .. t. orange गन्धभर नारंग m. 
thio-stannic Chem. गन्ध-त्रप्विक mfn. t. purple Teema FITEITEUT m. 
thio-stannite Chem. गन्ध-अप्वित .. t. red-brown गन्धभर रक्त-बभ्रु m. thio-stannous acid Chem. गन्ध-त्रप्य t. violet गन्धभर नीललोहित m. 
अम्ल. t. violet-brown गन्धभर नीललोहित- thio-sulphate Chem. गन्ध-शुल्बीय .. 
बभ्रुm. 
thio-sulphonic Chem. गन्ध- शुल्बायिक t. yellow गन्धभर पीत m. 
mfn. t. yellow-bronze गन्धभर पीत-कांस्य thio-sulphuricCbem. गन्ध-शुल्बारिक min. ___ m. 
thio-tolene Chem. गन्ध-पिरालेन्य n. t. yellow-brown गन्धभर पीत-ब m. thio-tungstic Chem. गन्ध-चण्डिक mfn. t. yellow-olive गधभर पीत-तैलबदर thio-urea.Chem. गन्ध-मिह m. 
m. 
t. metho-sulphate गन्धमिह प्रोद thio-phosgene Chem. गन्ध-भाजm. 
शुल्बीय n. thio-phosphate गन्ध-भास्वीय n. 
thio-urethan Chem. गन्ध-मिक्षिण्य n. thiophosphine Col. Ind. गन्धभास्वी . thioxene (thiophenet xylene) Chem. thio-phosphite Chem. गन्ध-भास्वित . गन्ध-काष्ठेन्य 1. thio-phosphoric Chem. गन्ध-भास्विक thioxine black Col. Ind. गन्धतिग्मी काल 
min. thio-phosphorous acid Chem. Tret t. brown गन्धतिग्मी बभ्रु m. 
भास्व्य अम्ल . 
t. dark blue गन्धतिग्मी असित नील m. thio-pliosphoryl Chem. गन्ध-भास्वरल n. t. field grey गन्धतिग्मी सेना धूसर m. 
876. 
m. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
ARM 
t. green गन्धतिग्मी हरि m. 
is short for शृगालकंटक yellow t. indigo गन्धतिग्मी निनील m. 
thistle) t. normal grey गन्धतिग्मी सामान्य Thomson effect Phys. भिन्नतापोष्म प्रभाव 
धूसर m. 
m. t. olive गधतिग्मी तैलबदर m. 
Thomson's tube Phys. (a. cathode t. orange गन्धतिग्मी नारंग m. 
ray measuring tube) निरश्मिमापन नाल t. wine red गन्धतिग्मी दाक्षिरा रक्त m. m. t. yellow गन्धतिग्मी पीत m. 
thorac-, thoraci-, thoraco- उर: thi-ozone Chem. गन्ध-प्रजारक m. thoracic औरस mfn., उर: thi-ozonide Chem. गन्ध-प्रजारकेय 1. thoracic duct Anat. औरस-प्रणाली f. third तृतीय mfn. 
thoracico- औरस-, उर: third bill of exchange Com. fax thoracic vertebra=dorsal vertebra 
तृतीयक .. 
उरकीकस m. third cerebral Anat. तृतीया मास्तिष्कीf thoraco- उर: third class तृतीय वर्ग m., तृतीय-श्रेणी . thoracograph (an apparatus for third class paper Com. तृतीय वर्ग पत्र . recording the movements and third cranial nerve Zool. तृतीया कार्पर- changes in size of the thorax) 
चेता. 
उरोलिख m. third filial generation (F3) Zool. thoracoscope Med. उरसीम M. (उरसि in 
__ तृतीय-सन्तति . (स.) 
the chest) third gear Automobile तृतीय दन्ती (-इन्) thoria Chem. (thotium dioxide) ह्रसजा 
m. third molar=wisdom tooth Anat. thorianite Mineral. (consists largely 
प्रज्ञा-दन्त m. 
of thorium oxide) ह्रसजारेयिज m. third moment of dispersion Statis- (-इज for खनिज mineral) ___tics तृतीय अपकिरण-घात m. 
thoriate vb. ह्रसजायन n. third of exchange Com. विपत्र-तृतीयक to impregnate (an electron-tube 
____cathode) with thoria] ह्रसजा-व्यापन third proportional Math. तृतीय-अनुपाती . 
thoric Chem. हसिक mfn. third quartile Statistics तृतीय चतुर्थक N. thori-ferous Chem. ह्रस-भर mfn. third rail electric locomotive Rly. thorite Mineral. (consists essentially 
Eng, तृतीय-वंशक विधुच्चलित्र 1. 
of thorium silicate) ह्रससैकिज m. third security Com. तृतीया प्रतिभूति . (-इज for खनिज mineral) third ventricle=diacoele=diacoe- thorium Chem. ह्रसातु m. 
· · lia Zool. तृतीया गुहा, अन्तःस्थ-गुहा f. thorium (90) ह्रसातु (६०) . third via Com. तृतीया प्रतिलिपि f.. 
meso-thorium I (88) मध्य-हसातु १ thistle funnel शृगाल निवाप m. (शृगाल 
877 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
meso-thorium 2 (89) मध्य-हसातु २ three-dimensional space त्रैविम वरिमा 
radio-thorium (७०) तेज-हसातु (६०) three element tube Phys. त्र्यंग नाल m. thoron (86) ह्रसाति (८६) 
three-horned frajer mfn. thorium A (84) ह्रसातु क (८४) three-lobed Zool. Framfa mfn. thorium B (82) हसातु ख (८२) three-mouthed त्रिमुख mfn. thorium C (83) ह्रसातु ग (८३) three-necked flask त्रिग्रीव पलिघm. thorium C (84) हसातु ग (८४) three-rayed bone Zool. Fratre fra n. thorium X (88) ह्रसातु क्ष (८८) three-toed sloth=ai Zool. व्यंगुल thorium-(82) हसातु ह (८२) 
शाखालम्बी (-इन्) m. t. acetate हसात शुक्तीय . 
three-way key त्रिमार्ग-कुंची f. t. carbonate हसातु प्रांगारीय n. threshold देहली . t. chloride हसातु नीरेय . 
threshold frequency Phys. देहली t. dioxide ह्रसातु द्विजारेय n. 
वारंवारता . . t. emanation हसातु निस्सृति . thrips Zool. (most species feed on t. fluoride हसातु तरस्वेय. 
plant juices) quisiera m. t. hydroxide हसातु उदजारेय. throat गल m. t. nitrate हसातु भूयीय n. 
throat practice गल-वृत्ति . t. oleate हसातु नक्षीय.. 
throbbing Phys. प्रस्पन्दन ॥. t. oxalate ह्रसातु तिग्मीय n. 
thromb-, thrombo- घनास्त्र t. oxide ह्रसातु जारेय . 
' thrombase धनास्त्रेद m. t. phenol-sulphonate हसातु दर्शव- thrombin Biochem. धनानि (धन clot 
शुल्बायीय . 
+अत्र blood) t. sulphate ह्रसातु शुल्बीय n. 
thrombo- घनास्त्र thornapple धत्तूरक 1. 
thrombocyte Physiol. घनास्रकोशा, धनास्त्रि thornapple leaves = stramonium 
_Pharm. धत्तूरक-पत्र ।. 
thrombogen Biochem. धनास्त्रिजन m. thoron Chem. ह्रसाति m. 
(forms thrombin धनास्त्रि) thread सूत्र 1. 
thromboid Med. घनास्राभ mfr. threading सूत्रण ". 
thrombokinase Biochem. (converts threadworm सूत्रकृमि m. 
thrombogen into thrombin) three aspect colour light Rly. घनास्रिकर m. 
त्रिदिश वर्ण प्रकाश m. 
cyto-zyme कोशा-किण्व M. three-celled त्रि-कोशावान् mfn. 
thrombosis Med. ETEIST f. three column cashbook Com.त्रिस्कम्भ thrombus Med. घनास्रक n. - रोक-पुस्त n. 
throttle (valve) Engin. (a valve for phree-cylinder locomotive Rly. regulating supply taru, as of 
Eng: विरम्भ चलित्र . 
___steam, or of gas and ait, to an . 878 
: 
कोशा . 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
engine) वातिरोध, बाष्परोध, प्ररोध m. thymic quifitati mfn. t. lever I Ry. Eng. प्ररोध-उद्यामm. thymo-, thym- पर्णा ___ 2 Automobile वातिरोध-उद्याम m. thymol Chem. quarta in. 
t. lever quadrant Rly. Eng. thymolate Chem. qufitata n. 
प्ररोध-उद्याम-चरण m. 
___thymol blue पर्णासीव नील m. t. valve Rly. Eng. प्ररोध कपाट n. thymol-phthalein • Chem. पर्णासीव through मध्यात् 
___ व्युत्तैलिन m. throughout TERET 
thymol-sulphone-phthalein Chem. through the agency द्वारा 
पर्णासीव-शुल्बा-व्युत्तैलिन m. throw I vb. क्षेपण 1. (H. फेंकना) thymo-quinone पर्णा-विज्वरा. 
2 n. Mach. (of the eccentric, etc.) thymotic, thymotinic gruffira min क्षेप m. 
(thymic पर्णासिक) throw down अवासन n. (H. नीचे गिराना) thymoxy- पर्णाजार thrush Zool. तर्दाशm. 
Thymus Bot. पर्णासीति f. (-ति for प्रजाति thrust Mil, वितोदन n., वितोद m. 
genus) thulia Chem. (thulium oxide) व्याहरिजा T. vulgaris सामान्य पर्णासी । 
thymus Anat. (it almost disappears thulium Chem. व्याहरिला. 
_in adults) यौवनलुप्तग्रंथि, यौवनलुप्त . thumb अंगुष्ठ m. 
t. extract यौवनलुप्त-निस्सार m. thumb impression अंगुष्ठ-पद n. (Pali t. hypertrophy यौवनलुप्त-अतिवर्धन . ___अंगुट्ट-पद) 
t. persistens hyperplastica = thunder गर्जन n. 
persistent thymus (it persists thunderbolt Mil. (American high into adult life) यौवनालुप्त m. ___ altitude fighter) वज्र n. (उच्चैर्योधक) thymyl Chem. पर्णासील n. thunderhead स्तनयित्लु-शीर्ष 1. 
thymylic quratlarni mfn. thus एवं 
thyroid cartilage Anat. काकल . thym-, thymo- (used for thymol) (from चरक) 
पर्णा- (पर्णासीव) 
thyroid extract Med. गलग्रंथि-निस्सार m. thymacetin Pharm. पर्णाशुक्ति /. thyroid gland गल-ग्रंथि m. thyme पर्णासी . 
thyroid secretion गलग्रंथि-उदासर्ग m. ___basil thyme तुलसी f. 
thyronine Biochem. गलग्रन्थिकि . thyme (the colour pitch pine) quifeit- thyrotropin Zool, sterfor f. 
वर्ण m. 
thyroxin Biochem. गलतिरिम . thyme camphor = thymol Chem. thyroxine Biochem. Temat f. 
पर्णासी-कर्पूर m. 
Thysanoptera Zool. झल्लरीपक्ष-गण m. thymegol पर्णा-तुल्यव m. 
Thysanura Zool. (consisting of silver thymene पर्णास्येत्य n. 
fish and bristletails) रजतमीननाण m. thyme oil पर्णासी-तैल 7. 
Ti (titanium) Chem. रं (रंजातु) 
879﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
Tibet भोट m. 
tight संकृष्ट, दृढ mfn. tibia I Anat., Zool. FETT N. 
tighten wb. संकर्षण 1. 2 (of insect)Zool. जंघा (not जंघास्थि) tightly दृढम्, दृढ tibial जंघास्थिक mfn., जंघास्थि-, जंघा tight-market Com. Feladi fagfur m. 
t. artery Anat. जंघा-रोहिणी/. tiglic acid Chem. तित्तिरिक अम्ल N. t. nerve Anat. जंघा-चेता. 
(तित्तिरि-फल Croton tiglium) tibio- जंघास्थि 
Tigris (river) Geog. faut f. (ancient tibio-fibula Zool. जंधानुजंघास्थि. 
Persian name in the inscrip tick चिंचिट m. (Hindi चीचड, Marathi tion of Darius, 6th cent. B.C.) 
गोचीड, Bengali आटालि, Gujarati tikor = curcuma starch बगाह) 
tile खर्परी. tick vb. प्रांकन n. 
colour comparison t. Chem. रंग ticked प्रांकित mfn. 
__तुलना-खर्परी. ticket पत्रक 1. 
Tiliaceae Bot. परूष-कुल n. t.day पत्रक-दिवस m. 
till यावत् (यावत् न. will be followed ticket-railway ticket Rly. संयान-पत्रक ___by तावत्) (Hindi जब तक) 
til oil Pharm. तिल-तैल M. t. checker पत्रक-निरीक्षक m. 
timber I=quality Acoustics लक्षण .. t. collector पत्रक-संग्रहीता (-तु) m. 2 (wood suitable. for building) t. office पत्रकालय m. 
काष्ठ, प्रकाष्ठ, निर्माण-काष्ठ 1. t. window पत्रक-द्वारी 
timber disease काष्ठ-रोग m.. tick-mark प्रांक m. 
time समय, कालm. . tidal air Physiol. श्वास-मात्रा f. 
time and distance Math. समय तथा tidal river वेला-नदी . 
. दूरत्व n. tidal waters वेला-वारि. 
time-barred (after lapse of proper tidal wave वेला-तरंग m. 
___ time) कालतिरोहित mfn. ... tide वेला . 
time-changes Statistics काल-परिवर्तन n. tie = stay Engin. (a tension mem time deposit Banking सावधि निक्षेप m. ____ber) आततिक . 
time deviations .Statistics काल-विचलन tier निश्श्रेणी tiers of cells Biol. कोशा-निश्श्रेणी. time exposure Photog. काल-विगोप m. tiffin (luncheon, esp. at midday) time. interval Phys. कालान्तर n.. .. 
मध्याह्न भोजन n.. 
time period कालावर्तन n. . t. room मध्याह्नभोजन-कोष्ठ m. timepiece कालदर्श m. tifid Bot. (having a deep incision). time pulse source Radar काल-स्पन्द . .. : गहन-दर m. 
प्रभव m. . . .. .. 4 tigeremosquito चित्र-मशंक m. 
time records समय-अभिलेख.. tigers Zool. चित्र मन्थर.m. 
time-saver समय-रक्षक. m. 
. 
880 .. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
time series Statistics काल-माला. 
t. iodide (stannic) sferi ottaa n. time sheet समय-स्तार m. 
t. iodide (stannous) अप्य जम्बेय. time-table समय-सारणी, समयावलि f. 
t. liquor Dyeing (a solution of time variables Statistics काल चल m. stannous chloride, used as a time variations Statistics काल-विचरण n. mordant) त्रपु-रस m. time wages समय-भूति . 
t.-man पुकार m. timing gear Automobile कालवशि-दन्ती t. monoxide पु एकजारेय. 
(-इन्) m. 
t. ore अपु-अयस्क १. timing gear case Automobile afer t. oxide अपु जारेय. 
दन्ति-कोश m. . 
stannic oxide प्विक जारय ।. tin I Chem. त्रपु . 
stannous oxide त्रप्य जारेय. 2 (a thin plate of iron or steel ___t. phosphate (stannous) त्रप्य भास्वीय covered with tin) 7 n. 
. 3 (a vessel of tin plate) त्रपुक N. t. pyrites (stannite) Mineral. अपु t. acetate (stannous) अप्य शुक्तीय . माक्षीक . t. ammonium chloride (stannic) t. resinate (stannous) त्रप्य उद्यासीय 
प्विक तिक्तातु नीरेय n. 
___n. t. bottle 74-79 f. 
t. salt Dyeing अपु-लवण 1. t. bromide अपु दुरेय ... 
t. sodium chloride (stannic) stannic bromide त्रप्विक दुरेय n. __ प्विक क्षारातु नीरेय. 
stannous bromide प्य दुरेय . t. spirit Dyeing (any of various t. bronze Col. Ind. त्रपु कांस्य M. 
solutions of tin compounds t. chloride पु नीरेय . 
. used as mordants) अपु-निषेचन १. stannic chloride प्विक नीरेय 1. t.-stone (cassiterite) Mineral. अपु stannous chloride त्रप्य नीरेय 1. 
प्रस्तरm. t. citrate (stannous) अप्य निम्बवीय 1. t. sulphate (stannic) अप्विक शुल्बीय t. crystals Dyeing त्रपु स्फट m. t. cyanide अपु श्यामेय . 
t. sulphate (stannous) अप्य शुल्बीय n. t. dichloride my fanitta n. 
t. sulphide (stannous) अप्य शुल्बेय. t. dioxide त्रपु द्विजारेय .. 
t. tetrachloride पु चतुर्नीरेय . t.-foil n. अपु-पर्ण . 
t.-white अपु-श्वेत mfn. t.-foil vb. त्रपु-पर्णायन .. 
tinctura-tincture Pharm. निष्कर्ष m. (to cover or coat with, or t. aconiti = tincture of aconite wrap in, tin foil) त्रपुपर्ण-आवरण, t. adhatodae वासक-निष्कर्ष m. त्रपुपर्ण-रोपण १. 
t. aloes=tincture of aloes t:-foiler अपु-पर्णायक m. 
t. aloes composita=compound t. hydr-oxide (meta-stannic acid) tinctute of aloes संयुत कुमारी 
त्रपु उद-जारेय 7. (सम-वप्विक अम्ल) 
निष्कर्ष m. 
881 
16 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
WhatS 
. 
t. aloes et myrrhae = tincture 
of aloes and myrrh t. alstoniae सप्तपर्ण-निष्कर्ष m. t. anthemidis कर्पूरगन्धि-निष्कर्ष m. t. antiperiodica = antiperiodic 
tincture=Warburg's tincture =tinctura warburgi TARPET 
Firenze m. i t. apocyni cannab. SFOLGTT-Faqiri 
m. t. arnicae radicis tincture of 
arnica root t. asafoetidae = tincture of 
asafetida t. aurantii = tincture of orange t. baptisiae tincture of bap 
tisia t. belladonnaeum tincture of 
belladonna t. benzoini composita = com 
pound tincture of benzoin 
संयुत धूप-निष्कर्ष m. t. benzoini co. meth. Yg Sta. ETT 
fireapta m. t. benzoini simplex असंयुत धूप 
filozof m. t. berberidis TETEPEGT-Ferretem. t. boldo=tincture of boldo t. bryoniaestincture of bryony t. buchu=tincture of buchu t. cacti grandiflori = tincture 
of cereus t. calendulae tincture of cal 
endula . t. calumbae tincture of cal pumba 
nty camphorae composita संयुत 
-f107 m. 
t. cannabistincture of canna 
bis t. cannabis indicae = tincture 
of cannabis t. cantharidini हरिभङ्ग-निष्कर्ष m. t. capsici=tincture of capsi 
cum t. cardamomi composita=com 
pound tincture of cardamom 
Fun Fat-Frutos m. t. cardamomi simple असंयुत एला 
Froid m. t. carminativa arat Frio m. t. cascarae sagradae पुण्यवल्क-निष्कर्ष 
m. t. cascarillaestincture of cas 
carilla t. catechu=tincture of catechu t. cerei=tincture of cereus t. chiratae=tincture of chiretta t. chloroformi composita = 
compound tincture of chlo 
roform in fta -f707 m. t. chloroformi et morphinae = 
tincture of chloroform and morphine t. chloroformi et morphinae 
composita = compound tincture of chloroform and morphine e prea HIETT 
farosatt m. t. cimicifugae = tincture of 
cimicifuga t. cinchonae = tincture of cin 
chona t. cinchonae composita=com pound tincture of cinchona 
ya fanny-Faroepie m. 
. 
882 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
t. cinnamomi = tincture of t. guaiaci = tincture of guai 
cinnamon 
acum t. cinnamomi composita 
t. guaiaci ammoniata=ammo compound tincture of cinna niated tincture of guaiacum mon ja TEFIAT-forrotti m. 
तिक्तातीयित आसिल-निष्कर्ष m. t. cocci = tincture of cochineal t. gulancha (tinosporae) EI t. colchici=tincture of colchi front of m. 
cum 
t. hamamelidis = tincture of t. collinsoniae=tincture of col hamamelis 
linsonia 
t. hemidesmi सारिवा-निष्कर्ष m. t. conii fa tuto fotografi m. 
t. hydrastidis=tincture of hy t. convallariae = tincture of drastis 
convallaria 
t. hydrastis = tincture of hy t. coto=tincture of coto 
drastis t. cubebae = tincture of cubeb t. hyoscyami=tincture of hyo t. damina वाजपत्र-निष्कर्ष m. 
scyamus t. digitalis = tincture of digi t, iodi=weak solution of iodine 
talis 
दुर्बल जम्बुकी-विलयन 1. t. ephedra vulgaris सोम-निष्कर्ष t. iodi decolorata विरंजित जम्बुकी 
FFF m. t. ergotae रुक्कवक-निष्कर्ष m. 
t. iodi fortis=strong solution t. ergotae ammoniata=ammo of jodine staat heeft op m. 
niated tincture of ergot formar 
-प्रबल जम्बुकी-विलयन 1. FEST 54-f1677 m. 
t. iodi fort, meth, samt STG. Froent e. eucalypti = tincture of eu fra per m. 
calyptus 
t. iodi meth. Ste. Trafit-farosata of m. t. euonymi=tincture of euony t. iodi mitis - weak solution 
mus 
of iodine at Fet-force m. t. ferri perchloridi = tincture. t. iodi mitis rect. le galet telerit 
of ferric chloride 
foto m. t. garlic लषुण-निष्कर्ष m. 
t. ipecacuanhae = tincture of t. gelsemii=tincture of gelse ipecacuanha 
mium 
t. jaborandi=tincture of jabo t. gentianae किरात-निष्कर्ष m. 
randi t. gentianae composita=com- . t. jalapae=tincture of jalap 
pound tincture of gentian Fiyat t. jalapae composita = com facra-fason m. 
pound tincture of jalap par t. grindeliae 1945-ficcano m. 
7 416-Ferrantet m. 
m. 
883 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
t. kaladanae कालधान्य-निष्कर्ष m. t. kalmegh 975979-f6975 m. t. kino = tincture of kino t. kino composita pena faceret 
Footno m. t. krameriae=tincture of kra 
meria t. kurchi कुटज-निष्कर्ष m. t. lavandulae composita igra 
#THEFT-716970 m. t. limonis = tincture of lemon t. lobeliae वमघास-निष्कर्ष m. t. lobeliae aetherea = ethereal 
tincture of lobelia वमघास दाक्षव 
firstiet m. t. lupuli=tincture of lupulus t, maticae TETET-fabeties m. t. moschi ti-flopp m. t. myrobalani हरीतकी-निष्कर्ष m. t. myrrhae=tincture of myrrh 't, myrrhae et boracis = tinc 
ture of myrrh and borax t. nucis vomicae = tincture of 
nux vomica t. oliveri corticis गन्धवल्क-निष्कर्ष 
t. pruni virginianae = tincture 
of wild cherry t. pulsatillae = tincture of pule i satilla 
t. pyrethri = tincture of pyre 
thrum t. quassiae=tincture of quassia t. quillaiae=tincture of quillaia t. quininae=tincture of quinine t. quininae ammoniata=ammo 
niated tincture of quinine 
Feracitatea farast-f1870 m. t. rhei (simple) after m. 
(HR) t. rhei composita = compound 
tincture of rhubarb per i 
faportoi m. t. sabinae faenar-fashion m. t. scillae=tincture of squill t. senegae=tincture of senega t. sennae composita = com 
pound tincture of senna संयुत 
TIETEIT-Freios m. t. serpentariae tincture of 
serpentary t. stillingiae लालामूल-निष्कर्ष m. . t. stramonii=tincture of stram 
onium t. strophanthi कुंचितपुष्पि-निष्कर्ष m. . t. sumbul = tincture of sum 
bul ; t. tolutanaztincture of tolu 
t. valerianae ammoniata = am 
moniated tincture of valerian . faraatreitfara afeg-F764 m. 
t. valerianae simplex = simple 
tincture of valerian at stfear-freepier m. 
t. opii=tincture of opium t. opii ammoniata = ammo 
niated tincture of opium तिक्ता 
तीयित अहिफेन-निष्कर्ष m. ' : t. phytolaccae कटूद्यास-निष्कर्ष m. 
t. picrorhizae acon-faroplast m. 4. pipali composita pga faqaft- 
Florent m. to podophylli=tincture of po- o dophyllum i ni serotinae = tincture of 
Wild cherry, . .. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
t. of buchu = tinctura buchu 
(tinct. buchu) Gia- thứ 7. t. of calendula=tinctura calen 
dulae (tinct. calend.) Trg-frihet 
m. t. of calumba=tinctura calum 
bae (tinct. calumb.) Ha-fasetter 
in. 
t. viburni prunifol. simplex 
wantra-face m. t. Warburgi = Warburg's tinc 
ture = antiperiodic tincture =tinctura antiperiodica fapient 
Frient m. t.zingiberis शृंगवेर-निष्कर्ष m. t, zingiberis fortis=strong tinc 
ture of ginger samt sjirea-foster 
m. tincture = tinctura (tinct.) Pharm. 
Freehofm. t. of aconite = tinctura aconiti 
(tinct. aconit.) slac-fasopat m. t. of aloes = tinctura aloes 
(tinct. aloes) I-fpono m. t. of aloes and myrrh = elixir 
proprietatis = tinctura aloes et myrrhae (tinct. aloes et myrrh.) - hi-farosani m. t. of arnica=tincture of arnica 
root t. of arnica root = tinctura 
arnicae radicis (tinct. arnic. rad.) = tincture of arnica . 
firfata-foto m. t. of asafetida=tinctura asafoe 
tidae (tinct. asafoet.) Front-fonction 
m.. t. of baptisia=tinctura baptisiae 
(tinct. baptis.) anaites-fotospor m. t. of belladonna = tinctura bel 
ladonnae (tinct. bellad.) fiatfeldt 
from m. t. of boldo = tinctura boldo 
(tinct. boldo) Far9qof-front m. t. of bryony=tinctura bryoniae (tinct. bryon.) aferuat-Ferrannot m. 
8851 
t. of cannabis = tinctura can 
nabis (tinct. cannab.) for 
Faloane m. t. of capsicum = tinctura cap 
sici (tinct. capsic.) #fa-fabetief 
m. t. of cascarilla = tinctura cas. carillae (tinct. cascaril.) 1. 
-fonie 11. t. of catechu=tinctura catechu 
(tinct, catech.) afat-frenare m. t. of cereus = tinctura cerei 
(tinct. cerei) = tinctura cacti 
grandiflori HETT89-First-frischio m. t. of chiretta=tinctura chiratae 
(tinct. chirat.) Forfat-fifoto 
m. t. of chloroform and morphine 
= tinctura chloroformi et morphinae (tinct. chlorof. et 
morph.) 59519-571KI-fochem. t. of cimicifuga = tinctura cimicifugae (tinct. cimicif.) 
105Ta-Fiono m. t. of cinchona = tinctura cin 
chonae' (tinct.cinchon.) fanita 
froatiem. t. of cinnamon=tinctura cinna 
momi (tinct. cinnam.) arcfACT foarte m. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
t, of cochineal tinctura cocci 
(tinct. cocc.) 1114-Frysopet m. t, of colchicum=tinctura col 
chici (tinct. colch.) Farvugga-shop 
froatio m. t. of collinsonia tinctura 
collinsoniae (tinct. collinson.) 
#58767-font m. t, of convallaria = tinctura convallariae (tinct. convallar.) 
of -forona m. t. of coto tinctura coto (tinct. 
· coto) -firbti of m. t. of cubeb = tinctura cubebae 
(tinct. cubeb.) Af-figo m. t. of digitalis=tinctura digitalis 
(tinct. digit.) Singa-france m. t. of eucalyptus=tinctura euca 
lypti (tinct. eucalyp.) . falcons m. "of euonymus = tinctura euo 
nymi (tinct. euonym.) garantie 
for senest m. t. of ferric chloride = tinctura 
ferri perchloridi (tinct. ferr. 
perchlor.) अयसिक नीरेय निष्कर्ष m. 
· t. of gelsemium=tinctura gel 
semii (tinct. gelsem.) gravifat 
F 67000 m. t. of guaiacum=tinctura guai- i aci (tinct. guaiac.) = tincture 
of guaiac fent m. t. of hamamelis = tinctura ., hamamelidis (tinct. hamam.) 
THE F-16 m. # of lopsztincture of lupulus Garpas Frognem. 
bhydrastis = ţinctura hyd- 
rastidis = tinctura hydrastis 
(tinct. hydrast.) frant-fabetet m. t. of hyoscyamus = tinctura hyoscyami (tinct. hyoscy.) 
cfar-filsam. t. of iodine = weak solution of iodine orgait fopp m.=de 
991-fac un n. t. of ipecacuanha = tinctura 
ipecacuanhae (tinct. ipecac.) 
qHF-foret m. t. of jaborandi = tinctura jabo 
randi (tinct. jaborand.) Faert 
faropio m. t. of jalap = tinctura jalapae 
(tinct.jalap.) 1997rg-firepo m. t. of kino = tinctura kino 
(tinct. kino) faeter-free in. t. of krameria=tinctura krame riae (tinct.kramer.) 19767-fixberger 
m. t. of lemon = tinctura limonis 
(tinct.limon.) faza-femei m. t. of lupulus = tinctura lupuli 
(tinct.lupul.) = tincture of hops Tans-fcd m. to of myrrh = tinctura myrrhae 
(tinct.myrrh.) THE FACT m. t. of myrrh and borax = tinc . tura myrrhae et boracis (tinct. 
myrrh. et borac.) TEV-T4U 
f16 m. t. of nux vomica = tinctura 
nucis vomicae (tinct. nuc. 
vom.) 791-Forcano m.: t. of opium = tinctura opii 
(tinct. opii) = laudanum ; fa-farsanom.' 
- 
886 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
UNCAN 
t. of orange=tinctura aurantii pruni virginianae = tincture 
(tinct.aurant.) Tor-Filloni m. 
of virginian prune=tinctura t. of podophyllum = tinctura pruni serotinae (tinct.prun. 
podophylli (tinct. podoph.) serot.) a faci-fasen m. 5197 ETT-Fogo m. 
___t. press निष्कर्ष-यन्त्र n. t. of pulsatilla = tinctura tinned (covered, coated, or plated 
pulsatillae (tinct.pulsat.) 40 with tin) saa mfn. 989-Farogant me 
tinned copper beaker fan arst t. of pyrethrum = tinctura q an m. 
pyrethri (tinct. pyreth.) picy04- tinning 71, 74-797 n. (tin-plating) 731-Fosotros m. 
tin ore 74-9477 7. t. of quassia=tinctura quassiae Tinospora Bot. Tifa f. (-fa fot 
(tinct.quass.) Fof -farget m. Tula genus) t. of quillaia = tinctura quil T. cordifolia सामान्य गुडूची. 
laiae (tinct.quill.) Fantara-feson tinplate n. 94-98 m. m. 
tinplate vb. (to plate or coat with t. of quinine = tinctura qui- tin) 94-99 17. 
ninae (tinct.quinin.) fasant- tin-plater 79-769-traf, 79-4eferat (-1) m. front m. 
tin-plating 79-4EET th. . t. of senega = tinctura senegae tint i n. (a light colour) TM m. 
(tinct.seneg.) REST-first m. copp. shade gra) t. of serpentary = tinctura ser- 2 vb. (to colour slightly) Trün. 
pentariae (tinct.serpent.) - tinted orifera mfn. Faroep m. 
tinted glasses Arifta 347177 17. (77) t. of squill = tinctura scillae tintometer Tire m. 
(tinct.scill.) #4646 108-fips m. tinware 797146 . t. of stramonium tinctura tinwhite 999 mph. 
stramonii (tinct. stramon.) tip 4 the 
5747-Faroon n. 
___pointed tip अणि f. t. of sumbul = tinctura sum- tire-tyre qfa m. (ancient word) ___bul (tinct.sumb.) जटामांसी-निष्कर्ष Tirhut Geog. तीरभुक्ति f. 
m. 
tissue ऊति . t. of tolus tinctura tolutana t. fluid Physiol. 3f-om. 
(tinct.tolu.) = t. of balsam of; t. respiration Zool. 3fa-n. 
tolu विरालधूपियास-निष्कर्ष m. . t. structure = histology ऊति t. of virginian prune = t. . an f.. 
of wild cherry! 
t. system Bot. fazifa f. . t. of wild cherry = tinctura titan-, titano- (titanium) Chem. Try 
887 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
titanate Chem. रंजीयn. 
titano-niobate Chem. रंज-काशीय . titan black Col. Ind. दस्यु काल m. titanous Chem. रंज्य mfn. 
t. blue दस्यु नील m. 
titanox (a mixture of titanium oxide t. pink F 149 m. 
रंजातु जारेय and barium sulphate t. red दस्यु रक्त m. 
हर्यात शुल्बीय' Hackh's Chemical t. rose दस्यु पाटल m. 
Dictionary, London, 1944) हशुरंजा t. scarlet दस्यु शोण m. t. yellow दस्यु पीत m. 
titanyl Chem. रंजल 1. titania Chem. (titanium dioxide) रंजजा titer Chem. इयदीक्ष्य 1. 
title नाम, नामधेय ., उपाधि m. titanic Chem. रंजिक.mfn. 
title deed Lip स्वत्व-संलेख m. t. acid रंजिक अम्ल . 
titrate vb. Chem. इयदीक्षण n. t. anhydride रंजिक अजलेय. titration Chem. इयदीक्षा /. t. iron ore-ilmenite रंजिक प्रयोयस्क TI (thallium) Chem. सिक् (सिक्ष्यातु) 
1. (अयस्+अयस्क) 
Tm (thulium) Chem. व्य (व्याहरिला) t. oxide रंजिक जारेय. 
tn. (ton) व., वर्. (प्रवर्त) titani-ferous Chem. रंज-भर mfn. Tn (thoron) Chem. ह्रस् (ह्रसाति) . t. iron ore रंजभर अयोयस्क (अयस् + TNG त्रिभूम 
अयस्क) n.. 
to Math. प्रति (2:5:6 २ प्रति ५ प्रति ६) titanite-sphene Mineral. रंसिज m. to Com. द्वारा। 
(-इज for खनिज mineral) . 
toad Zool. भेक m. titanium Chem. रंजातु m. 
toast vb. (to roast) श्रपण, भर्जन n. t. chloride (ic) रजिक नीरेय . toast (a slice of bread toasted on fire) to chloride (ous) रंज्य नीरेय. 
श्रात . t. dioxide रंजातु द्विजारेय . 
to be contradicted परोच्य mfn. t. oxide रंजातु जारेय n. 
to be included अन्तर्गत mfn. t. potassium oxalate WIE SETE Tobias acid Chem. (a variety of 
तिग्मीय .. 
naphthyl-amine-sulphonic acid उत्. t. sulphate (ic) रंजिक शुल्बीय N. ति. शु.) अप्युत्तिशु अम्ल n. t. sulphate (ous) रंज्य शुल्बीय. Tobin's tube Hygiene (the tube t. white रंजातु श्वेतm. 
carries the air from floor level titanor, titan-Chem. रंज 
to a height of about six feet) titano adj. Chem. रंज fm. 
उद्वातन नाल m. titano-columbate Chem. रंज-काशीय , tocopherol (Gk. tokes childbirth) titano-cyanide Chem. रंज-श्यामेय 1. titano-fluoride Cbem. रंज-तरस्वेय. toddy cat=palm civet=paguman titano-magnetite Mineral. रंज-चुम्बिज palm cat Zool. ताल-विडाल m. 
toe पादांगुलि f. (finger हस्तांगुलि). .. 888 
4 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
. 
toeweb अंगुलिजाल N. (from महाव्युत्पत्ति- t. red विरालेयी रक्त m. 
जालावनद्धहस्तपादः) 
toluol azo B-naphthol Col. Ind. together एकत्र, सम्भूय (Hindi साथ, इकट्ठे विरालव अज आ-उत्तैलव M. 
हो कर) 
toluyl (tolric+ - 1) विरारिल n. (विरालिक together with सह (Hindi के साथ) 
+• ल) toilet प्रसाधन 1. 
tolyl विरारल . t. room प्रसाधन-कोष्ठ m. 
toluylene विरारिलेन्य 1. t. table श्रृंगार-पटल, प्रसाधन-पटल . toluylene black Col. Ind. विरारिलेन्य token coin प्रतीक-टंक m. 
काल m. tol-, tolu- विराल 
t. black-blue विरारिलेन्य काल-नील m. tolamine blue Col. Ind. faerstraat het t. blue विरारिलेन्य नील m. 
m. 
t. bordeaux विरारिलेन्यः कपिशक m. t. green facrofanit of m. 
t. brown विरारिलेन्य बन्नु m. t. pink विरालतिक्ती आपमm. 
t. fast brown विरारिलेन्य स्थिर बभ्र t. violet विरालतिक्ती नीललोहित m. 
m. tolane Chem. विरालीन्य . 
t. fast orange विरारिलेन्य स्थिर नारंग tolane fast red Col. Ind. facrotru FETE 
___m. रक्त m. 
t. new brown विरारिलेन्य नव बभ्रु m. t. red विरालीन्य रक्त m. 
t. orange विरारिलेन्य नारंग m. tolene पिरालेन्य 1. (analogous to tolu t. red विरारिलेन्य रक्त m. 
ene विरालेन्य) 
t. yellow विरारिलेन्य पीत m. tolerate vb. सहन । 
tolyl (tohuic+ - 1) विरारल 1. tolidine Chem. वैरालेयी . 
___ toluyl विरारिल १. tolidine brown Col. Ind. वैरालेयी बनु tolyl black Col. Ind. विरारल काल m. 
t. blue fastest vitt m. tolu=balsam of Tolu विराल-धूपियास tomato रागालु n. 
m. 
tombac-Dutch metal ताम्रकुप्यातु, चतु tolu-, tol- विराल 
स्ताम्रकुप्यातु m. toluene (tolu + benzene, obtained -tome i Zool. (a somite) -CUSEF 
by distillation of coal tar) Chem. 2 Embryol. (segment)-खण्डक विरालेन्य . 
-tome -तक्ष-छिद toluic Chem. विरालिक mfn. 
-tomy -छेद toluide=toluidide Chem. विरालेय n. ton (t., tn.; 20 cwts)=short ton sasi toluidide विरालेयेय . 
m. (व., वर; २० गोणी) m.= लघु प्रवर्त toluidine विरालेयी. 
(ल. व.) toluidine blue Col. Ind. विरालेयी नील tone (from Sanskrit तान) = Music तान 
m. . t. orange विरालेयी नारंग m. 
2=tonus Physiol. तान m. 
m. 
889﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
-tone (lactone in sul-tone)-धा (शुल्धा) topographical anatomy परिस्थिति -tone (medicine; e.g. glandotone शारीर . 
अन्थिबल्य)-बल्य 
topography (location of the parts tone of a muscle पेशी-तान m. 
of an animal) Z00l. स्थानवृत्त, अंगवृत्त tongs संदंश m. 
1., अंगस्थिति . tongue जिह्वा 
-topped शीर्ष tonic Music (pertaining to the key Toppler's mercury exhaust pump ___note) मूलस्वरीय mfn. 
____Phys. अपिपारद उत्स्रावांच m. tonic बल्य n. (from सुश्रुत) 
torch वर्ती . tonka bean tree प्रानन्तमूल m. 
toric (meniscus remeT and cylinder tonneau=metric ton-millier प्रयुत- in one side) Ophthalmol. रम्भेंदुकला 
धान्य. tonsil.Anat. (almond-shaped) गलवाताम torocholate Biochem. वृषपित्तीय mfn. 
. 
torocholic acid Chem. वृषपित्तिक अम्ल . tonsillitis गलवातामकोप m. 
torpedo r=submarine mine Mil. tonus-tone 
(for destroying ships) नौनी . tony red=oil red AS 
2 vb. (to destroy, to explode, etc.) tools Com. साधन, उपकरणn. 
नौनीयन, नौघ्नी-क्षेपण, नौघ्नी-स्फोटन, नौनी loose t. अबद्ध उपकरण n. 
नाशन 1. t. board उपकरण-फलक . 
t. battery नौनी-समूहा . t. cabinet उपकरण-प्रमञ्जूषा. 
t. boat नौनी-नौका . t. steel Engin. उपकरण-वज्रायस. t.-boat destroyer नौनी-नौका-नाशक tooth abscess दन्त-विद्रधि m. toothed wheel दन्त-चक्र. 
th director नौघ्नी-देशिन . (an tooth enamel दन्त-वल्क m. (from सुश्रुत) ___instrument) toothless mammal दन्तहीन स्तनी (-इन्) t. mine=submarine mine नौनी 
निस्फोट m. tooth powder दन्त-क्षोद, दन्त-शाण m. t. net or netting Nav. नौनी-जाल . 
(दन्त-शाण from सुश्रुत) 
t. plane नौनी-विमान 1. tooth pulp Zool. दन्त-गो m. 
t. room Nav. नौनी-कोष्ठ m. tooth-socket Anat. दन्तोलूखल 7. 
t. school Nav. नौनी-पाठशाला top I शिखर, शीर्ष . 
t. station नौनी-स्थान . .. . 2 चूडा. 
t. tube Nav. नौनी-नाल m. : 3 लट्व M. (Hin 
torpedoer नौनीयक m. topaz पुष्पराग m. 
torpedoist I (torpedoer) नौनीयक m. top. corner उपरि-कोण m. 
2 Nav. नौघ्नी-विज्ञ m.. sttop gear Automobile प्रथम दन्ती, उपरि- 3 (one who favours the use of 
' दन्ती (-इन्.) m. . . . . torpedoes) नौती-वादी (-इन्) m. 
m. 
m. 
890 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
त 
बन्ध) 
Torricellian tube = barometric to the extent of contravention ___ tube ऊर्ध्वशून्यक नाल-वापीडमान-नाल m. प्रतिकूलता की मात्रा तक (Hindi) Torricellian vacuum Phys. ऊर्ध्व-शून्यक totipalmate Zool. (having all toes 
united by a web) सर्वांगुलिजाल Torrid Zone Geog. उष्ण-कटिबंध m. 
mfn. torsion Ophthalmol. विमोटन n. 
touch स्पर्श m. tortion=torsion Engin. विमोटन . touchy behaviour पाशुरोष आचरण 1. tortional Engin. विमोटन-कृत mfn. tough दृढ, चर्मल mfn. 
(caused by tortion) 
toughness दृढता, चर्मलता f. tortoise कर्म m. 
tour पर्यटन . torula condition (condition of mucor tourist पर्यटक m. 
___ in the absence of oxygen) अजारक- tourniquet Surg. रक्तबन्ध m. (रक्तस्राव 
दशा. torus = thalamus Bot. पीनाक्ष m. towel प्रोंछ m. 
('swollen axis') 
tower प्रस्थाणु m. total संकलन, संकलित M. 
township Surv. (36 sq. miles) ge n. ___ 2 (sum) योग m. 
(३६ व. क्रो.) total adj. अशेष, समस्त mfr. 
tox-विष total adhesion locomotive Rly. toxaemia विषरक्तता f. 
Eng. (whose wheels are all tox-albumic विष-शिवतिक mfn. coupled to act as driving wheels) tox-albumin Biochem. विष-शिवति . सर्वमिथुनित चलिन . 
tox-albumose Biochem. विष-श्वितधु n. total cleavage = complete clea- tox-amin Med. far-fara f. 
vage = holoblastic cleavage tox-anemia Med. विषारक्तता f. Embryol. पूर्णभाजन ॥. 
Toxascaris=Toxocara farzatoafer f. total cost (gross cost, selling cost) (आति for प्रजाति genus) 
Com. समस्त परिव्यय m. 
toxemia विष-रक्तता . total eclipse पूर्ण ग्रहण n. 
toxi- (toxic, toxin) विष-, विषि total hypermetropia Ophthalmol. toxic वैषिक, विषालु mfn. .. समस्त-पश्चनाभिता f. . . 
toxic-, toxico- विष total loss समस्त-हानि . 
toxical=toxic afora mfn. total personnel Aviation समस्त सेविवर्ग toxicant=intoxicant मादक mfn. 
m. 
toxicity विषालुता . total produce Com. समस्त उत्पादन . toxicology विषविद्या ., विषविज्ञान". total reflection Phys. अशेष परावर्तन 1. toxicum विष total weight समस्त भार m. 
toxi-dermia विष-चर्मता to the contrary एतद्विरुद्ध (Hindi इसके toxi-dermic विष-चर्मिक mfn. 
विरुद्ध) . 
toxi-ferous Physiol. विष-भर mfn. 891 
ना . 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
toxi-genic विषि-जन mfn. (producing 2 भूखंड, खंड m. 
toxin) 
traction Mach. संकर्षण 1. toxin Biochem. विषि . 
tractive Mach. संकर्षी (-इन्) mfn. toxinosis Med. अतिविषिता . (due to t. effort संकर्षि बल .. ___ toxin) 
t. force Dynamics कर्षि बल .. Toxocara=Toxascaris au poate f. tract of water जल-भाग, जल-विस्तार m. 
(-आति for प्रजाति genus) 
tractor कर्षित्र n. toy poodle dog Zool. क्रीडामानी (-इन्) trade I (business) व्यापार m. 
m. 
2 (buying and selling) पण्य, पणन n. Tr. (terbium) Chem. इ (इद्भुशला) 3 (commerce) afure n. trabecula Bot. (delicate threads con coastal t. समुद्र-तटीय व्यापार M. 
necting the stele with the cortex) entrepot t. (a foreign inter बाह्यकबन्धनी, दण्डिका 
mediate port or warehouse trabeculae cranii Zool. कर्पर-दंडिका f. मध्यपत्तन, मध्यागार) मध्यपत्तन व्यापार trace vb. रेखानुरेखण, अनुरेखण, अनुमार्गण n. 
m. trace n. लेश m. 
foreign t. वैदेशिक व्यापार m. traced path Math., Engin. अनुरेखित पथ free t. अबाध व्यापार m. 
home t. स्वदेशोय व्यापार m. tracer elements Phys. अन्वेषि-तत्त्व n. protective t. रक्षित व्यापार m. trachea Anat. श्वासनाल m. 
seaborne t. सामुद्रिक व्यापार m. tracheae-air-tubes Zool. TherT m. transfrontier t. सीमापार व्यापार m. tracheal gill Zool. श्वास-प्रवर्ध m. (a t. allowance व्यापार-मोक m. 
respiratory out-growth) 
t. balance = balance of trade tracheal system श्वासनाल-संहति . 
पण्य-अंतर, निराकाम्य-अंतर, व्यापारान्तर tracheid Bot.(water-conducting cells) 
जलवाहि-कोशा, वाहि-कोशा f. 
t, bill व्यापार-विपत्र । trachoma Med. कणियुजाकोप m. 
t. capital व्यापार-पुंजी . tracing cloth अनुरेखण वस्त्र n. 
t. centre व्यापार केन्द्र n. ___t. paper अनुरेखण पत्र n... 
t. charges व्यापार-प्रभार m. track पथ, संचार m. 
t. commissioner व्यापार-पायुक्त m. track rod (track=width between t. cycle=business cycle व्यापार ___wheels) Automobile चक्रान्तर्यष्टि f. 
चक्र . tracks (of tank) Mil.. पट्टी 
t. debtor पण्य-अधमर्ण m. trackside Ry. संचारपाव 1. 
t. dictionary व्यापार-शब्दकोष m. tract Anat. पथ m. 
t, discount पण्य-अपहार m. falimentary t. अन्न-पथ m. 
t. dispute (between capital and " optic t. दृक्-पथ m.. 
labour) व्यापार संघर्ष m. tract पुस्तिका f. .... . 
___t. expense 'व्यापार-व्यय m. 892 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
t. goods व्यापार-वस्तु . 
cantha (trag.) Pharm. प्रवेत्रनिर्यास m. t. mark व्यापार-चिह्न, पण्य-चिह्न, पण्य- trailer I Rly. (a. vehicle pulled by 
लक्ष्मn. 
another) अनुयान, परकृष्ट n., अनुसी t. name पण्य-नाम 1. 
(-इन्) m. t. office व्यापार कार्यालय m. 
2 (a short film, so called because t. price व्यापार-मूल्य 1. 
attached to the end of a long reel) t. rights पण्य-अधिकार m. 
अनुचित्र n. t. risk व्यापार-हानिभय n. 
trailing truck Ry. Eng. अनूद्वाही (-इन्) t. route पण्य-पथ, वणिक-पथ m. (an m. 
cient word) 
t. truck wheels Rly. Eng. अनूद्वाहि t. sale पण्य-विक्रय m. 
चक्र. t. secret पण्य-रहस्य ". 
t. wheel (any hind wheel of a t. treaty पण्य-संधि,व्यापारिक संधि m. 
locomotive except one serving t. union श्रमिक-संघm. 
as driving wheel; one of the t, unionism श्रमिक-संघता . 
hind wheels of a carriage) t. unionist श्रमिक-संघी (-इन) m. 
अनुचक्र. trader=businessman व्यापारी (-इन)m. t. wheel spring Ry. Eng. अनुचक्र 
retail t. अल्पशो-व्यापारी m. 
स्कन्द m. sole t. एकल-व्यापारी m. 
train 1 Rly. (a connected line of wholesale t. बहुशो-व्यापारी m. 
carriages etc.) संयान 7. tradefolk Com. पण्यजन m. 
2 पंक्ति . Tradescantia = spiderworts 
3 (the entire set up) संहित 1. (as in tradesman पण्यपुरुष m. 
combustion train दहन-संहित) tradespeople पण्यजाति ई. 
trained प्रशिक्षित mfn. trade wind व्यापार-वायु m. 
trainer प्रशिक्षक m. trading व्यापार m., पणन n. 
train-ferry Rly. (a ferry which carries t. account व्यापार-लेखा f. 
a train inside it, as from Calais t, association पणन-पार्षद्, व्यापार to Dover) संयान-तरणी f. 
पार्षद् . 
training प्रशिक्षण n. t. capital व्यापार-पुंजी f. 
t. command War प्रशिक्षण समादेश m. t. centre व्यापार-केन्द्र १. 
___trajectory Dynamics प्र-वक्र 1. (प्रक्षिप्त-वक्र t. certificate व्यापार-प्रमाणपत्र n. 
curve described by a projectile) t. company व्यापार-प्रमण्डल n. Tralle's alcoholometer (0-100 per t. result व्यापार-परिणाम m. 
cent) शतान्त सुषवमान m. tradition परम्परा f. 
trama (of a mushroom) Bot. fifenta traffic यातायात . 
___N. (loosely woven') traffic facility यातायात-सुविधा f. tramcar - streetcar रथ्यायान 1. tragacanth=gum dragon=traga- tram-line zeyturi-iffer f. 
893 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
tramway रथ्यायानमार्ग m., रथ्यायान n. transfer station संक्रामण-स्थात्र 1. trans- पार- (opp. to cis- अवार-) transform = convert vb. रूपान्तरण, transaction Com. व्यवहार m. 
परिवर्तन । cash t. रोक-व्यवहार m. .. 
transformation रूपान्तर n., परिवर्त m. credit t. उद्धार-व्यवहार m. 
. radio-active t. तेजोगिर-परिवर्त m. purchase t. क्रय-व्यवहार m. 
_t. of axes Matb. अक्ष-परिवर्तन 1. sale t. विक्रय-व्यवहार m. 
transformer (step up, step down) transaction of business कार्य-संपादन १. परिवर्तक 29., परिवर्तित्र n. (उत्क्रम, अवक्रम) transcendental Math. बीजातीत mfn. transfrontier trade Com. सीमापार 
t. curve बीजातीत वक्र 
व्यापार m. t. equation बीजातीत समीकार m. transfusion Med. संक्रामण . 't. function बीजातीत श्रित n. 
transfusion tissue Bot. संक्रामण-ऊति. transcribe wb. अनुलेखन 1. 
transit Com. पारनयन .. transcribing machine अनुलेखन-यन्त्र goods in t. मार्गस्थ वस्तु . 
. 
remittance in t. मार्गस्थ रोक m. transfer संक्रामण, स्थानान्तरण, हस्तान्तरण n. transition परीवर्त m. 
register of t. स्थानान्तरण-पंजी. transition pH परीवर्त समु (See pH) t. day हस्तान्तरण-दिवस m. 
transitional अन्तर्वर्ती (-इन) mfn. t. deed हस्तान्तरण-संलेख m. 
t. period अन्तर्वर्ती काल m. t. entry स्थानान्तर-प्रविष्टि f. 
t. provisions अन्तर्वर्ती प्रावधान 1. t. fees हस्तान्तरण-शुल्क m. 
transitory परीवर्ती (-इन्) mfn. t. journal स्थानान्तरण-दैनिकपंजी. t. stage Zool. परीवर्तावस्थाf. transfer of blood रुधिर-संक्रामण . translation Phys. I (as in motion of transferable संक्राम्य, स्थानांतरणीय, हस्तां t.) स्थानेतरण . 
तरणीय mfn. 
2 अनुवाद m. t. goods संक्राम्य वस्तु . 
translator अनुवादक m. transferee संक्रामिती (-इन), हस्तांतरिती translatory motion = motion of 
(-इन् ) m. 
__ translation Pbys. स्थानेतर-गति . transference संक्रामण, हस्तांतरण 1. translocation of food Bot. (transfer transference of pollen Bot. पराग- of food) अन्न-संक्रमण 1. .. संक्रामण, पराग-संक्रमण 1. 
trans-lucency पार-भासिता. transferer संक्रामक, हस्तांतरक m. 
translucent पारभास, पारभासी (-इन) mr. transferred संक्रामित, संक्रान्त, हस्तांतरित transmissibility Phys, पारेष्यता 
__mfn. . 
t. of forces बल-पारेष्यता .t. vote संक्रान्त मत 1. 
transmissible Phys. पारेष्य mfn. transferring संक्रामण, हस्तांतरण, स्थानांतरण transmission I संक्रामण.. 
2 Phys., Com. पारेषण n. "t. entry Com. स्थानांतरण-प्रविष्टि . t. factor Phys. पारेषण-खंड m. 
___894 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
- 
t. system Automobile पारेषण-संहति f. trans-shipment Com. नावन्तरण n. t. time Radar पारेषण-काल m. 
transuranic Phys. पारकिरणातु mfn. transmissive Com. पारेषी (-इन्) mfn. t. elements पारकिरणातु तत्त्व . transmit vb.Com., Phys. पारेषण . transversal Math. भेदिका transmitted पारेषित mfn. 
transverse अनुप्रस्थ mfn. (ancient word) t. pulse Radar पारेषित स्पन्द m. 
t. axis Math. (=latitudinal, along transmitter Com., Phys. पारेषक m. ___width) अनुप्रस्थ अक्ष m. transmitting antenna Radar पारेषी t. colon Anat. अनुप्रस्थ मलाशय m. 
प्रातन्तु m. 
t. common tangent = oblique t. set Phys. पारेषि-कुलक, पारेषित्र n. 
common tangent Math. तिर्यग transmutation I (of one element उभयस्पर्शी (-इन् ) m. . 
into another) Chem. तत्त्वान्तरण 1. t. dehiscence Bot. अनुप्रस्थ-स्फोटना f. 2 रूपान्तरण, परिवर्तन 1. 
t. opening Zool. अनुप्रस्थ द्वार . t. of elements तत्त्व-रूपान्तरण ". t. pitch Engin. अनुप्रस्थ अन्तराल 1. transparency arcferat f.. 
t. planes अनुप्रस्थ तल . transparent पारदर्श mfn. 
t. process Zool. अनुप्रस्थ प्रवर्ध m. transpiration Plant Physiol. उत्स्वेद M., t. section अनुप्रस्थ छेद m. 
उत्स्वे दन १. 
t. waves अनुप्रस्थ तरंग m. transpiration current = transpira- trap रुध, पाश M., पंजर . 
tion stream Bot. उत्स्वेद-वाह m. 
t. door Bot. रुधद्वार, कूटद्वार . transpire vb. Bot. उत्स्वेदन n. 
Trapa Bot. शृंगाटकति . (-ति for प्रजाति transplantation Bot., Surg. sfarsitul n. genus) 
(ancient word) 
_trapezium I (English-trapezoid) transport I Com. परिवाहन, परिवहन 1. समलम्बm. 
2 (banishment of convicts to a 2 (American-a quadrilateral of 
penal colony) निर्वासन, दूरवासन M. which no two sides are parallel) transportation I Com. परिवहन ।. 
असमान्तरभुज m. 2 निर्वासन . (as in transportation trapezoid (with two parallel sides) for life) 
Math. समलम्ब m. t. for life आजीवन निर्वासन n. travel यात्रा f.. transported soil Bot. आगत-उन्मृदा f. traveller यात्री, यायी (-इन्) m. transpose vb. Math. पक्षान्तरण, स्थानान्तरण commercial t. अभियात्री (-इन्.) m. transposition पक्षान्तरण, स्थानान्तरण n., . (short for अभिकर्ता यात्री) , 
व्यत्यय m. 
traveller's commission Com.. अभि t. cipher व्यत्यय-गूढलेख m. 
यात्रि-वर्तन n. transposition method = double traveller's expenses Com. अभियात्रि-व्यय 
weighing method of Gauss m. 
Phys. द्विस्तोलन . 
travelling यात्रा f., यायी, यात्री (-इन्) mfn. 895 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
t. agent Com. यायी अभिकर्ता, यात्रि- treble rule of three (rule of seven) __अभिकर्ता (-तृ) m. 
___Matb. सप्तराशिक . t..allowance यात्रा-अधिदेय . treble tabulation Statistics for Tur t. charges यात्रा-प्रभार m. 
सारणीयन 1. t. expenses यात्रा-व्यय m. 
tree वृक्ष m. t. load Engin. यायी भार m. tree climber (fish) Zool. वृक्षारोही (-इन्) t. microscope Phys. चल अण्वीक्ष m. m. t. post office vans यातृ प्रेषालय- tree ferns Bot. (ferns having the 
यान . 
form of trees) पर्णांग-वृक्ष m. t. thermometer यात्रा-तापमान m. tree-frog Zool. वृक्ष-मण्डूक m. traverse vb. पारगमन . 
tree turmeric दारुहरिद्रा f. (English traversed पारगत mfn. 
word is translated from Sanskrit) tray धानी , स्थाल. 
Trematoda Zool. विद्धपत्राः m.pl. acid t. अम्ल-स्थाला. 
trembles Veter. (an animal disease) sand t. सिकता-स्थाला. 
पशुकम्प M. tread (of a wheel) चार m. 
tremendous speed Phys. भीम वेग tread, treading vb. चारण n. 
im. (ancient word, name of a treason अभिद्रोह m. 
Dänava). treasonable अभिद्रोहात्मक mfn. 
tremor Zool. प्रकम्पm. ____t. words अभिद्रोहात्मक शब्द m. trench I Math. खात m. treasurer कोषाध्यक्ष m. 
__2 Mil. खाति f. treasure-trove Laty भूनिधि m. 
trend Statistics उपनति, प्रवृत्ति . treasury कोषागार . 
trephocytes = foot cells = nurse treasury benches=official benches cells=sustentacular cells=Ser 
मंत्रिवर्ग m. 
toli's cells citat f. t. bill कोषागार-विपत्र, राजकोष-विपत्र n. Treponema (T.) (a genus of micro 
t. note कोषागार-पत्र. (पत्र-अर्थपत्र) organisms of the order Spiro treat vb. Chem. FTTT n. 
chaetales, consisting of exceed treated Chem. साधित mfn. 
ingly slender spiral rods) सुकुन्तलाणु treatment I (medical) चिकित्सा'f., उप (सुकु.) 
चार m. 
T. anatum (found in ducks) कारंड . 2 (of a subject) प्रतिपादन १. 
t. of disease रोग-चिकित्सा /., रोगोपचार - T. calligyrum (resembles T. pal . . ., m 
___lidum) शेफमल सुकु. __t. of a subject विषय-प्रतिपादन . T. carateum (found in mal de los treaty (instrument containing the con ____pintos) पृषच्चर्म सुकु. ' 
ditions of surrender) समध्यर्पण-पत्र, T. cuniculi (causes vent disease सन्सिन ... ... .. 
in rabbits) शशोपदंश सुकु. ... 8967 
सुकु. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
T. hispanicum (causes Spanish trial dividend Math. अन्वीक्षा-भाज्य .. _trypanosomiasis) सुषुप्ति सुकु. trial jar अन्वीक्षा-कलश M. T. macrodentium दन्तमांस बृहत् मुकु. trial method अन्वीक्षा-रीति . T. microdentium दन्तमांस लघु सुकु. triamine Chem. त्रितिक्ती f. T. mucosum (found in the pus triamine black Col. Ind. वितिक्ती काल 
from pyorrhea alveolaris) दन्तपूय m. सुकु. 
triammonium salt Chem. त्रितिक्तातु T. pallidum=Spirochaeta pal लवण . 
lida (causative organism of triangle Math. त्रिकोण .., त्रिभुज m. syphilis) उपदंश सुकु. 
t. law=law of t. Phys. त्रिभुज-नियम T. pertenue (causative organism m. ___of frambesia) न्युपदंश सुकु. 
t. of forces Mech. बल-त्रिभुज m. T. recurrentis=Borrelia recur t. of velocities प्रवेग-त्रिभुज m. 
rentis 
triangular त्रिभुज-, त्रिकोणाकार mfn. T. refringens भासुर सुकु. 
triangular prism Math. त्रिभुज-संक्षेत्र 2. T.schaudinni (occurs in tropical triangular pyramid Math. त्रिभुज-स्तुप ___ulcers) वणीय सुकु. 
T. skoliodonta (sometimes found triangular topped tripod fartur-zitat ___in the mouth) आस्य सुकु. 
त्रिपाद m. T. vincenti = Borrelia vin- trianisoline Col. Ind. त्रिशतपुष्पवी f. ___centi गलशोफ सुकु. 
triarch Bot. त्रिसूत्र mfn. trespass (to enter unlawfully upon Triassic period Geol. (rocks are 
the land of another) अनधिकारप्रवेश m. largely red sandstone) रक्ताश्म-युग Trewia Bot. पिण्डारति f. (-ति for प्रजाति 
triatol black (tri त्रि+ -ate -ईय+ -01 T. nudiflora सामान्य पिण्डार m. 
-क) Col. Ind. त्रीयव काल m. tri- त्रि 
t. brilliant blue त्रीयव भासुर नील m. triad त्रिक 2. 
t. brilliant red त्रीयव भासुर रक्त m. triad adj. Chem. (trivalent) त्रिसंयुज t. brown त्रीयव बभ्रु m. 
mfn. 
t. coffee-brown बीयव म्लेच्छफल-बभ्रु Triadenum = Elodea - Elodes 
m. Bot. त्रिग्रन्थिति 1. (-ति for प्रजाति t. fast orange त्रीयव स्थिर नारंग m. genus). 
t. fast red त्रीयव स्थिर रक्त M. trial विचार, वैधिकविचार m., अन्वीक्षा f. _t. green बीयव हरि m. 
(अनुर्वीप्सायाम्---पुनः पुनः ईक्षा) 
t. heliotrope fra faritaifacio m. trial and error अन्वीक्षा तथा विभ्रम m. t. violet त्रीयव नीललोहित m. trial balance Com. अन्वीक्षा-सूची, परीक्षा- t. yellow श्रीयव पीत.m. . 
सूची f. (H. तलपट) 
Triatoma : Zool. (a genus having 
897 57 
___genus) 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
three distinct parts of the body-- Tribulus Bot. गोक्षुरति 1. (-ति for प्रजाति head, thorax and abdomen) genus) त्र्यंगाति . (-आति for प्रजाति genus) T. terrestris सामान्य गोक्षुर m. 
T. sanguisuga रक्तचूष त्र्यंग m. tribunal धर्माधिकरण . (ancient word) triaxon Zool. (a triaxial sponge) triceps muscle Anat. त्रिशिर-पेशी f. 
त्यक्षिक . 
Trichinella Zosl. ऊतिक्राम्याति f. (-आति triazine Chem. त्र्यजीवी . 
for प्रजाति genus) triazogene black Col. Ind. 4575TT T. spiralis मण्डल ऊतिकामी (-इन्) m. 
काल m. 
Trichinellidae (invades tissues) sofa t. orange न्यजजन नारंग m. 
कामिवंश m. (क्रामि-प्राकामि; वंश family) t. red त्र्यजजन रक्त m. 
Trichinopoly Geog. (in the pro triazol black Col. Ind. त्र्यजव काल m. vince of Madras) त्रिशिरपल्ली f. 
t. black-blue त्र्यजव काल-नील m. trichloro-tert.-butyl alcohol त्रिनीर-त t. blue त्र्यजव नील m. 
धृतल सुषव m. t. bordeaux त्र्यजव कपिशक m. trichocyst Zool. (stinging organs) t. brown त्र्यजव बभ्रु m. 
दशांग. t. corinth यजव रोहित m. 
trichome Bot., Zool. लोम 2. t. dark blue त्र्यजव असित नील m. Trichomonas (they possess a tuft of t. fast black त्र्यजव स्थिर काल m. three to five flagella) Zool. freno t. fast blue त्र्यजव स्थिर नील m. 
f. (आति for प्रजाति genus) t. fast brown त्र्यजव स्थिर बभ्रु m. T. confusa = T. intestinalis t. fast orange त्र्यजव स्थिर नारंग m. प्रान्त्र शिखी m. t. fast red त्र्यजव स्थिर रक्त m. 
T. vaginalis Tift foret m. t. fast yellow त्र्यजव स्थिर पीत m. Trichophyton Bot. केशकवकति . (-ति t. field grey यजव सेना धूसर m. for प्रजाति genus) t. green त्र्यजव हरि m. 
T. megalosporon महाबीजाणु केश t. indigo blue यजव निनील नील कवक n. 
m. 
T.megalosporon endoectothrix t. pure blue न्यजब शुद्ध नील m. 
__अन्तर्बहिर्महाबीजाणु केशकवक .. t. pure yellow त्र्यजव शुद्ध पीत m. T. sabouraudi (the commonest t. red त्र्यजव रक्त m. 
cause of ringworm of beard t. violet व्यजव नीललोहित m. 
___ and head) शिरोमुखदद्रु केशकवक . t. yellow त्र्यजव पीत m. 
T. tonsurans शिरस्त्वक् केशकवक .. tribal areas वनजाति-प्रदेश m. 
Trichoptera Zool. (wings covered tribasic Chem. Faufopi mfn. 
with hair) लोमपक्ष-गण m. tribe I Parasitol. वंशक m. 
Trichosanthes Bot. चिचिण्डाति f. (-ति ___ 2 वनजाति . 
for प्रजाति genus) tri-brom-aniline त्रि-दुरा-नीली. 
T. anguina ART Farquet f.' 898 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
Trichosporum Bat. केशबीजति . (-ति trigonometry त्रिकोणमिति f. ____ for प्रजाति genus) 
trihedral angle Math. त्रितल कोण m. Trichostrongylidae Zool. तनुछत्र-वंश m. trihydride Chem. त्र्युदेय N. 
(short for तनुछत्रनरवंश) 
trilateral त्रिभुज m. Trichostrongylus Zool. तनुछत्राति f. trilling Cryst. त्रिक n. 
(short for तनुंछत्रनराति; -प्राति for trillion : (American) महापद्म, द्वादशख 
प्रजाति genus) Trichuroidea Zool. (a superfamily 2 (English) अष्टादशख n. 
having a very long oesophagus) trilobed freue mfn. दीर्घनिगल-प्रवंश m. 
trilocular Bot. त्रिगह्वर mfn. trickle vb. पाश्चोतन 1. 
trimerous Bot. त्र्यवयव mfn. Tricoccae Bot. (fruit with three t. theory श्यवयव वाद m. _____carpels) त्र्यण्डप-गोत्र n. 
trimorphic Bot. त्रिरूप mfn. Triconodonta Zool. त्रिकूटदन्ता: m.pl. trinomial Math. त्रिपद n. tricuspid valve Anat. त्रिदल कपाट n. triode त्रिद्वार n. (electron tube विद्युदणु tricycle त्रिचक्र . 
नाल) tridecane Chem. त्रयोदशीन्य n. 
-triol -त्रिव tridecylic त्रयोदशलिक mfn. 
Trionychidae Zool. (a family of tridymite Mineral. त्रिकिज m. (-इज for soft-shelled, fresh-water turtles) 
खनिज mineral) 
मृदुकश्यप-वंश m. trifid Bot. त्रिदर mfn. 
Trionyx Zool. मृदुकश्यप m. trifocal faifa mfn. 
tri-oxide Chem. त्रि-जारेय. trifocal lens Ophthalmol. विनाभि वीक्ष m. trip याथ m. (from ऋग्वेद) (फेरा Hindi) trifoliate Bot. Ferquf mfn. 
triphylite=lithiophilite Trifolium Bot. वनमेथिति f. (-ति for tripinnate Bot. त्रिपक्षवत्, त्रिपक्ष mfn. 
प्रजाति genus) 
triplane Phys. त्रि-तल १. T. indicum सामान्य वनमेथि f. triple त्रिगुण mfn. trigeminal nerve Anat. त्रिशाख-चेता f. triple distilled Pharm. त्रिर मासुत mfn. 
fifth cerebral पंचमी मास्तिष्की . triple expansion Mach. fafäficut n. trigger Mil. घोट m. (Hindi घोड़ा, triple fusion Bot. विमिलन 1. 
___Bengali टिपकल) 
triple riveted त्रिपंक्ति-लवंगित mfn. Trigonella Bot. मेथिकाति f. (-ति for triplex त्रिक n. 
प्रजाति genus) 
triplex glasses Ophthalmol. FETETT T. foenum graecum सामान्य मेथिका उपनेत्र 1. 
triplex Mallet locomotive (three trigonelline Chem. #terant f. ___engines) त्रिक-चलित्र त्रिसंहित चलित्र n. trigonometrical ratio Math. त्रिकोण- triplicate of a bill Com. विपत्र-ततीयक n. 
मितीय-निष्पत्ति f. 
triplicate ratio Math. धनित-निष्पत्ति . 
899﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
triploblastic Zool. (having three 2. Zool. (a large genus of marine 
primary germ layers) त्रिस्तरी (-इन्) snails) वरुणमन्थराति . (आति for प्रजाति mfn. 
genus) triploid त्रिगुण mfn. 
3=Triturus tripod त्रिपाद m. 
Triton black Col. Ind. नरमीन काल m. round-topped t. गोल-शीर्ष त्रिपाद m. Tritonidae Zool. वरुणमन्थर-वंश m. triangular-topped t. त्रिकोण- शीर्ष trituratevb. I (to grind to a very fine 
त्रिपाद m. 
powder) परिपेषण. t. stand त्रिपाद-स्थाम. 
2 (to rub to a very fine powder) tripolar Biol. त्रिलांगूल mfn. 
परिधर्षण . triradiate व्यर mfn. (त्रि+ अर) 
Triturus Zool. (a genus comprising triradiate mark अरत्रय चिह्न. 
typical newts) सरटिकाति. (प्रति for tris- त्रिर्- . 
प्रजाति genus) tri-sachharose त्रि-शर्कराधु .. 
T. cristatus=crested newt TETT trisazo- निरज 
___सरटिका . trisazo adj. त्रिरज, त्रिरजक mfn. 
T. palmipes = palmated newt trisect, trisection r Math. सम-त्रिभाजन, (the teet are webbed) जालपाद 
त्रिभाजन . 
सरटिका f. 2 त्रिछेदन, सम-त्रिछेदन . 
T. punctatus=spotted newt= trisulphon blue Col. Ind. त्रिशुल्बा नील ____smooth newt पृषत् सरटिका /. 
T. torosus = giant newt महा t. bronze त्रिशुल्बा कांस्य m. 
सरटिका . t. brown त्रिशुल्बा बभ्रु m. 
T. viridiscens = red eft रक्त t. violet त्रिशुल्बा नीललोहित m. 
सरटिका f. Triticum Bot. गोधूमति . (-ति for प्रजाति T. vulgaris सामान्य सरटिका f. 
genus) 
trivalent I Chem. त्रिसंयुज mfn. T. vulgare सामान्य, गोधूम. m. 
2 Biol. fra mfn. T, repens=couchgrass शायिघास trivial name=popular name Bot., . गोधूम m. 
Zool. लोक-नाम . triticum=couchgrass (also called triweekly I (once in three weeks) 
quitch, quick, twitch, switch, with साप्ताहिक mfn. 
or without the word grass) 2 (three times a week) त्रिस्साप्ताहिक . : . Pharm. शायिधास n. 
mfn. Agropyron repens सामान्य शायिघास biweekly द्वैसाप्ताहिक, पाक्षिक, आर्ध 
m. 
साप्ताहिक mfn. Triton 1 (4 Greek sea demigod, lower trochanter Zool. gee m. HTRart of his body is fish like) नरमीन trochlea=pulley आकृषि m., घरी. 
निलसिंह) 
trochlear muscle = superior obli 
७०० 
m. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
que Anat. प्राकृषि-पेशी = उत्तर-तिरश्ची -trope यावर्त 
tropeine Chem. विकण्टालिन m. trochlear nerve = pathetic nerve tropeoline=tropaeoline 
Anat., Z00l. प्राकृषि-चेता. 
trophic function Zool. पोषण-कार्यn. fourth cerebral चतुर्थी मास्तिष्की f. trophicity=trophism Zool. पोषिता f. trochoid = trochoid joint = pivot trophic nerve Anat. (they influence 
joint Anat. विवर्तसन्धि m. 
nutrition) पोषणोपकारि-चेता f. trochophore=trochosphere 
trophic nucleus == tropho-nucleus Trochosphaera Zool. बंटगोलाति f. (वंट Biol. पोषण-न्यष्टि . 
tailless; -श्राति for प्रजाति genus) trophic organelles Zool. पोषांगिका . Trochosphaerida Zool. (tailless, glo- -trophin Zool. -पोषि. 
bular rotifers) वंटगोल-गण M. (गण Trophis Bot. शाखोटति f. (-ति for प्रजाति order) 
genus) trochosphere = trochophore Zool. T.aspera=Streblus aspera सामान्य 
(having a preoral circlet of cilia) 
- शाखोट m. पक्ष्मवलय m. 
trophism I (nutrition) atero 11. Trochozoa Zool. Taustat: m.pl. 2 (trophicity) qiroat f. trogon Zool. लोह-चटक m. (लोह occurs tropho-, troph- पोष 
_in मार्कण्डेय-पुराण) 
trophology (science of nutrition) Trombicula Zool. उपेन्द्रगोपाति f. (पाति पौषिकी, पोषण-विद्या f. 
for प्रजाति genus) 
tropho-nucleus पोषण-न्यष्टि f. T. akamushi अणु उपेन्द्रगोप m. trophopathy Med. (any disorder of 
T. holosericeum शारद उपेन्द्रगोपm. nutrition) पोषविकार m. Trombidiidae (a family) इन्द्रगोप-वंश m. trophoplasm Biol. पोषरस m. Trombidium इन्द्रगोपाति . (आति for trophotherapy Med. पोषचिकित्सा f. 
प्रजाति genus) 
trophozoite Zool. (a sporozoan dur trona = urao प्राकृत विक्षार m. (natural ing its growth phase) aatakerfi m. 
soda) 
trophozooid Zool. पोष-संजीव M. trona red 3 B=cotton red S -tropia -प्रावर्तिता troop-carrier (plane) Mil. सेना-वाहक m. -tropic, -tropical -आवर्तिक 
(विमान) 
tropical (vegetation) उष्णदेशीय mfn. tropaeolin विकुसुम्भि . 
tropical medicine उष्णदेश-आयुर्विद्या . tropaeoline==tropeoline विकुसुम्भी f. tropical region उष्णप्रदेश m. Tropaeolum Bot. विकुसुम्भति f. (-ति for -tropicity -प्रावर्तिकता . 
प्रजाति genus) 
Tropic of Cancer कर्क-रेखा , कर्क-वृत्त T. majus सामान्य विकुसुम्भ m. tropaeolum = garden nasturtium Tropic of Capricorn मकर-रेखा f., मकर 
विकुसुम्भलता. 
वृत्त । 
901 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
tropics I gourofcaret m. 
t. root Bot. सत्य मूल .. 2 उष्णप्रदेश m. 
t. spider Zool. सत्य-लता. tropidine Chem. (from tropine) विकण्टेयी t. weight Phys. सत्य भार m. 
trueness सत्यता . -tropin (transformer, converter, from truly yours=yours truly Correspon 
___-tropic)-प्रावर्ति 
dence भवदीय सत्यैषी (-इन्) m. tropine Chem. विकण्टालिकी f. 
truncated रुण्डित mfn. tropism-taxism Zool. आवर्तना f. 
t. cone रुण्डित शंकु m. -tropism -आवर्तना 
_t. prism रुण्डित संक्षेत्र n. tropo-pause Meteorol. (upper portion truncus arteriosus Zool. Tifu -FET ___ of the troposphere) उत्परिवर्त-मंडल troposphere (tropo- change) परिवर्त- trunk I Bot. स्कन्ध M. (stem काण्ड) 
मंडला . 
2 Zool. कबन्ध 1. (Hindi धड़) -tropy= -tropism 
3 (a box) पेटक .. trough द्रोणी. 
trust Com. प्रन्यास M. clay t. मृत्तिका-द्रोणी f. 
t. account प्रन्यास-लेखा/. t. closet द्रोणी-शौचागार m. 
t. security प्रन्यास-प्रतिभूति . trout Zool. कबुरी. 
trustee Law प्रन्यासी (-इन् ) m. trowel करणी/ (Hindi करणी, Tamil करण) trustworthy विश्वास्य mfn. troy (t.) (system of weights used for "Trutem" thermometer case 'सत्य' ___gold, silver, etc.) हैम (है.) 
तापमान-धानी . troy weight हैम भार m. 
Tryp. (Trypanosoma) असि. (असिकायाति) truce युद्ध-विश्रान्ति . 
trypan blue= chlorazol blue 3B truck उद्वाही (-इन्) m., भाण्डवाहन .. Trypanosoma (Tryp.) असिकायाति f. true सत्य, यथार्थ mfn. 
(असि.) (-आति for प्रजाति genus) t. balance Phys. सत्य-तुला f. 
T. equiperdum अश्वासिकाय m. t. copy Com. सत्य-प्रतिलिपि f. trypsin (Gk. tryein to digest+pepsin) t. dichotomy Bot. सत्य-युग्मशाखिता. Biochem. अभिपाचि . (produces a t. discount सत्य अपहार m. 
more thorough ft decomposition t. dissolution यथार्थ प्रविलयन . than pepsin) t. for all values Math. सर्हि सत्य trypsinogen Biochem. अभिपाचिजन m. t. formula यथार्थ सूत्र n. 
tryptic (from trypsin) Physiol. अभि t. fruit सत्य फल n. 
पाचिक mfn. t. nucleolus=plasm osome Zool. trypto-phane (triptic fm - phane) Bio . सत्य-निन्यष्टि . 
___chem. अभिपाचिक-दृश् t. ribs (connected as directly with try square = right angle gauge + the sternum उरोस्थि) Anat. उरोयुत लम्बकोणामान m. 
पशु. 
___tsetse fly Zool. (scourge of Africa) 
902 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
कालमक्षी f. (short for कालद्वीप-मारी rubber connections for metallic मक्षी) 
_t. धातुमय नालार्थ घृषि-युज M. T square (a ruler having a cross rubber t. घृषि-नाल M. 
piece at one end, used in making saccharometer t. शर्करामान-नाल M. parallel lines) रो (ब्राह्म रो) रेखक, बाहु soda glass t. विक्षार-काच-नाल m. रेखक m. 
synthetic rubber t. संश्लिष्ट घृषि-नाल Tsuya indigo=bromindigo t. test Statistics (the ratio of an ob Thiele t. (ब्राह्म) च नाल m. 
served deviation to its estimated T-tube (ब्राह्म) रो नाल, बाहु-नाल m. 
आगणित standard deviation) आग. U-tube ऊर्ध्वबाहु नाला . समन्वीक्षा . 
Y-tube त्रिवेणी नाल m. T-tube (ब्राह्म) रो नाल, बाह-नाल m. tube filler नाल-पूरक m. Tu (tungsten) Chem. च (चण्डातु) tube foot Zool. नाल-पाद m. tuatara Z00l. त्रिनेत्र m. 
tube-nucleus Bot. नाल-न्यष्टि f. tub (holds about 4 gallons आढक) द्रोण tuber I (a person engaged on tubes) tube = underground railway अधोभू नालिक, नाल-पुरुष m. 
संयान, (tube railway) सुरंगा f. (short 2 Bot. आकन्द m. for सुरंगा-संवान) 
3(a bulb) कन्द m. tube Chem. नाल m. 
tube railway = tube सरंगा-संयान 1. arsenic mirror t. (bent, straight) (shortened to सुरंगा) 
नेपालिक दर्पण-नाल M. (नत, ऋजु) tuber cinereum Zool. (grey hump) capillary glass t. काच कंश-नाल m. carbon t. प्रांगार-नाल m. 
tubercle I Anat. (of the rib) अर्बुद m. Carius glass t. भाशुनी-काच-नाल m. 2 Bot. आकन्दिका . combustion glass t. दहन-काच-नाल 3=tuberculum Zool. (an emin 
ence) कणिका, ककुदी /. filling apparatus for t. नालार्थ tuberculin Immunol. यक्ष्मि f. 
परण-साधित्र n. 
tuberculosis यक्ष्मा m. flexible metallict. आनम्य धातुमय नाल tuberculum Zool. ककुदी, कर्णिका f. 
m. 
_t. prelinguale पुरोजिह्व-कणिका f. furnace t. भ्राष्ट्र-नाल m. 
tuberosity Anat. (of the rib) प्रार्बुद glass reduction t. काच-प्रह्रासन-नाल m. 
m. 
tuberous Bot. साकन्द, आकन्दसंदृग mfn. heavy soda glass t. गुरु-विक्षार- काच ___t. taproot साकन्द अधिमूल N. 
नाल m. 
tube weaver Zool. नाल-वाय m. nitrogen t. भूयाति-नाल m. 
Tubicola Zool. नालगृह-गण m. pyrex glass t, अग्निराज काच-नाल Tubicolae Z00l. (spiders that cons 
___truct tubular nests) नालनीडाः m.pl. 
903 
__m. 
m. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
___ 
tubicolous Z00l. I (as worms) नालगृह t. bottle नालित कूपी . 
mfn. 
tubulation नालन 1. 2 (as spiders) नालनीड mfn. 
tubule Zool. नालिका . tubicorn=tubicornous 
tucked in अन्तस्तुन्न mfn. tubicornous = tubicorn Zool. (hol- tucking in Zool. अन्तस्तोदन । _low-horned) सुषिरशृंगी (-इन्) mfr. tufted habit Bot. गुच्छरूप n. tubifacient Zool. नालकर mfn. 
tumbu fly मुद्गरमक्षी f. tubifer Zool. (an animal that bears a tumefacient Med. अर्बुदकर nfn. 
tube) नालधर m. 
tumor अर्बुद m. tubiferous नालधर mfn. 
t. overgrowth Zool. अर्बुद अतिवृद्धि f. Tubifex Zool. नालोकसाति f. (-आति for tune Phys. (succession of notes) 
प्रजाति genus) 
संस्वर m. Tubificidae Zool. नालोको-वंश m. Tunga Zool. कन्दर्भिण्याति . (-आति for Tubiflotae Bot. (flowers with tubular प्रजाति genus) 
corollas नालदली) नालपुष्पाः m. pl., Tungar rectifier Phys. मंदानिपूर्ण शोधित्र 
नालपुष्पानुकुल 7. tubing नाल m. 
Tungidae (a family, the abdomen tubiparous Zool. The mfn. 
of the female becomes enor Tubipora Zool. नालरंध्राति f. (-आति for mously distended with eggs and 
प्रजाति genus) 
hence she becomes like a ball) Tubiporidae Zool. नालरंध्र-वंश m. 
कन्दगभिणी-वंशm. tubular नालवत् 
tungstate Chem. चंडीय 1. I (having the form of a tube) tungsten Chem. चंडातु m. नालरूप, नालाकार mfn. 
t. lamp चंडातु-दीप m. 2 (consisting of a tube, made t. steel Metal. चंडातु वज्रायस 1. with tubes) नालमय, नालकृत mfr. t. trioxide चंडातु विजारेय n. 
3 (provided with tubes) सनाल mfn. tungstenic (of, pertaining to, or tubular racemose Zool. नालाकार एक containing tungsten) चंडात्विय, चंडातु 
वर्ध्यक्षीय mfn. 
युत mfn. tubulate adj. नालवत् 
tungsteniferous चंड-भर mfn. I (provided with a tube) सनाल tungstenite Mineral. (tungsten sul mfn. 
phide) चण्डशुल्बिज M. (-इज for खनिज .2 (having the form of a tube) mineral) 
नालरूप, नालाकार mfn. 
tungsten ocher-tungstite Mineral. tubulate vb. (to form into, or to चंडातु गैरिक . 
provide with a tube) नाल-करण, tungstic Chem. चंडिक mfn. ... .सनाल-करण. 
t. acid चंडिक अम्ल n. tubulated नालित mfn. 
t. anhydride चंडिक अजलेय 1. 984 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
t. oxide चंडिक जारेय. 
Turkey rhubarb=Chinese rhubarb tungstite (tungsten trioxide)-tung- चीनरेच m. 
sten ocher Mineral. चंडजारेयिज m. turmericn. हरिद्रा । (-इज for खनिज mineral) 
turmeric adj. हरिद्रा-, हारिद्र, हरिद्रिक mfn. tungsto- (tungsten) Chem. चंड-(चंडातु) t. paper Chem. हरिद्रा-पत्र 2. tungsto-silicate चंड-सैकतीय 1. 
turmerine Col. Ind. हरिद्री . tungsto-silicic Chem. चंड-सैकतिक mfn. turn vb. वर्तन ?. tunica Zool. चोल m. 
turn about vb. अभितोवर्तन 1. t. adventitia-adventitia बाह्य चोल Turnbull's blue Chem. (dark-blue 
m. 
amorphous pigment having a t. externa=t, adventitia 
coppery lustre) ताम्रासित-नील m. t. interna=t. intima आन्तर चोल m. turned Engin. वर्तित, वर्तनी-कृत Mfn. t. intima=t. interna 
(made on a lathe) t. media मध्य चोल m. 
turner (a tool for turning; one who Tunicata=Urochorda Zool. सचोला:= forms articles with a lathe वर्तनी) 
पुच्छमेरवः m.pl. 
वर्तक m. tunicate Zool. सचोल mfn. 
Turnera Bot. वाजपत्रति f. (-ति for tunicated Bot. सचोल min. 
प्रजाति genus) tuning संस्वरण 1. 
T. aphrodisiaca = T. diffusa tuning fork Music संस्वरण द्विशाख m. 
सामान्य बाजपत्र m. (its leaves are tunnel disease=caisson disease= used as an aphrodisiac वाजकर) 
divers' paralysis=compressed turning I भ्रामक (that turns) air disease Zool. वाति-बुबुद-रोग m. 2 Drill आवर्तनम् (bubbles of gas form in the turning about Drill परीवर्तनम blood) 
turning point Math. परिणमन-बिन्दु m. Turbellaria Zool. पर्णचिपिट-वर्ग m. turnings खंड, चऋक्षेप m. turbid आविल mfn. (ancient word) turning to the right Drill दक्षिणावर्तनम् turbidimetry आविलमिति f. __ turnip शिखामूल . turbidity आविलता . 
turn-out Com. I (output) प्रदा f. turbine वरीवर्त m. (वरीवर्तते turns inces __2 (product) उत्पत्ति . 
santly) 
turnover Com. आपणन-राशि, विक्रय-राशि turbith त्रिवृतू . 
m. turgid आशून mfn. 
turnscrew=screw driver भ्रमि-चालक turgidity आशूनता . turgor pressure Bot. आशूनता-निपीड m. turn-table Rly. (a revolving plat 
Turkey brown Col. Ind. तुरुष्क बभ्रु m. form) वर्तन-स्थाम n. 
T. red तुरुष्क रक्त m. 
turn through मध्याद्वर्तन 1. (Hindi में से T. umber तुरुष्क-बभ्रुकी f.. 
वर्तन करना) 
905 
m. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
turn upside down अधोवर्तन n. two-humped camel Zool. द्विकपृष्ठ m. turpentine I (tree) सरल m. 
(ancient word) 2 Chem. सरली . 
two-mouthed द्विमुख mfn. 3 सरल-तैल n. 
two-pounder (gun) Mil. द्वि-प्राञ्जलि f. turpentine oil सरल-तैल 1. 
(शतघ्नी) turpeth=tutbith त्रिवृत् f. (the Eng- two-toed sloth Zool. द्वथंगुल शाखालम्बी ___lish word is from Sanskrit त्रिवृत्) (-इन्) m. turpethin Chem. त्रिवृति . 
TWS (tail-warning radar sets) Radar turquoise I Mineral. हरिताश्म १. पु. प्रा. ते. (पुच्छ-प्राबोधक तेजोन्वेष) 
(ancient word), हरितमणि m. tyloses pl. of tylosis 2=turquoise blue 
tylosis Bot. (blocks up the tracheal t. blue प्रनीलातिहरि m. 
cavities) गुहारुध m. t. green seurata m. 
tympanic = tympanic bone Anat. turtle कश्यप m. 
पटहास्थि n. turtledove Zool. अरुण-कपोतक m. 
t. bone पटहास्थि. tuscalin orange base G = azo t. bulla=bulla tympani पटह-वटी, 
orange NA 
पटहास्थिवटी . tuscalin red base=fast-red B base t. cavity पटह-गुहा . tusk Zool. (long protruding teeth) t. membrane पटह-कला . 
उद्दन्त m. 
t. plate Zool. पटह-पट्ट m. (short for tussor (टसर) पत्रोर्ण n. (Sino-Indian ___पटहास्थिपट्ट) ___Studies, Vol. II, p. 87) 
t. ring Zool. पटह-वलय m. (short for tutor अवबोधक m. 
पटहास्थिवलय) Twaddell's hydrometer पिगुरु तरलमान tympanum Anat. कर्णपटह, पटह m. 
____m. 
Tyndall's experiment Phys. (the 'tween-brain = between brain ice is cut and refreezes) कृत्तश्यान 
मध्य-मस्तिष्क . 
संपरीक्षा . twelve-inch (gun) Mil. द्वादश-प्रांगुल m. type I प्ररूप ?. (short for प्रथमरूप. twentyfive-pounder (gun) Mil. पंच Cf. Germ. Urbild) 
विशति-प्राञ्जलि. 
2 प्रकार m. twice as great as faut 
3 (image, pattern) प्रतिरूप n. twice-pinnate Bot. द्विः-पक्षवान् mfn. 4 Print. मुद्र m. twine (a strong thread) गुण m. type bar मुद्र-शलाका f. twiner Bot. वलयिता (-त) m. 
typed मुद्रलिखित mfn. twitching Physiol. स्फुरण 1. 
_t. copy मुद्रलिखित प्रति two-celled द्वि-कोशावान् mfn. 
type metal मुद्र-धातु m. two deep Drill fart: 
types of equilibrium Phys. समतोल twofold द्विगुण mfn. . ... 
प्रकार m. 
ing 
906 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
in. 
typewriter (machine) arcte m. typical compounds (fundamental Typha Bot. Toifat f. (-fa for of compounds from which a num 
genus) 
ber of others are derived by T. angustifolia सामान्य एरका . 
substitution) मूलभूत संयोग 2. typhlosole (blind channel) Zool. typically sefeat 
(a longitudinal fold of the wall typing na 7. projecting into the cavity of typist मुद्रलेखक m. the intestine) FH175 m. 
tyre = tire fa in. (ancient word) typhoid आन्त्रज्वर m. 
Tyrian purple = purple of the t. bacteriophage आन्त्रज्वर रोगाणुभक्ष ancients 
Tyroglyphidae (Gk. tyros cheese t. feverzenteric fever pra m. aferent to Vw to eat) af E- m. t. paratyphoid (T.A.B.) CT (atat family) 
a vat m. (91...) 
Tyroglyphus Zool. ftatia f. (fa t. paratyphoid-cholera (T. A. for store genus) 
B. C.) 15-a vatfacrant f. T. farinae fue afuera m. (HT. 9. c. f.) 
T. longior stafete m. typhus=spotted fever Med. quae Tyrolese earth = green earth 
m. 
tyroline = mauve typical प्रारूपिक mfr. 
tyrosinase दधिकेद m. typical average Statistics Stef97. FET tyrosine (Gk. tyros cheese F) 
Biochem, format f. 
17. 
U, Ur (uranium) Chem. Fes (FRUITE) 2 (difference between full capacity u (initial velocity) Phys. a (fe# and the actual contents in the 
at) 
cask) ETETTE. U (distance of object) Phys. 9 (96T- ulmic, ulminic fua mfn. 
FT) 
ulmin sfi f. U-boats (“Untersee Boot-German ulminic efis min. 
submarines) अधःपोत m. 
ulna Anat. अरनि m. udder 387g nh. 
ulnad adv. Anat. (towards the ulna; udell=aludel 
-ad) auf ulcer Med. व्रण m. 
ulnar Anat. (of or pertaining to the ulexite (boro-natro-calcite) cafu ulna) अरलि __m. (-इज for खनिज mineral) 
u. artery अरलि-रोहिणी f. ullage Com. 1 (actual quantity in a . u. nerve afect f. 
cask) ifa na 
ulno- (ulnar and) f . 907 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
ultifo Ophthalmol. (a trade name for ultraviolet rays पारनीललोहित रश्मि, 
multifocal) नैकनाभि 
पारजम्बु रश्मि m. ultimate अन्त, अन्तिम, अन्त्य, चरम, परम ultra vires Com. शक्ति-परस्तात् (intra 
mfn. 
___vires शक्ति -गत) ultimate analysis अन्त्य विश्लेषण ?. ultraviridine Col. Ind. पारहरिती . ultimately अन्ततः, अन्ते 
umbel Bot. (like an upturned unm ultimo (ult.) Com. गतमास्य (ग. म.) 
brella) 5997 n. ultimo-branchial body Zool. अन्तिम- umbellic Chem. उच्छत्रिक mfn. 
क्लोमज काय m. 
Umbelliferae Bot. (umbel-shaped ultra-पार-, अति 
.inflorescence) उच्छत्र-कुल n. ultraalizarine Col. Ind. पारविमंजिष्ठी Umbelliflorae Bot. उच्छंत्र-गोत्र. 
umber (a brown earth highly ultra corinth Col. Ind. पार-रोहित m. valued by artists as a permanent ultracyanine Col. Ind. पारश्यामी f. pigment) बभ्रमृत्स्ना, बभ्रुकी . ultra cyanol Col. Ind. पार-श्यामव m. umbilical cord नाल m. ultra fast violet Col. Ind. पार-स्थिर umbra Optics प्रच्छाया f. 
नीललोहित m. 
umpire प्रमाणपुरुष m. (from महाभारत) ultrafilter अतिपाव m. 
unacademic work अ-विद्योचित कर्म . ultrafiltration पारपावन 1. 
unaffected अप्रभावित afn. ultraflavine Col. Ind. arforrit f. unagitated अक्षुब्ध mfn. 
ultra green Col. Ind. पार-हरि m. unalterable अविकार्य, अपरिवर्त्य mfn. ultra high Radar अत्युच्च mfn. 
_unarmed tapeworm (Taenia. sagi ultra light blue Col. Ind. पार लघु नील nata) अनंकुश पट्टकृमि m. 
unattached असंलग्न mfr. ultramarine पारसमुद्रिक mfn. 
unavoidable अनिवार्य mfn. ultramarine blue Col. Ind. पारसमुद्रिक unbiassed error Statistics अनभिनत 
नील m. 
विभ्रम m. u. green पारसमुद्रिक हरि m. 
unbounded असीमाबद्ध, असीम mfn. u. red पारसमद्रिक रक्त m. 
unburnt अदग्ध mfn. u. violet पारसमुद्रिक नीललोहित m. u. gas अदग्ध वाति m. ultramicroscopic पाराग्वीक्ष-दृश्य Mfm. uncalled Com. अनाहूत mfn. ultramicroscopic virus पाराण्वीक्ष __u. capital अनाहूत-पुंजी f. 
विषाणु m. 
unceasing अविरामी (-इन्) mfr. ultra olive Col. Ind. पार-तैलबदर m. unchanged अविकृत, अपरिवर्तित mfn. ultra orange Col. Ind. पार-नारंग m. unchanging Math. अपरिवर्ती (-इन्) ultrasonic Phys. पारस्वनिक mfn. 
mfn. ultraviolet Phys. पारनीललोहित, पारजम्बु . u. force अपरिवर्ति बल n. 
mfn. .', . 
. 
unclaimed अनयथित mfn. 
n. 
908 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
u. balances अनयर्थित राशि m. underlying structure Zool. 78:72 u. dividend अनथित लाभांश m. ___ संरचना . 
u. interest अनध्यथित-वृद्धि . underproof spirit (u.p.) ऊनसुषवोद 1. uncombined असंयुक्त mfn. 
(ऊ. सु.) unconditional अप्रतिबन्ध mfn. 
underrate vb. अधोमूल्यन 12. unconfirmed credit Econ. अपुष्टीकृत under-root (as in V3) Math. करणी-गत 
प्रत्यय m. 
under-secretary उप-सचिव m. uncontrolled अनियन्त्रित mfn. 
under-sell vb. अधो-विक्रयण ॥. undated Com. Farifafa 
under-shrub Bot. अनुक्षुप m. u. bill विनातिथि विपत्र । 
understand vb. अवबोधन 1. (H. समझना) u. cheque विनातिथि धनादेश m. understood अवबुद्ध Mfn. undecagon Geom. एकादशभुज m. under-supply ऊन-प्रदाय M. undecane Chem. एकादशीन्य n. 
undertaker Com. (one who under undecomposed Chem. अविबद्ध mfn. takes a business) उपकामी (-इन् ) m. undecyl Chem. एकादशल n. 
undertaking = adventure = enter undecylene Chem. एकादशलन्य n. 
prise = venture Com. उपक्रम m., undecylenic Chem. एकादशलेन्यिक mfn. उपक्रमण १. undecylic एकादशलिक mfn. 
undertenant Com. अधोभाटकी (-इन् ) m. undenary Math. एकादशमय mfn. 
subtenant उपभाटकी (-इन्) m. under अधीन 
undervaluation Econ. अधोहण n. under- न्यून-, अधः-, अव-, ऊन-, अपूर्ण-, underwater radar जलाधस्तेजोन्वेष . 
__etc. 
underwrite vb. Com. अभिगोपन 1. under-capitalization. अव-पुंजीयन 1. ___underwriter Com. अभिगोपक m. under-charge न्यून-प्रभार m. 
underwriting capital Com. पुंजी-अभि under-charged न्यून-गृहीत mfn. 
गोपन n. under-correction ऊन-शोधन ?. 
u. commission अभिगोपन-वर्तन n. under-developed qui-fanfarct min. undeterminate=indeterminate under discussion पर्यालोचन अधीन, undetermined अनिर्धारित nfn. under-dose अधोमात्रा f. 
undetermined coefficient Math. under-feeding अल्पाशन n. 
अनिर्धारित गुणक m. under-graduate adj. स्नातक-पूर्व mfn. undifferentiated sarcoplasm Zool. under-ground भूमिगत mfn. 
अभिनित पेशीरस m. u. adventitious root Bot. भूमिगत undigestable अपाच्य mfn. 
आगन्तुक मूल . 
undigested अपाचित, अपक्व mfn. u. railway=tube अधोभू-संयान n. 
u. food अपक्व अन्न . . under-level निप्रवण mfr. 
undiminished अनाहसित mfn. under-level (when angle is acute) undischarged Com. अनुन्मुक्त mfn. 
Ophthalmol. folytaus m. 
u. bankrupt अनुन्मुक्त नष्टनिधि m. 
909﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
unfunded debt Com. अल्पकालीन ऋण n. 
u. floating debt अल्पकालीन चल ऋण 
u. liability अनुन्मुक्त देय .. undissolved अप्रविलीन, अविलीन mfn. undulate vb. तरंगण 1. undulated rifira mfn. undulating membrane Z00l. शीत . 
('sail', Marathi शीड - 'sail' is from 
Sanskrit शीत) undulation तरंगगति /., तरंगण . undulatory movement तरंग-गति . unearned अनर्जित mfn. 
u. income अनजित आय 2. 
u. interest अनर्जित-वृद्धि f. unemployed Com. वृत्तिरहित, वृत्तिहीन 
ungraduated अनंकित Mfn. 
u. pipette अनंकित नाडक n. ungreenable हर्यशक्य mfn. ungreenable (aniline) black हर्यशक्य 
(विनीली) काल m. unguentum = ointment Pharm. 
स्नेहलेप m. 
u. acidi borici = ointment of 
boric acid टांकिक-अम्ल-स्नेहलेप m. u. acidi carbolici प्रांगविक-अम्ल 
स्नेहलेप m. u. acidi salicylici=ointment of salicylicacid नम्रलिक-अम्ल-स्नेहलेप 
m. u. chaulmoograe=chaulmoog ____ra ointment पिमुद्गर-स्नेहलेप m. 
u. chrysarobini = ointment of 
_chrysarobin हेमगुहि-स्नेहलेप m. u. gallae=gall ointment द्रुस्फोट 
स्नेहलेप M. . u. gallae cum opio == u. gallae 
compositum=gall and opi um ointment द्रुस्फोट-अहिफेन स्नेह 
लेप m. u. hydrargyri = mercury oint 
ment पारद-स्नेहलेप m. u. hydrargyri ammon. forta. 
पारद-स्नेहलेप m. u. hydrargyri compositum == 
compound ointment of mer 
cury संयुत पारद-स्नेहलेप m. u. hydrargyri dilutum मन्द पारद 
स्नेहलेप m. u. hydrargyri nitratis पारद-भूयीय 
स्नेहलेप m. . 
unemployment Com. वृत्तिहीनता f., 
कर्माभाव m. 
u. insurance कर्माभाव-पागोप M. uneven अक्षम mfn. unexhausted अनिश्शेषित mfn. 
__u. paper अनिश्शेषित पत्र n. unexpected अनाशंकित, अकित mfn. unexpired Com. अनवसित mfn. unfair अन्याय्य mfr. unfair discrimination अन्याय्य विवेचन । unfavourable प्रतिकूल, अननुकूल mfn. 
u. balance of trade Econ. प्रतिकूल 
व्यापाराधिक्य, प्रतिकूल व्यापारान्तर १. unfertilized egg Zool. अनिषिक्त अंडn. unfinished Com. असमाप्त nfn. 
u. contracts असमाप्त-प्रसंविदा 
u. goods अपूर्णकृत वस्तु, कृतशेष वस्तु n. unfinished (crude) असंस्कृत mfn. unfixable Zool. हत्वा-न-रक्ष्य mfn. unfixed Z001. हत्वा-न-रक्षित mfn. unfold vb. I विपुटीकरण 1. 
2 Bot. (a lower) उन्मीलन n. unfolded I Bot. उन्मीलित mfn. 
2 अभंजित mfn. 
A 
910 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
. 
..... 
u. hydrargyri oxidi flavi=yel u. convergence Math. एकरूप अभि 
low mercuric oxide ointment 
सरणी . पीत-पारदिक-जारेय-स्नेहलेप m. 
u. increase Math. समांश-वृद्धि . u. hydrargyri oxidi rubri=red u. retardation एकरूप विमन्दन ॥. 
mercuric oxide ointment रक्त ___u. rod समांग-शलाका f. पारदिक जारेय स्नेहलेप m. 
u. velocity एकरूप प्रवेग m. u. hydrargyri subchloridi = uniformity एकरूपता, सारूप्य 1. 
ointment of mercurous chlo u. of data Statistics सामग्री-सारूप्य 1. 
ride पारद्य-नीरेय-स्नेहलेप m. uniformly distributed load Engin. u. paraffini=paraffin ointment समवंटित भार m. 
मुद्वसा-स्नेहलेप m. 
unilateral Com. एकपाश्विक mfn. u. paraffini alb. मृहसा श्वेत स्नेहलेप M. u. contracts एकपाश्विक-प्रसंविदा f. u. paraffini flav. मद्यसा पीत स्नेहलेप . u. current Phys. एकपाश्विक वाहm. ___m. 
unilith Chem. कुप्यश्वत m. u. resinae=resinointment उद्यास- unilocular Bot. एकगह्वर mfn. 
स्नेहलेप m. 
uninterrupted अनन्तरित nfm. (Vedic u. simplex = simple ointment word) 
असंयुत स्नेहलेप m. 
union I सम्मेलन, सम्मिलन ., सम्मेल m. u. sulphuris=ointment of sul- 2 उद्वाह, मेल m. - phur गन्धक-स्नेहलेप m. 
3 Com. संघn. u. zinci oxidi = ointment of trade u. श्रमिक-संघm. 
zinc oxide कुप्यातु-जारेय-स्नेहलेप m. union black Col. Ind. मेल काल m. Ungulata Zool. शफिनः m.pl. 
u. blue मेल नील m. ungummed अश्लेष mfn. 
u. blue-black मेल नील-कृष्ण m. ___gummed सश्लेष mfn. 
u. bordeaux मेल कपिशक m. unhampered अबाधित mfn. 
u. brilliant black मेल भासुर काल m. uniaxial joint Anat. एकाक्ष सन्धि m. u. brilliant green मेल भासुर हरि m. unicellular Biol. एककोश, एककोशीय mfn. u. brown मेल बभ्रु m. unicorn root=colic-root 
u. cyanine मेल श्यामी f. unicostate Bot. एकप्रनाडीक mfn. 
u. dark blue मेल असित नील m. unified Com. एकीकृत mfn.. 
u. dark green मेल असित हरि m. u. stock एकीकृत स्कन्ध m. 
u. deep black मेल गाढ काल m. unifoliate Bot. एकपर्ण mfn. 
u. fast black मेल स्थिर काल m. unifoliolate Bot. एकपर्णक mfn. 
u. fast blue मेल स्थिर नील m. uniform एकरूप, एकविध, समवेश,समांग, सम u. fast bordeaux मेल स्थिर कपिशक 
mfn. 
m. u. acceleration Phys. एकरूप त्वरण u. fast brown मेल स्थिर बभ्रुm. 
u. fast claret मेल स्थिर रक्तिरा. 
911 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
u. fast dark blue मेल स्थिर असित नील unit एकक 1. 
m. 
I मात्रा . u. fast green मेल स्थिर हरि . 
2 (of a federation) अंग, संधानांग n. u. fast grey मेल स्थिर धूसर m. unitary method Math. ऐकिक-रीति / u. fast heliotrope मेल स्थिर निनीला- unite vb. योजन n. 
तिरक्त m. 
united filament Bot. युक्त अंशु m. u. fast orange मेल स्थिर नारंग m. United Kingdom संयुक्त राज्य 1. u. fast red मेल स्थिर रक्त m. 
United Nations संयुक्त राष्ट्र n. u. fast yellow मेल स्थिर पीत m. United Provinces संयुक्त प्रान्त m. u.green मेल हरि m. 
unit of analysis Statistics विश्लेषण u. grey मेल धूसर m. 
एककn. u. leaf green मेल पत्र हरि m. unit of appropriation नियोजन-एकक n. u. light blue मेल लघु नील M. unit of classification Statistics aifa u. light green मेल लघु हरि m. 
करण-एकक n. u. magenta मेल धूम्रली . 
unit of density धनता-एकक 1. u. navy blue मेल नाविक नील m. unit of electro-magnetic intensity u. orange मेल नारंग m. 
Phys. विद्युच्चुम्बिक चण्डता-एकक n. u. pure blue मेल शुद्ध नील m. unit of electro-static intensity Phys. u. purple मेल नीलारुण m. 
विद्युत्-स्थैतिक चण्डता-एकक . . u. red मेल रक्त m. 
unit of enumeration Statistics प्रगणन u. scarlet मेल शोण m. 
एकक 1. u. turquoise blue मेल प्रनीलातिहरि unit of interpretation Statistics 
m. 
निर्वचन-एकक 1. u. violet मेल नीललोहित m. 
unit of length Phys. पायाम-एकक n. u. yellow मेल पीत m. 
unit of mass Phys. पुंज-एकक 1. unionism Com. संघता. 
unit of measurement Statistics माप unionist Com. संघी (-इन्) m. 
एकक . union meteorological organisation unit of momentum Math. गमता-एकक 
संघ धनवातिक संघटन n. 
n. uni-parous Bot. एक-सृट mfn. 
unit of output उत्पत्ति-एकक 1. unipolar=monopolar Anat. (hav unit of power Math. शक्ति-एकक 1. 
_ing one process) एक लांगूल mfn. unit of presentation Statistics उपस्था unique Math. अनन्य mfn. 
- पन-एकक.. unisexual I Biol. एकलिंग mfm. 
unit of refractivity भुजाय-एकक.. . . 2diclinous Bot. एकांग mfn. , unit of time Phys. काल-एकक।. 
unison Music Taikant m. 
, unit of value अहाँ-एकक ?. unissued Com. अनिर्गमित mfn. 
..unit of volume परिमा-एकक n. n.capital अनिर्गमित-पुंजी f.. unit of weight भार-एकक . ., 
*912 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
unit of work Phys. कर्म-एकक . universal law of gravitation Phys. units of electricity विद्युद-एकक n. 
वैश्व अभ्याकृष्टि-नियम m. unit nature 
universally present विश्व-व्यापी (-इन्) ampere current धुवहि (व.) mfn. coulomb quantity घुमात्रा (मा.) universally true Math. सर्वथा सत्य, सर्वत्र farad capacity धुक्षम (क्ष.) सत्य mfn. 
henry inductance द्युप्ररोच (प्र.) universe . Statistics (population; 
mho conductance धुसंवाह (सं.) entire group) समग्र . ohm resistance धुरोध (रो.) university विश्वविद्यालय m. 
volt potential शक्म (श.) university court विश्वविद्यालय-सभा/. unit-time एकक-काल 2. 
unknown अज्ञात mfn. unit tube=Faraday tube Phys. unknown quantity Math. अज्ञात राशि 
एकक-नाल M. 
m. (x, y, 2 य, र, ल ) unit volume परिमैकक . 
unknown resistance Phys. अज्ञात रोध unity Math. एक, (aggregate of quan m. 
tities or magnitudes taken as unlawful = illegal अवैध, अननुविध, one) समेक n. 
विधिविरुद्ध mfn. univalent I Chem. एकसंयुज mfn. unless यावन्न (Hindi जब तक न) ___ 2 Biol. एकगुण, एकल mfn. 
unlike विजातीय mfn, univalved Zool. एकपुट mfn. 
u. charges Elec. fasurate sport m. universal वैश्व, सार्वत्रिक, विश्वव्यापी (-इन) u. parallel forces विजातीय समान्तर 
mfn. universal algebra वैश्व बीजगणित 1. 
u. poles विजातीय ध्रुव m. universal black Col. Ind. वैश्व काल u. signs Math. विजातीय चिह्न 1. 
unlimited Com. असीमित mfn. u. blue-black वैश्व नील-कृष्ण m. 
u. company असीमित प्रमण्डल .. u. garnet वैश्व निरक्त m. 
__u. liability असीमित देय . u. green वैश्व हरिm. 
unlimited number=infinite Math. u. grey वैश्व धूसर m. 
असंख्य u. olive-brown वैश्व तैलबदर-बभ्रु m. unload vb. अवतारण . u. pure blue वैश्व शुद्ध नील m. unloaded अवतारित mfn. u. scarlet वैश्व शोण m. 
unloading अवतारण .. u. violet वैश्व नीललोहित m. 
unmanageable अप्रबन्ध्य mfn. u. yellow वैश्व पीत m. 
unmerchantable Com. अविक्रेय mfn. universal electric centrifuge वैश्व unmixable=inmiscible अमिथ्य mfn. 
विद्युन्मथित्र. 
unofficial प्रशासकीय, अनाधिकारिक mfn. universal geometry वैश्व-रैखिकी f. unossified Zool. अनस्थिकृत mfn. universal joint Macb. वैश्व सन्धि m. unpaid Com. अदत्त mfn. 
बल n. 
m. 
913 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
u. call अदत्त-याचना . . . u. equilibrium Phys. अस्थायी समतोल u. capital अदत्त-पुंजी........ ... 
m. . u. dividend अदत्त लाभांश m. . unsteadiness चंचलता. 
u. interest अदत्त-वृद्धि 
unstriated अरेखित, अरेख mfn. unpleasant smell अप्रिय गन्ध M. unstriated muscle=plain muscle unproductive Com. अनुत्पादी 
Anat. अरेख-पेशी ___mfn. 
unsuitable अनुपयुक्त mfn. u. expenses अनुत्पादी व्यय m. . . untilled land अप्रहता (ancient word), u. labout अनुत्पादी श्रम m.' 
अकृष्ट-भूमि . u. wages अनुत्पादि-भूति ... untouchability HEDRAFT f. unreal=imaginary frafata mfn. unvalued policy Com. अनहित गोपलेख m. unrealizable Com. अरोक-करणीय mfn. . unvarnished अलाक्षीयित mfn. unrealized Com. अरोक-कृत mfn. . . . unweighted Statistics Fata mfn. unredeemed balance अशोध्य शेष.m. u. average.of ratios अभारित मूल्यानु unrefined असंस्कृत mfn. . . . ... पात माध्य. unremunerative Com. अ-परितोषद mfn. u.geometric mean of ratio अभा unroll vb. प्रतिलोठन 1. . . . 
रित गुणोत्तर मूल्यानुपात माध्य .. unsaponifiable Chem. अस्वफेन्य. mfn. : u. index numbers अभारित देशनाड unsaponificable part : अस्वफेन्य भाग m. 
___u. median of ratios अभारित मूल्यानु unsatisfactory असंतोषप्रद, , असंतोषजनक । पाते. मध्यका . 
mfn. 
uphold-maintain संधारण n. unsaturated Chem. अननुविद्ध,mfn... upkeep समारक्षण 1. (Hindi देखरेख) unsaturated compound अननुर्विद्ध संयोग upon उपरि 
m. 
.: ... , upper epidermis Bot. उत्तर अधिस्तर unscrew=screw out vb निर्धमीयण १. m... unsecured Com. अप्रतिभूत Mn. . upper eyelid = palpebra frontalis 
u. creditors अप्रतिभून उत्तमर्ण m.:, . -palpebra superior Zool. उत्तरवर्ती 
u. liability अप्रतिभूत देय . : ... . unsegmented abdomen Zool. अखण्ड upper house उत्तर आगार n. 
.. upper jaw Zool. उत्तर-हनु . unskilled अदक्ष mfn. .. .. ... ... . upper lip-dorsal lip Zool. उत्तर प्रोष्ठ 
u. labour अदक्ष, श्रम, अदक्ष श्रमिक . . . . . 
u. worker अदक्ष कर्मी (-इन्) M. .. upper quartile Statistics (third quar unsold अविक्रीत mfn....... ... . .. .. : tile) उत्तर चतुर्थक . . unspent balance अवीत शेष m. ..... upper school उत्तर-पाठशाला.. unsplinterable अभग्नोत्पाती (-इन्) mfn. upright (erect) उदृजु ( right' is from unstable अस्थायी (-इन्..mfn... ... Skt: ऋजु), ऊर्ध्व mfn. 
m. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
upright axis ऊर्ध्व अक्ष m. 
u. chloride किरणातु नीरेय . upset price अल्पिष्ठ क्रोशमूल्य n. 
u. glass किरणातु काच m. upstroke उदाघात m. 
u. iodide किरणातु जम्बेय ?. upward उपरि, ऊर्ध्वमुख, ऊर्ध्व, ऊर्ध्वग 
u. lead (radium G) किरणातु सीस 1. upward displacement Chem. उपरि 
(तेजातु छ) विस्थापन . 
u. magnesium acetate FRUITET upward force ऊर्ध्वमुख बल, ऊर्ध्वग बल. 
भ्राजातु शुक्तीय 1. upward limit ऊर्ध्व-सीमा. 
u. nickel acetate. किरणातु रूपक upwards Math. उन्मुख 
___ शुक्तीय n. Ur (uranium) कि (किरणातु) 
u. nitrate किरणातु भुयीय n. ur- (urine) मूत्र 
u. oxalate किरणात तिग्मीय. ur-amido- मूत्र-तिक्तेय 
u. oxide किरणातु जारेय . ur-amil (from urea) Chem. मिह-तिक्तिल u. phosphate किरणातु भास्वीय n. 
u. potassium sulphate किरणातु ur-amino- मूत्र-तिक्ती 
दहातु शुल्बीय. uran-, urano- (uranium) Chem. किरण u. rays किरणातु रश्मि m. uranalysis मूत्र-विश्लेषण n. 
u. red किरणातु रक्त m. uranate Chem. किरणीय .. 
u. salicylate किरणातु नम्रलीय .. Urania blue न्यवनीलारक्त m. 
u. sulphate किरणातु शुल्बीयn. uranic Chem. किरणिक mfn. 
u. trioxide किरणातु विजारेय. u. acid किरणिक अम्ल n. 
u. yellow किरणातु पीत m. u. anhydride किरणिक अजलेय . 
u. zinc-acetate किरणातु कुप्यातु-शक्तीय uranidine Biochem. किरणेयी . 
. urani-ferous किरण-भर mfn. 
uranor, uran- Chem. किरण uranin fer for f. 
urano-circite Mineral. (a. hydrous uranine Col. Ind. Fersoft f. 
barium uranyl phosphate) भाकिरणिज uraninite Mineral. (regarded as 
a m . (-इज for खनिज mineral) . uranate of uranyl) किरणीयिज m. uranol (urano- अन्तरिक्ष-) अन्तरिक्षवा . (-इज for खनिज mineral) 
urano-phane Mineral. (a hydrous ura uranite Mineral. किरणिज m. (-इज for nium calcium silicate) सैकिरणिज m. 
खनिज mineral) 
(-इज for खनिज mineral) uranium Chem. किरणातु m. 
uranoso- (uranous) Chem. Fericuet uranium I (92) किरणातु १ (६२) uranoso-uranic oxide किरण्य-किरणिक uranium x (७०) किरणातु क्ष (९०) जारेय. uranium II (92) किरणातु २ (६२) urano-spathite (Gk. spathe a broad ionium (७०) अयनातु (६०) 
blade) Mineral. पृथु-किरणिज m. (-इज radium (88) तेजातु (८८) 
for efter mineral) u. acetate किरणातु शुक्तीय n. urano-sphaerite (Gk. sphaira ball) 
915 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
ureal मिहिय mfn. urea-meter = ureo-meter Biochem, 
मिह-मान m. urease Biochem. मिहेद m. ureic मिहिय mfn. ureide Chem. मिहेय . ureido- (ureide) मिहेय uremia Med. (ur- for urine) मूत्र-रक्तता 
Mineral. गोलकिरणिज m. (-इज for खनिज mineral) urano-spinite (Gk. spinos siskin- 
from its green colour) Mineral. श्याव-किरणिज m. (-इज for खनिज mine 
ral) urano-tantalite - samarskite Mine- 
ral. किरणसहिज . (-इज. for खनिज 
mineral) urano-thallite (a hydrous calcium 
uranium carbonate) Mineral. प्रांग- 
किरणिज m. (-इज for खनिज mineral) urano-thorite Mineral. किरणहससैकिज 
m. (-इज for खनिज mineral) uranotilzuranophane uranous Chem. किरण्य mfn. uranyi Chem. किरणल. 
__u. nitrate किरणल भूयीयn. uraotrona 
Uraria Bot. पश्निपर्णीति . (ति for प्रजाति 
genus) 
U. lagopoides FART. Trenyurt f. urase=urease urat- Chem. मेहीय urate Chem. मेहीय n. urat-emia मेहीय-रक्तता f. uratic मेहीयिक mfn. urat-uria मेहीय-मूत्रता f. ur-azine (German wrin+hydratin) 
मूत्राजीवी f. urazole (ur- 72 -+- hydrazin + - ole) 
___Chem. मूत्राजवा . urban नगरीय, नागर.mfn.. urban population नगरवासी (-इन्) m. urceolate Bot. घटाकार mfn. . . ure-=ureo- मिह urea. Chem. मिह m.. urea- मिह 
ureo- (urea) मिह uteo-meter=urea-meter ureo-metry मिह-मिति . -uret -मिहेय -uret Chem. (a suffix formerly used 
with the same meaning as -ide) 
-एय .. ureter Anat. वृक्कप्रणाली . urethan Chem. मिक्षिण्यn. urethane (urea. मिह + ethane दक्षीण्य) 
Chem. मिक्षीण्य . urethenum=urethane urethra Anat. मूत्रप्रसेक, मूत्रमार्ग m. urethritis मूत्रमार्गकोप m. uretic Med. I (of or pertaining to ___urine) मूत्रिक, मूत्रीय mfr. ___2= diuretic मूत्रवर्ध mfn. ureylene (ure - + - ylene) Chem. मिहलेन्य 
m. urgent अविलम्ब्य, अविलम्बनीय, अतिपाती (-इन्) 
mfn. urgent work a faqıfer Frei n. (Cf. safet ! 
अतिपाति कार्यमिदम् । शीघ्र निवेद्यताम् । in 
अभिषेकनाटक of भास III. I. 4) Urginea Bot. वनपलाण्डुति [.(-ति for प्रजाति 
genus) U. indica = Indian squill भारत 
वनपलाण्डु m. -urgy -कला f., -कर्म . . 
936 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
-uria Med. -मेह 
uro-bilino-gen Biochem. मूत्र-पित्ति-जन m. uric I (of or pertaining to urine) urobilinogen-uria Med. मूत्रपित्तिजन 
मूत्रिक mfn. 
मेहm. 2 Chem. मिहिक mfn. 
uro-bilin-uria Med. मुत्र-पित्ति-मेह M. -uric I (occurring in urine) #f . uro-canic acid Biochem. (an acid ob 
2 (related to uric acid or urea) tained from the urine of the dog) -मिहिक 
श्वमूत्रिक अम्ल . uric acid मिहिक अम्ल . 
uro-chloralic Chem. मूत्र-नीरस्विक mfa. uric acid-emia मिहिक-अम्ल-रक्तता. Urochorda Zool. पुच्छमेरव: m.pl. uric acid-uria मिहिक-अम्ल-मूत्रता f. uro-cyanogen Med. मूत्र-श्यामजन m. urico- =uric- (uric, uric acid) मिहिक Urodela Zool. सपुच्छ-गण m.ph. uricolysis मिहिकांशन . 
uro-erythrin Biochem. मूत्र-रुधिरि . -urilate -मिहीय 
urosis Med. (any disease of the uri -urilic-मिहिक 
__nary organs) मेह-रुजा, मेहांग-रुजा . urin-, urini-, urino- मूत्र 
urostyle Zool. मेरु-पुच्छ . urinal r मूत्रागार, मूत्रस्थान 1. 
uro-xanthin मूत्र-पीति. ___ 2 मूत्रकुण्डn. 
ursol Col. Ind. ऋक्षव m. (from bear urinaty मूत्र 
berry ऋक्षबदर) u. bladder Anat. मूत्राशय m. 
u. brown ऋक्षव बभ्रुण. u. calculus Med. FF11967 m. (ancient u. grey ऋक्षव धूसर m. ___word) 
u. red-brown ऋक्षव रक्त-बभ्रुm. u. organs Anat. मूत्रांग n. 
u. yellow-brown ऋक्षव पीत- 
ब m. u. passage Anat. मूत्र-मार्ग m. ursus= bear ऋक्ष m. (Hindi रीछ; 
u: plexus Zool. मूत्र-प्रतान m. ___UPSus is from ऋक्ष) urination मूत्रण . 
Ursus Zool. ऋक्षाति f. (आति for प्रजाति urine मूत्र. 
genus) u. hydrometer मूत्र-तरलमान m. 
U. maritimus-polar bear सामुद्र urini- =urino 
ऋक्ष= ध्रुवीय ऋक्ष m. uriniferous tubule Zool. मूत्र-नालिका f. Urticaceae Bot. दंशरोम-कुल . urino-, urini-, urin- मूत्र 
Urtiflorae Bot. वट-गोत्र ॥. urino-genital artery मूत्र-जनन-रोहिणी f. usage प्रथा, रीति. urino-genital system of the female usance Com. विपत्रावधि m. 
Zool. स्त्री-मूत्र-जनन-संहति. 
u. bill-time bill रूढावधि विपत्र, अवधि urino-meter मूत्र-मान m. 
विपत्र. .. uro-sur- मूत्र 
u. of a bill विपत्र प्रचलित अवधि m. uro-bilin (uro- + bile + -in) Biochem. usances=usance bills 
मूत्र-पित्ति . 
use प्रयोग, उपयोग m. uro-bilin-emia Med. मूत्र-पित्ति-रक्तता . usebe green-aldehyde green (the 
. .97 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
u. pore गर्भाशय-रन्ध्र n. u. tube-Fallopian tube गर्भाशय 
नाल m. uterogram Med. tafar-fet n. uterography Med. गर्भाशय-चित्रणा f. uterology गार्भाशयिकी, गर्भाशय-विद्या . uterotubal Med. गर्भाशय-नालीय mfn. uterus=womb गर्भाशय m. utility (value in use) Com. 3921TEIT 
first synthetic green dye obtained - in 1862 by Cherpin) 
usefulness उपयोगिता, उपकारिता f. 
ance Statics 3401T are m. use of force बल-प्रयोग m. uses of statistics सांख्यिकी-उपयोग m U-shape curve Statistics ऊर्ध्वबाहु वक्र . using up उपभोग m. usta, borax टंकण शृतक n. ustum, alumen = burnt alum दग्ध 
स्फटिका f. usually set: usufruct Law फलोपभोग m. usufructuary mortgage फलोपभोग-प्राधि 
m. usurer कुसीदिक m. (ancient word) usurious Com. कौसीद mfn. 
u. interest कौसीद-वृद्धि usury कुसीद n. (ancient word) utensil 7745 n. 
uter- =utero- Anat. गर्भाशय 'uterine Anat. गर्भाशय 
u. artery गर्भाशय-रोहिणी " u.gland गर्भाशय-ग्रन्थि m. 
utricle Zool. ('a bag of hide') sta m. utriculus Anat. दृतिका f. utter destruction परि-नाश m. U-tube ऊर्ध्वबाहु-नाल m. uva ursi (bearberry)=Arctostaphy 
los uva-ursi ऋक्षबदर m. (ursa is 
from ऋक्ष, Hindi रीछ) । uvea Anat. (a pigmented layer of the _iris) रंगी (-इन्) m. (from रंगा pig 
ment) uveal tract रंगि-पटल . uvula प्रतिजिह्वा (Marathi पडजीभ) U-X, U-Y (uranium X, uranium Y) 
Chem. कि-क्ष, कि-त्र (किरणातु क्ष, किरणातु 
uvea 
V (vanadium) Chem. रो (रोचातु) V.(apparent volume) Phys. पि (प्रत्यक्ष V (vatiance).Statisties वी (विचरण) परिमा) Cf. C.वि V (velocity) Phys. वे (प्रवेग) 
V. (initial volume) Phys. पा, (आदिम VI (initial velocity) Phys. वे, (आदिम प्रवेग) .. परिमा) :-V: (final velocity) Phys. वे, (अन्तिम प्रवेग) V. (final volume) Phys. पा, (अन्तिम 
V (vibration) Phys. वे (आवेप) 
परिमा) V..(Vibrio) आकु. (आकुन्तलाणु) 
v (image distance) Phys. प्र (प्रतिमूर्ति v- (vicinal) Chem. चा- (संचारी) 
दूरत्व) V, v (volt) Phys. शा, श (धुशक्म) V2 Mil. प्रोल्का २ (used by Germans in Carolume) Phys. पा, प (परिमा) 
World War II) 
98 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
vacanceine blue=union blue 
H v . distillation fiask शून्यक-आसवन vacancy रिक्तस्थान N., रिक्ति f. 
पलिघु : vacation I (as, of seats) रिक्त करना v.embedding bath शून्यक-न्यावेश 
(Hindi) 
तापन n. 2 अवकाश m. (Hindi छट्टी), दीर्घावकाश m. .. v. filter शून्यक-पाव m. vac blue-union blue 
H 
v . filter tube शून्यक-पाव-नाल m. vaccinable मसूर्य mfn. 
. . .v. gauge Rly. शून्यकामान M. vaccinal Med. मसरीय mfn. 
___v. photoelectric cell Phys. शून्यक vaccinate vb. मसूरण 1. (मसूरी-प्रवेशन) . भाविद्युत्-कोशा . vaccination मसूरण . 
v. pump (air, foot, hand) शून्यक vaccinationist Med. मसूरणवादी (-इन्) उदंच m. (वायु, पाद, हस्त) 
v. tube Elec. शून्यक-नाल m. vaccinator मसूरक m. 
v. tubing शून्यक-नाल m. vaccine Med. मसूरी-लस, रक्षाणु-लस m. vagal Anat. प्राणेशीय min., प्राणेशा 
(short for रक्षक-जीवाणु-लस) vagina Anat. योनि f., योनिमार्ग m. -vaccine -लस m. 
vaginal pore. योनि-रन्ध्र . . . vaccine bath मसूरी तापन .. 
vaginitis योनिकोप m. . vaccinia=cowpox Med. गोमसूरिका . . v. verrucosa कणि-योनिकोप m. vacuity I रिक्ति . 
vaginula Bot. (basal sheath) निकंचुक M. 2 = true ullage Com. etrar f. vago- (vagus) Anat. Situalt (difference between the full capa- vagus=vagus nerve Anat. प्राणेशा= city and the actual contents of a. . . "प्राणेशा चेता f.. cask) 
___. . ' wandering nerve Zool. दूरगामिनी vacuolar Biol. रसधानीय mfn. , . . 
चेता . .. .. vacuolated Biol. रसधानी-युत mfn. valence, valency Chem. संयुजता f: vacuolation Biol. रसधानी-निर्माण n.:: -valentChem. -संयुज , ,. ... vacuole Biol. (it contains the cell sap. valentinite : (Sbpoan in prismatic 
Formerly this space was thouglat orthorhombic crystals) PARISUHTEET to be empty and hence the name m. (-इज.for खनिज: mineral) vacuole) रसधानी f. 
- valer- (for valeric) बल- . . . vacuole sap Biol. maitem: (short valerate Chemi arrituni 
for रसधानी-रस) 
valerian=Valerianą udat f. vacuum शून्यक 1. . . “walerianae. thizoma = valerian 
v. and blast pump (combined) rhizome=valerian root जटिला-मूल 
शून्यक तथा अभिधमन उदंच m: (संयुमंत) . . . , ......... v. bench 4-octant f. 
valeric (Lat. valere to be strong) v. cleaner शून्यक-शोधक m:.. : 'Cheni. बलिक mfn... v. desiccator शुन्यक-शोषित्र : valeryl Chem. बलल '.. ' 
१७ 
M﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
valerylene Chem. बललेन्या . 
van (a winnowing device) वीजन 1. valid मान्य, समर्थ, विध्यनुकूल, सत्य, साधु van Ry. (for transport purposes; 
mfn. 
closed car) संवृता f., संवृतयान, संभारयान validation वैधकरण . validity मान्यता, विध्यनुकूलता, सत्यता, साधुता, vanad-, vanado- (vanadium) Chem. 
समर्थता f. 
रोच valine (isovaleric tv -ine) Biochem. ant vanadate Chem. toitu n. 
vanadic Chem. रोचिक mfn. valuation Com. मूल्य-निर्धारण, अपिण . v. acid रोचिक अम्ल n. 
(अहीं- आपन) 
v. anhydride रोचिक अजलेय. value vb. मूल्यन . 
v. oxide रोचिक जारेय. value n. अरे , मूल्य, मान n. 
vanadi-ferous रोच-भर mfn. v. in use=utility Com. 5qulfat vanadinite Mineral. (consists of lead 
vanadate with a small proportion v. received Com. प्राप्त-अर्हा f. 
of lead chloride) रोचसीसिज m. (-इज valued policy Com. निश्चितमूल्य गोपलेख for खनिज mineral) 
m. 
vanadious Chem. रोच्य mfn. valuer i Education (one who evalu- vanadium Chem, tad m. 
ates the marking of examina v. black Col. Inā. रोचातु काल M. tion answer books) अंकपरीक्षक m. v. bronze रोचातु कांस्य 7. 2 Com. मूल्य-निर्धारक m. 
v. chloride रोचातु नीरेय . valvate Bot. (leaves do not overlap, v. family रोचातु कुल १. 
• touching each other laterally) v. oxide रोचातु जारेय . अनतिछादी (-इन्) mfn. 
v. pentoxide रोचातु पंचजारेय. valve कपाट .. 
v. steel रोचातु बनायसn. safety v. क्षेम-कपाट, अभय कपाटn. 
v. sulphate रोचातु शुल्बीयn. v. amplifier Phys. कपाट-विपुलक m. v. trioxide रोचातु विजारेय n. v. gear Mach. कपाटोपयान्त्र . vanado-, vanad- (vanadium) Chem. v. spindle कपाट-तर्कु m. 
रोच valviform कपाटरूप mfn. 
vanado-silicate Chem. रोच-सैकतीय . valvular 1 441074 mfn. 
vanadous, vanadious Chem. रोच्य 2 (containing valves) कपाटयुत mfn. mfn. 3 (opening by valves) कपाटोद्घाटी v. oxide रोच्य जारेय. 
(-इन्) mfn. 
vanadyl Cham. रोचला . 4 (valviform) कपाटरूप mfn. .. : Vanda (from Sanskrit) Bot. वन्दति f. '5 (valved) कपाटित mfn. 
(-ति for प्रजाति genus) vampire (bat) Zool. ('a blood sucking V. caerulea सामान्य वन्द m. . 
ghost') रुधिरचूष/m. 
Van de Graaf generator Phys. (an 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
m. 
electrostatic generator with a belt) variance Statistics fagitur n. विद्युत्स्थैतिक पट्टक-जनित्र . 
variant Statistics and mfn. Van der Waals' law Phys. रोधित- variate vb. Statistics विचरण 1. ___ वाति-नियम m. 
variation I Math. विचरण 1. Vandyke=Vandyke brown=Van- 2 विभेद m., विभिन्नता _____dyke red न्यवरक्तपीत M. 
variation constant Matb. विचरण-अचल vane=blade (vanes of a wind-mill) 
फल n. 
varied विभिन्न mfn. Vangueria Bot. पिण्डति . (-ति for variety I भेद, विभेद M., विभिन्नता f. 
प्रजाति genus) 
. 2 Biol. भेद m. V. spinosa सामान्य पिण्ड m. 
various विभिन्न, विविध mfn. vanish=disappear vb. तिरोभवन 7. various groups विविध समूह m. vanishing point Math. तिरोभावी बिन्दु varnish rn. लाक्षी /. 
20b. लाक्षीयण ॥. vanning वीजन ॥. 
varnished लाक्षीयित mfn. ___v. shovel वीजन परावपm. 
varnish thermometer लाक्षी-तापमान m. van of an army सेनामुख, नासीर n. (an- vary vb. I विभिन्नन ।. 
cient words) 
2 Math. विचरण .. vapor=vapour 
Cf. deviation विचलन vaporimeter=yapourimeter 
varying transparency Phys. चल vapour In. बाषा m. 
__ पारदर्शिता . 2 vb. बाष्पन । 
varying width Phys. चल विस्तार m. v. density बाष्प-घनता . 
vary inversely प्रतीप-विचरण 1. v. density method बाष्प-घनता-रीति vas., vaso- वाहिनी 
vasa deferentia pl. of vas deferens vapourimeter बाष्पमान m. 
vasa efferentia Anat. रेतोमार्गाः m. pl. vapourization arsyet n. 
vasaka. वासका . vapourizer (an apparatus) 1104T 1h. vasa vorticosa Anat. (stellate veins varec (kelp ashes) वरुणधास-भस्म n. 
of choroid) नीलावर्त m. variable I Phys. विचरणशक्य, विचरणशील vasculat I Biol. (pertaining to a 
mfn. 
. vessel or vessels) वाहिनी-, वाहिन्य mfn. 2 Math. चल mfn. 
2 (supplied with or containing 3 Com. अस्थिर, चल afm. . 
vessels) वाहिनीमत्, वाहिनीयुत nfm. v. amount अस्थिर राशि m. . 
3 Bot. वाहि , v. market अस्थिर विपणि m. 
v. coat वाहिनी-पटल n. v. resistance Phys. विचरणशील रोध v. cryptogams Bot. वाहि-अपुष्पोद्भिद 
m. v. velocity Phys.चल प्रवेग m. .. v. cylinder Bot. वाहि-रम्भ m. 
921 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
v. skin Zool. वाहिनीयुत चर्म .. vat dye (the dye is reformed when v. strand Bot. वाहि-स्कम्भ m. 
exposed to the air वात) वात रंजक, v. supply Bot. वाहि-प्रदाय m. 
कुण्ड रंजक m. v. tissue Bot. (any conductive vault-arched roof चापछद m. 
tissue) वाहि-ऊति. 
v. d. (vapour density) Chem. बा. घ. vascularity ailenin IT f. 
(बाष्प-धनता) vascularize Zool. वाहिन्यन n. 
Vd (vanadium) Chem. रो (रोचातु) vascularized Zool. वाहिन्यित mfn. vector I Biol. प्रसारक m. vas deferens रेतो-वाहिनी f. 
2 Math. सदिश vaseline = petrolatum मृत्स्नेह m. v. algebra सदिश बीजगणित . 
(short for मृत्तैल-स्नेह) 
v. analysis सदिश विश्लेषण 1. v. oil मत्स्नेह-तैल n. 
v. notation सदिश संकेतना . vasicine Chem. (NeoLatin vasica vectorial angle Math. सदिश कोण m. 
from Sanskrit वासिका, वासक) वासकीf. vee thread sections Engin. काकपद vaso-motor Physiol. वाहिनी-प्रेरक mfn. सूत्रछेद m. vast span विशाल चापविस्तार m. (or vegetable alkali = vegeto-alkali 
वितस्ति) 
उद्भित्-क्षारक m. vastus Anat. बृहती. 
v. colour उद्भिद्-रंग m. v. externus बाह्य-बृहती. 
v. fat औद्भिद स्नेह m. v. intermedius अन्तःस्थ-बृहती f. v. kingdom उद्भित्-सृष्टि f. v. internus आन्तर-बृहती . 
v. matter उद्भित्-पदार्थ m. v. lateralis पार्श्व-बृहती . . vegetation I Bot. उद्वित-समूह m., पादप v. medialis मध्य-बृहती f. 
जात M. vat कुण्ड 
2 (a plantlike formation or arbo vat blue Col. Ind. कुण्ड नील m. 
rescent crystallization; as, vegeta v. bordeaux कुण्ड कपिशक m. 
tion of salts; branched growth of v. brown कुण्ड बभ्रुm. 
crystals) गाखि-स्फटन n. v. corinth कुण्ड रोहित m. 
vegetative cell वधि-कोशा f. v. green कुण्ड हरि m. 
v. division Biol. वधि-भाजन 1. v. grey कुण्ड धूसर m. 
v. organs Bot. वधि-अंग, वर्धनांग . v. heliotrope कुण्ड निनीलातिरक्त m. v. pole Embryol. वधि-ध्रुव m. v. olive कुण्ड तैलबदर m. 
v. propagation = v. reproduc .V. orange कुण्ड नारंग.m. 
tion Biol. वधि-प्रजनन ।. v. pink कुण्ड आपद्म m. 
v. stage वर्धनावस्था f. v. red कुण्ड रक्त.m. 
v. structure (of a fungus) Bot. वधि v. scarlet कुण्ड शोण m. 
काय m. v. violet कुण्ड नीललोहित m. . vegeto-alkali = vegetable alkali v..yellow कुण्ड पीत m. 
vehicle वाहन . 
922 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
___ 
m. 
v. for passengers R/y. पथिक-वाहन venomous विषधर Mfn. 
n. 
v. snake विष-सर्प m. vein I Anat. नीला f. 
venous blood Zool. सिरा-रुधिर 1. 2 Zool. सिरा f. (in frog, veins are venous pulse Med. नीला-स्पन्दन १. red and not blue) 
venous system Zool. सिरा-संहति f. 3 Bot. नाडी f. 
vent (an outlet for fumes and gases) veinlet Bot. नाडिका f. 
निर्गमm., वाति-छिद्र. velamen Bot. (corky epidermiscover- venter I Anat., Zool. उदर. 
_ing the aerial roots) मूलत्वक्षा f. 2 Bat. (swollen basal portion of velocity Phys. प्रवेग m. 
an archegonium, in which the egg v. of approach Math. उपगमन-प्रवेग is developed) अण्डधानी . ____m. 
ventilated संवातित mfn.. v. of circulation Finance परिचलन- ventilation संवातन 1. 
प्रवेग m. 
ventilation by perfilation Hygiene v. of projection Math. प्रक्षेप-प्रवेग (blowing through) ORTATET n. 
ventilator संवातायन ., संवातक m. v. of separation अपगमन-प्रवेग m. ventrad=ventrally Anat. (towards v. of sound ध्वनि-प्रवेग m. 
the ventral side) अभ्यधर v. ratio Mach. प्रवेग-निष्पत्ति . ventral=lower * mfn. velum I Zool. पटिका . 
v. aorta Zool. अधर-महारोहिणी f. ____ 2 Bot. (of a mushroom) अरकला f. v. blood vessel Zool. अधर-रुधिर 
(short for अरपट्ट-कला 'membrane वाहिनी f. covering the gills अरपट्ट') 
v. canal cell Bot. अण्डधानी-कुल्या 'velvet मृदुक n. 
____कोशा f. ___v. brown Col. Ind. मदुक बभ्रु m. v. fissure Zool. अधर विदर m. vena cava Anat. महानीला. 
v. lip-lower lip Zool. अधर प्रोष्ठ ,venation Bot. (arrangement of the ___m. 
veins) नाडी-विन्यास m. 
. . v. raphe Phys., Bot. अधर-सेवनी : vena vorticosa सिरावर्त m. 
. v. root Anat. अधर मूल 1. vendor विक्रेता (-तृ) m. 
v. surface Zool. अधर तल 1. vendors' share Finance विक्रेत-अंश m. ventricle I Zool. प्रवेश्म n. 
(Hindi विक्रेता का अंश) 
. ___2 Anat. गुहा . venesection Med. नीला-वेध m., नीला-वेधन 3 (of the heart) हृद्वेश्म . . . (Cf. the ancient words सिरावेध, 4 (posterior chamber in the heart) 
सिरावेधन) 
पश्चवेश्म , . Venetian lake=crimson lake ventricular system Anat. गुहा-संहति f. Venetian red=iron red 
ventro-intestinal vessel Zool. अधरान्त्र venin Biochem. सर्पविषि f. 
. .वाहिनी. :::923 , 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
ventrolateral Zool. अधरपावं mfn. vermin (noxious, mischievous small venture-adventure-enterprise= animals, such as flies, lice, bed 
undertaking Com. उपक्रम m. 
bugs, rats) जन्तुहतक m. joint v. सह-उपक्रम m. 
vermis Parasitol. कृमि m. venule Zool. सिरिका, नीलिका 
vernation Bot. (relation between Venus's flower-basket Zool. (hay different leaves in the bud, i.e., 
ing a basket-like skeleton) पुष्पवैदल the manner in which they are n. (वैदल wickerwork) 
arranged with regard to each verb क्रियापद . 
other) पारस्पर्य n. (short for कलि verbal alteration शाब्दिक परिवर्तन 1. कान्तःपर्णपारस्पय) Verbenaceae Bot. शेफाली-कुल n. vernier अनुश्रेणी . Verbenineae Bot. शेफाली-अनुगोत्र 1. v. caliper Mech. अनुश्रेणी-व्यासमि m. verde Italiano=sulphur green 3B v.division Phys. अनुश्रेणी-भाजन . -verdic -हरिकिक 
Vernonia Bot. जीरीति /. (ति for प्रजाति verdigris हरिकी . 
genus) -verdin -हरिकिf. 
vernonine Chem. अवल्गुजी f. (अवल्गुज verditer (from French vert-de-terre Vernonia anthelmintica) 
green of earth) मुद्धरि m. 
Verona earth=green earth verditer green मध्यपीतातिहरि m. veronal (a trade-mark applied to -verdol -हरिकव 
hypnotic barbital) स्वाप-कोलसु . -verdone -हरिका 
Veronese yellow = mineral yel ver du Cayor मुद्गरमक्षी f. 
low verifiable सत्याप्य mfn. 
verruca चर्मकील m. verification सत्यापन n. 
verruca peruviana (a chronic stage ___v. of accounts लेखा-सत्यापन n. 
of Oroya fever) चिर-कीलज्वर m. verified सत्यापित mfa. 
(short for चिर-चर्मकील-ज्वर) verify vb. सत्यापन ". 
versatile anther Bot. परिदोली परागाशय vermicide=vermicidal afhen mfn. __m. (swings freely) . vermicular I (full of worms) कृमिल versed cosine Math. उत्कोज्या (उत्क्रम 
कोटिज्या) 2 (wormlike) कृमिसदृश mfn. versed sine Math. उज्ज्या f. (उत्क्रमज्या) vermiculation कृमिगति f. 
versine=versed sine Vermiculite Mineral. कृमिरूपिज m. (-इज । vert de montpellier=verdigris 
for खनिज mineral) 
vertebra Anat. कीकस m.(ancient Vedic vermiform कृमिरूप mfn. 
word) Vermigerous कृमिभृत mfn. 
vertebral Anat. कीकस -vermilion हिंगुल m. 
v. arch कीकस-चाप m. No substitute Col. Ind. हिंगुलादेश m. v. artery कीकस-रोहिणी . 
. 924 
TAN 
nafn. 
VI 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
v. canal=spinal canal कीकस-कुल्या inflorescence consisting of a pair 
of much condensed, nearly sessile v. column पृष्ठवंश m. 
cymes, disposed around the axis v. ring कीकस-वलय m. 
like a true verticil) Vertebrata Zool. पृष्ठवंशिनः m.pl. vert lumiere=night green vertebrate Zool. पृष्ठवंशी (-इन्) m. very अति (Hindi बहुत) 
v. hormones पृष्ठवंशि-न्यासर्ग m. very close to अतिसमीप vertex I Math. शीर्ष n., शिरोबिन्दु m. very coarse powder अति-स्थूल क्षोद m. 
2 मुर्ध m. 
very fine powder अति-सूक्ष्म क्षोद m. vertical sau mfn. 
very good visibility अति-सु-दृश्यता f. vertical axis Matb. अनुलम्ब अक्ष, उदग्न अक्ष very high I (brilliance) सु-(सुशुभ्र) 
m. 
2 (saturation) अधि- (अधिविशद) vertical bar Statistics उदग्र दण्ड m. very low I (brilliance) वि- (विशुभ्र) vertical boiler उदग्र बाष्पित्र n. ____ 2 (saturation) अप- (अपविशद) vertical boiler stays Rly. Eng. GH- very low relief = stiacciato Art 
बाष्पित्र-स्थाप m. 
प्रनिम्न उद्भत n. vertical chamber उदग्र वेश्म n. 
very oxidizable अति-जारणीय mfn. vertical circle Math. उदन वृत्त ।. very soluble Chem. अति-विलेय mfn. vertical combination Com. उदन संयोग very soluble in water अति-जल-विलेय 
m. 
mfn. vertical distribution Zool. उदग्र वंटन n. very sparingly अत्यल्प vertically उदग्रतया 
very sparingly soluble अत्यल्प-विलेय v.downward उदनाधोमुख 
mfn. v. downward direction उदग्राधोमुख- very sparingly soluble in water 
दिशा f. 
अत्यल्प जल-विलेय mfn. v. opposite angles Math. e vesical (pertaining to the urinary 
शीर्ष-कोण m. 
bladder) मूत्राशय v. upward उदग्नोन्मुख 
v. plexus मूत्राशय-प्रतान m. , v. upward direction उदयोन्मुख-दिशा vesicle आशयक m. 
vesicular Zool. आशयकवत् mfn. vertical median partition Zool. उदग्र vesicular seminalis Zool. रैतस आशयक 
मध्य व्यवधान 1. vertical plane उदग्न समतल .. 
vesicular stomatitis of horses अश्वा vertical position Phys. उदग्न-स्थिति f. स्यकोप M. vertical scale Statistics उदग्र-मापश्रेणी f. vessel I (a receptacle) पात्र n. vertical section Phys. उदन छेद m. 2 (a ship) यानपात्र n. (ancient word), verticil=whorl Bot. भ्रमि m. 
नौ f., पोत m. verticillaster Bot. भ्रमियुग्म n. (a mixed 3 Anat. वाहिनी . 
925 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
va 
vestibule (of the ear) Anat. मध्यगुहा f. v. needle आवेपन-सूची f. vestige Biol. अवशेषक m. 
vibratory आवेपी (-इन्), प्रादेप-, आवेपक vesting (as of lands and buildings mfn. 
in the crown) निधान, निहित 
vibratory motion Phys. आवेपि-गति . vesuvine=golden brown 
Vibrio (V.) (a genus of the family veterinary पशुचिकित्सा . 
Spirillaceae) आकुन्तलाण (आक.) v. assistant surgeon पशु-उपवैद्य, पशु V.aquatilis (resembles the spiril __उपभिषक् m. 
_lum of cholera) उपविषूची आकु. v. college पश्वायुविद्यालय m. 
V. aureus (forms a golden v. department पशुचिकित्सा-विभाग m. ___yellow pigment) स्वर्ण आकु. v. dispensary पशु-औषधालय m. 
V. berolinensis (resembles the v. hospital पशु-रुग्णालय m. 
cholera spirillum) अनुविषूची आकु. v. surgeon पशु-वैद्य, पशु-भिषक् m. V. cholerae asiaticae=V. com v. training पशुचिकित्सा प्रशिक्षण 1. 
ma veto अभिषेध m. 
V. comma (found in the rice vexillum = standard Bot. ध्वज m. 
water stools of cholera cases) Vi (virginium) Chem. क्षु (क्षुद्रातु) 
विषूची आकु. via I द्वारा . 
V.desulfuricans गन्धकापहर आकु. 2 प्रतिलिपि f. (one copy of a set of El Tor v. (a cholera vibrio bills, of sola B/E एकल विपत्र) 
found in pilgrims to El Tor first v. प्रथम-प्रतिलिपि 
who died with symptoms of second v. द्वितीय-प्रतिलिपि . 
dysentery) उपातिसार आकु. third v. तृतीय-प्रतिलिपि . . 
V. fetus (found in placenta. or viaduct Rly. मार्गसेतु m. 
fetal membrane in some cases vial=phial (small bottle) #fqet f. of infectious abortion in sheep vibgyor Phys. जनिनीहपीनार (जम्बु, निनील, and cattle) पशुगर्भ कु. 
नील, हरि, पीत, नारंग, रक्त) 
V. finckleri=V. proteus vibrancy आवेपिता . . 
V. flavescens (produces a green vibrant आवेपक mfn. 
__ish yellow pigment) पीताहरि प्राकु. vibrate vb. आवेपन 1. 
V. flavus (forms an ochraceous Cf. oscillate प्रदोलन 1. 
___ pigment) पिंग आकु. vibratile = vibratory भावेपी (-इन्) V. gindha (pathogenic for ____mfn. . 
___guineapigs) वंटमूष आकु. vibratile filament Zool. आवेपी अंशु m. V. helcogenes (causes ulcers in vibrating आवेप 
__mice) मूषत्रण आकु. vibration n. आवेप m. 
V. jejuni (seems to cause an v. magnetometer Phys. आवेपन autumnal diarrhea in cattle) 
चुम्बकमान m. . . . . . . ' 
शारद प्रांकु.. . 1926 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
V. lingualis (from mice inocu- vice-regent=deputy regent उप 
lated with the coating of the प्रतिशास्ता (-तु) m. tongue) जिह्वा आकु. 
vicereine उपराज्ञी . V. metchnikovii (isolated from a viceroy=vice-king उपराज m. 
kind of chicken cholera) कुक्कुट- viceroyal=viceregal औपराजिक mfn. विषूची आकु. 
viceroyalty उपराजता f. V. milleri (from carious teeth) vice versa=conversely विलोमक्रमेण, __अशितदन्तीय आकु. 
विलोमतः V. nasalis (from the nasal mucus) vicinal 1 (neighbouring) sifaasa mfn. 
नासा आकु. 
__2 Chem. संचारी (-इन्) mfn. V. paracholerae=V. gindha. vicinity सामीप्य n. V. phosphorescens भासमान आकु. vicious circle दुष्ट चक्र . V. proteus = Finkler-Prior victor विजेता (-त) m. ___vibrio मन्दविषूची आकु. 
Victoria black Col. Ind. विजया काल m. V. saprophiles (from sewer mud) V. blue favet titet m. ___ कर्दम आकु. 
V. blue-black विजया नील-कृष्ण m. V. schuylkilliensis (related to V. fast cyanine विजया स्थिर श्यामी . 
V. metchnikovii) उपकुक्कुटविषूची V. fast violet विजया स्थिर नीललोहित . आकु. 
m. V. septicus=V. comma faqat V. green विजया हरि m. 
आकु. 
V. navy blue विजया नाविक नील m. V. sputigenus (found in sputum V. orange विजया नारंग m. ___septicemia) ष्ठीव प्राकु, 
V. pure blue विजया शुद्ध नील m. V. tyrogenus=Deneke's spiril V. red विजया रक्त m. 
lum (found in cheese) दधिक आकु. V. rubine facut ait f. vibrissa Zool. प्रश्मश्रु. 
V. scarlet fastet HUT m. viburnum (viburn.), Viburnum V. violet विजया नीललोहित m. 
prunifolium=black haw (used V. yellow विजया पीत m. in uterine diseases) Pharm. योन्य victorious विजयी (-इन्) mfn. .. 
Victor Meyer's method Chem. (dis Vicat needle वज्रलेप सूची . 
placement method) विस्थापन-रीति f. vice=vise संग्रभ m. 
Victor Meyer's vapour density vice-admiral (Royal Navy) महा-नौपति apparatus अपि-बाष्पधनता-साधित्र n. 
m. 
Victor Meyer's vapour density vice-chancellor उप-कलपति m. 
___ method अपि-बाष्पधनता-रीति f. vice-consul उप-वाणिज्यदूत m. 
victory fast m. vice-king=viceroy उपराज m. Vienna blue=azure blue viceregal=viceroyal 192fsta mfn. V. green=new green 
927 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
12. 
V. lake=mineral red 
. vino. (wine) TETET V. lime=Vienna white (calcium vinum = wine Pharm. EfT f. 
carbonate quite siirTI obtained v. aloes= aloes wine कुमारी-दाक्षिरा by exposing slaked lime to the 
air and used chiefly in poli ___v. antimoniate=antimonial _shing metal) धातुमाजे श्वेत m. 
wine आंजन-द्राक्षिरा f. V. red=mineral red 
v. colchici = colchicum wine V. white=V. lime 
हिरण्यतुत्थ-द्राक्षिरा f. view दृशा f. . 
v. ipecacuanhae वममूल-द्राक्षिरा . viewing दर्शन 1. 
v. pepsini = pepsin wine पाचि viewing lamp दर्शन-दीप m. 
द्राक्षिरा . vigorous ओजस्वी (-इन्) mfn.. 
v. quininae = quinine wine vigoureux black Col. Ind. प्रबल काल विज्वरी-द्राक्षिरा f. 
vinyl Chem. मद्यल .. v. brown प्रबल बभ्रm. 
vinylene Chem. मद्यलेन्या . v. fast black प्रबल स्थिर काल m. vinylidene Chem. मद्यलेयेन्य .. v. grey प्रबल धूसर m. 
violamine Col. Ind. नीललोहित-तिक्ती f. v. red प्रबल रक्त m. 
violaniline Col. Ind. नीललोहित-नीली /. v. yellow प्रबल पीत m. 
violanthrene Col. Ind. नीललोहित-क्षामेण्य villageguide ग्राम-पथदर्शक m. village headman ग्रामणी m. (ancient violation अतिक्रमण 7. 
word) 
violent प्रचण्ड mfn. villus (pl. villi) Anat. रसांकुर m., v. effect Phys. प्रचंड विपाक m. 
अंगुष्ठिका f. 
v. reaction प्रचण्ड-प्रतिक्रिया . vinculum Math. शिरोवार m.. 
violet नीललोहित, जम्बु mfn. vine black Col. Ind. लता. काल m. violet black Col. Ind. नीललोहित काल m. vinegaracetum (acet.) (a. solution ___v. phenylique==regina purple 
in vinegar) Pharm. चुक्र 7. 
violet blue रक्तातिनील mfn. v. of cantharides-acetum can violet-brown नीललोहित-बभ्र mfn. tharidis (acet. canthar.) हरिभृग- violet-red नीललोहित-रक्त mfn. 
चुक्र n. 
violin वीणिका v. of ipecacuanha = acetum scroll शंख m. , ipecacuanhae वममूल-चुक्र . 
peg-box नागदन्त-प्रदेश.m. v. of opium = acetum opii pegs amigos m. 
अहिंफेन-चुक्र . .. . 
nut मेरु m. v. of squill = acetum scillae finger board अंगुलि फलक . ___ (acet. scil.) समुद्रपलांडु-चुक्र .. neck-plate ग्रीवा-पट्टm. vinic मधिक mefne 
sound post ध्वनि-स्थूण m. 
928 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
sound holes ध्वनि-छिद्र n. 
ceral arches) ग्रसनी-दर m. (short resin उद्यास m. 
for ग्रसनी-चाप-दर) bridge सेतु 2. 
v. layer = splanchnic layer tail-piece 39111 n. 
___ अन्तस्त्य-स्तर m. button कुडम . 
v. mass अन्तस्त्य-पुंज m. bow धनुष n. 
v. membrane Anat. अन्तस्त्य-कला f. bowstring ज्या, धनुर्ध्या f. 
v. nervous system अन्तस्त्य-चेता viper Zool. पृदाकु m. (ancient word) संहति . virginium=verium, russium Chem. 
v. organ अन्तस्त्य-अंग. क्षुद्रातु 3. 
v. pericardium अन्तस्त्य-परिहत् m. viridine Chem. हरिती f. 
v. peritonium अन्तस्त्य-उदरच्छद m. viridite Petrog. हरिताश्म m. 
v. pleura अन्तस्त्य परिक्लोमm. virtual आभास mfn. 
v. pouches ग्रसनी-धान.. v. focus (rays do not converge v. skeleton Embryol. ग्रसनी-कंकाल 
to this point, but only appear ___m. to diverge from here) आभास-नाभि v. slit अन्तस्त्य-दरी. 
viscid आलग mfn. v. work Mech. आभास कार्य 1. viscidity ालगत्व. virus (Latin, akin to Gk. ios Skt. viscidize pb. पालगी-करण, पालगी-भवन 1. 
विष) विषाणु m. . 
viscid mass Zool. ालग पुंज M. virus of foot and mouth disease viscidness ASTIAT f. 
पदास्य-रोग-विषाणु m. 
viscidulous (slightly viscid) ईषदालग virus of rabies Med. आलर्क-विषाणु mfn. 
m. 
viscin पालगि. visa = vise ('seen' दृष्ट; an endorse viscoidal (somewhat viscous) अल्पालग 
ment on a passport denoting that mnfn. 
it has been examined) दृष्टांक m. viscometer=viscosimeter (viscosity visa, vise vb. (to examine and endorse +-meter) पालग-मान m. (here ालग ____a passport) दृष्टांकन 1. 
-आलगत्व; भावप्रधानो निर्देशः) viscera (internal organs) अन्तरङ्ग, अन्त- viscometrical ालगमितीय, मालगमानीय, 
Fa n. (ancient word) 
mfn., पालगमान visceral-splanchnic अन्तस्त्य 
viscometry मालगमिति. v. arch Zool. (one of a series of viscoscope आलगेक्ष m. 
arches developed in the walls viscosen. आलग m. of the mouth cavity and pha- viscosimeter ATATTHET M. 
rynx) ग्रसनी-चाप, मुखग्नसनी-चाप m. viscosimetry=viscometry v.cleft (on each side of the neck viscosity आलगत्व n . 
region between successive vis- viscount उपसामन्त m. 
929﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
viscountcy I उपसामन्तपद, उपसामन्तता V. A sitafa 1 
v. B जीवति ख 2=viscounty उपसामन्त-विषय m. 
v. B, जीवति ख, viscountess उपसामन्ता. 
v. B, जीवति ख, viscounty==viscountcy उपसामन्त-विषय v. B जीवति ख, 
m. 
v. B. जीवति ख. viscous-viscid 
v. B complex जीवति ख संकर m. viscous liquid मालग तरलm. 
v. Cजीवति ग viscousness=viscidness 
v. Dजीवति घ vise=visa 
v. E जीवति छ vise=vice संग्रभm. 
v. G complex जीवति छ संकर m. visibility दृश्यता. 
v.K, जीवति ट, visible दृश्य mfn. 
v. Kजीवति ट, visible light दृश्य प्रकाश m. 
v.Kजीवति ट. visible medium दृश्य माध्यम 1. 
v. K natural जीवति ट प्राकृतिक visible region दृश्य प्रदेश m. 
v. K synthetic जीवति ट संश्लिष्ट vision çfie f. 
v. concentrates जीवति-संकेन्द्रित n. visitor दर्शक m. 
v. deficiency जीवति-हीनता . visitors' gallery दर्शक-दीर्घा f. 
v. products जीवति-सृष्ट n. visual दाष्टिक mfn. 
vitamine-vitamin v. acuity दाष्टिक तीक्ष्णता, दृष्टि-तीक्ष्णता vitelline membrane Embryol. पीतकला 
f. (पीत for अंडपीत) v.angle Ophthalmol. (minimum vitelline nucleus विभाजि-न्यष्टि _separable angle) दाष्टिक कोण m. Vitex Bot. शेफालिति f. (-ति for प्रजाति 
v. axis Ophthalmol. दाष्टिक अक्षm. genus) 
v. indicator Radar दाष्टिक देशक m. v. negundo सामान्य शेफालिका. visualise vb. मनसेक्षण .. 
vitiate vb. प्रदूषण n. vital जीवनावश्यक mfn. 
vitiator प्रदूषक m. v. activity जीवन-क्रिया 
Vitis Bot. atentia f. (-fa for ustifa genus) v. amine जीव-तिक्ती /. 
V. vinifera सामान्य द्राक्षा/. v. force जीव-बल 1. 
vitoline yellow 5 G = phosphine vitalistic theory=vitalistic view of vitrain (Lat. vitrum glass) Geol. काचार ___ life (that life is self-determining) m. (See durain) 
Zool. आत्मधृतजीवन-वाद m. 
vitreosil काचसैकजा . vitalizing stream Zool. जीवनदातृ स्रोत vitreous body Anat. काचर काय m. 
vitreous chamber काचर वेश्म 1. vital statistics जीवन-समंक m. 
vitreous humour Anat. काचर जल n. vitamin जीवति . . . 
vitriol (glasslike) FTR n. 930 
TET 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
vitriol ocher Col. Ind. काचर गैरिक m. मेचगन्धिज m. (-इज for खनिज mineral) vivid विशदतम mfn. 
Volkmann's canal Anat. उपकुल्या f. vivi-diffusion apparatus जीवत्प्रसूति- volt Elec. (unit of electromotive force) 
साधित्र n. 
धुशक्म n. viviparity=vivipary 
voltage द्युशक्मता . viviparous I Zool. जरायुज mfn. (from v. doubler धुशक्मता-द्विगुणक m. 
अथर्ववेद) 
voltaic cell Elec. धुमात्रिक-कोशा f. 2 Bot. पितृस्थ-उद्भेदी (-इन्) mfn. ___voltameter==coulometer Phys. (for vivipary Bot. (germinating while still measuring the quantity of electri 
attached to the parent) पितृस्थ-उद्भेदन city passed) धुमात्रामान M. 
volt-am-meter Elec. (for measuring viz. (namely) अर्थात्, नाम्ना 
both volts and amperes) धुशक्मवहि Viragapatam Geog. (in the province मान m. 
of Madras) विशाखा-पत्तन 1. 
volt-meter Elec. (for measuring vol vocal cord Anat. (producing voiced tage) धुशक्म-मान M. 
घोष sounds) घोष-तन्त्री f. 
volume I ग्रन्थ, ग्रन्थखण्ड, बन्ध m. vocal sac Zool. घोष-स्यून m. 
2=loudness Acoustics are n. vocation-profession व्यवसाय m. 
3 (space occupied, as measured vocational school व्यावसायिक शिक्षालय by cubic units, as the volume of 
a. container) परिमा. Vogt's maps = map of formative volume expansion = cubical ex 
region (in the cosperm) Zool. pansion Phys. परिमा-विस्तरण = घन निर्मायि-प्रदेश-चित्र .. 
विस्तरण . void शून्य, प्रवृत्तिहीन (of no legal force) volumenometer Phys. परिमामान, सान्द्र 
in force an (as law) 
परिमामान m. (for measuring the volatile Chem. उत्पत mfn. 
volume of a body, esp. a. solid) ___v. alkali उत्पत क्षारक m. 
volume strain=volumetric strain volatility उत्पतता f. 
volumeter Phys. परिमामान, सर्वपरिमामान volatility testing disc उत्पतता-परीक्षण m. (for measuring volumes, as of 
बिम्ब m. 
gases or liquids directly, or volatilization उत्पातन ? 
of solids by displacement of a volatilization oven उत्पातन कन्दुm. liquid) volborthite Mineral. (a hydrous vana- volumetric office mfn. 
date of copper, barium and cal-. v. analysis Chem. परिमामितीय विश्लेषण cium) हरिरोचिज m. (-इज for खनिज mineral) 
v. analysis apparatus परिमामितीय volcanite = selen-sulphur Mineral. विश्लेषित्र .. 
(contains sulphur and selenium) v.factor परिमामितीय खण्ड m. 
931 
m. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
v.glassware परिमामितीय काचभाण्ड n. votable expenditure मतदेय व्यय m. v. strain, volume strain Mech. voten. मत 7., छन्द m. (छन्द is an ancient 
परिमा-विकार m. 
word, Latin wotum means a vow, volumetrically परिमामित्या (according wish, will' the same as Skt. छन्द) 
___to परिमामिति) 
__vote vb. छन्ददान, मतदान 1. voluminous (of large volume in pro- v. by ballot गूढ मतदान, शलाका मतदान 
portion to weight) महापरिम, महाकाय 
. mfn. 
v. by proxy प्रतिपुरुष मतदान , v. powder महापरिम क्षोद m. 
voted expenditure दत्तमत व्यय m. volumometer (for measuring incre- vote of censure निन्दन-मत 1. 
ment of growth in plants and ___voting मतदान, छन्ददान . animals) वृद्धिमान m. 
voucher Com. (that which vouches, voluntary ऐच्छिक, स्वायत्त mfn. ____gives witness and proves)प्रमाणक m. 
v. liquidation ऐच्छिक अवसायन 1. v. number प्रमाणक-संख्या f. v. nervous system स्वायत्त-चेता- vowel स्वर m. 
संहति । 
v. order स्वर-क्रम m. v. winding up स्वेच्छा-समापन n. voyage (journey by water) जलयात्रा Volvocaceae Bot. भ्रमाप्य-वाल 7. Volvocidae Zool. (a family) भ्रमाप्य-वंश v. account Com. जलयात्रा-लेखा 
m. 
___v. policy Com. जलयात्रा-गोपलेख m. Volvocina Zool. भ्रमाप्यगण m., भ्रमाप्याः V-shaped काकपद N., काकपदाकार mfn. 
m.pl. 
Vulcan विश्वकर्मा m. Volvox Biol. (the whole colony moves Vulcan black Col. Ind. विश्वकर्म काल m. 
and rotates) भ्रमाप्यति . (-ति for प्रजाति v. blue विश्वकर्म नील m. genus) 
V. brilliant blue विश्वकर्म भासुर नील V. perglobator = rolling alga 
(globe animalcule) अतिगोल भ्रमाप्य V. brown विश्वकर्म बभ्रm. 
V. dark brown विश्वकर्म असित बज्र vomer = ploughshare bone Anat., 
Zool. हलास्थि .. 
V. dark green विश्वकर्म असित हरि m. vomerine tooth Zool. हलास्थि-दन्त m. V. orange विश्वकर्म नारंग m. vomiting वमन . 
vulcanising=vulcanizing v. gas वमन-बाति m. 
vulcanite गन्धघृषि m. (sulphur + voracious महाशन mfn. 
rubber) -vorous -भुक् 
v. grating गन्धघृषि-झझरी . vorticella Zool. घण्टारूप m. 
v. stopcock गन्धघृषि-शिखिपिधा f. Vorticella Zool. घण्टारूपाति /. (आति for vulcanize vb. गन्धहण n. 
प्रजाति.genus) 
vulcanizing TTEET 1. 
m. 
__m. 
932 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
v. pan गन्धहण-भाजन n. 
v. press गन्धहण-पीड m. vulgar fraction Math. साधारण भिन्न m. 
vulgaris Bot. सामान्य mfn. (occurs in 
the specific names) vulture गृध्र m. 
W (water equivalent) Phys. ज (जल 
समाह) w, W (weight) Phys. भ, भा (भार) W. (west, the direction) प. (पश्चिमा) W (wolfram = tungsten) Chem. च 
(चंडातु) w (work done) Phys. कृ (कृत कर्म) wafer पर्पटक m. wage भृति . 
w. rate भूति-अर्घ m. 
w. statistics भूति-समंक M. wages Com. भृति . 
living w. निर्वाह-भूति . 
minimum w. निन्यून-भृति f. nominal w. रोक-भूति piece w. कार्य-भृति f. real w. वास्तविक-भृति . time w. समय-भूति . 
w. analysis book भृति-विश्लेषण पुस्त ___n. 
w. book मृति-पुस्त?. 'w. fund भूति-प्रणीवि. 
w. sheet भृति-स्तार m. waggon I (a vehicle) वाहन n. 
2 (carrying भाण्ड merchandise) 
भाण्डवाहन, भाण्डयान n. waggon load Rly. वाहन-भार m. wagtail Zool. खञ्जन m. (ancient word) wahoo bark = euonymus Pharm. 
सुनामवल्क m. walking leaf Zool. (looks like a leaf) 
पत्र-कीट m. 
walking leg Zool. गमन-पाद m. walking stick Zool. तृण-कीट m. wall भित्ति 
w. bracket Mach. भित्ति-विवध m. w. calendar fufa faferit f. w.-flower भित्ति-पुष्प . w. lizard Zool. Critf. 
w. shelf भित्ति-निधाय m. walnut अक्षोट m. wandering nerve (vagus) Zool. 
दूरगामि-चेता f. wandering oedema = calabar 
swelling Med. सी शोफ m. waning Phys. क्षयण . want I अभाव m. 
2 अभीच्छा . war (it includes military policy, stra 
tegy and tactics) विग्रह, समर m. warbler Zool. कूजिनी /. war book युद्ध-पुस्तक n. Warburg's tincture=tinctura war 
burgizanteperiodic tincture= tinctura antiperiodica Pharm. 
आवर्तघ्न निष्कर्ष m. war cabinet युद्ध-परिषत् /. war cloud युद्ध-मेघm. war college = school of war युद्ध 
विद्यालय m. war council युद्ध-परिषत् . wardrobe (a room or closet where 
clothes are kept) वस्त्र-कोष्ठ m., वस्त्र मंजूषा . 
933 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
washing धावन । 
w. blue Col. Ind. धावन नील m. w. bottle धावन-कूपी . w. flask धावन-पलिघm. 
w. soda. धावन-विक्षार m. washings n. Chem. धावन 1. wash leather bag Phys. प्रक्षालित-दति . washout closet Hygiene अपधावन-मलकुंड 
: 
70 
ware Com. भांड, द्रव्य, वस्तु . warehouse Com. भाण्डागार, वस्तुगृह, कोष्ठा 
गार .. 
w. book भाण्डागार-पुस्तn. w. keeper भाण्डागारी (-इन्) m. w. keeper's certificate भाण्डागारि- 
प्रमाणपत्र .. w. rent भाण्डागार-भाटक m. 
w. warrant भाण्डागार-अधिपत्र 1. warfare विग्रहकर्म, युद्ध, युद्धकर्म n. war-guilt युद्ध-अपराध m. warm I adj. प्रोष्ण mfn. (आ+उष्ण), उष्ण 
171611. 
2 vb. प्रोष्णकरण, पोषण . warm-blooded (animals) Zool. उष्णास्त्र, 
उष्ण-रुधिर mfn. warming प्रोष्ण-करण 1., पोषण .. warmth प्रोष्णता warn vb. प्राबोधन . warrant Com. अधिपत्र n. (short for 
अधिकारपत्र) warrant deposit Econ. अधिपत्र-निक्षेप m. warrenite=domingite war .risk युद्ध-हानिभय 1. war spirit युद्ध-भावना. wart Med. चर्मकील M. (from सुश्रुत) war-weariness युद्ध-श्रान्ति . war-work युद्ध-कार्य n. war-worker युद्ध-कार्यकर्ता (-त) m. wash vb. धावन 1. wash-basin धावन-पात्री / wash bottle धावन-कूपी . washdown closet Hygiene निघावन 
मलकुंड 1. washed sta mfn. 
washer I धावक m. 
rautoclave w. निपीडतापक-धावक m. 
Z-Engin. (ring) वलयक m. 
wasp वरट m. Wassermann's test Bact. (haemolysis 
test of syphilis) शोणांशन-उपदंश-परीक्षाf. wastage क्षेप्यक . waste क्षय m. waste book Book/keeping क्षेप्य पुस्तn. wasteful resistance Statistics हानिकर 
रोध m. waste land खिल m. (ancient word), 
वन्ध्या भूमि . waste matter क्षेप्य द्रव्य n. waste paper क्षेप्य पत्रn. waste paper basket क्षेप्यपत्र-पिटकn. waste pipe क्षेप्य नाडn. waste product I Com. क्षेप्य उत्पाद m. 
2 Bot. क्षेप्य सृष्ट १. wasting Com. क्षयी (-इन्) mfn. 
w.asset क्षयि-सम्पत्ति f. watch घटी, घटिका . watch dog रक्षी कुक्कुर m. watch-glass घटी-काच m. 
w. clamp घटी-काच-संधर m. watchman प्रहरी (-इन्) m. watch spring घटी-स्कंद m. watchwords (as of air travel) सावधान 
वचन .. water जल, वारि॥. water animal जल-चर, जल-प्राणी (-इन्) 
m. 
934 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
- 
- 
- 
- 
शूर 
m. 
water bacteria जल-शाकाणु m. (जलशा.) the surface of water with great water basin जल-पात्री f. 
agility) जल-जांधिक m. water bath Chem. जल-तापन ". 
water of constitution Physical Chem. water bath ring जलतापन-वलय m. 
संघटना-जल.. water beetle जल-भृङ्गm. 
water of crystallization Chem. स्फटन water bird जल-पक्षी (-इन्) m. 
जल n. water blower जल-मात्र 1. 
water opossum = yapok (Chiro water blue Col. Ind. जल नील m. 
nectes minimus) Zool.जल-युग्माशय m. water carriage system Hygiene जल- water pillar R/y. जल-स्तम्भ m. ___ वाहन-संहति . 
water pipe Automobile जल-नाड 7. water closet Hygiene (a privy) शौचा water-power engineering जलविद्युद् 
गार. 
अभियन्त्रणा f.. water compartment जलकोष्ठ m. waterproof जलरुध् mfn. water crane (a gooseneck appara water pump जलोदंच m. 
tus) जल-बक m. 
water retaining crop जलधारि सस्य . water cress (Lepidium sativum) चन्द्र water roots Bot. जल-मूल .. 
water scoop Riy. Eng. जल-प्रदर्वी f. water culture Bot. जल-संवर्ध m. water skipper = water measurer water dispersal जल-अपकिरण . water snake Zool. जल-सर्प m. watered capital Econ. तरलित-पुंजी, अधि- water-soluble जल-विलेय mfn. 
पुंजी f. (watering अधिपुंजीयन) 
w. induline Col. Ind. जल-विलेय w. stock तरलित स्कन्ध m. 
सुनीली. water equilibrium जल-समतोल m. 
w. rose Col. Ind. जल-विलेय पाटल m. water equivalent Phys. जल-समाह m. water spider जल-लूता . water filler Automobile जलपूरक m. water still जल-आसोत्र. water-fowl जल-कुक्कुटक m. 
water stoma Bot. जल-मुख n. water gas जल-वाति m. 
water strider = water measurer water gauge जलामान m. 
water supply जल-प्रदाय m. watering Com. अधिपुंजीयन, तरलन n. water tank जलाशय, जल-तडाग m. 
w. capital पुंजी-तरलन 1. 
watertight जलाप्रवेश mfn. w. stock स्कन्ध-तरलन । 
watertight packing Pbys. जलाप्रवेश water inlet pipe Rly. Eng. जलप्रवेश संवेष्टन . 
नाड. 
water tower जल-प्रस्थाणु m. water jacket जल-चोल m. 
water tube जल-नाल m. water level जल-तल ?. 
water tube boiler जलनाल-बाष्पित्रा . waterlogging जलानुवेधन 1. 
water tutbine जल-वरीवर्त m. water-measurer Zool. (with its water-value Phys. जलाही . 
widely extended legs glides along. water vapour Chem. जल-बाष्प m. . 
935 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
water-vascular system Zool. जल- 
वाहिनी-संहति . waterway Automobile जल-पथ m. waterworks जलदाय गृह 7. ___w. department जलदाय विभाग m. watery liquid Bot. जलवत् तरल m. watery sap जलीय रस m.. Watsonius Zool. (a genus having 
indistinct oral sucker) अव्यक्तचूषाति f. (प्राति for प्रजाति genus) 
W. watsoni सामान्य अव्यक्तचूष m. watt (a unit of power) afert f. (Far) 
wave तरंगm. 
w. antenna Radio तरंग-प्रातन्तु m. w, front Phys. तरंगाग्न. w. length Phys. तरंग-आयाम m. w. mechanics तरंग-यान्त्रिकी/. w. motion तरंग-गति. w. theory Phys. (undulatory 
theory of light) तरंगवाद m. wavy border तरंगित तट n. wavy bundle तरंगित पूल m. wax सिक्थ 7. (Hindi मोम) wax vb. वर्धन . waxing वर्धन . wax moth = bee moth = Galleria 
mellonella सिक्थ-शलभ m. wax palm सिक्थ-ताल m. waxy coating fiyaretgoy n. way I #ri m. 
2 उपाय m. weak मन्द, दुर्बल mfr. . weak demand Econ. मन्द अभियाचन . weakening effect Mach. दुर्बलकारी विपाक 
wealk solution of iodine - liquor 
iodi mitis (liq. iod. mit.) Pharm. 
दुर्बल जम्बुकी-विलयन . weak tincture of iodine - tinctura 
iodi mitis Pharm. दुर्बल जम्बुकी-निष्कर्ष 
m. wealth धन . wealthy Ta mfn. wear vb. Engin. विधर्षण n. wear and tear विघर्षण तथा दारण 1., घर्षदार 
m. (Hindi घिसाई) weariness श्रान्ति . weathercock वायुकुक्कुट, वायुदिग्दर्शक m. weathering (breaking down of rocks 
into smaller mineral particles) 
शिलाचूर्णन . weaver सुगृह, वाय m. weaverbird सुगृह-चटक m. web I जाल 1. 
2 Engin. संयुज, युजपट्ट m. webbed Zool. जालयुक्त mfn. wedge स्फान m. (Punjabi फाण, Gk. 
sphenos) wedge-shaped, cuneate Bot. स्फानवत् 
mfn. 
weed तणक (Marathi तृण), निर्देय 1. weeder Frigia m. (ancient word from 
निर् + /दे) weeding fachat n. (Marathi farcut) 
weedy (having weeds) तृणक-युत mfn. week सप्ताह m. . week-day (any day of the week ex 
cepting sunday) षडह-दिन । weekly साप्ताहिक mfn. weeping willow Bot. 7511 f. weigh vb. तोलन .. weighed quantity तोलित-मात्रा. weighing तोलन . 
weakening of demand Econ. अभि- 
याचन-मन्दन । weak solution दुर्बल विलयन . 
936 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
w. bottle तोलन-कूपी f. w. burette तोलन-द्रवमि m. 
w. paper तोलन-पत्र. 
• w. room Ry. तोलन-कोष्ठ m. weight Com. I भार m. 
2 वट्टक M. (Hindi बाट) gross w. सकल भार m. 
net w. शुद्ध भार m. weightage Com. तोलन-व्यय m. (weigh- 
ing charges) weight box वट्टक-मंजूषा f. weighted Statistics ofta mfn. 
w. arithmetic average भारित 
समान्तर माध्य. w. average भारित माध्य १. - w.geometric mean भारित गुणोत्तर 
मध्यक. weighting Statistics (alloting 
weights) भारावंटन 1. weightless भारहीन mfn. weightless spring balance वट्टकहीन- 
स्कन्द-तुला . weight lifted Phys. उत्थापित भार m. weight of gun शतघ्नी-भार m. weight of substance Chem. द्रव्य-भारm. 
(भ, भा) weights वट्टक m. (Hindi बाट) 
flat w. चिपिट वट्टक m. iron w. अयो-वट्टक m. set of w. वट्टक-कुलक 1. single polished brass w. एकैक 
प्रमृष्ट पित्तल वट्टक m... weights and measures भार तथा माप 
welding संधान n. Weldon process Chem. (manganese 
dioxide recovery process in chlo rine manufacture) लोजाप्ति-विधा f. (लो-लोहक manganese, जा-जारेय 
oxide, प्राप्ति recovery) well-balanced सुतुलित mfn. ___w. appearance सुतुलित रूप . well-defined angle सुनिश्चित कोण m. well-developed सुविकसित mfn. well-fitting सम्यग्-अन्वायोजी (-इन्) mfn. well-known सुज्ञात mfn. west (W.) पश्चिमा f. (प.) Western Ghats Geog. I (the northern 
portion of the Western Ghats) सह्याद्रि m. 2 (the southern portion beyond the Kaveri) मलय-पर्वत m. west northwest (W.N.W.) पश्चिम 
वायव्या. (प. वा.) west of north (N.W.) उत्तर-पश्चिमा f. 
(उ. प.) west of north west (N.W.W.) वायव्य 
पश्चिमा f. (वा. प.) west of south (S.W.) दक्षिण-पश्चिमा f. 
(द. प.) west of south west (S.W.W.) नैऋत 
पश्चिमा f. (नै. प.) Weston cell (e. m. f. 1.0183 volts) 
__ प्येकबिन्दुख (मृज्यातु-पारद) कोशा. west south west (W.S.W.) पश्चिम 
नैऋती . (प. नै.) wet and dry bulb recording hygro 
meter आर्द्र-शुष्क-कन्द लेखी-उन्दमान m. wet beribeti कदन्न जलंधर m. wet-plate process Photog. आर्द्र-पट्ट-विधा 
m. 
weighty भारी (-इन्) mfn. weld vb. संधान . welded Fanfirct mfn. 
welder संधाता (-तु) m. 
wet test Chem. आर्द्र-परीक्षा f. 937 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
wetting of surface पृष्ठतल-प्राण N. whale fafür m. 
whale-bone Zool. तिमि-अस्थि . whatever यत्किचित् (Hindi कुछ भी) wheat embryo Bot. गोधूम-भ्रूण 1. wheat germ=wheat embryo wheat germ oil गोधूम-भ्रूण-तैल N. wheat grain गोधूम-धान्य 1. Wheatstone's bridge Elec. (for the 
measurement of resistance) रोधमाप- 
सेतु m. 
Wheatstone's net Elec. धुरोधपरिपथ-जाल 
. 
wheel चक्र n. wheel and axle चक्र तथा अक्षदण्ड m. wheel animalcule Zool. चक्राणप्राणी 
(इन्) m. wheelbarrow एकचक्रिणी. wheeled carriage चक्रयान n. whence यस्मात् whey मस्तु n. (ancient word) while, whilst यदा, यावत्, यहि whip 1941 f. 
2 Politics ata m. (current in 
Marathi) whip snake Zool. कशा-सर्प m. whirl vb. आघूर्णन . whirligig beetle Zool. (body is boat- ___like) नौकाय-भृङ्गm. whirling hygrometer भ्रामी उन्दमान m. whisky (grain spirit obtained from 
barley, wheat, corn, etc.) धान्यिरा. whisper b. उपजपन . whisper n. उपजाप m. whistle श्रीकार, सीटी (Hindi) whistle-lever श्रीकार-उद्याम, सीटी-उद्याम 
m. White ant-termite Zool. वल्म m. 
white blood corpuscle Anat. सित 
रधिर-कोशा f. white bole=white clay 
white-breasted kingfisher Zool. चन्द्र: 
कान्त मीनरंक m. white clay Col. Ind. श्वेत-मृत्तिका f. white corpuscle सित-कोशा. white lead श्वेत सीस . white matter Anat. श्वेत द्रव्य .. white metal श्वेत धातु m. white mustard (Sinapis alba) श्वेत 
सर्षप m. white rust Plant Pathol. श्वेत मंडूर .. white seat Zool. श्वेत जघन m. white vitriol (zinc sulphate) Chem. 
श्वेत काचर . whiting श्वेतन 1. whitish आश्वेत mfn. Whitworth screw-thread section 
Engin. ५५° भ्रमिसूत्र छेद .m. whole qui mfn. whole cereals पूर्ण धान्य . wholegale (65-63 m.p.h.) प्रचंड वात M. 
(See Beaufort's Wind Scale) whole life policy भाजीवन गोपलेख m. whole number integral number) 
Math. पूर्णाङ्क m., पूर्ण-संख्या . wholesale I n. विपुल-विक्रय, बहुशो विक्रय 
m. 
2vb. विपुल-विक्रयण, बहुशो विक्रयण . 
3 बहुशो, बहुश: w. dealer बहुशो विक्रेता (-तृ) m. (H. __थोक व्यापारी) 
w. merchant बहुशो-वणिक् m. w. price बहुशो मूल्य n. (Hindi थोक 
मूल्य) w. price index numbers Statis 
tics बहुशो मूल्य देशनांक m. 
938 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
w. trader बहुशो व्यापारी (-इन ) m. 
2 Law रिक्थ-पत्र 1. wholesaler, whole seller विपुल-विक्रेता, Williamson's reaction=William 
बहुशो-विक्रेता (-त) m. 
___son's synthesis whole surface Math. पूर्ण तल n. Williamson's synthesis Chem. (syn wholetime पूर्णकाल, पूर्णकालिक mfn. thesis of ethers from sodium wholetime worker पूर्णकाल कर्मी (-इन्) alcoholate and an alkyl-iodide) 
m. 
अपिदक्षु-संश्लेषण n. whole-wheat सत्वग् गोधूम m. 
willow atat f. (Kashmiri at) wholly imaginary सर्वशः काल्पनिक nfn. Wilson's cloud chamber Phys. परमाणु wholly or partly पूर्णतया अथवा अंशतया मेघ-वेश्म n. wholly real सर्वशः वास्तविक nfm. wind vb. (to turn) कुंचीयन n. whooping cough=pertussis कुक्कुर- wind वात, वायु m. 
कास=अतिकास m. (Hindi कुकर खांसी) windbill=windmill Com. वातविपत्र, whorl=verticil Bot. भ्रमि m. 
चिल्लविपत्र 1. (kite bill) whorled leaf Bot. भ्रमि-पर्ण . 
wind dispersal Bot. वातापकिरण. Whyte system Ry. Eng. (in which windfall Com. अप्रत्याश पाय m. (प्रत्याशा 
locomotives are classified accord expectation) ing to wheel arrangement) चक्र- windlass हस्तघर्घरीf. (withहस्तशंकु hand विन्यास-वर्गीकरण . 
___spikes) wick वर्तिका f. 
windmill पवन-पेषणी f. (H. पवनचक्की ) w. holder वर्तिका-धर m. 
window द्वारी f. (Panjabi बारी), वातायन spirit lamp w. प्रासवदीप-वतिका f. M. wide Farritur mfn. 
window blind वातायन-अंधक M., वातायन wide-angle lens विस्तृत-कोण वीक्षm. 
यवनिका . widening स्फार m., स्फारण 2. 
window dressing I Com. अभिविन्यसन. wild वन्य mfn. 
2 विप्रलंभन . (as in the preparation wild animal वन्य पशुm. 
of B/S) wild bird वन्य पक्षी (इन्) m. 
window handle Automobile ara147 wild cherry = Prunus serotina - हस्तक m. 
Prunus virginiana (in Pharm. the windpipe Anat. श्वासनाल m. 
bark of wild cherry) वनप्रबदर m. windscreen wiper Automobile वायुरोध wildfire I दावानल 
प्रोञ्छ m. 2 (a disease of tobacco) ताम्रकूट- wind up vb. Com. अवसायन, समापन 1. मारी . 
compulsory winding up aftari wild indigo root=baptisia Pharm. समापन १. __ वननील . 
voluntary winding up स्वेच्छा wild yam वन्यालु M. 
समापन .. will 1 इच्छा 
wine=vinum द्राक्षिरा, मदिरा f. 
939﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
___w. flask द्राक्षिरा-पलिध m. 
w. telegraphist वितन्तु-संदेशक m. wine vinegar = acetum gallicum w. telegraphy वितन्तु-दूरलिखा . 
द्राक्षिरा-चुक्र . 
w. telephone-radiotelephone wing I Zool., Mil. 937 m. 
w. telephony=radiotelephony 2 (of an aeroplane) पक्ष m. (from w. waves वितन्तु-तरंग m. समरांगणसूत्रधार) 
wisdom tooth Anat. प्रज्ञा-दन्त m. wing commander (R.A.F.) अधिविमा- witch-hazel leaves = hamamelis 
निकm. 
सिलक-पत्र n. wing-cover Zool. पक्षावरण 1. 
with सहित (H. साथ) winged seeds Bot. सपक्ष बीजn. Withania Bot. अश्वगन्धाति f. (ति for wing resistance Aeronautics पक्ष-रोध m. प्रजाति genus) wings of the army=army coopera W. somnifera सामान्य अश्वगन्धा . 
tion aircraft Mil. सेनासहाय वायुयान 1. ___with compliments समादरेण, सप्रश्रयम् winning post विजय-दण्ड m. 
withdraw vb.प्रत्याहरण . winnow vb. निष्पवन, वीजन 1. 
withdrawal Com. प्रत्याहार m. winnowing basket शूर्प 1. 
withdrawer Com. प्रत्याहर्ता (-तु) m. winnowing device वीजन 1. 
withdrawn Com. प्रत्याहृत mfn. winter हेमन्त, शिशिर-ऋतु m. 
with ease=easily अनायास, सरलतया, सु winter-green (a plant) हेमन्त-हरि m. गमतया Winter's bark (used to cure scurvy) wither vb. विशोषण, म्लान n. 
प्रशीताद-वल्क m. 
withered विशुष्क mfn. winter sleep शिशिर-सुप्ति . 
withhold consent सहमति-प्रतिधारण 1. wiper प्रोञ्छ m. 
within अन्तः (Hindi अन्दर) wire तन्तु m. (from Vतन् to stretch, within a plane Math. समतल के अन्दर 
thus reis properly a metallic (Hindi) wire, that which is drawn out') without I बहिः (H. बाहर) nickel w. रूपक-तन्तु m. 
2 रहित wire-blanket Mil. (aircraft runway) 3 (excluding=exclusive of) fart 
तन्तु-कम्बल, तन्तु-मार्ग m. 
without a plane Math. समतल के बाहर wire-gauze तन्तु-जाली . 
(Hindi) wire-holder तन्तु-धर m. 
without limit Math. सीमातीत wireless I वितन्तु m. 
without recourse Com. दायित्व-रहित 2 vb.=radio vb. 
without reserve Com. संचिति-रहित , w. apparatus वितन्तु-साधिन . with respect to -प्रति, अनुसार 
w. beacon=radio beacon 
with the compliments of समादरेण, w. operator वितन्तु-चालक m. 
सप्रश्रयम् w. set-radio set 
with the stream=down the stream w. telegraph वितन्तु-दूरलिख m. W.N. (north of west) प. उ. (पश्चिमोत्तरा) 
940 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
, 
mfn. 
W.N.W. (west north west) प. वा. Woodruff key Macb. (segment of a 
(पश्चिम-वायव्या) 
disc) बिम्वखण्ड-कीला . wolf वृक m. 
wood sorrel अम्लीका f. Wolffian body = mesonephros woodwedges = keys Rly. स्फान, 
Zool. मध्यवृक्क m. 
काष्ठस्फान .. Wolffian duct Zool. मध्यवुक्क-प्रणाली f. woody काष्टीय, काष्ठमय mfn., काष्ठवत् wolfhound वृकाखेटिक m. 
(resembling wood wolframtungsten Chem. TUETT m. wool Juf f. (H. 35T) 
w. lamp चंडातु-दीप m. 
w. and hair ऊ तथा रोम ?. w. ocher=tungstite 
w. development officer 3014 w. steel=tungsten steel 
विकास अधिकारी (-इन्) . wolframate=tungstate Chen. चंडीय. wool black Col. Ind. ऊर्णा काल m. wolframic=tungstic Chem. चंडिक w. blue ऊर्णा नील m. 
w. blue-black ऊर्णा नील-कृष्ण m. wolframite Mineral. (an iron manga w. brilliant scarlet ऊर्णा भासुर शोण 
nese tungstate) चण्डलोहिज m. (-इज m. . for खनिज mineral) 
w. brown ऊर्णा बभ्रु M. wolf spider Zool. वृक-लूता . 
w. dark blue ऊर्णा असित नील m. womb=uterus Anat. गर्भाशय . 
w. deep black ऊर्णा गाढ काल m. wombat=Australian badger Zool. w. discharge black ऊर्णा मोचन 
(resembles a small bear in general काल . form) शिशुधान ऋक्ष m. 
w. discharge blue ऊर्णा मोचन नील wood 91158 n.. 
wood alcohol Chem. काष्ठ-सुषव m. 
w. fast black ऊर्णा स्थिर काल M. wood charcoal काष्ठ-अंगार m. 
w. fast blue ऊर्णा स्थिर नील m. wooden काष्ठ-, काष्ठमय mfn. 
w. fast brown ऊर्णा स्थिर बभ्रुm. wooden ware काष्ठ-भाण्ड 1. 
w. fast orange ऊर्णा स्थिर नारंगm. wood fibre Bot, काष्ठ-तन्तु m. 
w. fast violet ऊर्णा स्थिर नीललोहित Woodfordia Bot. धातकीति f. (-ति for 
प्रजाति genus) 
w. fast yellow ऊर्णा स्थिर पीत m. W. floribunda सामान्य धातकी f. w. green ऊर्णा हरि m. 
(Bengali धाए फूल) 
w. grey ऊर्णा धूसर m. wood-louse Zool. काष्ठयूका f. 
w. navy ऊर्णा नाविक m. wood naphtha काष्ठ-उत्तैल .. 
w. navy blue ऊर्णा नाविक नील m. wood peat (trees)=forest peat Bot. w. orange ऊर्णा नारंग m. __वृक्ष-जीर्णक 'n. 
w. printing black ऊर्णा मुद्रण काल m. woodpecker Zool. काष्ठकूट m. (ancient w. printing violet ऊर्णा मुद्रण नील 
word) 
लोहित m. 
941 
___m. 
__m. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
पच 12. 
w. red ऊर्णा रक्त M. w. red-black ऊर्णा रक्त-काल m. w. scarlet ऊर्णा शोण m. w. violet ऊर्णा नीललोहित m. 
w. yellow ऊर्णा पीत m. wool fat=adeps lanae Pharm. ऊणा 
वपा. woolly ऊर्णावल mfn. (from शतपथब्राह्मण) 'woolly opossum Zool. ऊर्णावल युग्माशय 
working account = manufac 
turing account Com. निर्माण-लेखा f. w. capital कर्मवाहक-पुंजी, सक्रिय-पुंजी . w. cost निर्माण-परिव्यय m. w. expenses निर्माण-व्यय m. 
w. partner सक्रिय भागी (-इन) m. working agreement कार्यवाहि-संविदा f. working alternately एकान्वेक कर्मकरण . working day=work day कार्य-दिवस . working drawing Engin. कर्मकरण उद्रेख 
m. 
m. 
w. pressure कर्मयोज्य निपीड, कर्म-निपीड, 
कर्मकरण निपीड m. w. tensile strength कर्मयोज्य पातन्य 
बल n. workman कर्मकार, कारु (ancient word) 
wootzawootz steel wootz steel (made in small crucibles, 
the process being the oldest known for making fused steel) 
==Indian steel भारत वज्रायस n. wording (expression, or act or 
manner of expressing, in words) शब्दरचना 
w. of motion प्रस्ताव-शब्दरचना. work rn. कर्म, कार्य 1. 
2 vb. कर्मकरण . 
w. and time कर्म तथा समय M. w. and wages कर्म तथा भृति f. w. day कार्य-दिवस m. w. house कर्म-गृह .. 
w. in progress क्रियमाण कर्म .. worked out Math. साधित mfn. -worker -कार worker Com. कर्मी, कर्मकारी (-इन्) m. 
part-time w. अंशकाल कर्मी (-इन् ) m. skilled w. दक्ष कर्मी (-इन्) m. 
unskilled w. अदक्ष कर्मी (-इन्) m. 
wholetime w. पूर्णकाल कर्मी (-इन्) m. work-function Phys. (it is the work 
which has to be done on an in" electron to liberate it from the 
metal) विमोचन-प्रकार्य 1. working कर्मकरण 1. 
workmanship कर्मकौशल .. workmen's compensation insur 
ance कर्मकार-हानिपूरण-आगोप m. -works -IST ' works Com. कर्मशाला f., कर्मान्त (ancient 
word), कर्म w. committee स्वामि-सेवक-समिति, 
श्रमिक-समिति/. w. cost निर्माण परिव्यय m. w. expenses निर्माण व्यय m. w. manager कर्माध्यक्ष, कर्मान्त-प्रबन्धक m. w. oncost = factory oncost 
निर्माणी-अधिव्यय m. workshop शिल्पिशाला f. (ancient word) 
w. drill शिल्पिशाला-व्यध m. work-table कर्म-पटल n. worm कृमि m. (insect कीट) 
flatworm fefcat m. hookworm अंकुशकृमि m. pinworm, seatworm सूचिकृमि m. roundworm मलसर्पm. 
942 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
tapeworm पट्टकृमि M. worm-teed Chem. (worm=screw) 
भ्रमि-बाप m. worm wheel Mach. भ्रमि-चक्र . wormwood कृमिद्रु m. (हु wood, tree) worsted (a smooth-surfaced yarn 
spun from long-stapled pure wool; also mixed, or union, yarn) 
समूर्णा wort किण्व्यकn. (from किण्व्य आक्वाथ 'in- 
fusion to be fermented') Woulfe bottle अनेकग्नीव-कूपी / wound व्रण, घातm. wound up Com. अवसायित Mfn. wound up spring कुंचीयित स्कन्द m. wrench प्रकुंच m. wrestler मल्ल m. wriggle Zool. संव्याकोचन 1. wriggling movement Zool. संव्याकोचि- 
गति . Wrightia Bot. इन्द्रयवति f. (-ति for 
प्रजाति genus) 
W. tinctoria सामान्य इन्द्रयव m. wrightine = conessine कलिंगी f. 
(कलिंग the seed of Wrightia anti dysenterica) 
wrinkle वलि m. wrist == carpus मणिवन्ध 2. wristbone मणिक m. write off Com. अपलेखन 1. 
w. off an account लेखा-अपलेखन 
. writing start n. 
writing material लेखन-सामग्री. writing off Com. अपलेखन . writing pad लेखन-चय m. writing table लेखन-पटल n. wrought iron व्यंगारित अयस् n. (decar 
bonised iron) w.r.t. (with respect to) Math. अनु W.S. (south of west) प. द. (पश्चिम 
दक्षिणा) W. S. W. (west south west) प. नै. 
(पश्चिम नैऋती) Wuchereria (threadlike worms caus 
ing elephantiasis) श्लीपदकृम्याति f. (आति for प्रजाति genus) 
W. bankrofti सामान्य श्लीपदकृमि m. Wular lake Geog. महापासरस् . Wurtz reaction Chem. (aliphatic hy 
drocarbons) अपिस्नायंगार प्रतिक्रिया f. (स्नै-स्नैहिक, अंगार-उदांगार) 
X (component along xaxis) Phys, या xanthanic acid Chem. पीतीन्यिक अम्ल 1. 
(Hindi य अक्ष पर संघटक) 
xanthate Chem. पीतीय 2. X, Xe (xenon) Chem. को (कोट्याति) xanthation Chem. (conversion into a xanth- Chem. पीत 
xanthate) पीतीय-करण . xanthaline (exanth-+Gk. bals salt) xanth-aurine Col. Ind. पीत-स्वर्णीf. 
Chem. पीतलवणी . 
xanthein Chem. पोतिन m. xanthamide (xanthic-tamide) Chem. xanthene Chem. पीतेन्या . 
पीतंतिक्तेय'n. 
xanthic Chem. पीतिक mfn. xanthane Chem. पीतीन्या . 
• xanthide Chem. पीतेय . 
943 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
xanthin Chem. पीति. 
xiphos खड्ग-+oura पुच्छ) खड्गपुच्छ xanthine Biochem. yrat f. 
गण m. xanthinuria Med. पीतिमेह m. 
Xiphosuridae Zool. खड्गपुच्छ-वंश m. xanthione Chem. atacat f. 
X-ray=Roentgen ray क्ष-रश्मि, धनवेधि xantho- Chem. पीत 
रश्मि m. xantho-carpous Bot. पीतफल mp. X-ray apparatus क्षरश्मि-साधित्र . 
(bearing yellow fruit). 
X-ray photograph = radiograph xantho-cobaltic chloride Chem. पीत- क्षरश्मि-चित्र n. 
केत्विक नीरेय 1. 
X2 test Statistics (the ratio निष्पत्ति of Xanthone Chem. पीता. 
an observed sum of squares af to xanthophore Zool. पीतिभर m. 
the cones pending variance fixed xanthophyll Biochem. पर्ण-पीत m. 
by hypothesis) व. नि. समन्वीक्षा f. xanthyl Chem. पीतल . 
X unit Phys. Riferent (1013 is it X-axis Statistics य अक्ष m. 
___ according to लीलावती) X.C. (X coupon 'without coupon”) xyl-, xylo- Chem. 165 
Com. प. र. (पर्णिका-रहित) 
xylan Chem. काष्ठिन्य . x coupon (X. C.) Com. पर्णिका-रहित xylate Chem. काष्ठीय n. 
(प. र.) 
xyle- Chem. काष्ठ X.D. (X dividend without divi- xylem Bot. GTE 11. 
dend') Com. ला. र. (लाभांश-रहित) -xylen- Chem. -काष्ठेन्य X dividend (X. D.) Com. EHTRT- xylene podne 11. 
रहित (ला. र.) 
xylene blue Col. Ind. काष्ठेन्य नील m. Xe (xenon) Chem. को (कोटयाति) 
x. chromine काष्ठेन्य वर्णी . . xenon Chem. कोटयाति m. 
x. cyanol काष्ठेन्य श्यामव m. Xenos Zool. यामपुंस्काति . (आति for x. fast blue काष्ठेन्य स्थिर नील m. 
प्रजाति genus) (याम-3 hours. The x. fast green काष्ठेन्य स्थिर हरि M. 
•males survive a few hours) 
x. fast violet काष्ठेन्य स्थिर नीललोहित xerophthalmia Med. शुष्काक्षिकोप m. xerophyte Bot. शुष्कोद्भिद्. 
x. light yellow काष्ठेन्य लघु पीत M. xerophytic characters Bot. शुष्कोद्भिद् x. milling red काष्ठेन्य संकोचन रक्त me 
लक्षण. . 
x. milling yellow काष्ठेन्य संकोचन X.I. (X interest 'without interest') 
Com. व. र. (वृद्धि-रहित) 
x. red काष्ठेन्य रक्त m. x interest (X.I.) Com. वृद्धि-रहित (व.र.) x. violet काष्ठेन्य नीललोहित M. xiphi-sternum-metasternum Zool. x. yellow काष्ठेन्य पीत m. . 
(posterior cartilage of the sternum xylenol Chem. काष्ठेन्यव m. 
in amphibians) पश्चोरोस्थि . xylenyl Chem. काष्ठेन्यल: . xiphosura-Gnathopoda Zool. (Gk. xylic Chem. काष्ठिक mfr. 
944 
पीत m. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
xylidic acid Chem. काष्ठेयिक अम्ल 1. xylidide Chem. काष्ठेयेय n. xylidine (from xylene) Chem. काष्ठेयी. xylidine orange Col. Ind. काष्ठेयी नारंग 
m. 
x. ponceau काष्ठेयी अधिरक्तापीत m. 
x. scarlet काष्ठेयी शोण m. xylin- Chem. काष्ठि 
pyro-xylin अग्नि-काष्ठि f. xylindein (Xylintindigo) Chem. 
काष्ठनीलिन m. xylitol Chem. काष्ठितव m. xylitone (sylate + -One) Chem. काष्ठिता 
xylo-, xyl- Chem. #165 xyloidin काष्ठाभि /. xylol Chem. काष्ठव m. xylonic acid Chem. काष्ठायिक अम्ल 1. xylonite=celluloid काष्ठकपूर m. xylo-quinone Chem. काष्ठ-विज्वरा. xylose=wood sugar Chem. काष्ठधु n. xyloside (xyl- t -oside) Chem. 
काष्ठध्वेय n. xyloyl Chem. #7667 n. (FICE-HTET) xylyl Chem. काष्ठल ॥. xylylene Chem. काष्ठलेन्या . X, Y,Z या, रा, ला ___x, y, z य, र, ल 
Y (Young's modulus) Phys. रे (रेखीय yeatly (annual) वार्षिक mfn. 
प्रत्यास्थता मापांक) 
yeast squa nh. Y (yttrium) Chem. भृ (भृशला) ____y. black Col. Ind. प्रकिण्व काल m. yak = Bos grunniens Zool. चमर m. y. cell प्रकिण्व-कोशा. 
(ancient word) 
yellow पीत min. yapok = water opossum Zool. yellow base Col. Ind. पीत पीठ 1. 
जलयुग्माशय m. 
y. berries पीत बदरी. yard (yd.) यष्टि f. (य., यष्.) 
y. chlorophyll पीत पर्णशाद m. yawning जम्भण 1., जृम्भा f. 
y. coralline पीत प्रवाली /. yaw root=stillingia Pharm. (pro y. cutch पीत गायत्री . . 
motes flow of saliva) लाला-मुल 1. y. developer पीत विकासक m. yawszpian=frambesia (resembles y. earth पीत मृत्तिका f. .. mild syphilis) न्युपदंश m. 
y. fast to soap स्वेफन-स्थिर पीत m. y axis Statistics र अक्ष m. 
y. fat colour पीत स्नेह रंग m. Yb (ytterbium) Chem. श्व (श्वेतला) y. ochre पीत गैरिक m. yd. (yard) य., यष्. (यष्टि) 
y. ultramarine पीत पारसमुद्रिक m. year वर्ष m. 
yellow brass पीत पित्तल 1. calendar y. पत्री-वर्ष m. (पत्री=तिथि- yellow-bronze पीत-कांस्य ॥. 
पत्री) 
yellow-brown पीत-बभ्रु mfn. financial year आर्थिक वर्ष m. yellow corn पीत धान्य. y. book वर्ष-पुस्त 
yellow fever पीत-ज्वर m. 
945 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
yellow-green a-aft mfn. 
-yl (used in names of radicals, esp. yellowish ापीत nfn. 
univalent ones) Chem. (HET) yellowish green ापीत mfn. -ylene (-31 + -ene) Chem. -stret yellowish red रक्तापीत mfn. 
-ylidene (-ylene-- wide) Chem. aria n. yellowish red yellow Flauta mfn. -yl-yl -567 (of the two of the first is yellowish yellow green guitara mfn. generally changed to 1 for ease yellow jasmine = Gelsemium of pronunciation) 
sempervirens=Carolina jessa- -yne (variant of ine) Chem. 47 m. mine asifa f. 
-ynol (variant of inol) Chem. -479 (-57) yellow jasmine root=gelsemium -ynone (variant of inone) Chem. - 
Pharm. tafa-4 n. 
(-34T) yellow-legged gull Zool. Hayre- yoghurt af n. 
farsit f. 
yohimbe Pharm. (its bark yields a yellow marrow पीत-मज्जा. 
hydrochlorate useful in functional yellow mercuric oxide = hydr. impotency) pagei m. 
argyri oxidum flavum (hydrarg. yohimbine praecepit f. 
oxid. flav.). Pharm. qrarf ITT 1. yolk Etie ., yusuta na yellow mercuric oxide ointment yolk gland Zool. EFE-TFT m. 
=unguentum hydrargyri oxidi yolk nucleus Embryol. qusmarafic f. flavi (ung.hydrarg. oxid. fiav.) TTT yolk plug Embryol, que ta-fi m. 
7 TOT FETT m. 
young बाल m. . yellow ocher r पीत गैरिक 1. 
young and old बाल तथा वृद्ध m. 2 (a colour) taraf n. young fustic Tout rigg m. yellow-olive पीत-तैलबदर ॥. 
young one (of a bird) Zool. 79 m. yellowroot 1 (Hydrastis canadensis) Young's modulus=Young's mo 
Bot. m. 
dulus of elasticity 2 = hydrastis = golden seal Young's modulus of elasticity = Pharm. via no 
stretch modulus=Young's mo yellow sienna=yellow ocher 
dulus -- modulus of elasticity yellow spot = macula lutea Zool. Phys. far-FT91. = MIFTTT-#1917, 
पीत बिन्दुः-सुस्पष्ट बिन्दु m. 
frienta STRIKT-AT41F 'm. :) yellow ultramarine पीत पारसमुद्रिक 
young sponge बाल छिद्रिष्ठ'n. : yield vb. EHFT Mh 
young stock Agriculture ana e m. yield 1. sifa, Benfet f., 344 m. 
Your Excellency Corresp: .45 35 gross y. 1991-TIET f. 
min. 
· net y. T*- f. .... . Your Highness Corresp. ETT yield point Mech. (at which permanent Your Holiness Corresp. par 
distortion begins) fermo-farm. Your Honour Corresp. 7 97. 
946 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
Your Lordship Corresp. sta Your Majesty Corresp. 29, 1991 yours faithfully=faithfully yours 
Corresp. भवन्निष्ठ youts obediently Corresp. भवदाज्ञाकारी 
(-) yours respectfully Corresp. भवत्संमान 
0 (-5) yours sincerely = sincerely yours 
Corresp. 7291- TOT (-) yours truly = truly yours Corresp. 
#91-HUT (-) Y-shape frauit Yt (yttrium) Chem. (TTT) -yte (for naming rocks as against 
-ite for minerals, as proposed by 
J.D.Dana in 1868) -434 ytterbia (ytterbium oxide) Chem. 
999 f. ytterbic Chem. श्वेतिक mfn. ytterbium Chem. श्वेतला. yttria (yttrium oxide) Chem. 29 
yttrialite Mineral. Ef 1. (-567 
for eft mineral) yttric Chem. Ef mfr. yttri-ferous Chem. 7-** mfn. yttrium Chem. भृशला f. 
y. nitrate a PTE n. 
y. oxide RIET TE N. yttro- (yttrium) Chem. 787 yttro-cerite Mineral. 77-75ftet m. 
(-इज for खनिज mineral) yttro-columbite Mineral. 7- fus 
m. (-इज for खनिज mineral) yttro-crasite (Gk. krasis a mixing; 
a hydrous titanate of the yttrium earths and thorium) Mineral. - 
afast m. (-59 for afire mineral) yttro-fluorite Mineral. 7tffam m. 
(-इज for खनिज mineral) yttro-gummite Mineral. 7-fuff m. 
(-इज for खनिज mineral) yttro-tantalite Mineral. TT-EFECT m. 
(-इज for खनिज mineral) Y-tube faut-F 12. 
tu farm. z. baseline Statistics शून्य-आधार-रेखा 
z, correction Phys. 5754-1797 n. z. error Phys. Tr-fam. z, method=null method Tri-eifa 
Z (atomic number) Chem. # (Thr 
WATF) Zanthoxylum Bot. तेजवल्कलति f. (-ति 
for geile genus) 
X.alatum सामान्य तेजवल्कल m. zebu=humped oxit (1) m. zenith farsifare m. zeolite Chem, जलसैकतिज m. (-इज for 
खनिज mineral) zero Trun. (fotre point) 
z. algebra शून्य-बीजगणितn, z, axial determinant Math, free 
2. point Mach. (pole of polar co 
ordinates) if fare m. z. position Phys. 7F-Frafa f. zinc vb. pat 11. 
(to treat of coat with zinc; gal 
947 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
vanize) कुप्यातु-साधन, रोपण... 
2. hypo-phosphite कुप्यातु उप zinc Chem. कुप्यातु M. (Hindi जस्त) 
भास्वित Z. acetate कुप्यातु:शुक्तीय n. . Z. jodide कुप्यातु जम्बेय . 2. alkyl कुप्यातु क्षारल . 
'Z. lactate कुप्यातु दुग्धीय १. z. amide कुप्यातु तिक्तेय . 
. 'Z. mercury cyanide कुप्यातु पारद 2. ammonium chloride कुप्यातु श्यामेय . 
तिक्तातु नीरेय . . 
Z. methide कुप्यातु प्रोदेय 1. 'z. ammonium sulphate कुप्यातु Z. methyl कुप्यातु प्रोदलं . ___तिक्तातु शुल्बीय . 
2. nitrate कुप्यातु भूयीय n. . 2. arsenate कुप्यातु नेपालीय .. 
z. oleate कुप्यातु म्रक्षीय .. z. auxiliary==z. dust 
Z. oxalate कुप्यातु तिग्मीय n. z. benzoate कुप्यातु धूपीय 1. 
Z. oxide कुप्यातु जारेय .. . z. blende Col. Ind. कुप्यातु अन्धन m. ' z. palmitate fara arsita n. z. bloom= hydro-zincite Mine Z. per-manganate कुप्यातु अति-लोहकीय ____ral. कुप्यातु-कुसुम n. 
___n. z. borate कुप्यातु टांकीय n. . 
Z. per-oxide कुप्यातु अति-जारेस .. z. bromide कुप्यातु दुरेय 1. 
Z. phenol-sulphonate कुप्यातु दर्शव z. carbonate कुप्यातु प्रांगारीय . 
शुल्बायीय.. z. chloride कुप्यातु नीरेय . 
Z. phosphate कुप्यातु भास्वीय 1. 2. chrome Col. Ind. कुष्यातु वर्णक m. 'Z. phosphide कुप्यातु भास्वेय :. z. citrate कुप्यातु निम्बवीय... 
z. potassium ferro-cyanide कुप्यातु z. copper-acid cell, कुप्यातु ताम्राम्ल दहातु अयस्य-श्यामेय n. 
कोशा . 
Z. resinate कुप्यातु उद्यासीय . . cyanide कुप्यातु श्यामेय . . 
z. salicylate कुप्यातु नम्रलीय . 2. dust कुप्यातु-धूलि f. 
z. silicate कुप्यातु सैकतीय n. Z. ethide कुप्यातु दक्ष्वेय . 
z. silico-fluoride कुप्यातु सैकत-तरस्वेय Z. ethyl कुप्यातु दक्षुल .. . 
n. z. filings कुप्यातु चूर्ण १. (रेत्रीक्षेप). 2. spar = smithsonite Mineral. z. fiuoride कुप्यातु तरस्वेय . . . . . 'कुप्यातु-धात्विया f. Z. foil कुप्यातु पर्णn. . 
'z. spinel=gahnite Mineral. कुप्य z. form-aldehyde-sulphoxylate ___ स्फटीयिज m. (-इज for खनिज 
कुप्यातु वन-सुव्युद-शुल्ब-जारलीय. . ___mineral) . . . z. formate कुप्यातु वम्रीय n. . 
z. stearate कुप्यातु.वसीय 1. 1 , 2. granules कुप्यातु-कणिका .. z. sulph-anilate कुप्यात शुल्ब-नीलीय . 2. gray कुप्यातु धूसर m. 
Z. sulphate कुप्यातु शुल्बीयं . . Z..green=cobalt green Col. Ind. z. sulphide कुप्यातु शुल्बेय ?... - कुप्यातु हरि . . 
'z. sulphide.white: Col. Ind: कुप्यातु .agrey कुप्यातुः धूसर ... 
. शुल्बेय श्वेत m. 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
z. tannate कुप्यातु शल्कीय n. 
2 (to impregnate with zinc) कुप्यातु Z. tartrate कुप्यातु न्यासवीयn. 
व्यापन 1. z. thio-cyanate कुप्यातु गन्ध-श्यामीय zingerone = zingiberone Chem. ___n. 
शृंगवेरा z. uranyl acetate कुप्यातु किरणल Zingiber (zingib.) = ginger Pharm. 
शुक्तीय n. 
. (the English word is from. z. valerate कुप्यातु बलीय n. 
____ Sanskrit) शृंगवेर . 'Z. vitriol कुप्यातु काचर n. 
Zingiber Bot. शृंगवेरति . (-ति for 'Z. white कुप्यातु श्वेत m. 
प्रजाति genus) 2. wool कुप्यातु ऊर्णा . 
Z.. officinalis सामान्य शृंगवेर m. Z. yellow Col. Ind. कुप्यातु पीत m. Zingiberaceae Bot. शृंगवेर-कुल १. zinci-(denoting the presence of zinc) Zingiberene Chem. शृंगवेरेण्य 1. 
Chem. कृप्य 
zingiberine शृंगवेरी . . zincic Chem. कुप्यिक mfn. 
zingiberol Chem. शृंगवेरव M. zincide Chem. कुप्येय . 
zingiberone शृंगवेरा. zinci-ferous कप्य-भर mfn. 
zircite (zirconium + -ite; native zir zincification Chem. कुप्यायन n. 
conia) Mineral. गोमेदिज m. (-इज for zincify vb. Chem. कुप्यायन ?. 
खनिज mineral) (to coat or impregnate with zinc; zirco-fluoride Chem. गो-तरस्वेय . to galvanize) कुप्यातु-आवरण, कुप्यातु- zircon गोमेद m. व्यापन . . 
zirconate Chem. गोमेदीय . . zinci oxidum=zinc oxide Pharm. zirconia Chem. (zirconium dioxide) 
कुप्यातु जारेय. 
गोमेदजा f. zincite = red zinc ore, red.oxide zirconic Chem. गोमेदिक mfn. ___of zinc Mineral. (native . zinc zirconi-ferous गोमेद-भर mfn. 
.. oxide) कुप्यजारेयिज m. ' (-इज for zirconi-fluoride Chem. गोमेद-तरस्वेय n. 
खनिज mineral) 
zirconium Chem. गोमेदातु m. zincky (pertaining to or containing Z. nitrate गोमेदातु भूयीय . 
zinc, or having its appearance) z. oxide (technical) गोमेदातु जारेय कुप्यिय, कुप्ययुत, कुष्यरूप mfn. 
____7. (परिभाषित) zinco- (zinc) कुप्य 
2. oxychloride गोमेदातु जार-नीरेय ?. zinco adj. कुप्य,कुप्यक mfn. . 
Z. potassium oxalate गोमेदातु दहातु zincoid कुप्याभ mfn: .. . 
तिग्मीय. zincolith=enamel white. . ., . z. silicate गोमेदातु सैकतीय... zincous कुप्यिय, कुप्यरूप, कुप्ययुत mr. 
z. sulphate गोमेदातु शुल्बीय 1. zincuret vb. Chem. कुप्येयन !' 
zircono- (zirconium) Chem. गोमेद I (to combine with zinc) 'कुप्यातु zircono-fluoride Chem. गोमेद-तरस्वेयn. योजन . . 
zirconyl Chem. गोमेदल . 
949﻿THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
Zizyphus Bot. बदरति 1. (-ति for प्रजाति zoological survey प्राणिकीय प्रापरीक्षण n. 
genus) 
zoology sufurait f., STORTFT n. Z. jujuba #TATUT m. 
Zoomastigina Zool. (a subclass, they Zn (zinc) Chem. (Forg) 
contain no chlorophyll) TG -zoa muita 
III: 13, p. Zoantharia = Hexacoralla Zool. zoophilous flowers Bot.. sifurecifra 
1914-19T: m.pl. 
984 n. Zoanthidae Zool. कुसुमजीव-वंश m. zoophysics (zoology which relates Zoanthidea Zool. कुसुमजीव-गण m. . to the physical structure and uses Zoanthus Zool. w fiqat f. (5far for of the organs of animals) प्राणिदैहिकी 
stifa genus) -zoic Geol. 64 
Zoophyta Zool. foto: m. pl. -zoid (note that 78- will begin the zoophyte Zool. fagstoft (-5) m. 
word, against zoid which ends zoophytography of samfuqti na the word) 
zoophytology afsa-sifurait f. zona ciliaris=corona ciliaris af- zooplasty Surg. Sifat f. 
999 m. 
zoospore (swarm spore) Bot. Tai TOT zona fasciculata=fascicular zone m. (they are motile) 
Zool.' (layer of columnar o zoo-sterol Chem. gefur-faunia m. FIFHORT-FT m. 
zor zee charts Statistics गोमूत्र-चित्र . zona reticularis . reticular zone Zr zirconium) Chem. TT (TTCTT) 
Zool. T-F m. 
Z-shaped Zool. ACT-WEY, FETITE-E34 zone I (region) saat m. 
mfn. 2 off, afcara m. 
. Z test Statistics (the natural logarithm zone of elongation Bot. दीर्वभावी प्रदेश छेदा of the ratio निष्पत्ति of two 
m. 
estimated standard deviations) ft. zonula ciliaris =zonule of Zinn 2. Aretat f. 
(suspensory ligament of the lens) Zwickau green' new green 
FESTE-FIR f. 
zygantrum Zool. (a fossa on the zoo-chemistry sTfO-HTC 1. 
posterior surface of the neural zoo-geography syfor-40 n. 
arch of vertebrae of snakes or zoogloea 'stage Bact. Tatuatorem lizards) 2114-art n. in 
zygapophysis = articulating pro -zooid 46 (English word is a suffix, cess Zool. riisiga m.“ 
while the Indian equivalent is a zygoma cheek bone = malar 
bone = zygomatic bone Tostfr zooid Zool. (anindividual in a colony) 
a m. 
zygomatic bone = zygoma 
prefix) 
950 
THE GREAT ENGLISH-INDIAN DICTIONARY 
zygomatic nerve Anat, Tusha f. 2 (pertaining to a zymogen) fafite zygomatico-facial nerve Anat. जनिक mfn. 
TETA-aa f. 
zymogenic bacteria किण्वजन शाकाणु m. zygomatico-temporal nerve store- zymogenous (producing fermenta 
har f. 
tion) किण्वजनक mfn. zygomorphic (flower)=monosym zymoid fuatu mfn. 
_metric Bot. एकसंमितीय mfn. zymology कैण्विकी, किण्वन-विद्या . Zygophyllaceae Bot. गोक्षुरकुल n. zymolysis = enzymolysis Biochem. zygosphene Zool. (articular process facier n. (action of enzymes) 
on the anterior surface of the zymo-meter =zymosi-meter fefivaat neural arch of vertebrae of snakes FTT m. which fits into the zygantrum) zymo-phosphate Biochem. 51fa चापस्फान 1. 
Fate n. (found in yeast) 'zygospore Bot. युक्तबीजाणु m. 
zymoplastic Biochem. विकरघटक mfn. zygote Biol. 1 year f. (sc. *ar) 
(they are believed to participate 2 (combination nucleus) ICE in the formation of enzymes) 
zymoscope Biochem. किण्वनेक्ष M. (for zygotene = amphitene Zool. YHTEE determining fermenting power) 
M. 
zymosimeter=zymometer zygote nucleus = combination zymosis (a process analogous to 
nucleus antufe f. 
___ fermentation) आकिण्वना f. zym-, zymo- fopvan 
zymo-sterol Biochem. (obtained from zymase Biochem. Fusce m. 
yeast fat) प्रकिण्व-सान्द्रव m. zyme Biochem. किण्व .. 
zymo-sthenic Biochem. (pertaining -zyme Biochem. (enzyme) facta 
to or designating an agent that zymic (due to fermentation) farfuce strengthens the activity of an 
mfn. 
enzyme) विकर-बलदीय mfn. . z. acid fenfuct Train n. 
zymotechnics (art of inducing and zymo- ferva 
applying fermentation) किण्वन-कला zymogen Biol. fapienta m. (producing f. 
enzyme) 
zymotic Med. fenfua nafn. zymo-genesis Biochem. fapi-an n. zymurgy (a branch of applied che zymogenic 1. (producing fermenta mistry dealing with fermentation 
tion) किण्वजनक mfn. 
processes) Faruqi-zapat n.