 3739 पाणिनीयव्याकरणसूत्रा 
BOOK I. CHAPTER FIRST. 
afe git ucifa l argi, era-Trn वृत्तिः ॥ इशिनः संज्ञान विधीयते प्रत्येकमाचां वर्णनां सामान्येन तद्भावितानामतडा. facri II 
1. PT, and are called vriddhi. This defines the word vriddhi. The letters IT, and t are vriddhi letters. The sutra consists of three words vșiddhi, at and aich. means the long T, the final a being indicatory only, and is for the sake of 
the pratyâhâra aich, and the pratyâhâra er means the letters and wit. 
The indicatory a in vrą serves the purpose of showing that the very form of having two måtrâs or prosodial measure, is to be taken. This also joins with the succeeding vowels è and wit by the rule of a4T (I. 1.70) or that "which precedes or succeeds ą," and indicates that these vowels must be taken as having two mâtrâs only, though they may be the result of the combination of vowels whose aggregate mâtrâs may be more than two. A short vowel has one måtrâ, a long vowel has two, and a consonant has half a mátrâ. Thus by a rule of arm or euphonic conjunction of letters #+T=T, as #FI + ST*:= HETETE. Here T has two mâtrâs and not four. So also in 35: the vowel e the resultant of tê has only two, not four, mâtrâs. 
Thus the initial vowels in the following secondary derivative nouns are vriddhi forms of their primitive vowels. yy: "bodily", from t ; 'body' graag : "optional", from "option"; 7 9:"the son of Upagu", from the word 49: meaning "a sage called Upagu." Similarly in grofter: "belonging to the house" the wis radical, and is also called vriddhi. The word vriddhi occurs in sûtras like farg9TTI (VII. 2. 1.) “Let the final ro of the base get vriddhi substitute before the affix ft of the Parasmaipada". 
One To: 1211 ac falla-T, TU: 11 इत्तिः ॥ गुरपशन संज्ञात्वेन विधीयते प्रत्येकमदेडां वर्णानां सामान्येन तकावितानामतका fagnare ! 
2. , & and i are called guna. Each one of the letters 7, t and whether radical or secondary is called a guna letter; as the initial vowels in the following:- ff," he 
GUNA VRIDDHI PARIBHASHA 
[BK. I. CH. I. §. 3 
moves"; ga "he comes", vieta "he goes." Here the initial vowels of the roots F, , and have been respectively gunated into y, and before the third person singular termination pa. 
The term Guna occurs in sàtras like faadu: (VII. 3.-82). "Let there be guna substitute for the ik of the root fag " to melt.".. 
par goreci u z nazifall : 1ga-egit, (art:, 74:) Tha: il grayut FTITTAT (TETT TŪT AT) Persyaruna ar pa ferrat arresantu 
.. 3. In the absence of any special rule, when ever guna or vriddhi is enjoined about any expression by using the terms guna or vriddhi, it is to be understood to come in the room of the ik vowels only. (i, u, ri; and li long and short,) of that expression. 
This is a paribhasha sätra, and is useful in determining the original letters, in the place of which the substitute gupa and vriddhi letters will come. The present rule will apply where there is the specification of no other particular rule. . . Thus satra VII. 3.84 declares:"when a sarvadhituka or an ardhadhi. tuka affix follows there is guga of the base." Here the sthani or the original expression which is to be gunated, is not specified, and to complete the sense, the word "ikah” must be read into the satra, The rule then being, « when a S. or an A. affix follows there is guna of the ik vowels of the base." The gupa of or is ; of or *, is , of Form is , of is 43; and their Viddhi is t, u, yr and I respectively. Thus otta 
twiaria "he leads." 
Therefore, wherever in any rule in this Grammar, guga or vriddhi is ordained by employing the terms guņa or vriddhi, there the word "ikah" in the genitive case, meaning "in the place of ik", is to be supplied to complete the sense. 
The word 'ik' is thus understood in the following rules, and is there qualified by the term F or 'base':- tu: (VII. 3. 82) 1: (VII. 2. 114) goryTy &c., (VII. 3. 86); stenar (VII. 4.11) PETIT TU: (VII 4.16) FEFT &c., (VI. 4. 156). 
In the following sâtras, the term 'ik' is understood and qualifies the word ånga or base, syre (VII. 3, 83), arturganfurgast: (VII. 3, 84). ' 
These sätras will be explained in their proper placeş. 
The word 'ik' has been used in tho satra to show that the long , g or the diphthongs and for the consonants, are not to take gupaor vriddhi-by this 
BK: 1. CH: I. gi 4. ). 
EXCEPTION TO GUNA AND VRIDDHI. 
.:5. 
· rule, as in the following examples any "a carriage", Hrefa "he feels aversion," afya" confined." . 
Here arra is formed by adding the affix fay, third person singular ter mination, with the class a affix Ty, to the root rot; aso+faq=r+ + 
fa. At this stage, rule VII. 3. 84, would require the guna substitution of the vowel of the base before the sarvadhituka termination T; the gupa substitute of e being , there would be a totala. But this is wrong, the letter È, being not included in the pratyâhåra ik, is not affected by rule VII. 3. 84, and there is no guna substitution in this case. Similarly there is no change in the long पाof यानम्. Thus या + ल्युत् (III. 3. 115)यानम् (VII. I. 1). Here had there been guņa by Rule VII. 3. 84; the T of , would have been changed into ", and the form would have been 7 which is wrong. But it is not so, as qT is not an a vowel. So also 3*+ fa afya. Here, there is no guna substitution in the place of the consonant. 
The repetition of the words guna and vriddhi ir. this sútra, (though by refer or the supplying of a word from the previous satra, these words followed from the two preceding sutras) is for the purpose of indicating that, this is a restrictive rule applicable only there, where guņa or vșiddhi has been ordained by the employment of the words gupa or vriddhi. Therefore, it is not so in the following cases :-ut: "sky", qayT: "way" #: "he," pri "this." at: is the nominative singular of the base for 'It is formed by rule VII. 1. 84, which declares that "in the nominative singular the Ictter at takes the place of P." Herc the letter is no doubt a vrid. dhi letter, but as this substitution is not enjoined by the enunciation of the term vriddhi, ut does not take the place of the vowel rol feat, but it replaces the final . Thus ff +T+ =ut: 
Similarly rule VII. 1. 85, declares that of the word gray, or is the substitute. The T is a vșiddhi letter no doubt, but not being enunciated by the term vșiddhi, it takes the place of an offer and not of 5. Thus we have GFUT:, the 7 being added by VII. 1. 87 
Similarly : from a, which is formed by VII: 2. 102 "short is the substitute of tyad, &c.," Here takes the place of g. Thus we have at, which is changed again into a by VII. 2. 106. 
न धातुलाप आर्द्धधातुके ॥४॥ पदानि ॥ न , धातु-लोपे, Sigurge, (quest ) u 
वृत्तिः ॥ धात्वेकदेशो धातुस्तस्य जोपो यस्मिन्नार्द्धधातुके सदार्द्धधातुकं धानुलोपं सत्र में गुणपद्धी प्राप्नुतस्ते न भवतः। 
4. The Guna and vriddhi substitutions, which otherwise would have presented themselves, do not 
ExcePTION TO GUNA AND VRIDDHI: 
(BK. I. CH: I. $ 4. 
werd 
take place, when such an ardhadhatuka (III. 4. 114) affix follows, which causes a portion of the root to be elided. 
This is an exception to sâtra 3. By that sätra iks were to be gunated or vșiddhied and by sätra VII. 3. 84, the root is to be gupated before all ardhadhituka terminations. All primary affixes, that are applied directly to roots in Sanskrit, are divided into two broad classes, called sårva dhâtuka and årdhadhâtuka. The affixes marked with an indicatory T (called 
Ta ), and the conjugational affixes, such as faq , : &c., (called far ) are sårvadhatuka ; all other affixes are called årdhadhâtuka. 
Though by the general rule, VII. 3. 84, the root is to be gupated before årdhadhâtuka terminations, yet it is not to be so, before those affixes which cause the site 'lopping off or ellipses' of a portion or a member of the original dhấtu Thus the termination Fair is a first person singular termination of the future tense ( CE ) and is an ardhadhâtuka termination; when this is added to root for 'to excel'the rol fs becomes gunated and we have Frau “I shall or will excel." But in those cases where there is a lope of the member of a root form, caused by an affix, there is no guṇation. Thus in Fior. "ágreat cutter," the original root is o "to cut" which forms the Intensive verb atay. In forming the noun of agency from the verb IICIT, an ardhadhatuka suffix 
y III. 1. 134, is added. Thus GLE +. At this stage, by force of sūtra II. 4. 74. which declares that "before the affix (III. 1. 134) the y of the Intensive verb must be suppressed,” the ya is dropped and we have ICT+. Here by the general rule VII. 3. 84, the final 5 would have been gunated. But by virtue of the present sâtra, no guna takes place, be cause here on account of the ardhadhâtuka affix TV, a portion of the root, namely, 7, has been elided ; therefore no guņa takes place. Thus we have HGT: “a great cutter.” 
The word ng “root” has been used in the sûtra, in order to indicate that the exception does not apply where there is an elision of an anubandha or of an affix. As in Den + Ta= + THT = far. Here the indicatory letter 
has been elided, but that does not prevent gunation. Similarly in the affix forç is added to the root fty "to injure.” Thus ftes+frey (III. 2. 75.) -ftę+(I. 3. 2. and 3.)- fryt. (VI. 1. 67.) Here the affix Ę is elided, but nevertheless, the guṇa substitute must take place in fię. Thus we have fry+out? (VII. 3. 86 and I. 1. 62) - 1 (VIII. 2. 39). 
The word ardhadhâtuka has been used to indicate that a sarvadha. tuka affix which causes the elision of a portion of a root, does not prevent gupa or vriddhi' as in tretia, (Rig Veda IV. 58.3) "he roars much." + 
toa (III. 1. 22). 19+faqethe+fa (II. 4. 74.). Here the sarvadhituka 
BK. I. CH. I. §. 5.) 
EXCEPTIONS TO GUNA AND VRIDDHI 
affix fag causes the elision of y, a portion of the root. The guna substitution however takes place, and we have + + (VII. 3. 94) - t ra, the augment being added by sūtra VII. 3. 94. 
The word "ikab" of the previous sätra is understood in this sūtra also. The ik letters only are not gunated or vșiddhied before such ardhadbatuka affixes; the other vowels may do so. Thus in it the equation is as follows:- +**FT+fay= +*+T(VI. 4. 33). Here the drdhadhátuka affix fyon has caused a portion of the root 57, to be suppressed, vise, the letter has been clided. But nevertheless the ♡ of yt is vriddhied before because y is not included in the pratyahara ik; and the exception contained in the present søtra only applies to the ik letters. So also ***+ (III. 3.18)=(1+ (VI. 4. 27.) - TTT: (VII. 2. 116. and VII. 3. 52). 
fufau uga agifer o foram-f-157-7 (quast, a) u इतिः॥ विशनिमित्ने ये गुणवृद्धी प्राप्नुतस्वे न भवतः । 
5. And that, which otherwise would have caused guna or vriddhi, does not do so, when it has an indica tory क् ग् or . 
Thus the past participle terminations and are ardhadhe tuka affixes, which would, by the general rule VII. 3. 84, have caused guna, but as their indicatory letter at is , the real terminations being, it and 896, they do not cause guna. Therefore, when these terminations are added to a root, the ik of the root is not gunated. Thus with the root fog "to collect" we have Ber: or for, . "to hear," ya:, var; ft; "to fear" ta, tart. 
Similarly the terminations pag anfora, y ry, RTT, P , &c., are all farg terminations the indicatory letters of all being ,' the real affixes being u, prora, y &c. &c. &c. Before these, the root is not gupated. 
Thus we have from y "to bear" ya, from PART "to pierce" Artem. 
The terms pana &c., of this sûtra are in the locative or seventh casc. The force of this case termination here is that of PTAT or cause, that is the guna or vșiddhi which would otherwise have been caused, does not take place, if an affix is part ifra, fog. Thus all ardhadhâtuka and sårvadhatuka affixes cause gupation of the final ik of the inflective base (VII. 3. 84.) Thus the Sårvadhâtuka affix Ty( ) in the following: 
+ y +fagra +9+ fa fa "he is.” Similarly sårvadhituka and ardbadhâtuka affixes cause the guna substitution of the short penulti mate ik of the inflective base (VII. 3. 85.) Thus N + TL + faq ni. 
The general force of the locative case in an aphorism is to cause the operation directed, on the expression immediately preceding it (1. 1. 66.) If the force of the locative case in the present satra were also that as 
&. EXCEPTION TO GUNA AND VRIDDHI... [BK. I. CH., I. &. 5..... 
explained in l. 1. 66, then the interpretation would be this:-An affix having an indicatory k, g or i, would not cause the gupa substitution of the vowel ik, immediately preceding it. The case of the penultimate short ik will not be covered by it. Then though the rule may apply to f+#T=f79: "collected" it would not apply to Por+FT; there would be nothing to bar the gupa subs titution of the penultimate F of Par. This however is prevented by explaining the locative as one of "occasioa" and thus + FT : “ broken.". 
Similarly from the root f we have a word f y:'victorious,' in which the affix Th has an indicatory L Thus # + T = f : "victorious" (III. 2. 139), so also RITE: "durable," 
Similarly the affix, va is a fost affix, the real suffix being , the being merely indicatory. Therefore when we is added to a root, there is no gunation or vșiddhing. Thus we have from fag" to know'. FF: 
Similarly by I. 2. 4, all sårvadhâtuka affixes that are not marked by an indicatory y, are treated as fog. Thus the second person singular termi nation तस् is हित, and we have चिनुत : “they two collect," similarly चिन्वन्ति , " they collect," 7 + = 9€:"cleansed," TREE " they cleanse." 
The phrase "when indicated by the term ik" is understood in this stra. The prohibition, therefore, applies to ik vowels only, and not to all vowels in general. Thus by III. 1. 30, the root ay " to desire" takes the affix furg; of this affix the letters and are indicatory, the real affix is . The force of g is to cause vsiddhi (VII. 2. 116). The indicatory does not prevent such vșiddhi, as the letter of any is not included in ik. Thus we have A+ = + = True "he desires." 
According to the wish of the author of the Mahabhishya, the verb Tot optionally takes vriddhi, before kit or nit affixes beginning with a vowel. Asqitea or Trip "they rub." Here in this sätra there is prohibition of the guna of the short penultimate ik also. 
The indicatory of the verbal tense affixes i.e., Te, forse, C, E, is an exception to this rule of for. This is an inference deduced from III. 4. 104 which declares " when the sense is that of benediction, then the augment are of Foo is as if it were distinguished by an indicatory ." 
There would have been no necessity of making as a fait, if fore were a डित, but the very fact of making यासुद कित् indicates by implication or is 
ra that the final 7 of forg, F &c. does not make these tense affixes isa. Thus in me or Imperfect tense we have dir "he collected" (gree + A - * - went - 44 .) 
दीधी वेवीटाम् ॥६॥ पदानि ॥ दीधी-वेवी-इटाम् ,(गुणवडीन)। वृत्तिः । दीधीवेश्योोटिवये गुणबद्धी प्राप्नुवस्वे न भवतः ॥६॥ 
BK. I. CH. 1. 86, 7-] 
SANYOGA DEFINED. 
6. Theguna and vriddhi substitutions, which would otherwise have presented themselves, do not however come, in the place of the vowels of didhi'to shine,' and vevi' to go,' and of the augment called s. 
The roots it and doever take the gura or vriddhi substitutions under ordinary circumstances. Thus the affix or generally causes vșiddhi subs. titution when added to any root; and so the affly Fre causes guņa. But these affixes when applied to the verbs didhi and vext, never cause vřiddhi or 
(VI. 1. 77). So also tft + F = n * (VII. 1. 1) = a. Similarly from t we have out and 1964 . In the Vedas, however, these verbs take gupa. Thus the (Rig Ved. X. 98. 7), and q : (Rig Ved. V. 40.5). These two verbs are confined generally to the Vedic literature, and the present rule therefore, seems to be an unnecessary prohibition; as they take gupa in spite of such prohibition 
of the augment F the real affix is F. In the general tenses, it is added to certain terminations beginning with consonants of the Teclass, it., 
person, singular is fully; this when added to the root "to move" requires an intermediate T, and thus we have the form afirma, I shall walk. This is aever gupated or vșiddhied, though according to the general rule, coming before an ardhadhâtuka termination, it ought to have been gunated. 
The augment F, could under no circumstances have taken vriddhi, the prohibition therefore, is in the case of the guna substitute of F. 
STHOFATTO PTT: 11901 afas:, TTT:, #17: # fa: "I parrafomozaigar: laheimar : veter i Tai gera 
me! 
7. Consonants unseparated by a vowel are called conjunct consonants 
This defines the word sanyoga The sûtra consists of three words, Ali, the plural of the pratyåhåra , denoting all the consonants, WAIT: means “ without any separation or space" and áut: which is the wond defined, and means "conjunct consonants." So that the satra means, conjunct consonants are those consonants between which there is no heterogeneous separating vowel and which are pronounced jointly, such as 
in the word :, "cock.” The word "sanyoga" applies to the whole of the conjunct consonants jointly and not to them separately. The plural number shows that the conjunction may be of two or more consonants. 
10 
ANUNASIKA DEFINED. 
[BK. I. CH. I. 8. 8: 
Why do we say "consonant"? If two vowels come together they will not be called " sanyoga". Thus farouge "a sieve umbrella," the two vowels a and have come together unseparated by any consonant; yet they are not called sanyoga, otherwise the final 7 would have been rejected by VIII. 2. 23"there is elision of the final of that pada which ends in a sanyoga letter." Why do we say "unseparated by a vowel"? If consonants separated by a vowel were also called sanyoga, then in the sentence a 7 , the syllable on would be called sanyoga, and by VIII. 2. 29, the initial would be elided. 
i genife#att garfem: uel ueifa ge-art वचनः, अनुनासिकः॥ 
ga: 11 YAHIFAT TeamT, FETT 1978 TU: Hispanenin YTFITI 
8. That which is pronounced by the nose along with the mouth is called Anunåsika or nasal. 
This defines the word anunåsika. The sûtra consists of four words "mouth" TEST" nose" **T: " utterance or pronunciation" and W EE: "nasals." Though the words ro + THT (II. 4. 2) will by the rule of com position form Tea and not Tunat, yet the latter form might be held to be an irregularity; or the phrase Teat r may be regarded as a compound of Tea + 1797, the word avachana meaning "partial utterance." That is a letter partially uttered by the nose and partially by the mouth would be called anunåsika. Therefore the nasals are those letters which are pronounced from two organs or places, i.e., the mouth and the nose. The pure nasal is anusvåra, while anunasikas are different from this, in as much as, that in pronouncing these, the breath passes through the nose and 
the mouth. 
The vowels are generally so nasalised. "If, instead of emitting the vowel sound freely through the mouth, we allow the velum pendulum to drop and the air to vibrate through the cavities which connect the nose with the pharynx, we hear the nasal vowels (anunåsika).' Thus i HT. In the Vedas, the particle wrę is anunåsika. As Y T: (Rig Veda. V. 48. 1), so also gry at ttar vi è (Rig Ved. VIII. 67. 11). 
The consonants , 7, U, 7 and are also anunåsika. Thus is pronounced by the throat along with the nose, y by the palate and nose, o by the upper palate and nose; # by the teeth and nose, and by the lip and nose. 
The semi-vowels 7, 7 and a are also nasalised and are then called anunåsika. The term anunåsika is used in satra V. 1.. 126 &c. 
Why have we used the word " by the mouth"? This definition will not include anusvåra or the pure nasal, which is pronounced wholly through 
Bk. I. CH. I. & 9') 
SAVARNA LETTERS. 
11 
the nose. Why have we used the word " by the nose"? In order to exclude the consonants a, T, 7, 8, 9 &c. &c., which are pronounced wholly and solely through the mouth. - तुल्यास्यमयत्नं सवर्णम् ॥९॥ पदानि॥ तुल्य-आस्स-प्रयवम्, सवर्णम् ॥ 
त्तिः ॥ तुल्य अस्यि प्रयनो यस्य वर्णस्य येन वर्णेन सह स समानजातीयं प्रति सवर्णसंतो 797 01 
rating 11 **gamat: TUINT 1964T* 
9. Those whose place of utterance and effort are equal are called savarna or homogeneous letters. 
This defines the word savarpa or a homogeneous letter. The satra consists of four words :-Sy "equal or similar," TFT "mouth or place of pronunciation," oha "effort" and TOK"words of the same class." . 
The WiFT or places or portions of the mouth by contact with which various sounds are formed are chiefly the following :- . TE "throat" 2.' hic palate,' 3. r ,'( head.) 4. Frar: 'teeth,' 5. 87 lips,' 6. fernt nose.' 
The 26 or quality or effort is of two sorts primarily, tatry: "inter. nal" and :)"external." The first is again sub-divided into five parts: 
. 1. Egeng or complete contact of the organs. The twenty-five letters from * to x belong to this class. In pronouncing these there is a complete contact of the root of the tongue with the various places, such as throat, palate, dome of the palate, teeth and lip. 
2. 
or slight contact. The letters a, 5, 7, 9 belong to this class of contacts. "In pronouncing these semi-vowels the two organs, the active and passive, which are necessary for the production of all consonantal noises, are not allowed to touch each other, but only to approach." 
3. fan or complete opening. The vowels belong to this class. 
4. Para or slight opening. The letters T, 4, 5, belong to this class. Some however place the vowels and T &c., into one group and call them all vivsita. 
5. #ayor contracted. In actual use, the organ in the enunciation of the short is contracted but it is considered to be open only, as in the case of the other vowels, when the vowel is in the state of taking part in some operation of grammar. . 
• The abhyantara prayatna is the mode of articulation preparatory to the utterance of the sound, the båhya-prayatna is the mode of articulation at the close of the utterance of the sound. 
· The division of letters according to abhyantra prayatna has been already given. By that we get, 1. the sparsa . or mute letters, 2. the antastha or intermediate between sparsas and ushmans, or semi-vowel : or 
12 
SAVARNA LETTERS. 
(BK. I. C1. I. $ 9. 
... 
. 
liquid letters, 3. the svaras or vowels or vivșita letters, 4. the ushmans or sibilants or flatus letters. 
The division of letters according to båhya prayataa gives us first surds or aghosha letters, 2. sonants or ghosha letters. The aghosha are also called svdsa letters, the ghoshas are called nåda letters. 
The second division of letters according to båhya prayatna is into; 1. Aspirated (mahåprana). 2. Unaspirated (alpaprapa). . 
The vowel has eighteen forms. The acute (udatta), grave v (anudatta) and circumflexedo ( syarita). Each one of these three may be nasalised (anunasika), or not (niranunasika). 
Then lastly everyone of these six may be short, long, or prolated. Thus:-V, 97, at, **, sf, , T, af, at, si, si, sit, 71, 91, st,t, sht, m, ita. 
Similarly the letters y, and have also eighteen forms. The letter @ has no long form; it has therefore 12 modifications. The diphthongs have no short forms, they have therefore, only 12 forms. The antastha or semi-vowels with the exception of have two forms each vis., nasalised and un-nasalised. The semi-vowels have no homogeneous letters corresponding to them. All letters of a varga or 'class' are homogeneous to each other. 
Thus then the homogeneous or savarpa letters must satisfy two condi. tions before they could be called savarna. First, their place of pronunciation or gee must be the same. Secondly their tea or quality must be equal. If one condition be present and the other be absent, there can be no savarpa-hood. Thus and y are both palatals, their greT or place of pro. nunciation being ang palate, but still they are not savarpa, because their q8 is different, the gua of being sprishta and that of T being vivrita 
Similarly and though their tha is the same i.e., sprishta, yet their Qey being different, onc being guttural and the other palatal, are not savarpa. 
There is exception to this rule in the case of and, which though having different areas are still called savarna by virtue of the varttika of Katyayana; "the homogeneousness of and, one with another, should be stated." Thus are + ATT:= art: ; here and a have coalesced into long by rules of sandhi, on the assumption that they are savarna letters. 
The word savarna occurs in sůtras like Yh: Tu :(VI. 1. 101). 
Why do we say "the place of pronunciation"? So that there may not be homogeneous relationship between 1 and q whose prayatna is the same but whose åsya is different. What is the harm if we make them savarpa? Then in words like aar and me, the q would be elided, if it be held homo. geneous with a, by VIII. 4. 65, "there is optional elision of ac, preceded by a consonant, when a homogeneous or follows." BK. I. CH. I. $ 10,11) 
PRAGRIHYA DEFINED. 
Why do we say "effort"? That there may be no homogeneity between r and the palatals, and 7 and T, whose organ of pronunciation is the same, but whose prayatna is different. What harm if it be so ? Then in voquet ara, the T would be elided before y by the rule already referred to, VIII. 4.65. 
an gol açta 11 a, svo er, ( gauta) # शनिः ॥ तुल्यास्य प्रयवावपि प्रसनी परस्परं सवर्णसंज्ञो न भवतः । 
10. There is however no homogeneity between vowels and consonants, though their place and effort be equal. 
This sutra lays down an exception to the former sutra. There can be no bomogeneity or savarna relationship between vowels and consonants, though their grey and feat may be the same. Thus and T have the same una namely arcs 'palate,' and the same 44a : namely vivšita, but still they are not to be called savarna. Thus in usefa, gruaci &c., the letters T and in the first example, and r and T in the second soot being homogeacous letters; there is no combination or sandhi, which would otherwise have taken place. 
Similarly il Tand y be held homogeneous, then Art + T (IV. 3. 53) - FIT+TOY(VI. 4. 148 ; here I would be elided by VI. 4. 148, but it is not so and we have 4974: " belonging to vipåså or born therein.” So also in grarsi "ox-skin," the would have been omitted, if held homogeneous with . 
ईदूदेद्विवचनम् प्रगृह्यम् ॥११॥ पदानि ॥ ईद-बद्-एद f497, 4779 
That I go ga ratat PTT 1969 na aparat 41 
11. A dual case affix ending in for For & is called Pragrihya, or excepted vowels which do not ad mit of sandhi or conjunction, 
As a general rule, Sanskrit allows of no hiatus in a sentence. If a word ends in a vowel, and the next word begins with a vowel, the two vowels coalesce, according to certain rules. This is called sandhi. But pragrihyas are exceptions to this sandhi, "they are certain terminations, the final vowels of which are not liable to any sandhi rules." (VI. 1. 125). This sætra gives three of these terminations, viz., the duals of nouns or verbs ending in (8), ( 7), orr (ET). Thus:- 
"these two poets," so also TT a "two winds;" hat "these two garlands." già ra "they two cook" giù na "you two cook." Here according to the general rule of sandhi, the final of art and the initial y of it ought to have coalesced into ant, but it is not so, because it is the nominative dual of ft. 
PRAGRIHYA. 
[BK. I. CH. I. $12, 13. 
Why do we say ending in i, & ande? Because when the dual ends in any other vowel this rule will not apply. As it + FITT," these two trees" (VI. 1. 78). Of course it follows from the definition, that,, or r of the dual number only are pragļihya; if these vowels terminate any other num ber they will not be pragřihya but will follow the general rule of sandhi, as aurti (1. s.) + T = ATT," the girl is here" (VI. 1. 77).... 
Vart: The prohibition of try &c., should be stated in treating of the pragļihya nature of $, &c. Thus Hot (two gems) + -* "like two gems." So also eagerar" like a couple," purata " like man and wife," cheet " like heaven and earth.” Some say that this vårtika is unneccessary. Because the final member of the above words is not go, but the particle 7 only; which has the same meaning as iva. 
:ergemate ni 92 .ogifar u erga:, ara, ( 67 ). त्तिः॥ अवसः सम्बन्धी यो मकारस्तस्मात् पर ईदूदेतः प्रगृह्य संज्ञा भवन्ति ।। 
12. (The same letters) after the Fof the pro noun we are Pragrihya.. 
In the pronoun , the dual termination in , Korg will be pra gribya by force of the last sätra, but the present sûtra makes this addition, that in the case of it, all terminations ending in, org and preceded by 
4, of whatever number they may be, will be pragtihya. As a matter of fact, there are only two such terminations satisfying the above conditions name ly ont and re. The rule may therefore be put in the following words of Dr. Max Muller:-"The terminations of it and a nom. plur. masc. and nom. dual of the pronoun wie are pragrihya." As of : "Those horses," and vrea. There is no example of the word adas ending in . 
Why do we say " of the word adas"? The letters , , g following after the of any other word will not be pragņihya. As out + = yay 
Why do we say "after the letter "? Because in the example in + WARS 7, "those here," the e, preceded not by # but by the art of my (V. 3. 71) is not pragrihya, which it would have been by the influence of sūtra 11, which includes E as well as and, and from which the word dual is not supplied here, else this rule would be useless. 
at 93 n aifa unat, (479) वृत्तिः ॥ शे इत्येतत् प्रगृह्यसतं भवति । 
13. The affix i, (the Vedic substitute of the case-affixes), is a pragrihya. 
· In the Vedic Sanskrit, the declesion of nouns sometimes differs some what from the ordinary Sanskrit. One of the peculiar Vedic terminations, which 
BK. I. CH. İ. $ 14.] 
PRAGRIHYA: 
15 
replace the ordinary declensional terminations is called 0 (VII. 1. 39-) Thus wraTreya, 
Of this substitute ), the initial T is indicatory, the real suffix being . This final is a pragtihya. 
In the sacred literature there is only one example of this pragrihya, as given above; while in imitation of this, we have in secular writing phrases as, fixta, yo ta, À fa &c. 
fagra Camarg, u 98 al ofifa u fara: , 14, SHTE I ( ) u 
वृत्तिः ॥ एकश्वासावध एकाबू निपातो व एकाच आवजितः स प्रगृह्यसंज्ञो भाति । 
14. A particle I. 4. 56 consisting of a single vowel, with the exception of the particle org is a Pra grihya. 
This sätra consists of three words: fara: "particle," gary "CON sisting of one vowel," PARE" with the exception of E." 
All such particles technically called nipäta (1. 4. 56) which con sist of a simple vowel without any consonant, are pragřihya and therefore are not liable to the rules of sandhi. As . “Oh, Indra" "O arise." 
It follows from the above definition that those nipätas which consist of two or more letters, vowel and consonant, are not pragrihya, e. g. sin arra 
rurg... 
Pre which is not a pragļihya, has four significations: As a diminutive particle when joined to adjectives and nouns, as w1+ Joy = 0, "little hot, tepid" (2) as a prefix to verbs, it expresses the senses of "near" "nearto," and with verbs of "motion," "taking" &c., it shows the reverse of the action, as t'to go,' WITH 'to come;'v + = .(3) as showing the limit inceptive ( TV) "from," " ever since," as WTTT: "ever since his birth," (4) as showing the limit exclusive (Haięt), "till" "until" as T+Tarra TATTg," until the reading begins." When the particle has not any one of the above sour senses and is used in expressing regret &c., it is a pragļihya, as OT gi forata "Ah! such there once was," u tra. "Oh! do you think so." 
The word gain in this aphorism has a peculiar meaning. It means "consisting of one vowel and nothing else." In other words, the vowels them.. selves when used as fria, e. g. 1, 2, 7&c. But the term gairy has a wider signification than that given to it in this satra. It means "a word or a portion of a word consisting of one vowel which can be pronounced at once"-in other words are means a " syllable." In that sense the words a, fa, ro &c.; will also be gary, but not so here. Therefore the rule of sandhi will apply 
16 
PRAGRIHYA. 
(BK. I. CH. I. $ 15 TO 18. 
to them, thus garan ter. See sâtra VI. 1. 1. where the word any means a monosyllable. 
Why do we say "a nipata ?" Because if the single vowel is not a par. ticle, but something else, an affix &c., then it will not be a pragļihya, as the final qin ir "he did," is the affix of third person perfect tense, and is liable to sandhi ; as PTTTT. 
sta'nt 941 arfa u sita, (HT) # हात्तिः ।। प्रोदन्तो यो निपातः स प्रगृह्य संशोभवति ॥ 
15. The final o of a particle is a pragrihya. This sútra consists of one word of the final is a surplusage. The words "pragrihya" and "nipåta" are to be supplied from the preceding stras to complete the sense. The meaning is that those particles which end in though consisting of several letters, are pragrihya. As wat " Halloo, go 
away." 
सम्बुद्धौ शाकल्यस्येतावना ॥१६॥ पदानि ॥ सम्बुद्धी, शाकल्यस्य, ait, CIA, (ATH) u 
वृत्तिः । सम्बुद्धि निमित्तो य पोकार स शाकल्यस्याचार्यस्य मतेन प्रगृह्य संज्ञो भवति, इति शने नार्षे अवैदिके परतः ॥ 
16. The final t of the vocative singular (II. 3. 49) before the word na according to Sakalya, in secular or non-vedic literature, is pragrihya. 
This sätra gives the opinion of the Rishi Sakalya, so that it is an optional rule. Thus both forms a (formed according to the general rule of sandhi) and are sfar (where his pragrihya) are correct. 
In ârsha literature the sandhi is imperative, not optional, as gat TT अझबन्धविश्यब्रवीत्. 
The mention of the name of any sage, such as that of Sikalya in this sätra, serves generally one of the two purposes :-(1) either it makes the rule an optional onc, vibhåsbartham, or (a) the mention is merely for the sake of showing respect to the particular sage, the rule would have stood as well without such mention ; pujártham, as the word Kåsyapa in sdin I. 2. 15. 
39: 11 99 of agtfa 3: , ( ATEN 1484fara a) u इनिः॥ उमः प्रगृह्य संज्ञा भवति इतौ शाकल्यस्थाचार्यस्य मतेन । 
17. The particle before iti, according to Sakalya is a Pragrihya. 
This sätra consists of the single word 75 meaning 7. According to the same Rishi Sakalya, is a pragrihya, before ma, in modern Sanskrit. This is also an optional rule. Thus 3 w or fara. 
Bk. I. CH. I. $ 18, 19. ] 
PRAGRIHYA. - 
ge in açtfan , ( 97**TO, CA: , 446 ) ____ वृत्तिः ॥ उमाइतावना के हत्ययमादेशो भवति दीपोंऽनुनासिकः शाकल्यस्य मतेन प्रगम 
11 
18. The particle of replaces a in non-vedic literature, and it is a pragrihya in the opinion of Sakalya. 
: Before the word fra the word 77 is replaced sometimes by the long nasal 4. Thus + a- ra orfafa. . 
In some authorities the sûtras 17 and 18 form but one sätra, and then it is divided by the method of yoga-vibhága, the division of a single sätra into two separate sûtras having two distinct rules. 
çat a fer u 98 leifar 
n ot, a, ami-span इत्तिः॥ईवन्तमूहन्त शन रूपं साम्ययें वर्तमान प्रगृह्यसंशं भवति । 
19. The final fand 5 of words giving the sense of the locative case are pragrihya. 
This sätra finds its scope in the Vedic literature generally. There is a sätra (VII. 1. 39) which declares that "in the Vedic Sanskrit, the case-affixes sup are often replaced either by T (1. s.), or are altogether elided, or they are changed into a letter homogeneous with the prior letter, or T, or ore, ort, or 21, or T, or Sur, or ur, or takes their place." Let us take the example where a case-affix is changed into a letter homogeneous with the prior. 
Thus the case-affix of the seventh case is f (r). In forming the 7. s. of "body," we have 7I+. The will be changed into a homogeneous letter with 
and we have 42+F= " in the body," as, mural Arts (for #749 ) This is the Vedic form, the secular form being wat. Similarly tilat+7=sitet "on the Gauri," as an art arra: (Rig Veda IX. 12. 3). It is in such cases, therefore, that the long i and A are used in the sense of locative, and are pragļihya. 
It is only long i and 4 which are pragļihya, and not any other vowel, though used in the sense of locative. Thus by the same aphorism (VII. I. 39) då (â) may be employed to denote the seventh case-affix. Thus afrat ft = + = in the fire,' as, forer: 
m ar HTHTTTT (Rig Veda V. 37. 5). Here though in the locative case, its final is not 
pragrihya. Therefore QT + mia. 
The and must be of the 7th case. Therefore Afa of IT (3rd s.) - on + (letter homogencous with the prior) - Het 'with wisdom'. Here i is in the sense of the instrumental case and is not pragrihya. Thus ft + - 
18 
GHU DEFINED 
(BK. I. CH. I. $ 20, 21. 
The word is used in the aphorism, in order to exclude the appli cation of this rule to cases like the following. Thus in forming the compound of apart" in the well" and "horse," the case-affix is elided, and we get art +94. Here, no doubt, the word fryt is in the locative case, though the case-affix is elided; but we cannot say that the long f of vàpi has the sense of the locative. Here, therefore, we shall have sandhi; as, Try:" the horse near the well." In other words, the present aphorism is not to apply to the final ort of words standing as the prior member of a compound term (purva-pada); for words like røt &c., in the above example, can never, by them. selves and alone, denote the locative case; while words like it, formed in the way described already, give the sense of the locative, even alone, though they be placed anywhere in a sentence. 
ShareACTA u pon atau ST, 17, 1, ergrad इत्तिः ॥ दारूपाश्वरथारो धातको धारूपोच दौ, दापी वर्जयित्वा घुसंज्ञका भवन्ति। 
20. The verbs having the form of da 'to give' and dha 'to place,' are called ghu. 
This defines the word ghu. Four verbs have the form of T, or assume it by the application of VI. 1.45, and two, of yT; they are called y. The ghu verbs bare certain peculiarities of conjugation to be described hereafter. 
The g verbs are the following:- 1" to give," as afuera; ry "to give," as, quar; "to cut," as, gitura; i "to pity"as, yura, un "to place" as, AfUTVITT, to "feed” as, afurafa. 
la the above examples, because of the verbs being , the ap of ra is changed into u by VIII. 4. 17. 
Similarly Ty "to cut" and "to clean" not being called y, rules VIL 4. 46 and 47 do not apply to them. Thus | + = frå 'what is cut,' as, & afe :. So also geerd "washed" as, TO TO “ a bright face." But with T" to give," &c. $T + = 14 +a (VII. 4. 46) - 57: "given;" so also we have f+#T + 7 (VII. 4. 47). The word occurs in sätra VI. 4. 66, &c. The word dåp includes also daip by the paribhåsha given under III. 4. 19, & changed into or by VI. 1. 45. 
. आद्यन्तवदेकस्मिन् ॥ २१॥ पदानि ॥ आदि-अंत-वत्, एफस्मिन् । 
वृत्तिः ॥ भादाविर पन्वय एकस्मिन्नपि कार्य भवति । 
21. An operation should be performed on a single letter, as upon an initial or upon a final. 
This is an atideća sätra and consists of four words, ame" beginning," * “end," et "like," ter "in one;" the literal translation being "beginning is end-like in one." "The affix C has the force of the locative, and the 
BK. I. CH. I. $ 22, 23. ] 
GHA DEFINED. . 
. 
19 
ac 
meaning is" on the beginning," and "on the end," i..., let an operation be performed on a single letter, as upon an initial or upon a final. Thus by III. 1. 3. an affix has udátta or acute accent on its initial vowel. Thus the affix tavya has accent on the first o, and we have s . But when an affix consists of a single vowel, it is itself the beginning and the end, and, as such, will have the accent. As in 1977 aupagavam the last á has the accent, which a represents the affix it. 
Similarly, by VII. 3. 102, the final of a base ending in short a is lengthened before a case-affix beginning with a consonant of 42 class. Thus +377=anon. This rule will apply when the word consists of one letter only, and that letter is a short r. Thus t re vrare " by those two." Here it must not be objected that the solitary is initial, and cannot be final. 
Why do we say "in one"? If a word consists of more than one letter, then the beginning is not like the end. Thus in the word at the initial short is not like the final long TT; otherwise T would get the name of (1. 1. 73), and the secondary derivative from # 7 would be formed by the affix (IV. 2. 114). But this is not so, the affix my is employed in. stead, and the form is an ITT :.. 
तरसमा घः ॥२२॥ पदानि । तरप-तमपी, घ.. वृत्तिः ॥ तरप् वम इत्येतो प्रत्ययो प संज्ञो भवतः।। 
22. The affixes tarap and tamap are called q. . This sätra defines o affixes. They are two,' ar and 77, the q in them being . The special use of these affixes will be described later on. These affixes are useful in forming the comparative and the superlative degrees respectively of adjectives, adverbs, &c. The base undergoes certain changes before these terminations, which will be treated of in its proper place. 
Thus the words antatt and antaar are formed by adding the affixes or and as to the word aart'a girl,' whose long is shortened before these affixes by såtra 43 of the third chapter of the 6th Book. 
aktuagefa sent 11 73 ostra u 99-90-ag-sfa, SEUTU 
#:11 TETUT rad HEUTIFT II . वार्निकम् ।। अर्द्धपूर्वपरम पूरणप्रत्ययान्तः संख्यासंज्ञो भवतीति वनव्यम् , समासकन् 
23. The words bahu 'many,' gana ‘class,' and the words ending in the affix vatu (V. 2. 39), and dati (V. 2. 41) are called numerals (sankhya). 
SANKHYA. 
[BK. I. CH. I. §.23. 
This sätra defines the word sankhyt, or numeral. .:::. 
These are certain words, besides the ordinary numerals, having some peculiarity of declension. The words like many,' and to 'class', and those that have the affixes T and ora after them, belong to this class.' The letters 3 and 7 of g and era are or indicatory, the actual affixes being to and 
fa. 
The word sankhya means "numerals;" and this class contains, among others, the Sanskrit numerals. The words formed by adding gare generally compound pronouns, e.g. are so much," "as much," TANEC "so much," similarly words formed by the affix afa, e.gara" how many," ata "so many," TO " as many." i. . 
: : Thus + TET (V. 4. 17)=ETT: "many times " the affix 16 being added only to sankhyê words in the sense of the repetition of the action. So also &+T(V. 3. 42) - TEHT" in many ways.” Here also the affix YT is added by virtue of as being a sankhya. Similarly 5: (V. 1. 22) "purchased for a big sum," agt: (V. 4.43)" manifold." So also TUNCT:, TUYT, 
TURI, TUT: ; so also avage, apa€T, a t; mapen., mayr, maramin aay.. ... : 
When the words and TU mean "abundance" and "multi tude" they are not sankhya. It is only when they are expressive of numbers, that they get the designation of sankhya.' The necessity of defining sankhya arose in order to exclude such words as, TT "numerous," &c., which though they express numbers, are not to be treated as " numerals," technically so called. . 
Vart:-The word "halt" when standing as a first term in a com. pound number which takes an affix giving the sense of an ordinal, gets the designation of sankhya, for the purposes of the application of the rules of samasa and of the affix 7. The ordinal affixes or púrana pratyayas are like (V. 2.48), A (V. 2. 49), VT (V. 2. 51), &c. Thus faitez: "eleventh," 
TH: "fifth," : "fourth," &c. Similarly we have 4:"purchased for 41 baskets" (a dvigu). Here w + 7 (an ordinal)= 94, a bahuvrihi compound meaning 41, viz., that in which hall is the fifth term. 
: : T= 17 : the taddhita affixes og and it required by V. 1. 19 and 26 being elided by V. 1. 28. 
Here, there is compounding (dvigu) by taking 19 as a sankhya, and then applying sâtra II. i. 51. The samása here is in the sense of taddhita, and this compounding is only possible by rules (II. 1. 50 and 51), when we gets the appellation of sankhya. Having got this name, it forms dvigu compound in the sense of the taddhita affixes and o (V. 8. 26). The word or takes both these affixes in the sense of * being 
BK. I. CH. I. 8-24, 25.]. 
SHAT. 
bought with." Thus tilitary and are both mean "bought with a measure called surpa." In the above compound of HTS: the sense is that of the above-named taddhita; but the affixes have been elided by V. 1. 28 after dvigu compounds. So also we have th: by applying the affix my. For these two purposes, namely samasa and the application of t, compounds of ardha, like ardha-pañchama are treated as sankhya. 
wrat 1 2811acFaul 4-07-STRAT, TC, (FET) w 
वृत्तिः॥ षकारान्ता नकारान्ता च या संख्या सा पदसंज्ञा भवति ॥ ::. . 24. The Sankhyas having or 7 as their final are called shat. 
This sûtra defines the term F which is a subdivision of the larger group sankhya. Those sankhyas which end in y or are called me. The word sankhya is understood in this sätra, because the word "Um is in the feminine gender, showing that it qualifies sankhyå which is also feminine. 
The numerals that end in or are six, namely five,' og 'six,' 71,'seven,' vai 'eight,' TTT'nine,' 'ten.' 
It is one of the peculiarities of words that they lose their nomina tive and accusative plural terminations (VII. 1. 22). Thus i Parepart, pe toata u .. The word wat in the sůtra shows that the letters and a must bo aupadeśika i.e., must belong to the words as originally enunciated and not added afterwards as affix &c. Thus in vana hundreds,' ATU 'thousands," 
er of eights' the 7 is not radical, but an augment, and therefore they are not and the nominative and accusative plural terminations are not elided; as Tar + r - Taifa &c. 
sfagul 74 afifa u sfa, 7, (vel, c.) 1 त्तिः।। डत्यन्ता या संख्या सा पदसंज्ञा भवति। 
25. And the sankhyas ending with the affix dati are called shat. 
This sůtra enlarges the scope of the definition of F by including in it, words formed by ra. By sätra 22, words in sfat are already san. khya; by this they are also . Therefore we have anfarra, 'how many are reading,' ala TTT (see how many. Here af has lost its plural termina tion by VII. 1. 22. 
तत्तवतू निष्ठा ॥ २६ ॥ पदानि ॥ तक्तवतू , निष्ठा । इत्तिः ॥ तशक्तवतुभक्तक्तवत् प्रत्यया निष्ठासंज्ञो भवतः॥ 
26. The affixes kta and ktavatu are called Nishtha, 
NISHTHA. 
[BK. I. CH. I. $ 26, 29. 
This defines the nishtha affixes, that is to say, the affixes of the past participle. The actual affixes are a, , the and being indicatory. They being Pag are liable to all the rules applicable to face affixes, such as rule 1. 1.5. Thus. We have, 1, 119, i, nar. 
The force of the indicatory a in ktavatu is, by IV. 1.6, to indicate that in forming the feminine of nouns ending in an affix having an indicatory yowel of Ok pratyahára (, , ), the affix f9 () must be added. Thus 146 (masc.), amit (fem.). The word nishthà occurs in sûtra VII. 2. 14. 
सर्वादीनि सर्वनामानि ॥२७॥ पदानि ॥ सर्व-आदीनि, सर्वनामानि ॥ 
T: Ta meat arahaina malta atralla fall 
27. The words sarva, "all,' and the rest are called sarvanama or pronouns. 
This defines sarvanama or pronominals. To know what are the other words comprised in the phrase "and the rest' we must refer to Påpini's Ganapatha where a list of all groups referred to in thc sūtras, is given. Thus we know from it, that the following are sarvanima: 
'all,' f 'all,' y 'two,' y 'both,' words formed by the affix GF such as aar 'which of two,' words formed by the affix 57 as 277 which of many,' qoz other,' w at 'either,' rare other,' te 'other,' F'other," 
A half,' or 'all,' Para 'whole,' a 'he, she, it,' a 'he, she, it,' 'who,' एक 'this,' इसमू 'it,' पदसू "that,' एक 'one,' हि two,' युष्मद 'you,' प्रस्मडू '1,' TE 'you,' fan what.' So also 'east,' 'prior,' 'subsequent,' * west or posterior,' iTU south or right,' 76'north or inferior, subsequent,' 
Trother or inferior,' T 'west or inferior,' are sarvanamas when they im ply a relation in time or place, as shown above, and not when they are names. So also when it does not mean a 'kinsman or a treasure,' but means 'own.' So also make when it means "outer,' or 'an under or lower 
garment' is a sarvandma. 
There are certain peculiarities in the declension of sarvanäma words. Thus though ending in , is not declined like to which also ends in , the plural of being ar, that of being TT:. Similarly the dative singular 
TTTA, HSF*; the abl. sing. TTTL, TEATE; the loc. sing. TT, affit; the Gen. pl. Tur, T &c. 
The compounds (with certain exceptions) ending in these words are also sarvandmas. The word 'both' is always used in the dual number as 
, nar. The object of its being inserted in the list of pronominals, (whilst its declension does not differ from that of c), is its taking the augment 
(V. 3. 71) which it could not have taken, if it were not a pronominal 
are Bk. I. ch. I. $ 28]. 
SARVANAMA. 
" 
as . Another object gained by its being so called, is the application of II. 3. 27, by which a pronominal may take the case-affix of the 3rd case or the 6th case in denoting cause. 
There are two Et in the above list, namely stand, having the same meaning, and both ending in T. But the final y of one is udåtta, and of the other anudatta. Some give one at only and not the other and say that both have anudatta accent.' The word ay is a sarvanama, when it is synonymous with the word 'all,' and not when it means 'equality' When it has the latter sense of equality,' it is declined like to i.e. like ordinary words ending in w, as Papini himself indicates in l. 3. 10, where he uses the regular genitive plural TITI, meaning among or of equais. As a pronominal the genitive plural would have been TL . 
The above words sarva &c. are not to be treated as pronouns when they are used as appellatives. For example, if it be the name of a person then it will be declined like ordinary nouns, as ar f 'give to Sarva (a person'). Here the datire singular is regularly formed. Similarly when these words are so compounded with others as to lose their original independent character, namely when they are 346 , they are not treated as sarvanama, but follow the regular declension, as dicat give to (him who is) above all.' Here in the compound quas Above-all' or 'Supreme Being,' the word 
loses its independent character and defines and determines the sense of another word. Fuller explanation of the word upasarjana will be given later on in I. 2. 43. This term part is an art that is a term the appli cation of which accords with its meaning. AllVI"..Am 
विभाषा दिक्समासे बहुव्रीही ॥ २८॥ पदानि ॥ विभाषा, दिन-समासे, बानीहै।, (सर्वादीनि, सर्वनामानि ). 
- वृत्तिः। विशां समासो दिक्समासो दिगुपदिष्टे समासे बहनीही विभाषा सर्वादीनि सर्वनाम संज्ञानि भवन्ति । 
28. The above words are optionally sarva nåma when they occur in a bahuvrihi compound signi. fying direction (II. 2. 26.) 
This is an exception to sâtra 29 which follows. As a general rule (see sutra 29), in bahuvrihi compounds, these words sarva &c. are declined like ordinary nouns. The present sutra declares an option to this, in special cases relating to compounds signifying direction. Thus the bahuvrihi compound of direction 3 SET north-east' may form its dative case as a pronominal, e.g. Th or it may form its dative like ordinary words ending in , i. . उत्तरपूर्वीये. So दक्षिणपूर्वस्य or दक्षिणपूर्णवे. 
SARVANAMA. 
[BK. I. CH. I. $ 2g 
- 
- 
- 
Why do we say "when signifying a direction"? The next sätra will enjoin that in bahuvrihi compounds, these words are not treated as pronomi. nals. Therefore, if in the present sûtra, we had not used the word fieras, it would have beca impossible to know where there was option and where prohibition. By employing the word " direction," it is thus determined, that in a samasa, relating to direction (II. 2. 26), there is allowed option, while there is prohibition in all other kiads of bahuvrihi compounds. 
Why do we say "ja compound"? So that the option may be jo that bahuvrihi which is purely samåsa, and in no other bahuvrihi. There is no option allowed in that bahuvrihi where there is a semblance of bahuvrihi but not exact babuvrihi. 
The quasi-bahuvrihi, or analogical bahuvrihi compounds, or to use the Sanskrit phrase, bahuvrihi-vadbhâra, is taught in sutra VIII, 1. 9. where words in repetition are treated like bahuvrihi. Thus R + TR - gaat 'one and one, each one.' Bahuvrihi compounds are possessive compounds, but in the above example, no idea of possession enters. However the compound here is treated like a bahuvrihi, for the purposes of the elision of the case-affix of the first member, and the whole compound gets the designation of pratipadika. In compounds like this, therefore, which are bahuvrihi-vat, but not exactly bahuvrihi, the present rule and the succeeding sätra do not apply. Thus great give to each one,' USFUF IN 11 
Why do we say "in the bahuvrihi"? So that there may be no option in the dvandva compound. Thus P racterort of the south, north and cast.' The prohibition in the case of dvandva by rule 31 is absolute and invariable. 
aaratet u 78 octufa a, agatet, ( garatfa, ga arafa, FTS ). 
AT: Il Teatre area a$APPENA TAI 
29. The words sarva &c., are not sarva náma when occurring in a bahuvrihi compound 
As a general rule (see sđtra 72), when any definition, rule, operation &c. is made applicable to a particular word, the same would also apply to any other word which ends in that word. Thus the plural of man being 'men' in English, the plural of blackman will be blackmen. So the definition of sarva nama given to sarva &c., separately, will also apply to the words ending in sarva &c. 
This sätra introduces thus an exception to søtra 27. In bahuvrihi or possessive compounds, the nature of which compounds will be described 
BK. I. CH. I. $ 30.1] 
SARVANAMA. 
25 
later on, the above mentioned words are not pronominals, and must follow the ordinary rule of declension. Thus the compound many meaning 'beloved of all' is a bahuvrihi compound of for beloved,' and fry all,' (which is a sarvandma). The declension of this compound will follow the general rule. Thus, in the dative singular, we have fauftty, though the dative singular of fat by itself is a, like other pronominals. So also प्रियोभयाय "to him who is beloved of both." So also sपन्याव, श्यन्याय &c. 
Similarly in bahuvrihi compounds, these words not being treated as pronominals, they do not take also the special affix way, but the general affix art. As, Cai, Ho t (V. 3. 70). 
Though the word bahuvrihi was present in this sutra by anuvsitti from the last aphorism, the object of using the word bahuvrihi again in this sutra, is this:-that the prohibition may apply to those expressions also which are no longer bahuvrihi, but whose original components were once bahuvribi. Thus the words Felirati and T ract are bahuvrihi compounds; but when these two words are further compounded into a dvandra compound, the present rule still applies. As, TETATEMAT:11 " 
तृतीयासमासे ॥३०॥ पदानि ॥वतीया-समासे, (सर्वादीनि T aifa, 7, ) u 
fa: il TA HÈ Tea Taifa yafet II 
30. In Instrumental Determinative Com pounds the words sarya &c. are not sarvanama . This is another exception to the definition of sarvanåma. There is a class of compounds in Sanskrit called tatpurusha compounds, in which the last word governs the preceding one. The word governed may be in any onc of the six cases: when it is in the third or instrumental case, the com pound is called tritiya tatpurusha. When, therefore, there is such a samása, the words mentioned in sûtra 26 are not to be declined like pronominals. Thus the word HRT is a compound of Ta and H e meaning prior by a month,' where the word mása is in the instrumental case. This compound will be declined like ordinary words, e.g. its dative will be THCETT, though the dative of पूर्व, when standing by itself, is पूर्वरम ; so also संवत्सरपूवाय ।। * The tritiya-samasa of the present sâtra has reference to the special tritfya-samasa ordained by the particular sûtra II. 1. 31. namely, " that which ends with the 3rd case affix, is compounded with the words půrva, sadrića, sama, &c." and has not reference to the tritiya-samasa in general, such as one ordained by II. 1. 32, "that which ends with the 3rd case-affix when it depotes the agent or the instrument is compounded diversely with what ends in a 
28 
SARVANAMA. 
(Bk, I. ch. I. $ 31, 32. 
krit affix." Therefore, in phrases T T i done by thee,' at it done by me,' these words are treated as pronominals, though in the instrumental case followed by a word ending in a krit-affix. In other words, reading this satra with II. 1.31, we find that pūrva is the only sarvandma which is so com pounded, and to which only the present sutra would seem to apply. 
The word we may appear to have been mentioned redundantly, as it has already been mentioned in the previous sätra, the primary object of the satra authors being to shorten the rules by the keeping out of every un necessary word. But here, the word it has been repeated, to show that even in phrases like ATETA ra, though not a compound, but used in construc tion with an instrumental case, the wordt is not a sarvapäma, that is to say, the prohibition extends even to phrases, which bear the sense of the instrumental compound, though not exhibited in the forın of the instrumental compound. 
39 ocifa u . (adreifa, wataifa, 978, 7) . 
इत्तिः ॥ इन्दे च समासे सादीनि सर्वनामसंज्ञानि न भवन्ति ॥ 
31. And in Collective Compound, II. 2. 26 the words sarva &c., are not sarvanama.. 
This sätra mentions another exception. In collective compounds the above words are not sarvanama. Dvandva is a compound in which two words are simply joined together, the compound taking the terminations of the dual or plural according to the number of compounded words, or the terminations of the singular, being treated as a collective term. Thus, the compound qorhat means, to the castes,' 'the orders' and Far 'the others'. The word par in this compound is not to be treated as a sarvan&ma, but an ordinary word. Therefore, in the genitive plural we have:-Ushauri and not at 9. So also EITTUTH of the priors and the posteriors.' 
The word 'and' in the sûrta indicates that it closes the list of exceptions or prohibitions that began with sutra. 29. 
famia mfo u 3po ogifa u farnar, afa, ( gutetta, gara, 
) वृत्तिः॥ इन समासे जसि विभाषा सर्वातीनि सर्वनामसंज्ञानि न भवन्ति । 
32. (Their dvandva compounds) are option ally sarvanama when the nominative plural termina tion jas follows. 
This is a proviso to søtra 31, and declares that before the termina. tion ? (which is the termination of the nominative plural, as we shall find later on, and which in the pronominals is replaced by ft), the dvandva 
BK. I. CH. I. 1 33,34) 
SARVANA MA. 
compounds may be treated either as sarvandmas or as ordinary words. Thus the plural of वर्णाश्रमतर may be either पाश्रमेतराः or •तरे, that is, the word may take either sr or ft. 
This sätra governs the four succeeding sättas. The option allowed in the case of the application of the affix Frist pl. to the dvandva compounds of pronominals, does not extend to the dvandva compounds of pronominals which take the affix प्रकचू (V. 3.71). There the sutra 31 is. absolute. Thus, कतरः+ कतमकः - कतरकतमका in the plural. This affix अक (प्रकचू) comes before the last vowel, with what follows it, of the pronominals and indeclinables. 
प्रथमघरमतयाल्पाईकतिपयनेमाश्च ॥ ३३ ॥ पदानि ॥ प्रथम घरम-तय अल्प-अर्द्ध-कतिपय नेमाः, च (विभाषाजसि,सर्वादीनि,सर्वनामानि)" 
वृत्तिः । प्रथम चरम वय अल्प अर्द्ध कतिपय नेम इत्येतेजसि विभाषा सर्वनामसंज्ञा भवन्ति ॥ 
33. And also the words prathama. 'first'; charama 'last,' words ending with the affix taya (V. 2. 42); alpa' few' ardha 'half 'katipaya 'some,' and nema ' half' are optionally sarvanama, before the nom. pl. termination. 
Thus we have प्रथमे or प्रथमाः, चरमे or घरमा, अल्पे or अल्पाः , पढ़ें or अद्धाः, कतिपये or कतिपयाः, नेमे or नेमाः,दितये or द्वितयाः॥ . 
The words " optionally when the affix y follows" are understood in this sutra. The governing force of the word " dvandva "does not extend to this, and stops at this. By the word are in the aphorism, is meant words ending in the affix ay. The rest are prátipadikas or crude bases. The word t has already been enumerated among the pronominals, therefore, the option in its car., is what is called prapta-vibhâsa, the result of which will be that though in the nom. pl. it may be declined like 7, the rest of its declension is like sarva, while in the case of prathama &c. the nom. pl. may be like sarva, but the rest of their declension must be like that of nara. The word ubhaya, has been formed by the addition of the affix ra, and it is already enumerated in the list of pronominals, therefore, by the present sutra its nom. pl. admits.of two forms. 
The application of the affix kan or akach must depend upon the nature of these words, if pronominals, then akach, otherwise kan. 
पूर्वपरावरदक्षिणोतरापराधराणि व्यवस्थायामसंज्ञायाम् ॥ ३४ ॥ पदानि । पूर्व-पर-अवर-दक्षिण-उत्तर-अपर-अधराणि, व्यवस्थायाम, असंजा याम्, (विभाषा, जसि, सर्यादीनि, सर्वनामानि ) ॥ 
वृत्तिः।। पूर्वादीनि विनापा जसि सर्वनामसंज्ञानि भवन्ति व्यवस्थायामसंज्ञायाम् ।। 
SARVANAMA. 
[BK. I. CH. 1..8.35 
34. The words pārva prior, para "after,' avara posterior,' dakshina' south,' uttara' north.' apara 
other, and adhara 'inferior,' when they discriminate relative position, not when they are appellatives, are optionally sarvanama before the affix jas. 
These seven words have already been mentioned in the list of sarvand. mas. They are always sarvana mas, when they have the meaning given to them in the list, i. e., when they imply a relation in time and space, but when used in any other sense than the one which has been determined or fixed for them, they are not sarvanå mas, nor are they so when they are used as appel latives (UFT). Thus, when the word pro means 'clever,' it is not a sarvane. ma, as, AUT TYT: "these clever minstrels,' similarly in TATT. . 
the northern Kurus,' the word is not a pronominal, for though it declares a direction, it is a proper noun, 
When these seven words are sarvanäma, they are declined like sarva, except in the nominative plural, when they may be declined either as sarva. nåmas, or as ordinary nouns. The option allowed in the case of these words is a praptavibhasa. 
That there is a 'specification' (niyama), or tacit implication, of a determinate point(avadhi), with reference to which something is to be describ ed by the word itself, is what we mean when we say "that a relation in time or place (avastha) is implied." For example, if we wish to describe Benares as being southern (dakshiņa), to do this, we may specify some point, say one of the peaks of the Himalaya with reference to which Benares may be des cribed as a "place to the southward.” Again we in the north may thus speak of the people to the south of the Vindhya mountains, as being southern, not with reference to the inhabitants of Ceylon, but with reference (as every one here understands by tacit implication) to us ourselves, who live to the north the Vindhya range. Thus, ( पूर्वे or पूर्वाः, अवरे or अवराः, परे or परा) वासिणे or पतिः ; उत्तरे or उत्तरा: अपरे or अपराः; अधरे or अधरा:. 
__खमज्ञातिधनाख्यायाम् ॥ ३५ ॥ पदानि ॥ खम्, अज्ञाति-धन eremura, ( famat, Afa, guiata viata ) u 
वृत्तिः । स्वमित्येतच्छब्दरूपं जसि विभाषा सर्वनामसंजं भवति न घेञ् ज्ञाति धनयोः CAKTU TO 
35. The word sva 'own,' when it does not mean a kinsman or property is optionally. sarvanama before the affix jas.. 
The word FT when it does not mean a na 'kinsman'or YT 'property' or 'wealth' is always a sarvandma, in every number and case, as it has been 
Bk. I. CH. I. $ 36, 37. ] 
AVYAYA DEFINED. 
29 
-- 
- 
-- 
- 
- 
enumerated among the pronominals, except in the nominative plural where it is optionally so. Thus ETT or FT: F#T: 'one's own sons,' 119 or TT TIT: 'one's own,cows'. 
But when it means 'kinsmen ' or 'articles of property' Fa: alone is the nom. pl. As, Fat grat' these kinsmen'strar: FT: 'much riches'. 
अन्तरं पहियोगेोपसंव्यानयोः ॥ ३६॥ पदानि ॥ अन्तरम-बहि योग-उपसंव्यानयोः (विभाषा, जसि, सर्वादीनि, सर्वनामानि)। 
वृत्तिः ॥ अन्तरनिस्यतरछनरूपं विभाषा जसि सर्वनामसंझ भवति बहियोग उपसंप्याने गम्यमाने ।। 
वार्तिकम् ॥ *अपुरीति प वक्तव्यम् । पातिकम् ॥ *विभाषा प्रकरणे तीयस्य वा डिस्सु सर्वनामसंज्ञेत्युपसंख्यानम् । 
36. The word antara being always a sarvana ma, when meaning “outer" or "a lower garment," is optionally so before the affix jas. 
___ The word अन्तर when it means बहियोग, vis., 'outer' is always sarvana ma, so also, when it means उपसंन्यान or a lower garment. Thus, अन्तरे गहा: or अन्तरा ग्रहाः 'outer houses, the residence of Chandal, and other low castes.. So अन्तरे or अन्तरा:शाटकाः 'the inner garments, such as petticoats worn under the upper garments." The word game when used in the above sense is always sarvanama, but in the nominative plural, it is optionally so. But; when it is not used in the above senses, it is never asarvanama, e.g., मामयोरंतरे rafat'he lives between the two villages,' where the regular locative is that 
With this sutra ends the section on sarvanamas, which began with sutra 26. : 
Vart:--The word prar when qualifying the word git! a city,' is not to be treated as a sarvanama, and is, therefore, declined like ordinary nouns. 
As, पन्तरायां पुरि वसति 'he lives out of the city.' 
Vart:--The words formed by the affix are such as, frata and adta, are optionally declined as sarvanama before the case-affixes having an indi. catory T (डित), which are the singular terminations of dative, ablative, geni. tive and locative, as, द्वितीयस्मै or द्वितीयाय, वतीयाय or वतीयस्मै. 
- स्वरादि निपातमव्ययम् ॥ ३७॥ पदानि ॥ स्वर्-आदि, निपातम्, अव्ययम्॥ वृत्तिः ॥ स्वराशीनि धब्दरूपाणि निपाताभाध्ययसंज्ञानि भवन्ति । 
37. The words svar 'heaven,' &c., and the parti- . cles (I.4.66) are called indeclinables.. ., 
This defines avyaya or indeclinables. The words FC &c. must be found out from the Ganapatha; they are the following: 
स्वर 'heaven,' अन्तर ' midst,' प्रातर 'in the morning,' पुनर 'again,' सनुतर 'in concealments' उस 'high, aloft 'नीचेसू 'low, down,'शनेसू ' slowly,' षक 
30 
.. AVYAYA : 
. 
[BK. I. CH. I. $ 38. 
‘rightly, separately, aside, singly, particularly, truly,' 'except; without,' 
n'at the same time, at once,' TUIG 'near, far from, directly.' TE 'sepa. rately, apart,' ve 'yesterday,' TE 'to-morrow,' FETT by day,' II by night or in the night, aren' at eve,' fera 'long, long since, a long time,' TE 'a little,' 90'slightly, a little,' TITL'ever,' N 'gladly,' gouTA silently,' afty 'outside,' at 'below, without, outside. For near,' Fra n car, hard, close by,' FTTH of one's self,' qut'in vain,' TTTH at night, by night,' q' negative particle, not,' at 'for this reason, by reason of,' at 'truly, really in .exclamation,' & 'evidently, truly,' ETA hall,' het n 'enclitic like, as Brahmanavat, priestly,' # wara 'perpetually,' 344T ' division,' ferro crooked ly, awry, over,' FETT, ralu 'exccpt, without furn, 'long,'*7'expletive particle,' Ta 'case,' or 'perpetually,' HEH 'suddenly, hastily,' feat with. out,' arat variously,' tha 'greeting, peace,' n'exclamation, oblation to Manes,'HA 'enough,' exclamation,' sira, 19 (interjection) oblation of butter,' T'again, moreover, otherwise.' ff being present,' syig'in a low voice, secretly, privately,' FAT patience. pardon,' fer RTAT ' aloft in the air; दोषा at night or in the evening,' मृषा, मिथ्या 'falsely,' मुधा 'in vain,'पुरा 'formerly,' fait or farmutually, together,' q 'frequently, almost,' C# 
again, repeatedly' y or 
at the same time,' para 'violently' out 'repeatedly,' 
F o r grunt with' TH, 'reverence," ffre 'without,' fra 'fie!' 7'thus,' TATT with fatigue, ATT "alike," Farg'widely,' #1, #15 do not.' 
So, also the words formed by the affixes ktvå tosun, kasun, by the krit affixes ending in org, t, ort, and the avyayibhâra compounds, are indeclinables. So, also the words formed by the affixes beginning with are (V.3.7) and ending with gre (V 3.47), by the affixes beginning with yo (V. 4. 42) and ending with Freja: (V.4 68), by the affixes 197, , gry and ere by the affixes having the sense of the affix it, or by the affixes T or 14, are or af, or are are also indeclinables. 
The words called nipata will be given under stras, 1. 4, 56 to 61. Thus a word which changes not ( 7 ha), remaining alike in the three genders and in all cases, and in all numbers, is what is termed an you or indeclin ables. 
तद्वितशासर्वविभक्तिः ॥३८॥ पदानि ॥ तद्धितः, ध, असर्व-विभक्तिः (mapa) . 
gret: 11 afgara: otisatirihi Tart nafot ni 
38. And the words ending in taddhita or se condary affixes (IV. 1. 76.) which are not declined in all the cases are also indeclinables.. 
BX. I. CH. I. $ 39, 40.) 
AVYAYA 
31 
This expands the definition of avyaya. There are three words in the sätra laddhitah, cha and asarva-vibhaktih. Taddhitas or secondary affixes are certain affixes, by which nouns are derived from other nouns, such as, from 45 we have ATTT:, sárva-vibhaktis are those words which take all case-terminations, asarva-vibhaktis are those which do not take all vibhaktis but some only. Thus the adverb 09: is declined in the singular ablative only, and does not take the dual and plural terminations. 
Those derivative words which do not take all the case-terminations, but only some of them and which are formed by the addition of Taddhita affixes are indeclinables. As a: 'thence,' at 'there. Both these words are formed by taddhita affixes from the pronoun that,' the one is used in the ablative case only and the other in the locative. So also 77., 77, FT, 
TET, PET, aft &c. 
STĀSTA: 113911 arran 67, -977-9: ( forum) वृत्तिः ॥ कृयो मकारान। एजन्सभ तदन्तं शब्दरूपमध्ययसंतं भवति । 
39. The words formed by those krit or pri mary affixes, (III. 1. 93) which end with g or in , di, t and 
I are also indeclinables. 
All affixes for the formation of nouns are of two kinds:-1. Those by which nouns are derived directly from roots: Primary affixes. 2. Those by which nouns are derived from other nouns: Secondary affixes. The former are called ksit, the latter, taddbita. . 
Words formed by krit affixes which end in org, ol, e, or ot(connot. ed by the pratyahara ) are avyayas. Thus the affix 5 (technically #FI) and 
(technically u , III. 3. 10) arc affixes which end in . The words formed by the addition of these affixes will be indeclinables. Thus IGE' to give,' and FATTA 'remembering' are avyayas. So also words like 'to live,' a 'to drink,' are also avyayas as they end in , &c. 
Thus, in the following examples, the words within quotation are avya yas 'ITE,' 'Bhard,' ',' , 'he eats first having made it relishing' (III. 4. 26). " " tru: (TT + III. 4. 9=); AT '777, 
ETA 75yTaÀN (1 + 4. Rig Veda V. 66. 3). VETI T stra' ET ATT TA TE POTIUT (Rig Veda III. 36. 10). 14: guta *HI FUITTEET TÀ,' (Rig Veda I. 25. 21, TT + T III. 4. 11 T. 
The word that is used in this sätra for the same purpose, as it was employed in sutra 24, showing that these terminations must be aupadesika," and not derivative. Therefore the following words are not avyayas : (d. s.), r: (g. s.) farina i fast: ' TATATAT:1 Tota : 11 
w igorya: 11 gou aqifa u ant, argen-*ya:, (Telu) .. : " FIT ET UT THI T5445814fafan 
SARVANAMASTHANA. 
( BK. I. CH. I. $ 40, 41. 
40. The words ending with ktva, tosun (III. 4. 16) and kasun are indeclinables. 
As item'having done' saar: 'having risen,' forgy: 'having spread." Thus in the following examples the words within quotation are indeclio. ables :-- Fra 2:1 TTECHTETA9rit:' 1 YTETTY'foreal factor Freret qui i n (Yajur Veda. I. 28) martTT: IT entreti'i (Rig Ved. Villa, 1. 12). 
qutara2 11 89 u afifa u puthra:- (pon)u f#: ll ATAT 154441 Pa II 
41. (The compound called) Avyayibhava (Il. 1. 5) is also indeclinable. 
The Avyayibhava or adverbial or indeclinable compounds are formed by joining an indeclinable particle with another word. The resulting compound, in which the indeclinable particle forms generally the first element, is again indeclinable, and generally ends, like adverbs, in the ordinary terminations of the nominative or accusative neuter. Thus hoeft upon Hari,' 754 after the form 1., 4., accordingly. . 
The word in the sätra shows that here ends the definition of avyaya. The avyayas, therefore, are all those words which are comprised in the above five sätras. 
What is the object gained by making the avyayibhava compounds arya yas? Three objects are gained, by making these compounds, indeclinables, viz., we can apply to them (s) the rule relating to the elision (g) of the case affixes and feminine affixes, i.e., sūtra II. 4.82 thus, in the following example, the words upågni and pratyagni though qualifying the word salavaḥ, do not take the gender and number of the latter, Julia paftar TANT: qara (2) the rule relating to accent when an avyaya is compounded with the word mukha, (IE FIT), 1.B., sätras VI. 2. 167 & 168. Thus, 
, here, sutra VI. 2. 167, required the final vowel to take the udatta accent, but the preceding word being an avyaya, sätra VI. 2. 168, intervened, and the first word retains its natural accent : (3) the rule relating to the change of visarga : into , this change being technical ly called उपचार: thus उपपयःकारः, उपपयःकामः, as compared with अयसकार: Here, the compound 3974: being treated as avyaya sutra VIII. 3. 46, applies and prevents the change of : into . 
The four stras 38,39,40, and 41 have all been enunciated under the svar adigana. sec s@tra 37. These sotras properly, therefore, belong to the gapa patha; their repetition here in the Ashtadhyiyi indicates that these rules are 
racz or not of universal application, viz., all rules relating to avyayas in gene ral, do not apply to them. Thus II. 3. 69. declaring that the genitive case is not used along with an avyaya is not a rule of universal application, for we see BK. I. CH. I. $ 42, 43. ) 
SARVANAMASTHANA." 
33 
indeclinables like उदेतो: governed by the genitive case as, सूर्यस्योदेतोः; or कूरस्थ दिक्षपः. 
शि सर्वनामस्थानम् ॥४२॥ पदानि ॥ शि, सर्वनामस्थानम् । वृत्तिः ॥शि इत्येतत्सर्वनामस्थानसंज्ञम्भवति ॥ 
42. The affix (VII. I. 20) is called sarva namasthanam 
This defines the word sarvanämasthåna.' The affix fg is the nominative and accusative plural termination of neuter nouns. It replaces the ordinary nominative and accusative plural affixes 19 and yet used in every other gender. The 7 of fo is servile, and the actual termination is t; the peculiarity of the affix fy is that it lengthens the penultimate vowel (VI.4.8) and addsan (VII. I. 12). Thus the plural of फल 'fruit' is फनानि fruits' So also कुण्डानि तिष्ठन्ति , and कुण्डानि पश्य. Here, there is no difference of form in the nominative and the accusative cases. So also मधूनि , पूणि, जतूनि. The word sarvanamasthāna occurs in sutra VI. 4. 8. 
· सुडनपुंसकस्य ॥४३॥ पदानि ॥ सुद , अनपुंसकस्य, (सर्वनामस्थानम्) वृत्तिः ॥ सडिति पञ्च वचनानि सर्वनामस्थानसंज्ञानि भवंति नपुंसकाइन्यत्र । 
43. The first five case affixes comprised in the pratyahara sut. (i. e., the three case-terminations of the nominative, and the singular and dual of the accusative) are called also sarvanamasthåna; except the case-afixes of the neuter gender. 
This defines further the word sarvanimasthåna. The case-termina tions in Sanskrit are 21 as arranged below : 
Singular Dual Plural. Nominative प्रथमा सु (स्) 
जस् (अस्) Accusative द्वितीया पम् 
शुस् (अस) Instrumental बतीया दा (पा) भ्वान् भि Dative 
चतुर्थी हे (ए) Ablative 
पंचमी हसि (अस) Genitive 
पष्ठी 
स् (अस्) प्रोस् चाम् Locative 
सममी डि (1) , सुप(१) The above are the 21 vibhaktis, the st of 577, the g of , the sofort &c. are indicatory. All these vibhaktis are included in the pratyahara y formed by taking the first vibhakti and the last letter of the last vibhakti. Similarly the first five terminations (सु, ओ, जसू, अमू and पोह) are represented by सुद and are called sarvanamasthåna in the masculine and feminine genders. In the declension of nouns, it will be seen, that some nouns have two bases, one before these sarvanämasthåna and the other before the rest 
मो मोद 
34 
SAMPRASARANA. 
(Bk. I. CH. I. $ 44, 45. 
Thus the word TTSTE 'king' has the base og before the gre vibhaktis, while in the remaining cases, the base is ra and Taas: 
Sing. 
Dual. 
Plural. Nominative राजा 
राजानी 
रामानः Accusative रामानमू 
राजानी 
राज्ञः Instrumental (TET 
रामभ्यां 
रोगनिः But in the neuter nouns there is no such difference. 
Hafa faTT 11 88 Il açta u 7, 91, fa, fara II अत्तिः। नेति प्रतिषेधो वेति विकल्पस्तयोः प्रतिषेधविकल्पयोविभापति संज्ञा भवति। 
44. "May or may not” is called vibhasha or option. 
This sūtra defines the word for NT. We had already had occasion to use this word in sâtras 28 and 32. Where there is a prohibition as well as an alternative course left open, it is called option or vibhasha. The commen tators mention three kinds of vibhasha:-pråpta-vibhasha., apråpta-vibhasha and prâptå prapta-vibhasha. The first occurs where there is a general rule already given, and then follows the optional rule; the second belongs to that class where there is no such general rule, but there is an optional rule, the third is intermediate between the two. 
Thus the root fit to swell,' by virtue of the rule Part IV. 1. 30), forms its perfect tense, either by samprasarapa, or in the ordinary way. Thus the third person singular is either मुशाय or शिश्वाय. 
इग्यणः संप्रसारणम् ॥ ४५ ॥ पदानि इक , यणः, संप्रसारणम् ॥ वृत्तिः।ग्यो यण स्थान भूतो भावी वा तस्य संप्रसारणमित्येषा संज्ञा भवति॥ 
45. The ik vowels which replace the semi vowels yan are called samprasarana 
This defines the word samprasarana. It is the name given to the change of semi-vowels into vowels. The pratyahara ik includes the four simple vowels 1,7, and , and their corresponding semi-vowels are 1, L, I, and included in the pratyåhåra yan. The word samprasarana is properly the name of the vowel which has replaced the semi-vowel. Thus the past participle of ETC 'to sleep,' is formed by adding the nishthá affix (see sätra 26). So that we have FTC + . But there is a rule (VI. 1. 15) by which there is samprasarana of the 7 of Fry before the fara affixes, and we have the form qu: 'slept.' Similarly from 1-araci, 2-EL, spyfa , Triax-95 ge. The term samprasarapa is also employed to designate the whole pro cess of the change of the semi-vowels into vowels as in VI. 1. 13; VI. 4. 131. 
ongrat afsat nyen ogifa ni enfe-rat, -e-rau वृत्तिः ॥ धादिष्टिद्रवति अन्तःकड़वति षष्ठी निर्दिष्टस्य। 
ces 
BK. I. CH. I. $ 46, 47.) 
AUGMENTS PA, Pang, AND Pag. 
35 
46. Of whatsoever the augments enunciated are distinguished by an indicatory { or , they precede or follow it accordingly. 
This sätra explains the special use of two of the indicatory letters {and . Where the indicatory letter of an augment is that augment is to be placed before the word in the genitive case with regard to which it is en joiued ; while a fan augment is to be added after the word exhibited in the 6th case with regard to which it is enjoined. Thus, there is a sutra (VII. 2. 35) which says "âruhadhatuka affixes beginning with a consonant except , have Ti". The question may arise where is this to be added, in the beginning or the end or the middle of the ardhadhatuka affix? This sätra answers the question. The indicatory shows, that it is to be placed before the erdha dhâtuka affix. Thus the future termination fait, is an ardhadhâtuka affix: when this is added to the root, it takes the augment . Thus +7+Ff= 
fufa, he will be. Similarly fear he will cut'. 
Similarly by satra VII. 3. 40. the root oft takes the augmente in forming the causative. This having an indicatory is to be added after the word off, as, ft + +fU7+*free 'he frightens.' 
मिदान्त्यात्परः ॥४७॥ पदानि । मिद्, अधः, अन्त्यात्, परः। f#: 01 afafeer TRUTTT: QUt formate di 
47. The augment that has an indicatory I comes after the last among the vowels, and becomes the final postion of that which it augments. 
This sūtra explains the use of the indicatory 7. The augments har. ing an indicatory , technically called for augments, are placed immediately after the final vowel of a word. Thus there is an augment called 7, in which and are y, and the actual augment is 7. When, therefore, it is said "let be added to the word,” the letter is added after the last vowel. Thus the plural of 9777 'milk' is formed in the following way: +7+T (VII. 1. 72) - Tura (VI. 4. 8). Here is added between and q i, e, after the gol, which is the final vowel of the word: and before this x the preceding short vowel is lengthened. Similarly TT + T + fa (III. 1. 77) - 7 + 3 + 0 + f (VI. 1.59) - Tera I Similarly farur. 
The word 9: is in the genitive case, having the force of nirdhåra na or specification ; it has the force of the plural, though exhibited in the singular, being taken as representing the class. The meaning is among the vowels.' This sätra is an exception to sutras I. 1. 49 and III. 1. 2, by which an affix is addcd at the end of the word exhibited in the 6th case. 
There is, however, an exception, in the case of the root Fry, in 
36 
. THE SHORT OF DIPHTHONGS. 
[Bx. I. CH. 1. $ 48, 49. 
L 
.. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
which the augment 7 is added not after the last vowel of , but between 
and I. The result of adding the augment ju between 7 and is, that sâtra VIII. 2. 29. applies, and the x is elided. Thus HFT + AT = #FST + + ATT (VII. 1. 60) - TTTT + FT - 158 + aT (VII. 2. 29)= ACTIT “He will im merse". So also fra 'immersed,' Frar, 96T. 
एच इग्घ्रस्खादेशे ॥४८॥ पदानि ॥ एषः, इक, हस्व-आदेशे। वृत्तिः ॥ एचो इस्वादेशे कर्तव्यागेव इस्यो भवति नान्यः॥ . 
48, Ofer vowels, is the substitute, when short is to be substituted. 
This sūtra points out the FT substitutes of pr. We know there are short and long vowels in Sanskrit, but properly speaking the gy vowels have no corresponding short vowels. Therefore, when, in any rule, y vowels are told to be shortened, this sætra declares that the short vowels of g and t, vt and gain for the purposes of the rule, will be and respectively. Thus, I. 2. 47 declares: "the short vowel is the substitute in the neuter of a crude form provided it end in a vowel." Therefore in compounding ara + t, the must be shortened. Properly speaking è has no short vowel corresponding to it, but by virtue of this sätra, & supplies the place of such a short vowel, and we have whare 'extravagant' so it, ia disembarked or landed,' TI , ary near a cow. All avyayibhava compounds are neuter (II. 4. 18). 
Why do we say 'of I? Because the short of other vowels will not be ras. Thus the short of an is. As, ora+ T wat, fo + HOT = 
पतिमाजः। 
Why do we say when short is to be substituted? Because when ga or prolated vowels are to be substituted for p , the will not be the substitute. As TET O Devadatta ! ! 
षष्ठी स्थानेयोगा ॥४९ ॥ पदानि ॥ षष्ठी, स्थान-योगा। 
वृत्तिः॥ इह शास्त्रे या षष्ठी अनियसयोगा भूयते सा स्थानयोगव भवति नान्ययोगा स्यानेयोगनिमित्तभूते सति सा प्रतिपत्नण्या॥ 
49. The force of the genitive case in a sútra is that of the phrase " in the place of” when no special rules qualify the sense of the genitive. . 
This sutra explains the mode of interpreting words used in the posses sive case (sixth case) in the søtras of Panini. The genitive case or shashțhi denotes many sorts of relations in Sanskrit, such as causation, possession, rela tion in place, comparison, nearness, proximity, change, collection, component member, &c. So that wben a word is in the genitive case in a sâtra generally, the doubt may arise in what sense that genitive is to be used. This aphorism 
a 
Bk. I. CH. I. $ 50.] 
THE LIKEST IS THE SUBSTITUTE 
lays down the restrictive rule for the interpretation of such words. It says that the force of such genitive is to convey the meaning of in the place of 
Thus in the sutra 3, the word ek is in the genitive case; the literal translation being :-" of ik there is guna and vriddhi." But “of” here means by virtue of the present rule of interpretation "in the place of." So that the sůtra means 'in the place of T. Similarly in the sätra immediately preceding this, vis. 48, we have the word in the genitive case and the sätra means of F. Here also " of " means " in the place of." 
. Thus in sutra gra (VI. 4: 36)' of hanti, there is the word , is the genitive of Fa; this genitive is used generally and its force is that of " in the place of." Therefore, 1 displaces the verb c in file or imperative mood, and we have file 'kill thou.' 
This satra is also thus translated by Dr. Kielhorn :-Only that which is enunciated in a rule, i.e. that which is read in a rule or rather that which in the real language is like that which is read in a rule in a gcnitive case, or that which forms part of that which is enunciated in a genitive case, assumes the peculiar relation denoted by the word part 'place' i. e, is that in the place of which some thing else is substituted, but some thing suggested by the former does not assume that relation. 
The word for here is synonymous with toy or 'occasion. Thus in the sentence TUT KITA TT: waf7647, the word sthåne, means 'prasange' i. e. wherever there is occasion to spread darbha grass, spread there the fara instead. Similarly in sútras : (II. 4. 52), or TT 1: (II. 4. 53), the words.asti,' and 'buru' are in the genitive case, and mean, 'wherever there arises occasion to use the verbs Ty or use there the verbs or ry instead respectively.' Thus areat, Th, raul, are the future, gerund, and pas sive participle respectively of t; so slso, 7, 747 and Fire are the same forms of t. 
The word FUTAOTTTT is a bahuvrihi compound of two words, not in apposition, (vyadhikarana bahuvrihi, see II. 2. 248 35), and it qualifies the word shashthi. The compound means for seat, that which assumes the peculiar relation denoted by the word sthana' Coosequently the seventh case-affix is not elided in this compound; on the analogy of compounds like 
TET: &c. 
__ स्थानेऽन्तरतमः ॥ ५० ॥ पदानि ॥ स्थाने-अन्तरतमः ॥ वृनिः॥स्थाने प्राप्यमाणानामन्तरतम पारेशो भवति सदृशवमः। 
50. When a common term is obtained as a substitute, the likest of its significates to that in the place of which it comes, is the actual substitute. 
38 
THE FOUR SORTS OF PROXIMITY. 
[ Bk. I. ch. I. $ 50. 
This sūtra also lays down another rule of paribhasha. To explain this we must take an example. The gupa of , 7, 8, and a. is *, , s. 
There is nothing to specify what letter is the guna of what. It might be said that is the gupa of because the definitions as laid down up to so far, do not say anywhere that it is not the guna of . So that when in a word lika fy we are told let there be the guņa off' we do not know what specific guna letter is to be substituted, whether it is t, g or . To clear up this doubt, this sůtra declares that the likest of its significates is to be subs tituted. Now the nearest in place to is both having their place of pro nunciation, the palate. Similarly w is the gupa of 7, because both are labials. 
There are four sorts of proximity or nearness :-(1) Dearness in place or it (i. e. palate, throat &c.); (2) nearness in meaning or (such as, singular terminations to be used after words used in the sense of singular); (3) nearness in quantity or STU (such as a short vowel to replace a short vowel, a long vowel, a long one); (4) nearness in quality or to (such as aspirates to re place aspirates, and sonants to replace sonants). Of all these approximates the first vis., the nearness in the organ of utterance has preference, in the selection of proper substitute. 
(1). Thus in applying rule VI. 1. 101, "when a homogeneous vowel follows ak, the corresponding long vowel is the substitute for both," we must have recourse to the present sätra for finding the proper vowel Thus 
8 + 0 = 0 ; here the substitution of the long 9, for the two short o's, is an example of substitution by nearness of place, for both vand I are gutturals. 
(2). A good example of substitution by the sense of the word is afforded by VI. 1. 63:-" The words , , &c., are the substitutes when the case-affixes Te (acc.-pl.) &c., follow." Here, we know the substitutes, but we do not know of what they are the substitutes. We apply the maxim of wita: "that only can become a substitute which has the power to express the meaning of the original, i.e., a substitute takes the place of that the meaning of which it is able to express." Thus we find that is the substitute of 974, of ra,to of TRAT, &c., which convey the same meaning and con tain almost the same letters. Another example of this is afforded by VI 3:34, by which feminine words in a compound are changed into masculine. Thus 
raust (fem) + gara = quyula:. 
(3). An example of prosodial substitution (HIUT:) is afforded by rule VIII. 2. 80, " is the substitute of what comes after the of Way not ending in and in the room of there is ." Thus Ty + VE+ 
= t; H+ *Z1T - THT +31 (VII. 3. 102)-VI + - ATL. Here, short replaces the short , and the long replaces the long ur. 
BK. I. CH. I. $ 51.) 
THE OTT SUBSTITUTES OF 
(4) An illustration of qualitative substitution is afforded by VII. 3. 52, "a letter of the guttural class is substituted for and when an affix having an indicatory y follows." Applying the rule of qua: we find that 
which is an alpaprana and aghosha letter replaces. Y having the same quality ; while I which is ghosha, and alpapråpa is replaced by the letter possessing similar quality. Thus + TX (III. 3. 18)=7; 4 + 1 
Art: ; + TT: 11 
Though the anuvšitti of the word sthina was understood in this sutra from the last, the repetition of this word indicates the existence of the follow ing paribhasha 
Wherever there exist several kinds of proximity between that for which something else shall be substituted, and its possible substitutes, there the proximity as to the organ of speech is weightier than the rest, i. c., there that only is substituted which is nearest as regards the organs of speech with which both are uttered. 
Thus in finding the guna substitutes of and 7 out of the three gupa letters , F and , we find that is a proximate substitute having regard to prosodial measure, i.e., Wand and have all one måtrd; while having regard to the proximity of the organ of utterance, we get g apd ot; the latter however prevails to the exclusion of the first; as, at, tatar. 
Why do we use the word "likest" in the superlative degree? Where there are many sort of proximities, the likest must be taken. Thus tro + 
a pala. Here, by VIII. 4. 62, " after a letter of my class, is changed into a letter homogeneous with the preceding," must be changed into a letter of the class . Out of the five letters of this class, a and are both aspirates, but is hard, and is soft; so T and are both soft, but I is unaspirate, and g is aspirate, therefore these must be rejected; the only letter which has the nearest approach to , is , which is both soft and aspirate. Similarly in frontara, the has been changed into *. 
उरण रपरः ॥५१॥ पदानि । उः, अण, स्परः। दृत्तिः।। (शकारस्य) स्थाने प्रसज्यमान एव रपरो वैदिवम्यः। 
51. When a letter of 4 pratyahara comes as a substitute for it is always followed by a r. 
This sûtra consists of three words vis., : which is the genitive singular off and means literally 'of ' or 'in the place of r'; the second word is , a pratyâhåra denoting , r and long and short ; the third word is tor: which qualifies and means 'having a r after.' 
This satra is useful in fixing the proper substitutes of . Thus, there. 
SUBSTITUTE REPLACES THE FINAL. 
(BK. I. CH. I. $ 52, 53, 
are only three guna vowels vir and ot. Of these what is the proper gupa for 
? By the application of the rule of nearness of place' we see that is the nearest substitute. So that is the gupa of ; and further by this. rule, this a must have a g after it. Thus though technically speaking or is the guna of the actual substitute is TT. Thus F+ar it; similarly Fat. . So also when is replaced by r as by sūtra VII. 1. 100, this subs titute 5 must be followed by a . As + wi-fi +I+qfa-facta 'he scatters;" similarly fica ‘he swallows.' . 
So also when is replaced by , as by sutra IV. 1. 115 this a must be followed by a ţ. As + HTC + 19 = egT: 'son of two mothers' 
This ç is to be added only when it is replaced by , or a ( 7) vowels, and not when it is replaced by any other letter. 
Thus by IV. 1.97, "the # of the word gyre is replaced by po(tech nically the ) when the affix By is added." Thus, hur + TL - FYTO + Von + eharra:, 'a descendant of Sudhatçi' Here the substitute of 
, that is to say, the syllable qa is not followed by I. 
The r in the text has been taken by some to be a pratyåhåra formed by the letter and g of Tor; and thus it includes the letters ç and . In that case the sutra would mean that you substitutes of Hand an are always followed by and a respectively. Thus guna of si=ar, of ji= al. . 
Betreuer II 4711 arifa 1 975., WORTRI, (eg:) वृत्तिः। षष्ठीनिर्दिष्टस्य य उच्यते पादेशः सोन्यस्यालः स्थाने वेदितव्यः ।। 
52. The substitute takes the place of only the final letter (of that which is denoted by a term exhibited in the genitive or sixth case). 
The rule of substitution by nearness of place applies to the last letter of the word which is exhibited in the genitive case and not to all its letters. Thus by sâtra VII. 2. 102, it is declared ZOTETTA: "in the place of 2 &c., there is 7." It does not mean that the whole word tery, is replaced by W; though at first sight it may appear to mean so; but it means, by virtue of the present explanatory stra, that the last letter of t29, namely is to be replaced by V. 
So also in sûtra I. 2. 50 TTOat: the short ç replaces only the final letter of mot and not the whole word, as q u : 'purchased for five gopis.' 
ritiu: 
fep 0431 agifa u 3-, 9, (it:, 073:, Facuri) वृत्तिः॥ हिच य प्रादेशः सोऽनेकानपि अलोन्रयस्व भवति ॥ . 
BK. I. CH. I. & 53, 54.] 
PET SUBSTITUTĖS. 
. 41 
53. And the substitute which has an indica tory (even though it consists of more than one letter) takes the place of the final letter only of the original expression. 
This sâtra is an exception by anticipation to satra 55. By that all substitutes, consisting of more than one letter, replace the whole word. 
Thus in forming the dvandva compound of Art and for there is a rule (VI. 3. 25) by which it is declared:- In the place of words ending in 
there is the substitution of 776 in forming dvandvas.' Now the substitute 
TE is a fr substitute, and therefore it applies to the last letter of the word and not to the whole word, vis, the of Art is only changed into y and not the whole word; and we have the compound मातापितरी, so also होतापोतारी. 
There is an exception, however, in the case of the substitute are (VIL 1.35) which, though it has an indicatory F., yet replaces the whole expressions y and and not only their finals. As fiqarg'may he live, or may you live'; instead of fig'may he live,' or it live thou.' 
snia: a II 881 o fer u sna:, 9769, (998: ) af: II grey at forelTUHOTA: gener at 
54. That which is enjoined to come in the room of what follows is to be understood as coming in the room only of the first letter thereof. 
When any operation is to be made in a word following another, such operation is to be made in the initial letter of such subsequent word. To give an illustration:“there is a rule (VI. 3. 97) by which it is declared : "In the place of my used after the words fa and art and the particles called 
at there is $." This rule may be stated in other words as:-' In the place of my there is when qq follows for ras. Now it is clear that is not to replace all the letters of my but only one. By s@tra 52 that letter would have been the last letter of me, but this sútra makes an exception, namely, where an operation is directed to be made in a word, simply by reason of its being placed after another word ; such change is to be made in the beginning of such second word. Therefore, the replaces the ag of 9 and we have f + g - fre (the final is added by V. 4. 74)'an island,' quarto 'promontory. So also in the sûtra ere: (VII. 2. 83) long is the substi. tute of at when the latter comes after the root wrę.' Thus Ary + Wig + fagreftar.. Here also the replaces the initial of 7. 
How can we find when an operation is to be performed on a subse. quent word? When the previous word is exhibited in the 5th or ablative case, sce sůtra 67. 
fTQ SUBSTITUTES. 
TUTUS 
[Bk. I. CH, I. $ 55, 56. 
" 
. 
अनेकाल शित्सर्वस्य ॥ ५५ ॥ पदानि ॥ अनेक-अल्, शित्, सर्वस्य, (eneo: ) 
F: II Wir t règ: freadFT Gafarra Bir tara 11 
55. A substitute consisting of more than one letter, and a substitute having an indicatory s take the place of the whole of the original expression exhibited in the sixth case. . 
This sūtra is an exception to satra 52 by which it was declared that an adeśa or substitute replaces only the last letter. This satra on the contrary enjoins that an adesa consisting of more than one letter replaces the whole ex pression in the genitive case, and not only its last letter. Even where an Adeśa consists of a single letter, but if it has a y as its indicatory letter, it re places the whole word. 
Thus, there is a satra are: (II. 4. 53) which means 'in the place of let there be ra.' Here the adesa ry consists of three letters (more than one), and therefore, it replaces the whole word and not only the last letter *. That is to say in forming certain tenses the verb is replaced by 7. Thus the future tense of is t'he will speak.' 
So also there is a sútra (V. 3. 3.) by which it is declared:-"In the place of TT there is r." Here the adeśa ş is an adeta having the q for its indicatory letter, and though it consists of only one letter, it replaces the whole word , and not only its last letter . 
Of course, it must be understood that the phrase "consisting of more than one letter' applies to the actual substitute, and not to the substitute with its indicatory letters, the latter being for the purposes of counting regarded as mere surplusages and not to be taken into account. To see whether an affic is 
at or not, the indicatory letters must not be counted; and the affix must be stripped of all its letters. 
स्थानिवदादेशोग्नविधी ॥५६॥ पदानि ॥ स्यानि-वत, आदेशः, 
Stars-foratu 
वृत्तिः ॥ स्थानिवदेशो भवति स्थान्याश्रयेषु कायेंवननाश्रयेषु स्थान्यलाश्रयाणि कार्याणि पर्जयित्वा । 
56. A substitute (ådeśa) is like the former occupant (sthani) but not in the case of a rule the occa sion for the operation of which is furnished by the letters of the original term. 
This is an explanatory satra, or this may be considered also as an atidesa s@tra, in as much as it declares that the operations to be performed 'BK. I. CH. I. $ 56.] 'SUBSTITUTE IS LIKE THE PRINCIPAL., 
123 
'on or by the original, may be similarly performed on or by the substitute, but with certain restrictions. The words of this sätra require some detailed exposition. Sthåni is the word or the portion of a word which is replaced. Adeśa is the expression which replaces something. Al-vidhi is a compound of al' meaning alphabet, or letters in general, and vidhi' rule i. e. any rule applicable to letters. 
There is an exception, however, to this rulc in the case of rules, the occasion for the operation of which, is furnished by the letters of the original term. That is to say for the purposes of orthographic rules, an &desa is not like the sthåni. A rule which is applicable to the letters of the sthani, need not be applicable to the letters of the adeśa. 
Thus the gerund of verbs is generally formed by adding the affix e. g. + El. Now VII. 2. 35. prescribes the insertion of an intermedi ate f before &rdhadhatuka affixes beginning with any consonant except y. This rule is clearly an al-vidhi, because the occasion for its application is con ditional on the letters of the affix. The affix et begins with and is an ardha. dhatuka affix and fulfils all the conditions of the rule. Therefore, we have 16 + + 91 - TEIET (VI. 1. 16; VII. 2. 37). 
Now in compound verbs the affix an is replaced by (tech. FoT). Thus #TE + #. This adeśa y which takes the place of FT has all the func tions of ET viz. it has the power of making gerunds; it makes the word an indeclinable (see rule 41 ante), as the affix | does. But the affix tar takes an intermediate i should, therefore, the adesa 7 take also the F or not? Now the augment which takes is by virtue of VII. 2. 35, because it be gins with a consonant of pratyahára; while is the only consonant which is not included in this pratyahara. Therefore, for the purposes of taking by rule VII. 2. 35. the adesa y is not like thT; since that rule is one which has its scope when there are certain initial letters; or an al-vidhi. Therefore, we have . . 
Substitutes replace either a groot,' or an base,' or a krit affix"primary affix,' or a taddhita affix 'secondary affix,' or an avyaya 'inde clinable,' or a affix'case affix,' or a fag affix'conjugational affix,' or lastly the full word or pada. . 
The substitute of a dhâtu becomes like a dhatu. Thus satras II. 4. 52 and 53 declare is the substitute of the root , and of the root # when an ardhadhatuka affix follows. Here the substitutes and are treated as dhâtu, and as such get the affixes 764 &c. by III. 1. 96, &c. Thus Yaar, fa, 1997; TT, TT, a. 
The substitute of aa anga becomes like an anga. Thus VII: a. To3 declares:-* is the substitute of the base face when a case-affix follows.' 
SUBSTITUTE IS LIKE THE PRINCIPAL 
(BK. I. CH. I. $ 56. 
Here, * gets the designation 'base' and so rules applicable to base, arc applied to also. Thus in 7, 2T, &c., we have 77, the lengthening of the vowel, and to substituted by VII. 1. 12, and VII. 3. 102, and VII. s.9. 
The substitute of a krit affix becomes like a křit affix. Thus VII. 1. 37 declares:- FC is the substitute of the krit affix it when the verb is a com pound, the first member of which is an indeclinable, but not qe Here, per is also called a křit affix, and as such, sätra VI. 1.71 applics, and that is added. As 76+Fat = 4 + + 
; similarly 1984 &c. The substitute of a taddhita affix is like a taddhita. Thus VII. 3. 50 declares : ' is the substitute of the affix r'as + one (IV. 2. 18) 
MAI, here, being treated as a taddhita, sutra 1. 2.56 applies and the word formed by it, gets the name of pråtipadika, and is so declined. 
The substitute of an avyaya is like an avyaya As, Tegeer; 44. The affix # makes avyayas (I. 1. 40), its substitute rug will also make the word an avyaya, and as such sätra II. 4. 82 applies, and the case-affixes are 
elided after these words. 
The substitute of sup-affixes becomes like sup. Thus VII. L 13 de. clares: y is the substitute of the sup-affix after an inflective basc ending in short .' Here, is treated as a sup-affix, and therefore satra VII. 3. 102 applies, and there is lengthening of the vowel, as, MT; T.. 
The substitute of tin becomes like tin. Thus III. 4. 101 declares : ',, and I are substituted for 2,46, 4, and fat when tense-affixes having indicatory follow.' Here the substitutes any &c., also make the words ending in them pada by rule I. 4. 14 as, +72, ao &c. 
The substitute of a pada is like a pada. Thus VIII. 1. 21 declares: "TE is the substitute of Teart, you , yor, and 7 of WEHTT, VEAU and w ay.' Here, and Te are treated as pada, and the final g is changed into visarga, as T., T.. 
Why have we used the word re in the satra? Without it the aphorism? would have been fietsaient, and this being a chapter treating of defi nitions, the meaning would have been, an adeca is called sthåni.' This certainly is not intended, for had it been so, then all operations would be per formed by or on the substitute, but none by the original. But this is not so. Thus rule 1. 3. 28, says 'the root preceded by is atmanepadi. TV the substitute of will be åtmanepadi, as QTTTE ; but I also will be so in its proper sphere, as, a. 
The word adeśa is used in the sutra to indicate, that the rulc applies even to partial substitutions : as changing the of a into 3 (III. 4. 86) in the Imperative c. g. 420. 
s. The word al-vidhi is used in order to indicate that the substitutes of fit, 
BK. I. CH. I. $ 57.] 
SUBSTITUTE IS LIKE THE PRINCIPAL 
45 
füg, 95 &c., such as the change of q into at (VII. 1. 84), I into T (VII. 1, 85), ginto (VII. 2. 102', are not to be treated like the original : as at:, Taar, # Had these substitutes been treated like the original, rule VI. 1. 68 would apply, and the case-affix y would have been elided. 
___ अचः परस्मिन्पूर्वविधी ॥५७॥ पदानि ॥ अधः, परस्मिन, पूर्व farur, ( Farfaraz errear: ) n 
ff: U GAIT: nefafa*: grant tot fulfikara | 
57. A substitute in the room of a vowel caused by something that follows, should be regarded. as that whose place it takes when a rule would else take effect on what stands anterior to the original vowel. 
"This sätra consists of three words:- *: genitive of the pratyahára y meaning of a vowel,' and means an Adesa which takes the place of a vowel. The words ådesa and sthånivat are understood and are to be supplied from the preceding sätra. The second word is 'parasmin' loc. sing. of 'para' meaning in the subsequent.' The locative has the force of on account of or by reason of. The third word is porva-vidhau loc. sing. of purva-vidhi mean ing'a rule applicable to a preceding thing. The whole sätra thus comes to mean that an ideśa which replaces a vowel, becomes sthioivat (like vowel), pro vided that the substitution has been occasioned on account of something fol lowing and when a rule is to be applied to anything preceding such an adeka. 
Thus there is an affix called for the actual affix being r; the other letters and being ra. The peculiarity of every affix having an indicatory . is to cause the vriddhi of the peoultimate vi (sätra VII. 2. 116) as 
N+je . Now in forming the denominative verb from the word , we have to add the affix fut. Thus n + but before pich, the y of quis substituted by a lopa' or blank, and this blank takes the place of the vowel of and becomes sthånivat by force of the present sätra. The result of becoming sthånivat is that though the y of is really a penultimate and ought to be vriddhied before 'pich' it is not so, the lopa-substitute not allowing the v tobe regarded as penultimate, and thus we have the form qe the present tease third person singular of which is quia. The equation being +*+, the zero preventing the one of or from becoming peoultimate. So also in the word nito, the aorist (F) of . Thus ++ *+4+*+$. Here, the v of Tuis elided by VI. 4. 48. (when an ardhadhatuka affix follows there is clision of the short of that which ends in short :) this elision is thus caused by something which follows (parasmin.) Now there is a rule (VII. 2. 7.) which de clares 'vriddhi is optionally the substitute of a laghu preceded by a consonant when on (aorist) follows. However in the present case the zero is consin, 
46 
SUBSTITUTE IS LIKE THE PRINCIPAL. 
[BK. I. CH. I. $ 57. 
dered as sthanivat, and prevents the application of sâtra VII. 2. 7; otherwise we get the form manft which is inadmissible. 
Similarly बहुखदा +कपू - बहुखकः । Here, the short a is the substitute of the long T of FT by VII. 4. 15; because of the subsequent (parasmin) affix kap'. However, the word age will not be considered as a word ending in a short vowel, for the purposes of the application of rule VI. 2. 174, (the udatta accent falls on the last vowel but one of a word that ends in a short vowel and is the last member of a bahdyrihi compound followed by the affix kap). On the contrary the shorty is regarded as sthånivat to long i. Thus 
tri. 
It is needless to say that this rule applies only to vowel &defa, there.' fore, where an adeśa replaces a consonant, the previous satra 56 has its scope and prevents its being sthanivat. Thus there is a kşit affix called Fe, the real suffix being u, the and q being diacritical letters. Before this y the verb ATL (to come) loses it, and lopa or blank takes the place of 4. Here then lopa or blank is an adeśa and a consonant is sthåni. 
Now there is a rule which says (VI. 1. 71), that before kțit affixes having an indicatory [, the letter is added after verbs ending in light vowels. Now in ITT, when I is omitted, the of T becomes final; and therefore a r is required before I (which is a fan affix). Thus we have rea. 
But had lopa or blank become sthånivat to T then the ot of it would have remained penultimate as it was when it was Try; and no would have been required. But it is oot so. 
Similarly in forming the word . Thus feat+ (III. 3. 90) HT I TE (VI. 4. 19). Here, T is substituted for ; this will not be sthånivat to ; though this substitute is caused by something that follows (parasmin! Were it to be sthånivat, there would come the augment yo() by VI. 1. 73. 
Similarly IETS, the aorist of Fr. Thus + +at+ang + F9+.+ FL (VIII. 2. 26). Here the is elided on account of what follows, but still the lopa substitute here is not sthånivat for the purposes of VIII. 2.41. Had it been sthånivat, g of F9 would be changed into a 
Moreover this rule applies where a vowel is changed on account of something which follows (parasmin). Therefore, where the change has not been occasioned by anything subsequent, the adesa (though of a vowel) is not sthånivat. Thus the words yomfat: and natura. 
The word ma is a bahuvrihi compound of gara and srat, mean ing'' he who has a young wife.' In forming this compound, the ot of at is rc placed by for ( tech. fare) by sätra V. 4. 134. This fe will not be sthanivat to w, as it is not caused by anything which follows. Had it been regarded as sthånivat, the could not be elided by VI. 1. 66 ('there is elision of 
BK. I. CH. I. $.57] 
SUBSTITUTE IS LIKE THE PRINCIPAL 
47 
and when any consonant exceptor y follows'). Thus, y at+fa or + 0 + Ba(V. 4. 134) - T: (VI.. 1. 66). 
Similarly the word HTC:, 'a descendant of 199TC also illus trates this rule. ( is a bahuvrihi compound of sys and 47, meaning 'whose foot is like that of a tiger. Now the final y of 'pida' is elided in such compounds by V. 4. 138. This lopa substitution is not caused by anything that follows, therefore, this lopädesa will not be sthånivat for the purposes of the application of satra VI. 4. 130 (To is the substitute of the word art when part of an inflective base ending in the word ty and entitled to the name of Bha. I. 4. 18). Therefore, 641941 +49 (IV. 1. 105)- a:. Had the lopa been like the original, there could not have been the substitution of 'pad' for 'påd.' 
Similarly the word vir, ist per, sing. atm. present tense of the root het 'to shine.' Thus genft+ ft+R (III. 4. 79). This change of intor is not caused by anything that follows, hence r is not sthånivat to, for the purposes of the application of rule VII. 4. 53 ('the finals of didhi and vevi are elided when an affix beginning with y or s follows'. Had g been sthånivat, the final would have been elided.. 
Similarly an ådeśa though of a vowel, and even though occasioned by a subsequent something, would not be sthånivat, if there is not the applica tion of a rule to something that precedes the adeśa (pårva-vidhi). If the rule is to be applied to something subsequent to the ideća; it will be applied to the exact adesa without considering what was the letter which the adeśa had replaced. It is only when a rule is to be applied to a prior object, that it becomes important to consider whether the Adeća is sthånivat or not. Thus the vocative case of it is eit: 1 The vocative is formed from the nominative case (11. 3. 49). The nominative of this formed by chang ing ut into and adding the case termination . Here the ideśa ut, replaces on account of the subsequent termination . Now there is a rule applicable to vocative cases which declares that the final g is drop ped after short vowels and g and I (VI. 1. 69). : 
Now is the ot of ot to be regarded as sthånivat to ot, which it re places; for the purposes of this rule of elision of finals? If so, the conse quence would be that the final would have to be dropped in the vocative. But it is not so. Because the rule VI. 1. 69, which ordains the dropping of after short vowels and g and applies to a letter, which is not anterior to the adeśa ut, but to one which follows it, and consequently there being no pûrva-vidhi here, the final & is retained and we have the vocative at: 1 
Similarly the word at:, 'the pupils of Babhravya.' The word 775 is derived from my in this wise. * (IV. 1. 105) - TO 
48 
SUBSTITUTE IS LIKE THE PRINCIPAL 
(BK. I. CH. I. $ 58. 
+ ! (VI. 4. 146 and VII. 2. 117) - TTT + T (VI. 1. 79) - 79757.. From this is formed to in this wise :- TOU + (IV. 2. 114) - 
T964+ ** (V.II. 1. 3) - + (VI, 4. 148) = N * *(VI. 4. 150). Here, had the substitute T which replaced the t of WT, been sthånivat to 
, rule VI. 4. 150 ('there is elision of the y of a taddhita affix coming after a consonant, when long follows'), could not have applied. But this sub stitute ry is not sthånivat for the purposes of rule VI. 4. 150, inasmuch as that rule does not apply to any letter that precedes the substitute 77, but to the very letters of the substitute itself. 
Similarly the word Art:, which is evolved from the root ye, in this wise For + 1 + Pak (III. 3. 92) + T +T (1. 3. 8)= a + y + + r (V1.4.64) = A . Let us then form a secondary derivative from the word ffy applying 
(IV. 1. 122), the whole of which affix is replaced by go (VII. 1. 2). Thus fart + y = fry + (VI. 4. 148) = 0 (VII. 2. 118). Here, the lopa substituted for the gr of by VI. 4. 64 is not sthanivat for the purposes of the application of IV. 1. 122 by which the affix is added. Rule V. 1. 122 says, 
dhak is added to a word ending in provided it be a word containing two vowels.' Now far ends in and contains two vowels; but if the lopa were sthanivat to the elided WT, then it would be a word of three syllables. That is however not so ; because the rule enjoining the affix an is not applicable to anything preceding the lopadeśa, but is enjoined with regard to something after this substitution.. 
न पदान्तद्विवचनयरेयलेोपस्वरसवर्णानुवारदीर्घजश्चर्विषिष ॥८॥ ufifa 7,75179-f9-ai-tera-at-aad-frent-is-91-9 fafay, ( nang) 
वृत्तिः । पूर्वेणातिप्रसक्तः स्थानिवद्भाव एतेषु विधिषु प्रतिषिध्यते। 
58. Not so, in rules relating to the finals of words, to the doubling of letters, to the affixing of varach, to the elision of ya, to accent, to homogeneous letters, to anusvára, to the lengthening of vowels, and to the substi tution of jać and char letters. : This sätra lays down an exception to the previous satra, by which it was ruled that an adeśa which replaced a vowel becomes sthânivat under cer tain conditions. This sätra says that a vowel adeśa is not sthånivat under the following circumtances. 
1. qerara - A rule relating to the last letter of a word.' Thus the of Te is elided before the terminations of dual and plural numbers (VI. 4. Inr). Thus we have ifa "he is,' F: 'they two are,'afina 'they are.' Now in the technical phraseology of Sanskrit grammarians, the 7 of tñ: and efo is 
BK. I. CH. I. $ 58.) 
SUBSTITUTE IS LIKE THE PRINCIPAL: 
. 
replaced by an adeśa called arg, the peculiarity of which is that the whole of it vanishes. . So that before the word En: there is this adeśa existing, though it is in an invisible form. This invisible adeśa will be sthånivat, as it replaces a vowel, by reason of something that follows, i. e. the affixes : and sofort being fer (I. 2, 4); and it will have all the powers of by the last satra, in the absence of any rule to the contrary. Therefore, in the sentence at Fit:! who two are' the final pt of ant and the invisible y of Fat: ought to coalesce by rules of sandhi into (VI. 1. 78). But this incongruity is prevented by the pre sent sútra, by which the change of ut into it is a m a forty or a rule relating to the finals of a word, therefore, we have antra: 1 So also in ana afra, rule VI. 1: 77 is not applied. 
2. 
P T T: 'a rule relating to the doubling of letters. In the sandhi of we have not. Here is changed into 1. If this y were sthånivat to , then the rule by which y could be doubled before I would be inappli cable. But y is not equivalent to , though its substitute; and we have the doubu ling of vand get the form TT. Therefore, in rules relating to the doubling of letters the adeša is not equivalent to the sthånt. 
3. TAN: 'a rule relating to the affix 1 . The affix my is a krit nffix which is added to certain roots to form nouns of agency; thus from fer 'to rule' we have STT: 'ruler.' So from the intensive verb orary we have Art: 'a vagrant. It is formed in this wise arart+(III. 2. 196) atra+. 
+T(VI. 4. 48). Here the of o has been dropped and replaced by lopa, on account of its being followed by theirdhadhâtuka affix TT. The next step is to drop the y by rule VI. 1.66 which declares that the letters / and < are dropped before affixes beginning with any consonant except य् .., beginning with consonants of वन pratyahara. Thus याया + 0 + पर. Now there is a rule (VI. 4. 64) which declares that the final long T of a base is dropped before årdhadhâtuka affixes having an initial vowel. Here there fore, if the adeśa 'lopa,' which replaced the vowel , be considered as sthånivat, and be considered as an affix having a latent initial vowel, then the ot of and requires to be dropped. But this sätra prevents this and we have the forma Arrr; as, w aTTT: Tìa forustuu 
4. HATTE: 'a rule relating to the dropping of ya.' Thus there is a verba 'to scratch'. In forming an abstract noun from it, the affix po (tech. Fi 
) is added. Thus 204 + fa=005+o+fa, the v of ) is added. The 
being dropped by VI. 4. 48. Now there is a rule (VI. 1. 66) already mentioned above which requires the elision of x before consonantal affixes. Now if the lopa. substitute be considered as sthanivat to y, then the affix fo is not an affix having an initial consonant and the rule, which requires the dropping of v, would not apply. The present satra, however, provides for this, and we have the form musta: 'scratching. .. 
80 
SUBSTITUTE IS LIKE THE PRINCIPAL. 
[Bx. I. CH. I. $ 58. 
5. F any: 'a rule relating to accent.' There is a sūtra (VI. 1. 193) which says that when a word is formed by an affix that has an indicatory 
, the vowel that immediately precedes such an affix has the udåtta accent. Now oer is an affix that has an indicatory , the real affix being a (VII. 1. 1.). It is an affix used in forming nouns of agency. Adding this affix to the desiderative verb to desirous of doing we have fait + eft + + p, the being dropped by VI. 4. 48. Now if the zero be considered as sthånivat, then the accent must fall on this latent but it is not so. The accent falls on the of ant; and we have for: , so also for all . 6. buffy:' a rule relating to the substitution of homogeneous letters. To explain this, let us form the second person singular of the verb fare in the imperative mood. The affix it is the sign of the second person imperative singular; and the verb fra belongs to the seventh-class of verbs called Rudhadi. This class of verbs take the vikarana (III. 1.78) the y andą being indicatory the real affix is it. This it is inserted between the radical vowel and the final consonant (I. d. 47). Therefore we have the follow ing equation:-0€ + 7 + + + + fy=ff+9+ 0 + + ff. The 
of or is dropped by VI. 4. 111, which declares that the wuf is dropped before those sårvadhâtuka terminations which are part or fy. By I. 2. 4 all sårvadhâtuka terminations which have not got an indicatory g are consi dered as Gay The affix ff therefore is a foc sårvadhâtuka affix, and by rule III. 4. 87, fe is to be regarded as Tiga, not having an indicatory q. The next stage is :- +7+o+a+ft; the ff being changed into fy by rule (VI. 4. 101) which says that 'ie is changed into it, when it follows a root which ends in a consonant of Fo pratyahára:' here ç and q are changed by general rules of sandhi into 3 and and we have fet + 7 + + + Fe (VIII. 4 41). Then there is a rule (VIII. 3. 24), which says that in the body of a word the Tis changed into anusvåra when followed by a consonant of a pratyähära.' Therefore we have :-- + FOF3 + F. This is the form to which the present rule is applicable. Thus, there is a rule (VIII. 4. 58) which says that an anusvåra followed by a letter of gre pratyahira i.e., any consonant except ! qanda is changed into a letter homogeneous or savarna to the letter that follows. Therefore, if we regard zero as sthånivat to the which it replaces, the anusvåra cannot be changed into y as homogeneous to . But it is not to be so regarded, and we have the form ft + + + = fios or fior; so also पिण्डि . 
7. E ITT: 'a rule relating to anusvåra.' The above example will serve the purpose here:--FU + + + + . This by the rule al. ready mentioned (VIII. 3. 24), requires the I to be changed into apusvára. 
BK. I. CH. I. $ 58.] 
SUBSTITUTE IS LIKE THE PRINCIPAL. 
51 
Now if zero be considered as sthànivat, then is not followed by a letter of pratyahåra , and cannot be changed into anusvåra. However, the 'zero is not regarded as sthanivat, and we change the into anusyåra. Other examples are ft +1+.+ L + fuqpa; so also for 
8. Fat:' a rule directing the substitution of long vowels for short vowels. Let us form the Inst. sing. of the noun naamThe ter. mination of the Inst. sing.is Tor . Therefore, we have gare + Harri 
+0+1+. Here the has been clided by rule VI. 4. 134, which teaches that words ending in I lose their before terminations technically called Bha. The termination of Inst. sing. is a Bha termination by force of rule I. 4. 18. The next rule that now comes into operation, is VIII. 2. 77, which requires the lengthening of the short penultimate vowels, of the pratya. håra, of words that end in corp and are followed by a consonant. Herc For is a root that ends in t; and if the zero be considered as sthånivat, thea this ç is not followed by a consonant, but by a latent vowel, and so the short of fit will not be lengthened. This rule, however, provides for such lengthi ening, and therefore we havc:- Tarot + + 7 + grafiiril 
9. Ferg: 'a rule requiring the substitution of soft unaspirate consonants, of pratyåhåra re, in the place of hard consonants' In this case also the adcśa that takes the place of a vowel is not sthanivat. 
Let us add the affix ftry to the root o'to eat,' compounded with the word oor #41. In Vedic literature wę is replaced by TE, (II. 4. 39); so we have, +T + FIT&+@+ + ++ + (VI. 4. 100)=++ ++ 
o+fa (VIII. 2. 26)= #+quotatit (VIII, 2. 40). 
It is at this stage, that rule VIII. 4. 53 requires the g to be changed into T. This is a sy rule, and teaches that in the place of letters of an class, the letters of my class are substituted, if followed by letters of HT class. If the zero which was obtained by dropping the y of , be considered as sthânivat, then the y is not followed by a consonant of any class, and cannot be changed into T. But it is not so. Therefore ag toto+frany:(Yaj. Ved. XVIII. 9). The various rules, by which first vis omitted, and then is dropped, have been referred to in brackets, and will be explained in their proper places. 
Similarly the word TTT, which is the Imperative (lot) 2nd per. dual of the root y, and is thus evolved. This root belongs to the Juhutyadi class, and therefore, there is reduplication. Thus *** +379 48 + 9 + 974 - T + yg + ATT ?+YE + ATL - P + + + + TD (VI. 4. 100) -7 + L + . tot ATI (VIII. 2. 26) -T + + + + TL (VIII. 2. 40) - + + •*. UT Til Here the change of ar into y is by the applica tion of VIII. 4. 53, which is a jaś rule, and therefore, the zero is not sthanivat. 
52 
SUBSTITUTE IS LIKE THE PRINCIPAL 
: [BK. I..Cù. I. $ 59. 
: :jo. T ah: 'a rule requiring the substitution of the letters of 
pratyahara instead of other consonants. In the application of this rule, also the substitute that replaces a vowel is not sthånivat 
Let us form the 2nd pers. sing. perfect of the verb 'to eat.' is replaced by Tm(II. 4. 40) and wgy is the termination of the second person singular of lit or perfect tense. 08 + WITH = + TTT (VI. 1.8) - 0 + TT + GE (VII. 4. 60) - T. + 9 + 9% (VIII. 4. 54) = 5 + g+ + + WE(VI. 4. 98) = 7+ . + ap. 
. At this stage comes the rule in operation, which says that the letters of Art pratyâhâra are replaced by those of pratyahara, when follow ed by letters of Ut pratyahara. Here ç is a letter of a class, and if zero is aot sthaniyat, it is followed by which is a letter of or class, and there. foreg is required to be changed into F of r class. By the present rule, zero is not sthånivat and thus we have:CHEE 66: (VIII. 3. 60) . Similarly in the 3rd per. plural aorist of rg is thus formed:- + 
og + + - + 9 + (II. 4. 80) = 4 + 4 + + + TI (VI. 4.98). Here had the lopa been sthânivat, rule VIII. 4. 55 could not have applied. But it being a char rule, the lopa is not sthånivat. Therefore we have, 1979. 
When lopa is the substitute of a vowel, it is. aot sthånivat, for the purposes of the application of the rules of accent, rules relating to the double ing of letters, and the rules relating to the elision of ya.. In other places, with the exception of the above three ; the lopa substitute of a yowel is, and must be treated as sthånivat. Thus agur: , Mat, fiat, qrat. In these cases the lopa-ådeśa being sthånivat, the rules relating to accent, lengthen 
ing and the elision of ya, do not apply. . figaste un gen agita u fauna, ofa, ( tanara, 69t:, :) u 
fill features TFT: Fiatakafa for a great 
59. Before an affix having an initial vowel, which causes reduplication, the substitute which takes the place of a vowel is like the original vowel even in form, only for the purposes of reduplication and no further. • 
.. This sûtra has been explained in different ways by the authors of the Kasika and of the Siddhanta Kaumudi. According to the latter, the stra means 'when an affix beginning with a vowel follows, that is a cause of re duplication, a substitute shall not take the place of a preceding vowel, whilst the reduplication is yet to be made : but the reduplication baving been made, Bk. I. CH. I. & 59.) 
SUBSTITUTE IS LIKE THE PRINCIPAL. 
. 53 
the substitution may then take place. The explanation givea by Kasika is more in harmony with the Great Commentary. For all practical purposes, the two explanations lead to the same conclusion. According to Kasika, the vowel-substitute is sthånivat, in the sense, that it is exactly of the same form as the original, and retains this form only for a fixed time vis., so long as the reduplication is being made ; but as soon as the reduplication has been made, the substitute takes its proper form. This rule has its scope in the rules relating (a) to the elision of long or, (b) to the elision of the penultimate, (c) to the elision of the affix fury, (d) to the substitution of semi-vowels for vowels, and lastly (e) to the substitution of a, v ar and org for at g and respectively by the rules of sandbi. 
(a). Elision of T. Let us form the 2nd person perfect tense of the root at 'to drink.' The termination of 2nd person perfect is H. This is, therefore, a termination beginning with a vowel, and it causes the redupli. cation of the root. The conditions of the present sútra all exist in this. Thus we have IT + QTF - 9+ + V (VI. 4, 64). Here the ot is elided by VI. 4. 6.4. which teaches that the air of the root is elided before &rdha dhâtuka affixes beginning with a vowel and which are pace or fem. and before 
6. The affix wie is such an affix (I. 2. 5, III. 4. 115). 
Now comes the rule about reduplication which is contained in satra VI. 1. 8, and teaches that a root consisting of a single vowel is reduplicated before the terminations of the perfect. Here, by the elision of y, the only visible root left to us is g which is a consonant without any vowel. The rule of reduplication, therefore, would not have applied to it, because there is no vowel in it, but for the present sätra, which solves the difficulty. Here the vowel-substitute zero must be considered sthånivat i. e. as if it were the very qr itself. Thus we have qT + + + g = 793 (VII. 4. 59). The long T of the reduplicative syllable has been shortened by VII. 4. 59. So also 95:1 
(6). The elision of the penultimate. Let us form the same tense of ' to kill.' + 8 [+ + + (VI. 4. 98). 
Here also the preliminary conditions are all fulfilled, the affix begins with a vowel and it causes the reduplication of the root. The penultimate 
of is replaced by the substitute lopa by VI.4. 98, which teaches that the roots Ta'to go' 'to kill' and a few others lose their penultimate before affixes beginning with a vowel and which are also part or fon. We know very to be such an affix. For the reasons already given, we can pot redupli cate the consonants as they have no vowel. However, this reduplication is cffected by virtue of the present rule, and we have:- + x + y = 19. (VII.. 4. 62,. VII. 3. 55). The first is changed into a by VII. 4. 62 and the second ginto g by. VII. 3. 55. . .... 
SUBSTITUTE IS LIKE THE PRINCIPAL 
[Bk. I. CH. I. $ 59. 
. 
(c). The elision of the affix iur. Let us form the Aorist (lur) of the causative form of . The causative is formed by adding the affix for to the root; and the aorist takes the augment . Thus we have:- + +fut += +=+ = +9+9+. The affix (III. 1. 48) is added in forming the aorist of causatives. The letters and are indicatory, the real affix being . Now by VI. 4. 51, the affix fuq is elided before an ardhadhâtuka affix that does not take the intermediate . Now Te is such an affix. Therefore we have gre + + . 
At this stage, comes into operation another rule (VI. 1. 11), which de clares that the root is reduplicated before the affix T . The is, thus, an affix which causes reduplication; it is an affix which also begins with a vowel. Therefore, it satisfies the conditions of this stra. Therefore, the zero which was a substitute in place of the vowel , becomes sthânivat to ; as if it were the very r itself. Thus we have the reduplicative syllable 2, by rule VI. 1. 2, which says that a verb beginning with a vowel reduplicates its second syllable. But as soon as the reduplication is over, the adeśa takes up its original form of zero. Thus C + + = ca. 
(d). The fourth class of cases, where this sätra has scope, is the substitution of 79 for vowels. Thus let us form the perfect 2nd person singular of 'to do':- + VIT C + 49, the semi-vowel ç taking the place of t by the general rule of sandhi VI. 1. 77. Now we have already learned that is an affix which causes reduplication and it begins with a vowel. Now ç is a substitute which comes in the place of a vowel (i.e., ), it will therefore be sthànivat by this sûtra. Had it not been sthånivat, the consonants could not be reduplicated, as they have no vowel. The substitute ę being taken equal to , we reduplicate F; in reduplication the This changed into by VII. 4. 62, and into by VII. 4. 66. Thus we bave :- :; similarly 5:1 
(e).. The fifth case is the substitution of yu &c. Let us form Ist person singular of the perfect of it 'to lead:' + 0 * + Ar + V. The is vriddhied before the termination of the perfect (VII. 2. 115), and then changed into gry by the general rule of sandhi (VI. 1. 78). Now the 
of the perfect causes reduplication, and it is an affix which begins with a vowel. It satisfies the conditions of this satra. Therefore the wry which was a substitute for being a vowel substitute, becomes sthanivat tog in form. la reduplicating the word 79, we reduplicate as if it were still A. Thus we have the form निनाय and not ननाय. Similarly निनय, जलव, and लजाब. - । 
Why have we used the word “ dvirvachane" in the satra? Without it, the aphorism would have stood thus:" Before an affix having an initial vowel which causes reduplication, the substitute which takes the place of a vowel 
BK. I. CH. I. 8 60.] 
.. LOPA DEFINED. 
53 
is like the original vowel." Let us form at the 3rd per. sing, perfect tense (T) of the root "to be exhausted," in the atmanepada. The affix of 3rd per. sing. atm, of lit, is PII (III. 4, 81). Thus + PET - TOT + TV (VI. 1. 45). Now here it is changed into , on account of the affix ey; this affix causes reduplication, but still is not to be considered as sthånivat to do. For if T be considered so, then in the next stage GT + T = TE + + TT (VI. 4.64) the lopa will be regarded as sthaniyat to and the reduplicative syllable will be and not Ft; the form being fra and not Fot. But is not sthånivat tot, because for the purposes of reduplication, the change of è into or is immaterial; it is the second and further change of q into zero which is directly connected with reduplication, (for if zero be pot considered sthånivat, there can be no reduplication); and therefore, this substitute zero should be regarded as sthånivat to g. 
Why do we say "which causes reduplication ?" Without these words the sätra would have stood thus:-"Before an affix having an initial vowel, the substitute which takes the place of a vowel is like the original vowel, for the purposes of reduplication." In that case we could not get the form , 3rd per. sing, desiderative present tense of her to shinc, to play.' This form is thus evolved:-- +1 (III. 1. 7) = +*+#T(VI. 4. 19) 
+5+UT (VI. 1. 77). Here, the change of rinto is caused by * (tech. 5), which begins with a vowel ; is this to be regarded as sthånivat to ? No, because 5 does not cause reduplication, it is I which causes reduplication. Therefore the equation is :- + 1 (VI. 1. 9) = m . If could be regarded like r, then the form would have been feqeta. 
Why do we say "beginning with a vowel"? Otherwise the sutra would have run thus :-"Before an affix which causes reduplication, the subs. titute which takes the place of a vowel, is like the original vowel, for the purposes of reduplication." The affix 45 of the Intensive verbs causes re duplication (VI. 1.9); but as it does not begin with a vowel, the substitute will not be sthanivat. Let us formula the 3rd per. sing. Intensive of the roots; to smell' Thus at +6 =ît +49 (VII. 4. 31)=atea (VII. 4. 82). Here, or is changed into on account of 7%; but is not sthånivat to VT; had it been so, the form would have been totaa. Similarly flaiua. 
rata Sta: 11 80 llotta cap , era o 
: ll ****TU GURUHYTTATT Tufaru Bertuare grote witsuisirutad TFT HTT tai hy tafa u 
60. The substitution of a blank (lopa) signi fies disappearance. 
This defines elision. When a letter or word-form becomes latent, 
56: 
PRATYAYA-LAKSHANA. 
(BK. I. CH. I. $ 61, 62. 
is neither heard, nor pronounced, nor written, it becomes lopa or is said to be elided. Lopa is the term for the disappearance of anything previously apparent.. 
la Sanskrit Grammar, this " lopa " is considered as a substitute or idesa, and as such this grammatical sera has all the rights and liabilities of the thing which it replaces. This blank or lopa is in several places treated as having a real existence and rules are made applicable to it, is the same way as to any ordinary substitute that has an apparent form. The Grammarians do not content them. selves with one sort of blank, but have invcated several other; there are many kinds of them, such as lopa blank, slu blank, lup blank, and luk blank, which like different sorts of zerods of a Mathema. tician, have different functions 
The word lopa occurs in sûtras VI. 1. 66 and VI. 4. 118 &c. The lopa substitute is a sense substitute, and not a form substitute. Thus when we say 'let the substitute lopa take the place of such and such a letter or word,' we do not mean that the letters , , qand should be substituted there, but the sense of the thing, namely 'disappearance.' 
Actuer 1989: &9 1195 fau Retar, 94-93-99, ( erant) 
पत्तिः॥ प्रत्ययावर्शनस्य लुक रन लुपू इत्येताः संज्ञा भवन्ति । 
61. The disappearance of an affix when it is caused by the words luk, ślu or lup are designated by those terms respectively. 
. When an affix is elided by using the term luk, that disappearance gets the appellation of luk, similarly when an affix is elided by using the terms ślu or lup, the disappearance gets the name of ślu or iup. 
Thus in +TO +f= 'he eats.' Here the vikarapa Ty has been elided by using the word luk (II. 4. 72). Similarly in Teta "he in vokes,' the vikaraṇa Tg is elided by the word ślu (II. 4. 75), so in tur:'a city in the vicinity of weeds called varana.' Here the Taddhita affix indicat. ing vicinity has been elided by the word lup. (IV. 2. 82), 
Why do we use the words "of the affix"? Without these words, the sQtra would have run thus : -" The disappearance is called luk, slu or lup." So that the disappearance of a base would also be caused by the use of these terms. Thus in II. 4. 70, there would have been "luk' of the bases &gastya, and kaundinya ; which however is not intended. In that sätra, the 'luk' of the affixes is only intended. So also in sätra IV. 3. 168 there would have been the substitution of "luk'. for the bases of the words.' 
प्रत्ययलेोपे प्रत्ययलक्षणम् ॥ ६२॥ पदानि ॥ प्रत्यय-लोपे, प्रत्यय. gaura ir 
वृत्तः । प्रत्ययलोपे कृते प्रत्ययलक्षणं प्रत्ययहेनुकं कार्य भवति ।। 
62. When elision of an affix has taken place (lopa), the affix still exerts its influence, and the opera tions dependaut upon it, take placo as if it were present. 
BK. I. CH. I. $ 62. ] 
PRATYAYA-LAKSHANA. 
57 
EU 
This sūtra declares that when an affix disappears by lopa-elision its potency does not disappear. Thus the term 'pada' is defined to be that which ends in a case-affix or a conjugational-affix. But after certaio bases, these affixes vanish; still those bases become 'pada' in spite of the vanishing of the whole affix. How can an operation directed by an affix take place, when the affix itself vanishes, is a doubt which may naturally arise. This satra answers the question. Though an affix may be elided by lopa, yet an operation of which such an affix was the cause, must take place. Thus wife is a pada though the case-termination has beea elided. Simi. larly the word 'he milked;' which is the imperfect (or) of , and is thus formed. Serg+fag= 15+T (III. 4. 100)= 1&to (VI. 1, 68)* +. (VIII. 2. 32) (here y is changed into g by taking the irord 'adub' as a 'pada') w at • (VIII. 2. 37)- TN (VIII. 2. 39) - r. 
Why have we used the word gery in this aphorism again, when it's anuvšitti was understood in this sûtra from the last? This repetition indi cates that the present rule applies where the whole of the affix is elided, and not when a portion of an affix is elided. The present sätra, therefore, does not apply to forms like omsta and art. These forms are the 1st person sing লিঃ Atmanepada of and . Thus মানু + ধ = রানু + ম (Ill. 4 106) - TEL + E + (III. 4. 102) - 9759 +4+. Here, & a portion of the affix et is elided by VII. 2. 79; now there will be no yere U of this partial elision of an affix. Had it been so, the final nasal of 3 would have been elided by VI. 4. 37: but that is not so: and we have to (VII. 3. 54 and VI. 4.98). 
The word FU means that by which a thing is recogoised. The word 947TU, therefore, means the effect by which an affix could be recog nised. The orthographical changes, like the following, are not however pratyaya-lakshapa. In forming the genitive singular of wealth,' we have ? + V = {T:, here, the change of it into re by the rules of sandhi, though caused by the affix t; is not such an effect, which the affix causes, by virtue of being an affix, but it is an effect caused by the accidental fact, that the affix begins with a vowel, and thus gives scope to the euphonic rule VI. 1. 78. Therefore, when in forming the genitive compound of tra: + Fot, we elide the case-affixa, we get the form twory. Here the elided affix will not cause the peculiar orthographic change mentioned above, which is dependent upon its letters, and not upon the affix as such. 
a gharger le agrfa 11 a, Ghat, orge, ( 17419 ga ) 
वृत्तिः ॥ लुमतापलेन मुझे प्रत्यये यरतस्य प्रत्ययलक्षणं कार्य न भवति । 
58 
: 
PRATYAYA-LAKSHANA. 
(BK. I. CH. 1. 8 63: 
63. Of the base (anga), whose affix has been elided by the use of any of the three words containing 9, the operations dependent on it do not take place, le garding such base. 
This sätra is a special exception to the previous aphorism which was too extensive. It declares, that when an affix is elided by using the words , , or , then the 'signor FHU or the peculiar virtue of the affix also vanishes. Thus there is an important difference in the elision of an affix by force of the words at &c.; and by the word airy. In one case the virtue of the affix subsists inspite of the elision, in the other it does not. . 
The word in this sätra requires some explanation, "A root, followed by a suffix (pratyaya), is raised to the dignity of a base (pratipadika); and finally becomes a real word (pada) when it is finished by receiving a case-termination (vibhakti). Every base, with regard to the suffix which is attached to it, is called Anga, body." 
Thus the word Tir: is the plural of the word . The word Trr: is formed by adding the affix 77 to (IV. 1. 105); the force of the indica tory being to cause the vşiddhi of the first vowel of the word (VII. 2. 117). But in forming the plural of #, rule II. 4. 64 presents itself, which declares that there is luk of the affix it when the word takes the plural. Here the affix el is elided by the word luk, which means not only the elision of the 
of or but also the shortening of or into o, that is, the affix being elided, it vanishes altogether, leaving no trace behind, in the shape of the viddhing of the first vowel, which the affix was competent to causc. 
Similarly E: is the 3rd per. dual present tense of 'to clean.'. It belongs to Adådi class in which the vikarana yg is elided by 'luk' (II. 4. 72); and hence there is no vșiddhi substitution, which would have taken place by VII. 2. 114, (the ik of the base Er is vșiddhied before verbal affixes). 
Similarly : 'they two sacrifice'; here the vikarana Tp-has been elided by using the word "élu' (II. 4. 75, let slu be substituted in the room of tap after the verbs hu &c). The effect of this elision is, that there is no guna substitution of the vowel of the base, which yg was competent to cause. 
When an affix is elided in any other way than by the enunciation of the three terms containing 7, it is competent to cause its proper effect. Thus +for+27+à e afr+7+8=ETE+ +=ara. Here the elision of the affix nich is by 'lopa,' (VI. 4.51) and hence though the affix vanishes, its cffect remains. Why do we say 'in respect of an Anga or inflective base?' Observe qe 'five,' 9H 'seven,' 94: milk,' ar såma veda." Here in the word païcha, the plural case-affix is elided by VII. 1. 32 
Bk. I. CH, I, § 64, 66. ) . 
TI DEFINED. 
. 
59 
(after the words called shat, the T and Ti arc elided by 'luk'). Here the affix is elided by enouncing the word 'luk,' the result is, that the affix cannot produce any change which it would otherwise, have caused, in the anga or inflective base; such as lengthening, as in rajan, 'a king,' 1. p. råjånab kings. But though it is inoperative as regards the anga, the elided affix is not altogether.inactive. It retains the virtue of rais. ing the base to the dignity of a pada. Thus:-14+7=+ , (luk VII. 1. 22). The word paichan is now a pada, and as such, it drops its final q. 
STOISETA FE 11 8 11 og fa il 77:, opremf, fent :' T rerat i saltar en Tara Peyafet 11 
64. The final portion of a word, beginning with the last among the vowels in the word, is called R. 
This sätra defines fe. It is that portion of a word which is included between the last letter and the nearest vowel. Thus in the word want the portion is ; so also in uw the portion . The word e. occurs in sutra III. 4. 79. 
The word 9. in the sätra is in the genitive case, which has the force of nirdharana or specification; and though it is in the singular number, it represents class name, meaning among the vowels.' 
अठोऽन्त्यात्यूर्व उपधा ॥६५॥ पदानि ॥ अलः, अन्त्यात. gà, vv u 
. f#: W PEERITU af Stalca: ET TU: TÄNYT ÉTÈ TRT 11 
65. The letter immediately preceding the last letter of a word is called the penultimate. 
This defines 34 or penultimate. Thus in the words o, fork, N, TI the letters ♡.1,3, and are aTYT. 
The word.upadha' occurs in sutra VII. 2, 116. 
· afefafa fafane går u geu aqifa u afera, fa, fafeta, garra . . 
वृत्तिः ॥ तस्मिन्निति सप्तम्यर्थनिर्देशे पूर्वस्यव कार्य भवति नोत्तरस्य ।। 
66. When a term is exhibited in the seventh case in these sätras, the operation directed, is to be understood as affecting the state of what immediately 
· precedes that which the term denotes. 
This is a declaratory or interpreting stra. When in a sútra, a word is used in the locative case, the operation ordained by that sätra is to be per. 
60 
THE FORCE OF ABLATIVE CASE. 
[BK. I. CH. 1. $ 67, 68. 
formed on the word preceding it. Thus in the sätra at yuft (VI. 1.77) the word art is in the locative case, which sâtra, therefore, means that ;, followed by a vowel (2) are changed into 1, LT,, (y). The literal translation of the sätra being: Of there is an in ver. The force of 'in' or the locative case being to induce changes in the letter preceding the vowel. Thus ry + 344 = ; so fit, 9460 
· The word nirdishța (meaning 'exhibited ') has been used in the sätra to indicate immediateness. Thus in dia, the r of air is not direct ly followed by the rof Fre, there being the letter / intervening, therefore, rule VI. 1. 77, does not apply here: and we have no sandbi. 
तस्मादित्युत्तरस्य ॥ ६७ ॥ पदानि ॥ तस्मात् , इति, उत्तरस्य, (Aafete.) u 
वृत्तिः ॥ तस्मादिति पसम्ययनिर्देश उत्तरस्यैव कार्य भववि न पूर्वस्व ॥ 
67. An operation caused by the exhibition of a term in the ablative or fifth case, is to be understood to enjoin the substitution of something in the room of that which immediately follows the word denoted by the term. 
This sutra explains the force of words in the ablative case when employed in these aphorisms. As the locative case refers to a preceding word, so the ablative refers to a succeeding word. 
Thus sūtra VIII. 4. 61 declares that after 3, of stha and stambha, the substitute is a letter belonging to the class of the prior. Thus + FITTH. Here the word of: is exhibited in the original sätra in the ablative case, and by the present sätra it means that a dental letter must be substituted in the place of sthåna, and by I. 1. 54 ante, this dental takes the place of 7; we have 39 +24774=.473. Similarly in sätra fas fas: (VIII.2. 18,' a word ending in a conjugational affix, when following after a word ending in a non conjugational affix, becomes anudatta.') Here the word 'atidah' is exhibited in the ablative case, therefore, the operation directed by this aphorism, namely, the substitution of anudatta accent, must take place in the word that follows. Thus सोनं पंचति; but not so in पस्योदुनमिति॥ 
U VRTU 8C ut qfa a 14,944, 17, ainu 
FT: U GET FRİT KÝ THAT TRI Prayerci safar 7 TTKİTS: Tatiat Tato Free 11 
. *11* Fra TaTU TIRI * Il 
BK. I. CH. I. $ 68. ] 
SVAM-RUPA RULE: 
11* foregutante tratta वात्तिकम् ॥* जित्पर्यायवचनस्येव रामायर्थम् ॥ . वार्तिकम् ॥ * झित्तहिशेषाणा मत्स्यापर्यम् ॥ 
68. In this Grammar, when an operation is directed with regard to a word, the individual form of the word possessing meaning is to be understood, except with regard to a word which is a definition.. 
This is a rule of interpretation. The word Fy which means 'one's own' denotes 'the meaning,' and the word 59 denotes 'the individual form of a word.' The sense of the satra is that a word denotes both things ex. pressed by those two words F and 64, vis., its meaning, and its form. Thus a rule applicable to WTF will be applicable to the word composed of , T, L, 7 and not to the words synonymous with agoi, such as, 777, SYG: &c. 
In this science, therefore, the very word-form is to be taken, and understood and operated upon, and not external sense: with the exception of words which are definitions, in the latter case the things defined are to be taken: 
This sutra is begun in order to remove the difficulty which might otherwise arise from a consideration that a word connotes a certain meaning, and as no grammatical operation is possible in a concrete object, we must take the words having the same meaning. As when a person is called to bring a 'cow,' he brings the animal cow, and not the letters C, 0, W. It may therefore be said, that as no grammatical operation is possible in a material thing, we may take all the names synonymous with the word and operate upon them; this sätra removes that doubt. . . 
Thus thc sâtra grada (IV. 2. 33) declares :-- "that the affix 'dhak' comes after the word 'agni'." Thus fra + 
TL "belonging to agni," as in the following sentence w ere fou. Here the word 
fra indicates the individual word-form and not its synonyms. Simi larly sútra IV. 2. 19 declares: let there be optionally sat after a f i'. As 
rent (VII. 3. 50 and 51) or prepay. The rule applies to the word-form "udašvita' meaning 'curd-milk' and not to any, ofte, Tara, FETTO and Afera, which are synonyms. 
There is an important exception to this rule, and that is in favour of terms which are techoical terms of Grammar and have been so defined. 
Thus T TT (1. 1. 20) and #497 T: (I. I. 22). Here the words 'g' and 'r' denote the words connoted by those terms and not to their word-form. There are, however, some sâtras in Påņini which are apo 
62" 
SVAM-RUPA RULE. 
(Bk. I. CH. I. $ 69.. 
parently exceptions to this rule. These exceptions have been arranged under four heads, technically called faa, FTL, ferat, and finis. When there is a rule about a word, it may mean that very word-form, or words represent ing species falling under that word, or words which are synonymous with it. Thus rule II. 4. 12 declares, - H 'tree' at 'deer,' au 'grass,' &c., may optionally be compounded as dvandva." Here the word TF stands as a generic name for the species falling under it, and does not represent the word-form, F. Thus we have dvandva-compound of + y, as 
FFT or NT. I Such sätras are called force. 
Then in sâtra III. 4. 40, we have an example of for. That sätra mcans the word gy 'to feed' takes the asfix USA ( U) when compounded with the word "." Here the word 'n' means both the word-form FT, as well as the synonyms of ty and the species of 67. Thus F and 'wealth' are synonyms ; while Fr wealth' and on 'cow' are genus and species. Thus F + young + oH - FOTOL. Similarly ÉTITI, 479144, 1994, p . Such sutras are called पित. 
Then in sätra II. 4. 23, we have an example of fo. "A Tatpurusha compound ending with the word 'court' is neuter, provided that it is preceded by the word råjå, or by a word denoting a non-human being." Here the synonyms only of the word 'råjå' are taken, and neither the word form 'råja,' nor the special instances falling under it. Thus 'king' + 
=FTY 'king's assembly,' TT+ TTTTH 'king's assembly.' But not E, but a. Nor can we take particular kings, such as you or gritt. In their case we must have got THT, FIT. 
Then in s@tra IV. 4. 35, we have an example of far. The sûtra means "the words of bird' TOFU 'fish' qm'deer,' take the affixo when the meaning is the killer thereof." Here the words for &c. denote both the .word-forms fæ &c. as well as the species denoted by those terms, but not their synonyms.. Thus pf7+5=17: 'a bird-killer,' HITELT, 'a fish .catcher.' Taft+8 = To : 'a vulture-killer. But we cannot take the synonyms of "fit,' &c. except in the case of HEFT,' when we may take the word 'मीन.' As मारित्यकः and मेनिकः 'a fish killer.' 
grecade TARTT: 188 uuerfat u eros, afce, Fauir, 7, WACTH: ( i ) 
gfer: 11 TAHTU REU atukai F15 kì là FTETT KIRTAN TAFEat u 
69. The letters of the Pratyahara o i. e. the vowels and semi-vowels, and a term having for its indi. .catory letter, refer to their own form as well as to their 
1 es Bk. I. CH. I. $ 70.] : 
TA-PARA RULE. 
63 
homogeneous letters, except when they are used as pra-. tyåyås or affixes. 
The pratyåhåra my in thus sätra includes all the vowels and liquids. This is the only instance where store pratyáhåra refers to the second q of 077. The letters included in TL, and the letters having an indicatory 3, refer to, and include their homogeneous letters also. Thus refers to all the five gutturals , C, T, 4, 5, similarly I, I, J, and g, as in sůtra 1.3.8. Similarly includes short, long and protracted . The words 'its own form' are understood in this sûtra, being drawn from the previous sútra: 
s sûtra WTTTU: (VI. 1. 87), 'when a vowel comes after v, guna is the single substitute for both.' Here though the rule mentions only short , we take the long I also. Thus not only 7 + FT: :; but ET + 69:-HIT: 1 So also in sûtra Srey eat (VII. 4. 32), 'there is long f in the room of when the affix 'chvi' (V. 4. 50) follows. Here long or is also included; thug 
U+#tae pulattia, and starterujatifa. So also in stra Trufa (VI. 4. 148). "When long follows, there is elision of the for of the base,' the rule applies to the bases ending in long and I also. ) 
This rule of course does not apply to affixes. Thus sûtra III. 2. 168; says, ' after words ending in the affix san, and the words ašansa and bhiksha, there is .' Here is an affix and therefore does not include long 5. Thus fart: 'a beggar.' So also in IV. 3. 9, the short only is to be taken and not the long one... 
94TFTOHTORTILO u arifa quoti, -ATOR, ( 947) 
- वृत्तिः । नपरो वर्णस्तत्कानस्यात्मनातुल्यकालस्य गुणन्तरयुक्तस्व सवर्णस्य पाहको tafa ETEZT EGYET IT 
70. The letter which has y after or before it, besides referring to its own form, refers to those homo geneous letters which have the same prosodial length or time. 
By the previous sätra it was declared that a vowel standing by it. self included all the letters of its class. Thus y includes wT; and , t; &c. This søtra lays down the rule by which the very form of the letter is takea and not all the letters of its class. This is done by placing a q either after or before the letter. Thus we means the very letter and not all its homo geneous letters. Similarly ug means short only and not long or protracted 7. We had to refer to this sätra, in our very first sätra, in explaining the term पात. 
· TADANTA-RULE. 
[BK. I. CH. I. & 71,72 
The sůtra consists of two words #97: and Tohu. Taparab means that which has a g after it or that which is after x. Tat-kala means having the same time. According to time the vowels are divided into short, long and protracted. Short vowels have one measure, long vowels two, and protracted vowels three. A consonant lasts half the time of a short vowel Therefore a letter preceded or followed by , refers to its own form as well as to those only of its homogeneous letters which have the same time. Thus the letter will include thc udåtta, anudatta, svarita (both nasalised and non-nasalised) H and not the long and protracted forms. 
This satra declares an injunction. The anuvşitti of story of the previ. ous sūtra does not run into this sotra. Any other letter than ve may be followed by a and the rule of this sätra will apply to that also. This rule qualifies the previous satra which would therefore mean that any letter which is not followed or preceded by a y includes its homogeneous letters also. 
Thus in the satra VII. 1. 9 ware gr. After words ending in sq (i. e. short o), ty takes the place of fore. Thus rat.. But in ons which ends in long et and whose prosodial time is different from $, this rule will not apply, and we have aft: . 
आदिरन्त्येन सदेता ॥ १॥ पदानि ॥ आदिः, अन्त्येन, सह, TH, ( 9 ) 
धृतिः ॥ प्राविरन्येनेस्संतकेन सह गृह्यमाणस्तन्मध्यपतितानां वर्णनां पाहको भवति स्वस्य च रूपस्य। 
71. An initial letter, with a final a letter as a final, is the name of itself and of the intervening letters. 
This sätra explains the mode of interpreting praty&håras. Thus the pratyahara ya means those letters whose beginning is and whose final o is 
Why do we say with the final indicatory letter?' Because a pra. tyahara like I would be otherwise ambiguous. It might be doubted whe ther it is formed with the final of tire and refers to the first five case-affixes, or whether it is formed with the initial of en and therefore refers to the first seven case-affixes. The present sQtra clears up the doubt. A pratyahára is formed with the final and not with the initial T. 
wa faforge II 90 Harfa u da, fafai, aq-ematea, ( Fil 9 ) 
पृत्तिः । येन विशेषणेन विधिविधीयते सतदन्तस्यास्मान्तस्य समुसयस्य माहको भवति स्वस्थ वरूपस्य॥ 
BK. I. CH. I. $72.) 
TADANTA-RULE 
85 
.นายe? 
वात्तिकम् ॥ * समास प्रत्ययविधी वदन्तविधेः प्रतिषेधो पनम्बः।* 
arfi # * afiraturunu* . THAT I * HATTATTETTHU N* 
72. An injunction which is made with regard to a particular attribute, applies to words having that attribute at their end as well as to that attribute itself. 
This sätra consists of three words : by what (attrib rule,' praez' having that (attribute) at its end.' 
This is a rule of interpretation. When a rule is made with regard to a particular attribute or letter, it means also words having those attributes or letters at their end. Thus there is a rule (III. 1.97) declaring "let there be the affix ay after the vowels." Here the phrase "after the vowels" means and includes " after the roots ending in rowels, as well as roots con sisting of a single vowel." Thus + T = 27. Therefore, this sätra means that when a rule is laid down in this grammar with regard to a partir cular attribute, that rule, besides being applicable to that particular attribute, is also applicable to words ending in that particular attribute. Thus a rule laid down generally with regard to vowels, will apply to words ending in vowels; a rule laid down with regard to certain forms, will apply to words ending in those forms. 
Thus the satra BTT (III. 3. 56) after there is a declares that the affix ach would come not only after T, but after any expression that ends in . Thus T + 9 = 9, F + V = :11 
Vart: The present rule, (called tadanta-vidhi) must not be applied to rules relating to compounds (samasa), and to pratyayas (affixes). Thus sútra II. 1. 24, declares that a word in the accusative case is compounded with the words frita, atita &c. As + Fara - Perta: involved in pain.' The present sūtra must not be applied here, and we cannot say that a word in the accusative case would be compounded with another that ends in srita ; for tadanta-vidhi does not apply here. Hence we cannot form a compound of € + Tapera: 
Similarly, in rules of affixes. Thus sütra IV. I. 99 declares " that the words 75 &c., take the affix**." Thus 7 + = TOUT: 1 But we can. not apply the affix phak to the word 773, the tadanta-vidhi not being appli cable here. The descendant of 777 will be called arrint and not as above. 
The above vårtika is however qualified by the following: 
Vart:-The above vârtika does not apply to words formed by affixes 
66 
VRIDDHAM DEFINED. 
[Bk. I. CH. I. $ 73. 
that have an indicatory 3 (, #, ap), short or long, or where a rule is pro pounded with regard to letters. Thus the affix ktavatu (I. 1. 26) has an indica tory 7, and we have 4. A rule which will apply to ksitavat will apply also to the word which ends in kritavat. Thus the feminine of kritavat is part (IV. 1. 6), the feminine of suksitavat will be suksitavati Similarly rule IV. 1. 95 97 says "after there is the affix ." This is & rule relating to pratyayas, but as it is propounded by mere letters, the rule of ladanta-vidhi will apply here. Thus TFT + T = TET'the son of Daksha.' 
Vart:-When a term, which denotes a letter, is exhibited in a rule in the form of the locative case and qualifies something else which likewise stands in the locative case, that which is qualified by it must be regarded as beginning with the letter which is denoted by the term in question, and not as ending with it. 
Thus sûtra VI. 4. 77, achi śnu dhatu bhruvam yvor iyan uvanau, means "iyad and uvad are the substitutes of what ends with the pratyaya śnu and what ends in a verbal root in for a, whether long or short, and of the inflective base bhrd, when an affix beginning with a vowel follows." Here the word 'achi' is exhibited in the seventh case, which literally means 'when a vowel follows;' but by virtue of the present vårtika it means, when an affix beginning with a vowel follows,' as. Fore, Tilt 
वृद्धिर्यस्थाचामादिस्तद् युद्धम् ॥ ३ ॥ पदानि ॥ वृद्धिः, यस्य, 07977, enfi, ag, ugu 
वृत्तिः । अचांमध्ये यस्य वृद्धिसंज्ञक पाविभूतस्तच्छब्दरूप पसंतं भवति ॥ बार्तिकम् ॥ *गोत्रान्तादसमस्तवत्प्रत्ययो भवतीति वक्तव्यम् ॥ . 
11* et 
a f HEIT 64: 11 * entregu * fearancenttifree 1* 
73. That word, among the vowels of which the first is a vriddhi, is called vriddham. 
This defines the word . The satra consists of five words : 16: 'the vşiddhi vowel ;'. F2 whose,' a 'among the vowels,' : 'is first;' at 'that ;' V 'is called vriddham.' 
If a word consisting of many vowels, has a vșiddhi vowel coming first in the order of vowels, that word is called vșiddham. Thus the words HAT, TGT &c., have the first vowel a vşiddhi vowel, therefore, they are called vriddham.. 
BK. I. CH. I.874,75.] 
VRIDDHAM DEFINED. 
· The word vşiddham has been defined in order to make applicable to these peculiar words certain taddhita affixes. Thus there is a rule (IV. 2. 114) by which the affix v is added to vriddham. Thus माला +छ मालीवः। 
Why do we say “ the first?" Because a word like सभासंनयन, which is not a vșiddha word, will not admit of the affir 7. Its corresponding deri. vative will be साभासंनयनः। 
Vart:-A proper noun, though not coming under the above defini. tion, may yet be regarded optionally as a vriddham. Thus देवदत्त + छ देवदत्तीया, or we may have देवरत्ता. : Vart:-A compound ending in a Gotra word, is regarded for the purposes of the addition of this affix, as if it was not compounded. Thus ta is a Gotra word and also vșiddham. Its compound ta will be re garded as a vriddham too, for the addition of the affix. As पृतरोदि + छ - पृतरोनीयाः 'the students of Ghritaraudhi. So also पोदनपाणिनीयाः, वृद्धाम्भीया: 
काश्यपीयाः &c. 
___Vart:-Exception must be made in the case of निवाकात्य and हरिवकारय। They do not take छ. Thus जहूवाकाता and हारिवकासाः. 
त्यदादीनि च ॥ ४ ॥ पदानि ॥ त्यद्-आदीनि, च। वृत्तिः । त्यहादीनि शब्दरूपाणि संज्ञानि भवन्ति । 
___74. The words tyad &c., are also called Vriddham. 
The Ery &c. have been given in the list of sarvanâmas. See sutra 27. These words are also called vriddham. Thus त+छ-तदीयमू, एतदीयम्, मीयम् इदमीयम्, अरतीयम् , स्वादायानः, मादायनि: &c. 
एङ् प्राचां देशे ॥ १५॥ पदानि ॥ एक, प्राचाम्, देशे, (यसा घामादिः, वृद्धम् )। 
वृत्तिः॥ एह यस्याचामादिस्तस्मादेशाभिधाने वृद्ध संज्ञं भवति । 
75. A word that has the letters and ot as the first among its vowels, gets also the designation of vriddham, when it is the name of Eastern coun tries. 
As is a country of the east, it is a viddham word and we have गोन+छगोनीयः; similarly एणीपचनीयभू, भोजकटीव.. 
68. 
VRIDDHAM DEFINED. 
. 
[Bx. I. CH. I. $ 75. 
The word pråk in the satra has been differently interpreted. The Grammarian Kunin takes the word pråk as an epithet qualifying the word Acharya, professor understood. In that case the sâtra will be thus trans lated :- In the opinion of the Eastern (or ancient) professors, a word that has the letters eando as the first among its vowels, and is the name of a country, is called vşiddham.' Under this interpretation, this will be an optional rule only, giving the opinion of eastern or ancient grammarians. 
Others however take the word pråk as qualifying the word deśa and the meaning then is as given in the text. 
Why do we say 'having the letters g and r'? If a simple vowel is first among the vowels, of a word, that word will not be called vriddham: and as such will not take the affix g; as IEETT., arrate:... 
Why do we say of Eastern country'? Because this rule does not apply to a word like to which is the name of a town in the Punjab, which is not an eastern country. Its secondary derivative will be :, born in Devadatta. 
Why do we say 'country'? The rule will not apply to rivers &c. Thus from Trafa we have mar' fish born in the river Gomati. . . 
ओ३म् 
11 979 77957911217 feire: ura: 11 
BOOK 1. CHAPTER II. 
गाङ्कुटादियोऽणिन्डित् ॥ ३॥ पदानि ॥ गाङ्कुट-आदि. **: , efsura, fa 1 
917: 119 recepu: r5FSUT: NUUT ET tafa, fotografia: 11 वात्तिकम् ॥ * ध्यचेः कुटादित्वमनसीति वक्तव्यम्।। 
1. All affixes after the verb gån 'to study' and the verb kuţ 'to be crooked,' and the rest, are as if they had an indicatory & (uit), except those affixes which have an indicatory # iit) or (pit). 
This is an atideda sätra, and makes certain affixes, though not having an indicatory , to produce the same effect as if they were really fen. 
The root te is substituted for the verb in certain teoses, in which the verb is defective (II. 4..49). The verbs are roots belonging to the Tudådi class of verbs, and they are forty roots beginning with F.to be crooked' and ending with a 'to groan.' 
Alter these roots all affixes are treated as if they were marked with a with the exception of those affixes which are fyr or fun. 
Thus from Tre, we have in the aorist the form arte; which is thus evolved. TY + + E + f + - 2 + + E + H (II. 4. 50) - mu + sit + ri (VI. 4. 66) gurite he studied,' wartai 'they two studied;" gert a 'they studied. Here by VI.. 4. 66, the or is changed into before the affix fry, which is regarded as fr. . Similarly, after the verbs &c., all affixes are treated as foc, with the exceptions already mentioned. 
Thus + T (III. 1. 133) - F + E + T (VII. 2. 35) - are, nominative singular fent who acts crookedly. Here the affix any being regarded as fcg does not cause the guna substitution of the tof us by I. 1. 15. 
Similarly with the affixes 5 and , we have it and een. So on with all the forty roots of kutadi class : e. g. gyfear gegangen, gegrenzt. 
70 
. 
AFFIXES LIKE IT 
[ BK. 1. CH. II. $ 2, 3, 
VC 
10 S 
But the affixes marked with sy or q will not be so treated. Thus fur by which causatives are formed, is such an affix; c. g. + fun + TL + fag - HITE + + + fa . Setara. Here there is guna of the of Fr. So also before the affix up of the perfect tense, we have उच्चकोट, and before the affix ण्वन we have उस्कोटकः। 
Vartika :-The root try to deceive,' is also treated like kutadi verbs, except before the affix #. As frent' he shall deceive,' Foto "for the purpose of deceiving' farmhoula &c. Here there is samprasarada before the nit terminations i, o and H , and the of 647 is changed into by rule VI. 1. 16.' 
But the affix wg is not nit and consequently there is no sampra. sårana before it. Thus 55697 T'an imp. 
fast et II u ognia i fs: , , (fa) n. T: Il fast:TU14:, FRYT Forageunit for fail 
2. An affix that begins with the augment (VII. 2. 35) is nit after the root vij., 'to fear, to move.' 
The root fast does not strengthen its vowel before the affixes that take the intermediate y, because those terminations are treated like it affixes. The root far belongs to the Tudâdi class. Thus f ar "he will be agitated,' T ETT 'for the purpose of being agitated.' aft ery ought to be agitated.' 
But those affixes, which are not preceded by the augment rg, are not like fea, and they consequently produce their own proper action, such as gunation &c. As 5T + f + FIE - 1971, fre. that which ought to be agitated.' 
farrator: nguoretra u f 97, Fot: 1 (isa , TEIN f#: 11 Forrara, TFITT FETES:PRETT FTAT T Porta il 
3. After the verb llina'to cover,' the affix beginning with the augment is regarded optionally 
like nito 
Thus before the site termination Far of the future, we may have either प्रोर्णविता or मोर्णविता " he will cover." 
The equation of the form is :- + + I + AT = 8+ F + FAT (VI. 4. 77) - sofa . When the affix is not regarded as f5, it produces guna, and we have the second form surat in 
Of course there is no option allowed before those affixes which do not take the augment 57, and before those terminations, consequently, we have only one form : as w+ Fyrrgrot +994 - HÓTT..covering,' aurrez 
which ought to be covered.' 
BK. I. CH. 11. $ 4, 5.) 
AFFIXES LIKE fans 
. 
FEL 
मिपू 
सार्वधातुकमपित् ॥ ४॥ पदानि ॥ सार्वधातुकम् , अप-इत , (fs ) n 
वृत्तिः ॥ सार्वधातकं यदपित्तन्हिसवति। 
4. A Sarvadhâtuka (III. 4. 113) affix not having an indicatory is like nit. 
The terminations which are added to roots are either Sarvadhatuka or árdhadhatuka. The Sarvadhdtuka terminations are all those that are marked with a and also the tense terminations called face, the latter are the following: - 
sing. dual. 
· 3rd Pers. 
fiti ) 2nd Pers. fas U 
Parasmaipada. ist Pers. 3rd Pers. 
মানা 2nd Pers. थास TT 17% Atmanepada. Ist Pers. I 
HEJ Except the terminations marked with a such as fa fe and &c. all the other Sårvadhatuka terminations are fm. The fita termina. tions like TT, TT &c., are also Siryadhatuka terminations. These affixes are also fet, unless they have a q as indicatory, as Ty. Thus the affix H, being an wie Sårvadhatuka affix, is a fs, and before it the vowel is not gunated : e. g. 69: they two do.' The equation is :- +*+ (the x is added by Rule III. 1. 79) « Hi5 + 7 + (VI. 4. 110)-5+90 - 09:11 Similarly if they do.' 
Here the tofnç is changed into 7 and we have a, by virtue of rule VI. 4. 110, which declares that the of the verb is changed into * before those Sårvadhatuka affixes which are FST or pay. Here he is a Sarvadhâtuka fra affix by the present rule, and hence the change. 
These four sûtras describe the fsa terminations. 
Why do we say 'a Sarvadhatuka affix.'? Because an ardhadhatuka affix though not being marked with an indicatory g will not be a fer. As 
doer,' 'to do' n duty. 
Why do we say 'not having an indicatory I'? If a Sårvadhatuka affix has an indicatory g it will not be nit. As 6+*+faq*tfa he does:' 
Tra 'thou doest,' TA 'I do.' 
असंयोगालिद् कित् ॥ ५॥ पदानि ॥ असंयोगात् , लिट् , f* , ( fora ) u 
पृत्तिः ॥ पसंयोगान्ताद्धातोः परोलिद प्रत्ययोपित किरवति ।। 
72 
: 
AFFIXES LIKE MIT.' 
[ Bx. I. CH. II. $ 5, 6. 
. . 5. The affixes of Lit (Perfect Tense) not com ing after a conjunct consonant, are as if they had an in dicatory (kit). . With this sůtra begins tbe description of affixes which are regarded as fair though not actually having a to mark them as such. The termina. tions of Pore (Perfect) not being for terminations, are to, after verbs that have no compound consonants. The phrase giac (not being marked with g), qualifies this sätra also, being drawn from the previous sätra by the rule of Anuvşitti. 
Thus from for 'to tear' the Reduplicated non-pit second person perfect is forg: 'thou hast torn.' FETITE : 'they have torn.' 
. Similarly freg: 'thou hast divided ; ' Aares: you divided;' * : and for 
This rule will not apply if the root ends in a conjunct consonant. Thus og to fall down' forms its second person Perfect :- + TIK WHE:. Here the affix is not treated as kit; for had it been so treated, it would have caused the elision of the penultimate nasal (anusvåra) of He by rule VI. 4. 24. Similarly from Lig we have rua. 
The pit terminations of the Perfect are not kit; and therefore, we have fat he has divided,' where the root is gunated before the 3rd per son singular termination on which is a fog termination, because it being the substitute of fag is regarded like ray by I. 1. 56. 
.: Parafanir ll&u açta ufas - Hafari,, ( foc faq) n 
इतिः ॥ इन्धिभवतीत्येताभ्यां परो निद् प्रत्ययः किद्रवति । 
• Tai 11* T AUFFET antret TT II 
6. The Lit or Perfect Tense affixes after the roots indhi' to kindle,' and bhu'to become,' also are kit. 
After these two roots the terminations of the Perfect are fria. These roots have been especially mentioned, because the root ending in a compound consonant will not be governed by satra 5; and the root y is mentioned because all the terminations of the Perfect are fario after , not excepting the roa terminations. Thus the verbs ats and fare illustrations of Perfect Tense from the root op as in the following examples:- Fryp799, (Rig Veda VI. 16. 15), and go o ur (Rig Veda VI. 16. 14). Here the nasal of the root is dropped by regarding the affix as Panią il Similarly from the root , we have fu, fruit 
Vart: This rule should be applied also to the verbs in 'to loosen,' sig 'to fasten,' 'to injure' and Fit 'to embrace." As sug: 'thou hast BK. I. CH. II. 87, 8. ] 
AFFIXES LIKE far 
73 
loosened' + 9 = 12 + . (The z is clided by the rule already mentioned in the last sûlra vis., VI. 4. 24). 
**+ *4+ 99=s : (VI. 4. 120). Similarly 9:; :, ftha, TYFH. 
मृडमृदगुधकुपहिशवदवसः झा ॥७॥ पदानि ॥ सृष्ट-सद-गुष 97-fu-46-49: , 57 ( face) a 
पृत्तिः ।। मृड मृद गुध कुष हिश वह वस् इत्येतेभ्यः परः स्वाप्रत्ययः किवावे । 
7. The affix ktvå is kit after mrid 'to be graci ous,' mrid 'to squeeze,' gudh 'to wrap up,' kush 'to tear,'klis. to suffer,' vad 'to speak and to vas'dwell' 
After these seven verbs, the gerundial kird is kit. It might be objected, what was the necessity of this sůtra ? The affix ktvá is clearly a kit affix, as it is marked with the diacritical letter a, and it was useless to call it a kit affix after these verbs. The reason of this apparent repitition is this. Though ktvd is a kit affix generally; but there is a later sútra in this chapter (1. 2. 18) which declares that the prefix T is not fire, if it is preceded by the intermediate F. Or in other words, if is added to those verbs, which are called verbs, viz., that take an intermediate , it is not then kit. Thus the verb put to sleep' is Therefore ut + + AT = + +FT U T . 
• Now it happens that all the seres verbs mentioned in the sutra are À verbs, and take an intermediate f. The tant before these verbs would have lost its kitness by virtue of sâtra 18; therefore arose the necessity of this sútra, to provide in anticipation an exception to that sätra, in favor of these verbs, where the affix ktvd is necessarily kit. Thus we have giSET * being gracious' मृदिया 'having squeezed' गुधिस्या 'having wrapped' कुपित्ता 'having torn,' ipinat 'having suffered' FEST 'having spokea' OTAKT 'having dwelt. The au of and they are changed into y by the rule of Samprasåraņa (VI. 1. 15). .. 
Moreover in the case of the verbs y, N and , sâtra 26 would have made the optionally kit; the present sûtra makes it necessarily so... 
रुदविदमुषग्रहिखपिप्रच्छः संश्च ॥ ८॥ पदानि ॥ रुद-विद-मुष. afe-a fa-qe ja, (a fs ) 
वृत्तिः ॥ रुद विक मुष पहि स्वपि प्रच्छ हत्येतेभ्यः संभ सवा च किती भवतः ।। . 
8. The affixes klod and san (III. 1. 7) are kit, after rud 'to weep,' vid 'to know,' mush to steal,' grah " to seize,' svap 'to sleep,' and prachchh' to ask.'. 
174 
AFFIXES LIKE किन् । 
( BK. I. CH. II. 
a 
je of 
After the above mentioned verbs the ktvå though taking an inter mediate and the affix at are many. The affix is employed in forming desiderative verbs. The of FT is TL, the real affix being u. The root is reduplicated before this #7 affix. Thus can'having cried,' 
igara 'he wishes to cry'; fanger having known,' falanta "he wishes to know'; Tetat (VI. 1. 16). 'having taken,' f ra 'he wishes to take'; RETT 'having stolen,' Frara 'he wishes to steal'; qa (VI. I. 15) 'having slept,' g ara 'he wishes to sleep,'re (VI. 1. 16) 'having asked,' agregar he wishes to ask'. The verb ge is changed into T, FTP into 94, into gas before kit affixes by samprasarana (VI. 1. 16). 
The keva and san would have been optionally kit after the verb faç and T by virtue of Rule 26 of this chapter, but this sûtra makes them necessarily so, after these three verbs. In the case of the verb 48, these affixes are kit by virtue of this sûtra only. In the case of the verbs Frs and 9 the affix an is of course kit, because these two verbs are anit, that is, they do not take the intermediate t; and therefore the at being directly affixed to them, and rule 18 not applying, the indicatory k would make it kit. In reference to these verbs, therefore, the present sútra teaches some thing new, only with regard to the affix at, by making that also kit. The verb yes takes the intermediate r when the affix any follow's, by vir sútra VII. 2. 75. 
Permisi Sulaifa u *: , 956 ( 797, fa ) n aft: 1 fift: Từ 4 ft: sâKể t. 
9. The affix san beginning with a letter of the Pratydhdra jhal is like kit, after verbs ending in ik vowels. 
In this sûtra there is the anuvritti of ot only and not oft. The sútra literally translated means:"After ik the jhal." The Pratydhara contains the four letters , a, . The Pratyahara e contains all the consonants, except the nasals and the liquids. After the verbs ending in 
the desiderative suffix er is kit, when it is on, that is to say when the affix er does not take the intermediate r. The affix an is an affix which begins with a letter of the Has class. But if the intermediate ris added before it, it is no longer a home affix, and in that case it is not fee. Thus from F# 'to conquer' which is a verb ending in , we have firma "he wisbes to conquer' 'to mix' ta; so also to do,' parasta E' to cross' fadiera, L'to be' rurai 
If however, verbs ending in or or oral, take an intermediate , they likewise take guna. As :-FER 'to smile' takes gupa, and makes its desiderative forfra. 
BK. I. CH. II. § 9, 10.) 
AFFIXES LIKE farm 
73 
.. The MA is not kit. alter verbs ending in any other letter than the ti. As Tarafa (from T) 'be wishes to drink.' So from FIT. WC have fagrar. 
The object of making the affix at kit affix after verbs ending in ik vowels, is to prevent the guşa of the vowel of the root, as in fra * wishes to collect' gra wishes to praise.' To this it might be objected "this cannot be : for rule VI. 4. 16 (when a beginning with a jhal i. c., not preceded by the augment follows, a long vowel is the substitute of verbs ending in a vowel, and of the verbs and TI) would prevent guna by substituting long vowel." To this it may be replied "if rule VI. 4. 16, enjoining long vowel, debars rule VII. 3.84 requiring guna, it should a fortiori : debar rule VI. 4.51 which requires the elision of the affix fu beforc Ardha dhatuka affixes not taking the augment F. But evidently that is not so; for the clision of fo is not debarred by VI. 4. 16. Therefore, the present sutra is made, so that even by giving 'scope to the rule of lengthening, the affix an be treated as far." Thus io rera scope is given to rule VI. 4. 16, and the vowel is lengthened. But this rule in its turn will be Jebarred in those cases where rule VI. 4. 51 will apply : in such cases the maxim contained in I. 4. 2 is our guide, and a subsequent rule will debar a prior rule of Panini when both find their scope in a single case. Thus in forming the desiderative of the verb TT to insorm,' both the rules VI. 4. 16 and VI. 4. 51 present themselves, but the latter prevails. The verb 
q belongs to the churidi class of verbs, and takes the affix foy. Thus TY + fog + T + farg; here the present sâtra comes into force, and a being treated as farist, the guna of the r of afy is prevented. Thus satra VII. 3. 84 requiring guna being set aside, sůtra VI. 4. 51 comes into play, and causes the elision of fu and we have 19 + + a = tara (VII. 4. 55 a changed to $)'he wishes to inform.' 
Searg 1198 11 asta u gorara, 7, ( 76, 77, 99105 , fexa) 
fa: ' manifaturg: TT:L ife: fafatil 
10. . And after a root ending in a consonant, and preceded by a vowel of the pratyahara ik, the affix san beginning with a jhal consonant, is like kit. 
Thus from farg'to pierce' we have farura'he wishes to break,' here the root for contains the ik vowel r; it ends in a consonants; the asfix a is directly added 'without taking an intermediate y, and therefore it fulfills all the conditions of the søtra; and the vowel is not gunated. 
76 
.. 
AFFIXES LIKE किन्. 
[ Bk. I. CH. II. S it. 
If the final consonant of the verb is not preceded by a vowel of the it class, the affix er is not kit after such a verb. As T + T. + 
- fara wishes to sacrifice.' Had the affix it been here á kit affix, there would have been samprasarana by rule VI. 1. 16 which declares that there is samprasårapa of the verbs T, ETT, and , &c., before kit affixes. 
If the san takes the intermediate r and is then no longer a pod 1, it is not kit; and causes gunation etcetera, As TT +7+ frafan 'he desires to be. Here there is guga of ri. 
Roots like , &c., are governed by this rule, though they end in conjunct consonants, for the word for of the sâtra means jati or class; thus Thall + FT + fag *** + ara (VI. 4. 24 the m being elided by treating 
सनू as कित) - धीप्सति or चिप्सति (VII. 4. 56). 
I feefarmaqay 11 99 u netfa a fos-fest, 17H. नेपदेषु (हलन्तात् इक् ल् ) ॥ 
त्तिः ॥ इगन्तादिसमीपाडुनः परो झनादी लिविची पात्मनेपदेषु परत: किसी HT: 11 
11. After roots ending in a consonant, that adjoins a vowel of ik pratyahara, the substitutes of lin (III. 3. 161) and sich (III. 1. 44) when they begin with a consonant of jhal pratyahara, are kit, when the åtmane pada affixes follow. 
The sætra consists of two words that and any, literally meaning "the affixes lin and sich in the Atmanepada." The other plirases, given in the above text must be supplied from the previous sätras, to com plete the sense. The anuvșitti of the word a., that began with sätra 8. docs not extend further. As:- hit 'may he break' and rate may he know,' afirm'he broke' og 'he knew.' 
Thus the root far ends with a simple consonant, is preceded by I a letter of ik pratyâhåra ; after this root the jhaládi affix ate of Benedictive in the Atmanepada is treated like fanp:; therefore there is no guna subs titution of the vowel of the root before this affix. for + e - faredite. Similarly in the Aorist we have sit - + fare + f + , the # of Aorist being elided by VIII. 2. 26. So also a + i = 1 + de (VIII. 2. 37) ** faite, 
If the final consonant is not preceded by an ik vowel, this rule will not apply. Thus Ben. TL + HE = + ate (VIII. 2. 36) - F + E (VIII. 2. 41) = OFIE (VIII. 3. 58). Similarly its Aorist is at. Had the affixes are and been kit, they would have caused samprasarana of x by VI. 1. 16. 
BK. I. CH. 11. $ 11-13.) 
AFFIXES LIKE fare. 
. This rule will not apply, if the Benedictive and Aorist affixes are Parasmaipadi. Thus the Aorist of as to let off,' is n + + 
+ y + y 5 + Fira (VI. 1. 58) - T + T (VI. 1. 77) - STIRI (VII. 2. 1). Similarly from t we have Aorist Parasmaipadi Fig. Had the Aorist been f , rule VI. 1. 58 (I is the augment of the verbs x and TL when an affix beginning with a jhal and not having an indicatory follows), would not have applied. 
This rule will also not apply, if the verb ends in a rowel. Thus of the verb ff, we have Ben, te, dor. Gg. Had the affixes been fail, there would have been no guna substitution of i into e. 
The rule will not apply if these affixes are not jhaládi but take the augment . Thus Ben. Ta + E fate, so also Aorist atrag. Had they been fact, there would have been no guna substitution... 
This rule, of course, is confined to the Benedictive and the Aorist. Other tenses will not be affected by this rule. Thus the 1st and 2nd Future of fag is her and rura. 
50 a 97 agria ul : ,, (fourt Ercandy ne fo) 
वृत्तिः ॥ चरवर्णन्ताद्धातोः परो निसिचावात्मनेपदेषु सन्नादी किती भवतः ।। 
12. And after verbs ending in the substi tutes of lin and the affix sich, are kit, when they begin with jhal, and the Atmanepada affixes follow. . 
As from 'to do' the benedictive is the may he do.' So also सिच्, as अकृत 'he did. So also हृषीष्ट and.अहत. 
Of course this rule would not apply if these terminations take the intermediate t; as q + NIET TE may he choose,' (Benedictive); V++ 
Fe="ite or TTOE 'he chose or covered,' the being lengthened by VII. 2. 38. 
T TH: 11 93 u azifenat, T: , (fosfatti na पदेषु झल् कित् ॥ 
FT: 11 Täytai: 97 PaTi THİTee in fant : 1 
13. Optionally after the verb gam, the lin and sich beginning with jhal consonants, in the Atmane pada, are kit. 
The verb ta' to go' is Atmanepadi after the preposition or by Rule 1. 3. 29. 
The result of its being kit is that the nasal is dropped in the Atmane. pada, in forming the Aorist with far, and the Benedictive. Thus we have 
78 
AFPIXES LIKE FATE. 
(BK. I. CH. II. $ 15. 
the forms:--संगसीष्ट or संगसीष्ट in the Benedictive3B and समगत or समगस्त in the sich Aorist. These forms are thus evolved:- . 
+7+ FIE - +T+MIE (VI. 4. 37) - HTHE 'may he combine.' Here the nasal of try is elided by treating the affix fie as part by Rule VI. 4. 37. In the alternative we have the 
So in the aorist #7+7+f +a +7+74+* (VI.4.37) - T. The for being elided by VIII. 2. 27 (after a short inflective base, there is elision of foy, if a jhal follows). So when y of my is clided by VI. 4. 37, there remains only at which is a base ending in short w, hence, the clision of सिन्. But in the alternative we have समगस्त. . 
57: fy n 98 nog u : , Tri( fuel) पतिः ।। हन्तेर्धातोः परः सिन् किनवति॥ 
14. The sich Atmanepada affixes are kit after the root han'to kill' 
As पाहत, पाहसाताम्, पाहसत are the aorist of हन्. When a सिचू or second aorist is kit the verb loses its nasal, by Rulc VI. 4:37. After the verb I the fare is only kit and not the Benedictive pare terminations, as was the case in the previous sūtra; hence the repetition of the word sich in this sútra. The sâtras 12, and 13 were governed both by fore and for; fromand after this sútra, the govern ing power of forc ceases. The governing power of the word “Atmanepada" in sûtra 13 does not however cease, andits anuvšitti runs through the succeeding sätras; though as regards this sätra, its anuvritti is redundant, inasmuch as before the Parasmaipada terminations, the root t is always replaced by Ty in the aorist, there is no necessity of making the affix sich a kit.For the object served in making sich, kit, after the verb , is to elide the nasal, while in the case of my, ao such purpose can be served. 
यमो गन्धने ॥ १५ ॥ पदानि ॥ यमः, गन्धने, (सिच् आत्मने og foc) 
#: 11 cutanatararear: fury 74: raq ad great TTH: 11 
15. The afix sich before Atmanepada afixes, is kit after the verh yam, when meaning to divulge.' 
ulge,' 'to make known that which had been conccaled.' The verb has various meanings. 
The result of kit is that the nasal is elided. The verb becomes Atmanepada when preceded by the preposition 9 by rulc I. 3. 28. Thus 39 + 7 + 7+* 4 'he devulged,' aqrarara , 44, the sich is elided by VIII, 2. 27 and by VI. 4. 37. When the verb a has any other meaning than 'to divulge,' then the far in the Almanepada is not kit; as a prica TL . he raised the foot.' So also T4F S he raised water from the 
Bx. I. CH. II. $ 16, 18. ] 
AFFIXES LIKE FAT. 
well. Though here the verb yam, is in the transitive form and takes aa ob ject after it, yet it is Atmanepadi by Rule 1. 3. 75 which declares “after the verb yam to strive, preceded by , and we when it does not refer to a book, the Atmanepada is emploved." 
HIGH I 18 4 tra 1 tim, , (44: निय आत्मनेपदेषु कित्) । . वृत्तिः ॥ घमेर्धातोरुपयमने वर्तमानातू परः सिचू प्रत्ययो विभापा किद्रवति पात्मनेपदेष 
16. The sich before åtmanepada affixes is kit optionally, when yam means 'to espouse.' .. Thus उपायव कन्याम् or उपायंस्त कन्याम् 'he espoused the girl,उपायव or उपायंस्त भार्याम् 'he espoused his wife.' 
The word 'Upayamana' in the sûtra means "to accept in marriage, 'to espouse.' The verb 4 preceded by the preposition 74 is Atmanepadi when it means 'to espouse' by Rule I. 3. 56. 
ordifru u 99 a agyfa FIT, FAIT:, ra, (FETARE aude fesa) * 
इनिः॥तिष्ठतेर्धातोः संज्ञकानाखाकारान्तादेशःसिप किरति प्रात्मनेपदेषु परयः॥ 
17. The afix sich before Atmanepada affixes, is kit after sthd" to stand" and ghu (1. 1. 20) yerbs, and these verbs change their into r before these termia nations. 
The roots for 'to stand,' 'to give,' T 'to place' 'to pity 'to feed' at 'to cut' change their vowels into f before the terminations of the Aorist of the Atmancpada; and those terminations are also kit. As 
EYET, 'he worshipped' IfEUTATE, Sert; ofera 'he gave' ha he fed.' 
नशा सेट् ॥ १८॥ पदानि ॥ न, घा, सेद, (कित्). . gfi # FF997: ha formata I 
18. The affix ktod when it takes the augment (i. e. when it is set) is not kit. 
We had had occasion to refer to this sätra in explaining sutra 7. The affix ktvå (the actual asfix being tvd, the k being merely it or indicatory letter) is on the face of it a kit affix. This sutra however limits its kitness to cases where it is not sét. If it is set i.e., has before it the intermediate it will not be treated like a kit affix. Thus in FETT, FETT, the affix tür is added directly to the root 'to do' and 'to sacrifice,' without an intermediate r and therefore the root has not been gunated, the affix here being kit. But in 
AFFIXES LIKE AN. 
(Bk. I. CH. II. & 19, 20. 
f 
FACET, ET, TIET, from fer fra and to 'to sweat,''to shine," "to be,' the affix is not kit, because there is an intermediate r before it and the root has been consequently gunated. 
Of course this sūtra relates to n ktvå only. Other affixes though having an intermediate p will be treated as kit, if they have an indicatory 5. Thus the affix (III. 3. 94) by which feminine nouns are formed from roots is a paria affix. This affix when , will remain lain, as fi+&+F 
ufT+ TE++fa (VI. 1. 16)-Ftuetta: (VII. 2. 37). Here there is sampra. såraga by treating ktin as kit. So also in fiecar and fare fara: there is no gupa. After 9 &c., the affix fine takes the augment by a Vartika under sútra VII. 2. 9 which sec. 
निष्ठा शीखिदिमिदिपिवदिषः ॥१९॥ पदानि । निष्ठा, -faffife-leaf-49: (a, e, f ) u 
वृत्तिः ।। शी स्विहि मिति लिदि धूप इत्येतेभ्यः परो निष्ठा प्रत्ययः सेणून किरवति ।। 
19. The sét Nishtha affixes are not kit after the verbs $i 'to lie down,' svid 'to sweat,' mid 'to melt,' kshvid' to be unctuous,' and dhfish 'to offend.' . 
The Nishthas are ata and ktavatu (see sätra 26, Chapter 1). They are obviously kit affixes. But in the case of the above five roots they are not kit, and the vowels take guna Thus far slept, uporaTT, AFEC:, waren, saria: ; AFTET, MITETT, T arl, :, Hart &c. In all the above roots the Nisktha affixes are also sét. 
The roots FE (ForeT), Far (PET), FATE( FATT) and ( Y ) have all long or as indicatory, as well as the syllable rs. These roots therefore by Rule VII. 2. 16 are generally unil, and consequently beyond the scope of the operation of the present satra. As f#: , ETHTL. But when the Nishtha affixes denote 'a state or condition, bhava,' or 'beginning of action,' then the above four roots optionally become set. (VII. 2. 17) It is in that case that the present s@tra is applicable to them. 
सुषस्तितिक्षायाम् ॥ २० ॥ पदानि ॥ सृषः, तितिक्षायाम् ( निष्टा E a fo) 
पत्तिः । सपेर्धातोः तितिक्षायामनिष्ठासेप्न किनवति ॥ 
20. The sét Nishthâ is not kit after the verb mrish when meaning 'to forbear.' 
• Thus 'forborne' AFFIT forbore... 
Why do we say 'when meaning to forbear? When it has not this sense, the set nishtha will be fair. As TT TTTTT'he spoke unintelli gible language. 
BK. I. CH. II. $ 21, 22. ] 
AFFIXES LIKE fa. 
81 
उदुपधासायादिकर्मधारन्यतरस्याम् ॥२१॥ पदानि ॥ उत्-उपचात्, 972-1f-setti, Trunte ( foregrosa fa ) a 
PRET: NI TETETATT MÀ premstu TRÌ faretra aurat * rata 11 
21. The sét Nishthå is optionally not kit, after the verbs with a penultimate x if used impersonally or denoting the beginning of action. 
According to some the se! Nishthá suffixes are not kit after the verbs having a penultimate a if those verbs are used impersonally (blåva) or denote the beginning of action (adi-karman). Thus t 'to shine' grant or utama "it has been lighted.' Similarly fata: or orag: 'he first illumined. The word penultimate or upadhd has been defined in sätra 65 antc. 
If the verb has any other vowel than y as penultimate, then the rule does not apply. As ficcant " written by him. Here ris penulti. mate; and therefore no option is allowed. . 
This rule has no application where the Nishthá does not express either recondition or 'Impersonal action'; or get beginning of action' but is used as a verbal adjective. As NTTO 'he gives a shining coin (called kârshậpapa).' Here the word of 'shining' is used as adjective. 
The rule applies to the Nishthâ which takes the intermediate T and not to others as geri QiET: 'the rice that has been eaten. Here no option is allowed. 
This optional form of past participle is restricted in its scope. Those verbs which take the vikarapa syrgi. e. the verbs of the Bhu class &c., admit of this option. Thus me to wrap up' belongs to Divadi class, and therefore, its participle has one form only as गुपित. 
TE: 3 APR u azifa u gas, 51, ( E, fosc, a fagl) u 
हानि ॥ पूनः परो निष्ठा प्रत्ययः का च सेपून किरवति ॥ 
22. The sét Nishtha and the sết ktud are not kit after the verb pun 'to purify.' 
The word optionally' of the previous sätra 21 does not govern this sätra, because the word optionally' has been again used in the next sâtra 23; of which there would have been no necessity, had the word 'optionally' governing force in this sûtra, for then this would have also governed the next sätra. The anuvşitli of the however is to be read in this satra. 
82 
AFFIXES LIKE PNE. 
[Bk. I. CH. II. $ 23, 24. 
. By rule VIL. 2. 31 after the verb c the affixes Nishtha and FT ktvå take the intermediate f. So that T kivá being set (by virtue of Rule VII. 2. 51) would have been non-kit by Rulc 18; and it might be asked what is the necessity of repeating it in this sätra : when sútra 18 comprised the case. The reason of this repetition is that by mentioning TFT klud in this sätra, it has governing force over the succeeding sütras. As ra: , TTTT. 
Rroga TagInp3 u agua 1 99-39917-7-7-rata 7 (97 te afa) . 
: 0 TFTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTT: 44:57 fan tara . . 23. The séţ ktvd is optionally kit, after the verbs having a penultimate y and ending in y and . 
The sét ktvå may or may not be kit after the verbs ending in y or 5 preceded by a nasal. The result of being kit will be that nasal will be dropped. In other words the dropping of the nasal is optional in such verbs. Thus from iयू we have प्रथित्वा or मन्धिल्या 'having twisted, गुफिरता or DITT 'having tied round' TUETT or fra. 
The word “Nishtha" does not govern this sutra, and comes to an end with the last satra. 
This rule does not apply to verbs that have not a penultimate T though they may end in 7 or. As the 'having reviled' T 'hav. ing tied!' Here by rule 18, the pa tvá being non-kit, the vowels of the root for, and he have been gunated. 
A verb may have a penultimate 1, but if it has not final oor , the rule does not apply. As बंस् + इबा मंसिखा 'having dropped' सिला 
having killed.' Had it been kit, the nasal would have been dropped. 
afecteaza u 28 llaçilar i afagafena:,, (a सेट् न कित्). 
gra: 11 
p 
grädast: 96. 97 82274: THEAT T Paper il 24. The sét kivá is optionally kit, after the verbs vašich, 'to cheat' lunch 'to pluck and rit 'to dare or abhor. 
After the above three verbs, the ktod affix being sel, may or may not be kit. As f or TETT 'having cheated. So also af or ot *having plucked' est or ofást 'having dared.' 
· When the verb a r it takes the affix 846 it is not governed by this sätra. See sätra III. r. eg. BK. I. CH. II. $ 25, 26) 
AFFIXES LIKE FT. 
When the kivd is not se!, but anil, then there is no option allowed. As + PT . 
तृपिपितशेः काश्यपस्य ॥ २५॥ पदानि । वषि-मुषि-कशेः, काश्यपस्य, (घा सेट् न कित्). 
वृत्तिः ॥ दापि मृपि कृषि इत्येतेभ्यः परः वा प्रत्ययः खेद काश्यपस्याचार्यस्व मते पाक किरपति 
25. The sét ktvd is optionally kit, according to the opinion of Rishi Kaśyapa, after the verbs trish 'to be thirsty,' mțish to sprinkle,' and kris "to become lean.' 
As TET OG FRücut 'having thirsted,' aferent or are having sprin kled,' GETET or a rt'having become lean.' By sâtra 18, the sef kind is never kit. This sQtra adds another exception to that general rule. 
The special mention of Kaśyapa is for the sake of showing respect. The T is already understood in this satra by Anuvritti from sätra 23. 
रलेोव्युपधादुडादेः संश्च ॥ २६ ॥ पदानिरल, 3.-उपधाद, 5-12:, FT, ( urat ft) 
वृत्तिः॥ उकारोपधादिकारोपधाधधातो रनन्ताद्धनादेः परः संध काच सेटो वा किती **: 11 
26. After a verb which begins with a conso nant, and ends in a letter of Ral pratydhdra, and has as its penultimate r or, z or 5, the ktvd and san affixes are optionally kit. 
The wording of this sätra requires a littit explanation. . It consists of the following words: 
1. To: ralah, ablative of (after the consonants included in the . Prata yhdra rali.e., all the consonants excepty and yu):-Verbs having their final letter any single consonant except ay or ju... 
2. Ty means "after penultimate 1." It is a compound of + 399. The itself is a compound of T + - , in thc dual . Therefore the phrase means "alter (verbs) having for their penultimate either fior z u long or short." 
3. : means "beginning with a consonant." All these three words qualify the word "verb" understood. 4. means "and san." 
The sätra means, those verbs which have a ro letter in the end, a ou in the beginning, and an , fora, * in their penultimate, may optionally treat the affixes kivá and sax asfa . 
84 
SHORT, LONG AND PROLATED VOWELS. 
Bk. I. CH. II. $ 27, 28. 
. Thus 'to shine,' makes graet or ufarar 'having shone,' Roho 'to write' makes लिखित्वा or लेखिस्या. 
Similarly in san affix we have 
f our or farura "he wishes to write' दिदातिपते or दिद्योतिषते 'he wishes to shine.' 
. The rule does not apply if the verb ends in a letter other than to As दिद + का - देविस्वा; its desiderative will be दिदविपत्ति. No option is allowed here. 
Similarly there is no option when the penultimate vowel is not or y. As a + FT - TACT. Des. fama. 
The rule also does not apply if the verb does not begin with a con. sonant. As gracit and pratara. There is no option allowed here. 
. The rule does not apply if the it and are anit. As I, M . 
In these 26 sūtras the description of affixes which are treated like free and parter is comprised. 
TOTS Fesliga: il fun azifa n 5-FTS: 074, e sha-ga: a . 
f: 11 755 RONTATTISSET 47*** Im a pealt ant stalo 
27. A vowel whose time is that of short u, long a and the prolated u, is called respectively hrasva short, dirgha long, and pluia prolated. 
The u having one mâtrå or measure is short, having two measures is long, having three measures is pluta. This sätra defines the three kinds of vowels according to their mdtrd. The letter on He has been taken to illustrate the rule. The phrase phrelga: is a Dvandva compound, in the Singular, and is exhibited in the masculine gender, contrary to the general rule II. 4. 17. 
The word kala means measure of time required for pronouncing a vowel. 
As ñ curd' y 'honey' here and 7 are short. Fant, na, here & is long. 
Te Devadatta I Here T a is pluta or prolated. These words are used in the following sutras I. 2. 47, VII. 4. 25. VIII. 2. 82. 
793 u pe Hl açıfa u 7, , ( gue ga:) a वृत्तिः । इस्व दीर्घ मुताः स्वसंज्ञायाधिष्यमाण पचएवस्थाने वेदिसम्याः। 
28. The short, long, and prolated, when enunciated as such, by using these terms, are to be understood to come in the place of vowels only... . This is a paribhâshå sätra, and declares the object to which the terms * short,' 'long' and 'prolated' are to be applied. When in this book short' 
BK. I. CH. II. $ 29. ] 
UDATTA" DEFINED.. 
'long' or 'prolated' are taught by using the words hrasva, dirgha or pluta, they must be understood to apply to vowels. As will be found in the sgtra. 1. 2. 42. ' "there is the substitution of harsva or short in the neuter gender of the crude-form." The word vowel' must be inserted in this satra to com plete the sense. That is :-the hrasva is substituted for the final vowel of the crude-form. Astqari, orang, Ti TT. 
The substitution must take the place of vowel and not consonant. As GITT ATHUGI. . Similarly sūtra VII. 4. 25. teaches “There is the substitution of dirgha or' long vowel' before all affixes beginning with the letter y, except krit and Sårvadhâtuka affixes." Here also the word vowel' must be read into the satra, which will then be " of an inflective base ending in a vowel, the long vowel shall be the substitute &c." As it tu£ + à - rag'it is collected'; 
+ 7 + t = ygà‘it is heard'. Why do we say "in the place of vowels only"? The substitution must take place in the room of a vowel and not of a consonant. As Fire + I + å spiraat'it is divided,' para 'it is pierced'. . 
So also in the case of pluta substitution. Thus rules VIIT. 2. 82 and 84, declare that in calling from a distance, pluta is substituted for the fa por tion of the word in the vocative. (The word is defined in 1. 1. 6.4). Here also the phrase of the vowel' must be read into the satra to complete the sense. The satra will then read :-"Pluta is substituted in the place of the vowel of the fa &c.” Thus , O Devadatta ! F I O Yajñadatta! 
· Why do we say "in the place of vowels only"? The substitution must be in the place of the vowel of the R and not of the consonant. As 
T , F . Here the syllables 7 and 5 are e, and the vowels & and have been prolated and not the consonant. 
The substitution must be counciated as such by using the terms, hrasva, dirgha, and pluta Therefore it is not so here; ati, 9227::, :, grata 
g : 1 See . . 4 . 
- 347a: 11 79 11 GTF u 9: , 3619 ; ( 27 ) 
1: TUTORTRETT ETT STÖT a'u i 
29. The vowel that is perceived as having a high tone is called Udåtta or acutely accented. . With this sūtra begins the description of the three sorts of vowel ac cents. The accent placed on a vowel by raising the voice is called udátta or acute accent. As wit: agníh, here i has the acute accent. The udatta is not marked 
. (') FETT Tigana mafantail (*) A rgin: () TET: ga EITT:11 Credil - 
W 
86 
ANUDATTA DEFINED. 
[ Be.. I. CH. II. đó,3t 
th 
in writing. The word 'vowel' of the previous sätra is understood in this also. These accents are the qualities of letters, and are well known in the sacred and profane literature. The vowel which is perceived as having a high tone is called udátta. This tone depends upon the organ from which the vowel is pronounced. In the various organs, such as the throat, palate &c., if a vowel is pronounced from a higher part of that organ, it is called udåtta. The vowel in the pronouncing of which there is the restraining and checking of the bodily parts, and in which there is dryness and roughness of tone, as well as a contraction of the larynx, is said to have the acute accent. The word is used in sutra Ill. 1. 3. ! "the first vowel of an affix has the udåtta accent." As 5+549dona kartávyam. . . . . . : . Alegre: 11 30 # ofifa u B:, 99917:, (99) 
वृत्तिः ॥ नीचैरुपलभ्यमानो योऽन् सोनुशत्तसंज्ञो भवति ॥ 
· 30. The vowel that is perceived as having a low tone is called Anudåtta or gravely accented. 
The word" vowel" of s. 28 is understood in this sutra. As fit: agnih, here w has the grave accent. The vowel accent known as grave or anudätta is pronounced by lowering the voice. In writing, the anudatta is marked by a line underneath the vowel. The vowel which is uttered from 
the lower portions of its special place of pronunciation gets the grave accent. 
This word is used in sútra III. 1. 4. "The case terminations called gq and those affixes that have an indicatory q are anudatta" &c. As tai, art. 
In pronouncing an anudatta vowel, there is slackening of the organs, and mildness, as well as softness and sweetness of tone : while there is expansion and widening of the larynx. . 
समाहारः स्वरितः ॥ ३३ ॥ पदानि ॥ समाहारः, स्वरितः (अधः, Gr#:, F1*:) ! 
वृत्तिः ॥ उदात्तानुदात्तस्वरसमाहारो योऽ स स्वरितसंज्ञो भवति ॥ 
- 31. The vowel that has the combination of Udatta and Anudatta tones is said to be svarita or circum flexly accented. 
The word “vowel" of s. 28 is understood here also. The syarita or circumflexed accent is pronounced by the combined raising and falling of the voice. It is marked by a perpendicular line on the top of the letter. 
The word is used in sätra VI. 1. 185.3. "The asfixes having an indi. catory at have svarita accent." As ir kanyå f in sikyam , * kvd. - 
() OCTUL (") Tyr afogat in () fareftalii 
Bk. I. CH. II. $ 32, 33.) 
THE SVARITA DEPINED. 
87 
This sätra is not to be understood to mean that a suarita is the reso tant of the combination of two vowels, an udatta vowel with an anudatta vowel. It means the accent midway between the two well-known qualities of letters known as acute and grave accents. 
तस्यादित उदातमढवम् ॥ ३२ ॥ पदानि ॥ तस्य, आदितः, 551918, eru 
Tint: 11 FT FANTAFE R EFTIT for 11 
32. Of it (svarita) the first portion is udatta, to the extent of a half measure, or prosodial length. 
It has been defined that syarita accent is a combination of udátta and anudatta. It remained doubtful what portion was accute and what grave. The present sätra clears up the difficulty, by declaring that in svarita, the first half is accute and the other grave.. 
The phrase ardhahrasta is used to indicate half the measure of a short rowel. Thus if a short rowel is svarita, its måtrå being one, half will be udalta and the other hall anudatta. If a long vowel, whose matras are two, be svarita, then I will be udatta, it will be anuddtta. If a pluté (protracted) vowel be svarita, then first half measure will be udalta, and the remaining 21 measures will be anudatta. In short, the udatta portion of a starita must not occupy more time than is taken in pronouncing a half short vowel. Thus in śikyam the a is svarita, half being acute, the other half, grave or monotony; in qrar kanya, the long & is svarita, its first half measure is acute, the remaining it is grave; in Titi manavaktin 
, here a prolated is svarita, its first is accute, the balance 21 measure is grave. 
एकश्रुतिदूरात्सम्युरी ॥३३॥ पदानि ॥ एकश्रुति, दूरात्, सम्बुद्वौ। F#: 11 gaura ni para prugt af 1 
33. In addressing a person from a distance, the tone is called Ekaśruti or monotony. 
Monotony or Ekaśruti is that tone which is perceived when a person is addressed ; in it there is an absence of all the three tones mentioned above; and there is no definite pitch in it. It is, therefore, the ordinary recitative tonc. : . The word 'Sambuddhi' means here addressing a person from a dis. tance; and has not its technical meaning of the singular number of the voca tive case. As un IT FTUT T I O boy Devadattal come. There is vanishing of all the accents in the above case; and the final short vowel of Devadatta is changed into pluta by the rule already referred to in s. 28 ante (VIII, 2. 84 grader) 11 
CASUIC 
88 
. 
EKASRUTI DEFINED. 
[ Bk. I. CH. II. $ 34, 35: 
w 
ww. 
. I the person is not addressed from a distance, then the word will get its proper accent. As IT HUR FTTH 'come, O boy. 
Devadattao. 
यज्ञकर्मण्यजपन्यूखसामसु ॥३४॥ पदानि ॥ यज्ञ-कर्मणि, अज QREE- 
FE, (qayfa: ) ú . .:. : Pat: 11 Styreerarum mifit HRÁFU Thauria ya mama .. 
34. In sacrificial works, there is Monotony, except in japa (silent repetition of a formula), Nyünkha vowels (sixteen sorts of om) and the Sama Vedas. 
In “sacrificial works” or on occasions of sacrifice, the mantras of the Veda are recited in Ekaśruti or monotony. But on occasions of ordinary reading, the mantras are to be recited with their proper three-fold accents. 
"Japa" is the repetition of mantras, and their recitation in a low voice or whisper. Nyúikha is the game of certain hymns of the veda, and the names of 16 sorts of " Om.” Some of these are pronounced with udatta and others with anudatta accent. Samas are songs, or the musical cadence in which some vedic hymns are to be uttered. As:- 
Tafa: four TRITT Taifa 
11 (Rig Veda VIII. 14. 16). . When a mantra is recited as a japa, then it must be pronounced with accents: As a aciste (Rig Veda X. 128. 1). . . 
When not employed on occasions of sacrifice, but are ordinarily read; the mantras must have their proper accent, and there will be no Ekasruti. 
In the sâma chanting, the mantras should have their accent, there can be no Ekaśruti there. As a farsi FEU ren. Here there is no Ekašruti: 
gh Ti ar 0146817: 134 ugira ni ETTE, 27, 490 #17: , ( 1557fur, exfa:) n 
TIF: 11 IU TOFATC: TOFTH T aa gayrerit. 
35. The pronunciation of the word vashat, may optionally be by raising the voice (accutely accent ed), or it may be pronounced with monotony. . 
The phrase "yajña-karma” is understood here. Even in yajda-karmas or sacrifices the word or may optionally be pronounced in a raised tone. The word to in the satra signifies tir. But why was not the word in used in the text, it could have been used with as much ease as पद? To this natural query, the only answer is, विचित्राःहि सूचस्व 
fa: mut: strange and wonderlul is the structure of Paņini's. aphorisms. Thus the fish or Eritrea to in poi :. . .... 
Bk. I. CH. II. $ 36, 37.) 
EKASRUTI DEFINED. ? : 
fHT913 fe i en aqifa u faaral, gefa, (ggfa:) वृत्तिः ॥ छन्दसि विषये विभाषा एकश्रुतिर्भवति पत्तान्तरे स्वर्यमेव भवति।। 
36. The Jonotony is optional in the recita tion of the Vedas, or they may be recited with accents. 
In the Chhandas or the Vedas there is option either to use the Ekaśruti tone or the three tones. Even on the occasion of ordinary reading, the Chhandas might be uttered either with the three accents or monotonously, Some say this is a limited option (vyavasthita-vibhasha). 
The option allowed by this sätra is to be adjusted in this way. la reading the Mantra portion of the Veda, every word must be pronounced with its proper accent: but in the Brahmaņa portion of the Veda there might be Ekaśruti; while some say there must be Ekaśruti necessarily and not optionally in the recitation of the Brahmapas. ... Thus :- afin gitiga or simply with great." I praise Agni 
the purohita." . The word T " optionally” of the last sutra could easily bave been read into this sätra by the rule of anutritli; why then use the word 
HTT"optional" again? To this we reply, this apparently redundant repe tition is for the sake of indicating that the anurȚitti of the word YU, which was understood in the last sútra, does not extend to this. Had we taken the anuvsitti of T, the other word also would have been attracted; hence the separate use of the word fra. 
न सुब्रह्मण्यायां स्वरितस्य तूदात्तः ॥ ३ ॥ पदानि । न, सुब्रह्म TAITEIT, arcate, 1, 5979: , ( g ia:) . . 
वृत्तिः।। सुप्राण्यायामेकतिर्नभवति। यस्तु लक्षण प्राप्त स्वरितस्तस्योदात्त पादेशो भवति।। 
37. There should be no Monotony in the re citation of the Subrahmanya hymns and in those hymns, the vowels, that would otherwise bare taken the svarita accent, take the udátta accent instead. 
The subrahmanya hymns are portions of Rig Veda mentioned in satapatha Brahmana. 
This sútra prohibits Eka_ruti in the case of certain prayers called subrahmanya. By rule 34 read with 36 ante, prayers might be optionally uttered with Ekaśruti accent. This ordains an exception to that rule. In subrahmanya prayers there is no ekaśruti; and in these hymns, a vowel which otherwise by any rule of grammar would have taken a svarita accent, takes an udatta accent instead. 
As सुग्रह्मण्यो ३ मिन्द्रागच्छ हरितपागच्छ. Here the word सुप्रमण्य is formed by the addition of the affix or to the word THAT, and this y will get suarita 
90 
. 
SUBRAHMANYA HYMNS. 
[ Bk. I. CH. "II. $ 38, 39. 
accent by VI. 1. 185, (Partition) as it has an indicatory q; by the present sätra, this nascent svaritu is changed into udatta. In the phrase se 13, the word Indra being in the vocative case, ris udåtta, they of Indra is anudatta VI. 1. 1981 The anuditta preceded by an udatta is changed into svarita (VIII. 4. 66)'. 
Thus the vol TX must become svarita, but by the present sätra this nascent svarita is changed into an udåtta. Thus in F, both vowels be come udatta. In the word Tea, the ot is udåtta; the next letter which was anudåtta becomes svarita, and from svaritu it is changed to udatta by the present rule. Thus in the sentence IT the first four syllables are all acutely accented, the fifth syllable is only anudatta. So also in gfte me, for the reasons given above, the letters and are anudatta, the rest are all acutely accented. :: : würme: 113611 ogifa 1 -FIŪT: , 19:, 
F: 11 TAHFIUT: FILTREATTER sraut vafa u : . 38. The word devd and Brahmåņa in those hymns have anudatta accent, : By sâtra 37, it was declared, that in subrahmanya hymns, svarita accent is replaced by událta accent. This sätra makes an excep tion in favor of the words and no occurring in those hymns. These words have anudatta accent. As T #HIO TEEN 'come ye Devas and Brahmapas." Here the word dat gets udatta accent, on the first syllable by rule VI. 1. 198. 1 (in the vocative the accent is on the beginning): Två has originally an anudatta accent which · by rule VIII. 4. 66' (an anudatta following an udatta is changed into svarita) would have been changed into svarita. This svarita, by the previous sätra required to be changed into udatta; but by this rule, it is replaced by anu dátta. In other words, the original anudatta remains unchanged. 
स्वरितात्संहितायामनुदात्तानाम् ॥ ३९ ॥ पदानि ॥ खरितात् , संहितायाम् , अनुदात्तानाम् , ( एकश्रुतिः)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ संहितायाम् विषये स्वारितारपरषामनुदात्तानामेकश्रुतिर्भवति॥ 
39. The monotony takes the place of the anudatta vowels which follow the svarita vowels, in close proximity (sanhita). 
Sanhita is the joining of two or more words in a sentence, for the purposes of reading or reciting. When words are thus glued together, then 
C) RAFAT ) FTSHIFTET HTTT: N 
BK. I. CH. II. $ 40, 41.] . SANNATARA DEFINED. 
91 
the anudatta accents become Ekaśruti if they are preceded by svarita vowels; and are pronounced monotonously. As tid. Area (Rig Veda X. 75.5) O Ganga, Yamuna, Sarasvati I this mine. 
Here the word på has udatta on the last syallable: the word is originally anudalta, but by rule VIII. 4. 66 1 following an udatta, it is changed into svarita; after this svarita all anudatta like , &c., are replaced by ekaśruti. All the vowels of the words To &c., had anudatta accent by rule VIII. 1, 19 (all vocatives get anudatta if standing in the middle of a sentence and not beginning a stanza.) 
The word “sanhita" has been used in the satra to show that when there is a hiatus between the words then there is no change of apudätta into ekaśruti. The word sanhita will be defined in satra I. 4. 109 
'उदात्तखरितपरस्य सन्नतरः ॥ ४० ॥ पदानि ॥ उदात्त-खरित: OTET, TITT: , ( HOTFITTI ) . 
वत्तिः ।। उदात्तपरस्य स्वरितपरस्य चानदात्तस्य सनतरमादेशो भवति । 
40. The accent called Sannatara is substituted in the room of an anudatta vowel, which has an udatta or svarita vowel following it. 
In the previous sätra it was said that an anudatta preceded by a svarita becomes Ekaśruti. If however such an anudatta is followed by an udatta or a svarita, it does not become Ekaśruti bụt becomes sannatara it. lower than anudatta. . 
The sannatara is therefore that accent which was originally auro datta, and which is preceded by a svarita and is followed by an udatta or a svarita. 
This is one explanation of the sætra. There is another explanation which does not take the anuvsitti of Ekaśruti in this sútra. The anudatta is replaced by sannatara when such anudatta immediately precedes an udatta or a svarita. The sannatara is also called anudatta. As 78: gratis: 11 
Here the word #rat: is anudatta. The word : has udatta on the last syllable by VI. 1. 171. * In the phrase wiacia: (TTT: +974:) The syllable at is anudaçta, because anudatta + anudatta - anudatta. This anudalta , preceding the udalta qi, is changed into sannatara. 
अपृक्त एकाल्प्रत्ययः ॥४॥ पदानि ॥ अपृक्तः, एक-मलू, cy: , 1 
gfa: '1779 Faizi tient ma gara *: STUPEFIFT II 
(') INSTITYTT Ffra: 1) () gmaia Tu (") : sifat dari (*) afterglacgega: 11 
92 
- KARMADHARAYA DEFINED. - [BK, I. CH. II. $ 4*** 
41. Au affix consisting of a single letter is called an Aprikta. 
This defines Aprikta affixes. They are those affixes which consist of only one letter of the alphabet. Thus the affix it in vervuitar is a one lettered suffix and is an Aprikta. Similarly the affix for kvin is an Aprikta, because the letters x, y, and are merely indicatory, the real affix is 0. This is being a single letter, and therefore an Aprikla, when added to a base, is elided by rule VI. 1. 67' (the Apriktu vis elided). Thus T TL + FAT = y +7 (III. 2. 58)' = GETTII UFL + for SATTEco-sharer.' (Ill. 2. 62). * An affix which consists of more than one letter is not an Aprikla. As erat: a ladle' formed by the Unådi affix pans ( af forb). 
. 6969: 19 76: : 182 u osifat u apg54:, rata: , **9179: , u 
#: di reyn: IT TUTTO ATTARIT Tie it . : : 
42. A Tat-purusha compound, the case of each member of which is the same, is called karmadharaya or 
· Appositional Determinative compound 
"Karmadharaya or Appositional Determinative compounds form a sub-division of the determinative compounds (Tüt-purusha). In them the first portion stands as the predicate of the second portion, such as in black-beetle, sky-blue." (Max Muller). *....***. The compounds like they "the blue lotus' FTHAT 'the supreme spirit' &c. are examples of karmadha:aya compounds. “The component words, if dissolved, would stand in the same case, (samånadhikarapa), whereas in other Tat-purushas, the preceding word is governed by the last." 
As, 707947, is a karmadharaya compound meaning "the best Government." Had it not been a karmadhiraya compound, the udáttu accent would have fallen on the syllable TT by rule VI. 2. 130,* (the word 
Nu has udatta on the first syllable in Tat-purusha compounds, except in karmadhiraya). 
Similarly + T= FITI (VI. 3. 42.the feminine adjective is changed into masculine in the karmadharaya). 
Each member of a compound may have the same case, but if it is not a Tat-purusha compound, it won't be karmadharaya. As 9 + 741** aftur:. 'He who has a wife for a cook.' This is an example of a Bahuvrihi compound, and therefore the word fait retains its gender sign. 
() puit for:ll (o) a 
rc 2 
(") r 
FT II (") Frotske udytulasi 
(') g BK. I. CH. II. $ 43, 44.) 
UPASARJANA DEFINED. 
- 
A compound may be a Tat-purusha, but if its component parts do not refer to the same thing and are not in the same case, it won't be karmadha. raya:-भालण राज्यम् Brahmana rajyam 'a Brahmana kingdom.' Hereराज्यमू gets udatta on the first syllable by the rule already mentioned (VI. 2. 130). 
प्रथमानिर्दिष्टं समासउपसर्जनम् ॥ ४३ ॥ पदानि ॥ प्रथमा-निर्दिष्टम्, समासे , उपसर्जनम् , 
त्तिः ॥ प्रथमया विभक्तया यनिर्दिश्यते समासशास्त्रे सदुपसर्जनसंखं भवति । 
43. In (this book, in the sætras relating to) compound, the word that is exhibited in the first (Nomi native) case, is called upasarjana or the secondary word. 
This defines or rather describes the Upasarjana. In the sûtras refer ring to compounds, the words that have the case termination of the nomina tive, are called Upasarjanam. 
Thus sutra II. I. 24 (द्वितीया बितातीत पतितगतात्यस्तमासाप:) is a sanasa sútra enjoining composition. In this salra the word frater is exhibited in the nominative case, and the remaining words are in the Instrumental case. The sutra means, "An accusative (दितीया) is compounded with the words श्रित, अतीत, पतित, गत, अत्यस्त, प्राम, and आपन and forms Tat-purusha." There. fore, in forming accusative compounds, the word having the accusative case will be called Upasarjana. Thus कष्टं +श्रितः - कष्टश्रितः. Here the word are being Upasarjana, stands first in the compound, by Rule Il. 2. 30. उपसर्जनपूर्वम् , (in a compound the Upasarjana should be placed first). Simi larly in rules relating to the formation of Instrumental, dative, ablative, geni tive and locative Tat-purusha, the words standing in those cases will be Upasarjana. Thus जंकुनाखण्डः, यूपदारु; प्रकभयम्, राजपुरुषः, अत्तशोण्ड.. 
Upasarjana is, therefore, that word which either by composition or derivation loses its original independent character, while it also determines the sense of another word called on or principal. 
__ एकविभक्ति चापूर्वनिपाते ॥ ४४ ॥ पदानि ॥ एक-विभक्ति , च, अपूर्व-निपाते , (उपसर्जनम् । 
इतिः।। एका विक्तिर्यस्य तदिदमेक विभक्ति, समासे विधीयमाने यनियतविभक्ति हितीये सम्बन्धिनि बहुभिर्विक्तिभिर्युज्यमानेप्येकयैवविभनया युज्यते तदुपसर्जनसंज्ञं भवति, भपूर्व निपाते, पूर्वनिपातं पूर्वनिपाताण्यमुपसर्जनकार्य वर्जयित्वा ।। 
___44. A word which has one fixed case, (while the word compounded with it may vary its case) is also upasarjana, except for the purposes of the rule which requires the upasarjana to stand first in a compound.. 
PRATIPADIKA DEFINED. 
(Bk. I. CH. II. $ 45: 
A word which in the analytical statement of the sense of a compound has one fixed case, whilst the word with which it is compounded may vary its casc is also called upasarjana, but does not necessarily stand first. : 
That which has one fixed case-termination is called eka-vibhakti, 1.e., a word whose case termination has been determined by a rule of samasa i.c., while the second word in composition with it may take many case affixes, it takes only one case affix; apůrva-nipate, such a word will be an upasarjana for all purposes, except for the purpose of the rule (II. 2. 30) 
· which requires an upasarjana to stand first in a compound. 
Thus the prepositions fat: &c., when meaning across &c., are com pounded with another word in the ablative case. Though the first word may have any one of the several case terminations, the second member must always be in the fifth (ablative) case, when analytically stated. Ex faoinen: + augt - mainta:. foto + 1 - Foruma, a to #TUT = firscritunar. Stirrara + TAIL * frekut, fir + muroy - Foru. 
Similarly the word for turer: 11 
If the word, when analytically stated, does not retain the one and the same case, it will not be called upasarjana, as the word art in the compound 
art, the king's daughter,' because #: + uret - ( 
T art; 78 + Harta - Tri; TTTT: + aarai = T rut, T: + ATT – T T . 
Had it been an upasarjana, the long of it would have been shorten ed into y as in the previous example. 
This upasarjana, however, contrary to the general rule (II. 2. 30) can not stand first in the compound, because there is no such form as, 
o i la: अर्थवदधातुरप्रत्ययः प्रातिपदिकम् ॥ ४५ ॥ पदानि ॥ अर्थवत्, qurg: , FARTU: , a fanfall 
f#: 1194 gotas datientia xafa yrgyeret 
45. A significant form of a word, not being à verbal root (dhátu), or an affix (pratyaya) is called a prátipadika or crude-form. 
This defines the word "pratipadika" or crude-form. The pratipadika is the intermediate stage in the development of a full word (pada), from the undifferentiated ore called the dhatu or root. It is that part of a word which is capable of receiving the case-terminations. 
The word means having signification. With the exception of verbal roots and affixes, a word-form having a significance or meaning is called 
(°) 3474 
can 
BK. 1. CH. II. $ 46. ] 
PRATIPADIKA DEFINED. 
. 93 
a pratipadika, as Rey: 'a wooden elephant,' feu: 'the wood-apple tree,'ay !a bowl,' drog a seat'. 
Why do we say "significant"? Of course it must have some meaning, thus of the word Ti, we cannot say that the portion is prátipadika; as it has no meaning, and had it been a prátipadika, the final would have been dropped by Rule VIII. 2.71 (the final of a pratipadika is dropped). 
The word must not be a verb, as the word TT (the third person sing. number, imperfect tense of FT); he killed. Had it been a pratipadika, the 7 would have been dropped. 
The word must not be an affix or ending in an affix:-as ar 'in the bowl.' Here the word ends in the affix r of the locative case, and is conse quently not a 'prålipadika' or crude form, but a complete word. Had it been a prấtipadika, the would have been shortened into by rule 47 succeeding. 
A nipata or particle though not a significant form of a word, yet gets the designation of prátipadika in the opinion of the author of the Mahal.. bhashya. As artesa, 
y a . . : 
Tigarh8!3 11 89 11 azifa -arga-BTT: , 4, ( Anfauft) 
TP 11 Fafalgar: Er ma femen Toft ! 
46. The forms ending in Krit affixes, or Tad dhita affixes, or compound are also called Pratipadika. 
This further explains the use of the word pritipadika. " Suffixes for the formation of nouns are of two kinds. Those by which nouns are derived direct from roots, primary suffixes. Those by which nouns are derived from other nouns; secondary suffixes. The former are called Kșit, (III. 1.93) the latter Tuddhita (IV. 1. 76). S Thus sa juna, man, is derived from the root su jux by the ksit suffix ; but ifta janina, appropriate for man, is derived from 
7 jana by the Taddhita affix fina. The name pratipadika would apply both to 7 jana and softa janinn, as nominal bases ready to receive the termi nations of declension" (Max Müller) 
Of the compounds, of which there are six varieties, we had occasion to refer to five already viz., Tat-purusha, Karmadhå raya, Deandva, Bahuvrihi and Avyayibhava. They will be fully dealt with in their proper places. 
In the last sûtra, the words "not ending in an affix" were too extea. sive; this sūtra makes an important provision in favor of words ending in Krit or Taddhita affixes. So also compounds are also called prátipadika. Being restricted to compounds only, it, of course, does not apply to sentences. 
() 
int: Atayfama 
() ofan.() OPTIT: #1 
96 
SHORTENIXG OF THE NEUTER BASES. (Bk. I. CH. II. $ 47. 
· The words formed by krit affixes are prâtipadika as, F (to do) +9 
usar+ TT. The affix G is a kşit affix, and it is added to the root to form agent by Rule III. 8. 133.' The letters q and are indi catory, the force of or being to cause the vşiddhi of the vowel of the root. The real asfix y is changed into * by (VII. 1. the affixes y and are replaced by va and respectively), thus the form an is a pratipadika, and is capable of declension by receiving case terminations, as, Trom: 11 Similarly 5+ 7 (III. 1. 133)' = a ; nom. case dr. 
The word formed by Taddhita affixes are also pratipadika; J40+ me=Ht+ = 'the son of the Rishi Upagu': nom. case 74., similarly 1951. 
In fact in the chapters treating of these affixes, the derivative subs tantives formed by them are always shown by the Indian Grammarians in the nominative case singular number. The examples of nouns given in this book will be always declined nouns and not prätipadikas, except in peculiar 
cases. So also in the chapter of samasa or compounds. 
The words ending in compound are prátipadika : as 07:+FT:=171 पुरुष, nom. case राजपुरुषः, 
हस्त्रो नपुंसके प्रातिपदिकस्य ॥ ४७ ॥ पदानि । हुस्खः , नपुंसके, प्रातिपदिकरयः ॥ 
वृत्तिः । नपुंसकलिङ्ग यत्प्रातिपदिकं वर्नते तस्य इस्वी भवति आदेशोजोन्स्यस्याचः ।। 
i 47. The short rowel is substituted in the neuter, for the final vowel, of a prátipadikau . In the neuter gender, the pråtipadika that would have ended in a long 
vowel, changes it into short. Thus yra +* art 'extravagant' as fart an'an extravagant family'; gia te waa'very hairy' tras a very hairy family 
There is no substitution of short vowel, if the noun is not in the neuter gender, as HTH + ft = arut, nom, case wut: 'the leader of a village or head-borough,' similarly horft: 'the leader of an army.' 
A word may be in the neuter gender, but if it is not a prätipadika, the vowel is not shortened, as to faga: 'two cantos remain. Here the g of rus is formed by the coalescence of v (of the pratipadika a ) and 
(the dual case termination); thus 3+ros. Now it might be urged, that here one letter , replaces two letters and F, therefore this substitute is equivalent to each of those letters separately, and consequently g is the vowel of the pratipadika and ought to be shortened. But this is not 
(") Tata (") gaat 
Bk. I. CH. II. § 48, 49. ) 
A RULE OF LUK-ELISION. 
97 
to be so, because the word prátipadika has been especially mentioned in the text, and therefore this ekadása is not treated as the final of the form which precedes it. 
गोस्नियोरुपर्जनस्य ॥ ४८ ॥ पदानि ॥ गो-स्त्रिया, उपसर्जनस्य, ( afaafqata ) # 
वृत्तिः ॥ उपसर्जनगोशान्तस्य उपसर्जनस्त्रीप्रत्ययान्तस्य च प्रातिपदिकस्य इस्वो भवति । वार्तिकम् ॥ ईयसोबहुव्रीहिः प्रतिषेधावनग्यः॥ 
48. A short vowel is the substitute of práti padika which ends with the word n'a cow,' and of that which ends with what has as its termination a feminine affix; when regarded as upasarjana 
The word upasarjana has been defined in sâtra 43. In compounds the word of becomes shortened when it stands last and is an upasarjana. 
Thus 177+ 
'possessed of a brindled cow. This is an ex. ample of a Bahuvrihi or possessive compound. So also hy a spotted cow'. Similarly in those pratipadika upasarjanas which end in feminine suffixes having a final long vowel, there is a shortening. Thus ffi r it finiranea:. Here the final long is shortened. So also farettura: . 
.. The word prátipadika of the previous sútra is understood in this. The word it in the sûtra means the form it and not other words synonym with it. The word at means "a word ending in a feminine affix," because 
it has the starita accent. The word upasarjana qualifies both these words, i.c. when T is an upasarjana and when a word having a feminine termina tion is an upasarjana.. 
Other examples are :- + =fe without a bed stead' annet: 'surpassing a necklace in beauty'. 
If such a word is not an upasarjana, there is no shortening, as, t arct 'the king's daughter. Here the word TTT is upasarjana, and not the word Art, which latter is therefore not shortened. The word must be a derivative word formed by the addition of an affix, which makes it femi nine. Thus the words Art, ft &c. are feminine originally, and are not de rived from the masculine nouns, by the addition of any feminine affix. There fore we have fast Fit: 'surpassing Lakshmi in beauty' piatt: 11 
Vart:--In Bahuvrihi compounds, exception must be made of femi nine nouns ending in the affix test, as agreret, frgarigelli 
goaicagta u yg ni açıfa n GF, arga-gf , ( ait, EGE HATT ) o 
gf#: ni afanart efa eitgenges gasta plati 
are 
98 
A RULE OF LUK-ELISIOX. 
[ BK. I. CH. II. $ 49. 
N 
. 
49. When a Taddhita affix is elided by the word luk there takes place the elision by luk of the feminine afix of the upasarjana. 
• The word a defined in sútra 61 Chapter 1, is twice used in this sQtra. Where a Taddhita affix is elided by the word ; there the feminine suffix of the pratipadika is also dropped, or becomes luk. Thus there are certain Taddhita suffixes by which patronymics are formed (one of them being T) from other nouns. Before this vi the initial vowel of the word is vriddhied and the final is gunated. Thus fany'ocean'; forms ferry + EN TUT+ = 'born in ocean or oceanic.' But there are certain words e. g. 
IST, gut &c. which are all feminine gender (see sätra IV. 3. 34)' after which the patronymic suffix is totally elided, without leaving any trace of its action, by using the word luk. Thus @YT+()=X68: 11 Here then the present sûlra finds its scope. The Taddhita suffix being luked; the original feminine termination ay also becomes luk. Therefore the patrony. mic derivative of M T (is not a longer word, as might have been expected) but actually a shorter word, namely 8:; similarly from our we have 997: &c. 
. Thus there is a feminine suffix called t (actually ) and certain words like to &c., (IV. 1. 49) take an additional suffix called (actually 
T). Thus the feminine offre will be + 55+ = p + gr* $. = faut. Now in forming Dvigu compound (Numeral Determinative compound;, the Taddhita suffixes are dropped. Thus T TGT: 'an offering (purodash) made in a dish with five compartments.' In this compound the Taddhita suffix or is dropped. Otherwise the form would have been atare: 0 Similarly when the word arut forms a Dvigu compound, the Taddhita suffixes are dropped. But not only that, even the original radical affixes are also dropped by force of the present sâtra. Thus : which means the cake sacred to the five goddesses ut. Here the full form was 0 + Tarot + 1. (The suffix you has the force of " sacred to God," Thus Ft + T = 
sacred to God Indra). In the above expression, first the Taddhita-suffix sy is luked by rule contained in sätra IV. 1.88 relating to Dvigu compounds: we have then remaining 4y + farat. In this stage, the present satra comes into force and declares that where a Taddhita suffix has been luked, the final feminine suffixes of the upasarjana pratipadika are also luked. Therefore, the feminine suffixes and are also dropped, and we have to which means "cake sacred to the five Indraņis (goddesses).". 
(") 1986 TEOG TUIFTINafasy 974 Faforgrera carrot () FHU. praefarve rgareriruntatu(*) fayadu... 
BK. I. CH. II. $ 50, 51.] 
A RULE OF LUK-ELISION. 
99 
The words and upasarjana of the last sätra are understood in this By the last sätra, a word ending in a feminine affix was told to be shortened when it was an upasarjana; this sútra teaches the total suppression of such an affix in special cases. To take another example: Thus Rule IV. 3. 163 declares a "luk takes the place of an affix signifying modification or product when fruit is meant." Thus is an affix which means modification. Thus t + 7 - Tout cow's milk or the product of cow.'. This affix is sup pressed when applied to a tree, in the sense of the fruit of the tree. Thus the fruit of the tree gro* will be called 1.C., first the Taddhita affix is luked, and then the feminine affix is also dropped. Similarly fruits of बदरी or बबुजी trees, are बदरं or बकुल. 
This rule only applies when a Taddhita affix is elided; and not so when any other affix is luked. Thus prat: + ago Triat 'the family of Gärgi.' Here in forming the samása, the case affix of the word gargt is luked by II. 4 711. But this suppression of the genitive termination does not necessitate the clision of the feminine affix of gårgt. 
This rule would also not apply if there is no elision by luk of a Tad dhita affix, as in ther. 
Nor will the rule apply when the word is not an upasarjana. As waret, at, 56:... 
g 17: 11 yol açta u ga, Hitat:, (afgaste ) i त्तिः ॥ गोण्यास्तद्धितलुकि सात इकारादेवो भवति॥ 
50. The short is substituted in the place of goni, when the Taddhita affix is elided by luk. . 
By the former sůtra when a Taddhita is elided, the long of the semi nine also required elision. But this rule makes an exception in favor of the word Trul in which, under similar circumstances the short replaces the long 
, as in the compound frio: 'purchased for five gonis. Here the Taddhita suffix which conveys the meaning of “purchased for," has been rejected after Trut by V. 1. 28,' therefore by previous sûtra , the feminine suffix also required rejection. But this sätra intervenes and changes the long f into short . 
This sūtra is divided into two separate rules by the process called yoga-vibhåga. Thus is made one sätra by itsell, and then it means, when there is a suppression of Taddhita affix by say, then the long is replaced by short F. Thus purchased with five needles=47: ht: nta: - Tarr., FURT:. This is restricted to such examples of purchase only. . 
() urgarfagreet: 11 (*) partire darrti . . 
100 
A RULE OF LUP-ELISION. 
[Bk. I. CH. II. & si. 
gfagnacarthanat 1990 astfa il gfa, gent, cafu #: 
ter:lleptira gerai pat teratari aend; it ofr on T18:16 minull graumag safti: 11 
Til garatfag Tea! 
:51. When a Taddhita affix is elided by using the word , then the gender and number (of the deri vative word) agree with those of the original word. . 
This sůtra consists of four words: ha,' where there is a rejection by using a 2 7'appropriate to the same.' 3 &17ti, gender,' 47 'num. ber.' The form vyakti vachane is dual. 
When a Taddhita affix is luped, then the derivative word retains the geoder and number of the primitive word. Note the difference between the rejection of a Taddhita by saying 'let there be a ' and "let there be a g?"! The direct action of both words is the rejection of the suffix; but a derivative formed by luk rejection may not retain the number and gender of the original word ; while a derivative formed by lup-rejection does retain the number and gender of the original word. 
Thus in the secondary derivative word factor: meaning a village not far away from første trees'; the masculine gender and .plural number of the original word has been retained, though made applicable to a village, which is in the singular number and neuter gender; similarly the word 6: is masculine plural in forın though applicable to a single province. 
This sūtra is not an approved rule; as will be mentioned by Panini in sâtra 53 following and is consequently of little practical importance. 
Thus erat: are a class of Kshatriyas, as such it is masculine gender and plural number. The country in which Pañchalds live is also called Pan chalds; similarly TT, ATTIT: &c. There is a rule 7795. (IV. 2. 81, the lup takes the place of an affix when signifying the proper name of a country or kingdom). Thus TTAT: + yor (this is one of the affixes forming country) m er:. . 
This rule does not apply when the affix is suppressed by the word 
&c. and not 1. Thus 5TU: 'salted soap' ATUETT: 'salted gruel,' GTU TER 'salted vegetable.' Here the affix at has been elided by the word 
luk, by IV. 4. 24, 1TUTE (after the word lavana; the affix is luked). 
These derivatives retain only the gender and number of the original, but no other quality. Thus as we have already seen that furtar: sirishah, is the name of a village and is formed by the lup of the affix. Now com. pounding it with a we have finity 'the forest of the village Sirisha. Here 
BK. I. CH. II. $ 53.1 
RULES OF LUP-ELISION. 
101 
the word pritar: means village, and not trees. Had it meant trees called sirisha, then the # of 7 would have become u optionally by Rule VIII. 4.6. (ATT TTEITAT: 11 the 7 of the word ry is optionally changed into y when preceded by words signifying annual herbs and trees). . 
Vart: In the case of the words Haritaki &c. the gender only is retained and not the number. As part of the fruits of Haritakie' Here 
is neuter in form, while staat is feminine. 
Vart:-The words Garaa &c. retain their number only but not gen. der, as 
a mountain forests i. e. forests in the vicinity of mountains.' Here tra is singular and tua plural, but the gender of both is the same vis, neuter. 
दिशेपणानां घाजातेः ॥५२॥ पदानि ॥ विशेषणानाम् , च, 
spara:, ( 
fa) 
वृत्तिः।। लुवर्थस्ययानि विशेषणानि तेषामपि व्यक्तिवचने भवनो जाति वर्जयित्वा ॥ वातिकम् ।। मनुष्यनुपि प्रतिषेधो वक्तव्यः॥ 
:52. And of adjectives, (the gender and num ber are the same as of the word formed by lup elision of the Taddhita and which they qualify) so far as the jäti (or kind or species) is concerned; (or when not expressing játi). 
When a Taddhita is luped, the adjectives which qualify such secondary derivatives agree with them in number and gender. This is a rule of syntax. Thus BET: Tutar: War:, altyar: H/F4hor: 'the pleasant Panchalds having plenty of food, plenty of milk and butter.' Here the. adjective Tuitar: pleasant &c., agrees in number and gender with the Panchalah; being also in masculine plural. But when such a derivative is used as a játi word then the adjective does not agree in number and gender, as पंचानाः मनपरः, गोही मामः.. Here are though qualifying Pafichåld does not agree with it in number and gender, as it is a noun of class. All attributes of such words formed by the lup of Taddhita agree with their substantives in number and gender: provided that such an attribute is not a common noun uscd as an ad jective. Similarly adjectives which do not directly qualify such Taddhita. lormed nouns, but do so through the medium of a noun of class, do not agree in gender and number with the Taddhita-word. Thus * TGT: 
THI THOTTt age: 'the country of Panchålas is pleasant and fertile. Here the words toita: and 58: qualify directly the word '49747:' and indirectly the word Panchålås, and therefore do not agree with the latter. . 
102, 
LUP-ELISION NOT APPROVED. 
(BK. I. CH. II: & 53: 
The 
The, explanation of this sûtra as given by Patanjali in the. Mahia, bhåshya is somewhat different from that of the Kåsika. The phrase arsi.. is analysed by him as 7 and Tel:, the sense being "and as far, as the játi goes." The word játi is thus explained :-. 
A word expressing whatever is distinguishable by its form or figure, or which being the name of an individual is easily found applicable to others. without any further teaching, (a common name) provided it is not a word used in all genders, (common noun feu Fifa genus); and (only, for the purpose of grammar as coming under the rules relating to the above mention ed words), a word expressing descendants by their parentage as well as a word expressing a person by the branch of the Vedas ( urer) which the family to. which the person belongs is competent to read. Treno (šakhådhyetçi) (tu silla ) = Hitarat: (jativâchakåh) grofa | fara at y TFT I सकृदाण्यात निग्राह्यगणे व चरणैः सह ।। . . 
The following examples will illustrate the meaning of the above de finition:-1) is a játi word because it denotes what is distinguishable by its form, i. e. by its being contiguous to a place covered with water, (2) 
is such a word, because when given as the name of an individual, is applicable to other sudras (common name), (3) lyurt is such a word, and (4) 25 a person belonging to the family competent to read the branch of the Vedas called katha is also such a word. But čarza is not such a word; because it is a proper name applicable to only one individual and te is likewise not such word, because it, though a common game, is used in all genders. 
Vart:-Prohibition must be stated in the case of nouns formed by. the y elision of an affix relating to man. Thus the Taddhita affix aq (0) is employed in denoting representation by imitation. Thus : means a figure like a horse (in wood or clay or paper). But when the imitation is that of a man, this affix is elided. Thus it means a “ doll of straw.” But when we want to say a doll in the figure of a man, we will have + G . ( TO V. 3. 98) = 79. Here this word is formed by the elision of an affix relating to man. Adjectives qualifying this word will not agree in gender and number. Thus *177759: 'the delightful straw figure of man.' antar: 
uta: 'a beautiful representation of an eunuch.' 
: agiva s79104ą 11 43 n açıfa 11 a-sfatura, DN. प्रमाणत्वात् ॥ 
Efeti II TEFTERİT TE FAREFITTITUSITE NI BK. I. CH. II: $ 53, 54. ) *: LUP-ELISION NOT APPROVED. 
103 
53. This (concord of gender and number, of primitive and derivative nouns, and of attributes and substantivesi need not be taught (or approved), because it has the authority of sanjñå (or conventional term or idiom). 
The agreement between the number and gender of the nouns and attributes; of primary and secondary words formed by suffix rejection, is not an approved syntax. The gender and number of particular deri vatives or adjectives are not blindly to be fixed by the primary words or the governed substantives; but it is a matter more or less of usage or idiom: and no hard and fast rule can be laid down for it. Thus the word 
TTT: 'wise' has the form of masculine plural, but is always applied to females, similarly WT: 'water' is always feminine plural in form, so also Ter: " T: 
T:. This sútra, therefore, modifies the former sůtras, and leaves the whole question of syntactic agreement to be decided by usage and idiom. 
The words like Panchålds, Kurava &c., should not be considered as derivative words formed by the lup elision of Taddhita ; but they must be taken as proper nouns and appellatives of certain countries; consequently the gender and number of such words are fixed by the nature of such words and not by any rule of grammar. 
लुव योगामख्यानात् ॥ ५४॥ पदानि ॥ लुप, योग-अप्रख्यानात्। ( suur) u 
इतिः ॥ योऽयंजनपदे मुप वरणादिभ्यति लुबुच्यते अयं नवनव्यः,किं कारणं योगान. ख्यानातू नहि पक्षाला परणा इति योगः सम्बन्धः मल्यायते नेतदुपजभामहे वृतयोगानगरे TUT a 11 
54. The sûtras declaring lup elision need not also be taught, because of the non-currency of the etymo logical meaning of the words supposed to be formed by lup elision. 
In explaining certain words, it is a round-about way of going to work to say that there was a suffix after them, which has been rejected, without pro ducing any effect. It is easier to say that the form is what we find it to be, and that its peculiar meaning depends upon usage. Moreover, in many cases, the would-be etymological meaning is not in fact the current meaning which the word has in ordinary language. It is therefore a useless circumlocution to presuppose the existence of a suffix, to add it to a word, and, then after all, to make it vanish. 
104 
PRADHANA AND PRATYAYA. [Bk. I. CH. 11. $ 55, 56. 
- 
- 
Thus FTUT: Varanáh is the name of a city: To say that it is derived from TUT: a kind of tree, because the city is situated near such trees, and the trees gave the name to the city, is a cumbersome process. Because there might be no trees TTUT at all near the town Varanå. Let us therefore call words like trur, TNT, &c., as simply proper nouns. Therefore there is no occasion for the application of the Taddhita affixes given in IV. 2. 69 and 70 (तस्य निवासः, धारभवन), relating to residence and vicinity; much less of rules relating to "lup' elision contained in IV. 28t and.82 (जनपदेशप , वरणादिभ्यच). 
योगप्रमाणे च तदभावेग्दर्शनं स्यात् ॥ ५५ ॥ पदानि॥ योग प्रमाणे, घ, तद-अभावे, अदर्शनम्, स्यात्, 
त्तिः ॥ पचालादयः संज्ञा शबा न योगनिमित्ताइस्युक्त, सद्यावश्यमेवाभ्युपगन्तव्यं योग प्रमाणेहि तदभावे प्रदर्शनं स्यात, यदि पच्चालादिशब्दो योगस्य प्रमाणं योगस्य वाचकः स्यातू सतस्तद भावार्शनमप्रयोगः स्यातू ।। 
55. And if the etymological meaning be held authoritative, then when such meaning is absent, the word also should vanish. 
This sútra strengthens the former sútra. If it be said that a word always retains its etymological meaning in current language; then when there is an absence of such etymological meaning, then the word itself ought to vanish. But we know, as a matter of fact, that, there are words which have altogether lost their etymological sense, and connote a thing different from their radical meaning. Therefore to explain such words by lup elision of affixes is improper, because they do not retain the meaning of their primitive words. 
It has already been said that words like पंचाला: &c. are not deriva-. tive words, &c. but are appellatives. If these words be taken as proving their etymological meaning, that is, as expressing or dependent upon, the sense of the original word, then when there is a loss of the original word signification, the secondary word must also cease to be employed. Thus if Pan chalås be the name of the country in which the Kshatryas called Panchålds live, then when they cease to live in this country, it should cease to be called Panchâlds. But we know, as a matter of fact, these words are now used without any reference to the people who once inhabited the countries. These words are consequently not derivative, but their sense is determined by usage. They are what may be called रूdि words. 
प्रधानप्रत्ययार्थवचनमधेस्यान्यग्रंमाणत्वात् ॥५६॥ पदानि । प्रधान-प्रत्यय, अर्थ-वचनम् अर्धस्य, अन्यप्रमाणत्वात् (अशिष्य)॥ 
वृत्तिः ।। प्रधान समासे किंचित्पदं प्रत्ययस्तष्यशादिः ताभ्यामर्यवचनमनिधानमनेन प्रका. रेण भवतीति पूर्वाचायः पारंभाषितम् प्रधानोपसर्जने प्रधानार्यसहबूतः प्रकृति प्रत्ययोसहार्य पूत इति। सम्पाणिनिराचार्यः प्रत्याचष्टे अशिष्यमेततू अर्यस्यान्यममाणस्वादिति । अन्य इति शास्त्रापेत्तवा लोकोव्यपदिश्यते, शदरभिधानस्वाभाविकं न पारिभाषिकमशक्यस्यात् लोकव एवाविंगतः। 
BK. I. CH. II. $ 56, 57.) 
KALA AND UPASARJANA. 
. 
105 
56. Nor need be taught) the rule relating to the dependence of the meaning of a word on the princi pal (pradhâna, in a compound) or on the affix (pratyaya); because the authority of the meaning of a word, com. 
pound or derirative) consists in something else. 
This sútra may be divided into two parts. The first part stating the proposition and ending with the word vachanam. The second part giving the reason. The first part consists of four words; Pradhana: 'Principal in a compound. As in the compound (1964: 'king's man,' the word raja is Upasarjana ; and qoy: is pradhana. 2. Pratyaya: 'affix. 3. * 'meap ing.' 4. T word or sentence.' 
in the time of Papini, there were somc grammarians, who held the opinion, that the meaning of a word is determined, if a compound word, then by its principal word; and if a derivative word, then by the suffix. Panini controverts this opinion by declaring that in as much as the meaning of a word is fixed by usage and idiom, therefore the proofs for the meaning of a word are not to be searched either in the affixes which go to form it; or by its principal word, if it is a compound. Because, says Panini, the proof of the meaning of a word is in something else, that is to say in the usage of a people and not in the suffixes &c. A person who has never heard the same of grammar, understands full well when told to bring a Raja-purusha. He brings an official and not a king, nor even any person in general. Similarly when told to bring an Unity he brings a cowherd's child, not a cowherd, nor a child in general, nor both. When, therefore, the sense of a word is determined by usage, there is no use to strive to find out the sense by grammatical rules. 
कालोपसर्जने घ तुल्यम् ॥ ५७ ॥ पदानि ॥ काल-उपसर्जने, च, grup, ( farena) a 
वृत्तिः ॥ कालोपसर्जने चाशिष्ये करमादर्यस्यान्यप्रमाणवातू ।। 
57. And a rule fixing thc meaning of Tense (kåla) and Upasarjana sequence) is equally (unnecessary, and need not be taught). 
Here Papini controverts the opinion of those grammarians who would even define time and sequence. Thus there were authors who de. fined pluperfect as a tense relating to time hundred years past, others said a thousand years past &c. Pånini declares that these are redundant definitions and reprehensible, for the same reason as given in the previous sutra. 
106 
SINGULAR DENOTES THE PLURAL. 
[ BK. I. CH. II. $ 58. 
. . To give another example. Thus gar: 767: or the period of the current day, has been thus defined by some Acharyas: "The period of time beginning from the point when one rises (or ought to rise) from his bed, according to the law, and ending with the point when one goes to bed, according to rule, is called adyatana." Others say "from midnight to midnight is the period of the current day." Similarly others have explained the "upasarjana' to mean "that which is not the principal word in a com pound is called upasarjana." The sage Pånini has not thought it worth his while to define such words as upasarjana, in as much as their sense is well understood by all as a matter of usage. Thus common people who have never heard of grammar, also know the correct use of tenses, they say. “This is to be done by me to-day, this will be done by us to-morrow, this was done by us yesterday." 
Similarly common people also know the use of the word upasarjana, for they say :- 7 TE ATR T u ry we are secondary or unimportant persons in this house or village,' meaning that they are not the principal persons. Therefore that which is valid according to the usage of the people is needless to be taught. 
. Why was not this sâtra included in the last? What is the necessity of making a separate rule of this? The answer is that it is an illustrative sätra, and does not exhaust the subject. There are other rules made by former sages which are also not taught by Panini. Thus the following rules of old Rishis are not taught herein, they being supposed to be well-known. *"A Bahuvrihi compound connotes ownership." "In Dvanda compounds the 'sense of both the members of a compound are principal” "In Avyayibhåva 
compounds the sense of the prior word is the principal" &c. 
जात्याख्यायामेकस्मिन्बहुवचनमन्यतरस्याम् ॥५८ ॥ पदानि । जाति-आख्यायाम् , एकस्मिन् , बहुवचनम् , अन्यतरस्याम् ॥ 
त्तिः ॥ जात्याख्यायामेकस्मिन्नये बहुवचनमन्यतरस्यां भवति । वार्तिकम् ।संख्याप्रयोगे प्रतिषेधोवतव्यः । 
58. In (a common) name (expressive of) class, in denoting the singular, the plural is optionally em ployed. 
The words of this sütrà require some detailed explanation. The name of a játi or species, always denotes one, since it is a collective noun, and will naturally take the singular number; by the present sätra such words may take the plural number also. In such nouns of class, the plural number has also the force of the singular. The anuvşitti of aśishyam does not go further. 
BK. I. CH. II. 158-60.] 
DUAL MAY. DENOTE. PLURALL 
107: 
• It follows from this that adjectives which are not themselves common noun, such as संपनः &c., agree with the noun and will also get the. plural number. Thus संपन्नो यवः or संपना यवाः; "Full grown barley" पूर्ववया-माण.. प्रत्युत्थेयः or पूर्ववयसो प्राह्मणाः प्रत्युस्येयाः॥ 
Why have we used the word játi in this sätra? For this aphorism. does not apply to Proper Nouns. Thus देवरत्न: Devadatta, यज्ञदन: Yajijadatta.. Why have we used the word gegron? A word may be a class noun or jati, but it may not be the appellation of a class. Thus the statue of kaśyapa may. also be called kaśyapa; this is a class noun, but as it is not the appellation grey or name of a class, such words cannot take the plural form and still denote a singular sense. 
Why do we say 'ekasmin'? When two or more class names are compounded as uitges the rice and barley:' the rule does not apply. 
Vart:-An exception must be made when a class noun is qualified by a numeral adjective. As एको मीहिः संपनः सुभितं करोति. 
___ अस्मदो द्वयोश्च ॥ ५९ ॥ पदानि ॥ अस्मदः, द्वयोः, च, (एक स्मिन्, बावधनं अन्यतरस्याम् ) 
पृत्तिः । अस्मदो योधस्तस्यकरखे दिखे च बहुवचनमन्यतरस्याम् भवति । वार्तिकम् ॥ सविशेषणस्य प्रतिषेधो वक्तवः। 
वार्तिकम् ॥ युष्मदि गुरावेकेषाम् ।। . . . 59. The plural of the.pronoun. asmad, 'I,' is used optionally, though the sense requires a singular or dual number. 
Thus “I speak " or “ we. speak " (पहं ब्रवीमि or वयं अमः), may be spoken by one person, similarly two persons may either use the dual casc or theplural case, thus मावां वः 'we to speak' or वयं भूमः 'we speak.' 
Vart :-There is prohibition when the pronoun of the 1st person is; qualified by an attribute :-as अहं देवदत्तो प्रवीमि . I Devadatta am speaking:': 
Trat matTĄ" I Gargya am saying.'. Here we cannot use the plural. 
Vart:-The word गुरु ' master' may have plural form though referring toone person, when following the word युष्मद as त्वं मे गुरु: or यूयं मे गुरवः. ' Thou art my master', or you are my master.' 
... फल्गुनीप्रोष्ठपदानां च नक्षत्रे ॥ ६० ॥ पदानि ॥ फल्गुनी-प्रोष्ठ पदानां घ नक्षत्रे॥ 
कृत्तिः ॥ फल्गुन्योईयोः प्रोष्ठपदच योर्नक्षत्रयोबहुवचनमन्यतरस्याम् भवति । 
60. And the dual of Phâlguni and Proshtha pada, when signifying asterisms, (also connotes option.. ally plural). 
108 
SOME RULES OF NUMBER. 
[Bk. I. CH. II. $ 61-63. 
. The word y in this aphorism draws in the anuvšitti of the word 14: from the last. Of the stars phalguni and proshthapada, the forms may be either dual or plural. As उदिते पूर्व फल्गन्यो (dual); or उदिताः पूर्वाः फल्गुन्यः (plural.) So also पूरे प्रोष्ठपदे or पूर्वाः प्रोटपदाः॥ There are two pairs of stars of the name of phalgunt and proshthapada, both being of feminine gender, and their logical number being dual.' The present sutra ordains plural optionally. If phalgunt and proshthapada are not names of asterisms they must have their proper number: as फल्गुन्यो माणविके। 
छन्दसि पुनर्वखोरेकवचनम् ॥ ६॥ पदानि । छन्दसि, पुन यस्तोः , एक-वचनम्, ( अन्यतरस्याम् )। 
... इतिः॥इयोस्विचने प्रावे पुनर्वस्वोश्छन्दसि विपये एकवचनमन्यतरस्वां भवति । 
__61. In the Vedas, the two stars, Punarvasu, may opptionally be singular, (and connote a dual). 
In the Vedas, the star punarvast which is always dual in form, may be in the singular form and connote a dual meaning. As a or पुनर्वसू नसनमादितिर्देवता || The option is only allowed in the Vedas and not in profane literature. In the latter it must be in the dual, that is, पुनर्वसू । Similarly when it is not the appellation of an asterism but of a man, there is no option. As पुनर्वसू माणवको. 
विशासयोश्च ॥ ६२ ॥ पदानि ॥ विशाखयोः, घ (छन्दसि, अन्य तरस्याम् ) 
त्तिः ॥ दिवचने प्राने छन्दसि विषये विशाखयोरेकवचनमन्यतरस्या भवति ।। 
62. In the Vedas, the two stars Visakha may optionally be in the singular number. 
The word foruren is in the dual number as a rule. In the Vedas, it is found sometime to 
d sometime to have the singular form, denoting duality. Thus विशखा नसनम् or विशाखे नक्षत्रमिन्द्राग्नी देवता॥ 
तिष्यपुनर्वखोर्नक्षत्रद्वन्द्धे वहुवचनस्य द्विवचनं नित्यम् ॥३॥ पदानि ॥ तिय पुनर्वस्वोः , नक्षत्र-द्वन्द्वे, बहुवचनस्य, द्वि-वचनम्, नित्यम् ॥ 
निः ॥ तिष्यपुनर्वस्वान्तत्रविषयेद्वन्द बहुवचनमसङ्गे नित्यं द्विवचनं भवति॥ . 
63. In the Dvandva ccmpounds of the stars Tishya and Punarvasû, the dual constantly comes in the place of the plural 
When there is a collective compounding of the words Tishya and Punarvasu (meaning two groups of stars), the final compound is always in the dual. Thus affat facugarria 'the Tishya and Punarvasu having risen are seen (dual)' 
Bx. 1. CH. II. $ 64. ] 
EKASESHA." 
109 
There is one star called Tishya; and there are two stars called Punarvasu. As the Dvanda compound of these stars refers to more than two stars, it ought to have been in the plural number. This rule teaches that there should be a dual number, where otherwise there would have been a plural number, Why do we say “Tishya' and 'Punarvasu'? Observe faruregir: 'the stars Visakha and Anuradha. The compound is in plural number. 
This rule would not apply if these words do not connote stars but are used in any other sense. As farsagathaT FUTT:, 'Boys called Tishya and Punarvasus. 
Why is the word 'star' repeated in the sutra, when the previous sûtras and the context show that stars were being treated of. The repetition is for the sake of including the synonyms of Tishya and Punarvasa. As fasaytir; g5997 , foga! 
The rule only applies when these words form a Dvandva compound, and not when they are compounded in any other way. Thus facultat: is an example of Bahuvrihi compound meaning "persons who confound the Tishya with the Punarvasa." 
The rule only applies to the plural Dyandra. If the Dvandva takes the singular termination, this rule has no application. As faragha rara. 
This sútra indicates by implication (jñåpaka) that "every Dvandva compound may optionally take the terminations of the singular" for otherwise the employment of the term Ty in the sûtra would be superfluous. . 
The word 'always' has been used in the text to show that the governing power of " option" stops here with this sûtra and does not extend to it or any further. 
सरूपाणामेकशेष एकविभक्तो ॥६४॥ पदानि । सरूपाणाम्, एक. ETT, -fanmi 
वृत्ति ॥ सरूपा शब्दानां एकविमनी परत एकशेषो भवति । 
64. Of the words having the same form, and all in the same one case-termination, the last one is only retained. 
This is a very important sútra, and deals with what is technically called Ekasesha (or retention of one). When there are two or more words of the same form, and the same case termination, standing together, one is retained and the rest are dropped. Thus TFT:+F:= F (trees, in dual) 29:+ :+ 9:= TGT:. 
Every individual thing requires an individual worl to express it; one word therefore could not express many things; to prevent the repetition of 
110 
EKASESHA. 
. 
(Bk. I. CH. II. & 65: 
the same word to express many objects of similar form, is the purpose of this sútra, by which one word is only retained. 
This applies only to words having the same form and not if they have different forms; as Feart: the plaksha and nyagrodha trees. 
The word " form " is used in the text to show that even if two words have different meanings, but the same form, the rule of Ekaśesha will apply, as अतः (die) +अतः (eye) + अतः (axle)=अक्षाः Similary पादाः and भाषाः . 
The present rule only applies to the retention of one, and prevents the retention of two or more. 
The word tg (retention is used to show that there is not a substitution (ddeśa) of one for many, but the retention of one out of many. 
The rule will not apply if the two words are in different case-termi. nations, though they may have the same form. As (1. s.) TOT (2. s.) Sura; Srcuri (3. d.) TT Thurat (4. d.) TTT. 
शुद्धो यूना तल्लक्षणश्चेदेवविशेषः ॥ ६५ ॥ पदानि ॥ पद्धः, यूना, तत्-लक्षणः, चेद् एव, विशेषः ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ वृद्धोयूनासहवचनेशिष्यते युवानिवर्तते तल्लक्षणोदेव विशेषः । 
65. The vựiddha (or patronymic Gotra word becomes ekašesba, and is retained, when compounded) with a patronymic word called yuvan, provided that the specific difference in form between them be in their sigus (affix) only. 
The word sesha of the previous sätra is understood here. The word "yünå" in the text is in the instrumental case. The yuvan word is dropped when read along with a Vșiddha word. The word Vriddha means gotra: the old acharyas (grammarians) used the word Vriddha for gotra. The vriddha (or in other words, the gotra) word designates a person between whom and original head of the family a son (or a word formed by an apatya affix) inter venes. In using together two words, one formed by a gotra affix and the other by a yuvan asfix, the Vçiddha is retained, where the difference between those words is in their affixes only. These two words gotra and yuvan are defined in sâtras IV.1. 162 and 163. (TRU T ra irtast sitafa O T FT Roughly speaking a gotra word is formed from the original noun which is the name of the head of the family when a son of such person is living; and a vşiddha word represents thus a grandson, or lower than that, but not a son ; while a yuvan word is derived from such last mentioned gotra word by another asfix and thus represents persons lower than grandsons. 
BK. I. CH. II. $ 66. 1 
EKASESHA. 
111 
The word 'tad' in the sätra refers to the gotra and yuvan affixes. The word lakshana 'sign' in the sůtra is synonymous with 'cause' or 'occasion'; meaning the specific difference is caused or occasioned by the gotra and yuvan affixes. The word in the sätra means 'if.' The word gr'only' is used to exclude others. The word fait: in the sätra means the 
dissimilarity of form.' 
Thus गायः+ गाायपः = गाग्यो. Here the first word denotes a clan called Gårgya (the offspring or grandsons of Garga formed by the affix (IV. I. 105) the sccond word denotes a younger branch of the same, and is formed by the Taddhita affix 150 denoting a secondary derivative.' In this then, the first or“Vriddha" remains; the second or the yuyan is dropped ; and the form “Gargyau" means both the old and the new clan. Similary Fa: + Antaret: STEFZ 11 
This Ekaśesha is to be done only in those cases, where the two words have the same radical form, the only difference between them being in their derivative formation. 
The words must differ only by thcir affixes, but their radical element must be the same. The rule therefore does not apply to :- : (a Vriddha 
word(+ वात्स्यायनः (ayuvan word) गार्यवात्स्यायनी।।। 
This rule of ekaśesha does not apply if one of the words be not a Vriddha word. Thus itt: + approirtu:=Tirrerut it 
Similarly vice versa गायः+गर्गः- गार्यगौ । Here the one word is Vriddha, but the other is not yuvan. 
The word " only " is used in the sutra in an exclusive sense, the force being, that two words may stand in the relation of Vriddha and yuvan, their radical element, i.e. form may be the same ; but if the secondary word has another sense over and above the sense of a yuvan affix, this rule is not applicable. Thus Rule IV, 1, 148 says a " Vșiddhå word may optionally take the affix it to form a yuvan word and to indicate contempt and born in the country of Sauvira." Thus roff: +47far := P rerant. Here the second word, though a yuvan word, connotes the additional sense of contempt and degradation. The affix an is not merely a yuvan affix but conveys the other sense also. The pure yuvan word being TTTTTTT: 
N. B. The system of domestic economy among the ancient Aryas was considerably differ ent from the prevalent one. The surnames or the gol ras represented the patriarchal system. Three forms of surnames are constantly met with in ancient literature. The first was most important; st wis the patronymic by which the lord of the united family the patriarch was known. For example, Garga or Gorgácharya was the recognised head of all the Gargas who may be a hundred. His eldest son and hcir was called Gärgi. This is the first form of the patronymic (apatya). The grandsons or sons of Gargi were named Gárgyas (Vriddham or Gotra). On the deceasc of the old patriarch, Gargi began to be called Garga, and the cldest of the grandsons was called Gärgi: And those great grand-sons who belonged to the family, and were designated Gårgayapas (yuvan) were now called Gargyas," 
(') taifeazit ru (") af TN 1 (°) qaraaretig fornu . 
ne 
1 
112 
EKASESHA. 
[BK. I. CH. 11. §. 67. 
स्त्री पुंवच्च ॥६६॥ पदानि ॥ स्त्री, पुंषत्, च (शेषवद्धयूना तल्ल०वि०) इतिः॥ स्त्री वृद्धा यूना सहवचने शिष्यते तल्लतभेदेव विशेषो भवति ।। 
66. And so also a feminine word, ending with a vriddha affix, when similarly spoken along with the same word but which ends with a yurau affix, is only retained ; and it is trcated like a masculine.. 
When a word denoting gotra and in the feminine gender is com pounded with another word denoting a yuvan, the first is retained and the last is dropped; and the feminine noun so remaining is then treated like the masculine. This aphorism makes an addition to the previous sútra and is governed by all the conditions mentioned in that sûtra. Thus r iu: - pt. Here note that the resultant form is the same as in the former sútra namely the masculine. . 
Similarly ait +Tartu:=ERT (masculine dual of Ire). 
Vart-The word stri in the sätra means Vșiddha stri, that is the eldest daughter of a grandson, or a further descendant considered as the female head of the family. The words 'tal lakshanaś chedeva višeshab' of the previous sůtra govern this sûtra also i. c. the distinction between the two words must be in their formative element and not in any thing else. 
gara FFTT Els llacura il gara, fent ( aita: , aw क्षणश्चेदेवविशेषः)॥ - वृत्तिः ॥ स्त्रियासहवचने पुमान् शिष्यते स्त्रीनिवर्तते स्त्री(समतणदेवविशेषो भवति ॥ 
67. A word in the masculine gender, similarly spoken along with the same word, but ending with the feminine affix, becomes ekaśesha, and the latter is dropped. 
When two words of different genders differ only in their derivative elements but not in their radical elements, that is to say, one is masculine and the other feminine because of certain affixes, the masculine only is retained and the feminine is dropped. 
The governing force of the words 'vşiddha' and 'yuran,' of sûtra 65, does not extend to this sůtra, but the remaining portion of sůtra 65 is to be read into this sútra. When a masculine word is read along with a femi nine word, the feminine word is dropped and the masculine is retained, when the difference between the two words is caused only by the feminine and masculine affixes: as m u: + arkut - ATGTU the Brahmana and the Brahmani'; **:+ 
giat. 'the cock and heo.' BK. I: CH. II. $ 68, 69. 1 
EKASESHA. 
113 
But not so in the following:-कुकुटः+मयुरी- कुक्कु टमयूयॉ the cock and the peahen,' Similarly गणकः + गणकी- गणकगणक्यो. Here the feminine affix to, by which the word ganaki is formed from ganaka; in addition to its feminine signification, has the further signification given to it by Rule IV. 1. 48, पुंयोगादाख्यायाम् , meaning the “ wife of" aganaka and not a feminine ganaka3; so also इन्द्रश इन्द्राणी चेन्द्रेन्द्राण्यो| Similarly पार्यः+पार्या-पायो but प्रायः 
आर्याणी - प्राण्यो . Because the feminine affix in aryani conveys more than its feminine signification. See Rule IV. 1. 49. 
This rule does not, of course, apply when it is not a masculine noun which is compounded, but it is a noun without any gender or neuter noua which is compounded with a feminine noun. Therefore प्राक+प्राची प्राकपाग्यो . The word en is an indeclinable and is without any gender.. 
भ्रातपुत्रौ स्वसदुहितृभ्याम् ॥६॥ पदानि ॥ भ्रातृ-पुत्री, स्वस दुहितृभ्याम् , (शेषः)। 
वृत्तिः ॥ ययासंख्यं भ्राहपुत्रद्याद्वौशिष्येते सहवचने स्वसहिदभ्याम् ॥ 
___68. The words bhratri, brother,' and putra, 'son, when spoken of along with svasri, 'sister' and duhitri daughter' respectively are only retained, and the latter are dropped. 
With this sûtra ceases the governing force of the remaining condi tions contained in sûtra 65. Even where the radical elements of two words are different, there may be an ekabesha under special circumstances. Thus भ्राह+स्वर-भ्रातरा (brother and sister or brothers), similarly पुष+ हिद-पुत्री, (son and daughter or sons). 
N. B.-The practical application of this sütra is very neatly illustrated by the following example. There is a verse in Yajñyavalkya smriti पवीहहिताश्व पितरोधातरस्तथा which declares that on the death of a sonless per. son his property passes to his wife, daughters, parents and bhratarah. 
Here the word bhrataraḥ, if it be taken as simply the plural of bhratsi, it means " brothers" and excludes sisters. But if it be interpreted according to this sutra, it means "brothers and sisters"; and thus gives sisters a right to inherit property of their brothers. . . . 
नपुंसकमनपुंसकेनैकवचास्यान्यतरस्याम् ॥ ६९ ॥ पदानि । नपुंसकम् , अनपुंसकेन , एकवत , च, अस्य , अन्यतरस्याम् , (शेष , तल्लक्षणश्चंदेवविशेषः) । 
वृत्तिः ॥ नपुंसकानपुंसकमानकृते विशेषेनपुसंकेन सहवचने नपुंसकशिष्यते; एकवचास्व. काय भवति अन्यतरस्याम् ।। 
114 
EKASESHA. 
[BK. I. CH. $ 70, 7i. 
69. A neuter noun, which has the same form, only differing in affix; is optionally retained, and the other is dropped, and it is like a singular number.' 
A neuter prevails over a masculine or feminine noun when spoken of along with them; provided that the words differ in gender signs only; but radically they be the same. Thus आलस्यो, मैथुन, निद्रा सेव्यमानं विवर्द्धते 'ldleness, lust, and sleep, indulged in, increase.' Here the adjective'sevyamanam' is in the neuter gender, though it qualifies the words 'Alasya' which is in the masculine;'maithunam' which is in the neuter, and 'nidra' which is in the feminine gender. The rule, therefore, may be stated in these words, that where one adjective qualifies several nouns, in different genders, but one of which must be neuter, the adjective agrees with the neuter. 
The above illustration also shows that the neuter ekaśesha may be in the singular number. 
If the neuter is compounded with another neuter, this rule does not apply. Thus U + +USTas the word is in the plural; there is no ekavadbhava. 
The words FFTOP fatt: of sútra 65 governs this sútra also : thus 96 9 , TETAPI, TETE. " The white (masc.) blanket, the white (fem.) wrapper, and the white (neut.) garment," may all be spoken of collectively as # (neut.). 
faat #177 II 90 11 agita u frat, Fiat (ata, priaterra) वृत्तिः ॥ मात्रासह वचने पिटशनः शिष्यते अन्यतरस्यामू 
70. The word pitsi, father' is optionally only retained when spoken of along with mâtri, 'mother.' 
Thus foar + HIGT = fratt, 'father and mother, or parent' or Tartatt. The verse quoted under sutra 68 illustrates this sätra also. There the word 
pitarau' has been explained by all commentators as "father and mother." The word "ekavad" of the last sätra does not govern this sütra ; though the anuvšitti of optionally' is to be read into this. 
Layt: EAT 11990 TIF I tayt:, sanat, (ata, *• ATEITE). 
वृत्तिः। श्वासह वचने श्वशुरशब्दः शिष्यते अन्यतरस्याम्॥ 
71. The word śraśura 'father-in-law,' is op tionally only retained, when spoken of along with śvašrų, mother-in-law.' 
Bk. I. CH. II. $ 71-73.) 
Erasesha. 
. 
115 
Thus T .+Try may be either father-in-law and mother in-law,' or 574TV 
त्यदादीनि सबैर्नित्यम् ॥ १२ ॥ पदानि । त्यद-मादीनि , सबैः, Faiza ( 19 ) 
वृत्तिः॥ यदादीनिशब्दरूपापि सः सहवचने नित्यं शिष्यन्ते स्यदाभिरन्यैश्य। पातिकमू ॥ यदादीनां मियोयत्यतपरंतगाछिप्यते । 
72. The pronouns 'tyad &c.' when spoken of along with any other noun, (pronoun other than 'tyad &c.) are always retained as ekašesha, (to the exclusion, of others). 
The list of 'tyadadi' pronouns has been given under sätra I 1.27. They are 12 words beginning with 'tyad' and ending with kim,' when these tyadadi pronouns are compounded with any other noun, (or a pronoun, which docs not belong to their class), they prevail, the rest are dropped. The word 'sarva' is used in the aphorism to indicate 'universality'; i.e. what eter may be the word in composition with them, the 'tyad &c.' are retained to the exclusion of others. The word 'nitya' is used to indicate that this is an obligatory rule, and not optional, as were the last rules. 
Thus #: (he) +967: (Devadatta)= (they two). . Vart:-When the words are compounded among themselves, the word which is read last in the order given in the Ganapatha remains, the rest are dropped. Thus T:+8=UT; :+ =all Thus ag is read alter ny (see I. 1.27), song will be retained and not at; similarly farm is read after ay, and therefore far is retained to the exclusion of 2L. 
ग्राम्यपशुसंघेष्वतरुणेषु स्त्री ॥ ७३ ॥ पदानि ॥ ग्राम्य-पशु-संऐषु, easy, fit , ( 319: ) 
वृत्तिः । प्राम्या पधूना संघाः माम्यपशुखंघाः एतेषु सह विवक्षायां स्त्री शिष्ववे। af nahramaforogoro 
73. The feminine noun is only retained, when denoting a collection of domestic animals, not being young. 
As a general rule, when there is a compounding of masculine and feminine nouns, the masculine noun is retained (sec 67). The present sútra is an exception to that rulc. It ordains that when there is a com. pounding of words denoting group of domestic animals, of different genders; 
116 
EKASESHA. 
| 
[ Bk. I. CH. II. $ 73. 
the feminine noun is preferred; provided that the words should not relate to the young of such animals. The word 'ataruna' in the aphorism qualifies the word 'pasu' with which it is in construction, and not the word ' sangha.' As TTT FIT: these cows (and bulls).' WAT : 'these goats' (both males and females). 
The rule only applies to domestic (gråmya) animals and not to wild animals; and only to beasts (pasu) and not men. As ET , these wild deers' (male and female), g99 FÀ, 'these antelopes' (male and female), AT HOT:, 'the Brâhmapas' (male and female) FIAT:, 'the Kshatriyas.' In all these, the masculine noun is retained by Rule 67. 
· Vart. This rule must be confined to domestic animals having divided hoof. Therefore IET A, 'these horses' (male and female). Here the masculine noun is retained, because horse has no divided loof. 
Why have we used the word (sangha) "collection"? Observe gat #TA:, these two cows are grazing. Here the word 'gåvau' does not connote 'bull' also. 
Why do we say “not being young."? AT 5 'these. calves'; t these kids.' Here the masculine noun is retained, by the applica tion of Rule 67. 
a 
ओ३म् ll 909772270757 erity: OTG: Il 
BOOK I. Chapter III. 
arcat oraa: 1 9 11 azifa u rea-: , uraa: . वृत्तिः ॥ भू इत्येवमादयः शब्दा क्रियावचना धातुसंज्ञा भवन्ति ।। 
1. The words beginning with bhû to become,' and denoting action, are called dhâtu or verbal roots. 
This defines the word dhatu or root. The list of Sanskrit verbs begins with the root bha 'to be.' Sanskrit grammarians have divided all verbs into ten classes, according to certain modifications which their roots undergo before certain terminations. The ten classes are as follows: 
1. Bhd class. 2. Ad. 3. Hu. 4. Div. 5. Su. 6. Tud. 7. Rudh. 8. Tan. 9. Kr. 10. Chur, 
There are nearly two thousand verbs, and they are conjugated in two forms, some taking the Parasmaipada terminations only, the others the Atmancpada terminations and some both. The present chapter deals mostly with rules determining the nature of the verbal root, whether it is Parasmaipadi or Atmanepadi or both. A verb expresses action. The word dhatu is a word coined by older granmarians than Panini and they employed the term in denoting a word expressing action. Here also therefore, the word dhatu means a word which expresses action. 
The al in the sûtra is for the sake of auspiciousness; for the regular sandhi of + sie is nie and not fe ; while Dr. Ballantyne considers that 
is a scparate root: he translates the sutra thus :- Let the verbal roots bha .be,' và 'blow' and the like be called dhatu." 
Faqat sa aifo all Ruaifa u go, re, arfa*: , # 
#: 11 348 tua saafat 3979, Tra fa ET: Faro TT a gai का स इस्संतो भवति।। 
2. The nasalized vowels are sy in Upadeśa, or original enunciation. 
118 
INDICATORY LETTERS, 
A 
1 PTT 
komand 
[BK. I. CH. III. $ 3, 4. 
Anunåsika or nasalized vowels are that is indicatory, when occur ring in technical words. Thus in thr, A,Fay the anunåsika is The original sätra contains the word 'upadesa' which we have translated as technical term. "Upadesa' literally means 'instruction or the first mentioning of a thing either in a sülrapatha, or ganapicha or dhatupåcha &c. 
From this sutra up to sötra o, there is a description of servile or indi catory letters called as “In Pånini's Grammar there is no visible sign of the nasality of a vowel hence we can know a vowel to be nasalized only from Pipini's explicitly asserting that it is so, or from our finding that he treats it in such a way that we must conclude he regarded it as nasal." An upadeśa is defined as signifying an original cnunciation, that is to say, an affix (pratyaya), or an augment (agama), or a verbal root (dhatu), or in short, any form of expression which occurs only in technical treatises of grammar, and which is not a word ready for usc, but one of the supposed original elements of a word. Thus in the root y' to increase,' the final pis indicatory, the real root is 4. So also the final wory is 
s If the word is not an upadesa, then the nasal vowel is not 3771 As 
34:11 A word may be an upadeśa and nasal, but if it is not a vowel, it need not be as the affix f in sötra III. 2. 74.( 697 
) - It is only the nasal vowel of an upadesa that becomes , and not all the vowels. The word occurs is sutras V. 2. 16. ( N &c.). 
हलन्त्यम् ॥ ३ ॥ पदानि ॥ हल्-अन्त्यम्, ( उपदेशे इत् ) T: 1) FT: geratz 20i frana u 
3. In upadesa, the final consonant of roots &c. 
is 
. 
All the final consonants of roots, asfixes &c. arc indicatory. As in the pratyahara sutras saइए; here is इत् । स न क; here is इत् ।। ए भोज here is an y ; hcreen is ! It is only in upadcéa, that a final consonant is . Not therefore, in afara or an, which are complete words. 
न विभक्ती तुस्माः ॥४॥ पदानि ॥ न विभक्ती, तु-स्-माः । fatin STATUTinat 
f a rat e HaT raf afax 
. 
* 
ble 
Aw 
4. The final dental consonants, and the final , and , are not m, in affixes called vibhakti or inflective affixes, 
BK. I. CH. III. $ 5.] 
INDICATORY LETTERS. 
119 
This is an exception to the previous sůtra which declared all final consonants to be . In case terminations, the final , 4,4,4, 1, G, and , are not . Thus the case termination of nominative plural is yrę. Here the finalą, though a consonant is not an ; and is not rejected, as in HTGUT: 11 The word g in the sätra means the letters of the class a, by virtue of sůtra 69 Chapter I. (see ante). The word vibhakti will be defined later on in sûtra I. 4. 104. These are terminations applied to nouns in declining them through various cases; and to verbs in conjugating them. Thus in sätra VII. 1. 12, 
टाइसिडसामिनास्याः ) the vibhaktis इन, प्रात् and ka replace टा, सि andr. Here the final a of the affix is not indicatory and hence not rejected, as Th . Similarly verbal terminations तस् and यस् as पचतः, पचयः॥ So also the inal म् as नाम् and तम् in अपचताम् and अपवतम् ।। 
This exception applies only to ribhaktis and not to affixes in gcncral. Thus the finals of u(III. .97 T27;) ja (V. 2. 123 sutarze) and (III. 1. 78 FIT #I) are and are rejected. This exception, however docs not apply to the vibhakti ein V. 3. 12 farsą or III. 4. 106, 11). Ia those two sâtras the final a of the vibhakti is . The reason of this is, that the present sätra is an anitya sútra, i.e. a rule not of general application. Im sûtra V. 3. 24, (TEHUS :) we find, the word hy takes the vibhakti og in the sense of mode or manner.' As T +45* , 'in this manner. Now I is a vibhakti by V. 3. 1. (grafout fruft) the ris , the real vibhakti is g. Now had the present sätra been of universal application, then there would have been no necessity of adding this as indicatory letter, which has been evidently added to save the T of yr from becoming an T. This sätra is con sequently an anitya sätra. 
erifericea: 15u acila u ne: , fa-7-54, (ra) « वृत्तिः ।। 
मिड इत्ये तेपा समुदायानामादितो वर्तमानानामिसंता भवन्ति ।। 
5. The initial ñi, tu, and qu are II The syllables Fy, and 3, standing at the beginning of a root are indi. catory; as flage' to have affectionate pleasure. The real root is fore, the fa is servile. So cafe 'to rejoice, be glad' the real root being 7. So 'to give the real root being T. 
The show's that the past participle has the power of the present III. 2. 187 (fra: 7:). As fo r : 'blown'; FAPTE- T: ' fat'; font 'bold,' 14--17:' soft,' - 'kindled.' 
The subjoined to a root serves to show that it admits the affix y to form a noun indicative of the act (III. 3. 89 fast); asig shaking'; - y: swelling.' 
The indicates that the root to which it is subjoined admits of the affix fry (111. 3. 88, fşa: f:) to form a noun or adjective atributive of the act 
120 
INDICATORY LETTERS. 
(Bk. I. Ch. III. $ 6,7. 
by which the substantive thing has been produced, as m ana' artificial' 
T -715T * ripe'; -77 sown.' 
If these three syllables do not stand in the beginning of a verb, they are not indicatory; as पयति, कण्डूयति &c. 
पः प्रत्ययस्य ॥ ६॥ पदानि ॥ षः, प्रत्ययस्य, ( आदि इत्) ॥ पत्निः ॥ पकारः प्रत्ययस्यादिरित्संतो भवति ॥ 
6. The initial g of an affix is indicatory. 
The initial y of an affix gets the name of my and is rejected. Thus by Rule III. 1. 145 (Furf 7) the affix 5 is added to a verb to indicate proficient in the art expressed by the verb. Theç and it are TI and was takes the place of (VII. 1. I, Fart). Thus +=+ana: 'a dancer' (by profession);' fem. That (IV. 1.41, FITANT 'words formed by affixes having an indicatory q take the affix it in the feminine.') : so also रजक: fem. एमकी. 
The initial q of an affix only is 57 and not every initial . Thus not in mo 'six,' or afspill The must be initial, therefore it is not in the affix ferry in s hanty. (Un I. 45) as fy: 'an ocean' afer: 'a buffalo.' 
चुटू ॥७॥ पदानि । घु-टू (प्रत्ययस्य आदिः , इत् )। f i n quereret privat : 
7. The initial palatals and linguals of an affix are indicatory. 
The consonants 1.0, 1,4, 1, 2, 5, and q are always and are rejected when initial in affixes. The word 'affix' of the previous sútra governs this also. 
As the affix + chphañ in sůtra (IV. 1.98 n a far ) Herc qis indicatory, as, alergy: II The initial chh of an affix is always replaced by ईय (VII. I. 2 प्रायनेयीनीयियः फट खच्या प्रत्ययादीनाम). The initial ज्ञ of an affix is . As. R (Nom. Pl. term.) ATHUI:ll The initial of an affix is always re placed by strą, as *+ T9 +# * 1 (VII. 1. 3 år s-a:). The initial of an affix is इतू as in ज्य which comes after the words पण्डिक &c. As पाण्डिक्यः (IV.3.92 ufuatilia:). The indicatory I causes rşiddhi by rules VII. 2. 115, 116 and 117: (arafofa, HITUTUT:, afgaste :). 
The initialt of an affix is TI as in III. 2. 16 (the root uç takes the affix z when compounded with a noun in the locative! As FT:' who goes among the Kurus.' The feminine of words formed by this affix take atqiIV. 1.15 FSETTECH &c.) As 90, nt . The initial of an affix is always replaced by: # (VII. 3. So Ef :.) The initial y of an Oifice is it, as in III. 2. 97 ( 
Feat stats: the root takes the affix * when in composition 
Bk. I. CH. III. § 8. ] 
INDICATORY LETTERS. 
121 
with a word in the locative, as TACT:, :. They indicates that the final of the word called should be elided when an affix having indicatory di is added. The initial of an affix is replaced by T (VII. 1. 2). 
The letter is always an when initial. As in the aphorism IV. 4 85 ( lo:) the affix u comes after the word 'food. As + :. The o causes Vriddhi. 
This sütra could very well have been included in the last aphorism. Why has it then been made a separate aphorism ?. The reply is that the present sûtra declares an anitya rule--that is to say, a rule which is not uni versally true. The initial palatal or lingual of every affix is not indicatory. Thus in the affixes and are the initial is not indicatory but forms part of the real affix. As for at foarta: 'famous for one's learning.' See S. V. 2. 26 da 
f 
u t. Similarly the initial of the affix trg (V. 2.31 VATTESETTET, Taaraatar: tigrut ATE :), is not it. As a 'flat nosed. 
Of course it is the initial palatal and lingual which are servile; if ese letters occur in the middle of an affix, they will not be indicatory. As 8 of the affix star is not indicatory in søtra V. 2. 35 ( A às) **: 
dexterous. 
garafga 11cl1 afar Il G-TF, afga, ( HR14K, BF: ya) 
वृत्ति ॥ नदितवर्जितस्य प्रत्ययस्यादितो वर्नमाना लकार एकार कवर्गा इत्संज्ञा भवन्ति ।। 
- 8. The initial 1 and ś, and the gutturals of all affixes, except taddhita, are indicatory. 
The initial , , , , 1, 2, of affixes are indicatory, except in Taddhita asfixes. Thus the initial in Fer is (III. 3115 F T 1) + 
979 (VII. II) collecting. The initial y in TT is (III. 1 68 ft TT) *+179 +PTT = 1 +8+fo= fa'he is.' The initial ais as in and on (1. 1. 26), as : eating' it. The initial is ng as in y(III. 2. 38 प्रियव पदः खचू the word पद takes the affix khach when compounded with प्रिय and ET) int: 'speaking kindly' 079: 'submissive.' The initial T is r as in the affix TFT (III. 2. 139 GIFT IFT), Greg: 'languid' forg: ' victorious,' FUTET: 'unmoveable. The initial ç is l as in IT (III. 2. 161 amatuet grt) **+977 TL brittle. The initial is TL, as in fe (termina tion of the ablative sing.) e ditto of genitive sing. (IV. 1 2), as 948+ 79= + = 7:' of a well minded.' In Taddhita affixes however, these initials ou and gutturals are not t; and are therefore not clided. Thus 31+5*ETTA: (V. 2. 96 arforurerat optrerearg) 'crested'; wir + 
122 
A RULE OF ASSIGNMENT. 
[ BK. I. CH. III. $ 9, 1o. 
-14: (V. 2. 100 Film Tento piani "hairy ;' +*7 * : IV. 3.-81-86 HTT#: *1)'a small tree.' 
. a ota: 119 ustfa il asi, ota:,( a ) ! वृत्तिः ॥ तस्येसंज्ञकस्य लोपो भवति ।। 
9. Of this, (namely of that which has been called ra), there is elision. 
This sûtra declares the function of Fl; namely it is a mere indicatory letter, and must be rejected. It is useful only as a mpemonic and is not a part of the term. 
The word tasya in the sůtra indicates that the substitution of lopa must be in the place of the whole term called I, and not only in the place of the final letter, which last is the general rule (see. I. 1 52). Therefore, the whole of fit, I and 3 is rejected and not only their finals. 
991 got: papa 1 90 asta I 79-99, erat:, GATE . वृत्तिः ॥ समानां समसंख्यानां समपरिपडितानामुशिनामनुदेशिनां च यया क्रममुहोशभिरनुरेशिनः 
part II 
10. When a rule involves the case of equal numbers of substitutes and of things for which these are to be substituted, their mutual correspondence or assign ment of each to each, is according to the order of euum. eration. 
Thus sätra III. 1 134 ( T erm Ffury:) declares: the affixes y, forfa and I are applied to af, afe and you class of words.' It means the affix Fy is applied to the words of class, the affix fofa to words of Art class, and to words of 17 class. The application must be respec tively according to order, and not hap-hazard. Similarly in VI. 1 27 hit qun (if a vowel follows) in the place of 5, 7, 1, there is Ti.e.,,,a, 
So also see S. IV. 3. 94 (keturirgthan ERTEC ET EL.:) where the four affixes dhak, chhan dhan, and yak are applied respectively to the words tudi, salatura, varmati and kůchavåra ; * e., the first affix in the order of enumeration to the first word, the second affix to the second word &c. As atoui, urmatta, rag: and area : 11 
Why do we say 'of equal members'? This rule will not apply if the number of substitutes and of things for which these are to be substituted are unequal. As in sůtra l. 4. 90 PUT arcar tratar afa eit: for here the words lakshapa &c. in the first part of BK. I. CH. III. $ 11, 12.] 
ATMANEPADA VERBS. 
123 
the sůtra are four in number, while the words prati &c. are only three. That sútra therefore must be read as thus. “The words ofa, eft and are karma pravachaniya, whenever they indicate either lakshapa (a mark), itthambhuta. khyana (a statement of mere circumstance); bhåga (division); or vipså (desire)." 
BritaniaTT: 1998 apyfa il rafata, fart: # far I FARTIN TA FITOTT TUTAR Perant difast. It 
11. In these aphorisms, when a word is marked with a svarita accent, by that an adhikåra or a 
governing rule is to be understood. 
When in this collection of grammatical sůtras, there is any sůtra that has a circumflex accent, it denotes that it is either the beginning of a subject and the subsequent sůtras are governed by it, or that it eads a sub ject and separates the previous sûtras from the following. 
As a rule, the sůtras are not marked with accents; it is therefore from commentaries that one has to learn whether a sutra has a syarita or not. Thus the following sätras, must evidently have svarita as they are go verning sůtras; 1844: (III. 11.) yrat: (Ill. 1. 91), FT (VI. 4. 1), FH (VI. 4. 129). 
अनुदात्तड़ित आत्मनेपदम् ॥ १२॥ पदानि ॥ अनुदात-इ-इतः आत्मनेपदम् ॥ 
वृत्तिः। भनुदात्तेती ये धातवो हितश्च तेभ्य एव भास्मनेपदं भवति नान्येभ्यः । 
12. After a root which has an indicatory anu dåtta vowel anudattet) or an indicatory n (uit), the affixes are those of the Atmanepada. 
The word 'atmanepada' here governs all the subscquent sútras up to sû. 77 inclusive, and is understood in them all; and will not therefore be re peated. Thus of the verb sa the final is anudatta and is Ft. It is there fore an atmanepadi verb. As अस्ति. Soपा-सूने, धीगोते. 
HTTF#ut: 11 93 laifa li Hra-muti, (echn977) पत्तिः ॥ भावे कर्मणि चात्मनेपदम् भवति । 
13. An atmanepada affix is the substitute of the afix a(III. 4. 69) when it denotes the action of the verb or the object of the verb. 
Sätra III. 4. 69 declares the “letter Home For &c.,) is placed after transitive verbs in denoting the object also as well as the agent; and after intransitives in marking the condition (ie., the action itself which the verb imports) also as well as the agent." The Paras. and Atman. asfixes would 
124 
ATMANEPADA VERBS. 
[ Bk. I. CH. IIJ. $ 13, 14. 
have come, therefore, generally after all these verbs. The present sätra res tricts Atman. affixes to bhava and karma verbs. 
This is clear. Impersonal verbs and passive verbs as a rule are conju gated in the atmanepada and take the terminations of that pada. These ori. ginally were verbs expressive of states rather than of actions. As of Ty we have marad a 'you dislike (lit. 'it is disliked by you', yaa war you sleep.' Similarly passive verbs as finya m 'the mat is made'i ffadt TT: 
the load is carried.' 
All verbs in Sanskrit may have three voices vis. active, passive, and middle or impersonal; active voice is generally parasmaipada. The reflexive verbs known as कर्म कर्तरि are also atmanepadi. Thus लयते केदार स्वयमेव 'the wood cuts of itself.' See sätra 78. 
कर्तरि कर्म व्यतिहारे ॥ १४॥ पदानि ॥ कर्तरि, कर्म-व्याति 12 H ( praat 977) 
वृत्तिः ।। कर्म व्यतिहारे तदिघिट क्रिया वचनाद्धातोरात्मनेपदं भवति ।। 
14. In denoting the agent, when reciprocity of action is to be expressed, the affixes of the Atmane pada are employed. . 
The active or negarea verbs when denoting reciprocal action are åtmanepadi. As, saraya, 'they cook for each other,' safaga he performs cutting of wood which was the appropriate office of another. ; 
The words “reciprocity or interchange of action" of this sûtra govern and are understood in the two following sůtras also. 
The word karma in the sůtra means action and not the technical karma meaning 'object' and the word vyatihara means reciprocity or interchange. When an action which was appropriate to one person is performed by another, whose duty it was not, that is called interchange of action. When such in terchange is not meant Paras. is used. As gafar they cut.' The word kartari here is used for the sake of the subscquent aphorism 78, which see. 
a ofa fear : 11 94 u actra 11 a, fa-f t- ta: ( आत्मनेपदम् कर्मव्यतिहारे) ॥ 
वृतिः।। गत्ययेभ्यो हिंसायेंभ्यश्च धानुभ्यः कर्म व्यतिहारे भात्मनेपदं न भवति ।। वार्निकम् ॥ प्रतिषेधो हसादीनामुपसंख्यानम् ॥ पार्मिकम् ॥ हरतेरपतिषेधः॥ 
15. After verbs having the sense of motion,' or injury,' when expressing interchange of action the Atmancpada affixes are not used. 
BK. I. CH. III. $ 16, 17.) 
THE ATMANEPADA VERBS. 
125 
This aphorism prohibits Atmanepada affixes in certain cases where by force of the last sätra Atmanepada affixes would have been obtained. As 
grata they go against each other,' ufafara they injure each other." safarza 'they fight together.' 
The word 'not' of this satra is understood in the subsequent sutra. 
Vart. This prohibition extends to the verbs to laugh,' and the rest. As bafael, Estrypa, wafarafl 
Vart.-Prohibition must be made of the verbs stra'to injure,' as 
इतरेतरान्योन्योपपदाच ॥ १६ ॥ पदानि ॥ इतर-इतर, अन्यः अन्यः, उपपदात्, च, ( कर्मव्य० आत्मने न)॥ 
त्तिः । इतरेतरोन्योन्य इत्येवमुपपदाद्धातो. कर्मव्यतिहारे पालनेपदं न भवति।। वार्तिकम् ।। परसरोपपदाधेवि वक्तव्यम् ।। 
16. And after the verbs which take the words itaretara 'each other, and anyonya 'one another,' as upapada (or dependant qualifying words), the affixes of 
be denoted. 
Thus इतरेतरस्य व्यति लुनन्ति : they cut each other' अन्योन्यस्य व्यतिलुनन्ति "they cut one another.' 
Vart.-This rule must also be applied when the word Tit is in com. position with the verb, as an upapada. As TTFETTET Efen. 
Afeg: 11 969 II afifa u a:, fazt, ( Chan ) वृत्तिः।। परस्मा विश आमनेपदं भवति । 
17. After the verb vis 'to enter,' when pre ceded by the preposition ni, the Atmanepada affixes are employed. 
As faufa'he enters,' but fafandt "he enters in.' 
Even when the augment of the Imperfect, Aorist and Conditional tenses intervenes between the root and the preposition, terminations are or the åtmanepada. As referua 'he entered in.' 
The fa of the sůtra must be an upasarga, because that has a sense, and not any नि. On this there is this paribhasha :-अर्थवाहणे नानर्यकस्य ". combination of letters capable of expressing a meaning denotes, whenever it is employed in grammar that combination of letters in so far as it possesses that meaning, but it does not denote the same combination of letters void of a meaning." Thus in a fauf WATT: 'the beetles enter the honey flowers.' 
126 
THE ATMANEPADA VERBs. 
[BK. I. CH. III. 
18, 19. 
Here the fo is a part of the word hy and has no sense by itself, and there fore the verb is in the Parasmaipada and not in the Atmanepada. 
. परिव्यवेभ्यः क्रियः ॥ १८ ॥ पदानि ॥ परि-वि-अवेभ्यः, क्रिया, 
(आ०)॥ 
वृत्तिः॥परिग्यवेभ्य उत्तरान् क्रीणारात्मनेपदं भवति ॥ 
18. After the verb kri 'to purchase,' when preceded by pari, vi or ava, the Atmanepada affix is em ployed, even when the fruit of the action does not accrue to the agent. 
The verb ta 'to buy or barter,' has an indicatory and therefore, by sätra 72 it will be Atmanepadi when the fruit of the action accrues to the agent. The present sútra, therefore, refers to cases wliere the fruit of the action does not accrue to the agent. 
The root wit' to buy as a general rule takes the terminations of both padas, but when it is preceded by pari, vi, or ava, it is restricted to Atmane. pada terminations. As ftatutà 'he buys'; Fantota 'he sells'; vastuta 'he buys.' 
The word pari, vi, and ava must be upasargas, therefore, in the follow. ing example, there is no Atmanepada termination, because the vi there, is not 
a preposition but a noun, as, बहविक्रीणाति वनम् .. 
विपराभ्यां जेः ॥ १९ ॥ पदानि ॥ विपराभ्याम् , जेः (आ० ) ॥ वृत्तिः।। वि परा पूर्वान्जयतेर्धातोरात्मनेपदं भवति । 
19. After the verb ji 'to conquer,' preceded by vi or parå, the Atmanepada afix is employed." 
This sůtra debars S. 78 by which the root f# is generally Paras maipadi. 
As विजयते 'he conquers' पराजयते 'he conquers.' The words vi and para must be upasargas (prepositions), for the application of this rule. In the following examples, they are used as substantives बहुविजयति वनम् , 
परा जयति सेना॥ 
आङो दोग्नास्य विहरणे ॥ २० ॥ पदानिः ॥ आङः, दः, अना• स्य-विहरणे, ( आ०)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ प्राङ् पूर्वाहतातेरनास्यविहरणे वर्तमानादात्मनेपदं भवति ।। वार्तिकम् । भारयविहरणसमानकितादपि प्रतिषेधो वक्तव्यः॥ वार्तिकम् ।। स्वाङ्ग कर्मकाथेति वक्तव्यम् ।। 
BK. I. CH. III. & 20, 21.) 
THE ATMANEPADA VERBS. 
127 
20. After the verb då 'to give,' preceded by ån, and when not meaning 'to open the mouth,' the At manepada affix is used, even when the fruit of the action does not accrue to the agent. 
The root gris generally both Parasmaipadi and Atmanepadi (see S. 72) But when preceded by the preposition T, it is restricted to the atamanepada As fartat 'he acquires knowledge. But when it means "to widen the mouth" whether actually or metaphorically, it is parasmaipadi. As OTEO ज्याददाति. 'He expands his own mouth.' 
Vart:-The prohibition also applies when the action is similar to the act of opening the mouth. As farferant sare 'he opens the tumour.' कूल व्यावदाति नदी 'the river breaks the bank.' 
.. Vart:-When the action does not affect the agents' own body the verb is atmanepadi, as ध्याददतेपिपीलिकाः पतंगस्थ मुखम् , ' 'the ants open the mouth of a locust.' 
__क्रीडोग्नुसंपरिभ्यश्च ॥ २१ ॥ पदानि ॥ क्रीडः , अनु-सम्-परिम्यः , घ , ( आज: , आत्मने प०) 
इत्तिः ।। क्रीडा विहार एतस्मादू अनुसम्परि इत्येवं पूर्वा भाङ्क पूर्वाधालने पर भवति ।। पातिकम् ।। समोश्कलने इति वक्तव्यम् ।। वातिकम् ॥ पागमेः क्षमायामारमने पदं वक्तव्यम् । वार्तिकम् ॥ शिक्षेजिज्ञासायाम् ॥ पातिकम् ॥ आशिषिनाथः।। वासिकम् ॥ हरतेर्गतताच्छील्ये॥ . . वातिकम् ॥ किरतेहर्षजीविका कुजायकरणेविति वक्तव्यम्। वार्तिकम् ॥ आडिनुमच्छोरुपसंख्यानम् ॥ वार्तिकम् ।। शप उपालम्भन इति वक्तव्यम् ।। 
21. After the verb krid 'to play' preceded by anu, sam or pari, as well as aú, the Atmanepada affix is used. . The word "भाडू" is to be read into the sutra by virtue of the conjunc tion च in the text. As पाक्रीडते संक्रीडते अनुक्रीडते, or परिक्रीडते 'heplays. 
Vart. When the verb mis compounded with I means 'to make a rattling or creaking noise,' it does not take atmanepada terminations. As संक्रीडन्ति शकटानि 'the carts rattle or creak.' The word anu, pari &c., being taught along with sam, indicates that the upasargas anu, pari &c., are to be taken, and not the karmapravachaniya anu pari &c. Therefore, when these prefixes are used as karmapravachaniya, they do not cause the verb mir to 
128 
THE ATMANEPADA VERBS. [ Bk. I. CH. III. & 21-22. 
take the atmanepada terminations as U gaitafa I'he plays in imitation of the boy.' For the definition and action of karmapravachaniya, see, I. 4.-83 and II. 3. 8. 
Vart.-The verb Sitty takes the atmanepada terminations when mean. ing 'to wait for', 'to over look' 'to have patience'as, w71TET HTEST 107961 * Have patience with thc boy.' 
Vart. The verb for takes åtmanepada terminations, when meaning 'to enquire':-as, facra forera 'he investigates sciences.in. 
Vart. The verb aty when meaning 'to bless,' takes atmanepada terminations, as, art ard 'he blesses with clarified butter.' mynt Trya I Why do we say 'when meaning to bless?' Observe, FUTarafa, 'he begs of Manavaka.' 
Vart.The verb era takes åtmanepada terminations when meaning to take after the nature of the parents. As 
t ar 45 'the horses resemble their father.' PR E TSET the cows always imitate their mother.' But when not having this meaning, we have to gofa'he resembles his mother.' 
Vart.-The verb farfa. takes åtmanepada terminations when meaning 'to scratch out or scatter with joy, for abode or food.' As 89frica वृषभो हरः 'the happy bull scratches with joy:' अपस्किारते कुछटो भक्षार्थी “the cock scratches in search of food,' stylFPTO ITS Surf the dog scratches to make his abode. When not having these senses we have fata 'he scatters about the flowers. The dental in apaskirate is added by sätra VI. 1. 142. 879TEGOTE fordell 
Vart.-The verbs q 'to cry' and real 'to ask' take the atmanepada terminations when preceded by the preposition gre, as yoga as'the jackal howls.' Hyesa Tat'he questions the Guru.' 
Vart.-The verb ug when meaning 'to touch the body by the word' takes åtmanepada affixes. As 997ra 'he promises by oath to Devadatta.' Otherwise we have unfo 'he curses. 
Thagrata : 1177 11 agfa n 94-97a-9-fata: , : u इतिः ।। सम् अव मवि इत्येवं पूर्वात तिष्ठते रात्मनेपदं भवति॥ वार्तिकम् ॥माडन स्थः प्रतितान इति वनग्यम् ।। 
22. After the verb sthå'to stand,' preceded by sam, ara, pra, ri, the Atmanepada afix is used. 
As xifaaat'he stays with,' gafagh 'he waits patiently,' sfard'he sets forth,' faragh'te stands apart.' 
BK. I. CH. III. 
23-25.] 
THE ATMANEPADA VERBS. 
129 
Vart.-The verb rept when preceded by are and meaning 'solemn declaration' takes atmanepada terminations; as भस्ति संस्कारमारमातिष्ठते ॥ Or to take another example, जलं विषं वा तव कारणादास्थास्ये 'for thee I shall surely have 
recourse to water or poison.' 
प्रकाशनस्थेयाख्ययोश्च ॥२३॥ पदानि ॥ प्रकाशन-स्थेय-आख्ययोः, च, ( स्था, आलने०)। 
. वृत्तः ॥ प्रकाराने स्येयाण्यायां च तिष्ठतेरात्मनेपदं भवति । 
23. After the verb sthå when meaning 'to, indicate one's intentions to another,' or 'to make-an Cásváidagi an arbitrator,' the Atmanepada affix is em 
ployed. 
The word prakasana means disclosing one's intentions. The word stheyåkhya is a compound of stheya .arbitrator' and åkhya 'name.' 
LAs तिष्ठते जायापत्ये 'the wife expresses her wish to the husband,ववि तिष्ठते , ' he refers to thee for settlement,' संद्यम्य कर्णादिषु तिटते यः, 'who, when he is in doubt, has recourse to Karpa as his judge or umpire.' 
उदोऽनूर्ध्वकर्मणि ॥२४॥ पदानि ॥ उदः, अनूर्व-कर्मणि, (स्था , आत्मनेपदम् )। 
त्तिः ॥ उतू पूर्वात् तिष्ठते रनुर्वकर्मणि वर्तमानादात्मनेपः भवति। वार्तिकम् ।। उद ईहायामिति वक्तव्यम् ।। 
24. After the verb sthå, preceded by ut, when not meaning 'to get up or rise,' as from a seat; the At manepada afix is employed. 
The word 'karma' in this aphorism means'action,' and does not mean the grammatical karma or object.' 
As गेहे उत्तिष्ठते 'he strives for the house' so also कुटुम्ने उत्तिष्ठते ॥ But भासनादत्तिष्ठति ' he rises up from the seat' 
Vart.-The force of the preposition ut must be to express T, 'effort, exertion, wish or desire, to surprise or excell.' I this be not the force of ut, the terminations are those of the Parasmaipada. As अस्माद मामान घसमनिष्ठवि ' a hundred is yielded by this village. The word ter qualifies the word Canürdhakarmani,' and does not debar the latter. 
उपान्मन्त्रकरणे ॥ २५ ॥ पदानि ॥ उपात् , मन्त्र-करणे, (स्था, आ० प०)॥ 
वृत्तिः । उपपत्तिष्ठतेमन्त्रकरणेयें वर्तमानादात्मनेपदं भवति । पातिकम् ।। उपादेवपूजासंगति करणमिनी करणपथिविवि वाच्यम् ॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ वा लिप्सायामिति वक्तव्यम् । 
i30 
The ATMANEPADA VERBS. 
(Bk. I. CH. III. $ 25-27. 
25. After the verb sthå, preceded by upa, when meaning 'to adore,' the Atmanepada affix is used. 
As - Teenaga'he approaches with prayers or worships the Garhapatya fire with aindra hymns.' 
If it does not mean praising with hymns' the terminations which the verb takes, are those of the Parasmaipada, as parturaura tartashe ap proaches the husband through youth.' 
Vart.-The verb RT after the preposition 59 takes the terminations of the atmanepada when meaning worshipping a deity,' 'to approach for in tercourse or uniting or joining,''to form friendship with,' and 'to lead to as a way.' Thus:-Ist Deva puja c araca'he worships the Aditya.' 2. Sangati karana पतिमुपतिष्ठते नारी the wife approaches the husband,' रथिकानुपतिष्ठते 
• forms union with charioteers.' 3. Mitri karana hranang art: the good man approaches the saints to make friends with.' What is the difference bet ween Sangati-karapa and Jitri-karana ? Sangati-karana means drawing near and approaching together in space, as ITTF raga "the Ganges joins the Jumna. While the friendly relations may be established without coming in physical contact. 4. Patha:- O TIT: Jatragat'this road leads to Srughna. 
Vart. It must be stated that the Atmanepada is optional when the sense is ' desire of getting. As भिक्षुको माझाकुलमुपतिष्ठते or उपतिष्ठति 'a beggar waits at the palace of a Brahmapa with the desire of getting something.' 
**979 1980 ograr ll 3797ra, 9, (59 FOT HONO)u बत्तिः ।। उपपर्वात तिष्ठतेरकर्मकादकर्मकक्रियावचनापारमनेपदं भवति ।। 
26. After the verb sthå, preceded by upa, when used intransitively, the Atmanepada afix is used. 
As भोजनकाले उपतिष्ठते 'he stands ready at the time of dinner,' यावदभुक्तमु पतिष्ठते 'he is present whenever it is dinner time,' यावदोदनमुपतिष्ठते 'he is present whenever there is food, that is he comes at the time of dinner. The word bhukta is formed by adding the affix kta to the root, and has the force of 
condition' here. 
The phrase 'when used in the Intransitive' governs the three suc ceeding sâtras also. 
If it is transitive; the verb upasthå takes the parasmaipada termina tions. As craraquara 'he approaches the king.' 
femi au: 1 39 nagyfa il TC-famum, : , ( ** Are To Do ) 
निः॥उ विइत्येवं पूर्वान तरतरकर्मकक्रियावचनादात्मनेपदं भवति ॥ ... 
*** 11 1916 tarefa Total 
BK. I. CH. III. & 27, 28. ] 
The ATMANEPADA VERBS. 
181 
27. After the verb tapa 'to shine,' when used intransitively, and preceded by ut or vi the Atmanepada affix is employed 
. As 3792 or fraga fra Frut. The scholar shines with knowledge.' But in transitive verbs, it is Parasmaipèdi. As fa un TC:, 'the gold smith heats the gold,' ferma afar 'the sun heats the back." 
Vart. It must be stated that the terminations are of the atmanepada, though the verb ut-tapa or vi tapa be transitive, when the object is some limb of one's own body. As nyafore or feragation or the heats his own hand or back' The word fly means one's own body and not the paribhashika or the techinical FI meaning " a thing which not being liquid or gaseous and being capable of being perceived by the senses, and not being one produced by a change from the natural state, exists in a living being and though sound elsewhere actually or at any particular tinie, had previously been known as existing in only a living being, or is found to have actually (not figuratively) the same relation to the being it is in, as a similar thing has to a living being." (Sec. IV. 1. 54 Filgreitaimerintah Therefore not so in the following TT TETTES 79 Fyra 'Devadatta heats the back of Yajña datta. When the preposition is other than ut or vi, parasmaipada affix is employed; as, freyfa. 
आडोयमहनः ॥ २८॥ पदानि ॥ आङः, यम-हनः, (अकर्मकात् OTTO CO ) 
वृत्तिः ॥ यम उपरमे, हन हिंसागत्योः । ताभ्यामकर्मकक्रिया वचनाम्यामा पूर्वाभ्यामात्मने. 98 Tata 
28. After the verb yam to stop,' and han'to 
the Atmanepada affix is employed. 
The word intransitive of s. 26 is understood here also. Both these verbs are generally parasmaipadi. When they take the affix or they become åtmanepadi. Yam belongs to Bhrádi class; and han to Adådi class. Thus MT++ TI+ ST+7+3+377 (VII. 3. 77 yaman 'chh is the substi tute of the finals of ish, gam and yam, when an affix having an indicatory [ follows) = पायच्छते 'it spreads.' भायच्छेते and मायच्यन्ते ; so also भा + हन +à ++ (1. 2. 4 and VI. 4. 37 TTEFINITT e gretatugaritat farista)=85&t, 'he strikes.' 847=87+371 - STT +57 +stra (I. 2. 4 and VI. 4. 98 ardua 1967570 at it as wals)- HITT (VII. 3. 54), (Idaho Mag) Pl. erat. 
Not so when these verbs are used in the transitive, as rufaa T'he draws up the rope from the well,' strefa Sa 'they kill the sinner with the foot.' 
132 
THE ATMANEPADA VERBS. 
[BK. I. CH. III. $ 29, 30. 
NET: 
Vart.-When the object is some member of the agent's own body these verbs take the Atmanepada terminations though transitive. As भायघरते पाणिम् ' he puts forth his own hand.' भाहते शिरं 'he hurts his own head.' When the object is some limb of anothers body, the terminations are of the Paras 
maipada, as पाहन्ति शिरः परकीयं 'they hurt others head. 
समागमृच्चिप्रच्छिखरत्यर्तिश्रुविदिन्यः ॥ २९॥ पदानि ॥ समः, गमि मच्छि-प्रच्छि-स्वरति अर्ति-व-विदिभ्यः, ( अकर्म० आ. प०)। 
वृतिः ॥ संपूर्वेभ्यो गमि ऋच्छि मच्छि स्वरति अतिभूविविइत्येतेभ्योऽकर्मके यो धातुभ्यः मात्मनेपदं भवति। 
वार्निकम् ॥ दृशेश्चेति वक्तव्यम् ।। 
29. After the verbs gam'to go,' richchh 'to become hard,' prachchh 'to ask,' svar 'to find fault,' ri "to go,' śrû 'to hear,' and vid' to know,' when used in transitively and preceded by sam, the Atmanepada affix is employed. 
• The above seven verbs when preceded by the preposition up and used in the intransitive, take the terminations of the Atmanepada. As संगच्छते (VII. 3. 77) "he joins,' hed he becomes hard or goes.' a 'he asks,' संस्वर he blames,'समरन्त 'they are attained. In the case of this last verb which belongs both to Bhvadi and Juhūtyadi class it is Atmanepadi only in tho Aorist. As सम् + +अ+त (III. I. 56 सनिशास्त्यति यथ) = समृत, as मां समृत (VI. 4. 15 पहुन्छन्दस्यमायोगेऽपि) सम् + + + भडू + अन्त - समरन्त (VII. 416 कशोडिगण:). This occurs generally in the Vedas. The verbविr must have the meaning of 'to know,' and not that of 'to acquire.' संशृणुते 'he hears, 
संविस्ते 'he knows.' 
___Vart.-The root दृश (to see) after the preposition सम् when used in transitively takes the terminations of the Atmanepada as BTTN 'he sees.' But when transitive, it takes Parasmaipada terminations as 4114 rafa. 'he sees the town.' 
निस मुपविभ्योहः ॥ ३० ॥ पदानि ॥ नि-सम्-उप-विभ्यः, हः, (मा० प०)॥ 
कृत्ति ॥ निसम उप वि इत्येवं पूर्वाद् ष्टयतेीतोरालनेपतं भवति ॥ .. वार्तिकम् ॥ उपसदस्यत्यूयोर्वा वचनम् ।। 
30. After the verbs hve' to call,'.preceded by ni, sam, upa, and vi, the Atmanepada is used, even, when the fruit of the action does not accrue to the agent. : BK: I..CH. III. $ 31, 32.): 
THE ATMANEPADA VERBS. 
· 133 
The verb to call whether transitive or intransitive is Atmanepadi after the above prepositions. The condition of being Intransitive does not apply to this satra, and from this sûtra forward general rules of Atmancpada are treated of. As facta, agua, 3950 il 
The verbis marked in the Dhatupåtha with a 7 and therefore by sûtra 72 of this Chapter, it will take the terminations of the Atmanepada when the direct fruit of the action accrues to the agent. But even when the direct fruit of the action does not accrue to the agent, the verb hve takes the ter. minations of the Atmanepada when preceded by the above prefixes. .. 
Vart.-The verbs 7 'to throw' and 5 'to note' take optionally Atmanepada affixes when compounded with upasargas. As farrara-ahe casts out,' wafa-o 'he collects.' 
Fugtarala: 39 in ugifer o fugiti, 1918:, (: 37T0 00) 
: Il ratai faqed VE VEF pirenage wara 
31. After the verb hve, when meaning to challenge' and preceded by ân, the Atmanepada is used, cven when the fruit of the action does not accrue to the agent. 
As ferit Fruimtgaà 'an athlete challenges another athlete (in order to conquer him)' OTTTETTHIETA 'one student emulates with another student.' 
This sâtra is also for the purpose of showing that the root hve takes the Atmanepada terminations even when the direct fruit of the action does not accrue to the agent. 
The word spardhå means to einulate, to vie, to desire to conquer another. When the verb hve has not the above signification, it takes the terminations of the parasmaipada. As rafa 11979: 'the cowherd calls the Cows.' 
गन्धनावक्षेपणवनसाहसिक्यपूतियत्नप्रकथनोपयोगेषु कुजः ॥३२॥ पदानि ॥ गन्धन अवक्षेपण-सेवन-साहसिक्य-प्रतियन-प्रकथनउपयोगेषु, रुनः, (STTO wo) 
TTFT: 1l Frasi Harare atacungo 
32. After the verb kri when meaning to di vulge,' 'to revile,' 'to serve.' 'to use violence,' 'to cause change,' sto recite,' and to do an act tending to effect a desired purpose,' the Atmancpada is used, even when the fruit of the action does not accrue to the agent. . 
184 
THE ATMANEPADA VERBS." 
(Bx. I. CH. III. $ 33. 
The verb by sūtra 72 would take the affiies of the Atmanepada when the direct fruit of the action accrues to the agent. This sätra has been begun to show that this verb takes the Atmanepada terminations under certain circumstances even when the direct fruit of the action does not accrue to the agent. 
The word gandhana comes from the root gandh 'to injure,' of churådi class and means to inform against another maliciously with the object of injuring such person. Avakshepana means 'to revile' 'to over-come,' sevana means 'to obey and serve,' så hasikya means 'an act of violence,' pratiyatna means 'im. parting a new quality or virtue,' prakathana means 'to narrate fully,' upayoga means the disposal of a thing for the object of attaining merit &c. 
Thus उरकुरुते, उदाकुरुने means he informs against (2) श्येनो पतिकामुताकुरुते "thc hawk overcomes or reviles a snail' (3) Uaitoa hc serves the prosti tutes,' HEMAT T 'he serves the mahamatra.' (4). TETCE 196'he outrages another's wife.' (5). pristofer a 'the fuel gives a new quality (boils) to the water (or he prepares the wood and water for a sacrifice).' The object of the verb kşi takes the affix of the sixth case i.e. genitive, only when the verb means pratiyatna, see S. II. 3. 53 (st: a) i Therefore udakasya, though an object, has genitive form. The verb takes the augment only when it is preceded by upa and signifies pratiyatna see VI. 1. 139. (Eyra gara na T a gTig) i Therefore, there is the insertion of sibilant in upaskurutc. (5). : ayon 'he recites stories,' TAITETETL 4736 'he recites slander. (6). você 'he devotes a hundred pieces of money, for the sake of inerit. सहस्त्रे प्रकुरुसे he devotes a thousand. 
Why do we say in these senses? Witness maar 'he makes a mat.' In this case the atmanepada affix is not employed. 
The verb kşi is understood in the three succeeding sůtras. 
est: garu 33 ? afifa u stru, gah, (**: $0 wo) u #: 11 for at ta: rasta Armatei afat if 
33. After the verb kļi preceded by adhi, when the sense is that of 'overcoming or defeat,' the Atmanepada is used, even when the fruit of the action does not accrue to the agent. 
This sätra is commenced to show that kşi may take the atmanepada affix even when the direct fruit of the action does not accrue to the agent. The word prasahana means 'to over come, to be not defeated.' As part 'he overcame him or he was not defeated by him.' 
Why do we say, 'in the sense of to overcome?' Witness mi th'he learns the meaning' in which example the atmanepada affix is not employed. 
BK. I. CH. IIL.834-36.] 
THE ATMANEPADA VERBS. 
135 
The necessity of making a separate sätra of this rulc, instead of io. cluding it in the last apporism, arose with the object of giving a distioctive meaning to the prefix adhi. 
ःशयकर्मणः ॥ ३४॥ पदानि ॥ वेः, शब्द- कर्मणः, (कृमः पा०प०)। 
वत्तिः॥ विपर्यात करोतेरकनिमाये कियाफले पदकर्मण पालनप भवति।। 
34. After the verb kri preceded by vi, even when the fruit of the action does not accrue to the agent, and when the sense is that of making sound,' (liter ally, having 'sound' for its object) the Atmanepada is employed. . The word karma in the sůtra indicates objective case or karaka; and does not express 'action,' as in some previous sutras such as 24 ante. 
As मोटा विकुरुते स्वरान् ' the birds are making noise, प्वांतो विकुरुवं स्वरानू। 
The ford f governs the succeeding sätra. . : Why do we say "when governing a word expressive of sound in the objective case"? Witness fi fratia art: 'love affects the mind." 
अ शाच ॥ ३५ ॥ पदानि ॥ अकर्मकात्, प, (रुतः आ० प० वे.) . दत्तिः। वि पर्वात करोतरकर्मवादकनकक्रियावचनादात्मनेपदं भवति । 
35. After the verhkqi preceded by vi, when used in transitively, the Atmanepada is used. 
As विकुर्वन्ते सैन्धवा 'the horse move gracefully,' भोदनस्य पूर्णावत्रा विकुर्वते "the students being full of food are acting as they will or are aimlessly wander ing about.' 
संमाननोत्सायनाचार्यकरणशानभृतिदिगणनव्यरेषु नियः॥ ३६॥ पदानि ॥ संमानन-उत्सजन-आचार्यकरण-ज्ञान-अति-विगणन-व्ययेषु, नियः, (आत्मनेपदम्) । 
इतिः ॥ णीम्, पापणे इत्येतस्माद्धातोक निमायक्रियाफलेरामनेपर्क भवति, सम्माननादिषु विशेषणेषु सरसु॥ 
36. After the verb nî 'to lead,' when used in the sense of 'to guide so as to render the person guided worthy,' 'to lift up,' 'to make one a spiritual guide,' 'to determine the true sense,' 'to employ on wages,' 
. 
ar 
CिAPF 
दार 
136 
THE ATMANEPADÁ VERBS. 
(Bk. I. CH. III. & 37. 
'to pay as debt,' and 'to give as in charity,' even when the fruit of the action does not accrue to the agent, the Atmanepada is used. 
This sůtra is begun in order to show that the verb it may take the terminations of the Atmanepada, even when the direct fruit of the action does not accrue to the agent, in the following cases, vis., when it means to 'respcct' &c. 
Sammanana means to respect; as para rit fraud 'the Chårvi gives instruction in the Lokayata sastra.' The word chårvi primarily means intelli gence, and by secondary use it has been extended to the preceptor also, such a preceptor gives instruction in Lokayata Sastra, that is to say, having estab lished the truth of the doctrines of that philosophy by argumentation, imparts them to the pupils. Those doctrines being thus established by reason, be come respected (Sanmånita) and honored. 
Utsañjana, 'to throw up, or lift up,' as 119gartea "he lifts up Manavaka.' 
Acharya-karana 'acting as a teacher,' that is to say, to bring a boy ncar oneself in such a way, that being so brought near (upa-neta), he may himself become an acharya. As A1799999a 'he initiates Manavaka (i. e., making himself the preceptor he brings the boy near himself.') 
Jnana means 'knowledge, a demonstrated verity. As a arat arat. gà 'the Chårvi investigates the truth of the Lokůyata doctrine.' 
Bhriti means 'vages. As 
d'he employs the servants on hire or wages.' 
Viganana means the paying off as a tribute, debts &c. As Antare ferrat, the Jadras pay the tax due to the king, that is, they discharge the debt. 
Vyaya means 'allotment of money on works of merit &c.' As i ferred "he expends a hundred picces on religious acts.' Ego fua.he devotes a thousand.' 
Why do we say, in these senses? Witness trafa Prahe carries the goat to the village' Here there is no Atmanepada affix, as the verb has not any one of the above significations. 
E qartt #F#FO upon aga u falta, , suite, #Fifor, (faq: 310 90) .वृतिः ॥ नयतेः कर्नादेवदत्तादिलकारवाच्यः कर्टरये कर्मण्यशरीरे सति नयतेरात्मनेपद 
Ffail 
37. After the verb nî, when it governs an incorporeal object existing in the agent, as its object; the Atmanepaula is used. 
BK. I. CH. III. $38. ] 
THE ATMANEPADA VERBS. 
137 
The verb oft is Almanepadi when governing an object which has no material body, but is an abstract noun, that is an object which has abstract but no concrete existence; and when such an object has its seat in a portion of the agent of the verb. As il faud'he subdues his own anger," Hry Fea'he suppresses anger.'. 
The word sarira means the body of living beings, aoy portion of such body is also called sarira. 
The object must reside in the agent, (kartristha), otherwise - the verb will be parasmaipadi. As IFTTT 25T PET AT mrafa Devadatha removes Yajnadatta's anger.' 
The object moreover must be immaterial, otherwise the affix will be of parasmaipada. As og fitafa 'be removes his own wort.' erat rapat 'he bows his neck.' 
Why do we say 'in the case of an object?' Witness for 'he is submissive through knowledge,' 4Tar facrata. Here the verb fiquia has not taken an accusative case, but is in construction with an instrumental case, and therefore the present rule does not apply. 
वृत्तिर्गतायनेषु क्रमः ॥३८॥ पदानि ॥ वृत्ति-सर्ग-तायनेषु, #, (BT0 00) 
वृत्तिः ॥ वृत्याविष्वय क्रमेर्धातोरात्मनेपदं भवति । 
38. After the verb kram 'to move' when used, in the senses of continuity,' energy' and 'development,' the Atmanepada is employed. 
. The word "kram' governs the succeeding sůtraš up to 43 and is understood in them all. 
The verb kram by sūtra I. 3.78 (after the rest, let the parasmaipada asfixes be employed in marking the agent), would have taken the affixes of the parasmaipada; the present aphorism enjoins Atmanepada affixes in cer tain cases when the verb means to have a taste for &c. 
. Vritti continuity' means unobstructed, or want of interruption (i. e., a taste for, or facility in, anything), 'sarga energy' means application resolution and determination. Tayana 'development' means increase and growth. 
As (1) 974 mag h is reason proceeds unobstructed through the Rig. scriptures i. e., he can casily comprehend the Rig.' (2). Fortung 2974 'the pupil shows energy or exerts to study the grammar. (3). fting UTETU * 'the shastras are developed in him.' 
Why in these senses only? Witness TTT 'he runs away.' 
139 
THE ATMANEPADA VERBS. 
[BK. I. Ca. III. $ 39-41. 
उपपराभ्याम् ॥ ३८ ॥ पदानि ॥ उप-पराभ्याम् , (कृत्तिसर्गता qing=5#: 69: 90) 
वृत्तिः ॥ उपरापूर्यात कमतेच्याविवर्यपु वर्तमानादारननेपदं भवति ।। 
39. After the verb kram, preceded by upa and para, when used in the senses of continuity, energy and development, the Atmanepada is employed. ::: 
The words yritti &c., of the last sútra are understood here also. Why has this been made a separate satra and not included in the last? The reason is to make a restrictive rule in the cases of upasargas; that is to say, only in the cases of the upasargas upa and para, there is atmanepada affix ; but not 50 when any other upasarga precedes the verb kram, though the sense may be of continuity &c., Thus 39748'he commences to advance,' *7 'he marches to attack.' 
Why do we say after the upasargas 'upa and pard'? Because, after any other preposition the affix will be of the parsmaipada; as maat'he makes progress. If the sense is not that of "continuity" &c., parasmąipada will be employed, as 4 a, TATHT. 
आउद्गनने ॥४०॥ पदानि ॥ आङः, उदगमने (क्रमः, आ०प०) ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ पाडू पूर्वात क्रमते रुद्गमने वर्तमानावात्मनेपदं भवति । atau ll Sam a Tour 11 
40. After the verb kram, preceded by án, the Atmanepada is employed, when used in the sense of the rising of a luminary. 
. As nine out: 'the sun rises.' grand man: 'the moon rises surtin 'the stars rise.' 
Vart.-This ascending must refer to heavenly bodies. Therefore in Tothfa witgraar, 'the smoke rises from the surface of the terrace,' the verb 117 is parasmaipadi. Why do we say in the sense of " to ascend"? Witness r a Art: atq' the boy assails the on stage in the featuring the 
. a: arcfacra 1 89 lloreta u :, org-fara, (*: STO TO ) • 
Il faig a: EFTETUSTA 
11 ... 41. After the verb kram, preceded by vi, the Atmanepada is employed, when used in the sense of 
placing of foot-steps. 
As ansit faith the horse is pacing.' The term vikramaņa is applied to the special movements of horse &c. 
Bk. I. CH. III. $ 42, 43. ] 
THE ATMANEPADA VERBS. 
139 
O 
cu. 
.. 
Though in the Dhatupatha (catalogue of verbal roots), the verb afa and I have the meanings of pada-viharapa and pada-vikshepa, that is "throwing or placing of foot," and so it might be objected that the present sätra is a useless repetition, yet as verbs have various other meanings than what is assigned to them in the dhatupatha, the present sätra is aot un. necessary. 
Why do we say "in the sense of throwing of foot"? In any other sense, the terminations will be those of the parasmaipada. As fatha Mitrat 
the told of the antelope skin is rupturedi' 
मोपाभ्यां सनधाभ्याम् ॥ ४२ ॥ पदानि ॥ प्र-उपाभ्याम, समर्या 17, ( **: 110 DO ) 
धानः ।। उप इत्येताभ्यां परमात् क्रमतेरास्मनेपदं भवति॥ 
42. After the verb kram, the Atmanepada is employed when it is preceded by pra and upa, both con. veying the same sense; viz. that of “beginning an action." 
As a 14,94 Ty'he commences to cat' &c. 
The prefixes pra and upa are synonyms, when they denote the com mencement of an action. 
Why do we say, "when they are synonyms." Witness the following 9: Tha T964a 'he goes during the first part of the day and he comes back during the latter part of the day.' Here in one case the sense is "to go," in another it means "to return." 
Why in the latter case of 'aparedyur upakramati' there is not At manepada by virtue of sůtra 39 ante, as there is the upasarga upa bere? The answer is that Rule 39 is not applicable, as that rule is limited by the condi. tion of the sense of continuity' &c. while in the present sätra, that limita. tion is not applicable. 
*748TIGT NYZA agtfall 37-guta, a (*#: BATO 90) a #ill att fythig sa creados para II. 
43. After the verb kram, the Atmanepada is optionally employed, when it is not preceded by any preposition. 
. The root kram' may always be conjugated as Atmanepadi when not having any upasarga. The upasarga will be defined in 1. 4. 59. The option allowed by this sätra is an example of what is technically known as aprapta vibhåså viz., an option which is not an alternative limitation to a general rule already found or known. 
140 
THE ATMANEPADA VERBS. 
(IBK. I. CH. III. $ 44-46. 
Examples: a or are he goes over.' Why do we say when it is without any preposition ?! For no option is allowed when it takes preposition. As pala. 
Bà : n 88 1 v à 4 giá, si, ( Tre ve ) TRET: 11 Fratele T arer4* tala 11 
44. After the verb jña, when used in the sense of denying,' the Atmauepada is emlpoyed. 
The root jña which ordinarily means 'to know and is parasmaipadi by rulc 78, becomes Atmanepadi wheộ through the virtue of any prefix it means to deceive;' as ta 'he deceives,' sta'he denies the debt 
of a hundred rupees,' ria .depies a thousand.' 
Why do we say when meaning 'to deny?" observe :- framera Home 'thou knowest not anything." 
***17 1184 Bagira u 979ma, (5, TO 90) f7: ll 
F rontariaTACHAT 11 
45. And when used intransitively, after the verb jña, the Atmanepada is employed, even when the fruit of the action does not accrue to the agent. 
As an art antarà 'he engages in sacrifice by means of clari. fied butter or honey.' (See II. 3. 51). 
This Atmanepadi form of jia is employed when the fruit of the ac tion does not accrue to the agent. From sâtra 76 it will be seen that when the fruit of the action accrues to the agent, the verb is Atmanepadi. 
How in the above example the verb jña is intransitive? Because the word sarpih is not the object of knowledge, but it is an instrument of sacri fice, into which one engages from complete knowledge (jöåna); and it (sar pishah) is in the genitive case by virtue of 11. 3. 51 ( STRIES TO ) by which the instrumental kåraka of the jña is put in the genitive case. 
Why do we say of " Intransitive"? Because in the transitive it is parasmaipadi, as emot at he knows (recognizes) the son by his voice.' 
संपतिभ्यामनाथ्याने ॥ ४६ ॥ पदानि । सम-पुतिभ्याम् अन्. spruna, ( 9 sprogo ) 
वृत्तिः ॥ संप्रतिइत्येवं पूर्वान्जानातेरनाम्याने वर्तमानादात्मनेपदं भाति । . 
46. After the verb jña, preceded by sam, and prati, the Atmanepada is employed, when not used in the sense of“ remembering with regret." 
BK. I. CH. III. $ 46-48. ] 
THE ATMANEPADA VERBS. 
141 
The word jña is understood in this stra: and the aphorism applies to that ifa which is used in the transitive. As we exmta'he looks for a hundred,'. SO FIAT sferamata he promises a thousand.' O 
aqurt (recarg Why do we say when not meaning remembering with regret?" Because it is not Atmanepadi, when it conveys that meaning. Thus itat: 
m 'he remembers with regret his mother form a l 
भासनोपसंभाषाज्ञानयमविमत्युपमन्त्रणेषु वदः ॥४७॥ पदानि । 978-997191-977-wa-farfa-Juroy, ug: . ( ATO . 
अनिः ।। भासनादिषु विशेषणेषु सत्सु वदतेरात्मनेपदं भवति ॥ 
47. After the verb vad, the Atmanepada is employed, when used in the senses of "showing brilli ance, or proficiency in," "pacifying," "knowledge," "effort," "difference of opinion," and "flattering." 
By sâtra 78, vad generally takes the terminations of the Parasmai. pada, by the present sútra, it takes also the affixes of the Atmanepada when having certain meanings. 
Bhâsana, (shining) means to illumine as yra at wraraa. The charvi illumines the Lokayat shastras, by his discourses and clear exposition. 
Upasambhåshd (persuasions) means to appease, to conciliate as a gyepat he conciliates or cajoles the servants. 
Irána (knowledge) means to know completely as a r area the chårvi knows completely to discourse upon Lokayat shastra. . 
Yatra (endeavour) means energy as to tra. "He toils in the field," traat'he toils in the house.' 
Vimati (disagreement) mcans dissension, want of unanimous opinion. As ** . "They disagree over the field' i. e., holding different opinions they talk diversely. 
Upamantrana (cnticing) means to coax in secret as, grietig en 'he entices the wife of a respectable family li.c., seduces her in secret)' TATUTSIY. 
na 'lie flatters another's wife.' 
Why in the above senses only ? See on fara he says something'. 
__ व्यरत्याचां समुचारणे ॥४॥ पदानि ॥ व्यक्तवाचाम् , सम्-उच्चा. Tot , ( *: , 6970 DO ) 
- वृत्तिः ॥ व्यक्तगचर्चा समुधारणं सहोचारणं तनवर्तमानाइदतेरात्मनेपर भवति । 
48. After the verb vad, the atmanepada is employed when used in the sense of" speaking articu lately in a similar manner." 
142 
THE ATMANEPADA VERBS. 
[Bk. I. CH. III. $ 49, 50. 
As a HTHOT: 'the Brahmanas are speaking. But in 84fon T: 'the cocks are crowing' it is properly Parasmaipadi. 
The sense of the sůtra is that when men, who are only capable of articulate speech, speak all in one and the same time, then the verb vad takes the affix of the Atmanepada. When lower animals make a chorus of noise, the verb does not take the Atmanepada. 
. There must be samuchcharapa for the application of this rule, when there is no samuchchårana or speaking in a chorus, this rulc does not apply, as ATHOT a 'the Brahman speaks.' 
अनारकर्मकात् ॥ ४९ ॥ पदानि ॥ अनः, अकर्मफात् , (बदः, FIO DO ) Thiarain 
f: TRICOTATOTT TAHIT ara 11 
49. After the verb vad, preceded by anu when it is intransitively used, the Atmanepada is em ployed, when the sense is that of“ speaking articulately in a similar manner.” 
As अनुबदते करः कलारस्य katha is echoing or imitates kalapa. He reutters exactly what the kalapa-reader or the teacher says. The word apu here means similarly. 
Why do we say in the Intransitive'? Because when it is used in the transitive it takes the affixes of the Parasmaipada. As geht TITATATER he repeats the yajurveda which he had learned before. 
The words 'uttering of articulate speech' are understood here also. Otherwise gente tar the lute resounds, here it is Parasmaipada. 
विभाषा विप्रलापे ॥५०॥ पदानि । विभाषा , विप्रलापे, (वदः आ० प० व्यक्तवाचां)॥ 
f: ut f4TH 599rat ageTTÙ TRIMITE Crai* tria FATT II 
50. After the verb vad, the Atmanepada is employed optionally, when the sense is that of “con tradicting each other." . As far or fra T: (the doctors are at variance). The words vyaktaváchåom (articulate utterance) and samuchchåraga (speaking to gether) are understood in this sätra also. 
No option is allowed when the sense is aot that of contradiction or Wrangling as g7 HTTTT:. The Brahmanas are speaking together. 
The phrase "articulate utterance' is necessary in this also. Because as faqayfa : the kites are quarrelling, the verb is in the Parasmaipada. Bk. I. CH. III. $ 51, 52.] 
THE ATALAYEPADA VERBS.. 
. 
113 
The wrangling must be by talking at one and the same time other wise this rule will not apply. As #HU TT UTF fra the doctors con tradict by tura another doctor. 
Barga: 1149 11 actra 11 yarg , 9: , ( To 09 ) GĦ: 1 #Trig forcatatan petani 
51. After the verb gri'to swallow,' when pre ceded by ava, the Atmanepada is used. 
As witía (he swallows). The root gri to swallow preceded by the preposition ava is Atmanepadi. The verb gri taken in this sútra means to swallow and belongs to the Tudådi class, it is not the gst 'to make sound' which belongs to the kryddi class. Because there is no word formed with the latter verb by affixing the preposition ava to it. By sâtra 78 this verb gri " to swallow' would have been Parasmaipadi, the present sätra debars that. 
When it is not preceded by ava, it is Parasmaipadi, as forras he swallows. 
67: Arash 11470 oCIFA U 5: , ufana , (a: H1090) a A: 11 TIL Firea: star TAPATECHÀY Tà 1 
52. After the verb gri preceded by sam, the Atmanepada is used, when employed in the sense of 
promising.' 
As un aired (he promises to pay a hundred rupees) If it does not mean to promise or acknowledge, it takes parasmaipada terminations. As data re hc swallows the mouthful. 
उदश्चरः सकर्नकात् ॥ ५३ ॥ पदानि ॥ उदः, घरः, सकर्मकात् । ( To go ) u 
PT: Il Regia: Ran t ai Taf 
53. After the verb char to walk 'prcceded by ut, when used transitively the Atmanepada is employed. 
As ग्रेहमुधरते he strays away from home; गुरुवचनमुधरते he transgresses the commands of his preceptor. 
Why do we say "when used in the transitive)? Observe r uta the vapour is rising. Here it is parasmaipadi. 
समस्तृतीयायुक्तात् ॥ ५४॥ पदानि ॥ समः, तृतीया-युक्तात , (TT: 10 do) 
17:11 Riigrafatary Tray & # 
144 
. 
THE ATMANEPADA VERBS. 
(Bk. I. CH. III. $ 54, 55. 
- 
54. After the verb char, preceded by sam, and connected with a noun in the Instrumental case, the Atmanepada is employed. 
As Htta er he rides on the horse-back. 
The rule docs not apply when it is not in composition with a word in the instrumental case. As 337 diant 
a ! O Devala! thou wanderest through both regions, this and that. Here though the sense of the Instrumental case is implied, yet as it is not expressly stated, we use the parasmaipada terminations. 
702 Baguenys nogifa u 70: , 7, 81, 8; au- , ( Treo go : OTO TO ) u 
__वृत्तिः । हाणदाने परस्मैपदी सतः संपूर्वाद् द्वतीयायुक्तादात्मनेपर भवति साचेर हतीया चतुर्थ्य aparati 
fan I FRETTET Thiar prevent than 
55. And after the verb då to give, preceded by sam, and connected with a noun in the Instrumental case, the Atmanepada is employed, provided this Instru mental case have the sense of the Dative case. 
When is the 3rd case used with the force of the 4th case? That is answered by the following. . 
Vart:-The Instrumental has the force of the Dative when immoral conduct is implied. As near or a 84984 (he gives with the object of enticing to the female slave or prostitute). 
The verb då to give, is generally parasmaipadi, it becomes atmane padi under the above conditions. 
Why do we say "when it has the force of the dative case" ? Because when it has not the sense of the dative, parasmaipada terminations will be used, as af egeresta, 'he gives with his haad.' 
It might be asked how the atmanepada terminations are employed when the preposition sam is not directly applied to the verb, but another pre position pra, intervenes between sam and the verb. The reply is that the word samah in sâtra 54 is not in the ablative case (which would have required its being placed immediately before the verb), but it is in the genitive case, and is used as an attribute. 
JUTEH: 2417ūt n 48 u agira ni gara, 4*: , , ( 10 g ) 
patill begeigen: a 
nd referaterimi stafit te 
BK. I. CH. III. $ 56, 57.) 
THE ATMANEPADA VERBS. 
146 
56. After the verb yam, to give, preceded by upa, when used in the sense of “espousing," the Atmane pada is employed 
. This is clear. As rattaa he espouscs or knows his wife. But not so when another's wife is meant, there it is parasmaipadi. 
By rule 78, the verb yam would have been parasm aipadi, but the present sätra makes an exception, when the root takes the preposition upa and means "to marry, to espouse, or to accept" The meaning of soa-karana is confined to accepting in general. This is according to Kasika; according to Mahabhashya, sva-karana means to make one's own what was not previously his owo. 
Why do we say in the sense of "marrying"? When it has any other sense parasmaipada affixes will be employed as # 179TTET Aragrafa, Devadatta has illicit intercourse with the wife of Yajñadatta. 
ICETİ 49: 1 49 11 azifa 1 JT--FP- a, : , ( SITO CON 
P#11 FT YFIR radat a mm * *978" 
57. After the Desideratives formed by the affix san, of the verbs jūå to know, sru, to hear, smri to remember, and driś to see, the Atmanepada is employed. 
The above four roots are åtmanepadi when in the Desiderative form, the suffix "san" being the pratyaya by which desideratives are formed. 
The verb jña takes the terminations of the atmanepada when used in the senses indicated by the three sätras 44, 45 and 46 already explained. The desiderative form of jną would ex necessitate take &tmanepada affixes when used in the above senses : see Rule 62. The present sûlra however enlarges the scope of atmanepada by declaring all desideratives of jña to be atmanepada, in whatever sense they may be used. 
Similarly by sûtra 29 ante and the vårtika under it, the roots $ru, and drić, take the terminations of the atmanepada, when preceded by sam, the desideratives of those would of course have taken åtmanepa da affixes by 62, but the present sûtra makes it general. 
The present sâtra however enunciates a new rule in the case of the root smri. 
As forrera he wishes to know (ie. enquires after) religion T शुभूषते he serves the teachers, नटं सुस्मर्षते he wishes to remember the lost. नृर्ष for a he wishes to see the king. 
Why do we say, when taking the affix san? Because the primitive verbs will take the parasmaipada terminations as starfa he knows; quia hc hears, enca he remembers frutat he sces. 
146 
THE ATMANEPADA VERBS. 
(Bk. I. CH. III. $ 58-60. 
. 
... 
aard: If 46 u azifa ut n, sat: , 9: , ( 49: eprowo) u f#:11 rim: Terraraq yafet 
.: 58. After the desiderative of jñk when pre ceded by anu the Atmanepada is not employed. 
This is an exception to the last sätra. The desiderative of jña with the prefix anu is not atmanepadi. 
This sätra read with sâtra 45 limits the scope of parasmaipada to the transitive, desiderative verb anu-jña. As gharafa he enquires after the son. 
Why do we say when preceded by anu? Because otherwise it will take the atmanepada terminations. As y Farad he inquires after religion. 
ARTE MIYa: 1148 11 oerfa # ufa-9976 TT, gai, ( 89: TO QO ) n . 
. : il fa queriai taregola: arrenda afatit 
59. After the desideratives of śru when pre ceded by prati and âñ the Atmanepada is not used. 
. The verb śru when taking the prefixes prati and an, is not åtmanc padi, though taking the desiderative "san." This is also an exception to the rule of sdtra 57. Thus प्रनिगुभूषति and पाणुभूपति॥ 
The word prati and ån must be upasargas; if they are used as karma pravachaniyas (see 1. 4.83) then the rule will not apply As T yfa Tita 11 
ata: fera: 11 & # OCTFT II : , fua: , ( 3710 TO ) 11 Tip: 11 TTT: foxrinrar a grant aftermath fall 
60. After the verb sad to decay, when it has onc of the affixes with an indicatory š (sit) the Atmane pada is used. 
The root 'sad' when taking any affix which is marked with an indica. tory , is conjugated in the atmanepadi. In connection with this, must be read sätra VII. 3. 78. TITATEYTHI TOETrelaciy azHYESTI stretat: by which the root y is replaced by it before affixes having an indicatory . Thus T + y + = sta + Hargitarat he decays or withers, पीयेते they two decay शीयन्ते they decay. 
Why do we say before affixes having an indicatory u? Before other affixes, it is not åtmanepadi. As part if he decayed, yogre he will decay, foucara. 
The well-known vikaranas like 99 , &c., the affixes like T &c., are for affixes. In other words the root sad is atmanepadi in all conjuga tional tenses. 
BK. I. CH. III. $ 61, 62.) 
THE ATMANEPADA VERBs. 
147 
facaderetaneu fa, geufset: , ( fora: 37T0 TO ) u 
ret: 11 fra THÌ T HÀqi yafor at 
61. Ifter the verb infi to die, when it has one of the affixes having an indicatory y, as well as when it takes the affixes lun (aorist III 2. 110) and lin (Benedic tive III. 3. 159) the Atmanepada is used. 
This is a restrictive sútra, the root 5 (to die), is marked with a r as an indicatory letter, so by shtra 12 it would be always Atmanepadi. But the present aphorism restricts it to Fluo (Aorist) and fes lin (Benedictive) tenses, as well as to those tenses which are fun. It will be found hereafter that out of the ten tenses, those that take for affixes are the special tenses 1.C., the present, the Imperfect, the potential and the Imperative. 
It is only before these three affixes, namely, liä, lur and sit affixes, that the root mți takes the terminations of the Stmanepada. Thus the aorist 
in amrita he died; Benedictive te mrishishța may he die. Similarly before sit affixes thus regt he dies,' = E ++ (VII. 4. 28 fe vare) 104 t + fava (VI. 4. 77. A TOMAR w e st) faca , fogo The root belongs to the sixth class of verbs called Tudadi which take the vikarana y in the conjugational tenses (III. 1.77). 
In other tenses, viz., the two Futures, the Perfect and the conditional, this verb is parasmaipadi. As: frafat he will die. Wafran. 
gaaga: 117 11 agita u gaat, 49: , ( 30 go) वृत्तिः ।। सनः पूर्वो यो धातुः पारमनेपदी तस्वनन्तादात्मनेपदं भवति ।। 
62. The verb which is Atmanepadi in its primitive form before the taking of the affix san, will also be Atmanepadi when it ends in the aflix san. In other words; after a desiderative verb, Atmanepada is employed, if it would have been used after the primitive verb. 
If the primary verb is parasmaipadi, its desiderative will be also parasmaipadi; if the primary verb is Atmanepadi, ils desiderative will be Atmanepadi. This is the general rule. Some exceptions to it have already been mentioned in satras 57, 58, and 59 A root which was atmanepadi, before taking the Desiderative affix utsan, will be atmanepadi even when it takes the affix # san. In other words, that by reason of which the atmance pada affixes were ordained in the primary verh, will cause the same termina. 
-148. 
THE ATMANEPADA VERBS.. 
[BK. I. CH. IIL 8 62. 
tions to be applied when the verb ends in a sao. Thus it was said in s@tra 12, that roots having an anudatta accented vowel as indicatory or a d as their indicatory letter take the terminations of the atmanepada. Thus OTA he sits down and ha' he sleeps. The verb Mię (to sit down) and ofte (to lie down) will remain atmanepadi, even when they are used as Desideratives. Thus qrafarăthe wishes to lie down.' Similarly sūtra 17 declared that the verb farfery is atmanepadi as frecue, this will be atmanepadi also in the Desiderative form, as fafaraua "he wishes to enter.' So also by satra 40, SIT** is atmanepadi, the Desiderative an d will also be atmanepadi. 
But though by 60 and 61. starts and fered are atmanepadi, yet ATUTA he wishes to tiedown' a 'he wishes to die,' are parasmaipadi. Because the atmanepada affixes were ordained after the roots of and 
T only under excep-tional conditions and not generically, and as those conditions do not exist in the desiderative, the latter does not take atmanepada terminations. 
Of course that which in its primary state would not have taken the terminations of the åtmanepada, there being a prohibition to that effect will not allow them in its Desiderative form. As warratra 'he wishes to imitate,' fatefa. Here the root sy by rule 79 has been especially de clared to be parasmaipadi, to the exclusion of åtmanepada affixes which would otherwise bave come by Rule 32 and 72, and therefore its Desiderative is also parasmaipadi. The force of causing atmanepada is counteracted by 79. 
Now it might be asked:~True, this rule provides for those cases where a root is conjugated in two forms, one a Priinitive and another a Desider. ative conjugation. But what provision do you make for those partial verbs which take the affix #7 even in their primitive form; and in whose case we have no prior form to look upon as a guide in the application of atmanepada affixes. And there are at least 7 such quasi-roots which take it in this way, called also the self-descriptive HT. Those quasi-roots are Tg, fast, facit, prę, 
V, TT and on. What are we to do with these quasi-roots, which are always conjugated with the affix at and have no simpler conjugation ?" To this we reply ; " In the case of these partial verbs which take the self-descriptive a the pada will be regulated by the indicatory letters which these quasi-roots have. For though the full roots are Tiaa fafart, fan, 17 , , dgn and free, yet by the maxim 
at fary: arge2 faqaya, "a sign made in a portion of a thing, qualifies the whole thing;" the sign made in the expression T &c., will qualify the whole verb spa &c." Thus we have read he despises, fara he cures; ftulad he investigates &c. 
BK. I. CH. III. $ 63. ] 
The ATMANEPADA VERBs. 
. 
149 
: ATTACHUCESITSET MET 13 u fa n 9779-2779440, 599: , Saarte ( ATO do ) 
वृत्तिः ।। भाम्प्रत्ययस्येवधातोः कृमोग्नुप्रयोगस्वात्मनेपदं भवति।। 
63. Like the verb that takes the aflix åm, if the verb be conjugated with the Atmanepada termina tions, so of the verb kşi when subjoined thereto as an auxiliary, tho terminations are of the Atmanepada, oven when the fruit of the action does not accrue to the agent. 
This sūtra applies where the fruit of the action does not accrue to the agent. There are in Sanskrit two forms of the perfect tense (Far): one formed in the ordinary way by the reduplication of the root and adding the terminations; the other called the periphrastic perfect, is formed by adding Tg to the root, and then affixing to it the perfect tense of the roots 5 (to do), 4 (to be ) or (to be). These latter verbs are called anuprayoga or auxiliary verbs, as it is with their help that the perfect tense is formed. The question then arises, what conjugation, parasmai or atmanepada, do thesc auxiliaries take in forming the periphrastic perfect ? This sûlra supplies the answer:- the auxiliary & follows the conjugation of principals, the other auxiliaries do not. Thus the root gy (to increase, prosper) is åtmancpadi, therefore in forming the periphrastic perfect, the verb will be also in the atmanepada. Thus turas (he prospered). Similarly 
(to appear with great splendour) is parasmaipadi and the auxiliary Faster it will be parasmaipada, as at (he appeared with great splendour). 
But the other auxiliaries * and spę retain their own peculiar conjuga tion and are not influenced by the conjugation of their principal. Thus gore 
TIT, Rim . 
The word am-pratyaya of the satra means 'that after which the affix am (III. I. 35 and 36. TERRUPT ) comes. Of the verb krin, when subjoined to another as an auxiliary, the termination is that of the atmanepada like the verb that takes the affix åm. If this sútra enjoined a rule of injunction (vidhi), then there would be the termination of the atmanepada even ia examples like atentie and 
where the fruit of the action accrues to the agent. This is no valid objection to the present sutra It is to be interpreted in both ways, that is, both as a vidhi (a general injunco tion) and a niyama (a restrictive injunction). How is that to be done? Be cause the word pårvavat of the last sûtra is to be read in the present aphorism also. The second explanation in that case will be for the sake of establishing a niyama or restrictive rule. 
150 
. THE ATMANEPADA VERBS. -[ Bk. I. CH. III $64. 
. It has already been said above that the auxiliary verbs , and 77 are used in forming the periphrastic perfect. This is done by force of the aphorism III. I. 40 F o rd Foe, meaning, the verb kşifi is annexed in the perfect tense, to verds that take am. In this sůtra (III. I. 40) the word kriñ is a pratyábåra, implying the verbs 5, and . It might be asked how is this pratyahara formed? The word kşi is taken from the fourth word of sutra V. 4. 50, 71897 tyto &c., and the letter á is taken from sútra V. 4. 58 taita &c. This is the way in which the commentators explain how not only the verb kțin is used as an auxiliary in forming the periphrastic perfect, but also the verbs y and era. These three verbs denoting absolute action unmodified by any especial condition have in all languages been fixed upon as the best auxi liaries. 
. It must however be noted that the word kriñ in this sûtra is not used as a pratyahara and consequently does not include the verbs and y 
मोपाभ्यां युजेरयशपात्रेषु ॥ ६४ ॥ पदानि ॥ म-उपाभ्याम, युजेः, 8775-0 . 7 TO 20 ) 
वृत्तिः। उप इत्येवंपूर्वाद् युनेरयज्ञपात्रप्रयोगविपयादात्मनेपदं भवति ॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ स्वराद्यन्तोपशष्ठादिते वक्तव्यम् ।। 
64. After the verb yuj to join, the Atmane pada is used, when it is preceded by pra and upa except with reference to sacrificial ressels even when the fruit of the action does not accrue to the agent. 
. The verb groet 'to join' is svaritet, and consequently by sätra 2 it is always atmanepadi, when the fruit of the action accrues to the agent. The present sätra declares when this verb may take the termi. nations of åtmanepada, even when the fruit of the action does not accrue to the agent. After the verb I preceded by the prepositions g and 39 the terminations are of the atmanepada, when not employed in reference to sacrificial vessels. As 925 he joins or employs' ; 347 'he fits or uses.' 
Why do we say "when not enıployed in reference to sacrificial vessels?" Because there the terminations will be of the parasmaipada. As इनन्यखि पानाणि प्रयुनक्ति. 
Vartika :-It shall be rather stated that the root takes the terminations of the åtmanepada when preceded by any preposition beginning or ending with a vowel. This is an important modification of the above rule. Thus 96 and fast. In fact, all upasargas, with the exception of L, far, and 
, either begin or end with a vowel, and therefore the Vårtika amounts to the inclusion of all prepositions with the above exception. 
Bk. I. CH. III. 865-67.] . THE ATMANEPADA VERBs. 
151 
With सम् , निर् and दुर् , however, the root will take parasmaipada termi nations; as संयुनक्ति. 
समः णुवः ॥६५॥ पदानि ॥ समः, णुवः , ( आ० प०). इत्तिः॥पुतेजने परस्मैपदी ततः संपूर्वादात्मनेपदं भवति । 
65. After the verb kshnu, to sharpen, pre ceded by sam, the Atmanepada is employed. 
The verb 'to sharpen, whet, or grind,' is generally parasmaipadi, but it is atmanepadi when it is preceded by the prefix सम्; as संदणुते ग्रस्नम् 'he whets the weapon' संक्शुवाते 'they two whet' संक्शुषवे 'they all whet'. 
It might be objected, why has a separate aphorism been made of the: verb kshnu, when it could well have been included in the sutra 29 ante, which also speaks of the force of the prefix sam, when used with the verbs gam richchha &c. To this the answer is that, that sätra treats of intransitive verbs, the word akarmaka being understood therein, while the present sätra, as is evident from the example we have given above, treats of transitive verbs. 
भुजोनवने ॥ ६६ ॥ पदानि ॥ भुजः , अनवने , (आ०प०). 
त्तिः । भुनपाननाभ्यवहारयोरिति रुधादो पड़पते । तस्मादनवने पाजने वर्तमानावारमने पदं भवति ।।... . 
66. After the verb bhuj, the Atmanepada is used, except in the sense of protecting. . 
The root bhuj when it does not mean to protect, is atmancpadi. This root belongs to the rudhadi class and has several meanings, as, to feed, to cherish, to preserve, to eat, and to enjoy. As भुंक्त ' he eats or enjoys' also bhulijate, bhurijate &c. But पुनान् भुनक्ति रिता 'the father cherishes the sons भनत्येनमग्निराहितः. 
The root bhuj belongs also to the tudadi class, but there it has the sense of being curved or crooked. The bhuj belonging to the tudadi class is not to be taken in this sätra, because that bhuj has never the sense of protecting. Therefore विभुमति पाणिम् ' he bends the hand,' is in the paras. maipada. 
पेरणी यत् कर्म गो चेत् स कर्मानाघ्याने ॥ ६७ ॥ पदानि ॥णेः, अणी, यत् , कर्म, गो, चेत् , सः, कर्ता ,अनाध्याने, (आ० प०)। . निः ॥ण्यन्तादात्मनेपदं भवति, कथम अणे यस्कर्म एणे चेन सदेवकर्म, स एव कर्ता भवति । अनाध्याने, प्राध्यानं वर्जयिला 
67. After a verb ending in the affix pi (causal) the Atmanepada is employed, provided that when the object in the non-ņi or non-causal sense becomes thé: 
132 
THE ATMANEPADA VERBS.: (BK. I. Ch. III. $ 67. 
agent in the causal ; and when it does not mean to re member with regret;' even when the fruit of the action does not accrue to the agent. 
The causatives (Post) are conjugated in the atmancpadi, when they are used in the passive voice, that is to say when a word which was an objective case in the ordinary verb becomes nominative case in the causa tive; and the nominative case of the ordinary verbs becomes objective case in the causative. In short when causatives are used in the passive voice, they are atmanepadi. This round-about phraseology has been employed, because the base of the active and the passive causatives do dot differ in form ; as Stritega saat it. 
The phrase 't: (after the causatives)' of this sätra governs the four succeeding sutras and is understood in them. The sätra consists of the follow ing words :-U: “after the causative;' 777' in the non-causative;" 4' what;" the object;' off in the causative;' ha'if;" #: 'that;' nomioative;" p ara 'except to remember.' 
In general, by sâtra 74, the causative verbs take the terminations of the atmasepada, when the fruit of the action accrues to the agent. The present sätra applies to the case where the fruit of the action does not accrue to the agent. 
After the verbs that take the affix foe, the terminations are those of the atmanepada. How? When that which was the object when the primi. tive verb was used non-causatively, becomes also the object when the deriva. tive verb is used causatively; and even that object becomes also the agent as well. There is exception however, in the case when the verb means to * remember with regret. As grief BREAT teatar: 'the elephant-keepers mount the elephant. Let us paraphrase this sentence by transforming the primitive non-causative verb grief into a causative form. The sentence then will be, drugara Fit Fryt 'the elephant makes itself to be mounted'. Similarly grofa gita in T: 'the elephant-keepers sprinkle the elephant'; and उपसेचयते हस्ती स्ययमेव 'the elephant makes itself to be sprinkled; पश्यन्ति भूत्या (TATTE 'the attendants sec the king'; and und Tat Fruit' the king makes himself to be seen. 
Why do we say "after the causatives ? Because the rule of this søtra will not apply, if the verb though conveying the sense of a cau. sal verb, is, however, not formed by the affix for: as are a great furat: 'the elephant-keepers mount the elephant;' and MTUESHTUT Fet arsifat "the elephant that is being mounted, mounts gracefully'. Here the termina. tions are of the parasmaipada in the second case also. BK. I. CH. III. $ 67.] 
THE ATMANEPADA VERBS. 
153 
Why do we say 'in the non-causative non-pi'? For this rule will not apply, when the primitive verb itself is formed by the affix fu ; such are the roots of the tenth class or churadi in which the pich is added in the self-descriptive sense, and not for a causative purpose. Thus the root Tu belongs to churadi class; whose causative and primitive forms are the same. As yoga of Tiran: 'the cowherd counts the herd;" and the causative form is tugfa : The 'thc herd makes itself to be count ed.' The terminations in both cases are those of the parasmaipada. 
Why do we say 'when the object (karma) becomes the agent. Be. cause the rule will not apply, when any other käraka or casc, than the karma or object, of the primitive verb becomes the agent in the causative. Thus, 
à rau 'he cuts with the scythe,' arra ECAT 'the scythe is made to cut of itself.' Here the word datra was the instrument of the primitive verb which became agent in the causative, and therefore in the causative the termi nations are of the parasmaipada only. 
Why do we say if in the causative' in the sđtra? It is for the purpose of indicating that the verb must be one and the same, both in the primary sentence and the causative sentence. Therefore the rule does not apply here where the causative verb aga in the second sentence was not used in the first sentence; UTEPE fai reagent. the elephant-kecpers 
mount the elephant;' and प्रारोहयमाणे हस्तीभीतान सेचयति भूत्रेण 'the elephant that is being caused to mount is made to sprinkle with urine the frightened men'. 
The word a: 'that' is employed in the aphorism to show that the objects in both sentences must be the same and not different. Therefore in the following example where the objects are different, the terminations of parasmaipada are only used. Wir Frei EFETTEIT: 'the elephant-keepers mount the elephant'; and writer Fift FUSHTETEA HOUrt'the elephant, 
that is being caused to mount, makes men mount on the land.' 
Why do we use the word karla (agent) in the sutra? If the former object is not the agent in the second case, the terminations of the parasmai. pada only would be used. As Sidariant fearat: 'the elephant-keepers mount the elephant; and arracula graty: 'the elephant-driver makes it to mount' 
Why do we say 'except when meaning to remember with tender ness?' Observe, hoa TITET Filament: 'the dove remembers, with regret, the forest trec;' and warunt FH: THE 'the forest trce is made to be remera, bered of itselli 
13.4 
The ATMANEPADA VERBS. 
(Bk. I. CH. III. $ 68-69. 
. : irrationaal 86 u agra a sit-Fri: ; agora,(a, ATO TO ) u 
grat: il fata: maty tyraternae *apa igra II 
.. 68. After the causatives of the verbs bhi to fear, and smi to wonder, even the fruit of the action accrues not to the agent the Atmanepada is employed, when the fear is produced directly by the causative agent. 
The phrase of the causative ending in fu' is understood in this sutra and is to be supplied from the previous aphorism. This satra is also restricted to cases where the fruit of the action does not accrue to the agent. The word in the aphorism has been defined later on in sûtra I. 4. 55 
( F I ); it is the agent which is the mover of another's agent. When 
a fear is caused by a go it is called 2017. The word te 'fear' in the aphorism is illustrative, and includes by implication feet astonishment' also. As in tega' the jatila, the cock-headed frightens.' yogt tud 
the munda, the shave-headed frightens'; la felura' the jatila astonishes," gost frente 'the munda astonishes' i.e. the very fact of matted-hair or shaven-head frightens' &c. . 
Why do we say ope? For if the fear or astonishment is not the direct result caused by the agent, but arises from something else, then the atmanepada will not be used. As a arrara 'he frightens him with the kunchika,' tu firun he astonishes with his form'. Here kunchika and rupa are the instruments, which cause fear or astonishment, and are not the hetu thereof. . 
Tfwagear: #SANe u ocifa u fw-ated: , 13 mra, : 0770 do ) ! 
: qft: ilmy feth,H1141159 Taicinzigetelt: Toni Taalarenare afa u 
69. After the causatives of the verbs gridh to covet, and vañch to go, the Atmanepada is employed, when used in the sense of deceiving, even though the fruit of action does not accrue to the agent. 
The phrase of the causatives ending in fu'is to be supplied here from satra 67. This sâtra is also restricted to the cases where the fruit of the action does not accrue to the agent. The word start of the stra means deceiving. As मानवक गर्धयते 'he deceires the boy, मानव वसवते 'he cheats the boy." 
Bk, I. CH. III. $ 70-71.) 
THE ATMANEPADA VERBS. 
155 
Why do we say 'when it means deceiving. For these verbs have not this meaning, their causatives take parasmaipada. As part mara 'he causes the dog to bark,' wit afa'he avoids the serpent.' 
i for: #7777vistaTMID 1160 u ogifa fou: ; #69-metal-ruhT: , 9, ( t: acara anto go ) 
1 Prür vuraca fiaTO Y ARETTE yara a Terror FORT 1 
70. After the causative of the verb 11 to melt or stick, the Atmanepada is employed, when used in the sense of showing respect, subduing and deceiving, even though the fi'uit of action does not accrue to the agent. 
The phrase of the causative ending in fu' is to be supplied here from sútra 67. This sûtra has its scope only when the fruit of the action does not accrue to the agent. In the Dhåtupåtha, there are two roots eft , one is technically called afts and means to stick, and belongs to divadi class. The other of meaning to'melt' belongs to kryâdi class. As there is no spccifi. cation in the sutra what it is to be taken, both are therefore taken. 
The force of the word in the sûtra is to include the word for *to delude' of the last sûtra into the present. The word T77 means to show respect. The word g itary means to subduc. As Ecrange he gets respect or causes respect to be shown to him through or on account of his matted hair.' श्येनो पतिकामुल्लापयते 'the hark subdues the partridge', कस्त्वामुल्लापयते who deceives thee...... 
The sûtra Tatua: VI. I. 51 declares that the foloft is optionally changed into i before certain terminations. But there is no option allowed when the root it has any of the above three senses: in these cases the substitu tion of an is necessary and not optional. For the option allowed by sâtra VI. I. 51 is a referater and not a general fart applicable every where. . 
Why do we say 'when it has the meaning of, to show respect &c.'? Because otherwise there is parasmaipada. As art e fat. 
for Tacizi Sat 69 H agifa u far-gaufra, 1999: ; re , ( a: Spre qe ) n 
. त्तिः ॥ एयन्तातू करोमियोपपदारमनपर भवति अभ्यासे. 
71. After the causative of the verb kri, the Atmanepada is used, when it has the word mithya, incorrect, as an upapada or dependent word, and is, 
166 
THE ATMANEPADA VERBS. 
[ BK. I. CH. III. $ 71-72. 
employed in the sense of repeated wrong utterance' even when the fruit of the action does not accrue to the agent. 
The phrase of the causative ending in for' is to be supplied from sätra 67. The aphorism is restricted to the cases where the fruit of the action does not accrue to the agent. The word abhyasa means doing again, or repetition; as qd FALUT arata mcans 'he repeatedly pronounces the word incorrectly that is with wrong accent &c., not once but constantly'. 
Why do we say 'when the word mithya is used as an upapada?" The causative of kļi will take parasmaipada when it has any other upapada. Thus 
Trafa'he pronounces the word correctly . Why do we say of the verb '? Because the causative of any other verb used along with the word mithyd will not have atmancpada; as and Azul anura 'he repeatedly utters the word wrongly.' Here qe takes parasmai 
pada. 
Why do we say 'repeatedly'? For if the incorrect utterance is not habitual, then parasmaipada will be used; as a fazarance for 'be pronounces wrongly, not always but once.. 
af afsta: **firara finalid ngen ogifatli afta-fai, - HATU,f41-28 ( a: STO DO ) 
पृत्तिः ॥ स्वरितेतो ये धातवोभितथ नेभ्य धारमनेपदं भवति कारं चेतू क्रियाफलमभिति। 
72. After the verb marked with a syarita, (svaritet) or which has an indicatory i iñit), the termi nations of the Atmanepada are employed, when the fruit of the action accrues to the agent. 
The anuvritti of the phrase u: does not go further. The word fofurnat is a compound, meaning 'fruit of the action. When the principal object for the sake of which the action is begun, is meant for the agent indi. cated by the verb, there the atmanepada is used after verbs having an indicatory for a svarita accent. As t he sacrifices for himself'qed 'he cooks for himself.' Here the verb ys and are marked with svarita accent in the Dhatupatha, and therefore they take the atmanepada terminations. 
Similarly Frà 'he presses the soma-juice,' and 'he does. Here the verbs T and have an indicatory . 
In all the above cases, the principal object of the action such as getting heaven by performance of sacrifice, eating of food &c., is meant for the agent. That is to say, he sacrifices in order that he himself may attain heaven, he cooks in order that he himself may eat, &c. . 
BK. I. CH. 111. $ 73, 74.) 
THE ATMANEPADA VERBS. 
157 
May 
Why do we say when the fruit of the action accrues to the agent'? Otherwise it will have parasmaipada. As A : the priests sacrifice, (not for themselves, but for their clients)' rafinat ara: 'the cooks cook (for their masters)' f **: ' thc menials work (for their masters).' Herc though the fees and the wages are the fruits which the agent gets, yet as that fruit is not the principal object for which the action was begun---the principal object of the sacrifice was not that the priest should get his fee, but that the sacrificer may go to heaven-the verb takes the terminations of the Parasmai pada. Here the principal (ruit of the action does not accrue to the agent; but to a third party. 
अपाद्वदः ॥ ३ ॥ पदानि ॥ अपाद्, पदः, (कर्नभिप्राये किया. FS (STTO CO ) 
: 11 TatiaTaa: fent traine wafa 
73. After the rerb rad to tell, preceded by apa, when the fruit of the action accrues to the agent, the terminations are of the Atmanepada. 
The phrase "when the fruit of the action accrues to the agent," is understood here. The sutra is clear. As part 4HTTÀ 'the wealth-seeker. forsakes justice, that is to say, he wishes to acquire wealth at the sacrifice of justice. But when the fruit of the action does not accrue to the agent, the parasmaipada is employed. As artefa. 
णिचश्च ॥ ७४ ॥ पदानि ॥ णिवः, च , ( कभिप्राये कियाफले GTTO QO ) 
qi: Il fun arrcHay tra para finan 
74. After a verb ending in affis ņi (causal) when the fruit of the action accrues to the agent, the Atmancpada is employed. 
The phrase "when the fruit of the action accrues to the agent” is to be supplicd from sâtra 72. The verbs that take the affix fua nich are gene. rally causatives. As an anyà 'he causes the mat to be made for himself' 9174ā 'he causes the food to be cooked for himself. When the fruit of the ac tion does not accrue to the agent, the parasmaipada is used. As ai atura 9762 he causes anothers' mat to be made. 
TEHT i STET la cifa u 74-37-HE*: , 99: , 77 ( cafHATO STO ) u 
वृत्तिः ॥ समू उपाडू इत्येवं पूर्वायमेः कर्मभिप्राये क्रियाने प्रारमनेपदं भवति पन्थवि VTT II 
158 
- 
THE ATMANEPADA VERBS. 
[BK. I. CH. III. $ 75, 76. 
75. After the verb yam to strive, preceded by sam, ut and ån, when it does not refer to a book, the Atmanepada is employed, when the fruit of the action accrues to the agent. 
The phrase 'when the fruit of the action accrues to the agent'is read into this aphorism by anuvritti from sätra 72. As Firsta y sunt he gathers rice' 
n a 'he lists up the load Tere 'he draws out the cloth.' The root yam preceded by the preposition we takes the terminations of the Atmanepada by virtue of aphorism 28 ante ; but in that aphorism the verb was intransitive, here it is transitive, and this explains the necessity of making tiro different sutras for one compound verb भायन्.. 
Why do we say when it does not refer to a book. For otherwise the verb will take the terminations of the parasmaipada. As questa format 
When however the fruit of the action does not accrue to the agent the above compound verbs are parasmaipadi. As thesia, sqefa, arrestat. 
अनुपसर्गाज्ञः ॥ ७६ ॥ पदानि ॥ अनुपसर्गत् , तः ( कसिमाये OTTO 90 ) a 
वृत्तिः ॥ अनुपसर्गाजानातेः कर्मभिप्राये क्रियाफने आत्मनेपदं भवति । 
76. After the verb jñå when not preceded by 
H 
pada, when the fruit of the action accrues to the agent. 
The phrase "when the fruit of the action accrues to the agent.is understood in this súlra also. Thus of arta •he recognises the cow as his own'; Ti artà'he recognises the horse as his own.' 
Why do we say when not preceded by any upasarga? For when compounded with prepositions, it may take the Atmanepada terminations; as 
a mma e'the fool does not know the heavenly regions.' 
When however, the fruit of the action does not accrue to the agent, the simple root at takes parasmaipada terminations. 19HET na he recognises Devadatta's cow.' 
विभाषापपदेन प्रतीयमाने ॥ ७७ ॥ पदानि ॥ विभाषा , उपपदेन, antara ( **fto HTO) n 
: 11 XTATU T argyre hay tatem * fforura fiamma FANATS स्मनेपदं भवति ॥ 
BK. I. CH. III. $ 77, 78. ] 
THE PARASMAIPADA VERBS. 
159 
77. The Atmanepada is optionally used, when the fact of the fruit of the action accruing to the agent is indicted by an upapada i.e., by a word used along with the verb. 
By the preceding five sätras 72 to 76, Atmanepada terminations were ordained to come after verbs which implied the accrual of the fruit of the action to the agent, that is to say, where the verb by itself denoted this. But when the same idea, instead of being inherent in the verb, is expressed by an upapada, that is by a word governed by the verb, the necessity of using the Atmanepada affixes, to denote the same idea, is obviously removed, and in such a case it is optional whether we use the Atmancpada or the Paras maipada terminations. As el un sfat or 'he sacrifices for his own yajina' कटं करोति or कुरुते 'he makes his own cot' स्वं पुत्रमपपदवि or भपपदते, FIAT 9a or Tea &c. So on with all the above five sđtras, 
शेषात्कर्तरि परस्मैपदम् ॥ ७॥ पदानि । शेषात्, करि, परस्मैपदम् ,, 
वृत्तिः ॥ शेषातकर्तरिपरस्मैपदं भवति शेषादेवनान्यस्मान अनुदात्तडित भात्मनेपदमुनम् ॥ 
78. After the rest i.e., after all those verbs not falling under any one of the previous provisions, the terminations of the Parasmaipada are employed, in marking the agent (i.e., in the active voice). 
The rules of Atmanepada have been declared in the preceding 66 sâtras, 12 to 77. The terminations of the Parasmaipada, which are the general verbal terminations, will come everywhere else that is to say where its operation is not debarred by any one of the preceding aphorisms. The present sätra declares this universal rule. The word sesha or the rest, means that which is the residue after the application of all the previous restrictive rules. Thus it was declared by såtra 12 ante that a root having an Anudatta vowel or a F as it, will take Atmancpada terminntions As , ga. The converse of this will take parasmaipada terminations, namely all verbs which do not have an anudatta accent or a F as it. Thus for 'he gocs,' qfa.it blows. It has been declared by såtra 17 that the root fau when preceded by fa takes Atmanepada termination, as fafarga. When not preceded by a but any other preposition it will take the parasmaipada termination. As citaufa, aftufa. 
Why do we say "when marking the agent"? For when used in the passive voice, the root will take the Atmanepada termination. As reud.it is cooked' un'it is gone.' 
160 
The PARASMAIPADA VERBS. 
[BK. I. CH. III. $ 79, 80. 
Why is not parasmaipada used when the verb is employed reflexively? As in the following cxample:-aga : funt the food cooks of itself.' Because in the present sätra, the word dit of sůtra 14 ante is to be read in by anuvritti, so that, in fact there are two man in this aphorism which thus means " when the agent of the verb is an agent pure and simple then paras. maipada is employed." While when a verb is used reflexively (anfaaft) the agent of the verb is also, in one aspect, the object of the verb; and it is there fore, that in reflexive verbs the Atmanepada terminations are employed. 
T uin: a bee li getta II 37-TTTT 1999: 1 (TEH957) 
__ वृत्तिः ॥ भनुपरा इत्येवं पूर्वान् करोते: परस्परं भवति । 
79. After the verb kri to make, preceded by anu and pam, parasmaipada is employed, even when the fruit of the action goes to the agent, and when the sense is that of" divulging" &c. . 
By aphorism 32 ante, the root took the terminations of the Atmane pada when the sense denoted was that of " divulging, reviling" &c., and it also took Atmanepada termination when the fruit of the action accrued to the agent by virtue of sätra 72, because the root has an indicatory 4. The present sûtra makes an exception to those rules, and ordains parasmaipada. Thus watta he imitates, Tatif he does well. 
HARITAT: fata: 11 60 11 GIFT II S afa-sfang: i fra: ( qo pe ) , 
TFF liftara glage gril 19: 9*XTi tafar a 
80. After the verb kship, to throw, coming after abhi, prati and ati, parasmaipada is used, even though the fruit of the action goes to the agent. 
The root for to throw, is svariteta therefore by sâtra 72 ante it would have taken Atmanepada termination, when the fruit of the action accrued to the agent; this aphorism ordains parasmaipada instead. As offergahe throws on' afältigfat'he turns away or rejects,' opfafanufa 'he throws beyond.' 
Why do we say "when coming alter abhi, prati, and ati"? Because when compounded with any other preposition, it will not take parasmai. pada, but will be governed by sutra 72. As gifted'he throws down.' 
The second time of sůtra 14 is also understood here, so that when the verb is used reflexively, the agent not being purely an agent, the present sůtra will not apply. As a Fad Fath' it is thrown on of itself." 
BK. I. CH. III. $ 81-83. ] 
THE PARASMAIPADA VERBS. 
161 
ATGE, 1169 11 agitar u HIC ITE: (TTO DO ) u : 119 TLF: THE Papa ni 
81. After the verb vah to bear, coming after pra, parasmaipada is used, even though the fiuit of the action accrues to the agent. 
The root to carry is svaritct, and by sutra 72 it would have taken the Atmancpada termination when the fruit of the action accrued to the agent. But the present sûlra ordains parasmaipada instead. As muefa 'it flows.' 
Why do we say " when coming after pra"? Because after any other preposition it will not take parasmaipada as prope he brings.' 
alan: 1167 0 ofifa 107: 149:-( He ao ) u वृत्तिः ।। परिपूर्वा सध्यतेः परस्मैपदं भवति ॥ 
82. After the verb mrish to bear, proceded by pari, parasmaipada is used, even when the fruit of the action accrues to the agent. 
The root "to suffer" is svaritet, and by såtra 72 it would have taken Atmanepada termination when the fruit of the action accrued to the agent. This ordains parasmaipada instead. As grafa he'endures or he becomes angry.' When not preceded by this preposition, it takes Atmanepada termination. As amyoga. 
According to some authors, the root ar of the last aphorism is said to be understood in this, so that he preceded by or will also take parasmaipada terminations; as gftaefat. 
116 ufatta: 01 63 u açıfa u fa-ATE-OFT: THI ( ato do) a 
P: il 
f ratlarini kerud: 064** **Per II 
83. After the verb ram to sport, preceded by vi and ån, parasmaipada is used. 
The verb tot means 'to sport.' It is anudattet and therefore by såtra 12 it would have taken Atmanepada terminations; the present sutra ordains parasmaipada instead, as ferrafa ho takes rcst'; sprafa 'he delights in,' oftcatat "he sports.' 
With other propositions than these, it will take atmancpada termina tion. As fica. 
162 
- The PARASMAIPADA VERBS. 
(Bk. I. CH. III. $ 84-86. 
सपाच ॥ ८४॥ पदानि ॥ उपात् । च । (रमः परस्मैपदम् ॥ इत्तिः । उपपूर्वादरमतेः परस्मैपदं भवति । 
84. And also after upa, the verb ram takes the afixes of the parasmaipada. 
Astrocafa 'he causes Devadatta to refrain.' The sense of the verb uparamati is causative here, as if it was stara. This is an example of a verb involving in it the force of the causative affix fory. 
It might be asked why was not the preposition 34 read along with the other preposition in the last aphorism, instead of making this a separate sutra. The answer is that the necessity of making a separate sâtra with the preposi tion upa arose from the exigencies of sutra making. It is desired, that the next sâtra 85 should apply only to the root upa-ram, and not to other com pounds of ram; and this could only be done by making these two distinct sätras. 
विभाषाकर्मकात् ॥८५॥ पदानि ॥ विभाषा । अकर्मकात् (रमः To go ) 
67:11 STRECHNETURIENT *q yara u 
. 85. After the verb ram preceded by upa, parasmaipada is optionally used, when employed intran sitively. 
The last aphorism ordained parasmaipada absolutely, this declares an option under certain circumstances. As यावद्भक्तमुपरमति or उपरमते .he desisted from or was quiet while it was eaten. 
q u àguranta: 11 ce nosila u ga-77-79-49 TE:-- : 1 : 1 ( 90 go) : 
इत्तिः ॥धयधनशान एडप्रत्येते योण्यन्तेभ्यः परस्मपदं भवति। 
86. After the verbs budh to know, yudh to fight, nas to destroy, jana to be born, in to go, pru to move, dru to run, and sru to flow, ending in the affix ņi (i.e., when used in the causative), parasmaipada is employed, even when the fruit of the action goes to the agent. 
By sätra 74 ante, causatives took the atmanepada termination when the fruit of the action accrued to the agent. This makes an exception to that and ordains parasmaipada. As elrafa he expands incafe he causes to fight; rafe he causes destruction, safa he begets; q vafa he teaches; प्रावयति he causes to obtain; द्रावयति he causes to mclt; मापयति he causes to trickle. BK. L CH. III. $ 87. ) 
. 
THE PARASMAIPADA VERBS. 
163 
- 
. 
. 
... 
. Of the above cight roots, those which are intransitive would have taken the parasmaipada terminations under the conditions mentioned in sätra 88 sub, that is to say, when the agent is a being endowed with a reason. The present aphorism in the case of such intransitive verbs makes this additional statement, that those intransitive verbs will take parasmaipada, even when the agent is not a being endowed with a reason. As anrufa quy he makes the lotus to expand, arrara Firat he makes the woods to strike each other, 19 यति दुःखम् he destroys the sorrow, जनयति सुखम् he produces pleasure. 
Again of the above eight roots, those that have ordinarily the sense of "moving" will get parasmaipada by sutra 87. The present sutra, in their case makes this additional statement, that they will take parasmaipada termina-. tions even when the sense is not that of moving. Thus #, means both 'to move,'. and 'to obtain,' means 'to run'as well as 'to melt,' and , means 'to flow' as well as to 'to trickle. As geä he obtains; ta the iron melts; a forgat afa the water-ressels drip. The examples in the first paragraph have there-, 
fore been thus translated. 
The root is always compounded with wv. 
fattaesar peu c9 u ocira u fazu-787-977: ! ( 01: OFF# ) a 
वृत्तिः॥ निगरायें यश चजनामश्र धानुभ्योएयन्तेभ्यः परस्मैपदं भवति।। ariana 1 : moutoa: 11 
87. And after the causatives of verbs which have the sense of the eating or swallowing' and 'shak ing or moving' parasmaipada is employed, even when the fruit of the action goes to the ageut. 
The phrase 'when used in the causative (ù:) of the last sûtra is to be read into this also. The parasmaipada is ordained as an exception to sútra 74 by which atmanepada was ordained when the fruit of the action accrued to the agent. The word Famu means eating,' and 'means' 'moving,' shaking. As farmara he causes to swallow ; Tafa he causes to eat. भोजयति he feasts. चन्नयति he moves%3; चोपयति , कम्पयति he shakens. This aphorism applies to transitive verbs, and to verbs whose agents in non-causa tive state are inanimate objects i.e., not possessed with reason. 
Part:--The prohibition of the root up to eat, must be mentioned. The causative of to eat, takes atmanepada. Thus erat : Devadatta cats; runt he is made to eat by Devadatta. 
. अणावकर्मकाचित्तवत् कर्त्तकात् ॥८८ ॥ पदानि ॥ अणौ। अक. ***19 i fora i *. ( : To no) 
ft: 1' 
RVTEROWAFIQ 
T afel 
164 
THE PARASMAIPADA VERBS. 
(Bk. I. CH. III. § 88. 
. 88. The affixes of the parasmaipada are em ployed after the causal of that verb, which in its non causal stilte was intransitive and had a being endowed with reason for its agent; even when the fruit of the action accrues to the agent. 
The phrase u: is understood here also. The Atmanepada was ordained by sâtra 74 when the fruit of the action accrued to the agent. This aphorism is an exception to that, and ordains parasmaipada. As HTAT देवदत्तः Devadatta sits: पासयते देवदत्तं he makes Devadatta to sit शेते देवदत्तः Devadatta sleeps, arafa he causes Devadatta to lie down. . 
Why do we say in its non-cansal state? For if the causative root is from another causative root, and not from a simple non-causative root, then the parasmaipada will not be employed. Thus 'if one person such as Deva datta, causes another person Yajnadatta, to cause a third person Ramadatta, to do an act denoted by an intransitive root, as mounting for instance, though Ramadatta mounts for his own benefit, the verb to be used in such a case is crea in the Atmanepada, from the root og to mount; and not Wirafa.' (lengar's Guide to Panini). 
Why do we say which was intransitive"? This rule will not apply if the verb in its non-causative state was transitive. Thus from at the causative from , is the person caused to do the act denoted by the verb does it for his own use, comes only arrgå though the person has a will; for the original root 5 though a non-causative root, is not an intransitive root.' (ibid). 
Why do we say 'haring a being endowed with reason for its agent? For if the agent is a non-sentient object, the verb will be Atmanepadi. Thus from uit the causative from y'to dry if that which dries is a thing not possessed of a will as 1627: 'paddy,' for instance, though the fruit of the action i.e., the drying, affects only the paddy itsell, comes grad in the atmanepadi, though 'to dry' is an intransitive root; e. g., unga astaras: the sun-shine causes the paddy to dry. (Ibid)... 
न पादम्यायमाझ्यसपरिमहरुचिनतिवदवसः ॥८९॥ पदानि । HI 17-71A-HEPA-3715.97-C1iYE-of-fa-44-48: 1 ( a: ATH 97) : 
gf#: Il grant figuu Ya Tano già TFTH: priaznogttat: TAY of tara u 
fapie 1 TASETTEPAT 11 
BK. I. CH. II. $ 89-91.) 
THE PARASMAIPADA VERBS. 
163 
89. But the affixes of the parasmaipada are not used after the causals of the verbs på to drink, dam to tame, ayam to extend, ayas to exert oneself, parimuh to be bewildered, ruch to shine, usit to dance, vad to speak, and vas to dwell. 
The last two aphorisms had ordained parasmaipada instead of Atmane pada, even when the fruit of the action accrued to the agent, thus debarring the latter's action which would otherwise have taken place by virtue of sútra 74. This sûtra prohibits the last two sútras, and re-instates Atmanepada of sútra 74. Thus root 97 to drink, has the sense of nigarana or swallowing, the roots ? &c., have sentient beings as their agent; the root to to dance has the sense of or moving, but still these verbs have atmanepada affixes, and do not take parasmaipada in the causatire. As groga he causes to drink, दमयते he causes to be tame, आयामयते he lengthens, भायासयते he troubles, परिमोहयते he entices, रोचयते he makes agreeable, नर्नयते he causes to dance, areya he makes to speak, aragd he causes to dwell. 
Vart:-The root va should be enumerated along with a &c. Thus yrrua fan it. The doe suckles a young.infant. . 
ar : u go u azila II ali 979: 1 ( TAGER) a निः ॥ क्यपन्ताद्धातोर्वा परस्मैपदं भवति ॥ . 
90. The affixes of the parasnaipada are used optionally after the denominative verbs ending in the affix kyash. 
The affix peg is ordained by sůtra III. 1, 12 JUET 
: after the words myfea &c. These root take optionally parasmaipada As 
farafa or a he reddens. Erafa or he makes pat pat. 
Al limone video 
arritis ul Cuara u grm: I gfs ( 4 TOFA 067) n 
वृत्तिः ॥ (नादि-यो जुडि वा परस्मैपदं भवति ॥ 
91. After the verbs dyut to sbine &c. the terminations of the Parasnaipadă are optionally em. ployed, when the affixes of luú (aorist) follow. 
The Dyutädi verbs are 22 in number, to be found in Dhátúpå įha in 
the force is that of &c. These verbs are anudatta and so by sûtra 12 they would have been invariably álmanepadi, this aphorisın makes them optionally 
166 
THE PARASMAIPADA VERBS. 
(BK. I. CH. III. $ 92, 93 
so in the aorist. Thus gacor guilay he shone. In other tenses than the aorist ( 6 ) these verbs are invariably Atmanepadi. As uraa he shines. 
For a list of Dyutädi verbs sec Dhatupatha. . 
47: Fryat: lll 88 agift # : E-BAT: I ( TEHCO ) # 
17:11 J, T T Funkti II gånat urg24: Fuarat TTT 17 TEATË Ta ir 
92. After the verbs vrit to exist &c., Parasmai. pada is optionally employed when the affixes sya (Fu ture and conditional) and san (Desiderative) follow. 
. The maine verbs are five in number and are included in the mana sub class. They are to be, Ty to grow, my to fart or break wind; Fer to ooze, and gg to be able. As ist Future feegra orf à, it will be, conditional 
TEET Or acca; Desiderative FIFATA or Taraua &c. 
In other tenses than the above, they are always Atmanepadi. As वर्नवे it is. 
लुटिचलपः ॥ ९३ ॥ पदानि ॥ लुटि । पारूपः। (स्यसनो वा TERRO) 
वृत्तिः ॥ लुटि च स्यसनोचकृपे परस्मैपरं वा भवति ॥ 
93. After the verb kļip to be fit, Parasmai pada is optionally employed, when luţ (Ist Future) is affixed, as well as when sya and san are affixed. 
The verb Ft is one of the five verbs of the sub-class, are of the last aphorism. Therefore it will take both parasmaipada and Atmanepada, when the affixes Fr or follow. The present sûtra makes the additional declar. ation in the case of ist Future or pan. Thus in Lut we have:-*HTÔ or कन्नासे thou wilt be; in Ist Future we have :-कल्पिष्यते or कल्पस्यति he will be%3 in the Desiderative we have: Fara or far ; in the conditional we hare:- Fura or T979 . 
ओ३म Il va 997an 
BOOK I. 
IG: 11 
CHAPTER IV. 
BIGSTED BUT N 9 11 qerfa n 97 Ferre, meist u 
TA: 11 KGTTT: mina a trata s pohtig Trailfea apuntat am: सत्र एकासंताभवतीति वदितव्यम् ।। 
1. From this sûtra up to the aphorism Kada râh Karmadhâraye (II. 2. 38) only one name of each thing named is to be understood. 
What is that name then? That which comes last, where the claims are otherwise equal (I. 4. 2.) and that which were its claim disallowed, would have no other opportunity of conducing to any result, would be the recognised name. As a short vowel is called 'light' by I. 4.10, and it is also called 'heavy' when it precedes n conjunct consonant (1. 4. 11.) Thus a short vowel has two names 'light' and 'heavy.' But it will not be called . light when it precedes a conjunct consonant, but will have only one name, i.e., 'heavy.' Thus in fa to divide for to split, the ris'light' while the same letter is 'heavy'in FireT teaching HT begging. 
Thus in the root Ty the wis . heavy' and therefore in forming its aorist we have the form vaara. Similarly . The rule VII. 4.93 aot applying here as that rule is applicable to laghu vowels only. 
विप्रतिषेधे परं कार्यम् ॥ २॥ पदानि ॥ विप्रतिषेधे, परम् , कार्यम् ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ (सुल्यबनविरोधो विप्रतिषेधः) सस्मिन् विप्रतिषेधे परंकार्यम् भवति । 
2. When rules of equal force prohibit each other, then the last in the order herein given is to take effect. 
The word Forgra y means 'opposition of rules of equal force. When two topics having different objects in vicw find scope of action simullang. ously in one particular case, that opposition of cqual forces is called 
168 
NADI DEFINED. 
[BK. I. CH. IV. $ 3. 
vipratishedha. A general rule (utsarga) and its exception (upavada), or an in variable (nitya) and an optional (anityo) rule, or an antaranga and a bahiranga rule, are not rules of equal force. There the stronger prevails against the weaker. As an example of rules of equal force, see VII. 3. 102. and VII. 3. 103: The first rule declares, 'when a case-affix beginning with a letter of yan pratyahara follows, the long vowel is substituted for the final of an inflective base ending in a short . As Vriksha + bhyam - Vșikshåbhyam. The next rule de clares :- When a plural case-affix beginning with a letter of jhal pratyå båra follows, & is the substitute for the final short of an inflective base.' As Vriksha + su=Vșiksheshu. But when the plural case-affix bhyah follows, what rule are we to apply? For the letter bha belongs both to the pratyaharas yan and jhal. Are we to lengthen the short , or substitute ? The present sútra gives the reply, g is to be substituted because VII. 3. 103 ordaining g follows next to VII. 3. 102. Thus Vriksha + bhyah - Vrikshebhyah. 
Jaoreet art # Bu açıfa u & Fit- 
meni, at a वृत्तिः ॥ ईकारान्तमकारान्तं च स्याख्यं शब्दरूप नदी संतं भवति । 
3. Word-forms ending in long i and û being names of females are called Nadi... 
The word u is compound of f +. The word stryakhya means that which by itself denotes the name of a female. These words must be always feminine, baving no masculine of the same form, as the word gråmapi has. As the words eart Kumari a virgin, T. yavågah rice gruel. The declen sion of nouns of nadi class is somewhat peculiar which will be treated of later. As see Rule VII. 3. 112r is the augment of the case-affixes having an indicatory when they come after a word ending with a Nadt. . 
Why do we say ending in and ? Because feminine nouns not ending in these vowels will not be declined like Nadi words. Thus while the dative of कुमारी will be कमाये , the dative of gहिद will begहिने . 
Why do we say which are feminine '? Because if they are names of males, they will not be called Nadi. As umut: leader of a village ; &rat: 
leader of an army; खलप: a sweeper; their dative being मामण्ये , सेनान्ये खनने. 
Why have we used the word åkhya 'name' in the text ? Because feminine gender must be denoted by the word itself and not by any other cpithet used along with the word. Thus if the head-borough or the sweeper should be of the female sex, the Dative Singular would still be around for and a fora. 
ने यडुवस्थानाय स्त्री ॥४॥ पदानि ॥न, श्य-श्व-स्थानी, Bet, gaat) u 
ga: 1 548 27T1:1417 malfeitastant at tetesit ni.. 
BK. 1. CH. IV. 4-6 ] 
.:: NADI DEFINED. 
169 
4. Feminine words ending in i and û which admit the substituto (ru) iya, and (TTT) uvaŮ (VI. 4. 77) are not called Nadi; except the word stri, (which is called nadi notwithstanding its substituting iyan).. 
The definition of Nadi given in the last sätra was rather too wide, this limits the scope. Thus af, happiness, 4 brow, admit the substitutes iyan and uvan respectively, and are not nadi. Their vocative singular is 
sit:, * &c., while the vocative singular of stri is far. 
___ यामि ॥५॥ पदानि ॥ वा, आमि, (नेयवा -यू-नदी) वृत्तिः ॥ इयडुबस्यानो यू अामिपरतो वा नदीसंतो न भवतः ॥ 
5. Feminine words ending in i and û, though admitting iyait and uvait substitutes, are optionally termed Nadi, when the affix âm (Gen Pl.) follows, but not so the word stri, which is always Nadi. 
+ 877 = st 776 + 7 föräng; x + yra a yor; or s + Ara * =* + 7 + 74 (VII. 1. 54.) - tur; 4 + 7 = rm. But stof is always 
nadi, and we have eftury strinàm. 
To the absolute prohibition enjoined by the last sätra, this allows an option in the case of Genitive Plural. 
Refat Etuku " agtfat fefa (-tfa) yai,, (I rat-9764-11-9eat): 
वृतिः ॥ निति परतो इस्लभ योः सम्बन्धी वः स्याख्यो इयवस्यानो पा नदीसंतो भवतः ॥ 
6. When a case-affix having an indicatory 1 (nit) follows, then feminine words ending in short i and û are optionally termed Nadi, as well as feminine nous in long i and û which admit ofiyan and uvan; but not so the word stri, which is always Nadi, : 
Feminine words in long i and a have been defined as nadt, words in short vowels can never be termed nadt, while even some words in long vowels have also been excluded from the scope of the definition if they take iyad and uvan. The present sútra declares an option in the case of all the above words, when a case-affix having an indicatory follows. 
. The case-allixes having an indicatory * are the Dative, Ablative, Genitive and Locative singulars. Thus we have: 
170 
GHI DEFINÉD. 
[ BK. I. CH. IV. 81-9. 
Dative मतये or मध्ये धेनवे or धेन निये or श्रियै ; Ablative Genitive मतेः or मत्याः धेनी or धेन्वाः श्रियः or श्रियाः; Locative मतो or मत्यामू धेनो or धेन्वा भियि or forat . So also ya or ye &c. But stri is always fod &c. . 
शेषो ध्यसखि ॥ ७ ॥ पदानि ॥ शेषः, घि, असखि, (हस्त्र) । 
वृत्तिः ॥ शेषो न पिसंज्ञो भवति सखिशल वर्जयिया । क श षः? इस्वमिवावान्त यजस्याख्यं ,स्याख्यं च यत्रनदीसंज्ञकं स शेषः॥ 
7. The rest of the words that end in short y are called ghi with the exception of the word sakbi. 
This defines the word ghi. The peculiarity of the declension of ghi words will be treated later on. The word hrasva is understood in this sútra. The word sesha or 'the rest implies 'the words ending in short for a which are not the names of females, or if they are feminine pames, they are not nadi words. 
As fit fire. Before case-affixes having an indicatory n, the ghi nouns gupate their vowel VII. 3. III. As अग्नि +है अग्ने + ए-अग्नये to the fire. So also वायु ४ - वायवे to the wind. But the declension of sakhi in these cases is:-सख्या सख्ये सख्युः and सख्यो. 
पतिः समास एव ॥ ८॥ पदानि ॥ पतिः, समासे, एव, (घि) 
8. The word pati is called ghi only when it is in a compound. 
The word pati would have been ghi by the last satra; the present süt ra is therefore a niyama rule, restricting the use of ghi in the case of pati to its occurring in composition. The word eva'only' is used in a restrictive sense. 
As gear by the lord but fait by the lord of creatures. So also पत्ये and प्रजापतये; पत्यः and प्रजापतेः, परयो and प्रजापतो &c. When पति isghi; there is guga of the vowel before the four ist affixes by VII. 3. 111. 
षष्ठी युक्तश्छन्दसि वा ॥ ९॥ पदानि ॥ षष्ठी-युक्तः, छन्दसि, वा, (पतिः घि) 
वृत्तिः ॥ षष्ठयन्तेन युक्तः पतिशलः छन्दसि विषये पा, पिसजो भवति ॥ 
9. The word pati when used in connection with a noun ending in the sixth or genitive case, is ghi, optionally, in the Chhandas (veda). 
The word pati is understood in this sûtra. By the last sätra, pati would have not been ghi when not in composition. This stra makes an exception to that when this word occurs in the Vaidic literature. 
BK. I.CH. IV.8 10-12.] . 
LAGHU AND GURU. 
it 
PR.. 
. 
. 
कुलचानां पतये or पत्ये नम: salutation to the lord of the Kulunchas. 
Why do we say 'when used in connection with a noun in the genie tive case'? Observe मया परया नरदृषियथासः. 
Why do we say 'in the Chhandas? 
हरवं लघु ॥ १० ॥ पदानि ॥ एवम्, लघु । वृतिः ॥ इस्थमक्षरं लघुसंसं भवति ।। 
___10. A short vowel is called 'light' (laghu). 
This defines the word Laghu. A hrasva vowel which has already been defined (I. 2. 27), is under certain circumstances called laghu or 'light'; thus the i of face to break, is laghu; and by being laghu it is gupated before the affix ता + श्रा,as भेत्ता he will break, by virtue of the rule VII. 3.86, which declares that a laghu penultimate vowel is gunated before a Sarvadhatuka or an ardhadhatuka affix. So alsoना ,भचीकरत and अजीहरत. 
संयोगगुरु ॥ ११ ॥ पदानि ॥ संयोगे, गुरु, (हस्खम्) वृत्तिः । संयोगे परतो इस्मतरं गुरुसंज्ञ भवति ।। 
11. When a conjunct consonant follows, a short vowel is termed 'heavy'(Guru). 
A hrasva vowel however is not to be called 'light' when it is followed by a conjunct consonant. As the i of TFT 'learning' is a heavy vowel. Thus farar is derived from far + oF (III. 3. 103, let the affix # come after that verb which has a heavy vowel and ends in a consonant when the word to be formed is feminine). So also कुण्डा and भिक्षा. 
दीर्घश्च ॥ १२॥ पदानि ॥ दीर्घम, प, (गुरु) वृत्तिः ॥ दीपंचाक्षरगुरुसंतं भवति ॥ 
12. And a long vowel is also termed heavy, (Guru). 
This is clear the anuvritti of the word conjunct is not understood in this satra. As I of faithe endeavoured, t he saw. Here the letterf is guru, and because of its being called guru, the rule III. 1. 36 is applied in forming the perfect tense by the addition of the augment . Thus all long vowels, and short vowels followed by conjunct consonants are guru or heavy: All other short vowels are laghu. 
___ यस्मात् प्रत्ययविधिस्तदादि प्रत्यये ऽहम् ॥१३॥ पदानि ॥ यस्मात् ॥ प्रत्यय-विधिः, तद्-मादि, प्रत्यये, अङ्गम् । 
निः॥ यस्मात् प्रत्ययो विधीयते धातोर्वा पानिपरिकामा तदादि पन्द्रका प्रत्यये परसोजसंह भवति॥ 
7179 
ANGA DEFINED. .. 
[BK. I. CH. IV. & 13. 
. 13. After whatsoever there is an affix enjoin ed, whether verbal root or ciude-form, that which begins therewith in the form in which it appears when the affix follows it, is called an Inflective base (anga). 
The words of this sůtra require some explanation. Yasmat after whatsoever ; pratyaya-vidhih compound of pratyaya meaning an affix and vidhih, a precept, i.e. a rule enjoying an affix; tadadi, 1. S. that which begins therewith; pratyaye 7. S. - in a pratyaya i.e. when a pratyaya folloivs (I. 1.) is 
called a base. . . After whatsoever there is an affix enjoined, whether it be a verbal root (Dhatu) or a nominal basc (pråtipadika), the word-form having that as its beginning, is called an anga, with regard to the affix that follows. The word yasmát is used in the aphorism to point out the thing named, as anga; because the word tadadi follows it. This defines the word anga. The word base' is thus a relative term with regard to its affix. Thus + HT - कर्ता he will doहर्ता he will lose. करिष्यति , हरिष्यति Here because the root 
and gets the name of they are gunated by (VII. 3. 84) similarly because TTT &c. get the name Anga, their vowel is vriddhied in 1971: &c. . 
The words kļi hri arc anga with regard to the affix ta &c 3 + 879 = TT: ; TT.T. Here upagu and kapatu are anga with regard to an. Similarly 5 + FT + 1 = tftrat + T = AfTyrr. Here the whole word form Karishya is regarded as anga, and as such the short a is lengthened by VII. 3. 101; because though the affix vah is enjoined alter the word kri, the form which begins with kşi i.e. karishya will also be called anga when the affix is to be added. The word tadadi, therefore, has been used in the satra, to make the definition of Anga applicable to the forms which a word may as. sume after taking the intermediate affixes like sya &c., or he belore the final affixes. Thus 5 + TT +7 * tur - ogifa (VII. 1. 72 and VI. 4. 8) kunda + num + 1 = kundan + 1 = kundani, bowls. Here the whole form kupdan is called anga, and as such it lengthens its vowel before 
the case-affix f by VI. 4. 8. 
Why have we used the word pratyaya? Without it the rule would have run thus:-- After whatever there is anything enjoined &c., is called Anga.' Then in aft + fact - praat. Here sandhi of vowels is enjoined between + - *. If it was here an Anga, then its last vowel would have been replaced by 5 (VI.4. 77), the form bcing fenfuture 
Why have we used the word for? Had we omitted it the rule would have run thus :- "After whatsoever there is an affix, whether root or prati dadika is Anga." Thus in sy spal, though the affix adhupa is placed after BK. I. CH IV. $ 14, 15. I 
PADA'DEFINED.. - 
17g 
the word dadbi, it is not enjoined by any rule; and the word so is not called anga. Had it been so called, then the g of dadhi should have been elided by rule VI. 4. 148. 
The word pratyaya has been repeated t:vice in this stra in order to: show that when an affix is clided, the term anga will not apply to what stood: before it. Thus in the compound word lat + fert for thc sake of the woman. Here in forming the Tat purusha compound the dative case-affix. after the word eft has been elided, för as a general rule case-affixes are: elided in forming compounds. If the word et after its affix bad been elided, still retained its old designation of Anga, the Fift + would have been; fero, the augment iyan being added by the rule already referred to above., 
सुप्तिङन्तं पदम् ॥ १४ ॥ पदानि ॥ सुप्-तिङ्-अन्तम्, पदम् ॥ वृत्तिः ।। सुबन्तं तिङन्तं च धनरूपं पदसंज्ञ भवति । 
14. That which ends in sup ( case-afix ) IV. 1. 2; or in tin III. 4.78 (tense-affix), is called a pada or inflected word. 
The sup or case-affixes are those by which nouns are declined ; and tió are tense-affixes by which verbs are conjugated. They have already been given before. Thus ATAU + T = Thur: the Bråhmanas qafa they cook. 
It might be asked by a caviller why the word fra has been used in the aphorism, for by the rule of tadanta given in Sätra I. 1. 72 a rule relating to sup will mean and include also that which ended with a sup-afix. To this we reply, that the very fact that the word anta is used in this satra, indicates by implication (jnapaka) that the Tadanta rule of Satra 72 Chapter I does not apply to rules of sanjña (definition) made with regard to affixes. Thus tarap and tamap affixes are called gha by Sutra I. 1. 22. The tadanta-vidhi will not apply here; words ending with these affixes will not be called gha: Thus Alkuat will not be called gha, for had it been so called, the long will be shortened in gat haluat. In short, an affix when employed in a rule which teaches the meaning of a technical term (sanjña) does not denote a word-form ending with the affix.' 
7: ph ng lagufa ula, , (97) # वृत्तिः॥ नान्तं धनरूपं क्वे परतः परसंशं भवति॥ 
15. The word-form ending in n, is called pada, when kya follows (i.e., the affixes kyach, kyan and kyash). 
These are affixes by which denominative verbs are formed from pouns. See. III. 1. 8, 11, and 13. A word ending in or is called pada, when these affixes follow. Thus THT + 4y = tsita 3rd Per, s. (ritafa hc 
PADA DEFINED 
(Bk. I: CH. IV. $ 16, 17. 
behaves like a king. So also THC + E T HYH (VII. 4. 25.) **** धर्माय or धर्मायवि. The result of its being called pada is that ther of राजन् , 
&c., is elided by Sätra VIII. 2. 7. (there is elision of final in a pada which is entitled to the designation of pratipadika). Thus *** + - 
TT + T - Tata (VII. 4. 33). 
These three affixes uur &c., come after case-infected words (i.l. words ending in sup), and though, before these asfixes, the case terminations are elided, still by Sätra I. 1. 62 such words would have retained the name of pada which they got by Rule 14 of this Chapter. The present sôtra however makes a restriction (niyama). It declares that only words ending in retain the name of pada ; while all other case-inflected words before these affixes do not retain that designation. Thus the words specch, ega ladle arc not treated as pada and we have read and grud. Had they been pada, the would have been changed into by VIII. 2. 30.. 
fafat ul 9€ agira u -gfa, , (998) f:ll fara TT TT: TERM for it 
16. When än aifix having an indicatory a follows then that which precedes it is called pada. 
The sätra 18 of this chapter teaches that before certain affixes, the prcceding word is called bha. This sätra declares an exception to that by anticipation. Thus Rule IV. 2. 115 declares :-"Alfixes and become after the vriddha (I. 1. 74) word 77." Here the allix Gt has an indicatory 
, thercfore the word 77, standing before it, will be called pada. Thus 92 + = syaita: VII. 1. 2. belonging to you. The result of being pada is that is changed into (VIII. 2. 39). Similarly X is in T (After the word ärņå there is yus V. 3. 123). Thus fuity :; so also E V. 1. 106, has as indicatory. Thus fit: There is no guna because of its being pada. 
स्वादिष्य सर्वनामस्थाने ॥ १७ ॥ पदानि ॥ सु-आदिषु, असर्वनाम FIA, (998) 
वृत्तिः॥स्वादिषु प्रत्ययेषु परतः सर्वनामस्यानजितेषु पद पदसंज्ञ भवति । 
17. When the affixes beginning with a (IV. 1. 2) and ending in (V. 4. 151.) follow, not being Sarvanånasthåna (1. 1. 43) then that wliich precedes is called pada. 
The affixes beginning with su and ending with kap aro mcant by the above sutra. Thus the case-allix ara (ins Dual) is an affix included in the above. Thus C + n - tripum, Tafti , ITTİ, Far, T T , T . Ther is clided by being pada 
BK. I. CH. IV. § 18, 19 ) 
BHA DEFINED. 
. 
193 
... Why do we say when not a Sarvanamsthana'? Observe t o at 
- t two kings. (F14: kings. The is not clided. 
. . . , T ! 86 llatía u q-*f, 479, (Farfesto) P: 11 PITYTT HTET FIT THEYT THAT Ruh 77: *# *f& II वार्निकम् ।। नभोगिरोमनुषो वायुपसंख्यानम् ।। पार्मिकम् ॥वषण्यसवयोः॥ 
18. And when an affix, with an initial y or an initial vowel, being one of the affixes, beginning with su and ending in k, follows, not being Sarvanåmasthånay then what precedes, is called Bha. 
This debars the application of pada. Thus rot + 4 (IV. 1. 105) at a grandson of Garga. So also may. The affix yan begins with a ya and the word garga being treated as Bha its final gis elided before the affix by VI. 4. 148. 
So also 5 + - FFT: (IV. 1. 95) grandson of Daksha :. Here the affix begins with a vowel the word standing before it being Bha, it causes elision of the final Hof daksha. . The word or is in the 7th case meaning when q or to follow; and by the last Vart of Sutra 1. 1. 72, it means when an affix beginning with ya or ach follow.' 
Vart:-The words TĘ, TE and should be treated as Bha when the affix rą follows. Thus TTF like the sky. torq like the Angiras. 1979 like the man. By being Bha, the ç is not changed into ç, which it would have been, had it been a pada (VIII. 2. 66). 
Vart:-The words is treated as Bha in the vedas when the words and follow. Thus pou; que ÀX. Herc had the word vrishan been treated as pada, the of would not have been changed into o (Sce Rule VIII. 4. 37); and this would have been dropped before the affix vasu by VIII. 2. 7. 
all Forma 98 il asta u a-hr, 99-77, (979) u. sfat: 11 AATA HATCH 1750 Here grad mat wiat for a 
19. Tlie word-form ending in t or in 8 is called Bha when an affix with the force of matup (whose is it,'' or in whom it is 'V. 2. 94) follows. 
The word Bha is understood in this satra. Thus is the word after having butter milk Nom. Sing. Tor: the herdsman having butter milk, foart WATE: the cloud full of thunder. So also our famous 
176 
BHA CASES. 
(Bk. I. CH. IV. § 20, 21. 
qerit full of milk. Thus gif + HIT - g ara, T + FR (V. 2. 121) - TT. By making these Bha, the operation of pada rule is debarred in their case. That is to say the final # of udasvit &c., and the x of yasas &c., are not changed into and respectively, which had they been pada words would have been the case by the action of Satra VIII. 2. 39, and VIII. 2. 66. vis., ggfirmand area which are incorrect. 
____ अयस्मयादीनि छन्दसि ॥ २०॥ पदानि ॥ अयस्मय-आदीनि, grafo, ( 
GPS: 1 starter fat tahul ganes farà arrat material : 
20. Words like ayasmaya &c., are valid forms in the chhandas (veda). 
These words being taught here in the topic relating to pada and Bha, show that they have been properly formed in the chhandas by the ap plication of the rules of Bha and pada. Thus भयस् + भय - अयस्मय made of iron. Here the word stere is treated as Bha and hence the x is not changed Into r . Thus 
iron-made coat of mail. Fanta on iron vessels. The present form of this word is opinia. In some places both these pada and Bha apply simultaneously. Thus in the word formed by + , the is first changed into #by treating the word rich as a pada. Then the word *is treated as bha, and therefore the ķis not changed into or before me. For had it been pada, the form would have been przą Rigvat. These irregularly formed words occur only in the chhandas or Vedic literature. Thus a Te P ar t. 
ay agama p9 li actra u agy, ag-au gfa: ll any 1974 
21. In expressing multeity, a Plural case affix is employed. 
When it is intended to denote multeity those affixes should be employed after nouns and verbs, which denote plural number. Thus far. gafar The Brahmins read. 
This rule applies to words which are capable of expressing numbers. Indeclinables (Avyaya) do not admit of numbers, and consequently they arc always in singular number which is the general form. 
che fa 98 N RP ut gefa n farge, fatto 
guereau 
पतिः॥विकल्पयोरर्थयोरिवचनकरचने भवनः । 
BK. h. C1. IV. $ 22-24. ) 
NUMBERS KARAKA. 
22. The dual and singular case-affixes are employed severally in the sense of duality and unity. 
This is also clear. When duality is to be expressed, a dual case. affix should be employed, and in the case of unit, the singular case-affin. Thus HUT : the two Brahmins cook. HTUT the Brahmin cooks.. 
फारफे ॥ २३ ॥ पदानि । कारके। पनिः॥ कारक इस्यधिकारो बेदितव्यः, यदित मध्यमनुक्रमिष्यामः कारक इत्येवं नहे. ed" 23. The phrase 'kâraka' (meaning in the special relation to a word expressing an action') is to be understood in the following aphorisms. 
Any thing that helps towards the accomplishment of an action is a karaka. Thus in 'cooking,' the fire, the furnace, the vessel, the cook are all helpers in the accomplishment of the acton. Thus Rama cooks food in a vessel, by the fire from the furnace for his master. Here Rama is agent käraka; 'food' is object karaka; 'vessel' is a locative karaka, fire is an ins trumental karaka, 'furnace' is the ablative karaka and 'master' is the dative karaka. 
The word 'kåraka' thus is synonymous with the word cause (hetu) and occasion (nimitta). All the various causes and occasions that are re quired to complete an action will be kårakas. Out of the seven cases in which a sanskrit noun is declined, six represent such relation with an action. The Genitive or the sixth case can never be directly related with an action, and thus can never stand in the relation of a kåraka to a verb. 
ध्रुवमपाये पादानम ॥ २४ ॥ पदानि ॥ ध्रुवम्, अपाये, अपादा. 7 (TT) n 
निः॥ भुवं यदपाययुक्त मपाय साध्ये यावधिभूत सत्कारकम्पादानसंगं भवति । पार्मिकम् ।। जुगुप्साविरामभमादार्थानामुपसंख्यानम् ॥ 
24. A noun whose relation to an action is that of a fixed point from which departure takes place is called apådâna or ablation. 
This defines the Ablation or Apadana käraka. Thus fraterna be comes from the village, ATTIEF he descends from the mountain. Furtar. lost his object. tar qfaq: fallen from chariot. The Apadana takes the sth case-affix (II. 3. 28) and the above examples show this. When therefore this relation is to be expressed, the fixed point (like grama, parvata &c., in the above) which is the limit denoted by a word dependent on a verb, is called ablation.' 
178 
THE ABLATION..... .. 
[BK. I. CH. IV. 825-278 
Vart:-The objects of verbs denoting 'aversion,' 'cessation' and * negligence' are also called ablation. Thus:-अधर्माजगप्सले he dislikes in justice; अधर्मादिरमति he ceases from injustice. धर्मात्प्रमापति he neglects justice. 
भीत्रार्थानां भयहेतुः ॥ २५ ॥ पदानि ॥ भी-त्रा-अर्थानाम्, भय हेतुः, (कारके अपादानम्) । 
वृत्तिः ॥ विभेत्यांना त्रायत्यानां च धातना प्रयोगे भयहेतुर्य स्तस्कारकमपापानसतं 
25. In case of words implying 'fear' and protection from' danger' that from which the danger or fear procedes is called Apådana käraka, . The verbs signifying 'fear' or 'protection' govern the object feared of, or the danger to be protected from, in the ablative case. Thus चोरोभ्यो विभति he is afraid of thieves, चोरोभ्य उदिजते he is agitated because of the thieves. 
चोरेभ्यस्मायते or रक्षति . He protects or saves from the thieves. 
Why do we say "the cause of fear (bhaya-hetu) is put in the ablative case? Observeपरण्ये बिभेति or मायते he fears or protects in the forest. 
पराजे रसोढः ॥ २६ ॥ पदानि ॥ पराजे, असोढः, (का० अपादानम्) . . 
वृत्तिः ॥ परापूर्वस्य जयतेः प्रयोगे सोदो योऽर्थः सो नशक्यते तस्कारकमपादानसंजभवति । 
.. 26. In the case of the verb parāji, to be tired or weary of,' that which becomes unbearable, is called Apådana kâraka. 
When the verb F# to conquer, with the preposition para has the sense of becoming tired or unbearable' it governs ablative case of the thing become unbearable. As अध्ययनात् पराजयते he finds study unbearable. 
Why do we say that which becomes unbearable.' Observe TV परामयते he defeats the enemies. 
वारणार्थाना मीप्सितः ॥२७॥ पदानि ॥ धारण-अर्थानान, ईप्सितः (का० अपादा०)॥ 
वृत्तिः॥ वारणार्थानां धातूनां प्रयोगे य ईप्सितोऽर्थः सस्कारकमपादानसंशं भवति॥ 
27. In case of verbs having the sense of 'pre venting, the desired object from which one is prevented or warded off is called Ablation or Apådana kåraka... ... : The obstruction to one's natural inclination is called 'vårana or pre vention. As यवेभ्यो गो वारयति or निवर्तयति he wards off or withholds the cow from the barley. 
Sense 
Bk. I. CH. IV.8 28.30.] 
THE ABLATION. 
179 
RAIN 
Why do we say "the object desired' is put in the ablative case'? Observe of rura fit he wards off the cow in the field. 
___ अन्ती येनादर्शन निउति ॥ २८ ॥ पदानि ॥ अन्ती , येन, अदर्शनम् , इच्छति, (का० अपादा०) ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ अन्तर्द्धिनिमिन येनादर्शनमालनाध्यतितत्कारकमपादानसंतं भवति ॥ 
28. When concealment is indicated, the per son whose sight one wishes to avoid, is called Apå dâna karaka. 
Thus narat o r faoitua he conceals or hides from the teacher; so that the teacher may not find him out or see him. 
Why do we say when concealment is indicated'? Observe चौरान मदिहसवे he does not wish to see the thieves. Here the term chauran is in the accusative case. 
Why Las the word ichchhati been used in the text? The apadana käraka is to be used there only, where one desires that he should not be seen, yet he shows himself. 
आयातोपयोगे ॥ २९ ॥ पदानि ॥ मा-ख्याता, उप-योगे, (फा० अपा०)॥ 
वृतिः ॥ उपयोगे साध्ये य भाख्याता तत्कारकम्पादानसंतं भवति । . . 29. The noun denoting the teacher is called Apâdâna or ablation, in relation to the action signifying formal teaching. . 
The word great means teacher, and it means acquiring know ledge in the regular way. Thus उपाध्यायादधीते or भागमयति he learns from the preceptor. 
Why do we say 'when meaning to learn'? Observe para yulfat he hears the player. . जनिकः प्रकृतिः ॥ ३० ॥ पदानि ॥ जनि कर्तुः, प्रकृतिः, (का० अपा०) . 
वृत्तिः ॥ अन्वर्यस्थमन्मनः का भायमानः तस्यया प्रकृतिः कारचं हेतुः सस्कारकमपान संसंभवति ॥ 
30. The prime cause of the agent of the verb jan to be born, is called Apādana. 
___That which is the Agent (क ) of the verb jan, is called अनिकर्ता. That which is the prime-cause (प्रकृति) of the agent (or product) of the root jan 
180 
• THE DATIVE. 
[BK. I. CH. IV. 131,32. 
is put in the ablative case. As अगच्छरो जायते , the arrow is produced froin horn गोमयाद पधिको जायते the scorpion is produced from cowdung. 
भुवः प्रभवः ॥३१॥ पदानि ॥ भुवः , प्रभवः, (का० अपा०), वृत्तिः। भूक ः प्रभवो व स्तस्कारकमपादानसंशं भवति । 
. 31. The source of the agent of the verb bhu, to become, is called Apadana.. 
The phrase 'of the agent (kartuh,) is understood here. The word प्रभव means the source or that from which anything arises. As हिमवतो गंगा प्रभवति the Ganges has its source in the Himalayas. काश्मीरेभ्यो विवस्ता प्रभवति. The Hydaspes has its source in Cashmere.. .. .. . 
___ कर्मणा यमभिप्रेति स संप्रदानम् ॥ ३२॥ पदानि ॥ कर्मणा, यम्, अभिति, सः, संप्रदानम्, (का०). 
पुतिः ।। कर्मण, करणभूतेन कर्ता यमभिप्रेति तरकारकं संमदानसं भवति । वार्तिकम् ॥ क्रियाग्रहण मपि कर्मभ्यम् ॥ वार्तिकम् ।। कर्मणः करएसंता वनण्या संमदानस्य च कर्मसंता॥ 
32. The person whom one wishes to connect with the object of giving, is called Sampradâna or re cepient. . . . 
Though the word or in the sůtra is indefinitely used, meaning 
• with the object' yet it is not every object of any verb. The object must be of the verb 'to give. 
A उपाध्यायाय गां ददाति hegives the cowto the teacher. माणवकाय मिताम् ददाति hegives alms to the boy. Here the words 'cow' and ' alms' are the object of the verb give'; the persons connected with this object are the teacher and the boy respectively. These latter are in the Dative case and take the 4th case-affix. 
Vart:—The person whom one wishes to connect with the action should also be called recipient. As श्राद्धाय निगर्डले he censures for the sake of Sraddha. युद्धाय सनस्पते be prepares for battle. पस्ये शेने she sleeps for her husband. 
Vart:-2. After some verbs (especially to sacrifice), the object (karma) gets the name of Instrument (karana) and the recipient (Sam. pradana) is called object (karma). 
Thus पशुना रुद्र यजते or पशुं रुद्राय ददाति he sacrifices with an animal to Rudra, which is equivalent to, he gives an animal to Rudra.' 
__ रुपयर्थानां प्रीयमाणः ॥ ३३ ॥ पदानि ॥ रुचि अर्थानाम्, प्रीयमाणः, (का० संप्रदानम्) . . . . . . . . . . . . 
पनिः ॥ च्यानां धातना भयोगे प्रीयमाणे योग्य तत्कारक संमानसं भवति ।। 
BK. I. CH. IV. $ 33-35 ] 
THE DATIVE 
181 
33. In case of verbs having the signification of the root ruch 'to like,' the person or thing that is pleased or satisfied, is called Sampradana or recepient. .. 
The verbs having similar meaning (artha) as the word ruchi or * liking'arc rou. A desire or longing caused by something else, is called ruchi. As देवदत्ताव रोचवे मारक: the sweet meat pleases Devadatta. यज्ञदत्ताव Figd 94: Yajnadatta likes Apupa. Here modaka is the agent that draws out the longing which is latent in Devadatta. 
Why do we say the person pleased? Observe para todas ofu. Deyadalta likes modak in the way. The word pathi being in ti 7th case. 
श्लाघन्सुस्वाशपां सीपस्यमानः ॥ ३४॥ पदानि ॥ श्लाघ-नहुरू 591-97977, uitter :, (770 dagio) a 
निः॥श्नाय न्हुइस्या शरइत्येतेषां जीप्यमानो यो स्तत् कारक संपदानसंहं भवति। 
34. In case of verbs slågh to praise, hnu to take away, sthå to stand, and sap to curse, the person whom it is intended to inform of or persuade by, these actions, is called Sampradana 
The word teen means whom it is desired to make known or in form. As tary Torqa he praises Devadatta, i.e., while praising Devadatta, he wishes that he should know this praise. So also with other verbs. As 
TETIT a he hides from (wishing that Devadatta should know of it) Deva datta. The fact she offers herself to Devadatta for (sexual embrace, wishing that he should know of it). It me he reviles Devadatta 
Why do we say the person whom it is intended to inform? Observe TTTT Forf of. Here pathi is in the Locative case. 
un set: 34 m Gira n urt:, 5- , (ETO ja Fro) a 
PT. Il vicera: seilet Tar se ATCE NA POTI 
35. In the case of the verb dhâri' to owe, the creditor is called Sampradana. 
The word 7979 of is compounded of two words 797 best and zu debt meaning (whose debt is best) creditor, as opposed to u debtor. As देवानाय शतं धारयति he owes hundred to Devndatta. 
Why do we say 'the creditor is called Recepient'? Observerar poatcafe 97 he owes hundred to Devadatta in the village. Here village is in the Locative case. 
182 
- THE DATIVE. 
[BK. I. CH. IV. 1 36-38. 
__ स्पृहे रीप्सितः ॥ ३६ ॥ पदानि ॥ स्पृहः, ईप्सितः, (का० संप्रदा०)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ स्फूह ईप्सायां, चुरादावदन्तः पश्यते, तस्य ईप्सितो योग्यस्तस्कारकं संप्रदान संज्ञ भवति। 
36. In the case of the verb sprih to desire, the thing desired is called Sampradana karaka. 
The verb er to desire, belongs to the churadi class. The word governed by this verb takes the Dative case. As पुष्पेभ्यः स्पृहयति he desires flowers, फन-यः स्पृहयति he desires fruits. 
Why do we say the thing desired.' Observe gonzit qarafa he desires flowers in the forest. Here it is in the Locative case. 
कुधगुहेया सूयार्थानां यं प्रतिकोपः ॥ ३७ ॥ पदानि ॥ क्रुध- दुष्ट ईया-असूय-अर्थानां, यं, प्रतिकोपः (का० संप्र०) । 
वृत्तिः ॥ क्रुधार्थानां प्रयोगे यं प्रतिकोपस्तस्कारकं संप्रदानसंभवति । .. 
37. In the case of the verbs having the sense of krudh to be angry, druh to injure, irshya to envy, aşûyå to detract, the person against whom the feeling of anger &c., is directed is called Sampradana 
' Krudh means non-tolerance, droha means doing wrong or hurt, irshya jealousy; and asůya means to find out the faults of another. The word kopa includes all the above four sorts of actions. As देवदत्ताय कुण्यति gafa fufa or Taufa he is angry upon, (i.e. with) or bears malice to, or is jealous of, or finds out the faults of Devadatta. Here Devadatta is in the Dative case. 
Why do we say " against whom the feeling of anger is directed.' Because if there be no feeling of anger, then these verbs will not govern the dative case, but the accusative. Thus ruthtreifat he is jealous of his wife, i.e., does not wish her to be seen by others. Here the word bharya is in the accusative case. 
बुधगृहो रुपसृष्टयोः कर्म ॥ ३८ ॥ पदानि ॥ क्रुध-दहोः, उप सष्टयोः; फर्म (का० यं प्रतिकोपः)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ धनुहो रूपन्टयो रुपसर्गसंबन्धयो ये प्रतिकोपस्लत्कारक कर्मसंज्ञ भवति । 
38. But in the case of the verbs krudh and druh, when preceded by prepositions, the person against whom the feeling of anger &c., is directed is called karma karaka or object. BK. I. CH. IV. $ 39, 40.) 
SAMPRADANA KARAKA. 
183 
This aphorism is a proviso to the last, and enjoins accusative case, where by the last, there would have been dative. The word upasrishta 
means having upasarga or preposition. As देवदत्तमभिध्यति अभिवपति. When used simply, those verbs of course govern the Dative case by the last aphorism. As देवदत्ताय अभ्यनि. 
राधीक्योर्यस्य विप्रश्नः ॥ ३९ ॥ पदानि ॥ राधि-ईयोः, यस्य, विपन्नः, (का० संप्रदा०) ॥ 
त्तिः ।। राधेरीमेश्चकारक संपदानसंखं भवति कीदृशं यस्य विनमः, विविधः प्रमः, विप्रमः स कस्य भवति यस्य शुभाशुभ पूज्यते ॥ 
39. In the case of the verbs rådh, to propi tiate, and iksh to look to, the person about whose good or bad fortune questions are asked is called Sampradana. 
The word vipraśna means literally asking various questions; and denotes questioning about the good or bad luck of another. Thus forma राध्यति-ईसते गर्ग: Garga is favorable to or looks to Devadatta, the sense is that being casually asked by Devadatta, he reflects upon the good or bad fortune 
of Devadatta. 
Another explanation of this sâtra is, the agent that puts various ques. tions is put in the dative case. As शिष्याय राधोति or इंसते वा गुरु: meaning, the pupil asks the teacher various questions to resolve his doubts, and the teacher answers those questions to the pupil. 
प्रत्याभ्यां श्रुवः पूर्वस्य कर्ता ॥४०॥ पदानि ॥ प्रति-आभ्यान, श्रुषः, पूर्यस्य, कर्ता (का० संप्रदा०) । 
वृत्तिः ॥ प्रतिभाऊ इत्येवं पूर्वस्य शृणोतेः कारकं संप्रदानसंज्ञ भवति कीदृशं पूर्वस्य कर्ता । 
40. In the case of the verb Sru preceded by thie prepositions prati and an; and meaning to promise,' the person to whom promise is made (lit: the person who was the agent of the former verb) is called Sampradana. 
The compound verb afany and str means to promise. A promise is made on the motion or at the instance of another. The person so prop who was the agent of the former action becomes the recipient of the promise in the latter case. As देवदत्ताय गां प्रतिशणोति--आशणोति he promises a cow to 
Devadatta. 
अनुप्रतिगृणश्च ॥ ४३ ॥ पदानि ॥ अनु-प्रति-गणः, च, (का० संप्रदा० पूर्यस्य कर्ता)४ 
निः ॥ भनुपूर्वसय प्रतिपूर्वस्य च गुणते: कारकं पूर्वस्याः क्रियायाः कर्नभूत संप्रदानसंज भवति। 
184 
INSTRUMENT KARAKA. 
[BK. I. CH. IV. $ 41-43." 
41. In the case of the verb gri, preceded by anu and prati, and meaning to encourage by repeating,' the person who was the agent of the prior action, which is repeated, is called Sampradåna. 
The phrase půrvasya kartå of the last is to be rcad into this aphorism. As it stimula. They encourage the Hotri, i.e., the Hotri priest invokes first, the others then follow him in invocation and by so doing encourage him. The word arr: and oft: mean cncouraging the invoker, 
साधकतमंकरणम् ॥ ४२ ॥ पदानि ॥ साधकतमन्, करणम् (sao) - 
वृत्तिः॥ क्रियापसिद्धौ यव प्रकृष्टोपकारक विपतितं तत्साधकतम कारक करणसं भवति॥ 
42. That which is especially auxiliary in the accomplishment of the action is called the Instrument or karapa kåraka. 
As griu pra he cuts with the sickle. acea foafat he divides by the axe. The instrument a an takes the third-case affix. 
Why do we say 'especially? Because in the case of the other karakás, the non-mention of the word 'especially makes it possible for us to use those cases, in not their strict sense. Thus though the locative case should be used where strictly a thing is located in another, yet we may say 
irai are the herdsman in the Ganges, not strictly in, but on the banks of, the Ganges. may the family of frogs in the well, i.e. on the sides of the well. 
fa: ** 1 xz lagfa il fea:, **, 9, (*10 97% ***TU ) 11 
वृत्तिः ॥ दिवः साधकतमं यत्कारकं तस्कर्मसंजं भवति चकारात् करणसतं च । 
43. That which is especially auxiliary in the accomplishment of the action, of the verb diy to play, is called karma object, as well as karaya, Instrument. 
The present sutra ordains accusative case, where by the operation of the last aphorism there ought to have been Instrumental case. The force of in the sůtra is to indicate that karapa is also to be read into this. As WEITT fronfa or artroufa he plays the dice or with the dicc. 
परिक्रयणे संप्रदानमन्यतरस्याम् ॥४४॥ पदानि ॥ परिक्रयणे, संप्रदानम, अन्यतरस्याम् (फा० साधकतम) ॥ 
: Il gfa **** Eat simreat tfat or 
BK. I. CH 1V. $ 44-47.) 
ADHIKARANA KARAKA 
185 
44. In the case of hiring on wages, that which is especially auxiliary in the accomplishment of the action of the verb parikri, employing on stipulated wages,' is optionally called Sampradâna or recipient. 
This ordains datire case, where there would otherwise bave beca Instrumental case. The word tego means to engage for a limited period on payment of wages, and not absolute purchase for all time. As Tara परिक्रीतो ऽनुमहि or शतेन परिकीतो ऽनुमहि . 
ADHIKARANA. eraritsu TUA 11 814 # ruta a T*:, foto 57077, (770) 
fa: 11 *Fit: Pfarra nettette faut afa NTFHafratu trata 11 
45. That which is related to the action as the site where the action is performed by reason of the agent or the object being in that place is called Adhikarana or the Location. 
That in which the action is supported or located is called adhara. As कटे भास्ते he is seated on the mat करे शेते he is sleeping on the mat. स्याल्या ya he cooks in the pot. The Adhikarana takes the 7th case-affix. . 
TETE FUTET À 11 H. Il fa il so-site-u 327978, F., (FT0 STOTT:) 
दृत्तिः ।। अधिपूर्वाणां शीद च्या आस् इत्येतेषा माधारोयस्सरकारकं कर्मसंसं भवति॥ 
46. That which is the site of the verbs si to lic down, stha to staud, as to sit, when preceded by the preposition adhi, is however called karma kåraka or objecte 
This ordains accusative case, where otherwise by the last sûtra there would have been the Locative case. As पाममधिशेते अधितिष्ठति or अध्यास्ते he lies down, occupies or lies in the village. 
af fafaga II yg agafa lift-fa-fast:, 9, (970 BMITT: **) 11 
वृत्तिः ॥ अभिनिपूर्वस्य विशतेराधारो यस्तस्कारकं कर्मसंनं भवति ।। 
47. That which is the site of the verb abhi niviš to enter, is also called karma-karaka. 
186 - 
KARMA KARAKA... 
(BK. I. CH. IV. $ 48, 49. 
As qrafafafara he resorts to the village. This is an optiooal rule, as the word "option" of sâtra 44 should be read into it. Thus we have the following forms also go sfiat: resorting to sin. marasamaalt. resorting to good. The rule bere is that of vyavasthita vibhasa. 
gairaus at: 11 86 11 geifa II 99-379-37-376-07:, (*To pierT: 1 ) 11 
f#: 11 99 47 
TT BET TRATTTT TAPAT *** *fo II वार्निकम् ॥ बसेरश्यर्यस्य प्रतिषेधो वक्तव्यः । 
48. That which is the site of the verh vas to dwell, when preceded by upa, anu, adhi, and an, is called karma-karaka. 
As पाममुपवसति सेना the army. dvells in the village पर्वतमुपवसति-अनुवसति अधिवसति or भावसति. 
Vart:--Prohibition must be stated when the verb means "fast. ing," or does not denote lying in a locality. As ont TTfa he fasts in the village. Here the verb upavasati governs the locative case and not the accusative. 
KARMA. agafaqasi ** yen li agrfa 11 ore, sferaan, **, (10) 
Il fri afhEn arra un ifade 
49. That which it is intended should be most affected by the act of the agent is called the object or karma. 
That which is especially desired by the agent to be accomplished by the action is called karma. As कटं करोति He makes the mat. मार्म गच्छति he goes to the village. Why do we say "desired by the agent"? Observe A7067 qua he tics the horse in the gram field. Here gram is no doubt most desired by the horse, but as horse is not the agent of the verb, the word 479 takes the locative case. Why do we use the word "most"? Observe that he eats the food along with the milk. Here milk is no doubt desired by the agent, but not being the principal object desired, takes the Instrumental case. 
Though the word " was understood in this sûtra by anuyritti from the last sätra, the repetition of this word here is to indicate that the anu vritti of the word adhåra does not extend to this sutra, because as we do not take the anuvritti of the word karma into this sútra, we do not take the 
Bk, I. CH. IV. $ 50, 51.) 
· Karma KARAKA. 
187 
anuvritti of any word of the previous sätra into this. Had we taken the anuvritti of the word karma from the last sätra, then we could use the acco. sative case in those limited instances, where the word is capable of taking the Locative case also, but not in other cases. Thus while we could very well say IT gua he enters the house, we could not say wirni qafa he cooks the food, frafa he drinks saktu. By repeating the word karma in this sútra, such examples become valid everywhere. The karma-karak, takes 
the second casc-affix. 
aan gairatferat !! 40.11 agyfa II , mw,a, erotfegan, (*10 **) 11 
वृत्तिः ॥ येन प्रकारेण कर्नु रीप्सिततम क्रियया युज्यते तेनैव चेत् प्रकारेण यदनीप्सित युक्तं भवति तस्य कर्मसंज्ञा विधीयते॥ 
50. If that which is not intended to be most affected by the act becomes however similiarly con nected with the action it also is called karma. 
That which is not desired by the agent is anipsita or object of aversion. Thus fare afa he eats poison, atafa He sees the thieves. 
TEST THAT FgTaifa going to the village, he plucks the roots of the trees. 
epaiva g 1149 11 erfat 11 3*fway, 9, (**) * वृत्तिः । पकथितं च यत्कारकं सरकर्मसंतं भवति ।। 
51. And that kâraka which is not spoken of as coming under any of the special relations of abla tion &c., is also called karma. 
There are some verbs in Sanskrit which take what is called an akathita object, in addition to their usual direct one. As its name indicates, it is that object which is not otherwise kathita or mentioned by way of any of the other case relations, such as STIE oraira &c. and is, therefore optional. If the noun capable of taking this akathita object be not intended for any other case, it is put in the Accusative case with such rerbs; as, as along 93: he milks the cow (her milk) 77 t 'he confines the cow to the fold.' Here w and ** are akathita or optional objects. If the speaker does not intend to have this object, the words will be put in their natural cases; as, T: (ablative) qerenfiu, 3 (locative) TURCH. 
The roots that are capable of governing two accusatives are mentioned in the following karika :-Harnes ses f or FH HRUF 11 tys स्याएकथित वथा स्यानी कर वहाम् ॥ 
- 
- 
- 
188 
KARMA KARAKA. 
[BK. I.CH. IV.853. 
In the case of the roots te 'to milk' या 'to beg,' पञ् 'to cook, for 'to punish,' qyto obstruct or confine' 'to ask,' fer to collect' 
to tell शास् 'to instruct' जि 'to win' (as a prize of wager) मन्य 'tochurn'मुम् 'to steal,' and also in the case of नी, कृष्, and ar all mean ing 'to take or carry' and others having the same signification, that noun which, besides the direct object, is affected by the verb, is put in the Accusa. tive case; as, गोपोन्धि पयः (S. K.) 'he milks the cow'; बलिं याचते वसा . 
Hebegs the earth of Bali'; similarly संडुनानीदनं पचति, गर्गाशसं दएडयति, मममवरुणद्धि गां, माणवकं पंथानं पृच्छति, वृक्षमवचिनोति फनानि, माएषक धर्म सूते-शास्ति वा, शत भयति देवदत्त, सुधा सीरनिधि मयनाति, देवरतं शतं मुष्णाति माममा नयति-हरति-कर्षति-पति वा are examples of the other roots in order. माणवर्क धर्म भाषते वक्ति था, बलि. वसी भिक्षते, तो स्व संवरणस्यायें बरयामि विभावसी are instances of this kind of object, because tę or 7 and font or have the same meaning as L and ary, the roots given in the kasika. 
Obs.----The roots चि, मुष, पच मंथ, रूप, जि, कृप , and ever वह are of cvery rare occurrence as governing two accusatives, in classical literature, though given in the abovc list. 
The roots mentioned above and others having the same sepse, take two objects. One of them is principal, and the other, secondary. In the case of the first twelve roots from gह to मुष, the nouns पय:, वसुओं, फलानि, सुर्धा, &c. are principal objects, and गां, बलि, वृक्ष, सीरनिधि &c. are secondary objects, for they can, according to the speaker's volition, be put in other cases. And in the case of the last four roots IT, is the principal object and ATA the secondary. Thus that which is necessarily put in the accusa. tive case in order to complete the idea of the verb, is the principal object, and that which may be put in the Accusative case, depending upon the speaker's will, is called the secondary object. 
गति बुद्धि प्रत्ययसानार्थशब्द कर्माकर्मकाणा मणिकर्तासणी॥५२॥ पदानि ॥ गति बुद्धि-प्रत्यवसान-अर्थ-शब्दकर्मा-कर्मकाणाम् , अणिकर्ता, सः, 
णी (कारके कर्म)। 
वृतिः ॥ गत्यर्याना युपर्याना प्रत्यवसानार्यानां च धातून तयाधब्द कर्मकाणा मकर्मकाण ज्च अण्यन्तानां यः कर्ता स एयन्तानां कर्मसंतो भवति । 
वार्निकम् ।। गन्ययेंषु नी वह्योः प्रतिषेधो वनव्यः । पार्मिकम् ।। बहेर नियन्त कर्टकस्यति वाष्यम् ।। पार्तिकम् ॥पादिखायोः प्रतियो परम्यः॥ पार्निकम् ।। मोर हिसार्थस्य प्रतिषेधो पत्नयः॥ 
52. Of the verbs having tho sense of mo tion' knowledge or information' and 'cating,' and of 
Bk. I. CH. IV. $ 52.] .. 
KARMA KARAKA. 
189 
verbs that have some literary work for their object, and of intransitive verbs, that which was the agent of the verb in its primitive (non-ni or non-causal state), is called the object (karma) in its causative state (when the verb takes the affix (ui). 
In the case of roots that imply 'motion,' knowledge' or 'informa tion' or some kind of eating,' and other roots having a similar sense; also of roots that have some literary work for their object, and of intransitive roots, that which is the subject of the verb in its primitive sease is put in the Accusative case in the causal, the object remaining unchanged; c.g. 
PRIMITIVE. - 
CAUSAL शपका स्वर्गमग 
प्रभून् स्वर्गमगमपन् स्ववेदार्थमविः 
स्वान पदार्थ मवेदयत् देवा अमृतमाश्नम् 
देवान मुसमाशय विधिवदमध्येत 
विधि वेदमध्यापयत् पृथ्वी सजिले भास्त । 
पृथ्वों सलिने भासवत् But in गमयति रामो गोविन्द (Rama makes Govind go) if some body else (विष्णु मित्र) prompts Rama to do this, we shall have to say विष्णमियो रामेण गोविन्द गमयति ' Vishnu mitra prompts Rama to cause Govind to go.' Here 
Ráma' is not put in the Accusative case, because it is the subject of the verb, not in its primitive, but causal, sense... 
Patanjali, in his Mahabhashya, adds this explanation on the meaning of the word शब्दकर्म in the sutra गतिवद्धि &c. शयकर्म may be either शब्दो येषा क्रिया or शब्दो येषां कर्म 
When we take the former interpretation, the roots यति (है) कंडवि (sic) and prerad (denon. of Ta) have to be excluded from the rule; as, para दयदत्तः हाययति देवपत्तेन; कंपति-शवायते-देवरत्नः; कंदयति-शब्दाययतिवरलेन . And the roots , al with for and stay with 34 must be included in the rule; as, quito विजानाति-उपलभते-देवदत्तः श्रावयति-विज्ञापयति-उपलमयति-वदनम् . IVhen we adopt the second interpretation, the roots जल्प, भाप् with cा and नप with दि, must be included in the rule; जबति-विलपति-भाभाषते-देवदत्तः, जल्पयति-विनापयति-प्राभापति देवदच. 
There are several exceptions and counter-exceptions to the preceding rule, which are important 
Vart:- The causals of it to lead' and Tr. 'to carry,' do not govera the Accusative, but the Instrumental; eg. भुत्यो भार नयति पहविषा A servant carries a load. भरयेन मार माययति पाडयति पा (S. K.) (He) causes a servant to carry a load. 
190 
KARMA KARAKA. 
[BK. I. CH. IV. $ 53. 
Vart:-But 78, when it has for its subject in the causal a word signifying a 'driver,' obeys the general rule; as, T&T R ef. Horses draw the chariot. fa poti 
Vart:-(b). The causals of the roots and urg, 'to eat,' govern the Instrumental casc; e. g. 4 eirafa T. The boy eats his food. 
a crtafa . (He) causes the boy to eat his food. 
Vart (c). , when it has not the sense of feer'injury to a sentient thing,' governs the Instrumental; as, parafa fast i, at forst देवदत्तन; but भक्षयति यवान् बनीवः, भक्षयति वली वर्वान् यवान् . 
By 'intransitive' roots mentioned above is meant such roots as are not by their nature capable of governing an object other than that of 'time,' place' &c., and not those roots which, though transitive, may some. times be used intransitively according to the speaker's volition, or when their meaning is, quite evident; as, Pat: qTT: cara. Here qera , though transi. tive, is used without an object, because it can be easily understood ; hence Pintu refa and not feat; but rarefa dr. I 
In forming the passive construction of casual verbs, the princi pal object in the causal, which is the subject (agent) of the verb in its primi tive sense, is put in the Nominative case, and the other object remains unchanged; e. g. 
PRIMITIVE. 
CAUSAL ACTIVE. CAUSAL PASSIVE. रामो मामं गच्छति. 
रामं प्रामं गमयति. 
रामो मामं गम्यते. Rama goes to a village. (He) causes Rama to Raina is caused to go &c. 
go to a village. भत्यः कई करोति. 
· peta per ar an nafa. 40: one area. The servant prepares a mat. (He) causes the servant The servant is made to 
to prepare a mat. prepare &c. गोविंदो मासमास्ते. 
गोविंद मासमासयवि. गोविंदो मासमास्यते . Govind sits for one month. (He makes Govind sit &c. Govind is made to sit &c. 
(a). But in the case of roots that imply 'knowledge' eating,' and those that have a literary work for their object, the principal object is put in the Nominative case, and the secondary in the Accusative, or vice versa e.g. माणवक धर्म बोधयति 'he makes Mananaka know his duty'; माणवको धर्म irza or ATUA Enza M. is made known his duty' or 'duty is made known toar.'; बहुमोदन भोजयति 'he makes the boy eat lood:' बरोदन भोजयते or 
pareat isa (s. K.). 
With regards to roots that govern two accusatives, the rules mentioned above hold good in their case also ;.i.e., those roots that imply motion dc., govern the Accusative of the subject of the primitive Case, and others, the Instrumental case, sometimes; as, That of anyt. 
BK. I. CH. IV. 8 53,54.] 
AGENT DEFINED.* 
. 
191 
याचतेः (धरो) वामनेन पनि पसुर्धा वाचयति '(God) makes Vamana. ask Bali for Earth.' गोपोनो नगरं हरति; (सामी) गोप गोपेन वार्ना नगर हारयति. '(The master) makes the cowherd take the sheep to the town.' 
झोरन्यतरस्याम् ॥५३ ॥ पदानि ॥ इ.कोः, अन्यतरस्याम् , (10 अणि कत्ता सणौ फर्म). 
त्तिः॥ हरतेः करोसेवाण्यन्तयोः कर्ता स ण्यन्तयो रम्यतरस्यों कर्मसंतो भवति। पार्तिवान् । अभिवादि पोरामनेपद उपसंख्यानम् ॥ 
53. The agent of the verb in its non-ni (pri mitive) form in the case of hri to lose and kri to make, is optionally called karma or object when these verbs take the affix. 
nf (CAUSAL ).. PRIMITIVE. 
CAUSAL As हरति भारं माणवका 
हारयति भारं माणवक or माणकेन. The boy takes the load. 
He causes the servant to take the loud. करोतिक देवदनः 
कारयति कटं देवास or पदसेन Devadatta makes the mat. 
He causes Devadatta to make the mat. Vart: The subject of the primitive. verbs qft and fu, when used in the Atmanepada, is either put in the Accusative or Instrumental case in the causal: as, 
PRIMITIVE. 
CAUSAL. अभियदति गुरु देवदत्तः 
अभिवादयते गुरुदेवदन or देवरलेन.: Devadatta bows down to the Guru. He makes Devadatta bow down to the 
Guru. • पश्यन्ति भत्या रानामम् . 
वर्षयते भक्ष्यान् रामान r वर्षयते भरव. The servants sce the king. 
He makes the servants see the king. .: KARTRI. स्वतन्त्रः कर्ता ॥ ५४॥ पदानि स्वतन्त्रः कर्ता । (का). वृतिः ॥ क्रिया प्रसिद्धी सातनयेण विवक्ष्यते सत्कारक कर्दसंग भवति ॥ 
.. 54. Whatever the speaker chooses as the in dependent, principal and absolute source of action is called karta or agent.. 
___The agent is absolute and unconditioned, as, देवतः पचति Devadatta.: cooks. स्थाली पति the pot cooks: 
182 
- 
NIPATA DEFINED. 
[ BK. I. CH. IV. 355.57. 
- तत् प्रयोजको हेतुश्च ॥ ५५ ॥ पदानि । तत्, प्रयोजका, हेतुः च, (का० स्वतन्त्रः कर्ता) 
वृत्तिः । स्वतन्त्रस्य प्रयोगको योऽर्थः तस्कारक हेसुसंज्ञ भवति चकारात् कर्टसंतं च ॥ : 
55. That which is the mover thereof, i. e., of the independent source of action, is called Hetu or cause, as well as kartå or agent. 
Thus arafa he causes to be made, grafa he cause to be taken. When hetu is employed as agent the verb is put in the causative form (III. 1. 26). 
The force of the word is to give both names to the mover of an agent, vis., Hetu and karta: otherwise by sutra i of this Chapter only one name would have been given. 
Nipata. 
THE PARTICLES. प्राग्रीश्वरालिपाताः ॥५६॥ पदानि । प्राग, रोवरात्, निपाता। पत्तिः ॥ अधिरीश्वर इति वक्ष्यति मागेतस्मादवधेयर्यानित कर्द्धमनुक्रमिष्यामः निपात संतास्ते वेदितव्याः॥ . . 
56. From this point forvard upto the apho rism Adhiri-svare (I.4.97), all that we shall say is to be understood to have the name of Nipâta or Particles. 
The word grah of this sůtra serves the same purpose as the word cha of the last ; namely, it makes the words Gati, upasarga and karmapravachniya take two names, i.e., their onc pame as well as the name Nipata. The letter rin पानी परात् is to remove doubt, ie, aphorism I. 4.97 should be taken as limit, and not sätra III. 4. 13 which has the word iswari also. 
चादयो ऽसत्वे ॥ १७ ॥ पदानि ॥ च-आदयः असत्वे, (निपाता) । वृतिः ।। पादयो निपातसंज्ञा भवन्ति न बेस्सत्त्वे वर्तन्ते ॥ 
57. The word cha 'and,' &c., are called Nipåta or Particles, when they do not signify substances. 
The following are particles (nipata) yand' T'or'e'an expletive' पह 'vocative particle' एवं 'only' 'exactly.' एवम् ' so, thus,' ननम् 'certainly, शश्वत् 'continually,' युगपत् "at once,' भूयस् 'repeatedly,' सपत् कपत् 'excel lently, कुवित् ' abundantly, नेत् चेत् 'if' घmil,' [the n is indicatory], वर 'where,' तम 'there, ऋश्चित् 'what if?, नह 'no'हन्त 'ah, ! माकिन् [भाकीन्] atau 'do not' granty indeed !' ATC' do not,' qmnot,' 17' as much as,' सावत् 'so much; से है 'perhaps' t (disrespectful interjection) श्रीषद रोष BK. I. CH. IV. & 58. ] 
PREPOSITIONS DEFINED. 
· 
193 
FEYET (interj.) ' oblation to the gods,' FONT oblation to the mancs,' forcfathers N oblation to the gods,' or(mystical ejaculation typical of the three great deities of the Hindu mythology), art thouing,' quii'thus,' introducing an ex position, (scertainly,' faith indeed,' 44'now' auspicious inceptive), 'excellent,' F (attached to the present tense gives it a past signification), 357'fie' r a rost. The vowels a, a, i, 1, u, Q, e, ai, o, au, whea, as interjections, they indicate various emotions, differ from the ordinary vowels. 
1.897, TETA, ATAT, OUT, 47, T7, fact, TT, TT, (AT), R, ETET, H. (F), 97, cor, IST, JATI, TT, 8757, TT, (1), TT, TT, , A231, fa, pero, , fa, 4, 7, Tą, 97, , (T. 74, 17. feq.] 74, FT, ( 673 ), शंक, शुकम्, खम्, सनात्, सनुस, महिका, सस्यम्, पातम्, अडा, हवा, मोचेत्, नाचेत्, महि STO, 212, 8:, , , , , , ( ), STOTTETTE, T4, 4, , fogat, ny. Po €16, (I), , **, TT, (**), qa, HT, TT, (), 94, 96 97 49, 84, eta, fat, pe:,. 
To the list of indeclinables belong also what have, without the reality, the appearance of an upasarga (No. 59), of a word with one of the termina tions of case or persons and of the vowels. lo the example H aryavdattam 'given away,' the afy is not really an upasarga, for if it were, the word (by VII. 4. 47) would be WT1 avattam. In the example ahanyuh wig: 'egotistic,' the ahat is not identical with the aham 'I,' terminating in a case affix-be cause a pronoun, really regarded as being in the nominative case, could not be the first member, in such a compound. To the example, oltarii asti. kshire, a cow or the like 'in which there is milk,' the asti area must be regard. ed as differing from the word asti, 'is,' which ends with the affix of the third person singular, otherwise it could not have appeared as the first member in a compound. 
प्रादयः ॥ ५८॥ पदानि ॥ प्र-आदयः, (निपाता असत्वे)। वृत्तिः ॥ पादयो ऽसन्ने निपातसंज्ञा भवन्ति ।। 
58. The words pra &c., are called Nipata when not signifying substances. . The following is the list of art: or 'prepositions:', 1, 48, 67, . 
7, fare, ,for, , f, g , 4f, wa, 9, 3, gt, ata , aft, 7711 
The making of this a distinct aphorism, wheo it could well have been included in the last, is for the sake of giving the Pra &c., words two pames, namely, those of Nipatas, as well as upasargas under certain circumstances, 1. e., when they are in compositioa with verbs. Not so bowever the cha &c., words. They never get the designation of upasargas 
When these words signifying substances they are not Nipatas. As TT of a the excellent army conquers. Here the word Ti is not a Nipata. 
194 
UPASARGA, AND GATI. 
(Bk. I. CH. IV. & 59. 60. 
उपसर्गाः क्रियायोगे ॥ ५९ ॥ पदानि ॥. उपसर्गाः, क्रिया-योगे 
(प्रादयः) । 
वत्तिः । प्रादयः क्रिया योगे उपसर्ग संज्ञा भवन्ति । वार्निकम् । माछब्दस्य चोपसंण्यानं कर्तव्यम्॥ वार्मिकम् ॥ श्रच्छदस्योप संख्यानम् ॥ 
59. The words pra &c., get the designation of upasarga or prepositions, when in composition with a verb. . ... As H + नयति = प्रणयति .. Here the dental i is changed into cerebral u because of the # getting the designation of upasarga (See sätra VIII. 4. 14). Similarly परिण्यति, प्रणायकः, परिणायक.. 
Why do we say when in composition with a verb? When in compo. sition with anoun they are not called upasargas. As प्रगती नायकोस्माद् देशात - प्रनायकोदेश: a country destitute of a leader. Here न is not changed inton. Thus while 9714: means 'a leader' the term were means destitute of a leader; tbough both have the same radical elements :-pra in one is an upa. sarga, in the other a Nipata pure and simple. 
Vart:-The word Art should be included in the list of upasargas. As मरुद्रिदत्तः = मरुत्तः given by Marut. मरुत् + दा + क - मरुत् + + व (VII. 4. 47). Here Marut being treated as an upasarga, though it does not end with a vowel, the T is replaced by # by rule VII. 4. 47 which declares 
the substitute of which is called ghu, when it is preceded by an upa sarga that ends in a vowel, and is followed by an affix beginning with which has an indicatory k.' 
It might be objected, that as 477 does not end with a vowel, sūtra VII. 4. 47 does not apply. To this we say that otherwise the giving the designation of upasarga to 4 is superfluous; and in order that this should not be so, the fact of its not ending with a vowel is overlooked. 
Vart:-The particle spat should be included in the list of upasargas. Thus अत् + धा + अ - अछा (III. 3. 106). Here because अत् is treated as an upasarga, that sutra III. 3. 106 is made applicable. . . . . 
गतिश्च ॥६० ॥ पदानि ॥ गतिः, च, (प्रादयः क्रियायोगे) ॥ निः॥ गतिसंतकाश प्रादयो भवन्ति क्रियायोगे॥ पार्निकम् ॥ कारिकाएदोष सण्यानम् ॥ पार्निकम् ॥ पुनशनसो उन्मसि गविसंज्ञौ भवत इति वक्तव्यम् ।। 
60. The words pra. &c., are called also Gati, when in composition with a verb. 
BK. I. CH. IV. & 61:) 
GATI. 
195 
As 9723, Now the gerund of the simple root 6 would have been EST, but as it is compounded with a gati word (II. 2. 18) the my is replaced by pay see S. II. 2. 18 and VII. 1. 37. # + F + PTY - POST (VI. 1. 71). Here pra being called gati we have compounding by rule 11. 2. 18; and then we apply S. VII. 1. 37. Similarly Fity. Here pra being a gati word retains its own accent by rule VI. 2. 49.' a gati retains in a compound its own accent when it immediately precedes a second member that ends in kta , provided the latter denotes the object of the action which is expressed by the root of which kta is added.' 
Similarly wantif, here pra being treated as gati gets annudatta accent by rule VIII. 277. 1.71 (andt f.1.57) 
The yoga-vibhaga or the separation of onc aphorism into two, is for the sake of the subsequent aphorisms. The annuvritti of gati only runs through the latter sůtras and not of upasarga. So that while pra &c., have two names upasarga and gati; uri &c., have only one name, namely, gati. 
___Thus in प्रणीतम् and अभिषिक्तम् , by treating the words u and भभि as upasargas we change the 7 and into o anda by rule VIII. 4. 14 and VIII. 3. 87: and again treating them as gati we regulate the accent. 
Vart:-The words amat should be included in the list of Gati. As (1) GTI (2) antara (3) araftar athat. In the first by taking it as gati we have samasa (II. 2. 18) and Fut (VII. 1.37.) The other tivo cascs illustrate accent. 
Vart:-The words air and mę are treated as Gati in the Vedas. As to gearrtarat 124. Here the word 996 being gati, causes funt to take annu dåtta accent (VIII. 1. 70) . Here also the accent is regulated by 
VIII. 2.71. 
huif feat71189 u asifa u a mfg fra-ETT:, (Fauretat Tha:) . 
A: 11 gatq: yet: Equat THT forurent afecta para el 
61. The words uri, assent, &c., and those that end with chvi (V. 4.50), and those that end with dach (V. 4. 57), (when in composition with the verb bha kri or as) are called Gati, 
The affixes chvi and dach are ordained when the verbs in composi tion is either 6, or ee (V. 4. 50 and 57) ůri &c., being read along with chvi and dach; shows that the verb in composition with them must also be any one of the above three verbs, and none else; in order to entitle att to the name of gati. 
196 
__ 
GATI. 
. 
[ BK. I. CH. IV. 562,63. 
. The words करी and उररी mean to assent and spread. Asकरीकरण (II. 1. 18 and VII. 1. 370 अरीकृतम् (VI. 2. 49), यदूरीकरोति (VIII. 2.71). So with the word उररी. The following is a list of these words: 
पापी. 
ताजी. 
धूसी. शकला. संशकला. 
सकला. 
अंशकला. गुनगुधा. 
सन्ः फल. 
फली. विली. 
पाली. 
पावाली. देवानी. 
The words ending in chvi are also gati. As uzteica having made white what was not white. 
So also words ending in fry as excret having made the sound pat. 
अनुकरणं घानिति परम् ॥२॥ पदानि ॥ अनुकरणम् , प; अनिति-परन् , (क्रियायोगे गतिः) । 
वृत्तिः । अनुकरणमनिनि परम् क्रियायोगे गतिसंतं भवति । 
62. A word imitative of sounds is also called Gati, when it is not followed by the word iti. 
The phrase अनितिपरम् is a Bahuvrihi compound; भन्-वि-परम् - 'that which has not the word sta after it' 
As खाद्य having made the sound khat. खाद्कृतम् (VI. 2. 49), यत्साकरोति (VIII. 3. 11). 
Why do we say when it has not the word fa after it?' Observe खारितिकृया निरष्ठीवत् . 
आदरानादरयाः सदसती ॥ ६३ ॥ पदानि ॥ आदर-अनादरयोः, सद्-असती, (क्रियायोगे गतिः) ॥ 
वृतिः ॥ भादरा नादरयो यथाक्रम सदसग्दो गतिसंतो भवतः ॥ 
. 63. The words sat and asat when in com position with a verb are called gati, when used in the sense of 'respect or love,' and ' disrespect or in. difference.' 
As सतकरय having honored (II. 2. 18 and VII. I. 37) भसत्कार, कृतम् or प्रसत्कृतम् (VI. 2. 49) यत् सत् करोति or यासत् करोति (VIII. 2.71). . .. 
BK. I. CH. IV. 864-66.] 
GATI. 
197 
- Why do we say when meaning 'respect or disrespect'? Observe सतकला काण्डंगता. 
भूषणेग्लन् । ६४ । पदानि ॥ भूषणे; अलम् , (लि गतिः )॥ 
वृत्तिः । भूषणे यो उनम् शलः स गविसंतो भवति । 
64. The word alam when in composition with a verb is called gati, when used in the sense of 'ormament.' 
The word is an indeclinable and has four meanings :-prohibi. tion, competent, enough and ornament. The term Hory is gati when it means ornament. As भलंकरय (II. 2. 18, VII. I. 370; भलतं (VI. 2.49) यवलंकरोति (VIII. 2.71) when it does not mean ornament we have भले भला व्रजति he goes hav ing eaten enough. 
अन्तरपरिग्रहे । ६५ ॥ पदानि ॥ अन्तर्-अपरिग्रहे, (कि.) गतिः॥ 
वृत्तिः । अन्तः शब्दोऽपरिमहे गदिसंज्ञो भवति। वार्निकम् ॥ भन्तः शब्दस्या विविधि पत्वेषपसर्गसंशावतम्या । 
65. The word antar is called gati, when used in the sense of 'non-accepting,' in composition with a verb. 
The word ofiap mcans 'taking' or 'accepting,' 798197 means there fore the opposite of this namely ' rejecting.' abandoning. As अन्तहत्य गहंगवः he went away having abandoned home; भन्तईतमनृतम् falsehood being aban doned. यहन्त ईन्ति. 
Why do we say 'when meaning to abandon'? Observe पवईस्वा मपिका श्येनोगतः the hawk went away taking hold of the mouse. 
Vart:- The word my is treated as an upasarga for the purposes of the application of the following rules ; III. 3. 106 by which he is added; rule III. 3. 92 by which fati is added; and rule VIII. 4. 14 by which is changed into m. As भन्त , भन्सद्धिः and अन्तयति. 
कणेमनसी श्रद्धाप्रतीपाते ॥ ६६ ॥ पदानि ॥ कणे-मनसी, श्रद्धा. प्रती-पाते, (गतिः) 
मुत्तिः ॥ कणेशन्दो मनस्शदश प्रज्ञा प्रतीपावे गतिसंज्ञो भवतः ॥ 
66. The words kape and manas are gati when in composition with a verb and used in the sense of 'reac tion by satiation.' 
198. 
GATI. 
[ BK. I. CH. IV. 867-69. 
.. The word श्रद्धा-प्रतीपात means 'satisfaction of desire.' As कणेहस्व 77: Farafat he drinks milk to his heart's content or till he is satisfied? So also मनोहत्य पयः पिबति . That is to say, he drinks so much till his desire (श्रद्धा) is satisfied by revulsion of feeling. When not having this sense we have a or मनोहस्वागतः he went away he satisfied. 
पुरो व्ययन् ॥६७ ॥ पदानि । पुरः , अव्ययम् , ( गतिः)। वृत्तिः । भसिप्रत्ययान्तः पुरः शब्दोग्ययं गतिसंज्ञो भवति ॥ 
67. The word purah in front of, when indeclin. able, and in composition with a verb, is called gati. - The pronoun पूर्व 'front' with the affix प्रसि forms पुरस् , and bys. I. 1.38 it becomes an Avyaya. (See S. V. 3. 39 pur being substituted for pårva). The object by making it gati is threefold (1) compounding by II. 2. 18 (2)accent by VI. 2.49(3) to change the:b into स् by VIII. 3.40. As पुरस्करव, पुरस्कृतम् and यत् पुरस्करोति, when not an indeclinable we have पू. पुरो, पुरः कला काएरंगतः. 
अस्तं च ॥ ६ ॥ पदानि ॥ अस्तम् , च, (गतिः अव्ययम् )। वृत्तिः ॥ मस्त पदो मकारान्तोव्यय मनुपनन्धी वर्तते स गतिसंज्ञो भवति ॥ . 
68. And the indeclinable word astam at home,' is called gati, when in composition with a verb. 
The word TETR is an indeclinable as it ends in (1. 1.39); and means ' not visible. As अस्तंगत्य सविता पुनरुदेति the sun having set, rises again प्रस्तंगतानि धनानि riches that have vanished. यदरसंगपति, when not an indeclin. able it is not gati as भरतं काएडम् the arrow has been thrown. 
अछ गत्यर्थवदेषु ॥६९॥ पदानि ॥ अध्छ , गति-अर्थ-वदेषु , (गतिः अव्ययम् ॥ 
. वृतिः ॥ प्रकाशनोऽव्ययमनिशमस्या वर्तते , स गत्ययेंषु धातुपु वरती च गतिसंती भवति। 
69. The indeclinable word achchha, meaning " before in the presence of,' is called gati, when used in composition with verbs denoting motion' or with the verb.'vad' to speak.. 
The word is an indeclinable and has the force of the word fr.: As भगत्य, भगतन् , and यरगति. . So also अवेद्य अच्छोदितम् . and याय पति when not an Avyaya, we have उदकमा गति . 
अदो अनुपदेशे ॥ ७० ॥ पदानि ॥ अदम् , अनुपदेशे, (गतिः) ॥ . इनिः॥ भवः शम्दो नुपरो गतिसंतो भवति । 
BK. I, Cu.. IV. 870-73.] 
GATI. 
- 
199 
70. The word adas. that’is called gati when in composition with a verb and not implying a direction. to another. 
The word upadesa means a direction to another. When a person cogitates within himself and does not address another, that is anupadeśa. That is when it is not a demonstrative pronoun. As पदः करव, प्रदः कृतम् and धदरः करोति when used as a demonstrative pronoun we have प्रदः कुल्या काएई गतः 
तिरो तिरी ॥ ७१ ॥ पदानि ॥ तिरः , अन्तः, (गतिः) । वृत्तिः । अन्तर्धिय॑वधानम्, तबनिरः शब्दी गतिसंझो भवति॥ 
____71. The word tiras when used in the sense of disappearance,' is called gati when in composition with a.verb. 
As तिरोभूय. तिरोभूतम् and यत् तिरोभवति why do we say when meaning disappearance? Observe तिरो भूलास्थितः . ., standing apart. 
. विभाषाकशि ॥ ७२ ॥ पदानि । विसापा, रुनि, (गतिः अन्त)। 
वृत्तिः ॥ तिरः शब्दः करोती परतो विभाषा गतिसंशो भाति॥ 
72. The word tiras meaning disappearance' is optionally called gati, when the verb kri follows. 
This is an example of प्राम-विभाषा. As तिरः करय or तिरस्कृत्य (VIII. 3. 42): तिरः कृत्वा or तिरस्कृत्वा (VIII. 3.42). The change of visarga into a is optional VIII. 3. 42. When not meaning disappearance we have far: कला का तिष्ठति he stands having laid aside the stick. 
.. उपाजेन्याजे ॥ ३ ॥ पदानि ॥ तपाजे अन्वाजे , (विभाषा कृषि गतिः)॥ 
वृत्तिः॥ उपाजेबाजेशब्दो विभक्ति प्रतिरूपको निपातो दुर्वनस्य सामधाने बर्नेने तो रुभि विभापा गतिसंतो भवतः ।। 
73. The words upa.je and anvaje both mean ing supporting or assisting the weak, are optionally called gati when used along with the verb kri 
___As आने कुरय or उपाने कस्वा having given support अन्याने काय or अन्वाजे कल्या. 
___ साक्षात्मभूतीनिच ॥७४॥ पदानि ॥ साक्षात्, प्रतीनि , , (गतिः विभाषा कृत्रि) 
वृत्तिः ॥ सासाम्प्रभृतीनि शब्दरूपाणि कृषि विभाषा मनिसंहामि भवति ।। वात्तिकम् ।। साक्षात्मभूतिषु समर्थ वचनम् । 
200 
: GATI. . 
[BK. I. CH: IV.874-77. 
गतिसंज्ञो भवतः ॥ 
. 
74. . The words sakshat, in the.presence of' &c., are optionally called gati, when used along with the verb kri. 
Vart: In the words arFT &c. the force of the affix fee is under stood, namely making a thing what it was not before. As साक्षात् कृत्य or कुत्ता मिथ्यात्य मिथ्याकमा making evident what was concealed before. 
अनत्याधान तरसिमनसी । ७५ ॥ पदानि ॥ अनत्याधाने उरसि मनसी, (विभाषा कनि गतिः) । 
वृत्तिः ॥ अनत्याधान मुपश्नेषणं सदभावे ऽनन्याधाने उरसिमनसी शब्दो विभाषा कृभि 
75. The word urasi, “in the breast,' and manasi'in the mind' are optionally gati when the verb kri follows, provided that they are not used in the sense 
of 'placing.' 
As उरसिकस्य or उरसिकृत्वा; मनसिकृत्य or मनसिकृत्या. When it has the sense of placing we have उरसिकृत्वा पाणि शेते he lies down having clasped the hand on the breast, मनसिकता वचनं ध्यायति he ponders having placed. the word in his mind. 
मध्ये पदे नियचने च ॥ ७ ॥ पदानि ॥ . मध्ये पदे, निवचने, च; (विभाषा कति गतिः अनत्याधाने) 
पत्तिः ।। मध्ये पढे निवचने इत्येते शब्दा, भनत्याधाने विभाषा कभि गतिसंता भवन्ति। 
76. And the words madhye in the middle;' pade in the foot' and nivachane 'speechless' are option ally gati, when kri follows, the sense not being of 'placing.' 
. As मध्ये कृत्य or कृत्वा पवे कृत्य or कुला; निवचने कृत्य or कृत्वा. 
____ But when it has the meaning of placing we have हस्तिनः पदे कस्वा शिरः ta he lies down having put his head under the foot of the elephant. 
नित्यं हस्ते पाणावुपयमने ॥ ७ ॥ पदानि ॥ नित्यम्, हस्ते-पाणी उपयमने (गतिः रुञि) ॥ 
वृतिः ॥ हस्ते पाणी इत्येतो शब्दो कृषि नित्यं गतिसंतो भवत उपयमने । . 
77. The word haste in the hand,' paņau ‘in the hand' are always and necessarily called gati when used with the verb kri in the sense of marriage.' .:. 
As पाणो फरय or हस्ते कृत्य having married. . But हस्ते कन्या 'कार्ष:पणं गतः he went out having taken in his hand a.karshapana (a coin). . . . 
BK. I. CH. IV. 878-81..] 
GATI. - 
201 
प्राध्वं बन्धने ॥ ७॥ पदानि ॥ प्राध्वम्, बन्धने, (गतिः कनि नित्यम् ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ प्राध्यमिति मकारान्तमन्ययमानुकूल्ये पर्तते, तदानुकल्यं बन्धनहे सुख यदा भवति सदामाशब्दः कभि नित्यं गतिसंतो भवति ॥ 
78. The indeclinable word pradhvam followed by the verb kri, is always called gati' when used in the sense of binding.' 
The word om ends in and means "favourably suitably.' When however it means 'bound' it is a gati: as, que having bound. But when. not meaning to bind, we have:-प्राय कस्वां धकहं गतः haring made the carriage agreeable, he is gone. 
जीविकोपनिषदायौपम्ये ॥ ७९ ॥ पदानि ॥ जीविका-उपनिषदी, औपम्ये, (गतिः रुनि ॥ 
वृत्तिः । जीविका उपनिषदित्यती शन्नो भौपम्ये विपये कृषि गतिसंतो भवतः ।। 
79. The words Jivikå and upanishad followed by the verb kți are called gati when used in the sense of 
'likeness or resemblance.' 
As जीविकाकुत्य having made it as if it was a means of living: उपनिषद करय-having made it like an upanishad. But जीविका कुस्मा गतः having made his livelihood he is gone. 
ते प्राग्धातोः ॥ ८० ॥ पदानि ॥ ते, प्राग, धातोः, (गतिः उपसर्गः)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ से गत्युपसर्गसंज्ञकाः धातोः प्राक् प्रयोक्नग्याः ॥ 
80. The particles called gati and upasarga are to ba employed before the verbal root: (that is to say, they are prefixes). 
The word à has been employed to include the term ayat also. The preceding examples all illustrate the application of this rule. 
छन्दसि परेऽपि ॥ ८१॥ पदानि ॥ छन्दसि, परे, अपि, (गतिः उपसर्ग मा०)। 
वृत्तिः । छन्दसि विषये गत्युपसर्ग संशका परेर पपि प्रयोक्तव्याः॥ 
81. In the chhandas (veda) these gati and upasarga are employed indifferently after the verbal root, as well as before it. 
As:-चायपिन्द्रासन्धत पायातमपनिमम ।। मविश्था चिया मरा (Rig. I. 2.6). 
202 
. KARMAPRAVACHANIYA. 
(Bx. I. CH. IV. $ 82-84. 
som 
In this we have great instead of gravayu and thou Indra, ye heroes, come ye both quickly to the soma of the worshipper by this sincere prayer.' 
Grattata 16# acta u margari, ; (TO 50 graff) 
वृत्तिः ॥ध्यवाहिताय गत्युपसर्गसंज्ञकाः छन्दसि दृश्यन्ते। 
82. In the chhandas (veda) these gati .and upasarga are also seen separated from the verb by inter vening words. .. As: TAT T FAT 39 TERTII ROT Fyfare (Rig. 1. 2. 4). "Indra and vayu, here are soma_libations for you. Approach, ye with pleasures for us. For the libations are desiring you." Here Jy is separated from the word अागत by the intervening word प्रयोनिः. 
KARMA PRAVACHANIYA. . : fiqueta: 1143 1 aftfa u ** tat: n . - वृत्तिः॥ यानित अर्द्धमनुक्रमिष्यामः कर्मप्रवचनीय संज्ञास्ते वेदितव्याः॥ 
83. From this point as far as aphorism I. 4. 97 the particles treated of, are to be understood as hay ing the name of karma-pravachaniya. 
These particles govern a substantive and qualify a verb and differ from other particles termed upasarga and gati. As I 4T well praised by you. FOT ET you have sprinkled. Here is a karma pravach aniya and qualifies the sense of the verb, i.e. it is an adverb. It is not an upasarga, for had it been so it, would have changed the u into « (VIII. 3. 65). The terin karma pravachaniya is a big term compared with other technical lerms such as, f2,for, 9 &c., which generally do not exceed more than two syllables. The word karmapravachaniya is not however merely a technical term; it contains within itself a definition of itself. It means that which qualifies or speaks about (r a ) an action ( ) is so called. 
अनुलक्षणे ॥ ८४॥ पदानि ॥ अनः लक्षणे, (कर्मप्रवचनीयाः) । . . fat: N Tatoard ***Tituntiat it 
84. The word anu when it denotes a sign, is called karma-pravachaniya. . 
The word lakshana means a sign; an attendant circumstance an invariable concomitant or accident in its logical sense and not merely an occasional concurrence. The force of gt in this case is that of after,'in consequence of,' because of, or being indicated by." As 1949.gtait rained Bk. I. CH. IV. $ 85, 86 ] 
KARMAPRAVACHANIYA. 
203 
after or in consequence of the muttering of prayers. To put it in other words, anu is a karmapravachniya when it governs the word which indicates the cause or the attendant circumstance of an action. 
So also CORTE HEART 
Fuat gaat afhafa geyin: TTTE. The God (clouds) rained having listened to the well performed reading, by Šakalya. The force of a karmapravachaniya, therefore, when fully analysed will be found to be that of an upasarga whose verb is not expressed in the sentence but is understood; and because of its being so understood, the particle itself secms to govern the noun which in fact was governed by the unexpressed verb.' Thus in the above example afrat is in the accusative case, apparently governed by the preposition WT, but really governed by the verb safar y understood. 
So also Et 
u 
. The Taurus sprinkled water nfter the sacrifice, TT 957: the people began sprinkling water after the rising of the canopus. 
Why make unnecessarily this sûtra, when 7 would have been called karma parvachaniya even by force of søtra go following, where also the word Jakshana occurs? This is for the sake of indicating that the karmapravachaniyas should always govern the accusative case (II. 3. 8) even in expressing to (II. 3. 23). Otherwise Rulc 23rd of the third chapter of Book II would ha set aside Rule 8 of the same by the maxim of 1. 3. 2: and would have caused a karama pravachaniya to govern an Instrumental case where the sense was that of hetu... 
Dataron cy i agafa un gatar-37, (**: **80) # #: it saya meleret drei Tr a ttaat 
85. The word anu is karma-pravachaniya when it has the force of the third case. 
The meaning of sth in this case will be that of' with' or along with. As नदीमनु अवसिता सेना the army lying along side the river. पर्वतमनु अवसिता सेना lying along the slopes of the mountain. 
gta 11 ce u asta ii eta, (991: #00) 1 : . : u ga oras24: H eterrafa il 
86. The word anu is karnia pravachaniya when it is used in the sense of inferior or subordinate to. 
The word to means inferior,' and being a comparative term re quires the other term with which comparison is made and which is superior; to complete the sense. In other words wa governs the person to which others are inferior, in the accusative case, As Turnar TUT: 'all grammari ans are inscrior to Sakatayana.' 
. ..... . ........ 
204 
- 
KARMAPRAVACHANIYA. 
[ BK. I. CH.. IV. 887-90.. 
__ उपोधिके च ॥ ८७ ॥ उप. अधिके, ध, (हीने कर्ग प्र०) . - वृत्तिः ॥ उपशनः अधिक होने च चौत्ये कर्मभवचनीयसंज्ञो भवति ॥ 
.- 87. The word upa when it means 'superior' or ' inferior to' is karma-pravachantya... . 
That is when the sense is that of 'over, above,' or 'inferior' as 74 खाया द्रोण: a Drona is above akhari. उप निष्के कार्षापण:akarshapana is more than a Nishka. In this sense 34 governs the Locative of the thing which is inferior (II. 3.9). So also उप शाकरायन वैयाकरणा: 'all grammarians are inferior to 
Śakatayana' In this sense 39 governs the accusative case. 
___अप परी वर्जने ॥ ८८ ॥ अप-परी, वर्जने, (कर्मप्र०) वृत्तिः ॥ अप परी शब्दी वर्जनेयोत्ये कर्मप्रवचनीयसंज्ञो भवतः ।। 
88. The words apa and pari are karma-prava chantya when meaning exclusion.' 
The force of vo and oft is in this case that of with the exception of.' As भपत्रिगने या वृष्टो देवः it rained outside of or with the exception of Trigarta. So also परिनिगतेभ्यो पटोदेवः . In this sense they govern the noun excluded in the ablative case (I1. 3. 10). When not having these senses, they are not karma-pravachantya. As प्रोटनं परिषिचति. He waters the rice. Here it is an upasarga, and hence changes the # intor. 
आङ मर्यादा बचने ॥ ८९ ॥ पदानि ॥ आज, मर्यादा-वचने; (कर्मप्र०) : 
निः ।। भाइ इत्येषशब्दः मर्यादावचने कर्मप्रवचनीयसंजो भवति ।। - - 
89. The word an as far as, is karma-prava chaniya when it expresses limit (e.g. when it means 'as far as inclusive of' or, as far as exclusive of.) 
The word in the text shows that both sorts of limits are bere meant. As पापाटलिपुत्राद्वृष्टो देवः it rained as far as (but excluding) Pataliputra भापाटलिपुत्रं षष्टी देवः it rained as far as (including) Pataliputra प्राकुमार 'यराः पाणिनेः आसांकाश्यात् , या मयुरायाः when it means 'little' or is a verbal prefix 
it does not get this name. 
लक्षणेत्यम्भूताख्यानभागवीप्सासुप्रति पर्यनवः ॥०॥ पदानि । लक्षण इत्यंभूताख्यान-भाग-धीप्सासु, प्रति-परि-अनवः, (कर्मप्र०). . 
वृत्तिः ॥ लक्षणे इत्यंभूताण्याने भागे वीप्सायां च विषयभूनाया प्रति परि अनु इत्येते कर्मपरपनीयसंज्ञा भवन्ति ।। 
BK. I. CH. IV. 191592.] 
: KARMAPRAVACHANIYA. 
.203 
पापा 
90. The words prati, pari and anu are karma pravachaniya when used in the. sense of ' sign' (in the direction of) 'mere statement of circumstance' (as re gards') division' 'share of' and 'pervasion' severally. 
As (1) वृक्षं पति-परि or अनु विद्योतते विद्युत् 'the lightening is flashing in the direction of the tree' (2) साधुदेवदत्तो मातरं भति-परि - भन 'Devadatta isagood man as regards his mother.' (3) हर प्रति हन्नाहन 'the poison fell to the share of Hara.' यदनमा प्रति स्थात् that it may fall to my share. . .So with परि and भनु. (4) वृक्षं वृक्षं प्रति सिञ्चति he sprinkles one tree after another. So with परि and भनु. 
___अभिरमागे ॥ ९ ॥ पदानि ॥ अभिः, अभागे (लक्षण इत्पं. भूताल्या० कर्मप०)॥ 
वत्तिः॥लक्षणादिष्वेव भागवर्जितेश्वनिः कर्मप्रवचनीयसंजो भवति । 
91. The word abhi is karma-pravachaniya, in the above senses of 'in the direction of, as regards, and 'each. severally'. but not when it means division, 
share of.' 
. The illustrations given under the last sätra mutus mutandi apply here also, with the exception of those given under head ft As वृत्तमभि विद्योतते; मातरमनि &c. But it is not karma-pravachantya when भाग is meant. भाग means the share which is allotted to one as his own. As यदलममानिध्यात् वर वीयताम् give that which falls here to my share. Here abhi is an upasarga, and therefore 8 of er is changed into g. 
प्रतिः प्रतिनिधि प्रतिदानयोः ॥ ९२ ॥ पदानि ॥ पुतिः, पति निधि-पतिदानयोः, (कर्मप०)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ प्रतिनिधिविपये प्रतिदाने विषये च प्रतिः कर्मप्रवचनीयसंतो भवति । 
92. The word prati is karma-pravachantya. when used in the sense of representative (representative of) or exchange (in exchange for.) 
That which is like to the principal is called stafit. 'Giving in return for what is obtained, is प्रतिदान . As अभिमन्युरर्जुनतः प्रति Abhi-manyu is the representative of Arjuna. ANETTET. F y: afya he exchanges Mashas for these sesamum. In these senses pratigoverns the Ablative (II. 3. 1). 
अधिपरी अनर्थको .॥ १३ ॥ पदानि ॥ अधि-परी, अनर्थका, (कर्मप्र०) । 
पत्तिः॥ भधिपरी शब्दो भनर्यको भनन्तरवाधिनो कर्मप्रवचनीयसंतो भवतः।। . . . 
208 
KARMAPRAVACHANIYA. 
[ BK. I. CH. IV. $ 93-96. 
93. The words adhi and pari. are karma-pra vachaniya when used as mere expletives. 
___ As कुतोभ्यागच्छति whence has he come? or कुतः पर्या गच्छति. These words though mere surplusages, have been called karmapravachaniya so that they may not get the designation of upasarga or gati and thus produce results peculiar to those words. 
सुः पूजायाम् ॥ ॥ पदानि ॥ सुः, पूजायाम, (कर्मप्र०) ॥ : - वृत्तिः ।। सु शब्दः पूजायामय कर्मप्रवचनीयसतो भवति । 
94. The word su is karma-pravachaniya in the sense of respect, (when it means 'excellently). 
As सुसिक्तं भवता , सु स्तुतं भवता excellently sprinkled by your honor. Well praised by your honor. By not being an upasarga, it does not change the 
into (VIII. 3. 65). 
___Why do we say ' when respect is meant? Observe सुपितं कि तवान has this your place been well sprinkled to-day. 
अतिरतिक्रमणेच ॥ १५ ॥ पदानि ॥ अतिः, अति क्रमणे, च, (कर्मप्र० पूजायाम् ) ॥ 
वृत्तिः॥ भति शमः अतिक्रमणे नकारात् पूजायांच कर्म प्रवचनीय संतो भवति ॥ .. . 
95. The word ati in the sense of super-abun. dance (' excessively') and 'excellently' is karma-prava chaniya 
The word watu means to do more than what is necessary for the accomplishment of an object. The force of in the aphorism is to draw in the word पूजायाम from the last. As अतिसितमेव भवता. It has abundantly been sprinkled by your honor, अतिस्तुतमिव भवता so also असिस्तुतं भवता excellently praised by your honor. अति सिक्तं भवता. 
___अपिः पदार्थ संभावनान्ववसर्गगर्दासमुच्चयेषु ॥६॥ पदानि ।। अपिः , पदार्थ-संभावन-अन्ववसर्ग-गहरे-समुच्चयेषु (कर्म)॥ . .. वृत्तिः ॥ पदायें संभावने ऽन्ववसर्ग गर्दायां समुचये च वर्तमानः अपिः कर्मप्रवचनीयसंज्ञो भवति । 
96. The word api is karma-pravachaniya, when it implies, the sense of word understood (some what') or possibility (e. g., 'even' in the sense of such a great person), or permission to do as one likes, (if you like'), or censure ('even' in the sense of what is disgrace ful); or collection (and). . 
Bk. I. CH. IV. $ 97,98.) 
KARMAPRAVACHANIYA..". . 
207 
The word gert means the sense of another word which is not expressed but has to be supplied. As arcas Farq there may be perhaps a drop of ghee Si Furt. Here some word like vindu.' a drop,' stoka'a little' matra'a measure &c.,. has to be understood. The word 477 means possibility, a supposition. As, qft für PET FOH possibly may sprinkle a thousand trees in one moment; I EGOTE (THI he' may praise possibly, a king. In the inqve cases it is used with the potential mood, 
af means indifference on the part of the speaker where he permits another to do as he likes. It is used with the Imperative mood. As for you may sprinkle if you like. We Fall you may praise, if you like. The word tot means censure, contempt or reproof. As first in fata पनाण्डुम् . The word समुधय means cumulative. As अपि स्तुहि-अपि सिंच praise as well as sprinkle. 
In all the above instances, the word not being an upacarga, does not change the & into c. 
Sportas negu afla u sfer, ai ( **70 ) u · FT: A PT: FIAT AT FATTO I BAT ETENIR ET-4: sivatadat staford 
97. The word adhi is karmapravachaniya when used in the sense of " lord” (“s being as a lord" or “having as a lord”). 
The word it means "master,' and it therefore requires another correlative word denoting 'property' of which one is master. The word adhi governs a Locative case. Sometime locative of the person possessing, sometime locative of the property possessed: as a RETET TAT: or S TT NET.. Brahmadatta rules over Panchålas. .. 
farat efst #BC # uefa u fator, Figo fo: ) 
. .. . . . . वृत्तिः । अधिः करोवौ विभाषा कर्मप्रवचनीयसंज्ञो भवति । 
98. The word adhi is optionally karma pra vachaniya when the verb kri follows. ... 
As 247 AM aftsara. Here the word of may be trcated either as a fa or a aith . When it is a fa the accent will be regulated by S. VIII. 1. 71; otherwise not. in 
208 
PARASMAIPADA AND ATMANEPADA. [ BK. I. CH. IV. $ 99, 100. 
. ... ... . : . लः परस्मैपदम् ॥ ९९ ॥ पदानि ॥ 8 , परस्मैपदम् ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ लादेशाः परस्मैपदसंज्ञा भवन्ति । 
99. The substitutes of # are called paras maipada 
pada . . . . 
The word 97: is in the genitive case, and means 'of. The word भावेश ' substitutes' must be supplied to complete the sense. The term न is a generic word for verb in general, viz., लद, लिट् लद लद, लेट् 'नोद, me for 
:. The substitutes of my are the well known personal terminations by which the verbs are conjugated in those tenses. Namely the following. : 
CAF 
PARASMAIPADA. 
Sing Dual. Plural. Ist Pers. pag पस्म 
स् 2nd Pers.. सिप् . प प । 
3rd Pers. तिम् .. - तम् .. मि. . . - ___And the affixes शट and ससु (III. 2. 107, and 124, and III. 4. 78). 
सडानावात्मनेपदम् ॥ १०० ॥ पदानि ॥ तङ्-आनौ आत्मनेपदम्, 
वृत्तिः ॥ पूर्वेण परस्मै पदसंज्ञायां मामायां तहानयोरामनेपदसंज्ञा विधीयते ॥ 
100. The nine affixes comprised under the Pratyahåra tan and the two ending in ảna (Sånach and Kånach), which are substitutes of H are called Atma nepada. 
The following are the Atmanepada affixes : 
Sing. 
माहिद 
Dual. 
• Plural. ist हद् 2nd यास् 
पायाम् 3rd a And the affixes शान and कान (III. 2. 106). 
प्रातान् 
. 
BK. I. CH. IV. F. 101-103.] 
PERSON DEFINED. : .. 
209 
- 
- 
- 
तिङस्त्रीणि त्रीणि प्रथम मध्यमोत्तमाः ॥ ११॥ पदानि ॥ तिः, नीणि , श्रीणि , प्रथम , मध्यम , उत्तमाः . . . . . . 
वृत्तिः ॥ निडोष्टादश प्रत्ययाः मय परस्मैपद संतकाः मवात्मनेपदसंज्ञकाः वरपरस्मैपदेषु भयस्तिकाः यथाक्रमम् प्रयममध्यमोत्तमसंज्ञा भवन्ति । भालने पदेष्वपि पयस्मिकाः प्रथममयमोनसंज्ञा भवन्ति । : 
101. The three triads in both the sets Paras maipada and Atmanepada, of conjugational affixes (com prised under the general name tin, a pratgâhåra formed of the first and last of them, viz., tip and mahin) are called, in order, Lowest (3rd person of European Gram mar, the middle (2nd person), and the highest (1st person). 
Of the 19 conjugational affixes, above given ; 9 are Parasmaipadi aad 9 are Atmanepadi. Each of these two classes is subdivided into three classes, according to person, as shown in the above list. : 
तान्येकवचन द्विवचन बहुवचनान्येकशः ॥ १०२॥ पदानि । तानि , एकवचन द्विवचन बहुवचनानि एकशः , ( श्रीणि २). .. वृत्तिः ॥ तान्येकवचन द्विवचन बहुवचन संज्ञानि भवन्ति एकशः एकैक परम् ॥ 
102. These three triads of conjugational affixes, which have received the name of Lowest &c., are called (as regard the three expressions in each triad) severally "the expression for one" (singular), “the ex pression for two" (dual), and "the expression for many" (plural). 
of the six triads thus formed, each is divided according to number. into three classes, viz., singular, dual, and plural. 
सुपः ॥ १०३ ॥ पदानि ॥ सुपः, (त्रीणि २ एकवचन द्विवचन बहु षषनानि एकशः) 
निः ॥ सुपच त्रीणि त्रीणि पदानि एकश एकवचन द्विवचन बहुवचन संज्ञानि भवन्ति । 
___103. Of sup (which is a Pratyahara formed of su the first of the case affixes and the final p of the last of them) the three expressions in each successive set of the three, are also severally called singular, dual and plural. 
210 
VIBHAKTI DEFINED.: 
[Bk. I. CH. IV. 1 104-106 
• The sup or the case-affixes by. which nouns are declined are at in number corresponding to the seven cases, see sutra IV. 1. 2.. They also have thrce numbers singular, dual and plural... .... विभलिव ॥ १०४ ॥ पदानि ॥ विभक्तिः, च, (त्रीगि २ सुपः तिक) 
. वृत्तिः ॥ श्रीणि श्रीणि विभक्ति संज्ञाश भवन्ति सुपस्तिथ . 
. 104. The triads of conjugational affixes and case affixes are also called vibhakti or Inflective affixes. : 
The word farthi means a complete triad. Thus it frafa means the threc affixes of the seventh casc, i. e., the locative singular, dual, and plural. So a fifth mcans the third person, singular, dual, and 
plural. , युष्मद्युपपदे समानाधिकरणे स्थानिन्यपि मध्यमः ॥१०॥ पदानि । युग्मदि, उपपदे, समान अधिकरणे , स्थानिनि, अपि , मध्यमः ॥ : 
... नि:॥ युष्मयुपपते सति व्यवहिले चाव्यवहिते सति समानाधिकरणे समानाभिधेये मुल्य कारके स्थानिनि प्रयुज्यमाने ग्यप्रयुज्यमानेगरि मध्यम पुरुषो भवति । 
106. When the pronoun yushmad, "thou" understood, and also when the same expressed, is the attendant word in agreement with the verb, then there is the verbal termination called the middlc (2nd person). 
This defines the 2nd person of conjugational afixes. As ख पचसि thou cookest or पचसि; युवा पचयः or पचयः you two are cooking; ययं पश्य or पचथ you cook. 
__ प्रहासे च मन्योपपदे मन्यतेरुत्तम एकवच ॥ ३०६ ॥ पदानि । प्रहासे , च, मन्य-उपपदे , मन्यतेः, उत्तमः, एकवत् , च, ( मध्यमः) । 
___ वृनिः ॥ महासे गम्थमाने मन्योपपते धातो मध्यमपुरुषो भवति , मन्यतेश्चीनमः स पैक वनवति ॥ 
... 106. When joke is implied with reference to an action, the verb denoting it is used in the 2nd person; provided that the word manya'to think'is the atten dant word (upapada) of such verb, and of the verb manya itself, the aflix must be of the 1st person and singular number. 
BK. I. CH. IV. 1 107-109.] 
AVASANA DEFINED. 
211 
The word प्रहास means joke, sports A एवं मन्ये श्रीदनं मोक्ष्यते इति नहि भौक्ष्यसे , भुक्तः सोतिथिभिः. Thus thou thinkestI shall eat rice, thou shalt not eat, that has been eaten by a guest. एहि मन्ये रथेन यास्यसि नहि यास्यसि, यातस्तेन 
ता. Ithink thou wilt go by the chariot, no, thou wilt not, thy father has gone before thee on it. When joke is not intended, the proper persons should be used: as, एहि मन्यसे मोदन भोवे . Thus thou thinkest I shall cat rice. 
अस्मात्तनः ॥ १०७ ॥ पदानि ॥ अस्मदि, उत्तमः, (उपपदे समा. नाधिकरणे स्थानिन्यपि) ॥ 
निः ॥ अस्मधुपपदे समानाभिधेये प्रयुज्यमाने प्यप्रयुज्यमाने ऽपि उत्तमपुरुषो भवति । 
107. When the pronoun asmad “I,” under stood and also when expressed, is the attendant word in agreement with the verb, then there is the verbal termination called the Highest or the 1st person. 
____This is clear. As भई पचामि I cook, or merely पचामि-पायो पचायः or merely पचायः. 
शेपे प्रथमः ।। १०८॥ पदानि ॥ शेषे प्रथमः ॥ .वृत्तिः। यत्र युष्मदस्मदी समानाधिकरणे उपपठेन सः तमशेष प्रथमपुरुषो भवति ।। 
108. In the other cases, namely where, " thou" or "I" are not the attendant words in agreement with the verb, there is the verbal termination called the Lowest (or 3rd person). 
As पति he cooks, पचतः they two cook. पचन्ति they cook. 
परः संनिकर्षः संहिता, ॥ १०९ ॥ पदानि ॥ परः संनिकर्षः . संहिता 
पतिः॥ परी यः संनिकों वर्णना मलमानाकालष्यवधान ससंहितासंतो भवति । 
___109. The closest proximity of letters, there being the intervention of half a mâtrů or prosodial length between them, is called contact or sanhita. 
When words are in sanhita, they are glucd together by the rules of sandhi. As बपन - दधि+पर. 
212 
AVASANA DEFINED. 
[ BK. I. CH. IV.10.. 
विरामी ग्वसानम् ॥ ११०॥ पदानि ॥ पिरामः अवसानम् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ विरति विरामः । विरम्यते ऽनेनेति वा विरामः । सोऽवसानसंज्ञो भवति॥ 
110. The cessation or the absence of succeed ing letters is called pause or avasåna. 
The word avasana occurs in satras VIII. 3. 15 &c. 
OCCI