 taget 
अथ षष्ठाध्यायस्य प्रथमः पादः । 
BOOK SIXTH. Chapter First. 
Erar a quiet II 88 a 11 C, a:,,TUHRI, #1 वृत्तिः ॥ गधिकारो ऽयम् । एकाच इति पद इति च प्रथमस्यति च वितयमधिकृतं वेदितव्यम् । इत उत्तरं यश्यामः प्रासंप्रसारणविधानात् तत्रैकाचः प्रथमस्य द्वे भवत इत्येवं तहेदितव्यम् । वक्ष्यति लिरि धातोरनभ्यासस्यति । तत्र धातोरवयवस्यानभ्यासस्य प्रथमस्येकाची भवतः ॥ 
1. In the room of the first portion, containing a single vowel, there are two. 
Upto Satra VI. 1. 12 inclusive it is to be understood that for the first syllable two are to be made, i. er the first syllable is to be reduplicated. This is an adhikara sätra : all the thrce words viz 419, and and grey are to be road in the subsequent satras upto VI. 1. 12, before the rule of Samprasarana begins. Thus Sätra VI, 1. 8 says" when fare follows, of an unreduplicated verbal root". The sense of this sätra is incomplete, unless we supply the three words of this sätra, when it will read thus : "when for follows, there are two in the room of the first portion, containing a single vowel of an unredupli catco verbal root". Thus from ar-WHITE (FTTT + op IV. 3.82 $T + HOT + 
+ ET[+ o VII. 4. 59 - STR "lie awoke"). So also 74, ropa, am from the roots 97. gandu Thc recuplication takes place through the force of the affix that follows. Thus the asfixes of the Perfect Tense (forse); the Desidera tive (TTT), thc Intensive (GF), the no vikaraņa, the Aorist in rc; all cause reduplication. 
The word incans that which consists of one vowel (per) | When a stem or root consists of more than one vowel (is a dissyllabic or polysyllabic root), then the T 424: will be the first syllable: as in stry thc portion s is the 944 a 'the first portion consisting of one vowel'. When a root cone sists of a single vowel, as 'to go', then strictly speaking there cannot be any portion which inay be called first (447) or ckach consisting of a single 
1038 
REDUPLICATION. 
[ BK. VI. C. 1. 8. 2. 
vowel). Here, however, will this rule be applied and r will be reduplicated, according to the maxiin "54147 TAHT"_" An operation which affects something on account of some special designation which for certain reasong attaches to the latter, affects likewise that which stands alone and to which therefore, just because the reasons for it do not exist, that special designation does not attach". So also in there is no first syllable strictly speaking, but still the rule will apply under the above maximn. In making Reduplications the Rule I. 1. 59 should always be borne in mind. Thus 94+ (ope of free) **41CTX + 9+ (VII. 4. 59 and 60)-qareil 
The word for in the satra indicates that the very word-form is to be doubled or pronounced-twice, and not that another word of similar meaning is substituted. In fact this is not a rule ordaining substitution of two, in the room of one; but of the repetition of the one. Compare VIII. 1. I. 
SICH 
11 ETA Ila, T:, Ferret 11 वृत्तिः॥ प्रथमदिर्वचनापवादो ऽयम् । भजाईितीयस्येकाचो दिर्वचनमाधाकयते । मच् माविर्यस्य धातो स्तरावयवस्य द्वितीयस्येकाचो भवतः ॥ 
2. Of that whose first syllable begins with a vowel, there are two in the room of the second portion con taining a single vowel. 
This debars the reduplication of the first syllable. In a verbal root beginning with a vowel, and consisting of more than one syllable, the second syllable is to be rcduplicated and not the first. Thus the fire root fu, (FE+ *+R+#7 VII. 2. 35 = f«), reduplicates the second syllable for and the 3rd per. sing is nie Rafa, the q being elided by VII. 4. 60: and changed to by VIII. 3. 59. So also warra, UNA II The last form is thus evolved, + *+&+#7 (VII. 2. 74)=MT+T+® (VII. 3. 84, and VI. 1. 51). Here now we have to make reduplication, and if I. 1. 59 be applied, then since a vowel affix y follows, the reduplication of my should take place 1. e. the # the sthani should be reduplicated. But we have explained the sQtra frasfor I. 1. 59, by the phrase 
P H S, i. e. the vowel-affix causing reduplication. Here the vowel-affix E docs not cause reduplication, but the consonant-affix at that does so. Therefore rule I. 1. 59 does not apply, for itself is a कार्या, and the maxim applies कार्यमनुभवन्नि कार्यानिमित्ततया wataa "surely that which undergoes an operation can, so for as it undergoes that operation, not be made the cause of the application of a grammatical rule". Thus from the root ate is formed wreat ; here the root it is gunated before the augment R. Rule I. 1. 5 declaring the prohibition of guņation with regard to per or fer words does not apply here. For though ate has an indicatory , yet as it undergoes an operation itself, it cannot be the cause of the application of another rule. 
BX VI. Cor. 1. $. 3) 
REDUPLICATION. 
1039 
Som 
Some persons explain the word arst as the Ablative singular (and not Genitive Singular) or wan: and they consider the word as a Karma dhåraya compound and not a Bahuvrihi compound. According to them the word means:-"The syllable following the initial vowel is reduplicated". (WUIATTEST:, STEGTIFAH 998:) . According to this interpretation, the word inizia is merely explanatory. 
ast: AMT: 1131 qera 11 a, -GT:, FUTTE: 1 वृत्तिः ॥ द्वितीयस्येति वर्गते । द्वितीयस्यैकाचो ऽवयवभूतानां न्द्राणां तदन्तभावात्मानं विचनं प्रतिषिध्य. से। नकारस्काररेफा द्वितीयैकाचो ऽवयवभूताः संयोगादयो न बिरुच्यन्ते ।। 
efnill Face granit Tel: II वा०॥ कारोपधोपदेशे तु न वक्तव्यः॥ वा०॥ यकारपरस्य रेफस्य प्रतिषेधो न भवतीति वक्तव्यम् ॥ वा० ॥ ईय॑तेस्तृतीय रे भवत इति वक्तव्यम् ॥ वा. ॥ कण्डादीनां तृतीयस्थकाचोभवत इति वक्तव्यम्।। वा०॥ नामधातूनां तृतीयस्येकाचो दे भवत इति वक्तव्यम् ।। वा०॥ यथेष्ट नामधातुष्विात वक्तव्यम् ॥ । 
3. The letters 1, & and r being the first letter of a compound consonant and being part of the second syllable, arc not reduplicated. 
The word dvitiyasya " of the second syllable", is understood hicrc. This sätra debars the doubling of the consonants 1, d, and r when forining parts of the second syllable, provided these letters occur in the beginning of a conjunct (saryoga) letter. Thus the Desiderative root of his afar, formed by adding ya and ru The second syllable here is a which is to be redupli cated by the last rule. But in doing so, 7 will not be doubled. Thus we get the form fatta; so also from mys and we have diffiqfa, and of trafa 18 
Why do we say "when , & and are the letters"? Observe ffarmers from in which is the initial letter and has been reduplicated in to all Why do we say "being the first letter in a conjunct consonant”? Observe atforforata from the root sal 'to breathe', the # being changed into or by VIII. 4. 19 and 21. Thc phrase stria: of the last sätra is understood in this sätra also. Thus triangali Soinc explain the word 973119: understood in this sätra in the same way as in the last, namely as a karmadharaya compound in the Ablative singular. They do so, in order to explain the forın forfa, which is thus evolvedrava wyra=7+ 4 III. 1. 8- igil Then refrafata pe fa l l Here though the second syllable consists of n,d and r, yet z alone 
is rejected in reduplication and not and I also, as and care not immediately after the initial vowel (***If) y in this case. 
Vårt:--This prohibition should be stated with regard to the letter I also. As of strata ! This prohibition applies when the word is taught primarily as having a penultimate T! But when it is taught as primarily 
1040 
REDUPLICATION. 
[ Bk. VI. CI. I. $ 5 
having a penultmate , then the rule does not apply: the or should then be ordained as a substitute of pill See Tudadi root 20. 
Vart:-There is no prohibition of the r when it is followed by a u Thus create it This is the Intensive form of the verb , and is thus evolved: 8+ 
6 (I11. 1. 22. Vârt) $5+(VII. 4. 30) , then follow's reduplication by the rules of this satra, The second syllable & has an initial which is not however rejected in reduplication, 
Vart:- In the case of the verb frefa the third should be reduplicated. "Third of what? Some -say the third of the consonants, and according to them the form is fierdera il Some say the third syllable, therefore of the root freepy (+ ), the third syllable « is reduplicated: Thus fratry, for (VII. 4. 79) the sorg is changed into shart $ by VII. 4. 79. Paranta 1 
Vart: The third syllable of the verbs qoşa &c. is to be reduplicated. Thus a + + - for-mgfarasta; so also safargera &c. 
Vårt: The third syllable of verbs derived from nouns is optionally 
• reduplicated. Thus अश्वीयियिषति or भशिश्वीयिपति ॥ 
Varts--Others say, any syllable of a TATT (verbs derived from nouns) may be reduplicated, Thus from the noun ge is derived the root gra, the desiderative root of which is gaan, which requires reduplication. Here any syllable may be reduplicated; as. 1, ggf , 2, grautfagra, 3. gotiatora, 4, 
stifarrafa i Or there may be double and treble reduplication simultancously as. ggfasttfäreafa il 
पूर्वाभ्यासः ॥४॥ पदानि ॥ पूर्वः, अभ्यासः॥ बत्तिः॥ति प्रथमान्तं यदनुवर्तते तदारिह पळयन्तं जायते । तर प्रत्यासत्तेरस्मिन्प्रकरणे ये विहिते नयोर्यः पूर्वो ऽवयवः सोऽभ्याससंज्ञो भवति । 
4. The first of the two is called the Abhyasa or the Reduplicate. . 
The word in the nominative case is understaod here, but for the purposes of this sätra it is taken in the Genitive case i. c, rürü: get "the first of the two” ardained above. The yard Abhyåsa occurs in satras III, 1, 6, VI. 1. &o, 
उभे अभ्यस्तम् ॥५॥ पदानि ॥ उमे, अभ्यस्तम् ॥ पतिः॥ति वर्तमाने उभेपरणं समशयसंज्ञाप्रतिपत्यर्थम् । ये विहिते ते उभे शापि समुक्ति अभ्यस्त संक्षे भवतः ॥ 
5. The both are collectively called Abhyasta. Though the word i was understood in the stra, the use of the word both'indicates that the word Abhyasta applies to the two taken together and not to any one of them separately. The word abhyasta occurs in stras 111, 4. 109, VI, 1. 32 &c. Thus satra VI, 1, 189 declares "the first vowel of 
BK. VI. Ch. I.8] 
REDUTLICATION. 
1041 
ANA 
an Abhyasta gets the udatta accent". The Abhyasta being the collective name of the both, the accent will fall on the first and not on the second, as in dra didati, the accent is on the first 11 So also by VII. 1. 4 sn takes the place of a after an Abhyasta, therefore, दद+झिदद + अति-दति ।। So also पक्त (VI. 4. 112). 
जक्षित्यादयः षट् ॥ ६॥ पदानि ॥ जक्ष, इत्यादयः, षद् ॥ वृतिः ॥ अभ्यस्तामात वर्तते । जक्ष इत्ययं धातुरित्यादयधान्ये षट् धातवो ऽभ्यस्तसंज्ञा भवन्ति । सेयं सपा मां धानूनामभ्यस्तसंज्ञाविधीयते ॥ जक्षमक्षहसनयोरिस्थता प्रति वेवी वेतिना तुल्यइति यावत् ॥ 
6. So also the six roots beginning with jakshi arc called abhyasta. 
The word abhyasta is understood here. The verb jakshi and the six verbs that follow it in the Dhatupatha, in all seven verbs, get this dcsignation, These are मक्ष, जाग, हरिद्रा, चकास, शास, देधी, and वेवी।। Panini has overlooked देवी and mentions only the first six. By getting the designation of Abhyasta these verbs get acute accent on the first syllable when followed by a sårva dhatuka Tense-alfix not having the intermediater and beginning with a vowel. Thus जापति -grati, जैक्षति jakshati, देरिद्रति ditridrati, चकासात chakasati, शाशति sasati, दीध्यते didhyate, and 'वेव्यते vevyate. The prescnt participlc दीध्यत् is irregularly formed by adding the affix Te ( ) and when so formed it does not take the augment नुम् by VII. I, 78. 
तुजादीनां दीपों ऽभ्यासस्य ॥ ७॥ पदानि ॥तुज, आदीनाम, दीर्घः, अभ्यासस्य॥ वृत्तिः ॥ तुजादीनामितिप्रकारेमादिशब्दः । कम प्रकारः । तुजदी?भ्यासस्य न विहितः, दृश्यतेच, ये तथा भूतास्ते तुजात्यस्तेषामभ्यासस्य वीर्घः साधुभवति ॥ 
7. In the room of a short vowel of the Reduplicate of the roots तुज &e, a long is substituted. 
There is no list of a verbs given any where. The word of in तुमादि therefore should be construed as "verbs like tuj". So that wherever we may find a word having a long vowel in the Reduplicate, we should consider it a valid form. Thus नूतुजानः (तु+कानच् III. 2. 106-तुभानः Rig. I. 3. 6). मामहानः, मनडान राधार, स्वधा मीमाय, स तूताव ॥ This lengthening only takes place in the Vedas before some special affixes, and not every where or in secular literature. 
As तुताज शावलान हरीन् । 
लिटि धातोरनभ्यासस्य ॥ ८॥ पदानि ॥ लिटि, धातोः, अनभ्यासस्य ॥ वृत्तिः । लिटि परतो नभ्यासस्य धातोरवयवस्य प्रथमस्येकाचो वितीयस्य वा यथायोग भवतः ।। पातिकम् ॥ द्विवचनमकरणे छन्नास वेति वक्तव्यम् ॥ वा० ॥ लिर्टिचिने जागतेवति वक्तव्यम् ।। 
8. When the tense-affixes of the Perfect follow, there is reduplication of the root, which is not alrcady reduplicated. 
1042 
REDUPLICATION. 
[ BK. VI. Cm. I. . 
The reduplication is either of the first syllable or of the second syllable according as the root begins with a consonant or a vowel. Thus 947 +0 = 90 9+ Ope=9919 So also 9975, imara u In the case of , Rule 1II. 1. 36 does not apply, so the Perfect of this word is not formed by adding 8784 and the auxiliary verbs and 1t; but regularly. In fact us is regarded as if it was all See sätra III. 1. 36 Vårt. eg utgja TOT OF STEFA: TÜTT, WHY TÍHauren कामुपमहात् ॥ 
Why do we say when me follows? Observe , Yu Why do we say "of a Dhatu'? Observe Fiat Forfat, margt! The question arises from the fact that the root (dhatu) always directly precedes the affixes of the Perfect, no vikaraņa intervenes as in the case of other tenses. So there was no necessity of using the word dhatu in the satra. To this it is replied that by III. 4. 117, sometimes force is treated as sarvadhatuka, and then it takes vikaraña. As y taking the vikarana it becomes ay; (III. 1.74 ) this whole base is not a dhåtu, therefore when the affixes of Perfect are added there is no reduplication, and we have fun! See III. 4. 117. 
Why do we say 'of a non-reduplicate? Observe out are n ot दम् । नोनयतेनोनाव, i.e. it is the Perfect Tense of the Intensive verb नोनय, and is not reduplicated again, te having already caused reduplication. So also संमान्या मरुतः समिमिक्षुः ending in the उस् of the Perfect. 
Vart :- In the Chhandas there is optionally reduplication of the root in the Perfect and other tenses. As Her m ot or fauna; Tarama प्रियाणि or ददाति प्रियाणि ।। मघवा दातु or ददातु, नस्तुतो वीरव धातु or धातु ॥ 
Vårt :--The root so is optionally reduplicated in the Perfect. As, HT (or TTT)1 474479 u 
सन्यकोः॥९॥ पदानि ॥ सन् यङोः ॥ बत्तिः ॥ धातोरनभ्यासस्येति वर्तते । सन्यडोरिति च षष्यन्तमेतत् । सन्नन्तस्य यडन्तस्य चानभ्यासस्य धातोरवयवस्य प्रथमस्थकाची दितीयस्य वा यथायोगं दे भवतः ॥ 
9. Of a non-reduplicate root ending in Fa (Desi derative) or 15 (Intensive) affixes, there is reduplication. 
The word 7961: should be construed as genitive dual and not as Locative dual. In the latter case, the meaning would be "when the affixes Fra and follow, a non-reduplicate root is reduplicated". The difficulty would be that while the root alone would be reduplicated. the augmentre would not, as inferth, Hurgefall 
The phrase u Tar is understood here also. The reduplication is of the first or second syllable, according as the root has an initial consonant or vowel. Thus qey+ 7 (III, 1. 7.) 94, reduplicate fava (VII. 4. 79). So 
BK. VI. C1i. I. . u) 
REDUPLICATION. 
1043 
fagfagra, e- STA, -fanfall So also of 45:-as, Argent (VII. 4. 83), Hra, arsta, spria, grootra If a root is already a reduplicated one, there is no reduplication : as h e status being the Desiderative forms of JICH (alrcady formed by svårthika wa II. 1. 5), and of water (the Intensive form of 7 )# Sec III. I. 22. 
et il polla Il pit वृत्तिः ॥ ली परतो ऽनभ्यासस्य धातोरवयवस्य प्रथमस्येकाचो द्वितीयस्य वा ययायोगद भवतः ॥ 
10. Of a non-reduplicate root there is reduplica tion when the vikaraṇa slu () follows. 
The ra is the characteristic sign of the roots of the third class, and causes the elision of the vikaraņa ! The reduplication is of the first or second syllable, according as the root has an initial consonant or a vowel. Thus TITA ( from y), fara frafa 11 
aften 8811 Tara ll als lll वृत्तिः ॥ षडि परतो ऽनभ्यासस्य धातोरवयवस्य प्रथमस्येकाचो द्वितीयस्य वा यथायोगः भवतः ॥ 
11. Of a non-reduplicate root there is reduplica tion when the allix 73 of the Aorist follows. 
The reduplication is of the first or second syllable according as the root begins with a consonant or a vowel. Thus atalgo, stogon (VII. 4. 93 and 94). So also seen, MUUL, 1 These are aorists of the causative roots 919 &c. 
When the Reduplicated Aorist of the Causative (open) verbs qe &c is to be formed, as here, we should first elide the causative sign for, then shorten the penultimate vowel, and then reduplicate. Then by VII. 4.93 the effect would be like as if we had followed, and this would not be prohibited by the short vowel being consdered sthanivat. For rule VII.4.93 says "Let the effect be as if it had followed, on the reduplicate, if followed by a light vowel, of an in ficctive base to which for followed by yis affixed; provided there is not the eli sion of any letter in the pratyahara occasioned by the affixing of pot ll" One of the conditions for the application of this rule is that the reduplicate must be followed by a light vowel. We have said above that the long penultimate is to be shortened before 7 1 Now arises the difficulty. Should this light yowel coming in the room of a licavy vowci be considered like the heavy vowcl by the rule of sthanivat accía (1. 1. 56), or not? It should not be con sidered so, for the reasons given in I. 1. 57. For it was established there that the sthanivadbhava will arise then only when some operation is to be done to a thing anterior to the non-substituted i. e. original vowel. Here no operation is to be applied to somcthing anterior to such original ( 
P EC) vowel, but to 
1044 
REDUI'LICATION. 
( BK. VI. CI. I. $ 13 
a form consisting of such substitute (afp) vowel. Therefore, the light vowel is not considered non-existent for the purposes of HTET 11 If this order of operation is not followed, there would arise incongruitics. The order must be this: Ist the elision of thot ( VI. 4. 51 ) and the shortening of the penultimate (VII 4.4) 3rd the reduplication. If the reduplication take place first and the vowel be shortened, then the reduplication having taken place before the subs titution of the vowel had taken place, such substitute will now be considered as sthanivad: the light vowel being considered as still heavy, will prevent the application of H T !| The difficulty will be in the forın of matura, where the short is ordained after the for it If this be the order of operations, there will not be the reduplication of the second syllable p in the word MFEET? This is, howwer, done by I. 1. 59. which see. 
art AETE AÇIu II 8211 qera 11 979977, FIER, HİÇTa, वृत्तिः ॥ शाश्वान साहान् मीडानित्येते शनाबाछनसि भाषायां चाविशेषेण निपात्यन्त ॥ पातिकम् ॥ कृमादीनां के भवत इति वक्तव्यम् ॥ वा.॥चरिलिपतिवर्शनांदिस्वमच्यचाभ्यासस्य। पा०॥ वेति वक्तव्यम् ॥ पा० ॥ इन्तेपत्वं च ॥ वा० ॥ पाटोर्णिलुक चाक् च दीर्घधाभ्यासस्य ।। 
12. The participles câsvân, sâh vân and midhvân are irregularly formed without reduplication. 
The word prosta is from the root na 'to give' with the affixu (III. 2. 107), here the reduplication and the augment T are prohibited irregularly. As AUTETT शशुषः सुतम् (Rig I. 3,7). The word साहान् is derived froin the root सत् 'to endure', by adding the affix e (III. 2. 107), thc irregularity being in long thening the penultimate, not allowing the augment of and the reduplication. Thus akm, TM : 11 So also start comes from far to sprinkle' with the affix Fe (III. 2. 107) the irregularity consisting in non-reduplication, non application of r, the lenthening of the penultimate vowel, and the change of t into | As मीडवस्तोकाय तनयाय भृत्य ॥ It is not necessary that these words should be in the singular always, in their plural forms also they do not redu plicate. 
Vårt: Reduplication takes place when a &c, are followed by the affix all Thus fancta a + 
2 a , fetao fornell The affix of comes after and for with the force of the asfix TN 
VA1t:--The roots , 7, 96, and take reduplication when follow ed by the affix (III. 1. 134) and the reduplicate (ablıyasa) takes the aug. ment i The final consonants of the Abhyasa (reduplicate) are not elided in these verbs, in order to give scope to the augmcnt, for is the final conso nants be elided by VII. 4. 60, then the addition of the augment becomes unnecessary; as there is no difference between the augment and the adesa (shortening of the vowel) taught in VII. 4. 59. Thus , q , 401477:, TETTE: 11 
BK. VI. CH. I $ 13. 
VocalisaTION. 
1045 
Vårt:-The above vārtika is optional, so we have the forms p gari trus, TĪ Agtei &c. 
Vårt.The root ga is reduplicated before the affix 07, and the aug ment are comes after the Abliyasa, and is the substitute of of the Abhyasa. Thus 62+7= 
got+ 
7+37175 + 
+7+7=m 
+ 7 = 11T 
a: (The second g is chang ed into by VII. 3. 55), as in the phrase taga: finantare 
Vart:-The causative root one is reduplicated before the affix 977, there is elision of fut (sign of the causative), and he is the augment of the Abhyasa, and it is lengthened. Thus q? 187797897 
ध्यङः संप्रसारणं पुत्रपत्योस्तत्पुरुषे ॥ १३॥ पदानि ॥ व्यङः, संप्रसारणम, पुत्र, fit:, 
a ll वृत्तिः ॥ पुत्र पति इत्येतयोरुत्तरपश्योस्तत्पुरुष समासें व्यः संप्रसारणं भवति । पातिकम ॥ व्यङः सम्प्रसारण मौकाक्षायाः पतिषेधः॥ 
13. There is vocalisation of the semivowel o of the affix tte (IV. 1. 78) when followed in a Tatpurusha com pound, by the words ga and afa il 
When the words and qra are tlie second members; forming a Tat purusha compound, there is samprasaraņa (vocalising the semi-vowels) of the affix sag of the preceding. That is & is changed intor i Thus it The Spar : (a Bahuvrihi compound taking the samåsanta affix or rather substitute by V. 4.137) #igerpaqaqua +BTTI (IV. 1.92) firmaet: 11 The feminine of this will be formed by adding 5 (IV. 1. 78). Thus we have Anitat (see IV. 1.78). Now in forming the Tatpurusha compound of this word with my or ra, the final u will be changed into and we have Terreift 
T:, Artetara: The m of a becomes merged intor (VI. 1. 108), and the short r is lengthened (VI. 3. 139). So also agt: 0 gairerat: 11 
Why do we say "of the affix tog"? Observe pagi, atrag: 11 
Why do we say "wlicn followed by g or gra"? Observe program कुलम्, कोमुरगन्भ्याकुलम् ।। 
Why do we say “when forming a Tatpurusha compound"? Observe ErroanaFA 974*4 = rangfatro 978:11 It is a Bahuvrihi compound. 
The affix szr is here the ferninine affix a followed by an (T) (see IV. 1. 77 and 74). 
A general maxiın relating to all affixes is "an affix denotes whenever it is employed in Grammar, a word-form which begins with that to which that affix has been added, and ends with the affix itself: paraard FT firfca TIFFET TEOTT" || This maxim, however, does not apply in case of femininc asfixes, where we have this rule "a feminine affix denotes whenever 
1046 
VOCALISATION 
[BK. VI. Cl. I. 
4. 
it is employed in a rule, a word-form which ends with that affix, but which need not necessarily begin with that to which the affix has been added, but where the word form is subordinate: श्रीप्रत्यये चानुपसर्जने न"॥ Thus we have परमकारीषगन्ध्यायाः पुषः- परमकारीषगन्धीपुष: and so also परमकारीपगन्धीपतिः ॥ Not so when the word is an upasarjana or subordinate in a compound. As भतिकान्ता कारीगन्ध्याम् भतिकारीषगन्ध्या, तस्यपुत्रः- मतिकारीपगन्यापुषः, भतिकारीपगन्यापतिः ॥ 
. This vocalisation takes place when go and ora alone, not compounded with any other word, stand at the end : not so when a word beginning or ending with these words follows. Thus कारीषगन्यापुत्रकुलं, कारीगन्थ्यापरमपुषः &c. 
Though a word ending in ag may have may semi-vowels, yet the vocalisation takes place of the affix य (प्यड्) only, according to the maxim निर्दिश्यमानस्यादेशा भवन्ति "substitutes take the place of that which is actually enunciated". 
The word deur has regulating influence upto VI. 1.44 inclusive. The rules of vocalisation (change of semi-vowels into vowels) is contained in these satras. . 
Vart:-Prohibition must be stated when afer and go follow the word गोकाश्च ॥ As गौकाझ्यापुषः, गोकाक्ष्यायातः instead of गोकाक्षीपुनः &c. 
बन्धुनि बहुव्रीही ॥ १४ ॥ पदानि ॥ बन्धुनि, बहुव्रीही ॥ निः॥ प्याः संमसारणमिण्यनुवर्तते । बन्धनउत्तरपदे बहुव्रीही समासे प्याः संप्रसारणं भवति । पा०॥ मातचमातृकमातृषु ॥ 
14. Thore is vocalisation of the affix w when the word ory follows in a Bahuvrihi compound. 
Thus कारीपगन्ध्यावन्धुरस्य- कारीपगन्धीबन्धुः ॥ So also कौमुद्गन्धीबन्धुः। 
Why do we say "when the compound is a Bahuvrihi"? Observe कारी पगन्याया बन्धुः - कारीपगन्ध्यावन्धुः, which is a Tatpurusha compound. I.ike the last satra, we have here also परमकारीषगन्धविन्धुः, but भतिकारीपगन्भ्यामन्युः, कारीपगन्ध्याबन्धु धनः, कारीषगन्ध्यापरमवन्धुः॥ 
Though the word myra is exhibited in the satra in the neuter gender, it is in fact a masculine word. 
Vart:-There is vocalisation of cae in a Bahuvrihi compound with मात, मानक and मात optionally: as कारीषगन्धीमातः or कारीषगन्यामातः, कारीषगन्धीमातृकः or कारीषगन्ध्यामातृका, कारीषगन्धर्धामाता, कारीषगन्ध्यामाता॥ The indicatory of मात makes the word take the udatta on the last syllable (VI. 1. 163), thus debarr ing the especial accent of the Bahuvrihi (VI. 2. I). All Bahuvrihi compounds ending in E take the sainásånta affix 2, so are would have become Alger by force of V. 4. 153, so the separate enumeration of Ary and arm here shows that aq is also optional. BK. VI. CII. I. S15] 
VOCALISATION. 
1047 
वचिस्वपियजादीनां किति ॥ १५ ॥ पदानि । वचि, स्वपि, यजादीनाम्, किति ॥ वृतिः ॥ संप्रसारणमिति वर्तते । यह इति निवृत्तम् । वधि । वच परिभाषणे। यो पश्चिरित च । स्थापि। मिण पवे । यादयो, या देवपूजासंगतिकरणदानवियतामति मा गणान्तात् । तेषां वाचस्पपियजा 
शनां किति प्रत्यये परतः संप्रसारणं भवति । 
15. The semivowels of the roots वच्, स्वए and यजादि verbs are vocalised when followed by an affix having an indicatory क॥ 
The anuvritti of does not run into this sotra. Tlie root rin cludes the aच परिभाषने of the Adadi class (II. 54 ) and the a substitute ofy (II. 4.53) स्वप् is the root मिप्यप् शये of the Adadi class (II 59). The यमादि verbs are the last nine roots of the Bhvadi class viz. यज, वए, वह, वस, पैम, ध्ये, म, पद and fall The semivowels of these eleven verbs are changed into the cor responding vowel, when an affix having an indicatory is added to them. Thus with the Past Participle affixes i and third we have the following forms: ... बच्-उक्ता, उक्तवान् , (VIII. 2. 30). 2 स्वप्-सुप्तः, सुप्तवान् 3 यज-पष्टः, इष्टवान्. (VIII. 2. 36) 4 व-उमः, उपवान, 5 बह-जरा, जवान् (VIII. 2. 31, 40, VIII. 3. 13 and VI. 3. 111) 6वम् अपितः कषितवान्, (VII. 2. 56 VIII. 3. 60) 7 वेम् -उता, उतवान्, 8 व्ये--सवीतः, संबीतवान्,92--हूतः, इतवान्, 10 वद्-उरितः, उदितवान् , H दुश्चिनः , धनवान् ।। - धातो स्वरुपमहणे तत्मत्यय कार्य विज्ञायते--When in a Gramimatical rule, an operation (dependant on an affix)is taught with regard to a root (dhatu) by mentioning particular verbs (dhâtu) specifically, and not by using the word "dhatu",generally, then the operation takes place only when the root is followed by such an affix as can be added to roots by emunciating the word yat: 11 The existence of this maxiin is inferred in the formation of the word घीणहत्यम् in VI. 4. 174, which see. Therefore, there is no vocalisation of वw in the following वाच्यति, वाचिकः ॥ Here वाच्यति is forined by adding क्यच to वाच् (वाचमिच्छति)॥ वाच् is formed by किप added to you, the vowel being lengtheid and sainprasarana being expressly preveutcd by Unadi II. 57. Now, it is a general rule that a root taking the affix विप, विद्, or विच् does not lose its character of a dhatu. Therefore वाच is a root (धात), and it ought to take vocalisation before the affix क्यच ॥ But क्यच् is not enunciated to come after a dhatu, but after a सुबन्त (सुपभात्मनः क्यच III. I. 8) in the rule ordaining its affixing. So also वाषिक: fornned by adding एक to वाथ् (See Vart. V. 3. 83). __ अहिज्यावयिन्यधिवधिविचतिवृश्चतिपृच्छतिभृज्जतीनां ङिति च ॥१॥ पदानि ॥ प्रहि, ज्या, वयि, व्यधि, वष्टि, विचति, वृश्चति, पृच्छति, भृज्जतीनाम्, डिति, च ॥ 
वृत्तिः॥ मह उपदाने, ज्या वयोहाना, वेमो वायः, ध्यध ताउने, वश कान्ती, व्यच व्याजीकरणे, भोवन रने, पच्छ शीप्सायां, भ्रस्ज पाक, इष्यतेषां धातुनां डिति प्रत्यये परतनकाराकिति च संमसारणं भवति। परिभाषा निधादेशः पवस्वरमत्यविधीडिाधिषु सिद्धांवक्तव्यः ।। 
1048 
VOCALISATION. 
( BK. VI. CH. I. § 16 
16. There is vocalisation of the semi-vowels of the following verbs, whon an affix having an indicatory or follows:- 'to take', var 'to become oll', ärsy 'to wcave', que 'to strike', my 'to shinc', sya 'to deceive', au 'to cut', 953 'to ask', and I 'to cook, to fry'. 
• By force of the word deur 'and', the anuvritti of ra is read into this sūtra. Thus 1. 
a t a, tetaang (by and ), gura (1. 2. 4), (by g7 of the Intensive). 2. Fa- , faina (VIII. 2. 44 # changed to a), TA (1. 2. 4), the short y is lengthened by VI. 4. 2 and is shortened again by VII. 3. 80. tag (ar), 3. Fa-The root is replaced by my when fase follows (11, 4. 41). This all can have no fra affix aftor it, it takes only fare terminations, which as we know are far (I. 2. 5). The examples, therefore given will be of fast afíxos only. Thus 4, y II Now arises this ques. țion 'why do you enumerate qfa, for is not ir (lor which are is substituted) already included in the class of verbs given in the last sätra, and by force of that sätra, afu will get samprasarana before affixes", The reply is "org is numerated here in order to show that the prohibition of sampra sarana with regard to as taught in VI. 1. 40, does not apply to its substi tute वाय in the Perfect Tense". Thus while the Perfect of वन is वा, ववतुः, वयुः, the Perfect of its substitute वाय is अवाय, जयतुः and जयुः ॥ More over VI. I. 38 teaches that the A of 4 is not vocalised in fase affixes, which therefore, implies inapaka) that the other seinivowel i, e, a of 44 will be vocalised. 4. 14-F I, farart, and with an affixes porn, tiaza II 5. 47-rera:, raama, and with fu affixes JE, UT II 6. sep-frai, taigam quia, areto H By a Vár: tika under I. 2. !, the word ge is considered to belong to giene class, and therefore all affixes after it, other than those having an indicatory , F or the affix mi, are considered as , and therefore, there will be samprasarana before these ashxes : as, TETAT, 174, ajattoral! 7.44- 01, How is the final of changed into a for by VIII. 2. 36 ought to have been changed into or belore the P altix ? To this we reply the affix is replaced by T (VII. 2. 42) and as this at is not a Que affix, Rule VIII. 2. 36 does not apply. This is done on the following maxim ; "The substitute of the Nishtha should be consideșed to be siddha or effective when applying the rules relating to the change of a letter into , to accent, to affix, and to the addition of the augment ". But when y is to be changed into the substitute is considered asiddha (not to have taken place). Thus we have the forms णः &c. Before डित affixes we have वश्वति, परीवृश्च्य ते ॥ 8. 5-पष्टः (VIII. 2. 36), पृष्टवान्, हित-पृच्छति, परीपृच्छपते ॥ The forms मप्र and बभ्रम्म would have been evolved by thc simple rules of Reduplication even, without the 
BK. VI. C1. I. §. 17 ) 
VOCALISATION. 
1049 
application of this rule. But +1 (111. 3.90)- !! Here there is no vocalisation, because Panini hiinsclf uses the word : in satra III. 2. 117 showing that this is the proper formn though irregular. 9, -: (VII. 2. 36), Han, -Tila, at 45 84T W The # of you is changed first into by Hi U PIT (VIII. 4. 53), and then is changed into » by : A T: (VIII. 4. 40). Poseu 
r eina II puell alla il fase, water, g ara, (HTETUTA) 11 
वृत्तिः ॥ उभयेषां वाच्यादीनां पहादीनांप लिटि परतो ऽभ्यासस्य संप्रसारणं भवति । 
17. There takes place vocalisation of the scni vowel of the reduplicate (abhyâsa) of both vachyadi (VI. 1. 15) and grahadi (VI. 1. 16) words, when the affixes of for follow. 
Thus re-44, 74794, FT-591, y o, 45-473, TT, 2479, 11 As regards qetie verbs; 9—57957, SATEU (there is no speciality in case of this verb, as these forms would have been evolved without even this rule). 41- TFT, 65524, f4--14, and water; fony, fairt, T HTT, TTTY, 
s fasen, Frey, - and art Some say that with regard to gw, it is equal whether there existed this present rule or not. For they argue thus, 4* + T = AT+*+* +pe+ (the OT: VII. 4. 60)=790! To this we reply, this forın would be evolved no doubt had this rulc not existed. But when this rule is applied, and you makc reduplication without first vocalising the t, then you will have to vocalise by force of this rule. Hence the necessity of this rule with regard to av also, for having changed into the, we have m y and then change into by VII. 4. 66. Then this o substitute becomes sthånivat to (1. 1. 59), and therefore there is no vocalisasion of this , for rule VI. 1. 37, prevents the vocalisation of a letter standing before one which has already been vocalised. There is no speciality with regards to 995 and #Fs verbs. 
This vocalisation of the reduplicate is taught with regard to those asfixes which are not perill With regard to fit affixes, the Rule VI. 1. 15 will apply. And as the rule of vocalisation is subsequent to that of redupli cation in order, therefore by the inaxiin of qrey I. 4. 2, vocalisation will take place first and then reduplication, according to the maxim 997: ta framfaran "occasionally the formation of a particular form is accounted for by the fact that a preceding rule is allowed to apply again, after it had previously been superscded by a subsequent rule". Thus ger+77 (which is famo I. 2. 5)- Jy 
+07:57+37+977: = 50; 3: 11 
1050 
Vor LISATION. 
[ BK. VI, CII I. § 20 
Though the phrase ar could have been supplied into this sätra by the context and the governing scope of the preceding sätras, its express mention in this sätra is for the sake of indicating, that the rule of vocalisation supersedes even the rule of mile: : VII. 4. 60, the vocalisation must take place at all events. Thus 64+3=64 +674 + Here by VII. 4. 60, the second consonant a of ought to have been elided, and the equation would have stood 7++87, and there would have been vocalisation of a by this rule. But that is not intended; there is vocalisation of a and we have farming In fact, the universal maxim of vocalisation is :-" The samprasarana and the operations dependent on it possess greater force than other operations which are simultaneously applicable". Hvertui ar r in TATA II 
FETTA 1810 eura Il Fara:, afg, (Anyaror) || वृत्तिः ॥ स्वापेरिति स्वर्ण्यन्तस्य पहणं तस्य पङि परतः संमसारण भवति ॥ 
18. Of the causative verb Farfa "to cause one to sleep”, there is vocalisation of the semivowel, when the affix 
of the Reduplicated Aorist follows. 
Thus the Aorist of Pig is 4472, ayrara, wyra 11 The vocalisa tion takes place before reduplication, then there is guņa of the penultimate short vowel, then this is again shortened by VII. 4. I, then there is reduplica tion, and then lengthening of the vowel of the reduplicate by VII. 4. 94. Thus Fila + = +9 (VI. 4. 51) + (VII. 3.86)= Arg+GET+ q (VII. 4. 1)=+T+7(VI. 1, 11)-91797(VII. 4. 94 ) which with the augment w becomes अमषुपत् ।। 
Why do we say 'when or follows? Observe Firea, Fitfoa: 11 The anuvritti of Parfa has ceased, that of fera however is here. 
स्वपिस्यमिव्ये यङि ॥१९॥ पदानि ॥ स्वपि, स्यामि,व्येआम, याङ,(संप्रसारणम्)। वृत्तिः ॥ निष्वप शये स्यमु स्वन पन शब्द, व्यम् संवरण, इत्यंतषां धानूनां याङ परतः संप्रसारणं भवति ।। 
19. There is vocalisation of the semivowel of tho verbs Faq 'to sleep', fun 'to shout', and get 'to cover', wlien followed by the affix us of the Intensive. 
Thus tirona, aferraa, astea (VII. 4. 25 the short r is lengthened). Why do we say 'when as follows? Observe fama formed by FC III. 2. 172. 
aa: 11 Roll बत्तिः ॥ वहीति वर्तते । वो तोर्यडि परतः सप्रसारणं न भवति । 
20. There is not vocalisation of the semi-vowel of T, when the affix rs follows. 
BK. VI. Cl. I. S. 23.] 
VOCALISATION. 
1051. 
The word यरि is understood here. As बावश्यते, वावश्यते, पावश्यन्ते ॥ Why do we say when यह follows"? Observe re:, धन्ति ॥ See VI. I. 16 to which this rule is an exception. 
चायः की ॥ २१॥ पदानि ॥ चायः, की। वृत्तिः ॥ यतीति वसे । षधि पूजानिशामनयोरित्येतस्य धातोयडि परतः कीरययमादयो भवति । 
21. The verb की is substituted for the verb चाय to worship, to observe', when the Intensive affix to follows. 
The phrase यडि is understood here. Thus वेकीयंत, कीयेते, कायन्ते ॥ The exhibition of it in the sotra with a long sindicates that there is long vowel even in tenses where he is elided, as eita: For is the satra had enunciated कि with a short r as the substitute of चाय, the forms चंकीयत &c would have been still valid. Thus कि+य-चि+कि+य% थे+कि+यस+की+च (VII. 4.25 causing the lengthening of the short 7). But then the Nishitha would have been चेकितः which is wrong. 
स्फायः स्फी निष्ठायाम् ॥ २२॥ पदानि ॥ स्फायः, स्फी, निष्ठायाम॥ वृत्तिः ॥ स्फायी भोप्यायी वृद्धावस्यस्य धातोनिष्ठायां परतः स्कीस्ययमादेशो भवति ॥ 
22. The स्फी is the substitute of रफाय “to swell', when the Nishitha affixes follow. 
Thus estri, fara argit Why do we say "when the Nishtha affixes follow"?Observe स्फाति: formed by निन् ।। In the phrase स्फाती भवति, the word स्फासी is the feminine of the word स्फाति formed by तिन् ॥ The phrase निष्ठाया "when the Nishtha follows" governs all the subsequent sotras up to VI. I. 29. 
स्त्यः प्रपूर्वस्य ॥ २३॥ पदानि ॥ स्त्यः, प्र, पूर्वस्य, (सम्प्रसारणम्)। वृत्तिः ॥ निष्ठायामिति वर्तते संप्रसारणमिति चास्फा इत्येतन स्वर्यते । स्स्ये यै पदसंघातयोईयोरप्येत बोलियोः स्यारुपमापनयोः सामान्यन ग्रहणम् । स्या इत्येतस्य प्रपूर्वस्य धातोनिधायां परतः संप्रसारणं 
भवति॥ 
23. The verb स्त्या (स्त्यै and ठ्य) when preceded by #changes its semivowel to a vowel, when a Nishtha affix follows. 
The phrases "when the nishtha follows", and "there is vocalisation" are understood here. The anuvritti or ffir does not run here. The roots pray and स्ट both assuine the form स्त्या and are included here. Thus +त्या+ -+स्ति 
+स (VI. I. 108)- प्रस्तीतः (VI. 4. 2), and प्रस्तीतवान् ॥ The s of nishtha affix would have been changed into 7 by VIII. 2. 43 in as much as the root fit has a semivowel and ends in long BTT 1 But by the vocalisation of 7, the condition of यणवत् for the application of VIII. 2. 43, no longer existing, the affix a is not changed to न || But त is optionally changed to म by VIII. 2.54 as प्रस्सीम: and प्रस्तीमवान् ॥ 
Why do we say "when preceded by ?" Obscrve AUTA: (VIII. 2 43). संस्थानवान् ॥ If it was intended that vocalisation should take place when : 
1052 
VOCALISATION. 
BK. VI. CH. I. S. 24. 
singly stood before, then the sotra could well have run thus fra: # The use of the word gita implies that the rule applies when stands first, though other upasargas may intervene between it and the root. Thus प्रसंस्तीता, प्रसंस्तीतवान् ।। The compound प्रपूर्वस्य should be explained as a Bahuvrihi=प्रः पूर्वो यस्य धातुपसर्ग समुदायस्य स प्रपूर्व (that which consisting of root and upasarga is preceded by His called पपूर्व). Therefore the rule is made applicable to प्रसंस्तीत: &c. 
द्रवमूर्तिस्पर्शयोः श्यः ॥ २४॥ पदानि ॥ द्रवमूर्ति, स्पर्शयोः, श्यः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ द्रवमूनों द्रवकाठिन्ये स्पर्से वर्तमानस्य श्यङ्गताविस्यस्य धातीनिष्ठायां परतः संप्रसारणं भवति।। 
24. There is vocalisation of the semivowel of the root श्या (श्य) 'to go' when the nishtha affixes follow, 
when the sense is " coagulation" or "cold to touch ". 
The word nie means hardening of a fluid, by coagulation &c. Thus शीनं घृतं, शीना वसा, शीनं मेवः "a coagulated butter, grease &c". The s of nishtha is changed to न by VIII. 2. 47. But when the sense is that of 'cold', the e is not changed; as शीतं वर्तते, गीतों वायुः, सीतमरकम् ॥ The word शीत is here used both as a noun meaning cold weather &c', and an adjective denoting 'cold'. There is no vocalisation when the sense is not that of 'coagulation' or 'cold', as संश्यानो वृधिकः 'the rolled up scorpion'. The short t is lengthened in चीन &c, by VI. 4. 2. 
प्रतेश्च ॥ २५॥ पदानि ॥ प्रतेः, च, (संप्रसारणम्)॥ वृत्तिः ॥श्य इति वर्तते । प्रतरुत्तरस्य श्यायतनिष्ठायां परतः संप्रसारणं भवति ।। 
25. There is vocalisation of a prcccoled by the upasarga ara, when the nishthâ affixes follow. 
Thus प्रतिशीनः प्रतिशीनवान् ॥ This shtra applies to cases where the words need not have the meaning of "coagulation" or "cold". 
विभाषा ऽभ्यवपूर्वस्य ॥२६॥ पदानि॥विभाषा, अभि, अव, पूर्वस्य, (संप्रसारणम्॥ वृत्तिः ॥श्य इति वर्तते । अभि अव इत्येवपूर्वस्य श्यायनिष्ठायां विभाषा सप्रसारणं भवति ॥ 
26. There is optionally the vocalisation of श्या followed by the Nishthâ affixes, when tlic upasargas ar and अव precede it. . . 
____Thus भभिशीनम् or भभिश्यानम् घृतं, अवशीनम् or भवश्यानम् वृश्चिकः ॥ This option applies even when the word means "coagulation and “cold". As भवशीनं or अवश्यानं घृतं, मेवः ॥ भवशीत or भवश्यानो वायुः, &c. भवशीतं or भवश्यानमुदकं ॥ 
The e in this satra serves the same purpose as in VI. 1. 23. Thus भभिसंशीनं or भभिसंश्यानं, भवसंशीन, भवसंश्यानं ॥ According to the author of Sid. dhanta Kaumudi, the word of shows that it is a vyavasthita vibhasha, hence there is no option allowed when गभि and भव are in the middle, as, समभियान, समवश्यानं ॥ Here we cannot have the alternative forms समभिशीनं &c. 
BR. VI. C11. I §. 29. ) 
VOCALISATION. 
1053 
Boat TR II U 11 na 1 674, T, II वृत्तिः ॥ विभाषेत्यनुवर्तते । श्रा पाके इत्येतस्य धातोय॑न्तस्याण्यन्तस्य च पाके ऽभिधेये कात्यये परता TATA farraa PHTUTII 
27. Optionally is formed in the sense of "cooked', by the vocalisation of the semivowel of a before the nishtha affix #11 
The word funt is understood here. The roots to cook' of the Bhvadi class, and put 'to cook' of the Adâdi class, and my 'to cook' of the Bhvadi sub-class Ghatadi, are meant here. In all these, replaces T, whether causative or not. Thus PTá sitt, Tá sa 11 This is a vyavasthita vivhasha ; so that wt is invariably changed to when rcferring to tr and aft, but not anywhere else. Thus Tot TT, witar Tar: (V11. 3. 36 and VI. 4.92). This word does not take double causative though the sense may require it. As 
på tri a 99197 "Devadatta through Vajñadatta has caused the milk to be cooked". The t is intransitive. When the sense is that of Reflexive, or Causative, there the form Vत is to be used. As भृतं सीरं स्वयमय, भूतं सीरं देवरलेन । 
Cart: 0 II RCN Tall part, of # वृत्तिः ॥ विभाषव्येव । भोप्यायी वृद्धावत्यस्य धातोनिष्ठायां विभाषा पीत्ययमादेपो भवति । 
28. î is optionally the substitute of the root care * to increase' before the Nish thâ affixes. 
The root part at belongs to Bhvadi class. The indicatory of shows that the affixes # and an arc changed into and TT (VIII. 2. 45) Thus 
ta un, tit , dagt: 11 The option here is also a regulated option (vya vasthita-vibhasha). The substitution takes place invariably when the root is without upasarga, and never when it is preceded by an upasarga. Thus gear: matum: 1 The substitution, however, must take place when the preposition 
Te precedes the root, and the words oprog: and we are in composition : as भापीनोन्धुः, भापीनभूधः ॥ 
focust 1188 11 Pa i fest, 451:, a, () #: U fanera faqtin/cara: francut a t i fare afica: carenz dernitat *9ra i 
29. There is substitution of ot for apps when the affixes of the Perfect (fea) and the Intensive (47) follow. 
The anuvritti of the word funt ceases. The phrase cara: ft of the last sätra is drawn into this by force of the word or 'and'; thus marque, or fgara, 
s alt 1 The substitution of a subsequent rule, would have debar.. red reduplication which precedes it in order. The reduplication, however, takes place after the substitution, by force of the maxim of ra: E &c men 
1054 
VOCALISATION. 
BK. VI. C1. I S 31. ) 
... 
. 
tioned in VI. 1. 17. Thus + fare ++Hf++ (VI. 4. 82 the a being substituted) - tiga with the affix 871. So also in the Intensive, as luua, भापपीयेते, भापेपीयन्ते ॥ 
Fahrt : Il 30 || canan faunt, sa: 11 वृत्तिः॥लिङ्यहोरिति वर्तते संप्रसारणामिति च । लिटि यडि च इवयतेर्धातोर्विभाषा संप्रसारणं भवति । 
30. There is optionally the vocalisation of tho semivowel of fear before the affixes of the Perfect and the In tensive. 
The phrases fast: and #TETOR are to be read Into this satra. Thus Ture or arty, 190: or rariTag: # So also in the Intensive as orgaa or 
au The root page would not have taken vocalisation before up by any pre vious rule, this satra teaches optional vocalisation. The root would have taken vocalisation before fore, which is a fa affix, invariably by VI. 1. 15, this satra modifies that by making the substitution optional. In the alternative, when the root does become vocalised, the reduplicate is also not vocalised in spite of VI. 1. 17. This explains the forın formala, which by VI. 1. 17 would have been Tur 7 + = ( VT + T VI. 1. 30 )-T+ora (VI. 1. 108)-T 
+1+® (VI. 1. 8) - TV 11 
ona #st: 38 11 Tata II oft, , FT, 751:,( #encore, ) 11 वृत्तिः । विभाषा वेरिति वर्तते । सम्परे बापरे पणी परतः श्वयतीतार्विभाषा संमसारणं भवति । 
31. There is optionally the vocalisation of the semivowel, in the causative of fea, when followed by the Desi derative Fit and the Aorist affix. 
The phrase faire it is understood here. In forming the Desiderative and the Reduplicated Aorist forms of the Causative of fis, there is optional vocalisation. Thus Turfagfa or fuprafasta II So also in the Reduplicated Aorist as, as भशशवत् or भशिश्वयत् ॥ By the maxim संप्रसारणं संप्रसारणाश्रयं च बलीयो Hafa (see sätra VI, 1. 17), the antaranga substitution of Vriddhi &c is supers eded by the samprasarana and the subsidiary operations relating to it here. The vriddhi and the substitntion of a take place after the samprasarana has taken place. The satra VII. 4. 80 teaching the substitution off for the 3 of the reduplicate, when an follows, shows by implication that the substitution caused by for is sthanivat though it itself does not cause reduplication (1. 1. 59). Thus श्वि+णि श्वै+1- श्वाय् +- श्वाय ॥ In reduplicating श्वायि we cannot form 
T4, but must consider the substitute equal to the original Form and must reduplicate it. We thus get farufufall In the case of vocalisation, the rules of Vriddhi &c are postponed. Thus fat + G + 7 ( VI. I. 108 )-T+for+ 
++ 4 = UIT +&+ + 7 = U+R+27 - 0979+ 4H Hcrc wc requ 
IK. VI. CIR. I $ 34 ) 
VOCALISATION. 
"1055 
ire reduplication. Here the substitute wat in my though not caused by 72, is treated sthånivat under 1. 1. 59 toy, which is carried in reduplication. Similarly the Aorist to for * \*****+ +++* U r +*+1=1 TT *******+ **** (VII. 41) 
VI. 4. 51 )=790€* (VII. 4. 94 ) 
HTCUTE 11 
a 117, cuTEN fari di o 
roa 1 690 YT T OTO TRI 
32. There is the vocalisation of the semivowel of the causative of hve () before the Desiderative and the Redu plicated Aorist affixes. 
The whole of the last sätra is to be read into this sötra. Thus werk fagfa and Yera, Tersifat; 7897, art and Thu The root gr does not take the augment a requircd by VII. 3. 37 before the asfix for, because the Samprasarana rulc is stronger. The repetition of the word je in this sotra, though its anuvritti was present, indicates that the force of the word FXN has ceased. Though this and the next sötra could well have been made one, their separation shows that the samprasarana does not take place whien ano ther aslix, not causing reduplication, intervenes. As ther-grastara: the Desiderative of this verb is जिहायकीयिषति ॥ 
*FTER YN2211 ha 1394 FIET, 7, ( ETCUTE ) n 
7. apyware 
U, FRETT karai, 
afaris noi, ar Ma E: TOT T ÁYETU YA 1 
33. There is vocalisation of the semivowel of g in the reduplicated form, in both the syllables. 
The abhiyasta means the reduplicate and the reduplicated, both the syllables. The vocalisation takes place before reduplication. Thus TT, EUR, and hafa This and the last sūtra arc one, in the original of Panini, they have been divided into two by the authority of a Vartika. 
Jonate 1 341 Mall ou, out,( FTCOR) M N 
I 
# 
YHTED WITH 34. In the Chhandas, the senivowel of this root is diversely vocaliscil. 
Thus it or ah, as farat 'Invoke Indra and Agni'. ft ! The former is Atmanepada, Present tense, ist Pers. sing. the vikarana, mre is elided, then there is vocalisation and substitution of H So also a 
67: forra, E h 
711 So also : as (Rig I. 2. 1. ) 'hear the invocation 
NEZ 
des 
1056 
VOCALISATION, 
[ BK. VI. Cl. IS 36. 
MS 
चायः की ॥ ३५॥ पदानि ॥ चायः, की॥ वृत्तिः ॥ बहुलं छन्दसीति वर्तते। चायतीताम्छन्दसिं विषये बहुलं कीत्ययमादेशो भवति॥ 
35. For at is diversely substituted at in the Chhandas. 
___ Thus विधुना निधिक्युः, नान्यं धिक्युर्न निचिक्युरन्यम् ॥ These are forms ending In the affix उस् of the Perfect. Sometimes there is no substitution. As भनि 
ज्योतिर्निचाय्यः ।। - अपस्पृधेथामानृचुरानडुश्चिन्युतित्याजश्राताः श्रितमाशीराशी ः ॥ ३६ ॥ पदानि ॥ अपस्पृधेथाम्, आनृचुः, आनुहुः, चिच्युषे, तित्याज, धाताः, श्रितम्, 
आशीः, आशीर्ताः ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ भपस्पृधेयाम् भानुयुः माहुः चिच्युपे तित्यान, माताः, नितम्, भाशी, भाशीतः, एतेनिपात्यन्ते छन्दास विषये ।। 
36. In the Chhandas, the following irregular forms are met with :-अपस्पृधेथाम, भानुचुः, भानुहुः, चिच्युरे, तित्याज, धाताः, श्रितम्, आशीः and आशीर्तः ॥ 
The word ooie is understood here. From the root pa 'to chala lenge', is formed भपस्पृधेथाम् being the Imperfect (लइ), 2nd Pers. Dual, Atmane pada : there is reduplication of the root, vocalisation of C, and the elision of म irregularly. As, इन्द्रय विष्णो यदपस्पृधेयाम् ॥ In secular language the form is मसयाम् ।। Some say, it is derived from स्पर्द्ध with the preposition भप, the vocalisation of [, the elision of , and the non-prefixing of the augment 87 in the Imperfect (VI. 4. 75). The counter-example of this will be BTTFTT याम् ॥ From भर्ष and भई 'to respect, to worship', are derived भानृचुः and भा. महः in the Perfect before the 3rd per. pl. उस, there being vocalisation of r and the clision of irregularly. Then there is reduplication, then Fe changed to म, then the lengthening of this भ, then the addition of the augiment म, as : मंउस-क + उस्क +कच् + उस्म +कच् + उस् (VII. 4. 66) मा+पच् + उस AVII. 4.70)-मा+ + + उस् (VII. 4.71)- भानुचुः॥ The irregularity consists In the samprasarna with the elision of भ॥ Thus यवमा अर्कमानचुः, न बसन्यानुहुः ।। The secular forms will be भानचुः, भानईः॥ The form चिच्युष is the Perfect 2nd per. sing. of the root oe to go': there is vocalisation of the reduplicate, and the non-addition of the augment before the affix ! This is the ir regularity. The regular form is getan ll The form fareast is the Perfect of स्य, the vocalisation of the reduplicate is the irregularity. The regular form isतल्याज From the root श्रीस 'to cook', is derived श्राता before the Nishtha affix, श्री changed to श्रा irregularly. As श्रातास्त इन्द्रसोमाः॥ The form श्रितं is also derived from the same root by shortening the vowel with the same affix. As ETH tre frati, par ū TET: 11 Some say the st substitution of it takes place when the word refers to En, in the plural, and fw when it rcfers to other BK. VI. C1. I $ 37 1 
VOCALISATION. 
1057 
than ETH I Sometimes the word 4ta: is seen in the singular, referring to objects other than i Thus z mat Fiat 11 In fact, the exhibition of the word ear: in the plural in the sůtra is not absolutely necessary. The words art and pratt: are from the same root aft, with the prefix sig and taking the affixes lang and fi respectively. Before these sit is replaced by afts, and the non addition of न in the Nishtha is irregular. As, तामाशीरा दुहन्ति भाशीर्म कर, भारमध्यत आशीर्नः॥ 
न संप्रसारणे संप्रसारणम् ॥ ३७॥ पदानि ॥ न, संप्रसारणे, सम्प्रसारणम् ॥ वृत्ति ॥ संसारणे परतः पूर्वस्य यणः संप्रसारणं न भवति । गार्तिकम् ॥ ऋषि वेरुत्तरपनिलोपश्छनसि ॥ धा० ॥रयेमतो बहुलम् ॥ 
37. When a semivowel hase been once vocalised, there is no vocalisation of the other semivowel that may pre cede it in the same word. 
Thus sy; has two semi-vowels [ and y; when is once vocalised into 5, the preceding 7 will not be vocalised into all Thus we have a ll From 642-farra:, 627 #ata: Though the rule of vocalisation does not specify what particular semivowel is to be vocaliscel, yct according to the maxim that the operation is to be performed on the letter nearest to the operator, the second semivowel in the above cases is vocalised and the first is not, by force of this rule. Had the first semi-vowel been vocalised, then there would be no scope for this satra, bccausc thcn no scini-vowel will be found preceding a vocalised letter. This stra is a jñapaka that the vocalisation commences with the second of the conjunct semi-vowels. 
Though the anuvritti of YAITU was understood here, the repetition of this word shows that the prohibition of double vocalisation in the same word applies even when the semivowels are not contiguous. Thus by VI. 1. 133 there is vocalisation of the word 997, the being changed to 7, the x is not changed as well It might be objected that when the 3 of y, and the sam prasarana of 7 coalesce into one by sandhi rules, then there being the substitu tion of one long for the two z's and this is sthånivat to the original, the u and 
of gent should be considered in fact as contiguous and not separated by an intervening letter, and therefore, the explanation given above does not hold goodl; we reply. The substitution of one long vowel for two vowels, is not considered sthanivat (Sce l. 1.58). Even though it be considered as sthanivat, it is still a separating letter. 
Vart:-There is vocalisation of the semivowel of for when followed by , and there is elision of the story, when it refers to Metres. As fa& FUF I 
ara II The word ge takes the samâsanta asfix s by V. 4. 74. Why do we say when referring to a inetre? Observe the 
1058 
VOCALISATION. 
[ BK. VI. CII. I $ 40 
Vart:- In the Chhandas there is diversely vocalisation of the semi vowel of रवि followed by the affix मतुप as रयि+मत्र +मत्र +T+मत्र +T--पत् (VIII. 2. 15) स्वत: as, भारंवानेतु नो विशः ॥ Sometimes it does not take place, as रविमान पुष्टिवर्द्धनः ॥ The म here is not changed to a as required by VIII. 2. 15. 
Vårt:--There is vocalisation of a before a when a Name is meant: as कावन्तं य भौशिजः ॥ This Vartika is unnecessary. See VIII. 2. 12 where the form कक्षीवत् is given. 
लिटि वयो यः ॥ ३८॥ पदानि ॥ लिंदि, वयः, यः (संप्रसारणम् न)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ न संप्रसारणमित्यनुवर्तते । लिटि परतो वयो यकारस्य संप्रसारणं न भवति ॥ 
38. In the substituted root वय (II. 4. 41), the u in the Perfect is not vocalised. 
The phrase म समसारणं is understood here. Thus उपाय, जयतुः, जयुः ॥ The word frse is employed in this aphorism for the sake of subsequent sotras, this one could have done well without it even. 
• वश्चास्यान्यतरस्यां किति ॥३९॥ पदानि ॥ वः, च, अस्य, अन्यतरस्याम, किति॥ वृतिः॥ भस्य षयो यकारस्य किति लिटि परतो वकारादेशो भवत्यन्यनरस्याम् ।। 
39. Before the tense-alftixes of the Perfect that have an indicatory क (I. 2. 5), for the य of वय may optionally bo substituted a व् ॥ 
____ Thus जयतु: or ऊपतुः, जवुः or अयुः ॥ According to Patanjali, the phrase वास्य of this stra could have beendispensed with;this much would have been enough: भन्यतरस्या कतिवमः ॥ Thus + अतुम् = वा+था+अतुस् = ववतुः and aवुः (the vocalisation being prohibited). In the alternative:-वा+भतुस् - T+अतुस् = उ+ उपङ्+अतुस् (VI. 1.77)=7 , 59: N Here there is vocalisation. In the case of a substitute, the यis never vocalised, so we have जयतुः, जयः ॥ Thus all the three forms have been evolved without using वमास्थ ॥ 
वेषः॥४०॥ पदानि ॥ वेअः,(संप्रसारणम्, न)॥ वृत्तिः ॥लिटीत्यनुवर्तते । वे सन्तुसंतानहत्यस्य धातोलिटि परतः संप्रसारणं न भवति । 
40. The semivowel of 'to weave' is not vocalised in the Perfect. 
Thus ववी, ववतुः, पवुः॥ This root belongs to यजादि class and would have been vocalised before fa affixes by VI, 1. 15; and before non-fat affixes the Reduplicate syllable of the Perfect would have been vocalised by VI. 1. 17. Both vocalisations are prohibited here. 
ल्यपि च ॥४१॥ पदानि ॥ ल्यपि, च,(संप्रसारणम्, न)। वृत्तिः ॥ वम इत्यनुवत्तते । त्यपिच परतो व्येमः संप्रसारणं न भवति ॥ 
41. The semivowel of a is not vocalised wlien the Participial aflix at follows. 
BK. VI. CH. I 8451 
VOCALISATION. 
1059 
Thus प्रवाय, उपवाय ॥ The separation of this sutra from the last, is for the sake of the subscquent søtras, into which the anuvritti of mag only runs. 
ज्यश्च ॥ ४२ ॥ पदानि ॥ ज्यः, च, (संप्रसारणम् न)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ स्यपीत्येव । ज्या वयोदानाविन्यस्य धातोयपि परतः संप्रसारण न भवति ॥ 
42. The semivowel of Fat 'to grow old' is not vocali sed when the affix at follows. 
Thus प्रज्याय, उपध्याय ।। व्यश्च ॥ ४३॥ पदानि ॥ व्यः, च, (संग्रसारणम्, न)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ ल्यपीत्येव । व्यम् संवरणहत्येतस्य धानोर्त्यपि परतः संप्रसारणं न भवति ।। 
43. The semivowel of व्या (व्य) to cover' is not vocalised when the affix ato follows. 
As प्रष्याय, उपध्याय ॥ The separation of this satra from the last, is for the sake of the subsequent sätra, in which the anuvritti of a runs. 
विभाषा परेः ॥४४॥ पदानि ॥ विभाषा, परेः, (सम्प्रसारणम्, न)। वृत्तिः॥ त्यपि च व्यत्यनुवर्तते । परेरुत्तरस्य व्येमित्येतस्य धातोपि परतो विभाषा संप्रसारणं न भवति । 
44. The vocalisation may. optionally take place when व्ये preceded by परि takes the affix ल्यप् ॥ 
Thus परिवीय यूपम् or परिष्याय ॥ The augment तुक presented by VI. I. 71 is debarred by VI. 4. 2. which causes the lengthening of the vowel: since VI. 4. 2 is subsequent to VI. 1. 71. 
आदेच उपदेशे शिति ॥ ४५ ॥ पदानि ॥ आत्, एचः, उपदेशे, मशिति ॥ वृत्तिः ।। धातो रिति वर्तते । एजन्तो यो धातुरुपदेशे तस्याकारादेशो भवति शिति तु प्रत्यये न भवति । 
45. In a root, which in the system of grammatical instruction (i. c. in the Dhatupatha), ends with a diphthong (ए, ऐ, ओ and औ), there is the substitution of आ for the diph thong, provided that no affix with an indicatory y follows it. 
___ The word धातोः is to be read into this satra from VI. 1. 8. Thus ग्लो ग्लाता, ग्लातुम्, ग्लातव्यम्, धौ-निशाता, निशातुम्, निशातव्यम् ।। Why do we say ending with an (diphthong)? Obscrve off from , and pi from l Why do we say in upadesa or Dhatupathar Observc चेता, स्तोता where and aare not the forms taught in the first counciation of the root in thc Dhatupatha, but are secondary forms. Why do we say, before non-शित् affixes? Observe ग्लै-1-पाए +ति = ग्लायात, म्लायति ॥ Exception is, however, imade in the case of the affix एश् of the Perfect: as जग्ले, मम्ले ॥ This is explained by interpreting the word शित as शिक्षावि, that is the affixes having an indicatory श in the beginning: एy has y at the end. This is done on the maxim afya faiyeTeTTE GEOT "when a term which dcnotes a lctter is cxhibited in a rule in the form of the Locative 
1060 
VOCALISATION. 
[ BK. VI. CH. I S48. 
case, and qualifies some thing else which likewise stands in the Locative case, that which is qualified by it must be regarded as beginning with the letter which is denoted by the term in question and not as ending whith it". 
The word भशिति is an example of प्रसज्यप्रतिषेधः. a simple prohibition of a contingent case. Therefore, the substitution of BTT for pr vowels, is not caused by the affixes that follow, but must take place prior to the occasion for the application of the affixes arises. Thus III. 1. 136 ordains a after roots ending in B4T; so that ws and are presupposed to end in sy when applying this affix: thus मुग्ला, सुम्लः ॥ Similarly byIII. 3. 128 we apply यच् to ग्ल and म्ले by presupposing it as भादन्त roots: as सुग्लानः, सुम्लानः ।। 
The word oT is understood in all the subsequent sutras upto VI. I. 57 न व्यो लिटि ॥ ४६॥ पदानि ॥ न, व्यः, लिटि, (आत्)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ध्यम् इत्येतस्य धातोलिटि परत भाकारादेशो न भवति ।। 
46. There is not the substitution of a for the Diphthong of the root oh when the affixes of the Perfect follow. 
Thus संविण्याय, संविष्ययिथ ।। The reduplicate of the Perfect is vocalised here by VI. I. I7. The Vriddhi in संविव्याय takes place by VII. 2. 115 before the णित् affix णल् ॥ 
स्फुरतिस्फुलत्योति ॥४७॥ पदानि ॥ स्फुरति, स्फुलत्योः, घधि, (मात्॥ वृत्तिः ।। भादेच इति वर्तते।रफुर स्फुल चलनहत्येतयो वारेच स्थाने घभि परत भाकारारेशो भवति ।। 
47. In the roots els and 'to move', there is the substitution of the for the diphthong when the affix घ follows. 
Thus विस्फारः instead of विस्फोरः, and विस्फाल: instead ofविस्फोलः ॥ By VIII. 3.76, the स is optionally changed to m after वि, as विष्फारः, and विष्फालः ।। 
फ्रीजीनां णी ॥४८॥ पदानि ॥ क्री, इ, जीनाम, णौ, (आत)॥ वृत्तिः ॥डकीम् द्रध्यविनिमये, पर अध्ययने, जिजये, इत्येतेषां धामूनामेषः स्थाने णो परत भाकारादेशो भवति ।। 
48. The substution of ar for the diphthong takes place in the causatives of the roots mit 'to by, & 'to study' and जि 'to conquer.' 
Thus कापयति, भध्यापयति and जापयति ॥ The augment is added by VII. 3. 36, since these roots end in long भा॥ 
सिध्यतेरपारलौकिके ॥४९॥ पदानि ॥ सिध्यतेः, अपारलौफिके॥ वृत्तिः ॥णावितिवर्तते । विधु हिंसासंराद्धपो रित्यस्य धातोरपारलौकिकर्ये वर्तमानस्यैषः स्थान जो परत भाकारादेपो भवति ।। 
BK. VI. CH. 1 $ 50.] 
DIT SUBSTITUTION. 
root 
49. The substitution of a takes place for the diphthong in the causative of that, when it does not refer to the next life. 
The word of is derived form mitti 'the next world' by adding the affix s with the force of 'for the sake of '(V. 1. 109). The double Vrid dhi takes place by VII. 3. 20. The sense of the word few must refer to wa or 11011-jntclligent things for the purposes of this substitution. Thus i NTUTA, ATÁ antara l Why do we say when not referring to the next world ? See तपस्तापसं सधयति, स्थान्येवन कर्माणि सेधयन्ति ॥ The force of सिध is here that of know ledge, arth: fhura = a1941 | The ascetic acquires certain know ledge through austeritics, the knowledge so acquired produces its result in the next world (t#) i. e. the next life, therefore, the era of the ascetic is for the sake of the next lise, and so there is no substitution of a forç il Why the substitution does not take place here : भन्नं साधयति, ब्राह्मणेभ्योदास्यामि ‘hc causes food to be prepared for the purpose of giving to the Brahmanas'. Here though the gist of the food produccs cssect in the next world, yet as that is thc cffect of 7 and not of the verb foy, the substitution does take place. When the verb fry directly and not through the mediation of another action, produccs paraloukika effect, then the substitution does not take place. The verb fay here belongs to the Divadi class and not to the Bhvadi, as the form ferara in the satra shows it. 
मीनातिमिनोतिदीड ल्यपि च ॥५०॥ पदानि ॥ मीनाति, मिनोति, दीडाम, ta, 11 वृत्तिः ॥ भावच उपदेशाइति धनते । मीम् हिंसायाम्, डुमिम् प्रक्षेपणे, दीङ्क्षय, इत्येतेषां धातना ल्यपि fra THUIT 1999 Tegra TIRURI FATA Tautata di 
50. And there is substitution of a for the finals of # 'to hurt’, fo 'to scatter', and at 'to decay' when the affix ang follows, as well as before those affixes which demand this substitution for the diphthong. 
By force of the word 'and' in the sotra, the substitution takes place of the diphthongs also of these verbs before all affixes other than ron, and this substitution takes place, before the occasion for the applying of the affixes arises (119TUTI TRÍ vara) So that these verbs should be under. stood as if they were enunciated with an e, so that all rules of affixes relat. ing to or will apply to them. Thus rat, 7247, HHIA, 4414, FATAT, FAHNEL; Pamatan, f97a, yar, 34877894, 95, 397 II The substitution of PT be ing understood to have taken place in the very 391(in the dhatupatha). of 
1062 
OTT SUBSTITUTION 
[ BK. VI. Cl. I. 852. 
these roots, the affixes relating to roots ending in for f do not apply to these at all. Thus उपायों वर्तते, ईषदुपदान, formed by पञ् and युथ by taking री- दा and adding these affixes (I11. 3. 128 and III. 3. 18) and not the affixes भय् (IIH. 3.56) and खल् (III. 3. 126). 
विभाषा लीयतेः ॥५१॥ पदानि ॥ विभाषा, लीयतेः॥ .वृत्तिः ॥ ल्यपीति वर्तत, माश्च उपशइति च । लीङ् श्लेषणहति दिवादिः ली श्लेषणइति कपादिस्तयोरु भयोरपि यका निर्देशः स्मयते । लीयतर्दातााप च एचश्व विषये उपदेशएवालान्यस्य स्थान विभाषा भाका 
पदेशो भवति। 
वार्तिकम् ॥ निमीमिलियां खलचोः प्रतिषधी वक्तव्यः । 
51. There is optionally the substitution of art for the final of age to adhere', in the very dhâtupâtha, when the affix any follows or such an affix as would deinand this substi tution of the diphthony. 
The final of it will take guna substitution before fe affixes, and will become on this incipient diplıtlong g is changed to ani by this rule. The same is the case with all the roots subsequently taught, thus खिद् will be खेद्र, and then g changed to HT, TT= tirs and sir changed to 37T &c. Therefore we have employed the anuvritti of ra diphthong' in all sûtras. The words ल्याप and भादेष उपदेश are understood here. The roots ली belonging to Divadi and Kriyadi are both included here. Thus विलाता, विलातुम्, विलात प्यम्, विलाय, विलेता विलेतुम, विलतव्यम् and पिलीय ॥ 
Vart: The a substitution does not take place when the affix are (III. 3. 56, III. I. 134) and खल् (III. 3. 126) come after नि, मि, मी and ली : as, ईषनिमयः, निमयो वर्त्तते । षप्रमयः, प्रमयो वर्तते । ईपद् विलयः, विलयो वर्तते ।। 
The invariably takes of substitution when the sense is that of 'showing respect, deceiving'or insulting'. As कस्त्वामुन्नापयते, श्यनो वत्तिकामुनापयते ॥ The option allowed by this aphorism is a restricted option (vyavasthita-vibliâsha) The substitution of a for the final of is optional when the sense of the root is not that of 'showing respect', 'subduing' or deceiving'. But when it has any one of these three senses, the substitution is compulsory. Sce l. 1. 70. 
• विदेश्छन्दसि ॥५२॥ पदानि ॥ खिदेः, छन्दसि ॥ वृत्तिः॥विभापति वर्तते । खिर दैन्यान्यस्य धातोरवःस्थाने छनासि विषय विभाषा भाकार भादेशो भवति ।। 
.52. There is optionally the substitution of in the room of the diphthong of the verb faç'to suffer pain', in the Chliandas. 
The word विभाषा is understood here. Thus चित्तं चिखाद or चिखेद ॥ In secular literature we have चित्तं खेदयति ॥ 
RK. VI. CI. I. $56] 
भा SURSTITUTION. 
1o63 
___ अपगुरो णमुलि ॥५३॥ पदानि ॥ अप, गुरः, णमुलि, (आत)॥ 
पत्तिः ॥ गरी उद्यमनास्यस्य धातोरपपूर्वस्य णमुलि परत एयः स्थान विभाषा आकार भादेशो भवति । 
53. There is optionally the substitution of in the room of the diphthong of the root Ir 'to exert' when pre ceded by the preposition अप and taking the affix णमुल् ॥ 
The affix 95 forining the Absolutive Participle is added by III. 4. 22, and the word formed by it is repeated. Thus अपगारमपगारम् or भपगारमपगोरम् ॥ So also this affix is added by III. 4. 53 : as, भस्यपगारं युध्यन्ते or भस्यपगोरं युध्यन्ते " they are fighting with raised swords'. 
चिस्फुरोर्णी ॥ ५४॥ पदानि ॥ चि, स्फुरोः, णौ ॥ वृत्तिः॥ चिम् स्फुर इत्यतया न्वाणी परत एचः स्थाने विभाषा आकारादेशो भवति ॥ 
54. There is optionally the substitution of ar in the room of the diphthong of the roots fa and the when in the Causative. 
Thus चापयति, चाययति (VII. 3. 36 for the addition of r) so also कोरयति or स्फारयति । 
प्रजने वीयतेः ॥ ५५ ॥ पदानि ॥ प्रजने, वीयतेः ॥ वृत्तिः ।। णाशित वर्तते ।वी गतिप्रजनकान्त्यसनखारनेषु इत्यस्य धातोः प्रजने वर्तमानस्य जो परतो वि. भाषा आकारादेशो भवति । 
55. There is optionally the substitution of any in the room of the diphthong of the root of in the causative, when meaning 'to conceive an embryo'. 
The root of Adâdi 39 means 'to go, to conceive, to shine, to eat, and to desire'. The substitution takes place when it incans 'to impregnate or conceive'. Thus पुरो बानो गाः प्रवापयति or प्राययति = गर्भ पायति ॥ The word प्रजन means the receiving of the einbryo which in course ostiine will lead to the birth of a child. 
विभेते तुभये ॥ १६ ॥ पदानि ॥ विभेतेः, हेतु भये ॥ वृत्तिः ॥णाति वन विभापति च । हेनरिक्ष पारिभाषिक स्वतन्त्रस्य प्रयोजकस्ततो यजयम्, स यस्य भयस्य साक्षादेतुः, तयं हेतुभयम् । तत्र वर्तनानस्य निभी भयास्यस्य धातोणां परनो विभाषा आकारादेशो भवति ।। 
56. There is optionally the substitution of a for the diphthong of the root भी 'to feur', in the Causative, when the fear is produccil directly through the agent of the causa tive. 
The words or and feet are understood liere. The word is in the satra is the technical हेतु meaning स्वतन्त्रस्य प्रयोजक ( I. 4.54 and.55.). .When the 
1064 
MT SUBSTITUTION. 
. 
(BK. VI. CI. I. $.58. 
WWW 
Hetu Agent himself is directly the cause of the fear, that fear is called the 
TTY "the fear caused by the lletu". Thus gorg YiTUN (VII. 3. 36 ) or afecta (VII. 3. 40'. So also strengt talat or quail This root takes the asfixes of the Atmanepaca, by 1. 3. 68; and the augment is added by VII. 3. 40, which does not come when there is 37 substitution, for the fin VII. 3. 40 is equal to T+ fi. e. # ending in ; and ineans aff ending in takes the augmentu 
. Why do we say 'when the agent of the causative is the proclucer of the fear? Observerse A #TATTE: 11 Here the scar is produced from the orient and not from Devadatta the Agent. 
नित्यं स्मयतेः ॥ ५७॥ पदानि ॥ नित्य, स्मयतेः॥ वृत्ति । णाविति वर्तते, हेतुभयाति च । नित्यग्रहणादिभाषति निवृत्तम् । स्मि ईपद्धसनदत्यस्य धातार्हेतु. süt ont grat FRATATTET Tall 
57. There is invariably the substitution of air for the diphthong of the root fan 'to smile' in the Causative, when the astonishment is produced directly through the Agent of the Causative. 
The words on and to are both understood here. The word fra shows that the anuyritti of FTTT ceases. Thus gostam a farina u Other wise we have कुञ्चिकयैनं विस्माययति ॥ The word भय here is taken to mean स्मयति i. e. 'wondering, feeling astonished'. See I. 3. 68 where also this meaning has been extended to pay by its connection with offer together; the proper word ought to have been इंतुस्मये in connection with स्मि, and हेतुभये in connection with भी। 
serietarhia 11 qell T ill us, N, S, 274, ffa il वृत्ति ।। सृज विसर्गे, उशिर प्रेक्षणे, इत्येतयोद्धास्वार्झलादावाकति प्रत्यये परतो ऽमागमो भवति । 
58. The augmentar (1) comes after the of a to create', and ry 'to sce', when an affix beginning with a is letter (the Mute and the Sibilant) follows: proviiled that it has no indicatry | 
Thus *+99={+*+*+7= nom. sing. HT, so also n. 0644, ret, 154, roll This augment prevents the guna substitute ordained by VII. 3. 86. But in part and Herita the Vriddhi takes place in the Aorist, after the augment so had taken effect. 
Why do we say when beginning with a Mute or a Sibilant? Observe STA, T with yil Why do we say not having an indicatory ? Observe FE!, before the affix i11 The forms of roots being exhibited in the sûtra, the rule applics when affixes relating to verbs come after these, and not when other affixes relating to noun follow. Thus 
F A , TAI IIere the words are used as nouns rather than verbs. For the maxin धातोः स्वरूपग्रहणे वसत्यये कायें applies here. 
BK. VI. CII. I. §. 61 ) 
ditta SUBSTITUTION. - 
10б; 
m 
अनुदात्तस्य चर्नुपधस्यान्यतरस्याम् ॥ ५९॥ पदानि ॥ अनुदात्तस्य, च, ऋतू, उ पधस्य, अन्यतरस्याम् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ उपदेशइति वर्तते, झल्यमकितीति च । उपदेशे ऽनुशनस्य धातोकारोपधस्य झलादावकिति प्रत्यये परतो ऽन्यतरस्याममागमो भवति । 
59. The augment comes optionally after the # of those roots which are exhibited in the Dhâtupåtha as anudâtta, when such roots end in a consonant having a gas penultimate, and are followed by an affix beginning with a mute or sibilant and not having an indicatory ! : : 
The word उपश is understood here, so also झल्यमकिति ॥ Thus पता or affar or ani, HI, grúar or HT! The roots go 'to satisfy', and 'to be happy to release', belong to Divadi class, sub-class Radhadi, and they take the aug. ment optionally (VII, 2. 45), so we have the three forms given above : for these roots are also anudatta in their first enunciation. 
Why do we say "which are anudatta in the Upadesá or the system of grammatical instruction"? Observe वां, बर्तुम् , पदव्यम्, from an उपमन which is exhibited as 7/, and because it has an indicatory s it takes F optionally, Why do we say 'having a penultimate # letter'? Observe TT, STI! Why do we say 'before an affix beginning with a mute or a sibilant'? Observe सर्पणम्, दर्पणम् ॥ Why do we say 'not having an indicatory क'? Observe तमः, EA: 11 Before affixes not beginning with a consonant this augment will not be inserted, as तर्पणम्, दर्पणम् ॥ 
शीर्षश्छन्दसि ॥ ६०॥ पदानि ॥ शीर्षन्, छन्दसि ॥ वृत्तिः ।। शीर्ष निति शम्दान्तरं शिरःशब्देन समानार्थ छन्दसि विषये निपात्यते ।। 
60. The word शीर्षन् is found in the Chhandas. 
This word is another form of für: and incans 'head'. This is not a substitute of fart in the Vedas, for both forms are found therein. Thus frcori हि तत्र सोमं की हरन्ति, यत्त शीणों दोभाग्यम् ॥ In the secular literature there is only one form शिरः॥ __ ये च तद्धिते ॥ ६१॥ पदानि ॥ ये, च, तद्धिते ॥ 
वृत्तिः ।। शीर्षनिति वत्तते । भादेशोयमिष्यते स कथं तद्धितइति हि परं निमित्तमुपारीयते स तदनुरूपां प्रकृति शिराशनमाक्षिपति । यकारादौ तद्धिते परतः शिरःशदस्य शीर्षनादेशो भवात ॥ 
वार्तिकम् ।। वा केशेषु॥ 
61. There is the substitution of this stem शीर्षन् for face when a Taddhita-affix beginning with y follows. 
The word fra is understood here. This rule teaches substitution. The original for which this substitution comes is not given in the satra, we must infer it. The appropriate original is शिरस् ॥ Thus शीर्षण्यो हि मुख्यो भवति. 
1066 
SOME SUBSTITUTION. 
[ BK. VI. CI. I. $62 
शीर्षण्यः स्वरः॥ The affix यत् is here added by IV. 3. 55. The word शीर्षण retains its original form before this affix 07, the final stt not being replaced by anything else (VI. 4. 168). WI.y do we say when 'a Taddhita-asfix follows'? Observe fri fogja - Forfata, here u is not a Taddhita affix, and so there is no substitution. 
Vart :--The substitution is optional when meaning 'hair'. As शीर्ष ण्याः केशाः or शिरस्याः केशाः ॥ . अचि शीर्षः ॥ ६२॥ पदानि ॥ अचि, शीर्षः ॥ पत्तिः ॥ भजारी तद्धिते शिरसः शीर्पशन भादेशो भवति । 
62. There is the substitution of शीर्ष for शिरस् when a Taddhita affix beginning with a vowel follows. . Thus हस्तिशिरसोऽपत्यं - हास्तिशीर्षिः formed by adding the Patronymic affix इम (IV. 1. 96). So also स्यूलशिरस इदम् - स्थौलशीर्षम् ॥ Had the word been शीर्षन् (instead of it as taught herein) then it would have retained its final 7 before these affixes and would not have given the proper forms (VI. 4. 168). Again in forming the feminine of हास्तिशीर्षिः by adding व्यइ (IV. I.78), arises this diffi. culty :-यह (य) is a Taddhita affix beginning with य, when this is applied to हास्तिशीर्षिः, we must apply the last rule and change the शीर्ष into शीर्षन् (for शीर्षन् being the substitute of March is prima facie a substitute of after also for the purposes of that rule. VI. I. 61). The forin which we get vill be this, हास्ति शीर्षः + व्यङ्हास्तिशीर्षण + य (VI. I. 61)- हास्तिशीर्षण्या (VI. 4. 168). But this is a 
wrong form, the desired form is हास्तिशीळ | How do we explain this? Thus हास्ति शीर्ष + प्यड - हास्तिशीर्ष + य (ther is elided by VI.4. 148 and in the room of we substitute a mero or लोपादेश)॥ Now this adesa becomes stlhanivat to r, thus the affix o not being directly applied to stof, because this zero intervenes, ut is not replaced by atoa as required by VI, 1.61, for it is not followed by an affix beginning with a but by a zero sthånivat to Faffix, 
This sätra is not of Panini, but is really a Vårtika raised to the rank of a sötra by later authors. 
पहरोमाइनिश्सन्यूषन्दोषन्यक छकन्नुदनासन्छस्प्रभृतिषु ॥६३॥ पदानि ॥ पद, दत्, नस, मात्, हृत, निश्, असन्, यूपन, दोषन्, यकन्, शकन्, उदन्, आसन्, शस्, प्रभृतिषु ॥ वृत्ति ॥ पार दन्त नासिका मास हश्य निशा अमृज यूप दोष यकृत् शकृत् उपक भासन इत्येतेषां वाशनां स्थान शस्मभूतिप्रत्ययंषु परतः पद् दत् नम् मास् हत् निश असन् युषन् दोषन् यकन् शकन् उदन् भासन् इत्येते भादेशा यथासंख्य भवन्ति । पा०॥ पारिषु मांस्पृरानामुपसंख्यानम् ॥ वा० ।। नस् नासिकाया यततरक्षुद्रेणु॥ पा०॥ यति वर्णनगरयोर्नेति वक्तव्यम् ।। BK. VI. CH. I. S. 641 
SUBSTITUTION. 
1067 
63. In the weak cuses (beginning with the uc cusative plural) the following stenms are substituted :--पद् for पाद, दत् for दन्त, नस् for नासिका, मास् for मास, हृदू for हृदय, निश for निशा, असन् for असृज्, यूपन् for यूप, दोषन् for दास, यकन् for यकृत, 
शकन् for शकृत, उदन् for उदक and आसन् for आस्य ॥ 
The Kasikâ gives 17 as the substitute for sha, the Sidhanta Kau mudi gives the original as off which has been adopted in the above. Some say that these substitutions take place in the Vedic Literature only, others say, they are general. Others read the word 'optionally' into this sûtra froin VI. I. 59 and hold that these substitutes are optional and not compulsory. 
Examples :--I. पद्-निपतचतुरो अहि, पशवतंय गोदुहम् ।। 2 दत्-या दती धावति तस्ये यावदन् ।। 3 नस- सूकरस्त्वयननसा ॥ 4 मासू-मासित्वा पश्यामि चक्षुषा ।। 5 हदू-हदा पुतेन मनसा जातवेदसम् । 6 निश-अमावास्यायां निशि यजेत ॥ 7 असन्- असिस्को स्नावरोहति ॥ 8 यूपन्--या पात्राणि यूरुण आरोषनानि ॥ दोषन् -यत्त दोषणा दौर्भाग्यम ॥ 10 यकन--यको वद्यति ॥ 11 कन् घको मात ॥ 12 उन्--उदो दिव्यस्य नाका ते ॥ 13 आसन्भासनि किलो मनि । 
Why do we say when the weak terminations of &c follow? Observe पादी ते प्रतिपीड़यो नासिकं ते कृश | As examples of this substitutions in the secular literature also, the following may be given : 
व्यायामक्षुण्ण गात्रस्य पद्धपामुद्रर्तितस्य च । 
व्याधयो नोपसपन्ति वैनतेयमिवोरगाः ॥ These substitutions take place before other affixes also : as, पला दोपणी, ककुदोषणी याचते महादेवः ॥ 
Vart:-The following substitutions also take place : मांस for मांस, पत् for पतना, and स्नु for सानुः as यनीक्षणं मांस्पचन्याः for मांसपचन्याः (Yaj. XXV. 36), पृल्म मयंम for पृतनासुमर्त्यम्, न ते दियो न पृथिव्या भधिस्नुषु for अधिसानुषु ।। 
Vårt : The 7# is substituted for at only when the affixes an and तम. and the word शुद्र follow : as, नस्यम, नस्ता, नस् क्षुद्रः॥ The यत् is taught in IV. 3. 55 and V. 1. 6; Het is taught in V. 4. 45. 
___Vart :--The substitution of नस् for नासिका before the affix यत् does not take place when it refers to letters', or citics' as: नासिक्यो वर्ण: 'a nasal letter' मासिक्यं नगरम् ।। 
धात्वादेः षः सः ॥ ६४॥ पदानि ॥ धात्वादेः, षः, सः ॥ वृणि ॥ धातोरादेः षकारस्य स्थाने सकारादेशी भवति ॥ पातिकम् ।। मुन्धातुष्ठिवुष्पकतीनां प्रतिषेधो वक्तव्य ॥ 
64. There is the substitution of # in the room of ther being the initial of a verbal root as enunciated in the Dhâtupåtha. 
The roots exhibited in the Dhatupatha with an initial , change it for स॥ Thus पह-सईत, पिच्---सिंचति || Why do we usc the word 'root'? Observe 
1068 
SUBSTITUTION. 
[BK. VI. C1. I. §. 65 
TET, TEI, yos: Why do we say 'initial ? Observera a 11 Why have then roots been exhibited in the Dhatupåtha with an initial , when for all practical purposes this q is to be replaced by E, would it not have been easier to spell at once these words with a ? This appears cumbersome no doubt, but the spelling of the roots with p is for the sake of brevity. Certain roots change their printo q when preceded by certain letters: those roots which thus change their letter for q have been at once taught with an initial y, and thus by VIII. 3. 59 their is changed to H1 Thus from f minstead of T we have a 11 Thus root is exhibited in the Dhatupatha with a q. and thus we know that the must be changed to run Otherwise a list of such roots would have to be separately given. One must refer to the Dhátu. påtha for a list of such roots. As a general rule, however, all roots beginning with a 8 and followed by a vowel or a dental letter have been taught in the Dhatupatha as beginning with an initial q, as well as the following roots F#, FFT, FETE, ET37 and 499, though followed by a orl The following roots though followed by a vowel or a dental are not taught with an initial q viz. og, , , FM, T, and all 
Vart:-Prohibition must be stated of the roots derived from nouns, and ofष्टि and षक॥ Thus षोडीयते, पण्डायते are roots derived from nouns, and though these roots begin with q are not changed: so fer-lofa, i- a il The word ige contains in it two roots 78 and foul, one with , another with y, and thus we have two forms in the reduplication :-aetona, zatoon il The substitution of x for op takes place in the case of the root that has y 11 : ot a: 114 11 Era il ori, a: 11 
पत्ति ॥ धातोरादेरित्यनुवर्तते । धातोरावर्णकारस्य नकार भादेशो भवति ॥ 
65. There is the substitution of for the initial of the root in the Dhâtupatha. 
The phrase धात्वारः is understood here. Thus णीम्-नयति, पम-ममति, ह-मायति ॥ But not भण्-भणति ॥ This does not apply to roots derived from nouns. TAROT Ordera II The roots are exibited in the Dhatupa tha with u for a similar reason as they are exibited with all By VIII. 4. 14, these roots change their into of when preceded by certain prepositions. All roots beginning with a o should be understood to have been so taught, with the exception of the following:-, af aff, TK, TIRE, Try and aty i ' artrouter II & II a II 19:, our:, afat al 
वृति ॥ धातोरिति प्रकृतं यत् ताधावारिति पुनातुमहणानिवृत्तम् । तेन धातोरधातोष वकारयकारयो बलि परतो लोपो भवति ॥ 
66. There is lopa-substitution (elision) of the a and a when followed by any consonant except all 
BK. VI. C1. I. 8.67] 
THE ELISION OF 7 AND CU 
1069 
The final or s of any stein, be it a root or not, is elided by an affix &c, beginning with a la consonant i. e. any consonant except Thus ford + TE (III. 2. 107)-FT+FT+T=ffeqa nom. singular feina, fiftieT, FIATA: 11 Thus $7+=57, 'spun, #9+ a = made a noise'. So also the affix & comes after cine in forming patronymic (IV. 1. 129). Of thc affix , r is replaced by pz (VII. 1. 2). Thus citus+p+c=" (the of the affix being cven clided bcforc)! So also in qo17, a t the a of FE(III. 4. 102 ) is clied before (I11. 4. 105).So also is elided in the following :--froin stri जीरदानुः (by Unadi affix जावे रतानुक) from वित्-असमाणम् formed by the Unadi affix fan with the negative ! There being diversity in the applica tion or linadi affixes (111. 3. 1), there is not substitution for r as required by VI. 4. 19. 
Why do we say "before any consonant except 87" Observe fata, añ when y is not clided. Why the word or is placed first? The elision of and should take place prior to the elision of thc aprşikta taught in the next sätra. Thus nga +(99= 3 (VI. 4. 48 )=#3 +="5: So 
+ Fang= " Why a ofau is not elided before which is a consonant? It is not elidel, because it is so taught. Had thic elision of obecn intended, the root would have been enunciated as an instead of a 11 If you say the is taught for the sake of forms like yua by samprasarana. and by reduplication, here also the 'lopa' would have applied, as being an Antaranga rule, while samprasarana, and the clision of by Barretq: arc Bahiranga. 
a TRIEU ETA la, वृत्तिः ॥ लोप इति वर्तते । वेरिति क्विवादयो विशेषाननुबन्धानुस्मृज्यसामान्येन गृहमन्स । बेरपृक्तस्य लोपो xiết 
67. There is elision of the asfix fa when reduced to the single letter all 
The affix fe includes far, far, far &c. in all tliese, the real affix is , which being an aprikta (1. 2. 41), is elided. Thus HET, OTET (111. 2. 87). Herc the affix fg is elidec. So also gain, E (111. 2. 58). Here the affix fan is elided. So also o 977477, gru (IIL 2. 62). Here the affix poe is elidcd. 
Wliy do we say "of an aprikta-an affix consisting of a single letter"? Observe si formed by the affix it (for being the rcal asfix); so also to: forince 1977, sec Uñadi Satras IV. 53. 44. No root can become a noun unless some kşit asfix is added to it (sec I. 2. 45 and 46); hence the necessity of these imaginary allixes, in order to raise certain roots bodily, without any change, to the rank or nouns--from Dhatu to a Pratipadika the way lies only through an asfix. And though thcsc imaginary affixes are after all totally clidcd, yet by 
1070 
ELISION OF F, FO AND UNI 
[ BK. VI. C1. I. $ 68 
I. 1. 62, they leave their characteristic inark behind, namely the derivative word becomes a noininal stem &c. Thus Fox words are adverbs (Gati) and Indeclinables. 
Egurrayut targatu i ll Tera II , TIT, frata, 5, fa, fe, H, NI 
वृत्तिः ॥ लोप इति वर्नत । तदिह लौकिनार्थेनार्थवत कर्मसाधनं द्रष्टव्यम् । लुप्यताति लोपः । हलन्तान् उपन्तादाबताच दीर्धात्परं सुति सि इत्येतत्पृक्तं हल् लुप्यते ॥ 
Küriku :-HainAEL MTB Testerea faragha ya 19: Farahihiratgail 
68. After a consonant there is the elision of the nominative-affix and the tense-affix rã and if (when reduced to the form of a anil A) being consonants; and so also after the long vowels and at of the feminine (aftix si and 
TC), there is the elision of the nominative aftix All 
The sotra translated literally means ---Aster a word ending in a con sonant, or st, or me when a long vowel, the affixes T, ra and fe when reduced to a single consonant asfix ( * ) are elided. But A and fe are elided only after a consonant and hence we have translated it as above. As examples of the elision of g after a consonant:- 157+ TTT (VI. 4. 8) +0=TOT, HYT, Jura, qora u After a 61 Sas, e, fra, a t After 29:- UT, बहुराजा, कारी षगया | The elision of ति and सि takes place only after con. sonants :-as, oferuara (+5 + fag= +*+27+7=> 87+4+4+a (VI. 1. 10) 
87+975 ++7 (VII. 4: 66 and 1. 1. 51 ) = +*+ +* (VII. 4. 60 ) =$+ +7+7 (VIII. 4. 54) +for+*+T (VII. 4. 76 ) = 6 + + E + L (VII. 3. 84 ) = TTT+7-Hayt ! So also *TTI ATTII In both these cases of the Imperfect has been elided. The ris elided in the following: HTTST. TERUHISTU (fa+p +fall The ç is changed into by VIII. 2. 75 and 
is elided by this rule). 
Why do we say “after a consonant, or a feminire affix and BTT"> Observe graft, gamt: 1 Why do we say "after a long vowelled feminine affix"? Observe farura, sincs, where the feminine affixes have been shortened. Why do we say "when followed by y, fa and Fa"? Observe Bp* alla 1 The fa being read along with fa, does not include fry, but refers to fere only. Why do we say when reduced to a single letter'? Observe fare funt II Why do we say the consonant is elided'? Observe forte, reak Here the apşikta affix m of the Perfect is not elided : though it being the subs titute of fa is like fa, and ought to have been elided, had the word en not been used in the sätra. 
BK. VI. Ch. 1. $09) 
BILISION OR FET, F, 
il 
1071 
ME 
Why has the clision of (y), T (TT) and < (fero) bcen ordained after consonants, as they would of themselves have been dropped by VIII. 2. 23, being the finals of a compound consonant? Then the forms (1F7, FHT could not be cvolved. As **+ = +T (VI. 4. 8)=Care and by eliding L by Rule VIII. 2. 23, the form would have become sia, and the final 7 could not have been elided by VIII. 2.7; for it is a maxim enunciated in the very opening of the Second chapter of thc 8th Book, that in the last three chapters of that Book (2nd, 3rd and 4th Books', a subsequent rule is as if it had not taken effect, so far as any preceding rule is concerned; thercfore, the rule VIII. 2. 7 ordaining the clision of 7, does not find scope, since VIII. 2. 23 (ordaining elision of 7) is considered as if it had not taken effect. So also in the case of human and quietat ll Tel + pöt + fag III. 2. 76= TUT+F4 (the nasal being clidcd by VI. 4. 24); now add y, we have JUTH{+ - JUH ; elide the final not by this rulc, but by VIII. 2. 23, we have sorak, here we cannot change the into by VIII. 2. 72 forç is not final in a pada, for Rule VIII. 2. 23 is considered as not to liave taken effect So also in the case of afxaistut The word awa: is 2nd. Pers. sing. of the Imperfect of 17 of Rudhidi class. Thus far +ME+fq-*++* +599+ = +fata+ * Tat +8( changed to ç by VIII. 2. 75) - 37f If we elide the final # of the cojunct by VIII. 2. 23, then in p7fH1+4, the I would not be changed into 7 to form afraits by VI. 1. 113 since the ellision of is considered as to have not taken effect when applying this rule. So also in f *17, by Rule VIII. 2. 24, there would be no lopa even, for m y rule is restricted by Truha (VIII. 2. 24), i. e. Ħ only and no other consonant is elided after y, therefore there will be no elision of it in meria by VIII. 2. 23. 
TGEFEC: 1188 11 na 115, GET, HE: 11 दृत्तिः ॥ लोप इति वर्तते, हलिति च । अनामति न धिक्रियते । तथा च पूर्वसूत्रे पुनरपृक्तमहणं कृतम् । एजन्सामातिपदिकाद् इस्वान्ताब परो हल्लुप्यतसचरसंबुद्धर्भवति ॥ 
69. The cousonant of the nominative-affix (x and its substitute ) is elideel in the Vocative singular after a nominal-stem cuilug in g or at or a short vowel. 
The word so is understood here also; as well as all The word TTi however is not to be rcad hcrc, as its repetition in VI. 1. 68 (though its anuvritti was there from the preceding stra) indicates. The affix of Vocative is the same as that of the nominative. By VII. 3.. 108, the short vowel of the stem is replaced by a guņa vowel when the Vocative Singular affix follow's. Thus we have sã and at for a fra and pry; and by VII. 3. 107, a short vowel is substituted for the long vowcl < and 5 of the feminine: as 7 and ng for 7 and 1 Now applying the present sätra, the affix # is elided after 
1072 
TE AUGMENT. 
[BK. VI. C1. 1..71 
all the above words. Asyra!, Tür!, !, BAN!, Ty! The Vocative Singular of oz a Neuter noun is thus formed. By VII. 1. 24, 874 replaces # of the nominative, the 37 of me and the final p of coalesce into one or by VI. 1, 107, which becames . Here by the rule that 'consonant' only is to be elided, wo olide q only (and not of which becomes a part of the word by VI. 1. 85, for it is considered both as the final of the word and the initial of the affix). Now x is not an mai pas for it is part of the affix 574, and its eli sion would not have taken place had we read the anuvritti of apşikta into this sutra. Thus we have !! But in all there is not the elision of the # of the affix 67, the substitute of g for the affix there is 53 (VII. 1, 25 ). This affix being fat causes the elision of the final 3 of 77 (VI. 4. 143;, and We have alr, here we have not a pratijadika which ends in a short vowel, but in a fou sonnt, hencer is not elided, Soe also VII. I. 25. The ward go is used in the sufra in order to indicate that the guna substitution is stronger than lopa. Therefore in a fa+, the asfix is not eliced first and then gupa substituted for ļ, but first there is guna substitution and then the affix is elided, 
regret agan ll 10 Il para II :, fefe, ! पृत्तिः ॥शि इत्येतस्य बहुलं छन्दसि विषये लांपा भवति ।। 
70. In the Chhandas, the clision of the case onding (ft) of the nominative and accusative plural rcuter, is optional, 
Thus দাগ or আন মাগি, খা খন or খানি স্বনানি। 
Fifi fora Te | 9811 ta il ffi, fara, era, वृत्तिः ॥ पिति कृति परता इस्वस्य तुगागमो भवति ।। 
71. To a root ending in a short vowel is adder tho augmenta () when & Krit-affix having an indicatory ç follows 
Thus अग्नि+पि+ क्विाग्निचिन, so also सामसुत् ॥ Similarly प्रकृत्य and y and rear formed by the affix ran ll Why do we say "ending in a short yowel"Observe , roft: # Why do we say "having an indicatory "? Observera, Tgl Why do we say "a kşit affix"? Observe qay, 9504, with the Taddhita-affixes are and it In the compound Aria, though the root is made short, yet there is no augment , in as much as the rule by which the root has been shortened is a Bahiranga rule, and the present rule is an Antaranga one. The maxim is la Tierra " "That which is Bahir anga is regarded as not having taken effect, or as not existing, when that which is Antaranga is to take effect", 
BK VI. C1. I. $. 74 ] 
TIIE AUGMENT TO II 
1073 
Mvh 
सहितायाम् ॥ ७२॥ पदानि ॥ सहितायाम् ॥ वृत्तिः॥ अधिकारो ऽयमनुवा परमेकवमिति यावत् प्रागेतस्मात्सूत्रादित उत्तर यास्यामः संहितायामित्येवं aufragar i 
72. In the following sútras upto VI. 1. 157 in clusive, the words barata in an unbroken flow of speech', should be supplied. 
This is an adhikara or governing sätra, exerting its influence upto VI. 1. 158. What ever we shall say in the stras preceding that must be under stood to apply to words which are in riffar, that is, which are pronounced to gether with an uninterrupted voice. Thus atay, my the x and a are changed to y and when the two words are pronounced without any hiatus. Other wise we shall have iu 94, Ty sy 11 
I l fall , वृत्तिः ॥इस्वस्य तुगिति वर्तते । छकारे परतः संहितायां विषये इस्वस्य तुगागमो भवति ।। 
73. The augment a is added to a preceding short vowel also when y follows in an uninterrupted speech. 
Thus refa, egia | The is change to y by VIII. 4. 40. The short vowel itself is the art (the thing to which tlic augment is added), and not the word ending in that short vowel. Therefore in fut, forog, the augment is not to be considered as part of the Reduplicate fter, but of the short 
only; and therefore it is not elided by TT (VII. 4. 60) rule applying to reduplicates. This follows on the maxim ITT: gratuit par "the part 'of a part cannot be considered as a part of the whole". Here is a part of the abhyasa syllable for which is itself a part of the verbal base, therefore a is not considered as an abhyasa: or because being an augment of is consi dered as part of r and not offer of which is the part. 
MEHTETET II 94 11 ha 11 376, ATST:, il वृत्तिः ॥ तुगित्यनुवर्गले, छहति च । भाडो जित पवादिषु चतुर्वर्थेषु वर्तमानस्य माङच प्रतिषेधवचनस्य Unit qargo A 11 
74. The augmenta is added to the particle as and tha prohibitive particle #r, whea y follows in a continuous text. 
The Particle at has the four senses of 1. littleness ( F:) 2. with verbs, as a prefix (a dra:) 3. the limit inceptive ( Tiara ) and 4. the limit exclusive (Heftet). This sätra ordains 7* necessarily, where by VI. 1.76, it would have been optional. Thus Tigar - Sretat; 2. With verbs:-as prestara, 3 and 4. Taytarar, माच्छायम | So also the negative particle मा, as, माइल्सीन्, माच्छिदत् ॥ The rinभाइ. 
1074 
RULES OF SANDIII. 
[ Bk. VI. Cl. I. $77 
and te shows that s when used as a Gati and a Karmapravachaniya and ar when used as a negative particle are meant. Therefore, the T is not necessary in the following :-भाछाया मानयति, प्रमाछन्दः॥ The तुक may be optionally added ill these as भारछाया and प्रमाच्छन्दः ॥ The आ here has the force of recollection (स्मरण); आछाया "Oh the shade". The word प्रमा is formed from the verbal root माद by the prefix v and the affix अ (III. 3. 106) with the feminine affix टाप, and the word ending in टाप् has not the indicatory ॥ 
दीर्घात् ॥ ७५ ॥ पदानि ॥ दीर्घातू, तुक् ।। वृत्ति ॥ छे तुगिति वर्तते । दीस्पिरो यश्छकारस्तस्मिन्पूर्वस्य तस्येव दीर्घस्य तुगागमो भवति । 
75. . The augmenta is allel to a long vowel, when followed by 3 in a continuous text. 
Thus हीच्छति, म्लेच्छात, अपघाच्छायत्ते, विधाच्छायते ॥ The augment belongs to the long vowel and not to the whole syllable ending in that long vowel. 
__ पदान्ताद्वा ॥ ७६॥ पदानि ॥ पदान्तात्, वा, तुक् ।। वृत्ति ॥ दीर्घाच्छतुगिति वर्तते । पदान्तादीर्घात्परो यश्छकारस्तस्मिन्पूर्वस्य तस्यैव दीर्घस्य पूर्वेण नित्यं प्राप्तो वा तुगागमा भवति । 
वात्तिकम । विश्वजनादीनां छन्दसिवा तुगागमो भवतीति वक्तव्यम् ।। 
76. The auginent तू. is attle:l optionally to a long vowel final in a full word (Parla) when followed by 3 | 
This allows option where by the last it would have been compulsory to add it. The augment is of the long vowel, and not of the word ending in long vowel. Thus कूटीच्छाया or कुटीछाया, कूबलीच्छाया or कुवलीछाया ।। The तु aug. ment here is added to the end of a pada, and this is therefore a padânta rule and not a pada-vidhi. Therefore the two words need not be in construction for the application of this rule; (समर्थ पदविधि) not applying. Thus तिष्ठतु कुमारीच्छत्रं हर देवदत्तस्य, "let the girl stay. Take the umbrella of Devadatta". Here कुमारी and uy are not in construction, but this stll added optionally. 
Vart :-The-augment त is optional in the Chhandas, after the words विश्वजन &c. As, विश्वजनच्छपम् or विश्वजनछत्रम्, नछायां कुरवापराम् or नछायां कुरवापराम ॥ 
इको यणचि ॥ ७७॥ पदानि ॥ इकः, यण, अचि ॥ वृत्ति ।। अधि परत को यणादेशो भवति । वात्तिकम् ॥ इकः प्लुतपूर्वस्य सवर्णीयाधनार्य यणादेशो वक्तव्यः । 
77. The semivowels य, व, र, ल are the substitutes of the corresponding vowels इ, उ, ऋ and ल (long and short), when followed by a vowel. 
This sutra is rather too wide. It must be restricted by VI. I. Ior, namely the following vowel must not be of the same class as the preceding for 
BK. VI. Cl. I . 80] 
THE SANDUI RULES. 
1075 
- 
- 
the application of this rule. Thus दधि+अत्र-दध्यत्र, मधु+भत्र-मध्वत्र, कर्त+ मर्थम् = कत्रथम. हर्त + अर्थम् =हत्रयम्', ल भाति = लाकातः ॥ 
___Vart:--This sernivovel substitution of vowels takes place, when pre ceded by a prolated vowel, even to the supcrsession of VI. 1. 1or requiring lengthening. Thus भग्ना३ इ इन्द्रं = अग्नायिन्द्रम्, पदाउ उपकम् -पटा ३ रकम् , अग्ना ३६ भाशा भग्ना ३ थाशा, पटा ३ उ माशापटा ३ बाशा ॥ भो । इन्द्रम्=भो ३ विन्द्रमः ॥ The phrase 'when a vowel follows' exerts its influence upto VI. 1. 108. 
एचो ऽयवायावः ॥ ७८॥ पदानि ॥ एचः, अय - अव - आय-आवः ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ एषः स्थाने ऽचि परतो ऽस् अ आय आर इत्येते आदेशा यथासंख्यं भवन्ति । 
78. For the vowels ए, ऐ, ओ and औ are respectively substituted अय , आय , अव and आव when a vowel follows. . Thus चि+ ल्युत् = चे+मनचयनम, लो + अन = लवन; चमक चायका, लो+भक =लायकः ॥ So also कयेते, व्ययते, याववरुणद्धि, +युष (III. 2. 148)=T+भन - रवणः । 
वान्तोयि प्रत्यये ॥ ७९ ॥ पदानि । वान्तः, यि. प्रत्यये॥ वृत्तिः ॥ यायमधः स्थाने वान्तादेश ओकारस्य ग भोकारस्थाव स यकाराशे प्रत्यये परतो भवति । वात्तिकम् ।। गायूती छन्दसि ॥ वा०॥ अश्वपरिमाणे च ॥ 
79. The substitution of są and are for at and I also takes place before an aslix beginning with all 
The वान्त are those which end in viz. अन् and भाद्र ।। Of the four substitutes taught in the preceding satra, those which end in ७ (viz. भ and M17) also comc when an affix with an initial a follows. It follows that the substituted letters must be shy and r 1 Thus a +7= HT+2=454: (VI. 4. 146 and IV.I. I05). So also माण्डव्यः, शंकष्यदारू, पिचव्यः कासः, नान्यो(IV.491)हवा Why do we say "997 and are"? Observe tufayfa=iara, no change of be fore य| Why do we say " before s"? Observe गोभ्याम्, नोभ्याम् ।। Why do we say " an affix"? Observe गायानम्, नीयानम् ॥ 
Vast:-The word गो is changed before यति in the Vedas. As गो+यति गयूनि, as आनो मित्रा वरुणा घृतैर्गतिमुक्षतम् ॥ Why do we say in the Vedas? Observs गोयतिः ।। 
Vårt:- This substitution takes place when referring to the measur osa road: -as, ग-यूति मात्रमध्वानं गतः॥ This is in the secularliterature, गम्यूति meaning कोशयुगम्।। 
धातोस्तनिमित्तस्यैव ॥ ८०॥ पदानि ॥ धातोः, तनिमित्तस्थ, ए॥ वृणिः ॥ एच इति पत्ते । बान्तो यि प्रत्ययति च । धातोर्य एच् तनिमित्तो यकारादिप्रत्ययनिमित्तस्तस्य थकाराश प्रत्यये परतो वान्तादेशो भवति । 
80. For the final diplıthougs aft and at of a root, are substituted wa and ara respectively, before an affix begin ning with T, then only when such diphthong has been itself first evolved by that affix. 
1076 
TIE SANDIII RULES. 
BK. VI. CI. I S 82.) 
The words pror, Tara grau are understood in this s0tra. The word A means 'caused by that' i. c. caused or occasioned by that affix begin ning with a 11 Thus forms its Future Passive Participle by an (III. 1.97), this affx causes the guņa of by VII. 3. 84: Thus += + 4, which according to the present sätra becomes myselyn a So also q- +*=482411 +047(111.1.125) 
t+= 1 and 91674 11 Why do we say of a root? This rule should not apply to a nominal stein. For then, though it may be all right in the case orary +2=THT +4= ana; it will not apply to cases like til 4.0 = 47521, Ar +2 = 152, where sit and át are not caused by the affix,but are integral parts of the stein before the affixes were added. Why do we say 'caused by that affix itself? The substitution will not take place, when the change is not caused by that affix. Thus the Passive of it with the upasarga m is 377 +à +27+Here by Samprasarana(VI.1.15) becomes Jas +7+4+Q; now by sandhi BTT +7= VI. 1. 87), we have rir +27= 11 Since it is not caused by a, there is no ar substitution. So also sir4a, rafa:, franta : (IV. 1.95). The word ya in the aphorism has the force of limitation, with regard to roots. In the case of roots, sit and BT before = are changed then only to me and Mc when has caused the production of spy and st; in case of nouns there is no such limita tion. Here the substitution takes place whether the 7 has caused the production of sy and sir or not. 
mouse 114 11 < | TETÀ Il peu jeit, TFT - TOP I वृत्तिः ॥ तिमि इत्येतयो त्योयति प्रत्यये परतः शाक्या गम्यमाने एकारस्यायादेशो निपात्यते । 
81. In pez and Free there is substitution of a for g only then when the sense is that of “to be possible to do". 
The roots for and before the affix on (111. 1. 97) assume these forms when meaning to be able to do the action denoted by the verb. As 
=: ( += +a); so also 4:11 Why do we say when mean ing “to be possible to do"? Observe yü qri, i qull Here the meaning is that of necessity'. 
Hezret 116 11 Tera Il ti, et al वृत्तिः ॥ क्रीणाते तोस्तदर्थे क्रयायें यनस्मिन्नभिधेये यति प्रत्यये परतो ऽयादेशो निपात्यते ॥ 
82. In 2ų there is substitution of 3 for a when the sense is that of exposed or put out for sale, salcable'. 
The word ca is derive from a 'to buy', with the affix an ; the guna « bcing changed to all The word mcans 'for the purpose of that' BK. VI. CII. 1 $ 841 
EKADESA. 
1077 
Ie, for the purpose of being bought As Picar T:, : : Why do we say when the sense is that of saleable'? Observe in it f or * we want to purchase corn, but it is not put out for sale". 
भय्यप्रवय्ये च छन्दसि ॥ ८३॥ पदानि ॥ भय्य - प्रवय्ये, च, छन्दसि ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ विभतेर्धातोः प्रपूर्वस्य च वी इत्येतस्य यति प्रत्यये परतश्छन्दसि विषयेऽयादशो निपात्यते ।। पातिकम् ॥ इदय्या आप उपसंख्यानम् ।। 
83. The forins roy and state are found in the Chhandas. 
The word om is derived from *+ , and or from a +it+ua 11 The guna t is changed to शय् ॥ Thus भय्यं किलासीत् ।। वसतरी प्रवय्या | The यत् is added to oft with the force of Ablative by virtue of the diversity allowed by कृत्यलुटो बहुलं (III. 3. 113) | Thus विभति भस्माद् = भय्यम् "frightening or fear able". The word 4724 is always used in the feminine: in other places is the proper form. Why do we say 'in the Vedas'? Observe ser, in sccular literature. 
Virt:--The word at should also be enumerated when referring to water. As **T= 21214: The asfix an is added by IV. 4. 110( + 
+4) 11 
Q#: reqrent: 11 28 il vanta Il Cai, Ta - Teti, II वृत्तिः ॥ आधिकारोयम् । ख्यत्यात्परस्येति मागेतस्मात्सूत्रादित उत्तरं यस्यामस्ता पूर्वस्य परस्य श्योरपि स्थाने एकादेशो भवतीत्येतरितव्यम् ।। 
84. From here upto VI. 1. 111 inclusive is al ways to be supplied the phrase "for the preceding and the following one is substituted". 
This is an adhikara satra. In every sūtra upto VI. 1. 112 (excluding the last), whatever we shall teach, there in the room of the tio, namely, the preceding and the succecding, it should be understood, that the substitution is onc. Tbcse form the well known rules of ekådesa, one letter or form replac ing two consecutive letters &c. Thus VI. 1. 87 teaches There is guna substitution, when it or 37 is followed by a vowell. We must supply into that sutra the phrase एका पूर्वपरयोः i. e. one guna is the substitute for the final अ or of and the initial vowel. Thus BigT+ = C H Here is the single subs titute of thc both preceding Iclter 9 and the socceeding letter | The words To show that the substitute operates simultancously on both. Otherwise the substitute would have come in the place of one only or of each one separately. Tbus in HT To: (71) = "after or ar, there is guna, in a vowel". Here MIT is in thic ablativc, and by I. 1. 67 the guņa operation would have taken place on the letter following it: so also me is in the Locative and by I. 1. 66, the 
1078 
EKADESA. 
[ BK. VI. CH. I $85. 
guņa operation would have taken place on the preceding ; so it is not clear of what letter there should be guņa substitution, of the preceding or the succeedle ing. But the present rule shows it must operatc on both simultancously. The word ta'single', shows that a separate or a different substitute does not operate: i. e. the substitute must be one, there should not be two separate substitutes one for each sthani, such as we find in the sätra VIII. 2. 42 (apai fagrat , T , " is the substitute of the a of nishtha, after and 7, and of the precediug r"). Here is taught as substitute both of and y, and as pon is not used in the sætra, we get two a, as fire+=fa+a=: But this is not the case here. According to Mahabhashya the word ga is redundant. 
ratta ay lu R ua il a - - , , 11 वृत्तिः ॥ एक हात वर्नत पूर्वपरयोरिति च । एकः पूर्वपरयोति योयमकादेशो विधीयते स पूर्वस्थान्तवावति, परस्याविषयवति । 
85. And this single substitute is considered as the final of the preceding (form), and the initial of the succeeil ing (form). 
The single substitute taught in the last, is considered in the light of the final of the preceding form and the initial of the succeeding. An adesa is like the sthani, but in an ekâdeśa, the sthani is indeterminate, or rather the sthani is the collection or the sum of the preceding and the succeeding. Hence the necessity of this satra. The sense of this atidesa sútra is this: as the beginning and the end of a thing are both included in the thing itself, and therefore when the thing is mentioned, the beginning and the end are both taken: so is the case with this single substitute. Thus to the stem way we add the feminine affix (IV. 1. 66); and now It*=*(VI. 1. 101) i. e. 24 *5= 
Here m y is a Nominal-stem (ATTATHAM) and the affix is a non-prátipadika, and the single-substitute is considered as the final of the pra tipadika. So that we can apply to the form array the term prätipadika and by virtue of this designation we can add the case-endings to it by IV. 1. 1. But for this rule, we could not have added the case-endings to it, because by virtue of the feminine affix the word would have rather ceased to be a pra ti jadika (I. I. 46), because this feminine affix is not included in IV. 1. 1. Similarly for the final non-case-ending o of N and the case-ending sit, there comes a single substitute of by VI. 1. 88, this ekådesa af is considered both as a non-case affix and a case affix, that is, as the initial of the affix at, and the final of qy and thus the word hit gets the designation of Pada I. 4. 14 as it ends in the go affix sit in 
This S 
does not apply in rules relating to letters i. e. to rules depending for their application on letters. Thus 3 + 1 - TII Here the 
BK. VI. Cit. I $ 86 ) 
EKADESA. . 
1079 
ckadesa si is as the final o of us, but not for the purposes of the application of the rule which says that the fun is changed to te after a nominal-stem ending in 97, so the Instrumental plural of tugt will not end in T:, but will be ugt f#: So also in 11 It is the Perfect 3rd per. sing. ofor ( VI. 1. 45). By VI. 1. 53, the x is changed to 3, and we have IFMT=YEST which by VI 1, 108 becomncs , the being the single substitute of and a This single substitute 3 should not be considered as sit for the application of the rule VII. 1. 34 by which the Perfect affix on () is changed in i after roots ending in 91 Similarly in अस्वै+अश्वः अस्या अश्वः (the e being elided by VIII. 3. 19). मस्ये is the Dative singular of r in the Feminine with a By VII. 3. 114 Fall is added in the Dative with the shortening of the preceding T ; as 97 + fatto (=Hell Here g is the single substitute for m and ! Here for the appli cation of VI. 1. 109 the single substitute g should not be considered like it The sthant of the single-substitute (ekâdeśa) is the sum of the preceding and the succeeding, both taken collectively is replaced by one, and not any one of thein separately. For that which is replaced by another is called sıhàni: as when x replaces of the whole form is called sthani, and not o or # separ ately. The parts, may be called sthani only inferentially, because the whole is made up of parts. The parts not being considered as sthåni, the rule of sthânivad bhava will not apply to an ekådesa with regards to the parts, and no operations dependant on such parts will be effected by such ekådesa. But it is intended that such operations should take placc. llence this sútra. 
Tragacha: Il CE A Il fra - :, : || #: I get grek o PART SET , F AITE a *trate : 1 and I TERMIcy afähit : N1 
86. The substitution of a single âdeśa is to bo considered as to have not taken effect, when otherwise F would have to be changed to e, or when the augment a la) is to be added. 
The word mara means not-accomplished i, e. the operation caused by its having taken effect is not procluced. The word asiddha always debars operations dependent upon thic adcśa, and gives scope to the operations de pendlent upon the general rule ( भसिद्धवचनमादेशलक्षणप्रतिषशार्थमुन्सगंलक्षणभावार्थ च ॥) Thus #SETT here is not changed loc! The equation is thus cxhibited : 
+9 7 =*[+ (the # changed to by VIII. 2.66 )=+*+91 (a being substituted for by VI. 1. 113) + PHYT (7-1-3 = T VI. 1. 87) fra (1-1-3= VI: 1. 109). Now applies our sætra. By VIII. 3. 59, e coming after sfr requiredto be changed into , but here thc singic-substitute vir is cons 
1080 
GUNA-EKADESA, 
[ BK. VI. CI. IS 87 
sidered to be non-effective for this purpose. Similarly कोऽस्य, याऽस्य, कोऽस्मै, योऽस्मै ।। Similarly in mire there is the addition of x by VI, 1. 71, though actually pre ceded by a long vowel. That long vowel had resulted from the ekadesa of į for 5-1-5, and this ekadeša is considered as if non-effective for the purposes of तुक् augment. Similarly in H-1-1-1-तुक्-यप्रत्य. Here also -I-T-ए is con sidered asiddha, 
Vart :-~-Prohibition must be stated in the case of samprasarana, the Locative singular case-ending is (r), and the Ist per. sing. Atmanepada affix इद् ॥ or vocalisation we have the following : शकहषु-माकान् यति, then we add range, before which there is vocalisation of I, this combining with in the follow ing मा becomes a ekadesa: as शकता--विप - कहा -1-0 (VI. I. I5)+शकहु (VI. I. 108). The Locative plural is forined by सु: शकहु-1-सु-शकदृषु the lengthening taking place by VI. 4. 2). Here & is changed to the ckadesa y for 37 1-8T not being considered asiddha. So also परिवीषु (परि +ध्ये + क्विा = परि+हए + क्वि.. परिवि, add सु)॥ of the affix oि we have:-वृक्ष-1-1- वृक्ष, add छत्रम्, then the single substitute p being considered not asiddha we have वृक्षच्छवम् or पछत्रम् ॥ or the affix of Ist Pers. Atmanepada we have अपचे-1-छत्रम् = अपचेच्छत्रम् or अपचे छत्रम | In both these cases we optionally add तुक् by VI. I. 75-76, by con. sidering the ekådesa (VI. 1. 87) as to have taken effect, and inaking the finals ng or long. Here the ekådesa is not asiddha and therefore cat is optinal and not compulsory. 
भाद्गुणः ॥७॥ पदानि ॥ भात, गुणः॥ . वृत्तिः ॥ भचीत्यनुवर्तते । भवर्णात्परोयो ऽधू भधि च पूढे यो ऽवर्णस्तयोः पूर्वपरयोरवणांचोः स्याने एको एण भादेशो भवति ।। 
87. The guna. is the single substitute of the final por e of a preceding word and the simple vowel of the suc 
ceeding (अ or आti vowels guna). 
... The word or is understood hicre, For the vowel which follows an mor , and for the mor which precedes a vowel, in the rooin of both these 
preceding and succeeding vowels, there is the single substitute guņa. Thus स+पदम् - तरेवम्, खदानन्द्रःखइन्द्रः, माला+इन्द्रः- मालेन्द्रः, तथ। ईहते- तहते, खट्टा+ईहते -खहते, तव + उदकम् - तवादकम, खट्वा + उदकम् खदातकम्, तत्र+श्या सवयः, खदा+भ्या -खदर्यः, तव+लकारः- तबल्कारा, खदालकारःखद्दलकारः॥ By analogy of I. I. SI, the guna substitute of being of is always followed by any, as that of it is follo. wed by To This universal rule is limited by the following aphorism. 
घृद्धिीचि ॥ ८८॥ पदानि ॥ वृद्धिः, एचि॥ पृत्तिः ॥ भादिति वर्तते । भवर्णात्परो व एच् एचि च पूर्वो यो ऽवर्णस्तयोः पूर्वपरयोरवणेची स्थाने वृद्धिरे. कादेशो भवति । 
. 
.. .. 
. ... 
BK. VI. C1. 1 $ 89. ] 
1081 
N 
WP 
88. The Vriddhi is the single substitute of a or of a proceding word and the initil diphthong of the succeed ind (or 3-t-diphthong = vriddhi). 
The word ** is understood here. For the diphthong which follows an or or er, and for the work which precedes a diphthong, in the room of both these preceding and succeeding for at and diphthong, there is a single substitute vix, the Vriddhi. This debars guna taught in the last sūtra. Thus 
+ 4851 - 41, + &*T US : + fraktarat: - facturi, CT* ATT 
+ TAPE WEITH:, UGT*7*- , **+ * - - *i, ugr+*99* uğrama: 11 
पत्येप्रत्यङ्सु ॥ ८१॥ पदानि ॥ पति, एधति, ऊठसु॥ #*#fifa #h, sira i wiara Freguera TEI TT Taramurai TV K E TE 
TU arr er: इयोरवर्गाचो स्थान वृद्धिोकादेशो भवति ॥ 
N NOTEat af te ll ll fratte 1 
G 
* } গুলেলনামূল ঘূতিলা। আর নুঙ্গা ঝিনুক 
89. The Vriddhi is the single substitute for the mor i-e of gra (root) and quiet (root vz), and for # or a 
{ of (the substitute of er in ge by VI. 4. 132). 
The wholc of the last sūtra and wr are understood here. The ry of the last sätra qualifics the root rin gat, i. e. when the root assumes the form by internal changes, then apples this Vșiddhi rule. Th: does not qualify the root v as that root always has an initial diphthong, nor does yo qualify for is not a diphthong. Thus + graa , 7+ 2 , 9f4; 94-- 
vārd: *-- -- UTET W In the last example, guna was the substitute re quired by VI. 1. 87, the present sotra ordains Vriddhi instead. In the case of qia and quia, the Vșiddhi was debarred by VI. I. 94: this sutra makes an exception to that rule. The present satra is an exception to VI. 1.94 and not to VI. i. 95, because the maxim is girareAT faut fufy any 
IT "Apavadas that prccede the rules which teach operations that have to be superseded by the apavada operations, supersede only those rules that stand nearest to them, not the subsequent rules". Therefore the present rule does not apply here, :- + 1-4-= +7= 7 (Here though x is changed to y, the rule does not apply). Therefore the form met is wrong. So also 7-7-79a: for here the root has not assumed the form y, therelore the rule does not apply, the word on qualifies the root FM 
Vdot:-The Vriddhi is the single substitute when is followed by fel, as surfen TI 
1082 
VRIDDITI-EKÅDESA. 
[ BK. VI. CI. I $ 90. 
g 
Väri: The Vșiddhi is the single substitute when it is followed by ir or रण, or इरिणी thus स्वैरम, स्वैरिणी ॥ The word tr is formed by the affix पत्र added to रगती (Ad. 8 स्वनाभिमायण करणं = स्वरम the compounding takes place by !!. 1. 32. Another form is it e arrior reyfa with the affix furra (11l. 2.78). 
Vart: The Vriddhi is the single substitute when is followed by 58, $7, KFC, 54, gem; as frei, frai, gira:, :,goa: 11 The word is derived froin the root ng to wish' (Tud. 59), TT 'to go' (Div. 18), and yg 'to repeat' (kry. 53), by adding the affix ; and the word peer is derived form the saine roots by add ing it lhis Vārtika ordains Vșiddhi, while VI. 1. 94 would have caused 
669:11 While the roots for 'to glean', and so 'to go' to injure, 'to show. (Bh. 115 and 642), form fe: and fo: with the above affixes; and with q, their forms 
will be प्रेप: and प्रेष्यः ।। 
Vårt: The Vriddhi is the single substitute when a word ending in om is followed by it and forms an Instrumental Tatpurusha compound: as 
i er, gift 7: = gerai, but gan ra:=507: 11 Why in Instrumen tal? Observe achat: 11 Why 'Compound? See gena: 11 
Vart:--The Vriddhi is the single substitute when the word u follows the following:- , TERATT, , TEM II As grofa 'principal debt', paratro 'the debt of a steer', proq debt of a blanket', i 'debt of a cloth'. 
Vart-So also when the words on and on are followed by pias, oport and format i Thc word oprof means a debt incurred to pay off a prior debt. The Dasarņa is the name of a river and of a country. 
MCW II got a II 17:, lll वृत्तिः ॥ एचीति निवृत्तम् । भचीत्यनुवर्तते । भारः परो योऽभचि च पूर्वो व भार तयोः पूर्वपरयोरा. पचार स्थाने वृदिरेकादेयो भवति । 
90. The Vridalhi is thic single substitute when the augment arę is followed by any vowel. . The anuvritti of of ceases : that of arfer however, is present. The vowel that is subsequent to the augment art, and the wrę which is precedent to a vowel-in the room of these two i. e. the wire and the vowel-subsequent and precedent, the Vriddhi is the single substitute. The augment mi is added to the roots beginning with a vowel, in the Imperfect, Aorist and Conditional Tenses (VI. 4. 72 &c). Thus triTE, TW, farsana, sintra, si viia, sircuit from roots farà (Bhu. 641), 7 sat gros (Tud. 32) and 3 * m (Tud. 20). Ace cording to Siddhanta Kaumudi the wre is the augment which is case-affixes take after nadf-words (VII. 3. 112). According to him the following are the examples : R!-|-MITE--F=T (Dative Singular). The one is the augment also in the Vedic Tense intre il 
NiK. VI. CI. I. . 92.] 
VkID11-IKATESA. 
1083 
- 
- 
The yand' in the sätra shows that the 4769 rule, taught in VI. 1. 95, 96 when उम्. ओं and मा follow, is supersecled, when the preceding vowel is भाद् ॥ Thus भोस्रीयन्. ओकारीयत् ।। मा- अबा-श्रीदा, नमिच्छन् - मोडीयन् ।। ___उपसर्गारति धातौ ॥ ९१॥ पदानि ॥ उपसर्गात् , ऋति, धाती ।। 
वृत्तिः ।। भादित्यत्र । भवान्तादुपसहकाराशे धातो परतः पूर्वपरयो स्थान वृदिरेकादेशो भवति ।। 
91. The Vriddhi is the single substitute when the 2 or at of a preposition (upasarga) is followed by the short of t verb. 
The word 917 is understood here also. When a preposition ending in mor on is followed by a root beginning with , the Vriddhi is the single substitute for the precedent st or art and the subsequent #1 This debars the guna taught in VI. I. 87. Thus उप+कच्छति = उपार्छति, प्राच्छति, उपाधोति ॥ 
Why do we say 'after a preposition'? Observe खइच्छीत, मालच्छति, प्रछकोदेशः GTTAT HET OFFEE TUE 11 Here the words is not treated as an upasarga, hence this sutra does not apply. It is a Gati here. Why do we say when follow's'? Obscrve 34-1579a: il Why have we used a after & indicating that short s is to be taken? Obscrve उप+भकारी यांत- उपर्कारांयात ॥ No option is allowed here by the subsequent søtra. The it is used, in fact, for the sake of the subsequent sûtra in case of Denominative verbs, no ordinary verb can begin wirh a long l Why have we employed the word urg, when the word “upasarga' would have caused us to infer its correlative urg? It is used in 
order to prevent the application of the rule VI. I. 129 which causes प्रकासभावः or non-sandhi of Thc repetition of Dhatu 'shows that the alternative prakriti bhava taught in VI. 1, 129, would not apply in the case of the # of a Dhatu. 
वा सुप्यापिशले ॥ ९२॥ पदानि ॥वा, सुपि, आपिशलेः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ मादित्येव । उपसर्गादृति धाताविति च । सुबन्तावयवे धामावृकारादौ परतो ऽवर्णान्तादुपसर्गात्पू. परयोरापिशलराचार्यस्य मतेन वा वृद्धिरेकादेशो भवति । 
92. According to the opinion of Apisali, the Vri ddhi is optionally the single substitute, when the mor o of a proposition is followel by a Denominative Verb beginning 
with ऋ॥ - Thus उपार्षभीयति or उपर्षभीयति, उपस्कारीयति or उपास्कारीयति ॥ The rand 
are considered as homogenous letters, therefore the word in the last sätra includes also. The name of the Gramınarian Apisali is mentioned for the sake of respect; the itself was enough to make it an optional rule. 
भीतो ऽमशसोः ॥ ९३ ॥ पदानि ॥ आ, ओतः, अम् • शसोः॥ वृणिः ॥ भोतोऽमिसि च परतः पूर्वपरयोराकार भादेशो भवति।। 
ase 
1084 
PARA-RUPA-EKÅDESA. 
[BK. VI. CI. I. ६.94 
93. For sit of a Nominal stem-1-3 of the Accusative case-ending अम् and अस्, the single substitute is आ ॥ 
The word भीत: is a compound of मा+भातः॥ Thus गौ - मम, = गाम, गो-न-अम् -गाः ॥ Thus गां पश्य, गाः पश्यः ॥ This debars the Vriddhi of VII. I. yo. So also ai or OT: 95%; as the word or is also a nominal stem ending in art The Sårva nâmsthana affixes are fuit after this word also ( see VII. 1.90) which woulet have caused Vriddhi, therefore, this a debars the Vșiddhi. The word where means the affix of the Accusative Singular, as it is read in connection with the case-affix ax, and as the word gy of the last sätra governs this also. Therefore भम् the verbal Tense-affix of the Imperfect is not meant: thus we have भचिनवम्, भसुनवम् ॥ 
पङि पररूपम् ॥ ९४॥ पदानि ॥ एङि, पररूपम् ॥ वृत्तिः । भारित्येव. उपसर्गादाताविति च। भवर्णान्तादुपसर्गादेडादोधातौ पूर्वपरयोः पररूपमेकादेवो भवति।। पात्तिकम् ॥ शकन्भ्वादिषु पररूपं वक्तव्यम् ।। वा०॥ एवेचानियांगे पररूपं वनव्यम् ॥ पा०॥ भोवोष्ठयोः समासे वा पररूपं वक्तव्यम् ॥ वा० ॥ एमन्त्रादिषु छन्दांस पररूपं वक्तव्यम् ।। 
94. For the s or at of the Preposition-1-4 or 1 of a verbal root, the second vowel is the single substitute. 
The words otra, qofrarat are understood here. In an upasarga end ing in for at followed by a root beginning with g or sìt, the vowels coalesce and the single-substitute is the form of the second vowel (पररूप)॥ This debars Vriddhi taught in VI. I. 88. Thus उपलयाति, प्रेलयति, उपाषति, मोषति | Some read into this satra the option allowed by VI. I. 92, according to them the para-rapa substitution is optional in the case of Denominative roots. Thus soatera or उपडकीयाति, उपोवनीयति or उपादनीयति ॥ 
Vart: The Para-rûpa substitution takes place in the case of Tary: &c. As धक-न-मन्धुः - शकन्धुः, कुल + मटा- कुलटा, सीम+भन्त- सीमन्तः 'hair'; when not referring to 'hair', the form is star a: 1 
Vårt :-The Para-rapa substitution takes place when it follows a word, and the sense is not that of 'appointment'. Thus rr-|-एव इहव; भद्य-1-एव= भयेष॥ When the sense is that of नियोग, the Vriddlhi takes place: as इहैव भव, माऽन्यत्र गाः ।। 
Vart:-The Para-rapa substitution takes place optionally when भोतु and भोष्ठ are compounded with another word: as स्थल भोतुः स्यूलौतुः or स्थलोतुः, so also fragt or faragt 11 When not a compound, the Vriddhi is compulsory: as तिष्ठ देवदत्तौष्ठ पश्य 'Stay Devadatta, see the lip'. 
___Vart:-In the Vedas, the para-rapa substitution takes place when एमन &c. follow. Thus भपां खा एमन् =अपां स्वमन् ॥ So also भपां त्वा भोपन्भ पा खोपन् ।। 
ओमाडोश्च ॥ ९५॥ पदानि ॥ ओम् - आङोः, च ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ भादित्येव । भवान्ताशमि भाडि व परतः पूर्वपरयोः स्थाने पररूपमेकादेशो भवति ॥ 
BK. VI. Cl. I. S. 61 ]. 
l'AKAKUIA. 
1085 
- 
- 
____05. For the अ or आ + ओ of ओम्, or + the vowel of tho Preposition 375, the second vowel is the single substitute. 
The आन् is understood here. Thus का--ओम् - कोम् ; या-1-ओम् - थोम् ; as कोमित्यवाचत, यामित्यवाचन ; आ-1-अहा आढा, then अय-न-आमा=अन्योढा, कवा-।-भोडाकदोडा, तदा + मोटा-तोटा ॥ आ+ऋश्यात् -, then अद्य-1-अात् = अद्ययात् ॥ Thus this rule supersedes both the Vriddhi and the lengthening (VI. 1. 88, and 101). 
उस्यपदान्तात् ॥ ९६ ॥ पदानि ॥ उसि, अपदान्तात् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ आरित्वेन । अवर्णावपशन्तासि पूर्वपरयोरागणापवादः पररूपमेकादेशो भवति ।। 
96. For the ar or T (not standing at the end of a Paula or fill worl)+3 of 37 tlic Tense-affx, the sccond vowel is the single substituto. 
The sia is understood liere. This debars the guna substitution taught in VI. I. 87. Thus भिन्या-1-उस् - भिन्ः, छिन्या-1-उस = छिन्ः ॥ भदा-1-उस् - मधुः, (लुङ of दा) अया--उस- अयुः ॥ All these are examples of लिङ् (Potential) and लट् (Imperfect). Thus भिन्द + यासुद्+झि (the यासु is added by III. 4. 103) मिन्द + य+ उस् (जुस replaced झि III. 4. 108)-भिन्नस् ।। भदा+सिच्+झि= अदा+o (II. 4.77)+ जुम् (III. 4. [10)= + उम् -- अदुः ॥ अ+या+ झि-अ+या+उस (VI. 4. THI)- अयुः ॥ The उस् is also the substitute of झि in लिट् (Perfect) see III.4 82. When the preceding vowel is not x or 1, this rule docs not apply. Thus the 3rd per. pl. of the Perfect of कृ is :--चक्र-1-उस = चक्रः ॥ So also froin भी we have अविभ-1-उस्% अबिभयुः ॥ The word अंपदान्तात् 'not being final in a pada' does strictly speaking, scrve no good purpose in this sutra. For the affi.Jæ can never be added to a Pada, it must always be added to a stem, that has not yet risen to the rank of a Pada. If y, however, be taken as the syllable (whether an alfix or part of an affix or not), then the limitation of 379 वान्तात् becomes valid. Thus का+उमा-कोला, का+उषिता = कोषिता॥ Most likely this wore has been read here for the sake of the subsequent sútra or because उस् syllable is taken here and not merely the affix उस् ।। 
अतो गुणे ॥ ९७॥ पदानि ॥ अतः, गुणे ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ अपनान्ताहिनि बनते । गकारापरान्तागण परतः पूर्वपायो स्थान पररूपमेकादेशो भवति ॥ 
97. Also when the short *, not being final in a Paula, is followel by i Guna letter, then in the room of both the precolent und the subsequent-the single subitstute is the form of the sulsequent i. e. the Guna. 
Thus पच-|-शप--मन्ति - पच-|-अन्ति - पचन्ति so also यजन्ति ।। This dcbars lengthening of VI. I. I01. पच+ए-पचे, यज+ ए = यजे, here the Vriddhi is debarred (VI. I. 88). Why do we say "after the short vowel w?" Observe या-1-अन्ति = 21157, Tia 11 Why do we say when followed by 'a Guna letter ?' Observe 
1086 
PARARUPA. 
[ BK. VI. Cl. I. $ 100 
भपच-1. अपचे, भयजे ॥ When final in a Pada, this rule does not apply : as दण्ड-1-मम दण्डानम् , यूपापम् , क्षुद्राप्रम् ॥ 
अव्यक्तानुकरणस्यात इती॥ ९८॥ पदानि ॥ अव्यक्तानुकरणस्य,अ वृत्तिः ॥ अव्यक्तमपरिस्फुटवणे तदनुकरण परिस्फुटवर्णमंत्र केन चित्सादृश्येन तदव्यक्तमनुकरोति तस्य यो. च्छन्नस्तस्सास्तिो पूर्वपरयो स्थान पररूपमेकादेशो भवति ।। 
वार्तिकम् ॥ अनेकाच इति वक्तव्यम् ॥ 
98. The s of इति is the single substitute for the भत् (of a word denoting imitution of an inarticulate sound)-1-इति ॥ 
The sound which is not distinct and clear, is called meat; when some one utters distinctly something which has some resemblance to that sound, by some contrivance, it is called अनुकरण or imitation of that sound. Thus पटत्-1 इति =पाटात, घटत् + इति = घटिति, सटत् + इति = झटिति, छमत् + इति = छमिति । 
Why do we say 'imitation of an inarticulate sound? Observe pra-t इति = अगदिति ॥ Why do we say "of अत्? Observe मरट् + इति= मराडति ॥ Why do we say when followed by इति? Observe पटत् +भत्र = पटवत्र ।। . Vart:--This applies when the word consists of more than one syllable. Therefore it does not apply in the following:-*+sia = afara w How do you. explain the form घटदिति in the following:-घटदिति गम्भीरमम्बुदैनंदितम् ॥ Here the word is not घटत्--हांत but घटदू- इति ॥ 
नानेडितस्यान्त्यस्य तु वा ॥ ९९॥ पदानि॥न, आम्रडितस्य, अन्त्यस्य, तु, वा वृत्तिः । अव्यक्तानुकरणस्याडितस्य यो ऽच्छन्द इतौ तस्य पररूपं न भवति तस्य योन्यस्तकारस्तस्य वा भवति ॥ 
99. This substitution docs not take place when a sound-imitation word is doubled, here, however, for the final a-1-6 of fa, the single substitute is optionally < (the second vowel). 
___Thus पटपटरिति or पटतपटेति करोति (पटनपटत् + इति = पटतूपट +{+ति पटत्पति)। The word is doubled by VIII. 1. 4. The para-rûpa substitution will take place when the whole word so reduplicated denotes a sound imitation, thus पटत्पटिति करोति ॥ Here we apply the precedeing sutra. The amredita is the name of the second member of the doubled word (VIII. 1. 2). 
नित्यमानेडिते डाचि ॥ १०॥ पदानि ॥ नित्यम्, आनेडिते, डाचि ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ भव्यतानुकरणस्याता ऽन्त्यस्योत पानुवर्तते । डापरं यदाम्रीडितं तस्मिन्पूर्वस्याव्यतानुकरणस्या छन्दस्य योन्यस्तकारस्तस्य पूर्वस्य परस्य चाद्यस्य वर्णस्य नित्यं पररूपमेकादशो भवति ॥ 
100. Of such a doubleil sound-imitation woril, to 
· which the affix is alded wliich causes the elision of the 
• final , for the final a of the first member and the initial BK. VI. CII. 1. . 101) 
l'URVA-RUPA-EKADESA. 
1087 
consonant of the second member, such subsequent consonant is always the siugle substitute. 
Thus 42YET A (V.4.57), a Pira II 57927-4-377 (V. 4. 57)=9879er =q292 (+q=q) | This sätra is really a Vârtika. When the affix fre (V. 4. 57) is added to per. there is doubling of the word by the Vårtika under VIII. 1, 12: this doubling takes place before the final Hy is elided. 
*: #Töf frs: Il poll arra || 37 Fi, Faot, : वृत्तिः ।। अकः सवर्णे ऽचि परतः पूर्वपरयो स्थान वीर्घ एकादेशो भवति । वार्तिकम् ॥ सवर्णीघखे ऋति कवा वचनम ।। वा०॥लति ल्ल वा वचनम् ॥ 
101. When a simple vowel is followed by a hoin. ogenous vowel, the corresponding long vowel is the singlo substitute for both the precedent and the subsequent vowels. 
Thus ar3 +994=#3197.91 179:= 1, +37=# and + MST: 11 Why do we say any or simple vowel ?' Observe para-i-= 375è Why do we say 'by a hoinogenous vowel?' Observc f-1-377=212777 Thc word ofy is understood here also. The word at, thicrcforc, qualifies the word 1 understood. The rule will not apply if a hoinogenous consonant follows. As 
Art Tau The & and Jare homogenous, in spite of l. I. 10: for that prohibi tion does not apply to the long f and , bccause the rule of classification and inclusion contained in styraRTV pet: (1. 1. 69 ) is not brought into opera. tion at the time when frie (1. 1. 10) rulc opcrates, because of its being a portion of #qof rulc. Therefore, so long as it does not come into operation it is not accomplished. Therefore first the rule of arst comes into play, then the rule of #qu definition ( 1.1.9) and then comes the fupi (I. 1. 68 ). Therefore in AST ATT those 77 only are taken which are not included in the class of homogenous vowels i. e. only the 9 vowels contained directly in re, and not the oppof vowels which I. 1. 68 would have denoted. Therefore though short g and are not of by I. 1.10: the long and would be savarna. 
Vart:-When # short is followed by # short, the long substitution is optional: so also with all This vårtika is necessitated because (1) the two or the precedent and the subsequent are not liomogenous, because one is samvșita and the other vivrita, or (2) because their prosodial length is 12 and so the word sti cannot be applied with consistency in their casc (5777&c). Thus 
F TT: = HT: or a TT:, so also gira-1- TT: = EL FITT: or होस्लकारः॥ The दीर्घ of rise 
Terhat: gerraut: 11 8081 Tera Il gyant, ef - gauf:, Il वृत्तिः ॥ भक इति वीर्ष इति वर्तते । प्रथमाशम्शे विभक्तिविशेष रूढस्तत्साहचर्या द्वितीयापि प्रयमेस्युक्ता। सस्यां प्रथमायां द्वितीयायां च विभन्नावधि भकः पूर्वपरयोः स्थाने पूर्वसवर्णार्थ एकादेशो भवति । 
1088 
PURVARUPA-EKADESA. 
( BK. VI. CI. I. $ 103 
102. For the simple vowel of a nominal-stem anil for the vowel of the case-affixes of the Nominative and the Accusative in all mimbers, there is the single substitution of a long vowel corresponding to the first vowel. 
The words wait and err: are both understood here. The word UAT here means the per i. c. the ist case or the Nominative, and includes here the radiat Fit also. This sūtra tcaches the substitution of a ray or a homogenous loug vowel corresponding to the first vowel. Thus atstat-1-air 
s ; -1-319=714; 744-1-RET ETAT:, so also FIT, U17, KAUT 11 In the casc of these last four examples ( -1-317 &c) the rule VI. 1. 97 would havo caused para-rapa substitution i. c. would have given the forin qu-l-37=, and that rule would have debarred the lengthening rule VI. 1. 101 on the maxim "apavadas that precede the rules which teach operations that have to he suporseded by the apavada nperations, supersede those rules that stand nearest to them ;" but not this auf lengthening rule as it does not stand nearest. The word nie 'when a vowel follows' is inderstood here also, Thus T-1-= , : " The word 97'the simple vowel' is understood here also. Thus -1-3ft = are 11 Why do we say 'a vowel homogenous to the antecedent ?! The substitute will not be one homogenous to the second 
substitution of pluta vowel having 3 incasures for a pluta vowel, 
TEIE 11 803 il ta il TEHTA, STAT!, 7:, jie II वृत्तिः ॥ तस्मानपूर्वरावर्णवी_दुत्तरस्य शसो ऽवयवस्य सकारस्थ पुसि नकारादेशो भवात ।। 
103. Aftor such a long vowol homogenous with the first, T is substituted for the # of tho Accusative casc aflix 
Ta in the masculino. 
Thus q--78=TH=- =HTE U So also wita, ar, I, FITA, qusita FATTI, STEFT, &c. All these are masculinc nouns. Now the word met formed by the elision of 97 mcaning a figure like a 7591 (V. 3. 08), may refer to both the males and females. It will however retain its feminine fdrin though referring to a male being (Sec A TTK 747 1. 2.51) 111 forming tho accusative plural of , the will not be changed into all Thus #9:972, qat: q7 Why do we say after such a long vowel homogenous with the first? The rule will not apply if the long vowel has resultaal by being a single substitute for the antecedent and the subsequent. Thus T is substituted for 
-- by VI. 1. 93. Here op will not be replaced by t as qal Why dla we say 'of the Accusative plural? Observe THT, GESIT: endings in Ft Noin PI, Why do we say "in the inasculine?" Observe, 877:, aái, grat: 1 
BK. VI. Ch. I. $ 1071 
PURVA-RUPA. 
1089 
नादिचि ॥ १०४॥ पदानि ॥ न, आत, इचि॥ भूमिः ॥ अवर्णादिचि पूर्वसवर्णदी? न भवति ।। 
104. The substitution of a long vowel homogenous with the first, does not take place when 39 or 3 is followed by a. vowel (other than अ) of the case-affixes of the Nominative and the Accusative. 
Thus वृक्षी, प्लक्षी, खडे, कुण्डे | Here Rules VI. I. 87 &c. apply. Why do we say "after 57 or ?" Obscrve prati Why do we say "followed by an इच (a vowel other than भ)"? Observe वृक्षाः here VI. I. I02 applies. 
दीर्घाजसि च ॥ १०५॥ पदानि ॥ दीर्घात, जसि, च ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ दीर्घाजसि इपिच परतः पूर्वसवर्णदीर्घा न भवति ॥ 
105. The substitution of a long vowel homogen ous with the first, does not take place when a long vowel is followed by a nominative or accusative case-affix beginning with a vowel (other than अ) or by the Nom. Pl. affix असू ॥ 
___Thus कुमायौं, कुमार्यः, ब्रह्मबन्यो. ब्रह्मवन्यः॥ 
वा छन्दसि ॥ १०६॥ पदानि ॥ वा, छन्दसि ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ दीर्घाच्छन्दसि विषये जसि च इघि च परतो वा पूर्वसवर्णदीर्थो न भवति ॥ 
__106. In the Vedlas, the long vowel may option ally be the single substitute of both vowels in these cascs last 
mentioned. 
Thus मारुतीः or मारुत्या, पिण्डीः or पिडयः, धाराही or धाराह्यो; उपानही or उपानह्यो । 
अमि पूर्वः ॥ १०७॥ पदानि ॥ अमि, पूर्वः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ अक इत्येव । आमि परतो ऽकः पूर्वपरयोः स्थान पूर्व एकादेशो भवति ॥ . 
107. There is the single substitution of the first vowel, when a simple vowel is followed by the 3 of the case endling अम् ॥ 
The word भकः is understood here. Thus वृक्ष- अम् = वृक्षम् (VII. I. 24) लक्षम्, अग्नि-1 अम् = अग्निम्, वायुम् ॥ The word पूर्व 'anteccalent, first' in the satra shows that the first vowel itself is substituted and not any of its homogenous vowels. Otherivisc in कुमारी+भम् = कुमारीम् the t would have been of thrce matras or mcasures, as it comes in the rooin of ( + 97, the aggregate matràs af which nrc threc. 
In the Vedas, there is option, as tat or Trů, first or iranil 21 is the 
1090 
PURVA-RUI'A. 
( BK. VI. CI. I.S. 109 
cnding of the Accusative singular of all genders and also of the nominative singular in the Neuter in certain cases. (Sce VII. 1. 23, 24 and 28). 
संप्रसारणाच ॥ १०८ ॥ पदानि ॥ सम्प्रसारणात, च ॥ वृत्तिः ।। पूर्व इत्येव । संप्रसारणादधि परतः पूर्वपरयाः स्थान पूर्व एकादेशो भवति ॥ 
108. There is the single substitution of the first vowel for the vocalised semivowel and the subsequent vowel. 
The word om is understood here. When a vocalised semi-vowel is followed by a vowel, the vocalised vowel is alonc substituted, the subsequent vowel merging in it. Thus 43-4-=53737--7 (VI. 1. 15) = 5€ (5-1-37=); so 374 (779-14=3 377--a), ar+ za -- TT STE-1-67 = ystá 11 Had there not been this merging, the vocalisation would become either usciess or the two vowels would have been hcard separately without sancihi. Thus in 79 +=33t9 +, if the a did not merge in 3, then it would cause sandhi, and I would be changed to a by Faroe and the word would again assumc the form a 11 But this grey would caues samprasarana rule non-effective, hence it follows that but for the present rule, the two vowels would have been heard separately as 3 878 II 
Thc rule of option in the Chhandas (VI. 1. 106 ) applies herc also. Thus we have यज्यमानी मित्रावरुणो or इज्यमानी ॥ "When you have just said that the two vowels will remain separate and there will be no XTREFT when there is 110 purvavad-bhava ve do you form a; it ought to be 7 3573484"? We have only said that vocalisation rulc becomes useless if there was not this rule of merg ing of the subsquent vowel; but where therc is this rule of purva-vad-bhava, and only an option is allowed, then the rule of vocalisation docs not become totally useless because it finds its scope in cases like re: &c, therefore when in the alternative it is not applicd, there guitar will take placc naturally, and thic ordi nary rules of sandhi will apply. The merging, moreover, refers to the vowel which is in the same anga or base with the samprasarana. Thus #ta z = 
+ =TR 39=US 11 Here Hi which is in the same sty with merges in to 
liBut in forining the clual, we have 7715 tar 11 Hcre 911 coming after the sam prasarana y does not merge thercin, and we have the il Similarly R+ 
06 Taifa! In fact when once the para-purvatva has taken effect, then subsequent vowels will produce their effect because in the antaranga operation 
se into re, the purva-rupa is ordained to save the samprasarana from modi fication, but there is no such necessity when a Bahiranga operation is to be applied. 
- एङः पदान्तादति ॥ १०९ ॥ पदानि ॥ एऊः, पदान्तात्, अति ॥ वृत्तिः ।। एड् यः पदान्तस्तस्मादति परतः पूर्वपरयो स्थाने पूर्वरूपमेकांशो भवति ।। 
BK VI. Cl. I. S. 112] 
PURNARUP.I-SANDIT. 
1091 
109. In the room of g or 247 final in a Pada, and the short 37, which follows it, is substituted tlio single vowel of the form of the first (q or art) | 
Thus अग्ने--अच: भग्नेऽत्र, दायो-न-अत्रवायोऽत्र ॥ This supersedes the subs titutes and अम् ॥ Why do we say 'of ए or भो'? Observe द-यत्र, मध्यत्र ।। Why do we say final in a Pada? Observe चे--अन% चयनम्, लो-1-मन- लवनम् ।। Here the Por si arc in the body of the word, and not at the end of a word. Why do we say "when followed by a short म? Observe वायो--इति = वायविति, भानो--ति भानविति ॥ Why do we say 'short? Observe वायो मायाहि = वायवायाहि ।। 
उसिङसोश्च ॥ ११०॥ पदानि ॥ उसिङसोः, च॥ वृत्तिः ॥ एङ इति वर्तते, अतातिच । एड उत्तरयोर्ड सिङसरिति परतः पूर्वपरयोः स्थाने पूर्व एकादेशो भवति॥ 
110. In the room of ए or ओ (in the body of a word),-1-अ of the euse-affix अस् of the Ablative and Genitive Singular, the siugle substitute is the form of the precedent. 
Thus 3771-1-37 = 3prāti, Trit: 11 The and J of arfta and ory arc guņa ted by VII, 3. ill. This sûtra applies wlien the por are in the middle of a word and not padanta, as in the last. Thus अग्नरागच्छति, वायोरागच्छति, भग्नेः स्वम्, वायोः स्वम् ॥ 
वृतिः ॥ डसिङसोरित्येव ककारान्तादुत्तरयोर्ड सिङसारति पूर्वपरयोस्कार एकादेशो भवति । 
111. In the room of ऋ-1-अ of the case-uffix असू of the Ablative and Genitive singular, the single substitute is the letter short उ॥ 
Thus होत-न-अम् = होतुर्म (The must always be followed by { I. I. Sr though this is not the substitute of Te only, but of + conjointly: on the maxiin that a substitute which replaces two, both shown in the genitive case, as : and TTFG in this sätra, gets the attributes of every one of these separa tely as the son of a father A and inother B (though both conjointly produce him ) may be called indifferently the son of A or the son of B. So the 3 may be called the substitute of # or aT) II The final & is then clided by VIII. 2. 24 and we have होतुर् = हातुः ॥ Thus होतुरागच्छांत, होतुः स्वम् ॥ 
ख्यत्यात्परस्य ॥ ११२ ॥ पदानि ॥ ख्य - त्यातू, परस्य ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ डसिङसोरिति वर्चते उदिति च । ख्यत्याशित खिशकइसीशन्स्योस्तिशब्दतीशब्दयोधकृतयणादे. पायारिदंप्रहणं, ताभ्यां परस्य डसि डसोरत उकारदिशो भवति ।। 
112. Tliero is tlic substitution of 3 for the 2 of 
1092 
RULES OF SANDIII. 
(138. VI. C1. 1. $ 113 
anter of the Ablative and Genitive singular, after are and afa, when for theç of those two stems T is substituted. 
The phrasc G EHT: and 39 are understood here also. The gi means and inclucles ro and eft when theç is changed to 4, and zu denotes ray and efi, thic being changed to all Thus tie-6-37F = FET: AS REITITETA, T: Fk11 So also पत्युरागच्छति, पत्युः स्वम् ॥ The illustration of खी is सखी thich is derivetl from the Denominative Verb thus : et tag=a, FETTegra = -1-490 (III. 1. 8) = T (VII. 4. 3). Now by adding in to the denominative root neta we get ut: 'one who wishes for a friend'. The Ablative and Genitive Singular of this word will be सखी-|-अस् = सख्युः also. Of ती we have the folloving example. लनमिच्छति = लूनीय, add क्रिपलनी, the Ablative and Genitive singular of which is also pay, the ot of it being the substitute of it of Nishțha, is considered like 1 (VIII. 2. 1). The peculiar exhibition of paarid ra in the s@tra, instead of saying directly aftraui indicates that the rule does not apply to words like अतिसखि &c : where we have अतिसखः, सेनापतेः ॥ The word stratary is fg in spite of the prohibition (l. 4. 7), for that prohibition applies only to efe and not to a compound which ends in it, on the maxim महणवता प्रातिपदिकन तदन्तविधिर्नास्ति ।। " That which cannot possibly be anything but a l'ratipadika does (contrary to I. 1. 72) not denote that which ends with it, but it denotes only itself”. According to Dr. Ballantyne this rule applies to all खी and ती, such as मुखी: one who loves pleasure' (मुखमिच्छति = सुखीय--विप). and gatt: 'one who wishes a son' (garnegargata-t-in): Thus yet, yat: &c. 
अतो रोरप्लुतादप्लुते ॥ ११३॥ पदानि ॥ अतः, रोः, अप्लुतात्, अप्लुते, ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ भति, उरिति वर्त्तते । मकाराप्लुतादुत्तरस्य रोरेफस्य उकारानुबन्धविशिष्टस्य प्रकारे ऽप्लुते परत उकारादेशो भवति ॥ 
113. The F is the substitute of .(the r substi tute of a final & VIII. 2. 66) when an at, which is not a pluta, both precedles and follows it. 
The phrase 37 is understood here, as well as the worel strat or VI. 1. 109, m. Thus T1-1-( 1st singular) = ATĘ=! (VIII, 2. 66). [77--977= T173-- 
= LETT-1-377 (VI. 1. 87)= 757 (VI. 1. 109); so also creatSat!! This orilains 3 for [, whereby VIII. 3. 17, there would have been otherwise 7; and this does not become asiddha (as it depends upon & VIII. 2. 66) for the purposes of VIII. 3. 17, as it otherwise would have been by VIII. 2. 1. 
Why do we say "after an s'? Observe a Prat-4-379=fall Why do say 'a short o'? Observe EETT:-1-37=HT BTT II Why do we use with its indicatory 7, and not use the generally? Observe FTI-1-877T=F777, grar-1-377 franca 11 Here the final r is part of the words, and is not produced from gul 
BK. VI. CH. I § 115.] 
NON-MODIFICATION. 
1093 
The word wa is understood here also froin VI. 1. 109. Ther must be follow ed by a short , therefore, not here: (4t-1-= II The subsequent # must be short, the rulc docs not apply here [-I-HATTAVAT: = TX Hill Why do we say 'preceded by an apluta 's The rule will not apply if a Pluta vowel precedes it. As, guitar 77 AH (VIII, 2. 84). Why do we say " when followed by an apluta 37"? Observe fast 99 m fram (VIII. 2. 86). Here at being held asiddha, there would have been 3 substitution, had not the plırase mogu been used in the aphorism. 
ERTI 88811 via II , PIN T AT SA TTTFT Tottar ara 11 
114. The F is the substitute of (the substitute of & VIII. 2. 66) when it is followed by a soft consonant and preceded by an apluta short all 
The yt pratyahara includes all sonants or soft consonants. Thus grant afa or gala or afer &c. 
प्रकृत्या ऽन्तःपावमव्यपरे ॥ ११५॥ पदानि ॥ प्रकृत्या, अन्तः-पादम् अव्यपरे ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ एडो ऽतीत्येव । एक इति यत्पञ्चम्यन्तमनुवर्तते तदर्यादिह प्रयमान्तं भवति । प्रकृतिरिति स्वभाव कारण था ऽभिधीयते । मन्तरित्यव्ययमधिकरणभूतं मध्यमाचष्टे । पावनेन च पावस्थेव महणमिष्यते न तु लोकपारस्य । अवकारयकारपरे ऽति परत एडप्रकृत्या भवति । 
115. The final cor i and the following when occurring in the middle half of a foot of a Vedic verse, retain their original forms, except when the 3 is followed by For In 
The word gi is understood here, but it should be construed here in the nominative case and not in the Ablative. The world a means 'ori ginal nature, cause'. The word art is an Indeclinable, used in the Locative case here and means in the middle'. The word 274: 'the foot of a verse' refers to the verses of the Vedas, and not to the verses of secular poetry. The word भति is also understood here. Thus ते भो भश्वमायुजन् से मस्मिन #TATTY, J4445T ME; FT 974974; THAT (R. Veda. V. 79. 1); quorut #fff: (Rig IX. 51.1); Tæt rett (Rig. VI. 58. 1) 
Why do we say 'in the inner half of a foot of a verse ?! Observe par afto fare as Why do we say "when or a does not follow 
?" Observe 47 (Rig X. 109. 1), #SITE W Why do we say y or or? Observe भन्वग्निरुषसामग्रमययत् ।। Some read this sutra as नान्ता पातमध्यपरे। Ac. cording to them, this sätra supersedes the whole rule of juxtaposition or hreat (VI. 1. 72). 
1094 
PRAKRITIBITAVA. 
[BK. VI. CI. I.S. 118 
MAHARA 
अव्यादवद्यादवक्रमुरव्रतायमवन्त्ववस्युषु च ॥ ११६ ॥ पदानि ॥ अव्यात, अव धात् , अवक्रमुः, अवत, अयम्, अवन्तु, अवस्युषु, च ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ अव्यात् अवन्यात् अवकमुः भव्रत भयम् अवन्तु अवस्यु इत्येतेषु यकारवकारपरप्यात परतोऽन्तः पारमा प्रकृत्या भवति । 
116. The g or sit retain their original form in the middle of a Veilic verse, wlicn the following words coine after them (though the st in these has a J and y following it) :--- अव्यातू, अवद्यात्, अवक्रमुः, अवत, अयम्, अवन्तु, अवस्यु॥ 
Thus भग्निः प्रथमोवसुभिर्नो भव्यात् ॥ मित्रमहो अवद्यात् (Rig IV. 4. 15), मा शि पासो भवक्रमुः (Rig VII. 32. 27); ते नो भव्रताः (Not in the Rig Veda). Prof. Bohtlingk gives the following examples from the Rig Veda : 
m u r 97*** (VI. 14. 3), संवहन्ता अवतान् (IX. 73. 5), कर्ते अव्रतान् (IX. 73. 8). शतधारो भयं मणिः, त मो भवन्तु पितरः (Not in the Rig Veda: according to Prof. Bohtlingk the अ of भवन्तु is generally elided in the Veda after ए or भा) कुशिकासो भवस्यवः (Rig III. 42.0). 
. यजुष्युरः ॥ ११७॥ पदानि ॥ यजुषि, उरः ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ उरः शब्द एरन्तो यजुषि विषये ऽति पकृत्या भवति ॥ 
117. In the Yajur-Verla, the word 5TH Wlien changed to è, retains its original form when followed by a short w which is also retained. 
Thus SÊ H OTA (Yaj. Veda Vajasan. IV. 7). Some read the stra as यजुप्युरोः॥ They take the word as उह ending in 3, which in the Vocative case assumes the form उरो | They give the following exaimple उरो अन्तरिक्षं सतर् ।। But in the Yajur Veda VI. II, the text reals उरोरन्तरिक्षत् सज़ः ॥ In the Yajur Veda, there being no stanzas, the condition of भन्तः पादं does not apply here. : ___ आपोजुषाणोवृष्णोवर्षिष्ठेम्बेम्बालेम्बिकेपूर्वे ॥ ११८ ॥ पदानि ॥ आपः, जुषाणः, वृष्णोः , वषिष्ठे, अम्बे, अम्बाले, आम्बिके, पूर्वे ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ यजुषीत्येव । भापो जुषाणो वृष्णो वर्षिष्ठे इत्यते शब्दा अम्बे अम्बाले इलेगा च यावम्बिकेशनापूर्वी यषि पठितो त भात परतः प्रकृत्या भवन्ति । 
___ 118. In the Yajur Veda, the short अ is retained after आपो, जुषानो, वृष्णो, धर्षिष्ठे, and also in and after अम्बे or अम्बाले when they stand before अम्बिके ॥ 
Thus मापो अमान् प्रातरः शुन्धयन्तु (Yaj. IV. 2). जुषाणो भत्तुराज्यस्य ( Yaj. V. 35), वृष्णो अंशुभ्यां गभस्ति पूतः (Yaj. VII. I). वर्षिष्ठे भधिनाके ।। The Vajasaneyi Sanhita has वर्षिष्ठऽधि (V.S I. 22): The Taittariya Sanhita has वर्षिष्ठे भधि । (I. I. 8. I. 4, 43, 2.5.5.4) अम्बे भम्बाले अम्बिके (V. S. 23. 18 where the reading is मम्बे अम्बिके ऽम्बालिके) but Tait S. VII. 4. 19. I, and Tait Br. III. 9. 6. 3 has भम्ब अम्बाल्यम्बिके ॥ The words अम्बे &c, though in the Vocative, do not shorten their vowel by VII. 3. 107, because thcy have been so read here. 
BK. VI. C11. I. §. 122.] 
PRAKRITI-BLAVA. 
KRITI-BULAVA. 
1095 
अङ्गात्यादौ च ॥ ११९ ॥ पदानि ॥ अङ्गे, इति-आदी, च ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ अङ्गशले य एतवादी चाकोरे यः पूर्वः स यजुषि विषये प्रति प्रकृत्या भवति ।। 
119. In the Yajur Veda, when the word as is followed by thic subsequent short # is retained, as well as the preceding t or ओ.॥ 
Thus ऐन्द्रः प्राणो भने अङ्गे भवाध्यत् , ऐन्द्रः प्राणो अझै अङ्गे नदीभ्यत्, ऐन्द्रः प्राणो भने भने नितीतः, ऐन्द्रः प्राणो अङ्ग अङ्गे पशाचिषम् (Yaj. 6. 20). . 
अनुदात्ते च कुधपरे॥ १२०॥ पदानि ॥ अनुदात्ते, च, कु-धपरे॥ बत्तिः ॥ यजुषीत्येव । अनुदात्ते चाति कवर्गधकारपरे परतो यजुषि विषये एड् प्रकृया भवति ॥ 
120. In the Yajur Veda, when an anudatta a is followed by a Guttural or a U, the antcccderit g or a retains its forin, as well as this subsequent 34 11 
Thus अयं सो मग्निः (Yaj. 12. 47), भयं सो मध्यरः॥ Why do we say when mis gravely accented ? Observe pisů, liere prò has acute accent on the first syllable. Why do we say “when followed by a Guttural (कु) or a ध"? Observe सोऽयमग्निः सहलियः ।। 
अवपथासि च ॥ १२१ ॥ पदानि ॥ अवपथासि, च ॥ वृतिः ॥ यजुषीत्येव । अनुदानइति पशब्दनानुकृष्यते । अवपथाःशब्ने ऽनुशते ऽकाराौ परतो यशाप विषयएड् प्रकृत्या भवति । 
__121. In the Yajur Veda, when the gravely ac cented अ of अवपथास follows ए or ओ, the vowels retain their original form. 
Thus त्री रुद्रेभ्यो अवपथाः ॥ The word अवपथाः is 2nd per. Singular Im perfect of an in the Atinanepada. Thus अ-1-वप् । शप्ना-यास ॥ The w is grave by VIII. I. 28. When it is not gravely accented, the drops. As यद्भ्यो ऽवपयाः ॥ Here is not grave by virtue of VIII. I. 30. 
सर्वत्र विभाषा गोः ॥ १२२॥ पदानि ॥ सर्वत्र, विभाषा, गोः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ सर्वत्र, छन्दसि भाषायां चाति परतो गारे प्रकृत्या भवति विभाषा ॥ 
122. After of the subsequent 3 may optionally be retained everywhero, in the Vedas as well as in the secular literature. 
गोऽश्वाः ॥ 
अवङ् स्फोटायनस्य ॥ १२३ ॥ पदानि ॥ अवङ्, स्फोटायनस्य ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ अतीति निवृत्तम् । अचीत्यतत्वनुवर्ततएव । अचि परतो गाः स्फोटायनस्याचार्यस्य मतेनावडा देशो भवति॥ 
1096 
IKAKRITI-BITAVA 
[ BK. VI. CH. I $ 125. 
123. According to the opinion of Sphotâyana, there is the substitution of 99% for the ait of ott when it is followed by any vowel. 
The anuvritti of aia ceases, that of are manifests itself. Thus fit 9= 144, so also 7911TH, TUTTA, gn, or in the alternative we have to 59, 11, TT , TTgk The substitute #5 is accutely accented on the first syllable. This accent will be the original accent in the Bahuvrihi com pound (VI. 2. 1). "Thus MET TAR tara: 11 In other places, however, this accent will be superseded by the sainásânta Udatta accent (VI. 1, 223) The mention of Sphoțayana is for the sake of respect, for the anuvritti of fortret was already understood in it. This is a vyavasthita vibhasha, hence in arh: the 7 substitution is compulsory and not optional, 
For Tracht 11 87411 lla, a, fateht II 
11 FATIFU S TCATO irinansiedae II 
124. The substitution of my for the wt of sit is compulsory when 4 vowel to be found in the word for fol lows it. 
Thus ware: 11 So also tra 09:!| The word force is not found in some texts or in Mahabhashya, 
प्लुतप्रगृह्या अचि ॥ १२५ ॥ पदानि ॥ प्लुतप्रगृह्या अचि, ॥ FT: Il care aparece egocelt area II 
125. The Pluta ( VIII. 2. 82 etc.) and Pragrihya (1.1.11 etc.) vowels remain unaltered when followed by a vowel (so far as the oporation of that vowel is concerned). 
Thus AT ST PIPET, 7514 T I F 97774 | These are examples of prolated vowels. The prolation of vowels is taught in the tripadi or the last three chapters of Ashtadhyayi; and the tripadi are considered asiddha for the purposes of previous sQtras (VIII, 2. 1.). This is not the case here, otherwise the mention of pluta would be redundant. Or the Excepted or Pragrihya vowels the following are the examples : poft fa, aty tha, ug far, the il Though the anuvritti of oft was current in this satra from VI. 1. 77: its repeti tion here is for the sake of ordaining natira il That is, the pluta and the pragríhya retain their original forms when such a vowel follows which would have caused a substitution. Thus ST FA, Fyra here in combining we+rinta ure, the is no cause of lengthening, therefore, the lengthening will take place, Now sincer is a pragpihya, it follows that fit which ends in g is also a pra, BK. VI. Cır. I $ 127.) 
PRAKRTI-BIIAVA. 
1097 
grihya, and therefore it should not be changed before w of all Hence we have the form जानू +अस्य- जानू अस्य ॥ There may also be the form जान्वस्थ, not by mouer, but by 42 H İ IT (VIII. 3. 33). In fact, the repetition of PTIT in this sätra is necessary, in order to enable us to give this peculiar meaning to the satra. Otherwise, had the sätra been simply gamat:, it would have been translated ordinaeily thus: “The Pluta and Pragrihya retain their form, when ever a vowel follows". Therefore in siya mpi, since 7 is followed by a vowel, it will retain its form, and will not coalesce with the y of SE But this is not intended. Hence the repetition of the word ATP, and the peculiar explan ation given above, namely, Pluta and Pragrihya vowels retain their form before a vowel which would otherwise have caused a substitution, but it would not prevent the operation of any other rule. Thereforc in se pra art. the 7+ 
will become lengthened, because o is not the cause of lengthening; it causes the change of 7 to t, which of course is prevented. The word fire of the last satra is understood here also. These pluta and pragrihya always retain their form and are not influenced by the rule of shortening given in VI. 1. 127. 
gir SEATTERI KETETE II 82€ !! Tata II 19:, Haiti, greater II वृत्तिः ॥ भाडा चि परत साहतायां छनसि विषये ऽनुनासिकारेशो भवति स प प्रकृत्या भवति । 
126. For the adverb ə, is substituted in the Chhandas the nasalised mi, when ! vowel follows it, and it retains its original form. 
Thus #9: (Rig V. 48. 1); mit mirage frien: (Rig VIII. 67. 11). Some read the word nie into this sūtra. Hence there is coalescence here: F T AGET = BTT BTTTT II 
इको ऽसवणे शाकल्यस्य ह्रस्वश्च ॥ १२७॥ पदानि ॥ इकः, असवणे, शाकल्यस्य, 5F, 
वृत्तिः॥इको ऽसवणे ऽथि परतः शाकल्यस्थाचार्यस्य मसेन प्रकृत्या भवन्ति, इस्वच तस्थकः स्थाने भवति॥ qffi FENEAU: surtimefi : 11 पा॥षामक्षादिषु छन्दसि प्रकृतिभावमा वक्तव्यम् ॥ 
127. According to the opinion of Sakalya, the simple vowels with the exception of a, when followed by a nonhomogenous vowel, retain their original forms; and if the vowel is long, it is shortened. 
Thus **, Y T, $ift **, Full H In the alternative we have ध्यान, मम्वत्र, कुमार्थत्र, किशार्यत्र ॥ Why do we say the vowels i.e. simple vowels with the exception of s'? Observe us ! Why do we say , followed by a non-homogenous vowel'? Observe 10: # The name of 
1098 
PRAKRITI-BIIAVA. 
[ BK. VI. C11. I $ 129 
Sakalya is mentioned for the sake of respect. Because the alternative nature of this sätra is clear froin its very formation. 
Vart:--This rule of Sakalya is prohibited in the case of words form ed by an affix having an indicatory [ and of words which form invariable compounds (nitya samasa):.Thus ari à iFTC, q ETET PRO The word story is formed by a fe aflix, namely by (V. 1. 106), added to #; and therefore the J is changed to all Before a raq affix the previous word is considered a pada ( I. 4. 16) Or nitya-compounds are garnituri, 
a i, ai, arvin which are so by: II. 2. 18 &c. 
Vart:- In the Vedas T 3TH: &c are found uncombined. As, EST ETET, AT FAT FUTTAT, TYT 579, PUT 377147 &c. 
44: Il PPC 1 Tra ll #gra, ni, ( CTT: ) || वृत्तिः ॥ शाकल्यस्य इस्वश्रेत्येतदनुवर्तते । कोर परत: शाकल्यस्याचार्यस्य मतेनाकः प्रकृत्या भवन्ति, इस्वम तस्याका स्थाने भवति ।। 
128. Accorling to the opinion of Sakalya, the simple vowel followed by # retains its original form, and if the simple vowel is long, it is shortened. 
Thus ug 27, HATT *2, 972: 11 Why do we say when follow ed by ? Observe, gall Why do we say "the simple vowels (37:)"> Observe वृक्षावृश्यः (वृक्षा+ऋश्य) | This rule applics even when the vowels are homogenous (which were excepted by the last rule), and it is not confined to For vowels as the last, but applies to 37 and at also. 
erreguretà Il PP8 Tarfa 11 37, 37-ta , gureva, il वृत्तिः ॥ उपस्थित नामानार्षतिकरणः समुदायादवछिय पदं येन स्वरूप ऽवस्थाप्यते तस्मिन्परतो ऽप्लुत परवति ।। प्लुतकार्य प्रकृति भावं न करोति ॥ 
. 129. Before the word ofa in the Piulapâtha, a Pluta vowel is treated like an ordinary apluti vowel. 
The word gerea means the affixing of xfa in non-Rishi texts; i, e. when a Vedic text is split up into its various padas or words and fra is added. That is in l'adapáțlia, the Pluta is treated like an ordinary vowel, and hence there being no rafa (VI. 1. 125), there is sandhi. Thus a nni far a , 
T 
T i rall Why have we used the word "like as ”; instead of saying "the Pluta becomes Apluta" why do we say "Pluta is treated like apluta"? By not using at the whole Pluta itself would be changed into Apluta, and would give rise to the following incongruity. There is prakriti bhava in the case of pluta and pragrilya. A vowel which is pluta need not be pragrilya, nor a pra grilya, a pluta. But where a vowel is both a pluta and a pragrilya at one and 
BK. VI. Cl. I 8 131] 
PRAKRITI-BIHAVA. 
1099 
NE 
the sametime, there will arise the difficulty. Thus in the dual अग्नी or वायू, ther and are pragrilya. They inay be made pluta also a spray or Now is before gia, the pluta became pluta, then we shall not her the prolation at all in भग्नी हति बाबू हात formed ny मग्नी ३+ इति &c. lior here thc vowels will retain their form by being pragrihya by VI. I. 125, and in additon to that they will lose their pluta, by the present rulc. But this is not intended. Hence the plutn is heard in अग्नी ३ इति, वायू ३ इति ॥ 
ई३ चाक्रवर्मणस्य ॥ १३०॥ पदानि ॥ई, चाक्रवर्मणस्य ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ई कारः प्लुतोऽधि परतश्चाक्रवर्मणस्याचार्यस्य मतेनाप्लुतवद्भवति । 
130. According to the the opinion of Chakravar maņa, the pluta ( 3 followed by il vowel is treated like an ordinary vowel. 
Thus अस्तु हीत्यवधीत or भस्तु ही हत्यप्रवीत् ॥ चिनु होरम or चिनु होयम् ॥ The name of Chakravarmana is used for the sake of making this an optional rule. This option applies to इति rule (VI. I. 129) as well as to words other than इति । In the case of a it allows sandhi optionally, when by the last rule there would have becn always sandhi. In the case of words other than tā, it ordains prakrili bhâr'a optionally, when there would have been always prakriti bhava by VI. I. 125. This is a case of उभयत्रविभाषा, prapta and aprapta both. 
___Ishti:-This apluta-vad-bhava applies to pluta vowels other than t; as पशा इयम् or शेयम् ॥ 
दिव उत् ॥ १३१ ॥ पदानि ॥ दिवः, उत् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ एकः पदान्तावतीत्यतःपक्प्रणमनुवर्तते । वि इति प्राति पदिकं गृह्यते न धातुः, सानुबन्धकस्यात् ।। 
131. For the final of the nominal-stem दिव, there is the substitution of 3, when it is a Pada (I. 4. 14 &c). 
The portion qp ofthe word Tera must be read into this satra from VI. 1. 109. The word for is here a nominal-stein and not a verbal-root. Thus far a यस्य- पुकामः, गुमान्, विमला दिन, साभ्याम्, शुभिः ॥ We have said that दि is here a prati padika and not a dhatu, for as a dhatu it ought to have its servile letter anuban dha and should have been read as fag 11 In the case of its Leing used as a verb, there takes place the substitution of long a for by VI. 4. 19. In that case we shall have अक्षायाम, शक्षभिः ॥ The उत् with a त् shows that short t is meant, and debars ऊर (VI. 4. 19). In the case of ऊट substitution the forms will bc qur, : 11 The 53 also comes bccausc it is taught in a subscquent sætra. Why do we say when it is a l'ada'? Obscrvc feat, itt: 11 
__एतत्तदोः सु लोपो ऽकोरनसमासे हलि ॥ १३२॥ पदानि ॥ एतत् - तदो, सु लोपः-, अकोः, अ- न - समासे -, हलि, ॥ 
1100 
PRAKRITI-BILAVA. 
[ BK. VI. Cl. IF 134 
पतिः ॥ एतनी बावककारी नभ्समासे न वर्तते तयोर्यः सुशब्दः कक्ष तयाः सुशमा यस्तार्थेन संबद्धस्त स्व संहितायां विषये हलि परतो लोपो भवति ।। 
___132. After एतद् and सद् there is elision of the case-affixx (of the nominative singular), when a consonant follows it, when these words are not combined with (V. 3. 71 ) and have not the Negative Particle in com position. 
Thus एप: + ददाति - एप पदाति, स ददाति, एषभुते, स भुइने। Why do we say of एतद and स! Observe वो ददाति, यो भुइने। Why do say “the case affix of the Nom. singular?" Observe एती गावी चरतः ॥ Why do we say without 
Observe एपको पति, सका दाति ॥ The words एतद् and तद् with the afix भरूष, which falls in the middle, would be considered just like एतत् and without such affix, and in fact would be included in the words are and सद, hence the necessity of the prohibition. The general maxim is : तन्मध्यपतित. मनट ग्रहणेन गयते 'any term that may be employed in Grammar denotes not merely what is actually denoted by it, but it denotes also whatever word-form may result when something is inserted in that which is actually denoted by it". 
Why do we say " when not compounded with the negative particle"? Observe भनेषो स्वाति, भसो ददाति ।। In the compound with the negative particle 79, the second member is the principal and takes the case affixes. Why do we say when followed by a consonant'? Observe PTTST, ETSY II 
स्य छन्दसि बहुलम् ॥१३३॥ पदानि ॥ स्यः, छन्दसि, वहुलम्, (सोः, लोपः,)। वृत्तिः ॥स्य इत्येतस्य छन्दसि हलि परतो बहुलं सोर्लोपो भवति ॥ 
133. In the Chhandas, the case-affix of the nomi native singular is diversely elided after Ft, when a consonant follows it. 
Thus उत स्य वाजी क्षिपणि तुरण्यति ग्रीवायां बद्धो भपिकक्ष भासनि (Rig IV. 40.4), स्थत मधुमी इन्द्र सोमः (Rig IX. 87, 4)| Sometimes it does not take place: as बम स्यो निपतेत् ॥ The स्व means 'he'. 
सोचि लोपे चेत्पादपूरणम् ॥ १३४॥ पदानि । सः, अचि, लोपे, चेत्, पाद पूरणम्॥ पतिः ॥स इत्येतस्याधि परतः सुलोपो भवति लोपे सति पारः पूर्यते ॥ 
Karika सैप दाशरथी रामः, सैष राजा युधिष्ठिरः॥ 
सैप कर्णो महात्यागी सैप भीमो महाबलः ॥ ___134. The case-affix of सस् 'he', is elided before a vowel, if by such elision the metre of the foot becomes complete. 
__Thus से राजा भयति चर्षणीनाम् (Rig I. 32. 15) सौषधीरनुरुप्यसे (Rig VIII. 43. 9). The case-ending being elided, the Sandhi takes place. Why do we say 
परतः 
दीपम 
भीमो 
BK. VI. CH. I $ 135 ) 
H AUGMENT. 
I101 
'when by such elision the metre of the line is completed'? Observe 8 77 barat Wăl The word of in the satra is for the sake of distinctivess: for the pur poses of inetre would not have been served by cliding the aflix before a consonant, for then the syllables would rem in the same. It is by sandhi that a syllable is lessenied; and sandhi would take place only with a vowel. Some explain the word ' as 'a foot of a Sloka' also, and according to them this rule is not confined to Vedic metres only. Thus we have :- pucat 49, Taguigt:, fie Fot hercurtt, er fr #87973: II 
Es friget: Il 834 11 tra il gg, , gd:, 11 TT: 11 sfwati, qiyalar tarafa ani sa Ti 40714T a meget इति चतराधिकृतं वैश्तिष्यम् ॥ 
135. Upto VI. 1. 157 inclusive, the following sentence is to be supplied in every aphorisın :-"before the is added " I 
This is an adhikara sätra and extends upto VI. 1. 157. Whatever we shall teach hereaster, in all those, the phrase 'the augment og is placed before the letter should be supplied to complete the sense. Thus VI. 1. 137 teaches "After FA, ait and 79 when followed by the verb , the sense being that of adorning". Here the above plirase should be read into the satra to complete the sense, i. e. "the augincnt is added before the of when it is preceded by 14, oft and 74, and the sense is that of adorning". Thus + 
+ +-d al, E , F otoT 11 In the succeeding aphorisms it will be seen that the auginent comes only before those roots which begin with a 11 What is then the necessity of using the phrase e in this satra? It is used to indicate that the # remains unattached to , though it stands before it. Thus though # becomes , yet the latter should not be considered to be a verb beginning with a conjunct (sanyoga) consonant: and therefore the guņa taught in VII. 4. 10 (the root ending in and preceded by a conjunct letter, takes gina bclorc pote) cloes not apply, nor do the rules like VII. 4. 29, nor the rules ordaining the addition of interınediate re (VII. 2. 43) by which the r would coine in and RTI (Imperfect and Aorist); as, fiuefte and TAF57; and so also VII. 4. 29, does not apply as strengta the Passive Imper fect ( 
u pis) of gifs# If so, then the anudatta accent taught in VIII. 1. 28 would not take place, since the augment I would intervene between the non-तिङ्-vord R and the तिडन्त word करोति. thus संस्करोति would have accent on the verb. It is a maxiin E 6977FAIDATTTT'in applying a rule relating to accent the intervening consonants are considered as if non-existent'; and thicrefore does not offer any intervention to the application of the rule VIII. 1. 28. If I is not to be taken as attached to e, how do you explain 
1102 
O AUGMENT 
[ Bk. VI. C1. 1. $ 139 
the guņa in the Perfect 3rd Per. Dual and Plural in this and which apparently is clone by applying VII. 4. 10. Though that rule strictly applies to roots beginning with a conjunct consonant, it will apply also to roots like fifa which have a conjunct consonant for their penultimate; and the guņa is donc also on the maxim agraaf AFŪa Tuà (See VI. 1, 132). The indicatory in rc is for the purpose of differentiating it from in the Satra VIII. 3. 70. 
__ अडभ्यासव्यवायोपि ॥ १३६॥ पदानि ॥ अद, अभ्यास - व्यवाये, अपि ॥ पत्तिः ॥ भव्यवाये ऽभ्यासव्यवाये सुद् कात्पूर्वो भवति ।। 
136. The augment is placed before * even when the augment on (VI. 4. 71) or the Reduplicate inter venes (between the preposition and the verb). 
Thus HFT (- + ), arhia, TTT (=R9+ ), afe Yr II This satra is not that of Panini, but is made out of two Vårtikas: भड् ज्यवायउप संख्यानाम् ; and अभ्यासव्यवाये च ॥ The augmented root स्क would have given the form Tent by VII. 4. 61, if # be considered an integral part of $, and no rule of Antaranga and Bahiranga be taken into consideration. It might be said where is the necessity then of this satra? The operation relating to a Dhatu and Upasarga is Antaranga, i. e. a root is first joined with the Upasarga, and it undergoes other operations afterwards. Therefore, first the augment gk is added, and then the me and spare operations take place. Thus FiFi is the forın to which one and apare operations are to be applied. Now, we have said in the foregoing aphorism, that is considered as unattached to mi and therefore, the augment at may be added after this , and so also the redu plication may take place without it. Thus we may have the forms like e anda and TT II But this is not desired, hence the necessity of the present satra teaching that even after we and reduplicate, the gę must be placed be fore and no where else. 
Fargast: metat pot lll 230 l Tela 11 - oft - 5989, Fiat, TU पतिः । सम् परि उप इत्येतेभ्यो भूषणायें करोत्तौ परतः सुद् कारपूर्वो भवति ॥ 
137. The angment er is placed before when FH, off and 39 are followed by the verbs and the sense is that of ornamenting. 
Thus fifa, Fifa , Fast!! The 4 of 7 is changed to anusvara by VIII. 3. 5. So also qrai ga viti 11 The is changed to aby VIII. 3. 70. So also with y, as zonai, 3470 JT * Why do we say 
BK VI. CH. I. 5. 140] 
मुद AUGMENT. 
1103 
'when meaning to ornament'? Observe उपकरोति ॥ Sometimes मुद् comes after सम even when the sense is not that of ornainenting : thus संस्कृतमनम् ॥ 
समवाये च ॥ १३८ ॥ पदानि ॥ समवाये, (च सुद ) वृत्तिः ॥ समवायः समुशयस्तमिवार्ये करोती संपर्युपभ्यः कात्पूर्वः सुडागमो भवति । 
___ 138. The augment सुट् is placed before क, when the verb n comes after सम, परि and उप, the sense being that of 
combining. 
The word समवाय means aggregation. Thus सत्र नः संस्कृतम तब नः परि कृतम्, तप नः उपकृतम् -समुक्तिम् that is 'we assembled there': ___उपात्प्रतियत्नवैकृतवाफ्याध्याहारेषु ॥१३९॥ पदानि ॥ उपात्,प्रति, यत, धैकृत, धाक्य - अध्याहारेषु ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ सतोगुणान्तराधानमाधिक्याय वृद्धस्य वा तावस्थ्याय समीक्षा प्रतियवः । विकृतमेव वैकृतम् । प्रज्ञाविवादण । गम्यमानार्थस्य वाक्यस्य स्वरूपेणापाशन वाक्यस्याध्याहारः । एतेष्वर्येषु गग्यमानेषु करतो धातो परत उपात् मुटु कारपूर्वो भवति ।। 
___139. The augment सुद is placed before क, when the verb & comes after 39, and the sense is that of 'to take pains for something, to prepare, and to supply an ellipses in a discourse'. 
To take pains in imparting a new quality to a thing in order to in crease its value, or to keep it safe from deterioration is called प्रतियनः ॥ That which is prepared or altered is called वैकृतं ॥ The word वैकृतं is the same as first, the affix of being added without changing the sense, by considering it to belong to in class (V. 4. 38). To supply by distinct statement the sense of a sentence which is alluded to, is called the nature of a sentence. Thus in the sense of taking pains' we have एधोरकस्योपस्कुरुते (See I. 3. 32); काण्डगुणस्योप स्कुरुते ॥ In the sense of 'altering by preparing' we have : उपस्कृतं भुने, उपस्कृतं गच्छति ॥ In the sense of 'supplying a thesis' we have उपस्कृतं जल्पति, उपस्कृतं. मधीते ॥ When not having any one of the above five senses (VI. I. 137-139) we have उपकरोति॥ 
किरती लवने ॥ १४० ॥ पदानि ॥ किरती, लवने ॥ इत्तिः । उपाश्त्येिव । तपादुत्तरस्मिन्किरती धातो लवनविषये सुद् कारपूर्वो भवति ॥ पातिकम् ।। णमुलपवक्तव्यः ।। 
140. The augment सुद् is placed before क, when the verb 5 comes after 39 and the sense is that of to cut or split', 
Thus उपस्कारं मद्रका नन्ति, उपस्कारं कारनीरका लुनन्ति - विक्षिप्य लुनन्ति ।। 
1104 
मुद् AUGMENT. 
[ BK. VI. CH. I.६. 143 
Vart::-The above augment takes place when nem is added to the verb 79-, as shown in the above examples. When the meaning is not that of 'to cut', the form is उपकिरति । 
हिंसायां प्रतेश्च ॥ १४१॥ पदानि ॥ हिंसायाम, प्रतेः, च, ॥ पत्तिः ॥ किरतावित्येव । उपात्प्रतेश्वोत्तरस्मिन्किरतो हिंसायां विषये सुद् कात्पूर्वो भवति॥ 
141. The augment सुत् is placed before क, when the verbr comes after उप and प्रति, and the senso is "to cause suffering". 
Thus उपस्कीणम् or प्रतिस्कीर्ण हन्त ते वृषत भूयात् = तथा ते वृषल विक्षपो भूयाद् यथा हिंसामनुवनाति ॥ 
Why do we say when the sense is to cause pain'? Observe afer कीर्णम ॥ 
अपाश्चतुष्पाच्छकुनिष्वालेखने ॥ १४२॥ पदानि ॥ अपात्, चतुष्पात , शकुनिषुः, भालेखने ( सुत्,)॥ 
वृत्तिः॥ किरतावित्येव । अपादुत्तरस्मिन्किरती चतुष्पाच्छकुनिषु, यवालेखन तस्मिन् विषये मुद् कातपूतों भवति ॥ 
वार्तिकम् ॥ हर्षजीविकाकुलायकरणेग्विति वक्तव्यम् ।। पा॥ हर्षजीविकाकुलायकरणेष्वेव किरतरात्मनेपदस्योपसंख्यानम् ॥ 
142. The angment ge is placed before efi, wlien the verb 5 comes after sty and the sense is the scraping of earth by four-footed animals or birds'. 
Thus अपस्किरते वृषभो हष्टः, भपस्किरत कुक्कुटो भक्ष्यार्थी ; अपास्करते श्वा भाश्रयार्थी भालिख्य विक्षिपति ॥ Why do we say four-footed animals or birds'? Observe भपकिरति देवदनः ॥ 
Vart: This rule applies when the scraping is through pleasure, or for the sake of finding food, or making a resting place. Therefore not here: भापकिरति वा भोवनपिण्डमाशितः ॥ And it is in the above senses of scraping through pleasure &c, that the root takes Atmancpada asfixes; otherwise the Parasmaipada affixes will follow. See I. 3. 21. Vart. . कुस्तुम्वुरूणि जातिः ॥ १४३॥ पदानि ॥ कुस्तुम्बुरूणि, जातिः, (सुद)॥ 
त्तिः । कुस्तुम्बुरूणीति सुद निपात्यते जातिभेद्भवति ॥ 
143. The word कुस्तुम्बुरु is irregularly formed with the augment per and means 'a species of herb'. 
The thesis is the name of coriander : i. e. grouen; the seeds are also so called. The exhibition of the word in the sotra in the Ncuter gender does not however show that the word is always Neuter. When not meaning cori ander, the form is कुतुम्बुरु (कुत्सितानि तुम्बुरूणि)| The word तुम्बुरु here means the fruit of the ebony tree, 
BK. VI. Ch. I. SI45] 
मुद AUGMENT. 
IIOS 
अपरस्पराः क्रियासातत्ये ॥ १४४॥ पदानि ॥ अपरस्पराः, क्रिया - सातत्ये ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ अपरस्परा इति सुद् निपात्यते कियासातत्ये गम्यमाने । 
Kurika लुम्पेश्वश्यमः कृत्ये तुंकाममनसोरपि । 
समो वा दितततयोमांसस्य पचियुड्यमोः॥ 
144. The word अपरस्पराः is formed by the aug ment y when the sense is that of uninterrupted action'. 
. Thus अपरस्पराः सार्था गच्छन्ति सन्ततमविच्छेदेन गच्छन्ति | When the conti nuity of action is not meant, we have भपरपराः सार्या गच्छन्ति-अपरे परच सकदव megful The arat comes from want, by adding sy to form the abstract noun, सततस्य भावः (V. I. 123)-सातत्यं ।। How do you explain सततम, it ought to be सन्ततम् ? The p of सम् is optionally elided belore ततं, on the strength of the Karika:-"The p of अवश्यम् is elided before a word ending in a kritya affix, the म् of तुम् is elided before काम and मनस् , the म of सम् is elided optionally before हित and तत, the final w of मांस is elided before पाक or पचन | As (1) अवश्य कर्तव्य - भवभ्यकर्तव्य, (2) भोज़म् कामः = भोक्तु कामः, श्रोतुमनः ॥ (3) सहितं - सहितं, सम् ततं -सततं ।। (4) मांस पाकः, मांस् पचनम् ।। ___ गोष्पदं सेवितासेवितप्रमाणेषु ॥ १४५॥ पदानि ॥ गोः-पदम, सेवित असेवित प्रमाणेषु ॥ 
वृत्तिः ।। गोष्पदामात सुद् निपात्यते तस्य च षत्वं सेविते ऽसेविते प्रमाणे च विषये ॥ 
145. The word गोष्पद is formed by सुद, when meaning a locality visited or not visited by cows, or when it means a quantity. 
Thus गोष्पदो देशः = गावः पद्यन्ते यस्मिन् देशे स गोभिः सेवितो देशः ॥ So also भगोष्पशन्यरण्यानि॥ The word गोष्पद by itself does not mean 'not visited by cows'. Therefore the negative particle is added to give that sense. So also गोष्पदमात्र क्षेत्रं, गोष्णवपूरं वृष्टो देवः ॥ Here the word has no reference to cow, but to the quantity of land and raili. When it has not the above senses, the form is गोपदम् = गोः पदम् ॥ What is the use of the word असेवित in the sutra, the word गोपद will give अगोष्पद by adding the negative particle, न गोष्पद- भगोष्यद? The force of नम् compound is that of सदृश "like that but not that". As भब्राह्मण ineans "a man who is a Kshatrya &c. not a Brahmana, but does not mean a stone &c". Therefore 371697 with A would mean "a place like a pasture land but in which cows do not graze, but in which there is a possibility of cows grazing". But it is intended that it should refer to a place where there is no such possibility, hencc athraa is used. Therefore, deep forests where cows can never enter, are called भगोष्पद ।। 
आस्पदं प्रतिष्ठायाम् ॥ १४६॥ पदानि ॥ आस्पदम्, प्रतिष्ठायाम, (सुद्) पर्मिः ॥ भाल्मयापनाय स्थान प्रतिष्ठा तस्यामारपसमिति सुद निपात्यते ।। 
1106 
सुर AUGMENT. 
[ IBK. VI. Cl. I. S 150 
146. The word आस्पद is formed by सुट् when meaning 'a place or position'. 
The word fast means 'firin place, established position, rank, dignity, authority'. Thus भास्पदम भनेन लभ्यम् ॥ Why do we say when 'meaning a place'? Observe भा पदात् =भापदम् ॥ 
आश्चर्यमनित्ये ॥ १४७॥ पदानि ॥ आश्चर्यम्, अनित्ये ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ भनित्यतया विषयभूतया सुतस्वामहलस्यते तस्मिन्नापर्य निपात्यते । चरेराह चागुराविति यत्म त्वये कृते निपातनामुद ॥ 
147. The word आश्चर्य is formed by सुट, when mean ing something unusual'. 
The word 2 is formed by adding the aflix on to the verb 7 with the preposition भा, and the augment सुट् ॥ Thus भायें यदि स भुजांत, भायं यदि 
सो ऽधीयीत | When not having this sense, we have भाचयं कर्म शोभनम् ।। 
वर्चस्के ऽवस्करः ॥ १४८॥ पदानि ॥ वर्चस्के, अवस्करः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ कुत्सितं वर्षों, वर्चस्कमन्नमलं, तस्मिन्नभिधये ऽवस्कर इति निपात्यते । भवपूर्वस्य किरतेः कर्मणि 
सरप या निपातनात्तुर ।। 
148. The word अवस्कर is formed with सुद् mean ing "excrement". 
That which has bad lustre is called वयस्क (कुत्सितं)॥ It applies to the ejected food. To the root is added the affix atg (111. 3. 57), the preposition भव and irregularly the मुट॥ Thus भवस्करोऽन्नमलम् ॥ The place where the excreta lie (the rectum) is also so called. When not having this sense, we have भयकरः ॥ ___ अपस्करो रथाङ्गम् ॥ १४९॥ पदानि ॥ अपस्करः, रथाङ्गम् ॥ वृतिः ॥ भपस्कर इति निपास्यते रया घेवति । भपपूर्वाकिरतेनशरविल्या, निपातनात् सुत् ।। 
__149. The word अपस्कर is formed with सुट् meaning *the part of a chariot'. 
This word is also derived from with the proposition at and the affix भए (III. 3.57) and मुद् augment. When not having this meaning, we have अपकरः ॥ 
विष्करः शकुनिर्विकिरो वा ॥ १५०॥ पदानि ॥ विष्करः, शकुनिः, विकिरः, वा ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ विकिर इति किरतविपूर्वस्यगुपधनापीकिरः कः इति करत्यय विहिते सुद् निपात्यत शकुनिभव पति । विकिरशम्माभिधेयो वा कुनिर्भवति । 
Verse सर्वे धकुनयो भक्ष्या विष्किराः कुक्कुटाहते। 
150. The word विष्किर is formed with सुट option ally when denoting a kind of bird, the other form being विकिर॥ BK. VI. Cl. I. S. 153] 
मुद AUGMENT. 
TH07 
This word is formed by adding the affix क (III. I. 135) to a with the preposition and the augment 11 The word tan also refers to birds only, a kind of cock. The phrase votarta r is added from the Vårtika and is no part of the original satra. Thes स .कुनयो भक्ष्या विकराः कुक्कुटाहत ॥ Though the sûtra Pirit would have given the optional form fm, the specific mention of this forin in the sætra indicates that are always means bird' and nothing else. Otherwise it would have refferred to some thing other than a bird. 
हस्वाश्चन्द्रोत्तरपदे मन्ते ॥ १५१॥ पदानि ॥ स्वात्, चन्द्रोसरपदे, मन्ने । वृत्तिः ॥ चन्द्रशमउत्तरपदे इस्वात्परः मुडागमो भवति मन्त्रविषय ।। 
151. In a Mantra, the ga is added to find when it is second member in a compound and is preceded by a short vowel. 
Thus अमन्द्रो युष्मान् ॥ Why do we say after a short vowel? Observe सूर्याचनमसाविव ।। Why do we say in a Mantra', Observe, मुचन्द्रा पोर्णमासी॥ The उत्तरपर can only be in a compound (samasa) as it is well-known to all. and it does not mean, the second word', as the literal meaning might convey: Therefore the rule does not apply here शुकमसि चन्द्रमसि ॥ 
पतिकशव फशेः ॥ १५२॥ पदानि ॥ पतिप्कशः, च, कशेः ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ कश गतिशासनयोरित्येतस्य धातोः प्रतिपूर्वस्य पचापधि कते सुद् निपात्यते, तस्यैव पलर 
Verse पाममय प्रवक्ष्यामि भव में वं मतिष्कशः। 
___152. To the root कश 'to go, to punish', is added the augment ut, when preceded by the prepositioni sía, the forin being.प्रतिष्कशः ॥ 
Thc word gfacky is formed by adding affix (III. 1. 134) to the root, with adding the prefix प्रति ॥ Thus पाममय प्रवेश्यामि भाव में ल प्रतिष्काः I shall inspect the town to-day, bc thou my emissary'. The word aan: means "a messenger, a herald, an emissary". Why do we say " to the root ofin"? Observe प्रतिगतः कशां प्रतिकशोऽधः 'a horse guided by the whip'. Here though 
is derived from 1, yet the augment does not take place, because the augment coincs to the root *l, and not to a derivative word. 
प्रस्कण्वहरिश्चन्द्रावृषी ॥ १५३॥ पदानि ॥ प्रस्कण्व हरिश्चन्द्रो, ऋषी॥ वृत्तिः । प्रस्कायो हरिचन्द्र इति सुद निपास्यते ऋषी घेदभिधेयो भवतः ॥ 
___153. The words प्रस्कण्व and हरिश्चन्द्र are formed by मुद, meaning the two Rishis of that naune. 
Thus प्रस्क फषिः, हरिचना कषिः ॥ The word हरिचन्द्र could be formed by VI. 1. 151 in the Mantra, here it rcfers to other than Mantras. When not referring to Rishis, we have प्रकण्वो दयः, (कण्वं पापं तत्प्रगतं यस्मान) हरिचन्द्रो मानवकः (हरिः चन्द्रो यस्य मुग्धस्य)॥ 
1108 
मुद् AUCAMENT. 
[ BK. VI. Cl. I. $ 157 
मस्करमस्करिणी घेणुपरिव्राजकयोः ॥ १५४॥ पदानि ॥ मस्कर मस्करिणी, वेणु परिव्राजकयोः॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ मस्कर मस्करिन् इत्येती यथासंख्यं बेणौ परिव्राजके प निपात्यते ॥ 
154. The word मस्कर means 'a bamboo', and HENTET means 'a mendicant monk'. 
When not having these meanings, the form is a Il This is an un derived nominal stem, having no derivation, to which ge is added when 'a bamboo' is ineant; and the affix fa in addition, when a mendicant is to be expressed and thus we have मस्कर and मस्करिन् ॥ Why do we say "when mean-: ing a bamboo or a mendicant". Observe मकरोपाहः "an alligator", मकरा समा "an occan". Soine say the word Art is a derivative word, being derived from 
o'to do' with the negative particle and the asfix 37, the long 8T being shortened. Thus मा क्रियत यन प्राताषध्यत-मस्करः 'a bainboo or stick by which the prohibition is made'. So also by adding that in the sense of aroging to the root s preceded by the upapada मा; we get मस्करिन् ॥ Thus मा करणशाला-मस्करी "a monk, who has renounced all works". A mendicant always says “मा कुरुतः कमाणि शान्तिर्वः श्रेयसी"-"Do no works ye men, for peace is your highest end". 
कास्तीराजस्तुन्दे नगरे ॥ १५५ ॥ पदानि ॥ कास्तीर, अजस्तुन्दे, नगरे । त्तिः ॥ कास्तीर भजस्तुन्न त्यती शब्दौ निपारयते नगरे ऽभिधेये ॥ 
155. The words कास्तार and अजस्तुन्द are names of cities. 
When not meaning cities, we have कातीरम् (संपत् तीरमस्य); and भजतुन्नम् (भजस्येव तुन्दमस्य)॥ 
कारस्करो वृक्षः ॥ १५६ ॥ पदानि ॥ कारस्करः, वृक्षः॥ वृतिः ॥ कारस्कर इति मुद् निपास्यते वृक्षवति ॥ 
156. The word ATTET means 'a tree'. 
This word is forined from कार++ट (III. 2. 21)-कारस्करः ॥ When not meaning a tree, the form is f**: 11 Some do not make this a separate sutra, but include it in the next aphorism. 
पारस्करप्रभृतीनि च संज्ञायाम् ॥ १५७ ॥ पदानि ॥ पारस्कर प्रभृतीनि, च, संज्ञायाम् ॥ 
वृतिः ॥ पारस्करप्रभृतीनि च शब्दरूपाणि निपात्यन्ते संज्ञायां विषये ॥ 
157. The words पारस्कर &e are Names. 
These words are irregularly formed by adding मुट ॥ Thus पारस्करः 'a country called Paraskara'. कारस्करः 'N. of a tree', रथस्या N. of a river', किष्का 
• N. of a measure', किष्किन्धा 'N. of a cave', तस्कर a thief', forined by inserting सुद् in the compound of सत् +कर, and eliding त् ॥ वृहस्पति 'N. of a Diety', formed similarly by inserting सुर between वृहत् + पति and eliding the तू | Why do we 
BK. VI. CI. I. S. 158 ] 
ACCENT. 
1109 
say when meaning a thief and a dicty? Observe तस्करः, वृहत्पतिः ॥ The words or and gar are used in the Ganapatha mcrcly for the sake of diversity, the word संता would have connoted that प्रस्तुम्पति गीः॥ When the root तुप तुम्प 'to injure' is preceded by the preposition 4, there is added to g, when the agent of the verb is a cow. Why do we say 'when the agent is cow'? Observe - mla r a: 1In rara the is added to a finite verb, which is thus conju gated :-प्रस्तुम्पत्ति गीः, प्रस्तुम्पती गानो, प्रस्तुम्पन्ति गावः ॥ This is an akritigana. Thus मायांचनम्, प्रायश्चित्तः ॥ 
1पारस्करो देशः, 2 कारस्करो वृक्षः, 3 रपस्या नदी, 4 किष्कु प्रमाणम्, किष्किन्धा गुहा, 6 तहतोः करपत्योभोरवतयोः सुद तलापश्च (तस्करः चोरः, वृहस्पतिः-देवता), 7 प्रात् तुम्पती गवि कर्तरि (प्रस्तुम्पति गौः) ॥ भाकृतिगणः ॥ 
अनुदात्तं पदमेकवर्जम् ॥ १५८॥ पदानि ॥ अनुदात्तम्, पदम, एक-वर्जम् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ परिभाषेय स्वरविधिविषया। यत्रान्यः स्वर उदात्तः स्वरितो या विधीयते तत्रानुदात्तं पदमेकं बर्जयि स्वा भवतीत्येतदुपस्थितं द्रष्टव्यम् ॥ 
Karikt मागमस्य विकारस्य प्रकृतेः प्रत्ययस्य च । 
पृथक्स्वरनिवृत्यर्थमेकर्ज परस्परा ॥ पातिकम् ॥ विभक्तिस्वरानम्वरो बलीयानिति वक्तव्यम् ।। पा० ॥ विभक्तिनिमित्तस्वराधनस्वरो बलीयानिति वक्तव्यम् ॥ 
158. A word is, with the exception of one syll able, unaccented. 
That is, only onc syllable in a word is accented, all the rest are anudatta or unaccented. This is a Paribhasha or inaxim of interpretation with regard to the laws of accent. Wherever an accent-be it acute (udatta) or a circuinflex (svarita)-is ordained with regard to a word, there this maxim must be applied, to make all the other syllables of that word unaccented. The word TTT means 'having an anudatta vowel'. What is the one to be cxccpted ? That one about which any particular accent has been taught in the rules here-in-after given. Thus VI. I. 162 teaches that a root has acute accent on the final. Therefore, with the exception of the last syllable, all the other syllables are unaccented. Thus in train the acute accent is on a, all the rest arc unaccented. The root accent is superseded by accent, thus 
ite has acutc accent on a 11 The HT accent is superseded by an accent, as लुनीतः, has accent on ता॥ The तस् accent is superseded by माम् accent, as लुनीतस्तराम् ।। 
आगमस्य विकारस्य प्रकृतेः प्रत्ययस्य च, पृयक स्वरानिवृत्यर्थ मेकवज पदस्वरः ॥ The words 'with the exception of one syllablc' show that the scparate accent of an augment, or a preparative clement, or a stem or an assix should cease, when a particular accent is taught for a word'. Thus as to (1) augment:-VI. 1.98 teaches “माम् acutely accented is the augment of चतुर and भनड whena sarvanaimsthana affix follows". Thus चत्वारः, अनाहः, here the augment-accent 
1110 
ACCENT. 
[ BK. VI. CI. I. $ 158 
supersedes the accent of the stem, for at was acutely accented on the first syllable, so also SACR, these being formed by the affixes Tea and a respec tively. Thus +377 ( F7 Un V. 58, accent VI. 1. 197 ); mase is thus derived : wat er=377T + TF + Feng, the # is replaced by , and there is vocalisation of of TE VI. I. 15977157 This word is formed by a Krit affix with a karaka upapada, therefore, the second term will retain its original accent, namely the final acute of a root. (VI. 1. 162 and VI. 2. 139 ) may itself is derived by adding the affix (Un IV. 189 ) which makes the word acutely accented on the first syllable. (2). Similarly as to FATT I Vikaraņa):-VII. 1.75 teaches "instead of भास्थ, दधि, सक्थि , and भाक्षि, there shall be भनइ acutely ac. cented when at follows or any of the subsequent terminations beginning with a vowel". This ma will supersede the acute accent of the first s of the stem: as metall The word key is derived from STF by adding the affix 
Tua (Un III. 154) which makes the word accutely accented on the first ( VI. 1, 197). This is an example of FATTI (3) Similarly in terra the accent of the stem taught in VI. 1, 162 'a root has an accent on its final', supersedes the accent of the vikaraņa (III. 1. 28, 3), i. e. the acute accent on at in pra gives way to the root-accent which makes a acute. (4) So also the accent of the affix sup ersedes that of the stem : as an Train, and 80th, which are formed by the affix punt (III. 1. 96) here VI. 1, 185 debars the accent of the root (VI. 1. 162). 
The determination of the proper accent of a word depends upon con sidering the various rules that have gone to form it, and the sequence of those rules, c. g. a latter rule (TC) superseling a prior rule, a nitya rule supcrscding an anitya rule, an antaranga superscding a bahiranga, an apavada rule super seding an utsarga rule. But another test is, what is the remaining rule that applies after giving scope to all. A rule, that in spite of another rule, finds scope or activity, bars that former rule. Thus tintura I It is derived from 19 root, which as a root has accent on the syllable (VI. 1. 162). When the affix . is added to it by III, 1. 28, the word becomes arira and it takes the accent of the affix (II1. 1. 3), i. e. the accent now falls on 9T; but now comes rule Ill. 1. 32 which says that a word taking the affix re is a root. Thus frarå gets the designation of root (Hr), and thus takes the accent of a dhatu (VI. 1. 162), and the accent falls on all 
The rule is that except one special accent taught in a sötra the other syllables take anudatta. Therefore, where there is a conflict of rules, the accent is guided by the follwing maxim: "ofarurat Tara FTSTEYT arquatu ' || namely (1) the sequence, a succeeding rule setting aside a prior rule (2) a Nitya rule is stronger then Anitya, (3) Antaranga stronger than Bahiranga, ( 4 ) the Apavada is stronger then Utsarga. When all these are exhausted, as we have illustrated above, then we apply the rule of afarag | What is this rule? To quote the words of Kasika: यो हि यस्मिन् साने शिष्यते स तस्य माधको भवाते "that which 
BK. VI. CH. I. $. 158) 
ACCENT. 
IIII 
docs remain and must last in spite of the presence of another, debars such other". Thus in gara; here the gruperFTT: "the accent of the affix" (III. 1. 3) by which the acute is on the first syllable of the affer is an apavâda to the WIDETE (VI. 1, 192) by which the final of a dhatu is acute, and it debars the dhâtu-accent; but this affix-accent is in its turn debarred in the case of deriva tive verbs formed with affixes, by the rule of afarge, because even ofter the addition of the asfix, these words retain the designation of dhatu. Similarly in a ThyTN:, "The son of him whose upper garment (uttarásanga) is of black color--the Son of Baladeva" the Bahuvrihi-accent (VI.2.1) being an apavada to Samasa-accent (VI. 1.223), debars the samâsa-accent; but this Bahuvrihi-accent is in its turn debarred by the rule of afarens when a further compound is formed and the final word is a compound only and not a Bahuvrihi. Though the accent of the Vikarana is a arafas, yet it does not debar the Sarvadhâtuka accent (VI. 1. 186). Thus in gata:, the accent of the vikarana o does not dobar the accent of all 
vårt: The 4-accent is stronger than the case-affix accent. Thus in wah:. here the accent of te vibhakti aster faz (VI. 1. 166 ) though afarre is debarred by 7 accent taught in VI. 2. 2, for Negative compounds are Tat purusha. 
Vårt:--The accent of 2 is stronger than the accent of that which is caused or occasioned by a vibhakti. Thus IT: 11 Here the augment ** in geit is occasioned because of the case-affix, for it is added only then when a Sarvanama casc-affix follows (VII. 1.98). This opt is udatta (VI. 1.98). But this udatta is superseded by the accent of the Negative particle. 
Why do we say 'in the body of a pada'? In a sentence, every word will retain its accent. As ! Fran T H "O Devadatta, drive away the white cow". The word qe is in fact uscd in this sâtra in its secondary scnse, namely that which will get the designation of qe when completed; had it meant the full ready inade pada, this word would not have been repeated in 
IT sotra (VIII. 1. 16, 17). Tlad a full 'pada' been meant, the incongruity would arise in the following. The word *** is acutcly accented on thc first as belonging to arifa class (Phit II. 15), adding the feminine affix site to it by its belonging to virufe class, we get ger, which will retain its acute on the first because it is not technically a 9 11 But it is not so, the word art has anuda tta accent on the first syllablc (Phit II, 15), and hence we can apply the s affix to it by IV. 2. 44, thus tr i = pall Similarly the word omfort formed from ** (belonging to Gramádi class Phit II. 15), with, the affix fə (V. 2. 115) and the feminine silali Ir liere the afhx grā being udatta causes all the rest syllables anudatta, just at the very moment of its application, without seeing whicther the word was a pada or not, then the word of being anudattadi would have taken 49, and therefore its exception is proper in the farm class 
1112 
END-ACUTE 
[ BK. VI. Cu I. $ 160 
(IV. 2. 38). But if the anudatta-hood of the remaining syllables were to follow after a word had got the designation of qt, then the word oft would remain acutely accented on the first, and its enumeration in IV. 2. 38 would be useless. 
marcatat ant sa FEIT: 11 898 11 Tetra || , strera, esti, atrai, 37:11 
वृत्तिः ॥कर्षतेर्धातोराकारवतश्च घमन्तस्यान्त उदानो भवति ॥ 
159. A stem formed with the Krita-affix go has the acute accent on the end-syllable, if it is forined from the root कृष (कर्षति) or has a long आ in it. 
Thus ***, 9ri, caroti, trati, 78, pp 11 This is an exception to VI. 1, 197 by which affixes having an indicatory # have acute accent on the first syllable. The word en is used in the aphorism instead of , to indicate that 
y of Bhvadi gaña is affected by this rule, and not $c-gra of Tudadigaņa. The word *: derived from Tudádi at has acute accent on the first syllable. 
358lciai II 880 ll Tata Il segretara, 11 g: || 488 H TTHT và sang Il 
. 160. The words goes &c. have acute accent on the last syllable. 
Thus 1. 795, 2. tites, 3. 975*, 4. **: 11 These arc formed by yg, and would have taken acute-accent on the first. 5. *:, 6. * are forined by op affix (111. 3. 61) which being grave (I11. 1. 4), these words would have taken the accent of the dhatu (VI. 1. 162), i. e, acute on the first syllable. Some read but also here. 7. gd: is derived from yx by 1, affix, tlic non causing of guņa is irregular, and the word means 'a cycle of tine', 'a part of a carriage'. In other scnscs, the forin is gia: # 8. 07*: -(63); is forinel by 9, and has this accent when it mcans 'poison', in other senses, the acute is on the first syllable. 9. arti, ai, qe: (:), and 77:, FITOT II These words are formed by T by III. 3. 121. When denoting instrument (C) they take the above accent, when denoting te the accent falls on the first syllable. 10. FTITU , e. g. grieša, iša, TI 11, in: First, the stotra means Sama Veda, the word aat: occurring in the Sama Veda has acutc on the last: in other places, it has the accent on the middle. 12. Wg Ti, thc pt has end-acute whicn meaning 'a cave', otherwise when sormed by atq affix it has acute on the first. 13. Aparater fratelang, thus *:, :, in other scnscs, the acute is on the first. 14. 9779 HTTP , c. 8. ITA:, 1978: 11 Some read the limi tation of Tarief into this also. 15. AYATTHUT: (Trier) 11 These are form ed by पम्, भक्ष though a ण्यन्त root is here घमन्तं ।। 
BK. VI. Ch. I. § 161 ) 
END-ACUTE. 
II13 
1 755, 2 yers, 3 753, 4 374, 5 T4, 64(4), 7 goe, 8 metra, 
yti, (red) acŪ, 10 Utgefa (afegt, fint, qft), 11 gafa: FIT 12 RTW TTI, 13 starar ritien, 14 27HTJTAT (1917TITHU*) , 15 774, भोगमन्थाः (भक्षमन्धभोगदेहाः)॥ 
___ अनुदात्तस्य च यत्रोदात्तलोपः॥ १६१॥ पदानि ॥ अनुदात्तस्य,च,यत्र, उदात्त 
: वृत्तिः ॥ उशन इति वर्तते । यस्मिन्ननुशने परत उदात्तो लुप्यते तस्यानुशनस्थाविरुवात्तो भवति । 
161. An unaccented vowel gets also the acute accent, when on account of it the preceding acute is elided. 
The word udatta is understood here. Thus *+=ar # The word Art has acute on the last, when the unaccented (anudatta) te is added to it, the of is elided (VI. 1. 148), the anudatta į becomes udatta. So also gru + 1x = 4: (VII. 1. 88), gfu+g-gì, gruq+r=qutu The it has acute on the last. So also कुमुद + इमतुप्- कुमुद्दान् (IV. 2. 87), नडन, तस्वत् ॥ The words our &c, are end-acute, and the affix #7 (7) is anudatta (III. 1. 4). 
Why 'an anudatta vowel gets &c'. Observe STIF: + 47 9 : 11 (Ie arra IV. 4. 76). Here though af is end-acute ( VI. 2. 144 formed by 097 with gati ) it is followed by # which is svarita .(VI. 1. 185), this svarita causes the lopa of #udatta: but it does not itself become ucâtta. No, this is not a proper counter-example. For by the general rule of accent VI. 1. 158, when onc syllable is ordained to be udatta or svarita, all the other syllables of that word become anudatta. Therefore when is taught to be svarita, all the other syllables ( likcx) will become anudatta. So there is no lopn of udatta when comes. The word 97807 is used to indicate that the initial anudatta becomncs ulatta. Ilad anudatta not been used, the sâtra would liave been 
EFTTT, which would mean of FT 97; Jiran akura STTT , for the anuvritti of 37 would then be read from the last. There would then be anomaly in the case of मा हि धुक्षाताम् , and माहि धुनाथाम् || From the root दुह we have formed धुक्षाताम and धुनाथाम् in the Aorist Atmanepada,dual. दुह +बस+भाताम -दुर+स् (VII. 3.72)+भाताम् ॥ Here भाताम् causes the elision of the udatta भ of it Therefore the final of war, would be udatta, which is not desired, The augment is not added because of HT, had it been added, the at would have been udatta (VI. 4. 71). Had fe not been given, then also the whole of Extrait would have become anudatta in C # because or fagsras: (VIII. 1. 28). Scc VIII. 1. 34 (r ). Why have we used the word in the satra? If it was not employed, then the subsequent anudatta may be such which would not have caused the clision of the previous udatta; such udátta being elided by some other operator, and still such anudatta would have becomc udalta. Thus in sofa, HTAT, HITET: 11 Here yra: is plural of Tha: 11 The word ophy is end acute and this acute (3T) was clided in thc plural, before the asfix a was added. 
1114 
END-ACUTE. 
[ BK. VI. CH. I § 165. 
The elision here is not caused by wy, but is a subject of te (not fame but fora). Therefore 7 does not become udatta, which would have been the case, had to not been used. Ar 
Trafa ya II The gotra affix was elided prior to the adding of the case-ending. Why do we say "when an udatta is elided"? Observera + (IV. 1. 104) - II The seminine of this will be **+ * (IV. 1. 73-*111 Here fcauses the elision of auodatta 8 of 7, and hence remains unchanged. So also opt of a 
grat: If P&P ll Tela Ilmat:, (, 3579:) || वृत्तिः ॥ अन्त इत्येव । धातोरन्त उतानो भवति ॥ 
162. A root has the acute on the end-syllable. The word era is understood here. Thus terra, pria, mutira, irrhia, sifat It Fara: 11 €311 Tata Il farc:, (fra: 3G14:) n वृत्तिः ॥ धितो ऽन्त उदानो भवति ॥ 
163. A stem (formed by an affix or augment or substitute) having an indicatory 7, gets acute on the end syllable. 
Thus itula, TETA, Tn. These are formed by gre III. 2. 161. So also gozat: by Il. 4. 70 where the substitute gfony is employed. To s is added to in the sense of #4, then is added the femininc affix it, thus airsoft has middle-acute. The descendants of Kundini will be carrogra: (by Try of Gargadi). The plural of Kauņdinya will be formed by eliding and substi tuting F103916 for the remaining portion. In the cases of affixes having an indicatory 9, the acute accent falls on the final, taking the stem and the affix in an aggregate. Thus EYS: | The affix a5 is one of those few affixes which are really prefixes. (V. 3. 68 The accent will not, therefore, fall on 5, but on the last syllable of the whole word compounded of the prefix + the base. So also with the affix *. It is added in the midile of the word, but the accent will fall on the end; as Jes (V. 3. 71). 
af TTET II 88 11 na llarg TET, (377, 17:) || वृत्तिः ।। चित्त इत्येव । चितस्तद्धितस्यान्त उदात्तो भवति ॥ 
164. A stem formed with a Tuuldhita-affix having an indicatory a, has acute on the end syllable. 
Thus alsstruat: formed by the ashx 957 (IV. 1. 98). $334+ 5+ ज्य-कौजायन्य: dual कामायन्या, pl. कोजायनाः (ज्य being elided by II. 4.62, and thus giving scope to accent). In this affix there are two indicatory letters 
and #; they has only one function, naincly, regulating the accent according to this rule, while s has two functions, one to regulate accent by VI.1, 197,and another to cause Vșiddhi by VII. 2. 117. Now arises the question, should the word get the accent ore or of 11 The present rule declares that it should get 
AK. VI. CH. 1 $ 1671 
END-ACUTE 
1 
Mh 
the accent of and not of sy, for the latter finds still a function lest to it, while if was to regulate the accent, would have no scope. 
enak: # 8644 11 fula: 11 
i af TI Mf27fu fimm wara li 
165. A stem formed by a Taddhita affix having an indicatory 4, has acute accent on the end syllable. 
Thus argua: formed by me (IV. 1. 99), so also ugrunt: 1 Similarly *, * formed by **(IV. 4. 1). auxit : 11488 dl vara ut faepi, ri, (8, Taru:) ! : la FIFE TATT UTTIT TE SI 
106. The Nominative plural (FR) of ae has Acute accent on the last syllable. 
Thus farmersfaa il This debars the Svarita accent ordained by VIII. 2.4 The word taga (feminine of VII. 2. 99) meaning three' is always plural. There are 110 singular or dual cases of this numeral; of the seven plural cases, the accusative plural will have acute on the final by VI. 1. 174; the remaining cases (Instrumental, Dative. Ablative, Genitive and Locative) have affixes beginning with a consonant, and by VI. 1. 179 they will be udatta. Thus the only case not covered by any special rule is (nom. pl); which would have been Svarita, but for this rule. If we be the only case not provided for, then merely saying fana: would have sufficed to make the rule applicable to i only, why has then it been employed in the satra? 
This is done, in order that in compounds, whicre fan may come as a subordina. te member, and where singular and dual endings will also be added, this rule will not apply. Had Fx been not used in tois satra, then in the case of simple far there would be no harm, but when it is seconed member in a compound there would be anomaly. Thus Haraat would have become end-acntc. But that is not desired. It is svarita on the final by VIII. 2.4. 
T: T II €5 l era || :, (03/y:) दृत्तिः ॥ चतुरः शासि परतो ऽन्त उहाको भवति ।। 
167. The word uit, followed by the accusative plural, has acute accent on the last syllable. 
Thus at479 the accent is on T!! The feminine of war is a (VII. 2. 99), which has acrte accent on the first (VII. 2. 99 Vårt), and its accusative plural will not have accent on the last syllable, This is so, because 
has acute on the first, as formed by re affix. Ils substitute we will also be so, by the rule of Foray! The special enunciation of 
W T with regard to me in the Vartika U faransit (VII. 2. 99) indicates that the 
12 
ELDO 
P 
16 
END-ACUTE. 
[ BK. VI. Cl. I $169 
present rule does not apply to चतसृ॥ Another reason for this is as follows: चतम + शम् - चतन+शाम ॥ Now comes the present Satra ; here, however, ther substitute of being stharivat, will prevent the udatta formation of the sy of m; nor will be considered as final and take the acute, as there exists no vo wels but a consonant which cannot take an accent. As चतसः पश्य ॥ Pro fessor Bohtlingk places the accent thus चतुरैः, Pro. Max Muller चतुरः ॥ I have followed Prof. Max Muller in interpreting this sutra; for Bohtlingk's interpre tation would make the ending पास accented, and not the final of चतुर ॥ 
सावकाचस्तृतीयादिर्विभक्तिः ॥ १६८ ॥ पदानि ॥ सौ, एकाचः, तृतीयादिः, विभक्तिः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ साविति सप्तमीबहुवचनम्य सुशनस्य महणम् । तब सौ व एकाच् समात्परा हतीयादिविभक्ति रुदात्ता भवति ।। 
___168. The case-affixes of the Instrumental and of 
the Locative Plural is monosyllabic. 
The word (locative of g) refers to the y of the Locative plural. Thus वाचा, पाभ्याम्, पम्भिा, वाग्भ्यः, याता, याभ्याम्, यार्षिः॥ Why do we say in the Locative plural'? Observe tatt, ta 11 Why do we say 'monosyllabic? Ob serve हारणा, गिरिणा, राजसु ॥ Why do we say the Instrumentals and the rest'' Observe पाँची, पांचः ।। Why do we say "the case-endings (विभक्तिः )?" Observe पाक्तरा, वाक्तमा ॥ The plural of the Locative being taken in the shtra, the rule does not apply to pay and eara, as in the plural of the Locative they liave more than one syllable, though in singular locative their stem has one syllable. 
अन्तोदात्तादुत्तरपदादन्यतरस्यामनित्यसमासे ॥ १६९ ॥ पदानि ॥ अन्तोदात्ता तू, उत्तरपदातू, अन्यतरस्याम, आनित्यसमासे ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ एकाच इति वर्तते, तृतीयादिविभक्तिरिति च । नित्यशब्दः स्वर्यते । तेन नित्याधिकारविहितः स. मासः पर्युदस्यते । नित्यसमासादन्यत्रानित्यसमासे यदुत्तरपरमन्तोदात्तीकाच तस्मात्परातृतीयादिविभक्तिरन्य तरस्यामुदात्ता भवति ॥ 
169. The same casc endings may optionally have the acuto accent, if the monosyllabic word stands at the end of a compound, and has acute accent on the final, when the compound can be casily unloosened. 
The phrases "एकाचः" and तृतीयादिविभक्तिः are understood here also. The nitya or invariable compounds are excluded by this rule. Thus grate or परमवाची, परमवान or वाचे; परमवायः or "वाचः ॥ So also परमत्वचा or "बच &c. According to VI. 1. 223, the compounds have acute accent on the final: that rule applies in the alternative when the case-affixes are not acute and gives us BK. VI. CII. I $ 171.] 
END-ACUTE. 
TIIV 
the alternative forms. Why do we say 'is acutely accented on the finalist Observe अवाषा, सुवाचा, सुस्वचा ॥ These are Tatpurusha compounds and by VI. 2. 2. the first term of the compound retains its original accent. Why have we used the word 'standing at the end of a compound' when the word AREA indicated that the compound was meant ? Had we not used the word TTTT परात, the aphorism would have stood as, अन्तोदात्तादन्यतरस्यामनित्यसमासें 'In a loose compound having acute on the final, the above affixes are acute, if the com pound consists of a monosyllable'. The word party will thus qualify the compound and not the second member of the compound, which is intended. And thus the rule will apply to FT (97 *) Ins. ist, mits : &c, and not to compounds having more than one syllable. Why do we say 'in loose com pounds'? Observe Hamar, HAT These words form invariable (nitya) compounds by II. 2. 19, and by VI. 2. 139, the second member retains its original accent, which makes fe udatta. 
*2550 FTSATHerah Il peu ll qila olan seta, Eger, THRITA FUTOTU I वृत्तिः । मञ्चेः परा ऽसर्वनामस्थानविभनिरुशता भवाति छन्सि विषये ॥ 
170. In the Chhandas, the case-endings other than the sarvanamasthana, get the acute accent when coming after all 
In the Vedas, a stem ending in the word 35€, has the acute not only on the affixes previously mentioned, but on the accusative plural affix also. Thus the pret Huff: (Rig I. 84. 13). Here the word had accent on ft by VI. 1. 222, but by the present satra, the accent falls on the case-affix II Though the anuvritti of "Instrumentals and the rest" was understood here, the word asarvanamasthana has been used hero to include the ending ug also. As VĀTET ET TETT 11 
FSTETETT TÅET: Il plegg Il Tarrat ll 58, H, alfa, ag, ga, &, 
: 11 #: 11 FETTETE TI TITAT ETT STARFATTET AFKEETT HATI 
171. The same (asarvanamasthåna) case-endings have the acute accent, when the stem ends in ate, also after 
74, after 97 &c (upto fakt VI. 1. 63), after a, ġa, # and fra 
The st is the substitute of the stof i (VI. 4. 132) and not the face taught in VI. 4. 19 &c). Thus , Tool, but not in OTT (Ins. sing of भक्षयू: derived by : substitution of a in अक्षदिव VI. 4. 19&c). इदम्-माभ्याम्, एभिः The anuvritti of " ƏTQTTTTT" is unsderstood here, therefore, when the word 
IT18 
END-ACUTE. 
[ BK. VI. CII. 1 $ 173 
i is not end-acute, this rule will not apply. When, therefore, there is anvadesa under II. 4. 32, the final being anudatta, this rule does not apply, as well a मिपुणमधीत | The पदादि words are पद, दत् &c upto निश् in VI. 1. 63. Thus निपचतुरी 31%, a Tarra, 87: 959, m*:, :,jai, garn, ga, gei, gĦ", tha: 494, trata, गर्भिः , विवः, विवों, दिव| As regards the other cases of दिव the accent is governed by VI. 1. 183. The word area and those which follow it, in VI. 1. 63, are not governed by this rule because they consist of more than one vowel, and the anuvritti of Pat: is understood here from VI. 1. 168. When these become monosyllable by the elision of (penultimate), then the vibhakti will be udatta by VI. 1. 161 even after these. The case endings after these words are of course, anudatta, except when these words become monosyllabic:As aterai बद्धो मपि कक्ष भासान, मत्स्यं न दीन उनि नियन्तं ॥ । " at grata il plezil Etrêt Il Tut:, Hit II वृत्तिः ॥ भष्टनो घन्तिाइसर्वनामस्यानविभनिहताना भवति । 
172. The asarvanâmasthâna case-endings after et eight', have acute accent, when it gets the form an II ... The word men has two forins in the acc. pl. and the other cases that follow it, namely set and are 11 The affixes of acc. pl. &c are udåtta aster the long form met and not after she || Thus tent: opposed to the fato, en con. अष्टभ्यः, अष्टासु con. मष्टसु॥ The word भष्टैन् has acute on the last syllable, as it belongs to the class of earre words (l'hit I. 21); and by VI. 1. 180 the accent would have been on the penultimate syllable. This rule debars it. The use of gror indicates that the word 796 has two forms, and the substitution of long s taught in VII, 2.84, thus becomes optional, because of this indication. Otherwise the employment of the word art would be useless, for by VII. 2. 84 which is couched in general terms, BT67 would always end in a long vowel. There is another use of the word fora, namely, it makes the word ster with long w 
VII. 2. 84) to get also the designation of 11 For if TETT was not to be called a gt, like me, then there would be scope to the present sûtra in the case of TEC while it would be debarred in the case of Tea without long BTC, by the subse quent rule VI. I, 180 which applies to T word, and hence the employment of the word dat would become useless. 
TO GAT THE Il pou li tra il 7:, * #:,761, वृत्तिः ॥ अन्तारानाशिति वर्तते । मनुम् यः शतप्रत्ययस्तरन्तावन्तोशत्तात्परा नही मनादिविभक्तिरसर्वना. मस्थानमुशत्ता भवति । till Faraq cerul 
173. After an oxytone Participle in ara the fomi mine suffix $,(nadi) and the case endings beginning with vowels 
BK. VI. CH. 1. §. 175.] 
1119 
wwwwwwwwwwwwwwwww 
w 
44 
i 
A 
STUDE 
YI 
i 
(with the exception of strong cases) have acute accent, when the participial affix has not the augment (i. e. is not ). 
The word spärrara 'after an oxytoned word' is understood here. Thus O , wat higaar, gaur, gant gaat, omnt from any and gati 
Why do ivc say "not having the augment 347" Observe , # Here also by VI. 1. 186, after the root Ir which has an indicatory , in the Dhatupasha, being written ay, the sarvadhatuka affxv (STT) is anu data. This anudatta 47, coalescing with the udatta p of (VI. I. 162), becomes udatta (VIII. 2. 5); and Rule VIII. 2. I not being held applicable here, the Participle gets the accent, and not the feminine asfix. Why do we say "a (feminine in $) word and before vowel-endings?' Observe arm, 74 
94 &c. Ir the participle is not an oxytone, the rule docs not apply. As boat, kare Here the accent is on the first syllable by VI. 1. 189. 
Vårt ---- The words yeat and ment should also be included : as grants ht, , pat 1 
174) Fall 2098 11 wana III, qui, ga, garai স্থালি স্বাবল লাখ গ গজাগি নামখানা মহিলা সংস্থা। গান্ধি। নামজ সু স্বী বসু। 
174. The sanc endings have the acute accent, when for the acutely accente final vowel of the stem, a semi-vowel is substitutol, and which is preceded by a consonant. 
Thus + ; ', rit", ei, garant, fextu pan. TIETII All these are 74 ending words and have consequently acute accent on the final (VI. 1. $63). Why 'acávely accented final vowel is repiaced &co? Observe , , , , formed by ma having acute on the first syllable. Why do we say . preceded by a consonant? Observe praat-graat na (VIII. 2. 4) 
A Weat fa : " This compound with yg gets udatla on the final by VI. 2. 175. in making the Instrumental singular of 
7, the 7 is replaced by , but as this is preceded by a vowel, the aflix gets the svarita accent. 
Vårt: The rule applies when the stem ends in though not in a semi-vowel, as at, ana 
Rię art: il 2494 II ana | 77, 375, yrat: 11 Tlf: I TRY 4 777 EVERTHITU SHQETHYTT I : 
175. But not so, when the vowel is of the fomi nine asfix (IV. 1. 66), or the final of a root. 
After the semi-vowel substitutes of the udalla m (IV. 1. 66 ) or of the udatta final vowels of the root, when preceded by a consonant, the weak case 
'X 
re 
!120 
VIBHATI-ACCENT. 
[BK. VI. CH, I. §. 176 
endings beginning with a vowel do not take the acute accent. Thus agro, Nga, gott, fre great from any, which has acute accent on 3, because is udatta (III. 1. 3), and the ekadesa of it, when it combines with the preceding vowel is also udatta (VIII. 2. 5). The o substituted for before the ending BTT, is a semi-vowel substitute of an udatta (9171819) the affix after it would have become udåtta by the last sätra, but not being so, the general rule VIII. 2. 4 applies and makes it svarita. Let us take an example of a semi-vowel substitute of the vowel of a root (47-49):-una from High 
como formed by far asfix, the second member of the coinpound retaining its original accent, namely, the oxytone, the semi-vowel being substituted by VI, 4. 83 before the vowel case-endings. 
हस्वनुझ्या मतुए ॥ १७६ ॥ पदानि ॥ हस्व, नुडभ्याम्, मतुए ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ अन्तोदात्तादित्येव । इस्वान्तावन्तोदात्तान्नुटबपरोमतुर उदात्तो भवति ॥ बानिकम् ॥ ऐशब्दाच मतुप उदात्तत्वं वनव्यम् ॥ था०॥ध प्रतिषेधो वक्तव्यः ।। 
176. The otherwise unaccented gra (aa) takes the acute accent, when an oxytoned stem ends in a light yowel, or the affix has before it the augmenta (VIII. 2. 16). 
The word Barra is understood here also. Thus far, TĀTE, कतमान, हर्तमान् ॥ So also vhen मतुप takes नुह, as अक्षण्वता, शीर्षण्वता Here by VII. 1. 76, the word HTN takes wag and becomes BT67, then is added te by VIII. 2. 16, and we have STT TAOTLU The preceding z is elided. When the stem is not oxytone (antodatta) this rulc does not apply: as agri The word g has acute on the first syllable, as it is formed from an with the affix (Uņ I. 10) which is fara (Un 1.9) so the retains its anudatta here. So also in the case of **, the affix does not become acute, though the word that has acute on the final as the intervening a makes the 3 of heavy when the affix is added: the general maxim galeri S ITUATT does not apply here, because the yery fact that is only taken as an exception, shows this. 
Vårt:--The affix it becomes acute after the heavy vowel of ? : as भारेवान रयिरस्यास्ति ॥ There is vocalisation of य of रयि, as arr then substitution of one, as t, then guņa, i ! 
Vårt :—The prohibition should be stated after f#: as fiteatartars पाक्या भवन्ति । 
नामन्यतरस्याम् ॥ १७७॥ पदानि ॥ नाम, अन्यत्तरस्याम् ॥ वृतिः ॥ इस्वग्रहणमनुवर्तते मतुमहणं च । तेन मतुपा इस्वी विशेष्यते । मतुपि यो इस्वस्तदन्तावन्तोदा जादन्यतरस्यां नाम् उदात्तो भवति । 
177. After an oxytoned stem which ends in a fight vowel, the genitive ending Ty has optionally the acute accent, 
BK. VI. CH. 1 $ 179.] 
VIBILAKTI-ACCENT. 
1121 
| Thus wীনী or মীলা, খায়নী or খালা, জনগাঁ or গান (see VII 1. 54). It might be objected, that Ta is not preceded by a short vowel, as is shown in the above examples, then how can the anuvritti of it'short or light vowel be read into this sūtra ? The reply is that the anuvritti of 70% should also be read into this sätra, the meaning being "a stem which has a light vowel when followed by any, will cause the an acute, though the light vowel may become heavy before this ending, in its present form". Other wise, this rule will apply to forms like fagora, argarin having light vowels before in and not to the forms above given. Why do we read fra with the 
augment (VII. 1. 54) and not ? The rule will not apply to iRin Tum which get the acute on the final by VI, 1. 174. Why do we say 'after a stem ending in a light vowel'? Observe arctora (the word it is end-acute by Uņ III. 138 and so is 6710 by VI. I. 161). Why do we say after an oxytoned word? Observe qurt, larg the words vg and have acute on the first syllable. 
gume ago Il pecll na 11 g , grate, 11 वृत्तिः ॥धन्ताच्छन्नास विषये नामुदात्तो भवति बहुलम् ॥ 
178. In the Chhandas, the ending Fry has di versely the acute accent after the feminine affixu 
Thus देवसमानाम् भभिभजतीनाम् , बहीनाम् पिता ॥ Sometimes it does not take place, as imagit; F iat 487: 11 
rupit Eata: 11 pe II a II , FT, 793*, Ener: वृत्तिः ॥ मन्तोदात्तादित्येतनिवृत्तम् । पदसंज्ञकम्यस्वि चतुररात्येताभ्यां च परा हलादिविभक्तिरुतात्ता भवति । 
179. The case-cndings beginning with a conson ant, have the acute accent after the Numerals callod og (I. 1. 24), as well as after fa and acro 
The anuvritti of MITTITE ccases, for the present i ule applics even to words like and 417 wlrich are acute on the initial by Phit II. 5. Thus qora, :, 77, hang, tarira, AFP, forti, terura, Fatira (See VII. 1. 55). Why do we say 'before case-affixes beginning with consonants'? Observa 999: 950 (VI. 1. 167 and VII. 2. 99). 
झल्युपोत्तमम् ॥ १८०॥ पदानि ॥ बलि, उपोत्तमम् ॥ वृत्तिः॥ पनिचतुभ्यो या झलादिविभक्तिस्तरन्ते पदे यदुपात्तममुशतं भवति । भिमतीनामन्त्यमुत्तम सस्ता मीपे च यत्तदुपौत्तमम् ॥ 
180. The above numerals, when taking a case affix beginning with a H or #, get the acute accent on the penultimate syllable, when the said numerals assume a form consisting of three or more syllables. 
1122 
ACCENT. 
[ BK. VI. C1. 1.§. 182 
- 
- 
---- 
The numerals are, for and are when ending in a case-affix beginning with a man consonant, form a full word (97), in such a word the penultimate syllable gets the acute accent. The very word penultimate shows that the qy must be of three syllables at least. Thus tini, fa, fal, ait: it Why do we say 'beginning with * and '? Observe, ara, 
A . 11 Why do we say 'the penultimate syllable'? Observe 751**, 35: 
farT HTETTA II 848 11 TIG II TYTTT, TTTH II त्तिः ॥ पशिचतुभ्यों या सलादिर्विभक्तिस्तदन्त पदे उपांत्तममुहात्तं भवति विभाषा भाषायां विषये ॥ 
181. In the Secular language this is optional. 
The the case-affixes coming after the above numerals , fo and tent may make the words so formed take the acute on the penultimate op tionally, in the spoken ordinary language. Thus offri or jau": # In the alternative VI. 1. 179 applies. So also aprir: or warm", la par: or latert 
a tiga tarqauft/ 
5 56747:11 822 11 anâ l 7, tit, art, it tauf, ITE, 3 , 5, T: Il TA: 7 entro et qui uimi trg HE C R E # 9 arall 
182. The foregoing rules from VI. 1. 168 down wards have no applicability after it, and save and words ending in them; nor after a stem which before the case ending of the Nominative singular bas y or sur, por after 1751, or after a stern ending in 250, nor as well as after 57 and all 
Thus star, pat, fier | Here by VI. 1. 168, the case-endings would have got otherwise the accent, which is however prohibited. So also utar, on and un ll Here VI. 1. 169 is prohibited. So also far, ta, zara, परमशुना, परमशुन and परमश्वभ्याम् ॥ The word साववर्णः (सौ भवर्णः) means 'what has or at before (ist. sing.)" Thus gry:, nogi, nay: ll 75:- {rs, I, TUTT II (The word राज is formed by किप् affix): भङ् =अञ्च् + विन् ; the prohibition applies to that form of this word wherein the nasal is not elided (VI. 4. 30). Thus , freau Where the nasal is elided, there the case-ending must take the accent; as gri, gre amare il are is also a fare formed word. Thus ST, SET, SET 6 is derived from x'to do' or from my 'to cut' by fat; as mar and great u Why has the word en been especially mentioned in this sätra, when the rule would have applied to it ei en without such enumeration, because in the Nomi native Singular this word assumes the form me and consequently it is art:? The inclusion of 17 indicates that the elision of it should not be considered asiddha for the purposes of this rule. Therefore, the present rule will not apply to words like T and a which in Nom. Sing, end in at, as ar and foar after the elision of 7 of 73 (VII. 3.94). Thus the Locative Singular of will 
BK. VI. CH. I $ 186.] 
VIRIIAKTI ACCENT. 
II23 
be aft by VI. 1. 168, this prohilition not applying, and the affix or will get udatta after पिता by VI. I. 176 as पितृमान् ॥ But rule VI. I. 176 will be debar red by the present in the case of वृक्षवान् because वृक्ष is a साववर्ण। 
दिवो झल् ॥ १८३॥ पदानि । दिवः, झल् ॥ वृत्तिः॥शिवः परा सलादिविभक्तिनादात्ता भवति ॥ 
183. After दिक् a case-ending beginning with भ or F is unaccented. 
Thus oan, 7: This debars VI. 1. 168, 171. Why do we say ' beginning with aझल् consonant'? Observe दिवा, दिवे ।। 
नृ चान्यतरस्याम् ॥ १८४॥ पदानि ॥ नृ, च, अन्यतरस्याम् ॥ वृत्तिः ।। नृ इत्येतस्मात्परा झलादिविभक्तिरन्यतरस्यां नोवाना भवति ॥ 
184. After a, a case ending beginning with भ or is optionally unaccented. 
___Thus नभिः or नीभः, नृभ्यः, नृभ्यः, न थाम् , नृभ्याम् , नृषु, न ॥ But not so बा, में। 
तितस्वरितम् ॥ १८५॥ पदानि ॥ तित, स्वरितम् , ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ तिस्परितं भवति ।। 
185. An aflix having an indicatory it, is svarita i. c. has circumflex accent. 
___ Thus विकीर्यम् , जिलाध्यम, formed by यत् (III. 1. 97). कार्थम् , हार्यम् with ण्यत् (III. I. 124). This is an exception to III. I. 3 which makes all affixes adyudatta. For exception to this rule see VI. I. 213&c. 
तास्यनुदात्तेन्डन्ददुपदेशाल्लसार्वधातुकमनुदात्तमन्विङोः ॥ १८६॥ पदानि । तासि, अनुदात्तेत् , जिदू, अदुपदेशात, ल, सार्वधातुकम्, अनुदात्तम, अ-दु, इको, ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ तासेरनुदानतोडितो कारान्तोपदेशाध शभात्परं लसार्वधातुकमनुशनं च भवति हुङ् इह इत्य ताभ्यां परं वयित्वा ।। 
'186. The Personal-endings and their substitutes (III. 2. 124-126) are, when they are strvadhatuka (III. 4. 113 &c), unaccentell, after the characteristic of the Peri phrastie future (तास), after a root which in the Dhatupa tha has an unaccented vowel or a (with the exception of KF and 9) as indicatory letter, as well as after what has a finals in thic Grammatical system of Instruction (upadesa). 
___Thus तासि :--कत्ती, कतारी, कतारः, this debars the affix accent (III. I. 3). Anudattct :-as, भास्--आस्ते, वस्-स्ते ॥ डिन्त :-पू- सूते, शी -शेते ॥ भत् उप देशः:-as तुरतः, नुश्तः, पंचतः, पैठतः॥ A root taking शप् (म) is considered as 
1134 
ACCENT. 
[ Bk. VI. C11. 1. $ 139 
taught (upadesa ) as if ending with an 9, as the indicatory letters and a are disregarded on the maxim yaratan (3729476) Thus 247, 
Tara: | The augment gran is added by i VII. 2. 82 which may be ex plained in two ways; first, the augment va is added to the final # of the base (anga) when STT (9777&c) follows; or secondly, the the augment is added to the base (anga) which ends in #, when I follows. In the first case poate becomes part and parcel of 8 and will be taken and included by the enuncia tion of w, and therefore My will mean and include an by having such as on the maxim TTATER attupura Themman "That to which an augment is added denotes, because the augment forms part of it, not merely itsell, but it denotes also whatever results from its combination with that augment". There fore we will not prevent the verb becoming TTT 1. But if secondly man be taken as part of the base which ends in *, then the tyre does not follow an 999999, because # intervenes. But we get rid of this difficulty by considering 7 augment as Bahiranga and therefore asiddha, when the Antaranga opera tion of accent is to be performed. The augment y*(#) in the last two examples consequently does not prevent the application of the rule. Though the affix TFY has an indicatory , yet fera accent (VI. 1. 163) is debarred by this rule, as it is subsequent. 
Why do we say after alfa &c. Observe per: f ic # The vi karaña ng is for (I. 2. 4) with regard to operations affecting the prior term, and not those which affect the subsequent. Therefore though ag is considered as fort for the purposes of preventing the guna of the prior term e, it will not be considered so for the purposes of subsequent accent. Or the word for in this satra may be taken as equal to डिदुपरेप and not the भातिशशिकाइन् like sनु । Why do we use the word upadesa ? So that the rule may apply to , qari, but not to fa, 4: the dual of 79 which ends in a in upadesa. though before aq and it has assuned the form Therefore Rs: su: 11 Why do we use the word (Personal endings)? Observe ite 079771 formed by 1794 added to g(111.2.1 28), which not being a substitute of me, is not a personal ending like 
II Why do we use the word Sarvadhatuka ? Observe faza, fasurit, re शियरे ॥ “Why do we say with the exception of नुड and r? Observe हुनु त, यद ar fra u 
आदिः सिचो ऽन्यतरस्याम् ॥ १८७ ॥ पदानि ॥ आदिः, सिचः, अन्यतरस्याम, वृत्तिः ॥ उदात्त इति वर्तते । सिजन्तस्यान्यतरस्यामादिरुवात्तो भवति ॥ बार्तिकम् ॥ सिच मागदात्तले ऽनिटः पितः पक्षे उदात्तन्वं वक्तव्यम् ॥ 
187. In fea Aorist, the first syllable may option ally have the acute accent. 
The word उदात्त is understood here. Thus मा हि काम, मा हि कार्टीम् ; मा हिलाविष्टाम or मा हिलाविटीम् ॥ In the last example the accent is on पि; and the 
BK. VI. CH. 1. §. 189 ) 
VERB-ACCENT. 
1125 
reason why Af and fe arc used in tliese illustrations, has already been explained in VI. I. 161. The indicatory of the shows that by VI. 1. 163 the acute will be on the otherwisc unaccented augment r, when it takes this augment. The fea being a fe affix will take the augment re (VII. 2. 35 ), and it is a general rule that augments are unaccented; so in the above the would have becn unaccented, and the accent would have been on the final, but for the indi. catory For fore, which otherwise would find no scope. Thus it gets acute. 
Vårt:-An affix having an indicatory ( 79 ) when coining after an Aorist formed by T without the augment (i ) is in one alternative udátta ( in the other, it is pon-acute ). This vārtika restricts the scope of the sotra with regard to an affixcs. Thus we get the following two forms, which otherwise would have onc forin only by dhâtu-accent, namely, acute on the first, for पित is anudatta. Thus माहि कार्षम् or मा हिकार्षम् ॥ But when it takes the 
augment, there are two forins ( ist.) AT FE 74 as a fagom (2nd.) TI hrax accent on (VI. 1. 163). but never ar R MT N When however the augincnt mis added, the accent falls on this augment (VI. 4. 71). 
स्वपादिहिंसामच्यनिटि ॥ १८८॥ पदानि ॥ स्वपादि, हिंसाम, अचि, अनिति ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ लसार्वधातुकग्रहणं यानुवर्तत.तरच्यनिटीति सम्बन्धादिह सप्तम्यन्तं भवति स्वपादीनां हिंसेचाजा. 
ATE FET tai sepateTATTETETT Yarall 
188. The acute accent is optionally on the first syllable when a Personal-ending, being a Sårvadhâtuka tense allix beginning with a vowel, provided that the vowel is not the augment इद, follows after स्वप् &c, or after हिंस ॥ 
The phrascariera in the locative case is understood here. Thus Sarah or Fagfor, afa or warra, fara or f all The accent on the middle falls by thic accent of thc allix III. 1. 3. Why do we say before an allix beginning with a 2000c/? Obscrve arra, foråret 11 Why do we say 'not taking tlıc auginent d' Observe fra and wita: 11 This rule applies to those voirei-beginning affixcs which are डिन् ; it does not apply to स्पानि, हिनसानि ॥ 
37FT FTATAI: 11 848 11 Tetra II T FTATH, SITG: II वृत्तिः ॥ अभ्यस्तानामजादावनिटि लसावधातुके परत भाविरुदात्तो भवति ॥ 
189. The acutc accent falls on the first syllable of the reiluplicate verbs when followed by an affix beginning with a vowel (the voucl being not ) and being a sarvadha tuka personal ending. 
Thus tria, la, furat, inng, ta, try:, stara, strang: Il Before consonant asfixcs: II Bcforc i affixes :- 1. Though thc word of was 
1126 
VERI-ACCENT. 
[ BK. VI. CI. I. S 158 
understood here from the last aphorism, the repetition is for the sake of making this an invariable rule and not an optional rule as those in the foregoing. ___ अनुदात्ते च ॥ १९०॥ पदानि ॥ अनुदाते, च,॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ भविद्यमानीदात्ते च लसावधातुके परतो ऽभ्यस्तानामाविरुवात्तो भवति ।। 
__ 190. Also when the unaccented endings of the three persons in the singular follow, the first syllable of the reduplicate has the acute. 
The endings fag fhg and fire are anudatta (III. 1. 4). This sätra applies to those personal endings which do not begin with a vowel. Thus terra, जहाति, धाति, जिहीते, मिमीते ॥ The word भनुदात्त is to be construed here as a Bahuvrihi i. e. an affix in which there is no udatta vowel, so that the rule may apply when a portion of the affix is elided or a semivowel is substituted : as मा हिमपात, and धात्या॥ 
सर्वस्य सुपि ॥ १९१॥ पदानि ॥ सर्वस्य, सुपि ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ सर्वशब्दस्य भुपि परत भाविरुवाला भवति । वार्तिकम् ।। सर्वस्वरोऽनकच्कस्यति वनव्यम् ॥ 
191. The acute is on the first syllable of Fire when the case-endings follow. 
Thus संवः, सयाः सर्वे ॥ Why do we say when the case-endings follow? Observe सर्वतरः, सर्वतमः the acute is ond || The word सर्व has acute on the final, as it is so taught in the Uñadi list by faremar It thus being anudattadi takes the affix भम् and forms सार्वः (सर्वस्य विकारः) This rule applies even when the case affix is elided in spite of the prohibition of न लुमताइगस्य (I. I.63): as सस्तोमः ।। 
Vast:-The rule does not apply when the affix भकच् is put in : as सर्वः ॥ Here the accent is on the final by चित् accent (VI. I. 163). 
भीहीभृहमदजनधनदरिद्राजागरां प्रत्ययात्पूर्व पिति ॥ १९२॥ पदानि ॥ भी. ही. भू, हु, मद, जन, धन, दरिद्रा, जागराम, प्रत्ययात्, पूर्वम्, पिति ॥ 
त्तिः॥ भी ही भूहमद जन धन दरिद्रा जाग इत्यतेषामभ्यस्तानां लसावधातुके पिति प्रत्ययात्पूर्वमुरानं भवति॥ 
192. In भी, ही, भू, हु, मदू, जन्, धन्, दरिद्रा, and जागृ, in their reduplicates, the acute accent is, before the sâr vadhatuka unaccented endings of the three persons in singular, (fa), on the syllable which precedes the affix. 
___ This debars the accent on the beginning. Thus विर्भति, जिति , विभाग, 
ममत नः परिज्मा || Here the root मद has diversely taken in the Chhandas the vikarana लु, though it belongs to Divadi class. जर्जनत्, इन्द्रम् ॥ The verb is here 
or the Vedic Subjunctive, so also is the next example. धनत् from धन धान्ये, 
वृतिः ॥ भी ही BK. VI. CI. I. S. 159] 
VERR-ACCENT. 
1127 
the roffa being elided by III. 4. 97, and the augment się being added by III. 4. 94. सधनत, दरिद्राति, जाति ॥ In the case of other verbs we have स्वाति ॥ Before asfixes which have not the indicatory [ (i. e. all endings other than the three singular endings), the accent will be on the first syllable: as pitala #1 
लिति ॥ १९३॥ पदानि ॥ लिति ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ लिति प्रत्ययापूर्वमुदात्तं भवति । 
___ 193. The acute accent falls on the syllable im mediately preceding the affix that has an indicatory ल॥ 
Thus चिकीर्षकः, जिहीर्षक: with the affix ण्वुल् (III. I. 133), भौरिकिंविधम् and ऐषुका भक्तम् with the affixes विधल् and भक्तल् (IV. 2. 54) accent on the कि and रि ॥ 
आदिर्णमुल्यन्यतरस्याम् ॥ १९४॥ पदानि ॥ आदिः, णमुलि, अन्यतरस्याम् ॥ वृत्तिः। णमुलि परतो ऽन्यतरस्यामाविरुवात्तो भवति । 
194. The first syllable may be optionally acute when the absolutive affix ma follows. 
Thus लालूयम् or लोलूयम् ॥ In the reduplicate form लोलू, the second part is unaccented by VIII. 1. 3. The present sätra makes accented. When it is not accented, will get the accent by an accent. This rule is confined to polysyllabic Absolutives, namely to reduplicated Absolutives (VIII. I. 4). 
__अचः कर्तृयकि ॥ १९५॥ पदानि ॥ अचः, कर्तृ-यकि॥ वृत्तिः । उपदेशइति वर्तते । भजन्ता ये उपदेशे धातवस्तेषां कर्तृयकि भन्यसरस्यामाविरुतात्तो भवति । 
195. The roots which are exhibited in Dhatu pâtha with a final vowel, may optionally have the acute on the first syllable, before the affixes of the Passive (यक्), when the sense of the verb is Reflexive. 
The word उपदेश is understood here. Thus लयते or लूपते केदारः स्वयमेव ॥ स्तीर्यते or स्तोते केदारः स्वयमेव ।। When the accent does not fall on the first lable, it falls on य (VI. I. 186).. This rule applies to अम्, सन् , and सन् when they get the form जायते, सायते and खायते; the long भा (VI.4.43) substitute is considered as if thcsc vcrbs vcrc taught in the Dhatupatha with long BT II Thus जायते or जायते स्वयमेव सायते or सायते स्वयमेव सायते or खायत स्वयमेय ।। Why do we say when ending in a vowel'? Observe भियते स्वयमेव ।। Why do we say "when the sense is Reflexive (कर्न)"? Observe लयत केदार देवदत्तन । 
थलि च सेटीडन्तो धा॥ १९६॥ पदानि ॥ थलि, च,सेदि, इडन्तः, वा। वृत्तिः ॥ सेटि थलि इट या उशत्तो भवति अन्तो वा भावि ऽन्यतरस्याम् । 
1128 
VIERB-ACCENT. 
[ BK. VI. C11. 1. $ 199 
196. Before the ending 87 of the Perfect, second person singular, when this ending takes the angment ; thic acute accent falls either on the first syllable, or on this r, or on the personal ending. 
Thus लुलविथ, लुलविथ, लुलविय, and लुलविथ. As थल has an indicatory , the syllable preceding the affix may have also the accent (VI, 1. 193). Thus we get the four forms given above. In short, with gy terinination, the accent may fall on any syllable. When the y is not fire, the accent falls on the root and we have one form only by frase accent (VI. 1. 193) :-uly in 
sfaciliteter il gecell fall fortfa, mai, m a il वृत्तिः । मिति निाते च नित्यमादिरुवात्तो भवति । 
197. Whatever is derived with an affix having an indicatory s4 or W, has the acuto accent invariably on the first syllable. 
Thus गाँN with यम् (IV. I. I05), वासुदेवकः, भैर्जुनका with धुन (IV. 3. 98). This is an exception to III. 1. 3. When the affixes are, however, elided, the word loses this accent, i, e, the affix does not leave its mark behind, as it generally does by I. 1. 63. Therefore mati, fat, qet: having lost 79. BTT and $7, have lost their accent also. 
आमन्त्रितस्य च ॥ १९८ ॥ पदानि ॥ आमन्त्रितस्य, च ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ भामान्त्रितस्याविरुवातो भवति । 
198. The first syllable of a Vocativo gots tho acute accent. 
Thus !, !, TETIT ! This debars tlic final accent ordained by VI. 2. 148. Though the affix may be elided by a gara word (an, ge or 9), yet thic effect of the affix l'einains bchinil in spite of I. 1, 63. As orýcr 
Toy! Traga! 11 
Fant: Heatherà il pell Taifa il pro, #2:, weather 11 वृत्तिः॥पथिमथिशनावीणारिकाविनिप्रत्ययान्ती प्रत्ययस्वरेणान्तात्ती तयाः सर्वनामस्थाने परत मारि. कात्तो भवति । 
199. The acute accent is on the first syllable of Trata and After when followod by a strong case-ending. 
The words Trime and PTT are derived by the Uñadi affix fat, (IV. 12. and 13) and are oxytone by III. 1. 3. They become adyudatta before strong cases. Thus frer, quht, futai, frut, fut, futa: # Before other cases wc have:98: 9974, : 50 | The accent is on the final by VI. 1. 162, there being elision of the udatta 11 The rule I. 1. 62, about thc reinaining effect of the affix, does not apply here, As ruinas, has acute on the final of the first 
BK. VI. Ch. I. 8 203] 
FIRST-ACUTE. 
1129 
MAR 
A 
- 
- 
- 
- 
word, by retaining its original accent. ___ अन्तश्च तवै युगपत् ॥ २० ॥ पदानि ॥ अन्तः, च, तवै, युगपत, ॥ 
वृत्तिः । विप्रत्ययान्तस्यान्तश्चशम्शविश्व युगपदुदात्ती भवतः। 
200. The Infinitive in ce has the acute on the first syllable and on the last syllable at one and the same tiine. 
Thus alt, at 11 This is an exception to III. 1. 3 by which a of Ft ought to have got the accent, and it also countermands rule VI. 1. 158 by which there can be only a single acute in a single word. 
क्षयो निवासे ॥२०१॥ पदानि ॥ क्षयः, निवासे ॥ वृगिः ॥ क्षयरानो निवास ऽभिधये आयुरात्तो भवति । 
21. The word T has the acute on the first syllable in the sense of house, dwelling'. 
Thus क्षय जागाह प्रपश्यन् ॥ The word is formed by घ affix (III. I. 118) and would have had accent on the affix (III. 1. 3). When not meaning a house we have : क्षयो वर्तते दस्यूनाम् ॥ The word is formed by अच् (III. 2. 31), 
जयः करणम् ॥ २०२॥ पदानि ॥ जयः, करणम् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ जयरामः करणवाची आगुदाना भवति ॥ 
202. The acute accent falls on the first syllable of जय, in the sense of whereby one attains victory'. 
Thus जयोऽश्वः, but otherwisc जयो वर्तते ब्राह्मणानाम् ॥ The formcr जय is by प affix, (III. I. 118) the second by अच् ( HI. 2. 31 ) ॥ 
वृषादीनां च ॥ २०३ ॥ पदानि ॥ वृषादीनाम, च, ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ वृष इत्यवमादीनामाविरुवातो भवति ॥ 
203. The words IT &c have the acute on the first 
syllable. 
Thus I. वृषः, 2. जनः, 3. ज्वरः, 4. महः, 5. हैयः, 6. गयः ॥ These are formed by मर (III. I. 134). The word गय is from गै-गायते, irregularly it is treated as गे। 7. नया, 8. तायः, 9. तय:, 10. चया, 11. अमः, 12. वेगः, 13. साः, 14.4: (formed by भय् numbers 8 to I are not in Kasika). सुइ is formed by क (III. I. 135) 15. अंशः, 16. गुहा (forined by: भङ्ग HI. 3. 104). 17. मरणा संज्ञायां संमती भाषकर्मणोः :---- शमः and रणः, 18. मनमः (formed by अच् III. I. 134), I9. शान्ति: formed by कि, 20. कामः, 21. यामः, both formed by धन, 22. भारा, 23. धारा, 24. कारा, (all three formed by गड III. 3. 101), 25. यहः- गोचरादिपु formed by घम् 26. कल्पः , 27. पार: formed by 07, which inay cither takc thc accent indicated by thicallix or by VI. I. 159, 28. पयः, 29. दवः ॥ It is आकृतिगणः || All words which arc acutely accented on the first, should be considerd as belougir.g to this class, if their accent can not be accounted for by any other rule. 
1130 
FIRST-ACUTE. 
[ BK. VI.CH. IS 206. 
वृषः, 2 जना, 3 पर 4 प्रह: 5हया, 6 गया, 7 नयः, 8 ताय , 9 तयः, 10 चयः, ll श्रम:, 12 वेदः, 13 मूदः, 14 भंशः, 15 गुहा, 16 शमरणी संज्ञायां संमती भावकमणोः, 17 मन्त्रः, 18 शान्तिः , 19 कामः, 20 यामः, 21 मारा, 22 धारा, 23 कारा, 24 वहः, 25 कल्पः, 26 पादः 27 पयः, 28 एवः, 29 भाकृतिगण ।। ___ संज्ञायामुपमानम् ॥ २०४॥ पदानि ॥ संज्ञायाम, उपमानम् ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ उपमानशब्दः संज्ञायामापुरात्तो भवति ॥ . 
204. The acute accent falls on the first syllable of that word with which something is likened, provided that it is a name. 
Thusञ्चा , ध्रिका, खरकुटी, ऐसी | All these are उपमान words used as names of the उपमेय (the thing compared). The affix कन् (V. 3, 96) is elided here by V. 3.98. It might be asked when कन् is elided, its mark, namely causing the first syllable to be acute (VI. I. 197), will remain behind by virtue of I. I. 62, where is then the necessity of this satra. The formation of this sätra indi cates that the premor rule is not of universal application in the rules relat ing to accent. 
When the word is not a Name, we have भप्रिमाणवकः ॥ When it is not an upamana we have देवरः (VI. 2. 148). 
निष्ठा च वचजनात् ॥ २०५॥ पदानि ॥ निष्ठा,च,यच, अनात् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ निष्ठान्तं च या संज्ञायां विषये आगुवातं भवति चेताविराकारो न भवति । 
205. A disyllabic Participle in त (Nishtha), when a Name has the acute on the first syllable, but not if the first syllable has an आ ॥ 
Thus thi, fa, 4: 11 This debars the affix accent (III. 1. 3). In non-participles we have देवः, भीमः ॥ In polysyllabic Participles we have चिन्तितः, रक्षितः॥ In Participles having long भा in the first syllable, we have, भात, भातः॥ When the Participle is not a Name we have, कृतम् , हृतम् ॥ 
शुष्कधृष्टौ ॥ २०६॥ पदानि ॥ शुष्क, धृष्टौ ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ भाविरुशत्त हात वर्तते । शुष्क धृष्ट इत्येतावादानी भवतः॥ 
206. Also f and ye have acute on the first syllable. 
These are non-Names. Thus शुष्कः and पृष्टः ॥ आशितः कर्ता ॥ २०७॥ पदानि ॥ आशितः, कर्ता ॥ वृत्तिः ॥माधितशमः कर्तवाची भावुरामो भवति ॥ 
• 207. The word aua meaning 'having caten' has acute on the first syllable. 
BK. VI. CL. I $ 212] 
FIRST-ACUTE. 
1131 
AAAAAAAmore 
__Thus भाशितो देवदत्तः 'Devadatta, having caten'. Here it is used as an active participle. The is added to my preceded by AT, to form both Active and Passive Participles : which by VI. 2. 144 would have taken acute on the final. This debars that. In the Passive Participle we have भाशितम् देवदनेन 'eaten by Devadatta'. भाशितमन्नम् the eaten food'. The former is भावे क्त, the second is कर्मणि क॥ 
रिक्त विभाषा ॥ २०८ ॥ पदानि ॥ रिक्त, विभाषा ॥ वृभिः ॥रिक्तशब्द विभाषा आदिरुदात्तो भवति ।। 
208. The word रिक्त may have optionally the acute on the first syllable. 
Thus it or fim | This debars VI. 1. 204 and 205. जुष्टार्पिते च छन्दास ॥ २०९॥ पदानि ॥ जुष्टा, अर्पिते, च, छन्दसि ॥ वृत्तिः । जुष्ट भर्पित इत्येते शब्दरूपे छन्दसि विषये विभाषा मागुतात्ते भवतः ॥ 
209. In the Chhandas, the words जुष्ट and भर्पित have optionally the acute on the first syllable. 
Thus fe or yes ; trta: or aft: In the secular literature the ac cent is always on the last syllable (III. I. 3). 
नित्यं मन्त्र॥ २१०॥ पदानि ॥ नित्यम्, मन्त्र॥ वृत्तिः॥ जुष्ट भर्पित इत्येते शब्दरूपे मन्त्रविषये नित्यमागुदात्ते भवता ।। 
210. In the Mantras, these words जुष्ट and भर्पित have always the acute on the first syllable. 
Thus जुष्टं देवानामर्पितं पितृणाम् | Some say that this rule applies only to शुष्ट and not to भर्पित ; in which option is allowed even in the Mantra : so that it has acute on the last in the Mantra even : e.g.तस्मिन्सानियता न घंकोर्पिता ॥ 
युष्मदस्मदोङसि ॥ २११॥ पदानि ॥ युष्मद-अस्मदो:-, ङसि॥ वृत्तिः । युष्मदस्मदी मदिमत्ययान्ते ऽन्तादाने तयोर्डसि परत आदिवात्तो भवति ॥ 
211. The acute accent is on the first syllable of युष्मद् and अस्मद् in the Genitive Singular. 
This applies when the forms are 94 and , and not # and all Thus मम स्वम, तव स्वम् ॥ The word युष्मद् and अस्मद् are derived from युष and अस by adding the affix मरिक् (Un I. 139) युष्मद् + हर- युष्मद् +भा (VII. I. 27)- तब भ+मश (VI. 2.96)=त + अंश (VII. 2.90) तव (VI. I.97). Here by VIII. 2. 5, 7 would have been udatta, the present sätra inakes a udatta. So also 
with मम ॥ 
अयि च ॥ २१२॥ पदानि ॥ अयि, च॥ वृत्तिः । युष्मदस्मदोरिति वर्तते, भादिरुशाग इति चइत्येतस्मिन परतो युष्मदस्मशेराविरुदात्तो भवति ॥ 
212. The acute accent is on the first syllable of युष्मद् and अस्मद् in the Dative Singular. 
1132 
FIRST-ACUTE. 
[ 1K. VI. C1. I $ 215 
Thus quam and 44, the forms # and #arc not governed by this rule. The making of two separate sûtras is for the sake of preventing the appli cation of our rule (1. 3. 10). Had tlic sútra been 6 ATISFür:, then yushinad in the Dative, and asinad in the Genitive alone would have taken this accent. 
gäsart: 11 2838 PT II Ta:, Bare: || वृत्तिः । निष्ठा च यजनादित्यता यमहणमनुवर्तत । यत्प्रत्ययान्तस्य यच आविरुवात्तो भवति न चंत्री EFTETIT wala 
213. Whatever is formed by thic affix yo, has, if it is a disyllabic word, the acute on the first syllable, with the exception of arout: from all 
The word my is understood here from VI. 1. 205. Thus , (111. 1. 97); E, A (V. 1. 6). This rule debars the Svarita accent required by face (VI. 1. 185) Il But it-arda il The rule does not apply to words of more than two syllables, thus :-feranten, eta u 
59 TİATEI puta: 1178811 Tata II S, T, T, KTE, SETH, OTA: 11 वृत्तिः ॥ड वन्न वृ शंस दुद इत्यतेषां या ण्यत् तन्तस्याविरुराना भवति । 
214. The acute accent is on the first syllable of fş, geç, T, ia and Jr, whon they are followed by the affix or II 
Thus Tu, kran, trun, FL, TOT : The two letters op and being indicatory, the 'myat' is not included in 'yat' of the last sâtra. The accent would be regulated by TH The accciit of a however is debarred by this rule. The q in the søtra is TE TYRT of Kriyadi class: the ag of Farre class takes kyap allix. Sce III. 1. 109. 
विभाषा वेण्विन्धानयोः ॥ २१५ ॥ पदानि ॥ विभापा, चेगु, इन्धानयोः ॥ IR II AU FAT 1727417*IST STÍTEETTIT Trai 
215. The acute accent is optionally on the first syllable of an and FH II 
Thus वंगुः or वेणुः ; इन्धान: or इन्धानः or इन्धानः ॥ The word वेणु is derived by the Uņadi affix o (III. 38), which being a fat would nlivars have acute on the first. This allows an option. The word gaur, if it is formed by nie it will bave the accent on the final. Ifit is considered to be formed by mny, the afhx being a sarvadhatuka is anudatta, and as it replaces ulâtta final of the root, it becomes ulatta (VI. 1. 161), and thus fua gets acute on the middle. It would never have acute on thc first syllable, the present rule ordains that also. When y is used as an upamâna ufitau, then it is invrinbly acutely acccnted on the first (VI. 1. 2014). 
BK VI. CI. I. S. 219] 
ACUTE. 
1133 
त्यागरागहासकुहश्वठकथानाम् ॥ २१६ ॥ पदानि ॥ त्याग, राग, हास, कुह, श्वठ, कथानाम् ॥ 
वृत्तिः । त्याग राग हास कुह श्वठ क्रय इत्येतेषां विभाषा भारिरुवाती भवति । 
216. The acute accent is optionally on the first syllables of त्याग, राग, हास, कुह, श्वठ, and कथ 
Thus त्यागः or त्यागः, गा, रागः, हासा, हासः॥ These are formed by पम् affix and by VI. I. 159 would take acute on the final, this ordains acute on the first syllable also. कुहः or कुहः, चड: or श्वठा, कप: or कथ: formed by भन् (III. I. 13). 
उपोत्तमं रिति ॥ २१७ ॥ पदानि ॥ उपोत्तमम, रिति ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ रिपन्तस्योपोत्तममुशतं भवति । त्रिप्रतीनामम्त्यमुत्तम तस्य समीपे यत्तदुपोत्नम् । 
217. What is formed by an affix having an indi catory t, has acute on the penultimate syllable, the full word consisting of more than two syllables. 
A penultimate syllable can be only in a word consisting of three syllables or more. Thus करणीयम् and हरणीयम् formed by भनीयर (III. 1.96); पटुमतीया, मृदुजातीयः by जातीयर् (V. 3. 19). This debars III. I. 3. 
चञ्चन्यतरस्याम् ॥ २१८॥ पदानि । चाड, अन्यतरस्याम्॥ वृत्तिः ॥ पन्त ऽन्य परस्यामुपोत्तममुशतं भवति । 
218. The acute accent may be optionally on the penultimate syllable of the reduplicated Aorist in Tg, the word consisting of more than two syllables. 
Thus मा हि चीकरताम् or चीकरताम् ॥ The augment भट् is elided by the addition of AT, VI. 4. 74; To prevents the verb from becoming anudatta VIII. 1. 34 then comes the चित् accent of षड् ॥ The augmented form with मद् has acute always on the first syllable VI. 4. 71. When the word is of less than three syllables, the rule does not apply, as, माहिदपत् ।। 
मतोः पूर्वमात्संज्ञायां स्त्रियाम् ॥ २१९ ॥ पदानि ॥ मतोः, पूर्वम, भात, संझाया म, खियाम् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ मतो पूर्ण आकार उहतो भवति तन्मवन्तं स्त्रीलिज संज्ञा भवति । 
219. The ar before the affix #has the acute accent, whea the word is a nanie in the Feminine Gender. 
___Thus भदुम्बरावती, पुष्करावती, पारावती (IV. 2. 85). The lengthening takes place by VI. 3. 120. storaat 1 Why do we say 'the H'? Observe nat. अमवती ॥ The words इक्षु Un. III. 157 and gम (V. 2. 108)are end-acute, so accent is on मतुप् by VI. I, I76. Why do we say when a name? Observe खावती॥ खडा is formed by कुन् and has acute on the first (Un. I. 151). Why do we say in 
1034 
ACCENT. 
[ BK. VI. CH. I. 5223 
the Feminine Gender? Observe marra Why do we say when followed by मत् । Observe गवादिनी ॥ 
अन्तो ऽवत्याः ॥ २२०॥ पदानि ॥ अन्तः, अवत्याः ॥ पत्तिः। संज्ञायामित्येव । भवतीशमान्तस्य संज्ञायामन्त उदात्तो भवति। 
220. The Names ending in mala bave the acute accent on the last syllable. . Thus भजिरवती. खपिरवती, सवती, कारण्डवी ॥ These words being formed by te would have been unaccented on the final (111. 1.4). Why do we use meet and not saft? Then the rule would apply to that also, for this word is really that ending in mal, the subsequent clision of 7 is held to be non-valid for the purposes of the application of this rule (VIII. 2. 2), But tlie change of म into व (मत् -व) is considered asiddha for the purposes of this rule. 
ईवत्याः ॥ २२१॥ पदानि ॥ ईवत्याः , (उदात्तः)॥ निः॥ वतीयान्तस्यान्त उत्तो भवति खियां संज्ञायां विषये। 
221. The Names ending in fant have the acute on the last syllable. 
___Thus भहीवती, कृषीवी, मुनीवती । . चौ॥ २२२॥ पदानि ॥चौ ॥ इत्तिः॥ पावित्यम्चात जुगनकारी गृह्यते । तस्मिन्पातः पूर्वस्यान्त उदात्तो भवति । वार्तिकम् ।। चावतद्धितइति वक्तव्यम् ॥ 
___ 222. In compound words ending in अञ्च् , the final vowel of the preceding word has the acute accent in the weak cases in which only of a remains. 
• Thus वाचः पश्य; धीचा, धीः मधूचः पश्य, मधूचा, मधूचे ॥ This is an ex ception to VI. I. 161, 170 and VI. 2. 52. 
Vart:-This rule does not apply before a Taddhita afix. As हाथीर्चः. Ary: 1 Here the accent is regulated by the affix (III. 1. 3). 
समासस्य ॥ २२३ ॥ पदानि ॥ समासस्य, (उदात्तः)॥ वृत्तिः ।। समासस्यान्त उदात्तो भवति । 
223. A compound word has the acute on the last syllable. 
Thus राजपुरुषः ब्राह्मणकम्बल, कन्याखनः, पटहशः , नदीघोषः, रामहर्षन, ब्राह्मणसामन् ॥ The consonants being held to be non-existent for the purposes of accent, the udatta will fall on the vowel though it may not be final, the final being a con sonant. The exceptions to this rule will be mentioned in the next chapter. . 
aitali, षष्ठाध्यायस्य द्वितीयः पादः। 
BOOK SIXTH. 
CHAPTER SECOND. बहुव्रीही प्रकृत्या पूर्वपदम् ॥ १॥ पदानि ॥ बहुव्रीही, प्रकृत्या, पूर्वपदम् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ पूर्वपरमहणमत्र पूर्वपदस्थे स्वरे उदात्ते स्वरित वा वर्तते । बहुव्रीहौ समासे पूर्वपदस्य यः स्वरः स प्रकत्या भवति, स्वभावेनावतिष्ठते, न विकारमनुदात्तस्वमापद्यते ॥ 
I. In a Bahuvrihi, the first member preserves its own original accent. : The word gaan means here the accent-whether udatta or swarita which is in the first member: For means, retains its own nature, does not become modified into an anudatta accent. By the rule VI. 1. 223, the final of a compound gets the accent, so that all the preceding members lose their accent and become anudatta, as in one word all syllables are unaccented except one. VI. s. 158. Thus the first member of a Bahuvrihi would have lost its accent and become anudatta; with the present sätra commences the exceptions to the rule that the final of a compound is always, udatta. Thus borcu ATTEET: 11 The word aproof is derived by the Taddhita affix mq (IV. 3. 154) from t'a kind of antelope ;' and has the fan accent (VI. 1. 197) i. e. on the first syllable: which the word preserves in the compound also. So also 
9 ; the word ge is derived from y by the Uñadi affixa (Uņ III. 27.), before which the vowel becomes lengthened (Uņ III. 25) and the affix is treated as far (Un III. 26), and hence the word is acutely accented on the first syllabic (VI. 1. 197). So also menti FIFT ; the word oft has a Krit formed word as its second part, and gets the acute on the final (VI. 2. 139). So also a 77, the word fraai is derived by on (V. 4. 29) affix and has faa accent (VI. 1. 197) i. e. udatta on the first syllable. So also 
s a yti, the word en is accented on the middle as it is formed by a front affix (III. 1, 133, VI. 1. 193). Waag*, the fa being enounced with an indicatory in Satra V. 2. 84 is acutely accented on the first. zaryti, the word we being formed by an (IV. 1, 161) a fan affix is svarita (VI. 1. 185). 
1130 
ACCENT. 
[ Bk. VI. CI. II. § 2 
The words udatta and svarita are understood in this aphorism, Therefore if all the syllables of the purvapada are anudatta, the present rule has no scope there, and such a compound will get udatta on the final by the universal rule enunciated in VI. 1. 223. Thus iti, here at being all anu. datta, the accent falls on il 
तत्पुरुषे तुल्यार्थतृतीयासप्तम्युपमानाव्ययद्वितीयाकृत्याः ॥२॥ पदानि ॥ तत्र g, Taura, Talut, Frit, 3YHTA, Tou, fearat, gout: 11 
वृत्तिः । तत्पुरुपे समासे तुल्यायें तृतीयान्तं सप्तम्यन्तमुपमानवापि भव्ययं द्वितीयान्तं कृत्यात्तं च यत्पूर्वपद तत्यकृतिस्वरं भवति ।। 
पार्तिकम् ॥ भव्यये नमकुनिपातानामिति वक्तव्यम् ॥ 
2. In a Tatpurusha, the first member preserves its original accent, when it is ą word (1) meaning "& resem blance", or (2) an Instrumental or (3) a Locațive or (4) a word with which the second member is compared, (5) or an Indeclinable, or (6) an Accusative, or (7) & Future Passive Participle. 
Thus (1) ramai, granita, magna, regai, atrainigai, TETE These are Karmadharaya compounds formed under 11. 1. 68: and Tru being formed by an is acutely accented on the first (VI. 1. 216). The word ET is formed by F (111. 2. 60 Vårt), and has acute on the final (VI. 1. 197 and VI. 2. 139). So also सहाश्वेतः सदृशलोदितः, सहशमहान् ॥ The word सरश is formed by pre added to y, and by VI. I. 197 the accent falls on (VI. 2. 139). (2) When the first member is in the Instrumental case, as :-ugmentyr= 
खण्डः , so also किरिकाणा (II. I. 30) कुला is derived from शंकु ला॥ To the root ला is added the affix with the force of age, and thus the noun at is udatta , or the whole word ghat is a word formed by iti affix and hence VI. 1. 165 applies and is final-acute. FRTTI is formed by the Uņādi affix ta (Uņ IV. 143), and it being treated as a fant (Uņ. IV. 142) has udatta on the final, 
(3) When the first member is a word in the Locative case, as the गो -भक्षगोण्डा, so also पानीण्डः ॥ The word भक्ष is formed by the affixस added to mu (Uņ III. 65), and is final acute (111, 1, 3). The word qra is formed by fik affix added to 77, and is acute on the first (VI. 1. 193) owing to the fact accent. (4) When the first member is a word with which the second member is compared, as :-barat, freuaft, TT, ürügihunt, - TRATAT, P ortatil These compounds are formed by II. 1. 55. Taft is formed by me and is final-acute; F is formed by a affix (mit Arašt=694) Bee III. 2. 5. Vart: and is acutely accented on the first, or by Phit sūtra II. 3 it has acute on the first is formed by the Uñadi affix a added to 4 BK. VI. Cui. Il $31 
SAMASA-ACCENT. 
1137 
cases 
(Uņ III. 62), and is finally accented (III. 1. 3). =FT4: formed by 
4 (111. 1. 134), and is irregularly changed into y as Panini himself uses this form (VII. 3. 5): and it is accented in the middle. The words ", 
o'z arc Genitive Tatpurusha, and their second member has accent on the first syllable (VI. 2. 135), (5) When the first member is an Indeclinable, as, Baru, ai, 190, T I Fla , fafcraferi, offres, tinta: II All these Indeclinable compounds have udatta on the first they are formed by II. 2. 5 &c. 
Vart:---In cases of Indeclinable compounds, the rule applies only to those which are formed by the negative Particle 7, by , and by Particles (nipata). Though 7, is one of the Nipatas, its separate mention indicates that accent debars even the subsequent -accent as m aill Therefore, it does not apply here FETHN: which has acute on the final and belongs to Mayuravyósakadi class. 
(6) When the first member as in the accusative case, as :- Herra Heigh, artarurot, ritrail They are formed by II. 1. 29. belongs to The class and is acutely accented on the last. H e is formed by the samasanta affix wet and is finally accented. 
() When the first member is a Kritya-formed word, as, irrat, ilsutora, grafreitas, procentu (II. 1. 68). 99 is formed by our and has svarita on the final : more and groirs are formed by more and are accented on the penultimate (VI. 1. 185 and 217) i, e. on II 
aurausana il 31 Tra li poti, ure, radil fFT: 11 GERRIT OTT, gegura quaisit purrar 
awar तिषु परतस्तत्पुरुष समासे प्रकृतिस्वरं भवति । 
3. The first member of a Tatpurusha preserves its original accent, when a word denoting color is compounded with another color denoting word, but not when it is the word ca 11 
Thus ESTETCET, taart, AN, TA RR: I or is formed by affix (Uņ. III. 4) and has acute on the final (II1 1. 3). ita is formed by the asfix an added to FR (Uņ, III. 94) and has accent on the first (VI. 1. 197). 
Why do we say 'color-denoting word,? Observe q 6ot: (VI. 1. 223). Why do we say 'with another color denoting word '? Observe E RT: (VÍ. 1. 223). Why do we say 'but not when it is ga'? Observe copt, piiratai ti The compounding takos place by II.1. 69. 
गाधलवणयोः प्रमाणे ॥४॥ पदानि ॥ गाध, लवणयोः, प्रमाणे॥ 'वृत्तिः ॥ प्रमाणवाधिान तत्पुरुषे समाले गाध लवण इत्यतयोरुत्तरपरयो पूर्वपदं प्रकासिस्वरं भवति । 
1138 
SAMASA-ACCENT. 
[ BK. VI. CH. II. §. 5 
4. The first member of a Tatpurusha preserves its original accent, when the second term is Trui or gaut, and the compound expresses a ‘measure or mass'. 
Thus शम्बगाधमुश्कम, भरिगाधमुदकम् 'water as low or fordable as a Samba or an Aritra i. e. of the depth of an oar or a pestle'. Toh, math 'so much salt as may be given to a cow or a horse'. These are Genitive Tatpuru sha compounds. Ta is formed by adding to 44 (Uņ. IV. 94), and has acute on the first (VI. 1. 197). Ofty is formed by the affix added to the (III. 2. 184), and has acute on the middle (I11. 1. 3): ti is formed by 91 (Uņ 11. 68) and has acute on the final SAT; *t is formed by affix added to STT (Uņ. I. 151), and has acute on the first (VI. 1. 197). The word you here denotes 
quantity', 'measure','mass', 'limit', and not merely the length. The power of denoting measure by these words is here indicated by and is dependent upon accent. 
When not denoting प्रमाण we have परमगार्धम् and परमलवर्णम् ॥ : TOTO rua 119 11 Taifa il TITETA, TATII 
वृत्तिः ॥ सत्पुरुष समासे दायादशवउत्तरपरे वायाग्रवाचि पूर्वपर प्रकृतिस्वरं भवति ।। 
5. In a Tatpurusha compound, having the word Tale as its second member, the first member denoting inheri 'tance preserves its original accent. 
Thus विद्यातायातः, धनदायादः ॥ The word विद्या is formed by the affix क्यप् (I11. 3. 99) which is udatta (III. 3. 96). The word u is derived by adding ipi tou (Uņ. II. 81). Though the Uñadi Sätra II. 81 ordains after the root v preceded by fa, yet by (III. 3. 1) rule it comes after yr also when it is not preceded by fa and a has acute on the first (III. 1. 3). 
In the forms fourrur: &c, what Genitive case has been taken ? If it is the Genitive case which the word gray requires by Rule II. 3. 39, then by the Vartika afat TUTAT TETT EAEUN (II. 2. 10 Vart), there can be no com pounding. The Genitive case there is the ordinary Genitive case of II. 3. 50. i. e. a 41* Genitive case, and not a qfar Genitive. If it is a game Genitive case, then why the other Geintive case is taught in II. 3. 39 with regard to frary &c. That sätra only indicates the existence of the Locative case in the alternative, and does not pervent the Genitive. In fact, had merely Locative been ordianed in that sätra, this particular case would have prevented the Genitive on the maxim that a particular rule debars the general. But the employment of both terms Genitive and Locative in that sätra indicates the alternative nature of the rule and shows that the Genitive case so taught is not a git Genitive, but a general Genitive. In short the Genitive taught in II, 
BK. VI. CH. II $ 8.) 
SANASA-ACCENT. 
11:39 
3. 39, is not an apūrva-vidhi, the words naturally would have taken Genitive; the taking of the Locative is the only new thing taught there. 
Why do we say when meaning inheritance? Observe qurt (VI. 1. 223 ) taking the final acute of a compound. 
gfagfry ferre t: 11 € 1 TETET I gfcarryFert. 7oout: 11 वृत्तिः ॥ तत्पुरुष समासे चिरकृच्छ्रयोरुत्तरपत्योः प्रतिबन्धिवाचि पूर्वपदं प्रकृतिस्वरं भवति ॥ . 
6. In a Tatpurusha compound, having the words fart or not as its second member, the first member, when it denotes that which experiences an obstacle, preserves its original accent. 
Thus tharton, 197 , TETUM or ser 11 The words at and surcrot are formed by pre affix, and have fan accent (VI. 1. 193). This compound belongs either to the class of Mayðra-vyansakādi (II. 1. 72), or of an attribute and the thing qualified. When going to a place is delayed owing to some defective arrangement or cause, or becomes difficult, there is produced an obstacle or hinderance, and is called mafert or HHHTE II Why do we say which experiences a hinderance '? Observe you 
पदे ऽपदेशे ॥ ७॥ पदानि ॥ पदे, अपदेशे ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ भपदेशो व्याजस्तहाधिनि तत्पुरुष समासे पदशब्दउत्तरपदे पूर्वपद प्रकृतिस्वरं भवति ॥ 
7. In a Tatpurusha compound the first member preserves its original accent, when the second member is the word e denoting “a pretext'. 
The word stoty means 'a pretext', 'a contrivance'. Thus frutar afera:, 301497 grega: ll Gone on pretext of voiding urine or excreta. . 
The word 7 is derived by adding the affix it to the root , the being substituted for 3 of , (Uņ. IV. 163), and has acute on the first (VI. 1. 197) or it may be a word formed by up to the root hurau The word To is also formed by us and by VI. 2. 144 has acute on the final. The compounding takes place by II. 1.72 or it is an attributive compound. 
Why do we say "when meaning a pretext?" Observe facor: =R प्णुपर्दम् ॥ 
निवाते वातत्राणे ॥ ८॥ पदानि ॥ निवाते, घात-त्राणे॥ afai il Arayat argenta a GE FAIT SA 96 testafai ATA II 
8. In a Tatpurusha compound, the first member preserves its original accent, when the second member is the word farara in the sense of a protection from wind'. 
Thus i farg a rh a hut as the only shelter from the wind'. So also शमीनिवातम्, कुड्यनिवातम् or कुञ्चनियातम् ॥ The word निवात is an Avyayi. 
1140 
SAMASA-ACCENT. 
[BK. VI. C11. 11. 9. 10 
bhava compound rare oport: (II. 1. 6): or a Bahuvrihi = fare qasih ut The words that are &c, are examples of compounds of two words in apposie tion. ot and i are formed by to (IV. 1. 41) and have acute on the last (III. 1: 3). Some say that 96 is derived from ☆ by adding on with the augment on and treating it as fact, is has the acute on the first; other's hold that it is derived by the affix Fur to and the affix has the accent. 
Why do we say when meaning 'a shelter from wirid'? Observe T Farera tafa, ac taforara -'he lives under the shelter of the king'; 'pleasant is the shelter or the protection of the mother'. Here fata = f: or vicinity. 
ne sarda la Taifa llare, sarà # , बुनिः ॥ कती भवमार्तवम् । अनाविवाचिनि शारदशब्दउत्तरपद तत्पुरुष समास पूर्वपदं प्रकृतिस्वरं भवति ।। 
9. In a Tatpurusha compound the first member preserves its original accent, when the second member is the word , having any other sense than that of "au tumnal'. 
The word strany means appertaining to season (FT) i. e. when the word my does not refer to the season of Ta or autumn. Thus trgTrain "fresh drawn water'. So also T URET: 'the saktu flour fresh from the mill'. The word tuy means here 'fresh' 'new': and it forms an invari. able compound. The word Try is formed by 3 affix added to yn (Un. I. 15), the # being elided. The affix is treated as fara (Uņ. I. 9) and the accent falls on the first syllable (VI. 1. 197). The word gita is formed by the augment qand shortening of the vowel of the root 'to tear' (uma), and the affix of 
(Uņ. 1. 131) and has accent on the final (II1. 1. 3). 
Why do we say when not meaning autumnal'? Observe qarta, Daunia 'the best autumnal grass &c. (VI. 1. 223). 
tarjon rretnia Il poll Taifa il stearg, pret, strant II वृत्तिः ॥ मध्वर्युकषाय इत्येतयोजातिवापिनि तत्पुरुषे समासे पूर्वपर प्रकृतिस्वरं भवति ॥ 
10. In a Tatpurusha compound denoting a genus, the first member preserves its original accent, when the second member is the word अध्वर्यु or कषाय ॥ 
Thus gemi, TC TÍ:, Filmre ! These are Appositional com pounds denoting 'genus or kind', with a fixed meaning. greg is formed by an, and has accent on the first (VI, 1, 213). is derived by sy affix (III. 1. 34), and to it is added the Taddhita affix forfa (IV. 3. 104), in the sense of 
(IV. 3. 101), and the affix is then clided by IV. 3. 107. The word कालाप comes from कलापिन् + मण, (IV. 3. I08) in the sensc of कलापिना मोक्तं (IV. 3. 
BK. VI. CH. 11. 9. 12 ] 
TATPURUSHA-ACCENT. 
1141 
101), and it would have preserved its form without change before this affix (VI.4 164) but for a vartika which declares that the rof Beta will be elided (See VI. 1. 144 vart). Thus fare gets accent on the final (III. 1. 3). So also afo ra, goian, fraft 24H These are Genitive com pounds. The words eftqug and mayay are Genitive compounds and have accent on the final (VI. 1. 223). The word fratta is formed by affix added to it and has acute on the final (VI. 1. 165). Why do we say when meaning a 'genus'? Observe, gate , Thera: (VI. . 223). 
सरशप्रतिरूपयोः साहश्ये ॥११॥ पदानि ॥ सहश, प्रतिरूपयोः, साहश्ये॥ वृभिः ॥सर प्रतिरूप इत्येतयोरुत्तरपदयोः साहश्यवापिनि तत्पुरुष समासे पूर्वपद प्रकृतिस्वरं भवति ।। 
11. In a Tatpurusha compound expressing res emblance with some one or something, the first member preserves its original accent, when the second member is Fry or green 
Thus पिसापा, मातृसदशः ॥ The words पितृ and माह are formed by Upadi affix ry (Un. II. 95 ) and are finally accented. By II. 1. 31, ku forms Instrumental Tatpurusha. That case, however, is governed by VI. 2. 2, which provides for Instrumental compounds. The examples here given are of Genitive Tatpurusha: and it applies to cases where the case-ending is not elided. As दास्याः सहयो, वपल्या सहाः ॥ Here दासी and वृषली are finally acute, and the case-affix gets the accent when semivowel is substituted (VI. 1. 174), So also forgatagi, fy: # Why do we say when meaning resem blance'? Observe T EH, T ET: (VI, I. 223): here the sense of the compound is that of honor' and not resemblance'. 
fannt garut I1 82 quia u femt, tarot II पतिः॥दिगाइत्तरपदे प्रमाणवाचिनि सत्पुरुप समासे पूर्वपदं प्रकृतिस्वरं भवति । 
12. In a Tatpurusha compound denoting 'mea Bure or quantity', the first member preserves its original accent, when the second member is a Dvigu. 
Thus 
f HER: and troupITAHA: 11 The word wan! - FEHT: TOT. HFA, the affix Arte denoting measure' (V. 2. 37) is elided (See V. 2. 37 Vart) Arep ET ART**= enen: "an Eastern seven-years old". So also rurft समसम: or पदसमः ।। प्राध्य has acute on the first; while गान्धारि is either accented on the first or on the middle; as it belongs to the Kardamadi class (Phit III. 10). Why do we say "before a Dvigu'? Observe anyt: 11 Why do we say 'when denoting measure?' Observe TCHAHHH: II 
गन्तव्यपण्यं वाणिजे ॥ १३॥ पदानि ॥ गन्तव्य, पण्यम, वाणिजे॥ पुतिः॥ वाणिजयपरत्तरपरेतपरुष समासे गन्तव्यबाषि पण्यवाषि:च पूर्वपदं प्रकतिस्परं भवति॥ . 
1142 
· TATPURUSIIA-ACCENT. 
[BK. VI. CH. II. 5 14 
13. Before the word asorar a trader', the first member of a Tatpurusha preserves its accent, when it is a word specifying the place whither one has to go, or the waro in which one deals. 
Thus #aforsti, Arcanforsti, ufafory: -HITS TANT - crazy 'the Madra-merchants i. e. who trade by going to Madra &c. All these are Loca tive compounds. He is derived by a affix (Uņ II, 13) and is acutely accented on the last (VI. 1. 165). 47$HI belongs to Kfshodaradi class (VI. 3. 109), and has acute either on the first or the second syllable. The word mur belongs to the Kardamadi class, and is consequently acute on the first or the second (Phit III. 10) In the sense of you we have: refox: 'a dealer in cows', perform &c. it is finally accented (Un II. 67): and so has acute on the first (Un I. 151) the affix being galt 
Why do we say the place whither one goes, or the goods in which one deals?' Observe परमवाणिजैः, उत्तमवणिजः॥ 
मात्रोपझोपक्रमच्छाये नपुंसके ॥ १४॥ पदानि ॥ मात्रा, उपना, उपक्रम, छाये, 
वृमिः ॥ मावा उपशा उपक्रम छावारतेपूत्तरपदेषु नपुंसकवापिनि तत्पुरुष समासे पूर्वपदं प्रकृतिस्वरं भवति । 
14. The first member of a Tatpurusha preserves its accent before the words माता. उपवा. उपक्रम and छाया when these words appear as neuter. 
Thus PTHTHT para anira, FEGANÝ # sita fall The word ATT is here synonymous with go, the phrase being - PRETUFTHATari, and is a Geni tive compound. The word wat is derived from pry, by the feminine affix * (III. 3. 103), and has acute on the final (III. 1. 3). The word or has also acute on the final as it is a word denoting 'a sea',( Phit sätra I. 2). So also with 3451, as quaigh aora; sirga 14 STUTI-94 yem/49 (see 11. 4. 21) All these are Genitive compounds. The word fora is derived by squ affix from for (PPOTTSY444 =170*), and has acute on the final, (IIT. I'3). The word suif being formed by a affix has acute on the first (VI 1. 197), so also foute i So also with 7994, as ren PTETT, taiyaina, Fourt han, fo Arattal All these are Genitive compounds. The word भाब्य (तन्येनं ध्यायन्ति) is derived from भा+ + क affix added with the force of op, the ty being changed to r the word belonging to NTTITE class (VI. 3. 109), and it has acute on the final by VI, 2. 144. The word resta is formed by sarac and has acute on the penultimate aft owing to the indicatory (VI. 1. 217). The word 94% has acute on the final by VI. 2. 172. The word pay is formed by 54 (III. 1. 134). The Tatpurusha compounds ending in IT and 94 are neuter by II. 4. 21. So also with rut, as Turan, 
BR. VI. CH. II. $. 171 
TATPURUSHA-ACCENT. 
1143 
IUSO 
अनुच्छायम् ॥ The word षु is derived from r by Taffix (Un I. I3), and it being treated as नित् (Un I. 9) the acute falls on r the first syllable (VI. I. 197). The word vir has also acute on the first by Phit sätra II. 3. The compound is a Genitive Tatpurusha-qui gal; and it is Neuter by II. 4. 22. When the compound is not a Neuter we have कुड्यछाया (II. 4. 25). 
सुखप्रिययोहिते ॥१५॥ पदानि । सुख, प्रिययोः, हिते॥ पुतिः ॥ मुख प्रिय इत्येतयोरुत्तरपरयोहितवाचिनि तत्पुरुषे समासे पूर्वपदं प्रकृतिस्वरं भवाति ॥ 
____ 15. The first member of a Tatpurusha preserves its accent, when the second term is ge or ge, and the sense is 'to feel delight, or is good'. 
___ Thus गमनसुखम् 'the pleasure of going'. So also धनमुखम् , प्याहरणमुखम् , मनप्रियम्, चिनप्रियम् , न्याहरणपियम् ॥ These are appositional compounds. All the above words are formed by eye affix and have acute on the syllable preceding the affix (VI. I. 193). The words sukha and priya have the sense ofहित or 'well good 'beneficial, i. e. when the thing denoted by the first term is the cause of pleasure or delght. When this is not the sense we have परमसुखम् , परमप्रियम् ।। 
प्रीती च ॥ १६॥ पदानि ॥ प्रीती, च ॥ पत्तिः ॥ प्रीतो गम्यमानायां सुख प्रिय इत्येतयोरुत्तरपदयास्तसुरुषे समासे पूर्वपदं प्रकृतिस्वरं भवति ।। 
16. The first member of a Tatpurusha preserves its accent, the second term being ge or fou, in the sense of "agreeable to one, or desired". 
Thus ब्राह्मणसुखं पावसं "the sweetmilk desired by or agreeable to the Brahmanas", छापियोऽनध्यायः ॥ कन्याप्रियो मृङ्गः ॥ &c. The words ब्राह्मण and छाप have acute on the final being formed by the affixes so and of (V. 4. 62) respectively (III. I. 3) and कन्या has svarita on the final. When not meaning agreeable to or desired, we have राजसुखम् , राजप्रियम् ।। __खं स्वामिनि ॥ १७॥ पदानि ॥ स्वम् , स्वामिति ॥ 
पत्तिः ॥ स्वामिएनउत्तरपदे तत्पुरुष समासे स्ववाधि पूर्वपदं प्रकृतिस्वरं भवति ।। 
17. In a Tatpurusha compound, having the word स्वामिन् as its second member, the first term, when it denotes the thing possessed, retains its original accent. 
Thus गोस्वामी, अश्वस्वामी, धनस्वामी ॥ The accents ofगी, भश्व and धन have already been mentioned before in VI. 2. 14. When the first member is not a word denoting possession, we have परमस्वामी॥ 
पत्यविश्वयें ॥१८॥ पदानि ॥ पत्यौ, ऐश्वर्ये ॥ वृभिः॥पतिरानउत्तरपदे ऐश्वर्यवापिनि सरपुरुषे पूर्वपदं प्रकतिस्वरं भवति ॥ .. 
1144 
TATPURUSHA-ACCENT. 
[ BK. VI. CH, II.S21 
18. In a Tatpurusha ending in a when it means . 'master' or lord', the first member preserves its original accent. 
Thus गृहपतिः, सेनापतिः, नरपतिः, धान्यपतिः॥ The word मह is formed by क (III. I. 144) and has acute on the final (III. I. 3). The word सेना is a Bahu. vrihi (सहानेन वर्तते-सेना), and by VI. 2. I the first member retains its accent. The word नर is derived from F to lead' by the affix भए (III. 3.57) and has acute on the first (III. I. 4), the word धान्य has svarita on the final (See Phit II. 332) Why do we say when meaning lord? Observe ब्राह्मणो वृपलीपतिः "a 
Brahmana, husband of a Sadra". 
न भूवाचिदिधिषु ॥ १९॥ पदानि ॥ न, भू, धाक, चित्, दिधिषु ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ पतिशम्वउत्तरपदे ऐश्वर्यवापिनि तत्पुरुष समासे भू वाक् चित् विधिपू इत्येतानि पूर्वपदानि प्रकृति स्वराणि न भवन्ति । 
___19. The words भू, वाक्, चित् and दिधिपू, however, do not preserve their original accent in a Tatpurusha when coming before the word ofa denoting 'lord'. . This debars the accent taught by the last aphorism. Thus wafet's, free पतिः, चितपति:, विधिपतिः ॥ All these are Genitive compounds and are finally accented by VI. I. 223. 
था भुवनम् ॥ २०॥ पदानि ॥ वा, भुवनम् ॥ बत्तिः ॥ पतिसम्मउत्तरपदे ऐश्वर्यवाधिनि तत्पुरुष समासे भुवनशम्नः पूर्वपरं वा प्रकृतिस्वरं भवति । 
20. The word gera may optionally keep its accent in a Tatpurusha, before gra denoting lord'. ... Thus भुवनपति: or भुवनपतिः॥ The word भुवन is formed by क्युन् (Un. II. 80), and has acute on the first (VI. 1. 197). Though Satra II. 80 (Unadi) ordains क्युन् after in the Vedas only. yet on the theory of बहुल (III. I. 3), it comes in the secular literature also, as भुषनपतिरादित्यः॥ 
आशङ्काबाधनेदीयस्सु संभावने ॥२१॥ पदानि ॥ आशङ्क, मा बाध, नेदीयस्सु, संभावने। वृतिः ॥ प्रकृस्या पूर्वपद तत्पुरुषाति वर्तते । भाभावाष नेदीयस् इत्येतेपूत्तरपदेषु संभावनवाधिनि वसुरुष समासे पूर्वपदं प्रकतिस्वरं भवति ॥ 
21. Before माशङ्क, आवाध and नेदीयस, the first mem ber in a Tatpurusha compound preserves its original accent, when it.treats about a supposition. 
___ The word संभावनम् भस्तिस्वाध्यवसाय: “the hesitation about the existence of a thing'. Thus गैमनाशपर्तते 'one fears the journey'; so also वचना, प्याहरणा. प, &c. Similarly मनायाधम्र्त -गमनं बाध्यते इति संभाष्यते "it has stepped in as 
-.rury 
BK. VI. Ch. II. F23] 
TATTURUSIIA-ACCENT. 
1145 
an obstacle to journey". So also fचनावाधम्, चाहरणाबापम् ।। Similarly मनदीयो पर्ससे, चननेदीयः व्यहरणनेतीब-गमममिति निकटतरमिति खंभाव्यते "the journey stands directly before". 
Why do we say when a supposition is meant? Observe परममेरीवः ।। All the above words are formed by my affix and have per accent. (VI. 3. 193). 
पूर्वे भूतपूर्वे ॥ २२॥ पदानि ॥ पूर्वे, भूतपूर्वे ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ पूर्वशवरत्नरपरे भूतपूर्ववाधिनि तत्पुरुष समासे पूर्वपर प्रकृतिस्वरं भवति ॥ 
___ 22. The first member of a Tatpurusha compound preserves its original accent when the word ger is the second 
member, and the sense is " this had been lately----". 
Thus मान्यो भुतपूर्वः = माम्पपूर्वः "formely had been rich". The compound must be analysed in the above way. The compounding takes place by II. 1. 57 or it belongs to Mayura-vyansakadi class. So also दर्शनीयपूर्व, मकुमारपूर्वः॥ . 
Why do we say when meaning 'had been lately'. Observe परमपूर्ण, उत्तमपूर्वः, which should be analysed as परमबासौ पूर्वति ॥ If it is analysed as परमो भूतपूर: then it becomes an example under the rule and not a counter-example In order therefore, to make this rule applicable we must know the sense of the compound. 
सविधसनीडसमर्यादसवेशसदेशेषु सामीप्ये ॥ २३॥ पदानि ॥ सविध, सनीर, समर्याद, सवेश, सदेशेषु, सामीप्ये ॥ पतिः ॥ सविध सनी समर्याद सवेश इत्येतेषत्तरपदेषु सामीप्यवापिनि तत्पुरुपे समासे पूर्वपरं प्रकसिस्वर भवति॥ 
23. The first member of a Tatpurusha compound preserves its original accent, when the second 'member is सविध, सनीड, समर्याद, सवेश, and सदेश in the sense of "what can be found in the vicinity thereof". 
___Thus मद्रसविधम, गान्धारिसविधम् , काश्मीरसविधम् ॥ So also मसनीम्, मईसमा एम, महसंबंशम् and भद्रसदेशम् So also with गान्धारि and काश्मीर ॥ The accents of these words have been taught before in Satra VI. 2.. 12, 13. The words सविध &c, are derived from सह विषया &c, but they all mean in the vicinity': मद्रसविधं-मद्राणां सामिप्यम् ॥ Why do we say when meaning in the vicinity thereof?Observe सह मयांपया वर्तते-समयाद सत्रम् ' a field having boundary'. देवदत्तस्थ समर्याद-देवदत्तसमय दम् “the bounded field of D'. Why do we say सविध &c? Observe पानसमया ॥ 
विस्पष्टादीनि गुणवचनेषु ॥ २४॥ पदानि ॥ विस्पट, आदीनि-गुणवचनेषु । वृणिः ॥ विस्पटातीनि पूर्वपानि एणवचपूनरपरेच प्रकृतिस्वाणि भवन्ति । 
1146 
TATPURUSHA-ACCENT. 
[BK. VI. C1. II $ 25. 
24. The words faire &c preserve their accent when followed by an Adjective word in a compound, 
- Thus a TE 457, natagong magan, farmama, fafortuna, the KTOR II The compounding takes place by II. 1. 4, and it should be analysed thus farTe 1954 &c. 
The words forty &c, are indeed here adjectives, and in conjunction with a &c, they denote an object possessing those qualities; and therefore not being in apposition, the compound is not a Karmadharaya. 
The word Forge has acute on the first by VI. 2. 49. The word hier is also acute on the first as it gets the accent of the Indeclinable. Some read the word as f4f4, which being a Bahuvrihi has also first acute. The word with has syarita on the first by VIII. 2. 4. The remaining words of this class are संपर्म, पंढ or कड, पण्डित, कुपल, चपल and निपुणे. Of these, the word संपर्न has acute on the final by VI. 2. 144; 45 is formed by o (Uņ I. 18), which being considered as fax (Uņ I. 9), it has acute on the first. Toon is formed by to the root , and is finally acute (VI. 2. 144). He has accent on the final being formed by a ksit affix (surt fa gu, nT Brera, or Uņ I. 106), 9 being formed by a R affix (Uņ I. ), has acute on the final (VI. 1. 163), for fort is understood in the Uñadi sūtra Un. I. 111 from setra Uņ. I. 106. The word forgot has acute on the final by VI. 2. 144, being formed by a affix added to your &c. 
Why do we say 'of fifTe &c' Observe quan Truman, both having acute on the final. Why do we say " when followed by a word expressing a quality”? Observe for EarPOT: 
श्रज्यावमकन्पापवत्सु भावे कर्मधारये ॥ २५ ॥ पदानि ॥ श्र, ज्य, अवम, कन्, पापवत्सु, भावे, कर्मधारये ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ज्य भवम कन् इत्येतेषु पापचन्दवति पोनरपरे कर्मधारय समासे भाववाचि पूर्वपदं प्रकृतिस्वरं wata 
25. In a Karmadhâraya compound, the first mem ber consisting of a Verbal noun (ra), preserves its original accent before adjective forms built from * (V. 3. 60), 4 ( V. 3. 61 ) ah and (V. 3. 64), and before a form built from the word oral 
Thus #8A, or paira:, faragh or ara; fram, TT, HA frog or artta: it So also manym, Fragrata: 11 All the first members are pour formed words and have fun accent i. e. on the first syllable. (VI. 1. 193). The words , 54 and are substitutes which certain adjectives take in the comparative and superlative degree, and the employment of these forms in the satra indicates that the comparative and superlative words having these ele BK. VI. CH. II $ 27) 
KARMADHARAYA-ACCENT. 
1147 
_ 
, 
ments should be taken as second members, and so also of Ty, the comparative and superlative are taken, for this is the meaning here of the word 94 11 
Why do we say " &c"? Observe ma i l Why do we say 'a verbal Noun? Observe tapas, where the word that is the sia la carraige'. Why do we say 'a Karmadharaya compound'? Observe 177* *:=114a: il 
HTCAT II & II Taifa il garc:, all वृत्तिः ॥ कुमारचन्दः पूर्वपर कर्मधारय समासे प्रकृतिस्वरं भवति ।। 
26. The word ar preserves its original accent when standing as a first member in a Karmadharaya compound. 
Thus कुमारकुलटा, कुमारप्रमणा, कुमारतापसी ॥ The word कुमार has acute on the final as it is derived from the root miterary with the affix my of 
u By 11. 1. 70, it is ordained that man is compounded with 79 &c. Some commentators hold that the word in must be followed by our &c. (II. 1.70 ) to make this rule applicable. They refer to the maxim m ua पोतया प्रतिपरोक्तस्येव महणम् "whenever a term is employed which might denote both something original and also something else resulting from a rule of grammar, or when a term is employed in a rule which might denote both something formed by another rule in which the same individual term has been employed, and also something else formed by a general rule, such a term should be taken to denote, in the former case, only that which is original, and in the latter case, only that which is formed by that rule in which the same in dividual term has been employed." Other Grammarians, however do not make any such limitation, but apply the rule to all Kaimadharaya compounds of TT 11 
ame: retare il pug I wanê li afa:, Starer II वृत्तिः॥ कर्मधारयाति वर्नते । प्रतिगत एनसा प्रतिगतमेनो वा यस्य सः प्रत्येनाः । तस्मिन्नुत्तरपदे कर्मः धारस्यादिरुवात्तो भवति । 
27. In a Karmadharya compound of Kumara followed by geda, the acute falls on the first syllable of Kumara. 
The word प्रत्येनस्-प्रतिगत एनसा or प्रतिगतमेनो यस्य॥ Thus कुमारपत्येनाः ।। The word udatta is required to be read into the satra to complete the sense : for the construction of the sotra requires it, and the anuyritti of the 'first member preserves its accent' would be inappropriate because the word of is employed here. 
qocala FITA II RC 11 reifa Iloring, ACRITHE II वृत्तिः ॥ पूगा गणास्तहाधिन्युत्तरपदे कर्मधारये समासे कुमारस्थान्यतरस्यामविरुदात्तो भवति ।। 
1148 
KARMADHARAYA-ACCENT. 
(BK. VI. CH. II $ 29 
28. The first syllable of Kumára is acute op tionally, when the second member is a word denoting the pame of a horde'. 
The word goy means 'a multitude, a collection &c'. See V. 3. 112 also. Thus SANTOT or TT (VI. 2. 26), or anyt: 11 So also Sur a t: or $41CTET: or groTAT: Il So also with ATEITERT, HI 
goro u Here Trek &c, are horde-names; and the affix ou is added to them by V. 3. 112: which is elided in the Plural by II. 4. 62. In the above examples when the word Kumara' is not accented on the first syllable, it gets accent on the last by VI. 2. 26, when the afaqimin maxim is not applied : when that maxim is applied, the final of the compound takes the accent by the general rule VI. I. 223. 
इगन्तकालकपालभगालशरावेषु द्विगौ ॥ २९॥ पदानि ॥ गन्त, काल, कपाल, willes, array, fant इत्तिः ॥ गन्तवत्सरपरे कालवाधिनि कपाल भगाल पराव इत्येतेषु च विगो समासे पूर्वपर प्रकृतिस्वरं भवति ॥ 
29. In a Dvigu compound, the first member pre serves its original accent, before a stem ending in a simple vowel, with the exception of a (5), before a word denoting time, as well as before कपाल, भगाल and शराव ॥ 
Thus saria, urda: 11 The above are examples of Taddhitartha Dvigu (II. 1. 52), equal to au: 114462, the 41 denoting-affix ry is always elided in Dvigu (V. 2. 3 Vart). So also shea, UF: 954 arar 
it wat ro T. This is also a Taddhitärtha Dvigu (II. 1. 52), formed by the -affix up (V. 1. 80-82). So also 4444 furt the affix or being elided (V. I. 88). So also 94, Furi, serai, laimi, rurai, lavca: 11 These are also Taddhitartha Dvigu formed by IV. 2. 16, the affix apoy being elided by IV. 1. 88. 
Why do we say " before an funt stem &c"? Observe qoften: mntai qm, FT: Why do we say "in a Dvigu Compound ?" Observe qat 
ta, muuda 
When these Dvigu compounds, by case-modifications do not end in R vowel, but the vowel is replaced by a semi vowel or Guņa, the rule will still apply. Thus 41-4: or secara: 11 This is done on the strength of the maxim ATHU T HAR. "That which is bahiranga is regarded as not hav ing taken effect or as not existing, when that which is antaranga is to take effect:" because the substitution of semivowel or guna is a bahiranga opera 
BK VI. CII. II. 5.32] 
DVIGU-ACCENT. 
1149 
tion in relation to accent. Or the substitutes may be considered as sthanivat to the short-vowel which they replace. 
बन्यतरस्याम् ॥ ३०॥ पदानि ॥ बहु, अन्यतरस्याम् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ बहुशब्दः पूर्वपदमिगन्ताविषत्तरपदेषु द्विगौ समासे ऽन्यतरस्यां प्रकृतिस्वरं भवति ।। 
30. In a Dvigu compound, the word बहु may op tionally preserve its accent when followed by an ik-ending stem, or by a time-word, or by kapala, bhagala and Sarava. 
This allows option where the last rule required the accent necessarily. Thus बहरत्रिः or बहरालः, बहुँमास्यः or बहुमास्यः, बहुँकपाल: or बहुकपालः, बहुभगाल: or पहु. भगाला, बहुँशरावः or बहुशरावः ॥ The word बहुँ has acute on the final being formed by the affix कु (Un I. 29). When ther is changed to u, as in the first example, the anudatta ay is changed into svapita by VIII. 2. 4 : when the first member preserves its acccent. In the other alternative, the accent falls on the last syllable. 
दिष्टिवितस्त्योश्च ॥ ३१ ॥ पदानि ॥ दिष्टि, वितस्त्योः , च ॥ वृत्तिः ।। दिष्टि वितस्ति इत्येतयोरुत्तरपदयाईिगो समासे पूर्वपदमन्यतरस्यां प्रकृतिस्वरं भवति ॥ 
31. In a Dvigu compound, the first member may optionally preserve its accent, when followed by the words दिष्टि and वितस्ति as second members. 
Thus पञ्चविष्टिः or पञ्चदिष्टिः, पञ्चवितस्तिः or पञ्चवितस्तिः ॥ The affix मावच is clided after the part denoting words dishți and vitasti (V. 2. 37). 
सप्तमी सिद्धशुष्कपक्कबन्धेवकालात् ॥ ३२॥ पदानि ॥ सप्तमी, सिद्ध, शुष्क, पक्क, बन्धेषु, अकालातू॥ वृत्तिः ॥ सप्तम्यन्तं पूर्वपदं सिद्ध शुष्क पक्ष बन्ध इत्येतेषूत्तरपदेषुप्रकृतिस्वरं भवति सा घेत्सप्तमी कालान भवति ॥ 
32. A locative-ending word when it does not de. note time, preserves its original accent, when followed by सिद्ध, शुष्क, पक and बन्ध in a compound. 
Thus सांकाश्यसिद्धः or सांकाश्यसिद्धः, काम्पिल्यसिद्धः or काम्पियसिद्धः॥ The words så mkaśya and kampilya have acute on the final, and by Phit Salra ( 111. 16 ) in the alternative the accent falls on the middle also. So also निधनशुष्का, अशुष्कः ॥ The word निधन is derived by क्यु affix added to नि-धाम् and has acute on the middle; the word om is formed from s root by the affix कक, and has acute on the final. So also भ्राष्ट्रपका, कुम्भीपका, कलशीपकः ॥ The words Kumbht and Kalasi are formed by an affix and have acute on the final; the word og is formed by 27, affix, and has acute on the beginning. So also चक्रवन्धः चारकबन्धः ॥ The word chakra has acute on the final, and charaka being formed by te has acute on the first. 
1150 
DVANDVA-ACCENT. 
[ BK. VI. CH. II. $ 33 
Why do we say when not denoting time'? Observe crie :. 94euf V The compounding takes place by II. 1. 41. The accent of the Locative Tatpurusha taught in VI. 2. I was debarrd by Kšit-accent taught VI. 2. 144. The present sūtra debars this last rule regarding Kșit accent, and re ordains the Locative Tatpurusha accent when the Ksit-words are rata &c. 
परिप्रत्युपापा वय॑मानाहोरात्रावयवेषु ॥ ३३ ॥ पदानि ॥ परि,प्रति, उप, अपाः, वय॑मान, अहोरात्रावयवेषु ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ परि प्रति उप अप इत्येते पूर्वपदभूता वय॑मानवाचिनि अहोरात्रावयव वाचिनि राम्यवयववाधिनि चोत्तरपदे प्रकृतिस्वरा भवन्ति । 
33. The particles परि, प्रति, उप and अप preserve their accent before that word, which specifies an exclusion, or a portion of day and night, (in an Avyayîbhâva com pound also). 
Thus the autta: “It rained all round (but not in) Trigarta". (See II. 1. 11 and 12). So also starter frental, printer So also Afa cargora, ÉRATUROT, 
F un, Fogarantin, faturgora, faunu, grua 11 éq fra at da, baita, haraad (II. 1. 11 and 12). 
By Phit Satras IV. 12, and 13 all Particles (Nipata) have acute on the first syllable. So also upasargas with the exception of a ll Therefore it &c, have acute on the first. In a Tatpurusha and Bahuvrihi compounds, these words pari', 'prati' &c, as first members would have retained their accent by the rules already gone before; the present sQtra, therefore, extends the principle of the preservation of the accent to Avyayibhava compounds also. The pre positions are and of alone denote the limit exclusive or ta, and it is there fore with these two prepositions only that the second member can denote the thing excluded, and not with ufa and 34 1l With these prepositions et and qft, the second term if denoting a member of day or night, are also taken even as excluded, therefore no separate illustrations of those are given. 
Why do we say 'before a word which is excluded, or is a part of a day and night'? Observe para m*T: gara! In afat "all round the forest, but not in it', the accent falls on the last by VI. 2. 178, which debars this general rule, as well as all special rules which might affect 47 in a compound. 
राजन्यबहुवचनद्वन्द्वन्धकवृष्णिषु ॥ ३४॥ पदानि ॥ राजन्य, बहु पचन, दन्छे, 23, arboris, ( quan face) 
वृत्तिः ॥ राजन्यवाधिना बहुवचनान्तानां यो इन्दो ऽन्धकवृष्णिषु वर्तते तब पूर्वपर प्रकृतिस्वरं भवति । 
. 34. The first member of a Dvandva compound, formed of names denoting thc Kshatriya ( warrior ) clans in 
BK. VI. C1. Il & 361 
DVANDA-ACCENT. 
1151 
the plural number, retains its original accent when the warrior belongs to the clan of Andhaka or Vrishņi. 
Thus rara FT:, Trat, feita anggar: 11 The words Svà phalka and Chaitraka are formed by spot affix (IV. 1. 114) and have acute on the last (Ill. 1. 3). The word fora has acute on the first syllable, and does not change in de moting Patronymic. Why do we say 'in denoting a Warrior clan'? Observe दप्यमायनाः ॥ Here प्य is derived from द्वीप by the affix य (IV. 3. IO)-द्वीपे भवाः। 
ARTT: HTTER FITN These names belong to Andhaka and Vrishội clans, but are not the warrior-names. The word op here means those Kshatriyas who belong to the family of annointed kings and warriors (Hatizat:); these (Dvaipya and Haimayana) do not belong to any such family. Why do we say 'in the Plural number'? Observe nurgal Why do we say 'in a Dvan dva compound'? Observe quotai ra:=ruegart: 11 Why do we say of Andhaka and Vfishni clans '? Observe 840MT: 11 
संख्या.॥ ३५॥ पदानि ॥ संख्या वृत्तिः ॥ इन्दूसमासे संख्यावाचि पूर्वपदं प्रकृतिस्वरं भवति । 
35. The Numeral word, standing as the first member of a Dvandva compound, preserves its accent. 
Thus एकादश, द्वादश, योदश or प्रयोदश॥ The word एक is derived from sp by 2 asfix (Uņ III. 43) and has acute on the first (VI. 1. 197). The guy is thic substitute of 1 (VI. 3. 48) and has acute on the final. 
भाचार्योपसर्जनश्चान्तेवासी ॥ ३६॥ पदानि । आचार्योपसर्जनः, च, अन्तेवा , ( Tesfa fata) वृत्तिः ॥ भाचार्योपसर्जनान्तवासिनां यो इन्द्रस्तपूर्वपदं प्रकृतिस्वरं भवति । 
36. When words denoting scholars are named after their teachers and are compounded into a Dvandva, the first member retains its accent. . 
The word share ineans 'a pupil''a boarding not a day scholar'. When the scholar is named by an epithet derived from the name of his teacher, that name is spraghsta: or teacher-derived name. Thus the afür frat:, for ita-teter, #U TTAT: 11 The son of Apišala is mijalla the name of a Teacher or founder of a schoolman acharya : formed by affix (IV. 1.95). The science taught by him is called strah, formed by adding spot allix to 99TI: (IV. 3. 101 and IV. 2. 11). The scholars who study the Apisalam are also called MITTAT: the affix denoting 'to study' is elided by (IV. 2. 59 and 64). Or thc pupils of Apisali will be also called Apisalah. Thus in both ways A pisalah is a scholar name derived from the name of a teacher. The word staatgasta qualifics the wholc Dvandva compound and 
20e 
1152 
DVANDVA-ACCENT. 
[ Bk. VI. Cri. II. $ 37 
not the first member only. That is, the whole compound in all its parts should denote scholars, whose names are derived from those of their teachers. There fore not here qriuata where though the first is a teacher-derived name, the second is not. Why do we say "names derived from the teacher's"? Observe Orario: 11 Why do we say "a Scholar"? Observe TOMirroratra 1 
Ar TTTTET II 31 T 11 T ISTI, , पतिः ॥ कातकोजपाया ये इन्दास्तेषु पूर्वपदं प्रकृतिस्वरं भवति । 
37. Also in the Dvandvas FreiTT &c, the first members retain their accent. 
Those words of this list which end in a dual or plural affix have been so exhibited for the sake of distinctness. The following is a list of thesc words. 1. 
m art (formed by stol IV. 1. 114 in the sense of Patronymic, from कृत and कुजप these being Rishi names)| 2. सावर्णिमाण्डुकेयो ( savarni is formed by Patron. affix and Arocena by sa IV. 1. 119). 3. BERHAT: The word Avanti is end-acute, to which is added thePatron affix îyan by IV. 1.171, which being a Tadraj is eiided in the plural; भवन्तीनां निवासी जनपद गवन्ति the quadruple significant for being elided. 
4. pintur:(Paila is derived from Pila the son of Pilå is Paila, the yuyan descendent of Paila will be formed by adding IV. 1, 156, which is, however, elided by II. 4. 59.) The word Syåparna belongs to Bidâdi class IV. I. 104, the female descendant will be Syaparni, the yuvan descendant of her will be Syä parneya. It is not necessary that the compound should be plural always 
We have पैलश्यापर्णेयो also. 
5. angguruar (Kapi has acute on the final. The son of Kapi will be formed by 74 IV, 1, 107, which is however elided by II. 4. 64. This com pound must, therefore, be always in the plural. 
6. Graafmagtama: (Sitikaksha is the name of a Rishi, his son will be Saitikáksha by U, IV. 1. 114, the yuvan descendant of the latter will be formed by which is elided by 11. 4. 58. Panchala's female descendant is Panchali, her yuvan descendant is Panchaleya. The plural number here is not compul 
sory. We have transmit also.) 
7. कडकबाथूलेयाः or कटुकवार्चलेयाः (The son of Katuka will be formed by FE IV. 1. 59, which is elided in the Plural by II. 4. 66. The son of Varchala 
is Vårchaleya). 
8. ramyaar: (The son of Sakala is Sakalya, his pupils are Sakalah by a IV. 2. III. The son of Sunak will be Saunaka by se IV, 1. 104, which will be elided in the Plural by II. 4. 64). Some read it as many, where the çà affix after Saņaka is elided by Il. 4. 66. So also : 1 
9. TUT: (the son of Babhru is Babhrava). 10. B ATTART: (Archá vinah are those who study the work produced by Richava, the affix 
BK. VI. C1. Il $ 47. ) 
DVANDVA-ACCENT. 
1153 
furat being added by IV. 3. 104. Mudgala belongs to Kanvadi class IV. 2. 111; Maudgalaḥ are pupils of the son of Mudgala). 11. glagter. This a Dvandva of Kunti and Suráshịra in the plural or of the country-names deriv ed from them like Avanti. Kunti and Chinti have acute on the final. 12. fafagtigt: as the last. 13. po st: (Both belong to Pachadi class formed by 377 111. 1. 134, from afs arga Bhvadi 300, 3 is formed from the same root with the prefix 77, the being elided, and both have acute on the final: and are enum crated in the Gargâdi list IV. 1. 105. In the plural the patronymic affix og is clided by 11. 4. 04. 14. spiraat: Here also ur asfix is elided II. 4. 64. 15. 19. ATTATYT: orfat: Avimatta has acute on the first being formed by the 77 particle. Both the words lose patronymic by II. 4. 66. 
16. an TIKETA: The son of Babhru is Babhrava, and the son of Salaiku or Salnika os 7517 IV. 1. 99 is Salankayana. 
17. 21 m ar: Danchyuta takes in the patronymic which is elid. ed by II. 4.66. 
18.75 MMT, Kathah are those who read the work of Katha, the asfix forfa (IV. 3. 104) being elided by IV. 3. 107. Those who study the work of Kalapin are Kalâpâh, the stat being added by IV. 3. 108, which required the 57 of kalậpin to be retained by VI. 4 164 but by a Vartika under VI. 4. 144 the 7 portion is elided before or le 
19. कटकौथुमाः Those who study the workof Kuthumin are कौथुमाः formed by sro IV. 1. 83 the r7 being elided before pup by VI. 4. 144 Vart already rcferred to abovc. 
20. ETYAPI Ter: Those who study the work of Lokáksha are Laukaa kshaḥ. Or the son of Lokáksha is Laukakshi, the pupils of latter are Lau kakshah. 
21. m arta 11 Strî has accent on the final. 
22. Ar t :, the son of Muda is Maudi, the pupils of latter arc Maudab. So also Paippaladah. 
23. Aracelet: Tlic double reading of this word indicates that Rule VI. 1. 223 also applies. 
24. TATIT or stra:=EFFE + SPATII Vatsa has acute on the final. 
25. So also argagretar:, The pupils of Susruta and Prithu are so called they take 77 IV. 1. 83. 26. Fr, 27. suara Yajya is formed by our added to up, the is not changed to a Guttural by VII. 3. 66. It has svarita on the final by ran accent (VI. 1. 185). Anuvakya is derived from anu + vach + can I 
महान् ब्रीह्यपरागृष्टीध्वासजाबालभारभारतहैलिहिलरौरवप्रवृद्धषु ॥ ३८ ॥ प atat ll HETTANTE, TE, TfT, GTF, sreta, HTC, Hica, trofees, thea, Hey, (Tefat each) 11 
1154 
KARMADHARAYA-ACCENT, 
[ BK, VI. CH, II, S. 40 
वृत्तिः ॥ प्रकृत्या पूर्वपदमिति वर्तत, इन्द्राति निवृत्तम् । महानिरयेतत्पूर्वपदं व्रीहि भपराह, गृष्टि इवास जाबाल भार भारत हैलिहिलं गैरव प्रवृद्ध इत्यतेपूनरपदेषु प्रकृतिस्वरं भवति । 
38. The word #ET (HET) retains its accent before the following : व्रीहि, अपराह, गृष्टि, इष्वास, जाबाल, भार, भारत, हलि हिल, रोरव, and प्रवृद्ध ॥ 
Thus महाव्रीहिः, महापराणः, महागृष्टिः, महेवासः, महाजाबालः, महाभारः, महाभारतः, महा हलिहला, महारोरवा, महाप्रवृद्धः ॥ The महत् has acute on the final. (Un II. 84) On the पतिपदोक्त maxim already mentioned under VI. 2. 26, this accent will apply to that compound of Hea which it forms under rule 11. 1. 61, for that is the particular rule of Karmadharaya compounding relating to mahat (pratipadokta). This rule therefore, will not apply to Genitive Tatpurusha. Thus महतो ब्रीहिः - महदूव्रीहि: 
which has accent on the final by VI. I. 223. 
2. The word wat is a Participle formed by i affix, and by rule VI. 2. 46, in a Karmadharaya compound, the first member will retain its original accent. What is then the necessity of reading this word in this sūtra? Ans. That sutra VI. 2. 46 applies, cn the maxiin of pradipadokta, to the special participles and nouns mentioned in II. 1. 59 and not to every parti ciple and noun. 
क्षुल्लकश्च वैश्वदेवे ॥३९॥ पदानि ॥ क्षुल्लकः, च, वैश्वदेवे ॥ वृत्तिः । क्षुलक रयतत्पूर्वपदं महाभ वैश्वदेवउत्तरपदे प्रकृतिस्वरं भवति । 
39. The words mahat and kshullaka retain their accent before the word Vaišvadeva. 
Thus महविश्वदेवम् , and क्षुलवश्वदेवम् ॥ The word kshullaka is derived thus a लाति- क्षुः to which the Diminutive क (V. 3.73&c) is added : and the word has udatta on the final. 
उष्ट्रः सादिवाम्योः ॥४०॥ पदानि ॥ उष्ट्रः, सादि, वाम्योः ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ उष्ट्रायः पूर्वपदं सादिवाभ्योरुत्तरपदयो प्रकृतिस्वरं भवति ।। 
40. The word 'ushtra' retains its accent before sådi' and 'râmi'. 
Thus उष्टसादि and उष्ट्रवामि ॥ The word राष्ट्र is derived from उप् by ष्टन् affix (Un IV. 162) and has acute on the first (VI. I. 197). This is either a Karmadharaya or a Genitive compound. In some texts the above examples are given with a visarga in the masculine, and not Neuter. 
गौः सादसादिसारथिषु ॥४१॥ पदानि ॥ गौः, साद, सादि, सारथिषु, प्रकृति स्वरम् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ गोशब्दः पूर्वपरं साद सादि सारथि इत्येतेषुत्तरपदेषु प्रकृतिस्वरं भवति । 
BK. VI. CI. 1 8 171.] 
SAMASA-ACCENT. 
1155 
41. The word 'गो' retains its accent before 'sada', ' sadi', and — sarathi'. 
Thus गोःसादः or गां सादयति = गोसादः, गो सादिगो सादिः, and गो सारयिः ॥साद is formed from सद् with the affix घम् and forms a Genitive compound (गोर सादः). Or from the causative verb सादयाति, we get गोसार: by adding भण् (III. 9. 1) गोसादी is formed by farfa from the same causative root. The Krit-accent is debarred in the case of साद and सादिन् , the Samasa-accent VI. I. 223 in the case of साराये। ___ कुरुगार्हपतरिक्तगुर्वसूतजरत्यश्लीलदृढरूपा पारेवडबा तैतिलकः पण्यकम्बलो दासीभाराणां च ॥४२॥ पदानि ॥ कुरुगाहपत, रिक्तगुरु, असूतजरती, अश्लीलह ढरूपा, पारेवडबा, तैतिलकद्रूः, पण्यकम्वलः, दासीभाराणाम, च, प्रकृतिस्वरम् ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ कुरुगार्हपत रिक्तगुरु भसूतजस्ती अश्लीलवरूपा पारेवडवा तैतिलकद पण्यकम्बल इत्येते समा. सास्तेषां दासीभारादीनां च पूर्वपदप्रकृतिस्वरं भवति ।। 
वार्तिकम् ॥ कुरुवृश्योहपताति वक्तव्यम् ॥ वा० ॥ संज्ञायामिति नष्यम् ।। 
42. The first member retains its accent in the following :- Kuru-garhapata', 'Rikta-guru', ' Asuta-jarati', ' Aslila-dridha-rapa.', ' Pare-vadaba.', 'Taitila-kadrdh', 'Pan ya-kambalah' and 'Dasi-bhara &c'. 
The first seven words are compounds, the first two of these are exhibi ted without any case-ending, the renaining five are in nom. Singular. T कुरुगाहपतम् (कुरूणां हिपत, Kuru is formed by कु affix addel to Un I. 24) and has acute on the final, 
___Vart:-So also वृजिगाईपतम् , the word Vriji has acute accent on the first. 
So also रिक्तो गुरु-रिक्तगुरु' or रिक्तगुरुः for rikta has acuteeither on the first or on the second (VI. I. 208). Soalso असूता जरती- भैसूतजरती, अश्लीलाहवरुपा-अश्लील दृहरूपा || Asata and aslila being formed by नम particle have acute on the first : (VI. 2. 2). That which has it is called to, the asfix my being added by its belonging to Sidhinadi class, and changed to by its belonging to kapilakadi class. So also पारवडवा, this is= पारवडवेव ।। This is a samasa with the force of 
, and there is elision of the case ending. The word or belongs to Ghritadi class, and has acute on the final. तैतिलानां का तैतिलकः , the son or pupil of Titilin is Taitila formed by भण् affix. पण्यकम्बल', panya ends in यत् and has acute on the first (VI. 1. 213). 
Vart:--पण्यकम्बलः has acute on the first only when it is a name. Other. wise in groase din compound, the accent will be on the final by the general rule VI. I. 223. The word पण्य being frrmed by यत् affix (III. I. I0I) is acute ly accented on the first (VI. I. 213). The word पण्यकम्बलः is as Name when it means the market-blanket i. e. a blanket of a well known determinate size 
1156 
SAMASA-ACCENT. 
[BK. VI. Cu. 11. S. 44 
10 
and fixed price, which is generally kept for sale by the blanket-sellers. But when the compound means a saleable blanket, it takes the samasa accent (VI. 1, 223). If it be objected what is the use this Vartika, for the word qoy being formed by a kritya affix, will retain its accent in the Tatpurusha, by VI. 2. 2, we reply that the heat used in V1.2.2 relates to pratipadokta kritya compounds such as ordained by curare la II. 1. 68, while here the compound is by radiqui frusgo II, 1, 51 and is a general compound. So also TEATART: = HT: 11 The words belonging to Dåsi bhårádi class are all those Tatpurusha compound words, not governed by any of the rules of accent, in which it is desired that the first member should retain its accent. Some of them are para, ara:, fira:, 
graftfa: 1 Vasu has acute on the first being formed by a fa allix Un l. 9 10). mafu: -siltutaaskann, formed by fat asfix (111. 3. 93), siis being form ed by q has acute on the first (VI. 1. 197). AT: is formed by sia affix added to the root माड् माने preceded by the upapada चन्द्र as, चन्द्र+मा+ अस् - चन्द्र 
E, the affix being treated as a (Uņ IV. 228), and is formed by an affix (Uņ II. 13) and has acute on the final. 
चतुर्थी तदर्थे ॥४३॥ पदानि ॥ चतुर्थी, तदर्थे, प्रकृतिस्वरम् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ चतुर्यन्तं पूर्वपदं तदर्यउत्तरपदे तदभिधेयाथै यत्तवाधिन्युत्तरपरे प्रकृतिस्वरं भवति । तरिति चतुर्यन्तस्यार्थः परामृभ्यते । 
43. A word in the Dative case as the first member retains its accent, when the second member expresses that which is suited to become the former. 
Thus यूपदारु, कुण्डलहिरण्यम ॥ The word यूप् has accent on the first syll able, as it is formed by q (Uņ III. 27) treated as a raq (Uņ III. 26). The word om is formed by in affix which is treated as fara (Uņ. I. 108) and has acute on the final. So also kręce, mer4411 Ratha is first-acute formed by kthan affix (Uņ II. 2). Vallt has acute on the final forined by str asfix. (IV. 1.41) Why do we say 'it being suited to the first'? Observe tri il This accent applies when the second member denoting the material is modificd into the first by workmanship. The composition takes place by II. 1. 36. 
of 8811 via il ri, oferece II वृत्तिः ।। चतुर्थीति वर्तते । अर्थशम्नउत्तरपदे चतुयन्तं पूर्वपदं प्रकृतिस्वरं भवति । 
44. Before the word "artha', the first member in the Dative retains its accent. 
Thus Arū A1512, in, oralarak The words are and fra arc finally acute as taught so in Uñadi satra (Uņ 11. 95): daar being formed by a fare affix (V. 4. 27) has acute on the middle ; fafu is formed by mira affix and has acute on the first, BK. VI. C11. II $ 47 ]. 
SAMASA-ACCENT. 
· 1137 
The difference between me and spent is that the former, like me 'wood', foron 'gold', has not inherent in it the sense of adaptibility, while 
4 means 'adapted'. Some say that the making of two sâtras, one with au and the other with ont indicates, that the former rule is applicable only to that compound where the material itself is changed into the substance of the first. Therefore the rule does not apply to wtur:, ECE &c, though 'grass be suited for the horse' &c. 
184 11 alfa il , a, Fata 11 पतिः॥कान्ते चोभरपदे चतुयन्तं पूर्वपदं प्रकृतिस्वरं भवति । 
45. The first member in the Dative case retains its accent before a Past Participle in all 
____Thus गोहितम, मनुष्यहितम्, भश्वहितम्, गौरक्षितम्, भैश्वरक्षितम् , तापसरक्षितम् धनम् ॥ The compounding takes place by II. 1. 36. The compound fortfara means itr. 
retag and is a sampradana Dative. 
कर्मधारये ऽनिष्ठा ॥ ४६॥ पदानि ॥ कर्मधारये, अनिष्ठा, प्रकृतिस्वरम् । वृत्तिः । कर्मधारय समासे कान्तउत्तरपदे ऽनिष्ठान्तं पूर्वपदं प्रकृतिस्वरं भवति ।। 
46. Before a Past Participle in 'kta', the first member, when it itselfis not a Past Participle, retains its ori. 
ginal accent in a Karmadhåraya compound. 
This rule is confined to the Past Participles and the Nouns specific. ally mentioned in 11. 1. 59 ; on the maxim of pratipadokta &c. Thus for 
GAT, maar:, zari, favagar: N The word for has acute on the first as it is formed by the affix a which is considered faq (Uņ IV. 51). The word got is end-acutc as it is formed by the affix (Uņ I. 124). The word is also end-acutc (VI. 2. 32). The word fus has acute on the middle. Why do we say in a Karmadharaya compound ? Observe out 
all Why do we say when it is a non-nishtha word ?' Observe maand Here the compound. ing is by II. 1. 60. 
अहीने द्वितीया ॥४७॥ पदानि ॥ महीने, द्वितीया ॥ {#: 11 artaraf ata FATÈ Thiraim faarura agendaeni mata 
nu ferrariyata 79,6479 
47. Before a Past Participle in 'kta', a word ending in the Accusative case retains its accent, when it does not mean a separation. 
Thus réce, fourniaa:, tarrat: 11 Kashta has acute on the end, trišakala is a Bahuvrihi compound (triņi Sakalani asya), and consequently acute on the first : grama has acute on the first as it is formed by the fræ aflix 
1158 
SAMASA-ACCENT. 
[ BK. VI. CI. II $ 49 
y added to 44, the final being replaced by my (Uņ I. 143) # Why do we say when not meaning separation'? Observe Teratai, arafai, because one has taken himself beyond käntara and yojana. 
Vårt :--This rule does not apply when the Past Participle lias an upasarga attached; as garr, Je ya , germ: (VI. 4. 144). This is an exception to rule VI. 2. 144. 
Taient FÅTT II Bella Il arter, Tot, (anufafath) वृत्तिः ॥ कर्मवाचिनि क्तान्तउत्तरपदे तृतीयान्तं पूर्वपदं प्रकृतिस्वरं भवति । 
48. A word ending in an Instrumental case rc tains its accent before the Past Participle in 'kta', when it has a Passive mcaning. 
Thus ita or area: :, 151697, HRICT TEA, Terrafáar, s ar! The word 'ahi' is derived froin with the proposition at which is shortened, and the affix rot (Uņ IV. 138), and has acute on the final, according to others the acute is on the first : Rudra is formed by affix (Uņ 11. 22) added to the causative ur; Maharaja is formed by the Samasanta affix ; nakha is formed by u affix added to a (Uņ V. 23) or it may be a Bahuvrihi area Cen=76i, formed by 9 (V. 4. 121), and has acute on the final : Datra is formed by g7 (III. 2. 182). Why do we say when having a Passive significa tion ? Observe to 17:=trara, the 'kta' is added to a verb of motion with an Active significance. 
matarac: || 88 il Teulat il fa, farar: ( farterta) 11 वृत्तिः ॥ के कर्मणीति वर्तते । कर्मवाधिनितान्तउत्तरपदे गतिरनन्तरः पूर्वपदं प्रकृतिस्वरं भवति ।। 
49. A word called Gati (I. 4. 60) when standing immediately before a Participle in 'kta' having a l'assive significance, retains its accent. 
Thus rea,gan: ! Here one of the following rules would have applied otherwise, namely, cither (1) the Samasa end-acute IV. 1. 223 (2) or the Inde clinable first member to retain its accent VI. 2. 2, (3) or the end acute by VI. 2. 139 and 144. The present sútra debars all these. Why do we say 'imme diately ?' Observe antron, Y, TESTER: 1 Where the distant Gati words Afy and do not preserve their accent, but the immediately preceding Gati, as y does retain its accent, though it is not the first member of the compound word. Compare also VIII. 2. 70. But in + atra: (agata being governed by this rule) we have to:, (II. s. 39 and VI. 3. 2) where VI, 2. 144 has its scope, though it had not its scope in sii+ ya: - ya: 11 In the former case this maxim applies कृदग्रहणे गतिकारकपूर्वस्यापि ग्रहणं ॥ “A Krit affix denotes whenever it is employed, a word-forın which begins with that to which that 
BK. VI. Ch. II. $ 51 ] 
SANASA-ACCENT. 
1159 
Krit affix has been added, and which ends with the Krit affx, but moreover shorld a Gati or a noun such as denotes a case-relation have been prefixed to that word-form, then the Krit affix must denote the same word-form together with the Gati or the noun which may have been prcfixed to it". In the second example, this maxiın is not applied, because scope should be given to the word भनन्तर in this aphorism. When the Participle has not a Passive significance, the rule does not apply because the word fo is understood here also; as, प्रकृतः कटं देवदत्तः। This sotra debars VI. 2. 144. ___ तादौ च निति कृत्यतौ ॥५०॥ पदानि ॥ तादो, च, निति, कृत्ति, अ-ती॥ . 
वृत्तिः ॥ तकारादौ च तुम्दवर्जिते निति कृति परतो गतिरनन्तरः प्रकृतिस्वरो भवति ।। 
50. An immediately preceding Gati retains itş original accent before (a word formed by) a Krit-affix beginning with a, which has an indicatory 7, but not be fore तु॥ 
___Thus प्रकर्ता (with हुन् ) कर्तुम् (with तुमुन् ), प्रकृतिः (with तिन्) ॥ This sätra debars the Kpit-affix accent (VI. 2. 139). Why do we say "before an affix beginning with t"? Observe प्रल्पाक: formed with the affix पाकन् (III. 2. 155), and the Gati z, the accent being governed by VI. 2. 139. Why do we say 'which is नित्'? Observe प्रकर्ता formed by नृच् affix. When a Krit-affix takes the augment , it does not lose its character of beginning with it on the Vartika कृदुपदेशो वा तार्थमिडर्थम् ॥ Thus प्रेलपिता, मलपितुम् ।। Why do we say but not before तु"? Observe आगन्तुः with the Unadi affix तुन् । 
तवै चान्तश्च युगपत् ॥ ५१॥ पदानि ॥ तवै, च, अन्तः, च, युगपत, (उदात्तः प्रकृतिस्वरम्)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ तवैप्रत्ययस्यान्त उरातो भवति गतिश्चानन्तः प्रकृतिस्वर इति एतदुभयं वुगपश्यति ।। 
51. An immediately preceding Gati retains its original accent before an Infinitive in तवै (III. 4. 14) but whereby simultaneously the final has the acute as well, 
Thus अन्वेता, परिस्तरित, परिपात, अभिचरितवै ॥ All upasargas have acute on the first except 'abhi': which therefore has acute on the final. ( Phit Su IV. 13) which declares उपसर्गा आगुदात्ता अभिवर्जम् ॥ This debars कुत् accent (VI. 2. 139) and is an exception to the rule that in a single word, a single syllable only has acute. 
अनिगन्तोञ्चतौ वप्रत्यये ॥५२॥ पदानि ॥ भनिगन्तः, अञ्चती, वप्रत्यये, (प्र कृतिस्वरः) 
वृत्तिः ॥ भनिगन्तो गतिः प्रकृतिस्परो भवत्यञ्चत्तौ चमत्यये परतः ॥ 
166 
SAMASA-ACCENT. 
[ BK. VI. CH. HIS55. 
52. An immediately preceding Gati not ending in g or 3, retains its original accent before a when an affix having a q follows. 
Thus माय माग्ची, प्राचः or प्रार, प्राची, प्राचः॥ The accent is acute and optionally svarita by VIII. 2. 6. So also पराइ, राज्ची, राज्चा , पैराचा, पराचा ।। But with प्रति which ends in r, we have प्रत्यक, प्रत्यचौ, प्रत्यञ्चः here by VI. 2. 139 the second member retains its original accent. Why do we say 'before an affix a'? Observe 3947: 11 When the nasal of 'anch' is elided, then rule VI. 1. 222 presents itself; but that rule is superseded when a Gati not ending in for a precedes, because the present rule is subsequent. Thus ry: and पैराचाः ॥ In some texts, the reading is मञ्चतापमत्यये ॥ The affix is like किए &c, (VI. 1.67). 
न्यधी च ॥ ५३॥ पदानि ॥ नि, अधी, च, (प्रकृतिस्वरौ)॥ त्तिः ॥ नि मधि इत्येतो चाचतो वमस्यये परतः प्रकृतिस्वरी भवतः ॥ 
53. The Gatis fa and arra, however, retain their original accent before ' anch'followed by a a affix. 
Thus न्य, न्यञ्चो , न्यश्चः ॥ The w becomes svarita by VIII. 2.4 So also भध्यह, मध्यञ्चो, भैध्यञ्चः, भधीयः, भैधाचा, नीचः, नीचा ॥ 
ईषदन्यतरस्याम् ॥ ५४॥ पदानि ॥ ईषत्, अन्यतरस्या, (प्रकृतिस्वरम् )। पतिः ॥ पदित्यतत्पूर्वपदमन्यतरस्यां प्रकृतिस्वरं भवति ॥ 
54. The word era when first member of a com pound may optionally preserve its original accent. 
Thus tषतकार: or षतकडाः , पिपिङ्गाल: or ईषपिङ्गलः ॥ त् has acute on the final. But in ईपभेदः &c, the Krit-accent will necessarily take place (VI. 2. 139); no option being allowed; because the compounds to which the present rule applies are, on the maxim of pratipadokta, those formed by frt with non Krit words under II. 2.7. 
हिरण्यपरिमाणं धने ॥ ५५॥ पदानि ॥ हिरण्य-परिमाणम, धने, (प्रकृतिस्वरम)। वृत्तिः ।। हिरण्यपरिमाणवापि पूर्वपदं धनशमउत्तरपदे ज्यतरस्यां प्रकृतिस्वरं भवति ।। 
55. The first member, denoting the quantity of gold, retains optionally its original accent, before the word धन॥ 
Thus दिसुवर्ण धनम् or विसुवर्णधनम् ॥ This is a Karmadharaya compound सुवर्णी परिमाणमस्य-दिसुवर्ण, तदेव धनम् ।। It may also be treated as a Bahuvrihi compound, then the accent will be of that compound, as हि सुवर्णधन : or दिसुवर्ण. धनः।। Why do we say 'gold'? Observe प्रस्थधनम् ॥ Why do we say 'quan. tity'? Observe कांचनधनम् ॥ Why do we say 'धन'Observe निष्कमाला ॥ . 
B. vi. C. II. 5. 58] 
SAMASA-ACCENT. 
1161 
- 
- 
प्रथमोऽचिरोपसंपत्ती॥५६॥ पदानि ॥प्रथमः,अचिरः,उपसम्पत्तौ (प्रकृतिस्वरम) इतिः ॥ प्रथमशम्मः पूर्वपदमचिरोपसंपनी गम्यमानायामन्यतरस्यां प्रकृतिस्वरं भवति । भधिरापसंपत्तिर पिरोपश्लेषोऽभिनवस्वम् ।। 
56. The word प्रथम when standing first in a com pound, retains optionally its original accent when meaning 'a novice'. . The word अधिरोपसंपत्ति = मधिरोपलेष or भभिनवस्वम् ॥ Thus प्रयमवयाकरणः or प्रथमवैयाकरणः - संप्रतिष्याकरणमध्येतुं प्रवृत्तः 'one who has recently commenced to study Grammar'. The word प्रथम is derived from अथ by मम (Un V.68) and by fac accent the acute falls on the last. Why do we say when meaning 'n Novice?' Observe प्रथमवयाकरणः (वैयाकरणानामाद्यो मुण्यो वा यः सः) the first Grammarian or a Grammarian of the first rank'. It will always have acute on the final. 
कतरकतमौ कर्मधारये ॥५७॥ पदानि ॥ कतर-कतमी, कर्मधारये, प्रकृतिस्वरम्॥ पतिः॥ कतरशन्नः कतमशब्दच पूर्वपदं कर्मधारये समासे ऽन्यरतस्यां प्रकृतिस्वरं मवति ॥ 
57. The words art and TH standing as the first member of a compound retain optionally their original ac cent in a Karmadhâraya. 
Thus कतरकरः or कतरकः, कतर्मकरः or कतमकठः॥ The word Karma. dharaya is used for the sake of the next sätra, this sotra could have done without it, as 'katara' and 'kataina' by the maxim of pratipadokta, form only Karmadharaya compound by II. I. 63. ___ आर्यों ब्राह्मणकुमारयोः ॥५८॥ पदानि ॥ आर्यः, ब्राह्मण-कुमारयोः, प्रकृतिस्वरम्॥ वृत्तिः ॥ भार्यशन पूर्वपदं ब्राह्मणकुमागानयोरुत्तरपदयोः कर्मधारय समासे ऽन्यतरस्यां प्रकृतिस्वरं भवति । 
58. Tlie word art optionally retains its original accent in a Karmadhārayau, before the words ब्राह्मण and कुमार॥ 
Thus आयब्राह्मणः or भार्यबाह्मणैः, भार्यकुमारः or मार्यकुमारः॥ The word आर्य is formed by og allix and has svarita on the final. Why do we say 'Arya'? Observe परमब्राह्मणः, परमकुमारः ॥ Why do we say before 'Brahmana' and 'Ku mara'> Obscrve BTINTA: 1 Why 'Karmadharaya ?' Observe opriri HTETUT: 
मायब्राह्मणः ॥ According to the Accentuated Text the accent is भार्य ( Pro. Bohtlingk). 
राजा च ॥ ५९॥ पदानि ॥ राजा, च॥ . वृत्तिः ॥ राजा च पूर्वपरं ब्राह्मणकुमारयोरुत्तरपत्योः कर्मधारय समासे ऽन्यतरस्यां प्रकृतिस्वरं भवति । 
59. The word Tt retains optionally its accent ... before the words — Brahmana' and 'Kumara', in a Karma 
dhåraya. 
SAMASA-ACCENT. 
[ BK. VI. CI. II. $6. 
Thus राजब्राह्मणः or राजब्राहाणा, राजकुमार: or राजकुमारः ॥ The word राजन् is formed by the affix कनिन् added to राश (Un I. 156). But राज्ञो ब्राह्मण राजब्राह्मणः where the compound is not Karmadharaya. The making of this a separate aphorism is for the purpose of preventing the yathasankhya rule and also for the sake of the subsequent sätra into which the anuvritti of ust runs and 
not of मार्य। 
षष्ठी प्रत्येनसि ॥६०॥ पदानि ॥ षष्ठी, प्रत्येनसि, (अन्यतरस्याम् राजा प्रकृति स्वरम् ॥ 
वृतिः ॥ राजति वर्तते, ऽन्यतरस्यामिति च । पष्टपन्तो राजशब्दः पूर्वपद प्रत्येनस्युनरे ऽन्यतरस्यां प्रकृतिस्वरं भवति।। 
60. The word 'rijan' ending in the Genitive case optionally retains its accent before the word प्रत्येनम् ॥ 
The words राजन् and अन्यतरस्याम् are understood here also. Thus राज्ञः प्रत्येनाः or राज्ञः प्रत्येनी The sign of the Genitive is not elided by VI.3. 21. When माकोश is not meant we have, राजसत्येना or राजप्रत्येनाः॥ Why do we say 'ending in the Genitive'? Observe राजा चासौ प्रन्यनाम-राजप्रत्यना: no option. 
के नित्यार्थे ॥ ६१॥ पदानि ॥ के, नित्यार्थे (पूर्वपदम् अन्यतरस्याम् प्रकृति स्वरम)। वृत्तिः ॥ तान्त उत्तरपदे नित्यार्थे समासे पूर्वपदमन्यतरस्यां प्रकृतिस्वरं भवति । 
61. A word having the sense of 'always', retains optionally its accent before a Past Participle in क॥ 
Thus नित्यमहसितः or नित्यप्रहसितः, सततप्रहसितः or सततमहसितः ॥ These are Accusative compounds formed under Rule I. I. 28. निस्य is formed by त्या affix added to the upasarga नि (IV. 2. 104 Vart); and has acute on the first, the upasarga retaining its accent, the affix being anudatta (III. I. 4). The word wat being formed by F affix with the force of 14, has acute on final by VI. 2. 14. If it be considered to have been formel by कर्मणि न, then the ac. cent will be on the beginning by VI. 2. 49. Why do we say when the first term 
means 'alvays'? Observe मुहूर्तमहासतः ॥ In the case of नित्यपहासतः &c the sa måsa accent VI. 1.223 was first set aside by the Accusative Tatpurusha accent VI. 2, 2. this in its turn was set aside by fi accent VI. 2. 144, which is again debarred by the present. 
प्रामः शिल्पिनि ॥ ६२॥ पदानि ॥ प्रामः, शिल्पिनि, (अन्यतरस्याम् प्रकृति स्वरम् ॥ 
धृतिः ॥ मामशब्दः पूर्वपद शिल्पिवाचिन्युत्तरपदे ऽम्यतरस्यां प्रकृतिस्वरं भवति । 
62. The word ग्राम when first member of a com pound, optionally retains its accent before a word denoting “a professional man (r artisan". 
BK. VI. C11. II. 8.64 1 
SAMASA-ACCENT. 
1163 
Thus मामनापित: or ग्रामनापित, प्रामकुलालor मामकुलालः ॥ The word प्राम has acute on the first. Why do we say "219"? Observe quhartall Why do we say 'a silpi a professional workinan'? Observe ATHROT; where there is no option. 
राजा च प्रशंसायाम् ॥ ६३॥ पदानि । राजा, च, प्रशंसायाम, (अन्यतरस्याम् la Fach) 11 वृत्तिः ॥ राजशब्दः पूर्वपदं शिल्पिवाधिन्युत्तरपदे प्रशंसायां गम्यमानाया मन्यतरस्यां प्रकृतिस्वरं भवति । 
63. The word TTT followed by a profession-de noting noun, optionally retains its accent, when praise is to be expressed. 
Thus ita: or ranga, ramai or 
"A royal barber i. e. a skillful barber or one fit to serve the king even" &c. It may be either a Karmadharaya or a Genitive compound. Why do we say '*7'? Observe qarTat: Why do we say when denoting praise? Observe hanga king's barber'. Why do we say a professional man'? Observe que 'a royal clephant'. ___ आदिरुदात्तः ॥ ६४॥ पदानि । आदिः, उदात्तः । 
वृत्तिः ।। माविरुवान इत्येताधिकृतमित उत्तरं यस्यामस्तत्र पूर्वपदस्याविरुवात्तो भवतीत्येवं तदेदितव्यम् ।। 
64. In the following up to VI. 2. 91 inclusive the phrase “the first syllable in-(the word standing in the Nominative) has the acute", is to be always supplied. 
This is an adhikära aphorisın. The first syllable of the guy will get the acute in the following aphorisms. In short, the phrase "adir udatta' should be supplied to complete the sense of the subsequent sätras. The very next sätra illustrates it. That sätra literally means "i word in the Locative case or a word denoting the name of the receiver of a tax or tri bute, standing before a word denoting that which is lawful, but not before FTOT". To complete the sense we must supply the words "has acute on the first syllable". Thus Faur, gaur FriT , , ritararaft # The word syft 'the first syllable' is understood upto VI. 2. 91, the word uit has longer stretch: it governs upto VI. 2. 137. 
WHÄTETTUR SETU 11 64 11 qera II Fuht, arcuit, ETU, ( ETH) 11 
वृत्तिः ॥ साम्यन्तं हारिवाधिप पूर्वपरं धर्म्यवाधिनि हरणशब्दादन्यामिन्नुत्तरपदे भावानं भवति । 
05. The first member of a compound, if in the Locative case or denoting the name of the Receiver of il tax, has acuto on the first syllable, when the second member is a word denoting 'what is lawful', but not when it is our 1 
1164 
SAMASA-ACCENT. 
[ BK. VI. Cr. 11.567 
The word giftof means 'appropriates the dues or taxes': and yra means 'the due or tax which has been determined by the custom or usage, of the country, town, sect or family. that which one is lawfully entitled to get'. The word is formed by an under IV. 4. 91 and 92 and has the sense of both. Or Locative words we have the following examples : -स्तुप-शाणा मुकुटे कार्षापणम् , इले-दिपदिका, हले-विपदिका, दृषदि-माषकः ॥ These compounds are formed under 11. 1. 44, and the sign of the Locative is not elided by VI. 3. 9 and 10. 
With the name of a due-receiver हारी we have the following :--याज्ञिकाश्वः “the horse which is the customary due of the sacrificer'. So also याकरणहस्ती, मातुलाश्वः, पितृव्यगवः ॥ In some places the established usage is to give a nाण coin in every sacred Tope &c, or to give a horse to a sacrificer &c. Why do we say 'whac is lawful'? Observe स्तम्बरमः, कर्मकर वर्द्धितकः पादतको नाम मूले स्थलोग्रे सूक्ष्म भादन पिण्डा, स कर्मकराय दीयते, अन्यथा कर्म न कुर्यादिति, न स्वयं धर्मः ॥ Why do we say "but not before हरण"? Observe वाडवहरणम् ' that which is given to a mare'. हरण is that customary food which is given to a mare after she has been covored, in order to strengthen her. The word oo is a Krit-formed word, its exclusion here indicates that other Krit-formed words however are governed by this rule when preceded by a er denoting word; and thus this sûtra supersedes the Krit accent enjoined by VI. 2. 139, so far. Thus arcata: has acute on the first by this rule, the subsequent VI. 2. 139 not applying. 
युक्ते च ॥ ६६ ॥ पदानि ॥ युक्ते, च, (आधुदात्तम् )॥ वृत्तिः ॥ युक्तवापिनि च समासे पूर्वपदमागुदात्तं भवति । 
66. The first member of a compound has acute on the first syllable, when the second member denotes that by whom the things denoted by the first are regulated or kept in order. 
The word ghi means 'he who is prompt in the discharge of his appointed duty' i.e. the person appointed to look after. Thus गोबनवः 'a cowherd looking after cow': अश्ववलवः, गोमणिन्दा, भश्चमीणन्द', गो संख्यः, भश्वसंख्यः ॥ 
All these word पल्लवः, माणिन्दः, सरायः &c mean पालकः the protector &c. 
विभाषा ऽध्यक्षे ॥ ६७॥ पदानि ॥ विभाषा, अध्यक्षे, (आयुदातम्)॥ वृत्तिः । अध्यक्षशदउत्तरपये विभाषा पूर्वपदमाधुसनं भवति ॥ 
67. The acute is optionally on the first syllable when the word y follows. 
___Thus जवाध्यक्षः or गवाध्यक्षः 'a superintendent of cows' : भैश्वाध्यक्षः or भश्चाध्यक्षः॥ __पापंच शिल्पिनि ॥ ६८॥ पदानि ॥ पापम्, च,शिल्पिनि, (विभाषा)(आधुदात्तः)। 
वृत्तिः ॥ पापशब्दः पिल्पिवाचिन्युत्तरपदे विभापा ऽऽनुदानो भवति । 
।। 
BK. VI. CI. II 870.] 
FIRST-ACUTE. 
1165 
68. The word me has optionally acute on the first syllable when followed by a word denoting a professional 
man. 
Thus पापनापितः or पापनापितः, पापकुलाला or पापकुलालः ॥ This rule applies to the pratipadokta samasa of gre in the sense of censure as taught in II. 1. 54, when it is an appositional compound; and not when it forms a Genitive compound. Thus पापस्यनापितः-पापनापितः ।। 
गोत्रान्तेवासिमाणवब्राह्मणेषु क्षेपे ॥ ६९॥ पदानि ॥ गोत्र, अन्तेवासि, माणव, ब्राह्मणेषु, क्षेपे, (पूर्वपदम् आधुदात्तम् ) 
वृत्तिः ॥ गोत्रवाचिन्यन्तवासिवाचिान घोत्तरपदे माणवब्राह्मणयोश्च क्षेपवाचिनि समासे पूर्वपदमागुत्तम् भवति॥ 
69, The first syllable of the first member of a compound has the acute accent before a Patronymic name or a scholar-name, as well as before माणव and ब्राह्मण, when a reproach is mcant. . Thus जैघावास्यः- यो जंघादानं वदान्यहमिति वात्स्या, संपद्यते सा; या श्राद्धादी वास्या नामेव पावप्रक्षालनं क्रियते, तत्रावास्यः सन् वात्स्याऽहमिति इते तलाभाय सः॥ भार्यासाश्रुतः 'a de scendant of Susruta under the petticoat government of his wife'. The com pounding takes place by the analogy of शाकपार्थिवः ॥ वैशाब्राकृतयः (Brahmakrita belongs to Subluradi class). The above are examples of Gotra words. Now 
with scholar names. कुमारीदाक्षाः 'the pupils of Daksha for the sake of marriage i. e. who study the work of Daksha or make themselves the pupils of Daksha for the sake of girls'. कैम्बलचारायणीयाः, तरीठीयाः, and भोदनपाणिनीया' &c. भिक्षामाणय: -भिक्षालप्स्येऽहमिति माणवो भवति ।। सीब्राह्मणः, वृषली ब्राह्मण, भयब्राह्मणः- यो भयेन ब्राह्मणः fromà i Compounding by II. 1.4 whicre no other rule applics. Why do we say when followed by a Gotra word ?' Observe दासीप्रोधियः ।। Why do we say 'when reproach is meant?' Observe महाब्राह्मणः ॥ 
अङ्गानि मैरेये ॥ ७० ॥ पदानि ॥ अङ्गानि, मैरेये, (आधुदातानि)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ भैरेयशनउत्तरपदे तदङ्गवाचीनि पूर्वपदान्यायुदानानि भवन्ति । 
70. The first syllable of the word preceding मैरेय, gets the acute, when it denotes the ingredient of the same. 
Thus trata: thc winc inaireya prepared from treacle or molasses'. मधुमेरेयः 'the maireya prepared from honey'. Why do we say when denoting 'an ingredient?' Observe परममरयः ॥ Why do we say " before मेरेय?" Observe पुष्पासवः॥ Every sort of spirituous liquor except सुरा is called मेरेय ।। 
भक्ताख्यास्तदर्थेषु ॥ ७१ ॥ पदानि ॥ भक्ताख्याः, तदर्थेषु, (आयुदात्ताः)॥ वृत्तिः ।। भक्तमनं तदाण्यास्तदाधिनः शनास्तदर्थेषुत्तरपदेषु भाएदाता भवन्ति ।। 
1166 
FIRST-ACUTE. 
[BK. VI. CI. II. 8.73 
71. A word denoting food gets the acute on the first syllable, when standing before a word which denotes a repository suited to contain that. 
Thus भिक्षावासः, भक्तकंसः, श्राणाकंसः, भाभीकंसः ॥ The words like भिक्षा, भक्त &c, are names of food. Why do we say 'when denoting the name of food'? Observe समाशशालयः (the word समाशसमशनं is the name of an action' and not of a 'substance'). Why do we say tadartheshu suited to contain that'? Observe fantai, which is a Bahuvrihi, and the first member gets acute on the final. 
गोबिडालसिंहसैन्धवेषूपमाने ॥ ७२॥ पदानि ॥ गो, बिडाल, सिंह, सेन्धवेषु, उपमाने, (आयुदात्तम)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ गवादिषूपमानवाचिधूनरपदेषु पूर्वपदमाशुदान भवति ॥ 
72. A word denoting the object of comparison gets the acute on the first syllable when standing before ott, बिडाल, सिंह, and सैन्धव ॥ 
Thus धान्यगवाधान्यं गौरिव ॥ The compounding takes place by II. I. 56, the words गो &c, being considered to belong to Vyaghradi class, which is an Akpitigana. The meaning of the compound must be given according to usage and appropriateness. Thus धान्यगवः means गवाकृत्याऽवस्थितं धान्यं ॥ So also हिरण्यगवः, भिक्षाविसाला, ब्राह्मणविडाला, हैणसिंहः, कासिंहः, सनुसन्धवः, पानसैन्धवः ॥ Why 
do we say “when denoting the object of comparision"? Observe परमसिंहः ॥ __ अके जीविकार्थे ॥ ७३॥ पदानि ॥ अके, जीविकार्थे, (आद्युदात्तम्)॥ वृत्तिः॥ भकमत्ययान्त उत्तरपरे जीविकार्थवापिनि समासे पूर्वपदमायुदात्तं भवति । 
73. The first member of a compound has the acute on the first syllable when the second member is a word ending in the affix 2, and the compound cxpresses a calling by which one gets his living 
Thus इन्तलेखका, नखलेखकः, अवस्करशोधकः, रमणीयकारकः = दन्तलेखनादिभिर्येषां जीविका ॥ The compounding takes place by II. 2. 17. Why do we say when meaning 'means of living'? Observe क्षुभक्षिका में धारयसि | All affixes which ultimately become अक by taking substitutes, are called अक affixes. Thus दुल, इन् &c areभक affixes (VII. I. I). Why do we say "ending in the affix भक" 
Observe रमणीयकर्ता ॥ Here the compounding takes place by II. 2. 17, and the affix is added in the sense of sport and not of livelihood. 
'प्राचां क्रीडायाम् ॥ ७४॥ पदानि ॥ प्राचाम, क्रीडायाम, (आयुदात्तम् ) वृत्तिः ॥ प्रादेशतिनां या क्रीडा तबाचिनि समासे ऽकमत्ययान्तउत्तरपदे पूर्वपदमागुदात्तं भवति ।। BK. VI. CH. II 87.] 
FIRST-ACUTE. 
I167 
74. A compound the second member of which is a word ending in 3 affix, and which denotes the sport of the Eastern people, gets the the acute accent on the first syllable. 
___Thus गालकपुष्पममिका, वीरणपुष्पप्रचायिका, शालमस्जिका, सालभजिका ॥ These are formed by बुल् affix (III. 3. 109), and the compounding takes place/by II. 2. 17. Why do we say 'of the Eastern Folk'? Observe जीवपुत्रप्रचायिका, which is a sport of the Western People. Why do we say when denoting a sport'? Observe वपुष्पप्रचायिका 'thy turn for &c, which is formed by ण्वुच् (III. 3. 11) and denotes 'rotation or turn'. 
अणि नियुक्ते ॥ ७५॥ पदानि ॥ अणि, नियुक्त, (आधुदात्तम्)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ भणन्तउत्तरपदे नियुक्तशचिनि समासे पूर्वपदमागुदात्तं भवति ।। 
75. A compound, the second member of which is a word ending in the Krit-affix for, and which denotes a functionary, gets the acute on the first syllable. 
___Thus छत्रधार, तूंणीधारः, कमण्डलुमाहः, झारधारः ॥ Why do we say when meaning 'a functionary? Observe काण्डलावः, शरलायः ॥ 
शिल्पिनि चाकृतः ॥ ७६ ॥ शिल्पिनि, च, अकृमः, (पूर्वपदम् आधुदात्तम्)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ शिल्पिवाचिनि समासे ऽणन्तउत्तरपदे पूर्वपदमायुदात्तं भवति स पदण कमो न भवति ॥ 
76. And when such a compound ending in अण affix denotes the name of a professional man, but not when the second term is कार (derived from कृञ्), the acute is on the first syllable of the first word. 
Here also the second term ends in अण् affix. Thus सन्तुवायः, वायर, वालवायः॥ Why do we say when denoting 'a work-man or professional person'? Observe काण्डलाः , शरलावः ॥ Why do we say but not when the affix भण् comes after '? Observe कुम्भकारः, अयस्कारः॥ 
संज्ञायां च ॥ ७७॥ पदानि ॥ संज्ञायाम, च, (पूर्वपदम् आशुदात्तम)। वृत्तिः ॥ संज्ञायां विषये ऽणन्तउत्तरपदे फ्रमा पूर्वपदमाशुदात्तं भवति ॥ 
77. Also when such an upapada compound end ing in Hu affix denotes a Name, the acute falls on the first syllable : but not when the second term is कार ॥ 
Thus तन्तुवायः 'a kind of insect, spider'. बालवायः 'the hill valavaya'. But not so star with ; as it: 'the name of a Brahmaņa caste'. __ गोतान्तयवं पाले ॥ ७८ ॥ पठानि ॥ गो, तन्ति, यवम्, पाले, (आगुदातानि)। वृत्तिः ।। गो तन्ति यव इत्येतानि पूर्वपदानि पालघवउत्तरपदे मायुदानानि भवन्ति । 
पाल 
। 
1168 
FIRST-ACUTE. 
[BK. VI. CH. II. 8.79 
78. The words trì, afre and ta get the acute on the first syllable when followed by पाल ॥ 
Thus गोपाला, तन्तिपाला, धवपालः ॥ The word तान्त is the rope with which calves arc ticd. ( FFAIT + ). This applies to words not dcnoting a functionary, which would be governed by VI. 2. 75. Why do we say &c? Observe Y: 11 Why do we say 'followed by Ta'? Observe the li 
forêt Il ve Il fa il fonat, (FATEH COTT) || वृत्तिः ॥ णिनन्तउत्तरपदे पूर्वपरमायुदानं भवति । 
79. A compound ending in the Krit-affix fora () has the acute on the first syllable of the first mem 
ber. 
Thus glauerfia, inertia, fuperfta, u उपमानं शब्दार्थप्रकृतावेव ॥ ८॥ पदानि ॥ उपमानम्, शब्दार्थ, प्रकृती, एष, (PHYTTETC) 11 
वृतिः ॥ उपमानवाधि पूर्वपरं शब्दार्थ प्रकृतावेव णिनन्तउत्तरपदमाशुदात्तं भवति ॥ 
80. When the first member of a compound express es that with which resemblance is denoted, then it has acute on the first syllable, before a word formed by fulla affx, only then, when such latter word is a radical without any pre position, and means 'giving out a definite sound like so and so'. 
The word at means the object with which something is likened : Tort means 'expressing a sound'; Tefa means 'root, without any preposi. tion'. Thus 5ष्टक्रोशिन्, ध्वाइसराविन् , खरनादिम् ॥ The word उपमान shows the scope of this sätra as distinguished from the last. So that, when the first term is an 3947 word, the preceding sätra will not apply, though the second member may be a part formed word. When the second term is not a word denoting 
sound, the rule will not apply. As case, iata which retain kşit accent (VI. 2. 139 ) Why do we say 'a radical word without any preposition'? Observe गर्दभोधारिन् , कोकिलभिष्याहारिन् ॥ Here the second terms radically (i.e. charin and hårin) do not denote sounds, but it is with the help of the Prepositions sq and af#, and of that they mean sound. The force of Ra is that the That words are restricted. Such words get acute on the first syllable only then, when the second member is a radical sound name. According to Patanjali, the first syllable gets acute, whether it denotes Tara or not, when the second word is a radical denoting sound. (शब्दार्थ प्रकृती धुपमानं चानुपमानं घायु THOU) Asgeir , for had not been used, the sætra would have run 
run 
BK. VI. Cl. II 881] 
FIRST-ACUTE: 
бу 
thus: उपमानं शनार्थप्रकृती and would mean:--"If the second member is a sound de noting radical word, then the upamâna first member and no other will get the acute". But this is not what is intended : because when the second member is a sound-denoting radical, the first member will get the acute, whether it is upamara word or not. The word एव therefore restricts upamana; i.e.a first . member denoting 3947 will get the accent then only, when the second term is a sound-denoting radical. If the second term is not a sound denoting radical, the first term denoting upamana will not get the accent. The compounding takes place by III. 2. 79. 
__ युक्तारोह्यादयश्च ॥ ८१॥ पढानि ॥ युक्तारोह्यादयः, च (आधुदात्ताः)। 
वृत्तिः ॥ युक्तारोह्यादयः समासा भाबुदाना भवन्ति । 
___81. The compounds युक्तारोहिन &e, have acute on the first syllable. 
Thus : युक्तारोही, 2 भागतरोही, 3 भागतयोधी, 4 भागतवम्ची, 5 मागतनी, 6 भागतनन्दी, 7 मागतमहारी ॥ These are formed by णिनि affix, and are illustrations of Rule VI. 2. 79. Some say, these delare a restrictive rule with regard to the first and second meinber of these terms. Thus tha &c must be preceded by T, &c and युक्त &c followed by रोहिन् &c to make this rule VI. 2. 79 applicable. Thus वृक्षारोहिन् though ending in णिनि does not take acute on the first, so युक्ताध्यायिन् ।। 8 मागतमत्स्या or °स्य, 9 क्षीरहोता, Io भगिनीभर्ना | The last two are Genitive com pounds under Rule II. 2.9. II पामगोधुक, 12 अश्वत्रिरात्रः, 13 गंभिरात्रः, 14 व्युष्टषिरामः, 15शनपादः (गणपादः), 16 समपादः ॥ All these are Genitive compounds. 17 एकशिति पात-एकाशितिःपादोऽस्य ॥ This is a Bahuvrihi of three terms. The word एकथितिः is a TaddhitArtha Samasa (II. I.51), and being a Tatpurusha, required acute on the final, as the Tatpurusha accent is stronger. This declares acute on the first. Moreover by VI. 2. 29, this word एकशितिः would have acute on the first, as it is a Dvigu ending in a simple vowel. But the very fact that this word is enumerated here, shows that other Dvigu compounds in fura are not governed by VI. 2. 29, therefore विशितिपाद् has acute on ति | The enumeration of the एकशितिपात् further proves by implication that the (एकशितिपात स्वरवचनं हापक निमित्तस्वरबलीयस्वस्य) accent for the application of which a case is present is stronger. (See Mahabhashya II. I. I.) The class of compounds known as पात्रेसमित &c, (II. I. 48) also belong to this class. 
युनारोही, 2 आगतरोही, 3 भागतयोधी, 4 भागतबञ्ची, 6 मागतनन्दी (भागतनी),6मा गतमहारी, 7 मागतमस्यः (आगतमस्या), 8 क्षीरहोता, 9 भगिनीभर्ता, 10 ग्रामगोधुक, 11 मश्वविराम: 12 गर्गत्रिरात्रः, 13 व्युटिविरात्रा, गणपादः (राणपादः), 15 एकशितिपात, 16 पासंमितादया (पा 
समितादयश्च), 17 समपादः ॥ 
दीर्घकाशतुषभ्राष्ट्रवट जे ॥ २॥ पदानि ॥ दीर्घ, काश, तुष, भ्राष्ट्र, घटम, जे, (आद्युदात्तानि)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ दीर्घान्तं पूर्वपदं काश तुष भ्राष्ट्र बट इत्येतानि च उत्तरपदे भागुदात्तानि भवन्ति ।। . . 
I170 
FIRST-ACUTE. 
[ Bk. VI. CI. II. 882 
82. When the first member is a word ending in a long vowel, or is काश, तुष, घ्राष्ट्र or वट, and is followed by ज, the acute falls on the first syllable. 
___ Thus कुंदीषः, मीना, कागज, पमः, भीष्ट्रजः वटजः These are for med by the afix sadded to जन् ( III. 2. 97). । अन्त्यात्पूर्व बहुचः ॥ ३॥ पदानि ॥ अन्त्यातू, पूर्वम, बहुचः (उदात्तम जे)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ अउत्तरप बहुचः पूर्वपदस्यान्त्यापूर्वपुतानं भवति ॥ 
83. In a word consisting of more than two syllables, followed by 5, the acute falls on the syllable before the last. 
Thus उपसरजा, मन्दुरजा, भामलकीजः, and वर्डवानः (though the last two words have upapadas ending in long vowel, the accent is governed by this satra and not the last). Why do we say "a Polysyllabic first member"? Observe इग्धजानि तृणानि । 
प्रामनिवसन्तः ॥ ८४॥ पदानि ॥ प्रामे, अनिवसन्तः॥ पतिः॥पामरावउत्तरपरे पूर्वपदमापुतात्तं भवति न चेग्निवसदाधिभवति । 
84. Before प्राम, the first syllable of the first mem ber has acute, when thereby inhabitants are not meant. 
Thus मलपामः, वाणिगप्रामः ॥ Here ग्राम is equal to समूह 'an assemby'. देव मामा-देवस्वामिकः ॥ Why do we say 'when not meaning inhabitants'. Observe पाक्षिमामः 'a village inhabited by the descendants of Daksha', माहिकमामः 'a village inhabited by Mahikas'. 
घोषादिषु च ॥ ५॥ पदानि ॥ घोषादिषु, च, (पूर्वपदम् माधदात्तम्)॥ वृतिः ॥ घोषादिषु चोत्तरपदेषु पूर्वपदमाधुतानं भवति ।। 
85. The first member has acute on the first syl lable when followed by घोष &c. 
Thus दानिपोषः, मासिकटा, पाक्षिपल्बला, दाक्षिवदरी, दाक्षिवल्लभः, पाक्षिदा, हाशिपिङ्गलः, शासिपिण, क्षाभिमाला, दातिरक्षा, साक्षिशाला, or (Trः or शालः), दाक्षिशिल्पी, हास्यश्चयः, साक्षि शाल्मली, कुन्दतृणम्, माश्रममुनिः, वालिपुंसा, दाक्षिकूटः ॥ 
of the above, those which denote places of habitation, there the first members though denoting inhabitants get the acute accent. Some do not read the anuvritti of भनिवसन्तः in this aphorism, others however read it. 
1पोष, 2 कट (घट), 3 बम (पल्पल), 4, 5 बदरी (बदर), 6पिाल, 7 पिशा, 8 माला, 9 रक्षा (Re), 10 पाला (शाला), 11 कूट, 12 शामली, 13 भश्वत्य, 14 तृण, 15 शिल्पी, 16 मुनि, 17 प्रेक्षा (मेमाकू; पुंसा) ॥ 
छात्र्यातयः शालायाम् ॥८६॥ पदानि ॥ छाव्यालयः, शालायाम, (माचदात्ता.)॥ पत्तिः ॥ शालायामुत्तरपदे छापपारय मापुराना भवन्ति ।। 
BK VI. Cn. II. S. 891 
FIRST-ACUTE. 
86. The words छात्रि &c, get acute on the first syllable when followed by the word शाला ॥ 
Thus छात्रिशाला, ऐलिशाला, माण्डिशाला ॥ 
Where the Tatpurusha compound ending in a becomes Neuter, by the option allowed in II. 4. 25%3; there also in the case of these words, the acute falls on the first syllable of the first term ; thus superseding VI. 2. 123 which specifically applies to Neuter Tatpurushas. Thus छाविद्यालम, लिपालम् ॥ 
1 छापि, पेलि (ऐलि), 3 माण्डि, 4 व्याडि, माखण्डि, 6 भाटि, 7 गामि (गौमि)। प्रस्थे ऽवृद्धमकादीनाम् ॥ ८७॥ पदानि ॥ प्रस्थे, अवृद्धम, अकादीनाम्, (पूर्वपदम् आधुढातम्)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ प्रस्थचन्द उत्तरपदे कक्याविवर्जितमवर्ष पूर्वपदमायुदात्तं भवति ॥ 
87. The first member, which has not a Vriddhi in the first syllable, or which is not want &c, gets the acute on the first syallble before प्रस्थ 
Thus इन्द्रप्रस्था, कुण्डमस्या, इरप्रस्था, सुवणमस्यः ॥ But not in सिमस्या, माहिक प्रस्थ: which have Vriddhi in the first syllable ; nor also in कर्कीपस्यः मधीमस्यः &c. 
कर्की, 2 मत्री (मधी), 3 मकरी, 4 कर्कन्धु (कर्कन्धू), 5 घमी, 6 करीर, 7 कन्दुक (कटुक), 8 कवल (कुबल ; कूरल), बदरी (पर)। 
मालादीनां च ॥ ८८ ॥ पदानि ॥ मालादीनाम्, च, (आदिः उदातः)। वृत्तिः ॥ प्रस्थाति वर्त्तते । प्रस्थउत्तरपदे मालादीनामाविरुवात्तो भवति ॥ 
88. The first syllable of माला &c, gets the acute when rey follows. 
Thus मालाप्रस्था, शालाप्रस्थः ॥ This sutra applies even though the first syllables are Vriddhi vowel. In the words pati and Or the letters and bir are treated as Vriddhi (I. I. 75). 
1 माला, 2 शाला, 3 शोणों (शोण), 4 द्राक्षा, 5 साक्षा, 6क्षामा, 7काची, 8 एक, 9 काम, 10क्षीमा ॥ ___ अमहन्नवं नगरे ऽनुदीचाम् ॥ ८९ ॥ पदानि ॥ अ, महत, नवम, नगरे, अनुदी 
चाम्॥ वृत्तिः ॥ नगरशउत्तरपदे महानवववर्जितं पूर्वपदमागुवातं भवति सदुदीचां न भवति ॥ 
89. The first member has acute on the first syl lable before the word नगर, but not when it is the word महत् or ta, nor when it refers to a city in the lands of the North crn People. 
Thus Qानगरम् , पुण्डनरम्, विराटनगरम् ॥ But not in महानगरम् and नवनगरम, Why do we say "but not of Northern People"? Observe नान्दीनगरम् कान्तीनगरम् ॥ 
1172 
FIRST-ACUTE. 
[ BK. VI. CH. II.893 
-- 
___ अमें चावणे दुव्यच्य च ॥ ९०॥ पदानि ॥ अर्मे, च, अपर्णम्, दुव्यच्, त्र्यच, (पूर्वपदम् आधुदात्तम्)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ भर्मशम्नउत्तरपदे यच् त्र्यच् पूर्वपदमवर्णान्तमाशुदात्तं भवति ॥ 
90. A word of tivo or three syllables ending in म or a (with the exception of her and 77), standing before the word af has acute on the first syllable. 
Thus इत्तामम्, ऐसार्मम्, कुक्कुटामम्, वायसार्मम् ॥ Why do we say 'ending in भ (long or short)? Observe वृहदर्मम् ॥ Why do we say 'consisting of two or three syllables'? Observe कपिजलार्मम् ॥ The words महा and नव are to be read here also. The rule therefore does not apply to महार्मम् and नवार्मम् ।। 
नं भूताधिकसंजीवमद्राश्मकञ्जलम् ॥९१॥ पदानि ॥ न, भूत, अधिक, संजीव, मद्र, अश्म, कजलम्, (आयुदात्तानि)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ भूत भधिक संजीव मद्रभाश्मन् कम्मल इत्येतानि पूर्वपदानि भर्मशउत्तरपदे नादानानि भवन्ति ।। वार्तिकम् ।। भायुशनप्रकरणे दिवोदासादीनां छन्दस्युपसंख्यानम् ।। 
91. The following words do not get acute on the first syllable, wher standing before 'arma', viz : भूत, अधिक, संजीव, मद्र, अश्मन and कसल॥ 
Thus भूताम, मधिकार्मम्, संजीवाम म्, मदाम म्, भश्मा म, मद्राइमाम म् (because the satra shows the compounding of those words in madrasmain) कञ्जलामम् ।। 
All these compounds have acute on the final by VI. I. 223. 
Vant:-In the Vedas the words दिवोदास &c, have acute on the first syllable. Thus दिवोदासाय गायत, वध्यश्वाय दाशुषे ॥ 
अन्तः ॥ १२॥ पदानि ॥ अन्तः ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ अन्त इत्यधिकृतमित उत्तरं यास्यामस्तत्र पूर्वपदस्यान्त उदात्तो भवतीत्येवं वेदितव्यम् ।। 
92. In the following sâtras uinto VI. 2. 110 inclu sive, is to be supplied the phrase "the last syllable in a word standing in the Nominative case has the acute". 
This is an adhikara aphorism. In the succeeding sâtras, the last syllable of the first member of a compound gets the acute accent. Thus in the next sätra the word en gets acute on the final. This adhikära extends upto VI. 2. 110 inclusive. 
सर्व गुणकात्स्न्ये ॥ ९३॥ पदानि ॥ सर्वम्, गुण, कात्न्यें ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ सर्वशम्दः पूर्वपदं गुणकार्ये वर्तमानमन्तोदानं भवति । 
93. The acute is on the final of the word सर्व standing as first member before an attributive word, in the sense of whole, through and tlırough'. 
BK. VI. CH. II 996) 
END-ACUTE FIRST MEMBER. 
1173 
Thus संश्वेता, सर्वकृष्णः, सर्वमहान् ॥ Why do we say सर्व? Observe परमश्वेता, here the attribute of a pervades through and through the object referred : but the accent is not on the final of qol Why do we say 'attributive word'? Observe afarrot,'golden', atra: 'silvery', which do not denote any attribute in their original state but modification. In fact it is not guarü here at all, but a faca o Wliy do we use the word. Kartsnya or complete perva. sion". Observe wiqi TT: - a: here the compounding takes place by the elision of the affix pre denoting comparison, and as it shows only compa ritive, not absolute, whiteness, the rule does not apply. Morcover, in this ex ample, the "kärtsnya" is not that of "guņa" but of "gunt", not of the 'attribute', but of the 'substance'. Objection:--I low do you form such a compound mit atha:= :, for it is prohibited by II. 2. 11.7 Ans. We do it on the strength of the following Vårtika Turu TATET T16, FATT 11 
संज्ञायां गिरिनिकाययोः ॥ ९४॥ पदानि ॥ संज्ञायाम, गिरि, निकाययोः। वृत्तिः ॥ संज्ञायां विषये गिरि निकाय इत्येतयोरुत्तरपदयोः पूर्वपदमन्तोदात्तं भवति । 
94. The last syllable of the first member before forft and family has the acute, when the compound is a Name. 
Thus Halftert:, YETTIT:, The finals of anjana and bhanjana are leng. thened by VI. 3. 117. Trafo faktai, Alfosfata:, forura fatal: 11 Why do we say when it is a Name'? Observe grafft:, ATER II 
कुमार्या वयास ॥ ९५॥ पदानि ॥ कुमार्याम्, वयसि, (पूर्वपदम् अन्तोदात्तम) वृत्तिः ॥ कुमार्यामुत्तरपदे वयसि गम्यमाने पूर्वपदमन्तोदात्तं भवति । 
95. The last syllable of the first member gets the acute when the word warâ follows, the compound denot ing age. 
Thus ardt 'an old maid'. The compounding is by II. 1.57. TEATA This compound is forincd by II. 1.49 with The words become masculine by VI. 3. 42 in both examples. Q. The word markt was formed by 5 by IV. 1. 20 in denoting the prime of youth, how can this word be now applied to denote old age by being coupled with or war; it is a contradiction in terms. Ans; The word it has two senses; one denoting "a young maiden" and second "unmarried virgin". It is in the latter sense, that the attribute Try or Hai is applicd. Why do we say "when the compound denotes age"? Observe परमकुमारी ।। 
उदके केवले ॥ ९६॥ पदानि ॥ उदके, अ, केवले, (पूर्वपदम् अन्तोदात्तम) ॥ बुनिः ॥ भकेवलं मिनं तदाचिनि समासे उत्कशनउत्तरपले पूर्वपदमन्तोदानं भवति ॥ 
96. Before the word 5h, when the compound denotes a mixture, the last syllable of the first member has the acute. 
1174 
END-ACUTE FIRST TERM. 
{ BK. VI. Cn. 11. & 99 
Thus एंडोरकम् or एडोरकम्, तिलोदकम् or तिलोदकम् ॥ When we have already made the 7 and acute by this rule, then the svarita accent may sesult op tionally, by the combination of the acute of guda and tila and the subsequent grave of Jih, by Rule VIII. 2.6. The word in means mixture. When 
mixture is not meant, this rule does not apply. Asतारकम्, उणावकम् ॥ 
द्विगौ तौ ॥ ९७ ॥ पदानि । द्विगौ, ऋती, (पूर्वपदम् अन्तोदात्तम)। वृत्तिः । विगावुत्तरपरे क्रतुवाचिनि समासे पूर्वपदमन्तावात्तं भवति । 
97. Before a Dvigu, when the componnd denotes a sacrifice, the last syllable of the first member has the acute. 
___ Thus गर्ग त्रिरात्रः, चारकत्रिरात्रः, कुसुरुविन्दसातरानः- गणां निराधः &c. Why do we say before a Dvigu compound? Observe भतिराव (रात्रिमतिक्रान्त इति पारिसमास:) which being formed by the Samasanta affix भच् (V. 4.87) has acute on the final (VI. 1, 163). Why do we say 'when denoting a sacrifice'? Observe विल्वसप्तराष-विल्यशतस्य विल्वहोमस्य वा सप्तरायः॥ ' सभायां नपुंसके ॥ ९८॥ पदानि ॥ सभायाम, नपुंसके, (पूर्वपदम् अन्तोदात्तम)। 
वृत्तिः ॥ सभाशब्दउत्तरपद नपुंसकलिङ्गेसमासे पूर्वपदमन्तावा भवति ॥ 
98. Before the word at when it is exhibited as Neuter, the first member of the compound gets acute on the last syllable. 
__Thus गोपालसभम्, पशुपालसभम् , सभम् , दासीसभम् , गावडालसभम् ॥ Why do we say before सभा'? Observe ब्राह्मणसभम् ॥ Why do we say when in the Neuter'? Observe राजसभा, ब्राह्मणसभा ॥ The word सभा becomes Neuter under Rules II. 4. 23-24: therefore when the word * does not become Neuter under those rules, then by the maxim of Pratipadokta &c: the accent does not fall on the final of the preceding term as, रमणीयसभ, here the word सभा is neuter not by the force of any particular rules, but because the thing designated (भभिधय) is neuter. . - पुरे प्राचाम् ॥ ९९ ॥ पदानि ॥ पुरे, प्राचाम, (पूर्वपदमन्तोदातम्)। वृत्तिः ॥ पुरचनउत्तरपदं प्राचां देश पूर्वपश्मन्तोनातं भवति । 
99. Before the word पुर, when the compound denotes a city of the Eastern People, the final of the first member has the acute. 
Thus ललाटपुरम् , कांचीपुरम् , शिवदनपुरम् , काणि पुरम् , नामपुरम् ॥ Why do we say of the Eastern people'? Observe शिवपुरम् ॥ . 
अरिष्टगौडपूर्वे च ॥१०॥ पदानि ॥ अरिष्ट, गौड, पूर्वे, च, (पूर्वपदम् अन्तोदात्तम) अतिः॥ भारिष्ट गोड इत्यवं पूर्व समासे पुरशवउत्तरपदे पूर्वपदमन्सोरात्तं भवति ।। 
BK. VI. CII. 11. §. 103 ) 
END-ACUTE FIRST TERM. 
1175 
100. When the words apte and its stand first, the first member has the acute on the final before the word 
पुर॥ 
Thus भरिष्टपुरम्, गौडपुरम् ॥ By the force of the word पूर्व in the aphorism, we can apply the rule to अरिष्टश्रितपुरम्, गौडभृत्यपुरम् ॥ 
न हास्तिनफलकमायाः ॥ १०१॥ पदानि ॥ न, हास्तिन, फलक, मायाः, (अ न्तोदात्तानि)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ हास्तिन फलक माय इत्येतानि पूर्वपानि पुरशन उत्तरपदे नान्तोदात्तानि भवन्ति । 
___101. But when the words हास्तिन, फलक and माय precedc , the acute does not fall on their final. 
This is an exception to VI. 2, 99. Thus हास्तिनपुरम्, फलकपुरम् , मार्देयपुरम् ॥ The son of is prima formed by , the word belonging to Subhràdi class. The ris elided by VI. 4. 147. __कुसूलकूपकुम्भशालं बिले ॥ १०२॥ पदानि ॥ कुसूल, कूप, कुम्भ, शालम्, बिले॥ 
वृत्तिः । कुसूल कूप कुम्भ शाला इत्येतानि पूर्वपदानि बिलशमउत्तरपरे ऽन्तोदात्तानि भवन्ति । 
102. The words कुसूल, कूप, कुम्भ and शाला have the acute on the last syllable before the word बिल॥ 
Thus कुसूविलम् , कूपविलम् , कुम्भबिलम् , शालाबिलम् ॥ But not so here सर्प बिलम् ॥ Why do we say ' before बिल'? Observe कुसूलस्वामी ॥ 
दिक्शब्दा ग्रामजनपढाख्यानचानराटेषु ॥ १०३॥ पदानि । दिकशब्दाः,ग्रामज नपदाख्यान, चानराटेषु ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ विधामा पूर्वपदानि अन्तोशत्नानि भवन्ति प्रामजनपदाण्यानवाचिधूत्तरपवेषु चानरादराने च ॥ 
103. Words expressing direction (in space or time) have acute on the last syllable, when followed by a . word denoting a village,or a country or a narrative and beforo 
the word चानराट ॥ 
Thus पूर्वे पुकामशामी, अपर पुकामशामी or and अपरें (VIII. 2.6). The compounding takes place by II. I. 50. पूर्व कृष्णभृत्तिका, भपरकृष्णमृत्तिका॥ Country name-पूर्व पञ्चाला: अपरंपचालाः ॥ These are Karmadharaya compounds (II. I. 58). Story name :--पूर्वाधिरामम् or पूर्वा, पूर्वयायातम्, पूर्वाधिरामकम् , अपरवायातम् ॥ So also पूर्वचानराटम् , अपर धानराटम् ॥ The employment of the term शब्द in the ap. horism shows that timc-dcnoting ff words as in gre should also be in.. cluded. The word भाधिरामम् is derived from अधिराममधिकृत्य कृतो पन्थः (IV. 3. 87). __ आचार्योपसर्जनश्चान्तवासिनि ॥ १०४॥ पदानि ॥ आचार्योपसर्जनः, च, भन्ते धासनि, (अन्तोदाता:)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ भाचार्योपसर्जनान्तेवासिवाधिन्युत्तरपदे दिशादा मन्तादाता भवन्ति ।। 
1176 
END-ACUTE FIRST TERM. 
[BK. VI. CH. II § 106 
104. The direction denoting words have acute on the final, before the names of scholars, when such names are derived from those of their teachers. 
Thus go fortat, erforatrati, ETT, TEIT: 1 Compare VI. 2. 36 Why do we say when derived from the names of their Teachers'? Observe garantat: Why do we say 'Scholar-names?? Observe carriera Ter II (arforate uren got paranta) 11 
SECTETT A 8044 li qaifa il 567-9E-TAT, 
F 1 वृत्तिः ॥ उत्तरपदस्थेत्यधिकृत्य या विहिता वृद्धिस्लत्युत्तरपदे सर्वशष्शविक्सन्दाधान्तोगत्ता भवन्ति ।। 
105. Words denoting direction and the word have acute on the final, before a word which takes Vriddhi in the first syllable of the second term by VII. 3. 12 and 13. 
By the s@tra TTCE4 VII. 3. 10. 12, the Vriddhi of the Uttarapada is ordained when the Taddhita affixes having sy, qor of follow, the Purvapada being 5, #and sul The word tera: therefore, means that word which takes Vriddhi, under the rule relating to uttarapada, i.e. under rule VII. 3. 12 and 13. Thus aan, STTM , 95%: 11 These are formed by sy affix (IV. 2. 125). Why do we say "which takes Vriddhi in the second term p Had the word 7119€ not been used, then the sätra would have run thus qखौ सच, and would have applied to cases like सर्वमासः, सर्वकारकः where मासः and are: are Vșiddha words not by virtue of VII. 3. 12. 
बहुव्रीही विश्व संज्ञायाम् ॥ १०६॥ पदानि ॥ बहुवीही, विश्वम, संज्ञायाम् ॥ पत्तिः ॥ बहुव्रीही समासे विश्वशब्दः पूर्वपद संज्ञायां विषये ऽन्तोदात्तं भवति ।। 
106. The word fasa has acuto on the final, being first member in a Bahuyrîhi, when it is a Name. 
Thus f , f :, faptert II This is an exception to VI. 2. 1 by. which the first member in a Bahuvrihi would have retained its original ac cent. Why do we say in a Bahuvrihi compound? Observe fragt: - font Ter: Why do we say when a name'? Observe TFT F9 = fa ll But 
Aki and for at have acute on the final, as they are governed by the sub sequent rule VI. 2, 165 which supersedes this. The word Bahuvrihi governs the succeeding sotras upto VI. 2. 120 inclusive. The word fan is originally acute on the first, as it is formed by the affix imm added to fall This rule has unrestricted scope in Ferrari, Fati:. and rule VI. 2. 165 has unrestricted scope in avi, mm: But in romana: and fansa: there is a conflict, as both these rules would apply, therefore by the maxim of vipratishedha, VI. 2. 165 super sedes this, BK. VI. Cir. 11. g. 109) 
FIRST TERM END-ACUTE. 
1177 
37 tag ol gove il Fifa II 377, ,991, वृत्तिः ।। उपर अश्व षु इत्येतेषत्तरपदेषु बहुव्रीही समासे संज्ञाया विषये पूर्वपदमन्तोशनं भवति । 
107. The first nember in a Bahuvrshi, before the words FTT, spa and <9, gets acute on the final syllable, when the compound denotes a Name. 
Thus antar, TT, thai, atzareti, yrag and tell This stra is also an exception to VI. 2 1 by which the first term would have retained its original accent. The word has acute on the first by Phit 11.7. The word 
TR is formed by Afac affix (Uņ IV. 145) and is first acute; ft is also first acute as formed by ra (Uņ IV. 118). The word gray if considered as an underived primitive, has acute on the first by Phit II. 19. If it be considered as derived from it with the affix pop then it is already end-acute and would retain its accent even by VI. 2. I. The first Bahuvrthi word nu has acute on the final by VI. 2. 172, the second Bahuvrlhi ccmpound gutgjet: has acute on of by VI. 2. 1, the third Bahuvrihi with i gets accent on all The word 468 is end-acute by V. 2. 38. Its mcntion here appears redundant. 
all foc | Eta Il Mall पत्तिः ॥ क्षेपे गम्यमाने उतरादिषूत्तरपरेषु बहुव्रीहौ समासे संज्ञायां विषये पूर्वपदमन्तोगत्तं भवति ॥ 
108. A word before 19T, spa and in a Bahu vrihi gets acute on the final, when reproach is meant. 
Thus it, ERTETT, 5 , farmarasi, saharorat :, Tag: 11 The word e has acute on the first as it is a Neutcı name (Phit 11. 3), and it would have retained this accent in the Bahuvrihi by VI. 2. 1. but for this sätra. The word of is formed by me (III, 1. 134) and lias acute on the final, and so it would have retained this accent by VI. 2. 1, even with out this satra. The word 
5 bcing formed by *7 (V. 3. 75) has acute on the first. Firoza is formed by the Nishita affix Fri 11 The word sagra being an avyaylbhava, the first mem ber would have retained its original accent. In this and the last satra, all the acutcs may optionally be changed into svarita by VIII. 2. 6. But it and Anat: havc acute on the final by VI. 2. 172, which being a subsequent satra, supersedes this present, so far as art and g are concerned. 
a agia il poe Il qua il 28, arall पत्तिः ॥ बहुव्रीही समासे बन्धुन्युत्तरपदे नद्यन्तं पूर्वपदमन्तोदात्तं भवति । 
109. In a Bahuvrshi compound having the word Tag as its second member, the first member ending in the Feminine affix i (ai word) has the acute on its final syllable. 
1178 
FIRST TERM END-ICUTE. 
[ BK. VI. CI. II. $ 112 
Thus miffanyi, artrag: N The words traf and Irait are formed by adding sig (IV. 1. 16 ) to irá and ma ending in (IV. 1. 105 ), and therefore, they are first acute. By VI. 2. I this accent would have been retai ned, but for the present søtra. Why do we say "a Nadi (Feminine in ) word"? Observe igny, the word un has acute on the first syllable as it is formed by maa (Uņ IV. 146) and it retains that accent (VI. 2. 1). Why do we say "before try"? Observe profita: H 
निष्ठोपसर्गपूर्वमन्यतरस्याम् ॥ ११॥ पदानि ॥ निष्ठा, उपसर्ग-पूर्वम, अन्य तरस्याम् ॥ 
दगिः ॥बहुव्रीहो समासे निष्ठान्तमुपसर्गपूर्व पूर्वपदमन्यतरस्वामन्तोदात्तं भवति ।। 
110. In a Bahuvrili compound, a Participle in s preceded by a preposition, standing as the first member of the compound, has optionally acute on the last syllable. 
Thus gorge: or paga (VI. 2. 169), or thata (VI. 2. 49 and 1) History or a gry: # When the word gu means (mouth) then by VI. 2. 167 which is an optional rule, the accent falls on the last syllable : 11 When the other alternative is taken or when it does not mean (mouth) then by VI. 2. 49 the acute falls on y, which accent is retained (VI. 2. 1). Why do we say "a Nishtha"? Observe ya IC: which is acute in the middle by the kşit accent being retained ofter (VI. 2. 139). Why do we say 'preceded by a preposition'? Observe y et which has acute on the first by VI. 1. 206. 
JECTETTE: 18P811 qera ll SATT, TTIT:,( 57:) | a 11 ETTERRETTI i fra 64r4 STRIFUTISETITI Patei aditam 
111. In the following sâtras, upto VI. 2. 136 inclusive, should always be supplied the phrase "the first syllable of the second member has the acute". 
This is an adhikara aphorism and the word 39 exerts its influence upto the end of the chapter, while the word stug has scope upto VI. 2. 187 exclusive. 
fuit quicura 188211 aria Il sofi, art, gra, ( 
A TT) # er i Tana TĒT TÓTTTTTTTTTTMSFTTTTTTTTT* pfall 
112. In a Bahuvrihi compound, the words of standing as second member, has acute on the first syl lable, when it is preceded by a word denoting color or mark. 
Thus with color we have 1960, or of, and with mark-name, we have o 
, the lengthening of TT and of takes place by VI. 3. 115. 
N 
BK. VI. Ch. II. HIS 
SCOND TERM FIRST-ACUTE. 
1179 
The marks of ' scythe', 'arrow' &c, are made on the ears of cattle to mark and distinguish thein. It is such a'mirk' which is mount here, therefore, the rule does not apply to स्थूलकर्गः॥ Why do we say कण! Observe श्वेतपाय, कूट: here श्वर being forined by अच् (II. I. 134) is end-acute, and कूट being for med by क (III. I. 135) is also end-acute and these accents are retained in the compound. Why do we say "when preceded by a word denoting color or mark"? Observe शोभनपाद: wirere शोभन being formed by युछ (II. 2. 149) is end-acute and this accent is rctained (VI. 2. 1). 
संशौपम्ययोश्च ॥ ११३ ॥ पदानि ॥ संशा, औपम्ययोः, च॥ बनिः ॥ संज्ञायामौपम्ये च यो बहुव्रीहिनते तत्र कर्णशम उत्तरपरमायुशतं भवति संज्ञायाम् ॥ 
113. In a Baluvrîli the second member has acute on the first syllable, when the compound deuotes & Name or a Resemblance. 
___Thus कुधिर्णः , मणिकर्णः, are Names : गोकर्णः, खरकण denote resem blance i.e. " persons having ears like a cow or an ass". 
कण्ठपृष्ठप्रीवाजधं च ॥ ११४॥ पदानि ॥ कण्ठ, पृष्ठ, ग्रीवा, जंघम, च, (आयु दातानि)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ कण्ठ पृष्ठ ग्रीवा जया इत्येतानि रत्नरपदानि बहुव्रीही समासे संज्ञोपम्ययोरावसानि भवन्ति ।। 
114. In a Baluvrihi expressing a Name or com parision, the second members कण्ठ, पृष्ठ, श्रीवा and जङ्घा have acute on the first syllable. 
___ Thus Name: शितिकण्ठः, नीलकण्ठः ॥ Comparision खरकण्ठा, उष्ट्रकण्ठः ।। Name काण्डपष्टः, नाकष्टः ॥ Resemblance गोपृष्ट, भजपष्टः॥ Name सुग्रीवः, नीलग्रीवः, पशग्रीवः ॥ Resemblauce गोपीवः, अश्वग्रीवः ॥ Name नाडीजङ्घा,नालजड्यः ॥ Resem blance गोजङ्घा, भाजयः, एणीयः ॥ 
The sotra mortuisia is in Neuter gender, and far is shortened as it is a Samáhara Dvandva. In the case of gore, the accent would have fallen on the final a by VI. 2. 172, this ordains acute on श्री॥ ___ शृङ्गमवस्थायां च ॥ ११५॥ पदानि गम, अवस्थयाम, च (आधुदात्तम्) 
वृत्तिः ॥ शाशन उत्तरपदमवस्थायां संज्ञौपम्ययोग बहुव्रीही भायुदात्तं भवति । 
115. In a Bahuvrîhi denoting age, (as well as a Name or a Resemblance), the second member >IF gets acute on the first syllable. 
___ Thus उद्गतः , चंगुलशृङ्गः, भंगुलभाः ॥ Here the word Yr denotes the particular age of the cattle at which the horns come out, or become one or two inches long. Name :-ऋप्या : comparison : गोभाः, मेषतः॥ Why do we say wlicni denoting 'agc &c'. Obscrve FUFPIF: 11 
1180 
SECOND-TERM FIRST-ACUTE. 
(BK. VI. CH. II. 118. 
नमो जरमरमिनमृताः ॥ ११६ ॥ पदानि ॥ नमः, जर, मर, मित्र, मृताः, (आ धुदात्ताः)॥ पत्तिः ।। नह उत्तरे जरमरमिस्त्रभृता बहुवाही समासे माधुतात्ता भवन्ति ।। 
___ 116. After a Negative Particle, in a Bahuvrihi, the acute falls on the first syllable of जर, मर, मित्र and मृत ॥ 
Thus भरः, अमरः, भमित्रः and ममृतः॥ Why do we say after a Negative Particle? Observe ब्राह्मणमियः ॥ Why do we say "जर &c". Observe भाईः when the final gets the acute by VI. 2. 172. 
सोर्मनसी मलोमोषसी ॥ ११७॥ पदानि ॥ सोः, मन्-असी, म लोम, उषसी॥ वृत्तिः ॥ सोरुत्तरमनन्तमसन्तं च बहवीही समासे भाशुदात्तं भवति लोमोषसीवर्जयित्वा । 
117. After the adjective सु in a Bahuvrihi, a stem ending in मन् and अस्, with the exception of लोमन् and उषस् has acute on the first syllable. 
__ Thus सुकर्मन्, धधर्मन्, सुषिमन्, सुर्पयस्, सुर्यास्, सुसोतम so also सुक्षत् and मुर्वत् from the root her and it with the affix fefta 11 The final x is changed to by VIII. 2. 72. But this substitution is considered asiddha for the purposes of accent, and these words are taken as if still ending in STA Why do we say 'after y?' Observe कृतकर्मन्, कृतयशस् ।। Why do we say 'ending in मन् and मस?' Observe सुराजन् and मुतक्षन् formed by the affix कनिन् (Un I. 156), and the accent is on g and a, but with g, the accent is thrown on the final by VI. 2. 172, 
Why do we say with the exception of लोमन and उपत्? Observe सुलोमैन and सबस (VI. 2. 172). The foll:wing maxim applies here: अनिमस्मन् महणान्यर्थवता धानर्थकेन चतबन्सविधि प्रयोजयन्ति “whenever भम् , or si or भस् or मन् , when they are employed in Grammar, denote by I. I. 72, something that ends with भन् or r or भस् or मन , there (भन , इन्, भस् and मन्) represent these combinations of letters, both in so far as they possess and also in so far as they are void of, a meaning". There fore the art and F# void of meaning are also included here. Thus yra is formed by मन् (Un I. 140), but कर्मन् is formed by मनिन् (Up. IV. 145), and प्रथिमन् is formed by मनिच् affix (V. I. 122) in which मन् is only a part. Similarly यशस is formed by भमुन् (U IV. 191), and so also स्रोतम् (Un IV. 202); but in मुस् (सुध्वम् from jस् with the affix विप III. 2. 76) the rule applies also, though भस् is here part of the root. But when the saimasanta affix कप is added (V.4. 154), then the accent falls on the syllable immediately preceding ac, for there the subsequent Rule VI. 2. 173 supersedes the present rule: thus सुकर्मका, सुवातस्कर।। 
. क्रत्वादयश्च ॥ ११८॥ पदानि । क्रत्वादयः, च,॥ वृत्तिः ॥ कस्वादयः सोरत्तरे बहुवीही मासे भाशुशता भवन्ति । 
BK VI. CH. II. S. 121) 
FIRST-ACUTE SECOND MEMBER. 
181 
__118. After सु in a Bahuvrihi, the acute falls on the first syllable of ऋतु &c.. 
___Thus सुक्रतुः, सुशीकः, सुप्रैपूर्तिः, सुईव्यः, सुभगः, सुर्पतीकः ॥ 
आधुदात्तं वयच्छन्दसि ॥ ११९ ॥ पदानि ॥ आधुदात्तम्, दुयच, छन्दसि ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ माझुदात्तं म्यज उगरपद बहुव्रीही समासे सोरुत्तर तवायुदात्तमेव भवति छन्दसि विषये ॥ 
119. In a Bahuvrîhi compound in the Chhandas, a word of two syllables with acute on the first syllable, when preceded by y, gets acute on the first syllable. 
In other words, such a word retains its accent. Thus:-Prer: 
सr (Rig Veda X.76.8). Here स्वचः and सुरंथः have acute on w and र, which they had originally also, for अश्व and रय are formed by कुन् (Un I. 151) and क्यन् (Un II. 2) respectively and have the नित् accent (VI. I. 197). Why dowe say having acute on the first syllable'? Observe या सुंबाहुः स्वंइगुरिः (Rig II. 32.7). Here बाहु has acute on the final (Un I. 27 formed by affix and has the accent of the affix III. 1.3). Why do we say 'having two syllables'? Observe सुगरसत्, साहरण्यः ।। This sutra is an exception to VI. 2. 172. 
वीरवीयाँच ॥ १२०॥ पदामि ॥ वीर, वीयर्यो, च, ॥ बत्तिः ॥ पीर वीर्य इत्येतौ च शब्दो सोरुत्तरी बहुव्रीही समासे छन्दसि विषये भाणुदात्तौ भवतः । 
120. In a Bahuvrîhi compound in the Chhandas, after , the words ofre and art have acute on the first syl lable. 
Thus सुवारेण ते, सुधीरस्ते अनिता (Rig IV. 17.4) सुवीर्यस्वश्व्यस् (Rig VIII. 13 36) where सुधार्य has acute on वी॥ So also सुवीर्यस्य पतयः स्याम | The word वीर्य is formed by यत् affix and by VI. I. 313, it would have acute on the first. But its enumeration in this sQtra shows that Rule VI. 1. 213 does not apply 
ये ॥ The word वीर्य has svarita on the final in the Chhandas, by Phit IV.9. In the secular literature it is adyudatta. 
कूलतीरतूलमूलशालाक्षसममव्ययीमावे ॥१२१॥ पदानि ॥कूल, तीर,तूल, मूल, शाला, अक्ष, समम्, अव्ययीभावे ॥ वृत्तिः ॥कूल तीर नुल मूल शाला अक्ष सम इत्येतानि उत्तरपनि अध्ययीभावसमासमा|शत्तानि भवन्ति ।। 
___121. In an Avyayibhava. compound, the follow ing second terms have acute on their first syllable : कूल, तीर, 
तूल, मूल, शाला, अक्ष and सम॥ 
___Thus परिकूलम, उपकूलम् , परि तीरम, उपतीरम् , परिलम् , उपतूलम् , परिमूलम् , उपमूलम् , परिशीलम् , उपशालम् , उपाक्षम् , पर्यक्षम् , सुषमम् , विर्षमम् , निषमम् and दुषमम् ॥ These last four are to be found in Tishthadgu class of compounds (II. I. 17). Why do we say 'कूल &c'? Obscrve उपकुम्भम् ।। Why do we say fin an Avyaytbhava 
1182 
FIRST-ACUTE SECOND MEMBER 
(BK. VI. CH. II. § 124 
compound?" Observe परमलम् , उत्तमकूलम् ॥ After the prepositions परि, प्रति, उप and भप, the words कूल &c would have become accentless by VI. 2. 33, the present satra supersedes VI. 2. 33, and we have accent on कूल &c and not on the Prepositions. 
कसमन्यर्पपाय्यकाण्डं दिषगौ ॥ १२२॥ पढानि ॥ कंस, मन्य, शूर्प, पाय्य, काण्डम, दिघगी ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ कंस मन्य र्ष पाव्य काण्ड इत्येताम्युचरपनि दिगो समासमायदाचानि भवन्ति ।। 
. 122. In a Dvigu Compound the following second members get acute on their first syllable:-कंस, मन्थ, सूर्प, पाय्य and काण्ड 
Thus feia, (T231 Heraf mta: the affix V. 1.25 is elided by V. 1.28) त्रिकंसः, धिमन्या, (the affix IV. I. 19 is elided by V. 1. 28) त्रिमन्यः, निः , ( the affix भम् V. I. 26 is elided)शिशेर्पा, दिपाय्यः, शिपाय्यः, रिकाण्डः,धिकाण्डः ॥ Why do we say in a Dvigu? Observe परमकंसा, उत्तमकंस ॥ 
तत्पुरुषे शालायां नपुंसके ॥ १२३ ॥ पदानि ॥ तत्पुरुषे, शालायाम, नपुंसके। . वृत्तिः ॥ शालाग्दान्ते तत्पुरुष समासे नपुंसकलिङ्ग उत्तरपदमागुवात्तं भवति ॥ 
123. The word mot at the end of a Tatpurusha compound when exhibited in the Neuter has acute on the first syllable. . Thus ब्राह्मणशीलम् , क्षत्रियालम् ॥ The compound becomes Neuter by II, 4.25. Why do we say "in a Tatpurusha"? Observe दृशाल ब्राह्मणकुलम् which is a Bahuvrihi compound and therefore first member retains its accent VI. 2. I, and as the first member is a Nishtha word, it has acute on the final. Why do we say the word शाला?" Observe ब्राह्मणसेनम् ॥ Why do we say in the Neuter'? Observe ATENTAT II Compare VI. 2. 86. 
कन्था च ॥ १२४॥ पदानि ॥ कन्या, स.॥ वृत्तिः ।। सत्पुरुष समासे नपुंसकलिङ्गे कथाशब्द उत्तरपदमायुदास भवति ।। 
124. In a Neuter Tatpurusha ending in it, the acute falls on the first syllable of the second member. 
. Thus सोशमिकन्यम् , आह्वरकन्यम्, पप्यकैन्यम् ॥ The word सौशामः denotes the descendant of मुशमा (शोभनः शमो बस्य)माहर is formed by the preposition मा with the verb e and the affix (III. 1. 136 ) The compound is Neuter by IL... 20. These are Genitive compounds. When the word is not Neuter 
we have दाक्षिकन्या ॥ ... आदिचिहणादीनाम् ॥ १२५॥ पदानि ॥ आदिः, चिहणादीनाम् ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ कन्थान्ते तत्पुरुष समासे नपुंसकलिङ्गे धिहणासनामाविरुवानो भवति ।। 
___125. In a Neuter Tatpurusha ending in कन्था , the first syllable of चिहण &c have the acute. 
BK. VI. CIL II $ 128 ] 
FIRST-ACUTE SECOND MEMDER. 
1183 
As चिहणकन्यम् , मडरकन्यम, मैडरकन्यम् ॥ The repetition of the word भावि In this s@tra, though its anuvritti was present, indicates that the first syllable 
of the first member gets the acute. The word fora is derived from the root peritia with f#99 which gives for and is formed by adding (111. 1. 134) to इन् ।चित+हन-चिहण the elision oft is irregular. 
चलखेटकटुककाण्डं गर्हायाम् ॥ १२६ ॥ पदानि । चेल, खेट, कटुक, काण्डम, गर्हायाम, 
वृत्तिः ॥ चेल खेट कटुक्र काण्ड इत्येतान्युत्तरपनि तत्पुरुषेसमासे गर्दायां गम्यमानायामागदात्तानि भवन्ति । 
126. The words चेल, खेट, कटुक and काण्ड at the end of a Tatpurusha have acute on the first syllable, when a re proach is meant. 
__ Thus पुत्रचे लम् , मार्याचे लम , उपानतले टम् , नगरखे टम् , (खेट इति तृणनाम, तद् दुर्बला उपाना ) दधिकटकम् (कटुकमस्वादु) उदश्वितर्कटकम् , भूतकाण्डम् ( काण्डमिति धरनाम, सबथा सस्वपी. साकर मेवं भूतमपि) प्रजाकाण्डम् ॥ The reproach is denoted of the sons &c by compar. ing them to पेल &c. The analysis will be पुत्र मेलमिव i. e. चलबत् तुच्छम् and the compounding takes place under II. I. 56: the Vyaghradi class being an akrti gana. When reproach is not incant, we have परमचेलम् । 
चीरमुपमानम् ॥ १२७॥ पढानि ॥ चीरम, उपमानम् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ चीरमुत्तरपदमुपमानवाचि सत्पुरुष समासे भागुदात्तं भवति । 
__ 127. The word चीर, at the end of a Tatpurusha, has acute on the first syllable, when something is compared with it. 
Thus वस्त्रम् चीरमिव - धनची रम्, पटची रम्, कम्बलची रम् ॥ Why do we say 'when comparison is meant?' Observe परमचीरम् ॥ 
पललसूपशाकं मिश्रे ॥ १२८ ॥ पदानि ॥ पलल, सूप, शाकम्, मिश्रे॥ वृत्तिः ॥ पलल सूप शाक इत्येतान्युत्तरपनि मिश्रवाधिनि तत्पुरुष समासे भागुदानानि भवन्ति ॥ . 
128. In a Tatpurusha ending in पलल, सूप and शाक the acute falls on the first syllable of these, when the com pound denotes a food mixed or seasoned with something. 
Thus गुडपललम् , घृतपललम् , घृतमूपः, मूलकटूपः, प्रतीकम् , मुगशाकम् = गुडेन मिश्र पलल &c. The compounding takes place by II. I. 35. Why do we say when meaning mixcd or scasoned?' Observe परमपललम् ॥ 
कूलसूटस्थलकर्षाः संज्ञायाम् ॥ १२९॥ पदानि ॥ कूल, सूद, स्थल, कर्षाः, सज्ञायाम् ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ कूल सूर स्थल कर्ष इत्येतान्युत्तरपदानि सरपुरुष समासे संज्ञायां विषयेभागुदानानि भवन्ति ॥ . 
ve 
S 
1184 
FIRST-ACUTE SECCND MEMBER, 
[Bk. VI. CII. II. S132 
129. The words कूल, सूद, स्थल' and कर्ष have acute on their first syllable, when at the ond of a Tatpurusha de noting a Name. 
Thus दाक्षिकूलम् , भाहकिकूलम् , देवसूदम् , भाजीसतम्, वाण्डायनस्थली, माइकिस्थली, पानि कर्षः ।। All these are names of villages. The feminine of स्थल is taken here, formed by हीप् (IV. I. 42). When not a name we have परमकूलम् ॥ ___ अकर्मधारये राज्यम् ॥१३०॥ पदानि॥अ, कर्मधारये, राज्यम् (आशुदाचम)। 
वृत्तिः । कर्मधारववर्जिते तत्पुरुष समासे राज्यमित्येतदुत्तरपदमासनं भवति । 
___ 130. The word राज्यम् has acute on the first syll ablo, when at the end of a Tatpurusha compound, which is not a Karmadharaya. - Thus ब्राह्मणराज्यम् , क्षत्रियराज्यम् ॥ In a Karmadharaya we have परमराज्यम् ॥ The accent taught in VI. 2. 126 to 130 is superseded by the accent of the Indeclinable taught in VI, 2.2, though that rule stands first and this subsequent, As कुलम् , कुराज्यम् ।। 
पर्योदयश्च ॥ १३१॥ पदानि ॥ धोदयः, च, (आधुदातानि) वृत्तिः ॥ वर्दी इत्येवमादीन्युत्तरपदानि भकर्मधारये तत्पुरुष समासे भाएगानानि भवन्ति ।। 
131. At the end of a non-Karmadharaya Tat purusha compound, the words are &c have acute on the first syllable, 
Thus वादग्या , वासुदेवपश्या, मर्जुनवग्यः, मर्जुनपक्ष्यः ॥ In a Karmadharaya we have qara | The words are &c are no where exhibited as such; tho primitive words वर्ग, पूग, गण &c subdivisionof विगादि (IV. 3.54)are here referred to,as ending with यत् affix. 
पुत्रः पुमभ्यः ॥ १३२॥ पदानि ॥ पुत्रः, पुभ्यः (आशुदात्तः)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ पुत्रशब्दः पुशब्दे व उनरस्तत्पुरुष समास भागतातो भवति । - 132. The word पुष coming after a Masonline noun in a Tatpurusha has acute on the first syllablo. 
Thus कौनटिपुषः, दामापुत्रः, माहिपपुवः ॥ Why do we say 'a पुष'? Observe कौनटिमातुलः ॥ Why do we say 'after a masculine word '? Observe गार्गीपुत्रः, . बास्सीपुचः॥ 
नाचार्यराजर्विक्सयुक्तशात्याख्येभ्यः ॥ १३३ ॥ पदानि ॥ न, आचार्य, राज, *. त्विक, संयुक्त, शात्याख्येभ्यः, (आधुदात्तः)॥ 
वृत्तिः॥ भाचार्य उपाध्यायः। राजा ईश्वरः। कविजो याजकाः । संयुक्तास्त्रीसंबन्धिनः श्यालादयः।ज्ञातयी मापिदसंबन्धिनो बान्धवाः भाचार्याचाप्यन्या परः पुत्रानो नागुदात्तो भवति । 
BK. VI. CH. II & 134. ) 
FIRST-ACUTE SECOND MEMBER. 
1185 
133. The word ge has not acute on the first syllable, when preceded by a word which falls under the category of teachers, kings, priests, wife's relations, and aga nates and cognates. 
The word of means 'teacher', 'prince, king', 'a sacri ficing priest', RYTT: 'relations through the wise's side' as part ‘brother-in-law &c: Arfa means 'all kinsmen related through father and mother or blood-relations', The word maar shows that the rule applies to the synonyms of "teacher' &c as well as to particular 'teacher' &c. Thus rigti, regregati, 147* gii, ati, fascyti, payti, mennyt, amnyt, ning:57. (VI. 3. 23) vymyri, faragti, mamayti, stragt, ryt (VI. 3. 23). Here the special accent of gw taught in the last sätra being prohibited, the accent falls on the last syllable by the general rule VI. 1. 2 23. 
quietapetag: 11 828 il tema ll quieira, a, , 4:, ( 347 Ta ) 
वृत्तिः ॥ उत्तरपवारिरिति वर्तते तत्पुरुषाति च । पूर्णादीन्युत्तरपदानि भप्राणिवाधिनः पष्टपन्तापराणि TUTU FATE HIQET WITH 
134. The words qui &c, in a Tatpurusha com pound have acute on the first syllable, when the preced ing word ends in a Genitivo and does not denote a living being. 
Thus ga aqua, perennia, but you where the first term is a living being, and many of where it is not Genitive. Another reading of the sätra is चूर्णावीन्यप्राण्युपमहात, the word उपमह being rhe ancient name of षष्ठी given by old Grammarians, 
17,2 7ff9, 3 #14, 4 artea, 5 172, 6 , 7 , 8 ( ), I mig 10 , 1177 (471977), 12 as it 
The word of is derived from the root out ( Div 50 ) with the affix HiFi; *fter and fig arc formed with the upapada afe and the verbs yn 'to go' and op 'to protect' respectively, and the aflix (muina air) (III. 2. 3); 
with the allix an added diversely (Uņ II. 56); TF with 9 (Uņ IV. 81) gives 77; this with str (aura) gives Trit ; F = TT (Prishodarådi); LTE (77) with F gives thc penultimate being lengthened; the word og is formed by the affix 4 added to the roots with the upapada (f ra e at gaira ) the angment ge being added to sfaruta - Il pes with the affix कपन gives इलपः, चम with असच् forms चमस, then is added l; चकन formed by 17(III. 1. 134 ) added to and reduplication, terary AT # 
1186 
FIRST-ACUTE SECOND-MEMBER. 
[BK. VI. CII. II. S. 137 
- 
- 
- 
ase 
. 
षट् च काण्डादानि ॥ १३५ ॥ पदानि ॥ षट्, च, काण्डादानि, (आधुदात्तानि)। वृत्तिः ॥ पद् पूर्वोक्तानि काण्डावीन्युत्तरपदान भप्राणषष्ठमा मायुदात्तानि भवन्ति ।। 
___135. The six words काण्ड, चीर, पलल, सूप, शाक and कूल of Sutras VI. 2. 126-129, preceded by a non-living geni tive word, have acute on the first syllable. .. As वर्मकाण्डम्, शरकाण्डम् ; दर्भचारम्, कुशचीरम ॥ In the last two examples चार is not used as a comparision, that case being governed by VI. 2. 127, तिलपललम्, मूलकशाकम् , मुझसूपः ॥ Here पलल, मूप and शाक do not denote mixing, which is governed by VI. 2. 128. नन्दीकलम् , समुद्रकूलम्, here the compound does not denote a Name, which would be the case under VI. 2, 129. Why these * six' only ? Observe erster: 11 
कुण्डं धनम् ॥ १३६ ॥ पदानि । कुण्डम, वनम् (आधुदात्तम् )॥ वृत्तिः ।। कुण्डशब्दोष कुण्डसादृश्यन बने वर्तते । कुण्डमित्येतदुत्तरपदं वनवाचि तत्पुरुषे समासे भागने भवति । 
136. The word कुण्ड at the end of a Tatpurusha. compound denoting 'a wood or forest', has acute on the: .first syllable. 
___ The word कुण्ड here denotes 'a wood' by metaphor. Thus वर्भकुण्डम्, धरकण्डम् ।। Why do we say when denoting 'a wood'? Observe माकुण्डम् ॥ The word कुण्ड means (1)a basin (2) a caste called kunda. Some say it means for est' also primarily and metaphorically. The force here is that of समुदाय, i.e. भरवणसमुदायः परकुण्डम् ।। 
प्रकृत्या भगालम् ॥ १३७ ॥ पदानि । प्रकृत्या, भगालम्, (प्रकृतिस्वरम् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ भगालवाच्युत्तरपद तत्पुरुष समासे प्रकृतिस्वरं भवति । 
___137. The word भगाल at the end of a Tatpurusha, preserves its original accent. 
The synonyms of भगाल are also included. As कुम्भीभगालम्, कुम्भीकपालम् , सम्भानीलम् The words भगाल &c., have acute on the mildle. Phit II. 9. The word Art governs the subsequent sâtras upto VI. 2. 143. . शितेनित्याबहुजू बहुव्रीहावभसत् ॥ १३८॥ पदानि ॥ शितेः, नित्य, अबह्वच, ब. 
हुव्रीहौ, अभसत्, (प्रकृतिस्वरम ) ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ शिवरत्तरपदं निसे यदबह भसच्छन्दवाणितं बहुव्रीही समासे तत्प्रकृतिस्वरं भवति । 
138. After parfa, a word retains in a Bahuyrihi its original accent, when it is always of not more than two syllables, with the exception of भसदू ॥ BK. VI. CIL II § 139) 
FIRST-ACUTE SECOND MEMBER. 
ACO 
1187 
Thus शितिपादः, शियंसा, शिष्ठिः ॥ The word पाद belongs to वृषादि class: (VI. 1. 203) and has acute on the first, and sig: and sig: being formed by me (Uņ V. 21) and 9 (Uņ II. 4) affixes, have acute on the first (VI. 1. 197). Why do we say 'aster fala'? Obscrve p ar: which being formed by the affix water has acute on the penultimate syllable ft by VI. 1. 217 # Why do we say 'always's Observe f ast, for though it is here of two syllab les, it is an abbreviated form of y, the final a being elided in: denoting condition of life (V. 4. 146), in compounds other than those denoting 'age', we have fafanyi, hence this word is not such which is always of two syllables. 
The word rufa has acute on the first syllable, by Phit II. 10, and retains this accent in the Bahuvrlhi (V1. 2. 1). Why do we say 'abahvach of not many syllable'? Observe to famme: Why do we say in a Bahuvrihi ? Observe roa: Faragra: 11 Why do we say 'with the exception of WALL? Observe Rawat This satra is an exception to VI. 2. 1. . 
dercentagelig ul 838 il tempat it ala, Finck, 344€T, 57, ( slaeach ) 
f#: alaykuria #angaierara i ote* 41544** ATTEMATE rent are तिस्वरं भवति । 
139. In a Tatpurusha, a word ending in a Krit affix preserves its original accent, when preceded by an In declinable called Gati (I. 4. 60), or a noun standing in inti mate relation to a verb (Karaka), or any word which gives occasion for compounding (Upapada see III. 1. 92). 
The above is according to Professor Bohtlingk. Thus pantan, nakata, asice, BOTE NI The compounding is here by 11. 2. 18. With karaka-word we have :- * . gargatan, saya merat: (III. 3. 117). With upapada words, we have :-ईषतकरः, दुष्करः, मुकरः ॥ All these arc formed by लित् affixes and the accent is governed by VI. 1. 193. i. e. the word av is forined by ( 9E sca 7); so also with mat ( Tuta Tramt # 3:); so also with in ( 
YFT:) Why do we say "after a Gati, Karaka, or an Upapada word?" Observe देवदत्तस्यकारकः देवरत्नकारकः ॥ Here the Genitive in देवदत्त docs not express a kâraka relation. The genitive is here a og Hor get deno ting a possessor and not a mor one: for had it been latter, there would have been no coinpounding at all, by 11. 2. 16. scc also II. 3. 65. The word is employed in the satra for the sake of distinctness; for a gati, karaka or upa pada could not be followed by any other word than a krit-formed word, if there is to be a samasa. For two sorts of affixes come after a root (dhatu ) naincly fas and all A samasa can take place with ksit-formed. words, but 
1188 
FIRST-ACUTE SECOND-MEMBER. 
[BK. VI. C1. 11. 9. 140 
not with tinanta words. So that without employing in the sutra, we could have inferred that my was meant. Therefore, it is said the 'Krit' is employed in the sätra for the sake of distinctness. According to this view we explain the accent in प्रपतिसराम् , प्रगपतितमाम् , by saying that first compounding takes place with r and the words पचतितर and पतितम ending in तरप् and तमप् and then माम् , is added and the accent of the whole word is regulated by Ty by the rule of HATTE ( see V. 3. 56. and V.4. 11). According to others, the 5 is taken in 
this sūtra, in order to prevent the gati accent applying to verbal compounds in words like पचति देभ्यः,or पचति देशीय (V. 3.67), or पषातिरूपम् (V. 3.66). The accent of these will be governed by the rule of the Indeclinable first term retain ing its accent. 
उभे वनस्पत्यादिषु युगपत् ॥ १४० ॥ पदानि ॥ उभे, वनस्पत्यादिष, युगपत, (sofern ) 1 वृत्तिः । प्रकृत्यति वर्तते । वनस्पत्यादिषु समासेषु उभे पूर्वोत्तरपदे युगपत् प्रकृतिस्वरे भवतः ॥ 
140. In previa &c, both members of the com pound preserve their original accent simultaneously. 
Thus gerai, both 7 and rat have acute on the first syllable, and get augment comes by VI. 1. 157. (2) Fa: oria:Trai gfa: (VI. 1. 157) The word en is acutely accented on the final, some say it has acute on the first. (3) q ura: (Sachs being formed by to), some make Sachi acute on the first restrai, by including it in Sarangrava class (IV. 1. 73). (4) adora (tand being formed by Un I. 80 has acute on the final, according to others it has acute on the first and napat-na pati or na palayati with FC and has acute on the first). (5) मैराशंसा नरा मस्मिन्नासीनाः शंसन्ति or नरा एव शंसन्ति ( nara is formed by me and has acute on the first, Sańsa is formed by up, the lengthe ning takes place by VI. 3. 137). (6) TINY: - TSFY is a Bahuvrihi : the Genitive is not elided by (VI. 3. 21. Vårt. ), and both have acute on the first. (7) HRT both 'Sanda' and 'Marka' being formed by og have acute on the first: the lengthening takes place by VI. 3. 137. (8) Ura fri Trishṇa has acute on the first, 96 has acute on the final. The lengthening here also is by VI. 3. 137. (9) TATITRERT I Bamba is finally acute, and visva by VI. 2. 106 has acute on the final, as visvavayas is a Bahuvrihi. The lengthening takes place as before by VI. 3. 137. (10) A : 14 HT is formed by Fire affix and try has acute on the final. The words governed by this sätra are those which would not be included in the next two sūtras. 
are all 888 11 tallaat, gra, all वृत्तिः ॥ देवतावाधिनां यो बन्नस्तत्र युगपदुभ पूर्वोत्तरपरे प्रकृतिस्वरे भवतः ।। 
. 141. In a Dvandva compound of names of Divini ties, the both members retain their original accent. 
BK. VI. CH. II § 144 ) 
FIRST-ACUTE SECOND MEMBER. 
1189 
Thus, इन्द्रासामी, इन्द्रावरुणी, न्द्रिाहस्पती ॥ The word इन्द्र has acute on the first (by nipatana), सोम is formed by मन् (Un I. 140), and has acute on the first (VI. I. 197), वरुण is formed by उनन् (Un III. 53) and by VI. I. 197 has acute on the first. ऐहस्पति has two acutes by VI. 2. 140, and Indra-Brihaspati has three acutes. Why do we say "names of divinities"? Observe yazarur | Why do we say 'a Dvandva? Observe o frajera!!! 
नोसरपदे ऽनुदात्तादावपृथिवीरुद्रपूषमन्थिषु ॥ १४२॥ पदानि ॥ न, उत्तरपदे, अनुदात्तादो, अ पृथिवी, रुद्र, पूष, मन्यिषु ॥ 
त्तिः ॥ उत्तरपदे ऽनुदात्तादौ पृथिवीरुद्पूषमान्यवांजते देवताबन्द नोभे युगपत्मकतिस्वरे भवतः ॥ 
142. In a Dvandva compound of the names of divinities, both members of the compound simultancously do not retain their accent, when the first syllable of the second word is anudatta, with the exception of पृथिवी, रुद्र, पूषन्, and मन्थिन् । 
Thus इन्द्राग्नी, इन्द्रवायू, the words Agni and Vayu have acute on the final. The word uttarapada is repeated in the satra, in order that it should be qualified by the word 'anudattadau', which latter would otherwise have qualified Dvandva. The word "anudattadau" shows the scope of the prohibition and the injunction. Why do we say with the exception of 'prihivi' &cm Obscrve 
örargrubar or set dvyávå has acute on the first, 'prithivi' being formed by 'iîsh', has acute on the final. सौमारुद्रौ, Rudra is formed by rak' affix (UT II. 22.), and has acute on the final. इन्द्रापूषणो, Pushan has acute on the end. (Un I. 159) PATATIUAT, the words Sukra and manthin have acute on the final. •. 
भन्तः ॥ १४३॥ पदानि ॥ अन्तः, ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ भन्त इत्याधिकारी यक्ति कर्णमनुक्रमिष्यामस्ता समासस्योत्तरपदस्यान्त उदात्तो भवतीत्येवं सोवि. सध्यम् ॥ 
143. In the following sutras up to the end of the chapter, should always be supplied the phrase "the last syllable of the second member has the acute". 
The application is given in the next sätra. थाथताजवित्रकाणाम् ॥ १४४॥ पदानि ॥ थ, अथ, घ, क्त, अच, अपइत्र, काणाम, (अन्त उदात्तः,)॥ धृतिः ॥ य गय पत्र त भञ् अप् इत्र क इत्येवमन्तानामुत्तरपशनां गतिकारकोपपदापरेषामन्त उदात्तो भवति ॥ 
144. The last syllable of the second member has the acute, in the verbal nouns ending in थ, अथ, घ, क्त, अच्, अप, इत्र and क, when preceded by a Gati, a Karaka or an Upa pada (VI. 2. 139). 
1190 
END-ACUTE SECOND TERM. 
[ BK. VI. CI. II. 146 
Thus galu, army: formed by our affix (Uņ 11. 2 and 3), and but for this sotra, by VI. 2. 139 these words would have retained their original accent which was acute on the first. भयः-भावसर्थः, उपवसर्थः formed by भयन् affix (Un III. 116), घन्-प्रभेदैः, काष्ठभदः, रज्जुभेदः ॥ का-दादागतः, Here t has the force of कर्म, and the gati भा would retain its accent (VI. 2. 49) therefore, भागत is first acute: this accent would have been retained when compounded with the karaka 
word dara, but for this sitra. विशुष्क भातपशुष्कः ॥ भच् ( III. 3.56):-प्रक्षवः, प्रजयः, the words a dwelling', and $72 victory' are acute otherwise on the first (VI. I. 201, 202). . अप-प्रलयः, प्रसवः ॥ -प्रलविम्, प्रसवित्रम् ॥ क-खरवर्षः गोवर्षः-गां वर्षति, खरी वर्षति (III. 2. 5 Vart): प्रवर्षः, प्रहर्षः, (क being added by III. I. 135). The word वृष has acute on the first as it belongs to वृषादि class (VI. I. 203). When the preceding words are not Gati, Karaka or Upapada, this rule does not apply : as सुस्तुतं भवता, भतिस्तुतं भवता, where F and भति being Kar mapravachaniya, the words get the accent of the Indeclinable. 
सुपमानातू क्तः॥ १४५॥ पदानि ॥ सु, उपमानात, का॥ वृत्तिः ॥ इत्येतस्मादपमानाथ पर कान्तमुत्तरपदमन्तादानं भवनि ।। 
145. The Participle in क has acute on the final, when it is preceded by y or by a word with which the second member is compared. 
Thus मुकृतम् , मुमुक्तम् , सुपीनम् ॥ With Upamana words we have--वृकाव लम्, पालनम् , सिंहविर्तितम् ।। This debars VI. 2. 49 and 48. When मु is not a Gati, the rule does not apply, as मुस्तुतम् भवता ।। 
संज्ञायामनाचितादीनाम् ॥ १४६ ॥ पदानि ॥ संज्ञायाम, अनाचितादीनाम् ॥ बत्तिः ॥संज्ञायां विषये गतिकारकोपपदात् कान्तमुत्तरपदमन्तोदानं भवति भाषितान्वियिस्था । 
146. The Participle in 'kta' has acute on the last syllable, when preceded by a Gati, or a Karaka or an Upa pada, if the compound denotes a Name, but not in आचित &c. 
Thus सपूतों रामायणः, उपहूतः शाकल्यः, परिजग्धः कौण्डिन्यः ॥ This debars VI. 2. 49, धनुषखाता नदी, कुहालखातम् नगरम् , हस्तिमृरिता भमिः ॥ Here VI. 2. 48 is debarred. 
Why do we say “when it is not भाचित &c" Observe भाषितम् &c. 
आचित्त, 2 पांचित, 3 भास्थापित, 4 परिगृहीत, 5 निरुक्त, 6 प्रतिपन्न, 7 अपश्लिट*,8 प्रश्लिट, 9 उपहित (उपहत) 10 उपस्थित, 11 संहितागवि (संहिताशब्दो यदा गारन्यस्य संज्ञा तवान्तावात्तो म भवति । यता तु गोः संज्ञा तदान्तोदात्त एक ॥) 
The word dient in the above list does not take acute on the final, when it is the name of anything else than a 'cow'; but when it denotes 'a cow' it has acute on the final. 
- प्रवृद्धादीनां च ॥ १४७ ॥ पदानि ॥ प्रवृद्धादीनाम, च, (अन्तोदात्तम)॥ पत्तिः ॥ प्रवादीनां च कान्तमुत्तरपदमन्तोदात्तं भवति ।। 
BK. VI. Cl. II. F. 149 ] 
END-ACUTE SECONT) TERM. 
1191 
147. The words प्रवृद्ध &c. ending in 'kta' have acute on the final. 
Thus प्रवद यानम्, प्रवृद्धा वृषलः, प्रयत्नाः सनाः , भाकर्षेऽवहितः, अवहितों भोगेषु, खहा कर्ड, कविशस्त:। It is an Akritigana. The words have acute on the final, even when not followed by an &c, though in the Ganapatha they are rcad along with these words. Soine hold it is only in connection with an &c that these words have acute on the final. This being an Akritiyana. we have पुनरुत्स्यूतं पासोरथ, पुनर्निकता रयः &c. 
1 प्रवृद्धं यामम् , 2 प्रवृद्धो वृषला, 3 प्रयुतासष्णवः or प्रयुक्ताः सनः 4 आकर्षे ऽवहितः, 5 भवहितो भोगेषु, खदारूतः 7 कविशस्तः, भाकृतिगण. 
कारकाहत्तश्रुतयोरेवाशिषि ॥ १४८ ॥ पदानि ॥ कारकात, दत्त, श्रुतयोः, एव, आशिषि ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ संज्ञायामिनि वर्तते, क इति च। संज्ञायां विषये भाशिषि गम्यमानायां कारकादुत्तरयोत्तश्रुतयोरेव तान्तयारन्त उदात्तो भवति ॥ 
148. The final of Part Participles ter and ya alone has acute, in a compound denoting a Name and a benediction, the preceding word beiug a word standing in close relation to an action (karaka). 
___ Thus देवा एनयासुः देवदतः, विष्णुरवं भूयांदू-विष्णुभूतः ॥ 
Why do we say "of दत्त and भूत? Observe देवपालितः (VI, 2.48), which, though a Name, is not governed by VI. 2. 146, and does not take acute on the final, for the present rule makes a restriction with regard to that rule even, So that where a Participle in his preceded by a karaka, and the compound donotcs a bencdiction and a Naine, the accent is not on the final, as required by VI. 2. 146, but such a word is governed by VI. 2. 48, unless the Participle be Datta and Sruta, when the present rule applies. The word indicates that the rule will not apply when a gati or upapada precedes. Wliy do we use free (alone)? So that the restriction should apply to 'karaka', and not to 'Datta' and 'Sruta'. For the words 'Datta' and 'Sruta' will have acute on the final even after a nonkaraka word. As *, qua: u Why do we say 'when denoting benedi ction'? Tlie rule will not apply where benediction is not incant. As a: TAT 
grat i1 This rule applies to Datta and Sruta after a karaka-word, only when benediction is meant. It therefore does not apply to a 'the name of Arjuna's conch', as stigahara i ni, which is governed by VI. 2. 48. 
इत्थंभूतेन कृतमिति च ॥ १४९ ॥ पदानि ॥ इत्थंभूतेन, कृतम्, इति, च, (अ न्तोदात्तम् )॥ वृत्तिः ॥ इमं प्रकारमापन इत्थंभूतः । इत्यंभूतेन कुलमित्येतस्मिन यः समासो वर्तते तत्र कान्तमुत्तरपद मन्तोसत्तं भवति ॥ 
____149. The Participle in क्त has acute on the final, when the compound denotes 'done by one in such a condition's 
1192 
END-ACUTE SECOND TERM. 
[ BK. VI. CI. II SIST 
The word इत्यंभत means 'being in such a condition', Thus सुप्रमलपितम्, उन्मत्तम्लपितम, प्रमत्तगतिम् , विपन्नश्रुतम् as Adjectives and Abstract verbal nounts. This is an exception to VI. 2. 48. When the words मलपित &c are used to de note Noun of Action (भाव, then by VI. 2. 144 they get of course acute on the final. 
अनो भावकर्मवचनः ॥ १५० ॥ पदानि ॥ अनः,भाव, कर्मघचनः, (अन्तोदात्तम)। 'वृत्तिः ॥ भन प्रत्ययान्तमुत्तरपदं भाववचनं कवचनं च कारकात्परमन्तोदात्तं भवति । 
150. After a kâraka as mentioned in VI. 2. 148, the second member ending in the affix a, and denoting an action in the Abstract or the object (i. o, having the senses of a Passive Adjective), has acute on the final. 
Thus भावनभोजन सुखम, पयपान मुखम् , चन्ननप्रियङ्गकालेपन सुखम् ॥ All these are examples of भाव or Abstract Verbal Nouns. राजभोजनाः शालयः, राजाच्छादनानि वा सास, are examples of कर्मवचन or Passive Adjectives. These are formed by ल्युट् under III. 3.116. For the satrn III. 3. 116 may be explaincil by saying that (1) ल्युट is applied when the Upapada is in the objective case and bhava is meant, (2) as well as when object is to be expressed. When the first explan ation is taken, the above are examples of Bhava; when the second explanation is taken, they are examples pf Karma. Why do we say " ending in भन्" । Observe, fa THT W Why do we say "when expressing an action in the abstract (bhava), or an Object (karma)"? Observe इन्तधावनम् , here स्युट् is added after an Instrurnental karaka (III. 3. 117). Why do we say "after a karaka"? Observe निशनम् , भावलेखनम् ॥ In all the counter-examples, the second members retain there original accent, 
मनुक्तिन्व्याख्यानशयनासनस्थानयाजकादिक्रीताः ॥ १५१॥ पदानि ॥ मन्, क्ति म्, व्याख्यान, शयन, आसन, स्थान, याजकादि, क्रीताः॥ वृत्तिः । मन्नन्तं निवन्तं व्याख्यान शयन भासन स्थान इत्येतानि याजकादयः प्रीतशादीगरपदमन्तोरा तं भवति । 
151. The words ending in मम् or तिन् affixes, and the words व्याख्यान, शयन, आसन, स्थान and क्रीत as well as याजक 
&c, have acute on the final, when at the end of a compound, preceded by & kåraka word. 
___ Thus मन-रयवर्मन् वाकटवर्मन् ॥ निन्-पाणिनिकृति, मापिशालिकृतिः॥ व्यख्यान भगवनव्याख्यानम, छन्दोव्याख्यानम् ॥ एयर---राजशयनम, माधणायनम् ॥ भासन्--राशासनम, माझा शासनम् ॥ स्थान-गोस्थानम, अश्वस्थानम् ।। याजकादि words are those which form Genitive compounds under II. 2.9, and those compounds only are to be taken here; as ब्राह्मणयाज क्षत्रिययाजका, ब्राह्मणपूजर्कः, क्षत्रियपूजकः ।। क्रीन-गोत्रीतः, भश्चक्रीतः ॥ This is an exception to VI. 2. 139. and in the case of ata, rule VI. 2. 48 is superseded, The words भ्याख्यान &c do not denote here भाव or कर्म, had they done so, rule 
BK. VI. C1. II. $. 1531 
SECOND) TERM FIRST-ACUTI. 
1193 
VI. 2. 149 would have covered them. When the first member is not a karaka, we have प्रकृति: and महार: ॥ 
1 137.23*, 3 , 4 af fir 5 19 min 6 h, 7 ER (FET) 87 , 9 , 10 , 11 r , 12 977o, 13 gr, 14 era, 15 
सप्तम्याः पुण्यम् ॥ १५२॥ पदानि ॥ सप्तम्याः , पुण्यम् ॥ निः ॥ सप्तम्यन्तारपरं पुण्यमित्येतदुत्तरपरमन्तोदात्तं भवति ॥ 
152. The word gør las acute on the final when preceded by a noun in the Locative case. 
Thus anza goreneango, u The compounding takes place by II. 1. 40 by the process of splitting the satra (yoga-vibhaga), taking Frit there as a full sútra, and in another. Here by VI. 2. 2, the first member would have preserved its accent, the present sutra supersedes that and ordains acute on the final. The word you is derived by the Uñadi affix a (Uņ V. 15) and would have retained its natural accent (VI. 1. 213 ) and thus get acute on the first syllable by krit-accent. (VI. 2. 139 ). Why do we say 'a locative case? Observe in goj - argall __ ऊनार्थकलहं तृतीयायाः ॥ १५३ ॥ पदानि ।। ऊनार्थ, कलहम, तृतीयायाः ॥ 
TT: 11 sarua Peyma Teu gametrouaremaa ***** 11 
153. The acute falls on the final of words having the sense of 57, and of 657, when they are second members in a compound, preceded by a term in the instrumental case. 
Thus ita, merita, arena, natura, of , and The compounding takes place by II. 1. 31. This is an exception to VI, 2. 2 by which the first member being in the third case, would have retained its original accent, Some say that the word mir in the stra means the word form me, so that the aphorisın would mean...-"after an Instrumental case, the words 5*, 94, and get acutc on the final". The examples will be in addition to the above:- atyT: - Umut4: 11 If this be so, then the word-form 
y alone will be taken and not its synonyms like formimit. &c. To this we scply, that 57 will dcnote its synonyms also, by the fact of its being followed by thc word stý a By sätra II. 1. 31, and 57 always take the instru. inental case, so we could have omitted the word watura:, from this s@tra, for by the maxim of pratipadokta &c, maruaime would have referred to the compound ordained by Il. 1. 31. The mention of wäre here is only for the sake of clearness, 
मिश्रं चानुपसर्गमसंधौ ॥ १५४ ॥ पदानि ॥ मिश्रम्, च, अनुपसर्गम, असंधौ ॥ पतिः ॥ तृतीयोति वर्तते । मिश्र इत्येतदुत्नरपरमनुपसर्ग तृतीयान्तात्परमन्तोशनं भवत्यसंधी गम्यमाने । 
1194 
SECONT TERM END-ACUTE. 
TCRNE END 
CO 
[BK. VI. CI. II. $ 155 
154. The word fw has acute on the final after an Instrumental case, when it is not joined with any Preposition and does not mean a 'compact or alliance'. | Thus যুৱমিশ, 
নিম্মী , বিমিখা। Why do we say নিশ? Observe - a: # Why do we say 'not having a Preposition'? Observe [CETAT: 11 The employment in this sätra of the phrase 'anupasargam' implies, that wherever else, the word misra is used, it includes miśra with a preposition also. There fore in II. 1. 31 where the word Fher is used, we can form the Instrumental compounds with the preceded by a preposition also. Why do we say 'not denoting a compact? Observe ON T orci te otra Tatu 197: # The word hy here means a contract formed by reciprocal promises, if you do this thing for me, I will do this for you. Others say, it means close proximity, without losing identity, and thus differs from fe in which two things blend together into one. Therefore though the King and the Brahmaņa may be in close proximity as regards space, they both retain their several individralities: hence the counter-example ATEMPAT OTTET N While in the examples ufit: &c there is no possibility of separating the two. 
at Turufaat T asauf lear: 11 844 11 qera || 7i, yor, afats, #4, s, fea, mh, auf:, afaari, II वृत्तिः ॥ संपादि मई हित मलम् इत्येवमर्या ये तद्धितास्तरन्तान्युत्तरपदानि नमो गुणप्रतिषेधे वर्तमानात. पण्यन्तोदात्तानि भवन्ति ।। 
155. The words formeil with the Taddlita affixes denoting 'fitted for that’ (V. 1. 99), leserving that' (V. 1. 63), 'good for that’ (V. 1. 5), capable to effect that’ (V. 1. 101), have acntc on the final, when precedled by the No gative Particle 79, when it makes a negation with regard to the above mentioned attributes. 
Thus 'suited for that (V. 1.99):- UC 
= Fer of the fait (EHTİF u The affix is 1 976 deserving that' (V. 1. 63 ): FOTO:=#017 # (oparia). The affix is 5 (V. 1.64 and V. I. 19). Fa 'good for that' (V. 1. 5) :- ala: - 7 eft : Il The afflix is V. I. I. : 'capable to effect that' (V. 1. 101):- hargam: - Har : ! The affix is 09 (V. I. 18) Why do we say 'after 79? Observe T hera - Tru, FarmFT :, where the negative fat is used and therefore the avyaya pa retains its accent by VI. 2. 2. Why do we say 'negation of that attribute'? Observe TURI: 
TITUTI I The word To here means the attribute denoted by the Taddhita affix, and not any attribute in general. Thus 8 FOTTUTTAT 
BK. VI. Ch. II. $158] 
SECOND TERM END-ACUTE. 
1195 
कर्णवेष्टकाभ्याम् न संपादि मुखम् ॥ Why do we say in the sense of sampadi &c' ? Observe पाणिनीयमधीयते = पाणिनीय; म पाणिनीयः, -अपाणिनीयः ॥ Why do we say "Taddhita affixes"? Observe कन्यां वादुमहति-कन्यायोडा, म बोगा भवाग ॥ Here तृच् akrit affix is added in the semsc of 'deserving' (III. 3. 169). 
ययताश्चातदर्थे ॥ १५६॥ पदानि ॥ य. यतोच, अतदर्थे । वृत्तिः ॥ य यत् इत्येतो यो तद्धितापतत्य वर्तेते सरन्सस्योत्तरपदस्थ नमो गुणप्रतिषेधविषयारन्त उतानो भवति ।। 
166. The words formed with the Taddhita affixes T and rg when not denoting 'useful for that', have acute on the last syllable, after the particle sy negativing the attribute. 
Thus पाशानां समूहः = पाश्याः, न पाभ्याः- अपाश्याः, So also. अतृण्योः ( IV. 2. 49); इन्तेष भव - दन्त्यम्, न दन्त्यं - मदनथम्, मकर्ण्यम् (V. 1.6). Why do we say'atadartha: not useful for that'. Observe पार्थमुश्क्रम् - पायम्, न पाया- अपायम् (V. 4. 25). This rule does not apply when the affixes are not Taddhita, as open formed with the krit affix au There must be negation of the attribute, otherwise पन्यादन्यत् = मदन्त्यम् ॥ The affix य and यत्, one without any anubandha and the other with the anubandha a being specifically mentioned, excludes all other alnxes having य as their effective element, such as उप &c. (IV. 2.9), thusa पामदेव्य- अवामदेष्यम् ॥ See IV. 2.9. 
___ अचकावशक्ती ॥ १५७॥ पदानि ॥ अच, को, अशक्ती॥ वृत्तिः ॥ भ क इत्येवमन्तमशनी गम्यमानायामुत्तरपदं नमः परमन्तोदात्तं भवति । 
167. A word forined with the krit affix अच and क, precelled by the particle 5. has acute on the final, when the mear 
Thus अपर्चः-य पकं न शक्रोति, so also अजयः, अपठः, भविक्षिपः, भबिलिखः (III. 1. 134&c), Why do we say when meaning 'not capable'? Observe भपयो दीक्षितः, भपचः परिव्राजकः ॥ A दीक्षित and a परिव्राजक do not cook their food, not because they are physically incapable of cooking, but because by the vows of their particular order thcy are prohibited from cooking. ___ आक्रोशे च ॥ १५८ ॥ पदानि ॥ आक्रोशे, च ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ भाकोशे च गम्यमान नम उत्तरमकान्तमन्तोदात्तं भवति । 
158. A word formed by the krit-affixes अच् or क, preceded by the Negative particle, has acute on the final when onc abuses somebody by that word. 
Thus अपर्यो ऽयं जाल्म: this roguc docs not cook, though he can do so'. Here avarice is indicated, tlic fellow wants more pay before he will cook : and not his incapacity. So also अपाऽयं जामः, so also अविभिपः, भविलिः ॥ 
संशायाम् ॥ १५९॥ पदानि ॥ संशायाम, (अन्तोदात्तम् )॥ वृत्तिः ॥ भाको गम्यमाने नमः परमुत्तरपदं संज्ञायां वर्तमानमन्तोशत्तं भवति ।। 
s not capable.'' 
1196 
SECOND)-TERÀI END-ACUTE. 
[ BK. VI. Cl. II. 162 
159. When abuse is nieant, a word preceded by नश् , has acute on the final, in denoting a Name. 
Thus भरेवदत्तः 'No Devadatta, not deserving of this name' भयज्ञदत्ता, भविष्णुमिः॥ 
कृत्योकेष्णुश्वावोदयश्च ॥ १५०॥ पदानि ॥ कृत्य, उक, इष्णुच, चावादयः,च॥ वृत्तिः । कृत्य उकाणुच् इत्येवमन्ताभावाश्यम नम उत्तरेन्तोसगा भवन्ति । 
160. After the Negative particle, the words formed by the kritya uffixes ( III. 1. 95), by उक, and rष्णुच्, and the words चारु &c. have acute on the final. 
Thus kritya:-- 
अ ध्यम् , भकरणीयम, उका-अनागामुकम्, भनपलाषुकम् ॥ इष्णु भनलंकारिष्णुः,भनिराकरिष्णुः ॥ The affix इष्णुच् includes खिष्णुच्च् also: अनाध्यभविष्णुः, भसु. भगभाविष्णुः ॥ चार &c:-अचारुः, भसाधुः, भयोधिकः, भवदान्यः, अननमेजयः (double nega. tion), भनकस्मात् (double negation), The words वर्तमान, वर्धमान खरमाण, ध्रीयमाण, रोचमान, क्रीयमाण, and शोभमान preceded by भ (नम् ) when denoting names have acute on the final. भविकारः, भसहयाः and भविकारसदृशः (विकार and सह taken jointly & separately). भगृहपति, भगापतिकः ॥ भराजी and भन: in the Vedas only. In the Vernacular they have the accent of 77, i. e. udatta on the first 
1चार, 2 साधु, 3 यौधाक (योधिक) 4 अनमेजय, 5 वदान्य 6 अकस्मात् . 7 वर्तमानवर्धमा मत्वरमाणध्रियमाणकोयमाणरोचमानशोभमानाः (क्रियमाण कोयमाण) संज्ञायाम, 8 विकारसशे व्यस्त समस्ते (भविकार, भसहश भविकारसदारा), गृहपति, 10 गहपतिक, 11 राजाहोम्छन्नासि. 
विभाषा तृन्नन्नतीक्ष्णशुचिषु ॥ १६१॥ पदानि ॥ विभाषा, तृन्, अन्न, तीक्ष्ण, शुचिघु, (अन्तोदात्तः)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ हन्नन्त भन्न तीण शुष इत्येतेषु मम उत्तरेषु विभाषा ऽन्त उदात्तो भवति ॥ 
161. After the Negative particle, the final of the following is optionally acute :-a word formed with the affix तृन्, and the words अन्न, तीक्ष्ण, and शुचि ॥ 
Thus नृन्-भकर्ता or अकत्ता ; भन्न &c-अनन्नम् or अननम्, अतीण, or भैती. मम मश: or भशुचिः ॥ The alternative accent is that of the Indeclinable. (VI. 2. 2) 
बहवीहाविदमेतत्तद्भयः प्रथमपूरयोः क्रियागणने ॥ १६२॥ पदानि ॥ बहुवाही, इदम्, एतत्, तद्भयः, प्रथम, पूरयोः, क्रिया-गणने, (अन्तउदात्तः)॥ 
बत्तिः ॥ बहतीही समासे इमम् एतद् तस्त्येितेभ्य उत्तरस्थ प्रथमशब्दस्य पूरणप्रत्ययान्तस्य च क्रियागणने वर्तमानस्यान्त उदात्तो भवति ।। 
162. In a Bahuvrihi, after the words इदम्, एतद् and aę, the last syllable of qua and of a proper Ordinal Numeral, has the acuto, when the number of times of an action is meant. BK VI. C1. II. . 165 ) 
END-ACUTE SECOND MENDER. 
1197 
- 
- 
__ Thuste प्रथम गमनं भोजनं वा-स इदमप्रथमः I this is the first time of goingg or eating'. दितीय, तृतीयः, एतपथमः, एतद्वितीयः, एततृतीयः तस्मयमः, सद्धितीयः तत् तायः ।। Why do we say in a Bahuvrihi?' Observe अनेन प्रथमः प्रथमः ॥ Here the first meinber being in the third case retains its accent by VI. 2. 2. Why do we say "after idam &c". Observe यत्प्रथमः- याप्रथम एषाम्, here the first term rctains its accent by VI. 2. 1. Why do we say 'of prathama and the Ordinals'? Observe aita arata=!: !Why do we say 'in counting an action'? Observe भयं प्रथम एषांतर प्रथमाः ॥ Here substances are counted and not action. Why do we say in counting'? Observe अयं प्रथम एषां प्रथमा: i.. प्रधानाः ॥ and the word 49# means here 'foremost', and is not a numeral. When the me asfix is added, the acute falls on the last syllable preceding my !As अथर्मकाः ॥ The Bahuvrthi governs the subsequent satras upto VI. 2. 178. 
संख्यायाः स्तनः ॥ १६३॥ पदानि ॥ संख्यायाः, स्तनः ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ संख्यायाः परः स्तनशब्दो बहुव्रीही समासन्तोदात्तो भवति ॥ 
163. In a Babuyribi. after a Nuneral, the word Fra has acute on the final. 
Thus farraat, feat, That I Why do we say after a Numeral ? Observe दर्शनायस्तना | Why do we say 'स्तन'? Observe द्विशिराः ॥ 
विभाषा छन्दसि ॥ १६४॥ पदानि ॥ विभाषा, छन्दसि, (अन्तोदात्तः)॥ पत्तिः ॥ छन्दसि विषये बहुव्रीही समासे संख्यायाः परः स्तनशम विभाषा ऽन्तोशत्तो भवति ।। 
___164. Optionally so, in the Vedas, the stana after a Numeral las acute on the final. 
Thus विस्तनौ or हिस्तना, चतुःस्तनों or चतुःस्तना ।। संज्ञायां मित्राजिनयोः ॥ १६५॥ पदानि ॥ संज्ञायाम, मित्र, अजिनयोः (अन्त: दात्तः)॥ 
पात्तः ॥ संज्ञायां विषय बहुधीही समासे मित्र अमिन इत्येतयोरुत्तरपदयोरन्त उदात्तो भवति। पार्मिकम् ॥ ऋषिप्रतिषेधो मित्र ।। 
165. In a Bahuvrihi, ending in मित्र and अजिन, the ncute falls on the last syllable, when the compound denotes a Namc. 
____As देवमित्रः, मित्रः, वृकाजिनः, कुलाजिमः कृष्णाजिनः॥ Why do we saya Name? Observe प्रियमित्रः, महाजिनः॥ 
Vait:--Prohibition must be stated in the case of Pay when the name is that of a Rishi. As विश्वामित्र: which is governed by VI. 2. 106 ।। 
__ व्यवायिनो ऽन्तरम् ॥ १६६ ॥ पदानि ॥ व्यवायिनः, अन्तरम्, (अन्तोदात्तम् ॥ 
त्तिः ॥ व्यवायी व्यवधाता। सहाधिनः परमन्तरं बहुव्रीही समासे ऽन्तोदात्तं भवति ।। 
1198 
END-ACUTE SECOND MEMBER. 
(BK. VI. CII. II. $ 169 
arts 
166. In a Bahuvrihi ending in अन्तर, the acute falls . on the final, after a word which denotes that which lies between'. 
Thus nान्तरम् through an intervened cloth cr drapery', पटान्तरम, कम्बला न्तरम् = वस्त्रमन्तरं व्यवधायकं यस्य &c. Why do tve say when meaning lying between'? Observe मारमान्तरम् - आत्मा स्वभावोऽन्तरोऽन्यायस्थ ॥ 
मुख स्वाङ्गम् ॥ १६७॥ पदानि ॥ मुखम्, स्वाङ्गम, ( अन्तोदात्तम् )। वृत्तिः ॥ मुखमुगरपदं स्वागवाधि बहुव्रीहोसमासे ऽन्तोदात्तं भवति । 
___167. In a Bahuvrihi the acute is on the final, when the second member is a meaning mouth i. e. the actual bodily part of an animal and not used metaphorically. 
Thus गारमुखः, भद्रमुखः ।। Why do we say an actual part of a body'' Observe दीपमुखा शाला || Here मुख means "entrance or door". The word or mears "a non liquid substance actually to be found in living beings &c". as explained in III. 4. 54. 
नाव्ययादकशब्दगोमहतस्थूलमुष्टिपृथुवत्सेभ्यः ॥ १६८॥ पदानि । न, अव्यय, दिक्शब्द, गो, महत्, स्थूल, मुष्टि, पृथु, वत्सेभ्यः । 
वृत्तिः भव्यय विक्शन गो महत् स्थूल मुष्टि पृथु वत्स इत्येतेभ्यः परं मुखं स्वाङ्गवाचि बहुव्रीही समासे नान्तारात्तं भवति॥ 
168. In a Bahuvrihi, the acute does not fall on such y denoting a real mouth, when it comes after an Inde clinable, and a name of a direction, or after गो, महत्, स्थूल, मुां पृथु and वत्स ॥ 
Thus: अव्ययः-उपमुखः, नीच मुखः ॥ The words उषैः and नीचैः are finally acute and retain their accent. विक्-प्राङ्मुखः, प्रत्यइमुखः ॥ The word प्राङ् has acute on the first by VI. 2, 52, and प्रत्यंइ is finally acute by VI. 3. 139. गौ &c:-गोमुखः, महामुखः, स्यूलमुखः, मुष्टिमुखः पृयुमुखः and वसमुखः ॥ In these the first members of the Bahuvrihi preserve their respective accents under Rule VI. 2. I and in the case of compounds preceded by it, tri and T, the optional rule taught in the next sätra is also superseded by anticipation, though the words may denote comparison. . 
निष्ठापमानादन्यतरस्याम् ॥१६९॥ पदानि । निष्ठा, उपमानात्, अन्यतरस्याम्॥ वृत्तिः । निष्ठान्तादुपमानवाधिनम मुखं स्वानमुत्तरपदमन्यतरस्यां बहुबाही समासन्तान भवति । 
169, In a Bahuvrihi, the word मुख denoting 'an actual mouth', has optionally the acute on the final, when preceded by a participle in a, or by that wherewith something is compared. 
.. 
. 
BK. VI. C11. II $ 171] 
END-ACUTE SECOND MEMBER. 
1199 
Thus रक्षालितमुखः or प्रक्षालितमुख: or प्रक्षालितमुखः ॥ When the final is not acute, then Rule VI. 2. 110 applies which makes the first member have acute on the final optionally, and when that also does not apply, then by VI. 2. I. the first meinber preserves its original accent, which is that of the gati (VI. 2. 49). Thus there are thrce forms. So also with a word denoting comparison: सिंहमुखः or सिंहमुखः, व्याघ्रमुखः or व्याघ्रमुखः ॥ 
जातिकालसुखादिभ्यो ऽनाच्छादनातू क्तोऽकृतमितप्रतिपन्नाः॥१७॥ पदानि। जातिकाल, सुखादिभ्यः, अनाडादनात, कः, अकृतमितप्रतिपत्राः॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥जातिवाचिन भाच्छादनवर्मिसात् कालवाधिनः मुखामियम रकान्तं कसमितमतिपन्नान्वयित्वा बहुव्रीही समासेन्तोश भवति । 
170. After a word denoting a species (with the exception of a word for 'garment or covering' ), and after a time-denoting word as well as after a &c. the Participle in 
has acute on the final, in a Bahuvrihi, but not so when the participles are कृत, मित and प्रतिपन्न । 
___ Thus सारङ्गजधः, पलाण्टुभमितः, सुरापीतः ॥ कालः-मासजातः, सवत्सरजातः, यहजासः ध्यहजातः ।। सुख &c:-सुखजातः दुःखजातः, तृप्मजातैः ॥ Why do we say "after a Spe cies, a time or मुख &c. word" ? Observe पुषजातः (II. 2. 37), the participle being placed after the word Putra. Why do we say 'when not meaning a garment'? Observe वस्त्रच्छन्नः, वैसनच्छनः from the root बस् with the affixes टन and स्युट respec tively. Why do we say when not कृत &c."? Observe कुण्डकृतः, कुण्डामितः कण्डप्रातपत्रः; कण्ड is first acute by Phit II. 3 being neuter. These three participles do not stand first in a compound (contrary to II. 2. 36), as this sutra implies. In the counter-examples, above given, the first members retain their original accent (VI. 2. 1). The words सुख &c are given under III. I. 18. 
1 मुख, 2 दुःख, 3 तुम (तृम तोत्र) कच्छू, 5 मन, 6 भास*, 7 भलीक प्रतीप, 9 करुण, 10 कृपण, 11 साद. 12 गहन. 
वा जाते ॥ १७१॥ पदानि ॥ वा, जाते, (अन्तोदात्तः)॥ वृत्तिः॥जातशमउत्तरपरे वा ऽन्त उशनो भवति बहुव्रीही समावे मातिकालमुखाविस्था । 
171. After a species (with the exception of gar ment) or a time denoting word, or after सुख &c. in a Bahuvrihi, the word ara has optionally acute on the final. 
Thus दन्तजातः or इन्तजातः, स्तनजात: or स्तनजातः, मासजातः or मासभातः, संवासर जात: or संवत्सरंजातः; सुखजातः or सुखजातः, दुःखजात: or दुःखनातः &c. The words an and स्तन are first-acute by Phit II. 6; मास is first-acute by Phit II. IS, संवत्सर finally-acute by Phit I. 7. बहिष्टवरसरति शत्यान्ताम् “words ending in हिट, बस्स, ति, बत and u are inally acute", as वहिष्ठः, संवत्सरः, सप्ततिः , ति , गर्यम् ॥ The words मुख and दुःख are end-acute by Phit I. 6. 
1200 
END-ACUTE SECOND MEMBER. 
[ Bk. VI. CI. II. S 174 
नसुभ्याम् ॥ १७२॥ पदानि ॥ नन्, सुभ्याम्, (अन्तोदात्तम् )॥ पृत्तिः ॥ नम्सुभ्यां परमुत्तरपद बहुव्रीही समासन्तोरानं भवति ।। 
172. A Bahuvrihi formed by the Negative particle * or by g has acute on the last syllable of the compound. 
Thus भयया देशा, भत्रीहिः, अमार्षः, सुया, मुव्रीहिः, सुमाषः॥ The acute here rests on the last syllable of the completed compound ; so that the rule ap plies to the compounds which have fully developed themselves by taking the samasanta affixes. Thus मनृचः ( formed by the samasanta affix w V.4.74), Though the word fire and 5TTTE are both present here by context, yet the operation is performed on samasa. This is to be inferred, because of the next satra. For had the present sâtra meant that the final of the second member (उचरपद) preceded by नभ् and सु gets the acute, then there would have been no necessity of the next sätra, for the present would have covered the case of सुकुमारीक &c because कप is not a part of the second term (uttarapada) कुमारी but of the compound (Samasa) wint; and therefore, if we translated the present sQtra, by saying that the end of second term gets acute, the accent would have fallen on { in Fra : even by this sūtra. But this is not intended, because of the accent of the samasanta words area and 9: There is necessity of the next satra, because a sama sa includes not only the simple samasa, but one ending with a samasånta affix. Therefore, had not the next sätra been made, the accent would have fallen on an and not on f, for the affix ay is considered part of the samasn and not of the uttarapada समासान्त समासस्थवाश्यवा नात्तरपदस्य। 
कपि पूर्वम् ॥ १७३॥ पदानि ॥ कपि, पूर्वम् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ नमसुभ्यां कपि परतः पूर्वमन्तोरानं भवति ॥ 
___173. A Bahuvrihi formed by नञ् or सु and ending in the affix कप, (V.4.153) has acute on the syllable precedling 
the affix. 
By the last sätra the accent would have fallen on it, this makes it fall on the vowel preceding it. Thus भकुमारी कोदेशा, भवृपलीका, भब्रह्मवन्धकः, मुकु मारीकः, सुवृष लीकः, सुब्रह्मबन्धैंकः ॥ 
स्वान्ते इन्त्यात्पूर्वम् ॥ १७४॥ पदानि ॥ ह्रस्वान्त, अन्त्यात, पूर्वम, (उदात्तम्)। धृत्तिः । इस्वो ऽन्तो यस्य तदिदं इस्वान्तमुत्तरपदं समासो बा, तत्रान्त्यापूर्वमुदात्तं भवति काप परतो नमः ज्यां परं बहवीदी समासे ॥ 
174. When the compound ends in a light vowel, the acute falls on the syllable before such last, in a Bahuvrihi preceded by its and a to which is added. 
____Thus भयवकोदेशः, मनीहिकः, मर्मापका, मुर्यवका, सुत्रीहिकः, सुभाषकः ॥ The re: petition of g in this sūtra, though its anuvritti was present from the last 
BK. VI. CI. IL S 184.) 
IND-ACUTE SECOND MEMBER. 
1201 
shows, that in the last aphorism, the syllable preceding 719 takes the acute, while here the syllable prcccling the short-vowcl-ending final syllabic has the acute and not the syllable preceding syll This is possible with a word which is, at least, of two syllables (not counting, of course, सु and क or कप ). Therefore, in अर्शका and सुनका, the acute is on the syllable preceding कप by VI. 2. 173, because it has here no antyat-purvam. 
बहोर्नवदुत्तरपदभूनि ॥ १७५॥ पदानि ॥ बहोः, नश्वदुत्तरपदभून्नि । वृत्तिः ॥ उत्तरपरार्थबहुले यो बहुशमनो वर्नते तस्मानमइव स्वरो भवति । नसुभ्यामित्युक्तम् । वहोरपि सया भवति॥ 
175. A Bahuvrihi with बहु, has the same accent 19 77, when it denotes muchness of the object expressed by the second member. 
In other words a Bahuvrthi with the word g in the first member, is governed by all those rules which apply to a Bahuvrihi with a Negative Particle such as Rules VI. 2. 172 &c. when this gives the sense of multiety of the objects denoted by the second member. Thus बहुया देशा, बहुव्रीहिः , बहु तिल: the same as VI. 2. 172. बहर्यवकः, बहीहिका, बहुमोषक: by VI. 2. 174 बहुर्जरः, बहुमरः, बहुमित्रा, बहुमतः by VI. 2. 116 : these examples of VI. 2. 116 are not given by Dr. Bohtlingk. 
Why do we say 'uttara-pada-bhumni-when multcity of the objects denoted by the second member is meant'? Observe पहुषु मनोऽस्य - बहुमना भयम् (VI. 2. 1). 
न गुणादयो ऽवयवाः ॥ १७६ ॥ पदानि ॥ न, गुणादयः, अवयवाः (अन्तोदात्ताः) वृतिः । गुणादयो ऽवयववाचिनोबहोरुमरे बहुव्रीही नान्तोदाना भवन्ति । 
176. In a Bahuvrihi, after बहु, the acute does not fall on the final of Tu &c. when they appoar in the compound as ingredient of something clse. 
Thus बहुगुणाः रज्जुः, बहक्षरं परम्, बहुँच्छन्दोमानम्, बहध्यायः (VI. 2. I). गुणादि is An Akrtigann. Why do we say “when it denotes an avayava or ingredient", As बहुगुणी ब्राह्मणः = अध्ययनश्रुतसराधाराश्योऽत्रगुणाः ॥ 
1 गुण, 2 अक्षर, 3 अध्याय, 4 सक्त, छन्दोमान. आकृतिगण. उपसर्गात स्वाङ्गं ध्रुवमपशु ॥ १७७॥ पदानि ॥ उपसर्गात, स्वाङ्गम्, ध्रवम, अपशु, ( अन्तोदात्तम् ) वृत्तिः । उपसर्गान् स्वाङ्गं ध्रुवं पशुवर्जितमन्तोदात्तं भवति बहुव्रीही समासे ॥ 
177. A word denoting a part of the body, which is constant (and indispensable), with the exception of y, has, after a Preposition in a Bahuvrihi compound, the acute on the Jast syllable. 
1202 
END-ACUTE SECOND-MEMBER. 
[BK. VI. C11. II. 9. 182 
.. Thus प्रपृष्ठः, मोदरः, प्रललार्टः; सततं यस्य प्रगतं पृष्ठं भवति स प्रपृष्ठः ॥ Why do we say after a Preposition'? Observe दर्शनीयललाटः ॥ Why do we say part of the body'? Observe शाखो वृक्षः ॥ Why do we say 'dhruva-constant and indis pensable'? Observe उद्वाहः कोशति ॥ Here the hand is raised up only at the time of cursing and not always, so the state of It is temporary and not perma* nent. Why do we say with the exception of पशु? Observe पशुः, विपर्युः (VI.2.1). 
वनं समासे ॥ १७८॥ पदानि ॥ वनम्, समासे, (अन्तोदात्तम् )। वृत्तिः ॥ समासमात्र वनामत्येतदुत्तरपदमुपसर्गात्परमन्तोदात्तं भवति ॥ 
178. After a preposition, it has acute on the final in compounds of every kind. 
Thus प्रवर्ण बटव्यम्, निर्वणे प्रणिधीयते, the a changed to m by VIII. 4.5. The word 'samasa' is used in the sätra to indicate that all sorts of compounds are meant, otherwise only Bahuvrihi would have been meant. 
अन्तः ॥ १७९ ॥ पदानि ॥ अन्तः ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ भन्तशम्शदुसरं वनमन्तोदात्तं भवति ॥ 
179. After अन्तर the acute falls on the final of वन ॥ __ Thus मन्तर्वणा देशः॥ This sotra is made in order to make न oxytoned, when a preposition (upasarga) does not precede. 
अन्तश्च ॥ १८०॥ पदानि ॥ अन्तः, च ॥ वृत्तिः ॥मन्तवमोचरपरमुपसर्गादन्तोदानं भवति । 
___ 180. The word अन्तर has acute on the final when preceded by a Preposition. 
Thus प्रान्तः, पर्यन्तः ॥ This is a Rahuvrthi or a प्रादि compound. न निविभ्याम् ॥ १८१॥ पदानि ॥ न, नि, विश्याम, (अन्तोदासः)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ निवि इत्येताभ्यामुत्तरोन्तश्यो नान्तोदात्तो भवति ॥ 
___181. The word antar has not acute on the final, after the prepositions नि and वि ॥ 
Thus न्यन्तः, यतः, here the first member retains its acute, and semivowel is then substituted for the vowel 6, then the subsequent grave is changed to svarita by VIII. 2. 4. 
परेरभितोभावि मण्डलम् ॥ १८२॥ पदानि ॥ परेः, अभितः-भावि, मण्डलम् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ परेकनरमभितोभाविवचनं मण्डलं चान्तोगत्तं भवति । 
182. After art, a word, which expresses some thing, which has both this side and that side, as well as the word Fuse, has acute on the final. 
Thus परिकुलम्, परितीरम्, परिमण्डलम् ॥ This is a Bahuvrihi or प्रापि compound or an Avyayibhava, If it is an Avyayibhava, then rule VI. 2, 33 is superseded, 
BK VI. C1. II § 186 ) 
END-ACUTE SECOND MEMBER. 
1203 
and the first member does not retain its original accent. भभितः उभवतः 'on both sides, अभितोभावोऽस्यास्ति - अभितोमानिन् 'that which has both sides: namely those things which have naturally two sides such as 'banks', 'shores' &c. 
प्रादस्वाङ्गं संज्ञायाम् ॥१८३॥ पदानि ॥ प्रातू, अस्वाङ्गम, संक्षायाम,॥ वृत्तिः । मादुत्तरपरामस्वामवाचि संज्ञायां विषये ऽन्तोदात्तं भवति॥ 
____183. After प्र, a word, which does not denote & part of body, has acute on the final, when the compound is a name. 
Thus प्रकोटम, प्रग्राम, प्रहारम् ॥ Why do we say 'not denoting a body part? Observe प्रहस्तम्, पदम् ॥ Why do we say when a Name? Observe प्रपीठम् ॥ 
निरुदकादीनि च ॥ १८४॥ पदानि ॥ निरुदकादीनि, च, (अन्तोदातम्)॥ पतिः ॥ निरुतकादीनि च पामरूपाण्यन्तोदात्तानि भवन्ति । 
184. The words निरुदक &c, have acute on the final. Thus निरुरकम् , निरुलपम् , निरुपलम् &c. 1 निरुपक, 2 निरुपल निरूलए 3 निर्मक्षिक, 4 निर्मशक, निकालक, 6 निष्कालिक, 7 निषेप, 8 दुस्तरीप, 9 निस्तरीप, 10 निस्तरीक, 11 निराजिन, 12 उपजिन, 13 उपाजिन, 14 पोईस्तपादकेशकर्ष भाकृतिगण. 
These may he considered either as a EE or Bahuvrihi. If they be considered as avyayi bhava compounds then they are end acute already by VI. I. 223. The word निकालक-निष्कान्तः कालकात्, is a Pradi-samasa with the word काल ending in the affix कन् ॥ The word दुस्तरीपः is thus formed: to the root xis added the affix ई and we have तरी (Un III. 158) मीम् पातिसरीपः; कुरिसत स्तरीप:- दुस्तरीपः॥ The word निस्तरीकः is formed by adding the affix कप to the Bahuvrihi निस्तरी| The words इस्त, पार, कश anb को have acute on the Final alter परि, as, पारहस्तः, परिपादः, परिकशा, and परिकर्षः॥ 
अभेर्मुखम् ॥ १८५॥ पदानि । अमेः, मुखम, (अन्तोदात्तम् )॥ वृतिः ॥अमेरुत्तर मखमन्तोदात्तं भवति । 
185. The word ge has acute on the final when preceded by अभि ॥ 
As, भाभिमुखम् ॥ It is a Bahuvrihi or a प्रादि samasa. If it is an Avyayi. bliava, then it would have acute on the final by VI. 1. 223 also. By VI. 2. 177, even ge would have oxytone after an upasarga, the present søtra makcs the additional declaration that ge is oxytone even when the compound is not a Baluvrihi, when it does not denote an indispensable part of body, or a part of body even, as was the case in VI. 2. 177. Thus भभिमुखा पाला ॥ 
अपाच ॥ १८६॥ पदानि ॥ अपात, च, (अन्तोदात्तम्)॥ बात ॥ अपापोतरं मुखमन्तोदानं भवति । 
1204 
END-ACUTE SECOND-ITEMBER. 
(BK. VI, C11. II. & 190 
186. The word मुख has acute on the final, after the preposition अप् ॥ 
___Thus भपमुखम्, अपमुखैः ॥ The compound is in one case Avyayibhava also, when rule VI. 3. 33 will be superseded. The separation of this from the last satra, is for the sake of the subsequent aphorism, in which the any. vritti of my only goes. 
स्फिगपूतवीणाओवकुक्षिसीरनाम नाम च १८७ ॥ पदानि ॥ स्फिग, पूत, घीण, अनः, उध्वम् कुक्षि, सीर नाम, नाम, च, 
वृतिः ॥ स्फिग पूत वीणा भज्जस् अध्वम कुक्षि इत्येतान्युत्तरदान सीरनामानि नामशब्दचापादुत्तराण्यन्तो. पात्तानि भवन्ति । 
187. The words स्फिग, पूत, वीणा, अक्षस, अध्वम्, कुक्षि, नामन् and a word denoting uplough', have acute on the final when preceded by अप ॥ 
Thus अपस्फिर्गम्, भपतम् , भपवीणम् , भपाजः, भपाध्वी ( This ordains acute on the final where the compound apadhwa docs not take the samåsanta affix by V. 4. 85, when it takes that affix, the acute will also fall on the final be cause my is a fora affix.) This further shows that the samisanta affixes are not compulsory. (मनित्या समासान्तः), भपकुक्षिः, अपसारः भपहला, अपलालम, भपनाम । These are the compounds or Bahuvșihi or Avyayibhavas. Some of these viz. स्फिग, पूत and कुक्षिः will be end-acute by VI. 2. 177, also when they denote parts of body and a permanent condition and the compound is a Bahuvrihi. Here the compound must not be a Bahuvrihi, nor should these words denote parts of body and permanent condition of these parts. 
अधेरुपरिस्थम् ॥ १८८ ॥ पदानि ॥ अधेः, उपरिस्थम, (अन्तोदात्तम्)॥ पत्तिः ॥ अधरुत्तरमुपरिस्थवाधि मन्तोदानं भवति । 
188. After आधि, that word, which denotes that thing which overlaps or stands upon, has acute on the final. 
Thus भधिदन्तः = दन्तस्योपरि योऽन्योदन्तो जायते 'a tooth that grows over ano ther tooth'. भधिर्कणः, अधिकैः ॥ These are प्रादि samasa or an appositional compound in which the second member has been dropped. Why do we say when meaning 'standing upon? Observe autora Here the acute is on of the krit-formed second member retaining its accent (VI. 2. 139). 
अनोरप्रधानकनीयसी ॥ १८९ ॥ पदानि ॥ अनोः, अप्रधान, कनीयसी, (अन्तोदात्तम) 
वृत्तिः ॥ अनोरुत्तरमप्रधानवाचि कनीयवान्तावा भवति । 
___189. After अनु, a word which is not the Principal, as well as three has acute on the final. 
The word sur means a word whiclı stands in a dependant relation in a compound. Thus अनुगता ज्येष्ठम् = भनुन्यष्टः, भनुमध्यमः ॥ These are मादि samasa 
BK VI. CH. II. §. 193 ) 
END-ACUTE SECOND MEMBER. 
1205 
in which the first member is the principal or Pradhana. मनुगत कनीयान् भनुक भीर्वाद, here the second member is the Principal: the word कनीयस् is taken as प्रधान |Had it been non-pradhana, it would be covered by the first portion of the sätra, and there would have been no necessity of its separate enumeration. 
Why do we say "भप्रधान"? Observe अनुगतो ज्येष्ठः-अनुज्येष्ठः, where ज्येष्ठ is the Principal. 
पुरुषश्चान्वादिष्टः ॥ १९०॥ पदानि ॥ पुरुषः, च, अन्वादिष्टः ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ पुरुषशब्दो ऽन्वादिष्टवाची पानोरत्तरोन्तादात्तों भवति । 
190. After we, the acute falls on the final of go, when it means a man of whom mention was already made. 
The word bilar means of a secondary importance, inferior', or mentioned again after having already been mentioned'. Thus TINE: पुरुषः- अनुपुरुषः; but अनुगतः पुरुषः- अनुपुरुषः ॥ 
अतेरकृत्पदे ॥ १९१॥ पदानि ॥ अतः, अकृत्पदे॥ वृत्तिः ॥ मतेः परमकृदन्तं परशम्ममान्तोदात्तो भवति । वार्तिकम् ।। मते तुलोपहति वक्तव्यम् ॥ 
191. After afà, a word not formed by a krit-affix, and the word 9a, have acute on the last syllable. 
____ Thus सत्यकुशी नागः, भतिक शोऽश्वः, मतिपर्श करी ॥ Why do we say 'non krit-word and पर'? Observe अतिकारकः ॥ 
Vart:--The rule is restricted to those compounds in which a root has been elided. That is, when in analysing the compound a verb like an is to be employed to complete the sense. Therefore it does not apply to शोभनी गायः मतिगायः ॥ But it would apply to भतिकारुका, which when analysed be comes equal to भतिकान्त कारुम् ।। __ नेरनिधाने ॥ १९२॥ पदानि ॥ नेः, अनिधाने, (अन्तोदातम् ) ॥ 
वृत्तिः ।। नेः परमुत्तरपदमन्तोदात्तं भवति । 
192. After नि, the second member has the acute on the last syllable, when the sense is of 'not laying down'. 
The word निधानं अप्रकाशता 'not making manifest'. Thus निमूलम् , न्य म्, नितृणम ॥ These are either Bahuvrihi or pradisamasa. In the case of their being Avyayibhava, they would have acute on the final by VI. 1. 222. 
Why do we say when meaning 'not laying down'? Observe निवाक-निहिसा as निवागवृषलः ; निदण्डः-निहितदण्डः ॥ The force of नि is that of निधान here. 
प्रतेरंश्वादयस्तत्पुरुषे ॥१९३॥ पदानि ॥प्रतेः, अश्वादयः, तत्पुरुषे, (अन्तोदाताः) वृत्तिः ॥ प्रतेरंवादयस्तत्पुरुष समासेन्तोदात्ता भवन्ति । 
193. In a Tatpurusha compound, the words aig &c hare acute on the final when preceded by प्रति ॥ 
1206 
END-ACUTE SECOND MEMBER. 
[BK. VI. Cl. II. 196 
Thus प्रत्या, मतिअनः, प्रतिराओं ॥ In the case of राजन् this rule applies when the Samasånta affix ay is not added, when that affix is added, the acute will also be on the final by virtue of at which is a pont affix. 
__1 भंश, अन, 3 राजन्, 4 उष्ट्र, 5 खंटक (रोटक), मिर, 7 भाद्रा, 8 श्रषण, कृत्तिका, 10 मध, 11 पुर (मार्थपुर भार्धपुरः)। 
____ The word is formed by the affix कु under the general class मृगः (Un I. 37), राजन् is formed by the affix कनिन् (Un I. 156), उष्ट्र by adding ष्ट्रन् to उप to burn'. (Un IV. 162), खिद् + लखेटक; जिर is formed by किरच (Un I. 53) मा+ना+मड् (III. 3. 106), with the augment र added to था-भार्दा ॥ + ल्यु - श्रवण, कृत + तिकन् - कृत्तिका ( Un III. 147) +अच् ( III. I. 134)-अर्च; पुर् + क-पुर।। 
___Why do we say in the Tatpurusha'? Observe प्रतिगता मंधयोऽस्य-मय शुरयाष्ट्र ॥ 
उपाद द्वयजजिनमगौरादयः ॥ १९४॥ पदानि ॥ उपाद्, यच् अजिनम्, अ. गौरादयः, ( अन्तोदात्तम् )। 
वृत्तिः ।। उपादुत्तरं यजजिनं चान्तोसत्तं भवति तत्पुरुष समासे गौरादीन्वयिल्या ।। 
194. In a Tatpurusha, the words of two syllables and अजिन have acute on the final when preceded by उप, but not when they are rite and the rest. 
Thus उपगतो देवः - उपदेवः, उपेन्द्रा, उपसोमः, उपोर्डः, उपाजिनम् ॥ But not so in उपगौर, उपनेषः &c. 
1 गौर, 2 मेष (नैप) 3 सैल, 4 लेट, 3 लोट, 6 जिता, 7 कृष्ण (कृष्णा) 8 कन्या, एष (एड) 10 कल्प, ll पाठ 
Why "in a Tatpurusha"? Observe उपगतः सोमोऽस्य - उपसोमः ॥ ___ सोरवक्षेपणे ॥ १९५ ॥ पदानि ॥ सोः, अवक्षेपणे ।। 
वृत्तिः ।। सुशवारपरमुत्तरपदं तत्पुरुष समासेन्तोसत्तं भवाते भवक्षेपणे गम्यमाने ॥ 
____195. After सु, the second member has acute on the final in a Tatpurusha compound, when reproach is mcant, in spite of the addition of g which denotes praise. 
___ Thus दह खल्विदानी, मुस्थण्डिले सुस्मिताभ्यां सुप्रत्यवसितैः ॥ The word / here verily denotes praise, but it is the sense of the whole sentence that indicates reproach or censure. Why do we say "after मु"? Observe कुब्राह्मणः ॥ Why 'when repreach is meant'? Observe शोभनेषु तृणेषु-सुतणषु ॥ 
विभाषोत्पुच्छे ॥ १९६॥ पदानि ॥ विभाषा, उतपुच्छे, ( अन्तउदात्तः)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ बरपुच्छशब्द तत्पुरुषे विभाषा ऽन्त उदात्तो भवति । 
___196. In a Tatpurusha, the word उतपुच्छ may optionally have acute on the final. BK. VI. CIL. II $ 198 ) 
END-ACUTE SECOND MEMBER. 
1207 
Thus कान्तः पुच्छा = उपुच्छ: or पुच्छः (VI. 2. 2) | When this word is derived by the affix अच् from पुच्छरस्थति उत्पुच्छयति, then it would always have taken acute on the final by VI. 2. 144, the present sätra ordains option there also. The rule does not apply to a non-Tatpurusha: as, उतस्तं पुण्छमस्य उपुग्छः ॥ 
द्वित्रिभ्यां पाइन्मूर्ख सु बहुवीही ॥ १९७ ॥ पदानि ॥ द्वि, त्रिभ्याम् , पात, दत्, मूर्ख सु, बहुव्रीही, ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ वित्रि इत्येताभ्यामुत्तरेषु पादू पत् मूर्खन इत्येतेपूचरपरेषु यो बहुव्रीहिस्तम विभाषा ऽन्त उदात्तो मवात॥ 
197. In a Bahuvrihi, the words पाद, दत् and मूर्धन् have optionally acute on the final after द्वि and त्रि 
Thus at पानावस्थ-विपत् or द्विपात्, विपद् or त्रिपाद, द्विान् or te, विन् or निन्, हिम or निमूर्धा ॥ The word पाद् is पार with its welided,(V. 4. 140) क्त is the substitute of दन्त (V. 4. 141) and मूर्धन retains its e not allowing samasanta affix. This also indicates that the samasanta rule is not universal. When the sainasanta affix is added, then also the acute is on the final, for the arif is here the Bahuvrihi compound, and this is only a part of it. Thus शिमूर्खः, त्रिमः ॥ Why after ft and fy? Observe appearauf here the first member is middle acute by Phit II. 19 and this accent is retained VI. 2. I. Why 'पाद् &c'? Observe दिहस्तम्, विहस्तम् ॥ Why 'Bahuvrihi'? Observe श्योम हिम ॥ 
सक्थं चाक्रान्तात् ॥ १९८॥ पदानि ॥ सक्थम्, च, अ क्रान्तात्, (अन्तोदात्तः) (विभाषा)। वृत्तिः ॥ सक्यमिति कृतसमासान्तः सथिोत्र गृह्यते सोक्रान्तात्परो विभाषान्तोशतो भवति । 
___198. The word सक्थ has acute on the final op tionally, when preceded by any word other than what ends in ॥ 
The word ay is the samasanta form of a fi (V. 4. 113, ). Thus 
: or Antagy:, spranu: or supporteraner: The word Art being formed by प्रज्ञादि गण and लक्षण by कस्न (Un III. 19) are both end-acute. Why not after a word ending in a? Observe चक्रसक्यः which is always oxytone as it is formed by पच् (V. 4. 113)a चित् affix. 
परादिश्छन्दसि बहुलम् ॥ १९९ ॥ पदानि ॥ परादिः, छन्दसि, बालम् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ छन्दसि विषये पराविरुवात्तो भवति बहुलम् ॥ 
___Karika-पराविध परान्तम पूर्वान्तश्चापि दृश्यते । 
पूर्वावयश्च दृश्यन्ते व्यत्ययो बहुलं ततः।। वार्तिकम् ।। अन्तोदात्तप्रकरणे त्रिचक्रारीनांछन्दस्युपसण्यानम् ॥ वा० ॥ पूर्वपरान्तोदात्तप्रकरणे मरुवृद्धादीनां छन्दस्युपसंख्यानम् ॥ पा०॥ पूर्वपदाशुदात्तप्रकरणे शिवोपासादीनां छन्नस्युपसंख्यामम् ॥ 
first syllable and the final syllable of the second member, as well as the final syllable and the first syllable of the preceding member are seen to have the acute accent, in supersession of all the foregoing rules". 
As to where the final of the second terms takes the acute, we have this Vartika.In the Veda, &c have acute on the final of the second term. As Frau, fara , fararů, 11 Fiat sie gepeat 
As to where the final of the preceding takes the acute, we have this Vartika:--The words F TG &c in the Vedas have acute on the final of the first term. As E k and ferraty: 1! 
As to where the first syllable of the preceding takes the acute, we have this Vartika :- In the Veda, the words Featere &c have acute on the 
first syllable of the first member. As faTETT TT 
CO 
आम्३ । षष्ठाध्यायस्य तृतीयः पादः। 
- BOOK SIXTH. 
CHAPTER THIRD अलगुत्तरपदे ॥१॥ पदानि ॥ अलक, उत्तरपदे ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ भागात च उत्तरपदे इति च एतराधिकृतं बेदितव्यम् । यदित मनुक्रमियामो ऽलुगुत्तरपदह स्येव तहेदितव्यम् ॥ 
1. In the following upto VI. 3. 24 inclusive is always to be supplied the phrase “the elision does not take place before the second member of the compound”. 
The words there is no elision', and TTCTT "before the second member" are to be supplied in the subsequent sQtras. Both these words govern the sâtras upto VI. 3. 24, jointly ; while to extends further upto that point whence commences the jurisdiction of भङ्ग (VI.4. 1). Thus sätra VI. 3. 2 says "the affixes of the Ablative after 'stoka' &c". The present satra should be read there to complete the sense, e. g. "the affixes of the Ablative after stoka &c are not elided before the second member of the compound". Thus स्तोकातू मुक्तः-स्तोकान्मुक्ताः, मल्पानमुक्तः॥ Why do we say “ber fore the second member "? Observe निष्क्रान्तः स्तोकात्-निस्तोका ॥ The maxim of pratipadokta does not apply here. 
पञ्चम्याः स्तोकादिभ्यः ॥ २॥ पदानि ॥ पञ्चम्याः, स्तोकादिभ्यः, (अलुक्)। वृत्तिः ॥ स्तोकान्तिकदूरार्थकृच्छाणि स्तोकादीनि तेभ्यः परस्याः पञ्चम्या उभरपदे ऽलुग्भवति ॥, 
2. The Ablative-ending after स्तोक &c is not elid ed before the second member of a compound. 
Thus स्तोकान्मुक्ता, अल्पान्मुक्ता, भन्तिकाशगता. मभ्याशावागतः, दादागता, विप्रकृटा. पागतः, कृच्छ्रान्मुक्तः ।। By I. 2. 46, a case-inflected word when forming part of a compound is called pratipadika, and by II. 4.71 the endings of a Pratipadika are elided. Therefore, in forming the compound of Fianca **?, the ablative ending required to be dropped. The present sūtra prevents that. The words स्तोक &c in the dual and plural are never compounded, and consequently this rule does not apply to them. Thus स्तोकाभ्यां मुक्ता, स्तोकेभ्यः मुक्तः are separate words and not compounds, for not being treated as compounds, these are not 
1210 
NON-ELISION OF CASE-AFFIX 
[BK. VI, Cl. III. SS 
one Pada (एकपर) or one word, and do not have one accent, for in one word, there is only one acute. Thus while farat i being one compound word will have one acute (VI. I. 158, VI. 2. 144), the word स्तोकाभ्यां मुना being treated as two words, will have separate acute accents. The above compounding takes 
place by II. I. 39. 
Vart: The word ब्राह्मणाच्छसिन् should be enumerated in this connec tion. Here also the Ablative is not elided. Thus ब्राह्मणावाराव शंसात-ब्राह्मणा wgfara "a kind of Ritvik priest". 
ओजः सहोम्भस्तमसस्तृतीयायाः ॥३॥ पदानि ॥ ओजस्, सहस्, अम्भस् तम सा, तृतीयायाः (अलक)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ भोजन सहस् भम्भस् तमस् इत्येतेभ्य उत्तरस्यास्तृतीयाया मलुग्भवति उत्तरपदे ॥ पार्तिकम् ॥ अजस उपसंण्यानम् ।। पा०॥ पुंसानुजो अनुषान्ध इति वक्तव्यम् ।। 
3. The Instrumental endings after मोजस्, सहस, अम्भस and तमस् are not elidded before the second member of a compound. 
Thus भोजसाकृतम्, सहसाकृतम्, मम्भसाकृतम्, तमसाकृतम् ॥ Vart-मजस् also should be enumerated. Thus अम्जसाकृतम् ।। 
Vart:-The compounds पुंसानुज: and जनुपान्ध: should also be mention. ed. Thus पुंसा हेतुनानुमः पुंसानुजः ॥ अनुषा हेतुनान्धः-अनुषान्धः॥ The word अनु is another name of जन्मन् 'birth'. 
मनसः संज्ञायाम् ॥४॥ पदानि ॥ मनसः, संक्षायाम, (अलक्)॥ वृत्तिः । मनस उत्तरस्यास्तृतीयायाः संज्ञायामलुग्भवति ॥ 
4. After Han when the compound is a Name, the Instrumental endings are not elided before the second 
member. 
__ Thus मनसारत्ता, मनसागुमा, मनसासंगता | Why do we say 'when a Name'? Observe मनोदत्ता, मनायता ॥ 
आज्ञायिनि च ॥ ५॥ पदानि ॥ आशायिनि, च, (अलुक)। वृत्तिः ॥ भाज्ञायिन्युमरपरे मनस उत्तरस्यास्ततीयाया भलुग्भवति ।। 
5. Also before आशायिन्, the Instrumental endings of मनस् are not elided. 
Thus मनसाज्ञायिन् मनसाऽऽज्ञातुं शीलमस्य ॥ आत्मनश्च पूरणे ॥ ६॥ पदानि ॥ आत्मनः, च, पूरणे, (अलुक्)॥ वृनिः॥ भास्मन उत्तरस्यास्तृतीयायाः पूरणप्रत्ययान्तउत्तरपदे ऽलुग्भवति । 
6. The Instrumental endings after thT are not clided when an Ordinal Numeral follows. 
BK VI. C11. III $9) 
NON-ELISION OF CASE-AFFIX. 
. 
1211 
___ Thus भान्मनापंचमः, आस्मनाषष्ठः || The Instrumental case here takes place under the Vartika तृतीयाविधाने प्रकृत्यादीनामुपसण्यानं (II. 3. 18 Vart). Aud com pounding takes place by II. 1. 30, by separating parar of that aphorism and making it a separate sotra or in this way :-आत्मना कता पंचमः भात्मनापंचमः ।। How do you explain the form भामचतुर्य in जनाईनस्त्वामचतुर्थ एव? It is a Bahu vrlhi compound-भामा चतुर्थोऽस्य ॥ The word पूरणे is a later addition of the Vårtikakâra. 
वैयाकरणाख्यायां चतुर्थ्याः ॥७॥ पदानि ॥ धैयाकरणाख्यायाम, चतुर्थ्याः, (अल्लक)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ वैयकारणस्याख्या वैयाकरणाख्या। माख्या संज्ञा । यथा संशया वैयाकरणा एव व्यवहरन्ति तस्या मात्मन उत्तरस्यावता मलुग्भवति ॥ 
7. The Dative case ending is not elided after आत्मन् when the compound is the name of a technical term of grammar. 
Thus मामनेपदम, मात्मनेभाषा | The compounding takes place by the yoga-bibhaga of satra II. I. 36, and the force of the Dative is here that of tadartha. 
परस्य च ॥८॥ पदानि ॥ परस्य, च, (अलुक)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ परस्य च या चतुर्थी तस्या वैयाकरणाख्यायामलुग्भवति॥ 
8. The Dative ending is not elided after पर, when the compound is the name of a technical term of grammar. 
Thus परस्मैपदम्, परस्मभाषा । हलदन्तात्सप्तम्याः संज्ञायाम् ॥९॥ पदानि । हल् अदन्तात, सप्तम्याः, संझा याम, (अलुक)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ हलन्तावान्तायोत्तरस्याः सप्तम्याः संज्ञायामलुगभवति ॥ वार्णिकम् ॥ हुदाम्यां डेः ।। 
9. The Locative ending is not clided after a stem ending in a consonant or a short a, when the compound is a Name. 
Thus युधिष्ठिरः, स्वधिसारः, गविष्ठिरः ॥ Though गो does not end in a consor nant, yet it retains its Locative ending by virtue of VIII. 3.95 (गवियुधिभ्यां स्थिरः) which shows by implication that he is governed by this rule. So also ending words: as अरण्यतिलकाः, अरण्येभाषकाः, बनेकिंशुकाः, वनहरिद्रकाः, बनवल्बजकाः, पूर्वाण स्फोटकाः, पेपिशाचकाः ॥ Why do we say "after a word ending in a consonant or 
म"? Observc नध्यं कुक्कुटिका- नदीकुककुटिका, भम्यां पाशा भूमिपाचाः॥ Why do we say 'when a Namc'? Obscrvc styirs: || 
___ Virt:-The Locative ending is not clided after or and दि; as : हविस्मक, दिविस्मृतः ॥ 
कारनानि च प्राचां हलादौ ॥ १०॥ पदानि ॥ कारनानि, च, प्राचाम्, हलादी, (अलुक्)॥ 
1212 
NUN-ELISION OF CASE-AFFIX. 
(BK. VI. CI. III. g. 12 
वृत्तिः ॥ प्राचां देश बकारनाम सब इलावावृत्तरपदे हलदन्तादुत्तरस्थाः सप्तम्या भलुगभवति । 
10. The Locative-casc affix is not clided after a stein er.ding in a consonant or a short an, in the name of a tax of the Eustern people, when the second member begins with a consonant. 
Thus सूपेशाणः, पदिमाषका, इलेपिदिका, इलेषिपदिका | All these are names of taxes, and would have retained the Locative ending even by the last rule. The present rule makes a niyama or restriction, which is threefold, namely (1) when it is the name of a tax, and no other word, (2) when it belongs to the Eastern people and no other people, (3) and when the second member begins with a consonant. 
Why do we say when it is the name of a tax.? Observe apareau: मभ्यर्हितपशुः॥ It is the name of 'a duty or dues', but not of a tax'. Why do we say "of the Eastern people"? Observe यूपशुः = यूथपशुः ॥ Why do we say "before a second member beginning with a consonant'? Observe भविकटे रण: 
भविकटोरणः ॥ So also नयां हनीनवोहनी ॥ For accent of these words see VI. 2.65. 
मध्याद्गुरौ ॥ ११॥ पदामि ॥ मध्यात, गुरौ, मसुन् । वृत्तिः ।। मध्यादुतरस्याः सप्तम्या पुरात्तरपरे ऽलुगभवति ॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ मन्ताति वक्तव्यम् ।। 
11. The Locative case-affix is not elided after मध्य when To follows. 
As, मध्यगुरुः ॥ 
Vart:--So also after मन्त; as भन्तेगुरुः ॥ अमूर्खमस्तकात् स्वाङ्गादकामे ॥ १२॥ पदानि ॥ अ मूर्ख, मस्तकात, स्वाङ्गात, अकामे, (अलुक्)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ मूर्दमस्तकवर्जितात्स्वानादुत्तरस्याः सप्तम्या अकामउत्तरपदे ऽलुगभवति ।। 
_____12. The Locative case-affix is not elided after a word denoting a part of the body (with the exception of मूर्धन् and मस्तक), before every word other than काम ।। 
Thus कण्ठे कालोऽस्य - कण्ठेकालः, उरसिलोमा, उदरेमणिः ॥ But मर्धशिखः, मस्तक शिखः, मुखे कामोऽस्य-मुखकामः ॥ When the first member does not denote the name of a part of the body, the rule does not apply: as अक्षशौण्डा , nor does it apply when the first member does not end in a consonant or u, as अंगुलित्राणः, मङ्घावलिः ॥ 
बन्धे च विभाषा ॥ १३॥ पदानि ॥ बन्धे, च, विभाषा, ( अलुक)॥ वांतः ॥बन्ध इति घमन्तो गृह्यते । तस्मिन्नुत्तरपदे हलवन्तादुत्तरस्थाः सतम्बा विभाषा ऽलगभवति ।। 
BK. VI. C11. III &17) 
NON-ELISION OF CASE arrix. 
1213 
13. The Locative casc-affix is optionally not elid ed after a word ending in a consonant or a before बन्ध ॥ 
Thus हस्तबन्धः or हस्तबन्धः, चक्रेवन्धः or चक्रवन्धः ॥ This declares an option, with regard to the last rule, in a Bahuvrihi when the first member is a FIF word, and also it is an option to VI. 3. 19, when the compound is a Tat. purusha, whether the first be pain or not. The word my is formed word. When the first member ends in a vowel (other than ), the rule does not apply. As ufiny: 11 
तत्पुरुषे कृति बहुलम् ॥ १४॥ पदानि ॥ तत् पुरुष, कृति, बहुलम्, (अलुक्)। वृत्तिः ॥ ससुरुषे समासे करन्तउत्तरपदे समस्या बहुलमलुग्भवति ॥ 
14. In a Tatpurusha compound, when the second member is a word formed with a krit affix, the Locative end ing is optionally preserved. 
___As स्त रमः, कर्णेजपः, but also कुरुचरा, माचरः॥ 
प्रावृदशरत्कालदिवां जे ॥१५॥ पदानि ॥ प्रावृद,शरत, काल,दिवाम,जे,(अलुक्)। वृत्तिः ॥ प्राट् घरत् काल दि इत्येतेषांज उत्तरपदे सप्तम्या मलगभवति ॥ 
___16. The Locative ending is retained after प्रावृद्, शरत, काल and दिव when ज follows. 
Thus मावृषिमः, शरदिजः, कालेजः, दिविषः ॥ This sutra is but an extension or amplification of the previous satra. 
विभाषा वर्षक्षरशरवरात् ॥ १६ ॥ पदानि । विभाषा, घर्ष, क्षर, शर, घरात्, (अलुक्)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ वर्ष भर घर पर इत्येतेभ्य उतरस्याः सप्तम्या ज उत्तरपरे विभाषा ऽलुग्भवति ॥ 
16. The Locative ending is optionally retained after वर्ष, क्षर, शर, and घर when a follows. 
Thus वर्षेजः or वर्षगः, सरंज: or भरजः, शरेजः or परजः, वरेजः or वरजः ॥ घकालतनेषु कालनानः॥१७॥ पदानि ॥ घ, काल, तनेषु, काल नामः, (अलुक्) वृत्तिः ॥ घसंज्ञके प्रत्यये कालाने सनप्रत्यये च परत कालनाम्न उत्तरस्थाः समन्या विभाषा ऽनुग्भवति ॥ 
17. The Locative ending is optionally retained after a word denoting time ending in a consonant or when acy or ang, or the word fires or the affix at follows. 
The affixes तर and सम are called घ (I. I. 22). Thus :-पूर्वा,सरे or पूबा. के.सरे, पूर्वाहे,तमे or पूवात,तमे ॥ काल :--पूर्वाहे, काले or पूर्वाड काले ॥ सन:-पूर्वाहतने or पूवा . सने ॥ Why do we say 'after a time-name'? Observe शुक्लतरे, शुक्लतमे ॥ The condition that the preceding word should end in a consonant or w applies here also. Thus no option is allowed in राषितरायाम् ।। 
Thus 
1214 
NON-ELISION OF CASE AFFIX. 
[BK. VI. CH. III. § 20 
As a general maxim, an affix denotes whenever it is employed in Grammar a word-form which begins with that to which that affix has been added, and ends with the affix itself (प्रत्ययमहणे यस्मात् स विहित स्सवाद सान्तस्य 
Eure) Thus the word u, my &c in VI. 2. 144 means a word ending in o affix &c. But in this chapter, so far as the jurisdiction of a goes, an affix does not denote a word-form ending in that affix, on the following maxim : उत्तरपराधिकार प्रत्ययपहणे न तदन्त ग्रहणम् ; on the contrary the affix denotes its own-form. Thus , and in here do not denote a word ending in these affixes. This rule we infer from the fact that in sätra V1. 3. 50, the author declares " is the substitute of a when the word me, and the affixes , 
tu, and me follow". Had the affix spor here meant the word-form ending in or, then there would have been no necessity of using the word is er in the satra, as ren is formed with the mot affix. The word dit in the aphorism means the word-form aitas ill See Satra IV. 3. 23 for the affix it 
शयवासवासिष्वकालात् ॥१८॥ पदानि ॥ शय,वास,वासिषु, अकालातू,(अरक्) वृत्तिः। शय वास वासिन् इत्येतेषुत्तरपदेष्यकालवाचिन उत्तरस्याः सप्तम्या विभाषा ऽलुग्भवति । 
18. The Locative ending is optionally retained before the words शय, पास and वासिन् when the preceding word does not denote time, and ends in a consonant or short mil 
Thus crai, or 194, 1997: or TTH:, ATATTET or 91HTEL W After a time-name we have gairs uz: 11 After a vowel ending word (other than ) we have भूमिधयः॥ 
Vart:—The Locative case-affix is retained after se when dia, or the affix यत् or मतुप follows. Thus मप्सुयोनिः, भसध्यः, भप्मुमन्तौ ॥ The affix on is added by treating 8 as belonging to the forefa class (mg **, IV. 3. 54). 
arregaurag allge 11 ana 117, 5, fera, qunag, 5, (186) || वृत्तिः॥इनन्त सिद्धशब्द बध्नाती च परतः सप्तम्या भलुग्न भवति ॥ 
19. The Locative ending is not preserved before a stem ending in a, before the word fers, and before a word derived from बन्छ । 
Thus fuformanfaa, niat sarau, irftrenera, non, por n The compounding takes place by yoga-vibhaga of sūtra II. 1. 40. Some use the word w ay as an illustration under this rule: then is derived by 999 of III. 1. 134. The pat ending in qy is governed by VI. 3. 13. This sutra is an exception to VI. 3. 14. 
A TA II Roll Tata II , 9, N 4, (a) (219 ) वृतिः ॥स्येवोत्तरपदे भाषायां सप्तम्या अलुग्न भवति ।। 
· 20. The Locative ending is not preserved before Fun in the spoken language. 
BK. VI. CI. III 22. ) 
NON-ELISION OF CASE-AFFIX. 
1215 
Thus विषमस्या, कटस्था, पर्वतस्थः॥ But भाखरेष्ठ, in the Veda, as in कुष्णोस्या खरेष्ठः ॥ स is changed to r by VIII. 3. 106. 
षष्ठया आक्रोशे ॥ २१॥ पदानि ॥ षष्ठया, आक्रोशे, (अलुक्)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ भाको गम्यमाने उत्तरपदे षष्ठया भलुग्भवति । वार्मिकम । पछीप्रकरणे वाग् विपश्यापो युक्तिदण्डहरेषु यथासंख्यमलग्बतष्यः ।। वा० ॥ भापुण्यायणामुख्याधिकापुण्यकुलिकति घालुवक्तव्यः ।। चा०॥ देवानां प्रिय इत्याच षष्टया भलए पतष्यः ॥ वा०॥ शेषपुण्छलाङ्गुलेषु भुनः भसंज्ञायां षष्ठपा मलुग्यत्तष्यः ।। वा०॥ दिवस पासे षष्ठमा मलुग्वक्तव्यः॥ 
21. The Genitive case affix is retained , when the compound expresses an 'affront or insult'.:. 
Thus चोरस्यकुलम्, वृषलत्यकुलम् ॥ Why do we say when insult is meant ?. Observe ब्राह्मणकुलम् ॥ 
___Vart: The Genitive is not elided after वाक् when followed by युक्ति, after विश् before इण्ड, and after पश्यत् before हर | As, वाचोयुक्तिः , दिशोरण्डः, पश्यतोहरः॥ 
Vart:-The Genitive affix is not elided in the following words भानु व्यायणः, भामुण्यपुषिका and भाष्यकुलिका ॥ ममुष्य is the Genitive Singular of the Pronoun भाम, and is enumerated in the मडादि class (IV. 1.99) and takes फक in forming the Patronymic, आयुष्यापस्या-मामुष्यायणः, भमुष्यपुषस्य भावः-मामुष्यपुत्रिका formed by बुश (V. I. 133) | So also भामुष्यकुलिका। 
Vart :--The Genitive affix is not elided in the compound देवानमियः ।। The author of Siddhanta Kaumudi says "when the sense is that of a fool, the affix is not elided in devânam-priya" There is no authority for this, either in the Mahabhashya or the Kasika. This was the title of the famous Budd hist monarch Asoka, who would not have adopted it, had it meant 'a fool'. The phrase fa que has been added by Bhattoji Dikshit through Brahmani cal spite. 
___Vart: The Genitive affix is not elided after श्वन when प, पुच्छ and सांगल follow it :-गुन शेपः, शुन: पुच्छा , शुनोलांगुलः ॥ 
. Vårt:-Thc Genitive affix is not elided after for when the follows: as दिवोरासः॥ 
पुत्रे ऽन्यतरस्याम् ॥ २२॥ पदानि ॥ पुत्रे, अन्यतरस्याम, (अलुक्)॥ वृत्तिः । पुषशनउत्तरपरे भाको गम्यमाने ऽन्यतरस्यां षष्ठपा मलुग्भवति । 
22. The genitive affix is optionally retained when insult is meant, when qe follows. 
Thus दास्याः पुत्रः or सापुत्रः, पपल्याः पुषः, or वृषलीपुनः ॥ But when insult is not meant we have ब्राह्मणीपुषः।। 
ऋतो विद्यायोनिसम्बन्धेभ्यः ॥२३॥ पदानि ॥ ऋतः, विद्या, योनि, सम्बन्धेभ्यः, ( अलुक्)॥ 
1216 
NON-ELISION OF CASE-AFFIX. 
[BK. VI. CH. III S 26 
दृत्तिः॥पकारान्तेभ्यो विद्यासम्बन्धवाधियो योनिसम्बन्धवापि चमोत्तरस्वाः पछया भलुभवति ॥ 
23. The genitive affix is retained after a word ending in and expressing a relationship through study or blood. 
____Thus होतुरन्तेवासिन्, होतुः पुषः, पितुरन्तेवासिन् or पितः पुषः ॥ Why do we say "a word ending in "? Observe भाचार्यपुषः, मातुलपुषः ॥ The relationship through 'study' or 'blood' should be between the first and the second member of the compound. Therefore, the rule does not apply to होनधनम्, पितृधनम् होए गठन, पितगृहम् ॥ 
विभाषा स्वस्पत्योः ॥२४॥ पदानि ॥ विभाषा, स्वस, पत्योः, (अलुम्॥ वृत्तिः । स्वस पति इत्येतयोरुत्तरपदयोर्ककारान्ते यो विधायोनिसम्बन्धवाषिभ्यो विभाषा लुग्भवति॥ 
24. The genitive affix is optionally elided after a stem ending in when faş and yra follow, the relationship between the two words being through study or blood. 
Thus मातुःस्वसा or मातुःवसा or मालध्वसा, पितु स्वसा or पितुरवसा or पितृवसा । When the affix is elided, then pis invariably changed to y by VIII. 3. 85; and when it is not elided, then the change is optional (VIII. 3.85). So also दुहितुः पतिः or दुहिहपतिः, ननान्दुः पतिः or बनान्हपतिः॥ 
आनङ ऋतो द्वन्छ॥ २५॥ पदानि ॥ आनऊ, ऋतः, दन्छ। वृत्तिः ॥षकारान्तानां विधायोनिसंबन्धवाचिनां यो बन्दस्तषोत्तरपदे पूर्वपरस्यानडायो भवति ।। 
25. In a Drandva compound of words ending in short and expresssing relationship through study or blood, the m e is the substitute of the of the first member. 
Thus होतापोतारो, नेटोहातारी, प्रशास्तापतिहारी मातापितरी, यासाननाम्दी॥ The substitute is really , the 7 is useful only to prevent the application of I. 1.51, by which a r comes after every simple vowel substitute of all 
Why do we say 'both words ending in E'? Observe forary TAB II The anuvritti of gw is understood here, so that the of the first member is changed to मा before पुष also, though it does not end in . As पितापुपो, मातापुनी।। 
देवतावन्वेच॥ २६॥ पदानि ॥ देवता हुन्छे, च, (मानक)॥ पतिः ॥ देवतावाधिनां यो नास्तरोत्तरपदे पूर्वपरस्थानडादेशो भवति ॥ पार्मिकम् ॥ दमयन वायो प्रतिषेधो वक्तव्यः ।। 
26. The state is the substitute for the final of the first member in a Dwandva, compound of the names of the Devtas. 
Thus प्रावरुणो, इन्द्रासीमी, इन्द्रायास्पती, मिषापरणी॥ The repetition of the word Dyandva in this sätra, in spite of its anuyritti from the last, shows that BK. VI. Cil. III. . 30 ) 
NON-FLISION OF CASE-AFFIX. 
1217 
the rule applies only to such Dvandvas which are generally found in the Vedas and are well-known. It does not apply to compounds like ब्रह्मप्रजापति, framUTII In fact it applies to the Dvandva of those Devatas whose com 
panionship is well-known. 
Vart:--Prohibition must be stated with regard to try in both cases, whether first or last, as भाग्निवायू or वायग्नी ।। 
ईदग्नेः सोमवरुणयोः ॥ २७॥ पदानि ॥ईत, अग्नेः, सोम, घरणयोः, ॥ वृधिः ॥सोम वरुण इत्येतयोवताहने ऽग्ने रीकारादेशो भवति ॥ 
27. For the final of अग्नि, is substituted the longs, when सोम or वरुण follow in a Dvandva. 
Thus stratetit, profruto The is changed to a by VIII. 3. 82. 
चौ॥२८॥ पदानि ॥ इत्, वृखी,॥ वृत्तिः ॥कतवृद्धावुत्तरपदे देवताइने ऽग्नेरिकारादेपो भवति॥ पार्मिकम् ॥रानी विष्णोः प्रतिषेधो वक्तव्यः ॥ 
28. The short is the substitute of the final of to in such a Dvandva in which both members take the Vriddhi. . Thus भाग्मिवारुणी, which would have required long by the last rule: 
माग्मिमारुसम्, which would have required मानह by VI. 3. 26. Thus माग्निवारणी मनहाहीमालमेत, भाग्निमारतं कर्म क्रियत ॥ माग्नीमरुतो देवताऽस्य (IV. 2. 24), takes the Tad. dhita affix, and by VII. 3. 21, both members of the compound take Vriddhi. When both members do not take Vriddhi, the rule does not apply: as opprinn: (भाग्नान्न), because इन्द्र does not take Vriddhi, by VII. 3. 22. 
Vart:-Prohibition must be stated when the word for follows : as भाग्मावष्णवं च निर्षपेत् ॥ 
दिवी धावा ॥ २९ ॥ पदानि ॥ दिवः, धावा, (देवताइन्छे)। पत्तिः ॥ शिवित्येतस्य चावा इत्ययमादेशो भवति देवताइन्ने उत्तरपदे ॥ 
. 29. For fee is substituted rat in a Dvandva of the names, of the Devatas. 
Thus याचाक्षामा, घावाभूमी ॥ दिवसश्च पृथिव्याम् ॥ ३०॥ पदानि ॥ दिवसः, च, पृथिव्याम्, (देवताइन्छ । पुतिः ॥ पृथिव्याहत्तरपदे देवताइन दियो दिवसित्ययमादेशो भवति षकारादू चावाच॥ 
30. For दिव् is also substituted दिवस् (as well as पावा) when पृथिवी follows in a Dvandva of the names of Devatas.. 
Thus दिवसपयिष्यो, पावापृथियो | The word दिवस् is exhibited in the apho. rism as far ending in 84, in order to indicate that the of FITE is not changed to for a visarga or upadhmaniya when followed by giurat al Following is an 
1218 
NON-ELISION OF THE CASE-AFFIX. 
[BK. VI. CH. III. 34. 
anomalous use there being no Dvandva compounding here. art Forget Truft ममते॥ 
उषासोषसः ॥ ३१॥ पदानि ॥ उषासा, उषसः, (देखताद्वम्)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ उपस उपासा रत्ययमादेशो भवति देवताइनं उत्तरपदे ।। 
31. For उषस् is substituted उषासा in a devata dvandva. 
Thus:-उपासासूचन, उपासानता मातरपितरावुदीचाम् ॥ ३२॥ पदानि ॥ मातर, पितरी, उदीचाम् ॥ त्तिः ॥ मातरपितरावित्युतीचामाचार्याणां मतेनारमशो मातृशब्दस्य निपात्यते ।। 
32. According to the Northern Grammarians, मातरपितरी is a valid form. 
This is formed by errę substitution of the of Area The other form Is मातापितरी॥ 
पितरामातरा च च्छन्दसि ॥ ३३॥ पदानि ॥ पितरा, मातरा, च, छन्दसि, ॥ इत्तिः ॥ पितरामातरा इति छन्दसि निपात्यते ॥ 
33. In the Vedas the form पितरामासरा is valid. 
In the ordinary language a nd is the proper form. The Vedic form is derived by adding 7 to the first member, and oft is added to the second by VII. 1. 39: and then Guņa by VII. 3. 110. Thus HT HT Tapi fono मातराच॥ 
खियाः पुंवद्भाषितपुंस्कादनू, समानाधिकरणे स्त्रियामपूरणीपियादिषु ॥ ३४ ॥ पदानि ॥ लियाः, पुम्बत्, भाषितपुंस्कात, मनू, समानाधिकरणे नियाम, अपूरणी, प्रियादिषु ॥ 
वृत्तिः॥भाषितपुंस्कानूनीरस्य पुरावस्येव रूपं भवति समानाधिकरणउत्तरपदेबीलिपूरणीमिया विवर्जिते॥ 
34. In the room of a feminine word there is subs tituted an equivalent and uniform masculine form, when it is a word which has an actual corresponding masculine, and does not end in the feminine affix ऊड़, and is followed by ano ther feminine word in the relation of apposition with it; but not when such subsequent word is an ordinal numeral, nor प्रिय &c. 
The words of this sätra require a detailed analysis ; fetar: 'for a femi nine word', वद् "like the mascul ine", i.e.a substitute like the masculine takes the room of a feminine word. भाषितपुंस्कातू-भाषितपुमान्येन, by which a masculine is spoken of i.e.a word which has an equivalent masculine, the correspond 
IMELN 
BK. VI. CI. III. $. 34) 
MASCULISATION. 
1219 
ence must be in the form (pra) and the connotation (1914) of the two words; that is when both the words are coextensive in their denotation, applying to the same objects, but of different genders. A word which has not the affix 67 is called II That feminine word which does not end in s and has a corresponding masculine word, having the same form and connotation, (of course, with the exception of affixes) is called a F 
a mily The word Ara p is a Bahuvrihi, the fifth affix is not elided anomalously. Of such a w ayeine feminine word, there is the substitution of a masculine form. Provided that, the second member is a (FATHER ) i.e. a word in apposition with the first, and (Par) of the feminine gender : with the excep tion of an Ordinal numeral (o) and offre &c. 
Thus दर्शनीयमार्यः (दर्शनीयाभार्या यस्य). Here वर्णनीया is a feminine word having a corresponding masculine word of the same form and force, namely. Futai, moreover this feminine does not end in the affix *, but in the affix 01 ; it is followed by another feminine word arut which is in the same case with it, and which is not a Numeral nor included in the part class; hence this word after is changed to the corresponding masculine word fra i So also 
yrer, re: 11 Why do we say fart: 'for a feminine word? Observe ATAT MTOTO IR = FTATEME: 11 Why do we say which has an appropriate mas culine ( magen:)? Observe UMTA: 11 There is no corresponding masculine of खदा।। Why do we say "of the same connotation and form समानायामाकतो"? Observe infiript:, the masculine word Art has not the same significance as hrott is The words गर्भिमायः, प्रसूतभार्यः, and प्रजातभार्यः are anomalous. Why do we say not ending in ? Observe moms: 11 Why do we say 'both words being in the same case and referring to another person? Observe para amar offarat "the mother of Kalyaņi". Why do we say far 'followed by a feminine word? Observe parft TTANT = Faroqrar: () Here the second mem. ber sun is a Neuter word. Why do we say 'not being an ordinal Numeral'? Observe agroft et atai ar pirt qarati, so also aparata: 11 The Ordinal Numbers must be the Principal Ordinal and not the secondary Deriva tive Ordinals. Therefore the rule applies here F17ET: 44: 11 The samasånta affix 9T (V. 4. 116) also applies to an Ordinal which is a Principal and not what is used as a secondary word : and therefore the above compound does not take अप॥ Why do we say not before प्रिय &c. Observe कल्याणीप्रियः ॥ 
far, 2 HINT, 3 not, 4 *T, 5 m, 6 , 7 ara, 8 FT (PAT), 9 7, 10 , 11 il, 12 991, 13 gira, 14 TT (TAT) 15 TT, 16 |The compound C T is anomalous. 
तसिलाविधाकृत्वसुचः ॥ ३५॥ पदानि ॥ तसिलादिषु, आकृत्वसुचः ॥ वृतिः ॥ पञ्चम्यास्तसिलियतः प्रति संख्यायाः क्रियान्यावृत्तिगणने करवसुभिति प्रांगतस्माद ये प्रत्यया. FIJ FITTEET: 5777f 11 
1220 
MASCULISATION. 
(BK. VI. CH. III. $ 36 
वार्तिकम् ॥ शसि बहल्पार्थस्थ घुबडायो वक्तव्यः॥ पा०॥ खसलामुणवचनस्य पुंबडायो वनव्यः । वा॥ भस्था तद्धिते पुंबडायो वक्तव्यः॥ वा०॥ ठक्छसोम पुरवायो वनव्यः॥ 
35. A feminine word not ending in the affix ऊक, and having an equivalent and uniforin masculine, is changed to such masculine form, before the affixes beginning with are 
&c (V. 3. 7) and ending with कृत्वसुच् (V. 4. 17) . Thus तस्याः घालायाः-ततः, तस्यां -सप, यस्यां यब, यस्या-यतः॥ The following 
are the affixes before which the feminine is changed to masculine: qand me, वरप् and तमप, परद, जातीयर, कल्प, देश्य, देशीय रूप, पाचप, यम, थाल, दा and हिल तिल सातिल ॥ All other affixes do not affect the gender. Thus सरप् समर् &c दर्शनीयतरा, वर्णनीयतमा, पपरी, पटुजातीया, दर्शनीयकल्पा, पर्शनीयवेधीया, दशनीयरूपा, वर्णनीयपाया । कया प्रकृत्या 
-कयम् , बवा प्रकल्या-यथा, तस्यां वेलाया-त, तर्हि &c. 
Vart-The feminine of g and is changed to masculine before the Taddhita affix स:-as बही-यो देहि-बहुमो देहि भल्पाभ्यो देहि मल्पयो ऐहि ।।। 
Vart:-A feminine Adjective is changed into masculine before the affixes m and सल्॥ As पदव्या भावः- पटुवम् or पद्धता | Why do we say 'an adje ctive'? Observe कन्या भावाकी or कठीता। 
Vårt: The feminine word is changed to masculine before all Taddhita affixes, except, when the word gets the designation of भ॥ Thus हस्तिनीमां समूहः-हास्तिकम् ॥ Had the word not become masculine, then हस्तिनी having lost its (VI. 4. 148), the word of the would not be elided before the Taddhta affix, because the lopa-elision being sthanivat, would have prevented the app. lication of the rule VI. 4. 144, ordaining the elision of the final syllable. So the form would have been something like हास्तिनिकम् instead of हास्तिकम् ॥ Why do we say 'with the exception of v? Observe suvai, firma: the masculine being क्येत and रोहित। The word भाग्नेयः (= अग्नायी देवता भस्य स्थालीपाकस्य) is an excep. tion to this rule. 
Vart:--The masculine-change takes place before the affixes उक् and छन् । As भवल्या भाषा-भावस्काः, भवदीयाः ।। 
क्यङ्मानिनोश्च ॥ ३६॥ पदानि ॥ क्यङ्, मानिनो, च,॥ वृत्तिः ॥ क्याडि परतो मानिनि व बिया भाषितपुंस्कादमूह पुंवडवति ॥ 
36. A feminine word not ending in ऊ and hav ing an equivalent and uniform masculine, is changed into inasculine before the Denominative pie, and the affix hfa il 
Thus from एनी-एतायते, श्यनी-दयेतायते ॥ मानिन् :-दर्शनीयमानी भयमस्या: "IHe esteems her as handsome". दर्शनीयमानिनीयमस्याः (श्यम् अस्याः “She esteems her as handsome'. The word alfata is employed for the sake of non-feminine and non-appositional words. Thus non-feminine words:-दर्शनीयां मन्यते देवरतो यशरतां 
BK VI. CI. III.S. 39] 
MASCULISATION. 
221 
Ctra 
दर्शनीयमानी अयमस्याः ॥ For non-appositional ivords :-as, दर्शनीयां मन्यते देवदत्ता पक्ष दत्ता-दर्शनीयमानिनी इयमस्याः ॥ 
न कोपधायाः ॥ ३७॥ पदानि ॥ न, क, उपधायाः, ॥ त्तिः ॥ कोपधायाः स्त्रियाः पुंगडावो न भवति ।। वात्तिकम् ॥ कोपधप्रतिषेधे वुतद्धितग्रहणं कर्तव्यम् ॥ 
37. A Feminine word havi a penultimate क, does not assume thic Masculine forin. 
Thus पाचिकामार्थः, कारिकाभार्यः, वृजिकाभार्यः, मद्रिकाभाय:, मद्रिकाकल्पा, मद्रिकायते ॥ वृजिकायते, मद्रिकामानिनी, वृजिकामानिनी, वैलेपिकं (बैलेपिकाया धम्य). This rule is an ex ception to all the previous rules VI. 3. 34-36 : and not only to VI. 3. 34. 
Vårt :--The rule applics to the off of the aflix g and the Taddhita i and not to every off Tlicrefore the masculine transformation takes place here पाकभार्यः, भेकमार्यः ॥ The word पाका means "young"; and भेकी means 'action'. 
संज्ञापूरण्याच॥ ३८॥ पदानि । संक्षा, पूरण्याः , च, ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ संज्ञायाः पूरण्याच स्त्रियाः पुंवद्रावो न भवति ॥ 
38. The feminine is not changed to masculine, when it is a Name or an Ordinal Numeral. 
Thus दत्ताभार्यः । गुमाभार्यः । इनापाशा । गुप्तापाशा । दत्तायते । गुप्तायते । इत्तामानिनी । एमामानिनी । पूरण्याः । पञ्चमीभार्यः। शमीभार्यः । पञ्चमीपाशा । दशमीपाशा पञ्चमीयते । शमीयते। पञ्चमीमानिनी । दशमीमानिनी । 
वृद्धिनिमित्तस्य च तद्धितस्यारक्तविकारे ॥ ३९॥ पदानि वृद्धिनिमित्तस्थ, च, तद्धितस्य, अरक्तविकारे, ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ वृद्धिनिमित्तस्तद्धितः स यदि रक्त विकारे च न विहितः, तदन्तस्य स्खीशम्नस्य न वनपति ।। 
39. The feminine is not changed into Masculine, when it is formed by such a Taddhita affix, which causes the Vriddhi of the first syllable, with the exception however of the Taldhitas meaning 'colored therewith', and 'made there of'. 
Thus नौनीभाषः, मायुरीभार्यः, सोनीपाशा, माधुरीपाशा, सोनीयते, माधुरीयते, सोनीमनिनी and माथुरीमानिनी ।। 
Why do we says which causes Vriddhi'? Observe मध्यमभार्यः (मध्ये भवा - मध्यमा formed by the affix म IV. 3. 8 which does not canse Vriddhi). Why do we say 'of a Tadhita'? Obscrve काण्डलावभार्यः (काण्ड लुनाति-काण्डलावी with STT (greper) and stg). Why do we say when not mcaning 'colored there with' or 'inade thercof'? Observe. कषायण रक्ता-कापायी, काषायी वृहतिका यस्य काषायवृक्षतिकः, लोहस्य विकारोलाही लौही ईषा यस्य स्थस्य- लोहेषः (IV. 3. 134). The word graffig should be explained as a Bahuvrihi, and not a Tatpurusha, i. e. a taddhita aslix, in which there is an clement like mor or F &c which causes 
1222 
MASCULISATION. 
[ IBK. VI. CI. III.42 
Vriddhi. Therefore this exception does not apply to तावडायः यावनार्यः (तावती भार्या यस्य &c). Here the affix बतुप V. 2. 39added to तद् does not cause Vriddhi by its own force, but by VI. 3. 91. 
स्वागावेतो ऽमानिनि ॥४॥ पदानि ॥ स्वाङ्गतू, च, इतः, अमानिनि, ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ स्वाङ्गादुत्तरी य ईकारस्तदन्तायाः स्त्रिया न पुंवङ्गवति भमानिनि परतः ।। 
40. A feminine in ending in the name of a part of boily, does not become masculine, except when the 
word मानिन् follows. 
Thus दीर्घकेशीभार्यः, शुलकेशीभार्यः, दीर्घकेशीपाशा, लक्ष्णकेशीपाशा, दीर्घकेशीयते, लक्ष्ण केशीयते, but पटुभार्यः (पद्ध not denoting any bodily member), भकेशभार्यः (भकेशा भार्या, not ending in long t), and दीर्घकेशमानिनी ॥ The exception भमानिनि has been added froin the Vårtika and is no part of the original sa tra. ___ जातेश्च ॥४१॥ पदानि ॥ जातेः, च, (न) ( अमानिनि)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ जातेच खिया न पुंषद्भवति अमानिनि परतः ।। 
___41. A feminine noun expressing a class or kind does not bccomo masculine. 
___Thus कठीभार्यः, बढ्चीभार्यः कठीपाशा, बहूचीपाशा, कठीयते, बहधीयते ॥ But not so when मानिन् follows, as कउमानिनी, बहुचमानिनी ॥ . The exception does not apply to हस्तिनीनां समूह: हास्तिकम् ।। 
पुंवत्कर्मधारयजातीयदेशीयेषु ॥४२॥ पदानि ॥ पुम्बत्, कर्मधारय, जातीय, देशीयेषु, ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ कर्मधारये समासे जातीय देशीय इत्येतयोच प्रत्यययोर्भाषितपुंस्कादनून स्त्रियाः पुंषद्भवति । वार्तिकम् ।। कुक्कुन्यादीनामण्डादिषु पुंवद्रावो वक्तव्यः ।। 
42. The feminine (unless it ends in 5), having an cquivalent and uniform masculino, becomes masculine in a Karmadharaya, and before जातीय and देशीय ॥ 
This søtra is enunciated as a prohibition to the preceding sätras. Thus it applies even to words liaving a penultiinate of (VI. 3. 37). Thus पाचकवृन्दारिका, पाचकजातीया, पाचकदेशीया ॥ It applies even to Names and the feminines which are ordinals in opposition to VI. 3. 38. Thus दत्तवृन्दारिका, दत्त जातीया, इत्तवेशीया, पंचमवृन्दारिका, पंचमजातीया, पंचमदेशीया ॥ It applics even in op position to VI. 3. 39: सोपवृन्दारिका, चीनजातीया, सोनदेशीया ॥ So also in opposition to VI. 3. 40, as लक्षणमुखवृन्दारिका, लक्ष्णमुखजातीया all श्लक्ष्णमुखदेशीया ॥ So also in opposition to VI. 3. 41, as कवृन्दारिका, कठजातीया, कठदेशीया ॥ 
The feminine must have a corresponding masculine (भाषितपुंस्क), Sothe rule does not apply खदावृन्दारिका, as खदा has no corresponding masculine. The feminine should not end in ऊ; as ब्रह्मवन्धूवृन्दारिका ।। 
Vart :--The words कुक्कुटी &c become hmasculine belore अण्ड &c : as, काव्या कुक्कुटाण्डन् । भृग्या:पद = मृगपदम , मृग्या-क्षीरं - मृगक्षीरम, काक्याः शायः-काक 
BK. VI. C11. 111 8.11 
MASCHLISATION. 
1223 
शायः ॥ This rulc need not be made, as the first member in thesc compounds may be considered as class denoting words of common gender. 
Vart :-IVhen a word formed by an affix having an indicatory ख, or the affixes तर and तम &c (VI. 3. 43) follow, the final long vowel of the first term becomes short instead of its becoming masculine. As कालीमात्मानं मन्यते काल्येवाहम् = कालिमन्या (compare VI. 3.66) हरिणिमन्या, पद्वितरा. पद्वितमा, पद्विरूपा, पदिकल्पा, पदिका, मृतिका | We have said that the rule does not apply to the feminines in अ॥ The words इडविट् , दरद, पृथ and उशिज arc names of countries denoting Kshatriya clans. The tadraja affix (VI. I. 168 and 170), is elided in forming the feminine of these (IV. 1. 177). Thus we have the compound of इडषिद वृम्दारिका ॥ When the first words become imasculinc, we have ऐडविड, शरद, &c. Thus ऐडविडवृन्दारिका, भौशिजवृन्शारका ।। 
घरूपकल्पचेलडब्रुवगोत्रमतहतेषु उयोऽनेकाचो हस्वः ॥४३॥ पदानि ॥ घ, रूप, कल्प, चेलड, ब्रुव, गोत्र, मत, हतेषु, ज्यः, अनेकाचः, हस्वः, ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ घ रूप कल्प चलट् ब्रुव गोषमतहत इत्येतेषु परतो भाषितपुस्कात्परो यो डीप्रत्ययस्तदन्तस्याने. काची इस्यो भवति ।। 
43. Before the affixes तर, तम, रूप, कल्प, before चेल (with the feminine in ई), बुध, गोत्र, मत and हत, a word ending in the feinipinc affix er becomes short, when the feminine consists of two or more syllables, and has an cquivalent and uniform masculine. 
Thus घब्राह्मणितरा. ब्राह्मणितमा ब्राह्मणिरूपा, ब्राह्माणिकल्पा, ब्राह्मणिचेली, बामणिया ब्राह्माणगात्रा, ब्राह्मणिमता and. ब्राणिहता ॥ घ, रूप and कल्प are affixes, लड् &c are words as second members; बुधः is formed by अच् ( III. I. 134) added to g, guņa anzi substitution being prevented anomalously. Why do we say ending in ई (डी)? Observe दत्तातरा, गुमातरा | Why do we say consisting of more than onc syllabic? Because words of one syllable optionally become shortened by the next rule. Why do we say having a corresponding mascu line? Observe आमलकीतरा कुवलीतरा, where भामरकी and कुवली have no cquivalent 
masculinc forms. 
नद्याः शेषस्यान्यतरस्याम् ॥४४॥ पदानि ॥ नद्याः, शेषस्य, अन्यतरस्याम, ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ नद्याः शेषस्य घाविषु परतो हस्थो भवनि अन्यतरस्याम् । कश्च शेषः । भडोच या नदी उपन्त च यदेकाच् ॥ 
वार्निकम् ।। कृपया प्रतिषेधो वक्तव्यः ॥ 
44. In all the remaining feminine words called Nadi ( I. 4. 3 and 4 ), the substitution of short vowel under the preceding circumstances is optional. 
1224 
MASCULISATION. 
[Bk. VI. Cl. III.46 
What are the re or the remnants? Those feminines which are not formed by long ई (डी), and are called Nadi; and those feminines which end in long f but -consist of one syllable. Thus ब्रह्मवन्धतरा or ब्रह्मबन्धुतरा वारवधूतरा 
or वीरवन्धुतरा, खितरा or खीतरा, स्वितमा or बीतमा ।। 
___Vart:-Nadi words formed by कृत् affixes are excepted: as लक्ष्मीतप, तन्वीतरा formed by the Unadi affix t (Un III. I58, 160) 
उगितश्च ॥ ४५ ॥ पदानि ॥ उगितः, च, (हस्वः) (अन्यतरस्यां)॥ वृत्तिः । उगितच परस्या नद्या धादिषु भन्यतरस्यां इस्वो भवति । 
45. The feminine ई (डी) added to a word formed by a Taddhita-aslix having an indicatory s ors, is optionally shortened before the &c (VI. 3. 43 ). 
Thus प्रेयसितरा or प्रेयसीतरा, or श्रेयस्तरा, विदुषितरा or विदुषीतरा or वित्तरा ।। The first is formed by the Taddhita affix fagy, and the second by all In one alternative, there is masculisation also when we get the forms are &c. Or this latter form may be considered to have been evolved froin pun, to which is added the affixes denoting comparison, and then the feminine affix, in denot ing a feminine. 
आन्महतः समानाधिकरणजातीययोः ॥ ४६॥ पदानि ॥ आत् , महतः, समाना धिकरण, जातीययोः, ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ समानाधिकरणउत्तरपदे जातीये च प्रत्यये परतो महत भाकारादेशो भवति ॥ पातिकम् ।। महात्वे धासकरावीशष्टेषूपसंख्यानं पुवचनं चासमानाधिकरणार्यम् ।। वा०॥ अष्टनः कपाले हविष्युपसंख्यानम् ॥ वा० ॥ गवि घ युक्ते ऽष्टन उपसंख्यान कर्तव्यम् ॥ 
46. For the final of महतू, is substituted आतू (आ) before a word which is in apposition with it and before profiter il 
As महादेवः, महाब्राह्मणः, महाबाहुः, महाबलः, महाजातीयः ॥ But महतः पुत्रः- महत्पुषः "the son of the great man": the two words are not in apposition. The com pounding with FT takes place under 11. 1.61. This rule applies to compounds under that rule, as well as to Balruvrihis, when also the two words are in appo sition, as in महाबाहुः ॥ In fact this is the object of using the word samanadhi karana in this sætra. Had it not been used, then by the maxim of pratipa Jokta,'the rule would have applied only to the Tatpurasha compounds of mahat taught under II. I.61 but not to Bahuvrihis. In महद्भुतश्रन्द्रमा-अमहान महान संपन्नः, the long is not substituted, as the sense of hen is hicre secondary. 
Vart:--मा is substituted for the final of महत् before पास, कर and विशिष्ट, the feminine wat being changed to masculine, though the words may not be in apposition. As महत्या घास:- महापासः, महत्या करः- महाकरः, महत्याविशिष्टः = महाविशिष्टः ।। 
Vart:--आ is substituted for the final of अष्टन् before कपाल, when a sa crificial offering is meant. As अष्टाकपालं चहं निर्वपेत ॥ Why do we say when 
meaning a sacrificial offering? Obscrve अष्टकपालं बाह्मणस्य ।। 
BK VI. CH. III $19) 
SOME SUBSTITUTES. 
1225 
Vårt:- is substituted for the final of atal before tit, when the mean ing is that of 'yoked'. As, भटागन पकटेन ॥ But मष्टगई बामणस्थ, where 'yoking' is not meant. The e in art is for the sake of distinctness. 
- अयटनः संख्यायामबहुव्रीह्यशीत्योः॥४७॥ पदानि ॥ यष्टनः, संख्यायाम, भव हुव्रीहि, अशीयोः ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ दि भष्टम् इत्येतयोराकारादेवो भवति संख्यायापुत्तरपदे भबहुत्रीशीत्योः । वार्निकम् ॥ 
प्रातादिति वनव्यम् ॥ 
47. आ is substituted for the final of zि and भएन when another Numeral follows, but not in a Bahuvrihi or 
before अशीति ॥ 
Thus sपश, हाधिशतिः, वार्षिशन, भारत, पाविशतिः, भटाविशत् ॥ Why do we say irand भष्टम्। Observe पञ्चाश | Why do we say 'when followed by a Numeral'? Observed मातुरः, मटमातुरः ॥ Why do we say 'not when the com pound is a Bahuvrthi, or the word watra follows'? Observe ft Tri, TaT:, ब्धषीतिः ॥ 
Vårt:--This rule applies upto one hundred. Therefore not here, दिशतम् , द्विसहसम, अष्टशतम्, अष्टसहस्रम् ॥ 
प्रेस्रयः ।। ४८॥ पदानि ॥ः, त्रयस, ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ त्रि इत्येतस्य पयामित्ययमादेशो भवति संख्यायामबहुव्रीशीयोः ॥ 
48. For fe is substituted for when another Numeral follows, but not in a Bahuvrihi or before अशीतिः ॥ 
A. अयोधा बयोवशासिः, प्रतिशत ॥ But not in श्रमातरः (the second word not being a Numeral), nor in विशा: which is a Bahurrihi, (II. 2. 25) ज्यधाति ।। This substitution takes place upto hundred : not here, निशसम, पिसहनम् ॥ 
विभाषा चत्वारिंशत्प्रभृतौ सर्वेषाम् ॥४९॥ पदानि ॥ विभाषा, चत्वारिंशत, प्रभृती, सर्वेषाम् ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ चत्वारिंशम्मभृतौ संख्यायामुत्तरपदे ऽबहुव्रीह्यशीत्योः सर्वेषां ब्याटन् पि इत्येतेषां यदुनं सद्विभाष भवति।। 
49. The above substitution in the case of all (fer, Hिand अपन), is optional, when the word चत्वारिंशत् and the 
numerals which follow it arc the sccond member. 
____ Tus द्विचत्वारिंशत or वाचवारिंशत्, विपञ्चाशत् or प्रयापञ्चाशन, भष्टपञ्चाशत् or भशापचापत| This also before hundred : as, द्विशासम् and भष्टशतम्, मिशतम् ॥ 
हृदयस्य हल्लेखयदणलासेषु ॥५०॥ पदानि ॥ हृदयस्य, हृत, लेख, यत्, अण, लासे पु.॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥रयस्य पित्ययमविपो भवति लेख यत् लास इत्येतेषु परतः ॥ 
1226 
SOME SUBSTITUTES. 
[BK. VI, Cl. III. $53 
50. पद is substituted for एदय, yefore लेख, and the affixes यत् and अण and before लास ॥ 
Thus हरयं लिखति हमेखः, हण्यस्य प्रियं- हाम्, हरयस्येवम् =हाम्, हल्यस्य लासो हलासः॥ The word लेख is derived by भण् affix from लिख ॥ Before the word लेख formed by घr affix, this substitution does not take place, as हत्यलेखः॥ The inclusion of लेख in this sutra proves the existence of this maxiin " उत्तरपदा धिकार प्रत्ययमहणे न तदन्तमहणम्" || See VI. 3. 17. 
वा शोकष्यप्रोगेषु ॥ ५१ ॥ पदानि ॥ वा, शोक, व्यज्, रोगेषु ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ लोक ष्यम् रोग इत्यतेषु परतो हदयस्य वा हदित्ययमादेशो भवति ॥ 
51. हद is optionally the substitute for दय, when the words शोक, and रोग or the affix ष्य follows. 
Thus मेकः or हत्यशोकः, सौहार्यम् or सोहरय्यम् ॥ Here यह is added as हरय belongs to Brahmanadi class V. I. I24. When हद् is substituted there is Vriddhi of both the members F and e by VII. 3. 19. So also होगः or हस्य रोगः ॥ All these forrns could have been got from हत् which isa full word sui generis, having the same meaning as 64:11 The substitution taught in this satra is rather unnecessary. 
पादस्य पदाज्यातिगोपहतेषु ॥५२॥ पदानि ॥ पादस्य, पत, माजि, आति, ग, उपहतेषु, ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ पारस्य पर इत्ययमादेशो भवति भाजि भाति ग उपहत हत्येतेषत्तरपदेषु ॥ 
52. पदू is substituted for पाद, before आजि, माति, ग and उपहत ॥ 
Thus पदाजिः =पादाभ्यामजति ; पदातिः = पावाभ्यामतति ॥ भाभिः and भाति: are formed by ण् from भज and भत् (Un IV. 131), and irregularly भज् is not changed to वी though required by II. 4.56; before this affix. So also पगः पादाभ्यां गच्छति पदोपहतः - पादेनोपहतः ॥ पाद belongs to Vrishadi class (VI. I. 203) and has therefore acute on the first syllable, the r substitute liowever has acute on the final, only in the उपदेश (VI. I. 171), therefore in पदोपहतः, पदू retains its accent (VI. 2. 48), and it becomes acute on the final. While qar, qartai and q: have acute on the final (VI. I. 223 and krit-accent). 
पद्यत्यतदर्थे ॥ ५३॥ पदानि ॥ पद, यति, अतदर्थे, ॥ वृत्तिः । यत्प्रत्यये परतः पारस्य पवित्ययमादेशो भवत्यतदर्थे । वार्तिकम् ॥ पाव के परसाबुपसंख्यानम् ॥ 
53. पद is substitutell for पाद before the affix यत् used in any sense other then that of "suited there to.; 
Thus पाशविध्यन्ति - पद्याः शर्कराः, पद्याः कण्टकाः ॥ Vhen यत् has the force of " suited there to" we have पायम्-पागार्थमुदकं ॥ (sec IV. 4.83 and V. A. 25) BK. VI. Ch. III.558] 
SUME SUBSTITUTIONS. 
1227 
Vart:-Before the affix इक्, in the sense of the walks there by', पर is substituted for पार; as पादाभ्यां चरति - परिकः ( IV. 4. 10) by 8न् affix. The word पार in this sutra means the actual foot', a part of aniinal organism. Therefore पद is not substituted before the यत् of V. I. 34, as हिपाचम् , निपाद्यम् because पाद here denotes ,a measure'. 
हिमकाषिहतिषु च ॥५४॥ पदानि ॥ हिम, काषि, हतिषु, च, ( पद्)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ हिम कापिन् हति इत्येतेषु पादशवस्य परित्ययमादेशो भवति ॥ 
54. पदू is substituted for पाद before हिम, काषिन् and हति ॥ 
Thus पद्धिमम् , (=पादस्य शीतं) पत्कापिन् (- पादचारिणः) as in भय पत्कापिणा यान्ति, and पद्धतिः (पशभ्यां हन्यते)॥ 
ऋचः शे॥ ५५॥ पदानि ॥ ऋचः, शे॥ वृत्तिः ॥क्संबन्धिमः पाशवस्य शे परतः पदित्ययमादेशो भवति ॥ 
55. पदू is the substitute for पाद before the affix शस्, when the meaning is that of a Hymu (Rik). 
Thus पच्छो गायत्री शंसति-पाई पाई शंसति, the affix शस् being added by V. 4. 43. Why do we say 'when meaning a Hymn'? Observe 97TT: #79qo ma il 
घा घोषमिश्रशम्देषु ॥५६॥ पदानि ॥ वा, घोष, मिभ, शव्देषु, (पद)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ घोष मिश्र शब्द इत्येतेषु चोत्तरपरेषु पादस्थ वा परित्ययमादेशो भवति ॥ वार्मिकम् ॥ निष्के घेति वक्तव्यम् ।। 
56. This substitution of a for 5 is optional before घोष, मिश्र and शब्द ।। 
___ Thus पद्घोषः or पादघोषः, पन्मिश्रः or पादमिश्रः, पच्छ: or पादचनः॥ 
Vart:-So also before निष्कः as पग्निष्कor पादनिष्कः ।। उदकस्योदः संक्षायाम् ॥ ५७॥ पदानि ॥ उदकस्य, उदः,संज्ञायाम (उत्तरपदे)। वृतिः ॥ उदकशब्दस्य संज्ञायां विषये उद इत्ययमादेशो भवति उत्तरपद परतः ॥ वार्तिकम ॥ संज्ञायामुत्तरपदस्य उपकारस्य उदारेशो भवतीति वक्तव्यम् ॥ 
57. उद is substituted for उदक, when the compound is a Name. 
Thus उपमेघ: a person called Udamegha', उदवाः "a person named Uda vahah." The well-known Patronymics from these are भोदमधि: and भोपवाहिः ।। 
Why do we say 'when it is a Name'? Observe उदकगिरिः ॥ 
Vart~ is the substitute for when it stands as the second meinber of a compound and denotes a Naine: as, लोहितोरा, नीलोदः, सीरीवः ।। 
पेवासघाहनधिषु च ॥ ५८॥ पदानि ॥ पेषम्, वास, वाहन, धिषु, च, ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ पेषं पास वाहन धि इत्येतेषु चोरपदेषु उपकस्य उद इत्ययमावेशी भवति ॥ 
58. उद is substituted for उदक before पेषं, घास, पाहन. and धि॥ 
1228 
SOME SUISTITUTIONS. 
[ BK. VI. CH. III. . 6t 
Thus 
Thus उपपेप पिन िformed by णमुल् by III. 4. 38; परषासः- उपकस्वपासा, so also वाहनः ॥ उपक धीयतेऽस्मिन् सवधि'a water jar'. 
एकहलादौ पूरयितव्ये ऽन्यतरस्याम् ॥१९॥ पानि ॥ एक, हलादौ, पूरयितव्ये, अन्यतरस्याम्॥ वृत्तिः । हरू भादिर्यस्योत्तरपदस्य तदेकहलादिस्तस्मिकहलादो पूरयितध्यवाचिन्यन्यतरस्थाभुरकस्थ उप इत्सवमारेपो भवति ॥ 
___59. उप is optionally substituted for उदक, before a word biginning with a single consonant, and which expresses that which is filled with water. 
Thus उपकुम्भः, or उदककुम्भः, उपपापम् or उपकपात्रम् ॥ The word एकपलादि means 'a word beginning with a single simple consonant'. The rule does not apply to उरकस्थालम् as the second member begins with a conjunct consonant: nor to उपकपवर्तः, as the पर्वतः is not a vessel which is to be filled. ___ मन्थोदनसतुबिन्दुवज्रभारहारवीवधगाहेषु च ॥ ६०॥ पदानि ॥ मन्थ, ओदन, 
सतु, बिन्दु, वन, भार, हार, वीवध, गाहेषु, च, ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ मन्य भोदन सक्न विन्दु वज भार हार वीवध गाह येतेधूसरपवेधूपकस्य उद इत्ययमादेशो भवति मन्यतरस्याम् ॥ 
60. उद is optionally substituted for उदक, before मन्थ, मोदन, सक्कु, विन्दु, वन, भार, हार, वीयध, and गाह ॥ 
Thus उपकन मन्यः- उदमन्य or उदकमन्यः । उपकेनौदन, उरोदनः or उपकोदनः । सक्तु । उपकेन सक्तः, उपसक्तु or उपकसक्तुः। बिन्दु । उदकस्य बिन्दुः, उदबिन्दुः on उदकबिन्दुः । वस । उपकस्य धा, उपवाः ॥ उदकवजः। भार । उदकं विभतीति उदभार or उदकभारः । हार । उपकं हरतीति, उद. हाor उदकहारः। वीवध । उपकस्य वीवध, उदवीधः or उदकवीवधः ।गाह । उदकंगाहत इति, रवगाह: or उपकगाहः॥ 
इको इस्वोक्यो गालवस्य ॥ ६१॥ पदानि ॥इका, हस्वः, अजयः, गालवस्य, अन्यतरस्याम् ॥ वत्तिः ॥ गन्तस्यान्यन्तस्योत्तरपदे इस्वो भवति गालवस्थाचार्यस्य मतेनान्यतरस्याम् ।। पार्मिकम् ।। भ्रकुंसादीनामकारो भवतीति वक्तव्यम् ।। 
61. According to the opinion of Galava, a short vowel is substituted, in a compound, before the second member, for the long s vowels (ई,ऊ, ऋ), unless it is the long vowel of the Feminine affix ई (जी). 
In other words, for f, when it is not the Femininc affix (f) and for I, a short and J are substituted in a compound before the second member. Thus मामणिपुष: or मामणीपुषः, ब्रह्मबन्धुपमः or ब्रह्मबन्धपुषः॥ Why do we say vowels? Observe ugrari, FTATTO: 11 Why do we say 'not the long for the Feminine affix '? Observe गार्गीपुषः, वाल्सीपुषः ।। The name of Galava is mentioned pujartha for the anuvritti of 'optionally' was present in this sūtra. It is a limited option 
BK. VI. CII III S64] 
SHORTENING. 
1229 
pujartha, (vyavasthita vibhasha), and does not apply to कारीषगन्धीपति &c which are governed by VI. 3. 139. 
Vart:-It does not apply to Avyayibhava compounds, nor to those words which take या or उपङ् augment in their declension, as श्रीकुलम्, भूकुलम्, काण्डीभूतम् , कुडपीभूतं, वृषलीभूतम् ।। 
Vart:-It does however apply to भुकंस &c, as धुकुंसा, भ्रुकुतिः॥ Others say w is substituted for U &c as भ्रकुंसः and भ्रकुटिः 
एक तद्धिते च ॥६२॥ पदानि ॥ एक तद्धिते, च, (इस्वः) ( उत्तरपदे)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ एकशब्दस्य सद्धिते उत्तरपदे इस्वो भवति॥ 
62. The short is substituted for the long of quit, before a Taddhita aslix, and when a second meinber follows. 
As एकस्या आगतं = एकरूप्यम्, एकमयम्, एकस्या भावः - एकलम् , एकता | So also एकस्याः क्षीरं - एकभीरम्, एकदुग्धम् ॥ The shortening takes place of the Feminine word एका, having the affix भा॥ When एक is an adjective (गुणवचन) then the above forms could be evolved by the help of the rules of masculation, such as VI. 3. 35, i.e. when एक means the numeral one. But when it means 'alone', then those rules will not apply. The word ek is exhibited in the stra without any case-affix as a Chhandas irregularity. The examples given are of or in the feminine which alone can be shortened, and not of pfi whose final is already short. Nor can the rule of shortening be applied to ए of एक, for the rule applies to the final letter, aud not to a vowel situeated in the body of a word. 
यापो.संझाछन्दसार्बहुलम् ॥६३॥ पदानि ॥ जयापोः, संझा, छन्दसोः, बहुलम,॥ वृत्तिः । उपन्तस्यावन्तस्य च संज्ञाछन्दसोबहुलं इवो भवति । 
63. The short is diversely substituted for the feminine affixes and 2 ( ST and so) in a Name and in the Vedas. 
As रेवतिपुत्रः, रोहिणिपुत्रः, माणितुत्रः ॥ Sometimes not, as मान्दीकर, नान्दीपोषः, नान्दीविद्यालः So also in the Vedas, as कुमारिवारा, प्रदर्विशsometimes the shortening does not take place, as फाल्गुनीपौर्णमासी, जगतीछन्दः ॥ भाप ending words in Name: शिलबहम् , शिलपस्थम् ; sometimes there is no shortening, as, लोमकागृहम्, लोमकाखण्डम् ॥ So also in the Vedas:-अमक्षारण जुहोति, ऊर्णम्रा पृथिवी विश्वधायसम् ॥ Sometimes there is no shortening, as, अर्णासूत्रेण कवयो वयन्ति ।। 
त्वे च ॥ ६४॥ पदानि ॥ त्वे, च, (हस्वः)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ स्वपराये परतो उधापाबहुल इस्वो भवति ॥ 
64. The feminine affixes & and a diversely become sliort, before the allix ralli 
Thus भजाया भावः = अजवं or भजालं, रोहिणित्वं or रोहिणीलम् ॥ These are Vedic illustrations, no Names can be formed in स्व॥ 
1230 
SHIORTENING. 
[ BK. VI. CH. III. 867 
इष्टकेषीकामालानां चिततूलभारिषु ॥ ६५ ॥ पदानि ॥ इष्ट का, इषी का, माला नाम, चित, तूल, भारिषु, ॥ 
वृतिः ॥ इष्टकषीकामालानां चित तूल भारिन् इत्यतेपुत्तरपदेषु ययासंख्य इस्यो भवति । 
___65. For the long vowel, a short is substituted, in इष्टका before चित, in इषीका before तूल, and in माला before भारिन् । 
Thus Restoran, ruangan and Amfi oft FRATII The rule of tadanta applies to rent &c, so that the compounds ending in a &c are also governed by this rule : as पवेष्टकधितम, मुज्जेषीकतूलम् , उत्पलमालभारिणी कन्या । 
खित्यनव्ययस्य ॥६६॥ पदानि ॥ खिति, अनव्ययस्य, (हस्वः)॥ निः ।। खिवन्तउत्तरपदे ऽनव्ययस्य इस्वो भवति ॥ 
66. A short is always substituted for the final of the first member, when the second member is a word formed by an affix having an indicatory #, but not when the first member is an Indeclinable. 
Thus कालिमन्या, हरिणिमन्या ॥ The augment मुम् does not prevent the shortening, had it done so, the rule would have been unnecessary. But दोषा. मन्यमहः, दिवामन्याराषिः, where दोषा and दिवा are Indeclinables there is no shortening. The above words are formed by खश् (III. 2. 83). The phrase anavyayasya indicates by implication that the word re here means frai, contrary to the 
maxim enunciated in VI. 3. 17 उत्तरपवाधिकारे प्रत्ययमहणे तरन्तविपर्नेष्यते ॥ For an 
· Avyaya can never take a fee affix which are ordained only after dhâtus. 
अषिदजन्तस्य मुम् ॥ ६७॥ पदानि ॥ अरुस, द्विषत, अजन्तस्य, मुम्, ।। वृत्तिः ।। मरुस विषत् त्यसयोरजन्तानां च खिदन्त उत्तरपदे मुमागमो भवति भनष्ययस्य ।। 
67. मुम् is the augment added immediately after the final vowel, of अरुस, द्विषत, and of a stem ending in a vowel, unless it is an Indeclinable, when a word formed by a fea affix follows. 
Thus भरुन्तुदः, विपन्तपः, कालिमन्या &c. See III. 2. 35, 39, 83. The t of मरस and ther of द्विषत् are dropped by VIII. 2.23. : Why do we say 'of mom &c'? Observe facultat 11 Why do we say 'not an Indeclinable'? Observe दोषामन्यमहः, दिवामन्याराषिः॥ Why do we use the word in **, when merely saying T: would have sufficed by the rule of tadanta-vidhi? This indicates that the shortening taught in the prece ding sätra does not debar the yq augment, nor does 54 debar the shortening. So that gw is added after the shortening has taken place. 
इच एकाचोम्प्रत्ययवञ्च ॥ ६८॥ पदानि ॥ इचः, एकाचः, अम, प्रत्ययवत्, च,॥ वृभिः ॥इमन्तस्य एकाचः खिरन्तवमरपंद ऽमागमो भवति शम्प्रत्ययवधिनायकवचनवध स भवति । 
BK. VI. CII. III 8 70.] 
मुम् AUGMENT. 
1231 
68. A monosyllabic word, ending in any vowel other than 37, when followed by a word formed by a raa affix, receives the augment on, which is added in the same way as the affix of the Accusative singular. 
The word भम् is to be repeated here thus, एकाचोऽम्, सम्प्रत्ययवथ । Thus गांमन्यः, स्त्रीमन्यः, or नियंमन्यः, श्रियंमन्यः, भुवमन्यः ॥ By force of the atideia भमप्रत्ययवत् , the changes produced by the Accusative ending are caused by this augment also : viz: the substitution of long , the substitution of a vowel homogenous with the first, the guņa, the substitutes race and IT AS B AYI मन्यः (VI. I.93); पूर्वसवर्ण as धीमन्यः (VI. I. 107); guna, as,-नरंमन्यः (VII. 3. ) and इयङ् and उवइ, as श्रियंमन्यः, धमन्यः (VI. 4.81 &c). Why do we say ending in a vowel other than अ (इच)? Observe वन्मन्यः ॥ Why do we say 'a mon. osyllable'? Observe manj Hrar: 11 
The affix भम् is elided after a Neuter noun (VII. I. 23), therefore, will this अम् also be elided when श्री is treated as Neuter? As श्रियमात्मानं मन्यते ब्राह्मणकुलं-प्रियंमन्यम् or श्रिमन्यम्! The second is the valid form according to Patanjali. 
वाचंयमपुरंदरौ च ॥ ६९ ॥ पदानि ॥ वाचंयम, पुरन्दरौ, च, ॥ वृत्तिः ॥वाचंयम पुरंदर इत्येतो निपात्यते । 
69. वाचंयम and पुरन्दर are irregularly formed. 
Thus वाचयमः भारत (III. 2. 40 खच affix). पुरं धारयति-पुरन्दरः (III. 2. 42). The shortening of a# and pre takes place by VI. 4. 94. 
कारे सत्यागदस्य ॥ ७॥ पदानि ॥ कारे, सत्य, अगदस्य,॥ वृत्तिः ॥ कारशउत्तरपदे सत्य भगद इत्येतयोर्मुमागमो भवति । वार्तिकम् ॥ भस्तुसत्यागदस्य कारहति वक्तव्यम् ॥ वा०॥ भक्षस्य सन्दास कारे मुम वक्तव्यः । वा०॥ धेनोर्भष्यायां मुम्बक्तव्यः॥ वा०॥ लोकस्य पृणे मुम्बक्तव्यः ॥ वा०॥ इत्ये ऽनभ्याशस्य मुम्बक्तव्यः ॥ वा०॥ भ्राष्ट्राग्न्योरिन्धे मुम्बक्तव्य। वा०॥ गिले ऽगिलस्य मुम्बक्तव्यः ॥ वा०॥ गिलगिले ति वक्तव्यम् ।। वा० ॥ उष्णभद्रयोः करणे मुम्बक्तव्यः॥ सुतोपराजभोजमवित्ये सेभ्य उत्तरस्य दुहितशब्दस्य पुरवलादेशो वा वक्तव्यः ॥ 
70. मुम् is the augment of सत्य and अगद when the word Art follows. 
As सत्यकार:-सत्यंकगति or सत्यस्यकारः ॥ So also भगकारः॥ Vart:-So also of अस्तु, as अस्तुंकारः ॥ 
Vart:-So also in Vedas, of भक्ष before कारः-e. g. भक्षकार, in secular language भभकार:॥ 
Vart:~Of धनु before मध्या, e.g. धनुभष्या ।। Vart :-Of लोक before पृण, c.g. लोकपणा ॥ 
1232 
MUM AUGMENT. 
[ BK. VI. CI. III 874 
Vart:-Of मनभ्याश before इत्य as मनभ्याशमिन्यः ॥ Vart:-Of भ्राष्ट्र and अग्नि, before इन्धः, as भ्राष्ट्रामिन्धः, भग्निमिन्धः ।। 
Vårt:„A word before fora takes on augment, unless it is also its e.g. तिमिलिः , but गिलगिलः॥ 
Vart :-So also before गिलगिल,e.g. तिमिङ्गिलागलः ॥ Vart:-Of उष्ण and भद्र before करण, e. g. उष्णं करणं, भद्रकरणं ॥ 
Vart :- * is optionally the substitute of great when the words , उम, राज, भोज, and मेरु precede it e. g. सूतपुत्री or सूसदुहिता, उपपुषी or उपदुहिता, राजपुत्री or राजदुहिता, भोजपुषी or भोजदुहिता, मेरुपुषी or मेरुदुहिता ॥ Some read पुष in the Saran. garavadi class (IV. 1. 73 ), and then this word has its feminine gut 11 This is seen in other places also, e.g. शैलपुत्री ॥ 
श्येनतिलस्य पाते मे ॥ ७१॥ पदानि ॥ श्येन, तिलस्य. पाते, मे, ॥ वृत्तिः ।। श्येन तिलइत्येतयोः पातशब्दडनरपदे अप्रत्यये ममागमो भवति ॥ 
71. मुम् is the augment of the words श्येन and तिल, before gra, when the affix is added. 
Thus श्येनपातोऽस्यां क्रीडायां- श्यनंपाता, लंपाता| See IV. 2.58. Why do we say before ? Observe care il 
रात्रेः कृति विभाषा ॥७२॥ पदानि ॥ रात्रः, कृति, विभाषा, (मुम्)॥ वृत्तिः ॥राने कदन्तउत्तरपदे विभाषा मुमागमो भवति ।। 
72. The word for optionally takes on before a word formed by krt-affix. 
Asराविधरः or रात्रिचर, राविमटः or राज्यटः ॥ This is an aprapta-vibhasha. The augment is compulsory before a krit-affix having an indicatory ख, As, राधिमन्यः ॥ 
नलोपो नमः ॥ ७३ ॥ पदानि ॥ न, लोपः, ममः, ( उत्तरपदे)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ नमो नकारस्य लोपो भवत्युत्तरपदै॥ पार्तिकम् ॥ नमो नलोपो वक्षेप तिड्युपसंख्यानम् ॥ 
The 7 of the Negative particle 75, is elided when . it is the first member of a. compound. 
Thus भब्राह्मणः भवृषलः, भसुरापः, भसोमपः ।। 
Vårt :-The of g is elided before a verb also, when reproach is meant : as, अपचसि त्वं जाल्मा, मकरोषि वं जाल्मः ॥ 
तस्मान्नुडचि ॥ ७४॥ पदानि ॥ तस्मात, नुन, अचि, (उत्तरपदे)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ तमाल्लुप्तनकारानमः नुडागमो भवति मजादावुत्तरपदे ।। 
74. After the above न-elided नञ् (i. e. after अ) is added the augment us, to a word beginning with a vowel. 
Thus मनजः, अनश्वः, अनुष्टः ।। Why do we use तस्मात् "after such a नस"? Otherwise I would have been the augment of 5, and not of the subsequent 
BK. VI. CI. III. 8.77] 
NUT AUGMENT. 
1233 
word for: the sutra would have read thus नुहाई॥ Adding नुर् 10 नम् or rather to , we have 879. (granting that I is not to be added before but after it, against I. I. 46). Nov मन् +भजः will be मनजः and not भनजः for VIII. 3. 32 will cause the doubling of the final a of Stal II Hence to prevent this con tingency, at is ordained with regard to the second member and not with regard to u or नन्न । 
नभ्राणनपानवेदानासत्या नमुचिनकुलनखनपुंसकनक्षत्रनकनाकेषु प्रकृत्या ॥ ७५ ॥ पदानि ॥ नभ्राट्, नपात, नवेदा, नासत्या, नमुचि, नकुल, नख, नपुंसक, नक्षत्र, नक, नाकेषु, प्रकृत्या,॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ नभ्राद नपात् नवेदाः नासत्या नमुषि नकुल नख नपुंसक नक्षब मख नक नाक इत्येतेषु मम् प्रकृत्या भवति ॥ 
75. The Negative particle remains unchanged in नमाज, नपात, नवेदस, नासत्या (dual), नमुचि, नकुल, नस्त्र, नपुंसक, नक्षत्र, नक and नाक॥ 
Upto arget the words are exhibited in the Nominative case in the shtra, the rest are exhibited in the Locative! नभ्राजते -नभ्राट्, formed by किए and न composition. न पाति-नपात् formed by ua affix. न वेति-नवेदा, formed by भमुन् । सत्सु साधवः - सत्याः, न सत्याः - असत्याः, न असत्या नासत्याः॥ न मुञ्चति-न मुधि, formed by कि affix (Unadi), भास्य कुलमस्ति - नकुलः ॥ नास्थ खमस्ति-नखम् ॥ न स्त्री न पुमान् = नपुंसकम् ॥ मारते मीयते वानक्षत्रम् ॥ न कामति-नक by raffix: न भस्मिन् मकम् - नाकम् ॥ 
एकादिश्चैकस्य चादुक् ॥ ७६ ॥ पदानि ॥ एकादिः, च, एकस्य, च, अतु, ॥ वृतिः ।। एकादिश नम्प्रकृत्या भवति एकरावस्यादुगागमो भवति ॥ 
76. The Negative particle remains unchanged in a word which begins with 4, and of this gif, there is the augment अदुक (अ). 
Thus एकेन न विंशतिः - एकानविंशतिः, एकानविंशत् ॥ These are Instrumental compounds. The augment ng is added to the final of the first member, so that we have optionally two forms एकात् न विशतिः and एकान् न विशति by VIII. 4. 45. 
नगो ऽप्राणिध्वन्यतरस्याम् ॥ ७७॥ पदानि ॥ नगः, अप्राणिषु, अन्यतरस्याम, ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ नश्पकृत्या भवति । 
77. The Negative particle is optionally retained unchanged in an, when it does not mean a living animate 
being. 
Thus नगाः or भगा: 'trees', or 'mountains', literally 'what do not move'. The affix is added to all! Why do we say when not referring 
1234 : 
SOME SUBSTITUTES. 
[ BK. VI. C11. III. 80. 
to animate beings. Observe spur: q: eftão ll No alternative form is allow ed here. 
सहस्य सः संज्ञायाम् ॥ ७८ ॥ पदानि ॥ सहस्य, सः, संज्ञायाम् ॥ वृत्तिः। सहायस्य स इत्ययमादेशो भवति संज्ञायां विषये ॥ 
78. & is substituted for me, in a Name. 
Thus ATTUA, AYT, 1997 # Why when it is a Name? Observe H EIT, DAT II The word * has acute on the first syllable, becarse all Particles have acute on the first syllable. The substitute, Ħ coming in the room of the acute # and the grave , will have an accent mid-way between acute and grave, namely, it would have the svarita accent. But, as a matter of fact, it has the acute accent. As hy, re: 11 These are Bahuvrihi. In Avyayibhava, the samasa-accent will prevail (VI. 1. 223 ), as ate, II 
प्रन्थान्ताधिकेच ॥ ७९ ॥ पदानि ॥ ग्रन्थान्त, अधिके, च,॥ वृत्तिः ॥ ग्रन्थान्त ऽधिके व वर्तमानस्य सहशब्दस्य स इत्ययमादेशो भवति ।। 
79. E is the substitute for ac, when it has the sense of 'upto the end' ( in connection with a literary work ), or 'more'. 
Thus tini saia yra il So also rea=( Taran) 1978 (18 ) broyta ! These are all Avyayibhava compounds by ° apa 
(II. 1. 6). Therefore, when a word, denoting time, is the second member, He would not be changed to #, because of the prohibition in VI. 3. 81. The present sätra removes that prohibition by anticipation, with regard to time denoting words even, when the meaning is that of the end of a book'. When the sense is that of 'more', we have alrer, Firq: atqor: Aluran HT: | 
द्वितीये चानुपाख्ये ॥ ८॥ पदानि ॥ द्वितीये, च, अनुपाख्ये, (सहस्यसः)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ द्वितीये ऽनुपाण्ये सहस्य स इत्ययमादेशो भवति ।। 
80. Ħis the substitute for Fre, when it is in con nection with a word which refers to a second object, which latter however is not directly perceived. 
Of the two things which are generally found co-existing, the non principal is called the second' or feet II That which is perceived, observed or is known is called 39149, that which is not perceived &c is up, i.e. what is to be inferred. That is, when the second object is to be inferred from the presence of the first, # is added to such second word. Thus are: (ara:) 
a pigeon which points out that conflagration has taken place some where'. A T AT "a storm-wind which announces the Pisachas", Arial UHT 11 
Here the fire, the Pikacha or the Rakshasas are not directly perceived, but their existence is inferred from the presence of the pigeon &c. 
011 
BK. VI. CH. III. $.84 ] 
SOME SUBSTITUTES. 
1235 
__ अव्ययीभावे चाकाले ॥८१॥ पदानि ॥ अव्ययीभावे, च, अकाले, (सहस्यसः)। वृत्तिः ॥ भव्ययीभावे च समासे कालवाधिन्युत्तरपदे सहस्य स इत्ययमावेशो भवति ।। 
81. स is the substitute of सह, in an Avyayibhava when the second member is not a word denoting time. 
___Thus सचकंधेहि, मधुरं प्राजा, but सहपूर्वाणम् the second member being a time denoting word (II. I. 5). 
वोपसर्जनस्य ॥ २॥ पदानि ॥वा, उपसर्जनस्य ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ सर्वोपसर्जनो बहुव्रीहियते । तदवयवस्य सहरावस्य वा स इत्ययमादेशो भवति॥ 
82. स is optionally the substitute of सह, when the compound is a Baluvrihi. 
That compound in which all members are secondary-उपसर्जन-1s a सर्वोपसर्जन, and the Bahuvrihi is such a compound, because in it all the mem bers are secondary, the Principal being understood. Thus सपुषः or सहपुत्रा, सच्छामः or सहच्छात्रः॥ Why do we say of a Bahuvrihi? Observe सहयुवा, सहकुल्ला। The substitution does not however take place in a Bahuvrthi like सहकृत्वमियः or सहयुद्रप्रियः ।। 
प्रकृत्याशियगोवत्सहलेषु ॥३॥ पदानि ॥ प्रकृत्या, आशिषि, अ,गोवत्सहलेषु,॥ वृत्तिः ॥ प्रकृत्या सहानो भवति माशिषि विषये ऽगोवत्सहलेषु ॥ 
83. The word retains its original form when the sentence denotes benediction, except when it is गो, वत्स 
or हल॥ 
___Thus स्वस्ति देवदत्ताय सहपुत्राय, सहच्छापाय, सहामात्याय ॥ But optionally here, as स्वस्ति भवते सहगवे or सगये, सहवात्साय or सवत्साय, सहहलाय, or सहलाय॥ The phrase भगोवत्सहलेषु is no part of the original satra, but has been added by the Kal from a Vartika. 
समानस्य छन्दस्यमूर्खप्रभृत्युदर्केषु ॥ ८४॥ पदानि ॥ समानस्य, छन्दसि, भ, मूर्ख, प्रभृति, उदर्केषु ॥ वृत्तिः । समानस्य स इत्ययमादेशो भवति छन्दसि विपये मूर्खन् प्रति उद इत्येतान्युत्तरपदानि वर्जयित्वा। 
84. स is the substitute of समान in the Chhandas, but not before मूर्धन्, प्रभृति and उदर्क। 
Thus अनुभ्राता सगW, अनुसखा सध्यः , योनः सनूत्यः (See IV. 4. 14). समानो गर्भः - सगर्भः, तत्र भवः - सगर्व्यः formed by थन् affix IV. 4. 114. But समानमा , समान प्रभतयः, समानोदर्काः ॥ This substitution takes place in sccular literature also. as सर्पक्षः, साधर्म्यम्, सजातीयः &c. 
ज्योतिर्जनपदरात्रिनाभिनामगोत्ररूपस्थानवर्णवयोवचनबन्धुषु ॥ ५॥ पदानि । ज्योतिः,जनपद,रात्रि,नाभि,नाम,गोत्ररूप, स्थान,वर्ण,वयोवचन,बन्धुषु,(समानस्यसः) वृत्तिः । ज्योतिस जनपद राषि नाभि नामन् गोत्र रूप स्थान वर्ण वयस् वचन बन्धु इत्येतेषत्तरपदेषु समा. नस्य स इत्ययमादेशो भवति ॥ 
1236 
. 
SUBSTITUTE. 
[BK. VI. CI. III. $ 89 
85. This substitution of # for fart takes place before ज्योतिस्, जनपद, रात्रि, नाभि, नामन्, गोत्र, रूप, स्थान वर्ण, घयस, वचन and बन्धु in the common language also. 
Thus सन्यातिः, सजनपदः, सराषिः, सनाभिः, सनामा, सगोत्रः, सरूपः, सस्थानः, सवर्णा, सपयाः, सवचना, सबन्धुः ॥ 
चरणे ब्रह्मचारिणि ॥ ८६॥ पदानि॥चरणे,ब्रह्मचारिणि,(समानस्यसः)(उत्तरपदे) वृत्तिः । परणे गम्यमाने ब्रह्मचारिण्युत्तरपदं समानस्य स इत्ययमादेशो भवति ॥ 
86. स is substituted for समान before ब्रह्मचारिन् when it denotes persons engaged in fulfilling a common vow of studying the Vedas. 
Thus समानो ब्रह्मचारी - सब्रह्मचारी ॥ ब्रह्म means the Vedas. The vow of studying the Veda, is also called a He who is engaged in the perform ance of that vow is called ब्रह्मचारिन् । समान refers to the vow, the vow of studying being common to both : i. e. समाने ब्रह्मणि व्रतधारी-सब्रह्मचारी | Accord ing to Bhattoji Dikshit to in the sâtra means a great or a department of Vedic study. He who has a common (samana) branch (charana) is a sa brahmchari. 
तीर्थे ये॥८७॥ पदानि ॥ तीर्थे, ये, (समानस्यसः)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ तीर्थशब्दउत्तरपदे यत्प्रत्ययपरे परतः समानस्य स इत्ययमादेशो भवति । 
87. स is substituted for समान, before तीर्थ when the affix यत् is added to it. 
Thus सतीर्थ्य = समाने तीर्थे वासी (IV. 4. 107). ' a fellow-student ? विभाषोदरे ॥ ८८॥ पदानि ॥ विभाषा, उदरे, ( समानस्यसः) (उत्तरपदे)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ उदरशब्दउत्तरपरे यत्प्रत्ययान्ते समानस्य विभाषा स इत्ययमादेशी भवति ॥ 
88. The substitution of स for समान is optional before 397 when the affix an is added to it. 
Thus सोपर्यः or समानोदर्यः (IV. 4. 108). हगहशचतुषु ॥ ८९॥ पदानि ॥ हक्, श, धतुषु, (समानस्यसः)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ रक् दृश पतु इत्येतेषु परतः समानस्य सत्ययमादेशो भवति । पातिकम् ॥ दो पति वक्तव्यम् ॥ वाहः क्समत्ययोपि तत्रैव वनण्यः ॥ 
89. स is substituted for समान, before हक, अश and the affix वत् ॥ 
Thus FEST, HET ! The affixes and frien are added to y under III. 2. 60. Vart:-which give as the forms हक् and gश | Vart :-So also before हल : as सहमः ॥ हक्ष is formed by क्स affix under III. 2. 60. Vartika. The affix rg is taken for the sake of the subsequent s@tra. 
इदंकिमोरीश्की ॥ १०॥ पदानि ॥ इदम, किमोः, ईश, की, (हगहशवतुषु)॥ वृतिः ॥ किम् इत्येतयोरी की इत्येतो यथासण्यमादेशो भवतो हाहावतुषु । वार्तिकम् ॥ रक्षे चेति वनाव्यम् ।। BK VI. C1. III. $.92) 
SOME SUBSTITUTES. 
1237 
90. is substituted for in and for frin before the words हन, रश and the affix वत् ॥ 
Thus , ka and rare, aca, aley and fearg it fat and an are changed to track and a + ram by V. 2. 40 and the long f is elided by VI. 4. 148 : and we get इयत् and कियत् ।। 
Vart:-So also before TM, as th: and atom: N HỊ Hall: H I BI I am, Hai,( tiện) वृत्तिः ।। सर्वनाम माकारादेशो भवति रग्डरावतुषु ।। वार्तिकम् ॥ दो वेति वक्तव्यम् ॥ 
91. ar is substituted for the final of the Pronouns (I. 1. 27) before these words T, ty and the affix era il 
Thus areas, arge:. art, T, 2757, nr 
Vårt :-So also before an, as I and IEĦ: II विश्वग्देवयोश्च टेरग्याञ्चतौ (ता) वप्रत्यये ॥ ९२॥ पदानि ॥ विष्वक, देवयोः, 3,:, , wait, want II ai: 117495 an art: r*delenit HFT ora 1444 वार्तिकम् । उनसि त्रियां बहुलमिति वक्तव्यम् ।। 
92. In the room of the last vowel with the con sonant that follows it, of a Pronoun and of the words facere and are, is substituted mir, when with the affixe follows. 
Thus f yffung, This form is thus evolved. **+ *re Y+O-9 +7(VII. 1.70) Then there is elision of the final conjunct consonaut sy, then the final dental is changed to guttural because of the f4. asfix (VIII. 2. 62 ), e. i. 7 is changed to and we have a which with for gives the above form. देवघड, तद्यद, यद्यड्माद्र and सध्रि (VI. 3.95) have acute on the final irregularly (nipatan) in order to prevent the krit-accent, and when y is changed into y the following vowel becomes svarita (VIII. 2.4). Why do we say of विष्वग and देव? Observe अश्वाची-भश्वमञ्चति, the feminine डीए being added by IV. 1. 6 Vart. The # of mo is elided by VI. 4. 138. and the final of 
is lengthened by VI. 3. 138. Why'when 95 follows? Observe for II Why do we say 'when the affix follows? Observe fac t II The o is totally clided by VI. 1, 67. Another reading of the satra is ayatā ( 
waar gere). It would give the same result, the meaning then being when no affix follows. The word avrà or ser indicates by implication that in other places where siinply a verb is inentioned, it mcans a word-form beginning with that verb which ends with some affix. For had cyà not been used, then the rule would have applied not only when añch followed, but when anchana ending in fr also followed. The maxim धातुमहणे सरादि विधिरिष्यते is illustrated in मयस्कृतं and 
1238 
SOME SUBSTITUTIONS. 
[BK. VI. C11. 111. $ 96 
अयस्कार; for VIII. 3. 46 teaches that visarga is changed into म् when f follows. There the denotes not only the root but a word derived from therefore which begins with e, such as am: and gat: Therefore the rule applies to forms like sure which is followed merely by the verb ; as well as to forms like 
भयस्कृतः ॥ 
Vårt:- In the Vedas, diversely before the feminine nouns: thus in "विश्वाची व घृताची च" there is no substitution in विश्वाची, but in कद्रीची there is this substitution, कद्रीची is derived from किम् + भउ - काद्रि+अच् ॥ Then is added डीए and then like भश्वाची॥ 
समः समि॥१३॥ पदानि ॥ समः, समि, ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ समित्येतस्य समित्ययमादेशो भवति अञ्चतो व (भ) प्रत्ययान्त उसरपदे ।। 
93. समि is substituted for सम्, before this भक्ष when no affix (or a affix) follows. 
___ Thus सभ्यक, सम्यञ्चो, सम्यञ्चः ॥ तिरसस्तियलोपे ॥ ९४॥ पदानि ॥ तिरसः, तिरि, अलोपे,॥ वृत्तिः ॥ तिरम् इत्येतस्य तिरित्ययमादेशो भवत्यञ्चतो व (भ) प्रत्ययान्तउत्तरपदे ऽलोपे । यदा ऽस्य लोपो न भवति ॥ 
94. तिरि is substituted for तिरस् before this अञ्च् when no affix (or u affix) follows, provided that the w of अच् is not elided. . Thus सिर्यद, तिर्यची, तिर्यञ्चः ॥ Why do we say when there is no eli sion'? Observe farver, Fall Here w is elided by VI. 4. 138. The word in in the satra is ambiguous. It may mean elither (1) " where w is elided" or (2) “Where there is no elision". The latter meaning should be taken however. 
सहस्य सध्रिः ९५॥ पदानि ॥ सहस्य,सध्रिः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ सत्यस्य सधिरित्ययमादेशो भवत्यञ्चतो व (भ) प्रत्ययान्ताउन्नरपरे। 
95. सध्रि is the substitute of सह, before अ fol lowed by no affix (or e affix). 
Thus सध्यूह, सध्याची, सध्यूचः ; and सधीचः, सधीचा॥ See VI. 3. 138 for long vowel. ___ सध मादस्थयोश्छन्दसि ॥ ९६ ॥ पदानि ॥ सध, माद, स्थयोः, छन्दसि, ॥ 
• वृत्तिः ॥ छन्दसि विषये माद स्थ इत्येतयोरुत्तरपश्योः सहस्य सध इत्ययमादेशो भवति ।।। 
96. सध is substituted for सह in the Veda, when माद and स्थ follow. 
Thus सधमाशेगुन्य एकास्ताः, सधस्थाः॥ Another example is भाखा वृहन्तो हरवी युजाना, मागिन सधमादो वहन्तु (Rig III. 3.7) सहमायन्ति देवा भस्मिन् । 
चन्तरुपसर्गेभ्यो ऽपईतू ॥९७॥ पदानि ॥द्वि, अन्तर, उपसर्गभ्य वृत्तिः॥विभन्तरित्येता यामुपसर्गाधोत्तरस्यामित्येतस्थकारादेशो भवति ॥ वार्तिकम ।। समापन निषेधी बतायः ॥ वा०॥ ममनवर्णादिति वक्तव्यम.॥ 
BK. VI. Cl. III. S. 99] 
SOMP. SUBSTITUTES. 
1239 
97. After द्वि, अन्तर् and Prepositions, long t is the substitute of अप ॥ 
By I. 1. 54, 1 replaces the first-letter of mq viz # only. Thus 09:, मन्तरीपः, नीपम्, वीपम्, समीपम् ॥ The samasanta v is added by V. 4.74. 
__Vart :-Prohibition should be stated with regard to समाप ॥ समापं नाम देवयजनम् ॥ Others say after a Preposition in w, the long substitution docs not take place. Thus प्रापम्, परापम् ॥ The word upasarga strictly speaking denotes adverbs, and cannot be applied to nouns like mg; here however, this word is used in a loose sense in the satra. It means a &c. 
ऊदनोईशे ॥ ९८॥ पदानि ॥ उत्, अनोः, देशे, ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ मनोरुत्तरस्याप नकारादेशो भवति देशाभिधाने ॥ 
98. After अनु, ऊ is substituted for the अ of ) मए, when the sense is that of a locality. 
Thus भन्पो देशः, but भन्वीपम् when locality is not meant. The long s is taught for the sake of showing how the word is to be analysed; as T54: 379: it The form भनूप: could have been evolved with a short also, as भनु+उपः - अनूपः॥ But this analysis is not intended. 
अषष्ठयतृतीयास्थस्यान्यस्थ दुगाशीराशास्थास्थितात्सुकाोतकारकरागच्छषु ॥१९॥ पदानि ॥ अषष्ठी, अतृतीयास्थस्य, अन्यस्य, दुक, आशीः, आशा, आस्था, आस्थित, उत्सुक, ऊति, कारक, राग, च्छेषु ॥ वृतिः ॥ अषष्ठीस्थस्य अतृतीयास्थस्य चान्यशनस्य दुगागमो भवति भाशि स् भाषा भास्था मास्थित उत्सुक अति कारक राग छ इत्येतेषु परतः ॥ 
Kirikt - दुगागमा विशेषेण वक्तव्यः कारकच्छयोः । 
षष्ठीतृतीययोर्नेष्ट भाशीराविषु सासु ॥ 
99. अन्य, when not used in the Genitive or the Instrumental, gets the augment दुक (द), before आशिस, आशा, भास्था, आस्थित, उत्सुक, ऊति, कारक and राग, as well as before the affix छ (ईय). 
____ Thus भन्या माशीभन्याशीः भन्या भाषा-अन्यवाशा, भन्या मास्था-मन्यवास्था, भग्य भास्थितः- अन्यदास्थितः, भन्य उत्सुका- भन्यदुरसुका, मन्या अतिः भन्यतिः, भन्यः कारका भन्यत्कारका, अन्यो रागः अन्यद्रागः ॥ So also with छ, as अन्यस्मिन् भवः भन्यवीयः ॥ . It takes y because it belongs to their class ( IV. 2. 138.) 
The word 9772 belongs to the class (IV. 2. 138). Why do we say when not in Genitive or the Instrumental ?. Observe मन्यस्य भाशी-मन्यापीः, भन्येन भास्थित अन्यास्थितः &c. With regard to the word कारक and the affix छ, the FF augment is universal, though we may be even in the Genitive case &c: as अन्यस्य कारकमम्यत् कारकम्, भन्यस्येवम् = अन्यीयम् ॥ The unusual occur rence of two negatives in the shtra (अषष्ठी and भतृतीया), implies this. 
cur. 
1240 
SOME SUBSTITUTE. 
[ BK. VI. CH. III. 106 
अर्थे विभाषा ॥ १०॥ पदानि ॥ अथे, विभाषा, (उत्तरपदे)॥ दतिः ॥ भर्थशमउत्तरपदे भन्यस्य विभाषा दुगागमा भवति ।।। 
___100. दुक् is optionally the augment of भन्य when मर्थ follows. 
As भन्यदर्थः or भन्यायः ॥ कोः कत्तत्पुरुषे ऽचि ॥ १०१॥ पदानि || कोः, कत्त तत्पुरुष, मचि, ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ कुइत्येतस्य करित्ययमादेशो भवति तत्पुरुष समासे उजाबाबुत्तरपदे ।। वार्मिकम् ॥ कमाये पापुपसंख्यानम् ॥ 
101. ich is substituted for in a Tatpurusha, when a word beginning with a vowel follows as the second member. 
As करजा, करवः, कदुष्टः, कामम् ॥ Why do we say in a Tatpurusha? Observe कूष्ट्रो राजा ॥ Why do we say “when the second member begins with a vowel"? Observe कुब्राह्मणः, कुपुरुषः ॥ 
Vart:-कत् is substituted before पय, as कषयः- कुरिसतानमः ॥ — रथषदयोश्च ॥ १०२॥ पदानि ॥ रथ, वदयोः, च, ॥ वृतिः ॥रय पद इत्येतयोमोसरपदयोः कोः कदित्ययमादेशो भवति । 
102. कद् is substituted for कु before रय and षद also. Thus कद्रया, काकः ॥ हणे च जाती ॥ १०३ ॥ पदानि ॥ तृणे, च, जाती, ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ तृणशाम्वउत्तरपदे माताभिधेयायां को कदादेशो भवति ।। 
103. कतू is substituted for कु, when तृण follows de noting a species. 
As कणा नाम जातिः ॥ But कुत्सितानि तणानि- कुतृणानि ।। का पथ्यक्षयोः ॥ १०४॥ पदानि ॥ का, पथि, अक्षयोः, ॥ त्तिः ॥ पथिन् भल इत्येतयोरुत्तरपश्योः कोः का इत्ययमादेशो भवति । 
__104. का is the substitute of कु, before पथिन् andar ॥ Thus कापथ: and काक्षः ॥ ईषदर्थे ॥ १०५॥ पदानि ॥ ईषत्-अर्थे । इतिः॥पदय वर्तमानस्य कोः का इत्ययमादेशो भवति । 
105. Er is the substitution for, when the meaning is a small'. 
As कामधुरम् , कालवणम , काग्लम ॥ Though the second member may begin with a vowel, yet this substitution takes place, in spite of VI. 3. ION : as कोष्णम् ॥ 
विभाषा पुरुषे ॥ १०६॥ पदानि ॥ विभाषा, पुरुष, ॥ वृत्तिः । पुरुषशपउत्तरपार विभाषा कोः का इत्ययमादेशो भवति ॥ 
___ 106. का is optionally substituted for कु, when the word gray follows. 
BK. VI Cl. I.. 109] 
IRREGULAR COMHOUNDS. 
4A 
. 
. 
का 1₹. 
SED 
A 
NARRATION 
ayu 
म 
Thus nापुरुषः or कुरुपः॥ This is an apraptii-vibhasha. In the sense of a little पडू', the substitution is compulsory ; as पर पुषः पयः ॥ 
चोरणे ॥ १७॥ पदानि ।। पम्, च, उणे ॥ वतिः 
तप का कवयिाथमा भवाति काम विभाषा । 
107. T and are optionally the substitutes of $ when your follows: 
A ण , कोरण or कष्णम् ॥ 
पथि चच्छन्दसि ॥ १०८॥ पदानि । पथि, च, छन्दसि, यन्तिः ॥ पधिपाउत्तरपद छन्दसि विषये को कर का इत्यताबादेश भतो विभाषा ॥ 
108. This substitution of का, and na for p takes place in the Veda, before qui 
Thus कवषयः, कापधः and कुपथः ।। अपोदरादीनि यथोपदिष्टम् ॥ १०९ ॥ पदानि ॥ पृषोदादीनि, यथोपदिधम् ॥ अतिः धोदशीनि मरूपाणि येषु लोपागमवणविकारा शासन विहिता दृश्यन्ते च तानियोष विष्टानि सानि भवन्ति ॥ 
बालिका दिवानभ्य इनरस्य तीरस्य तार भावो था भवति ।। वा॥ वाचो पारे जा च लभावानरपस्येभि प्रत्यये।। था। अपडवं हनुराधारान्तरपाटुश्यं च ।। স্বা। দুহাম্বলা জাম পাই । धावरोहती छन्दस्युत्व बक्तव्यम् ॥ वा ॥ पीवावश्सनाशीनां च सोपो बतष्यः ॥ 
Karittt वांगमो वर्णविषयको चापरो वर्णधिकारनाशौ। 
धातीस्तातिशयन योगस्तदुच्यते पज्यविध निक्षतम् ।। 
109. The elision, angment and mutation of leto ters to be seen in TTTT &c, though not found taught in treatises of Grammar, are valirl, to that extent and in the mode, as taught by the usage of the sages.. 
The word यथोपनिष्टभू-शिष्टचारिवानि ॥ Thus पृषवरी यस्य षोडरमा, पुषण WÁ TEC H Hcre there is clision of all! So also artes e , here बाहि is replaced byw, and r replaces of वाहक जीवनस्थ मूत: जीमूत:, here बन has been elided: नानां शायनं श्मशानम् ; here a replaces शय; and शान for प्राथन ॥ स्थम-रयलम: here ar replaces अध, and स्खल replaces स्थम ।। पिशिता-पिशाख । 
Rui T a rn Here are takes the affix in the locative, and xx is replaced by यां हानि - मयरः ॥ Here महो is replaced by भय, and the inal of riselided before the asfix 7211 And so on with 284, teu &c. 
Vint:- becomes optionally are after a word denoting direction, as दक्षिणतीरम् or शंक्षण-नारम् . उत्तरतारम् , or उत्तरतारम् ॥ 
Vans-Before the Patronymic xx affix, are becomes arsim as, triary. स्थापश्यहाइलः ॥ 
Vart:--The final of qy is changed to before 7. Ty, and yt (meaning 
CLIE 
1242 
SOME SUBSTITUTES. 
[ BK.VI. Cl. III. 112. 
location'): and the first letter of the second member is changed to r or | Thus षट् दन्ता भस्य पाउन् ; so षोडश; पधा or घोडा कुरु ॥ The addition of ris optional here. The putting of you in the plural number indicates that has here the meaning of "in many parts or ways" (नानाधिकरण). In fact it has the force of an affix here. The rule therefore does not apply to these:--पद् धाति or धयति-पद्धा ॥ . 
Vart. The final ofer is changed to a, before दाश, नाश, म and ध्ये and the first letters of these are changed to their corresponding cerebrals. Thus दु:खन दाभ्यते, माश्यते, रयत यः-दूहाशा, दूणाशा, दूडमः, In the last (पम्भ) there is elision of the nasal also. E turar a : 1 Here is added the affix a to the root 
भ्या (ध्ये) preceded by the upapada दुः, by III. I. I36. 
Vårt is substituted for the final of Fr when the verb #follows in the Vedas: as एहिवं मायस्थो रोहावं (रोहाव is Imperative Ist. Pers. Dual). 
__Vast:--The final of पविस् , पयस् &c. is elided in the Vedas. as पीवीप बस मानां, पयोपवसनानाम् ।। ___ संख्याविसायपूर्वस्याह्नस्याहनन्यतरस्यां डो॥ ११०॥ पदानि ॥ संख्या, वि, 
साय, पूर्वस्य, अह्नस्य, अहन् , अन्यतरस्याम, डो॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ संख्या विसाय इत्येवपूर्वस्याद्वानस्य स्थाने महनित्ययमावेशो भवत्यन्यतरस्यां हो परतः ॥ 
110. अहन may optionally be substituted for अह, in the Locative singular, when a Numeral, or fax or Fre pre cedes it. 
Thus ru m ah, sug: The Locative singular of these are sig or हाहनि, यति or ज्यहनि ॥ Soalso घरे, ज्यते ॥ With विध्याति, व्यानि or ज्यो; साथ-सायाधि, सायाहनि, साया ॥ These are एकाशिसमासः, and this very satra is an indicator that may be compounded with other words than a Numeral, or fa or are 11 Thus we have fourg - HEAR: (11. 2. 1). But it, and start only. 
दलोपे पूर्वस्य दीपो ऽणः ॥ १११ ॥ पदानि ॥ दलोपे, पूर्वस्य, दीर्घः, भणः ॥ वृत्तिः ।। स्काररेफयोलोपो यस्मिन् स इलोपः, तप पूर्वस्थाणो दीर्णं भवति ॥ 
__111. When द् or र is elided, for the preceding 29, F and sa corresponding Long vowel is substituted. 
Thus लीडम् , मीठम् , उपगढम् ॥ रलोपे-नि-रक्कमनीरता, मग्निर् स्थ: भग्नीरया, इन्द्ररथः, पुना रक्कम वासः, माता राजक्रयः ॥ For the elision of r see VIII. 3. 13, and for the elision of see VIII. 3. 14. But भावृटम् , they is not lengthened because it is not included in the pratyahara भण् which is formed with the ofभाउ | ___ सहिवहोरोदवर्णस्य ॥ ११२॥ पदानि ॥ सहि, वहोः, ओत, अवर्णस्य, ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ सहि वहि त्यतयोरवर्णस्योकार भादेशो भवति लोप ॥ 
112. When & or T arc elided, there is the substi tution of my for the ap or any of the verbs Fire and a ll 
BK. VI. C1. III $115.) 
Seak SUUSTITUTES, 
1243 
pore 
Like 
Thus सोहा, सोम, सौम्यम्, पीडा, बोम् and वाष्यम् ॥ Why do we say of or ? Observe 4*, **87# Why do we say of which includes long *T also ? The rule will apply even when the short 2 of me and is changed to me by Vriddhi: as rarJE Had mercly #been read into the sätra, instead of so then coming after the 1 of it, it would have denot ed only short (सावपि पर पर: I. 1.75). __ साथै साट्दा साढेति निगमे ॥ ११३॥ पदानि ॥ साथै, साहा, साढा, इति, निगमे।। 
युतिः। सासाला साडा इति निगमे निपात्यन्ते ।। 
____113. साथै, साहा and साहा ure irregularly formed iu the Vedas. 
Thus साया समसान, साहा आन् ॥ The latter is formed by mer affix, the *substitution not taking place. In the other alternative ai is changed to 
IN FIU is formed by her affix. In the secular literature fire and re the proper forens. 
संहितायाम् ॥ ११४॥ पदानि ॥ संहितायाम, ॥ अनिः संहितायामित्यवमाधिकारः । यदित अर्बभनुक्रमिथ्यामा संक्षिसायामित्येवं तहेदितव्यम् ॥ 
114. In the following sutras upto the end of the pada, are to be supplied the following words :-" In an un interrupted flow of speech”. 
Thus sätra VI. 3. 135 declares "at the end of a two-syllabic in flected verb becomes long in the Hyinius". Thus बिमाहिल्या सत्पति का नाम The word Fiftare should be read into that sätra to complete the sense. So that when the above words stand separately, we haveविधहि, श्या, सत्यति, हारनTAIL 
कर्णे लक्षणस्याविष्टाष्टपञ्चमणिमिच्छिन्नच्छिन्द्र सुवस्वस्तिकस्य ॥११५॥ पदानि॥ कर्णे,लक्षणस्य,अविष्ट, अष्ट, पञ्च, मणि, मिन्न,छिन्न, छिद्र, नव, स्वस्तिकस्य (दीर्ध:)। 
निः॥ कर्णश उत्सरपदे लक्षणवाधिमी वीर्षो भवति विष्ट मष्टम् पञ्चम् मणि भिनछिनछिनमथ स्वस्ति क इत्येतान्यजाविया ॥ 
115. Before कर्ण, there is the substitution of a long vowel for the final of the preceding word, when it de notes a proprietorship inark or. the cars of cattle, but not when the words are विष्ट, अष्टन, पञ्चन्, मणि, भिन्न, छिन, छिद्र, सुव and 
स्वस्तिक॥ 
Thus nाधाकर्णः, विशुणाकर्णः, विगुणाकणा, गुलाकर्णः, भाइ लाकर्णः ॥ The word a herc incans any peculiar inark showing the proprietorship, put or made on thc cars of animals. Why do we say when it denotes such a mark ? 
wand 
1244 
SANIIITA-CHANGES 
( BK. VI. CH. III 
19 
Observe ननकण ॥ Why do we say with the exception of विष्ट &c'? Observe विटकर्णः ॥ भष्टकर्णः, पम्चकर्णः, भिन्नकर्णः,जिमकर्णः, छिद्र कर्णः, मवकर्णः, स्वस्तिककर्णः and मणिकर्णः।। 
नहिकृतिकृषिव्यधिरुचिसहितनिषु कौ ॥११६॥ पदानि ॥ नहि, वृति, वृषि, व्यधि, रधि, सहि, तमिपु, को, ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ नहि वृति पूषि पधि रधि सहि तमि इसेतेपु सिमस्यथापूसरपपेय पूर्वपरस्य दीपों भवति सं. पितायां विषये ॥ 
116. A long vowel is substituted for the final vowel of the preceding word, before the verbs as, T1, TT, TY, हम, सह and तन्, when these roots take the affix कि 
Thus पाना (उपान Nom. S.), so also, परीणत, नीयत, पावत, (with vrt) प्रादह, उपाद, (with vrsh) ममावित्, हरयावित्, वावित् (with vyadh) नीर, भभीरक, (ivith ruch) तापड, (with sah) तरीतर (vith tan). The nasal is elided after गम् before कि (VI. 4.40), by an extension of that rule, it is clided after an also. Why do we say when he follows? Observe परिणामम् ।। 
वनगियोंः संज्ञायां कोटरकिशुलकादीनाम् ॥ ११॥ पदानि ॥ धन, गिर्योः, मं शायाम, कोटर, किंशुलकादीनाम, ॥ 
पतिः ॥ बन गिरि इत्येतयोगनरपश्योर्ययासंग कोटारीना किएनकारीनां च पीपों भवास संज्ञायां विपये॥ 
117. For the final vowel of niet &c. a long vowel is substituted before वन, and so also of किंशुक &c. before गिरि, 
when the compound is a Name. 
Thus कोटरारणम् , मित्रकावणम् , सिकारण, सारिकावणम ॥ So also rकशलकागिरिः, भम्मनागिरिः, &c. 
The न is changed to ण in वन by VIII. 4.4. But भसिपकपनम् and ra furt as these words do not belong to the above classes. 
1 कोटर, 2 मिश्रक, 3 सिधक, 4 पुरग (पुरक), 5 शारिक (सारिक)॥ 
1किरालक (किंशलक), 2 पाप (सायक), 3 नर', भम्बन, 5 मम्मन, 6 मोहित, काकुट ।। .. घले ॥ ११८॥ पदानि ॥धले, (पूर्वस्य दीर्थः)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ वले परतः पूर्वस्य दीपों भवति । वार्तिकम् ॥ मनुत्साहभातपितणमिति ।। 
___118. The final of the preceding word is leng thened before the affix वल॥ 
Thus भामतीवला, कपीवला, दन्ताबला || These are formed by the affix any (V. 2. 112). 
___Vart:-Not so, of उत्साह, भातृ and पित : as रत्साहवल, पावलः and पितृपालः ।। ___ मतो बहुचो ऽनजिरादीमाम् ॥ ११९ ॥ पदानि ॥ मती, बहवः, भमजिरादीनाम, (संमायाम)॥ 
तिः ॥ मतो परतोपापोऽनिराश्विभितस्वीपो भवति संज्ञायां विषये।। 
BK. VI. CH. III S 122 ) 
SAMUITA-LENGTIIENING. 
1245 
119. The final vowel of a word consisting of more than two syllables is lengthened before the affix #a, when it is a name, but not of the words IT &c. 
Thus उदुम्बरावती, मशकावती, धीरणावती, पुष्करावती, भमरावती॥ These are form. ed by the affix मतुः (IV. 2. 85) The मत् is changed to st, by VIII. 2. II. Why do we say 'of a word consisting of more than two syllables ? Observe that it why with the exception of अजिर &c'. Observe भजिरवती, खदिरवती, पुलिनवती,हंसकार ण्डवती, चकाकरती।। When the word is not a name, there is no lengthening, as वलयवती ॥ 
1मजिर, 2 खदिर, 3 पुलिन. 4स, कारण्डव (हंसकारण्डव) 6 चक्रवाक. शरादीनां च ॥ १२०॥ पदानि ॥ शरादीनाम, च, (दीर्घः)॥ पत्तिः ॥ शरादीनां च मतो दीपों भवति संज्ञायां विषये ॥ 
120. The final vowel of शर &c. is lengthened be fore as when it is a Name. 
As घरावती, वंशावती ॥ The म of मत् is changed to a because it is a Name (VIII. 2. 11). But not so after af &c as these belong to our class (VIII. 2.9), 
1 शर, 24, 3 धूम, 4 महि, कपि 6 मणि, 7 मुनि, 8 शुचि, हनु. इको वहे ऽपीलोः ॥ १२१ ॥ पदानि ॥ इकः, घहे, अपीलोः॥ सिः॥ गन्तस्य पूर्वपदस्थ पीलुवर्जितस्य वहउत्तरपदे दीपों भवति । पार्निकम् ॥ अपील्यादीनामिति वक्तव्यम् ॥ 
121. The final and the 3 of a word, with the ex ception of पीलु, are lengthened before यह ॥ 
Thus पपीबहन, कपीवहम् , मुनीवहम् ॥ Why do we say 'ending inr vowels? Observe पिण्डवहम् ॥ Why not of पीलु? Observe पीलुबहम् ॥ 
Vårt:---It should be stated "with the exception of the and the rest." As पारुषहम् ॥ ___उपसर्गस्य घअयमनुष्ये बहुलम् ॥ १२२॥ पदानि ॥ उपसर्गस्य, घनि, अमनु 
ज्ये, बहुलम्,॥ वृत्तिः ॥ उपसर्गस्थ घमन्तउत्तरपरे ऽमनुष्यभिधेये बहुल दीपों भवति । 
122. The final vowel of a Preposition is diversely lengthened, before a word formed by the krit-affix a, but not when the compound denotes a human being. . 
Thus नक्शा , बीमार्गः, अपामार्गः ॥ It does not take place, as प्रसेवा, प्रसारः॥ It is lengthened before साद and कार, when building is meant, as मासादः and प्राकारः, otherwise प्रसा: and प्रकारः। Optionally in देश &c. as प्रतिवेशः or प्रतीवेशः, प्रनिराधः or प्रतीरोधः | When huinan beings are meant, there is no lengthening, as निपाशे मनुष्यः ॥ 
1246 
SAMHITA-LENGTHENING. 
(Bk. VI. CH. III. $ 127 
HAAN 
कः काशे ॥ १२३ ॥ पदानि ॥ इकः, काशे, (दीर्घः)॥ वृत्तिः॥ गन्तस्योपसर्गस्य कायदत्तरपदे दीर्घो भवति । 
____123. A Preposition ending in s, or उ lengthens its final before काश ॥ 
As नीकाराः, वीकाः , मनूकाशः॥ काश is formed by अच् (IH. I. 134). Why do we say 'ending in or z'? Observe gatu: where the Preposition does not 
end in इक्॥ 
दस्ति ॥ १२४॥ पदानि ॥ दः, ति, (दीर्घः कः उपसर्गस्य) वृत्तिः ॥ इत्येतस्य यस्तकारादिरादेशस्तसिन्परत इगन्तस्योपसर्गस्य शिर्षो भवति । 
124. A Preposition ending in for 3 lengthens its final vowel, before the verb at, when the latter is changed to त ॥ 
Thus नीत्तम्, पीतम्, परीसम् ॥ See VII. 447 for the change of a to an But प्रत्तम्, भवत्तम्, where the prepositions do not end intor | Why do we say ' is changed to al'? Observe faatuiu fatatira it Why do we say for 'a substitute of T, beginning with a a'? Observe 9th, here is the substitute of (VII. 4.46). 
अष्टनः संज्ञायाम् ॥ १२५॥ पदानि ॥ अष्टनः, संज्ञायाम, (दीर्घः)॥ बुनिः ॥ अष्टनित्येतस्योत्तरपदे संज्ञायां दीर्थो भवति ।। 
125. A long vowel is substituted for the final of AUT before the second member, when the compound is a name. 
Thus मटावकर, भष्टावन्धुरः भष्टापदम् ॥ But भटपुषः, भष्टभार्यः where the com pounds are not names. 
छन्दसि च ॥ १२६ ॥ पदानि ॥ छन्दसि, च, (दीर्घः)। वृत्तिः ॥छन्दसि विषये ऽटन उत्तरपदे वीर्यों भवति ।। पार्मिकम् ॥ गवि च युक्त भाषायामष्टनो दीपों भवतीति वनण्यम ॥ 
126. In the Veda also, the long vowel is substituted for the final of Et before a second member. 
Thus भाग्नेयमष्टाकपालं निर्वपत, भष्टाहिरण्या दक्षिणा, भष्टापदी देवता सुमती ॥ The form Hereft is the feminine in 349 (IV. 1. 8) of HETT (V. 4. 138 the # of are being elided in a Bahuvrihi), पद being substituted for पात् by VI. 4, 130. 
Varti-The final of meg is lengthened before it even in the vernacu lar, when yoking is meant. Thus मष्टागवं शकटम् ॥ 
चितेः कपि ॥ १२७॥ पदानि ॥ चितेः, कपि, (दीर्घः)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ चितिपदस्थ कपि परती दीपों भवति ॥ 
127. The final vowel of fara is lengthened before the affix कप॥ HK VI. CI. III 9 133) 
SAMIIITA-LENGTIIEMING. 
. 1247 
Thus एकषितीका, विषितीका, प्रिचितीकः ॥ विश्वस्य वसुराटोः ॥ १२८ ॥ पदानि ॥ विश्वस्य, वसु, राटोः, (दीर्घः)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ विश्वशमस्य वमुराडित्येतयोरुत्तरपदयोदीर्घ भादेशो भवति ।। 
128. The final vowel of fama is lengthened before वसु and राट् (the form assumed by राज). 
Thus विश्वावसुः, विश्वारा ॥ The rule applies to the form of राज in the Nominative singular, and not when it retains its own form: as विश्वराजी, विश्वराजः॥ 
नरे संक्षायाम् ॥ १२९ ॥ पदानि ॥ नरे, संज्ञायाम, (दीर्घः). वृत्तिः ॥ नरशउत्तरपरे संज्ञायां विषये विश्वस्य दीर्थों भवति ॥ 
129. The final of विश्व is lengthened before नर, when the compound is a Name. 
___Thus विश्वानरः, वैश्वानरिः (the son of Vishvanara). But विश्वन-विन्ध नरा बस्य when it is not a name. 
मित्र चर्षों ॥ १३०॥ पदानि ॥ मित्रे, च, ऋषी, (दीर्घः)। वृत्तिः ।। मिले चोत्तरपदे पावभिधेये विश्वस्य वीर्यों भवति ।। 
130. The final of fasar is lengthened before fat when it is the name of a Rishi. 
As farfar: 'the sage Visvamitra'. But forfer: 'a boy called Visvamitra?. मन्त्रे सोमाश्वेन्द्रियविश्वदेव्यस्य मतौ ॥ १३१॥ पदानि ॥ मन्त्रे, सोम, अश्व, इन्द्रिय, विश्वदेव्यस्य, मती, (दीर्घः)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ मन्त्रविषये सोम अश्व इन्द्रिय विश्वदेव्य इत्येतेषां मतुप्पत्यये परतो वीपों भवति। 
131. In a Mantra, the final vowels of सोम, अश्व, इन्द्रिय and विश्वदेव्य are lengthened when the affix मतुए follows. 
___Thus सोमावती, अश्वावती, इन्द्रियावती, विश्वव्यावती ।। 
ओषधेश्च विभक्तावप्रथमायाम् ॥ १३२॥ पदानि ॥ ओषधेः, च, विभक्ती, अप्र थमायाम, (मन्त्रे)॥ वृत्तिः॥ भोषधिशदस्य विभक्तावप्रथमायां परतो दीपों भवति । 
132. In a Mantra, the final of ओषधि is lengthen ed before the case-endings, but not in the Nominative. 
Thus शोषधीभिरपीपतन, नमः पृथिव्यै नमः भोषधीभ्यः॥ Why do we say 'be fore case-endings'? Observe भोपधिपते ॥ Why do we say 'but not in the 
Nominative'? Observe स्थिरेयमस्वौषधिः ॥ 
ऋचि तुनुघमक्षुतकुत्रोरुष्याणाम् ॥ १३३ ॥ पदानि ॥ ऋचि, तु, नु, घ, मक्ष, तङ्, कुत्र, उरुष्याणाम, (दीर्घः)॥ 
त्यषा दीघा भवति ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ऋषि विपये तु दुघ माता कुरुष्य इत्येषां हों भवात 
. .. .. . . . 
1248 
SAMHITA-LENGTILENING. 
[BK. VI, Cl. III. S I37 
133. In the Rig-Veda the finals of the particles नु, तु, घ, मक्षु, the tense-affix तड, कु, the ending m and the word उरुष्य are lengthened. 
Thus :-मानून न पहन (Rig IV. 32. 1)नु-न करणे॥ घ:-उत वाषा स्थालात् ॥ मन:-मन गोमन्तमीमहे ।। तड़: भरता जातवेदसम् ( Rig x. 176. 2). सह is 
# substitute of T, when it is treated as ist, therefore it does not apply here, शृणोत मावाणः (I. 2. 4). कु-कमनर; -अनागौः ; उरुप्या गोमेः॥ 
का सुनि॥१३४॥ पदानि ॥ इकः, सुधि, (दीर्घः)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ मुम् निपातो गृह्यते । गन्तस्य सुमि परतो मन्त्रविपये दीपों मवति ॥ 
134. In a Mantra, the finals of the preceding member ending in or Jare lengthened before the particle 
Thus भभीषुणा सखीनाम् (Rig. IV. 31.3)वर्ष क षुण रतये (Rig I. 36. 13). The u is changed to by VIII. 3. 107: and a changed too by VIII. 4. 27. 
चचोतस्तिकः ॥१३५॥ पदानि ॥ द्यचः, अतः, तिङः, (ऋचि दीर्घः)॥ वृत्तिः॥प्रस्तिान्तस्यात अग्विषये दापों भवति ॥ 
135. A tense affix ending in x is lengthened in the Rig-veda, when the Verb consists of two syllables. 
Thus विद्या हित्वा सत्पात पर गोनाम् &c. See Rig III. 42.6, विद्या हि तस्व पितरम् &c. But not here देवा भवत वाजिनः, as the verbconsists of more than two syllables: not also here मा देवान् पनि यक्षि as the verbs do not end in म॥ 
निपातस्य च ॥ १३६ ॥ पदानि ॥ निपातस्य, च, (ऋचि)(दीर्घः)॥ इतिः॥मिपातस्य पग्विषये दामादेशो भवति । 
136. In the Rig Veda the final of a particle is leng thened. 
Thus एवा से, मच्छाते, भच्छा रितारः ( R. I. 2. 2). अन्येषामपि दृश्यते ॥ १३७ ॥ पदानि ॥ अन्येषाम् अपि, दृश्यते, (दीर्घः)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ भन्येषामपि दीर्घो दृश्यते स शिष्टप्रयोगादनुगन्तव्यः॥ यस्य दीर्घस्वं न विहितं रक्ष्यते च प्रयोगे सह मेन कम्यन ॥ 
पार्मिकम ॥ शुनो पन्तदंष्ट्राकर्णकुन्दवराहपुच्छपदेषु ।। 
137. The elongation of the final is to be found in other words also. 
Here we must follow the usage of the Sishthas. Where the lengthening is not ordained by any of the rules of Grammar, but occurs in the writing of standard authors, there we should accept such lengthening as valid. Thus केशाकाण, कपाकषि, जलासाद् , मारकः, पूरुषः ॥ 
B. K. VI. Ch. III. $ 139] 
SAMJIITA-LENGTHENING. 
1249 
Vårt:-The final of me is lengthened before the following 
for , TT&, go, and i-as ca: RE:, Tif:, I, 29TKIE, TY , 779 N 
Pell that I am, (reperti:) वृत्तिः ॥ चौ परतः पूर्वपरस्य दीपों भवति ॥ चावित्यम्चति मनकाराकारो गृयते ॥ 
138. The final vowel of the preceding member is lengthened before , when it assumes the form a, having lost its nasal and the vowel. 
Thus : pa, a , a, y pa, VYT, I The nasal of 54 is elided by VI. 4. 24, and the m by VI. 4. 138. In + the ç is not changed to its semivowel, though that is an antaranga rule, because the present sätra ordains specifically long f, and so also of+ 9 and + See also VI. 3. 92. 
संप्रसारणस्य ॥ १३९ ॥ पदानि ॥ संप्रसारणस्य, (उत्तरपदे दीर्घः)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ संप्रसारणान्तस्य पूर्वपदस्योत्तरपरे पीपों भवति । 
139. The vowel substituted for a semivowel is lengthened, when it stands as the first member of a compound. 
As ardienti, promotera:, frafa: u See VI. 1. 13. uspe= 
a y ( being added as samasanta by V.4.136 and 137). The op tional shortening ordained by VI. 3.61. does not apply here, for that option is a definite and restricted option; moreover, on the maxim of qrey, 'a subsequent rule superseding a precedent,' rule VI. 3. 61 is superseded by VI. 3. 139; and the rulc VI. 3. 61 can not be revived by the maxim gai waf fart "occasional ly the formation of a particular form is accounted for by the fact that a preceding rule is allowed to apply again, after it had previously been superseded, by a subsequent rule." For here the following maxim will prevent the revival m. fyrra var TAT " when two rules, while they apply simultaneously, mutually prohibit each other, that rule of the two which is once superseded by the other, is superseded altogether, and cannot, therefore, apply again, after the latter rule has taken effect." 
praxi षष्ठाध्यायस्य चतर्थः पादः । 
ol BOOK SIXTH. CHAPTER FOURTH 
URTI 
HET IS11 nat | FF, II वृत्तिः ॥भधिकारोयमाऽऽसममाध्यायपरिसमाः। यदित उमनुक्रमियामोजस्वेत्येवं सोदितव्यम् ।। 
1. Whatever will be taught here after upto the end of the Seventh Adhyâya, is consequent upon the stem (anga). 
This is an adhikara satra. Thus in VI. 4. 2 is taught the lengthen ing of the vowel of a samprasarana : as gai, sfri, afa: il That means that the vowel preceded by a consonant belonging to the stem is lengthened. Therefore in fort+ +5=farsaw, the vocalised vowel is not lengthened, as Fart is upasarga and not stem. So geam ul Similarly VI. 4. 3, teaches the leng thening of the final before नाम, as भनीनाम, वायूनाम् ॥ But क्रिमिणाम् पश्य, पामनां 44, as fan and are not the end-portions of a stem. The stem is FTAT and 
HOT 'a female having para or TT', formed by * affix (V. 2. 100). The forms f or and ma are Accusative Singular. Similarly VII. 1. 9 teaches that after 29, fre is changed into or 11 AS , : 11 There also, the must be the final in an anga or stem : hence not here are TEIT, 
APORTTT, the fire does not follow an arga. Fue means boiled rice and FRIT means नाधिः ॥ 
The maxim of s uper rrutira does not apply here ; for had it been so, there would have been no necessity of making this satra. For ex ample, in the søtra A (VI. 4. 3), the affix r having a meaning would have been meant, and not any other tra il 
The word fra must be read in the following sätras, otherwise there would arise incongruity : first; så tras teaching the lengthening of the vowel when in or Samprasarana follows, thus : VI. 4. 16 ordains the lengthening of vowel before सन्, as विवीपति ; but not here दधि सनोति for r of दधि is not that of anga. . So also in Samprasarana, but not in 69 &c as shown above, 
BK. VI. CH. IV & 2] 
LENGTIIENING. 
1251 
andly-For the purposes of get in satra VI. 4. 68. The optional change of भा into trust refer to anga, as ग्लेयात् or ग्लाया, but not here निर्या art or farart, for here is not part of the anga, and so of cannot be consider ed a conjunct part of anga. 
3rdly-For the change of g to ma in VII. 1. 35. There also must be portion of the anga, and not the particle, therefore, it or sit art, but hot here जीव तु स्वम् ।। 
4thlym-For the substitution of rug aud 796 in VI. 4. 77. Therefore not here श्यर्थम् and वर्यम् ।। 
Sthly-For the sake of B augment in VII. 1. 54. But not here are भामिति भाह॥ 
6thlyFor the sake of shortening of vowels. Thus VII. 4. 13 ore dains the shortening of sou vowels before all It refers to the anga-vowel, as IT !! But not here, surt at faraft or IT: U rtrat 
And lastly for 7784 or # substitution. Thus VII. 4. 48 ordains the change of g into it in the case of s before ! It refers to aóga, as of li But not here Art:, for so here is not anga. 
To sum up in Sanskrit : 2 ayera u EUTETE EFTET TETT भास्वत्यधिकार प्रयोजनं ।। 
The word of is in the Genitive case. But the force of Genitive is here not only that taught in I. 1. 49 (Fara on:), but of mere relation-ship. Or are may be considered as a mere pratipadika, without any case-affix. In the subsequent aphorisms, it should be read with proper case-affixes as the exigencies of each sätra may require. Thus in opar fare I (VII. 1. 9) T* should be read in the ablative case: भकारान्ताद् अनाद् भिसः ऐम् ॥ The Genitive case has force of Fyriget in satras like asi, where the whole of mis replaced (VI.4 36). It has the force of prayegt in sätras like rar ire: (VI. 4. 89). It has the force of fafarafé an: in garrant (VII. 1. I). Or the Genitive case in s a may be changed into any other case, as already shown. 
T: HRN ETA :,( 375FT WATUHL CTH: ) वृत्तिः ॥ अगावयवादलो यदुत्तरं संप्रसारणं तदन्तस्याङ्गस्य दीपों भवति ॥ 
2. The long vowel is substituted for a vocalised half-vowel 24, ç and J at thic end of a stem, when it is preced cd by it consonant which is a portion of the stem. 
Both the words are and so from VI. 3. In, and I am from VI. 3. 139 are understood here. Thus ga: from 1, sat: from far, ita from a ll Why do we say 'preceded by a consonant'? Observe 79 and 49477 from all Why do we say that the preceding consonant should be a portion of the stem? 
1252 
LENGTHENING. 
[BK. VI. CI. IV.Ss. 
Observe oua, here r is not an integral part of the stem, but a portion of the upasarga face and therefore r is not lengthened. Why do we say 'at the end of a stem'? Observe ti, fare: from 54 and 546; here the vowel r is in the middle of the stem. Why do we say 7, 8 and a substitutes of semivowels'? Observe yata: 1 Here has been vocalised into ą, being substituted for before the affix ata (V. 2. 55). There will not be lengthened. Or the absence of lengthening in adta is an irregularity countenanced by Påņini himself in sotras like II. 1, 30 &c. The word of should be repeated in this sQtra, first to qualify the word हल, and then to qualify the letters भ, tandu 
नामि ॥३॥ पदानि ॥ नामि, ( अङ्गस्य दीर्घः)॥ पतिः॥ मामीत्यतत्पष्ठीबहुवचनम् भागत नुटकं गृह्यते ॥ तस्मिन्परतोङ्गस्य दीर्थो भवति । 
Karika-नामि दीर्थ भामि वेल्वास्कृते दीन नुत् भवेत् । 
पचनापत्र समास्ति, नोपधायाब चर्मणाम् ॥ 
3. The long vowel is substituted for the final of the stem before the Genitive Plural affix ft (having the aug 
ment नु). 
Thus मग्नीनाम्, पानाम्, कनृणामहरीणाम् ॥ Theanuvritti ofमण (VI. 3.III) ceases. The augmenter (VII. 1.54) inara is for the sakeof the subsequent sätra; like VI.4-7. and the lengthening takes place after the addition of to the genitive affix m1 For if the lengthening took place before the addition of r, there would be no occasion for which comes only after short stems. - नतिस्चतस् ॥ ४॥ पदानि ॥ न, तिस्, चतस, (नामि दीर्घः)। 
वृत्तिः ॥ तिस् चसह इत्येतयोर्नामि दीपों न भवति ॥ 
4. The finals of fare and an are not lengthened before नाम् ॥ 
As तिहणाम, चतसृणाम् ॥ The very fact of this prohibition proves by imi. plication that the final of these words is not changed to r before a genitive plural, VII. 2. 100 notwithstanding. In fact नुट् is added before scope is given to that rule, and thus the preceding rule VII, 1. 54 prevents the application of the subsequent rule VII. 2. 100. 
उन्दस्युभयथा ॥ ५॥ पदानि ॥ छन्दसि, उभय था ॥ वृत्तिः ॥छन्दसि विषये तिसृचतानामि परत उभयया हश्यते, दीर्घमादीच।। 
5. In the Veda, the finals of तिम् and चतस् are found in both ways, before the Genitive plural नाम् ॥ 
In some places they are seen as lengthened, in others not. As farger मध्यदिने or तिरुणाम मध्यदिने | So also चतसृणाम् and पताणाम् ॥ . नच ॥६॥ पदानि ॥ नु, च, ॥ 
वृमिः ॥ न इत्येतस्य नामि परयुभयथा भवति । 
BK VI. CII. IV. g. 10 ] 
SOME MLES OF Prol 
1253 
6. So also नु before the Genitive Plural नाम is leng thened optionally. 
As वं नृणां नृपते, and वं नृणां नृपते ॥ According to some this option is con fined to the Vedas, according to others, it extends to secular literature also. - नोपधायाः ॥ ७॥ पदानि ॥ न, उपधायाः, (नामि दीर्घः)। 
पत्तिः ॥ नान्तस्यास्योपधाया नामि परतो शर्यों भवति । 
7. In a stem ending in , the preceding vowel is lengthened before the affix ath 11 
Thus पम्चन् + नाम (VII. I. 55)- पश्चात् + माम् (VI. 4.7)- पञ्चानाम् (VIII. 2. 7); समानाम् , नवानाम् , दशानाम् ॥ Why do we say 'ending in i? Observe चतुर्णाम् ।। But not in any where the affix is not T but are without It 
सर्वनामस्थाने चासंबुखौ ॥८॥ पदानि ॥ सर्वनामस्थाने, च, असम्बुद्धौ (नोप धायाः दीर्घः)। 
वृत्तिः । सर्वनामस्थाने व परतो ऽसबुद्धी भोपधाया दीपों भवति ।। 
8. In a stem ending in 7, the preceding vowel is lengthened in strong cases, with the exception of the Vocative singular. 
___As रामा, रामानी, राजानः, राजानम् , राजाना | So also सामानि तिष्ठन्ति ॥ राजा was राजान्स , the was elided by VI. I. 68, and e by VIII. 2.7. Why do we say in strong cases'? Observe रामनि (Loc-Sing); सामनि (Loc. Sing). Why do we say 'but not in the Vocative Singular? Observe हे राजन् । हे तक्षम् ! 
धा षपूर्वस्य निगमे ॥ ९॥ पदानि ॥ वा, ष, पूर्वस्व, निगमे ॥ वृत्तिः ॥षपूर्वस्याचो नोपधाया निगमविषये सर्वनामस्थाने परतो ऽसंपनी वा दीर्थों भवति । 
9. The lengthening of the penultimate vowel of a stem ending in 7, before the affixes of the strong-case, is optional in the Veda, when precedes such a vowel. 
Thus स तक्षाणं or तक्षणं, तिष्ठन्तमब्रवीत् । मभुक्षाणं or कभुक्षणमिन्द्रम् ॥ 
Why do we say'in the Veda'? In the secular literature we have a, Turont parra: always. 
सान्तमहतः संयोगस्य ॥ १०॥ पदानि ॥ सान्त, महतः, संयोगस्य, (दीर्घः)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ सकारान्तस्य संयोगस्य यो नकारः महतच तस्योपधाया दीर्घो भवति सर्वनामस्थाने परतो संबो। 
10. In the strong cases with the exception of Voca tive singular, the penultimale vowel is lengthened, in the caso of a stem ending in t, with a Nasal consonant preceding it, al of महत् ॥ 
1254 
LENGTIIENING. 
[ BK. VI. Cl. IV. SIR 
That is, a stem ending in the conjunct consonant #, elongates its penul timate vowel before the affixes of the first five cases. Thus श्रयान्, यांसा, श्रेयांसः, श्रेयांति, पयांसि, यशांसि ।। महत्-महान्, महान्सी, महान्तः॥ But हे प्रयन्, हे महन् in Vocative Singular. The Nasal is inscrted by VII. 1. 70. 
__ अप्तृन्तृस्वसृनप्तनेष्टुत्वष्ट्रक्षनृहोतृपोतृप्रशास्त्रणाम् ॥११॥ पदानि । अप, तृन्, तृन्, स्वस, नप्त, नेष्ट, त्वष्ट, क्षत्तृ, होत, पोत, प्रशास्त्रणाम् ॥ 
अप् इत्यतस्य तृजन्तस्य स्वस नप्त नष्ट खष्ट्र शस्त होतृ पान प्रशास्त्र इत्येतेषां चाहानामुपधाया वीर्षो भवति सर्वनामस्थाने परतो ऽसबु॥ 
11. In the strong cases, with the exception of the Vocative Singular, the penultimate vowel is lengthened in अप, in stems formed by तृन् and तृन् affixes, and in स्वस, नप्त, नेष्ट, त्वष्ट, क्षत, होत, पोत and प्रशास्त। 
Thus 4: fosfat Some would have it even in compounds; as TETRA सडागानि | The Samasanta rule is not applied here, because it is anityn. If it be considered nitya, then also there is lengthening, but without the addition of the nasal.तन समासान्तो विधिरनित्य इति समासान्तोन क्रियते। नित्यमपि च नुममकृलादीघस्वमिष्यते। मन्। कर्तारौकटान् । वदितारौ जनापवादान्। कारः। तृच्ाकारी कटस्थाक राहारी भारस्य, हरिः । स्वस। स्वसा।स्वसारी।स्वसारानप्तानमानितारोनतारः। नेष्ट । नेटारी । नेष्टारः । वष्ट । खष्टारी। स्वष्टारः । भत्त । क्षत्तारी । क्षत्तारः । हो । होता। होतारः । पोह। पोतारी। पोतारः। प्रशास्तु । प्रशास्तारो। प्रशास्तारः । नत्रादीनां प्रहणमध्युत्पत्तिपने विभ्यर्थम् । व्युत्पत्तिपक्षे नियमार्थम् । एवंभूतानामन्येषां संज्ञा वान्नानां दीयों मा भूदिति । पितरौ । पितरः । मातरौ । मातरः । भसंबुद्धाविति किम् । हेकतः । हेस्वसः॥ 
If the words pa &c. be considered as ara, not derived from any root, then their enumeration is here for the sake of Vidhi (injunction); if they be considered as derivative words formed by Uñadi affixes, then their enumera tion is for the sake of niyama (restriction), so that other words formed simi larly are not to be governed by this rule. As पितरो, पितरः, मातरी, मातरः॥ Why do we say 'not in the Vocative Singular'? Observe हे कर्तः, हे स्वसः ।। In the above examples off is substituted for by VII. 3. 110. 
इन्हन्पूषार्यम्णां शौ ॥ १२॥ पदानि ॥ इन्, हन, पूष अर्यम्णां, शौ, (दीर्घः)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ इन् इन् पूषन् भयमन् इत्येवमन्तानामङ्गानां धौ परत उपधाया दी| भवति । 
12. The penultimate vowel is lengthened before the affix rô (Nominative and Accusative Pl.), when the stem ends in इन्, or हन्, or पूषन् or अर्यमन् ॥ 
According to the maxim (See VI. 4. 14 also) that "मन् , इन्, मल, मन प्राणान्यर्थवता धानर्थकंन च तदन्त विधि प्रयोजयन्ति", the employment of हन् in this siltra includes and means "worls ending in the syllable 7" ll As regards the rest (इन् &c.), the affix शि (Neuter Pl.) is never added to then alone, but when they are parts of a compound. Thus it is a noun formed by the addition of 
BK. VI. C1.IV. S. 12 1 
LENGTHENING, 
1255 
the aflix"Fr to the root a; and the affix Kvip is added to it only then, when it is preceded by another word like * Brahma" &c. See 111. 2. 87. Similarly the words 97 and opera are masculine and cannot take the Neuter I'lural asfix fe in their original state. They must be parts of a neuter com pound, to adinit this affix. Hence we have used words " when the stem ends in a &c." 
Thus Tea and Theftiori que foi o I ENSTO 
I N सिद्रे सत्यारम्भो नियमार्थः । इन्द पूषार्यम्णामुपधायाः शावर दीर्घो भवति नान्यत्र । दण्डिनी। छविणी। 
upont igauit is hoitot 
Though this result could have been obtained by VI. 4. 8, the special snention of these words shows that except in Accusative and Noin. Pl. the lengthening does not take place in other strong cases. As सण्डिनी, छरिणी, वन. 
fuit, got, a ROTH 
Karikå :-Rcgarding the rule of lengthening taught about &c here, let the wise reader, after making a restrictive rule with regard to (sarva namas thầna) affixes in general, make again another rule regarding the affix fe in particular, (i. e., makc a yoga-bibhåga) By so doing, the form poruca (Loc. sin.) of the Acharya, will not be found fault with. 
2. (But if yoga-vibhaga be not made) then I rule that the anuvritti of a being dropped, let the rule be made with regard to fu affix in general (without regarding it as a Sarvanamasthåna affix). And as the rule of lengthening applies to penultimates, there would arise no fault, if the vowel of en is lengtheneci before the demonstrative affixa (in words like 
IT 5T8a, This refers to VII, 4. 25). 
3. Or if the anuvritti of r (Sarvanamasthana) be taken into this Satra, because of the context, then the mention of fu in this Satra, (would be redundant, because the word Sarvanäinasthana includes it, so far as the strong cascs arc concerned) but it would find scope and utility in preventing the lengthening in those cascs to which the context of Sarvanamasthana does not apply. That is, the Sarvanamasthana will be restricted with regard to 6 &c to the asfix fg and not to affixes generally 
Note :-fo is the nflix of the Nom. and Acc. Pl. in Neuter (VII. 1. 20.) It it a Sarvanamasthana by I. 1. 42. But the word Sarvanamasthana may be read into this sutra from the preceding VI. 4. 8. What is then the necessity of employing ft in this? The above karikn answers this. 
lu the case of a cnding words, thc subscqucnt rulc VI. 4. 15, which required the lengthening of thc penultimate vowel before an asfix having an indicatory or s, is however debarred by the present restric tive rulc. Thus the Locative Singular (ft) is yra, and opefall How do you make this? By splitting up the present sutra into two parts, the first part bcing 571 Termurah, and the sccond bcing all It would then mean : 
1256 
LENGTIIENING. 
[ BK. VI. C11. IV. § 14 
(1) The penultimate vowel is lengthened, in strong cases only and no where else, when the stem ends in Form or in qua or shum ll (2) So also it is lengthened before the strong case fu and no where else. These two restric tive rules therefore, would debar all other rules of penultimate lengthening which would otherwise have been applicable. But a rule which does not re late to penultimate vowel, is not debarred by this restriction, but does take effect. Thus वृषहायत, भ्रूणहायते denominative verbs in क्यङ् ॥ 
Or even though the Sarvana masthana may be read into the satra by anuvšitti, yet this may be considered a Restrictive Rule in general, and not only with regard to ft considered a Sarvanamasthåna or a Neuter affix for is the Sarvanamasthana affix of the Neuter : which has no other Sarva namasthana, therefore, it is a general Niyama and not only a Sarvanamas thåna or a Neuter niyama. Therefore in this niyama the word "ag aica "_" of the Neuter "--is not to be taken. 
For if it be taken, then the Sätra would mean, the neuter stems in &c are lengthened in for only and no where else. The result would be that in examples like moreta Aror (loc. sin), there would be no lengthening at all (i.e. we shall never have the form orta in loc. sin. by force of VI. 4. 15); moreover, by so doing, there would arise this anomaly also, that words other than Neuter would also not be lengthened. 
The force of the definition of Sarvanamasthana applies to Neuter also in certain cases, therefore, any rule (niyama) made with regard to Sarva nå masthana would apply to Neuter also. 
118811 qera Il , a, ( 3TETT: ht: ) 1 वृतिः ।। सावसंबुद्धौ परत इन्हन्पूषार्यम्णामुपधाया दीर्थो भवति ।। 
13. The penultimate vowels of a stem ending in इन, हन, पूषन or अयमन् are lengthened before the affix स of the Nominative Singular but not in Vocative Singular. 
Thus pust, MT, AT, SAT 11 The r is elided by VIII. 2. 7, and the case-affix by VI. 1. 68. in the Vocative singular we have 701, 7, वृषहन् हे अर्थमन् ॥ 
Erabara ararat: 118811 oara li a, Arapi, 9, prat: # वृत्तिः ॥ भतु मस इत्येवमन्तस्य अधातोरुपधायाः सावसंबुद्धौ परतो दीर्घा भवति ॥ 
14. In the Nominative Singular (with the excep tion of the Vocative Singular) the penultimate vowel is lengthened in a stem ending in my, and he when the conso nant () does not belong to a root. 
Thus *(with 7404 Uņ 1. 63 from ar to shine), m a (with #to); OTTATA and 44477 (with ago ) The In (a) is added to the above by VII, 1. 70, after the elongation has taken place, for is added before clongation, the BK. VI. C1. IV. . 16 ) 
LENGTIIENING. 
1257 
vowel no longer being penultimate, will not be lengthened at all. :-as U991, E90, Fiat: 11 Why do we say 'not belonging to a dhatu'? Observe पिण्डमः where e belongs to the root मस् (पिण्ड असते), so also चर्मयः (चर्म वस्त)॥ The We having no significance as an affix &c is also included here, on the strength of the maxim "whenever 977, or pa or me or HF, when they are taught in Grammar denote by I. 1. 72, something that ends with these, there they re present these combination of letters both in so far as they possess, and also in so far as they are void of a meaning ". ( 
SAFE 981 gar a vy सवन्तविधि प्रयोजयन्ति)| The word अन्त in the satra indicates whatever ends in भतु whether when first enunciated (उपदेश), such as उपतु, कवतु &c, or which assumes the form oy in grammatical inflection, such as Hgg which in upadesa ends in m e, but becomes are in sram or application. In Vocative singular we have हे गोमन् , हे सुपयः this rule not applying there. __ अनुनासिकस्य किझालोः डिति ॥ १५॥ पदानि ॥ अनुनासिकस्य, कि, झलो, 
वृत्तिः ॥ मनुनासिकान्तस्याङ्गस्थ उपधाया वीर्यों भवति क्विप्रत्यये परतो सलादौ च डिति ॥ 
15. The penultimate vowel of a stem, ending in a nasal, is lengthened before the affix fe, and before an affix having an indicatory a or F, which begins with a consonant other than a semivowel or a nasal. 
Thus mm and art from the roots ta and my by VIII. 2. 64. So also before an affix beginning with a consonant (any consonant but a nasal and a semivowel). As a: (with 7), TATTEL (with m), surat (with per), and fea: (with finan). These are all formed with fan affixes. As to for affixes we have our and para formed by He 3rd Person Dual added to the Intensive roots ya and And He is fra by I. 2. 4. Why do we say 'end ing in a Nasal'? Obscrve STTT, TEF, II Why do we say 'before of and jhaládi allix'? Observe ora, tai Wliy do we say a fea or a fixa asfix? Observe that and that I 
WHITHI a Il 8€ lll la 1120, , TATA. Afa, ( art!:) II धृत्तिः ॥ अजन्तानामझानां निगम्योग सनि सलादो परे वा दीर्थों भवति । 4 4 I TATISTITE 7716410, 11 
16, The lengthening of the vowel takes place in the case of a stem ending in a vowel, as well as of Ex and the when the Desiderative affix pre being jhalâdi (i. c. not taking the augment ) follows. 
Thus of roots ending in vowel we have :-Afrara, ara, rentedra, fetera (VII, 1. 100); of mq and ota, Priath, and f inal 
2158 
LENGTIIENING. 
. 
[ BK.VI. C. IV. 19. 
Vari:-The rule applies to that it which is the substitute of (II. 4. 48) 'to study'. Therefore, not here, fiiU TIÊN TT (cf. VII. 2. 58); In the Veda we read fra AHTAIT, where though tp mcans 'to go' and is not, therefore, the substitute of TT, the lengthening takes place by the rule VI. 3, 137. Or the word sy should not be added in the satra at all: which should be read as I hfa meaning "There is lengthening of the stein when the Desiderative follows". This would apply of course, to vowel-ending stems, because the sentence would mean that, for there cannot be lengthening of a consonant. This will apply to y also, in this way :-" A stem ending in a vowel is lengthened in the Desiderative, and so also of tq which is a substitute of the vowel-stem r" In this way, we may see, that there is no necessity of the Vartika. 
anlatan 11 pro ! Tera Ilala:, fahret | वृत्तिः ॥ सनातेरजस्व सनि झलादौ विभाषा दीर्घो भवति । 
17. The lengthening of the stem of an is optional, before the Desiderative Fri, wlicn it does not take the augment 
Thus faaiera or fatale! But in feara ara no alternative is allowed, as Ris added to y by VII. 2. 49 Vart: optionally. 
44729 Pro II 8611 ara al $4, a, fen, (u ) वृत्तिः ॥ क्रम उपधाया विभाषा दीर्थो भवति त्याप्रत्यये सलादो परतः ।। 
18. The penultimate of 4 is optionally lengthen ed, before the affix , when it is without the augmente 
Thus Forest or AIRT ; but when only, with re augment. But when my is replaced by pure, the rule does not apply: as th , 894739 This is on the maxim अन्तरङ्गानपि विधीन् पहिरोल्या बायवे'a bahiranga substitution of ल्य! super. sedes even antaranga rule". 
sest: segailer allgeil atât il seti, 15, agafah, a, (fanget: ) u वृत्तिः॥छ इत्येतस्य सतुक्कस्य वकारस्य च स्थाने यथासण्या कर इत्येतावादेशो भवतः, अनुनासिका प्रत्यये परन: वो सलादी च डितिः ॥ 
19. For any including the anymout 7%) is substi tuted at, and for is substituted 53, before an aflix beginning with a Nasal, as well as before fas and jhalâliisa and fri affix es (VI. 4. 15). 
Thus 4, fa: from you and faus, with the affix 76 (III. 3. 90 ) the by being replaced by II Similarly from the root fery we have furt: thus: fare +(Un III. 9). -F# +5+ FT+- 77 FM: (VII. 3. 84). Here the F is added to the stem prior to the scope being given to the guņa rule of VII. 3. 86, other wise the form would be for +7=7+7= # +55 +67 Having thus added , 
BK. VI. CI. IV $ 20.1 
LENCTUIENING. 
1250 
before scope could be given to the guņa rule VII. 3. 86, we make sandhi of 18 + 5 = 64, because semivowel substitution is antaranga opcration and of wider scope than guna, and the maxim of proferrari 458 has no scopo here. “An operation which is taught in the Arigadhikara, and affects the anga or stein, possessos grcater force than an operation which concerns a coinbination of letters (i. e. is taught in a sandhi rule)". 
With we have wory formed with pery (Uņ 11.57 ) added to se, there is no vocalisation of the semivowel T, and there is lengthening of A, and uy changed to v. So also TATI 
or the change of $ into F we have the following :- !, forma: (FT + fang=f+5=1: ) Herc thc substitution is Bahiranga, and +5 , the change of r into is antaranga, therefore on the maxim of far for Hot (a baliranga is non-existent for the purposes of an antaranga); there should be no change of r into a, for gis non-existent. That maxim is however set aside by 915rat i CIA: "A bahiranga operation is not regarded as bahiranga, and consequently asiddha, when an antaranga operation is to take effect, which depends on the immediate sequence of a vowel and something else". 
So also before a jhaládi affix; as 5+ =TE, AN(T), TT (RET); here sy is changed to. T, there is vocalisation by VI. 1. 16, and a changed to 
<by VIII. 2. 36. 
So also is changed to 5 as, gri, gara, DATT II 
When the affixes are not fer or fact, the rule does not apply: as quat, : 1 Some do not read the anuvritti of fair and for into this sätra, and explain quz and : by VI. 1. 131 : short being substituted for 7 of for 11 
In "gris" (VIII. 2. 36) the letter y should not be taken, because by the force of the present sutra, v is ordained to come every where in the place of 
The indicatory in hi is for the sake of distinguishing this 5 in sâ tras like page (VI. 1. 89). In the sutra " (VI. 4. 132) there is also indicatory 11 . 
Bacartiersefahamas211 | 20 || cara il fat, mat, fafa, apa, HETH, 
J T , , ( fust: FT) 11 वृत्तिः ॥ ज्वर वर प्रिवि भव मव इत्यंतषामझानां वकारस्य उपधायाध स्थाने अडित्ययमादयो भवाति क्यो Tai sgan yigla u 
20. In fare, rattia, wa, and 47, before the above mentioned affixes (ff, at Nasal or a jhalâdli 'f ' or isa) there is the single substitution of 1 for tliv Lind the vowel preced ing the fial consonant. 
1260 
LENGTIIENING. 
( BK. VI. CII. IV § 22 
Thus ut, gt, :, : NATO, A, T, afet: il para:-*, Ti, 4, - gr : 4 = ', dit, đai, tài || Hai , g, g, đi, em trai | H à FAUT TATOTT qU, forog 491 garn 
In stand ( the 5 replaces as well as the of which followsq; and in fort, Hy and at it replaces the and the vowel ç and which precede all Another reading is खित् ॥ 
Tregta: 11 11 Ifa Il tra, 19:,( Part:) | वृत्तिः ॥ रेफादुनरयोछोर्लोपो भवति क्वी परतो सलादो डिति च परतः ॥ 
21. After T there is the clision of u and ą before fat and jhaládi form and 'sa' affixes. 
Thus from gof- , gå, gr, at man, aft:, the af of Nishtha is not changed into 7 by VIIJ. 2. 57. So also from goi we have , ga, gri, roti, gure maff: !! So also the is elided, as from it , TT:, rois ata a : 11 yat:-:, yd, yt:, yai, yorura, tu 
TECSS HTCT, II RP 11 qera Il aferer, , ATHIC II वृत्तिः । असिद्धयदित्ययमधिकारो यदित अदृमनुक्रमिष्याम भा भघ्यायपरिसमाप्तस्तदू मसिद्धवद्वेदितव्यम् ।। 
· वार्तिकम् ॥ दुग्युटावक्यणोः सिद्धौ भवत इति वक्तव्यम् । 
22. The change, which a stem will undergo by the application of any of the rules from this sûtra upto VI. 4. 129, is to be considered as not to have taken offect, when we have to apply any other rule of this very section VI. 4. 23 to 129. 
This is an adhikara rule. The above translation is given according to Prof. Bohtlingk. According to Kasika the IT extends up to the end of the chapter. Dr. Ballantyne translates it thus :-"The rules, reckoning from this one to the end of the chapter, are called Abhiya, because the chapter ends with a series of rules dependant on the aphorison 'bhasya' VI. 4. 129. When that (i. e. one of the abhiya rules) is to be brought into operation, having the same place for coming into operation as another abhiya, which has already taken effect, that one which has taken effect, shall be regarded as not having taken effect". 
The word att means 'up to ' i. e. upto VI. 4. 129. in which last sätra the word * occurs : i. e. in applying the rules taught upto VI. 4. 129. The word sy shows that the two rules must have the same 9 4 or place of operation, where their places of operation are different, they are not asiddha to cach other. The word nie shows that an utsarga or general rule must take effect, as if existing in spite of a special rule, and that an 'adeśa' or substitution taught by another rule should not be considered to have taken effect in apply. ing the special mulc. Thus in forming v ind uri ( Imperative 2110 person) 
BK. VI. Cu, IV S 22 ] 
ABUIYA-RULES. 
1 261 
Q is first substituted for a 'to be' by VI, 4. 119: and er for at by VI. 4. 35 and then is added by VI. 4. 101. The latter rule says that this added in the Imperative, only after those roots which end in a consonant of an class. Now we and sure end in a thal consonant, and can take y, but their substitute (and FT cnd in a vowel and not a consonant and should not take fil The present rule helps us here, and for the application of N (V1.4. 101) the substi tution of for mor y for it should be considered as asiddha or not to have taken cffcct. Similarly in Bin (Vedic Inperative, to being clided by 11.4.73) and are from TA and 7, the nasal being elided in the case of 4, VI. 4. 36 and ut being substituted for T (VI. 2. 36 ) we have the stems om and HT, which ending in at would require thc ellsion off by VI. 4. 1os. But since the change of 7 &c is not regarded as having been accomplished, the elision of r does not take place. 
Why do we say murt'up to VI. 4. 12y'? In applying any other rule the changes ordained by abhiya rules would not be considered as asiddha. Thus sana and at: from 5 and Fit Here the nasals of ranj and bhafij have been elided by VI. 4. 27-28 and 33 before the affixes and in respec tively, and we have the stems (y, and * to which rule VII. 2. 116 applies and we have Vriddhi of e preceding the final consonant. Had the elision of the nasal becn considered as non-effective for the purposes of VII. 2. 116, then could not have taken Vriddhi, as it would not then be TT or penultimate 
Why do we use the word in the aphorism? The rules are asiddha to cach other with regard to a common place of operation and not otherwise. Thus 9T+TEL( )+49 (Acc. Pl ).-99 +37+HT (VI. 4 131 vocalisation 
VI. 4. 64, then we cannot clide the air of qr, because of is not then followed by a vowel (a being non-existent). 3 however is not considered as asiddha, and or being thus clided, we have पपुषः in पपुषः पश्य | Similarly पि+ षस् + भर विधि +3+ BT Herc also is not considered asiddha, and we apply rule VI. 4. 82, and substitute o for x as foui qaz Similarly #+7+7 
+#+ y=: Here also g is not considered asiddha, and we change the Fof into a by VI. 4. 77. In all the above thrce cases, the clision of T, or change of to 1, or of 5 to 14, takes place in reference to 14, while the samprasarana of takes place with reference to the Accusative plural case-ending the which makes the stem Bha. So they have not the same माश्रय | Nor does the maxim of मसिद्धं बहिरङ्गमन्तरले apply herc, because thic special maxiin of Abhiya governs the sutras of this section, so there cannot be the relation of Antaranga and Bahiranga among these sutras, simultancously with their being asiddha to cach other. 
1262 
ABIIYA-RULES. 
[Bk. VI. Cl. IV. 824 
Vart:--The substitute बुक (VI. 4.88), and युद् (VI. 4.63) should how ever be considered as not asiddha, and rule VI. 4. 77 teaching 197 and VI. 4. 82, teaching z substitution should not be applied simultancously with them. Thus भू-भूष, बभूवतुः बभूवः with बुक, and उपदिगये, उपविदीयात, उपविदीयरे with युट् of VI.4.63. In the case of s, when बुक् is alded, there is not the addition of उवा, and in the case of दीद, when युट् is added, there is not यणादेश ।। 
The se in qram has the force of limit inclusive, so that, the asiddha rule applies to the satras governed by भ॥ 
भानलोपः ॥ २३॥ पदानि ॥ नात, न लोपः, ॥ . पत्तिः ॥मादिति ममयमुस्सष्टमकारी गृह्यते तत उत्तरस्य नकारस्य लोपो भवति । 
. 23. After a, which is added to the roots of the seventh class as a characteristic (i. c. the vikarana अम्), there is the elision of the following all 
Thus मनक्ति and भनति from मज to anoint', and भस्म 'to break'. Thus भग्न+मम् + तिः = अनम्न+ति (I. I. 47)= भनइ +ति (VI. 4.23)= मनक्ति | So also हिनस्ति from हिसि (हिन्म) 'to injure'. Why do we say after म' and not merely after न' without the indicatory ? Observe यज्ञानाम्, यवानाम् , where the 7 of the is not elided after the 7 of an and ya, the lengthening of x by VII. 3. 102 being sthanivat would not have prevented the elision. In the case of विमानाम् and प्रमानाम् (formed by विम+नाम् and प्रम+नाम्) also, the न of माम् is not elided after p of विम | For the Wof the satra is the technicals the vikarana, and not any combination of the letters and न || The prati. padokta maxim applies here. लक्षणप्रतिपदोक्तयोः पतिपदोक्तस्येव महणम् ॥ 
भनिदितां हल उपधायाः डिति ॥२४॥ पदानि ॥ भनिदिताम्, हलः, उपधा याः, द्धिति ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ भनिरितामझानां हलन्तानामुपधाया नकारस्य लोपो भवाति डिति प्रत्यये परतः ॥ 
पातिकम् । भनिदितां नलोप लङ्गिकम्प्योरुपतापशरीरविकारयोरुपसंख्यानं कर्तव्यम् । वाजेणों मगरमणउपसंस्थान कर्मष्यन् ॥ दा०॥ घिनुणि च एजेरुपसंख्यानं कर्तव्यम॥ 
पा.॥रणकरमनरजः सूपसंख्यानं कर्त्तव्यम् ॥ 
24. In a root-stem ending in a consonant pre ceded by 1,--this not being added to the root owing to its having an indicatory I (VII. 1. 58)—the or is clided when an affix having an indicatory F or follows. 
Thus from बन्स् and वन्स् are formed वस्तः and ध्वस्तः with नबस्थते, ध्वस्यते with यक, सनीवस्थते, पनीध्वस्यते with वह the नी being added by VII. 4. 84. But असा and नानन्यते, then is not elided, the root being written in the Dha. tupatha as Tonera, and being added by VII. 1. 58. Why do we say randing in a consonant? Observe नीयते, ननीयते from नी which has a penulti. 
BK VI. CII. IV § 28 ) 
ELISION OF NASAL. 
1263 
mate nasal, but ends in a vowel. Why do we say 'penultimate'? Observe नपसे, नानापते ॥ Why do we say having an indicatory क or r? Observe बंसनं, चंसनं with ल्युत् ॥ 
Vart :-The roots ला (लगि) and कम्प् (कपि) are exceptions, where mean ing 'to feel pain or difficulty' and 'a disease of the body'. These, though exhibited in the Dhatupatha with an indicatory , are treated as exceptions to the rule of भनिदित : thus बिलागतः and विकपितः, when not having the above 
meanings, we have बिलहितं and विकम्पितं ।। 
Vårt:The causative of the root 79, loses its nasal when meaning 'to hunt deer' : as, रजयति मृगान् 'he hunts the deer', but एमजयति वस्त्राणि 'he colors the clothes'. 
Vart:-म्ज loses its nasal before the affix पिनुण, as रागी।। 
Vart: The words रजकः, रमनम्, and (ज: are formed from रज by the elision of the nasal. 
दंशसजस्व शापि ॥२५॥ पदानि ॥दंश, सञ, स्वनाम, शपि॥ पत्तिः ॥ इंच सज्ज बज इत्येतेषामझानां शापि परत उपधाया नकारस्य लोपो भवति । 
25. The nasal of इंश, संज् and स्व ज is elided be fore the vikaraņa To of the roots of the 1st class. 
Thus anति, समति and परिष्वजते for the change of the स् of स्वम् to see VIII. 3.65 
रमेश्च ॥ २६ ॥ पदानि ॥ रखेः, च,॥ वृत्तिः ॥ रजेख शापि परत उपधाया नकारस्य लोपो भवति । 
26. The nasal of रज is also elided before शप॥ ____AS रजति, रजतः, रजन्ति ॥ The separation of this from the preceding is for the sake of the subsequent satras in which the anuvšiti of ranj only runs and not of dans &c. 
घधि च भावकरणयोः ॥२७॥ पदानि ॥ घनि, च, भावकरणयोः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ भावकरणवाचिनि धमि परतो रज्जेरुपधाया नकारस्य लोपो भवति ॥ 
27. The penultimate nasal of रम्ज़ is elided before gy, when the word formed with it expresses a state or an instrument. 
Thus रागः 'passion, color, or the coloring stuff'. Thus मापयों रागः, विचित्र राग: denote भाव, while रज्यतेऽननिति राग: denotes instrument. The घम् is added by III. 3. 121; and a changed to by VII. 3. 52. But catalanita 'a theatre; 
स्यदो जवे ॥२८॥ स्यदः, जवे, ॥ वृत्तिः । अवे ऽभिधेये स्यद इति पनि निपात्यते । स्यन्दनलोपो वृद्धपमावस । 
28. The word fra is formed by as in the sense of 'speed'. 
1264 
ELISION OF NASIL. 
[ BK. VI, CI. IV. 832 
This word is derived from proces, the nasal is elided, and the Vriddhi prohibited irregularly. Though the ardhadhatuka affix y causes here the elision of a portion of the root, viz of of स्यन्दू, yet rule I. I. 4 does not apply here. That rule prohibits Guņa and Vșiddhi, only in case of a vowels, here the Vriddhi is prevented with regard to sol The prevention of this Vriddhi is irregular and not governed by I. I. 4. Thus गोस्यवः' भश्वस्यदः meaning "cow speed," " horse-speed." but तैलस्यन्दः, and तस्यन्दः meaning "dripping of oil or ghee". 
अवोदधौमप्रश्रयहिमश्रथाः॥२९॥ पदानि ॥ अवोद,पध,आम,प्रश्रय, हिमश्रथाः वृत्तिः ॥ भवोद एध भोपप्रप्रय हिमश्रथ इत्येते निपात्यन्ते । 
29. अवोद, एध, ओभ, प्रश्रय, and हिमश्रथ are irregularly formed by the elision of all 
Thus उन्दू-भव + उन्दू+प भवोदः; न्+घ - एषः, the guna is irregular, for I. I. 4 applied here, and prevented guna. उन्द + मन्- भोध (Unadi मन्). प्र+ श्रन्य+घम-प्रश्रयः (The want of Vriddhi is the irregularity). So also हिमश्रयः ॥ 
· नाचेः पूजायाम् ॥ ३०॥ पदानि ॥ न, अञ्चेः, पूजायाम् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ मम्चे पूजायामयें नकारस्य लोपो न भवति ॥ 
30. The nasal of अञ्च is not clided when the mean ing is to honor. 
Thus भञ्चिता भस्य गुरवः, महिपतमिव शिरो पहात ॥ The augment is added by VII. 2. 53. When the sense is not that of 'honoring', we have उपक्तमुक कुपात "the water was draren from the well." Here ther is prohibited by VII. 2. 15. 
कि स्कन्दिस्यन्दोः ॥ ३१॥ पदानि ॥क्ति, स्कन्दि, स्यन्दोः, (न लोपः)॥ वृत्तिः।। कामत्यये परतः स्कन्द स्यन्त इत्येतयोनकारलोपो न भवति ।। 
31. स्कन्द and स्यन्द retain their nasal before the affix क॥ 
Thrs स्कन्या, and स्थन्दित्वा or स्यन्या, the इe being added when स्यन्त is considered as having an indicatory # in the dhatupatha. When F is added, is no longer and by virtue of thc rule I. 2. 18, and elision would not take place, for no rule of elision would apply in that case. 
जान्तनशां विभाषा ॥ ३२॥ पदानि ॥ जान्त, नशाम, विभाषा (न लोपः)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ जान्तानामङ्गानां नशेष कामत्यये परतो विभाषा नकारलोपो न भवति ॥ 
32. The nasal may be optionally clided before का in a root ending in and in नश् ॥ 
Thus रक्तवा or रतवा, मन्तवा or भत्त्या, नष्टा or नंष्ट्रा See | VII. I.Go for the augment - in नश् ॥ When इद् comes, we have नशिस्खा ॥ 
भजेश्च चिणि ॥ ३३॥ पदानि ॥ भजेः, च, चिणि, (विभाषा न लोपः)॥ वृत्तिः॥ भजेच चिणि परतो विभाषा नकारलोपो भवति॥ 
BK. VI. Ch. IV. & 36 ) 
ABIIYA-RULES. 
1265 
33. The nasal may be optionally elided in before the third person Passive of the Aorist in feru () 
Thus is or m all This is an aprapta vibhasha, and teaches for the first time the elision of # in a certain contingency. 
TTA 250 | 38 TT 8:, G. 3. :,( a) 11 वृत्तिः ॥शास उपधाया इकारादेशो भवति अङि परसो इलादौ च मिति ॥ वार्तिकम ।। क्यो च शास त्वं भवतीति वक्तव्यम् ॥ चा॥क्विा प्रत्यये तस्थापि भवतीति वक्तव्यम् ॥ 
34. Before the Aorist in 35 and before an affix beginning with a consonant having an indicatory or there is the substitution of for the vowel of TĘ I 
Thus अन्वशिषन, अन्वशिषताम् and भन्वशिषन् ; so also शिष्टः (with क), शिष्टवान् (with #), at iTe: PTCH: (with the tense-affixes hi and 7: which are a by I. 2. 4). The F is changed to by VIII. 3. 60. Why do we say "before the affixes of ot Aorist and consonant affixes '? Observe ela, vrag, Turg: It 
Vart:- There is the substitution of for the vowel of urg before the affix वि. As भार्यशी:- मार्यान् शास्ति | So also मिशी ॥ The form is thus evolv ed, TÆ+ fefefefto-fat+o=et: (the shorts being lengthened by VIII. 2. 76. 
The root er is that root which takes me aorist; namely the second Adadi शास् (शासु अनुशिष्टी), and not the Bhvadi and the first Adadi शास (माहवामु 
tan) 11 "Thiercforc not here werea, STUFITAT: 11 
Vårt:-But before feric, this Tix also is changed, as mit:, HT , naqilf Or this is an irregular form indicated by the author in the word firard: used in 
VIII. 2. 104. 
Il 24 11 qera u , , वृभिः ॥ शासो हौ परतः शा इत्ययमादेशो भवति ॥ 
35. Before the Imperative affix re, Tris substituted for যামু 
Thus ry, Tall The fg is changed to fu by VI. 4. 101. See VI 4. 22. The anuvritti of quar: is not here, so is substituted in the room of thic full word me and not only for the penultimate vowel of n 1 The anu vritti of fit and for also is not here. Therefore, when this is treated as the (III. 4. 88), then too the substitution takes place, though a foc Sárvadhatuka is not feq (I. 2. 4). Thus af is also found in the Vedas as having acute on the first syllable, which can only be when fy is raq and consequently anudatta (III. 1. 4) 
rast: Il Be Il Taria Il grati, 57:,( ) वृत्तिः ॥ हन्तातोर्ज इत्ययमादेशो भवति ही परतः ॥ 
1266 
ABIIIYA-RULES. 
BK. VI. Cl. IVS38] 
36. ज is substituted for on before हि॥ Thus अहि शधून् । अनुदात्तोपंदशवनतितनोत्यादीनामनुनासिकलोपोझलिङिति ॥ ३७॥ पदानि॥ अनुदात्तोपदेश, धनति, तनोत्यादीनाम, अनुनासिक लोपः, झलि, डिति ॥ 
वृत्तिः॥ मनुशनोपदेशानामझानां पनतेस्तनोत्यादीनां चानुनासिकलोपो भवति सलाडिति प्रत्यये परतः ॥ 
37. The final nasal of those roots which in the Dhâtupâtha have an unaccented root-vowel, as well as of 29 and ca &c, is elided before an affix beginning with a conso nant (except a semi-vowel or nasal), when these have an indi catory or 
Thus यमु gives us यस्वा (with तया), यतः (with ), यतवान् (with नपतु), यतिः (with निन्), Similarly रमु gives us रस्वा, रतः, रतवान् , रातिः॥ यम , रम्, नम् , गम् , हन् and 4 which end in a nasal are to be considered as unaccented roots, though taught as accented in the Dhatupatha. So also of वन्: i. e. पतिः withनिन्, with तिच् the nasal is not elided as वन्ति; (VI. 4.39) and before other jhaladi affixes व, retains a as all those affixes take the augment Bli The pane roots belong to the eighth class. Thus ततः, ततवान्. The Tanadi roots are ten in number, तम् सन् , क्षण, क्षिण, कण, तण, पूण, पन् , मन् and कृम् ॥ of these सन् takes long मा also (VI. 4.45). क्षण-क्षतः, क्षतवान् , ऋणू-अतः, कतवान् ; तृणहतः, नृतवान् । घृण-पृतः प्रतवान् वन्-वतः, पतवान् ; मन्-मता, मतवान् ।। 
Why do we say before a हित affix? Observe मतस, भतथाः (I. 2. " these affixes are डि) So also not in शान्त:, शान्तवान्, तान्तः, तान्तवान्, दान्ता, दान्त पान , not being anudatta in the Dhatupatha. If the root does not end in a nasal, the rule does not apply, as in 4441, 44477 11 If the affix does not begin with ajhal consonant, the rule does not apply: as गम्यते, रम्यते ॥ If the affix is not कित् or डिन्त the rule does not apply: as, यन्ता, यन्तध्यम् ॥ Why do we say "anudatta by upadesa"? So that the rule may apply to th root, as mat, but not to शम्, as शान्तः शान्तवान् ।। For गतिः is formed byतिन् affix and is accented with udatta on the first, but it is a secondary udatta and not of upadesa or dhatu patha, and does not prevent the elision of an of Similarly v is udatta upadesa though in शान्त it has become भनुदात्तः ॥ The former though taught in the Dhatupaţha as udatta, has been specifically mentioned above as anudatta, and TH is taught as udatta in the Dhatupatha, and no where else taught as anudatta. 
घा ल्यपि ॥ ३८॥ पदानि ॥ वा, ल्यपि, ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ल्यपि परतो ऽनुवात्तोपदेशवनतितनोत्यादीनामनुनासिकलोपो वा भवति ।। 
38. The nasal of the above roots (i. e. anudatta ending in a nasal, and stand calla) is optionally elided be fore the Absolutive affix ल्यए। BK. VI. Cl. IV S 42 ] 
ABHISA-RULS. 
1267 
This is a vyavasthita-vibhasha. The option applics to roots ending in म. In the case of roots ending in other nasals, the elision is compulsory. Thus प्रयत्य or प्रयम्य, परत्य or भरम्य, प्रणय or प्रणम्य, मागत्य भागम्य, but no option in माहत्य, प्रमत्य, प्रवत्य, प्रक्षत्य ॥ 
न क्तिचि दीर्घश्च ॥ ३९ ॥ पदानि ॥ न, क्तिचि, दीर्घः, च ॥ वात्तः ॥तिमि परतो ऽनुदानोंपरशादीनामनुनासिकलोपो वीच न भवति । 
39. Before the affix tha, the above roots neither drop their nasal nor lengthen their root-vowel. 
The above roots i. e. anudattopadeśa, ending in a nasal, and and सनावि, do not lose their nasal before तिच्. Thus यन्ति, तन्ति, वन्ति ॥ The leng. thening would have taken place by VI. 4. 15, when the nasal was not elided : that also is prohibited. __ गमः कौ ॥ ४०॥ पदानि ॥ गमः, को, (अनुनासिकलोपः)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ अनुनासिकलोप इति वर्तते । गमः क्यो परतो ऽननासिकलोपो भवति। वार्तिकम् ॥ गमादीनामिति वक्तव्यम् ॥ वा०॥ अडच गमादीनामितियक्तव्यम् ॥ 
40. The masal of गम् is always elided before कि ॥ Thus भगत, कलिङ्गगत, मध्वगतो हरयः ॥ The t is added by VI. I. 71. 
Vårt:—It should be stated of me and the rest. The elision takes place here also संयत्, परीतत् ॥ 
Vart:-The nasal of गम् &c. is elided before मह : as, मगूः , भमेधः ॥ विडनोरनुनासिकस्यात् ॥४१॥ पदानि ॥ विट-घनोः, अनुनासिकस्य आत् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ विटि वनो च प्रत्यये परतो ऽनुनासिकान्तस्याङ्गस्याकार भादेशोभवति ॥ 
___41. A stem ending in a nasal, and followed by the asfix fac or an, always substitutes long at for its nasal. 
Thus मम्जा, गोजाः, तजाः, मद्रिनार, गोषाः (e. g. गोषा इन्द्रोनषा मसि Rig V.), कृपखाः, शतखाः, सहसखाः, दधिकाः, अप्रेगा उन्नेतणाम् ॥ The affix विट् (which is totally clided) is added under III. 2. 67. The स of सन् is changed to r by VIII. 3. 108. in गोषा॥ With the affix पन् we have the following :--वित्रावा, भजावा (III. 2.75). The repetition of the word अनुनासिक in this setra shows that the limitation of anudattopadesa &c. which applied to the TITRE cf satra VI. 4 37 does not apply here. 
जनसनखनां सन्झलोः ॥ ४२ ॥ पदानि ॥ जन-सन-खनाम् सन्-झलोः, (आत्)॥ वृतिः ॥ जन सन खन इत्येतेषामजानां सनि झलादो दिति झलारी प्रत्यय परत भाकार भादेशो भवति । 
42. The long आ is substituted for the final of जन्, सन् and खन् before the consonant beginning Desiderative affix सन्, and before any other affix beginning with a jhal con sonant, which has an indicatory or 5 il 
1268 
ABIIYA-RULES 
[ BK. VI. Cui. IV $. 44. 
Thus arai, sa , sira, ara:, FIAT, Fa:, ferrata; ara, U TC, arraill In stand on the Desiderative does not begin with a consonant, but takes the augment , then is not therefore elided, as जिजनिषति, चिखानपति ॥ In the case of the root , the Desiderative takes (, so we have two forms fear and faalaala (VII. 2. 49). The Desiderative has, therefore, been mentioned in the aphorism, only for the sake of the root a 11 
If the phrase : be taken to mean 'the Desiderative beginning with a consonant', then we should read the anuvfitti of are afrsfa from the pre ceding satras, to complete the sense of this; and if the phrase means "when the Desiderative of a jhaladi affix follows ", then we should qualify the word Desiderative by the word jhal from the preceding sätras. Or we may divide the sätra into two (1) Before a fan or for jhaládi affix long T is the substi tute of the 7 of 'jan', 'san' and 'khan'. (2) And so is the case, when the Desiderative affix follows, not having the augment (, for then also the 7 of *jan', 'san' and 'khan' is replaced by long II 
The 7 of the root i would have required elision by VI. 4. 37, be cause this verb belongs to Tanádi class, still the HT substitution taught in this sâtra takes place, by preference, on the maxim of fara Ti (1. 4. 2). In fact, though in this section of asiddha (VI. 4. 22) one rule is considered as asiddha for the purposes of the operations of another rule, yet one rule supersedes another by the maxim of vipratisedha. That that maxim applies in this section also, is to be inferred from the employment of the term i n VI. 4. 66, which supersedes the lopa of s taught in VI. 4. 64, and substitutes instead the longit 
o farmaT Il 831 Tota lla, faratet, (STEET TA) 11 वृत्तिः ॥ यकारा द्विति प्रत्यये परतो अनसनखनामाकार भादेशो भवति विभाषा। 
43. There is optionally the substitution of long a for the finals of I, ac and act before an affix beginning with 
and marked with an indicatory or il 
Thus जायत or जन्यते (with यक) जाजायते or जजन्यते (with यह)। So also area or ata, HTHiga, or tun, urua, or yana, eta or notrà il Before the vikarana set of the Fourth class, which is fea according to l. 2. 4; the is always substituted for ma by VII. 3. 79. No option is allowed there. 
aia II 881 Canlatara:, , (FTTT HIGH वृत्तिः । तेनोतेर्यकि परतो विभाषा भाकार भादेशा भवति । 
44. The long at may be optionally substituted for the final of तन before the Passive characteristic यक ॥ 
Thus तायते or तन्यते; but no option is allowed in तन्तन्यते with यङ्॥ a: Reife HTRITACRITE 11 84 11 ut i hai, Rafa, 19, , TET, RUITETA, 11 वृत्तिः ॥ सनोतरणस्य तिथि प्रत्यये परत भाकार भादेशो भवति लोपभास्यान्यतास्याम् । 
BK VI. CII. IV. 8.46 ] 
LENGTHENING 
1269 
45. The long as is optionally substituted for the final of frat before the aflix ; and there is also elision option ally of the Nasal. 
Thus we have three forms hita, and A ll The word waathird "optionally' has been employed in the sätra for the sake of clearness only; for the first of VI. 4. 43 could have been read into it by annvritti. Lest any one should doubt, that the annvșitti offriret had ccascd with the last aphor ism, this word भन्यतरस्याम् is employed here. 
माधातुके ॥ ४६॥ पदानि ॥ आर्द्धधातु के। वृत्तिः । मार्चधातुकास्यधिकारो न ल्यपीति मागेतस्मादित अधमनुकमिण्याम भार्चधातुकत्येवं तो. 
दितव्यम्। 
*** 46. From this upto VI. 4. 68 inclusive, is always to be supplied “before an affix called ardhadhatuka (III. 4. 114&c)." 
This is an adhikära sätra and extends upto VI. 4. 69 (exclusive). In all thc sūtras upto VI. 4. 68 should be supplied the phrase "before an affix called ardhadhatuka". Thus VI.4.48 teaches "the w standing at the end of a verbal stem is elided". To complete the sense we should add:"before an ardha dhatuka affix". Thus the final # of the verbal stem er is elided before the ardhatuka affix g, as विकीर्षित, मिहर्षित, but the final w is not elided before a sarvadhatuka affix, as the w of भव in भवति, भवतः॥ The luk-elision of u after roots ofभादि class, implies that there is never lopa of शए। 
The following purposes are served by this sätra, i. e. an ardhatuka affix causes the following special changes (1) भतोलोप:- The elision of भ of a stem, as shown above, in चिकीर्षिता, चिकीर्षितुम्, (2) यलोपथ, The elision of a by VI. 4. 49, 50: as भिदिता, बेभिरितुन्, पेभिक्तिप्यम् from बेभि the Intensive stem. Before Sarvadhatuka, we have भियते, पच्चियते ॥ (3) णिलोपत्र प्रयोजनम् , The eli. sion ofणि by VI. 4. 51, as कारणा हारणा पाच्यते (पाधि+यक् +ते पाच +4+), याश्यते। In Sarvadhatuka, पापयति, याजयति, कारयति, हारयति ॥ (4) भाल्लोपः, the elision of भा. VI. 4.64-- as पपतः, पपुः, ववतुः वः, In Sarvadhatuka, यान्ति, वान्ति () खिम The substitntion of longt for भा in some roots, VI. 4. 65 as धीयतेतीयोin Sarvadhatuka अदाताम, अधाताम् (6)एवम् -The substitution ofए for मा, VI.468 : as स्नेयात, ग्लेयात; in Sarvadhatuka, स्मायात, ग्लायात्।। This is confined to the Precative (asirlin). (7)विण्यदभावन सीयुटि, the treatment of the Precative like Aorist Passive inधि , by VI. 4.62. as कारिषीट, हारिषीट ॥ In Sarvadhatukar कियत, हियेत॥ 
Raisikt:-अतो लोपो थलोपम णिलोपन प्रयोजनम् । 
भाल्लोप ईस्वमेवं च पिण्वनावम सीयुटि । भ्रस्जो रोपधयोरमन्यतरस्याम् ॥४७॥ पदानि । भ्रस्जः, र-उपधयोः, म. अन्यतरस्याम् ॥ अत्तिः ॥ भ्रस्मा रेफस्योपधायाध रमन्यतरस्यां भवति । 
1270 
ARDIIADIIATU-CHANGES 
(BK.VI. CI. IV. 49. 
47. In the room of the Tand the penultimate letter # of the root 57, there is optionally the substitute th, when an àrdhadhâtuka affix follows. 
The G and cease to exist and takes their place. The substitute having an indicatory # comes after the final vowel (1. 1. 49). Thus **+ = ***+= met the sy being changed to or by VIII. 2. 36, and #to x by VIII. 4.41. The other form will be wer; so also very and win, 28279 and , WSITE or 1911 But : and naby VI, 1, 16, in spite of this rule. The word to (VI. 4. 37). is understood here also. The rule therefore applies to the simple root bhrasj as originally taught in the Dhatupa tha, and not to any Derivative root from it.' As the Intensive ( 15 ) is tyrua 11 
at 9: 11 8611 ma il sa:, 19:, ( 
H C ) #1 वृत्तिः ।। अकारान्तस्यार्द्धधातुके लोपो भवति । वार्तिकम ॥ वृद्धिदीर्घाभ्यामतो लोपःपूर्वविप्रतिषेधेन ॥ 
48. The standing at the end of a stem is olided before an archadhâ tuka affix. 
Thus चिकीर्षता, चिकीर्षितुम् , and चिकीर्षितव्यम्, from the Desiderative stem चिकीर्ष | So also धिनुत: and कृणुतः from the roots धिन् and कृण्व् thus, धिन् + उ (III. 1. 80)=PRZE++7 (III, 1. 80 )=r ta ( being elided before the ardhâtuka 7)= , the 3rd Personal dual of it is TETA: 11 The addition of x by III. 1. 80 and its subsequent elision by the present sätra, may appear a redundancy, but the elided being sthanivat, prevents guna of fun So also a: 11 See sätra III. 1. 80. Why do we say "the sp is elided'? Observe , atat here and a have not been elided. Why do we say "ta: with a ["? The long sT will not be elided : as art, tatil Why do we say "before an Ardha dhatuka'? Before a Sarvadhatuka there will be no elision of st nor before a Taddhita : as वृक्षवम् and वृक्षता ॥ 
Vårt:-The elision of such # takes place even to the supersession of the subsequent rules relating to Vriddhi and lengthening. Asचिकीर्षका, जिही 
**i, forat a and Fararsza il 
TRI : Il y 1 na 11 TFT, 65:11 वृत्तिः ॥ हल उत्तरस्य यशस्वार्द्धधातुके लोपो भवति । 
49. When it consonant prcccdles the final in a verbal stem, this w is clided also before an ardhuulhâtuka affix. 
. Thus वेभिरिता, बेभिरितुम् , बेभिरितव्यम् from the Intensive stern बेभिध॥ In the sâtra ara is given, which is the Genitive singular of a namely of the let ters a l By the rule of apirsa (. 1. 52), the 97 of a ought to be clidcd 
BK. VI. Cr. IV. . 52 ) ARDIIADIIATU CHIANGES 
1271 
and not ; but that rule is evidently inapplicable here, since the elision of x would have taken place by the preceding rule : the present rule therefore teaches the elision of a (ya). Or the word ni may be considered as in the ablative case, and then by I. 1. 54, the first letter would be elided namely all Why have we taken the two letters (ar) conjointly viz] a and not ? Observe इंग्यिता, मग्यिता, शुध्यिता from the simple rootsj, मध्य, and Here y not being sollowed by , is not elided (see Bhvadi 541-546). Why do we say "when preceded by a consonant?' Observe FTATORT, Araat 11 
क्यस्य विभाषा ॥५०॥ पदानि ॥ क्यस्य, विभाषा, (भाधातुके)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ क्यस्य हल उत्सरस्थ विभाषा लोपो भवति भार्डधातुके। 
50. The elision of g of the Denominative stem (PT) is optional, when preceded by a consonant and followed by an ardhadhatuka affix. 
The क्य denotes the affixes क्यप् and क्या ॥ Thus समिथिता or समिषिता, इपिता or दृषदिता meaning समिधमात्मन इच्छति or समिधावाचरति &c. 
Orchala 1198 11 na ulot:, afa, ( arrange) u वृत्तिः ॥ भनिरादाबाधातुके नलोपो भवति। 
51. The r of the verbal stem formed with the affix for, is elided before an ardhadhâtuka affix which does not take the augmenta li 
This debars rar, the semi-vowel a, the guņa, Vriddhi and the long substitutions. Thus waal, HC, muu, TEET, OTT, TOUT, TEX, TH, Hi , ma and a (see VII. 4. I for the shortening of the stem of the Aorists in these). Why do we say 'not having the augment ?' Observe 
ant and green 
निष्ठायां सेति ॥५२॥ पदानि ॥ निष्ठायाम, सेटि॥ वृत्तिः ॥ निष्ठायां सेटि परतो जेलोंपो भवति । 
52. The affix for is elided before the affixes and mag when these take the augment 
Thus iftira, gitara, orang, shall Why do we say "before an ardhadhatuka aslix having the augment "7 Observe aft: q: 11 This is the part participle of the causative, the being the sign of the causative. By VII. 2. 15 read with VII. 2. 49, gry is a root which takes no r augment in the Nishtha. It may be objected that VII. 2. 15 preventing a augment applies to verbs of one syllable (VII. 2. 10), and the causative aft being of two syllables will always have in the Nishtha, and so it is useless to use the word of in the satra. The word Art in the stra fixes the time when the elision of for should take place. Namely, first there should be added the 
1272 
ARDHADIHATU CHANGES. [ BK. VI.CH. IV.856 
augment and then, there should take place the elision of for II Otherwise we shall have this difficulty कारि+त, here let us elide the fण first : and we get कार+त, now we cannot add toत, for कार् being a verb of one syllable will not take re by VII. 2. 10. Therefore, the reverse process must be adopted, We must clider first. For afga: see also VII. 2. 27. . जनिता मन्वे॥५३॥ पदानि ॥ जनिता, मन्वे॥ 
वृतिः॥ जनितेति मन्त्राविषये सारी णिलोपो निपात्यत । 
53. In a Mantra, the word जनिता is formed irre gularly by the elision of for before the affix with the aug 
ment इट् ॥ 
Thus 1 : forat sfall Otherwise stafqar in secular literature. It is an exception to VI. 4. 51. 
शमिता यशे ॥ ५४॥ पदानि ॥ शमिता, यक्षे॥ वृद्धिः॥ यज्ञकमणि शमितति इडावा मिलोपा निपात्यते । 
54. शमिता is formed irregularly by the elision of for before an x augmented affix, when meaning a sacrificial act. 
Thus पतं हविः शामितः ॥ It is formed by w and is in the Vocative case. Why do we say 'when referring to a sacrificial act'? See Thai Targa: 11 See Satpatha Br. III. 8. 3, 4 and 5. - अयामन्ताल्वाय्येतन्विष्णुषु ॥ ५५॥ पदानि ॥ अय, माम्-अन्त-आलु-आग्य इनु-हष्णुषु ॥ 
वृतिः ॥ भाम् मन्त मालु माग्य इस्नुष्णु प्येतेषु परतो मेरयादेपो भवति । 
55. अय is substituted for the r of णि, before the affixes आम्, अन्त, आलु, भाग्य, इत्नु, and इष्णु ॥ 
____Thus कारयां पकार, हारयां चकार, गण्डयन्तः, मण्डयन्तः ( formed by the Unadi affix सच्, स-भन्न, added to the roots गंड and मंड) भालु । स्पृहयालुः । भाय्य, स्पृहयाप्या, गृहयाच्यः ॥तुः सनायस्नुः ॥ष्णु:-पोषयिष्णुः ॥ Thus sutra could have been well dispensed with; for the ç of for would take guņa q which will be changed to my by the rules of Sandhi, be fore these affixes. This substitution of sq for is for the sake of the subsequent sätra however, because there could not be changed to me by any sandhi-rules. 
- ल्यपि लघुपूर्वात् ॥ ५६॥ पदानि ॥ ल्यपि, लघु पूर्वात (णे अय॥ वृत्तिः॥स्यपि परतो लघुपूर्वादुनरस्य रयादेशो भवति । 
56. Hy is substituted for the r of for, before the Absolutive affix 69, when the vowel preceding the r is light. 
Thus प्रशमध्य गतः, संदमप्य गतः, प्रवेभिस्य्य, प्रगणय्य ॥ But प्रपात्य गतः the vowel preceding the being long. Here VI. 4. 51 applies, The shortening, the 
u. 
BK. VI. CII. IVF Go.] ARDIIADIIATUKA CIHANGES. 
1273 
elision of a and the elision of should not be considered as asiddha, as their place of operation is not the same. Thus + foreremt; this mi is shorten. ed by VI. 4.92, and we liave Tf1 This shortening is not to be considered as asiddha, for if asiddha, there being no laghu purva, the present rule would not apply. Similarly ofta is the Intensive root, its g is elided by VI. 4. 49, this elision is not considered as asiddha, if it were asiddha, the F of fir would not be laghu. Similarly the elision of min to which is a root which ends in म, (see Dhatupatha Churadi 309), is not considered as asiddha for similar reasons. 
विभाषा, ऽऽपः ॥ ५७॥ पदानि ॥ विमाषा, आपः,॥ वृत्तिः ॥माप उतरस्य य॑पि परतो विभाषा ऽयादेपो भवति ॥ 
57. ea is optionally substituted for the r of for before the affix ल्यए, after the verb आए। .. Thus प्रापथ्य or प्राप्य गतः॥ This however does not apply to the भाप substitute for reas भष्वाप्य गतः (VI. I. 48, VII. 3. 36). The maxim of Prati padokta applics here. 
युप्लुवोहघिल्छन्दसि ॥ ५८॥ पदानि ॥ यु-प्लुयोः, दीर्घः, छन्दसि, (ल्यापि)॥ वृत्तिः । प्रत्येतयोयपि परत छन्दसि विषये दीपों भवति । 
58. In यु and प्स, long is substituted for उ, before ल्यए in the Veda. 
_Thus शान्त्यनुपूर्व वियूय ; यत्रा यो दक्षिणा परिप्लूय ॥ Why do we say in the Chhandas? Observe संयुत्य, भाप्लुत्य in the secular literature. 
क्षियः॥ ५९॥ पदानि ॥ क्षियः, (दीर्घः ल्यपि)॥ पतिः ॥ शिवम वीपों भवति ल्यपि परतः ॥ 
59. A long is substituted for the roff before ल्यए॥ 
____As प्रक्षीय, उपक्षीय ॥ 
निष्ठायामण्यदर्थे ॥६०॥ पदानि ॥ निष्ठायाम. अ-ण्यदर्थे, (दीर्घः)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ ण्यतः कृश्यस्थार्थो भाषकर्मणी ताभ्यामन्यन वा निष्ठा तस्यां सियो दीपों भवति । 
60. A long is substituted for the sof foy before the Participle in es, when it has not the sense of the future 
Passive Participle in ण्यत् ॥ 
The force of oun is to denote condition (Impersonal action) and ob ject (passive). When the Past Participle has not the force of oun, the vowel of fi is lengthened. Thus flori, autori, aftofta: all used in the active sense. The is added to the Intransitive for to denote the agent (111. 4. 72). Thus प्रक्षीणमिदं देवरसस्य this is the spot where Devadatta perished'. Here nis used with a Locative force (III. 4.76). Why do we say 'not having the force of 
1274 
ARDIIADIATUKA CIIANGES. [ 1K. VI. C1. IV. $ 62 
0917 Observe TAREHÀNHET: 11 Here x is added with the force of condi tion, and akshitam means 'imperishable'. The vowel not being lengthened the a is not changed to म (VIII. 2.46). 
वा कोशदैन्ययोः ॥६१॥ पदानि ॥वा,आक्रोश-दैन्ययोः (शियः दीर्घः विभाषा) बत्ति ॥ माक्रोष गम्यमाने देन्ये च लियो निष्ठापामण्यार्ये वा दीर्घा भवति । 
61. The long is optionally substituted, for the r of fa, before the Past Participle , not having the sense of the Future Passive Participle vera, when the word means 'imprecation' or 'a miserable plight'. 
Thus शितायुरेषि or मीणायुरेषि, शितक: or क्षीणका, सितोयं तपस्वी, सीणोऽयं तपस्वी। When not having the sense of cursing or miserable condition, we have one form only, as क्षीणमनः॥ 
स्यसिच्सीयुटतासिषु भावकम्मणोरुपदेश ज्झनमहाशा वा चिवविट् च ॥२॥ पदानि ॥ स्य-सिच-सीयुट्-तासि, भाष-कर्मणोः, उपदेशे, अच्-हन्-प्रह-दशाम, वा, चिण्वत, इद्, च, 
वृत्तिः ॥स्व सिन् सीयुद् तासि सत्येतेषु भावकर्मविषयेषु परत उपरे ऽनन्तानामझाना हन् मह इए इत्येतेषां पचिवकार्ये भवति वा । या पिण्यत् तारागमो भवति । 
62. Before the affixes fer (First Future and Condi tional), सिच् (S-Aorist), सीयुट (Benedictive) and तासि (the Priph rastic Future), when there are used in the Impersonal (ra) and Passive (कर्म) Voices, (1) the verbal stems ending in a vowel in the Grammatical system of instruction (उपदेश), as well as the verbs (2) हन् (3) प्रह् and (4) are treated optionally in the same way as in the third person of the Passive Aorist in feru. and when so treated, they have the augment इद ॥ 
The augment is, of course, added to the affixes fa, fary, ety and afe and not to the stem. What are the special objects served by this atidesa aphorism? They are given in the following verse : 
Karika पिण्वदू पबिर्युक् च इन्तम घत्वं 
वीर्षधोक्तो यो मितां वाघिणीति । इ चासिस्तेन में लुप्यते णि 
नित्यमायं वलनिमित्तोऽविधाती। First :-The Vriddhi takes place as in popor (VII. 2, 116, VII. 3. 34), ' secondly, there is the addition of पुक् augment (VII. 3. 33), thirdly vis substi. tuted for the cof हन् (VII. 3.54), fourthly, the roots having indicatory 
BK. VI.Cl. IV.8.63 ] 
CHIN-VAD-BIHAVA 
1275 
(Bhuadi 809 to 873) optionally lengthen their vowel (VI.4.93), and lastly the addition of the auginent re being consiclered as asiddha or not to have taken effect by VI. 4. 22, the rule VI. 4. 51 applies and the causative affix for is elided : and this is added irrespective of the conditions and limitations of VII. 2. 35 &c. 
(1) Roots ending in a vowel in the Dhatopatha with the affix स्य as, विः-चायिष्यत or ष्यते, मयायिष्यत or अचेष्यत | So also with ar, as, पायिष्यसे or सास्यते, भवायिष्यत or भदास्यत । 
In शमि there are three forms, the two पामिप्यते or धमिप्यते, अशामिप्यत and भग्रामिष्यत being given by the elision of the causative ending by VI.4.51, in spite of the r augment which is considered as asiddha : and ut being a root of fara class, the m is lengthened optionally by VI. 4. 93. The forms gafun and भामयिष्यत are given when not treated as पिण, the causative is retained, the penultimate being shortened by VI. 4.92. With the affix सिच्-भचाविपाताम् or मधेषाताम्, भविषाताम्, or मदिषाताम् and भशामिषाताम् or मशमिपाताम् ॥ With the affix सीयुद-चाविषीट or चेषीट, विपीष्ट or पासीe and शामिषीष्ट or शमिषीट" With the affix तासि :-चायिता or घेता, दायिता or दाता, शामिता or शमिता ॥ The पिण् aorist model of these roots is अचायि, भवाय (VII. 3.33), and ममि (VII. 3.34) or भवामि (VI. 4.93). 
(2)हन् :-Fut.धानिष्यते or हनिष्यते; Con.भघानियत महमियत, Aor.भानिपाताम or भवाधिषाताम् and भइसाताम् (II. 4.44); Ben घानिषीट or वषिषीष्ट; Per. Fut. घामिता or FATII The peror model is alfa il 
(3) ग्रहःFut. माहिप्यते or महीप्यने Con. ममाहिष्यत or ममहीप्यत; Aor.भमाहिषा ताम् or भग्रहीपाताम् (महिषाताम)?; Ben. माहिषीष्ट or (पहिषीट) पहीषीट, Per. Fut. माहिता or afar | The lengthening of #takes place by VII. 2. 37. The roro model is भमाहि॥ 
(4) :- Fut. पशिष्यते or प्रायते, Con. मदर्शिष्यत or भद्रक्ष्यत ; Aor. भाटिपासाम् or महमाताम् ; Ben दधिषीट or दक्षीट; Per. Fut. दर्शिता or Fटा (पी)?॥ The पिण् model Is प्रदर्शि॥ 
Why do we say before स्य &c? Observe चेतव्यम्, दातव्यम् ।। Why in the Impersonal and Passive ? Observe fromat and traat Why in Upadesa ? The rule applies to कारिष्यते also, though कार (after guna change) ends in a con. sonant, but in its original ennuciation it ends with a vowel. The atidesa rule being enunciated with regard to stems (aiga), prevents the subs titutions of s and sr and इण् ॥ Thus हानष्यते, घानिष्यते, एष्यते or मायिष्यते, अश्येष्यते or अध्यायिष्यते ॥ The substitutes वध or गा (II. 4. 42, 43, 45, 50). do not coine according to the Kasika, when these roots are treated as च ॥ 
दीडो युडचि डिति ॥ ६३ ॥ पदानि ॥ दीङः, युद्, अचि, द्धिति ॥ वृत्तिः॥ दीयुडागमो भवति अजारी क्षिति प्रत्यय परतः ॥ 
1276 
ARDITADIHATU CHANGES 
[ BK. VI. Cit. IV 566 
63. युद is the augment after दीड, of an ardha dhatuka affix beginning with a vowel and having an indica tory or FH 
Thus retra, yontrara and referat at The Personal ending is pain by I. 2. 5. for being in the Ablative case, the augment is applied to the affix. This augment, however, is not to be considered as asiddha (VI. 4. 22) for the purposes of semi-vowel substitution under VI. 4.82. If that substitution were allowed, the augment would become useless. Why before an affix having torr? Observe उपदानम् ॥ 
आतो लोप इति च ॥ ६४॥ पदानि ॥ आतः, लोपः, इटि, च,॥ वृत्तिः ॥ इडाशवार्चधातुके डिति चाकारान्तस्याङ्गस्य लोपो भवति ॥ 
64. The final of a root is elided before an ärdhadh&tuka affix with the augment as well as when it begins with a vowel and has an indicatory w or 1 
Thus ufro and are 11 Here the affix has the augment. 990, पपुः, तस्थतुः, तस्युः ॥ Here the affixes are कित् by I. 2.5 गोदा, कम्बलदर with the affix क (III. 2. 3). So also प्रा (fem), प्रधा (fem) by मह III. 3. 106. Before Sarvadhatuka affixes, we have यान्ति, वान्ति, व्यत्यो and व्यत्यले ।। The two latter are the Imperfect ist Pers. Sing. Atm. of u and it with the affix (TE). When it does not begin with a vowel, we have ग्लायते, वासीव ।। 
चिति ॥६५॥ पदानि ॥ईत, यति,॥ वृत्तिः ॥ईकार मादेशो भवति भाकारान्तस्थाजस्थ यति परतः ॥ 
65. The final at of a stem is changed into & be fore the Krit-affix यत् ॥ 
__Thus देवम्, धेयम, हेयम्, and स्तेयम् ॥ The Guna takes place according to VII. 3. 84. 
घुमास्थागापाजहातिसां हलि ॥ ६६ ॥ पदानि ॥ धु, मा, स्था, गा, पा, जहाति साम्, हलि॥ बत्तिः संज्ञकानामझानांमा स्पागापा जहाति साइत्येतेषांहलादी डिमति प्रत्यये परत ईकारादेशो भवति। 
66. For the final of the roots of the form of दा and धा (घु), as well as for that of the roots मा, स्था, गा, पा, हा (जहाति) and सा (सो), there is substituted ई before an ardhadha tuka affix beginning with a consonant, which has an indicatory क् or ॥ . 
Thus दीयते, धीयते with यक, देदीयते, वेषीयते with यह ॥ So also मीयते मेमीयते स्थीयते, तेष्टीयते, गीयते, जेगीयते, मध्यगीट, भध्यगीपाताम्, मध्यगीषत, पीयते, पेपीयते, हीयते, जहीयते, भवसीयते, भवसीयते ॥ 
The qr 'to protect' of Adadi (47) is not meant here. be come the BK. VI. C11. IV S 69 ) 
AbulYA-RULES. 
1277 
vikarana yg is elided in roots of that class. Its form will be mad. It is Bhvadi 
'to drink' that is taken herc. So also fr-fagra is not to be taken here. Its form is grau 
Why do we say 'before a consonant'? Obscrve :, : N Here had en not been used in the sotra, the H of a would be replaced by [ by the present sūtra, even before a vowel-affix 5. O ; for the lopa of ar taught in VI. 4. 64 is prevented by this subsequent sutra teaching & substitution. In fact, the employment of the word in the aphorism is a jsåpaka that the rule of vipratishedha (1.4.2) applies in this section of asiddha (VI. 4. 22), and the lopa of is superseded by the present rule substituting f instead.So also a and war before non-fan and non fu affixes. 
rets il en Tara 16:, fors, वृत्तिः॥ घुमास्थागापाजहातिसामानां लिडि परत एकारादेशो भवति ।। 
67. is substituted for the 3 of the above roots in the Benedictive mood Active. 
Thus 2017, 12, 1977, FuaTT, Trana, 917 and m ama 11 Before non fan and non-f we have ears and wale it By the word Fee is here meant the prips or the Precative mood; the Personal endings of which mood are ardhadhatuka by III. 4. 116. More-over by Ill. 4. 104 the Parasmaipada affixes only of the Benedictive are fara, so the present rule does not apply to the Atmanepada affixes of the Precative. 
a Seterum : 116<ll qatat ll at, RTET-BRUTT, ora:, (fors ) (ara:) वृत्तिः ॥ ध्वादिभ्यो ऽन्यस्य संयोगादेराकारान्तस्य वा एकारावयो भवति लिडि परतः ॥ 
68. For the final at of any other root than those mentioned in VI. 4. 66, may optionally be substituted, in the Benedictive active, when the root begins with a conjunct consonant. 
The Fat was the only root of VI. 4. 66, which could have been affect ed by this rule. It has been, however, specially exempted by the word भन्यस्य ॥ Thus ग्लेयात् or गलायात्, म्लेयात् or म्लायान, but only स्येयात् (VI.4.66), and area (not commencing with a double consonant). The phrase Te is understood here and therefore the rule applies to Parasmaepada affixes (III. 4. 104). Thus mette in Atmancpada. The root considered as an anga, should consist of a double consonant, therefore in faratura (from far[+ ), of is not to be considered as a root having a double consonant, fort is no part of the anga, but of the preposition. 
न ल्यपि ॥ ६९॥ पदानि ॥ न, ल्यपि, घुमास्थागापाजहातिसाम् ॥ 
1278 
AUGMENT म॥ 
[ BK. VI.CH. IV S.72 
वृत्तिः॥स्यपि प्रत्यये परतो घुमास्थागापाजहातिसां यदुक्त तन्न । 
69. The ई substitution for आ under rule VI. 4. 66, does not apply when the absolutive affix or follows y 
मा, स्था, गा, पा, हा and सा॥ 
Thus प्राय, प्रधाद, प्रमाय, प्रस्थाय, प्रगाय, अपाय, प्रहाय and भवसाय ॥ The affix ल्यप् as the substitute of क्ला , is a कित् affix by I. I. 56. 
मयतेरिदन्यतरस्यांम् ॥ ७॥ पदानि ॥ मयतेः, इत्, अन्यतरस्याम, (ल्यापि)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ मयतरिकारादेशों वा भवति ॥ 
70. may optionally be substituted for the ant of मा, (मयति) before ल्यप् ॥ 
Thus अपमित्य or अपमध्य॥ लललझ्वडुदात्तः ॥ ७१॥ पदानि ॥ लुङ्, लङ्, लङ् क्षु, अट्, उदात्तः (अङ्गस्य)॥ 
वृत्तिः ।। लुङ् लह लहत्येतेषु परतोङ्गस्याडागमो भवति, उदात्तश्च स भवति ॥ 
71. अद् acutely accented is the augment of the verbal stem in the Aorist, Imperfect and the Conditional. 
Thus भकाति, भहात्,ि मकरोत, अहरत् and अकरष्यित्, अहिरिष्यत् ।। आडजादीनाम ॥७२॥ पदानि ॥ आद्, अच्-आदीनाम, (उदात्तः)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ भाडागमो भवत्यजादीनां लुङ्ललले परत उदात्तश्च स भवति ॥ 
72. आद् acutely accented is the augment of a. verbal stem beginning with a vowel, in the Aorist, Imperfect and the Conditional. 
Thus ऐशिष्ट, ऐक्षत, ऐक्षिष्यत; भौजीत्, भौग्जत, भौब्जिष्यत् ॥ ऐहिष्ट, ऐहत and ऐहष्य भौरभीत. माम्भत, and भौम्भिष्यत् ॥ The Vriddhi takes place by VI. I. 90. 
The,Passive Imperfect (ल) of यज्, वप् and वह are ऐज्यत, भोप्यत and sua formed by strę and not 97 11 First, the affixes of the Imperfect are added and then the Passive characteristic ye is added to these roots, which causes the vocalisation of the semi-vovels, and we have इज्यत, उप्यत, and उयत stems (VI. 1. 15). The stems having now assumed a forin in which they begin with a vowel, take mic! The addition of tense-affixes being an antaranga opera tion precedes the addition of augment. After the affixes have been added, the vikaraņa gan, being nitya, is added and precedes in order the augment, the latter being so far anitya; after 4# addition the roots assume a form in which we can add 97€!! Why are is considered anitya depends on the following maxim :-शानान्तरस्य प्राप्नुवन् विधिरनित्यो भवति "when the word-form in reference to which a rule teaches something; after the taking effect of another rule that applies simultaneously would be different from what it was before that other rule had taken cffect, then the former rule is not nitya." 
BK. VI. CI. IV 876] 
TIIE AUGMENTAR 
1279 
छन्दस्यपि दृश्यते ॥ ७३ ॥ पदानि ॥ छन्दसि, अपि, हश्यते, आत् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ छन्नसि विषये भाडागमो दृश्यते । वत्र हि विहितस्ततोन्यत्रापि दृश्यते । 
73. The आत् augment is found in the Veda also.. 
It is found there before the roots beginning with a vowel as well as before consonant roots. Thus मावः, मानक, and भायुनक् ॥ भाव: is the Aorist of वृ, the affix being elided by II. 4. 80. भाना from न (II. 4.80), and भायुनक is the Imperfect of युम् ॥ 
न मायोगे ॥ ७४॥ पदानि ॥ न, माङ्, योगे (लङ लङ् लक्षु)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ माङयोगे लुङ्लङ्लक्षु यदुक्तं तम भवति ।। 
74. In connection with the prohibitive particle AT, the augmentara or ang is not added in the Aorist, Imper fect and the Conditional. 
Thus मा भवान् काति, मा भवान् हार्षीत, मा स्म करोत, म्प स्म हरन, मा भवानीहिष्टमा, भवानीलिष्ट, मा स्म भवानीहत, मा स्म भवानीमत ॥ ___ बहुलं छन्दस्यमायोगे ऽपि ॥ ७५॥ पदानि ॥ बहुलम्, छन्दसि, अ माङ योगे, 
अपि ॥ वृत्तिः॥छन्दसि विषये माङ्योगेऽपि बहुलमडादौ भवतः ममायोगेपि न भवतः ॥ 
___75. There is diversity in the Veda : the augment अट or आट is added even with मा, and sometimes not added even when there is no मा ॥ 
Thus in जनिष्ठा उग्रः (Rig X. 73.1), काममूनयीत् (Rig I. 53. 3)and काममर्दयीत, the augment is not added though there is no मा ॥ In मा यः क्षेचे परवीन्यवाप्सः, मा stirret:, 1 37T:, the augment is not elided, though the particle Ar is added.. 
परयो रे ॥ ७६ ॥ पदानि ॥ इरयोः, रे, (बहुलंछन्दसि)॥ वृत्तिः ।। रे इत्येतस्य छन्दसि विषये बहुलं रे इत्ययमादेशो भवति ॥ 
76. रे is diversely substituted for हरे in the Veda. 
Thus के स्वि प्रथम वधे मापः (Rig X. 82. 5) या स्य परिवः ॥ In धे, the मा of धा is elided before the affix रे by VI. 4.64, the रे substitution being consid. ered as asiddha (VI. 4. 22) for the purposes of the elision of Tu Sometimes the substitution does not take place, as quaren fruframifor a fait il Here re augment is first added to i after the hz roots and the affix thus becomes a then? is substituted again for this go by this sūtra, thus the aflix is brought back to its original condition. To show this repetition 
the stra has exhibited the word get in the dual number. ___ अचि श्नुधातुभ्रुधां य्वोरियडुवङी ॥ ७७॥ पदानि ॥ अचि, श्नु, धातु, भवाम्, 
य्चोः, इयङ्, उवङी,॥ 
1280 
यद् and उवङ्॥ 
[ Bk. VI. CI. IV. 80] 
वृत्तिः॥श्नुप्रत्ययान्तस्याङ्गस्य धातोरिवर्णोवर्णान्तस्य भइत्येतस्यायहरवइत्यताबादेशौ भवतोचि परतः।। वार्तिकम् ॥ इयङबङ्मकरणेतन्वादीनां छन्दसि बहुलमुपसंख्यानं कर्त्तव्यम ॥ 
77. Before an affix beginning with a vowel, there are substituted for the 3 of 7, the characteristic of the roots of the fifth class, for the final , ई, उ and ऊ of a root, as well as for the ऊ of भ्र, the इय (for sort) and उव (for उ or ऊ). 
Thus भाप्नुवन्ति, रानुवन्ति, शक्नुवन्ति, from roots of the sth class. चिलियतुः ललुवतुः, हला, नियो, नियः, लुवा, लुवः and ध्रुवी and भ्रवः ।। 
Why do we say before an affix beginning with a vowel'? Observe भाप्नुयात, शक्नुयात्, राप्नुयात् ।। Why "of मनु &c."? Observe लस्य, लक्ष्याः , पध्ये, वध्वाः ॥ Why “off and "? Observe qaigi, pasi where the vowel is the it 
Vart:-The Guna (VII. 3. 84) and Vriddhi (VII. 2. 115) however take place to the supersession of इयइ and उवह: as from चिचयनम् and चायका, 
लवनम् and लावक, with ल्युट् and खुल ।। 
Vart:-In the Chhandas there is deversely the substitution of the and उबड़ in the case of तन् &c. Thus तन्वं पुषेम or तनुवं पुषेम | विषुवं पुषेम, स्वगों लोकः, सुवर्गो लोकः, त्र्यम्बकं यजामहे, त्रियम्बकं यजामहे ॥ 
अभ्यासस्यासवणे ॥७८॥ पदानि॥अभ्यासस्य,अ,सवणे ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ भभ्यासस्येवोंवर्णान्तस्यासवण धि परत इय उवड् इत्येतावादेशौ भवतः ।। 
78. इयड and उवह are substituted for the r and उ of a reduplicate, before a non-homogenous rowel. 
___ Thus इयेष, वोप, इयर्ति, (VII. 4.77) but Kषतुः and ईधुः, ऊपतुः and अपुः before homogenous vowels and care and fra before a non-vowel. . स्त्रियाः ॥ ७९ ॥ पदानि । स्त्रियाः, (अचि इयङ्)॥ 
वृत्तिः॥ बीइत्यतस्याजादी प्रत्यये परतः यहादेशो भवति ॥ 
79. इयङ is substituted for the t of स्त्री before an affix beginning with a vowel. 
As स्त्री, स्त्रियो, खियः; but स्त्रीणाम् the न bcing added by a subsequent rule, supersedes this rule. The making this a separate sätra is for the sake of the subsequent apliorisms. 
धाऽमशसोः॥ ८॥ पदानि ॥ वा, अम्, शसोः (इय स्त्रियाः)॥ वृत्तिः ।। ममि शसि परतः स्त्रिया वा उयडादेशी भवति ॥ 
80. The substitution of rug for the 4 of stri is optional before the accusative endings अम् and शसू (अस)॥ 
Thus स्त्री पभ्य or स्त्रियं पश्य, स्त्रीः पश्य or स्त्रियः पश्यः ॥ पणो यण् ॥ ८१॥ पदानि ॥ इणः, यण, ( अस्य अचि)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ दणोङ्गस्य यणादेशो भवति अचि परतः ॥ 
BK VI. CI. IV & 83 ) 
SEMIVOWEL SUBSTITUTION. 
1281 
81. For the of the root xu (ora) is substituted a semivowel (1), before an affix beginning with a vowel. 
Thus ara, F, 97 11 This supersedes fue substitution, and is itself superseded by VII. 2. 115, and VII. 3. 84 which ordain Vriddhi and Guna: on the maxim मध्ये ऽपवादः पूर्वान् विधीन् वाधन्ते, नोत्तरात् ।। "Apavadas that are sur rounded by the rules which teach operations that have to be superseded by the apavada operations, supersede only those rules that precede, not those that follow them." So we have an and 27: 11 
एरनेकाचो ऽसंयोगपूर्वस्य ॥ ८२॥ पदानि ॥ एः, अनेकाचः, अ संयोगपूर्वस्य, (arat: atferge ) II वृत्तिः ॥ धातोरवयवः संयोगः पूर्वो यमादिवर्णान्न भवति असावसंयोगपूर्वस्तदन्तस्यास्थानेकापोधि परतो यणादेशो भवति ।। 
82. A semivowel is substituted before an affix be ginnir.g with a vowel, for the final cort of a root, not proceded by a conjunct consonant forming part of the root, when the stem is not a monosyllable. 
The word at: is understood here, and the word dat is qualified by that: i. e. the orf which is not preceded by conjunct consonant forming part of the root is called an asamyoga pārva < 1 Thus far, fargi, fit, उन्यः, प्रामण्यो, प्रामण्यः ॥ All the above examples are of the soot भी preceded by the gati prepositions and an, or a Karaka-upapada ATH 11 The rule will not apply however if the preceding word is neither a gati nor a Karaka, but an adjective, as 97471, its dual and plural will be open and T Af: by 1 Why do we say 'of r or '? Observe yurg: and get from me which ending in s takes 79€ substitution. This is also shown in the next sútra. Why do we say the stem should be of more than one syllable ? Obscrve aft; its dual and plural are fant and forg: by a ll Why do we say the r or should not be preceded by a conjunct consonant? Observe atat d. qimet pl. asiatie: by 75! Why do we say " forining part of the root"? So that the rule may apply to an also. Here though is preceded by a conjunct 
, yet the latter is not part of the root, one being part of the upasarga II Thus we have it and greetill The phrase spremerger should in fact be taken as qualifying the Icttcr , and not as qualifying the word o r 
311: afo llell ifa il tit:, afa, (Ty, arar:, retorgerea, marer: 81571) II 
वृत्तिः ॥धास्ववयवः संयोगः पूर्वो यस्मादुवर्णान्न भवति तान्तस्याङ्गस्या नेकाधो ऽजारी सुपि परतो यणादेशो 
83. When a case-affix, beginning with a vowel follows, then the semivowel q is substituted for the final 
1282 
SEMIVOWEL SUNSTITUTION 
[BK. VI, C11. IV. § 87 
5 of a stem containing more than one syllable, if the stem ends with a verbal root ending in 3 not preceded by a con junct consonant forming part of the ront. 
As no roots at the end of: 'a stem end in short 7, the latter is not mentioned in the translation. Thus खलपू 'a sweeper':-d. खलप्यो, pl. खलप्वः; so also शतस्वी and तस्वः, and सकुल्लू : dual सकृल्ल्यो and सकल्ल्यः ॥ But लुलुपतुः and लुलुवः before tense-affixes, (non-सुप्); लू-लुवा, लुवः (because consisting of one syllable only), and कटा-कटमुवी, कटप्रवः (because s is preceded by a con junct consonant forming part of the root). The rule does not apply if the first member is not a Gati or a Karaka word : as परमल :-परमलुवौ and परमलुवः ।। 
वर्षावश्च ॥ ८४॥ पदानि ॥ वर्षा भवः, च, अचि सुपि यण् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ वर्षाभू इत्येतस्याजादी मुपि परतो यणादेपो भवति । वार्तिकम् ॥ पुनर्वतिवक्तव्यम् ॥ 
84. ~ is substituted for the ऊ of वर्षाभू also, when a case-affix beginning.with a vowel follows. 
As वायी, वर्षाश्वः ॥ वर्षाभू 'what is born in the rains, a kind of herb.' This is an exception to the subsequent rule. 
Vart:-The semi-vowel substitution takes place when हन्, कार and पुनर् precede भू; as हुन्थ्यो, इन्धः, पुनधी, पुनर्वः, कारवी (काराभ्वी), कारभ्वः (काराभ्यः)॥ 
न भूसुधियोः॥५॥ पदानि ॥ न, भ, सुधियोः, यण ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ भूसुधी इत्येतयोर्यणादेशो न भवति॥ 
85. The semi-vowel substitution does not take place in the case of stems ending in # or the word gut, be fore affixes beginning with a vowel. 
Thus प्रतिभु-प्रतिभुवी, प्रतिभुवः; सुधी-सुधियो, सुधियः॥ VI. 4. 77. छन्दस्युभयथा ॥८६॥ पदानि ॥ छन्दसि, उभयथा, भूसुधियोः ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ छन्दसि विषये भूसुधी इत्येतयोरुभयथा दृश्यते यण ॥ 
86. In the Chhandas, in the case of a stem in भू and सुधी, are found sometimes the इयङ, उवा and sometimes the semivowel substitution. 
As विश्वम,विभुवम,सुभ्यः and सुधियः; वनेषु चित्रं वि विशे, विशे विभुवम् , सुध्यो हव्यमग्ने सुधियो हण्यमग्ने । 
हुश्नुवोः सार्वधातुके ॥ ८७॥ पदानि ॥ हुश्नु वोः, सार्वधातु के, अङ्गस्य, अने काचः, असंयोग, पूर्वस्य, अचि ॥ 
वृत्तिः । इत्येतस्याङ्गस्य नुमत्ययान्तस्यानेकाचो ऽसंयोगपूर्वस्याजासौ सार्वधातुके परतो यणदेशो भवति॥ 
87. The semi-vowel व् is substituted for the 3 of s, and for that of नु (the characteristic of the fifth class roots), 
BK. VI. Ch. IV. $ 891 
SUBSTITUTION. 
1283 
before a sârvadhâtuka affix (III. 4. 113) beginning with a vowel, when the stem consists of more than one syllable and the 3 is not proceded by a conjunct consonant. 
Thus - TA, TET; 16%, so also with y-as yra grog, HYTTI Why do we say "of g and formed stems"? Obscrve in, dola, from Intensive bases, by thc clision of the ag affix, The 95 is elided in the secular literature also, by the implication (jnapaka) of this aphorism, for no counter exainple can bc forincd of a root consisting of inore than onc syllable and ending in 3, not preceded by a conjunct consonant and followed by a Sarva dhâtuka affix, unless the intensive roots with the elision of a be taken. Nor can we get examples from the Chhandas, for the preceding rule applies only to ardhadhâtuka affixes. Why do we say before a Sarvadhâtuka? Observe जुहवतुः, जुहुवुः (VI. 4. 77). So also not in भाप्नुवन्ति and पप्नुवन्ति as the ris preceded by a conjunct consonant. 
a respost: I ll A Il ya!, , , foeti, fa, il वृत्तिः । भुवो बुगागमो भवति लुडि लिटि बाजादौ परतः ॥ 
88. I gets the augment « (99) before the tensc-affixes of the Aorist and the Perfect, when beginning with a vowel. 
Thus 67179, 1; 87, 790, THE EgIT TIE: Alell la Il 59, 39-TRAT:, TIE,95 FT, FT, THE वृत्तिः ॥ गोहो ऽस्य उपधाया ऊकारादेशो भवति भजादी प्रत्यये परतः॥ 
89. For the penultimate pt of the guņated stem TTTE (from Te), there is substituted s before an affix begioning with a vowel. 
Thus hal, fa , hryTaner, fr64, PATET, pra i Why do we say 'penultimate'? So that the substitution should not apply any where else. The form is taken in the satra to prohibit the application of the rule to cases where uz docs not assume the form STE I Therefore not here, fattai, fi: I This change will not take place before the affixes begin ning with a consonant; as Farrel, faringe | Some say, the word is exhibited as siit in order to prohibit the sta substitution of for before fun !! As fare + fare= ne (VI. 4. 56 11ot applicu), the substitution being considered as asiddha (VI. 4. 22) would have brought in 314, T being considered as a word having a light vowel for its penultimate. According to Käsika the substi tution, however, is not asidelia, as their places of operation are different. 
it ut il gol ata Il tri, ot, 3 TIRT: 0 वृत्तिः ॥ दोष उपधाया ऊकार मावशी भवाति मी परतः ॥ 
1284 
SONE LENGTIIENING 
BK. VI CII. VI.893 
90. The ओ of दोष is replaced by : before the causative for 11 
Thus दूषयति, दूषयतः, दूषयन्ति | Similar reasons as in गोह, may be given for the root sy being exhibited as an in the satra. When not followed by णि, we have दोषो वर्नते ॥ __ वा चित्तविरागे ॥ ९१ ॥ पदानि ॥ वा, चित्त-विरागे, उदुपधायाः णी, ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ चित्तविकाराय दोष उपधाया वा अकारादेशो भवति णी परतः॥ 
91. The a substitution for the ओ of दोष is op tional, when the sense is that of the disturbing of the mind. 
___Asपि or प्रज्ञां खूपयति or दोषयति ॥ Otherwise साधनं दूषयति when mental agitation is not meant. .. मितां हस्वः ॥९२॥ पदानि ॥ मिताम, ह्रस्वः, णी, उपधायाः, ॥ 
वृत्तिः॥मितो धातवो घटाइयो मित इत्यवमादयो ये प्रतिपादितास्तेषामुपधाया इस्त्रो भवति णी परतः॥ 
92. The roots having an indicatory म, retain their penultimate short vowel before the causative rû lt 
The An roots are opene a subdivision of Bhwadi (800 to 873), and all other roots that end in भम् as सम् and तम् of Divadi class. Thus घटयति, व्यययति, जनयति, रजयति, शमयति, ज्ञपयति ॥ Some read the anuvritti of the word 'optional ly' from the last sûra into this. This will then be a limited option only (vyavasthita-vibhasha). The forms उस्कामयति and संक्रामयात are thus explained. 
93. Optionally a long may be substituted for the penultimate of the causative of a roots, before the third person of the Passive Aorist in चिण (E), and before the Abso lutive affix णमुल (अम्)॥ 
चिएणमुलाही? ऽन्यतरस्याम् ॥ ९३॥ पदानि ॥ चिण्, णमुलोः, दीर्घः, अन्य तरस्याम, णो, मितः उपधायाः ॥ वृभिः॥चिपरे णमुल्परं च णी परतो मितामानामुपधाया दीर्घो भवति भन्यतरस्याम् ॥ 
Thus अशमि or मशामि,भतमि or भतामि with चिण; and मंशमम, and णमंशामं; तमंतमम् or तामंशामम with णमुल ।। Why have we used the word दीर्घ in the sutra? The rule does not teachinerely the optional shortening. So that in the alternative of short, we have mult and in the other alternative we have भशामि, so that there is long. For had दीर्घ not been used, it would have taught optional short only, i. e. it would be a इस्वविकल्पविधि only, and there will be this difficulty :-~-when the causative of causative is taken, as in शमयन्तं प्रयुले, there would not be lengthening in the alternative. Because the lopa substi tute of T would be sthaniyat : therefore, the for which would be followed by 
BK VI. CI. IV. 8. 93 ) 
LENGTHENING 
1285 
f** or 997, would not have in it the face anga, because the first for intervenes between the r anga and the poor and op affix, and that for which is preced. el by a fan anga is not followed by report and , because the second for (though elided) intervenes. Therefore, there would not be optional short here, but compulsory short, by the preceding sätra and no lengthening. The rule, therefore, teaches the optional substitution of the long (&). For there arises no Such anoinaly in this view. For taking this rule to be a refy, the lopa substitution of for would not be sthanivat, by the express prohibition contain ed in l. 1. 58, and so we can get forms of double causatives. But if we take it a xerranty, then the lopa-adeśa of for being sthanivat, would prevent getting the alternative long form. Therefore the word is used in the satra to make this rule a fair, and prevent sthanivat-bhava. Thus take the causative of tq, which will be ora by the last sūtra. Take its Intensive with AG, 0 + which causes doubling by VI. 1.9 - a of+4C - T +46(VII. 4.60) + (n or nasal being added to the abhyasa by VII. 4.85 ) 
MT+ = +(VI. 4. 51 ) - 0984. Add for to this ie. make the causa. tive of the Intensive, 0m+++fu Then the sp of a is elided by VI. 4. 48 0++. Then « is elided by VI. 4. 49- 4+="Url This UR is the causative root of the Intensive of the causative r 1 Now add fror or Ting to this root; and we get two forins short and long súa or cura with 
TT and 0944 or Ture with the The long forms could not have been obtained had this not been a dem, for then the lopa-adeså of fore being sthani. vat would have prevented the application of a The roots ry and in (both Divadi) ending in do not ever lengthen the root vowel before formand og by VII. 3. 34. The present satra, therefore, does not apply to the simple roots. The derivative causative roots of these, namely, ura-149fa, * ret, option ally lengthen the penultimate before these affixes. Thus of# + Frövq + fuper (the of ro bcing elided by VI. 4. 51) - or uro (with the augment - 
ya or war) This rule applics when the Causative of the Causative root takes these affixes. In fact, the mention of the word of implies as much, otherwise the satra could have been made without this word, for the word " optionally' would have brought in both 'short' and 'long'. Thus in qua agrihe causes another to make quiet,' we add for the Causative sign.), to the Cauzative root A, as oft +for 4+* (VI. 4. 51) , the lopadesa here is not sthanivat for the purposes of lengthening (Fire) the # of 9 (1. 1. 58) From this area with from we get wuifh, and with 78% we get 
## But we cannot get the short forms, by taking the other alternative, as the lopadcsa will then be sthanivat. Hence the necessity of the word me in the stra. Thus the pay and orgy forms of the Causative of the Cau. sative (i.e. the double Causative) of u are मधमि or भवामि; धर्मखमम् or शामंशामर and from the form पंधमयति, we have मशंधमि or मंपचामि, प्रमशंगमम् or शामपं. 
1286 
CAUSATIVE SHORTENING. [BK. VI. CH, IV. 897 
TARII These latter are from the Causative stems of the Intensive root. The sign 48 of the Intensive has been elided (VI. 4. 49) as shown above. 
खचि हस्वः ॥ ९४॥ पदानि ॥ स्वचि, हस्वः, ( उपधायाः अङ्गस्य)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ खपरेणी परतो इस्यो भवत्यस्योपधायाः ॥ 
94. The penultimate of the Causative stem is shortened before the affix खच ॥ 
Thus द्विपन्तपः, परंतपः, पुरंदरः ॥ See III. 2. 29 and 4 लादो निष्ठायाम् ॥ ९५ ॥ पदानि ॥ ह्लादः, निष्ठायाम, (हस्वः उपधायाः अगस्य)॥ वृत्तिः॥हला स्योपधाया बस्यो भवति निष्ठायां परतः ॥ 
95. The penultimate of the Causative of हद । is shortened before the Participle affixes क्त and तवतु ॥ 
Thus प्रमः, प्रतुप्रधान , but महापयति before non-nishtha. The rule applies also when fint follows as ara: Il This is done by splitting up the aphorism into two (1) gावः (2) निष्ठायाम् ॥ ' छादेर्थे ऽवयुपसर्गस्य ॥ ९६ ॥ पदानि ॥ छादेः, घे, अद्वयुपसर्गस्य, (उपधायाः हस्व:)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ छादेरास्याद्युपसर्गस्य धमत्यये परत उपधाया इस्त्रो भवति । चार्तिकम् ॥ भविपश्त्युपसर्गस्येति पत्तव्यम् ।। 
96. The penultimate of the Churâdiu is shortened before the affix a (III. 3. 118), when not preceded by two prepositions (or more). 
As उरवछरः, मच्छता, दन्तच्छरः ॥ But समुपच्छाद: with tivo prepositions. The same when preceded by more than two prepositions, as समुपातिच्छायः ॥ The elision of for of otra &c., by VI. 4. 51, should not be considered as asiddha (VI. 4. 22) or sthanivat (I. 1. 57), otherwise there would be no penultimate to be shortened. 
Vart-The prohibition with regard to for should be extended to numbers more than two. . इस्मन्त्रनिकषु च ॥ ९७ ॥ पदानि ॥ इस, मन्, त्रन्, विषु, च, छादेः (उपधायाः 
वृत्तिाइस् मम् पन् विक्ष इत्येतेषु परतश्छादेरुपधाया इस्त्रो भवति । 
97. The penultimate of gif is shortened before the affixes इस, मन, अन् and कि ॥ 6. Thus छदिन , मन् (neuter), छपम्, धामच्छत् and उपच्छत् ।। The first three are Uñadi affixes. 
· गमहनजनखनघसा लोपः ङित्यनकि ॥९८॥ पदानि ॥ गम, हन, जन, खन, घसाम, लोपः, डिति अनङि, ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ गम इन जन खन घस इत्यतेषामानामुपधाया लोपो भवत्यनारी प्रत्यये कित्यनहि परतः ।। BK. VI. CII. IV. §. 101 ) 
KIT AND NIT CHANGES. 
1287 
98. The root-vowel of गम्, हन्, जन्, खन्, and घस् is elided before an aflix beginning with a vowel, when it has an indicatory or ; but not before the Aorist affix lll 
___ Thus जग्मतुः, जग्मुः जयतुः, जन्नुः, जज, जज्ञाते, जज्ञिरे, चयनतुः, चपनुः, मातुः, जाः, मक्षममीमवन्तपितरः, कितीकिम्, गमनम्, हननम् ॥ भनहीतिकिम, भगमन, भघसत् ॥भवीयेत्र, गम्यते, हन्यते ॥ 
Why having indicatory For ? See गमनम, हननम् ॥ Why not भ ? See भगमन, अघसत् ॥ Why beginning with a voivel,? See गम्यते and हन्यते ।। 
तनिपत्योश्छन्दसि ॥९९॥ पदानि ॥ तनि, पत्योः, छन्दसि, (किति उपधायाः लोपः)। वृत्तिः ॥ तनि पति इत्येतयोगसि विषये उपधाया लोपो भाति अजारी किति प्रत्यये परतः॥ 
99. In the Chiliandas, the root-vowel of at and que is elided before an affix beginuing with a vowel, when it has an indicatory or all 
As वितबिरे कायः, शकुना व पप्तिमः ॥ In secular language विसमिरे, पेनिम् ॥ घसिमसोहलि च ॥१००॥ पदानि ॥ घसि, भलो, हलि, च, ( अचि मिति)। वृत्तिः ॥ घसि मस इत्येतयोभन्दासि उपधाया लापो भवति इलावावजाशै च क्रिडति प्रत्यये परतः । 
. 100. The root-vowel of घस् and भस् is elided in the Chhandas, before any affix, whether beginning with a vowel or a consonant, which has an indicatory Ford 
Thus सन्धिषमे सपतिश्च मे, बब्धांते हरी धानाः ।। सन्धिः is thus derived : किन is added to the root भदू ; then by II. 4. 39, घस् is substituted for म; thus घe+ ति-घस+ति (being elided by the present satra)-+ति (स् being elided by VIII. 2. 26), then # is changed to y, and a to o and we have fout: it Then समानाधिः -सम्धिः (समान changed to स VI. 3. 84). The word धाम् is the Im. perative of भस्, thus भस् + लु+साम्भ भस् + ताम्भ स् + ताम् (VI. 4. 100) बम् +ताम् (VIII. 2. 26) +धापू धाम् ॥ This rule of elision being a nitya and a subsequent rule ought to have operated first, but, as a Vedic anomaly, the reduplication takes place first. See VII. 2.67 
Why do we read "before an affix beginning also with a consonant"? Because the elision takes place before a vowel affix also, as वसति-मस् +पल+ 
• शिव भस् + मति (VII. I. 4)-अप्सति (VIII. 4.55). 
Why having an indicatory or ? Observe PT THEN The has been added into the aphorism by the Vartikakära. 
झलायो हेर्दिः॥ १०१॥ पदानि ॥ दु-मल्योः , हे, धिः ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ इत्येतस्माद् सलन्तेभ्योत्तरस्य हलाः स्याने घिरादेवो भवति । 
101. After and after a consonant (with the ex ception of semi-vowels and nasals), f is substituted for the 
1288 
CERTAIN SUBSTITUTES. 
[BK VI. CHL IV. $. 10.4. 
Imperativo affix id, when the latter does not take the ang. 
ment इट् ॥ 
Thusg-शुधि सन् consonants; भिद -भिन्छि, छिन्-छिन्ति ॥ But कीणीति, मीणीहि (VI.4.113) not ending in consonants. Why fooly Oerve शुसार। Why do we read the anuvšitti of into this sitra? When fidcs not begin with a consonant, but with a vowel, i.e. when it takestheaugment, therule does not apply. As रूशिकि, स्वपिहि॥ In the case of शुद्धतात. भिन्नान, when feis replaced by ATT (VII. 1.35) this substitution does not take place be: ause KTT is a later rule in the order of Ashtadhyayt, and because सकरतो विप्रतिषेधे बाधितं तदाधितमय “When two rules, while they apply simultaneously mutually prohibit each other, that rule of the two which is once superseded by the other, is superseded altogether". When भकw is added by V. 3.71, hि substitution takes place, as मिन्द्रांक, छिन्द्रकि॥ The maxim पुनः प्रसा विज्ञानात सिद्धम् applies hre:- Occa sionally the formation of a particular form is accounted for by the fact that a. preceding rule is allowed to apply again, after it had been previously super 
seded by a subsequent rule." ...श्रुश्टणुपवृभ्यश्छन्दसि ॥ १०२ ॥ पदानि ॥ भु-ऋणु-पृ-श-पू-भ्यः, छन्दसि, 
वृत्तिः ।। श्रुणु पकवत्येते य उतरस्य दधिरांशो भाति सि विषये। 
102. घिis substituted for हि in the Vedas, after , णु, प, and 
As बुधी इविमिन्न, पृणुधी, गिरः, पूर्षि, उरुकदुरुणस्क hि and भवावधि, ॥ 
In Tyut, then is not elided after the 3 of y as it was required by VI. 4. 106, since the present aphorism specifically mentions it. The lengthen ing takes place by VI. 3. 137. The forms other than yiu are irrey ul ır; eng 
being added diversely by III. 1.85,and then elided diversely by बहुलं उन्नसि II.4.73 
आइतब्ध ॥ १०३॥ पदानि ॥ अड-इतः, च, हेद्धिः ॥ वृत्तिः । मन्तिम हेखिरादेशो भवति ॥ 
103. fo is substituted for fe, when the tense-affix is not जित् ॥ 
Under 111. 4. 88 fa is also part in the Vedas: and when it is far, it is not is by I. 2. 4. Thus गरन्धि, यन्धि and युयोधि in the following सोमान्धि 
भस्मभ्यं समर्थश्व प्रयन्धि, युयोध्यस्मज्ञ जुहुराणमेनः 
Why do we say when it is not डित'? Observe प्रीणीहि ॥ रन्धि is irregularly Parazmaipada of 19; the re being replaced by sg, and the redupli cate lengthened as a Vedic form. The q, is not elided, by VI. 4. 37 as the affix is not डिन् ॥ प्रयाध is from यम, the is elided : and युयोधि from पु (योति), the पाप being replaced by इलु ॥ 
चिणो लक ॥ १०४॥ पदानि ॥ चिणः, एक, प्रत्ययस्य । वृत्ति ॥ चिण उत्तरस्य प्रत्ययस्य युग्भवति ॥ 
BK. VI. CH. IV. S. 107 ] किन AND Eि CIIANGES. 
1289 
104. The personal-cndings are elided after pau, the third person, singular Passive of the Aorist. 
As महारि, भालांकि, भकारि, भपाधि So also भकारितराम, भहारितमान, here the elision of the personal affix त (III. I.60) of the Aorist being considered as asiddha, the affixes que, and who are not elided: though if the sätra were to be literally interpreted, every affir after fora, ought to be elided. Or the word Asra is understood here; so that fit and for asfixes of fou are elided and 
not every affix. ___ अतो हेः ॥ १०५ ॥ पदानि । अतः, हेः, अङ्गस्य ॥ 
पतिः ॥ भकारान्तारलादुत्तरस्य हेर्लुग्भवति ॥ 
105. The Imperative affix fc is elided after & stem ending in short अ॥ 
Thus पच, पठ, गच्छ, धाव | But हि, रुहि after stems ending in e. Why do we say "short "? Observe grill, gftit (EMT+f, the substitution by VI. 4. 113, should be considered asiddha), here it is not elided after the long o 11 
उतश्च प्रत्ययावसयोगपूर्वात् ॥ १०६॥ पदानि ॥ उतः, च, प्रत्ययात, असंयोग पूर्वोत्॥ 
वृतिः ॥ उकारो यो ऽसंयोगपूर्वस्तरन्तात्मस्थयादुत्तरस्य हे ग्भवति । पातिकम् ॥ उतश्च प्रत्यवाहित्यष छन्दसि पेति वक्तव्यं ॥ 
_____106 The Imperative हि is elided after the 3 of an affix, in the vikarana with which the Present-stem (special conjugation) is made, provided that the 3 is not preceded by a conjunct consonant. 
The affix with which the Present-stem is made is 3 and u Thus पिनु, मनु, कुरु ।। Why after ''? Observe लुनीहि, मुनीहि ॥ Why do we say "r being part of the vikaraṇa or affix"? Observe sft, gft, here is part of the root itself, and not of the vikarana. Why de we say not preceded by a conjunct consonant,? Observe प्राप्नुहि, राघ्नुहि, ताणुहि ॥ 
Vart:--The elision of fe after the 7 of the vikaraņa and is option. al in the Vedas ; as भातहि यातुधानान्, पिनुहि यशपतिम् , तेन मा भागिनं कणुहि ॥ 
लोपश्चास्यान्यतरस्यां म्वोः ॥ १०७॥ पदानि ॥ लोपः, च, अस्य, अन्यतरस्याम, मयोः ॥ 
पत्तिः ॥ योयमुकारो ऽसंयोगपूर्वस्तान्तस्य प्रत्ययस्यान्यतरस्यां लोपो भवति॥ 
107. The J of the vikarana I and el, where not precoiled by a conjunct consonant, may be clided optionally before a personal ending licginning with or all 
Thus मुन्न: or मुनुवः, सुन्मः, मनुमः, तन्वः, सनुवः, सम्मः, तनुमः ॥ The must be 
, 1290 
ha and FP-CHANGES 
[ BK.VI. CII. IV. 111. 
long to the affix, and should not be part of the root. Therefore not in T, TH: U 
Why do we say not preceded by a conjunct consonant'? Observe #77, T*T: only. Though the elision word was understood in this sūtra, the mention of to indicates that the final is only to be elided, and not the whole affix . It is a general maxim that the words and fr cause the elision of the whole affix, while 'lopa' will cause elision of the final letter only of the affix. If the whole affix be elided, we could not get yor: &c., Moreover, in and si formed by guņa of, there would have been no guņa, had the word 
* been used, for I. 1. 63, would have prevented guņa; but by using the word PTT we have such guņa also by I. 1. 62. 
Pacittà: Il foc il fat ii facta, attai, I 'वृत्ति ॥ करोतरुत्तरस्य उकारप्रत्ययस्य वकारमकारास प्रत्यये परतो नित्य लोपो भवति । 
. 108. The elision of 3 is invariable before x and in the case of $ ( cita ). 
Thus : and g: u Thus +*+ - +*+a: (VI. 4. 110) o+ (VI. 4. 108). Now the lopa being not sthanivat, when a vowel is to be lengthened (I. 1. 58), 7 of should be lengthened by VIII. 2. 77. This con tingency is prevented by VIII. 2. 79. 
tell fog 11 Tata II 9, , 19: farinda: 11 चिः॥थकारारीच प्रत्यये परतः करोतरुत्तरस्याकारमत्ययस्य नित्य लोपो भवति ।। 
109. The affix J of the stem goo is always elided before a personal ending beginning with a git 
Thus mula safart and a ll The augment arkt is treated here as an affix, and it makes the personal ending to which it is added, as an affix beginning with all 
अत उत्सार्वधातुके ॥ ११०॥ पदानि ॥ अतः, उतू, सार्वधातु के, डिति॥ वृत्तिः ॥ उकारप्रत्ययान्तस्य करोतेरकारस्य स्थाने उकार भादेशी भवति सार्वधातुके डिति परतः । 
110. Before a Sârvadhâtuka aslix with an indicat ory or E, short 3 is substituted for tlıe ar of (FT+3) when gunated. 
Thus +7+7=*[ +7 + (VII. 3. 84)=1+3+ 3774: (VI.4.110) The gp is fra by I. 2. 4. So also gara, 6 il Why do we say 'before a Sarvadhatuka'? So that the rule may apply to what was once a Sarvadhâtuka, though no longer existent. Thus ge where the personal ending s is elided, but it leaves its effect behind. The 7 in shows that this is not to be tunated by VII. 3. 86. When the asfix is not fin or ist we have , Tre and T (1. 2. 4). 
ACHT: 11888.11 ora 11 99-Fit:, -19:, Ara area सतिः। भस्यास्तमाकारस्य लोपो भवति सार्वधातुके द्धिति परतः । 
BK. VI. C11. IV $ 114. ) 
FAT AND FEE CHANGES. 
CIAN 
1297 
111. Before a Sarvadhatuka कित orरित affix, the भ of u and अस् is clitlel. 
is the characteristic of the roots of the Rudhadi class, while ste is the root itself. Thus रुन्धः; रुन्धति, भिन्स, भिन्दान्ति; Soalsoof भस्. स्तः, सन्ति ॥ But भिनगि and भस्ति before non-किन and non-~~डित् affixes. इन+भम् ought to be नाम, instead of that we have fx in the satra. The 9769 single substitution is an irregularity. 
इनाभ्यस्तयोरातः ॥ ११२॥ पदानि ॥ इना-अभ्यस्तयोः, आतः, लोपः सार्वधा तुके कठिति ॥ 
वृत्तिः॥मा स्वेतस्याभ्यस्तानां पानामाकारस्य लोपो भवति सार्वधातुके मिति परतः । 
112. Before a Sarvadha.tuka कित् or जित् affix be ginning with a vowel, the long at of T (the vikarapa of the 9th class) and of the reduplicate stems is elided. 
Thus लुनते, लुनताम्, भलुनत ; मिमते, मिमसाम, ममिमत, संजिहते, संजिहताम् and समजिहत | Why do we say 'of ना and the reduplicates'? Observe धान्ति, arfa 11 Why 'of long e'? Observe farural Why before fint and fort'? Observe भलुनान्, भजहान् ।। 
ईहल्ययोः ॥ ११३ ॥ पदानि ॥ ई, हलि, भ-धो (इनाभ्यस्तयोरातः सार्वधातु के काडिति)॥ वृत्तिः॥मान्तानामानामभ्यस्तानांच घुवर्णितानामात ईकारादेशो भवति इलाश सार्वधातुके मिति परतः॥ 
____113. Before a Sarvadhatuka फित् or जितू affix be ginning with a consonant, the a ofw and of the reduplicate stems is replaced byई, except when the root is दा or धा (घ)॥ - Thus लुनीता, पुनीता, लुनीयः, पुनीया, सुनीते and पुनीते ॥ of reduplicates we have मिमीते, मिमी, मिमीये, संभिहीते, संजिही, संजिहीये ।। Why do we say 'be ginning with a consonant'? Observe लुनन्ति, मिमते ॥ Why with the exception of पु? Observe पता, पत्तः ॥ So also लुनाति and जहाति before non-कित् and non for affixes. 
इहरिद्रस्य ॥ ११४॥ पदानि ॥ इत, हरिद्रस्य, (हलिसार्वधातुकेमिति)। वृत्तिः ॥ रिद्रातईलादो सार्वधातुके डिति परत इकारादेशो भवति । पार्तिकम् ॥ दारिद्रातरार्धधातुके लोपो वक्तव्यः ॥ वा०॥ सिजन प्रत्ययविधी भवतीति वक्तव्यम् ॥ Kartka | न दरिद्रायके लोपो दरिद्राणे च नेष्यते । 
दिवारिद्रासतीरयेके रिशरिद्विषतीति वा ॥ पा. ॥ भयतन्यां वेति वक्तव्यम् ॥ 
114. Fis substituted for the मा of दरिद्रा before a Sårvadhatuka fria or fea asfix beginning with a consonant. 
Thus हरिद्रितः, हरिद्रियः, दरिद्रिवः, दरिद्रिमः ॥ But दरिद्रति before a vowel affix (VI. 4. 112) and putra before a non-fft affix, 
1292 
FATLAND ET CHANGES. 
[BK. VI. CH. IV 118 
Vart:-The final of fin is elided before an Ardhadhatuka affix. Vårt:-And this elision should be considered as siddha, in applying rules relating to affixes. Thus pícat by loosing aT becomes thou, and we should apply those affixes which would come after a form like 'daridr', and not what would have come after a form like 'daridra'. Thus o comes after roots ending in long B (III. 1, 141): but this affix would not be applied here, but the general affix (111. 1. 134). Thus faria eft: 
Karikå :- The elision does not take place in the forms foram and पशिाण, and the Desiderative may be either दिदरिद्रासति or विदरिद्विषति ॥ Sid. dhanta Kaumudi gives the following rule: "Sit of flu should be considered as elided when applying an ardhadhatuka affix, but optionally so before if (Aorist), and not at all before m (Desiderative), og andre" ir 
Vårt :-Optionally so in the Aorist (adyatana-past) as, evitare or fonetit The latter form is evolved by VII. 2. 73 and elision of fun The form fore in the satra is Vedic, the root being shortened from it to funt 
भियोज्यतरस्याम् ॥ ११५॥ पदानि ॥ भियः, अन्यतरस्याम, (इतहलि द्धिति ATOUT *) 1 वृत्तिः ॥ भी इत्येतस्थाजस्थान्बतरस्यामिकारादेशो भवति इलाश कडिति सार्वधातुके परतः॥ 
115. ris optionally substituted for the of Wt before a Sarvadhatuka uffix beginning with a consonant and having an indicatory por lo 
Thus निर्मितः or विभीतः, विभियः or बिभीयः, विभिवः or विभीवः विभिमः or विभीमः। But frafa before a vowel-beginning affix and frifa before a non-ren affix and fresh before an ardhadhatuka affix. 
जहातेश्च ॥ ११६ ॥ पदानि ॥ जहातेः, च, ( हलि अन्यतरस्याम डितिसार्व ETC) I 
त्तिः ॥ महातेथ कारादेवी भवति भन्यतरस्यां इलादो डिति सार्वधातुके परतः ॥ 
116. r is optionally substituted for the up of ( ra) before a Saryadhâtuka o or fra affix beginning with à consonant. 
Thus aita: or omta: (VI. 4. 113) ray: or wtry: (VI. 4. 113). But Er before a vowel affix, and warra besore a non-rex affix, and stata and Aurten before an ardhadhatuka. The separation of this satra froin the last, is for the sake of subsequent aphorisms. 
1889 retta lla, , , ( ARIKETA) # वृत्तिः॥ महातेराकारमान्तादेशो भवति इकारमान्यतरस्यां हो परतः । 
117. PT as well as ( may optionally be substituted for the final of the stem of Et before the Imperative ending 
BK. VI. CH. IV $ 120 
SUBSTITUTION 
1293 
Thus जहाहि नहिदि or जहीहि (VI. 4. 113). लोपो यि ॥ ११८॥ पदानि । लोपः, यि, (जहातेः सार्वधातुके डिति)। वृत्तिः ॥ लोपो भवति जहातेर्यकारा गित सार्वधातुके परतः। 
___ 118. The final of the stenm of हा is clided before an affix beginning with z being a Sårvadhâtuka fara or fa affix. 
Thus जह्यात्, जह्याताम् and जयुः ॥ ध्वसोरेद्धावभ्यासलोपश्च ॥ ११९ ॥ पदानि ॥ घु-असोः, एत्, हो, अभ्यास लोपः, च,॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ घुसंज्ञकानामानामस्तेश्च एकारादेशो भवति ही परतो ऽभ्यासलोपश्च। 
119. For the final vowel of the roots ay and ET (घ), and for the स् of अस्, is substituted ए before the Imper ative ending ft; and thcreby the reduplicated syllable of T and en is elided. 
Thus देहि, and धेहि, of धु, and एघि of मस्, the a being elided by this sūtra, and on being elided by VI. 4. III. This site of the present sQtra should be considered as having an indicatory y so that the whole of the reduplicated and not only the final letter of the abhyasa (I. I.55) is elided. ___ अत एकहल्मध्ये ऽनादेशादेलिदि ॥ १२० ॥ पदानि ॥ अतः, एक-हल, मध्ये, मनादेशादेः, लिटि॥ 
वृत्तिः॥डिन्तीतिवर्तते । लिटि परत मादेश भादिर्यस्याङ्गस्य नास्ति, तस्य एकहरूमध्ये,असहाययोईलोमध्ये यो ऽकारस्तस्य एकारादेशो भवति, अभ्यासलोपत्र लिटि डिति परतः॥ 
वार्तिकम् ॥ उम्मेरेवं वक्तव्यम् ॥ वा०॥ नशिमन्योरलिघेवं वक्तव्यम् ।। पा०॥ छन्दस्यामिपचोरप्यलिटि एवं वक्तव्यम् ॥ वा ॥ यजियप्योम। 
120. g is substituted for the short standing between two simple consonants of a verbal stem, before the personal endings of the Perfect which have an indicatory क् (I. 2. 5), provided that, at the beginning of the root, in the reduplication, no other consonant has been substi tuted ; and when this ¢ is substituted, the reduplicate is olided. 
Thus रेणतुः, रेणुः, येमतुः, येमुः, पेचतुः, पेचुः, देमतुः, देभुः ॥ Why for म'? Observe fiyat:, fatas: the is not replaced. Why do we say 'short m'? Ob: serve ररासे, ररासाते, ररासिरे ॥ Why do we say 'standing between two simple con sonants'? Observe tri, ma il Some say this example is not appropriate, for by I. 2. 5, the Perfect affixes are not in here, as they come after a conjunct consonant. The following is then more appropriate :-तस्सरतुः and तत्सरः ॥ Why do we say 'which has 10 substituted consonant in the reduplicatc'? Observe धकणतुः, चकणुः, जगणतुः, जगणुः, बभणतुः, बभणुः ।। 
1294 
SUBSTITUTION 
(BK. VI. CI. IV S. 121 
The substitution referred to here must be caused by the affixes of the Perfect, therefore, the rule will apply to नेमतुः, नेमुः, सहे and सेहाते, हिरे though Op and are the roots, and of and çare changed to 7 and The substi tution of ty consonant or a consonant in the reduplicate, should not be here considered asiddha (VIII. 4. 54, read with VIII. 2. 1). That substitution will be considered a substitution for the purposes of this satra and will make the stem Ayurf, as is indicated by the special exception made in favor of 
hot and you (VI. 4. 122). If the form of the letter is not changed in the reduplicate, by substitution, then such substitution will not make the stem 
TUTTA: 1 Thus by VIII. 4. 54, a letter (9,2, 1, , 4, ,,#) is substi tuted for a consonant (other than a nasal and a semi-vowel) in the reduplicate. 
Thus in qe the reduplicate is 999, the first q is also a substitute, for the t substitute of q will be all Such substitutes, however, are not meant here. 
This we learn from the implication ( jnapaka ) of sûtra VI.4. 126 where exception is made in case of 76 and 11 Therefore, where the substitute is a different letter, then the reduplicate becomes adešadi: otherwise not. 
When the affixes are not act or for the rule does not apply: as me 999, F 998 1 
Vart:-- is substituted for the # of 7 under similar circums tances :-thus :, H H The elision of the nasal by VI. 4. 24, would be considered asiddha by VI. 4. 22, hence this vårtika. 
Vart:—is substituted for the 4 of 79 and 7 before affixes other than those of লি। As মন, মনন্ধা। অননু is the Aorist in w of ময়ু which belongs to Pushädi mots (III. 1. 55). A is formed by t (I11. 1, 150). Padamanjari gives uz (3 rd Pl.), and quotes map T: 
Vårt:- In the Vedas, ç is substituted for the 3 of spa and 4 before affixes other than those of the Perfect, as starT, ( + 74 + 1 , the aug. ment gw being dropped); Tere instead of Tê , the Imperfect of quru The shortening is also a Vedic irregularity. 
Vårt :--So also of and 79,as mis and the Imperfect Vedic forms. The augment are being added by VI.4. 73. 
af 1182811 Tifat Ilyfes, a, hf, ( T HET STARF:) वृत्तिः । थलि च सीट परतो ऽनादेशादरहस्य एकहल्मध्यगतस्थातः स्थाने एकार भदिशो भवति भभ्यास लोपन ॥ 
121. Q is substituted for 24, of a verbal stem stand ing betwcen two simple consonants, the stem not having any different letter substituted in the reduplicate, when the ending van of the Perfect having the augmcut s follows, and thereby, the reduplicate is clided. 
111 
BK. VI. C1. IV $ 123 1 
SUBSTITUTION. 
1295 
seen two simple 
* 
This sheeplicate having 
Thus पेचिय, शेकिय But पपक्य before anitl; विदेविथ, the vowel be ing r and not a; ततलिथ, रसिथ, the w not standing between two simple con sonants; and चकणिय, बाणय, the reduplicate having the substitutes u and clifferent from and * # This sätra applies even when the affix is not किन्; and थल् is read in the satra only for the sake of clearness, no non-kit Per. 
foct ending can take except all 
तफलभजनपश्च ॥ १२२॥ पदानि ॥ त, फल, भज, प्रपः, च, (अत एक हलमध्ये अनादेशादेलिटिथलिचसेटि)। वृत्तिः ॥ फल भजनप इत्येतेषामानामत एकारादेवो भवति, मभ्यासलोपथ, लिटि मिति परसस्थति च सेटि॥ 
बार्तिकम् ॥ श्रन्येपोसि वक्तव्यर।। 
122. ए is substituted for the अ of त, फल, भज and अप, and the reduplicate is elided, when the affixes of the Perfect having an indicatory + (or ) follow, as well as when थल with the इद् augment follows. 
Thus तेरतुः, सेरुः, सरिथ, फेलतुः, फेलु, फेलिय, भेजतु, भेजुः, भेजिय, पे, पाते, पिरे। In the case of the rule applies to the obtained by Guņa, contrary to VI. 4 126, in and the rule, that no different substitute should be in the reduplicate, is not adhered to, and in to them does not stand between two simple consonants. 
Vart: It should be stated that the rule opplies to y also:-as, mugi, श्रेयुः। 
राधो हिंसायाम् ॥ १२३ ॥ पदानि || राधो हिंसायाम् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ राधो हिंसायाम]अर्णस्य एकार मादेशो भवति, अभ्यासलोपन लिटि छाडिति परसस्थलि चहे 
_ 123. ए is substituted for the मा of राध when meaning 'to hurt some one', and the reduplicate is elided, before the affixes of the Perfect having an indicatory x (or 
), as well as before yer with thc augment. 
Thus अपरेधतुः, अपरेधुः, अपरेधिय, but राधतुः, राधुः, रराधिय in any other sense than that of 'hurting'. In this sätra the long st of my is to be replaced by ए, the anuvritti of short भ (भतः VI. 4. 120) is therefore not appropriate here. We should either read the annuvřitti of a from VI. 4. 112, or we should read the word ons in this way "in y whatever stands between two simple consonants is replaced by ए". 
वा जभ्रमुत्रसाम् ।। १२४॥ पदानि ॥वा, ज, भ्रम, त्रसाम, ॥ वृनिः॥प्रमु अस इत्येतेषामानामतः स्थाने या एकार भादेशो भवति भाभ्यासलोपन लिरि डिति परत स्थलि च सेटि। 
1296 
ए SUBSTITUTION. 
[Bk. VI. CI. IV. 126 
124. ए is optionally substitnted for the w of the stems जर् (ज), भ्रम, and प्रस, and the reduplicate is thereby elid cd, before the affixes of the Perfect having an indicatory & (or ), as well as before the थल with the augment इट् ॥ 
Thus जेरतुः, जेरुः, जेरिथ, or जजरतुः, अजरुः, जजरिय, भ्रमतुः, धेनुः, भ्रमिथ, or बम मतुः, बभ्रमः, बभ्रमिथ, सतुः, सुः, सिथ, or सत्रसतुः, तत्रसुः, सबसिय ।। 
फणां च सप्तानाम् ॥ १२५॥ पदानि ॥ फणाम, च, सप्तानाम्॥ वृत्तिः ॥ कणादीनां समानां धातूनामवर्णस्य स्थाने वा एकार भादशो भवति, अभ्यासलोपन लिटि डिति परत, स्थलि च सेटि॥ 
____ 125. ए is optionally substituted for the t and मा of the seven roots फण, राज, भ्राज, भ्राश, ग्लाश, स्यम् and स्वन् ; and the reduplicate is elided thereby, before the affixes of the Perfect having an indicatory (or ) as well as before the u with the augment. 
___Thus फेणतुः, फेणुः, फेणिय or पफणतुः, पफणुः, पणिय रेजतुः, रेजु, रोजिय, or रराजतुः, रराजः, रजिया भेजे, भेजाते, भ्रजिरे, or बभ्राजे, बभ्राजाते, बभाजिरे, भ्रशे, धेशाते, धिरे, or बनाये, बधाशाते, पम्राशिरे; लेश, म्लेशात, म्लशिरे, or बलाश, बम्लाशाते, बलाशिरे; स्येमतुः, स्येमुः, स्थमिथ, or सस्यमतुः, सत्यमुः, सस्यमिय; स्वेनतुः, स्वेनुः, स्वनिथ, or सस्वनतुः, सस्वनुः, सस्वनिय, Why of 'seven", Observe, वनतुः, मध्यनुः, दयनिय ॥ The Phanadi is a subdivision of 
Bhuadi (873-879) - न शसददवादिगुणानाम् ॥ १२६ ॥ पदानि ॥ न, शस, दद, वादि, गुणानाम, ( अत एक हल्मध्येऽनादेशादेलिटि)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ पास दर इत्येतयोर्वकारादीनां च धातूनां गुण इत्येवमभिनिवृत्तस्य च योकारस्तस्य स्थाने एकारा. देशो न,भवति, अभ्यासलोपच ॥ 
126. ए is not substituted for the अ of शस, दद्, or of roots beginning with a a, or of such verbal stems in which the results through the substitution of Guņa, though the affixes of the Perfect being कित् or ङित् follow, or the set थल, nor is the reduplicate elided. 
Thus विशशसतुः, विशशः , विशशसिये, पददे, दददाते, बददिर, Of roots beginning with :-वयमतुः, ववमुः, ववमिथ, | Of roots where w is the result of Guna, विशशरतुः, विशशः, विशशरिथ, लुलविय, पुपविध ॥ गुणानाभिनिवृत्तस्याब्दिस्योकारस्थ चायमकार इति एवं प्रतिषिध्यते ।। 
The e of Guņa may result either from the guņa of as changed to कर or of a changed to भो again changed to we as लु-लव ॥ . अर्वणनसावनमः ॥ १२७ ॥ पदानि ॥ अर्वणः, तृ, असौ, अनमः ॥ 
पत्तिः॥भनित्यतस्याङ्गस्यत् इत्ययमादेशो भवति, सुश्चत्ततः परो न भवति, स च नम उत्तरो न भवति ।। BK. VI CII. VI. $ 130 
BIJA RULES 
1297 
127. तु (which is changed to न्तु in the strong cases, and forms the feminine in tunaccented) is substituted for the final of the stem , except in the Nominative singular or when the word is joined with the Negativo 
particle. 
The real substitute is , the is for the sake of making this affix an उगिन्, so that in sarvanamasthana cases we have नुम् augment VII. I. 70. Thus भर्वन्ती, भवन्तः, अन्तिम, भवन्ती, भवतः, अवता, भयान, अजिर, भर्वती, भार्वतम् ॥ भसाविति किम्, भर्वा । भनम इति किम्, मनर्वाणी, भनर्वाणा, मनर्वाणं वृषभं मन्द्रजिहम् ॥ 
But मा in the Nominative Sing: and भनीणो, भनर्वाणा, मनर्वाणं वृषभ मन्द्रजिहम् with the Negative Particle नम्॥ 
मघवा बहुलम् ॥ १८॥ पदानि ॥ मघवा, बहुलम, (तु)॥ वृत्तिः ।। मघवन्नित्येतस्याङ्गस्य बहुलंह इत्ययमादेशो भवति ।। 
128. & is diversely substituted for the final of मघवन् । 
As मघवान् , मघवन्ती, मघवन्तः, मघवन्तम्, मघवन्ती, मघवतः, मघवना, मघवती, माधव सम्॥ न च भवति, मघवा, मघवानी, मघवानः, मघवानम्, मघवानी, मघोनः, मघोना, मघवन्याम्, मघवभिः मघोनी, माघवनम् ॥ - भस्य ॥१५९॥ पदानि ॥ भस्य ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ भस्येत्ययमधिकार, मा मध्यायपरिसमाः, यदित कर्षमनुक्रमियामो भस्येत्येवं तहेदितव्यम्॥ 
129. Whatever will be taught in the following upto the end of the Adhyâya, should be understood to apply to the nominal stems called Bha (I. 4. 18, 19). 
Thus sutra VI. 4. 130 says 'पद् is the substitute of पादू'It means TE is substituted for ar when the latter gets the designation of y T हिपरः पश्य, विपदा कृतम् but दिपारी, दिपाः where the affixes are those of Sarva 
namasthana. 
। पाद: पत् ॥ १३०॥ पाद:, पत्॥ वृत्तिः ॥ पारिति पादशम्शे लुप्ताकारो गृह्यते । तदन्तस्थानस्य भस्य परित्ययमादेशो भवति । स च पाच्छन्न स्या भवति ॥ 
130. For grę is substituted rę when the former is Bha. 
The substitute replaces the whole form and not only the final, on the maxim निर्दिश्यमानस्यादेशा भवन्ति "substitutes take the place of that which is actually cnunciateel in a rule." | Thus हिपरः पश्य, दिपा, हिपरे, दिपरिकां ददाति (V. 4. 1), त्रिपतिका पदाति, वैयाघ्रपद्यः॥ 
वसोः संप्रसारणम् ॥ १३१ ॥ पदानि ॥ वसोः, सम्प्रसारणम् ॥ वृत्तिः । वस्वन्तस्य भस्य संप्रसारणं भवति । 
1298 
VOCALISATION OF Fit 
[BK. VI, CI. IV. $ 133 
alone, but, on Thus TÊTE, TENET, the Vriddhi 
131. The semi-vowel of the affix at (diq) is vocalised to g in a Bha stem. 
Thus Figu: 74, Fagar, TG, YT: 93, 94, 94, 979: 731 For the purposes ofthe elision of 2 (VI. 4. 64), vocalisation under the present satra should not be considered as asiddha (VI. 4. 22). Thus 9T + (111. 2. 107 ) +99T+TF=T9T+7+ TEL (VI. 4. 131, VI. I. 108). Now is were to be con sidered as asiddha, then the affix does not begin with a vowel, and we can not apply VI. 4. 64, which requires the elision of at, but the samprasarana is not considered assiddha, and we have qe +34 + ** - T: 44 it in the nomi. native, where the stem is not *, we have 4 ++ 4 +4 +6 (VI. 4. 66 ) =gart (VII. 1. 70, VI. 4. 10, VI. 1. 68 and VIII. 2. 23). The affix pag is included in my for the purposes of samprasarana. 
BIC 36 1133211 Fiat ll ETE:, 575 l वृत्तिः ॥ वाह इत्येवमन्तस्य भस्य जर इत्येतसंप्रसारणं भवति ॥ 
132. The x in ang is vocalised to 5 (50), when the compound stem is Bha. : The word me is a foa formed stem by III. 2. 64. It can never stand alone, but, must be preceded by an upapada: hence we have used the word "compound." Thus gerei, BIET, OTT, ferite, PERTTET, Fritz. 11 By VI. 1. 108, 5+ BTT (ofat)=Fjand then 98 += t; the Vriddhi being substituted by VI. 1. 89. This form could have been evolved by simple samprasarana thus : 49+ + FI 49 +75+ (VI. 1. 108)=18+ TIE + STF (the asfix fora III. 2. 64, will pro duce gupa)-4818: (VI. 1. 88). In fact that is never added to 7 (III. 2. 64) unless the preceding member ends in m and that of+sit of at will always produce eft u The making of this special samprasarana in , indicates the existence of following maxim: STAFETF ; and the samprasarana being a bahiranga operation, is considered as asiddha for the purposes of guna which is an antaranga operation : therefore, we can never get the form wing 11 
Farah Sahabat 11 833# Tata Il pa, E, #Tata, wafaa वत्तिः॥ श्वन युवन् मघवन् इत्येतेषामङ्गानाममद्धित प्रत्यये परतः संप्रसारणं भवति ॥ 
133. The of श्वन, युवन् and मघवन् becomes voca lised, but not before a Taddhita affix. 
Thus 1:. TAI, 19, ai, ai, ga, ai, per, na 11 But WTI HINTA असत. माधवनः स्थालीपाक: with Taddhita affixes. शीवन is formed by भन affix (IV. 3. 154) and being added by VII. 3. 4 as mesma belongs dvårådi class. . 
This vocalisation takes place of the nouns ending in 7, but not when they become feminine or do not end in a, as Trat: 3, 4TH, 49, yar di 
The word ora: of the next sätra, in a way, qualifies this sätra also. 
BK. VI. Ch IV. 81381 
• 
T ELISION. 
1200 
• अल्लोपोऽनः ॥ १३४ ॥ पदानि ॥ अल, लोपः, अनः॥ वृत्तिः । भनित्येवमन्तस्य भस्य मकारलोपो भवति ॥ . वार्तिकम् ।। गनी नकारान्तस्यायं लोप इष्यते ॥ 
134. Of a Bha. stem ending in अन्, the भ is elided. 
As राज्ञः पश्य, राज्ञा, राक्षे, सणः पश्य, सक्ष्मा and तक्ष्णे | Van:-The elision takes place of a stem which actually ends in a, therefore, it does not take place here, राजकीयम् ॥ __षपूर्वहन्धृतराशामणि ॥ १३५ ॥ पदानि ॥ष पूर्व, हन्, धृतराझाम, अणि ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥षकारपूर्वो यो ऽन् हनो धृतराज्ञच तस्याकारलोपो भवति । 
135. Of a Bha stem ending in अन् with a preced ing , as well as of Et and TFT, the a is elided before the affix अण्॥ 
Thus गौरीणा, ताणः, भीनतः, धार्तराज्ञः ॥ But सामनः, वैमन ॥ Why do we say before the allix mo? Observe an 4: 11 Why do we say 'preceded by a g'? Observe सामनः and वैमनः from सामन् and विमन् formed with the affix भण; here neither the 3 of 77 nor the final syllable ny is elided, since VI. 4. 167 keeps these words in their primitive state so far. 
विभाषा डिश्योः ॥ १३६ ॥ पदानि ॥ विभाषा, डि, श्योः (अल्लोपोऽनः)॥ पत्तिः ॥डी परतः धीशब्दे च भनो विभाषा भकारलोप भवात ॥ 
.. 136. In a stem ending in अन्, the अ is option ally elided before the Locative ending { and before tho ending शी (६) of the Nominative and Accusative Dual Neuter. 
As पति or राजनि, साम्नि or सामनि, साम्नी or सामनी (VII. I. 19). न संयोगाबमन्तात् ॥ १३७॥ पदानि ॥ न, संयोगात, व, म, अन्तात्, (अल्लो पोऽनः)॥ 
युतिः ॥धकारमकारान्तासंयोगादुत्तास्यानो ऽकारस्य लोपो न भवति ।। 
137. The win atat is not elided when the Bha stem ends in वन् or मन् with a consonant preceding व् or म्॥ . Thus पर्वणा, पर्वण, भयरणा, मथर्वणे, चर्मणा and चर्मणे॥ Why do we say 'pre celed by a consonant'? Observe प्रतिदीना, प्रातीने, साम्ना, साम्न | Why do we say 'stems in 47 and 87'? Observe aanr, and a pair of 
अचः ॥ १३८ ॥ पदानि ॥ अचः, (भस्य अल्लोपः)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ अथ इत्ययमपति तनकारोगपते । तरन्तस्य भस्य भकारस्य लोपो भयति ॥ 
1300 
ELISION OF भ॥ 
[IBK VI. Cl. IV S 142 
___138. The अ of अच् (अञ्च) is elided at the end of a Bha stem. 
Thus धीषः पश्य, धीचा, धीचे, मधूचा पश्य, मधूचा, मधू ॥ The lengthening of the first member takes place by VI. 3. 138: and 7 of 954 is elided by 
VI. 4. 24. __उद ईत् ॥ १३९ ॥ पदानि ॥ उदः, ईत, (अचः)॥ 
वृत्तिः । उद उत्तरस्याच ईकारादेशो भवति ॥ 
139. Long t is substituted for the अ of अच् (अञ्च), after the word so when the stem is Bha. 
As उदीचा, उदीचा, उदाये ॥ मातो धातोः ॥ १४० ॥ पदानि ॥ आतः, धातोः, (भस्य लोपः)॥ वृत्तिः ॥भाकारान्तस्य धातोर्भस्य लोपो भवति । 
___140. The final आ of a Bha stem, when it ends in a root, is elidled. 
Thus कीलालप: पश्या, कीलालपा, कीलालपे, शुभंयः पश्य, शुभया, and शुभवे from कीलालपा and उमंया | Why do we say the मा of a root'? Observe खट्वाः पश्य, मालाः पश्य ॥ This satra should be divided into two(I) भातः (2) धातोः; so that the long in general may be elided. For Påņini himself has declined Fat and इना by the elision of भा, see VII. I. 37, (तत्वो ल्यप) and III. I. 83, (श्नः शानच्)। 
मन्त्रेभ्वाङ्यादेरात्मनः ॥ १४१॥ पदानि ॥ मन्त्रेषु, आङि, आदेः, आत्मनः ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ मन्नेषु भाडि परत भात्मन भादोंपो भवति ॥ पातिकम् ॥ भाडोन्यत्रापि छन्दसि लोपो दृश्यते ॥ 
____141. In the Mantras, the beginning of आत्मन् is clided, when the affix of the Instrumental Singular follows. 
भाइ is the name of the Instrumental singular affix, given by ancient Grammarians. Thus स्मना देवेभ्या, मना सामेषु ॥ Why in the Mantras? Observe मात्मनो कतम् ॥ Why in the Instrumental Singular? यास्मन स्तनो परिठा ॥ 
Vårt :--The elision of 4 of 'atman' is found in other cases also, but not so frequently as in the Instrumental, as स्मन्यासमजत मह्यम् ॥ 
ति विशतेडिति ॥ १४२ ॥ पदानि ॥ ति, विंशतः, डिति, (भस्य, लोपः)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ भस्य विशस्ति शमस्थ डिति प्रत्यये परती लापा भवति ॥ 
142. Of the Bha stem fãatra, before an affix hav ing an indicatory ड, the ति is clidlel. 
Thus विशकः-विशत्या कीतः (with ड्युन् V. I. 24), विशं शनम् , (विंशतः पुरणो विशा, with डट affix V. 2. 43), एकविंशः ॥ Why do we say having all indicatory ड? Observe विंशत्या ।। 
BK. VI. CI. IV S 144.] 
THE ELISION OF भन् ।। 
1301 
टेः॥ १४३॥ पदानि ॥टे, (डिति, लोपः)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ टिसंज्ञकस्य डिति प्रत्ययेपरतो लोपो भवति ।। 
143. Before an asfix having an indicatory , the last vowel, with the consonant, if any, that follows it, is clided. 
Thus कुमुात, नडत and तस्वत् with ड्मतुप (IV. 2. 87). So also पिता कीत: -शिकः with बुन् of V. I. 24. The rule applies even to non-bha bases, for effect must be given to the indicatory | Thus उपसरजा, मन्दुरमः (III. 2.97 
with the krit affixt)॥ 
नस्तखिते ॥ १४४॥ पदानि ॥ नः, तद्धिते, (भस्य, दे, लोपः)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ नकारान्तस्य भस्य देलोपो भवति सद्धिते परतः ॥ पार्तिकम् ।। नान्तस्य टिलोपे सब्रह्मचारिपीठसपिकलापिकुयुमित तिलिमाजलिलाझलिशिलालिशिखण्डिसू. करसमसुपर्वषामुपसंख्यानं कर्तव्यम् ॥ वार्तिकम् ।। अश्मनो विकार उपसंख्यानम् ॥ 
पा०॥धर्मणः कोष उपसंख्यानम् ॥ था.॥ शुनः संकोष उपसंख्यानम् ॥ 
पा.॥अध्ययानां च सायंप्रातिकापर्थमुपसंख्यानम् ॥ 
144. Of the stem bha, the final [ with the vowel that precedes it, is elided, before a Taddhita affix. 
Thus भामिम्मिा , भोडुलोमिः, सारलोमि: froin भनियमन, बहुलोमन्, and सरलोमन् with the Taddhita affix (IV. 1. 96). Why do we say 'ending in q'? 
Observe सास्वतः ॥ Why ' before a Taddhita affix'? Observe धर्मणा, धर्मणे ॥ 
Vårt :-The final y with the vowel that precedes it, is dropped before a Taddhita in the following : I. सब्रह्मचारिन्-साब्रह्मचाराः (IV. 3. 120), 2. पीह सर्पिन्--पैठसाः (IV. 3. 120), 3. कलापिन्कालापाः (IV. 3. 108 and IV. 2.59), 4. कुथुमिन्-कोयुमाः (IV. 3. 101), 5. तेतिलिन्त तिलाः ( IV. 3. 116), 6. आजलिन्-माजला: (IV. 2.59), 7. सालिन्लागला, 8. चिलालिन्-शलालाः, 9. शिखण्डिन्-खण्डाः, 10. सुकरसमन्-सोकर समाः, II. सुपर्वनसौपः ॥ In the above those which end in st, elide the re in spite of VI, 4. 164, and those in अन् contradict VI. 4. 167. 
Vart:-अश्मन् loses its भन before a Taddhita affix meaning 'prepared there with' : as, भाश्मः , otherwise आइमनः ॥ 
Vart:-Of चर्मन्, the अन् is elided when meaning 'a sheath or purse': as, चार्म कोशः (IV. 3. 134), otherwise चार्मणः ।। 
Vart:-The भन् of श्वन् is elided when the sense is 'to contract', as पौषः संकोचः (IV. 3. 120), otherwise प्रोवनः ॥ 
Vart :-The Indeclinables like सायंमासिक: &c are formed by there elision : as सायंमातिका, पौनः पुनिकः, बाह्यः, कौतस्कुतः (formed by L IV. 3. 11). But not before the affixes and पुल, as मारातीयः, शाश्वतिका ॥ Panini himself has shown the exception, in the case of श्वाश्चतिक, by using it in II. 4.9. So also 
शाश्वतम् ॥ 
अह्नष्टखोरेव ॥ १५५॥ पदानि ॥ अह्नः, ट, खोः, एव ।। वृत्तिः ॥ अहग्नित्येतस्य टखोरेव परतटिलोपो भवति । वाग ॥ महः समूहे खा वतव्यः ।। 
1302 
ELISION Of AND H II 
[ BK. VI. Cl. IV S 148 
145. The अन् of अहन्' is elided only before the affixes and all 
- Thus दे.भहनी समाइते - यहः, यहः (V. 4. 91 with च्), अहनी अधीटा भृता भूता भावी वा-हीना, ध्यहीनः (with a V. 1 87). 
Vart: ख is added to भहन in the sense of तस्य. समूहः, when referring to a sacrifice. अहां समूहः क्रतुः महीनः (IV. 2. 42). 
Though the 979 of 849 would have been elided by the last aphorism: also, before the affixes e. and ख, the present shtra makes a restrictive rule : भइन् does not lose its final भन्: before any other Taddhita affix, thus भमा निर्व सम्भादिकम् (vith ठ. V. 1 79.). The word एवं 'only' is for the sake of perspicuity. महन् alone does not lose its final मन् beforce and a, other stenms. also do the same. This ive infer, from the exception made in the case.of. átman and adhvan, before e in Vli 4; 169. 
ओर्गुणः ॥१४६॥ पदानि ॥ ओः, गुणः ।। वृत्तिः ॥ उवर्णान्तस्य भस्य गुणो भवति सद्भिते परतः ॥ 
146. For y or 5 of a blia stem, there is substi tuted Guna, before a Taddhita affix. 
Thus बाभ्रष्यः from बभू, माण्डव्या fiom मण्ड, ध्यं दारु (from कु), पिचव्यः कासः, (from पिचु) कमण्डलव्या मत्तिका ( from कमण्डल ), परशष्यमयः, भोपगवः, कापटवः &c. Instead of making the satra simpler by saying sinira 'let sir be substituted for ror', the employment of the technical phrase ghi in the aphorism indicates the existence of the following maxiin har gaat Fafyutin: “A rule is not universally valid, when that which is taught in it, is denoted by a tech nical term". The present sutra is, therefore, anitya, and we have forms like स्वायंभुरः from स्वयंभू without guna. See VII. 4.30 also. 
ढे लोपो ऽकवाः ॥ १४७॥ पदानि ॥ ढे, लोपः, अ, कटवाः। वृत्तिः । परत उवर्णान्तस्य भस्याकदवा लोपो भवति ॥ 
147. The 5 or 3 of a bla stem is elided before the affix एय (द), but not of the stem Katrt'. 
Thus कामण्डलयः, तिबाहेया, जाम्बया, माद्याहयः, 1 ut काट्यो मन्त्रमपश्यत् ।। यस्येति च ॥ १४८॥ पदानि ॥ यस्य, ईति, च, (भस्य, तद्धिते, लोपः)॥ वृत्तिः ॥वर्णान्तस्यावर्णान्तस्य च भस्य ईकारे पर तद्धित च लोपा भवति । वात्तिकम ॥ यस्यत्योङः इयां प्रतिषधी वक्तव्यः ।। वार्तिकम् ॥ इयङ् उवभ्यां लोपो भवति विप्रतिषधेन ॥ 
148. The final rund अ (both long and short), of a bha stem, are elided before i Taldhitil aflix and before the feminine alfixen 
Thus दासी, पक्षी ,सखी from साक्षि, प्लाक्षि and सखि with the feminine aflixt 
MK. VI. C1. IV. S. 1491 ELISON OF & AND 911 
T303 
(IV. 1.65) The above forms could also have been evolved by the simple rules of sandlii, as n+fat # It might be asked, where was then, the necessity of cliling ? There would arise difficulty in the forms like stra wita u From the word ui forined by r under IV. 1. 62, we form the compound rotarari - faut, the final becoming short by I. 2. 48 (the sainasanta affix ay is not added here as required by V. 4. 91, that rule apply ing to the masculine formata and not to the feminine Fet). Now if in forming सखि स खी, had we not elided the letter t of खि, then the long f being the single substitute for both + F, would be considered as like the finals of art by VI. 1. 85. That being so, the word were would be con siclered a 1101-re word by 1.4. 7, for ere has been specifically excluded form for class. Not being a fog, we cannot have the form manu: in the Ablative and Genitive singular, Hence the necessity of eliding before the feminine , so that the ckadeśa rule VI, 1. 85, should not apply. 
The short ris elided before Taddhita affixes:- o-staar, ofis-regi, ft-984: # is elided before fas :- - , - , aria-aFit u and on are elided before the Taddbita :- - :, HV-a , 17- fr. 
ra- T , TAT-Aran: ! 
Vart:- Prohibition must be stated in the case off (d), when it is the substitute of (VII. 1. 18), being the case-affix of the nom, and acc. dual in the neuter, and of certain feminine in long s7 # Before this f, the preceding vowel, rand o are not elided. The stem before this is also bha by 1.4.18 in the case of Neuter nous. Thus tu+ ro ; il rä+f-te (the a would have beeen elided by VI. 4. 149). It is owing to this Vartika, that we have inserted the word 'feminine' in the translation of the sotra. This may also be done by reading the anuvritti ur nai (VI. 4. 136), and (VI. 4. 137) into this sūtra. 
Vårt :-45 and 377 are superseded, when they would apply simul taneously with this lopa. Thus og and i have unimpeded scope in oft or #+oft or STET (977), as ferat, 7927, yht, Lopa has unimpeded scope in 
- fogna: (with a. IV. 1. 135), and Tura: 11 But in fanft+ap (IV. 1. 135), both the rules VI. 4. 77 and VI. 4. 148, present themselves. The foriner is superseded, and we have read: (sratra s t:, TEATRO): so also rane: rinn: with the # affix, this word belonging to Subhradi class 
(IV. 1. 123). 
सूर्यतिष्यागस्त्यमत्स्यानां य उपधायाः ॥ १४९॥ पदानि ॥ सूर्य, तिप्य, भग. FI, HEUTTA, 3, 39T:, (fa, afaa, atq:) 1 
वृत्तिः ।। सर्य तिव्य अगस्त्य मस्य इत्येतेषां यकारस्य उपधाया भस्य लोपो भवति इति परततलि . वानिकम् ॥ ममयस्य ज्यामिति वनव्यम् ॥ वा ॥ मूर्यागस्त्ययोश्छे षन्मांच॥ 
1304 
ELISION OF 711 
[ BK.VI. CII. IV. 149. 
10 il fangen for at 70 l mimog aftur qra: FURITETET BYT 169, orgere afroll TR II Pro ll Rata Torta alla Il re 11 11 
149. Of the blia stoms på, fara, pipe and HRT, (and their derivatives when they are Bha) the penultimate or is also elided before the long & and a Taddhita affix. 
Thus contrare in + q under IV. 3. 112-14, then f of - hift), as hit 
So also fa-478, Hot OTT N So also offerta oft fleet (IV. 1. 114), prata: ; So also gara-wet with her as it belongs to Gauradi class (IV. 1. 40). If the words Tu &c, were to be qualified by the word , then the satra would mean सूर्याशनां भसंज्ञानां "of सूर्य &c, when they get the designar tion of "; and the result of this interpretation would be, that the rule would apply to cases liko par afto, TRIEU = it, &c, only, where the forms era &c, are Bha, and not to their derivatives, as fru &c: and there would not have been the forms like and mAT; because, here the word na is not Bha before the affix , but the word arg is Bha. Hence we have intro duced the words "and their derivatives " in the translation, so as to cover the cases like fra II 
In the last example, we again have an illustration, of the rule VI. 4. 22, which says that for purposes of asiddha the same must be the same, Thus सौर्य+ई-सौर्य + अ lopati-सौरी ॥ But सौर्य itself was formed by the eli, sion of g of pů before the affix gry, thus, y + Boy A totoon (last satra) 
TÁ !! But if this lopa be considered as asiddha by VI. 4. 22, then we have the following equation rato +7 (of 7)+f=*r*++* (w of sto being elided by VI, 4, 148)+ Here I cannot be elided, as it is not upadha or penultimate: because the first lopa is considered asiddha. But it is not to be so considered, as their scopes (877972) are different. Hence we have the elision of a by this satra. It should not be objected that they here is not penulti mate, but ultimate: as Ara+ i = 0 + 0 + (9 elided by the last sätra ), and 
thus a is ultimate. Here, however, rule VI. 4. 22, applies. This elision of of will be considered asiddha for the purposes of the ellsion of y, their scope being the same. So being considered asibdha, a still retains its designation of upadha and is elided by the present sūtra. It should be remembered here, that we could not take help of the rule of sthanivat-bhava, because for pur poses of any, that rule is set aside. See 1. 1. 58. 
: Why do we say the penultimate a? Observe era This word is thus formed. The affix per is added to perft by V. 3. 53, in the sense of Heeft atat!! Then the xreft hecomes masculine #boy: VỊ. 4. 35, and we 
RK. VI. C11. IV. g. 151) 
ELISION OF $ 11 
1305 
have #24T This word takes thg by IV. 1, 15, because it is formed by an affix having an indicatory ! Thus ***++$, and the word is a, but the q is not elided, because it is not penultimate. The g has been read for the sake of the subsequent sätras : tyrar: alone would have been enough for the purposes of this aphorisın. The rule contained in this satra is rather too general ; it is limited by the following vårtikas, which enumerate the conditions under which the elision takes place. 
Vart :-Thc a of Arra is elided before the feminine only: therefore not here to FİY=FTET 
Vart :-O and spiritu before the affixes y, and f (of the femi nine): as alta, grå, fata:, Areat it But not here # ATT, 
formed with the Patronymic 871 (IV. I. 114) 
Vart :-office and you when referring to asterisms, as, ma i g a : :, : (IV. 2. 3). 
Vart. Of before the affix aft, the mis elided, and the word has acute on the first syllable : as, maar in maar a gara (V. 4. 45). 
Vart:- Before the affix at, it loses the syllable far as well as an, as 14: or MPH14:, in oth ##: sfonTAT OTTU NI 
Vart:-The elision of of formi takes place diversely, before the second member also, as in an or =HTT( changed to by VIII. 3. 106) 
Vårt:- The elision takes place also before the affix a, as minha, this is found in the Atharva-Veda, (Hra **:, with the affix a IV. 4. 110). 
EFTERT II 240 l vatra ll , TFT, (TTTTT: 19:fall वृत्तिः ॥ हल उत्तरस्य तद्धितयकारस्य उपधाया इति परतो लोपो भवति ॥ 
150. The o of a Taddhita when preceded by a consonant, and penultimate in a stem, is elided before the feminine Il 
The anuvritti of "taddhita" ceases, because of its mention in the next satra. llence this sätra applics to feminine s only. As if, meent from more and 24 Why do we say when preceled by a consonant'? Observe 
till Why do we say 'of a Taddhita'. Observerare rafata ___ आपत्यस्य च तद्धिते ऽनाति ॥ १५१ ॥ पदानि ॥ आपत्यस्य, च, तद्धिते, अनाति ( :) वृत्तिः ॥ अपत्ययकारस्य हल उनरस्य तद्धिते मनाकारावी लोपो भवनि ॥ 
151. They, belonging to a Patronymic affix, pre ceded by a consonant, is elided before a Taddhita, when it cloes not begin with an att if 
1306 
ELISION OF PENUITMERE. [ BK. VI. Cl, IV. S. 153. 
Thus गर्मागां समूहः - गार्गकम् froin गार्ग्य, वाम्सकम froin चास्य (IV. 2. 37-40). Why do we say 'a Patronymic a'? Observe सांकाश्यकः, काम्पिल्यका (IV. 2.80). 
The repetition of the worl Tacklhita indicates that the clision takes place some-times of the non-patronymic u also, as सामी इष्टिः॥ 
Why do we say not beginning with a long str'? Observe afruitat, वात्स्यायनः ॥ The य should be preceded by a consonant, otherwise we have कारिकयस्थापत्य-कारिकयिः ॥ Why do ive say when followed by a Tarldhita affix'? Observe mråkiri, arror: ( before the Genitive and Locative dual affixes). 
क्यव्योश्च ॥ १५२ ॥ पदानि ॥ क्य, व्योः, च, (हलः, लोपः)। वृत्तिः ॥ क्यवि हत्येतयोम परत भापत्ययकारस्य हल उत्तरस्य लोपो भवति ॥ 
152. The ç belonging to a Patronymic affix, pre ceded by a consonant, is elided before the Denominative affix क्य, and the adverbial affix वि ॥ 
___Thus वारसीयति or वास्सीयते गार्गायति, or गार्गीयते ॥ So also पार्गीभूतः, वासी भतः॥ But सांकाश्यायते (where य is not Patronyinic) and so also सांकाश्यीभूतः; and not also in कारिकयीयति, कारिकेयीभूतः, the e mot being preceded by a conso nant. 
बिल्वकादिभ्यश्छस्य लुक् ॥ १५३॥ पदानि ॥ बिल्वक-आदिभ्यः, छस्य, लुक (भस्य तद्धिते॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ नादिषु बिल्वादयः पश्यन्ते । नडादीनां कुक् च इति कृतकुगागमा विल्वकादयो भवन्ति तेभ्य उत्तरस्य छस्य भस्य तद्धिते परतो लुग भवति । 
153. The affix छ of the bha stems बिल्वक &e is elided before a Tuulihita asfix. 
The fact &c are a subdivision of Nadadi class (IV. 2.91), and the augment is added to them by IV. 2. 91. After these words, with the aug 
ment क, the affix छ is elided. Thus विल्वा यस्यां सन्ति =विस्वकीयाः; तस्यां भवाः (IV. 3.53)- वैल्यकाः ॥ Sinilarly वेणुकीयाः-वेणुकाः, वैत्रकीयाः, वैधकाः, वेनसकीयाः, वैतसकाः, मृणकीयाः, सार्णकाः क्षुकीयाः, एक्षुकाः, काष्ठकीयाः, काष्ठकाः, कपोतकीयाः, कापोतकाः ॥ There is shortening of the final of Qचा by the Vārtika अज्चा इस्वस्वं च ।। कुम्चकायाः, कोचकाः ।। छपदणं किम, छमात्रस्य लुग्यया स्यात् कुको निवृनिर्मा भूवित, ॥ भन्यथा हि सानयोगशिष्टानामन्यतापाये 
भयोरप्यभाष इति कुगपि निवर्नेत । लुग्पहणं सर्वलोपो यथा स्याद् यकारमावस्य मा भूत् ॥ 
The affix is specifically mentioned in order to show that the affir only should be elided and not the augment #11 Otherwise it would also have been elided on the strength of the maxim :-संनियोगशिष्टानामन्यतरापाये (or भभावे) उभयोरप्यभावः (or भपायः), "When of the two things which are taught to gether, one disappears, then the other disappears likewise". The लक indi cates the elision of the whole affix ईय, and not merely of य॥ 
तुरिष्ठेमेयस्सु ॥ १५४ ॥ पदानि ॥ तुः, इष्ठ, इम, ईयस्सु, (लोपः)॥ BR VI, CI. IV. 8. 1501 Some SUISTITUTIONS 
1307 
वृत्तिः । इट इमनिच ईयसुन् इत्योपु परत तस्य लोपा भवति । 
14. The allix तृis clittent before the affixes इष्ठन्, इमनि and ईयसुन्। 
Thus करिष्ठः, विजयिष्ठः, पक्षियः, शहीयसी धेनुः ॥ The whole affix g is clided; otherwise only the last vowel (f) with the following consonant would liave been elided by the following rules. The anuvšitti of us of the last aphorisin: should not be read into this, for had the elision taken place by then the mark of the allix would also have disappeared likewisc (r. 1. 63.), and there 
would have remained no guna in विजांयष्ठ and करिष्ठ ॥ See V. I. 122, and: V.. 3.59; for these affixes.. The affix. इमन् has been read into this aphorism for the sake of the subsequent sötra, there being no example of a followed by: हमन् ; तु is followed by इष्ठ and ईयस by V. 3.59. 
टेः ॥ १५५ ।। पदानि ॥ टे:, (भस्य लोपः इष्ठेमेयस्सु) ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ भस्य टेर्लोपो भवति इष्ठमेयस्तु परतः। पार्तिकम् ।। णाविष्ठवप्रातिपदिकस्य कार्य भवतीति वक्तव्यम् ॥ पा०॥णाविष्ठवप्रातिपदिकस्य पुंबडावरभावटिलोपयणादिपरविन्मतार्लक्कनर्थमिति ॥ 
155. The last vowel, with consonant, if any, that follows it, is elided when the affixes tष्ठ, इम and ईयस follow. . 
Thus पटिष्ठः, पटिमा, and पटीयान् from पड, and लाषष्ठः, लघिमा and लघीयान from लघु 
Vårt:-The Pratipadika followed by the causative for, undergoes all' thic changes, as it would have undergone, had the affix rg followed it. Those changes are (r) पुंधडाव: the feminine noun becomes. masculine: as, एमीमाचष्टे - एतयति, श्यतयति ॥ इष्ठ belongs to तसिलादि affixes and causes masculation by VI..3: 35, (2) रभाष:-the change of a tor, as पृयुमाचष्टे - प्रथयति, प्रत्यति, see VI. 4. 161.. (3) टिलोपः~as, पटुमाचष्टे - पटयति, लघयति by this satra, (4) यणादिपरम् i.e. the application of Rule VI..4. 156, as, स्यूलमाचष्ट-स्थश्यति ॥ According to the school of Bharadvaja, three more purposes are served : ()विन् मतोलृक्-as साषण माचष्टे = खजयति, वसुमन्तंमाचष्टे = बसयात, sce V. 3. 65. (6) कविधिः-the substitutionr of कन् for युवन् and अल्प. (V. 3.64)as युतानमाषष्टेः or मल्पमाचष्टे - कनयति ॥ (7) प्रादि substitution, as required by VI. 4. 157: as, प्रियमाचष्टे - मापयनि ।' 
स्थूलदुरयुबह्रस्वक्षिप्रभुद्राणांयणादिपरंपूर्वस्य च गुणः॥१५६॥ पदानि ॥ स्थूल, दुर, युव, हस्व, क्षिप्र, क्षुद्राणाम, यण, आदिपरम, पर्वस्य, च गुणः, ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ स्थूल दूर युव इस्व क्षिप्र क्षुद्र इत्येतेषां यणादिपर लुप्यते इष्ट मयस्तु परतः, पूर्वस्य च गुणो भवति । 
166. Before the affixes इछ, इमन् and ईयस्, is clided the last semi-vowel witli that which follows it, in for the first vowel, au (Guna is substitute:l, in स्थूल, दूर, युवन्. हस्व, क्षिप्र 
and क्षुद्र॥ 
1308 
Some SUBSTITUTES. 
( BK. VI. C11. IV. $ 159 
That is ल, र, पन्, व, र, and t are elided. Thus स्थविष्ठः, स्थवीयान् ; दविष्ठः पीयान् ; चविष्ट, यवीयान् ; हासष्ठा, इसीयान् , इसिमा; क्षपिष्ठः, क्षपीयान् , पिमा ॥ The words इस्त्र, सिप, and क्षुद्र are read in Prithvadi class and take iman' affix (V. I. 123). सारिधः, शादायान् , क्षोदिमा ॥ Why do we say परं in यणादिपरं i.e. 'the last semi vowel'? The first semi-vowel of art and get i.e. g of g and r of should not be elided. The word of is employed for the sake of distinctness. 
प्रियस्थिरस्फिरोरुबहुलगुरुवृद्धतृप्रदीर्घवृन्दारकाणां प्रस्थस्फवहिगर्षित्रबद्राधि वृन्दाः ॥ १५७ ॥ पदानि ॥ प्रिय, स्थिर, स्फिर, उरु, बहुल, गुरु, वृद्ध, तृप्र, दीर्घ, वृन्दारकाणाम, प्र, स्थ, स्फ, वर, बाह, गर्, बार्ष, त्रप, द्राधि, वृन्दाः , (इष्ठेमेयस्सु)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ प्रिय स्थिर स्फिर तरु बहुल गुरु वृद्ध हम दीर्घ वृनारक इत्यतेषां सस्य स्क वर बहि गर पर्षि पर प्राधि वृन्द इत्यते यथासंख्यमारेशा भवन्ति इष्ठेमेयस्सुपरतः ॥ 
157. Before the affixes इष्ठ, इमन् and ईयस् the fol lowing substitutions take place :- for प्रिय'; w for स्थिर, स्फ for स्फिर, घर for उरु, बंद for बहुल, गर् for गुरु, घर्ष for वृद्ध, अप for तुप, द्राघ for दीर्घ, and वृन्दू for वृन्दारक ॥ 
Thus Hठा, प्रेमा, मेवान् ; स्थिर, स्येष्ठः, स्यान, स्येमा ; स्फिर, स्फेटः, स्फेयान् ; उरु, परिष्ठः, परिमा, वरीयान् । बहुल, बहिष्ठः, बंहीयान, हिमा; एक, गरिष्ठः, गरीयान, गरिमा ; वृक्ष, वर्षिष्ठः, वान् । 
प, पिष्टः, पीयान् दीर्घ, द्राधिष्ठा, द्राधीयान्, प्राधिमा, वृन्दारक, वृदिष्ठः, बन्दीवान् पियोरपुर बहुलदीर्घाः पृथ्वादिषु पबन्ते, सेनान्येषामिमानेर न भवतीति नोशाहियते ।। 
Of the above, priya, uru, guru and bahula are read in Prithvadi class and take हमन् (V. I. 122), others do not. 
बहोलोपो भू च बहोः ।। १५८॥ पदानि ॥ बहोः, लोपः, भू, च, बहोः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ बारुत्तरषामिष्ठमयसा लोपो भवति तस्य पबहोः स्थाने भूइत्ययमादेशो भवति ।। 
____158. The r and t of these affixes (इमन् and ईयस) are elided after बहु, and for बहु is substituted भू॥ 
Thus want, yr In the case of rø, the following rule 159 will apply. Under I. I. 54 and 67, बहो. being in the Ablative, the first letter of the suc ceeding term is elided, viz.rors;in this case.||बहु belongs to Prithvadi class and takes स्मन् affix. (V. 1. 122) The repetition of बहोः is for the sake of pointing out the sthânî, for which the word is to be substituted : otherwise * would have replaced these affixes. 
इष्ठस्य यिद् च ॥ १५६ ॥ पदानि ॥ इष्ठस्य, यिद, च, (बहोः भू च बहोः)॥ पत्तिः ॥बहोरत्तरस्याटस्य विडागमो भवति बहाथ भरावधो भवति ॥ 
159. After बहु, the augment यिट् is alled to इष्ठ, and भू replaces बहु ॥ 
As was: 11 This augment fac dclars the lopa substitution, of the last sútra, in the case of 1811 The in fact is for the sake of pronunciativii, the 
BK VI. CH. IV $ 162 ) 
( SUBSTITUTION 
1309 
augment being all Or re may be taken to have lost its by the foregoing sotra, and to the g, the augment fa may be added. 
ज्यादादीयसः ॥ १६०॥ पदानि ॥ ज्यात, आत, ईयसः॥ वृत्तिः । ज्यादुसरस्य यस भाकार मादेपो भवति ।। 
160. आ is substituted for the first letter of ईयस, after ज्य॥ 
As भ्यायान् ॥ ज्य is substituted for मशस्य by V. 3.61. 'Lopa' being shut out by the intervening fac VI. 4. 159, the sta is read in this satra. Ir the anuvfitti of 'lopa' were present here, then the sof 39 would be lengthen ed before चन् by VII. 4. 25, and we would get the form ज्यायान् ॥ The pecil. liar construction of this satra indicates the cxistence of the following maxim:--मनने पुनर्वत्तायविधिः 'when an operation which is taught in the anga. dhikara (VI. 4, end-VII. 4, end) has taken place, and another operation of the angadhikara is subsequently applicable, this latter operation is not allowed to take place." In VII. 4. 25, however, विडत् is understood, and lengthening could not have taken place by that rule. 
रऋतो हलादेलघोः॥११॥ पदानि ॥र, ऋतः, हल, आदेः, लघोः, (छेमेयस्सु)। पतिः ॥रान मादेषो भवति कारस्थ इलादेर्लघारिष्ठेमेयस्सु परतः ॥ 
Karika. पृथु पृटुं शं चव कृष्णं च हरमेव च । 
__परिपूर्व वृहं चैव पडेसान् रविधी स्मरेत् ॥ ___161. Before the affixes इष्ठ, इमन् and ईयस, र is substituted for the x in a stem, when this is preceded by a consonant, and is not prosodially long (on account of being followed by a double consonant). 
Thus मयिष्ठः, प्रथीयान and प्रयिमा from पृथु (V. I. 122), मरिष्टः, मरीयान and अदिमा । Why do we say "the '? Observe qfip: &c. Why do we say 'preceded by a consonant'? Observe मजिष्ठः, कनीयान् ॥ Why do we say 'when prosodially short'? Observe कष्णिष्ठः, कष्णीवान, कृष्णिमा | The following are the six words to which this rule applies and to none else:-पृयु, मृदु, भय, कृप, हर, परिवृत॥ It therefore, does not apply to words like कुत, मार, भात, &c, as समाचाटे- कुसथति, मातरमाचटे-मातयति, मातरमाचष्टे-धातयति । 
विभाषोश्छन्दसि ॥१२॥ पदानि ॥ विभाषा, ऋजोः, छन्दसि, (प्ठेमेयस्सु)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ इत्येतस्य पतः स्थाने विभाषा रेफ भादयो भवति इटेमेयस्तु परतश्छन्दसि विषये ॥ 
162. Before the affixes इछ, इमन् and ईयस, the of ऋजु may optionally be changed to र, in the Chlhandas. 
As रजिष्ठ: and कजिष्ठः, in रजिष्टमेसि पन्थानम्, खजिष्ठः ॥ प्रकृत्येकाच् ॥ १३ ॥ पदानि ॥ प्रकृत्या, एक-अच् , (रष्ठेमेयस्सु)॥ 
1310 
PRAKRITI-BHAVA. 
[BK. VI. Ch. IV. St65 
बृनिः ।। एकाड्यासज्ञकं तविष्ठेमेयस्नु परतः प्रकृत्या भवति । वार्तिकम ॥ प्रकृत्या के राजन्यमनुष्ययुवानः ॥ 
163. A monosyllabic bha stem retains its origi nal form, without undergoing any change, before the affixes इष्ठ, इमन्, and ईयस् ॥ 
Thus अमिष्ठः, खजीयान्, समयति from मग्विन् , the विन् being elided by V. 3. 65, the stem thus becoming monosyllabic. asura is the causative, formed on the model of इष्ठ by the Vartika under VI. 4. 155. So also बुधिष्टः, बुचीयान् and सुचयति from बुग्वत्, the मतुए being elided as before. Why do we say 'a mono syllabic stem? Observe वसिष्ठः from वसुमत् ॥ This rule is an exception to VI. 4. 155. 
Vart:-राजन्य, मनुष्य and युवन् retain their original form unchanged, before the affix भक | As, राजन्यानां समूहः - रामन्यकम्, मानुष्यकम् ॥ This debars the elision of a required by VI. 4. 15. So यूनो भावः- यौवनिकः with gम् affix (V. 1. 133), in supersession of VI. 4. 144. 
इनण्यनपत्ये ॥ १९४॥ पदानि ॥ इन्, अणि, म नपत्ये, (प्रकृत्या)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ नन्तमनपत्याणि परतः प्रकृत्या भवति ।। 
164. The final इन् of a bha stem remains. unalter ed before the non-Patronymic mu affix. 
Thus सांकटिनम्, सांराविणम, सांमार्जिनम् (III. 3.44 and V. 4. 15). These are formed by the Krit-affix बनुन् (III. 3.44), and then भण् is added in स्वार्थ by v. 4. 15. So also साग्विणम् from नग्विन् । Why when भण् follows.? Observe इण्डिनां समहः = दाण्डम् ॥ It is formed by भम् (IV. 2.44). Why do we say 'non Patronymic'? Observe मेधाविनाऽपत्यं - मेधावः ।। ___ गाथिविदथिकेशिगणिपणिनश्च ॥ १५ ॥ पदानि ॥ गाथि, विदथि, केशि, गणि, 
पणिनः, च, (अणिप्रकृत्या)। 
वत्तिः॥ गाथिन् विदथिन् केशिन् गणिन् पणिन् इत्येते चाणि प्रकृत्या भवन्ति । 
___165. गाथिन्, विदथिन्, केशिन, गणिन् and पणिन् remain unchanged before the Patronymic are also. 
Thus मायिनासत्यं - गायिनः, वैरथिनः, शिनः, गाणिनः, and पाणिनः ॥ This satra applies to Patronymics. 
संयोगादिश्च ॥ १६ ॥ पदानि । संयोग- आदिः, च, (इन् अणि प्रकृत्या )। त्तिः । संयोगारिम इनणि प्रकृत्या भवति । 
___166. The syllable इन् of a stem ending in इन् remains unchanged before sur, when it conjunct consonant precedes it. 
Thus शाइनेऽपत्यं -- शानिः, याद्रिणः, वाजिणः ॥ 
BK. VI, CI. IV. SI71] 
PRAKRITI-BIHAVA 
1311 
अन्, ॥ १६७ ॥ पदानि । अन्, ( अणि प्रकृत्या)। इत्तिः ।। भग्नन्तमणि प्रकृत्या भवाति अपये चानपत्ये च ॥ 
____ 167. The syllable अन् of a stem ending in अन् remains unchanged, before to affix, whether Patronymic or otherwise. 
___As सामानः, वैमनः, सौवनः, जैलनः, from सामन, वेमन्, सुलन and जिस्मन् ॥ 
ये चाभावकर्मणोः ॥ १९८॥ पदानि ॥ ये, च, अभाव, कर्मणोः, (तरिते अन् प्रकृत्या) 
दृतिः ॥ यकारादौ च तद्धिते ऽभावकमजोरर्थयोरन् प्रकृत्या भवति । 
168. The syllable अन् of a stem ending in अन्, remains unchanged before a Taddhita beginning with , when it does not denote existence in abstract or the avocation of some one. 
____ Thus सामसु साधुः-सामन्या, ब्राह्मण्यः ॥ But राज्ञो भावः कर्म पापण्यम् ॥ राजन् belongs to Purohitadi class and takes यक् (V. I. 128). ___ आत्माध्वानी खे ॥ १९९॥ पदानि ॥ आत्म, मध्वानौ, खे,॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ भास्मन् भवन इत्यती खे परतः प्रकृत्या भवतः ॥ 
169. The finals of the stems आत्मन् and अध्वन remain unchanged before the affix o 11 
Thus शामने हितं -भास्मनीनः (V. I.9), मध्यानमलामी (V. 2. 16)- मध्यनीनः ॥ But प्रत्यारमम् and प्राध्वम् ॥ The first is formed by the samasanta affix added to the avyayibhava (V. 4. 108), and the latter by अच् (V. 4.85). 
न मपूर्वो ऽपत्ये ऽवर्मणः॥१७॥ पदानि ।न,म, पूर्वः,अपत्ये, अवर्मणः, (अणि)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ मर्यो ऽन् भवर्मणाणि परतो ऽपत्येर्थे न प्रकृत्या भवति । पार्तिकम् ॥ मपूर्वप्रतिषेधे वा हितनाम इति वक्तव्यम ॥ 
170. In a stem in a with a preceding , with the exception of it, the ending it does not remain un changed before the patronymic affix अण ॥ 
Thus सुषाम्णोऽपत्यं = सोषामः, चान्द्रसामः from चन्द्रसामन् ॥ Why do we say 
• preceded by '? Observe AITA, preceded by a 11 Why do we use 'Patrony. 
mic'? Observe चमा परिवृतो रथः- पामर्णः, the भन् not being changed by VI. 4. 167. Why do we say 'with the exception of वर्मन'? Observe चक्रवर्मणोऽपत्र 
-चाकर्मणः ॥ 
Vart:-Optionally so in हितनामन्, as हितनाम्नोऽपत्यं -इतनामः or इतनाममः ॥ ब्राह्मो जाती ॥ १७१ ॥ पदानि ॥ ब्राह्मः, अजातो, ॥ वृतिः ॥ ब्राह्म इत्येतदपत्याधिकारपि सामा दपत्यादन्यत्राणि टेलोंपायें निपात्यते ततोऽजातो अपत्यारोव भपत्ये जातावणि ब्रह्मणाष्टिलोपो न भवति ॥ 
1312. 
PRAKRITI-RITAVA. 
[BK. VI CII. VI. S174 
_171. ब्राह्म is irregularly formed from ब्रह्मन्, when not meaning 'a kind or jati.' 
This sutra should be divided into two (1) ब्राह्मः, the final भन् of ब्रह्मन् is elided, when the spot affix with the force of the Patronymic, as well as with any other force, comes after it. Thus ब्राह्मो गर्भः, ब्राह्मं हविः, ब्राझमखम ; ब्राह्मो नारदः ॥ (2) भजाती, but not so, when the Patronymic denotes a jati; for then the भन् of ब्रह्मन् is not clided before the भण् affix : as ब्रह्मणोऽपत्यं = माण: 'a Brahmana'. When jati is expressed, but to has not the force of the l'atronymic, the of ब्रह्मन् is elided. As ब्राझी औषधिः ॥ 
कार्मस्ताच्छील्ये ॥ १७२ ॥ पदानि ॥ कार्मः, ताच्छील्ये, ॥ वृत्तिः । कार्म इति ताच्छील्ये टिलापो निपात्यते ॥ 
___172. कार्म is irregularly formed from कर्मन्, by the elision of the final , when the sense is accustomed to such an occupation or prompt therein'. 
This is formed by w affix (IV. 4. 62). If this is the case, then by VI. 4. 144, the form कार्म is regularly evolved. The fact is, that y and भण् affixes, in the sense of tachchhilika are considered as one, and therefore VI.4. 167, would have prevented the elision of the final 977 syllable. In fact this proves the existence of the folloving maxin:- साच्छीलिक णेऽण कृतानि भवन्ति ॥ "The same operations which are occasioned by the addition of the affix 70, take place, whenever the alfix o is added in the sense of one accustomed to that." Thus though aię is added, to 97-formel words, it is also added to op-formed words, in the feminine: as चोरी; सापसी &c. The ण taught in V. 2. 101, and III, 1. 140, is excepted. Why do we say, having the sense of accustomed to that? Observe कर्मणः परम् = कार्मणम् ।। 
औक्षमनपत्ये ॥ १७३॥ पदानि ॥ औक्षम्, अ नपत्ये ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ भौक्षमित्यनपत्येणि टिलोपो निपात्यते ॥ 
173. From उक्षन् is formed औक्ष, when not meaning a descendant. 
As भौक्ष पटम् but माणः-उमणोऽपरयम्, the w is elided in the latter example by VI. 4. 135. 
दाण्डिनायनहास्तिनायनाथर्वणिकजह्माशिनेयवासिनायनिभ्रीणहत्यधैवत्यसारवै स्वाकमैत्रेयहिरण्मयानि ॥१७४॥ पदानि ॥ दाण्डिनायन, हास्तिनायन, आथर्वणिक, जैमाशिनेय, वासिनायनि, भ्रौणहत्य, धैवत्य, सारव, ऐश्वाक, मैत्रेय, हिरण्मयानि, ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ वाण्डिनायन हास्तिनायन भायर्वणिक जैमाशिनेय वासिनायनि धाणहत्य धैवत्स सारव ऐश्वाक मेरेय हिरण्मय इत्येतानि निपात्यन्ते । 
174. The following are irregularly formedl; 1. 
Bk. VI. C1. IV. & 174] 
PRAKRITI-BITAVA, 
1313 
Dandinîyana, 2. Hästinayana, 3. Åtharvaņika, 4. Jaihma sineya, 5. Visinayani, 6. Bhrauņa hatya, 7. Dhaivatya. 8. Särava, 
9. Aikslıvârka, 10. Maitreya and 11. Hiraņınaya. 
These words are thus derived (I and 2) शाण्डिनायन and हास्तिनाथन from इण्डिन् and tre belonging to the class. The affix is ** (IV. 2.91). If they do not belong to that class, the affix is added irregularly : fosärsga a r &c. The final is not elided. (3) y belongs to Vasantà di class (IV. 2. 63). The science or work of Atharvan Rishi is also called Atharvan. He who studies that work is called Atharvanika: the final is not elided before the 
F affix. (4 and 5) The descendants of PMATTA and men are Jaihmašineya and Vasinayani, the former with the affix of the Subhràdi class (IV. 1. 123), and the latter with the affix form of IV. 1. 157. The finals of the stems are not dropped. (6 and 7) These are derived from you and time with the affix प्यम्, and - being replaced by त-भ्रूणनो भावः, धीनो भावः ॥ इन् takes त before affixes having an indicatory a org by VII. 3. 32: it might be said would be added to 7677 before or by that rule. That rule is, however, con fined to affixes which come after roots only, and not to Taddhita affixes. That rule does not apply to cascs like that, I'll The p in Bhraunhatya is there fore, an irregularity. (8) arc is from a with the affix , the final sty being elided, ati **: -ATTERI (9) The son of 115, with me affix (IV. 1. 168), the final is elided, or HER TY #:=TNT: with mor affix (IV. 2. 132). Accent on thc first or the final. The irregularity consists in the clision of final 3 H As one word is and the other on, the s@tra ought to have read this word twice, strictly speaking. The single reading may be justified on the ground, that the s@tra gives 0717 without any accent (eka-śruti), and consequently includes both (एकश्रुतिः स्वर सर्वनाम) ॥ 
114 
(10) 9 is from far of Grishtyádi class IV. 1, 136, and takes r as farg+, here VI. 4. 146, requires Guņa, but VI.4. 146, prevents it, and requires lopa of , but VII. 3. 2, required the substitution of ra for gil The irregu larity consists in eliding y altogether as 494, the mor fået cannot be elided by VI. 4. 148, befor 4, as the lopa of g is considered asiddha VI. 4. 22; how ever the result is the sainc, for +Q=ç by VI. 1. 97; the single substitute being the form of the subsequent. The plural of ina will be fyt: (the plural of hy); as it belongs or Yaskadi class and loses the affix in the plural (11. 4.63). Another form of this word is for formed under VII. 3. 2. It might be objccted that had far been read in Bidadi class (IV. 1, 104), it would have taken the affix 2 , and the form 99 would have been evolved regularly: as 1991+ 2=47 +52 (VII. 3. 2)+#=: This would have prevented also the necessity of including this word in the Vaskadi class (II. 4. 
63), for then by II. 4.63, भम् formed words would lose the affix in the plural and we would have got the form in the plural. So far it would have been all right, but if #ta were to be formed with 7 affix, as proposed, then the per derivative of this word would have required to be formed with stat affix under IV. 3. 127, and not with g under IV. 3. 126; but we require बुम, as मंयका संघः ॥ (II) हिरण्मय from हिरण्य with मय with the elision of य, हिरण्यस्य विकार-हिरण्मयः ॥ 
ऋल्यवास्त्व्यवास्त्वमाध्वीहिरण्ययानिच्छन्दसि ॥ १७५॥ पदानि ॥ त्व्य, वास्त्व्य, वास्त्व, माध्वी, हिरण्ययानि, छन्दसि, ॥ 
वृतिः ॥ व्य वास्थ्य वास्त्व माध्नी हिरण्यय इस्वेतानि निपात्यन्ते छन्दसि विषये ॥ 
175. In the Veda the following are irregularly formed : Ritvya, Vastvya. Vastva, Madhvi, and Hiranyaya. 
The word gray is derived from my, and are from me with the affix बत, उ being changed to द॥ प्रती भवम् फरव्यम, वास्ता भवम्-वास्तव्यम् ॥ वास्त्व is from वस्तु, as वस्तुनि भवः पारस्वः with the affix भण् ॥ मात्री from मधु with the affix भण् in the feminine, as माध्वीनः सन्स्योषधीः ॥ हिरण्यय is from हिरण्य with the affix मयद, ther being elided. 
Printed by Freeman & Co., Ld., at the Tårå Printing Works, Benares,