 mtzq1 अथ अष्टमाध्यायस्य प्रथमः पादः । 
BOOK EIGHTH. CHAPTER First. 
सर्वस्य द्वे ॥१॥ पदानि ॥ सर्वस्य, वे ॥ gfr: 11 atat infot Happeningar FFT 3T 4 4: 7 TPFART: atent भवत इत्येवं तहेदितव्यम् ।। 
1. From here upto VIII. 1. 15 inclusive, is to be supplied always the phrase "the whole word is repeated". 
This is an adhikara satra. Whatever will be taught hereafter upto TFT (VIII. 1. 16) exclusive, there the phrase a t it should be supplied to com plete the sense. Thus VIII. 1. 4. teaches "when the sense is that of 'always', and each'." Here the phrase 'the whole word is repeated' should be supplied to complete the sense. i. e. “The whole word is repeated when the sense is that of always and each". What is to be repeated ? That which is most appro. priate in sound and sense both. Thus one qofa becomes two, as qua 'he always cooks'. Similarly and tota: 'every village is beautiful'. 
The sâtra 'sarvasya dve', should not be confounded as meaning 'the word-form sarva is doubled'. For then rules likes VI. 1. 99, and VI. 1. 100 will find no scope. The word sarva has several meanings: (1) the totality of things (75:) as atria, (2) the totality of modes (Part:) a tatag:- *• 
* 4ra; (3) the totality of members (7747:), as at: gery: # In the present sätra, the word sarva has this last sense: namely all the members of a word are doubled, no portion is omitted. The force of the genitive case in sarvasya, is that of sthana, i. e. in the room of the whole of the words like qft &c there is doubling. So one meaning of the sätra is, that in the room of the one word, two are substituted. In making such substitution, we must havc regard to the rule of nearness. 
1492 
DOUBLING. 
(BK. VIII. C1. I. § 1 
Another meaning of the satra however is, that it does not teach subs titution but repetition or employment, not adesa, but prayoga. That is to say, one word is employed twice. In this sense, of course, there is no room left for finding out the proper substitute. The very word-form, are &c, is employed twice, i. e. is repeated twice or pronounced twice. 
The word sarvasya is employed in the sotra for the sake of distinctness only. Otherwise, one may double only the last letter of a word by the rule of 
Tasarea, though that rule is not, strictly speaking, applicable to such cases. 
Obj. The word 64 should be employed in the sätra, in order to pre vent the application of the rule to Samasa (compound), to taddhitas, and to vakyas (sentences). Thus ha quifsentia 1 Here there is the sense of vipsa with regard to seven leaves, and does not mean a tree having seven leaves. There ought to have been doubling; but it would not take place, if we take the word padasya in the aphorism. Similarly formira, here also the sense is that of vipsa, and there ought to have been doubling, before the affixing of the taddhita affix. So also in ST GIÀ qrafan the sentence BTÀ Grain is not doubled, if we employ padasya. So the word padasya, should be employed in the satra. Moreover, it would prevent our employing the word padasya again in VIII. 
1. 16. 
Ans. We could not employ the word padasya in this sūtra, for then the rule would become very much restricted. Moreover in the above examples, there can be no doubling; for anqof: means that whose every twig bears seven leaves पणि पर्वाण समपानि मस्य: so that the sense of vipsa is not here inherent in the word sapta or parna. In the case of the taddhita example, there would be no doubling, because the force of vipsa is there denoted by the taddhita afix itself, and so doubling is not necessary. Moreover, a sentence 
can never be doubled, because vipsà can take place with regard to a word, and not a sentence. Therefore the word of should not be employed in the satra. 
On the contrary, if we employ the word padasya in the satra, it would give rise to the following anomalies. We could not have ata q ; for upasarga being considered as a separate pada, only great would be doubled, and x would not. So also, we have two forms par and FUI Here is added to the root g, and g is optionally changed to g by VIII. 2. 77, and in the other alternative there is ll As 9 and 7 are both asiddha (VIII. 2. 1), the doubling would take place without making this q or r substitution. So that having first doubled the word ( something as TET TIENT ) then optional por * change will take place, and we shall get wrong forms, like a IT, TET TUT in doubling. While the correct forms are T İMT, or 
, and not the hybrid doubling as given above. Hence the necessity of the vartika qurarara. Perfet (See VIII. 2. 3 last vārtika). 
BK. VIII. CH. I. §. 4) 
DOUBLING OF WORDS 
1493 
Or the word as may be considered to be formed by my affix of so भाषा, meaning सर्व कार्य यस्मिन्नस्ति सरिद सर्व सस्य भवतः ॥ That is, all operations having been first performed, then the word is doubled; so that a word in its inchoate state is not doubled. 
तस्य परमानंडितम् ॥२॥ पदानि ॥ तस्य, परम्, मानेडितम् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ तस्य द्विरुक्तस्य यत्परं शमरूपं सदामेडितसंज्ञं भवति ॥ 
2. Of that which is twice uttered, the latter word form is called amredita (repeated). 
Thus in or r , TTT FITrafora TTurcara FI, the second word being amredita is pluta. The word met occurs in Satras VI. 1. 99, VIU. 1. 57, VIII. 2. 95, VIII. 10. 3 &c. 
The art here denotes avayava-shashthi: and the word pri denotes the avayava. In fact, this sQtra indicates by implication, that a Genitive case is employed, when a member (avayava) is denoted. So that the sentences like पूर्व कायस्य become valid. 
In the above examples, the word has become pluta by VIII. 2. 95. 
ETT 113 11 gefa II ETA, TII वृत्तिः ॥ भनुदात्तं च सवति यसमेडितसंज्ञम ॥ 
3. That which is called åmredita is gravely ac cented. 
Thus yo ;99991 
That is, all the vowels of the amredita become anudatta or accentless. In the above examples, the root in becomes atmanepadi by 1. 3.66: the Personal endings are anudatta by VI. 1. 186; the vikarana Taq gets the acute by III. 1. 3; the of this # is elided by VI. 4. 111, and thus reth becomes finally acute by udatta-nivýtti-svara (VI. 1. 161). The amredita bhunkte becomes wholly anudatta. The word V is formed by the affix $ and is finally acute. 
नित्यवीप्सयोः॥४॥ पदानि ॥ नित्य, धीप्सयोः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ नित्ये चार्थे वीप्सायां च यते तस्य भवतः ॥ 
4. The whole word is repeated when the sense is of 'always' and 'each'. 
What words express ‘always? The finite verbs, and the Indeclinable words, formed by krit affixes. What 'always' is meant here? The word 'nitya' here means 'again and again', and this idea of 'repetition' is the quality of an action. That action which the agent does principally, without cessation, is called "nitya". So that nitya refers to an action (See III. 4. 22). Thus m et 'he cooks continually'. अल्पति जल्पति 'he talks incessantly. भुकस्वा भुक्त्वा वमति or 
1494 
DOUBLING OF WORDS. 
( BK. VIII CI. I S. 6 
fri ini at each one, when he has eaten goes away.' See 111. 4. 22. garantiertari ifa (See III. 4. 2). The affixes ktvå and ņamul formed words and the Imperative mood express the idea of 'again and again', only when they are repeated. While the words formed with the affix uc (Inten sive) express this idea by the inherent force of the affix, without repetition. Thus पुनः पुनः पचति - पापच्यते ॥ And when this intensive action is continually done, then this word also should be repeated; as qran Tawau In the above, examples have been given of nitya, as illustrated by finite verbs like qaret, Indeclinable krit words like it, and like it Now for fratii In what words the fra is found ? It is found in nouns (og formed words). As finite verbs (fax) express nitya, so inflected nouns (99) express vipså or a distri butive sense. What is ineant by the word vipsa ? It is the wish of the agent to pervade (vyaptum ichchha) an object through and through with a certain quality or action. That is, when many objects are wished to be pervaded by the speaker, with a particular attribute or action simultaneously, it is vipsa. Thus GTA ATT Trofra : 'every village is beautiful. So also start from treta: पुरुषः पुरुषो निधनमुपैति ॥ 
When a finite verb is repeated owing to the idea of nityata ; and we also wish to add to such a verb the affix denoting comparative or superlative degree, such affix must be added after the word has been repeated, as quê qoraatit But in the case of a noun, which is repeated owing to vipsa, the whole superlative or comparative word should be repeated, as H athra|| 
vieta ilk qafa il 97:, asia 11, वृत्तिः ॥ परीत्येतस्य वर्जनेर्थे । भवतः ।। वार्मिकम् ।। परेवनेऽसमासे वेति वक्तव्यम् ।। 
5. The word oft is repeated when employed in the sense of 'with the exception or exclusion of”. 
As of oft for TT (I. 4. 88 and II. 3. 10) 'It rained round about (but with the exclusion of) Trigarta'. Similarly aft qft artta, ftoft t ill Why do we say when meaning exclusion? Observe art artreure el 
Vart:-Optionally af, meaning 'exclusion', is repeated when it occurs not in a compound, as it fit 
f o r of fra: It In a compound, there is no repetition as, gramit Tür, because the word of has not the mcaning of exclusion only here; in fact, the whole compound word denotes here the idea of exclusion, and not the word oft alone. 
The word of is here a Karmapravachaniya (I. 4. 88), and governs the fifth case by II. 3. 11. In fout the word is an upasarga 
h a ragut ll ll qura II 9, FH, 54, 5, 484 Troll पतिः ॥ सम्प उत त्यतेपां पादपूरणे भवतो दिर्वचन पादः पूर्वतं ।। 
BK. VIII. CH. I. $.8] 
DOUBLING OF WORDS. 
1495 
____6. प्र, सम, उT and उत् are repeated, when by so doubling, the foot of a verse is completed. 
As म मायमानभरतस्य शृण्वे (Rig VII. 8.4), संसमिपुतले वृषन् ॥ (Rig x.191. I), उपोप मे परामश (Rig I. 126.7), कि नादुदुहर्षसे दातवार (Rig IV. 21.9). Why do we say when a foot of a verse is completed there by? Observe प्रदेवं देण्या धिया । This rule applies only to the Vedic verses, for there alone the Preposition may be used separate from its verb. In the secular literature, this rule has no applicability, as Prepositions are never so used. 
उपर्यध्यधसः सामीप्ये ॥७॥ पदानि ॥ उपरि, अधि, अवसः, सामीप्ये। वृत्तिः ॥ उपरि भधि अधम् इत्येतेपीभवतः सामीप्ये विवक्षित । 
7. उपरि, अधि, and अधस् are repeated, when it ex presses uninterrupted ncarness. 
The word samipya means 'proximity' whether in time or space. As उपर्युपरि दुःखम, or उपर्युपरि मामम, मध्यधि प्रामम, अधोधो नगरम् ॥ Why do we say 'mean ing near? Observe उपरि चन्द्रमा:॥ Why the word is not repeated here: उपरि शिरसो घटं धारयति ॥ The relation expressed here is not that of nearness, but that of above and below. 
उपर्युपरि पश्यन्तः सर्व एव दरिद्वति। 
अधोधो दर्शने कस्य महिमा नोपजायते ॥ Here the doubling is in the sense of vipsa. वाक्यादेरामन्त्रितस्यासूयासंमतिकोपकुत्सनभर्त्सनेषु ॥८॥ पदानि ॥ वाक्य आदेः, आमन्त्रितस्य, असूया, सम्मति, कोप, कुत्सन, भर्सनेषु ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ एकार्थः परसमूहो वाक्यम् । वाक्यारेरामन्त्रिसस्य रे भवतः असूया संमति कोप कुत्सन भर्समहत्ये. तेषु यदि तवाक्यं भवति ।। 
8. A Vocative, at the beginning of a sentence, is repeated, when envy, praise, anger, blame, or threat is meant by the speaker. 
A collocation of words, expressing one idea, is called a sentence or vakya. Thus (1) envy :-माणवकमाणवक मैभिरूपका भभिरूपक रिक्त ते भाभिरूप्यम्॥ (2) praise - माणवको ३ माणवक मंभिकपको ३ मभिरूपक शोभनः खल्वंसि ॥ (3)anger : मायका माणक अविनीसको भविनीतक इदानी शास्यसि पाल्म (4) blame:-क्तिक। शक्तिके यष्टिके । यटिके रिका से शक्तिः ॥ (5) Threat-चौर चौरा ३ वृषल वृपला पातयिष्यामि स्वा, बन्धयिष्यामि स्वा ।। The first word becomes pluta as well as gets svarita accent, by VIII. 2. 103, in the case of the first four; in the case of 'threat', the second word or the amredita becomes pluta by VIII. 2. 95. Why do we say "at the beginning of a sentence"? The Vocative in the middle or the end of a sentence is not to be repeated, as धोमन खल्वसि माणवकः ॥ Why do we say of a Vocative? Observe उदारोदेवरसः ॥ Why do we say when meaning envy &c. Observe देवदन गामभ्याम शुक्लाम् ॥ 
· 
1496 
DOUBLING OF WORDS. 
[BK. VIII. CH. I. $ 10. 
In some books, the vakya is defined as a collocation of words having one finite verb', (P TE PERDIT ) 11 In the first example, is added. . * fifcera II Ell verfall i, a afire, a II 
वृतिः ॥ एक मित्येतच्छन्दरूपं द्विरुक्तं बहुव्रीहिवरवति ।। 
9. When ge is repeated, it is treated like a mem ber a of Bahuvrîhi compound. 
The making it a Bahuvrihi is for the sake of eliding the case-affix, and treating the word as a masculine, even when it refers to a feminine. Thus 
ham qora (not patien), menyei Teita (not pa 41 ). The accent is regulated by VI. 2. 1. the case-affix is elided by II. 4. 71, and masculinising by VI. 3. 34. This double word vanai should not however be treated like a Bahuvrihi for the purposes of the application of the following three rules, () The sätra I. 1. 29 by which pronouns are not declined as pronouns when mem bers of a Bahuvrihi compound. The ivord patie however is declined like a Pronoun, as part II For sởtra 1. 1. 29 applies to a compound which is really a Bahuvrihi, and not to a word-form which is treated like a Bahuvrihi. The repetition of the word Bahuvribi in that sätra, though its anuvritti was under stood from the preceding one; indicates this. (2) The application of the rule of accent. Thus by the following satra, a word is repeated when a mental pain or affliction over something is expressed. Thus न न करोति, सुसुमागर्ति ॥ This double-word is treated like a Bahuvrihi, but not for the purposes of accent. For by VI. 2. 172 a Bahuvrihi preceded by or gets acute on the final, but not so 7 or yell Here four rules of accent present themselves ist VI. 1. 223 or daining acute on the final, 2nd VI. 2. I the first member retaining its accent, 3rd VI. 2. 172 already mentioned, 4th VIII. 1. 3 by which the second member becomes anudatta, The rule VI. 2. 1 however regulates the accent, in superses sion of the other three. (3) The third rule which does not apply to this Bahu vrihi-vat pana is the rule of samasanta affixing. Thus ,g: g: (doubled by VIII. 1. 10 ) do not get the samasanta affix by V.4. 74. 
terte Il poll Taifa | OT, , allt वृत्तिः ॥ भावापनमावाधः । पीडाप्रयोक्त धर्मः । तब वर्तमानस्थ । भवता बहुव्रीहिवचास्व कार्य भवति ।। 
10. A word is repeated, and is treated like a mem ber of Bahu vrihi compound, when a mental distress over some thing is expressed. 
Thus Tana: 'gone, gone to my affliction', otti, fachaferi, in the masculine, and गतगता, नएनष्टा, पतितपार्तता in the Feminine (not गतागता for the reasons given in the preceding aphorism ). The accent is governed by VI. 2. I. 
BK. VIII. CH. I. S. 12 ] 
DOUBLING OF WORDS. 
1497 
कर्मधारयवदुत्तरेषु ॥ ११॥ पदानि ॥ कर्मधारय, वत, उत्तरेषु॥ वृत्तिः ॥त उत्तरेषु दिर्वचनेषु कर्मधारयवकार्य भवतीत्येतहेदितव्यम। कर्मधारयले प्रयोजनं मुल्लोप पुवज्ञावान्सोवात्तवानि ॥ 
11. In the following rules, the double-word is treated like a Karmadhâraya compound. 
The reason for making it a Karmadharaya is to elide the case - affix (II. 4.71), to make the first member a masculine term even when the word refers to a feminine (VI. 3. 42), and to regulate the accent by VI. 1. 223. Thus पद्धपद्धः, मृदुमदुः where the first member has lost the case-affix. पटुपही, मृदुमती where the first member is treated as a masculine, even when there is a on in the penul timate as कालककालिका (See VI. 3. 37 and 42); पटुप?, पटुपड़ी, the accent falls on the final, for the rule VI. I. 223 was debarred by VIII. I. 3, but the present rule re-instates VI. I 223. The word उत्तरेषु is for the sake of distinctness, the sätra being an adhikära one, would liave applied to the subsequent aphorisms, without even the word uttareshu. 
प्रकारे गुणवचनस्य ॥ १२॥ पदानि ॥ प्रकारे, गुण-वचनस्य ॥ . वृत्तिः ॥ प्रकारो मे साहश्यं च । तदिह साम्यं प्रकारो रायते । प्रकारे वर्समामस्व गुणवचनस्व दे भवतः ॥ 
वार्तिकम् ॥ भानुपूज्य डेभवतासि वकन्यन् ॥ वा ॥ स्वाथै मार्यमाणेनेकस्मित भवत इति वक्तव्यम् । वा०॥पापले देभवत इति वनण्यम् ॥ पा०॥ क्रियासमभिहारे भवत इति वक्तव्यम् ॥ पा॥ भाभीये हे भवत पति पत्नग्यम् । पा०॥ अपिीभवत इति वक्तव्यम् ॥ वा । पूर्वप्रथमयोरातिशयविवक्षायां देभवत इति वक्तव्यम् ॥ वा ॥ उतरडतमयोः समसंप्रधारणयोः बी निगः भावे भवत पति वक्तव्यम् ॥ वा० ॥ कर्मध्यति र बनानी के भवत इति पत्नष्यम् सामासवष बहुलम् ॥ पा०॥ श्रीनपुंसकयारुत्तरपदस्य चाम्भावो वक्तव्यः । 
12. An adjective is repeated, when it is meant to express that the said attribute belongs to a thing only to a limited degree, and the double word is treated like a Karma dharays. 
The word at means both difference and fresemblance'. It means 'resemblance' here: i.e. the person or thing resembles, but is not fully like, the thing expressing the attribute. Thus पदुप?', tolerably sharp', भूदुमूः "pretty soft", पाण्डमपण्डित: &c. The sense is that the attribute is not futly possessed by the person. The affix जातविर (V. 3.69)also expressing प्रकार, is not debarred by this satra. Thus पटुभातीयः, मूदुजातीयः॥ 
Why do we say prakare "when denoting somewhat like it"? Observe TETTH: 'the clever Devadatta'. Why do we say 'an attributive or adjective word? Observe मग्निमाणवकः, 'a fiery boy', गीर्वाहीकः 'a cow-like Bahika'. Here 
1498 
DOUBLING OF WORDS: 
LING 
(BK. VIII. CH. I. §. 12 
'agni' and 'gau' are not naturally adjective words, though employed here like 
adjectives. 
Vast:-An adjective is repeated when denoting that persons or things possessing that attribute are to be taken in their due order. Thus 
Feri, ma non hai, mi in noua: 11 
Vart:-A word denoting more than one is repeated without change of sense, when it denotes the limit or extent of the thing. Thus FTT air frontar WTENİ ATS 10 ore 'give a masha, a másha out of this karshapaņa to you two': i, e. give only two masha one to each. A karsha pana contains many mashas, out of them, the extent of gift is limited to two only. This therefore is dist inguishable from the distributive double (vipsa). The words ATS A - - 
fe; the Ary does not take the dual case here. Why do we say when it ex presses the limit'? Observe IT arsforfag 7 arah , 4 in, far 
Inf. Here the word are itself does not express limit, but the qualifying words yai, t, f&c. Why do we say 'denoting more than one? Observe 
मस्मात् कार्षापणाविह भवयां मापमेकं देहि ।। 
Vart: In expressing perplexity or alarm, a word may be repeated twice. The word 796 in the vartika means 'a confused state of mind'. As mit grbar Ter "a snake, a snake, beware. beware'. It is not a necessary condition that the word should be repeated twice only, but as many times as one likes, so long as his meaning is not manifest. As: : : fa, शुध्यस्व बुध्यस्व ॥ 
Vart:-When intensity or frequency of an action is denoted, the word is uttered twice: as, T attoo TRSTÅ II See III. 4. 2. 
Vårt:-In re-iteration the word is doubled; as, TT TT quat, ar i l See III. 4. 22. This has also been illustrated under VIII. 1. 4. 
Vart:—The word is repeated when the affix my follows; as, qc927 tū ति, पटपटायते ॥ This doubling takes place when the word denotes an imitation of an inarticulate sound ( V. 4. 57). Therefore, not here, fortat a, var 
ufat, where the affix 74 denotes 'to plough', ( V. 4. 58). Because of this restriction, some read the vârtika as, ut I 
Vart: The words and 4 are repeated when a comparative or superlative sense is to be denoted: as gift gi guanti, TÁ AUTÁ gou The com parative and superlative affixes are not debarred hereby, as, पूर्वतरं पुण्यन्ति, मयमतर पच्यन्ते ॥ 
Vart:-The words ending in the affixes TT and 39# (comparative and superlative), are doubled when they refer to feminine nouns and are employed in determining or pondering upon the relative condition of the superiority of one out of two or many; as समाविमावास्यो, कतरा कतरा भनयोरायता " Both these are rich: let us ponder how much is their richness.” + T&T, AT AT STAR 
W 
BK. VIII. Cl. I. F. 15] 
• I. I. 15] 
DOUBLING OF WORDS. 
1499 
व्यता । This is found in words other than those ending in सर and aम; as; उमावि. मावाव्यो, किशी किसी मनयोराब्यता ॥ This is also found where the abstract noun denoting condition (as मान्यता) is not in the feminine: as, उमाविमावाब्धी, कतर क. सरोऽनयोर्विभवः "Both these are rich, let us see what is their respective greatness." 
____Vart:-In denoting reciprocity of action, the Pronominal is doubled; and diversely it is treated like a compound (II. 2. 27) when it is not treated like a compound, then the first word is always exhibited in the nominative singular. See I. 3. 14, III. 3.43,and V.4. 127. Thus. अन्यमन्याममे ब्राह्मणा भोमयन्ति " these Brahmanas feed one another." भन्योन्यमिमे ब्राह्मणा भोजयन्ति । अन्योन्यस्थ प्राणा भोजयन्ति -इतरेतरान् भोजयन्ति ॥ The word मन्य and पर are never treated as a compound, and face is always so treated. The following are from "Siddhanta Kaumudi:- भन्योज्यो, भन्योन्यान् भन्योऽन्येनकृतं, मन्योज्यसैवतं, मन्योऽन्येषां पुष्करैराशन्ते (Magh) परस्परं ।। 
Vart:- In the feminine and neuter, the augment or is added option ally to the second term under the above circumstances, as, भन्यो न्यामिमे ब्राह्मण्यो भोजयता, मन्योन्यं भोजयता, इतरेतरां मोमयतः, इतरेतरं भोजयतः ॥ भन्योऽज्यामिमे ब्राह्मणकुल मोजयता, इतरेतरामिम ब्राह्मणकुले भोजयता, इतरेतरमिमे ब्राह्मणकुल भोजयतः ॥ __अकृच्छ्रेमियसुखयोरन्यतरस्याम् ॥ १३॥ पदानि ॥ अ-कृच्छे, प्रिय, सुखयोः, अन्यतरस्याम् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ प्रिय मुख इत्येतयोरन्यतरस्यांरेमवतः भकुच्छ्रे बोत्ये ॥ 
13. The words 'priya' and 'sukha' are repeated op tionally, when they mean "easily, without any difficulty". 
The word means difficulty and sorrow, may means 'without difficulty or sorrow, i.e. pleasantly'. Thus प्रियनियेण ददाति, सुखसुखेन दवासि, or प्रियेण ददाति, सुखन ददाति = मतिप्रियमपि वस्व नायासेन ददाति ॥ That is, he gives with pleasure, without feeling it as a trouble. Why do we say "when meaning easily"? Observe प्रियः पुत्र: "beloved son". मुखी रथः ।। 
यथास्वे यथायथम् ॥ १४॥ पदानि ॥ यथा स्वे, यथा यथम ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ यो व मामा यात्मीय तत्तपथावं तस्मिन् यथायमिति निपात्यते । यथाशवस्य दिर्वचन नपुंसकलिङ्गताच निपात्यते ।। 
14. The word यथायर्थम् is irregularly formed in the sense of "respectively, fitly, properly". . What is one's own nature, and whatever is natural to one, that is called GOTETII In this sense is formed toate there being doubling and neuter gender. It is an Indeclinable. As ज्ञाताः सो पदार्था यथायथम् =ययास्तभावं "all ob jects have been known according to their respective nature". सर्वेषां तु यथायथं यथास्मीय॥ 
द्वन्द्वं रहस्यमर्यादावचनव्युत्क्रमणयज्ञपात्रप्रयोगाभिव्यक्तिषु ॥ १५॥ पदानि ॥ द्वन्द्रम, रहस्य, मर्यादा वचन, व्युत्क्रमण, यश पात्र प्रयोग, अभि व्यक्तिषु॥ 
1500 
DOUDLING OF WORDS. 
(BK. VIII. CH. 1. §. 17 
वृतिः॥ इनमिति विशब्दस्य दिवचनं पूर्वपदस्थाम्भावः भवं चीतरपरस्य निपात्यत रहस्य मशवचन म्युग्क्रमण यज्ञपात्र प्रयोग भभिव्यक्ति एतंषु भयेषु ॥ 
15. The word “dvandvam" is irregularly formed, in the sense of 'secret', and when it expresses a 'limit', ** separation', 'employing in a sacrificial vessel', and 'mani festation'. 
The word rt is formed from it by doubling it, changing the first r in to 94, and the second g into mit The word or itself means or secret; while it marks 'limit' HITT &c only secondarily, by context of the sentence. Thus i patent 'they are consulting some secret'. Limit or more1444, as, nga qari marunt=Argon Agi Tegra, a, maging ii (See Maitr. S. 1.7. 3 Sankh. Br. III. 97). Separation of ey *:- F a: - fagfernity gurrafera: # Vyutkramana means bheda or separation, placing at a different place. Employment with regard to a sacrificial vessel (an :) as - i n for at the (See I. 3. 64 ) U m an or manifestation : as I नारदपर्वतो, इनं संकर्षण वासुदेवी-हावयभिष्यतो साहचर्येण ॥ 
The word is found employed in connection with other senses also; as, ri t a fua ngarfrci, : &c. 
YFU II PENTTI I TET I इतिः ॥ पदस्वेत्यवमधिकारःमागपदान्ताधिकारात् । यदित अर्धमनुकमिस्यामः पदस्थेत्येव तदेदितव्यम् ।। 
16. Upto VIII. 3. 54, inclusive, should be always supplied in every subsequent sätra, the phrase “ of a word ", or “to the whole of a word ". 
This is an adhikära sätra, and extends up to VIII. 3. 55. Whatever we shall treat of here-after, should be understood to apply to a full 'pada' or a completed word. Thus VIII. 2. 23, (Harmaa 19: ) teaches "there is eli sion of the final of what ends in a conjunct consonant". The word gerne must be supplied here to complete the sense : viz, of a word which ends in a con junct consonant, the final is elided. Thus'q , , from 49 and amare 
Why do we say 'of a Pada? Observe que , amit where the though sanyoganta is not elided, because the stem is no longer called pada. The force of the Genitive in the must be construed according to the context, sometimes as sthana-shashthi i.c." in the room of the whole pada"; and sometimes as avayava-shashțhi i.e." of a pada-of the portion of a pada ". 
ET II puell 
11 TETO 11 वृत्तिः ॥ पादित्ययमधिकार प्राकृत्सने च सुप्थगोचावावित्येतस्मापरित उर्द्धमनुक्रमिध्वामः पदादित्येवं ariqasaq 11 
17. Upto VIII. 1. 68, inclusive should always be supplied the phrase "after a parla". BK. VIII. C11. 1. $. 18 ] 
ANUDATTA 
1.501 
Whatever we shall teach hereafter should be understood to apply to that which coinės after a pada. Thus the sätra VIII. 1. 19, teaches "of an amantrita". The phrase "ma, must be supplied to complete the sense. That is, "of a pada, which is in the Vocative case, and which comes after another pada, all vowels become anudatta". Thus rei auf "Cookeșt thou, o Devadatta". Why do we say, "after a pada"? Observe que II Here Devadatta is not anudatta (VI. 1. 198). 
अनुदात्तं सर्वमपादादौ ॥ १८॥ पदानि ॥ अनुदासम्, सर्वम्, अ-पाद-आदौ ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ भनुदात्तमिति च सर्वमिति प. अपाशाविति च एतत्रयमधिकतं वेदितव्यमापादपरिसमामे, रित अपरं यक्ष्यामः भनुज्ञातं सर्वमपाशावित्यवं तदितव्यम् ॥ 
18. Upto VIII. 1. 74, inclusive is to be supplied the phrase “The whole is unaccented, if it does not stand at the beginning of the foot of a verse". 
The three words anudattam "unaccented ", sarvam "the whole", and apadadau "not in the beginning of a l'ada of a verse", should be understood to exert a governing influence over all the subsequent sätras of this chapter, upto its end. Whatever we shall treat of hereafter, must be understood to be wholly unaccented, provided that, it does not stand as the first word of a verse or stanza. Thus VIII. 1, 19, says "of a Vocative ". The whole of this satra should be read there to complete the sense, viz: "all the syllables of a Voca tive are unaccented when a word precedes it, and it does not stand as the first word of a hemistich"; as QUE FITTII 
Why do we say "when not at the beginning of a hemistich"? Observe बसे नियस रणसं त्यो भनवण्या , here पत्यो though in the Vocative case, is not anu datta, as it stands at the beginning of a Pada." 
Similarly VIII. I. 21, teaches "ti and t are the substitutes of THE More in the plural". The present sätra must be read there to complete the sense, viz, when not at the beginning of a verse. Thus craTT: Pi, : FTO II But at the beginning of a hemistich, we must have the forms york and WHITE instead of q: and all As, 
रुखो विश्वेश्वरो देवो युष्माकं कुलदेवता। . 
स एव नायो भगवानस्माकं शत्रुमर्दनः ।। The word qr in the satra refers both to the hemistiches of the sacred Rik hymns, as well as to secular slokas. 
Q. Why do we employ the word in the stra? 
Ans. The word sarvam is used in the sởtra, in order to indicate that a word, which has not acute accent on the first syllable, should also become anudatta. For the word gera (VIII. 1. 17) is in the ablative case, and shows that the operation taught in any sätra governed by it, will be performed on 
1502 
ANUDÅTTA 
(BK. VIII. CH. I. $. 18 
the first syllable, according to the maxim si malli Thercfore, by rule VIII, 1. 28, the word q978, which is acutely accented on the first syllable, (because 
and fag are anudatta), will only lose its accent in 1977:47a; but not so the verb ata which is acutely accented in the middle (by the vikarana accent) in देवदनः करोति ॥ But by force of the word सर्व, करोति also loses its accent. 
Q. This cannot be the reason, for the author indicates by his prohibition in Satra VIII. 1. 29, that a verb loses its accent, where ever that accent may be. For there is no verb when conjugated in a which has acute on the first syllable. 
Ans. The word 'sarvam' is used to prevent the operation of isaalfi:; for where the rule orie: qrey will not apply there the other will apply: so that, if "sarvam" was not used, the rule would apply to the finals, and not to cases where there were other than initials to be operated upon. Thus the rule VIII. 
1. 28 would apply to : which is finally acute by VI. 1. 186, in 194714 
:, but not to 49: Thu 
Q. No; this cannot be the reason of employing the word 'sarvam'in the sätra, for the author indicates that the rule is not confined to the finals, by the prohibition he makes in favor of T in VIII. 1. 51; for there is no verb, when conjugated in Lșit, which has acute on the final. All Lşit is acute in the iniddle by VI, 1, 186. So the sensoruta rule does not apply, 
Ans. The word 'sarvam' is used for this reason. Had 'sarvam', not been used, then in those cases where there was no other rule to apply, like VIII. 1, 19, there only the word would become anudatta. But in cases where another rule also operated, there this anudatta rule would not apply, for then there would be two different sentences. For a thing which is already in existence can be made the subject of a rule ordering certain operations to be performed on it; but not so a thing which will come in existence in future time. Thus the words gi and At are ordained as substitutes of yushmad and asmad by one sentence VIII. 1. 20; while another sentence ordains their anudatta-hood. So here there is separation of sentences (vakya-bheda): which is not desireable; for a vakya bheda should be avoided, if possible. But by employing the word 'sarvam', this vakya-bheda is made tolerable, 
Another reason for employing this word is that the substitutes af and it should come in the room of the whole declined forms of yushmad and asmad, with their case-affixes. Had not this word (sarvam) been used, then of and #r would have replaced only ,yushmad' and 'asmad'. Obj. Will not the anuvritti of the word "padasya', cause the whole declined word to be replaced by qi and not only the crude-forms yushmad and aşmad? And there cannot be a full word unless it takes case-affixes; so the whole of yushmad and asmad with their case-affixes will be replaced. Where is the necessity of using the word 'sar 
BK. VIII. C11. I . 19) 
ANUDÁTTA. 
1503 
11 
vain? Ans. This objection will apply to those cases where a Pada is a word ending in a case-affix. But the word oy is a technical term also, and applies to crude forms before certain case-affixes. Thus a nominal stem (not a full word) is also called Pada by 1. 4. 17, before non-sarvanamasthana case-affixes. Therefore yushmad and asmad will be pada before those affixes. Thus be sore the affix of Dative Dual, they will be called Pada; and had it not been used, then only "yushmad" and "asmad" will be replaced and not their case affixes. Thus ar ti fua, watat a I Here ai and Åt would require after 
them the case - affix azt otherwise. 
AfaT I SE 11 tar ll THIRATTRI, II वृत्तिः ॥ भामन्त्रितस्य पदस्थ पदापरस्यापावाशे वर्तमानस्य सर्वस्यानुरात्तो भवति ॥ पातिकम् ॥ समान वाक्ये निघात युष्मद स्मादेशा वक्तव्याः ।। 
19. All the syllables of a Vocative are unaccented when a word precedes it, and it does not stand at the beginn ing of a hemistich. 
___ Thus पचसि देवात्त , पचसि यज्ञदत्त ॥ The Vocative is acutely accented on the first by VI. 1. 198, the present makes it all unaccented. 
Vårt:-The rules relating to nighata (by which all syllables of a word become unaccented, such as the present, and VIII. 1. 28 &c) and to the sub stitutes of yushmad and asmad apply then only, when the preceding word which would cause the nighâta or the substitution, is part of the same sentence with the latter word. Therefore not here:-97 VT, FTTH 11 "This is the staff. Carry by mcans of it." Here # does not lose its accent by VIII. I. 28, though preceded by the Noun danda, because these are parts of two different sentences. 
Tri 99, at afacara i 1744 94, ## *fafa il "Cook the food, it will be for thee. Cook the food, it will be for me." That is the rice cooked by thee, will do both for thyself and myself. Here the , and a substitutions have not taken place (VIII. I. 22) for yushmad and asmad, for the same reason. 
Another example is, wale ferit, my "Vishnumitra is here, Come back Devadatta." Here Devadatta, though in the Vocative case, does not lose its accent. Nor can you say that mauti geraft: will make this vårtika redundant. In all the above examples, the different sentences are connected with each other in sense. Thus in the last example, Devadatta was searching for Vishnumitra, when some one says to him, 'Here is V. come back D." Thus the two sentences are samartha, yet there is no nighata. But the rule will apply here:-17 ! Arara ula i qurfea BiH (VIII. 1. 28 ) I urtat a WITH TFATTA 11 In the last examples the Vocatives, the verbs and the substitutes of yushmad and asmad are not in syntactical construction with the words that immediately precede them, and yet the nighata rule &c does apply: inspite of the general maxiin qafn :(II. 1. 1), for rules relating to completed words apply to such words only which are in construction. 
1504 
PRONOUNS. 
[BK. VIII. Cl. I. S. 22 
In the last example, the construction is rह स्थिता माता ते देवान, and not देवान. Thus re is in syntactical construction with स्थिता and not देवान, yet it causes nighata of Devadatta. Similarly in नद्यास्तिष्ठनि कूलं, the word नयाः is not in construction with तिष्ठति, but with कुलं, i.e. नणाः कृतं तिष्ठति; yet it causes the nighata of fara ni Similarly oriat is not in construction with a, but with मोदन, i.e. घालीनां भोरनं ते दास्यामि ॥ Yetitcauses a substitution of yushmad. Though the preceding words are not samartha with regard to the words that follow them, they cause the changes, because the words are in the same sentence. 
युष्मदस्मदोः षष्ठीचतुर्थीद्वितीयाखयोर्वानावी ॥ २०॥ पदानि ॥ युष्मद, अ स्मदोः, षष्ठी, चतुर्थी, द्वितीयाखयोः, चाम, नावी॥ वृत्तिः ॥ युष्मदस्मद् इत्येतयोः पष्ठीचतुर्थीवितीयास्यवोर्बयासंख्वं पानोहत्येतावावेशी भवतस्तौ चा मुशती॥ 
20. For the Genitive, Dative and Accusative Dual of yushmad and asmad, are substituted art and respectively, when a word precedes, and these substitutes are anudatta. 
All the three satras पदस्थ, पदात् and भनुदात्तं सर्वमपादा are applicable here. Thus मामो वां स्वम । अनपदो नौ स्वम् । पामो वां दीयते । जनपदो मी दीयते । मामो वां पश्यति । अनपदी नी पश्यति ।। 
These two 47 and Ht come in the Dual only, because other substitutes have been taught for the Singular and Plural in the two subsequent s@tras. 
Why do we say "for the Genitive, Dative and Accusative"? In other cases there will be no substitution. As, पामो युवाभ्यां कसम् ॥ The word स्य in the sOtra indicates that the case affixes must be express and not understood, for the purposes of this substitution. Therefore, not here: ति युष्मनपुवः though here yushmat is preceded by a word in a sentence, and is in the Genitive case yet q: substitution (VIII. 1. 21) does not take place, because the case-affix is elided. - बहुवचनस्य घनसी ॥ २१ ॥ पदानि ॥ बहुवचनस्य, वस, नसी॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ बहुवचनान्तयोर्युष्मदस्मयोः षष्ठीचतुर्थीद्वितीयास्थयोर्ययासंख्य पम् नम् इत्येतावादेशी भवतः ॥ 
21. For (the Genitive, Dative, and Accusative) plural of yushmad and asmad are substituted ap and af respect ively,(when a word precedes, and these substitutes are anudatta). 
Thus पामो : स्वप, जनपदोनः स्वम् ग्रामो वो दीयते, जनपदो नो दीयते; मामो : पश्यति अमपदो नः पश्यति॥ 
- तेर.यावेकवचनस्य २२॥ पदानि ॥ ते, मयो, एक, वचनस्य ॥ पत्तिः ॥ युष्मदस्मदरिकवचनान्तयोः षष्ठीपतुस्थियोर्ययासंख्यं ते मे इत्येतावादेवी भवतः।। 
22. For the Genitive and Dative Singular (of yushmad and asmad are substituted) åt and # respectively, (when a word precedes and these are anudatta). 
BK. VIII. Cl. I. $ 24] 
PRONOUNS. 
1505 
Thus पामस्ते स्वम, ग्रामो मे स्वम, मामस्ते दीयते, मामो मे दीयते ॥ For the Accusa. tive singular, other substitutes have been taught in the next sätra, hence and A come only in Genitive and Dative. ___ त्वामौ द्वितोयायाः॥२३॥ पदानि ॥ त्वा, मो, द्वितीयायाः॥ 
पतिः ॥ एकाचनस्येति वर्तते। द्वितीयाया बदकाचनं तदन्तयोर्युष्मदस्मर्यथासंख्या मात्येतावा. 
शौ भवतः॥ 
23. For the Accusative Singular of yushmad and asmad are substituted at and #1 respectively, under the same circumstances. 
The word एकवचनस्य is understood here. Thus मामला पक्ष्यति, प्रामो मा पश्यसि ।। 
न चवाहावयुक्तं ॥ २४॥ पदानि ॥ न, च, धा, ह, मह, एव, युके। पतिः ॥ च वाहमह एव एभिर्योगे युष्मदस्मदोर्वानावादयो न भवन्ति । 
24. The above substitutions do not take place when there is in connection with the pronouns any of these: च, 'and' वा, 'or'ह, 'oh! मह 'wonderful', or एव 'only'. ... . 
Thus मामस्तव च स्वम्, पामो मम च स्वम् ।। 
युवयोग स्वम् । भावयोष स्वम् । युष्माकं च स्वम् । अस्माकं च स्वम् । मामस्तुभ्यं च दीयते मामो मा चहीयते। युवाभ्यां च दीयते । भावाभ्यां च दीयते । युष्मभ्यं च दीयते। भस्मभ्यं च दीयते। मामस्थां च पश्यति । मामो मां चपश्यति । युव च पश्यति । भावां च पश्यात । युष्मांध पश्यति । मरमांच पश्यति ॥ वा । प्रामस्तर वा स्वम । मामो मम वा स्वम् । युवयोर्वा स्वम् । भावयोर्वा स्वम। युस्माकं वास्थम । भमाकं वा स्वम् । मामस्तुभ्यं वा दीयते । पामो मह्यं वा दीयते । युवाभ्यां वा दीयते । भावाभ्यां या दीयते । युष्मभ्यं वा दीयते । स्मभ्यं वा वीतये । मामस्त्वां या पश्यति । मामो मां वा पश्यति। युवां वा पश्यति । भावां वा पश्यति । युष्मान् वा पश्यति । भस्मान्या पश्यति । । । पामस्तव स्वम् । मामो ममह स्वम् । पुश्योई स्वम् । भावयोई स्वम् । शुष्माकंह स्वम् । मरमाकंह स्वम् । मामस्तुभ्यं ह दीयते । पामो माय हवीयते । युवाभ्यांहदीयते। भावाभ्यां ह दीयते । युष्मभ्यं न दीयते । भसभ्य दीयते । मामस्वाह पश्यति । पामो माह पश्यति । पुवांह पश्यति । भावांह पश्यति । युष्मान्ह पश्यति । भस्मान्ह पश्यति । महापामस्तवाह स्वम् । पामो ममाह स्वम । युषयोरह त्वम्। भावयोरह सम्। युष्माकमह स्वम् । अस्माक मह स्वम् । प्रामस्तुभ्यमह दीयते । पामोमह्यमह दीयत । युवाभ्यामह दीयते । भावाभ्यामह दीयते । युष्मभ्यमह दीयत । भस्मभ्यमह दीयते । ग्रामस्वामह पश्यति। मामो मामह पश्यति । युवामह पश्यति । भावामह पश्यति । युष्मानह पश्यति । समानह पश्यति । एव। मामस्तवैव स्वम् । माम.ममैव स्वम् । युवयोरेव स्वम् । भावयोरेव स्वम् । युष्माक्रमेव स्वम् । भस्माकमेव स्वम् । मामस्तुभ्यमेव दीयते । मामा मामय दीयते । युवा भ्यामेव दीयते। भावाभ्यामेव दीयते । युष्मभ्यमेव दीयते । भस्मभ्यमेव दीयते । मामस्वामेव पश्यति । ग्रामो मामेव पश्यति । युवामेव पश्यति । भावामेव पश्यति । युष्मानेव पश्यति । भस्मानव पश्यति । युक्ताहणं सासापोगप्रतिपस्यर्थम् । युक्तयुक्त प्रतिषेधो न भवति । पाम ते स्वम्। मगरं च मे स्वम् । 
The word g is employed in the sâtra to indicate direct conjunction. There is, therefore, where the conjunction is not direct but intermediate the employment of the shorter forms. As पाम ते स्वं, नगरं च मे स्वम ॥ 
The particles च, वा, &c denote conjunction, "separation' wonder' 
अस्माकमबभामस्तपाते। युवा 
1506 
PRONOUNS. 
[BK. VIII. CH. I. S. 26 
&c. Where the sense of 'conjunction. ' ' separation' &c are inherent in the pronouns yushmad and asmad, and these particles are employed to inanisest that sense, there the present sätra will apply its prohibition. 
पश्यार्थश्चानालोचने ॥ २५॥ पदानि ॥ पश्य, अर्थः, च, अनालोचने ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ पश्यार्या दर्शनार्याः। वर्षनं ज्ञानम्। भालोचनं चक्षुर्विज्ञानम् । तः पश्याथैरनालोचने वर्त. मानैर्युन युष्मदमदीनावादयो न भवन्ति ॥ 
25. The above substitutions do not take place also in connection with verbs having the sense of “seeing”, when physical seeing is not denoted. 
__The word पश्याः is equivalent to दर्शनार्याः, and दर्शन means knowledge', i.e. verbs denoting 'to know', a means perception obtained through sight i.e. physi cal 'seeing' opposed to metaphorical "seeing" - "knowing". The substitutions of ai and # &c. for gone and do not take place when these pronouns are employed in connection with verbs denoting 'seeing' (metaphori cally) but not. looking' (physically). 
. Thus प्रामस्तव स्वं समीक्ष्यागतः, मामो मम स्वं समीक्ष्यागत; मामस्तुभ्य दीयमानं समीस्वागता, मामो मह्यं दीममानं समीक्ष्यागतः, मामस्वां समीक्ष्यागतः, ग्रामो मां समीक्ष्यागतः॥ 
• Why do we say when not meaning to look'? Observe that youtat, ' मामो मा पश्यति ॥ 
Ishti:-With regard to verbs of " seeing ", the rule should apply even where the connection is not direct: as, we have already illustrated above. 
सपूर्वायाः प्रथमाया विभाषा ॥२६॥ पदानि ॥ स पूर्षायाः, प्रथमायाः, विभाषा॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ विद्यमानपूर्वालयमान्तालादुत्तरयोर्युष्मदस्मदोर्विभाषा पानावाल्यो न भवन्ति ।। 
· वार्तिकम् ॥ युष्मदस विभाषा भनन्यादेश इतिवक्तव्य ॥ . वा ॥ सर्व एव पानावादयोऽन्वादेश विभाषा वक्तव्यः ।। 
1 26. When the pronoun follows after a Nomina tive, which itself is preceded by another word, then the above substitutions may take place optionally. 
- Thus ग्रामे कम्बलस्ते स्वम् or ग्रामे कम्बलस्तवस्वम् ॥ ग्राम कम्बलोमेस्वम् ॥ प्रामकम्बलोमम स्वम् ।। प्रामकम्बलस्ते दीयते ॥ पाम कम्बलस्तुभ्यं दीयते ॥ ग्रामे कम्बलो मे दीयते ॥ ग्राम कम्बलो मा दीयते ॥ माम छामास्वा पश्यन्ति ॥ मामे छात्रास्त्वां पश्यन्ति ॥ पामे छात्रामा पश्यन्ति ॥ प्रामे छापा 
मां पश्यन्ति ।। 
Why do we say "which itself is preceded by another word"? Observe कम्बलस्ते स्वम, कम्बली मे स्वम् ।। 
Why do we say "after a Nominative"? Observe कम्बलो मामे ते स्वम्, कम्बलो मामे मे स्वम् ॥ 
Vårt:--The option herein taught is restricted to you and me when not employed in anvådcía. But when there is anyâdesa, then the substitution is 
BK. VIII. CII. I. . 27) 
PRONOUNS. 
1507 
compulsory and not optional. This vārtika restricts the scope of the satra, and makes it a vyavasthita vibhasha. Therefore, there is no option here, where there is anvadesa: utalot (#4, HT M # FEU 
Vårt:-Others say, that the substitutes of, &c are all optional, when not employed in anvādesa, whether the nominative is preceded by another noun or not. Thus the rules 20, 21, 22, 23 are optional. As: Fre, or कम्बलस्तव स्वम् , कम्बलो में स्वम् or कम्बलो मम स्वम्॥ Why do we say “when not in anvadesa"? Observe PET FTE T HAT FT II C. If this is so, where is the necessity of the present sūtra at all? Ans. The present sätra is for the sake of anvādesa: i.e. the option taught in the present sätra will take place only then, when there is anvadesa and not otherwise ; thus sprut TH # RETT, or ponta **TSETT FT4, T P ETC, or 71 HTAT #FT 10 In other words, according to this vārtika, rules 20, 21, 22 and 23 are all optional in anva. desa, but compulsory where is no anvädesa; but when the pronoun is preceded by a nominative which itself is preceded by another word, then the above rules are not compulsory, even in anvädesa: there also the option will apply. 
fait suitreia Emirateverent: ll pull qatar a fri, Tigretta, कुत्सन, आभीषण्ययोः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ तिङन्तात्सराणि गोत्रादीनि कुत्सने भाभीक्ष्ण्ये चाय वर्तमानानि भनुदात्तानि भवन्ति ।। 
27. The words * &c, become unaccented after a finite verb, when a contempt or a repetition is intended. 
Thus in 1 , wegla , when contempt is meant. 
Here you opt means 'he proclaims his Gotra &c, so that he may get food &c'. qa is from the root oft saffror 'to make evident' (Bhu. 184). Similarly #tra Tun "he repeatedly utters, his descent &c, in order to get married &c". Where contempt is not meant, it has the force of repetition, i.e. he repeatedly utters his Gotra as one is bound to do, in marriage-rites &c. And पति पचति गोत्रम्, जल्पति अल्पति गोत्रम् when repetition or intensity is denoted. Similarly qora , qua qua ya 11 The word gi is a noun derived from the root by the affix option, the substitution for has not taken place, as an anomaly. 
1 ora, 2 , 3 , 
4 7, 5* , 6 , 7 poster, 8 972, gara, 10 q. ngo, IL 7, 12 TH, 13 PET, 14 fees, 15 T ATH (TH T) 16 470, 17 , 
The word an optionally becomes anudátta : in the alternative, it is first-acute. Thus qala TA or qah - 
1508 
ACCENT. 
[BK. VIII. C11. I. & 29 
Why do we say after a finite verb'? Observe and finu 
Why do we say "Gotra and the rest"? Observe qura 997 Here are is an adverb. 
Why do we say 'when contempt or repetition is meant'? Observe ania RTV "He digs a well having assembled the Gotra". 
The words 'contempt and repetition' in the text qualify the whole sentence or sūtra, and not the word ta nor the word TETT understood. For we find that whercever the word ita is used in this Chapter, it always implies the sense of contempt or repetition'. Thus the word tranne is used in VIII, 1. 57 and there also the sense is of contempt and repetition. 
fassfas: 11 RCI1 valfa il fay, s: 11 वृत्तिः॥ तिङन्तं पदमातडतापात्परमनुसतं भवति । 
28. A finite verb is unaccented, when a word precedes it, which is not a finite verb. 
Thus 1977 gal Why do we say "a finite verb"? Observe taget 4, V 
Why do we say 'when the preceding word is not a finite verb? Observe wa t 'the act of cooking exists'- gran faian Tere the word wafa is a finite verb, therefore the verb pachati does not lose its accent. So also parte sufs, ma, fala 'successful he conquers, rules, thrives', qizi og alfare "for us conquer and fight". The word at: is in one sense redundant, because in one simple sentence, two finite verbs cannot be employed; one sentence consists of one finite verb only. But the very fact of this sätra indicates that the condition of waar does not apply to this satra; so that the two words need not be portions of the sanie sentence, for the application of this nighâta: as we have already explained in VIII. 1. 19 Other examples are: are gufa (Rv. 1. 1. I). #regla (Rv. I, I. 4), fra Fraat 49 (Rv. V. 1. 1), #SATTET AT @ # 
TOT II 38 il Para Il a, og 11 वृत्तिः ॥ पूर्वेणातिप्रसक्ते प्रतिषेध भारभ्यते । मुरन्तं तितं नानुशतं भवति । 
. 29. But the Periphrastic Future is not unaccented, when it is preceded by a word which is not a finite verb. 
This restricts the scope of the last sätra which was rather too wide. Thus **, ST! *ffa. ATT ATT: 11 The Sarvadhatuka affixes , d, e, are anudatta after the affix are by VI. i. 186, the whole affix are becomes udatta (III. 1.3) and where the portion of FIE I. e, the syllable Me, is elided before the affix 77, there also the # of 37 becomes udatta, because the udátta has been elided. See VI, 1. 161. 
mes 
BK. VIII. CI. I. S. 31] 
ACCENT. 
1509 
निपातैर्यद्यदिहन्तकुविनेश्वेचण्कश्चिद्यत्रयुक्तम् ॥ ३०॥ पदानि ॥ निपातः, यद्, यदि, हन्त, कु वित्, नेत, चेत्, चण , कश्चित्, यत्र, युक्तम् ॥ योनः ॥ नेति वर्तते । यत् यदि इन्त कुवित् मेत् चेत् चण् कथित् यत्र इत्यतीनपासयुक्त तिङन्तं भानुदान भवति ।। 
30. The finite verb retains its accent in connection with the particles यत्, that', 'because', यदि, if', हन्त, 'also'!, 'O', कुवित्, 'well', नेत्, 'not', चेत्, 'if', च 'if', कञ्चित् (interrogative particle, implying 'I hope' or 'I hope not)', and 7 'where'. 
Thus यत् करोति, यत् पचति, यदि करोति or यदि पंचति, हन्त करोति, हन्त पचति, कुवित् करोति, कुषित पचति, नेज जिमायन्यो नरकं पैताम (Nir. I. II), स चेद् भुत.स घेद् मधीते । The particle go with the indicatory i has the force of all Thus spei qat 
वचन मरिष्यति ॥ Other examples are स्वम् च सोम मो शो जीवातुम् न मयमो 'if thou, Soma willest us to live, we shall not die' भी च गच्छान् मित्रमेना दधाम "if he will come here, we will make friends with him." इनम मूलयाति नः, नतः पादपं नशत "If Indra makes us happy &c". This rule does not apply to the च which is a conjunction meaning and'. So also:कषिद् मुक्ती, कधि मधाते, यत्र मनाली 
Why do we say "with particles"? Observe यत् कूमति शकटम् - गच्छत काम शकटम | Here यन् is not a particle, but the Present Participle of the root rm 'to go'. It means गच्छत् ' the car creaks while going'. Rule VIII. 1. 18 applies here. 
Q. Now by the rule of Pratipadokta &c. that a should only be taken, "which is a Particle; moreover it is read in connection with other Particles like are &c, so it must be a Particle. How then can the Present Participle यत् be taken at all? Ans.-This sutra indicates that the प्रतिमा rule and the area rule do not apply here. Thus the word art formed with the affix चतुर (V. 2. 39) is also included in the word यावत् of this sutra. A. सावदुषो राधी भस्मभ्यं, रास यावत् स्तोतृभ्यो मरदो गृणाना-यावतोऽश्वान प्रतीगृहणीयात ।। 
Why do we use the word yah" in connection with ". Observe sy पते मनो दक्ष दधस उत्तरम् ।। 
Other examples are: यं यज्ञ परिभूरसि (Rv. I. I. 4.) 'what offering thou protectest'. यत्र नः पूर्वे पितरः परयु: 'whither our fathers of old departed'. अद्याप यदि यातुधानो मस्मि ' let me die on the spot, if I am a sorcerer', हन्तेयान् प्रथिवीम जामहे “ come on, let us share up this earth ". ब्रह्मा चेद्धस्तम् महीत if a Brahman has grasped her hand', नेत् वा पति सूरी मर्षिणा ' that the sun may not burn then with his beam' उक्रयेभिः कुविद् भागमत् will he come hither for our praises'(Whitney's Grammar, Para 595). 
नह प्रत्यारम्भे ॥ ३१॥ पदानि ॥ नह, प्रत्यारम्भे ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ नह इत्येतेन युक्ने प्रत्यारम्भे तिङन्तं नानुदात्तं भवति ॥ 
1510 
ACCENT. 
[ BK. VIII. C1. I."$ 34 
31. The finite verb retnins its accent in connec tion with ac when employed in the sense of forbidding. 
When something urged by one, is rejected insultingly by another, then the reply made by the first tauntingly, with a negation, is pratyarambha. Thus A says to B: "Eat this please". B rejects the offer repeatedly, in anger or jest. Then A in anger or jest says 'No, you will eat"-as h 11 Here in ga retains its accent, which is acute on the middle, for it becomes accentless as it follows TV (VI, I. 186), and pay becomes udatta by the george (III. 1.3). 
Another example is aute 'No, you will study'. Why do we say, 'when asseverative? Observe afte fruitf "Verily in that world they do not wish for fee". Here it is pure negation witte is first acute by the accent, Art is final acute because it is formed by any of om (III. 1. 134), fire is first acute, because it is a Pronoun ending in (RUFTICHETTA Phit II. 6) and post is anudatta by VIII. 1. 28. 
सत्यं प्रश्ने ॥ ३२॥ पदानि ॥ सत्यम्, प्रश्ने । पतिः ॥ सत्यमित्यनेन पुनं तिबन्त नानुदानं भवति ममे ॥ 
32. The finite verb retains its accent in connection with me when used in asking a question. 
Thus Efeit ir ta 'Truly will you eat? Een A 11 Why do we say 'in questioning? Observe fra THT T 'I shall tell the truth, not falsehood', सत्यमिहासंयमिन स्तवाम् ।। 
* ata Tela 11 247, facil वृत्तिामात्यनेम युक्तं तिडन्तममातिलोम्ये गम्यमाने नानुदान भवति ।। 
33. The finite verb retains its accent in connection with my when used in a friendly assertion. 
Anything done to injure another is prati-loma, opposite of this is apratiloma, or friendliness. In fact, it is equal to anuloma. Thus to 'yes, you may cook', Here anga has the force of friendly permission. So also mo HH But when it has the force of pratiloma, we have:- u i T u Tort HAIR / "Well, chuckle O sinner! soon wilt thou learn, O coward". Here AF is used in the sense of censure, for chuckling is a thing not liked by the person: and is pratlloma action: for pluta-vowel see VIII, 2. 90, 
fall 34 11 qera ift, वृत्तिः ॥ द्विात्यनेन युनं तिकन्तममातिलोम्ये नानुशन भवति ।। 
34. The finite verb retains its accent in conncction with it when used in a friendly assertion. BK. VIII. CI. I. S. 37] 
ACCENT. 
ISM 
___Thus स हि कु, सहि पंच, सहि ॥ Why do we say in friendly assertion'? Observe स हि कूज वृपल । इदानी ज्ञास्यास जाल्म ॥ 
छन्दस्यनेकमपि साकाङ्क्षम् ॥ ३५॥ पदानि ॥ छन्दसि, अनेकम, अपि, साका क्षम् ॥ वृत्तिः॥हिचेसिवन्ते छन्दसि विषये हियुक्तं तिजन्त साकाङ्क्षमनेकमपि नानुदातं भवति ॥ 
35. In the Veda, the finite verb retains its accent (but not always), in connection with हि, when it stands in correlation to another verb, even more than one. 
That is sometimes one verb, sometimes more than one verb retain' their accent. Thus of more than one verb, we have the following example:--- 
अनृतं हिमत्तो वदति। पाप्मा एन वि पुनाति 'Because the drunkard tells falsehood, therefore sin will make him impure: i. e. he does incur sin". Here both verbs marã and विपुनाति retain their accent: ande has the force of यत् 'because'. According to. Kaiyyata the meaning of this sentence is धस्मान् मत्तोऽनृतं पति, तस्मादनृतपन दोषेण 
yua i. e, a drunkard does not incur the sin of telling a falsehood, because he is not in his senses. See Maitr. Sanhita I. II.6. As regards one verb in a correlated sentence retaining its accent and the other losing it,we have:-अग्निर्दि पूर्वमुईभयत समिन्द्रोऽमूहमवत् ।। Here the first retains its accent and the second not. The force of ris to denote here cause and its effect. So also:-मजा घग्नेरजानिष्ट गर्भात (or गर्मम्), सा वामपुश्वर अनितारममे (Taittariya Samhita IV. 2. 10, 4). The word wat is first acute, the augment # having the accent; while #92017 is all anudatta. 
यावद्यथाभ्याम् ॥ ३६॥ पदानि ॥ यावत्, यथाभ्याम् ॥ वृनिः॥यावयथा इत्येतान्यां युक्तं तिङन्तं नानुदास भवति ॥. 
36. A finite verb retains its accent in connection with यावत् and यथा ॥ 
Thus यावद् मुहत. वयामुश्क यावधीत यथाधीत, देवतः पचति यावत, देवात्ता पचति थया| The meaning is that the verb retains its accent, even when यावत् and यया follow after it. Another example is यया चित् कण्वमावनम् ॥ The word भावसम् is the Imperative (लो) Second Person Dual of the root भत् ।। यावत् स्तोतृभ्योऽरदोगृ. पानाः ॥ The verb भरवः is Imperfect (लड) Second Person singular of the root 
'to scratch'. The accent, is ons (the augment). . 
पूजायां नानन्तरम् ॥ ३७॥ पदानि ॥ पूजायाम, न, अनन्तरम् ॥ वृत्तिः ।। यपियों इत्येताभ्यां युक्तमनन्तरं तिङन्तं पूनायां विषये मानुदात्तं न भवति किसहि मनुसत्तमेव ॥ 
37. But not so when these particles यावत् and यथा immediately precede the verb and denote 'praise'. 
1512 
Accent. 
[BK. VIII. C11. I. $. 40 
That is, the verb loses its accent, and becomes anudatta, Thus यावत् पचति शोभनम्, यया पचति पोभनम् , यावत् करोति चारु॥ 
Why do we say when denoting 'praise? Observe यावद मुल, यथा मुल॥ 
Why do we say immediately? Observe यावद् देवरत्तः पंचसि शोभन, यथा देवदत्तः करोति चार॥ Here the verbs retain their accent by the last sutra. 
उपसर्गव्यपेतं च ॥३८॥ पदानि | उपसर्ग, व्यपेतम, च॥ . वृत्तिः ॥ यावययाभ्यां युक्तं उपसर्गव्यपेतं च पूजायां विषये नानुदानं न भवति किं तर्हि अनुशत्तमेव भवति । 
38. A finite verb loses its accent when it denotes (praise' and is joined immediately with grea and tu through the intervention of an upasarga or verbal-preposition. 
The last sätra taught that the verb loses its accent when immediately preceded by any and a This qualifies the word 'immediately' and teaches that the intervention of a Preposition does not debar immediateness. Thus यथा प्रकरोति पारु, यथा प्रपचति शोभन, यावत् प्रकरोति चार, यावत् प्रपति प्रोभनम् ॥ 
The word 'immediately' is understood here also. Thus are : प्रपंचति, गोमन, यथा विष्णु मित्रः प्रकवि पार || The upasarga z has udatta accent. Prof. Bohtlingk's Edition reads the sutra as ध्यत्रेतं ।। 
तुपश्यपश्यताहैः पूजायाम् ॥ ३९ ॥ पदानि ॥ तु, पश्य, पश्यत, महे:, पूजायाम् ॥ . 
वृतिः ॥ तु पश्य पश्यत भह इत्यतैर्युनं तिङन्तं नानुशतं भवति पूभायां विषये ॥ 
39. A finite verb retains its uccent in connection with तु, पश्य, पश्यत, and मह, when meaning 'praise'. 
Thus माणवकस्तु भुले योभनम् ; पश्य माणवको भुक्न शोभन, पभ्यत माणवको भुबन शोभनम, मह माणवको मुल गोभनम् ॥ Why do we say 'when meaning praise'? 
Observe, पश्य मृगा धावति । 
The repetition of the word are here, though its anuvritti could have been supplied from VIII. 1. 37, shows that the negation of that sätra does not extend here: for the garant of that sätra is connected with two negatives, the Fof that sutra, and the न of VIII. I. 29, but the पूजायाम् of this satra is con 
nected with the general न of VIII. I. 29 only. 
__Another example is भारद स्वधामनु पुनर्ग स्वमेरि ॥ 
अहो च ॥४०॥ पदानि ॥ महो, च ॥ वृत्तिः ॥भहो इत्यनेन युक्तं तिहन्तं नानुदात्तं भवति पूजायां विषये ।। 
40. A finite verb retains its accent when in con. nection with a meaning praise'. 
Thus महो देवरत्तः पचति शोभनं, भहो विष्णुमिषः कति थारु ॥ The separation 
BK. VIII. C1, 1. S. 43 ) 
ACCENT. 
1513 
of this 073 from g &c, of the last sätra, indicates that the next rule applies to ser only. Had mir been joined with a &c, then Rule VIII, 1.41, would have applied to &c, which is not desired. Hence the inaking of it a sepa rate søtra. 
are T 1891 gola il T. AHET N fa: 1 an gi fan Tent iga @ 11 
41. A finite verb retains its accent optionally when in connection with 7 in the remaining cases (i.e. where it does not mean praise). 
What is the one alluded to here? The te means here senses other than w or 'praise'. Thus Chat Atelier or $2497 Bar a This is a speech uttered in anger or envy and not in praise ( 4 ) So also मम गहमेष्यसि ॥ 
The word og is employed in the sđtra simply for the sake of distinct. ness; for sätra 40 applies to cases of puja, while this søtra will give option in cases other than puja. 
go a terra ll 82 11 ora Ilga, , atcerral .. वृतिः ॥ पुरा इत्यनेन युक्तं सिडन्त परीप्सायामय विभाषा मानुतानं भवति ।। 
42. A finite' verb retains its accent optionally in connection with go when it means 'haste' (i.e. when gor means 'before'). 
The word परीप्सा means स्वरा or quick'. Thus अधीष माणवक पुप विद्योतते विद्युत, or पुरा स्तनयति स्तनयिरनु ।। The word पुरा here expresses the future occur rence which is imminent or very near at hand. It is against the rule of Dhar masastras to study while it thunders of lightens. 
Why do we say when meaning haste'? Observe 7 o gautu 11 Here the word ge expresses a past time; that is, it means "long ago". So also ofan #grah u See III. 2. 118 and 122, for the employment of gt in the Past Tense, and III. 3. 4, for the Present. 
नन्वित्यनुज्ञेषणायाम् ॥४३॥ पदानि ॥ ननु, इति, अनुशा, एषणायाम् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ ननु इत्यनेन युक्तं तिङन्तं मानुशनं भवति अनुषणायां विषये ॥ 
43. A finite verb retains its accent in connection with ay, when with this Particle, permission is asked. 
The word pour means 'asking, praying'. The word HTFT means 'permission. The compound a means 'asking of permission'. Thus 
u fa , "may I do it, sir”; TT TETT NT: 'can I go sir'. The sense is give me permission to do or to go'. 
a 
: 1514 
ACCENT. 
[BK. VIII. CH. 1. §. 45 
Why do we say when 'asking for permission'? Observe Hennef * 
? auf T: 'Devadatta hast thou made the mat? Well, I am making it. Here we has the force of an answering particle, and not used in asking permission and hence the verb loses its accent. 
किं क्रियाप्रश्नेनुपसर्गमप्रतिषितम् ॥४४॥ पदानि ॥ किम्, क्रिया-प्रभे, मनु पिंसंगम-अप्रतिषिद्धम् ॥ 
fillfinariamente una ferida ya faraghofaufafará argu safer 
44. A finite verb retains its accent in connection with fenn, when with this is asked a question relating to an action, and when the verb is not preceded by a Preposition or by a Negation. 
Thus 
F 7* FH, et RTE II fani tayari , me fruta a Here some say, that the first verb (gefa or it) being directly joined with for retains its accent, whilst the second verb (U or forw) not being joined with fa, loses its accent by the general rule VIII. 1. 28. Others say, though the word for is heard in connection with one verb only, yet as both verbs are objects of doubt, therefore, fe is logically connected with both of them, and so both verbs retain their accents. Thus it will retain its accent according to this view. 
Why do we say when the question relates to a fare or action? The rule will not apply, when the question relates to an object or antall Thus कि देवदत्त मोदन प्रति माहोस्विच्छार्क। 
Why do we say “when a question is asked"Observe fetare Here fat is used to express contempt, and not to ask a question. 
Why do we say not preceded by a Preposition'? Observe para part प्रपचति माहौस्वित् प्रकरोति ।। 
Why do we say "not preceded by a negative particle". Observe, faite देवदत्तीन पति माहोस्विन न करोति ।। 
लोपे विभाषा ॥४५॥ पदानि ॥ लोपे, विभाषा॥ वृत्तिः ॥ किमी लोपे क्रियाप्रमे तिडन्तमनुपसर्गमप्रतिषिद्धं विभाषा मानुसात भवति ।। 
· 45. When however fint is not added in asking guch a question, the finito verb may optionally retuin its accent. 
When farina is elided in asking a question relating to an action, the finite verb which is not preceded by a Preposition or a Negative Particle, optionally does not become anudatta. When is there the elision of this facin because no rule of Panini has taught it? When the sense is that of an in terrogation, but the word focus is not used. In short, the word 'lopa' here does not mean the Grainmatical substitute, but mercly non-use. As CTT: 41a (or 
BK. VIII. CH. I . 47 ) 
ACCENT. 
1515 
ser ) In Ta(or ) Here the sentence is interrogative, even without the employment of firit The option of this sätra is a Prapta-vibhasha, as it is connected with the sense of fafall The counter-examples are the same as in the last aphorism, but without fait 
OPES HFT TETRA TI 8&#1 gaura il gfe, #, Tate, u पतिः ॥ एहिमन्ये इत्यनेन युक्त तरन्त सिडन्त नानुदास भवति प्रहासे ।। 
46. In connection with great used derisively, the First Future that follows it, retains its accent. 
The word YETE means great laughter, i.e. derision, mockery, raillery, jeering, gibing, sneering. Thus er sinnt strach, TÍ HYÈ, i estaraft: di oft grua area, af Rh, ang fart The word of is the Imperative second Person of the root ru preceded by the preposition PE II 
Why do we say "used derisively'? Observe gr FFU W wing fa; HỊ TRr, R = 4G I 
By satra VIII. 1. 51, in fra, after the Imperative of which is a verb of motion' (af), the following First Future (m) would have retained its accent. The present sätra makes a niyama or restriction, namely that in connection with the Imperative pret, the mi is accented only then when 'derision' is meant and not otherwise. Thus the art loses its accent here: एहि मन्यसे भोवन भोश्वे ॥ The employment of the First Person in मन्ये in the satra is not intended to be taught: for by I. 4. 105, the verb #7 (aa) takes the affix of the First Person instead of the second, when 'derision' is meant and not otherwise. When Tite is not intended, the proper personal affix of the Second Person is employed. The employment of the First Person ceases there also by this restrictive rule. Thus gros ARTE MIT 
The above counter example is given according to Kasika, according to which gie par fra TA19 11 But according to Mahabhashya, the counter-example is f r in gregie it Here are cer loses its accent. The meaning of the above is वं रयेन यास्यसि इति महं मन्ये, एहि ॥ According to Kaiy yata, this would be an example also under the rule, the First Person not being necessary:- gayet Tüa FATTA II 
जात्वपूर्वम् ॥४७॥ पदानि ॥ जातु, अपूर्वम् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ आतु इत्येतदविद्यमानपूर्व तेन युक्तं तिङन्तं नानुदान भवति । 
47. A finite verb retains its accent after fint, when this wo is not preceded by any other word. 
2:516 
ACCENT. 
[BK. VIII. CH. I. S.50 
Thus पातु मोरसे, मातु मध्वयंस, जातु कारिवामिHere is anudatta by VI. 1. 186, as it is an sarvadhatuka affix coming after an मदुपध, the word तु is first acute, as it is a Nipata. Why do we say 'when not preceded by any other word? Observe:-कट पातु करिष्यति॥ The word कटं is end-acute as it is aफिर or noun. 
किंवृत्तं च चिदुत्तरम् ॥४८॥ पदानि । किमत्तम्, च, चिदुत्तरम् । वृत्तिः ॥ किमोवृनं किंवत, किंवनमहणन सहिमसान्त प्रतीकातरस्तमौ च प्रत्यवी, पस्किवृत पिलर मविद्यमानपूर्व बनेन त तिम्न्त मानुराम भवति । 
48. Also after a form of fou, when the particle चित् follows it, and when no other word precedes such form of 
fon, the finite verb retains its accent. . The word किम्वल is a Genitive Tatpurusha meaning किमोवृतं ॥ The word a means any form of money with its case-affixes, as well as the forms of किम् when it takes the affixes स्तर and तम ॥ Thus कमिद मुस्त, कमिद भोभयकि, 
कषिद मधीते, केनचित् कति, कस्मै चिदशाति, कसरभित् करोति, कतमाथिदू मुक्ति। 
Why do we say followed by चित्? Observe को मुहले। 
The word of the last sätra qualifies this also; therefore, the verb loses its accent here:-देवरत्नः किंचित् पठति ॥ 
__ माहोउताहो चानन्तरम् ॥ ४६॥ पदानि ॥ माहो, उताहो, च, अनन्तरम् । पतिः॥निपातपतिपेषोनुवर्तते ॥मपूर्वमिति ॥ माहो ताहो इत्येताम्बामपूर्वाभ्यां कुनाममन्तर तिन मानुरासं भवति। 
49. Also after an immediately preceding strat and उताहो, when these follow after no other word, the verb retains its accent. . The prohibition of nighdta or want of accentuation is understood here, so also there is the anuvritti of mon from the last. - Thus माझे or उता मुक्ते, उता पंति। Why do we say immediately preceding? In the following sởtra will be taught option, when these particles do not immediately precede the verb. 
Why dowe say "when no word precedes them" Observe देवदल माहो or उताहो मुक्त। 
शेषे विभाषा ॥५०॥ पदानि ॥ शेषे, विभाषा ॥ . पतिः ॥ माहो रताझे इत्येतान्यांक तिग्न नानुतानं पे विभाषा भवति । कम.पः बन्यदनन्तपत् ।। 
50. When the above-mentioned Particles are and उताहो do not immediately precede the verb, the verb may op tionally retain its accent. 
BK. VIII. CH. I. $. 51 ] 
ACCENT 
1317 
. Thus met de or guret ni sam tratat or geta 10 
गत्यर्थलोटा लण्नचेत्कारकं सर्वान्यत् ॥ ११ ॥ पदानि ॥ गत्यर्थ-लोटा, लड्, 6, 77, 7777, e-pa वृत्तिः ॥ गतिना समानार्या गत्यर्याः; गत्यर्यानां धातूना लोट् गत्यर्थलोदा बेन गत्यर्थलोटा चुत लडन्ततिक तं मानुदात्तं भवति, न घेत्कारकं सर्वान्यसवति ॥ 
यौव कारके कर्तरि कर्मणि वा लोट् सव यदि हरपि भवतीत्यर्थः। कर्मकर्मणी एवाप tra Hôm nhà 
vệ sinh 4 
51. The First Future retains its accent in connec tion with the Imperative of a verb denoting 'motion' ('to go, 'to come' to start' &c), but only in that case, when the subject and object of both the verbs are not wholly different one from another. 
Those verbs which have similar meaning with the word itfe 'motion are called trut: # The Imperative of the maref verbal roots, is called static In connection with such an Imperative of verbs of 'motion, the First Future does not become anudatta, if the karaka is not all different. The sense is;: with whatever case-relation (karaka), whether the Subject or Object, the Imperative is employed, with the same karaka, the First Future must be employed. In connection with the finte verb here, the word aan denotes the Subject and Object only, and not any other karaka, such as Instrument, &c. 
Thus mye ti, 
n u Come O Devadatta to the village, : thou shalt see it'. Here the subjects of both verbs rires and nare are the same, and the objects of both verbs are also the same, namely on and all HT is a Preposition and is accented, reg and TT both lose their accent by VII. i. 19 and 28, ora is first-acute being formed by the fara affix ! So also mi 
T77 9TH, Āri inua "Come, O Devadattal to the village, you will eat rice". : Here the subjects of both verbs are the same, only the objects are different, and so the rule still applies. माहर देवदत्त शालीन, यज्ञदन एतान् मस्थित Here the subjects are different, but the objects are the same; namely om Similarly 
n streli, ana in "Let the rice be carried by Devadatta, and let them be eaten by Yajñadatta." 
Why do we say 'verbs of motion'? Observe 
q 
rt, Teen Why do we say 'After the Imperative'? Observe 
a ri, n a Here the Potential mood is used. 
Why do we say the First Future' ? Obseve sipas 478, Tare Fit Here the Present Tense is used. 
Why do we say 'if the karaka is not wholly different'? Observe 
1318 
ACCENT. 
[BK. VIHI.CH. I. 8.53 
मागच्छ देववस माम, पिसा ते मोवनं मोस्यते ॥ रयन्तां देवदत्तेन धालयः, सनावस्तेन शास्यन्ते ॥ रचन्ता is the Imperative of qy 'to carry'. 
Why do we use the word सर्व 'wholly? Observe मागच्छ देवदान पाम, वं च महब क्याव एनम् ॥ Here also there is prohibition of nighata and the First Future retains its accent, for the subject of the Future is not wholly different from that of the Imperative. For here the subject of the Imperative is the subject also of the Future, though only partly, in conjunction with another, Moreover, the object here in both is the same. Had not been used in the satra, where the sentence would have remained the same, there the rule would have applied, and not where the sentences became different. 
लोट् च ॥५२॥ पदानि ॥ लोद, च ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ लोरन्त सिग्न्त गत्यर्थलोटा एक नानुदा भवति, न पत्कारक सर्वान्यसवति ॥ 
52. Also an Imperative, following after an Im perative of verbs of 'motion', retains its accent, when the sub ject or object of both the verbs, is not wholly different. 
____Thus मागच्छ देवदत्त ग्राम पश्च ॥ मात्रा विष्णुमिन माम शाधि ॥ मागम्यतां देवदन मामा दृश्यतां यशवनेन ॥ 
But not here qष देवरचौदन, मुदनम् because the first Imperative is not one of गत्यर्थ verb. Nor here, भागच्छेदेवदत्त मामं पश्येनम् because the first verb is not Imperative but Potential. 
If the subject and object of both Imperatives are wholly different, the rule will not apply. Th us मागच्छ देवरत्न भामं, पश्यतु रामं यज्ञदतः ॥ 
By the force of the anuyritti of a the rule will apply to the follow ing: भागच्छ देववन माम, वं पाईप पश्यावः ।। 
The separation of this sätra from the last is for the sake of the sub sequent satra, by which the 'option' is with regard to fire and not au 
विभाषितं सोपसर्गमनुत्तमम् ॥५३॥ पदानि ॥ विभाषितम, सोपसर्गम, अनुसमम् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ सर्वे पूर्वमनुवर्तते। मातविमापेय, लोरन्तं सोपसर्गसमर्मितं गत्यर्थलोटा पुनतिजन्तं विभाषित मानुशतं भवति न पेस्कारकं सर्वान्यावासि ।। 
53. An Imperative preceded by a Preposition, and not in the First Person, following after an Imperative of verbs of motion', may optionally retain its accent, when the Karaka is not wholly different. 
The whole of the preceding sätra is understood here. This is a Prapta-vibhasha. Thus भागच्छ देवरस मामं प्रवि or भविध मागण्ठ देवदत्त पासप्रणार्षि or Hशाधि ॥ When the verb is accented, the upasarga loses its accent by 
VIII, I.71, 
BK. VIII. CH. I. $ 55 ) 
ACCENT 
1519 
Why do we say artrit "joined with a Preposition? When there is no Preposition, there is no option allowed, and the last rule will apply. As more देवदत प्रामंपश्य। 
Why do we say TÁ 'not a First Person'? Observe a resta देवदत्त, ग्रामं प्रविशानि ॥ 
Fall 48 11 461 Il fra, a, u वृत्तिः। पूर्व सर्वमनुवर्तते गत्यर्थलोटं वर्णयित्वा इन्त इत्यनेन युक्त लाउन्तं सोपसर्गमुत्समवजित विभापितं मानुवासं भवति ॥ 
54. An Imperative, with a Preposition preceding it, may optionally retain its accent, in connection with gra, but not the First Person. 
With the exception of art te &c, the whole of the preceding sätra is u nderstood here. 
__ Thus हन्त प्रविध or प्रविश, हन्त शांधि or प्रशाधि ॥ But no option is al lowed here at , as it is not preceded by a preposition. Here rule VIII. 1. 30, makes the accent compulsory after इन्त ॥ So also हन्त प्रमुनजाब, हन्त 
, where the 1st Person is used, the verb retains its accent compulsorily by VIII. 1. 30. 
The word 
is Imperative First Person, Dual of the root ry in Atmane pada (1. 3. 66). The Personal ending is anudatta by VI. 1. 186, because the verb is anudatta-it. The vikaraṇa o therefore retains its accent. 
आम एकान्तरमामन्त्रितमनन्तिके ॥ ५५॥ पदानि ॥ आमः, एक-अन्तरम, माम 
4, Tafall gre: II TA THA P ATI ATEIT HATI 
55. After wa, but separated from it by not more than one word, the Vocative retains its accent, when the per son addressed is not near. 
Thus sa gott ; Hall TTT The nighdta being hereby prohibited, the vocative gets accent on the first syllable by VI. 1. 198. In the second example, though h itself is a Vocative, it is not considered to be non existent by VIII. 1. 72, but becomes effective by virtue of VIII. 1.73, as it is in apposition with the Vocative that follows. . 
Why do we say tu? Observe Tr* quer | Here it is anudatta by VIII. 1, 19. 
Why do we say ya 'separated only by one word '? Observe STET म पसि देवदत्ता॥ 
Why do we say 'the Vocative '? Scc m TIR MITT II 
ACCENT 
(BK, VIII. CI. T. 9. 56 
Why do we say 
not near'? See tr Tua IT 1 Here some hold that w is equivalent to y far oft'. Therefore, according to them, the prohibition applies to m e as well as to prara: Had it been merely a prohibition of nighdla, then the sdtra would become redundant, as the nighata is precluded by the rule of eka-śruti (1. 2. 33). Thus arguing, they hold that eka-sruti being asiddha, the pluta-udatta or VIII. 2. 84, is not pro hibited: and so the last vowel is prolated. 
Others say that the word wat means that which is not far off (!) nor very pear. It does not mean I only. For had it meant xc, the author could have used the word in the sätra Therefore the rule of eka-áruti (1. 2. 33), has no scope here at all, for it applies to evocatives. Not being uc, the plutodatta also should not be exhibited in the illustration; for the rule VIII. 2. 84, applies also to & Vocatives. 
In the example mes , the word on being a Nipata is first acute; the word is a shortened form of 7. (VIII.3.1. Vart), and it is accent less by VIII. 1. 19, being a Vocative case preceded by another word. I would also have become accentless by the same rule, this s0tra prohibits it. The Forer being thus prohibited by this sötra, two rules make themselves manifest now for application. The one is of payingTH (1. 2. 33) causing an or monotony i the other causing yangiwa by & T (VIII. 2. 84). The opinions referred to above, relate to this doubt. 
यजितुपरं छन्दसि ॥ ५६ ॥ पदानि ॥ यद, हि, तु, परम, छन्दसि ।। fi i maneh Haha ufafefe hagan yeni feat guir from 
Tur 11 
: 56. A finite verb followed by us or for a retains its accent in the Chhandas. 
The anuvritti of rare should not be taken in this sdtra, but that of freu Thus with aut we have:---14 T #27 a The verb 7 * is the Imperfect (m) 2nd person singular of of Tudâdi class. With fy we have, grof (Rig Ved. I. 2. 4). The verb c is the Present (mm) Plural of 1 of Adadi class. The samprasarana takes place because it belongs to my class. With we have, s IRIA T # By the previous satra VIII. I. 30 a verb in connection with an would have retained its accent, so also in connection with by the sūtra VIII. 1. 34, and in connection with a by VIII. 1. 39: the present sätra is, therefore, a niyama rule. The verb retains its accent when these three Particles only follow and not any other. If any other Particle follows, the verb need not retain its accent. Thus wa FIT OREO 15 Here yer is the 1st Person Dual of the Imperative of a (x +48 + - + BK. VIII. Cui. I. $. 58) 
ACCENT 
1521 
MTE + III. 4.92-durt the x being elided, as tre is like III. 4.85 and 99). The verb gfe is the 2nd Person Singular of the Imperative of the root ro, preceded by the Particle मार ॥ Here in पक्षाव एवि (-रोहाव भारहि), the verb पहाव is followed by the Particle *, and does not retain its accent. But for this rule, it would have retained its accent. Because ere is a reguf (VIII. I. 51), art is another mr in connection with it, and therefore, by VIII. I. 52 it would havę retained its accent. But now it loses its accent because it is a far follow ing after a non far word fy: It The visarga of ffi is elided before by VIII. 3. 14, then the preceding is lengthened and we have ET (VI. 3. III). An other reading is for an , It is a Vedic anomaly, the visarga is changed to tu 
चनचिदिवगोत्रादितरिताडितेवगतेः॥५७॥ पदानि।चन,चित, श्व,गोत्र ną, afga, a fay, pora: II पतिःचन चिखगोबादि तद्धित भाडित इत्येतेषु परता भगतरुत्तर सिन्तं मानुशास भवति । 
57. A finite verb retains its accent, when it is not preceded by a Gati Particle (I. 4. 60 &c), and when it is followed by a, feta, a, TT &c, a Taddhita affix, or by its own doubled form. 
Thus : & ft TT; ! ft for, ata u The list of Gotradi words is given under sätra VIII. 1. 27. Thus TTT TA 74, 747 
14, 
&c. The Gotradl words, here also, denote cen sure and contempt 
With a Taddhita affix, y aften : * The examples should be given with anudatta Taddhita affixes, like 699,999 (V. 3. 65 and 67). Any other Taddhita affix added to the verb would cause the verb to lose its accent, the Taddhita accent overpowers the verb accent: as पतिदेय (V. 3.67), 
With a doubled verb, as ; *: fefe gefel 
Why do we say 'when not preceded by a Participle called Gati'? Observe देवदत्ता प्रपति चन | The word गति in this sotra as well as in सगतिराम fit (VIII. 1. 68) should be taken in its restricted sense, namely upasargas treated as Gati, and not the extended definition of Gati as given in 1. 4. 61. Therefore the verb retains its accent here: a 77, un 476 Tortura, a 
According to others, throughout this Book Eighth, the word Gati means, the Upasarga Gati. 
चादिषु च ॥५८॥ पदानि ॥ च, मादिषु, च ॥ वृत्तिः ॥चारिषु च परता तिङन्तमगतः परं नानुवान भवति ॥ 
58. A finite verb, not preceded by a gati, retains its accent before the Particles (ar, T, C and get VIII.1. 24). 
1522 
ACCENT 
[BK. VIII. CH. I. F. 6t 
M 
The चादि words are those mentioned in satra VIII. I. 24. Thus देवाण पति ष खादति च, देवदना पचति वा खादविवा, देववत्त पंचति । खातिह, देवदत्तः पचति मह 
खादित्यह, and देवरना पचत्येव सावत्येव ।।। 
But when preceded by a gati, we have देवदत्तःम पंचति च म खावति च। Here the first verb retains its accent by virtue of the next sätra, but the second verb loses its accent. 
चवायोगे प्रथमा ॥ ५॥ पदानि ॥च, वा, योगे, प्रयमा ॥ वृत्तिः॥भगवरित पूर्वसूचानुकटमित्यच नानुवर्तते।पपासेवाभ्यां योगे प्रथमा विज्ञविभक्तिनादत्ता भवति ॥ 
69. The first finite verb only retains its accent in connection with u and चा॥ 
The anuvritti of morate which was drawn in the last sätra, does not run into this. Thus गईमाम कालयति, वीणां च वादयति ॥ गर्दभान् वा कालवति, नीणां वा वापयति ।। 
The word any in the satra indicates that the mere connection with the verb is meant, whether this connection takes place by adding these words e and 1, before the verb, or after the verb, is immaterial for the purposes of this sätra, ( not so in the last ). The word geht shows that the first verb is gov ered by this rule and not the second. 
हेति क्षियायाम् ॥१०॥ पदानि ॥ह, इति, क्षियायाम ॥ वृत्तिः॥हत्यनेन युक्ता प्रथमा तिविभक्तिर्मानुशत्ता भवति सियायां गम्यमानावाम । 
• 60. In connection with the first verb retains its accent, when an offence against custom is reprimanded. 
The word forat means an error or mistake of duty, a breach of etiquette or a fault against good breeding. 
Thus स्वयं हरयेन याति, उपाध्यायं पाति गमयति 'He himself goes on a car, while he causes his Preceptor to trudge behind on foot'. स्ववह मोदनं भुक्त, सपाध्याय सक्तुन पाययति 'Himself eats the rice, and makes the preceptor eat the gruel'. Here in both examples, the nighata of the first verbs is prohibited. The verbs become svarita-pluta by VIII. 2. 104. 
माहेति विनियोगे च ॥ ११॥ पदानि ॥ अह, इति, विनि योगे, च। तिः॥ महात्यनेन युक्ता प्रपमा तिरविभक्तिर्नानुराता भवति विनियोगे गम्यमाने पशब्दात् सियावां च। 
61. In connection with अह, the first verb retains its accent, when it refers to various commissions, (as well as when a breach of good manners is condemned ). 
The word paraat means sending a person to perform several com missions. The word u in the satra draws in the anuvšitti of firar also. 
Thus स्वं भह मा गच्छ, भह भरण्यं गच्छ ॥ So also when लिया is meant, 
VK. VIII. CH. I. F. 64] 
ACCENT. 
1523 
as स्वयमह रथेन याति ३, उपाध्याय पनि गमयति ॥ स्वयमहोदन मुहते, उपाध्याय सक्तून् Tropfer w The prohibition of nighdtn and prolation are as in the last apho. rism. 
चाहलीपपवेत्यषधारणम् ॥ १२॥ पदानि ॥ च, अह, लोपे, एव, इति, अव धारणम् ॥ 
पत्तिः ॥ चसोपे महलोपे च प्रयमा तिहाविभक्तिर्मानुसाना भवति एवेत्येतदवधारणा प्रयुज्यते । 
62. When u and मह are elided, the first verb still retains its accent, when ce with the force of limitation, takes their place. 
When does this a take place ? Where the sense of or why is connoted by the sentence, but these words are not directly employed, there is then the elision of च and मह॥ There the force ofu is that of aggregation (सबुधय), and of he is that of 'only'( ). The o is elided when the agent is the same, and we is elided when the agents are several. 
Thus where y is elided:-देवदत्त एव पाम गच्छतु, देवदत्त एवारण्यं गच्छतु मान चारण्यं च गच्छतु ॥ 
So where मह is elided: as:-विवस एव मामं गच्छतु, यज्ञदन एव भरण्यं गच्छतु - माम केवल, भरण्य केवलं ॥ 
Why do we say अवधारणं 'when limitation is meant'? See देवतः वेव मोश्यते, देवदत्ता व पाध्येव्यते॥ The word एव here has the sense of never' an im possibility'. The first sentence means म चिन् मोक्ष्यते ॥ क्य+एव-वेव by पररूप (VI. I. 94 Vart). 
चादिलोपे विभाषा ॥ १३॥ पदानि ॥ च, आदि, लोपे, विभाषा ॥. वृत्ति पारयो मचवाहावयुकाति सूपनिर्दिष्टा गृह्यन्ते तेषां लोपे प्रथमा तिइविभक्तिर्नानुदाता भवति विभापा॥ 
63. When च, (वा, ह, अह and एव ) are elided, the first verb optionally retains its accent. . Thus with च लोप:-शुल प्रीहयो भवन्ति or भवन्ति, श्वेता गा माज्याव दुहन्ति । Here wat optionally may either lose or retain its accent. So also when 7 is elided, as :-श्रीहिभियत or यजेते, यवै यजेत ॥ So also with the remaining. 
घेवावेति च च्छन्दसि ॥४॥ पदानि ॥ वाव, इति, च, छन्दसि ॥ वृतिः॥ वैवाव रत्येसाभ्यां युक्ता मयमा सिविभक्तिर्विभाषा नानुदासा भवाति छन्दसि विषये ॥ 
64. Also in connection with and ara, may optionally, in the Chhandas, the first verb retain its accent. 
Thus मह देवानाम् मासीत् (or भासीत् ), पिरसुराणाम् मासीत् ॥ दृहस्पति देवानां पुरोहित भासीत (or मासीत), अण्डामर्कावमुराणां (Taittariya Sanhita VI.4.10, Ibut with out the particle), भयं वाव हस्त मासीत् (or मासीत् ), नेतर भासीत।। 
1524 
ACCENT. 
[BK. VIII. CH. I. 167 
a has the force of स्फुट and क्षमा, and वाद that of प्रसिद्धि and स्फुट ।। एकान्याभ्यां समर्थाभ्याम् ॥६५॥ पदानि ॥ एक, अन्याभ्याम, समर्याभ्याम् । वृत्तिः ॥ एक मन्य हत्येतान्यां समर्याभ्यां युक्ता प्रथमा तिरविभनिर्विभाषा मानुराना भवति छन्दसि विपये। 
65. Also in connection with एक and अन्य, optionally in the Chhandas, the first verb retains its accent, when there words have the same meaning ('the one the other'). 
Thus प्रजामेका जिन्यति (or जिन्वति), मकारक्षति । तयोरन्यः पिप्पलं स्वाति (or अत्ति), मनमनन्यो मभिचाकशीति (Rig Veda I. 164.20, Mundaka Upanishad III. I). 
Why do we say समर्थाभ्यां having the same meaning'? See एको देवानु. पातिष्ठा || Here एक is a Numeral and has not the sense ofमन्य the one another'. The word " is used, in fact, to restrict the meaning of 47, for it has various meanings: while there is no ambiguity about the word भन्य ॥ एकोज्याचे प्रधाने च मयमे केवले तथा साधारण समानेऽल्पे संख्यायां च प्रयुज्यते ॥ 
यवृत्तानित्यम् ॥१९॥ पदानि ॥ यत्, वृत्तात्, नित्यम् । 
• वृत्तिः प्रथमा छन्दसीति निवृत्तं, निघातप्रतिषेध इत्येव ।। वार्तिकम् ॥बयाकाम्ये पेति पकव्यम् ॥ 
66. In connection with यदू in all its forms, the verb retains its accent always. 
The anuvritti of rear and yet ceases. The prohibition of nighata, which commenced with म लद् (VIII. I. 29) is present here also. In what ever sentence the word occurs, that is called ac ! The word * denotes here the form of in all its declensions with case affixes. According to Kasika, Wie and I are not included, according to Patanjali they should be included. See also the explanation of fan qui in VIII. 1. 48. 
Thus यो मुदतभावति, वेन मुम, बस्ने साति, वर कामात बमः ( Rig Veda x. 121. 10) बापहपावति (T. S. V. 5. I. I.) बदूपाबवते ॥ For the form बापर see VI. 3.92. Though the sotra is in the Ablative (बदूपत्तात्) and therefore requires that the verb should in-mediately follow it, yet in the ar gift, the intervention of ary: does not prevent the operation of this rule, according to the opinion of Patanjali. 
Vart:-Optionally when the sense is that of wheresoever' or when soever'. The word the means ar 'as one wishes', without regard of time or space. The nighata is prohibited here also. As बावचन बमवे तर देवयजन एव बजते ॥ . 
पूजनात्पूजितमनुदार काष्ठादिभ्यः ॥ ६॥ पदानि । पूजनात, पूजितम, मनु दासम, काष्ठादिभ्यः॥ 
वृत्तिः॥पूजनेश्वः काष्ठादिभ्यरत्तरपदं पूभितमनुसनं भवति । वार्तिकम्। मलोपम॥ 
BK. VIII. CH. 1. $.67) 
PRONOUNS. 
1525 
67. After a word denoting praise belonging to Ta class, the word whose praise is denoted, becomes aundatta. 
This refers to compounds, the first members of which are praise-de noting words. The word rental, is added to the sätra from a Vartika. 
Thus SY, TETET, TEME , from **: 11 
শাখুগ্ধ খ্রহ্মান্ধ! লাশপাশি ঃ কাহ্ম প্রকাশ। 31 yan *INI IETT*: NO TOTE *: tre i arrear : 4: 
#9: 17 I TET* 18 pesar I SIN 
TUTTA I Uran মিঃ । জাঙ্ক খু! খাইয়া স্কুল । শ্রাঞ্জয়া। 
Vårt:- The final should be elided in forming these words. The word 74 is an adverb, and therefore in the accusative case, like are ! In such a case, there can be no compounding: hence the elision of an is taught. This is the opinion of Vartika-kara Katyayana. According to Kasika, there is compounding under sia fe rule, and so is elided by the general rule of samasa. This becoming of 
M T takes place in the compound, and after composition. In fact, it is an exception to the general rule by which a com pound is finally acute (VI. 1. 223 ) But there is no elision in fron &c. and there is no loss of accent also of the second word. By the Vartika faina, this further fact is also denoted, where the case - affix is not employed and so the x is not heard, there the second member becomes anudatta. When there is no compounding, there is no elision of as reunira, 917 RN 
Though the word ***would have implied its correlative term ofre, the specific mention or are in the aphorism indicates, that the word denoting. 
faa should follow immediately after the word denoting # In fact, this peculiar construction of the sotra, is a jaapaka of the existence of the follow ing rule :- 
peritosferar "In this subdivision or context, though a word may be exhibited in the Ablative case, it does not follow that there should be consecutiveness between the Ablative and the word indicated by it". This has been illustrated in the previous rule of Art in. explaning forms like any use &c. 
Though the anuvfitti of 'anudatta' was current, the express employ ment of this term in the satra indicates that the prohibition (of anudatta) which also was current, now ceases, 
On this subject, the following extract from the Commentary on Siddhanta-Kaumudi, will give the view of later Grammarians :--The words 
19 &c, are all synonyms of , meaning wonderful, prodigious: and are words denoting praise. This is an aphorism appertaining to samasa subject. In the examples the compounding takes place under the rule of Mayura vyansakadi. 
1826 
ACCENT. 
[ BK. VIII. CII. I. 869 
Vart:-The elision of t should be mentioned. दारुणम् + मध्यापक, in making the compound of these two words, the elision of the case affix, in, this case म, is natural. The valtika, therefore, teaches nothing new, but only repeats this general rule in a particular forin. This is the opinion of the authors of Kasika. But according to Kayyata, the commentator on the Great Bhashya, this aphorism is not a samasa rule: and the words दारुणम् &c, are adverbs not admitting of samasa; and so the rule applies to these words when they are not compounded. There is no authority for holding these to be compounds under the Mayuravyansakàdi class. Haradatta also says, had this been intended to be a samasa rule, the word we would have been used in the satra and this is valid. There is no adhikara of samasa here, that could have caused samasa and in this view, the vårtika familias also becomes effective: had it been a samasa rule, the vārtika would have been redundant. 
काष्ठ, वारुण, 3 अमातापुन, देश, 5 भनाज्ञात, 6भनुतात, 7 भपुन, 8 भयुत, १ भद्भुत, 10 अनुक्त, 11 भश, 12 घोर, 13 मुख्य, 14 परम, 15 सु, 16 भति, 17 कल्याण 
- सगतिरपि तिऊ॥६८॥ पंदानि ॥स, गतिः, अपि, तिह। वृत्तिः ॥ सगतिरगतिपपि पूजनेभ्यः काष्ठादिभ्यः परं पूजितं तिदन्तमनुतानं भवति । 
68. (After such words denoting praise) the finite verb (which is praised) becomes anudátta, even along with the Gati, if any, that may precede it. 
Whether a finite verb is compounded with a gati or stands single, both the compound and the simple verb lose their accent, when it is qualified by the adverbs का; &c. Thus यत्का , पति , यत् काठ पूपचति ॥ By VIII. I. 28, the finite verb would have lost its accent after the word 78, but this loss was prohibited by VIII. I. 30 in connection with यत् the present satra re-ordains the loss, by setting aside the prohibition of VIII. 1. 30. 
The word of along with its Gati', indicates that the Gati even loses its accent. The word Gati here is restricted to Upasargas. Therefore not here यत् का सक्री करोति, यत् काष्ठं कृष्णी करोति॥ 
The word is used in the satra to indicate that the words qualified by 9&c in the preceding sâtra, were non OT words-i. e. were substantives. 
The rule of AMTIN of that sätra, therefore, does not apply here. - कुत्सने च सुप्यगोत्रादौ ॥ १९॥ पदानि । कुत्सने, च, सुपि, अगोत्रादी॥ 
निः॥ पवादिति निवसम् ॥ सगतिरपि तिकिति पर्तते ॥ कुत्सने च सुबन्ते गोषादिवर्जिते परतः खग तिपि तिर भगविरप्यनुरातो भवति ॥ 
वातिनम् ॥ किवाकुत्सन पति पत्तव्यम् ॥ वार्तिकम ॥ पूतिम चानुबन्धी भवतीति वक्तव्यम् ॥ बा॥ विभाषितं चापि वर्षमनुवास भवतीति वक्तव्यमा . Karika sपि कुल्सने क्रियाया मलोप इष्टोऽतिहीति पोनार्थे । 
पूतिम चानुबन्धी विभाषिवं पापियर्थम् ।। 
69. A finite verb, along with its preceding Gati, if any, becomes anudatta, when a Noun, denoting the fault of the action, follows, with the exception of गोत्र &c. 
BK. VIII. C11. I. $. 70 ) 
ACCENT. 
1527 
The anuvritti of IT (VIII. 1, 17) ceases. But the anuvfitti of the last sätra is current. Thus gora gra, que gfe, quit ARZT, per forza 
Why do we say a 'denoting the fault of the action'? See ot 
Why do we say on a noun? Observe fala 
f ast Why do we say with the exception of its &c. See for irra, faft , 91 
Vårt: It should be mentioned that the 'fault' mentioned in the satra, must be the fault relating to the mode of doing the action, denoted by the verb. The rule will not apply, if the man refers to the agent and not to the action. Thus fara glan , gufa gana at 
Vårt: It should be stated that a has an indicatory | The effect of this is that the word gfa is finally acute, because of the indicatory To The word gra is not a fire formed word, because it is not feminine, as we find it in sentences like giatay; nor is it a word forined by affix, because this is not a dat word; therefore, it is a word without a derivation. Therefore by fanfare P (Phit I. 1) it will be end-acute. The vårtika, therefore, indicates that when gfer causes the loss of accent of the verb, then it is end-acute, but in other cases it is acute on the beginning. According to Padamanjari, oft is derived from by adding the Uņadi affix fou diversely (UP IV. 180), and is first acute. 
Vårt: A finite verb in the plural number, loses its accent optionally: when it loscs its accent, then afa is end-acute. Thus gorg , or qofte hai, 
af aft? or grabe al 
Karikd. The following noun denoting fault must refer to the action. The elision of g is intended only in the case of non-verbs, because it is so said by those of old. The word gfa has an indicatory , but it is optionally so when the verb is plural. The elision of mentioned above refers to the elision of in all 07-1419*** Format: The words in mean Araration भयोजनमैतदिल्यर्थः॥ 
गतिर्गतौ ॥ ७० ॥ पदानि ॥ गतिः, गती। वृत्तिः ॥ गतिर्गतो परतो जवानो भवति । 
70. A Gati becomes unaccented, when followed by another Gati. 
Thus muuda, araufa, firegal # Why do we say that: "a Gati becomes &c"? Observe t : 4991 II Here tarm is a Pratipadika and does not lose its accent. Why do we say 'when followed by a Gati'? Observe wit मनेरिन हरिभि हि मयूर रोममिः ॥ Here मा is a Gati to the verb चाहि, the complete verb is an u But as T is not followed by a Gati, but by a Pratipadika 47, it retains its accent. Had the word par not been used in the sætra, this 
I would have lost its accent, because the rule would have been too wide, without any restriction of what followed it. 
1528 
Accent. 
(BK. VIII. CH. I. $.71 
:: fals priarrafa Il og at renfa il fals, a, garrafa It 
वृतिः ॥ गतिारति पते ॥ तिरन्ते ग्वात्तवात परतो गतिरनुासो भवति । 
71. A Gati becomes anudatta, when followed by an accented finite verb. 
The word गति is understood here. Thus यत् पचति, यत् करोति ॥ 
Why have we used the word fart in the sätra ? In order to restrict the scope of the word watt; so that a Gati would not become accentless before every udatta word, but only before udatta verbs. Thus nr does not become anudatta before मनैः in भी मन रिन्द्र हरिमिहि ॥ If it be said that the word ma is a particular name which the Particles get before verb only, and therefore a would always refer to its correlative term verb, and not to noun, like as the word father refers to its correlative term son and not nephew: and that, therefore, wirfir must refer to the verb like an and not to a noun like 
; then also we say that the employment of the term fart is necessary, in order to indicate that the verb must be a finite verb, and not a verbal root, So that though a verbal root be udatta, yet is in its conjugated form (fr ) it is not udatta, the fat will not lose its accent. Thus in un 9 aufk, the root 
is anudatta, but the front form mufar is udatta, hence the rule will apply here: which would not have been the case had arafa not been qualified by Raftul For the maxim is unforget Yan het oft meget : 11 Therefore in a fore, the designation of for is with regard to yg or verbal root. Obj: Ifraft is used for this purpose, then the rule will not apply to an भाग ending forms, like म पचतितराम् and प्रपचतितमान, for these are not तिम्त but as a matter of fact, we find that q loses its accent, in these forms also. How is this explained? Ans. Here there are two views : some compound the Gati y with the completed arany form of a 1 According to them, this would get the accent, on the rule that an Indeclinable first member retains its accent (VI. 2. 2); so that even if the word fat was not used in the stra, the form qofort being the second member of a compound, became anudatta; and so # being followed by an anudatta never loses its accent. According to them, therefore, the Gati never loses its accent in fufae &c. Others com pound the word ending in frog (af ) with the Gati, and having formed 
fat, then add the affix m1411 According to this view, the accent debars all other accents, on the maxim, 'the accent of the last prevails' (afegy), and so g is anudatta, not by this rule, but by T n According to them the word is 49 fructu According to both of these views, this sätra is not necessary for the purposes of four &c. But there is a third view which makes this sätra necessary even for this purpose. There is this maxim: Affrancangan : A EGET HTEOST: "It should be 
BK. VIII. CH. I. $.72 ] 
ACCENT. 
1529 
stated that Gatis, Karakas and Upapadas are compounded with bases that end with Kţit-affixes, before a case-termination has been added to the latter". This maxim itself has been explained in two different ways, one saying that the compounding takes place with krit-formed words only before the addition of case-affixes; but with words formed by Taddhita affixes, the compounding does not take place before a case affix has been added. The other view makes no such difference between krit-formed and non-kfit formed words. This latter view is not necessary for our purposes. According to the first view, the Gati u can never be compounded with quaTV, as it is not a gall So both and quay having different accents, the present sâtra became necessary to cause the loss of accent of gt 
Why have we used the word उदानवति? See पति, में करोति ॥ Here the verb loses, its accent by VIII. 1. 28, hence the Gati retains its accent. 
बामन्त्रितं पूर्वमविद्यमानवत् ॥ ७२ ॥ पदानि ॥ आमन्त्रितम, पूर्वम्, अविद्यमा Tall वृत्तिः॥मामनितं पूर्वमविचमानवरवति, सस्मिन्सति यत्का तम भवति॥ 
72. A preceding Vocative is considered as non-ex istent, (for the purposes of the accent of the following word; and the enclitic forms of युप्मदू and अस्मद). 
Such a Vocative is treated as if not at all existing, it is simply ignored. The operation which its presence otherwise would have caused does not take place, and that operation takes place which would have taken place had it not existed. What are the particular purposes served by considering it as non existent? They are (1) the absence of the accent-less-ness of the subsequent vocative, which the first, taken as a 94, would have caused under VIII. 1. 19. As I have! Here the first Vocative does not cause the second Vo cative to lose its accent, but it remains first acute by VI. 1. 198. (2) The accent less-ness of the verb required by VIII. I. 28 is prevented: as, ar (3) The substitution of the shorter forms of genç and m y, required by VIII. I. 20-23 is prevented, as * ** (not a) ara: FPT T 4* (not #) #: min (4) The application of VIII. 1. 37 takes place, in spite of the intervention of the Vocative between the Particle and the verb; such intervention is not considered as taking away anything from the immediateness ( art) of the Particle from the verb: as, 1997 quta (5) For the purposes of VIII. I. 47, though a Vocative may precede sig, the latter is still considered as may 1979 and VIII. 1.47 applies, as ATT HIT T U (6) So also in the case of VIII. 1. 49, as met ATT UTE, JIET T e , no option is allowed here by VIII. 1. 50. 
(1930 
ACCENT 
[BK. VIII. CH. I. $.73 
Why do we use the word 'as if or in the sotra, instead of saying Saltogether'? In other words, why do we say "it is considered as if non-ex istent", instead of saying "it is considered altogether non-existent"? The vocative does produce its own particular effect. Thus in are throat the vocative it is considered as one word (AR) for the purposes of separating Atg from the vocative au under VIII, 1. 55. This is the opinion of Patanj ali; but the opinion of the author of Kasika is that I would have been con sidered as nirgamall but for VIII. 1. 73. 
Why do we say 'a Vocative'? Observe fare: Why do we say 'with regard to the subsequent word? The vocative itself will not be considered as non-existent, for the application of rules that would apply to vocative as such. Thus in terrame, the vocative y gets its accent by VI. i. 193 also. In fact, the word go connotes its correlative a 'subsequent'; and the vocative is considered as non-existent, for the purposes of the opera tions to be performed on such subsequent term, whether such operation becaused Ly the vocative itself, or by any other cause; but it is not to be considered non existent for the purposes of operations to be performed upon itself. Therefore in विदत्त पंचसि, Devadatta does get the accent of the vocative. Inम में गो बमुन 
ET UT the first vocative is considered as non-existent with regard to 257, and, therefore, as is considered as following immediately after the pada # and thus ugit becomes anudatta, not because of t), but because of Ă; simi larly achita and Targ are anudatta, not because of the preceding Vocative, but because of u In other words, the intervention of the vocatives does not stop the action of #11 
नामन्त्रिते समानाधिकरणे सामान्यवचनम् ॥ ७३॥ पदानि ॥ न, आमन्त्रिते, समानाधिकरणे, सामान्य-वचनम् ॥ वृतिः ॥ भविषमानवस्वस्थ प्रतिषेधः ॥ मामन्मितान्ते समानाधिकरणपरतः पूर्वमामन्त्रितान्तं सामान्यवचन माषियमानवरवति ।। 
73. A perceding vocative, when it conveys a gene ral idea, is not to be considered as if non-existent, for the purposes of the subsequent Vocative,which stands in apposition with the former. . This sätra prevents the operation of the last sätra in the particular case when the two Vocatives are in apposition, and the second qualifies the first. Thus la troi, frutta ruanggu The first vocative being considered as existing, second vocative loses its accent 
Why do we say the vocative subsequent? Observe to be here the very does not lose its accent. Why do we say 'standing in apposition or समानाधिकरणे? Observe वर पण्डित बादच, here the word पण्डिव qualifies परन, and is not in apposition with 1998, and hence it retains its accent. Why do we say 
A 
'which is a generic word? The rule will not apply when the Vocatives are synonyms. Thus अन्ये देवि सरस्वतिकाव्ये fi Pantai Amal All these Vocatives are synonyms of Saraswati, and hence all retain their accent of the Vocative (VI. 1. 198). According to Padamanjari the reading given in Taittariya Br. is:-- fits Pa ateriat fra 
af ATE AN, gana a aa aa II 1974 means 'a generic term'. Wheu the first is a generic term, and the second is a specific term, (AUT * ) qualify ing the first, and both are in the singular number, there the present rule will apply. 
विभाषितं विशेषवचने बहुवचनम् ॥ ४॥ पदानि ॥ विभाषितम, विशेष qa, qarah ! 
वृत्तिः ॥ पूर्वणाविद्यमानवस्वे प्रतिपिजे विकल्प उच्यते ॥ विशेषवचने समानाधिकरण मामन्वितान्ते परतः gestartPTÉ 
A 
11 74. When the preceding Vocative is in the Plu ral number, it is optionally considered as non-existent, if the subsequent Vocative, in apposition with it, is a specific term. 
This ordains option, where the last sätra would have made the con sideration of the first vocative as existent compulsory. Thus from or at you: bua t or kretant urhur: 11 
The anuvfitti of 1999 is understood here; the second vocative, therefore, must be a gem, as being the correlative of the former: where is then the necessity of employing the word faith in the satra? This word is used in the aphorism for the sake of precision only, 
Why do we say 'in the plural number'? Observe an unsel No option is allowed here, and the preceding vocative is always considered as existent and so rule VIII. 1.73 applies. 
The satras 73 and 74 as enunciated by Papini are:-73. ATHA I tor; 74. EMmart For Adua (i. e. 73. The preceding Vocative is not considered as non-existent, if the subsequent word is a Vocative in apposition with it. 74. Optionally so, if the preceding vocative is a general term and the subsequent vocative is a particular term). Patanjali made the amendment by adding amata to 73 also, and the author of Kasika has added a to 74 from the commentary of Patanjali and has omitted am from it: though he reads its anuvšitti, 
apart 
अथ अष्टमाध्यास्य द्वितीयः पादः। 
-MOI 
. 
Aankond 
Chapter SECOND. 
Y 
22 
. 
L 
10 
Teater 19 Yarar i går, afera বি: দুদ্দাক্সিম্বিয়ানহ্মার গা গুৱাথশির: ৪ হাক্ত লিঙ্কাল জুঞ্জাক্সিৰিী ষ্ট্র কিছু স্বল্প স্বল্প আয়াজঞ্জাল গুলাগঞ্জ থাইলী স্ত্রী কিল্লা জগাই ও চুল শুষ অস্থায়ী 
খ মীথ: 
গুৰক্ষায় মাল বিল্পিঃ বিহ্মার গল্প বা ঝুলি খ | গাৱিন্ত্র মাঈলঙ্গমাগুইআই সুখশাখ । 
1. Whatever will be taught hereafter, upto the end of the work, is to be considered as not taken effect, in relation to the application of a preceding rule. 
This is an Adhikara or governing rule, and extends upto the end of the Book, Whatever we shall teach hereafter is to be understood as non-existent, with regard to the preceding rule. With regard to whatever has been taught In the preceding Seven Books and a quarter, the rules contained in these three last chapters are considered as asiddha. And further, in these three chapters, a subsequent rule is, as if it had not taken effect, so far as any pre ceding rule is concerned. The word i n ferat , farare adau The rule is as if non-effective, does not produce the operation of a siddha or effective rule", This rule of non-effectiveness is for the sake of prohibiting the operation of an Adcia rule, and establishing the operation of an utsarga or general rule. Thus M TUT; (; TT, HET STE: In all these, the 'elision of cand by VIII. 3. 19, being considered as not to have taken effect, there is no further sandhi, and **** does not give rise to guga, nor m*** 
* In fact, for the purposes of the application of T : rule or VI. 1.87, or the rule of VI. 1, 101, the rule VIII. 3. 19 is considered as not to have taken effect at all. 
Similarly a, aer, men from Thus so+=*+ (VII. 2. 102 * being substituted for the final , which again merges in the 
BK. VIII. Cl. II. §. 1 ] 
ASIDDIIA-RULE. 
1933 
preceding VI. 1. 97)=#&+* (VIII. 2. 80. being substituted for , and q for of a). Now the substitution of fit for takes place only after Pro nouns ending in sy; but my is a pronoun ending in 3, so this A (VII. 1. 14) should not take place. The present satra helps us out of this difficulty, and the change of my into a by VIII. 2. 80 is considered asiddha for the purposes of the application of VII. 1. 14. 
शुश्किका शुष्कजया च क्षामिमामौजसथा। 
मतावले मलां जश्वं, गुडलिण्मानिदर्शनम् ॥ The forms Teh, TUTET, HAT, M6 , and uponry illustrate this rule excellently. 
(1) Tall To the root Ty we add the Nishtha a, as += 1 + (changed to go by VIII. 2.51)- 350 Add the feminine affix ag and we have TOT 10 Add to this the asfix * (V. 3. 70, 73), as U 1+ yeah, the femi nine of which with org will be goc (the shortening taking place by VII. 4. 13). Now is changed to by VII. 3. 44 and we have for at ll Now rule VII. 3. 46 makes this substitution optional, when a precedes the , as is the case here: and that rule would require the alternative form you But there is no such alternative form, because the # of great was the substitute of 
by VIII. 2. 51, which is considered as asiddha for the purposes of the appli cation of VII. 3. 46. 
(2) TUTO Here rule VI. 3. 37 would have required the form to be TTHFI like fontanegr; there being no puh-vad-bhava when there is a penultimate fi ll But the min gut being the result of VIII. 2. S1 is consi dered as asiddha for the purposes of VI. 3. 37. 
(3) Parang This word may be considered to have been formed by adding the affix it to the Patronymic word na: or to the noun nila [TT fire- A:, or HSRiteata ] 11 The word or is formed by adding the Nishtha a to the root , as #+- +#(VI. 1.45)-FT (the of being changed to by VIII. 2. 53). Now this is considered as non-effectual for the pur. poses of application of VIII. 2.9, which requires the change of of 7 to , when we is added to a word having a penultimate #, as in tell Therefore 
we have क्षामिमान् and not क्षामिवान् ॥ 
(4) Tanul This is the Aorist third person singular of the Derivative root with, from the Past-Participle of a Thus 48+= (VI. 1. 15). Add to it for in the sense of FATRAIR (III, 1, 26): and then form its II The is formed by adding TT (III. 1.48), before which the stem is reduplicated (VI. 1. 11). In reduplicating, all the rules that went before in forming at are consi dered asiddha; viz. the rule by which was changed to t (as + 7+8 11+ # VIII. 1. 31), the rule by which was changed to (TC+8=78+ VIII. 1. 
1534 
ASIDDHA-RULE. 
[BK. VIII. CH. II. §. 2 
40), the rule by which y was changed to r (VIII. 4. 41), and the rule by which the first I was elided (VIII. 3. 13 as 7+12+1=5 VI. 3. 111). The elision of fit before for being considered sthanivat, we reduplicate ; as THT + TC += TL (VII. 4. 60) (VII. 4. 62) - T (VIII. 4. 54). There is no ( added by VII. 4. 79, because of the prohibition of math of VII. 4.93. With the augment, it becomes 1 The form stratea is from of ending in the affix किन् ॥ 
(5) Truary 11 This is formed by adding # to the word Titan, which is formed by fem (TC ) Here also the # of heg is not changed into 
by VIII. 2. 10; because the change of tox (VIII. I. 3), and again of i to are considered asiddha. 
The rules of interpretation, however, contained in the previous part will apply to this part also; because such rules connot be considered 'prior' or gad; for they become operative then only when occasion requires to apply them. The maxim which governs such rules is din afarga 1 The rules, there fore, which are exhibited here in the sixth case such as VIII. 2. 23, or the seventh case, as VIII. 2. 26, or the fifth case, as VIII. 2. 27, should be inter preted in accordance with the s@tras yet furat TETT, arrara fafttry, Tom TRII 
But with regard to the paribhasha farafa qi agrict, the above will not hold good. . For, by the very fact, that a subsequent rule in these chapters, is held to be asiddha, with regard to the prior, there cannot arise any conflict of two rules of equal force with regard to them. And it is only where there is such a conflict, that the above rule of interpretation applies. This being so, in forte, mire formed by 9 (III. 1. 124) the guņa ordained by VII. 3. 86 is not debarred by the off rule VIII.2. 77, because there is no conflict between guna'rule VII. 3.86 and the dirgha-rule VIII. 2. 77, for the latter is simply non-existent with regard to the former. 
But though the forefarby rule does not apply in these chapters; yet an apavada rule here even, does over-ride an utsarga rule, for otherwise, the enunciation of an apavada rule would be useless. The apavada rule is there fore, not considered asiddha. Thus the utsarga rule a: (VIII. 2. 31) is set aside by the apavada rule वार्धातोः (VIII. 2. 32), and thus we have दोग्धा, होगधुम (tig-g+mg) 
नलोपः सुस्वरसंशातुविधिषु कृति ॥२॥ पदानि ॥ न लोपः, सुप्-स्वर-संक्षा To-farea, afa il 
पतिः ॥मलोपः पूर्वबासिनो भवति सम्बिधी स्वरविधौ संज्ञाविधी तुग्विधी च कति। विधिचन्नावं प्रत्येकम भिसंबध्यमानः स्वरसंज्ञातुकां विधेयस्याने कर्मषष्ठीयुक्त वसाधनो ऽभिसंबध्यते । मुपादु संबन्धसामान्य पचमठपन्तेन कर्मसाधनः । तेन सुपः स्थाने यो विधिः अपि च परभूते सर्वोसौ बिधिरिति सर्वनाविलं Hoft 
BK. VIII. CH. II. $ 2] 
ASIDDHA-RULE. 
1535 
2. The elision of a final . (VIII. 2. 7) is con sidered as if not to have taken effect, in applying the follow ing rules; (1) rules regarding case-endings, (2) rules regarding accents, (3) rules regarding any techuical term of Grammar, and (4) rules regarding the augment a before a Krit-affix. 
The word part in the sätra applies to all the four words preceding it: as afara, fara &c. The force of the Genitive compound in froh, d an girare is that of ordaining the existence of something eg. when an accent is to be given to a word, or a particular designation is to be given to it or when it is to be added to it, (HTTEIT) # The compound at means however, the rule relating to the case-endings themselves, as well as, the rule which would apply to a word, when a case-ending follows ( aria) 
(1) Trap:--As cam#:, afa: 11 Here the elision of of u and HYT being asiddha, the fire is not changed to ta by VII. 1. 9. So also Tw 
274, di, 19, ahol Here the finals of Ty and are not lengthened before ai by gi9y (VII. 3. 102) and nor changed to before y by (VII. 3. 103): as in out and thy of the stem ending in ## 
(2) स्वरविधि:-As राजवती and not राजवती ॥ For the elision of being asiddha, the rule VI. 1. 220, does not apply, for the word is considered not to end in some but haft Similarly in quraq and para, the elision of being asiddha, the first member does not become ady-udatta by VI. 2. 90. Similarly q fit: the elision of being asiddha, the first member does not retain its 
original accent as required by VI. 2. 29. 
. The word om is first acute, as it is formed by the affix afta(Un I. 156). That is formed by adding tg to the Age ending word, by IV. 1. 6. quart is a compound under rule II. 1. 50 of q -1-4, and when is elided, the first member becomes a word ending in and would require the accent of Vi, 2. 90. 
(3) Fa :-As 3* Algomi, All4: 1 The elision of being asiddha, the words for and cu are still called shash though they no longer end in a supiral I. 1. 24). Being called ", they do not take og in the feminine (IV. 1. 10). 
According to the Vartikakära, there is no necessity of using the word संज्ञा in the satra (संज्ञा ग्रहणानर्थक्यं च नमिमित्तस्वाबोपस्य), because the elision of is caused by reason of its having such a designation ( as ). Thus without its having the name of there would be no elision of and up, without such elision, there is no pada sanjña of these words, and unless these words get Pada designation, there can be no elision of x by VIII. 2.7. The shash designation, however, would not be retained by these words after taking 
1536 
ASIDDHA-RULE 
[ BK. VIII. CH. II. $. 2 
plural affixes, when feminine affixes are to be added to them, but for this satra. The 997 and an ending ing would require ritg in the feminine, which is however prohibited, for when we and q are elided, the words end in 
and require are for their feminine, which is also prohibited, because, by the presert sätra the word still retains its designation of an 
Q. How can this be the purpose of this sätra ? There are two views as regard definitions ( 1 ), the one is that a particular name is given to a thing once for all, prior to any operations; and operations are performed after wards upon it or with it, as occasions arise. This view is embodied in the maxim auro caITCAT'Sanjña, and Paribhashas remain where they are taught.' The other view is that the sanjna sQtra is to be read with every particular operative satra, and the sanjña given to the word afresh, with every new operation. In other words, the sanjña sätra becomes identified with a vidhi sūtra, every time that a vidhi is to be applied. This is embodied in the maxim कार्यकाल संज्ञापरिभापम् “Sanjnas and Paribhasas are attracted by or unite with the rules that enjoin certain operations." In the first view, the rę sanjña will be good throughout, both for the purposes of eliding fa and r and for prohibiting To H Hence thus sätra is not necessary in that view. But in the other view, the satra is necessary. For if the view be taken that a sanjña is to be applied with regard to each operation, then that sanjna which had taken effect for the purposes of eliding te and up, will no longer hold good for the purposes of preventing the application of the feminine affix. Hence, the word 
is taken in this sđtra, to prevent the application of the second view. 
(4) arany-Thus , qf*: 11 On account of the elision of being asiddha, the g augment is not added, though required by VI. 1. 71. (Thirea fafar fag) 
Some hold that need not be read in the satra. They argue in this way:-There is this maxim afara Anafar afturen "That which is taught in a rule, the application of which is occasioned by the combination of two things, does not become the cause of the destruction of that combi nation". Now the elision of oz of 1 took place because of the case affix mai, this elision cannot be the cause of adding Fu Or the of being a for oper ation would be asiddha with regard to the antaranga elision of This opinion is, however, not sound. The employment of an in this sätra indicates, that the two maxims above referred to, are not of universal application i.e. they are anitya. 
• Why do we say before a Kft - affix? Observe Tu, TROTTI Here tra is added by VI. 1. 73. 
The elision of taught by VIII. 2. 7 &c would be asiddha by the 
BK. VIII. CI. II. $. 3) 
ASIDDHA-RULE 
1537 
general rule VIII. 2. 1; the specification of the four cases in which it is asiddha shows that it is a restrictive or niyama rule. That is, the elision of is con sidered asiddha only with regard to these four rules, and no other. It is not asiddha in strah ( 7*7+ 0+* +&+#art III. 1. 8, VII. 4. 33). There would not have been long had the titq been asiddha. So also usra there is lengthening, (VII. 4. 25) and there is ekadeša (VI. 1. 101). 
ay #13 at 11 a, , a, 11 वृतिः ॥ मुभावो नाभावे कर्तव्ये नासिनोमवति कि तर्हि सिद्ध एव ।। वार्तिकम् ॥ एकादेशस्तरोन्तरङ्ग सिनो वक्तव्यः ।। वा ॥ संयोगान्तस्य लोपोरोरुले सिजो वक्तव्यः । वा॥ सिल्लोप एकादेश सिनो वक्तव्यः ।। पा०॥निटादेशः पलस्तरपत्ययविधीडिधिषुसिनो वक्तव्यः॥ वा०॥प्लुतविकारस्तुग्विधा छ सिनो वक्तव्यः॥ पा ॥ धुलं धुटि सिचं वक्तव्यम् ॥ वा० । मभ्यासजश्वचर्षे एस्वतुकोः सिने वक्तव्ये ॥ वा ॥र्विचने परसवर्णव सिचं वक्तव्यम् ॥ वा ॥ पदाधिकारमेलवालयवनवलपलणस्वानुनासिकछलानि सिद्धानि वक्तव्यानि । 
3. The sutra VIII. 2. 80, teaching the substitu tion of y for the ff of the Pronoun , is however not treated as asiddha in relation to the case-ending | 
The existence of g is not considered uneffected when there is to be added at 11 On the contrary, it is considered as siddha or existing. Thus ! being considered as siddha, we gets the designation of ra by I. 4. 7, and as such, its Instrumental Singular is by VII. 3. 120, waru Had the & been considered as non-effected, then the stem would not have been called ghi, and there would have been no # added. But when it had been added, then the g being asiddha, Hy is considered to be as sy ending in , and this # would require lengthening by gigy VII. 3. 102: but it is not done on the 
maxim सनिपातलक्षणो विधिरनिमित्तं तद्विघातस्य “that which is taught in a rule the application of which is occasioned by the combination of two things does not become the cause of the destruction of that combination". There being no long say the 3 of ong remains short. Or this sätra may be considered to be the condensation of two sotras (1) , is siddha when #t is to be added, (2) g is siddha when any operations, otherwise to be caused when # is added, are to take place. Or the sense of the satra is ने परतो बत् प्राप्नोति तसिन् कर्तव्ये मुभाषी Afr: "the g is not non-effected in relation to any operation that would otherwise be occasioned when followed". From this, it would follow by implication that g must be considered valid for the purposes of Art, itself. So g being always siddha, T is added : and there is no lenghening. 
Vart:-That ekadeba accent which is antaranga, should be considered as siddha. What is the necessity of this vārtika ? In order to regulate the accents of 1, 74, 2. me, 3. IL substitutions of g, and m; 4. the accent of 
1538 
ASIDDHA RULE. 
(BK. VIII. Cl. II. $. 3 
ekadesa substitutes, 5. the accent of the Ty formed words, 6. for the purposes of rule VI. 1. 158, by which all syllables of a word are anudatta except one, and 7. for the purposes of VIII. 1. 28, by which all syllables become anudatta. : Thus (1) let us take me first. is finally acute by Phit I. 1. The locative of this is [+ff (anudatta 1II. 1. 3) - ( is udatta VIII. 2. 5). Now combine +994 +- u So also a The udatta ekadesa & must be considered as siddha, so that the se substitute of should also become udatta. (2) ma: As card 79 # Here also oft is udatta for similar reasons. $&+*-+T+(VII. 3. 112) - $41C + +=$1 +*+(VI. 1. 174)=CHTE+P (VI. 2. 90) FT (VIII, 2. 5). The is udatta and its mr substitute will also be udatta. How do you give this example? This example is then valid, when by VI. 1. 174, first the affix is made udatta, then this T (BIC VII. 3. 112) augment is added to t, and then (18+) there is vriddhit; and then gH7+ HV But if the order be reversed and 7+q be first combined into &, and then this be made udatta by VI. 1. 174, then there would be no necessity of this vārtika for the purposes of surga The word it is end-acute by Phiț accent (Phit I. 1). Auld to it fe in the feminine (IV. 1. 20), as +=5418+ ( is elided by VI. 4. 148)=3*11+ (VI. I, 161)-618 I 
(3) 19. As tuprofen or guitar, for the same reasons as above [ + RT ( anudatta ) - VIII. 2. 5, Tut+ n). 
(4) एकादेण accent. As गाने पे ॥ Here गा+ गाङ्गे॥ The word Try is formed by u affix (stat fra) and is end-acute. The ekadesa is udatta by VIII. 2. 5. This udatta accent will remain valid: so that when for Q+ there is pūrva-ropa-ekadesa by VI. 1. 109, this ekadesa y will be udatta by VIII. 2. 5, or it will be svarita by VIII. 2. 6. The word sand is a urft compound, rasgre ! Here by VI. 2. 2, the Indeclinable first term would have retained its accent: but the word is end-acute by VI. 2. 189. 
(5) - accent. As gel, gali Here in tutup, the affix o is udatta, and oc is anudatta. The ekadeba s will be udatta by VIII. 2. 5. This ekadeša - udatta should be considered valid for the pur poses of the rule VI. 1. 173 by which the feminine affix and the weak case-ending are udatta. Thus ge+f ait, += The prohibition ni in VI. 1. 173 is a jnapaka or indicator of the fact that the ekadesa accent should be considered siddha, in the accent of the ug, because without this ekadesa accent, there is no satri ending word with a which is antodatta. 
(6) CATT: accent. As fiu, fara u Here in trump (VI. 1. 186) the ekadesa w is udatta by VIII. 2. 5, and this ekadesa accent is con sidered valid for the purposes of rule VI. 1, 158, by which all the remaining syllables become anudatta, as atrag, at 
BK. VIII, C11. 11. $. 31. 
ASIDDHA RULE. 
1539 
(7) # : accent. As egongofu, MO Prefalt Here the eka les'n-accent of art and fut being valid, rulc VII. 1. 28 applics, and all the syllables become anudatta. 
The word antaranga is used in the vârtika' to indicate that the Bahiranga ekådes'a accent will not be siddha. Thus quarra and furra, where the word that is first acute, as it is an Indeclinable. And amet qeala The accent of qua+ fa-qurla is governed by VIII. 2. 5. This ekadesa accent of long f has reference to external sandhi, and therefore na turally it is a bahiranga. This bahiranga ekådesa accent is not siddha for the purposes of the application of previous sūtras. Thus satra VIII. 1.71. requires that the gati should be unaccented before an accented verb: but does not lose its accent, as quatra is not considered as an accented verb. In the second example, the off is not considered as accented, therefore, it does not be come anudatta by VIII. 1. 28. 
Vart:-The rule VIII. 2. 23 causing the elision of the final consonant in a word ending with a conjunct consonant, should be valid for the purposes of changing & into l What is the necessity of this vårtika ? Observe हरिया मेदिन स्वाThe word हरिवः is formed by मतुल् affix हरयोऽस्व सन्ति-हरि+मत्। Now by VIII. 2. 15 the # is changed to 4, as ft + or fit add o (Voc.Sg.) as f* +5, then add yr augment, as 4 + Then there is elision of the final consonant-FETE 11 Now by VIII. 3. 1. the final 7 is changed to , and we have fut, the would be changed to y by VI. 1. 114, if the elision of the conjunct consonants be considered as siddha : for then this is followed by #, a my letter. But if such elision be considered asiddha, then is considered not to be followed by 7 letters, but by the consonants which were elided. 
Vart:- When ekâdeba is to be done, the elision of fou is to be con sidered siddha or valid. As presta and writt # Here the r is elided by fe fe (VIII. 2. 28.) This elision is considered valid or siddha, and thus we have dirgha single substitution of f for f+f as MT2+8+ WHEE+P+0+ ft 
Vårt:- The substitute of the Nishtha affixes should be considered as valid or siddha for the purposes of the rules relating to the (1) changing ose to C. (2) accent, (3) affix, and (4) r augment. As(1) aqui, T TT U The root is 
y (VI. 11) the indicatory shows that the nishtha « is changed to a (VIII. 2. 45). This nishtha substitute is considered as valid or siddha, and the final of the root is not changed to c, as it otherwise would have been by VIII. 2. 36: for would have been still considered as or a he letter. The equation is as follows :-p + +H (VI. 1. 16)-(4+* (VIII. 2. 45) = 
+#(VIII. 2. 29) - ta (VIII. 2. 30) 9: (VIII. 4. 1) The x is chang ed to me by VIII. 2. 30, by considering H as asiddha and therefore equal to a or a letter Thus it will be seen that this is a n for the purposes of 
1540 
ASIDDHA RULE. 
[BK. VIII. CH. II. $ 3 
rule VIII. 2. 30, but it is for only for the purposes of rule VIII. 2. 36. 
As regards the other three cases, viz, accent, affix and R auginent, the one word in, will illustrate them all. The irregular formation of this word is variously explained. It is formed by "nipatana" under VIII. 2. 55. It is the Past Participle of the root , thus evolved fx+r+*- *+&+* 
+7 (Er being elided, this is the anomaly) - Here the elision of m is considered as valid and siddha, and therefore, it is considered as a word of two syllables, for the purposes of accent, under rule 1819 01 (VI. 1. 205). Had the lopadeea of been considered asiddha, the word would have been considered as if of three syllables, and that rule of accent would not have applied. 
Similarly भीवन तरति-क्षीविक formed by छन् (IV.4.7) which affix is added, because it is considered a word of two syllables, the elision of a being considered as valid for the purposes of IV. 4.7. 
Similarly we may be considered to have been formed by eliding the Ti as t+= + In this view of its formation, the augment is not added, because the lopa of l is considered as valid and siddha for the pur poses of augment. In the opinion of Patanjali, the words far may well be omitted from the vârtika, for being a portion of a pria, the word quart would include for also. 
Vart :-The prolation modification of a vowel (pluta) should be consi dered as valid and siddha, for the purposes of the rule relating to te augment before the letter y ll Thus by VIII. 2. 107, the Vocative words wh and get assume the forms suri, and get | These and 7 are pluta-vikaras. As 
TRITI TET 1 38344 Here the modification caused by VIII. 2. 107, is considered as valid and siddha; otherwise there would have been no com pulsory. g6 augment as required by VI. 1. 73 but optional under VI. 1. 76. 
Vart:-The and palatal change should be considered siddha and valid before F. (VIII. 3. 291. The root ofan Hà (1.41) is read as beginning with a #, which is changed to y because of the subsequent or by VIII. 4. 40. This is not considered asiddha. Had it been so, there would come up aug ment by VIII. 3. 29, in 976 serata, tata # The words are and are my and formed from the roots fa and rela by 147q 11 
Why is the root eat considered to begin with and not with g as we find it written? Because had it been a root beginning with u originally, we could not get the form of which would have been 4 The form C is thus evolved. Thus 13 gia = q t by adding ring From 9447 we form a Derivative root in णिच् in the sense of मधुच्युतमाच? मधुरावति । Add again for to this Derivative root ff, the foren will be elided, and we have you, then ( which represents ) is elided because it is at the begin. ning of a compound letter (VIII. 2. 29), and a is clided, because it is at the BK. VITI, CH. II S. 3] 
ASIDDIIA-RULE 
1541 
end of a conjunct letter final in a pada (VIII. 2. 23), and thus there remains n g, and is changed to (VIII. 2. 30) we have a Had the root been 
Tafa, then this y could not be elided, and so we should elide only the final 
and u and the form would be gry which would be changed to and then to and we should get nya which is not desired. 
Vårt :--The ug and substitution of letters in the reduplicate should be considered siddha and valid for the purposes of change (VI. 4. 120) and as augment. Thus torg: and may it Here the change of #, to & in the reduplicate should be considered as valid, otherwise this would be Banana root and the Perfect would be any and Ay: 1 Similarly from for we have चिण्डिरसति, and from उच्छ, चिण्डिपति ॥ In the latter, the second syllable se of afvĘ (Desiderative) is reduplicated by VI. 1. 2. Here had the reduplicate substitute o for been considered asiddha, there would not have been Faug 
ment by छेच (VI. I. 73) 
vart:-The change of letter homogeneous with the subsequent is valid and siddha for the purposes of doubling. As a car, ISTEHC, azata, VETKE 1 In qara &c the is changed to anusvåra by VIII. 3. 23, and the anusvåra is then changed to a letter homogeneous with the subsequent by VIII. 4. 58. Had the Trato change been asiddha, there would have been no doubling by VIII. 4. 47. 
Vart: If there be the adhikara of the word 'pada' in those satras which ordain the following changes, then those changes are considered siddha for doubling, namely, I. 24 the change into * (VIII. 2. 21), 2. #24 the change into r(VIII. 2. 31), 3. 967 the change in to ø (VIII.2.33). 4. The the change into H (VIII. 2. 50), 5. 887 the change tor (VIII. 2. 75), 6. me the change to (VIII. 3.85), 7.04 the change to a (VIII. 4. 11), 8. anunâsika change (VIII. 4. 45), 9. yen the change to s (VIII. 4. 63). 
As I. *: ; TTTTTTT: 11 2. fragman 3. arghat N 4. JĀT TH: or मुत्तो नुसः ॥ 5. अभिनोभिन: or भभिन अभिमत् This is me second person singular of for the Forfag is elided by VI. 1. 68, and the final changed optionally to & by VIII. 2.74. The r is the vikarana katil 6. arg: CTET Arg: ster Or ArGFTET, A: ETAT, 7. TT TT Arrior or ArTT ATT II 8. FUT IT O or ar77999 a 1 9. 75 134 1337* or 75047 Trail 
The ** &c, changes being all optional, had the changes been con sidered asiddha, we would have got the following double forms also more, 
TEHTC which are not desired. 
All these can be explained by dividing the sätra go into two. The first being , and this negative will prohibit all asiddha-ness mentioned in the 
1542 
ACCENT. 
( BK. VIII. CI. II. S. 4 
preceding vârtikas. The second satra would be gà, and we would here draw in the anuvritti of 7 from the preceding. 
उदात्तस्वरितयोर्यणः स्वरितोऽनुदात्तस्य ॥४॥ पदानि ॥ उदात्त-स्वरितयोः, qui, paftar, bareret II 
वृत्तिः ॥ उदात्तवणः स्वस्तियणम परस्यानुदासस्य स्वरित भादेशो भवति ।। 
4. A svarita vowel is the substitute of an anu dåtta vowel, when the latter follows after such a semi-vowel, which has replaced an udatta or a svarita vowel. 
An unaccented vowel becomes svarita, when it comes after a wy (semi vowel), which may itself has come in the room of a vowel which was acute or svarita once. 
Let us first take the vowel following an udatta yan. Thus gråt, Fa: 11 The word dit is acutely accented on the final, because the long & (Fig) replaces of ATC (VI. 1. 161). The semi-vowel is substituted in the room of this acute; the anudatta mr and become svarita after such a Q11 
Now to take an example of a svarita-yan. The words free and m are finally acute by kfit-accent (VI. 2. 139). The Locative singular of these words are 0 +1=9ce, and 5 by VI, 4.83. This is a semi vowel which comes in the rooin of the acutetherefore, it is udatta-yaq. After this udatta-yan, the anudattar of the Locative becomes svarita by the first part of this sūtra. Now when + Hut and a s + Hrut are com bined by sandhi, this svarita & is changed to t; it is, therefore, a syarita-yan. The unaccented will become svarita, after this svarita-yan. As encarur and staru i The word rur is finally acute and consequently sat is not acute (Phit. I. 18). 
Obj:-Here an objector may say: that the svarita accent on r in water is by this very satra, this svarita is to be considered as asiddha for the purposes of no adesa of VI. 4. 83. How can then the substituted for this be considered as svarita-yan? 
Ans :- This is considered as siddha by asraya. (0441a Ferrara) 1 . Obj :-If this be so, then TTTTTTTFT morta: (VIII. 4. 66) should also be considered as siddha : and we should have svarita in PETUT &c also. For the word his first-acute by Phit Il. 3. Therefore it is svarita by VIII.4. 66. The q. is svarita yan, the anudatta i after this should become svarita ac cording this view, but this is not so. 
Ans:--To avoid this difficulty, we have the following. 
Vart :- G Ò PASTI 64: 11 "The are accent should be con sidered as valid, for the purposes of a substitution". 
BK. VIII. CH. II. §. 51 
ACCENT. 
1543 
Some say, that even in such cases as wala the above rule applies, and that the unaccented vowel becomes svarita, if it follows a syarita-yag which is preceded by an acute vowel. They quote the following from Taitt arlya sakha : थास्ते विश्वाः समिधः सन्त्यग्ने, where the of अग्ने is pronounced as svarita. So also in the Brahmaņa portion as : stroafa the mi is read as svarita. But according to Katyayana and Patanjali, the unaccented vowel does not become svarita by this sätra, when it follows a syarita-yaq which is preceded by an acute vowel. 
To get rid of these anomalies, the Mahabhashya proposes several alternatives, two of which will be mentioned here. The first proposal is to divide this composite sätra into two parts: (1) 
a u: TRF HETIRI Partat **7 "an unaccented vowel becomes svarita when it follows after an udatta yan". (2) स्वरितयणय परस्य अनुदात्तस्य स्वरितो भवति "an unaccented vowel becomes svarita, when following a svarita yan" and in this second satra, we shall read the anuvfitti of udatta-yaņ from the preceding half. So that this half will mean:: en façar: FITTAE, fa 909: Tra T Paitat ha in The svarita must have been obtained by the application of the first half of this s@tra and this svarita should be changed to app, which would change the anudatta into svarita. So that the fifTe y means this particular svarita obtained by the application of this very sætra. 
The second proposal is not to read svarita into the sotia at all. The svarita in proposal at would then be explained by udatta-yanah rule. Pre +r+ ATUT Hermany + + HTUT II Here is udatta-yan. This will cause m to be come svarita. The intervening svarita is considered as not existent for the purposes of accent a s.mafuri 1 Nor is this q to be considered as sthâni-vad to y by I. 1. 57, for in applying the rule of accent, such a substi tute is not considered as sthanivat by I. 1. 58. 
Why do we say " of udatta and svarita"? Observe 11 + rot-HOTT, so also ur #1 Here the semi-vowel replaces an unaccented $, and is 
UIT TE These words are first acute owing to fit accent (IV. 1. 73). 
Why do we say "an unaccented vowel becomes svarita"? Observe कुमार्यच, किशोर्यत्र॥ The word भैष is acutely accented on the first by लित् accent. (VI. 1. 193). 
एकादेश उदात्तेनोदात्तः ॥ ५॥ पदानि ॥ एकादेशः, उदान, उदात्तः॥ पत्तिः ॥ तेन सहानुनस्य एकादेशः स रातो भवति ।। 
5. The single substitute of an unaccented with an udatta vowel is udatta. 
The word "of an anudatta " is understood here. An unaccented vowel, 
154 + 
. 
ACCENT. 
[ BK. VIII. Cl. II. $ 6 
which combined with the preceding udatta vowel remains as a single substitute, becomes udatta. Thus for the udatta r of sth and for the case-ending which is anudatta, there is always substituted long single by VI. 1. 102. This single substitute will be udatta according to the present sQtra, as muualle 11 Simi larly ra, N Y : 11 
Why do we say "with udåtta vowel"? Observe qofon, a fall Here qy+19+ 
+ + FR Here ge is anudatta by III. 1.4, so also was by VI. 1. 186. The ekadesa of these two non-accented will be anudatta. In forming this para-rapa ekadesa by VI. 1. 97, the svarita of the site of ug caused by VIII. 4. 66 is considered as invalid or asiddha. 
Other examples are Fis: (Rig. V. 61. 2) and xmat : The word qi is anudatta by VIII. 1. 21. read with VIII. 1. 18. The word is acutely ac cented on the first, as it is formed by adding to me (Uņ. I. 151). The x of This changed to I (VIII. 2. 66), which is again changed to a (VI. 1. 113). Thus 
S II Here becomes pārva-rupa by VI. I. 109, which is udatta. A is formerl from face by an affix (V. 3. 12 and VII. 2. 105) and is svarita (VI. 1. 185). The word is acutely accented on the first by the Phiț II. 6. The single long substitute is udatta. 
स्वरितो वा ऽनुदात्ते पदादी॥६॥ पदानि ॥ स्वरितः, वा, अनुदाते, पदादौ ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ अनुदाते पक्षादी रवानेन सह व एकादेशः स स्वरितो वा भवत्युवरातो वा । 
6. The single substitute of an unaccented vowel, standing at the beginning of a word, with an udatta vowel, may optionally be svarita or udatta. 
Thus g+area: त्यत: or सुस्थितः विईक्षते वक्षते or वीक्षते; वमुकः+मति = she or she 11 Here the word g is a Karmapravachaniya by 1. 4. 94. when it is compounded by aire with the Past Participle, the Avayayibhava compound retains the accent of its first member (VI. 2. 2), and so it is acutely accented on the first, and the rest are anudatta. Thus the udatta of g is com pounded with the anudatta 7 of 274a: which stands at the beginning of a Pada, and so the ekadesa is optionally svarita. In rear and resfe also the verbs fa and HFE lose all accent by VIII. 1. 28 and so f and become anudatta, which when compounded with fand T T become optionally svarita. 
The word forca: is employed in the sætra only for the sake of distinct ness, for the satra may have well stood as syarat art in this form of the sätra, the udatta of the preceding sätra would become optional when the second member is a word beginning with anudatta. Udatta being optional, in the other alternative, where there will not be udatta, the svarita will be substituted by reason of the nearness in position. 
BK. VIII. Cu. II. 9.7 ] 
ACCENT. 
1545 
Why do we say "anudatta beginning"? Observe ! Here he begins with udatta aud not anudatta, and hence no option is allowed. 
Why do we say "beginning of a word"? Observe th:, THT:, 8# and Ti, where anudatta case-endings are not beginnings of words. 
According to Bhattoji Dikshita this is a vyavasthita-vibhasha; in this wise. There will necessarily be svarita (1) where a long f is the single substi tute of (F+t) or of two short (2) where there is purva-rupa by the application of Tan Ka (VI. 1. 109). There will be udatta where a long vowel comes in. Thus in विश्वम् - बीदम् in वी ज्योतिर्हदये, the long tis substituted for two short r's. This substitution of a long f for two short y's is technically called girl Where there is Pras'lesha, the long is necessarily syarita. Similarly when there is a ll i, e. thc peculiar sandhi taught in VI. 1. 109. Thus #517, firsurtra il So also where there is : afat i.e. the substitution of a semi-vowel in the room of an udatta or svarita vowel, as op 11 The above rules about svarita are thus summarised in the Prátisakhyas : Paraty H iragay all But where a long is substituted as a single substitute for T+f (one of the 's being long), there it must always be acute. As of n atura (Rig. 1. 190. 4). The words para + fut are compounded into fitraa The word PR Locative singular is finally acute by VI. 1. 171. fa is from the Divadi root at, and has lost its accent by VIII. 1, 28. 
मलोपः प्रातिपदिकान्तस्य ॥ ७॥ पदानि ॥ न, लोपः, प्रातिपदिक, अन्तस्य । वृत्तिः ॥प्रातिपदिकस्य परस्य योन्यो नकारस्तस्य लोपो भवति॥ वार्मिकम् ॥ महो नलोपप्रतिषेधो वक्तव्यः । 
7. The at the end of a Nominal-stom, which is a Pada (I. 4. 17), is elided. 
The word en 'of a Pada' is understood in this sätra. Thus cru, upam, a , a, at:, trw : 11 The Nominal stem gets the designa tion of Pada, before these affixes, by I. 4 17. 
Why do we say 'of a Pratipadika or Nominal stem'? Observe THE 11 Here it is a verb, the 3rd Per. Sg.Imperfect () of the root 211 
Why do we say 'at the end'? If the word o f had not been used in the sätra, then the stra would have stood thus Feat Strana; and as the word orj is understood here, the sätra would have meant, there is elision of 7, where ever it may be, of a Pada called stem. So that the 7 of 
a n would also have required elision. In fact, the genitive case here in fe is not sthana shashthi, but viseshaņa shashthi, a Ty TAPET TA Ataget 11 
Q. But even if you use the word wat in the sätra, it is compounded with the word theft, and the sense of the sQ tra will be " which is at the 
1546 
ACCENT. 
(BK. VIII. C11. II. $. 9 
end of a pratipadika, which (pratipadika) is a portion of a pada" &c. and not " which is at the end of a pada". So that the rulc will not apply to Actat but will apply to Tri &c? Ans. The word qarah is not compounded, with the word om in the satra. It is used without any case-affix, on the analogy of Chhandas usage. In fact, it is in the genitive case, the affix being elided by VII. 1. 39. 
Vart: The prohibition must be stated with regard to the elision of the # of my 11 As :, In the case-affix g is luk-elided by VII. 1. 23, the pratyaya-lakshana is prohibited by I. 1. 63, and hence the 4 of 9 is changed to [ by VIII. 2. 69. Tirana, 
For the rules VIII. 2. 68 and 69 by which the final of 6767 is changed to ļ, are asiddha with regard to this present rule requiring elision of , hence this vartika. 
There is no necessity of this vårtika, for the subsequent rules VIII. 2. 69, 68 will debar r it Ans. But and are considered asiddha for the pur poses of #elision. The & and I would have debarred #elision, had they otherwise found no scope. But they have their scope. Q. Where have they their scope? Ans. In the penultimate i.e. in the preceding the qui Q. The very fact that the author has used the word or in the satra VIII. 2 68, shows that does not replace but all Ans. If so, then will find scope in the Vocative, where is retained by VIII, 2. 8, and it will be this which will be replaced by 5, as and so also front fame! 
The word teen is a Baliuvrihi (II. 2. 24), the Vocative affix is elided (VI. 1. 68), and the changed to by VIII. 2. 68, and it is changed to " (VI. 1. 114). In the p is not elided by the option of the Vartika under VIII. 2. 8. 
To remove these objections, they say, the word 467 which is used in VIII. 2. 68 is in nominative singular without the elision of y, and it is to be repeated as 195 
The one indicates the exact forın, showing that the is not elided ; and by the second word the ris ordained for this final al 
a ferrumit: 15.1 gefa 11 a, fs, Fraait: ll. वृत्तिः॥ परता संबुजीच नकारलोपो न भवति । पार्मिकम् ॥ गाइसरपदे प्रतिषस्य प्रतिषेधो वनव्यः ॥ पा॥वा नपुंसकानामिति वक्तव्यम् । 
8. (But such 1) is not clided in the Locativo und Vocative Singular. 
This debars the elision of , which otherwise would have taken place by the preceding sútra. The examples of non-elision, of in the Locative singular are to be found in the Vedas. As You (Rig. I. 164. 39), nahra, of hy Here the sign of the Locative, namely, t (ft) is elided by VII. 
1. 39. In the Vocative Singular, the r is not elided, as , 
BK. VIII. CI. II. .9) 
THE ELISION OF # il 
1547 
Q. When r or the Vocative is elided, the preceding stem is no longer a Pratipadika, and the stem does not get the designation of op before the affix but is *, hence where is the necessity of making the present prohibitory rule, when the elision of would not have taken place in the Locative and Vocative singular, by any rule ? 
Ans. The very fact of the prohibition of the elision of, as contained in this aphorism, indicates by implication (jnapaka), that a word retains the designation of pratipadika, though an affix' has been elided after it and though such elided affix may produce its effect (I. 2. 45 read with I. 1. 62). Nor will such elided affix give the designation of Bha () to such a stem. Thus राज्ञः पुरुषः-राजपुरुषः, here the is elided by considering the word राजन् as a prátipadika, even after the elision of the Genitivc affix in the compound, and it is not a Bha, which would have required the elision of by VI. 4. 134. 
Vart:--Prohibition of the prohibition must be stated, when the Lo cative word is followed by another word in a compound. That is, when a compound is a Locative Tatpurusha, the 2 is elided : as, to fapt 4 ** fam: 11 
In M IC! the first member n does not retain its by the present satra, because the whole compound, as such, is in the Vocative case, and not the word 771 In fact, there can be no compound, which in its analysis, will give the first member as a Vocative word. 
Vårt:-Optionally so in the neuter nouns. As n, it! मादुपधायाश्च मतोवों ऽयवादिभ्यः ॥९॥ पदानि ॥ म, आत, उपधायाः, च, ra:, TỦ, 4 vang: 
वृत्तिः ॥ मकारान्ताद् मकारोपधारवान्तादवोंपधाचोत्तरस्य मसोर्ष इत्ययमादेशो भवसि यशाविन्यस्तु परतो TWE NI 
9. For the # of the affix #a is substituted a, if the stem ends in or m (and ) or if these are in the pen ultimate position; but not after tre and the rest. 
Alter a stem ending in or having as its penultimate letter, and aster a stem ending in or HT, or having these letters as its penultimate, there is substituted for the x of 17 11 First after stems ending in /, as fint (977), 17(6+1). Secondly t penultimate : as otan, m art 11 Thirdly a stem ending in 8 or of, as TT, TT, ugra, Athari Fourthly 
or or in the penultimate : as-TOIT, IT , THIS II 
Why do we say "# or ending or A or penultimate"? Observe M ATA, TOATE W Why do we say "with the exception of 47 &c”? Obscrve 
ATAN, MERATA, Jina II 
The following is the list of a te words. 
1548 
MATUP. 
[BK. VIII. CI. II.S. 12 
1. यव, 2. दस्मि, 3. उर्मि, 4. भूमि, 5. कपि, 6.कुचा , 7. पशा, 8. क्षा, 9. प्राक्षा । These words cither end in # and m or have these as their penultimate. 10. धषि, II. ध्वनि, 12, सजि . These are exceptions to VIII. 2. 15. 13. हरित 14. ककुत, I5 गरुत् ।। These are exceptions to VIII. 2. 10. 16. T, I7. मधु, 18. दुम, 19. मण्ड, 20. धुम ।। These are exceptions to VIII. 2. II. 
This is an akritigana. Wherever in a word, the r of het is not chan. ged to , though the rules require it, that word should be classified under यवादि class. In the secondary word नार्मतं (- नृमत इ), the change has not taken place, because the mis here a Bahiranga, the real vowel being eli 
The word mrt in the satra is the Ablative of A, i.e, of +99; it is a Sa mahara Dvandva of these two letters. 
. शयः ॥ १०॥ पदानि | झयः॥ वृत्तिः॥सयन्तादुसरस्थ मतो इत्ययमादेशो भवति । 
____10. The v is substituted for the p of मत् after a stem ending in a mute consonant. 
As भग्निचिस्यान् मामः, उपविवस्वान् घोषः, विस्वान् बलाहकः, इन्द्रो मरुस्थान, पहान 
संज्ञायाम् ॥ ११॥ पदानि ॥ संज्ञायाम् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ संज्ञायां विषये मतो रत्ययमादेवो भवति ॥ 
__11. The w is substituted for म of मत, when the word so formed is a Name. 
. As महीवती, कपीवती, पीवती, सुनीवती ॥ For long vowel, see VI. 3. 120. 
आसन्दीवदष्ठषिश्चक्रीवत्कक्षीवदुमणुधर्मण्वती ॥१२॥ पदानि ॥ सन्दीवत, अष्ठीवत्, चक्रीवत, कक्षीवत्, रुमण्वत्, चर्मण्वती॥ वृत्तिः ॥ भासन्दीव मष्ठीवत् चक्रीवत् कसीवद् रुमण्वत् चर्मण्यती इत्येतानि संज्ञायां निपात्यन्ते । 
___ 12. The following Names are irregularly formed : lusandivat, ashthivat, chakrivat, kakshivat, rumanvat, charman 
vati. 
The change of a tor in these was obtained from the last sätra. The irregularity consists in the substitutions of stems. मासन्दीपत, is from the stem भासन which is here changed to भासन्नी | As भासन्दीवान् मामः,भासन्दीव महित्यलम। As in the following bloka : 
भासन्दीवाति धान्याई रुक्मिणं हरितवजम् । 
भवं बवन्ध सारणं देवेभ्यो जनमेजयः ॥ When not a name, we have भासनवान् ॥ Others say, that there is a separate and distinct stem भासन्दी, as in the sentence भोदुम्बरी रामासन्दी भवति ॥ The change of a to z after this word would take place regularly by the last satra: its mention here, according to these authors, is merely explanatory. 2. भष्ठीवत् is from 
BK. VIII. C11. II . 15 ) 
MATUP. 
1549 
Het which is changed to set 11 As for the name of a particular portion of bocly; the kncc-joints. Otherwise STRELITE "I 3. ita is from which is ch anged to चक्री, as चक्रीवान् राजा॥ Otherwise we have चक्रवान् ॥ चक्रीवन्ति सरोहविधी मानि भवन्ति is a Vedic example. It means सारस्पते सोनामानि सदो हविर्धानानि, न खेकत्रा negara, a Tatara 7 
1 114. 7 is from it, there is vocalisation of a and the lengthening is by VI. 4.2. HITTT is the nameof a Rishi. Otherwise we have, 279TL 11 5. F ET is from top which is changed to 
9. Otherwise we have mora II Others say, that there is a distinct word , and the q is not elided, but changed to all Or that the affix aq takes the augment 3 11 6. funt is from me, there is non-elision of 7 and its change to all Or at has taken 7 augment. The Charmanvati is the name of a river. Otherwise we have not 11 
_उदन्वानुदधौ च ॥ १३ ॥ पदानि ॥ उदन्वान, उदधी, च॥ वृत्तिः॥ उपन्यानिस्युश्कशनस्य मतावुइन्भायो निपात्यते उदधावर्षे संज्ञायां विषये ॥ 
13. The word 39 ra is irregularly formed, in the sense of "a sea". 
It is derived from 39*'water' with the affix it rire is the name of a Rishi, because he controlled the rains, it rained at his command. It also means occan or that in which water is held, like were &c. The affix fe is added by III. 3 93, and changed to at by VI. 3. 58, and thus we have 
: 1 Why do we say "when meaning a sea"? Observe 
: 'a pot having water'. Here the main idea is not that of "holding or containing", but simply the general fact of possessing water: a human being may also possess water in the same way. 
राजन्वान्सौराज्ये ॥ १४॥ पदानि ॥ राजन्वान्, सौराज्ये ॥ वृत्तिः ॥राजवानिति निपात्यते, सौराज्ये गन्यमाने । 
14. Also thrETT, when the sense is of a good government. 
The kingdom whose king is good is called Untu, ant tu The aflix tire is used here in the sense of HRT or praise. Otherwise TATU 
grire: IPX1 Tha il grei, f, T: 11 वृत्तिः ॥ छन्दसि विषये वर्णान्ता फान्साघोत्तरस्य मसोईस्वं भवति ॥ 
15. In the Chhandas x is substituted for the # of ha, when the stem ends in (or) or Ill 
To take some examples of a stem ending in , as forma SUSTA wala; BRETT FT; PITA 7 yetfa; afar; TNT HUR (HTTLE from रवि with vocalisation). सरस्वतीवान, भारतीवान्, धीवांधकः ॥ As all rules have 
1550 
नुद् AUGMENT. 
[BK. VIII. CH. II. S. 17 
optional force in the Chhandas, we have no change here सार्षिमन्तम, ऋषिमान्, परतीमान् मयं पावापृथिवीमन्तं ॥ Ofsteins ending inr we have गीर्वान, धूर्वान, भाशीर्वान् । 
अनो नुत् ॥ १६ ॥ पदानि ॥ अनः, नुत् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ छन्दसात वर्तते ऽनन्तादुत्तरस्य मतार्नुडागमो भवति छन्दास विषये ॥ 
16. The affix #q gets the augment , in the Chhandas, after a stem ending in अन् ॥ 
As अक्षण्वन्तः कर्णवन्तः सखायः; अस्थन्वन्तं यदनस्थाविर्भात (Rig. I. 164.4), अक्षण्वता लागलेन ; धीर्षण्वती, मूद्धन्वती ॥ 
The word भक्षण्वत is thus formed : भाक्ष + मतुए - भम् + अन् + मन् (मनहर is substituted for the final of akshi by VII. I. 76) - भक्षमत (the is elided by 
VIII. 2.7). Now we add the augment नु। If this augment is added to मतुए, as Hey then it becomes a portion of #, and this would be changed to e by VIII. 3.9 read with I. I. 54, and not the letter , because - intervenes. If we add this augment to the end of the stem, then in भक्षण्वता &c. we cannot change it to or because of the prohibition in VIII. 4. 37, and the augment being , the would be changed to by VIII. 3. 7 in gurare: &c (VIII. 2. 17). The first view, however, is the correct one and the difficulty in its acceptance is obviated by नुटोऽसिद्धस्यात् तस्य च वस्वं न भवति ततः परस्य च भवति : as shown above. 
The augment being considered as asiddha, is not changed to 4, but the letter following it, is so changed. Thus भान् (VII. I. 76)+मत् -मक्ष + मत (the 7 of the stem is elided by VIII. 2. 7). Add the augment now, and we have भक्ष+न्मत् ॥ The augment according to VIII. 2. I, is asiddha, so that according to VIII. 2. 9, x is substituted for , and not for , as would have been required by I. I. 54. 
नादू घस्य ॥ १७॥ पदानि ॥ नात, घस्य । वृत्तिः॥ नकारान्तादुत्तरस्य घसंज्ञकस्य नुडागमो भवति छन्दसि विषये ॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ भूरिदानम् तुइ वक्तव्यः ॥ वाः ॥रथिन ईकारान्तादेशो घे परतः ॥ 
17. In the Chhandas, the affixes are and re ceive the augment नुद् after a stem in नू ॥ 
The affixes सरप् and तमप् are called घ॥ Thus सुपथिन् +तर-मुपथि+तर (VIII. 2.7)-सुपार्थि+ नूतर (VIII. 2. 17)=सुपचिन्तः ॥ So also दस्युहन्तमः ॥ 
Vart:-The augment K is added to these affixes after fit; as भूरितवत्तरः (III. 2.74, the affix is पनि ). 
Vart:-Long t is the substitute of the final of रथिन् before तर and तम॥ The word form is formed by the affix tra in the sense of # The final q is first elided by VIII.2.7, and then for the short off the long f is substituted by the present vartika. If the long f were substituted for the final a of the as fuf+, then this long of being asiddha, it could not be compounded by ekadesa with the preceding into f, and the form would always remain futa: il As rotati, and rotari tangu Or this f may be considered to have come after स्य in the sense of मतुर ॥ BK. VIII. CH. 11. $ 19 ) 
CHANGE OF I TO II 
Issi 
कृपो रोलः ॥ १८॥ पदानि ॥ कृपः, रः, लः ॥ वृत्तिः ॥को रेफस्य लकारादेवो भवति । वार्तिकम् ॥ कृपणकृपाणकपीटकर्परादयोपि पेरेव द्रष्टव्याः ॥ वा० ॥ बालमूललधसुरालमङ्गुलीनां वा रोगमापातहति वक्तव्यम् ॥ पा० ॥ कपिलकारीनां सज्ञाछन्नसाय रोलमापद्यतइति वक्तव्यम् ॥ 
18. For ther of the root कृप, there is substituted c॥ 
The there merely indicates the sound, and includes both the single consonant and the same consonant of the vowel op 11 So also with #11 So that for the single there is substituted æ; and for when a portion of the is substituted, i.e. we becomes I Thus = RTL, as in the sätra ft RY: (I. 3.93). कल्मा, कल्मारी, कल्मारः ॥ क्लामा, क्लसवान् ॥ 
The word $1 is derived froin the root ap by vocalisation, as it has been enumerated in Bhidadi class (कपेः संप्रसारणं च III. 3. 104). The vocalised root-form is not to be taken here, as it is a lakshanika form. 
___Vart:--The words कृपण, कृपाण, कृपीट, कर्पर &c, are also from क्रम् ॥ Or by the Uņadi diversity, the change does not take place. 
Vart:-Optionally so of बाल &c. As, बाल: or बारः, मूलम् or मूरम्, लघु or रघु, मसुर" or अमुलः, भलम् or मरम्, मालिः or महरिः ॥ 
Vart:-Optionally so in the Vedas, or when names, of कपिलका &c, as कपिरकः or कपिलकः, सिल्पिलीकम् or तिप्पिरीकम्, लोमाणि or रोमाणि, पांरारं or पांशुल, कर्म or कल्म, शुक: or शुक्ल:, कल्मषं, कर्मषं । 
Some say 'cand o are one': and operations regarding may be performed with regard to fill __उपसर्गस्यायती ॥ १६॥ पदानि ॥ उपतर्गस्य, अयतौ ॥ वृत्तिः । अयती परत उपसर्गस्थ यो रेफस्तस्य लकार म.दतो भवति ।। 
19. is substituted for the r of a Preposition, when अयते follows. 
___Thus पलायते, प्लायते ।। Here arises the queston, does the word अयति qualify the word g, or does it qualify the word Preposition. In the first view, the satra would mean, " the immediately followed by spala is changed to "li But as a matter of fact, I is never immediately followed by mafa II. Thus in प्र+मयति or परा+भया, the letter w and मा intervene respectively. The ekadesa sandhi of these, will make immediately followed by squa; but the ekådesa, being sthànivat will prevent it. This difficulty however, is overcome by the maxim येन माण्यवधानं क्षेम व्यवहितेऽपि वचनमामाण्यात, for otherwise the rule will be useless. For the same reasons, परि+भयते-पल्ययते, though here र intervenes between t and भयते ॥ In short, the intervention of one letter is considered as no intervention. 
In the secon:1 view, the sâtra would mean when a Preposition is follo wed by ayat then its ( is changed to , and none of these difficulties will arise 
1552 
CHIANGED TO 
11 
(BK. VIII. C1. II. $. 21 
with regard to the above forms. But then would arise a fresh difficulty, for the 
of at would also require to be changed into 11 Some say, that afar is never followed by भयति: while others hold that the form प्रत्ययंत प्रति+मयते) is valid. According to the first view, the valid form is great. The of the Prepositions 
& and fata is changed to (, but this is not changed to m, because it is asiddha: thus we have the forins faraona, stoop 11 But there is a preposition for also ther of which is changed to , as pranit See VII. 2. 46. According to the Siddhanta Kaumudi, there is a Preposition | also, which gives great all 
प्रो यकि॥२०॥ पदानि ॥ प्रः, यकि। वृत्तिः ॥ गइस्चतत्व धातो रेफस्व लकार भाविधी भवति यति परतः॥ 
20. is substituted for the r of q in the In tensive. 
__Thus निगिन्यते, निगिल्येते, निगिल्यन्ते ॥ The root takes वह, when the sense of contempt is conveyed, with regard to the action denoted by the root, (III. 1. 24). mii forefa fram 
Some say that a of the satra includes the two roots ( tra Tud. 117) and 5 (gourfer Kry. 28). Others hold that the Tudadi gpl is only taken and not the Kryadi. The Kryadi gri never takes the Intensive form, no example of which is to be met in literature. 
Why do we say in the Intensive? Observe partita with the Passive afix यक्॥ 
fa HRT II 880 Tartat llafer, feant. वृत्तिः ॥ मजादौ पत्यये परसो पो रेफस्व विभाषा लकारादेखो भवति ।। 
21. The t of gri is optionally changed to a. be fore an affix beginning with a vowel. 
As farina or affar, fartup or farsitu, P : or forreu 
This is a vyavasthita-vibhasha, the optional forms have particular meanings. Thus Tri meaning 'neck' is always with ; while to: 'poison' is always with 
In fata or face , the elision of Por is considered sthanivad, and hence this option, though the actual affix begins with a 11 Obj.-The sthani vad-bhava rule is invalid licrc by VIII. 2. 1. Aus. The rule of docs not hold good with regard to the rules of संयोगादिलोप, लल and पल on the maxim “tea ITT: HammaTURI 
Or the will be first changed to , as being antaranga, and then the for will be elided. 
The forms fora, rint: arc either from the Kryadi root gri, or l-change has not taken place on the maxim धातोः स्वकपमहणे तत्मत्यवे विज्ञानम् and as the 
BK. VIII. C11. 11. $.24) 
ELISION OF FINAL 
: 
1553 
affixes up and m: are not affixes which are ordained after a verb, but are affixes added to nouns, licnice the my change has not taken place. In fact the words 'an affix beginning with a vowel' in the satra, means "a verbal affix beginning with a vowel," and not a noun affix. These are the Dual and Plural of the Nominative case of y formed with the affix per il 
OT ETENI: BPII T a n :, , - ut: 11 वृणिः ॥ परित्येतस्य यो रेफस्तस्य पशब्दे श ष परसो विभाषा लकार भादेशो भवति ॥ पर्तिकम् ॥ योग चोति वक्तव्यम ।। 
22. The F of art is changed to , before gha and anka. 
As pria: or qrqi, que: or q ili The word a here means the word form 4, and not the technical & off and Fang I See III. 3. 84 by which 87 is replaced by qui 
Vårt:—So also, it must be stated, before the word on: 11 As, gftatai or afisari: 11 
संयोगान्तस्य लोपः॥ २३॥ पदानि । संयोगान्तस्य, लोपः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ संयोगान्तस्य पदस्थ लोपो भवति ।। 
23. When a word ends in a double consonant, the last consonant is dropped. 
As गोमान, पवमान, कृतवान् and हसवान In अयान, भूवाम् , the s though subsequent in order, does not prevent the operation of this rule, because it is asiddha (VIII. 2. 66). Thus i916+ +&(VII. 1. 70), 19 (VI. r. 68) 
real (VIII. 2. 66) (VI11. 2. 23) ian(VI. 4. 8). But though the stay does not debar lopa, it debars the wy change. By VIII. 2. 39, the final & re quired to be changed to a letter of HC class; & prevents it. As 40, 995 dl 
For my is ordained even where the present family applies and where it does not apply. Thus it is ordained in sent where the present sätra applies, as well as in tot where this s@tra does not apply. But the HR rule (VIII. 2. 39) covers the whole ground of 847, hence is a rule were not debarred by 549, the latter would find no scope. Therefore 544 debars are to justify its existence, but it does not debar Ban q : for it still has scope left to it else where. 
In porn and AT formed from + and Ag +979, by changing x and to zand , we have some + 4 and 967+, where I and [ are final in a pada, and so they require to be elided. It is, however, not donc, because you substitution is a Bahiranga operation, as it depends upon two words and consequently, is considered asiddha for the purposes of this rule, which depends on one word only 
Why do we say 'of a Pada'? Observe Trat, T ill 
1554 
ELISION OF म्॥ 
[ BK. VIII. Cl. II. 8.35 
- 
ग़त्सस्य ॥ २४॥ पदानि ॥ रात् , सस्य ॥ वृत्तिः ।। संयोगान्तपदस्य यो रेफस्तस्मादुत्तरस्यान्त्यस्य सकारस्य लोपो भवति । 
• 24. Of a word ending in a conjunct consonant, only F is elided, if it comes after T; (but any other con sonant coming after r is not elided). 
Thus ww: and Hir: for spre and are the Aorist of pc and at in the following passages : गोभिरक्षा, प्रत्यम्पमस्ताः ॥ The ई is not added as a 
Vedic diversity. See VII. 3.97. 
So also argi, pag: for high and forget it Here by VI. I. III, the € + of माह+भम् is changed to 7, which is followed by by I. I.SI. 
___ Though the final स् would have been elided even after t by VIII. 2. 23, the special mention of g after shows, that this is a niyama rule. So that any other letter than & following after will not be dropped. Thus from कई+विवर (III. 2. 177), here t is not elided, though final in a pada, but is chan. ged to a guttural by VIII. 2. 30, and to t by VIII. 4.56. Also भमाई from इज in me the fag G) is elided by VI. 3. 18; there is vriddhi by VII, 2. 114, the is changed to ç by VIII. 2. 36, which is changed to VIII. 4. 53 and finally to (चर)। 
धि च ॥ २५॥ पदानि ॥ धि, च ॥ वृत्तिः॥ धकागदी प्रत्यये परतः सकारस्य लोपो भवति । 
Karika:--घि सकारे सिपी लोपथकातीति प्रयोजनम् । 
माशाध्वं तु कथं जशवं सकारस्य भविष्यति ॥ . सर्वमेवं प्रसिद्धं स्थातिमापि न विद्यते । लाभापि न मूर्दन्ये महणं सेटि दुष्यति ॥ घसिमसोन सिध्येत तस्मास्सिामहणं न तत् । 
छान्नसो वर्णलोपो था वयष्कारमधरे । 25. The æ is dropped before an affix beginning with ध॥ 
As भलविध्वम्, मलविङ्कम, भपविध्वम्, भपविडम् for भलविरुध्वम् and भपविरुध्वम् ॥ Had this & (off ) not been elided; then would be first changed to g, and then to a letter of C class (VIII. 4. 53), would never be heard even optionally, though so required by VIII, 3. 79, but the forms would be always 
with r, as मलावितम् &c. ॥ 
From an ishti, the elision of t is confined to the स् of the Aorist सिन्, and not to any other & Thus # is not elided in an in tara afiscdit rare (हे घिर पलितं सच् चकाद्धि शोभस्वेत्यर्थः). It is the Imperative of चकाम् the सिप is changed to fa, and fe to (VI. 4. 101), and a to by VIII. 4. 53. Similarly it does not apply to generala, where # is changed to sand then to a (VI. 1. 114) 
BK. VIII. CH. II. §. 25 ) 
ELISION OF 
U 
1555 
T II The elision of in ros: from with it, and in a from we in the Imperative with t, is a Vedic diversity. But according to Patanjali T is the proper form; while in qua the antaranga debars this bahi ranga & elision. 
Obj.-.-.If so, how do you form sursi, by the elision of of ur; for & would not be clided? Ans.—The x is not here elided but changed to my letter, by VIII. 2. 39. Obj. If so, & may always be changed to sy letter, and there is no need of eliding it; in pronouncing, it will make no difference, whether you pronounce with one consonant or two, e.g. A or min Moreover by so doing, you will shorten the sQtra VIII. 3. 78, by omitting the word T from it. For the forms like 1774, , will be evolved regu larly by changing of the to ; and the x after it will be changed to 1, and then changed to y by TORT (VIII. 4. 53). Ans. So far it will be all right, but in o Aorist we shall never get the alternative forms of T4 &c, though we may get the form man(VIII. 3. 79). Therefore, the word hy should be taken. 
Obj. - Iffer is to be taken here, then the # of and they will not be dropped, and we shall not get the forms anys and cavi in the passages afte 
orta à, and movi i FUT: 1 Therefore, the present sätra should not be confined to my only. Ans.We shall explain efni by saying, that it is a word derived from 80, and so also meat from the root roll 
(N. B.-The word afhe: is generally thus derived; 7€ + 18+fo(II. 4. 39) +fa (VI. 4. 105)-{+ f(VIII. 2. 26). Had the present rule been confined to f&, the could not have been elided by VIII. 2. 26. See VI. 4. 100, where these two forms are developed). Or we may explain these forms as Vedic irregularity, by which letters are sometimes dropped, and so gę and have lost their ! That letters are sometimes dropped in the Chhandas, we see in passages like the following कारमध्यरे for निष्कारमध्वरे; graceprat for ; m m 7: for pri ; pourrait pro or $75011 fragt: gut: 11 
The above discussion is summarised in the following 
Karika:- nit ferhar a la girtin, "This rule is confined to the elision of the off only, for the sake of preserving the in Timer" : 
HTUST ? a rarara # "How then do you form our by the elision of? The is not elided but changed to a ry letter"... . 
** A FIT, DIE WIRA ftudiofar of the gora il “ If this be so, then let to come every where, for there is no difference in sound, moreover this will shorten VIII. 3. 78 by omitting the word from it. The 
cannot come every where, as the difficulty will be in the Aorist ". Ofer muilof सिधेत, तस्मात सिरहणं मतत् । “The forms सग्धिः and बग्धां could not be formed 
1556 
ELISION OF 
11 
[BK. VIII. CH. II. $ 28 
from yg and we if the elision of were confined to feer. Hence for should not be read into this sūtra." 
छान्दसो वर्णलोपो वा यष्कारमध्वरे " The elision ofe in सन्धिः and बग्धां will be explained as a Vedic anomaly, for letters are often dropped in Vedic forms, as in इकतारमध्वरे instead of निष्कारमध्वरे ॥" 
Hot glas II & II Taifa il put, ale i वृत्तिः ॥सल उत्सरस्य सकारस्य सलि परतो लोपो भवति ॥ 
26. The is elided when it is preceded by a jhal consonant (any consonant except semi-vowels and nasals), and is followed by an affix beginning with a jhal consonant. 
Thus मभित for ममिस्त, ममिया' for भभितस्याः॥ Soalso भत्ति , मच्छिस्थाः, reg, The last example may also be explained by VII. 4. 49; the elision of the # of for being considered as asiddha, the g of the root is chan ged to 11 
Why do we say 'of a jhal consonant'? Observe water and Fert: u Why do we say followed by a jhal consonant ? Observe S ONRA, PATET I 
The æ of this satra refers also to the æ of ra ; no other p is elided. As the FTAT ; ETTE FYTT9 11 Here the æ of fitar and furi, though preceded by a jhal letter, could never be elided as they do not form portion of one word. 
ETWA II Rull Tefal FIT, BTCT वृत्तिः॥ इस्वान्तामादुचरस्थ सकारस्थलोपो भवति झलि परतः ॥ 
27. The F is elided, before an affix beginning with a jhal consonant, when it is preceded by a stem ending in a short vowel. 
As waa; H9T: #1 Why do we say after a short vowel stem? Observe Au, THIE # Why do we say 'after a stem? Observe 54ti, etter, विषुः अपाविटाम् and भपविषुः ॥ Why do we say before an affix beginning with a jhal". Observe th, 911 
This lopa is also of the fe, therefore not here fiuti, era il Here to the word ft is added the affix on (V. 4. 18), and then the comparative affixes i and 4 with mra. (V. 4. II). This is not dropped. 
rfall 85 | Tara 1 :, fil पतिः॥र उत्तरस्थ सकारस्थ लोपो भवति ईटि परतः ॥ 
28. The ag is dropped after the augment , if after this at the augment a follows. 
Thus the Aorist - stem of is ANI ( III, 1. 44; VII. 2. 35 ), the Personal ending & gets the augment by VII. 3. 96; and by the present 
TI 
BK. VIII. CH. Il $. 30] 
GUTTURAL CHANGE. 
1557 
sätra , this p between r and f is dropped, and we have seria; so also, aria, 
ht, NT, MAITI 
Why do we say after the augment c'? Observe warfa, ersten Why when the augment f follows ? Observe saftig trag: Il 
A F: 
l l RE || Tara Il Fiti, ertraut, gra, all वृत्तिः ॥ परस्यान्त वा संयोगः झलि परतो वा सयोगस्तयोः सकारककारयोलोपो भवति ॥ - वार्तिकम् ॥ संलि सहीति वक्तव्यम् ।। 
29. The F or $, when initial in a conjunct con sonant, is dropped, before a jhal afix, and at the end of a word. 
A conjunct consonant, having for as its first member, when coming at the end of a l'ada, or when followed by a jhal beginning asfix, loses its For all Thus from the root oft we have : and rare before the jhal affix # and pant; the substitution of art for r is considered asiddha for this purpose (VIII. 2. 1). So also argiant at the end of a Pada. Similarly #7: 79T, TISTE from EU I So also with initial , as from 7; so also wel, TETTE, HEUTE U 
Vart:- It should be rather stated that "before a jhal affix included in the pratyahara "The is a pratyahara formed with the & of (III.1.5) and the of ET (III. 4. 78). It thus includes all the krit affixes, and dhatu affixes i. e. affixes which come after a verb and not the Taddhita or the Femi nine affixes. This Vartika applies to all the preceding satras of this sub-division and is of use in the following places. 
गिरोड भोधिाईटरांच हपस्यः काष्ठस्थिर। कुम्चायति मा स्मैषु सवादीनि भवस्थिति। 
So that in fort: there should not be the optional # by VIII. 2. 21. In TH18:, the g of one is not elided before e as required by VIII. 2.. 25. In fer the rule VIII. 2. 27 does not apply. In rey: the rule VIII. 2. 26 does not apply. In ETFUTTI the rule VIII. 2. 29 is non-applicable. In get the rule VIII. 2. 30 does not apply. In gå: (Tfa) there is not lengthening by VIII. 2. 77. Thus B FTAT II Here would require to be elided as initial in a consonant, followed by a jhal consonant ll 1895 is formed by adding fefq to Tall But according to Patanjali, there can be formed no valid word from up with e, a fortiori, no such word can be formed as AT90EFUTAT ( Teuf fagfa ). 
In afara, pra, the g and are not elided, because is a Bahir anga substitute and asiddha, and the word IERI #799 are not considered as Pada, ending in a conjunct consonant. 
Why do we say "of and "? Observe' affh, poffe Why do we say 'initial in a conjunct consonant'? Observe qa: 11 
Why do we say at the end of a word '? Observe prat, : # st: : 1130 || gata i at:, : 11 वृत्तिः ॥ चवर्गस्य कवदेशो भवति मलि परतः पदान्ते च ॥ 
1558 
CHANGED TO $11 
(BK. VIII. CH. II. $ 32 
30. A Guttural is substituted for a Palatal, beforo a jhal affix, or at the end of a word. 
Thus पत्ता, पत्तम, पत्नण्यम् and मापनप from पच्॥ Similarly बना बक्तम, image and all 
In at the feminine in ere of y ( ) by IV. 1. 4 list, the sya palatal is followed by q a jhal letter, and therefore, it should be changed to a guttural. It is not so, because Panini himself uses this word, in this form, in satra III. 2. 59. Or because the rule is confined to raffixes only. Or the root is go without and with a penultimate 7, and not q as we find in Dhatu patha me miferarft arat: ( Bhu. 200 ). With the elision of we have Fagfafa: before the firing affix (VI. 4. 24) : in Past Part, and mit 11 In ragning we cannot have the optional form of the Nishtha by I. 2. 21, because the elision of the penultimate by VI. 4. 24 preceded on the basis of the affix being ac, thus 34+9= 2+ 1 This elision of th, will not make the root for the purposes of the application of rule I. 2. 21, on the max im समिपासलक्षणो विधिरनिमित्तं तद्विघातस्थ॥ In fact, one of the reasons on which this maxim is based, is this very fact, that the elision of a does not make the root 
Ty for the purposes of making the affix non-fann at The asfix for takes the augment Runder VII. 2. 9 (vârt). The word is formed from this root by Pero affix (III. 2. 59): the final is first elided by VIII. 2. 23, and then is changed to by VIII. 2. 62. The rule VI. 4. 24 thus finds no scope here. 
In this view of the case we say many is an irregular form of this root kunch, because it is so exhibited in III. 2. 59. There the anusvara and parasavarna change of this a to by VIII. 3. 24 being considered asiddha, there is no palatal , and hence there is no guttural change. : Till spill all t., T: 
वृत्तिः ॥ इकारस्य कारादेशो भवति सति परतः पाते च॥ 
31. ois substituted for before a jhal letter and at the end of a word. 
Thus aru, etorn, Erasmul The R is not added by VII. 2. 48, WHITE, FORSTE by form (III. 2. 63, VI. 3.137 and VIII. 3. 56) TRT, 94, AS, 4897, facere MUI. 2. 64) from all and 4, with the affixes free and fou For the of these affixes there is substituted by VIII. 2. 40, and this is changed to r by VIII.4.41, before which is dropped the first o by VIII. 3. 13. For the in 
er either is substituted by VIII. 2. 39, or < by VIII. 4. 56. 
Trata: 11 32 qera 1 cari, unt, a: II वृत्तिःकारार्धाताईकारस्थ पकायदेशो भवति सलि परतः पान्ते ॥ 
ci 32. Of a root beginning with ", the g is substitu ted for . before a jhal letter or when final in a Padu. 
BK. VIII. CH. II. $. 33 ) 
CHANGED TO 11 
1559 
For the final of a p-beginning root, y is substituted under similar circumstances. As my, men, my, 184, gt, erga, 779894, ingy, from 
and u For the art of the affixes &c. # is substituted by VIII. 2. 40, before which, the o becomes or by VIII. 4 53. For the q in YT is substitu ted out by VIII. 2. 39, or E by VIII. 4. 56, and becomes y by VIII. 2. 37. . 
Why do we say "of a root beginning with "7. Observe urg, 
The force of the genitive case in mat: is not to make it in apposition with the word it, but it has the force of denoting a part as related to the whole: so that it means "the word which begins with and forms part of a root, for the of such a part is substituted ." What does follow from it? The lettera is substituted in it also, which begins with all For without the above explanation (धातारपवयो यो दादिमस्तापयवस्थहकारस्थ &c), the w would have come in examples like TF , without the augment A, but not where there was the augmentu Moreover, that it is an ayatür TT will appear necessary in satra VIII. 2. 37. 
If it has the force of denoting a 'portion or member', how do you expla in the forms oat, frge, for here no portion is taken but the whole word? This will be explained on the maxim of T TT: "An operation which affects something on account of some special designation, which for certain reasons attaches to the latter, affects likewise that which stands alone, and to which therefore, just because the reasons for it do not exist, that special designation does not attach". (T 97 PARTE Or we may explain the sQtra, by saying 'that root which begins with x in its original enunciation in Dhatupatha!? Thus in original enunciation the root is all not beginning with If a De rivative root be formed from it like वामलिम (सामालिहामिछात-दामलियाति), it is a root which begins with ; the of this Denominative root, however, will not be changed to g, for it is not a root of upadega. Therefore, when we add more to this root, we get free by VIII. 2. 31, and not mit E 
u forma II PRH vatra il 91, C, E, T, furth! इतिः ॥ मुहष्णुह ब्णि इत्येतेषां धातून हकारस्थ वा पकारानेयो भवति झलि परतः पान्ते च ॥ 
33. The of druh, muh, shquh, and shpih is op tionally changed to a, before a jbal letter or at the end of a word. 
Thus gvi, mor or it, fuga, A E, &, MAT, , , 508,91 mat, TWITT, UTETE, TH , fog, mat, dui, fere, for 
The root I would have taken always by the last sätra, this makes it optional. The others would not have got but for this s@tra. 
These roots belong to Radhadi sub-class of Divadi gana: and are 
1560 
CHANGED TO 
# 
BK. VIII. CH. 11. S. 36 
taught there in this very order (Div. 89-91). By belonging to Radhadi sub division, the r is optional (VII.2.45). Instead of making the sätra regretatu, this longer formation of the aphorism indicates that the rule applies to co also, as rea or C. See VII. 1.6, for if the roots were taught not specifically but by up, then the rule would not apply to yan luk. 
: # # To il :, : N I U TET FETTR Yamaha PTER # 
34. The of my is changed to before a jhal letter or at the end of a word. 
• As TET, ALV 
24747, 
q u Ther of the affixes &c, is changed to y by VIII. 2. 40; and for the preceding ” is substituted by VIII. 4. 53. A is formed by VIII. 2. 39, read with VIII. 4. 56. your is formed by far as it belongs to her class, the lengthening is by VI. 3. 416, and -change by VIII. 4. 14. It would have shortened the processes of trans formation, had only been ordained in the sotra, instead of $; but the ordaining of ¥ is for the purposes of VIII. 2. 40, by which there should be y for the participial a &c, in 71, and that there should not be the change of this Nishtha vinto by VIII, 2. 42. Thus ****** * (VIII. 2. 40)= ve (VIII. 4. 53) But had the substitute been , we should have r ** * by VIII. 2. 42. 
Bm F: 1 X 1 TERITO, : # খি আজ রূহ্মাৱঞ্জে স্ক্রাষ্ট গন্ধ লি : ৪ খালি। স্কুলম্বী খায় বা ক্ষ। 
35. For the of the root wry, there is substituted y before a jhal letter. 
As Inte, FMET # The word wily becomes meer by VIII. 4. 55. Why has the last mentioned substitute w not been ordained here, for this en would also have given the form o r by ste change, as the v is also changed to ; and by so doing there would have been only one sätra, instead of two i.e. 
T would have been enough? Making this separate substitute, is for the sake of indicating that the rule VIII, 2. 40, does not apply here. For had VIII. 2. 40, still applied, the substitute of the last sätra would have been enough. The substitute, however, would have been the best. 
The word en is understood here. Hence there is no change before vowel affixes, as IV, VI, ATEN 
Vårt:- In the Chhandas, * is substituted for the oír and N Thus জাল গল্প; গন্ধ ৰূজা মিয়ী জ্ঞা, বন্ধুসঙ্কল্পঞ্জ নিকাশজ গাঙ্ স্কা ক্ষার্থী। 
2 
SET 
* 
T, T, 
G, HS, 68, TTTM , #: . 
2 
. BK. VIII. C11. II. §. 37 ) 
& CHANGE 
1561 
वृत्तिः ॥ भस्म सत्र मन बम राम भाज इत्येतेषां छकारान्तानांशकारान्तानांप पकार भावको भवात सलि परतः पदान्ते च ॥ 
36. For the final consonants of vrasch, bhrasj, srij mpij, yaj, råj, and bhraj, and for the final 3 and 1, there is 
substituted before a jhal letter, or at the end of a .word. 
Thus HET, AA, AE M II WET I WI I UTTEE IT! HET I HETI NEPALI NE I TI et I ATGT I Attorn i 
afriqut I get i qE694 1 736 | TRIPATE I FTC, fruc, Faure N The u ending words would have been changed to 77-letters and the others to Gutturals; this sūtra debars that by ordaining To In E and start there is vocalisation by VI. 1. 16, the 
is elided by VIII. 2. 19, and becomes #q-letter , which becomes by VIII. 4. 56. The word uair is formed by FC, there is lengthening and no vocalisation. 
The roots and are never followed by a jhal beginning affix, because such affixes will always take augment. These roots are, therefore, mentioned here, for the sake of the change of their to ç, when at the end of a word. Some, however, form nouns like Tits, ift: with fire affix from these roots by III. 3. 94, värt., and augment is prevented by VII. 2.9. 
Of roots endinging we have to: ET, 936, 926414, KATE 11 Accord ing to one view, the letters should not be mentioned in this sätra: for by VI: 4. 19, 5 is always changed to y, and this will be changed to by the present sätra. Others hold, that the change of 3 to y by VI. 4. 19 is confined before 
y or fit affixes, and therefore the mention of y is necessary in this sätra; moreover the substitution here, and the g substitution in VI. 4. 19. refer to the conjunct letter ( with the augmente)For if it were not so, then y alone being changed to g, the of would be changed to y, and we should have the instead of ge: 1 
Of roots ending in g we have forget, Aga, mesta, posa; far:-421, agu, 40, Prat 
garatu AT ART Frant: lll Ull gana Il 24-999, FT:, 79, Parer, #, sat: 1 
वृत्तिः॥ धातोरवयवो व एकाच् सपन्तः तस्वयवस्व बयः स्थाने मा भारेयो भवति सलि सकारे अपने 
909: a 
37. For the letters a, a, 5 ore in the beginning of a monosyllable, and belonging to a root, and which ends in #, , a, or 8, there is substituted #, #, torx res pectively, before or ra, or at the end of a pada (word). 
___ Thus from पुष्-मोत्स्यन्ते, ममुन्नम् and मर्यमुत्; from एह-मि घोक्यते न्यवाप, coles U becomes up by VIII. 2. 31, and thus it is a root ending in, jhash. 
1562 
CHANGE. 
(BK. VIII. CH. II. $. 38 
From 1(which becomes by VIII. 2. 32, and thus is a jhash ending root) in the grou, nyt il 
So also from Ty we have pref: the 2nd Person. Şing. Imperfect (7) Intensive (yah luk). There is guņa of , the Æ (of fers and Pers. Sing.) is elided (VI. 1. 68), and we have , and for the letter at of the monosyl labic root, u is substituted by the present aphorism. 
Then the final ¥ is changed to , A (VIII. 2. 39). Then is changed to by VIII. 2. 75, 
Then the first is elided m (VIII. 3. 14). Then there is lengthening by VI. 3. 111, and we have wat in 
The monosyllable should be such that it should begin with a TV and end with a my letter, and should be a full root or the portion (1 ) of a root. In fact, this word which we found necessary in VIII. 2. 32, is absolutely necessary here, in order to explain forms like one from the Denominative root 
#ra, by former 
Why do we say "a monosyllable beginning with my and ending with HY?" Observe trafe from the Denominative root maat # For had a not been employed in the sđtra, the word TTT: (VIII. 2. 32) would have qua lified to: and the sätra would have meant "in a root which ended in a jhash, and which contained a r letter as its member; there is jhash substitution for such ", and the office would be changed then. 
Why do we say "for a ry letter "? Observe gre a t here is not changed to all! Why do we say ending in jhash? Observe thefer o Why before &r and ? Observe dut, T4, Tall 
: Why have we taken up and not merely u? Observe from in the , Imperative 2nd Per. singular, the being changed to A (VI. 4. 101). The substitutes are four *, , x and y, and their respective sthanins are also four, i. e. 6, 7, and ; so that is the substitite of t; but, as a matter of fact, y never so stands at the beginning of a monosyllable, and so there is no r substitition. ...TETUT IRC lllqua il 4:, , ut:, all 
दत्तिः॥धति धातिकतर्विचनो निर्दिश्यते।तस्वलन्तस्वधा स्थाने भाभादेशो भवति तकार थकारयोः परसमकारान्स्योग परतः ॥ 
38. For the ç of the reduplicated form of UT) is substituted u, before the affixes beginning with a, a, # and before ध्वम् ॥ 
The word r is taken in the sotra as the reduplicated form of YT pia and not the root ATCO of Bhuadi class, as og intervenes there. By the word we draw in the words and all Thus TT, weer, NE, YU, TAN By the express injunction of this sätra, the elided is not 
BK. VIII. C1. 11. S. 40): 
THE FINAL LETTERS. 
1563 
considered as sthanivat. The last sätra could not have applied to y for two reasons. ist. It does not begin with a letter, for the real reduplicate is and ris merely a substitute, and is considered asiddha. 2ndly. The form does not end in a jhash consonant, but in a vowel and though this w is elid. ed before these affixes, yet the lopa would be sthånivat Hence the necessity of in this satra. See coutra, the vārtika in Mahabhashya. 
The word hier is understood here, and so also ; and there can be no affix, but begins with # or y, that can come after ou Why do we employ then the words 'before and y'? Had we not used these, the sätra would have referred to # and only, as being in immediate proximity, and the draws them in. According to Padamanjari the words our could have been dispensed with: for before & and y, the change would have taken place by the last sætra, whilst by this satra, the same change would have taken place before all other hs-beginning affixes, and such affixes that can come after ay are # ora-beginning affixes. 
The word jhash is understood here also, therefore the rule applies to It then only, when it assumes the form of me, by the elision of *; and hence not here infatti 
Noi sia 81 Tata I WOT, WT:, ha a f: if TU HTTU *** TAMATEU. 
39. A corresponding #, a, , r or p is substi tuted for all consonants (with the exception of semivowels and nasals) at the end of a word. 
· As ITTF, ST , HATTE , part II The word as is formed by changing the & of free to a first, and then changing this to y, a jas-letter. 
The word om 'at the end' is used in the satra to indicate that the anuvritti of सलि ceases. Thus पस्ता, बस्तुम् , वस्तव्यम् ।। 
The exceptions to this have been given in VIII. 2. 30 &c, and VIII. 2. 66. At an avasana or Pause, a 7 consonant may be substituted for a pe by VIII. 4. 56. 
FTURAT SY: 11 801 Taura 1 *:, -ut:, :, : 11 वृत्तिः ॥सप उत्तरयोस्तकारयकारयो स्थान धकार भादेशो भवति ॥ 
40. is substituted for a or ac H, 3, 7 or 4 (jhash), but not after the root (TE) 
Thus from it we have it, wat, 544, AT, PET: 
The 4 of me is changed to by VIII. 4. 53. From T , a ann, 274, TETUT: 11 The is changed to a by VIII. 2. 32, and then it is changed to T by VIII. 4. 53. 
1364 
NISHTHAT CHANGE. 
[BK. VIII. CH: II. 8.43 
- From लिह:-लेगा, लेदुम, रब्बा, मलीन, मालीसः ॥ In ले &c, the , is changed to a by VIII. 2. 31, and y changed to a by VIII. 4. 41, before which the preceding ris elided by VIII. 3. 13. - From बुध :-बोडा, बोदूधुम, बोनम्यम्, माल, भाला ॥ For the r of दुष there is substituted by VIII. 4. 53. 
Why do we say "but not after the root धा"? Observe धत्तः, पत्यः ॥ षढोः कः सि ॥४१॥ पदानि ॥ षढोः, कः, सि॥ वृत्तिः॥पकारस्कारयोः ककायदेशो भवति सकारे परतः॥ 
__41. his substituted for r or a before स॥ 
Thus for mof विष् we have विवश्यते, भविश्या, विविक्षति ॥ For rofलिए (लिड VIII. 2. 31) we have लेस्थति, भलेस्यता लिलिक्षति । 
For the # of the affix Fm &c, is substituted by VIII. 3. 59. 
Why do we say " before "? Observe foaft, II रदाभ्यां निष्ठातो नः पूर्वस्य च दः॥४२॥ पदानि ॥रदाभ्याम, निष्ठाता, ना, पूर्वस्य, च, दः॥ 
वृतिः ॥ रेफरकारावानरस्थ निष्ठातकारस्थ नकार मारयो भवति । पूर्वस्व पदकारव। 
42. After t and F, for the a of the Participial suffix and 7a, there is substituted a, and the same substitu tion takes place also for the preceding Fu 
Afterr:-भास्तीर्णम्, विस्तीर्णम्, विशीर्णन, निगीर्णम, भवपूर्णम् ॥ . After :-भिमः, मिनवान्, छिना, हिमवान् from मि and छि॥ 
Why do we say "after t and e"? Observe कसा, कतवान् ॥ The word r here does not denote the common sound (, which would include < also, but the consonant rol But even if be taken a common sound-name including 
and €, yet the change does not take place in any &c, because betneeen and the r-sound, there intervenes vowel-sound , for Cis sounded not like pure , but (+ a vowel sound. 
Why do we say fof the Participial suffix"? Observe कर्ना, हा॥ 
Why do we say for the r"? Observe चरितम, हरितम| Here the rof the Nishtha does not follow immediately after the augment intervenes. 
Why do we say " of the preceding"? The succeeding will not be changed. As मिनवद्भ्याम, भिनवनिः॥ 
In the word ark: the descendant of the rof Nishtha is immediately preceded by , but no change has taken place, because the Vriddhi, by which 
is changed to it, is Bahiranga and consequently asiddha, and for the pur poses of a change, ther so obtained is invalid. . 
संयोगादेरातो धातोर्यण्वतः ॥ ४३ ॥ पदानि ॥ संयोग-मादेः, मातः, धातोः, यण्वतः॥ 
BK. VIII. CH. II S. 44) 
NISHTHA # CHANGES. 
NI 
1565 
वृभिः ॥ संबंांगादियों धातुराकारान्सो बयान तस्मादुसरस्व मिष्ठातकारस्य नकारादेशो भवति ॥ 
43. For the a of the Nishtha there is substituted #, after a root ending in my and commencing with a conjuncti consonant, if the latter contain a semi-vowel. 
Thus from sr we have प्राणः, प्राणवान् ॥ ग्लाना, ग्लानवान् from ग्ला । These roots in and ou end in 91, have a conjunct consonant in the beginning, one of which is a semi-vowel cand in 
Why do we say "beginning with a double-consonant"? Observe anni, थासवाम् ॥ 
___Why do we say "ending in मा"? Observe युसः, व्युतवान् । प्लुतः, 
Why do we say "after a root"? Observe निर्याता, निर्वासः ॥ For the roots here and do not begin with a conjunct consonont, and that which is a conjunct i.e. ef and of is not a root, hence the rule does not apply. 
Why do we say " having a you or semi-vowel"; Observe Firai, स्नातवाम्॥ 
ल्वादिभ्यः ॥४४॥ पदानि ।।ळू-आदिभ्यः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ लम् छेदने इन्वेतपति परण इति थावत् पत्करणेन समापिता ल्यायो यन्ते । तेभ्य उत्सरस्व निष्ठातकारस्थ नकारादेखो भवति । 
वार्तिकम् ॥रकारल्याविन्यःनिानिष्ठावरतीति वक्तव्यम् ।। पा०॥ दुग्योदधिमेति वक्तव्यम् । पा०॥ पूमा विनायति वक्तव्यम् ॥ वा.॥ सिनोसेर्मासकर्मकर्षकस्येति वकण्यम् ॥ 
44. The n of Nishtha is changed to न, after the roots and those that follow it. 
These roots belong to Kryadi class, and commence from खूछेदने (IX. 13) and end with वाणे (IX. 32), 
Thus sनः, समवान, धूमः, धूमदान, सीमा, जीनवान् from ज्या the vocalisation is by VI. I. 16. 
Vårt :-After a root ending in corvand after a root of Luadi class, the स of the affix निन् is changed to , like as in Nishtha. Thus कीर्णिः, गीणिः, पीणिः, सुमिः, पूनिः ॥ These are from क (IX. 26), ग (IX. 28), (IX. 18), Vand पूम् ॥ . 
Vart:--The vowel of the roots दुगती (Bhu. 991) and (Bhu. 997), are lengthened before the Nishtha which is changed to all. As TTH:, fara: : 
Vart:-The न change takes place after पूम् 'to destroy' (Bhu. I015), As पूना बवा-विनटाः ॥ But पूतं धान्य from पूम् 'to purify' (IX. 12). 
Vart:- The same change takes place after the root fea of Svadi class (2) when used in a Reflexive sense of becoming a morsel fit for swallo ing. As fait An: TT i.fe. where a morsel by being mixed with curd, con diments &c, becomes rounded of itself, there this forin is used. पथमामः पिण्डीक्रियमाणो पासो, वदा दध्वारिष्यम्जन योन समानुकूल्वं प्रतिपयले तराऽयम् प्रयोगः ॥ But 
1566 
NISHTHA B CHANGE. 
[BK. VIII. Cl. II. 8.46 
when not used in this sense, we have feat graa Elan | Moreover, the qe must be the object and not the subject of the verb. Therefore not here: सितो पासो देवदत्तेन ॥ 
मोदितश्च ॥४५॥ पदानि ॥ ओदितः, च॥ वृत्तिः॥ भोकारतो धाता सरस्व निष्ठासकारस्य नकारादेशो भवति । 
45. The s of Nishtha is changed to a, after a root, which has an indicatory s in the Dhátupåtha. 
___Thus मोलस्त्री-लग्ना, लग्नवान, मोविजी-रहिग्नः, रहिग्नवान ॥ भोप्यायी वृद्धी:-मा पीना, मा पीनवान्॥ 
The roots सूमाणिप्रसवे (Div. 24) &c. are considered as मोदित् ॥ Thus, मूनः, मूनवान् : पूर-पूना, पूनवान् ; पी-पीना, दीनवान् सी-डीनः, डीनवान् धीर-धीनः, धीन वान् मी मीना, मीनवान्रीदरीणा, रीणवान्, ली-लीनः, लीनवान्, श्री वीणा, ब्रीणवान् ।। : क्षियो दीर्घात् ॥४६॥ पदानि ॥ क्षियः, दीर्घात् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ क्षियो धातोपांदुनरस्थ निष्ठातकारस्थ नकारादेवो भवति ।। 
46. The त of Nishtha is changed to न, after क्षि, when the root-vowel is lengthened. 
Thus भीणाः नेपाः; क्षीणो आत्मः ; क्षीणस्तपस्वी ॥ The vowel of fe is lengthened by VI. 4. 60 and 61. 
Why do we say 'when the vowel is lengthened'? Observe मसितमसि मामेशः ॥ The word भक्षितं is formed with us in the sense of भाव and means 'imperishable'. The Nishtha being added in the sense of oun, there is no lengthening of the vowel by VI. 4. 60. 
The root fit includes the two roots f g and for raziarrut: As fra: कामो मया ॥ See also the commentary of Sayana on भसितोतिः सनेविम वामिन्द्रः सहक्षिण॥ (Rig I.5.9). 
Obj:—The form na: in the satra is the Genitive singular of the root noun oft ending in long f, and will denote the root of ending in long f accord ing to the maxim प्रकतिवदनुकरणं भवति "an imitative name (as sी here)is like its original (the root )". What is then the necessity of employing the word gafa in the satra? For had the root fog with short s been meant, the form would have been all 
Ans.-The dhatu imitative noun though taking यह (VI. 4.77) as in Hai, includes the dhatu ending in short y also, as in satra VI. 4. 59, 60 where rending in short r is taken. 
Q. If a root ending in short vowel may also be indicated by an imi. 
· tative name, declined with the augment, then why is the root of exhibited 
in sätra I. 3. 19 as w: instead of fra: i. e, the satra ought to have been fount भिव: and not पिपराभ्यां ? 
BK. VIII. CH. II.sso] 
NISHTHA न CHANGE 
1567 
Ans. Here the word fx is not used as a dhatu-imitative word, there is no intention here to denote the verbal idea of the particular act connoted by the root for; on the contrary, it simply expresses the mere form f l . 
श्यो ऽस्पनों॥४७॥ पदानि || श्या, अ-स्पर्श ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ श्यातेरुत्तरस्य निष्ठासकारस्थास्पर्षे मकार मादेशो भवति ॥ 
47. The Nishithiâ a is changed to a after , but not when the Participle denotes 'cold'. 
Thus शीनं घृतम्, शीमो मेवा, शीना वसा; but शीतं वर्तते, शीतो वायुः, शीतपुरकम् ॥ The a of er is vocalised to by VI. 1. 24. 
The prohibition applies when the noun is an adjective and means 'cold'; and not when it means a disease. Therefore we have srauta: with 7 change. 
The word fre is a guna word formed by on, and denotes the parti cular guna or sensation to be sensed through the organ of touch. In this sense it is derived from the root स्पृश संस्पर्शने ॥ It also denotes a disease, deri ved from FTT 979 There is nothing to show, what fd is meant in the satra. Explanation is the only refuge here. 
अञ्चो ऽनपादाने ॥४८॥ पदानि ॥ अचः, अन्-अपादाने ॥ वृतिः ॥भज्यतेरुत्तरपदस्थ निष्ठासकारस्य नकारादेशो भवतिन वेदपादान तक भवति । 
48. The Nishtha h is changed to न, after अञ्च, but not when it is in connection with an Ablative case. 
Thus समक्री शकुनेः पादरी - सती; सस्मात् पशवो न्यकाः॥ .. 
Why do we say when not in construction with an Ablative case'? Observe उदत्तमुदकं कृपा-उन्नतं 'drawn out'. 
The word व्यक्तम् is from the root मम्त व्यक्तिरक्षण कान्तिगतिषु, and not from the root #7; and hence the Nishtha is not changed. 
दिवो ऽविजिगीषायाम् ॥४६॥ पदानि ॥ दिवः, अ-विजिगीषायाम् ॥ निः॥दिव उसरस्य निष्ठातकारस्य नकारादेशो भवति अविजिगीषाधामर्थे । 
49. The Nishtha h is changed to न, after दिव, when the sense is not that of 'play'. 
The word Afstoffet means "desire of conquest or gain", but here it means "gambling". 
__Thus भागूनः, मौरिका, परिपुनः क्षीणः || Why do we say. “ when it does not mean to play"Observe the righ t Here the throwing of dice is with the desire of winning or gaining victory (vijigisha) over the opponent. 
निर्वाणो ऽवाते॥५०॥ पदानि ॥ निवाणः, अ-वाते॥ वृत्तिः॥ निर्वाण इति निस्वाहातरुत्तरस्य मिष्ठातकारस्य नकारो निपात्यते । माताधिकरणो वात्ययों भवति ॥ 
1568 
NISHTHA CHANGES 
[BK. VIII. CH. II. S.54 
50. The word forator is irregularly formed by changing the Nishtha a to a, when the sense is not that of "wind'. 
The word Panor is formed from the root , with the preposition par and the Participial affix a| Thus निर्वाणो जग्न-उपशान्तः, निर्वाणा प्रदीपः, निर्वाणो भिक्षः 
-उपरत। 
Why do we say when not meaning " the wind "? Observe faatat mari, निर्वावं पातेन ॥ 
___ In the sentences निर्वाणः प्रदीपो पालन, निर्वाणोऽग्निर्वासन, the change has taken place, because the location of the verb is in the rate and afin, and not in the ry, which is merely an Instrument. Hence the above vritti uses the words "if the sense of the verb t does not govern are in the loca tive case". 
शुषः कः॥५१॥ पदानि ॥ शुषः, कः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ शुषे तोरुत्तरस्व निटातकारस्थ ककारादेशो भवति ॥ 
51. R is substituted for the Nishtha a after the root शुरु॥ 
As शुष्क, शुष्कवान् ॥ पचोपः॥५२॥ पदानि । पचः घः॥ वृत्तिः॥पातोहसरस्व निष्ठातकारस्य वकारापो भवति । 
52. g is substituted for the Nishtha a after the root पच् ॥ 
As पक्वा, पक्वान् ॥ क्षायो मः॥५३॥ पदानि ।क्षाया, मः॥ वृशिः ॥धातोरुत्सरस्व निष्ठातकारस्व मकारादेशो भवति। 
63. म is substituted for the Nishtha a after the rootan 
Thus शामः, सामवान् ॥ प्रस्त्योन्यतरस्याम् ॥ ५॥ पदानि ॥प्रस्स्यः, अन्यत रस्याम॥ वृतिः ॥अपूर्वात स्वायतेश्वरस्व निष्ठातकारस्थान्यतरस्वां मकारावधो भवति ॥ 
54. # is optionally substituted for the Nishtha a, after the root fe prcccded by # 
Thus stifta: or galai, 74474 or afterara u In the second alterna tive when does not come, we first vocalise the root fou into wft, and then add u Had Samprasarana not taken place first, then the Nishtha # would have been changed to # after fra by VIII. 2. 43. But when samprasarana is 
BK. VIII. CH. II. 5.56] 
NISHTHA CHANGES. 
1569 
once made, the root no longer has a semi-vowel and so there remains no occa sion for the application of VIII. 2. 43. See VI. 1. 23 for vocalisation, ___ अनुपसर्गाफुलक्षीवकुशोल्लाघाः ॥ ५५॥ पदानि ॥ मनुपसर्गात, फुल्ल-क्षीब-श 
उल्लाघाः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ फुल सीव कुश उमाप इत्येते निपात्यन्त मधदुपसर्गादुसरा भवन्ति ।। वासिकम् ॥ उरकुलसंपुण्योरिति वक्तव्यम् ॥ 
56. The irregular Participles फुल्ल, क्षीव, कुश and उल्लाघ are formed then only, when no Preposition pre cedes them. 
The word 94 is derived from the root f or free the r is changed tos | The change of a to z (VII. 4.88)and the want ofse augment (VII. 2. 16) are,regular. The same change takes place before कवतु also, as फसवाम् ॥ . 
The affix t is elided after the roots भी, कर and रत-साए, and the augment is prohibited; this is the irregularity in offer, su: and Tama: II 
Why do we say when not preceded by a Preposition ? Observe you: मुमनसा, प्रलीविता, प्रकृधिता, प्रामाषितः ॥ In the case of लाप, prepositions other than T are prohibited. 
Or the augment is added, and then is elided from aften &c. See VIII. 2. 3 vart. 
Vart:-The forms उतमः and संम: should be enumerated. . Here a is changed to m, though the root has taken a Preposition. 
In the word of us, the word of is not a Preposition with regard to the verb py; afina: pu: su: # So that oft is upasarga of the verb ? understood, hence we have the form o: 11 
नुदविदोन्दत्राघ्राहीभ्यो ऽन्यतरस्याम् ॥५६॥ पदानि । नुद, विद, उन्द, त्रा, घ्रा, हीभ्यः, अन्यतरस्याम्॥ वृतिः ॥ नुर विश उन्द पापा ही इस्तेभ्य उत्सरस्वमिष्ठासकारस्थ भकारमादेशो भवतिभन्यतरस्याम्॥ 
Karikd: नेस्त विदितो निष्ठा वियतेर्विमान्यते। 
वितेनिम विसम भोगे विनम्र विन्दते ।। 
56. The Nishtha a may optionally be changed to न, after नुद, विद, उन्द, त्रा, घ्रा, ही ॥ 
___ Thus नमः or नुत्ता, विमः or विता, समुमः or सत्ता, पाण: or नाता, प्राण: or पाता, हीण or हीतः॥ 
With regard to it, the change was not ordained by any rule, and so It is an aprapta-vibhasha. With regards to others, the न change would have always taken place by VIII. 2. 42 and 43, this makes it optional. 
The root fe fuo of Rudhadi is to be taken licre, and not the other विद roots. Thus the following : Karika 
1570 
NISITIIA 
[ BK. VIII. CH. II. 4.60 
The Nishtha of विद्-वैति of Adadi class is विदिता; (2) of विद्-वियते of Divadi class is Thi only; (3) of fax of Tudadi is fy:; (4) of four of Rudhadi are both वित्तः and विनः॥ The Tudadi विद् has also the form वित्तः in the sense of भोग by VIII. 2. 58. 
न ध्याख्यापमूच्छिमदाम् ॥ ५७॥ पदानि ॥न, ध्या, स्या, प, मूछि, मदाम। वृत्तिः ॥ध्या क्या मर्छि मद इत्येतेषां निष्ठातकारस्व मकापदेखो न भवति ।। 
57. Tlie Nishthá a is not changed to a after wat, स्या, प, मूच्चि and मद ॥ 
Thus ध्याता, ध्यातवान्, स्थाना, स्वासवान, पू, पूर्नवान्, मूर्मः, भूर्नवान्, मन्ना, मत्तवान्। 
This debars the change prescribed by VIII. 2. 42, 43. 
The root ott is exhibited in the sQtra in its lengthened form; the root gut is lengthened by VIII. 2. 78, and the us is elided before by VI. 4. 21. 
वित्तो भोगप्रत्यययोः॥५८॥ पदानि । वित्तः, भोग, प्रत्यययोः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ विन इति विदेलाभार्यासरस्वकस्व मसाभावी निपात्यते भोगे प्रत्यय पाभिधेवे॥ 
58. The irregularly formed Participle fou denotes 'possessions' and 'renowned'. 
This is derived from na of Tudâdi class, the # is not changed to न though so required by VIII. 2. 42. 
Thus वित्तमस्य बहु-धनमस्वबह he has much riches'. Because riches are enjoyed (मुज्यते), so they are called भोग or 'enjoyments' par excellence. 
___ In the sense of 'renowned', we have वित्तोऽयं मनुष्य: “this man is re nowned or famous". Here वित्त-प्रतीतः ॥' प्रताविते प्रत्ययः ।। 
Why do we say when having the sense of 'possessions' and 'fam ous'? Observe family 
मितं शकलम् ॥ ५९॥ पदानि । मित्तम, शकलम् ॥ वृतिःभिसमिति निपात्यते शकलं चेतवति ॥ 
59. The word for is irregularly formed in the sense of 'a'fragment, a portion'. 
Thus भित्तं तिष्ठति, मित्तं प्रपतति ।। This is synonymous with शकल॥ The root-meaning of fe is not very manifest in this word, it may be taken as a rudhi word. The regular form is for under VIII. 2. 42. 
ऋणमाधमण्यें ॥१०॥ पदानि ॥ ऋणम, भाधमण्यें। वृत्तिः॥णमिति कास्येतस्माखातोरुत्तरस्थ निष्ठातकारस्व भकारो मिपास्यते माधम विषवे॥ 
60. The word Bu is irregularly formed in the sense of debt.' 
It is derived from the # is changed to all The word of is com pounded from भधम पुणे "he who in a debt transaction holds a lower position" BK. VIII. C11. 11. . 62) 
GUTTURAL CHANGE. 
1571 
i.e. a debtor. This nipatana shows that such irregular Locative compounds may be formed; for hicre the first member is not in the Locative case, but the second member. The condition of being a debtor is in those or " indebtedness: ". 
If this is so, then the word omhof: 'creditor' cannot be formed? This is no valid objection. For who is illustrative only of something to be paid hereafter, in consideration of something formely received; and thus includes 
of also; which also has been so employed by the author himself in wito wait: ( 1. 435). 
The word om we use in sentences like at ea, di una 
Why do we say when meaning 'debt'? Observe A, TTT 11 मसत्तनिषत्तानुत्तप्रतूर्ससूर्तगूर्तानि छन्दसि ॥ ११॥ पदानि ॥ नसत्त, निषत, ma, a, a, Taifa, grafell 
तिः ॥ नसत निषत्त भनुस प्रसूर्त सूर्त पूर्व इत्येतानि छन्दसि विषये निपात्यन्ते। 
61. In the Chhandas we have the following irregu lar Participles:--nasatta, nishatta, anutta, pratūrtta, sürtta, gurtta. 
The words 69 and for are derived from the root u preceded by * and ft, and there is not the a change of VIII. 2. 42. Thus fra TITAT I In secular literature we have # 11 So also PP: in the Vedas, but fagoer in secular literature. The word MIH: is from with the negative 01 The option of VIII. 2. 56 does not apply here. As ITHTI OTT(2569) Il maga is from स्वर् or दूर्व, as प्रतूने वाभिमम् (-प्रतर्णम् ) When it is derived from वर then i is added by VI. 4. 20; and when from then VI. 4. 21 is applied. # is from the is changed to irregularly, as सूांगावःसृतागायः ॥ गर्ने is from , as पूर्व THAT (-qof) u 
TURTS: 116211 Tata u farm, ARTUFT, F: 0 वृत्तिः ॥ पदस्थति वर्तते। विन्प्रत्ययस्थ सर्वच पदान्त कृत्वमिष्यते । किन्प्रत्ययो यस्माखातोस किन्प्रत्यया, तस्य पदस्थालोन्यस्थ कवर्गादेवो भवति । 
62. A stem formed with the affix for under III. 2. 58 &c, substitutes, at the end of a word, a guttural for the final consonant. 
The word gefa is understood here. The word ffure is a Bahuvrihi meaning 'that stem which has kvin as its affix. For the final consonant of such 
a stem, a guttural is substituted. As a (III. 2. 58), TA, HAFTE II 
The sutra could have been fipa: ; the word wat is used in the sotra to show the Bahuvrihi compound; so that the coffee may not be changed to a guttural. Moreover this Baluvrihi also indicates that the roots which take the lo affix, change their final to a guttural before other affixes than fet 
1572 
FINAL CHANGES. 
(BK. VIII. CH. Il. 8 64 
W 
. 
Thus the roots fire and take a to form and nouns by 111. 2. 59, 60. The guttural change will take place even when these roots are declined as verbs: as, Artt WHERE TATT 79, where sara and man are the Aorist of ry and VI The augment is not elided, though the it is added ( VI. 4. 75 ) as a Vedic diversity. The augment also does not take place as a Vedic irre gularity. The augment spa is added by VI. 1. 58, and the vowel is lengthened by Vriddhi by VII, 2. 3. Thus 3 + + f&y+fiq - ** (V1. 1. 58 )= HTC (VII. 2. 3 and VIII. 2. 62). Other wise it would have been q by VIII. 2. 36. So also in rai, tri:, the g is changed to a guttural, though the noun is a fare formed noun and not formed by san; and this is so, because the verb m does take regg also. 
Obj. If this be so, there ought to be guttural change in ta from the root with faig? Ans. The guttural change however in not desired here. 
In gutturalisation, is changed to it, and y to u, which both become by Tea ( VIII. 4. 56) 
Talat il <3 1 TIA t:, at il पत्तिः॥ पदस्थति वर्तते । नः परस्य वा कवर्गादेयो भवति ॥ 
63. The final of all at the end of a word is op tionally changed to a guttural. : The word gera is understood here also. As E trenuta: (Maitr. S. I. 4. 13): or at forhighet: 1 According to Pro. Bohtlingk this latter form is not found in the Samhita. 
Here the root te has taken forre in denoting condition or state';by con sidering it as belonging to figure class. 
जीवस्य नाश-जीवनक् or जीवन ।। The gutturalisation optionally debars the q change of VIII. 2. 36. When the change takes place, this is changed to x by VIII. 2. 39 and VIII. 4. 56. 
statt arat: 11 €811 caifa || :, 7:, pret: 11 वृतिः ॥ मकारान्तस्य धातोः परस्य नकारादेवो भवति. वार्तिकम्। भनुनासिकस्य किझलो हितीतिवीर्घल्वम् ॥ 
64. a is substituted, at the end of a word, for the final # of a root. 
As qurt, 4011, I These are formed by adding fer to the roots da, . and The lengthening takes place by VI. 4. 15. The being considered as asiddha is not elided. 
· Why do we say "of A-ending roots"? Observe fan, 1878 
Why do we say "of a root"? Obscrve 97, 11 
roog 
BK. VIII. Cn. II S. 67) 
SUBSTITUTION 
1573 
The word gery is understood here also. So we have qarat, fara: where # is not at the end of a word. 
म्वोच॥६५॥ पदानि ॥म, घोः, च ॥ fe: 11 *****ŪTU 9: 
H ay wait 4T !! 
65. a is substituted for the # of a root before the affixes beginning with # and all 
As भगन्म, मगन्य the Imperfect of गम्, as in the sentence भगम्म समस: 979 The T is elided as a Vedic diversity. So also FT with pig, the augment r is not added by the option allowed, owing to VII. 1. 68. This satra applies to those cases where the # is not at the end of a word, as it was in the last sätra. 
FHEN : 11 EC lll aaa II , Frat:, r: ll . वृत्तिः ॥ सकारान्सस्य पदस्य सझुप इत्येतस्य च भवति ।। 
66. For the final and for the or of any is subs tituted a, at the end of a word. 
Thus far, 73671 So also reffit, for: is derived from yg with the affix fogy and the preposition ere, which is changed to or in Bahuvrihi. The lengthening takes place by VIII. 2. 76. and the word means astfa: ll The F is [, but it should be distinguished from it. This secondary i (or ) undergoes a distinct and separate Sandhi change from that of the primary a 
Han: sacar: TET 11 86 11 If I wanti, sareti, gder:, all #: ! *7*: : gürer: ma fagrant II 
67. The same substitution takes place for the final of the Nominatives of waar, maar: and still 
The word waar: is from 7+%; BAT: from A+, and rur: from T + mŲ If The affix foram is added to the two latter by III. 2. 71. The word भववाड़ is also formed by विन् (III. 2.72). Thus the three words श्वेतवासपो . TTV and on are formed. These words take the affix Vi before the Pada. terminations (See Vartika to III. 2. 71). After having taken re, the above forms at: &c., are made in Nominative singular irregularly. 
Why is this nipatana, when & would have come by the last sQtra and the lengthening would have taken place by VI. 4. 14, of the words , 
A and you? They are so exhibited here, for making them long in the Vocative singular also. For they could not have been lengthened in the Vocative singular, because VI. 4. 14 does not apply to it. Thus , H TT, TUTT: 11 
1574 
SUBSTITUTION 
[ BK. VIII. Cl. II.870 
- 
- 
- The word shows that other forms, not enumerated, may also be in cluded here under. As उक्यवाः ॥ 
महन् ॥ ८॥ पदानि ॥ भहन् । वृत्तिः ॥मानियेतस्थ पदस्थ कर्भवति ।। वार्तिकम् ॥ भहो रुविधी रूपराधिरयन्तोषूपसंख्यानं कर्तव्यम् ॥ 
68. रु is also substituted for the t of अहन at the end of a Pada. 
Thus महोन्याम, महोभिः॥ The sutra exhibits the form महन् without the elision of 7, in order to indicate that there is not elision of all As folat, निदाघः, हे दीर्घाहोऽयोति ॥ See Vartika to VIII. 2.7. Then of महन् is not changed to r in the satra by VIII. 2. 69, because it is intended to show the word-form भहन् ॥ The Nominal stem is Pada in the above examples by I. 4. 17. 
Vart:-Before the words रूप, पyि and रयन्तर, then of महन् is changed to || As महोरूपम्, महाराषः, महारयन्तरं साम || This is an exception to VIII. 2.69. Others say, that this change takes place universally before all words begin ning with t; as महो रम्यम्, भो रखानि ॥ __रोज्सुपि ॥१९॥ पदानि ॥रः, अ-सुपि॥ 
वृत्तिः॥मानित्येतस्य रेफादेशो भवल्यमुपि परतः ॥ 
69. When no case-ending follows (i. e. at the end of a Pada in the narrower sense), is substituted for the 7 of महन् । 
. Thus भर्दिवाति, मह ॥Why do we say when no case-ending follows? Observe महोभ्याम्, महोभिः॥ Here r-called replaced the final of महन् ॥ The difference between this w-called and the ordinary r is illustrated in the above set of examples. The f-called ris changed to by VI. 1. 113, the ordinary i 
is not so changed. 
Obj. In महर्दवाति and मह रक्त the case-ending is elided after भहन् , and so by Pratyaya - lakshana, we may say that there is a case - ending here also ? Ans. This is not so, because of the following maxim भो रविधी छमता लुमे प्रत्यय लक्ष न भवति ॥ The rule of pratya lakshana does not apply to the substitution of t for the final of my when the affix has been elided by or by. Therefore, this is not considered to be followed by Tv or case-affix. But where an affix is elided by using the word at there the rule of Pratyaya - lakshaņa does apply to all As, daetsy, tato forte. (VIII. 2. 7). Here the affix is elided by using the word 'lopa' by VI. 1. 68. .. अन्नधरवरित्युभयथा छन्दसि ॥७॥ पदानि ॥ अनस, ऊधस्, अवस्, इति उभयया, छन्दसि ॥ 
वृतिः ॥ भन्मस् कषर भवस्ये तेषां छन्दति विपये उभवया भवति। 
BK. VIII. CH. 11. $- 72 ) 
FINAL CHANGE. 
1575 
aniqli goh 179741 Tahun T egal पा०॥ महरादीनां पत्याविषूपसंख्यान कर्त्तव्यम् ॥ 
70. In the Chbandas, both F and are substituted for the final of amnas, Udhas, and avas. 
Thus भन्न एव or मनरेव, जय एव or अधरेव भव एव or भवरेव ।। When ris subs tituted for the finals, this is replaced by a by VIII. 3. 17, which is elided by VIII. 3. 19. The word means 'a little', and 77 protection'. 
Vårt :- and both replace the final of gear before , in the Vedic as well as in the secular language. As gear (VIII. 3. 14, VI. 3. 111) 47. ar 11 
Vårt: The words art &c before fa&c should be enumerated. That is, the finals of orer &c are replaced by Fort before a &c. As. Arfa: orx qfh: or 48: qfa; T:, ** GV:, : TT, mora, oft: qfa, oft * qfa; ytra, y: yra, # gra: Here is substituted for the final ( of aet &c, which at first sight may appear superfluous. But it is so ordained, in order to prevent the visarga change of this cut 
TW Heraulta: 11 og 11 qera nya, T., Allta: वृत्तिः । भुवस् इत्येतस्थ महाव्याहसेश्छन्दसि विषये उभयया भवति ॥ 
71. In the Chhandas, 7 and may replace the final of the word yarn when used as a malà-vyâhriti. 
Thus quifTory Fair! The maha - vyähritis are three, used generally before the famous Gayatri mantra. They denote respectively the earth, the firmament and the heaven. It is an Indeclinable and a Vyahriti denoting the firmament. The other two are q: and fr: 11 
Why do we say when it is a maha - vyahriti? Observe ya TAK 
2, without guņa of the root, and the x augment is not added as a Vedic diversity. 
de terrenget : || 12 | Efat ilag, hg, my, waga, T:N वृत्तिः ॥ससजुषोरुरिष्यतः स इति वसे । वस्वन्तस्य परस्य सकारान्तस्य बंधन अमावास्येतेपांच दकादियो भवति ॥ 
72. ç is substituted for the final # of a word end ing in the affix बस, and for the final of नंस, ध्वंस and अनडु at the end of a Pada (in the wider sense I. 4. 14, 17). 
The anuvritti of is understood here from VIII. 2. 66. It qualifies 4 only, and not the rest. That is, when the word forined by the affix ends with , such # is replaced by all For a word formed by te does not 
1576 
CHANGE. 
[BK. VIII. C1. II. 8. 73 
sometimes end in f, and in those cases the rule will not apply. As an and wir always end in Ħ, there is no necessity of qualifying these by the of VIII. 2. 66. Hage ends in and so # cannot qualify it. 
Thus fairera, F TW, 919777014, 1rA: with e affix. :-Fun 14, TOTECTA: 11 (VII. 1.70 and III. 2. 36). 114- aara, qofetery: N 475 871570, 475N 
But when a formed word does not end in & , the rule does not apply. As AUTE, prel Here is not changed to it 
In the case of 47, the x is ordained, before any other rule manifests itself; thus in f ui this y debars ; so why should it not debar the rule relating to the elision of the final in frert also ? This rule sets aside , but it does not, however, over-rule the elision-rule, because it is not directly con nected with this change. 
Why in gazrag the is not changed to ? By the very fact, that it is ordained (fryra-mata), this a will not be changed to : otherwise a rule would become superfluous; for it would be easier to say let be changed to and we should get the form भनझाद by this rule without नुम् ।। 
Obj: Is this be so, that the 34 is not changed to t, because of giving it a scope, then in 
4, this should not be changed into & by VIII. 3. 9? 
Ans :-No; the maxim is that that rule is set aside, with regard to which a particular rule would become useless, if not so over-ruled: but that rule is not set aside which is only an occasion for the application of another rule (arare afa tisti, afafuataza, OFW T FT HITT Trei peaa) u With regard to 
change, the Tu vidhi is useless (anarthaka), with regard to change, it is merely an occasion. 
The word 4979 is understood here also, so the change does not take place in frigir and facia: 1 : 
facraft: If 43 1 rafa il faca, 7-ENT: II वृत्तिः ॥ तिपि परतः सकारान्तस्य पवस्व मनस्तकार भाविको भवति । 
73. is substituted for the final æ of a root, with the exception of Ma, before the Personal ending a (a), when it stands at the end of a word. 
The 7 of a root can stand at the end of a word when the Personal ending is dropped. Thus भचकाद् भवान्, भन्वाद भवान, from the roots चकास् and Ell The Personal affix is elided by VI. 1. 68, and thereby comes to stand at the end of a Pada. .* Why do we say 'before fag'? Observe HIFT formed by fire affix added to the root. 
BK. VIII. Cl. II.S.77] 
PENULTIMATE LENGTHENING. 
1577 
Why do we say with the exception of भम् ? See भाप एवंद सलिलं सवर्ण मा" Here भाः is the Imperfect 3rd Person singular ofमस्॥ The ईद is not added as a Vedic irregularity. See VII. 3.93, 97. 
सिपि धातो हर्वा ॥ ७४॥ पदानि । सिपि, धातोः, रुः, चाः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ सिपि परतः सकारान्सस्य पदस्य धातो हः हत्ययमादेशो भवति कारोवा॥ 
74. दू or n may optionally be substituted for the स् of a root, before the Personal ending सि (स), when such स stands at the end of a Pada. 
Thus मचकास लम् or अषकात् त्वम्, अन्वशास् लम् or मन्वयात खम् ॥ For the gis first substituted visarjaniya, which is then changed to all 
The word urg: is employed in the satra for the sake of the subsequent sotras : so also the word & 11 
दश्च ॥ ७५॥ पदानि ॥दः, च॥ वृत्तिः॥एकारान्तस्व धातोः पदस्थ सिपि परसो भवति दकारी वा॥ 
75. दू or n may optionally be substituted for the final दू of a root, before the Personal-affix सि, when such दू stands at the end of a Padn. 
Thus भभिनत् लम् or मभिनस् त्वम्, मच्छिनत् त्वम् or मच्छिनस् लम घोरुपधाया दीर्घ इकः ॥ ७९ ॥ पदानि ॥ घोंः, उपधायाः, दीर्घः, इकः॥ वृत्तिः ।। रेफवकारान्सस्य धातोः पदस्थ उपधावा इको दीपों भवति । 
76. A penultimate rory is lengthened, when the final ç or a of a root can stand at the end of a Pada. . 
Thus eft, gi, di, tilt: These are all examples of roots ending in &# Of roots ending in , examples will be given in the next sūtra. 
Why have we used the word 'penultimate? Observe भविभर भवान, here ther of the reduplicative syllable is not to be lengthened. 
Why do we say 'of vowels? So that the ofw in the above exam. ple afert may not be lengthened. 
The word yrat: 'of a root' is understood here also. Therefore I and a are not lengthened in अनिः, वायुः ॥ 
. The word पदस्य is understood here also, therefore, not here, गिरी, गिरः ॥ 
हलि च ॥ ७७ ॥ पदानि ॥ हलि, च ॥ पतिः ॥ हलि च परतः रेफवकारान्तस्य धातोरुपधाया इको दीर्घो भवति । 
77. Of a root ending in r or , the penultimate. For उ is lengthened, before a consonantal beginning affix. . 
Thus भास्तीर्णम्, विस्तीर्णम्, विधीर्णम, भवगूर्णम्, all ending in ॥ So also, शम्धीत, सीव्यति ending in ॥ 
1578 
PENULTIMATE LENGTHENING. 
[BK. VIII. CH, II. $ 78. 
The phrase "of the root", is understood here also. Thercfore not here, दिष्यति and चतुर्यति, which are derived from the nouns दिव and चतुर i.e. दिव forfa-facafä, and Tr a dia II 
The phrase "of the vowels r or r" is understood here also. Therefore not here, wåa, you 11 
This rule applies to cases which are not final in a pada : but to cases where (or q are in the middle of a pada or word. 
उपधायां च ॥ ७८॥ पदानि ॥ उपधायाम, च॥ वृत्तिः ॥ धातोरुपधाभूतो बौ रेफवकारी हल्परो तयोरुपधाया इको दीर्घो भवति । 
78. The short x or 3 of a root is lengthened, when the verb has r or a as its penultimate letter, and is fol lowed by a consonant. 
The anuvritti off is current. The root must end in a consonant, and must have a forq as preceding such consonant, for the application of this rule. Thus gui, gfgat, noi, far. gef, affar. udf, ufitat ll 
The (or must be followed by a consonant. Therefore not here: as, Paft, fsift are roots having a penultimate t, which however is followed by a vowel. Therefore we have forfteira, fuftoifa il 
Q. Why there is not lengthening in fielt, Ref: or forbi, rag: Perfect, forms derived from the roots for an and off at &c? Here the r of the abhyasa required lengthening, and it would not be shortened, as it is asiddha. 
Ans.—The a substitute of here by VI. 4. 82, is treated as sthani vat, to y, and therefore, the [ ort is considered as not to be followed by a consonant, and hence there is no lengthening. Another reason is, that the area substitute is taught in angadhikara (VI. 4. 82), and depends upon the affix, and is consequently Bahiranga, with regard to this rule of lengthening which is antaranga. Hence you is considered as asiddha. Therefore and g are not followed by a consonant (for is not considered as such for the above reasons), 
Similarly in are formed with affix from the Denominative (R ) root ar 1 Here is added before 74 as +8+ and then s is elided, 
+1+ 1 Here the elision of spis a Bahiranga process, and therefore, is not here really penultimate, and so there is no lengthening of the vowel. 
In afat (Instrumental singular) there is lengthening by VIII. 2. 77. To the root प्रति-दिव is added कनिन् by Un I. 156, and we have प्रतिदिवन् ॥ To this is added TT (Instrumental affix), as ufafaa+mT, and mis elided by VI. 4. 134, and we get urafton !! The lengthening takes place here, the elision of is not considered here as sthanivat, and so becomes penultimatc. In fact, 
BK. VIII. C11. 11. 9.80] 
PATEL DECLENSION. 
1579 
here we apply the maxim that a lopa substitute of a vowel is not to be con sidered as sthanivat when a rule of lengthening is to be applied (See I. 1. 58). 
l.Well, let it not be sthanivat, but the elision by VI. 4. 134, depends upon a case-affix, and is Bahiranga, and therefore asiddha for the purposes of this rule which is antaranga: and so therefore, there would be no lengthening? 
AMS.The maxim of ofera of should not be applied here: because it is an anitya rule. 
The word ffa is formed by the Uņadi affix it added to the root (FT), the being changed to (Un V. 49). So also fifti and fruits are form ed by the Uñadi affix fani added to and I (Uņ IV. 143). The Genitive Dual of which is fonti and firat: N There is no lengthening in fufa, Marat: and ftrat, on the maxim that the Upadi formed words are primitive words and not Derivative; and so the rules of etymological changes do not apply to them (रणारयोऽव्युत्पमानि प्रातिपरिकानि) ॥ 
न भकु राम् ॥ ७९ ॥ पदानि ॥न, म, फर, छुराम ।। वृत्तिः ॥ रेफवकारान्तस्य भस्थ कर छरतियोष वीर्षो म भवति। 
79. The lengthening of vowel does not taks place under VIII. 2. 77, when the Nominal stem ending in ç or a is called Bha (i. e. when a q follows), and also not in कुर and छुर् ॥ 
Thus धुर्वः (धुरं पति IV.4-77or धुरि साधुः) | Similarly यात्, एर्थात् ॥ The latter is Benedictive of Or a l 
Why have we qualified the word * by saying that it must end in or ? Observe aparatul, aportat a For here the stem which ends in is not-Bha, and the stem which is Bha does not end in but in all 
Ft Sarly #: || 50 || gaytra il HF :, :, TC, 3, 7, 9: 11 वृत्तिः ॥ भरसो ऽसकारान्सस्य वर्णस्व वापरत्व उवर्णादेखो मबति एकारस्थ चमकारः ।। af II ET SÄia fa To 
Káriki:-*nt que gran para un TI 
के चिदन्त्यसदेशस्थ नेत्येके ऽसेहि दृश्यते ॥ 80. When the pronoun te does not end in , then there is substituted J or 5 for the vowel after , and for at 
Thus 4, TH, TTL, SHT, 7 7976, 11 is substituted for it before a case-cliding by VII, 2. 102, which in Feininine. becomes # By the 
1580 
मदम् DECLENSION 
[BK. VIII. CH. II. §. 80 
present sätra read with I. 1. 50, meg is substituted for ** and my for BTT 1 The 2. which replaces one-måtrå vowel will be one-matra a i. e. short e, and the which replaces a two-matra vowel will be a two-matra 7 i. e. long | See I. 1. 50. 
Why do we say, "not ending in e"? Observe a pair=wyra u Obj. How can this be a valid example, as the word vary is understood here, and well before the affix is not a pada (I. 4. 15)? Ans. This indicates that the g change takes place, even when it is not a pada. As II 
Vart: It should rather be stated that the rule applies to that were which has no sir, orą or (11 So that the prohibition may apply to HSY, 4. 
II The visarjaniya being considered as asiddha, this word is considered as ending in it 
In order to apply the prohibition to at and I also, some explain the sd:ra thus :-: Bra ECHTE, 94 EFARRT AT: fal "The word of in the gatra is a Bahuvrihi, and means that in which s is substituted for a" ! The sätra is thus confined to the form my derived by changing the into my by VII 2. 102: and not to any other 
When # takes the final-substitute H by VI. 3. 92, how is this rule to be applied ? Thus by III. 2. 59, the root sy takes fg7 W We compound it with , as assaja ! 76 +59 + 976 +90 +975 + fera (VI. 3. 92) = NT(VI. 4. 24). Now there are three views, (1) the of my, and, of o are both changed to g by the present sätra; (2), the first is not changed, but only I; (3) none is changed. Thus we have (1) 884€ (VII. 1. 70, VI. I. 68, VIII. 2. 23 and 62), sugest, m95954: 1 (2) Secondly, 
m en magasit, 4 : 1 (3) Lastly m , a, 7954: The above verse sum marises this: 
· " Some ordain that g should come separately for both adas and adri, as there is double m (in l oga); others would have g only for the last portion which stands in proximity to the final, (i, e. for ); while a third class would have nowhere, because they explain wh: of the satra, by a nfining it to: VII. 2. 102.” The first class interpret mē: by " that form of which has no t'; and they do not apply the maxim भनन्त्यविकारेऽन्त्यसदेशस्य कार्य भवति “when a modification is ordained with regard to some thing which is not final, the operation takes place on that only which is in proximity to the final. ” The second class apply this maxim and make y change only for T which stands in proximity to the final; while the last class interpret the word sê: in a different way altogether (87: HFT TRY FITSEE ATE) # 
. Why do we say grck' for the vowel aster'? Observe siga, sü:, the final o as not changed to all BK. VIII. CII. II S. 82) 
PLUTA. 
1581 
एत ईदहुवचने ॥८१॥ पदानि ॥ एतः ईत, बहुवचने । वृणिः ॥ असो वकारादुत्तरस्य एकारस्य ईकारादेशो भवति इकारस्य च मकार बहुचने बहूनामर्याना 
TH 
81. For the coming after the ex of 47, there is substituted {, and is changed to #, when plurality is to be expressed. 
Thus ममी for मरे (or मते) अमीभिः for अभिः , ममीभ्यः for भदेवा, अमीषाम् for STIGTE, opty for and it is changed to a in ea &c. 
The word or in the sätra does not mean the technical Prot; for that would have made the sūtra have this sense "when the affixes of the I'lural number follow". In that case, we could not get the form wat where no plural affix follows. Hence we have translated it, by saying when plura lity is to be denoted. 
arFRT: TT 37: || 52 11 qata Il artur, :, :, : N वृत्तिः ॥ वाक्यस्य टेरिति प्लुत इति ष उदात्त इति च एतत्रयमप्यधिकृतं पेस्तिष्यमापारपरिसमान, येदित वर्यमनुक्रमिष्यामी वाक्यस्य : प्लुत उदात्त इत्येवं तस्तिष्यम् ॥ 
82. Upto the close of this chapter (Påda), is always to be supplied : "the last vowel of a seutence is pluta and has the acute". 
This is an adhikara sätra. All the three words i.e. "the last vowel (R) of a sentence", "pluta" and "acute "--are to be supplied in the subs equent aphorisms to complete the sense, upto the end of this Pada What ever we shall treat hereafter will refer to the final vowel (a) in a sentence, and it will get the pluta lengthening and acute accent. Thus VIII. 2. 83, says " In answer to a salutation, but not when it is addressed to a Sadra". We must supply the present aphorist to complete the meaning :-"In answer to a salutation, the last vowel of a sentence becomes pluta and gets the acute accent, but not when it is addressed to a Sadra". As true I I भायुग्मानेषि देवदत्ती॥ 
One adhikara sets aside another adhikara, this is the general maxim, Will therefore the adhikara of the present aphorism set aside the adhikara of the word Prey (VIII, 1, 16)? No, the adhikara of The has not ceased, though latent. Otherwise in Fort &c. the 7 would be required to be changed to & by VIII. 3.7. But it does not become so, because the manifests itself there. 
The employment of the word "vakya" would not debar the anuvritti of 97, for the final vowel of a sentence, will a fortiori be the final vowel of a word (pada), then what is the use of employing the word 47447 in this sätra ? 
1982 
PLUTA. 
(BK. VIII. C11. II. S. 83 
The word ayy is employed in the satra, so that a word which is not the last word of a sentence, will not get the pluta and acute. Had the sotra been Ted &c. then all the words of a sentence would become pluta and acute in the final. 
The word R is employed to indicate that the final vowel becomes pluta and acute, though the word may end in a consonant. As afraftig Had fe not been used, the rule would have applied to words ending in vowels only, and not to words ending in consonants. 
प्रत्यभिवादे ऽभूने॥ ८३॥ पदानि ॥ प्रत्यभिवादे, अ-शुद्रे॥ दृषिः ॥ प्रत्यभिवादो नाम बरनाभिवाप्रमानो गुरुराधिपं प्रयुहते। तबापूजाविषये वाक्यं वर्तते तस्य टेः प्लुत TETT HITTU 
पातिकम् ।। चियामपि प्रतिषेधो वक्तवः॥ वा.॥ भसयपि केषित् मतिषेधार्मच्छन्ति ।। इटिमभिवादवाक्ये बत संकीर्तितं भाम गोत्र वा तद बर मयभिवाद वाक्वान्ते प्रयुज्यते ताप्लुत इन्वत। पा०॥ भोगजन्य विशांति वक्तव्यम् ॥ 
83. In answer to a salutation, but not when it refers to a Sudra, the last vowel of a sentence becomes pluta and gets the acute accent. 
The word writery means "respectful salutation of a superior or elder by an inferior or junior for the sake of obtaining his blessing. It consists of three acts 1. rising from the seat, 2. touching of the feet, 3. the uttering of the formula of salutation". The word great means, the blessing given by the superior or elder in answer to such salutation. In giving utterance to such blessing, the last vowel of the final word gets udatta and acute, provided that, such blessing is not pronounced on a Sadra. 
: Thus Afterna Tis is said by Devadatta to his Guru. The latter says eft Higura proporretan "O Devadatta I be thou long-lived". 
Why do we say when not referring to a Sadra? Observe Area - st is said by a Sadra. In reply to this the Guru replies w argra pf an! 
Vart:-Prohibition must be stated with regard to women also. As afira g is said by Gargi. To this the Guru replies : argent wat in 
Vårt.Some would have this prohibition where a detractor or an arrogant person is addressed. So long as one's arrogance or ridicule does not become manifest, there is prolation. But when one comes to know that he is my detractor, and is really ridiculing me by a show of respect ; then the reply is not a blessing, but is, in fact, a curse. Thus afferta Form Ti, is uttered by the detractor ; and the Guru understanding the word Sthalin to be the Proper Name of the person, replies are ration. Then the 
BK. VIII. CII. II. $ 85 ) 
PLUTA. 
1583 
detractor says, Sthalin is not my Proper Name, but an adjective, like daņdin, viz. he who hias a pita or cooking pot. The Guru, believing this to be true, again replies, syCATE pre futfity but without prolation, because the word is not a Proper Noun. The other then says "O Sir, it is not my epithet, it is iny Proper Name ". The Guru now comes to learn that he is being laughed at, and so gets angry and says : Free A 
f ter ; POFT TO fenfor! I Here it is a curse, as well as a pun : i. e. "burst thou, O sinner 1 like unto a cooking pot (sthalin - sthall-vat). 
Ishli :- This prolation takes place there only, where the Proper Noun Gotra &c. with which the salutation was made, is employed by the Guru at the end of the sentence; and not where the position of the Proper Name &c. is different. Therefore not here, देवदस कुशल्यसि; देवदत्त भायुष्मान् पराध, for here the word Devadatta is not used at the end of a sentence. 
Vart :The prolation is optional, when #t: follows such Proper Name, or when the Person addressed is a Kshatriya or a Vaishya. As it Aparça TVS # Reply (1) argenta pf flor (2) organe gry #V8 So also when a Kshatriya is addressed, as a HIT , Reply (1) ryan raor (2) atur pro 
m 
Vaishya: 
m quis fit Guru : rgorate Fine or argente a la .. 
To all 5811 Tata Il TTT, , ll वृत्तिः ॥राते यदाक्यं वर्तते तस्य टेःप्लुनो भवति स चोदात्तः ॥ इटिः॥ वाक्यस्यान्ते या सम्बोधनपदं भवति, तर भयं प्लुत प्यते ॥ 
84. The final vowel of a sentence becomes pluta and acute, when used in calling a person from a distance. 
The word or is in the Fifth case by 11. 3. 35; the word om means 'calling', 'addressing'. Thus Toy #74** I u omey HI ATTTF PHTHIRIT The word 'distance is a relative term, and is not fixed at what distance there should be prolation. The prolation however takes place, when a voice is to be raised, in order that the sound may reach the person. That distance upto which the voice can be heard without raising its pitch and without any special effort, need not be considered as "distance" for the purposes of this satra. 
The word gå here includes, 'addressing in general, and not only 'calling'. Thus there is prolation here also सत्तून् पिब देवदत्ता, पलायस्व देवता 
This pluta sentence becomes eka-Sruti by I. 2. 33. 
Why do we say "from a distance" ? Observe om 10144 14571 
Ishti --This prolation takes place only then, when the noun in the vocative case stands at the end of the sentence. Therefore, there is no prola tion here: TOTI 
Berata erat: 1154 u raufa n t, d, matit, , at: 11 
. 
1584 
PLUTA. 
(BK. VIII. C1. II. §. 86 
वृत्तिः ॥ प्रयोगे दूपदूत यहाक्यं वर्तते तब हहयारेव प्लुतो भवति ॥ 
85. When the words and are employed, in ad dressing a person from a distance, there the fand alone get the pluta and the accent. 
Asi 1977, 
19 
7 1, 7777211 The repetition of the words and in the satra, is for the sake of indi. cating, that the prolation takes place even when it and do not stand at the end of a sentence. 
गुरोरनृतोनन्त्यस्याप्येकैकस्य प्राचाम् ॥८६॥ पदानि ॥ गुरोः, अन्-ऋतः, अ. RETRT, TO, 5, 4, TET 11 वृत्तिः ॥ कारवर्तितस्य गुरोरनन्त्यस्यापिशवादन्यस्यापि टेरेकैकस्य सम्बोधने वर्तमानस्य प्लुतो भवति पाचामाचार्याणां मतेन ॥ 
86. In the room of a prosodially long vowel, (with the exception of x) though it may not stand at the end, there is substituted a pluta for one at a time, under the above circum stances (VIII. 2.83-84), in the opinion of Eastern Grammarians. 
This satra indicates a special sthanin for the pluta vowel taught by VIII. 2. 83 to 84. With the exception of e. for every heavy vowel, though it may not be the final vowel of the vocative word, and for the final vowel also, but only one at a time, there is pluta substitution, in the opinion of Eastern Grammarians. Thus देवदत्त or देवदत्त or देवदतः ॥ Similarly with याज्ञदत्त, यज्ञान or $ 
Why do we say yit: "of a prosodially long vowel"? So that the of and in Devadatta and Yajñadatta may not be prolated, for this is short. 
Why do we say ma:"with the exception of "? Observe softa, propo fonts, but never I SOTAC U 
The word vastu shows that the prolation should not be simultaneous, but of one at a time; not 1111 
The word Tea "in the opinion of Eastern Grammarians" is used for the sake of creating option. So in one alternative, there is no prolation at all. 
As organ PT IT | Thus the present sūtra, makes VIII. 2. 83 and 84, optional sūtras. This also is an authority for the following dictum of Patanjali" a 48: Argefa funt apros: " ( Mahabhashya VIII. 2. 92. Commentary). Thus all rules relating to Prolation become optional. In short, the word should be read in all rules regarding prolation, and thus without doing violence ( sâhasa ) to grammatical authority, one may have optional pluta everywhere. 
13K. VIII. C11. 11. §. 89 ) 
PLUTA 
1585 
AFTETÀ Il suo il para lanta, a rra II पत्तिः ॥ अभ्यारानं प्रारम्भा सत्र य भीमशः तस्य प्लुतो भवति ।। 
87. The vowel iu is pluta in the beginning of a sacred text. 
The word and means the commencement of a sacred mantra or Vedic text. Thus shine for goffa ya Tuferit II (Rig I. I. I). 
Why do we say "in the beginning"? Observe sia mo Argumenta (Chhandogya Upanishad. I. 1. 1). Here is not used to indicate the com mencement of a Text or Mantra, but is itself the subject of comment 
HOT 11 5511 a 1, TT, PATUT 11 वृत्तिः ॥ येत्येतस्य यज्ञकर्माण प्लुतो भवति ॥ इष्टिः ॥ये यमामह इत्यत्रैवायंप्लुत इष्यते ॥ 
88. The vowel of # becomes pluta in a sacred text, when it is employed in a sacrificial work. 
Thus wasTE# Why do we say when employed in sacrificial work? Observe à une ma 547 "Ye yajamahe consists of five syllables". Here it is simple recitation. 
Ishti :-The word ais pluta before it only. Therefore not so here: the rainTUEU (Rig. I. 139. 11). 
Torert: 1 CE 1 TET Il furet, a: 11 T: 11 42 for de goma A fa 
89. In a sacrificial work, 473# is substituted for the final vowel, with the consonant, if any, that may follow it, of a sentence. 
The word for is understood here also. The word gott means wir 11 It is the name given to this syllable. This one is substituted for the final letter (fa) of that word which stands either at the end of a Pada ofa sacred hymns or at the end of a hemistich of such Rik. Thus for wat hire frater (Rig. VIII. 44. 16), we may have sai taifa fwaran So also for the गाति मुनयुः (Rig. III. 27. 1), we may have देवार जिगाति मुनयोंम् ॥ 
The word is repeated in this aphorism in spite of its anuvritti from VIII. 2. 82, to indicate that a replaces the whole last syllable, with its vowel and consonant. Had fe not been repeated, then by the rule of white SERVER the final letter only of the portion of a sentence would have been replaced. Thus in g#T', the visarjaniya alone would have been replaced. 
When not comployed in connection with sacrificial works, there is no such substitution. Thus in simple rcading of the Vedas, we should always rccitc si taifa la It 
1586 
PLUTA 
[ BK. VILL. Cl. II. 8.93 
याज्यान्तः ॥ ९०॥ पदानि ॥ याज्या, अन्तः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ याश्या नाम बेमाश्याकापव्यन्त मन्मास्तषामन्यो पटि सबसे वज्ञकर्मणि। 
90. The last vowel at the end of Mantras called Yajya, when employed in sacrificial works, is pluta and has the Acute. 
Thus स्तोमविधेमामय (Rig. VIII. 43. II), जिह्वामी कृपे हव्यवाहा (Rig. x. 8.6). 
Why do we say "at the end'? There are some Yajya hymns, consiste ing of several sentences. The final vowel (F2) of every sentence would have become pluta, in such a hymn. To prevent it, the word "anta" is used, so that the final vowel of the hymn at the end of all, becomes pluta. 
शूहिप्रेभ्यश्रौषडौषडावहानामादेः ॥ ६१॥ पदानि ॥ हि, प्रेग्य, श्रौषद्, भौषट्, भावहानाम, मादेः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ हि प्रेष्य श्रीपद् वौषट् भावह इस्थतेपामारे प्लुतो भवति यज्ञकर्मणि ॥ 
91. In a sacrificial work, the first syllable of अहि, प्रेग्य, औषट्, धौषट् and मावह is pluta. 
Thus मनयेऽनुहि (Maitr S. I. 4. II), मनये गोमयानि (or ) में , मस्तु श्रीपद सोमस्यामे वीही। वरिषद, मनिमाइवह 
So also in posaran RTIST on the analogy of grs, so also TATIATU The word वोपद् is illustrative of the six forms वपद, वौपद, वापर, वोक्षद्, वामद, पशाद॥ 
But there is no prolation in मावह देवान यजमानाब; भावह भात वेदः॥ __ अग्नीत्प्रेषणे परस्य च ॥३२॥ पदानि ॥ अग्नी, प्रेषणे, परस्य, च ॥ बत्तिः॥मग्नीधः प्रेषणमग्नीप्रेषणम् समादेः प्लुतो भवति परस्य च ।। 
92. In an order given to Âgnidhra priest, the first syllable as well as the succeeding syllable is pluta. 
In a Yajna, the principal priests (rtvij) are four Adhvaryu, Udgata, Hota, Brahma. Every one of these has three subordinate priests (rtvij) under them : as shown below. 
NAMES OF PRINCIPAL. 
SUBORDINATE, *. 
6. Adhvaryu: (Yajur) Pratiprasthata Nestha (VI.4.11) Unneta. Udgata (Saman) Prastota 
Pratiharta Subrahmanya. Hota (Rig) VI. 4. 11. Maitra varuņa Aclichliavak l'ota (VI.4.11). Brahma (Atharvan) Brahmanâchhansi Agnidhra Gravastuta. 
III. 2. 177. 
BK. VIII. C11. 11. 8. 94 ) 
PLUTA. 
1587 
The duty of Ágnidhra is to kindle the sacrificial fire. In a summons or call (aqor) made by the Adhvaryu, who is the Director of ceremonies, to the Agnidhra to perform the functions of Agnidh, both syllable become pluta. 
The word prolio is a compound - spority: aque" a call or summon relating to Agnidhduty.” 
___Thus मा श्रावक, भोपा ॥ The pluta takes place only in these examples; therefore, not here, as wallpa APT; Te Foto 1 Some, therefore, read the aunvritti of the word Pantot from the next sötra, into this, and would have it an optional rule, of fixed jurisdiction ( viyavasthita vibhasha ). Others say" all pluta rules are optional” ( 7 : 
A TAU THA:) In TUTU , AR 7, there is Vedic diversity. 
The words 'relating to sacrificial work' ( MFH ) are understood here also. Therefore not in ST MITTEN 
farhrt genderaat: 11 EB 11 Tata u frater, TK-afaqaat:it: .n वृतिः ॥ पृटपतिवचने विभाषा हे प्लुतो भवति । 
93. ft at the end of an answer to a question may optionally be pluta. 
Thus g. मकाः कर्द देवाल? Ans. भकाही'.or मका हि ॥ . मलावी on ? Ans. fari f or a 
Why do we say "in answer to a question”? Observe perforatul 
Why do we say it: "off"? Observe A HET NI निगृह्यानुयोगे च ॥ ९४॥ पदानि ॥ नि गृह्य, अनु योगे, च ॥ पतिः॥स्वमतालच्यावनं निग्रहः ॥ भनुयोगस्सस्य मतस्थाविष्करणम् ॥सन नियमानुयोगे यहाक्यं वर्तते सस्वप्लुितो भवति विमापा ॥ 
94. The end syllable of that sentence is optionally pluta, when it asserts something which has been refuted, and is employed by the victor by way of censure. 
The word Paag: means the refutation of anothers opinion. Ryu is a gerund, and means 'having refuted'. gat: is the expression of the same proposition which has been refuted. When a person has demonstrated the untenableness of anothers assertion, and then employs the said assertion by way of taunt, reproach or reprimand, then the final syllable of such a sentence becomes pluta. The satra literally means "Having refuted (it) when asserting (the same by way of censure)." 
. Thus an opponent asserts that " The word is not eternal." (fort: :). Proving by arguments the untenableness of this position, and after refuting it, the victor says by way of reprimand aren: 0 auta orain To FearRT II * This is then your assertion—that the word is not eternal. Similarly ng afacereat or wa kufregrey al matracarent or Murr T roll 
1588 
PLUTA. . 
[BK. VIII. CH. II. 897 
In some texts of Kasika, according to Padamanjari, only the last example is given. 
मानेडितं भसने ॥६५॥ पदानि ॥ आनेडितम, मर्क्सने । वृत्तिः ॥वास्यादेरामन्धितस्वेति भर्सने चिनातस्थामरिसं प्रवते ।। पार्मिकन् ॥ भर्त्सने पर्यायेणेति वक्तव्यम् ॥ 
95. The end syllable of an amredita Vocative is pluta, when threat is expressed. 
A Vocative is reiterated when threat is meant (VIII. 1. 8). Its final syllable becomes pluta. Thus on an anaan aT 11 So also create बन्धयिष्यामि खा, दस्थ बस्यो &c. 
Though the anuvritti of the satra VIII. 2. 82, is current here, yet the final of the sentence is not pluta, but of the amredita. 
Vart:-It should be rather stated that any one of the repeated words may be pluta by alternation. Thus चोर चोर or चरि नौरा ॥ The word amre dita is employed in the satra as illustrative of the doubling, for threat is expressed by both words, so pluta may be of both words in turn: and not of the second word only, though that is called technically amredita. 
अजयुक्तं तिकाकारक्षम् ॥ ९॥ पदानि ॥ अझ युक्तम, तिकाकाक्षम् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥भात्यनेन युक्तं तितमाका भर्सने प्रयते ॥ 
.96. The final syllable of a finite verb, used as a threat becomes pluta, when the word of is joined with it, and it demands another sentence to complete the conclusion. 
Thus मजकूमारानी शास्वाति माल्न ॥ मा बाह, रानी शास्वसि माम॥ 
Why do we say a verb ? Observe भदेवदत्त निध्या पदसि॥ 
Why do we say "when this calls for a conclusion"? Observe मापच॥ Here it is a complete sentence and does not demand another to complete the sense. 
The word of the last sätra is understood here also. Therefore not here, मामधीप्प, मोदन से हास्यामि ॥ Here मा has the force of solicitation. (VIII. 1. 33) 
विचार्यमाणानाम् ॥९॥ पदानि ॥ विचार्य-माणानाम् ॥ पतिः ॥ प्रमाणेन वस्तुपरीक्षण विचारः । तस्व विषये विचार्यमाणानां वाक्यानां देः प्लुतो भवति । 
97. The end-syllable of those sentences is pluta, which denote acts of reflection (or balancing between two alternatives). 
To determine a thing by weighing all arguments pro and con is called vichara or judgment. Thus होतव्यं दीक्षितस्व गृहान होताम "should one per. form sacrifice in the house of an initiated person". Similarly वियूपास भनुनहरे 
BK. VIII. CH. II S. 100] 
PLUTA. 
. 
1589 
पूपा ॥ Here also it is being reflected upon whether पे तिटन or खूपे भनुमत् ।। i. e. should the stake remain upright or should it be put flat by the yajamana. कि यूपस्तिष्ठेन, किवा दूपं यजमान शाययेत् ।। 
पूर्वे तु भाषायाम ॥ ९८॥ पदानि ॥ पूर्वम, तु, भाषायाम् ॥ वृतिः ॥ भापायां विषये विचार्यमाणानां पूर्वमेव प्रयते॥ 
98. In the common specch, the end-vowel of the first alternative is only pluta. 
This makes a niyama or restriction. The previous sotra, is thus con fined to Vedic literature, and not to the vernacular. here has the force of 'only'. Thus महाशा 'Is it a snake or a rope'? लोटोकपोसीन 'Is ita clod of earth or a pigeon ? 
The priority, of course, depends upon employment. The order of words depends upon one's choice. 
प्रतिश्रवणे च ॥EET पदानि ॥ प्रतिश्रवणे, च ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ प्रतिवणमभ्युपगमः प्रतिज्ञानम् ॥श्रवणाभिमुल्यं च समाविशेषात्सर्वस्व पण । प्रतिभवण यहाक्यं वर्तते तस्वप्लुितो भवति ।। 
99. The end-syllable of the sentence which express es assent or promise or listening to, is pluta. 
The word afty means "agreement, assent or promise": It also means "listening to". All these senses are to be taken here, as there is nothing in the satra to restrict its scope. Thus it has three senses, I. to pro mise something to a petitioner, 2. to acknowledge the truth of some proposi tion, 3. to listen to another's.words. Thus ग मे देहि मोः, . हन्त पानि ।। 2. मित्यः 
दो भवितुमर्हति ॥ 3. देवदत्त भीः, किमाया। 
अनुवास प्रमान्तामिपूजितयोः ॥ १० ॥ पदानि । अनुदात्तम, प्रम-अन्त, अमि पूजितयोः॥ वृत्तिः ॥भमुशता प्लुतो भवति भमानी मभिपूभिते च॥ 
100. The end-vowel at the end of a question or of a praise is pluta, but unaccented. 
That which is employed at the end of an interrogative sentence is called HTTY: 11 According to some, this rule does not ordain pluta, but only ordains the anudatta-ness of those syllables which become pluta by the previous rules VIII. 2.84 &c. The meaning of the sutra then is:-That pluta which comes at the end of an Interrogative sentence or a sentence denoting .admiration, is anudatta. 
Thus भगौ पूर्वाहन पामम् ममिभूनाश or मग पूर्वाहन मामा पढा(i.e. भगमः पूर्वान् मामान अमिभूते or पटो)॥ The words भमिस्ते, and पटो being finals in a 
1590 
.PLUTA 
[ BK. VIII. CH. II. 5 103 
question, become anudatta as well as pluta. The other words भगमः &c be. come svarita and pluta by VIII. 2. 105. See VIII, 2. 107. 
As regards मभिपूजिते we have शोभना खल्वति माणवका । Here the final of माणवक becomes anudatta and pluta. 
चिदिति चोपमा प्रयुज्यमाने ॥ १०१॥ पदानि ॥ चित, ति, च, उपमा-भय, प्रयुज्यमाने । 
वृत्तिः ॥ अनुदानमिति पते चिदित्येतस्मिनिपाते उपमा प्रयुज्यमाने वाक्यस्य टेरनुशताप्लुतो भवति । 
. 101. The end-vowel at the end of a. sentence becomes anudatta and pluta, when the particle fera is em ployed, denoting comparison. 
The word ei is understood here. This sätra ordains pluta as well and not merely accent. 
Thus भनिषिदू भाया 'may he shine as fire'. So also राजधिर् भावान् 'may be shine as a King'. . 
___ Why do we say when the sense is that of comparison'? Observe कर्ष पिद माहुः ॥ Here पिद् has the force of littleness or difficulty'. 
Why do we say tarawhen expressly employed'? Observe afra मणिवको भायात् 'Let the boy shine like fire'. Here पित् is understood, hence the rule does not apply. . परिस्विदासीदिति च ॥ १२॥ पदानि ॥ उपरि-स्वित्-आसीत, इति, च॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ भनुदात्तमिति वर्तते ।। उपरिस्थिदासीत्येतस्य टेरनुदानः पशुतो भवति ॥ 
102. In cuft fraq areia the end vowel is anudatta . and pluta.. 
. . . The word anudatta is understood here also. The end-vowel would have been pluta here by VIII. 2. 97: the present sätra really ordains accent. lessness of this pluta. . . . 
Thus qui furetat, poft ferrer (Rig X. 129. 5). In the first pore tion prate is pluta and udatta by VIII. 2. 97, in the second it is anudatta by the present satra. 
- स्वरितमानेडितेसूयासमतिकोपकुत्सनेषु ॥ १०३ ॥ पदानि ॥ स्वरितम् , माने डिते, असूया, सम्मति, कोप, कुत्सनेषु॥ 
पतिः॥स्वरितः प्लुतो भवति भाग्रेरिते परतः मसूबायां सम्मती कोपे कुत्सने च गन्यमान। पा०॥ ममूवादिषु वा वचनं कर्तव्यम् ।। 
103. Of the two Vocatives of the same form standing at the beginning of a sentence, the end-vowel of the first becomes pluta and svarita, when envy, praise, anger, or blame is expressed. 
: The vocative is doubled by VIII. I. 8. This satra ordains pluta there. . Tin Envy::~माणवकार माणवक, भाभिकपका भभिरूपक, रिनंतमभिकप्यम्॥ Praise: BK. VIII. CH. II. §. 105 ) 
PLUTA. 
1591 
माणवकार माणवक, अभिरूपकार मभिरूपक शोममः खल्बसि ॥ Anger :-माणपकार माषषक, भविनीतकार मविनीतक वानी ज्ञास्यसि पाल्म | Blame:-पानीकार शाक्तीक, थाटीकार चाटीक रिकाले शक्ति। 
Vart: The word "optionally" should be read into this sotra. Thus there is no pluta and svarita in one alternative As माणवक माणवक &c. 
झियाशी प्रेषेषु तिडाकाक्षम् ॥ १०४॥ पदानि ॥ शिया, माशी, प्रेषेषु, तिर आकाक्षम् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ स्वाति इति वर्तते । शिया भाचारमेव माशी प्रार्थनाविशेषः । शम्मेम व्यापारणं प्रेपः । एतेषु गम्यमानेषु तिन्सामकाइसं यत्तस्व स्वरित प्लुतो भवति । 
___104. When an error against polite usage is cen sured, or when a benediction or a bidding is intended, the end syllable of a finite verb becomes pluta and svarita, if this requires another sentence to complete the sense. 
The word 'svarita" is understood here. The word hy means 'the error in usage' or 'want of good breeding'.(VII1.1.60) anir: means 'benediction'. प्रेप: means 'order' or 'commanding by words'. 
Thus (1) स्वयं श्येन याति, उपाध्याय पवाति गमयति ।। स्वर्व मोवन मुरन, पाध्याय सक्सून पावति ॥ In both these, the first sentence requires the second as its complement, and hence there is THTHT # 
Benediction:-मतांध लप्सीपार धनं च तात; छन्दोध्येपीष्ठी व्याकरण च, भा॥ . Order:-कट कुकरमामं च गच्छ; बवान् लमीहि, सक्ष पिय 
Why do we say " when it requires another sentence as its comple ment"? Observe वी ते माथुरस्तु; मग्नी विहर ॥ There cannot be any counter example of fat, for there two sentences are absolutely necessary to express the sense of censure. ____ अनन्त्यस्यापि प्रभाल्यानयोः ॥१०५॥ पदानि ॥ अनन्यस्य, मपि, प्रभ, भास्या 
मयोः ॥ 
वृतिः ॥ भमन्यस्वापि मन्यस्यापि पदस्थ है। प्लुतो भवति प्रमे मास्वाने च। 
105. In a question or narration, the end-vowel of a word, though uot final in a sentence, becomes svarita and pluta, as well as of the word which is final in a sentence. : 
The word 'padasya' is understood here: and so also the word 'svarita'. The end-vowel of a word which is not the last word in a sentence, as well as of the last word, becomes svarita and pluta, when a question is asked, or a fact is narrated. In fact, all the words of a sentence become svarita and pluta hereby. 
Thus in questioning we have:-माग पून मामा भान भूतr or 92117 11 Thus all words have become svarita and pluta. The final word 
1592 
PLUTA. 
( BK. VIII. CI. II. S. 106 
would, in one alternative, become anudatta also, by VIII. 2. 100, as shown under that satra. The force of the word me in the sätra, is to make the final word also syarita, and thus this sätra makes VIII. 2. 100 an optional sätra with regard to question. 
In akhyana or narration, there is no other rule, which is debarred by this. Therefore there, all words become svarita and pluta necessarily, by the force of this stra. Thus itaquaq aralıq : u 
Another view of this sotra is that the word of applies only to akhyana, so that in akhyana all words become svarita. But in pragna, the final word will not become svarita, but arudatta necessarily by VIII. 2. 100. According to this view, this sätra does not ordain option. This view is not adopted by Kasika, or Padamanjari or Siddhanta Kaumudi. 
प्लुतावेच दुतौ ॥ १०॥ पदानि ॥ प्लुतो, ऐचः, तौ। वृत्तिः ॥ राबूतादिषु प्लुतो विहित तब ऐचः प्लुतमसो सहवववभूतावि दुतो प्लुतो ॥ 
106. In forming the pluta of the diphthongs & and , their last element { and 3 get the pluta. 
The pluta ordained by VIII. 2. 84 &c. when applied to go or sit, cause the prolation of the last element of these diphthongs namely of orill The word om in the stra is Nominative dual of , and the aphorism literally means "qand 7 are pluta of the diphthongs and " ! 
Thus Isfisren, wir # 
The letters and oft are compound letters or diphthongs consisting of +8 and +7ll In making the pluta of these, the question arises, should both ® and (or a) be prolated, or only the last element, or the first only. 
The present sätra answers that doubt. If in the analysis of these letters, be taken as having one matra (or moras), and rand one matra, then the pluta and will have two matrås, so that the whole piuta and 4 will have three matrås. In fact, the word is used here as a Past Participle of a having the force of a verb; and sदुतौ प्लती means दुतो प्रवते i.e. वृद्धि गच्छता, i.e. 
and are lengthened. And x and are lengthened to that extent, so as to make and of three matras. Thus when +r and + T each has one matra, then the pluta of r and will have two matràs as we have said before. But when +(C) and #++ (wit) are considered to have half mátra, and r and Tone matra and a half, then t and I are made pluta, so as to have two and a half (25) matras each, thus the whole of and mit, has still three matras. In fact, the definition of pluta is, that it is a yowel which has three matras: so that we should so prolate the vowel as to make it have three matrås. 
.. .But according to Patanjali, this pluta of $ and my has four matras. Thus ptr and m ë each has one matra. The pluta of r and a will have 
BK. VIII. CH. II. . 107) 
PSUTA. 
1593 
three matras. Thus *+ 11 and 8+31. or the whole has four matras. Accord ing to this view a vowel may have four matras also. 
एचोप्रगृह्यस्यादरादूपते पूर्वस्यास्यादुत्तरस्येदुतौ। १०७ ॥ पदानि । एचो, अ-प्रगृह्यस्य, अदूराबूते, पूर्षस्य अर्धस्य, भात, उत्तरस्य ईत, उती॥ वृत्तिः ॥ एचो प्रगृयस्वादूरादू ते प्लुतविपवस्वाईस्याकार मादेशो भवति स प प्लुतः रसरस्वकारोका रापादेवी भवतः॥ 
पातिकम् ॥विषयपरिगणं कर्तब्ध । वागाप्रमान्तामिपूभितविचार्यमाणप्रत्यभिवादबाज्यामिति बकबम्। 
पा॥मामनियते छन्दसि जुतविकारोवं पतयः ॥ 
107. In the diphthongs, which are not Pragthya (I. 1. 11 &c) and which become pluta under the circums tances mentioned in VIII. 2. 83 &c., but not when that circumstance is a call from a distance (VIII. 2. 84); for the first half, there is substituted the prolated at, aud for the second portion r or 31 
The diphthongs or are g, g, it and it Their elements are +, and +Tu When these diphthongs are to be prolated, at the end of a word, the diphthong is resolved into its elements, the first portion is prolated, and or 7 added, as the case may be. This and , in fact, are the substi tutes of the second portion, which may be for 7, or or itu 
This rule is not of universal application, but applies to Rules VIII. 2. 100, VIII. 2. 97, VIII. 2. 83, and VIII. 2. go only, according to the 
Vart:-The scope of this s@tra should be determined by enumerat ing the rules to which it applies. 
Vårt :-It should be stated that it applies to sQtras VIII. 2: 100, 97, 83 and go. 
Thus VIII. 2. 100: As strana: gain aria frantu or mento ut ft 144471 mwant or anit! So also VIII. 2. 97: Free Affaria punt i So also VIII. 2. 83, as :-A TE A 
or getit i So also VIII. 2. 90:-as. 
· PTB Tuma ET4 Trei 
a f arantii (Tait. $. I. 3. 14. 7). This pluta HT is udatta, anudatta or svarita, according to the parti cular rule which has been applied, i. e. at the end of a question it is anudatta or svarita, and every where else, udatta. The and are of course, always udatta : because the anuvfitti of udatta is current here. 
Why do we restrict this sQtra to the above-mentioned four rules? Observe para forat afat AT 
4* frogga in In fact, the present sätra being confined to the above-mentioned four rules, the words a nd in thc satra, are redundant: and should not have 
1594 
PLUTA. 
[BK. VIII. CH. 11. $ 108 
been used. Moreover the word gray should have been used in the satra, for it applies to diphthongs at the end of a pada. Therefore, not here, at müft mara I Here it before the sarvanamasthana affix y is not a Pada (I. 4. 17). 
Why do we say when it is not a Pragphya'? Observe great 
Vart :-This peculiar modification of pluta vowel takes place in the Vocative case in the Vedas. As भमाया पीवार सवेन त्वष्टा सोमं पिव|Here by no other rule, the Vocative would have become prolated 
तयोविचि संहितायाम् ॥ १०८॥ पदानि । तयोः य, वी, अचि, संहितायाम् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥तयोरिसोर्यकारवकारादेशी भवतो ऽधि संहितायां विषये ॥ 
Kariká:fa wants for anagara FATTI 
Y FITAR ferat uranterent formato m49fat agere not 1991 
सेनतबोमन शाकलीयों वस्वरवाषनमेव हेतुः ।। 
108. For these vowels & and 5 are substituted , and ę when a vowel follows them in a samhita (in an un broken flow of speech). 
The word afgarara is an adhikara and exerts its influence upto the end of the Book, Whatever we shall teach hereafter, upto the end of the Book, will apply to words which are in Sanhita. 
Thus HTITUT, TETATUT, "PATIO , PETITE II Why do we say "when a vowel follows"? Observe SRTIL, TETIT 11 
Why do we say of arala 'In an uninterrupted flow of speech'? Ob servę prati ra, TT TTC in Pada Patha. 
This sūtra is made, because { and being Pluta-modifications are considered as asiddha (VIII. 2. 1) for the purposes of tour (VI. 1. 77). But supposing that some how or other, these r and I be considered siddha, still the present rule is necessary to prevent their lengthening before a homo geneous vowel (VI. 1. 101), or their retaining their form unchanged by VI. 1. 127. If it be said, that these rules VI. 1. 101, and VI. 1. 127, would not apply, because of the Vartika i ganten a f ari garat : (Vartika to VI, 1.77); still the present sätra ought to be made, in order to prevent re accent (VIII. 2. 4). 
Kariká :-2. Could not this have been accomplished by the counter of VI. 1. 77, that the Acharya has taught this separate & and substitution ? 
Ans. If you say that pluta is siddha in the vowel sandhi rules, because of the jnapaka in satra VI. 1, 125, then still this rule is necessary in order to prevent the lengthening of VI. I. 101, and the Sakala rule VI. 1, 127. 
of VIII. 2. 4. 
According to one view, the vårtika under VI. 1. 77, refers to those vowels which are not pluta-elements, like the present and o, but which are independent vowels following after a pluta vowel. As ir n= 1 FEU 
Here is a Nipata. 
ओ३म् । 
अथ अष्टमाध्यास्य तृतीयः पादः। 
- BOOK EIGHTH. CHAPTER THIRD. 
ALI 
मतुषसो रु सम्बुद्धौ छन्दसि ॥१॥ पदानि ॥ मतु, धसोः, रु, सबुद्धौ, छन्दसि॥ वृत्तिः ॥ मत्वन्तस्व वस्वन्सस्य च पदस्य हरित्ययमादेखो भवति सम्बुद्धी परतः छन्दसि विषये। वार्तिकम् ॥ वन उपसंख्यानं कर्तव्यम् ॥ वा०॥ भवरगवदयवसामाचावस्व ।। 
1. For the final of the affixes ac and ra, there is substituted n, in the Vocative singular, in the Chhandas. 
The word algarai is understood here. A word ending in the affix मत् or वझ, changes its final t or स् intor, in the Chhandas, in the Vocative singular. Thus मत :-इन्न मरुल बह पाहि सोमम् (Rig. III. 51.7) हरियो मेदिनं बा॥ Here मरुत्वः is Vocative Sg. of मरुत्वत् and हरिवः of हरिवत, meaning "he who is possessed of Maruts or Hari horses”. The of ma is changed to by VIII. 2. 10%3; rs. The base मस्त before this termination is Bha by I. 4. 19. The affixR (nom. sg.) is elided by VI. I. 68; ther is elided by VIII. 2. 23, and then (of नुम् VII. I.70)is changed to { by this sutra. So also इन्द्रायाहि तनुजाम: उपब्रह्माणि हरिवः (Rig. I. 3.6). 
With वस् :-भीईस्तोकाय तनयाय मुळ (Rig. II. 33. 14), निसाहः॥ See VI. I. 12, for the formation of मीडान, साहान् with कर। 
Why do we say 'of मत् and पम्'? Observe ब्रह्मन् स्सोप्यामः ॥ Why do we say in the Vocative Singular? Observe य एवं विद्वानमिमापने ॥ Why do we say in the Chhandas? Observe हे गामन् , हे पपियन् ॥ 
Vart: The affix बन् should also be enumerated. The affixes कनि and afty are both meant here. Its final is also changed to g in the Vocative Sg. As यस्लायन्त वमुना प्रातरिवः ॥ The word प्रातरिवन् is formed by adding कुनि to the root (प) preceded by प्रातः॥ See III. 2.75. The तुक् is added by VI. I.7. 
BK. VIII. CI. III. $. 3) 
NASAL 5. 
1597 
- 
Vart :-The finals of 777, 7 and are changed to , option ally in the secular as well as the sacred literature, and the syllable 7 of these words is changed to si H This is a general rule, applying both in the Vedas and the Bhasha. Thus - Hi or * Il prir: or भगवन् । मघवत्- भोः or हे भवन् ।। Or these words भोः भगो' and भो: are so irregularly formed by the acharya himself in VIU. 3. 17. These are found in other numbers than the Vocative Singular, as भो देवदसयज्ञरसो, भो देवरत्तयज्ञात विष्णुमित्राः ॥ It is found in connection with Feminine nouns also, as भो बामणि ॥ 
The adhikara of the word figurni does not exert any apparent influence in this satra. It however has influence in those subsequent satras, where the change in one word is occasioned by another word on account of sanhita or juxta-position, as in VIII. 3.7. 
See VIII. 2. 3 (Vartika 2) by which the lopa is considered siddha in Friti, otherwise there would have been no change in tū # &c. 
MF: gerer garnell vara 149, affi, TRT TATU वृतिः ॥ भधिकारोयम् । इत उत्तरं बस्व स्थाने सर्विधीवते ततः पूर्वस्व तु वर्णस्व वाऽनुनासिको भवतात. तरधिकतपेदितव्यम् ॥ 
2. In the following sâtras upto VIII. 3. 12, this is always to be supplied :—"But here a nasal vowel may optionally be substituted for the preceding vowel after which 
has been ordained". 
. This is an adhikara sätra. For the letter which stands before that letter for which has been substituted, there is substituted a nasal voivel, in this division of Grammar, where is the subject of discussion. 
Thus sätra VIII, 3. 5 says " In the place of the final of 7, there is $ when augment follows". The vowel w of becomes nasal ; as dient, 
1, kenong N 
Why have we used the word in the stra? It means "here i. e. in this division where is the subject of discussion". Obj. This object would have been gained, without using the word aw; since it is an adhikara satra and would apply to all Ans. No. Here is taught in connection with nasal, therefore, the rule would not apply to any other context. For had not been used, we could not have known the extent of the jurisdiction (adhika ra) of this nasal ; and we might have applied the rule of nasality to those beyond the jurisdiction of e, such as VIII. 3. 13. The employment of a prevents this doubt and shows that and nasality are co-extensive. 
मातोदि नित्यम् ॥३॥ पदानि ॥ मातः, मटि, नित्यम् ॥ पतिः॥ भाटि परतो पूर्वस्थाकारस्य स्थाने नित्यमनुमासिकादेशो भवति ॥ 
1598 
NASAL 6. 
( BK. VIII. CH. III. $. 5 
3. A nasal vowel is always substituted for at before , when it is followed by a letter of a pratyahara (i. e, when it is followed by a vowel or T, 4, 9, or T). 
Thus VIII. 3. 9 teaches & substitution of the long o preceding it, would have been optionally nasal by the last sätra. The present sútra makes it necessarily so. Thus hi af (Rig. III. 46. 2) HI T YAT (Rig. VIII. 6. I). will 
Some (i. e. the Taittariyas) read it as anusvära. This is a Vedic diversity. 
Why do we say " for a long *"? Observe p erete Why do we say "when a vowel or 8, 9, 7, or follows"? Observe wainua, pastrata n 
.The word faca 'always' is employed for the sake of distinctness only. The very fact of making a separate sotra, would give it a compulsory force, even without the word nitya. 
अनुनासिकात्परोऽनुस्वारः॥४॥ पदानि ॥ अनुनासिकात, परः, अनुस्वारः ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ मनुनासिकाइन्यो यो वर्णः रोः पूर्वः वस्थानुनासिको न विहितस्ततः परो ऽनुस्वार भागमो भवति । 
4. After what precedes , if we omit to substitute the nasal, then anusvåra shall be the augment. 
The substitution of nasal is optional by VIII. 3. 2. When nasal is not substituted, we add an anusvara to such vowel. The word at should be read into the sotra to complete the sense, i.e. ETT HUt pof: "a letter other than a nasal", i.e. a letter for which nasal has not been ordained, and which stands before & 
Thus VIII. 3. 5, teaches substitution of the wofern an anusvara would be added. As reuf, sifatan u Similarly VIII. 3. 6, teaches substitution of the r of gu# An anusvára will be added here also, as, gritar II Similarly VIII. 3. 7, teaches & substitution of final al Here also an anusvara will be added, as wi ll 
Some say " the word g: in the sätra means mor, and so we need not supply the word भन्यः from outside". They say भनुनासिकान पर अनुनासिकानन्यः; i, e, the anusvára takes place in that alternative when there is no nasal. That anusvāra is an augment and not a substitute. It is an augment to the vowel which precedes al 
4: 
e n raifa Il Fa:, gracil वृणिः ॥ सम त्यतस्य हर्भवति मुटि परत सहितायां विषये ।। वार्मिकम् ॥ संपुकानां सो वक्तव्यः ॥ पा.॥समा वा लोपमंके । 
BK. VIII. CH. III 3.6] 
NASAL &. 
1599 
5. & is substituted for the a of fri (and thereby or is substituted for ) when the augment #follows, in a samhita. 
The augment or is added by VI. 1. 137 &c. Thus af or iron af, o u or iffinch, Antoun or f ou14 11 The word is thus evolved: 4+ 
+amf=T +&+af (VIII. 3. 5). Here rule VIII. 3. 15 appears and requires to be changed to visarjannya. This visarga may optionally be retained unchanged by VIII. 3. 36. This, however, is not done in the present ins tance : but the visarga is always and necessarily changed to by VIII. 3. 34. In fact, the option of VIII. 3. 36 is a determinate option (vyavasthita vibhasha) and does not apply to the present case. 
Or even this sätra may be so read as to teach the substitution as well. Thus, the satra is gra with two y, and the sätra will mean, " is 
substituted for the 4 of 4 before er, and this is always changed to "Il 
Why do we say "for the r of "? Observe info Why do we say "before "? Observe afat 11 
Vait:For the finals of an gn and are there is always substituted 11 There would arise anomalies, if & be substituted. Thus renf, JEPATHT, * Fill In fact, according to this vārtika, is never substituted for free (VIII. 3. 5), H (VIII. 3. 6) and Art (VIII. 3. 12). 
Vårt:- ANTHR Some would have the elision of the pafter Tu This Vartika is not given in the Kasika, but the Padamanjari gives it, and so also the Mahabhaslıya. 
According to Bhattoji Dikshita there will be 108 forms of this word संस्कर्ता॥ Thus संस्कर्ता and संस्कर्मा with the elision of e | Then with two स्, as kuriant, haf o Then we apply VIII. 4. 47 to this latter, and have three 
, as referint or that I The anusvåra is considered to be a vowel () for this purpose. Froin the thrce nasal forms संस्कर्ता, संस्कर्ता and सिस्स्स्क र्ता, we get three more by doubling the by the vartika : 44:11 The three forms having anusvara, will also double their anusvåra in addition to doubling. Thus we have 12 forms in anusvara : and six in nasal, altogether 18 forms. Then the will be doubled and trebled : and thus with one , two hand three Ħ, we have 3 x 18 - 54 forms. This will be doubled (2 x 54 108) when 999 is nasalised. 
H: H TTI & II Perfall H, 5 , 7-97 वृत्तिः ॥ पुमित्येतस्य भवति शम्परे खाय परता॥ 
6. &is substituted for the # of ga. (whereby the 
1600 
NASAL 
(BK. VIII. C11. III. g. 7 
g is changed to š or ) before a surd mute (*) which is followed by a vowel, semivowel or a nasal (a pratyahára). 
Thus पुस्कामा or पुस्कामा; पुंस्पुषः or पुस्पुनः; पुंस्फलं or पुंस्फलम् (धली or gull The visarga in griTAT required to be changed optionally to * jihva moliya by VIII. 3. 37, but it is not so done. It is changed always to here by VIII. 3. 34, also. The of jy is dropped by VIII. 2. 23, and the preced ing sound is 4, which comes to light in forms like gar &c. For the sake of distinctness, Panini has elected to exhibit the shorter form go when in the beginning of a composition : because this shorter form you is the real stem in composition. u pratyahara includes the ten hard consonants, and we pra tyahara includes all vowels, semivowels and nasals. That is formed by the affix op GAIB Hall 
In that alternative when we read the preceding sätra as arhitefe, then the anuvfitti of this will be current in the present sQtra also, and so there will be no scope for the operation of VIII. 3. 37. And though the anuvfitti of is also current, yet it will not apply here, because of its non-appropriate ness in that alternative. 
Why do we say 'before a surd mute'? Observe arh:, (V. 4. 92). Why do we say 'followed by a vowel or semivowel or nasal'? Observe graft, ger: 11 Why do we use the word op in the satra? Had we not used it, the sätra might have been open to this construction also. The of you is so changed before a me letter which has an a letter, (whether preceding it or following it). So that the rule would have applied to gare, JAITT: If 
Eseura Il l garrar i ati, afa, HUTT 11 afat: 11 TARTUPTE TREE TAART Trygt of papill 
7. is substituted for the final q of a word, with the exception of the 7 of tart, before a letter (3,3, 0, 7, , m), which is followed by an w letter (vowel, semi vowel and nasal). 
The word wat is to be read into this sätra. The word meum in the sātra is in the Nominative case, but it has the force of Genitive. 
Thus watotrafa or wirota ; waifwatilar or wifeaft; waittaa or waitteid, (from the root of 'to go'), katera or wait 
Why do we say "before a 5 letter'? Observe #977 fat Why do we say with the exception of the 7 of qura'? Observe 4919 otrafa, qur fortfall Why do we say 'when my follows 5T'? See *977 10: # Te is sword, he who is dexterous in it, is called 1997: ( V. 2. 64). BK. VIII. C11. III. $ 10] 
NASAL 8. 
1601 
_उमयथर्वा ॥८॥ पदानि । उभयथा, ऋक्षु॥ af: 11 TATUTEN T977 Tier 4847 EU 38 1 
8. In both ways, in the Rig verses. 
This ordains an option to the last sätra, by which the & substitution was compulsory. A word ending in or followed by a letter of of class, which itself is followed by ora, changes its final to optionally in the Rig Veda. Sometiines there is t and sometimes म् ॥ Thus तसिन् ला धाति or तसिंम् स्वा 
धाति प"स्तीम॥ 
Why do we say " in the Rig verses ". No option is allowed here are many खाद उखादिताम् ।। 
दीपादति समानपादे ॥९॥ पदानि ॥दीर्घात, मटि, समानपादे॥ वृतिः ॥ दीपदुसरस्व पदान्तस्य मकारस्व रुभवस्यदि परसस्तो पेनिमिसानिमित्तिनी समानपादे भवतः ॥ 
9 g is optionally substituted for that final a of a word which is preceded by a long vowel, and is followed by an a letter (vowels and semi-vowels with the exception of p), when these (a and ) come in contact with each other in the same stanza of the Rig Veda. 
The # of VIII. 3. 7 is understood here : and so also C The word Try means $47, i, e. when both words are in one and the same Pada of the verse. Thus efter for (Rig. IX. 107. 19) *** BETRA (Rig. I. 1. 2) ** मच्छादरीष्यत् महाँ इनोय भोमसा॥ 
Why do we say 'preceded by a long vowel'? Observe ya # Why do we say " when followed by a vowel or 4, Torr'? Observe par arraru Why do we say when both words are in the same pada of a verse'? Observe ATCHTAR 347{U: 
The word step of the preceding sätra is understood here also : so that it is an optional rule : and remains unchanged also, as m en 
Therma l See VIII. 3. 3. 
au ll folll la Il 7, gf it of RNATET APUR P Tool 96a: 11 
10. g is optionally substituted for the T of be fore 1 
The e in q is for the sake of pronunciation only. Thus #: art or TP ; : ftoft or is ftoft 11 
Why do we say "before '? Observe hrana #Some read the anuvritti of ran into this sutra, so that it is an optional one. Thus we have at also. The nominative case in 7 has the force of Genitive, 
1602 
ELISION OF THI 
(BK. VIII. C11. III. . 131 
Factoryret 888 qartall Franta, greit पतिः । स्वतवानित्येतस्य नकारस्थ भवति पायुशन्द परतः ॥ 
11. The 7 of aner is changed to before ore I 
As स्ववियुरंग्ने (Rig. IV. 2.6). The word is स्वतवस, the नुम् is added by VII. I. 83. The word is derived from तु वृद्धी with the affix भमुन् (स्वन्तको बस्यऽसौ स्वतवान्) । 
कानानेडिते ॥ १२॥ पदानि ॥ कान्, मानडिते॥ वृत्ति ॥ कानित्येतस्थ भकारस्य भवति भामेडिते परतः ।। 
12. ris substituted for the q of a when it is fol lowed by another 1 which is an amredita. 
The sâtra might have been ft; but the use of the longer form for shows, that where there is doubling', and the word gets the designa tion of amredita, then the rule applies. Thus कास्कान् भामन्त्रवते, कास्कान् भोजयति; or aithit &c. When the second 7is not an amredita, we have 117 414 qala? Here one is font asking question, and the other is used in the sense of contempt. This word is read in the list of P I (VIII. 3. 48), and hence sätra VIII. 3. 37, does not apply. Or the X of #4: HgR (VIII. 3. 5), is understood here, and that is enjoined here and not ! It should not be objected that in the preceding søtras also should be enjoined and not ; because in those sätras T is appropriate but not so here. 
Why do we say "when an amredita fit follows'? Observe TE AT qraft where one is interrogatory and the other denotes contempt (II. 1. 64). 
14:18311 Tarfa 11 8:, d, erg: || वृतिः ॥ कारस्थ डकार लोपो भवति । 
13. There is elision of when follows. 
. Though this satra is read in the division of Grammar which is govern ed by qara, yet this elision takes place only then when the v is not at the end of a pada. Thus it from fore+al The is changed to 7 by VIII. 2. 31, and the ris first changed to y by VIII. 2. 40, and then to T by VIII. 4. 41. Thus fore+TH The first is elided by this satra. Similarly dira, 
all The change of winto by VIII. 4.41, should be considered as valid and siddha for the purposes of this rule, otherwise this rule will find no scope. 
Obj:- It will find scope before that which is primary, as in martin + tit, where t of rent is primary. 
Ans-No. Here the first 7 will be changed to by Trule (VIII. 2. 39) and so there will be no occasion to elide it. The form will be safer tal Nor is this mi rule an apavada to * rule, because it has its scope in 
&c. For the ru rule depends upon one pada, and is antaranga, or being 
BK. VIII. C1. 111. S. 15 ) 
VISARGA. 
1603 
prior to this the lopa is asiddha with regard to it. Therefore they will take place first. Moreover in fase to there is similarity of sounds ( rampala); though there may not be theoretical similarity (METS 777) when the change of vinto 7 by VIII. 4. 41, is considered asiddha. But this theoretical technical dissimilarity will be removed by the express text of the present sâtra. But in Wins Arnie there is ncither similarity of sounds (Sruti krtamânantaryam) between and , nor similarity created by any technical rule; therefore 19 has no scope here. It is Bahiranga as well as subsequent to my rule (VIII. 2. 39), and therefore doubly asiddha; and consequently it does not debar the *rule. So when & is changed to by a rule (VIII. 2. 39) in fisk, then there remains no sort of anantarya-neither of kruti nor of sastra. 
रोरि॥ १४॥ पदानि ॥र:, रि॥ वृत्तिः ॥रेफस्व रेफे परतो लोपो भवति । 
14. ris elided before a Ill 
The sätra is : A, and not of# That is an is the form which : A and aft will both assume. " is the Genitive of Į, and o: would be the Genitive of ll The satra is not confined to only, but to every in general including 11 Thus in, 197where it is simple of fat and K; and भनी स्था, and इन्दूरपः where it is (ममिः स्या, इन्दुः स्या), The lengthening is by VI. 3. 111. The word qafe is understood here, and the Genitive here has the force of propi. e, a quality, or avayava-shashthi; i. e. when it is a portion of the pada. Thus a it which is not at the end of a pada is also elided. Had the Genitive been construed as sthåna-shashthi, then train would qualify 97, and the rule would mean "should be elided before a when at the end of a word." # See VIII. 1. 16. But wc liave the clision of the penultimate in 
of the second person singular of the Imperfect of the Intensive, and we get the form orat: it See VIII. 2. 37. So also 897ETT: from me in Intensive, Imper fect. The reduplicate is lengthened by VII. 4. 83, the T is elided, and reg is elided by VI. 1. 68, the final is changed to by VIII. 2. 39, and this chan ged to by VIII. 2. 75. ___ खरवसानयोर्विसर्जनीयः ॥ १५॥ पदानि ॥ खर, अवसानयोः, विसर्जनीयः॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ रेफान्तस्य परस्य खरि परतो ऽवसाने च विसर्जनीयादेशो भवति । 
15. The Visarjaniya is substituted for y, before a en consonant or when there is a Pause. 
Tha word v is understood. The visarga is the substitute of final in a Pada, before surd consonants and sibilants, or at a Pause, 
Thus [graft (VIII. 3. 34, VIII. 4. 40), 931741, fa, THEFTT:, gheti, minh, helaat, Alfh, gi ut Pause:- 1; III 
Who do we say "before a ut consonant or at a Pause"? Observe sarafa, arafa, Tis: (a Faqi *:), 79 (na) In thesc two latter, 
1604 
AND a 
(BK. VIII. CH. III. $ 17 
the Vriddhi being considered as Bahiranga, and the being the result of such Bahiranga Vriddhi, is asiddha, and is consequently not changed to visarga. 
The word gee is understood here, and the genitive should be cons trued here as sthana-sashthi, so that for the final for a Pada there is visarga, and not for that which is not final. 
g: ano il tetta il ti, era il मात्तिः ॥ हत्येतस्य रेफस्य मुपि परतो विसर्जनीयादेशो भवति ॥ 
16. Visarjaniya is substituted for the g called t (and not any other t), before the Locative Plural case affix II 
Thus 94:6, afrig, T:11 The word og is here the Locative Plural affix. Though the would have been changed to visarga by the last sätra also; the making of this a special stra is for the sake of niyama. That is, only becomes visarga, and not any other ! Thus it, wel, when the ris not ! In qua &c, the becomes & by VIII, 2. 66. 
waitratagerer TT II puell garia Il Ht, grit, wait, merT, :, ARTII 
वृत्तिः ॥ भो भगो भयो इत्येवपूर्वस्य भवणेपूर्वस्य पारो रेफस्य बकायदयो भवति मशि परतः॥ 
17. & is substituted for the & called t, when it is preceded by भो, भगो, अघो, म or , before an अश् letter (vowels and soft consonants). 
Thus H T, T , mai 94, wma, wat molt, mot all , 
, 1647 Fana, TonT TO W The o is elided by VIII. 3. 19, 20, 22 &c. With a, the forms will be irau, pitas, tas ir 
Why do we say when preceded by T &c'? Observe aftach, TT II Why do we say when followed by a letter of all pratyahara'? Observe thi, 
* N No, this is no valid counter-example, because no other word follows the visarga ; while some word must follow it because the word sanhita (VIII. 2. 108) is understood here. 
Ans. If this be so, then gą is employed in this sötra for the sake of subsequent sūtras. Its employment here is superfluous. For letters other than my are at 11 Before a t letter, the will be changed to visarga by VIII. 3. 15; and the one of this rule will be considered as asiddha for the purposes of VIII. 3. 15, so there will necessarily be visarga. Thus y serves no purpose in this satra, but is for the sake of subsequent ones. Thus in VIII. 3. 22, the word gits must be qualified by the word mv, namely those conso. nants only which are in the class 1 Before any other consonant there will be no elision of all Thus i que TEI The denominative verb from this will be m ara u A secondary derivative from this root, with the affix 
BK. VIII. CH. III. S. 19] 
AND Y ELISION. 
1605 
विच् will be ur as in वृसत् करोति | Here would require elision by VIII. 3. 
22, before , but it is not so because it qualifies PN 
Obj.-If so, why is the word इल् used in that sutra VIII. 3. 22, it would have been better to say इशि सर्वेषाम् instead of हलि सर्वेषाम् ।। 
Ans.-The word is used in that sutra for the sake of the subse quent sutra VIII. 3. 23, which applies to all consonants. Had eru been used in VIII. 3. 22, then in VIII. 3. 23, हलि ought to have been used. . 
Moreover oft is used in this sutra, so that rules VIII. 3. 18, 19 may not apply to वृक्ष करोति ।। 
___ This sutra applies to s called , therefore not here प्रातरण, पुनरत्र। 
व्योलघुप्रयत्नतरः शाकटायनस्य ॥ १८॥ पदानि ॥ व्योः, लघुप्रयनतरः, शाक टायनस्य॥ वृत्तिः । वकारयकारयो भगोभषोभवर्णपूर्वयोः पान्तयालघुपयनतर भादेयो भवति, मधि परतः, शाकदा यनस्याचावस्य मतेन ॥ 
18. व् and (in भगोय् &c and after a or मा, at the end of a Pada ) are pronounced with a lighter articulation be fore an T letter, according to the opinion of Sakatâyana. 
That the effort in pronouncing which is very light is called laghu-pra yatna - tara. Effort or articulation is a quality of the person who utters and which is the cause of the utterance of a letter. Land of lighter articulation are substituted for the final and e in भोय, भगोय, अपोय , or after an a or मा ।। The lighter will replace the heavy , and so the lighter o the heavy all 
Thus भोयत्र, भगोवब, भयोयन, कयास्से or क मास्ते, मस्मायुजर or भस्मा उमर, मसावा वित्यः or असा मादित्यः, वाव or झा भन, मावानय or हा मानव ॥ 
The lighter articulation results from the relaxation of the muscles and the organs employed in speech. The places of pronunciation are palate &c, the organs are the root, the middle and the tip of the tongue. When the con tact of the tongue with the various places is very light, the articulation is laghu prayatna - tara. In fact, g and q are to be slurred over. 
लोपः शाकल्यस्य ॥ १९॥ पदानि । लोपः, शाकल्यस्य ॥ निः॥ वकारयकारयोः पदान्तबोरवर्णपूर्वयोलोपो भवति शाकल्यस्थाचार्यस्थ मतेनाधि परतः ॥. 
19. व् and preceded by a or आ and at theend of a pada, are elided before an 7 letter, according to the opi nion of Sakalya 
Asकमाने or कबास्ते, काक भास्त or काकयास्ते, भमा ग्यर or भमायुदर, वाव or बाभव, मसाबादित्यः or मसा भादियः॥ 
The name of Sakalya is used to make it an optional rule. Therefore, where there is not the lighter articulation of cand a by the last sätra, there 
11606 
.7 AND Q ELISION. 
(BK. VIII. CH. III. § 21 
also in the other alternative the fuller sounds of and are heard. Thus there are three forms, heavy q and , light and g and elision of and all 
When q and q are preceded by sit, then there is elision by the next satra compulsorily. 
sitat perpa Il poll at llai, pret il पत्तिः॥मोकारादत्तरस्य यकारस्य लोपो भवंति गार्ग्यस्थाचार्य्यस्य मतेन भारी परतः ।। 
20. a preceded by st is elided, according to the opinion of Gârgya, before an amal letter. 
There can be no preceded by MT, so only is taken in explaining the sutra. Thus it 99, 9, 744, it all 
The making of it a separate sutra, is for the sake of indicating that this is a necessary (nitya) rule and not a vibhasha rule. The name of Gárgya is used simply honoris causa (pujärtha ). The elision of laghu - prayatna , which VIII. 3. 19 would have otherwise caused, is hereby prohibited. So that 
laghu pratyatnatara e does come also. As भो भy or भीया, भगो भy or भगोवा, Hy and 
According to others every kind of ( whether heavy or light ) is to be elided: and pray is not valid in their opinion, 
ufs avall B811 Tufa ulf, all वृत्तिः ॥ भवर्णपूर्वयोः व्योः पादान्तयोलोंपो भवति रमि च परे परतः ।। 
21. q and a( preceded by w or et, at the end of a pada), and followed by 3, when it is a word, are elided neces sarily. 
The particle is a full pada or word. That Particle is meant here by the word 79, and not the 39, which is a root obtained by the samprasarana of 11 Thus & t genfura:, & tanta: 11 
Why do we use the word of " when it is a pada"? So that the rule may not apply to the form assumed by a by samprasarana as a TH - 
HRW. Obj. 7 could never have meant the form assumed by , for the samprasarana ofa is , the ris merely indicatory. Moreover the maxim of lakshana-pratipadokta &c, will prevent the inclusion of this 4 resulting from vocalisation, when there is a separate l'article a lt 
Ans: The word qt is used here for the sake of the subsequent sätras like VIII. 3. 32. So that ge may come before a word beginning with a vowel, and not before a vowel which is an affix. Thus there is no double in quefour 
This is also a nitya rule, and not optional. IIad it been optional, there would have been no necessity of this aphorism, because VIII. 3. 19, would have bcen enough. 
• BK..VIII. CH. III. S. 25] 
NASAL 
1607 
हलि सर्वेषाम् ॥ २२॥ पदानि ॥ हलि, सर्वेषाम् ॥ पतिः॥ हलि परतो भोभगाप्रपोमपूर्वस्य यकारस्य पान्तस्य लोपो भवति सर्वेपामाचार्याणां मंतन । 
22. (The य preceded by भो, भगो, अघो, or by अ or आ, being final in a pada, is elided) before a consonant, according to the opinion of all Âcharyns. 
Thus भो इसति, भगो इसति, भयो हससि ; भो याति, भगो वाति भयो, याति, वृक्षा इसन्ति ॥ Though the anuvritti of and - both is present here, yet we have taken 7 only to the exclusion of g 1 Because after #1, #rī and so there is a only, and never ; and can come only when preceded by a or मा : the only example of which given by Grammarians is वृक्ष करोति (VIII. 3. 17). Here is not elided, because the word aft qualifies the word Bris of this sůtra. 
Q.-But should be elided in वृक्ष इसति, because tis an भए letter. . 
Ans.---There is no such example to be found in any standard author. Moreover Patanjali in his commentary on the Pratyahara sūtra #q says that no words can end in 0,5, or So that the existence of the very word 
TMT is doubtful. 
The word sarvesham indicates that VIII. 3. 18, even does not apply, and there is no light articulation, but lopa there too. 
मोऽनुस्वारः॥ २३॥ पदानि ॥ मः,अनुस्वारः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ मकारस्य पदान्तस्यानुस्वार आदेखो भवति हलि परतः॥ 
23. The Anusvara is substituted for म. at the end of a word, before a consonant. 
Thus कुण्डं इसति, वनं इसतिं, कुण्डं याति, वनं याति ॥ The word हलि is under stood in this satra. Therefore not here, वमन, किमThey must be at the end of pada; therefore not here; गम्यते, रम्यते। 
नश्वापदान्तस्य झलि ॥ २४॥ पदानि ॥ नः,च,अपदान्तस्य, झलि॥ पतिः ॥नाकारस्थ मकारस्य वापरान्तस्यानुस्वारादेशो भवति सलि परतः॥ 
24. The Anusvara is substituted for the t and म, not final in a pada, before all consonants, with the excep tion of Nasals and semi-vowels. 
Thus पयांसि, यशसि, सपीषि, धषि with (VII. 1.72); and भाकंस्थते, मावि कंस्थते, अधिजिगांससे with म्॥ 
Why do we say 'not final in a Pada'? Observer UHU Why do we say before awe consonant'? See रम्यते, गम्यते ॥ 
मो राजि समः कौ ॥ २५॥ पदानि ॥ मः, राजि, समः, को। वृत्तिः ॥ समो मकारस्य मकार मादेशो भवति राजतो किप्प्रत्ययान्ते परतः॥ 
25. म is substituted for the म of सम्, before the word राज् ending with the affix विप् ॥ 
1608 
NASAL 
(BK. VIII. CH. III. $. 28 
Thus समार, सामाज्या | The substitution of म for a is for the sake of preventing the anusvåra change (cf VII. 1. 40). Why do we say 'before ang'? See संयत् (VI. 4.40 Vart). Why do we say 'of सम्? Observe fकंपन (V. 4. 70). Why do we say 'ending with विव'? Observe संराजिता, संराषितुप, संराजितब्धम् ॥ 
The ferry is added by 111. 2. 61, the x is changed to g by VIII. 2. 36, which is changed to at the end of a word, in eine il fruttory is formed by 
47 affix, as it belongs to Brahmanadi class. 
हेमपरे वा ॥२६॥ पदानि ॥हे, मपरे, वा ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ एकारे मकारपरे परतो मकारस्य वा मकार भादेशो भवति । पार्तिकम् ॥ चवलपरे बवला वा ।। 
26. म is optionally substituted for म्, before r, which itself is followed by a All 
The may be changed to anusvåra or remain unchanged before a word beginning with झ॥ Thus fo or किम् प्रलयति, 'what does be cause to shake'? कयं प्रलयति or कयमप्रलयति ॥ 
Vart :-Besore u w, and the preceding , may be changed to a or #respectively. Thus fain: or fadu:, 'what does it matter about yester day'? किलयति or कि इलयति 'what does he cause to shake'? कि इलाश्यति or किलें इलाश्याति 'what gladdens'. 
नपरे नः ॥२७॥ पदानि ॥ नपरे, ना, ॥ पतिः॥ मकारपरे हे परत मकारस्थ वा नकारादेशो भवति ॥ 
27. - is optionally substituted for म, when it is followed by < which has a 7 after it. 
a becomes before a word beginning with g; as fama ant or failer 'what withholds'. कयनाते or कर्य नुते ॥ 
णोः कुक्क् शरि ॥२८॥ पदानि ॥ इणोः , कुफ्, टुक, शरि॥ वृत्तिः ॥कारणकारयोः पदान्तयोः कुक्दुम् इत्येतावागमी वा भवतः ॥ 
28. The augment is added to a final F, and the augment to a final u, before a sibilant, optionally. 
Thus प्राइकते, or पार घेते; मादक षष्ठ: or पार षष्ठः, पारक सावे or माह खाये। पण्ोते or पण ते॥ 
The augments are far and go with an indicatory 9, showing that they are to be added to the end of the prior word (I. I.46),and not to the beginning of the second word. In sanhita reading, it would have made no difference practically, whether these augments were added to the end of the first, or the beginning of the second. But they are added to the end of the first, in order to indicate that VIII. 4.63, will take effect. Thus we have पारसे also. This y change of a would not have taken place had the augment been added to 
BK. VIII. CH. III $. 30) 
NASAL. 
1609 
qof gh; because in pot (VIII. 4. 63) the gre letter must be at the end of a pada. So that if u were added to y of ea, as fa, here too y follows a po letter, but this free letter ($) is not at the end of a pada, so y will not be changed to y (VIII. 4. 63). Thus is not changed to as in the body of a word, like विरप्शिन् though u is a सत् letter. पुरा कूरस्थ विसृपो विरणित् ॥ विरशि HET, formed with the Preposition added to the root ry, with the Uñadi affix fora 
Moreover in sy ara, the # is not changed to g by VIII. 3. 59. Had the augment as been added to aid, as arù, the would have been changed to q, as OTT TÄ, for then VIII. 3. 111, would not have applied, as # was no longer at the beginning of a pada. 
Moreover in for ETÀ, the æ is not changed to because of the prohibi tion of VIII. 4. 42. Had been the augment of ara, as garā, then there would have been the change of a to by VIII. 4. 41. 
g: f HI RE I Tanat ll 3, 
f ll वृत्तिः ॥ उकारान्तात्परादुत्तरस्य सकारादेः पदस्य वा धुडागमो भवति॥ 
29. After a word ending in , there may option ally be added the augmenty to a word beginning with ## 
Thus m a ma or Mise arh, HYTTE Marte or grante ATO IL 
The word 7: is to be construed as Ablative singular, and not Genitive singular of , because of the maxim उभयनिर्देशे पञ्चमी निधो बलीयान्॥ 
Q. Why it is ge and not yes, in other words, why is this augment added to the beginning of the second word and not to the end of the first ? 
Ans.This is done in order to prevent the change by VIII. 4. 41. But being at the beginning of the second word, VIII. 4. 42 would prevent this change. ETT + T R ECHT, (VIII. 4. 41) but the correct form is yfirse ara II For the of patie is # substituted by VIII. 2. 31, which becoines 
by VIII. 2. 39, for the y of the augment, mis substituted by VIII. 4. 55, and for there is Ę by the same rule. 
7 ll foll Tara lla, il वृत्तिः ।। मकारान्तापदादुसरस्य सकारस्य वा धुडागमो भवति ॥ 
30. After a word ending in , is optionally the augment to a word beginning with 
Thus * TA, HATT ETT or 417 Brů, at A ll The ç of the augment becomes it by VIII. 4. 55. This is asiddha (VIII. 2. 1), and there. fore it is not changed to by VIII. 3. 7. This is the reason why the augment is exhibited as and not ge u In sätra VIII. 3. 29 would have done as well but not so herc. This view of the Kasika, however, is not approved by Padamanjari. They can never be changed to herc, because is followed 
Th 
1610 
NAMUT. 
[BK. VIII. Cu. III. $ 32 
by which is not an org letter. The word want is understood in VIII. 3. 7. In fact, I would have been a better augment. 
far ll 38 N Terra a fit, & II वृत्तिः ॥ नकारस्थ परान्तस्य शकारे परतो पा तुगागमो भवति ।। 
31. The augment a may optionally be added to a word ending in t, when a word beginning with y follows. 
Thus ware Sight 1 The augment is added to the end of the preced ing word, and not to the beginning of the second word, in order to change y into cll In fact, the augment y added to the second would have been as good as , namely both are #; but then y change would not have taken place. 
Obj.-If this be so, then why is not changed to , since it is no longer final in a pada, when I is added to it, in to v 
Ans.—This is to be thus explained. The satra fit: ETY: (VIII. 4.40) should be divided into two parts, in order to prevent of change. Thus the first part will be fit: Qat, which will mean that # and a followed by v and g will not cause the change of a to op 11 The next sätra will be gi, which will mean that the preceding & and g are changed to g and g respec tively. 
FAT geareta Egitarra ell qatta Il FH:, Beara, ara, ryt, faceta 11 
PT: || FIGYUN F A TTIGHETEN TErroll are forma al Fochtend हणमा भवति । 
32. After a word ending in F, vort which is preceded by a light vowel, the same consonant F, u or is added invariably at the beginning of the next word, which commences with a vowel. 
The word F#: is in the Ablative singular here ; and Fir qualifies 74: ; and 7 itself qualifies the word Tee understood, and thus there is tadanta-viddhi. Though the word 764 (VIII. 1. 16) is in the Genitive singular, yet it should be converted here into Ablative singular, because of its connection with F#: 8 mfur is in the Locative singular, but should be cons trued as Genitive singular here : it is exhibited in the 7th case for the sake of brevity, and of the subsequent sätras. F is a pratyahara meaning r, o and 
; and so also 75 is a pratyahara containing the three augments R, and गुत् ॥ ... In other words is augment after after op and after a ; or that these letters are doubled practically. Thus F is the augment after a word ending in T, as qRTETET 11 is the augment after a word ending in, as BK. VIII. CH. III. 8. 33 ] 
SUBSTITUTION. 
1611 
FOTO I is the augment after a word ending in 2, as gara, THAT, TAIF, WHY II 
Why do we say 'ending in F, or f'? See A ll Why do we say 'preceded by a light vowel? Observe 9TETE, THIET 11 Why do we say "follow ed by a vowel"? Observe ya da il 
The Mahabhashya thus comments on this aphorism : 
Vårt: Fyfe qendaforai "The FK augment is added to a vowel which stands at the beginning of a word". So that in ffort+ (Ins. Sing.), is not added to me, because it is not the beginning of a Pada. Then should this vårtika be held to be necessary? No, because the word qara is understood here: so I will not come in Til But then it will come in q*7+T 11 Because it is a compound of two nouns, and though the case-affixes have been elided, yet it is here a Pada by reason of pratyaya lakshaņa; and hence there should be a here added to 87 | Ans. This is no valid objection. fast is not here a Pada, on the maxim उत्तरपरले चापदादिविधौलुमता लु प्रत्ययलक्षणं न भवति "When an affix has been elided by or 99, the pratyaya-lakshana rule will not apply, when the object of it is to give the designation of Pada to the second member of a compound, with the exception of the rule applying to the begin ning of a Pada". Thus in 
the word form is not treated as a 97, because the rule to be applied is to the end here. But the second member of a com pound is treated like a pada, when a rulc is to be applied to the beginning of a Pada. Thus in l, the second member is considered as a Pada for the purposes of the rule Elaqaar: (VIII. 3. 111), and the is not changed to all This view proceeds upon the supposition that the word or governs this sūtra. But the anuvsitti of a ceased with VIII. I. 27, as we stated before. How are we then to get out of this difficulty ? Are we to make the above vārtika necessary ? No: because the anuvritti or from VIII. 3. 21 runs into this satra. So that the s@tra means 69 HOT 
IR 11 "The augment ric is added to a vowel with which a Pada commences". Not therefore to the case affix or in 
POTTI 
# T atar Tata II T:, 35., 4., at u वृत्तिः॥ मय उत्तरस्य समो वा वकारादेशो भवति भधि परतः ॥ 
33. Ę is optionally the substitute of the Particle J, when it is preceded by a pu consonant (all consonants with the exception of semivowels, sibilants, tand ),and is followed by a vowel. 
Thus og EE : or T T art, TTFT tu: or fara ti, famiga 07444 or PEFIT4794 The 7 is a Pragrihya by I. 1. 14, and therefore would have remained unchanged, this ordains optionally. This app being considcred asiddha, thc is pot changed to anusvara in fapie 1997, PET &c, by VIII.3. 23. 
. 1612 
VISARGA SANDHI. 
[BK. VIII. CH. III. S. 36 
When this a is followed by fa, and preceded by a 97 consonant, then by I. I. I7, it is optionally प्रगृत्य, and it may be replaced by When it is not a pragrihya, then it is changed to by वणादेश (VI. I. 77), or to by the present satra. In the case of यणादेश , there is anusvara by VIII. 3. 23, as किविति ॥ When it is a Pragrihya, then it is changed to by the present satra as farmara or fagfall So also with substitute, where the will be nasal : as fari far, or will remain unchanged, as a TH Thus we have five forms with इति॥ 
विसर्जनीयस्य सः॥३४॥ पदानि ॥ विसर्जनीयस्य, सः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ विसर्जनीवस्य सकार भविषो भवति खरिपरतः ॥ 
34. सू is the substitute of a visarga, when a hard consonant (सर) follows. 
The word खरि is understood here. Thus वृक्षश्छादयति, प्रक्षवछादयति, वृक्षष्ठ कारा, प्रक्षधकारः, वृक्षस्थकारः, अक्षस्थकारः, वृक्षमिनोति, प्राधिनोति, भष्टीकते, प्रभाटीकते, वसस्तरति, प्रशस्तरति ॥ 
By VIII. 3. 15, the was changed to visarga before a hard consonant, or at the end of a Pause. In the present sotra, no special cause being men tioned, the change would take place, not only before a hard consonant, but at the Pause also, i.e. in वृक्षा, सक्ष: also. This however, is not the case, because the word afgaruq governs this satra; so the # change will be in Sanhita only, and not in Pause, moreover we read the anuvritti or as here and so prevent the change in Pause. 
शर्परे विसर्जनीयः ॥ ३५॥ पदानी ॥ शप्प्रे, विसर्जनीयः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ धरे खरि परतो विसर्जनीयस्थ विसर्जनीयरियो वति ॥ 
35. The visarga is the substitute of visarga, when it is followed by a hard consonant (खर) which itself is follow 
ed by a sibilant (शर)॥ 
The word or is a Bahuvrihi, meaning that which is followed by of a In other words, when a sibilant follows a hard consonant, the preceding visarga remains unchanged. Thus शाः पुरम, पुरुषः परम, भविः प्साताम्, वासः सोमम्, पुरुषः सः, धनाधनः क्षोभणमर्षणीनाम । 
Though the sätra could have been shortened by saying aga; yet the longer form is used, in order to indicate that the jihvamuliya and upadh maniya changes also do not take place, in cases like मशिप्सासम वासः क्षोमम् ॥ 
था शरि॥ ३६॥ पदानि ॥ वा, शरि॥ पतिः॥ विसर्जनीयस्थ विसर्जनीयांवेशो वा भवति शरिपरे॥ पार्मिकम् ॥ खपरेशरिया लोपो वक्तव्यः॥ 
36. The visarga is optionally the substitute of visarga, when a sibilant follows. 
BK. VIII. CI. III. S. 38] 
VISARGA SANDHI 
1613 
As वृक्षः शेते or मएशेते, लक्ष घेते or लसणेते, वृक्षः पणे or वृक्षपण्डे, वृक्षः साये or वृक्षस्साये | Cf. VIII. 4.40, 41, for v and ॥ 
Vart:-When the sibilant is followed by a hard consonant, there is optionally the elision of the preceding visarga. As UT FITET: or CHT: FOTATE or वृक्षास्थातारः॥ 
कुपोक पौ च ॥३७॥ पदानि ॥ कुपोकपी,च॥ . वृत्तिः ॥ कवर्गपवर्गयोः परतो विसर्भनीयस्य यथासंख्यरकप त्यताबादेवी भवतः ॥ 
37. xक and x प are optionally substituted for the visarga, when followed by a hard guttural or a hard labial. 
Thus वृक्ष करोति or वृक्षः करोति, वृक्ष : खनति or वृक्षाखनति, वृक्ष - पति or वृक्षा पति , वृक्ष र फलति or वृक्षः फलति ।। The and p in x nand x are for the sake of pronunciation only. The substitutes are the Jihvamoliya and the Upadhma niya : two lost sibilants belonging to the class of off and q respectively. 
__When the rule VIII. 3. 34. does not apply, then this satra will apply3B and will debar that. But VIII. 3. 35. will not be debarred. As वासः सीमम्, मबिसातम् ॥ There is no vipratishedha between VIII. 3. 35. and 37, because of the asiddhahood of one with regard to the other. (VIII. 2. I). In fact, every rule in these three chapters stands by itself, and ignores the existence of the subsequent rule. Hence VIII. 3. 35 would not have been debarred by VIII. 3. 37. 
To get this, some divide this sūtra into two :-(1) : "The visarga is the substitute of visarga before a guttural or labial which is followed by a sibilant." (2) * * The jihvámoliya and upadhmaniya are substitutes of a visarga before a guttural and a labial in every other case." 
सोपदादौ ॥ ३८॥ पदानि ॥ सः, अ-पदादी। वृत्तिः ॥ सकार भादेशो भवति विसर्जनीयस्य कुयोरपरायो परत पाशकल्पककाम्येषु॥ पातिकम् ॥ सोपदारावित्वनध्ययस्योत वक्तव्यम् ॥ रेव काम्ये नान्यस्थति नियमाय वतव्यम् । वार्तिकम् ॥ उपध्मानीयस्य कवर्ग परतः सकार भादेपो भवतीति वक्तव्यम् ॥ 
38 स is the substitute of a visarga before an affix beginning with a hard guttural or labial. 
The word omat means "when the guttural and labial are not at the beginning of a word," in other words, when they stand at the beginning of an affix. This is possible only before the affixes पाप, कल्प, क, and काम्य ॥ Thus पयस्पाशम् (V. 3.47); पयस्वाल्पम् , यशस्कल्पम् (V. 3.67), पयस्क, यशस्कर, (V. 3.70); पयस्काम्यति, ययस्काम्याति (III. I.9). 
Why do we say when not at the beginning of a word'? Observe पय कामयते, पय-पिवति ॥ 
Vårt :-Prohibition must be stated, when the visarga belongs to an Indeclinable: as, प्रातः कल्पम्, पुनः कल्पम् ॥ 
1614 
VISARGA SANDIII 
[ BK. VIII. CI. III. S. 40 
Vårt: The visarga which comes from r is only changed to g before काम्य, and not any other visarga. As पयस्काम्यास, and यशस्काम्यति; but not here, गीकाम्यति धूम्काम्यति ॥ 
Vart is the substitute of the Upadhmâniya when followed by a guttural. The root - (भाजये Tud 20) has Upadhmaniya as its penultimate: though it is written in the Dhatupatha as 356 the only represents the qof 
प, and is not to be pronounced. This »प is changed toस, when the final जू is changed to a guttural, as 7 , and then this & is changed to as in 
अभ्युद्गः , समुहः ।। 
These words, however, may be derived from the root ry with the Pre positions भभि, उत, and सम् उत्, by adding the affix || 
इणः षः ॥ ३९॥ पदानि ॥णः, षः॥ वृत्तिः । अपवासाविति वर्तते । रण उत्तरस्य विसर्जनीयस्य षकारादेयो भवति कुपोरपायोः परतः पाशक ल्पककाम्येषु॥ 
39. is the substitute of that visarga, which is preceded by r or 3 and is followed by an affix beginning with a bard guttural or a labial. 
The word opere is understood here also. The affixes meant are the same पाश, कल्प, क, and काम्य ॥ Thus सर्पिष्पाशम, यजुष्पाशम, सर्पिष्कल्पम्, यजुष्कल्पम्, सर्पिष्कम् , यजुष्कम् ; सर्पिष्काम्यति, यजुष्काम्यति ॥ 
Why do we say by an afix'? Observe भमिः करोति, वायुः करोति, भग्निः पचति, वायुः पचति ॥ 
The affix should begin with a guttural or a labial. Therefore not here, सर्पिस्ते, यजुस्ते ॥ 
In the succeeding satras, the anuvritti of a from VIII. 3. 39 and of To: q: from this, are both current. The visarga will be changed to g if pre ceded by r or 7, otherwise it will be all 
According to some, this sotra ordains q in the room of the taught in the preceding sâtra, and not of visarga : and so also in the following søtras. 
नमस्पुरसोगत्योः॥४०॥ पदानि ॥ नमस-पुरसोः, गत्योः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ नमस्पुरम् इत्येतयोतिसंज्ञकयो विसर्जनीयस्थ सकारादेशो भवति कपोः परतः । 
40. For the visarga of that and grey there is substituted before a hard guttural or a labial, when these words are Gati (I. 4. 67 and 74). 
Thus नमस्का , ममस्कर्तुम्, नमस्कर्तव्यम् । पुरस्कर्ता पुरस्कर्तुम् , पुरस्कर्तव्यम् । 
Why do we say “when they are Gati"? Observe पूकरोति, पुरी करोति, परः करोति ॥ Here पुरः is a noun, Accusative Plural of पू: ॥ 
नमम् is Gati by I.4.74, and पुरम् is Gati by I. 4.67. The anuvritti of भपदादी ceases. 
BK. VIII. C11. III S. 42 ) 
VISARGA SANDHI. 
1615 
दुदुपधस्य चाप्रत्यय 
दिपधस्य चाप्रत्ययस्य॥४१॥ पदानि॥द-उद-उपधस्य.च. अ-प्रत्यस्य॥ वृतिः ॥इकारोपधस्य उकारोपधस्य चामत्यस्य विसर्जनीयस्य पकार भादशों भवति कुपोः परतः ॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ पुम्मुहसाम्प्रतिषेधो वक्तव्यः ॥ 
41. is substituted, before a hard guttural or a labial, for the visarga which is preceded by r or 5, and is not part of an affix. 
This applies to the visarga of निर, दुर, बहिर, मविस्, चतुर and प्रादुस् । Thus निष्कृतम्, निष्पीतम् , दुष्कृतम्, दुष्पीतम् , बहिस, बहिष्कृतम्, बहिष्पीतम्, भाविस, भाविष्कृतम्, भाविष्पीतम, चतुष्कृतम्, चतुष्कपालम् , चतुष्कन्दलम् , चतुष्कलम, मादुष्कृतम्, प्रादुप्पीतम् ॥ 
Why do we say 'when not belonging to an affix'? Observe mai करोति, वायुः करोति ॥ How do you explain मातुः करोति, पितुः करोति? For here in पितुः &c, the स् of the affix is elided by VIII. 2. 24, and ther of पितुर+स् is changed to visarga; this is not the visarga of an affix, and ought to be chang ed to cl1 
Ans.-The inclusion of the word भ्रातुपुत्रः in Kaskadi class (VIII. 3. 48) indicates by implication, that a change does not take place of this visarga in पितुः, मातु: &c: the only exception being धातुः॥ The reason of this may be that the visarga here does not follow a simple a, but an ekadesa (VI. I. III). 
Vårt: - Prohibition must be stated in the case of gg and ; as पुस्कामा, मुस्कामा । 
Vart:-वृत्रिभूतानां पखं वक्तव्यम् । The visarga is changed to even whent or T are vriddhied; as नेकुल्यम्, शैकुल्यम् ॥ 
Vart:-प्लुतानां सादी च ॥ The visarga is changed to m even when t or are pluta, and then before dentals as well as gutturals and labials. Thus निाकुलम, दुष्कुलम् (VIII. 2.86 for pluta). दुाप्पुरुषः, वहीटरः ॥ 
These last two vârtikas may be dispensed with, because Vriddhi and Pluta are Bahiranga change, and so the visarga will be changed to q in these cases also by the satra itself; except so far as ar is concerned. 
तिरसोन्यतरस्याम् ॥४२॥ पदानि । तिरस:, अन्यरस्याम्॥ वृतिः ॥ तिरसो विसर्जनीयस्यान्यतरस्यां सकारादेशो भवति कुपो परतः ॥ 
42. The visarga of the Gati face is optionally changed to p before a hard guttural or a labial. 
___Thus तिरस्कर्ता, तिरस्कर्तुम्, तिरस्कर्तव्यम्, or ति कर्ता, तिरस्कर्तुम् , तिर कर्तव्यम् ॥ The word na: is understood here also. Therefore no option is allowed here, for: FAT FIT #:, where farte does not mean 'disappearance'. (I. 4. 72). 
द्विस्त्रिश्चतुरिति कृत्वोथें ॥४३॥ पदानि ॥ द्विः-त्रि:-चतुर्, इति, कृत्वोर्थे । वृत्तिः ॥ इति संबद्धते । विस् बिस् चतुर इत्येतेषां कल्लोथें वर्तमानानां विसर्जनीयस्थ षकार भादेशो भवाति अन्यतरस्यां कुपो परतः ।। 
1616 
VISARGA SANDHI. 
(BK. VIII. Cht. III. S. 43 
43. ç is optionally the substitute of the visargas of TEFT, TR and OT when they are used as Numeral adverbs, (before a hard guttural and labial). 
The affix (8) is added to the three words dvi, tri and chatur in the sense of krtvasuch by V. 4. 18. 
As fg: üle or f ara, f: Hufe or foundta, ma or Taufa, ft: qera or faqefa, fü: qefa or qafa, ag: quia or genera It 
Why do we say 'when used in the sense of kritvasuch or Numeral adverbs '? Observe ourna, nema, where is compulsory by VIII. 3.41. Tosing tira: (IV. 2. 16 and IV. 1. 88). This sūtra is an example of ubhayatra-vibhasha. With regard to the visarga is a non-affix visarga, and hence VIII. 3. 41, would have made a compulsory, this makes it optional. With regard to her and for the visarga is that of an affix (ayor & V. 4. 18), and hence VIII. 3. 41, would not have applied. Thus with regard to 
at it is a Prapta-vibhasha, and with regard to fare and fore it is an Aprapta vibhasha. 
Why have we used the words 'dvis, tris and chatur'? Objector's answer: so that the rule may not apply to see Aufh, the visarga of kritva such (V. 4. 17) is not changed to put 
The anuvşitti of and x is understood here from VIII. 3. 41: so that the visarga must be preceded by 7 and 7 for the application of this rule. In query: the visarga is preceded by- , and so there is no applicability of this rule. 
In fact, by reading the anuvšitti of (1947 into this sūtra, and qualify ing the visarga by the further epithet of belonging to a word that has the sense of kritvasuch'; we may dispense with the words fafaraghfar from the satra. The simple sätra perrot would have been enough. For there are no other Numerals that have a penultimate r or y, except these three. The chief objection to this view is, that in urt the visarga is not the affix gr, but a portion of the word (See V. 4. 18): so the rule would not apply to chatur, if this word were not expressly mentioned. 
The various objections and their solutions are given in the follow ing verses. 
कस्वजर्षे पत्वं ब्रवीति कस्माचतुष्कपाल मा पत्वं विभाषया भूमनु सिलं तक पूर्वण ॥ सिद्धेपयं विधत्ते चतुरः पत्वं यदापि कल्पीयें। 
लुप्ते कृत्योर्धाये रेफस्य विसनीयो हि॥ एवं सति विदानी दिस्त्रिचतुरिस्यनेन कि कार्यम् ॥ 
भन्यो हि नेदुदुपधः कृत्वोयः कभिदप्यास्ति । भक्रियमाणे ग्रहणे विसर्जनीयस्ता विशेष्येत ।। 
BK. VIII. CH. III. $ 43 ) 
VISARGA SANDHI. 
1617 
चतुरो म सिध्यति तथा रेफस्थ विसर्शनीयो हि॥ तस्मिंस्तु क्रियमाणे युनं चतुरो विशेषणं भवति । 
प्रकृतं पदं तदन्स तस्थापि विशेषण न्याय्यम् ॥ Karikd:-कत्वमुजर्षे पत्वं ब्रवीति कस्मात्? Why does the author teach पल when these words have the sense of Numeral-adverbs? In other words, why the word put is used at all in the satra? There is no necessity of using it at all, because far, fare are clearly adverbs as they are formed by the affix 
( V. 4. 18 ) and 4 being read in their company will also denote the adverb chatur, in which has been elided (V. 4. 18). So that all these three words are 99-formed, and all gy-formed words have the sense of Kștvasuch. One answer to this is that the rule of hy does not always hold good, as in putera (. 1.6), the words oft and rf are verbs, while ris an augment. Though therefore fire and in are krtvortha words, yet tot need not be so: and may be a simple Numeral. Ans, Tomas HT et F4191 TL 11 The word his is employed to indicate that there should be no optional pain in 
T N Thc here is compulsory by VIII. 3. 41. l.TE PAS gator it Well this would be valid by the previous sūtra (VIII. 3. 41). That is, let in चतुष्कपाल also there be roptional षस्व, as चतुःकपाल and चतुष्कपाल Now rule VIII. 3. 41 will apply to waiara and will change this visarga to , so that with regard to चतुष्कपाल, we shall have always . Ans. सिनेयं विधते चतुर 9* ang at, # tula care for startet i If VIII. 3. 41 be considered as applying here (siddha), then when the affix is elided after , and the t is changed to visarga, then the adverb g: also ends with a non-affix visarga, and will come under the compulsory qe rule of VIII. 3. 41; for though we may have optionally two forms as : Ufe and ugota, by the present sätra, yet in the former the visarga would be changed to q by VIII. 3. 41. Hence the necessity of employing the word as I l. But we say that the x in the adverb at is that of gu, thus + 41+(VIII. 2. 66)= + (the first is elided by VIII. 3. 14)- 1; and that this when changed to visarga, will be an affix-visarga and so VIII. 3. 41 will not apply to the adveró 1 Ans. No. For at would require to be lengthened by VI. 3. 111. and the form would be 7778 
एवं सति लिदानी द्वित्रिमतुरिस्यनेन कि कार्यम् ॥ If this be so, then what is the purpose served by using the words are a in the aphorism? The simple sotra कल्लोऽर्थे would have beenenough. Because (भन्योहि नेदुदुपधा कुवोर्थः कश्चिदप्यति) there are no other numeral adverbs than these three which have a penultimate I or it 
भक्रियमाणे महणे विसर्जनायस्सदा विशेष्येत। If we do not use the words dvis, tris, chaturiti in the sätra, then the word kptvorthe would qualify the word visarga, and the satra would mcan " thic visarga of an asfix which has the sense of kfitvasuch is changed optionally to "# The result of this will be 
1618 
VISARGA SANDIII. 
[BK. VIII. Cu. III. g. 44 
that ( wag frafa TuriFFS Panstafun ) it will not apply to y where the visarga is that of and not of the affix geli 
Therefore by using dvis &c, the word of would qualify us (aften तु क्रियमाणे युक्तं धतुरो विशेषणं भवति) ॥ 
Ans.-प्रकृतं पदं तरन्तं तस्यापि, विशेषणं नाय्यम् ॥ Though we may not use dvis &c, the word kftvortha will not qualify visarga, but will qualify the word 
whose context runs here; and the rule of Fort will apply; so that the satra ISË will mean, pri eta eraka úr festa, afa ETHN: VETU HI “The visarga of that word which is employed in the sense of a Numeral adverb, is optionally changed to y or before a guttural or a labial, provided that such visarga is preceded by por ". 
The above is the opinion of Patanjali, who considers the words dvis &c, as redundant. The Kasika however controverts this opinion. According to hiin, if these words were not used in the satra, then the mere satra misit would be insufficient for the visarga of rg: though used as an adverb, the qy will be compulsory by VIII.3.41; for the present sa tra will be considered as asiddha or non-existent for the purposes of VIII. 3. 41, (See VIII, 2. 1). But this how ever may be answered by saying that the rule of generat applies in these chapters, with this modification, one subject-matter is considered as asiddha with regard to another subject-matter gone before ; but one aphorism is not considered asiddha with regard to a previous aphorism, when belonging to the same subject matter. (Tô HeuThrad a :) 1 Therefore the present sätra VIII. 3. 43, would not be considered asiddha with regard to VIII. 3. 41. Or the present sätra may be considered as an apavada to VIII, 3. 41: and an apavada is never asiddha with regard to an utsarga. 
Eht: Fra 1881 Tarfa il EF-SET, ATH II वृतिः ।।इस उम् इत्येतयोविसर्जनीयस्यान्यतरस्यां पकारादेशो भवति सामर्थे कुधीः परतः ॥ 
44. For the visarga of words ending in fe and Se, before a hard guttural or labial, there is optionally substituted 7, when the two words stand in correlation with one another. 
The is understood here. Thus सर्पिष्करोति or सर्पिः करोति, यजुः करोति or ugodfat 11 
Why do we say when the two words are correlated'? Observe fase aft:, for $74, where af&: is not in construction with fou, but with magali 
The word erzät here means sìth or mutual relation of two words; and not " having the same meaning", or it may mean both. In fact he is equivalent to MARTEHT I. e. the syntactical want of another word to complete the sense. It does not here mean 'compound'. For it being a qfary: the word ui is 
BK. VIII. CH. III. F. 46] 
VISARGA SANDHI. 
1619 
understood here (समर्थः पतविधिः II. I. I). The employment of the word सामर्थ्य here indicates that it is a different samarthya from that of II. 1. 1. It docs not denote एका भाव: or ऐकाय which is the samarthya of compounds where two or more words denote one object. The så marthya here means vyapeksha, which is thus defined मामाभूतयोः, पदार्ययो यो पदी वसे, तयो यो योगः “the syntactical union of two words expressing two different ideas". 
नित्यं समासे ऽनुत्तरपदस्थस्य ॥४५॥ पदानि ॥ नित्यम, समासे, अनुत्तर पदस्थस्य॥ वृत्तिः । इससोरिति वर्तते । समासविषये इसुसोर्विसर्जनीवस्यानुसरपरस्थस्य नित्यं पलं भवति कुपोः परता ॥ 
45. Tho visargn of an इस or उस्-ending word, which is not preceded by any other word, is invariably changed to in a compound, when followed by a hard gut tural or labial. 
The words and Tस् are understood here. Thus सर्पिष्कुण्डिका, धनुष्कपा लम, सर्पिष्पानम्, धनुष्फलम् ।। 
Why do we say when it is not preceded by another word? Observe परमसर्पिः कुण्डिका, परमधनु कपालम् ॥ The option even of the last sutra does not apply to these examples. 
The word altre is derived from the root fit by adding the Uņadi affix इसि (Un II. I09), and यजुम् by the Unadi affix रसि (Un II. II7), therefore on the maxim प्रत्ययग्रहणे &c, the word सुसो would denote the mere forms सर्पिस् and यजुम् and not forms like परमसर्पिस् &c. then what is the necessity of employing the word भनुत्तरपदस्थस्य in the satra? 
The very employment of the word anuttara-pada-sthasya in this sätra, is an indicator (jnapaka), that the restriction of the following maxim does not apply with regard to the affixes rस् and उस् : प्रत्ययमहणे यस्मात् स विहित स्तदाद स्तदन्तस्य महणम् " an affix denotes, whenever it is employed in Grammar, a word form which begins with that to which that affix has been added and ends with the affix itself". This maxim not applying, we have परमसर्पिष्करोति or परमपिः करोति by the previous satra VIII. 3.44. 
l. Why is not there option in the case of compounds also by the previous sätra ? 
Ans :--Because the word aqua there means it, and therefore does not apply to compounds. ____ अतः कृकमिकसकुम्भपात्रकुशाकर्णीवनव्ययस्य ॥ ४६॥ पदानि ॥ अतः, - 
कमि-कंस-कुम्भ-पात्र-कुशा-कर्णीषु, अन्-अव्ययस्य॥ वृत्तिः ॥ भकारादुसरस्य मनष्ययविसर्जनीयस्थ समासेजुत्तरपदस्थस्य नित्य सकारोरशो भवति कागि कंस कुम्भ पात्र कुशा की इत्येतेषुपरतः॥ 
1620 
VISARGA SANDHI. 
[BK. VIII. CI. III. S 47 
46. For the visarga of a word ending in th, with the exception of an Indeclinable, स् is substituted in a com pound, when a form of g and कम, or the words कंस कुम्भ, पात्र, gokul and puff follow, and the first word is not preceded by another word. 
Thus :-अयस्कारः, पयस्कारः (III. 2. 1) कम्-अवस्कामः, पवस्कामः, कंस: भयस्कंसः, पयस्कंसः, कुम्भः, मयस्कुम्भः पयस्कुम्भः ॥ Soalso भयस्कुम्भी पयस्कुम्भी, on the maxim प्रातिपदिकमहणे लिविशिष्टस्यापि महणं भवति ।। पात्रः-अयस्पापम्, पयस्पापम्, भयस्पाभी, पयस्पात्री। कुषा:-अयस्कुशा, पयस्कुशा॥ कर्णीः-अयस्की , पयस्क | The form सुनस्कर्णः belongs to Kaskadi class (VIII. 3.48). 
Why do we say mn: "a visarga preceded by short 64, or the visarga of the word ending in #:"? See ottant:. y.am: 1| Why do we say 'preceded by short म? Observe माकरणम् ॥ The form भास्कर belongs to Kaskadi class (VIII. 3. 48). See also III. 2. 2. 
Why do we say " with the exception of an Indeclinable *? Observe चाकारः, पुनःकारा 
The word समासे is understood here also. Therefore not here; वयः करोति पयः करोति, वर्ण कामयते ॥ 
The word TETTOYEFUFI is also to be read in this. Therefore not here, परमपयः कारः, परमपय कामः ॥ 
The word of need not have been taken, because it is a form of the root कम् , since it is derived from कम् by adding the Unadi affix स (III. 62 Un)? 
Ans.--The employment of the indicates the existence of the follow ing maxim:--रणादयोऽव्युत्पनानि प्रातिपदिकानि "Words which end with उण &c. are crude-forms that do not undergo or cause such operations as would depend on their etymological formation." ___ अधःशिरसी पदे ॥४७॥ पदानि ॥ अधः-शिरसी, पदे ॥ 
इतिः॥ भवम् शिरस् त्वतयोर्विसनीयस्य समासेऽनुसरपरस्यस्य सकार भादेवो भवति पदयदे परतः॥ 
___47. For the visarga of अधस् or शिरस् when not preceded by another word, and followed by the word or in composition with it, there is substituted स् ॥ 
Thus मधस्तवम्, शिरस्सदम् ।। अषसदी, शिरस्पती ।। The word समासे is understood in this, therefore not here मधः पदम् ॥ 
The word मनुत्तरपदस्थस्य is also understood here. Therefore not in the following परमशिरः पदम् । . The word मधस्पदम् is a compound formed under Mayaravyansa kadi class. BK. VIII. CH. III G. 49) 
VISARGA SANDHI. 
1621 
frilagt 1861 atat ll pilay, a वृत्तिः ॥ कस्क इत्येवमाशु च विसर्जनीयस्य सकारः षकारो का यथायोगमादेशो भवति कुपोः परतः ॥ 
48. Fore is substituted for the visarga, before a haril guttural and labial in the words in and the rest. 
This is an Apavada to Sätra VIII. 3. 37. g is substituted after for 7, and everywhere else. Thus fitti, 2. ERTE : (with or of a :). 3. yy: (VI. 3. 23) 4. Tip: (VI. 3. 21) 5. uri; 6. gueat (from n'to buy' with the affix forg, because it belongs to Sampadadi class.) 7. HUF: (from or in the sense of * :). 8. mient (the & is by VIII. 3. 12). 9. altsgfugit, 10. 44, II. warm 12. aften, 13. a ugu "The words 9 to 13 are exceptions to VIII. 3. 45, so that there might be q, even when af &c are preceded by another word. Thus theft or to The counter-example then to VIII. 3. 45 will be marø: 04" This is the opinion of the Parayanikas. But in the Mahabhashya, the counter example under VIII. 3. 45 is theft!OTT! Another reason why these words are listed here, is that change will take place, even where there is no correlation or vyapeksha. As farea artrooi rau So also when there is correlation, as i affarga: Here artą is an incomplete word.' The q change, will take place even where there is no compounding. Where there is no compounding, and there is complete want of correlation, even there they will invariably come. And where there is correlation, but no compounding there the would have been optional by VIII. 3. 44, but it becomes invariable here, on account of these words being so listed. Thus we have these cases : (1) Without correlation, as farea afegio U (2) Where there is correla tion, as i a pota: 11 (3) Where there is composition, as are for I (4) Where there is no composition and no correlation even, as, in example (1). (5) Where there is correlation but no compounding as in example (2). In all these cases there is o invariably in case of these words. 14. BF7OT, 15. मेस्पिण्ड भविहितलक्षण उपचारः कस्कादिषु द्रष्टव्यः । 
Every change of visarga to #ora, must be referred to Kaskadi class, is not governed by any other rule. Thus this is an Akştigapa. Upachara is thc name of Ę and q which replace the visarga. 
The Parayana is of two sorts, Dhatu-Par, and Nama-Par. Those who devote themselves in committing to memory and reciting these are Paraya nikas. 
grale et superiorit: II SE I rata il grafe, at, 3-4-erihaarat: 11 af: il ne fra faufaen TT TT wafa gt: grat que entra eman di 
49. # may optioually be substituted for the 
1622 
VISARGA SANDHI. 
(BK. VIII. C11. III. $ 51 
visarga before a hard guttural and labial, in the Chhandas ; but neither before g, nor before a doubled word. 
Thus 821 ir or FFTTE U This is an example of non-compounds. In compounds, the change is compulsory by VIII. 3. 46: because the option of the present sutra is asiddha there, and it finds its scope in cases other than compounds. If the maxim garot THIETAT # Da gar: be applied, then the two sutras VIII. 3.46 and VIII. 3. 49 belong to the same acut and one is not asiddha with regard to the other. Then we could give examples of com pounds also under this sutra; but then such compounds will also be governed by VIII. 3. 46, and so the a would be compulsory. 
FreakyA or FRI 74, here the word forma: is an Indeclinable and hence the rulo VIII. 3. 46, does not apply to it. T OT: ATC: or FO FATT: 11 Here 7 is substituted for the and then the 7 is changed to a by VIII. 4. 27. The word art: is a q formed word. 
Why do we say "not before # and a doubled word'? Observe mfu: o fagra (Av. V. 26. 1), gar: geus altul 
In affaeftant: ger (Rig. X. 139. 1), ##: 974* (Rig. I. 12. 10), the change has not taken place, as all rules are optional in the Vedas. 
9afafadaaraa: Il yo il para 11 :-**a-*cafe-gay, 02-27iga: 11 
FT: dle of a URT pode ser mapparea aprann keretüt ve safe para 11 
50. The visarga is changed to in the Chhandas, before Fri, 469, fa, fu and a but not so the visarga of saferat: 
Thus fare: 11 is the Aorist of F, the has been elided by II. 4. 80: the of is guņated before the affix fag, thus we have all the t is elided by VI. 1. 68; and the augment me is not added by VI. 4. 75. Simi larly fa ll Here also ma is the Aorist of , with by III. 1. 59. 947tha, here it is the per of $; ug is added instead of a, as a Vedic ano maly. TUFET, here fy is the imperative of the fa is changed to fg, the vikaraña is elided, and changed to by VI. 4. 102. See VIII. 4. 27, for the change of # to op 11 , here is Past Participle of 11 
Why do we say 'but not of mrafa: '? Observe a mafai (Rig. I. 43. 2). 
gyur: nerere Il r801 Our Il ya faft:, qa, agere afat: 11 
S ATI TITATEATEA TARAT AT PUT TH: qd il 
BK. VIII. CH. III. S. 55] 
VISARGA SANDHI. 
1623 
51. The visarga of the Ablative case is changed to स् before परि meaning over'. 
The word Chhandas is understood here also. Thus दिवस्परिप्रथम जसे (Rig x. 45. I) भग्निहिमवतस्परि॥ दिवस्परि, महस्परि॥ 
Why do we say 'of the Ablative'? Observe महिरिव भोगैः पर्येति बाहुम् ॥ Why do we say “before परि"? See एभ्यावा एतल्लोकेभ्यः प्रजापतिः समेरयत् ॥ Why do we say when परि means 'over'? See दिवः पृथिव्याः प्रोजउद्भुतम् (Rig. VI. 47. 27). Here परि has the sense of "on all sides". 
पातौ च बहुलम् ॥५२॥ पदानि ॥ पाती, च बहुलम् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ पातौ च धासौ परतः पञ्चमी विसर्जनीयस्थ बहुलं सकार भादसो भवति छन्दसि विषये ॥ 
62. स may diversely be substituted for the visarga of the Ablative before the verb ora in the Chhandas. 
Thus farfurg, CELEYTT 11 Sometimes, the change does not take place, as परिषदः पास ॥ 
पठ्या पतिपुत्त्रपृष्ठपारपदपयस्पोषेषु ॥ ५३॥ पदानि ॥ षष्ठ्याः -पति-पुत्र-पृष्ठ पार-पद पयस-पोषेषु॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ षष्ठीविसर्जनीयस्यसकारावेशो भवति पति पुष पृष्ठ पार पद पयस् पोष इत्येतेषु परतः छन्दसि विषये ॥ 
___b3. For the visarga of the Genitive, there is subs tituted स in the Vedas, before पति, पत्र, पृष्ठ, पार, पद, पयस, and पोष ॥ 
Thus वाचस्पति विश्वकर्माणमूतये, (Rig. x. 81.7), दिवस्पुत्राय सूर्याय, विवस्पृष्ठे धावमानं सुपर्णम्, भगन्म, समससारम, उपदे समिध्यसे, सूर्ये चक्षु दिवस्पया, रायस्पोर्ष यजमानेषु धत्तम् ॥ 
Why do we say after a genitive case'? See मनुः पुणेभ्यो सायं ध्यभजत् ।। इडाया वा ॥ ५४॥ पदानि ॥ डायाः, वा ॥ वृत्तिायाः षष्ठीविसर्जनीयस्य वा सकार भादेवो भवति पत्यादिषु परतश्छन्दसि विपये ॥ 
64. स is optionally substituted for the visarga of FET41:, before ofà &c, (VIII. 3. 53.) in the Chhandas. 
Thus sायाः पतिः or डायास्पतिः डावापुस्तायाः पुस्तः। डायास्पृष्टम् । इराया पृष्ठम। डाया सारम, डाया: पारम | सायास्पदम् । बायाः परम् । इडायास्पयः । जायाः पयः । बतायाः पापम् । डायास्पोपम् ।। 
अपदान्तस्य मूर्धन्यः॥५५॥ पदानि ॥ अ-पदान्तस्य, मूखन्यः॥ वृत्तिः । अपरान्तस्यति मूर्धन्य इति चैताधिकृत वेदितव्यम् । मापारपंरिसमाः ॥ 
55. Upto the end of the Pada, is throughout to be supplied the following: “A cerebral letter is substi tuted always in the room of --- , whien this letter does not stand at the end of a word". 
1624 
A SANDHI. 
[ BK. VIII. CII. III. $ 57 
Here ceases the Padadhikara which commenced with VIIT. I. 16. The two words w e 'not final in a pada', and 'cerebral' exert a governing influence on all sätras upto the end of this chapter. Thus VIII. 3. 59, teaches "of an affix and a substitute". The whole of the present sätra should be read there to complete the sense : i.e. “a cerebral sound is subs tituted always in the room of the # of an affix and of the # which is a substitute, when it does not stand at the end of a word'. Thus far, gul, fing, वायुषु ॥ 
Why do we say not final'? Sec stor , F # Though the anu vritti of er was understood here, yet the employment of tlie word 'cercbral' is for the sake of t; as 294 (VIII. 3. 78). 
FT: FIG: E: 11 g&ll Tatra II FEE, FIG:, : || वृत्तिः ॥ सहे तो सारूपस्य यः सकारस्तस्य मूर्खन्य भादेशो भवति । 
56. & is substituted for the x in Fit, when this occurs in the form of Ars (FC) 
Thus जलाषा, नुरापाद्, पृतनापाट् ॥साइ is derived from सह by the affix षि (U11. 2. 63), there is vşiddhi of the penultimate, the & is changed to r(VIII. 2. 31). and the upapada is lengthened (VI. 3. 137). 
: #: would have been enough, for there is no other form art ex cept this derived from ax; why then the word is used in the satra? There is another form सार not derived from सह ॥ Thus सह उन वर्तते सरः, सरस्य 
अपत्य-सारिः॥ He in whose name there is the letter r is called सड; as पर। 
Why do we say 'in the form of ETE'? The rule will not apply when the form is er, as FETO, TIAT, I Why do we say 8: " for the a"? So that the bar of ETT may not be changed to cerebral : the is already cerebral. 
Vant: N 4 8 Tall cut it: il HT: AI và trang trong đợt 2 : PER fast 
57. From this, upto the end of the chapter, should be supplied in every sútra, the following :-" when a vowel (with the exception of 2 or 3), or & or a guttural precedes". 
The word pois a pratyahara sormed with the second aof yol a It includes all vowels and semivowels excepts and all of the semi-vowels ( is only efficient: so that only is taken in the translation, means the letters of the ai class. Thus prent: is supplied in VIII. 3. 59, to complete the sense. Thus fr, PTT, g, n, o, ifte, w, a, FL !! 
Why do we say " when preceded by you or "? Observe trafa, Here the affix & offera, and thc substitute F in Mat (VII. 2. 106) are not changed to 11 
BK. VIII. CH. III. §. 59] 
CHANGE. 
1625 
नुम्बिसर्जनीयशय॑वायेपि ॥ ५८॥ पदानि ॥ नुम, विसर्जनीय-शर्यवाये, अपि ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ नुम्यवायपि विसनीयव्यवायपि पर्यवायेपि इण्कोरुत्तरस्थ सकारस्य मूर्धन्यादेशो भवति । 
58. The substitution of g for æ takes place then also, when the auginent (14), the visarjaniya or a sibilant occurs between the said ru and y letters or tho I 
The word 'separation, intervention' applies to every one of the words #, &c. Thus (1) when an intervenes, as eitir, N, Kite (VII. 1. 72, VI. 4. 10). (2) When a visarjaniya intervenes, as afg, T a ip (VIII. 3. 36) (3) When a Sibilant intervenes, as Art, 
a n d The takes place, when a &c intervene singly and not when they intervene collectively. Therefore not here, FT, FR from the root fy'to kiss. Here there is the intervention of two, namely, fu and &(111. 4. 91). 
The word format is in the Ablative case, and it required that the should follow immediately after it. Hence the necessity of the present sätra for the intervention of certain letters. 
आदेशप्रत्यययोः ॥ ५९॥ पदानि ॥ आदेश, प्रत्यययोः। वृत्तिः ॥ भादयो यः सकारः प्रत्ययस्य च या सकार इकोरतरत्तस्य मूर्चन्यो भवति । 
59. is substituted for that æ which is a subs titute (of the or of a root in Dhậtupâtha by VI. 1. 64), or which is (the portion of) an affix, under the above mentioned conditions (VIII. 3. 57, 58), of being preceded by an u vowel or & guttural. 
The word cerebral is understood here from VIII. 3. 55, as well as il The satra adeśa-pratyayoh is in the Genitive case. The force of the Genitive however is different in the word adesa, from what it is in pratyaya. In the first it is samanadhikaraña-shashthi, in the latter avayava-yogashashthi. That is that which is an adega, and that which belongs to an affix. If we took it as avayavayoga shashthi in both places, then the satra would mean "of that which is a portion of a substitute, or of an affix," and there would arise the following anomaly. In doubling a word by VIII. 1. 1, one view is that two are substituted in the room of one (See VIII. 1. 1). Thus frafra, gigant Here the x in these words, is a portion of a substitute, and would be changed to g, if we tran slate the sätra as above. 
If we take the other view, and translate the sätra as "of that which is a substitute or an affix", we land on the following anomaly. We must have forms like ontrafa and eftrafa, and not the correct forms meafa, eftanti; 
1626 
CHANGE. 
(BK. VIII. CH. III. 5. 60 
for here # is not an affix, but a portion of an affix. In fact, with regard to affixes, the sätra would be confined to those affixes only which consist of a single , such as fong in the Vedic subjunctive a ll That this is the proper interpretation of the s@tra is indicated by the sätra VIII. 3. 60, (the next aphorism). The substitute qy is taken in this stra. If therefore, the force of Genitive in भादेवस्य was-भादेवस्य यः सकारः and not-मादेशः थः सकारः, then there would have been no necessity of including the substitute 45 in the satra, for then the present sätra would have covered the case of 76 also. Similarly, if the force of the Genitive in प्रत्ययस्य was = प्रत्ययः यः सकाए, and not-प्रत्यवस्था या 
T:; then there would have been no necessity of excludirig the affix are (V. 4. 52) from the operation of the present rule by VIII. 3. III, because it is not an affix consisting of a single letter 11 
Having surmised this, we shall now give illustrations. First of that which is a substitute. It can only be the & which replaces the g of a root in Dhatupatha. Thus feq, 9641 !! Of an affix, we have fay, art, ; 947 in part 17; and an in a ITALNI 
In the case of that and at, the is not the portion of an affix, but the whole affix itself: the present sätra should therefore not apply to this i 
Ans.—Here we apply the maxim 2441UTE Pafo 
These words ( E and T) are from the roots 8 and , in with fwy, the x is elided by III. 4. 97, the augment 9€ (III. 4. 94.), the affix farq by III. 1. 34; the 7 of 9 is changed to a guttural, and the ofw to and then to a guttural. 
The Uņadi word mi (7Q+Un III. 70) complies with this rule, but not so the word mi and Wai (Uņ III. 73) formed with the same affix at 11 
शासिवसिघसीनांच ॥०॥ पदानि ॥ शासि-वास- घसीनाम, च ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ शासि पसि पास इत्येतेषां च कोरुत्तरस्य सकारस्थ मूर्खन्यो भवति । 
60. V is substituted for the स् of शास, धस् and घस् when it is preceded by an tu vowel or a guttural. 
Thus for Safnara, wafuga, the Aorist of arg; the Reis replaced by A7 (III, 1. 56), and the changed to r by VI. 4. 34. So also शिष्टः, बिटवान् ॥ From वस् we have रपिता, हपितवान, उपिला॥ The Samprasarana takes place by VI. I. 15 as it belongs to yajadi class. From & we have SWT, in the Perfect. He is the substitute of 07 (II: 4. 40), the penulti mate is elided by VI. 4. 98. So also ma in ira font (Rig. I. 82. 2). This is the Aorist form of He, the 2 is substituted for me (II. 4. 37) : the Aorist sign is elided by II. 4. 80. 
BK. VIII. CI. III. $.61] 
Pre RULE. 
1627 
This sätra is made to cover cases not governed by the last satra, namely, where the g is not an adeśa. Though the prin Te is the of a subs titute, yet it is not governed by the preceding aphorism, because the word STORT there means 'the & which is a substitute'. Here is not a substi tute, but a portion of a substitute. The non-substitute Te is not to be taken here : as it seldom occurs. 
The word post is understood here also. Therefore the rule would not apply to urfEH, TE and OET UI 
Farifavela querenteral & II rata il fa-oolti, va, olt, मभ्यासात् ॥ वृत्ति ॥ स्तातर्फान्सानां च पणभूते समि परतः अभ्यासादिण उत्तरस्व मावशसकारस्य मूर्खन्यादेशो भवति । 
61. g is substituted for after { or in the re duplication of a Desiderative, if the p of page is changed to g; but only in Eg and in Causative of roots which in Dhatupatha begin with a C# 
This rule is confined to the Desideratives of ra and of ę beginning roots in the Causative, provided that the Desiderative signe is changed to go The rule applies to the of the substitute, and not to the affix & as there can be no such after a reduplicate syllable. Therefore y means that which replaces the of the roots. 
Thus from eg we have graf i Here the æ of me is changed to by the last sätra, and therefore so also after the reduplicate 7, the # of is changed to put 
of the Causatives of roots beginning with g in Dhatupatha, we have fanafaqih, fergefa, generall In this last, theç is changed to aby VII. 4..67. 
Though this change would have taken place by the previous stra (VIII. 3. 59), yet the separate enunciation of this rule indicates that this is a niyama aphorism--the change takes place only in these cases of and Causatives of Desideratives under the conditions mentioned in this sätra, and no where else. Thus f&feruit from the root portò (Tud, 140). This is a root, which is exhibited in the Dhatupatha with a T, therefore the form ought to have been fartufat by VIII. 3. 59, but it is not so, because of the niyama of the present sätra. So also get from anya (Div. 24): and who from grū (Tud 115). 
If this is a niyama rule by the very fact of its separate enunciation, what is then the necessity of using the word om in the aphorisın ? Ans. rent sturtarr; so that, the sätra may; mcan "iff and Causatives only, when .com fullows" ? and not "if and Causatives when you only follows". In the 
1628 
Trey Rule. 
(BK. VIII. CH. III. 8. 61 
latter view, we could not get the form ger; and the rule would have applied to FATEHFT also. 
Why do we say "in the Desiderative q"? So that the niyama may not be any where else. Had for not been used in the satra, the restriction would have been with regard to every affix, and the sätra would have meant “if there is occasion of or change after a reduplicate, it should take place only in the case of Fa and the Causatives". Therefore a change would not have taken place in the ey, as it is not a Causative. 
0.- farasettu:? Why have we used the word go with q, and not the word fra? That is, what compulsion was there to exhibit the Desiderative affix 6%, in this changed form ? The word farra is the name given in the Prati sakhyas to q and of change. 
Ans. So that the restrictive rule may not apply to the mana form of orell As eft II The Art is here fora by I. 2. 8, and there is vocalisation by VI. 1. 15. For had af been used in the sætra, then the restriction would have been with regard to all Desideratives in general, whether the na was changed to q or not. Therefore as there is restriction of VIII. 3. 59, in the case off fartufa where is not changed to r; so there would have been restriction in ugo, the & could not have been changed to a by VIII. 3. 59. Similarly in faBr FT II 
.-What is the necessity of exhibiting you with the anubandha r? So that the rule should not apply to q in general, but to the Desiderative affix प only. As मुपिष इन्द्रम् ॥ This मुषुपिषे is the Perfect of स्वप्, the affix यास् is added as Chhandas irregularity instead of ex; for gte there is a, the affix is fara by I. 2. 5, and so there is vocalisation by VI. 1. 15, and reduplication, and the augment r is added by VII. 2. 13, the g is changed to my, as Estonia, the Ę is elided by VIII. 3. 19. Here after the reduplicate o, the x is changed to q, in g by the general rule VIII. 3. 59, as the restriction of this sätra does not apply in this case. But had q in general been taken, then using has an affix q, and therefore sätra VIII. 3. 59, would have been restricted, and there would have been no change of g to g after the reduplicate, as it is not a causative. Hence ya has been employed with an anubandha. 
Why do we say 'after a reduplicate'? 
Ans.—So that this restriction may apply to that q which would have been caused by the r or y of an abhyasa, and not to that which would have been caused by an upasarga. As qraftrorular, though without the Preposition, the form is सिरिसते ॥ . 
0.-No, this cannot be the reason, because the caused by the upa sarga is considered as asiddha, and hence there would be no restriction. 
BK. VIII. CH. III. S 63 ] 
TO CHANGE 
1629 
Ans...Then we say, the abhyasa is taken to be qualified by , namely that abhyasa which is caused by , would give occasion to this rule and not any other abhyasa. Therefore is a reduplication has been caused by AF, and then your is added to it, then the restriction of the present sätra will not apply, and more change will take place though the root may not be a Causative &c. Thus the 4 of Fig is uigea (VI. 1. 19), the Desiderative of this root is afara, with r augment, thc clision of 9 (VI. 4. 48) of a, the elision of y by VI. 4. 49. 
Q_No this also cannot be the reason : because the Tr change is antaranga, while the restriction niyama is Bahiranga. Therefore, the word abhyasa is employed superfluously in the sætra. 
Ans. The word abhyasa is taken in the satra, so that the restriction may be with regard to that a which might have been caused by the çor z of the abliyasa; and not to that of which might be occasioned by the form of a dhatu or verbal root. Thus ifift, mitte 1 Here the root r in the sense of ma, is turned to Desiderative with m; and by VI. 1. 2, the is reduplicated, then by VII. 4. 79, the is changed to fill Thus fare; here by the force of the r of the abhyasa fh, the is changed to q as fee; (VIII. 3. 59) then as the restriction of this sätra does not apply, the root causes the grea of the abhyasa, as well! Had the word spear not been used in the satra, the # of abhyasa could not have been changed to q, for then the sätra would have meant "q is substituted for , only in the case of Ey and Causatives in the Desiderative qon"; and as they is not a Causative-Desidera tive, the restriction would have applied. 
सः स्विदिस्वदिसहीनां च ॥१२॥ पदानि ॥ सः, स्विदि-स्वदि-सहीनाम,च ॥ वृति ॥ विदि स्वदि सहित्येतेषां ण्यन्तानां सनि पभूते परतो ऽभ्यासादुत्तस्य सकारस्थ सकारादेशी * u 
62. pis substituted for the after the redupli cate of the ru Desiderative of the Causatives of fearç, pra, and ag 
The substitute of debars the cerebral change. In other words, ther of these roots remains unchanged. As 
f arfa, feretreffit and सिसाहविपति॥ 
प्रासितादव्यवाये ऽपि ॥३॥ पदानि ॥ प्राक्,सितात, अद्, व्यवाये,मपि ॥ वृति ॥ सेवसितेति वस्यति माक्रांसतसंशम्दनापदित कर्थमनुकमिन्यामस्तवाव्यवायेपि मूर्यन्यो भवति त्वं तहेदितव्यमपियवादनस्यवायेषि॥ 
63. (The substitution of g for Ę, to be taught hercafter, will take place) for all roots upto ha exclusive in 
1630 
पत्व RULE. 
[BK. VIII. CI. III. S.65 
VIII. 3. 70, even when the augment अद् intervenes (between the F and the efficient letter). 
The root सित् occurs in sotra VIII. 3.70. Thus VIII. 3.65 teaches प change: as अभिषुणोति, परिषुणोति, विषुणोति निषुणोति ॥ So also when मद् inter venes; as भभ्यषुणोत, पर्यषुणोत, ज्यधुणोत, न्यषुणोत् ॥ The force of भपि is that the change takes place even when the augment does not come, i. e. in cases other than the augment. 
स्थादिष्वभ्यासेन चाभ्यासस्य ॥४॥ पदानि । स्थादिष, अभ्यासेन, च, अभ्यासस्य ॥ पत्तिः ॥ प्राक् सिताविति वर्नते ॥ उपसर्गामुनोतीच्या स्थासनबसेधति स्थाववस्तेषु स्थाविषु मानसितर्स रावनादू भयासेन व्यवाये मूर्खन्यो भवत्यभ्याससकारस्य च भवतीत्येवं वेदितव्यम् ॥ 
64. In FoT &c upto fera exclusive (VIII. 3. 65 to VIII. 3. 70), this v substitution takes place then also, when the reduplicate intervenes, and the ey of the reduplicate is also changed to all 
The words fhur are understood here also. The perft roots are, स्था, सेनय &c in VIII. 3.65 and ending with से in VIII. 3.70. The satra consists of two sentences : (1) The पल takes place in स्था &c. even when a reduplicate intervenes ; (2) The # of the reduplicates of FAT &c. is changed toll The first is a vidhi rule, and the second is a niyama rule. 
Thus after where the abhyasa intervenes. This applies even to, roots other than those which have been taught with a q in the Dhatupatha. As भमिषिषेणयिषति, परिषिणविषति (सेनया भभियातुमिच्छन्ति). This applies moreover to reduplicates which end in म, as भभितष्ठा; here the would not have been changed toप (by VIII. 3.59) as it is not preceded by t or | Another raison d'etre of this sätra is that it prohibits you (VIII. 3. 61). As fartufo, परिषिषिक्षति 
The word syruk is for the sake of niyama, as we have said above. स of स्था &c. and of no other roots is changed to ॥ As भामिनसूपति from पू प्रेरणे with सम्, the augment is debarred by VII. 2. 12 : the root स् is unchanged by the niyama prohibition of VIII. 3. 61 ; the reduplicate premains un changed by the restriction of the present sūtra. 
उपसर्गात्सुनोतिसुवतिस्यतिस्तौतिस्तोमतिमासेनयसेवसिचसअस्वजाम् ॥१५॥ पदानि ॥ उपसर्गात, सुनोति-सुवति-स्यति-स्तौति-स्तोमात-सा-सेनय-सेध-सिख. सज-स्वाम॥ वृत्तिः॥ उपसर्गस्थानिमित्तादुत्तरस्व मुनोति मुवति स्थति स्तौतिस्तामति स्था खेमय सेष विच सम्म स्वजावेतेषां सकारस्थ मूर्धन्यादेशो भवति । 
66. Nis substituted for स, after an r and उ of an upasarga in the following verbs : स (सुनोति), सू (सुवति), सो BK. VIII. CH. III. I. 66] 
षस्व CHANGE. 
1631 
(स्यति VII. 3. 71), स्तु (स्तौति VII. 3. 89), स्तुम (स्तोमते), स्था, सेनय (Denominative), सिध् (सेधति), सिच, सञ्ज und खम् ॥ 
Thus अमिषुणोति, परिषुणाति, अभ्यषुणोत्, पर्थषुणोत् ॥ सुवति, ममिषुवति, परिषुत्रति, मभ्यधुवन, पर्यवत् ॥ स्यति, मभिष्यति, परियत्ति, अभ्यव्यात्। पर्यज्यत । साति, अभिष्टौति, परिष्टोति, अभ्यष्टौत।। स्तोमति, भभिष्टोभते, परिटोमते, अभ्यष्टोमत. पर्यटोभत ॥स्था, मभिष्ठास्यति, परिष्वास्थति, अन्य छान, पर्यटन, ममिसष्ठी, परिती । सेनय, भाभिषेणयति, परिषेणयति, मथपेणयत्, पर्यषणयत् ॥ अभि विपेणयिषति, परिषियिषति ॥ सष, मभिधति, परिषेधति, सभ्यषेधत्, पर्यषेधत् । सिच, मभिषिञ्चति, परिपिपति, सभ्यपिञ्चत, पर्यषिञ्चत्, अभिषिषिक्षति, परिषिषिक्षति ॥ सम्ज, अभिषमति, परिषमति, मध्यपजन, पर्यषजन, अभिषिषहमति, परिषिषडक्षति ।। ध्वज, अभिष्वमते, परिधनते, अभ्यब्वमत, पर्यव्यजत, मभिषिवझते, परिषिप्वइससे ॥सेध इतिशाविकरणनिधासिध्यतिमिवृत्यर्थः। उपसर्गादिति, किम् ? दधि सिग्पति, मधु सिञ्चति, निगताः ॥सेषका भस्माहेशाभिः सेधको देश इति ॥ मायं सिरुप 
सर्गः ॥भभिसावकीयतीत्यचापि न मुमोति प्रति क्रियायोगः किसहि सापकीयं प्रति ॥ मभिपाययतीत्या मुमोतिमेव प्रति क्रियायोगी न सापयतिमिति पलं भवति ॥ 
The root fery is exhibited in the satra as er with ut vikarana, thus debarring सिध-सिष्यति ।। 
Why do we say "after an upasarga"? Observe दधि सिञ्चति, मधु सिम्पति (VIII. 3. III). So निसिपको देश-निर्गता सेषका भस्माद् देशात् ।। Here नि: is not an Upasarga to सिच, but to the noun सेचक | Similarly in भमिसावकीयति, the upasarga अमि is not added to the root (मुनोति), but to the third derivative of F (सुनोति), Namely, from g we derive सावक with ण्वुल, and from सावक we form the Denominative root arrira with 7 ; and to this Denominative root भाभि is added. The upasarga, however may be added to the root first, and then बुल् and क्या added. In that case, the rule will apply. As मभिषावकीयति।। So also with the Causative, as tafa, for here the upasarga is added to the root y and not to the causative form arra il 
The roots घुस भमिपये belongs to Svadi class, sप्रेरणे to Tudadi class, घोऽन्तकर्मणि to Divadi class, दम् स्तुती to Adadi class and दम स्तंभे, to Bhuadi Class. These have been shown in the sätra in their declined form in order to indicate that the rule does not apply to their यह लुक, as मभिसोषवाति ॥ See VII. 1. 6 for this rule of fair exhibited roots. On the other hand, the roots for &c. being not so exhibited, change their a in यह लुक् also, as मभिषिचीति ॥ 
The upasarga need not end with and a for the purposes of this rule. Thus निष्षुणोति, दुग्घुणोति, where the upasarga is निस् and दुस् ॥ 
सदिरप्रतः ॥ १९॥ पदानि ||सदिः, अप्रतेः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ सदे सकारस्य उपसर्गस्यानिमिसाइप्रसकत्तरस्य मूर्धन्य मावेो भवति । 
___66. The स of सद is changed to ष after an Upa sarga having an t or उ, but not after प्रति ॥ 
The word efe: is in the first case, but has the force of genitive. Thus गिदिति विपति, न्यषीवन, व्यषीवत् ॥ निषसाद, विषसाद | The second a remains un 
changed in the Perfect by VIII. 3. 118. 
1632 
पषCHANGE. 
[BK. VIII. CH. III. 8.69 
Why do we say 'but not after afa'? Observe urtetara u Prof. Bohtlingk points out that the sotra is put as given by Sayanacharya in his commentary on Rig Veda VI. 13. I. Panini, however, often uses the first case with the force of the Genitive, as in VIII. 3. 80. 
स्तन्मेः ॥ ३७॥ पदानि ॥ स्तनमः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ स्त-मः सकारस्य उपसर्गस्यानिमित्तायुमरस्य मूर्खन्य भादेशी भवति ॥ 
___67. The स of स्तन्म is changed into m after an up asarga, having an e or उ॥ 
Thus ममिष्टभ्नाति । परिष्टनाति । मन्बटभ्नात् । पर्वहनात् । भमितरम्भ । परितटम्म । The word aa: of the last sätra is not to be read here. Hence we have forms like:-मतिमाति। प्रत्यारम्नान, प्रत्यतितरम्भ ___ अवाचालम्बनाविर्ययोः ॥१८॥ पदानि ॥ अयात, च, आलम्बन-भाविदयेयो। 
वृत्तिः ॥ भवधमानुपसर्गादुनरस्व स्तन्मः सकारस्य भूर्जन्यादेशो भवति । मालम्बने मावि च। 
68. The # of FH is changed into or after the preposition in the sense of support and contiguity'. 
The word as means "support, refuge, that upon which any thing depends or leans". The means "the state of not being four or far off, i.e. to be contiguous'. 
Thus eru " He remains leaning upon a staff" &c, m e fatfa # So also in the sense of to be near, as भवटधा सेना 'the army near at hand'. मब एग्धा परतू ॥ See V. 2. 13. 
Why do we say " when having the sense of support or contiguity"? Thus मपस्तब्धो वृषल पीतेन 'the Sadra is afMicted with cold'. . The present sätra is commenced in order to make the change even 
while the preceding letter is not tor in 
वेध स्वनो भोजने ॥९॥ पदानि ॥ः, च, स्वनः, भोजने ॥ बासिः ॥ रुपसर्गारवाचोत्तरस्व भोजनार्ये स्वनतेः सकारस्व मूर्चबरियो भवति ॥ 
69. The v is substituted for the सू of स्वन्, after वि and भव, when the sense is " to smack while eating". 
Thus विश्वणति, पवणत्, विषवाण, भवयणति, भवावण, भवपप्वाण, That is, he makes sound while eating, he eats with a smack. 
Why do we say when making a smacking sound in eating"? Observc विस्वननि मृ " the drum sounds". ___ परिनिविभ्यः सेवसितसयसिवुसहसुदस्तुस्वजाम् ॥ ७० ॥ पदानि ॥ परि-नि-वि 
ज्या, सेव-सित-सय-सिवु-सह-सुद-स्तु-स्वजाम् ॥ पतिः ॥ परिनि विस्खेतेश्य उपसर्गेच उत्तरेषां सेव सिस सब सिसहमद स्तु स्वम्मत्येतेभ्यः सकारस्थ मन्बमादेशो भवति ।। 
BK. VIII. CH. III S. 72 ] 
पल RULE. 
1633 
___70. प is substituted for the स of सेव , सित, सय, सिन्, सह, the augment सुत्, स्तु, and स्वज, after the prepositions परि, नि, and वि 
The root f belongs to Bhuâdi class. The word fear is the Past Participle of fr a , and is the noun derived from the same root with the affix peg; for is a Divadi root. 
Thus परिषेवते । निषेवते । विषेयते । पर्वषेवते । व्यषेवते । न्यषेवते । परिविषेविषते। विषि पेविषते। निविषेविषते । सित । परिषितो. विषिसो, निषितः । सया परिपयो, निषयो, विषयः । सिन् । परिषीयति। निपीव्यति। विपीव्यति। पर्यपीण्यत् । न्यपीव्यत् । ध्यषीष्यतू । पर्यसीव्यत् । वसीयत् । व्यसीध्यत् । सहपरिषदते । मिषदते । विषहते । पर्यपहतान्वषहत। व्यपहत । पर्यसहस । न्यसहत । व्यस हत । पर। परिष्करोति । पर्यस्करोत् । स्तु । परिटौति । निटोति । विष्टौति पर्वोत् । न्यटोत् । ज्यटीत्। पर्वस्तौन् । यस्तोत् । व्यस्तोत् । बज । देशसञ्जस्वम्जामिति मलोपः। परियो। निष्पमते । विषयते । पर्यवमत । पर्वस्वमत। पूर्वव सिनेस्तुस्वग्जिमाणपतरार्थमा भन्याय विभाषा यथा स्वात् ॥ 
The nasal is elided in puby VI. 4. 25. The & off and would have been changed to g by VIII. 3. 65 also. Their inclusion here is for the sake of subsequent sätra, by which the change is optional when the augment au intervenes. 
सिषादीमा पाइल्यवायेपि ॥ ७१ ॥ पदानि ॥ सिवादीनाम, पा-अद्-व्यवाये, अपि॥ वृत्तिः॥ ममन्तरसूणे सिरसादस्तुस्वम्यामिति सिवादकः । सिवादीनामाम्बवायपि परिनिविच उत्तरस्व सकारवया मूर्चन्यो भवति॥ 
71. The ar-change may take place optionally in the free and the rest of the last sûtra), even when the augment w intervenes between the prepositions परि, नि or fa and the verb. 
The सिवादि are the four roots सिसह, स्तु and स्वज, as well as the aug menter i This is an example of ubhayatra-vibhasha. In the case of a 
and make it is prapta-vibhasha, in the case of others it is aprâpta. The examples have already been given under the preceding sätra, and so need not be repeated here. __ अनुविपर्यमिनिभ्यः स्यन्दतेरमाणिषु॥७२॥ पदानि । मनु-वि-परि-भाभ निभ्यः, स्यन्दतेः, मप्राणिषु॥ 
वृत्तिः॥म विपरिमान निहत्येतेभ्य उत्तरस्व स्यन्देसरमाणिषु सकारस्थापन्यादेवो भवति॥ 
72. V is optionally the substitute of the स् of स्यन्दू, after the prepositions मनु, वि, परि, ममि and नि, when the subject is not a living being. 
The root स्थन् मनपणे is anudatta. Thus मनुबन्यते । विप्वन्दते। परियन्दते। भामचन्दस लम् । नियन्दते । भनुस्वनते । विस्वन्दते । परिस्चन्दते । 
1634 
9 
CHANGE. 
(BK VIII. CH. III $. 75 
Why do we say 'when the subject is not a living being'? Observe Afer 4 * The option of this sätra will apply, when the subject is a compound of living and non-living beings. Thus grand or wat Ha 
The subject here is a Dvandva compound, and it is not in the singular number because of II. 4.6. The word wife is a Paryudasa and not a Prasajya-pratishedha. If it be the latter sort of prohibition, then the force will be on the word living, and in a compound like , consisting of living and non-living beings, the prohibition will apply because it has a living being in it, and so there will be no ll In the other view, the force is on the word non-living, and because the compound contains a non-living being, therefore the option will be applied, and the presence of the living being along with it will be ignored. 
The anuvfitti of oft, & and is understood here from VIII. 3. 70. So tliese words could well have been omitted from the satra, which might have then been spaafia FYRTATE, and by the force of we would draw in the anuvritti of oft &c. 
धेः स्कन्देरनिष्ठायाम् ॥ ७३॥ पदानि ॥ः, स्कन्दः,मनिष्ठायाम् ॥ पतिः । पेरुपसगासरस्थ स्कन्दः सकारस्थ मुर्धन्यो वा भवति भनिछायाम् ॥ 
. 73. is optionally substituted for the æ of Fing, after the preposition a, but not in the participles in a and 
The root is स्कन्दिर गति घोषणयोः॥ Thus विष्कता or विस्कन्ता, विष्कन्तुम् or विस्कन्तम्, विकन्तव्यम् or विस्कन्तव्यम् ॥ 
Why do we say 'but not in the Nishtha'? Observe par V I 98 || Tena il ri, il af acuratara ETF ar gate 7979 1 
74. ¢ is optionally substituted for the # of Finance after the preposition of every where. 
Thus fiat orgftimar, fingu orgfirugan, ahora 44 or after all 
The word oft could well have been included in the last sätra as forzi a &c. The very fact that it has not been so included, indicates that the prohibition of afnemara does not apply to it. Thus oftenpoot or qfien 11 
परिस्कन्दः प्राच्यभरतपु॥७५॥ पदानि ॥ परिस्कन्दः, प्राध्यभरतेषु॥ . पतिः॥ परिस्कन्द इति पुर्वन्याभावो निपात्यते प्राध्यभरतेषु प्रयोगविषयेषु॥ 
75. The word of my is used without the cerebral change in the country of Eastern Bharata. 
BK. VIII. CI. III. S..78] 
CEREBRAL CHANGE. 
1635 
• This is an anomaly. The required by the last sätra is prohibited. The other form is परिष्कन्नः॥ The word परिस्कन्द is formed by the affix भए or it is a Nishtha, the being elided. The word भरत qualifies the word प्राच्य ॥ 
Prof. Bohtlingk translates it "qfien is seen in the usage of the Eastern People and the Bharata". He bases his construction on the sätras II. 4.66, and IV. 2. II3, where प्राच्यभरतेषु means “the Eastern People and 
Bharata". ___ स्फुरतिस्फुलत्योनिनिविभ्यः ॥ ७ ॥ पदानि ॥ स्फुरति, स्फुलत्योः, निस, नि, विभ्यः॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ स्फुरतिस्फुलत्यो सकारस्थ निस् निवि इत्येतेभ्य उत्तरस्य वा मूर्द्धन्यादेशो भवति ॥ 
76. ष् is optionally substituted for the सू of स्फुर and even after the prepositions are, fat, and fatal 
___ Thus निष्फुरति or निस्स्फुरति, निस्फुरति or निष्फुरात, विस्फुरति, विष्फुरति ।। स्फुलति, निष्फुलति, निस्फुलति, निस्फुलति, निष्फुलति, विस्फुलति, विष्फुलति ॥ 
घेः स्कनातेनित्यम् ॥ ७७॥ पदानि ॥ घेः, स्कनाते, नित्यं ॥ वृत्तिः । वेरुतस्य स्कम्नाते सकारस्थ नित्यं मूर्खन्यादेशो भवति ।। 
77. uis always substituted for the सू of स्कम्भ, after the preposition वि ॥ 
__ Thus विष्कम्नाति, विष्कम्भिता, विकम्भितुम्, विकम्मितव्यम् ॥ इणः षीध्वंललिटां घोङ्गात् ॥ ७८॥ पदानि ।। णा, पीध्वं, ललिटाम, धः, अङ्गात् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ मूर्धन्य इति वर्तते । इणन्तारात्परेषां पीलुड्डिटां यो धकारस्तस्य मूर्धन्योदशो भवति ॥ 
78. The cerebral sound is substituted in the room of the ध् of षीध्वम्, and of the Personal-endings of the Aorist and the Perfect, after a stem ending in fur (a vowel other than अ). 
The word 'cerebral' is understood here from VIII. 3.55. Thus च्योषीम, लोषीतम् ॥ Aorist :-अध्योम, मप्लोइम् (VIII. 2. 25). Perfect : पकड़े ॥ 
Though the anuvritti of man was current here from VIII. 3. 57, yet the repetition of the word re here indicates that the anuvfitti of or the guttural ceases. As पक्षाध्यम, यक्षीश्वम् । 
Why do we say "the ध of पीध्वं, लुand लिन"? Observe स्तुध्ये, मस्तुभ्यम्, where the is of लद् and लङ् ॥ 
Why do we say मङ्गात् ' after a stem? Observe परिवेविषीध्वम्, from विप्ल Slip of the Juhotyadi class. There is Guņa of the reduplicate by VII. 4.75, the F of glue is elided by VII. 2. 79, and t here is inade up of the q of the root विषु, and ईवम् the affix; therefore षी here is not after the anga परिवेषि, for the ayga here is ofta fou, and fw is the aflix. This result could have been 
1636 
CEREBRAL CHANGE. 
[BK. VIII, CII. III. $. 81 
obtained, without using the word wat in the sålra, by the maxiin y upon amata "a combination of letters capable of expressing a meaning, denotes that combination of letters in so far as it possesses that meaning, but it does not denote a combination void of meaning ". 
ferret: Il Vell Taifa il fratet, C: # वृत्तिः ॥ इणः परस्मादिट उत्तरेषां पीवलुइलियां या धकारस्तस्य मूर्खन्यादेशो भवति विभाषा॥ 
79. The cerebral sound is optionally substituted for the g of free and of the Aorist and the Perfect after the augment , when the stem ends in sa il 
Thus ++ 7=faler or tg so also create or after fromपू| Aorist:-अलविध्वम् or मलविडम ॥ Perfect:-जुलुविध्ये or लुलुधि । 
The word 74 is understood here and it qualifies the word is, so that the stem should end in an ra vowel which should be followed by the re augment and this letter should be followed by enq and the w beginning affixes of the Aorist and the Perfect. If the stem does not end in an tu vowel, the rule will not apply; as मासिषीध्वम् from the root भास उपवेशने ॥ 
Then in the word of dirit, will the cerebral change not take place by the option of this sutra or otherwise? This is from the root de o in the Per fect with the augment re (VII. 2. 13.), and Fe (by VI.4.63). Some say that as the augment intervenes between the stem ending in si vowel ), and the augment r, therefore this rule will not apply and there will not be the option al rul Others hold that the anuvritti of War has ceased, and the anuvritti of rou is only current, in this sutra, and there is no intervention and so there will be the optional change into tu 
समासेगुलेः सङ्गः ॥५०॥ पदानि ॥ समासे, अगुले, सङ्गः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ सासकारत्याइयुलेहत्तरस्य मूर्धन्यादेवो भवति समासे ॥ 
80. ç is substituted for the æ of the after the word megte in a compound. 
Thus FFUMURI AFURAT TERTE I FUSO : arcaiet Why do we say in a compound? Observe HTU E 999 11 
The word ai is exhibited in the sätra in the nominative casc. The force is here that of Genitive i.e. a II 
भीरो स्थानम् ॥ ८१॥ पदानि ॥ भीरोः, स्थानम् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ स्थानसकारस्य भीरोरुत्तरस्व मूर्खन्यादेपो भवति । 
81. is substituted for the # of ferd when pre ceded by fire in a compound. 
Thus frutta The word compound is understood here also; other wise it fyra 909 il 
BK. VIII. CI. III. S. 85] 
- CHANGE. 
1637 
अनेः स्तुतस्तोमसोमाः॥८॥ पदानि ॥ अग्ने, स्तुत्, स्तोम, सोमाः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ अंग्ररुत्तरस्य स्तुत् स्तोम सोम इत्यतेषां सकारस्य मूर्खन्यादेशो भवति समासे। इष्टिः । अमेर्षाित् सोमस्येव्यते ॥ 
82. V is substituted for the स of स्तुत, स्तोम and सोम when preceded by अग्नि in a compound. 
Thus अग्नित, अग्निटोमः, भग्नीषोमः ॥ 
Ishti :-The F of sita is lengthened before tra and it is after such lengthened, that ther of सोम is changed toप, otherwise not. As मग्निसोमी माणवकी। Soalso wग्निसामी सिष्ठत: (where 'agni' means fire, and 'soma' a kind of herb ) "the fire and the soma plant are here." 
When there is no compounding we have spa ETA: !1 
The word siraga is formed by pg, the sacrifice in which Agni is prais ed (स्तूयते) is so called. अग्निष्टोमा is also the name of a sacrifice: the first division (संस्था) of the Soma-yaga. अग्नीषोमः is a देवता-इनः so where there is no Devata-Dvandva, the change will not take place. Thus where Agni and Soma are names of two boys, or where they refer to physical fire and herb. According to Ašvaldyana there is lengthening and a change in the last case also, as मन्नीपोमो प्रणेष्यामि ॥ 
ज्योतिरायुषः स्तोमः ॥८३॥ पदानि ॥ ज्योतिः, आयुषः, स्तोमः॥ . वृत्तिः ॥ ज्योतिम् मायुम् इत्येतान्यावुत्तरस्य स्तोमसकारस्य मून्यादेशो भवति समासे ।। 
83. The # of Faith: is changed to g after sulfate and आयुस in a compound. 
___As ज्योतिष्टोमः, भायुष्टोमः, but ज्योतिः स्तोमवर्षयति where there is no com. pounding. 
मातृपितृभ्यां स्वसा ॥४॥ पदानि ॥ मात, पितृभ्याम, स्वसा॥ वृत्तिः ॥ मातृ पितृ इत्येताभ्यामुत्तरस्य स्वमृसकारस्थ समासे मूर्धन्यादेशो भवति । 
84. The æ of Fra is changed to R after arg and fra in a compound. 
As मातृष्वसा, पिसृष्यसा ॥ See VI. 3. 24. मातुःपितुामन्यतरस्याम् ॥८॥ पदानि ॥ मातुः, पितुाम, अन्य तरस्याम्॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ मातुर पितुरत्येसाभ्यामुत्तरस्य स्वसूशब्दस्यान्यतरस्यां मूर्खन्यादेशो भवति समासे । 
85. The स् of स्वस् is optionally changed to , ufter मातुर् and पितुर् in a compound. 
___Thus मातु:स्वसा. or मातुःश्वसा; पितास्वसा or पितुम्बसा ॥ The word मातर and पितुर् end in , which is changed to visarga (See VIII. 2. 24). In fact, the word poet is so exhibited in the satra itself, with a t, the word arg: therefore, by the rule of fire is also to be understood as a ending word. 
Q.-Well, if this be so, when thisris changed to a visarga, and the visarga changed to Ę by VIII. 3. 36, then there would be no changé ? 
. 
. 
1638 
CHANGE. 
[BK. VIUI. CI. III. $ 87 
Ans.--The change would take place both after the visarga-ending or -ending words, on the maxiin hafir RAITA “That which has under gone a change in regard to one of its parts, is by no means, in consequence of this change, something else than what it was before the change had taken place". Therefore, these words are taken to end in 1 For if they were taken to end in 7, then the rule would not apply when they ended in a visarga. If they be supposed to end in a visarga, then the form fogue# with a before are in the satra is hard to explain. 
The word nie is understood here also. Therefore not here ang: FTET when the words are used separately in a sentence. 
अभिनिसस्तनः शब्दसंज्ञायाम् ॥८॥ पदानि ॥ अभि-निसा, स्तनः, शब्द Fem 1 
वृत्तिः ॥ भनि निस् इत्येतस्मादुनरस्य स्तनतिसकारस्य मूर्खन्यादेशो भवति भन्यतरस्यां घरसज्ञायां गम्य मानायाम् ॥ 
86. The e of rar is optionally changed to q after the double preposition af far, when the word so formed is the name of a particular letter (i.e. visarga). 
As suferit profi, m ert matata: or mufafant pof: or fastaflar: The compound preposition - causes this change, and not any one of them separately. Thus Apastamba : THE 
GATHTTi ferro frer, 1q4TOTEUTT " a name (nama) should be such that it should consist of two-syllables or four-syllables, that its first portion should be a noun (nama-parva), and its second portion a verb (Akhyata), that it should end in a long vowel (dirgha) or a visarga (abhinishțâna), that the first letter of such a noun should be a ghosha or sonant letter (ghosha-vad-adi), and a semi vowel (antastha) should be in the body of it." Thus the names of groter, ATT fulfill these conditions and are good names. 
Why do we say "when it is the name of a particular letter."? Observe अभिनिस्तनति मृताः ॥ The anuvritti of समास ceases from this place. 
gratuit affroyr: II ll qera Il gyer, EMMA, affa, यच्परः॥ 
वृतिः॥ उपसर्गस्थानिमित्तानादुरुपयोगरस्य यकारपरस्याचपरस्थ चास्तिसकारस्य मूर्खन्यो भवति । 
87. The F of the verb ate is changed to q, when it is followed by a vowel or and is preceded by orgi, or an upasarga having or g in it. 
The word dat means 'followed by a org' The word 45: is an Indeclinable, meaning 'cvidently'. 
. Thus sharafat, farfa, farfal, gift; mina, facara, fauna, grg: Sa 
BK. VIII. CI. III F. 88] 
CHANGE. 
NE. 
1639 
Why do we say "when preceded by an Upasarga having an r or 3?" Observe दांधस्यात्, मधुस्यात् ।। Why do we say 'of the verb अस्? Observe मनु सृतम्, विसृतम् ॥ 
Q.-How is there any occasion for the application of the rule here? The context here relates to स, and the word "upasarga" qualifies that स, but here the upasargit is not applicd to w but to the whole verb , thcrcforc this is no counter-example. In fact, what is the necessity of using the word w at all in the satra: for even without it, the word 'upasarga' would qualify that verb which consists of a only, and such a verb is set, with its o elided and no other verb? Nor is the employment of stų necessary for gri, for it comes only in connection with the verbs कु, भू and भस् ॥ 
Ans.-All that you urge, is true, yet the following counter-example should be given, as mą, the son of Anusg will be phy: with as it be longs to Subhradi class. Thus भनुसू+उक्-मानुसू + एय-मानुस् + एय॥ Here the 
is elided by VI. 4. 147. Now when 5 is elided, the è is the only verb element that remains, भनु is upasarga, and एव is affix ; so that had भस् not been taken in the sâtra, the rule would apply to this & also. 
Why do we say "when it is followed by a vowel or "? Observe निस्तः, विस्ता, प्रादुस्तः॥ 
सुविनिर्वयः सुपिसूतिसमाः ॥८॥ पदानि ॥ सु, वि, निर्, दुर्व्यः, सुपि, सूति, समाः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ सुविनिए दुइत्येतेभ्य उत्तरस्य सुपि सूति सम इत्येतेषां सकारस्य मूखन्यादेशो भवति । 
Karikd:-सुपेः षवं स्वर्मा भूईिसुष्यापेति केन न। 
हलादिवोषान्न सुपिरिष्टं पूर्व प्रसारणम् ।। स्थादीनां नियमो मात्र प्राक्सितादुत्तरः सुपि। 
अनर्थके विषुषुपः थुपिभूतो विरुच्यते ॥ 
88. The स of स्वप्, सूति, and सम is changed to after सु, घि, निर् and दुर्॥ 
The word arg is exhibited in the sætra as the form of pay with voca lisation. Thus सुषुमः, निःषुप्तः दुः पुतः ॥ The word सूति is theक्तिन् ending form of स; the rule applies to this form only, as सुतिः , विषतिः, निःषात and दुःषतिः ॥ The word सम also means the noun सम and not the verb सम स्तम वैक्लष्ये ॥ Thus मुपमम्, विषमम्, निषमम्, दुःषमम् ।। 
Karika-Why is taught with regard to the gu form of pig? Ans. सुपेः पलं स्वपेर्मा मन, so that the पल change should not take place in स्वप् form, as विस्वमः and विस्वमक (III. 2. 172)॥ ए. विसुष्यापति केन न? For what reason the पल change has not taken place in the reduplicate विसुण्याप, for here also in the reduplicate, is the form सुए, as विमुपस्वप, and then by applying हलाविशेष rule, the uis elided, and एकदेशविकृतस्थामन्यस्यात् applies? Ans. हलाविशेषान् म सुपिः, we 
1640 
CHANGE. 
[BK. VIII. CI. III. $ 92 
reduplicate the form pro, as fortyF79 and then elide q, as fartpty, and then voca lise, as विसुस्वप so that there being no form मुए, there is no पवाट पूर्व प्रसारणं, in fact, the vocalisation takes place first, and then elision according to an ishți. See VI 1. 17. Otherwise, in FTTF19, as g is elided, I would also have been elided. Why is the # of fageann not changed to g by VIII. 3. 647 faretai faqat AT T argit: yra, the rule VIII. 3. 64 does not apply, because that rule is confined only to verbs up to fara in VIII. 3. 70, while 94 is after that verb. Moreover the quf og being elided, the mere y is w a, and the maxim is भार्थबदू ग्रहणे नानर्थकस्य ॥ Q. If this maxim is applied, how do you form विषुषुपुः? Ans. अनर्थक विषुषुपुः धुपिभूताविरुध्यते, here the form पुए is doubled, and not सुप् ।। The root is first joined with the affix वि+स्वप्, then there is vocalisation विमुप, then there is a change, as fagg, then reduplication, as ferg ul Now rar being considered asiddha, the doubling should take place first? No, for we have already shown that for the purposes of doubling, the great change is not asiddha (VIII. 2. 3 Vart.) 
fararefteti ara: T. II SE I fa il fat, afinn, ara:, te वृत्तिः ॥ नि नदी इत्येता यामुनरस्य बातिसकारस्य मूर्द्धन्यादेशो भवति कोचले गम्यमान । 
89. The g is substituted for of FIT after â aud at when the word so formed denotes “dexterous." 
Thus facuta: 4 facrat (yai tai piatra 0 1 This last word is formed by the affix it added to far preceded by the upapada sest under sätra 111. 2. 4. 
Why do we say when meaning dexterous ? Observe fafila:, IAM ( Tai Fir#: ) 
सूर्य प्रतिष्णातम् ॥६॥ पदानि ॥ सूत्रम्, प्रतिष्णातम् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ प्रतिष्णातमिति निपात्यते । मू घेरवति । प्रतिष्णातं सूपम् ।। 
90. The word sfracra: is irregularly formed when meaning a sutra. 
Thus gfermata i. e. Tan 'pure'. When it has not this meaning we have a FITA' bathed' 
कपिष्ठलो गोत्रे ॥ १॥ पदानि ॥ कपिष्ठलः, गोत्रे॥ वृत्तिः ॥ कपिष्ठल इति निपात्यते गोपविषये ॥ 
91. The word -1986 is irregularly formed denot ing the founder of a gotra of that name. 
Thus the son of Kapishthala will be arrangem: 11 The word gotra" here does not mean the grammatical "gotra," but the popular term 'gotra' denot ing' clans,' as described in the list of pravaras. Why do we say "when denot ing the founder of a gotra"? Obscrve POEUFS The land of the monkeys. BK. VIII. CI. III. S. 95] 
CHANGE. 
1641 
प्रष्ठो ऽग्रगामिनि ॥ ॥२॥ पदानि ॥ प्रष्ठः, अग्रगामिनि ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ प्रष्ठ इति निपात्यते अप्रगामिन्यभिधेये ।। 
92. The word प्रष्ठ is irregularly formed when denoting 'a chief' or 'one who goes .in front'. 
Thus garsa7 meaning a 'best horse' Why do we say when meaning 'going in front'? Observe प्रस्थ हिमवतः पुण्ये "On the sacred peak of the Hima laya". प्रस्थो श्रीहीणाम् 'a measure of barley'. 
वृक्षासनयोर्विष्टरः ॥९३॥ पदानि ॥ वृक्ष, आसनयोः, विष्टरः ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ विष्टर इति निपात्यते वृक्ष भासने च वाच्थे । विपूर्वस्य स्तृणातेः पलं निपात्यते ॥ 
93. The word fart is irregularly formed in the RCnSc of “trec” and “sent." 
This word is formed by adding the affix app to the root preceded by the preposition वि॥ Thus विटरो वृक्षः ॥ विष्टरमासनम् ॥ 
Why do we say when meaning a 'tree' or a 'seat'? Observe मौलपिवाक्यस्य विस्त| See satra III. 3. 33. by which भए is added here instead of धम्॥ 
छन्दोनानि च ॥६४॥ पदानि ॥ छन्दोनानि, च॥ वृत्तिः ॥ विष्टर इति निपात्यते । विपूल्स इत्येतस्माजातोः छन्दोनानि चेत्येवं विहित इति विष्टर त्यपि प्रकृते विष्टार इत्यत्र विज्ञायते ।। 
94. Also when it is the name of a metre, the irregular form aur is used. 
By Sotra III. 3. 34 the word Pere is formed denoting a sort of metre called विष्टारपंक्तिः ॥ 
Why do we say when denoting the name of a chlandas's Observe पदस्य विस्तार ॥ 
In fact this sutra makes unnecessary the sutra III. 3. 34. To avoid this difficulty, some say that the sútra III. 3. 34 is not confined to the preposi tion वि, so that we can form मस्तारपक्तिः संसारपक्ति। 
गवियुधियां स्थिरः ॥१५॥ पदानि ॥ गवि, युधिश्याम, स्थिरः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ गवियुधिभ्यामुत्तरस्य स्थिरसकारस्य मूर्धन्यादेशो भवति ।। 
95. The ar of reart: is changed to after the words गवि and युधि॥ 
Thus गविष्ठिर, युधिष्ठिर ॥ The compounding takes place by II. I.44. and the 7th case affix is not elided by VI. 3. 9. though the word ir does not end in a consonant, yet it retains its Locative ending by virtue of this satra. 
विकुशमिपरिभ्यः स्थलम् ॥ ९॥ पदानि ॥ वि, कु, शमि, परिभ्यः, स्थलम् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ विकु चमि परि इत्येतेभ्य उत्तरस्य स्थलसकारस्य मूर्वन्यादेशो भवति ॥ 
1642 
CHANGE. 
[BK. VIII. CI. III. $. 98 
96. पू is substituted for सू in स्थल after वि, कु, शमि, and परि॥ 
Thus विष्ठलम्, कुष्ठलम्, शमिष्ठलम and परिष्टलम् ॥ The word वि, कु and परि are compounded under II. 2. 18.; the word शमी forms a genitive by VI. 3. 63. In the aphorism the word of is shown with a short x, indicating thereby that when thetis not shortened, the cerebral change does not take place; as शमी स्थलम् 
अम्बाम्बगोभूमिसव्यापद्वित्रिकुशेकुशङ्कगुमाजिपुझिपरमेबाहिहिव्यग्निभ्यः स्वः ॥९७ ॥ · पदानि ॥ अम्ब, आम्ब, गो, भूमि, सव्या, अप, द्वि, त्रि, कु, शेकु, शकु, अङ्गु, मजि, पुजि, परमे, बर्हिस, दिवि, अग्निभ्यः, स्थः ॥ वृत्तिः । अम्ब भाम्ब गो भूमि भप विपि कु कु कु महा मजि पुजि परमे बर्हिम् शिवि भनित्ये तेभ्य उत्तरस्य स्थशमसकारस्य मूर्द्धन्यादेशो भवति ॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ स्थस्थिन्स्पृणामिति वक्तव्यम् ॥ 
97. The सू of स्थ is changed to m after अम्ब, आम्ब, गो, भूमि, सव्य, अप, वि, त्रि, कु, शेकु शकु , अङ्गु, मञ्जि, पुञ्जि, परमे, बहिर्स, दिवि and अग्नि ॥ 
Thus अम्बष्ठः, माम्बष्ठः, गोष्ठः, भूमिष्ठः, सध्येष्ठः, भपष्ठः, विष्ठः, विष्ठ, कुष्ठः, शेकुष्ठः, घरकुष्ठः, अष्ठ, मस्जिष्ठः, पुजिष्ठः, परमेष्ठः, बर्हिष्ठः, विविष्ठा, भमिष्ठः ।। 
The word for is shown in the sâtra in the first case, and means the word-form fy, and it is not the genitive case of fut, for then the rule would apply to गोस्थानम्, भूमिस्थानम् &c. 
Vart:--The same change takes place in स्था, स्थिन्, and स्यAs सव्येष्ठाः । परमेष्ठी । सध्यष्ठा सारथिः॥ 
सुषामादिषु च ॥८॥ पदानि ॥ सुषामादि षु, च ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ सुषामादिषु चनेषु सकारस्य मूर्धन्यादेशो भवति ॥ 
___98, The सू is changed to in the words सुषामन् and the rest. 
Thus सुषामा ब्राह्मणः = शोभनम् साम यस्य मसौ ॥ 
1सुषामा, 2 निःषामा, 3 दुःषामा, 4 सुषेधः, 5 निषेधः (निषेधः), 6 दुःषेधः, 7 सुपंधिः, 8 निःपंधिः (निषेधिः), 9 दुःपंधिः, 10 मुष्टु (सुष्टु), 11 दुष्टु (दुष्ठु), 12 गौरिपक्यः संज्ञायाम, 13 प्रतिष्णिका, 14 अलापाहम, 15 नौषेचनम् (नौषेवनम्), 16 दुन्दुभिषेवणम् (दुन्दुभिषेचनम्, अवनम) 17 एति संज्ञायामगात्, 18 हरिपेणः, 19 नक्षत्रावा, रोहिणीपेणः ॥ भाकृतिगण ॥ 
Some of the above words would have been governed by the prohibi tion in VIII. 3. III, others would never have taken ष, hence their inclu sion in this list. The word मु is here a karmapravachaniya (I. 4.94) and निर् and I also are not upasargas, because they are so only in connection with the verbs it and sit; so VIII. 3. 65 does not apply to the preceded by faith and दुर् ॥ The words निषेध' and दु:षेधः-निर्गत: लेधः or दुर्गतः सेधः ॥ The word सेध here is a घम् formed word, from पिधू हिंसा संरायोः ; if it be derived from 
BK. VIII. CH. III. $ 101 ] 
qan CuANGE. 
1643 
R i m, then also, the word is included here in order to prevent the appli 
cation of VIII. 3. 113. The words yeni, Tiq : &c arc derived from with the prepositions and 4, and the affix for (I11. 3. 92); and there of 
is changed to (il The words 9, are Unadi formed words (Un. I. 25). The word iiftuny: is a Bahuvrihi, the e of afgy is changed to g and the Samasauta is adolcd (V. 4. 113). The long for the first inember is shortened by VI. 3. 63. The word af fort is formed by adding the l're position gfa to the root ET, and the affix 27 (111. 3. 106), and we have stron with i; then is added by V. 3. 73, and shortened (VII. 4. 13), and added by VII. 3. 44. The word #19 is formed by adding more to facu दुन्दुभिषेवर्ण is also a ल्युत् formed word from सेवति or सीव्यति ॥ 
एति संज्ञायामगात् ॥ ९९ ॥ पदानि ॥ एति, संज्ञायाम्, अगात् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ एकारपरस्य सकारस्य मूर्धन्यादेशो भवतिकोत्तरस्थागकारात्परस्य संज्ञायां विषये ॥ 
99 The followed by g and preceded by u orç is changed to, when the word is a name, and when the is not pre 
ceded by THI 
Thus yra: # HRT-ari, ofta a #4=qftati, so also itu, gvoft 11 Why do we say 'followed by ç'? Observe fa il Why do we say 'when a Name'? Observe quite a F-TYTUT (VI. 3. 34). Why do we say when the # is not preceded by I'? Observe 5 : V The phrase pant: is understood here also, so the rule does not apply to etha: 11 
TETET II poolll Torfa il 7 ETC, ET II TH: 1 yra: E FIFA UTIFT gra katter RTIERIT afa 
100 When the preceding word is the name of a Lunar mansion, the substitution for Ft under the above mentioned circum stances is optional. 
Thus रोहिणिपणः or रोहिणिसेना, भरणिपेण: or मरणिसेनः ॥ But not here शत forre : were the preceded letter is Tit These two sâtras 99 and 100 are realy Gaņa-stras, being read in the Naif Gana. The author of Kasika has raised them to the rank of full sätras. 
All cerebral e changes, when not referable to any specific rule, should be classified under this Sushamadi gaṇa. 
Flurt alta u Sofi alat ll gear, art, aleat वृतिः ॥स्वादुतरस्थ सकारस्थ मूर्धन्यादेशो भवति तारों सखिते परतः ॥ . पासकः ॥ सिडन्तस्य प्रतिषेधो वक्तव्यः ॥ 
101. ax is substituted for a final a preceded by a short or before a Taddhita affix beginning with all 
1644 
षत्व RULE. 
[ BK. VIII. CI. III. S. 103 
The following are the affixes before which this change takes place, namely, सर, सम, तय, व, सल, तस, त्यप् ॥ As तर--सर्पिष्टरम् यजुष्टरम् ।तम । तपिष्टमम । यजुष्टमम । तय । चतुष्टये ब्राह्मणानां निकेताः ।व। सर्पिष्ठम् । यजुष्टम् । तल । सर्पिष्टा । वटा । तम् । सपिटो, यजुष्टः । व्यप् । भावियो वर्धते । इस्वादिति किम् । गीस्तरा । धूस्तरा । तादाविति किम् । सार्पस्सारवति । प्रत्ययसकारस्य स्यात्पदाचारीत सत्यपि प्रतिषेधे प्रकृतिसकारस्थ स्वात् । सखितमति किम् । सर्पिस्तरात॥ 
Why do we say before affixes beginning with all Observe affrIT वति ॥ 
..But this would never have been changed to q because of the prohibition in VIII. 3. III, how can you then give this counter-example? 
Ans.-Though the स of the affix सात् is prohibited by VIII. 3. III, yet the counter-example is valid, because the æ of the base effe is also not changed. Why do we say 'of a.Taddhita? Observe सर्पिस्तरति ।। 
Vart:-Prohibition must be stated of finite verbs before Taddhita affixes. As भिन्यस्तराम्। छिन्तरतराम् ॥ These are the Potential third person plural of fire and for with the augment urg; the Taddhita affix peg is added by V. 3. 56, and भाम् is added by V. 4. II. 
Vart :-Prohibition must be stated with regard to ger as gertu ģATT 13 निसस्तपतावनासेवने ॥ १०२॥ पदानि ॥ निसा, तपती, अनासेवने ॥ वृत्तिः॥निसः सकारस्य मूर्वन्यादेशोभवति तपती परतोनासवनर्ये । 
. . 102. pis substituted for the # of fare before the verb ng when the meaning is not that of repeatedly making red hot'. 
The word se means doing a thing repeatedly and here it means making it red-hot repeatedly. Thus निटपतिः सुवर्णम् = सकृत् मग्रिम् सर्पति i.e. he puts the gold into fire only once. 
Why do we say when not meaning repeatedly. Observe निस्तपति सुषण सुवर्णकारः-पुनः पुनरम स्पर्शयति । 
In the sentences निष्ट रक्षः, मिष्टप्ता भरातयः the change has taken place either as a Vedic irregularity or because the sense of repeatedness is not implied here. 
युष्मत्तत्सतक्षुम्वन्तःपादम् ॥ १०३ ॥ पदानि ॥ युप्मत, तत, ततक्षुः पु, अन्तः पादम्॥ वृत्तिः ॥ युष्मत् सत् ससक्षुस् इत्येतेषु सकारादिषु परतः सकारस्य मूर्खन्यादेशो भवति स पेन्सकान्तः पादं भवति॥ 
103. The standing in the inner half of a stanza is changed to w before the त of त्वम् &c. and तद् and ततक्षुस् । 
BK. VIII. CH. III S. 107 ) 
षस्व RULE. 
1645 
The word युष्मद् here means the substitutes स्वम्, स्वास्, ने, स. As ममिष्ट, नामासीत् ॥ स्वा, भनिष्ट वर्लयामसि ।।से, भग्निष्ट विश्वमानय ॥ तय, भयमे सधिष्टक, (Rig VIII. 43.9) ॥ सत्, ममिष्टविश्वमापृणाति, (Rig X.2.4) सतनुस्, पावापृथिवी निष्टलक्षुः ॥ भन्तः पादमिति किम् , नित्यमात्मनो विवाभूतमिस्तस्पुनराह भासतो विचर्षणिः ॥ 
Why do we say in the inner half of a stanza ? Observe 7779T मिन्शाभूग्नि स्तरपुनराह जातवेश विचर्षणिः ॥ Here the word ममि is at the end of the first stanza while an is at the beginning of the second stanza, therefore the F of fire is not in the middle of a stanza. 
यजुष्येकेषाम् ॥ १०४॥ पदानि ॥ यजुषि, एकेषाम् ॥ वृत्तिः । यजुषि विषये युष्मत्तत्ततक्षुः षु परत एकंषामाचार्याणां मसेन सकारस्य मूर्धन्यादेशो भवति ॥ 
107. In the opinion of some, the above change takes place in Yajurveda also. 
___Thus अधिर्भिवम् or मधिमिस्त्वम् । अनिष्टमम् or भमिस्तेमम् । अमिष्टत् or ममिस्तत् । मर्षिष्टिस: or भचिस्तितक्षुः ॥ 
स्तुतस्तोमयोश्छन्दास ॥ १०५॥ पदानि ॥ स्तुतस्तोमयोः, छन्दसि । वृत्तिः ॥ एकेषामिति वर्तते । स्तुत स्ताम इत्येतयोः सकारस्य छन्दसि विषये मूर्खन्यारेपो भवति एकेषा माचार्याणां मसेन छन्दसिविषये। 
105. The # of Ega and Fath, in the Chhandas, is changed to in the opinion of some. 
Thus प्रिभिष्टुतस्य or विभिस्तुतस्य, गोप्टोम पोडशिनम् or गोस्तोम पोडशिनम् ॥ This change would have taken place by the general rule contained in the next sätra VIII. 3. 106, the special mention of thy and fra here is a mere ampli fication. The word gite of this sätra governs the subsequent sutra also. 
पूर्वपदात् ॥ १०६ ॥ पदानि ॥ पूर्वपदात् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ पूर्वपरस्यानिमित्तादुत्तरस्य सकारस्य मूर्धन्यादेशो भवति छन्नति विपये एकेषामाचार्याणां मतेमः । 
106. In the Chhandas, according to some, mis changed to g, when it stands in the beginning of a second word, preceded by a word ending in &c. 
The words छन्दसि and एकषां are both understood here. Thus हिन्धिः or हिसन्धिः, विषन्धिः or त्रिसन्धिः; मधुष्ठानम् or मधुस्थानम्, दिसाइवं चिन्धीत or द्विपाहवं चिन्वीत ।। 
The word gefa here means the first member of a compound word as well as the prior word other than that in a compound. Thus पिम्पसहवाय or पिासमखवाय ।। 
सुञः॥१०७॥ पदानि ॥ सुजः। वृत्तिः ॥ मुमिति निपात र गृह्यते तस्य पूर्वपरस्यानिमित्तादुत्तरस्य मूर्वन्यादेशो भाति छन्ास विषये । 
1646 
TE CHANGE. 
[BK. VIII. C11. III. S. 109 
107. The of the Particle g is changed to or in the Chhandas, when preceded by another word having in it the change-effecting letter & &c. 
Thus atq: aetate (Rig. IV. 31. 3) ago: (Rig. I. 36. 13. The lengthening takes place by VI. 3. 134, and a changed to u by VIII. 4. 27. 
patata: 11 80511 ranta il pala:, : वृत्तिः ॥ सनेतिरनकारान्तस्य सकारस्य मूर्खन्यादेशो भवति । 
108. The F of the verb) Frit, when it loses its o, is changed to q, under the same circumstances. 
Thus titan: (Rig. IX. 2. 10), formed by the affix fer (III. 2. 67), the is elided by VI. 4. 41. So also : 11 
Why do we say when it loses its q'? Observe refa fram (Atharv. III. 20. 10). Here the affix is (III. 2. 27). See however is for in Rig. VI. 53. 10. 
Though this q change would have taken place by VIII. 3. 106 also, the separate enumeration is for the sake of niyama or restriction. Some however read the word treta: in the list of arna words (VIII. 3. 110), and they hold that the proper counter-example is threrafata 11 So also feat: formed by adding for to the Derivative root PHATTE, thus fanfite +fen=fer we (the m is elided by VI. 4. 48) +0. add y, firefTe + eftarare+(x is elided by VI. 1. 68. Now the final x (of the Desiderative asfix ) is liable to be changed either to ç or to (6). The & being asiddha, the change takes place.)-faefar-fwait: (the lengthening is by VIII. 2. 76). Here the Desiderative affix et is not changed to, hence this word is not governed by VIII. 3. 61. This being the object of this satra, there will be o change in fegrafagfe in the Causative. 
pre: gawaint all pop Il retrat lant: q7977-marreta, fe: Il gaan hari ya Dar Litūraferi 
109. The e of fiy is changed to o, after getalt and 
Thus TTANTE, EHITTI! Some divide this sätra into two; as (1) F: ; (2) gaarafazia il So that the rule may apply to stay also. The word Kris lengthened by VI. 3. 116, in sanhita : and the change takes place in sanhita only. Otherwise the form is Tahaa 11 The word 'and' in the sâtra includes words other than those not mentioned in it. The word nie would be valid by this also. 
BK. VIII. CH. III. S. 112] 
पख CHANGE. 
1647 
न रपरसृपिसृजिस्पृशिस्मृहिसवनादीनाम् ॥ ११॥ पदानि ॥ न, र-पर, सपि, सृजि, स्पृशि, स्मृहि-सवनादीनाम् । वृत्तिः ॥ रेफपरस्य सकारस्थ मृपि मृति स्पाधि स्मृति सबमारीनां च मूर्खन्यो न भवति । । 
110. The substitution does not take place if T. follows the सू, as well as in सूप, सुज, स्पृश स्पृह, and in सपन and the rest. 
Thus विनसिकायाः कार्ड जुहोति ॥ The word विसिक is formed by the affix दुल (III. 3. 109), विसधः कथयति ॥ This word is from the root सम्मु विश्वास, the is not added by VII. 2. 15 and the nasal is elided by VI. 4. 24. before the nisthha s| हप:-पुरा करस्य विस्पः ॥ The word विसपः is formed by the affix कमन् (III. 4. 17), सृष:वाचो विसर्जनात् ॥ स्मृधः-विविस्पृशम् ॥ स्मृति:-निस्मृहं कथयति॥ 
The following is a list of me words : 
सिवने सपने, सूत सूते, सोमे सोमे, 4 सबनमुखे सवनमुखे, किसः किसः (किंस्थतीति किसः), 6 अनुसबनमनुसबनम्, 7 गोसनि गोसनिम्, 8 अश्वसनिमश्वसनिम् ॥ In some books this is the list 9 सपने सपने, 10 सवनमुखे सवनमुखे, 11 भनुसवनमनुसवनम् (भनुसबने २),12 सज्ञायां हास्प. सिसवः, 13 शकुनिसबनम्, 14 सोमे, सामे, 15 सुते मुते (सूते २), 16 संवत्सरे सवत्सरे, 17 विसं विसम्, 
18 किसं किसम् (किसं किसम्), 19 मुसलं मुसलम् 20 गोसनिम्, मश्वसनिम् ॥ 
सात्पदाचोः ॥ १११ ॥ पदानि ॥ सात, पदाधोः। वृत्तिः ॥ साविति चैतस्य यडि परतो मूर्धन्यादेशो न भवति । 
111. The substitution does not take place in the affix fra and for that which stands at the beginning of a word. 
Thus are here is the affix ordained by V. 4. 52, and it would have been changed to by VIII. 3. 59. The present sätra prevents that. The Padadi refers to those verbs which in the Dhâtupa tha are taught with a q, and for which a is substituted. This also is an exception to VIII. 3. 59. Thus भमिसान्। दधिसात् । मधुसात् ।। So also with Padadi Ras दधि सिम्पति, मधु सिञ्चति ॥ 
सिचो यहि ॥ १२॥ पदानि ॥ सिचः, यकि। वृत्तिः ॥ सिचः सकारस्य यति परतो मूर्धन्यारेचो न भवति । 
112. The g substitution does not take place in the स of सिन् of the Intensive. 
Thus सेसिच्यते and भमिसेसिच्यते ॥ 
Q.-Ther of the reduplicate should be changed into m by VIII. 3.65, in offertaa, and thc of the root should be changed into o by VIII. 3. 64. Because this one of the roots taught in VIII. 3. 65, and therefore, as this 
1648 
शल्य CHANGE. 
[BK VIII. CH. III . 116 
ANTAwaimamawimagesaxi 
I 
* 
- 
. 
" 
1 
। 
Wi 
latter rule prevents the operation of VIII. 3. In i. e. so far as it goes, so it would prevent also the operation of this rule and the form ought to be 
अभिषे विषय 
Ans.-~-They ordained by VIII. 3.65 prevents only the operation of me of VIII. 3. 111, and oot the of this rule. Therefore the present prohibition is of universal application. 
Why do we say in the Intensive. Observe अभिपिरिक्षति ॥ सेधतेगती॥ ११॥ पदान | सेधतः, गती। ক্ষুনি : গান শুনলান না মুহ্মাকে মুঞ্জয়ী মখার। 
113. The # of the verby is not changed to when the meaning is that of moving. 
Thus sfWAUATE stri, aftevafe T # This is an exception to VIII, 3.63. 
Why do we say when meaning to drive'? Observe शिष्यमकास्थिति dua o Here the sense is that of preventing or prohibiting. 
प्रतिस्तब्धनिस्तब्धौ च ॥ ११४ ॥ पवानि ॥ प्रतिस्तब्ध-निस्तब्धौ, च। तिमलित निस्सा लेती न्यनिषधाय नियात्यो । 
114. The words प्रतिस्तब्ध find निस्तब्ध are ano malous. 
In these words the x is not changed to e, though so required by VIII. 3.67. 
सोढ़ः ॥ ११५॥ पदानि ॥ सोढ़ः। वृत्तिः । सहिरवं साइभूतो गृहाते तस्य सकारस्थ भूर्द्धन्यादेशो न भवति । 
116. The स् of सोढ form of the root सह is not changed to ५ ॥ 
As परिसोडा, परिसोदुम् , परिसोडव्यम् ॥ This is an exception to VIII. 3.70. 
Why do we say when Rr assumes the form of सोड' Observe पहि पहले. विषहते ॥ 
स्तम्भुसिधुसहां चहि ॥ ११ ॥ वदानि ॥ स्तम्भु-सिवु-सहाम्, चकि। वृत्तिः ॥ स्तम्भुसिबु सहपत्ये ले कि परतः सकारस्य मूर्खन्याशा न भवति । शानिकः ॥ स्तम्भु सिसह चार उपसमिति वक्तव्य । 
116. The change does not take place in the reduplicated Aorist of the roots स्तम्भ, सिव् and सङ् ॥ 
The root may required change by VIII. 3. 67, and the roots ray and A by VIII. 3.70. Thus पर्यतस्तम्भत, अभ्यतस्तम्भस् । सिक:--पूर्थतीषिवन, न्यसीषिवन। सद :---पूर्वसीयत, व्यसीयात् ।। 
3 
ma 
EL 
का 
. 
. 
Ph 
REER 
4 
BK. VIII. CII. III. S. IT9] 
पल RULE. 
1649 
Vårt:- This prohibition refers to the change that is caused by an Upasarga and not to the reduplicate change, as we have illustrated in the a bove example. 
सुनोतेः स्यसनोः ॥ ११७॥ पदानि ॥ सुनोतेः, स्य-सनोः । वृत्तिः ॥ सुनातेः सकारस्य मूर्खन्यादेशो न भवति । स्यसनि च परतः । 
117. सू of सु (सुनोति) is not changed to v in the Future, Conditional and Desidlerative. 
Thus:-अभिसोध्यत्ति, परिसौष्यति, अभ्यसोध्यत्, पर्यसोध्यत् ॥ 
What example will you give under Desiderative? Ta # This is not a valid example, for by VIII. 3. 61, the reduplicate will not be changed here. Then we shall give the example भभिमुसूषते ॥ This is not also a proper example, for it is governed by the restrictive rule of VIII. 364. Then this is the example ofiar, faaa derived from the desiderative root of f by the affix 1999 | Here the desiderative affix ere is not changed to (VIII. 3. 61) and therefore the second a would have been changed to as it comes after a reduplicate. 
Why do we say before स्व and सन् ॥ Observe सुपाय । सदियञ्जोः परस्य लिटि ॥ ११८॥ पदानि ॥ सदि-ध्वजोः, परस्य,लिटि। . वृत्तिः । सदि वाम्म इत्येतर्यो बोलिटि परतः सकारस्य परस्य मूर्खन्यो न भवति । 
118. The F of wę and after the reduplicate in the Perfect is not changed to all . 
In the Perfect, when these words are reduplicated, there are two स's, as ससार and सस्पंज After a preposition, the first a will be changed to ष, but not so the second. Thus भाभिषसाद, परिषसाद, निषसाद, विपसार, परिषस्वजेः, परिषस्वजाते, परि पस्वभिरे, भभिषस्वजे॥ The nasal of वंज is elided though here, the लिदू affix is not कित, because it ends in a compound vowel (VI.4.24), (I. 2.5 and 6). 
The word prin does not occur in the sotra, but has been inserted in it by the auther of Kasika from the following Vartika:-सो लिटि प्रतिषेधे स्थान रुपसंख्यानं कर्तव्यम् ॥ 
नियमिभ्योड्व्यवाये या छन्दसि ॥ ११९ ॥ पदीन ॥ नि-वि-अभिभ्यः, अत् व्यवाये, घा, छन्दसि । 
वृत्तिः ॥ नि वि भभि इत्येतेभ्य उपसर्गेश्च उत्तरस्थ सकारस्थाइबवावे छन्दसि विण्ये भून्यायो म भवति वा। 
119. The g is optionally substituted in the Chhandus after the prepositions नि, वि and अभि, when the aug inent a intervenes. 19791 अथ अष्टमाध्यायस्य चतुर्थः पादः। 
old BOOR EIGHTH. CHAPTER Fourth. 
रषाभ्यां नो णः समानपदे ॥१॥ पदानि ॥रषाभ्याम्, नः, णः, समानपदे ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ रेफषकाराभ्यामुत्तरस्य नकारस्य णकारादेशो भवति, समानपदस्या निमित्तमिमिसिनो भवतः। पार्तिकम् ।। कवर्णावति वक्तव्यम्। 
1. After and o, the is the substitute of T, when they occur as component letters of the same word. 
These letters must be parts of the same pada or word, one being the 'occasion' for the application of the rule as regards the other. As are , fariruja, All So also after e; as, orih, gstrit, net ir 
The letter ç is included in this aphorism for the sake of subsequent sūtras : for will be changed into when preceded by q by rule 41 of this Chapter, as well. 
Why do we say "when occurring in the same word?" Observe ofra नयति, वायुनथति ॥ 
Vdrl :--So also after the lettere il As fargura, magur, ATT , MEN 
This vårtika may well be dispensed with: because the t in the sQtra is the common sound r which we perceive both in rand F; and so the will denote both the vowel and the consonont. See contra. VIII. 2. 42. Obj. But if even this be so, the lettere has three parts, its first part is a vowel, in the middle is the sound of a quarter mátra, and a vowel sound at the end. This vowel-sound will intervene between the f-sound and the subsequent 
, and will prevent the application of the satra, hence the vârtika is valid ? 
Ans. This vowel-sound will be no intervention, because it will be included in the exception or of the next sätra. Obj. The vowel-sound at the end of te is not a full vowel of one matra, but is of half-matra, being only a fragment of , and hence is not included in the pratyahara nne, it has no separate 
1652 
q CHANGE. 
(BK. VIII. CH. IV. & 3 
for or you or homogeneity with any vowel. Hence this vowel-sound will prevent the application of this rule. Ans. The o change, however, does take place in spite of such intervention of a fragment of a letter, as we know from the jnapaka of VIII. 4. 39. In the kshubhnadi list there we find gay as an exception, implying that is generally changed to or after such a fragmentary interposition. Or we may take away as a jóa paka, that after the letter & also the o change takes place. 
3 Trouarütd 12 
a ll --9-319-ZA- 10, 3919 वृत्तिः ॥ भदकुपुभाइ नुम् इत्येतैर्ध्यवायपि रेफपकाराभ्यामुत्तरस्य नकारस्य षकार भनियो भवति । 
2. The substitute of takes the place of a, even when a vowel, or t,a, or a guttural, or a labial, or the pre position mT, or the augment a intervenes, causing separation. 
The pratyahara w stands for vowels and the letters a t. Thus Th, pera, faftur, foot, MT, UGUT &c. 
The means all the gutturals, e. g. santor, eta, ota, torti The y means all the labials, e. g. , Thor, o que, 
a ll The means the particle : e. g. uforan from T (VIII. 2. 34) fau (cf VIII.4. 14). The particle mt is a vowel and so included in one pratya hara. Its specification in the sätra shows that the restriction of the rule to the letters occurring in the same word, does not apply in the case of mic, in which 
case the rule applies to letters separated by another word. 
So also when the anusvåra separates the letters e. g. 19, join 
It is from the root gitaa, the is added, because the root is a (VII. 1. 58) and a changed to anusvåra by VIII. 3. 24. Q. Well the interven tion is here by Anusvåra and not , why is then yg taken in the stra? 
The word 74 in the satra refers to anusvåra, and must be taken co-extensive with it. Otherwise the rule would not apply to words like go from fardu Here the anusvára is not the substitute of the augment i but an original anusvära. Even where there is an augment , but where it is not changed into‘anusvara, the rule does not apply. As , irafan from a strana: 
The rule will apply even when these letters are combined in any pos sible way, or occur singly. As in, here a guttural and a vowel i. e. 2 letters come between rand See VIII. 3. 58 in the case of all 
पूर्षपदारसंशायामगः ॥३॥ पदानि । पूर्वपदात, संक्षायाम, अगः ॥ वृत्तिः । पूर्वपरस्यानिमित्तादुत्तरस्थ गकारवर्जिता नकारस्य षकार भादेशो भवति संज्ञायां विपवे। 
3. So also, I is replaced by ut, when the letter occasioning the substitution, occurs in the first member of a compound, and the whole compound is a Name, provided that the first member does not end with the letter til 
BK. VIII. C11. IV 5.4] 
o CHANGE. 
1653 
AS गुणसः, वार्डोणसः (a kind of antelope), खरणसः, तर्पणखा | See V. 4. 118 and IV. I. 58. 
Why do we say "when a Name'? Observe, farfer: 11 Why do we say when ‘not ending in the letter ot"? Observe; Era ut 
Some say, that this sotra is a fan or a restrictive rule, and not a fi or original enunciation, so that the substitution takes place, only when the word is a Name, and not otherwise. A compound is one word or 1944, though composed of two or more words or 9€ ll Therefore by VIII. 4. 11 the will always be changed into a when preceded by [ orq. But the present sätra restricts its scope, to those cases only, when the compound denotes a Name, as not in चर्मनासिका ॥ The word पूर्वपद is a relative term and connotes an उत्तरपद । 
The present s@tra therefore applies to those cases where the ( org is in the g9e, and a occurs in the 191911 It therefore, does not apply to ide words, nor when both the letters occur in the a ll in the case of a Taddhita, there isa पूर्वपद, but there is no properly speaking उत्तरपद ॥ Thus खरपस्यापाय-खारपाय: (IV.1.99). Here the affix 879 is equivalent to age, and up is the Porvapada. But the affix pan not being a Pada, we cannot call it an uttara pada. Hence 
will be changed into of though engig is not an Appellative but a generic term. So also मातृभोगाय हितः=मातभोगीणः with ख affix. Similarly in करणापियः, the words and a both occur in the Parvapada and are not affected by this rule, but by the general rule VIII. 4. I. So also the proviso relating to it, only prohibits the change of an into u, but does not prohibit the restrictive charac ter of this satra. 
According to others, this satra is an original enunciation or a Vidhi rule, and not a Niyama rule. They say that the word F 19 in VIII. 4. I is equivalent to face v i. e. a word integral and indivisible into component words. In other words, inte means, a 'simple-word'. The present sätra therefore enunciates a new rule for a "compound-word". For in a compound or FTE, there being a division of gin and an 197, we cannot say that a compound is a #A1799 or indivisible word. Hence this sätra is a fare il 
The sätra should be thus divided :-fare darurg one sätra, and 17: another. So that every rule relating to or change would be debarred with regard to a intervention. 
वनं पुरगामिश्रकासिध्रकाशारिकाकोटराग्रेभ्यः॥४॥ पदानि ॥ वनम, पुरगा, FAAT-fowl-aft macht: 11 वृत्तिः ॥ पूर्वपदारसंज्ञायामिति वर्तते । पुरगा मिश्रका सिधका शारिका कोटरा भमे इत्येतेभ्यः पूर्वपदेय उत्तरस्य बननकारस्थ नकारादेशो भवसि संज्ञायां विषये। 
4. The at of 47, is changed into o, when preceded by the words puraga, misrakå, sidhraka, sarika, koțara, and 
1654 . 
o CHANGE 
[ BK. VIII. CH. IV. 8.6 
agre, as first members of the compound, and the whole compound is a name. 
The words 41 and art of the last sätra, are to be read into this aphorism. Thus पुरगावणम् , मिश्रकावणम् , सिघ्रकावणं, कोटरावणम् , भवणम (II. 2. 31) धारिकावणम् ॥ 
The lengthening of the finals in the above is by VI. 3. 117. Though the word süqut is not a Name, yet the rule VI. 3. 9, applies to it and the case affix is not elided, because it is so read in Rajadantadi list (II. 2. 31), 
The substitution of o for a would have taken place by the preceding rule. The separate enunciation of the rule with regard to the word of, shows that this is a restrictive or farah rule. The # of is changed into w, when preceded by these words only and no other. Thus कुबेरवन, तपारवनम् , भसिपपवनम्।। 
प्रनिरन्तःशरेचप्लक्षाम्रकायॆखदिरपीयुशाभ्योसंज्ञायामपि ॥ ५॥ पदानि ॥ प्र-निर-अन्तर-शर-क्षु-लक्षा-आम्र-कार्य-खादिर-पीयुक्षाभ्यः संज्ञायां, अपि॥ 
वृत्तिः॥प्रनि मन्ता राक्ष भाम काप्ये सदिर पीयूक्षा इत्येतेभ्ध उत्तरस्य पननकारस्य संज्ञायाम संज्ञायामपि णकारादेवो भवति । 
5. The a of an is replaced by ot, even when the compound is not a Name, when it is preceded by the words pra, nir, antar, sara, ikshu, plaksha, ámra, kårshya, khadira, and piyaksha. 
__ Thus प्रवणे वाटम; निर्वणे प्रतिधीवते, अन्तर्वणे, शरवणम्, सुवणम्, प्रसवणम्, भाषणम्, कार्यवणम्, खदिरवणम् and पीयुक्षावणम् ॥ 
The words प्रवर्ण and निर्वणं are प्राविः compounds. भन्तर्वणं is an Avyayt bhava in the sense of a case-affix. The rest are Genitive compounds. 
विभाषौषधिवनस्पतिभ्यः ॥॥ पदानि ॥ विभाषा ओषधि-वनस्पतिभ्यः । वृणिः ॥ भोपधिवाचियपूर्वपर वनस्पतिवापि तस्यानिमित्तादुसरस्व पनमकारस्य णकार माधो भवति विभापा। 
पार्तिक । यक्षरध्यक्षोभ्य इति वक्तव्यम् ॥ वा०॥ हरिकादिभ्यः प्रतिषेधो वक्तव्यः॥ 
Karika फली वनस्पतिज्ञेयो वृक्षाः पुष्पफलोपगा। 
भोषधः फनपाकान्ता लता गुल्माम वीरुधः॥ 6. The a of qa is optionally replaced by a, when the cause of change occurs in the first member of the compound and which denotes a perrenial herb or a forest tree. 
. When the pärvapada is a word denoting wife or a perenniel herb, or denoting a refa or a tree, and it lias a change-producing letter, then the ar of वन is replaced by | This is an optional rule. Thus :-पूर्वावनम् or पूर्वावणम् 
BK. VIII. CH. IV. §. 8 ] 
CEREBRAL CHANGE. 
1655 
CM 
मूविणम् or मूविनम् ॥ Here पूर्ण and मूर्मा are names of भोषधि ॥ Similarly शिरीप great or futeau; toto or Tatra N1 
Vart :- This rule applies when the first word is a dissyllabic or trisyllabic word. Therefore the change does not occur in T ama; Tall 
Vårt :-Prohibition should be stated with regard to the words &c. As iftart99, faf77911 
. Though there is a distinction, botanically speaking, between a qk and a TAFTA also; yet in this sūtra, the word geeft includes Įi also. 
Kårika:-Technically speaking too is a tree that bears fruit apparently without a flower, as a fig tree udumbara. mh is a tree that bears both flower and fruit, orary is an annual herb, that dies after the ripening of the fruit, and creepers and tubercles are called वीरुधः ।। 
STRICTII Tetta il , eart II पतिः ॥ भदन्तं यापूर्वपदं तस्यानिमित्तादुत्तरस्याहो नकारस्थ णकार भादेशो भवति। 
7. The or is the substitute of of 67, when it is preceded by a word ending in a, having in it a letter capable of producing the change. 
Thus galer: "sore-noon"; m : "after-noon". Why do we say "ending in "? Observe, fait, il 
The word me is substituted for at by V. 4. 88. The word f being used in the sotra as ending in y, the rule does not apply. to other words. Thus tart II The word 8: in the satra is in the nominative case, and should not be construed as the genitive of $, because all sthanins are exhibi. ted in Nominatives as, 7 (VIII.4.4), anga (VIII.4.8), ani &c. The compound ing takes place by II. 2. I, then is added the samăsânta affix (V. 4. 91). and a substitution by V. 4. 88. The word that it is a Bahuvrihi compound and rot a Tatpurusha, and hence the affix re does not apply to it. The feminine fq is added by IV. 1. 28, there is elision of om of mee by VI. 4. 134 
वाहनमाहितात् ॥८॥ पदानि || घाहनम, आहितात् ॥ fĦ: 11 enfamia alegeti TUTA Taifa 116***TIFT ETT I RI 
8. The at of alga is changed into u, when the letter, producing the change, occurs in the first member of a compound, denoting the thing carried. 
Thus trian'a sugar-cart'. warna "a reed-cart". Banguna 'a hay-cart'. 
The thing which being placed on a cart is carried, is called S A II 
Why do we say " denoting the thing carried". Observer a "a vehicle belonging to Dakshi". 
1656 
ण CHANGE. 
[ BK. VIII. Cn. IV. & II 
The word is formed by adding my to , and lengthening of the penultimate is valid by the nipatana of this satra. 
पानं देशे ॥ ९ ॥ पदानि ॥ पानम्, देशे। वृत्तिः ॥ पाननकारस्य पूर्वपदस्थानिमित्तादुत्तरस्य देशाभिधाने गकार भावेशो भवति । 
9. The ar of qra is changed into ut, when it occurs as the second member of a compound, the first member of which contains a letter causing change; and the whole com pound denotes a country or a people. 
The word 977 is formed by the affix mye III. 3. 113. Thus witara रशीनरा:-क्षीरपाणं येषां 'the milk-drinking Usinaras'. मुरापाणाः प्राच्याः the wine-drin king Prachyas'. सौवीरपाणाबाहीका: "the sauvira-drinking Bahlikas". कपायपाणा गान्धाराः &c. 
Why do we say "when denoting a country"? Observe firari the drink of the Dakshis. 
The words oftail and the rest are applied to persons also through the medium of being country-names. 
वा भावकरणयोः ॥ १०॥ पदानि ॥वा, भाव-करणयोः॥ वृत्तिः ।। भाव करणे पयः पानशनस्तदीयस्थ नकारस्य णकार मादेशो भवति वा पूर्वपदस्थानिमित्तादुत्तरस्था। वार्तिकम् ॥ वामकरणे गिरिनचादीनामुपसंख्यानम् । 
10. Optionally when the compound denotes a condition or an instrument, the 7 of yra is changed into ot, when it is a second member, the cause of change occurring in the first member in a compound. 
Thus भारपाणम् or क्षीरपानम् "drinking of milk" कपायपानम् or कपायपाणम् 'drinking of kashaya'. मुरापाणम् or मुरापानम् &c are examples of भाव or condition. 
Similarly क्षीरपाण: ofक्षीरपानः कंस: a vessel for drinking milk' This is an example of apo or instrument. 
Vart :-Optionally so in the case of farta &c. Thus fittast or parturst; चक्रनदी or चक्रपदी, चक्रनितम्बा or चक्रणितम्बा॥ 
प्रातिपदिकान्तनुम्विभक्तिपुच॥११॥ पदानि ॥प्रातिपदिकान्त-नुम-विभक्तिषु,च॥ हानिदेशि घर्तते । प्रातिपदिकान्से नुमविभक्ती च यो नकारस्तस्य पूर्वपदस्थानिमित्तादुत्तरस्व वा णकार भावियो भवति । वार्निकम् ॥ युवादीनां प्रतिषेधो वक्तव्यः॥ 
11. Optionally w is substituted for a when it stands at the end of a Nominal-stem (Pratipadika) or is the augment qn or is a of a case-affix, (when the cause of change occurs in the first member of the compound). 
BK. VIII. CII. IV. $. 12 ] 
OF CHANGE. 
1657 
Thus, to take the case a gift first. Arno or 
m eat from Hrant 'masha-sowing' formed by foret under III. 2. 81. 
To take the exampleofa नम augment माषवापाणि orमाषवापानि, व्रीहिवापााण or wire rara nom. pl. neut. The. augment ng is here added by VII. 1. 72 from #1919927=ANET with Hot I, the plural ft is added by VII. 1. 20, and then नुम् ॥ 
To take the विभक्ति or case-termination, माषवाण or मापवापेन, प्रीहियापेण or an 11 
The word of fate means 'final in a Pratipadika'. But here it means 'final in a pratipadika which is a second member, of compound, the first mem ber containing the cause of change'. Therefore the change does not take place in nofroni ufitat=rfforat "the sister of Garga". But rotuprift if the word is derived from ht: 'the share of Garga', with the adjectival affix , feminine 
o, meaning, "enjoying the share of Garga." In this case, like the word rff: 'fit to be possessed by a mother': the change will invariably take place. 
The word Anstroof oi oft is to be understood to have a final 2, the affix being added afterwards in accordance with the following maxim :-(II. 2. 19). "It should be stated that Gatis, Karakas, and Upapadas ars compound ed with bases that end with krit-affixes, before a case termination or a feminine affix has been added to the latter" un g i : G FATTET TIF 09#: N 
Therefore the composition takes place first with the word ending in the krit affix, as मापवापिम् (माष+पापिन् ), and thus the second term चापिन् is a Pratipadika which ends in 7, and so the rule is applied to it, when the feminine affix is added. 
Similarly 1 is not considered as the end portion of the second member of the compound, but as the end-portion of the full compound word. 
Vart :-Prohibition must be stated of the words gi &c. As program (VI. 4. 133 vocalisation), afruar II TFA is a gati-samas, siart 
पकाजुत्तरपदे णः॥१२॥ पदानि ॥ एकाच, उत्तरपदे, णः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ एकाजुत्तरपदं यस्य स एकाजुत्तरपदः । तस्मिन्मेका सरपरसमास प्रातिपदिकान्तनुविभक्तिषु gequetia AETERI ATCET OPRITT tot el 
12. In a compound, the second member of which is a monosyllable, there is or in the room of 7 of the second member, provided that the # is at the end of a pratipadika, or is the augment 9h, or occurs in a vibhakti ; and when the first member contains a cause of change. 
Thus quot and 14: 'the Vfitra-killer'. trofa "Drinkers of milk': unfo 'drinkers of wine': being examples of T VII. 3. 88, tito and groot are examples of case-terminations. 
1658 
CEREBRAL CHANGE. 
(BK. VIII. C1. IV. §. 14 
Why the letter a is repeated in this satra, while its anuvritti was understood from the context? It is repeated in order to show that this is not an optional rule, but an obligatory rule. In fact, it shows that the anuvritti of a'optional' ceases, and does not extend further. 
shfa 8311 qera il gafa, il वृत्तिः ॥ कवर्गवति चोत्तरपदे प्रातिपदिकान्तनुविभानिषु पूर्वपरस्यानिमित्तादुत्सरस्वमकारस्थणकारदेखो TI 
13. In a compound, the second member of which contains a guttural, there is a in the room of a, that follows anything which standing in the prior member is qualified to cause the change, provided the # be at the end of a pråtipadika, or be the angment Th, or occur in a vibhakti. 
: If the second part of a compound contains a letter of the class, the change is obligatory, even though the second part be not monosyllabic. As aereftruit, qeyfitor, fronto, AU 14:- Tagmar, agafer : बमयुगण, खरयुगेण ॥ 
The word qugfiunt is a compound of te with fit (the affix for is added first to go and then the word so formed is compounded with vastra). Thus the becomes alfarerna i.e. it becomes the final of a Nominal-stein, which stands as a second member in a compound. 
उपसर्गादसमासेपि णोपदेशस्य ॥ १४ ॥ पदानि ॥ उपसर्गात, अ-समासे, अपि, णोपदेशस्य ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ण उपदेणे यस्यासौ णोपदेशः । णोपदेशस्य धातोर्यो भकारः तस्व उपसर्गस्थामिमिलादुतरस्व णकारादेशो भवति भसमासेपिसमासपि। 
14. Of a root which bas ut in its original enuncia tion, when it comes after a cause of such change standing in an upasarga, even though the word be not a samasa, the a is changed into or if 
The word o u ineans a root which is enunciated in the Dhatupa tha with an initial ण, Thus प्रणमति 'he bows'. परिणमति, प्रणायकः 'a leader'परि ar &c. 
Why do we say “after an Upasarga"? Observe s i fa 41414 HIT TUTA 'a country without a leader'. Here the word or is not an upasarga, but a mere nipata. See I. 4. 57, 58 and 59. In fact, 9 is upasarga here with regard to ra understood, and not with regard to oft i 
Why do we say "even when it is not a compound ?" Because by con text, the anuvšitti of the word 796, which is current throughout this sub 
BR. VIII. CH. IV. §. 17 ) 
Open CHANGE. 
1659 
division, would have been understood in this sūtra also, and the rule would have applied to samasas only, for there only we have pårvapada. By using the word me it is shown that the adhikara of pārvapada ceases, and the rule applies to non-compounds also where there is no पूर्वपर। 
Why do we say " having o in Upadeba"? Observe wifi, qariga, मनकः ॥ For the root नई is recited in Dhatupatha with म | There are eight such roots मई, नाद, माय, माप, नन्द, मक्कन, नृत् ।। See VI. 1.65. 
हिनुमीना ॥ १५॥ पदानि ॥ हिनु-मीना, वृत्तिा॥ हिदु मीना इत्येतयोरुपसर्गस्यानिमित्तादुसरस्थ नकारस्य णकारोशो भवति । 
15. The 7 of its and fitan is changed into ot, when coming after an upasarga containing in it & cause of change. 
Thus प्रहिणोति, प्रमिणुतः, प्रमाणाति, ममीणीतः॥ The root ne belongs to Svadi class of verbs and takes the vikaraña y technically ; and the root of belongs to Kryadi class which takes the vikaraga #1 # In the sâtra the verbs are shown with the vikaragas affixed. Under certain circumstances the forms of the vikarana is changed from y to stand a to of, but the rule still applies, because the substitute of an am or vowel is like the principal. See l. I. 57. 
पानि लोट् ॥१९॥ पदानि ॥ मानि, लोट् ॥ वलिः ॥ उपसर्गाशित वर्तते । मानीत्येतस्य लोगदेवस्योपसर्गस्यानिमित्ताइसरस्व मकारस्य षकारादेशी 
16. The न of मानि, the affix of the Imperative, 1st Person, is changed into o when it follows a letter competent. to cause such a change standing in an Upasarga. 
The word भानि is the termination of the Imperative. Thus प्रवपाणि, प विपाणि, प्रवाणि, परिवाणि ॥ 
Why do we say the Imperative? Observe प्रयपानि मांसानि ॥ Here भानि is the neuter plural termination, and the word means प्रकटा वपा , तानि ।। 
According to Padamanjari, the employment of the word me in the sätra is redundant. For without it also oft would have meant the Imperative affix, and not the Neuter termination, on themaxim of मधर्व महणे &c. Moreover in the noun प्रवपानि, is not an upasarga at all, on the maxim यत् क्रियायुक्ताः पादय स्तं प्रति गति-उपसर्ग-संक्षे भवतः ॥ 
नेर्गदनदपतपदधुमास्यतिहन्तियातिवातिद्रातिप्प्तातिवपतिवहतिशाम्यतिचिनोति देग्धिषु च ॥१७॥ पदानि ॥ने,गद-नट-पत-पद-घु-मा-स्थति-हन्ति-याति-वाति-द्राति प्साति-पपति-बहति-शाम्यति-चिनोति-देग्धिषु, च॥ 
वृतिः॥निरियेतस्योपसर्गस्थानिमित्नादुसरस्थ नकारस्य णकारादेशो भवति गद मद पत-पद घुमा स्यात हन्ति याप्ति वाति द्राति साति पति वहति शाम्यति चिनोति ग्धि इत्येतेषु परतः। 
1660 
opphay CHANGE. 
. (BK. VIII. C1. IV. . 18 
: : 17. The y is the substitute of tof the prefix fa, following a cause for such change standing in an upasarga, when these verbs follow, gad 'to speak', nad 'to be happy', pat 'to fall', pad 'to go', the ghu verbs, må 'to measure', sho to destroy', han to kill', ya to go', va. 'to blow', dra to flee', psa. 'to eat', vap to weave', vah to bear', sam to be tranquil', chi 'to collect', and dih 'to anoint. 
. . Thus गरः, प्रणिगपति, परिणिगति 
मदः, प्रणिनदति, परिणिमाति पता, प्रणिपसति, परिणिपतति, 
पा, प्रणिपगते, परिणिपपते घु, मणिदवाति, परिणिददाति, प्रणिदधाति, परिणिधाति 
• माइः, प्रणिमिमीते, परिणिमिमीते 
मेहः, प्राणिमयते, परिणिमवते Ishti:- By the word At in the satra, both verbs rc and are to be taken and not the roots of or for HT Ata, for they also take the form it by 
VI. I. 50. 
स्वति प्रणियति, परिणियति 
इन्ति मणिहन्ति, परिणिहन्ति वाति मणियानि, परिणियाति 
पाति प्राणवाति, परिणिवाति प्रणिवाति, परिणिहाति 
प्साति प्रणिन्साति, परिणिप्सावि The last five roots belong to Adadi class. 
• पति प्रणिवपति, परिणिवपति वहात प्रणिवपति, परिणिवाति 
शाम्यति प्रणिशाम्यति, परिणिकाम्थति (VII. 3.74) . चिनोति प्रणिधिनाति, परिणिधिनोति देधि. प्रणिदेग्धि, परिणिन्धि 
Ishti:-The above change takes place even when the augmente inter venes.. As मण्यमवन, परिण्यगवत् ॥ 
The roots fara &c, are exhibited in their declined form in the stra, in order to indicate that the rule does not apply to a form of these roots (VII. I. 6). - शेषे विभाषाकखादावषान्तउपदेशे ॥१८॥ पदानिशेषे, विभाषा, मकवादी, अषान्ते, उपदेशे ॥ अनिः॥रिति वर्तते उपसर्गादिति चमककारखकाराविरपकारान्तम उपदेचे बोधाता पस्तस्मिन्परत उपसर्गस्यानिमित्तादुत्तरस्य नेर्नकारस्य विभाषा णकार मादेशो भवति। 
18. In the remaining verbs, optionally the # of नि is replaced by ण, when it is preceded by an upasargu competent to cause the change; provided that, in the original enunciation, the verb has not an initial for e, nor ends with # 
The words ने' and उपसर्गात are understood in the satra. The word शेष means verbs other than those mentioned last. Thus aforafa or afaquía, ofera भिनत्ति or प्रनिभिनति ॥ 
कापस 
. BK. VIII. CH. IV. $ 20 ) 
or CHANGE 
1650 
Why do we say erat "not beginning with or "? Observe afit a, gfrarera i Here there is no change 
Why do we say ra: "not ending in "? Observe graftale in 
Why do we say mù "in original enunciation "7 So that the prohibi tion may apply to forms like af , Tary, oftafa (VIII. 2. 41). Here 
&c, do not begin with or nor does fou end with c but with (VIII. 2. 41) but in the Dhatupatha the verb and er begin with and and fore ends with c, and hence the rule will not apply. So also in order and fra from the root for u Here though the verb now ends with by VIII. 2. 36, yet in the original enunciation or Dhatupatha, it ends with # 
मानित १४॥ पदानि । अनितेः॥ पति मनिनकारस्योपसर्गस्यानिमित्तादुसरस्व णकारादेवो भवति । 
19. The o of the verb 'to breathe', is chang ed into o, when preceded by an upasarga competent to produce the change. 
Thus yrafaft- of "he breathes'. Torto Il For augment, see VII. 2. 76. 
mra: n Roll ma i Hry: N पनि उपसर्गस्यानिमित्तादुतरस्यानिसिमकारस्य पदन्ते वर्तमानस्य पकायदेशो भवति । 
20. The 7 of 8 is changed into o, when it is preceded by an upasarga competent to produce the change, provided it occurs at the end of a pada. 
ASAT I ron !! This rule is an exception to VIII. 4. 37 sub, by which final in a pada is not changed into The word wat in the satra is to be understood to be equivalent to quali, and the rule applies when the word is in the vocative case. 
According to some ti is taken to be a part of the last sätra, and has the meaning of proximity! That is the A is changed to u, if the r is not separated from the by more than one letter. Therefore there is no change in परि+मनिति-पर्वमिति ॥ In this view, another मन्त should be taken for the sake of final , in stratu 
According to others the form grafer is valid, and they do not connect orange with the last søtra. 
The word gro is a forry formed word, and the final is not elided in the Vocative Singular because of the prohibition of VIII. 2. 8; in every other place, when the x is padanta, it would be dropped ; and therefore the illustra tion is given with Vocative singular, which alone satisfies the requirements of this sūtra, 
1662 
OTR RULE. 
(BK. VIII. CH. IV. . 23 
उभौ सान्यासस्य ॥२१॥ पदानि ॥ उमी, साभ्यासस्य । वृत्तिः ॥ सान्यासस्यामितरुपसर्गस्यानिमित्तादुत्तरस्वोमयोनकारयोर्णकार मादेशो भवति । 
21. Both the as are changed into or in the redu plicated forms of the verb 7, when preceded by an upasarga competent to cause the change. 
Thus in the Desiderative giforforgia and Aorist of the Causative afaraca, and so also quaranta and gay it 
If the maxim granadilat be cot applied here; then we have the following dilemma in, ina+atiga Here the affix a requires reduplication, And the present sätra requires o change of #1 The or being asiddha, the reduplication being made first, we have antara tatra, and then the reduplicate o intervenes between the cause x and the root-qof in, and so this would not be changed to all If however the above maxim be applied, we first apply the otky rule, as enig + p + fa, and then reduplicate for; and we get the form faforeta even without this satra. 
. If we could get this form by the application of the above maxim, where is the necessity of the present satra? The sätra is necessary in order 
indicate that the above ,maxim is anitya or not of universal application. And because it is anitya, that the form ATT is evolved by reduplicating rc (See VIII. 2. 1). 
हन्तरत्पर्वस्य॥२२॥ पदानिहन्तः,मतपस्य। इतिः ॥ भकारपूर्वस्व इन्तिनकारस्व पसर्गस्यानिमित्ताइनरस्थ णकार भादेशो भवति । 
22. The 7, when preceded by , in the root &, is changed to uf, when the verb is preceded by a preposition com petent to cause the change, 
Thus good, noad, coma aftreme ! 
Why do we say parte 'when preceded by #? When q' is elided, the change does not take place. As , OTTHIAS (VI. 4. 98, and VIII. 3. 54) 
Why do we say many "perceded by short *"? Observe data and want, the Aorist of mat by the affix fry(III. 1.60) + + faro (VIII. 3. 54) prometa (VIII. 2. 116) en 'he killed'. Here being preceded by the 
ļong at is not changed. 
water I R8 Para 1 apart:, 971 मुतिः ॥धकारमकारबो परतो हन्तिमकाफ्योपसर्गस्यानिमित्ताइसरस्वमा पकापदेखो भवति। 
23. Optionally when yor #follow, the # of han is changed to of, when preceded by an upasarga competent to cause the change. 
Thus gyvai, gfra, ormai and fort, por 9 
or : # This sätra enjoins an option in certain cases, where it would have been obligatory by the last rule, 
BK. VIII. CH. IV. . 26 
of RULE. 
1663 
rantat i el otro lat, at वृत्तिः ॥ भन्त पानादुत्तरस्य इन्सिनकारस्थात्पूर्वस्य णकारारेपो भवति । 
. 24. The a preceded by short of the root is changed into ot, when the root follows the upåsarga part, and the word does not mean a country. 
Thus goud and out 
Why do we say “when not meaning a country wir?" Observe Haftalt) To: 11 
The phrase ayte "preceded by short mp of sūtra 22 ante, is to be read into this sätra also. Observe, pastrane 
Why do we say " short gi" See, ma u The word antar is an upasarga for the purposes of our change, by the vartika under l. 4. 65; therefore, it would have caused the a change by VIII. 4. 22. The present sätra is made, to show that the change takes place only then, when it does not mean a country, 
अयनं च ॥ २५॥ पदानि । अयमम्, च ॥ वृतिः। भन्सरघाति वर्तते । भवनमकारस्थ चान्ता सब्वाइसरस्वणकारादेवो भवति । 
25. The a of arra is changed to ot, when preceded by the word , and the word does not denote a country. 
Thus med dramall Why do we say "not denoting a country"? Observe nature tu: 11 This o change would have taken place by VIJI. 4. 29. this special sätra is for miry purposes. The word om is formed by added to or । । 
garage 11 RC 1 na 1 g , *0- tal : वृत्तिः॥एकारान्तावमापूर्वपदानुत्तरस्व प्रकारादेखो भवति छन्दसि विषये। 
26. In the Chhandas, at of a second term is changed into ot, when the prior term ends with a short even when there is an avagraha or hiatus between the two terms. 
In the Veda, 7 becomes e, after a e, after which in Padapatha, the word appertaining to it is divided. Thus in Pada-patha the words Torri &c, are separated, and are read as I, AT The word u fafasg qua, as in Pada-patha. 2444877 means 'after a short which is an avagraha'. The here, of course, means 'a word ending in ', because alone cannot be a pārvapada. The only took place during saqhita, and in Pada reading this o would not have remained, hence this sätra. 
Why have we used the word avagraha in the satra? Because we have already said that the word saņhità governs all sätras of this chapter. So the 
is changed to o in the Sanhita state in these; and the qis retained, when 
* 1664 
CHANGE. 
[BK VIII Cu. IV g. 28 
in the state of avagraha. The word avagraha in the satra indicates the scope of the rule. The is changed to o after that only, which is capable of avagraha, namely that which stands at the end of a word (pada), and not that which is in the body of a word. Thus in THT, fagarra, the is capable of avagraha, as it is at the end of a word / or fag; but when it is not at the end of a word, it can never become avagraha, and will not produce the q change. 
The word gére is understood here. The word wat means a hiatus or separation. Thus पित याणम्, नृमणा ॥ Here is भवगृम ॥ The change of Hinto a is effected ordinarily then, when the terms, one containing the cause, and the other A, are in tifear or conjunction. For the rules of Sandhi and the rules like these can apply only to words in sanhita. The present rule is an exception to it, and here, even when the words are not in Efter, but there is an actual hiatus between the two, the change still takes place. The word afar of VIII. 2. 108, exerts regulating influence upto the end of the Book. 
TET E hragt: 11 201 cena u a:, a, UTC, 36, gt: वृत्तिः । नस् इत्येवस्व नकारत्व णकारादेयो भवति धातुस्थानिमित्तादुत्तरस्योरुशवाताव उन्नति fi 
27. In the Chhandas, the at of (the Pronoun) a is changed into o, when it comes after a root having a r or op 
· or after the words t and g(x) 
Thus tarot: (Rig VII. 15. 13). 'O Agnil protect us'. funt UT TIL (Rig. VII. 32. 26) 'Teach us this'. :-porrar (Rig. VIII. 75. 11)g- igor: estar) Rig IV. 31. 3). Auf anger: (Rig. I. 36. 13). 
The word Te is here the pronoun TA, which is the substitute, in certain cases, of AT (VIII. 1. 21) and does not mean here the substitute of forenti In the next sätra, however, both Te are taken. urey means 'that which exists in a dhatu', namely and q when occurring in a root. The word re means the word-form 77; and g means y, and is exhibited with q-change. It does not mean the affix g of the Locative Plural. Therefore, not here i wa S#: 11 The word oor is the 2rd Person singular, Imperative, the lengthening is by VI. 3. 135. The root fuy has the sense of pray in the Veda. poft is 2nd Person sg. Imperative of (VI. 4. 102), the visarga of : is changed to g by VIII. 3. 50. In mitg there is lengthening by VI. 3. 134: so also in 99: &c. 
guerrascall 8511 Tata Il genia, o वृत्तिः ॥ उपसर्गस्यानिमित्तादुनरस्व मसो मकारस्य णकारादेशी भवति । 
.. 28. The 7 of are is changed diversely into ot, when, it comes after an upasarga having a cause of change. 
BK. VIII. CH. IV S. 30 ) 
जस्व RULE. 
1665 
Thus प्रणः प्रहामणस प्रणोरामा ॥ The change does not sometime take, place, as, प्रनो मुञ्चतम् ॥ 
By force of the word of the rule applies to secular literature also as distinguished from the Chhandas or sacred Vedic text. Thus yurer To The word game does not govern this sūtra. 
In goret gera, the word ay is the substitute for after and means 'nose'. See V. 4. 119. 
This is not the satra as given by Panini. His sutra is उपसर्गारनोलर "after an Upasarga, the n of नस् when not preceded by or followed by an मो, is changed into o" There being several objections to this rule, the above rule is substituted as an amendment, in the Mahabhashya. For may have two meanings:-(1) मोकारात् परः, that which comes after भो; (2) मोकारः परोऽस्मात that which is followed by si u In both cases, the rule is objectionable. In the first case, the m change would be required in प्रमो मुञ्चतं; in the second case,. there should be no o change in gur a 1 In fact, we find in the Vedas प्रण: as well as प्रन:, so also प्रणो as well as मना ॥ Hence the necessity of this am endment. 
कस्यचः ॥ २९॥ पदानि ॥ कृति, अच॥ . वृत्तिः ॥ कृत्यो यो भकारो ऽच उत्सरस्योपसर्गस्यानिमित्तादुत्सरस्थ कारादेवो भवति । 
पातिककस्थस्य णले निर्विष्णस्योपसंख्यानं कर्सष्यम् । 
29. The - of a Krit afix, preceded by a vowel, is changed into o, when it follows an upasarga having the cause of change. 
The following are the specific Krit affixes in which this change takes place:-मन (यु), मान (शानच् &c VII.2.82), मनीय, (III. I.96) मनि, (III. 3. 111) पनि (जिनि III. 2.78 &c ) and the substitutes of निष्ठा (VIII. 2.42)॥ 
Thus मनः प्रयाणम् , परिमाणम् , प्रमाणम्, परियाणम्॥ मानः प्रयायमाणम, परिवावमाणम्॥ भनीय प्रयाणीयम् , परियाणीयम् ॥ 
भनि भायाणि, मपरिवान॥ . : पनि प्रवायिन् , प्रयायिणी, परियायिन् , परियायिणी निष्ठादेशः प्रहीण, परिहीणः, महीणवान् परिहीणवान् ॥ Longit by VI. 4.66. 
Why do we say अच: ' preceded by a vowel ?' Observe प्रभुना, परिमुना the Nishtha of भुज ॥ It is thus formed: भुज+क-मुश्त -भुज+म (VII. 2. 45, the root भु is read as मुमा कौटिल्य in the dhatapatha, having an indicatory भो, thus giving scope to the rule). भु +म-भुग+म (VIII. 2. 30)-मुम ॥ . 
Vårt:--The word affou should be enumerated in this place. As fift. णोमि खलसंगेन ॥ निविण्णाहमवासेन ॥ 
णेर्विभाषा ॥ ३०॥ पदानि ॥णे, विभाषा॥ पतिः ॥ण्यन्तामों विहितः कुम्मत्ययः तस्यस्य नकारयोपरागस्थानिमित्तादुतरस्य विभापाणकारदेवो भवारी 
1666 
पल RULE. 
[ BK. VIII. CH. IV. 8.32 
____30. The of a Krit - affix ordained after a causa tive verb ( ण्यन्त ), is optionally changed to [, when it comes after an upasarga having a cause of change. 
Thus प्रयापणम् or प्रथापनम् , परिवापण or परिवापनम् , प्रबापमाणम् or प्रवाप्यमानम, प्रवापणीयम or मयापनीयं, ममवापणिःor भायापनिः, प्रमापिणी or प्रयापिनी॥ 
Why have we used the word face ordained in explaining the stra? Because the change takes place, even where the ont affix does not follow directly after the affix णि, where a third affix such as ब intervenes. As प्रबाप्पमाणम् ॥ The or being in the ablative, under the ordinary rule of interpretation ( I. 1. 72 ), the krit- affix should come immediately after fa. 
इलम्जु पधात् ॥ ३१॥ पदानि ॥ हला, च, पच्-उपधात् ॥ पतिः॥हलारियों धातुरिझुपधस्तस्मात्सरोकायसवः तस्वस्थ नकारस्याप उत्तरस्थोपसर्गस्थानिमि सासरस्व विभाषा णकारादेवो भवति। 
31. A krit - affix, coming after a verb, which be gins with a consonant and has a penultimate a vowel, chang es optionally its 7, which is preceded by a vowel, into y, when it comes after an upasarga having a cause of change. 
The phrase त्यचः is understood here. Thus प्रकोपणम् or प्रकोपनमा , परिको. पण or परिकोपमम् ॥ 
Why do we say : 'beginning with a consonant'? Observe and 1,44. where the change is obligatory, under VIII. 4. 29. These are from te पेरायाम् and महवितकें। 
Why do we say 1999'having a penultimate <vowel'? Observe अवपणम् and परिषपणम् ; no option. 
By the rule ry: the change was obligatory, this rule makes it op tional. 
The of the krit-affix must come after a vowel, otherwise there will be no change. See परिमा 
The word in the satra should be interpreted as one, and not as ordinarily "after what ends in "u For an fury verb implies that it ends with a consonant, and so the employment of the word om in the text would have been useless had it meant इलन्तात् ॥ 
इजादेः सनुमः ॥ ३२॥ पदानि ॥ इजादेः, सनुमः। वृतिः ॥ इबाद सनुमा हलन्सानासोर्विहिसोबः कुत्तस्यत्व मकारस्थोपसर्गस्थानिमित्तादुत्तरस्व पकाये भवति । 
32. A ksit - affix ordained after a verb beginning with an vowel, having the augment yg in it, and ending 
BK. VIII. CH. IV. §. 34 ) 
CEREBRAĽ CHANGE. 
1667 
" would have to commence est interpret in by the 
with a consonant, changes its t into it, when preceded by an upasarga having in it the cause of change. 
The word of the last sätra is understood here. But contrary to the construction put upon it in the last sätra, here it means it, by the natural rule of construction as given in I. 1. 72. We must interpret it so here, because it is impossible for an a root to commence with a s; while to have done so in the last aphorism would have been redundant. 
Thus aru , piroury from the part; the T is added because it is PETH 74, a r , 90 Turvo, Innn grò the nasal is part of the root. The rule will not apply to me, because ya here means the anusvara generally ( VIII. 4. 2) though the change would have been valid by the gcncral rule, ( VIII. 4. 29 ) this sätra makes a fan or restriction. That is, only in the case of an age verbs the change takes place, not in other ach verbs. Thus प्रमानम, परिमानम from the root माग सर्पणे ॥ . . 
This rule does not affect rule VIII. 4. 30, relating to our verbs, for those verbs cannot be said to end with a consonant. Moreover, we have used the word fign: in explaining the satra, in order to indicate this fact, that the kpit-affix must be ordained after a consonant-ending verb. In the case of causative verbs, the kpit-affix is ordained after a vowel-ending (ro) verb, and the vowel is elided after the adding of the affix. So that before the adding of the affix, the verb did not end in a consonant 
या निसनिक्षनिन्दाम् ॥ ३३॥ पदानि ॥वा, निस-निक्ष-निन्दाम् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ उपसर्गादितिवर्तते । मिस निक्ष निन्द इत्येतेषां मकारस्थोपसर्गस्यानिमित्तादुसरस्थ चा नकारा देशो भवति । 
33. The n of निस निक्ष and निन्द is changed to ण optionally, when preceded by an upasarga having in it a cause of change. 
Thus that or afra, aforemport or for, afara or APARTE II 
These verbs are written with o in the Dhatupa tha, and therefore by rule VIII. 4. 14 ante, the change of 7 into or would have been obligatory. The present sätra makes it optional. The root forfa means 'to kiss', care dau, and पिदिऊत्सायाम् ॥ 
न माभूपकमिगमिप्यायिवेपाम् ॥ ३४ ॥ पदानि ॥ न, मा-भू-पू-कमि-मि-प्यायि era il 
वृतिः ॥ भासती भूसत्तावान पवने कमि कान्तो गमि गती प्याथि यो पेप कम्पने येतेपासपस र्गस्यानिमित्तादुत्सरस्वकल्पस्य मकारस्थ णकारादेशो न भवति । i atrac OATHI AASTATTERI 
34. Thoot of a krit-affix is not changed to o, though preceded by an upasarga having in it a cause of change, 
1668 
a CHANGE. 
(BK. VIII. CH. IV. §. 36 
when the affix is added to the following verbs: 1, "to shine', 
'to be', q 'to purify', fi 'to be brilliant', TI 'to go', ami to increase', aq 'to shake'. 
This rule is an exception to VII1. 4. 29. Thus : भा प्रभानम् , परिभानम् भू प्रभवनम्, परिभवनम् पू अपवनम्, परिपवनम् ॥ 
Ishti:-The verb c is to be taken and not the verb ge # In the case of the latter the change is obligatory, as, 790 FTTFT II 
कमि प्रकमनम् परिकमनम् ।। गमि प्रगमनम् परिगमनम् ॥ cara alatt, FATT I 
1978, qftigt! . Vart: The above roots, even when in the Causative, do not change the # of their kpit-affix, As ga1979, fa i 
TOYETECCE II 34 11 qera I TE, YETETT प्रतिः ॥ षकारात्पदान्तादुत्तरस्य मकारस्य णकारादेशो न भवति । 
35. After a final in a Pada, the q is not changed to un 
Thus far , 0977*; the visarga is changed to here by VIII. 3. 41. The rule VIII. 4. 29 is debarred. 799179 (is a genitive compound contra II. 2. 14). So also 774 (II. 1. 32). The q is in these two by VIII. 3. 45, and VIII, 4. 10 is debarred. 
Why do we say " a after a g?" Observe faufai il 
Why do we say पदान्तात् 'final in a Pada'? Observe कुष्णाति, पुण्णाति ॥ The word Tra is equivalent to stay or Locative Tatpurusha; and does not mean final of a Pada. Therefore the rule does not apply here. gaffar (ins. sg.) gayvill Here the # is added by V. 4. 154. Ora AIF garda (a Bahuvrihi). The c is by VIII. 3. 39. Before the affix a, the word Tafta is a Pada (1. 4. 17), and thus & (c) is final of a Pada: but it is not final of a pre ceding member followed by another Pada. The rule, in fact, applies to compounds, the being final in the first term. 
at: Te II 38 Il fallarti, TRT I पत्तिानो पकारान्तस्य प्रकारादेषो न भवति । 
36. is not the substitute of the verb y 'to destroy', when ending incl. 
. When the r is changed to q in aty, the # of Hq is not changed. Thus ANE, FRE: The gu ordained by VII. 1. 60, is elided by VI. 4. 24, and g changed © by VIII. 2. 36. 
____ Why do we say पान्तस्यो Observe प्रणश्यति, परिणश्यति ॥ The word मत is taken in order that the prohibition may apply to words like metara, which did end with g though the has been changed by other rules, and is no longer visible. For here the T of Fg is changed to g by VIII. 2. 36, and then this is changed to by VIII. 2. 41 ; and the 19 is added by VII, 1. 60. 
BK. VIII. CH. IV. 8.40] 
of CHANGE. 
1669. 
पदान्तस्य ॥ ३७॥ पदानि ॥ पदान्तस्य ॥ . इतिः ॥ पदान्तो यो नकारस्तस्य णकारादेशो न भवति । 
37. Of a a final in a Pada, o is not the substitute. Thus वृक्षान्, पक्षान्, मरीन्, गिरीन् ।। पदव्यवायेपि॥३८॥ पदानि ॥ पदव्यवाये, आपि ॥ इतिः ॥ पदेन व्यवायपि ससि निमित्त निमित्तिनोर्नकारस्य पकायदेशो न भवति । वार्निकम् ।। पदण्यपाये ऽतद्धिताति वनव्यम् । 
38. The or is not changed to ✓ when a Pada' intervenes between the cause of the change and the word containing the all 
The word पदव्यवाय is a compound meaning पदेन व्यवाय 'separated by a Pada'. Thus मापकुम्भवापेन, चतुरायोगेन, पावनद्धम, पर्यवनम्, प्रगानयामः, परिगामयामः ॥ Here the Padas कुम्भ, मन, भव &c, intervening, the change does not take place. 
Vårt:-It should be stated when there is separation by a Pada, except in a Taddhita. Prohibition does not apply to words like माईगोमयेण, शुकगोमयण ॥ Here गो takes the affix भवद् by IV. 3. 145, and the word गो is a Pada by I.4.17,and it intervenes between मय and the first word. The author of Mahabhåshya however does not approve of this Vartika According to 
him the word पदव्यवाय means पदेष्यवाय ।। 
शुभनादिषु च ॥ ३९॥ पदानि ॥ क्षुम्नादिषु, च॥ वृतिः ॥ अन्ना इत्येवमादिषु धनेषु नकारस्य णकारादेखो न भवति। . 
39. The u is not the substitute of 7 in the words kshubhna &c. 
The 'not' of sätra 34 is to be read into this. Thus , so also in gufta, gain, the substitutes of more being like the principal I. 1. 57. 
So नूनमनः where the change was called for by VIII. 4. 3, and VIII. 
Lalubne note substanchang 
4. 26. 
. 
नन्दिन्, नन्दन and नगर when second members in a compound, denoting a name, as, हरिनन्दी, हरिनन्दनः, गिरिनगरः ॥ 
The word नृत् when taking the Intensive affix यह, as, नरीनृत्यते ॥ 
हनु, सृमोति also belongs to this class. मर्तन, गहन, मन्दन, निवेश, निवास, मामि and भनूप when used as second terms in a compound. As, परिमर्तनम्, परिगहनन्, which required change by VIII. 4. 3. So परिनन्दनम् contrary to VIII. 4. 14. परनिर्वधा, परनिवास, धरानः, दर्भानूपः ॥ All these are Names. 
After the word भाचार्य there is no change, as, भाचार्यभोगीना, भाचार्यानी ॥ 
हरिका, तिमिर, समीर, कुबेर and हरि and कर्मर followed by वन do not cause change in the n of वन when the compound is a Name. This is an भाकतिगणः ॥ . 1 भुना (भुम्माति), 2 नृनमन; 3 मन्दिन्, 'मन्दन, मगर, एतान्युत्तरपदानि संज्ञायां प्रपोज. यन्ति, हरिनन्दी, 7 हरिनन्दनः, 8 गिरिमगरम्9 नृतिहि प्रयोजयति, मरीनृत्यते; 10 मतम, 11 गहन, 
1670 
PALATAL CHANGE. 
[ BK. VIII.CH. IV.S4 
12 मन्दन, 13 निवेध, 14निवारा, मि, 16 मनप, एतान्युत्तरपदानि म योभवन्ति, 17 परिनसनम् , 18 परिगहनम, 19 परिनन्दनम् , 20 परनिवेषः, 21 परनिवासा, 22 ग्रामिः, 23 हर्मानूपा, 24 भाचावणवं चभाचार्यभोगीनः (भाचार्यानी). क्षुम्ना, 25 सृप्नु, नुनमन, 26 मरनगर, नन्दन- बहनृती, 27 गिरिनदी. 28 गृहनमन, निवेश, निवास, ममि, भमूप, भाचार्यभोगीन, 29 चतुर्हायन, 30 इरिकादीनि वनोत्तरपनि संज्ञायाम् । इरिका, सिमिर, समीर, कुबेर, हरि कर्मार. भकतिगण. 
स्तो चुना श्चुः॥४०॥ पदानि ॥ स्तोः, श्चुना, श्चुः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ प्रकारचवर्गाभ्यां सन्निपात कारचवदेशी भवतः । 
40. The letters स and the dentals when coming in contact with and the palatals, are changed to ay and palatals respectively. 
The rule of qurin does not apply here with regard to first part frit ora a The e in contact with p is changed to y but it is also so changed when in contact with letters of a class. Similarly letters of # class coming in contact with g or a letter of class, are changed to y class. The rule of re, however, applies to the gubstitutes, namely # is changed to , and g to go 
• Ist, स in contact with us as, वृक्षम् +ते-वृक्षशेते, so also प्लक्षम्यते ॥ 
2nd. स in contact with :-as, वक्षस् +चिनोति- वृक्षाधिनोति, प्लमधिनोति, वृक्षा पति, प्लसक्छापयति । 
3rd. तु with y:-भग्निचित +ोते-भग्निचिच्छेते, so सोममुछेते ॥ 
4th. E with :-भग्निचित् +पिनोति = भग्निचिच् चिनोति, so also सोमनचिनोति, माग्निापिन्छाइयति, भग्निषिजयति, भग्निचिश सकारम् , सोमनुच्छादयति, सोममुजयति, सामसस्स. कारम् , भग्निचिजकारः, सोमाजकारः ॥ Similarly मरम् gives मज्जति, the स is changed to by AMITT ATT VIII. 4. 53, and then this is changed to a palatal i. e. to here; and obtained by sy rule is not considered asiddha here. See VIII. 2. 3. So also from Yey we have forfall 
sth. धकार followed by सकारः as, बड़+न (III.3.90)-ब -वज्ञा, याच+न -थामा ॥ In fact the instrumental case sचुना shows that the mere contact of 
and a with and g is enough to induce the change, whether it is followed by , or as be followed by all Other examples of mere contact are : 
5th.(a) सfollowed by jis changed into as, भर+तिम + +ति (III. 1.17..VI. I. 16)-भूर+ति- भूपश+ति-(VIII. 4.53) भजति ॥ Similarly मस्व forms मब्बति प्रम forms वृभाति ।। 
The aphorism Tra (VIII. 4. 44) which prohibits the change of g into when following the letter q, indicates by implication that the rule of mutual correspondence according to the order of enumcration (1. 3. 10) does not hold good here. 
Had the sutra been स्लो मोः युः i. e. instead of instrumental, had there been the locative case, then the rule would not have applied to cases covered by the fifth clause. 
धुना हुः॥४१॥ पदानि ॥ टुना, ष्टुः ॥ पतिः ॥सकारतवर्गयोः पकारटवर्गाभ्यां संनिपाते षकारटवर्गाबादेशी भवतः । BK. VIII. CH. IV. F. 43] 
PALATAL CHANGE. 
A 
1671 
41. The letters and dentals in contact with qand cerebrals, are changed into q and cerebrals respectively. 
The word fant is to be read into the sotra. Here also there is absence of mutual correspondence according to the order of enumeration. 
(1)स with ras, वृक्षर+पण्डे - वृक्षपण्डे, प्लक्षपण्डे ।। । (2) with , as, वृक्षस + टीकते- वृक्षाष्टीकते, वृक्षधकारः, प्लसटीकते and पटकारः ॥ 
(3) with as पे+ता-पेष्टा, पेटुम्, पेष्टव्यम्, कृषीर, कृषीष्ठा: (Atmane, Aorist 2nd per dual). 
(4) तु with g, as, भनिचित् +टीकते-अप्रिचिट्टीकते, सोमसुट्टीकते, मनिषिद्वकारः, ममिनिसीनः, भमिचिटकते, भामिचिण्णकार, सोममुहकारः, सोममुहीनः, सोममुरोकते, सोम सुण णकारः॥ 
___ The root म भतिक्रमणासियोः, and भद्र भाभियोगे, are read in the Dhatu patha with a and Ę penultimate, in order that when the affix ferq is added to them, the final 7 and 7 being elided by Benta rule, the derivatives will be मत and मद् ending in t and | Another reason is that the sotra VI. I. 3. should apply to their reduplicate. In these roots the x and are changed, as भद्दति and भइति ॥ 
न पदान्ताहोरनाम् ॥ ४२ ॥ पदानि ॥ न, पदान्तात, टोः, अनाम . . वृत्तिः ॥ पदान्ताहवर्गादुत्तरस्य स्तोः दुल न भवति नामित्येतर्जयित्वा । वार्तिकम् ।। मनाम्नतिनगरीणामिति वक्तव्यम् । 
42. After टु final in a Pada, the change of a dental (स्तु) to a cerebral (४), does not take place, except in the case of the affix नाम् ॥ 
Thus वलिट् + साये- वलिदसाये, मधुलिदसावे, श्वलितरति, मधुलिदतरति ॥ 
Why do we say पदान्तात् 'final in a Pada'? Observefr+ - +t - : ॥ 
Why do we say टोः 'after 'P Observe सर्पितमम्सर्पिष्टमम् ॥ 
Why do we say ma 'except in the case of the affix nam'? Observée पर+माम-पणाम् ॥ This exception is very inadequate. Hence the following .. 
Vårt :-It should be stated rather that mates and oft as well as an are not prevented from undergoing the cerebral change. As, quora 'of six', qoora: ninety-six, and proport 'six cities.'. 
__ . . : . तोः पि ॥४३॥ पदानि ॥ तोः, पि॥ वृत्तिः ॥सवर्गस्य पकारे यदुक्तं मन भवति। 
43. In the room of तु there is not a cerebral subs titute, when a follows. 
The word म is to be read into the aphorism. As, भमिषितपणे-भषि चितपणे ॥ भवानपण्डे, महानपरे ॥ 
1672 
REDUPLICATION. 
[BK. VIII. CH. IV. 847 
शात् ॥४४॥ पदानि ॥ शात् ॥ पतिः ॥ धकारादुत्तरस्य तवर्गस्य यदुनं सन्न भवति । 
____44. In the room of तु there is not a palatal substi tute, when a precedes. 
The words 7 and ht: are understood here. This is an exception to VIII. 4.40. Thus, प्रच्छ मि (III. 3.90)-प्र+म (VI. 4. 19)-प्रमः, विमः &c. 
यरोनुनासिकेनुनासिको वा ॥४५॥ पदानि । यरः, अनुनासिके, अनुनासिका, 
वृत्तिः ॥ यरः पदान्तस्यानुनासिके परतो वानुनासिकादेशी भवति । 
· वानिकम् ॥ बरोनुनासिके प्रत्यये भाषायां नित्यवचनं कर्तव्यम् । 
45. In the room of a y letter (every consonant except final) in a Pada, when a Nasal follows, there is op tionally a Nasal substitute. 
. The word पदान्त is understood here. Thus वाक् + नयति-वामयति or वार नयति, मग्निपिनयति or भग्निचिन्नति, विटुबनयति or विदुनयति, वलिणनयति or श्वलिइवति ।। 
Why do we say 'final in a Pada'? Observe, पे+मि-वेधि | Here there is no option. So also gमाति ॥ .. 
Vart:-When it is a pratyaya or affix that follows, the nasalisation is obligatory in the secular language. Thus वाक+माघम्वादमानम्, किवन्माचम् ॥ It is, however, only before the affixes 44 and in that the change is obligatory, and not before every affix beginning with a nasal. 
। अचो रहाभ्यां ॥४६॥ पदानि ॥ मचः, रहाभ्यां, दे॥ वृत्तिः ।। मच उसरी बौरेफहकारी ताभ्यामुत्नरस्व बोटे भवतः । 
46. There is reduplication of यर् , i. e. all the con sonants except r, after the letters र् and following a vowel. 
The word u of last sotra is understood here. According to others, .thear is also understood, and this is an optional rule. Thus मई, मई, मम्मा , 
मपन्न। 
Why do we say मच: "following a vowel'? Observe दुते, मलपति ।। अनचि च ॥४७॥ पदानि ॥ अन्, अचि, च ॥ बत्तिः॥मच पत्तरस्थ यो भवतो ऽनधि परतः । 
पातिकम् ।। वणो मयो भवत इति वक्तव्यम् । पारा खयो भवत इति वनव्यम् । पा॥भवसाने च बरोरे भवतः इति वकम्बम् । 
47. When a vowel does not follow, there is re duplication of 4 (all the consonants except ), after a yowel. 
The words : and #: are understood here. 
Bx. VIII. CH. IV S. 50) 
REDUPLICATION. 
1673 
Thus fp+*+=949+** (VI. 1.77)- +*+ 4+** (VIII. 4 53) - 7°, so also it 
Why do we say trur: "after a vowel ?" Observe fem, F EUI 
Vårt:- *** ***: | This Vārtika may be interpreted in two ways. First taking : as ablative and qa: as genitive. "The letters of the pratyahara w are reduplicated after letters." 891, il Secondly taking w as genitive, and : as ablative, "The letters are reduplicated after we letters". As y, 
Vårt.- Ca n This is also similarly explained in two ways. Ist" There is reduplication of a letters, after a sibilant for ur letters". as flor, F . Secondly. There is reduplication of a sibilant (or letters), after 
ou letters, se, a***, W 
Vart- ruego *| There is reduplication of a when a Pause ensues. As , , , &c. 
These reduplications are curiosities, rather than practicalities, नादिन्याक्रोशे पुत्रस्य ॥४८॥ पदानि |न, मादिनी, आक्रोशे, पुत्रस्य fait et qTH TO i gum #: ! যান্ধি গাই স্ব স্ব 
ও উঃ আ জন্ধায় প্রায় वाचा दिसीयाः शरि पोकरसाहा। 
48. There is not reduplication of the letters of putra', when the word adini follows, the sense being that of reviling or cursing. 
This debars the reduplication required by the last satra. Thus wirdt afar"O sinful one thou art cater or thy own son". Here the word guferit is used simply as an abusive epithet. But when a fact is dég cribed, and the word is not used as an abuse or u, the reduplication takes place. Thus guiet met 'a kind of tigress, that eats up her young ones'. 
ut soft 
Vårt: So also when y is followed by guna 11 As guest fer 919 # So also gen 
Vårt:-Optionally so when the words and follow. As yet or gwai, nor gen 
Vari:-According to the option of Acharya Paushkarasådi, the letters of a pratyahara are replaced by the second letters of their class, when followed by a sibilant (a letter of u pratyahara). 
As a: becomes qu: a becomes more and get becomes 
1674 
. 
SOFTENING 
(BK. VIII. CH. IV. &. 54 
शरोचि ॥ ४६॥ पदानि ॥ शरः, अचि ॥ वृतिः॥परोधि परतो न भवतः । 
49. . There are not two in the room of a sibilant (शर), when a vowel follows. 
The word 2 is to be read into the sotra. This debars the application of rule 46 ante. Thus कपति, वर्षति, भाकर्षः, भावः ॥ ... Why do we say भपि 'when a vowel followst Observe पर्वते॥ 
निप्रभृतिषु शाकटायनस्य ॥५०॥ पदानि ॥ त्रिप्रभृतिषु, शाकटायनस्य॥ 'वृत्तिः ॥मिति वर्णेषु संयुक्नेषु धाकटायनस्थाचार्यस्य मतेन न भवति । 
50. According to the option of Sakatayana, the doubling does not take place when the conjunct consonants . are three or more in number. 
A इना, चना, राष्ट्र, राष्ट्रम, धाष्ट्रम् ॥ सर्वत्र शाकल्यस्य ॥५१॥ पदानि ॥ सर्वत्र, शाकल्यस्य । वृत्तिः॥चाकल्याचार्यस्व मंतन सर्वपशिर्वचनं न भवति । 
· 51. According to the opinion of Såkalya, there is reduplication no where. 
As मर्कर, मर्क, प्रमा, अपहनुते ।। दीर्घादाचार्याणाम् ॥ ५२॥ पदानि ॥ दीर्घात, आचार्याणाम् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ दीर्घादुत्तरस्या 
52. According to the opinion of all Teachers, there is no doubling after a long vowel. 
As बाणम्, पापम्, भूगर्म, भूगम् ॥ झलां जशशशि ॥ ५३॥ पदानि । झलाम, जश, सशि। वृत्तिः॥सलां स्थाने अशारेयो भवति मणि परतः। :: 
53. In the room of a letters, there is substitution of u letters, when pro letters follow. 
A mute letter is changed to a sonant non-aspirate mute, when a sonant mute follows it. . .. This is the well-known rule of softening the hard letters. Thus लम् + सालम्धा, so also लम, लण्यष्यम् ; सेग्धा, पोग्घुन, दोग्धवम् ; बोजा, बोम्, बोजव्यम् । 
1 . Why do we say aft, when a jhas follows'? Observe :, . : 
अभ्यासे चर्च॥५४॥ पदानि ॥ मध्यासे, चर,च॥ तिमन्चासे पर्समानानां सलां चरादेवो भवति चकाराज। ... 64. The चर is also the substitute of झब् letters 
occuring in a reduplicate syllable, as well as जम् ॥ . In a reduplicate syllable, a sonant non-aspirate (TV) as well as a surd non aspirate (T) is the substitute of a Mute letter. By applying the rule of 
BK. VIII. CH. IV S. 57 ] 
CHANGE. 
1675 
nearest in place (1. 1. 50), we find that sonant non-aspirate (0) is the subs titute of all sonants; and is the substitute of all surds. In other words: all aspirate letters become non-aspirate. The word y has been drawn into the satra by the word 'also'. 
Thus preferat | Here 6 (Desiderative), is added to the root m7, thc u is changed to g by VII. 4. 62, and this aspirate s is now changed to non-aspirate by the present søtra. Praqa, 
F 
, freteft, farfugla, TH , parerla, güÀ II . 
If there is a (non-aspirate surd) in the original, it will remain of course unchanged. As, reftala, Fattiava, faalala ni 
The original rg also remains unchanged. Thus farafH, STN, #, hall Or to be more accurate a pt is replaced by a t and a wy by a 
Tra letter. 
खरिच॥ ५५॥ पदानि ॥ खरि, च॥ वृत्तिः ॥ खरिच परसो सलां चरादेशो भवति । 
55. In the room of , there is the substitute ET, when 7 follows. 
A sonant non-aspirate mute is the substitute of a mute, when a-surd mute or a sibilant follows. The words fri and op: are supplied from the last sotra. Thus i+1=*TT, #2, #Freig; 19y+tare ; entanta, sifica from and 7, there is added by VII. 4. 54, in the room of of n and in and we have fire and forex then the first is elided by. VIII. 2. 29. 
पावसाने ॥ ५९॥ पठानि ॥ वा, अवसाने ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ सलां परिति वर्तते । भवसान वर्तमानामांसला परादेखो भवति । 
. 56. The ar is optionally the substitute of a man that occurs in a Pause. 
The words HAI T is understood in the stra. A sonant or a surd non-aspirate may stand as final in a Pause: but not an aspirate consonant By VIII. 2. 39, a non-aspirate sonant can only stand in a final position. This ordains that a non-aspirate surd may also stand as the final, when there is Pause. Thus te or mi, or , nies or tea, fugg or 
qui Uriaren: ll 40:11 oara II OTI, TRI, BAT: # वृत्तिः ॥भणा मप्रगृह्यसंज्ञस्थावसाने वर्तमाने पानुनासिकादेवो भवति । 
57. The anunåsika is optionally the substitute of an 4 vowel which occurs in a Pause, and is not a Pragpihya. 
1, r and 7, short and long, may, when final in a Pause, be pronounced as nasals, provided that they are not Pragrihya ( I. 1. 11 &c.) The me here 
1676 
SEMI-VOWEL CHANGE. 
(BK. VIII. C11. IV. . 60 
- 
- 
is a Pratyahara with the first म् ॥ Thus r िor दधि, मई or मधु, कुमारी or कुमारी॥ 
Why do we say 'of an भण् vowel?" Observe, कर्त, हई । 
Why do we say which is not a pragrihya'? Observe भग्नी, वाबू which are pragrihya by I. I. II. 
अनुस्वारस्य याय परसवर्णः ॥५५॥ पदानि ॥ अनुस्वारस्य, ययि, परसवर्णः॥ वृत्तिः ॥.मनुस्वारस्य ययि परतः परसवर्णमादेशो भवति । 
58. In the room of anusvåra, when ta follows, ir letter homogeneous with the latter is substituted. . . Thus हिता, चरितुम्, शक्तिव्यम् , उम्छिता, कुण्डिता, नन्दिता, कम्पिता &c. These are from roots कि शायाम्, रञ्छि उम्छे, कुरिदाहे, दुनदि समूत्रो, कपि चलने ॥ Here नुम् is is added because they are afert, and this becomes anusvåra by VIII. 3. 24, and this anusvara is changed to t when followed by aguttural क् &c, to म् when followed by a palatal up &c, and so on to y, and all 
Why do we say when a follows'? Observe भास्वते, भाषिक्रस्यते ।। 
In कुर्वन्ति, पन्ति, the म is not changed into m, though required by VIII. 4. 2. Because the opere is asiddha, and therefore by the prior rule VIII. 3. 24, the न is first changed into anusvara (VIII. 2. 1). That anusvara is again changed into or by the present rule, it being homogeneous with 1 This change again being me as if it had never taken place (VIII. 2. 1), the of is never substituted for न 
या पदान्तस्य ॥५६॥ पदानि ॥घा, पदान्तस्य॥ वृत्तिः ॥ पान्तस्वानुस्वारस्थ ययि परतो वा परसवर्णोदेशो भवति । 
59. In the room of anusvåra final in a Pada, the substitution of a letter homogeneous with the latter 
ional. 
_Thus सं कथं चित्रपलं रबमानं मभन्स्य पुरुषोभधीत् or तपञ्चिनपलण्डबमानन्नमः स्थम्पुरुषोऽवधीत् ।। 
तोलि ॥१०॥ पदानि ॥ तोः, लि। पतिः ॥ तवर्गस्व लकारे परतः परसववियो भवति । 
..। 60. In the room of तु (a dental) when the letter follows, one homogeneous with the latter is substituted. 
Thus ममिचित् + लुनाति-ममिचिल्लुनाति, सोमबुललुनाति; भवान् + मुमाति-भाल जानाति, महाँल्लुनावि ॥ Here a has been changed to pure s, while the dento-nasal qis changed to á nasal 
उदा खास्तम्भोः पूर्वस्य ॥६॥ पदानि ॥ उदः, सा स्तम्भोः, पूर्वस्य । वृत्तिः ॥ब उसरको स्था स्तम्भ इत्येतयोः पूर्वसवर्णादयो भवति । पार्मिकम् ॥ र पूर्वसवर्णले स्कन्देक्छन्दस्युपसंख्यामम् । पा०॥रोगे चेति वक्तवन । 
BK. VIII. CH. IV. 5. 64] 
CONSONANTAL CHANGE. 
1677 
61. After उदू, in the room of the स of stha and stambha, the substitute is a letter belonging to the class of the prior (i.e.a dental is substituted for this स)। 
As उद+स्थाता- उद+थयाता-उद+थाता (VIII.4.65)-उतायाता (VIII. 4. 55)- उन्याता, उत्थातुम्, उत्थातव्यम् ॥ So also with स्तम्भ, as, उत्सम्मिता, उत्तम्भितम् &c. (See I. I. 67 and 54). 
Why do we say of स्था and स्तम्भ? Compare उत्तात ॥ 
Vart:-In the Vedas, the above substitution takes place in the case of स्कन्द preceded by उद् ॥ As, भये पूरमुल्कन्दः ॥ 
___Vart:-So also when it means a disease. As उल्कन्दको माम रोगः॥ Or this form may have been derived from the root *, and not pali 
झयो होन्यतरस्याम् ॥ १२॥ पदानि ॥ यः, हः, अन्यतरस्याम् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ सय उत्तरस्य इकारस्य पूर्वसवर्णादेशो भवति भन्यतरस्याम् ।। 
62. In the room of the letter , after (a sonant Mute) there is optionally a letter homogeneous with the prior. . 
The pratyahara includes all Mutes. But practically sonant Mutes are only taken here. 
As वाक् + इसति-वाग्घसति or वाग् इसति, वलिरसति or इसति, भमिचिद धसति or इसति, मिष्टुर भसति or इसति, सोमसुद् धसति or सोमसुद हसति ।। 
Why do we say सयः 'after a sonant Mute?' Observe माइइसति, भवान् इसति॥ 
शश्छोटि ॥ १३॥ पदानि ॥शः, छः, अति॥ पतिः ॥ सय इति वर्तते । अन्यतरस्यामिति च । सय उत्तरस्य कारस्यादि परतछकागरेपो भवति मन्यतरस्याम् । 
वार्तिकम् ॥ छत्वममीति वक्तव्यम् । 
63. In the room of श preceded by a surd Mute there is optionally the letter when a vowel or 7, a ors follows such श॥ 
Though a means all Mutes, the rule, however, applies to surd mutes. The words झe and भन्यतरस्यां are to be read into the shtra. Thus पा+ते वाक्छते or 'ते। ममिचिच्छेते or भमिचित्ते , श्वालिद से or छेते, पिपछेते or ते॥ 
Vart:- It should rather be stated when a letter of the pratyahara follows. The sotra only gives me letters, the vārtika adds the letters , and the nasals. Thus सत् श्लोकेन-तच् छलोकेन, तच्छमश्रुणा ॥ 
हलो यमा यमि लोपः ॥ १४॥ पदानि ॥ हलः, यमाम्, यमि, लोपः। . वृत्तिः । इल उत्तरेषां यमा यमि परतो लोपो भवति भन्यतरस्याम् । 
1678 
ELISION. 
[ BK. VIII. CH. IV. $. 65 
64. : After a consonant, the following semi-vowel or & nasal is elided optionally, when the same lotters 
follow it. 
The word in should be read into the satra. Thus regar or qar, the middle y being elided. In year there are two as, one of the affix Fun (III. 3. 99); and the second of mar (VII. 4. 22), and the third arises by doubling (VIII. 4. 47). Bereg (formed by doubling by the Vartika under 47 ante), or erfarer son of Aditi' In re there are two as, one of om (IV. 1, 85), and the second arises by doubling. 
Similarly IR TT SEAT FRA = 1 Then by VIII. 4. 47, there is a third 2, as arc ll Here also we may elide the one middle a or both the middle a's. Thus H RT: or surfaca: 
Why do we say #: 'preceded by a consonant'? Observe 4 when mis preceded by a vowel. 
Why do we say 4479"of a letters"? Observe of:, poeta (V. 4. 25) where a is not a ok!! 
Why do we say at " when an follows " ? Observe urgery here is not followed by a au 
सरो झरि सवर्णे ॥ १५॥ पदानि ॥ झरः, सरि, सवर्णे ॥ पतिः॥इल उत्तरस्य सरो सरिसवणे परतो लोपो भवति भन्यतरस्याम् । 
. 65. A Mute or Sibilant (#T) preceded by a con sonant and followed by a homogeneous mute or sibilant, is optionally elided. 
The word on: is understood. Thus , y have three a, namely, one* substituted for m by VII. 4. 47, the second # resulting from the change of to by the change, the third # is that of the affix. A fourth arises by doubling (VIII. 4. 47) of these four, one or two middle ones may be dropped. HEMT here are four æs. A fifth may be added by doubling, and by this rule, one, two or three of them may be elided. 7+T+ H4H+ + (VII. 4. 47) the word Hell being treated as an Upasarga (I. 4. 59, vârt) - HHH 
Why do we say 'of a jhar'? Compare yrke, here 7 which is not a per is not elided, though it is follwed by a pt letter. Why do we say it followed by a jhar'? Şee f499954: 11 This is a Bahuvfihi compound=far: getel The word ga stands first in the compound under II. 2. 35. (vart). The full word is furger, the 87 is elided by VI. 4. 134, and we have fq ; and then this becomes a palatal 1 Here is pre ceded by a letter, and itself is a ph, and is followed by a homogeneous 
BK, VIII. CH. IV. $ 67 ) 
ACCENT, 
1679 
www 
.cwWMAN 
WE UNA 
W 
AN WAWA 
letter , but as x is not all, they is not elided. The elided mis not con sidered sthånivat, and so is considered to be immediately followed by 
Why do we say To when a homogeneous jhar follows 'Observe ** &c, where and are not homogeneous. 
By using the word #404, the rule of mutual correspondence (I, 3. 10) is avoided. Had the rule been put of the rule of mutual correspondence according to order of enumeration would have applied, and the forms fifty famou could not have been evolved by the elision of before For the evolution of these forms see the commentary under 1. 1. 58. These are the Imperative and Person Singular of fire and it The # of w is elided by VI. 4. III: the fe is changed to by VI. 4. 101, the r is changed to by VIII. 4. 53, the ofw is changed to anusvåra by VIII. 3. 24; this anusvåra is again changed to by VIII. 4. 58; the wis changed to x, and by the pre sent rule, the preceding is elided before this x it 
UTGITTer cafca: 11¢¢ 11 qera , TVRI, Falta: 11 স্কৃতি | সুস্বা স্নায়ুকোষ স্বহিষান্ধী শক্তি। 
66. The Svarita is the substitute of an Anudatta vowel which follows an Udåtta vowel. 
Thus what i ca sardana . Here which was wie by rule VIII. 1.28, becomes svarita by the present rule, as it comes after the udatta of agni. 
So also e, sri Here is added by IV. I. 105, and being for the words are first acute. The final is anudatta, which becomes svarita. So also want and , the qy and fac are anudatta, the root is accented, the of 99 becomes svarita. 
The rule VI. r. 158, does not change this svarita into an Anudatta, because for the purposes of that rule, the present rule is mue, or as if it had not taken place (VIII. 2. 1). Therefore both the udatta and the syarita accent are heard. 
varat atrapOame na # a, earca-3 , 3-757-18m. 
m am ! T: 1 TruFa Firaun ESTAREI Farcar # WI T TRAT Taaruraru all ylvia: - TI I 
67 All prohibit the above substitution of svarita, except the Acharyas Gârgya, Kasyapa and Galava; when an udatta or & svarita follows the anudatta. 
This debars the preceding rule. That'anudatta which is followed by an Udatta is rai or 79T: The word 9 means yr in the termino. logy of ancient Grammarians. That anudatta which is followed by a svarita is called fra: # These are Bahuvfibi compounds. Thus Inte rnet 
So aise 
. 1680 
ACCENT. 
(BK VIII. CI. IV 9.68 
WMNEAR 
T o The word is first acote by pran accent, before this udatta, the # of these words does not become svarita. So with state- orde 
Trg The word is svarita being formed by the form affix on (V. 3. 12); before this syarita the preceding a does not become svarita. 
Why do we say, "except in the opinion of Gargya, Kasyapa and Galava"? Observe sprint, 
According to their opinion, the svarita change does take place. 
The employment of the longer word instead of the shorter word pris for the sake of auspiciousness, for the Book has approached the end. The very utterance of the word is auspicious. All sacred works commence with an auspicious word, have an auspicious word in the middle, and end with an auspicious word. Thus Panini commences his sätra with the auspicious word 
fx 'increase' in Sätra I. 1. I): has the word run the well-wisher' in the middle (IV.4.143), and a at the end. 
The mention of the names of those several Acharyas is for the sake of showing respect (pujârtham). 
* * are 11 | wana | , , gran वृतिः ।।एकोष षिवृती ऽपरः संवृतरसमा विवृतस्य संवृतः क्रियते । भकारो विवृतः संवृतो भवति। 
68. The which wag, considered to be open (faya) in all the precerling operations of this Grammar, is now made contracted (ca) 11 
The first x is here for or open; the second is de or contracted. The open is now changed to contracted # # "In actual use the organ in the enunciation of the short is contracted; but it is considered to be open only, as in the case of the other vowels, when the vowel sy is in the state of taking part in some operation of Grammar. The reason for this is, that is the short w were held to differ from the long in this respect, the homogeneous ness mentioned in 1, 1. 9, would not be found to exist between them, and the operation of the rules depending upon that homogeneousness would be debarred. In order to restore the shorts to its natural rights, thus infringed throughout the Ashyadhyayi, Panini with oracular brevity in his closing aphorism gives the injunction ; which is interpreted to signify--Let short 
be held to have its organ of utterance contracted, now that we have reach ed the end of the work in which it was necessary to regard it as being other wise". (Dr. Ballantyne). . 
· Thus !, * # In this Grammar, the wis regarded open or vivrita, when operations are performed with it: but in actual pronunciation it is con tracted. The Jong em and the pluta are not meant to be included here in the open short ; therefore those two are not contracted by this rule. Only BK. VIII. C11. IV. $.68] 
1681 
WWW. 
Tott 
the short consisting of one matra, with its various modifications is to be taken here. In other words the six shorts are only taken here, namely 2., K., * For these six short open #s, there are substituted six con tracted corresponding *'s See l. 1.9. 
HTH HEN 
10. 10. 98. 
Prioted by Frooman & Co., L., at the Tara Priolog Worke, Bonare