 69737. ;. 
॥ अथ द्वितीयाध्यायस्य प्रथमः पादः॥ 
BOOK SECOND. 
CHAPTER FIRST. 
#: affaft: ngu geifa n 944: , x-fafti .. Fa: 11 afarian, *: * MR PORT: Verder op fortes. Il 
1. A rule which relates to complete woirts (and not to the roots aud affixes out of which the words are coustructed) is to be understood to apply only to those words the seuses of which ure connecter. 
5. This is a paribhasha or interpreting aphorism. Whercever in this Grammar a that is found, that must be understood to apply to end words. A rule relating to y or complete words is called gears. The word fart is formed by adding a to the root ys; that which is ordained (विधीयते) is called विधि. What are those rules which are ordained with regard to complete words? They are as follows.-(1) Rules relating to ang or com. pounding of words; (2) Rules relating to 
f o r the application of declensional and conjugational affixes; (3) and the rule by which one word is considered as if it had become a constituent member of another word (RTSATT YTT). 
The word om means capable; that is to say, that which is capable of expressing the sense of a sentence on analysis, is called a ; or the word/ 
4 may mean that which depends upon words as connected in sense; that is to say, a rule relating to words whose senses are coonected together. 
Thus it will be taught in sätra 24 a word ending with the second case-affix is optionally compounded with the words for,geta &c. and forms tatpurusha compound;' as, et fra: = 48 : 'who has had recourse to pain. But when these words are not or connected in sense there can be no compounding; as, TUTT***. At sa 1607see O Devadatta, the pain, Vishnumitra has taken recourse to his teaclier's house. Here the words to and fare though read in juxtaposition are not compounded, as they are not समयं. 
SAMARTHA WORDS. 
[ Bx. II. CH. . $ 1. 
Similarly, it will be taught in sůtra 30'a word coding with the 3rd case-affix is optionally comppunded with what denotes that the quality of which is instrumentally caused by the thing signified by what ends with the 3rd case-affix and with the word op wealth; as, t al + or - Taaraut:' a piece cut by nippers.' Here also when the words are not con nected in sense there is no composition; as, atrafo Mar4T, To 341 'thou shalt do it with the nippers, Devadatta is cut by the stones.' 
Similarly, sátra 36 declares, ' a word ending with the 4th case-affix, is compounded optionally with what denotes that which is for the purpose of what ends with the 4th case-affix, and so too with the words , af &c. 
Thus are + T - TYT' wood for a stake.' But when these words are not connected in sense, there is no composition; as, 7 i ara, 6 T FT it go thou for the stake, the wood is in Devadatta's house.' 
Similarly, sätra 37 declares 'a word ending with the 5th case-affix may be compounded with the word भय; as, के यो भयं - एकभयं fear by reason of a wolf. But when these words are not connected in sense, there is no composition; as, गच्छ वं मां के यो, भयं देवदत्तस्य यज्ञदत्तात् 'come thouto me from the wolves, there is fear to Devadatta from Yajñadatta. 
Similarly, sutra II. 2. 8 declares "a word ending with the 6th case affix is optionally compounded with what ends with a case-affix;' as, (: TYT - TTY: 'the king's man. But when the words are not af, there is no composition: as ref Ta:, 50917 OTTFT the wife of the king, the man of Devadatta.' 
Similarly, sâtra 40 declares. "A word ending with the 7th case-affis is optionally compounded with the word TM skilled;' as, # TIT: 
PUTET: 'skilled in dice.' But when the words are not connected in sense, there is no composition; as, शक्तस्वमक्षेषु, शोण्डा पिवति पानागारे ' thou art skilled in dice, the gambler drinks in the tavern.' 
Why have we used the word 'a complete word' in the stra? So that this and oftarer may not apply to offt i.e. rules relating to letters. : Thus rules of afaz 'conjunction of letters' are off and not qefits; and therefore the condition of being connected in sense, does not apply here. Two words however disconnected in sense, must be glued together by the rules of sandhi, if those rules are applicable. Thus sätra VI. 1. 77 declares: 
instead of a letter denoted by the pratyahara au there is one denoted by the pratyanara yu , in each instance, where one denoted by the pratyahara 
immediately follows;' . as, + QUTT a AUTT. This substitution of g for will take place, whether the words are in construction or not, as 
BK. II. CH. I. § 2. ] 
. PARANGAVAT WORDS: 
215 
faag na pana 'let the curd remain, eat thou with the vegetable curry.' So also fac martat TITETIT 'let the girl bc, take the umbrella from Devadatta. Here the augment or (a subsequently changed into ) comes between art and 57, though the two words are not connected in sense (VI. 1.76). 
सुवामन्त्रिते पराङ्गवत्स्वरे ॥२॥ पदानि ॥ सुप, आमन्त्रिते, पर-अङ्गवत् , स्वरे ॥ 
वृतिः।। सुबन्तमामन्त्रिते परतः परस्याङ्गपद भवति , स्वरे, स्वरलतले कर्तव्ये ।। वार्तिकम् ।। सुबन्तस्य पराजबद्भाव समानाधिकरणस्योपसंण्यानमननन्सरलात् ।। पार्मिकम् ॥ भव्ययानां प्रविषेधो वाग्वः।। 
2. A word ending in sup or a case afilx, when followed by a word in the vocative case, is regarded as if it was the anga or component part of such subsequent vocative word, when a rule relating to accent is to be applied. 
In other words, the word ending in a case-affix enters, as if, into the body of the vocative (amantrita) word; as it will be taught in sâtra VI. 1. 198 which declares 'a word ending in a vocative case-affix, gets the udátta accent on the beginping i.e. first syllable. Now, this rule will apply even when a word ending with a case-affix precedes such word in the vocative case. Thus the word wat O two lords ! has udatta on the first syllable. Now, when this word is prcceded by another inflected noun as Tre of prosperity, the accent will fall on y, the two words being considered as a single word; as:- 
chest ogroit Tier II TFT FETARE 11 Rig. I. 3. 1. "O Asvins, riding on quick horses, lords of prosperity, and bestowers of plenty of food, eat the sacrificial offerings to your satisfaction. So also in the following: TETO thou vandering with a bowl. TOATE 
O thou cutting with an axe.' Astrot rat thou king of Madras.' autour TRATTO thou king of Kashmir.' 
Why do we say 'a word ending with a case-affix ? If the preceding word ends with any other affix than a case-affix, this rule will not apply. As a fisgary Othou who art pained, I am pained because of this thy pain. 
Here for being a fan (a verb)' is not considered as an aðga of the vocative word. 
Why do we say when followed by a word in the vocative case ?" This rule will not apply when the subsequent word is not a vocative. As 77 met: Garga is at homc,' 
216 
SAMASA DESIGNATION.. 
[ BK..]I..Chr.i. $ 3. 
.. 
.. 
.' 
Why do we say of the subsequent ? It will not be a part of the vocative word which precedes. As a quarto Devadatta wandering with a bowl' Here you can has got become part of Devadatta, but of the subsequent word gayi . 
Why do we say 'an anga or component part 34 Both must be con. sidered as one word for the application of the rule of accent, so that the first syllable of each word separately may not get the udatta. 
Why do we say as if or .' It is not altogether the body of the subsequent word ; rules depending upon its own separate independent existence also take effecte 
Thus rule VIII. 1. 55 declares a word ending in the vocative case is not anudatta when it follows the word are there intervening a word between itself and wre; as, Bat! Here kundena is considered a separate word for the purposes of Rule VIII. . 55 and is said to intervene between 
भाम् and the vocative word पटन् । 
Why do we say 'for the purposes of the application of rule of accent?' For the purposes of the application of any other rule, it will not be the anga of the subsequent word; as, a fuer'O thou sprinkling in the well.' *747. Here had and and been the angas of the subsequent words for all purposes, their T and 7 would have been changed intor and o respectively by Rules VII. 4. 2 &c. 
Vart:-When a word ending in a case-affix becomes, as if, the com ponent part of the subsequent word, it becomes so even when there are several words in apposition with it which intervene between it and the vocative word ; because that, of itself, does not constitute want of immediate ness. Thus तीमैया सध्या सीष्यन् 'O thou sewing with a sharp needle' तीक्ष्णेन परशुना वृधन . 
Vart:-Prohibition must be stated of indeclinable words. As Terutama 'Othou reading loudly.' pritara. 
1958177Tuare: 13 agra u 1726, 457 , GHIU: # 
Fa: 11 ATKINTETTE arfan saudagafaceri ennastar aleasai: 11 
3. From this point up to the aphorism kada. rakarmachåraye (II. 2. 38), all the terms that we shall say describe will get the desiguation of samasa or compound. 
BK. I. CH. 1. & 4. ] 
SAMASA DESIGNATION. 
217 
Thus it will be stated. *The indeclinable word car when not mean ing like unto.' Here the word en must be read into the sätra to complete the sense. · In fact this chapter and the second chapter treat of compouads and therefore the word compound must be read in all those aphorisms. 
The word pråk is employed for the same purpose as it was used in 1. 4. 56 that is to give the designation of care to various technical terms like sueftir &c. which otherwise would not have got the name of T. 
सह सुपा ॥४॥ पदानि ॥ सह, सुपा (सुप् समासः) ॥ 
निः ।। सुविति सहेति मुपैति च यमप्यधिकृत वेदितव्यम् वरित अर्भ मनुक्रमियान स्तन मुपस्थितं द्रष्टव्यम् ॥ 
4. The words 'saha supå' mea ning 'with a word ending in a case-affix,' are to be understood in each of the succeeding aphorisms.. 
In this aphorism the word ay is understood from sätra.., so that it consists of three words vis., 94, 68, 69. All these three words jointly and severally, one at a time or two at a time, should be understood as governing the succceding aphorisms, as the contingency of cach sätra may require. This aphorism will constantly be applied in translatiаg the satras that follow. 
Why have we used the word af? Well, without it the sůtra would have stood thus: Ta'a noun may be compounded with another noun.' But this overlooks the case of a compounding with a verb. The word is therefore used so that we may be able to break this composite sätra into two separate and simple s@tras, namely: 
(1). 8, 9, rud a 'a case-ipflected word may be com. pounded with a word with which it is connected in sensc. Here the word or with the help of the three words are taken from sútra 2, #nya from sätra 3, and un from sútra i, forms one complete aphorism, and applies to com. pounds like 
w e wair. The accent will depend upon these being considered as samasa. 
(2). a OC ofegà a sup-inflected word is compounded with another sup-inflected word. The compound which does not fall within any of the various sorts of compounds to be treated of hereafter, will fall under this general head of compounds; as, पुनरुत्स्थ त पासो रे पनर्मिती स्प.. This also is for the sake of accents. 
218. 
AVYAYIBHAVA DESIGNATION. 
TA 
[ Bk. II. CH. I. $5,6 
अव्ययी भाव ॥५॥ पदानि । अव्ययीभावः , . पतिः ॥ यानित सर्वमनुक्रमियामो ऽव्ययीभावसंज्ञा स्ते वेदिवम्याःn. 
6. From this forvard whatever we shall describe will get the name of Avyayibhåva samasa or adverbial compound. 
This is also an adhikara aphorism like the last. As far as sátra 21, the compounds treated of, will get the designation of Avyayibhava. The word your tatry like the word 69thta is a self-descriptive term, and not an arbitrary term like ft , f&c. When that which was not an indeclinable becomes an indeclinable, it is called stain or 'becoming an indeclinable.'. In the Avyayibhava compound the sease of the first of its elements is the main one or the independent one on which the other depends. 
अव्ययं विभक्तिसमीपसमृद्धिव्यद्धयर्याभावात्ययासम्प्रतिशब्दप्रादुर्भाव पश्चाद्यथानुपूर्ययोगपद्यमादृश्यसंपत्तिसाकल्यान्तवचनेषु ॥ ६॥ पदानि । अव्ययम्, विभक्ति-समीप-समृद्धि-व्यद्धि-अर्थाभाव-अत्यय-असंप्रति-शब्दप्रादुर्भाव. पश्चाद्-यथा-आनुपूर्व-योगपद्य-सादृश्य सम्पत्ति-साकल्य-अन्त-वचनेषु, (सुप सुपा अव्ययीभावः समासः) (समर्थः). 
पतिः ॥ विभनयादिषयषु यदव्ययं वर्तते तत् समयेन सुमन्तेन सह समस्यते भव्ययीभाव व समासी भवति । 
6. An indeclinable (avaya) employed with the sense of an inflective-affix (vibhakti) or of near to, or prosperity, or adversity, or absence of the thing, or departure, or not now, or the production of some sound, or after, or according to, or order of arrangement, or simultaneousness, or likeness, or possession, or to. tality, or termination, is invariably compounded with a word ending in a case-affix which is connected with it in sense, and the compound so formed is called Avya yibhava . 
The words and so are understood in this sútra. The word 47 should be read as connected with every one of the above 
phrases. 
BK. IL. CH. 1. $9] 
AYYAYIBHAVA DESIGNATION. 
219 
- 1. f y99;As of 
' a story relatiog to womea.' orang relating to a girl.' 
2. 1799-As 34907'dear to the jar.' 79 un near to the gem.' 3. 
;-As as well or prosperous with the Madras'; FTV well with the Magadh.' 
4. व्यद्धिवचन-As दुर्गवारिक "ill with the Gavadikas;' दुर्यवन 'ill with the Yavapas.' 
5. 7797;-As fifa 'free from fies; falgar free from mosquitoes. 
6. #44747;As farena on the departure of the cold weather'; Fight. . 
7. BET77;-As ardeat 'past (aot now) the time of wearing 
quilts. 
. 8. par HITTTT;--As far oft'the exclamation Hari' (thus opp yfa fc rod 'in the house of the Vaisboava there is the cry of Hari Hari'). . 
9. TETT;-As agri ay 'the infantry after the chariots.' 
10. Uni 47;-The meaning of the word Tur is four-fold, viz. corres pondence, severality or succession, the not passing beyond something, and likeness; thus (1) Ty'in a corresponding manner.' (2) que 'according to each or several object or signification. (3) Tuff ' according to one's ability 
1. भानुपूर्यवचन;-As अनुज्येष्ठं प्रविशन्तु भवन्त: let your honors enter in the order of seoiority.' 
12. Tan77;-As *Esimultaneously with the wheel.' . 13. 1997;As eafu' like a friend.' 
14. 777;-As 'as warriors ought.' 
15. 4797;As atu4 'even to the grass' it, the whole, not leaving even a scrap. 
16. TT7;-As eft as far as the chapter of fire (ie. the whole Veda). 
____ यथा सादृश्ये ॥ ७ ॥ पदानि ॥ यथा , भसादृश्ये , (समय: हुए 997 FOTOHTO80) 'N 
P: 11 quedaria que TO TEATA ETT af ureth, soatare* rett rafini 
7. The iudeclinable word yathå when it does not signify 'likeness' is invariably compouuded with a 
220* 
AVYAYIBHAVA DESIGNATION 
[Bk. II. CH. I. $ 8,9. 
word ending in a case-affix which is in construction with it and the compound is called an Avyayibháva Samasa 
Thus ar ATHUMT iarite every old Brahmana. So also चयाध्यापका. 
. Why do we say when not signifying likeness?' . For there is no composition when likeness is indicated. As UTHATUT UF: As is Deva. datta so is Yajñadatta, 
This samasa could have been included in the last sâtra clause to, but making a separate sätra shows that the word or there must be limited by the present sûtra, to first three meanings of the word u4t given there and not to its fourth meaning. vis. there is no compounding when it means likeness. 
यादवधारणे ॥८॥पदानि ॥ यावद, अवधारणे, (समुपा qogome ) = 
gillardagsTaaraa peintrat TT E areat Hoitara* atat wait 
8. The indeclinable word yårat when it sig. zifles limitation, is invariably compounded with a word ending in a case-afix which is in construction with it, and the compound so formed is called Avyayibhåva. 
The word 7TTU means accurate ascertainment, restriction or limitation. As, 214 HTC U119TUFTjavite so many Brahmanas only and not more as there are pots': i.e., if there are five pots then invite fivc Brah mans;if six pots, theo iovite six Brahmans. 
Why do we say when meaning limitation'? Observe an ATT T'I ate so long as it was given to me,' i.e. I donot know for certainty how much I have eaten. 
gafar raid I gli agra 11 54, Afaal, #1*1-*, ( 278 TOHTO BATOTT)* . 
fa 11 marta Prat graafd here are tala ut 
9. A word ending in a case-affix is com pounded with the indeclinable word prati, when mean ing a little and the compound is called Avyayibhåva. 
BK. II. CH. I. $ 10, 11.] 
OPTIONAL COMPOUNDS. 
. 
221 
The word att means a drop,' 'a little," "a wee bit;' as, teft "a little of vegetable,' quofa'a little of soup." 
: Why do we say when meaning a little'? Observe our ofa Ferrara f x 'it lightens in the direction of the tree.' Here it is not compounde 
Though the word sup was, by anuvritti from sätra 2, understood in this sätra, its repetition in the text is for the purpose of indicating that the anuvritti of the word wera which began with sůtra 6 docs not extend further into the subsequent s@tras. . The word graar being exhibited in the 3rd case-affix is not an upasar. jana (l. 2. 43) and therefore, it comes as the last member of the com pound (II. 2. 30). 
que tien: afro 1 90 u aqifa u 07-99197-:, feur, (HOHOTT ) N 
ta: gretara sat104 aftur af urende dies are wafa 11 
10. The words aksha, 'a dic for playing with,' saldkå "an ivory piece used in gambling,' and sai kbliya numerals' arc compounded with the word pari, and the compound formed is called Avyayibhava. 
This part is restricted to terms applicable to gambling. Thus there is a game called panchika which is played with fire dice or five ivory pieces When all these five pieces fall with faces turned upward, or all with faces turned down, then the thrower wins the game. But when the fall is other. wise, he loses. Thus tft' an unlucky throw of dice. Taraft, an un. lucky throw of ivory pieces '; so also gami'an unlucky throw by one over' ferit, forft and lastly ft.' This is the maximum. But when Eve are of one form, then of course, he wins 
faat # 99 al agita n fara gia: Il alan agaanacantenfieret afat 
11. The word vibhâshå or option governs all suic ceeding sâtras. 
This is an adhikara satra. All the rules of compounding given here. after, are optional. The same sense can he expressed by the uncompounded words as by them when compounded. But not so are the compounds which have been treated of, before. Compounds like , un, mift &c. mentioned above arc invariable compounds (fara ware), the sense conveyed by the coinpound term, not being capable of analysis, by taking the senses of 
222 
· OPTIONAL AVYAYIBHAVA COMPOUNDS. [ BK. II. CH. I. $ 12-16 
the separate members of the compounds, or at least not capable of expressing any sease without inserting extraneous words on analysis. 
___अपरिवहिरचयः पञ्चम्या ॥ १२ ॥ पदानि ॥ अप-परि-बहिः अञ्चवः, पन्चम्या ( स०अ० सह० वि०). 
निः॥भा परि वहिस् भानु हत्येते सुबन्ताः पात्रम्यन्तेन सह विभाषा समस्यन्ते अध्ययी. भाव समानो भाति । 
12. The words apa, pari, bahih and indeclin. ables ending in añchu may optionally be compounded with a word ending iu the fifth case-aftis, aud the con. pound so formed will be Avyayibhåva. 
As त्रिगर्मम् ष्टो देशः or भाविगने यो पुष्टो देवः 'it rained away from Trigarta. So also, परित्रगतम् or परिधिगते यः 'round about Trigarta,'हामम् or बहिर्मामात् 'outside the village' प्राग पामम् or प्राग मामात् 'east of the village.' 
Words formed from the verb sit 'to go,' are in 'north' als -east, &c... : From this sûtra we learn by inference (jñàpak) that the word met also governs the ablative case (see II. 3. 29). 
___ आज मर्यादाभिविष्योः ॥ १३ ॥ पदानि ॥ आङ्, मर्यादा-अभि. विध्योः , (स०अ०वि०पञ्चम्या सह). 
वृत्तिः ।। भाकित्येतन्मादायामानविधी व वर्तमान पसभ्यन्नेन सह विभाषा समस्थत, अव्ययीभाव समासो भवति॥ 
13. The word åú when signifying limit ex. clusive or límit inclusive, may optionally be compounded with a word ending in the fifth case-affis and the com. pound so formed is called Avyayibhava. 
As, आपानिपुर्व or अपाटलिपुत्रात् वृष्टो देवः 'it rained up to Pataliputra.' भाकर or भाकुमार यो यमः पाणिनेः 'the fame of Panini extends even to the boys.' 
__ लक्षणेनाभिप्रती आभिमुख्ये ॥ १४॥ पदानि ॥ लक्षणेन , अभि. प्रती, आभिमुख्य , (स०अ०वि००). 
निः॥ लक्षणे चिन्हें सदाचिना सुबन्तैन सहाभिपती शब्दावानिमुख्य बर्नमानी विभाषा समस्येते अव्ययीभाव समासो भवति । 
14. The words abhi and prati when implying direction (towards), are optionally compounded with a word ending in a case-aflix denoting the limit, or the Pk." II. CH. 1. $ 15, 16. ] OPTIONAL AVYAYIBHAVA COMPOUNDS. 
228 
goal which regulates or marks the direction; and the resulting compound is Avyayibhava. . 
The word lakshana means a sign goal. See also 1. 4. 84 and go for a further explanation of this word. As भन्यग्नि or अग्निमनिलभाः पतन्ति "the moths fall in the direction of fire.' So also trh or afrai orat, the sense being, that making the fire their aims ( FT ) they fall towards it. . 
Why do we say 'when meaning lakshana'? Observe U T'he turned back and went towards Srughna i.e., having torned back he weot only towards the direction of Srughna but not to that place itself.. 
Why do we say the words abhi and prati? Observe dafifTa To: The went in the direction of the fire. . 
Why do we say when meaning direction towards'? Observe spurt : or TTFITFT: 'the recently marked cows.' 
अनुर्यत्समया ॥ ५॥ पदानि ॥ अनुः , यत्-समया, (म०वि०म०. e Facia) 
· FT:ll Tatrart da AFUMAT en forrer Heard met HATT *Tia II .. 15. The worl anu 'uear to' is optionally compounded with that ord, ucarness to which is indi. cated by the particle, and the resulting compound is Avyayîbhåva. 
As, mainta: 'the thunder bolt fell near the forest.' Why do we say ? Observe that anar 'near the forest.' 
Why do te say when compounded with the word, nearness to which is indicated? Observe a fama foar it lightens towards the tree.' 
. Though this compounding was valid even by sátra 6, because near ness is mentioned there also; it is repeated here in order to show that an Avyayibháva compound mentioned here is an optional compound after all, and not an invariable compound like others. i. OFT 41919: u 9€ l agita u otu, p, 1979: , (80 etofacto Hota org:) n : P: 11 SETTERIN *Fonta ag firaret apetint greaturav SITE *Thana. 
224 
ÍRREGULAR FORMATIONS. 
(Bk. II. CH. I $ 16-18. 
16. The word anu 'alongside of' is option ally compounded with the word indicative of that whose length the particle expresses, and the compound 
so formed is called Avyayibhåva. 
As, भनुगंग. वाराणसी 'the city of Benares extends alongside the river Ganges' भनुयमन मयुरा 'Mathura, alongside of the Yamuna, the length of Mathura being measured by that of the Yamuna.'. 
Why do we say 'length?? Observe the fedrad farga. 
तिष्ठद्गु प्रभृतीनि च ॥ १७ ॥ पदानि ॥ तिष्ठद्गु प्रभृतीनि ; च (अव्ययीभावस०)। 
वृत्तिः ।। तिष्टापादयः समुदाया एव निपास्यन्ते, विष्ट गुमभूतीनि शब्दरूपाणि अन्ययी भावसतानि भवन्ति ॥ 
17. And the words tishthadgu, 'at the time when the cows stand to be milked,'&c. are Avyayibháva compounds. , . 6. The words सिष्टगु &c. are all irregularly formed Avyayibhara com pounds. Most of these words are epithets of various times. The force of 
in the sätra is restrictive, that is to say these words always form the Avya. yfbhava compound and nothing else. They are as follow : hi विष्टदगु, बहदगु, भायनीगवम् , खनेयवम्, स्लेबुसम् , लूनयवम् , सूयमान. यवम् , पनयवम् , पयमानयवम् , संहतयवम् , संयमाण्यवम् , संहतबुलम्, मंझियमाण बुसम्, समभूम, समरदाति, सुषमम्, विषमम् , दुषमम् , निश्पमम् , अपरसमम् , भाय. सीसमम, प्रहम् , प्ररथम् , प्रवगम् , प्रदक्षिणम्, भारदक्षिणम्, संप्रति , असंपति, पापसमम् , पुण्यसमम् , र कर्मव्यतिहारे V. 4. 127.e.g. कचाकधि। . 
____ पारे मध्ये षष्ठया वा ॥ १८॥ पदानि ॥ पारे, मध्ये , षष्ठया, वा (स०अ०वि०७०) . वृत्तिः ।। पारमध्यशब्दो पश्यन्तेन सह विभाषा समस्यते भव्ययीभाव समासो भवति । 
____18. The words para across,' and madhya middle' may optionally be compounded with a word ending in the sixth case-aflix, when they take the forms pare and mallhye, and the compound so formed is 
Avyayibhava. .. Ordinarily these words would have formed Possessive Tatpurusha compounds. The present sûira ordains Aryayibhåra instcad. The force of 
BK. II. CH. I. 1 19, 20.] 
IRREGULAR FORMATIONS. 
223 
in the text is that the Genitive Tatpurusha compounding also takes place in the alternative. As, पारगंगम् or गंगापारम् 'across the Ganges.' मभ्यगंगम् or 
गंगमध्यम् 'middle of the Ganges.' 
Of course according to the option allowed by sâtra II. 1. 11., this com. pounding need not take place at all, the same sense being expressed bya phrase; as पार गंगायाः or मध्य गंगावाः . 
... संख्या वंश्येन ॥ ११ ॥ पदानि । संख्या, यंश्येन, (स०वि०अ०स०). 
वृत्तिः।। पंचे भवः वश्या, तद्वाचिना सुबन्तेन सह संख्या समस्यते भव्ययीभाषण समासी भवति ॥ 
19. A numeral may be compounded with a word denoting 'one belonging to a family' and the resulting compound is Avyayibhiva. 
The word *t means uninterrupted descent of persons from a com mon source whether through birth or knowledge. A succession of teachers and pupils, of ancestors and descendants &c., would constitute a to'family: One born in or belonging to such a jy is called a girl or descendant. 
As, दिमुनि व्याकरणस्य 'of the Vyakarana which has two sages as its principal expounders vis., Pagini and Patanjali. So, विमुनि व्याकरणस्य 'having three representatives vis. Pånini, Patanjali and Sakatayana or Katyayana.' 
When we desire to express their equality as regards knowledge, then both the words are put in the same case: as द्विमुनि or निमुनि व्याकरणंम् . 
So also when the relationship is by birth: as, एकविंशति भारतानर Twenty-one Bharadwajas. These a subsequent compounds are like Dvigu. 
.. नदीभिश्च ॥ २० ॥ पदानि ॥ नदीभिः, च, (स०अ०वि०संख्या), वृत्तिः ।। नदीवचनैः शनैः सह संख्या समस्यने, अव्ययीभाव समासो भवति । 
20. A numeral (sankhyâ) may be compound. ed with names of livers’and the resulting compound is Avyayibhava denoting an aggregate. 
According to Patanjali this refers to their Aggregate (समाहार); as सप्तगङ्गम् ' at the : meeting of the seven Ganges,' दियमुनं 'at the meeting of the two Yamunas, पंचन' where the five rivers meet'. सतगोदावरम् 'where seven Godavaris' meet. See. II. 4.1, 17. . 
अन्यपदार्थ च संतायाम् ॥ २॥ पदानि । अन्यपदार्थ, च, संज्ञा याम् , (सअविनदीभिः) ... वृत्तिः ॥ नदीभिः सह सुबन्तमन्यपदायें वर्तमान संताय विषये समस्यते भव्ययीभारण घमासो भवति ॥ 
226 
:: 
TAT-PURUSHA.. 
[ Bk. II. CH. 1. 8:21:23 
21. A vord ending in a case-affix is com. pounded with words denoting the names of rivers, when the compouud word denotes a thing other than that expressed by the terms of the compound, and is an appellative; the compound so formed being an Avya yibhåva. : "The anuvritti of the word sankhyå does not extend to this sätra. Though this rule is given in the subdivision relating to optional compounds, it is, however, a Vitya-samasa rule: for no Name (at) can ever be expressed by a sentence, and that being so, these compounds can never be analysed. As, your 'the country called Unmatta Ganges.' So also f int, 
un; Titjor 11. 4. 18. ... Why do we say 'when it denotes a thing other than that expressed by the component parts of the compound'? Observe fun the river Krishnavepa.' 
Why do we say when it expresses an Appellative'? Observe suunnitt QU: 'the country where the Ganges moves rapidly.' 
तत्पुरुषः ॥ २२ ॥ पदानि ॥ तत्पुरुषः ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ तत्पुरुष इति संज्ञाधिक्रियते प्राग्बहुबोहे, योनित अर्द्धवमनुक्रमिष्यामस्तररुपसंज्ञा argoa: 11 
. 22. From this aphorism as far as aphorism II. 2. 23, the word Tat-purusha is the governing word, aid is understood in all the following sůtras. 
.. From this sutra as far as the sätra II. 2. 23 relating to Bahuvrihi compounds, the word Tat-purusha should be read into each sätra. This big term is of older coinage than that of Panini, being, in fact, made by older grammarians. In the Tat-purusha compound, the sense of the last of its elements is the main one, and gorerns the preceding one. The Karma dhåraya (Appositional Determinative Compound) and Dwigu (Numeral Deter. minative Compound) are also subdivisions of this class of compounds. The rest of this chapter and 22 sůtras of the second, deal with this. 
. fayan 23 ni açıla u reg: , , (aeg.:) 1 
Fa:!! fage HATTROTECHAT II. .... 
23. And the kind of compound called Dwyigu Aumeral Determinative Compound) is also called Tat. purusha. 
IS 
BK. II. CH. I. $ 23-25.) 
TAT-PURUSHA. 
227 
· The object of making Dwigu a subdivision of Tat-purusba Compound is that the antara affixes aod rules given in V. 4. 68-160 should apply to Dwigu also. Otherwise we could well have dispensed with this sutra; as sútra 52 of this chapter already defines Dwigu. Thus TT* V. 4. 9. fem. DTCT (IV. I. 15, 21), 'an aggregate of 5 pricces' :'V. f. 89, SATTEaa 
aggregate of 5 cows.' ITE' an aggregate of ten cows.' V. 4. 92. 
द्वितीया त्रितातीतपतितगतात्पस्तप्राप्तापन्नः ॥ २४ ॥ पदानि । fgatar fara-nata-ufaa-19-92449-919-roza: , (gogntogefour azg57) n 
वृत्तिः ॥ द्वितीयान्त सुबन्त भितादिभिः सह समस्यते, तसुरुष समायो भवति । - वार्तिकम् ।। श्रितादिपुगमिगाम्यादीनामासंख्यानम् ॥ 
24. A word ending with the second case-afix is compounded with the words frita 'who has had recourse to,' atîta 'gone by' putita who has fallen upon,' gata 
who has gone to atyasta' who has passed,' pripta who has obtaiue 1,' and åpanva'who has reached,' and the resulting compound is called Tat-purusha 
As t fara: = fa: 'who has had recourse to trouble.' Tratante So also :- arráta: 'who has passed over the drcary forest.' Trafat: * fallen into hell.' Arga: 'gone to village.' ATTE: 'passed the waves." 09:who has reached pleasure.' GIFT: 'who has obtained happiness.' 
Vart:-The words it, mit &c. should also be included. As art, Hrit; MTIH:. . 
*that u shu aqrar i Fyn, hat, (pofasaogo) वृत्तिः ।। स्वयमित्येतस्सुबन्तं कान्तेन सह समस्यते सानुरुप समासो भवति ॥ 
25. The indeclinable word swayam 'oneself, is compounded with a word ending in the affix kta, and the resulting compound is called Tat-purusha. 
· The anuyritti of the word fanitar from the last aphorism into this, cannot take place; though, however, it is understood in the next sátra. The word being an Indeclinable, cannot take any case-affix. As From that get "feet washed by himsell' fra forsitaran. 
In this compounding, the two words do not appear to have undergone any change after their composition. They are the same as they were (beore the composition. But by calling their juxtaposition, 'a compound, 
1 
Ca 
228 
TAT-PURUSHA." 
[ BK. II. CH .. $ 36, 37. 
two indirect advantages are gained. Namcly these two words arc regarded as one word, and their accent is also similarly regulated. See Rule VI. I. 223. 
The words ending in kta which is a Nishtha. affix, are past parti. ciples. 
u w ogifa l agt, 48, (gofacatoriaeo) (fgaitaat) ' निः ॥ खवाशब्दो द्वितीयान्तः कान्तेन सह क्षेपे गम्यमाने समस्यते , मयुरुपच समासो 
font 
26. The word khatwå in the accusative case is compounded with a word ending in the affix kta, when censure is implied, and the compound so formed is Tat purusha : The word is means 'censure,'blame' and this sense can be con. noted only by the compound word as a whole and not by any of its consti tuent elements. This compound is also, therefore, a Nitya Compound, though it occurs in the subdivision relating to Optional Compounds:--because it is impossible to analyse such a compound and express, by means of seatonce, the sense convcyed by the function of the compound word. 
Aserrat: or area: (literally lying on a bed); silly, stupid, goiog wrong or astray. 
There is no compounding when censure is not meant. As ATET: "lying on a bed.' 
Why this word should have this opprobrious meaning, will be under: stood from the consideration of the following facts :-a person under the Aryan social polity, could only then enter the married state or the life of a house-holder, as it was called, when he had completed his Brahmacharya i.e. the prescribed period of bachelor studentship. All Brahmacharis were bound to sleep on ground and not on ter or cots, so long as they were Brahmacharis. A person who without completing his studies, and without obtaining the permission of his teacher, entered into matrimony, was origi. nally called, in reproach, 7167: 'who had ascended the couch in an improper way. Then the term was extended to all persons guilty of vile action. 
To lleno u otra a Fifa, (gofodorp wa) (feritaat) a 
fi d'arteetagendyratarea TATU.EUTE feritaret ifta otev: सत् सुबन्त कान्तेन सह समस्यते तत्पुरुष समासो भवति॥ 
BX. II. CH. I. $ 27-29.-) 
ACCUSATIVE TAT-PURUSHA.' 
229 
27. · The indeclinable word såmi meaning 'half' is compounded with a word ending in the affix kta, and the resulting compound is Tat-purusha.' . 
The word ara being an avyaya, and not denoting any substance, cannot take the affixes of the second or any case. Therefore the anuvritti of the word failar would be inapposite in this aphorism. . 
As AITHE T'half-done.' wr.fta half-drunk' an A y 'hall-eaten.': 
The object attained by this samása is the same as in 11. 1. 25, namely making them one word and taking one accent. 
FIGT: 26 11 Fifa 11 5181:, (acfaonomergatoartha) 
पत्तिः ॥ कानवाधिनः घमा दितीयानाः कान्तेन सह समस्यन्ते विमापा तशुरुप समासो orali 
28. The words deuoting time, being in the accusative case, are optionally compounded with a word ending in the affix kta, and the resulting compound is 
Tat-purusha. . . 
"This rule applies when duration of time is not connoted by the compound, which is provided for, in the next aphorism. The word for does not mean here, as it would otherwise mean by Sätra I. 1. 68, the word: form काज but special words denoting काल. 
As far 'the new moon,' (literally, the moon that has begun to measure the month). Similarly THAT T: , t arat: applied to six Muhurtas (of 48 minutes each) which are called T and WT which some. times occur in day time (in the summer month) and sometimes in the night (in the winter). 
Bregmaata rupe u azila u E -paita, 7, (Befato JOHOHET: gar ino) # .:: FT: 11 BISTRIT: Taarantarar standard and ETT UTE EFTFI forniret HETTY HAE tafà il 
29. Woids denoting time being in the accu: satire case, are optionally compounded with a word cuding in a case-afix, when used in the sense of com: plete connection throughout with the time (i.e., dura tion of time) and the resulting compound is called Tat purusha, 
280 
INSTRUMENTAL TAT-PURUSHA. 
[BK: II. CH. I. $ 29-34. 
The word file is understood in this aphorism; but not so the phrase 'ending with the affix this 
The word gegaan means "uninterrupted connection. For accent of these words see VI. 2. 2. 
As मुह सुखम् ' a momentary pleasure:' सर्वरानकल्याणी, सर्वराशीमना. 
तृतीया तत्कृतार्थेन गुणवचनेन ॥ ३० ॥ पदानि ॥ तृतीया , तत्: $a-3767, 70-9a2a , (qoracaogg7 78) a 
• वृत्तिः ॥ हतीयानं सुदन्तं गुणवत्रमैन अर्थशब्देन च सह समस्यन्ते तत्पुरुष Era talat ito 
30. A word ending with the 3rd case-affix is optionally compounded with what denotes quality, the quality being that which is instrumentally caused by the thing signified by what cnds with the third case atfix and with the word artha 'wealth,' and the com pound so forined is called Tat-purusha. 
The words ya, yr are understood here: and the whole of this sätra is an epithet of those words. A noun in the instrumental case is compound ed with a word expressing quality, and with the word op: provided that the word expressing quality is itself the result produced by the sense of the word in the instrumental case. As alaus: itaqosi'cut by nipper' fanfaa: 'made blind of one eye by a hog' yurt: 'wealth acquired by grain. For accent of these words see VI. 3. 2. 
Why do we say when caused by the word in the instrumental case'? Observe 79: 'blind of one eye.' Here stor in the 3rd case is not the instrumental cause that produccd blindness and hence no compounding. 
Why do we say a word expressing quality ?' Observe :- +91917 'sowing with the cows.' Here though 'sowing' is instrumentally caused by the Cows, yet it does not qualify cows but the sower, and hence no compounding. 
Guna-vachanas are those words which, not being words formed by primary or secondary affixes, or other words entitled to the name of sankhya, or sarvanama, or jari, or compound words, are words denoting qualities and capable of being used as adjectives qualifying substantives. 
पूर्वसदृशसमोनार्थकलहनिपुणनिश्लगैः ॥ ३१ ॥ पदानि । ga-agu-94-8A18-fice-faya-f#-2328: , (Fofãopozataio) # 
निः ॥ पूर्व सदृश राम अनार्य कलह निपुण मिश्र श्लमण एतैः सह तृतीयान्तं समस्य ATET: AM TRT II 
पार्निकम् ॥ पूर्वादिष्यपरस्गोपसंख्यानम् ॥ 
BK. I. CH. I. $ 31, 32. ) 
INSTRUMENTAL TAT-PC'RUSHA. 
231 
. 
ushlar 
. 
31. A word ending in the third case-affix is compounded with the words parva 'prior,' sadrisa 'like,' sama 'similar,'ûnartha 'words having the sense of less, kalaha 'quarrel,' nipuna "proficient,' misra 'mixed,' and slakshņa 'polished sleek' and the resulting compound is called Tat-purusha. 
From this sätra, we learn incidentally that the words qui &c., govern the instrumcotal case. 
__As, मासेन पर्वः = मासपूर्व 'prior by a month,' संवत्सरपूर्वः 'prior by a year, AITATTT: 'ike the mother,' ATTET: like the father,' Arta: similar to the mother,' forcay: 'similar to the father,' 4777, are less by a masha, #f olg: 'a fight with the swords,' AT: 'bandying words. Efren: 
proficient in speech, Hime fast: * proficient in the observances of sacred duties,' faali-Ian: 'mixed with scsamum or juggery' TATU: 
polished in behaviour.' 
Vart :-The word at should be enumerated in the list, as parte: "later than a month.' 
___फर्तृकरणे कता बालम् ॥ ३२ ॥ पदानि ॥ कर्मू-करणे ; कृता apsa, (sofasa gatoso) 
वृत्तिः ॥ कसरि करणे च या वतीया सहन्त कृदन्तेन सह समस्यसे बहुल, तत्पुरुष । HARUT ya 
32. A word ending with the third case-affix, when it denotes the agent or the instrument (II. 3. 18) is compounded diversely with what ends with a krit affix; and the compound so formed is called Tat purusha. 
The word i shows that there is a general relaxation of all the rules and conditions. As spreapa: - Rra: 'killed by the snake' Teffio: 
divided by the nails.' q *:'cut by the axc.' 
Why do we say when denoting the agent or the instrument'? Observe firmata:'dwelt with alms. Here the force of the 3rd case is that mcntioned in sätra Il. 3. 21 and not that of II. 3. 18.' . 
Why do we say 'diversely'? Observeru TTR cutting with the sickle.' qui 'cutting with the axe. llere there is no compounding. But there is compounding where otherwise there ought not to be, because of the word 45:-as TETT : and 4 *: . 
232 
· INSTRUMENTAL TAT-PURUSHA. [Bk. II. Cl. 1. $ 33, 34 
UN 
fu qa 133 agift ni mta: , ef6-47-aca, (Foreogoniatoto) a 
• वृभिः ।। कई करण्यार्या तृतीया तदन्त सुबन्तं कृत्यैः सह खभस्यते अधिकार्यवचने T41417 FAT, MT9 Erla 11 
TRT1 Prayed a quantitat misit . 
33. A word ending with the third case-affix when it denotes the agent or th: instrument, is com: pounded optionally with a word ending in a kritya affix, when an exaggerated statement (whether of praise or of censure) is implied, and the compound is Tat-purusha. 
As arendami'a shallow river (so shallow that a crow may dip his beak into it and touch the bottom and drink). : : 'a shallow well' (so that a dog can lick water from the brink of it). TF 'thia grass' (so fragile that it can be cut by vapour) 
ET.. . 
This sátra is in a way a prolongation of the last . : Vart:-The phrase 'words ending in a kritya affix' must not be taken universally, only the ksitya affixes a and to are meant in the above sQtras. The following are the kritya asfixes:- cu, stata , , FTG, ru, (see sätra III. 1.95-132). Thereforc there is no compounding when the word ends in Hey as in aran: 979541 . . . . . 
a 0497177 v 38 u ogifa ni tata, 499, (of one qogo80) • : : 11 6297 antara ## Ug ned for that, han aaral naar : . 34. A word ending with the third case-affix and denoting a condiment, is optionally compounded with a word ending in a case-affix, signifying food, and the resulting compound is called Tat-purusha. 
That which is to be prepared is called , and that which prepares is om; as azi: FIT 3410 17: 'rice prepared or made relishable with curd.' So also wien:. The words 'food' and 'condiment' as reprca sented in the above compounds, are connected in sense by a verb understood .Bk. IL CH. I. $ 35, 36, ) 
DATIVE TAT-PURUSHA.. 
235 
: edo faxilaruvan 34 di agira u nador, faxit- (Hofacaeqogope) .. : 11 forsitanium agatart our de 4d, anger KATT *ta il 
35. A word, ending with the 3rd case-afix and denoting a relish giving or refining irrgredient, is compounded with a word meaning, victuals, and the compound is Tat-purusha. - Anything eatable, whether hard or soft, is called 777; its refinement is called for TU. As TETAT: 'barley prepared with jugge Terar 
Hattened parched rice prepared with juggery.' 
. The connection here also between the two words is established by a verb uu derstood. 
. auf neuttaféreagarka; 3 u Gra ni pareit, apa-aars-fa-gg-faa: (asfaogogoro) • . वृतिः ॥ तदर्थ अर्थ पनि हित सुख रक्षित इत्येते: कह चतुर्यन्त समस्यते , मसुरुष । OTT fa 11 
FT 11 söz facaanrant* a fost as i 
36. A word ending with the 4th case-affix is compounded with what denotes that which is for the purpose of what ends with the 4th case-affix and so too with the vorils artha'on account ot,' bali 'a sacrifice," hita 'salutary,' sukha pleasure' and rakshita' kept;' and the compound is called Tat-purusha. . . . ; 
The words , on are understood in this sätra : and the whole sätra qualifies these words. 
By the expression and for the purpose thereof,' the special relation of a material and its modification alone is by Patanjali here held to be intended. As ETE: - To: 'wood for stake' (that is wood which by modi fication will be changed into a stake). Konfecus gold for ear-ring.' But aot so here. tatry Farel'pot for cooking.' 7TV9 'the wood mortar for threshing. From this sûtra we may also infer ihat the Dative case conveys also the sense of 'for the purpose thereof.' The word arut is taken as one word by some, meaning' a thing serviccable thereto.' See VI. 2. 44. For accent scc VI. 2. 45. ...... . ... .. .. . 
ABLATIVE TAT.PURUSHA 
[BR. II. CH. I. 136-38. 
Vart:-With the word gu the compound so formed is a Nitya com. pound (an invariable compound) and agrees in gender with the word which it qualifies; as, arm TT: 'milk for the sake of Brahmans;' and Arvuri ng "gruel for the Brahmanas.' So also mirtit:' a sacrifice for Kuvera' HETTA.25. 'a sacrifice for the great Raja.' गो.हतं ' what is good for cows.' भवहित 'what is good for horses' गोतुखं 'what is pleasant for cows' गोरक्षित what is kept for çows,' ías grass)... : ... पञ्चमी भयेन ॥ ३७ ॥ पदानि ॥ पञ्चमी, भयेन , (म००वि०म० सुपा सह) 
__ निः ॥ पसम्यन्तं सुमन्त भयरान सुबन्तेन सह समस्यते विभापा वापुरुपय समासो मावि 
... वार्तिकम् ।। भय भीत भाव भीम रिवि वनग्यम् ।। 
37. A word ending with the 5th case-afix is optionally compounded with the word bhaya 'fear,' and the compound is Tat-purusha. 
The phrase g aar is understood here, and the sötra qualifies it. .. .: . As के योभयं - वृकभयं 'fear from wolves ' चौरमयं fear from thieves' Fyrr 'fear from robbers.' 
___Vart:-So also with the words भीत, भी. and भीः as कभीतः , पकनीतिः, एकंभी:: : This sätra is an expansion of sûtra 32 and an exposition of the word पहल there. So that we may have the following compounds also: पामनिर्गवः 'gone out of the village.' अधर्म जगुप्सुः . 
.. अपेतापोढमुक्तपतितापत्रस्तरल्पशः ॥३८॥ पदानि ॥ अपेत. अपोट-मुक्त-पतित-अपत्रस्तैः , अल्पशः , (स०वि०तमु०पञ्चमीस०) । ' निः॥ भोत भपौर मुक्त पतित अपत्रस्त इत्येतेः सह पक्षम्यन्त समस्यते सत्गुरुपश 
समासो भवति ॥: अल्पश इति समासस्थान्पविषयतामाच॥ ... 38. A word ending with the 5th case-afix is compounded with the words apata'gone away,' apodha 'carried away,'mukta 'freed,' patita 'fallen,' apatrasta, 'afraid of,' when the event takes place in a gradual manner, and the compound is called Tatpurusha. 
As, सुखापेतः 'gone away from pleasure' कल्पनापोटः 'carried away by imagination' चक्रमुक्तः 'freed from the wheel.' सर्गपतितः "fallen from heaven.. MFITER: 'afraid of the waves.' This is an cxpansion of II. 1.37. 
BK II. CH. I. $ 38-40. ] 
ABLATIVE TAT-PURUSHA. 
287 
. By using the word JETT: 'in a gradual degree,' is shown the limited range of this kind of compounds. Not every ablative word can be so com, pounded. Hence there is no compounding at all in the following cases : grarsta ga, 'fallea from the mansion. I 67: · afraid of eating. For here the fall &c. is violent and sudden, and not gradual and slight. - स्तोकान्तिकदूरार्थकच्चाणि क्तेन, ॥ ३९ ॥ पदानि स्तोक op 6-84-58-wifor, , ( Faofacgorante) ne 
f#: 11 FİK FAKT roaut: taat: . VETU TE=PHT: FENT OF Hirura, a are le 11 . 
afd74 11 Taurent af tiên 476797! 
39. Words with the sense of stoka a little, antika'ncar,' dûra 'far,' and also tl19 word krichchhra 
penance,' ending in the 5th case-affix are compounded with what ends in kta, and the compound is Tat-purusha 
As Fari : 'loosed from a little distance.' 
So also अन्तिकादागतः 'come from near' अभ्याशादागतः 'come from near' ETTETTA: 'come from far, Fe rra: 'come from a distance.' * . saved with difficulty.' E L 17:'obtained with difficulty.' 
• By rule VI. 3. 2 the case-affix is not elided. in compounds of this kind. 
Part:--The words to 'a hundred' and aga 'a thousand' are similarly compounded with the word . As, Tart STUTAT: beyond a hundred:' So also TCEUTAT: beyond a thousaad.' In these examples the word ya and #37 being exhibited in the ist case and thus being upasarjana ought to have stood as the first meinber of the compound (II. 2. 30); But these compounds are supposed to fall under the class of (TFF &c., (II. 2. 31) and hence the upasarjana stands as the second member of the compound. Irregularly is also the augment a( ) interposed between these two words. 
gamit antag: 1 yon afifa n gant, artat: (poate falo Bogo la 
19: 11 aprasti toteft: ang trend amery Hurent safet 1. .. i 
•;. ; 40. A word ending with the 7th case-affis is compounded with the worls šaunda "skilled' &c. and the compound is Tat-purusha, 
288 
LOCATIVE TAT-PURUSHA. 
[ BK. II. CH. 1. $ 40-43. 
· The word utga: in the satra being in the plural number indicates a class of words beginning with saunda. . . As, भोप घोण्डः - भभयोण्डा • skilled in dice' अक्षत: 'cunning in dice' Defeat: 'a gamester in dicc.' 
The following is the list of शोण्डादि words:-1 शोण्ड, 2 धर्त , 3किसव,4 प्यार,5 प्रवीण,6 संधीत, अन्तर when meaning place, 8 अधि,9पटु, (or अधिपद्ध), io पण्डित , 1 कुशल , 12 चपन , 13 निपुण, 14 संप्यार' 15 भन्य , and 16 समीर . 
. सिद्धशुष्पकवन्धश्च ॥ ४ ॥ पदानि । सिद्ध-शुष्क-पक-बन्धः, च, (सात विसप्तमी). . . . . ... 
पत्तिः ॥ सिद्ध-शुष्क पक बन्धे इत्येतेः सह सतम्यंत समस्यते, ससुरुष समासी भाति ।। 
41. A word ending with the 7th case-afix is compounded with the words siddha perfected,' sushka 
dried,' pakva'cooked' and bandha 'bound,' and the resulting compound is Tat-purusha. . 
x As, सांकाश्यसिद्धः 'perfect in Sankasya.' कापियसिद्धः 'perfect in Kampie lya.' मातपयुक: ' dried in the sun.' जयाशुष्क: dried in the shade.' स्थालीपकः 
cooked in pot.' कुम्भी पक: 'cooked in an earthen jar.' चक्रवन्धः 'bound on the wheel. For their accent sec VI. 2. 32. 
These are also further illustrations of the word as in såtra 32. . 
वाक्षेण क्षेपे ॥ ४२ ॥ पदानि ॥ माइक्षण क्षेपे, (तविo. सप्तमी)॥ .. वृत्तिः । वानवाधिना सह सक्षम्यन्तं सुबन्तं समस्यते, तत्पुरुष समाधो भवति, भेपे गम्यमाने । 
___42. A word ending with the irth case-affix is compounded with the word dhvanksha, a crow,' (and with synonyms of crow) when contempt is implied; and the resulting compound is Tat-purusha. . . As, तीर्यवांतः 'a crow at the sacred bathing place' i.e., a very greedy person; as a crow in a bathing place does not remain long, any where, so a person who goes to his teacher's house and does not tarry there long, is called a तीर्थकाकः or a भीर्यवावसः . 
When it has not this meaning, there is no compounding: as, füher स्तिष्ठति There is a crow in the sacred bathing place.' .. कृत्यैऋणे ॥४३॥ पदानि ॥ कृत्यैः , अणे, (सात.. मुं०स०सह) . 
वृत्तिः ॥ कृत्य प्रत्ययान्तैः सह ससम्यन समस्यते, तत्पुरुष समासो भवति॥ . . . . 
. 
. 
RK. II. CH. I. $ 43-45:) 
LOCATIVE TAT-PURUSHA. 
237 
43. A word ending with the 7th case-affix is compounded with words ending with a kritya-affix (a fut. pass. Participle) and the resulting compound is Tat purusha, when 'debt' is implied. 
This compound is confined to the words formed by the ksitya affix un and not to every ksitya-formed word. 
As, Hrafia debt repayable within a month.' So smrtial payable within a year.' Puur repayable within three days. 
By using the word 4 we indicate by implication any appointed time in general, and not merely a time for the payment of a debt. Therefore we get compounds in the following cases also:quia ang 'the Sama that should be sung in the morning.' granaatit : 'the chapter that should be studied in the morning.' 
Why do we say "debt"? Observe are iar faterr 'the alms that should be gives each month.' 
. nr 1188 aptra o, istina, ( ponofaragot gar HP) . 
77: il carat food ##**** FTT ER HAFTH, FREE WA PETI 
44 A word ending with the 7th case-affix is invariably compoundeil with a word ending in a case atfix, when the compound thus formed is used as an appel. 
lative, and is call:d Tat-purusha_samåsa. 
A sanjña is expressed by the complete word, hence it is an invari able (aitya) compound; for we cannot express an appellative by a sentence. 
As, Stora farsan: 'wild sesamum' yielding no oil; anything which does not answer to one's expectation. So also run97: , fiat:' anything found unexpectedly.' So also offT: , fami*: . 
The casc-affix is not elided, in this case, in accordance to sátra VI. 3. 9. (The 7th case-affix is not elided after words ending in consonants or in short sy when the compound denotes appellative.) 
TIETOATAT: u tus u azifa u tha, 398:-775-1990, i gofamae crono) 
पत्तिः ॥ भहरवयवा राग्यपयवा सम्रन्ताः कान्तेन सह समरयते, सरस्पर समाधी 
238 
LOCATIVE TAT-PURUSHA. 
(Bk. II. CH. 1. $ 45-47 
45. The names of divisions of day or night ending with a 7th case-affix are compounded with words ending with the aflix kta; and the resulting compound is Tat-purusha. 
As, gatoshay done in the morning.' TTT done in the after noon.' Mary'donc in the first part of the night.' T i done in the last part of the night.' 
Why do we say 'members or divisions of day and night 7 Observe प्रहनि भुकम् 'eaten in the day ' रामो पुनम् 'occurring in the night.' 
This being a continuation of sdira II. 1. 32, we have diversely oft and sharrita. 
n u era u 9, ( nofootpOTT ). निः ॥नमेत्येतत् साम्यन्त कान्तेन वह समस्यते, वरुप समासो भवति॥ 
46. The word tatra there,' which is a word ending with the 7th case-affix, (V. 3. 10) is compounded with a word ending in kta, and the resulting compound is Tat-purusha. 
Thus att caten there.' Hy done there," * ' drunk there." By making this a compound, the samc purpose is served as in sätra II. 1. 25 namely, these two words form one word and get one accent. 
ma utagirar a da, ( Hofavagoas A) * JFF: 11 ** steari atorgat Farada Ek H4E4d, Tort Barent Hofer et 
47. A word ending with a 7th case-affix is compounded with a word ending with the affix kta, when 'censure' is implied, and the compound is Tat purusha 
As, w7777 sat na 'they arc as if an ichneumon standing on hot ground (metaphorically said of the inconstancy of man) ON 
So also a ferropa dried in water,' (figuratively used for any thing unheard of or impossible.) 
So also of Tan ( lit. )'making water in a stream,' (fig.) 'doing a useless action.' per far offered oblation in ashes,, (fig.)'a fruitless action.' 
The 7th case-affix is not elided in the case of this sätra also. See satra VI. 3. 14. 
Bk. II. CH. I. $ 48-49. ) 
IRREGULAR TAT-PURUSHA. 
239 
___ पात्रेसमितादयश्च ॥४८॥ पदानि ॥ पात्रे , संमित-आदयः, , (सत क्षे)। 
मुनिः ॥ समुदाया एव निपारयन्ते, पास मेतादयशदास्सत्पुरुषसंज्ञा भवन्ति क्षेपे गम्यमाने।। 
48. The words like påtre-sammita 'a clish-com panion'(a parasitel, &c., are Tat-purusha compounds, when contempt is implied. 
All these are irregular compounds. Some of the words contain ed in this list are compounds formed with the past-participle (*); they could have been formed by previous aphorism also. Their inclusion in this list is for the purpose that their first member should have udatta on the beginning; because all the words belonging to this class, are a subdivision of a larger class called 'युनारोधादि Class' treated of in sutra VI. 2.81. 
The following is the list of the words:---! पासमिताः पावलाः'। parasite' (constant at meals or dinner time). 3 उदुम्बरमशकः, 4 उम्परकृषिः, 5 उपरकमिः, 6 कपकपः , 7 अपटकपः , 8 कपमका , 9 कुम्भमएएकः, 10 रदपानमण्डूका, 
। नगरकाकः, नगरवायसः, 13 मातरिपुरुषः, 14 पिएडीगरः, 15 पिसरियर, 16 गेहेर, 17 गेहेनरी, 18 गेहेडी , 19 गेहेविमिती, 20 गेहण्यार, 21 गेहेमेही, 22 गेडेवाही, 23 गेहेषः, 24 गेहेषतः, 25 गहतः, 26 पाखनिकरकः, गोमेशरः, 28 गोविनिती, 29 गोष्ठेदांसी, 30 गोप्ठेपटुः, 31 गोपण्डितः, 31 गोप्रगल्भः, 33 कर्णेभिरिटिरा, 34 कचुरुचुरा॥ 
पूर्वकालेकसजरत्पुराणनयकेवालाः समानाधिकरणेन ॥ ४ ॥ पदानि ॥ पूर्वकाल-एक-सर्व-जरत्-पुराण-नव-केवलाः समानाधिकरणेन, (०विस्तासु०सु०स० ) 
वृत्तिः ॥ पूर्वकाल एक सर्व जरत् पुराण नव केशन इत्येते सुबन्नाः समानाधिकरणेन सुपा सह समस्यन्ते, तत्पुरुपक्ष समासी भवति। 
49. A case-inflected word denoting an action which naturally precedez in time (parvakäla), and the words eka' one, sarva'all,'jarat 'old,' purânia 'ancient, nava 'new' and kevala 'only,' are compounded with their co-relative case-inflected words which are in the same case with them; and the compound so formed is Tat-purusha 
The phrase te is understood here, the whole sätra qualifying it. 
Words which separately can be applied to many distinct and differ cnt objects, when they apply to one common object, are said to be in apposi tion (समानाधिकरण) or abiding in a common substratum. 
la the present sätra thc word-form pårva-kala is not to be taken 
20 . 
“ IRREGULAR TAT-PURUSHA 
[BK. II. CH. 1. $ 49-15. 
(I. 1.68) but its significates%3; vahile of the rest एक &c., the very word-form is to be taken. A word denoting action which naturally precedes in time, is compounded with a word denoting action which naturally succecds it. As, वातानुनतः 'bathed and perfumed' कासमीकृतम् ' ploughed and levelled.' धमरूटम् 'burnt and healed.. एकपटी / having one petticoat.' एकभिक्षा 'begging once in aday.' सर्वदेवा: 'Allgods. समनायाः 'all men.' जरखस्ती 'old elephant.' अर गृष्टिः 'an old cow. मरवात्तिः 'old occupation.'पुराणाम् ' old rice.' पुराणवसथम् 'an old habitation. So नवनम्न वावसथम् केवनानम् 'only rice.' 
Why do we say when they are in the same case? Observe **21: पाटी 'one's petticoat.' 
These and the subsequent compounds are Karmadharaya Compounds (I. 2. 42) 
दिसंख्ये संज्ञायाम् ॥५०॥ पदानि ॥ दिक-संख्ये, संज्ञायाम् ; ( म००वि०पासमानाधिकरणेन ) । 
पतिः ॥ विग्वाधिनः शब्दाः संख्या व समानाधिकरणेन सुमन्तेन सह समस्यन्ते , तस्सुरुपश समासो भवति । 
50. Tho worls expressing a point of the com pass, ora number (sankhya) enter into composition with the word correlated to them by being in the same case, when the sense of the compound is thit of an appella tive; and it is a Tat-purusha. 
The phrase 'being in apposition,' is understood in every one of these sütras up to the end of the chapter. 
- As पूर्वपुकामरामी 'the town of Ishukamatami-in-the-cast.' अपरेपकामरामी the town of Ishukamasami-in-the-west.' पंचाम्राः 'the five mangoes' सप्तर्षयः 'the seven-sages' (the constellation of the Great Bear), 
Why do we say when the sense is that of an appellative?' Observe TATTET: 'northern trees.' 17 ATUT: ' five Brahmanas.' See IV. 2. 107. 
तद्धितात्तिरपद समाहारे च ॥५३॥ पदानि ॥ तद्वित-अर्थ-उत्तरपद समाहारे , ( स०वि०दिकसंख्येसम्म०)। 
निः॥ मखितायें विषये उत्तरपच परत: समाहारे चाभिधेये दिसंख्ये समानाधि करणेन सुपा सह समस्येते , सत्पुरुष समासो भवति ।। 
-51. In a case where the sense is that of a Taddhita-aflix, or when au additional member comes after the compound, or when an aggregate. is to be ex 
Bk. II. CH. I. $ 51-52.), 
Dvigu. 
. 
241 
pressed, then a word signifying a point of the compass or a number, enter3 into composition with a case-in. Hected word which is in agreement with it by being in the same case, and the compound so formed is called Tat-purusha 
First let us take the case where the sense is that of a Taddhita-affis. Thus when a compound is formed out of the words that oral *T: ' that which is in the eastern hall' (in which analytical exposition of the compound in question, the word T (IV. 3. 107) serves to represent the force of a Taddhita-affix) the compound having reached the form of art VIAT, the feminine termination of the af is rejected, because Patanjali declares that the masculine state belongs to a pronominal when exercising any of the five functions belonging to a word; we have :-* + MAT + (IV. 2. 107) - al : (VII. 2. 117 and VI. 4. 148) who is in the castern hall.' 
So also when an additional member comes after the compound (uttar. padel As, Tira: or Turf: 'loving the eastern or western hall." Those Uttarpada Compounds are invariable (Nitya) compounds, so that they can not be resolved into their component elements. 
When a ITC' aggregate' is to be expressed, it is of course impossi ble to use a word expressing points of the compass (fak words). The following compounds are formed with numbers ( deur ), when employed with the force of a Taddhita affix; as, a Time, T: 'relating to five barbers.' r es: 'relating to an oblation offered in five cups' (197) (IV. 1. 88). So also 
o TV (V. 4.92) 'Whose wealth consists of five cows,' FTTTTT: 
The following are examples of aggregates: t 'the collection of five fruits' (IV. 1. 21) not an aggregate of ten bundles,'hart 'the aggre. gate of the three worlds.' tft'an aggregate of five virgins;' this word is neuter by II. 417. and the long is shortened by I. 2. 47. 
serigai fag: 1147 logifa il sjeni gati, fy:,( Hofwo तद्धितार्थोत्तरपदसमाहारे ). 
वृत्तिः ॥ सद्धितायोत्तरपदसमाहारे चेत्या यः संख्यापूर्व: समासः बिगुसंज्ञो भवति । 
52. In a case where the sense is that of a tad dhita affix, or when an additional member comes after the compound or when an aggregate is to be expressed. the compound, the first men ber of which is numeral, is called Dvign or Numeral Determinative compound. . 
249 
IRREGULAR TAT-PURUSHA. 
(Bk. II. CH I. $ 52-53. 
First to take an example of Taddhitartha:-as, ces 
: T: 'an offering prepared or offered in five cups.' So also UFYA: 'prepared in tea cups. These are names of Purodasa offerings; and are formed by adding the affix you in the sense of refining an object of food' by sátra IV. 2. 16; then this affix is elided () by IV. 1, 88. 
To take an example when an additional member comes after the com pound. As rela: loving five ships. fru money which has come by two ships' (f++* V. 4. 99 = f(T) 
Of an aggregate we have dart. The feminine is formed by IV. 1. 21. 
कुत्सितानि कुत्सनैः ॥ ५३ ॥ पदानि ॥ कुत्सितानि फुत्सनैः, ( gefacgogsepoke ) # 
पनिः ॥ कुरिससवाचीनि सुबन्तानि कुरखनवचनैः सुबन्ते. सह समस्यन्ते , तत्पुरुष t G 11. in found fault lot 3. Case-inflected words expressing vileness are compounded with case-inflected words, expressing contempt, and the resulting compound is Tat-purusha. 
Asantouf;'a bad or dull grammarian.' Here it might be asked is the word sqTmco grammar' a word of contempt, or the word toru 
grammarian'? Neither 'Grammar' (it being a part of Vedanga,) nor the person who studies it i.6., the grammarian, can be an object of contempt ordinarily. 
The word 'grammarian' is, however, the expression of contempt in an indirect way, thus :The person studying grammar but not studying it well, becomes an object of contempt and such a despicable person becomes also contaminated. The word wat is a term of contempt per se. It literally means, a person who on being asked a question, and not possessing ready wit and intelligence to answer it, scratches his head and contemplates vacancy (Hera) and tries to divert the questioner's attention by exclaiming how beautifully clear is the sky,' such a person is called aft:. 
Such compounds are confined to cases where the reason for the use of any particular term is to express contempt with regard to the signification of that term. So we can not form a compound of the sentence 
f i c: 'the thief grammarian;" for, contempt is not expressed with regard to the signi fication of the word grammarian.' But when the term "grammarian' it. self is used in a contemptuous signification, then a compound will be formed. 
This aphorism is commenced in order to introduce an exception to sätra 57, by which an adjective stands as the first member in a compound. By the present sätra, however, the attributive word will stand as the second me mber. BK. II. CH. I. $ 53-55.) 
IRREGULAR TAT-PURUSHA. 
243 
Other examples of such compounds are: aranan T one who hankers after performing sacrifices for persons for whom one ought not to perform sacrifices' HE T : an unbelieving logician,'' an athiest.. 
No compound can be formed under this aphorism, if both the words are not used in an opprobatory signification as such. Therefore it is not in the following case. TATU: 'the bad Brahmana' &c. 
91970717 graa: 48 geifa u 019-74, sreda: , ( Heaofaogope ) 
वृत्तिः । पाप अणक एते सुबन्ते कुत्सितवचनैः सह समस्येते , सत्पुरुष समासो भवति ।। 
54. The case inflected words påpa'sin,' and anaka 'insignificant,' are compounded with words expressive of vileness, and the compound is Tat-purusha 
Both the words qr and T are words of contempt ( ra); by the last sútra, they would have stood as second members in the compound; the present stra, however, is so framed with regard to sâtras I. 2. 43 and II. 2. 30, that they will stand as first. As artifra: or U ta: 'a contemptible barber 979 or simpananas: 'a contemptible potter." 
___उपमानानि सामान्यवधनैः ॥५५॥ पदानि ॥ तपमानानि, सामान्य. giá: , ( deaetaegorea ) N 
वृत्तिः॥ उपमानवाचीनि सुबन्तानि सामान्यवचनैः सुबन्तैः सह समस्यन्ते , तत्पुरुष समासो aft 10 
55. Case-inflected words denoting objects of comparison, are compounded with words denoting what is likened to them, by reason of the latter possessing qualities in common with the former, and the compound is Tat-purusha 
That by or to which a thing is compared is 'upamana' and the upamcsa' (the thing compared) is called m y or 'common. Thus TITAT 
9: .cloud-black Krishna' (Krishna black as a cloud). Here foto is a quality common to Krishna and cloud: therefore 'cloud' which is the art is com pounded with it. So also dat 'lily-white.' name 'Swan-sounding' $4914-uftiget 'globular as Nyagrodha tree.' For accent sce VI. 2. 2. 
But not so in ATT TATAY'black Devadatta' or 9 T: 'the rice are like fruits' FT GIFT: 'clouds like inountains. . 
244 
IRREGULAR TAT-PURUSHA. : [ Bk. II. CH. I. $ 56. 
उपमितं ध्याघ्रादिभिः सामान्याप्रयोगे ॥ ५६ ॥ पदानि । उपमितम्, 8919-Hiffa: , Fm74-9puta, ( pogofa ogohogoatfago ) . P: 11 gehage et artis yang : amalg a7177 guer, ETC964* HET *ft , amarrar : graden 
56. A case-inflected word denoting subject of comp:uisou is compounded with the words vyåghra (tigur,' &c., the latter being the standard of comparison, and in construction with the former; and the compound is Tat-purusha; provided that any word expressing the common characteristic (AHO) as explained above, is not employed. . This is a modification of sůtra 57, by which the objective would have stood first; by the present, the attribute stands second. As * BATETT - 545217: 'a person-tiger' (in strength) goofar: 
In the last satra, the compounding was between the and the common quality. In the present, the compounding is betwcen the 91 and certain #19 but never with AP414 717. Therefore we can not for this kind of compound from the following sentence:- 6 Cale Te IT: 'a mao strong as a tiger.' Similarly 7, 10 , 377, UTVENI 
The words tam &c. are origj: i. 6., this is a class of compound words, the fact of a word belonging to which, is known by its form, a posteriori and is not discoverable by any consideration of its constituent parts a priori. 
The following is the list of such words: : 1. tyre - A tiger. 2. fas - A lion. 3. # - A bear. 4. A . A bull. 5. - Sandal. 6. # - A wolf. 7. T - A bul!. 8. TT - A boar, hog. 9. Pay - An elephant. 10. = A tree. 11. - An elephant. 12. - A kind of deer. 13. 79 - The spotted antelope. 14. gosti - A lotus flower. 15. PMID - A tree Butca Frondosa. 16. Fint - A rogue, cheat. 
আকুষিণী 
1. getan 
? A lotus-like face. 
2. 2014 3. 
) try - Sprout-like hand, a tender hand. 4. 9747976. 
. BK. II. CH. I. 8 57.58.] 
IRREGULAR TAT-PERUSHA. 
'! 
...... विशेषणं विशेष्येण मालम् ॥ ५५ ॥ पदानि । विशेषणम् , विशे. 
ध्येण , बहुलन् । 
- निः॥ विशेषणवापि सुबन्त विशेष्यवाधिना समानाधिकरणेन सुबमोन सा बहुलं समस्यते , ससुरुष समासो भवति ।। 
__57. A case-inflected word denoting the quali. fler (the Adjective), is compounded diversely with a case inflected word denoting the thing thereby qualified, (the Substantive) the latter being in agreement (same case) with the former; and the compound is Tat-purusha. 
The discriminator' is called Feat and the discriminated' is called विशेष्य as नीलोसस a blue lotus,' रक्कोसल'a red lotus.' 
By using in the rule the expression diversely it is meant that in some cases it is imperative to make a compound (नित्यसमास) ashणसर्पः 'a black snake.' लोहितालिः 'red rice':-and sometimes it is forbidden; as, रामी जामदग्न्यः 'Rama called also Jamadagnya' (as being the son of Jamadagai): पर्ननः कार्नवीय:-and in some cases it is optional, नीनमुरान or नीलोत्पन. 
Why do we say 'qualifier ?' Observe HR: #4: 'the Takshala snake." Why do we say 'qualified.' Observe मोहितस्ततकः 'the red Takshaka. 
पूर्णपरप्रथमचरमजघन्य समानमध्यमध्यमवीराश्च ॥ ५८ ॥ पदानि । पूर्व अपर-प्रथम-धरम-जघन्य समान-मध्य मध्यम-वीराः, (सातावि०म०म० समानाधिकरणेन)। 
वृतिः ॥ पूर्व अपर प्रथम परम जपन्य समान मध्य मध्यम वीर हस्येते सुबन्ताः समानापि करणेन सुपा सह समस्यन्द , नमुरुष समासो भवति । 
___58. The case-inflected words parva 'prior,' apara 'other,' prathama 'first,' charama 'last,' jaghanya 'hindmost, samâna 'equal,' madhya 'niddle,' madhyama 'middle,' and viha. 'hero,' are compounded with words ending with a case-aftixand which are in agreement (same case) with them; and the compound is Tat-purusha. 
As पूर्व पुरुष: 'ancestor,' (any one of the three, father, grandiather and great-grandfather), भपरपुरुषः 'successor,' परमपुरुष: last person,' मपन्यपुरुषः 'hinder. most person,' समानपुरुष..' equal person,'माय or मध्यमपुरुष: 'middle person,'वीरपुरुषः 'heroic person.' 
248 
IRREGULAR TAT-PORUSHA.. 
(Bk. II. CH. 1. & 59. 
. harga: atfeft: nye ut. agılan F-ara: , erfare: , ( Foacfaogogo#TA) * . ..gra: 11 tiranga: erat. affar: ama t: wafant, night* saret fafa 
All starleg sprantau 
59. The case-inflected words śreni 'class' &c., are compounded with words krita 'made>&c., which are in agrcement (same case), with them; and the com pound is Tat-purusha. 
Vart:--The words silu &c., for the purposes of this sätra, are suppos cd to have the force of the affix ft (chvi). Thus iur: fur: Fa: =U T: 
made into classes' (those who were not classified before). 
The class of words called alle are akriti-gana and cannot be known a priori. This Samasa is also an invariable Samasa by reason of sätra II. 2. 18, since all words that end io chvi (fog) are called gati (1. 4. 61.), 
1. = A line, a series. 2. - One or *. 3. A heap, collection, multitude. 4. T , Name of Krishna or 7. S. tif A heap, mass, collection. 6. f - A collection, heap. 7. fra * An object or frut. 8. firma = Poor, indigent or fun, fyt. 9. -Distant. 10. - The god of rain.' 11. 19 = Divine, celestial. 12. gop - Sha. ved, bald. 13. - Become, being. 14. 47 - Sraman or u. 15. TETET = Liberal minded. 16. HUIT* - A teacher. 17. gritage = Handsome. 18. ART - Brahman. 19. Fira - Kshatriya. 20. FFTE . Dis. tinguished, distinct. 21. F- Clever, skillful, dexterous. 22. groza - Learned, wise. 23. aus = Right, proper, good. 24. 497 = Shaking, trembling, tremulous. 25. f - Skillful, dexterous. 26. 690 = W'retched, helpless. 
grofaTot SOTT 1. Done, performed, made. 2. f = Measured. 3. - Thought, believed, supposed. 4. ** = Produced, formed. S. - Said, spoken, uttered. 6. - Joined, united. 7. ETETT - Knowo or under. stood thoroughly. 8. #17 - Repeated, recited. 9. H un - Reckoned up, counted, summed up. 10. Ta = Considered, supposed, imagined 11. Barra - Served. 12. No - Ascertained, known. 13. f - Corresponded with, answered. 14. fortresa - expelled, banished. 15. 346-Assisted, benefited, served &c. 16.79769 - Invited. 17. - Seen, looked, perceived. 18. Fesa - Counted. 19. Mata - 
[BK. II. CH. I. 860, 61. 
IRREGULAR TAT-PURUSHA. 
247 
Broke::, torn, rent, burst. 20. 2157 = Said, ultered. 21. faryo - Well known, renowned. 22. उदित - Risen. 
कन नविशिष्टेनानम् ॥ ६ ॥ पदानि ॥ तेन, नन्-विशिष्टेन, अनन् , ( स०त०वि०स०समानषि०). 
इतेः । नव विशेषो यस्य सर्वमन्यत् प्रकृत्यादिक तुल्यं सनविशिर्ट वेन मविशिरेन तान्तेन समानाधिकरणेन सह अनन् कान्तं समस्यते , ससुरुषसमासो भादि। 
वार्निकम् ॥कृतापकृतादीनामुपसंख्यानम् ॥१॥ पार्निकम् ।। समानाधिकरणाधिकार शाकपार्थिवादीनामुपसंख्यानम् , उत्तरपहलोपथ ॥२॥ 
60. A voir ending with the affix kta, and not having the negative auginent naí is compounded with the same word ending with the attix kta but which is distinguished from the former, by having the augment nan; and th: compound is Tat-purusha. 
Thus कुताकृतम् 'done and not done,' भुक्ताभुत 'eaten and not eaten,' पीता. पीतं 'drunk and not drunk,' उदितानु देतं 'spoken and not spoken.' 
The intermediate augment or the , as in the following two examples, do not make the forms dissimilar. qiraalra ftra, PATER लिशितेन ॥ 
Vart:-The compounds कनापत &c. should also be included. 
भाकृतिगोग्यम् 
1. कृतापकृत. 2. भुनविभुन. 3. पीन.सीन. 4. गतमल्यागत. 5. वातानुयात. 6. कयाक्रयिका. 7. पुटापुटिका. 8. फलाफनिका. 9. मानोन्मानिका. 
Vart:-The compounds like शाकपार्थिव should also beenumerated.and there is elision of the second member in these compounds. As शाकप्रियः पार्षिक: 
- धाकपार्थिक 'tha king beloved by the people of his era.' it. an era making kiog. 
1. कपार्थिव. १. कुतपसाश्रुत. 3. प्रजातोपनि. 
सन्महत्परमोत्तमोत्कृष्टाः पूज्यमानैः ॥ ६ ॥ पदानि ॥ सत्-महत्. परम-उत्तम तस्कृष्टा, पूज्यमानः । 
पतिः ॥ सत् महत् परम उत्तम उत्कृष्ट स्वेते पूज्यमानैः सह समस्यन्ते, लसुरुप समासो 
. 
. 
. 
। 
248 
IRREGULAR TAT-PURUSHA 
'[ Bk. II. CH. I. $ 62, 63. 
61. The words sat‘good,' mahat'great,' parama “highest,' uttama 'best,' and utkrishta excellent,' are compounded with the words denoting the person deserving of respect; and the compound is Tat-purusha. 
As aray'a good person,' TET: 'a great man;'479769: 'the highest person;' TTATGT: 'the best person ;' 656969: 'the excellent person.' 
Why do we say with words denoting the persoo deserving of respect ?' Observe 12:01: *** ' the ox was pulled out of the mud! 
gogicam : 7599147 87a ucifa in q*77*-?frey goen, goraraan 
fa: 11 FTC pro fac roa: 1544174 pst 745, ATETETU w at in 11. 
62. A case-inflccted word denoting object deserving of respect is compounded with the words vrindåraka ‘eminent,'någa 'serpent or elephant,'kuħjara Selephant'; and the compound is Tat-purusha. 
As tipi : 'an excellent bull or cow. Taller: 'an excellent horse'. So also :, 1 T: &c. Why do we say when meaning the object deserving of respect?' Observe gatuar:"the serpent Susima.' 
at at fáafira 13 ofifa 1 $at-sant, Hifafa 
F#: U TC-nt fa-aftrat parat tia e a atua, ITV समासो भवति । 
63. The words katara which or who of tro' and katama 'whiclı or who of many', when used in aşking questions about the genus or class, are com. pounded with other case-inflect.:d words with which they are in construction, and the compound is Tat. purusha. 
As and anacarong: 'which of the two is katha, and which kaldpar' ***s: and TF1ATT: " which of these is katha &c.' . 
It taight be objected, what is the use of employing the word Ariforefoon in the aphorism; since the word at is especially employed in asking such questions; (see V, S. 93) and the word will get the same signification by being read along with it?' The very use of this phrase 
BK. II. CH. I. $ 64, 65.) 
IRREGULAR TAT-PURUSHA. 
in the aphorism shows that the word op has other meanings besides that of an interrogative pronoun, of determining jati; as कतरो भवतोपरन: which of you two, Sirs, is Devadatta,' and want to 
which of you, Sirs, is: Devadatta. Here there is no questioning about jati, all belonging to the same genus, hence there is no compounding. (Accent VI. 2. 57.) 
किं पे ॥ ६४ n पदानि । किम् , क्षेपे , ( सात समसमानाधित करणेनवि०). 
निः॥ विमिन्येतत् क्षेपे गम्यमाने सुपा सा समस्यते , तत्पुरुष समासो मामि॥ 
64. The word kim 'what,' when implying 'contempt, is compounded with a word ending in a case. affix, and the compound is Tat-purusha. 
As किरामा बोनरसति 'he is a bad king who does not protect his sub. jects.' किं सखा योऽभिपति he is a bad friend who hates.' किंगोः योग बहवि ' it is a bad ox that does not carry.' . The affixty (V. 4.91) does not come after this compound as in FETT, मरामः &c., by force of Rule V.4.70. Otherwise the form would have been किंरान and not किरामा. 
Vhy do we say when censure is implied?' Observe कस्य राजा - रानः 'whose king: किंपखः 
पोटायुवतिस्तोककतिपयराष्टिधेनुवशावेहहष्कपणीप्रवक्तृश्रोत्रियाच्या पकधूतातिः ॥ ३१ ॥ पदानि ॥ पोटा-युवति-स्तोक-कतिपय गृष्टि-धेनुः अशा-बेहद-बकयणी प्रवक्त-श्रोत्रिय अध्यापक-धूतः , जातिः, ( महत. वि०स०) . 
पतिः ॥ पोटादिभिः सह जातिवाचि सुबन्न समस्यते , तत्पुरुष समासो भवति ॥ 
65. A case-inflected word denoting a genus (jâti) is compounded with the words poti a hermaphro dite,' yuvati, 'a young female,' stoka 'a little,' katipaya'a few,' grishţi 'a cow which has had only one calf,' dhenu 'milch-cow,' vasa. 'a barren female,' vehad, 'a cow that miscarries,' bashkayani'a cow that has a full-grown calf,' pravaktri'an expounder,' śrotriya 'a learned Brahmana, adhyapaka. 'a teacher,' and dharta ta cunning fellow; and the resulting compound is called Tat-purusha...:: 
250 
IRREGULAR TAT-PURUSHA. 
[BK. CH. I. $ 66, 67. 
As item 'a young female elephant' 544 ia' a female elephant.' So also अग्निस्तोकः 'a little fire' उशिवत् कतिपयम् 'alittle butter milk,' गोगाष्टिः , गोषेनुः, art: , 18 , yut, 3 1 'an expounder of Katha', ultra, a Brahmana who has mastered the Katha branch of the Yajur Veda' nur: "a teacher of the Katha branch of the Yajur Veda.' 
Why do we say 'when denoting a genus or a common noun ?' Observe F: THT Devadatta expounder.' 
The word ve has not a bad signification here. Hence ya mcans 'a Brahmana well versed in the Katha branch of the Yajur Veda.' 
naipinga u se u ogifa najava:, , ( Bonofae जातिसह समानार्थ) ॥ 
fat: ll staaf art antaran: Tatua, 4769 HUT Pa II 
66. A case-inflected word deuoting a genus (jâti) is compounded with a word denoting praise and the compound is Tat-purusha. , 
The words denoting praise should be rudhi (1) words like for &c., which retain their specific gender though used along with words of other genders, in apposition with them, as, 11*'an excellent cow,' a war an excellent horse' W i thin an excellent cow. These words are 
generally used at the end of a compound to denote 'excellence' or 'the best of its kind." 
Why do we say 'when denoting genus ? Observe and Haftan excellent virgin.' 
युवा खलतिपलितवलिनजरतीभिः ॥ ६७ ॥ पदानि ॥ युवा , cefa-afda-af57. gratia: , ( Hofavao togarafuota) 
ia ll CRUTIEF: arrivare a ry: anegd, 544 arat 
Hafa upla: Il 
67. The word yuvâ'young,' is compounded with the words khalati, 'bald headed,' palita 'grey-hair. ed'valiua 'wriukled,' jarati 'decayed,' when they are iu agreement (same case); and the compound is Tat purusha. 
The word arator is exhibited in the feminine gender, in the aphorism, with the object of indicating the existence of the following maxim of inter pretation afara 60 after 79 
Bk. II. CH. I $ 68, 69.) 
IRREGULAR TAT-PURUSHA. 
251 
A Pratipadika denotes, whenever it is employed in grammar, also such a crude form as is derived from it by the addition of an affix denoting gender.' 
___As, युवा + खलतिः - युवाखजतिः . So also युवतिः खलती - युवखलती in the feminine: 'bald in youth.' So gापलित: fem. युवराजिता, 'grey-haired in youth' युववाजिनः fem. युववलिना 'wrinkled in youth' यवमरन् fem. युवजरती' appearing old in youth,' (prematurely old.) 
कृत्यतुल्याख्या अजात्या ॥ ६८॥ पदानि ॥ कृत्य तुल्य-माख्या , भजात्या , ( स०वि०त०स००) 
वृत्तिः ॥ कृत्य-प्रत्ययान्तास्तुस्थपर्यावाच सुबन्ता ममातिवचनेन समस्यन्ते , तत्पुरुषध समासो भवति॥ 
68. Words ending with a kritya affix, and the word tulya 'equal,'and its synonyms, are compounded with words which do not denote genus (jâti) being in the same case with them; and the compound is Tat purusha 
As, भोज्योष्णम् 'hot food, भोज्यनवणं 'salt food' पानीयभीतलं ' cool drink, सुल्यश्वेतः 'equally white,' साशवतः 'equally white.' साशमहान् equally 
great' 
Why do we say ' when not denoting a genus? Observe भोग्य भोदनः 'eatable rice.' Here the word भोज्य is used as an Adjective and not as a common noun. Hence there is no compounding even under Il. I. 57. 
वों वर्णन ॥६९ ॥ पदानि वर्णः, वर्णन, (सत०वि०सह समानाधि०)॥ 
वृत्तिः ।। वर्णविशेषवाचि सुबन्त वर्णविशेषवाधिना सुबन्तेन समानाधिकरणेन सह समस्वते, तत्पुरुपक्ष समास भवति । 
69. A case-inflected word denoting colour'is com pounded with another case-inflected word which is in agreement with the former, and also denotes colour, and the compound is Tat-purusha 
As कृष्णसार: 'spotted antelope, लोहितसार: antelope-gappled with red.' कृष्णशयन: ' oappled with black spots' &c. For accent VI. 2.3. 
25% 
IRREGULAR TAT-PURUSHA. 
(BK. II. CH. I. $ 70, 7i. 
917: ** F: n 90 # açta u 4173, 7-ffu: , (ref@oqonorije ) i .: 57:11 marra: momeft: EE HET, rayonu Tared for u . 
70. The word kumara 'a boy' is compounded with co-ordinate words śramanâ'an ascetic,' &c., and the compound is Tat-purusha. 
. In this list of your and the rest, with the words which are feminine such as श्रमा , मनजिता, कुजटा, the word कुमार must also be in the feminine gender; with the words which appear as masculine, c.g. 2017, TK, sifa the word dat must -also be masculine, because 'a Pratipadika denotes, whenever it is employed also such a crude form as is derived from it by the addition of an affix denoting gender. : As, aretatur and TXHUT: 'a virgin ascetic or a bachelor ascetic. 
1. Ur Labouring, toiling. 2. Efeu Gone abroad or into exile. 3. - An unchaste woman. 4. mitut - A pregnant female. 5. Tye - A hermit, derotee. 6. frat A female servant. 7. qua 
- An unchastc woman. 8. qana - A teacher. 9. 76 77 * Handsome. 10. Pozo - Learned, wise. 11. 91 - Soft. 12. - Right, proper, good. 13. T - Shaking, trembling. 14. Fagor = Clever, sharp, skillful. 
gorgt füa 169 n agita il gorc: , fütur ; (Hogoro ) 
पतिः ॥ धनुष्माहवाधिनः सुबन्ता गर्भिणी शमेन समस्यन्ते , तत्पुरुष समासो भवति। बार्तिकम् ॥ चतुपाजातिरिति पनवम् । 
71. A case-inflected word denoting a quad. ruped is compounded with the co-ordinate word gar bhini, and the compound is Tat-purusha. 
morfoff 'a pregnant cow.' Harmfif at a pregnant she-goat' 
Vart:It should be stated that the rule is confined to the words denoting genus of quadrupeds. So not here:-कालाती गर्भिणी or स्वस्तिमती ofiot 'the pregnant cow called Kalaksht or Svastimati. 
Why do we say 'quadrupeds ?" Observe maut .". Bk. II. CH. 1. $72.) 
IRREGCLAR TATPURUSHA. 
253 
मयूरव्यं सकादयश्च ॥७२॥ पदानि ॥ मयूर-व्यंसक-आदयः , , सम्तावि० ) 
पनिः ॥ समुदाया एव निपात्यन्ते मवरयंसकारयः शम्नास्तत्पुरुषसंज्ञाश भवति । 
72. And the words mayûra-vyamsaka 'cun ning like a peacock,' &c., are Tat-purusha compounds. 
These are irregularly formed Tat-purusha compounds. The force of the word in the aphorism is that of restriction. For though the compound like मयूरव्यंसक is allowable, we cannot form a compound like परम मयूरव्यंसक . 
Siddhark kan The following is the list of such compounds : 
मयूरध्यसकादयः॥ 1. मयूरव्यंसक. 2. छात्र व्यंसक. 3. कम्बोजमुएर. 4- यवनमुएड. 5. हस्ते गृह्य or हस्तगृह्य in the Vedas. 6. पाडेगृह्य or पारगृह्य. 7. लागलेगृह्यor नागनगन. 8. पुनर्भय ।। एहीडादयो न्यपदायें as, 9. एहीर वर्तते . 10. एहियवं पर्नते ॥ ॥. एहिवाणिमा (क्रिया ) . 12. अपेहिवाणिमा. 13. हिवाणिमा. 4. एहिस्वागता . 15. भहिस्वागता. 16. एहिद्वितीया . 17. अपेडिद्वितीया . 18. प्रेहिदिनीया. 19. एहिकटा. 20. अहिकटा or अपोहटका. 21. प्रेहिकटा or प्रोहकटा . 22. भाहरकरा. 23. प्रेहिकमा . 24. प्रोहकईमा . 25. विधमचड़ा. 26. उमड़ा. 27. उद्धरना . 28. भाहर पेना. 29. भाहर पसना. 30. (आहरसेना) . 31. भाहरवनिता. 32. (आहरवितना) : 33. कृन्तविचक्षण. 34. उद्धरोत्सना . 35. उद्धरावसजा. 36. उभविधमा . 37. उसत्रनिपचा or विपश. 38. उसनिपता. 39. उचावचम् . 40. उघनीत्रम् . 41. भाचोपचम् . 42. भात्रपराचम् . 43. नखपचम् • 44. निश्च म् । 45. अकिंचन . 46. स्नास्वाकानक. 47. पीथास्थिरक . 48. भुतासहित. 49. प्रोष्यपापीयान् . 50. उत्पस्यपाकना or व्याकुला . 5. निपरयरोहिणी . 52. निषण श्यामा . 53. अपेहिमपसा . 54. एहिविषसा. 55 इहरसमी . 56. इहद्वितीया । महि कर्मणा बहुलमाभीनये कार चानिदधाति . 57. महिमोर. 58. जहिजोसम् . 59. जहिस्सम्बम् . 60. ( जहिस्तम्बः ) . 61. उज्जहिस्तबम् or ब; पारख्यासमारख्यातेम क्रियासातवे . 62. भश्नीतपिबता . 63. पत्रसज्जता . 64 खादतमोदता .65. खान वमता . 66. खादताचमता. 67. पाहरनिवपा. 68. पाहरनिष्किरा. 69. पावर. निस्किरा. 70. उत्पत्रविपचा . L. निन्धिनवण . 72. कन्धिविधता . 73. पानवता . 74. पचपहा. 
258 
IRREGULAR TAT-PURUSHA. 
(Bk. II. CH. 1. & 72. 
प्राकृतिगणोग्यम् , 1. अकुतो भवः . 2. कान्तिपूर्णकः. 3. कन्निशीकः . 4. भाहोपुरुषिका . 5. भहमहमिका . 6, यहच्छा. 7. एहिरेयाहिरा. 8. उन्मजावमृभा . 9. द्रव्यानरम् . 10. अवश्यकार्यम् . 
. 
. 
ओन् । ॥ अथ द्वितीयाध्यायस द्वितीयः पादः ॥' 
BOOK SECOND..." 
CHAPTER II. 
पूर्वापराधरोत्तरमेकदेशिनकाधिकरणे ॥ १॥ पदानि ॥ पूर्व-अपर अधर-उत्तरम्, एकदेशिना , एकाधिकरणे, (स०तवि०म०म०). . वृत्तिः ॥ एकदेशोस्यास्तीरयेकरेशी भवयवी तदाधिना सुमन्तेन वह पूर्वापरापरीसर. शनाः सामाठिकदेशवचनाः समस्यन्ते वत्पुरुष समासो भाति ।। 
1. The words purva "front,' apara 'near,' adhara ‘lower,' and uttara ‘upper,' are compounded when in construction with a word signifying a thing that las parts, provided that the thing having parts is distinguished numerically by unity; and the compound is Tat-purusha. 
The word 'ekadhikarana' (the unity of substance) is the attribute of or qualifies the word 'ekadesin.' This debars the Genitive Tat-purusha compound ordained by sutras; which would have placed the words 'purva' &c., last in the compound, whereas being here exhibited in the nominative case (1.2.43 and II. 2. 30), they take the precedence. 
पर्व+कायस्य - पर्वकायः the front of the body';भपरकायः 'the back of the body'; W art: 'the lower part of the body '; and para: 'the upper part of the body.' 
Why do we say 'what signifies a thing that has parts '? Observe पर्व ना. कायस्व. But not so in पूर्व घनाणामामन्मय 'invite the fore-most of the pupils': because here the substratum (adhikarana) is not unity (eka).. But how do we get the compounds like मध्याहः 'noon'; arयाहः 'evening? The word 'ahna' is compounded with every word signifying its parts, because we learn this by inference from sätra VI. 3. 110. . 
___अर्द्ध नपुंसकम् ॥ २॥ पदानि ॥ अर्दुम् , नपुंसकम् , (सविता स०एकदेशिना एकाधिकरणे). . . . 
पनिः ॥ भई भिरयेतनपंसकमेक्ररेशिनकाधिकरणेन समरवले तत्पुरुष समासो भवति ॥ : 
256 
EKADHIKARANA TAT-PURUSHA. (BK. II. CH. 11. § 2, 3. 
2. The word ardha when it signifles ex actly cqual parts i. e. halves, is always neuter, and is compounded with a word signifying a thing that has parts, provided that the thing halved is numerically one; and the compound is Tat-purusha. 
The word or is neuter when it means exactly equal parts or bisec tion. 
The word gamefut and pairatu are understood here. This sätra also debars sutra g; as wefrorrat - Avoit 'a half of the pepper'; 
l et a half of the Kosátakt.' 
... Why do we say " when it is neuter'? Otherwise we bave T 'hall the village'? T: 'half the city. 
The word 'ekadesin' must also be taken here. Thus in the sentence The could carry a half of the animal is of Devadatta'; we cannot compound the word 'ardha' with 'Devadatta.' 
The word 'ekadhikarapa' must also be taken here. So we cannot com pound of factory 'the half of the peppers.' 
द्वितीयतृतीयचतुर्थतुर्यापयन्यतरस्याम् ॥३॥ पदानि ॥ द्वितीय. alo-egel-gatiu, syuatem, (poatfoya-*) #1 ::. i: 'fententia asunto pailuair ATUA ugragmeat paraan 
pytyy aurat Haft 1 
3. The words dvitiya, 'second,' tritiya'third,' chaturtha "fourth,' and turya 'fourth,' are optionally compounded with that wort which signifies a thing that has parts, provided that the thing having parts is distinguished numerically by unity. The compound so formed is called Tat-purusha. :: This also debars sūtra By the force of the word 'optionally' used here, II. 2. 9. also applies. The prohibition contained in II. 2. 11. as to 
the compounding of a genitive with an ordinal, does not apply here; for that sule can find iti scope in other ordinals than those mentioned here, 
As faits ForToT: = fantafmat 'second begging. When we apply satra 9, we have मिक्षादितीवं. So also with the words वतीयभिक्षा, चतुर्थ निशा, TEHT. 
. Vari:--The word gita 'fourth' should also be included. As fan. नगरीय or रीयनिता. 
BK. II. CH. 17. $ 4-6. ] 
IRREGULAR TAT-PURUSHA 
231 
But we cannot form compounds, for reasons given in the last satra, of the phrases द्वितीय भिक्षाया भिभुकरब orदितीब निताण . 
प्राप्तापने च द्वितीयया ॥४॥ पदानि ॥ मास-मापले, द्वितीयया , ( सातावि०स०१०). 
वृतिः ॥ मास मापन इत्येतो रितीक्षाम्तेन सह समस्येते वसुरुष समासो भावि ॥ 
4. The words pråpta 'obtained,' and apanna" 'obtained' are optionally compounded with words ending in a second case-affix and form Tat-purusha compound. 
• The anuvritti of the words 'ekadesin' and 'ckadhikarapa' does not cxist here. This aphorism states an alternative course to rule II. 1. 24. Thus we have fra for: Artt sitfrant) or if TATT: ' obtained his livelibood.' So 
also भापजीविकः or मीपिकापनः. 
कालाः परिमाणिना ॥ ५॥ पदानि ॥ कालाः, परिमाणिना, (NO वित सु०स० )। 
वृत्तिः ॥ परिमाणमस्यास्तीति परिमाणी वदाविना सुबन्तेन सा बामोत् परिमाणपचना: कानशब्दाः समस्यन्ते तरपुरुष समासी भवति ।। 
5. Words denoting time are compounded when in construction, with words denoting the object whose duration is measured by the time, and the com pound is Tat-purusha. 
s This is also a kind of genitive compound. As मासो जातस्य - मासनादः 'a month old' (born a month ago.) So also खरतरजातः a year old: 
पहनातः ' two-days' old.' &c. 
मन् ॥ ६ ॥ पदानि । नञ् , ( समर्पःस०वि०त.). पृत्तिः।। न समर्थन सुबन्तेन सह समस्यते सत्रुपक्ष समासी भवति॥ पार्मिकम् ।। नमो नलोपस्तिहि मे ॥ . 
6. The negative word nañ is comipounded with a case-inflected word with which it is in con struction, and the compound is Tat-purusha. 
AS IT ATHY: - SRUU: 'who is not a Brahmana,' (though a man). The of a is elided by VI. 3. 73: 
Varti-The 7 of or is also clidcd even when the sccond member is a verb, provided that censure is implied as अपचसि संभाल्म 'thou cookest not Oknave.' . 
258 
. 
IRREGULAR TAT-PURUSHA 
(Bx. 17. CH. 11. $ 7, 8. 
... The word has six senses: (1) ETETT 'likeness or resemblance; as WATAT: 'one like a Brahmapa and wearing the sacred thread &c., but not a Brahmapa, but a Kshatriya or a Vaisya.' (2) Apr 'absence,' negation, "want,' or 'privation, as ATT 'absence of knowledge.' (3) 'difference' or distinction,' as *99. not a cloth, but something different from or other than a cloth'. (4) Pan 'smallness,' diminution' used as diminutive particle, as WEITT'having a slender waist.' (5) SATURT'badness,' "unfit. ness,' having a depreciative sense, as TET' wrong or improper time.' (6) fathe opposition,' 'contrariety,' as stra: ' opposite of morality,' 'immora lits.' 
tusan u be ugenta un, 99901 , ( Fonefaogoro)n वृतिः परित्व शमोकदम्तेन सुपा सा समस्यते तत्पुरुष समासो भवति॥ 
finansine gutataferranter i 
7. The word Ishat'a little,' is compounded with a case-inflected word which does not end with a krit-affix; and the compound is Tat-purusha 
Vart:It should be stated that the word for is only compounded with words expressing qualities (adjectives), as ITC: 'a somewhat proud.' 
qay 'a little brownish.' foto : a little hideous.' for a little rais ed! fra man'a little yellow.' ***** ' a little red.' 
Why do we say 'with words expressing qualities'? Observe fordi there is no compounding here. 
get closifa il post, (Hoforogoro ) . वृतिः ॥ पपन्त सुबन्त समन सुमन्तेन सह समस्यते तत्पुरुष समासो भवति ।। tiffanye il para t ener for Tasta 
8. A word ending with a sixth case-affix is compounded with a case-inflected word with which it is in construction; and the compound is Tat-purusha. 
As tra: 0541 - se: 'the king's man' ATAU 'the Brahmana's blanket 
Vart:-When a word takes the genitive case because of its connec tion with a word ending in a krit affix; that word may be compoundedwith such a krit word. Rule II. 3. 65., states the conditions when a krit-formed 
BK. II. CH. II. $ 3,9. 1 
IRREGULAR TAT-PURUSHA. 
259 
word governs the genitive case. Thus TV: a hatchet”; (a fuel cutter) TATOTTT: 'Palasadestroyer. leaf cutra 
Why do we say so? The very fact that a special rule has been made for the compounding of genitive cases governed by krit-nouns, shows that other words which take genitive case by some special rule, are not so com. pounded. Such as the genitive cases ordained by II. 3. 38, 51, 52. In fact the genitive case ordained by any rule of Panini, other than 11.!3. 51, is a prati padavidhana' genitive; and a word taking genitive case according to those rules, is incapable of composition; see vårtika under II. 2. 10. 
979#Iffas II Cu aerat II 476-affir:, , ( 80 qofgogogogosto 
F#T: 11 amiffit: at et heut umet para sa finali in Taipet a trasy Fit ****! 
fall Tula fortale ***** 
9. A word ending with a sixth case-affix is compounded with the word yâjaka 'sacrificer' &c., and the compound is Tat-purusha 
The compound which was ordained by the last aphorism, would have been prohibited by Rule 16 in the case of * &c.; hence the necessity of the present aphorism to guard against such a prohibition. As HTHUM: 'a Brahmana's sacrificer.' Fiftuar: 'one who sacrifices for Kshatriyas. 
( a ). i. 9 . 2. . 3. f . 4 aftor. 5. Tiem. 6. 619 or firan. 7. Mart. E. FAM or hear . 9. Tr*. 10. i 11. **. 12. rumu . 13. aftmuar. 14. a 15. 16. . 
. Vart:-A word in the genitive case is compounded with a word expressing a quality which abides in the former word. As ATBUOTT: • Brah mana-caste.' ( :' sandal-scent.' Rita: 'the wood-apple juice. . 
Vart:-So also with an adjective in the comparative degree ; and the sign of comparison 7 is elided. Thus atst Hitta : - ta: "the whitest of all!' at TTT: - Barat 'the greatest among all.' This "vårtika' is an exception in anticipation to the next sätra which prohibits composition, when the genitive has the forcc of specification. Thus FIFT ITT: * a cow whitest among all... 
460 
COMPOUND PROHIBITED. 
(Bk. II. CH II. $ 10, 1 t. 
a fagtea r1 99 11 qera a a, fagica, (naofaogo gouet). 
af: 11 Petru att a need II . पार्तिकम् ।। प्रतिपदविधानाच पठी न समस्यत इति वाग्वम् ।। 
10. A word in the genitive case is not com pounded with another, when the force of the sixth case afix is that of specification (nirdhårapa). 
With this sätra, begins a series of exceptions to the composition of words in the genitive case. The separation of one from the many, on account of its genus, attribute and action, is called 'oirdharana.' As 49 शरतमः "the Kshatriya is the most powerful amongst men.' कृष्णा गर्वा संपनभीरतमः 'the black cow is the most milk-giving amongst cows." Tyrat ftat: 'the runner is the swiftest amongst walkers. This form of genitive meaning 'amongst,' is ordained by sâtra II. 3. 41. . . 
Vart:- A word taking a genitive-case by force of any rule other than sätra II. 3. 50, is never compounded. See sätra 8. Thus the following words are never compounded afiday, Ariana 
पूरणगुणहितार्थ सदव्ययतव्यसमानाधिकरणेन ॥१७॥ पदानि ॥ gra-ga-gia-376-47-4694-72-e8rafitūta ( 1 ) a 
ia: 11 79 79 pari a Hory na wafanu reed: not a phead 11 
11. A word ending with a sixth case-affix is not compounded with a word having the sense of an ordinal, an attribute, or satisfaction, or with a participle ending in the affix called 'sat' (III. 2. 127) or an indeclin able, or ending with the atfix tarya, or with a word deuoting the same object (i. e., when they are in apposi. tion). . : The word 'artha' joias with all the first three words, as (1) em 1977. 
fifth amongst the pupils;' BTOTT ETTH. (2) MTRT a'the blackness of the crow,' Trur: F . (3) 4tat a: 'satisfied of fruits;'art :. (4) ATETET 'the doing of a Brahmana ;' ATUTA #12: the doing of a Brahmana. (5) ATGTE4 TI 'being done oi Brahmana,' *4*6* T. (6) ATKET Rout. When however the asfix is Ty having the indicatory (III. 1. 96.) there is compounding as A ndoai 'the Brahmapa's duty' () TTT: पाटलिपुत्रकस्व 'of the king Pataliputraka' पाणिनेः समकारस्थ 'of the sutra composer 
BK. 11. CH. II. $ 12-14.) 
COMPOUND PROHIBITED. 
261 
Papini. We cao however form a compound like the following a rangifufti : By the general rule relating to words in apposition contained in sátra II. 1. 57, the difference between that sätra and the present, is as to position of the words. In the genitive compound the genitive word would have stood first 
if compounded; not so in the other, there the quality stands first. 
wat u gerrara # 82 Haifa na , 1, m ra, ( t *) 
वृत्तिः ॥ को वः पूजायां विहितस्तेन पष्ठी न समस्वत । 
12. A word ending with a sixth case-afix is not compounded with a word ending with the affix 'kta,' when the force of'kta' is to denote' respect'&c. 
The affix is added in the sense of inclination, understanding or respect by sätra III. 2. 188. The present sutra alludes to that aphorism when it uses the word at: and påja itself is used only as an illustration and includes the other two significations of 'kta' also, namely mati 'inclination, and buddhi 'understanding. 
As trata-u-ra: 'the king wishes, understands or respects.' 
Why do we say 'when meaning respect'? When 'kta' has not this signification there is compounding. As wreferat' pupil's laughing.' 
witacoralfaat 93 al carfa ut eff$70-anfeant, , ( 909 at that ) 
TFF: Il 
S i to at guard u 
13. A word ending with a sixth case-affix is not compounded with a word ending with the affix 'kta,' when the force of the latter is to denote locality' in which something has happened. 
When the affix is attached to roots denoting 'fixedness, motion or eating', it gives the sense of agent and of location in connection with the action denoted by the roots i. c., that the action is located by the agent ia this or that site (III. 4. 76); as raat aan 'here they have gone.' Fast "here they have caten.' 
कर्मणि च ॥ १४ ॥ पदानि ॥ कर्मणि, 4, (सषष्ठीन). #: ll **for ETF Enead u 
14. A word ending with a sixth case-affix is not compounded with another, when the force of the genitive case is that of the accusative. 
262 
COMPOUND PROHIBITED. 
(Bk. II. CH. II. $ 15, 16. 
The anuvfitti of us does not extend to this aphorism. The word karma qualifics shashțhi. Sätra II. 3.66 declares the conditions when, instead of the accusative, the genitive may be employed i. c., when the agent and the object of the action denoted by the nouns formed by krit affixes, are both used in a sentence, the object is put in the genitive case and not the agent; as vai nu 
होमगोपालकन' the milking of cows without a cowherd is a wonder.' रोचते भोप FT T HY 'cating of rice agrees with Devadatta.' any u 8: Y स्वात्तेन 'the drinking of milk by Devadatta is indeed excellent.' शिचिमा समरव 
a: 907 at 'wonderful is the structure of sdtras by Papini. T i saft n 91'll reifa u 791- 
H ra, maft, (Hopet ) . 
पत्तिः ॥ कर्तरि या पष्ठी या बारकम च सहन समस्यते ॥ 
15. A word ending with a sixth case-affix is. not compounded with a word ending with 'trich' or 
aka,' when the force of the genitive case is that of an agente 
. . The word 'kartari' qualifies the genitive-case. The affix ry is taught in sätra III. 1. 133, and the affix 4* is not a single affix; all affixes that have an clement g are *; such as Er or porr (sätra VII. 1. 1.) Thus भवतः शायिका 'your honor's repose' भवत भाधिका 'your eating' भवतोगामिका 
• your going in front.' 
The affix cis employed always in forming nouns of agency; hence there can be no example of a word in a genitive case having the force of an agent, governing another word also having the force of an agent. They therefore serves no purpose in this aphorism, but applies to the sätras that follow. 
The genitive has the force of an agent under conditions mentioned ia 11. 3. 65. 
Why do we say 'when it denotes agent'? Observe traitant turcafer. 
Faft ut 98 a 14 n self, (pougtagn ) 11. #: dimife rachat east ar 878964 . 
16. A word ending with the sixth case-affix is not compounded with a word ending with 'trich'or 'aka' affix when the force of these latter affixes is that of an agent. 
The word "kartari' qualifies the word 'aka' only and not 'trich," for the latter always denotes the ageat and nothing else. BK. II. CH. 11. § 16-18.) 
Nitya TAT-PURUSHA. 
289 
As vai HIT “the creator of waters' get tar "the destroyer of cities' Sertat 'the holder of thunderbolt. 
It might be suggested that the word met being read in the class of QYTE (sätra 9) ought to be compounded. The word wat there means 'hus band,' while in the example we have given, it means 'holder.' 
The above are examples of words formed by . Now we shall give examples of words formed by भक, thus भोवनस्व मोनक: the eater of rice,' सनना पायकः 'thedrinker of saktu.' 
नित्यं क्रीडाजीविफयोः ॥ १७ ॥ पदानि , नित्यन् , क्रीडा सोविकयोः, (सुस्तषष्ठी) 
पतिः ।। क्रीसयां जीविकायां च मिरय पष्ठी समस्यते तत्पुरुष समासो नाति ।। . 17. A word ending with a sixth case-affix is invariably compounded with a word ending with aka, when these affixes deuote a sport or a livelihood; and the compound is Tat-purusha. 
This is a Nitya-samasa incapable of analysis. This anuvsitti' of the word 'aa'which began with sútra 10, does not extend further. The affix ay never has the sense of sporting or livelihood; the only examples possible are of 'aka' Thus मालकयुमनभिका 'a sort of game played by the people in the castera districts ia which uddalaka Rowers are broken or crushed. So also वारपुषपचायिका 'aplay ofgathering flowers.' 
So also r : 'one who earns his bread by painting or marking the teeth.' मखनेखक 'a nail-painter by profession.. 
Why do we say 'when meaning sporting or livelihood. Observe भोपनस्य भोमकः. 
कुगतिप्रादयः ॥ १८॥ पदानि । कु-गति-प्र-आदयः, (साता नित्यसमर्थःसह) 
वृतिः ॥ कु गति प्रादयः समन शनान्तरेन सह निर समस्यन्ते नानुरुप समासो भवति । 
वार्निकम् ।। पादयो गताय प्रथमया ॥ वार्निकम् ॥ भत्यादयः कान्ताय द्वितीयवा ॥ वार्निकम् ॥भवादयः कुराचयें बतीयवा ॥ पार्निकम् ।। पर्यादयो ग्नानाययें चतुथ्यो। पार्निकम् ।। निरादयः कान्तापयें पसम्या। वार्निकम् ॥ इवेन सह नित्यसमासो विभत्तवलोपः पूर्वपरमहतिस्परसंच बसाया गार्निकम् ॥ प्रातिप्रसंङ्गे कर्मप्रवचनीयानां प्रतिषेधो सका। 
264 
- NITIA TAT-PURUSHA. 
(Bk. II. CH. II. $ 18 
18. The indeclinable word ku 'bad,' the par. ticles called gati, and the prepositions pra, &c., are in variably compounded with other words with which they are in construction; and the resulting compound is Tato purusha. 
The word ku means 'badness or sia'; as, VET: 'a sinful man': (2) Gati (I. 4. 60) as, t 'having asserted '; (1. 4. 61.) yurada i 
So also with the words &c., when they are mere particles and not used as 'upasargas,' or 'gati'; as I meaning bad,' in oy: 'a bad man'; so also 
and niet meaning 'respect' in qu: 'honorable man'; stergay'excelleat man'; * means ' a little' as eft : 'brownish. 
Generally these are attributive words but they are found elsewhere also, as को or करणाor कपोष्णन् 'tepid.' Soalso दुष्कृतम्, मसिस्तुतम् and भावदम् ।। 
Vart:- The words & &c., when the sease is that of 'gone' or the like, combine with what ends with the first case-affix. Thus anard'a herc detory teacher'; so also creatinet.' 
• Vart:-The words wa &c., when the thing denoted has the sense of 'gone beyond' or the like, combine with what ends with the second casc affix. As maTT: GET fired: (. 3. 44 and 48) 'without a bed-stead,' was . 'excecding the accklace in beauty.' 
Vart:-The words 874 &c., when the thing denoted is cried out' &c., are compounded with what ends with third case-affix as 75: ar – MY 
titroni'what is announced by the cuckoo' i.C., the Spring. 
Part:--The words oft &c., when the thing denoted is 'weary' &c., are compounded with what ends with the fourth case-affix as gitaraquara g ar: 'weary of study.' nift:'wealth' (sufficient to support a maidea). 
Vart:- The words forç &c., when the thing denoted is 'gone beyond' &c., are compounded with what ends with the fifth case-alfx, as factura: * who has gone beyond Kausambi'; so also fraicrofa. 
Vart:-A word enters into composition with pri 'like'; and there is no clision of the case-affix, and the first member of the compound retaios its natural accent, as purtr' like a word and its meaning,' et 'like two garments.' 
Vart:-Prohibition must be stated of &c., when they are 'Karma pravachaniya'; as two foruma faget the lightening flashes in the direction of the tree,' an ITT ATT af “Devadatta is good towards his mother." 
BK. II. CH. II. § 19, 20. ) 
NITYA TAT-PURUSHA. 
265 
9909fare a geu verfat 59947, stere ( Boge fregardi: 9) n 
TA: 11 894ficat air samniU HT HAFT AUTOTT FELT Toft 
19. An upapada or attendant word (III. 1. 92), which does not end with a tense-affix (III. 4. 78) is in variably compounded with that with which it is in con struction. The compound thus formed is Tat-purusha. 
Thus *. 'one who wakes pots,' FEAT: 'one who makes cities.' 
Why do we say 'which does not end with a tense-affix'? Observe एधानाहारको प्रमति 'he goes to bring fuel. 
It might be objected, that the question of compounding with a word ending in a tense-affix is irrelevant; since the anuvfitti of the words is understood here, so that face will find no scope. To this we reply that we should infer that the words or should not be read into this and the last aphorism. The following Paribhasha also arises from this sátra.. 
गतिकारको पपरानो कृद्धिः सह समासाचनं पाक सत्पतेः ।। . . "It should be stated that Gatis, Karakas, and Upapadas, are compound. ed with bases that cad with krit-affixes, before a case-termination or feminine affix has been added to the latter." 
The result is that Upapadas and Gatis are rot compounded by sátras 18 and 19 with case-infected nouns, but they are compounded with pri. mary nouns before a case-termination or feminine affix is added to the latter. The same considerations apply to kårakas also. Thus HTTA 'a female brought in exchange for a horse,' is formed correctly. To wted H - HTS mitat; add to (IV. 1. 50) and we have start. If on the other hand, the feminine affix ate had beca added to sita previous to its composition with HTT the form would have been "Itay, and we should have had no base ending with short and in that case y could not have been added by IV. 1. 50. 
harcuta il po nogifa in spat, 77, Harga ( FOTO farge89) * 
fra: 11 Hadithi Tera: at sa air pada 18 
20. When an upapada is compounded with an indeclinable , then it is compounded only with those avyayas which end in the affix 74.. 
286 
OPTIONAL TAT-PURUSHA 
(BK, II. CH. II. $ 20, 21. 
This makes a restriction, to the general compounding of upapadas with avyayas as ordained by the last rule. As F ATT I he eats having made his food sweet.' So also TERTE'having seasoned. The avyayas ending in HF are formed by the affix the (111. 4. 26) &c. 
Why do we say 'with avyayas ending in spa? Observe terit "the time of eating. Here the avyaya ends in sy of the affix it added by rule III. 3. 167 (the affix tumun may be applied, when the word in con 
struction is not a verb, but it , afa or eesttime.') 
The force of the word 'onlyis to indicate that this composition takes place in those cases where a rule ordains 7 only, after any root with regard to any upapada; so that no composition will take place where the affix e as well as another affix is ordained after a root with certain upapadas. Thus sätra III. 4. 24, declares: "thc affixes Frand part come after a verb when the words " , 47 and get are upapadas." Here the art (affix ) is not the sole affix ordained; but there is a co-ordinate affix with it namely . Therefore in Hi 'having first eaten' there is no composition because *7***is not the only form we can have; for, 
a t is also used in the same sense. 
तृतीयाप्रतीन्यन्यतरस्याम् ॥२१॥ पदानि ॥ तृतीया-प्रभृतीनि SpaTENA ( FODTos03faaqda ) u 
वृत्तिः ॥ उपांशस्तृतीयायामियतः प्रभृति यान्युपपदानि तान्यमेवाध्ययेन सहान्यतरस्या समस्यन्ते तत्पुरुष समासो भवति।। 
. 21.. An upapada ending with a third case-afix (III. -4. 47) &c., is compounded optionally with an inde: clinable formed by the affix and the compound is Tat puruslia. " 
The term app is understood here. The upapadas ending with a third case-affix &c., are given in sâtra III. 4. 47 and the sâtras that follow. As 
Test F or This he eats after having relished the food with radish.' So also gratuite or go da (Ill. 4. 49) "he lics pressing on his ribs.' For upapadas ending with other cases, see sätra III. 4 52 &c. This being an optional rule, it is not necessary that the upapada should be tulya-vidhana with the W; so that this optional compounding may take place even under rule Ill. 4. 59 where is not the only affix enjoined, but there is my as well. This vibbåsha may therefore be called both in and Ma vibhasha. It is # with regard to those rules where is the only affix 
employed; and it is HTH with regard to those where is not the only · allia, 
BR .II. CH. II. 
1.24.] 
BAHUBRIHI. 
267. 
वाच ॥ २॥ पदानि । का, च, ( स०तन्दतीयाप्रमृतीन्य न्यतरसान उप०). 
___ निः॥ कापाययेन सह हतोबा अभूतीन्युपपदानि भन्यतरस्या समस्यन्ते तत्पुरुष समासो भवति ॥ 
22. An upapada ending with a third case-affix or any other of the remaining four cases, is optionally compounded with a word ending with the affix ktvå: and the compound is Tat-purusha 
This rule provides for avyayas ending in TJ which the last two rules did not provide. Thus we have उच्चीकृत्व or करा . Here the aflix ais added by sätra III. 4. 59, In the case when there is composition, the Fris replaced by the substitute foi otherwise not. Sec VII. 1. 37. 
of the upapadas being in the 3rd case &c., applies here also. Therefore there is no composition in भलं कला or खलुकृताः 
. शेषो बहुब्रीहिः ॥ २३ ॥ पदानि ॥ शेषः , बहुव्रीहिः (१०). 
वृतिः ॥ ऐपः समासो बहुप्रीहिसंती भवति ॥ 
23. The remaining compound is called Bahu. vrihi. 
A compound which does not fall within any one of the rules given above, will be Bahuvrthi. This is a governing aphorism and extends up to satra 28. Thus चिषगुः 'possessed of a brindled cow.' 
अनेकमन्यपदार्थ ॥ २४॥ पदानि ॥ अनेकम् , अन्य-पद-अप (80 बाबीहि). 
वृत्तिः ॥ भनेक सुबन्तमन्यपदायें वर्तमान समस्यते बहुप्रीहि समारो भावि पार्निकम् ।। बाबीहिः समानाधिकरणानामिति पत्तायन। पार्तिकम् ॥भययानां पानीहिकपः॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ साम्युपमानपर्चपदस्योगरपदजोपच सम्बः॥ . बार्तिकम् ।। समुदायविकारपध्वाध बहुव्रीहिरुत्तरपदलोपति पनवम्।. . . . पार्तिकम् ।। प्रादिभ्यो धातुमस्योतरपदस्य लोप पा परमीहितम्यः । पार्तिकम् ॥ नमोऽस्त्यर्थानो याबीहिर्वा चोतरपदलोरक्ष तकः । पार्मिकम् ।। सुचधिकारेऽस्तिक्षीरादीनां बहवीहितग्बः॥ 
24. Two or more words, ending in any case. afax, form a compound, denoting another new thing, not connoted by those words individually; and the com: pound is called Bahuviihi.. .... 
268 
BAHUVRIHL 
[ BK. CH. I. $ 24. 
anllage which water bar com The Bahuvrthi compound comes with the force of all the affixes but the first; as from aro - AHIT 979. 'alwater-reached village. 
TT 'a bull by whom a cart is drawn.' TEHT: 'Rudra to whom cattle is offered," egater Ferroft. a vessel which rich tacchi perairan: Devadatta pol." sessed of a brindled cow.' staat er: 'a village possessed of heroic mea.' 
• Bahuviihi compound is not formed with the scose of the first case. As qe ta 'gone when it had raiaed.' 
Why do we say more than one'? So that there may be compound. ing of many words, as in the following verse: 
सुसमनटके शेन सुनमामिनवाससा। पुत्री पर्वतराजस्य कुतो तोर्विवाहिता ॥. 
Why was the daughter of the king of the mountains married by Siva possessed of beautifully-delicate-locked-hair, and cheap deer-skin-dress.' 
Vart:Bahuvrihi compounds are formed of words having the same case, so that words not being in apposition are not so compounded; as de 
. .. 
Vart:The compounds of indeclinables are Bahuvrihi ; as neer: possessed of raised mouth. So also haja: &c. 
Vart:The second member is elided in a Bahuvrihi compound of which the first member is a word in the locative case, or a word with which comparison is made (ayat). As, et feun: sFT - : ' in whose throat there is blackness (Siva)' faila: 'who has hair on his chest.' TFT TOTO TEU - 'he whose face is like that of a camel' ago * ass-faced. 
Vart:---Bahuvrihi compound may be formed after cliding the second member with a word in the sixth case denoting collection or modification.' As Hurai a: = yarat: , TE I SET T'he who has a collec tion of hair as crest.' FE FERITA SEX - Total: 'hc who has orda. ments made of gold 
Vart:-The optional compounding of what arises from a verbal root coming after * &c. should be stated, and the clision of the subscquent term. As gerard gott * $74:' a tree of which the Icaves are all fallen.' So also FYRIT.. 
Vart: The compounding of words signifying what exists, coming after the negative to should be stated, and the optional elision of the second of the terms. As, H UATT TIIUFT : 'childless. So also sprca: wife less.' 
Part: Compounds like H IT should be stated as Bahuvrihi. As wanita berop 'a Brahmanf having milk.' These words are indeclinables. 
The word 'asti' here is an indeclinable though appearing as a verke 
BK. II. CH. 11. $ 25, 263) 
BABUVRIHI. 
209 
E975649krafa to a plug n geura EX2T, 1899-8147-27-#fus-ten: , , ( Fougelfe:a) - 
निः ।। संख्येवे या संख्या पर्न नया सहाम्ववासन्नादूराधिकसंख्याः समस्यन्ते बहुप्रीडिश समासो भवति।। 
25. Indeclinable words and the words asanna near,' adůra 'near,' adhika 'more and the words called sankhyå (Numerals) are compounded, with another san. khyå word, when the souise-is-that-ofanninerarorsan khyå. The compound is Bahuvrihi. series as an adina 
Thus 34 UT: (V. 4. 73) those who are near ten i.l. nine or eleven. Similarly fitt: 'aineteen or twenty-one' (VI. 4. 142). So also 
H EUT: 'nine or eleven.' HETE: 'pinc or eleven.' TATUT: 'cleven. 
So also two 'numerals' may be compounded; as, fart: 'two or three.' fertur:' twenty.' 
Why do we say with a qumeral? Observe de 1909: 'five Brab. maaas.' 
Why do we say 'with an Indeclinable &c? Witness Ta'. ter. Why do we say when denoting a numeral'? Observc ufyat faula tara 
of cours more than twenty.' 
दिङ्नामान्यन्तराले ॥ २६॥ पदानि । दिल्-नामानि , अन्तराले ( Foago ) 
वृत्तिः ॥ दिइनामानि सुबन्तानि भन्तराले वाच्य समस्यन्तै बहुव्रीहि समासो भवति।। वार्तिकम् ।। सर्वनाम्नो पत्तिमाये पंचायः ।। 
26. Words which are the names of the points of th: compass are compounded, when the compound signifies the intermediate point, and the compound so formed is Bahuyrihi. 
Thus ffirmat.raç dakshina-pQrva, south-east" (the direction midway between south and east.) Pest 'north-east.' 
The word ma is introduced in the sůtra to indicate tbat no compound. ing takes place when the words denoting direction are derivative words whose primary signification is not indicative of direction; as p a liaty Feuir o g' the point between cast and north. Here the words ont' cast and atact 'aorth' though denoting directions, arc derivatively so, and beace no compounding, 
170 
BAHUVRIHI. 
[Bk. II. CH: II.327, 28, 
Vart:-Whenever a Bahuvrihi gets the designation of Sarvanaman (I. I. 28, 29), the first term becomes masculine, by VI. 3. 34; as रक्षिणा + पर्छ - रक्षिणपर्वा ।। . . . . 
तत्र तेनेदमिति सरूपे ॥ २७ ॥ पदानि ॥ तत्र, तेन, इदम्, इति, सरूपे ( स०मपुत्रीहिः). 
पतिः ॥ सनेति सतम्यन्ते सरूपे परे सेनेति च दतीयान्ते इदमित्येतस्मिन समस्यते बहुव्रीहि समासो भवति ॥ .. 
27. Two homonymous words both being in the locative case or both being in the instrumental case) are compounded, the sense being this happens therein or with that.' The compound so formed is Bahuvrshi. 
The word means 'a word ia the locative case,' and a word in the instrumental case. The word 864 or similar form' applies to both. The word in indicates that the mcaning of the compound so formed should be learned from popular usage, therefore it means, 'seizing, striking, fighting. All these senses are implied by ra. The word is exhibited in the locative case, if the sense is that of seizing; and the word is exhibited in the instrumental case, when the sense is that of striking; the word indicat ed by the word दरमिते is युद्ध; as केरोषकेशोषु च गृहीला इ युद्ध वृत्तं - केशाकशि (VI. 3. 137 and V.4. 127.) ' hair to hair, fighting by pulling each other's hair'; कचाकधि hair against hair'; एडेथ एडेश प्रहश्य र युद्ध पूनं - एएडादएिड 'stick against stick, fight with stick and stave; so also मशलामशली. In the above examples the.samasanta affixt is added at the end by rule v. 4. 127; and all such words are Aryaya or indeclinable. The final vowel of the first term is lengthened by Rule VI. 3. 137. 
Why do we say 'having the same form? We cannot form such a compound from the following : हलेश मुपलेश प्रहाय हवं युद्ध वृत्तम् . 
तेन सहेति तुल्ययोगे ॥ २८ ॥ पदानि ॥ तेन, सह-इति , तुल्प योगे, ( स०बहुब्रीहिः). 
वृतिः ॥ सहेरयेतयारूप तुल्ययोगे वर्नमन तेति हमीवान्सेन सा समस्यते बहुप्रीहिश समासो भवति । 
28. The word saha 'together is compounded with a word ending with the third case-affix and the compound is Bahuvrihi; provided that, the companion and the person accompanied are equally affected by any. action or thing, in the same mannr. 
Bx. II. CH. II. $ 28-30.) 
PURVA-NIPATA IN DVANDVA. 
m 
: Thus a gray . T: (VI. 3. 82, e changed to ) 'he has come accompanied by his son'. awy: 'accompanied by the pupil.' ac' accon panied by the servant.' 
Why do we say 'tulya-yoga'? Witness ate pf: gitarte efet abatt *the she-ass carries the whole burden, though there exist her ten sons.' 
How do we get the forms like :, wire: , 17 &c., in which there is no ' tulya-yoga'? It shows that this condition is of limited operation (gra normation of ). 
prog: n ze nogfa na-op, *: , ( * ) N. पतिः ।। भनेक सुबन्त चायें पर्तमान समस्यते बघ नासो भवति । 
29. When a set of several words ending with case-affixes stands in a relation expressible by 'and' the set is made into a compound; and the compound so form ed is called Dvandva. 
The meanings that may be indicated byr' and are four, (1) act: 'community of relerence,' (2) HTT#'collateralness of reference, (3) razaratur: *mutual conjunction' and (4) ETETT. 'aggregate.' la the first two cascs vis. community of reference, and collateralness of reference, composition does not take place, because the words are not directly related to one anotber (II. 1. 1). Composition is enjoined therefore, when the sense of is that of mutual conjunction and lumping. Thus we cannot compound TTT TTT YHT' reverence God and thy Guru' or FREMT at Te 'go for alms and bring the cow. But we can compound the following my math - ant ' the Plaksha and the Nyagrodha trecs.' So yatafor-TERTUT: , T TT 
Travel 
safå gerne in se il ozifa u sagaian, gota (fars:) * पतिः ।। उपसर्जनसंशक समासे पूर्व प्रयोनम्वन् ॥ 
30. The upasarjana ( I. 2. 43 ) is to be placed first in a compound. 
The word ard is understood here. The upasarjana being the word exhibited in the nominative case in the rules relating to samasa, must stand first. The constant application of this rule has been illustrated in the pre vious aphorisms. Without this rule, there would have been no fixity as to the position of words. 
Uncateg en 33 u açıfa o 1497-may, tay, ( Fogue ) 
if: 11 morgenmig reyes talantaran 
272. 
PURVA-NIPATA IN DVANDVA. 
(Bk. II. CH. II. $ 31-33 
. 31: the upasarjana is to be put last in the words Rajadanta &c. 
• Thus T T: ( parat (THT).' a chief of teeth' (i..., an cyetooth). It is not merely the upasarjana that is placed. last in these examples; but words which by some other rules would have stood first, stand in this list as second. 
1. राजदन्तः. 2. भोवणम् . 3. निमवासियम् . 4. नममुषितम् . 5. सिनस मुटम् . 6. मटलचितम् . 7. भवलिमपक्रमे . 8. भर्पितीतम् . 9. (भर्पितोमम् ). 10. उसगावम् . . उनएलमुसनम् . 12. तण्डुलकिण्वन् • 13. दृपदुपलम् . 14. भारहा. यनि. 15. (भारग्वायनबन्धकी). 16. चित्ररथवाल्हीकम् . 17. भवन्त्यामकम् . 18. शवार्यम्. 19. बातकराजानो. 20. रिपक्सेनार्जुनो . 21. भतिध्रुवम् . 22. पारगवम्. 23. शब्दायों. 24. धर्मार्यो . 25. कामार्यों . 26. भशन्दो. 37. भर्यधों. 28. भर्यकामो. 29. कारिमतम् . 30. गाजवामम् . 31. (गोजवाजम् . 32. गोपालि धानपूजासम् . 33. (गोपालधानीपूलासम् ). 34. पूनासकारएउम्. 35. (पूलासककु. रएडम् ). 36. स्थलासम् • 37.. (स्थूलपूनासम् ). 38. उशीरवीजन् . 39. (जिज्ञास्थ. 40. सिन्नास्थम् . 4. (सिनावस्थम्). 42. चिमास्वाती . 43. (चिस्वाति). 44. भार्यापती. 45. सम्पती. 46. जम्पती . 47. मायापती. 48. पुषपती. : 49: पुत्रपा. 50. केशश्मश्रु or मधुकशो. 5... शिरोविजु. 52. धिरोवीजम् . 53. शिरोजानु. 54. सर्पिर्मधुनी. 55. मधुसर्पिषी . 56. भावन्तो. 57. भम्तादी: 
58. गुणवृद्धी. 59. पृद्धिगुणी. 
द्वन्द्वे घि ॥ ३२ ॥ पदानि ॥ द्वन्दे , घि, ( स०स०पूर्वम् ) । वृत्तिः ॥ इन्हें समासे घ्यन्तं पूर्व प्रयोक्तम्यम् ।। 
32. In a Dvandva compound, let a word called घि (I. 4.7) stand first. 
As हरिहरी • Hari and Hara.' So also पटुगुमो and मृदुगुमौ. Where there are more than one such for words in a compound, any one may be fixed upon as first member, and the rest to follow no fixed rulc, As FEATURT: Or पशुरूमावा. 
____Why do we say 'Dvandra? Observe विसरपटुः which is Tat-purusha.. 
___अजाद्यदन्तम् ॥ ३३ ॥ पदानि ॥ अज्-आदि-अदन्तम् , (म०३०पूर्वम्वन्द्वे ) 
पृत्तिः ॥ मनायदन्तं शब्दरूपं दो समासे पूर्व प्रयोक्तग्यम् ।। पार्निकम् ।। बहुप्पनियमः॥ पार्निकम् ॥ वन्य जापदन्त विप्रतिषेधेन । 
33. In a Drandva compound, let what begins with a vowel and ends with a short s be placed first. 
. •BK. II. CH. II. 1 33, 34.] . PURYA-NIPATA IN DVANDVA. 
__Thus, उष्ट्रखरम् 'the camel and the ass.' उन्दूराशकम् 'the camel and the hare.' 
Vart:--When there are my such words there is no fixed rule. :As भश्वरयेन्द्राः or इमरयाश्वाः । 
Vart:-In the Drandva compounds the for would stand first only then, when the rule of Tara does not prohibit it. Thus Farat or FIT. Here 4.87 and try though , do not stand first, because he beginning with a vowel and ending in short भ, by the rule of vipratishedha takes precedence (I.4.2). 
Why do we say 'ope with a tot al. 1: 70)? This rule does not apply when it is long मा as भरवा + पुषः - भश्वावृपो or पारवे ... ... 
अल्पाचतरम् ।। ३४ ॥ पदानि ॥ अल्पान्तरम् , (सद्वन्देपूर्वम्) । वृत्तिः॥ भन्पान्तरं धन्दा बने समासे पूर्वप्रयोगम्यम् ॥ । पार्निकम् ॥ अतुनक्षमाणामानुपूष्येण समानातराण पूर्वनिपातो परयः ॥ 2. मार्मिकम् ।। सावतर पूर्व निपततीति वक्तव्यम् ।। 
पार्निकम् ।। भन्यति । पूर्व निपततीति वक्तव्यम् ।। पार्मिकम् ।। वर्णानामानुपयेण पूर्वनिपातः ।। 
पार्मिकम् । भातुश्च ज्यायसः पूर्वनिपातो पतम्यः ॥ . . पार्निकम् ॥ संख्याया भल्पीयस्याः पूर्वनिपातो पकग्वः ॥ 
34. In a Dvandva compound, that word-form which has fewer vowels, is to be placed first. . . . 
Thus Hक्ष +न्यग्री - सतन्यमोधी ; and धवखदिरपनाशाः ॥ When there are many words, there is no fixed rule. As siegerforafior: 
I Vart:- Names of seasons and stars consisting of equal number of syllables should be arranged in the compound according to their natural order 
When they do not consist of equal syllables, the shorter should be placed first; as पीज्मवसन्सो . . 
2 Vart:-A word consisting of light (laghu) vowels is placed first. As, कुशका; शरशादम् . 
___Vart:-The more honorable of the two is placed first; as, मातापितरो 'mother and father, हामfaith and intelligence' दीवातपसी "initiation and austerity'. . . , .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
PURVA-NIPATA IN BAHUVRIHI. 
[- BK. II. CH. II. $34, 35. 
. . : Vartir-The castes are placed according to their order: as, मामणसचिव विद् पदाः 'Brahmana Kshatriya Vaisya and Sudra' There is no limitation of equality of syllables here. 
Vart:The name of the elder brother is placed first; as afuersitat 'Yudhishthira and Arjuna.' ... Vart:-Among numerals, the less in value is placed first; as few "+#0; and three’i fragt 'three and four.' 
• सप्तमी विशेषणे बद्रीयौ ॥३॥ पदानि ॥ मममी, विशेषणे , बहुधीही , ( म०पूर्वम् ). .: निः ॥ साम्यन्त विशेषणं च बहुव्रीहिसमासे पूर्व प्रयोनम्यन् ॥ .. 
वार्निकम् ।। सर्वनामसंख्ययोरुपसण्यानम् ।। वार्निकम् ॥ वा भियस्य पूर्वनिपातः ॥ पार्निकम् । समस्याः पूर्वनिपाते प्रासे गड्वादिभ्यः सम्यन्त परम्॥ 
35. A word with the seventh case.afnx and an epithet are to be placed first in the Bahuvrshi compound. 
In a Bahuvrihi, all words are upasarjana, and hence there is no rule for their arrangement. The present aphorism declares that rule; as कण्ठेकाल: 'who is black in the throat. So also रसिलोमा, विमगः, शवलय. 
:- Varti-The sarvanamas and the numerals stand first; as सर्वश्वतः, सर्वकामः, विश,विकृष्णः. In a compound formed by the composition of sarva nama words with a sankhya word, the latter should stand first; as, रुपन्द, 
वन्यः &c. 
___Varta-The word भिय may optionally stand first; as गुरमियः .or भिवगुगः. 
Vart:-After the words org &c., the word in the 7th case-afix comes as subsequent; as nga: 'abump-necked 
- with a fibra How is then the word वडेगड: 'hump in the shoulder' to be explained? This is governed by the general rule, and not th xcep tional vartika. 
निष्ठा, ॥ ३६॥ पदानि ॥ निष्ठा, ( म०बहुप्रीही पूर्वम् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ निष्टान्त च बहुव्रीहिसमासे पूर्व प्रयोनग्यम् ॥ .... . पार्मिकम् ।। निटासा पूर्वनिपाले जातिकालसुखानिक पावचनम् । पार्मिकम् ।। पहरणायें शव परे निष्टासमम्बी भवन निकम्बन्। 
17 
By: I. CH. II. 3. 36-38.] ..... OPTIONAL PURVA-KIPATAL 
38. What ends with a Nishtha (L. 1.26) shall stand first in a Bahuvrihi compound. . . 
Thus बुनयोगः 'one who is devoted to devotion': रुक'one who has made the mat'; मिक्षितनिधिः 'one who has begged alms.. . . 
Part:-A word expressing jati (genus), time, or pleasure, is placed subsequent; as, शामग्धी , माखनातः , and सुखमानः &c.. 
Vart-Tbe.words ending in Nishtha or in the locative case stand subsequent, whea coming after words denoting striking '; as h y 'ready with sword'; एडपाणि: "holding sceptre in hand' 
वाहिताग्न्यादिषु ॥ ३०॥ पदानि ॥ वा, भादित-अग्नि-मादिषु (निष्टा पूर्वम् ). 
पतिः ॥ भाहिताग्न्यारिए निगन्य पूरा भयोग्यम् ।। 
37. In the compounds Ahitågni and the like, the Nishtha-formed word may optionally be placed first. 
Thus Hartea: or sheantar 'one who has consecrated fire.' 
1. भाहितामि. .. भारपुष: 3. भातदम्ब, + मातरमभु. 5. नीष. 6. पपीय. 7. पपपीव.8. बसमा. 9. गवार्य 
भाकृविगणोऽवम् . 1. गडकएड. १. भस्थयन् . . 3. (भरमुचत). + एण्डपाणिभूतयोमर. 
This wraf class is akritigana; so that words like a &c., must be looked for in this class. 
कडाराः कर्मधारये ॥ ३ ॥ पदानि ॥ कहाराः , कर्मधारये, (समासे पूर्व). 
मुनिः । कडारा शमाः वर्मधारय समासेवा पूर्व प्रबोनम्याः ॥ 
38. The words kadarah and the like, are optionally placed first in the karma-dharaya. 
Thus anरममिनि: orमिनिकरार Kadarajaiminih or jaiminikadarab. “The taway Jaimini.' 
278 
OPTIONAL PURVA-NIPATA. 
•[ BK. II. CH. II. $ 38. 
.. . . 31. 2. TH. 3. v . 4. t. 5. 474. 6. 08. 7. P. 8. T . 9. . 10. f . 11. fr . 12. Payoff. 13. ( Farfars). 14. pr. 15. . 16. 78C. 17. offre. 18. 481. - 19. 
.'20. T . 
This sátra enjoins an option where by general rule gupa words being attributes would have invariably stood first. 
Why do we say in the karmadharaya compound'? Observe fiere Tout 977: 'a village of tawny men,' which is Bahuvrihi. Here ends the force of I. 4. I and II. 1. 3. 
ओ३म् 
॥ अथ द्वितीयाध्यायस्य तृतीयः पादः॥ 
BOOK SECOND. 
CHAPTER III. 
अनभिहिते ॥ १॥ पदानि ॥ अन् अभिहिते। 
निः ॥ भनभिहित इत्यधिकारोऽयं वेदितव्यः । यदित उर्द्धमनुक्रमियामोग्नभिहित इस्वे तोदितम्यम् ॥ 
1. The word 'auabhihite ' meaning 'not being specified 'is to be unlerstood as the governing word. 
Whatever will be taught from this point forward, should be under stood to apply to those cases which have not been specified otherwise. The case-affixes like thosc denoting 'object''instrument' &c., are applied to a noun, only then, when the force of the case-affix is not otherwise denoted or mention. cd or exhibited. The force of a case-affix may be so denoted either by first, the conjugational affixes far; secondly, by the Primary affixes or 7thirdly, by the secondary affixes are; or lastly by compounds. Thus sûtra a declares that the second case-affix is applied in denoting the objeet, as कटं करोति 'he makes the mat'; groefa 'he goes to the village.' But the object can otherwise be denoted. Thus by the passive conjugational affix, as कृयते कहः 'the mat is made.' Here the termination of the veri denotes the object. See satra I. 3. 13. and III. 4.69. So also by the krit affix, as कृतः कटः 'the mat is made, see Sätra III. 4. 70. So also by a Tadubita asfix as :** or Traan: meaning 'purchased with a hundred' -शतेन क्रीतः . Similarly by samasa, as माममुदके ग्रामन् 
- प्रामोहको प्रामः ॥ 
कर्मणि द्वितीया ॥२॥ पदानि ॥ कमणि , द्वितीया । वृत्तिः ॥ कर्मणि कारके या संख्या तत्र द्वितीया विभनि भवति॥ वार्निकम् ॥ उभसर्वतसोः कार्या घिगुपयोरिपु विष। द्वितीयानेडितान्तेषु नतोऽन्यत्रापि दृश्यते ॥ वार्निकम् ।। अभितः परितः-समया-निकपा हा प्रति-योगेप च दृश्यते ॥ 
2. When the object is not denoted by the termina tion of the verb, i. c. when the verb doc.s not agree with it, the second case-aflix is attached to the word. 
278 
ACCUSATIVE CASE. 
( BK. II. CH. III. $ 2,4. 
ms 
The terms dvitiya &c., are technical phraseology of older gram marians, and hence not defined by Panini; they apply to the triads of gg affixes. T 'he makes the mat,' q uofa he goes to the village.' 
The words 47: , at , fra and the double forms oft, sini, mait, when they have the sense of nearness, govern the accusative. Some. times other cases also, as JAUH Ari'on both sides of the village'; atat are on all sides of the village'; priare'fie to Devadatta'; 399 FT* just over the village'; siury or spirit TTR just below the village. 
Vart:--The words anf77: , qfta: both meaning 'round', a , fara sa both mcaning 'ncar' and 'woe be to,' and afa 'to,' govern the accusa tivc case; as, अभिनो मामम् 'round the village,' पार्म सपया 'near the village'; हा देवदनं 'woe be to Devadatta'; युभुतितम् न प्रतिभाति किंचित् 'to a hungry person nothing occurs to his mind.' See l. 4. 49 &c. 
aatar flaenfe n u ogifa n antar, a, sti, gero, ( #fo) a 
वृनिः॥ हन्मसि विषये जुहोतेः कर्मणि कारके कृतीया विभनि भवनि द्वितीया च॥ 
3. In the chhandas (veda), the object of the verb - hu'to sacrifice' takes the affix of the thiri case, und of the second as well. 
This ordains the third case-affix; and by force of the word 'and' the second case-aflix is also cmployed as camagra Efe' he satisfies or pleases Agni with barley-powder,' or trafach eifa 'he throws barley powder into the fire as oblation.' 
Why do we say 'in thc vedas?' In the classical Sanskrit, the accusa tive only must be used and not the instrumental. 
PATISTITUTE 8 anifa u BIO, S tur, , (feater) 
Fa: 11 fa77 SATTLE farat are tatę zda i strazi za fenirat Farafii 
4. A word joined with (or governed by) the word antara, or antareņa takes the second case-allix. 
The anuyritti of dvitiva is understood here and not that of tritiya. Both these words antara and antarena are Nipalas. They govern the ac cusatire. This debars the genitive case. The word antarå means 'be tween' while antaroņa mcans besides that,' without,'('exception,' with reference to ''regardin As. Saiu gare för unga 'nothing can be 
Bk. II. CH. III. $ 4-6.] 
ACCUSATIVE CASE. 
279 
gained without excrtion. Brary or qala ** 'the bowl is be tween thee and me. कोन्यस्यामा तरेनशकः विकम् 'who elsc but thee is able 
to retaliate,' 
Why do we say 'when joined with ?' Observe ACT That पाटलिपुत्रं नुप्रस्थ प्राकारः . 
Frencaattagarata uy rostfan $18-Feat , fpargat; (feritar) 
f#: 11 Flat Tots Typatu Ferritar fortfartafar 14an straard 
5. After a word denoting time, or length, the alix of the 2nd case is employed, when denoting full duration, 
Han fret he reads for a month,' he studies full one month,' are rulut' prosperous during the month (uninterruptedly), at gen: 'lower during the year continually,' i * 'the river winding for one kos without any break,'को पर्वतः the hill through one full kos.' सभा वाणी राजन् Tazh uar 'O king the hall of Visravana is 100 yojanas in leagth." 
The word maaien or 'full continuity' means the complete rela tion of time or space with its action, attribute or substance. 
Why do we say 'atyanta-sanyoga or complete continuity? Obserre मासस्य निरधी or कोशस्येकडेथे पर्वकः॥ 
eqat qatar ut & il agila a spat, gaitar, ( Fernant Tormanta ) 
TF: 1 977 ET4T rintaande citar firaf 11 
6. The third case-affix is employed after the words denoting the duration of time or place, when the accomplishment of the desired object is meant to be ex pressed. 
FATTETSita: he learnt the Anuvāka in a month,' Hi l ista: 'he learnt thc Anuváka by going over a kos.' 
The word o f means the finishing of an action, on the attainment of the object intended by the action, but not before. Thus TTTTT 
svita: means 'Anuváka was perseveringly and effectually read by him in the whole year.' 
When the idea of apavarga is not intended, the accusative case is em: ployed, as Ararata : 'Icarnt for a month, but not yet completed, the 
Anuvaka. 
a 
m 
ACCUSATIVE CASE. 
[ Bk. II. CH. III. 87.9. 
मसमीपन्नम्पी कारकमध्ये ॥७॥ पदानि ॥ सप्तमी-पञ्चम्यो, कारक-मध्ये , ( कालाधवनो०)। 
वृतिः ॥ कारकयोमध्ये यो कालामानो ता-या सप्तमी परम्यो विभती भवतः 
. 7. A noun denoting time or place gets the affix of the seventh or the fifth case, when the sense implicd is that the timc or space is the interval between one action aud another action (or implies an interval of time and space between two kârakas). 
___Ex. भय भुना देवदत्तो हे पहावाभोना 'having dined today, Devadatta will dine in or after two days. Here the time' is the interval between the agent and his power of eating. So also इहस्थोऽयमिम्बासः क्रोशात् क्रोशे वा लक्ष्य विश्येत् ' standing here, he will hit a mark at the distance of one kos. Here kos is the interval between the agent and the object, or the object and the abla tion, or the object and the location. The rule I. 3. 1o does not apply here. 
कर्मप्रवचनीययुक्त द्वितीया ॥ ८॥ पदानि ॥ फर्मप्रवचनीय-युक्त ; द्वितीया. 
वृत्तिः ॥ कर्मप्राचनीयुक्त द्वितीया विभक्तिपति ।। 
8. The second case-astix is employed after a word which is joined with a karmapravachantya (I. 4. 83), 
Ex. शाकल्यस्य संहितामनुमावर्षत् It rained on (hearing) the reading of the Veda by Sakalya.' So also HITTYM 199 **: 11 
यस्मादधिकं यस्य चेश्वरवचनं तत्र सप्तमी ॥ ॥ पदानि ॥ यस्मादु अधिक, यस्य, च, ईश्वर-वचनं , तत्र , कप्तमी, (कर्मप्रवचनीययुक्त ). 
वृत्तिः । यस्मावधिकं यस्य घेश्वरवचन कर्मप्रवचनीयैर्युक्त तब सप्तमी विभक्तिर्भवति । 
9. Wherca voril is govained by a karmapravacha niya in the sense of more than' (I. 4.87) or 'lord of' (I.. 4. 97 ) there the 7th case- affix (locative) is employed. 
Ex. उपखार्याम द्रोण: 'A Drona is more than a Khari, अधिनमदते पंचाला: *Brahmadatta is the lord of Panchålas.' The phrase TFTTT 9 indicates that both the thing owned and the owner may be in the locative. See 
Uner 
1.497. 
. 
This aphorism debars the accusative. 
BK. II. CH. III. 8 10-12.] . 
0-1 
ABLATIVE CASE. 
281 
पञ्चम्यपाङ्परिभिः ॥ १० ॥ पदानि ॥ पञ्चमी, अप-आरु. परिभिः , (कर्मप्रवचनीययु०) । 
वृत्तिः ॥ भप भार परि हत्येतेः कर्मप्रवचनीयोंगे पसमी विनिवति ॥ 
10. The fifth case-affix (Ablative) is employed when a word is governed by the following karmaprava 
chanîyas i. e. apa, åñ and pari. 
Ex. 877 or off or oft gee, garanter it: 'It rained off or upto or with the exclusion of, Pataliputra.' 
The oft here has the meaning of 'exclusion '(I. 4. 88) being read along with अप; therefore, not here वृक्ष परि विद्योतवे विद्युत् (I. 4.90). . 
प्रतिनिधिप्रतिदाने च यस्मात् ॥ १॥ पदानि । प्रतिनिधि प्रतिदाने , च , यस्मात् ( कर्मप्र०) (पञ्चमी)। 
वृत्तिः । यस्मात्मतिनिधिर्यतच प्रतिदान तन कर्मप्रवचनीययुक्त पञ्चमी विभक्तिर्भवति ॥ 
11. The 5th case-afix (ablative) is employed after what soever is governed by a karmapravachaniya in the 
sense of 'substitute' or exchange '(I. 4. 92). 
Ex. भभिमन्युरर्जुनतः प्रति 'Abhimanyu is the representative of Arjuna. माषानस्मैतिनेभ्यः प्रतियच्छति 'he exchanges mashas for this sesamum.' See I. 4.92 for an explanation of प्रतिनिधि and प्रतिदान. 
गत्यर्थकर्मणि द्वितीयाचतुर्थी चेष्टायामनध्वनि ॥२॥ पदानि । गत्यर्थ-कर्मणि , द्वितीया-चतुश्यों , चेष्टायाम् , अनध्वनि 
वृत्तिः ॥ गत्यर्यानां धातूनां टाक्रियाण परिसन्नक्रियाणं कर्मणि कारकेसवर्मित द्वितीयाचतुथ्यों भवतः 
12. In the case of roots implying motion, the place to which motion is directed takes the affix of the 2nd (Accusative) or the 4th (Dative) case in denoting the 'object,' when physical motion is meant, and tho object is not a word expressing' road'. 
Ex. मार्म or मामाय गच्छति 'he goes to the village. But not so in मनसा eft qala (the verb not denoting physical motion) 'he goes mentally to Hari' अवानं गच्छति 'he goes over the way' the object being the 'way'). But not so in भोदन पचति 'he cooks rice%3' (the verb not denoting 'motiony nor in अश्वेन व्रजति (the verb not denoting the object." 
282 
DATIVE CASE. 
[ BK. II. CH. III. 320, 12-14 
Note-The word adhvan includes the synonyms of road (I. 1.68) as पन्यानं गच्छति, मार्ग गपति.. 
Note:--The prohibition applies with regard to the going over or occupying the road; so that where a person from a wrong road goes to the right road, there the fourth case-affix will be employed as questa 
चतुर्थी संप्रदाने ॥ १३ ॥ पदानि ॥ चतुर्थी , संप्रदाने । वृत्तिः । संपाने कारक चतुर्थी विभक्तिर्भवति ॥ पार्निकम् ॥ चतुर्थी विधाने सादथ्य उपसंपयानम् ॥ वार्तिकम् ।। पिसंपद्यमाने चतुर्थी बनाया । यार्तिकम् ॥ उखातेन ताप्दमाने चतुर्थी पकया। वार्निकम् ।। हितयोगे चतुर्थी रकण्या। 
13. In denoting the sampradana-karaka (I. 4. 32) the fourth affix or the Dative is employed after the noun. 
Ex. उपाध्यायाय गां ददाति 'He gives a cow to the teacher' देवदत्ताय रोचते 'it pleases Devadatta' (I.4.33) पुजेभ्यः सायवि (I.4. 36) 'hedesires flowers' 
Vart-The fourth case-affix should be employed when the sense is that of. for the purpose thereof' as zorg en 'wood is for making posts.' कएजनाय हिरण्यं 'gold used for the purpose of making ear-ring.' (न्धनाय स्थानी 'pot for the sake of cooking.' अवहननायोलुखनं 'mortar for the sake of threshing:' 
Tart:-The verb F and other verbs meaning 'to be fit or adequate for, result in, bring about, accomplish, produce, tend to,' govern the dative case: as, मुत्राय कल्यते यवागू: 'the barley gruel tends to produce urine. So also मूनाय संपद्यते जायते वा यवागुः. 
Vart:-The fourth case-affix is employed with the force of 'indicating a portent or calamity,' as. 
वाताय कपिला विद्युहातपायादि लोहिनी॥ पीता वर्षाय विज्ञेया दुर्भिक्षाय सिता मतेत् ।। 
"The reddish lightening portends wind, extremely red indicates heat, yellow portends rain and white lightening prognosticates famine.' 
Part:-The fourth case-affix should be employed in connection with the word fea: as direithean 'good for cows.' 
क्रियार्थीपपदस्य च कर्मणि स्थानिनः ॥ १४ ॥ पदानि ॥ क्रिया-अर्थ उपपदस्य , च, कर्मणि , स्थानिनः .(चतुर्थी)। 
वृत्तिः ॥ क्रियायोपपदस्य व स्थानिनोपयुज्यमानस्य धातोः कर्मणि कारके चतुर्थी विमाने 
भगत निः॥ क्रिया BK. II. CH. III. $ 14. 16. ) 
DATIVE CASE. 
283 
14. The fourth case-afix is employed in denoting the object (karma) of that verb, which is suppressed (sthậui) in a sentence, and which has in construction (upapada) therewith another verb, denoting an action, performeil for the sake of the future action (kriyârthe III. 3. 10). 
In other words, when the sense of an infini tive of purpose formed by tumun'aud 'nyul'(III. 3. 10,) is suppressed in a sentence, the object of this infinitive is put in the Dative case. 
at ni = #FORT W . he goes for fruits i. c., to bring fruits' This debars accusative case. So also we have it: * 'he goes for fuel' The words Tiigruteez and RIFT. are in apposition. The first is a Bahuvrihi compound of land + 3444 and means a verb whose upa pada denotes the purpose of the action (kriyârtha).' Thus in GTAITESH 'to bring fuel'; the infinitive verb streia is for TÜTTTT, the object of this verb is py:; when this verb is suppressed, it becomes forfatt: ; the object of this verb takes the fourth case-affix. 
Why do we say of the verb whose upadada denotes the purpose of the action ?" Observe to finity 
Why do we say 'in denoting the object.' Witness pihazt anfa yada 'for fuel he goes with a cart.' 
Why do we say when suppressed? Observe pitarea af. 
तुमर्थाच भाववचनात् ॥ १५ ॥ पदानि ॥ तुम अर्थात, च भाव. agara, ( ago) u 
T: IL TRATTATatran foreningu fry, tafatit 
15. The fourth case-alfx is employed after a crude-form which cuds in an asfix denoting condition' (abstract noun, III. 3. 11.) and having the force of the alix tum (or Infinitive of purpose). 
__Ex. यागाय ब्रजति 'he goes to offer a sacrifice' = यष्टुं वनति. So also TOTT fa, me ft. 
The word dat means having the same significance as the affix Ty'. 
नमःस्वस्तिस्वाहाखधालंवषड्योगाच ॥ १६ ॥ पदानि ॥ नमः-खस्ति Fier-F91-888-245-17mą; , ( ago) u 
TF: 11 TA: FTF FIIET FIYT SITT T rudaia Taui for f ait 
28+ 
. 
. DATIVE CASE. 
(BK. II. CH. II.& 16-17. 
16. The fourth case-afix is employed in cou junction with the words namah 'salutation,' svasti 'peace,'svålå, sva lhå (terms use.l iu offering oblations to Goils and Pitris respectively), alam '& match for' 'sufi. cient for' and vasbat a term of oblation. . Ex. Titan: , Erfa ganzi, FIETST , ENT : , M HER FATT 
Salutation to Gods'; 'peace to the people'; 'svåhå to fire'; 'svadha to the Pitsis'; 'an athlete is a match for an athlete' &c. The word oot includes its synonyms also, as 95, TTT: &c.; so T ITT, TTAT. 
The indicates that the Dative will debar Genitive, in spite of 11. 3. 73, in the case of these words, though used benedictivley; as, 7. That mau 
मन्यकर्मण्यनादरे विभाषारमाणिषु ॥ १७ ॥ पदानि ॥ मन्य-कर्मणि, static?, fanar, enforg. ( ago). 
P: 11 *ffu aforatia fort ui forft *aft Hii itama u 
11 geamurerft aparmara 5941 
17. In deuoting the indirect object, which is not an animal, of the verb mauya 'to think,' the dative case is optionally employed, when contempt is to be shown. 
Ex. न मा तणं तणाय वा मन्ये I do not consider thee worth a straw.'मस्या o ar 'I do not consider thee worth a chaff.' Why do we use the word Hoe? Observe #MTTU FOTOTAA. The optional dative will not be employed with the synonyms of the verb safa. So also the sůtra uses the form fou with the vikarana 449, indicating that it is Divadi that governs a dative, and not the Tanádi a ; for the latter governs the accusative only, as q **1 ao fat. 
When contempt is not meant, the verb does not govern the Dative, as: 
strat po, HT 11G SIGGE I S ETT Hot FT FTAT TOTUFO il 
"I consider a rock to be a stone, I consider mortar but as wood, I consider him to be the son of a blind woman whose mother cannot sce.' 
So also when the object of comparison is an animate being, it will not take the dative:-as o TT at 'I do not consider thee even as a jackal' The case of that write is an exception. " 
Vart:-Instead of using Storfors in the sútra, the word STAirles should be used. The following words belong to Navidi class, they are always in the accusative after the word Art, never in thc Dative: ship,' arini crow,' 
'food,' T'parrot,' and 'jackal.' 
Bk. II. CH. III. $ 18-21. ) 
INSTRUMENTAL CASE. 
ENTAL 
285 
कर्तृकरणयो स्वतीया ॥ १८ ॥ पदानि । कर्व करणयोः वतीया । वृत्तिः । कर्तरि करणेच कारके हतीया विभक्ति भवति । वार्निकम् ॥ तृमीया विधाने प्रकरयादीनामुपसंस्थानम् ॥ 
18. In denoting the agent (I. 4. 54) or the instru. ment (I. 4. 42), the third case-alix is employed. 
Ex. देवदत्तेन कृत 'done by Devadatta,' हालेप नुनाति 'he cuts with the sickle. So also, यज्ञदत्तंन भुक्तम्, परशुना निति ।। 
. Vart:--The following words take the 3rd case. ffa 'original,' T* 'almost,' गोत्र 'gotra, सम 'equal,' विषम 'unequal,' विद्रोण, पंचक and साहम as प्रावण 
याक्षिकः , गायोऽसि गोत्रण, समेन or विषमेष धावति, द्विद्रोणेन क्रीणाति &c. 
सहयुक्त प्रधाने ॥ १९ ॥ पदानि ॥ सहयुक्त, अप्रधान, ( वतीया ) 
वृत्तिः ॥ सहायन युक्त मधाने तृतीया विभक्तिर्भवति ।। 
____19. When the word सह 'with,' is joined to a word, the latter takes the third case, when the scuse is that the word in the third casc is not the principal but the accompaniment of the principal thing. 
Ex. पुत्रेण सहागत: पिता 'the father has come with the son.' 
The same will be the result with the synonyms of u as, gan art *with the son.' So also when the word or is understood, as Pånini himself uses in I. 2.65 वृद्धो युना &c., 
Why do we say when not the principal. Observe, fredag सहोपाध्यायस्यगोः . 
येनाङ्गविकारः ॥ २० ॥ पदानि ॥ येन , अङ्ग-विकार , (वतीया). वृत्तिः ॥ येनाङ्गन विकृतेनाङ्गिनी विकारो लन्यते ततस्तृतीया विभनिर्भवति॥ 
20. By whatsoever limb, being defective, is pointel out the defect of the person, after that the third case-affix is employed. 
As, MEUT HIU: 'blind of one eye' great 1:' lame of foot.' qorape su: &c. The word aiga in this sura applies to the whole body, whatsoever by reason of being a member of the body is defective is indicated here. 
इत्थंभूतलक्षणे ॥ २१॥ पदानि । इत्थंभूत-लक्षणे , ( वतीया), 
वृत्तिः।। चित्रकार मात्र इत्थंभन, स्तस्पलतणमित्यं भूतलक्ष, सतस्वतीया विजन भवति। 
286 
INSTRUMENTAL CASE. 
[ BK. II. CH. III. 831.24 
21. Any mark or attribute, by which is indicated the existence of a particular state or condition, is put in the third case to express this relation. 
Elfelles: 'he is an ascetic by (the fact of his having) matted hair.' भपि भान् कमण्डलुना जनमत्रासीत् 'your honor might see the student by the fact of his having a kamandalu.' So also छानेणोपाध्यायन् ' a teacher by thefact of having students.' शिखया परिव्राजकम् 'a Parivrajaka by a tult of hair.' But not so here, कमण्डलुपाणिग्रामः 'a student. has kamandalu in his hand.' Because here in the compound कमएडलपाणि is hidden the mark. 
Why do we say ittha-bhuta? Observe वृक्ष प्रति विद्योतन। 
___ संज्ञोऽन्यतरस्यां कर्मणि ॥ २२ ॥ पदानि ॥ सम्-जः , अन्यतरस्या, कर्मणि, (तृतीया), 
वृत्तिः ॥ संपर्वस्य जानातेः कर्न.ण कारके द्वितीयायां प्राप्तायामन्यतरस्या सृतीया विभक्ति भवति ॥ 
- 22. After the verb sam-jina the third case aflix is optionally employed in denoting the object.. 
पिना or पितरं संजानीते the knows his father.' मात्रा or मातरं संजानीते। 
हेतौ ॥ २३ ॥ पदानि ॥ हेती, (तृतीया ) ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ फलसाधनयोग्यः पदार्थो नोके हेतुरुच्यते ; सद्वाधिनस्तृतीया विभक्तिर्भवति॥ 
23. When a word denotes 'cause,' it takes the third case aflix. 
• विद्यया यशः by learning there is produced fame.: धनेन कुलम् by wealth, family; कन्यया शोकः 'by daughter there is grief. 
The word to here is used in its popular sense and not the gram matical lietu (l. 4.55). Any thing capable of accoinplishing a desired object is called hetu. 
• अकर्तणे पञ्चमी ॥ २४ ॥ पदानि ॥ अकर्तरि , ऋणे , पञ्चमी, (हेती)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ कर्तवर्जितं यदृर्ण हेतुस्ततः पञ्चमी विभक्तिर्भवति ।। 
24. A word, implying debt, considered as a. 'cause' but not as a kartri or agent, takes the fifth case affix. 
Ex. varet: 'he has been bound on account of a debt of a hundred pieces.' 
BK. II. CH. III. $ 24-27) 
CASE-AFFIXES. 
287 
Why do we say when not denoting the agent? Observe शतेन पन्धित a debt of hundred has thrown bim in prisou '; here it being considered as a prayojaka hetu, is an agent and takes the third case-affix. . 
विभाषा गुणे स्त्रियाम् ॥ २५॥ पदानि ॥ विमाषा , गुणे, अस्त्रियाम् , (हेतौ पचमी)॥ 
__ वृत्तिः । गुणे हेनादत्रीलिङ्गे विनापा पञ्चमी विभन्निर्भवति ॥ 
25. The fifth case-affix is employed optional ly when the noun expresscza: attribute, being the cause of an action, and not being of the feminine gender. 
Ex. जाडपने जाडयताम् वा पडः 'he has been bound by reason of his dullness.' पांडित्येन or पांडित्या मुकः 'saved through learning.. . 
Guga-vachana nouns are generally abstract nouns. Therefore not here धनंन कुजम् . If an abstract noun is of leminine gender, this rule will not apply, as बुख्या or प्रज्ञया मुक्तः he was set at liberty on account of his skill or wisdom.' 
षष्ठी हेतुप्रयोगे ॥ २६ ॥ पदानि ॥ षष्ठी , हेतु-प्रयोगे । वृत्तिः ।। हेतुशब्दस्य प्रयोगे तो धारये पष्टी विभक्तिर्भवति।। 
26. The sixth case-affix is employed after a noun implying the cause of an action, when the word hetu is used along with such a word. 
Ex. अन्नस्य हे तो र्वसवि 'he dvells for the sake of food.' 
सर्वनाम्नस्तृतीया च ॥२७॥ पदानि ॥ सर्वनाम्नः तृतीया , ध, ( हेतुप्रयोगे ) ( षष्ठी). 
वृतिः ।। सर्वनाम्नी हेतुशब्दप्रयोगे हेतो द्योत्ये तृतीया विभनिर्भवति पठीच ।। वार्निकम् ।। निमित्तकारणहेतुषु सर्वासा प्रायदर्शनम् ।। 
27. After a sarvanaman (I. 1. 27) when it sig. zifies the cause of ari action, and the word hetu is used 
with it, the third case-affix is employed, as well as the sixth. 
____Ex. कस्व or केन हेतुना वसति · for the sake of what does he live?' यस्थ or येन हेतुना वसति. 
Vart;-IVhen the words निमिन or कारण are so used, almost all the case affixes may be employed : as किं निमित or केन निमित्तेन or कस्मै निमिनाव or कस्तानि.मनात् or कस्य नि.मेनस्य or कस्मिन् नि.मने वसनि. Similarly with the wardi 
288 
ABLATIVE CASE. 
[BK. III: CH. 11. $ 27-29. 
karapa and hetu. Here also the word ga does not mean the word-form hetu (I. 1.68) but its synonyms also; as किं प्रयोमनं or के प्रयोजनेन or कस्मे प्रयोजनाब 
&c., वसति. 
अपादाने पञ्चमी ॥ २८ ॥ पदानि ॥ अपादाने , पञ्चमी । निः ॥ भपादाने कारके पश्चमी विभनिर्भवति। बार्तिकम् ॥ परमीविधाने व्यवनोपे कर्मण्युपसंख्यानम् ।। वार्निकम् ॥ भधिकरणे चोपसंख्यानम् ॥ . वार्निकम् ॥प्रमाण्यानयोश्च पञ्चमी वक्तग्या ।। 
वार्निकम् ।। यताधकालनिर्माण तस्त्र पञ्चमी बनव्या ॥ वार्निकम् ॥ ततारकाने सामी पत्तण्या ॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ भवनः प्रथमा ससमीच पत्तण्या॥ 
28. When the Apādana-kuraka (I. 4. 24) is denoted, the fifth case-affix is employed. 
Ex. मामादागच्छनि 'he comes from the village' (I. 4. 24); केभ्यो विभेति (I. 4 25), भध्ययनात् पराजयते (I. 4. 26) &c. 
Vart:--The fifth case-affic is employed in denoting the object, when the verbal participle ending in rur is elided ; as मासामा प्रेक्षते - प्रासादात प्रक्षते 'he sees from a palace.' 
Vart:- And under similar circumstances in denoting the location the place where an action is performed is put in the ablative case, as, भासने उपविस्य प्रेसते-भासनात् प्रेक्षते 'he sees from a seat.' 
Vart:-In questions and answers, the fifth case-affix is employed:-कुती भवान? पारनियमाद' whence is your Honor coming? From Patali putra.' 
Vart:- That point of time or space from which distance in time or space is measured is put in the ablative case:-as, गयोधमतः सांकाश्यं चरवारि योजनानि ' Sankasya is from Gavidhuma four yojanas.' कार्निक्या आग्रहायणी मासे * Agrahayana is one month from Kartika. The word denoting the distance in time is put in the locative case, as मासे. 
Vart:- In the above the fvord denoting the distance in space may be put either in the nominative or locativeas गोषमतः तांकाश्य चत्वारि योजनानि or 
चतुर्थ योजनेषु । 
____ अन्यारादितरत्तदिक्शन्दाञ्चत्तरपदाजाहियुक्त ॥ २९ ॥ पदानि ॥ अन्य आरात्-इतर ऋते-दिक्शब्द अन्च उत्तरपद-आच्-आहियुक्त , (पञ्चमी)॥ 
पत्तिः ॥ भन्व भाराव इतर ऋते दिक्शन भजूनरपर भाच भाहि इत्येतैयाँगे पम्पमी विभक्तिर्भवति। 
BK. II. CH. III. $ 29-31.) 
GENITIVE CASE. 
289 
· 29. When a noun is joined with words mean ing other than' or with årát near or remote' or itara 
different from or rito without,' or words indicative of the directions' (used also with reference to the time corresponding to thom) or with words having añchu 'to bend' as the last member of the compound and expres sive of direction), or with words ending with the affix âch or åhi (V. 3. 36 and 37) the fifth casc-afix is employed. 
Ex wat, frat, rad, 41€, fart TET different from Deva datta' MITTE ATT "remote from or ncar to Devadatta. The word drát meaning 'near or remote 'would have taken the sixth case-affix by såtra 34, but this enjoias sth case-affix. # 
a r q 'excepting Deradatta. Ef hry 'cast of the village,' उनरोपामात् 'north of the village,' पर्यो यीमात् पसन्तः 'the spring is prior to summer' ng pera para 'to the cast or west of the village' Top P OTE * THIQ 'to the south or in the eastern direction of the village.' 
The words like grae &c., formed from the verb anchu are also fino; their separate enumeration shows that the sixth case-affix ordained by the next sätra docs not come after them. 
TETAPHATTA ll go al afifa 1 meet, wart प्रत्ययेन ॥ 
मुनिः भवसन प्रत्ययेन युक्त पठो विमनिर्भवति ॥ 
30. The sixth case-wix is employed when used in connection with words endirg with affixes hav. ing the sense of the affix atasuch (V. 3. 28). 
The affix want is ordained by V. 3. 28. 
Ex. 4144 pirma: TTT TETIT auft *'to the south or north, fore most, in or above the village.' 
paar featur ut 39 il agita u gaar, fantar 11 7:11 pm to Far 957*24 tfa Tarafa i pratar Fri tid II 
31. With a word ending with the asfix 'enap' (V. 3. 35), the second case-afix is employed as well as the sixth. 
Ex. f r a FTTET Tsouth of the village.' 
290 
CASE-AFFIXFS. 
[BK. II. CH. III. 532-34.. 
पृथग्विनानानाभिस्तृतीयाsन्यतरस्याम् ॥ ३२ ॥ पदानि ॥ पथग विना-जानाभिः , तृतीयां , अन्यतरस्याम् , ( पन्चमी) ॥ 
वृत्तिः ।। पृथक् विना नाना इत्येते योगे तृतीया विभक्तिर्भवति भन्यतरस्यां पञ्चमी ॥ 
32. When joined with the words prithak Without,' vinå 'without' and nânå 'without' the third case-affix is employed, optionally (as well as the fifth and the secondi. 
Ex रामाद्रामेण रामं वा विना प्रयग नाना पा ' without or different from Rama.' 
This sutra may be divided into two parts:--(1) प्रयग् विना नानाभिः (२) वतीयान्यतरस्याम् . By this arrangement we can read dritiya into the aphorism. 
बिना पातं विना व वियुत्प्रपतन बिना। 
विना हस्ति कमान्दोषान् केनेमो पासितो घुमौ ॥ 
करणे च स्तोकाल्पहच्छ्र कतिपयस्या तत्त्ववचनस्य ॥ ३३ ॥ पदानि । करणे, घ, स्तोक-अल्प-कच्छ कतिपयस्य , असत्त्ववधनस्स , (तृतीया पञ्चमी-अन्यतरस्यां)॥ 
___ वृत्तिः ।। स्तोक भल्प कृच्छू कतिपय इत्येते योऽसस्ववचने यः करणे कारकेन्यतरस्यों रवीया भवति पक्षे पञ्चम्ये॥ 
33. When expressing an instrument-kåraka, optionally after the words stoka 'little,'alpa 'little,' krich. chhra difficulty,' and katipaya'some,' the fifth case-affix is used, when they do not deuote material objects. 
Ex. स्तोकात् स्तोकन वा मुक्तः and अन्यान्नकः or अल्पेनमुक्रः &c, 'he got off easily &c. But स्तोकेन विषेन हतः, अल्पेन मधुना मत्तः &c. killed by a little poison.'No option allored, as it qualifies a substance. So also स्तोक मुंषति 'he loosensa little.' Here स्तोक is used as an adverb and not as an instrument (करण). 
दूरान्तिकार्यैः षडयन्यतरस्याम् ॥ ३४॥ पदानि ॥ दूर अन्ति क-अर्थः , पपी , अन्यतरस्याम् , ( पञ्चमी) ॥ 
वृतिः ॥ दूरान्तिकार्यः शबोंगे पठी विभक्तिर्भवति भन्यतरस्या पम्पमी च॥ 
34. When in conjunction with words having the sense of dara distant,' and antika. 'near, the sixth case-arix is optionally employed. 
Ex. मामा मामस्य वा वन विमार, भान्तकं, भयाशं, निकट समीपं वा 'the forest is distant from or near to the village.' 
P.x. II. CH. III. $ 34-36. ] 
CASE-AFFIXES. - 
291 
The force of the word syruareat is to indicate that the 5th case-affix employed in the alternative, would have run into this sätra, had we not used 'anyatarasyam.' 
दूरान्तिकार्थेभ्यो द्वितीया च ॥३५॥ पदानि ॥ दूर-अन्तिक. अर्थभ्यः , द्वितीया , प; ( पचमी)॥ 
वृत्तिः ।। दूरान्तिकार्य यः शन्ने यो द्वितीया विभक्तिर्भववि षकारासचमी इतीवापि समुचीयते ॥ 
35. After the words having the sense of dara 'distant,' and antika. ' near, the second case-alix is used as well as the fifth and the third. 
Ex. दूर दूरादरेण वा ग्रामस्य and भन्तिकात् , अन्तिवन or अन्तिकं मामस्व. 
ese words have their original significa tion and do not denote a substance. Otherwise the proper case-affix should be employed, as परः पन्थाः , दराव पये दहि. 
सप्तम्यधिकरणे , प, ॥३६ ॥ पदानि ॥ सप्तमी, अधिकरणे, च , (दूरान्तिकार्थेभ्यः). 
पृत्तिः । सप्तमी विभक्तिर्भवग्यधिकरणे कार चकारा एरान्तिकायेंभ्या । वार्निकम् ॥ सरमीविधाने नस्येविषयस्य कर्मएयुपसंख्यानम् ।। बार्मिकम् ।। साध्वसाधुप्रयोगे च समनी वनम्या । पार्मिकम् ॥ कारकाहाणी चा कारकले सामी वक्तग्या ॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ भकारकाहर्हाणांचा कारकस्ये सामी तम्बा। वातिकम् ।। सद्विपर्यासेप सप्तमी पत्नप्या ॥ पार्तिकम् ॥ निमित्तारकर्मसंयोगे सममी पत्तग्या ॥ 
36. The seventh case-aflix is employed when the sense is that of location (I. 4. 45) as well as after the words meaning ' distant' or ' near'. 
Ex. करे भास्ते 'he sits on the mat' भन्तिकेदरे या पामस्य 'ncar or distant from the village.' स्थाल्यो पचति 'he cooks in the pot.' Thus the words हर and s on take four case-affixes, namely the second, third, fifth and seveath. 
Vart:-Words like भधीतिन् 'who has learnt,' गृहीतिन् 'who has com. prehended;' 1. c., words formed by adding to the past participle io , govern the locative of that which forms their object:--as apima sarara'verscd in Grammar.' परिगणिती यज्ञिक ' well versed in sacrificial rites.' भामान्ती छन्षि * well read in the Veda.' Sce V. 2. 88. 
aar 
CASE-AFFIXES. 
(Bk. III. CH. II. $ 36-38. 
Vart: The words any and any govern the locative of that towards whom goodness or otherwise is shown; as मातर साधुरवाणु वा 'well behaved or ill-bchaved towards his mother.' 
Vari:-The Locative absolute is used in cases other than those specified in the next sätra, namely, in cases where the action done or suffered does not indicate the time of another action; as देष भुनाने दरिद्रा भास 'the poor are sitting, while the rich are eating,' परिषु भासीनेषु ऋद्धा भुखठे “the rich are eating, while the poor being seated.' So also vice versa. : 
Vart:-The Locative is sometimes used to denote the object or purpose for which anything is done; as. 
धर्मणि दीपिन इंति, दंतयोन्तिक्रारम् । 
केशेषु चमरी हंति सोवि पुष्कलको हतः ॥ dan kills the tiger for his skin, the clephant for his tusks, the chamari cow for her hair, and the musk-deer for its musk.' 
यस्य च भावेन भावलक्षणम् ॥३७॥ पदानि ॥ यस , प, भावेन, भाव-लक्षणम् , ( सप्तमी)॥ । निः ।। भावः क्रिया । यस्य च भवेन यस्य क्रिययाक्रियान्तरं लक्ष्यते तनो भाववतः सममी विभक्तिर्भवति॥ 
37. By the action (bhava) of what-soever, the time of another actiou is indicated, that takes the seventh case-affix. 
This is Locative Absolute.गोषु दयमानासु गतः 'the cows being milked, he wentavay' दुगधास्वागतः 'and returned when they were milked' भनिषु हुथमानेषु गतः, हुतेप्यागवः. 
Why do we say 'by the action of whatsoever'? Observe 1 HETTA: स मुंडे . Why have we used the word 'action ' twice? Witness यो भुनी स देवदत्तः. 
षष्ठी घानादरे ॥३८॥ पदानि ॥ षष्ठी, च, अन्-मादरे, (सप्तमी , भावेन भावलक्षणम् ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ भनादराधिके भावलक्षणे भाववतः पष्ठीसप्तम्यो विभक्ती भवतः ।। 
38. The sixth case-affix is employed (as well as the seventh), when disregard is to be shown, after that by vhose action the time of another action is in 
dicated. । 
This is Genitive Absolute. 7: fa al marit'in spite of her weeping, he went away. The force of this genitive is that of the English words 'not with-standing' tin spite of for all, &c., मन्दाः पशव वहताः पश्यतो रातसव the BK. II. CH. III. $ 38-41. ) 
GENITIVE CASE 
293 
Nandas were killed like so many beasts, Rakshasa looking on,' (not-with standing that Rakshasa was looking on). 
__ स्वामीश्वराधिपतिदायादसाक्षिप्रतिभूमसूतश्च ॥ ३९ ॥ पदानि ॥ स्वामिन् ईश्वर अधिपति-दायाद-सासिन्-प्रतिभू-प्रसूतैः, च , (षष्ठी सप्तमी).. 
वृत्तिः ॥ सामिन् वर अधिपनि दायार सातिन् प्रतिम् प्रसून इत्येतेोंगे पष्ठी सक्षमी विनती भवतः। 
39. The sixth and the seventh case-affixes are useil after words when they are joined with svåmin master,' isvaralord,' adhipati 'ruler,' dåyåda' an heir,' sâkshin witness,' pratibha 'a surety,' and prasata 'be. gotten. 
गया गोषु वा स्वामी or वर ' master of cows. So also गामधिपतिः or गोधिपतिः , गर्वा वाया: or गोषु पायाः, गर्वा or गोषु शासी, मनि:&c 
These words naturally would have governed the Genitive; the present sutra ordains Locative as well. 
आयुक्तकुशलाभ्यां चासेवाधाम् ॥ ४० ॥ पदानि ॥ आयुक्त कुशलान्यां , घ, असे वायाम् , (षष्ठी सप्तमी)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ भायुक्तो व्यापारिनः कुरानो निपुणः तान्या योगे भासेवायो गम्यमानायां पठी साम्यो विभक्ती भवनः॥ 
40. In conjunction with the words ayukta engagerl,' and kušala 'skilful,' when mcaning entire absorption in an engagement, the sixth and tlie seventh case-affixes are used after a word. 
___Ex. भायुक्तः कुशलो वा कटकरण काकरणस्य वा 'deeply absorbed in mat making. 
When not ineaning 'dceply absorbed, the construction is different ; as straini Ta? 'the cow is slightly yoked to the cart.' Here the seventh case-affix only is employed. 
___यतश्च निर्धारणम् ।।४३ ॥ पदानि ॥ यतः, च, निर्धारणम् , (षष्ठी-सप्तमी)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ यतो निर्धारण सतः पष्ठीवनम्यो विभती भवतः ।। 
41. The sixth and the seventh case-affixes are used after those words from which specification is made, (as of an individual from the whole class). 
394 
CASE-AFFIXES. 
[ BK. II. CH III. 
41-44 
- 
Ex. गळ गोषु वा करणा बत्तीराः 'among cows the black one gives much milk.' मनुष्याणां or मनुष्यपुतभियः शरतमः . 
A nirdharana or specification is made by separating one from the many by reason of its genus, quality and action (11. 2. 10). 
पञ्चमी विभक्त ॥ ४२ ॥ पदानि ॥ पञ्चमी, विभक्त , ( यतय निवारणम् ।। 
वृतिः ॥ यस्मिनिर्धारणाश्रये विभक्तमस्ति ततः पञ्चमो विभक्तिर्भवति ॥ विभागो विभक्तं ।। 
____42. The fifth case-affix is employed when the thing specified is different or divided from (and not included in) that from which specification is intended. 
____This debars the sixth and the seventh case-afixes, as, माथुराः पादलि. पुनभ्यः सुकुमारतराः 'Mathura is more beautiful than Pataliputra.' 
साधुनिपुणाभ्यामर्यायां सप्तम्यप्रतेः ॥ ४३ ॥ पदानि ॥ साधु. निपुणाभ्यां , अर्घायाम् , सप्तमी-अप्रतेः ।। 
वृत्तिः ॥ साधु निपुण इत्येताभ्यां योगेऽर्चायां गम्यमानायां सामी विभक्तिर्भवति न चेत्, प्रतिः प्रयुज्यते॥ 
43. In con unction with the words sådhu 'good,' and nipuna 'skillful,' when they denote respect, the seventh case-affix is employed; provided that the word prati is not used. 
Kraft art: or fagn: 'good behaved towards his mother'? But anytartis मातरं प्रति 'Devadatta is good behaved towards his mother.' 
Why do we say when respect is denoted? Observe, साधभरयोरातः the servant is good towards the king.' Here it is a bare statement of a fact. 
The exception applies not only to pat but to other prepositions, like परि, अनु &c., as, मातरं परि साधुवदनः ॥ 
प्रसितोत्सुकाभ्यां तृतीया च, ॥४४॥ पदानि ॥ प्रसित. उत्सुकाभ्यां , तृतीया , च , ( सप्तमी)॥ 
वृत्तिः । प्रसित उत्सुक इत्येताभ्यां योगे तृतीया विभनिर्भवति चकारात्सममी च ।। 
44. In conjunction with the words prasita "longing for,' and utsuka 'greatly desirous of,' the third case-affix is nised after a word, as well as the seventh. 
Ex. निद्रायां निद्रया वा उत्सुकः 'longing for sleep.' केशः or केशेषु पसिनः 
BK. II. CH. III. $ 45-47. ) 
CASE-AFFIXES. 
. 
295 
at fa u toe en aqifə # FAT, «gfa, (pretar ort) . 
Titill TTATA 4T Tatanegrar forat 76: 11 
45. When an aflix declaring the time of an Asterism is elided by lup (IV. 2. 4); the seventh and the third case-affi ses are used after the word, whose affix is so elided. 
Ex. पुण्येण पुण्ये वा पायसमभीयात् 'when the moon is in the Asterism of Pushya, let him drink milk.' See Rules IV. 2. 4 and IV. 2. 5. So also atta पललोदनं मयासु पालोदनन् . But not so here चालेपु वसति 'he lives in Panchala'. Here the country is meant, and not a star, though here also there is elision of the Taddhita affix. . 
Why do we say 'lup clision '? Observe Ta 4: 'the planet ia the Maghd.' Here there is no elision. But why not in spage: , affT. Be cause they do not denote location, which is understood. It is when location is expressed by such words that we may use the third case-affix in the alternative. 
प्रातिपदिकालिङपरिमाणवचन मात्रे प्रथमा ॥ ४ ॥ पदानि । arfafce-378-te-oftam-47-A7, 097 
FT: Il afarianHAT FF4rt aftuCAT 779449 Fistere il 
46. Where the sense is that of the Nomival. stem (I. 2. 45) or of gender only, or measure only or num. ber only, the first case-affix is employed. 
Ex. 7 : 'aloft,' r 'below,' ant virgin,' TH: "tree,' Cowl,' n'a measure'. By 'number' grammatical number is meant ; as 'one,' at 'two,' 067:'many'.' 
The sense of a Pratipadika is to denote mere existence. Genders are three, masculine, feminine and neuter. Measures are such as dropa, khåri, adhaka &c.. Numbers are singular, dual and plural. The Nipatas which do not denote anything are also Pråtipadika. 
gatua yli 8o llefall gratua, 9 ( 1) 11 TF: 11 THTR279 foref**efa 11 
47. And when the sense is that of addressing, the first case-afix is employed. 
Ex. I t o Ram'i mt. (TT: 11 
296 
. 
VOCATIVE CASE. 
[ BK. II. CH. III. F 48.57. 
साउउमन्तितम् ॥४८॥ पदानि ॥ आमन्त्रितम् (सम्बोधने प्रथमा) 
पतिः ।। संबोधने या प्रथमा तदन्तं शब्दरूपमामन्त्रितसंझ भवति 
48. The word ending with the first case-affix, in the sense of addressing, is called Amantrita or vocative (VIII. 2.78). 
. एकवचनं संबुद्धिः ॥४९॥ पदानि ॥ एकवचनं सम्बुद्धिः, (आमन्त्रितम् प्रथा ) 
धृतिः ॥ भामन्त्रितपथमाया यटेकवचनं तत्संबुद्धिसंजं भवति ।। 
___49. In the sense of vocative, the singular number of the first case-affix is called Sambuddhi. 
The vocative singular is called sambuddhi, when it is employed in the vocation. Thus VI. 1. 69 declares after an inflection base ending in ge or in a short vowel, a consonant is elided if it be that of Sambuddhi' asराम ॥ 
षष्ठी शेषे ॥ ५० ॥ पदानि ॥ षष्ठी.शेषे । 
वृत्तिः । कर्मादिभ्योऽन्यः प्रातिपदिकार्थव्यतिरिक्तः स्वस्वामिसंबन्धादिः शेषस्तत्र पठी विभक्तिर्भवति । 
60. The sixth case-affix is employed in the remaining cases, that is to say, where there is a sense, such as the relation between property and its owuler, &c. different from that of a word related to a verb and from that of a Nominal-stem. 
Ex. राजः पुरुषः 'the king's man' पशोः पादः ‘beast's foot' पितुः पुनः father's son.' 
जोगविदर्थस्स करणे ॥ ५९॥ पदानि ॥ ज्ञः, भविदर्थस्य , करणे, (षष्ठी)। 
... वृत्तिः ॥ जानातेर विदर्थस्याज्ञानार्यस्य करणे कारके षष्ठीविभक्तिर्भवति । 
51. Of the verb w jñâ,. when not used in the sense of' to know,' the instrument takes the sixth case affix. 
Ex. मधुनो जानीते 'he engages in sacrifice with honey'. So also सर्पिषो जानीवे. The verb जा when. not meaning 'to know', has the significance of 
Bk. II. CH. III.S51-54] 
GENITIVE CASE. 
297 
* to act, or to engage in;' or it may denote * false knowledge'; as, afin or मातहतोपा. Comparel. 3.45. 
But not so here स्वरेण पुर्व मानाति he recognises the son by the voice. 
____अधीगर्थदयेशांकमणि ॥ ५२ ॥ पदानि । अधि-हक-अर्य-दय-ईशां, कर्मणि , ( षष्ठी). 
पत्तिः ॥अधोगर्याः स्मरणार्थःबहानगतिरतणेषु। ईशश। एतेषां कर्मणि कारके शेषलेन विवक्षिते पष्ठी विभक्ति भवति । 
52. Or the verbs having the sense of remem. bering,' (adhik) and of daya 'to give,' 'to pity' 'to protect,''to move,' and of isa'to rule or be inaster of the object takes the sixth case-affix. . . . 
Ex. AFT: spila he remembers th: mother,' arata 'he gives clarified butter, नायंगामाणामी? the can not rule his limbs.' But not so here मातःस्मरवि because yo here is not the object. The word dr is also understood here. So that the cases not otherwise provided for, take this case. So that are स्मरति is also allowed. 
रुनः प्रतियरने ॥ ५३ ॥ पदानि ॥ रुजः, प्रतियत्ने, (कर्मणि शेषे षष्ठी) 
निः॥ करोतेः कर्मनि. कारले ऐपलेन विलिने प्रतियत्रे गम्यमाने पछी विभनि भवति । 
____53. The object of the verb kri takes the sixth case-affix, when it means 'to impart a new quality or virtue' (I. 3. 32). 
Ex. एभोटकस्योपस्का 'the wood gives a new quality to the trater' (or he prepares the wood and water for sacrifice). (By VI. I. 139, a is inserted). 
When hinten is not meant, the second case-affix is employed: as करोति.. 
The word de is also understood here. So that we have also puta पस्कुरुते॥ 
रुजार्थानी भावनानामज्वरे ॥ ५४॥ पदानि ॥ 5-अर्थानां , भाववचनानाम् , अञ्चरे , ( कर्मणि शेषे षष्ठी), 
• वृतिः ॥ हजार्थानां धातूनां भाववचनानां भावकर्नकाण अरिवर्जितानां कर्मणि कारक शेषन वित्तिते पठी विमनिर्भवति ॥ 
. पार्निकम् ।। भन्नारि संसाप्योरिविपतम्बम् ।। 
*298 
· GENITIVE CASE. 
(Bk. II. CH. III. $ 54-56. 
54. The object of verbs having the seuse ot ruj'to afflict,' with the exception of the Causative verb jvaraya 'to be feverish,' takes the sixth case-affix, when the verb expresses a condition (i. e., when the subject is au Abstract nouu). 
Ex. चीरस्यजति रोगः 'the disease afflicts the thief' चोरस्यामयति भामयः। 
Why do we say when the subject is an Abstract noun'? Observe ti AT FF'the river breaks the banks.' So also not here to sera.I FTC: the fever burns the thief.' So also when the verb garg is used, te Hati 
The word it is also understood here. Thus it orfa fra: # 
priufe 719: 1143 11 agt u entfat, #19: (** for at agt) . 
TFT: U my advartaitit: 9598, Harit:FFET ** Aan de FT fra et ferit infall 
55. Of the verb nåth when meaning 'to bless'; the object takes the sixth case-afix. 
Ex. par arran'he blesses the honey.' But AMET , sagot. mirits 'he solicits månavaka saying (child) son, study.' Here are does not mean to bless, and so it takes the accusative case. 
जासिनिग्रहणनाटकाथपिषां हिंसायाम् ॥ ५६ ॥ पदानि ॥ जासि fa9f4-717-*19-forf , figigra, ( *for at ) 
1:11 HII foraju TE #4 face roast vrai fiar fiqut for r ent বিশলিগলি। 
56. The object of the verbs jâsi' to strike'; 'to hurt,' han 'to strike' preceded by fa and , nåţ to 'injure,' krâth,' and 'pish,' when they mean, 'to injure', takes the sixth case-afix. 
CET 15a , fra, fargfa, qfta, forfa , Tarafa, 4 1, foafe an, 'he injures the thief.' ' 
The root te belonging to the Churadi class should be taken, and not Divådi. 67 with the prepositions pra and ni may be taken inany order. The root #4 takes in the causative vriddhi irregularly. This verb is Bhvadi and falls into the subdivision ghatadi, and is called there a fost verb; all for verbs shorten their penultimate before the causative affix for (VI. 4. 92). 
Thus 474 is an irregularity. 
BK. II. CH. III. & 56-59. ) 
GENITIVE CASE 
299 
0 
Why do we say when meaning to injure? Observe at: fruit 'he pounds the barley." 
The word dris also understood here as fretta. Only these govern the genitive, not so here tid fraen , le forfall 
व्यवहपणोः समर्थयोः ॥ ५७॥ पदानि । व्यवह-पणोः, समर्थयोः ( 514 for st). 
: 1*T48 TU petaret: at: hartă: 4.0 Maret forritinu 
57. The object of the verbs vyavahfi and pan when they are synonymous, that is when they mean 
dealing in sale and purchase transactions' or 'staking in gambling,' takes the sixth case-afhx. 
Ex. T 4 TFT or qurd'he deals in, or stakes hundred. . 
Why does not the verb qo take the affix my? It takes arą vihen mean ing 'to praise or honor,' and not in the sense of 'gambling, or bartering' &c. Not so here yarn TTETRA he throws the dice,' #0 Tirua 'he praises the Brahmanas.' The word hy is also here understood, so that we have to go 
he stakes a hundred.' 
दिवस्तदर्थस्य ॥ ५ ॥ पदानि । दिवः, सदस्य । (व्यवहपणोः समर्थयोः कर्मषष्ठी), 
FAT: 115445 fr e e frete: **A got forfra 11 
58. The object of the verb div when having the above-mentioned sense of 'd aling' or 'staking,' takes the sixth case-affix. 
Ex. TAFE ftsafe 'he stakes or deals in hundred.' But not in more doara 'he jokes with the Brahmana. . 
The yoga vihbaga, when this root might well have bcen included in the last aphorism, is for the sake of the succeeding sůtras, in which the anuvritti of fit runs, and not of others. 
fanistanit u ge u agra faftat, gaat, (iqah The forgot) n . 
fi:n avai alat perateenue forman pret fera* 
59. The object of the verb div when having the above-mentioned sense of dealing or staking, option. ally takes the sixth case-affix, when it is preceded by an u pasarga (or prepositioni). 
300 
GENITIVE CASE 
[ BK. II. CH. III. 8 59-62. 
____Ex. शतस्य शतं वा पद दीपति 'he deals in or stakes a hundred.' But no option is allowed when the verb is simple as in the last aphorism ; oor does this rule apply when the sense is not that of dealing or gambling. As, Tarat afa Houfa 'he throws the missile.' 
द्वितीया ब्राह्मणे ॥ ६॥ पदानि ॥. द्वितीया , बालसे, (द्विव. स्तदर्थस्य कर्मणि )। 
वृत्तिः ।। प्राणविश्वे प्रयोगे दिवस्तदर्य कर्मणि कारके द्वितीया विभक्तिर्भवति । 
60. The object of the verb div when having the above-mentioned sense of dealing' or 'staking' takes the second case-affix in the Brahmana literature. 
Ex. गामस्य तदहः सभायां दीव्येयुः (Maitr. S. I. 6. II) In the Vedic literature the simple verb div takes the accusative instead of the genitive. And with upasarga it is optional. The anuvšitti of the word og does not extend to this sutra, or the following. 
प्रेष्यत्रुवोहविषोदेवतासंप्रदाने ॥ ६१ ॥ पदानि ॥ प्रेष्य अधोः , हविषः , देवता-सम्प्रदाने ( षष्ठी कर्मणि ). 
वृत्तिः । भ्यनुवोहविषः कर्मणः पष्ठी विभक्तिर्भवति देवता संपदानेसति ॥ 
61. . The object of the verb preshya and brûhi (imperative singular of Divadi verb, meaning ' send' and 'utter,') denoting sacrificial fool, takes the sixth case aliis, when making offerings to deity is meant or when deity is the recepieut. 
Ex. अनये छागस्य हविषोरपाया मेदसोऽनहि प्य वा ' send to fire as oblation, the goat, the fat, and the marrow.' But not here:-अमये छागं हविर्षपी मेदो जुधि : Because the verb is not preshya or bruhi. So also not here अमये गोमयान् प्रेय . Because it is not an oblation. Yot here too माणवकाय पुरोडाशं प्रेष्य . Because the recepient is not a diety. Compare VIII. 2.91. 
Vart:- This rule does not apply when the word ofera 'set out' qualifies the word हविः as; इन्द्रामियो छागं हविषा मेवः प्रस्थित प्रेष्य 'send to Indra and Agni the oblation set out for them' &c. 
____ चतुर्थ्यथै बहुलं छन्दसि ॥२॥ पदानि ॥ चतुर्थी अर्थे , बहुलं , छन्दसि ( षष्ठी)। 
वृत्तिः ॥ एन्नस विषये चतुर्थ्यथे पष्ठी विभक्तिर्भवति बहुलम् ।। वात्तिकम् । षष्टधयें चतुर्थी वक्तग्या । 
[ Bk. II. CH. III. 8 63-64. 
CASE-AFFIXES. 
901 
62. In the chhandas the sixth case-afix is employed diversely with the force of the fourth case alix. 
Ex. पुरुषमगधन्द्रमस: or चन्द्रमसे 'to the moon, amale deer.' गोधा कालका at are aptarą or raflauz: 'to you lords of the forest, are lizard, kalaka bird, &c. So also STIAT 591 RI (R. Ved. X. 136. 7). 
Why do we say 'diversely ? Observe olarsa, fegrateft. 
Vart: In the Veda, the 4th case-aflix is employed in the sense of the sixth: as या सर्वेण पिवति तस्य खोजायते 'who soever woman drinks with a roman in her courses, gets herself in menstrua. So also at refa wa TUTTET 'who cleans her teeth, her teeth become black.' Turrela at $79: 'who pairs her nails, her nails become ugly. So on, in ang 17: arargata 
, a aforefa fluga 11 Fan Art: (T. S. 2. 5. 1. 7). 
yha FICUT nagfa uh: , , *rot, (post) uc त्तिः । यजेर्धातोः करणे कारके उन्दसि पहल षष्ठी विभनिर्भवति ॥ 
63. The sixth case-ath.x is diversely employ ed in the chhandas in denoting the instrument of the verb yaj 'to sacrifice.' 
Ex. घृतस्थ or प्तेन यजते 'he sacrifices with butter.' सोमस्थ or सोमेन यजत ॥ 
कृत्वोर्थप्रयोगे कालेऽधिकरणे ॥ ६४ ॥ पदानि ॥ करवो-अर्थप्रयोगे, $18, furo (orgt ) 
FF: 11 Fistfal qezarai pard To S. ATU met Fertilitara II 
64. The sixth case-asix is employed in denot ing location (adhikarana) after a word denoting time (kâla): when used along with a word ending with an aflix having the sense of kritvasuch (V. 4. 17) 'so many times.' 
Ex. IGRIT 'he eats five times a day. In short, 'words meaning so many times, or the numeral adverbs of frequency, govern the genitive of time in the sense of locative.' As farai sutat' he studies twice in 
a day.' 
Why do we say 'having the force of ? Observe mi ja "he sleeps in the day.' 
This rule will not apply when the adverb of frequency is understood, not expressed (prayoga) as in STEFT 4. Nor when the time is not meant, as fg: #teamrath he eats in two brass vcssels.' So also when location is 
302 
GENITIVE CASE. 
BK. II. CH. III 564-66.] 
not meant: as द्विरहो न. The शेष being understood we nave द्विरहन्यधीते. 
___कतकर्मणोः कृति ॥ ६५ ॥ पदानि ॥ कर्तृ-कर्मणोः, कति । (षष्ठी) 
वृत्तिः ॥ कृत्प्रयोगे कर्तरि कर्मणि च षष्ठी विभक्तिर्भवति ॥ 
65. The sixth case aflix is employed after a word, in denoting the agent and the object, when used along with a word ending vith a krit afix (III. 1.93). 
Ex. क्रियो कालिदासस्य the composition of Kalidasa.' भाहता मतना the per former of sacrifice. So also भवतः शायिका'your turn of lying down.'भपां बटा, पुरा भत्ता बञस्य भर्ता. But not in शस्त्रेण ना 'cutting with weapon.' 
Why do we say "kçit? Not so when a Taddhita-affix is employed as aarai. In other words, the genitive in Sanskrit is both subjective an objective. 
उभयप्राप्तौ कर्मणि ॥ ६६ ॥ उभयप्राप्ती, कर्मणि, ( कति षष्ठी)॥ 
वृतिः ॥ उभयोः प्राप्तियस्मिन्कृति सोयमुभयप्राप्तिस्तभकर्मण्येव पष्ठी विभक्तिर्भवति , न कर्तरि॥ 
धानिकम् ।। भकाकारयोः स्त्री प्रत्यययोः प्रयोगे नेति वतन्यम् ॥ वातिकम्। शेषे विभाषा॥ 
66. When the agent and the object of the ac tion denoted by the words formed by krit-affixes, are bot 
used in a sentence, in the object only, the sixth case-affix is employed, and not in the agent (the object is put in the genitive case and not the agent). 
भाशों गवां दोहोउगोपालकन the milking of a cow without a cowherd isa wonder.' रोचते में भोदनस्य भोजनं देवदत्तेन 'The cating of rice by Devadatta pleases me;' पयसः पानं यज्ञदत्तेन 'the drinking of milk by Yajnadatta.' 
Vart:- When the agent and object are both used, the agent is put in the instrumental, or genitive case, when, as some say, the krit termina tions are of the feminine gender, or as others say, when the terminations are of any gender; as, विचित्रा जगतः कृतिहरेहरिणा वा 'the creation of the world by Hari is wonderful.' शब्दानामनुशासनमाचायण आचार्यस्य वा 'the dissertation on words by the acharya' विचित्राहि सूत्रस्य कृतिः पाणिनेः or पाणिनिना 'beautiful is the struc. ture of sutra by Panini.' Apte. 
तस्य प, वर्तमाने ॥ ६७ ॥ पदानि ॥ क्तस्य, च, वर्तमाने ( षष्ठी)। पत्तिः ॥तस्य वर्तमानकानविहितसव प्रयोगे पष्ठी विभक्तिर्भवति॥ [ BK. II.CH III. $67-69. 
CASE-AFFIX. 
30 
AamrC 
वार्तिकम् ।। नपुंसके भावउपसंख्यानम् ।। . पातिकम् ॥ शेषविज्ञानात् सिद्धम् ॥ 
67. The past participle ending in the when used in the sense of the present tense, (III. 2. 187 and 188) is used with the genitive. 
Ex. tata fora: 'honored by kings,' starrat Arga: 'I alone am re garded by the king.' 
Why do we say 'क'? Observe भोदन पचमानः 'rice is cooked. Why do we say when denoting the present tense? Observe मा गतः 'gone to the village.' 
Vart:-When used as abstract neuter nouns, past participles are used with the genitive, as RICET C# 'the dancing of a peacock.' area for the laughing of the students.' कोकिनस्य ध्याइतम् the screaming of the cuckoo.' When, however, agent is desired to be particularised, the instrumental case is employed: as खणहसितम् . 
This sâtra debars sätra 69 by which genitive is prohibited after Nishthå affixes. This is an exception to that sætra. 
__ अधिकरणवाधिनच ॥६॥ पदानि ॥ अधिकरणवाधिनः , प; (षष्ठी) 
वृत्तिः । कोधिकरणे चेति वक्ष्यति तस्य प्रयोगे पष्ठी विभक्तिभवति ॥ 
68. The past participle in h is used with the genitive when the former expresses location (III. 4. 
76). 
: This also is an exception to the prohibition about Nishtha contained in II. 3.69. As इदमेभामासितम् 'this is their seat.' इसमेषां शयितं this is their sleeping.' 
In connection with verbs taking two objects, both take the genitive case, irhen a word ending in kțit-affix denotes the agent, as they would have taken thcaccusative: as, नेताश्वस्य ग्रामस्य चत्रः 'Chaitra is the leader of the horse of the village.' When, however, one is the principal, then the object takes the genitive: as, नेताश्वस्य प्रामं चैत्रः , 'Chaitraleads the horse to the village.' 
न लोकाव्ययनिष्ठाखलर्थतनाम् ॥ ६९ ॥ पदानि ॥ न, ल-उ-तक अव्यय-निष्ठा-खलर्थ-तृनाम , ( षष्ठी) 
पतिः ।। ल र क अध्यय निष्ठा सन्नर्थ तन इत्येतेषां प्रयोगे षष्ठीविभक्तिर्न प्रति बार्तिकम् ।। उक प्रतिषेधे कर्मभाषायामप्रतिषेधः।। पार्मिकम् ।। अव्ययप्रतिषेधे तोसुनकसुनोरमतिषेधः।। वार्निकम् ॥ द्विषः शतुर्वा वचनम् ॥ 
301 
CASE-AFFIXES. . . . . [ BK. II. CH. III. $69, 70. 
-AFFIXES 
69. The sixth case-affix is not used to ex press the agent or the object, when the word is govern ed by an Active Participle ending in the affix ल , or 3, or 54, or by an Indeclinable, or by a Past Participle in 
and weg, or by a word ending in an alis having the sense of खलू or by a Non of agency formed by तुन् । 
After these words, the Instrumental case must be employed to denote the Agent, and the Accusative case to denote the object. This sutra debars Genitive which would have come by II. 3. 65. The word nie is formed by 
न + 3 + उक =न + ऊक = लोक. 
1. The word means the substitutes of i. c., the Present Parti. ciples in शट , शान (III. 2. 124), कान (III. 2. 106) कमु (III. 2. 107) कि and किन् (III. 2. 172). Thus भोदनं पचन , पचमानः, पेचानः or पेचिवान् , पपिः खोमम् , ददिर्गाः। 
2. The affix ris enjoined by III. 2. 168, as, करं चिकीर्षुः , भोदन बुभुनः॥ The prohibition applies when a word ending in four (III. 2. 136) is the governing term; as, कन्यामनंकरिष्णुः ॥ 
3. The affix उकis ordained by III. 2. 154: as आगामुकं वाराणसी रत आहः ॥. 
Vart:- But the word 719 in secular Sanskrit, governs the Geoitive, as दास्याः कामुकः 'lusting for the slave.' 
4. Indeclinables formed by कृत् affixes, as, कटं कन्या , ओदनं भुना ।। 
Vart;--This prohibition, however, does not apply to the indeclin ables formed by तोसुन् (III. 4. 16) and कसुन् (III. 4. 17) as, पुरा सूर्यस्योटेतोराधेयः , पुरा करस्य विक्षो विरपशिन् (I. I. 40). 
5. Nishtha i.e., n and नयतु ; as ओदनं भुक्तवान् देवदत्तेन कृतम् . 
6. The words formed by खलर्य affixes (III. 3. 126), as, ईपत्करो भवता करः, पित्यानः सोमो भवमा . 
7. The art in the aphorism is a pratyä håra, formed by taking the c of TE (III. 2. 129) and the final Toft (III. 2. 135), meaning the alfixes शानन् (III. 2. 128), चानश (HI. 2. 129), शर (III. 2. 130) and हन् (III. 2. 135). As सोमं पवमानः , नटमासान , अधीयन् , पारायणन् , कर्ता कटान् , वदिता जनापवादान । 
Vart:-Optionally so, when the root दिए takes the affix चन्द , as, चौरं or चौरस्य द्विषन् ॥ 
अकेनोर्भविष्यदायमर्ययोः ॥७॥ पदानि ॥ अक-इनो, भविष्यट-आधमर्ययोः (षष्ठी)॥ 
निः ॥ अकस्य भविष्यांत काने विहितस्येनस्तु भविष्यवि चाधमएये च विहितस्य प्रयोगे पष्ठी वितिनं भवति ।। 
BK. II. CH. III. 8 70-72.] 
CASE-AFFIXES. 
70. The sixth case-alix is not used wheu the word is goverued by a verbal noun in w denoting futurity, or in denoting 'futurity and indebtedness.' 
The affix अक , such as एबुन, दुम&c., denote futurity, and never denote indebtedness. The affix (such as rofa (III. 3. 3 and 170) denotes both. Thus कटं कारको व्रजति 'he goes to make a mat' ओदनं भोजको प्राति 'he goes to eat rice.' So also with T, as, ar mit or that he has to go to the village. Ti pret he owes hundred.' 
Why do we say 'when denoting futurity or indebtedness'? Obserre यवाना लायक: 'the cutter of barley:' खत्तनों पावकः, भवरवं करी कटरव ॥ 
Why is the Genitive employed in the following वर्षशतस्य परकः, पुपोत्राणां पर्शकः? The words पुरक and दर्शक , though formed by भक (III. 1. 133), are not formed by that what which denotes futurity, vis., III. 3. 10. The prescat sútra relates to this latter , and not every than in general. 
___ करयानां कर्तरि वा ॥ १ ॥ पदानि ॥ कृत्यानां, कर्तरि , वा., (षष्ठी)॥ 
पति: । करयानां प्रयोगे करिया पठी विभक्तिर्भवति, नकर्मणि।।. . दार्तिकम् ।। उभयमानी करये पठधा प्रतिषेधोवनयः।। 
71. The sixth case-affix is optionally employ: ed in denoting the agent, (but not the object), when the word is governed by a Future Passive Participle (kritya). 
By II. 3.65, verbal nouns, (krit-formed), always govero the Genitire in denoting agent or object. The present sutra declarcs an option as to agents only, in the case of those verbal nouns which are Future Passive Participles. Thus भवतः or भवता कटः कर्तव्यः (III. 1.95). 
Why do we say in denoting the agent ? In denoting the object, no option is allowed; the Genitive is compulsory. As गेयो मानवकः सानाम् ॥ 
Vart:--The prohibition of the Genitive should be stated in the case of the Future Passive Participles of those verbs which govern two objects Thus क्रष्टव्या पान शाखा देवदानेन , नेतन्या माममजा देवरलेन । 
तुल्यार्थैरतुलोपमाभ्यां तृतीयाऽन्यतरस्याम् ॥ ७॥ पदानि ।। तुल्य-अर्थः , अतुल-उपमाभ्यो , तृतीया, अन्यतरस्याम् ।। 
वृत्तिः॥ मुल्यायः धन्दयोंगे तृतीया विभक्तिर्भवस्यन्यतरस्यां , पले पठी च, सुलोपमा शनी वयमा 
72. The third or the sixth case-affix may optionally be employed, when the word is joined with another word meaning like to, or resemblance ; cxcept. ing तुला and उपमा:.. 
306 
CASL-AFFIXES. 
[ BK. II. CH. III. 572,73. 
Thus तुन्यो देवदसेन or पदनस्व, साशी देवदत्नेन or वदनस्य ॥ But with चुला and उपमा the Genitive must necessarily be employed. As तुला देवासस्व नास्ति, उपमा कृष्णस्वम वियते ॥ 
Though the anuvsitti of I was understood in this sätra from the previous satra, yet the repitition of macrury is for the sake of the subsequent sQtra. The word in II. 3. 73 attracts the word Fry into that sätra ; but had the word H4FCRITT not been used in this sůtra, then the word y would have attracted the word aitar instead, which is not desired. 
On this sátra, Professor Apte says:- Papini says that the words a and Th can not be used with the Instrumental. But this is against good usage: as, तुला यदारोहति दंतवाससा(Kum. Sanm. V. 24), नभसा तुला समारोह (Raghu. vaisa VIII. 15). स्फुरोपमं भूनिसितेन शंभुना (Magh I. 4).' 
चतुर्थी धाशिष्यायुष्यमद्रभद्रकुशलसुखार्थहितः ॥७३॥ पदानि । चतुर्थी , च, आशिषि, आयुष्य-मद्र-भद्र कुशल-मुख-अर्थ-हितैः, ( अन्यतर साम् ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ आशिषि गम्यमानायाम् भायुज्य मनु भद्र कुशल सुख भर्य हित इत्येतयांगे चतुर्थी विभक्तिवति । चकारो विकल्पानुकर्षणार्यः । 
वार्तिकम् ॥ भवायुम्यादीनां पर्यार्थ यहां कर्तव्यम् ।। 
73. The fourth as well as the sixth case aflix may be employed, when blessing is intended in con nection with the words &yusha 'long life,' madra'joy,' bhadra 'good fortune,' kušala 'welfare.' sukha 'happi ness,' artha 'prosperity,' and hita 'good.' 
The in the sätra makes the employment of Dative optional: in the alternative we hare Genitive. 
Vart:-In this sutra आयुष्य &c., include their synonyms also. 
Thus आयुष्यं देवदत्ताय भूयात् or भायुष्यं वदत्तस्य भयात् ।। Similarly चिरं जीवितं , मद्रं, भद्रं, कयनं, निरामयं, सुखं,शं, भों, प्रयोजनं, हितं पथ्यं देवदत्ताय or देवदत्तस्य भूयात् ॥ 
Why do we say when 'benediction is intended? Observe urgse देवदत्तस्य तपः 'the austerity is the cause of the long life of Devadatta.' Here there is no option allowed: and the Genitive case is only employed, 
ओश्म ॥ द्वितीयाध्यायस्य चतुर्थः पादः॥ 
BOOK II. CHAPTER IV. 
द्विगुरेकवचनम् ॥ १॥पदानि ॥ द्विगुः । एक-वचनम् । निः॥ द्विगुः समासः एकवचनं भवति । 
1. The compound Dvigu (II. 1. 52) is singular in number.. 
The word it is a genitive Tat-purusha compound meaning the expression for one,' that is to say, it expresses the sense of unity. The rule therefore, enjoins that the sease inherent in a Dvigu compound is that of unity. 
This is confined to Samåbara Dvigu i. e., an aggregate compound taken in a collective sense. As, पसपर्व ' an aggregate of five cows, पचपनी (IV. 1. 21.). The sense of Dvigu being that of one, it follows that it retains the singular number even when further modified by other affixes, and used as an attributive and though no longer a Dvigu; as, पसपनीयं शोभना ।. 
द्वन्द्वश्च प्राणितूर्यनाङ्गानाम् ॥ २॥ पदानि ॥ इन्दः, , मावि सूर्य-सेना-अङ्गानाम् ( एकवचन) . वृत्तिः । प्राएयङ्गाना इन्च एकाइवनि, तयातूर्याङ्गाना सेनाङ्गानां च ॥ 
2. A Dvandva compound too is singular in number, when itis compounded of words signifying mem bers of the animal body, players (or singers or dancers) and component parts of an army. 
As,पाणिपादम् ' the hand and foot' शिरोपीय 'the head and neck' मालिक पाणविकम् 'players on the mridanga and panava (kinds of drums)'रपिकावरोहम् 'the soldiers on chariot and horse.'वीणावादकपरिवादकम् , रधिकपादावम् ।। 
This rule applies 10 cases of Samáhara Dvandva or aggregate Dvandva Compounds only; and not to llaretara Dvandva (II. 2. 29.) 
308 
DVANDVA COMPOUND 
(Bk. II. CH. IV. & 2-3. 
In the Dvandva Compounds of animals such as elephants, horses &c., the singular is optional; (II. 4. 12.) The present rule also gives us an index as to where we must make Samahara Dvandya and where an Itarctara Dvandva. The Dvandva compounds of words signifying members of animal body, players or army, are always and solely Samahara Dvandva. The compounds of words like hatt 'curd and milk' (II. 4. 14) are purely Itaretara Dvandva and can never be Samahara Dvandva; while compounds of words denoting tree, animals &c.,(II. 4. 12.) are optionally either Samahara or Itaretara Dvandva. 
__ अनुवादे धरणानाम् ॥ ३॥ पदानि ॥ अनुवादे, धरणानाम् । (6, 767) 
Ther: Il Porrat Tufa, 4 TRINI 
4 II 
B arat eit 4541 
3. A Dyandva compound of words signifying persons belonging to the different Vedic-Schools when the sense is that of repetition, is singular. 
The word eru means a school or branch of any of the Vedas der signated by the name of the person who founded such a branch and hence means such a person. The word Tir means repetition by way of explana. tion, illustration or corroboration; that is to say, when a speaker demonstrates for some special purposes, a proposition which had already been demonstrated before, that is called anuvada. 
This aggregate is used with the aorist of the roots Fyr and only; as 
BATAMTH 'katha and kildpa arose (again, further demonstrating their doctrines)'; 4487 yun 'katha and kauthuma established again.' 
Why do we say 'when meaning repetition'? Observe a 5 TGITT: or feug: 75HT:, when demonstration for the first time is meant. It is the aorist ol for and which takes such a Dvandva and not any other verb or any other tense of these verbs; as:-भनन्दिषुः कटकालापाः and उद्यन्ति कठकालापा:.. 
. Note: This sůtra is translated thus by Mr. Iyangar, 'Aggregation alone is admissible between words denoting persons belonging to the differ ent charaṇas of the Vedas, when they are used along with the aorist derived from the roots stha and in, in the sense of recitation of the charaṇas as al. ready learnt, as distinguished from Icarning them the first time." Prof. Bohthlingk's translation is, 'The Dvandva Compound of the names of Vedic Schools is singular, when such a school is repeatedly mentioned equally along with another. 
BK. II. CH. IV. & 4-6.] 
DVANDVA COMPOUND: 
909 
.. 
. 
YO 
अध्वर्युक्रतुरनपुंसकम् ॥४॥ पदानि ॥ अध्वर्यु, ऋतुः, म-नपुंस ( 376, 947) 
FF: 11 spajausti Termagamfarai TFI #TKT II . 
4. A Dvandva compoud of words denoting sacrifices (kratu) ordained by the Yajur (Adhvaryu) Veda, is singular, provided they are never used in the neuter geuder. 
As, a TTÀYA 'the Arka and Aśvamedha sacrifices,' targtfatter 'the Sayahna and Atirațra sacrifices.' 
Why do we say .Yajur-veda sacrifices ? Observe you the Ishu and Vajra ceremonies,' उभिदनभितो।। 
Why do we say 'when not in the neuter gender'? Observe HETTA 'the Rajasaya and Vajapeya sacrifices.' 
Why have we taluRTAT? Because the word : is a technical term applying only to Soina-sacrifices and not any sacrifices in general. Therefore, though Darśa and Paurpamasa are Yajur-veda ceremnonies, they not being Soma ceremonies, the present rule does not apply. 
Brunatsfangereau yn ogifa l aparat: , fa Phelaam, &, q4a97) 
f*: 1 yuta fitta dennaT TEATEAT BERT hat 
II 5. A Dvaudva compound of words denoting (persons who have studied) subjects, which in their order of study are not remote from each other, is siugular. 
As, 4*4 'a person who has studied the pada arrangement and a person who has studied the krama arrangement; so also u s . 
Why do we say 'order of study'? Observe fratru 'father and son.' Why do we say not remote'? See oli tut sacrifice-knower and the grammarian.' 
Fifatnya & H reifa ni afa: , wafuata, (ma, *2 ) u 
.: Il surfagiftai arat r T TKV, Ut fart 11 
6. A. Dvandva compound of words signify. ing játi (genus) which are not names of living beings, is singular. 
$10 
DVANDVA COMPOUND. 
(BK. II. CH. IV. § 6,7 
Thus ATIVI 'tbc probe and the kaise'; vrug for fried rice and barley cake. 
Why do we say words denoting genus? Observe Forgathat Nandaka and Papchajanya.' 
Why do we say 'oot of living being? See HIBU Fruit “ Brahmagas and the Kshatriyas. 
This rule applies to the jati or geous names of substances (fortfa) and not the jati names of qualities and actions. (gurmarra), Thus Theeyut: "colour, savour, odour, and tangibility '; G rtufo' going, contraction and expansion.' 
Even with jati names of substances, the Dvandva compound takes singular, only when the objects are spoken of collectively as a class; when, bowever, the individuals belonging to a class are indicated, the proper number should be employed; as, US 77679781a farafta 'in this bowl are the badari and amalaki fruits.' 
The words a 'genus,' ou 'substance, yu'quality and for "action' are technical terms of Indian Logicians. Jäti has already been ere plained. Substances are nine: eartb, watcr, light, air, ether, time, space, soul, and mind. Qualities are twenty-four: colour, savour, odour, tangibility, number, dimension, severalty, conjunction, disjunction, priority, posteriori ty, weight, Auidity, viscidity, sound, understanding, pleasure, pain, desire aversion, effort, merit, demerit and faculty. There are five actions; throwing upwards, throwing downwards, contraction, expansion and going. 
विशिष्टलिङ्गो नदी देशोग्यामाः ॥७॥ पदानि ॥ विशिष्ट-लिङ्गः, art, 1, 1T: , ( Gogo) # 
T: 11 for sustas yrat farasymai tetement mat duniant. ramai arat इन एकपरवति॥ 
पार्तिकम्॥भमामा इण्यम नगराण प्रतिषेधी पत्तायः॥ Tall grain qurul afastit Ther: 11 
7. A Dvandva compound of words of different genders, denoting names of rivers and couutries, but not of towns, is singular. 
Thus til "the Ganges and the Sona.' T: + t = m i t 'the country of the Kurus and the Kurukshetra' ध्यरावती कुरुकुर माङ्गलम् ॥ 
Why do we say of different genders ? Observe forent 'the Ganges and the Yamuna. Both being feminine gender, so also : 11. .. 
BK. IL CH. IV. & 7-9. ) : : DVANDVA COMPOUND 
S11 
: Why do we say rivers and countries'? Observe a yat'the beo and the pea-hen.' 
Why do we say not of a town? See turcfarat, Jambaba and Salukint' which are the oames of two villages or gråina. 
We hare taken the word 'river," as the word 'country' does not in clude 'river.' So also mountains' are not included; as par t the Kailasa and the Gandbamadana.' 
Vart: The prohibition extends to villages and lovas (grama) but not to cities, (Nagara), as Hy tror 'the cities of Mathura and Påtaliputra.' 
Vart:-When a compound consists of two words, one a town and the other a city, the prohibition applies; as arah'the city of Saurya and the village of Ketavata.' 
4712: 14 dagfa n 99-4714: , ( a ye467) वृत्तिः ॥ भुद्रमन्त वापिना इन एकपरवति ॥ 
8. A Dvaudva compound of words signify ing small animals, is siugular. 
. Thus that the louse and the nil'; 1990*7 'the bug and the mosquito.' The word area means an animal of a very small size. Some say that animals not having bones are called , (invertebrates); others say, those which are small ia size ; others say, all below the moogoose are ksbudrajantu. 
out a fartu: griafax: nen gaifa n gai, a, fale , jirafax: ( 96, ( 90 ) 
Far: ll dat ons nie fache hieraat varat at ayatlet in 
9. A Dvandva compound of words siguifying those animals only among whom there is permanent enmity i. e., natural aud eternal antipathy or quarrel, is singular. 
The word forth means enmity: and ar fa: means permanent. 
Thus, frattagant the cat and the rat; tum 'the dog and the jackal'; foret. the snake and the mongoose. 
Why do we say "natural and eternal'? Observe the resursiaran: menerapa Gaupali and Salankayana are quarrelling. 
The force of the word in the aphorism is that of only.' Drandra compounds of such animals only are invariably singular ; no other rule, erca 
312 
Bk. II. CH. IV. $ 9-11. ] 
DVANDVA COMPOUND." 
if otherwise applicable, would apply to such compounds. Thus rule ta says that Dvandva compounds of beasts and birds, is optionally singular. That rule (by 1.4, 2.) would have set aside the present rule. Rut a prevents that, and no optional plural number is allowed in case of beasts or birds that are naturally at war as भश्वमाहिपन्. 'the horse and the buffalo';काकोनकम् 'the crow and the owl.' 
शूद्राणामनिरसितानाम् ॥ १०॥ पदानि ॥ शूद्राणाम् , अ-निरव. सितानाम् , (द्वन्द्वः, एकब ). 
पतिः॥ भनिरसितराद्रवाधिना पदानां इन्द्र एकपति. 
10. A Dvandva compound of words denoting those classes of SQdras who have not been expelled from the communion of higher classes, is singular. 
Thus, तसावरकरम् 'the carpenter and the blacksmith'; मकतन्तवायम् 'the washerman and the weaver.' 
The word of fara means one not expelled (from the dish). 
A Sadra who can take food from the dish of a higher class, without permanently defiling that vessel, is called an Anirvasita Sudra. . 
Why do we say ' not expelled't Observe पण्डालमृतपाः 'the Chandala and the Mritapa' 
गवाखप्रभृतीनि ॥ ११ ॥ पदानि ॥ गवाख-प्रभृतीनि , ( एक वधनमा 
वृत्तिः ॥ गवाश्वमभृतीनि कृतंकवद्भावानि दमरूपापि साधुनि भवति । 
11. The word gavåśva, and others are also Drandva compounds which take the singular number. 
Thus गवाश्वम् 'the cow and the horse. So also गवाविका . 
गवाश्वादिः 1. गवावा . 2. गवाविकम् . 3. गडकम् . 4. भजाविकम् . 5. भजे रकम् . 6. कुस्मशमनम् . 7. कुम्भकरातकम् . 8. पुनपोनम् . 9. श्वचण्टानम् . 10. स्नीकमारम् . L. दासीमाणकम् . 12. शाटीपिच्कम् . 13. . उष्ट्रखरम् . 14. उष्ट्रा शम् . 15. भूमशात् . 16. भारीपन . 17. यकृन्ने. 18. मांशोणितम् . 19. भगरम् . 20. दर्भपतीकम् . 21. भर्नुनशिरीषम् . 22. वोलपम् . 23. दासीदासम् . 24. कुरीकुटम् . 25. भगवतीभागवतम् . 
Vart:--In this list, the forms as given, are singular; but when the same words assume different forms they may take either .number. As गोरखम् or गोषी. In this form of गोand भv the next rule.applies and option is allowed. DVANDVA COMPOUND. 
EK. II. CH. IV.812, 13.] 
.313 
33 
विभाषा क्षमृगतृणधान्यव्यनुनपशुशकुन्यखवडवपूर्वापराघरोत्त राणाम् ॥ १२॥ पदानि ॥ विभाषा, वृक्ष-सुग-तृण-धान्य-व्यञ्जन-पशु-शकुनि अश्ववडय-पूर्व-अपर-अधर-उत्तराणाम् , (दाए) 
वृत्तिः ॥ वृक्ष मृग बण धान्य व्यञ्जन पशु शकुनि भवदडव पूर्वपर भरोनर हत्येसची इन्छो विभाषकषावति ॥ 
वार्तिकम् ।। बहुप्रकृतिः फलसेना वनसतिमृगशकुनिक्षुद्रजन्तुधाग्यणानाम्॥ 
12. A. Dvaudva compound of words being the names of trees, wild auimals, grass, corn, condiment, domesticbeasts and birds, and thecompounds asva-vadava, 
purva-para and adharottara, are optionally singular. 
12 Thus, ससम्यग्रोधम् or सक्षन्यग्रोधाः 'the Plaksha and the Nyagrodha trees'); रुरुपषतम् or रुपपता: 'the Ruru-deer and the spotted antelopes '; कुराकाशम् or कुशकाशाः 'the Kuta grass and the Kasa grass'; मीहियवम् or मीहियवाः 'the rice and the barley' विपतम् or a 'the curd and the butter' गोमहिषम् or पाः 'the cow and the buitalo'; तित्तिरिकपिचलम् or ना: 'the Tittiri (akind of part ridge) and the Kapinjala birds';भश्ववडवम् or वा: 'the horse and the mare'; पूर्वापरम् ort' the first and the last '; भघरोत्तरम् ort the upper and lower: 
Vart:--The Dvandva compound of words denoting names of fruits, army, large trees, wild animals, birds, small animals, grain and grass, is singular, when a large number or quantity of these is spoken of; that is when a large oumber of them is taken collectively, the compound is singular, otherwise not; as, TETHER fage: 'a badari and an amalaki fruit are here'; रविकाधारोहो 'a charioteer and a horseman'; अन्ययोधो 'a Plaksha and a Nyagrodha tree';रुपपनो'a Ruru and a Prishata deer'; हसबकवाको 'a Hansa and a Chakravaka bird'; for 'a louse and a nit'; alfcunt. a bribi and yavagrain'; कुराकाशो 'the kusa and kasa grass. 
विप्रतिषिद्धं चानधिकरणवाधि ॥ १३ ॥ पदानि ॥ विप्रतिषिद्धं. च , अनधिकरण-वाचि , (विभाषा द्वाएक) 
वृत्तिः॥ विप्रतिपिद्धार्थाना शब्दानामनधिकरणवाचिनामद्रव्यवाचिर्ना हर एकपदवति विभापानुकर्षणार्य अकारः॥ 
13. A Dyandva compound of words of con. trary siguifications, but not being the names of con crete substances, is optionally singular. 
Thus शीतोष्णम् or शीतोष्णे 'cold and heat'; सुखदुःखे or सुखःखे 'pleasure and pain'; मोदितमरणं or मोविसमरणे life and death.' 
· The word formarea means words of contrary significations, indicates the anuvšitti of the word "optionally from the last sätra. 
. 314 
.. 
. DVA QVA COMPOUND. 
Bk. II. CHi IV. 8'13-16. 
. Why do we say of contrary significations ? Obserre, कामक्रोधो 'lust and anger,' which are not of contrary significations. 
__ . Why do we say 'not being the names of substances? Observe धीतोष्णे उदके 'cold and warm waters, which denote substances. 
न दधिपय आदीनि ॥ १४ ॥ पदानि ॥ न, दधिपयः , आदीनि (द्व०ए०) . वृत्तिः । दधिपय मादीनि शब्दरूपाणि नकवडवन्ति ।। 
14. The Dvandva compounds like 'dadhipaya' &o., ara not singular. 
___Thus दधिपयसी 'the curd and the milk'; सर्पिमधुनी or मधुसर्विपी ! the clarifted butter and the honey.' 
With this sätra begins prohibition of singular number which previous s@tras would have caused. 
The following is a list of such compounds: 
.... दधिपयसी. 2. सर्पिर्मधुनी or. मधुसर्पिषी. 3. ब्रह्मप्रजापती. 4. शिव वैश्रवणो. 5. स्कन्दविशाखो . 6. परिवादकौशिको . 7. प्रबोपसो. 8. शुक्रष्णो. 9. इध्मावहिषी । निपातनादीपः ।। 10. दीसातपसी. प. श्रदातपसी. 12, धातपसी. 13. अध्ययनतपसी ... 14. उलूखलमुसले. 15. भाषावसाने . 16. श्रद्धामधे . 17. 
शक्सामे . 18. वाङ्मनसे . 
अधिकरणेतावत्वे च ॥ १५ ॥ पदानि ॥ अधिकरण-एता वत्वे, प, (न द्वाए.)॥ 
वृत्तिः । अधिकरणं वर्तिपदार्थः, स हि समासस्यार्थस्याधारः तस्यैतावत्वे परिमाणे गम्यमाने दो नेकपायति॥ 
15. A Dvandva compound denoting & fixed number (etavatya) of eonerete things (adhikarana) is not siugular. 
cumanta brenomead by dla m As, श दन्तोष्ठाः 'ten gets of teeth and lips', शमाणिकपाणविकाः 'ten sets of drum and panavika players. Compare 11. 4. 2. . विभाषा समीपे ॥ १६ ॥ पदानि ॥ विभाषा समीपे, (अधिकरणता. वटवे, द्वन्दः एकव०)। 
वृत्तिः ॥ अधिकरणेतावस्वस्य समीपे विभाषा इन्द्र एकपलवति ॥ 
16. A Dvandva compound, denoting an ap. proximate number of concrete substąuces, is optionally singular. 
स्यत 
.. 
. 
BK. II. CH. IV. & 16-18. ] 
SAMASAS. 
313 
As, 990 Fax or TT UT FRA 'Dearly ten i. t., ning or eleven sets of teeth and lips'; उपराध मानिकपाणपिकम् or उपदा मानिकपाणपिका. nearly tea (nine or eleven) mridanga and panava players' 
Ao indeclinable, when compounded with a numeral, may cither be a Babuvrihi or an Avyayibhava compound. When the compound is singular in form, it is Avyayibhava, and when it takes proper number-terminations, 
it is Bahuvrihi compound. As, उपयं; उपशाः (II. 2.25). 
म नपुंसकम् ॥ * ॥ पदानि । स, नपुंसकम् ( एकवचनम्, द्वन्दः, द्विगुः ). 
पत्तिः ॥ यस्यायमेकपडायो विहितः समपुंसकलिङ्गो भवन विमय पार्निकम् ।। अकारान्तोसरपदोरिगुः नियां भाग्यवे॥ पातिकम् ।। पाद: विवामिटः॥ पार्मिकम् ।। भनो मलोपथ पाच रिगुःखियाम्॥ पार्निकम् ॥ पाबादिभ्यः प्रतिषेधो पत्ताबः ।। 
17. It, namely the Dvigu or the Dyaudva compound, with regard to which singular number has been ordained by the above rules, is always a neuter 
gender. 
___As, शमवम् 'anaggregate of ten cows,' पाणिपादम् 'hands and feet.' शिरोमीयम् 'head and neck.' 
This sůtra debars the operation of the rule by which a compound gets the gender of its subsequent member, See II. 4. 26. 
Vart:-A Dvigu, the last member of which ends in shori , is employ. ed in the ieminine gender only; as पसली , पारथी . 
Vart:-A Dvigu, the last member of which is a feminine word endia ing in भाप् affix, is optionally feminine; as, पजखम् or प खही. 
____Vart:-A Dvigu, the last member of which is a word ending in भन्, is optionally feminine and the ris elided; as, पसमक्षन् or पक्षवत्ती, 
Vart:--Prohibition must be stated in the case of Dvigu compounds ending in पात्र &c., पचपात्रम् ; चतुर्युगम् ; रिभुवनम् . 
अव्ययीभावश्च ॥ १८ ॥ पदानि ॥ अव्ययी भावः, -, (नपुं. सकम् ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ भव्ययीभाव समास नपुंसकलिङ्गमाति।। वार्मिकम् ।। पुण्यसुदिनाभ्यामहः कषतेश्यते ॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ पयः संख्याध्ययाकीरतेभ्यते। पाकिम् ॥ क्रियाविशेषणानो कर्म नपुंसक्रनिडाना सपनाबा।। 
निम. 
316 
SAMASAS. 
(Bk. II. CH. IV. & 18-20, 
18. An Avyayibhava (II. 1. 6.) compound is also neuter gender. 
Thus, i fer pertaining to a woman'; so also, 345FR, 3* &c. 
But for this rule, an Avyayibhava compound would have been either without any gender, if gender were to be regulated by its first member, which is generally an indeclinable, and which is the principal member in the com. pound; or it would have taken the gender of its subsequent member, like other compounds in which the last member is principal. 
The force of is to include cases not mentioned already. 
Vart:-Neuter gender is employed after the word HF preceded by पुण्य or सुदिन ; as पुण्याहम् 'sacred day'; सुदिनाहम् 'lucky day.' 
Vart:--The word ger is neuter when compounded with a numeral or an Avyaya; as fuy, 1941, 94, a. 
Varti-Adverbs, qualifying verbs, are put in the neuter gender and accusative case); as 4 râ'he cooks mildly,' irgi pafat' he cooks well.' 
तत्पुरुषोऽनकर्मधारयः ॥ १९॥ पदानि ॥ तत्पुरुषः, अन ma: ( agama : 
fer: 11 stare more apoiaTS-TEACTII Tarafangit otettare दधिकृवं वेदितव्यम् ॥ 
19. A Tat-purusha compound, with the excep. tion of that which is formed by the particle nan, and of the Karmachåraya compound, becomes neuter gender, in the cases esplained in the following sâtras. 
This is a governing sätra and regulates the sense of the succeeding aphorisms which show when a Tat-purusha may be neuter. Thus, aterry or. Ar (II. 4. 25); but hit CTA (the compound not being Tat-purusha); That (it being a compound with th="); and q e (it being Karmadharaya. 
gigi #70taitang ni Roll agrfa 11 m, 4911, gutang. ( acgha: agga ) . 
वृत्तिः ॥ संज्ञायां विषये कन्यान्तस्तत्पुरुषो नपुंसकलिङ्गो भवति, सा चेत् कन्या उशीनरेषु sifa 11 
20. When denoting an appellative, a Tat. purusha compound culing with the word kanthà 
towni,' is neuter in gender, provided that it is the name of a town situated in the country of the Usinaras.. 
BK. II. CH. IV.$ 20-22. ) 
SAMASAS. 
317 
As, alter the town of Sausami'; stranica 'the town of Ahwara.' 
When not an appellative, the form is different; as, stuart. So also is the town is not in the country of the Uślaaras; as R . 
This debars the rule (11. 4. 25.) by which a compound gets the gender of its subsequcot term. (For acccat see lv. 2. 121) 
उपशोपक्रमं तदाद्याविख्यासायाम् ॥२१॥ पदानि । उपचा ****, TE-3ff- 
m enterama ( aegea: , ag*). पृत्तिः ॥ उपज्ञोपकर्म तदन्तस्तत्पुरुषो मतकलिङ्गी भवति वहाचापिण्यासावां तवो. रुपनोपकमयोरारापिण्यासायो गम्यमानावाम् ।। 
21. A Tat-purusha compound ending with the words 'u pajūå' invention) and upakrama' (com. mencement) is neuter in geuder, when it is intended to express the starting point of a work which is first in vented or commencech 
As, U YATAKAN TUT 'the grammars Kalapa &c., had their commencement with Panini's invention '; raretra Vyadi-intea ed Dushkarana '; predr4 AETT: 'the palace is an invention of rich folks.' 
ifu Arif 'the measures are the invention of king Nanda." 
Of course, when it has not this sense, the neuter gender is not cm ployed; as देवदमोरतो रथः “the chariot made by Devadatta,' यज्ञदनोपक्रमो रयः 'the chariot commenced by Yajñadatta' So also the scase may be that of invention &c., but when these words are not employed, the neuter gender is not used; as pref T : 'the slokas invented by Valmiki.' N. P. Prof. Bob thlingk gives arforumai 2017 The Grammar omitting the time of day is the work invented by Panini, (VI. 2. 14.) 
छाया बाहुल्ये ॥ २२ ॥ पदानि ॥ छाया, बाहुल्ये, (तत्पुरुषः ag*) 
वृत्तिः ॥ जयान्तस्तसुरुषो नपुंसकन्निड़ेग भवति बाहुल्ये गम्यमाने, 
22. A Tat-pirusha compound e'iding with the word chhå gå 'shadow' is neuter in gender wheu the sense is that of protuseness of the thing indicated by the 
first term. 
Thus, 17543727'A crowd of locusts darkening the sky.' TIETTY'the sugarcane shade i. e., groves of sugarcane.' Otherwise, rurat the sba. dow of a wall.' (VI. 3. 14, accent.) 
318 
SAMASAS. 
[ BK. II. CH. IV. 8 23-25: 
The sutra 25 gives optional neuter; this rule cnjvins invariable deater when chhaya has the sense of prosuseness. 
सभा राजामनुष्यपूर्वा ॥ २३ ॥ पदानि ॥ सभा, राजा-मनुष्य. पूर्वा (तत्पुरुगनपुंसक), 
वृत्तिः ॥ षभान्तस्तत्पुरुषो नपुंसकलिङ्गो भवति, सा चेत् सभा राजपूर्वा मनुष्यपूर्वा च भवति॥ 
23. A Tatpurusha compound ending with the word sabha. 'court' is nenter, provided that it is preceded by (a word syuouymous with) the word Råjå, or by a word denoting a non-human beiug. 
As इनसभम् 'the King's Court.' श्वरसभम् - Lord's court.' 
But in राजसभा 'the King's Court,' the word is not neuter; for synony..s of TiT are only to be taken and not the word-form tat; aa apparent exception to Rule I. 1. 68. 
Soalso रतःसमम् 'the Court of the Rakshasas.' पिशाचसमम् 'the Court of the Pisachas.' 
But in काष्ठसमा, देवदत्तसभा &c., the word is not neuter; for the word noo-human has a technical significance meaning Rakshasa or a monster. 
____ अशाला च ॥ २४ ॥ पदानि ॥ अशाला, च, (तत्पुरु० नपुंसक)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ भगाना च या सभा सदन्तस्तापुरुषो नपुंसकलिङ्गो भवति । 
24. A Tat-purusha. compound ending with the word sabha, when it does not mean a house, but 
means concourse, is neuter. . 
As, atesta, reteta 'the concourse of ladies and slaves ;' otherwise भनाथसभा 'the poor-house. 
विभाषा सेन सुरापायाशालानिशानाम् ॥ २५ ॥ पदानि । विभाषा, सेना-सुरा-छ.या-शाला-निशानाम, (नपुंसकं, तत्पुरुषः)। 
वृतिः । सेना सुरा छाया शाला निशा इत्येवमन्तस्तत्पुरुषो नपुंसकलिङ्गी भवति विभाषा । 
25. A Tat-purusha compound ending with the words senå 'army' surâ 'wine,' chhåyå ‘shadow', sala 'house' and uisa night,' is optionally neuter, with the exception of that which is formed by the particle nan (II. 2. 6) and the karmadhåraya compound. 
BK. II. CH. IV. 8 25-28.] 
SAMASAS. 
319 
As प्रामणसेना, प्रामणसेनन् 'the Brahmana army, बासुरम्. यवसुरा 'the barley wine,' कुमम्ययम्, कुष्पखया 'the shadow of the wall,' गोशालम्, गौशाला 'the cow house,' rur , T UT'tomorrow night.' But wear non-army," परमसेना good army, the former being negative and the latter karmadharaya compound. For accent see VI. 2. 14, 123 
. परवलिई द्वन्द्वतत्पुरुषयोः ॥ २९ ॥ पदानि । परवत्-लिङ्गम् , द्वन्द्व-तत्पुरुषयोः 
वृत्तिः । परस्य यलिङ्ग नरवति द्वमस्य तमुरूपस्य च ॥ . वार्तिकम् ।। दिगुमाशापनालंपूर्वगतिसमासेषु प्रविधी वनमः। 
26. The gender of Dvandva or Tat-purusha compound is like that of the last word in it. 
This applies to Itaretara Dvandva or coupling by mutual conjunction कामयापिने those two (em) the cock and the peahen' भयरीकुममाविमो 'those two (mas.) the peahen and the cock.' The Samåhåra Dvandva is always neuter. So also in Tat-purusha compound not especially mentioned in the previous aphorism: As भईपिप्पल्याः , भर्खपिप्पली half apippali; भदकोशनकी. 
Vart:-Prohibition must be made in regard to (t) Dvigu compound, (2) compounds with ar, भापy and, भल, and (3. compounds with Gati words%3B as, पंचक्रपानः 'Purodasa prepared in five cups': प्रातमीविका (प्राम + मीपिका) has obtained living.'भापजनीविकः, भलंमीविकः; निकोशाबि 'gone beyond Kausambi. 
पूर्ववदखवावी ॥२७॥ पदानि । पूर्ववद् , अश्व-बहवी, (लिङ्गम् ) ॥ 
. वृतिः ॥ भश्ववडयोः पूर्ववलिङ्ग भवति । 
27. The gender of the compound of the word asva. horse' and vadava' a mare, is like that of the first word in it. 
This applies where the compound is not an aggregate by rule Il. 4 12; in that case it will be neuter. भश्चमड़वादिमी; भश्ववड़बान , भगवड &c., (in every number and case) those two (mas., the horse and the mare. This is an exception to the last and general rule, by which the gender of the subsequent term, guides the gender of the whole compound. . . 
हेमन्तशिशिरावहोरात्रे च ध्छन्दसि ॥२८॥ पदानि । हेमन्त. शिशिरी, अहोरात्रे, च, छन्दसि , (पूर्ववत्, लिङ्गम् ) .. 
वृत्तिः ॥ हेमन्त शशिरो महोरा हायवयो पवनसि विपये पूर्ववलित" 
320 
SAMASAS. 
[BK. II. CH. IV. $ 28-30. 
28. Of the compounds 'hemantasisirau' and 'ahoratre' the gender is like that of the first word; in the Chhandas. (vedas). 
हेमन्तशिशिरावृतमा भीगावि, महोराने इस भूमः। This aphorism debars the general rule given in II. 4. 26. 
This applies to these words in all cases and numbers, not being con. fined to them in the dual number, thougb exhibited in the sâtra in the dual number, as:- TUTTU: , 47904FT: 44, VEITTIOITAT: The white fortnight is fuel-wood, the black fortnight is the duog-cake, and days and nights are bricks (of the altar of sacrifice).' 
Why do we say 'in the Vedas? Observe : faftfr, Toront qorat. In the Vedas the ordinary rules of gender are often set aside; this is an individual example of the universally exceptional nature of the Vedic language. 
TATE IET: gfe it pe 11 ora u 77-967-4987: , fe in FT 11 TTT 43 E rreta gler und 
4 11 HITAT: getia Turys 
29. The Dvandva and Tatpurusha compound ending with råtra and ahna and aha are spoken of in the masculine. 
These words refer to ksit and Samásånta affixes. Thus the word rre is formed by the + H (V. 4. 87) #5 is formed by V. 4. 88 and off by V. 4. gr. The general rule 11. 4. 26 also does not apply here. 
fogat: , FACT:' A space of two or three nights' qui: , TITIK: , nung: the sorenoon, the afternoon aod doon', 'two days' pz8:, 'three days." 
Part:-The words &c., are masculine, as *. , gura, 5T &c., 
__ अपपं नपुंसकम् ॥ ३० ॥ पदानि ॥ अपथम् , नपुंसकम् ॥ 
: 994 Tatagalat 
30. The Tatpurusha word apatham'a bad road' is neuter. 
urain'this (neuter) is a bad road' 911 TITAT: 'the fool roams on wrong roads. But udg: a (masc.)' a roadless country. Here the compound being Bahuvrihi the word is masculine so; also 1947 ut i 
BK. II. CH. IV. & 31.) 
SAMASAS. 
321 
अर्थः पुंसि ॥ ३ ॥ पदानि ॥ अर्थाः, पुंसि , च, (नपुंसकम् ) । 
वृतः ॥ भर्द्धचादयः शमा पुति मसके च भाज्या ॥ 
31. The words 'ardharcha' &c., are spoken of in masculine and neuter. 
As : and भर्चम् - hall a verse', गोमयः and गोमयम् 'cow.dung. These twofold genders sometime, convey different meanings, the masculine form having one meaning and the neuter, another. . Thus 97:' treasure,' qu: or पमम् lotus', खः 'treasure, and शंखम् or शंख: 'conch-shell,' भतः or भूनम् 'ghost.' But when it is a verbal noun, it takes the gender of the word it quali. fies. सैन्धवः or संन्धवम् — salt'; but when it is considered as a derivative word meaning' born in or belonging to the sea' it takes the gender of the word it qualifies. सारः 'best' सार 'compendium. So धर्मः and धर्मन् . 
1. भ . 2. गोमव. 3. कपाय. 4. कापिण. 5. कुतप. 6. कुसप. 7. (कुणप). 8. कपाट. 9. शहल. 10. गथ. I. व्य. 12. पन. 13. कान्ध. 14. पर. 15. गृह. 16. सरक. 17. कंस 18. दिवस. 19. यूष. 20. अध. कार. 21. एड. 2. कमण्डलु. 23. मएड. 24 भूत. 25. दीप. 26. एन. 27. चक्र. 28. धर्म. · 29. कान्. .30 मोदक. 31. शतमान. 32. यान. 33. मख. 34. नखर. 35. धरण. 36. पृ. 37. वा.म. 38. हिम. 38. रजत. 40. सत्ता 40. पिधान. 41. सार. 42. पाच 43. एन. 44. संभव. 45. भोषध. 46. भादक. 47. चषक. 48. द्रोण. 49. खलीन. 50. पाभिव. 5. प.ठक. 52. बारवाए. 53. (वारपारण) 54. प्रोय. 55. कपित्य. 56. शुष्क, 57 शाल. 58. शील. 59. शुक. 60. (शुरू). 66. शीपु. 52. कवच. 63. रेणु. 64. (ल.) 65. कपर. 66. शीकर. 67. मुसल. 68. सुवर्ण. 69. वर्ष. 70. पूर्व. 7. पमत. 72. जीर. 73. कर्ष 14. भाकाश. 75. भटापर. 76. मङ्गल. 17. निधन. 78. निर्यास. 79. गम्भ. 80. वृत्त. 81. पुस्त. . पुस्त. 83. रित. 84. पृ. 85. निगर 86. (खल). 87. मनक 88. मधु. 89. मूल. 90. स्थन. . शराब. 92. वान. 93. प. 94. विमान. 95. मुख. 96. प्रमीय. 97. पूल. 98. पा. 99. कटक. 100. कएटक. 10. कर्पत). 102. शिखर . 103. कम्क. 104. (परकना 105. नटमक. 106. (नामस्तक). 107. पलव. 10 कुसुम. 109. बण. 10. प. L. कुण्डल. 12. किरीट. 13. (कमल). 14. भवृद. 115. श. 116. तिमिर . 17. भाश्रम. 18. भूषण. 19. हल्कस. 120. (इपास). 121. मुकुल. 122. वसन्त . 123. तटाक. 124. (नाग). 125. पिटक. 126. वि . 127. वि . 128. पिण्याक. 129. भाष. 130. कोश. 131. फलक. 132. दिन. 133. देवत. 134. पिनाक. 135. समर. 136. स्थाणु. 137. भनीक. 138. उपवास. 139. शाक, 140. कांब. 141. (विशाल) 142. चपाल 143. (चखाल.) 144 खएड. 145. र. 146. विटप. 147. (रण). 148. (बल). 49. (मक). 150. सणाल, 15. इस्त. 15. पाई. 
328 
· SAMASAS. 
[ Bk: II. CH. IV. 8. 3131 
153. हल. 154:: (भूष.) 155. साएप. 156. गाएडीव. 157. मएडप . 158. पटह. 159. सोध. 160. योध. 16. पा . 162. शरीर. 163. फल. 164 (छन . 16. पुर. 166. पुरा. 167. राष्ट्र. 168. अम्बर. 169. विम्ब. 170. कुहिम . . मण्डल . 12. (कुकुर ). 173. - कुडप. 174. ककुर. 173. खण्डन. 176. तोमर. 177. तोरण. 178. मसक. 179. पञ्चक. 180. पुडख. 18. माय. 182. (वान). 183. अल. 184. वल्मीक. 185. वर्ष. 186. पत्र. 187. वस. 188. ह. 189. उयान. 190. उद्योग 191. स्नेह, 192. स्तेन. 193. (स्तन). 194. (स्वर). 195. संगम. 196. निष्क, 197. 
म. 198. पूक. 199. सन. 200. पपिन . 201. (योवन). 202. (कलह). 203. मालक. 204. (पालक). 205. मूषिक. 206. (मण्डल). 207. (वन्कल). 208. कुन. 209 (कुख). 210. विहार . 21. लोहित. 212. (विषाण). 
13. भवन. 4. भरण्य. 215. पुलिन. 216. एड. 217. भासन. 218. ऐरावत. 219. एर्ष. 220. सीर्य. 221. नोमन. 222. (लोमश). 223. समाल. 224. लोह. 225. इण्डक. 226. शपथ. 237. प्रतिसर. 228. सा. 229. धनुस् . 230. मान. 231. वर्षक. 232. कर्च. 233. सण्डक. 234. मा. 235. सहल. 236. भोदन. 237. प्रवाल . 238. शकट. 239. अपरा. 240. नीर. 241. शकल. 242. सएल॥ 
इदमोन्वादेशेऽशनुदात्त तृतीयादौ ॥ ३२ ॥ पद.नि ॥ इदमः , अन्वादेशे , अश , अनुदात्तः वतीयादी. 
पत्निः ॥ इदमोनादेश विषयस्यादेशो भस्थनुदात्तत्वतीयादा विभक्तो परतः॥ 
32. In the room of idam “this,' in case of its re-employment in a subsequent member of the same sentence and referring to the same thing (anvådesa) there is the subtitution of aś which is an dåtta i. e., gravely accented, when the third case-affix and the rest follow. 
The word to means literally saying (adesal 'after' (anu) or after-say or re-employment. 
भए (actually भ) replaces इदम् in all cases except the nominative and the accusative, when anvadeśa or repetition is implied. 7 replaces the whole of Fix by 55 and not only the final . Anvadesa means repeating in a second sentence with reference to the preceding in which it has already been used. Both pronouns, the antecedent and the subsequent, must refer to the same object. As, भाभ्याम् छात्राभ्याम् राषिरधीता , भयो भाभ्यामहरप्यधीतम् * These students studied in the night and they have read in the day also.' 
The substitute PTT will replace 4, even when the latter takes the affix . भकन् (V. 3.71) . BK. II. CL. IV. 832-34.] 
SAMASAS.. 
328 
- 
- 
- 
---------- 
- 
भस्मे छापाव कम्बल देहि, भयो भने शाकटमपि हि 'Give this student a blanket and give him also a cloth'. भस्थ छापस्य शोभने शीलम् , भयो भस्थ प्रभूतं स्वन्, this student's conduct is excellent, and his wealth is great.' 
___Se also when the affix भक (V. 3.71) comes after the Pronominal as दमका यो छानाम्यां राधिरधीता, भयो भाभ्यामहरप्यधीवम् . 
The mere mentioning in a subsequent sentence is not aavadcsa: it is the employment again of what has been e.nployed to direct one operation, to direct another operation. Therefore the rule does not apply here: 
m aut भोजय, इमंच यतवनम् "feed Devadatta and this Yajhadatta.' 
एतदस्त्रतसोस्त्रतसौ चानुदात्ती ॥ ३३ ॥ पदानि ॥ एतद्ः, -तमोर व.तसो, च, अनुदात्ती, (अन्वादेशे, अश, अनुदात्तः). 
वृनिः॥ एतयोऽन्वादेशविपयस्व भशादेशो भवति भनुदानस्वासोः परतः ॥ तो पापि मतसादमुहात्तो भवतः ।। 
33. In the room of gat in case of its re-em ployment there is the substitution of the gravely accent ed भy when the affixes (V. 3. 10) and तस (V. 3. '7) follow, and the afixes and are are auudatta also (gravely ac. cented.) 
Thus भर 'here, and भतस् 'hence' in the following:-एतस्मिन् या सवं सामः; भयो भन युक्ता अधीमहे । 'We live in this (etasmin) village, happily, therefore let us read with full devotion in this (atra).' एतस्माजनाच्छन्दोऽधीच, भयो भतो व्याकरणमप्यधीच्या 'Learn from this student Prosody and also learn' from hir. Grammar.' By rule V. 3.5. भय् is declared to be the substitute of एतत् ; its repetition here is to indicate that this भy of anvadesa is anudatta. 
द्वितीयाटौरस्वेनः ॥ ३४ ॥ पदानि ॥ द्वितीया-टा-ओस्स, एनः,' (इदम्, एतद्, अन्वादेशे, अनुदाने) 
. वृत्तिः ।। द्वितीया दा भोस् इत्येतेषु परत इसमेनोरम्बादेशविषययोरेनराम भारेशी भवति भनुदासः ॥ 
पार्मिकम् । एनदिति नपुसकेकवचमे वक्तव्यम् ॥ 
34. When an affix of the 2nd case or a (Ins.. Sing.) or भोए (Loc. dual) follows, एन which is anudatta is the substitute of aud pa iu the case of its re-em. ployment. 
324 
ARDHADHATUKA SUBSTITUTES. 
(Bk. II. CH. IV. & 34, 35; 
L 
The word is also understood in this sätra though it was not so ia the last. This skipping is technically called 'frog-leap.' Thus:- or part इन्दोमयापन, भपो एनं प्याकरणमध्यध्यापव 'teach this pupil Prosody, and teach him Grammar also.' भनेन or एतेन अत्रेण राभिरपीता 'भयो एमेनाहरण्यधीवम् 'this pupil studied in the night and he studied in the day also. wat or garat e 
शोमन शीलम, भयो एमयोः प्रभत व 'the family of these two students is respectable and their wealth is great.' 
Vart:- The word gaat, ncuter and singular, is also used in aavadeśa:. as, ' m TITHUATT "bring this bowl and wash it. The above three Satras regulate the accent only of certain pronouns. 
engage u 38 u azifa u prg-angan gfar: Il faut quingentemerarengan alansaren 
35. The clause when the afix is Ardha dhåtuka' is understood in the following aphorisms up to aphorism 58 of this chapter. 
Thus it will be taught in sätra 42, 'that is the substitute of when fare follows.' The words 'when the affix is årdhadhatuka' must bei read into the sitra to complete the sense. The result will be that in the ardhadhatuka Fast namely the art or the Benedictive mood, is re placed by ry, but not so in the Sårvadbatuka for i. ., the Potential mood (faffee). Thus, Benedictive ngry 'may he kill'; but Potential for let him kill.' 
The word organ is in the 7th case; the force of this case-affix here is not that given in 1.... 66. i.e., the sâtra does not mean 'when an ardhadhatuka affix follows. But the 7th case has the force of indicating the subject, the meaning of the satra being when the subject is an ardhadha tuka affix. The result of this explanation is, that the various substitutions enjoined hereafter should be made forst, and then the respective affixes should be applied. Thus whenever we want to affix any ardhadhatuka-affix to WF 'to be,' we must first substitute x for it, and then take the proper ardhadhatuka-affix which would come with regard to *. Thus we can apply 
a to by rule III 1..97 which says: "after verbs ending in vowels is applied.' But this affix could never have been applicd to sto which ends in a consonant. Thus we have oury. So the substitution does not depend upon any particular affix, but ardhadhatuka-affixes as a class, 
Bk. II. CH. IV. $ 36. 37.) 
ARDHADHATUKA-SUBSTITUTES. 
826 
भदो जन्धिल्यति किति ॥ ३६॥ पदानि । अदा, जन्धिा, ल्यप्-ति, fafa, ( eng-ga) a 
पतिः ॥ भयो मधिराशो भाति स्वपि पर नकारातच किति प्रत्यवे॥ 
36. The word ata is the substitute of 'to eat,' when the affix +49 (VII.1.37) or an årdhadhituka force afix beginning with a follows. 
gyng Having caten.' (8 + s + ray = + your + a). So also upono 'catea' ( + = + a). 
The F in stry is merely for the sake of articulation and is not an anubandha, otherwise there would have been the insertion of the nasal of (5). So also the y in yr &c., is merely for the sake of articulation. But MT + = 'food' is an irregularity. 
The employment of fuq in this sätra indicates the existence of this Paribhasha. A bahiratga substitution of +49 supersedes cvca antaraðga rules. Because in case this maxim did not exist, the substitution of your for 
before a which is taught in this sálra, would follow already from the word fatto (before that which is distinguished by an indicatory *') in this rule, i.. sy would (by maxim 'that which is bahiranga is regarded as not have ing taken effect, or as not existing, wben that which is antarauga bas takea effect') first be substituted for me before it and rug afterwards for . 
Why do we say 'before affixes beginning with a'? Observe vadis catea. 
Wby do we say 'before affixes baving indicatory ? Observe भलावा. 
geganters u ga naerfor n gevat: , The (stas 
STEREO ) * 
fer: u gle afert MIUI fa u 
*** UI TENTA Seguerragni 
37. When luă (aorist) or san (desiderative) follows this the substitute of my 'to eat.' 
eq, THAT, 79 'he ate.' The in qet is servile and indicates the substitution of so for fest of the Aorist (III. 1. 55.) So also in desidera tive, as, franara, Firen : 
f i 'wishes to eat. . Vart:--The verb or is replaced by vo when the affix my follows Thus ! + $T +HTY = Te + * = T. 'voracious.' 
396 
ARDHADHATUKA-SUBSTITUTES, 
[Bk. II.CH. IV.138640. 
पापोत्र ॥ ३८ ॥ पदानि ॥ पञ्-अपो, च, (मदः, पस्तू, आ०), पतिः ॥ पनि भपि च परतोसो पस्लु भावेश भवति॥ 
38. And when the afnx पम् and भम् follow That is the substitute of T. 
पासः "food, grass,' भ + पम् =पास + म III. 3. 19). प्रषसः 'voracity:' म+ भद् + भप् = 4+ पक्ष. 
बहुलं छन्दसि ॥ ३६॥ पदानि । बहुलं . छन्दसि , ( अदा, घरल, मा०). 
पत्तिः । छन्दसि विषये बहुलमदो पल्लू भावेशो भवति॥ 
___ 39. In the chhandas (Vedas), पस्न is diverse, ly substituted for भर. 
पस्ताननम् । सनिश्चमे । (Yajur Veda Vaj. S. XVIII. 9). Sometimes it does not take place; as भातामय मध्यतो मेद सद्भुतम् । 
The word is used in this sutra and the word ofrecer in the next. There is evidently difference between the senses of these words, other wise Panini would not have employed them in such juxtaposition, had they been synonymous. For then the anuvritti of age in the dext sätra would have been sufficient. The following verse indicates that difference. 
कचित् प्रवृत्तिः कचिदपवृत्तिः, कचिदविभाषा कचिदन्यदे। विविधान पहुधा समीक्ष्य , चातुर्विध बाहुलकं वदन्ति ।। 
'Sometimes they are, where there is no express rule for their ap. . plication; sometimes they are not applied, in spite of an express rule for their application; sometimes they are optionally employed or not, and some. times there is some other result, licence permitted by the rule.' Thus ini पस्ताम् there is not elision of the penultimate. 
.लिट्यन्यतरस्याम् ॥ ४० ॥ पदानि । लिटि , अन्यतरस्याम्, (भदः, घस्ल, आः). 
वृत्तिः ।। लिटि परतोनोग्न्यतरस्यां पस्लादेशो भवति । 
40. When Forte (Perfect) follows yn is optional. ly the substitute of भह. 
अघास or भार 'heate, जनतु: or भारतु: they two ate,'शभः or भादुः they all ate. The word जततः is thus formed:-पत् + भतस् = पस् + पम् + भतम् (VI. 
BK. II. CH. IV. $ 40-42.] 
ARDHADHATUKA-SUBSTITUTES. 
327 
1. 8) = प + पन् + भतुम् (VII. 4.60) = + मस् + भनुः (VII.462) = + 
पर + भतुस् (VIII. 4. 53) = + एम् + भतुस् (VI. 4.98.)अतः (VIII. 3.60). 
वेभो वयिः ॥ ४॥ पदानि । वेनः , वयि, (लिट्यन्यतरस्साम्, भाईः). 
पतिः ॥भी पयिरादेशो मतिभन्यतरस्या लिहि परतः ॥ 
41. When fat follows, fx is optionally the substitute of वेम् 'to weave.'. 
In the Perfect tense thus we have two roots: Let us first take Then we have regularly + लिट् = 2 + एन् = वयो. The roots in ,ऐ and 
i are treated like routs ending in a thus: 
Sing. Dual. Plural. 
| In this case samprasarana or 1. यो 
पवित बविम 
dained by VI. 1. 17 does not take 2. पविय or पवाय, युः पर 
| place by VI. 1.40. 3. यो 
When however we take the base , the being for the sake of articulation only, we have the following forms:- + पलवय् + + भ (VI. 1. 8)-उय् + पय् + भ (VI. I.17-उवाय; .the e is not changed intor by VI. I. 38. In this dual we have पय् + भतुम् = उय् + भतुः (VI. I. 15) = 1+ रख + भतः (VII. 4. 60) - जयतुः The affix भतुस् being कित् affix by rulel, 2.5there is samprasarana belore reduplication. Thus we have नवाब, व्यतुः, क . Further by rule VI. 1. 39 before any affixes ? may be optionally substituted for a , i. e., : or to: and sy: or TI 
हना बथ लिजि ॥ ४२ ॥ पदानि । हनः, षध, लिडि ( भाई धातुके). . 
पतिः। हन्तेर्धातीवंध इत्ययमायो भवति निति परत भाईधातुके। 
42. one is the substitute of 'to, kill' when the ardhadhâtuka fe (Benedictive) follows. 
यस्यात् ' may he kill,' प्यास्ताम् ' may they two kill,' वण्यासुः ' may they all kill! 
The substitute ry ends with short #, this ap is elided. This elision being like the original (sthanivat I. I 56), in forming the Aorist मुर, we have भव + • ई = भवधीत् . Here zero being sthanivat prerents the vriddhi ol भof a which otherwise would have taken place by VII. 2.7. 
328 
ARDHADHATUKA-SUBSTITUTIONS. 
(BK. II. CH. IV. $ 43-45. 
लुचि ॥ ४३ ॥ पदानि । लुडि; च (हना, बघ, मा०). वृत्तिः । नुनि च परतो हलो पप इत्यवमाशो भवति॥ 
____43. And when नुर (Aorist) follows, षषु is the substitute of T. 
भवधीत् 'he killed,' भवधीष्टाम् 'they all killed. The division of this aphorism from the last sâtra (yoga-vibhaga) indicates that the next rule applies to Aorist only and not to Benedictive as well. There is no option in Benedictive Atmancpada. 
आत्मनेपदेष्यन्यतरस्याम् ॥ ४४ ॥ पदानि ॥ आत्मनेपदेषु , अन्य। तरस्साम , (हनो, बध, लुडि, माः) । 
वृत्तिः ॥ पूर्वेण निरवे प्राप्ने विकल्प उच्यते । भात्मनेपदेषु परतो हनो लुरूपन्यतरस्या पप हत्ययमादेशो भवति॥ . 
44. When Atmauepada affixes follow, my is optionally the substitute of 7 in the c (Aorist). 
Thus भावधिष्ट or भाहत ; भावधिपाताम् or भाहसाताम् ; भावधिपत or भाहसत.. 
The verb इन् becomes Atmanepadi when preceded by भा (I. 3. 28). Atra I. 2. 14, the Aorist-affixes in the Atmanepada arc fatice after and by VI. 4. 37 the न is elided before कित् affixes, then by VIII. 2. 37 the a is elided. Thus भारम् + सिच् + व = भाहत . 
इणो गा लुङि॥ ४५ ॥ पदानि ॥ इणः , गा , लुडि, () पत्तिः ॥ जो गा इत्ययमादेशो भवति नुनि परतः ॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ इण्वदिक इति वक्तव्यम् ॥ 
- 45. गा is the substitute of the root rp when मुर follows. 
भगात् ' he went.' (II. 4. 77) भगाताम् 'they two went' भगुः 'they all went; The repetition of the word or in this sûtra though its anuvšitti was coming from the last aphorisms, indicates that there is no option allowed even in the Atmancpada, being the invariable substitute in all the Padas. Thus sportfit भवता 'you . went.' The form भगात् is thus evolved भ+गा+सिच+त-भगा। (II. 4. 77.). . 
Vart:-T is the substitute of 'to remember in the Aorist, as it is of 7. Thus भष्यगात् ' he remembered.' भन्यागासाम्, भभ्यग.. The roots belongs to Adadi class. 
BK. II. CH. IV. $ 46-49) 
ARDHADHATUKA-SUBSTITUTIONS. 
320 
- 
जा गमिरगोधने ॥ ४६॥ पदानि पा; गमिः , अबोधने, (मह) 
पतिः॥जो परत रणोऽयोधनार्यस्थ गमिराशो भवति।। 
46. When the afix for (Causal) follows, of is the substitute of many wheu the sense is not that of 'informing' but that of going.' 
गमयति 'makes him go' गमयतः, गमयन्ति &c. But प्रत्यायवति 'causes to believe.' . भधिगामवसि. Ther of गमि is for articulation. So also sato 'remember'; as, भधिगमयदि।।। 
__ सनि च ॥ ४ ॥ पदानि । सनि,., (णः , भयोधने , गमिः ). 
पत्तिः ॥ पनि परत होवोधनार्यस्य गमिरायो भवति ।। 
__47. And when सन् (Desiderative, follows, गमि is the substitute of q when the sense is not that of 'informing.' 
भिगमिपति' wishes to go'भिगमिपतः, जिगमिपन्ति. But भोन प्रतीपिपति'he wishes to inform the meaning: So also with st, as भचिनिगमिपति The yova. vibhaga indicates that the anuvritti of only runs in the next sätra and not of पि. The form is thus evolved in the Parasmaipada; गम+सन-गम + गन+ स (VI.1.9) ग + गम् + (VII. 4. 60) = + गम् + स (VII. 4.63)- + गम् +E+S (VII. 2.50) = जिगमिष, and then we add the personal terminations. 
TET४८॥ पदानि ,, ( सनि ; गमिः) वृत्तिः ॥ इन्ध सनि परसो गमिराशी भवति ॥ 
___48. And of re to study,' गमि is the substitute when a follows. 
भधिभिगांसते , खेते, • सन्ते 'he wishes to study. The rootss is always preceded by the preposition अधि. This will be Atmanepadi by I. 3. 12 and l. 1. 56. The form is similarly cvolved by the application of rules 
VII. 2.58, and VI. 4. 16. 
गालिटि ॥ ४ ॥ पदानि ॥ गारू, लिटि, (क) पतिः॥ गामदेशो भवतीने लिटि परवः ।। 
330. 
ARDHADHATUKA SUBSTITUTION. 
. (BK. II. CH. IV. 149, 5t. 
49. गाम् is the substitute of r when लिन् (Perfect) follows. 
The substitute being like its original (I. 1. 68.) I would have been Atmanepadi, even without the indicatory, 7. Why has then this beca added toit? The object is that in the sutra I. 2. 1. गाद there should mean this substitute are and not the verb mrt 'to go.' 
Thus we get भधिनगे 'he studied'. भधिनगाते , भधिनगिरे. See VI. 4.64 and III. 4.8. 
विभाषा लुङ्लुडोः ॥ ५० ॥ पदानि ॥ धिभाषा, लुङ्लुकोः (T, बि, गाइ) ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ नुमि लुटिप परत रहो विभाषा गानाशो भवति।। 
60. गाद is optionally the substitute of हर when (Aoristy and लड (Conditional Future) follow.. 
Let us take the case when I replaces . The affixes of F and any are treated as far by I. 2. 1. and then by the Rulc VI. 4. 66 (Whea .ao ardhadhatuka affix, beginning with a consonant and distinguished by an indicatory or follows; then let & be the substitute of long or of the verbs termed ' and of मा, स्था, गा, पा, ह, सी), we get भध्यगीष्ट (भधि + + गी + 
स),भभ्यगीपातान, भावगीपत . In the alternative we have भव्येष्ट , भायेषाताम् and भयेपन. 
So also in ल: as भास्यगीव्यत, भव्यगीभ्यताम् , भायगीयन्त, or in the alter. native, भय्येष्यत, मध्ये येताम् and भयेज्यन्त. 
णौ च संश्वको, ॥ ५॥ पदानि ॥ णो, च, सन्-चलो, ( :, गाह, विभाषा). 
पृत्तिः । गोसन्मरे वह परे च परत इहो विभाषा गाहावेशो भवति । 
51. Se is optionally the substitute of C in the cansative fu, when that causative takes the affix san (desiderative) and chan (Aorist.).. 
f refersfa or spamforfacf 'he desires to teach. The form is thus: evolved: TT + porq=TR (VII. 3. 36); then by the rules already stated, we get the above form with the affix सन् . भायजीगपत् or अध्यापिपत् 'he taught.' The kis changed into भा by VI. 1. 48. Thust + णिच् = भा + 
निभा + प + = tf. This rule applics to the desideratives of causatives and aorist of causatives. 
Bk. II. CH. IV. $ 53-56.] 
ARDHADHATUKA SUBSTITUTION. 
331 
namely, te &c. 
ception to this rule 
Buxiliary verb in 
experte'48 uogia erra: , : 
पतिः ॥ भस्तेर्धातो इत्यवमावेशो भवति भाईचालुके । 
• 62. * is the substitute of the verb we 'to be,' when an årdhadhåtuka afix is to be applied. 
WANT he will be,' way in order to be,' 'must be Now the Perfect tense affixes are also ardhadbatuka affixes (III. 4. 115). The Per fect of 7€ is therefore the same as that of , namely, TE &c. There is, how cver, an important exception to this rule, oamely, when He is employed as an auxiliary verb in forming Periphrastic Perfect of other verbs. la that casc Hą forms its Perfect tense regularly, HTR , stres, : &c. This apparent breach of the present stra is explained by taking the term in Ill. 1. 40. as a Pratyahara including F, and we, and if & could not form its Per fect in the regular way, its inclusion in this Pratyahara would be useless; hence we conclude, that as an auxiliary verb, rę forms its Perfect regularly. 
gâr afa: n 43 nucifa n gai, aft, (TO) » yfa: 11 gat PTTÈTIt tafer Hring, fordi II 53. Sofer is the substitute of 'to speak' when any årdhadhatuka affix is to be applied. 
The 'he will speak,' 'in order to speak. The role is for the sake of articulation only. The substitute being like the principal, m is Atmanepadi when the fruit of the action accrues to the agent, as he spoke,' Toyd'he will speak." 
धक्षिकः ख्याञ् ॥ ५४॥ पदानि । पतिक, ख्या, (मा.). 1: 11 fare: Uttafa T OE ' fyll utformade radi 
*4 11 pa afatit II पार्तिकम् ॥ असनयोष प्रतिधो पत्नयः॥ 
*TT 11TH #graffa 9959 54. mart is the substitute of Fire 'to perceive, to tell,' when any årdhadhâtuka affix is to be applied. 
भाण्याता ' he will perceive or tell'; भाण्यातुम' in order to tell';भास्यासम्बर 'must be told. The substitute being like the principal, f being always Atmanepadi (1. 3. 12), I would have also been always Atmanepadi. But in that case the letter q would have no scope ; it therelore follows that are is not always Atmanepadi, but under conditions mentioocd in 1. 3. 72. 
332 
ARDHADHATUKA SUBSTITUTIONS 
(Bk, II. CH. IV. $ 55, 56. 
Vart_This substitute is also said to begin with my instead of . Thus Hamar , Happy, hrqura. 
. Vart:--Prohibition must be stated when meaning "exclusion'; as #9: TUT: 'bad men should be excluded.... 
Vart:-Prohibition must be stated when the affixes sa and 7 follow: as 7 iar: the Rakshasas are cruel.' This is Vedic Sanskrit; modern 
44:. The meaning of the root of here, is 'to injure.' So also f *: afra:; here the afbx is *7. 
Vart:- Substitutes are made diversely in denoting appellatives and not qualities and in the Vedic Sanskrit; as 'food' (here the substitute of does not replace T); 'killer (y being substituted for 67 before ); TTT body'( is substituted for fo before the unidi affix gT); f uu: (here 79 is not replaced by FIT before ); HTT'a court yard' (here is not re placed by me as the next sätra 56 requires). 
an fefe n 94 nocifa u at, fefe, (afatai, 6419) Tih: 11 fale maits: gant an 55. is optionally the substitute of fe when Frase (Perfect) follows. 
The far, also is an ardhadhatuka asfix and by the last sûtra ta would always have been the substitute of w; the present sûtra makes this subs titution optional, as भाचल्यो , भाचख्यतः and भाचख्युः . In the alternative we have भाचवों, भाषचताते and भाचचत्तिरे;:' he told &c' 
height: 11 4€ llogifa na:, zt, 279-2747: (710) u बुनिः॥अर्धातोत्यियमादेशो भवस्यार्द्धधातुके परतो पनपी वर्जयिला ॥ afilipit: qfag FT ITERUMI 
eren II FATTI Mara Farming and ** 56. is the substitute of the verb "* 'to drive,' to lead,' wlien an àrdlhadhâtuka affix follows, with the exception of the afhxes (III. 3. 18.) and are (III. 3. 69). 
14* ' driver,' reatai. 
IVhy do we say 'with the exception of my and 877'? Observe a +47 + = 27'society'; #: 'driving out': So also with y, as 43: la multitude or herd of animals &c.' : 'driving out of cattle.' Sec III. 3. 69. 
Why have we used # with a long ? For the sake of forms like spint: &c. Bk. II. CH. IV. $ 57, 58. 
ELISION OF YUVAN AFRIX. 
Vart:-Prohibition must also be stated (along with me and spy) of the affix * , as #4891'a meeting, fame.' 
Vart:- The substitution is optional before årdhadhatukas beginning with a letter of P Pratyahara (all consonant except *) as print or after Hot or gris . See VI. 2. 144 for accent. 
2 otu yg u ogifa a1, 7(: et, eqre) a qft: 112 qoya asiat * FASHIOTTI HETI 57. #is optionally the substitute of wit when the afhx (III. 3. 15 &c.) follows. 
This declares an option in case of the affix feet, the word y in the Sotra referring to this affix; as, 9997: or gripit : 'driving stick or whip.' 
एयक्षत्रियार्षभितो यूनि लुगणितो.५८॥ पदानि । स्य-क्षत्रिय. era-fsas, gfa, gy, -: - 
वृत्तिः ॥ एयान्तात् क्षत्रियगोनान् भापदिभितश पायोरणिमोनि नुग भवति । 
वात्तिकम् ॥ भप्राथनगोषमाषा युवमत्ययस्योपसंख्यानम् ॥ 58. After a woril ending with the Gotra afix on (IV. 1. 151. and after a Gotra word denoting the des cendant of a Kshatriya or a Rishi (seer), and after a word ending with a Gotra alis having an indicatory , the afix sty and employed in forning (IV. 1. 163) des cendants, are elided by the substitution of all 
1. Thus by sátra IV.1. 151 (the affix to comes after &c., in denot. ing descendent) we get tog reg: (VII. 2. 117) 'a grandson of Kuru' This is a Gotra word (IV. 1. 162). Now in forming a word denoting á lower descendent than grandson, we add a Yuvan asfix. Thus ICEU + E (IV. 1. 95). Now this is elided by the present sútra, and we get the form oy: which thus means both a Gotra and a Yuvan (IV. 1. 163) descendent of Kuru. Só that thou: is the name both of the father and the son. 
Now it may be objccted : 'the word cou: belongs to the fame class and by IV. 1. 154, it will take the affix for . Do we, what we may, the form will be sure for: (VII. 1. 2.)' To this we reply, the word onicot: which we see in that list of fara &c., is not the word atroa: which we formed by adding pa under rule IV. 1. 151; that Tikadi word is formed by r under rule IV. s. 172, and is confined to Kshatriya. The street: which we have taken, denotes a Brahmin Gotra formed by IV. 1. 151. 
334 
ELISION OF YUVAN AFFIX. 
(Bk. II. CH. IV. $ 58. 
2. Now to give an example of a word denoting the descendent of a Kshatriya We take IV. 5. 114. which tells us that 'the affix you may be added to the words which are the names of Rishis, or of persons belonging to the sami. ly of Andhaka, or Vrishinis or Kuru.' The Aodhaka family is a Kshatriya fanily, and 1957 is a person of that family. Theo (TFF +870 = 14796: 'a des cendent of Svaphalka. This is a Gotra descendent. In forming Yuvaa des cendent we have 14** + (y. Now this must be clided by the present satra. So that I 1664 means both father and the son. 
3. Now to give an example of Rishis family. The sätra last mention ed IV. 1. 114. will also hold here. We take the word afar; and af#8+ mas; the Yuvan affix willy similarly be elided after this; and thus the word staa: means both the father and the son. 
4. Then to take the example of Gotra word formed by affixes having indicatory s. Thus sätra IV. s. 104. declares 'the affix or comes after, the words fore &c., in denoting Gotra descendents. Thus far+679 ; Then add 
to denote Yuvan descent, and we have at + F. By the prescat rule this is elided and thus we have *: both for the father and the son. 
The above examples show the elision of the affix ry. Now we shall give example of the elision of the affix sq. Now rule IV. 1. 154 says 'the affix fit comes after the words fa &c., in deooting descendent.' Thus for + 1 = arroft: (VII. 1. 2.) Then to form the Yuvan descendent we add sa by IV. 1. 83. Thus datafa + 47. By the present sutra, this yra is clided, and we have harufr. both applicable to the father and the son. Other examples can be multiplied. 
Why do we say there is elision only after these worde'? The Yuran affix will not be elided after other words. Thus rule IV. I. 112 says: *The affix we comes after fut &c., in forming Gotra.' E + 2 = 1 Now this is neither a word formed by to nor is it the name of a Kshatriya or a Rishi; nor any affix having goes to form it. Therefore the Yuvan affix F will not be elided after this. Thus ante + (IV. I. 95) if: 'son of Kauhada.' 
Why do we say 'affix deroting Yuvaa descendent is elided ?" An affix not denoting W Yuvan descendent will not be elided. Thus the pupils of वामरस्य are called वामरथ्याः which word is thus formed: वामरथ + एव = पान nu: 'a descendent of Vámaratha' (IV. 1. 115). Then to denote pupils we add spy by IV. 2. 111. Thus 2 + 2y =627: 'a pupil of Vamarathya' 
Why do we say "Yuvan affix ug and are elided? The other Yuvan affixes under similar circumstances are not clided. Thus the Yuvao 
Bk. 11. CH. IV. $ 59, 60.) 
ELISION OF YUVAN AFFIX. 
. 
838 
descendent of a (grandson of my) will be trat: Here the affix** (IV. 1. 101) is not elided. 
Vart-All Yuvan affixes are elided after Gotra words not denoting Brahmin Gotras; as an applies equally to father and son; Frifas: father, भावालिः son%3 भोम्बरिः father, भोम्बरिः son; भाण्डीशषः father, भाण्डीजरषिः son. Here, first is added by IV. 1. 173, then to denote Yuvan descendent. Then this is elided by the present Vartika. 
defera llige al apila u te-anifema, ş (gfa, go fust:) a 
वृत्तिः ॥ पेल इत्येवमादिभ्यश दुवमरवयस्व जगभवति ।। 59. And after the words tas &c. there is the prelision of the युवन affix. 
olett + sf = des. (IV. 1. 118). "The Gotra descendent of Paila. T: + f (IV. 1. 156). The present rule intervenes, and thc Yuvan affix He is elided; so do is both a Gotra and a Yuvan word. Some say that the 'Paila &c. words are formed by the affix ; (IV. 1.95) and then the luk elision of the Yuvan affix would be valid by the next rule 60. They would limit the scope of the present sutra to cases where the Gotra of the people is aot knowo, the Prachyas not being indicated. 
1. tr. 2. off. 3. Erfa. 4. ARTH. 5. tofu. 6. refu. 7. a. 8. far. 9. teafa. 10. oposals. 11. rufset. 12. Mart. 13. STR . 14 forat. 15. traria. 16. fafy. 17. fo. 18 sieraar. 19. vitsipalli. 20. H att. 21. sep. 22. 
TERM. 23. Ty. 
**: 97979 u fon ogifa 164, 1977, (gfa, gy) a वृत्तिः ॥ गोने वाम् तदन्तायुषप्रत्ययस्व जुग भवति ॥ 60. After a word ending with the Gotra affix (IV. 1. 95) there is luk-elision of the Yuvan affix, when the Gotia of the people called Prachya (Eastern) is denoted. 
TAMT + r = marit: 'the Gotra descendent of Pannagara'; after this the Yuvan affix (IV. 1. 101) is elided by the present rule, and so 
#myft: is both the father and the son. So utafa: father and son. The word 997 here qualifies the word Gotra understood and does not show that it is an optional rule in the opinion of Eastern Grammarians. When the Gotra of Prachyas is not denoted, there is no elision. Thus r. and T ag: son of Dakshi.' 
336 
.. 
- ELISION OF YUVAN AFFIx. 
[BK. II. CH. IV: 861, 6a 
नत्य 
न तास्वलिभ्यः ॥६॥ पदानि ॥ न, तोवलिभ्यः, (यूनि, लुग)। . पत्तिः । सोल्वल्याहि-यः परस्य युवप्रत्ययस्य न नुम् भवति ।। 
61. After the words तौल्वनि and the rest there is not luk-elision of the Yuvan affix. 
सोल्वलिः is the name of the father and तोल्वलायनः is the son of the former, formed by the Yuvan affix फक् (IV. 1. 101). 
___1. सोल्वनि. १. धारणि.. 3. पारणि. 4. रावणि5. देलीपि. 6. देवति. 7. वालि . 8. नैवति . 9. नेवकि. 10. रेवमिमि. I. देवमति . 12. देववक्षि. 13. चाफकि. 14.वकि. 15. कि. 16. 4. 17. भानहारति. 18. भानराहति: 19. पोकरसादि. 20. भानुरोहति. 21. भानुति. 32. पाठोहनि. 23. मे.मश्रि.. 24. भाडाहति. 25. मान्धकि. 26. वेशीति . 37. भासिनासिं. 28. आहिसि. 29. भावरि. 30. ने.पि. 31. भासिवन्धकि. 32. पो.प . 33. कारणुपानि. 34. कार्व. 35. 
रकि. 36. बहति॥ 
__ तद्गाजस्य बहुषु तेनैवास्त्रियाम् ॥ ६२ ॥ पदानि ॥ तद्राजस्य, बहुषु, तेन-एव, अस्त्रियाम्, (लुग) ॥ 
वृत्तिः । तद्राजसंजस्य प्रत्ययस्य माप पर्वमानस्य भस्त्रीलिङ्ग-स्य लुग् भवति, तर बेदगोनमययनकृतं बहुत्वं भवति । 
62. There is luk-elision of the Fath (IV. I. 174) affix, when the word is used in the plural number, provided that the plural number is taken by the base it self, and not by its standing as a compound epithet deperi dent upon another word, and provided that the base is not used in the feminino. 
भा = अंग + भण (IV. 1. 170) 'a prince of Aiga'; plural भङ्गाः 'the princes of Anga.' The affix so is elided by the present rule, and the Vriddhih vanishes with it too (I. 1.63); but sert: 'the princesses of Anga,' plural of stieft 'a princess of Anga.' But firerait: 'he to whom the prince of Vanga is beloved' forms its plural foragit: 'they whose beloved is the prince of Vanga,' there being no elision. 
यस्कादिभ्यो गोत्रे ॥ ६३ ॥ पदानि ॥ यस्क-आदिभ्यः, गोत्रे, (बहुषु, तेनैवास्त्रियाम, लुग) 
वृत्तिः॥ यस्क इत्येवमादिभ्वः परस्य गोनमाययस्य बहुषु वर्तमानस्यास्त्रीलिङ्गस्य लुम् भवति सेनैव चेदगोनप्रत्ययेन कृतं बहुत्वं भवति । 
63. After the word यरक &c., there is the luk. elision of the Gotra alix, when the word of itself and 
BK. JI. CH. IV. 3 63, 64.) 
ELISION OF GOTRA AFFIX. 
837 
not as part of a compouud epithet dependent on an other word, takes the plural; but not in the feminine. 
TFF + X -TE: 'a descendent of Yaska not ncarer than grandson.' lo the plural, tbc affix is elided and the form is of the descendents of 
TETTT: 11 1. UF . 2. m. 3. . 4. ATAFUU. 5. 4: R . 6. 0 . 7. 147. 8. . 9. Tüt. 10. fufca. 11. gr. 12. fquet g . 13. mar. 14. 4. 15. . 16. . 17. W alta. 18. foru. 19. Figu. 20. U. 21. e. 22. agr. 23. Aya 24. Haup, 25. JAC. 26. gate 27. Frey. 28. 34ftiumy. 29. ngan. 30. nigra. 31. siger. 32. sata. 33. tinara. 34. 1964. 35. q . 36. p . 37. p. 38. *.*. 39. Breytt. 40. With. 41. xforces. 
TANE 11 68 11 ogifa 11 49-27A:, , (agy, aaagh) # FEC: 11 TAITSE TYRET I startaraffent. * in waferli Ti 11 aracutat 57 58 TramTH .. .. 
64. And there is luk-elisiou of the Gotra affix es r(IV. I. 105) and 4? (IV, I. 104.) when the word of itself and not as part of a compound epithet dependent on another, takes the plural but not in the feminine. 
mm + = met: ; plural out: 'the male descendents of Garga'. So also for the male descendents of Vatsa'; the singular being, .: Similac ly, fog + = 4. (IV. 1. 104); plural for: and not *: ; similarly if singular; ht: plural 
But these affixes are not elided when the word forms part of a com pound. Thus, forarat: 'those to whom Gargya is beloved;' ftat: 'those to whom Baida is beloved.' 
These affixes will not be elided in the feminine. Thus, t, fa, feminine plurals." 
Of course these affixes must be Gotra or patronymic affixes, otherwise there will be no elision. Thus go + 4y = a living on the island,' plural ar; here the affix ay is not elided as it does not denote a Gotra. So 8 + 9 = sino: 'the pupil of Utsa,' plural wiat:.. 
Vart:- In forming Tat-purusha compound of the singular and dual genitive, the affix 49 and spare optionally clided. Thus tip a m . osant or ani, mutta moters or * . . 
338 
ELISION OF GOTRA AFFIXES. 
[BK. II. CH. IV. 165, 66. 
. Similarly अंदस्य or वैश्योः कुलं - बैरकुलं or पिडकुल. 
Why do we say 'the affixes or 8754'? Because other affixes will not be elided in forming सत्पुरुप compound; such as भाङ्गकुलं। 
Why do we say ' singular or. dual'? Because in the plural तत्पुरुष compound these affixes must necessarily be elided and not optionally; thus गर्माण कुलं-गर्गकुलं. 
Why do we say 'in forming ng compound'? Because in forming other compounds, these affixes will not be clided. Thus, 34yfreit which is an अध्ययीभाव compound, meaning गार्गस्य समीपं. Of course, it is only in the Geni. tive तसरुप that this rule is applicable%; it will not therefore apply in कर्मधारव 
सत्पुरुष &c., as परमगाग्वः। 
अत्रिभृगुकुत्सयसिष्ठगोतमागिरोभ्यश्च ॥ १५ ॥ पदानि ॥ अत्रि भूगु-फुत्स-वसिष्ठ-गोतम-अशिरोभ्यः, ष, (लुग)। 
वृत्तिः ॥ भग्यादिभ्यः परस्य गोत्रप्रत्ययस्थ बहुषु लुग भवति ॥ 
66. And after the words भनि , भृगु, कुन्स, वसिष्ठ, गोतम oftare, there is luk-elision of the Gotra-affix, when the word takes the plural, but not in feminiue. 
. . Thus the plural of मात्रेय (अभि + हक IV. 1. 122.) the des. cendent of भनि, is अनयः, the regular plural of भनि. So also, singular भार्गवः, plural भुगवः, singular कोरसः, plural कुत्ताः ; so, वसिष्ठाः, गोतमाः, भडिरसः. In all these the affix has been elided. Thus भृगु + अण = भार्गव: the descendent of Bhrigu. Of course, it is only in the plural number that the Gotra affixes on and ory are elided, not in any other number; so we have in singular भानेयः भार्गव:; dual आयो भार्गवो; plural भाषयः, भूगवः &c. . 
But when these words are part of a compound, the Gotra affixes are not elided in forming their plural. Thus fororitat: or forenintat: 1 
In the Femininc plural the affixes are not clided. Thus:-orica: निवः। 
बवध इस प्राध्यभरतेषु ॥ ६ ॥ पदानि ॥ बहवः, इनः प्राश्य भरतेषु, (बहुषु० लुग)। 
वृत्तिः ॥ बहुच प्रातिपदिकाद व इन विहितः प्राच्यगोने भरतगोने च वर्तते तस्व बहुए 
लुग भवति । 
66. There is luk-elision of the Gotra-affix इम् (IV. 1. 95) after a word containing many vowels (a poly syllabic word) which denotes the Gotra of the people called area and a when the word takes the plural. 
BK. II. CH. IV. 8 67, 68.] 
ELISION OF GOTRA AFFIXES. 
839 
- The plural of qwritft: is CHITT:, there being elision of Ki so also q. रेपणः plural of मान्यरेपनिः; so the plural of बोधिहिरिधिष्ठिराः the descendente of Yudhishthira. But af: and thing: not being polysyllabic, their plural will be daa: and grea: .. 
Why do we say 'when denoting the Gotra of Prachyas and Bharat as? Because when denoting the Gotra of any other people, these affixes will not beelided. Thus पानाकयः plural of बानाकिः, हस्सिदासवः plural of हस्तितातिः . 
Though the Bharatas are Prachyas, its specification here is to indicate that, wherever 'Prachyas' will be used, it will not include Bharatas as in V. 4. 60. Here the Yuvan affix of Bharatas will not be elided. Thus wron: father, भानावनः son. 
ganifcat: 019611 ara a a, 119-79-mfra: (m),a $: 11 soft trafena: 7C** FREYFT afer il 
67. After the words alaga , &c., there is not luk-elision of the Gotra affix, when the word takes the plural. 
This prevents the application of II. 4.64. Thus 1977+ TTT, plural irrat: ; singular 19t:, plural staat. The 1977 &c., belong to Vidadi class, vide IV. I. 104, and are the following:- , fire, fire, , HT, WTA, TU and strto. The remaining words such as ita &c., should not be taken in this sub-class. In the case of a &c., the Gotra affix must be clided in the plural by Rule 64. Thus iftar: fanerar: &c. 
faolsaarlement en El llogifa u fa-faca-face, , (agost) # 
FT: 11 fararpena: framfor erat ett par it 
68. After the words for fans &c. when used as Dvandva compound, there is the luk-elision of the Gotra affixes, when the compound word takes the plural. 
Thus f*+ arafa:(IV. 1. 154). Its plural is rath: 1 TTTT: TUTT: = fara framt: 1 There is elision of fry. So also sait: plural alary: (IV. s. 95) + nutra: T rat: ; there is elision of 7 (IV. 1. 95). The following is a list of such compounds. 
1. fazafant: 2. OTSITAT: 3. 5974#T: (TITATOTT: + FTTTTTTT.. IV. 1. 99, elision of 5). 4. TTTTTT: (arw4:+ 717. IV. 1.95, elision 
340 
ELISION OF GOTRA AFFIXES. 
(BK. II. CH. IV. & 69. 
of ). पकनखगदपरिणा, 6. उजककुभा (भौग्मयः IV. 1.95. + काकुभाः IV, I. 112, then the elision of and org). 7. 
H T UT: (the elision of my IV. 9.95 as in 4).8 उरसलंकाः (औरसायनयः IV. 1. 15 + लांकटयः IV. 1. 95, elision of किम् and .9. बदक कपेिष्टनाः (elision of as in 4) 10. कृष्णामिनकृष्णसुन्दराः (elision of . भनिवेश-पासेरकाः (भामिवेश्यः IV. 1. 105+दासेरकर: IV, 1.95, elision of both यम् and i). 
___उपकादिभ्योऽन्यतरस्यामद्वन्द्वे ॥ ६ ॥ पदानि ॥ उपक-आदिभ्या, अन्यतरस्याम् ,अद्वन्द्वे, (बहुषु लुग द्वन्द्वे ) 
पतिः ।। उपक इत्येवमादिभ्यः परस्य गोत्रप्रत्ययस्य बहुषु लुग भवति भन्यतरस्या बनेका ॥ 
69. After the words उपक &c. there is option. ally luk-elision of the Gotra affis when the words take the plural whether they enter into a Dvandva com pound, or are used separately. 
Of the words belonging to this list, three have already been enumerated in the group of Tika-kitavadi of the last sätra. The elision is invariable in the Dvandva compound of these three, but when used separately the elision is optional. As, उपकलमकाः, भ्रष्टककपिष्ठलाः, कृष्णाजिनकृष्णसुनरा:. But the plurals of भोपकायनयः, the Gotra-derivative of उपक (IV.I.99) is उपकाः or भोपकायनाः; of नाम कायनः is लमका: orनामकायनाः; of भ्रष्टकि is नाटकाः or भाटकयः. The plural of कापिष्टलिः is कपिटलाः or कापिटलय. The plural of काष्र्णजिनिः is कृष्णजिनाः or कार्णाजिनवः. 
The plural of कृष्णसुन्दरः is कृष्णसुम्बराः or काणेसुन्दरयः . 
of the rest of the words belonging to this group, there is option allowed, both when they occur ia Dvandva compound or when used alone. They are as follow: 
1. पएडारक. 2. भण्डारक. 3. गडक. 4. सुपर्यक. 5. सुपिष्ट . . 6. भयर कर्ण. 7. खारीजष. 8. शनावल. 9. पतञ्जन. 10 कठेरणि. L. कृषीतक. 12. काशकस्त्र. 13. निदाप. 14. कलशीकण्ठ. 15. सामकएठ. 16. कृष्णपिंगल. 17. कर्णक. 18. पर्णक. 19. जटिलक . 20. वधिरक. 21. जन्तुक . 22. भनुन्नीम. 23. भईपिंगलक. 24. प्रतिलोम. 25. प्रतान. 26. अनभिहित. (27. चुडारक . 28. उदा. 29. सुधायुक. 30. भवन्धक . 31. परञ्जल . 33. भनुपर. 33. अपनग्ध. 34. कमक. 35. लेखात्र . 36. कमन्दक. 37. पिश्चन. 38. मसूरकर्ण.. 39. मदाप. 40. कदामन . 4. दामकण्ड) 
__ आगरत्यकौण्डिन्ययोरगस्ति कुण्डिनम् ॥ ७० ॥ पदानि ॥ अगस्त्य कौण्डिन्ययोः, अगस्ति कुण्डिनच् , (बहुषु लुग, अणो यः)॥ 
निः ॥ भागस्पाण्डिन्ययोरणो यमच महुए नग भवति परिशिष्टस्य प्रकृतिभागस्व बथासंख्यमस्त कुण्डिनदस्यनावादेशी भवतः ।। 
BK. II. CH. IV. $ 70-72.] 
ELISION OF CASE AFFIXES. 
341 
w 
70. There is luk-elision of the Gotra affixes sro audry of the words are and litera, when they take the plural; and the words sparent and a fost are the substitutes of the bases sɔ remaining afetr the elision. 
The plural of भागस्य is भगस्तयः (as it it was the plural of भगस्ति) and of कोएिडन्यः is कुएिडना.. The affix भण् (IV. I. 114) after भागस्य and the afix 
(IV. 1. 105) after para are elided. 
The 9 in 1977 is indicatory and regulates the accent (VI. 1. 163); the word fogy has udatta on the middle vowel; and its substitute will also have the same accent. There is no clisioa however in HTTEIT EITT (IV. 1. 89) TIERT: (IV. a. III). 
a mgafagfasst: 169 na sifa 9:, vig-afaaf. 07:,( ST) . 
: il at foreniyohar: arfagfrauaTAN ETT Tfu u 
71. There is luk-elision of the case-affix of a word when it gets the name of a root, or os a crude form. 
A noun is changed into a root ( ) when it is made a denomina tive verb. Asmagia (III. 1. 8, he wishes for a son of his own. A noun which forms part of a compound becomes a crude-form (1. 2. 46); as ra: 'having recourse to pain' 4: 'king's man. In all these examples, the 
casc affixes have been elided. 
Thus grush = geriat, here the 2nd case-affix is elided. T = acara: &c. 
Why do we say when it gets the name of yr or fare ? 
Because when it gets any other name, such as * &c., the case-affix is not elided. Thus #:, F: 1 
erfauxfaxa: 979: log a açırat u opfe-rafata:, 991, (ST) 
fa: 11 offer for at THERE IT ETT TARTU 
72. After the verb ste 'to eat' and the rest, there is luk-elision of the Vikaraṇa sta (III. 1. 68). 
Thus HF + Ty + fa = 'he eats'; fact he kills; Ire' he covies, The Adedi verbs belong to the second conjugation. In this class of verbs, therefore, the terminations are added direct to the root. 
312 
___ELISION OF SAP.' 
[BK. II. CH IV.573-76 
. बहुलं छन्दसि ॥७३॥ पदानि ॥ बहुलम्, छन्दसि , (थपः लुग) ॥ वृनिः । छन्दसि विपवे शपो बहुन लुग् भवति । 
73. In the Chhandas (Vedas) there is diversely the luk-elision of the Vikarana शप (III. 1. 68). 
There is elision in other conjugations than Adadi; and there is some times even no elision in Adadi verbs. As वर्ष हनति 'he kills Vritra.'हन + शप + ति=हनति instead of हन्त। Soalso, अहः शयते instead of शेते. (Rig. V.I. 32.5). In these cases the Vikarana शप् has not been elided. 
In some cases the शप् is elided as नाचम् नो देवाः instead of पायध्वम् ।। 
यडोचि च ॥७४ ॥ पदानि ॥ यङः, अचि, घ, (लुग बहुलम) ॥ व वृत्तिः । यो लुग भवति भचि प्रत्यये परतः, चकारण बहुलंमहणमनुष्यते नतु उन्नति 
निः॥ 
ति 
74. And there is diversely the luk-elision of यह (III. 1. 22) when the affix भम् (III. 1. 134) follows. " By using diversely' there is elision of a when other affixes thao मच् follow, both in the sacred and profane literature as लोलुपः 'much cutter' (नोलय + भ);पोपुरः ' much purifier.' सनीवंसः from खंस 'to drop.'नीस: from via 'to fall,' the # being added by (VII. 4. 84). 
So also यह is elided before other affixes than भन्: thus शाकुनिकी मानपीति , दुन्दुभियावीत ॥ See also l. I. 4. 
जुहोत्यादिभ्यः श्लुः ॥ ७५ ॥ पदानि ॥ जुहोति-अ.दिभ्यः, श्लु, (शप:) 
निः॥ जुहोत्यादिस्य उत्तरस्य शपः श्लु भवति । 
75. After the verbs & 'to sacrifice' and others, there is slu-elision of the Vikarana शपु (III. 1.68). 
These verbs belong to the Juhotyadi class. जुहोति 'he sacrifices: (III. 1. 10). इन causes the reduplication of the root. So also विभति 'he fears. Harito from frin'to purify,' he purifies. 
बहुलं छन्दसि ॥ ७६ ॥ पदानि ॥ बहुलम्, छन्दसि , (शपः श्लु). वृत्तिः । छन्दति विषये बहुलं शपः श्लु भवति ।। 
____76. In the Chhandas there is slu-elision of [ diversely. 
Elision does not take place where ordained, and takes place where not ordained. For fuifor (instead of Faria)'he gives pleasant objects,' via instead of धाति. Bk. II. CH. IV. $77,78] 
. 
ELISION OF "SICH.' 
343 
परस: 
. .So also there is slu-clision of the vikaranas alter roots other than those belonging to the Juhotyadi class. Thus; पूर्ण विवधि, जनिम विपकि. 
गातिस्थाधुपाभ्यः सिषः परस्मैपदेषु ॥ ७७ ॥ पदानि । गाति-स्था-घु-पा-भूभ्यः , सिधः, परस्मैपदेषु. (लुग). 
वृत्तिः । गाति स्या पु पादयेतेभ्यः परस्य खिचो लुग भवति परसो पदेषु परतः ॥ वार्निकम् ।। गापो हो पियत्यो हणम् ॥ 
77. There is luk-elision of the alix fay(III. 1. 44) in the Parasmaipada, after the verbs mi 'to go,' pre 'to stand,' the verbs called g (I. 1. 20), a 'to drink' and v 'to be.'. 
is the substitute of Fu (II. 4. 45). faq the affix of the Aorist is elided after these verbs in the Parasmaipada as भगात् 'he went, भस्थात् 'he stoed, भवात् 'he gave, भधात् 'he held, भपात् ' he drank,' भमत 'he was.' 
Vart:-The verbs गा and पा in the aphorisin mean the गा 'to go" (which is the substitute of ru, and not a to sing,') which also assumes the form गा , and r'to drink' and not पा 'to protect.' The verbs गा 'to sing' and or to protect' will form their Aorist with ferq without its elision ; thus भगासीत् 'he sang,' अगसीत् 'he protected.' . 
. In the Atmanepada the fery is not elided ; thus *nrerat gradini. , 
विभाषा घाघेशालास; ॥ ८ ॥ पदानि ॥ विभाषा, प्रा-घेद-शा. छासः, (सिषः परस्मै विभाषा लुग) ॥ 
वृत्तिः॥ प्रा धेट्शा छा सा इत्येतेभ्य उत्तरस्थ सिचः परस्मैपरेषु विभाषा लुग भवति । 
78. After the verbs ar to smell,'se' to drink.' शा' शो) 'to pare,' छा (छो) 'to cut, and सा (सो) ' to destroy, there is optionally the elision of fey, when the parasmai pada term inations are employed. 
Thus भत्रात् or भघ्रासीत् ' he smelled; भधात् or अधासीत् 'he drank;' भशात् or भशासीत् 'he pared,' भच्छात् or भजतीन् 'he cut' and असात् or भसासीत् 'he destroyed.' . . 
.There is no option allowed in Atmanepada ; thus, spararat guarat वदनेन ॥ 
The root or is a Ghu verb, and in its case, the far would have been elided by the last rule also. The present declares an option. 
844 
ELISION OF SICH. 
BK. II. CH. IV. $ 79, 80 
--- 
___तनादिभ्यस्तथासो, ॥ ७॥ पदानि ॥ तन-मादिभ्यः, त-यासोर, (सिवःविभाषा लुग) 
वृत्तिः ॥ तनादिभ्य उत्तरस्व सिवस्तयासोः परतो विभाषा लुग भवति । 
79. After the verbs सन् 'to expand, and others there is optionally the luk-elision of pay when the Atmanepada affixes mand ery of the second person follow. 
Thus Maa (VI. 4.37) or wafers 'he expanded,' aratur: or afast: 'thou didst expand.' Similarly wela or Hafta he gave.' warar: or Hafer: 'thou didst give.' 
The roots and a must both belong to the Atmancpada, and not to Parasmaipada. Hence in the Parasmaipada there is no elision of सिद. 
Thus, भतनिष्ट यूयम् 'you did expand.' 
... मन्ने घसन्ध्यरणशवदहादा कुगमिजनिभ्यो : ॥८॥ पदानि॥ भन्ने घस वर-णश-सु-दह-आत्-राय-रू-गमि-जनिन्यः, ले, (लुग)। 
वृत्तिः । मन्नविषये पस हर श ह भात् वृषक गमि जान इत्येते व उत्तरस्य ने इंग भवति॥ . 
80. In the Mantra portion of the Vedas there is luk-elision of the sign of the Aorist (& Perfect), after the verbs qe 'to eat' a 'to be crooked,' y 'to destroy' I 'to choose,''to cover,''to burn,' verbs ending in long 9, 17 'to avoid,' 'to make,' of 'to go' aud sa 'to be produced.' 
The word for is the name given by ancient grammarians to the affixes of Perfect tense as well as the Aorist, or it might be common term for all tense-affixes. Thus from घस we haveभजन in the sentence, भन पितरो मी' मदन्त पितरों' तीवसन्त पितरः पितरः शुन्धधम् (Yajurveda XIX 36 so also Rig. I.82.2). 
From the verbs we have माइर्मिनस्य खम् . From नरा we have प्रणव in the following verse भानः शंसो भररुषो धर्तिः प्रपड्मयस्यारता गोवरणसते॥ (Rig.l. 18. 3.) 
The word og in the sätra includes both and F, as the word पेन in the following ब्रह्म जतानं प्रथम पुरस्तादिमी' मवः सुरुचो वेन भावः । सयु ध्या उपमा भस्य विष्ठाः मतच योनिमसतच विः ॥ (Yajurveda 13.30 
____From rr we have भाधक् as in सरसाइमिनो नेषिवस्यो मापस्करी: पयसा मान भाक II (Rig.VI. 61. 14). The word भात् means verbs ending in long भा as प्रा 'to fill. Thus, मिनः देवानामुगावनीकं चक्षुमित्रस्य वरुणस्याः । भामा पावा प्रथिवी भन्तरिक्षं सर्व भामा भगतस्तस्थु ॥ (Rig. I. 115.1.) 
The root gives us वर्क as in the following verse:-मामी भस्मिन्महाधने परा. बगरभवथा । संवर्ग संरवि नवः ॥ (Rig. VIII 15. 12). 
BK. II. CH. IV. 8 81-83] . 
ELISION OF TENSE AFFIXES. 
343 
Froms we have भकन् as in the following verse भम् कर्म कर्म कर पाषा मयोभुधा देवः कर्म स्वास्त प्रेत सामुः ॥ (Yajurveda III. 47). 
___From गम we have भग्मन; as in the following verse: वृतेव यत बहुभिर्वसको स्वरमि जागृासो भनुग्मन् । रूवमग्नि दर्शतः पहल पपा विवहा दीदिवासं ।। (Rig. VI. I.I). 
From जन we have भजत as भज्ञत वा भस्य दन्ताः , This is an example from the Bråhman literature, as the word om in the satra' refers also to the Brahman literature. 
आमः ॥८॥ पदानि ॥ आमः, (डे,लुक) ।। वृत्तिः ॥ मामः परस्य ने भंग भवति । 
81. There is luk-elision in the room of that tense-affix (F) which comes after ty of the Perfect. 
भाम् is used in forming Periphrastic Perfect हांचके 'he endea voured. Here, after the verb for all tense-affixes are elided, and the Perfect of Fis added to form its Perfect. Similarly कहांचके,सांप। 
अव्ययादापसुपः ॥ ८२॥ पदानि ॥ अव्ययात, आप-सुपः, (लुक). वृत्तिः। भव्ययादुत्तरस्यापः सुपच लुगमवति । 
82. There is luk-elision of sprey (the feminino termination) and सुप (the case-affixes) after an Avyaya or Indeclinable. 
Thus, सन शानायाम् 'in that hall'. Here the Indeclinable at there, does not take the feminine termination, although it is equivalent to earn 'in that.' So also TTT'having done' Feen &c. Here the case-affix is elided. 
__ नाव्ययीभावादतीग्मत्वपञ्चम्याः ॥८३॥ पदानि । न, अव्ययी भावात्, अतः, अम् , तु, अपञ्चम्याः , (सुपः लुक) ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ भदन्तापव्ययीभावादुत्तरस्य सुपो न मुम् भवति, भमाशस्तु तस्य सुपो भवरव. पसम्याः ॥ 
83. There is not luk-elision of the case-aflix ater an Avyayi-bhava. compound that ends in भा; भाम् is the substitute of its case-afixes, but not when it is the fifth case-affix. 
This debars luk-elision which was to have taken place by the last stra; instead of luk-elision, we have s added to the words ending in short भ3; for examples of this, see sutra II. 1.6%3; as उपकुम्भतिमति ' upakumbha is standing'; उपकुम्भं पश्य 'see the upakumbha.'. . 
818 
SUBSTITUTION OF CASE AFFIXES. 
[BK. II. CH. IV. $ 84, 85. 
Why do we say 'after words ending in short *7'? Because after Avyayf. bhava compound ending in any other vowels there is not substitution, but there is total-elision of the case-affixes; as भधिस्त्री , भधिकुमारी. . . . 
But the ablative case-affix is not elided after Avyayibhava com pound ending in short *, nor is there the substitution; as 34TRITT. . 
वतीया सप्तम्योर्षहुलम् ॥ ८४॥ पदानि ॥ तृतीया-सप्तम्योः, बहु उम् , (अम् अव्ययीभावे)॥ 
पतिः ।। हतीया समभ्योर्विभक्त्योहलमम्भावो भवति भव्ययीभावे ।। 
वार्तिकम् ।। समस्या ऋद्धि नही समास संख्यावयपेभ्यो नित्यममिति वक्तव्यम् ॥ 
84. The change to spy of the third and seventh case-affixes coming after an Avyayîbbåva compound that ends in भ, occurs diversely. 
उपकुम्भेन or उपकुम्भम् कृतं 'done by upakumbha , उपकुम्ने निहि or उपकम्पम् निधेहि ' put it in the upakumbha' 
Vart. The ** substitution is invariable and not optional in the locative case when the Avyayibhava compound denotes prosperity. (II, 1. 6.) or a com pound of rivers (II. 1. 20 and 21) or a compound having a numeral for its 
member (II. I. 19); as, सुमद्रम् 'well or prosperous with the Madras'; सुमगधम् 'well or prosperous with the Magadhas'; similarly उन्मनगङ्गम्। जोहितगङ्गम्। एकविंशतिभारद्वाजम् । The word ' diversely' establishes all these even without the Vartika. 
लुटः प्रथमस्य डासैरसः ॥ ५ ॥ पदानि ॥ लुटः, प्रथमस्य हारी रसः॥ 
वनिः ॥ लुडाशस्य प्रथमपुरुषस्य परस्मैपदस्थामनेपदस्य च डारो रस इस्येसे भावेशा भवन्ति यथासंख्यम् ॥ 
85. 31, and are substituted respectively in the room of the three-affixes of the third person of मुद (First-future), both in the Parasmaipada and the 
Atmanepada. 
Thus in the Parasmaipada awal "he will do,' analit 'they two will do;' कार: 'they will do.' So also in the Atmanepada we have भध्येता, भध्येतारो, भ येतारः। 
Why do we say in the 3rd person'? Observe ya: का.सा वोयेसावे॥ 
--:00:----