 ओ३म् । 
अथ पञ्चमध्यायस्य प्रथमः पादः। 
BOOK FIFTH 
CHAPTER FIRST प्राक् क्रीताच्छः ॥१॥ पदानि । प्राक्, फ्रीताद, छः। 
वृत्तिः ॥ तेन क्रीतमिति वक्ष्यति, मागेतस्मारक्रीवसंशब्दनायानित अर्षमनुकमिप्याम छमत्ययस्तेष्वपि कतो वेदिवष्यः। 
___ 1. From this one forward to tena-kritam' V. 1. 37, the affix 'chha' bears rule. 
The affix has the various senses taught in these thirty-seven stras V. i. i. to 37. Thus in the Satra area 'suitable for thať, V. 1. 5. the words must be read to complete the sense. Thus वल्लेभ्योहितों वत्सीयो गोधुक, करभीय राष्ट्र, भंकरभीया, भवत्सीयः॥ The limitation of the jurisdiction of o has been indicated in the sotra with regard to the meaning of the affix, and not with regard to the affix. As an affix, 5 has no force beyond SQtra 13, the affix or being the ruling affix thereafter. 
उगवादिभ्यो यत् ॥२॥ पदानि । उ, गवादिभ्यः, यत् । वृत्तिः । माक् क्रीतादित्येव । वर्णान्तास्मातिपदिका गवादिभ्यस, यत्प्रत्ययो भवति, प्राक्क्रीतीयेपर्य। 
2. The affix 'yat comes after a pratipadika ending with 3 (long or short), and after the words of and the rest, the senses of the affix being those taught upto Sutra V. 1.37. 
The senses of Prak-kritiya affixes are three viz, those taught in sätras V. 1. 5, V. I. 12, and V. 1. 16. This any debars vll Thus U Being + une - घरव्य (VI.4.146, VI. I.79). As हव्यं वारू, 'wood', 'it for a stake'पिचयः कापांव So also कमण्डलव्या मृत्तिका 'earth' lit. fit for a water-pot'. 
So also after गवादि words,eg, गन्यम 'suitable for cows', हविष्यम् 'suitable for offering'. 
The words सनः meaning 'a kind of leather', and चक: a kind of हरि offering, and 'a kind of food', all end in 7 and are governed by this satra, 
851 
बन्। 
[ BK. V.CH. I.S4 
in spite of V. 1. 15 which applies especially to leathers, and V. 1.4 and its vārtika which applies especially to offerings' and 'food modifications. This is an example where a subsequent sâtra does not debar a prior sởtra (I. 4. 2). Thus सनायित्-सनहाय पर्म, leather fit for making.Sanangu', घर+यन्- घरख्या स्तण्डमा 'rice fit for making charu', सन+यत्-सत्तच्या धानाः 'barley' fit for making Saktu'. 
In the list of rare given herëunder, occurs at y, which means that नाभि is replaced by नम when the affix यत् is added. Thus नामये हितः नभ्यः mean ing y: 'axis, axle' lit. 'fitted for the nave of the wheel'; or a wood fit to be made the nave of a wheel or भम्जनम् the grease. When the word नाभि means 'navel' of a living being, then it will not take this art, but it will take the यत् of V. 1.6. In that case, नम will not replace नाभि e.g. नाभि यत्-नाभ्यम् 'suitable for navel' i, e. oil. 
The word Tt occurs in a class. It takes samprasarana, o being changed to 7, and optionally this 7 is lengthened; and the udatta accent falls on the final. As वन्+यत्-शुन् + यत्-शुन्यम् or शुन् + यत्-अन्यम् 'fit for a dog'. Contrary to V. 4 144, the it of it is not elided before the taddhita affix 
The word अपस् occurs in the गवाyि class. Its final is replaced by मनः c.g.ब्धस् + यत्- कर+मन+य-उधन्यः कप: a welr. 
1गो, इविस, 3 मक्षर, विष, बर्हिस, 6 मष्टका, 7 स्खश (ख), ग, 9 मेधा, 10 एप (सक), 11 माभि नभं च, 12 गुनः संप्रसारण पाच पलं सत्संनियोगेन चान्तोदात्तखम्, 13 कसो न प, 14 कप', 15 खर', 16 दर (उदर), 17 खर, 18 मसुर', 19 भवन (भवन; मवा) 20 भर', 
शघेद', 22 धीज',23 R' (पीस), 24 स्कन्न। 
कम्बलाच संज्ञायाम् ॥३॥ पदानि । कम्बलात, च, संज्ञायाम् (यत्)। त्तिः ॥ कम्बलावाक्कीतीयेपर्येषु यजत्यया भवति, छस्यापवादः संज्ञायां विषये 
3. The affix यत् comes in the Prak-kritiya senses, after the word 'kambala', when a Name is meant. 
This debars chha'. Thus कम्बल + यत् कम्बल्यं 'A kambalya-measure of wool - 100 Palas of wool. This is the name of a measure, such as कम्बल्यमूर्णा पलयतम्। 
Why do we say parai? Observe umiar gust "wcol" lit. 'fit for making blanket', which is formed by ou 
विभाषा हविरपूपादिभ्यः ४॥ पदानि । विभाषा, हविः, अपूपादिभ्यः (यत) वृत्तिः ॥ हविर्विशेषवाचिभ्यो पूपादिभ्यव प्रातिपदिकेभ्यः प्राक्क्रीतीयेन्वर्येषु विभापा यत् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
4. The affix ea comes optionally after the words denoting 'offering,' and after apupa &c, in the sense of Prak-kritiya. 
Thus **9." fit for making " i. e curd :-or militants with ७. So also पुडाश्या' or पुरोरापीया स्तण्डला, 'suitable for making Purodasa'ie 
BK. V. Ch. I.S.1 
852 
a kind of rice. The word of occurs in the tranh class (V. 1. 2) and it neces. sarily takes all there being no option. The fit here, therefore, means things denoting sacrificial offerings, and not the word-form 'havi.' 
• So also after भपूपादि, as, अपूप्यम् or मपीयं, तण्डल्यम् or तण्डलीये 
अपूप, 2 तण्डुल, 3 अभ्यूप (भष), 4 अभ्योप, 5 अवोष, 6 भन्येष, 7 पुक, 8 मोदन, सूप, 10 पूप, 11 किण्व, 12 प्रदीप, 13 मुसल, 14 कटक, 15 कर्णवेष्टक, 16 बर्गल', 17 भगत, 18 भत्रविकार यश, 19 एप', 20 स्टूणा, 21 दीप (पीप), 22 अश्व, 23 पक, 24 कट, 25 भयः स्यूण, 
. Vart :-The affix un comes optiorially after words denoting modifica tions of food: such as T. In the case of 'saktu' however, no of op tion is allowed. See V. 1. 2. 
तस्मै हितम् ॥५॥ पदानि ॥ तस्मै, हितम् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ तस्माइति चतुर्थीसमर्याद्धिवमित्येतस्मिन्नय यथाविहिवं प्रत्ययो भवति । 
5. An affix comes after a word in the fourth case in construction, in the sense of 'good for that.' 
___Thus सेभ्यो हितो गोधुक्-वसीय 'fit for calves' ie a cow-milker. So भवतीया, पटव्यम्, गण्यम्, हविष्यम, भपूप्यम, अपूपीयम् । 
शरीरावयवाद्यत् ॥६॥ पदानि ॥ शरीर, अवयवात, यत् । वृत्तिः ॥शरीरं प्राणिकायः। शरीरावयववाचिनः प्रातिपदिकायत् प्रत्ययो भवति तस्से हितमित्येतस्मिन्दिप । स्यापवाद 
6. The affix e comes in the sense of 'good for that,' after a word denoting a part of the body. 
The word svart means animal organism. This debars 5, thus, foran good for the teeth.' कयम, पोष्टपम्, बाभ्यम्, नस्यम् such as dentrifice, snuff, oil &c Sec VI. I. 213. . 
खलयवमाषतिलवृषब्रह्मणश्च ॥७॥ पदानि । खल-यव-माष-तिल-वृष, ब्रह्मणः, च, (यत्) वृत्तिः॥खलादिभ्यो यत्प्रत्ययो भवति वस्मै हितमित्येतस्मिन्विषये। छस्थापवार। 
7. The affix to comes in the sense of 'good for that,' after the word 'khala,'“yava,' mâsha," tila,' vpisha' and 'brahman.' 
This debars . Thus terrein "suitable for threshing floor.' So also ध्यम, माध्यम, तिल्यम्, प्यम् and ब्रह्मण्यम् ॥ 
No secondary derivatives can, however, be formed of the following वृष्णे हितम, ब्राह्मणेभ्यो हितम् the full phrases must be used in these cases, for these words take neither s nor यत् though his-पन्and ब्रह्मन् is-व्याप। 
853 
[ BK. V. CH. I.89 
The word in the stra indicates that the rule applies to words other than those enumerated. Thus रयाव हिता-ध्या ॥ 
अजाविभ्यां थ्यन् ॥ ८॥ पदानि ॥ अज-अविश्याम, थ्यन् । वृत्तिः ॥ भन मवि इत्येताभ्यां ध्यन् प्रत्ययो भवति तस्मै हितमित्येतस्मिन्विषये । छस्यापवादः ।। 
8 The affix 49 comės in the sense of good for that," after the words' aja' and 'avi.' 
This debars !chha. Thus sa ara: 'the yellow jasmine called yathi: भविभ्या यूयिः ॥ 
आत्मन्विश्वजनभोगोत्तरपदात खः॥९॥ पदानि॥ आत्मन्-विश्वजन, भोगोत्तर पदात, सः। 
वृत्तिः॥मात्मन् विश्वजन इस्येताभ्यां भोगोत्तरपदाच प्रातिपदिकारणः प्रत्ययो भवति तस्ले हितमित्येतस्मिा विषये। छस्थापवादः ॥ 
पार्निकम् ॥ पञ्चजनादुपसंख्यानम् ॥ वार्तिकम ॥ सर्वजनान खब। पा० ॥ महाजनान्नित्यं भवन्तव्यः॥ पा० ॥ राजाचार्याभ्यांतु नित्यम् ॥ पा० ॥ माघार्यादणत्वं च ॥ 
9. The affix kha' comes in the sense of good for that,' after the words '&tman,' and 'yisvajana' and after compounds having the word ' bhoga' as their second term. . 
This debars sm In the sutra, the t of भात्मन् has not been elided, indicating that it should not be compounded with the word in which would have been the case otherwise. It therefore follows from this irregular con struction of the sätra, that the word it does not apply to the words भास्मन् and विश्वजन, but these words are themselves prakriti. Thus भाल्मन् +ख भाल्मनीनम् ' suitable for ones self the t of atman, which required to be elided by VI.4144, is saved by VI.4169. So also विश्वजनीनम् 'suitable for all men.' The word for must be a karmadharaya compound, meaning "all men, for the application of this rule; when it is a Tatpurusha or a Bahuvrihi compound, it will takes. As, विश्वजनाय हित-विश्वजनीयम, 'beneficial for man-kind.' 
Vart:-So also after Karmadharaya Compound पंचजन,eg.पंचमनीनम, ptherwise प्रषजनीयम्।। 
Vart:-After the Karmadharaya compound सर्वजन, there are the affix. es ठम् and m, as, सर्वजनीनं, and सार्वजनिकम; otherwise सर्वजनीयम् ॥ . 
Vårt:The affix og comes always after the word #gra whether it be a Karmadharaya or a Tatpurusha, but not so when it is a Bahuvrihi Com. pound. As महाजनाय हित-मादाजानकं ॥ In a Bahuvrihi it will be महामनीवः with 
BK. V.CH. I. 812] 
सम्॥ . 
854 
Compounds having as their final term, also take the affix up. as, मातृभागीणः and पितभागीणः॥ The word भोग means 'body. But मापयिः and पिषीय: with y, when the word it does not follow. 
Vårt : The words - and math followed by 'bhoga' take always the affix ख, as, प्रजभोगीनः and भाचार्यभोगीनः ॥ In the case of भाचार्यभागीन:, the 
is not changed into o (VIII. 4. 2.) The words do not take the affix y when used singly. As, राज्ञ हितम्, आचार्याय हितम, no affix being employed. . 
सर्वपुरुषाभ्यां गढऔ ॥ १०॥ पदानि ॥ सर्व-पुरुषाभ्याम, ण-दो। वृत्तिः ॥ सर्वपुरुषाभ्यां यथासंख्यं णडनी प्रत्ययो भवतः तस्मै हितमित्येतस्मिनिषये। छस्यांपवार पार्तिकम् ।। सर्वाण्णस्य वा वचनम् ॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ पुरुषावधविकारसमूहतेनकम्पिति वक्तव्यम् ।। 
· 10. The affixes ot and come in the sense of 'good for that' after the words - sarva' and 'purusha'. 
This debars chha'. Thus सर्वस्मै हितं -सार्यम् . So also पौरुषेयम् । Vart:--The affix a comes optionally after सर्व, as, सीयम् or सार्वम् । 
Vårt :-The affix comes after 9 when the word so formed means: 'slaughter', 'modification', 'a crowd', or made by him'. As i et TY: &c. 'man-slaughter', 'a crowd of men', 'human action', 'made by man'. e.g. पौरुषेयो पन्या 'a book written by man' contra. भपौरुषेया वेदाः 'The Vedas are non-human'. . माणवचरकाभ्यां खञ् ॥ ११॥ पदानि ॥ माणव-चरकाभ्याम, खम् ॥ शनिः ॥ माणवघरकशब्दाभ्यां खम् प्रत्ययो भवति तस्मै हितमित्येतस्मिन्विषये । उस्यापवादः ॥ 
11. The affix खम् comes in the sense of good for that', after the words 'manava', and 'charaka'. 
This debars छ. As माणवाय हितं - माणवीनम्. So also चारकोपम् ॥ . तंदर्थ विकृतेः प्रकृती ॥ १२॥ पदानि ॥ तदर्थम्-विकृते, प्रकृती.. त्तिः ॥ प्रकृतिरुपालनकारणं, तस्यैव उत्तरमवस्थान्तरं विकृतिः । विकृतिवाधिनः प्रातिपदिकावकतापभि धयायां ययाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति । 
12. After a word being the name of a product, the above-mentioned affix comes, to denote a thing which is the primitive that is serviceable for that. · 
The word gaat means 'primitive or the material cause of a product', The word fait means 'the product! or modification of such primitive तदर्थे 'serviceable for that' i. c. the primitive being serviceable for the product':. The word Art shows that the primitive must be serviceable for that parti. cylar product and nothing else That is to say, an affix will not come to 
855 
BK. V. CH. I. $13) 
denote any product in general, but only when the primitive is serviceable for a particular product and nothing else. The word of shows also that the word must be in th: 4th case, when the affix is added. Some read the words a få also into this satra. 
Thus w e frana Barat 161H itafor f 'wood serviceable for making charcoal;" so also (EAT: 'bricks serviceable for making a wall'. Here aria and qrarda are formed by & V. I, 1. Similarly T *wood serviceable for a spear.', f i Arra: cotton plant serviceable for 
cotton', 
Why do we say a serviceable thereto? Observe parat YTT:, T AT 9 # Here there is modification of primitive, but is the product also of other things than err: such as m* &c. 
Why do we say fuga: 'after a product'? Observe to FT, there is no affix. For ay: 'a well' and water' do not stand in the relation of 
fa and an i. o material cause and effect. As water' is not the modi fication or product of the well, though it is found in the well, and therefore, the affix is not employed. 
Why do we say that 'to denote a primitive'. Observe segut aut 'a sheath serviceable for a sword'. The sword is a product of iron, but a sheath is not the primitive of the sword 
By using the words ata and Pasla it is further shown that the pra kriti is liable to modification or vikara. 
छदिरुपधिबलेर्टम् ॥ १३॥ पदानि । छदिः उपाधि, बले ढम्॥ M: 11 BTEUTTAM CU TE seeria arit fra: saatferraarifTiofanart: 11 
13. The affix (+447) comes, in the sense of a primitive serviceable for a product, after the words 'chhadis', "upadhi', and 'bali', denoting the product. 
This debars g." Thus Onegaior quita, argitara, TTATUS: # 
The affix comes after the word 34f without changing the sense to धीयत स्याधिः स्यांगम् 'part of a wheel between the nave and the circumference or the wheel istelf'. The word s y also means the same 
ऋषभोपानहोर्यः ॥ १४॥ पदानि ऋषम, उपानहोः ध्यः। fu947319 paarai xe gratuita at parang paraan ng i grire 
14. The affix set ( +/ ) comes, in the sense of a primitive serviceable for a product, after the words 'pishabha' and 'upinah' denoting the products.. 
BK. V.CH. I. 16.] 
856 
___ Thus आर्पयो पत्ता, भोपानयोः मुमः ॥ This 'nya' debars 'chha'. Even when the primitive is 'leather opt, the affix 'nya' will come after 3979 irregularly debarring भम् of V. 1. 15. Thus भोपानां चर्म ॥ 
चर्मणोम् ॥ १५॥ पदानि ॥ चर्मणः, अञ्। वृत्तिः ॥ धर्मण इति षष्ठी। चर्मणो या विकृति तदाधिनः प्रातिपरिकापम् प्रत्ययो भवति सस्य विकास कृतापित्येतस्मिन्विषय । छस्यापवादः ।। 
15. The afix ( +1—27) comes, in the sense of a primitive serviceable for a product, after a word expressing the product of leather. 
The word 94: in the aphorism is in the genitive case. This na debars छ. Thus पाने धर्म and वार चर्म a leather serviceable for making a vard. hra' and 'varata' i.e. a leather thong. ___ तदस्य तदस्मिन्स्यादिति ॥ १६॥ पदानि । तद्-अस्य, तद - अस्मिन्, स्याद 
इति । वृत्तिः ॥ तरिति प्रथमा समर्थविभक्तिः, प्रस्योते प्रत्ययार्थः, स्यादिति प्रकृतिविशेषणम । इतिकरणो दिवता. र्थः । एवं वितीयेपि वाक्ये । सप्तम्यर्थे तु प्रत्यय इत्येतावाविशेषः । प्रथमासमर्थास्पष्टयर्थे बातम्यर्षे प यया विहितं प्रत्ययो भवति । यत्तव्ययमासमर्थ स्यांचत्तवति । इतिकरणस्तत दिवसा ॥ . 
16. The above mentioned affixes come after & word in the first case in construction, with the force of a geni tive or a locative, when the word in the first case is agent of the verb 'syat';—in other words—the above-mentioned affix es have also the senses of 'very well sufficient there to and 'very well sufficient to be made therein'. 
The word hy shows that the word in construction must be in the Ist case, the words भस्य 'of it' and भस्मिन् 'in it' show the senses of the affix, the word fairn 'it can be qualifies the primitive, the word that is for the sake of distinctness. Thus प्राकार मासाम् इष्टकानां स्यात् -प्राकारीया इटकार the bricks sufficient to raise a wall. So also पासायं दार ॥ Similarly पाकारोऽस्मिन्दधे स्वात प्राकारीयो देशः 'a place sufficient to make a wall therein'. प्रासादीया शमिः 
The word pic being in the Potential Mood ( Farfet Fere) of won'to ben has the force of संभावन 'potentiality, sufficiency' as given in Sotras III. 3. 154 &c. Such as when the large number of bricks makes it possible to raise a wall, we say प्राकार मासामिष्टकानां स्यात् ॥ Similarly when the quality (गुण)of a land, such as its area, situation &c, makes it possible to erect a palace therein, 
we say, प्रासादो स्मिन्देणे स्यात् ।। 
In the examples under this sotra, there is no modification (रिकार) of 
857 
[ BK. V. CH. 1. sis 
that the secular 
the primitive (प्रकृति) into a product, as was the case under sutra v.... 12. The examples under this sätra show merely the adequacy, fitness or sufficiency of a thing for a certain purpose. Herein lies the difference between this satra and the previous ones. : The repetition of the word as twice in this satra shows the existence of this Grammatical maxim: अनेकस्मिन् प्रत्ययार्ये प्रत्येक समर्थ विभक्तिः संबन्धनीया * when the sense of an affix is more than one, the case in construction to which the affix must be added must be shown in each case.' 
Why there is no affixing in this case: प्रासादो देवदत्तस्य स्यात! The use of wà in the Satra would prevent this, the force of a beir.g that the sec usage must be looked to in forming these derivatives 
परिखाया ढम् ॥ १७ ॥ पदानि । परिखायाः, ढम् ।। पतिः ॥ परिसायदान दम् प्रत्ययो भवति तदस्य तदस्मिनस्यादित्येतस्मिनयें। छस्थापनांकः । 
___17. The affix ढ (+-एय) comes, after the word 'parikha' in the above senses of this is sufficient for that', and this is sufficient therein'. 
This debars 8. Thus fieret af 'jand sufficient to make a mote thereon'. . 
Up to this Satra was the governing force of the affixes y and që u Hereafter another affix will be taught 
प्राग्वतष्ठम् ॥ १८॥ पदानि । प्राग्वतेः, ठम् ।। वृतिः ॥ तेन नुल्य क्रिया घेदातिरित वक्ष्यति । प्रागतस्मावतिसंशदनाद्यानितउधमनुक्रमिष्यामः ठम् प्रत्य. यस्तेष्वधिकतोयक्तियः॥ 
18. Upto Sutra V. 1. 11b (excluding that) the affix - (+/-th or +/-क) bears rule. 
The affix 59 governs all the succeeding sâtras upto a gri fan art, and has the senses given to it in Sätras V. 1. 37 &c. Strictly speaking the affix 8 governs only upto V. 1. 110 and not upto 115. Thus in Sätra 72, the afix si must be read. as पारायणिकः, तोगणिका, धान्द्रायणिकः ।। ___ आहदिगोपुच्छसंख्यापरिमाणाक् ॥ १९ ॥ पदानि ॥ आ-अहात-अ-गो-पुच्छ 
संख्या-परिमाणात् -ठक। वृत्तिः॥ महतीति वच्यति । भा एतस्मावईसंशवनायानित अमनक्रमिष्यामः ग् प्रत्ययस्तेम्वधिकतो वेदितव्यः गोपुच्छादीन्वयित्वा। भभिविधाययमाकानाईत्यपि ठह भवत्येव। 
Karika अर्धमानं किलोन्मानं परिमाण तु सर्वतः। 
भायामस्त प्रमाणं स्यात्संख्या वाह्या सर्वतः ॥ 
BK V. CH. I. $. 19] 
858 
19. Upto Sûtra V. 1. 63, inclusive, the affix 80 (+1-* or +1.-*) bears rule, with the exception of the word gopuchchha', or a Numeral, or a word denoting a measure of capacity. 
Strictly speaking a governs upto sutra V. 1. 65. The word is made up of MT + more The force of a here is more or inclusive, so that in the Satra arra (V. 1. 63) also, the car will be employed. The affix se debars osqu The sense will be the same as given in V. 1. 37 &c. the difference be tween me and of being in accent only. Thus f ar månaft , So also पाणिर्कम। 
But गोपच्छेन क्रीतम्-गोपच्छिकम्, the accent falling on गौ; so also with words denoting Numbers and Measures, as पौष्टिकम, प्रास्थिकम, कौरविकम्। 
The'word that in this sätra has its technical signification, and not its etymological sense. Technically if tot does not include sout, etymologia cally it does. Paņini has used this word after in some sätras in its technical sense, in others in its etymological sense. Thus in sâtras IV. 1. 22, and V. 1. 19 the technical sense is taken, while in satras IV. 3. 156 and V. 1. 57 the etymological sense is meant. Technically gitarot means et ari or a measure of capacity, and surface namely length and breadth and height or depth, such as gry: &c, i.e. a cubic measure and a square measure. In this sense it is to be distinguished from the measures of length or lineal measure, technically called , such as a Fageru 'a cubit' &c, on the one side, and the measures of weight, technically called such as 97, &c on the other side. In short gant means a measure of weight or gravity, qfara means a measure of volume or capacity, throy means a lineal measure, and a great is beyoud all 
these 
· TFHIET FAC T: 0301 retra II TFATE-family: (59) वृत्तिः ॥ भाादित्येव । निष्कादिभ्यः शन्ने यो ऽसमासे ठक् प्रत्ययो भवति माहीयेप्चर्येषु । होपवाद । 
20. The affix e comes after the words facere &c, when they are not parts of a compound, the sense of the affix being that taught in the subsequent sâtras upto V. 1. 63. 
The word Beira is understood in this sátra also. This se debars of. Thus tant, quia, aresti, Aria 
Why do we say TT&T when not compounds ? Observe the in 
nin formed by on (V. I, 18.) Compare VII. 3. 17 by which the Vriddhi of the second term takes place and not of the first 
. Q. Is not the employment of the word wire in the Satra redun dant? For by the maxim महणवता प्रातिपदिकेन वदन्तविधिनास्ति "that which cannot 
859 
[BK. V. CH. I. $ 21 
passibly be anything but a pratipadika, does, contrary to l. 1. 72, not denote that which ends with it, but it denotes only itself;" the pratipadika from being especially mentioned in the satra, the rule will apply to the word fun and not to a word ending with fa# 
A. The employment of the word SHH in this Sätra, indicates by implication napaka), that in spite of the above maxim, the quelle: I. 1.72 applies in the previous sotras, while in the subsequent sotras its does not. As Trance UT V. 1. 2, the art applies not only to it &c but to words ending in it &c. As गव्यम् and सुगव्यम, मतिसुगष्यम् ॥ Not only भपूप्यम् भपूपायम् V. I. 4 but also वापूप्यम्, यवापूपीयम् ॥ Not only इन्त्यम् V. 1.6. but also [जवन्त्यम i While in the sotras subsequent to this V. 1. 20, the tadanta-vidhi ap plies only to words preceded by a Sankhya and that also in Sätras upto V. 1. 115 and not there after as, frut. andu r V, 1. 72. Even in this latter case, when an affix is elided by means the tadanta vidhi does not apply. Thus grai gerai aia-ft +59 V. I 18 farta, the affix being elid. ed by V. 1. 28. Now in forming a tertiary derivative from this word forta, the tadanta vidhi will not apply. Thus far , here what affix are we to subjoin? If tadanta-vidhi applied, we get the affix * V. 1. 26 in the alter native. But tadanta-vidhi not applying, we get the general affix on V. 1. 8 and have notice I Here the affix or is not elided by V. 1, 28, as there is no Dvigu compounding. The above rule is suinmarised in the following ishti प्राग्वतेः संख्यापूर्वपदानां तदन्तमहणमनुकि ॥ 
The words 1. f4*, 2. qui, 2. 48, 4 reitor and s. me belong to wait class. 
शताश्च ठन्यतावशते ॥ २१॥ पदानि ॥ शतात, च, ठन्-यता, अशते । fup: I SUTEILPRA I TAUIT Gant geeet 149: sud sfäritt istefa ad 794791 
21. The affixes (444) and ta (-a) come in the senses taught upto V. 1. 63 after the word ra, when it is not a part of a compound, and when it does not mean merely a 'hundred'. 
The word HTET V. 1. 19 is understood here also. These affixes xx and a debar the affix V. 1. 22. Thus dan mat=ru or viam purchas ed for a hundred gold coins', 
Why do we say sua 'when not meaning merely a hundred'? Observe प्रतं परिमाणमस्य-छतकं निदानम् 'a band whose measure is hundred'. The word मयते qualifies the sense of the affix, and not that of the base, the latter not being pos sible; for the word va as a base must always mean a hundred'. The following examples will illustrate the meaning; rat:qfATRER= 'a book con BK V. CH. I. §. 22) 
860 
sisting of hundred Adhyayas'. In this case there is essentially no difference be tween the base (prakriti) and the sense of the affix (pratyayartha), though there is apparent difference, for the sake of applying the affix. For u is a book essentially consisting of huhdred: while you a carriage purchased for a hundred coins', does not contain hundred as its essential part. Similarly unret: herd of cows hundred In number'. Here the re: essentially consists of ug and so there is the affix ans and not or (V. 1. 58) But not so in the case of अत्यं घाटकशतं, शतिक शाटकातं, for here the sense of the affix is formed by the sentence, and not discovered merely from the word. Hence the following Vartika warfare sau saratait 
The word in the sotra draws in the word uita from the previous satra. Thus TT=ftur, fun a=funi 'purchased for a hundred and two coins'. Here the affix is a V. 1. 22. So far u According to the Ishti given in the last Satra, the tadanta vidhi applies here. 
संख्याया अतिशदन्तायाः कन् ॥ २२॥ पदानि संख्यायाः,अतिशदन्तायाः,फन्। वृत्तिः । भाादित्येव । संख्याया अत्यन्ताया अशदन्तायाभ कन् प्रत्ययो भवति माहीयेपर्येषुहमो सवार 
22. The affix kan (1- ) comes after a Numer al, when it does not end with fa or Ta, the sense of the affix. being that taught hereafter upto V. 1. 63.. 
The word ATEIT is to be read into this sátra also. The word bereit is defined in l. 1. 23. This debars qu' Thus furt: mia:- , , 
part 1 
Why do we say when it does not end in Fa or TT'? Observe enfrenting घावारिशतक: formed by ठम् ॥ But why कतिक: is formed by कन् and not by म् or se, as the word fa also ends in fa? The word area is formed by adding the affix afa, while the rule applies to the numerals which in their primitive state end with fa such as Arfa, mutra:, faufa &c. Here apply the two maxims 
TTHEU AMary'a combination of letters capable of expressing a meaning denotes whenever it is employed in Grammar, that combination of letters in so far as it possesses that meaning, but it does not denote the same combina tion of letters void of a meaning;' and farganya agöt E m 'when a term void of Anubandhas is employed in Grammar, it does not denote that which has an Anubandha attached to it'. Therefore when fa is taken, it does not mean उति॥ 
alle al 1231 ana ul arat:, , an fet il a tenere forma pa, paa a romatferred laht: TYRAT FAT गमो भवति भावयें। 
23. The affix 'Kan' coming after a Numeral end 
861 
[BK. V.CH. 1. g. 25 
AUSCRO 
W NLOAD INDOORINGAR 
SON 
w 
ing with a, takes optionally the augment is the sense of the affix being those given upto V. 1. 63. 
The words ending in ware RT; see 1. 1. 23: and would consequent ly take a by V. 1. 22. The present sätra ordains the optional affixing of to this on Thus सास्क: or तासिका, थायतिक: or बाधक 
faralarangyti gaTE 1384 canau farura-fakta 
ETT 1 per a ferarekupi utal are sima forma mater 
24. The affix ( **) comes in the senses taught upto V. 1. 63, after the words · Vingati' and 'tringat', when it does not denote & Name: the fat and of the base being dropped before this affix. 
Thus frafa +9=f&**** (VI.4. 142)f i fry+ fræ+ *** (VI. 4. 143) 
Why do we say spalaramu when not denoting a Name? Observer mura, fer f ormed by affix V. 1. 22. 2. Why do you affix , when it is prohibited by the phrase xhumu; for fruta ends in and our ends in ? The affix will be added by dividing the sätra into two: viz: (1) furtuna (2) rany; the meanings being (1) The affix. Kan' is added to viašati and trinjat; (2) The affix dvun is added to the same words, when not denoting a name. 
कंसाठिन् ॥ २५॥ पदानि केसात-दिउन् । वृत्तिःकंसाडिन् प्रस्थयो भवति भाहियेष्वर्थेषु भोपचार.. 
mint a rara a 
a ' ® # FEVERT it 
25 The affix feat ( *) comes in the senses taught upto V. 1. 63, after the word of 
. This debars ; the anubandha R of for shows that the Teminine of the word will be formed by T (IV. 1. 15), the r of is for the sake of pro nunciation, the room is for accent (VI. 1. 197). Thus * fem. irrat a 
Vario-So also it must be stated after the word m; e. g. , ta # 
Vårt:-So also after the word nifque, e. g. if fem. T Porto Sometimes the word en is substituted for itu before this affix, as, fan sem, aut 
. BK. V. CH. I. F. 28.1 
. भए। 
. शूदिअन्यतरस्याम् ॥ २६ ॥ पदानि ॥ शूर्पात्, अश, अन्यतरस्याम् ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ पूर्पशनादन्यतरस्यामा प्रत्ययो भवति माहीयेपर्येषु । भोपवादः ॥ पो सोपि भवति । 
. 26. The affix अम् (+-) comes optionally in the senses taught upto VI. 1. 63, after the word 'surpa'. 
___This debars ठम् which comes in the alternative. As, पूण क्री-चोपन or प्रोपिकम् ॥ 
शतमानावंशतिकसहस्रवसनादण् ॥ २७॥ पदानि ॥ शतमान-विंशतिक-सहन घसनात-अण् । वृत्तिः ॥ शतमानादिभ्यः शन्ने यो ऽण् प्रत्ययो भवति माहीयेपर्येषु । हाम्कनामपवाद। 
27. The affix अण् (+-अ) comes in the senses taught upto V. 1. 63, after the words - Satamana', 'vinsati ka', 'sahasra', and 'vasana'. . 
This debars हम्, उक् and कन्॥ Thus तमामेन क्रीत-पातमान so also बैंशतिकर साहसम् and वासनम् । - अध्यर्द्धपूर्वद्विगोटुंगसंज्ञायाम् ॥ २८ ॥ पदानि ॥ अभ्यर्द-पूर्व-द्विगोः, लक्,असहा याम्। शत्तिः ॥ माहावित्येव । मध्यर्द्धग्रहः पूर्वो यस्मिन्सस्मारथीपूर्वामातिपदिकात् विगोष परस्य मा यस्व मुन् भवति, मसंज्ञायां विषये। 
28. The affix having the senses taught upto V.1.63, is elided by , after a stem beginning with the word adhy ardha, and after a Dvigu compound, when it is not a Name. 
The word मादान is understood here also. Thus मध्यर्द्धकसम, रिकंसन, मत ईर्पम्, बिशूर्पम्, त्रिकंसम् , विपूर्णम् ॥ Here the affixes टिठन् and मम् are elided. 
Though in the words fonda &c. the affix is elided, it is only so when the affixing of the taddhita occasions a Dvigu compounding (II, 1. 51) such as in शान्यांशपाभ्यां क्री-विशर्पम् ॥ Here the resultant is a Dvigu compound. But in forming tertiary derivatives the affix is not elided, as निशूर्पण कीत-रिपोर्षिकन् ।। Hence the following rule: Para afatit148472 H See IV. 1. 88, V. 1. 20. N. 
Why do we say मसंज्ञायान् 'when not a Name'? Observe पांचलोहितिकर or पंचलौमितिकम् and पांधकलायिकम् being names of certain measures. The femi nine word लोहिनी is changed into the masculine by the Vartika भस्थारे शनिवे given under VI. 3. 35. 
The word spend is a Sankhya (See I. 1. 23), and a word beginning with it will be a Dvigu compound. Its separate mention in this sätra may appear superfluous. It is however so mcntioned, in order to indicate (inapaka) that 
863 
लेक-ELISION. 
[ BK. V. CHI. S. 131 
Le 
When the ama 
ce evolved by sumas also be enumer 
this word is not always a Sankhya. Thus for the purposes of the application of the affix कुलसू (V.4.17), this word is not a sankhya. 
. विभाषा कार्षापणसहस्राभ्याम् ॥ २९ ॥ पदानि ॥ विभाषा, कार्षापण, सहला भ्याम, (लक) 
वृत्तिःमधर्मपूर्वाद दिगोष कापापणसहमान्साबुत्तरस्याहीयमव्ययस्य विभाषा लग्भवति। वा । सुवर्णतमानयोरुपसंख्यानम् ॥ 
29. The affix having the senses taught up to V: 1. 63 is optionally luk-elided, after the words karshapana, and sahasra, when they are preceded by adhyardha or are members of a Dvigu compound. 
This sätra makes the elision optional, when it was compulsory by the last satra. Thus मध्यकार्षापणम् or मध्यकापणिकं, शिकार्षापणम् or दिकापणि कम्, here the affix टिठन् (V. 1. 25) is elided in one case, and not elided in the other. When it is not elided, प्रति may be substituted for कापापण (V. I. 25) मध्यप्रतिकम्, विप्रतिकम् ॥ 
So also after the word सहम, e.g.मध्यसहस्रम् or मध्यर्द्धसाहलम, दिसहसम् or दिसाहलम॥ When the affix is not elided, the forms above shown with irregular 
Vriddhi of the second stem, are evolved by sutra VII. 3. IS. 
putia vil.3.15. Vårt :--The words grad and want should also be enumerated. As, मयसवर्णम् or मध्यसोवर्णिकम्, शिसुवर्णम्, विसोवर्णिकम, मध्यर्द्धशतमानम्, अथर्वशातमानम्, दिशतमान or दिशातमानम् ॥ The irregular Vriddhi of the second term takes 
place by VII. 3. 17. 
द्वित्रिपूर्वानिष्कात् ॥ ३०॥ पदानि । दि,त्रि, पूर्वात, निष्कास, (लुक्)। पत्तिः । हिगोरित्येव । विधिपूर्वाद् दिगोनिष्कान्तााहीयपत्ययस्य विभाषा मुग्भवति । पा॥ बापांति वक्तव्यम् ॥ 
___ 30. The Arhiya-affix (V. 1. 63) is optionally elid ed after a Dvigu occasioning compound, of the word nishka, preceded by dvi and tri. 
The word fuit: 'a taddhita occasioning a Dvigu compound' of V. I. 28 is to be read into this satra. Thus दिनिष्कम् or दिनष्किक, प्रिनिष्कम् or पिनेकि कम् (VII. 3. 17) 
Vart:-So also when nishka is preceded by wr.g.बहुनिष्कम् or पहुने किकम् ॥ The irregular Vriddhi of the second term is caused by VII. 3. 17. 
बिस्ताच ॥ ३१॥ पदानि ॥ विस्तात्-च (लुक्). वृणिः ॥ शिषिपूर्वादिति षकारेणानुकृप्यते, विधिपूर्वाहिस्तान्तादिगोः परस्यास्यप्रत्ययस्य विमापालग्भवति । 
31. The arhiya-affix (V. 1.37-63) occasioning.a 
BK. V. CH. I. F. 34] 
864 
1 
. 
भात 
था 
Dvigu compound, is optionally elided after the word bista, preceded by dvi or tri. 
The word or in the sätra draws in the words referuara u Thus ftirhang or दिवस्तिकम्, त्रिविस्तम् or प्रिस्तिक, बहुविस्तम्, रोस्तिकम् ॥ 
The separation of this sätra is for the sake of the subsequent satra. विशतिकात्वः ॥ ३२॥ पदानि ॥ विंशतिकातू-स्खः। पृत्तिः ॥ मध्यपूर्वावातिपदिकाहिगाव विधतिकशान्ताराहीयेवर्येषु ला प्रत्ययो भवति 
32. The affix kha (fa) comes in the arbiya senses (V. 1. 37-63) after the word viisatika, when preceded by the word adhyarddha or a Numeral, occasioning a Dvigu. . Thus sufrufanitary, faruraatty and perforarestare a Being especi ally ordained, this affix u is not elided by V. 1. 28 ___ खार्या ईकन् ॥ ३३॥ पदानि । खाः , ईन् । 
वृत्तिः । अभ्यर्द्धपूर्वाद् द्विगोरित्येव । मध्यपूर्वाषातिपदिका विगोत्र खारीधम्दान्ताराविषयेषु ईकर प्रत्ययो भवति । 
पातिकम् ।। केवलायेति वनव्यम् ॥ वा.॥ काकिण्यामोपसंख्यानम् ॥ वा केवलाया। 
33. The affix fkan (1-**) comes in the Århiya senses (V. 1. 37-63), after the word khari, when preceded by the word adhyardha or a Numeral occasioning a Dvigu. 
Thus अभ्यर्जखारीकर, दिखारीकम् ॥ Vart:-So also after the word सारी alone, as सारकम् । 
Vart:-So also after the word काकिणी, as, मध्यकाकिणीक, शिकाकिणीकर, त्रिकाकिणीकम् ॥ So also when the word is alone: as, काकिणीकर 
पणपादमापशताद्यत् ॥ ३४॥ पदानि ॥ पण-पाद-माष-शतात, यत् । वृत्तिः ॥ मध्यपूर्वाद् दिगोरिल्येव । मध्यर्द्धपूर्वाद् दिगोब पणपादमापचतपदान्सादाहीयेपर्येषु यत् प्रत्ययो भवति। 
34. The affix yat (4) comes in the arhiya senseis (V. 1. 37-63), after the words pana, pada, masha and Sata, when preceded by the word adhyardha, or a Numeral occasion. ing a Dvigu. : 
Thus अभ्यर्द्धपण्यम्, दिपण्या, विपण्यम् so also मध्यपाचम्, दिपायम्, विपायम् ।। . Here पाद is not changed into पर, by VI. 3.53. The substitution enjoined by 
VI. 3. 53 takes place when re means the foot of a living being, while here it means a measure of capacity. So also मध्यर्द्धमाज्यम्, रिमाध्यम, निमायन, मधई अत्यम्, दिप्रत्यम, विल्यम्। 
855 
[ BK. V. CH I. S.37 
- 
- 
. शाणाद्वा । ३५॥ पदानिशाणात्-चा (यत) .. 
पतिः ॥ मपर्व पूर्वाधिगारित्येष । पाणबारम्पपूर्वाई दिगोपीयेप्वर्य वा यत् प्रत्ययो भवति । मो. पवार पक्षे तोपि भवदि। 
वात्तिकम् । वाविपकम्पम् । 
35. The affix yat comes optionally after the word sana, in the arhtya-senses (V. 1.63), when it is preceded by the word adhyardha or a Numeral occasioning a Dvigu. 
This debars of which also comes in the alternative, and is then elided by V, I. 28. Thus मध्यघाण्यम् or मधीग्राणम्, रिवाण्यम् or विशाणम्, पिघाण्यत् or विमानन्। 
____Vart:-So also optionally after the word Un, as, मध्यपस्थम् or 'पतम्, शिल्य or 'तर, पिपत्यम् or 'पद. 
• द्वित्रिपूर्वादण्च ॥ ३६॥ पदानि ॥ द्वित्रि-पूर्वात, अण, च। पृत्तिः ॥शाणारेत्येव, दित्रिपदाच्छाणान्तावातिपदिकादाहीयेपर्येषु भा प्रत्ययो भवति, चकारायचा। 
36. The afix an (+-अ) as well as 'yat' optionally also comes after the word såņa, in the arhiya-senses (V. 1. 37-63), when preceded by the words fg and ft. 
The aq comes optionally by the last sötra and is also drawn into this by the words. Thus we have three forms, दिशाण्यम्, देशाणम्, and बियाणम्, so also निशाण्यम्, बैशाणम् and पिचाणन् । 
The irregular Vriddhi of the second term in cases of compounds of numerals, taught in VII. 3. 15-17, does not however take place in the case of Ura, this word being especially excluded from the operation of those rules, sec VII. 3. 17. The Vriddhi here is regular as taught by the general rule 
VII. 2. 117. 
तेन क्रीतम् ॥ ३७॥ पदानि तेन-ौतम् । वृत्तिः ॥ठमादयस्खयोदश प्रत्ययाः प्रकृतार षामितः प्रभाति समर्थ विभनयः प्रत्ययार्याध निर्दिभ्यन्वतिने ति हतीयासमर्यात् क्रीतमिल्ये तस्मिन्न यथाविहिवं प्रत्ययो भवति । 
37. The thirteen affixes taught in V. 1. 18-36, have the sense of "purchased with this price", and are added to a word in the third case in construction. 
___The thirteen affixes उम्, ठक, उन्, यत्, कन्, छुन्, टिठन्, मम्, मण, ख कन, C and have already been taught. Now is taught their sense, and the case in construction of the word to which they should be added. The shows that the word must be in the 3rd case in construction : and mary shows that the sense is that of purchased'. The illustrations have already been given in the previous sátras. Some more may be mentioned here. Thus खात्याक्रीतं-साततिका, माघीतिकर, मेकिकन, पाणिकर, पादिकन, माषिकर, पत्यम्, प्रतिकर, हिकर, पिकम् &c 
BK. V.CH. I.S 38.] 
860 
The affix will come after a word in the 3rd case in construction when it means 'price,' and the force of the 3rd case is that of 'instrument' (11. 3. 18) and not that of agent.' Therefore, there is no affixing in the words T T कीत or पाणिना की। 
Nor does the affix come after a dual or a plural. Thus threat to of मस्यः कीत, there is no affixing, as it is not the idiom. But द्वाभ्यां कीर्द-शिकर, चिकन पंचकम्, मुझे क्रीते-मौनिकम्, भाषिकम Here there is afixing after a dual and plural, for the words fit, ca are essentially dual. or plural, and in the case of Tai and #14, those are always used in the plural, for it is not possible to purchase anything with a single grain of gt or ATTIN ___ तस्य निमित्त संयोगोत्पाती ॥ ३८॥ पदानि ॥ तस्या निमित्तम, संयोग-उत्पाती। 
वृत्तिः । तस्येति षष्ठीवमर्यानिमित्तमित्येतस्मिन्न ययाविहित प्रत्ययो भवति, पनानिमित्तं संयोगबेख भर. ति उत्पातोपा 
पानिकम् ॥ तस्यनिमित्तमकरणे वातपित्त लष्मभ्यः धमनकोपनयोपण्याम . पा.॥ समिपाताचेति पत्तव्यम्। 
38. The above affixes have further the sense of " for its sake", when the meaning is a relation or an unwont ed appearance. 
The word ara shows that the word in construction must be in the 6th case, the word निमित्त 'cause or occasion gives the sense of the affix; संयोग means 'a connection, or relation': 76978: means a portend indicative of good or bad luck.' Thus तस्य निमिर्त धनपतिना संयोगः- प्रत्यः 'a connection with a rich man for the sake of getting a hundred.' So also orai, ETCH: It So also very fafree मुत्पातो दक्षिणाक्षिसपनम् - रयम, प्रतिकम, साहसम् "the twitching of the right eye for the sake of a hundred "i. e, indicative of acquiring or losing a hundred, a thouse and &c. 
Part:-The above affixes come after the words वात, पित्त, and sलम in the senses of allaying or vitiating. As they'allaying or vitiation of windy humour. So also पत्तिकम्, प्लेमिकम् ॥ 
Vart:-Also after the word सन्निपात, as, सान्निपातिकम् ॥ गोदरचोऽसंख्यापरिमाणाश्वादेर्यत् ॥ ३९ ॥ पदानि ॥ गो-दरचो, अ-संख्या-परित माण-अश्वादेः, यत्। वृत्तिः ॥ गौशनादरचम मातिपदिकारसंण्यापरिमाणाचादिविवर्जितापत् प्रत्ययो भवति तस्व निमित संयोगोत्पाताविस्येतस्मिन्न। उमादीनामपवाद। पार्मिकम् ॥ ब्रह्मार्थसादुपसंख्यानम् ॥ 
39. After the word गो and after a word having two syllables, with the exception of a Numeral, or a Measure of 
867 
म and मम्। 
[ BK. V.CH. I.S43 
capacity, or asva &c, the affix yat (य) is added, in the above sense of 'a relation or a portent for the purpose of that. 
This debars on. As ont fiftri tràm Tanda-haqs 'a connection or a portent for the sake of a cow. So also after a word of two syllables, as, धन्यम्, स्वयंम, पपस्यम्, मायुज्यम् ॥ : ... 
Why do we say “when not a word denoting a Numeral, or a Measure of capacity or भइव &c"? Observe पंचामा निमितं-पंचकम्, परकम्, मष्टकम् प्रास्थिकम् पाकिम्,भाभ्यिक- formed by: V. I. 22, 18, 19 
Vart: The word ब्रह्मवर्चस should be enumerated : eg. प्रवर्षसस्य निमिस गरणा संयोगः-प्रवर्षस्यम " relationship with a teacher in order to acquire Brahmavarchasa." 
1 मध, मम्मन्, गण, 4 वर्णा, उमा, 8 गङ्गा (मा भा), वर्षा (वर्ष), 8वतु.॥ पुत्वाच्छ च ॥ ४०॥ पदानि पुत्त्रात, छ, च। पतिः॥ पुरवपदाच्छा प्रत्ययो भवति चकापण्प तस्य निमिन संयोगोत्पातापित्येतस्मिन्विषये ॥ 
___40. After the word putra, the affix chha (य) also comes, as well as yat (4), in the above sense of 'a relation or a portent for the purpose of that.' 
The trord ger being a dissyllabic word would always have taken an by the last aphorism. This ordains s also. Thus पुषस्य निमित्तं संयोग उत्पाती पा-पु. भीयम् or पुत्र्यम् । . सर्वभूमिपृथिवीभ्यामणौ ॥४१॥ पदानि । सर्वभूमि-पृथिवीभ्याम, अण्-अत्रौ । 
निः ॥ सर्वभूमिपृथिवीरानाभ्यां ययासंख्यमणनी प्रत्ययो भवतः, तस्य निमित्तं संयोगोसातादिस्येतस्मि विपये। डकोपादो॥ 
41. The affixes an (+-अ) and ai (+/-m) are respectively added to the words sarvabhūmi and prithivi, in the above mentioned sense of "a connection or a portent for its purpose". . 
__This debars g. Thus सर्वभूमेनिमिन संयाग उत्पातोपा-साभामः, so also पापिषःn In gratuita: there is Vriddhi of both members of the compound by VII. 3. 20. 
तस्यश्वरः॥४२॥ पदानि । तस्य, ईश्वर... वृत्तिः ॥ तस्येति पष्ठीसमर्याभ्यां सर्वभूमिपृथिवीपमा यामणमा प्रत्ययो भवत ईश्वर प्रत्येतमिनिपये। . . 
42. To the same bases sarvabhumi and prithivi, are added the same affixes an and að respectively, in the sense of "lord thereof". . 
Thus ergatesti artimai 'the Lord of the whole earth', af4r: 'the lord of the earth'. 
BK. V.CH. I.5461 
.. . . The word स्य, showing the genitive construction of the base, has been repeated in this sotra, though its anuvritti was running into it from V. 1.389 in order to show that the senses given in V. 1.38 do not extend further. Had pfa not been repeated here, the word FUT: would have been an attribute, like the words संयोग and उत्पात, of the word निमियः. :. . .. ... ... .... .. तत्र विदित इति च ॥४३॥ पदानि ॥ तत्र-विदितमति-च (मण्-अओ).. 
पातिः ॥ तवति सप्तमीसमर्याभ्यां सर्वभूमिपृथिवीप्रमाभ्यां यथासंख्यमणभो प्रत्ययों भवता, विदित हत्येवा सिम। 
43. To the same bases 'sarvabhami and prithivi, being in the 7th case in construction, are added the same affixes an and av respectively, when the sense is that of “known therein". . . The word वादतः means known published. &c: सर्वभूमो विदितः - सार्वभौमः known in the whole world. So also पार्थिवः . : ... ... .. - लोकसर्वलोकाम् ॥४४॥ पदानि ॥ लोक-सर्वलोकात, ठम् ।. 
पत्तिः ॥ लोकसवलोकशवाभ्यां सति सामीसमर्थाभ्यां विदित हत्येतस्मिन्विषये ममत्ययो भवति। 
___44 The afix thai (+/-(क) comes in the sense on known therein', after the words loka and sårvaloka, in the 7th case in construction. .... ... ... ... ... ... . . ... Thus लोके विदितः = लौकिका, सार्वलौकिकः ॥ The irregular Vriddhi of both 
members takes place by VII. 3. 20. 
तस्य पापः॥४५॥ पदानि ॥ तस्य-वापः। वृत्तिः ॥ तस्येति सममीसमर्यादाप इत्येतमिनये ययाविदित प्रत्ययो भवति। 
45. The above mentioned affixes ( V.. 1. 18 &c) come after a word in the sixth case in construction, in the, sense of 'sown with so much'. 
· The word : means 'sown therein' i. e. a field. . Thus FYRITY: प्रास्थिकम् 'sown with a Prastha', द्रोणिकम्, खारीकम्, i. c a field sown with a quantity of grain measuring a Prastha or a Drona or a Khari. . पात्रात्टन् । ४६ n. पदानि ॥ पात्राव-पुन्।. . . . . . 
वृत्तिः ॥ पानधदात् छन् प्रत्ययो भवतिः तस्य पाप हवेतमिन्विपदेमोपचार 7. . 46. The affix shthan (- ) comes in the sense 
of 'sown with so much', after the word patram .. 
This debars 4. The of you is for accent (VI. 1. 192), the giş for mg (IV. 1. 41). The word qridenotes a measure of capacity. Thus, ir net 
-पौषिक सम, fem पात्रिकी क्षेवमनि। 
869 
BK. V.CH. I. 5 491 
. 
. 
वदस्मिन्वृद्ध्यायलाभशुल्कोपदा दीयते ॥४७॥ पदानि । तद्, मस्मिन्, पृद्धि माय-लाभ-शुल्क उपदा, दीयते । वृतिः ॥ शिव भयमासमर्यासिमिति सप्तम्यय ययाविहित प्रत्ययो भवति यमषयमासमय मावि बैतडीयो। 
वार्निकम् ॥ चतुर्थउपसख्यानम् ॥ 
47. The above mentioned affixes have also the sense of "an interest, or a rent, or a profit, or a tax, or a bribe given thereby or in that". 
The affix is added to a word in the first case (ar) in construction. The sense of the afnx is that of a locative (भलिन) The word दीयते is given' in the singular number joins with each one of the word वृद्धि, माय &c. The sum paid by a debtor to his creditor over and above the principal, is called it or in terest. The share of profit taken by landlord in villages &c, is called me or rent. The increase iver the capital by sale of cloth &c, is called it or pro fite The share of the king for protection &c. is called f or tax. The pre sent or bribe is called rपदा ॥ Thus पंचास्मिन् वृद्धि भायो वा लाभो वा एल्को पारपदावा दीयते-पंधक: that transaction &c. in which five per cent is given as interest, rent, profit tax or bribo. Similarly समक, पत्या, पतिक, साम &c. 
Vart:-So also in the sense of a Dative Asपंचास्ने पनि मायो वा लाभी पां उपदा वायते-पंचको देवदत्ता “Devadatta to whom five per cent is given as In. terest &c". This Vartika may be redundant, if we take the locative as some. times having the force of dative alsa As in the sentence सममबाहरणे दान। 
पूरणाान् ॥४८॥ पदानि । पूरण, अर्वाद, उन्, 
पतिः॥ पूरणवाधिनः शाशनाप इन् प्रत्यया भवति तामिन्वृद्धायलाभशुल्कोपरापीयतहल्येतलि. मायें । यथाययं हटिठनोरपवार। 
48. The affix than (-- ) comes in the same sense of "an interest, a rent, a profit, a tax or a bribe given thoreby or therein'', after a word denoting an ordinal, and after the word ardha. 
This debars and टिठन् ॥ Thus दितीयो वृयादिरस्मिन् दीयते-दितीविका, हती. विका, पैचार्मिक, सममिकः, मर्दिकः॥ The word भई is technically the name of रुपका। ___ भागाचच ॥४९॥ पदानि ॥ भागात, यत, च . . . पनि ॥ भागधायन् मत्ययो भवति । पकापरंभ । नाभिन्द्यायलाभकोपका दीयतात्यतामनायें। 
49. The affix yat (4) comes after the word bhaga in the sense of "an interest, a rent, a profit, a tax or a bribe given thereby or therein". BK. V.Ch. I. BSI.1 
. .876 
: By the word ay in the sotra tu also comes. This debars reu Thus भागो वृधादिरस्मिन् दीयवे-भाग्यं or भागिक एवम् ; भाग्या or भागिका विधतिः॥ The word भाग also denotes रूपकार्ष। __ तदरात वहत्यावहति मागवंशादिभ्यः ॥ ५० ॥ पदानि । तत्, हरति, पहति, 
आवहाति, भाराव, षशादिभ्यः। वृत्तिः ॥ सरिति वितीयासमर्याद्धरत्यादिवर्येषु ययापिहित प्रत्ययो भवति । 
50. The above mentioned affixes, after the word भार preceded by the word पंश &c, have the sense of 'who carries away, or conveys or brings that *. 
The case in construction here is accusative (at). Thus tent meg, mera भावति पा-पांचभारिका, कोरजमारिका, बाल्बममारिकार। 
Why do we say "after भार"? Observe हरति, no affixing. Why do we say "preceded by वंश &c". Observe वीहिमारं हरति, no affixing. 
According to another explanation, thephrase भाराद् शादिभ्यः is explained as भारभूतेभ्यो शादिभ्यः. Then the sotra will mean “the above named affixes come after बंध &c. when they denote a load". Thus भारमतान् पंचान् इति-पांधिकर; कोटजिक, वात्यजिकः॥ Why do we say "when denoting a load भार? Observest रवि | Why do we say after वंश &c.? Observe भारभूतान् बीही पहाति। Both these explanations are valid and traditional. 
The word gua means to carry to another place or to steal; 67 to carry on ones back or head, negra means to produce or bring. 
14, 2 कुटा, 3 बल्वस, 4 मूल, 5 स्युणा, (स्थुण), 6 भन, 7 भइमन्, 8 भश्न, 9 समप', 10 उक्ष, 11 सदा। ___ घस्नद्रव्याभ्यां ठन्कनी ॥५१॥ पदानि ॥ वन-द्रव्याभ्याम्, ठन्, कनौ। 
पतिः ॥ पदम्यादाभ्यां दिनीयासमा यां यथासंख्य छन् कन इत्येतो प्रत्ययो मवतो हरत्यारिलया। 
____51. The affixes than (- - इक) and kan ( -) come respectively after the words vasna and dravya, in the second case in construction, in the same sense of who carries &c.. 
Thus वस्नं हरति वहति वाम्पनिक, अन्य संभवत्यवहरति पचति ॥ ५२॥ पदानि । सम्भवति, अवहरति, पचति । . . वात्तः॥समिति द्वितीया समर्थविभक्तिरनुवर्तते । सरिति द्वितीयासमारसंभवत्यादिपर्येषु क्याविहिवं प्रत्ययो भवति । साधेयस्य प्रमाणानतिरकसंभवः । उपसंहरणमबहारः। विकेशन पाका। . 
पार्निकम् ॥ तत्तपतीति द्रोणारच 
52. The above-mentioned affixes have also the 
cans 
87r 
{ BK. V. CH: I:354 
sense of "what is capable of holding that; or takes away that, or cooks that." 
The word is understood here, showing that the word in construc tion to which the affix is to be added should be in the accusative. The word # means the capacity to hold the exact quantity; It means. 'taking away, or containing. Thus मस्यं संभववि प्रास्थिक: a vessel capable of holding a.Prastha measure. So प्रस्यमवहरतिor पचवि-मास्पिक: a vessel or a person that takes away, holds or cooks a Prastha measure.' Similarly rate and TOT N The word संभव does not govern the word पति, thus प्रस्थं पति ब्राह्मणी प्रास्थिकी * Brahmant who cooks a Prastha' . 
i Vart:--The-affix to also comes after the word giá in the sense of 'who cooks that' e.g. द्रोण पचति प्राह्मणी-द्रोणी or बौणिकी ॥ .. .. . . . . . . . .... 1. आटकाचितपातात्वोन्यतरस्याम् ॥ ५३॥ पदानि ॥ माढक, आचित, पात्राद, 
खः, अन्यतरस्याम् । । निःn भाडकाषितपापपन्ने यो द्वितीयासमय यो ऽन्यतरस्यां संभवाविवर्येषु खः प्रत्ययो भवति । 
53. The affix kha (ईन) may optionally be added in the above sense of being capable of holding &c,' after the words adhaka, achita, and påtra.' : . 
___ This a debars sr which comes in the alternative. Thus मादक संभवति भवहरति, पचति वा-मारकीना or भारकिकी, भाषितीना or माधिसिकी, पाषीणा or पानिकी 
द्विगोष्ठश्च ॥ ५४॥ पदानि । द्विगोः, छन्, च वृत्तिः॥ भारकाषितपाचारित्येव । भाडकाषितपाचान्सार विगोः संभवत्यादिश्वर्येषु छन् प्रत्ययो भवति, चकावाख, भन्यतरस्याम्॥ . 
54. The affix shthan (+ -इक) as well as the affix स्व (ईन) may optionally come, after the same words adhaka, achita, and påtra, being final of a Dvigu compound, the sense being that of what can hold, &c.' 
They is read into the sätra by the word of the aphorism These two affixes u and get being especially ordained, are not to be elided by V. 1. 28. But when in the alternative, we add the general asfix , then it is elided by V. 1. 28. The 7 of 87 is for accent (VI. 1:19). and the x for free. Thus we have 3 forms:---याडकिकी, यातकोना, or घारकी न्यापितिकी, याषितीना, व्यापिता. In this case of anfaa the feminine is not formed by zig (IV. 1. 21) because of the specific prohibition contained in IV. 1. 22. So also हिपानिकी, निपानीणा and रिसानी 
कुलिजाल्लुफ्ती च ॥ ५५ ॥ पदानि ॥ कुलिजात, लफ, खो, च। वृतिः। दिगोरित्येव कुलिजयगान्ताद् दिगोः संभवत्यादिपर्येषु लक्खो भवतः । चकारावंच मन्यतरस्या महणावत्या लुगपि विकल्प्यते ॥ 
BK V.CHIT 
872 
. 
:i . 56. After the word kulija, being thë final of a Dvigu, there is optionally the elision of the above affixes, or the adding of the affix ख (इन), in the sense of what can hold that & : "... 'By the affix is also added.' The elision being optional, the affix उम्. I. 18 may optionally be elided by v. i. 28. Thus we get four forms: विकुलिजिकी (न्), द्विकलिजीना (ख), हिलिजा (उम्मक), कृलिजिकी (म्) In the last example, there is not vriddhi of the second term, though it was so re quired by VII. 3. 17. The anomaly is explained by holding that the word 
pass should be included in the exception along with an and are of VII. 3. 18. . सोस्यांशवनभृतयः॥५६॥ पदानि । सो, अस्य, अंश, धन,भृतयः। 
• वृत्तिः ॥ स इति प्रथमासमारस्यति षष्ठपर्ये ययाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति वतन प्रथमासमनवनवतयरेका भवन्ति ॥ 
:56. The affixes taught in V. 1. 18 &c have also the sense of this is his portion, price or pay!'.. 
The shows that the case in construction is nominative. The word भंश means 'share,' वस्न means 'price,' ति means 'wages.' Thus पंच मंचौ वस्नो वा भृतिवास्य-पंचक 'whose portion, price or pay is five' So समका, साहसः॥ 
तदस्य परिमाणम्॥ ५७॥ पदानि ॥ तद, अस्य, परिमाणम्। वृत्तिः । तदिति प्रथमासमारस्थति पष्ठपर्ये यथाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति यत् पयमासमय पारमाणं घेतावति। 
57. The affixes V. 1. 18 &c have the sense of ** this is its measure." 
The word as shows that the word in construction should be in the nominative case. Thus प्रस्थः परिमाणमस्य-प्रास्थिको राषि: a heap whose mass is a Prastha. So also सारीका, प्रत्या, प्रतिका, साहसः, द्रोणिका, कोरविका, पार्षथतिका, पार्षवर लिका, So also षधिजीवित परिमाणमस्य-पाटिका, दिसाप्ततिक 
.. Why the words at have been repeated in this sätra, when their anuvritti could have been drawn from the last aphorism, the word TSR and arre being the same? The repetition shows that the affixes are again ordained, so that the elision taught in V. 1. 28 does not apply. Thus tot sitfra aftores. मस्य-विषाष्टक, दिसामतिक, Here the affix is not elided by V. 1. 28. 
• संख्यायाः संक्षासंघसूत्राध्ययनेषु ॥५८॥ पदानि ॥ संख्यायाः, संज्ञा-संघ-सूत्र 
अध्ययनेषु । 
• धृत्तिः ॥ तदस्य परिमाणमिति वर्तते । संख्यावाधिनः प्रातिपरिकापरिमाणोपाधिकावपमासमरस्थति 'पटपय यथाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति । संज्ञासंघसवाध्ययनेमिति प्रत्ययार्थविशेषणम्। : पार्तिकम् ॥ स्तोमे रविधिः पञ्चदशायर्थः॥ था.॥शनपतोडिनिश्छन्दति . . . . पा.॥विशतप्रतिपकष्यम... ... . 
873 
.. 
(Bk V. CH. 1 $ 59 
58. The affixes V. 1. 18 &c come after a word de noting & numeral, in the sense of “this is its measure," when the word so formed means a Name, a Multitude, a Book, or & fixed way and mode of study. 
The phrase HTFT faro is understood here. The word in construction to which the affix is to be added should be in the nominative case. When it is a Name, the affix does not change the sense of the radical. Thus 4999 
-पंच 'the Five' as क्षका कुनयः, विकार 'the Three'-पाललायनाः॥ The sense of the primitive is changed when it means a g'a multitude or flock'; as पंचकर संपा, मटकः ॥ So also when it means a सूब'a Book', as, भाटावयायाः परिमाण मस्व समस्य-मटकं पाणिनीयम् 'The Ashtaka of Panini viz, a Book comprising Eight Adhyâyas'. So also com u44144, for Huara Is not a collection of Adhyayas the same as orgi? No, the word is confined to a collection of living beings only. 
The word praat means 'study'. Its numerical measure (dren oftaru) means the particular number of times, or ways in which it should be read. Thus jurastita: 'what is studied five-times or in five modes' histas so also भष्टकर or भवका . 
Vårt:—The affix 7 comes after the words 90 &c, when the word means a Stoma As, 24 Hort: qfM444 = 42413 patas, arqu: MTA: &c. The indicatory causes the elision of final (R) by VI. 4. 143, in the cases of words like gode: &c. In the case of v: the q is elided by VI. 4. 147 
Vart:—The affix fola comes in the Chlandas after words ending in Un and ag, as, said MAT, fromat ATET: u . . : Vårt:—So also after the word frora, as farferats 
पड़किविंशति त्रिशचत्वारिंशत्पश्चाशत्पष्टिसप्तत्यशीतिनवतिशतम् ॥ ५९ । Gena i netei, fãana, fruta, arantia, qsellata, afy, para, aita, नवति शतम्। 
TT: U per afarurat Thalgaierent user forgrunti care PALOTAISTA UT Arena मासिडम् । . . 59. The following words are anomalous : paokti 
• a verse', vinsati 'twenty', tringat 'thirty', chatváringat 
• forty', panchasat.fifty', shashthi 'sixty', saptati • seventy', - asíti eighty', navati'ninty', and sata 'a hundred'. 
The words filifa yfocus are understood here also : qfits is formed by adding fæ to e, the final being elided, meaning "a verse the measure of which is five, i. c, a half-quarter consisting of 5 syllables. The word frafit is formed by adding afar to the word for which replaces the tiyo word it 
BK. V. CH. I. F. 6.] 
छ 
रयत: asो यतो परिमाणमस्व संघस्य-विषति'. So the affix v comes alter पिर representing TUTUT ; so for ruit fat we have me and then add a similarly with G UT 11 Similarly with the rest. 
· Note- All the rest appears to be the conjectural etymology of Patanjali and Kisilla Käru,and hence it is omitted. 
___ The word पंक्ति also means 'aline'. As ब्राह्मणपक्ति पिपीलिका पनि। Here the sense has no relation to its etymology. 
पञ्चदशती वर्ग वा ॥ ६०॥ पदानि । पञ्चत्-शती-धर्गे-चा. वृत्तिः । पञ्चत् पश्चात् इत्येतो निपात्यवे वरस्य परिमाणमित्यमिन्त्रिपये पर्गेमिषेये। 
60. The words pañchat and dasat in combination with varga, may be anomalously so formed, in the sense of. 'this is its measure'. 
This ordains trâ instead of V. 1. 22, which also comes in the alternative As पंचवर्गः, पपवर्ग: or पंचकोरर्गः, पचकोवर्ग 
सप्तनो छन्दास ॥ ६१॥ पदानि । सप्तनः, मम्, छन्दसि. निः॥ वर्गहत्येव । सदस्य परिमाणमिति च । समन्धमाच्छन्दावि विपये ऽम् प्रत्ययो भवति वर्गमिषेये। 
61. The affix at (+/-) comes after the word . saptan, in the Chhandas, when the meaning is that of a 
Varga. 
AS TH सामान्यजन ॥ The phrase areय परिमाणं is understood here. विंशश्चत्वारिंशतोमा॑ह्मणे संज्ञायां डए ॥ १२॥ पदानि । त्रिंशत्-चत्वारिंशतो, ब्राह्मगे, संज्ञायाम, डण। वृत्तिःतस्य परिमार्णामस्या । वर्गइति निवृत्तम् । शिवत्वारियच्छमाभ्यां संज्ञायां विषये उप प्रबके भवाति, वस्य परिमाणमित्येतस्मिन्विषये ब्राह्मणेभिवे। 
____62. The affix dan (+-) comes after the worda triasat and chatvarinsat, in the sense of this is its measure', waen it is the Nams denoting a Brahmana-boot. 
The word mi does not govern this sætra. The indicatory y causes the elision of the last vowel with the consonant that follows it (VI. 4. 143) The force of the locative case in mad is that of mint and not fire, I. c. when the word means a Brahmana itself. Had the force been that of for, it would have meant, 'in the Brahmana literature'. Asविधवष्यायाः परिमाणमेला माह्मणानां-धानि ब्राह्मणानि 'The Brahmana containing thirty Adhyayas'. So पावारिंशानि ब्राह्मणानि | These being the names of certain Brahmapas 
तदर्हति ॥६३॥ पदानि ॥ तद्-अर्हति ।।। पतिः तदिति द्वितीयासमादति त्यस्मिन्न यथाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति। 
87. 
[ BK. V.CH. I. 367... 
. . . 63. - The affixes v. 1. 18. &c, have also the sense . of who deserves that', 
The case in construction here is accusative. Thus waresTARTA HP पिका "who deserves the white Umbrella". So also वायुग्मिका, घस्या, प्रतिका साहब 
छेदादिभ्यो नित्यम् ॥ ६४ ॥ पदानि ॥ छेदादिभ्यः,नित्यम् ॥ वृभिः । निरयमहर्ष प्रस्थयाविशेषणम् । छरादिभ्यो द्वितीयासमय-यो नियमहतीत्यभिनय यथाविहित प्रत्ययो भवति । 
64. After the words छेद &c in the second case in construction, the above-mentioned affixes have the sense of "who deserves that under all circumstances". 
Thus छे नित्यमईति छैदिक, so also मेरिका 
19, 2 भेद, 3 द्रोह, वोह, नत (वर्त),कर्ष, तीर्थ', 8 संप्रयोग, 9 विपयोग, 10 प्रयोग', 11 विमकर्ष, 12 प्रेषण, 13 संपन, 14 विमम', 15 विकर्ष', 16 प्रकर्ष', 17 विराग विरों प (irom विराग is formed देराधिक),.. 
शीर्षच्छेदाचच ॥६५॥ पदानि ॥ शीर्ष-छेदात यत्, च।। वृतिः ॥ शीर्षच्छेरचना वितीयासमर्यानित्यमहतीत्यमित्र यत् प्रत्ययो भवति चकाराययाविहित। 
. 65. The affix yat (*) as well as the above affixes come after the word Sirshachchheda in the accusative, in the sense of who deserves that under all circumstances'. 
. Thus शिरश्छेदं नित्यमईति-धीपच्छेयः, or परिका । The word चिरस् is changed irregularly into it before the affix. 
दण्डादिभ्यो यः॥६६॥ पदानि ॥ दण्डादिभ्यः, यः। वृत्तिः । नित्यमिति निवृत्तम्।। दण्डादिभ्यो द्वितीयासमर्थेभ्यो ऽतीत्यस्मिन या प्रत्ययो भवति । कोपवारः। 
66. After the words danda &c in the accusative, the affix ya comes in the sense of who deserves that'. 
The word free does not govern this sátra. This « debars Te V. 1. 19. Thus एण्डमईतिहण्डर: ' deserving to be killed'. मुसल्यः &c 
पिण्ड, मुसल, 3 मधुपर्क, कथा, मर्ष, 6 मेष, 7 मेधा, 8 सुवर्ण',9वक, 10 ष, 11 पुग, 12 राहा, 13 भाग, 14 15, 15 भा'. 
Note.---The Sidhanta-Kaumudi gives the sutra as दण्डादिभ्यो यत्: another version gives the sâtra as postfang: only drawing the affix up from the last satram 
छन्दसिच॥६७॥ पदानि । छन्दसि,च (यत्)। वृत्तिः । प्रातिपदिकमान.च्छन्नास विषय सरहतीत्यास्मा बत् प्रत्ययो भवति । मादीनामपवादः। 
67. The affix yat (m) comes in the sense of 'des erving that', in the Chhandas, after.every pratipadika... .... 
BK: V.CH. I. S.i] 
816 
- 
- 
This debars हम् &c. Thus उपक्या वृत्तयः, प्वः पापा, गत्यों देशः ॥ See VI. 1. 213. 
पात्रा घेश्च ॥ ६८॥ पदानि । पात्रात्, धन्, च॥ ... .. वृत्तिः । पात्रमा पन् प्रत्ययो भवति चकारायच, तदहतीत्यस्मिन्नये । टमोरपवादः। - - 
68. The affix ghan (16) together with yat (*) comes in the sense of " deserving that", after the word patra. 
This debars on and on The word ry denotes measure also. Thus पाचमर्हति-पायः or पापियः॥ . ___कडङ्करदक्षिणाच्छ च॥१९॥ पदानि कडङ्कर-दाक्षिणात्, उ,च।। 
वृत्तिः । कडहरवाक्षिणाशम्दान्यां छः प्रत्ययो भवति, चकारायच्च तदहतीत्यस्मिन्विषये । कोपवाए। 
____69. The affix chha (ईय) as well as yat (4) comes in the sense of deserving that', after the words kadankara and dakshina. 
This debars # Thus freagra d a: or meget 'one deserving straw' such as a cow. So also rarotta: or throat 04: 'a Brahmana deserving alms.' 
स्थालीविलात् ॥ ७॥ पदानि । स्थालीबिलाव-(छ-यता) वृत्तिः। छवतावनुपर्ने । स्यालीविलाशच्छयतो प्रत्यया भवतः सईतीन्यस्मिन । कोपवारो। 
___70. The affixes chha (य) and yat (य) come in the sense of 'deserving that,' after the word sthålíbila.. 
This debars t'u Thus framfararepogost: or furettora: 'rice deserving the pot'i. c. cookable rice. ___ यक्षविग्भ्यां घखौ ॥ १॥ पदानि । यज्ञ-ऋत्विग्भ्याम्-ध-खत्री 
वृत्तिः । यज्ञशवालिकामाच्च यथासंण्यं घसमी प्रत्ययो भवता सतीत्यस्मिन्विषये । कोपवास। पातिकम् ॥ यज्ञालिंगयां तस्कर्माहतीत्युपसंस्थामम् ॥ 
71. The affixes gha (य) and खम् (+-न) come respectively after the words yajða andsitvija, in the sense of 
deserving that.' 
___This debars ठक् ॥ Thus थलियो माण: 'a Brahmana worthy of honor at a sacrifice' मार्मिजीनी ब्राह्मणः ॥ .. . Vart:-After the words yajna and ritvija, these affixes have also the sense of “ deserving the performance thereofm. Thus यज्ञकर्माईति-पक्षियो देख: 2 place fit for the performance of sacrifice' पत्विक कर्माईति-भार्लमीन ब्राह्मणकला। 
Here ends the governing power of V. 1. 19: hence forward is the government of or V, 1. 18 
आपदा 
था 
। 
no 
877 
[ BK. V.CH. I.S.75 
पारायणतुरायणचान्द्रायणं वर्तयति ॥७२॥ पदानि । पारायण-तुरायण चान्द्रा यणम्, वर्तयति (उम्) वृत्तिः । समर्यविभक्तिरनुपर्तते । महतीवि निवृत्त । पापयणादि यो दितीवासमय-यो पर्नवतीत्वास्मिनायें ग्म प्रत्ययो भवाद। 
. 72. The affix than (+/-क V. 1. 18) comes in the sense of 'who performs this', after the words parayana, ture yapa and chandrayana, being in the 2nd case in construction. 
___The force of मर्हति ceases. Thus पारायणिक छान 'a pupil, who reads under a teacher': सोरायणिको बजमाना, पानायणिकस्तपस्वी ॥ The word पारायण 
means a teacher' (परस्य कति ) । 
संशयमापनः ॥७३॥ पदानि । संशयम्-आपत्र (ठ). 'पुतिः। समयमा वितीयासमतापन हत्येतस्मिन हम्प्रत्ययो भवति। - . 
73. The affix that (+l-(*) comes after the word sansaya in the accusative construction, the sense being "fallen into this, or thrown into it”. : Thus U4H1# A# -siares Farg: "a doubtful pillar", i.& in a 
precarious state. 
योजन गच्छति ॥ ४॥ पदानि । योजनम-गच्छति (उम्) वृतिः॥योगमपन्या हिसायासमा गच्छतीत्यस्मिन जम्मव्ययो भवति॥ वानिकम् ॥ कोशनयोजनघतयोपसण्यानम् ।। वा.॥ ततोऽभिगमनमईतीति च कोयनयोजनप्रतयोससंस्थानम् ॥ . 
74. The affix thañ comes in the sense of 'who goes', after the word yojana in the accusative construction. 
Thus योजनं गच्छति योनिका - Vart:-So also after the words क्रोधशत and योजनघत. As कोप्रतिका, योजनाविका 
Vart:-The affix after these two words means also who is worthy to be approached from so far". As कोशवाइभिगमनमति-कोथतिको भिक्षः, योजना पंतिकमाचार्य। 
पथः कन् ॥ ७५॥ पदानि । पथ:-कन्। वृत्तिः॥पपिनधन्दादू द्वितीयासमर्याद गच्छतीत्यस्मिन कन्यत्ययो भवति। 
75. The affix shkan (1-5) comes in the same sense of who goes there', after the word patha, being in the 
• 2nd case in construction, 
of the affix *, ¢ is for #19 (IV. 1. 41), and a for accent (VI. 1. 197) A पन्यानं गच्छति -पंथिकः fem. पथिकी । 
BK. V. CH. I. 5.78] 
उम्॥ 
. 
878 
पन्यो ग नित्यम् ॥ ७६ ॥ पदानि । पन्थो,ण,नित्यम्। वृत्तिः ॥ नित्यमहर्ष प्रत्ययार्यविशेषणम् । पयः पन्थ इत्ययमादेशो भवति पत्र प्रत्ययो नित्वं गच्छवीबकि विषये ॥ 
76. The affix na (+ म) comes after the word pantha, which becomes the substitute of pathin, the sense of the affix being “who always goes”. 
The word for qualifies the sense of the affix. Thus gara para trans ति-पान्यः as पान्यो भिक्षा याचते ॥ Why नित्यं ? See पयिकः । __ उत्तरपथेनाहतं च ॥ ७७॥ पदानि ॥ उत्तरपयेन-आवृतम् च (ठ) । 
वृत्तिः ॥ निधारेव समर्पविभक्तिः । उसरपयशवतीयासमराहतमित्येतस्मिन्निपये म प्रबो भवति॥ 
वार्निकम् ॥ माहतप्रकरणे वारिजङ्गलस्थलकान्तारपूर्वपदादुपसंख्यानम् । या ॥भजपयशकुपथाभ्यां चोपसंख्यानम् ॥ वा. मधुकमरिषयोरण स्थलात्। . 
77. The affix est comes, after the word 'uttarapatha' in the third case in construction, in the sense of who passes by that way' and 'what is conveyed by that way'. 
The construction of the satra shows that the base must be in the 3rd case. The word shows that the word refa 'who passes by that way' should also be read into the aphorism. Thus उत्तरपयेनाइतं- मौलपिकर उत्तरपयेन गच्छति-भोसरपयिका। 
Vårt :-So also after the word qe preceded by the words ft. Er स्थल, कान्तार the affix has the sense of 'conveyed by that way' or 'passing by that way': As वारिपनाहतः-पारिपयिकम, वारिपयेन गच्छति- वारिपयिकः, so also पाइल पथिक, स्थालपयिक, कान्तारपथिक, masculine or neuter according as the affix means 'conveyed or passing. 
Vart:-So also after the words भजपय and कृपय as, भजपयेनाहवं गच्छति पा-भाजपथिका, गांकुपधिक ॥ 
Vårt :-The affix on comes after the word frapy when the thing conveyed or brought means honey' or 'pepper'. As स्यालपयं मधुकं, स्थापयं मरिचर। 
कालात् ॥ ७८ ॥ पदानि कालात (ठ)। वृत्तिः ॥ कालाविष्यधिकारः। यदित कर्ममनुक्रमियामा कालादित्य तोदितव्यम् । 
78. In the following sätras, the phrase "after a word denoting time”, should be supplied to complete the sense. 
The word कालान् bears rule in the following. aphorisms upto v.....96 jnclusive. Thus the next sQtra da fare ng means accomplished by means thereof: We must read the word काल into it. As मासेन मिर्वसम्-मासिक &c 
CS 
879 
1 BK. V. CII I..83 
तेन निर्वतम् ॥ ७॥ पदानि ॥ तेन-निवृत्तम् । इतिः ॥ तेनेवि नतीयासमर्यास्कालवाधिनः प्रातिपरिकार्विनमित्यस्मिन्नम् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
79. The affix than (+-5%) comes after a word denoting time, being in the third case in construction, in the sense of “ to be accomplished by that time". 
Thus wygr Fachm an " to be accomplished in a day" i. c. a certain portion of reading &c, भार्धमासिकम, सांवत्सरिकम् ॥ 
तमधीष्टो भृतो भूतो भावी ॥ ८॥ पदानि ॥ तमधीप्टो, भृतः, भूतः, भावी। वृत्तिः ॥ समिति द्वितीयासमर्यास्कालवाधिनः प्रातिपरिकाधीष्टो तो भूतो वा भावत्यस्मिन्नये यथाविहित प्रत्ययो भवति। 
. 80. The above-affixes come after a word expressa ing time, in the accusative case in construction, in the senses of “ solicited to instruct for such a period, hired for such a period, which had lasted for such a period, or which will last so long". 
The word m e: means "honorary office", therefore 'one solicited to teach, but who accepts no pay III. 3. 161, भूतः means "engaged on wages", ko means 'the time pervaded or occupied by its existence', and are the same as last in the future. The word denoting time will be in the second casc by II. 3.5. Thus मासमधीट-मासिकोम्प्यापक, so also मासंता-मासिका कर्मकर, मा. मतामाखिको व्याधिः, मासंभावी- मासिक रस्सा 
Q. The solicitation (अध्येपण) and hiring (भरण) only take a short time, how can these acts extend over a month ? 
A. It is not these acts, but their results which extend over a month, such as, teaching and serving. . __ मासाद्वयसि यत्खनो ॥ ८१॥ पदानि । मासाद्, पयास, यत्-खो। 
निः॥ मासपनालयस्यभिधेये यस्खमी प्रत्ययो भवता । मोमपादो। . ... 81.. The affixes yat (य) and khai (+'न) come after the word masa, in denoting 'age'. 
This debars of The word T of the previous sätra should be read into this. Thus मासंभवः-मास्यः or मासीन: 'a month old'. 
Why do we say when denoting 'age'? Observe मासिक द्विगोर्यप् ॥ ८२॥ पदानि । दिगो, यए। निः॥ मासादयसीति वर्तते । मासान्ताद् दिगोयप् प्रत्ययो भवति पयस्यनिये।। 
82. The affix yap (य) comes after the word masa rhen forming a Dvigu compound ; and meaning 'age'. [BK. V.CH. 1887.] 
.स. 
880 
Thus दो मासोत:-विमास्थः, बिमास्वः . 
· पण्मासाण ण्यष ८३॥ पदानि । षण्मासात, ण्यत्-च॥ . वृत्तिः॥ वयसीत्येव । पण्मासशनाइयस्यभिधये ण्यत् प्रत्ययो भवति, बर ॥ 
83. After the word shaạmása, come the affixes nyat (+-) as well as og and 3, in the sense of age'. 
Thus पाण्मास्या, पण्मास्यः, and पाण्मासिका .. अवयसि ठंश्च ॥४॥ पदानि ॥ अवयसि, ठन्, व. वृत्तिः ॥ पण्मासनादवयस्यभिधेये ठन् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
84. The affix than (1-क) comes also after the rrord shanmasa, when 'age' is not meant.. : The ar draws in the affix o also. Thus parlent or quarent bra'a disease lasting six months'. 
समायाः खः॥ ८५॥ पदानि । समायाः, खः ।। वृत्तिः ॥ अधीष्टादयवसाये ऽयां मनुवर्तन्ते । समायना दितीयासमा मधीटारिनथेषु खः प्रत्यको भवति । उसोपवादः॥ 
85. The affix kha (fa) comes in the fourfold senses of solicited, hired, lasted, and will last, after the word sama. 
This debars उम्॥ Thus समामधीटो, तो भूतो भावी पा-बमीनः ॥ Some say, the sense of the afix is तेन निर्वनं V. 1.79, as समया निर्दनः-समीनः । 
द्विगोर्वा ॥ ८६॥ पदानि ॥ द्विगोवा (खः) वृत्तिः ॥ समाया ख इत्येव । समान्ताद हिंगोनिर्वृत्ताविच पञ्चसुपा खाप्रत्ययो भवति । 
86. The affix kha comes optionally in the senses taught in V. 1. 76, 80, after the word Sama, forming a Dvigu. 
____In the alternative Tम् will also apply. The Vartika taught in V. 1. 20 (पारवतेः संख्यापूर्वपरानां सरन्तग्रहण मलकि) applies here also. Thus हिमासीनः or मा. सिका, पिमासीन: or मासिक 
रावयहस्संवत्सराध ॥ ७॥ पदानि ॥ रात्रि-अहः-संवत्सरात्, च (स्वः)। वृत्तिः ॥रापि महः संवत्सर इत्येवमन्ताद बिगोनिवृत्ताविपर्येषु पाखः प्रत्ययो भवति । सेन ने पसे .. मपि भवति ॥ 
87. The affix kha optionally comes in the firefold senses (V. 1. 79, 82), after the words ratri, ahan, and sam vatsara, occasioning a Dvigu. . . . 
In the alternative or will also come. Thus facratori, Tufti, porta: .VI. 4. 145 or यहिका, विसंवत्सरीणः, विसांवत्सरिकः VIL 3. 15. 
( BK. V.CH. I. $.04 
US 
VE 
SEA 
ORD 
w 
NEHODS 
ROV 
43 
VE 
ra1<quan , 
খালাছে গীল it 
88. The above affixes kha and the i may also be elided after a Dvigu ending in varsla. 
The affix as well as come in the five fold senses V. 1. 79, 80, alter the word of forming a Dvigu; and these two affixes may also be elided optionally. Thus we have three forms; framt, ma or forw a disease that lasted two years'. Compare VII. 3. 16; but when the sense is that of 74, the form will be laten 
चितवति नित्यम् ॥ ९॥ पदानि चित्तवति-नित्यम् (सुक) স্কুল ক্ষিকাল দুই শিৱই স্বয়ং স্থিলীনিৱাৰিত্বপূবগঞ্জ জয়নি হুমগুলি। 
89. The affixes meaning accomplished &c V. 1. 79, 80, are necessarily elided after the word varsh forming a Dvigu, when it refers to a being endowed with reason. 
Here the clision is compulsary and not optional as in the last Thus Au rek: a boy two years old'. Why do we say frnd when meaning endowed with reason *? Observe frenat a N 
ft: 
f u rano na nefeat:, fotor, Tarn স্থানঃ ঃ স্বষ্টিকাৰী নিয়াজান, ছুময় অভিজুয়ালুয়াকান্দি সুম্বী শিষ্যকে 
Tulemu, OFTVER : 
. 90. The anomalously formed word shashţikah has the meaning of "what are matured in six nights". 
The word erion may be said to be formed by adding to arton in the 3rd case in construction, then eliding the word or, the force of the affix being 'matured". Thus creure qu at: a kind of barley. It is a name of barley and therefore docs not apply to pulse, beans &c, though they may also ripen in six days 
TURI1349f 11 T T ara, y:, para el M: RUFemaltaTfk #10fOTty safe and i yragt La ITINUTE # 
91. The affix chha (Cu) comes in the Chhandas, in the fivefold senses taught in V. 1. 79, 80, after & stem end ing with vatsara. . 
This debars Thus puerta:. preda: संपरिपूर्वा च ॥ १२॥ पदानि ।। संपरिपूर्वात् च ॥ 
: 
.1 
. 
2 
.. . 
: 
BBC 
: 
X 
& 
BK V. CH. I. 5.94] 
. 
. 
म् । 
. 
. 
88 
92. The affixes ख (ईन) and छ (हेय) come in the Chhandas in the fivefold senses taught in V. 1. 79, 80, after the word vatsara, when preceded by sam and pari. . 
Thus संवत्सरीण and संवत्सरीयः, परिवतर्पण: and परिवलवा. तेन परिजय्यलयकार्यसुफरम् ॥ ९३॥ पदानि ॥ तेन-परिजय्य, लय, कार्य, सुकरम वृत्तिः ॥ लेनेति हतीयासमर्यास्कालवाधिनः प्रातिपदिकालरिजय्य लभ्य कार्य मुकर इत्येवेपर्येषु पम् प्रत्ययो भवति 
. 93. The affix thañ (+-- or ) comes after & word denoting time, in the 3rd case in construction, in the sense of “to be subdued, to be gained or attained, to be completed and to be easily completed in that time". 
Thus मासेन परिमप्यः (शक्यते जेतुं)-मासिको प्याधिः, सांवत्सरिको व्याधि, मासेन सम्पः -मासिका पटा, माखन कार्यमासिकं पान्द्रायणं, मासेन सुकरो-मासिक पासा . 
तदस्य ब्रह्मचयम् (ठ)॥९४॥ पदानि ॥ तत्-अस्य, ब्रह्मचर्यम्। वृत्तिः ॥ तदिति प्रयमा समावस्यति पम्पर्षे उम् प्रत्ययो भवति, यचदस्योति निहिं ब्रह्मचर्य पेद्भवति। तरिति द्वितीयासमकालवाधिनः प्रातिपरिकादस्येति पयर्थे उम्प्रत्ययो भववि ब्रह्मचर्य पदगम्बो। 
पातिकम् । महानाम्न्यादिभ्यः षष्ठीसमर्येभ्य उपसंख्यानम् ॥ पा०॥ तपरतीति। पा०॥ भवान्तरदक्षिारिभ्यो डिनिर्वतव्यः॥ पा.॥ मष्टाषावारिधतो इस सिनिम वक्तव्यः . पा०॥ चातुर्मास्यानां यलोपा इस डिनिश पतष्यः॥ पा०॥ चतुर्मासांप यो बजे। पाः ॥संज्ञायामण्यत्तस्यः । 
94. The affix that comes after a word of time in the sense of“ an abstinence that lasts so long" or "who prac tises abstinence so long". 
The word of shows that the word must be in the accusative cases अस्य shors the force of the affix, ब्रह्मचर्य: joins both. Thus मा ब्रह्मचर्यमस्व मासिको ब्रह्मचारी “who practises abstinence for a month". So also भार्धमाविका, सांवत्सरिक 
Another explanation is, the affix than comes after a word in the first case in construction, when the sense is that of an abstinence which lasts for such a period. As मासोऽस्व ब्रह्मचर्यस्य मासिकं ब्रह्मचर्यम् " an abstinence lasting for a month". मार्धमासिक, सांवत्सरिकं ।। 
In the first case the affix relates to a person, in the second, to the vow itself. Both these explanations are valid, as the structure of the aphorism is open to both constructions 
Vårt :-So also after the words awaret &c in the genitive construction. As महानामिका, गाशनिक, भारिप प्रतिकर। 
u 
: 
BK. V. CII. I. $.96) 
. 
.. 
t 
h ere was never 
K 
.. Vart After those words, the afhx mcans also 'who practises that. A গন্ধীস্থ = সাধ্যানার্সি, হিল্লো, শানি: গঙ্গালাম্নী + ক = ঞ্জানান (VI. 3. 35 Vart) #TETT* (VI. 4. 1442 
9,7 fm!! Vårt:-The affix a comes after the words ÍNT &c, in the sense of who practices. As we 
mana, facutian i : Vårt. The affixes it and ara come after the word E T UE, as জ্ঞাখোঁজি ন = গদ্যবিছাঃ of ঋদ্দশ্বেবি। .:. : Vårt:--The same affixes come after the words aniru &c, the final being clided. As aula per or UTCANET . i . VartThe affix e comes after word, in the sense of produced there". As E Tax ETFAIR 1 It refers to a sacrifice 
Vårt :-- The affix son comes, when it is a Name, as, TËS ** CAN atbara u So also urget, art. Trust a 
ET Petar wardry: 11941 vai II TF, , TETIT, Tartx: 
Mi a seampie waa rinlan TEL PRAT **! 
95. The affix thai, comes after a word being the name of a sacrifice, in the sense of " the fee thercof". 
As para crear after sua, u fazi . 
The word om in the sotra implies that the affix comes even after those sacrifice-denoting words which do not express time (V. 1.78), had it not been used, the sätra would have applied only to such sacrifice-denoting words as he:, crture, which are time-denoting words as well. The Vartika in V. 1. 20 ivould apply to MTOTT &c. Some texts do not ready in the satra. 
तत्र च दीयते कार्य भववत् ॥ २६॥ पदानि ॥ तत्र, च, दीयते, कार्य, भववत् 
per il para ulama alangan tad turfachandwara wanita 
96. The affixes having the sense of ** (IV. 3. 53, IV. 3. 11) come after a time-denoting word, in the sense of "what is given in that, and what is done in that". . . 
AS ATR 499 = ETTER (IV. 3. 11). This word also means are far and Ara 97 | Similarly ciueita, siqa (IV. 3.17), (IV. 3. 20), * (IV. 3. 16), *** (IV. 3. 22). ** (IV. 3. 16), e (IV. 3. 21), arcu (IV. 3.16. All these words mean also what is given or done in those seasons, The word or in 4997 means that all the rules of : (IV. 3. $3) apply here. 
This satra should be divided into two parts, one joining with the previous soura, as 757 448, qarga, as opieria T 404, 
TO 
BK: V. Ch. I. 599.] 
उम्॥ 
. 
. 
884 
So far does the word Files V. 1.78, bear rule. Hereafter general affixes will be taught . व्युष्टादिभ्यो ऽण् ॥ ९७॥ पदादि । घ्युरादिभ्यः, अण् । 
वृत्तिः । तत्रेति सप्तमीतमययो म्युष्टशीरभ्या दीयते कार्यमित्येतयारण् प्रत्ययो भवति। ...। वार्तिकम ।। अप्रकरणे ऽग्निपदादिभ्य उपसंख्यानम् । ' : 97. The affix an (+-अ) comes after the words घ्युध 
&c in the 7th case in construction, the sense of "being given therein or done therein". 
Thus ध्युष्टे दीयते कार्य वा-युष्टम् , नेत्यम। 
Vart:-So also after the words अग्निपर &c. As, भाग्निपरम्, पैलमलम। This Vartika can be dispensed with, as the word om &c can be included in the scent list of words. 
1युष्ट, 2 नित्य, 3 निष्कमण, 4 प्रवेशन, 5 उपसंक्रमण, 6 सीर्य, 7 मस्तरण (भास्तरण), सं. माम, संपात, 10 भग्निपद, 11 पीलमल (पालु, मूल), 12 प्रवास, 13 उपवास, 14 संचम, 15 दीपं. ॥ । तेन यथाकथाचहस्ताभ्यां णयतौ ॥ ९८ ॥ पदानि ॥ तेन,यथा,कथाच,हस्ताभ्याम्, णयती॥ वृभिः । यते कार्यामति वर्तते । तेनवि तृतीयासमाभ्यां यथाकयाघहस्तादाभ्यां यथासंस्य पदली प्रत्ययो भवः। 
98. The affix (+-अ) and यत् come respectively after the words yatha-katha-cha, and hasta, being in the third case in construction, having the sense of what is “ given or is done in this way or with this". । 
The words fua and to apply to both; the rule of parama: (1. 3. 10) not applying to it. The word यथाकथाच is an Indeclinable, meaning contempt Of course this word cannot take any case-affix, it therefore only gives the sense of third case. As यथा कथाच हीयते कार्य वा-याथाकथाषम् हस्तेन हायवे का वा हरयम् ॥ . 
संपादिनि ॥ ९९॥ पदानि । संपादिनि (ञ)। .. ........... . वृत्तिः । सेनेत्येव । तृतीयासमात्संपादिन्यभिधेये ठम् प्रत्ययो भवति। .. 
99. The affix than (+/--क) comes after a word in the Instrumental case in construction, in the sense of fitted 
for that".. ... .. . 
The word सपतिः means 'suitable, proper, it'. The word संपाहिन् । formed by adding णिनि to संपद, the force of the affix being that of neces sity (III. 3. 170). As कर्णविष्टकाभ्यां संपादि मुखं काणेयेष्टकिकं मुखं 'a face fit for car. rings'. वात्रयुगिकम् शरीरम् i. c. पस्त्रयुगेन विशेषतः शोभते ॥ 
| 
Bx. vCel.ic 
এ 
, 
.. 
: 
. 
, 
L 
র ফু ফু খালি স্কুল & কন্যা সুহানুভা অক্ষয় খালি স্থিলীষ্ট্রেলিজ। লাহ্মঃ । 
100. The affix yat (+) comes in the sense of “be ing fitted with that", after the words karma and vesha, in the third-case in construction. 
This debats tha, প্রগ থই কাম স্থায়, খইল বন্ধ ইযী গs For accent sce VI. 1. 213. 
तस्मै प्रमवति संतापादिन्यः ॥ १०१॥ पदानि ॥ तस्म-प्रभवति, सन्तापादिभ्य 
. 
. 
ম 
- 
- 
. 
: 
: 
শর 
খুনি: সুলাৰি প্ৰষি খাস্থি মুমধাক্কিাই ছু অস্ত্রী গন্ধা। 
101. The affix thai (+- ) comes after the word santâpa &c in the datire construction, in the sense of "what is able to effect that". 
The word frafa means "able, capable'. The dative here has the force of Wস ( 3,i5) As, মাথায় গুষ্টি ও মাঝার্শ্বি, গ্রাহ্মাহি । | বন্ধু, ৪ না, কঙ্কাল্প, হামী, ১ মগ, ? বী, ৪ নিস্কন্তু, ৪ জুলা, 10 লিম 11 কি, 2 মুখ, ঘ, 14 শান্ত, }$ খায়, ৫ খ, মুম্বাই , ৪ মীন 
# গুল, পী শনীলাষ্টিকাৰীৰ্কি, মুখ 
যােচ্ছ। ২০২। বলি। যীশু, আলু, দ্য । জুরি ছাজস্থায়ী মখান, অক্ষয় , স্ত্রী মীখালাচ্ছি। 
102. The affix yat () is also added in this sense of able to effect that, after the word yoga. 
| Thus খােথ মশকান্ট্রি - o শ্রীৰিাজ্জা । জমকা জঙ্গও খান জয়, জঙ্গ দি: ৫ রূষাভ মহীমনি সুস্থ স্বাধীনধি। মা চমৃধা। 
103. The affix ukai (+15) comes after the word Karman, in the same sense of able to effect that'. . This debars ag. As 
a This word arc means always a "bow, and is never employed to designate anything else ... 
समयस्तदस्य प्राप्तम् । १०४। पदानि । समयः, तत, भस्य प्राप्तम् (ठ) सूति समयका तरिति प्रथनासमांद मस्येति स म् प्रत्ययो भवति यतस्प्रथमासमर्थे प्राई ঈ ক্ষ ৪ 
104. The affix than (+- ) comes after the word samaya in the first case in construction, in the sense of " that has arrived for it". 
: 
Cr 
: 
- 
"" 
BR. V. CH. 1. $ 109) 
... 
TR1 
2 
WP 
Thus crafuriko a work for which the time bas come'. sgårcer 11 806# uerfat 1, ar খুন: শাহ গান্ধার্মানুসন। গৰৱালান গঘমা ধুয়া খরি জুয়ার এ দুই মালি, 
FR! THEO atent fout জ্বালি। প্রশ্ন কাজে স্বল্প সুখকুয়ান 
105. The affix an (+- ) comes after the word 
cone fitu, meaning that has come for it". 
As W HISKE 
(Guña by VI.4 140) " the flower for which the season has arrived " 
Vårt:So also after the words * & As Naturfovu 
VE TEY II 80€ 11 ara llorare, sen ব্যা: ৪ জনুজলাৰ স্বৰ ঘৰু মন্ত্রী মম্বা অফ ঘাঙ্গামাবিথই। জীবৃন্ধ। 
. 106. In the Chbandas, the affix ghas (CC) comes after the word in the same sense of 'season has come for it'. 
This debars wert. As with armiera: # Here there is no Guma by VI. 4. 146, because by søtra 1. 4. 16, besore the affix ye gets the designation or , hence the guna rule which applies to (1.4. 18) does not apply. 
CUTI U TE n nota, qq # are: it FTOHET ATR TRA I 
107. The affix yat () comes after the word Kila, in the same sense of 'time has come for it's 
. As BFTA:, arrat dhe u See VI. 1. 213. 
प्रकृष्ट टम् ॥ १०८ पदानि ॥ प्रकृष्टे ठञ्। FFT: 1 Tigra, a práva via fa r t fra TaTAT 4783TRE qui 9 YETUT FI . 
108. The affix thai ( *) comes after the word Kala in the first case in construction, in the sense of “long standing”. 
As the same 
long-standing debt". After long standing enmity" 
In this sätra T and 2 are understood, but not so the word KTO प्रयोजनम्॥ १०९ ॥ पदानि ।। प्रयोजनम् (39) : # and #Haurrara que a 414, 
U T * ** 109. The affix than (+/- ) comes after a word in the first case in construction in the sense of that whose occasion or purpose is this". 
Lite 
YTYY 
29 
Bs 
[ BK. V.CH. I. Snt 
As इनमहः प्रयोजनमस्य-ऐनामहिकम्, गागामहिकम् ॥ . विशाखांगाढादण्मन्यदण्डयोः ॥ ११० ॥ पदानि ॥ विशाखा-अषाढात, अण, मन्य-दण्डयोः॥ . वांनः ॥ विशाखापागणदाभ्यामा प्रत्ययो भवति तदस्थ प्रयाअनमित्येतस्मिन्निपये यथासंख्यं मन्यपण्डयोर भिधेययोः। 
वार्तिकम् । चूडादिभ्य उपसंख्यानम् । 
110. The affix an (+-) comes in the sense of that whose purpose is this', after the words visåkhâ, and asha dha, when the derivative of the first is combined with free and that of the second with दण्ड . 
AS देशाखो मन्या, मापागे दण्डः ॥ 
.. Vart: So also after the words घडा &c. As घडा प्रयोजनमस्य-चौडम्, प्रद्धा प्रयोजनमस्य- श्राद्रम् ॥ . अनुप्रवचनादिभ्यश्छः ॥ १११॥ पदानि ॥ अनुप्रवचनादिभ्यः, छः। . वृत्तिः॥ भनुपदपनादिभ्यः मातिपरिकभ्यश्छः प्रत्ययो भवति तदस्य प्रयोजनमित्यस्मिविषयमोपवाः। . वानिकम् ।। विशिरिपतिहिपकतेनासपूर्वपदादुपसंख्यानम् ॥ वा. ॥ स्वर्गादिभ्यो यदक्तवः । 
वा०॥ पुण्याहवाचनारि यो लुग्वत्तस्य । 
111. The affix Chha (ईय) comes in the same sense of 'that whose purpose is this', after the words अनुप्रवचन &c. . This debars se | Thus अनुप्रषचन प्रयोजनमस्य = अनुप्रवचनीयम्, उस्यापनीयम् ॥ 
Vårt:-So also after the derivatives formed by the affix opat () from the radicals विश, to enter', पूर, to fill', पत् to fall', and rs to mount', when pre ceded by a word. As गृहप्रवेशनीयम्, प्रपापूरणीयम् , भश्वमपसनीयम्, प्रासागरोहणीयम् ।। - Vart:-The affix यत् comes after the words at &c. स्वर्ग प्रयोजनमस्य 
स्वयम् , यशष्यम्, भायुष्यम्, काम्यम्, धन्यम् ॥ . Vart: The affix is elided after the words पुण्याहवाचन &c. As, पुण्याह 
दाचन प्रयोजनमस्य-पुण्याहवाचनं, स्वस्तिवाचन, शान्तिवाचनम् ॥ . भनुप्रयचन, 2 उत्थापन, 3 उपस्थापन, 4 संवेतन, प्रवेधन, 6भनुप्रवेशन, 7भनुवासन, 8 मनुवचन, 9 भनुवाचन, I0 अन्वाराष्ण, 11 प्रारम्भण, 12 भारम्भण, 13 भारोहण, 14 भनुवेपन, 15 भनुवाइन, 16 प्ररोहण । 
• समापनात्सपूर्वपदात् ॥ ११२ ॥ पदानि ॥ समापनात, सर्वपदात (छ:)। वृतिः ॥ समापनशाम्पूर्वपदाविद्यमानपूर्वपराच्छः प्रत्ययो भवति तदस्य प्रयोजनामिन्येतस्मिन्निपये । ठमो. 
पवारः। 
112. The affix Chha comes in the same sense of * that whose purpose is this ", after the word sama pana, when it has a word in composition preceding it. 
BK. V. CH. I. FII.] 
- 
वन् । 
.. 
. 
888 
This debars ठम् ॥ Thus छन्दः समापनं प्रयोजनमस्व-छनः समापनीयम्, व्याकरण समापनीयम् ॥ The specific mention of the word पर in the aphorism indicates that the rule will not apply when a word other than a ' pada,' such as the affix 'bahuch,' V. 3. 68. precedes the word Samapana. 
ऐकागारिकट चौरे ॥ ११३॥ पदानि ॥ ऐकागारिकद, चौरे। . वृत्तिः॥ ऐकागारिक इति निपात्यते परिभिधेये। 
113. The word ichromittie is irregularly formed, in the sense of a 'thief'. 
The feminine will be in al. Thus एकागारं प्रयोजनमस्य-ऐकागारिक: fem. °की ॥ This word can be regularly formed by टन, but it will always be res: tricted to mean a thief. When any other thing is designated, it will not take this affix. Thus एकागारं प्रयोजनमस्य भिक्षाः, here there will be no affixing. The feminine moreover will be in til Some say the word is formed by adding the affix Fe with the irregular Vriddhi of the first syllable. . आकालिकडाद्यन्तचने ॥ ११४॥ पदानि ॥ आकालिक द्, आधन्तववने । 
वृत्तिः ॥ भाकालिकर इति निपात्यते माद्यन्तवचने । समानकालयनस्याकालशम भावधः । माद्यन्वयो चैतविशेषणम् । कर प्रत्ययश्च निपात्यते। वार्तिकम् । भाकालाच ॥ 
- 114. The word akalikat is irregularly formed in the sense of “what coincides with the beginning and the end i. e. what lasts only an instant”. 
The word भाकाल is substituted for समानकाल. Thus माकालिका स्तनयिला 'a thunder lasting for an instant'. भाकालिकी विद्युत् “a lightening lasting atvin kle ". i. e. whose death is equal to its time of birth or dying as soon as born. 
___Vart:-The affixes ठन् and ठम् also come after भाकाल%; as भाकालिका विद्युत् ॥ 
So far is the governing power of the affix tq V. 1. 18. - तेन तुल्यं क्रिया चेद्वतिः ॥ ११५॥ पदानि ॥ तेन, तुल्यं-क्रिया-चेत् वतिः। . वृत्तिः । तेनेति तृतीयासमतुल्यमित्यर्थे वतिः प्रत्ययो भवति यत्तुल्यं किया घेता भववि ॥ 
115. The affix vati (वत्) comes after a word. in the third case in construction, in the sense of " like that", when the meaning is similarity of action'. 
As ब्राह्मणेन तुल्यं वर्तते-ब्राह्मणवत्, राजवत् ॥ . 
Why do we say "action"?. The affix will not be joined when the similarity is in quality'. As पुर्वणसह स्यूल: "as big as the son", पुषण तुल्यः पिला 
तत्र तस्येव ॥ ११६ ॥ पदानि ॥ तत्र,तस्य,इव (वतिः)। 
A ... ... ... . 
889 
. 
सन् ॥ 
. 
[ BK. V.CH. I. 8120 
वृत्तिः । तदेति सप्तमीसमर्यानस्येति पठीसमयांच पाय पतिः प्रत्ययो भवति । 
116. The affix vati comes also in the sense of " like what is therein or thereof'. 
. As मयुण्यामिव- मयुरावत् 'like that in Mathura'. as मयुरावत् मुरे भाकार, पाटलि पुत्रवत् साकेते परिखा देवदत्तस्येव देवरत्तवद् यज्ञानस्व गावः &c. 
तदईम् ॥ ११७॥ पदानि ॥ तद्-अहेम् (वतिः)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ तरिति दितीयासमर्यादईमित्येतस्मिन्वय पतिः प्रत्ययो भवति । 
117. The affix vati comes after a word in the second case in construction, in the sense of “befitting that or suited to.that". 
__As राजानमर्हति-गजवन् पालनम् "the protection as befits a king i.e.as a king should protect". ब्राह्मणवत्, फपिवत्, क्षत्रिययन् ।। ___ उपसर्गाच्छन्दसि धात्वर्थे ॥ ११८॥ पदानि ॥ उपसर्गात्-छन्दसि-धात्वर्थे(वति)। 
वृत्तिः । उपसर्गासाधने धालथे वर्तमानास्वाथै वतिः प्रत्ययो भवति छनसि विषये ॥ 
118. In the Chhandas, the affix vati is added to an Upasarga (Preposition), in the sense of a verbal root. - 
As the word उता and निवतः in the following Rik (X. 142.4), 
यदुनो निवतो याति बप्सत् पृथंगेपि प्रगधिनी सेना ॥ "IVhen thouO Firel goest burning high (उहतः उनतान) and low (निवता-निगतान्) trees &c 
तस्य भावस्त्वतलौ ॥ ११९ ॥ पदानि ॥ तस्य-भाव:- स्वतौ ॥ वृत्तिः ॥वस्येति षष्ठीसमर्याद् भाव इत्येतस्मिन्न खतली प्रत्ययो भवतः।। 
119. The affixes tva (त्व) and tal (~-a or ता) come after a word in the sixth case in construction, in the sense of “ the nature thereof".. 
As भवस्य भावः भवलम् or मर्थता, गोत्वम or गोता ॥ . आच त्वात् ॥ १२०।। पदानि ॥ आ-च-त्वात् (त्व-त वृत्तिः । ब्रह्मणस्व इति वक्ष्यति।भा एतस्माखयेसंशब्दनाद् यानित अर्वमनुकमिष्याम, स्तन पतलो प्र. सयावधिकतो स्तिथ्यो। 
120. From this forward as far as the aphorism V. 1. 136, the affixes त्व and तल bear rule. . Thus in V. 1. 122, 4 and 7 are read, giving the forms gyer and पृयुता &c. This rule is intended to secure admission for these two affixes not withstanding the bars in the shape of subsequent aphorisms directing the em ployment of other affixes. These affixes signisy, in addition to HT4 (nature), कर्म (action) also, in V. I. 124. The word च in the aphorism is intended to secure their admission notwithstanding the affixes मम् and aw (VI. I.87). Thus मियाभावःणम, नीलम, बीता'the nature of a female'. पुंस्तम्, पुंस्ता, पाँसम् ॥ BK. V.CH. I. S. 120] 
. 
890 
- 
न नपूर्वोत्तस्पुरुषादचतुरसंगतलवणवटबुधकतरसलसेभ्यः ॥ १२१ ॥ ' पदानि । ननपूर्वात, तत्पुरुषात्, अचतुर-संगत-लवण-बट-चुध-कत-रस-लसेभ्यः। . वृतिः ॥ इत उत्तरे ये भाषप्रत्ययास्ते न:पूर्वानपुरुषान भवति चतुरादीन्वर्जयित्वा 
121. The affixes denoting nature', taught here after, do not come after a Tatpurusha compound formed by the negative particle 2, with the exception of the following: chatura, saigata, lavana, vata, budha, kata, rasa, and lasa. 
. Thus the words अपति, भपड and भरमणीय will have two forms only ie भपतित्वम् or भपतिता, अपटुत्वम् or मपटता, मरमणीयत्वम् or भरमणीयता ॥ While by V. I. 128, other compounds vill have या also, as सेनापत्यम् ॥ An exception to this is भाविदूर्य (VII. 2. 25, as used by the author himself. Why do we say मम् पूर्वांत "a Tatpurusha whose first member is नम्"? Observe बाईस्पत्यम्, प्राजापत्यम् ॥ 
Why do we say after a Tatpurusha d' Observe, when the word or is a Bahuvrihi compound meaning नास्य पटवः सन्ति, its derivative will be मापटपम् । So also, भालापवम् ॥ 
___So also the compounds of चतुर &c, with नम्, eg: भाचतुर्यम्, भावंगत्यम्, मालवण्यम्, भावरपम्, माबुध्यम्, भाकत्यम्, भारस्थम्, मालस्यम् ॥ In some texts, there is युध instead of Qष । 
पृथ्वादिभ्य इमनिज्वा ॥ १२२॥ पदानि ॥ पृथ्वादिभ्यः, इमनिच, पा. वृत्तिः ।। पृथु इत्येवमादिभ्यः प्रातिपदिकभ्य इमनिष्यत्ययो भवति वा, तस्य भाव इत्येतस्मिन्नथे । . 
122. The affix imanich (**) comes optionally in the sense of 'nature thereof', after the words prithu &c. . 
The word 'optionally' is employed with the intention of securing admission for the affixes भण् &c. Thus प्रयोर्भावः- प्रयिमन् nom. प्रथिमा (पू+इमर - पृरइमन् VI.4.155-प्रय् +इमन् VI. 4. 161 प्रथिमा), or पार्थवम by V. 1. 131. So also मदिमा or मादवम् ॥ The r of पृथु and मg is elided by VI. 41s and is substituted for by VI. 4. 161. Of course, thc affixes e and we come here also as, पृथुत्वम्, मृदुत्वम्, पृथुता, मृदुता ॥ 
1पृथु, 2 मृदु, 3 महत, 4 पड, तनु, मधु, 7 वह, 8 साधु, भाशु (भासु!), 10 उस (कर), 11 गुरु, 12 बहुल, 13 खण्ड, 14 दण्ड, 15 पण्ड, 16 भकिचन, 17'बाल', 18 होड, 19 पाक, 20 वत्स, 21 मन्द, 22 स्वादु, 23 इस्त, 24 वीर्ष, 25 प्रिय, 26 धूप, 27 पज, 28 सिष, शुद्र, 30 मणु', 31वेश (.. 
वर्णदृढादिभ्यः प्यश् च ॥ १२३ । पदानि ॥ वर्ण-रदादिभ्यः,व्यञ् च । वृत्तिः ॥ वर्णविशेषवाधियः प्रातिपदिकम्यो दादिया प्यम् प्रत्ययो भवति, पकागदिमानिय, तस्य भाव ज्येतस्मिन्विषये. 
89r 
. . .. 
[ BK. V. CH I. ६. 124 
123. The affix shyan (+/-य) also comes, as well as imanich, after a word denoting colour, and after the words dridha &c, in the sense of 'nature thereof'. . Thus शुक्लस्य भावः-शौकल्यम्, शक्लिमन, शुक्लस्य, शुक्लता, कार्यम् , कष्णिमन्, कृष्ण पम्, कृष्णता; यम्, द्रतिमन् (nom. 'मा), रत्वम्, इता ॥ 
The ç of car shows that the feminine is formed by me (III. 1. 41). As miferea: fem. surat (VI. 4. 148. and 150). 
1दर, 2 वृक्ष', 3 परिवृड, + ध, 3 कृश, 6 चक (चक्र), 7 शुक्र',8चुक', भाग 10 कट, (आकृष्ट), 11 लवण, 12 सान, 13 शीत, 14 उष्ण, 15 जड, 16 बधिर, 17 पण्डित 18 मधुर, 19 मूर्ख, 20 मूक, 21 वेयांतलातमतिमनःशारदानाम् (लाभ is also read The affix shyati isadded tocompounds ending in yata ko preceded by vi,as, बियातलम्, वियायता,वियातिमा, वोयात्यं; दिलाभव, विलाभता, विलाभिमा, वालाभ्य, विमतित्व, विमतिता, विमतिमा, नत्यं and धमतं (V. 1. 131); विमनस्लं, विमनस्ता, विमनिमा, बैमनस्यं and विशारदवं, विशारदता, विशाररिमा, वैशारदम) ।। 22 समो, मतिम नसो, (The words mati and manas preceded by am take shyafi, as संमतिक, खमतिता, &c). 23 जवन. 24 अम्ल, 25 बाल, 26 तरण, 27 मन्द, 28 स्थिर, 29 बहुल, 30 वर्ष । 
गुणवचनब्राह्मणादिभ्यः कणि च ॥ १२४॥ पदानि ॥ गुणवचन-ब्राह्मणादिभ्यः, कणि , च (प्य) 
वृत्तिः ॥ गुणमुक्तवन्तो गुणवचनाः सुवचनेभ्यो ब्राह्मणादिभ्यच तस्येति पठीसमय यः कर्मण्यभिषेवे यम प्रत्ययो भवति । चकारा भाव। 
वार्तिकम् ॥ चातुर्वण्यादीनां स्वार्थडपसंख्यानम्। 
124. The same affix shyan has after a word expressive of quality, and after Brahmana &e, the sense of the activity or occupation of something or some one. 
The y in the aphorism is employed with the intention of including भाव or "nature". The word कर्म denotes activity. जडस्य भावः कर्म वा जाउयम् so also ब्राह्मण्यम्, माणष्यम् ॥ 
The words * and my bear rule upto the end of the chapter. This class of Acut &c, is akfitigaņa i. e. the fact of a word belonging to which is known only from the forms met with in writers of authority. 
Vart:-The affix does not change the sense in पातुर्वर्ण्य &c, as पलार एव वर्णाः पातुर्वर्ण्यम् ॥ चातुपत्रम्यम्, बैलोक्यम्, बेस्वर्यम्, पाड्गुण्यम, सैन्यम् , सानिध्यम्, सामी प्यम्, भोपम्यम्, सोण्यम् ।। 
1 ब्राह्मण, वाडक,3माणव, 4 महतो नुम् च, माईन्यम् चो, धूर्त 7 माराधय, विराधक, 9 अपराधय, 10 उपराधय, 11 एकभाव, 12 दिमाव, 13 त्रिभाव, 14 भन्यभाव, 15 भोपत, 16 संवादिन, 17 संवेधिन्, 18 संभाषिन्, 19 बहुभाषिन्, 20 शीर्षपातिन् (शीर्षपातिन), 21 विषातिन, 22 समस्य, 23 विषमस्थ, 24 परमस्थ, 25 मध्यमस्थ, 26 अनीश्वर, 27 कुशल, 28 चपल, 29 निपुण, 30 पिशुन, 31 कुतूहल', 32 क्षेषज्ञ, 33 निश्न', ॐ बालिष, 35 भलस, 36 दुपुरुष, 
[BK. V. CH. 1 8 128.] 
. 
बद। 
892 
37 कापुरुष, 38 राजन्, 39 गणपति, 40 अधिपति, 41 गहुल, 42 यार, 43 विद्यास्ति', 4 विषम', 45 विपात', 36 निपात', 46 सर्ववेदादिभ्यः स्वायें, सार्यवेधः- सर्ववेदः ॥ 48 चतुर्वेदस्योभयपदवृद्धिष, en चातुर्वेद्यम् 49 शौठीर 50 मक, 51 कपि, 52 विसि, 53 पिशाच,54 विशाल, 55 धनपति, 56 नरपति, 57 निव 58 निधान 59 विष, 60 स्वभाव,61 निघातिन, 62 रामपुरुष, 63 विधाय 64 विशात, 65 विमात, 66 नयास, 67 सुहित, 68 दीन, 69 विदग्ध, 70 उचित, 1 समय, 72 शील, 73 तत्पर, 74 पद 75 यया सथा, 76 पुरस्, 77 पुनः पुनः, 78 भभाषण, 79 तरसम, 80 प्रकाम, 81 यथाकाम, 82 निष्कुल, 83 स्वराज, 84 महाराज, 85 पुखराज, 86 समाज,87 भवितूर, 88 अपिशुन, 89 अनुशंस, 90 भवथा षय, 91 भययापुर, 92 स्वधर्म, 93 मनुकुल, 94 परिमण्डल, 95 विश्वरूप, 96 फस्विर, 97 उदासीन, 98 ईश्वर, 99 प्रतिभू, 100 साक्षिान), 101 मानुप, 102 भास्तिक, 103 नास्तिक, 104 युगपड, 105 पूर्वाधर, 106 उत्तराधर माकसिगण। 
स्तनाद्यन्नलोपश्च ॥ १२५ ॥ पदानि । स्तेनातू-यत्, नलोपः, च। वृत्तिः ॥ स्तेनगन्नापछीसमांडावकर्मणायंध्यत्ययो भवति; नशनस्य लोपम मति । 
125. The affix yat (et) comes in the sense of "na ture thereof or action thereof”, after the word stena, in the genitive, and a is elided before this affix. 
. As स्तनस्य भावः कर्म वा-स्तेयम् ॥ Some divide the shtra into two सनात् प्यम् भवति (2) ततो यन लोपश्ष as स्तन्यम् and सेयम् । __सख्युर्यः ॥ १२६॥ पदानि ॥ सस्युः-यः॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ सखिशदादू यः प्रत्ययो भवति भावकर्मणारर्ययोः॥ पातिकम् ।। सवणिग्भ्यां चेति वनव्यम्।। 
____126. The affix य comes in the sense of 'nature or action thereof', after the word सखि . 
As सख्यम् ' friendship'. 
Vart:-So also after the words दूत and वणिक, as, इत्यम् and वणिज्यम् । The word वाणिज्यम् is formed by V. I. 124, वणिक् belonging toबाह्मणादि class ___ कपिज्ञात्याक् ॥ १२७ ॥ पदानि ॥ कपि ज्ञात्योः, दक् ॥ 
वृत्तिः॥ कपिज्ञातिधदाभ्यां टक् प्रत्ययो भवति भावकर्मणारययाः॥ 
127. The afix dhak (+-एय) comes in the sense of 'nature or action thereof', after the words kapi and jiati. 
Thus कपे भांकः कर्म वा-कापेयम् , ज्ञातेयम् ॥ The rule of यथासंस्म (I. 3. 10) does not apply any where under this head.. .. पत्यन्तपुरोहितादिभ्योयक् ॥ १२८ ॥ पदानि ॥ पत्यन्त-पुरोहितादिभ्यः, यक। 
वृत्तिः ॥ पत्यन्ताप्रातिपदिकारयुगोहतादिभ्यश्च यक् प्रत्ययो भवतिभावकर्मणार्ययोः ।। 
___128. The affix yak (+-य) comes in the sense of 'nature or action thereof', after a compound ending with pati, and after purohita &c. 
' 
। 
যুঞ্জয় 
( Bx , CR. . . 30 
টি 
/ 
: 
. 
ক 
* 
* E 
| 
f 
. 
- 
Thus নাথ মবি ফ্রী খাবনাথ, গাৱৰমাণ, জীবত্রি, গুঞ্জ 
| 1 গুরম্ভি, যার মানে, খাজ ক}, B গান্ধি (আমি দ্বিাক্ষি , গলি, ও গাল, * মুল, ৪ টি, ও ঋষ্টি, 1 আলি খার্জি 11 জার্ম, 18 খালি 
3 ব্যক্তি দ্বীন্ধি 14 মুজি, $ শিক্ষ, 16 নিবন্ধ (মালিঙ্গা), i wজাল্ট ৪ শিক্ষ, 
রিহ্মা), 19 আফিফ, 20 গুজি , 2 ফ্লপি 22 জানুক্ষ, 2% বৃদ্ধি, 24 খুখি খান্ধা), 25 স্বাক্ষ, ৪ মুন্ধি ? ব্যাখ (খি), ৪ চান্ধি, ৫৫ জি, ৪) জেয়ী; &} মূঞ্জ জে 2 শালিক, 3 গন্ধি , গু খাদ্ধ (স্ক 3$ লাগা, 
শ্রৱিকা ও দুঙ্গি, 3৪ মাল, ৪ লি. 40 লিঙ্গ, 4 মিল্ক + সুনি, এ পঞ্জি * মুলনিক্ষ, 45 ঋবিক্ষ, 48 লিঙ্ক এ ক্ষি, 49 লিপি, 49 গন্ধি , 80 স্কিন্ধ, ২ পঞ্জি , 
ই নিন্ধ, 63 জুঙ্গি 4 ফুলবিজু ইঃ | মাখা মূল্লাবিল্পবীনৗযাঞ্জাবিথী । {ৎ ঘানি ॥ আগসূলুল্মবি 
খী মুলুল- ফ, ঋজু । ' জুলিঃ মাগধূলাথি ঃ গনী গানঃ সুন্নাঙ্গাপ্রিক্ষ্মা জুকায় গা ভাৰস্কুল লামী 
129. The affix aħ (+-2) comes in the sense of "nature or action thereof', after class names of animals, and words expressing age, as well as after udgatri &c. 
. Thus wথ সাঃ স্কুল ব্যাখ, আঁছু, ক্ষীমা, জখানে, ঋীম, মীঈশ্ব। | l সুমাই, স্কুল ৪ ঘনিষ্কলু, মূ ল, ঈী, শী, ? স্কুল (র), ৪ জুয়া 9 লিঙ্গ ঘফিল গুলি ), i০ গুরু, যুদ্ধ, i , i3 , 14 ঝুমকা র In the Mantra litarstare sabhaga takes me, 18 rd; sometimes there is no me, as মীমা সুয়াস্ত্র , 
| ছালাহ্ৰাখিী । ছাযনান , আয় । জুনি: স্থানালীঃ মানঘাঘী যুষাঙ্গি মুখী মৰি স্বৰূরগীৰবঃ 
জন্ধু গালিগঞ্জ লাখ স্ত্রী। 
130. The affix an (+---) comes in the sense of .nature or action thereof', after compounds ending in hayana, and after yuvana &c. 
Thus খ্রিকান মাখঃ ঋণ বা রান, সন্ধান; শীৰ, খাধি : 
art:-The of মা is elided, as wীঘি মাস্ক: ক স্ব গ শাখা। } যু, কথ, 3 , * প্রমান, প্রথা ( ন ), ৪ আৰু ( শালু, ( নক্ষ, ৪ রঙ্গ (স্মল , ৪ জয় 10 গুন্তু, ll s, ia gী, 3 , 14 গুরুত্ব 15 , 16 হয়, 1 , 18 , 19 , 20 মুখ, at হিমাল, 2 স ম্মান, 24 নুমাৰ, ছুযাৰ হয় স ন্তু , 28 , 26 , 27 লিঙ্গ, as বিয়ুম, 24 জুনু, 80 & ৰ, 3} গীঘি খন্থ, 32 গল্প, 3} স্কুল, 2 , 35 , 36 খি, 3 , 3৪ - ঘু, }} জিন, & . 
. 
* 
. 
,, 
, 
।। 
৫ 
= 
। 
BK. V. CH. I. I. 133] 
894 
गन्ता 
॥ १३१॥ गन्तात्-च वृत्तिः ॥ गन्ताष लघुपूर्वादण् प्रत्ययो भवति भावकर्मणोः।। 
. . 131. The affix an (+-) comes in the sense of 'nature or action there of, after a stem ending in हक (६, है, उ, or I or ल), when the preceding syllable is prosodially light. . 
. Thus शुचे भावः कर्म वा- पौषम्, भीनम् (मुनि), नागरम् (नगर) हरितकम् (इतकी) पाटवम् (पड), लाघवम् (लघु). Why do we say लघुपर्वात् 'the preceding syllable being light'? Observe क सम, पाण्डुखम् ॥ Why काव्यम् from कार? The word कार takes car as belonging to Brahmaņadi class V. I. 124 
N. B. The word anta in the Satra may will be dispensed with The apborisma lagho pårvåd ikab will give the same meaning. 
योपधाद्गुरूपोत्तमा ज् ॥ १३२॥ पदानि ॥ योपधात-गुरु-उपोत्तमात्-घुश् । वृत्तिः ॥ विप्रभृतीनामन्तस्य समीपमपानमम् । गुरुरुपोत्तमम् यस्य तद्रूपोसमम् । यकारोपधादरूपोचमा कुम् प्रत्ययो भवति भावकर्मणोः 
वार्तिकम् ॥ सहायाइति वक्तव्यम् ॥ ..., . . . . . . . . 
132. The affix vui (+1-7*) comes in the sense of 'nature or action there of", after a polysyllabic stem whose penultimate letter is y, and whose penultimate syllable is prosodially heavy. 
The word antri means the last syllable but one in a word of three syllables or more. That word whose penultimate syllable is T# 'heavy', is called गुरुपोत्तमम् : the योपधा means having penutimatet. 
Thus मणीयकम् from रमणीय, वासनीयकं from वसनीय 
Why do we say " the penultimate letter being "? Observe 4474** from विमान॥ 
Why do say TFT " the penultimate syllable being heavy"? Wit. ness क्षत्रियत्वम् ॥ 
. Vart:-Optionally so after the word सहाय, as, साहायकम् and साहाय्यम्।। 
The words and should be distinguished: the first means penultimate syllable (implying thereby the word is of more than two syllables), and the second means penultimate letter. 
द्वन्द्वमनोज्ञादिश्यश्च ॥ १३३॥ पदानि । द्वन्द-मनोज्ञादिभ्यः च (बुन) वृत्तिः ॥ इन्दरांशकेभ्यो मनोज्ञादिभ्यम घुम् प्रत्ययो भवति भावकर्मणो. 
133. The affix vui comes in the sense of 'nature or action there of?, after a dvandva compound and after the words manojűa &c. 
895 
.. 
. 
[BK. V.CH. I. 367 
Thus गोपालपरापालानां मायः कम पा-गोपालपपालिका, म्योपाध्यायिका, कोलकाप किका, मानोक्षकम, काल्याणकर. . . . 
मनोज्ञ, मियरूप, ममिरूप, कल्याण, 5 मेधाधिन्, 6 माग्य, 7 कुलपुष, 8 छान्दस, 9 जाब, 10 श्रोत्रिय, । चार, 12 धूर्त, 13 विश्व (वैश्योर), 14 युरन, 15 कपुष', 16 मामपुत्र, 17 
कुत्राल,18 मामपण्ड (मामखर, 19 मामकुमार, 20 मुकुमार, बहुल, 22भवदयपुत्र (भवम); 23 भाष्यपत्र, 4 भमुण्यकुल, 25 सारपत्र', 26 प्रसपुत्रा, 27 कुशल, 28 महापुरुष.॥ 
गोत्रचरणाच्छ्राघात्याकारतदवेतेषु ॥ १३४॥ पदानि गोत्र-चरणात, श्लाघा अत्याकार-तद्-अवेतेषु (खु)। वृत्तिः ॥ गोपवाधिनमरणवाधिनत्र मातिपरिकाद् पुश्प्रत्ययो भवति प्रत्येक भावकर्मणोरर्थयोः मापा. विध विषयमूवे. 
____134. The afix vun comes in the sense of 'nature or action thereof' after a family-name (Gotra), and after the Name of a Vedic School, when one boasts thereby, or mani fests his contempt thereby, or when it means ons who has at tained that (or has come for an inspection or inquiring thereof). 
The word लापा means boasting: मत्याकार means 'contempt', भवेत: means TEXTA: 'who has gained that', ora: 'who inquires that'. The word un refers to try and more The word aa: means "who has obtained that or 
who has known that. 
To take first इलापा as गार्गिकया लापते or काठिकया इलापते "boasts of belong. ing to the family of Garga, or the school of Katha". To take earth , as, Tirit कयारयाकुरुते, काठिकयात्यकुरुते "he manifests contempt upon another, because of his belonging to the clan of Garga or School of Katha". To take सस्वेता as, गार्गि कामवेत-कारिकामवेतः-प्राम: or भवगतवान् । 
Why do we say when it means boasting &c" Observe गर्यस्वम, कालमा। Thea of ma is elided in the above examples by VI. 4. 148 & VI. 4. 151. 
होत्राभ्यश्छः ॥ १३५ ॥ पदानि होत्राभ्य छ।' तिः ॥ होचायन लिग्विोपवचनः ऋविविधषवाचिभ्यश्छः प्रन्ययो भवति भावकर्मणो । 
____135. The affix chha (ईय) comes in the sense of 'nature or action thereof', after words expressing Hotra 
priests. 
___Thus भान्छावाकीयम,मत्रावरुणायम, ब्राह्मणाच्सीयम्, भानीधीयम् प्रतिप्रस्थानीयम् मेष्टी oproteru frana: is plural to prevent application of I. 1.68. therefore the rule does not apply to the word-form "hotra' derived from t+खन meaning aritorj. 
অাৰি ৷ গঙ্গঃ মুন্তাখরখানি মুম্বী লম্বাবি শাখালী গুজহ্মান্ত le affix tva (ar) comes in tho sense of "08 reof', after the word Brahman, denoting ৩৪; • • • • • • • • • • • Thus দুলী শাশ্ব ক্ষ = g This deba$ কাজ দ্র is a Brahman, by caste, we have set or WIN 
province of the affixes FF and (IV. 1.87). 
ओ३म् । 
अथ पञ्चमध्यायस्य द्वितीयः पादः।। 
BOOK FIFTH 
CHAPTER SECOND 
धान्यानां भवने क्षेत्रे खम् ॥१॥ पदानि । धान्यानाम्-भवन-क्षेत्रे-खम् ॥ वृत्तिः॥निर्देशादेव समर्थविमनिराधान्यविशेषवाचिभ्यः पठीसमयेभ्यो भवनभिधेये खम् प्रत्ययो भवीत, सरवन क्षेत्रं भवति। 
1. The affix khai (+-न) comes after the name of any particular corn, being in genitivo case in cons truction, in the sense of a place of growing, when that place is a field. 
According to Böhtlingk, the Sotra should be thus translated. "To a corn-name is added fन, to express the fields in which the corn grows". Accord. ing to Ballantyne, it is translated "when we speak of a place for grain, or a field of it, there may be the affix khan". 
The word ni of grains', shows that the word in constructiou should 'be in the genitive case. The plural number shows that the affix is not to be added to the word-form you, but to words which denote various kinds of dhanya (I. 1.63), भवन means the place whereathing is produced or grows (भवन्ति जायन्ते)। 
Thus मुझाना भवन क्षेत्र-मोहीमर, कोद्रवीणम्, कोलस्थीन । 
Why do we say "of grains ? There will be no affixing in a case like this हणानां भवन म । 
* Why do we say when it is a field"? Observe पुझानां भवन कुशून 'a gra. nary where kidney-beans grow. 
नीहिशाल्योर्दक ॥२॥ पदानि । नीहि-शल्यो-टा। वृत्तिः ॥ श्रीनिवालिशमाभ्यां प्रत्ययो भवति भवने सेोऽभिधेये खमोपवादः। 
2. The affix dhak (+-एय) comes in the above sense of 'a place of growing, when it is a field', after the words wift and ufor 
BK V.CH. II. $.61 
1 
Atsialistikablowania pro 
g 
r 
amsimamo 
. 
: 
1 
19 
Thus metai ** *$440, uhaana field fit for growing rice', অন্ধঘাটাঘৰু! কী লিখবন্ধ-থ্রিদ্ধা, খ. Ar 1 a 
takrat para sa ART 
, 3. The affix yat (+ or -7) comes in the same sense of a place for growing, it being a field', after the words yave, yavaka, and shashtika. 
| This debars দুধ Thus ষানী অস্ব স্ব আস্থ, খ , অটিজম ও See VL 1. 213 for accent 
farat foartarrhufe: 18 qera nferant,fe--*-87 u :(7 ) fat fant ET **** pe foart e fa 
.. 4. The affix yat comes, in the sense of place for growing, it being a field', optionally after the words tils, misa, uma, bhangi and anu. . .. 
The affix khan sill come in the alternative. Thus thor ' field for growing sesamum", frame or artrore 'a field for growing beans, kay or জার্মী a field of linseed, গায় ০৮ আন্ত্রী 'field of emp, শঙ্খ ০৮ da field for small grain". Fra: a: 
una ta I par ti. gra: u natuurtea prin u rmare 
5. The affix kha (fa) and khan (+- ) come in the sense of “wholly made thereof", after the word sarva charman. 
The word as is here a part of the sense of the affix, and joing with the word 6a, and not with . The compounding is in fact made by the affix Thus গন কে লিঃ or ষাধর্মজিঃ “made wholly of feathe 
| ung Harden: 6: 6 5 4 THIẾT 
BỊ - ĐIGRs ai 24TYWUEPRIKVENERUT ant : arata 
6. The affix kha (a) comes in the sense of mirror', after the words yathậmukha, and sanmukba being in 
the 6th case in construction. 
The word 2: means that in which something is seen, such as, looking glass, mirror &c, which reflect things. The word use is an Avyayibhava compound, the meaning of qy being that of likeness 11. 1.6. Thus 13 *** 
1 
- PR 
NA 
RO 
24 
_ 
a 
. 
RL 
116 
44 
12 
899 
BK. V. CH. II. 
9] 
JANA 
Bawas garam 
स 
NA 
MEREKHA 
THREE 
qurguiat showing or reflecting the likeness of the face ma mirror, te u Waiget: 'showing or reflecting the whole face um looking-glass. ___ सत्सर्वादेः पथ्यङ्गकर्मपलपात्र ज्यामोति ॥ ७॥ पदानि ॥ तत्-सर्यादेः, पथि-अङ्ग 
कर्म-पत्र-पत्रिम, व्यामोति (ख) . কাৰিাঃ প্রাঃ ৰিীয়া মুখশাকি? শীয়া যুঃ পাৰছিঃ মনিষিক্ষ ॥ ঝষ্টি। भाविपरिकार पथि मा कर्मन् पक्ष पाच हत्येवमन्ताद द्वितीयासमर्थाध्यामातीत्यस्लिाये रखः प्रत्ययो भवति । 
.7.. After the words pathi, aigs, karman, patra or påtra, preceded by sarva, being in the second case in ' construction, the affix kha (ईन) comes in the sense of what 
pervades or fills the whole of that". 
Thus सर्वपयं भ्यानोति सर्यपयीनारयः, सर्वाङ्गीणस्तापा, सर्वकर्माणः पुरुषः, सर्वपक्षीणः মার্ক, জঙ্গি শ্রীলঃ ৪ 
. माप्रपद प्रामोति ॥ ८॥ पदानि ॥ आप्रपदम्-प्रामोति (ख)। 
বিঃ মখটিরি খুলুন। মাথায় সখীর্যীশাখ স্মাম্মবঙ্গাবরি ফ্রিীষে वाप्नोतीयस्मिन्न खः प्रत्ययो भवति । 
8. The affix kha (न) comes after the word apra pada, in the sense of "reaching thereto.". 
The word प्रपह means the top of the foot'. भा means "upto". मामए ! an Avyayibhava compound meaning to the top of the foot'. Thus मापपई पामोति 
मामपदीनः पट: 'cloth reaching to the end of the feet', ie showing the width of the cloth by comparison with the body. . अनुपदसर्वात्रायानय बद्धाभक्षयतिनेयेषु ॥ ९॥ पदानि ॥ अनुपद-सर्वान-अया 
नयं, अद्धा-भक्षयति-नेयेथु (ख) वृत्तिः ॥ अनुपादिभ्यः प्रदेभ्यस्तरिति हितीयासमर्षे यो यथासंख्यं बचा भक्षयति मेय इत्येतेष्वर्येषु खः प्र हृथयो महि । 
9. The affix kha comes after the words anupada, sarvanna, and ayanaya, being in the second case in construc. tion, in the senses of 'so bound', 'eating that , and to carry thereto' respectively. 
Thus अनुप बना भनुपदीना'a kind of shoe'; this word is always feminine The force of 5 here is that of length' or 'likeness'. That is 'a shoe of the measure of a foot'. So हर्यानानि भकायांत सर्वानानोभिक्षुः a mendicant who eats the whole food'. So also warada: UTC? 'a chessman or piece that is taken to the position on the chess called aya naya'. The word en is compounded of two words *7, meaning 'going from right to left', and 'from left to right; 
स 
मय.. 
SAPP पास 
IP. 
CER 
EPALI 
AAME 
TA 
PO4R BK. V.Ch. II.SI. 
स. 
900 
d it means a particular position in which the picces moving from right to 
eans 
According to some sortuta is the name of the front pieces in ones own row of chess-men. A piece which moves only in one side, does not admit of this affix. The piece which is carried from one side to another, admits of this affix. Others move only in one direction or mu, but not both. Kaiyyata: यस्तु धार एक पाय एव संघरति तब न भवति प्रत्ययो, यो हिधार पार्धान पावान्तरमा मीयते, स एव भयानयं नीयते, भन्यास्तु अयमेव नीयवे, मनयमेव नीयते वा। 
परोवरपरम्परपुत्त्रपौत्रमनुभवति ॥ १०॥ पदानि । परोवर-परम्पर-पुत्त्रपौत्वम्, अनुभवति (खः) .. निः॥ परोवर परम्पर पुलपोखा इत्येतेभ्यस्तरितिदितीयासमर्थेभ्योऽनुभवतीत्यस्लिमर्ये व प्रत्ययो भवति । 
10. The affix kha comes in the sense of "who witnesses or experiences that", after the words parorara, parampara and putrapautra, in the second case in construction. 
The word gaat is compounded of qc and At the tin o being irre gular, the compounding being caused by the affix. परांगावपंथ भनुभवति-परोपरीकः "who lives to see high and low". The word er is compounded off and Top the compounding being caused by the afix. As, रांग परवपंथानुभवति-परम्परीण Similarly पुचपोषीणः। 
The word cave is a separate word as well, not formed by or admitting this affix. As मन्त्रिपरम्परा मन्वं भिमति॥ ___आवारपारात्यन्तानुफार्म गामी ॥ ११॥ पदानि ॥ अवारपार-अत्यन्त-अनुकामं, 
गामी(खः)। वृत्तिः ॥ भवारपार भत्यन्त भयुकाम इत्येतेभ्यो दितीयासमर्थन्यो गामीत्येवस्मिन्नखात्ययो भवति। वार्तिकम् ॥ विपरीता। 
11. The affix kha comes in the sense of "who purposes to go", after the words avarapara, atyanta, and anukåma, being in the accusative case in construction : 
The word of means 'sacafa', see III. 3. 3. The genitive case is prohibited by II. 3. 70: the word tot governing the accusative. Thus CITU गामी-भवारपारीण: 
Vart :-So also when the words are reversed. As qronta: Ni So al. so when the words are taken separately as, warto and groupe 
So also भत्यन्तं गामी- मत्यन्तीना- गन्ता॥ मनुकामीन:-बर्ट गन्ता समांसमा विजायते ॥ १२॥ पदानि । समांसमां-विजायते। वृत्तिः ॥ समांसमामिति वीप्सायां मुबन्तसमुदायः प्रकृतिः। विशायदे गर्भ धारयतीवि मत्वयार्थगर्भ रणेन सकलापि समा व्याप्यताति मत्यन्तसंयोग द्वितीया. .. 
पातिकम् ॥ पूर्वपदे सुपो ऽलुग्वत्तण्या पा.॥भनुत्पत्ताइसरपस्वचपा यलोपो पत्ता 
Sor 
. 
.." 
[ BK. V.CH. II.314 
12. The affix kha comes after the word samams mâm in the sense of who bears in the womb'. 
The word विजायते means गर्भ धारयति 'who bears in the womb.. This verb governs the accusative of time bent by II. 1. 29. Thus went forarua 
-समांसमीना गोः खमांवमीना परवां 
Vart:-According to others the aphorism means 'the affix comes in the sense of to give birth to or to get ayoung".i.eविजायते-गर्भम्प्रेषनं ॥ According to them, the verbgoverns the locative: समायां समायां विज्ञायते-खमांसमीना, the of the first aurut being elided, the rest of the vibhakti (10) remaining. The word will mean" an animal that gives birth to a young one every year". 
Vart:-Sometime there is no affixing, but the whole sentence is to be ased to express this meaning, or the q only of both members is to be elided and a sentence formed. As समां समां विजायते or समयां समयां विधायते। 
अद्यभ्वीनावष्टब्धे॥१३॥ पदानि ॥ अचश्वीन-अवष्टग्धे। वृत्तिः ॥ विजायताति वर्तते । अयश्वीन इति निपात्यते भवष्ठम् विजने । भासने प्रसवे । मावियें ह मूर्धन्यो विधीयते, भवाचालम्बनाविर्ययोरिदि। 
___13. The word adyasvind is anomalous, meaning "a female near delivery". . The word विज्ञायते is understood here The word मटण्य means 'im minent, near'. It is formed by **+AT+ Tie the being changed to by VIII. 3. 68. Thus wa 
T F T-nuntat fit: "a cow likely to give birth to-day or to-morrow". So also भयश्वीना परवा 
. Some do not read forura into the sätra, which then means "The word adyasvina is irregularly formed meaning imminent". As अवधीनं मरणं 'im. minent death'. Borut Faut: 'separation likely to take place to-day or to morrow'. ___ भागधीनः ॥ १४॥ पदानि । अगवीन । 
वृत्तिः॥ भागवीन इति निपात्यते । मार्वाद मा तस्य गो प्रतिपादनात् कर्मकारिणि खः प्रत्ययो नि. पात्यदे 
14. The word agavina is irregularly formed. 
This word is formed by adding to the word of preceded by the preposition मा, as भागो+ख भागवानः ॥ The force of the affix is that of a servant'. A person who is engaged in business till the return of the cows, Leaday-labourer. 
अनुग्वलंगामी ॥ १५॥ पनानि । अनुगु-अलंगामी (ख) वृत्तिः ॥ गोः पवाद् भए । अनुराधन्दारलंगामीत्यस्मिन्न खा प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
15. The affix kha comes after the word anugu in the sense of who is fit to follow'. . 
BK. V. CH.II. 319] . 
. 
ख.. 
५ 
. 
.. 
प 
Thus the word अनुगु means गोपमा॥ Thus भनु पर्था गति -मनुगवीना "who is suited or able to follow after the cows'i.e. a cowherd. 
अध्वनो यत्ती ॥ १६॥ पदानि । अध्यनः, यत्-खो। वृत्तिः ॥ ताति दितीया समर्थविभक्तिरनुवर्तते । मलंगामीति च प्रत्ययार्यः। मपन्धना रितीबासम दिलंगामीत्येतस्मिन्नथे यत्सीप्रत्ययो भवता । 
____16. The affixes yat (य) and kha (नि) come after the word adhvan, in the above sense of who is fit or able to follow'. 
Thus भयानमलंगामी- मपनीनः or मध्वन्या. 'able to undertake a journey'. By aphorisms VI. 4. 168, 169, the word op retains its original form before the affix 4 and E, not losing its final me which it does before other affixes, by VI. 4. 144 
अभ्यमिताच्छ च ॥ १७॥ पदानि । अभ्यमित्रात-उ-च (यत खौ) . वृत्तिः । अभ्यमित्रासद् द्वितीयासमर्यादलंगामीत्यस्मिन छः प्रत्ययो भवाति । चकाण्यत्सी। 
___17. The afix Chha (य) also as well as yat and kha, comes after the word abhyamitra, in the sense of 'who is able to go'. 
The draws in यत् and ख. Thus अभ्यमिचं भलंगामा मभ्यमित्रीयः, अभ्यमियर, भभ्यमिचीणा 'an warrior who valiantly encounters his enemy'ममिवाभिमुखं सुप गच्छति॥ 
गोष्ठात्खम् भूतपूर्वे ॥ १८॥ पदानि ॥ गोष्ठात्, ख, भूतपूर्वे । वृत्तिः ॥ गावस्तिष्ठन्त्यति गोष्ठम् । गोष्टयमेन सन्निहितगीसमूहो देश.उच्यते । भूतपूर्वमहणं तस्येव विशे पणम् । गोष्ठमाइतपूर्वोपाधिकारवायें खा प्रत्ययो भवति । 
18. The affix khai (+/-न) comes after the word goshtha in the sense of 'it formerly had been '. 
The word गोष्ठ is a compound of गो स्थाi.ea cow-pen, it means the place all around a cov-pen. The word भूतपूर्व qualifies it Thus गोष्ठो मतपूर्वः tretat ir: 'a place which was formerly a Goshtha'. Otherwise when not 
meaning formerly, we have गोटो वर्तते 
अश्वस्यैकाहगमः ॥ १९॥ पदानि । अश्वस्य, एकाहगमः (ख). पत्तिः ॥ निर्देशादेव समयविभक्तिः । भवसम्मात्पष्टीसमर्दिकाहगमहत्येतस्य खम् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
__19. The affix khan comes after the word asva, in the genitive case in construction, the sense being what is travelled over or traversed in one day'. 
903 
सामपसीन. 
(BK. V.CH. II.822 
The word being in the sixth case shows the construction it should have before the affix. The एकाहगमः means एकाइन गम्यते i.e what is or can begone over in one day. Thus मचस्येकाहगमोऽभ्या-भाचीन, as भाधीनानि पतित्वा-यावन्ति योजनान्येकाहनाश्वेन गम्यते सारवां पतं गत्वा ॥ सहयाधीने वा त स्वों लोकः। ___ शालीनकौपीने अधृयाकार्ययोः ॥ २०॥ पदानि । शालीन कोपीने, अधृष्ट-अका 
येयो। 
वृत्तिः ॥धालीनकोपीनरामौ निपास्येते ययासंण्यमष्टे ऽकायें पाभिधेवे मष्टो प्रगलमा । मकार्यमा रणा विरुद्धम् । शालीनकोपीने मष्टाकार्ययोः पर्यायौ ययाकयं चिद म्युलायितथ्यौ । 
20. The word sålina and kaupina are anomalous, when meaning 'modest' and 'a shameful action' respec tively 
The word we means 'not proud', * means "unfit to be done' i. e. an infamous act. The words come from "a hall” and any a well'. It is not easy to trace any connection between 'modesty' and 'a hall', or between 'shameful' and 'a well'. However some say शालापवेशनमईति 'who deserves to enter a hall', a greitai, naruwera who deserves to be thrown into a well'-कोपीन:, hence a thing to be concealed, and the dress that con ceals it. As शालीनो अडा, कोपीन पा . 
नातन जीवति ॥ २१॥ पदानि । वातेन, जीवति (ख)। वृत्तिः । निर्देशादेव तृतीया समर्यविभक्तिः।बात मातृतीयासमर्थाज्जीवतीत्यस्मिनये खम् प्रत्ययो भवति। नानाजातीया भनियतवृत्तय उसेषमीविनः संपावाता॥ 
21. The affix khan comes after the word vrata in the third case in construction, the sense being " who leads this life, or who lives by this". 
The word ata means a multitude or mass composed of various castes, who have no fixed employment, and live by violence, or by bodily labor. Arat 
tafa * Arata: 'a person wlio lives by the labour of his body, not of his brain'. 
साप्तपदीनं सख्यम् । २२॥ पदानि ॥ साप्तपदीन,सख्यम्। निः॥ सासपदीनमिति निपात्यते सत्वेऽभिधेये 
22. The word saptapadina is anomalous, when meaning 'friendship': 
The word TR17 comes from 789 but the connection of senses is not very clear. It is said anभिः पदेरवाप्यते-सातपदीनम् “formed by walking to gether seven steps or by talking together seven words". The circumambula tion of the Fire by the bride and bridegroom in seved steps makes the margi 
BK. V. CH. 11. 25. 1 
IN 
44E3 
NO 
? 
1 
X SA 
TU 
age irrevocable ever seems to have some connection with that The sword annyitas or means 'a friend. also; the abstract sense being made applicable by analogy to the person as well 
att erano ma la, truer (*) Tugari fyre emrat e vai P reet, Pet Part 4 ra TUTKU 
23. The word haiyangavina is anomalons, when it is a Name. 
The word for means "fresh butter'. The word comes from : " yesterday' and efr *cow. BirdER PATC prepared from yesterday's milk 1. " fresh butter". The affix does not come in the sense of any na in general. There is no affixing in simirea farm when it means in or #whey'. 
per a team of Fa: aur FTESTIT | 781 TA TRI, TIE e, teame, uicas, mugs 
f: Prata pertam: steaman: Haritanaw are tarat: * prit গুগী গন্ধ 
24. The affixes kuņap (Fu) and jáhach (6) come after the words pilu &c and karna &c respectively, when the senses are respectively the fruiting-season of this and the root of this 
The word met shows that the construction must be genitive The affix up comes after feil words, signifying ripening, and the affix * comes after a words signifying the 'root'. 
Thus tea & ciui, hov, so also in 
EU - MEX 
1**, 2 m, 37, 48,5 EU, 847, 7 , 88, 903 (ME! ) 10 7, II , 12 93.13 26, 14 . # 
105,2 g ), 3 ut, 4 UT, 57, 6 , 7 , 8 WC * पक्षात्तिः॥२५॥ पदानि ॥ पक्षात, तिः। वृत्तिः ॥ सत्यत्येव । तस्येति षष्टीसमर्थात्पक्षणमान् मूलभिधे तिः प्रत्ययो भवति । 
25. The affix ti (fa) comes after the word paksha in the genitive case in construction, in the sense of the root of it'. 
The word of the last sätra is drawn into this aphorism; and not the word qra as well. This is an exceptional case of city, generally the 
. 
905 
[ BK. V. CH. II. 828 
. 
ऐकरेयोऽप्यनुपतते “ Sometimes it also happens that only a part of the words of a rule which are mutually connected is valid in a subsequent rule, while the rest ceases to be valid : 
Thus The TFqura: i. e. apat na 'the root or the first day of a Paksha or a fortnight'. . तेन वित्तश्चुचुपचणपौ ॥ २६ ॥ पदानि । तेन, वित्तः, चुचुप-चणपौ। 
वृत्तिः ॥ तनेति नृतीयासमांदित्त इत्येतस्मिन्न घुमुप पण त्येतो प्रत्ययो भवः। 
26. The affixes chutichup (पुरुष) and chanap (चण) come after a word in the third case in construction, in the sense of 'celebrated through this'. 
The word for means known, illustrious. Thus fauter for furgog, विधाचणा, केएचणःn The initial w in these affixes is not इत् (I. 3.11 . 
विनश्यां नानाजी नसह ॥ २७॥ पदानि । वि-नश्याम,ना-नानी,नसह। वृत्तिः ॥ विनम् इन्येताभ्यां यथासंख्यं ना नाम् इत्यती भवतः । नसहेति प्रकृतिविशेषणम् । मसहाय प्रय. म्भावे वर्तमानाभ्यां विनम्भ्यां स्वार्ये नानामो प्रत्ययौं भवतः ॥ 
27. The affixes at and also come respectively after the words वि and नम्, in the sense of 'not being together'. 
___Thus वि+ना-विना 'without'; मम् + ना-नाना 'several: 'धेः शालच्छङ्कटचौ ॥ २८॥ पदानि । धेः, शालच, शङ्कदची। वृत्तिः ॥ विशनाप शालच घट इत्येतो भवतः । साधनक्रियावचनादुपसर्गास्वायें प्रत्ययो भवतः॥ 
.:28. The affixes salach (aud) and sařkatach (शंकर) come after the preposition वि, without changing the sense. 
Thus विगते पढ़े-विशाले, विधंकटे ॥ Thus these words may apply to a cow, as Ferarsi, feruan: It According to some these words are adjectives mean ing'great, laige' &c. There is no connection here of sense of base and the affix. : . संप्रोदश्च कटच् ॥२९॥ पदानि ॥ सम्-प्र-उदः, च, कटच। 
वृत्तिः ॥ सम्प्र उद् इत्येतेभ्यः कटप् प्रत्ययो भवति । चकाराम । वार्तिकम् ॥ कटपकरणे लावृतिलोमाभङ्गाभ्यो रजस्युपसंख्यानम् ॥ वा. ॥ गोष्ठापयः स्थानादिषु पशुनामादिश्च पसंख्यानम् ॥ पा०॥ संघाते कट वनव्यः ॥ वा०॥ विस्तारे पट वनव्यः॥ वा०॥ दिले गोयुगर । वा०॥ प्रकृत्यर्थस्य घट्ले पड्गवच्॥ वा.॥ विकार स्नेहने तेल पा०॥ भवनक्षेवे वादिभ्यः धाकटशाकिनी ॥ 
29. The affix katach (फर्ट) comes after the words sam, pra, ud, (and vi). 
BK. V.CH. II.31] 
. 
विवरण: 
906 
The fit is read into the satra by virtue of the word To Thus shell मकरम्, उस्करम, विकरम् । 
Vart: The affix कर comes after मलाबु, तिल, उमा, and मा in denoting dust thereol. Aमलादुनी रमा-मलाबूकरम, तिलकटम्, उमाकटम्, भंगाकरम् । 
Vart: The affix tiger comes after the names of animals, in denoting the places. As गवां स्थान -गोगोष्ठं, महिपीगोई, &c. 
Vart:-When a flock is denoted, the affix कर is added, asमविकटम् ।। Vart:-When spreading is denoted, the affix is पट, and भविपर. 
Vart:-When a couple is denoted, the affix is गोयुग, as, अश्वगोयुगम, उष्ट्रगोयुगम्। 
Vart:-When six is denoted, the affix is परगवर, as, इस्तिषड्गव, मार पड्गवम् । 
Vart. The affix toy comes when it means the oil of it. As prog तेलम्, संसदीततम्, तिलोतम् । 
Vårt:-The affixes urne and m denote a field where it grows', after the words ar &c. As Rधाकटम्, मूलधाकटम्, इक्षुधाकिन, मूलधाकिनम् । 
अवात्कुटारच॥ ३०॥ पदानि ॥ अवा,कुटारच, च. पत्तिः ।। मवान कुटारच् प्रत्ययो भवति। चकारात कर। 
30. The affix कुटारच् as well as कटच comes after the word अव 
. As भवकुटारम्, भवकटम् 'downwards', 'very deep'. नते नासिकायाः संज्ञायां टीटम्नाटज् भ्रटचः॥३१॥ पदानि । नते, नासिकाया, संशायाम, टीटच-नाटच्-म्रटचः। वृत्तिः ॥ भवादित्येव । नमन नतम् । नासिकायाः संवन्धिनि मतेऽभिधेये टीटच् नारच् भट येवे प्रत्यया भवन्ति संज्ञायां विषये। 
____31. The affixes टीटच, नाटच् and भ्रटच् come after the word wa, in the sense of a hooked nose, when the word so formed is a Nane. 
Thus माविकाया मवम् -मपटीटम, or भवनाटम्, भवभ्रटम् ॥ The word signifies the nose, as well as the person also, as मटीदा नासिका, भवटीटः पुरुषः. 
नबिडज्विरीसची ॥ ३२॥ पदानि ॥ ने, विडच्-बिरीसचौ।। वृत्तिः । नते नासिकाया इत्यनुवर्तते, संज्ञायामिति च । निधनानासिकाया नते ऽभिधेये विरम् विरीय 
इत्येतो प्रत्ययो भवः ।। 
32. The affixes ferre and father come after the word fa, in the above sense of a hooked nose, the whole word being a Name. 
907 
. 
मा 
(BK. V. CH. II. 535 
.. . Thus pares and parata u How do you say Partreur: or perpart It is by analogy. 
इनच पिटशिक चि च ॥ ३३॥ पदानि ॥ इनच, पिटविक, चिच श्रुतिः । मेरित्येष, नते मासिकाया इति च । निधध्यानासिकाया नभये हम पिटच्य् इत्यसो प्रत्ययो भवतस्तत्सानियोगेन च निराधस्य ययासंख्य विकास इत्यताबादेवी भवता ॥ 
वार्णिकम् ॥ ककार प्रत्ययो पलव्यक्षिक प्रकृस्या देशा 
# ক্লিখি বিশ্ব শাখায় স্কুণ্ড } গুলাৱী ঋজ ! 
33. The affixes and faca come after the word in the above sense of a hooked Dose; and ferre and per are the substitutes of or before those affixes respectively. 
Thus नि+इनाम चिक् + इन - विकिनः नि पिट - वि + पिट चिपिटः ।। Vart :-~So also comes and चिक replacing नि, as नि+ चिक+क 
P44 
HAR 
स 
PATTIST 
V4rt. The afix comes after the word om in the sense of its eyes'; and चिन and पिन are substitutes ofकिन : as, हिने मत्व पापी बि, पिडा * bicar-eyed? 
Vart. ca is also the substitute As, yo!! These words apply to * eye also, as NW, 96, 9 “ sorc-eyes." They apply to person also. ___उपाधियां त्यकन्नासनारूढयोः ॥ ३४॥ पदानि । उप-आधिभ्याम्, स्थान, 
आसन्न-आरूढयो धृतिः ॥ उप अषि हत्येसाभ्यां यथासण्यमासमारूडयोवनमानाभ्यां स्वाथैत्यकन्यस्ययों भवति ॥ . 
34. The affix tyakan (.-त्यक) comes after the words upa and adhi, in the sense of 'nearness' and 'elevan tion' respectively; the words so formed being Names. 
Thus पस्यका पर्वतस्थासमम् lowland, a land at the foot of the mountain' भाभिस्यका पर्वतस्थारूडम् a table-land, high-land'. The rule VII. 3. 44 does not apply here, so we do not get the forms परियका or भधिस्विका 
कर्मणि घटो ठच् ॥ ३५॥ पदानि ॥ कमणि, घटः, अठन् । वृत्तिः । निर्देधादेव समर्थविभक्तिः। कर्मशनासामीसभार पट इत्येतस्मिन ऽठच् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
35. The affix athach (अठ) comes after the word karma in the seventh case in construction, in the sense of 'employing oneself zealously in it'. . 
The word घटः means zealous work. Thus कर्मणि घटते कर्मः पुरुषः clever, proficient person'. . ___ तदस्य संजातं तारकादिभ्य इतच् ॥ ३६॥ पदानि ॥ तत्, भस्य, सजातम्, 
.. 
१६ 
[Bx v.ck, t; 17.। 
s - 
; 
: 
: 
: 
' 
। 
r 
- 
- 
( 
% 
) 
E. 
18 
ধূলিঃ পাৰিবি প্রথানুমাজোৰঞ্জ: 
জাষ্ট্র সন্ধি ঘষধ গুল মহী সন্ধষ্টি ও জাম্বন্ধ গুৱা 
36. The affix itach (7) comes after the words táraka &c. in the first case in construction, in the sense of 
that whereof this is observed'... 
| Thus লাস্কা দা গা মা = কান্ধৰ লগঃ a starry sky. e a night in which stars are visible gram 'a tree in which flowers have grown'. 
The গঙ্গোষ্টি class গাঙ্গুলি 1 শান্ধা, খ, ৰূপ, এ প্লয়ী, গী, টঙ্ক, 
৪ জন ৪ লিঙ্গ, 10 বুখী if সুন্না, গঞ্জা, দ্যা 14 কঙ্কণ, ii , iঃ গুঞ্জ, ” ফুলে, 18 , iঃ স্কুল, a0 , ডি 2 , 24 , 24 , ৬ নিম্ন @ ফুঞ্জ 27 , ৪ ৰি, ৫ খিষা, 30 গুল্লা , 02 , 3 , 14 স্বচ্ছ, ৪৪ টা ৪৪ ধী? ব্লু, ৪ , 39 স্কুঞ্চগঙ্গা স্ব ল্প } 40 গয়, 4} আখি, এ যু , # , * শী জু, $$ স্থা, & , ” নিন্দ, 49 সুঞ্জ পুল 4 গন্ধা , 50 , 11 , 2 , ও 
ব্দ, 54 মুঞ্জ, & ঙ্ক, 56 , 5 {ষা, ৪ শ্রীল, 39 স্কুণ, 0 স্বাস্থ, ৫ খি, ৪ জানায়, 63 ফুয়া, 64 লল, 6 মুফু, 66 ঈক্ষ ৪ কাঠা, 69 69 জল, * জয়জ ? মুন্না, 72 #ং , 79 স্বাবল 4 স্কুল, 75 ,76 লাক্ত, ?? স্কুল, গম, ” হ্ম, & জুতা, ৪ স্কয়ার, ৪ জুকস্কুল , 83 গঞ্জি , ৪ জিকাে (ব, সুগ), as wয়, ৪৪ খ্ৰীষ্ট 
স্থা, ৪? বা, ৪৪ স্বামীদানি , গ্যাস খুল; but ঘাখিী মী) ৪ঃ কালু, 93 হয়ঞ্জ #i , ১৫ গুৱাৰী, র গী, 94 , 
মমাঘ সুৰয়লাৰঃ # 9 # ঘানি ॥ মাই, সুৰ -মানুঞ্জ: ফুনিঃ ॥ শুনুন। নানি মথনাম্বশ্বৰ প্ৰম প্ৰয জন্ধু সাজু দ্বাধন স্বল্প মন্ত্র न्ति थत्तपथमाखमय प्रमाणं वेतति 
স্কান্ধি ঃ মাঞ্জ জুমঃ ৮ প্রয়তিনি স্থাও এ স্কুৱা স্কুল: আ# # স্থানানি 
ভিন রূছুন্ধু ও ৪ দিলা মধ্য আর্থি ব্ৰহ্ম মাহ্মগুঞ্জ: থাও স্বল্প 
মারূক্ষ্মী ঋন্ধু । 
37. The affixes dvayasach (a ), daghnach (4) and mâtrach (ATT), come in denoting "that whereof this is the lineal measure" after a word in first case in construction. 
The word PR is understood here. Thus 7 y 
9 , 61 ** 'as high as the thigh'. So also urg , 
M T and TETNEK As 
'water reaching upto the thigh. According to some the first and the second affixes (dvayasa and daghna) come in denoting the measure of altitudes and depths, and not horizontal measures. The affix on comes in a general sense also. As YTHIN *2 cubit long. 
Vårt: The affixes denoting lineal measure are elided after words, which are themselves recognised as standards of measure Thus at WTWARE 
== 
, 
": 
' 
. 
. 
909 
बतु 
॥ 
[ BK. V. CHII.S.38 
- 'that which is sama (a hand) in length'. Similarly fifte, foart 1. The affix matra only is elided, the other two affixes are never applicable to these words. 
Vart:-The elision is invariable after a Dvigu. Asपमा प्रमाणमस्व -विधमः, विवितस्तिः ॥ Why do we say invariable"? The elision will take place even where there is doubt. दिष्टी स्यातां वानवा-हिदितिः। 
Vårt :—The affix comes after a word, when it denotes a stoma; as, पंचदयस्तोमः, पंचदशी पचिः॥ The causes डीए (IV. I. I5) . , 
____Vart:-The affix हिनि comes after words ending in u or पत्) as पंच दधिनोर्बमासा, विधिनो मासाः। 
Vart: So also after the word frufa, as feruari 
Vårt: The affix any comes after words denoting lineal measure, and mass measure, and after a numeral, even when there is doubt. As Typ पम्, - धमः प्रमाणमस्य स्यान्न वा, विष्टिमात्रम्, प्रस्यमावम्, कुडवमाप, पंचमाचम, यमाचा गावः । An exception to this is contained in the 2nd Vartika, where matra is clided in Dvigu compounds, owing to the word for being used there 
Vårt: The affixes T y and Art come without changing the sense, diversely after a word ending in वतु; as तावदयसम्, तत् परिमाणमस्य धान्यादिस्तावन सावन्मानम्, एतावदयसम्, एतावन्माषम् &c. 
पुरुषहस्तिभ्यामण्च ॥ ३८॥ पदानि । पुरुष, हस्तिभ्याम्, मण, छ । वृत्तिः ॥ तस्येत्येव, प्रमाणइति च । पुरुषहस्तिभ्यां प्रयमासमाभ्यां प्रमाणोपाधिकाभ्यामस्येति पश्चर्ये १ प्रत्ययो भवति, चकायद् यसजादया । 
38. The affix an (+- ) also, as well as dvaya sach &c, comes after the words purusha and hasti, in the first case in construction in the sense of that whereof this is the lineal measure'. 
The phrase pita garo is understood here. By the affixes ray &c are drawn in. Thus पुरुषाप्रमाणमस्य-पौरुषम्, पुरुषयसम्, पुरुषवास, पुरुषमाचम्, इस्तिायसन् हस्तिशम्, हस्तिमात्रम्, हास्तिनम् ।। . . . Vart:-The affix is always elided after a Dvigy. As दिपुरुषावकर, पिपुरुषक विस्ति, त्रिहस्ति, बिपुरुषी, पिपुरुषी, बिहस्तिनी पिहस्तिनी॥ - यत्तदेतेभ्यः परिमाणे वतुप् ॥३९॥ पदानियत्-तद्-पतेभ्यः, परिमाणे, धतुए । वृत्तिः॥ तदस्येत्येव । यत्तदेतेभ्यः प्रथमासमर्थेभ्यः पारमाणोपाधिक योस्यति षष्प वनुश्प्रत्ययो भवति । 
Karika रावसावर्यवोप्यानिधः पृथुगुच्यते । 
माषायप्रतिपाताय भावः सिद्धय डावतो। पानिकम ॥ वतुपकरणे पुष्मदस्मद्भ्यां छन्दखि सादृश्यपसंख्यानम् । BK. V. CH. II. 3.4] 
किन। 
910 
39. The affix vatup () comes after the words yad, tad, and etad, being in the first case of construction, in signifying " that where of this is the measure of volume". 
___ The phrase तस्व is understood here. As यत् परिमाणमस्व-बावान, This form is thus evolved; यत् + वतुप-यावत् (theti भत् being replaced by भा by VI. 3. 91)- 92 (the gu being added by VII. 1.70)=214197 (the of being lengthened by VI. 4. 41); the vibhakti J being elided by VI. 1. 68, and a being eliided by 
VIII. 2. 23 we get finally यावान, सावान्, एतावान् ॥ The परिमाण is used in this sotra, in order to distinguish it from the word garot used in the last aphorism (Sec V. 1. 19). Therefore , FT & gave take the affixes 'matra' &c also in the sense of प्रमाण, which would not have been the case, had परिमाण not been used in the satra, for then the special affix ! would have debarred matrach &c in the case of यत् &c: The word डावतु in the karika is the name given to this affix by the ancient grammarians; so that according to them there was no necessity of VI. 3.91 to replace it of यत् &c, by भा; thus यत् +रावतु-यावत् ।। 
Moreover the affix any being added in the sense of opera, (capacity ) only after a &c, it follows that the words so formed, may take the further affix माषष &c in the additional sense of प्रमाण (length); which would not have been the case had the word qrto not been used in the satra. Thus terra मस्व-तावद् as धान्यं राशीकतं । From this तावत् we have तापत् प्रमाणमस्व कुरपार-बार मात्रम् meaning यावर राशीकृतस्य धान्यस्य ध्ये, नाहर भस्थापि, 
Vart:-The affix has comes in the sense of like this', after the words पुष्मद् and भस्मद् in the Chhandas. As स्वावत: पुरुषसो व विमस्य माधवः। 
किमिदंभ्यां वो घः॥४०॥ पदानि ॥ किम्-पदम्भ्याम्, वा, प... . वृत्तिः ॥ किमिदंभ्यानरस्य चतुपो पकारस्थ पकायदेयो भवति ॥ . 
40. After the words kim and idam, घ (इय) is substi tuted for the ar of vatup. 
Thus किम् + चतुर-की+पतुः (VI. 3.90)-+यतुम् (VI.4148)-कियत् nom. कियान, Similarly इयत् nom. स्यान् . . 
किमः संख्यापरिमाणे इति च ॥४१॥ पदानि ॥ किमः,संख्यापरिमाणे,इति,च। वृत्तिः ॥ संख्यायाः परिमाणं, संख्यापरिच्छेद इत्यर्थः । संख्यापरिमाणे वर्तमानात् किमा प्रथमावर ति पष्ठपरतिः प्रत्ययो भवति । चकारातुम् । तस्वकारस्य पादेयो भवति.. 
__41. The affix dati (अति with the elision of इम) as well as the affix vatup comes after the word 94, in the first case in construction, in the sense of 'numerical quantity': 
91t 
[ BK. V. CH. II. $. 43 
· The introduces the affix ray which is changed into and 
___ The word संख्यापरिमाणे means संख्यायाः परिमाण. सक्यापरिच्छेदः 'making estimate by numbers'. As my rear for AYP ATIMTI =*f *T&TUT: or faunir maur: 'how many Brahmanas in number do you estimate these'. This al ways comes in the plural. . 
This word is formed, in fact, when a question is put relating to the numerical quantity (sankhya-parimana) of any thing. But the word sata khya-parimaņa may be explained also as a Karmadharaya, in which the attributive word has been placed second. It will then mean "quantitative number". The sotra will be rendered thus: " kim takes dati, when it means a quantitative number". It should not be objected that numbers are always quan titative, and therefore parimaņa is redundant in the aphorism. For sometimes numbers are used not to define any quantity but merely to mark contempt. As in the following: 
मनतानाममन्त्राणां जातिमात्रोपजीविनाम्। सहस्रशः समतानां पारपत्वं न विद्यते॥ Here the word E : is used indefinitely in a contemptuous sense. Therefore, it is not true that a number always defines a quantity. Where Fair is used to express contemptuous number, no affixing takes place: as tai sou for 
114 | The word parimaņa in this sätra is not used in its technical sense; as in Satra 39 ante: for its very repetition here shows that it is used here to denote quantity' in general, and not capacity', for a number cannot mean *capacity'. 
संख्याया अवयवे तय ॥४२॥ पदानि ॥ संख्यायाः, अवयवे, तयए। वृत्तिः ॥ तस्यत्येव । संख्याया भवयवे वर्तमानाया अस्येति पष्टपथें तयप् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
42. The affix tayap (at) comes after a numeral, in the sense of " that whereof the parts are so many". 
The word वदस्य is understood here. Thus पंच अवयवा भस्थ-पंचसयम् hav ing five parts'. The part being connected with the whole, the force of the affix is to denote the whole. So also ruang, 47, reut (VIII. 3. 101 and IV. 5. 15) 
दिवियां तयस्यायज्वा ॥४३॥ पदानि ॥ द्वि-तिभ्याम्, तयस्य, अयच्, था। पतिः। पूण विहिवस्य तयस्य वित्रिभ्यां परस्य वा ध्यादेशो भवति । 
43. The affix ayach (**) is optionally the sub stitute of tayap, after words dvi and tri. 
As 797TR-600 or facare, per or frauga couple' 'a triad' (VI. 4. 148) 
The word " is used in the satra to indicate the sthånin or thing to be replaced. Had it not been used, the søtra would have run thus fifa 
7 "ayach optionally comes after dvi and tri". Here ayach would have be 
Bx. V. CH. 11. 5.45) 
91% 
9 
Aue 
VEN 
come a separate affix, instead of being a mere substitute Where is the harm in its being a separate affix? Then the word you or will not form their feminine in ; but a being taken as sthånivat to (1. 1. 56), the affix er which by IV. 1. 15, applies to , applies to y also. Thus we have a 
# Moreover by I. 1. 33, words ending in « are declined as Pronouns optionally before nominative plural termination. By the rule of sthanivat Adeia (I. 1. 56), the words ending in sa will also be Pronouns. As it or part pe or ra: # The in s y is for accent, showing that the substitute "aya" differs in accent from the sthani taya. __ उभानुदात्तो नित्यम् ॥४४॥ पदानि ॥ उमात उदाता,नित्यम् । 
far: T*V*TET faktura TENEN 
43. After the word ubha, ayach is always the substitute for tayap, having the acute (udatta) accent on its first syllable. . 
The affix y having indicatory takes the acute accent on the final syllable (VI. 1. 163), i. e. on . the special mention of the udatta in the 
· sätra shows that the accent should be on a syllable which would otherwise not have taken it i. e. the first syllable i. c. w; for had this not been the mean ing, there was no necessity of using the word udAtta in the satra. 
It is a Sankhya word (1. 1. 23) in the secular sense, it would have taken my, the present sätra ordains & instead as a substitute always. If it is not a Sankhya, then we should first ordain yg after it, by the process of splitting the sotra 42 ante into two, thus rur: 44, 44 and then replace 74 by * * 
Thus it 
48 79 ataugas ; for sport तस्मिन्नधिकमिति दशान्ताः ॥ ४५ ॥ पदानि ॥ तत्-अस्मिन्-अधिकम्-इति Furant 3: U 
fa: 1 fra Urauff ENKT U fafdary route fa ue F M i fercurea TRT #1 
.... 
. 
9 
46 
EA 
R 
W 
23MERINO 
A 
. 
PNE 
E 
4.2 
. 
W 
THE FATE # HTT** 
45. The affix da (with the elision of * of the base), comes after a Numeral ending in dasan, being in the first case in construction, in the sense of “this is surplus. 
9 
i 
Thus HV NA 
TU # "hundred + eleven" 
So also 
the 
913 
E*. 
. 
(Bx. V. CH 11.847 
9. 
NO 
Why do we say ending in V1 Observe 
en M Why do we say "ending *> Observe for HT HET 
Ishli This rule applies when both words denote a thing of the same denomination. As V etu wa 
faru - #raf all But not here TTU ETT * *T*T uruan. 
Iskuti:--This applies only after and axa, therefore it does not apply here :- UTVT OFTE OG 
The word fa in the sätra is for clearness. The rule applies to war also, as para CEO which may mean either (1) HTV Garan tert or (2) গুহ্মারু বিহ্মালি । 
mafarande 4€ ll varfer Tamara: (3:) .. জুষ্টি লিখিস্ত্রি , ও জরি ও স্বাঞ্চানখবিন্ধাব ঃ গরী গম্বার প্রশিল্প 
are ran 
u para 
46. The affix da comes in the sense of “this is surplus in it”, after & Numeral ending in tc and after pura ; with the elision of a and a 
The indicatory causes elision of fe portion VI. 4. 14. &c. Thus fruita pa t vi. U , ROT # This rule applies to abstract Numerals. Hence not here, forf Herttuan 
So also after frafa; as from 
VårtSo also after compounds ending in frufci, as, ka v This also applies to pure Numbers. Therefore not here, at Fort for # 
A 
US ON 
KUCH::. 
* 
so 
US 
. 
धनुचर्ये मधद प्रत्ययो भवाति अन्तरमयमासमथै गुणस्य निमाने धर्मले। 
47. The affix mayat (FT with feminine in ) comes after & Numeral in denoting a thing given in ex change; in the sense of '"containing so many times more of something" or "the price of & portion of this is so many equal portion of the other"... 
The tvord are from V. 2. 36 should be read in this. The sense of the aphorism is " after a Numeral in the first case in construction (C), with the force of a genitive (4*), comes the affix , when the word in the first case in construction denotes the value (fr ) of a portion (M)". The word means per or * portion", and mor means price'. In comparing the quality of one thing with another, fanny is the value or price. Thus writt Park 
23 
BK. V. CH. II. $ 48. ] 
914 
http 
FITNEYT 
P 
U T "two parts of Yava is the price of one part Udasvit". Similarly fat, , lit. * Udasvit is fra or two-times * the value of yava". 
The word or is in the singular number. The comparison must therefore be made with one portion of a thing, with the several portions of the other. The ratio must be 6:1, but never *: 2, or 4:3 &c. Therefore the rule does not apply here, MIT VITT TT # The malso must be more than one. The rule therefore does not apply here: PA ATT Park 
The word for denotes an integral number, therefore the rule will not apply to fraction. As a r 
# The affix also comes in the sense of purchasing or the comparative value of a thing, i. e. in denoting the thing received in exchange.(A4) As ** Nam Tanka TTEX2T, as f* * * * you are 
TEFTİ Uri "the exchange value or Udasvita is twice as much as that of a Yava". The word farat means the thing given in exchange; and frame the thing rueived in exchange. Both words are reciprocal and are terms of barter or exchange, but they do not apply to sales or purchases for coins. 
Why do we say Tuyet of a portion'? Observe the f a r fra 11 Here being no comparison of ratios, there is no allixing. 
Why do we say para "in denoting the thing given in exchange * Observe, दो गुणो क्षीरस्य एकस्तलस्य- द्विगुणं एव्यते सैले शीरण "one part of oil cooks or absorbs as much as two parts of milk". Here the sense is that of cooking and not of purchasing. 
In short of has the meaning of time or fold'. As foran "two time" the word qualifying sometime the F, sometime the fin; eg f ra 
TI" Udasvit is two-times of two-fold of Yava in value', or f74 u 1 8 ** £3°0-times Yava are equal to one Udasvit'. 
तस्य पूरणे डट् ॥४८॥ पदाति । तस्य, पूरणे, डट् । fan de autarcraft: stia 
yrra vara 11 48. The affix dağ (**, causing the elision of the last vowel with the consonant following it) comes after a Numeral in the sixth case in construction, when the sense is "making full this number'. 
That by which a thing is completed is called # Thus garut Tuis Grau: the "eleventh" (i. e. the one which, added to ten, completes the eleven). Similarly waits: By this ashx, ordinals are formed. The rule therefore, does not apply to a case like this:- 
TAI KITE: . नान्तादसंख्यादेमंद ।। ४९ ॥ पदानि । नान्तातू असंख्यादेः भट् ॥ .. To: il tria i TarTİ VATT : ANETT REGN: grau get NCT 
y 
CEO 
SA 
915. 
तियुए। 
[ BK. V.CH. II. SS 
___49. The augment mat (म) comes before र, in the above sense, after a Numeral which ends in a when no other Numeral precedes it. 
Thus 19 'fifth' (the completer of the five), FHA: n Why do we say 'ending in my Observe fun quofu: 'twentieth'. Why do we say 'not preceded by a Numeral? Obsere एकारधानां पूरणं - एका ॥ 
थट् चच्छन्दसि ॥५०॥ पदानि ॥ थट्, च, छन्दसि । निः॥ मान्सादसंख्याः परस्य रस छसि विपये पडागमो भवति, चकारात्पक्षे मटपि भवति । 
50. The थट् is the augment of उद्, in the Chhan das, after a Numeral ending in 7 and not preceded by another numeral : as well as the augment मद । - Thus पंचयः, समय: or पंषमा, सनमः ॥ As पर्णमयानि पञ्चयानि भवन्ति and पञ्चममिन्द्रियमस्यापारमन् ॥ Sce V. 2. 56. 
__ षट्कतिकतिपयचतुर्रा पुक ॥५१॥ पदानि ॥ षट्-कति-फतिपय-चतुराम, थुङ्गा दृत्तिः ॥ रडित्यनुपसते तसतम्या विपरिणम्यते । पद् कति कतिपय चतुरात्येतेषां रटि परतस्युगागमो भवति ॥ . 
पातिकम् । चतुरन्छयतावाद्यभरलोपथ । 
51.. When dat follows, थुक् is the augment of the words shat, kati, katipaya and chatur. 
The « is to be read into this sátra, and it should be changed into locative, as उदि 'when dat follows". The word कतिपय is not a Numeral, it takes by force of this satra. Thus पणां पूरणो-षष्ठः 'sixth'. कतिया 'the which in order? कतिपयपः 'the one in order after several', चतुर्य: the fourth'. 
__Vart: The afixesछ (य) and यत् come after चतुर and there is eli sion of the first letter. As ata or H 
In this and the two following satras, the action of the of vanishes when an augment is added. . 
बहुपगगणसंघस्य तिथुक्॥५२॥ बहु-पूग-गण-संघस्य, तिथुक। वृतिः ॥ रहित्येव । बहु पूग गण संप इत्येतेषां उरि परतस्तियुगागमो भवति । 
52. When dat follows, तिथुक is the augment of the words bahu, pagu, gana, and saigha. 
The word it is understood here also. The words and are not Numerals; they take the affix उद् by virtue of this sutra. Thus बना पूरणो-बहुतियः, पूगनियः, गणतिष, and संपतियः ।। 
' बतोरिथुक् ॥ ५३॥ पदानि ॥ तो, इथुक् । वृतिः ।। रडिस्येव । पसेउटि परत घुगागमो भवति । पश्चन्तस्य संख्यालापूर्वेण रडिहितस्तस्मिमयमागमो विधीयते। 
याशि 
BK. V. C1. II. $ 56] 
53. When dat follows, ty is the augment of a stem ending in ratu. 
The word 2 is understood here also. The words ending in fy are Numerals (1. 1. 23): and they will take u by V. 2.48; the present sätra declares the augment. Thus asai m uxtari, mehr, are 
द्वेस्तीयः॥५४॥ पदानिवतीयः : u fevereita e a great i athari 
54. The affix are comes in the sense of com pleter thereof', after the word dvi. 
This debars on Thus rei quit faster the second that which completes the two 
तेः संप्रसारणं च ॥ ५५॥ पदानि । ने, संप्रसारणं, च (तीयः)। T: I fyra: gr 
i TTT: Camaro ganar hafa 
56. The affix tîya comes in the sense of .com pleter thereof', after the word tri ; and there is samprasarana (vocalisation ) of the stem. 
The substitution of a vowel for a semi-vowel is samprasarapa (1. 8. 45). Thus + 7+7+ata qara: (VI. 1. 108, the rof pay assumes the form of the prior letter which is substituted for ) India: the is not lengthened by VI. 4. 2, because that rule applies to the lengthening of the 
letters only, this word being read into VI. 4. 2, by anuvritti from VI. 3. III. The pratyahara sa is formed by the first w, and means the letters W, 
and an 
विंशत्यादिभ्यस्तमडन्यतरस्याम् ॥ ५६॥ पदानि ॥ विंशत्यादिभ्यः, तमद, अ 
ON 
0 
SA 
fi u foveatean: F***67mh arcu 
56. After the words vinsati &c, tamat (ar fem. in 1) is optionally the augment of dat. 
This rule falling under the jurisdiction of you, we must read the word into this sätra, as the affix to which the augment is added. Thus forvars 
:frufany: or fv: twentieth. hurray; or aru, mafcuram or fr fru, Mama: or fau, 
m y or art: # . There is no furam class given in Ganapatha. These are ordinary words like frott, fan&cThe words fura, Fur &c of V. 1. 59, should not be taken as the firear alluded to by this sätra. For had it been so, sve 
917 
( BK. V. CH. II. $ 57 
could not have formed the words like trufa ! ; because the rule applying to fauna specifcally mentioned, will not apply to fura as the end of a com pound. As this maxim declares, pat apa yatira " that which cannot possibly be anything but a Pratipadika, does, contrary to 1. 1.72; not denote that which ends with it, but it denotes only itself". This being the case, the word Frur &c must be taken in their popular signification, and not as particular pratipadikas; and hence also becomes valid the exception given in V. 2. 58, in the case of fe &c when preceded by another numeral. For the very prohibition Weig: in that rule, shows, that with the exception of cft &c, the present rule applies to other in words, as, Dit &c 
Böhtlingk takes , and as separate affixes and not as aug ment. He says "The commentators take a here and in the following SØtras as an Augment of ® (V. 2. 48), because of &c with the affix a vould yield fraai by 111. 1. 3, whilst otherwise it would be accented as frufaa According to this interpretation V. 2. 49 and V. 2. 50 are Augments, though they would yield the right form as affixes also. That Panini by forms #6, and ETC so much resembling , should not have meant an affix, is not probablc. Moreover one does not understand well this, why he, if he intended that *, u and y should be taken as augments, does not, for the sake of clearness, ordain this after the stem, which could have been expressed by adding of the servile (i. e. E, F and ques), as he does in the case of the augments ar V. 2. 51, fays V. 2. 52 and 5 V. 2. 53. I also think this, that Panini, when he designated this affix ye, did not think of the accent" 
In the case of and there will be no difference whatever whether We take them as affixes or as augments. Thus 14+7- T+* (VI. 4. 144) D444# 
नित्यं शतादिमासार्द्धमाससंवत्सराच ॥ ५७॥ पदानि ॥ नित्यम्, शतावि, मा. ART, ATH, HITECTE, a, (2 ) 
T: N 4779: TU T TO I TE HATTER TRUETY 01 . 
AN 
25 
ho 
YA 
57. Always after the words sata &c, and after mása, ardha-masa, and sam-vatsar; tamng is the augment of dat 
The words care are numerals. The words te &c, are not numerals; they would not have taken ve, but by the implication of this sotra. Thus OXU 79:-Un hundreth'; 64904, all Similarly ATEITI TY. TEXT fa: 'the last day of the month'. 47, n. 
BK. V.Ch. II.SIL.] 
मम्॥ 
918 
By the next Sutra V. 2. 58, the words om &c, would also have taken समद; but the scope of that sotra is confined to numerals not preceded by another numeral. There is no such restriction here. Hence we have एकमत बमः, द्विशततमः ॥ 
षष्ट्यादेश्चासंख्यादेः॥ ५८॥ पदानि ॥ षष्ट्यादेः, च, असंख्यादेः, (तमद)। वृत्तिः ।। पष्टपादः संख्याशमारण्यांदः परस्य डटी नित्यं तमडागमो भवति । 
58. After the words shashți &c, when no other Numeral precedes them ; tamat is always the augment of dat. 
___By sotra V. 2. 56, the augment was optional, this makes it com. pulsary. Thus षष्टितमः, सप्ततितमः॥ 
Why do we say when not preceded by a Numeral"? Obserre, एकपट: एकषष्टितमः, एकसप्तमः or एकसप्ततितमः॥ Here V. 2. 56, applies also.. 
मतो छः सूक्तसाम्रोः॥ ५९॥ पदानि । मती, छः सूक्त, साम्रोः। . वृत्तिः ॥ मताविति मवर्थ उच्यते । प्रातिपरिकान्मत्वयें छः प्रत्ययो भवति एके खामनि चाभिधेये ॥ 
59. When a Sukta or a Saman is to be expressed, the affix Chha (ईय) comes after a pratipadika (nominal-stem), in the sense of the affix matup (V. 2.94). . 
The word wat means 'in the sense of ac affix'.. The sense of his is "whose is it or in whom itis". Thus भच्छावाक् धन्शेस्मिन्-मच्छावाकीयम् सत्तमः मित्रावरणीयम्, यज्ञायज्ञीयम् साम, वारवन्तीयम् साम । 
The affix coines after a collocation of words, as fritati 'the Sakta containing the words भस्य वाम' eg. Rig Veda Mandala l. sokta 164 Here the words भस्य वामस्य are considered as a Nominal Stem. So also कयाधुभायम्। 
अध्यायानुवाकयो क्॥६०॥ पदानि ॥ अध्याय, अनुवाकयो, लुक वृत्तिः ॥ मतावित्येव । मलयउत्पत्रस्य छस्य लुग् भवति, भभ्यायानुवाकयोभधेययोः॥ 
60. Then an Adbyâya or an Anuvâka is to be expressed, there is luk-elision of the affix Chha having the above sense of matup. 
This sätra indicates by implication (119*:), that the affix 5 comes after a nominal stem, to denote an Adhyaya or an Anuvāka. According to Patanjali the elision is optional. Thus गर्दभाण्ड होस्मिन्नस्ति-गर्दभाण्डोऽध्यायः, भनु. पाको वा ॥ In the alternative, गर्दभाण्डीयः; so also दीर्घजीदिवः or दीर्घजीवतीयः, पलित स्तम्भः or पलितस्तम्भीय। 
विमुक्तादिभ्यो ऽण् ॥ ६१ ॥ पदानि । विमुकादिभ्यः, अण् । वृत्तिः ॥ मसावित्येव, भध्यायानुवाकयोरिति । विमुक्तादिभ्यः प्रातिपदिकेभ्यो ऽम् प्रत्ययो भवति मल्ल, मभ्यायानुवाकयोरभिधेययो। 
919 
. 
कन् । 
. 
[ Bk. V.CH. II.3 64 
61. The affix an (+-) comes in the sense of matup, when an Adhyâya or an Anuvåka is to be expressed, after the words vimukta &c. 
Thus दिमुनशमोऽस्मिन्नस्ति पत्तोऽध्यायोजुवाको वाSo also देवासुर &c. 
1 विमुक्त, 2 देवामुर, 3 रसोऽसु, उपसद्, सुवर्ण (सुपर्ण), परिसारक (परिपादक) सत्यन, 8 वसु, महत् (महत्वत् ), 10 पवीवन, 11 पसुमन, 12 महीवन (महीयल), 13 सल्लत, 14 पहवत्', 15 दशार्ण, 16 दशाई, 17 वयस् (दशाहपयर), 18 हविर्धान, 19 पतमिन् (पसबि), 20 महि पी, 21 मस्यहत्य, 22 सोमायूषम्, 23 इडा, 24 ममाविष्णु (विष्णू), 25 उर्वशी, 26 पूषन् (वषहति), 27 मित्री, सोम, 29 हेतु.. . 
गोषदादिभ्यो वुन् ॥ १२॥ पदानि ॥ गोषदादिभ्यः, वुन् । वृत्तिः । मतावित्येव, मध्यायानुवाकयोरिति प। गोपारिभ्यः मातिपदिके यो इन्प्रत्ययो भवति मलये ऽप्या. चानुवाकयो 
62. After the nominal steins goshada &c, there is the affix vun (!-अक), in the sense of matup, when an Adhyâya or an Apuváka is to be expressed. 
Thus गोपदशमोऽस्मिन्नस्ति-गोपदकोऽध्यायोऽनुवाको वा॥ इषका, मातरिक्षक &c. Another reading is fines the final consonant being mute. 
1गोषद् (गोपर), 2 पेवा (स),3 मातरिश्चन्, देवस्य वा, देवीराप,कृष्णोऽस्था, खरेयः, 7 देवी (देवी) चिय धिया (घियम्),8 रनोहण, युम्जान, 10 भम्जन, 11 प्रभत्त, 12 प्रत, 13 कशानु (धान). 14 सहसशीर्षा, 15 वातस्य ते, 16 कृपाभ, 17 स्वाहामाण, 18 प्रसन (O.॥ 
तत् कुशलः पथः ॥६३॥ पदानि ॥ तत, कुशलः, पथः, (न्),. वृत्तिः ॥ नित्येव । तति सममी समर्यात्पपिन् धमारकुशल इत्यस्मिनये इयत्ययो भवति । 
63. The affix vun comes, after the word pathin, being in the seventh case in construction, when the sense is "versed therein or skilled therein". 
Thus पथि कुशलः - पयका (पथिन् + बुन्-पर+पुन VI.4144-पर+भE VIL.I.1.), आकर्यादिभ्यः कन् ॥ ६४॥ पदानि ॥ आकर्षादिभ्यः, कन् । वृत्तिः ॥सवेत्येव, कुशल इति । भाकादिभ्यः प्रातिपरिक या सप्तमीसमभ्यः कुशल इत्येतस्लिमये का प्रत्ययो भवति॥ 
64. The affix kan (!-क) comes in the sense of 'versed therein, skilled therein', after the nominal stems âkarsha &c, being in the seventh case in construction. 
Thus भाकर्षे कुचलः-मावर्षका,सस्क: Another reading has माकप (Bohtlingk) 
1भाकर्ष (भाकप), 2, 3 पिशाच (पिपासा), 4 पिचण्ड, मधनि, ममन, नि चय (विचम),8षय, विजय', 10 अय, 11 भाषय, 12 नय, 13 पार (निपार,14दीप, 15हर, 16 हाद, 178, 18 गबर, 19 घलाने, 20 भव। BK V. CH. II. 1.68] 
. 
कर 
920 
धनहिरण्याकामे ॥६५॥ पदानि । धन्, हिरण्यात, कामे (कन्) । वृतिः ॥समेत्सव, कनिवि च । धनहिरण्यमाभ्यां तंत्रति सामीसमर्थान्यां कामान्यास्मिनये कन्यत्ययो भवति। 
65. The affix kan comes, after the words dhana and hiraṇya, being in 7th case in construction, in the sense of 'a desire thereafter'. 
The word काम means 'desire, wish'. Thus धने कामः-धनको देवानस्थ, हिरण्यको देवदत्तस्य। 
स्वाङ्गेभ्यः प्रसिते ॥६६॥ पदानि ॥ स्वाङ्गेभ्यः, प्रसिते (कन्) । वृत्ति ।। सवेत्येव, कनिति प । स्वागवाचिभ्यः पन्नेभ्यस्तयेति सप्तमीसमर्येभ्यः प्रखितात्येतस्लिम कन्यत्य यो भवति॥ 
66. The affix kan comes after a word denoting a part of one's body, in the sense of who takes care of it, 
who bestows care upon it'. 
The words and an are understood in this sátra. The word in means 'devoted to, intent upon, craving after'. Thus केणेषु प्रसितः केशकi.e: केधादिरचनायां मसक्त एवमुच्यते॥ The स्वाभ्यः is in the plural number, indicating that the affix comes even after a collective compound of Svänga terms. Thus दन्तोष्टका, केघनखका । See II. 3.44 
उदरागाधूने ॥ ६७॥ पदानि ॥ उदरात, ठाधने। वृत्तिः । तत्रेत्येव, प्रसितहति च । उदरममावासीसमास्यसितात्येतलिमये डक प्रत्ययो भवति । . 
67. The affix thak (+-इक) comes in the sense of voracious', after the word udara. 
The translation given above is according to Dr. Böhtlingk. Accord ing to the Kasika, the anuvritti of ra is also read into this satra. The mean. ing then would be "thak comes after the word udara in the seventh case in construction, in the sense of who is devoted therein', when the word so forined means “ voracious". A person who is very much distressed by hunger is so called; उरेविांजगीण्यते॥ Thus उदरे प्रसितः-मारिका (i.eमायन), 
Why do we say when it means 'voracious? Observe an: 'abdominal'. सस्येन परिजातः॥ ६८॥ पदानि ॥ सस्येन, परिजातः, (कन्). वृत्तिः ॥ कन्प्रत्यय इत्येव स्मर्यते, न उक् । निशादेव ततीया समयविभक्तिः । यस्यशान्तीयासमाल रिजात हरयस्मिनये कन्प्रत्ययो भवति । 
68. The affix kan (1-5) comes after the word sasya, being in the third case in construction, when the sense is " to supply richly with it". 
921 
BK. V. C1. II. $ 71] 
The anuvşitli of *, not of is to be read here. The word of here means 'good quality', and not "corn'. Another reading is TRT. The word of means 'all, every where'. That which is full of (TT ) good quali. ties (ar) in which there is no defect, that is the signification here. Thus am aftsa: - #F: af: 'a rice, above all praise', any: 'a-good man, not equalled by any'. Het stop: *a precious stone of the best quality', i.e. perfect in form'. 
Hai ETOILES niny, grâ, (*1) . 
• वृत्तिः ॥ भंशयहानिर्देशादव वितीयासमाद्धारीत्येतस्मिवर्ये कन्प्रत्ययो भवति । 
• 69. The affix kan comes after the word aðsa 'a share in the second-case in construction, the sense being 
who must take that'. 
The word jy is used in the accusative in the aphorism, showing that the construction must be accusative. The word me nom. erg is formed by adding for to the root , the force of the affix being that of "must, or neces sity". Sce III. 3. 170. The word FTP will govern accusative and not geni. tive 11. 3. 70 
Thus # *# 'an heir', i e. who is entitled to take a share at partition i.e. a TUTTI I U JT: N 
grar recrue I Voll a llar, FT, (*) वृत्तिः ॥ तन्त्रशानिर्देशाश्व पञ्चमीसमर्याद चिरापहातहत्येस्मिन्नर्थे कन्प्रत्ययो भवति । 
70. The affix Kan comes after the word tantra (a loom', in the sense of "taken off therefron not long ago or shortly before". 
The word my must be in the fifth case in corsts uction, by the very fact of its being so employed in the satra. The word for means short time, not long' 987 means "taken off". Thus Fare : - * 'a cloth just taken off the loom' i. e. an unbleached cloth. As : gri, mai 
art 'a new mantle's ra: or TT: - 
ब्राह्मणकोष्णिके संज्ञायाम् ॥ ७१॥ पदानि ॥ ब्राह्मणक, उष्णिके,संक्षायाम(कन्) वृत्तिः ॥ ब्राह्मणक उष्णिक इत्येतो शन्दी निपात्येते कन्प्रत्ययान्ती संज्ञायां विषये ॥ 
71. The words Brâhmaņaka and ushộika are ano malous, when they are a Name. 
Thus ब्राह्मणको देशः, उष्णिका यवागः ॥ The affix कन् is added toब्राह्मण, with the force of a place where Brahmaņas who live by pro.ession of arms dwell'. Similarly उष्णिक means भल्पामाः॥ 
eans 
b 
H 
DONATIONAL 
HERH 
EE 
AMER 
8 
N 
A 
.. 
. 
शीतोष्णाभ्यां कारिणि ॥ ७२ ॥ पदानि । शीत, उष्णाभ्याम, कारिणि, (का) वृत्तिा शीतोपताम्य कारिणयमिषेये कपल्ययो भवति । 
72. The affix kan comes after the words stta and ushpa, in the sense of who goes to work thus'... 
The word om and are being used as adverbs will be in accusative construction. As da UTE 'who goes to work coldly le a lazy man die कालस, बडः, Similarly Tणक भिकारी, ren who goes to work hotly'. . 
अधिकम् ॥ ७३॥ पदानि । अधिकम्, (क) पुतिः ॥ भधिकमिति निपात्यते । अध्यायोत्तरपरलोप हस्थ 
73. The word adhika is anomalous. . 
The word of meaning & more, is formed by adding to the word mas; there being elision of the second term before the affix. Thus it कोणा सार्या “a Drona is superior to Khart" भधिका सारी हाणेन Ka Khart is infer rior to Drona * The word are governs nominative or accusative indiffer ently. . . 
अनुकामिकाभीकः कमिता ॥ ७॥ पदानि । अनुक, ममिक, ममीका, कमिता। श्रुतिः । अनुमभिक मभीक हरयेने अशा कमस्ययान्ता निपात्यन्ले कानिदेस्येतस्मिार्थे । 
74. The words anuka, abhika and abhika are anomalous, meaning being at liberty to do or being fond of: 
Thus अनुकामयते मनुका 'desirous, libidinous'. अभिकामयते ममिकor mit: 'a lover, voluptuous person. 
__पावेनान्विच्छति ॥ ७५॥ पदानि । पावन, भनु, इच्छति, (कन्)। 
त्तिः ॥ 
पाशतृतीयासमर्थादविच्छतीत्यस्मिाथे कमस्ययो भवति । 
75. The affix kan( _-) comes after the word par. sya, in the third-case in construction, signifying who strivea to gain something by that". 
The word of means "a fraudulent or crooked expedient'. One who endeavours to obtain any thing by fraud is called in a cheat, a juggler, a partisan: शार्थ = a rib, a crooked thing, as पाधिका मायाविन, कीरतिक बालिका &c. 
अयः शूलदण्डाजिनाभ्यां ठक्टभो ॥ ७६ ॥ पदानि । अयाशूल, दण्डाजिना भ्याम्, उक्, ठी 
लिण्डाजिना यया भवा 
76. The affixes thak (+-इक) and thai (+-इक) come respectively after ayabsula and dandájina, in the same sense of “who strives to gain something by that".. 
NAMED REP. 
. 
::-:.----: 
HELIVE: 
प 
. 
(BK. V. CH. 11. $ 78 
The word en is understood here also. The word want means * a violent proceeding! Who seeks to obtain any thing by violent means is called aran TEPEET # The word hy means staff (daqda) and hide (ajina) LC outer badges of devotion or hypocrisy. Who sceks to gain something by hypocrisy and deceit is called off 
erafat murah grat! W cena il pardur, troru, ta, 5 
ce 2010 
12 
ZO 
. 
3 
নিজা অবস্থায় ক্ষী মঞ্জি # । | আকিছু গালায় রাঙাঙ্কার স্কুল, সুজয়কে অল্প কিয় খুচ্ছ । 
77. The affix kan (L ) is added to an ordinal number, in the sense of " acquiring & subject after so many attempts"; and there is optionally the elision of the affix denoting the ordinal number. 
. The word arafaret (V. 2. 53) stands here as a type of all words ending In affixes denoting i.e ordinals. The word op means "acquired or Icarned hereby. This qualifies the base. Thus fata o 
or feates the acquisition of the knowledge or book by the second time' l. €, *successful mastery by the second time". So also f or free 
or tatu 
Vart-When the word, formed by the affix kan, means the person who acquires after so many times then the elision of the yo affix is compulsory and not optional Thusga 699 wird -VETTY Devadatta who learns the book for the sixth time' i.e *who succeeds in learning the book at the sixth attempt'. Similarly chi, 
The word as here is confined to books only and to nothing else. 
CUT ITHUT: 1 en TIA N , QYTH, Huf, (41) fi a fa HEUTE A 
w rafos, AYU TVRT1d u 78. The affix kan comes after & word in the first case in construction, with the force of a genitive case, when the sense is he is their leader 
The word great means 'head-man, leader, spokes-man? Thus rapat - *, * 
Why do we say "when meaning a leader'? Witness from: VENTEM Here there is no affixing 
WOO 
txt 
: 
R 
$ 
339 
Aid 
i 
LP 
ERRO 
DE 
O 
. 
S 
. 
11 
R. 
RO 
4. 
a na, 
SI 
20 
nyt 
* 
SO 
# 
# TITOME ra, ha Arte 
4 YFRITT e tu 
[BK. V.CH. III.] 
924 
79.' The affix kan comes after the word drinkhala 'a clog', in the sense of "clog is its fetter", when the whole word means a young camel. 
___ Thus Sखलं पन्धनमस्थ करभस्व-शंखलका n The young ones of camel are called " The wooden clogs put on their feet to prevent them from straying are called 14 H Though the ropes &c are also used along with the clog, yet érinkhala being the principal object that takes away the free dom is called aya or bond or fetter. 
उत्क उन्मनाः ॥८०n पदानि । उत्कः, उन्मनाः, (का). . पत्तिः ॥ उस्क इति निपात्यते रन्मनास भवति । गत ममी बस्व सरम्ममा । 
80. The word utka is anomalous, meaning long. ing after, yearning'. 
He whose mind anxiously desires or yearns after a thing is called एन्मनः ॥ The word तस्कis formed by adding on to the preposition . Thus एस्को पपरतः, उस्का प्रबासी-रखकर or उत्कण्ठिवा. 
कालप्रयोजनाद्रोगे ॥ ८१॥ पदानि ॥ काल, प्रयोजनात, रोगे, (कन्)। पतिः ॥ मर्याभ्यां समर्थविभक्तिः । कालाययोजना अपायोग समर्पविभनियुकानोगेऽभिधेये कन्यत्वको भवि। 
81. The affix kan comes after a word expressing a time, or a cause or effect (of the disease), when an illness is denoted. . 
The word काल means 'days' &c, and प्रयोशन means ithe cause of disease) or its effect'. Thus fratasi T: - fastest St the fever which comes on the second day'. चतुर्थकाः 'a fever which comes on the fourth day'. Simi. larly after a word denoting भयोशमा, as, विषपुनिता-पिपपुष्पको पए 'a fever 
caused by poisonous Aowers'. So also कापपुष्पका Soalso रम्प कायमस्व-रण्यकर 'a fever producing heat', पीवको पर 
When 'illness' is not meant, then there is no affixing, as, fida firat SAT The word hy is to be read into this satra from the next sitra. There fore words fiatan &c are Names, 
तदस्मिन्ननं पाये संद्यायाम ॥२ पदानि । तर, अस्मिन्, मनम, प्राये, संसा याम, (कन्)। वृत्तिः ॥ तविसि मयमासमारस्मिमिति सप्तम्पर्षे कन् प्रत्ययो भवति, बसम्पयमासमर्थमा पवायविषय सत् भवति॥ 
पातिकम् । पटकेभ्य इनितम्बः। 
. 82, The affix kan is added to & word denoting food, in the first case in construction, in the sense of "this 
and r 
(BK. V. C# 11. 9. 85 
TA 
A 
w 
1727 
RE 
PES 
3 
tregul 
is the principal food on this particular occasion”, when the whole word so formed is a Name. . 
Thus Errer: MTWARE KİTTY Gardt " The Gudapopika Paurgraåst * l. e that particular Full Moon day in which cake of sugar form the principal accompaniment of food. Similarly famTMT, U T, Regien &c 
Vårt The affix come alter in the same senso. As per TH 
MATT I arra Ferri, **** T UTARUes et nett, ha É Urat kigurer and are are un 
83. The affix på (+ ) comes after kulmisha, in the same sense "this is the principal food on this parti colar occasion.and the whole word is a Name.. : 
The g of we is for the sake of causing Vriddhi and accent. Thus FT: QUESTHETIAN Cara ___ोनियंश्छन्दो ऽधीते ॥ ४॥ पदानि ॥ श्रोत्रियम्, उन्दस, अधीते,.. 
n uwe fasercut on s aanut 
84. The word frotriyan is irregularly formed mean ing who has studied the Chhandas'. i The pin ma is for the sake of accent. As 
h u y: *a Brah mbaga learned in the Vedas". The word 4 is either a condensed expression for the full sentence fruta, referring to no parlicular base or affix. Or the word as is replaced by 14, and then is added the affix 47 But how do you form then groei, in the sense of y ou, by adding the affix or by IV. 2. 597 The present sätra is optional, the word T of V. 2. 77 being under. stood here: so that we have the form fan also. Some say that w e applies only to that person who has not only studied the Vedas but who acts upon its purport also, while or applies to a student in general, so one sotra does not debar the other, as they apply to different objects. . 
m o til 1 af 16, HT, 1972,a, fin urafata maziwata neuro i parata walau I WATCY. Vacan fet uur* u 
85. The affixes ini (CD) and than ( -) come after the word sraddha, in the sense of this is eaten by him". 
Thus i 
6 or : "a person who has eaten obsequial food". This relates to a person who eats on the day the Sraddha ceremony takes place; and not at any other time nor who eats stale food of biddha wa 
IB 
WO 
BK. V. CH. II. $. 88 ) 
share with these termine 
SA 
ya N a Karu The word er originally means a certain ceren ony, and is derived from the word wat with the affix * V..101. In a figur." ative sense, it here means the food taken at that ceremony. 
F a : #CE I a II rata, ret., 
fan water gerund start f rom east TEEN সুয়ে দ্বিধঃ বুখানম নিঃ প্লয় মন্ত্রি 
86. The affix ini (FC) comes after the word pårva, in the sense of 'by whom soraething was done formerly". 
The word of the last sätra is understood here. But what is the verb of which is the agent. The does not come to be read into this sätra Therefore we must supply some general verb such as doing' &c, to complete the sense Thus g am # So also a TH &c. **** s. of d. . pl. In fact Te means by whom some thing was done &c formerly. 
Tai I cila i rar, a, ( :), fi Bari di apelat nga ana fenti FK FÉV arte: I ULEFERENT a malar xfa: waw wf . 
87. The affix ini comes after the word purva, also when another word precedes it, the sense being by whom something is done'. . 
::: Thus ক্ষুধী শুধু ক্ষুনমনন ‘who formerly madeধী জানা , 
In these words, first and are compounded by II. 1.4; and then the afix is added. These two sotras V. 2. 86, 87, give rise to these two maxims 0674T CU malef TIITEE "that which connot possibly be anything but a Pratipadika or Nominal-stem, does, (contrary to l. 1.72) not denote that which ends with it, but it denotes only itself." y ears fry "The rule of vyapadesivad-bhäva does not apply to a pratipadika". That rule is embodied in the following paribhasha- au t -"an operation which affects some thing on account of some special designation, which for certain reasons attaches to the latter, affects likewise that which stands alone and to which therefore, just because the reasons for it do not exist, that special designation does not attach". 
Tur u l cel mai il cu :, , (a ) : 
Naara i kerana sayfa semasa 
88. The affix ini comes after ishta &c. in the senso of 'by him'. 
Thus - Tiere &c. "who wished", "who performed a charitable act". The words tha, yfir &cformed by rx will govern locative instead of accusative. See värtika under 11. 3. 3& 
A 
U 
927 
[ BK. V. CH. II. 1.91 
प 
पत्या 
1 2पूर्व, पासादिव (उपसादित),4निगदित, परिगदिव',6परिवारित, निकाय द,8निपारिव', निपडित, 10 संकलित, 11 परिकलिस, 12 संरक्षित, 13 परिसित, 14 मर्षित, 15 गणित', 16 भरकीर्ण, 17 मायुन.18 गृहीत, 19भानात, 20 श्रुत (भामासमुत), 21 मधीत, 23 म. 
धान (9,23 भासेपित, 24 भरधारित, 25 भपकल्पित, 26 निराकस, 27 उपकृत, 28 पाकत, 29 - सुयुक्त, 30 मनुगणित, 31 भनुपठित, 32 ज्याकलित, 33 परिकथित, 34 संकल्पित, 35 विकलित. 38 निपतित, 37 पठित, 38 पूजित, 39 परिगणिक, 40 उपगणित, 41 परिक्ष (9,42 भपवारिक, 43 उपमत, 
निग्रहीन, 45 भाषित.. 
छन्दसि परिपन्थिपरिपरिणो पर्यवस्थातरि ॥ ८९॥ पदानि ॥ छन्दसि, परिपन्थि, परिपरिणी, पर्यवसातरि .. पतिः ॥ परिपन्थिन् परिपरिन् इत्येता धनी छन्नास विषये निपात्येते पर्यवस्थातर बाच्थे । पर्यवस्थावा पतिपक्षसंपनरयते॥ 
89. In the Chhandas, the words paripanthin and pariparin are anomalously formed by this affix, and have the sense of 'an antagonist'. 
The word पर्यवस्था means 'an adversary, an antagonist' Thus मा वो परिपरिको पिन् मा वा परिथिनो विपन (Yaj. Ved. IV.34). These words are obsolete in secular literature. See however Gita III. 34 
अनुपचन्वया ॥ १०॥ पदानि । अनुपदी, अन्वेश। पनि ॥ ममुपपीति निपात्यते ऽन्देश वत्स भवति ॥ पदस्थ पचारनुपरम् ।। 
___90. The word anupadin, formed enomalously by ini, denotes 'who goes after, who searches'. 
. . Thus मनुपदी गाप, भानुपी उष्ट्राणाम् "going after or searching the cows and camels. ___ साक्षादू धरि संज्ञायाम ॥ ९१॥ पदानि ॥ साक्षात्, द्रशरि, संक्षायाम् (इनि)। निरासाक्षाच्छन्दो ऽध्ययम् । तस्मादिनिःप्रत्ययो भवति रिवाये । संज्ञा महणमभिधेयनियमार्थन 
91. The affix ini comes after the word sakshat, in the sense of 'a spectator, looker on', when the word so formed is & Name. 
The word Erre is an Indeclinable. The word dan is used in the aphorism to restrict the sense of the word. Thus साभादू ब्रटा-साक्षी,d. साक्षिणी, pl. साक्षिणः 'an eye-witness'. In any transaction like loan, &c, three persons directly see the fact, and may be called ret, viz. who gives, who takes, and another who merely looks on. By using the word संज्ञा, the word साक्षित् is restricted to the mere looker on, and not to the lender or borrower. 
क्षेत्रियन् परक्षेत्रे चिकित्स्यः ॥ १२॥ पदानि ॥ क्षेत्रिय, परक्षेत्र, चिकित्स्यः । पत्तिः ॥ सत्रियमिति निपात्यते । परोने चिकित्व हवेतस्मिन् वाक्याय परवचनम् । परोपारा पति सामीसमर्थात चिकित्स्वइत्येतस्मिाषप् प्रत्यया परपरलोपथ निपात्यो। 
BK. V. CH. II. $.931 
. 
. 
- 
W 
92. The word kshetriyach (a ) is anomalous, meaning "curable in another body" i.e. "not curable in this life 
The whole word enunciated here in the sense of para-kshetre chikitsya; or the word , with acute on the last syllable, is formed by adding the affix vy to the word for the force of the affix being curable therein and the word r is elided before this affix. Thus fra e n incurable disease 984'incurable Icprosy * : I c-organic disease. The word 
means body assumed in the next reincarnation. The word any applies to an irremediable disease 
The word means 'poison aiso 
quutama pred *that which is to be removed from another's body where it has entered'. Or 
Tres mcans 'rank growth or grass", i. c. q r 
a f un on F # " that like grass &c, which grows in a para-kshetra or another's held 1. c. a field set apart for grain &c and not for grass, and which therefore must be weeded out (chikitsya)* Or afere is an “adulterer, Le prin in 
T Fora farretas: * These are all secondary meanings 
LAN 
P 
. 
..? 
a 
Start 
20 
ful, Falegn, TEL FEUE, F UX, E , fa, at,()! f 
e rir a vrut I ETTET Trai , T serrurier স্কুষ্টি। কুয়াকাঙ্খীসল্লিমিলস অনুয়ায়ী ক্ষঞ্জিসুন্দ্র নির্মিযজু জু স্কুল 
Ortar orti q uaita eri rurawataran I AMNT TE বিঃ ৰূরুঙ্গ জুজু ! মাগনা স্কুণ্ডু। জুনল গুলাম শান্তি স্কুঞ্জে 
93. The word Indriyam, (baving udátta on the last), is anomalous, meaning an organ of sense; and so called, either because it is "the characteristic from which the exis tence of Indra is inferred", or "it is seen by Indra', or "it is created by Indra', or 'it is wished for by Indra', or 'it is given by Indra', 
The word fra is a primitive word, meaning organs of sense, such as eyes &c. Its derivation is obscure, if it is a derivative word at all in the latter alternative, it may be said to be formed by the affix added after a in the sense of either a mark thereof'. ASR B 
a The senses (indriyas) are so called because, Indra is Atma or soul, and it is inferred by the existence of the senses, eyes, ears &c. So that these organs are the marks or signs or linga of Indra : because they being an instrument presupase an agent, there being no instrument without an agent. 
RX 
999 
. 
# 
. 
. 
(BK. V. CH. II. $ 94 
MYRTLAYER T 
ODAY WHERE 
NUMENTAIRES 
Or the sensed (indriyas) are so-called because they are seen or kaowa by Indra or Atma' ( C WTC) The affix is here added to a Word in the third case in construction. The knowing or perceiving of the senses by the Self is an allusion to the following Sruti of the Aitareya Upa nishad Chapter 111. verse 13, where the Self having created the physical body took a survey of it. 
We are on "He beheld this Brahma who dwells in the body who pervades everywhere, and exclaimed * I have seen this ".Or they are so called because they are created by Indra or Atma (ru ) i. c. the senses are formed according to the good and bad deeds of the Sell Or they are so called because they are wished for by Indra or Self (a rt and as they are the gate-ways of knowledge. Or they are so called because they are given by Indra (A ) . c. they are allotted to their respective objects by Indra e g. the eye is given to perceive forms, the tar to perceive sounds and so on. The word er or joins every one of the above 
The word of shows that there may be other appropriate significations also: As 
a senses difficult to be subdued by the Soul तदस्यास्यस्मिन्निति मतुः ॥ ९४॥ पदानि ॥ तत, मस्य, अस्ति, अस्मिन्, इति 
1 
HL 
. 
2 
HST 
TUP 
fri i area runt * Ana yurt, a wa 
! As I favorit FC W Shiha and Taft, WYR78 
মুক্তি প্রাঙ্গুলি ** Kdrld W WGERE forat sta uredi 
. . 
Esta w TV i u 
g 
ot # : 
94. The affix matup (10, *. ) comes after & word in first case in construction in the sense of whose it is," or in whom it is. 
Thus tris af9 nom. 11477'having cows, as ar trix hafaRTI (being substituted for by VIII. 2. 9), as aren Similarly un r u The word tia shows that the use of act and cog nate affixes are restricted in their application. For example, a person who has three barley grains only will not be called uur! This affix comes when the significations are (1) A large quantity or number, as in " having many cows'. (2) When censure (RT) is implied, as , cercet (3) when praise (dat) is meant, as hyd r. (4) when an inherent or perma. nent quality of a thing is meant (FR ) as, ficat # (5) When excel lence (front) is meant, as, of RT (6) When accompaniment (af). is meant, as fit, ont (7) When the sense of a "to beis denoted, as 
লিঙ্গ 
T 
: BK V. CH. 11. $ 96.) 
Vårt:-The affix or is elived after words of quality (a ), as # Casa Y EN SOT, &c . ___ रसादिभ्यश्च ॥ १५॥ पदानि । रसादिम्य, व, 
FETI I CETff warfare eo ara, arreteer een pagado 
95. The affix matup comes after the nominal stems rasa &c, in the sense of whose it is', or 'in whom it is 
As an, a , # Why this special sotra with regard to tuif words, when they would have taken wit by the last satra. This pre vents the application to these words of other affixes having the sense of How do you form then go 
a 6 # These are rare forns. According to Patanjali this sätra is useless. Or the word &c, must denote qualities, perceivable by the organs of taste, touch &c, l. e a should mean taste, 6 form. Therefore the forms moof and are valid, meaning OHUSTAT So also can 2:=Treri, here ay and do not mean 'form' and 'taste. And all words of quality having one syllable are governed by this søtra, and form their derivative in * See V. 2. 115 
1 Te, 29, 30, 4 m, 5 , 6 09.7 , 8 ****, 9 79(TC CENT mi fugon), 10 ars ( ) 
settorerrat RACE I n fan STATUL, HTC: , pace 11 
MONS 
. 
Y 
" 
ama u ra**** 
96. The affix lach (*) comes optionally, in the sense of matup, after & stem ending in long at, the word expressing something which is found only in a living being. 
Thus from 'a crest', we have game or aroma. So also T* or TOTTEN Why do we say "which is found in a living being > Observe four TL 4: the crested flame of a lamp'. Why do we say ending in ? Observe car, VITETEN 
Vårt: It should be stated that the affix my comes only after what denotes member or limb of a living being, (and not anything like love, pas. sion, intelligence &c, that are also found in living being) Hence there is no affixing of sy here : forutsealaf tfar, fettare 
Every affix is udatta (111. 1. 3), unless contrary is indicated by some anubandha. They would have been udatta by. III. 1. 3, even without the indicatory (V1. 1. 163) The employment of this anubandha, however 
938 
[BK. V: CH. II.698 
indicates that this udatta will never be changed into svarita, as other udattas are by rule VIII. 2.6, as चूडोप्रसि ॥ 
सिमादिभ्यश्च ॥ ९७ ॥ पदानि । सिघ्मादिभ्यः, च, (लच्) . वृतिः ॥ लजन्यतरस्वामिति वनते । सिमाविधः प्रातिपरिक यो लच् प्रत्ययो भवत्वम्बतरस्वां मत्वर्षे ॥ सार्मिकम् ॥ पाणिधमन्योपच ॥ वा० ॥ पातरम्तबलललाटगलानामूङ् च ॥ पा०॥ जयापटाकलाः क्षेपे । पार्मिकम् ॥समन्दूपतापापेष्यते ॥ 
97. - The affix lacn comes in the sense of matup, 'after the words sidhma &c, and optionally matup also. 
Thus formirati or formala, Tmi or varell The word gear fara under stood in this satra, causes the employment of the affix tog in the alternative. It does not mean that the affix you is optional. For were my optional, then the affix sa and on would come by V. 2. 115 after those words of FEMINA class:which end in 8. But that is not the case. 
Vart:—The words to and fa lengthen the vowel before is, as पानीला, धमनीलः ॥ 
Vart:-The words पास इन्त, बल, ललाट and mल take the.augment कर before ल,as पासूलः, दन्तूलः, बलूलः, ललादूला, गलूलः ॥ 
___Vart:-The word जटा, घटा, का and कला take लघु, when censure is meant, as अटालः, घटालः कलाल. and कालः, but जटावांस्तापसः when no censure is meant. 
Vart:- This affix comes after words denoting lower organisms, and word denoting disease: as यूंकालः मलिकालः, विचार्षिकालः, विपादिकालः, मूछाला 
1 सिम, 2 गड, 3 माणे, 4 काम, पीज (जीव), 6 वीणा', 7 कृष्ण', 8 निप्पाप, 9 पांड, 10 पावं, 11 पर्दू (परर), 12 हनु, 13 सतु, 14 मांस, 15 पाणिधमन्योर्षिय 16 वातदन्तबललास. नामूह च 17 पटापटाकराकला (का)मेपे, 18 पर्ण, 19 उदक, 20 प्रज्ञा, 21 सकि, (सक्थि) 22 कर्ण, 23 मेह, 24 जीत, 25 श्याम, 26 पिक, 27 पिस, 28 पुष्क.(शुष्क), 29 पृयु, 30 , 31 मम्मु, 32 मण्ड, 33 पच, 34 पद, 35 कपि, 36 गण्ड (कण्ड), 37 मन्यि, 38 श्री', 39 कुश, 40 धारा', 41 वर्णन्', 12 पमन्', 43 लेमन्, # पेच', 45 निष्पाद', 46 कुण्ड', 47 झुद्रमन्सूपतापयोग 48 गण्ड, 49 संज्ञा ।। . घसांसाध्या कामवले ॥ ९८॥ पदानि ॥ वत्स, अंसान्याम, कामवले, (लम्)। 
वृत्तिः ॥ पसांसचावांतप्रत्ययो भवति ययासंख्य कामवति बलपति चार्थे । 
98. The affix lach comes after the words vatsa and ansa, in the sense of love and strength respectively.' 
Thus Kivis 'loving the calf, loving, tender'. BM: 'strong, lusty'. The word a means 'calf'; in carns there is no trace of its origin, for it is applied to father, master &c, as वत्सलः स्वामी, वत्सलः पिता &c. The word भंस means 'shoulder': but sich means 'strong! The affix my in these cases is not optional, but necessary and debars Talk In other senses, the matup only is added as अंसवती गौः, भंसवान दुर्वलः ॥ 
se 
BK. V. CIL II. $ 101) 
फेनादिलक्ष ॥ ९९ ॥ पदानि । फेनात,इल च, 
। 
NE 
A 
CAL 
CA 
US 
S 
D 
A 
W 
99. The affix ilach ( ) #8 well as lach, comes after the word phena, in the scrise of matup: and optionally the affix matup also. 
The word r draws in my; and the word warmera understood in the sätra adds are in the alternative As fi, #: and may # 
लोमादिपामादिपिञ्छादिभ्यः शनेलचः ॥ १०॥ पदानि । लोमादि-पामादि-पि Oiar, মূল। মার্কি খামাঝি বিস্তাবিজ্ঞ: দিঘী শ্রী সুখাৱৰ ক স্ব স্ব মন্ত্র থলি arry 
100. The three affixes la (T), 1a (a), and a () come in the sense of matup, respectively after the words of these three classes i. e. lomádi, pămâdi, and pichchhadi : and the affix matup also comes in the alternative. 
The affix y comes after than words as, e or "hairy. The affix * comes after raf words, as, Tips or art scabby'. The affix My comes after for words, as, from or 
M b roth Vart-The affix comes after the word in the sense of beautiful; as a 'the fair one' i.e. a woman. 
Vart-The words wrest, pro and shorten their final vowel before #, as ui a field', . 
. Väri:-The word fra (fe ) loses its second member, before , and the change caused by sandhi (a in to ) is undone Otherwise the form 
ould be স্বল্পঞ্জ ( being elded}, a বিকাছালি গার্দি কাজি oin variously . 
Vårt:--The effix e comes after my before which is changed to *, as ne 
Vårt:--The affix ilach comes after jaja, ghafi, and kala, when censure is meant, as wir, Víca: niem: but seart when no censure is meant 
1 7, 207, 3*. $ ft. 5 fift, 6***,772,8 ,9 * * 
1 0976, 277, 3 , 4 , 5 , 8 7 (4), 7 a, 8 m, 9 46 10 * 11 17 any, 12 mai 
Tetesori (oralaries), P 
o r (ratoriui). K . 13 
, 13 Freforegion Fyrir (rayer), 14 € ( ), 15 , 16 * .. 
1 f t (v), 2 , 3 (**), 4 * (THT), S TETET (UTC T), 9, 8, 74, BF. 9 am 
RO 
17 
1941 
A 
. 
933 
( BK. V. CH. 11. $ 104 
.. 
1 
S. AT S * 
* 
w rattur: al Porn Tu I -47-warri, or har i tar U 
S 
wara rao . 101. The affix na (+ ) comes in the sense of matup after the words prajña, Sraddha and archa : as well as the affix matup. 
As yr: or art. r or ra, mi or m ay The Katika has introduced the word for into the satra from the vartika 1 
Vårt.So also after aft, as : orar : : Farat ferrat i Pern qara 199:- , arat 
T: 1 F#F# FA na rent year water 
102. The affixes vini (face) and ini (C) come, with the force of matup, after the words tapes and sahara respectively. 
The word 97 ends in me, and therefore by V. 2. 121, it would have taken faa; similarly ar* ends in w, and by V. 2. 113, it would have taken 
ra; it may, therefore, be objected, where is the necessity for the present sotn? To this it is replied, that by the next sätra, these words take the affix ay also; so that, had there not been this present søtra, the ye would have debarred the application of maand na of V. 2. 115 and 121. The affix xa (V. 1.115) is also debarred after the word , though it ends in W 
9 
अण् च ॥ १३॥ पदानि ॥ मण,च. श्रुतिः । तपः सहकाभ्यामण्य प्रत्ययो भवति । A lle vareri AT 
103. And also an (+ *) comes after tapas and sahasra. 
Thus ani, ETER: # The separation of this sátra from the last is for two purposes, Ist the anuvfitti of my runs in the subsequent sätras, which could not have been done had it been included in the last sätra, - 2nd the rule of yathasankhya (1. 3. 10) would not have applied in the last sötra, bad or been read along with fin and TAN 
Vårt. The words sulca &c, are governed by this rule and take a As fara frasen ** sua: par: 1 Similarly at: (a kind of hell) , 
ag, 164, and . 
fratresCST 1898 al 0-1 () will markama El ATI 
BK. V. Ch. 11. $ 107. 1 
934 
80 
AL 
104. The affix an comes, in the sense of matop, after sikati and Sarkar.. 
Thus ad aer, gråt Yu These are the example, when they do not denote a place. In denoting a place they will take rand of the next sotra 
देशे साबिलचौच ॥ १०५॥ पदानि । देशे, लए, इलचौ च । আলিঃ বিহ্মান্ধ-স্ব স্ব মিষ্ট পুঝিলক্ষ্মী গল্পঃ অক্ষায় অ, শকু জ্ঞ 
. 105. When the sense is of 'a locality', there may take place the lup-elision of the affixes denotnig matup (with the preservation of the gender and number of the word), or there may be the affix ilach (a), as well as an and matup, after the words sikate and sarkars. 
By in the sotra, and we are introduced. The at refers to a and every afix in general. Thus ** 
T e 
femer ton or form , a: or FETT 'a sandy country. So also rur: or ta: or urer or wat 'a stony locality, 
Why do we say when meaning a locality, Observera a vessel of sand', vrat "honey or sugar". In the case of the elision of the affx, the gender and number are preserved by 1. 2. 51. 
दन्त उभत उरच ॥ १०६॥ पदानि ॥ दन्ते उधते उरच।। f: ti THT ON THE O TSTE TU TI 
106. The affix urach (0) comes after danta, de noting 'having projecting teeth. 
Thusay na WFT PE 
The words in the sotra are either in the nominative or the locative case, but have the force of ablative. 
Why do we say when the meaning is that of projecting? Observe F#m7 'having teeth. __ अपसुरिमुष्कमधो रः ॥ १०७ ॥ पदानि । ऊष, सुषि, मुक, मधो, . 
C: il 
g 
i 
uut vara med **W T ****TUTTE I appellatier FWY था। कहा इरशाद व 
107. The affix & comcs, after the words ůsha, sushi, mushka and madbu, with the force of matup. 
Thus av r 'a barren soil, impregnated with asha or salt. africa a perforated wood i. e. containing his or hole'. T qu'a bez st having testicles or mushka'. yq T: 'sweet sugar. The word shows that the words formed with care names of certain things. Therefore it will not apply 
XEA 
N 
G 
E 
K21 
9 
49 
938 
[ Bk. V.CH. 11.5 110 
CN 
LINALO 
CALON 
PR 
I 
MARIA DEL 
. 
here is a poor there is salt In this pok, we cannot say ayd yr., nor জুন জুয়া 0 আসি ইঞ্জিঃ । 
Vart-The affix & comes after . m and sw, as CheTV 08740 
0 'an ass, lit having a wide throat. Uarama na form a Stalkative, E K 7: 40 tan elephant having tusks. The word *** means the tusk of an elephant or the lower jaw of an elephant. The word ** 
is a common name for all elephants. 
Vars: The afhx comes after 7, via and qr6, as yra "a city, lit. having trees (naga tree), 260# 
Vårt: So also after the vowel being shortened: as UTM Tax #106 @ 1-7X144:1 Ti Vava*: rare 
. 108. The affix # comes after dyu and dru, in the sense of matup. . Thus # and 4: These are primitive words, and therefore do not take way in the alternative. . 
shtrat sacru a ria , *, are 
R 
: 
the 
ten 
AN 
31 
আলি খমন্ধ নাকি কলি সুঙ্গ । স্বা। লমী লীগ ও ও পেৰীখনিণী গন্ধু স্ব স্ব tি জাপাখানজী নয় ! 
109. The affix a comes optionally, with the force of matup, after kega. 
Though the word waar was understood here from V. 2.90 (sce sötra 97); its repetition shows that in the alternative we have not only gy but the affxes on and (V. 2. 115) also. Thus we have four forms : , 
*: and I 
Vårt-The affix is secn after other words also. As Arory: a kind of serpent, Forum 'a kind of gem', Aur:, * T:, fra ****, (LET": 
Vårt:-The final of spüre is elided before, as w ell 
Vart:in the Chhandas, the afhxes T. and are come in the sense of Thus :- on baru (2:). grita ; 94 
t; and y, as I or at 
Vart :--The affixes et and y come respectively after an and rep as, re, TTC 
TUETTICHETAT I 880 Eur 1 Tu$t, UTC, FOTOK () Trendy Tu ai mai face 
110. The affix a comes after gândi and ajaga, in the sense of matup, when the word is a Name.. .. 
Secui 
Art RUSSI 
. 
25. 
XX 
29 
? 
* 
< 
U 
BK V. Cn. II. S. 114] 
इनि 
936 
As most the bow Gandiva of Arjuna' ct 'the bow Ajagava of Siva'. There is shortening also, as गायि ॥ The sotra is so framed, that the word mot and nfo are both included 
- काण्डाण्डादीरनीरची। १११ ॥ पदानि । काण्ड, अण्डात, रन्नरयो। वृत्तिः॥काण्ड भण्डात्येताभ्यां ययासंख्यमीरनीरची प्रत्ययो भवको मलये। 
111. The affixes iran - ( र) and trach (1) come in the sense of matup, after the words kanda and anda respectively. 
Thus काण्डीरः and भण्डीरः ॥ Another reading has मार and मारी। रजःकृष्यासुतिपरिषदो पलम् ॥ ११२. पदानि । रजः-कृषि-आसुति-परिषद, घलन् । 
वृत्तिा ॥ रजामतिभ्यः प्रातिपदिक यो पलम् प्रत्ययो भवति मलये पातिकम् ॥ वलपकरणे ज्येभ्योपि रयतइति पत्यम्।। 
___112. The afix valach (घल) comes, in the sense of matup, after rajas, krishi, asuti, and perishad. 
As रजस्वला बी, कृषीवला कुटुम्बी, भारतीवलः पाण्डिका, परिपाले पत्रा .The lengthening of vowel in care and mara takes place by VI. 3. 118. The affix 
q comes only under certain senses and conditions, as shown in the above examples. Thus in रजोऽस्मिन् पामे वियते, there is no afixing. 
Vart: The affix valach is scen after other words also. As भातबला, पुषवलः, पितृवला, उत्साहाला 
दन्तशिवात्संज्ञायाम् ॥ ११३॥ पदानि । दन्त-शिखात्, संशायाम (बलच)। वृत्तिः ॥ एन्सपिसायदाभ्यां चलच् प्रत्ययो भवति मवर्षे संज्ञायां विपये। 
___113. The affix valach comes in the sense of matup, after danta and sikha, when a Name is formed. 
___ Thus तावल न्यः, इन्तावलो गमः, पिखावलं मगरम्, पिखावलो स्यूण - The final vowel of पन्त is lengthened before पल by VI. 3. 11& . . ___ ज्योत्स्नातमिस्राङ्गिणोर्जस्विन्नघुस्वलगोमिन्मलिनमलीमसाः॥११४॥ पदानित ज्योत्सा-तमिस्रा-ङ्गिण-उर्जास्विन-गोमिन-मलिन-मलीमसाः.. 
वृत्तिः । ज्योत्स्नादयः शमा मलयें निपात्यन्ते मवर्षे संज्ञायां लिपये। 
_114. The words jyotsna, tamisra, ariigina, arja svin, arjasvala, gomin, malina, and malimasa are irregularly formed, in the sense of matup and are Names. 
They are thus formed. szilfare +7 Felltall moon-light' (ther being elided). तमम् +( मिला 'night'. (r being added ): it has other genders than feminine as तमिजं नमः 'dark sky'. भामच्-धिनः। The augment 
937 
BK. V. CH. II. $1171 
ere is added to and then the affix a and my; as +94 +fr fem *FTA: + Fit FTIRE: +py #fas; **+ * ****: 
pasar n 888 a n , #. ont u mailarearaten waar well: 1 
115. The affixes ini (17) and than ( 5) come in the sense of matup, after nominal stems ending in short ; and in the alternative matup also comes. 
Thus font foga, on nom. 51, GTA # The word watu (V. 7. 96) Is understood here also, so we have , as part Or Why do we say 'short **? Observe arm. Here there is neither noru 
These two affixes pa and do not come after words of one syllable, after words ending in krit-affixes, after words denoting genus (jati), and when the constuction is that of locative. As fand a form only P TT, en Krit: as, taro Genus, as, ort, and Locative; as p8TFT a po 
r! There are, however, some exceptions to this, as krit r ea enda, eta Genus (ati) megugrana, 
ग्रीधादिभ्यश्च ॥ ११६॥ पदानि ॥ बीह्यादिभ्यः च (इनि-नो अतिः ॥ बीयाविन्य प्रालिपविकेभ्य इनिडना प्रत्ययो भवता मह । 
116. The affixes ini and than come in the sense of matup, after the words vrihi &c; as well as the afix matup. 
Thus iet (nom. Het), , , , , TATTI 
These two affixes, however, do not come after all wire words. Accord ing to Patanjali, the affix a comes after fram sub-division, and the affix 
at after aiunt sub-division, after the remaining words, both and we (6) come The fucin after which 17 only comes are:«I er, zene, 3 HTT, 4 Mar, 5 FT 6411, 7 , 8 RE#1, 997799, 10 , 11 42, 12HT, # The very &c. are the following i Trg?, 2 TQ, 3 År; they take only. The rest take both. The word Am will get these affixes by the next stra also, why is it then read in this class? The word die in the Tundadi class V. 2. 117, does not mean the word-form f, but words synonym with it Thus Or 
UIT, U, una, ATTN The word in preceded by the negative particle, takes thesc affixes, as aunt and muru The remaining words are , 2, ore, ne, ZT, ÉNT # 
तुन्दादिभ्य इलच॥ ११७॥ पदानि ॥ तुन fr: Il Gazi OVAT E 
H arta UTI 117. The affix ilach ( also comes in the sense of matup, after the nominal-stems tunda &c. 
VP 
GANE 
Bk. V. CH. ii. g. It@j : 
.. 
938 
The force of u is that इनि, उन and मतुप् also come. As दुन्दिला, तुन्दी, तुनिकः, तुन्दवान: Similarly उदरिला, उदरी, उरिका, उतरवान् । - The following is the list of तुनारि words 1 तुन्द, 2 बरं, 3 पिपट, 4 पर, 5 यब, 6 ब्रीहि, 7 स्वाहाविदोष ॥ That is to say, the afix लप comes after words denoting parts of one's body, when the largeness (विवृद्धि) of those organs is implied : as विवृद्धौ कणों यस्य स काणलः, कर्षी, कर्णिकः, कर्णवान् ॥ .. .. 
___ एकगोपूर्वाह नित्यम् ॥ ११८॥ पदानि ॥ एक-गोपूर्वाव, ठब, नित्यम् । । वृत्तिः ॥ एकपूर्वाहीपूर्वाध प्रातिपदिकानिष्यं ठम् प्रत्ययो भवति मरव। 
118. The afix thai (+'-६क) comes always in the sense of matup, after a stem, which in composition is preceded by एक or गो। 
Thus एकशतमस्यास्ति-ऐकवतिक; गौरसिका, गोसहनिक . . . , 
The word oma: of V. 2: 115, is understood here also ; so that, stcms not ending in an are not governed by this rule, such as frutachura, no affixing. The word ऐकगविकः is an apparent exception, it being formed by adding or to the samasanta ivord एकगव (V.4.92). How do you explain मौकटिकformed by उम् from गोशकटी? Here कट is taken for एकटी, both being synonyms (N. B. This opinion of the Kasika-author is not in harmony with that of Patanjali, who does not read the anuvritti of ma: into this sätra. According to him ditore कंटिक is formed from गोशकटी; and एकविंशति &c, do not take this afix, because it is against usage. But the author of Kasika says-भ पात इत्यनुवरीम् नापतोल गह्मात् इत्येवमार्यम्-the anuvritti of अतः must surely be read, for the sake of sutras like V. 2. 128, though in the 90tras, like rantaaret &c there is no necessity of reading the anuvritti of मत.) 
. The word Farra'always', is used in the sotra to indicate that does not come in the alternative. In all the previous sotras agy came in the alter native. How do you form एकद्रव्यवत् in एकद्रष्यवला? This is not a correct form; or it may be said to be a compound of एक and ष्यवस्तात् ।। 
शतसहस्रान्ताश्च निष्कात् ॥ ११९ ।। पदानि ॥ शत-सहस्रान्तात्, च, निष्कात् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ एतान्तात् सहसान्ताप प्रातिपदिका ठम् प्रत्ययो भवति मत्वर्थे । तो घेच्छससहसपी निकाल. 
भवतः 
119. The affix than comes in the sense of matap, after the words sata and sahasra, when they follow after nishka. 
___ Thus निष्कशतमस्यास्ति नैष्कपतिकः, नष्कसहनिकः ॥ But not so after पुषर्ष निष्कपतं, it being never so found in usage 
रूपादाहतप्रशंसयोर्यप् ॥ १२० ॥ पदानि ॥ रूपात, आहत, प्रशंसयोः, यए। : 
939 
मिनि ॥ 
[BK. V.Cl. II. S12 
बृत्तिः ॥ माहतप्रशंसे प्रकृत्युपाधी,भाहतपयंसाविशिष्टायवर्तमानापमाया प्रत्ययो भवति मत्वर्थे । पार्निकम् ॥ वपकरणे ऽन्येभ्योपि भ्यतइति पतष्यन् ॥ . 
____120. The affix yap (य) comes in the sense of matup, after the words rûpå, when stamping (coining) or .praise is denoted. 
Thus आहतं रूपमस्य-रूप्यो नार: “a Dinara having stamped on it the form of some king &c.रूप्यः केदारः, कावं कार्षापणम् . Similarly प्रशस्त रूपमस्वास्ति-रूपया ger: 'a lovely person'. The form impressed on a dinar &c by hammering &c, is called stay or stamping. 
Why do we say when stamping or praise is denoted ?' Observe yo वान् 'having form'. 
.. Vart :---The affix व is seen after other words also, as हिन्या पर्वताः, गुण्या ब्राह्मणाः ॥ 
अस्मायामेधास्रजो विनिः ॥ १२१॥ पदानि ॥ अस्, माया-मेधा-जः, विनिः ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ असन्ताप्रातिपरिकान्माया मेधा सज इत्येतेभ्यम विनिः प्रथयो भवति मत्वर्थे । ' 
121. After a stem ending in अस्, and after maya, medhâ and sraj, comes the affix vini (ra) in the sense of matup. 
Thus पथस्-पवस्थिन्, यश-बस्थिन् ॥ मावाविन, मेधाविन्, सम्विन् ॥ The word Arat being included in our class, will take a, and also V. 2. 116. 
As माची, मायिकः ॥ .. . 
बहुलं छन्दसि । १२२॥ पदानि ॥ बहुलम्, छन्दसि (विनिः)। वृत्तिः ॥छन्दसि विषये बहुलं विनिः प्रत्ययो भवति मत्व।। . वार्तिकम् ॥छन्दसि विनिमकरणे ऽष्ट्रामेखलाइयोभयरुमाहरयानां दीर्घत्वं वेति वक्तव्यम् ।। 
वार्तिकम् ।। मर्मणशेतिवक्तव्यम् ।। वा०॥ सर्वचामयस्योपसंख्यानम् ॥ वा०॥ वृन्दावामारकन्वतब था॥ फलबहाभ्यामिनस्वक्तव्यः॥ वा॥हस्थाचालुएन्यतरस्याम् ।। . वा॥ शीतोष्णहमेभ्यस्तन सहतहत्यालुज्यतयः॥ वा०॥ तन सहतहात-हिमाघेलुः ।। वा॥ बलापोलच् ॥ वा०॥ वातासमूह चं॥ वा.॥ तन् पर्वमापां वक्तव्यः॥ वा.॥ भनिदभावे इनिर्वनग्यः॥ .. 
- 122. In the Chhandas, the affix vini is added diversely in the sense of matup). .. As भग्न तेजस्विन् ॥ Sometimes it is not added, as सूर्यो वर्चस्वान् ।। 
Vart:-In the Chhandas, the finals of ब, उभय and हरय is lengthen ed optionally before विनि; and it comes after भष्ट्रा, मेखला and रुला also : as मष्टावी, मेखलावी, यावी, उभयावी, रुजावी, हस्यावी ॥ 
___Vart:-So also after मर्म, as मर्मावी ॥ 
Vart:-Always after भामय, in the sacred as well as secular literature. As भामयावी ॥ [BK. V. CI. IIT ISE) 
भाल and मार। 
940 
Vart:-The affix मारकन् comes after yr and नारका, पन्दारका Vart:-The affix इन comes after फल and 4t, as मलिना and पति 
Vart:-So also after हुए; the affix चाल comes optionally: as, अथाह सायी, हायिका, हरयवान् ॥ The issa by I. 3.7. 
Vart:-The affix भालु comes after शीत, रण, and rप, in the sense of not being able to bear that. As drá Taardraig 'shivering from cold. उम्णाल, पालु। 
Vart:-So also after fire comes the affix e in the above sense: as हिंम म सहवे-दिमेल। 
. . Vart:--The affix बलुप in the same sense after बल, as समसहवेम्ब लला 
Vart:-So also after वाय; as वातानां समूह, or पावं न सहते-पाल. . Vart:-The affix a comes after पर्व and मरुतः A पर्वत: and मरुतः । 
Vårt:--The affix a comes after in the sense of 'not having that, as मी 'a beggar, who has not artha or wealth'. Otherwise मर्यवान् 'rich'. All these are obtained by पहला 
- ऊर्णाया युस । १२३ ॥ पदानि । जायाः, युख । वृश्चिः॥ वर्णाशनायुम् प्रत्ययो भवति मलये। . . 
123. The affix gp is added to sout in the sense of matup, (in the Chhandas). 
The of the makes the word of a 7 (I. 4, 16); the result of which is that rules applicable to x Bha do not apply; e g.VI. I. 148, by which the final or $, or mis elided. Thus tirg: u According to some; urte is to be read in this satra. The author of Siddhanta Kaumudi says that this is reasonable: for if yus is added to Orņa in secular literature also, then there was no neces sity of this sátra. The word arpa could have been read along with aham and subham in V. 2. 140. 
.. घाचो ग्मिानिः॥ ११४॥ पदानि । वाचः, म्मिनि । भूचिः॥ वावधान ग्मिानिः प्रत्ययो भवति मल। 
124. The affix gmini (मिन्) comes after the word vach, in the sense of matup. 
. Thus वाग्मी, पाग्मिनी, वाग्मिनः, The affix is not मिन, for had it been so, the form would have been पामिन् by VIII.4.45 Vart.. 
आलजाटची बहुभाषिाण ॥ १२५॥ पदानि ॥ भालच्-माटची, बहुभाषिणि। वृत्तिा पाशमानयमासमर्यादालए भारंच इत्येतो प्रत्यया भवतो माथे पहुभापिण्यभिषेये। पार्तिकम् । कुलितहति पत्नष्यन् । 
125. The affixes alach (भाल) and atach (माई) come in the sense of matup, after vach, the word denoting 'a talkative'. : . . . . . . . . . . . 
941 
: .इनि 
[ BK. V. CH II.S. 128 
This debars ग्मिन् ॥ . Thus वाचालः 'garrulous', वाचाट : . . 
Vart-These affixes come when contempt is expressed.. An orator पारमी) also talks much, but to the purpose. He will not be called वाचाल: or पाचारा॥ :: स्वामिन्नश्वये ॥ १२६॥ पदानि । स्वामिन्, ऐश्वर्य । 
वृत्तिः । स्वामिनिति निपात्यते ऐश्वर्ये गम्यमाने । स्वशब्देश्वर्यवाचिनो मन्वय मामिन्प्रत्ययो निपात्यते । 
126. The irregularly formed word svamin denotes 'Sir or Lord'. :. The affix Hift comes in the sense of lordship after the word 74 Thus स्वमस्यास्ति-ऐश्वर्यमस्यास्ति स्वामिन् ॥ Why do we say when meaning 'Sir. Observe, स्ववान् ॥ 
अर्शआदिभ्यो ऽच् ॥ १२७॥ पदानि ॥ अशादिभ्यः, अन् । वृत्तिः । अस् इत्येवमादिभ्यः प्रातिपदिकेभ्यो ऽमस्यया भवति मस्वयें । 
127. The affix ach (अ) comes in the sense of matup after the words arsa &o. 
. Thus भोलि भस्य विद्यन्त-मसः उरस: &c. IT After a word denoting a mem ber of the body comes the affix अच, when defect is meant. As खनापादास्यास्तिम खजा, काणः ॥ So also after words denoting color, as शुक्लोऽस्यास्ति-शुक्ला पटः॥ 
अर्शम, 2 उरस, 3 तुन्न, 4 चतुर, पलित, 6 जटा, 7 घटा, 8 पाटा', भघ (मन), 10 कर्दम, भम्ल (माम), 12 लवण, 13 स्थानातीनान, 14 वर्णात् . भाकृतिगण । 
द्वन्द्वोपतापगात्प्राणिस्थादिनिः ॥ १२८॥ पदानि । द्वन्द्व-उपताप-गोत-प्रा. णिस्थात्, इनिः॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ इन्दः समासः । उपतापो रोगः । गो निन्य, तविषयेभ्यः पन्मेभ्यः प्राणिस्थार्थवाचिभ्य हानि प्रत्ययो भवति मत्वर्थे। पा०॥ पाण्याम ॥ 
128. The affix ini (न्) comes, in the sonse of matup, after a dvandva compound, after the name of a discasc, and after anything denoting fault, when the thing is found in & 
living being. 
Thus Dvandva:--कटकवलयिनी 'a woman having a bracelet and a zone', पाइसनपुरिणी 'a woman having tankha and napur ornaments'. So after diseas. es: कुष्टी 'a leper', किलासी'a white leper. Soalter names of faults:-ककरावी, काकतालुकी।. . . . . . . . . . . . 
Why do we say when found in a living being Observe पुष्पफलवान TIT: N The affix, according to a Vartika, does not come after words de noting members of a living body: .as, पाणिपादवती॥ The word मत: V. 2. 115, is understood in this sätra, so that the affix docs not come after words not 
BK. V. CH. II. S. 1310 
942 
ending in e: asविषकनाटिकास्ती। Though Dvandva compounds &cending in n, would have taken in by V. 2. 115, the repetition of this affix in the present satra shows that Dyandva compounds &c, take only ra, and not उन् &c ___घातातिसाराभ्यां कुक च । १२९॥ पदानि । वात-अतिसाराभ्याम्-कुल्, प.. 
वृत्तिः ॥ वाताविसारशहाण्यामिनिःप्रत्ययो भवति, सत्संनियोगेनष वयो। कुगागमो भवति । 
120. The nugmont kuk (5) comes before fat, after the words våta and atisara, 
The words me and m are being names of diseases, will take by the fore-going sûtra; the present aphorism only teaches the affixing of the augment. Thus वातकी, भतिसारकी| Another reading is भतीसारकी. 
Vart:-So also after पशाच, as पिशाचकी श्रवण: 'the Kubera'.. 
This is when the words yra and Sier denote discases. Otherwise, वातवती गुहा॥ 
धयसि पूरणात् ॥ १३०॥ पदानि ॥ वयसि, परणात, (इनिः). वृत्तिः॥ इनिरनवर्तते । परणप्रत्ययान्ताप्रातिपरिकाशिनिः प्रत्ययो भवति मन्वय पखि पोत्स। 
130. The affix ini comes in the sensc of matup, after an ordinal numeral, when ago is denoted. 
. Thus पम्पमोऽस्यास्ति मासः संवत्सरोवा-पंचमिन् 'five months or years old',as मंचमी उष्ट्रः ॥ Similarly नवमी, दशमी &c. By V. 2. IIS the affix इनि would have come after these words; the present sätra is a restrictive rule teaching that 5 does no come in this sense. 
Why do we say क्यसि 'yhen age is denoted', Observe, पंचमवार भामरागः __ सुखादिभ्यश्च ॥ १३१॥ पदानि ॥ सुखादिभ्यः, च, (इनिः)। 
वृत्तिः ॥ सुख इत्येवमादिभ्यः प्रातिपदिकेच इनिः प्रत्ययो नियम्यवे मत्वर्थे। 
131. The affix ini comes (to the exclusion of other affixes) in the sense of matup, after the words sukha &c.. 
Thus मुखिन् nom. मुखी; दुषिन् &c. When censure is implied, then इन comes after माला, to the exclusion of मतुए, as माली 
. . . The following is the list of मुखादि word:- . 
1 सुख, 2 दुःख, 3 हम, 4 कृच्छ, 5 मात्र (भाग), भन',7भलीक, करुण (करुणा) सोग, 10 प्रतीप (प्रमीप), 11 शील,12 हल, 13 माला क्षेप, 14 कपण, 15 प्रणब (प्रणाब) 16 इल', .17 कम॥ 
धर्मशीलवर्णान्ताच ॥ १३२॥ पदानि ॥ धर्म, शील, वर्णान्तात, च, (इनिः)। पत्तिः ॥ भन्तपना प्रत्येकमभिसंबध्यते, धर्मायन्तास्मातिपदिकादिनिःप्रत्ययो नियम्यदे.. 
2 
(BRV.CR. 11:9-1351 
WOOD 
: . 132. The affix ini comes in the sense of matup, (to the exclusion of others), after nominal steps ending in dharma, atla, and varpa.. 
i 
. 
X 
.. 
4 HR! 
. 
NUKK 
MTD SW** 
CAS 
ESTET 31 a n Fri, gra, (fa: ) 
.: S: N PETTEMfa: nu fara 887 strada 1. 133. The afbx ini comes in the sense of matup, after the word hasta, when a genus is denoted by the word: 80 formed.'. ... Thus h alle*** TUK elephant'. Why do we say when meaning a' erta *a genus ? Observe per 
Turfcargarfiro a 834 # vara u surie, for, ( fr ) .. far i reforme fat roer og 
134. The affix ini comes in the sense of matup, after the word varpa, when the word so formed means & Brahmacharia. 
. Thus eft'a Brahmachart. The first three or castes, who are entitled to the investiture with sacred thread, and lead the life of a Brahma student are so called. When the meaning is not of Brahmachart we have fare # 
guma#74 Ta #gwax, 1, (fa:). fit gaat era stata fi rout f rau 
itu aa ar HIGGEN * 1 Targa 4* या अाधासमिहिने । 
पासायति वनव्यम् । 
135. The aflix ini comes in the sense of matup, after the words pushkara &c, when the word so formed denotes a locality. 
Thus genital'a tank", saraf & Why do we say when locality' is expressed? Observe g ene - 
Vart-The affix comes after ** preceded by <re of , as permet 
Vari-So also after words preceded by t; as, tutur, affar. tai 1 
Vårt:-So also after when meaning ‘not near'; as sfera meaning etsiiFETSKW 'distant from wealth. Otherwise muere 'having wealth'. a part-So also after a compound ending in , as your frivants : 
1999, 290, 3 ****, 6 farm, 6 894,6**, 7 aftree, 8 fire, ga 10 min 
OP 
T3 
LYURT 
TISKT 
ADA 
W1 
৯ই 
. 
1. 
, 1 ৱিা, যা কালী, 14 জিয়, ৪ যুদ্ধাস্ত্র, id অল্প অল্প }, {? ঠি, 18 
, 
# 
- 
ক 
. 
: 
24 বি. 28 গাঞ্জ”, 30 গজ, 8ক্ষম, ৪ জুয়া, $$ স্কুঞ্জ, 
প্রস্তাঘী মন্তব্যকে ! ( অস্বনি। শাখি, মন, অন্য ভুয়া । 
মুলি। : মানিবন্ধিশ্রী সঞ্জয়ী মল। যেমগম খজুল ঘনি ধ্বমুখী। 
136. 'After the nominal-stema bala &c, comes the affix matup optionally, as well as ini... ........ . 
The affix fe will come in the alternative. Thus n orang (. লাল); স্বাদু or সুক্ষ্মান্ধী (৮. সুভ্রান্তি । 
| 1 , 2 , ও বঙ্গো (জান্ধ), * কঙ্কা, , ৪ জিকাে, * ৪ পূৱা, # সুল, 10 জুলু, l ফ্লাঘা, 2 গ্রাম, 13 সুখ, 14 স্লাঙ্ক, 1$ গ্রী, 18 প্রালা, t? সু ৪ বস্থা 9 হিজাজ, প্লট স্কুল, 2 , a 
* স্নাযা মাদাম ও যান। স্বল্পাকা, যামু না। 
वृतिः ॥ ममतास्मातिपदिकान्भशमान्तान इनिः अत्ययो भवति अस्व, समुतान सज्ञा गम्यते । 
137. After a nominal-stem ending in #Tora, comes the afix ini, in the sense of matup, when the whole word 80 forned means a name. 
Thus +7 44+ (VI. 4-144) -- Uffem. afumat # So also a t Similarly 1, m , Erfurt 11 Why do we say, 'when reaning a laime? Observe, মুলা , ব্যাথা 
কঁহাখা অমত্মানুষ: দুই প্রধান শাখা, যশ- 
খুন 
1 
: 
f: 
বুলি ॥ নিৰি সন্ধাৰায়ুৰূবার্থান্ধী, আখ গ ঘুরির অঙ্কু বৰ ঃ প্রঃ - দি । 
138. The seven affixes ba, bha, yus, ti, tu, ta and yas, come in the sense of matup, after 'water and happincse', and ya 'happiness'. 
: 
* 
: 
1 
৫ 
The in ye and , make the stem, a Pada (1.4 16), the result of which is that of and is changed Into Anusváva before these two affxes by VIII. 3. 23. When denoting a Name, the forms will be 69 and স্কুল্যে ঃ 
तुन्दिवलिवडेभः ॥ १३९ ॥ पदानि । तुन्दि-बालि बढेः, मः। ফুৰি ফুলি গাল গতি দ্বষী  ঃ মুখ্রষ্ট বারি মম . . 
. 
.. 
. 
. 
: 11. 
: 
'good'. 
Thus is a HTCTTTTT, 'selfish haughty', Ty r The cofre makes the words Wet and T7. Padas; and 
rell 'auspicious', is changed into 
मोरम् । 
अथ पञ्चमध्यायस्य तृतीयः पादः। 
BOOK FIFTIE CHAPTER THEÐ. 
· Prett frafer: 11811. a ornar, formales: ! 
#: 1 fustanetevanz gran part, eriala torre utayari THE FACT 1721 
1. The affixes taught from this aphorism forward as far as V. 3. 27 (exclusive) are called Vibhakti. 
The affixes herein taught do not change the sense of the word, L they are in affixes which leave to the word their own denotation. The rule IV. 1. 82, extends no further than this, hence the words formed by these affixes do not produce epithets connoting the sense of the primitive and deaot ing something else 
Thus V. 3.7 declares, that after the words any in the ablative there is the affix afera, as 90%, ra: «: * 
The purpose served by designating these affixes as Vibhakt' is (a) to debar the elision of final and of the affixes as (1. 3. 4Thus in the aftix grote V. 3. 18, is not r, had it been so, rule I. 1. 47 would have applied: (b) to regulate the accept of , thus far bere by VI. I. 171, the affix afat becomes udatta by virtue of its being Vibhakt, othewise the accent would have been regulated by the indicatory (VI. I. 193); (c) to maka applicable to these words the rules of me, that is, the rules given in the Satras VII. 2. 102, and those that follow. Thus tuk + ETEE , the being replaced by w by VII. 2. 102. 
... The affixes now to be taught being FT47, the anuvfitti of erfar and 44 of IV. I. 82, does not apply to them. The word of IV. 1. 82 however applies here, so that these affixes are optional, thus we may have or a $¥ or #.. 
947 . 
. 
म 
. 
[Bk. V.CH. III. 35 
. किंसर्वनामबहुभ्यो धादिभ्यः॥२. पदानि । किम्-सर्वनाम-पहुभ्यः,अवय दिभ्यः 
वृत्तिः ॥ प्राविध स्थिर। किमा सर्वमाम्नो बहुपदाप प्राणि प्रत्यया पेपिदया। वात्तिकम् । बहुमहणे संण्यापरणम् ॥ 
2. These Pragdisiya affixes come after the word kim, and after a stem called sarvanama, and after bahu ; but . not after dvi &c. 
The words it &c, though पवनाम are exempted. Thus कुष, कृता, बला, या बहुता, बहुपः। 
Why do we say why not dvi &c'. Observe rura, curs i Why do we say किन् &ct Observe वृक्षात, वृक्ष &c. The word किम् is a सर्वनाम, but it being included in the dyadi class, would have been exempted from the operation of this rule had it not been separately mentioned 
Vart :-—The word r here is a Sankhya. Therefore, the affix does not apply here, पहोः सूपान, वही सूपे ।। 
इदम ॥३॥ पदानि ॥ इदमः, श्य.. वृत्तिः ॥ प्राग्दिश इत्येव । इदमाश इत्ययमादेशो भवति प्राग्दिशीयेषु प्रत्ययेषु पयः । 
3. For idam, there is the substitute rt (), when a Pragdistya affix follows. 
. The word gita is understood here also. The gofry is indicatory of the substitution of the whole (1. 1. 55). Thus (44+ V. 3. 11, - H 
पतेती रथोःnen पदानि । पत-इतो, र-थो वृत्तिः ॥ रेफपकागदी माग्दिशीये प्रत्यये परत इदम एतेतावादेवी भवतः। रोपवाद! 
. . 4. The substitutes ga and a come instead of idam, when a Pragdisiya affix beginning with rand u respec tively follows. 
This debars roll The.at in is for the sake of euphony. Thus feq+ हिल = एलर्दि (V. 3. 16); एम् + य इत्यम् (V. 3. 24). . एतदोश् ॥५॥. पदानि ॥ एतदः, भश । 
वृत्तिः ॥ प्राग्दिशहत्येव । एसा माग्दिधीये परतो पित्ययमादेद्यो भवति। 
__b. The substitute अश् comes in the place of एतद् when a Pragdisiya affix follows. 
. The s of भए causes the replacement of the whole (I. 1.55). Accord. ing to Patanjali the substitute is मन् and not भए ॥ Thus एतत् + तसिल्भ व: V. .3:7; मग V, 3. ta 
Vart: This satra must be divided into two parts, and 
and the mean 
the 
BK. V. Ch. III. 101 
948 
MARDANDAtoopamaaMRANCERHomewan 
lng being. (1) The substitutes * and come in the place of rar when affixes beginning with and respectively follow, as - gart (V. 3. 21) 
* E-F # The ty must be the cores which comes after idam (V. 4. 24) for the application of this rule (L), and not the of थाल् (V.3.23) before which the substitate will be my u The word or will take up by the implication af this rule. (2) The substitute replaces ac before other Pragdiálya afixes. 
सर्वस्य सोऽन्यतरस्यां दि॥ ६॥ पदानि ॥ सर्वस्य, सः, अन्यतरस्याम्, दि . बानः । वर्षस्य स इत्ययमादेशो भनि प्राविधीचे कापा प्रत्यये परतो न्वारस्था। 
6. The is substituted opionally for a before & Pragdisiya vibhakti beginning with a 
Thus it or ET# When the affix is not Pragdistya, there is no substitution : as, सर्व ददाति सवा आझमी'a Brahmant who gives all'. 
पहचस्यास्तसिलू॥७॥ पदानि । पञ्चम्या, सासिलू। वृत्तिः ॥ पञ्चम्यन्तेभ्यः किमर्वनामबहुभ्यस्यसिम्प्रत्ययो भवति । 
7. The affix ( lae) comes after the word kim, a sarvanama, and bahu, when ending in the ablative case. 
As किम् + तसिल्कु +स् (VII. 2. 104) कुवा, यता, क्षमा, बहुवः . ' तसेच ॥ ८ पदानि । तसैः, च. 
धृतिः ॥ प्रतियोग पञ्चम्यास्ततिः, भपादाने चाहीयहोरिक्षिस्थति । सस्य क्षः किसर्वनामबहुभ्यः परस्थ আমি কাঞ্জি 
8. The affix tasil (-tak) is substituted for rec (V. 4. 44, 45) when kim, a sarvandma, and bahu follow, 
. Thus कुतः, यतः, शता, or बहुत मागतः॥ This substitution is for the sake of accent; and for giving it the designation of vibhakti. 
पर्यभिज्यां च ॥ ९॥ पदानि । परि-ममिया, च ( तसिल ) वृतिः। परि भनि हत्येतान्या क्षविद प्रत्ययो भवति । 
9. The affix tasil comes after pari and abhi also. 
This affix comes when oft means *all'; and any means 'both. Thus परिता सरतः; 'all round; भभितर, उभयत: 'on both sides'. 
सप्तम्यारन् । १०. पदानि । समस्या प्रल वृषिः ॥ किसर्वनामबहुभ्यः साभ्यन्तमा बल प्रत्ययो भवति । 
10. The affix tral ( 1) comes after kim, a bar vanama, and bahu, when ending in a locative. 
Thus ** (VII. 2. 104) .where', (VII. 2. 102) 'there', 'in many places. ____ इदमो हः ॥ ११॥ पदानि । इनमः, ह. पुतिः ।। हमः सम्यन्ताम्मत्ययो भवधि । चलो उपचार 
THAN 
949 
[ BK. V. CH. III. S4 
. 11. The affix & comes after' ending in the locative. 
This debars बल् ॥ Thusr(V. 3.3) 'here'. . . . . . किमो ऽत् ॥ १२॥ पदानि । किमः भत् ।। पतिः ॥ किम साम्यन्तादयत्ययो भवति । लोपाल। 
12. The affix अत् (अ) comes after kim ending in the locative. 
This debars पल्॥ Thusrकम्+भत्-क+भ (VII. 2. 105)akasकुभोत्यसे 'where will you eat'. वाघेप्यखे| According to some also comes, as कष। This is done by drawing the word 'optionally from the next satra. So that this sátra becomes an optional one 
घाइचच्छन्दसि॥ १३॥ पदानिया,ह, च, छन्दा इतिः ॥ किमः सप्तम्यन्तावा हा प्रत्ययो भवति छन्दखि विषये । यथापा । 
13. Optionally the affix & also comes in the Chhan das, after the word kim in the locative : as well as the. other affixes. 
Thus कुह (VII. 2. 104), क, कुप. As in Rig Veda VIII. 62.4: कुहस्थ कई जग्मयुः कुह लेने पेतः । Where are ye two? Where are you (or did you) going? Where do you fall like eagles de. 
इतराभ्योपि दृश्यन्ते ॥ १४॥ · पदानि इतराभ्यः, अपि, रश्यन्ते। वृत्तिः ॥ सामीपञ्चम्यपेसमितरखम् । इतपभ्यो विभक्तिभ्यस्तसिलाग्यो रषयन्ते। . . . . . . : 
__. 14. The above affixes are seen coming after kim, a sarvanama and bahu, ending with other case-affixes also,' besides the locative and ablative. 
That is to say, the affixes तसिल, पल, &c come after kim &c which are not in the ablative or the locative case. By the employment of the ex pression are seen', it is hinted that this may take place not on every occa sion, but only when in juxtaposition with such words as Your Honor', faty: 'long-lived', argamu 'having long-life', and tarifgai 'the beloved of the Gods'. Thus: 
• Anus 
. . Nom. ततो भवान् or तब भवान् - भवान।। . . Acc. ता भवन्तम् or ततो भवन्तम्-तं भवन्तम् ।। Ins. सब भवता or वतो भवता-तेन भवता। 
Dat. तवो भववे or का भवते-तस्मै भयते ॥ ... . Abt. ततो भवत: or तष भवतः तस्माद् भवता। Gen. ततो भव: or तब भवतः तस्य भवतः॥ Loc. तसो भवति or व भवति-तस्मिन् भवति॥ . . BK. V. CH. III. Si9] 
982 
. . Similarly with the words aigs, urgare and garanti for : . सर्वैकान्यकियत्तदः काले दा ॥१५॥ पदानि ॥ सर्व, एक, अन्य, किम, पद तदः, काले, दा 
वृत्तिः ॥ साम्या इतिवर्तते, न खितराभ्य इति । सवारियः मातिपदिकम्योदा प्रत्ययो भवति। वल्पवाद। 
15. After sarva 'all', eka 'one', anya 'other', kim what', yad 'which', and tad 'that', when time is de noted, comes the affix at, the words being in the locative case. . The word war: V. 2. 10 is understood here and not the word oor of the last. This debars पल् ॥ Thus सर्वदा or सदा (V.3.6) 'at every time' or always', एकदा 'once', भन्यश'at another time' का (VII. 2. 103) 'when', बरा 'when',सा 'then'. 
Why do we say is when time is denoted'; Observe (where although the case is the 7th, the affix is not ar, because the sense is) 'in every place' or 'every where'. 
इदमो हिल ॥ १६ ॥ पदानि । इदमः, हिल् ॥ वृत्तिः । सप्तम्या इत्येव । काल इति च । इदमः सप्तम्यन्ताकाले वर्तमानाद् हिल् प्रत्ययो भवति।हस्थापवार 
16. After idam 'this', ending in the locative case, comes the affix rhil (-!हिं), when time is denoted. 
The words girl and are are understood. This shil debars ha The छ of हिल is for accent. Thus मस्मिन् काले-एतहिं (V. 3.4) at this time'. Why "when time is denoted'? Observe, # 'in this place', as atau Sec V. 3. 4 . अधुना ॥ १७॥ पदानि । अधुना ॥ 
वृत्तिः॥ मधुनति निपात्यते । इदमो ऽशभावो धुना प्रत्ययः 
.. .. . . . . ___17. The word adhuna is anomalous, having the same sense. 
___As अस्मिन् काले-मधुना 'at this time' भए is substituted for sm and, पुन affix is added. 
दानी च ॥ १८॥ पदानि । दानीम, च। . वत्तिः ॥ इदमः सप्तम्यन्ताकाले वर्तमानाहानी प्रत्ययो भवति । 
18. The affix dânîm also comes after idam, end ing in the locative, and denoting time. :) 
Thus भस्मिन् काले-हदानीम् (V. 3. 3) 'at this time: . . . तदो दा च ॥ १९ ॥ पदानि ॥ तदः,दा, च. . . . . . . . . : वृत्तिः ॥ तरसप्तम्यन्ताकाले वर्तमानाद्वा प्रत्ययो भवाति चकारापानीप 
.. 19. After tad, ending in the seventh case, when time is denoted, comes the aflix T, and also danin:. . 
981 
[ Bx. v.CH. III. In 
The moth is read into the satra by force of the word 'also'. Thus यस्मिन् काले- or दानीम् 'at that time'. This satra, so far as it ordains दा after the word of is useless, because the word already takes yr by V. 3. 15. 
. तयोहिलो चच्छन्दसि ॥२०॥ पदानि ॥ तयोः, दा, हिलो, च, छन्दसि। 
वृतिःतयोरिति प्रातिपदिकानोंघातयोरिदमा वम यथावण्यं दाहिनौ प्रत्ययो भवव भ्छन्नषि विषये। पकापचयापार .. 20. After these two (nominal stems idam and tad), come respectively the affixes dà and rhil, in the Chhandas, and also the other affixes.. 
The affix it comes after yg and fi after açu Thus (V. 3. 3), aft (VII. 2. 102). So also rerit and prilli As I gata funt grey maria (Rig Veda VIII. 27. 11). 
अनद्यतने हिलन्यतरस्याम् ॥ २१॥ पदानि । अनद्यतने, हिल, अन्यतरस्यामा वृत्तिः छन्दसीति न मर्यते । सामान्येन विधानम् । किंसर्वनामबहुभ्या बातम्यन्तभ्यो ऽनयतने कालविधेरे वर्तमानेभ्यो हिल प्रत्ययो भवत्यन्यतरस्थान। 
21. The affix rhil (-1 हिं) comes optionally, in denoting time not of the current day, after the words 
•kim, the sarvanama, and bahu &c.' in the 7th case.' 
The anuvritti of s y is not read into this satra. This is a general rule. Thus कहि or का (VII. 2. 103), याई or यदा, स िor मा । ___ सद्यःपरुत्परायेंषमापरेद्यव्यधपूर्वेधुरन्येधुरन्यतरेधुरितरेधुरपरेधुरधरेषुरुभयेधुरु तरेयुः ॥ २२ ॥ पदानि ॥ सद्यः, परुत, परारि, ऐषमः, परद्यवि, अद्य, पूर्वेधुः, अन्येपुः, इतरेधुः, अपरेयुः, अधरेद्युः, उभयेयुः, उत्तरेयुः । 
वृत्तिः सम्याः कालाति पर्त्तते । सम्प्रभृतयःयदा निपात्यन्ते प्रकृतिप्रत्यय भादेशः कालविशेषाति सर्वमेतन्निपातनाम्लभ्यते। 
पातिकम् । शुषोभयाइतम्या 
22. The following words are anomalous : sa dyab, parut, parari, aishamas, paredyavi, adya, purvedyus, angedyus, anyataredyus, itaredyus, aparedyus, adharedyus, ubhayedyus, and uttaredyns.. 
The words in and antics are understood here. The base, the substi. tute, the affix, the paticular time &c, must all be deduced from these forms, Thus #a: is formed from 7a, by substituting for wr, and adding the affix पल; in the sense of a day'. समानेऽहनि-सद्यः 'the same day'. The पूर्व and gant are replaced by t, and then the affixes on and oth are added, in the sense of a year'. Thus पूर्वस्मिन् संवत्सरे-पहल 'last year'. पूर्वसरे संवत्सर-पसार 
•the year belore last'. The Tu replaces दम, and affix खमतण is added, in the 
BK. V.CH. III. 833.1 
980 
sense of year'. Thus मस्मिन् सवत्सरे-ऐपमः - during this years. Torts added एपरि in the sense of 'aday': as, परस्मिनहनि-परेपदि 'the other day'. The मध replaces and the affix ok is added in the sense of a day'. Thus af एनि-भय 'today'. To the words पूर्व, भन्य, मन्यतर, इतर, भपर, मघर, उमर and Tris added the affix एएस, in the sense of 'a day': as पूर्वस्मिनहनि-पगुस् 'on the day before', भन्यस्मिनहनि मन्येधुर 'on the following day'. मन्यतस्मिनहनि-मन्यतोष: 'on either of two days" इतरस्मिनहानि इतरेष: 'on another day', भपस्लिमहनि भपरेया: 'on the following day', भस्मिनहनि-भपरपु: 'on a previous day'. रम. घोरहनोः उभयेषु: 'on both days'. 
प्रकारवचने थाल् ॥ २३॥ पदानि ॥ प्रकारवचने, थान् ॥ . वृत्तिः। किसर्वनामबहुभ्यो ऽवभाविभ्य इति गते । सप्तम्या कालइवि निवृत्तमा सामान्यस्य विषो मेरका प्रकारः । प्रकृत्यर्थविशेषणं चैतत् । प्रकारवृत्तिभ्यः किसर्वनामबहुम्मा वायु पाल् प्रत्ययो भवति। 
23. The affix thal (-1था) comes, after the words kim &c V. 3. 2, when we speak of a kind or manner of being. 
The sätra V. 3. 2, is to be read into this. The anuvfitti of War and Has ceases. The word uit means the differentiating quality distinguishing a species among the genus : it means 'sort', 'kind', 'mode', 'manner' &c. Thus तेन प्रकारण-तपा 'so, in that manner'. Similarly चया, सर्वया ॥ The affix surat taught in V. 3. 69 has also the same force, with this difference that ja. tiyar applies to words which denote things possessing such a quality (प्रकारवार, while thal denotes mode itself. Therefore, one does not debar the other, so that we have forms like forsircita:, and water 
इदमस्थमुः॥२४॥ पदानि ॥ इदमः, यमुः। वृत्तिः । वंशाप्रकारवचने थमुः प्रत्ययो भवति । थालोपगार। 
24. After idam comes the affix thamu (97) in the same sense i. e. in denoting manner. 
This debars पाल् ; thus : मनेन प्रकारेण-पत्थर v.3.4 In this manner. They in yg protects the 4 from becoming T (Sec I. 3. 4) 
किमश्च ॥ २५॥ पदानि । किमः, च, थमुः। वृत्तिः । किंशदान प्रकारवचने यमुः प्रत्ययो भवति । 
25. Also after kim, comes the affix thamu in the sense of manner. 
Thus केन प्रकारेण-कथम् 'howts. था हेतौ चच्छन्दसि ॥ २६ ॥ पदानि ॥ था, हेतो, च, छन्दासि। . वृतिः। किंपदादेती पर्तमानात्या प्रत्ययो भवति, पकायवकारपषने । पति विपये। 
951 
भवम 
[ BK. V.CH: II. 
280 
.::... - 26. The affix या comes in the sense of 'cause ': also (as well as 'manner'), in the Chhandas, after the word kim. 
.. The word प्रकार पचने is read into the satra by force of ॥ Thus कया whereforet why? for what reason?', कथा 'how'. The. former is an example of 
हेतु 'reason or cause', the second of प्रकार 'manner. As in the foll sentences : कया मामं न पृच्छसि-केन हेतुना पामं न पृच्छति ॥ कथा देवा भाखर पुराविद ॥ . 
Here end the affixes having the designation of Vibhakti. . . दिशब्देभ्यः सप्तमीपञ्चमीप्रथमाभ्यो दिग्देशकालेवस्तातिः ॥ २७॥ पदानि। दिक्शब्देश्यः,सप्तमी-पञ्चमी:प्रथमाभ्यः, दिक्-देश-कालेषु, अस्तातिः। 
वृत्तिः । दिशा पदाः विक्शन्नाः तेभ्यो दिक्शन्देभ्यो दिग्देशकालेषु वर्तमानेभ्यः सप्तमीपञ्चमी. प्रयमान्वे: भ्यो ऽस्वातिः प्रत्ययो भववि स्वायें। 
27. After words of 'direction', ending in the loca tive, ablative and nominative, and referring to 'direction', 'locality' or 'time', comes the affix astâti (attila), without change of sense." : .. 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
• The word विशदाmeans 'words denoting directions'. Thus पुरस्कार, has all these three significations in the following sentences, पुरस्तादवसति 'he lives eastvard'. पुरस्तागत: 'he came from east' पुरस्ताद रमणीयम् It was delightful pre viously. Similarly with मधस्ताद 
: Why do we say 'after words of direction? Observe out fett Tara Why do we say 'ending in the locative, ablative and nominative'? Observe gerne uri ra: 11 Why do we say when the sense is 'a direction', 'a locality' or 'a time? Observe quiere U Tara 'he lives in the presence of the guru'. 
This affix is a fun affix, like the affixes taught previously. The words denoting direction must be primitive words of direction; and not de rivative words like ऐन्द्री &c. which also denote direction. The rule of यथासंख्य does not apply here. . 
दक्षिणोत्तराभ्यामंतसुच ॥ २८॥ पदानि । दक्षिणा-उत्तराभ्याम, अतसुच् ॥ . वृत्तिः ॥ दक्षिणोत्तराभ्यां विदेशकाला वर्तमानाभ्यां सप्तमीपञ्चमीप्रथमान्ताभ्यां स्वार्थेऽतच् प्रत्ययो भवति। मस्तातेरपवादः। 
28. After dakshiņà and uttara; (referring to a direction or a locality or a time, and ending with locative, ablative or nominative) comes the afix atasuch (अतस) . . . 
. This debars manau The wordcan never refer to time, so with regard to it direction and locality are only taken. Thus दक्षिणतो वसति, दक्षिणत भागता, पक्षिणतोरमणीयम् ।। उसरतोवसति, उत्तरत भागतः, उत्तरतोरमणीयम् ।।. The t of भतेर is for the sake of differentiating this affix from me in sotras like II. 3: 30 
BK. V. CH. III. 
32 
S 
भत्तालि 
मा 
. 
MA 
S TROPRDAMO SanawanamataramNOmwimmiAawani 
H ANGASTREAMARIOSwarasamaAPRITHPUnenwwwmarPurenewMERMONASAPPENIPURASIMHARADARMERASHIROMANIPATIOMARIPATRAPANEMARANEPAL 
विभाषा परावणभ्याम् ॥ २९ ॥ पदानि । विमाषा-पर-अवराभ्याम् (मतसुब्) । वृत्तिः परावस्यमाभ्यां विभाषा सम्पदयो भवति अस्वावरथे। 
29. Optionally after para and avara, comes the affix atasuch, in the sense of astati. . 
Thus परता or हस्तात् or भवरस्तात् or मरवो बखाति, मागतः or मावा . . . . : अञ्चलक॥ ३०॥ पदानि ।। म सुफ 
NE 
H 
AbroamanupA 
भRA 
- 
S 
FE 
ve 
एस 
HAM 
H 
30. After words of direction ending in अच, there is luk-elision of the affix astati.. . 
Thus प्राक् or प्रत्यक , प्राध्यां दिशि पति = प्राग् पसात मागागा, प्राममणीब। The feminine afhx of 74 is also clided, when the taddhita affix is elided by 
Sec'l. 2. 40 उपर्युपारष्टात् ॥ ३१ ॥ पदानि । उपरि-उपरिष्यात् ॥ वृनिः । उपरि उपरिष्टाम् इत्येतो धन्दौ निपारेयते भस्लावर । अर्षस्योपभावः रिन रिटातिलो छ प्रस्बो निपायो। 
81. The word upari and uparishtat are anomalous in the sense of astati. 
These words are derived irregularly from the word gu by changing it into उप, and adding the affixes रिल and रिटातिल ॥ Thus कयां दिशि पति - उपदिशलि. Soalso अपर्यागला, उपरिमणीयम् ॥ उपरिष्टाइखति, उपरिष्टवागतः, परिष्टमणीयम्। 
पश्चात् ॥ ३२॥ पदानि पश्चात् वृत्तिः ॥ नाविषय शो निपात्यते ऽस्ततिर अपरस्य पश्शनाच माविश्व प्रत्यक्षा वार्णिकम् ॥ दिकपूर्वपदत्यापरस्य पश्चभावा वक्तव्या, भातिश्च प्रत्ययः । या पोत्तरपदस्य दिकपूर्वपदस्य पधभाको बन्ध्या था॥ विनापि पूर्वपदेन पचभायो चलन 
32. The word paschat is anomalous, in the sense of astäti. 
The word is formed by changing out into , and adding the affix भाति As अपरस्थाविधि वसति- पाइसति, मागतः, इमणीय &c. 
Vart :--So also when u is preceded by another word denoting direction, it is changed into pascha and ati is added. As बक्षिणपश्चात उत्तरपब्बा 
Vårt:--So also when an follows such a compound, apara is changed into paicha ; as, क्षक्षिणपधाः , उत्तरपचाः ॥ 
Vart :-~Apara is changed into palcha, when followed by ardha, and not preceded by any other word. As, पमा 
पश्च पश्चा चच्छन्दसि ॥ ३३॥ पदानि ॥ पश्च, पश्चा, च, छन्दसि । धूनि ॥ पाली निपास्येते छन्दसि विषवे, मस्तातरर्थे । सकारात्पश्चारित्यापि भवति । अपरस्थ व भाषा कायकारौ च प्रत्ययो निशास्यते ॥ 
APP 
ST 
T 
40 
50 
BA 
4 
. 
P 
..... 
: 
:-' 
te 
A 
.: 
. 
(BK. V. CH. III. $ 36 
. 
Mf 
w 
* 
* 
* 
* 
& 
33. The words pascha and paschi are anomalous in the Chhandas, having the force of astati. 
By x, the word game is also included. As ju tahu ra, or Wy fapt As you (Rig Ved X. 89. 21) güregte (R. V. X. 149. 3) 
SERCICErma: # *# wala n 3FIT, **C, teruta, ata মুনি থাকিস্তায় গাৰি চাহী সদাই প্লান। 
34. To the words uttara, adhara and dakshina is added the affix iti, in the sense of aståti. 
Thus citerai fare raft TUEETA; TAFTITAT:, Fluxester Similarly tutt and feruaru 
MAURITCRITHER S er: 20 qara 1999, PRITETTU, , #sepur: 
Trêt étterTM SATE SPEArtearate ele agaferraturat 
35. The affix enap (57) comes optionally, (after the words uttara, adhara and dakshiņa, in the sense of astäti,) when the limit indicated is not remote, and when it is not a substitute of the ablative case-affix. 
The affix it and the other affixes taught above come with the force of locative, ablative and nominative The 7 comes with the force of locative and nordinative and not that of ablative The adverbs so formed refer to objects not at a distance. Thus mor or Tour or T T Tata or ( 
au Similarly , ET, YRIT TUR &c, so also figura, TOTE, THAT, Ular &c, *He lives near by in the north-ward or southward'. Why do we say *when not denoting distance! Observe cafe he lives far away in the north". Why do we say when not having the force of ablative'? Observe TWT1: * come from the north'. 
The word ur govems all the succeeding sotras upto V. 3. 39 exclusive Some do not read &c into this sätia: according to them this is a general rule applicable to all words denoting direction. As you ATT (11. 3.30). The in enap is for the sake of accent (I11. 1. 4). 
दक्षिणादाच् ॥ ३६॥ पदानि । दक्षिणात, भान् ॥ pe: Neka sehat YRTTA IT 
91@sprint 36. The affix ach (2) comes after the word dak shipa, in the sense of astati, but not as a substitute of the ablative case-affix. 
Vis 
17 
4. 
BX V. CIL 111. 40 
Dr 
he word of the last sätra is not read into this: though the word ** governs it Thus to you or mutax, but fra mm. They in mny is not for the sake of accent (VI. 1. 163) for the simple afix my would be udatta by the general rule III. 1. 3. The serves the purpose of differe entiating this from other affixes in Sotra 11. 3. 29 
sme T U a me,, , (red) স্কুল। 
স্থান্ধাধা গুইঃ গদাৰ গাল, অন্ধাকা। ফু অন্ধথিশানধর্মকান্ত। 
37. The affix ahi (am) comes after the word dakshiņa, in the sense of astati, as well as ach, when the re ference is to a distant limit. 
Thus faut rata or TOY FAITH "he lires far away in the south. Similarly for 
M ore Why do we say when the adverb denotes a distant limit*? Obs erve at pala N The word #9 governs this also: as, 
w e r # & II 3€ Cena 1 , , ( ATC) # ITU TE ****, a. g arantera 
38. The affixes and are come after uttara in the sense of estâti; when the reference is o distant limit. 
Thus 790 or T he War or tota " He lives far away in the north: or the northward far away is pleasant. But when distance is not meant we have to pare ! The Ford a m : governs this also: as kyrrr&: 
Era unha gue 1 98 m aura o gê **UTE HE:, -7- : , Qur . 
T YRIT a farqi fara fr angename ye Fare 
i ar i quréa " 
ITU TITI 39. After pårva, adhara and avara comes the affix asi (**) in the sense of astati; and pur, adh, and ay are their respective substitutes before this affix. 
The word er does not govern this sátra. Thus go riu, मागतः, पुरो रमणीवयू | Similarly मधस् and अवस् with seति, भागत: and हमणीयम् - As 
খাষাক্ত খাগ: খৰঙ্গী, গীষা, গুৰক্ষাঃ aid শ্রীমঙ্গবন্ধু 
alla ri8 ra ta, all dis: 1 667 iniqua *o*: great are you star war 
40. The same substitution takes place when the affix aståti (KITCU) followe. 
MINE 
PAPA 
: 
PER 
[BK. V. CH. III. S 44 
WWWMWWWWWWMWMVADU 
WWW 
w 
? 
W 
3 
That is y form, wy for nye and my for * # This sätra indicates by implication that the affix a V. 3. 27 is not debarred by * after these Fords. Thus Teamh or r or 
H T la or na: or coffend 
• विभाषा ऽवरस्य ॥४१॥ पदानि । विभाषा, अधरस्य 
n7776 rainer TETET NE KUANTOT no 
41. The substitution of a for at is optional when aståti followe. . This declares option when by last it was compulsory. As APTEE or 
খুন স্থাৰ গাগ, ০৫ জঙ্গী 
eru far UT II W. ane a ETST:, facrú, 
i en fyrir fundar Outer Fri : জুলাই সুস্থ স্থানে ক্রিয়ায় স্কুলমালখা: বিশ্ব স্ব কাজ ঠি। 
42. The affix dha (1) comes after a nominal-stem denoting a Numeral, when it means the mode or manner of an action. 
The word pou and or have the same meaning. The adverbs so formed apply to every kind of action. Thus at 
T h e cats once. A musta he goes twice'. Similarly fr. W . W E 
rufaad 189 ufar arraferard, 7, () fi a 99 No, procr QrUTTI था एकीकरण । मधिकरणदिघाले म्यमाने संख्यायाः स्वार्थ या प्रत्ययो भवति । 
43. The affis. dhe comes after a numeral, when the sense is a change in the apportionment or distribution of substances. A 
The word dit is understood here. The word wat means ' matter, stuft, substance'. M y change in numbers. Thus to make one into many, or to make many into one. Thus go of TYY OF "divide one heap into five'. HEUTE AV 3681 
. 
. 
1 /4 UVF SHIUT MITTEATE, 
44. After the word eka the substitute dhyanan (+ ) comes optionally instead of dha. 
Thus एकता पछि कुछ or एकच्या कुद, धकधा मुहले or ऐकभ्य मुले ॥ The re petition of ur in the sätra shows that the substitution takes place when the sense is that of fer, as well as when it is that of a famm Had y not been repeated, the substitution would have come in the sense of W feen only, as immediately preceding this sitra. 
BK. V. Ch. III. $ 48. ] 
958 
WAWAN 
ANDATARAMEDEO 
http 
tonttrtt 
Writ 
tet 
HON 
farula w # matfat i fast:, , 1 ক্লানঃ অনুবন্ধ। খ্রিীঃ স্বনিী খাগজ ত্মিঘাথলেক্ষ্মিা ঝিৰিৰ লগত মুগ্ধ 
খালি খাই । 
45. The substitute dhamuś (+ ) comes op tionally, in the place of T, after the words dvi and tri. 
Here also it comes in both the found and are senses. By , the word 'optionally is drawn into the satra. Thus fr or a , or 
# 
Vart -The afhx * (da, with the elision of the final vowel) comes without changing the sense, after words ending in dhamun. As ty, , ia efur vfa in , fauna á 
QYTY WĘ I NEMA n gura, mai fost ar Ynye UE arra neram 1 
46. The substitute edhách (Tui) comes optionally in the place of dha, after dvi and tri. 
Thus N (VI. 4. 148) or bror , rar,rve or AN Art TC On warfat i ry ফুলি। নি । যুগ্ধ মানাৰিন্ধিাকা খায় মন্ত্রী শাহ। 
47. The affix pasap (12) denotes something as insignificant. 
The word a means "contempt, trifting &c. Thus are e marTv : "a very bad Grammarian. So also 
m i or course this will not come in denoting a person who is a good Grammarian, but bears bad 
character, or who is a good performer of sacrifices but immoral 
Curcan T 1 82 TA qrore, ar-frarc, EN T: I great ETUI Farenaeum 
ST *** **T& 48. After (& nominal stem being) un ordinal number ending in tiya, comes the affix (1-2), (the word retaining its denotation), when & part' is meant. 
This sätra is made only to teach accent, for the word to which is added undergoes no other change of form except in accent Thus fate (V. 2. 54) has udatta on # (III. 1. 3) but when yt is added, the accent falls on (VI. X. 197) Thus rare ai aly: the moiety". Similarly enter the one-third'. Why do we say when 'part' is meant Otherwise, there is no change in accent The affix it always comes in forming ordinal numbers and for no other purpose, for the era in vords like suna is not significant as it is not an 
gata! 
[ BK V. CH. III. $ SI 
Ordin 
afhx.' The employment of the word in the aphorism is useless for the purposes of this sätra Its anusfitti, hosvever, runs in the other sotras, and that is the only purpose that it serves bere. 
TFT srete 18 ans, AT TXT, PERETET() ঋলিঃ খুলনা । লাক্ষা ইত্যাদি গেমস্মে শাল প্রদান থার্থ পু 
wa **ae fres 
49. After an ordinal numeral upto eleven exclu sive, comes the affix **, the word retaining its denotation, when a part' is meant : but not so in the Chbandas. 
This is for accent also. Thus :, **, *, , ora: 1 Why do we say arv: "before eleven'? Observe hus, yo no change of accent (V1 1. 223) Why do we say 'not in the Chhandas." ? Observe, 
era FUITIETY (7 has acute on the hnal being sormed by 6 preceded by * V. 2. 48, 49) 
PUTEHTYP TIN TA H - TRT, ST, লী, কাজী পীর গল্প। গাঞ্জা খান সবই কারি ফি : গুগী ৱাৰ । 
50. The affix ila (-a) also comes as well as art, after shastha and ashtama, when a part' is meant, but not in the Chhandas. 
The words for and we are understood here. By , the affix at is included. Thus da: or te, ex: or re* 
Ar t : 3114811 AT-94-99*:, 57-1, Ther: * MKFZU I 97124771 UUTA 
al T ü rücür: 199 ATTITY HOW I SETT YTT: GALITE 1464 
ert I 
RO 
2 
51. After the words shashtha and ashtama there may come respectively $7 (1_*) and 5 clision of the affix, when the meaning is a division of a measure called måna or grain, or the part of the body of a beast respectively, 
The word xy means a grain weight (if affata ). That is to say, * comes after a when a division of ra 'measure' is expressed; and comes after we when a part of my is denoted. Thus ayant TT: a sixth of a grain measure'. SIEHE TIT: 'an-eighth part of the body of a beast'. The 
* here takes the place of the affix as well as well By , the affixes above mentioned are also employed: as grg: or 9:, "TET: or Tea When a measure or the body of an animal is not denoted, this rule (thougar optional) will not apply. BK V. C#. 111. $.541 
Prod 
Sea 
HIN 
wargir faurert 8471 a 1 *ra, amefara, 7, HET ধ্বলি ব্যঙ্গাত্মধ্বস্বান: শা গ্লানিম্বু গ্রহী স্থান। প্রায় গরু গানিস্তাঃ 
gia1 
52. After the word eka, comes also the affis akin ich (a ), (the word retaining its denotation), when the sense is without & companion '. 
By the word , the affix it and the clision also take effect: the elision being of tror # Thus quam (nom. Qarat), or *** By using Ther, it is indicated that the word here is not a nurreral meaning 'one', but a noun rocaning alone. nap, sua, q uaru, ar 579, 
a zi w a So that this word will have dual fair, and the plural net ! 
and 147vrat , TE. 
:1 na frase go URTE: 1 ngarcia T a rray area মনখুধাৱষ্ট মালাখাবিহ্মা আ গয়া মমি 
63. The affix up (with the feminine in i comes, after a nominal stem, the word retaining its denota-, tion, when the meaning is this had been before '. 
The word or is a compound of and qu: the compounding being by Tu, and denotes something done in a past time. Thus 15 km STT: 'once opulent'. 94790 # The indicates that the feminine will be in 
Atq; as, parella The or is not in though required by 1.3.7. This proves that yg rule is anitya. The sotra V. 2. 18 might have been read after this, with the saving of the word **:, but then would have debarred which is, however, not intended. 
4 .98 TETAN TYYT, , .. i 11 marca: perut war *TOTT. 
54. After a nominal-stem ending in the sixth case, comes the affix ren, and also e, in the sense of 
having belonged formerly to somebody'. 
The word me here qualifies the sense of the affix, and not the sense of the base, as it sras in the last sátra. Thus far yoga 'the cow that formerly belonged to Devadatta'. Similarly TN 
अतिशायने समाविष्ठनी ॥ ५५ ॥ पदानि ॥ अतिशायने, तमा, छनौ । fall funnhaurrt. I fart: gravfru infraffet area fara fra at N 
9 
. 
SES 
961 
[ Bk. V.CH. III. 557 
. . .. 55. When the sense is that of surpassing, there 
come the affixes तमप् (तम) and छन् (1-3), after a nominal stem, the word retaining its denotation. i . These affixes form the superlative degree. The word maar is an irregular form of afaust, and it qualifies the sense of the primitive. The स्वार्थिक affixes sometimes qualify the sense of the primitive Thus भाव्यतमा -सर्व इमे भायाः , भयमेषामतिण्येनाव्या 'the richest' ie 'these are all rich, but he surpasses them all in riches. Similarlyर्णनीयतमः 'most handsome'. मुरुमार. बमः &c Similarly पड-पषिया, गुरु-गरिधर, लघुविधा (VI. 4. 155) When among superlatives, further excellence is indicated, then these words may take additional affixes : as श्रेष्ठ, though a superlative, forms श्रेष्ठतमः | As देषोका सविता पार्पयतु श्रेष्ठतमाव कर्मणे । युधिष्ठिर श्रेष्ठतमः कुरूणामिति . . . 
तिङश्च ॥५६॥ पदानि ॥ तिङः, च। पत्तिः ॥ तिजन्तापातिधायने पोत्ये षमा प्रत्ययो भवति । 
56. So also after a finite verb, comes the affix tamap, when 'surpassing' is meant.. 
By चाप्मातिपदिकात IV. I. I whose force runs throughout, the taddhita affixes are ordained only after nominal stems; they would not have come after verbs, hence this sutra. Thus पचतिसमाम् (the भाम् is added by V.41) 
सर्व मे पचन्तीवि, भयमेषामतिण्येन पंचति, 'he cooks surprisingly'. अल्पासितमान &c. The affix + never comes after a verb, as by V. 3. 58, it is restricted to adjectives. 
द्विवचनविमज्योपपदे तरबीयसुनौ ॥ १७॥ पदानि ॥ द्विवचन, विभज्य-उपपदे, तरप, यमुनो। . 
पत्तिः ॥श्योरर्थयोधन विवचनम् । विभक्तव्यो विभज्यः । निपातनाय । वर्षे विभज्ये पोपपरे प्रातिप. विकानिहन्ताचातिशायने तरचीयसनी प्रत्ययो भवतः । तमविधनोपवास 
57. The affixes tarap (तर) and tyasun (--ईयस्) come in the sense of surpassing', after a nominal stem or a finite-verb, when it expresses (comparision between ) two things, or when that which is added to it (upapada), is to be distinguished from another. 
• The word fra does not mean 'dual', but means an expression for two. विभज्य is irregularly formed by यत्, and means 'that which is to be distingui shed or differentiated'. This debars दम and छन् ॥ The rule of यथासक्य (I. 3. 10) does not apply here. First to take an example of fat or when com parison is between two things : thus: विमावास्यो, भयमनयोरतिधयेन-मास्यतरः 'both are rich, but he is richer amongst the two'. Similarly सुकुमारतर, पतितराम्, 
Bk. V.CH. III. .601 
and fसुर । 
.963 
मान्य 
नस्पतितपम् (V.411): or with बन्: as, रिमो पह, भयमनयोतिएबम पड:-पटीवार 'more skillful of the two', सीमान् ॥ Secondly to take an example ofविमपोष परie when a word in construction is to be differentiated: thus माधुप: पारलिपुर केभ्य भाज्यता 'The men of Mathura are richer than those of Pataliputn. Here there are more than two things, but as the words are expressed in tho sentence, the comparative degree in plural number is used. Similarly thir तरा, पटरीयांसा सघीयांखः॥ or course all these words must be plural, as they refer to more than two persons . अजादौ गुणवचनादेव । ५८ ॥ पदानि । अजादा, गुणषचनाव, पप, (छए, ईयसुनौ)। वृतिः ॥ धमीयपनावमारी सामान्येन विहितो तयोरयं रिपयनियमाशियते । गुणवधादेव भवतस्तो गा भ्यस्मारिदि। 
58. The two afilxes beginning with a vowel (i. e. free and ro) are added only after words donoting attributes. 
The affixes to and faut are restricted in their scope by this sotra le they come only after adjectives or adverbs, in expressing comparative and superlative degrees Thus संघीयान् , लपिष्टा, पीयान्, पटिष्टा; but not after words like पाषक &c. There we have पाचकवल, पाचकसमः ॥ The word एवं 'only' res tricts the scope of the affirs, and not of theprinitiver. Thus पद्धतए, पदवमः are also valid forms. 
तुश्छन्दसि ॥ ५९॥ पदानि । तुः, छन्दसि, (इष्ठन्, ईयसुनौ)। पत्तिः ॥ तुरिति सन्चो सामान्यन पाहणम् । पम्ताच्छन्दसि विपये भणारी प्रत्ययो मरतः 
50. These affixes ishtan and tyasun come in the Chbandag after a nominal stem ending in a 
They is ablative of which includes both 7 and 4 This ex tends the application of these affixes to words other than attributes. Thus भतिचयेन कर्ता- करिष्ठः (कर्द + कर+ by VI. 4. 154, Fis elided) As भामुदि करिष्टः, दोहीयसी धेनुः ॥ By Vartika under VI. 3.35 बोहित्री is changed into masculine पाहित and then ईयर is added, when riselided by VI.4154 
प्रशस्यस्य श्रः ॥ ६॥ पदानि प्रशस्यस्य, श्रः वृत्तिः ॥ प्रप्रस्यानस्य इत्ययमादेशो मवदि भगायो प्रस्थययोः परः ।। 
60. For प्रशस्य is substituted श्र, when these affixes ishtam and iyasun follow. 
Though Te is not an attribute, it takes these affixes by the applica. tion of this rule. The anuvritti of art runs here, but the word must be changed into locative for the purposes of this aphorism, and which will read thus मयस्यस्य प्रोऽमायोः ॥ Thus सर्व मे मवस्था भयमेपामतिधयेन प्रशस्थः श्रेष्ठ, उमाविमी प्रचस्या, भयमनयोसियेन प्रचल्या-श्रयान् ॥ Rule VI. 4 163 prevents theelision of the 
_ 
- 
- 
त्या 
. 
REE and fara 
(BK. V. CH. III. 165 
विधि 
4 
5 
of, which otherwise would heve been elided by VI. 4. 148 and 955). These words are equal to प्रत्यक्ष and प्रशस्यतमः । 
SLIDube 
R 
Ara 
स 
a 
PATRE 
. 
মুক্মিঃ প্লাহাজাহ য় খুমাত্মা গান্তি শ্রীঃ স্থায়ী প্রঃ : 
61. For prasasya, ज्य. is also substituted before these two affixes. 
As vde:, varer ( 197 is substituted for the offer by VI. 4. 160) युद्धस्य च ॥ २॥ पदानि । द्धस्य, व (ज्य). निः। वृद्धस्य इत्ययमादेशो मवस्यमा प्रत्ययधो पावः। 
62. ज्य is also substituted for qख, when ishtan and tyas follow. 
Thus sze"the oldest', parent the older'. By VI. 4. 157, is also substituted for m; and we have vir and alam also. The word though not a gupavachana, takes these affixes by the implication of this sotra 
अन्तिकवादयोदसाधौ ।। ६३ पदानि । अन्तिक, बाढयो, नेद, साधौ . খুনিঃ গন্ধিৰাষাধ্যম বন্ধ স্থানকােষী অমী ১লা অঙ্গ। 
63. For आन्तक is substituted नेव, and for wra is साध, when these affixes follow. 
Thus नदिधम् , नेदीया, साhिar and साधीयान् ॥ सर्वाणीमान्यान्तिकानि इसमेधामतिश्चयन, मेदिष्टम् । बभे रे भन्तिके बदमनारतिधयेन नहीयः । इदमस्माग्दीयः । सहने बादमधीयते। प्रथमस्मास्सा धीयाधीते। 
युवाल्पयोः कनन्यतरस्याम्॥६४॥ पदानि ॥ युव, अल्पयोः वृत्तिः । युवाल्पादयोः कनित्ययमादेशो भवस्यन्यरस्थामजाणः परमः ।। 
64. Before these affixes, * is optionally substi tuted for युवन् and अल्प 
• . Thus कानधा, कनीयान् or यषिः , पीयान् : similarly भल्पिष्ट, भम्पीयान्, or कनिष्ठः, कनीयान् । वर्षहमे घुवानः, भयमेषामतिशयेन, कनिछः । हाधिमा युवाना भयमनथोरतिशचन्त, कनीयान् । यविष्टः । यहीयान् । सर्वहमेऽल्पा । अयमधामनिधयेन, कनिष्ठ अभाविमाप्रपाषयमनयारतिशेयन कनीयान् । अयमस्मारकनीयान् । अल्पिष्टः मल्पीयानिति पा 
विन्मताला ॥६५॥ पदानि । विन, मतोः, लुक। वृत्तिः ॥ पिनो मतुपश्च लगा भवानि मनायोः प्रत्यययोः परतः ॥ 
65. The affixes विनू and मत् are luk-elided, when ishtan and fyasun follow. 
Thus बिन्याजिया, अजीयान् स्वरबन्दस्वाधिष्ठा, स्वचीयान् । सहमे अग्विणः, - भधामतिश्यन,मजिया भादिमा धाग्विणी, अयानयोरतिशयन, सजीयान् । भयमस्मात् सजीयाम् । सर्वहन अक्षरहन्सा भयमेषामतिशयन, स्वषिष्ठः । उमाविमा स्वन्तो, भयमनयोरतिपयन, स्वचीयाम् अयमस्मान पीयान् ॥ This sotra is a jna paka or indicator that words ending in विन् and मन or en form their comparative and superlative degrees by adding 48 and r u 
१ 
- 
+TREET 
म 
TRE 
. 
R 
A 
L 
[Bx. V.CH. III 
6.] 
96. 
- प्रशंसायां रूपए ॥६६॥ पदानि ॥ पशंसायाम, रूपए। वृत्तिः ॥ प्रसा स्तुतिः । प्रकपर्यस्व विशेषणं पेसत् । प्रशंसाविशिष्टे ऽयवर्तमामात् माविपरिकात् स्वायें रूपप् प्रत्ययो भवति। 
____66. The affix पकए (रूप) comes without change of connotation after a stem (nominal or verbal) denoting praise. 
The word ver means ' praise', and it qualifies the sense of the pri mitive; i. c. when the sense of the primitive is that of praise', then 99 is added. As a general rule the Fift affixes, which do not change the denota tion of the word, serve the purpose of prominently bringing forward one parti cular meaning out of the several meanings possessed by a primitive. Thus प्रशस्तो वैयाकरणः-वेयाकरणरूप: 'a celebrated Grammarian'. So also याक्षिकरूप। The praise may be implied by the sense of the primitive, without being abso lute praise: thus घोररूप: 'a celebrated thief', इशुरूपः 'a celebrated robber'; . person very expert in his evil courses even; these word being applied to a thief who is so dexterous that he can steal 'the collyrium from the eye-lashes', or a horse from under the rider', without the latter being aware of it 
The affix comes after a verbal word ending in fat, for the word far V.3.56is understood here also. Thus पचतिरूपम, पचतारूपम or पचन्तिरूपम् who is celebrated, who two are celebrated or who all are celebrated in cooking'. These words quf644 &c cannot take dual or plural; because the action de noted by the verb is only one, not many. These words are always in the neuter gender, by the general usage of the people. 
षदसमाप्ती कल्पदेश्यदशीयरः ॥ ६॥ पदानि । षत, असमाप्ती, कल्पए, देश्य, देशीयरः । 
वृत्तिः ॥ संपूर्णता, परार्थानां समाप्तिः । स्तोकेनासंपूर्णता, पदसमाप्ति प्रकृल्यविशेषण तत्। पदस मासिविशिष्टे ऽथे वर्तमानात् प्रातिपदिकात् कल्पर देश्य देशीयस्येते प्रत्यया भवन्ति ।। 
67. The affixes कल्पए (फल्प), देश्य, and देशीयर् (देशीय) come after a nominal or verbal stem which connotes a slight incompleteness. 
The word w at means “fullness of objects'. A little non-fullness is called tषसमाति॥ Thus पडकल्पः , पडदेश्यः or पढदेशीयः 'clever but slightly incom plete' i. e. 'toberably clever'. , 2, tadtar: H So also after verbs, as पचतिकल्पम, जल्पविकल्पम् &c 
विभाषा सुपो बहुच पुरस्तातु ॥ ६८॥ पदानि । विभाषा, सुपः, बहुच्, पुर. स्ताद, तु. 
धृतिः ॥षरसमामिविविटेथे वर्तमानात मुबन्तादिभाषा बहुप् प्रत्ययो भवति, सप.पुरस्ताव भवति, मपरतः॥ 
963 
भक 
. 
[ BK. V. CH III. 1.70 
___68. Optionally to a declined noun may be added the affix बहुच (बहु), but it stands before: when the sense is slight incompleteness. 
This is the only exception to the general rule that an affix is added after a word. The affix or however is added before the word. The rof my indicates that the udatta will fall on the final vowel of the word. See VI. I. 163. Thus बहुपडः a tolerably skillful person'. बहुमु, बहुगुडी दाक्षाः ॥ By the word 'op tionally it is indicated that the affixes apy &c also come. By using the word gy: 'to a noun ending in a case-affix i. e a declined noun', it is indicated that the affix is not added to finite verbs (farm)# 
प्रकारवचने जातीयर् ॥ ६९॥ प्रकारवचने, जातीय। वृत्तिः सामान्यस्य भेदको विशेष प्रकार, सस्य वचने प्रकल्यर्थविशेषणं चेतत् । सुबन्तालकारविण्टेि ज्य वर्तमानात् प्रातिपदिकान स्वार्यजातीय प्रत्ययो भवति। 
___69. The affix जातीय comes after a case-inflected. word which expresses 'a speciality'.. 
That which distinguishes one thing from another is called state or 'spe ciality. When a word expresses speciality, it is called करणचनः ॥ This word qualifies the sense of the primitive. The affix srdrac and the affix grę V. 3. 23 both denote प्रकार, but while जातीय denotes प्रकारवान, the other denotes प्रकारमान I. a. merely प्रकार॥ 
Thus gara: 'he may be reckoned among the clever persons'. So also मृदुजातीयः, पचनीयातायः॥ 
The above Sätra may, therefore, be translated in these words also, "the affix wrata has the sense of "belonging to the class of", "bcing of the natur og 
प्रागिवारकः ॥ ७॥ पदानि ॥ प्राक् , इवात्, कः॥ निः॥ इंव प्रतिकृताविवि वस्यति । प्रागेतस्मादिवशदनामानित ऊर्ध्वममुकमियामा कमव्ययस्तयषि कसी वेदितव्यः॥ 
70. The affix ku (*) governs all the sätras, as far as ire pratikritau (V. 3. 96). 
. Properly speaking nextends only upto V. 3.86. Thus in the sutra Para V. 3, 73, the word # must be supplied to complete the sense. As y गांभकः॥ This affix adoes not come after finite verbs (तिमन्त), but the affix 
(V. 3. 7.1) comes after such verbs. In other words, the phrase fac. V. 3.56, should be connected, by way of anuvritti, with the next satra, and not with this 
भव्ययसपनाम्नामकच्मास्टैः ॥ १॥ पदानि ॥ भव्यय, सर्वनाम्नाम, अकन्, प्राक, टे॥ 
वृत्तिः॥ तिन्मेत्येव । भव्ययानां सपनामा प्रागिबीयेपर्येष्वकष्प्रत्ययो भवति, सच पाक्दै, न परतः। कस्वापदादा॥ 
VE 
DR. V. CH. III. $.72) 
** 
* 
Draaipun 
tata 
US 
N 
.VE 
PT 
. 
erikan 
qum n aar # # * * 
71. The affix akach (374) is added to an Indeclinable and to a Pronominal, before the last vowel of those words; in the sense of Prágiviya affixes. 
The shows that the acute accent falls on the final (VI. 1. 163) though the affix is inserted in the middle of the word. The phrase 
7° V. 3. 56 is understood here also. This e debars Thus ** *2+72+ Bi similarly , war from and da: # So al. 50 after Pronominals, as fourth, and from a fost and D la these last examples, it will be seen that the affix is added to words ie to declined nouns, and not to grafer or crude-noun: as was required by IV. 1. 1. Sometimes, however, the afix is added after a Pratipadika alsa. The usage will determine when the affix should be added to a Nominal stern (Prati padika) and when to a Subanta word. Thus in yop , *, Terme 
E, 7 , 75 , the affix is added to pratipadika viz to yo giving ge* 9 which are then declined as Pronominals. But in the examples গুৱা , ৰহ্মা , সন্ধি, the affix # e added to the অঙ্গ প্রথা (tik Instrumental case of gore and , and era and ma the Locative singular of the same. From the above examples, this rule may be deduced; the affix * is added to the Prdlipadika, when case-affixes beginning with s, G or * follows: and the affix is added to the declined pronoun, in the remaining cases 
Vårt: The affix 74 is added to the Indeclinable mom # The is Indicatory, therefore, at comes before the final vowel (1. 1.47) As ge + 
6- lary, as you wa n t farefi he remained silent". When, however, the meaning in that 'whose habit is so', then the affix is added, and the of 75004 is elided. As aute 'a taciturn. 
The phrase @ (V. 3. 56) being understood here, the afix ce comes after finite verbs also. As - 
- Harga 66 
1 , , (a ) : #1 ****** vifaakuntariat Harull af i Tati errari: 
72. The letter is the substitute of the final of an Indeclinable, when the affix akach is added. 
The word vw is to be read into this sätra and not ry, because no Pronominal ends in ## Thus fa. Et and qu** from fir, and 
* Thus R +**= +*+ * f now comes the present rule and the final & is changed into , as fgr or 
अज्ञाते ॥ ७३॥ पदानि अज्ञाते। মূলি; যা প্রাকাশখিী মলা। নাবীঈম রূপানাহ্মণৰিহ্মান্ধাঞ্জ থা জাৰিছি peat 
1 
ge 
BANHO 
Die 
1 
goy 
( BK. V. CH. 111.977 
1 
73. The affix (V. 3. 70) and **.(V. 3. 71) come after a word, noun or verb, when something or somebody not known, is spoken of. 
This may or want of knowledge refers not to the object itself, but to its relation with some other object. As *** 'whose horse répand the ass* (of shom is this)? &c. Similarly in 'high' (is it so?) * Is it low"> 'was this agreed to by all'? So also f eat. Similarly qvara " He cooks, is it?* maafk, * He speaks, does be ? 
fad 40 ma naerd পূৰিাঃ গার্কিন নির্ণয়: গযেখাজউঞ্জ বনু। নিখোখার্কি খ স্থলমানাআঁখি 
O QUE pro *fa . 
74. The above affixes come when the thing is spoken of as contemptible. 
Thus agam a sorry horse'. 
, . r eta fa # are "he cooks comtemptibly. para " he speaks insignificantly, 
AaTui 104 TH, TH . স্কুল বিষয়। কুষিখাদ্যধি স্বর্ননানাৰ কালিমাহ্মিা জয়শ্রী জান্ধা। 
75. The afbx kan (1 ) comes in the above sense of contemptible, when the whole word is & Name. , 
The word gaat of the last sätra is understood here also. This en debars # 15, 4, * 
अनुकम्पायाम् ॥ ७६ ॥ पदानि ॥ अनुकम्पायाम् । 
MY V 
D 
** 
* 
PO 
ATP 
TO 
PIT 
SAYAR 
V 
A 
SIVA 
76. The above affixes come when compassion is denoted. 
The word 1 1 means * compassion, pity, endearment'. Thus * * the little child', 'poor child'. , whai, freni fel he trusts'. F ara 'alası he sleeps. The two latter are examples of finite verbs taking this afix 
at tagac II Pan fral, a, HTC T: 1 Tartumat ATU NORTEAK WUna 
77. Also as an expression of courteousness, the above mentioned affix is added to that by which compassion is shown. 
The word te means * policy' or 'expedient', such as conciliation disscasion' and *punishment. 90.7 mcans joined with that, ie with gift 
TO 
BEN 
23 
MERE 
COS 
YA 
BX. V. CH. 111. $.79 ) 
1 
968 
AL 
compassion. In other words, the things signified by the bases, are connected as means of relies with the persons or things that have been objects of compassion. Thus, mer t alas! here are baricy for you". Ref : alas here are sesamun for you. , 'O deart come and cat'. (These words are supposed to be addressed to a person who is starving, by one who wants to relieve him. Iyengar). Being moved with compassion, he entreats cours teously the object of sympathy, with gifts to relieve bis want in the last Sotra, the affix was added, in the sense of compassion, to the name of the person or action that cvoked pity. In the present sätra, the affix is added to the object or action by which pity is shown. The word Pro is from the Imperative second person Singular of y to go with the upasarga EN 
g eyat | 1 ETT I TV, agents, a, 971 
pot 
MO 
WANTERA 
: 
CA 
2 
1 
WARS 
$ 
wa TTT Triat HUT! 
78. The affix thach ( ) is optionally added to a word of more than two.syllables, being the name of a human being, as an expression of compassion, or of courtesy joined with compassion. 
in the aiterative we have - also. As হ্মশিনী : জ্ঞ শিক্ষক ( 
বন্ধু ******** V. 3. 83). When 7 is added there is no shortening of the base, as : Similarly a ny or 
Why do we say ryafter a polysyllable?"* Observe , TH* Why do we say being a Man-name', Observe Eh, W which are cpithets and not Proper Nouns (HET TE FT); or these are names of quadrupeds. __धनिलचौ च ॥ ७९ ॥ पदानि धन्, इलची, ॥ 
are: # matura ingratofy forma un * 
TWT My rear our & 
79. Also the affxes ghan (1 ) and ilach (**) come after a word of more than two syllables, being the name of a human being, when compassion or courtesy joined with compassion is expressed. . 
The force of is that the other affix also comes, as well as run Thus from we have: 14: 
; ## So from T: -- afe #:, ANE : # V. 3. 83. 
SONY Carell com a Igre, :, 357, maigi ai TET HTTÚR THUre: stran ATC GESTÀSTI 
T +4: TUTAR ar ma: 171 
" 
N 
'S 
CORO 
ton 
R 
AR 
(BK. V. CH OIL &. 82 
17 
: 80. According to the opinion of Eastern Gram marians, the affixes adach (**) and vuch (7) also come after a humao-name beginning with the word ; 
The shows that the former affixes also come. The sense of the afixes are the same as above viz compassion or courtesy. Thus from the word , we have, 1. *(kan), a. an (thach), 3, aft: (ilach), 4. 194: (ghan), S. (vuch), 6. 7* (adach) The shortened forms are by. V. 3. 83. In diminutives, the forms are generally shortened. The word n is used as a sign of respect (pujártha), for the word a was understood in the aphorismo by anuvfitti from V. 3.78. 
Gare: 
2 স্কুল: প্প টি আমলই দানলে মা কাজী জী সুলনাময়ী মা বিল্প গল্পটি প্রানশায় গীবী জলবী ওয়ার্ক 
81. The affix kan ( _-6) is added to a Name of a human being, which expresses & special idea : when compas sion or courtesy is meant. 
The farm are words like X &c which are well-known names of particular species of animals &c, but which are come to be applied to men by way of metaphor. The anuvritti of av: does not extend to it. This is a general rule Thus suis , *# The word T being understood in the sutra, the previous affixes also come, as sarfemme, forrest The word arry is used along with ma, to prevent the affix bcing added to the word-form ka (1. 1. 68). 
GRUTTI 
I TEREO 
RES 
OKUNAR 
SOS 
IN 
: 
A. 
S 
na ar trigo 
82. The affix kan ( 5) comes in the sense of compassion, after a man-Dame ending in fra, and this second member is elided before the affix. 
The words and -ugenai are understood in this xdtra. Thus c : from canaiand fra from farmi u Vyaghrajina and Sinhajina are names of men. 
R 
. 
K3 
S 
PER 
X 
3 
pre Non agua i TNO ZËT SETE renforca: wanaren 764 IT EI MUU TANTO छात्तिकम् ।। चतुर्थाच अवस्य लोपा बतष्याचा अनजाद विभाषा लोपा वक्तव्यः । 
• T: FET TRITTSTON 
• In serata A POI AT47 HWT 
ima TN BK V. CH. 111. $. 83 ) 
1 
ELISION, 
*** 
. 
KIrski tratta I . 
Ved ute জাহ্মি হাজাৰম্বুঝলাম্বুখী স্বল্পক্ষ 
83. When tha (V. 3. 78) or one of the affixes beginning with a vowel (V. 3. 79, 80) tanght above, follows, there is elision of all that portion which comes after the sea cond vowel of the anme of a human being. 
The word hy is understood here from the last sötra The word Any indicates that the whole of that portion of the term which follows the second vowel should be elided, otherwise, only the first letter of the third sylla ble would have been elided by 1. 1.54. The illustrations have been given above 
Thus T+ ; here all the letters after the mos e should be elided : as 
so also ora, pa 
The affix r is replaced by for (VII. 3. 50 and $7) hence its spe cial mention in this sõtra For had it not been used, the sotra would have run thus When an affix beginning with a vowel follows &c'. This rule would have applied to be substitute of r, but not to substitute of * which comes after words ending in T, L F and But it is intended that (and not a substitute of 5 should be added to words whose second syllables end in 3 (or ) vowels. If it be said that substitute of would be sufficient for words like them &c. also as it will cause the clision of the third and subsequent syllables; and when such syllables are elided, would be the proa per substitute to add to ro and not , which we can do by the rule of sthani: vat; we say, it is not so. For if it were the case, we should add the substi tute and not in the following: +36 (VI. 4. 51)- +* (VI. 4. 148), because, after elsion, are ends with But we know that is not added but 7, and we have arah: Hence the emplyment is in the sätra is proper as - 79**, :- * 
Vart :-It should be stated that the portion after the foxrff vowel is elided in certain cases. As a re f ier, Natas, refrente 
VartWhen an affix not beginning with a vowel follows, the elision is optional. Thus देवल कन् = देवबनकर देवकर, यज्ञदत्तक: Or बनकर 
Vart.-There is elision of the first term, when these afhxes &c denoting compassion, whether beginning with vowel or not, follow. Thus fi, f, fu, 75 from or any or T &C 
Vårt :-The dimunitive of compassion or endearment may be formed without adding any afix, by simply dropping either the first or the second term of the name. Thus ry: or from , & 
* or QRT* 
www 
.www/ 
www. 
W 
WVA** 
WWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWW 
9 
991 . 
ELISION." 
parantamers vorare submarine e vendosures cousine sería nacionais insurance com Vart:--The affix is replaced by after a word ending'in x as, গানু: frova মাজহ্মা, অলং-~~- খা ॥ So also after a word ending in a ঝালকা 
Vårt:--When the second vowel is mi, a pore, then this is also elided. As কাজি frorn দম্ভী, গাজ্জঃ from শান্তা 
Vårtz-When the first member consists of a single syllable, there is elision of the second member : as far from artur (the I changed back to en because the stem is now * and not TT, and rule VIII. 2. 39 does not apply.) So also: Fr, F # The form in (and not a from g) is an excepe tion. It is dimunitive of acum: 1 
Tagur fara gurbareri atera u n fa u arre, guft, fars, , stargrare, HTC # 
faruriyamTUT ETTET yra perante tra i terapie আলিঙ্কঃ স্বলীল মল্লিী মন্থঃ কারুকাজখনামনি এল। ... .... 84. · There is elision of that portion of the word, which follows the third vowel, in the case of a man-Dame begin ning with Sevala, Supari, Visala, Varuna, and Aryaman, when the above affixes tha or those having initial vowel follow., . This debars the previous sotra. Thus waai : gra ** fear of ou , ona, oft from 1977; so also fu , forum fufti , ftrari, :: Waptrani, pra, and waite: .... . 
· Vart -The third vowel must be the original third vowel, and not that which results from Sandhi. Thus in i and murali; though the apparent third vowels are and m, but they being the result of com pounding bettveen der+* and on aruta: the original vowels are taken. Thus शेवलिक: from ऐकलेन्द्रदतः, and सुपरिक: from सुपार्याधीईनःand not बलेयिक and rem 
1 . Ea # 260 21 TEATTEET, ataupun | HEROES Amani AUT विहित प्रत्ययो अति 
85. The above-mentioned affixes * (V. 3. 70) and the rest come in expressing the small quantity or small number of anything. 
Thus spread a little oil'. , , , a somewhat high, a somewhat low &c. Na "he cooks a little. Te * he speaks somewhat'. 
स्वे ॥ पदानि । स्पे. . 
L 
A 
. 
an 
ATX 
14 
SA 
2 
Y 
312 
mit 
. 
2 
Br. V. Ch. HI.9] 
. 
- 
. 
- 
- 
. . 
. 
.:.:.:... 86. The above mentoned-affixes (V.3.70) come in 
expressing shortness of length or diminutive. ... The sea here is opposed to पीर्ष or long'. Thus इस्योवृक्षा-सका small tree'. प्रक्षक, स्वम्भकः ॥ 
• संज्ञायां कन् ॥ ७॥ 'पदानि । सज्ञायाम, कन् .. वृत्तिः । स्वास्येव । इस्वस्वहतुका या सतावस्यां गम्यमानायां कम् प्रत्ययो भवति । पूर्वस्वायमपपार 
-87. The affix kan ( क) comes when the short thing is a Narme.. ... Thus kधकः, येणुका, रखकः. This debars on 
कुटीशमीशुण्डाभ्यो ॥८॥ पदानि । कुटी, शमी, गुण्डाया, वृत्तिः । इस्पात्येव । संज्ञामहषं नादुनते, वामान्यन विधामम् । कुरीयमीगुण्डाभ्यो इस्सा. पोखरा भल्ययो भवति । कस्यापार। ...... 88. The affix r comes after the words kuti, samt, and sunda, when shortness of length is meant. . The word en is understood here, but not safu This debars * V. . १०. Thus स्वा कुटी कुटीरः, घमीर and Tण्डार ॥ The derivatives are masculine names; though the primitives are feminine . .. 
कुत्वाः, दुपच् ॥ ९॥ पदानि ॥ कुत्वाः , उपच॥ . "वलिः । इस्वास्येव । कुनधनादस्वर योग्य उपच्यत्ययो भवति। कस्थापराषः- - - - - - - .. ' 
89. The affix dupach (उप) comes, in expressing diminution, after the word kutû 'a jar'. 
This debars Thus sav., from the long being clided owing to rll It means a small leathern vessel for oil This word is neuter also, as, तपम्। - कासूगोणीया एरन् ॥ ९०॥ पदानि ॥ कास, गोणीश्याम, परम् । 'वृत्तिः । इस्वहस्येव । कासुगोणीधन्दाप्यां इस्वले पाये रिपत्ययो भवति । कस्यापवार। . . . 90. The afix shtarach (तर with feminine t IV. 1. 40) comes in expressing diminutive, after the words kash and gopt. . . 
us स्वा कासू-कामतरी'a small lance'; गोणीतरी 'a small sack. . वत्सोक्षाश्वर्षभेश्यश्च तनुत्वे ॥ ११ ॥ पदानि । वत्स, उझ, अश्य, ऋषमेन्यः, च, तनुत्वे, (पर)। पनि । हस्वइति निवृत्तम् । वत्स उभन् भश्व पभ हत्यतेभ्यस्तनुस्वे पोये एरपस्ययो भवति। 
91. The affix shtarach expresses slenderness, after the words vatsa, ukshan, asva, and rishava. 
978 
** 
(Bx. V. CH. III. $ 93 
motivati 
on 
T 
ITY 
it 
sight s 
es 
ROGER 
2. 
S 
. 
w 
AN 
* 1993 
23 
: The anuvritti of Ify ceases. Thus me a weaned cair becoming slender in reaching the second period of its age 6 a slender buil': being the third age of a 
T 
hoa nule': ( 
F 
a r); Tut: slender buil or that cannot draw the load', 
Muut facrat TUET ann a 
n ua, ax:, Baru, muri, FT, ENER স্থা। কি খ গ : গালিথাকী দুইজ লিলি ফুল গন্য ক্ষুধার্ত। নিরক্ষা ay Fire I 
92. After the words for, ac and ag, in determin ing of the one out of two, comes the affix datarach (Tt with the elision of the final and ) 
This affix comes in the svårtha sense. The differentiation of a portion from the whole by means of its peculiar caste, action, attribute or name is alled Frame or specification. Thus ***:: amongst you two, who is Katha'. wan: F** amongst you two, who is the agent. d * 
3 amongst you two, who is clever. A won ' which of the two amongst you is Devadatta'. Similarly at of the two the one who, o *offthe two that one as vadar T HET IST. * of the two, let that one who is Devadatta, come'. The taddhita affixes being optional (IV. 1. 82), this idea may be expressed by a sentence also. As, # 
t a , & who amongst you two is Devadatta, let him come a slaufudalla llar, a, a , 80711 
fama rata, faut cat para para futet i et spent at MYTCU TRA safirmava: 14: 914 6441 
93. The affix datamach ( w with the elision of the last syllable) comes after kim, yat and tat, optionally, when the object is the determining of the one out of many, the question being that of caste. ... The words f or and FVC are to be read into the sotra. Thus 
År i 8: 'which of you, Sirs, is a Katha Brahmana PTT:, * E UR 'that one of you, Sirs, who is a Katha, let him come. The word op 
"optionally indicates that the affix (V, 3: 71) also comes, as 
:, , ame # This idea may be expressed by a sentence also, owing to the XEITT (IV. 1. 82): as, i *; 27:, TOT 
Why do we say 'when question is that of caste? Obserye, men 973. Here the question is about a Name: and not jati. The word qrup applies to for only, the pronouns on and a not being interrogative prononus. But the vord 2010 applies to all these three pronouns. 
1 
. 
X 
SEC 
T 
E 
HP 
": 14 
YOR 
MK. V. CH. 111. $97) 
According to some, the affix per has also this force, after the word u as, no mat : 'which of you, Sirs, is a Katha Bråbränaru WRIT. A$ may be inferred from the satra *** xfayton* (IL 1.63) 
32 
*** 
সুখী দাম 
94. After the word , according to the opinion of Eastern grammariane, may be added the affixes datarach and datamach in the above senses. .. 
The draws in r u That is way comes when one out of two Is to be specified; and any when one out of many is to be specified. The word nr does not govern this s@tra: it being a general suic. Thus 
and water, at mai ferW: 
. The word TT® is for pujartha ; the word er being already under stood in the sotra. ___ अवक्षेपणे कन् ॥ १५॥ पदानि । अवक्षेपणे, कन् । সুলি । লখিকার মন জয়। স্বাক্ষণশালানিবিন্ধাক্ষী । 
95. The afix kan (1_ ) comes after a nominal stem, in expressing scoffing. 
· Thus HF 'Grammar used in a derisive sense, when its study pro duces pride As an ITT : * thou art proud, because thou hast 
read grammar only'. 
Ta a Here the words mature and E n are used in a mocking sense. When, however, the derision applies to 
the person itself, then 7 is added by V. 3.14: as &c. 
So far the governing power of V. 3.70 poslanci 1 Ta d, glareat,(0) 
.. * fanget i Farragiri H** retrai 
96. The affix means also like this'; when the imitation of a thing is to be expressed. 
The word is understood here Thus fang: kan imitation of a horse in wood or clay &c. , ! Why do we say * imitation ? Observe syfter ma: "The gayal cowo. 
संक्षायां च ॥ १७॥ पदानि ॥ संज्ञायाम्, च, (कन् . f: I hegura, rara Tigar TRT erat a ani 
97. The affix kan comes in the sense of like this', when the whole word so formed is a Nane.. 
Name.. . . . . 
i 
a 
R 
$ 
R 
975 
कन्-ELISION. 
BK..V. CH. IILSION 
. This applies when imitation is not meant. Thus मवसरण्स्य संज्ञा-मभकर ! thing reminding a horse'. राष्ट्रका, गमका 
लुम्मनुष्ये ॥ ९८ पदानि । लए, मनुष्ये। पतिः । संज्ञायामित्येव । संज्ञायां विहितस्य कमी मनुष्ये ऽभिधेवे हर भवति । 
____98. When in the same way a Man is denoted, the affis is elided by lup; the word retaining its number and. 
gender. 
. Thus पम्चा (पम्षेवमनुप्यः) 'straw-man'ie an effigy in stray. So also रासी, खरकटी ॥ For accent sce VI. I. 204 
. .. Why do we say a man', Observe मधकः, ष्ट्रक: &c. This sotra may be considered to be an enlargement of V. 3. 100 . जीविका चापण्ये n ९९। जीविकायें, च, अपण्ये (लए) 
चिःबीविकार्य यशपण्यं तमिममिये कनो हर भादि। .. . 99. A similar elision of the afix कन् takes place then also, when the figure is made a means of livelihood, it being presumed, that no traffic is driven thereby. 
That which is bought and sold is called you; that which is not so dealt with is a yoq: 11 The rule applies to the images of gods which are made means of subsistence by a low order of Brahmaņas, not by selling them, but by exhibiting them from door to door. Thus Teat: 'the idol of Vasudeva': चिव 'the idol of Siva'. स्कन्दः, विष्णुः, भादित्य &c . Why do we say मपण्ये? Observe, हस्तिकान् विक्रीणीवे 'he sells the images of elephent'. भश्वकान्, स्यकान्। 
This rule is also an amplification of V. 3. 100 देवपयादिभ्यश्च ॥ १०॥ पदानि ॥ देव पयादिभ्यः च ॥ वृत्तिः । इसे प्रकृतिकृतो संज्ञायां च विहितस्य कनो देवपयादिस्य उत्तरस्य र भवति । 
. भर्यास पूजनास विषकर्मध्वाचा 
से प्रतिकतो लोपः कनो देवपयादिषु । ___100. After. the words devapatha &c, there is si .milar elision of the afix kan, (V. 3. 96 and 97) expressing 
an image or a Name. 
The ऐपय class is भाकृतिगणः n Thus देवपपः, सपया। 
1 देवपय, 2 सपथ, 3 वारिपथ, 4 स्यपय, स्यलपय', 6 करिपय', मजपय',80 पप, 9 पतपय, 10 पपप, 11 सिन्धुपथ (सिंहपय), 12 सिद्धगति (सिंहगति), 13 उष्ट्रपीय (ष्ट्र पीपा), 14 पायरजु (चामरज), 15 हस्त, 16इन, 17 हण्ड, 18 पुष्प, 19 मत्स्य, 20 अलपप, 21 ( It मारुतिगण। 
'BK. V. CH. III. S10s.. 
976 
i . Kanika :—The affis *7 is elided wben the imitation is an image of a god that is worshipped, or a picture, or a design on a flag. As for free are examples of gods, मर्जुनः 'the picture of Arjuna', सुर्योधन 'the picture of Duryo dhana', कपिः 'the flag having the figure of monkey', गहरा the eagle-flag': 
घस्तेढम् ॥ १०१॥ पदानि । यस्ते, वृत्तिावत्यनुवर्तते, हवः प्रथवि प्रत्यया सामान्येन भवन्ति प्रसिकसो चापतिकतो पापखि पम्पादिवायें पोषम् प्रत्ययो भवति। 
- 101. The affix dhak (+'-एय) comes after vasti, . in the sense of like this'. . 
The word is understood here. The affixes taught hence forward come in a general sense, and are not confined to images. Thus fafts fem. पास्नेयी 'like the abdomen'. 
शिलाया दः ॥ १०२॥ पदानि । शिलाया, इतिः। शिलाचवादिषायें प्रत्ययो भवति। 
- 102. The affix dha (एय) comes after sila, in the sense of like this'. 
Thus fara frá FW: 'curd, hard as stone'. According to some, the affix सम् also comes after पिना, as लेयम् । 
शाखादिभ्यो यत् ॥ १०३ ॥ पदानि ॥ शाखादिभ्यः, यत् । पत्तिः । पाखा इस्येवमादिभ्यः प्रातिपदिके यो यव्यत्ययो मपति रखा। 
___103. The afix यत् comes, in the sense of 'like this', after sakha &c. 
Thus पाखव-पाण्या, मुल्यः (VI. I. 213),अपन्यः &c. 
1 खा. 2 मुख, 3 अपन, भूक मेप, 6 मध', 7 चरण, 8 स्कन्ध, स्कन्द, 10 रन, 11 शिरल, 12 मम, 13 परण. .. न्य च भव्ये ॥ १०४॥ पदानि । दूव्यम्, च, भव्ये (यद)। 
पत्तिः । म्याग्दो निपात्यने भन्ये मियो । हुपादिवायें यखाययो निपात्यते।। 
104. The word द्रव्य is anomalous, meaning beau tiful'. 
The word is formed by adding a to the word * The word ya means 'nice, excellent, proper, fit; having or containing in himself all the desired requisites'. As बन्योऽय पत्रपुषः 'how nice is this Prince': इम्बोध भापकर । 
कुशापाच्छः ॥ १०५॥ पदानि । कुशामाद । वृत्तिः । कुशामधन्दादिवायें छः प्रत्ययो भपाति। 
105. The afix chha (ईय) comes in the sense of 'like this', after the word kusagra. 
977 
( BK. V: CH. III. $ 107 
T 
169 
. Thus A ( Y ) : ** Intellect sharp as the point of the kula grass *. umta u 
FATEITY Tvera 08 Tata | WATETI, E, artvar, (3:) 
ir parent ATP i grifau CHETYPE **seered vt 
106. The affix chha (i) comes, also only in the sense of like this', after & compound noun which contains in itself the force of like this'. : The word ki refers to 6 and afgry means trufa# A compound which is formed with the force of €, takes the affix 8, when a second pe is to be indicated. In the chapter on Compounds, no samása is taught with the force of ; this sötra, therefore, indicates by implication that such a samasa of two nouns can be formed, having hidden in it the sense of a Such a samasa will come under the head of gu ONT RE: (II. 1.4 
| Thu জালালীয় প্রত্যাখ্যাগী গু ৰক্ষী। 
The word kama mcans 'like the crow and the palm-fruit* : 'the unexpected and sudden fall of a plam-fruit upon the head of a crow so as to kill it, at the very moment of its sitting on a branch of that tree; and is used to denote a very unexpected and accidental occurence. Thus Devadatta happens to enter a village, and on that very day, robbers happen to attack the village, and in the fray, Devadatta is killed, this coincidence of the robbers and Devadatta is called maatetaaa*:, and the killing of Devadatta is like that of the crow by the ar fruit. The first case of HTT: will form the com pound, the second case of qy will give rise to the affixing of , as arta # इत्तस्य वधः (the compound काकताल meaning काकतालसमागमसदृशाश्वोर समागमः) and the derivative word काकतालीय meaning काकमरणसद्धः ): 
Similarly 
m o ta means "like the death of a goat (aja) by the accidental falling of a sword (kripana) as the goat was passing". Similarly 
eu rata means "like the accidental falling of a vulture (vartika) in to the hands of a blind person who thus captures it". All these are unintentional (atarkita and curious (chitrtkarana) coincidences. In short, these words mean 
accidentally, "unexpectedly 
erant su 11 fell et il recie , tai organ : nastar su edat part 
107. The affix an (+_) comes in the sense of like this', after the words sarkard &c. 
Thus iter , & 
r watu, 2 , 3 beat, 4 age (farger; fafest, harga 1), 5 goeta, 6 OY, 7 MM, 847", gare, 10 art (ft), 11 5* () 12 featu 
1 
SANE 
. 
Atm 
C 
RE 
भल्यादिभ्यष्ठ ॥ १०८॥ पनानि ॥ अडल्यादिभ्यः, সুবিঃ a wহস্থাশি স্বার্থ ও গঞ্জী অস্থা। 
_____108. The affix thak (+- or ) comes in the sense of " like this, after the words anguli &c. 
Thus শিক্ষা (= ঞ্জয়লী), মালাকা। 
भयलि (माती), 2 भरुन, अक्षु. * बल्य5 मण्डर, 6 मण्डल, कुली (शुष्कृत 8 t", कपि, 10 इनि- 11 12 खल, 13 अधिन, 14 गोणी, 15 उम्, 16 कुलिशा 17शिप 
MAA 
4 
.. 
. 
A 
... 
.. 
CHARORNPROn 
. 
. 
. 
NE 
एकामालागादियाथै 
___109. The affix thach (क) also comes. optionally after the word ekasalâ : with the force of like this'. . 
Thus कपालिकः or ऐकालिक by sna कोलोहितादीका ॥ ११॥ पदानि || कर्क, लोहितात, ईका॥ अनिः । कलोदित धनाभ्यामिवाय ईका प्रत्ययो भवति। 
110. The affix comes in the sense of like this', after karka and lohita. 
Thus काकीक: "like a or white horse'. लोहिताकफोट a Crystal though not itself red, appears red, owing to the reflection of some thing behind it. 
प्रनपूर्वविश्वेमात्धाल् छन्दसि ॥ ११॥ प्रत, पूर्व, विश्व, इमात, थान, छन्दसि। वृत्तिः ।। मन पूर्व विश्व इम हरयवय हवायें थात् प्रत्ययो भवति उन्नति विषये। 
111. In the Chhandas, the affix thal ( UT) comes iu the sense of like this', after pratna, pårva, visva, and ima (idanı). 
Thus : 
प्रद्रया दुई विश्वमयाँ उयेष्ठतान्तिपिई स्ववियू । (Rig Veda V. 44. 1). 'Him (Indra), as the ancients, as the predecessors as all creatures, and as these living men have worshipped &c'. 
पूगाज भ्यो ऽप्रामणीपूर्वात् ॥ ११२॥ पदानि । पूगात्-व्यः, अप्रामणी-पूर्वात् ।। वृत्तिः । इशय इति निवृतम् । नानाजानीया अनियसवृनयो ऽर्थकामधानाः सपाः पूगा । पूगषाधिना গান্ধিসুধাই : গয়েমী সাল 
112. The affix aya (+-) is added withouth changing the connotation, to & word denoting a horde, but not when the word is derived from the name of their leader. 
The anuvritti of r ceases. The word got means a crowd of men of various castes, having no fixed livelihood, connected together with the object 
SamotBAD 
म 
MEHAN 
हापा GUICE 
PPAL 
प 
NEPAL 
979 
(BK. V. CH. 111. 114 
Y 
of acquiring wealth &c. Thus 'the trident bannered horde'. dual 
Eur. Pl. *T: # Similarly, w et, fra, as, , *** in the plural, the affix is elided by 11. 4.62... 
Why do we say writt? Observe HT: (V. 2. 78) a horde whose leader is Devadatta'. From this s@tram commence the Try affixes &c, the affixes that have the sense of King thereof. The afhx therefore, has this meaning also viz. 'the leader of the horde. " aansidhar 8890 Tuna 1 ara, ***:, aferera, (sir ) , 
. 
# 
PRE 
635 
24 
2. 
HP 
NY: 
FIT Federata . 
113. The affix nya comes after the name of wild band, and after a word ending in chphan (+- IV. 1. 98), without change of sense ; but not in the feminine. 
A collection of persons of different castes, having no determined live lihood, and living by violence are called Any or 'wild band'. Thus mirare *a wild band living of pigeons, খাদ্য and ণীল থাকা, মানি, মন্তিময়ী , 
treat # So with words ending in , as , , plesatuan, XNR 2 pl. Etura: # . 
.. Why do we say " not in the Feminine ?" Observe aret, nifiant, eruit, want 
आयुधजीविसंघा ध्यड्डाहीफेवनालणराजन्यात् ॥ ११४॥ पदानि ॥ मायुध sifertur, Tu reteny, Qu-paru 
Nagysia #: 
WSOY 15 Tetra TKI TERE ay VTT : 1 star TOUCHCHICTY Hair wur . : 114. To a name expressing & multitude living by the trade of arms, is added the affix ayat (+-y with the fem. in 6), when it is the name among the Vâhika, but not when it is the same of a Brühmana, nor when the word is Rajanya. 
The anuvritti of gaan does not govern this sdtra. Thus teater restat pl. aTi, fem. taciti sorte, arrint, pl. *T: fem. nit, Aran, med pl. a fem. # 
Why do we say 'living by the profession of arms *7 Observe Whi, 
# Why do we say "a multitude Observe quru Why do we say *ataongst the Vähika Observe ud:, : Why do we say "not a Brah. mana or the word-form Rajanya" Observe FINT , UPM, THAT ITU 
Auguri 860 auf I , UTU . 
Tina 110HII Natazi TU U Tere I 
1 
SO Rx v. Ca ft. 
} 
.. 
L, 
: 
] 
" 
। 
-- 
- 
. 
. 
। 
: 
র 
। 
এ 
} 
.. 
115. The affix tenyan (+- 4 with the fem. ia t) comes after the word Vrika, a class of persons living by trade of arms. . . . . 
Thus re ut, pl. ny, femrat The affix will not come, when স্কুঞ্জ means a wolf. As ক্লাশী ক্ষুঞ্জ প্রাটি ক্ষুঞ্জন্ধি । 
| মাবিনিকাপ্তা:ং অন ॥ ঘান্তি, স্মিথ, অদ্ভাৱ,কা স্কুল লাকযাক্কি রূষাক । জ্বালার্ষিঃ খিৱি- 
প্ৰীষ্মীপ্তিঋদ্ধি কার : মা শ্বাক্তি ইঙ্কামানুঞ্জীৱনা থাকা গুলঞ্জ জ ঃ ইঃ 
শুয়ে কথা হ্মীলিমাল লীগ্ধ জালজিঃ # 
116. The affix chha (v) comes, without change, ing the sense, after damini &c, and after the six warrior stocks called Traigarta shashtha. 
The following are the six warrior races of Trigarta arte, per জন্ধি, জানি, প্রায় ৯ আসক্সি । | This স্থানীয় স্থানীয়ী, p. ঝুমন; জর্থী মাগীশ, p. গুল; ক্লীশ্রী: p. কাতায় স্বাক্ষী p! 
ঝুজ, সুষ pi, নয়: স্নামানী, p. গ্লালগাল, প্লা p. গ, ঙ্গালী pl. ঞ্জালন্ধু । | খালি, 2 গুখি, ৪ জিব্দি, গীর্জ (ঞ্জীকাক্কি ফার্কি 8 ী ি মজুলি (ননি, মানি মূস্তুনি , ৪ কালার্জি, ও মুয়াজিদি, 0 ক্ষীদ্ভাজি, জাষ্ট্র সুল (কালি, { স্থল, ৪ রান, 14 ক্রি , 18 খি, 18 , !” 
শ ব্দ , ৪ ক্ষান্ধা, 1$ দ্বিগীযুগ্ধ, 20 জ্বানির 2 ঝুঞ্জি, গু জ্বৰূক্ষ্মী, 24 , 24 দ্বিচ্চ । 
पोदियौधेयादिश्यामणौ । ११७॥ पदानि ॥ पादि, यौधेयादिभ्याम् अ জ, গভী মূৰি:! খুঞ্জীবিকাঘান্বিন্ধ। আৱাৰিী আঁখিন্ধি মাৰিবন্ধ স্নায়ুখঞ্জীবিঘখাজিঞ্জ স্বামী স্ত্রী শ্রঙ্কঃ 
117. The affix an (+- ) comes after partu &c, and the affix at (+- ) comes after yaudheya &c, without changing the sense : when these words denote warrior classes. 
Thus ঘাম:, pl. : gঃ p. গুরুষ, অস্ত্র pl. ধাঃ । 
} ঘ, 2 , 3 , * ক্ষান্ধী (জালী, কুক্স, ৪ , ৭ , ৪ , ৫ স্থা 16 ফি , t সুষঙ্গালি, ৫ জাহ্মজ ৪ 
| খীষ, জী, 3 গুঞ্জ, হীরন্তু, ৪ মা , ও যা ? সুকান্ধলঞ্জ জানি, ৪ জিন, ৪ মাৰ, 30 ঝান #ীষী, 12 খান # See v.1, 178, 
মিলিৱিকান্তাবন্তিৰামীনুভূয়লা থং বন্ধৰি । ঋমিটি বিলু, স্বান্তনু, হিব্বাৰ, মামী, ভাব, খুম, গগ, অঙ্গ। 
এH 
. 
| 
L 
' 
. 
. 
১৩ 
: 
:: 
::::::: 
. 
। 
' 
' 
* 
* 
' 
' 
| 
কলন - 
শুরু 
. * 
অ 
অ 
: 
: 
; 
; 
::::"। 
| 
; 
| 
গুরু । 
: 
পঙ্কিায়িী সঙ্গী চান্বিথ 
বা স্কুলু গুপ্ত 
yas (+-) comes without change words abhijit, bidabhrit, salavat, to and frumnt, when those words « 
খালু ceases Thus শিরিন লাগিলি, ofte er n oe ATAXT: 01 62* 
1991 
अथ पञ्चमध्यायस्य चतुर्थः पादः। 
BOOK FIFTH. 
O. 
4 
2 
20 
26 
. 
distriDUIVA 
? 
$ 
TETET E ciri 11 fatin 7%, yari, * PATE, freten Fety, 
que aur ET ATT # 
1. The affix vun (..**) comes after the words pada and sata when preceded by a numeral, the sense being that of distributive relation; and the final of the stem is elided. 
Prátipadikas preceded by a numeral and ending in the rords are or Un take the afix 7 when a distributive sense (rar) is to be expressed: and by the addition of this, the Anal is elided. 
By V1.4 148 the final sa of pada and Sata would have been elided before the taddhita affix vun; even if such elision was not taught in this rules The repetition of the word in this rule, therefore, indicates that the elision ordained here is not one caused by the affix. For if the citsion had been caused by the affix, then by I. 1. 57, such P T or substitute * would be equivalent to the principal (sthanivat); and would thus debar the application of the rule VI. 4. 130 by which pad (and not pada) is changed into a In other words, the lopa taught by area is an or caused by some thing which is subsequent, namely by a taddhita afhx or by r or affilx ; therefore, this lopa would be sthani-yat for the purposes of the rule which yould apply to somethịng preceding it (1. 1. 57). Therefore, påd becomes sthâni-vat to pada. Therefore, the anga or base ending with pada' will be called x, and not the base ending with 'pad', and thercfore VI. 4. 130* which applies to bases will not apply, and there will be no substitution of for 
(BK. V. CR. IV. $3 
21 
0 
AC, as there is not in the form 4. But we want such substitution and hence the employment of words "the hnal of the stem is elided ". 
Thus rara "he gives two quarters to each "farsi NTT (ram+ FONTE + YYVI.4 130-E T VII. 3. 44 by which of w is changed into ) Similarly t o profitant TIC 11 
The compounds above formed are taddhitartha Tatpurusha com pounds, viz compounds containing the sense of a taddhita affx, by rule II. I. $1. After the compound is formed, then the affix rt is added. Thus first we have twrp and fua compounded by II. I. 51 and then the affix is added. The words are and when not so compounded, take 5 affix only in the feminine 
Why do we say " of the words 97 and va "7 Observe 
o n cama, no affixing. Why do we sayo * preceded by a numeral Observe q* en 
aura Why do we say "in a distributive sense" 7 Observe îngrot fa " He gives two quarters: " UN FIFE # 
The enumeration of me and ya is useless, as the affix is found after other words also. As fpirit " he gives two cakes to each". PAGATE 
i en 
· goureux a , aeriaT:, , (ECU) O রুটি খুন স্কুঙ্কু খান স্বশ্রয়ী মুয়ামানা স্বাস্থানাল গ্রাখিন্ধিন্ধে পঁয় 
neza mara 
w Y . 
2. Also when the sense is of a punishment or a donation. . . . . . 
. . 
. .. 
· The word pre means * punishment", and prat means "gift or do nation". The pratipadikas yry and ca preceded by a numeral, and convey Ing the sense of punishment or donation, take the affix , and the final is elided. This sotra is begun to show that the " distributive sense ** does not apply here. Thus it TT 
**** feq: " punished with the in fiction of a fine of tvo Padas (a quarter coin)". TT Trafnframt 
"he makes a gift of two Padas". Similarly pufa poca "punished with a fine of two hundreds " fquiaki szereta &c. 
Feet: w t nan warfari furcaFT:, *T, (1967) h U Femi: * Årez yea 4967 m ütar*: » mi d an 
3. The afix kan (1 ) comes in the sense of " like that or specialty ", after the words sthola &c. 
This debars the affix ital (V. 3. 69). Thus fra: "bulky. So also w t, 796 
RR119 
TORS 
TO BE 
a 
L 
BK. V. CL. IV. & 5. 
Vårt on The words and a should be included in the list of stholadi words. As ***, T: # According to one version the words are * and mand not in and en So the derivatives will be re and 178 the words that end in long vowels mt, or , shorten their voivels before this affix, by VII.4 13. AS, GU + 47* 19* "snake-like". The word om takes 
when tila is meant, as alt ury # # takes are when mcau. ing an, as T: # 16. fer, ana, R, and ESTE take this afhx when wine is meant, a qrum, IT, ternt * a kind of wine *. E takes this affix when meaning a covering, as irmas a covering of the colour of cow's wine, or go-motra may mean a certain arrangement of colours such as white and black". U takes 7 meaning a snake, as *: (VII. 4. 13) *a kind of snake of the color of wine * fe takes it when meaning sali grain, as i t 
Tora The following is a list of Sthuladi words. 
· 1 , 2 , 3 , .5 g fag. 6 , 7 raia Artan 
0914, 8 TT 9 , 9 g 1, 10 m ung, 11 SETTE, 12 rug, 13 640NY ( 48, 4), 141 . .' . . : 
TA FITOT * I wat aat, 47, (0) Tu maniatūta i anti stampa: 1 **partat moduara mer 
F 
ANTIR 
14 
19 
YTOTEC tomat 
NOM 
LAS' 
iy 
O 
NO 
DYER 
Dota 
. 
. 
XS 
91 
4. After & participle ending in kta, comes the affix kan, when the meaning is something not yet wholly completed. 
The word verta means an act which has been fully accomplished: mare therefore, means, an act which has not been fully accomplished, 
Thus **** "not yet wholly divided " So also ft & : Why do we say *something not wholly completed *Observe finu "totally divided ", or totally cut'. 
F ann 57, there ! fy: 1 TIHTV 
TEYEN 5. Not so when a word in the sense of "halt", precedes such participle. - When the word me or any other word having this sense, is com -pounded with a participle in the affix is not added to denote the sense of incompleteness. Thus T. TIET &C (II. 1. 27. The word showa that the symonyms of all are also to be taken. Thus . &c 
Objection : --It is redundant to have prohibited after a word pre ceded by half, because the word "halt" itself shows that the action has not been completed 
2 
[ Bk. V.CH. VL. 97 
Answe - The prohibition contained in this satin does not refer to them of the last sátra, where it has the sense of "incompleteness *. It te fers to that which comes after a word, without changing the sense of that word (RTT ) # Thus the words Max and f (the comparative and superlative degrees of show by the very fact of their comparison, that the action denoted by them is not complete. These words far and A m also take the affix my without change of sense AS ACE and fa***** and E * &c as used by Patanjali himself in the following sentences - ক্তি লিঙ্গ মন্ত্রি, গুঞ্জি ঞ্জ নেই । This is also prohibited in the case of compounds with a 11 In fact, this sätra teaches by implication 
Käpaka) that comes also in the sense of svårtha 
IEET Tagatul thar | AT, TT, (40) ধূলি: মম্বন, স মৰিঃ স্কুঙ্কৰীভাঙ্গন ধমান ৰূল্মী সবজি। 
6. The affix kan comes after the word brihati when it means "an article of dress ". 
The word ** is to be read into this sotra and not its prohibition. The force of this 4 is nél, or it is an example of An u Thuset *** Tan (ro) (VII.4.13 by which long vowel is shortened) *an upper garment or mantle * 
Why do we say " when it means dress "7 Observe yet ya," the metre called Brihati". 
Eustacredne gouryTrueTE: 10 a 1 * *, शिता, अलङ्कर्म, अलैपुरुषः, अध्युत्तरपदात् । 
वृत्तिः अपडश भाषितं भलकर्म अलपुरुष हत्येतेभ्यो ऽयुत्तरपदाच्या स्वार्थे वा प्रत्ययो भवति । 
7. The affix kha () comes after the words ashaduksha, isitnog, alan karın, alampurusha, and after a stem ending with adhi. 
The force of « is part i e. it does not change the sense of the word, The word 943 means that which has not six eyes * 067 is compound ed from them by adding * (V. 4. 113) " having six eyes". The affix 
is to be added to this word already ending in the affix shach. Thus 168 to "a secret not having six eyes ". i. e. * a secret known or determin cd by two persons only to the exclusion of a third". Similarly for 
uq * STIFTET ESTH = 
"a forest where formerly cattle had graze ed". The augment on is added to wrfua by nipata, or irregularly. So also 
e 
*: * QUIN: competent to do any act, ciever. Sosti 36 FEHÉ ETT gaaf ITT: - fit for a man. 
O 
. 
BK. V. CR. IV.$. 9) 
A word ending with my, will be a Tatpurusha compound, by IL 2. 40, as the word of belongs to Saundadi class. As un 
The affix kha in the case of these words is invariable (nitya), because the word funt occurs in the next sätra, and it is a maxim of interpretation that a rule occurring between two optional rules is nitya. The above words always occur with this affix and never without it while in the case of other words taught hereafter this affix comes optionally. There are other affixes also which are svdrthika and wilya. Such as 894 &c up to the affix cu (V. 3. 55 to 95) &c upto (V. 3. 112 to V. 4. 1) &c upto ,(V. 4 11 to 21) and affixes taught from V. 4. 6 Let to V. 49 (C) ending in 
na and all Samasanta afixes 
fazerestauri watae fani, *:, , forure, 
ধূলি জাৰিবিন্ধাবজিবি লালাখা বিপা প্রতি ৪ 
8. The affix kha (a) may optionally be added without change of sense to a stem ending in anch( )',when it does not mean a point of the compass used in the femi nine gender. 
Thus yra or * "old", setor pantang new. . 
Why do we say "when not denoting a direction in the femininega Observe t he "eastern region", il faut "western region." Why do we say "a point of the compasso? Other words in the feminine will take this affix As n gutt, 
w at four # Why do we say "in the femininely A direction or fram used in any other gender will take this affix. As n o tes 
to p ay HARI ya N T 1 5141, 3., pyfa T: H Hairexafardan o ya wanan 
9. The affix chha (T) is added without change of sense, to a stem ending in the word wa, when it means ap propriateness. 
The word ry means the substance or substratum in which jati or generic quality adheres or any thing by which a thing is regulated and indi vidualised ( fagnar A a ). Thus fy means that substance by which the genus Brahmana, Kshatriya &c is distinguished. Thus w anita: "appro. priate to a Brahmana". franta, quats &c . 
Why do we say “when meaning appropriateness". Observe me *Tia: HnY of the Brahmana caste is beautiful". 
CTATIT P ra, fa, . 
1897 
EST OS 
987 
. 
GOA 
Da 
• জুঝি ? দুলাকিকিঞ্জুিমাআ ঃ গত শনি মন খানালামগ্নস্বরুপন্ত্রি ও 
10. The afbx chhe (f) is optionally added to s stem ending in eum, if it is compounded with something with which another is made to take an equal place. 
The word in means *T* FOTO 4T 'whose place is the same or ** or equal. Thus VT 
ETTİ# or feara: (Forgny PTT whose place is that of a father similarly লাকুশ্রাণীখঃ or লাখােনা; খোন্দী: or গান । 
Why do yve say " when it means equal to". Observe item * COW shed" w yrare “stable". The word for in arra is for the sake of disk tinctness. The word gear as a Bahuvrihi compound is the appropriate word to be taken here, and not when it is taken as a Tatpurusha compound like 
TK FUTÁ The word "when", is a conjunction : and joins the two meanings 
The rule 9 occurring between this rule and 8th rule, both of which are optional, must be taken to be a nitya rule, as explained above. 
a fram - किमेनिङव्ययधादाम्वन्यप्रकले ॥१९॥ पदानि ॥ किम, एत्, तिक अव्यय, घा 
KHIRT 
2 
. 
._ 
ETY 
. 
P... 
. 
7 
ঘৰ গা পূজয় স্বস্তি 
11. To the affix mand T (I. 1. 22) ordained to come after the word (V. 3. 55) or after a word end ing in < (VI. 3. 17) or after a finite verb (V. 3. 56, 57) or after an indeclinable, is added the affix am (1), but not if the excess belongs to a substance (and not to an action or quality). 
The a or ny and ary affixes are employed for comparison ( 'ex cess') of adjectives and adverbs This rule applies to adverbs and not to adjectives : i. e. when an adverb qualifies a verb or another adjective, but not when an adjective qualihes a noun. The denoting word by itself has no 'excess &c, it is the adjective which qualises such substance that is capable of excess or comparison. The prohibition in 
therefore really relates to the quality of a substance; i, e. to adjectives. affi a Fr T I 
ad y Tera NTN 
Thus faux or FRUTA "how excessively", giam or garg, TC, 99 FeGuy or quanru "he cooks surprisingly", TFTUE, IT“ more or most loftily or loudly 
But when the excess belongs not to an action or attribute, but to a substance, the amu STT is not added. As den: 787 "a most lofty tree. . 
[13%. V. CH. IV $ 14 ) 
9: 
9 
WAT 
' 
N 
अमु, चन्दसि ॥ १२ ॥ पदानि । अमु, च, छन्दसि। মূৰি নিগুম্বন্ধই , শ্লষ্ট কাষ্ট গুণাবলি ? জ্ঞায় 
12. In the Chhandas, the affix amu (ar) also is added after the above, under similar conditions. 
To the word Frau, words ending in g, finite verbs and indeclinable when taking the coinparative affixes xt and is added the affix in the 
Vedas, when these words are used as adverbs. By the force of the word * also' in the stra, the affix sy is also included. Thus 
u n d or < RA: 1 Pat means HT 
The vords ending in an and we are indeclinables as they are include ed in the class of Svarádi (1. 1.37) 
wameul 83 11 ta raguai, fFT: # wguratragere I Senduaren weit ware 
13. The affix thak (+- ) comes after the word anugadin, without changing its sense. 
Thus it " repeater or who ochoes back". T: feum ! P4 na ora, Far, ST 
#cafagit open raunar afkrigas, a purpose wat wara ferat fare . 
14. The affix an (m) comes without changing the sense, after a word ending in the affix pach (+1-3), when the word is feminine. 
By III. 3. 43 the affix ry is ordained after feminine words denoting reciprocity of action. The affix e comes after such a word without change ing the sense, when the thing denoted is feminine Thus TATU, Querei u n 
Q.-Why the word " feminine" is repeated in this sätra, when we already know from III. 3. 43 that my comes only after feminine words; and a svarthika affix like my coming after a feminine word will keep the word feminine 
Ans.---The repetition of the word in this sätra, teaches by impll. cation (napaka) the following " FITTET: sunt: set f r o sta" # Sometimes it happens that bases which are derived by means of affixes that do not convey any particular meaning of their own, but leave the mean. ing which is conveyed by the original to which they are added, unchanged. do not take their gender and number from those original bases from which they are derived". Thus HFT THT, HEART YUHT (TU Froy:) formed by adding the swartha affix (V. 3. 67) to * and ans, the resultant words being in the feminine gender. Similarly from - is derived without change of meaning, but change of gender, 
(BK. V. C11 IV. $. 17 
DAD 
+ 
E 
SA 
0224 
hi 
! 
02 
TA 
2 
. 
. 
* 
** 
. 
ru 
SOS 
furgur: 11 848 for natur, qu i গুলি ? শাখী গাঙ্গু নিৰনাৰাষ্ট্র ও কাজী মখান। 
15. The affix an (+ - ) comes without changing the sense, after & stem ending in the affix inun (rou). 
By III. 3. 44, the affix is added to a root to express a condition resulting from a universal co-operation of the action denoted by the root. But a word formed by this after all an imaginary yord, it requires the further addition of this affx mor to make it a complete word. In fact, all svärtha affixes generally complete the not fully developed word. Thus giurium বু, জঙ্গুি জ্ঞ 
Ferencantarea 861 i fornitori, Art, (40) আখি । ঝিঙ্গীৰিষাঃ বাজিয়ে গুঞ্জ সায়ী সনি আই সি ॥ 
16. The affix an ( 5) is added to the word fait when & word expressing " fish " is to be made. 
Thus rencont " a fish". Why do we say when it means a fish"? Observe fare NTT: " Devadatta who is gliding out" 
segrar: 
f ureterarura wagy 1 per a norr, fatura parafarmurt, ETH 
: &unutra: ferreiropora parah An 
aar wat in 17. The affix kritvasuch (car) is added to a Numeral, when the ropetition of an action is to be counted. 
This is also a syártha afix. The word maaf means "again and again or repetition". The counting of actions belonging to the same class and having the same agent, which occur again and again is called ante Fru Thus ** VE R " he eats five times". So also ex 
* &c. 
Why do we say "after a Numeral", Observe 
t 
h e eats many times as 
Objection :- Why do we say " action" when we know that an 'action alone can be repeated, and not a substance or an attribute? Reply: The word 
er is employed in this søtra for the sake of the next sätras, into which its anuvnitti flows. Thus in sätra 19, a 62 when the affix does not apply to count repetition, because it is impossible for a unit to express repetition; but merely to count the "action" only. 
Why do we use the word "repetition"? The affix will not apply when merely "actions" are counted. Thus Gurur: "five cookings ", Q &c 
Why do we use the word "counting", when we know that a Numeral is nothing but counting Had the satra been merely संख्यायाः क्रियाभ्यावतो कृस्व 
12 
* OW BK. V. CI. IV. $. 20) 
990 
WHO 
9 
y, there would arise this anomaly. The numerals upto ten denote only the thing numbered (Hair), but the numerals above those denote both the counting (Fourt) and the thing counted (wmd) u If were not used, the affix would come only after the numeral denoting sankhyeya and not sabkhyana. Thus it will apply to ATLE T :, but not here ou un because bere the word wat does not denote repetition, but merely a counting. By using the word for it applies to both 
Farragut peu veta uff, *., # Tru T ra que farinera i yere were 
SYTYTI 
18. The affix "such" () is added to the numeral dvi, tri and chatur, in the same sense of counting the repeti tion of an action. 
This debars 48+! Thus fr 
, 
in fa ST A TER #The # in the last example is elided by VIII. 2. 24: but meaning "sour", and it meaning "four-times *, are differently accented : the rof gy indicating that the accent udatta falls on the last syllable. Thus U (TETE Un V. 58, beieg formed with the affix 'uran added to ), and 
(with N . CUTR I EU , (EG) N : # #Tarp Formu a v 44: farm 57°11 
19. The vord Foc is substituted for before the affix , when an action is to be counted. 
This debars near The 'rcpetition' being impossible, the action alone is counted : so the anuvritti of may only runs into this sätra and not of #ur # Thus x * "he eats once * on The y of h is elided by VIII. 2. 23. But not here in gerir as being against usage. 
A 
. 
. 
MS 
LES 
CA 
i 
11 
ৰূলঃ হুদান ক্ষিশ্বৰূৰগৰ খনমানা ঝিমাখা খা গয়ঃ সৰাৰ । ফুল গন্ধ 
20. The affix yt is optionally added to the nu meral ay, to count the repetition of an action, occurring in a not distant period of time. 
This debars el which comes in the alternative. The word my * "not remote", qualifies fruiti i. e, when the recurring of the action takes place within a short time, it is r e ll Thus C or an FETER 
* " he eats many times a day. But when a remote time is denoted then app does not apply. Thus C AIUR YF 'he eats many times in a month, not daily, owing to poverty &c. 
991 
: 
BK. V. CL. IV.$ 22' 
ARRERADA 
DALARNAVALANSWEAR 
. 
sletter 
M 
a 
c 
तत्यकृतवचने मयत् ॥ २१॥ पदानि ॥ तत्, प्रकृतवचने, भयद् ॥ . prerafata untariatri, soita tener unani puretuie intra 
NO. 
WA 
ST 
PM 
21. The affix mayat (Hwith the feminine in grave ) is added to a word in first case in construction, when the sense is "made thereof", or "subsisting therein". 
The translation of the sätra given above is according to the rendering of Prof. Böhtlingk. According to Kašika: signifies that the word in cons truction to which the affix is to be added should be in the nominative case, (IV. 1. 82) the word ** means "happening to be in abundance. So that according to this interpretation the sotra should be translated, as done by Dr. Ballantyne, "The affix mayat may be employed after a word denoting some substance, when eve require an expression for it as abundant". Thus i ****** "abundance of food", w "abundance of cake". According to others, that in which there is abundance of the thing signified by the word to which the affix is added, is denoted by the whole word. Thus m গালি = গ ঘর a feast in which there is abundance of food. মূত্মময় ঋঃ 
# Both senses are possible, as the sotra is constructed 
"The word * in the sätra has two senses. It being made by the affix fur conveys the force both of the nature (III. 3. 114) and the site. In the former case, (taking, 4 to mean "the mention of that as abund ant)", we have "abundance of grain". But in the second case, (taking it to mean "that in which something is spoken of as abundant)" we have w 20: ta sacrifice at which food is abundant". (Dr. Ballantyne's Laghukaumudi). 
समूहवश बहुषु ॥ २२॥ पदानि । समूहवत, च, बहुषु, (मय)। TT: 11 #49 I ET "Taquaray ATM TI ** 
22. When that, whereof something is made or subsists in, is a multitude, then the affixes expressing a great quantity (IV. 2. 37 &c) may also be employed to denote " made thereof, subsisting therein”. 
The shows that we also comes in the same sense. Thus Aren: Bar: siyo NECTAT: * T (IV. 2. 47) or in ; so also urestimator ve 
# In the second sense we have, À 4T ET: H T - in or any সহ র দ্বালি or ক্রীমঃ । 
Wrar UFOEHTSAL ST: #294 valfart mart, TFT, (fak. H a , s: 8 
#: 16 : Fir fai pagat # 
D 
9 
Bx. .Cit. 
.. 
} 
৫ 
: 
{ 
১ 
. 
. 
। 
ক 
। 
: 
। 
' 
। 
. 23. The aflix Aya (+- ) comes, without chang ing the sense, after the words ananta, avasatha, itiha and bheshaja. 
Thus ালন ও , 
জু মু » ফ্লাহ্ম = dueiline place, a sanctuary for sacred fire'. for "traditional account', the affix here is added to a word which is not a prátipadika The word gefa y means tradition, as me ঞ্জ কখােশ যান। বিশ্বজু = ঞ্জ ঞ্জ 
It is optional to add this affix, owing to the general optional nature of all taddhita affixes. See IV. 1. 82. | ৰাৰা । ২৪ অন্ধৰি ৰবাবা, স্বা , অৰু 
স্থালঃ নানাজানদারুনুর্থখালা গুৰু গৰাষ্ট্ৰীয় স্থা? 
24. After a stem ending in the word car being in the fourth case in construction comes the affix y, in the sense of " appointed for it"... 
The word in has the same meaning as a " for the sake of that (IL. 1. 37). Thus f ara *** "offering &c, sacred to Agni". So als বিশ্ব স্বাণুর । | ধামখুমী ! এই পানি আস্থ, মা , (৫ 
নি; } ব্যায় । স্বার্থ ক্ষষিখায় নাকশিমুষ্ট্র স্ত্রী স্বা। স্থা ! ত্যাঙ্গালুথসঙ্কল আ ! সন্ত্রসস্ত্রীক ষ্ট 
ও ! দায় লু হাথুথুয়া মুহা: ৪ ও ৪ জু ছয় লক্ষ্ম ক্ষান্ধু । প্রাপ্ত ৪ লা জুলাঙ্খী মন্ত্রী প্রকার ও মিগ্রাঙ্গলাে ঋই মার্গীয়া ' ও ওয়াশ 
: 25. The affix re comes after the words are and , being in the fourth case in construction, when the mean 
mein, ing is 'for the purpose of that'. 
The word arnt is understood here also. Thus err o r water, meant for washing the feet". So also qui The accent of these words is governed by VI. 1. 213, the udatta being on the first syllable. 
The in the sotra implies the inclusion of words other than in and 7, not mentioned here. The affix an applies to other words also, as স্বপ্ন  ঃ মুপ্পানি: So also , , , ঋঞ্জি, ই, রূহ্ম , নিস্ক, অথ, জান, দুই, লঙ্ক, মুখ, গ, ঘৰি । These words take অ in the Vedas tha সুষঃ, যু, লায়, ক্ষা, স্বাস্থ্য, স্ট্রয়, 
নিষ, স্কুঞ্জ, যু:, মুলা, গরু সুখ, সুর : arid খায় in মিহীনুগ্ৰহয়। ই লাষ্ট্রিয়াঙ্কা ! প্রাথী ঋন জুখ কুন্সীই। ক্লা। সয়াৰ ! মুম্বকঃ নিস্ব কানি। ছায়ন্ত্রি ও মালিঃ গুলা ক্ষি: মজনম জু। মুখ! : যুক্মি: ২৪ So also the words অঙ্ক 
an # লিঙ্কা ! 
। 
- 
. 
: 
s: 
; 
993 
, 
(Bx. V. CH. IV. . 29 
VårtThe affix and comes after the word 84; as HATI yafu, 
WG 
LIL 
YV 
Y 
# 
Vart is the substitute of #, and the affixes 4. 4 and are added to it; as, UM, , 
Vårt:-To the word meaning old, the affix is added as well as the ashxes , m* and veryone, and 4*, and fore! 
Vart-The affix is added to the words *77, 54 and 5#, e.g. - 4, kur # This affix comes after in the Vedas, as, 
f iue Varts.The affix * comes after tv and FiTYTT, as, o tras grun # The feminine is formed by e as writur, rum All these are illustrationsof the option allowed by IV. 1. 82, so that somctimes these affixes do not apply, as wী গলা, ব্যথায় সু 
Vårt in the Chhandas, as comes after he and 767, mara and * in a , AT TO 
अतिथेचः ॥ २६॥ पदानि । अतिथेः, ध्यः por u arrestauracia sua sant petiera u 
26. The affix nya (+- ) comes after apare in the fourth case in construction, in the sense of "for the purpose of that 
The word en is understood here also. Thus farà a u देवात्तल ॥ २७॥ पदानि ॥ देवात, तल। वृत्तिः ॥ नादय॑हति निवृतम् । विवाहात स्वार्षे तल् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
27. The affix are comes after ea, without change of sense. 
The anuvritti of Areze does not apply here and ceases. Thus * ** This word is always in the feminine, another example of the rule that a word derived by a svärthika affix does not always follow the gender of its primitive 
wa:, 1961 na 1 :, : 
I never FIT : Neque 
28. · Thc affix # comes after ea, without change of senge. 
Thus গন্ধ = দাবি: ষ্টি । 
Teller: 28 Efet il serfra:,(**) M N 77 q: Fr a yera 
29. The affix it comes after the words are &c, without changing their sense. . . 
Thus 46: 
24:, : = ATH 
PA 
: 
A 
* 
* 
. 
... 
A 
2 
. 
Bx v. Chi, iv. ৪a. } 
ck 
-- 
ছere nce 
1 , 2 ধ্বজ, ৪ টি, * হালু, গান, গা ধীর, ৪ জুল খান্তা স্বী, কালানুঞ্জীৰ, l ঋী লাম্বিশ্বৰ ( খিয়ান , lf ও নি, ১৪ জুন জি, laঞ্জায় লাল স্থা হিক্ট, 18 ধ্বান জানি , 18, , ? মুঞ্জ ( শয়) l৪ স্থা, # # 0 শাবিজ্ঞe 
নক্কানি আ a , : N. B. The afix is added to you and a wben denoting e sensons 44, জুতা , জীৱ গুৰু Otherwise ফাম, খান ॥ লুৰ and খ্রিয়াল take ঞ্জ ঞ্জnera denoting an anizol, a. পুন: or থিয়ান অয়, other-ise সুনাম:, বিয়াখী পাঞ্জ, & গল্প takeem when meaning 'clever, #8 w 
otherwise me only. takes when meaning 'artificial, se, nara: Fire takes when denoting student who has completed his stady of the Vedas, as eran gra takes when meaning empty, a৪ ৰন্ধানি ঘি গন্ধ, otherwise গুন আঃ i, . স্থায় খুন্তি 
may takes when contempt is meant, as reäar # taket whom meaning thread, ag si Mars, otherwise : VÚCE # The word ending in 
Fuent takes 41, as 
The worde depoting play thinge of girls take 9. se জন্ধু । | তান্ত্রিনালখী ॥ ২০ অলি। তান্ত্রি, মলী, ()। ৰূলি লাৰিকলী স্বাৰা ঋতু স্ত্রী মরি। 
30. The affix *7 comes, without changing the sense, after the word mea, when it means a precious stone. 
Thus fra t a: "Ruby". Why do we say 'when it means a precho cious stone?' Observe, rige: 'reda. | স্ব দাবি। ২। হানি! , , নী, () রূনি মনি স্বল্প স্থসানাল্লান্তিয়াহ্মো রুজী গঞ্জ ঞ্জ খালি লাগাঙ্গিখন স্ব স্ব ই 
31. The affix *t comes after her, when it means color which is not permanent. 
Thus লাঠি: স্কীত্ব red with anger. লাহিন খনৰ । Why do we say "not permanent" Observe a r: "a red cow". TU "the red blood". 
Vart:- The derivative of that may not take the gender of the primi tive, as তাৱিৰিক্ষা o ছিৰিন্ধা বন | | হক ও ২২। ঘানি। কে, (জন্ম) স্থানি: কাস্থি ই ঋী মনিষী গন্ধা 
32. The afix 5 comes after the word aga mean ing a substance dyed red. : 
| As লান্ধি ৰূলঃ or : Similarly শান্ধিা or লাঞ্ছিনা স্থা জ্বালা ॥ কই ? হলি। কাতান্ত, ধ্বনি: স্বনিই কী ৰূলক। জ্বালানি স্বলমানায় গ গন্ধ । 
99$ 
. 
[ BK V. CH. IV. $ 36 
TE 
. 
. 
33. The affix is added to the word , when it means a passing color, or dyed with color. 
The word of and are both understood here. Thus Art power the face black with shame or confusion". T 6 cloth dyed blue-black. HTFT ord : : fayfax480 181 Tarla il facere pr., 
u ma FEUTATE: Fir Tegea 418 
34. The affix*(*--ori ) comes without changing the sense after the word feare and the rest. 
Thus on: 1999, TT The mof 897 is shortened, as, ram The word Fint should be read as were in order to apply and not *. as, #rama The F is elided, because it is an Avyaya. See VI. 149. The affix is optional by IV. 1. 82. . 
1 fana, 2 , 3 790T, (rar) EPF (arter), 4 , 5 7 , 6 * fon, 7 , 8 ATETE, 974C, 10 arar, 11 524814 12 1, 13 , 14 , 15 , 16 a 17 , 18 
ar autea TR 1 341 IT Il qar, Earorm, () স্থালি গ্রামঃ গাম্বিলী খ্রী শ্রী কান্দ্ৰি কুমাৰাত্মা গু মংঘ সম্মান। 
35. The nffix comes after ry when it means the purport of the message spoken by another. 
The word 61167 means ' declared, expressed'. That which was spok en formerly by another, and which is carried by a third party as a tiding * or * news', is called crear Thus 
T u fa 'he relates the verbal message, 9 Some say it applies to written message also Why do we say " when it means a verbal message ?" Observe, ku 
TEX'the speech of Devadatta is sweet ताकारकर्मणो ऽण ॥ ३६॥ पदानि ॥ तद्युक्तात, कर्मणः, अ॥ a: y sikatua TT Trung: ERTU SU ELECT **** !! ব্যবস্থা, লুন্ধতী লাভৱানৰক্ষাৰ অস্ত্রাদলাদিত্মম্মম্মম্বৰ 
36. The affix at comes after the word 'occupa tion', when it occurs in connection therewith (i. e. when it is the result of an oral message or commission). .. 
Thus 
an occupation of a commision agenty. i. e. when an act is done in pursuance to or on hearing of a verbal message or commission. 
Vart:-The words you, **, Fire, are, py and take the affix or in the Vedas. As mea:, - , so also 5, 4, arm, i, HY, WITRY: H 
The following words formed by you without change of sense, occur in 
ULA 
K 
VA 
& 
BK V. CH. IV. $. 40 ) 
996 
*AH 
MASUAL 
W 
AS 
the Vedic and the secular literature:-ETSA, wrap, (eurat:), 
V 
(75 
a WR 
N 
. 
K 
V 
* 
V 
T 
NY 
কুলা, বিস্কুল, (বিঃ বিজ্ঞা কা জলি জ্ঞাসুঙ্গ, ঙ্গান্ধাযুঞ্জ, লম্বা । : roorat # Tura MT , srat, (a) 
E # ÄTHYOWTman supaya 
37. The affix ww comes after it when it docs not mean a species. 
Thus in fore he drinks medicir.e", w rama "he gives medicines, Why do we say "when not meaning a son or species". Observe, wiYWY 
a 'the herbs are growing in the field. amera 116 ara alami, , (MU) : $ যক্ষ্মালনী মূল: সু জুখোঃ গনি কাজ প্লী অার্ন । 
38. The affix au comes after the words are &c. (the words retaining their sense). 
Thus 777**** *FT *a wise person", feminine weit; while a man possessed of wisdom * with feminine ar comes from a "visdomby the affix « having the sense of qu ("being possessed of"), taught in V. 2. 101. The 
# of this sotra comes from the root arm -7:"he who knows fully * 
The word fram occurs in the list of wante words. It is formed by the addition of the affx at 1111. 2. 124, to the root, as, +02= nom. S. BET 
The very fact that ive have such a from facut shows that the substitution of re for vaster the word mc taught in VII, 1. 36 (by which we get fra) is an optional substitution, the word " optionally" being drawn in from Satra VII. 1. 35. The word y takes ou when meaning 'body', as ; othenvise ** "the sense of hearing', UK takes to when meaning a black antelope', as x16 
The word or takes so when meaning 'a black antelope', as, I N 
17, 2017, 3 afu. 4 (36 . ), AN, 6 Forg, 7 Part 8 6 9 fra, 10 y 11 7 ulit, 12 674, 13 7 , 14 , 15 Arc, 18 T ( ), 17 N, 18 ( € ), 1948 ( !), 20 476 (al ) 21 En, 22 ( 
) 23 98 ( 9547, ), 24 OT, 25 rak, 26 surg , 27 GT ( NTGU) 28 29 FUE, 30 WTfa, 31 * * (!), 32797, 33 , 34 rv, 35, 36 TT. N 
मृदस्तिकन् ॥ ३९॥ पदानि । मृदः, तिकन् । T: 01 UEFTU fara au 
39. The affix at comes after the word re taining its sense). 
Thus for 'mud', or course this is also an optional affix not a milya affix like many of the svårthika affixes enumerated in V. 4-7 
सस्नो प्रशंसायाम् ॥ ४॥ पदानि । स, जौ, प्रशंसायाम् ॥ 
* 
C3 LE 
A 
PEPPA 
(Bk. V.CH. IV. $ 43 
the 
S 
. 
X 
ya 
TE 
40. The affix and a come after when it means 'excellence. 
This dcbars the affix * V. 3. 66. Thus TUFT ENT or T&T 11 These two affixes are nitya or invariable, i. e whenever superiority is to be ex. pressed we must add these affixes. The reason for our calling it nitya is that the word FIR'optionally follows it in V. 4. 42. so that this affix is not optional c. V. 4 7, 10, &c. 
. वृकज्येष्ठाभ्यां तिलतातिलो चच्छन्दसि ॥४१॥ तिलो, च, छन्दसि 
# # xüRTATUT I AUTT SUSTAIT Armi curated fararlant seuar 
8 từ fast 1 
s ố đề 
41. In the Chhandas, the affix raalL-faland after come after ye and , when excellence is denoted. 
The word raam is to be read into this sätra. This also debars 47 V. 3. 66. Thus ara: or war, as, art mit Farrate (Rig. Veda 11. 34. 9 Similarly suyana: il 
1 
STRA 
to 
ক্লাজ্জো, অন্য 
TW: EuterTa rt: TT UT FEU 
PR. 42. After a word signifying much or little, comes the affix te optionally, when the word stands in agreement with a verb (as kåraka). 
- No especial com being mentioned, all cases such as accusative &c are to be taken. Thus @= EUR, refrente - G et i So also : প্রণাদি or প্রায় স্থান &c. Similarly গুলায় স্থান = গুচ্ছ or স্বল & Why do we say "signifying much or little"? Observe 
n at, n aan Why do we say "when it is a karaka"? Observe A FITA Word of many Here the words are in genitive case and a genitive or oth case is not a 
or a case, dependent or related to a verb: and so the affx is not applied here 
By the word 'signifying', the synonyms of and of are also includ. ed. Thus fatura, a EUR ! 
This affix is to be applied only when the action refers to an auspicious act. Thus agura - angienne; 
S ci-fÊg **E! Thus gut of "Give much on auspicious occasions as sacrifices &c". SIMU "give a little on unauspicious, occasions as funeral feasts &c" 
F ar f ra 1834 e eur, 44 , 6, # 
14TH, (1) # 
PIT 
P 
BE V. Ch. IV. 9 45 
12 
সুবিঃ 
আৰষ্ট জন্তুঙ্খলা স্বস্ত্রী স্থায়ী হয় অর্থ সংঘর্ষিক। 
43. The affix Te comes optionally after crude forms denoting numbers, and words denoting units of a coin in the singular number, when a distributive sense is to be ex pressed (and the word is a karaka). 
Thus rent fcut Arara "He gives two sweet-meats to each". So also fro:# Similarly after words in the singular number as, ar PUUT POTE "he gives a Karshapana coin to cach". So also ATT TV: That by which the sense of unit is expressed is called cka-vachana. The words kärshapana &c denote quantity, but their function in the sentence is to denote one-ness i e one to each, though in fact many are given. 
Why de we say "after Numerals and units of coin? Observe e SË amma "he gives a pot to each". Why do we say "when a distributive sense is meant? Observe o ang "He gives two". TRITUR rama the gives a kårsb Apana". 
This rule of ourse applies when the word is in relation with a verb viz, when it is a karaka, and not when it is in the genitive case governing ano ther noun, As জুয়ায় স্বামী “Lord of tv each” াদ্ধা  াম্বাঝাঞ্জ ফায় 
"Possessor of a karshapanas each". In fact the work “karakåt" of the last sätra Is understood here also. This sätra is exception to VIII. 1.4 
afar qurureata: 18 ana nafcunt, qer, afar 
| 969 tour a ut farfar aparata: art & স্বার্থ মানুঞ্জে কিছু ক্ষুয়াল । 
44. The affix are comes after that Ablative case which is ordained owing to the union with the Karma-prava chaniya Ford aan 
This Ablative case is ordained by Satra 11.3.11. Thus 51: T T for fr a : # The anuvritti of " optionally" runs here also: thus it is an optional rule; we have the regular forms TT&T &c, also. 
Vårt -The affix afc comes after the words are &c: as, wtfara, anal, 6. &c. This is an akgitigana, no complete list being given. 
__ अपादने, चाहीयरहोः ॥ ४॥ पदानि ॥ अपादाने, च, महीय, बहो। वृतिः ॥ अपादाने या पञ्चमी बस्याः पऊभ्या या ससिः प्रस्थयो भवति । सामान्दै हीथरूहोः खबन्धि 
. 
A 
A 
4c 
SA 
A 
r 
A 
45. The affix per comes after that Ablative case which has the force of an Apå dâna Kâraka, except when this 
999.. 
[ BK. V. CR. IV. $ 47. 
W 
TR 
S 
. 
04 
SHO 
apadana relation arises owing to the union with the verbs gia 
(passive of T) and # ... 
Thus 4141 arm or rart, so also oro fa, qua: or 
a nt See Sotras l. 4. 24, 25, and 26 &c. Not so when the verbs de and govern the ablative : as, fruttaa, vare marefa 11 The form ta is given in the sotra to indicate that the verb y whose present tense is en is to be taken, and not firetra N Thus ive have a fosteta or afiseta 11 How do you explain the use of * tasi" in the following well-known versc: " . $: mat 7"? The words here are not in the ablative, but in the Ins trainental case i. e ফুঞ্জ স্বৰ্জন স্বা স্কুল , 
warunt gag, fo, garerari, (are:) ! 
ro: 1 or I : 
P T I FRIV ar atar *HT ak: era a GT 7*781 
46. The affix tasi comes after that Instrumental case which does not denote an agent, and is governed by a verb having the sense of "to excel", "not to give way", and .sto blame", 
• Thus ৰূননানা ০ স্কুল নামখান, আলিঙ্গ or মাহিনীমনি । This mcans when a person of good conduct surpasses. others through his conduct, he is said to have excelled through his conduct and character". So also a or gai similarly ren or ftant &c, the sense being he does not succumb or is not moved owing to his strength of conduct or character. Similarly in OT RY:N, S u or na: ir "blamed owing to his bad conduct". 
Why do we say when not denoting an agent" Observe T * sblamed by Devadatta". 
1947990 | 81 e 11 ,979, , , (af :) 
*** galau Brat i fra 9149 T UT URA ENTR: WAT gatal for तिरकारि सान्तावा तसिः प्रत्ययो भवति । 
47. And the affix tasi comes optionally after & word ending in the third case-affix, when such word is joined to the verb “hiya ", or the noun "papa"; not denoting an ngent. 
The words art and Future: are understood in this aphorism. Thus इनन हीयते or वृजलो हीयते । पारिवेण हीयते or पारिषतो हीयते ॥ So also in construction with the word T, as, in 99: or a TT: || 19: or afera: T: # This 
. 
..... 
. 
9 HK V. CH. IV. 50) 
CHVI. 
1000 
What SHM 
wa 
. 
% 
1 
19 
VAPA 
use of the affix is in places other than those where censure is meant: in other words, it comes where no censure is implied but a simple fact is mentioned. Where censure is implied, the afhx tasi would come by force of the preceding aphorism V. 4. 46. 
The word wat being understood here also, the asfix does not come when the 3rd case-afhx has the force of an agent: as yra * 
You & 1811 far I amr, k a, (aie:) 979: H TTC1W **: 1 v M UTC 1 afe: wat 
48. The affix tasi comes optionally after a word ending in the sixth case, when the sense is that of a party name or faction. 
Taking sides with one faction or another is called on: Thus iter TRA TUS*77** * i The Devas became Arjunites. So also ATERAT: * * *The Adityas became Karnäites". 
Why do we say "when it denotes a Party-name" Observe, ** EITUT " the branch of the tree * 
Tiara 11 y . na Thr, 7, auta, (arer) * th: 11 Ott : 1 70€: Tror fou , en sfat weerant ** ***** 4091 
49. The affix tasi comes optionally after a word denoting i diseasc, ending in the sixth case, when the heal ing of the same is denoted. 
The word goy means disease, and your means "healing, curing'. Thus creatur: at 55 META: ; so also futar 36# 
Why do we say 'when healing is meant? Observe rurarar: rats 
Front Thapa: 1140 CET *, * , , 474, neft, ferm 
वृत्तिः कारणस्य विकाररूपेण भूतस्य तदात्मना मायी भननडाबः । संपवतः कुना संपथका। हप A 
tar a TRETS favico PT war ** 
60. The afüx chvi comes after a word, when the agent has attained to the new state expressed by the word, what the thing previously was not, and when the verbs kri to make', 'to be', and to be arc conjoined with it 
The words any are not words of Panini, but of the Vårtika-Kara, and read into the sätra by the author of Kafika. When something or some body has become that which is expressed by the stem, then this affix ft 
PR 
65 
O 
2 
. 
T 
1001 
[Br. V. CH. IV. $ 52 
is added. When the cause of a thing arrives at the state of being that very thing so produced, it is said to be abhätatadbhavam'the state of that what it was not. The agent of the action of attaining is called sampadya karta. 
Thus un mur, HüFrm "he whitens"when some one who is not white becomes whit: l. e some one makes him so, then we say man 
# So also ***, FATTE U tai The word vê is thus formed:- *+ - +*+(the mof sukla is changed into f by VII. 4. 32, and the whole affix is elided by VI. 1. 67) - Similarly patute * * he makes a jar of the clay': pha, et fart 11 
Why do we say 'becoming that what it was not? Observe T# *he makes white'. Here the thing that has been made white is not ex pressed, and hence no affixing takes place 
Why do we say “when conjoined with the verbs and speg** Observe ay yara The verb here is to produce', and hence no affixing Why have we used the words sampadya kartari 'the agent that has attained, for even without their use, the words abhota-tadbhava 'becoming what the thing previously was not', would imply that the attainment was or the agent? The use of sampadya-kartari shows that the attainment spoken of here should be of the 'agent', and not of any other käraka, as, montage W 'becoming in the temple what was not before in the temple; such as a tree &c. Here the kåraka is locative and not agent, and the becoming of what the thing previously was not refers to location and not to agency. Hence no affix is added here. 
अर्मनश्चक्षुश्चेतोरहोरजसा लोपश्च ॥५१॥ पदानि ॥ अरुस्, मनस्, चक्षुश्चेतस् 6, THT 14, N 
: : 
wtarget n a vyan: 
. 51. The affix chvi comes after the words arus, manas, chakshus, chetas, rahas, and rajas, and there is elision of their final consonant. 
The affix peg would have come after these words by force of the last $Qtra which is of universal application : the present sätra is made in order to teach the elision of the consonant. Thus FETEF aa, alfa15 
, na, SE FAIR # So also 
m a , ta or ma, so also you, विषेती, विरही, and विरजी कति or भवति or स्यात् ।। The short r of भE and as is lengthened by VII. 4. 26, and the x of the other words is changed into by 
TY 
VII. 4. 32. 
विभाषा साति कात्स्न्ये ।। ५२॥ पदानि ॥ विभाषा, साति काले। ' 7:11 WTA afmaat mustaf HIV I fear NT Fift prut vera 
TRATI 
A 
01 
. 
SIT 
- 
WER 
" 
. 
M 
W 
ex 
N 
.. .:.52. The affix -såti may be employed optionally in 
the sense of chvi, when something is changed in all its parts into something else. " 
The whole phrase * When the agent has attained to a state it pre viously had not and the verbs kri, bhd and asti are in conjunction " is under stood here. The affix ira is employer when the original is changed in its totality ( ) Thus HTC W K " the whole weapon is in a blaze has become fire". Ve may also say wf **f& TER 1 So also at try Hot or 7**** * *The salt becomes all water ". 
Why do we say "in its totality" ? Observera : T f * tha cloth whitens in part*. . *. The word * optionally shows that the ashx chvi also comes in the same sense While the optional affixing of these terminations chvi, sau &c is governed by the Maha-vibhasha of sötra IV. 1, 82 (see V. 3.1). .. अभिविधौ संपदा च ॥५३॥ पदानि अमिविधी, सम्पदा, च, (साति) .. 
# s 
h : Amarantert fafara wa watu wataa, van tra 
63. The affix sati comes after a word in the senso of chvi, when it is in construction with the verb sam-pad, and the meaning is that all things of a kind are changed into some thing else, though partially. 
The word on : mcans pervasion'. The force of the word in the satra is that the same sense is expressed when the verbs and se are in construction as well By drawing the anuvgitti of the word vibhash& into this sotra, we may, in the alternative, employ the allix fy in the same sense of abhividhi: but then it must be followed by the verbs and we only and not by the verb 97 # 
Thus far wu or naar wala; han 608 or *77 & নী সম্বরি এ ঋী মসুলি। 
What is the difference between the words abhividhi and kartsnya of these two sotras? Where all things of similar origin get changed, though it be partially only, it is called abhividhivikara As, weyi ne d a ante TET E Aaa; or wie 
m 
i t Here e has the force of an 7 , namely, all things belonging to the kind of weapons such as swords, lances and all things of the nature of salt, but not these things in. dividually in its totality. While the word kartsnya means that one thing In all its parts assumes the form of another thing. In short, the difference between these two words is this: when one object is changed in all its paste, 
O 
- 
Y" 
बाल 
[ BK. V. CH. IV..ss 
Jammernment 
- 
SM 
. 
3E 
..4 
A 
GAANA 
. 
. 
WAS 
8. 
ब 
SES 
it is kärtsnya change, when many objects are changed in some of their parts, it is abhividhi change 
तवधीनवचने। पानि ॥ ५४॥ तवधीनपचने. (साति) भूतिः । अतसबापहाते निवृत्त अन्तरोपावानात् कस्तियोगे पता चति वर्सन । सधान बदायस 
বান্ধা: কানামানিয়ার স্বীকার নি। সামম্বিকাঠি मातिपरिकरिधितब्ध ऽभिधये सातिः प्रत्ययो भवति मन्जिनिः संपदा योग। 
54. The affix såti comes after a word expressing .*a master or lord', in the sense of dependent upon this', when it is in conjunction with the above verbs kri, bhú asti, and sim-pad. 
. The anuvritti of haar ceases here, as a different sense altogether is assigned to the affix. The anuvritti of the four verbs Kyi &c, however, runs into the sotra. The word of means under the supremacy or control of that', 'under the proprietorship of that'. Proprietor in general and the object of rulership in general are indicated by the word tadadhina. . Thus राजाधीन 
TTT kila "he (a king) brings it (a kingdom) under his dominion". Similarly राजसात स्थान or मति or संपद्यते ॥ So also ब्राह्मणसाद भवति, करोति, स्थान 
যায় । 
देये पाच ॥ ५५ ॥ देये, पा, च। वृतिः ॥ तबधीनवधनइत्यनुवर्तते । सस्य विशेषण देयमहणम्। दातब्य देयं, शवधीने ये चा प्रत्ययो भवान थकापसालिम भस्तिभिः सपा व योगे। 
66. The affix tra comes in the sense of 'to be given to that', as well as the affix sati, in conjunction with the above verbs kri, bha, asti and sampad. 
The phrase "dependent upon that is understood here also. The word 94 qualifies the above phrase. When a thing which is known as a proper gift for the Brahmanas, is put under their control by offering it to them, then the affix tra is employed. Thus ब्राह्मणाधीन देयं करोति = प्राह्मण वा or माणसात करोति * He gives it to the Brahmaņas, as it is an object which ought to be given to them". *18***ara "it becomes given to the Brahmans". So also with a and crua Why do we say "when the sense is that of to be given"? Observe 
স্ক্রয়ার মান খু । 
देवमनुध्यपुर 
यो द्वितीयासा 
५६॥ पद नुष्य, पुरुष, पुरु, मत्येभ्यः, द्वितीया, सप्तम्योः बहुलम, था। 
वृत्तिः सातिनिवृत्तः पाप्ररथयो ऽनुपर्तते । देवादिभ्यः प्राविधिक यो दिसीयासम्यन्ता वा प्रत्ययो भवाले बहुलम् । 
56. After the words deva, manushya, purusha, puru and martya ending in the 2nd or 7th case, the affix tua 
S 
काम्या 
E 
NEPAL 
. 
--- 
। 
का 
PER 
मा 
TA 
Bx. V. CH. IV. S. 57) 
* 1004" 
is diversely employed, having the force of the accusative or locative case.. : The anuvritti of sati ceases, that of tra continues. The verbs ki, bhd and asti also have no scope here. This is a general sdtra. Thus rare 
TOT T rata, a Tara TT TETE 11 So also ng VT, TINTT, TEXT, and मर्थवा॥ 
By using the word 'diversely' in the aphorism it is intended that the affix comes in this sense after other words also; as v situata i 
अव्यक्तानुकरणायजवरादिनितो डान् ॥ ५७॥ पदानि । अव्यक्तानुफरणात, ua, musta, mirant argu 
वृत्तिः ॥ यत्र चनावकारादया वर्णा विशेषरूपेण न व्यश्यन्त सोऽध्यक्तः । तस्यानुकरणमन्यतानुकरणम । यच् अवराई यस्य सद्ब जवरार्धम् । भवरशम्शेपकरें। यस्थापकर्षे क्रियमाणे मुष्ठ न्यूनम दावं संपपते तस्मादन्यतानुकरणानितिपराड्डायत्ययो भवति । 
.. 57. The affix dach comes after the half of a word denoting an imitation of an inarticulate sound, when such half consists of at least two syllables, and when it is not followed by the quotation-mark 'iti'. 
The sound in which the letters **T &c are not distinctly expressed is called avyakta 'unmanifest' or 'inarticulate'. The imitation of such a: sound is called avyakta-anukaraña. That whose hall consists of at least two syllables is called dvyajavarardha, that is a polysyllabic word of four syll ables or more when doubled, the smallest number of whose vowels are two, not less, when halved. The phrase "when joined with kri, bhd and asti" is understood here. The affix comes after that word which when reduplicated is such that its half (ardha) is at least (avara) of two syllables (dvyach). When the affix reç is added there is reduplication of the word. That is first the 'word is reduplicated and then the affix is added. Thus yere is a sound imita 
tion word. By reduplication it becomes पटपट (eg. पटत् +पटत्-पटर पर the final of the first word is changed in to the form of the next letter y, and then for two q one is substituted by VI. 1. 100). Thus gegen RYET atifa "he makes a sound like patat patat". So also with a and Fa # So also दमदमा करोति, भवति or स्यात् ।। The final मन of पम्पत् is alided by VI.4143 before the affix zu having an indicatory , the real affix being ATN 
Why do we say " when it is name of an imitative sound ?" Observe ra mufa "it makes or turns to stone". Why do we say "after that half which consists of at least tivo vowels"? Observe T'he utters the ex clamation srat'. Why do we say "at least"? Observe trecer sufo where the half consists of more than two syllables and the rule still applies. So 
100$ : 
( BK V. CH. IV.960: 
# 
6 
RO 
A 
can 
21 
also 
w a ufaa Why do we say "when for does not follow **Observe qafe eart (VI. 1.98) The of my is for the sake of accent, it prevents the circumflex (swarita) accent. Thus, 4**+fra Here first the of war which was udatta, becomes anudatta by VIII. I. 28. Then by VIII. 2. 5, ** of ar and of F&\coalesce into an adatta at, as yzyzna N But then comes in rüle VIII. 2. 6 which would make this w optionally svarita, the indicatory prevents it. Some read tain, the # however does not change the sense. " 
कृओ द्वितीयतृतीयशम्बबीजात्कृषी ॥ ५८ ॥ पदानि कुभः द्वितीय, शम्ब dara, , (TC) . 
A u fedtugtare: gom: r arat ET4 waren at W... : 58. The affix dach comes after the words dvitfya, tritiya, samba, and bija when connected with the verb kri, and meaning to plough in such a way. . 
The repetition of the word in this sotra indicates that the and fat are not to be taken. Thus fafar #f-fra ** (**fcert) *'he makes the second ploughing of the held'. So also wata mufa, Tata "he makes the field ploughed contrariwise to what it was plouglied before=&AT 
i afarh | So also put sa- ti faca la 
Why do we say when meaning "to plough" 7 Observe fra #ule TRW 
संख्यायाश्च गुणान्तायाः ॥ ५९॥ संख्यायाः, च, गुणान्तायाः, (डा). fall 
a , f carta OFI TVO S414 q* a at C Troop di rumah air mani 17 Haar arti : 
59. The Affix dach comes after a Numeral follow ed by the word guņa, the sense being to plough so many times. 
The word is understood here. Thus farop or FOST U He" he ploughs the field twice or thrice"- 9 fair cart FA N 
Why do we say " when meaning to plough"? Observe fruit ("he doubles the rope". 
समयाव यापनायाम् ॥६॥ पदानि ॥ समयात, च, यापनायाम्, (डाच्)। f r ei fara familia TN Craentarca.60097 | ER** 
varor HTATZİ grūta 
:. 60. The affix dach comes after the word samaya when & follows, when the sense is that of neglecting'. 
The word 5. is understood here also. The anuvfitti of Erceascs. The getting of leisure from the duties is called 9 or 'time; the neglect or Boss of such time is meant by the word यापना, Thus समया करोति कालोप कति 
N1 
OPY 
AY 
NA 
112 
ST 
Hea 
X 
X 
ESP 
- 
To 
AAN 
(su *: T &#create a ne Ferrera *, & pauza) *who 
procrastinates'. Why do we say when the sense is that "neglectingnry Observe o ur "he makes time 
arrafrecarefcuna u retrat ll 9, fateqrart, maar স্কুল কুল ধ্বস্ব। প্ৰত্বৰ্গনিম্মম্বােঘাসনিম্মখন স্বয় সন্ধৰি কুমী স্ত্রী স্ত্রি । . 61. The affix dach comes after the words sapatra, und nishpatr& followed by the verb kri, when the sense is that of causing intense pain. . 
The word is understood here also. The word ati-vyathana means violent pain. Thus V HOT T = TT&TT Hrvata "the hunter pierces the stag with the arrow so violently that the feathered part of the arrow also enters the body". So also for fa v our fearrett "he pierces so voilently that the arrow entering one side comes out of the other with its feathers". Why do we say when meaning to cause violent pain", Observe 79* mura , Front Termura cir¥6 . i pametfoto wa africre, fart, (pre).. 
লিঃ (৫ ফু ঘে। নিকুলগ্নান্ধীই প্রশ্নমালামী বায জুজু হয় গঙ্গা', 
62. The affix dach comes after the word nishkula followed by the verb #, when the sense is 'to disembowel'. . ; . The verb should be read into the stra. The word for means to bring the inner organs out, or to eviscerate. Thus far T he disembowels or guts the animals". fam aufer FK " he takes out the kernel or seeds of the pomegranite " Why do we say “when meaning to disembowel or take out the kernel* ? Observe foot aafa TR *he makes the enemies family-less ". . . 
geferrgura 1431 Tai ga, four, argc () xt: u grauaremini Azi arat any great ani i 
63. The affix dach comes after the words sukha and priya, followed by kri, when the meaning is (' to con cede'' gratify ') 'to go with the grain'. 
The word gara means "agreeability', 'to conform to the wishes of the object of adoration'. Thus gu fa, fora & F 
r erefter smo vufx " tries to please the heart of the master &c". This affix comes when, while doing a pleasant or agreeable thing, the idea is to please another by such an act Otherwise observe: gaurar or f ara TV " the drink ing of medicines gives pleasure &c". ... guructs €48| 97 i siara, aifacit, (ar)... 
VAR 
11 
2 
(BK. V. CH IV. 5. 69 
11. 
WORK 
## $a I Feuerrefria remana ayat *** droits 
: 64. The affix dach comes after the word dabkha followed by kri, when meaning to do something against the grain or " to contravene". 
The verb is understood and pratilomya means * to oppose' or "to act against another's wishes ", " to pain the heart of one's master &c*. As 
Q ra qua " the servarrt pains the master". 
Why do we say " when meaning to go against the grain " Observe' na Urdu TOT 
I TOT, 9, 1 স্থানঃ জুম ধ্ব। ধূলাশান্ধবিষই আম্মু ঘশ্বঘা ধান কুমী বায় ।। 
65. The affix dich comes after the word gula followed by kri, when the sense is that of roasting. 
Thus far far nier "he roasts the meat on a spit". Why do we say " when meaning to roast" ? Observe wa "the bad food causes colic 
FUTETTU 1€! at ! FRITT, Tù, (372) N : 1 PETI Furtarmar para o OT # 
66. The affix dach comes after the ford satya; followed by kri, when not meaning to swear. 
The word are means truth' as opposed to "falsehood'. Sometimes it means to swear, as in the sentence "Heat TYÖT FOR " This latter sense is prohibited. Thus Gada par "the merchant concludes the bar. gain of the goods i. e he settles that he will purchase these wares". Why do we say when not meaning to swear', Observe ut ata mgr "the Brah. mana swears" _ मद्रात्परिवापणे ॥ ६७॥ पदानि ॥ मद्रात, परिवापणे, (हाच). 
* 59 EEE I RETETEYTEENTH THE ATT ETT SITTEN 
67. The atfix dach comes after the word madra followed by kri, in the sense of 'to shave'. 
The word Yo means 'to shave to raze'. The word means * auspicious! Thus ** *** Huta - na 
Vårt:-So also after the word ; as IT a arfer art "the bar. ber shaves the hair of the boy on the auspicious occasion". 
Why do we say when mcaning 'to shave! Obseite for fula 10 
BK. V. CH. IV. 8. 69 ) 
1008 
__ समासान्ताः॥ ६८॥ पदाnि समासान्तः. वृत्तिः॥ भधिकारोयमापाएपरिसमाप्त, प्रत्यया विहितास्ते समारास्वान्तावस्या एकादेशा भवन्ति, तर ia Twafa 
68. The following affixes are addod to the onds of compounds without changing their sense.. 
This is an adhikara or regulating sötra: and governs all sätras upto the end of this chapter. All the affixes to be ordained here after become the final part and integral portion of a compound, so that whenever a compound is formed, these affixes must be added to complete the compound. These affixes are useful in forming the Avyayi bhava, the Dvigu, the Dvandva, the Tatpurushia and the Balu-vrihi compounds: in fact so long as these affixes are not added, the compounds do not get the designation of Avyayibhava &c. Thus 39+TTTT91t: now before this word can be properly called an Avyayibhava, we must clide the final or by adding the samasanta affix zo (V. 4. 108), and we get the form , to which we is added by II. 4. 83 and we have उपराजम्, so also अधिराजं ॥ So also विपुरी, विपुरी the samasanta being added to go by V. 4 74, then the feminine affix rg by IV. 1. 21, the whole word fast being called Dvigu. So also, fuaft and Tungroft o Here the affix T (V: 2. 128) is added to the whole, samasanta word aan my &c which gets the name of Dvandva. Similarly ragr(faraigo:), agr: (graigo:). Here the whole samasanta (V.4.74) word gets the name of Tatpurusha, and hence the first memberretainsitsaccent by VI.2.2, namely udatta. (phit IV.I zand 13) 
a r gr: being Bahuvrihi, the first member rctains its accent, namely acute on the final, as , art: have been taught as antodata in the very list of Svaradi(l. 1. 37). 
As a general rule all affixes come at the end of a word (II. 1. 2), what is the use of employing the word "anta" in this stra? It means that when words like avyayibhava &c are employed, they mean words having those affix es already at their end. Thus the Dvigu compound of frugt-Ty+(V. 4. 74) - fryt: so that when rule IV. 1, 21 says that the feminine of Dvigu compounds ending in take it refers to Dvigu compounds which have already taken the samasanta affix , otherwise the rule IV, 1, 21 would not have applied, for strictly speaking at ends in and not in H Similarly rule V. 2. I28 ordaining to after Dvandva compounds, means that the affix comes after a Dvandva compound that has already taken the samasanta affix 
(V. 4. 106), as au+farema+fq9+ (V. 4. 106) Ti, uffit * 
a harc 1 && tarfa il a, yaara (FATEMAT:) a वृत्तिः ॥ यान् शन्नानुपादाय समासान्ता विधीयन्ते राजाहः सखिभ्यष्टमित्येवमादीन वा से पूजनात् पूजन. a t a T BATETIT Tata # a llorai farangu 38598 11 70 gratiarum 
1009 
: - समासान्त 
: [BK..V. CH, IV. Sm 
69. The samasanta. affixes are not applied to those words, the first member of which is a word expressing praise. 
3. Later on will be mentioned certain words which when standing as member in a compound take these samasanta affixes. The present rule pro hibits the application of those affixes when such words are preceded by a word expressing praise. Thus V.4 91 ordains the affix zu when thc wodr राजन् enters a compound, as, महा + राजन् महा+यजन्+रच्- महाराजः, and not महा रामा u But मुरामा, अतिराजा, so also मुगी, भतिगोः (V.4.92 prohibited), . . . .: : Vårt:-The word expressing praise must be or sta and not any word cxpressing praise in general. Therefore, the prohibition does not apply in परमरामः and परमगरः॥ . . Vart:--This prohibition applies up to sutra v.4.113 exclusive. Thus मुसक्यः , भतिसक्यः , स्वक्षः, भत्यक्षः, here the affix प (V.4.113) is not prohibited. . 
किमः क्षेपे ॥ ७० ॥ पदानि । किमः, क्षेपे, (समासान्तः, न). . 
• वृत्तिः॥क्षेप यः किशदस्ततः परस्य समासान्तो न भवति । 
70. The samâsânta affix is not applied to a word preceded by our in the sense of reproach. 
Thus कि+राजन् -किंराजन् as किराजा योन रक्षति “He is no-king who does not protect". किसखा योऽभिद्धति, किंगौयों न वहति ॥ (V.491,V.4.92, II. I. 64) The compounding here takes.place by Rule II. I. 64 
Why do we say when meaning reproach "? Observe कस्य राजा- किराण किसखा, किंगवः ॥ . 
• नमस्तत्पुरुषात् ॥ ७१॥ पदानि ॥ नत्रः, तत्पुरुषात, (समासान्तः, न)। वृत्तिः ॥ परे वक्ष्यमाणा ये राजादयस्तदन्तानपुरुषात्समासान्तो न भवति। . . . : 
71. The samâsânta affix does not come after a Tatpurusha compound of words like råjan &c, herein taught, when the negative pariicle of precedes them. . : Thus भराजा, मसखा, भगीः (V.4.91 and 92 prohibited) Why do we say "after a Tatpurusha compound?" The same words preceded by the negative particle will take the samasånta affix when forming compounds 
other than Tatpurusha, as अणषो मानवका, मधुरं पकटम् ॥ (V.4.74 applied) पयो विमाषा ॥ ७२॥ पदानि ॥ पथः, विभाषा, (समासान्त)। वृत्तिः ॥ नमस्तन्पुरुषारिति वर्तते। नमः परो यः पयिन्यनस्तदन्तानपुरुषासमाखान्तो विभापान भवति । 
. . 72. The samåsânta affix does not optionally come after a Tatpurusha compound of the word ofera with न । 
. 
erve BK. V.CH. IV.5.74] 
मा 
. . . . 
. 
loto 
This declares an option, where under the last sdtra the omission would have been necessary. Thus मपयम् or मपन्याः ॥ (See V.4.74 and IL. '4. 30), 
बहुव्रीहौ संख्येये रजबहुगणात् ॥७३॥ पदानि । बहुव्रीही, संख्येये, च्, अपहु, गणात्। . 
वृत्तिः ॥ संपवये यो बहुव्रीहिनते स्मारबहुगणान्ताइट प्रत्ययो भवति। वार्तिकम् ॥ उच् प्रकरणे संण्यायास्तरपुरुषस्योपसंख्यानं कर्तव्यं निविद्यापयम् ।। . 
73. The affix dach comes after a Bahuvrshi com pound denoting numeral, except when the last term of such compound is bahu and gana. 
___This Bahuvrihi is formed by rule II. 2. 25. Thus परणा, परिवार, सपत्रिंशाः, भासमाया, प्रदिशाः, मधिकरचा, विषाः, पंचपाः, पंचरणा 
Why do we say 'denoting a numeral'? Observe पिपरा, पबलर:. Why do we say not after bahu and ganai? Observe, उपबहार, पगणाः ॥ The difference here is in the accent for had rę been added, it would have made the final of armor acute, but it not being so, the first member retains its accent, namely acute on the first. 
Vart:--The Tatpurusha compouds of numerals like निधि &c, take also the affix y11 Thus faianta ferua: faftauft vifor ITR 'Devadatta 
बघतारालिन्य-निधिः खः 'the sword is more than thirty fingers long'. 
अक्पूरःपथामानक्षे ॥७४n पदानि ॥ ऋक्,पः, अप, धूर, पयाम्,अ,मनक्षे। वृत्तिः॥ बहुव्रीहाविति न स्वय॑ते । सामान्येन विधानम् । फकपुर भए पुर पथिन् इत्येवमन्तानां समासा नामकारः प्रत्ययो भववि समासान्तोऽखेन। 
74. The affix a comes after rik, pur, ap, dhar and pathin when finals in a compound, but not so when dhůr is in conjunction with aksha. 
The anuvritti of the word bahuvrihi does not enter here. It applies to all compounds in general. The word of qualifies , as it cannot qualify the words &c. 
Thus अनुष-बहषः,अच:, Par: as, ललाटपुरम्, नान्दीपुरम्॥ ap as, दीपम्- (निर्गता भापो यस्मिन्)-दि+भए-हि+ए (VI.3.97)-दीप, मन्तरीपम्, समीपम् | dhuras, पमाण, महाधुरा Ipathin, as, अलपयः ॥ 
Why do we say "when not in conjunction with my?" Observe, FT y: अक्षः, राधमः ॥ . The words : and : apply to students of Rik: thus Tri means "a boy who has not read the Rik". बहवः “a Brahmana who has read many 
HOIT 
मद। 
[ BK. V. CH. IV. 8.16 
- 
Rig verses". The affix is not applied when it refers to the Vedas, as अनक साम, बहक् सूकम् ॥ 
अच् प्रत्यन्ववपूर्वात्सामलोम्नः ॥ ७५ ॥ पदानि ॥ अच् प्रति, मनु, मव, पूर्वाद, साम, लाम्नः ॥ ससिः॥ प्रति अनुभव हत्यपूर्वान्सामान्तालोमान्ताच समासादच् प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
कृष्णोदपाण्डपूर्वाया भूमेरच् प्रत्ययः स्मृतः । 
गोदावर्याच नवाब संख्याया उत्तर यदि ॥ 
75. The affix ach comes after the words saman and loman, when prati, anu and ava precede them....: 
As प्रतिसामम, मनुसामम्, भवसामम् ॥ प्रतिलोमम्, मनुलोमम्, मवलीमम् ।। 
Vart :-The affix my comes after the word ara preceded by the words कृष्ण, उदक, पाण्ड, and also after the words गोदावरी and नदी when preceded by a numeral. As, कृष्णभूमः पाण्डभूमः, उदग्भूमः ॥ पञ्चनदम, सप्तगासवरम् (see II. I. 20). 
. Vart :-The affix Hy is added to sf when preceded by a numeral. As, विभूमः प्रासादः, विभूमः &c, दशभूमकं सूत्र ।। This affix is added to words other than those mentioned above: as पद्मनाभः, कर्णनाभः, समपत्रः, दीर्घरानः, भराषः ॥ Here the affix song is added to try and oft in All this can be done by dividing the above satra into two parts viz. (I) म (2) प्रत्यन्य &c. That is भच् comes after all compounds and (2) after सामन् and लोमन् preceded by प्रति &c. 
- अक्षणो दर्शनात || ७ || पदानि ॥ भक्षणः, आदर्शनात. (अच) वृत्तिः ॥ अजित्यनुवर्तते । दर्शनादन्यत्र यो ऽतिशमस्तदन्तादच् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
76. The affix ach comes after the word akshi when not meaning 'the eye . 
The word मच् is understood here. Thus लवणासम्, पुष्कराक्षम् ॥ These are Tatpurusha metaphors formed by II. I. 56. • 
. Why do we say when not meaning the eye"? Observe ब्राह्मणालि । How do you explain the forms कबरामः, गवाक्षः, which apparently contradict this rule, because TTis a many-holed leather horse-veil through which the horses can see, and so also Tar is a window through which men see? This is no fault. The word पन in the sutra does not mean to see', here, but is a synonym of 'eye'. - अचतुरविचतुरसुचतुरस्त्रीपुंसधेन्वनडुहसामवाङ्मनसानिध्रुवदारगवोर्वष्ठीवप दष्टीवनक्तं दिवरात्रिंदिवाहर्दिवसरजसनिश्श्रेयसपुरुषायुषव्यायुषत्र्यायुषय॑जुषजातो क्षमहोक्षवृद्धोक्षोपशुनगोष्ठश्वाः॥ ७७ ॥ पदानि ॥ अचतुर, विचतुर, सुचतुर,स्त्रीपुंसी, धेम्वनडुह, ऋक्साम, वाङ्मनस, अक्षिध्रुव, दारगव, उर्वष्ठीव, पदष्ठीव, नक्तं दिव, रात्रिन्दिव, अहार्दव, सरजस, निश्रेयस, पुरुषायुष, द्वयायुष,त्र्यायुष, ऋग्यजुष, जातो स, महोक्ष, वयोक्ष, उपशुन, गोष्ठश्वाः ॥ 
BK. V. CH. IV. .77) 
{:1912 
• वृत्तिः । अप्रत्यवान्ता एते धना निपात्यन्ते । समास भवस्यापि निपातनारेर प्रतिपत्तथा।। ..... पातिकम् ॥ चतुयेऽपकरणेऽयुपाभ्यापसंख्यानम् ॥ 
77. The following words are irregularly formed by adding the affix ach :-achatura, vichatura, suchatura, stri-pudsau, dhenv-anaduhau, rik-såme, vår-manase, akshi bbruvam, dara-gavam, drvashţhivam, padashțhivam, naktam divam, råtrim-divam, ahar-divam, sarajasam, niþ-Sreyasam, purushd-yusham, dvyd-yusham, trya-yusham, rig-yajusham, játo-kshaḥ, mabo-kshak, vriddho-kshah, upasunam, and go shthasvah. 
The first three of these words are Bahuvrlhi: Ferrara. ATUFT T THIRT OF 'that whose four arc absent or non-existent'. Mag 
alfa rift F " whose four are gone". H ü rrafa steait 'whose four are good". 
The next eleven words are Dvandva compounds. They are clear Thus बीच पुमामालीपुंसी 'the man and woman' but not here बियाः पुमान् (विवं afa gara T:)-aisant "a brave towards women only". V magiy e t "cow and bull". TOTR - Fare "the Rik and the Saman". T T मनम- वामनसे “the speech and mind". मक्षिच भुवा प-मशिवम् “the eye the brow". The compound is singular as being parts of members of human body, (II. 4. 2) 
* TUTTO "the wives and cows". O fety uferit il + metarat y cost Here the final syllable (called R) is elided : so also gret + met + PURE TUTTI I TRE FIT f erd "by night and day'. These are two indeclinables having the force of locative, and this compoundirg is also irregular. The words and first both mean'day': the compound of try is not, however, a superfluous compound of two synonyms. It is used here in a distributive sense- Ea "day by day". The word arrat is an Avyayibhava, meaning 'all', as acara I The affix does not come when it is a Bahuvrihi: as सह रजसासरमा पत्यम्॥ The word नि:वसं -निधितं श्रेय and is a Tatpurusha: but not so in निवस्कः पुरुषः ॥ Then is the word RT a Genitive Tatpurusha 54519: 1 Not so when it is a Dvandva, as पुरुप मायुष-पुरुषायुषी॥ The words यायुषम् and वायुषम् are Same hara Dvigu compounds. Therefore not here, mar r , surg: 11 The word Page is a Dvandva. Therefore not here pariran e ga (TE ETE Haa) il The three words ending in TH are Karmadharaya. Not so when these are Bahuvrihi : as BTHT MTENTT: &c. The word *1974 is an Avyayibhava- ria 11 Here the non-elision of the final syllable, and 
1013 
[ Bx. V: CH. IV. 8 8I 
the change of 7 of 7 into o (samprasarana) are Irregular. The word me: is a Locative Tatpurusha, as otosu:-10ps # 
** Vart :-The affix up comes after red when preceded by for and ** as पिचतुपा, उपचतुराः॥ . . . . . _ब्रह्महस्तिभ्यां वर्थसः ॥ ७८॥ पदानि ॥ ब्रह्मा, हस्तिभ्याम, वर्चसः, (अच्)। 
पत्तिः ॥ ब्रह्महस्तिभ्यां परो यो वर्चशम्दस्तदन्तात्समासादप्रत्ययो भवति ॥ . वार्तिकम् । पलपराजभ्यां चेति वनग्यम् । 
78. The affix ach comes after the word varchas, when preceded in a compound by the words Brahma or hasti. 
Thu xझवसम, इस्तिवाम् ॥ Varchas means 'light', 'strength'. 
Vart:-So also when Varchas is preceded by the words pallya and rajan : as, पल्ल्यवर्यसम्, राजवर्षसम् ॥ 
अवसमन्धेभ्यस्तमसः ॥ ७९ ॥ पदानि । मव, सम्, अन्धेभ्यः, तमसः, (म)। वृतिः ॥ भव सम् भन्ध इत्येतेभ्यो यः परस्तमःधणस्तरन्तासमासाद प्रत्ययो भवति । 
79. . The affix ach comes after the word tamas when preceded by the words ava, sam and andha in a com pound. 
Thus भवतमसम, सन्तमसम्, भन्धनमस 
· श्वसो घसीय श्रेयसः ॥ ८॥ पदानि ॥ श्वसः, घसीयः, श्रेयसः, (अन्) । निः॥ श्वेता परौ यो वसीयः श्रेयायौ तदन्तास्समासारच प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
80. The affix ach comes after the words yastyas and Sreyas, when they follow the word svas in a compound.. 
. Thus भोवसीयसन्, भम्प्रेयसम् ॥ These compounds belong to the class of Mayðravyansakadi (11. 1. 72) The word sy is usually employed in blessing or praising the object expressed by the second term. Thus Nः श्रेयसन भयान -घोभनं श्रेयस्ते भयात् ॥ The word भोवसीयसम् is a synonym of N. प्रेयसम् ॥ The word aata: is derived from t meaning "praiseworthy", "rich", by adding the affix ईयमुन (V. 3.57)- . 
- अन्ववतप्ताद्रहसः ॥ ८१॥ पदानि ॥ अनु, अव, तप्तात, रहसः, (अ) निः॥ भनु भव तम इत्येतेभ्यः परो यो रहश्शनस्तदन्तासमासार प्रत्ययो भवति॥ 
81. The affix ach comes after the word rahas, when it follows anu, ava, and tapta. in a compound. 
Thus भनुरहसम्, भवरहसम्, बारहसम्॥ प्रतेकरसः सप्तमीस्थात् ॥ ८२॥ पदानि । प्रतेः, उरसः, सप्तमीस्थात् , (अ) । पातः ॥ प्रतेपणे उरदस्तरन्तासमासारच प्रत्यया भवति स दुरस्त्रमा सामीस्यो भवति। 
[BK. V. CH. IVF 85] 
म 
. 
2014 
82. The affix ach comes after the word ures when it follows the word prati in a compound, and it has the sense of the locative. 
Thus प्रत्युरसम् - रखि पतThis is an Avyayibhava compound, the Indeclinable having the force of a vibhakti (II. 1. ) 
. Why do we say "when having the sense of the locative?" Observe प्रत्युर-प्रतिगतपुर॥ ___ अनुगवमायामे ॥ ३॥ पदानि ॥ अनुगवम, आयामे, (अनू)। 
वृत्तिः । अनुगवमित्या प्रत्ययान्तं निपात्यते भायामेनभिधये। 
83. The word anugava is irregularly formed by adding the affix ach, and has the sense of "suited to the length of the cows". 
Thus ergoni ar " the chariot suited to the length of the oxen". This compound is formed by II. 1. 16. Why do we say when meaning "the length", Observe, गवां पचा-मनुए। 
द्विस्तावा त्रिस्तावा दिः॥४॥ पदानि । द्विस्तावा, त्रिस्तावा, दिः.. वृणिः । बिस्तावा विस्तादति निपात्यते वेदिनदभिधया भवति । मन् प्रत्ययष्टिलपाः समासव निपात्यते । 
84. The words dvistava and tristava are irregu larly formed meaning a vedi or 'alter'. . . 
The affix ng is added and the final syllable I. e. r is elided. Thus firfarat dit: "an altar twice as big as an ordinary one". FETT OF "thrice as big as an altar". The words are compounds off and for: plus FTT mean ing "as much". Why do we say "when applied to an altar"? Observe ff स्तावती रज्जः, विस्तावती रजः। 
उपसर्गादध्वनः ॥ ८५॥ पदानि ॥ उपसर्गात, अध्वनः, (अच्)। निः ।। उपसर्गात्परो यो मनशमस्तवन्तास्समासाद भच् प्रत्ययो भवति। 
-_85. The affix ach comes after the word adhvan, preceded by an upasarga in a compound. 
Thus प्रगतोऽध्यान-माया स्या, प्रायम् एकटं, निरम्पस, प्रत्यणम् । 
Why do we say when preceded by an Upasarga"? Observe परमापा, त्तिमाया॥ 
तत्पुरुषस्याङ्गुले संख्याव्ययादेः ॥ १६॥ पदानि ॥ तत्पुरुषस्य, अगुले, संख्या, अव्ययादेः, (अच्)। 
वृत्तिः ॥ भलिशान्तस्य तत्पुरुषस्य संख्यादेरण्ययविमा प्रत्ययो भवति॥ 
86. The affix ach comes after a Tatpurusha com pound ending in the word anguli, when a Numeral or an In declinable precedes it. 
1015 
We 
2 
A 
A 
671 
AUT 
w 
NCS 
and 
Thus i warunt , SU 1 This compounding takes place by 11. 1. $1. This is a Tadhitartha compound, the taddhita affix * * being elided by the Vartika w F ire" there is always the elision of the afx vy denoting measure when a Dvigu compound is formed " See V. 7. 37 Vart) So also when an Indeclinable precedes it: as form as farta 
, U* 1 Why do we say when a Tatpurusha compound? Observe T UR, arrat E1 The word "Tatpurusha * is understood in all the subse. quent sátras up to V. 106 
Chern Tereyagan T*: 1491 r , 3,040, 6ren, THẾ G H I 
স্বাক্ষর: ৪ গৰম গায় স্ত্রী ছিলেন যুগ্মহত্যা মাঘী প্রদান 
প্রাকনুয়াক্কগঞ্জ । ফাঙ্কশ জুলা। গুগঞ্জ বন্ধ, গল্পীঃ বৰাগঃ হী। পুর , জুঞ্জ। গল্পঃ পুৰাণৰ দামঃ 
87. The affix ach comes after the word råtri, when preceded by ahan, or sarva, or a word denoting a portion of night, or sankhyata or punya, when the compound is a Tata purusha, as well as when a Numeral or an Indeclinable pre codes the word råtri. 
The anuvritti of 444 is drawn in to this sátra by force of the word "and" of the sotra. The word 1487 forms a Dvandva compound as a 
gry: "day and night" So also rw, * 'the first part of night : Uy: the latter part of night. These are formed by II. 2. 1. So also at th: - Ary This compound is formed by 11. 1. 57. So also guar urr. - # So also when compounded with a Numeral or an Indeclinable : as, tot 16a - fax, pro, fa sfreyjaruv:11 
615 d : 1 °C EN 1176., ag, er জালি ৯ ধাক্সান্ধু লিলিহ্মাগলিং গালি বা গঙ্গালিগাল শােম্বন্ধী শনিব কায়দা 
88. For aban is substituted aboa, when preceded by the above words, (and taking the affix gach to be men tioned in V. 4. 91). 
When the affix rufollow's 66, and the latter is preceded by the words &c, then 7 is substituted for 967 By the term : " these Words" is meant the numerals (with the exception of q* V.490) the In declinables, the words an, wina and words denoting a part of a day, for these are the words mentioned in the last satra. The word is also men tioned therein, but it is not taken here, for there can be no Tatpurusha com pound of 2 with # The word you is also excluded by V. 4. 90. Thus Kraai = 67, sagt, shari - Mugi, face: # So also get ST, (VIII. 
4.7), gerai, "90W, durata (according to some wate: V.4 90). 
NE 
.. 
A 
ta 
- 
BX. V. CH. IV. 5.90) 
1016 
PY 
W 
The ordaining of substitution is redundant according to the Vartika kära. In his opinion, the sätra : q* alone would have been enough. The meaning then would have been the affix me comes after the word when preceded by these words are &c" The adding of would produce the same result: as f* ** ** (VI. 4. 134 the middle of M17 is elided) HON The only specific result which ry would have prol' duced was to make the feminine of these words end in long (IV.1.157 and the elision of the final of C (V1.4, 145) But the compoands oti 4787 are masculine always (11.4 29), they can have no feminine: and as the desired form is i, the sotra VI. 4. 545 cannot apply. The affix my is: therefore, the proper affix and the substitution of t for rx is redundaotami 
ara: FATTO Ian na 112, art, FATETE, I F# 11 CUTE ETTEVU THIETTATAFUR VERITÀ 2 water *** 
89. This substitution of ahna for ahan, does not take place after & Numeral, wheo it forms & Collective noun meaning & Dumber of days taken as & ubity. 
This substitution is prohibited in the case of Samahara-Tatpurusha Thustat 162 , so also a Herc rule V. 4 gr applies 
Why do we say "when meaning a collective noun?" Observe part 1069, SETT # This is a Taddhitartha Dvigu compound formed by IL 1.51; the affix ETT denoting * ** (IV. 3. 53) is elided by IV. 1. 88; and the final of is elided by VI. 145. 
Chat a t + 1 vạn t sự, sang মূলঃ ৱষাঘা অ ধ্বয়াৰ কাষ্টয়ী ৰ গঞ্জি। বলাকালীন সুমাঞ্জলি 
90. And also after the word that stands last in the above list (i. e. g*) and eka, this substitution does not take place. 
The word in means 'last'; and refers to your which is the last word in V. 46. 87. The word 7* 'last' is used instead of gua as a Thus four, hre: 1 Some include the penultimate word en also in the prohibi tion. According to them are: is the proper form and not 
(TUTE FATEXTC1881 a n TrHT, 76, fax, f: 1 447 867 afar mikileak ze **& U 
91. The affix tach is added to the words rdjan, ahan, and sakhi, when standing at the end of a Tatpurusha compound. 
SSR 
2 
& 
44 
72 
RIKSAAPA 
[BK. V. CH. IV. 993 
ARXIX. 
. 
... Thus #1, #. FT81, 8: (VI. 4. 145 ) ma: 0 ; } HTRUC: 11 Why not so here in t reat instead of Tuto For according to the maxim "a pratipadika denotes, whenever it is employed in Grammar, also such a nominal stem as is derived from it by the addition of an affix denoting gender* (TITUTE Ffaften 2010); the stem on .wquid denote the feminine also. To this we reply, that the construction of the sätra shows that the feminine sint is not to be taken. Because my being a prosodially lighter word than o ought to have been placed first in the compound. Its not being so placed indicates that that form uw only is to be taken whose final vowel becomes lengthened into w in compounding with 
Le T+6and not cat**** 
c ach # ma ntili, wargara, () EFT: U TĪTUErmayeuren en waren er overtaget 718 u 
92. The affix tach comes after att stauding at the eud of a Tatpurusha compound, when no clision of a Tad dhita affix has taken place in forming such compound. 
Thus TT, *, * . UT*Why do we say "when no Taddhita affix has been elided in forming the compound 7 * Observe, . STIEN : 1 (Here the affix š V. 1. 37 is elided by V. 1. 28 and hence the samásanta affix ay is not added). So also que: 
Why do we say "when a Taddhita is elided"The prohibition does not apply when a grafix is clided : as ( 
T TTTTTTTTTTA (III. 1. 8 and 11.471) 
Why do we say when there is elision ? Merely adding a Taddhita afhx in forming a Tatpurasha, will not debar the samasanta affix:as ar 
a = + 9 + 7a (the gach is added by this sätra, and the taddhita su to dcnote ay ma: by IV. 3.81)= 424, T 44, 
V W RITETE: 131 C erar, < (2) . A: I : TIETEERIUT & OUT STai ya 1 
93. The affix ach comes after the word uras standing at the end of a Tatpurusha compound, when it has the sense of the most excellent of its kind'. 
The word * means the principal': as the word ay is the principal member of an animal, so by metonomy it has come to mean the principal". Thus anni 70= NIET so also F67 "the most excellent of horses or elephants * 
Why do we say "when mcaning the most excellent ". Obscrve 77 C: in "the breast of Devadatta * 
AN 
BK. V. CH. IV. $971. 
: 
* 
HTTEET Sanat: 
MC: 
at 
:, * 
, **:, ETETTEL 
OU 
ORXAN 
t 
H 
. 
I 
V 
. 
. 
. 
. 
ti 
A 
12 
WO 
ঝুলি ৪ জন মজু গল্প রূদনকাষস্থ মই মথা আৰৱ হয় অস্তিত্ব ও 
94. The affix tach comes after anas, usman, ayas, and saras when at the end of a Tatpurusha compound, it denotes a genus or name. 
| Thits শ্বশম, না , জানায়, and সকল ae example of words, while yerWT, 
F 1 , sigaraan, and spa Why do we say " when meaning a játi or a sanjna ?" Observe um, 2291, EETC. 
** wur: 1841 an 41A, ETXT, , qu:,(2). fa: # madwarfua aura Thema ao FAYZUET FUT*EXTRY 71 
95. The affix tach comes after taksha when pre ceded by gran and kauta, in a Tatpurusha compound. 
The anuvritti of jati and sanjña does not run into this satra. Thus TAFT T - **vi, at GTUTE 'the public carpenter of all'. i 7: e; कोटस्य तक्षा कोडना meaning स्वतन्त्रः कर्मजीदी, न कस्यथिमातिबद्धः and independent artisan, not particularly bound under engagement to any one". 
W: THE FETI ara, ya:, () gram: il sfavoreTU 1: 270EKTRIKTN 
96. The affix gach comes after the word Svan prece ded by ati, in & Tatpurusha compound. . 
Thus kaa kwa rue:"the boar that surpasses the dog* L e. V " very swift, Soort 
"the dog-surpassing servant i. e. more devoted to his master than a dog " So also want GTT service worse than that of a dog afar 
JAFIC Torg 1 gun Tan Yr, waru, (2) . gran ll 3477 Yusirs CHIAR 
97. The affix gach comes after the word svan end ing in a Tatpurusha compound, when another thing not be ing a living object is compared with it. 
Thus ka T- **: 'a dog-like bow'. ** "a dog-like blade". This compounding takes place by II. 1. 56. 
Why do we say " when something is likened to it* > Observe 97 WHT ĀTE: "a clod of earth which is not a dog". This is not a very happy counter-example of Kafika : for in the case of Tatpurusha compound 
OURENSE 
ti 
" 
1 
925 
" 
. 
W 
1 
1019 
( BK, V. C#. IVA 100 
XuPAXTAX* 
XXXXWW* 
XXXXXXX 
1 
no 
19.A 
there is express prohibition taught in V.4.71. The proper example should be fi TATE: ! Why do we say "when the thing compared is not a living being," ? Observe ere: *7* 7 "a dog-like monkey". 
: STY Fry: II PET 11 ETT, TT, airci, : (ro) জুলিঃ }} স্বাৰ সুখ দুষ্ট জ্বলঞ্জ: অহা : জ্বিহ্মারুখসানা, স্বস্থলাকাষৰা মুখী ngỂ TTG 
. 98. The affix ach comes after sakthi when pre ceded by uttara, mriga, and parva in a Tatpurusha compound, as well as when a thing is compared with it. 
By the forcee of the word in the satra, we read in the word ** Talso. Thus **, Y ETI, Tan So also in t *** 
EEN. . 
ar fart: 11 autarer:, fait, (a) . T ! AVERE Ferrara Fera ! 
99. The affix tach comes after the word nan, when at the end of a Dvigu compound. 
Tus শাৰী শাৰ স্ক্রিন, $০ also মিজু ! Thus নাজু, জলাঞ্জ u: are also formed. So also ru m 
, 714444 (IV. 3. 38). Why do we say śwhen in a Dvigu compound', Observe the king's ship". The phrase 
"when a Taddhita affix is not elided * of sätra V. 4. 92 applies here also. Therefore ry does not apply in afaran sai sở đi, anh N 
.99 
TR I aia, (2 ) तिः ॥ मशहाल्परो यो नोपतपन्नागपुरुषाच्यत्यया भवाति ।। :.: 100. The affix tach comes after the word nau, when preceded by the word ardha, in a Tatpurusha com pound. 
Thus TT- T# The compounding takes place by 11. 2. 2. The compound is of neuter gender, and does not take the gender of the term as required by 11. 4. 26: for gender is regulated by usage more than any grammatical rules ( 137**** FT) 
art: sah 1 808 at ll erat:, ETH, (TE) iti u francia (44329carat i carturare for at U 4: ertrutymarket দ্ভুসুম্বী ধ্বশ্বান গস্খামাজ্বালা গল । 
101. To the word khåri, at the end of a Dvigu compound, and to the same, when preceded by the word ardha, 
US 
24 
PU 
54 
22 
YZ $ est 
TE Bx, V. CH. IV. S 104 ) 
foco 
Do 
Han 
** 
& 
1 
in & Tatpurusha compound, the affix tnch is added, according to the opinion of the Eastern Grammarians. 
The words fit: and many are both understood here Thus tura HTTGTR or from So also a gry&T or parow According to Padamanjari this sátra could be dispensed with: as ar is synonymous with জু, as থি , ক্মিয় । Aid it will be govered by the vartika , গ্রুগুঞ্জ Gre var under V. 1. $7 and 58, in Mahabhashya. 
fars 3: # 402 m Taifa, forn, w :,( ) f*: in format O S UENERITROV 6 
102. The afbx fach is. added to the word anjali, when preceded by dvi or tri, in & Dvigu Tatpurusba com pound. 
'' Thus ঝুৰৱৰ্ম নানী = ঞ্জল, so aiso গুগল ৪ The word গন্ত understood here also, so that when the compound is not a Dvigu, the rule does not apply. Thus far ** The phrase "when a Taddhita is not elided (V.492)* is understood here also. Therefore the afix ry does not apply here : name *:45H So also saw (V. 1. 28.) The phrase "according to the opinion of the Eastern Grammarians* V. 108 is to be read into this sotra. Thus in the alternative we have 
m *3 fe ta 
, aga u ta, () 
I wa RITA 
R UKEwa Fria Ford আঙ্গি ও মামলা 
স্থূল ঞ্জ 103. In the Chhandas, the affix fach comes after & Tatpurusha compound in Neuter Gender ending in my or * 1 
* Thu$ জুষ্টি + ল =ন্ধুি as ins প্রাঞ্জল পুঞ্জীঝি, so also শিক্ষিয়িষ্ট # So also when a word ends in me as, Turana (+57 +594+ry. 
*) so also go5UTY # . Why do we say "when ending in or E7 Observe her - ET N Why do we say " in the Neuter "7 Observe T ruf W K " 
Vårt:--The word T " optionally" should be read into the sotra Therefore is optionally added, as xury or Xian, por ** 
TITT 20 
EN:, 5174194Terra, (TE; জুলিঃ ! সুন্নাহালুখী গান গাই ঈঙ্গেী নাৰী । 
... 104. The aflix Gach comes after the word brah miņa in a Tatpurusha compound, when the compound denotes & person belonging to a certain country. .... . ... 
NT 
A 
12 
W3 
VA 
1021 
(BE V. CH. IV. 5.107 
HE 
The word 1991. a belonging to a country. This affix comes after that Tatpurusha the first member of which is a word denoting a country. Thus * => Uuti, and more: ** Brahmaga of Surashtra or Avanti". This is an example of Locative Tatpurusha compound. 
Why do we say when referring to the name of a country Observe KE RETE: * Narada the bard of the gods, 
CAT 
RO 7362 
লিঃ ॥ মঙৰুখ থুবী স্টঃ রা সুষলাখ ৪ সন্ধায় 
105. The affix tach comes optionally after the word brahman preceded by the words F and hat, in a Tat purusha compound. 
Thus BH OF HET, HETKEN OF ETHEIT # The word vois & synonym of m *a Brahmana". 
Far m araer a 808 8. ratra il Trat, .6. , para aart () ৰূলিঃ পশষবিন্ধান নি: স্কুলখানা স্কান্দা থানা স্কুহ্মাননা প্রসূ সুখ অস্থা, স্ব স্ব : মুঙ্কাই স্ব লক্ষ্য । 
106. The affix gach comes after a Dvandva com pound ending in & palatal, or å g or a or a when the compound is a Samåbära Dvandva (collective noun taken as & unity.) 
The anuvritti of Tatpurusha which commenced at V. 4. 86, ceases. The rule applies to KATEKETE "an aggregate Dvandva” which is always in Neuter singular; and not to patar" or mutual conjunction". Thus *******, so also *, way, , TR ACTE, are re 
F, TNKER, GUSU 
Why do we say "after a Dvandva"? The affix will not come after & Tatpurusha, as, 79: HT6Y N Why do we say " when ending in a consonant of class, or 6, and ? Observe arm Why do we say "in a Samahara Dvandva *7 Observe yi kuu 
अध्ययीभावे शरत्प्रभृतियः ।। १०७॥ पदानि ॥ अव्ययीमावे, शरत्प्रभुतिया, 
A 
92 
. 
PA 
fr: if our sa EY RT Tawartie : 
107. The affix tach comes after the words Sarat &o, when forming an Avyayabhava compound. 
Thus #p: ety-TL. GUT, r , starnuxu 
Bx V. CH. IV...] 
Roar 
Why do we say when forming an Avyayibhava compound? Observe परमपरतू ॥ Those words of शुरदादि class which end inar consonant add in variably (ar) the affix tach in spite of V. 4. 111. The anuvfitti of avayayi bhava extends upto V.4. 113. 
शरद. 2 दिपाश, 3 अनस, 4 भनम् , 5 उपान, अनादि, हिंमत.हिक 10 विद्, स, 12 दिए 13 14 विश, 15 चतुर, 18 स्थदूरी 17 18 19 किया। 20 जराचा रसूख (8 अपजसम्), 24 प्रतिपरसमनुभ्यो मणः ( प्रत्यक्ष परीक्षा, खमक्षम, and अन् क्षम, The second ia Tatpursha) 22 पथिन्, 28 सह . 
• अनी ॥ १०८ पदानि । अनः, च वृत्तिः । मन्तादम्ययीभावा प्रत्ययो अचान समासान्त, 
108. The afix tach comes after an Avayayibhåva compound ending in my, as the final of the compound. 
Thus उपराजम् , मध्यानम्, प्रत्यात्मम् ॥ The final भन् is elided by VI. 4. 144 नपुंसकादन्यतरस्याम् ॥ १०९॥ पदानि नपुसंकात, अन्यतरस्याम, (उच). 
ACH 
4:MAN 
IASupargare 
awanNITION 
AJEN१४ 
श 
साप 
हुन् प्रत्ययो भवसि समासान्तः । 
109. The affix tach comes optionally after an Avayayibhava compound, ending with a neuter word, whose final syllable is अन् । 
The word wat is understood here also. The word "Neuter qualifies, the second i. e. last term of the compound. This allows option, where as the previous sutra had made it compulsory. Thus अखिचर्भ, or प्रतिधर्म, अधर्म or अधर्म 
नदीपौर्णमास्याग्रहायणीभ्यः ॥ ११॥ पदानि । नदी, पौणमासी, आग्रहाणी ज्या, (). पतिः ॥ भदी पार्णमासी भामहायणी इत्येवमन्नाव्ययीभावाइन्यतरस्या प्रत्ययो भवति । 
110. The affix tach comes optionally after an Avayayibháva ending in nadi, paurņamási, and Agrahayani. 
Thus ना समीएम् - उपनयम् or अपनदि, उपपोषमासम् or उपपौर्णमाति, उपामायणम् or उपायहायणि 
झयः ॥ १११॥ पदानि । झयः वृत्तिः ॥ हाय हति मत्स्याहारमहणम् । झयन्ताहण्ययीभावान्यामरस्या दृष् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
111. The affix tach comes optionally after an Avy ayibhiva compound ending in a letter of jhay class (a mute letter). 
The here means the pratyahara me all the Mute consonants. Thus उपसमियम, or उपसमिन, उपपदम् or उपरपस् । 
A 
SEX. 
E 
DITIEWSummer 
. 
1033 
[ AK. V.CH. IV. 114 
HANN 
A RRARO TR 
A BALLOWTRANSPALATVAILER 
CA 
AN 
31 
Forte Rr8831 firt, , earney, (E) : স্কুল & কাহিঙ্গালীলাদু খীৰ নক্ষত্যায় মন 
112. The affix tuch comes after an Avyayibhava compound ending in 'giri', according to the opinion of the Grammarian Senaka.. . Thus itu or wanit, e or TRW The name of Senaka: is mentioned for the sake of respect (pujártha), for the anuvritti of the word 
FrameT" optionally " was understood here already. 
ETTET armat: FAIETE A 888# a I TERET, FREE penting KITETT, # 
কি স্বাগস্বাক্ষী থাঃ ফিী মুক্তি স্বামী ও গাবী মানি মশাল 
113. The affix shach comes after the words sakthi and akshi, final in a Bahuvrihi compound and denoting a portion of one's body.. . 
Thus 
te , so also UN, PARTFIUET: The word Ti is genitive dual, while it ought to be ablative Why do we say "in a Bahuvrihi compound ** Observe qururfu, ITI # Why do we say master sakthi and akshi?" Observe frang, garu Why do we say * when denoting a part of the body>" Observe fra *, FPTsicer: 
. The new affix is employed instead of 2 for the sake of the accent Thus * , fterc By sátra IV. 1.41 the feminine or words ending in an affix having an indicatory is formed by Fic and not 
* Had the affix here been , then the feminine would have been form ed by stg (IV. 1. 15), which is anudatta (I11. 1.4) Now by rule VI. 2. 198 the second term “saktha has optionally udatta accent, on this final in a Bahuvrihi. When therefore, it is not oxytone, then by adding the final of fupft would have been anudatta, so that the feminine in one case would be oxytone, in the other not, which would be anomalous. But when xte is. added, it is always udatta, which is desired ; and removes the anomaly. The anuvfitti of Bahuvrihi extends up to the end of the chapter. . .. 
TO 894 
m ., Tou, (2) #. gry at NASUSTATURATE: proyecey were mare grew antara 
114. The affix shach comes after. 8. Bahuvrihi compound ending in the word anguli, when the compound means "& piece of wood". 
. Thus xac, kere, so also uit # This is the name of a wood. en spoon or fork of the figure of a finger by which barley &c are scattered... 
BRV 0 
*1024 
11 
.12 
. 
44 
19 
. Why do we say “in a Bahuvrihi"? Observe ft. M ary. 
FACT # It is a Tatpurusha compound formed by V. 4. 86, by adding represent as samásånta affx, the angufi meaning here size and not g**. Why do we say * when meaning a wood" ? Observe dvi 
fatura : 1889* a rå, faxr, , u ferri U TE LUTTERTIGHT: U T EFTI 
116. The affix sha comes after a Bahuvrihi com pound ending in mûrdhan, and preceded by dvi and tri. 
Thus fruits, # The feminine is formed by #ty and the accent is regulated by V1.2. 197. 
Why do we say "preceded by dvi and tri?" Observe your #cyruarat: upp€ll a # * Truir, savut: 
A 
her 
i 
. 
" 
8W 
প্রসঙ্গ মানুষ কিন্তু মাথা । স্বাক্ষী প্রমাৰি পখানাকুঞ্জ স্কুল এন্ড কলেজ প্রাঙ্গু 
স্থা ! মুক্ত ি রথযাজু ঃ ঋw ঃ আঃ গ ন্ধ ঝিঞ্জি । 
116. The affix ap comes after a Bahuvrihi com. pound ending in a feminine ordinal Numeral or in the word pramânt. 
The word of means words in the feminine gender ending in an op dinal affix (V. 2. 48 &c) #10y means a witness, a principal". Thus 
4 at otw arch (74 " the nights, the fifth of which is auspici. ou$ , স্কুঞ্জলা স্বাস্থ ৪ so ais০ টি গার্গী ভূহ্ম = ীলঙ্গা কাল meaning wanym " having a woman for authority, 
i Väri:The affix my applies when the Ordinal Numeral is the prin. cipal (pradhana) member in a coinpound. When the Ordinal enters fully into another object, and is not merely wrapped up as it were in another ob ject in a secondary way, there the Ordinal is the principal. The prohibition of puhvad-bhava--the change of feminine into masculine ordained by VI. 3. 24-applies also to the Ordinal when it is pradhana. Therefore, the affix is not added here 
: 41=krat ni 
.. it Vart:The affix my comes after a when preceded by a word de noting asterism. As e ok. AT Kai o n the night whose Icader is the asterism inriga so also g ive # Why do we say "an aster rism" } Observer 
Vårt:-The affix we comes after 6 in the Chhandas. As a Surfer, MINT * 
Van: The affix ry comes after the word TP when preceded by an ordinal having an affix denoting wages of service. Thus i TETSKO 
29 
10Rs 
[ Bk. V.CH. IV. 119 
मासिका कर्मकर so also पयकमासिकः कर्मकर॥ Sotra V. 1.56 gives the rule for forming words denoting vages' by adding कन् (V. I. 22) Therefore पत्रक मासिक' means "an artist whose monthly wages are ten coins". 
अन्तर्वहिन्यौ च लोम्नः ॥११७॥ पदानि ॥ अन्तर, बहि भ्याम, च लोम्न, (मए) पनिमन्त पहिस इत्येताभ्यां परो यो लोमन्धदस्तदन्ताबहुव्रीहरप्पत्ययो भवति । 
117. The affix ap comes after a Bubuyrihi end ing in loman and preceded by antar and babis. 
__Thus भन्तर्गतानि लोमान्यस्य - अन्तलोमा मापारः 'a cloak having the hairy sur. face inside'. Similarly पहिर्लोमः परः ।। 
- अध्नासिकायाः संज्ञायां नस चास्थूलात् ॥ ११८ ॥ पदानि ॥ अच्, नासिका याः, संज्ञायाम, नसम्, च, अस्थूलात्। वृत्तिः ॥ नासिकान्तादहवीहेरचपत्ययो भवति नासिकायम नसमारंपमापपवे ।। वार्तिकम् ॥ खुरखुराभ्यां नम वतन्यः । 
118. The affix ach is added to the word nåsika final in a Baluvrihi, when it expresses a Name, whereby nas is substituted for nåsika, but not so when the word sthala precedes the word ndvika. 
Thus दुरिष नासिकास्य - पूणसा, वाशीणसा॥ The is changed to by VIII.4.3 so also गोनसः॥ Why do we say'"when it isa.Name"? Observe तुगनासिकः॥ Why do we say "not after स्यूलो" Observe स्यूलनासिको बराह . . Vat:-After the words खुर and खर, for नाषिका is substituted मर but no affix is added : as, खुरणाः, खरणाः ॥ In the alternative, the affix मच is added, as खुरणस, खरणव . 
Ishti:--The forms शितिनार, भर्चना: and महिना: are valid in the Revela. tion (the Vedas), ___ उपसर्गाश्च ॥ ११९ ॥ पदानि ॥ उपसर्गात, च, (अच्)। 
निः ॥ उपसापरी यो नासिकाराम्दस्तदन्ताबहुप्रीहेरच प्रत्ययो भवति नासिकाशनम नसमापपते ॥ . पार्निकम् ॥ वमों बनव्या ।। 
119. The affix ach comes after the word nåsik& final in a Bahuvrihi, when an upsarga precedes it, and this substituted for are all 
This rule applies where the word is not a sanjna, as it was in the last Thus उन्नता मासिकास्य-उत्रसा, प्रणसः॥ The न is changed into m by VIII. 4-28. 
Vart:--The vis substituted for नासिका when वि precedes it As, विग सानासिकाऽस्य-विपः, so also विषयः in the same sense 
सुप्रातसुश्वसुदिवशारिकुक्षचतुरश्रेणीपदाजपदप्रोष्ठपदाः ॥ १२० ॥ पदानि सु प्रात, सुश्व सुदिव, शारिकुक्ष, चतुरश्र, एणीपद, अजपद, प्रोष्ठपदाःn 
12 ) 
Bk. v. c. 1y, 
as 
soad 
wrow 
----=-=-ww+++++ 
+++awat----+++-ww+++++ 
+ 
: 
জ্বলিঃ মাষী ঋগীম্বিশান্তা ঘষাদা নিন। প্রস্তুৰি কাল্টিৰি নিষাদস্থ 
120. The following Babuyrihis are irregularly formed by adding ach ----SU-prata, su-sva, su-diva, Särikuksba chaturnsra, epi-pada, aja-pada, and proshtha-pada. 
In some of the above compounds the (syllable) is elided. * 
: 
::: 
= 
= 
" 
= 
৭ 
স 
১ 
, 
) 
: 
: 
: 
} : 
- 
ই 
সাদামাম = অৱক্ষ্মঃ পূঃ জু প্ৰাঙ্কা » গৃগীজ, So মজব আঁধী গী, গুপ্তযুগ্ধ ঋন্তু এ মঞ্জুরু 
: 
- 
* 
স্থতি, যাঁ, যার জন্য । স্কুলঃ মুৰ গল ব্লু স্থানঃ জ্বী স্কুলিথিয়ামী মুস্তুগীয়া 
স্ত্রী শান প্রকার 
. 
: 
- 
. 
" 
- 
121. The affix ach comce optionally after the words hali and sakthi, final in a Bahuvrihi, when preceded by a Negative particle or by the words dus and su. | Thus বিশাল নিক্সে = ঞ্জাল। or লি, প্রস্থ ০ লিঃ, স্কুৱা চালিত উই Se ais Bণয়, মুখি, সুখ ar সুখি, মুখ: ০r মুহিঃ 
Some read the text as fmum: According to this reading we have জান্দি or , খালিঃ or gঙ্ক স্বিক স্বাস্থে ), ঘদ্ধি or : 
नित्यमसिन प्रजामेधयोः ॥१२२॥ पदानि ॥ नित्यम्, भसिन, प्रजा, मेधयोः। স্খান | নফুদা ইয়ঃ সমূদু ধু ধান পৰী শ্ৰী খুগামী নাৰীষ্টানমন্ত্রিস্তু মাষী সৰ সুমালঙ্কঃ 
122. The aflix asich (FC) comes invariably after prajd and medhå, final in a Bahuvrihi, when the above parti cles. 454, and get precede them. 
| Thus মািনা মঞ্জঃ we সমকায় no, s. অঙ্গ, so also হয়ঞ্জা, মুয়ঞ্জা, গুন, TV, UTUT # The word "invariably" (farm) shows that the anuvritti of the word."optionally" of the last sötra dues not run here. The word nitya also indicates that the affix ach comes after praja and mcdha even when preceded by other words. As: 
আমি কি স্বাকস্বাঘর্ষ: 
স্কন্ধন ব্রাহ্ম স্বার্থালী । 
* 
* 
; 
' 
; 
। 
' 
ন 
} 
धुनिः बहुमजा इति उन्नति निपात्यो, 
123. The form bahuprajas is valid in the Vedas. 
Thus **T H E # In the secular literature, the form is - মু:, aঞ্জ স্কুল গ্লাঙ্গ 
1027 
[ BK. V. C1. IV. $.127 
HO 
K. 
· quieft errn an wala, mar, sarai * 1 T ÎN VÂUTATIVE entrar pera narr: 11 
124. The affix anich (7) comes after the word dharma, when it is the last member of a Bahuvrihi com pound, and is itself the only word without any other word joined with it or when the first member is a single word. 
Thus ruriy hispa Furry nom. sin. marunt so also fravat a Why do we say on " when it alone is the last member" 7 Observe qe# FT VISE 
# The word in according to Kasike qualifies the word in understood. That is, the first membar must be 0: & word though a compound word, according to Kaumudi, and it explains such forms as E TERTUZVAT, E Fofi (e. g. pari a kisgarSERT ) i According to Prasadakara केपलात् qualifies both the words धर्मात् and पूर्वपयात् ॥ 
The guftauETART: 18848 ET II SFHT, g, arta, qur, Fi#$T: 1 En after XXTË FUNCH 93 5946777 fra 11 
125. The word jambhan stands at the ending of a Bahuvrihi, when preceded by su, harita, trina, and soma 
The *7 is a word that has already taken the samásånta affix ? irregularly, and means' food' or tooth. Thus **, as (onaj sk), TXT 
79: so also stat, 7 79 442) 514*** #1 When it means 'tooth, the compound should be analysed as, que or BATAT SIXITSEE # If su &c do not precedc it, we have any 
दक्षिणेमी लुब्धयोगे ॥ १२६ ॥ पदानि ॥ दक्षिणेर्मा, लुब्धयोगे। fa: Neraka ETİBATITA Catet me u . 126. The form dakshiņerman is an irregularly forned Bahuvilhi, when used in conjunction with a hunter. . The word y means son or a fowler, a hunter. Thus short 
report guy: a stag wounded by the hunter on the right flank. But in the following verse: 
Turan TART areat, it denotes merely hunte ing. The word *** incans 'a wound'. Why do we say 'in reference to a hunter? observe স্বাভিাল কাজু ইষ্ট 
aufaent i P9 | Tanr, cuero II OPET: il fait un gatto ITU07 @iana 4670 RON 
127, The aflix ich comes after a Bnhuvrihi when the compound denotes the reciprocity of an action. 
The compound dcnoting reciprocity of action is formed by 11. 2. 27. Thus Foro d 
RT R 
II So also ***, Fugara, pu 
[BK. V. CH. IVF 13.] 
1028 
TN The affix reforms also avyaylbhava compounds, as it occurs in the list of fast words II. 1. 17.' 
विदण्ड्यादिभ्यश्च ॥ १२८॥ पदानि । द्विदण्ड्यादिभ्यः, च। वृत्तिः । विदण्ज्यादयः शमा प्रत्ययान्ता साधयो भवन्ति । हिण्यादिस्य रवि तारध्ये एषा चतुर्थी, म पञ्चमी। . 
128. The words dvidandi &e are valid forms in ich. 
The word Freumaa: is in the dative case, and not the Ablative case. The dative here has the force of " for the purpose of that" (II. 1. 36). This word is therefore equal toविण्य र्थमिच प्रत्ययो भवति "the afix comes for the sake of the words dvidandi &c", i. e. it comes in such a way as to form the words dvidandi &c. These words are used in fixed senses. Thus द्विवण्डि महरति, विमुसाल प्रहरति, but not here, विण्डा घाला ॥ Though the context is that of Bahuvrihi, yet some of these words are Tatpurusha: as निकुथ्य कर्णाधाववि-नि. 
फुध्यकर्ण धावति ॥ प्रोझपादो हस्तिनं वाहयति प्रोपादिहस्तिनं वाहयति॥ The compound 
· ing takes place by 11. 1. 72. 
1 दिण्डि, 2 विमुसलि, 3 उभाजलि, 4 उभयान्जलि, 5 उभारन्ति, 6 उभयावन्ति, 7 उभाहस्ति, 8 उभयाइस्ति, 9 उमाकर्णि, 10 उभयाकर्णि, 11 उभापाणि, 12 उभयापणि, 13 उभावाह, 14 उभयावाड, 15 एकपदि, 16 प्रोगपति, 17 भाव्यपदि, (भाध्यपदि), I8 सपदि, 19 निकुध्यकर्षि, 20 संहतच्छिा . अन्तवासि। 
__ प्रसन्यां जानुनो ः ॥ १२९ ॥ पदानि ॥प्र, सम् श्याम, जानुनो, हुः। वृत्तिः॥प्र सम् इत्येताभ्यामुत्सरस्व जानुपन्दस्व जुरायो भवति समासान्तों पहुव्रीहो। 
129. After the words pra and sam, there is the substitution of jñu for jánu, when forming the Bahuvrihi compound. 
Thus प्रकृटे भानुनी भस्व-प्रचः, So also सः॥ ऊोद्विभाषा ॥ १३०॥ पदानि ॥ ऊर्वात, विमाषा (:). वृत्तिः ॥ अर्षशनादुत्तरस्य भानुशमस्य विभाषा सुरित्ययमादेशो भवति । 
130. The substitution of jiu for janu is optional, when the word ürdhva procedes it. 
Thus कानुनी भस्थ अवजार्नुः or अप्रतः॥ ऊयसो ऽनङ्॥१३१॥ पदानि । ऊधसः, अनङ्। वृत्तिः ॥ ऊधमान्तस्य बहुव्रीहरनहायो भवति समासान्तः । 
___131. The syllable anan is the substitute of the final of it in a Baldvrihi. 
· As guf FUTSFAT: Turtit, era u The feminine is formed by add ing site (IV. 1. 25); and these words are always used in this form for the feminine only; no substitution takes place in the masculine, as महोधार पर्जन्य, 
'1020 
इन् 
[BK. V.Cr. IV. 136 
. 
स 
.. 
4 
J 
APage 
A 
FAS 
SPSC 
4E 
- 
- 
. 
. 
. 
१ 
घटोधी धेनुकम् ।। उपस + अम् - अचन् (VI. 4. 148). अधन् + जी-अधून + (w being elided by VI. 4. 134) अभी ।।" 
धनुषश्च ॥ १३२ पदानि ॥ धनुषः, च। স্থানঃ ৫ খাদ্য ঋছুক্ষীষ্টৰলাৱয়ী মখাল । 
132. The anath is the substitute of the final of dhanus in a Bahuvrihi. 
As धनुरस्थ शाकंभन्धन nom. s. धाधम्या | So also ण्डावधन्या, पुमधन्धा, अधियचन्दा 
वा संशायाम् ॥ १३३॥ पदानि ॥चा, संझायाम, (अन). अतिः॥ धनुःधवान्ताबहुतौहरनहादेशीया मशात संज्ञायां विषय । पूर्वेण नित्यः प्राभाविकल्प्यते ।। - 133. The substitution of अनs does not optionally take place when the Bahuvrihi is a Name. 
. This declares an option, where the last sötra had made the substitu tion compulsory. As पासपदु: or आत्तधन्या, धनु: or बन्दा 
जायायानिङ॥१३४॥ पदानि जायाय জানি। মায়ায় মার্নিয়ায় স্থান । 
134. For the final of arut is substituted fats in a Bahuvrihi. - Thus jषमि जाया अस्य शुषजानिः (जाया + मिदनाय नि मानि, ther be Ing elided by VI. 1.66). So also वृद्ध मानिः ॥ There is punyad-bhava also ___ गन्धस्येदुत्पतिसुसुरमियः ॥ १३५ ।। पदानि ।। गन्धस्य, इत, उत्, पूति, सु, 
सुरमिभ्यः वृत्तिः ।। उन पूति सुरभि इत्येतेभ्यः परस्थ गन्धशनस्य इकारादेशो भवति सामासान्तौ बहवीही समास। 
135. For the final of stay is substituted when preceded by उत, पति, सु and मुराम in a Bahuvrihi. 
Thus they of re is replaced byr, AS उदगान्धः, पति गन्धिः शुगन्धि, खुरम STU: " Why after these only? See alatut era: N 
Vart:-The word or is a material noun as अन्धान पिनाष्टि, and an adjective as चन्दनगन्ध : having the scent of sandal'. The rule of substitution applies when it is used as an attribute. Therefore, not here, शोभना गन्धा अस्व-मुगन्ध भापणिका "a shop-keeper having many sweet perfumes for sale". 
अल्पाख्यायाम् ॥ १३६॥ पदानि । अल्पाख्यायाम (इन्द्र) वृत्तिः ॥ भल्पापयायो यो धास्तस्वकारादेशो भवति समासान्तो बानीही समावे 
136. The is substituted for the final of गन्धat. the end of a Bahuvrihi compound, when गन्ध means 'a little'. 
Thus सूपान्योऽस्मिन् सूपगम्धि भोजनम् " food with a little broth". So gr. शन्धि #food with a little-a mere scent-ol ghee'. So क्षीरगन्धि Here गन्ध is a synonym of मल्म " 
काम 
6 BK. V.CH. IV. . 1391 
साप 
030 
PEARANTHROPADMRATANE 
A 
MAA 
1 
___उपमानाञ्च ॥ १३७ ॥ पदानि । उपमानात्, च, (इ). 
স্থানঃ রূপানাৰী অৱজা সুশানালী ফ্লাই 
137. The ris substituted for the final a of गन्ध at the end of Bahuvrthi, when preceded by a word denoting a thing with which it is compared. 
A प्रत्येक धोऽस्य पंधगन्धिः, स्थलगान्धः वरीषगन्धि । पादस्य लोपो ऽइस्त्यादिभ्यः ॥ १३८॥ पदानि ॥ पादस्य, लोपः, सहस्त्या 
. 
मरा 
MPERS 
काम 
HAS 
मान्य 
P 
44 
E- 
HENDE 
. समान 
138. The final a of art is elided when it is at the end of a Baluvrihi compound, preceded by a word denoting a thing with which it is compared, but not so when such word is afkr.&c. 
The word " is understood here. The substitution is a samasanta affix in a way. Thus क्याप्रत्ये पादास्य व्यायपान सिंहचानू. But स्ति पाहा, कटोलगा . . 
हस्तिन, 2 कुहाल, 3 भव', कशिक, कुरुत, 6 कटोल, काटोलक, 8 माण्डोल, 9 भण्डालक, 10 कण्डोल, 11 कण्डोलक 12 मञ्च, 13 कपाल , 4. शाल, 15 गजु, 16 महिला, 
(महिला), 17 शासी, 18 गणिका, 19 कुसल.. 
कुम्भपदीषु च ॥ १३९ ।। पदानि ।। कुम्मपदीषु, च, (लोपः). वृतिः ॥ कुम्भपतीमतयः कृतपाइलोपाः पश्यन्त बनाया एवं । सर ज्ञयम् । पाहस्य लोपो भवति कुम्भपयादिविषये। राधा कुम्भवप्रायः सिध्यन्ति। 
139. The words kumbhapndi &c, hare been form ed by the similar elision of the wof पाद। . 
The forms कभपदी &c, are formed by eliding the final भ of पार, and then substituting for any before the feminine affix by IV. 4. 139This substitution takes place only before the feminine afix at, and no where else, as कुम्भपती, शतपही ॥ Those words in the list, the first members of which denote an object of comparison or a numeral, would have elided by V. 4. 138 or V. 4. 140. In their case, this satra teaches the invariable affixing of a to such words ; so that the optional rule IV. 1. 8 does not apply to them. 
कुम्भपी, 2 एकपक्षी, 3 आलपती, 4 सालपी, 5 मुनिपनि गुणसी. पी. पी 9ोधापती, 10 कलशीपती, विपदी, 12 हापड़ी, 13 द्विपदी, 14 विपदी, 15 पंपदी", 16 सीपी 17 शितिपदी 18 विपदी , 19 क्षुषी, 20 निष्पदी, 21 माईपड़ी, 22 कुणिपसी. (कृणपती), 23 पी, 24 दिदी, 25ोणपदी (द्रोणीपी), 26 हुपदी, 27 सकरपदी, 28 शकल्पती. 29 महापसी, 90 स्थूणापती, (एलपी), 31 अपती", 32 लचीपदी. 33 मालापती, 34 आपदी, 35 पूक्षपदी, 36 सपषवी, 97 
ज्यपछी, 38 भरपती, 39 स्तनपदी, 40 कलहसपती, 4 विषपती. 
कल 
.. [ BK. V. CH IV. S. 144 
mmarwdRRONMunaweso 
mnimom 
mmmmmuAwaamana 
maARIANTamasomnamuAmraemonumerammausu 
AHMEDY 
44 
U 
संख्यासुपूर्वस्य ॥ १४॥ पदानि ॥ संख्या, सुपूर्वस्य, (लोपः)। वृतिः ॥ संख्यापूर्वस्य सुपूर्वस्य च बहवीहे पादशनान्तस्य लोपो भवति समासाan 
140. The final r of पाद is elided also when a Numeral or the word सु precedes it, in a Bahuvrihi. 
___ Thus at पावावस्य-विसात. विपात, so also शोभनौ पादावस्य सुपात् ॥ 
घयसि दन्तस्य दत् ॥ १३१॥ पदानि ॥ वयसि, इन्तस्य, दत॥.. कृतिः ॥ संख्यापूर्वस्य सुपूर्वस्य च बहुप्रीहेयों हन्त शमस्तस्य वह हत्ययमादेशो भवति सामाखान्तो बसि 
শ্রণালি 
141. Forç is substituted in a Bahuvribi, when a Numeral or a precedes it, and the whole word expresses & stage of life i. e. an age. 
The offer is indicatory, making Rule VII. 1. 70 applicable, by which a nasal is added before it in declining these words in sarvanamasthana cases: and rule IV. 1. 6 also applies to them. All rules relating to an apply to these. Thusो इन्तावस्य-विदन् “a child of the age in which two teeth have appeared". So also चिन्, चतुईन् । शोभनाइन्नाभस्य समस्ता जाता: सुमन कुमार, "a boy of the age in which all his teeth have appeared beautifully". Why do we say denoting 'age'? Observe शिवन्त कुंअर ॥ __ छन्दसि च ॥ १४२॥ पदानि । छन्दसि, च, (दत)। 
पतिः॥ हुन्नति च दन्तमस्य एतत्ययमादेवो भवति समासान्तो बहुवीही समावे॥ 
142. For danta is substituted dat in the Vedas. then final in a Bahuvrihi. 
__Thus पत्रान्तमालभेत, उभयवर भालभेत । 
स्त्रियां संज्ञायाम् ॥ १४३॥ पदानि स्त्रियाम, संझायाम् (दत) . वृत्तिः ॥ स्त्रियामन्यपशर्षे संतायां विश्व इन्त शवाम स्तू इत्ययमादेशो भवति । 
143. For danta is substituted dat when in the feminine gender denoting a name. 
____Thus प्रयोक्ती, फालपती || Why do we say when denoting a Name ? Observe समदन्ती, विमती 
विभाषा यावारीकाभ्याम् ॥१४॥ पदानि विभाषा, याव,आराकाभ्याम् (द)। पतिः । श्याच भरोक हरयताभ्यां परस्य दन्त शस्य इतू इत्ययमाद्यो भवति । 
144. Optionally dat is substituted for danta, in a Bahuvrihi compound, when it is preceded by the words sydva and aroka. 
Thus श्यावन्तः or यावयन्, भरोकन्तः or अरोकरन् । भरोक means 'dark' * non-luminous'. The word संज्ञायाम् of the last sotra governs this also, so that 
S 
- 
Ped 
Bx, y, Ca. 
.. 4}} 
= 
. 
.. 
. 
. 
... 
. 
. 
. 
.. 
. 
. 
... 
. 
.. 
. 
.. 
. 
. 
... 
.. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
.. 
. 
. 
... 
.. 
. 
... 
.. 
.. 
. 
.. 
. 
" 
r 
; 
; 
; 
' 
E 
টি 
: 
: 
২ 
, 
নং 
২ 
s: 
. 
. 
d, 
ও 
ফ 
; 
when the compound is not a Name, the substitution does not take place; as 
থাম্বন, কী ? 
গলায়ন্তস্বরূষাইখম ॥ ৪৭ ॥ ঘানি গঙ্গাল, হয়, যু, স্কুঞ্জ, অ ন্য : অ, ) 
যা হিমশ্রি গাথা খা খা মূল্প ৰা স্থান গুঞ্জে স্থানাঙ্কা দ্বিজা স্কুল প্রয়া মন্তি অমান্দী ঋগীবী দায় ॥ 
145. The substitution of dat for danta is optional in a Bahuvrihi, when it is preceded by a word ending in or by , , and অন্তু 
The word " optionally " is understood here also. Thus 5TTFE, or গলায়লঃ, so aiso ফুলঃ of থাকা মুল্পেঃ of স্কুল, ধুখঃ or স্কুথ, রুম্ভ or স্বাস্থল 
. The e of the sotra indicates that the substitution optionally takes place in other cases not enumerated : as re: or een or for , 
মঃ or মন, ছি প্ৰেক্ষাঃ or বিধায় । w্যাঘাষ তথ: # ৪ ঘৰ। ৰব, মুখখা, তীঃ লিঃ জাহান প্রস্তুফিলীখী গন্ধা ফালী স্বাহা জানাযাঙ্গু জ্বালানী প্রকাশ সুন্নী ধমন্ত্রী বিশ্ব জুকান্ত .. 
146. The final letter of knkuda is dropped in a Bahuvrihi, when it denotes age or condition of animals. 
The word KRT means the changes shich things undergo by lapse of tire, such as age &c. Thus লাল জগঞ্জ = মঙ্গালহ্ম ক্লান্ত। * ৫he young of an anirval", পুলকুল » আ middle-aged anima : সুষ ও ক্ষুদ্ধ ** ord * ফুলক্ষ = ঞ্জ ‘song ' মুক্তি পানথুল্ম লাৰি 
Why do we say when denoting a condition ? Observe 4 N विककुत्पर्वते ॥ १५७॥ पदानि ॥ त्रिफकुत, पर्वते । ৰূলঃ। শিকান্ত কুমাৰী জন্ধায় সাবঃ মুহাম্বলী নিক্সন বন্ধ নয়। 
147. The Bahuvrihi vord Trikakud, formed by the elision of the final a of kakuda, is the name of a moun tain. 
*****7 " a three-peaked hill, the peaks having the shape of a hump". All three-peaked hills are not so called it is the name of a particular hill. When not denoting a hill we have fait 
ঘিা জাঙ্ক ৪। খানি , বিঞ্চ, জাহ,(তীখঃ) খুন ৪ র্থ স্থানান্য স্বয়ে স্কাল কী কৰাৰ খীৰ মাধ। 
| 
t 
1 
: 
| 
1038 
. 
[WK. V. CH. IV: 5.159 
11 
. 
N 
" 
thp 
4 
UL 
6 
TAS 
KONYA 
: 148. After ut and vi, the final of køkuda is elided in a Bahuvrihi compound. . 
Thus ********679, 0 also fernst The word 79T means palate. 
· quifgarer 11 888 n gaat ll quica, Ferrer, (39: )) স্কুলঃ ঘুখ জ্বাস্তু ঝিমাখা লাবী ঋষকি স্বয়ম্বী মা ও 
149. After purņa, the final of kåkuda is option ally elided in a Bahuvrthi compound. 
| Thus ধুপছু জাকুশং » দুর্গাঙ্কু or দুর্গন্ধাঞ্জ g et ASTATAI: 186 r@ I ET, TET, , afarut: 
T: # UGT fat Pagrama aurem *rronadt: GETYKA SPAUWIFT ATT fer rattet, at SOTTO 
150. The words suhrit and durhrit aro irregularly formed Bahuvrshi compounds, denoting "a friend" and "& foe" respectively. .. 
The word en is derived from g+8F4, the era of rea being elided in he Bahuvrihi. It means one whose heart is favourably disposed towards another. So also is derived from 55+679, he whose heart is evil. 
: Why do we say "whën meaning a friend and a foe respectively. * ? Observe GETU: Tema 'the kind-hearted, merciful'. see " the evil heart. ed thief 
2 
94 
der: # # TATE: 9 9 & 
151. The affix comes after uras &c final in & Bahuvrihi compound. 
Thus streia segūs! So also fair , her : 11 
The words art, 17 4:, an and mai are exhibited in the list of urasadi words as nominative singular, and not in their crude-forms as is the case with other words. The reason of this is that the singular number of these words take the affix y, and not their dual and plural numbers. With regard to the dual and plural of these, the affix any is optionally added by force of sätra V. 4. 154 Thus ftyart or fejf, Car or vė## 
190, 2 an, 3 , 4 YHTE, 5 , , 7 , 8 mti, 9 fv, 10 , 11 of, 12 miny: (The afix is added to w when preceded by the Negative particle 8, 4 ) 
Ti fauna #847 1 na 1 mi, feryna ( 50 ) 
BK. V. Ch, IV. 8 155] 
कर॥ 
1034 
वृत्तिः । सन्ताबहुव्रीहेः कप् प्रत्ययो भवति स्त्रियां विषये ॥ 
____152. The affix कप is added to a Bahuvrihi the last member of which ends in , when a feminine word is denoted. 
Thus बहवो दण्डिनोऽस्यां शालायां-बहुदण्डिका शाला | So also बहुछत्रिका बहुस्वामिका मगरी, बहुवाग्मिका सभा | Why do we say when denoting a feminine? Observe बहुदण्डी राजा or बहुदण्डिकः ॥ The latter form is derived by adding कर optionally under V.4. 154 
नघृतश्च ॥ १५३॥ पदानि ॥ नदी, ऋतः, च, (कप्)॥ वृत्तिः ।। नयन्ताबहुव्रीहर्षकारान्ताच का प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
153. The affix कए is added to a Bahuvrihi the last member of which is a feminine word ending in long e or ऊ defined as nadi words, or which ends in a short ऋ॥ 
The word नदी is defined in I. 4. 3. Thus बहुकुमारीको देशः (बव्यः कुमर्यो स्मिन्देशे), बहुब्रह्मबन्धूकः ॥ बहुकर्तृकः ॥ The त in फत् is for the sake.of euphony. 
शेषाद्विभाषा ॥ १५४॥ पदानि ॥ शेषात्, विभाषा, (कप्)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ यस्मादबहुव्रीहेः समासान्तो नविहितः स शेषस्तस्माद्विभाषा कामत्ययो भवति ॥ 
154. After all other Bahuvrîhi compounds not covered by the foregoing rules, may optionally be added tho affix कए॥ 
Thus बहुखलक or बहुरबहाक: or बहुखद्धा, बहुमालक' or बहुमालाक: or बहुमाल, बहुवीणक: or वहुवीणः or बहुवीणाकः &c. The word शेष denotes all those Bahuvrihi about which no special rule has been given above. How do you explain the forms अनुकं साम, बवृकं सूक्तं, in which the affix कप is added, though these words are governed by the general rule V. 4. 74, and ought to have taken the sama santa affix st? The affix * is added to ti when the compound has a special meaning such as अनृचः means 'a boy', बवृनः 'a charana'. 
. Why do we say "after the rest"? Observe प्रियपथः, प्रियधुरः ॥ न संक्षायाम् ॥ १५५॥ पदानि । न संज्ञायाम्, (क)॥ .. धृतिः ।। संज्ञायां विषये बहुव्रीही समासे का प्रत्ययो न भवति । पूर्वेण प्राप्तः प्रतिसिद्धते ॥ 
___155. The affix कप does not come after a Bahu vrihi when a Name is meant.. 
This debars कप् ordained by the last. Thus विश्वदेवा भस्य - विश्वदेवः, वि 
श्वयशाः॥ 
(Bk. V.CH. IV. $ 159 
0 
1990 
CHI 848 u vara fri, স্থান: ॥ বালাই খুলেমী প শক্তি ও স্বাগৰি গানটি 
156. The affix it does not come after a Babu. vrthi the last member of which ends in the affix ok! 
This debars all the previous rules. Thus a a rt, here rule V. 4. 154 is debarred. : FUISFyrirst, here rule V. 4. 153 is prohibited. By rule I. 2. 48 the long final fought to have been shortened, but this is not done by considering it as a masculine "feet cater fork" Seo Vårtika under 1. 2. 48. 
wa ura: 8 840 Per a , (*) .. স্থানঃ স্বার্থ স্ত্রী জয়ী ঋই কাম্বাবুষঙ্গী ঞ্জ অস্ত্রী * মন্ত্রি : 
157. The affix *c does not come after a Bahu vrihi ending in the word bhràtri, when it means 'praised'. 
The word wat means "praised', 'respected' &c Thus * $6 urat one having a good brother'. Why do we say when it means * praised", Observe stergat, gawa 
# 84 na ngai, yete, (a ) N ঘূৰি খলান্দায়ু প্রামান্য বিশ্ব জন্তু সখী গ অন্ধ । 
168. The affix eq does not come after a Bahu vrihi ending in short in the Veda. 
Thus get prankT-441, safont, grafreT, ETTATU arsta auto ears 1 848 nagtat ni AT&T, arseti, faig (4,) PTT: 1 6719 setter game: 44 Peetr 
169. The affix 44 does not come after the words nadi, and tantri final in a Bahuvrihi, when they mean organa of body. 
| Thus dী পাখী চালাক্তি। স্কা, ননীষা। The word স্বল্পী means artery'. Why do we say meaning "parts of body"? Observe, kan 1991, ART AUT ! The word 747 is a feminine word formed by ty that comes after jati; pt is formed by the unadi affix & (un 111. 158) In a the long is shortened as being an upasarjana (I. 2. 48); but the off is not shortened, as here is not a feminine affx, but a krit affix (en farem: fer 
; See 1. 2. 48 also). 
NE 
DA 
1030 
BAN 
ver 
Awete 
varan facentor:, ! en een fraai e word watter is irregularly formed, 
· affix 54, though the last word is a Nadi 
means either aspat or all Here se is o weave': and denotes the instrument of weaving i. e. 
f und: re:, ** 
= 
: "a new nket", from which the shuttle has not yet been ex im. The is changed to by VIII.4 29.