 ओ३म् अथ चतुर्थाध्यायस्य प्रथमः पादः । 
BOOK FOURTH. 
CHAPTER FIRST. 
ज्याप्रातिपदिकात् ॥१॥ पदानि ॥ डी-आप-प्रातिपदिकात् ।। कृत्तिः ॥ भधिकारोऽयम् । यरित अर्थमनुक्रमिप्याम भापम्चमाध्यायपरिसमाप्तेडाप्पातिपदिकारिये घोदितण्यम्॥ 
1. (From this point forward as far as the end of Book Fifth, whatever we shall treat of, should be understood to come), after what ends with the feminine affixes , or are, or after a Nominal stem. 
This is an adhikara' aphorism pure and simple. It simply consists of terms which other aphorisms, in order to complete their sensç, arc under the necessity of borrowing. In other words, this sūtra points out the base Fifa to wich the affixes beginning with y treated of in the next sötra, and ending with my (V.4. 151), are to be applied. 
The sätra consists of three words. The term A is a common name for the three affixes T, 279, and a ll The term my, is the common name for the three affixes ere, and roll These are feminine affixes and are taught from sätra 4 to 65 of this chapter. The word gitatia means 'a Nominal stem' and has been defined in sūtra I. 2. 45, 46, i. c. that which is possessed of a meaning, not being a root or an affix; or what ends with a Krit or a Tad dhita affix. The word coregrafia is a Samahara-dvandva or Collectivo aggregate of these three words 
Q. All affixes are placed after the base (See Sätra III. 1. 2); the affixes treated of in the last Book were to be placed after the root ('dhatu'); the remaining asfixcs taught in Books Fourth and Fifth, will therefore, be placed after all such bases hata which are not roots (dhatu); and such bases remaining are pratipadika and feminiuc words, What is theo the necessity 
604 
CASE AFTIXES. 
(BK. IV. CH. I. SI 
of making this sūtra, when these pratipadika &c, are the only bases left to us to apply the affixes taught herein-afterii rot" 
A. To this we reply, the necessity.of making this sätra arose from following considerations: that the word wat afgreat should qualify the words 'T'' ,''the letter w' THI', and '79, wherever used in the following sätras. So that, where a rule says: "let such an affix be applied to a Vriddha word," we must understand it to mean, "let such an affix be applied to a Vriddha word which is a pratipadika, or which ends with 'ni' or 'ap'; and not to every Vriddha word." The principal aphorism, besides the present, which regulates the application of Taddhita affixes, is IV. 1. 82, which declares :-"The taddhita affixes, on the alternative of their being employed al all, come after the word that is signified by the first of the words in construction." Thus IV. 1, 157 says; "The affix ff is added, according to the opinion of Northern Grammarians, in the sense of descendant,' after a word which is entitled to the designation of Vriddham, provided it does not end with a Gotra affix." Thus the idea, the son of Amragupta,' may be expressed either by the phrase 'BATH WRIT244'; or by adding the affix 'phin' to the first of the word in construction, viz, 'Amraguptasya," which is a Vriddha word (1. 1. 73) But can we apply the affix "phin' to the first of the word in construction in the following, arr. - TH4744, because the word 'jnanam' the genitive plural of 'ja', is a Vriddha word ? Certainly not, because the word 'prátipadikat' must be read into this sūtra IV. I. 157, and the affix "phin' should be added after that Vriddha word which is in its crude. form also a Vriddham, and not that which becomes Vriddham only in construction. Now the pratipadika of 'jáanâm' is 'jfa', the latter is not a vriddham, therefore, the rule does not apply to it. So also the word 'jna' is a vriddham in its prátipadika state; but in the following phrase, it loses its vşiddha nature; ' Algiryan' meaning the son of two wise Brah man ladies'. Still the affix.phia' must be added to the word 'jnyor', because its pratipadika is a vşiddha word (2) Similarly the word ' a' (sätra IV. I. 160; 'the affix phin is applied diversely to a non-vriddha word, according to the opinion of the Eastern Grammarians") must be qualified by the word 'pratipadika'; otherwise it would lead to similar incongruous results as in the last aphorism. (3) Similarly the word in Satra IV. 1.95 ('the affix par is added after a word which ends in the letter ') must be qua. lified by the word pratipadika'; that is to say, the word in its crude-form must end in 7, and not necessarily when it is in construction. If it were not . so; then the affix '' will apply only to the word 'Bira' in '841984but will not apply to the words ardit:', or rath' in the phrases ' Tear" or 'Frame14'! But the affix 'Fl' applies to all those thrcc words . 
BR. IV. CH. I. $. :) 
THE CASE AFFIXES. 
603 
(4) Similarly the word uit!' in IV. 2. 44, (the affix my is added to a word which has the grave accent on its beginning) must be quali fied by the word prátipadika. That is, the word in its crude form must have the grave accent on its initial, though in construction, it may or may not have grave accent Otherwise, the affix T will apply to the words : and i' which in construction are anudattádias in i fram: 
T POT' (VI. 1. 168); but which in their crude-forms (1,7) are udattadi. And conversely, the affix ,' will not apply to the word tanara which in construction is udattadi, as, Hiru Faac,' but which in its crude-form is anudattade 
2 Similarly the word "err in IV. 4. 7. (the affix is employed after words consisting of two vowels, when the sense is that of crossing), must be qualified by the word prátipadika. That is, the word in its pratipadika state must consist of two vowels, though in construction it may consist of more than two syllables. Otherwise, this affix will not apply to the word gent in the phrase en quat, while it will apply to the words 'पापा' and 'वषा' in the phrases, 'पाषा तरति,' 'वषा सति'. But this is undesirable 
Why have we employed the word 'hy-ap' in the aphorism? Is not the word pratipadika wide enough to include the words ending with the feminine affixes, by virtue of the paribhasha: "A pratipadika denotes, whenever it is employed in grammar, also such a crude-form as is derived from it by the addition of ar. affix denoting gender," > 
A. Not so. The paribhasha you quote applies to that case, where there is a rule, relating to an individual word-form, given in the Satra itself. In other words, "this paribhasha is applicable when a word is employed in grammar which either dcnotes pratipadikas generally (as the word 'pratipadika' does in this sūtra) or denotes a praticular pratipadika, (such as the words .TT, qa, rasa, and woa, in II. 1. 67)." That is, in 11. 1. 67, the masculine form yuva, also includes the feminine : but not so every-where. Moreover the words, @T, or have been employed in the Sotra, in order to make the Taddhita affixes 'applicable to feminine words ending in long (4) or long (79). Thus the feminine of 'काल', and 'हरिण' is, 'काली', and 'हरिणी', the feminine of 'बा' and 'भाला' is 'खदा' and 'माला' After these words we can apply t 
Taddhita affix ar: as fafiga, Froord,' raa', and 'rare' N 
Now, had we not used the word 'ny-ap' in the Satra, and wished to express the same idea as is donc, say, by the word "kalitara,' we could not have got this form at all 
THE CRSE AFFIXES 
[BK. IV. CH 1. 3. 2 
l. The word is takes # by IV. I. 42; to which when Art is added, the vowel is shortened by VI. 3. 43; and we shall get the form STOW Why do you then say that the Taddhita affixes could not be applied, but for the words ny-ap? 
A. To this we answer, that by the rule of vipratishedha, the Taddhita would have debarred the feminine. Thus, when feminine alonc is meant and not comparison, we shall have art; and when comparison alone is meant and not feminine, we shall have nimat; but when both feminine and comparison are meant, then would arise the difficulty; and according to the general maxim, the Taddhita would have debarred the feminine. But by using the word ny-ap, it is shown that first the feminine affixes are to be added, and then the com parison making affixes. 
स्वौजसमौद्छष्टाभ्यांभिस्भ्यांभ्यस्ङसिभ्यांभ्यस्ङसोसामङ्योस्सुः ॥ २ ॥ Taifa il ging, a-3-, 21-371-fe, .-291-97€, STê-221-877, GĘ TET, Fs-sire-u ( surfa af fira) f#: li garatfaafinta Farga: year: T 
2. (After what ends with the feminine termina. tions 7 or 314, or after a Nominal stem the following case Affixes are employed for declension) : 
Singular. 
Dual. 
Plural. ist. su (s) 
au 
jas (as) 2nd. am 
aut (au) Bas (as) ta (a) 
bhyam 
bhis ne (e) 
blyam 
bhyas hasi (as) 
bhyam 
bhyas 6th. has (as) 
am 7th. ni () 
3rd. 4th. 
5th, 
OS 
. 
sup (su). 
Sup tou 
In the above affixes, letters like 3 in çare 'anubandhas' employed either for the sake of facility of pronunciation, or as distinguishing marks, The final g is employed for the sake of forming the pratyahara ho, which is the collective name for the above 21 case-affixes. The force and meaning of these affixes have already been explained in a former part of this work; and therefore, need not be repeated here. We shall now give examples of the application of these affixes to words formed by A, as, marit; by Fre as, गारी; by हीन् as शाहरवी; by टाप् as खडा; by as बहुराजा; and by चार as कारीर 
Tam; and lastly to a pratipadika, as. Well 
BK. IV. CH. I. $3] 
THE CASE AFFIXES. 
कुमारी। Dual 
Plural 
Singular 
कुमारी कुमारीम 
. 
.. 
. 
कुमार्यो 
कुमारी 
Int 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 
कुमार्ग कुमा. कुमार्याः कुमार्याः कुमावान् 
कुमारीभ्यान कुमारीभ्याम् कुमारीभ्याम् 
कुमारीनिः कुमारीपः . कुमारीपा कुमारीणा कुमारी 
कुमायों कुमायों 
nth 
खवा। 
. 
. 
1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 
खडया सदावे खवाया 
सदाभ्याम् सदाभ्याम् खडान्थाम खयो 
खदार . 
• खडा 
सहामिर 
• सद्दामा सहाम्बा 
सहानाम 
खवायाम् 
रषद् । 
1st 2nd 3rd 
अपामा 
4ta 
उपभ्याम् अपस्यार उपम्यान 
5th 6th 
पदो The words गोरी and पारखी are declined like कुमारी; and बहुपमा and कारीपगन्ध्या are declined like खदा॥ 
स्त्रियाम् ॥ ५३॥ पदानि । स्त्रियाम् । वृत्तिः ॥ भधिकायम् । यदित अर्थमनुक्रमिप्यामः खियामित्येव सरितम्यम् । 
3. When feminine nature is to be indicated, the affixes which we shall treat of hereinafter must be employed. 
This is an adhikara sätra pure and simple. The phrase 'when feminine nature is to be indicated', must be read in all the following aphorisms upto 8t inclusive. The anuvritti of the word 'pratipadika' should be read into this sotra, from the first satra, not so, however, the anuvritti of the words 'ही-मापू'; for we are now going to form words by the application of tand 
भाए affixes. . 
THE FEMININE AFFIXES. ( BK. IV. CH. I. 8.4 
___ अजायतष्टाप् ॥ ४॥ पदानि ॥ अजादि-अतः-टाए (खियाम ज्याप्रा०)। 
वृतिः ॥ ममादिभ्यः मातिपदिके योऽकारान्दार मातिपदिकात स्त्रियां दार सत्ययो भवति । 
4. The affix ang is employed to indicate feminine nature, after the Nominal-stem 'aja' &c, and after the stems ending in short 2 N 
of the affix ery, the letters and are T, the real affix is my # The letter q indicates that the affix has anudatta accent (III. 1.4); the letter is employed to distinguish this affix from चार and गए। 
The words * &c, are given below. Thus n'a he goat,' ar 'a she goat'. The words ending in short x are such as, or whose feminine will be वरना ॥ The word भत् is used in the aphorism, the indicatory t shows (I. I. 70) that the short w having one matra should be taken; and not the long ! Pratipadikas that end in long मा, such as कीलालपा or शुभया (III. 2.74)do not forin their feminine by taking , but are both masculine and feminine, Thus, Trur: antrasyT: ATETof 'the auspicious-going, nectar-drinking Brahmant'. Had the feminine of such words been formed by arg, then the case-affix of the nominative singular would have been elided after them (VI. 1. 68). 
Following are the words belonging to the sun class: 
1. भज मना. . एक एडका 3. कोकिल कोकिला । 4. पटक पटका . मध मचा 8. भूपिक मपिका 
N. B. The above words denotejati' or kind and though they end in short w in the masculine, they would have taken, but for the present sätra, the affix 'htsh' (IV. 2.63) in the feminine 
7. बाल बाला 8. होर होरा 9. पाक पाका . 10 वत्स पल्सा l मम मन्दा 12. विलास दिलासा 
N. B. The above six words are descriptive of age, and though they end in short w in the masculine, but for the present s@tra, they would have taken the affix' ' (IV. 1. 20) in the feminine, 
13. पूर्वापहरण, पूर्वापहरणा; 14. भपरापहारण : मपरापहारणा; 
· N. B. These two words are formed by the affix ore, and being fer would have taken Tी (IV. 1. 13) but for this sotra, 
भवफला । 
15. सफल 17. भभिनफल, 19. पिण्यफल, 
संफला 
भनिनफला पिण्डफला 
16 भत्रफल 18. प्रणफल, 20. पिफल, 
BK. IV. CH. 1. 8. 4) 
THE FEMININE AFFIX er i 
609 
N. B. The above words ending in phala' would have taken the affix pish (IV. I. 64) but for their enumeration in the ajadi' class ; 'f ' when a Dvigu Compound forms its feminine as f when a Bahuvrihi Com. pound, its feminine is from 
21. grup, 
22, array, 23. Tayo, 
474997; 24. 94 
rangut; 25. ungo 
Ougui; 28. go, The above words ending in gey would have taken pish by IV. 1. 64. . 27. 
u . B. N. But the feminine of visit when the meaning is the wife of a sddra'; so also when the word T is compounded with the word met as, FETTA' a woman of 'TI' class'. 
The term 'HETTO is applied to the caste of Abhiras: and this com. pound word would lave taken the affix* ' by the rule of tadanta vidhi given in I. . 72, but for the vårtika, viz ETT 7867 i fart' It might be objected that the tadanta vidhi cannot apply here on the strength of the following maxim :-“That which cannot possibly be anything but a pratipa dika does not denote that which ends with it, but it denotes only itself, Therefore, the word 'gQdra' which cannot be anything but a prátipadika, does not denote 'maha-f0dra'. This objection is sutile: the very fact of this vartika indicates by implication (jnapaka), that with regard to the application of the feminine asfixes, the tadanta-vidhi is valid and does apply. Thus we have the forms like भतिधीवरी भतिपीवरी and भतिभवती 
28. Đi N 29. 
fast 80. Giong Huy 
· N. B. The above words end in consonants and would not have takea ergy but for their being included in the in class. , 31. tuy 
32. mar e 
33. que usar B. N. The above words denoting matrimonial realtion would have taken the affix 'hish' by IV. 1. 46 
34 anyo SETT The word 'mala' preceded by the negative particle nah, would have otherwise taken 'hish' by IV. 1.64 : Fizisten 4 varan aatori, fg, ( faretru garIT ). . 
निः॥ सायन्तेभ्यो नकारान्नेभ्यब प्रातिपदिके या स्त्रियां ही प्रत्ययो भवति । 
5. The affix sig is employed, in formning the femi nine, after Nominal ston ending in or in ti 
of the affix tg, the letter is taken in order to make a common term with Ag and ta; and the q is takca to distinguish ti from those 
60 
THE FEMININE AFFIX AM (BK. IV. CH. 1. . 
affixes; the real affix is to Thus, ** ;-. f; -8.667; - f. forft; ofit,-f. orat : fall 88 qera u sfita:, , ( fargt 19) 
f: 1 TT 5 A TE TUTTE agrirejant, fimul ferai #q real afei. पार्मिकन् ॥ धातोसगतः प्रतिपेधीवक्तव्यः । बार्तिकम् ॥ मंचते भोपसंख्यानम् ॥ 
6. And after what has an indicatory'uk' (J, Zora) the affix zi is employed, in denoting the feminine. 
The age is a pratyahara meaning, and all Wherever it is possible to make these letters indicatory, in whatever way it may be, that word-form is called ft That which ends with such a word is meant here. A pratipadika pure and simple. not formed by an affix, may be afrat, thus the pronoun 447 among the sarvanamas: an affix may be af as the affixes 
nito and up, and therefore, the words formed by these affixes will be first; similarly a letter may be store as meaning in VI. 4. 127, ("y is the substitute of the final of an inflective base ending in a &cm) 
· Thus, ** 'honored' sir.--. waat madam'. Applying the rule of tadantavidhi, we have mana-mana 'most exalted lady'. Similarly 49 (formed by adding u III. 2. 124 ) forms the feminine qurt, they comes by VII. I. 82. So also anat fa female sacrificing'; * optat a mare'. - Vårt:-Prohibition must be stated in the case of verbal roots having an indicatory 'uk'. Thus the roots to fall down, in 'to fall down' have indicatory ; and we get from these roots, the paatipadikas like TOTAL and qua,(III. 2.76). The Tu atkvot, quin Aleti Here, the feminine is not formed by adding free 
Vårt:-The pratipadikas ending with the verb 'anchu', however, take the affix or As, roft, ad it, 
a ll ! erat calon genfot 17:, t, v, ( farei sig) FT: Il calenia gran fani otg ra th : 1 ar II TITU: . 
7. The aflix ta' is added, in forming the feminine to the stems that end in the syllable 7, and is the sub stitute of the final of such syllable. 
Thus tea (Uņádi IV. 115) f. trad'a female artisan'; Hanf ftat'a young woman, a stout woman', Tief. 'night' (g+of III. 2. 75) lit. that which destroys light. So also 
# 
BK. IV. CH. I. $ 10) 
** 
611 
Words ending in mare formed by the affixes Tara, (III. 2. 103) fe and fag (III. 2. 74) These words end in and consequently would have taken og even by IV. 1. 5; the necessity of the present sätra arose in order to teach the change of into y in case of words ending in IN 
Vårt. If the affix Ft is ordained to be added to a word ending in C, (a letter of FT pratyahaha), and is thus immediately preceded by a soft consonant then this rule does not apply, that is to say, there is neither the application of the affix at nor the change of q into Thus ay is both masculine and feminine as, Arya ATEM: or premt'a Brahman brother or sister in arms'. In the lis preceded by which is a letter of r class, but as n is not ordained to be applied to y but to y, and we get the indirectly by guņa, the vartika does not apply to such a case. Hence with 
पादोऽन्यतरस्याम् ॥८॥ पदानि ।। पाद:, अन्यतरस्याम (खियां डीए)। धृत्तिः ॥ पारन्तान प्रातिपदिकादन्यतरस्यां वियां डीए प्रत्ययो भवति । 
8. The affixut' is optionally employed in the femininc, after a Nominal-stem ending with word pâd.' 
The word are becomes Ty when final in certain Bahuvrihi compounds (V. 4. 140) Thus far is both masculine and feminine, or it may optionally form its feminine by long (ott) In the latter alternative, the form will be fry, the word qrę being replaced by by VI. 4. 130, (as read with I. 4. 18) Similarly fon or feruet ; 787697E or goeft u 
erara su ata il 279, 31, ( Part 977: ) वृत्तिः ॥ ऋचिवाच्यायां पादन्तात् प्रातिपस्किात् स्त्रिया या प्रत्ययो भवति । 
9. The affix z7g is employed in the feminine, after a Nominal-stem ending with the word 'pâd', when the word denotes a verse of the Rig Veda. 
This debars stru Thus fy en a Rik verse consisting of two quarter verses'; similarly feet , 796427 Why do we say " when denoting a' Rik verse"? Obscrve fine 'Devadatta (a woman) having two fect'. ___ न पद स्वनादिभ्यः ॥ १०॥ पदानि ॥ न, पट्, स्वनादिभ्यः, (स्त्रियाम)। 
वृतिः ॥ पद संतकेयः स्वस्रादिभ्या प्रातिपदिकेभ्यः स्त्रीपरययो न भवति । 
10. The feminine affixes are not employed after the stems called '97' (1. 1. 24), and after FTF &c. 
This prohibits all feminine affixes that would otherwise have present. ed themselves. Thus q M80xt: 'the five Brâhmaņi ladies'. So also OR, 74, 7 &c arc feminine as well as masculine. The following words belong to the 
. .. 
. [ BK. IV. CH I. F. 14 
Svastadi class:-स्सा 'a sister', दहिता'a daughter'; ममान्दा 'a husband's sister'' aar'a husband's brother's wife', mar a mother', fara: 'three'. Tak 'four'. 
मनः ॥ ११॥ पदानि ॥ मनः (डीप स्त्रियां) वृत्तिः ॥ मनन्ताम्रातिपदिकात् ही प्रत्ययो न भवति । 
- 11. The affix डीए is not employed after a Nomi nal-stem ending in the syllable मन् ॥ . 
By. IV. 1. 5, pratipadikas ending in het would have taken the affix 19, in as much as they end in ; but the present sätra prohibits that. Thus सामन् ' a string' is both neuter and feminine; and is declined as follows:-LS. सामा; d. सामानौ, pl. ामानः ॥ Similarly पामा, पामानी, पामामः॥ 
Here by using the term we mean words formed by an affix whose effective element is t, such as the affix AFTET (Uņadi IV. 344) in the words दामन (दो+मानिन्) and पामन्: as well as words which end in मन् which does not re present an affix. This is done on the strength of the following paribhasha : भनिनसमन ग्रहणान्यर्थवता बनर्थकेन च तरन्तविधि प्रयोजयन्ति॥ "Wherever भन् or or भम् or मन् , when they are emyloped in grammar denote by I. I.72 something that ends with मन् or or भस् or मन् , there भन्न , भस्, and मन represent these combinations of letters both in so far as they possess, and also in so far as they are void of, a meaning." Therefore, words like सीमन् and भतिमहिनन्, where मन् is not an affix, but an integral part of the word, are also governed by the pre sent sutra. Thus, सीमा, सीमानी, सीमानः भतिमहिमा, भतिमाहमानी and प्रतिमहिमानः । 
__ अनो बहुव्रीहेः ॥ १२॥ पदानि ॥ अनः, बहुव्रीहे, (स्त्रियां डीएन)। पतिः ॥ अनन्तात् बहुव्रीहे. चियाम् डीप् प्रत्ययो न भवति । 
12. The affix sie is not employed to denote the feminine, after a Bahuvrihi compound ending in अन् । 
This refers to those Bahuvrthi compounds in which the penultimate is not elided. Of the Bahuvrthi compounds which lose their penultimate letter, it is optional to employ this affix or not; as it will be taught in IV. I. 28. Thus सुपर्वन् ' possessed of beautiful joints' is both masculine and feminine. As सुपर्वा, सुपर्वाणी, सुपर्वाणः; so also सशर्मा, सुशर्माणी and मुशाणः ॥ In these cases the penuti 
mater of पन् or मन् is not elided. See VI. 4. 137. 
Why do we say "after Bahuvrihi compounds" ? Because after any other compouds, this rule will not apply. As भातराजन् is an Avyayibhava compound, its feminine will be भतिराजी।। 
डावुमाभ्यामन्यतरस्याम् ॥ १३॥ पदानि ॥ डाप, उभाभ्यां, अन्यतरस्पां, (मनः अनोबहुव्रीहेः स्त्रियां)। वृतिः ॥ दाप् प्रत्ययो भवति उभाभ्यां मनन्ताबातिपदिकादनन्ताप बधीहरबतरस्यान BK. IV. CH. I. §. 14) 
613 
13 The affix or comes optionally after both these, viz.the Nominal-stem eoding in #, and a Bahuvrihi compound ending in all 
Or the affix 77, the letter indicates that the affix is to be added after the elision of the R (I. 1. 64) of the base. Thus TAT+Tg-T+07-MAT, This being an optional rule we have I.पामा d, पामे or पामानी,1, पामाः or पामानः similarly with frit, as, drar, dra or eart, Tar: or Tary: 
.. So also in Bahuvrihi compounds ending in 7. As: 
HT, 
बराजे or बबुराजानी, 
UNT: or TTTT: # SAHT, 
बहुतले or यहतक्षाणी, 
FATHT: or 4 TOT: 11 Why do we say "optionally" ? So that the option may apply to stra IV. 1. 7 also; i. c. when a pratipadika ending in 77, which can be regarded as ending in , is a Bahuvrthi compound, then the change of a into and the application of free are optional • we may apply the affix ny instead. As : बरधीया or बांधीवरी पीया or बहुपीवरी॥ __ अनुपसर्जनात् ॥ १४॥ पदानि ॥ अन् उपसर्जनात् ॥ 
इत्तिः ॥ यदित अर्थमनुवामिष्यामोनुपसर्जनादित्येवं सदेरितव्यम् । 
14. The following rules apply to a Nominal-stem which is not a subordinate term in a compound. 
This is an adhikara aphorism pure and simple, and has governing force upto IV. 1. 77: and prohibits the application of affixes to 'upasarjanas'. That is to say, whatever we shall treat of hereafter, sis to be understood to apply to such terms only, which are not upasarjana or a subordinate term in a compound. ( 1. 2. 43). Thus the next sätra declares "the affix hip is added in forming the feminine after what ends in short s, if the affix with which it ends has an indicatory &, &C." Thus the word om is formed by the affix (111.) 2. 16), and ends in 8. The feminine of this word will be formed by the as कुरुचरी, similarly मद्रचर-मद्रचरी | But if these words being the last members of a compound, are treated as upasarjana (1. 2.43), then they will not take the affix to in the feminine. Now in a Bahuvrihi compound, all the com ponent members are upasarjana, (I1, 2, 35); therefore, the feminine of such compounds will not take it a Thus, or ATT ETT I Similarly IV.1. 63 says, "the affix atę is added after words denoting jati" as, at, But where these words are upasarjana, 'nish' will not be added : as, THIET 
STT FYTI 
As a general rule, tadanta-vidhi (I, 1, 72) docs not apply to compounds ; but the prosent Butra indicates by implication that the tadanta-vidhi applies to compounds for the purposes 
614 
. 
Tu 
(BK. IV. CH. I. $. 15 
of the application of feminine affixes. For had it not been so, there would have been no necessity of making the present sätra ; for a rule applicable to a simple word as such, would Dot have applied to it when it was part of a compound whether suborilinate (npasarjana), or principal (pradhana). But the present sutra indicates that the tndanta-vidhi doen apply, if the word does not become a suborilinnte menaber, but is regarded as the principal dicmber, of a compound. 
The feminine of a wire or a t will be to or Treath, in as much as the second member here is pradhana : the word 'kumbha-kara' being formed by * (III, 2, 1), and thus making it possible to apply by IV. 1. 15. The affix so referred to in the next sätra refers to the krit-affix Byut (III. 2. 1), as well as to the Taddhita affix you 
टिड्ढाणद्वयसदनज्मानच्तयप् ठक ठककरपः ॥ १५ ॥ पदानि ॥ face-m-310-79-4 7 -829449-791-77-45-464: (ta: ferir H BTQ) 11 वृत्तिः। टिदादिभ्यः प्रातिपदिकेन्यः खियां डीए प्रत्ययो भवति । afrail treyta fragtry earth 
15. The affix foto is added, in the feminine, after the Nominal-stems ending in short *, if the affix with which it ends has an indicatory a, or if the affix be , or u, or use or द्वयसच , or दनच, or मात्रच्, or तयए, or ठ, or ठम् or कञ् or Fatyti 
The word 29'ending in short is understood here by anuvritti from IV. 1.4; and qualifies the affixes above-mentioned, wherever neces sary. This debars the affix zty of IV. 1. 4. We shall give example of each seriatim (1) Thus, m., 94 f., m., f, Heart (78+ +f; the final of is elided by VI. 4. 148.) The word kuru-chara is formed by < (111. 2. 16). of which is indicatory. 
Q. It might be objected, "why is not the affix to added after the words qamra, formed by the affix una (III. 2. 124) in as much as this affix is a substitute of me; and because my has an indicatory , therefore, its sub stitute will also be supposed to have an indicatory (I. 1. 57)." 
A. To this we reply, 'the affix me is not far as it has two indicatory letters, and 
Q. If that be so, affixes like fant should also be called no fear affixes, as they have also two indicatory letters. 
A. To this we reply, that is Fuc be not regarded feat, then the indicatory To Fure finds no scope any where: as the indicatory of per has its scope in stra 111. 4. 79. Therefore, the feminine of qera will be the Similarly, the indi 
BK. IV. Cl. I. $. 15 ) 
- 
frem 
615 
catory of augments will not cause the application of the affix tg; thus 4fcat fra # Here the feminine of great is formed by wt and not. This is indicated by sūtra IV. 3. 23, which says "augment i is added to the affixes 34 and 348". If the off could have made the affix fer for the purposes of this present satra; the anubandha & had been unnecessarily added to the affixes y and stay in the above. ; (2) of words ending in r we have, m, ergota f. ergoreit so also f. . The r stands for the affix tt; and it is replaced by P (VII. 1, 2) Thus Front + PF (IV. 1. 120)-yo+- atguta(VII. 2. 118). There is no affix which is merely without any indicatory letters; and denoting the feminine ; the only affix, as said above, is TET 1 Thercfore, the following maxim does not apply here :-"When a term void of anubandhas (indicatory letters) is im ployed in grammar, it does not denote that which has an anubandha attached to it", and we cannot say that the r of this søtra refers to the anubandha-less r of V. 3. 102 which is always Neuter. 
(3) of words in on, we have already said that the affix my here refers to both the Krit and the Taddhita affix 'an'. Thus with the krit affix 'an we have **** and FTTT (I11. 2. 1), the feminine of which is ad and FOTO II With the Taddhita affix 'an' we have alwa (IV. 1. 92, the feminine of which is afraiu Sometimes words formed by the addition of the affix or are operated upon as if they were formed by . Thus . anet are the feminine of Art and an (IV. 4. 62), sometimes words formed by o are not so treated, as progT, HET (IV. 2. 57). . 
(4) Words formed by son as iter . Hreit, miqyra, f. 1947, (IV.1.86) Though by IV. 1.73 the affix it would have come after the words ending in By, the re-employment of this affix in the present sätra is for the purpose of preventing the application of the affix at which would have presented itself by IV. 1.63 ; that is even when jati' is indicated, gish' is not to be employed here, 
(5) The three affixes 469, and my are added by V. 2. 37; as, uur. Torft 'reaching to the thigh. Similraly w at, sayt, marah 
(6) So also with words formed by 9% (V. 2. 42). As qe of which the parts are five' so also puta 
(7) So also with words ending in on (IV. 4. 1) as, Hifitat a femalo dicer', Urmint. The r is replaced by ra (VII. 3. 50). 
(8) Similarly with words ending in a (V. 1. 18): as, tai elegant. The affixes on and of are separately cnumerated in this stra, in order to cxclude the affix tt &c. For had the word = merely been used, then it would have meant all the three affixes , 57 and up, which is not desired 
616 
(BK. IV. CH. I. $ 17 
(9) Similarly with words ending in 9 (III. 2. 60) as, argut, argut 
(10) So also with words ending in E (III. 2. 163) as Hy swift', pu 
· Vart :- In addition to the foregoing, there should have been the enumeration of the asfixes 78 and mg (IV. 1, 87) and 4* (IV. 4. 59) and ay (I11. 2. 56) and of the words poor and an 'a youth'. Thus euit .a fe male', fet a male', watent a female spear bearer', miniroft 'enriching ; वरुणी or सदनी'ayoung woman'. 
pan8€ 1 fat Ilust:, , ( faci ) वृत्तिः ॥ यमन्ताप प्रातिपदिकान् वियां सीप प्रत्ययो भवति। पातिकम् ॥ भपत्यमाणं कसंध्यम् । 
16. The affix any is employed, in denoting the feminine, after a Nominal-stem ending in '9' (IV. 1. 105). 
Thus triatge pel +(VI. 4. 148) + f (VI. 4. 150) Alfa female descendant of Garga'; so also create 
Fart:- This rule applies when the affix 4 denotes a descendant, and not otherwise. Therefore will not be applied to form the feminine of 
4 of 14+ (IV. 3. 10) Its feminine will be a living on or relating to 
· an island'. 
The separation of this satra from the last, (for the affix it could well have been included in the same), is for the sake of the subsequent aphorisms; in which the anuvfitti of as only runs and not of others. 
· Trei Fai Farga: u pun tall STHI, 4, afe:,( : forut) पुचिः ॥ प्राचामाचार्याणां मतन यमन्तात् स्त्रियां यः प्रत्ययो भवति स च तद्धितसंज्ञः॥ 
17. In the opinion of the Eastern Grammarians, the affis 'shpha' is employed after what ends with the affix 'yan', and it is to be regarded as a Taddhita affix. 
or this affix of the letter gis indicatory (I. 3. 6), and shows that the words formed by this affix will take 'nish' (IV. 1. 41) The feminine nature is here manifested by these two affixes jointly, viz by 'shpha' and dish'. The object of saying that'shpha' is to be regarded as a taddhita affix, is that the word so formed may get the designation of pratipadika (1. 2. 46). The affix x is replaced by the substitute orat (VII. 1.2). Thus + + -matcrott; so also referent a This being an optional rule, we have in the alternative, गार्गी and वासी। 
The word *T "every where", of the next sätra is to be read into this, by a process inverse to that of anuvritti, in order to prohibit the applica 
. 
BK. IV. CH. I. . 19] 
गए। 
бі 
tion of those rules even which would otherwise debar this. Thus IV, 1.75 says:-'the affix पाए comes after भावप' WHere भावप ends in बम, and by IV... 16, the word भावध would have taken the affix hip: IV. 1.75 debarred this But according to Eastern Grammarians, here also the affix 'shpha' will be added. Thus भावव्यायनी। 
सर्वत्र लोहितादिकतन्तेभ्यः ॥ १८॥ पदानि ॥ सर्वत्र, लोहितादि कतन्तेभ्यः, (यमः स्त्रियांफ) दृणिः ॥ सर्वत्र लोहितादिभ्यः कसपर्यन्तेभ्यो यमन्तेभ्यः खियां का प्रत्ययो भवति । 
18. The affix 'shpha' is invariably added in the feminine after the words beginning with lohita' and ending with kata', when they take the affix yan. 
The words ita &c. are a subdivision of Gargadi class ( IV. 1. 105) The present sätra makes the application of the affix , compulsory while it was optional in the last. The word en refers to the independent pratipadi ka ma in the said subdivision, which follows immediately after the word af, and not to the word 945 of the same class, where the word is not an independent full nominal-stem but a member only. Thus ticarucft, uiforegrant पाध्यायणी। 
Karika कण्यास्तु शकलः पूर्वः कतावत्सराप्यते। 
पूर्वोत्तरी तदन्तादी फाणी तप प्रयोजनम्।। For the purposes of the application of it and ory, the word 148 which is enumerated in the Ganapatha after the word कण्व (See IV. 1. 105) should be regarded as if it stood immediately before you and after a Thus we have प्राकल्यायनी (with en, and धकला. with मण, meaning पाकल्यस्वम UTTT: 'the pupils of Sakalya'. 
कौरव्यमाण्डूकाभ्यांच ॥१९॥ पदानिकौरव्य-माण्डूकाभ्याम, च, (त्रियांफ)। वृत्तिः ॥ कौरव्य माण्डूक हरयताभ्यां खियां का प्रत्ययो भवति । वार्णिकम् ।। कोरष्यमाण्ड्कयोगसुरेरुपसंख्यानम्। 
19. The afix 'shpha' is added, in the feminine, after the words फोरव्य and माण्डूक । 
The word toe is formed by adding the affix on to the base (IV. 1. 151); this word, ending in 2, would have formed its feminine by 27" (IV. 1. 4), but for the present sätra. So also by IV. 1. 119, the word Aroga is formed by spot added to Ros; and the feminine of mandQka would have been formed by nip (IV. 1. 15), but for the present aphorism, which supersedes that affix, Thus कोरण्यायणी, माण्डकायनी॥ 
How do you expain the form कारखी in the phrase कोरपी खेमा। 
618 
Agn 
[BK. IV. CH. I. g. 21 
We explain it by saying that cft is not the feminine or shed; but of mic, formed by adding myus to it by sūtra IV. 3. 120 
Vårt:--Thc word wat should be enumerated along with kauravya and mandükya. Thus mifugot # The word orgft is formed by the affix added to the word of ; the word "asuri' would, therefore. have taken the affix sport in forming the further derivative (IV. 2. 112). But according to the opinion of Patanjali, the word, asuri' should form its further derivative (called also ufq6) by taking the affix 5 (IV. 2. 114) Thus ruta: 464: ( 1 ) 
para gah I Roll Trailer, TEÀ, ( fauti ng ) वृत्तिः॥प्रयमे वयसि ययातिपदिकं श्रुत्यावर्तते ततः स्त्रियां की प्रत्ययो भवति । वातिकम ॥ वयस्यपरमहतिवनष्यम् । 
20. The affix TV is employed, in the feminine, after a Nominal-stem ending in and denoting early age. 
The word 79: means the condition of the body as dependent upon tim:; such as, youth, old age &c. Words expressive of early age form their feminine by t, though ending in a Thus, TATO 'a girl'. faluru 'a young girl' 'a she-kid'. 
Why do we say denoting 'carly age?' Observe rufry 'an old woman'; har 'an old woman'. Why do we say ending in *? Observe fill, which is both masculine and feminine. 
Vårt:-The sâtra should have been para 'words expressive of not old age'? Thus ar 'a young woman', farroet 'a young woman'. These words denote the second stage of life, and not the first, i. e. they denote women who have attained their maturity. . 
How do you explain the form or 'a girl? This is an exception, and Paņini himself uses the word 'kanya' showing that it is a valid form; as in sūtra IV. 1. 116. 
The words like Jaar 'an infant girl that does not know how to lie down properly' sifa for a female infant whose feet are still tender and red' do not directly, but mctaphorically, express age, and hence are not governed by this rule. 
ferit: 11 28 11 fall fogait, ( faci atg) वृत्तिः । विगसंतकात् मातिपदिकान् स्त्रियांडीए प्रत्ययो भवति। 
21. The affix it comes in the feminine after & Nominal-stem ending in short a, which is a ‘Dvigu' compound. 
Thus qugft, qught I But we find from the three myrobalans', because this is onc of the words spoken of as a &c' (IV. 1.4) 
BK IV CHI $ 23. 1 
619 
अपरिमाणविस्ताचितकम्बल्येभ्योनतद्धितलाक ॥२२॥ पदानि ॥ अपरिमाण forta-feia- 
caratteri, 7, anni, ( Erfarnt:) वृमिः । भपरिमाणन्ता विगोविस्तावित कम्बल्यान्ताप सद्धितलुकि सति ही प्रत्ययो न भवति । 
22. The affix sig is not employed, when a Taddhita affix is elided, after a Dvigu compound ending in a word not denoting a mass or measure ; or in 'bista', 'ichita'; and 'kambalya'. 
This debars Snip which otherwise would have presented itself by virtue of the last sūtra. The words perra: 'a weight of gold equal to 80 Rakti kas', gay 'a measure of 10 cart-loads or 80,000 tolahs'; and appear a mea sure', all denote measure; and are the only words expressing measure to which this rule applies. The word oft174 means 'measure', as distinguished from a Numeral', Sce V. 1, 19, &C. 
Thus it is a Dvigu compound, meaning 'purchased for five horses.' Ilere the Taddhita affix (V. 1. 37) giving the sense of purchased with has been elided by V. 1. 28. This compound does not end in a word denoting parimaņa techincally so called ora measure. The feminine of this word will not be formed by rk but by zrę, thus, 45414'a female purchased for five horses'. 
The words denoting 'time' or 'number' are not words denoting 'mca sure' as understood in this sätra by the word 'parimaņa'. Thus, ficat, a two years old female child', fortaf'a three years old female child' (V. 2. 32 Vart.) So also fry a female purchased for two hundreds', similarly forvat So also with the words विस्त &c. As दिविस्ता 'purchased for two bistas', विविस्ता, 
fal, autorat, finear, and frame &c. 
Why do we say 'not ending in a word denoting a Parimana or a *measure'?' Observe met, Aarat " a female purchased for two or three adhaka". Here adhaka mcans a measure equal to 7 ib. II OZ. avoir. 
Why do we say 'when a Taddhita affix is elided'? In 'Samahara Dvigu' compounds, the affix 'hip' will apply. Thus gant an aggregate of five horses', so also conft! 
काण्डान्तात् क्षेत्रे ॥ २३ ॥ पदानि ॥ काण्ड-अन्तात, क्षेत्रे, (द्विगो तद्धितलुकि Eiga) वृणिः ॥ काण्डशान्ताद् दिगोस्तद्धितलुकि सति क्षेत्रे पाध्ये डीए प्रत्ययो न भवति । 
23. The affix or is not employed after an adjectival Dvigu compound, ending in the word 'rog', where the Tad dhita affix is elided, wheu the compound mcans a field. 
620 
Hell 
[ BK. IV. C1. I. $ 25. 
... Thus fint et m 'a division of a field of the measure of two kan das.' Here, the word fast is a Dvigu compound ending in kaqda'; the Taddhita affixes denoting measure enjoind by V. 2. 37, have been elided by the vårtiku 'Parot Pintars given under the same sätra. The feminine, therefore, of this word will not be formed by 'nip' but by ty; so also frames FITTON 
The term "kanda' is a word expressive of non-measure; and, therefore, the prohibition contained in the last sđtra applies to it; the present satra is made to regulate this prohibition. That is to say, the prohibition contained in 
the last sätra is not universally applicable in the case of Drigo compounds ending in 'kanda'; it applies to cases where the compound refers to superfici al land measure. Therefore we have, finit Typ: 'a rope two kandas long ';. filoft tsyr: 'a rope three kändas long'. 
पुरुषात्प्रमाणेऽन्यतरस्याम् ॥२४॥ पदानि ॥ पुरुषान, प्रमाणे, अन्यतरस्याम, (feuit: afacereasty ) . वृत्तिः ॥ प्रमाणे या पुरुषधम्नस्तदन्ता लिगोस्तद्धितलाक सति भन्यतरस्यां न ही प्रत्ययो भवति । 
24. The affix 'is not optionally employed after a Dvigu compound, where the Taddhita affix is elided, when the compound ends in the word 'purusha', referring to measure. 
Thus SEAT or faget star'a mote two purusha wide so also feat or f at &c. The present sätra ordains an option where IV. 1. 22 would have made the prohibition universal. Why do we say 'when referring to measure'? Observe f a 'a female purchased in exchange for {wo males; No option is allowed here. Where the Taddhita affix is not elided, the present rule does not apply. Therefore in Samahara Dvigu we have fagot or farget u 
UGRIERETETTE II 39 II una ll again this brg ( ferui ) il इतिः॥ अवस् शब्दान्ताद बहुव्रीहः खियां डीए प्रत्ययो भवति । 
25. The affix, 'sh' is employed, in the feminine, after a Bahuvrihi compound ending in the word ûdhas an udder'. 
Thus the Bahuvrihi compound of qurg'a bowl and VF will be googte ve; then the final of Odhas is replaced by the substitute 76 (V. 4 131); thus we have ny; which would have been liable to the rules IV. 1, 12, 13. ante ; the present sūtra enjoins fic instead. Thus giustutt (VI. 4. 134) 'a woman with full bosom'; rerupt a cow with udders like jars'. 
Why do we say after a Bahøvrihi compound'? Observe ATHY *W: - AT Art: (II. 2. 4) which is a Tatpurusha compound. 
BR. IV. Ch. I. $ 27. ) 
621 
The Satra IV. 1. 28 also is debarred in this case: for though the pen. ultimate w is clided by the VI. 4. 134. yet rule IV. 1. 28 does not apply here 
The substitution of pet for the final of Ve takes place only then, when the feminine nature is to be expressed and not otherwise. Therefore in the masculine we have en ni'the big-bosomcd cloud'. 
Heyroteig 28 a 17-248474-07ati, fing ( a 
TF: FERT) N त्तिः । संस्थादरम्ययादेश बबीरुपचनान्तान की प्रत्ययो भवति 
26. The affix o't comes in the feminine, after a Bahuvrihi compound ending in Odhas', beginning with a Nu meral or an Indeclinable. 
This sätra ordains 'nip', where by the last sQtra there would have been 'hish'. Thus #+5VT+HAR+ (V. 4 131 )-rout having two udders '; so also sguft,'having three udders'. The above are Bahuvrihi com pounds beginning with a Numeral. Similarly mezi 'many-uddered.; faut “having no udders' 
Why do we say 'beginning with'? So that the rule may apply to compounds like Fafanirft and fiftet, in which the words 'dvividha' and 'tri vidha', though not Sankhya are words which begin with a Sankhya. 
दामहायनान्ताश ॥ २७ ॥ पदानि ॥ दाम-हायनन्तात, च, (त्रियां डीए संख्या 
ATE:) वृत्तिः ॥ संख्यादेवहुधीरे मशान्तालायनशम्दान्ताच स्त्रियांनी प्रत्ययो भवति । वार्णिकम् ॥ हायनो पयसि स्मृतः। 
27. The affix sta comes, in the feminine, after & Bahuvrîhi compound beginning with a Numerol, and ending with the words dầman 'a rope', and hîyana 'a ycar'. 
The word Tit was liable to be operated upon by three rules, by, IV. 1:13 ordaining eng, by IV. 1. 11 prohibiting totally thc affixing of g and IV. 1. 28 ordaining nip optionally : the present sätra ordains nip to the exclusion of all thosc rules. As fora'a (mare) bound by two ropes'. firmat 
Siinilarly grey would have taken long aT by IV. 1. 4. this ordains long 11 Thus fegraaft two years (old girl)', farrooft; Tariqoft H 
Vårt : The word 'hayana'must denote 'age', for the purposes of this satra. Therefore we have no nip here:- Fraat Om 'a hall of two years ex. istence'. So also f7672ar and arran II Morcover in thcsc latter cases the at is not changed into o; for when 747 denotes 'age', it is the only that the is changed into a and not otherwise. 
622 
. 
ए॥ 
[ BK. IV. CH. I. 530 
अन उपघालोपिनोऽन्यतरस्याम ॥ २८ ॥ पदानि । अनः, उपधा-लोपिन:-म न्यतरस्यां (बहुधीहे डीए). इतिः ॥ मनन्तो यो बहुव्रीहिरुपधालोपो तस्मादन्यतरस्यांनी प्रत्ययो भवति । 
28. The affix sta optionally comes after that Bahuvrihi compound, which ending in the syllable star loses its penultimate 1 
Thus URUSE is a Bahuvrihi compound ending in t: in applying nip, it loses is penultimate by VI.4 134 (मलोपोऽनः there is elision of w of भन् wlien a bha affix follows) Thus trait' having many kings'. In the alterna tive, when nip is not added, we may add the asfix z by IV. 1. 13. Thus tuto पजा, बाराजे, बहुराजाः ॥ Or we may apply the prohibition 'contained in IV. I. 12 and have बहुराजा, बहुराजानी, बहुराजानः ॥ when the penultimate is not elided we cannot apply the affix it at all : in cases of such compounds there are only two forms of the feminine noun as सुपा, सुप, सुपाः or सुपर्वा मुपाणी. 54tur: ut That is to say we apply IV. 1, 13 and 12 only; for in the case of 39 &c. rule VI. 4. 137 prevents the elision of the penultimate : (न संयोगाइमनन्तान्, there is not elision of the # of it when it comes after a conjunct consonant ending in a or म)॥ 
नित्यम् संझाछन्दसोः ॥ २९॥ पदानि ॥ नित्यं, संज्ञा, छन्दसः ( अनउपधा लोपिनोऽन्यतरस्यां कीप) वृत्तिः ॥ अनन्तादीहेपधालोपिनः संज्ञायां विषये छन्दसि पनित्यं डीप् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ . 
29. The affix डीप necessarily comes in the Chhan das and in forming Names, after that Bahuvrîhi compound which ending in the syllable to loses its penultimate an. 
This is an exception to the last rule; for while that enjoined the op tional, the present enjoins the compulsory application of the affix it Thus सुराजी “the city called Surajnt'; अतिराज्ञी 'the city of Atirajni'. Similarly in the Chhandas we have गौः पम्पदामी, एकदानी, विदानी 'a cow having five udders, one udder, or tivo udders'. एकमा समानमर्धी 
__ केवलमामकभागधेयपापापरसमानार्यकृतसुमङ्गलं भेषजाच ॥३०॥ पदानि ।। केवल-मामक-भागधेय-पाप-अपर-समान-आर्यकृत सुमङ्गल-भेषजात, च, (संझाछ न्दसोः डीए स्त्रियां) वृत्तिः ॥ केवलादिभ्यः प्रातिपदिकेभ्यः संज्ञायांउन्नति विषये स्त्रियां ही प्रत्ययो भवति 
30. The affix sty necessarily comes in denoting the feminine, after the following Nominal-stems when em ployed to express a Name or in the Chhandas :- केवल, मामक, भागधेय, पाप, अपर, समान, आर्यकृत, सुमङ्गल and भेषज ॥ BK. IV. CH. I. $ 32.) 
. 
623 
The phrase din Ort of the last sätra is understood here also. Thus not in the Chhandas, as opposed to try in the ordinary language, when not denoting a Name%3; so also मामकी and मामिका; भागषेयी as मिवावरुषयोमान धेयी and भागधेया; पापी and पापा; मपरी as उतारा योमपवा विजिग्ये ; (Rigvedal. I. 13/and भपण; समानी प्रवाणी and समाना; भार्यकृती and भार्यकता: सुमाली (Rigveda X. 85.33) सुमङ्गला; अपजी and भेषमा मुमाल takes an also by IV. 1.41,as belonging to Gauradi class No. 86. : THEITSAT 11 3811 Tall T, 2,315, (AST GRAT: g ) 11. 
वृत्तिः । असविषयावन्यव संज्ञायां छन्दसि चराविशनात् ही प्रत्ययो भवति। पारिकम् ॥ मजसारिथितिवनष्यम् ॥ .. 
• 31. The affix are comes after the word tot in the Chhandas, and in denoting a Name, except when the affis FF (nominative plural) is added. 
Thus trop pet, riti (3rd pl); (Rigveda X. 127. 1. I. 35. 1) but in the nominative plural we have trai, the regular plural of the word of, as in the sentence यास्ता राषयः, instead of पत्र्यः॥ 
Vart:-According to Katyayana, nip is not added, not only when we apply the nominative plural termination se; but in all other terminations beginning with R also. Thus of E SET; here in the accusative singular case also thc 819 is not employed. 
But how do you explain the form 04: in the following paraayein procare ; This 'ratrya' is the nominative plural of 'ratrt' which is formed by the feminine affix hip; and not by nish. The forms evolved by adding my or Ag are one and the same, except with regard to accent ; that formed by nish has udatta accent on the final: the other has it on the initial. The word af is formed by the krit affix foro (Un. IV. 67), and therefore, it is a word which is governed by IV. 1.45 because it is a word falling in Bahuvadi class, by virtue of the general subrule "a word ending with the vowel y of a krit affix, other than it belongs to Bahuvadi class; some say 
every word ending in f, if it has not the force of the asfix fint belongs to this class". Therefore it takes tig in forming the feminine ___ अन्तर्वत्पतिवतोर्नुस् ॥ ३२ ॥ पदानि ॥ अन्तर्वत्-पतिवतः, नुक्॥ 
f# # faraldry ma zic 14:* .: 32. The augmenter is added to the words aretat and grea, when the affix sig is added to form the feminine. 
This satra points out the base and teaches the addition of the aug ment au When this augment is added, and it must be added at the end, - 
624 : 
q 
. 
(BK IV CIL I. $. 33 
by sūtra I. 1. 46), the forms become water and game; and these words must take hip by virtue of IV. 1. 5, if not by this sotra. Thus we have 
tät and pracatThis irregular formation of the feminine is employed only then, when the sense of the words so formed is a pregnant female' and 'one whose husband is living respectively. Therefore we have not the above forms in the following:-प्रयते स्वया पतिमती पथिवी; here the word पतिमसी qualifies the word ford and has not the sense of having the husband living', therefore its formation is regular. Similarly when the sense is not of a preg nant female', the femirine will not be asiat ; in fact there will be no affix ing of () Because og is added to words possessing certain attribute, as described in V. 2. 94, while the word al has the sense of location, and can never be in apposition with the sense of TTEC "having" as required by V. 2. 94 The word wat would not therefore take FEST # It does so irregularly by this satra. They is changed to o by VII1.2 g in F The change of a tot in fant is however irregular. 
The augmenter is optionally added to these words in the Vedas as aratat or amarrada paraut or fart of # 
orgataheta II 33 11 yê li ry, 7i, usreta, ( ferat) कृषिः ॥ पनिम्नस्य नकारादेवः खियां विधीयते ॥ 
33. The substitute a replaces the final of qra before the feminine affix ty, when the word so formed means *a wife, who takes part in the sacrifices of her husband'. 
Thus fa r 445 # The feminine qat means legitimate wife, she who is entitled to take part in the sacrifices of her husband. The word dit is an Instrumental Tatpurusha compound and means "related through sacrifice i. c who shares the fruits of and is entitled to participate in, the sacrifices of her husband. But when the sense is not that of wife', the feminine of ara will be पdि as ग्रामस्य पतिरियं ब्राह्मणी 'this Brahmant is the head or mistress of this village'. If the word wat means 'the wife who takes part in the sacrifices of her husband', it cannot be applied to the wife of a Sodra, for a Sodra cannot per form a sacrifice, a fortiori not his wife? The term qat is, however, extended to the wife of a Sadra also, by analogy, as the marriage of a Sadra also takes place by offering sacrifice to Fire and making it a witness, 
विभाषासपूर्वस्य ॥३४॥ पदानि । विभाषा, सपूर्वस्य (पत्युनः, स्त्रियां, अनुपस Start ) निः ॥ पनिशान्तस्य मानिपरिकस्य सपूर्वस्थानुपरार्जनस्व खियां विभाषा नकारादेशो भवति ही तु लभ्यत एक 
BKIV.Cl. I.537] 
की 
। 
625 
34. In forming the feminine with the affix ty, is optionally the substitute of the final of vra, when the latter is preceded by another word. 
The word pure a means when the word ga is not an upasarjana, but stands at the end of a compound. Thus वृद्धपतिः or वृद्धपत्री; स्यूलपाति: or स्यूलपानी। This is an example of apråpta-vibhasha. Because it is free from the limita tions of 'yajila-sanyoga' of the last sätra. Why do we say when it is preceded by another word? Observe पतिरिय ब्राह्मणी पामस्य, this Brahman lady is the mis. tress of the village' Here the feminine is gra and not qar 
नित्यंसपत्न्यादिपु ॥ ३५॥ पदानि ॥ नित्यं, सपदी-आदिषु, (पत्युनः स्त्रि.). वृत्तिः । साल्दादिपु नित्य वधुनकारादेशो भवति डीप तु लभ्यत एव । 
35. In forming the feminine with the affix zig, the word पति always takes the substitute न, in the words like 'सपती' and the rest. 
This enjoins the necessary and not optional substitution of x for the final offa, before the affix 49, in the cases of certain words. The word 'nitya' is used in the aphorism for the sake of precision. Thus सपती, एकपमी ॥ 
The compound of the following words with qat are governed by this rule: I समान 'equal' 2 एक 'one', 3 वीर 'hero', 4 पिण्ड'a cake',sभात 'brother' 6 पुष 'a son', and 7 Ta'a slave' (this only in the Chhandas). 
पूतकतारैच ॥३६॥ पदानि ॥ पूतकतोः, ऐच, (स्त्रियां डीए) वृत्तिः॥पूतक्रतुराब्दस्य खियामेकायदेशो भवात ही प्रत्ययः॥ 
36. In forming the feminine, the letter & is the substitute of the final of the word aan, when the affix she is added. 
Thus maar 'the wife of Patakratu'. This and the two succeeding satras, are in a way more intimately connected with IV. 1. 48, in asmuchas the sense of the feminine words must be that of 'wife of, otherwise these sutras will not apply. Thus if the meaning is not that of 'wife of the word प्रतकत: will be both masculine and feminine as well, meaning she by whom sacrifices (कतवः) are sanctified (पूताः). 
वृषाकप्यशिलसितकुसीदानामुदात्तः ॥ ३७॥ पदानि । वृषाकपि-अग्नि-कुसित फुसीदाना, उदात्तः (ऐ डीए स्त्रियां) 
त्तिः ॥ वृषाकप्यादीनामुवान ऐकारादेशो भवति स्त्रियां डीप प्रत्ययः॥ 
37. In forming the feminine with the affix tv, the letter having udatta accent is the substitute of the finals of वृषाकपि, आग्नि, कुसित and कुसीद ॥ 
626 
GIA 
(BK. :V. CH. I. $ 39 
The words and and it have udåtta accent on the middle vowel (Phit Sa II. 19), the feminine of these has udatta, however, on the final. The words 'agni and the rest have the udåtta on the final (Phiç sa 1. 1), their substitute g will necessarily be udatta, by the rule of sthanivat bhava, even if the present sätra had not explicitly declared it to be so. Thus 
arrot (Rig Veda X. 86. 13) 'the wife of Vrishakapi", spratet, (Rig Ved. I. 22. 12) the wife of 'Agni', arut 'wife of Kusita', streerit 'the wife of Kusidai. The present rule only applies when the sense of the feminine word is that of 'wife of. Otherwise we have all: ai 'the women Vrishakapi' and not geratu For the accent of the word 4, Sec VI. 1. 203. 
Hitta Il zen na 1 AFT:, at, ant, (serer: Pauisīg) N इत्तिः ॥ मनुशब्दात स्त्रियांडीए प्रत्ययो भवति भोकारमन्तादेयः ऐकारोशायः॥ 
38. In forming the feminine with the affix sig, is optionally the substitute of the final of Ag, as well as the udatta ) : The phrases and 717 are understood. The force of an is to make the substitution optional Thus we have thrcc forms, rett or fart or , all meaning "the wife of Manu. The word for has udatta accent on the first vowel, as it is formed from you by the affix 3 (Un l. 10), which by Un I. 9 is treated as having an indicatory 7, and affixes having indicatory a throw the accent on the first syllable. (VI. I. 197) ___ वर्णादनुदात्तातोपधात्तोनः ॥ ३९॥ पदानि ॥ वर्णाद्, अनुदात्तात, तोपधात, 
8:, 7: ( a referi ) 
तिः ॥ वर्णवाधिनः प्रातिपदिकानुशचान्ताचकारोपधाद्वाडीप् प्रत्ययो भवति, तकारस्य च मकापदेयो भवति । 
वार्चिकम् ।। पिशङ्गादपसंख्यानम् ॥ पार्मिकम् ॥ भसितपलितयोः प्रतिषेधः।। वार्मिकम् ॥ छन्दसिक्रमित्येके । भापायामपीप्यते। 
39. The affix fg is optionally employed after a Nominal-stem expressive of colour, ending in a gravely accent ed vowel, and having the letter & as its penultimate letter: and the letter is substituted in the room of all 
Thus of ga 'variegated'; the feminine is part or got 'variegated', so TT or unit 'black', sfia or fruft 'green'. All these words have udatta accent on the first vowel either by Rule VI. r. 197 (parantera and "word formed by affixes having an indicatory s or have udatta accent on the first vowel":) 
BK. IV. CH. I. $ 40 ) 
· BIEN 
: 
· 627 
because these words are formed by the Ugadi affixes * (Un III. 86) and 6972(III. 93 ) or by the Phit sätra 11. 10 (Tini parafarama "of words expressive of colour and ending in q, or fa or for a, the udatta accent falls on the first vowell) 
Why do we say "expressive of color? Observe EIT, AFATN These words are also acutely accented on the first syllable, by rule VI. 2. 49 (Tatarat: "the first word retains its natural accent in a compound of a gati word with a word formed by the affix tta", But as these words do not express color, their feminine does not take sip. 
Why do we say "ending in a gravely accented vowel?" Observe par 'white. Here though the word expresses 'color', yet it has acute (instead of grave) accent on the final (by rule of Phit sutra I. 21 yarfrir "the words ghfita &c. have udatta on the final") 
Why do we say "having the letter at as its penultimate letters > Other wise the affix nish will be employed in forming the feminine. 
· The words for the application of this rule must end in the letter min the masculine. Otherwise this rule will not apply. As fofaererent 'a black Brahmant woman'. Here fofa is a word expressive of color, it has a penul timate , has anudatta accent on the final (VI. 1, 197) as it is formed by the affix imit; but as it does not end with #, its semir.ine is not formed with hip. 
Vårt :-—The affix hip comes also after the word frut; as, fruð of tawny color'. 
Vårt :-There is prohibition in the case of the words fra and afisat; as maar 'black' and gresar 'grey'. . 
Vårt :-According to some, the substitute a replaces the final of these two words area and afara in the Vedic literature. As ofent (Rig Veda IX. 73. 29); F (R. Veda V. 2. 4). According to some authorities, these latter forms are valid in literature other than the Vedic :--As tai poluhrat MTV __अन्यतोडीए ॥ ४०॥ पदानि अन्यता, डी, (वर्णादनुदात्तात् निर्या)। 
इतिः॥ वर्णशाचिनः प्रातिपदिकानुनत्तान्ताव स्त्रियांनी प्रत्ययो भवति । 
40. The affix ste is employed in the feminine after every other word expressive of color and ending with an anudatta accent. 
The word T of IV. 1. 38 does not govern this sätra. The word aan: means in other cases than those governed by the last aphorism i.e. after words which have not a as penultimate. The difference between nip and nish affixes consists in accent, the former being gravely accented (111. 1. 4) and the latter acute, Thus art, amri, a u 
628 
. 
र॥ 
[BK. IV. CH. I. I. 41 
Y 
When the word does not express color, this rule does not apply. As सहा'a bed-sted'. 
When the word does not end with a gravely accented vowel, this will not apply, as, कृष्णा , कपिला ॥ 
पिगौरादिभ्यश्च ॥४१॥ पदानि ॥ष-तू-गौर-आदिश्या, च, (त्रियांडीए) वृत्तिः ॥ पिद्धः प्रातिपादके यो गौरादिभ्यम त्रियां ही प्रत्ययो भवति । 
___41. The afix डीए is employed in forming the femi nine after words ending with affixes which have an indicatory 
and after the words tre and the rest. 
Thus by Sätra III. 1. 145 (furera Ft) the affix is added to a root, to form noun of agency, denoting an artist The feminine of the words . so formed, will take thish. As, नर्तकी 'an actress', खनकी 'a digger'; (मकी'a dyer'. So also the words år &c; as id, heeftThe following is the list of words belonging to Gauradi class. 
1गोर, 2 मत्स्य, 3 पनष्य, 4 शन, 5 पिङ्गल 6 इय, 7 गवय, 8 मुकय, 9 अय, 10 पुर, II सूण 12 हुण, 13 द्रोण; 14 हरिण, 15 कोकण, (काकण,) 16 पटर, 17 उकण, (मामल) 18 भाम लक, 19 कुरल, 20 पिम्ब, 21 बार, 22 फर्करक (कर्कर) 23 सकार, 24 पर्कार, 25 पुष्कर 28 शिखण्ड, 27 रलद 28 कण्ड 29 सनन्द 30 सुपम, 31 सुषव 32 भालिन्द 33 गज, 34 पापडश 35 भाटक, 36 भानन्द, 37 भाश्वल्य 38 सुपाद, 39 भाखक (भापषिक), 40 शकुल, 41 सूर्य (पूर्व) 42 पूर्प, 43 सूच, 4 यूप (पूष) 45 यूप, 46 सूप, 47 मेय, 48 वल्लक, 49 धातक, 50 सल्लक, 51 मालक, 52 मालत, 53 साल्वक; 54 वेतस, 35 वृक्ष (T स) 56 अतस, 57 उभय. 58 भूत 59 मह, 60 मठ, 61 छेद, 62 पेश, 63 मेक64 श्वन 65 तक्षन्, 66 मनबुही, 67 अनाही, 68 । एषणः करणे । 69 देह, 70 देहल, 71 काकारन 72 गवादन, 73 सेजन, 74 रजन, 75 लवण, 76 भौराहमानि (भौवाहमानि) 77 गौतम (गो तम) 78 पारक, 79 भयस्थूण (प्रयास्यूण) 80 भौरिकि, 81 भौलिकि, 82 भोलिनि. 83 थान 84 मेध, 85 मालम्बि, 86 भालजि, 87 मालब्धि, 88 भालसि, 89 केवाल, 90 भापक. 91 भारट, 92 नट, 93 टोट, 94 नोद, 95 मूलाट, 96 शातन, 97 पोतन, 98 पातन, 99 पाउन (पानट) 100 भास्तरण, 101 भधिकरण, 102 अधिकार 103 अप्रहायणी (मामहायणी) 104 प्रत्यवरोहिणी 105 सेचन, 106 सुमङ्गलातज्ञायाम् । 107 भण्डर 108 सुन्दर, 109 मण्डल, 110 मन्थर, lll मंगल 112 पट, 113 पिण्ड, 114 पण्ड, 115 मई, 116 गर्द, 117 एम, 118 सद, 119 भोड (भाई) 120 हद (हम) 121 पाण्ड, 122 भाण्डल (भाण्ड) 123 लोहाण्ड, 124 कदर, 125 कन्दर, 126 करल, 127 तरुण, 128 तलन, 129 कल्माष, 130 हन् , 131 महत्, 132 सोम, 133 सौधर्म । 134 रोहिणी नक्षत्रे । 135 रेवती नक्षत्र । 136 विकल, 137 निष्कल 138 पुष्कल । 139 कटाच्छोणिवचने । पिप्पल्यावयथ । 140 पिप्पली, 141 हरितकी (हरीतकी) 142 कोशातकी, 143 धगी, 14 बरी, 145 शरी, 146 प्रथिवी, 147 क्रोप्द, 148 मातामह, 149 पितामह, 150 सुगेड, 151 सुब, 152 सूर्य, 153 सकलूक. 154 भालिगि, 155 पावन, 156 एत, 157 विटक, 158 मह, 159 दहन, 160 कन्द, 181 कण। . 
N.B.-The word me though denoting color, is finally acute by virtue of this sůtra ; the word RT &c, being jati words having a penultimate u would 
BK. IV. CH. 1. § 42. ] 
629. 
not have taken nip (IV. 1. 63) but for this satra; 1x and run would have tak en T (IV. 1. 13), poor is formed by pre and would have taken nlp (IV. 1. 15) pouaspargyot a balance, a probe'. # would take áin also by IV. 1. 73. Similarly it may be shown why the several words have been included in this list. By the vartika arate fre given under IV. 2. 36, the affix Amin ATOM is. treated as having an indicatory au The word #TETT will take me because it is fent; its inclusion in the list of Gauradi indicates that the rule of Ag application, because a word is for is not universal ( After for ATV ) N Therefore we have forms like t &c. 
जानपदकुण्डगोण स्थलभाजनागफालनीलकुशफामुफफबराद् वृत्त्यमानवपनाकृति माधाणा स्थौल्यवर्णानाच्छादनाघ्योविकारमैथुनेच्छाकेशवेशेषु ॥४२॥ पदानि ।। जान पद-मण्ड-गोण-स्थल-भाज-नाग-फाल-नील-कुश-कामुक-कवरात्, वृत्ति-अमन-भव पन-अकृतिमा-श्राणा-स्थौल्य-वर्ण-अनाच्छादन-अयोविकार-मैथुनेच्छा-केशवेशेषु (खि uisto) 
FF: il Sirataifang ganya: qaran parte prateng Tre A great atau 
42. The affix sag is employed after the eleven words 'jânapada' &c., in the sense of profession' &c. respec tively; i. e. after the words 1. 3799 2. 9v3, 3. iur, 4. Fug 5. HIS, 6. ART, 7. , 8. ates, 9. 97, 10. , and **; the affix 55 is employed when the sense is that of 1.'profession or liv ing' 2. 'a bowl', 3. 'a sack or vessel for kecping grain', 4. 'a n& tural spot of ground'; 7. 'a cooked food or rice-gruel', 6. 'stout, 7. 'black-coloured', 8. 'blue-coloured other than cloth', 9. 'a plough-share', 10. 'a libidinous female', 11. 'a fellct or braid of hair', respectively. 
Thus 3177997 'a profession', otherwise i t, the difference being in accent only. For this word is formed by adding the affix spy to janapada, by sởtra IV. 1. 86, as it belongs to Utsadi class of words: in forming the feminine the affix it will be added in this latter case, thus throwing the acute accent on the first syllable 
(2) So also givet 'bowl-shaped vessel, otherwise not a name of Durga'. (गोणी 'a sack' यष धान्यादि प्रक्षिप्य मीयते otherwise गोणा, a particular name (4) fari'a place not prepared by artificial Improvement'; otherwise fury as Rime crucial (5) TST 'cooked', otherwise THT, (6) 'a stout war man', otherwise art! The word tot when a guņa-vachana word i.e a word expressive of quality, in the sense of 'stoutness', takes the affix hish in the feminine; otherwise z7q when expressing general qualities. When it is a jati. 
630 
tru 
(Bx. IV. CH. 1. $ 44 
vachana word it takes ar under all circumstances. (7) ar 'a black-coloured female', otherwise my 'cruel' (8) a blue-coloured animal or indigo' The word T4 in the satra is rather too wide, it should be confined to the two senses above indicated i. e. when it applies to a plant called indigo or to animals'. Such as it, or Art II; or when it denotes appellative as fra In other cases we have fram 'a blue-coloured cloth. (9) gut 'a plough share', otherwise au 'a rope or a kind of grass' (10) mit 'a libidinous or lustful woman' cther wise Filme 'a woman desirous of wealth. (11) 'a fillet or braid of hair', otherwise ilu 'mixed, -variegated. 
Just greu 1831 Tefal Toot, gare (ferut jo), वृत्तिः ॥धोणशनावाचामाचार्याणां मतेन स्त्रियांना प्रत्ययो भवति। 
43. The affix aty is employed in the feminine according to the opinion of the Eastern Grammarians, after the word शोण. 
Thus iuft or drop 741 'a red or bay mare'. By Phit Satra 11. 10 referred to already in IV. 1. 39 the udatta in orar falls on the first syllable, and by IV. 1. 40 it would have taken as always; but the present sätra makes a niyama rule and restricts the application of g according to the opinion of Eastern Grammarians only, and not of others. 
घोतो गुणवचनात् ॥४४॥ पदानि ॥ वा, उतः, गुण वचनात् (स्त्रियां डी). वृत्तिः ॥ गुणश्चमान प्रातिपदिका उकापन्तान खियां वा डीप प्रत्ययो भवति । Tra i TT Torget 
पा.॥ खरुसंयोगोपचारमतिपयो वक्तव्यः । 
44. The affix zig is optionally employed in the feminine after a word ending in short 3, and being expressive of a quality. 
The word puppy means what expresses quality: i.e. swords not being words formed by primitive or secondary affixes, or other words entitled to the name of sankhya or sarvandman, or jali, or compound words, pro vided they are words denoting qualities and capable of being used as adjec tives qualifying substantives as the word stais, not as the word , which though it expresses a quality, cannot be used as an adjective." (Guide to Panini). Thus from 'dexterous', we have ost or 45: (without a feminine affix); so hor gft 'soft'. Why do we say 'ending in a short '? Observe 
fara goft 'this Brahmana lady is pure'. Why do we say "expressive of a qualityph Observe mig: 'a mouse' (both masculine and feminine). 
Vart:-After the word when expressive of a quality, the affix hip is employed in the feminine; in order to make the first syllable acutcly ac 
BK. IV. CH. I. 146] 
जीर॥ 
631 
cented. As, पस्थी । बसु is formed by r (VI. Io) and is adyudatta because the ris FIT 
Vårt. Prohibition must be stated after the word u aod words though endirg in short , have conjunct consonant as penultimate. As wetti ब्राह्मणी 'a Brahmant who chooses her own husband'. Similarly पाणु is both gender, as oz is a conjunct consonant. As gresitt maradt 
The word Guna गुणः 'quality' has been thus defined: 
सले निविधतेपेति पयग् जातिपुसश्यते। 
माधेयशक्रियाजम सोऽसस्वकृतिमुणः । बाहादिभ्यश्च ॥ ४५ ॥ पदानि ॥ बहु-आदिभ्यः, च, (खियां षा-डीए) . वृत्ति ॥ रत्येवमारियःप्रातिपदिकेभ्यः स्त्रियां पा सीए प्रत्ययो भवति। 
45. And the affix डी is optionally employed in the feminine after the words af and the rest. 
As or what * The following are the words belonging to the Bahva. 
· di class 
1 बा, पति, 3 भम्पति, 4 मनुति, महति, 6 एकदि, (एकति), 7निर प, 8 पारि, 9 वारि, 10 पति 11 राधि, 12पाधि, 13 महि, 1 कपि, 15 यदि, 16 मुनि, 17 इतः प्राप्यंगात्। 18 कृतिकारारनिनः। 19 सर्वतोनिन्नविष्यके। 20 चण्ड, श भगत, 22 कपण, 23 कमल, 24 विकर, 25 विद्याल, 28 विघट, 27 भरुज, 28 पत्र, 29 चना भागानयार (चन्द्रभागा मचाम) 30 कल्याण, 31 उदार, 32 पुषण, 33 महम्, कोर, 35 मल, 38 खुर, 37शिखा, 38 बाल, 39 प्रफ, 40 गुर ॥भारुतिगणोऽयम् ॥ सेन। 43 भग, “गल, 45 पगाल्यादि। 
The affix hish also comes optionally after words ending in shorts being the names of the limbs of animals; as, धमनि: or धमनी So also after the vowel rofa krit affix, not निन् (III. 3.94), as राyि or पपी॥ Some say that the feminine affix nish may come after any word ending in , if it has not the force of the affix fill The word is a guņa-word and would have optiox ally taken tiish even by the last sätra, its specification here is for the subse quent sätra, by which it necessarily takes dish in the Chhandas. It is an Ákritigana 
नित्यं छन्दसि ॥४६॥ पदानि ॥ नित्यं, छन्दसि, (बडादिभ्यः स्त्रियांडी) वृत्तिः । बह्वादिस्य छन्दसि विषये नित्यं स्त्रियांनी प्रत्ययो भवति । 
46. The affix zie is always employed in the Vedic literature, in forming the feminine of the words are and the rest. 
Thus नहीं हिस्वा प्रपिषन् ॥ Here बही is the name of a herb. . 
The word for 'always' is used in the aphorism, more for the sake of the subsequent sätra, which it governs than for this sotra For the word 
632 
Zhr u 
[ BK. IV. CH. I. $ 48 
optionally does not govern this, and the aphorism even without the word nitya? would have been a necessary rule and not optional: for T HALIA नित्योविधिः सिजा, योगारम्भभिनय योजनः । 
भुवश्च ॥४७॥ पदानि । भुवः, च, (छन्दसि नित्यं खिया डीए). . gir: 1 gagner forma fani Fi FAPT 4 yeye wafu 
47. The affix fe is always employed in the Chhandas in forning the feminine, after the word un 
Thus foreft, 44, Fruit, geeft u 
But why not so in the case of PTA:? Because it ends in long , while Ferroft &c. are feminine of free &c. ending in short Tu In fact the word *: "after a word ending in short r" of Sätra IV. 1. 44 governs this also. The word : is the ablative case of y irregularly formed by the substitution of #96; this form being confined to sätras only. 
पुंयोगादास्यायाम् ॥४८॥ पदानि ॥ पुंयोगात-आख्यायां, (स्त्रियां कीर्ष), वृत्तिः ॥ योगादेतो यत्पातिपदिकं स्त्रियां पनते पुंस भाषाभूत तस्मान् दीप प्रत्ययो भवति । पातिकम् ॥ गोपालकादीनां प्रतिषेधः॥ पातिकम ॥ सूर्यादेवतायां पार पत्तयः॥ 
.: 48. The feminine affix to comes after a word when it expresses the name of a wife in relation to her husband. 
Relation (yoga) with a male (punsa) is called gümr ! Thus the wife of the an astrologer' is called it, so also grateft 'the wife of a chief minister', qot 'the wife of a chief'; gall &c. Thus the word op means an astrologer, a calculator or a mathematician; and the wife of such a person will be expressed by the word ooit ! But if a woman is herself an astrologer &c, she will be called T ( by Tp) &c. Therefore when matrimonial rela tion is not denoted, this sūtra will not apply. 
Why do we say “in relation to a husband'? Observe TT 474TI *two women of the names of Devadatta, and Yajñadatta, not wives of Deva datta and Yajnadatta.' 
Why do we say " *Teet or a name"? The word formed will be the name of a woman whose husband is possessed of the quality denoted by the word, and not that the woman possesses that quality. In the case of a woman, therefore, the word is merely a Name or a Designation, and has no reference to the etymological meaning of the word. Moreover, the omission of the word sparen would have made the sätra ambiguous, for the phrase $UMT also means an effect produced by union with a man' such as pregnan cy. And words afget and at would have required f and not a BK. IV. Ch. I. $ 49 ] 
633 
Vart:-Prohibition must be stated in the case of words like that and the rest. Thus that the wife of a cow-herd'. 
Vart: The affix are comes after in denoting the wife of Sorya, when she is a celestial being. As out the celestial wife of the god Sorya', while at will denote a human wife of Surya, such as, Kunti &c Thc affix 
te makes the word acutely accented on the final: for the word has acute on the initial, and had been only prohibited and no specific affix ordained, then te would have applied, and it would have left the accent unchanged. Hence a distinct affix it is ordained. 
इन्द्रवरुणभवशवरुद्रमृडहिमारण्ययव यवनमातुलाचार्याणामानुक्॥४९॥ पदानि॥ 91-967-7-7--473--***-ta- ATO topatu, HIET, (farai 10) 
वृत्तिः ॥ इन्द्रादिभ्यः प्रातिपदिकेभ्यः घियांनी प्रत्ययो भवदिभामुक चागमः ॥ पातिकम् ॥ हिमारण्ययोर्महले । पार्तिकम् ॥ यवाहोपे ॥ पा॥ ययनाल्लिप्याम् ॥ वा ॥ उपाध्यायमातुलाभ्यां पा॥ पा ॥भाषायांदणवेच॥ वा.॥भर्यक्षभियाभ्यांवा ॥ वा०॥ मुलाच्छन्दसि लिए। 
49. The augment area is added to the Proper Nouns 7, TUT, *a, a, 55, and us, and to the words from 
snow', 34707 a forest', ta 'barley', yan 'a Yavana', 11g a maternal uncle', and art 'a preceptor', before the fe minine affix की ॥ 
The present sätra teaches two things, the addition of the augment orgra (ru) and secondly the feminine affix g Out of the above words, in case of those about which matrimonial relation is desired to be expressed, i. e. the Proper Nouns up to 7, the present satra teaches only the addition of the augmentare, for in their case, the affix at would follow by force of the preceding Satra. In the case of the remaining words, it teaches both these things. 
Thus farat "the wife of Indra', fourt "the wise of Varuņa ',* *r* *the wife of Bhava', urut the wife of Sarva', of the wife of Rudra', 
fra 'the wife of Mrida'. 
Vårt: Of the words for and we, there is the augment dig in the sense of greatness. Thus forat a glacier, mach snow', prourit 'a great forest'. Otherwise these words are always Neuter and never take feminine 
· Vårt :-After the word "barley' the feminine affix and the aug . ment are added in the sense of fault. The fault consists in its imitating barley 
634 
Agn 
[ BK. IV. CH. 1.3$ 50 
while not being a barley. In fact the word denotes a new and inferior sort of grain. Thus "a kind of grain, oat". 
· Vart:-Alter the word on, the affix and the augment are added in the sense of handwriting. Thus of the written character of the Yavanas'. 
Vårt:-Or the words to 'a maternal uncle', and rara a pre ceptor', when the feminine affix comes to express the wise thereof, the augment is optional. Thus woment or #TEFT the wife of a maternal uncle' उपाध्यायानी or उपाध्यायी 'the wife of a preceptor' . 
Vart:And there is not the change to the lingual o of the dental of the augment Arr (VIII. 4. 2) after the word Art Thus retail or Barat 'the wife of a preceptor'. 
Vårt :-After the words and and in this rule applies optionally : when the matrimonial relation is not intended but the word retains its own sense. . Thus spruit or at the female of the Arya or Vaishya class', frarott or marcat a female of the Kshatriya class'. When matrimonial relation is to be expressed, then only is added. As pruf 'the wife of a Vaishya', afira 
the wife of a Kshatriya'. : Vårt. In the Chhandas, the affix with the augment arter is added to the word wat; and the affix is treated as if it had an indicatory 4 The force of the indicatory is to make the vowel preceding the affix, take the acute accent (VI. 1. 193 fafa). Thus fruit Far ETH (Rig Veda X. 102. 2) : sarcas curgata 1 408 geta o marci, #kur-gata, (farai stu) u कृति ।। क्रीतपमान्तान् प्रातिपदिकात् करणपूर्वात स्त्रियांनी प्रत्ययो भवति । 
50 The affix sig is employed in the feminine after a compound word ending in tra, the first member of the compound being the name of the means wherewith the thing is bought. , 
The word oorgra means that compound in which the front or 'means' is the first member. Thus wairat a female bought in exchange for cloth'; so also tatatat 'a female bought in exchange for dress'. 
Why do we say "when the first member of the compound is the name of the means" > Observe paraf 'well purchased', var ill-purchased': But why is not the affix c cmployed in yatar in the following verse : सा हितस्वधनकीता प्राणेभ्योपि गरीयसी 'she purchased in exchange of riches is more dcar to him than life. Here the word ate has first taken the affix etc forma 
BK: IV. CH. I. . 52) 
635 
ing star and then this feminine word is compounded with # The general rule is fronterat : STUTT HTF herit: "Gati, Karakas and Upapadas are compounded with bases that end with Krit-affixes, before a case termination or a feminine affix has been added to the latter". The word water is an exception, founded on the diversity allowed by a RT 
(II. 1. 32) 
कादल्पाख्यायाम् ॥ ५१॥ पदानि ॥ काद, भल्पास्यायाम्, (करणपूर्वादीष farai) 
शनिः ॥ करणपूायातिपदिकात् कान्तदल्पाख्या की प्रत्ययो भवति । 
51. The affix ste is employed after a compound Nominal-stem in which a name denoting the means wherewith, is the first member, and the second member is a word formed by the Participle , when the sense is that of 'a small quantity'. 
The word Aitor Htt'preceded by a noun denoting the means where with', of the last sätra governs this also. The participlc in , must be pre ceded by a noun in the instrumental case, and the sense conveyed by , to the action should give the sense of 'little', in connection therewith. The CH an of the sätra qualifies the whole word. Thus afarit a:'a sky covered slightly with clouds', uffit art'a dish slightly covered with soup. 
Why do we say when the sense is that of' little'? Observe paraAHT Argoft" a Brahmant lady covercd with sandal essence para o . यहुव्रीहेश्चान्तोदात्तात् ॥५२॥ पदानि ॥ पहुव्रीहे, च, अन्त-उदात्तात, (काद fani ) . वृत्तिः ॥ बहुयीहियोऽन्तोशनस्सस्मान् खियां नगर प्रत्ययो भवति । afera o pater fisstofauti to to 11 guforystcartrar u पा०॥ भबहुनश्सुकाल सुखारिपूरिति पनाम्यम् ॥ 
52. The affix ste is employed in the feminine after that Bahuvrihi compound, which ending with a word formed by the affix thr, has an acute accent on the last syllable. 
The word 77 of the last aphorism governs this also. This satra applies to those Bahuvrihi compounds in which the first member is a sudnga word. But if the antecedent member is not a svanga word, then the applica tion of the rule is optional. As jefiaft 'having a rent on the temporal bone', ut having a rent on the thigh'. T eget (ST4F2T), UT # By II. 2. 36 Vart farangur : 979994, the Nishtha stands in the second place, otherwise by 11. 2. 36 it ought to have formed the first member of the 
636 
riga 
(BK. IV. CH. 1.3 53 
compound. The words &c. are jati words, and by VI. 2. 170, the acute is on the final. 
Why do we say "after a Bahuyrthi compound ?" Observe m aat which is an Ablative Tatpurusha compound (II. 2. 38). The compounding is by II. 1. 32, and it has acute on the final by VI. 2. 144 
Vårt :-Prohibition must be stated in the case of the participle WTC bom', which is also acutely accented on the final. Thus ICT a female who has cut her teeth ;' FUTET "a female whose breast has been developed'. See II. 2. 36 Vart. . . i 
· Vårt:- In the case of words for ayetaft &c, the affix is employed in certain senses only. Thus qui portat a wife'; (afhen YFIT:liforn); but giftftat a woman whosc hands have been taken, but not before the sacred fire, a concubine &c.' 
Vart: Exception must be stated in the case of compounds, the ante cedent member of which is any one of the following words :-5, 74, 8, words denoting time, go &c. Thus wom, par, mat, hrastar, TTEETTITAT, JEST or erstar &. . Bahuvrihi compounds get acute accent on the final syllable when they fall under the rules VI. 2. 170 and the following. 
. अस्वान पूर्वपदावा ॥ ५३॥ पदानि । अ-स्वांग-पूर्वपदात, वा, (अन्तोदात्तात् कात् बहुव्रीहेः स्त्रियां डीए)। 
FT: U PETITE gérerairan TITE TAR fazi u og geenit afat ... वार्निकम् ॥ बहुलं संज्ञाछन्दसोरिति वनभ्यम् ॥ 
53. The affix sig is optionally employed in the feminine after a Bahuvrîhi compound ending in 7, having acute accent on the final, the antecedent word not being a word denoting a part of the body. .. . The words 
w ant and har govern this sūtra. This aphorism lays down an option, where by the last aphorism, it would have been compul sory. Thus ulty, is a word having acute accent on the final (VI. 2. 170), but as the first portion of this Bahuvrihi is not a Svänga word, but a jati word, its feminine will be शाअन्धी or चाईजग्धा | So also पलाण्दुभक्षिती or पलाण्डु 
trat and guitat or gritat . 
Why do we say 'when the first member of the compound is not a svanga word'? Observe soft ft which admit of only one form. 
If the final is not acutely accented, the rule will not apply. As Tuot and 78703 which are not acutely accented on the final (Sec VI. 
BK.IV. C1. I. $. 54 ) 
.: 
E 
. 
637 
2 170), because the first member is a word denoting dress or 15, which is especially excepted from the scope of rule VI. 2. 17a 
Vårt:-Diversely in the Chhandas and in Names. As garaget or महनक्लिना। ___ स्वाहाघोपसर्जनादसंयोगोपधात् ॥ ५४॥ पदानि । स्वाङ्गाद, च, उपसर्जना 
T M-3947, (ar forut st) धृतिः ॥ स्वांगेयदुपसर्जनमसंयोगोपधं सवन्तावाविपाईका खियां नीर प्रत्ययो भवति । वार्तिकम् ॥ भंगगावकण्डेय रवि वक्तव्यम्। 
54. And the feminine affix io comes optionally after what ends with the name of a part of the body, when the word is a subordinate member in a compound, and has not a conjunct for its penultimate letter (i. e. the final a is not preceded by a double consonant). 
The Anuvritti of the words पहनी है, कान्तारन्तोदात्तात् does not extend to this aphorism. But the anuvfitti of the word ay 'optionally does extend to this Sotra. Thus पनमुखी or चन्द्रमुखा, भतिकशी or भतिकैया ॥ The word मदि 
u is a Tatpurusha compound meaning 
n aar urs, and nu is upasarjana by I. 2. 44 
Why do we say "what ends with the name of a part of the body"? Observe ou 'having much barley. Why do we say "subordinate in a compound'? Witness e "without crest" (where the four is not subor dinate or cpithetical). Why do we say "not having a conjunct for its penulti. mate letter'? Witness gurp, Hr . 
Vart :- This rule applies to a compound ending with the word , and up, though in all these, the penultimate is a double consonant. Thus Bu or ; Et or IT, frust or finastu 
The word has a technical meaning as given in the following verse: 
भवं मतिमत्वा प्राणिस्थमविकारजम। 
भतरूपंतपष्ट घेतलेन चेत् तत्तयायुतम्।। A word denoting a thing which not being a fuid, is capable of being perceived by the senses because of its having a form, is svänga; it must exist in a living being, but not produced by a change from the natural state though found elsewhere actually, had previously been known as existing in only a living being, or is found to have actually the same relation to the being it is in, as a similar thing has to a living being. 
638 
नीर। 
[ BK. IV.CH. I.S.56 
मासिकोदरीष्ठजयादन्तकर्णशृगाच ॥ ५५ ॥ पदानि । नासिका उदर-मोष्ठ जङ्घा-दन्त-कर्ण-भंगात, च, (स्वांगाव लिया था डीए). 
वृषिः ॥ नासिकायन्तावातिपदिकात खियां पान मस्ययो भवति । पार्तिकम् ॥ पुच्छाति वक्तव्यम् ॥ वार्निकम् ।। कररमणिविषधरे योनित्यम् । वा. ॥ अपमानालाप पुच्छा। 
55. And the feminine e comes optionally after compounds ending with नासिका 'a nose,' उदर 'belly,' ओष्ठ 'lip' जंघा 'leg', दन्त 'a tooth', फर्ण 'ear, and 'horn'. 
This is an exception to the last and the succeeding sdtra. Some of the words above given are either such which have a conjunct penultimate letter, and thus beyond the scope of IV. 1. 54; or they are polysyllabic words and thus covered by IV. 1. 56. Though this rule is an exception to 54 and 56; yet it is qualified by IV. I.57. Thus नासिका or तुलनासिकी, तिलोदरी or सिलोरण, विम्बोष्ठी or पिम्दोमा, दीपंजेपी or दीपंगंधा, समदन्ती or समदन्ता, चारकर्णी or पास्कर्णा, हीरणही or तीरण . Vart:-So also after the word पुच्छ tail'. As कल्याणपुच्छा or कल्याणपुच्छी। 
Vårt :--The affix nish comes necessarily and not optionally after compounds of पुष्उ with कपर मणि, विष and घर As, करपच्डी 'a peahen भाणपुच्छी, विषपुच्छी, 'a scorpion' and घरपुष्छी। 
Vårt: So also the feminine affix nish is necessarily employed after the words and gay when used as a simile or as objects of comparison. As उलूकपक्षी सेना, उलूकपच्छी पाला ॥ 
नकोडादियद्वचः॥५६॥ पदानि । न, क्रोड-आदि-यहु-अचः, (खियां डीए)। वृत्तिः ॥ क्रोरायन्ता बहमन्ताच मातिपदिकात् स्त्रियांनी प्रत्ययो न भवति । 
56. The feminine affix te does not come after a Nominal-stem which denoting a part of the body, belongs to the class क्रोडा 'the flank &c, of a horse', nor when the word is a stem of more than two syllables. 
The class at &cis akriti-gana, that is a class of words constituted by usage. The following are some of the examples:-As कल्याणकोडा, कल्याण 
• खुरा, कल्याणोखा, कल्याणपाला, कल्याणएफा, कल्याणगुता, कल्याणपाणा | So also सुभगा, PIIM, &c. Of the case where the word is polysyllabic, the examples aro सपना, प्रयजपना, महाललाटा, ॥ The word कोडr is feminine itself, and in the Bahuvri hi the feminine sign of the first member is elided by pungvad-bhava, and ATET is shortened to its because it is an upasarjana (1. 2. 48) 
BK IV. CH. 1. 3.60 ] 
नी 
॥ 
639 
सहनम् विद्यमानपूर्वाध ॥१७॥ पदानि । सह-नम-विद्यमान-पूर्वाद, च, (खि यां डीएन). निः ॥ सह मम् विद्यमानइत्येवं पूर्वान् मातिपदिकाल स्त्रियां ही मस्ययो न भवति । 
57. The affix or does not come in the feminine after a Nominal-stem denoting a part of the body, when the word is subordinate in a compound, preceded by the word hy 'with', नज 'not', or विद्यमान ' having'. 
Thus सकेगा, भकेगा विद्यमानकेशा ॥ So also. सनासिका मनासिका or वियमान मासिका। The last example shows, that the present rulegoverns also IV. 1.55 ante: as well as IV. 1. 54 
नलमुखात्संायाम् ॥ ५८॥ पदानि नख-मुखात, संशयां, (स्त्रियां कीपन)। वृत्तिः ॥ नखमखान्तामातिपदिकारसंज्ञायां खियां विषये ही प्रत्ययो भवति। 
58. The feminine affix ang is not employed after नख, and मुख, when (the word at the end of which they stand) is a Name. 
Thus पूर्व + मखा, पूर्पणखा, Surpanakha the sister of Ravana'. The - is changed into by VIII.43 (पूर्वपदात् संज्ञायामगः) ISo also वजणखा, गोरमुला. कालमुखा &c. Why do we say 'when denoting a Name? Witness वाममुखी कन्या 'a copper-faced damsel', or चन्द्रमुखी 'moon-faced' . 
दीर्घजिसी च छन्दसि ॥ ५९॥ पदानि । दीर्घजिद्दी, च, छन्दसि। वृत्तिः ॥ दीर्घजिदी इति छन्दसिविपये निपात्यदे.. 
59. The form ifrilut 'long-tongued' is irregul arly formed in the Chhandas... 
The word freirat is the feminine of fruity but as the latter has a conjunct consonant for its penultimate, the feminine affix at would not have applied to it by IV. 1.54. The present aphorism enjoins ए. Thus हर्षिनीही in the sentence दीर्घजीही वे देवानां हस्यमले। 
The word 'and' in the aphorism is used in order to draw in the word dit from the last, so that the word dirgha-jthof is always a Name.. Moreover by using the femininc form dirgha-jihvt in the satra, it is indicated that the application of it is necessary and not optional, as was the case in the last sūtras. 
दिक्पूर्वपदान डीए ॥ ६॥ पदानि । दिक्-पूर्वपदात, डीए, (त्रियां). . वृत्तिः ॥ दिक् पूर्वपदालातिपरिकान डीप, प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
60. The feminine affix to comes after a Nominal stem which is preceded by a word signifying direction.. 
640 
HEN 
[ BK. IV. CH. I. $. 62 
... This aphorism over-rules all the rules and prohibitions contained in sätras 54 to 58. Whereever by those rules there would have been hig, the present enjoins q instead. Though the form will be the same, the differ. ence will be in the accent ; the affix to being anudatta (III. 1. 4) Thus steuet or rester, Fant or giraat, But not so in argento; or art or ATTETIT because these words do not take it g (by IV. I. 56), therefore they never give occasion to the application of algu The sätra ought to be read as if it contained two rules (1) the affix me comes after a compound the first member of which is a word denoting direction and the second is a svanga word or is the word 116T &c. the penultimate not being a conjunct consonant, (2) but are is not added to Compounds ending in a &c. or in a word of more than two syllables. In other words the sđtra may be translated Sa is the substitute of T when the first member is a word denoting direc tion". Therefore the affix it will come only there, where else. the affix at would have come and not otherwise. This is the reason why the anuvritti of ot is taken in the next sätra (IV. 1. 61) and not that of titul . 
916: 11 € eta I 16:,( 399 ferai) A: ll Temaremaaienia fani yeye raft 11 
61. The feminine affix at comes after a Nominal stem ending with the word पाह। 
The anuvritti of g is to be taken in this aphorism and not that of 19, though the latter was nearer. The word om is forined from the root 41 with the affix fore(III. 2. 64). The word ng is never found alone, but as ends of compounds, hence we apply the rule of ladanta, and have translated it by saying a "word ending in vah." Thus feruiisit 'sustaining the demon. This form is thus evolved :-PC + ATE + 7 - foren+E+HITE+19 (VI. 4. 1324157, Uth is the samprasarana of vah, when this is a bha)-feta + +49 (VI. 1. 108) No ' after a samprasarana if a vowel follow, the form of the prior is the single substitute'),=fararet (VI. 1. 89 Fer 'vriddhi is the single substitute when eti, edhati or oth follow'). Similarly 98757 'a young heifer train. ing for the plough' 
Feuigratia #Terima 182 # ana i Fatapereat, fa, HITIU इत्तिः ॥ खसी भशिश्वी इत्येतोयब्दी कीषन्ती भाषायां निपात्यते॥ 
62. The forms Fat and strat are irregular forms ending in 574 found in secular (or vernacular as opposed to (Vedic) Sanskrit. . 
Thus सखीय में ब्राह्मणी, and मास्याः शिरस्तीति भधिश्ची ॥ Why do we say 
BK. IV.CH. I. 5.64] . 
सी। 
641 
in vernacular Sanskrit ? Observe as a team and mfugra grande fogaritage म्यवे॥ 
Sometimes we find these forms in the Vedas also, though rarely, as भाधेनको धुनयन्तामशिश्वी ।। सखी सापरी भव। ___ जातेरस्त्री विषयादयोपधात् ॥ १३॥ पदानि । जाते, अस्त्रीविषयात, भयोप 
धात, (स्त्रियां डीए) वृभिः॥ मातिवापि ययातिपदिक नच जियामेव नियवमन्त्री विषयमयकारोपपंच तस्मान् मियां कीर प्रत्ययो भवति । 
पातिकम् ।। योपधप्रतिषेधे हय गवय मुकय मत्स्यमनष्याणाम् प्रतिषेध। 
63. The feminine affix it comes after a word denoting a jâti or species when it does not express in its original meaning a feminine, and which moreover has not the letter y for its penultimate. 
. The word जाति was defined under Satra I. 2.52. Thus कुस्कुरी 'a hen'; सूकरी 'a she-hog', माहाणी 'Brahmani'; पली 'a woman of the Sadra caste', नारायनी 'a woman of Nadayana class', पारायणी 'a Charayant', कटी 'a woman of Brahmans who read the Katha', पहाची 'a woman of the class of Brahmans who read the Rig Veda'. 
Why do we say "expressive of a jati"? Observe most 'shaven' ( where the word expresses not a jati but a quality). Why do we say "not invariably feminine"? Witness ABATT 'a fly' (supposed to breed without a male). Why do we say "not having the letter y for its penultimate 7" Witness from a female of the Kshatriya class'. 
Vårt: In excluding words that have the letter & as penult mate, there is not involved th: exclusion of the following words which have a penultimate ) viz, गवय 'the Bos Gaveans.', इय 'horse', मुकय 'a sort of ani mal', मत्स्य 'a fish', and मनुष्य 'a man'. Thus गवयी, हयी, मनुषी, (VI. 4. 150 हलस्तदि are there is elision of the u of a taddhita affix coming after a consonant when longt follows') मस्सी ॥ Thes of matsya is elided by the vartika 'मस्वस्थ Erg' See also VI. 4. 149. All these words are also included in the class truf (IV. I. 41.) and would have taken जीए independently of this vartika. 
Another definition of jati is : 
मावर्भावविनाशाभ्यां सत्यस्य युगपदाणेः। 
असर्वलिंगांबढ़यों मां जातं कायो विदुः॥ (Sce translation under I. 2. 529 ..पाककर्णपर्णपुष्पफलमूलवालोत्तरपदाच ॥ ६४॥ पदानि पाक-कर्ण-पर्ण-पुष्प फल-मूल-चाल-उत्तरपदात, च (स्त्रियां की)। 
वृत्तिः ॥ पाकादि उत्तरपवाज्जातिवाधिनःप्रातिपदिकात् धियां डीए प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ पुपफलमलोत्तर दात न यतोनेप्यते सरजादिषु पन्यते ॥ यया सपाक्काण्डमान्तशतकेभ्यः पुष्पात् ॥ . 
642 
[ Bk. IV. CH 1. 9.66 
intu fona: FTAT TARTN 
64. And the feminine affix to comes after the Nominal-stem expressive of jâti, followed by the following, 47% 
cooked', 4. of ear', qof leaf', ça 'flower', i fruit', nes 'root', and aro 'youth'. 
Here the affix applies to words which in their original sense denoted females and thereforc were not provided by the last satra. Thus rent धंकी , धालपर्णी, घंखपुष्पी, दासीफली वर्भमली, and गोवाली। 
When, however the affix te is not intended to be applied to com pounds ending with first, and is, then thosc compouds will fall under Ajadi class (IV. 1. 4) ; such as $477, , MT, &c. 
इतो मनुष्यजातेः॥६५॥ पदानि । इतः, मनुष्य-जातेः, (स्त्रियांसी) निः॥ इकारान्तावातिपदिकान्मनुष्यजातिवाधिनः खियां नीए प्रत्ययो भवति । पातिकम् ॥म उपसंख्यानमसात्वर्थन् । 
65. The feminine affix to comes after a Nominal. stem ending in short y denoting classes or races of men. 
Thus *****t 'women of Avanti', t 'women of Kunti, mit Da kshi'. Thur mafia S (IV. 1. 171) A: 'men of Avanti'. In th minine this affix by IV. 1. 176 is elided. reft "the female descendants of Plaksha". Why do we say "ending in short "? Witness for Vaishya', my 'Darat'. Why do we say "of men"? Witness Fait: 'partridge'. Though the anuvritti of the word wat could have been read into this aphorism from IV. 1, 63, its repetition here indicates that ac is to be applied even when the penultimate letter is a Thus m aat 11 
Vårt:--This rule applies to words ending in the taddhita affix (IV. 2. 80 ) though they do not denote a jati Thus admit, Arafata The affix g here referred to is the quadruply significant affix taught in IV. 2. 80° and ordained to come after gar &c, and does not denote a jati 
67: EE N ETn55, ya:, (ACTara: fera) # निः ।। उकारान्ताम्मनुष्यजातिवाधिनः प्रातिपदिकान खियामूर प्रत्ययो भवति॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ अप्राणिजातेधारवादीनामिति बतष्यम् ॥ 
66. After a Nominal-stem ending in short , not having the letter s as its penultimate letter, and being ex-. pressive of races of men, the affix in the feminine is 0. 
The anuvritti of the words gana and Mutaw shculd be read into the satra to complete it. Thus a: a female of the country of the Kurus' NATA: "a Brahmani of the class of the fallen Brahmans so called", fra: "a woman of the Jivabandhu class”. . . BK. IV. Ch. I. 8 68. ) 
* 
643 
Thus it - IV. 1. 172, and this affix is elided by IV. 5. 176 in the feminine 
The indicatory letter in T is to distinguish this affix in Sotras like STT TET: (VI. i 175), for had the affix been enunciated merely as . then the Sotra VI. 1.175 would have run as A TET: and the sense would have been ambiguous, for we could not have known what affix was particularly meant there 
The long 5 is taught to debar the affixe, for a short I would have also given the form ($+7=7*) u The long 5 therefore, indicates that the affix , enjoined by V. 4 i 54, in Bahuvrihis, will not apply in the feminine forms HUTTU: and the like, by the rule of vipratishedha. 
Why do we say "not having the letter as its penultimate* ? Wit ness purgareput 'a woman of the class of Brahmanas versed in the Yajur Veda'. 
Vårt:The affix *. comes under similar conditions after words denoting non-animate jati, except the words &c. Thus MTS: ''the bottie gourd'; : 'the jujube tree.' Why do we say "non-animate"? Witness 
'a kind of lizard.' Why do we say "except the word rajju &c** Witness (T: 'rope': 'check' &c 
• STEFATHITTA U EU I EN I E-Bato, Firma, (faut 55 ) पनि ॥बाहुण्यान्ता प्रातिपदिकाल्संज्ञायां विषये बियामूर प्रत्ययो भवति । 
67. The feminine affix 50 comes in denoting a Name, after a Nominal-stem ending with the word erg # 
Thus IT!: 'Bhadrabahd'; Mr. &c. Why do we say in "ex pressing a Name"? Observe gorete: 'a woman having rounded hand' which is an attributive word. In other words, when the compound is a name, it takes long in the feminine. 
$* $ Tanat a quiti, , (faret 56) इतिः ॥ पंगुधनात् बियामूदप्रत्ययो भरदि। बार्तिकम् ॥ चतुरस्योकाराकारलोपममयः। 
68. The feminine affix 57 comes after the word IT ‘lame'. 
As 'a female lame'. 
Vårt:-The feminine affix fe is added to none, and thereby there is elision of the letter t and of the letter of the word. As : 'mother-in law' This debars the punyoga tc of IV. L. 48 
644 
[ BK. IV. CHI.S2 
उरुत्तरपदादीपम्ये ॥ १९॥ पदानि । ऊर-उत्तरपदात, भौपम्ये। इत्तिः ॥जरूरपरावातिपदिकारीपगम्यमाने चिवारमयो भवति। 
69. The feminine affix 76 comes after a stem end ing in 50 when comparison with something (expressed by the first term) is meant. 
Thus R TK: 'a female with thighs like plantain-stem'. TRT ATEIT: 'a female with thighs like the nose of an elephant'; risa y female with thighs like the ulnar or tapering fleshy side of the hand'. 
Why do we say “when expressing an object of comparison? Wit ness वृत्तोरूः स्त्री'a woman with round thighs. The word करेशकरोड "thigh like the proboscis (कर)of an elephant (कोण) isa poetic irregularity in the following विषकर प करेणुकरोमि। 
सहितशफलक्षणवामादश्च ॥ ७॥ पदानि । सहित, शफ, लक्षण, घामादेच। पतिः ॥ सहित फ लक्षण वाम इत्येवमादेः प्रातिपदिकाकगरपदान बियामूद मत्ययो भवति । वार्चिकम् ।। सहितबहान् चात पसर॥ 
70 The feminine affix he comes in the Vedas after the word ऊरु when the words सहित 'accompanied or joined', शफ . 'a hoof', लक्षण 'a mark,' and घाम 'handsome' precede it. 
This aphorism applies, when no comparison is intended. As far a female whose thighs are joined (eg. from obesity)' o r 'whose th are put together like the two hoofs on a cow's foot,' payuran: 'whose thighs are marked,' I 'with handsome thighs.' 
____Vart:-So also with the words सहित and सह. As साहितोक: and सहोकः। 
कद्रुकमण्डल्वोश्छन्दसि ॥ ७१. पदानि कनु, कमण्डल्वोः, छन्दास। वृत्तिः ।। कपदास्कमण्डलुशवाप छन्दसि विषये नियामूदप्रत्ययो भवति । वार्चिकम् ।। गुग्गलुमधुमनुपतथालूनामिति वनप्यम् ॥ 
71. The feminine affix 55 comes in the Vedas after the words कट्ट 'tawny,' and कमण्डलु 'a water pot.' 
Thus कम सुपर्णीमानकमण्डल पदावरचात् । 
Why do we say " in the Vedas" Witness कई and कमण्डलुः। 
Vart:-So also after the words गुग्गल मा, बतु and पसयालः॥ Thus गागला, मषः, अनू:, and पतवाल:।। 
संज्ञायाम् ॥ ७२॥ पदानि । संक्षायाम् । वृतिः॥ कदकमण्डलुपदाभ्यां संज्ञायां विपये नियामूह प्रत्ययो भवति। भच्छन्दो वचनन् । 
72. The feminine affix 55 comes in denoting a Name, after the word कg and कमण्डल, 
BR. IV. CH. I. $73) 
an 
645 
This rule applies to other than Vedic forms. Thus : 'a semnale named Kadrd wife of Kasyapa', i 'Kamaqdalo'. Why do we say "ja denoting a Name"? Observe : 'the tawny color.' *77*: 'a water-gourd' 
शाईरवायोडीन् ॥ ३॥ पदानि । शारवादि, अबीन् । इतिः । पारिवारि-योगमन्वेश्वष प्रातिपरिवासियां जीन पत्ययो भवति । 
73. The feminine affix it comes after the words mera and the rest, and that which ends with the affix ! 
Thus it a Sarngrava woman', met 'a Kapatava woman'. So also after a word formed with the affix per (as ordained in S. 86, and 104 &c. of this chapter), as, 'n female descendant of Bida'. Araf a female des. cendant of Urva'. This sätra applies to words expressing jati or kind. In other words, this aphorism debars the affix fg of IV. 1. 63 &c. where it came after jati-vachaka words; but it does not debar that which is employed in describing the relation of wife, such as, the fire of IV, 1. 48 
The difference between # and the consists in accent only, the resultant forms otherwise being the same. The words formed by will have událta accent on the first syllable fautrition (VI. 1. 197 a word end. ing with an affix having an indicatory For has udatta accent on the first syllable') : while the word formed by 4 will have acute accent on the affix Thus * . a female descendant of Bida', and 'the wife of Baida'. 
The following is a list of Sarngaravadi class words: 
I art, 27960, 3 rum, 4 764, 55, 6 # These words are formed by the affix to the first four being formed by the past of ( IV. 1. 83 ) from jगक, कपड, गग्गल and मान्; the word गोतम is formed from गोतम by the wory of IV. 1. 114 This word is also included in Gauradi class IV. 1.41. 
T1084, 8 H16 , 9 mifa, 10 WITHU, 11 muthya These are formed by 
IV. 1, 123) except kamandaleya which is formed by 1 (IV. 1. 135) 12 T ra, 13 a N These are formed by of IV. I. 101 and IV. 1.99. and denote castes or Gotra. 14 hora is also formed by (IV. 1. 123) 15 16 or are formed by E (IV. 1. 171). 17 , 18 gift are formed by added to T+ 'to try', and 9fe + HT+ (Uņ IV. 117 6 YIT 19 pou is for. med by T (IV. 1. 10520 Arra is formed by T (IV. 3. 76). 21 uur, 22 
ETA, 23 tipos: arc jati words. 24 wira, 25 
These take it when denoting a Name. These words are formed by the affix ren, and are conse 
quently TTC, and should have taken HT (IV. 1. 6). This ordains fico 
Q. The word att is formed by and it is formed by (IV. 1. 95), both are adyuddatta owing to . (VI. 1. 197) When Text is added, the accent remains unchanged, for matup being part is anudatta (I11. 1. 4) There 
646 
HH 
(BK. IV. Cu. I. . 74 
fore whether it be added or star to these words, it makes no difference in the accent, for they remain adyudatta. Where is the necessity of including these two words in this list. 
Ans. To this we reply meg frem foreta u For had these words taken tq of IV. 1. 6, then the long f would have been optionally shortened before the affixes T &c. by . VI. 3. 45. But by taking at the shortening is compulsory (VI. 3. 43), and not optional. Because they in the sætra of (VI. 3. 45) has the force of the word , and means the art words formed by adding f to a words, by enunciating the word afeta are optionally shortened. Therefore IV. 1. 6 where the word oft is used is governed by this rule of optional shortening, and not the words formed by TEN 
26 7 27 . The word ę would have taken to by IV. 1. s, and op would have taken ate as it denotes, a jati. These words take vriddhi before #ta, the form being art in both cases. 
यश्चाए॥ ७४॥ पदानि ॥ यः, चाए। वृतिः ॥ यहन्तामातिपदिकात् खियां पाप् प्रत्ययो भवति । म्यः यस्य सामान्यमहणमेतत् ॥ mfano 19 :11 
74. The feminine affix erg coms after a stem which is formed by the affix ser or will . 
The affix here denotes and includes both the affixes Terre (as taught in S. 171 of this chapter) and 6 (See 78) as it is the common element of both. Thus tillar'woman of the race of Ambashțhya', tratat 'a woman of the race of Sauvirya', Arrar'a woman of the race of Kausalya'. 
Similarly व्यर formed words, as, कारीषगन्ध्या, वाराया बालाक्या। 
Vårt:-The affix it comes in the feminine after a word ending with the affix at when the letter immediately precedes such yas. As wat 'a female descendant of Sarkarāksha', and to a female descendant of Patima shya', frank a female descendant of Gokasha'. These words belong to Gargadi class (IV. I, 105), and by sūtra 16 would have taken agu 
'The q of the affix an is for the sake of forming a common term ATC with gng and erg; and the regulates the accent making the final acute (VI. I. 163). The word dat is included in Kraudadi list (IV. 1. 80) and takes the augment or in the feminine, and hence it would have taken by force of the present sätra and need not be included in the Vartika. There is no Samprasarana of the a when go or Tra is added to this word (VI. 1. 13 ), the form being franary: and not thigT: # 
आवट्याच ॥ ७६ ॥ पदानि ॥ आवट्यात, च, (त्रियां चाए). gf || MTV ferqi argü N 
BK. IV. CH. I. 578.] 
TADDHITA-AFFIXES. 
647 
75. And the feminine affix any comes after the word 196 
The word nie belongs to Gargadi class (IV. 1. 105) which after taking चम्, would have taken Tी (IV. I. 16). Thus भावमा 'a female descendant of Avata'. But m ater will be the proper form according to the Eastern Grammarians. See aphorism IV. 1. 17. 
तद्धिताः ॥७६॥ पदानि ॥ तदिताः। वृत्तिः ॥ भधिकारोऽयम् । भापम्पमाप्यायपरिसमाप्नोनित कीमनुक्रमिप्यामस्तद्धितसंज्ञाले वेदितम्बाः। 
76. The Taddhita-affixes are treated of here after. 
This is an adhikara or govering satra. Up to the end of the Fifth Book, all the affixes that will be taught, are to be understood to have the name of Taddhita. Thus the affix fo taught in the very next sdtra. As घुवतिः The word so formed is called Pratipadika.. The word तद्धिता: is in the 
I number, and not exhibited in the singular, like the words पत्यका (III. I. 1) &c; and it, therefore, indicates that it includes also affixes which are not especially taught in this book. Such as पृथिबमामो॥ भमावि पधार डिम ॥ As पाधिव, भमिम, भारिम, पभिम ॥ See Vart IV. 3.23. The word Taddhita is used in Satras like करितसमासान I..2.46 
यूनस्तिः ॥७७॥ पदानि । यूनः, ति. अधिः ॥ युवन्यात्मातिपरिकात् बियां निःप्रत्ययो भवति । स च सद्धिसतो भवति । 
77. The feminine affix far comes after the Nominal stem yat and this affix gets the name of Taddbita. 
As a young maid'. By IV. 1. 5, at would have been other wise employed, the present satra debars it The word gara ending in p does not take the affix of IV. 1. 65, for the affix for itself is a feminine-making affix though a Taddhita: or the word gte may be regarded as a non-jati word and hence IV. 1. 65 would not apply. __ अणिोरनार्षयोर्गुरुपोत्तमयोः प्य गोत्रे ॥ ७८॥ पदानि । भए इमो. अना र्षयोः, गुरूपोत्तमयोः, व्यङ, गोत्रे 
पतिः ॥ गोरे यावणिमी विहितावनापों तरन्तयोःप्रातिपदिकयोकपोचमयोः बियां प्यादेपो भवति । निर्दिश्यमानस्यादेशा भवन्तीत्यणिमोरष विज्ञायते ॥ उसमयमा स्वभावात् विमभतीनामन्यक्षरमाह रचमस्य समीपमुपोधर्म, गुरुः पोचमं यस्य सद्गुरूपोसम प्रातिपदिकम् ।। 
78. In Patronymics used in a narrower sense (counting first from the grand-child), which are formed with the affixes que and rst, the feminine is formed by substituting 
648 
(BK. IV. CH. I. $79. 
() for the mand of those affixes and adding the long a under IV. 1. 74; provided that they do not denote Rishi clans, and have a prosodially long syllable preceding the last syllable, 
The wording of this aphorism requires a little analysis. It consists of five words: (1) of 'of mo and reg (2) rur: 'of non-rishi' (3) - gitaar 'having a heavy vowel as upoltama i. e. last but one,' (4) F 'the sub stitute is shyad' (5) 'in denoting gotra.' That is to say, the gotra affixes mo and are replaced by before the feminine affix 19, in those words which denoting non-rishi gotras, have a heavy vowel as last but one. The word uttama meaning last letter, being formed by the superlative affix tamap, implies that the word must be of at least three syllables. Therefore, the pre sent sätra does not apply to forms like me &c. 
of the substitute of the letter and are indicatory, the real affix is , the letter & differentiating this affix from me and the letter affording a common hold for both. In forming the feminine we shall have to add a by IV. 1.74 Thus atras having the smell of dung-cake', is the name of a person. In forming a patronymic from this word, we add the affix o N Thus ad + spor (IV.1.92) Replace this affix by and we have artigo 18 
as: gives us atau 11 Similarly with words taking the affix (as taught in satra भतहम् IV. 1.75): as वाराहि gives us वाराया, so also बालाया। 
Why do we say 'of my and all Witness TTTT from T UI Here the word Tommy belongs to fame gaña, and therefore by IV. 1. 104, it would take the affix in forming gotra patronymic: this affix * is not replaced by , and the feminine is by long f(IV. 1. 15); for though, its last vowel but one is heavy, it is a non-rishi gotra word, yet it does not fulfil the other condition of taking the affix भण् or म्॥ 
Why do we say 'of non-rishi gotras'? Witness mrest and that u Why do we say 'whose last vowel but one is heavy'? Observe miracoft and 
retu Why do we say 'denoting Gotra Witness mitt born in Ahi chhatra', maguf'born in Kanyakubja'. 
गोत्रावयवात् ॥७९॥ पदानि । गोत्र-अवयवात् (लियां प्य)। वृमि: । मणिमोरित्येव । गोधावया गोषाभिमतः कुलाख्याः पुणिकणिकमुखरपतव, स्ततो गोने दि. हितयोणिमोचियां यहादेपो भवति। 
79. After a word denoting a non-principal gotra, Here is the substitute of u and 4, in the feminine, even though the syllable preceding the final be not prosodially long. .. 
c 
BK. IV.CH. I.S81] 
649 
The phrase for of the last satra governs this also, not so, however, the word भगरूपोसमः। The phrase गोपावर means insignificant or non-famous gotras. i. e. names of kulas i. e. Pra, such as families like of the former which are not famous and are not included in the gotra list. Thus sirar भोणिक्या and मोलयां। 
The word out in the satra has various significations, one sense being "separate from', another being 'part of', and individual members' &c. If the last sense be taken, then we can evolve forms like वदस्या याज्ञवल्या These forms may also be explained by taking them as belonging to the area class of the next aphorism. In short, those who wish to apply this aphorism to "the immediate descendant', such as the son or daughter, and not to a gotra descendant, which means agrandson and down; can alsodosa 
In fact the word गोगावयब is equal toभववरगोग or भमषानगोष and isa karmadharaya samasa, namely gotras not cnumerated in the four # These are, however. technically called कुत. . 
कौड्यादिभ्यश्च ८॥ पदानि क्रौडि-आदिभ्यः, च, (सिया प्यर) पतिः॥ कोरियेवमादिभ्यष चियां पर प्रत्ययो भवति । भगुरूपोतमार्थ मारमा राममणिपर्य। 
80. The affix er comes in the feminine after the words art and the rest. 
This rule applies even where the syllable next to the final is not heavy, and even where the word does not take the affix wo or In fact of is not a substitute here but an augment. Thus c .a female Kraudi लाडपा 'a female Ladi'. The following is the list of Kraudadi words: 
कोति, 2 लाख, प्यारि,4मापिपलि, भापक्षिति- These are formed by se (IV. 1.95 6चापयत, घयत (पेटयत) 8 सेकयत (कवत) 9ल्पयत (वकल्पमत) These are formed by the affix मर ॥ 10सोपातकि. This is formed by re with the substitute भकर (IV. 1.97) added to सधात् ॥ ॥ सतयुषल्याम् The word er takes व्यर when denoting agrown-up maiden as सत्या; otherwise मता'. daughter', formed by गए, or सती by जी denoting ajati. 12 भोरक्षपि. This debars of jati as भोज्याः , otherwise n as भीमाः (भोजयति), 13 योतकि, 14 काति, 15 भोरिकी, 16 भोलिकि 17 पाल्मलि, 18 पालास्थान, 19 कापिटलि, 20 गोकरम (गोल) All these except the last are formed by FF, the last is formed by ag of Garg. adi class. . देवयशि शौचिवृक्षि सात्यमुनि काण्ठेविधियो, न्यतरस्याम् ॥ १॥ पदानि । 
दैवयशि, शौचिवृक्षि, सात्यमुनि, काण्ठेवितिभ्यः, भन्यतरस्याम् । परितः ॥ देवयति घोषसि सात्यमामि काण्ठेविधि इत्येतेपामन्यतरस्याप्या प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
81. The affix optionally comes after the words देवयशि, शौचक्षि, सात्यमुनि and काण्ठेविति । 
650 
A RULE OF TADDHITA 
(BK. IV. CH. I. $ 82 
GUGS 
. These words end in the affix ry, and the word gotra is not understood. in the satra. In the case of gotra descendants, the substitute shya' would have come by IV. 1. 78. but whereas by that sätra it would have been com pulsory, the present aphorism makes it optional. But if the sotra be taken to apply to immediate descendants' as opposed to gotra descendants, then this is a new rule altogether and not a rider to IV. 1. 87. In the alternative when 
is not added, t will be added by rule IV. 1. 65 ante. Thus t re or $4t, so also on or offt, arugra or arengt, mosfat or off in 
समर्थानां प्रथमावा ॥ ८२॥ पदानि समर्थानां, प्रथमाव, वा दृस्तिः ॥ पवमप्यधिक्रियते, समर्यानामिति च, पयमादिति च तिच, स्वार्थिकात्ययावधिमायमधिकार। प्रागविधी विभक्तिरिति यावन् । स्थायिकेपुपस्योपयोगो नास्ति, विकल्पोपि समानवस्थितः केचिनियम व भवन्ति । लक्षणवाक्यानि:--वस्थापत्य, तेन र रागानमभव, रस्येवमादीनि भविष्यन्ति । तेषु सामों सति प्रथम निर्दिष्टादेव विकल्पेन प्रत्ययो भवतीति रितण्यम् ॥समानामिति निबारणे पठीसमर्थानां मध्ये प्रथम प्रत्ययप्रकृतिलेन निर्यिते॥ 
82. The Taddhita affixes, on the alternative of their being employed at all, come after the word that is signified by the first of the words in construction in an aphorism. 
All the three words, viz (1) a tat 'of the words in construction' (2) Tar 'after the first ; (3) 4T 'on the alternative', exert a governing in fluence on the subsequent aphorisms, up to the aphorisms which leave to the words their own denotation : that is to say, up to the end of the second chapter of the fifth Book ; before the beginning of the sätra T rot for fi (V. 3. 1). The present sätra as a whole, of course, has no applicabili the affixes which leave to the words their own denotation (Fra); for the latter affixes are in many cases compulsory and not optional, as are the affixes to be taught hereafter in Book Fourth and the first and second chapters of Book Fifth : These affixes will come after the word, that is signified by the first of the words in construction, in an aphorism. Thus IV. 1. 92 declares Val qeyru 'his son'. Here the first word is nou 'his', therefore, the affixes forming the patronymics will come after the word signified by 'his': i.e. after the word in the genitive case. A.'yrirgefir7** 'the son of Upagu'. Here the affix my comes after the word 4 which is the first word representing "tasya' in the genitive case in the sentence ayriye 11 Similarly in the sätra F TTT (IV. 2. 1); here the first word is m, therefore, the affix will be added to the word in the instrumental case in a sentence representing the word in by which'; as 9899 H TÉT 1974. 'Kashaya is a cloth, coloured 
BK.IV. CIŁ I. $.83 ) 
651 
dy Kashdya'. Similarly in sötra r *T: "there staying' (IV. 3. 53.) here the first word is , 'there', in the locative case, therefore the affix will be option ally added to the word in the locative case in a sentence, representing the word 'there': as to 4-hrr:"who stays in Srughna'. 
The word e r is the genitive plural of am, and the force of the genitive is that of specification or 'nirdharana':-. e. 'among the words in construction, the first is specifically pointed out as the prakriti or base, to which the affix is to be added. Why do we say "among the words in cog struction"? Witness 
set of the blanket of Upagu; the son of Devadatta'. Here the two words to are not in construction, for उपगी: governs कम्बल and भपय is governed by देवाचस्व Why do we say * after the first"? So that the affix may come after the first word geen in the genitive case, and not after 4 which is in the nominative case, Why do we say " in the alternative" ? Because the same idea may also be expresse cd by a sentence ; thus we may say tydnyed, instead of the Taddhita formed word orque: The same idea may also be expressed by a compound word (samasa); as Trier 'the son of Upagu'. In fact, the samasa rule here is not superseded by Taddhita-rule, as it otherwise would have been by 1.4 2. because the anuvritti of urteure is understood herc: so that in the alter native when the Taddhita affix is not employed, thc samasa rules will find scope 
This sätra has boen thus rendered by Dr. Bohtlingk: "when hence forth the meaning is specified in which an affix is to be added, then ong should know that the rule applics to the first of those words which are associated with onc another in sense, and that the affix is optional". 
प्रागदिव्यतोऽण् ॥ ३॥ पदानि । प्रान, दीव्यतः मण् । grea: il grafooria para 2017 Fingefasurarstregere alfa feceratan 
83. The aflix au should be understood to come after whatever we shall teach hercafter upto the aphorism tena divyati &c. 
Up to aphorism IV. 4. 2, thc affix ww has a governing influence, exccpt wherc it is specifically superscried by any particular rule. This aphorism may be looked upon either as an adhikara sätra or a paribhasha sätra or a vidhi sūtra. The application of this aphorism will be illustrated throughout the next three chapters. Thus in IV. 1. 92 mfattet wc read the present aphorism and add the affix spy in the sense of his son'. As styma: 'the son of TTi'; 19: 'the son of Kapatu. 
This affix has various meanings, such as, a patronymic (IV. 1. 92), 
6si 
. 
NYA 
. 
[BK. IV.CH. I. S.85 
coloured with (IV. 2. i) sidereal time (IV. 1. 3), revealed såma-veda (IV. i. 7), covered car (IV. 2 10) &c. 
अश्वपत्यादिभ्यश्च ॥ ४॥ पदानि ॥ अश्वपत्यादिभ्यः च । वृत्तिः भवपल्यादिभ्यः प्रातिपरिकन्या प्रारदीयतीयेप्चर्येवर प्रत्ययो भवति । 
84. The affix aque comes after the Nominal-stems : asvapatil &c, in the various mentioned senses taught antecel ently to tena diryati &c. 
This is an exception to the next aphorism, by which the affix on would have come after words ending with 'pati.' The present sotra cnjoins भण instead. Thus मपवि+मण्-भावपतम् (VII. 2 117 सरितलवामारे when a Taddhita affix follows with an indicatory or there is vriddhi in the room of the first rowel among the vowels) The of ra is clided by VI. 4. 148 Aria where long follows, and when a Taddhita affix follows, there is cli sion of ther ort, or wor भा, of abha'.) 
The following is a list of words belonging to your class : ___मक्षपनि, 2 ज्ञानपति, 3 आतपति, 4 धनपति, 5 गणपति, 6 स्यानपति, यज्ञपति, 8 गष्ट्रपति, 9 कुलपति, 10 गृहपति, (पशुपति) धान्यपति, 12 धन्वपति,13 बन्धुपति, 14 धर्मपति, 15 समापति, 16 प्राणपति, 17 शेषपति। 
दित्यदित्यादित्यपत्त्युत्तरपदापण्यः॥ ५॥ पदानि । दिति, अदिति, भादित्य, प ति-उत्तरपदान, ण्यः. वृत्तिः । दिति अशिति भादित्य इत्येतेभ्यः पयनरपराध प्रातिपरिकामागीयनीयम्वर्येषु यः प्रत्वको भवति। 
पातिकम् ॥ यमाति वनष्यम् ॥ चार्तिकम् ॥ वाड्मतिपितमतां छन्दस्यपसंख्यानम् ॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ चिण्या मानी ॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ देवायनमो॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ बहिषाष्टिपथ वार्तिकम् ॥ ईकष वाचिकम् ॥ईकर छन्दसि॥ वाचिकम् । स्थानोकार , वार्तिकम् ।। दोनोपस्येषुबह। पार्चिकम् ॥ सर्वत्र गोरजाशिप्रत्ययप्रसायन्। वार्चिकम् ॥ण्याश्योर्यविशेषलक्षणापासपूर्वविप्रतिषेधेन। 
85. The afnx ण्य comes, in the various. senses taught here-in-after antecedently to tena divyati &c, after the Proper Namncs, Diti, Aditi, and Aditya;, and that which has the word ofa at its final member. . Thus FTT +07 fra: 'the son of Diti.' : 'the descendant of Aditi', 
.a' sacred to Aditya.' Similarly with words ending with gra, as 48191 + न्य-प्रामापरवं; so also सेनापस्था . . . 
Tart:-So also after the word यम; as याम्या । 
Vårt:- In the Chhandas, after the words , na and An As tregi (Vs, 13,58.) मात्यम् and पतमत्वम्॥ BK. IV. CH. I. . 85] 
#.' 
. 
-653 
Vair:-The affixes q and no come after the word fuhu Thus fit + qura; fuit+8=4 TN The resulting forms are the same, but the feminine of the former will be in by IV. I. 4, and that of the latter 974 applying IV. 1. 15. 
Vårt :-The affixes app and are come after the word in 'a god'. As fogn or try 'divine'. 
. Vart :-There is elision of the R of thes, and there is the affix g; as if +47 external'. Fortrand the affix fas may be employed. As fes + 
'external'. (VII. 2. 118 Fifa 7, there is vsiddhi of the first vowel when the Taddhita affix has an indicatory ) Vertim in the Chhandas it takes the affix far as if the difference being in the accent (VI. 1. 197) 
The word per is an mera, and the above vårtika declares that its portion is elided. This very fact indicates by implication, that the R of other Aryayas need not necessarily be clided beforc those affixes, before which the basc is called » bha. In fact the following vårtika mums (thc R of the avpara base is elided) given under sútra VI. 4. 144 (the R of the base bha is clided when a tadahita affix follow's) is not a universal rule. Thus from the avraya mr we get Arut &c; here thc Ê is not clided. 
Vår! :-Of the word Riria the R is replaced by as TETAS # 
Vart:-Thc R of them is replaced hy in the plural when the patro nymic affixes follow ; as AT: TTT: H Why do we say in the plural number? Witness vilgnita:, ria: (IV. 1.99) 
l'art:-\Vhen an affix beginning with a vowel presents itself after the word m, let the affix 4 be substituted for it. Thus what is descended (or produced, &c) from n is expressed by resta (VI. 1. 79) Why do we say 
• beginning with a voirel'? Ovserre गाभ्यो हितं or भागतं- गोरुप्यम् and गोमयम् । 
Väri:-These affixes om &c, taught in this sätra will come to the exclusion of all the other affixes hereinafter taught, which are employed in : especial senses. Thus mu is employed especially to denotc a descendant. But after the words fera &c mo will not be employed, but 04, as "a descendant ofदिति: So also वानस्पत्यम् -(वनस्पतीनाम् समहः), to the exclusion of IV. 2. 37&c In fact the rule for fart ginton (I. 4. 2) does not hold good here 
If that be so, how do you explain the form tha: " This word is not directly formed from the word era but from feat, the feminine of the word fifo, formed by the affix H (IV. 1. 45, the word fara being formed by the Krit affis fan and therefore it will take it in the feminine). To the feminine word रिती is added उ and we get देतेयः ॥ The Paribhasha प्रातिपदिकमहणे लिए fefeftora (a rule of grammar which applies to a masculioc applies also 
634 
मम. 
[ BK. IV. CH I. 5.87 
to the same word in the feminine) is not of universal application, as this very illustration shows. Others consider the forma para as incorrect, as not to be found either in the Mahabhashya or any Vartika. 
उत्सादिश्योन ॥८६॥ उत्स-आदिभ्यः, भक्ष. तिः ॥ उत्सारिभ्या प्रारदीव्यतीयेपर्यन्नर प्रत्ययो भपति । अणस्तरपवारानां च बाधकर . पातिकम् ॥ प्रामारच्छन्दसीति पनव्यम्। 
86. The affix अम् comes after the word उत्स &c. . in the various senses taught antecedently to tena-divyati &c. 
This debars the affix pop taught in IV. 1. 83 as well as the especial 'affixes here-in-after taught. Thus उत्स+भर-भीमा, भोपानः॥ The following 
is the list of words belonging to TET class, 
1 उत्स, 2 उदपान, 9 विकर, 4 विनर, 5 महानद 6 मदानस, 7 महामाण, 8 तरुण, 9 नल्न । 10 वष्कया। 1 पृथिवी, 12 धेनु, 13 पनि l जगती, 15 पिए, 16 अनुहम, 17 जनपद, 18 भरत, 19 उशीनर, 29 पीप्म, पीलकुष, । 22. उदस्थान देचे । 23 पृप संघ, 24 मलकीय, 25 स्यन्तर, 26 मध्यदिन, 28 इडन, 28 मदन, 29 सच्चन, 39कुर, 31 पम्पाल, 32 इन्द्रावसान, 33 उष्णिह, अककम, 35 सवर्ण, 35 देव, 37 मीमारच्छन्ाति । 
Vårt :--Thc word is in the above list, takes this affix, when it does not mean 'a metre of prosody'. Therefore it is not so here: पैनी पिप्पू' The Graishmi Tristup metre'. But णः 'belonging to summer'. The word अन्दर here means 'metre', and not Veda. The word nursery mô, the phrase असे meaning भखमाखे, (स being the name given toसमास by Ancient Gram marians), Thus the compound will be गोवकयिः॥ The Paribhasha महणवता मातिपस्किन तबन्त विधिप्रतिषेधा does not apply here. Therefore, tadantavidhi ap plies here and we havc माधनवम् (अन्नाम् समूह). The word उदस्थान takes मम when meaning a 'place': as referait u; otherwise btrary at the son of Udasthana' The word qe takes or when moaning 'a share,' otherwise it will take my, as atsu: 
स्त्री पुंसाभ्यां नम्बी भवनात् । ८७॥ इतिः ॥ धान्यानां भवने इति वस्यति । तस्य प्रागिस्यनेनैव संवन्धः प्राग्भवनसंघदनाास्तष बी. हासुबाष यथाक्रम नरममा प्रत्ययो भवतः 
87. The affixes ts and my come after the words ait and ge respectivoly, in the senses specified in tho apho rism reckoning from this one-as far as “dhânyanam bhavanc kshetre khan" (V.2. 1). 
Thus at +8= won' feminine.' The sense of the affixes taught in the Fourth Book, and Chapter ! of the Fifth Book, are various. Therefore 
BK. IV. CH. 1. 8. 88 ) 
LUX IN DVIGU 
. 
655 
the word drop will have all those various significations ; thus, it will mean cither sitgart (IV. 3. 53) 'existing in females,' or oturi FT: (IV. 2. 37) 'a collec tion of females; or ayam (IV. 3. 74) 'what has come from females'; or w foo (V. 1. 5) 'suitable for females' &c. 
Similarly i+q arg'masculine, or existing in males, or a collec tion of males, or what has come from males, or suitable for males &c . 
These affixes, however, are not to be employed in the sense of the affix y taught in V. 1 119. For Panini himself uses the form (and not 
ra) in søtra VI. j. 34, thus indicating by implication (FT*) that in the sense of the affix fg is not to be used. Thus , # The forms oftet, wat, je* and greet are exceptional. See V. 1. 121. The g of ge is elided before Arg by VIII. 2. 23. had it not been elided, one affix would have been taught in the sūtra, and not two. 
बिगोलंगनपत्ये॥८॥ पदानि । द्विगो:, रुक, मनपसे 'वृतिः। विगोर्वः संबन्धी निमित्तलेन तद्धितः मावीम्यनीयो सत्यप्रत्ययं वयित्वा तस्य सरभवति । 
88. A Taddhita affix, ordained to come ou account of the relation of the words being that of a Dvigu compound, is elided by luk, when it has the sonse of the various affixes taught antecedent to tena divyati &c, but not so, the affis having the sense of a Patronymic. . . 
The phrase frei of IV. 1, 83 governs this aphorism also, and not the phrase भवनात् of the last. Thus पज्यम कपालेषु संस्कृता पम्पकपाला 'pre pared in five cups.' Similarly ruhym "prepared in ten cups." for "he who studies two Vedas.' Raf: "who studies three Vedas." Here the affixes denoting rå (IV. 2. 16), and muta (IV. 2. 59) have been clided. Why do we say "not so when the affix denotes a Patronymic."? Observe the 'a descendant of two Devadattas. #: 'a descendant of three Devadattas, Here the patronymic affix is not elided, though the compound is a Dvigu. 
Why do we say "when it has the sense of the various affixes taught antecedent to tena divyati ? * Observc faraform: * 
Thc Dvigu compoond with the sense of a Taddhita affix is formed under 11. 1. 51. The affix will not, therefore, be elided where it does not give rise to a Dvigu compound. Thus पश्चकपालस्ये- पाञ्चकपाल॥ Or the genitive case in niti may be taken as sthana-shashthi, the sense being 'there is the substitution of pre-elision in the room of Dvigu,' the word Dvigu being hero taken by metonymy for the affix which gives rise to Dvigu. Of course, when two words have blended into a Dvigu compound, the affixes will not be elided 
656 
GOTRALUK-ELISION 
[BK. IV. CH. I. 589 
after such a word, because it becomes a prátipadika like others, as qiyrEN If so, how is the affix elided in T a 
s? This is not so ; there is no Taddhita added, and the word my can never be analysed into q54RKET, 1 If the latter sense is to be expressed, we must use a sentence, and no single word. In fact three are the only valid forms, and they arise without adding of any Taddhita affix to पञ्चकपाली, viz पञ्चस कपालेष dapati, T YRA difai, and prepari (a Samahara Dvigu). A Samahara and a Taddhitartha Dvigu of these are analysed in the same way, while the third पश्चकपाल्वाम् संस्कृवः will always remain a वाक्य and never give rise to a Taddhita . How do you explain the non-elision of the affix in ita:, 147 and पाकुला The word पियः does not mean तिखो पिय मधीते but यश्या विया, farea, Fofura = reg: 1 Similarly qua77: dose not mean $45 S HT: but ong : - 47, 474-1977 H So also with great 1 
Why the affix is not elided in पंप यो गाय मागत-पंचगर्गरूप्यम् or पंचगर्ग 24? Bacause the elision of those affixes only take place which begin with a vowel. 
गोत्रेऽलगचि ८९॥ पदानि ॥ गोत्रे, भलक, भचि। वृतिः ॥ यस्कादिभ्यो.गोवत्यादिना येषां गोषप्रत्ययानां मुगुक्तस्तेपामारी पार दीप्यतीवे विषयभूने प्रतिपिते। 
89. The luk-clision of Patronymic.(Gotra) affixes in the plural, which have been enjoined by Sutras II. 4. 63 and the rest, is prohibited, when the affix has an initial vowel, and it has the sense of the various affixes taught antecedent to tena divyati &c (IV. 4. 2). . 
Thus the plural of mi is a: (II. 4. 64). But the disciples of ra will be formed by the affix o(IV. 21. 114) which is a pragdivyatlya affix. and for the purposes of adding this affix the base will be considered to be pret: as if there was no clision. Thus pet: +3= ffur: (VII. 1. 2 and VI.'4. 151), and not that I Similarly eraetter, n a , gryrefter: disciples of Vatsyas, Atreyas, Kharpayaņas.' '. . . Why do we say "hte "i. e. "when the Gotra affix is elided"? Observe 
NA, T N Here the affix denoting "fruit" is elided by mi by Satra IV. 3. 163. Then when the pragdivytlya affix sport is addel, the luk-elision is maintained. Thus thc fruit of mind is an; from which are belonging to or coming from the jujube-fruit.' 
Why do we say " having an initial vowel”? Observe offraz (*194= गर्गरूप्यम् and not गार्गरूप्यम; and गर्गमयम्; and not गार्गमयम् ॥ Here the affix रूप्य, 
vals 
. 
Bx LY.CH. 1. 8: 90'] 
YUVAN-ELISION. 
657 
a pragdivyatlya affix taught in sätra IV. 3. 81 does not begin with a vowel; therefore it is added to not and not more Similarly the next affix TK.(IV. 3. 82) : 
Why do we say “ when it has the sense of a praydivyatlya affix* ? Thus it for poffan who is fit for the Gargas'. Here the affix (V. 1. 1) has the sense of suitable for that', as taught in Sätra V. I. 5 not one of the prägdivyatiya senses. Hence the luk clision is inaintained. 
The Gotra-affixes are taught to be clided in the plural only: and when after such supposed elision a Singular or Dual Person is intended, this rule will still apply and there will be no elision. Thus fire will form its Gotra derivative by (IV. 1. 104) as fort+WHITN The plural of T will be Pret: by the clision of a One yuvan or two yuvan descendants of these fort: will be formed by the affix (IV. 1. 95), for the application of which the word for will be supposed not to have lost its , therefore e will be added to it, thus TT+rn; then this is elided by II. 4. 58 The resultan: form is t, 10 The many descendants (in the plural) of one or two बेद will be विसः। 
qfar 11800 watia nigra (afer) निः॥ प्राग्वीभ्यत इति वर्तते । मचीति च । प्रागदीभ्यतीयेऽभावी प्रत्यवे विवक्षित पुद्धिस्येनत्पन्ते एक युवप्रत्ययस्य लग् भवति। तस्मिन्निवृत्ते सति यो यतः पामोति स ततो भवति । ....... 90. There is luk elision of the Yuvan Patronymic 
forming affix (IV. 1. 163) when a prâgdivyatiya affix begin ing with a vowel is to be added. 
The elision of the Yuvan affix must take place mentally; having done which, we should therr look out for the proper Pragdivyatiya affix to be added to the word-form thus remaining. Thus the Patronymic (Gotra) of €16 is TETET (IV. 1.95) formed by adding # The Yuvan form of the latter (by Sätra IV. 1. 150) will be 470T: I When we intend to add a Pragdivya. tiya affix to this last word, (c. g. an affix having the scnse of "the pupils of" ;) we should first mentally elide the Yuvan affix or (IV. 1. 150) from this word fueron I Having donc which we get the form *Tetafa; and it is with regard to this form 4ractafa that we should search out what is the proper pupil-denot ing affix: and that by sätra IV. 2. 112 is all Thus fuerafa + 4y = 4Teraar 'the pupils of Phânțahfitas'. Had we in the first instance applied the pupil denoting affix to the Yuvan word mean, such affix would have been s and not mo, for the latter is ordained for thosc cases only where the word onds with the Gotra affix (IV. 2. 112) . . . 
Similarly the l'atronymic of Toft is rif* (IV. 1. 25). The 
658 
YUVAN-ELISION. 
. 
(BK. IV. CH. 1.g. 92 
Yuvan of A rt is for (IV. 1. 148). The pupils of Bhagavittika will be riff: by adding the affix mo(IV. 2. 112) 
Similarly the Patronymic of farar is bare formed by (IV. 1. 154) The Yuvan or art is tarta formed by the affix (IV. 1. 149) The word denoting the pupils of irradia will be formed by adding 5 (IV. 2. 114) not to this word, but to run. Thus tantra 
Similarly the Patronymic of IT is afsifa (IV. 1. 95) The Yuvan derivative of the latter will be 9410; (IV. I. 151). The word denoting pupils of the #119a will be a ssIT: (IV. 2. 112) 
Similarly Patronymic from Here is a : (IV. 1. 160), the Yuvan af the latter is strong (IV. 1. 83); the word denoting the pupils of the latter is : by (IV. 2. 112 formed from IFT) # Why do we say " an affix beginning with a vowel"? Observe free rnd foethu Why do we say " a Pragdivyatiya affix"? Observe arrara par a situa* (See the last Satra) 
फफिमोरन्यतरस्याम् ॥ ११॥ पदानि । फफ-फियो, मन्यतरस्याम् । इतिः। फिमोर्यवप्रत्ययो माग्दीप्यतीयेऽमा प्रत्यये विवक्षितेऽन्यतरस्या सम् भवति । 
91. There is optionally luk-elision of the Yuvan affixes and first when a Prigdivyatîya affix beginning with & vowel is to be added. 
By the last sätra, all Yuvan affixes vere told to be elided. The present sätra declares an option in the case of the Yuvan affixes and Run Thus the patronymic of Tot is more (IV. 1. 105); the Yuvan of me is formed by *(IV. 1. 101) mprega: # The word denoting the pupils of Gangyana will be first or Turtur; arte or unit: 1 Similarly of the affix f (IV. 1. 156). Thus from yra, the Patronymic is an (IV. 1. 112). The Yuvan of the latter is TFTUA (IV. 1. 146). The pupils of Yaskayani will be called arata or affirman: * 
तस्यापत्यम् ॥१२॥ पदानि । तस्य-अपत्यम्। निः॥ भनिचोय, पूर्वरुत्तर प्रत्ययाभिसंबद्यावे। तस्येति पाठीसमर्यादपत्येतस्मिन्न यथाविहितं - स्थयो भवति, प्रकृत्यो भवति प्रकृत्य/विशिष्टप्पार्थों उपत्यमारमेह गृह्यते । 
92. The affix au mcntioned in IV.1.83 and those which follow it denote 'the descendant of some one'. 
This sätra points out the meaning of the affixes; and it refers to the affixes that have preceded, beginning from me (IV. 1. 83) e. g. moy, 02, *? &c and to the affixes that follow. The affixes herein taught have the force of denoting descendant, when they arc added to the word in construction which 
BK. IV. CH. L$ 93. ) 
GOTRA-AFFIX 
. 
659 
is in the genitive case. The translation given by Dr. Ballantyne of this aphorism is :-"Let the affixes already mentioned or to be mentioned come optionally in the sense of the offspring thereof, after what word ending with the sixth case-afhx and having completed its junction (with whatever it may require to be compounded with), is in grammatical relation there to". 
Thus we may cither use the sentence eth; or by adding on (IV. 1.83) to the word 799 (which has the 6th case-affix in construction in the above sentence), form samn: "the offspring of Upagu". Area: (IV. 1. 84) the offspring of migra', faci (IV. 1. 85) 'the offspring of Diti' (IV. 1. 86) " the offspring of Utsa". Bror (IV. 1, 87) 'the offspring of a woman". FFT: (IV. 1. 87) 'the offspring of a man'. 
The Universal sätra C (IV. 3. 120) will include this may also for the word m may be applicd to any thing like onge, GT,fra, formen &c Since by that rule IV. 3. 120 9 &c, may be applied in the sense of apatyam also, what is the necessity of this present sätra ? The present sútra is made in order to debar those ashxes like J, (IV. 3. 114) which debar the affix * &c in the case of Thu How can an water affix debar a 47 affix? The met affixes try &c are treated like or for this purpose. Thus these affixes 94 (IV. 1. 83-87) debar the g in the Vriddham under certain circumstances. Thus भानोरपत्वं मानवः, so also भ्यामग: from श्यामाः ( 141 NITISH)N . 
Künid grefeuert mit 
उत्सर्गःप एवासी बद्धान्यस्व प्रयोजनमा एको गोत्र ॥९॥ वृत्तिः ॥ अपरये पौत्रप्रभृति गोष, मस्मिन् विवक्षित भेटेन प्रत्यपत्यं प्रत्ययोलचिपस निवमः क्रियते। गो. og fa, atsteua ya u 
93. The one and the same affix is employed when a morc distant descendant, how low so-ever, is to be denoted. 
The word Gotra is defined in Sutra IV. 1. 152 and means the offspring beginning with the grandson. There would have arisen the application of a separatc afix in denoting the descendant of every one of such persons; the present sutra declares a restriction. Thus the son of th: is f (IV. 1.95) The son of ITT: (or in other words the grandson of mi) is a: (IV. 1. 105) This is forired by a Gotra asfix. Now the son of a will also be called má, no ne: asfix will be added. In fact, in denoting the Gotra descendants how low socver, the affix us will be added to the word Ti, though there may be screral intermediate descendants. Thus the sâtra restricts the application of the affix. Or in another view or the matter, it may be said to restrict the 
660 
PATRONYMIC IN 
[ BK. IV. CH. 1. $ 95 
base to which the affix is to be added. Thus the son of und will be formed by adding the alix not to the base pod (which would have been the case were IV. 1. 92 strictly applied), but to the base of u So that one base is to be taken and adhered to throughout, in applying Gotra affixes. 
गोत्रायन्यस्त्रियाम् ॥ ९४ पदानि गोत्रात, यनि, भलियाम्। वृत्तिः॥ मयमपि नियमः यून्यपत्ये विवक्षित गोगादेव प्रत्ययो भवति, म परमप्रकल्यमन्तरयुषः । 
94. When a descendant of the description deuot ed by Yuvan (IV. 1. 163) is intended to be expressed, a new affix is attached, only after what already ends with an affix marking a descendant as low at least as a grandson (gotra) : but in the Feminine the word is not termed Yuvan, and no new affix is added. 
This is also a niyama or restrictive rule. Thus the Yuvan of prof is ququr: (IV. 1. 101). Similarly amarguti, turgor, Thrauri, stoti, arrafas: 
Why do we say " but in the Feminine the word is not termed Yuvan"? Observe mit which is the feminine of #: (Gotra) as well as of Thru: (Yu van) Similarly mft feminine of : and 44: In short, Yuvan affixes are not added in the feminine. If it is intended to denote a feminine descen dant of the kind Yuvan, the feminine word formed by Gotra affix will denote such a descendant also. 
What is here prohibited i. e. is the term Gotra superseded by the term Yuran? If it is a niyama rule, there will be no wiyama with regard to the feminine, as the prohibition is contained in the same sentence. Therefore in the feminine, the Yuvan asfix will not get the designation of Gotra, because Gotra-name is debarred by Yuvan Name. Therefore the sâtra should be divided in two, e. g. manufa gent wara (2) kaitsfarang ! (1) After a Gotra formed word a new affix is added in denoting a Yuvan descendant, (2) but not so in the feminine. In fact the name Yuvan is prohibited in the feminine, therefore, the feminine will be known Gotra always and never by Yuvan. 
अत ९५॥ fa: 1 afurrealitat Parraren arabera ad affu . 
95. The affix it comes after a Nominal-stem which ends in short a, in denoting a descendant. 
This debars sro (IV. 1. 83). Thus pe a mer: descendant of Daksha'. Why do we say short # (for this is the force of the letter I added to w, by I. 1. 69 and 70)? The descendant of gten: or armar (words which end in long w) will not be formed by the affix ritu 
Bg. I, Ch. I, 
p. 1 
6, 
* 
* 
2 
. 
SA 
The descendant of Fury by this sötra is rudur, but the form formed by sur is also met with. As * ati T ra * "Give Sita to the son of Dasaratha." 
बाहादिभ्यश्च ॥ १६॥ पदानि ॥ बाहु-आदिभ्यः, च। জুলিঃ ব্রা খুশ্বি : শ্রীষ্টের মত খঞ্জি ৪ স্বৰূ ময়মমাঃ জুলাই 
বা স্বাৱামৰ যদা যান বীমাৰ তীব্ধ কলাঙ্গ বা গৰিখ প্রাঞ্জ ঘিনা ন্ধু মাখানি । 
96. The affix is added in the sense of a descen dant, after the words Båhu' &c. 
Thus area: " a descendant of the clan of Bahu." The words "Bahu &c, either do not end in short, thus making the last rule inapplicable; or if they end in short, then some other rule would have prohibited the applica. tion of . Hence the necessity of the present sūtra. 
This is a class of words recognizable only by the form (Hata). 
1 জাহ, , ও স্বা, * স্বািক্স, হি ই অস্ত্র ? স্কুল { খার্জি ক) ৪ ঘন্সী, জুলা, ৫ পুৱা !! ঋলাল, iঃ সন্ধিা 3 স্কুল, i মা 
- ফা} 5 গুহ্ম, যা সুহ্ম, !? খুমি, ৪ পুর্বিক্ষ, খুব্ধৱ, 2 , a ইহু সঁ, a2 *, 20 মহাৰ, 24 , 25 জুলাৰু, 28 , a , ৪ - গন্ত, 29 , 30 ঋমিনীগঃ , , , ৫৪ খিরে, 8 মাঙ্খ, 3s দ্বান্ধিলু, ও গদ্বী ?? জাম , 89 স্থানীনি, শুরু খুইলাঝি, 40 রুমান, মা ক্লান্তি , 42 লাশ, 43 লী, 44 চুঙ, 45 সুষ, 48 গল্প, # স্বাচ্ছ, ৪ জাঙ্ক, 49 মুঘু, 50 , 1 , 52 ৪ লাখাৰু, ও খাময়ী ঋলা, পূজ 
সু, 56 মুল বিঘলায়। হন। 57 বাৰ্জি ৪ জান্ধুবি 89 ফুলদানি ৫ গান: ফুস্তাক্তি 
Vårt :- The words te &c must be Proper Names, being heads of Gotras from whom clans take their name: otherwise the affix r will not be applied. Thus the son of a private person called it will be anyo: * 
Vart-The operations to be effected upon words denoting relation are prohibited with regard to the same word-forms when denoting Proper Names. Thus the offspring of wit meaning father-in-law' is mind, but when it means a person called Svašura, then the derivative will be gft a 
The in the satra indicates that other words not included in the list also take this affix. Than$ স্বান্দ্রিঃ , বন্ধুস্থাৰি, জলন্ধ, ক্লা , কীলানী: ইই 
| আৰ । ওই অলি পুজা অঙ্কজ, : লুকি খালাই শ্রেয়ী শান্ত স্থায়ী এ স্থায়ী কার # স্বাবিক ! আনিকালিমালিজি প্রকা 
ই 
* 
: 
' HE 
= 
= 
- 
' 
১ 
":::: 
| 
- - 
* 
662 
. 
(BK. :V. CH. I. $ 98 
97. The affix er is placed after the word sudhatri in denoting the descendant, and the x of sudbåtri is replac ed by the substitute **befere this affix. 
Thus सुधानरपत्यम्-सापासकिः 'the descendant of Sudhatri.' 
Vårt:-The substitute replaces the finals of mare, Ta, art, yer and far when the Patronymic is to be added. Thus tarafas, पारडकि नेपावकि, चापालकि, बम्बाकि। 
गोत्रे कुजादिभ्यश्च फम् ॥९८॥ पदानि । गोत्रे, कुम्जादिभ्यः, च फम् । चिः ॥ गोषसंज्ञके गले पाध्ये कुंभाविपशफल प्रत्ययो भवति। 
98. The affix "chphañ' comes after the words *Kuñja' &c, when a remoter descendant (called Gotra) is to be denoted. 
This debars or the affix *the letter is for the sake of distinguishing this affix from the affix ; such as in sätra V. 3. 113, by which the words ending in affix ** take the further asfix (sa), in order to form a complete word. The letter 3 of this affix causes Vriddhi (VII. 2. 117). Then remains & which by sūtra VII. 1. 2, is replaced by mru Thus + 
+ 149+ 
5 r . This is not a complete word as yet. We must add a by satra V. 3. 113. Thus the full word is mistrere 
the grandson or a lower descendant of Kunja' dual of it is street, plural is mat; the affix o being elided by II. S. 62, in the plural, it being an asfix of the air class (IV. 1. 174) Similarly R4:, STUTATÁT, ATURATAT: # 
Why do we say " when a Gotra descendant is to be denoted ? ** Observe : "the son of Kunja". Here is added by IV. 1.95 in denot ing immediate descendant. There is difference in the accent of these words, in the different numbers. Thus in the singular and dual, the accent will be regulated by the latter p of the asfix a which is added in those numbers, But this affix being elided in the plural, the accent there will be regulated by the letter of gu That is to say, in the singular and dual, the udatta will fall on the first syllable (VI. 1. 197); in the plural, it will fall on the last syllable (VI. 1, 164) 
The word ma of this sutra governs the succeeding sotras up to aphorism IV. 1. 112: so that all the affixes taught in these fifteen søtras denote grandsons or descendants lower than that. 
1 ***, 2 m, S VEC, 4 a 5 a, 6 797,7 , 8 ura, 9 g 31, 10 , 11 ay, 12 Fin. 13 , 14 , 15 TXT, 16 fua, 17 r. BK. IV.Ch. I. 5 100.] 
663 
मडादिभ्यः फन् । ९९. हतिःभर इत्येवमारिभ्यः प्रातिपरिधी गोपापले फष्प्रत्ययो भवदि। 
99. The affix फ comes, in denoting a Gotra des cendant, after the Nominal-stems नड and the rest. 
Thus भागयमः (मर+पा-मार+मायन VII. 2. 118 and VII. I.) Simi. larly चारायण: * the grandson or a lower descendant of Nada or Chara'. But the son of नर will be मारि (IV. 1.95). 
The word or is changed to that before this affix. Thus ariaTFT: * The word uit occurs in Gent class II. 4. 59, the Yuvan affix is, therefore, elided after it, thus urn is a common name for "father' and 'son'. It takes 
E by IV. 1. 96, as belonging to Bahvadi class which is an Akrti-gana. The . word भनिधर्म takes a when denoting the qपगण gotra,eg.मामिधर्मावणः-पार्क 
गण्यः; otherwise the form will be मामिधर्मः. The word कण will form काविनः when a Brahmana is meant; otherwise कारिणः, so also गणावमः-पाविष्ट, other. wise ufor: # The word is changed to get as welva: N 
1 नर, 2 पर, (वर) 3 बक, मुंज, 5 इतिक, 6 विध, 7 उपक, 8 एक, 9. मक। 10 लंकु घलईच। 11 साल, 12 वामप्य, 13 तिक। 14 भनिधर्मद्रषगणे। 15 प्राण 16 नर, 17 सायक, 18 पास, 19 मित्र, 20 दीप, 1 पिङ्गर, 22 पिल, 23 किंकर, 24 कि. इल, 25 कातद, 26 कासल, 27 काश्यप (कश्यप) 28 काश्य, 29 काल्य (काब) 30 भा, I भमुन्य (ममन) 32 रुग्णरण्ये ब्राह्मणवासि । 33 ममिक, 34 लिगु, 35 चिव, 36 कुमार, अकोट कोट। 38 लोई, 39 वर्ग, 40 स्तम्भ, 41 वियफा, 12 अप, 43 तण, शकर, 45 सुमनस, 48 मुमत, 37 मिमत, 48 कच, 49 अलंधर, 50 मप्पर, 51 धुगंधर, 52 सक, 53 इरिन्, 54 हस्तिन, 55 पिण्ड, 56 पंचाल, 57 चमसिन, 58 मुकत्व, 59 स्थिरक, 60 ब्राह्मण, 61 पटक, 62 पदर, 63 मचल, 64 खरप, 65 ला, 66 इन्ध, 67 मन, 68 कामुक, 69 ब्रह्मरत, 70 उम्पर, 71 योग, 72 मलोह, 73 रण्डप, 74 मन्, 75 भवक, 78 पान ज्य, 77 भाग्य, 78 भन्नगत, 79 भन्तजन, 80 इमरा, 81 भंपक, 82 याम,83 काम, 84 वाव ।। 
हरितादिभ्योऽधः॥ १००॥ पदानि ॥ हरित-आदिभ्यः, भमः। इतिः ॥ हरितादिवियन्तर्गणः।हरितादिभ्यो ऽसन्तभ्योपत्ये फक्प्रत्ययो भवति। 
100. The affix फक comes after the words हरित &c, when they end in the affix अझ (IV. 1. 104). 
The words efto &c, form a subdivision of fate class, which class by IV. 1. 104 takes the affix me in forming Gotra words. Thus the Gotra descendant of हरित will be हारित (हरित+भश्). The son of हारित will be formed by this sitra and not by IV. 1.95. Thus हारित+फक-हारितायन: "the son of Harita or the great-grandson of Harita ". In fact, the force of the asfix " of this Satra is that of a Yuvan affix, though it is taught in the chapter of Gotra affixes; because according to the general rule IV. 1. 98 one Gotra affix can be only added to a word, and the word that being already formed by a Gotra affix 
664 
[BK. IV.CI.I. F. 103 
pe will not take again another Gotra affix ** Therefore, as is here a Yuvan-affix ___ यभित्रोध ॥ १०१॥ पदानि ॥ यमो , च, (फल). 
चिः । वमन्सारिमन्ताप प्रातिपदिकादपये फक् प्रत्ययो भारति। 
101. The affix फक् is added in denoting a descen dant after a Nominal-stem ending in the affixes Tg and rg 
The most of this s@tra has, like that of the preceding sdtra, the force of a Yuvan affix, since it is to be added to words formed by the Gotra affixes ug and Ru Thus गर्ग+पए (IV. I. Ios)-गायः ॥ गा+फागावणः 
शाक्षिा शालिफिकपाक्षायणः॥ It is not every word which ends in or which takes the Yuvan affix it; but only that word where the affix 48 or 
has the force of a Gotra affix. Thus the affix ag is added by IV. 3. 10 to denote proximity to a sea. As A +49-: This word will not take the affix 5511 Similarly by IV. 2. 80 the affix is added to the words FT &c, the force of the affix being protrat Thus Erfat. This word will not take the affix फक्. 
शरखच्छुनकद भृगुवत्साप्रायणेषु ॥ १०२॥ पदानि । शरद्वत, शुनफ, दर्भा स, भृगु, वत्स, आप्रायणेषु (फक). वृतिः ॥ गोष इत्येव । परात् पुनक पर्म इत्येतेभ्यो गोत्रापले फक् प्रत्ययो भवति ययासंख्यं अगुवस्सापा गणेपर्येवपत्यविषेषु। 
102. The affix फक comes in denoting a Gotra descendant after the words 'saradvat', 'sunaka', and 'darbha', when they denote the descendants of Bhrigu, Vatsa and Agrâyana respectively. 
Thus पारहातायन:- भार्गवः otherwise शाररातः (formed by मम्) जोनकावना -वालयः, otherwise शानक, दार्भायणः-मामायणः, otherwise समिः, (formed by H IV. 1.95), 
The words TET and 4 belonging to form class would by IV, 1. 104 have taken the affix mx in denoting Gotra, the present sätra prohibits that in certain cases and enjoins instead. 
द्रोणपर्वतजीवन्तादन्यतरस्याम् ॥ १०३॥ पदानि द्रोण, पर्वत, जीवन्तात, म. न्यतरस्याम् (फक) 
निः ॥ गोमहत्येव । द्रोणादिभ्यः प्रातिपदिकम्यो गोपापल्यऽन्यतरस्यां फक प्रत्ययो भवति । 
- 103. The afix फ comes, in the sense of a Gotra descendant, optionally after the words , Drona,' 'parvata,' and jivanta.' 
BK. IV. CH. I. $ 104 ) 
NEW 
665 
This debars rg of IV. 1.95. Thus area: or that, irfara: or arte: alati orf 
The affix is employed in denoting a remote (gotra) offspring and not an immediate descendant or son. How is then we the son of Dropa, called murai and not that in the phrase "HYTTAT Fraraat?"? The trop here does not refer to the Droņa of the Mahabharat, but to some ancient founder of a clan of that name, and his descendants were called fra: N In modern times, by an easy error, Afvatthama was called Drauņayana, owing to the similarity of sounds. ____ अनुष्यानन्तये विदादिभ्योऽम् ॥ १०४ । पदानि । अनुषि-मानन्तये, विदा 
Ferri, N पतिः॥ गोवास्येव । विवादिभ्यो गोचापत्येऽप्रत्ययो भवति । ये पुमरवानृषिपदाः पुवादयस्त जन्त पपत्य एव भवति । मनप्यानन्तयइत्यस्यायमर्थः, मषियोऽनन्तरे भवतीति । 
104. The affix at comes after the words 'Bida' &c, in denoting a remote (Gotra) descendant: but after those words of this class which are not the names of ancient sages, the affix wer has the force of denoting immediate des cendant. 
This Sotra consists of four words: a "non-Rishi or not being the name of a sage"; maat in expressing an immediate descendant." forenfem "aster Bidadi words " wy" the affix . Thus of the words falling in Bidadi class, the words like Tyson's daughter,' TR'si iter-in-law are common nouns and not names of Rishis. When the affix is added to these words, it has the force of denoting immediate descendant. Thus + irr 'grand-son.' ja 9-MT: “ daughter's son. But when added to other words which express the names of Rishis, the affix makes the Gotra desa cendants. Thus for 
the grandson or a descendant lower than that of Bida' 
Hlow in a context relating to Gotra affixes, we come to this two fold meaning of this sūtra? To this we reply, that the phrase wu should be thus construed. The word 'anfishi' is in the ablative case, the case affix being elided. The word stad is the same as the the affix sue being added without change of significance. Therefore the words like any &c. denote the immediate (anantara) descendant of &c, and do not denote a remote descendant (gotra), nor a descendant in gencral. Therefore, the above phrase means :—'after a Bidadi word which is not the name of a Rishi, the albix an' is added in denoting an immediate descendant.' 
. .... 
666 
« 
(BK. IV. CH. I. $ 104 
Q. Another way of explaining the phrase is this, the word 'anantarya' is equal to'nairantarya' -'uninterrupted succession' Therefore, where there is an uninterrupted succession of Rishis between the first name and the person to be designated by a Patronymic, there the affix 'an' will not be added. Thus the word my belongs to the Bidadi class. • Indrabha' a seventh descendant of Kaśyapa, will not be denoted by 114 formed with me, because between 
and 744, there is an unbroken series of Rishis, but by of IV. 1. 114 Therefore the following phrase will be valid न्द्रभूः सप्तमः काश्यपानाम् | For भर is elided in the plural by II. 4. 64, but arr a is plural of 7 formed with the general patronymic pot of IV, 1, 114 and hence not elided. 
A. This explanation is not to be preferred, merely in order to explain the word काश्यपानाम in इन्द्रभूः सपमा काश्यपानाम् ॥ The general Patronymic an affix mu of IV. 1, 114 is not debarred by this a Therefore 41249 with we will denote fry, which may also be denoted by 7949 formed with pou For had the above explanation been correct, then for for the grandson of Kusika could never be called anrufi (formed with g), for both Gadhi the father of Vibva. mitra, and Kusika the grand-father were Rishis. 
In denoting an immediate descendant or a descendant in general, the Rishi words for &c, will take other appropriate affixes. Thus far forms 
f'a descendant of Bida' by IV. 1. 96 and not by of IV. 1, 114, because it is supposed to belong to the Akrtigaņa of Bahvadi. 
i fare, 2 , 3 , 4 furti, 5 , 6744047 femra, 8 (Far) 9 PTT, 10 po (fe ) 11 TT, 12 g, 13 fan, 14 T Team, 15 , 18 , 17 y* (as) 18 , 19 071477, 20 fug. 21 fr, 22 APR, 23 77, 24 urin, 23 s ata, 26 447. 27 74*, 28 471, 29 cartró, 30 A, 31 fata, 32 TF, 33 mm (W ) 34 mete 1, 35 fag, 36 ra, 37 grana, 38 97, 39 teftat () 40 nafer, 41 f9, 42 v 43 m , 44 451, 45 TIFF, 46 347, 47 , 48 gars, 49 J, 50 sfiq, 31 791,52 pealt qui 53 fiy, 54 €, 55 6414 
The word grade in the abore list is replaced by Ty when taking the affix meu Thus run a TEH** TCT: (the son of a Brahmaņa begotten on a Sudra woman, who though married to the Brahmaņa is meant 'a strange woman' oiving to the great difference of race). 
The word qrat occurs in maura (VII. 3. 20) and repulf (IV. 1. 126) classes also. Therefore when the sense is 'a son begotten on another's wise' who is also called arall, the form will be return, with double vriddhi of both members by VII. 3. 20: which docs not take place in the casc of 
BK. IV.CH. I. S. 106] 
GOTRA OEN 
गर्गादिभ्यो यञ् ॥ १०५॥ सिः ॥ गोपहत्येव । गारियो गोपापलेबम् प्रत्ययो भवति।। 
105. The aftix trst comes, in the sense of Gotra descendant, after the words • Garga' &c. 
Thus it, the grandson or a still lower descendant of Garga', so also वात्स्वः &c. 
___ 1 गर्ग, 2 बस,। 3 वाभासे। 4 संस्कात, भन, 6 म्यानपान, 7 विरासत, 8 मा. पीमयोग, 9 भगस्ति, 10 पुस्ति , 1 चमस, 12 रेम, 13 भनिवेष, 14 पंख, 15 घर, 16 एक, 17 एक, 18 धूम, 19 भवर, 20 मनस, 21 धनंजब, 22 वृक्ष, 23 विधावस, 24 पर माण, 25 लोहित, 26 सित, 27 व 28 वल्गु, 29 मण्ड. 30 गड, 31 पंक, 32 लिंग, 33 गहलु, 34 मन्त, 35 मैक्षु, 38 भलिगु, 37 जिगीषु, 33 मन, 39 सन्तु, 40 मनायी, 41 सन, 42 कयक, 43 कम्यक, स, 45 हम (म) 46 तन, 47 तरस, 48 बल, 49 तण्ड, 50 बसण्य, 31 कपिकत, 52 कत, 53 कप, 54 मत, 35 कुस्कत, 36 मनह 57 कवि, 58पुर कुल, 59 पनि, 60 कण्व, 61 चकल,62 गोकश,63 भगस्त्य, 64 कुण्डिनी 65 यज्ञवल्क, 66 पर्णवल्क, 67 भभवनात, 68 विरोहित, 69 अपगण, 70 रहगण, पण्डिन, 72 वर्णक (पणक) 73 चालक, 77 महल, 75 मुसल, 76 अमदनि, 77 पराघर, 78 अकर्ण (जानुकर्ण) 79 महित, 80 मन्वित, 81 अम्मरय, 82 धर्करास, 83 पुतिमाप,84 स्यूग, 85 भदरक (मररक) 86 एलाक,87 पिल, 88 कण, 89 गालन्द, 90 उनक,91 तितिक्ष, 92 मिपम(भिपर) 93 भिष्म,94 भडित, 95 भाण्डत, 96 दम, 97 कित, 98 चिकित्सित, 99 देवहू, 100 , 101 एकल, 102 पिप्पल, 103 हामि, 10 सुलोडिन्, 105 सुलाभिम्, 106 उक्य, 107 कुटिए, 108 संहित, 100 पय, 110 कन्यु, 11 भुर, 112 कर्कटक, 
13 रुस, 114 प्रपूल, 115 बिलम्ब, 116 विषा 
The word is found in the Alicant sublist of this class. It ought to take after in the feminine by IV. 1. 18, how then the form # in मानवी प्रमा! The affix पम् comes in denoting a Gotra offspring, but in denoting a descendant in general, this affix will not come, and hence no shpha also. If so, then why the immediate descendant of अममि is called मामदग्न्य: which is a Name of Parasúram the son of Jamadagni, or why Vyasa the son of Parasara is called पायर्य: These are exceptions formed by गोषणाप्यारोप:ie by superimposing of Gotra-form on these. Their proper apatya forms are by Tu (IV. 1. 114) i. c. 1477: and TOUT: # 
मधुबम्रोमा॑ह्मणकौशिकयोः ॥ १०६ ॥ पदानि । मधु, बभ्रोः, घालण-कौशिकयो (य ) वृत्तिः ॥ मधुपमा घम्नाय गोवापत्ये यम् प्रत्ययो भवति ययासस्यं प्राह्मण कोधिक पाये। 
___106. The affix यश् comes, in the sense of a Gotra descendant, after the words fry and ay when the words so formed mean • Brahmana' and 'a Kausika' respectively. 
Thus T4754: - AkrOT: Brahmaņa. Otherwise #14: "son of Madbu" बामप्या-कोषिक: Otherwise पात्रयः॥. 
668 
GOTRA EN 
( BK. IV. CH I. S. 108 
Then 
The word of belongs to the Gargadi class, so it would have taken yah by the last sâtra also. The present sätra declares a restriction, viz. Ty takes 
only then when it is denoted. Its being read in the Gargadi class serves another purpose : as it belongs to the sub-classs pifcam, the rule IV. 1. 18 becomes applicable to it; so that its feminine is formed by the Thus mimaru o In fact, it would have been better, if in the body of the Ganapa tha, instead of writing alone, there was nafsu It would have saved the repetition of it in the present sätra. ___ कपिबोधादाङ्गिरसे ॥ १०७॥ पदानि । कपि, योधात, आङ्गिरसे। 
gfn: * N e pari fettsyrefait to tag aaral 
107. The affix it comes in the sense of a Gotra descendant, after the words in and are, when the special descendants of the family of Angiras are meant. 
Thus + = 'the grand-son or a still lower descendant of 
• Kapi' of the family of Angiras.' So also err: 
Why do we say of the family of Angiras ? Observe ara: (IV, I. 122) *the gotra-descendant of Kapi " so also on formed by because it is a Non-Rishi word or because it belongs to Båhvadi (IV. 1.96) class. 
The word #9 occurs in Gargadi class. The present sätra declares a restriction i. e. the 'yan' is to be applied only when Angirasa descendant is meant. It is included in the Gargadt class also for the purpose of apply ing IV. I, 18. Thus #1414 ft "grand-daughter or a still lower descendant of Kapi." ___ वतण्डाश्च ॥ १०८॥ पदानि ॥ वतण्डात, च, (गोत्रे, यम्) 
वृत्तिः ॥ भागिरस इत्येव । वतण्डनावाङ्गिरसेऽपत्यविधेपे गोरे यम् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
108. The affix 'y' comes in the sense of a Gotra descendant, after the word ' arare,' when meaning a descen dant of Angirasa. 
Thus an-mhac, otherwise Tavi i 
The word the occurs both in the Gargadi class (IV. s. 105) and in the Sivadi class (IV. 1. 112). It would have taken both affixes and more The present sätra declares that when it means an Angirasa, then go wili not take your of the rate class : and when it does not mean Angirasa, then it takes both these affixes e. g. aract: and präs: any descendant of Vatanda. .. लुक स्त्रियाम् ॥ १०९॥ 
यूनिः॥ भातिरसात्येव । पतण्डराजारादिरस्यां स्त्रियां यत्र प्रत्ययस्य लगभवति ।। 
BR.IV. CH. 1. 9. 110 ) 
GOTRA TON 
669 
109. The affix 'a' is luk-elided in the feminine after the word art when meaning & female descendant of Angirasa. 
Thus from ther: we get to in the masculine. In the feminine the is elided by luk, and we have that +1 (IV. 1.73) * "a female descendant of Vatanda of the clan Angirasa." Why do we say "of Angirasap Observe srüsurat formed with 'shpha' under lohitadi rule (V. 1 181 When Taux takes * under Sivadi class, its feminine is most # Though the word is formed with more yet in the feminine, there is not a substitution (IV. 1. 78). because Vataqda is a Rishi-Name. 
अश्वाविश्य फ१०॥ प्रतिभानिसहति निवृत्तम्। मनादिभ्यो गोपापलेकम् प्रत्ययो भवति। 
110. The affix comes, in the sense of a Gotra descendant, after the words spa &c. 
The anuvfitti of angirasa does not extend to this aphorism. Thus *99***94-HTCF(VII. 1. 2)-1114: (VII. 2. 117) 'the grandson or a still lower descendant of Afva'. Siinilarly Ki 49 There are some words in this class which already have taken a patronymic affix, eg, urim , and 
After these words thc affix of course has the force of a Yuvan affix. The word write is formed by fr+T(IV. 1. 122) AT (a Rajar shi)-1-54 (IV. 1 171), and at 
+ 1 (IV. 1. 105) The word ry takes phan only when it denotes an Atreya, as rarent, otherwise ufa with por vra: with a # The word ma takes 'phaf' only when the offspring 
of a male is to be denoted, as मातस्यापस्य जातायन: but भाताया भपत्य-मातेवा. with pau The word arra takes 'phan' when denoting a Bharadvaja, as 
14144:, otherwise it will take the affix , which will be clided by II. 4. 28, leaving the form भाषा 
The words wir of the above list mean that when a person born in Atri Gotra is adopted by a person belonging to Bharadvaja Gotra, then the affix is to be added, he of course is an Atreya but gets a new Gotra of Bharadvaja. Thus ATTETIT, otherwise the form will be war with. or of IV. I. 104 
I 2 WWE 3 4 775 ftp 6 7 of 8 Part () 9 si 10. Tea 11 faTy 12 13 OCT 14 V 15 for 16 a 17 vite 18 19 a . 20 shot 21 TA 22 7 23 FT 24 4 25 5 26 fev 27 - 28 of 29 aitfor 30 FRITT 31 y 32 y 33 TITAE 34 PTT 35 36 UT ATT 37 7 38 39 40 ua 41 42 F 43 PUT 44 four 45 fiift 16 anyag 47 99 48 &* 49 50 degli 74 51 44 52 75 53 gre sig 54 str 55 TC 56 57496 57 58 TU. 59. 
670 
GOTRA पर 
[ BK. IV.CH. I. . 12 
(मनस्) प्रान्त मन B1 भाषेव भगा 62 मसास भावे 6 माता 65 किलर 66 पर 674 68 पार 69 शिष 70 सदिर 71 भण्डिक 72 श्रीवा 73 कुल 74 काण 75 मर 76 पीक,74, 78 लेर, 79 80 मोबस, मन, 
. भर्गात्त्रंगते । १९१॥ पतिः। भर्गधनारपत्ये विशेष गते गाने पर प्रसत्यो भवति। 
111. The afix 'फम् comes in the sense of a Gotra descendant, after the word of, when the meaning is & 
Traigarta. 
Thus भर्गाया गर्न: ; otherwise भागिः (IV. 1. 982 शिवादिभ्योग ॥ ११२॥ पदानि ॥ शिव-आदिभ्यः, भए। वृणिः ॥ गोप इति नियम । मतः प्रभात सामान्वेन प्रत्यया विसावन्ते । धिवारियोपत्ये मक 
यो भवति। 
112. The affix su comes in the sense of a descen dant, after the words शिव &c. 
The anuvritti of the word Art (IV. 1.98) does not extend to this sötra. The affixes taught hereafter are generic patronymic affixes. The affix मण debars म् &c, Thus चिवन-मण - a descendant of Siva'. Similarly पौडः 
The word ay 'a carpenter' occurs in this class ; being a common noun denoting an artisan. it would have taken the affix by IV. 1, 153; the present sätra prevents that. It does not, however, prevent the application of न्य ordained by IV. 1. 152. Thus सक्षन्-न-मण-ताणः॥ तमन्नव-साक्ष्य U The mis elided by VI. 4. 134. The mord tat occurs in this class, as well as in Subo hradi class IV, 1. 123) and Tikadi (IV. 1. 154). There are thus thrse forms of this word:-गांगः; गांगायनि: and गांगेयः ॥ The word विपाषा occurs in this class as well as in Kunjadi class (IV. 1.98) It has thus two forms: पाय: and Erruraru: with chphah 
The asfix to will come after a word consisting of two syllables, when it is the name of a river: the affix (IV. 1. 121 ) would have debarred the 
al por of (IV. 1. 113) in case of patronymics formed from river names. However, it is not so, because of this prohibition. The Patronymic from the river name fraft would be formed by so(IV. 1. 113), as thg : but this is replaced by fraar: # 
1चिव 2 प्रोट 3 प्रष्टिक चण्डसम्म 6 भरिएण्ड 8 कुगर ककुम (ककुमा) 10 मन भिम्लान 11 कोहित 12 सुख 13 संधि 14 मुनि 15 ककुत्स्थ 16 कहोर 17 कोहड 18 कय 19 कहब 20 रोष 21 कपिल (कपिल) 22 संभन 23 वतण्ड 24 जणकर्ण 25 मारहा 26 अलद 27 परिल. 
BK IV. CH. 1. $. 114). 
PATROAYMIC 
u 
. 
671 
28 पापिक 29 पिर 30 व 31 पार्षिका 2 गोपिका 33 कपिलिका 34 मरिलिका 35वधिरिका 36 भगीरक 37 38 मांजाक 39णिक 40 संसार की खाल कार 3रेख सबभालेला 46 विश्वण 47 खण 48 वर्तनास 49 प्रीवाम 50वियप 51 पिरक 52 पिटाक 53 वशाक ममा 55.कर्णनाभ 56 अरस्कार 57 प्रथा 58 रोप 59 पुरोहितिका 60 सुरोहितिका 61 सुपेरिका 62 भाद श्वत (भयंत) 63 सुपिट 64 मसुरकर्ष 85 मयूरकर्ण 68 सरकर्ष 67 खदरक 68 सन् 6 रिपये 70 गंगा गाविपाए 72 बस्क 73 लय 74अब 75 भवास्युल 76 रुणकर्ण (उपकर्ण) 77 पर्ष 78 मल न्दन 73 विरुपास 80 भूमि 81 इला 82 सपनीमचो मया: 84 विषेणी विवर्णच ॥ 85 मोफिलिक 86 रोहितिक, 87 कोष, 88 गाभिलिक. 89 रामल, 90 तराक, 91 पराक, 92 परत inan माकतिगण। ____ अवृद्धाभ्यो नदीमानुषीभ्यस्तन्नामिकाभ्यः । ११६ ॥ 
इतिः॥ वादयस्याषामादिस्तपदम्। भवृद्धाभ्यः विपन्नधर्मः । मदीमानुशीय इधर्म, स्वेनामेस बकवयो निर्दिषयन्त । सन्नामिकाच इति सर्वनामा प्रबवपकतेः प्रत्यवमनः । भरद्धानि बानि मरीनां मानुपीणां च नामधेयानि तेभ्यो ऽपत्येऽन् प्रत्ययो भवति। को पार. 
113. The affix अण् comes, in the sense of a des cendant, after words which are the names of rivers, or women, when such words are not Vriddham words; and when they are used as names and not as adjectives. . 
The word Vriddham in the sätra, does not mean the technical Pat. ronymic of that name as defined in other Grammars and used in Sotras like IV. 1. 166, but mcans the Vriddham as defined in this Grammar i. e. a word whose first syllable is a Vriddhi letter (I. 1. 73) The word weapa: shows the orthography of the word to which the affix is to be added. The word argreti declares the meaning of that word and both attributes refer to one and the same base, i.e. orthographically the base should have a Vriddhi letter in the first syllable, and etymologically it should denote a man or a river. The word MITAAT: applies both to the base and the affix. 
Thus यमना-यामनः 'a son of the Yamuna.' ऐरावत ' son of the Iravati:' तस्तः 'son of the Vitasta.' मार्मदः 'son of the Narmadda.' These are all names of rivers. Similarly पाक्षितः 'son of Sikshita'चन्तित 'son of चिन्तिता' .. 
Why do we say 'when not a Vriddha word? Observe arraro भपर्व - चान्द्रभागेयः; so also वासवदयः formed by क (IV. 1. 120), Why do we say being 'names of rivers or women.' Observe सोपणयः and देनवः॥ Why do we say when it is a name?" Observe yोमनाया मपत्य-धोभनेयः the son ofa beautiful woman.' 
(IV. 1. 120) is the general affix by which patronymics are formed from feminine bases. The present sätra is an exception to that 
ऋष्यन्धकवृष्णिकुरुभ्यश्च ॥ ११४॥ ऋषि, अन्धक, वृष्णि, कुरुभ्यः च इनिः॥पयः प्रसिद्धा वसिष्टाश्यः । भन्धका कृष्णकः कुरव इति शापया । न्यारिकुर्वन्तभ्यः मावि पविक यो ऽपये जमायया भवती, मोमवार। 
672 
PATRONYMIC Hu 
( BK. IV.CH. I.S. nis 
114. The affix my comes, in the sense of a des cendant, after a Nominal-stem denoting the pame of a Rishi, or the name of a person of the family of Andhaka, Vrishni, and Kuru. 
This debars the affix au The Rishis are like Vasishtha, Visvamit ra &c. Thus far, TOTT. N So also , re being persons belong ing to the family of Andhaka ; and IT, TIR: being persons belonging to the family of Vpishội, and pai, amar: being persons belonging to the family of Kuru 
The word om is the name of a Rishi, in forming its Patronymic, the present sätra enjoins mons; but IV. I. 122 enjoins ; thus there being a con flict, we apply the maxim of interpretation contained in 1. 4. 2. So that the Patronymic or sre will be formed not by you but by 1 Thus *11a: Similarly 747 a person of Andhaka family, forms its patronymic m ert: IV. 1. 152 by 27; and not by 19, so also trynon 'son of Vaishvaksena' a per son of Vrishni, family; so also hina: son of Bhimasena' a person of Kuru family. 
Note-The worda or sabdks are eternal; bow is it thien that rules applying to thona should be made dependant upon their occurring in particular families or not, when families themselves are qua-eteraal? In other word, how a rule affecting a permanent object is con ditioned by an impermanent adjunct ? To this, some reply that Plaini bas by more coincidence (und not as cause and cffect) classified certain definite aumber of worde as belonging to certain faunilies, and then the rule made applicable to them. Moreorer a permanent object in some time designated by an inpermanent object : w the permancat timo is designated by the name of Saku. Others say that the familien of Andhska &c., we also pernaneat, and the words 
•Nakala'. Sahadeva' &c., fouod therein are of course, permanent. 
मातुरुत्सख्यासंभद्रपूर्षायाः ॥ ११५॥ पदानि ॥ मातुः, उतः, संख्या, सम, भद्र, qatar: 1 
for U AT TEXTCUINTETT Furca sor ved 98, TATA : 1 
115. The affix au comes in the sense of a descen dant, after the word mâtri when it is preceded by a Numeral, or by the words Free or ; and the letter J is substituted for the final # of matri. 
Thus from firme we have that: “son of two mothers i.e. son of one and adopted by another." RATE + MY PATC+3+N-THIRT+3+1+* (I. I. 51.) Similarly pontu, irgo, and TTTT # 
This satra is made in order to teach the substitution of short for tho BK. IV. CH. I. . 118) 
PATRONYMIC 
613 
of Ty; for the word at would have taken the affix my by the general rule IV. 1. 83. The sætra contains the word gerai in the feminine gender, show ing by implication that the rule applies where the word arg denotes female Thus संमिमोते-संमात 'he who measures together'. Its patronymic will be HATT: .son of a fellow-measurer'; because here the word Ary does not mean 'mother', but a measure'. Nor the word धान्यमातृ 'barley measurer' will be affected by this rule. Why do we say when preceded by a Numeral &c.* Observe सीमावः 'son of Sumatri'. The word देमायेव is formed by IV. 1. 123 as belonging to Subhradi class. 
कन्यायाः कनीन च ॥ ११६.. पतिः॥ कन्यापनादपत्येऽण् प्रत्ययो भवति स्कोपचार तत्सन्नियोगेन कनीनपलमासो भवति । 
• 116. The affix अण् comes in the sense of a descen dant, after the word कन्या, and when this affix is added, कनीन is the substitute of Kanyå'. 
Thus Troyes Arata'the son of a virgin viz Karpa or Vyasa'. This debars the F of IV. 1. 121. The word al means a virgin, the son of a virgin is produced by immaculate conception. मुनिदेवतामाहात्म्बार या योगेपि न कन्या महाति, यया कुन्ती, पया सल्याती। 
विकर्ण, शुङ्ग, च्छगलाद्वत्सभरद्वाजात्रिषु ॥ ११७ ॥ पदानि । विकर्ण, शुक, उगलात, वत्स, भरद्वाज, भत्रिपु. 
चिः ॥ विकर्णगच्छगलगन्नेभ्यो यथासंख्य पत्तभावामाविषपत्यविषेषणपत्ययो भवति 
___ 117. The affix अण comes after the words विकर्ण, शुङ्ग, and छगल, when the sense is a descendant of the family of Vatsa, Bharadvaja and Atri respectively. 
Thus वैकर्णः- वास: otherwise कर्णित चोर-मादामः, otherwise घोषित छागल:-भात्रेयः, otherwise छागति 
In some texts the word for is used and not go # The former being a feminine word, its Patronymic will be पौनेयः, by IV. I. 120 when it does not 
mean adescendant of भराया। 
पीलाया वा ॥१९८॥ इतिः॥ पीलाया अपत्ये वाण प्रत्ययो भवति । 
118. The affix au comes optionally after the word पीला in denoting a descendant. 
The word try being the name of a female would have taken out by 
या 
" 
674 
PATRONYMIC 
(BK. IV. CH. I. $ 121 
IV. I. 1133; but this मण् would have been prohibited by IV. 1. 121 as it is. dissyllabic feminine word. Hence the necessity of the present sätra. Thus पेलor पैलेय 'son of Pila' 
टक्च मण्डकात्॥ ११९ । वृधिः ॥ मण्यारपबेग्क् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
119. The affix ढक comes optionally in the sense of a descendant after the word मण्डक as well as the affix भण। 
___ Thus we get three forms, मदुक+-मांडूकंया, मंडूक+म-मांक - क+म्-माण्मुकि. . 
स्त्रीभ्यो दक। १२०॥ इतिः॥ बीमहणेने बारिपत्ययान्ताः पना गृपन्ते । बी-योपत्वेरक प्रत्ययो भवति । वार्मिकम् ॥ परवाया वाच॥ पार्तिकन॥ भण् कुरुपाकोकिलात्मनः। 
120. Words ending in the feminine affixes take the affix ce in forming their Patronymic. 
The word at in the aphorism means 'words ending in the feminine affixes Ty &c. That is, words ending in long and f of the feminine. T विनता+क- धनतेयः (IV. 1.2) So also सापर्णेयः “Son of Vinata or Suparnt". But ऐरविड and दारद formed by भणmeaning sons ofविर and ser, for though these words are feminine. they do not end in feminine affixes. 
Vart -The affix it comes after fou when meaning u Thus · वारवेयः- वृपः "bull." Here dhak' has not the patronymic force. The patrony. 
mic will be वारवः 'the son of amare' 
Vart:-The feminine words that and fairy take the affix or in forming the patronymic. Thus क्रोधः “the son of a curlew." कौकिला: “the son of a cuckoo' 
दयचः ॥ १२१. पदानि ॥ द्वि-मचः (स्त्रीभ्यां दक)। वृत्तिः॥ अषः बीप्रत्ययान्ताल्पत्ये क् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
121. The affix 'ढ' comes in the sense of a descendant, after a word ending in a feminine affix and con sisting of two vowels. 
Thus het mye**T#: son of Datta', 194: "son of Gopi". This debars the spor of IV. 1, 113. . 
Why do we say 'having two vowelst Observe थानुनः 'son of यमुना', which is a trisyllabic word, and not dissyllabic. 
इतश्चानिमः ॥ १२१ ॥ पदानि । इतः, च, अन्नः । निः॥पकारो म्यच वस्यानकर्षणार्थः । इकारान्तारपानिपरिकारमिमन्सारपस्थे कमायो भवति । 
BK. IV. CH. I. $ 125 ) 
GOTRA TU 
6 
122. The afix 'क' comes, in the sense of a descendant, after a dissyllabic Nominal-stem ending in short r, but not, however, after a word ending in the patronymic affix . 
The anuvfitti of 'stri' does not extend to this aphorism. The force of the word in the sätra is to draw the anuvetti of the word or of the last sutra. Thus HIT: 'the son of Atri'. Hva: 'the son of fari' 
Why do we say " after a word ending in short r"? Observer: "son of " u Herc H though a dissyllabic word, yet cnds in # 
Why do we say 'not ending in the patronymic affix Ta'? Observe साक्षायणः 'son of साति' | Here though दाक्षि isadissyllabic word ending in short 1, it does not take the affix for there is the affix (IV. 1. 95.); so also GUINTA: 11 Why do we say 'having two vowels'? Observe HTÙY: "son of nar" 
शुम्रादिभ्यश्चः ॥ १२३ ॥ पदानि ॥ शुभ्र-आदिभ्यः, च (द) 
. वृत्तिः ॥ शुभ इत्येवमादिभ्यः प्रातिपाहिक यो रमत्ययो भवति । 
__123. The affix 'हा' comes in the sense of a des cendant after the stems शुभ्र &c. 
This debars and other affixes. The word in the sætra shows that some words not occuring in the list of gift may take the re, as it is an माक्रतिगणः ॥ For though the words गंगा, पांच are not in the list, we find still forms like गांगेयः, पाण्डवः &c. 
Thus शुभ्रस्थापत्य-प्रायः॥ 
1गुन, विट पुर (विष्टपुर) ब्रह्मकत, 4शतवार, शनाथल, (पलाचल) 6लाकाम, 7 लेखामु, (लेखा), 8 विकंसा, (विकास), 9 रोहिणी, 10 रुक्मिणी, 11 धर्मिणी, 12 दिए, 13 शालूक, 14 अगस्ति, 15 शकाधि, 16 विमान, 17 विधवा, 180क, 19 विश, 20 देवतर शनि, 22 शुक, 23 उम, 24 ज्ञातल (तल) 25 बन्धकी, 26 सकण्ड, 27 विनि, 28 भतिथि, 29 गोदन्न, 30 कुशाम्ब, अमकष्ट, 82 पाताहर 33 परिक, 3 सुनाम, 35 लक्ष्मणश्यामयोसिंह। 36 गांधा, 37 कलास, 38 भणीव, 39 प्रवाहण, 40 भरत (भारत) 41 भरम; 42 मकण्ड, 43 कर्पर, 44 इसर, 45 भन्यतर, 46 भालीन, 47 मुदन्त, 48 सुदक्ष, 49 सुवक्षस्, 50 मुशमन्, 51 कह, 52 तुम, 53 भकशाय, 54 कुमारिका, 55 कुगरिका, 56 किशोरिका, 57 भम्बिका, 58 जिह्माशिन, 59 परिधि,.60 वायुदत्त, 61 शकल, 62 शलाका, 
खडूर, 64 कुवेरिका, 65 अशोका, 66 गन्धपिङ्गला, 67 खडोन्मगा, 68 मनुष्टिन, (अनुमति) 69 भरतिन्, 70 पनीवर्दिन, 1 विम, 12 वीज, 73 जीव, 74 श्वन, 75 भइमन्, 76 अन, 77 मभिर 78 शमावर, 79 शलाका, 80 कुकसा, 81 भरत, 82 मघाट, 83 ककल, 84 स्थल, 85 मकयु, 88 बम, 87 कटु, 88 मृकण्ड, 89 गुड़, 90 1,91 कुशेरिका, 92 शवल, 93 मधिन । 
विकर्णकुपीतकात्काश्यपे ॥ १२४॥ पदानि । विकर्ण, कुपोतकात् काश्यपे। वृतिः ॥ विकर्णशरकुषीतकशाप काश्यपे ऽपत्यविशेष प्रस्यया भवति । 
676 
PATRONYMIC PE # 
[BK. IV.CH.I.. 127 
124. The afix दई' comes after the words •Vi karna' and 'Kushita', when they mean the descendants of Kasyapa. 
Thus वैकर्णेयः and काषीतकेयः-काश्यपः; otherwise we have देकर्षिः and को सकिः formed by IV. 1.95. 
मुचो वु च ॥ १२५ ॥ पदानि । सुवः, वुन्, च (ढ) निः॥ भूधबाइपस्येवक प्रत्ययो भवति, तस्सनियोगेन च युगागमः। 
__125. The affix 'द' comes in the sense of a des cendant, after the word and the augmenter is added when this affix is to be applied. 
Thus s+र +बुक् +डक (I. I. 40-+डक्-विया (VII. I.) कल्याण्यादीनामिनङ् ॥ १२६ ॥ पदानि ॥ कल्याणी-आदीनाम, इन। वृश्चिः॥ कल्याणी इत्येवमादीनां शबानामपत्ये प्रत्ययो भवति, तत्सत्रियोंगेन परमादेशः। 
126. The afix 'ढ' comes in the sense of a descendant, after the words कल्याणी &c. and the substitute इन takes the place of the final of these words before this affix. 
In the case of those words in this list which end in a feminine affix, the present sätra teaches merely the substituion of mas, for they would have taken the affix taby IV. 1. 120. But in the case of other words, the Satra teaches both the substitution of ste and the addition ofree 
Thus कल्याणी+रक्-कल्याणिन् + कल्याणिनेयः 'son of Kalyant.' सुभगा। - मुभागन् + उक्सामागिनेयः ॥ Similarly दागिनेयः ॥ In these last two words, there is Vriddhi of both the initial vonel a and the second vowel of . This is done by the special rule VII. 3. 19. 
1कल्याणी, 2 मुभगा, 3 दुर्भगा, 4 बन्धकी, 5 अनदृष्टि, 8 भनुमृति (मनुसृष्टि) 7 जरती, 8 बलीवरी, ज्येष्ठा, 10 कनिष्ठा, 11 मध्यमा, 12 परस्त्री। 
कुलटाया वा ॥ १२७ ॥ पदानि ॥ कुलटायाः, पा (ढ) वृत्तिः । कुलटाया अपरयेटक् प्रत्ययो भवति, तत्सनियोगेन च या इनडादेशो भवति । भादशायें वचनं प्रत्ययः पर्वणव सिद्धः। . 
___ 127. The afix 'ढ' comes in the sense of a descendant, after the word soet, and is optionally the substitute of the final before this affix. 
The word कुलटा means literally one who wanders (मटति) from one family (कुल) to another, i.e. an unchaste woman. . This satra is made to teach substitution only, for rent would have taken by the general rule IV. I. 120. Thus कुलटा+ - कुलाटिन् + क्-कोलटिनेयः or कोलटेयः 'son of an unchaste woman. This word get being a word denoting contempt, will take also the afix rp by IV. 1. 131. Thus कोलेटेरः । 
BK. IV. Ch. I. $ 131.]' 
PATRONYNIC RICE 
677 
चटकाया ऐरकू। १२८॥ पदानि।चटकाया, ऐरक। इतिः॥ पटकाया भपरवे ऐरक् प्रत्ययो भवति। वार्मिकम् ॥ पटकावि पत्नयन्। वार्मिकम् ॥लि यामपत्ये हग्यतम्ब 
128. The word rent takes the affix dra in form ing the patronymic. 
Thus rer'son of Chataka'. 
Vart:-So also after the masculine word op * Thus ar 'son of Chafaka'. 
Vart:-In forming a descendant denoting a female, there is luk-eli sion of the affix. Thus the female descendant of a will be 741, the al being added as belonging to Ajadi class IV. 1. 4 
गोधाया दक। १२९ । पदानि । गांधाया, दूछ। वृतिः ॥ गोधाया अपत्ये एक् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
129. The affix 'o' comes in the sense of a des cendant after the word गोधा । 
Thus ita + imi: # or the affix 'dhrak', the letter is replaced by ra (VII. 1. 2), & causes Vriddhi (VII.2.118) and makes the udatta accent fall on the final (IV. 1, 165). Thus the real affix is gert, but the vis clided by VI. 1. 66 and so the affix that is actually added is PT # 
This word fint occurs in the Subhradi class IV. I. 123, also, thus it takes the affix' dhak' as well. Thus a: I 
tufta 1880 n quê I Brø, stara (steret:) वृतिः ॥ गोधाया अपरये उदीचामाचार्याणां मतेन भारत प्रत्ययो भवति । 
130. The affix are', comes in the sense of a descendant after the word "ha,' according to the opinion of Northern Gramınarians. 
Thus TT i It might be objccted that the res contains the letter AT unnecessarily, for at would have served the purpose as well, because it ends in long * already. The objection is valid in the case of it, but the very fact that Panini uses this affix mues, shows by implication, that there are other words also which take this affix, and in whose case the affix 
F would not suffice. Thus the words and que also take this affix, as 
FITC, Tor: 11 The mention of the name of Northern Grammarians is for the sake of showing respect only. 
क्षुद्राभ्यो वा ॥ १३१॥ पदानि । क्षुद्राध्या, वा (द)। 
678 
GOTRA VE 
[ BK. IV. CH. I. 5135 
वृत्तिः ॥ शुद्रा महीना धर्महीनाथ। मर्यधर्मेण तदभिधावन्य जीलिङ्गाः प्रकृतयो निर्दिश्यन्ते । मुद्रा यो वापरये दक् प्रत्ययो भवति । . 
131. The affix 'क्' comes optionally, in the sense of a desceudant, after the feminine words denoting mean objects. 
The anuvfitti oft is to be read in this sätra, and not of art, though the latter immediately precedes it. The word Tur means those who are defective or wanting in any bodily limb or organ, or who are low in social status and religious principles. This sûtra debars which would come in the other alternative. Thus #TOTT: 'the son of an one eyed woman', or finirati, दासरः or दासयः 'son of a female-slave'. 
पितृष्वसुश्छण् ॥ १३२ ॥ पदानि । पितृष्वसुः, छ । इनिः ।। पितम्चसशनारपत्ये पण्पत्ययो भवति । 
132. The affix 'su' comes in the sense of a des cendant, after the word 'पितृ-प्वर'. 
This debars star Thus faastę+39 - Gazeta the son of the father's sister'. The छ of the affix is replaced by ईव 
ढकि लोपः ॥ १३६ ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ पितृपसुरपत्यप्रत्यये कि परती लोप भवति. 
133. The final vowel offre-care' is clided when the affix 'क', in the sense of a descendant, is added. 
Thus पितपस + ढक-पतवसेयः॥ This satra indicates by jnapaka that the word for takes the affix 'dhak. also. 
मातृष्वसुश्च ॥ १३४॥ पदानि ॥ मातृष्वशुः, च (छण, ढकि लोपः)। निः ॥ पितृष्वसुरिस्येतस्पेक्षते, पितृप्नसुर्यदुनं तन्मातृवसुरपि भवति । छणप्रत्ययो कि लोपर। 
134. So also, after the word 'मातृष्वस्' the affix 'छम्' is added, and the final is elided when 'ढक' follows, in forning patronymics. 
The Satras IV. I. 132, 133 above apply to मातृष्वस् also. As मातृप्यनीयः or मानवसेयः 'the son of a mother's sister'. 
चतुष्पागो ढम् ॥ १३५॥ पदानि । चतुष्-पादभ्यः, दम् । त्तिः ॥ चनुम्पादभिधायिनीभ्यः प्रकृतिभ्योऽपत्ये बम्पत्ययो भवति ।। 
135. The affix 'ढर' comes in the sense of a des cendant, after the bases denoting quadrupeds. 
This debars भण् &c. Thus कमण्डल + दम् = कामण्डलेयः (IV.4147, the 3 bcing clided before ). So also traigo and 4: from fufare and sprea 
BK. IV. CH. I. $ 140 ). 
GOTRA ** 
679 
__ गृष्टयादिभ्यश्च ॥ १३६ ॥ पदानि ॥ गृष्टि-आदिभ्यः, च (द)। 
कृत्तिः । अष्टपादिभ्यः अमेऽभ्योपवे ममखयो भवति । 
___136. The affix 'ढम्' comes, in the sense of a descendant, after the words 'गृष्टि' &c. 
This debars भण् and रक् &c. Thus गायः हावThe word गृष्टि when it means 'a cow' will of course get the affix by the last Sotra. The present sútra applies when it does not mean a four-footed animal, but means 'a woman who has one child only'. 
गृष्टि, टि, 3 बलि, हलि, 5 विधि,कुड़िामबस्ति, मिना। राजश्वशुरायत् । १३७॥ पदानि ॥राज-श्वशुरात्, यत् । शतिः राजनवपुरानाभ्यामपस्ये वयत्ययो भवति । 
137. The affix यत् comes in the sense of the des cendant, after the words 'राजन्' and 'भ्यशुर. 
This debars more and Hq respectively. Thus 044: (IV. 4. 168) 'a person of Kshatriya class'. This is the special ineaning of the word; it does not mean the son of a Raja.' The word पजनः will mean 'the son of aKing.. So also myrk: 'son of the father-in-in-law." 
क्षत्राद्धः। १३८ ॥ इत्तिः ॥सवारपत्ये पा प्रत्ययो भवति । 
138. The affix 'gha' comes, in the sense of a des cendant, after the word 'Kshattra'. 
Thus tria:'a Kshatriya.' This is also a class name. The son of will be wir: 11 The affix here should not be confounded with the technical q which means the affixes areg and g (1. 1. 22). 
कुलात्खः ॥ १३९ ॥ वृत्तिः ॥कुलधान्तान् प्रातिपदिकास्केवलाचापत्ये खः प्रत्ययो भवति। 
__139. The afix kha' comes, in the sense of a descendant, after the Nominal-stem kula' and a compound word that ends in ‘kula.' 
in the next sútra, it will be taught that the word ons when not preced ed by any other word, takes the affixes 'yat' and 'dhakan.' That indicat by implication that the present sätra applics to the simple word oors and to the words ending in कुल also. Thus कुलीनः, भान्यकुलीनः, प्रेषियकुलीनः । 
अपूर्वपदादन्यतरस्यां यड्ढकौ ॥ १४०। पदानि । अपूर्वपदान्. अन्यतरस्या. यत, ढफो । 
630 
- 
PATRONYMIC 847 # 
. [ BK. IV. CH. I.8 144 
पतिः ॥ भावयमानं पूर्वपरं यस्य तापूर्वपर, समाससंबन्धिनः पूर्वपदस्थाभावेन कुलामो विधेयने । म पंपदाल्कुलधशादन्यतरस्यां यत् कम्त्य ती प्रत्ययो भवतः। ताभ्यां मुक्त खोपि भवति । 
.. 140. The affixes 'यत्' and 'ढकञ्' come optionally after the word 'kula ,' when it is not preceded by any other word which gets the designation of pada (I. 4. 14). 
The word of means when the word 'kula' is not the last member of a compound. Thus कुन्यः , कोलेयकः। By the use of the word 'optionally, we get the affix also. Thus carita: u The word by: has udatta on the first syllable (VI. I. 213), 
The word T has been defined in l. 4. 14 The word is not a pada. Therefore बहकल vill take these affixes., Thus बहकुल्यः , पाहकलेयक: and बकुलीन: 
महाकुलादश खत्री ॥ १४१ ॥ पदानि ॥ महा-कुलात, अश, खो,। वृचिः ॥ मन्यतरस्यामित्युनवर्वते । पोखः। 
. 141. The affixes 'अम्' and 'ख' come option ally after the word 'mahâkula.' 
Thus माहाकुलः, माहाकुलीनः and महाकुलीनः ॥ The last is formed by the affixey of IV, 1. 139. 
दुष्कुलाड्ढक ॥ १४२॥ पदानि ॥ दुष्कुलान, दक् । कृत्तिः॥ दुष्कुलशनापत्य रक् प्रत्ययो भवति। 
___142. The affix 'ढ' comes optionally, in the sense of a descendant, after the word 'dushkala.' 
___ Thus कुलयः ॥ By the force of the word ' optionally' we get m also Thus दुष्कुलीनः ॥ 
स्वमुश्छः ॥ १४३ ॥ पदानि ॥ स्वसुः, छः। इतिः ॥ स्वसुधम्मादपत्ये छ: प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
143. The affix 'chha' comes in the sense of the descendant, after the word FIER 
This debars भण् ॥ Thus स्वसीयः the sister's son.' भ्रातुर्व्यच ॥ १४॥ पदानि ॥ भ्रातुः, व्यत, च ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ श्रावधवारपत्ये व्यत् प्रत्ययो भवाति । चकाराच्छन । 
144. The affix 'vyat' also comes, in the sense of a descendant, after the word 'भ्रातृ'। 
By the force of the word in the satra, we get the affix as well. 
BK. IV. CH. I. $147. ) . 
PATRONYMICH 
681 
This debars au Thus wraca: or wrofitar'the brother's son'. The g of the regulates the accent, making it svarità. 
व्यन्सपने ॥ १४५॥ पदानि ॥ व्यन्, सपने (भ्रातुः)। शत्तः ॥ भानुयार भ्यन्प्रत्ययो भवति समुदायेन पेशमियः सपरच्यते। 
145. The affix vyan' comes after the word 'ara' when the sense is that of 'an enemy'. 
The word wa mcans 'enemy'. The sense of descendant is not connoted by this affix. The difference between me and en is in accent (VI. 1. 185 and VI. I. 197), Thus पाप्मना भ्राम्येण "by the sinful enemy'. भातमा कण्टक: "the enemy is athorn". 
रेवत्यादिभ्यटक् ॥ १४६॥ पदानि ॥ रेवती-आदिभ्यः, ठक्॥ इत्तिः ॥ रेवंतीत्येवमादिभ्योऽपत्य उक् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
____146. The afix 'क्' comes, in the sense of ades cendant, after the words रेवती &c. 
This of course debars rs &c. Thus रेवती+उक-पतिका 'the son of Revati'. So also भाभपालिकः (VII.350) 
- परेवती, 2 मधपाली, 3 मणिपाली, 4 वारपाली, 3 वृकम्चिन, कान ? पार, 8 कर्णमाह, 9 एण्डमाह, 10 कुक्कूटान, 11 (ककुदास) 12 चामरमार, 
गोत्रस्त्रियाः कुत्सने ण च ॥ १४७॥ पदानि ॥ गोवस्त्रियाः कुत्सने, ण, च (उ). वृत्तिः ॥ अपत्यं पात्रप्रति गोषं प्रयते । गो या बी वाभिधायिनः शपले मा प्रत्ययो भवति चकाराकल, कुस्सने गम्यमाने । पिनुरसविज्ञाने मात्रा प्यपदेशोपत्यस्य कुत्ता 
147. And when contempt is to be expressed, the affix o comes, in the sense of a descendant, after a feminine word denoting a Gotra-descendant. 
By the force of the word in the sūtra we get the affix 55 also When one's father is not known, and he is called by a name derived from his mother, it casts a slur upon his legitimacy; hence such an epithet is a fat or 'a defamatory or contemptuons epithet'. Thus गार्गी is a female gotra-descen 
• dant. Her son will be called गार्ग:, as गार्गः जाल्मः॥ So also गार्गिक Similarly the son of ग्नुचुकायनी will be लघुकायनः and ग्लोधुकायनिक 
This affix being added to a Gotra word has the force of a Yuvan asfix, 
Why dowe say 'a Gotra descendant'. Observe कास्कियो बाल्मा (formed by T IV. 1. 120). Why do we say 'female descendant? Observe urgut 
आल्मः ॥ IVhy do we say 'when contempt is meant Observe गार्गेयो माणवकः which is to be explained as गाग्या अपत्यं पुमान् युवा भवति ।मानामहादेवपलसणाया प्रयोग इति नास्ति कुस्सा। 
682 
GGTRA किम् ॥ 
( BK. IV. CH. I. $ 189 
वृद्धाक्सौवीरेषु बहुलम् ॥ १४८॥ पदानि । वृद्धात, ठक्, सौवीरेषु, बहुलम् । वृणिः ॥ नासौवीरगोनारपत्ये बहुलं बक् प्रत्ययो भवति कुल्सने गम्बमाने। 
Kurikk. pagat ferinftatasaruffran 
एतीयस्वाकशापेयो गांचाबहुलं ततः। 
148. When contempt is to be expressed, the affix 39' is diversely added in the sense of a descendant after a Vriddha word denoting Sauvira Gotras. 
Thus met 'the son of Bhagavitti'. So also aruar formed from po (IV. 1. 83) aufm, and then adding # In the alterna tive we have the affix** (IV. 1. 101) as maatuti, so also auferre: # The word nur belongs to Subhradi class IV. 1, 123 : and forms ruta:, his son will be p urifier: or snurra: il or course, when antempt is not ex pressed, we have to fint: only. 
The operation of this sätra is, in fact, confined to the three words भागविनि, तार्णविनव, and भाकशापेय as given in the karika.. 
Q. What is the necessity of using the word 'Vrddha' in the satra, for the anuvritti of the word 'gotra' is understood in the satra, and a Sauvira class Nominal-stem formed with a Gotra affix will necessarily have a Vrddhi letter in its first syllable? The word Vyddha is employed in the sätra to stop the anuvștti of fare: ; for had 'Vddha' not been used, then with the anuvrtti of 
ity from the last sätra, there would have come the anuvštti of farur: also, but by using Vriddha' the anuvytti of 'Gotra' only is taken, and not that of 'striyah'. 
Why do we say " of the Sauviras"? Observe profesi#: # Why do we say 'in denoting contempt'? Observe tonfrerit T074511 Why do we say diversely'? The word indicates the anomalous nature of these four sūtras IV. 1. 147 to 150. Thus the first of these viz IV. 1. 147 only denotes contempt, the last of these viz IV. 1, 150, denotes Sauvira' only and not contempt; whilst the middle two namely IV. I. 148 and 189 denote both 'contempt' and 'Sauvfra'. 
$33711889 n geta u 8:, 3-7 (sortietail) वृत्तिः ॥ फिमन्तात्मातिपरिकानसावीरगोत्राक्पत्ये छ प्रत्ययो भवति षकाराक कुसने गम्यमाने । 
Kerikt w Bumt qurufor: Arti mar: 
सौवीरेषु च कुत्तायां ही योगी पदवित् स्मरेत् ॥ . 189. When contempt is to be expressed, the affix 3 (ils well as the allix G) comes in the sense of a des-' BXIV. CH. I. S. 151 1'. 
. 
Ag. for. 
. 
683 
cendant, after a Nominal-stem ending in the affis free and denoting a Sauvira Gotra. 
Thus the son of a will be a mara: formed by the affix ft (IV. 1. 154) as this word belongs to Tikadi class. The son of Yamundayani will be cither quartas or art 
But when contempt is not to be expressed, the son of arafas will be mamu Thus angerufat uttraff +Il. 4. 58)= art 
So also when persons of Suvira country are not meant, y is not added Thus काबनिः । 
The # of the sotra refers to per and not to find for a stern formed by fe will not have a Vriddhi letter in the first syllable and will not be called 
Vriddham's and the anuvritti of this word is understood in the satra. 
• According to the Karika, three ant stems, all belonging to Tikadi class, are only governed by this sūtra viz 44, pero and refren: # The son of 
9 is Varshyâyan ___ फाण्टातिमिमताभ्यां णफिी ॥ १५० ॥ पदानि । फाण्ढाहति-मिमताभ्यांण. for (Heitig) 
: * TetraThunusini arttapartyeen op het gerent : 
150. The affixes up and for come, in the sense of a descendant of a person belonging to Suvira country, after the words Phäntähriti and Mimata. 
This debars i By the rule of composition in 11. 2. 34, the word fata consisting of less syllables than 47°2764, ought to have been placed first. Its not being placed first in this sötra indicates, that Satra 1. 3. 10 docs not apply here. So that both the affixes of and fry are applied to cach of these words, and not one to each respectively, Thus poetaa: or postar ait: ;a: orrera: N 
When not denoting Sauvira Gotras, we have tearat and Happi (by I See IV. 1. 101 and IV. 1. 99) The word fiat belongs to Nadadi. class. (IV. 1. 99) 
galimit ry: 11348 11 To 56-lesti, vt: 1. वृत्तिः ।। कुरु इत्येवमादिभ्या प्रमेयोऽपत्ये ज्या प्रत्ययो भवति । 
151. The affix va comes, in the sense of a descendo. ant after the words Kuru' &c. 
Thus +09 : So also otra v The word takes the affix og by IV. 1. 172, so that the form hrey is cvolved both under the present 
684 
( BK. IV. CH. I. . 151 
sätra and sotrd 172; but the difference in these two words is this. The word me formed by the one of IV. 1. 172, loses its affix in the plural, because all of IV. 1. 172 is a Tadraja affix (see II 4 62): but the word formed by the present sätra retains its affix in the plural. As N The word om occurs in the Tikadi class (IV. 1. 154), and it takes as such the affix free. As 
कौरव्यामणि 
The word tot occurs in this class and it means the caste known as Rathakara. Rathakara is a caste a little lower than the twice-born. See Yajsyavalkya Smriti, V.95. But when the word 4T means a person who makes chariots, that is an artisan, it will take the affix not by this Satra, but by the succeeding sätra 
The word oft occurs in this class. Its derivative will be ther: There will not be puhvadbhava as required by VI 3. 34 &c For had th been punvadbhava, then by Heart rat, all Bha bases will become pubvad before a taddhita affix except ru Therefore केपिनी+ण्यकेन्+िण्य | At this stage rule VI. 1. 144 will appear and cause thc elision of Ra and we shall have केन-ब-कैश्य ॥ But this is not the form desired, hence the word कोधिनी is 
read with the feminine affix in the list. 
The word om takes this affix in the Vedic literature. Therefore, the form in the modern Sanskrit is incorrect. 
The word are occurs in this class With the exception of accent, it s treated in every other respect like a word of Kanvadi clase, a subdivision of Gargadi (IV. 4. 105) Thus disciples of M : will be formed by the affix 
(IV. 2. 111). As TR27 +0=1464: (VI. 1. 105). The plural will be TATAT:(11. 4. 64). The feminine gender will be proceft (IV. 1. 16) or armira (IV. 1.17). The Yuvan will be mad (IV. 1. 101) So also it will take 
· pro when the sense of collection &c is expressed (IV. 3 127 ): as THEAT * 
But as to accent, it will not be like Kagvadi words, for while those words being formed by the affix you will have udatta on the first syllable (VI. 1. 197) the accent of u will be governed by the # 
19, 2 Toft (), 3 , 4 **HTC (THE), 5 , 6 9,7 Tr #fa, 81, 9 forura (fa), 10 algust, 11 T (or ro) 12 4rty, 13 fogant, 14 art, ( i ), 15 gfx", 16 , 17 tarihe, 18 , 19 QUIRT, 205, 21 F T (TTT), 22 , 23 g, 24 gent (ac), 25 °, 26 74, 27 , 28 arurit, 29 3 a, 30 quira, 31 a, 32 
ATTY, 33 Furg, 34 , 35 putar, 36 yet, 37 , 38 oy, 39 UF 40. TIA, 41 uran, 42 urta", 43*44 45 m. 46 forest (rafmust), 47 rue en 
(ia a Vartika ). 48 FIFTIER, 49, 50 TECH 51 qrafa, 52 99sit, 53 pacar. . . 
BK IV. CH. I. F. 141 
किम। .. 
सेनान्तलक्षणकारिभ्यम । १५२॥ पदानि । सेनान्त, लक्षण, कारिम्या, व (ज्यः ). 
तः ॥ समान्तान् मातिपदिकाल्लक्षणम्यान कारिपचने यापत्ये या प्रत्ययो भवति । कारिसमा कार पांवन्दवायादीनां सपका। 
___152. The affix 'ग्य' comes in the sense of a des cendant, after a Nominal stem ending in 'send,' after the word ‘lakshana,' and after words denoting artisans. 
The word of means “handicrafts, such as weavers, barbers, potters, &c. Thus करिपेवा हारिपेण्यः, लामण्यः, तान्नाप्प, कोम्मकार्वा, मारिवः । 
उदीचामि ॥ १५३॥ वृत्तिः ॥ नान्तलक्षणकारियो ऽपत्वाम् प्रत्ययो भवति गीच मतेन । 
153. According to the opinion of Northern Gram-' marians, the affix 'rsr' coines in the sense of a descendant, after the words ending in senâ,' the word 'lakshana,' and words expressing artisans. 
Thus कारिषणिः, हारिपनि, लाक्षणिः, सान्नुवावि, कोम्मकासि | As to the word ael 'carpenter.' See IV. 1. 112. It will have areणः and तारयः, but will not take 
u The word alfa being a Vriddha, non-gotra word, will take for under IV. 1. 157 according to the Northern Grammarians, as dritararat: u 
तिकादिभ्यः फित्र । १५४॥ वृभिः॥तिक इत्येवमादिभ्यः सोन्योऽपत्ये फिम् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
154. The affix 'फिम्' comes, in the sense of a descendant, after the words fare &c. 
Thus farãi, atrara: 11 The word or occurs in this class. In taking this affix, it adds an intermediate u as avatar: y The word they occurs in this class, and denotes a Kshatriya: because it is immediately preceded by the word भार- उरसाते-उरणः क्षत्रियः, his son will beaurala with,भम which ends in an affix denoting a Kshatriya (IV. 1. 168). But the word tray formed by the affix orgy of IV. 1. 150 will take the affix TT and not fit of this Sotrai See II. 4.58 and 68. . . 
1तिक, 2 कितव, 3 संसा, 4 बाला (बाल) 5 पिखा, 6. (रप, 7 घाम (पाच) 8 सैन्धक, 9 यमुन्न, 10 रुप्य, 11 माम्ब, 12 मील, 13 मामिच, 14 गोकरथ, 15 कर (कर) 16 देवरथ, 17 देतल (सेतिल) 18 भोरस (मोरण), 19 कोरक, 20 भोपिक 21 भोलिकि, 22 पीपयत, 23 पेटयत, 24 शीकयत (शकयत) 25 क्षेतयत, 28 वानववं (पाजवत K.) 27 चन्द्रमस, 28 शुभ, 29 गङ्गा, 30 वरेण्य, 31 सुपामन, 32 भारत (मारer). 33 वापका, 4 ल्यका (सल्या; खल्व) 35 वृष, 36 लोमक, 37 रक्ष (उदय) 38. 
686 
[ BK. IV.CH. I.S. 157 
स, 39 मुवामन, 40 ब (कब), 41 मीत, 42 अगल, 43 रख, मायक, 45 अजयर, 46 वसु, 47 बन्धु, 48 भाषन्धका (as well asभाबन्धका). 
• कौसल्यफार्मार्यान्या च ॥ १५५॥ पदानि । कौसल्य-कार्मार्याभ्यां च (फिश्)। इनिः॥कोसत्यकार्यशाम्बामपत्ये किम् प्रत्ययो भवति । वार्मिकम् ॥रएकांखलकारछाग पाणां हर 
155. The affix it comes in the sense of a des cendant after the words Kausalya, and Karmirya . 
This debars gu Thus terrara: and rarerur: I These words, how ever, do not mean the son of art or 4744," but they mean "the son of कोखल, and कार" because of the following Vartika 
Vart: The words दग, कोसल, कमार छाग and am take the augment युट before the affix फिम॥ Thus दागन्यायनिः, कोसल्यायानिः, कामायायनि:, छाग्यायानः and yा. 
यायणिः । - अणोदयचः॥१५॥ वृतिः॥ अणन्तात् यथा प्रातिपदिकादपत्ये फिम् प्रत्ययो भवति । पार्णिकम् ॥ स्थवादीनां वा फिम् वनप्या. 
156. The affix 'phia' comes, in the sense of a des cendant, after a dissyllabic word ending in the affix 'अम्'. 
This debars Fu Thus 4rtreta: 'son of Kartra,' or 'son of a Hartra.. 
Why do we say "which ends in the affix story? Observe hizo son of Dakshi' (IV. 1, 101). Why do we say a'dissyllabic word? Observe मोपगविः 'son of भोपगई। 
Vart. The pronouns 'tyad &c." optionally take the affix f ormu Thus त्यादरायान: or ज्यादा, यासयनि: or यार, तादायान) or ता॥ 
उदीचां वृद्धादगोत्रत् ॥ १५७॥ पदानि ॥ उदीचा, वृद्धात, अगोत्रात् (फित्र) “वृतिः ॥ वृद्धं यच्छमरूपमगो तस्मादपरये फिम् प्रत्ययो भवति उदीचामाचार्याणां मतेन ॥ : 
157. According to the opinion of Northern Gram marians, after words with a Vriddhi in the first syllablo, when it is not a Gotra-name, the affis 'phig' is emplayod in the sense of a doscendant. 
___Thus भामगुप्तायनि: “ son of भामगुम," मामरक्षायणिः 'son of पामरस', मपिता ara' son of a barber.' This latter is formed in spite of IV, 1, 152, because rule 1. 4. 2 applies hera : Why do we say 'according to the opinion of Northern Grammarians ? Observe मामगुतिः. Why do we say after a word having a Vriddhi in the first syllable'? Observe amarer: 'son of 277. Why do we say 'not being a .Gotra-name? Observe भोपगचिः॥ .. 
BK. IV. CH. I. F. 160] 
. फिन् । 
687 
वाकिनादीनां कुरुच ॥१५८॥ पदानि वाकिन-आदीना, कुक्य (फिश)। शनिः ॥ वाकिन इत्येवमारिधः पम्ने योऽपत्ये पिम् प्रत्ययो भवति सत्समियोगेन पां कुगागमः। 
158. The augment (Kuk) is added to the words Vakina &c. when the patronymic affix 'phin' follows. 
This वाकिनकायनिा, गोरधकावनिः ॥ This debars R&c But if the anu. vritti of rat is read into this aphorism, then it becomes an optional rule. In that case we have in the alternative:-पाकिनिः, गारपि 
- 1 वाकिन, 2 गोपर (गारेष K.) 3 कार्कप (कार्कन्ध K, काक, परि . मिणोर्नलोपब। 
पुत्रान्तादन्यतरस्याम॥ १५९॥ इतिः ॥ पुत्लान्तावातिपरिकायः फिम्मन्बयस्तास्मिन् परभूते ऽन्यतरस्यां कुगागमो भवति पुत्लान्तरस्व। 
- 169. The augment 'कुद' optionally comes after a stem erding with the word patra, when the patronymic affix 'phin' follows. 
The anuvritti of the words "according to the opinion of Northern Grammarians when the word has a Vriddhi in the first syllable" must be read into this sūtra. Of course, a word ending in my cannot be a Gotra-word, for a Gotra word means a grandson or a still lower descendant. Hence a word ending in to having Vriddhi in the first syllable will take the afix RA by IV. I. 1573; the present aphorism only rules that it takes the augment कुक optionally. 
Thus we have three forms :- गार्गीपुषकायणिः or गार्गीपुत्रायणिः or गार्गीपुनिः । So also वारसीपुषकायणिः, वारसीपुत्रायणिः and वालीभिः।। 
प्राचामवृद्धात्फिन्बहुलम् ॥ १६०॥ पदानि । प्राचाम, अवृदात, फिन, बहुलम् । निः॥ भवृद्धाच्छन्नरूपादपत्ये फिन् प्रत्यया भवति बहुल माषां मनेन । 
.160. According to the opinion of Eastern Gram marians, after a stem not having a Vriddhi vowel in the first syllable, the affix 'phin' is diverscly employed in the sense of a descendant. 
Thus gorra: or more 'son of Gluchuka', u af r ova: or mitt घुम्बिः ॥ Why do we say, " not having a Vriddhi in the first syllable ", Ob serve प्रजदन्तिः ॥ The words माषाम, बहुलं and भन्यतरस्याम् all denote optional rules so the cmployment of any one of them would have here sufficed. Why two are used in this sätra viz. f and that? The mention of Grammarians is made as a token of respect, and that is used to express the non-uniformity of the satra construction. In some places this affix fe is not at all added, as mit, प्लातिः॥ .. ... 
588 
GOTRA AND YUYAN. 
(Bk. IV. CH I. $. 163 
। 
मनोजांतावभ्यतो पुरुच । १६१ ॥ मनो:-जातो, मश्-यती, पुरुच। वृत्तिः। मनुमनाम या हत्येती प्रत्ययो भवतस्त सानियोगेन पुगागमः खमतरायन पेखातिर्गम्यते । 
Karik भावे कुत्सिते हे मनोरोत्साकर स्मृतः। 
__ भकारस्य च पूर्वन्यस्तेन सिद्यवि माण। 
__161: The affixes अन and यत् come. after the word Manu', and the augment gk is added when these affixes follow, provided that, the whole word so formed denotes a class name (jati). 
• Thus मनु+पु+मम्-मानुषः a man or man-kindi. So also मनुका formed with anu These affixes here have not the force of Patronymics, 
ence they are not dropped in the plural, asमामपा: "men". When thedescen dant is to be expressed, we have the affix भण् as मन+मण-मानवः 'son of Manu', as in Tattu So also the word T4, there is changed into up and denotes the descendant of Manu, with the sense of contempt as well as dullness implied. 
अपत्यं पौत्त्रप्रभृति गोत्रम् ॥ १२॥ वृत्तिः ॥ पोलमति वापत्यं भगोषख भवादि। 
___162. A descendant, being a grandson or a still lorer offspring, is called Gotra. 
· When an offspring, with reference to a person, is the son's son of that person or lower than that, it is called Gotra. Thus the son of 'Garga' will be mit, and the son or grandsons &c of turt: with reference to Garga will be गायः Similarly पारस्वः.. 
Why do we say 'a grandson or a still lower descendant? The im mediate descendants or the son will not be called Gotra. Thus कौन्मिा , गानि। __ जीवति तु पश्ये युवा ॥ १६३॥ पदानि । जीवति, तु, वश्य, युवा (अपत्र-पौत्रप्र भृति)। वृत्तिः । मभिजनमबन्धो वंधः । तत्रभवो वंश्यः पित्रादि, स्तस्मिन् जीवति सति पोचपत्यपत्वं युवसई भवदि. 
163. But when one in a line of descent beginning with a father (and reckoning upwards ) is alive, the descen dant of a grandson or still lower descendant is called Yuvan only. 
The word to means an urinterrupted scries of family descent-or'a line'. One who occurs in such a line, like father &c, is called 44: u When such 
BK. IV. CH. 1. g. 164 1 
YUVAN 
.689 
a vanéya is alive, then the descendant of a grandson &c is called Yuvan. The phrase पोषमभूत्वपल in the sutra should be construed as पोषावर बर मात्र "He who is the descendant of a grandson &c In the last sätra, however, this phrase trurykate was properly construed by putting the word arrita in the case of apposition with any meaning "a descendant being a graodson &c* Thus the word Yuvan will be applied to a person who is at least fourth in the order of descent, from the propositus with reference to whom the derivative is made. Thus fy: being the head, we have mi: 
[ mt: (son or putra) 
rt (Gotra) 
l ayu:(Yuvan) if Garga or Gargi &c be alive). The force of the word in the satra is that it will be called Yuvan only, and not Gotra as well । भ्रातरि घ ज्यायसि । १६४॥ पदानि । प्रातरि, च, ज्यायसि (जीवति-अपल पौत्रप्रभृति-युना). वृत्तिः ॥ भावरि ज्यावासि जीवति कनीयान गुपसंतो भवति पोचपावेपन । 
164. When an elder brother is alive, the younger brother gets the title of Yuvan, being the descendant of a grandson &c. 
Even when a 79: like father &c is not alive (and a brother is not vanáya), the younger brother gets thc designation of yuvan, when the elder brother is alive; thus: 
गर्गः (dead 
mm: (dead) 
re: (dead) 
गाग्वणः 
The word fiet: is confined to ancestors like father &c, so a brother can never be a vaniya, because he is not the source from which the other brother ariscs. This sõtra applies to cases when Vansya is not meant. Thus Gårgyäyna ia the name of the younger brother with reference to the elder brother, Gargya; similarly Vetsyiyana, Dakhsāyaṇa, and Plakshayaņa. 
वान्यस्मिन् सपिण्डे स्थविरतरे जीवति ॥ १६५ ॥ पदानि । घा, अन्यस्मिन, स पिण्डे, स्थविरतरे, जीवति (अपत्य-पौत्र प्रभृति युषा)। वृत्तिः ॥ धातुरष्यस्मिन्सपिण्ड स्थाविरतरे जीवति पौत्वमभतेरपत्य जीवदेव युववंश वा भवति । 
690 
YUVAN 
[ BK. IV. CH. I. $ 167 
...165.. The living descendant of a grandson &c is called optionally a Yuvan, when a more superior sapinda other than a brother is alive. 
. The sapiņda relationship extends up to seven degrees. The word perfet means 'superior', and paperiat is comparative and means 'morc superior, that is to say, superior both by degree of descent and by age. The word fria is again read in this aphorism, though there is the anuvritti of Art also from IV. 1. 163. This frit of the sätra qualifies the word descendant, the Arafa which is understood by context qualifies the word sapinda thus . 
Garga (dead) 
: . . . . ... 
Gargi (dead) : Gargi (alive 
. . Gargya (alive) Gargya (dead) 
Gangyayga) or 
alive 
Gargya Here the uncle or the brother of a grand-father being alive, the desa cendant is optionally called Yuvan or Gotra. 
वृद्धस्य च पूजायाम् ॥ १६६ ॥ पदनि । वृक्षस्य, च, पूजायाम् (वा-युवा). इतिः॥भपस्यमन्तर्हित वृद्धमिति शास्त्रान्तरे परिभाषणाद्गो पद्धमित्युच्यते । वृद्धस्य युषसंज्ञा वा भव तिपूजायां गम्यमानायाम् । संज्ञासामागोत्रं युवप्रव्ययेन पुनरुच्यते। 
166. The Gotra is sometimes optionally regarded as Yuvan, when respectful reference to him is intended. 
The word Vriddha is another term for Gotra. As T r efrigor: or pia: "you honored Gargyayana or Gargya". This sätra is in fact a Vartika - and not a sätra of Påņini. Similarly at ATE art: or TT, TY 497 T your: or in 
Why do we say 'when respectful reference is intended'? Observe, 47444: and It The definition of Vriddham as given by other.. Gramma rians is मपस्यमन्सहित वृद्धम् ॥ यूनश्च कुत्सायाम् ॥ १६१ ॥ पदानि । यूनः च,कुत्सायाम् (धा-युवा)। त्तिः ॥ कुत्सायां गम्यमानायां युनो वा युवसंज्ञो भवति। 
167. The Yuvan is optionally spoken of as Gotra, when contemptuous reference to him is intended. 
Thus triat Hea: or pergunt : N When contempt is not intended, the only form is parta:!| This is also a Vartika and not a sötra. 
BK. IV. Ch. I. $ 169. 1 
जनपंदशब्दात्क्षलिंयादम् । १६८॥ पदानि ॥ जनपदयम्दात सत्रियाव अम् ।। वृत्तिः॥ जनपदयो यः सखियवाची तस्मादपलेऽम् प्रत्ययो भवति। पार्मिकम् । क्षत्मियसमानरामाज्जनपश्चगानस्व पजन्यपत्ववत् । 
. 168. The affix 245 comes in the serise of a descens dant, after a word, which while denoting a country, expresses also a tribe of Kshatriyas. 
Thus iait: 'the son of Pafichala', so also fra and Her arc Kshatri: yas who live in that country. Of course, when the word is only expressive of Kshatriya, but not of the name of a country, worst will not be used but pour the difference being in the accent. Thus itara: 'the son of Drůhya'; ART'the son of Puru.' Why do we say when it expresses Kshatriyas? Observe ATROTRE qurtare* = 93 quasi, (IV: 1.95) 'the son of Panchala a Brahmana'; so also ani u 
Vårt:-Let the same affix, which comes when the sense is that of the progeny, be added to a word denoting a country named after Kshatriyas, to denote the king thereof. Thus M TS-are the king of the Ksha triyas called Panchåla or of the country of Panchalas'. So also the king of the Kshatriyas or of the country of Vidcha'. 
The words Panchala &c.originally are names of Kshatriya tribes only, secondarily they have been applied to the country inhabited by those tribes, because the Taddhita affix dcnoting the country inhabited by them, is clided by IV. 2. 81. Thus the same word in comes to denote thc Kshatriya tribe as well as the country called Panchala. It will make practically little differ cnce to consider words like Panchala &c. as original (not derivative) name of countries as well as of Kshatriyas. In fact, Påņini himself considers them in the same light in this sutra, and does not think them to be derivative words, in spite of his own sätra IV. 2. 81. Those words when denoting a country are always in thc plural, as fyrr, in dcnoting the Kshatriya, they arc in the singular. __ साल्वेयगान्यारियां च ॥ १६९ ॥ पदानि । साल्वेय-गान्धारियां,च (अ).. 
पत्तिः ॥ साल्वंयगान्धारिशब्दाभ्यामपाये ऽम् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
169. The affix comes in the sense of a descend ant after the words Sålveya' and 'Gándhari'. 
Both these are names of countries and denote also Kshatriyas as well. Therefore, by sūtra IV. 1. 171 they having a Vțiddhi in the first syllable, would have taken the affix 'Ryan', the present sätra enjoins 'af' instead. Thus HTFIT: 'the son of Salvcya, or thc king of Salveya', : 'the son of Gandhari 
692. 
[ BK. IV.CH. I.S 
or the king of Gandharit The vartika untler Satra IV. 1. 168 given above applies here also, i.e. the affix denotes also thc king there of 
यमगधकलिंगसूरमसादण् ॥ १७॥ पदानि बच-मगध-कलिंग-सरमसात् अण (जनपदशदात-क्षत्रियात)। वृत्तिः ॥ अनपचनात् क्षत्रियाभिधायिनो यचो मगध कलिज सरमस इत्येतेभ्यमापत्येऽणपत्ययों भवति । 
107. The affix spot comes, in the sense of a des cendant, after dissyllabic words, and the words Magadha', 'Kalinga' and 'Suramasa', when they are the names of countries as well as of Kshatriyas. 
This debars भम्॥ Thus मांगः, पांगा, मागधः, कालिक, and सोरमसः 'the son as well as the king of Anga, Banga, Magadha, Kalinga and Suramasa." Similarly forg, A169: 11 The Vartika 'afunf' given above applies to this also, as मांगों पजा, गान्धारो पना &c. ___ वृद्धत्कोसलाजादाय ॥ १७१॥ पदानि । वृद्धरत-कोसल-अजादाद,ध्या 
(जनपदशब्दात्-क्षत्रियात). 
वृत्तिः ॥ जनपस्यमप्रियादित्येव । वृद्धाय प्रातिपदिकादिकापन्ताच कोखलाजावधवायां चापत्यै म्यर प्रत्ययो भवति॥ 
वार्तिकम् ॥ पाण्डोर्जनपदयमान छनिया डपण वक्तव्यः । 
___171. The affix 'ज्य' comes in the sense of a descendant, after a word having a Vriddhi in the first syllable, and after a word ending in short, and after the words 'Kosala' and 'Ajida', when they are the names of countries and Kshatriyas. 
This debars भम्॥ Thus, to give example of Vriddha words, भाम्बष्टप: tra: 'the sons or kings of Ambashţha and Sauvira'. Similarly to take words ending in short s. we have मावन्त्यः and कौन्त्यः 'the son or kings of Avanti and Kunti'. These are words ending in shortru So also कौसल्य: and भाजाया, which are neither Vriddhas nor end in short cu 
Vart:-The affix 'dyan' comes after the word 'Pandu' when it is the name of a country as well as ofa Kshatriya tribe. Thus पांडप:, otherwise it will be पांडवः ॥ See IV. 1.74 
कुरुनादिभ्यो ण्यः ॥ १७२॥ पदानि ॥ कुरु-नादिभ्योः, ण्यः। वृनिः ॥ जनपरगनाक्षस्त्रियादित्येव । कुरुशमन्नाहिन्यव प्रातिपरिकभ्याण्या प्रत्ययो भवति । 
___ 172. The affix ण्य comes after the word 'Kuru', and a word beginning with a, when these words denote a country, being the name of a Kshatriya tribe also. BK. IV. CI. I. 8174.] 
TADRAJA 
the form terra tra This also, as met 
How then in 
This debars'ap' and 'an'. Thus कोरम, नेपमा 'the son of Kuru and Nishadha: The affix denotes 'the king there of also, as कौरव्यो पमा How do you explain the form नेपधाईति पेरपी This is an archaic or Vedic form. How then in सनषषस्थार्थपतेः सुताय? This is a poetic license __ साल्वावयवप्रत्यप्रथकलकूटाश्मकादिश् ॥१७३॥ पदानि ॥ साल्वावयव-प्रत्याए कलक्ट-अश्मकात, म्॥ 
इमिः ॥ अनपायनान शास्त्रियादित्येव । साल्वावयवेभ्यः प्रख्यमयकलकूदासकायदेभ्यवापार प्रत्यय भवदि। 
Karikd खम्बस्सिनसला मरकाप गन्धयः। 
अलिशा परवण्डाम साल्वावलंशिवा. 
173. The affix comes in the sense of a descen dant, after a word which denotes any subdivision of the coun try of Sålva ; and after the words • Pratyagratha', 'Kalakūta', and 'Asmaka', when these are names of countries and of Kshatriya tribes. . . 
The word art is the name of a Kshatriya woman, her son will be Ettema: (IV. 1. 121) formed by *; also urr. formed by spor # The dwelling place of Ete will be also are which is the name of a country. 
The sub-divisions of the country called ara are six, viz Udumbarab, Tilakhalah, Madrakarab, Yugandharah, Bhuliigah and Saradandab. The patro nymic from these will be: भोम्बरि लखलिमाद्रकारित, योगधरिः,भोलिनिand पारदण्डित So also the affix tin' will be added to the words • Pratyagratha' &c. As 4e44fu:, zft: and safi # The affix has the force also of the king there 
of'. As भोपुम्बरोराजा According to Mahabhashya, the words Busa, Ajamidha, and Ajakanda also take this affix, as trai, taft: and h a s al 
ते तद्राजाः॥ १७४॥ वृत्तिः॥तेमादयस्तद्राजसंता भवन्ति। 
174. These (viz the affixes अ IV. 1. 168&c) are called Tadraja (the king there of') affixes. 
The affixes treated of in these six sutras 168 to 173 are called Tadraja. The pronoun refers to these only and not to all the affixes treated or before S. IV. 1. 168 ; for they have the special designation of Gotra and Yuvan sec II.462. The illustrations of these have already been given under each of the above six aphorisms. 
- कम्बोजाल्लुक ॥ १७५॥ पदानि ॥ कम्योजात-मुन (तद्राजस्य)॥ वृणिः ॥कम्बोजात् प्रत्ययस्य लुग भवति । पातिकम । कम्बोजादिभ्यो लुग्दचनं चोलापर्यम्॥ 
w 
TADRAJA 
. 
[ BK. V. CH. I. $ 177 
175. After the word • Kamboja', there is elision by luk' of the Tadrija affix. 
Namely the affix *. which would have come after the word ty because it denotes a country as well as a Kshatriya tribe, is elided. Thus art. The king of Kamboja, 
drt:- It should be stated rather after Kamboja and the like, because we find the affix elided after Chola' &c. Thus waithe king of Cholas'. So also केरला एक सपन। 
त्रियामवम्तिकुन्तिकुरुभ्यश्च ॥१७६ । पदानि ॥ नियाम, अवन्ति-कुन्ति-कुक 
FF: il fathastust 987 arxa ferraforirari poterat 
176. In denoting a feminine name, the Tadrâja is clided after the words Avanti, Kunti and Kuru. 
That is to say the affix 'qyan'. (IV. 1.171) after the word "Avanti! and! Kunti', and the affix 'qya! after the word 'Kuru' are elided when the word to be formed is the name of a female. Thus metto Frat and a daughter or princess of Avanti, Kunti of Kuru'. The word om takes a in the feminine by IV. 1. 66. Why do we say 'in denoting the feminine'> Observe mrfra, atrez: and 
. T U glave u qera 1 348:-- (feruru, uk) यूनिः॥ भकारप्रत्ययस्य तद्वाजस्य नियामभिधेयायां लग्भवति ॥ 
177. In forming the feminine of a word which ends in the masculine in the Țadrâja affix 39, the affix is luk clided. 
Thus m. पोरसेनः परसेनी; m. मा .मही ॥ The word मत: of the satra should not be construed by the rule of tadanata vidhi (1. 1.72) If so con. strued it will mean "a Tadraja affix ending in my is elided". There have been taught five Tądraja affixes, namely 'an ()', 'aņ (*)', 'Ayah (a)', 'aya ()'and 'in (o'. Of these the first four all end in w; thercfore all these four affixes should be elided in the feminine. But this is not the meaning of the author ; for had it been so, there would have been no necessity of the previous satra, for then the present satrą would have covered the case of 'Avanti', Kunti' and 'Kuru'. But the very fact of this satra IV. 1, 176 indicates by arse that the ladanta vidhi does not apply here. Therefore, the feminine of 
48 is 1977891, of arata is aretat 
BK. IV.CH. I. 178] . 
TADRAJA 
698 
नप्राच्यभर्गादियाँधेयादिभ्यः ॥ १८ ॥ पमिः ॥ पाय-यो मारियो थोपवादिश्चमोलमस्या भवति । महत्वनेन विवाहमा पति पियदि 
178. The Tadaraja affix is not elided in the fe minine, if it forms the names of the Kshatriyas of the East, or it comes after the word 'Bharga' &c and 'Yaudheya' &c. 
This sätra debars the elision of the Tadraja affix # (required by the last sutra) Thus पापानी, देदेही, मांगी, वांगी, मागधी these being all Eastern people dwelling in countries cast of the Saravati river. Similarly of got & Thos भार्गी, कारुपी, कैकेयी. So also of यो &c Thus पोषयी, जौवी and प्रेकेबी। 
The Tadraja affixes taught above are five, but besides these there are others taught in the fifth Adhyaya (V. 3. 112 to 119) The word ata is formed by such an affix (V. 3. 177 मम्) The present rule therefore indicates by impli cation, that the rule of elision contained in IV. 1. 177 applies not only to the Tadraja affixes taught in this chapter, but to the Tadraja affixes taught in V. 3. 112 to 119. Thus the Tadraja affix my in (V. 3. 117) added to yg &c. is elided in the feminine: cg. m. पायपि, mभानुमिमी-&c 
1 भर्ग, 2 कप (करूप), कब, कमीद 5 सा, 6 सुस्याल 7 रह (रण and उरस). B कोरग्य. 
1 यौधेय, १ कोकेय, 3 चौक, + ज्यााणेय (यावाणेव), 5 धोतेय (पातेवः पातेव) विगत, 7 भरत, 8 उपनिर, गर्ने। 
भोरम् । अथ चतुर्थाध्यायस्य द्वितीयः पादः।। 
BOOK FOURTH. CHAPTER SECOND 
तेन रकं रागात्॥१॥ वृत्तिः॥ तेनति तृतीयासमर्थाद्वागविणेषवाधिनः शमानमित्यतास्मिन यथाविहित प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
1. The affix अए already ordained (IV. 1. 83) comes after the name of a colour in the sense of "colored thereby". 
The verb mans to change white into arsther color. That by which a thing is coloured is called पगः 'color'. तेन 'by which',i.cafter a word in the instrumental case in construction, being the name of a particular colour. Thus roop TT 1914'a cloth coloured of a dull red'. So also wir.184, कोसम्मम् । 
Why do we say रागात् "after the name of a color"? Observe देवरचने तं वनम, here the affix मण will not come after the word 'Devadattena', for though it is in construction in the instrumental case, yet it is not the name of a colour. 
___In the sentence "कापायो गभस्य कणों, हारिद्री कुक्कटस्यादी" the words कापाव and grity are used metaphorically. - 
From this sitra up to IV. 2. 12 inclusive, the affixes are to be added to the word which is in the instrumental case in construction in a sentence (IV. 1. 82): as in the last chapter, the affixes were added to a word in the genitive case. 
लाक्षा रोचना शकल कर्दमाठ ॥२॥ पदानि ॥ लाक्षा, रोचना, शफल, कर्दमात, ठक्॥ पुचिः ॥ लाक्षादिभ्यो गगधनेभ्यस्वतीयासमयेभ्यो रक्तमित्येतस्मिनायें उप्रत्ययो भवति । वार्तिकम ।। मील्या मन् वनष्यः॥ वा.॥पीतात् कन्वनष्यः । पा.. हरिदामहारजना यामम्बनाया। 
BK. IV. CH. I. 54] : 
697 
2. The affix 4 comes, in the sense of colored thereby, after the words lakshâ, rochana, sakala, and kardama, (which being names of colours, are in the instrumental case in a sentence). 
This debars भण. Thus लाभाया रन प लाभिकम्, so also ऐचनियर, Ur and 4 
According to the opinion of Patanjali, the affix my also comes after 17 and 4: 1 Thus *4 and 1411 According to Mahabhashya the words vairs and do not occur in the s@tra, but are given in the Vartika. 
. Vårt:-The affix ray comes after frit: as frut - ON 
Vart:The affix (1. 3. 8) comes after fra, as rata - rata 
Vårt:--The affix comes after for and MOT, as fers and auto पजनम्॥ 
pour To: T. वृत्तिः ॥ हतीयासमर्यान् नक्षमविशेषवाधिनः धमार पुक्त इत्येतस्मिायें ययारिहिवं प्रत्ययो भवति । घोसो चुनाः, कालपेस भवति। .. 3. The affix au already ordained 1V. 1. 83 comes after a word in the instrumental case in construction, which is the name of a lunar mansion, to signify a time connected with the asterism. 
. A time is said to be connected with an asterism when the moon is in conjunction with any one of such asterism. Thus goa, fa, &c are lunar asterisms, when the moon is in any one of these asterisms, then the affix is added to the name of such asterism in order to denote time of such conjunction. Thus go to a: (VI. 4. 149) e. 8. Altusu: "th: night in which moon is in Pushya". So also r ufti ;TH 'the month in which the moon is full in Pushya i. e. December', so also A194 "the month Magha' &c. 
Why do we say that connected with the asterism' i Observe te HET TUR: 1 Why do we say 'time'? Observe gregor : 
pratt i 8 m; Fra a 9-a 
. वृत्तिः॥ पूर्वेण विहितस्य प्रत्ययप्य भवति अविणेप। 
4. The affix above ordaiued is elided by lup, when there is no specification. 
That is the affix enjoined by the preceding aphorism is elided if no specification is to be understood or a particular portion of time such as 
698. 
(Bk. IV. CH. 1. $ 7 
night &c. Thus Hid: ger 'to day belongs to the asterism Pushya' meaning that to-day the moon is in conjunction with Pushya; but by 'to-day' neither the day time in particular nor the night time in particular is meant, but both alike. The time is day and night, when there is no specification of such time, whether it is day or night, then there is elision. 
संज्ञायां स्रवणाश्वत्याभ्याम् ॥५॥ त्तिः । सवणयावत्ययात्पन्नस्य प्रत्ययस्य लुइ भवति संज्ञायां विषये ।। 
8. The affix above ordained is elided by lup, after the words Sravana and Asvatha, when the whole word so formed is an appellation, and there is specification of time. 
Thus T UTT, ETT HES: "the night called Sravana; the Muharta called Asvattha". The affix being clided by Jup, why should not I. 2. SI apply here? We should say otr: afer and not put urh: The reason is that 
E' is an irregularly formed word, as Panini himself uses it in sätra IV. 2. 23. Why do we say 'when it is a Name or Sanjna? Observe croft or Argestur: 1 
relos: H&N fallai II त्तिः ॥ नक्षबहनदास्तृतीयासमर्यागने काले छः प्रत्ययो भवति विशेष वा विपेच 
6. The affix 3 comes after the Dvandva cont pound of the names of lunar mansions, when it is in the instrumental case in construction, to signify time connected with the asterism whether there be a specification or not. 
Thus tria ufti, faqataiteme: So also when there is no specification : as भय राधानुराधीयम, अद्य तिष्यपनववीयम् ।। The affix here in these two last cases is not elided, though there is no specification of time, because the present satra, being a subsequent sútra, will debar IV. 2. 4 which ordains lup (I. 4. 2). 
रष्टुं साम॥ ७॥ वृत्तिः ॥ तेनेति नृतीयासमपर्धा दृष्टं सामेश्यतास्मन्नये ययाविहितं प्रत्यया भवति, यद् दृष्ट साम घेत्तद्रवति ॥ 
7. The affix mur (IV. 1. 83) comes, after a word in construction in the Instrumental case, in the serise of seen the thing scen by the one whose name is in the Instrumental case, being the Sama Veda. 
Thus 
ar "the portion of the Sama seen by (or reveal. ed to) Kruncha." So also a n t ATA 
BK. IV.CH. II.S9) 
सिः ।। कलियबाखतीवासमा सामेष्येतस्मिन्नय रहमत्ययो भवति॥ पातिकम् ॥ सर्वगानिकलि यांरग्वनम्बः ॥ पार्टिकम ।।टे सामनि भावारिस्वतीयकम्पम् । पार्मिकम् ॥ बातचार्य योन्येन बाधितः पनाविधीयते स वा रिसरतीति पत्नयर। पार्मिकम् ॥तीवादीका स्वायें पा वनम्बः ।। वाचिकम् ।। म विचायाः॥ पार्निकम् ।। गोगरापदियो । Ktrika दृष्टे सामनि जाते च हिरण्डिा विधीयते । 
वीयावीकन विधाया गोवाइवादिन्यते।। 
8. The affix a comcs, in the sense of Sama Veda scen, after the word Kali', being in the instrumental casc in construction. 
This debars भण॥ Thus कलिना साम-काले। "The Sama Veda revealed to Kali". This sūtra is really a Vartika and not a sútra of Paņini 
Vart: The affix .dhak' comes always after for and ; not mere ly in the sense of Sama-Veda seen. Thus मग्रिना इष्ट साम-मानेयम् 'the Sama. Veda revealed to Agni'. ममी भ% भामेथन् 'who stays in Agni' (IV. 3.53) भने पगई ."what has come from Agni" =माग्रंयम् (IV. 3.74) &c. Similarly कालेब means 'the Sama-Veda scen by Kali, he who stays in Kali, what has come from Kali &c. 
Vårt: The affix spor is optionally treated as if it had an indicatory when the sense is that of Sama-Veda seen. Thus उशनसा दृष्टं साम-भोधनसम् or भोशनम् (the force ofडित् being to elide their portion; VI.4.143) 
Vart:-The affix मर in the sense of 'born', is optionally treated as for provided that it be that which being debarred by IV. 3. 11, is rer ordaincd by IV. 3. 16. The affix भण् governs all sutras up to IV. 4 2 by force of IV. 1. 83.; but it is debarred by F of IV. 3. 11, and is re-ordained In IV. 3. 16. Thus शतभिपशि मातः- तमिपः or प्रतभिषाः । 
Vart:-The affix ईका comes, optionally, vithout changing the sense after words ending in तीय" Thus तीयीकम् or द्वितीयकम्, तीयीकम् or तृतीक्कम। 
____Vart:-Not so when it qualifics विया, as द्वितीया or तृतीया पिया। - Vart:-The affix IV. 3. 126 has the force of "Sama-Veda scen" when it comes after a Gotra-word. This भापगवकम् or कापरवकम् 'the Sama Veda seen by Aupagava, or Kapatara'. The affix comes after a word dcnoting a Gotra or Charapa. 
वामदेवाड्, व्यड्, त्यो ॥९॥ पदानि । वामदेवात्-यत्-ज्यो । वृत्तिः ॥ वामदेवशमशन नृतीयासमर्थात् इष्टं सामस्याम्मन्नर्थे उपत् उपत्यता प्रत्ययो भवतः॥ Karika सिले यस्यतिलोपेन किमर्थं ययता डिसी। 
महणं माता भूवामप्यस्य नमस्परे ।। 
700 
(BK. IV. CH. II 5 11. 
9. The affixes are and come in the sense of the Sama-Veda seen, after the word Vamadeva, being in the Instrumental case in construction. 
This debars भण् ॥ Thus पामदेवेन वर्ट बाम वामदेब or वामदेव ॥ The indicatory in 'dyat' shows that has svarita accent (VI. 1. 125) 
Q. What is the use of the indicatory ? 
Ans. The final syllable is elided when a fan affix is added, by VI. 4. 143. 
Q. The final y of it would have been elided without making this affix for, by the rule VI. 4. 148, then what is the use of making this affix fora 
Ans. Well, the author here indicates by jnapaka, the existence of these two maxims of interpretation, viz. Paribhashas F at 
T ra"when a term void of anubandhas is employed, it does not denote that which has an anubandha attached to it". 1945 T raita " when a term with one or more anubandhas is employed it does not denote that which, in addi tion to those, has another anubandha attached to it". 
For had and a been only taught instead of dya' and 'dyat', then by rule VI. 2. 156 the final of such word, with the negative particle 9, would take udatta on the final, but that is not the case. Therefore w e is not finally acute, but has acute on the first syllable, taking the accent of the Indeclinable (VÍ. 2. 2). As m enu 
frent, fo rata il aften: ty: 1 वृत्तिः ॥ तेनेति तृतीयासमर्थात्परित इत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे यथाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति, योसौ परिवतो त्यस walau 
10. The affix spot comes, after a word in the Instrumental case in construction, in the sense of surround ed' the thing so surrounded being 'a chariot'. 
Thus the aftgat ry:z ar: “a chariot surrounded with cloth". So also r :, tror 1 Why do we say 'the thing so surrounded being a chariot 
Observe वनेण परिदतः कायः the body surrounded with cloth the word परित means covered from all sides. The affix will not be used is the chariot is not completly surrounded. As छान परिपतोरपः॥ - पाण्डुकम्बलादिनि ॥११॥ पदानि पाण्डु-कम्बलात्ननिः। 
इत्तिः ॥ पाण्डकम्बलधब्दात सूतीयासमर्धात् परिश्तो रयायतस्मिन्नर्थे नि प्रत्ययो भवति। 
11. The affix xia comes after the word qrugs, being in the third case in construction, in the sense of 
surrounded', the thing so surrounded being a chariot'. 
BK. IV.CH. II.314]. 
मर। 
- 700 
This debars au Thus from 'a carriage covered with a white woolen blanket'. The word qruan means the housing of a royal elephant. The form 979maris would have been obtained by the affix of of V. 2. 115, the present sutra is made in order to debar the affix for ___ पवैयाघ्रादम् ॥ १२॥ पदानि ॥ वैप-धयाघ्राद-अम् । 
पत्तिः दीपिण्यायोर्विकारभूते चर्मणी पवैया, ताचा हतीयासमाभ्यां परिहतो त्य इत्येतस्मिन्न ऽम् प्रत्ययो भवति 
12. The अञ् comes after the words 'dvaipa' and vaiyâghra' being in the third case in construction, in the sense of 'surrounded', the thing so surrounded being 'a chariot'. 
Thus पेन परिवतो त्याप 'a car covered with a tiger's skin'. So also देवापः॥ This affix भर debars भण, the difference between these two being in accent only. ___ कौमारापूर्ववचने ॥१३॥ कौमार-अपूर्व-धचने । 
पतिः ॥ कौमारे इत्येतापत्ययान्तं निपास्यते भूपचने । Karika कोमारापूर्ववचने कुमाया भाविधीयते। . 
मार्वल यहा तस्याः कुमार्या भवतीदिया। 
13. The word kaumara' is irregularly formed by adding the affix ore, when meaning 'virginity'. 
___ Thus कोमारो भतां अपर्वपति कुमारीमुपपन्न: "the husband of a virgin'.ie one whose wife was given to him in marriage while she was a maid (not a widow) So also कोमारी भार्या - कुमारी मपूर्वपतिः पतिमुपपन्ना"a virgin wife"i.cawife who is taken in marriage while she was a maid (not a widow. In both these cases the word refers to the woman. 
The word wart is formed by adding a to HIT Thus farata th: - कोमार; सस्यबी कोमारी भार्या। 
तत्रोधृतममत्रेभ्यः ॥ १४॥ पदानि । तत्र-उधृतम, अमत्रेभ्यः. वृत्तिः ॥ तत्रेति सामीसमर्थादमत्रवाधिनः पब्दातमित्येतस्मिन्नर्ये यथाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ . 
14. The affix tu already ordained (IV. 1. 83) comes in the sense of placed thereon' after words denoting vessels, when such words are in the locative case in construc tion. 
The word hy means, 'thereon' i.e. a word in the seventh case in cons. truction. भमंत्र means 'vessels': उदतम् means 'placed', or literally the' reluse 
70 . 
.. 
. 
बन्। 
. 
[ BR. IV. CH. II. 17. 
of dinner'. Thus atrast: EUR gat: "boiled rice placed on a dish." So also मास्तिका, कापर : Why do we say "after a word denoting vessel" ? Observe TUTTO मोदनः ' boiled rice placed on the hand:: 
The word as, denoting a word in the locative case in construction', governs the six subsequent sätras upto IV. 2. 20 inclusive : 
स्थण्डिलाच्छवितरिते॥ १५॥ पदानि स्थण्डिला-शयितरि-व्रते। वृतिः॥ स्थण्डिलानात्सममीसमर्थात् यिनयभिषेवे यथाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति, समुदायेन चद्वतं गम्यते॥ 
15. The affix. अण already ordained (IV. 1.83) comes after the word foriga being in the serenth case in construction, in the sense of 'a sleeper thereon', and the whole word so fornisd denotes 'aperson performing a row'. 
. Thus स्थण्डिले पयितुं व्रसमस्य: स्थाण्डिल: "a person who has taken the ror to sleep on the bare ground' i. c. an ascetic or a Brahmachart. 
. Why do we say 'vor'? Obserre स्थण्डिने घेते ब्रह्मदतः 'Brahmadatta sleeps on the bare ground', not as a matter of vow, but of necessity or plea sure. The word aa mcans a 'vow or an observance ordained by religious codes'.. 
संस्कृतं भक्षाः ॥ १६॥ पदानि । संस्कृतम्-भक्षाः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ सति सामीसमर्थासंस्कृतमित्येतस्मिन्नर्थे यथाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति यत्संस्कृतं भक्षायने मवन्ति ॥ 
The affix my comes after a word ending in the locative case, to denote what is prepared therein'-if that which is so prepared be 'granular food'. 
Thus ute FMT YHT=Ter: 'a cake fried in the pan'. Similarly FrTUT: कौम्भाः ॥ Why do we say." if it means food ? Observe पुष्पपुटे संस्कृतो मालागुणः ॥ 
शूलोखाद्यत् ॥ १७॥ पदानि ॥ शूल-उखात्-यत्। त्तिः ॥ शुलशन्नादुखाशनाप सप्तमीसमर्थात्सस्कृतं भक्षा इत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे यत् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
17. The affis ta comes in the sense of prepared food, after the words and sen ending in the locative case. . This debars 37 (IV. 1.83) As has its or roasted on a spit. ie. meat. So also फ्यम् 'flesh boiled in a pot'. 
दभठक् ॥ १८॥ पदानि ॥ वनः उक्॥ इचिः ॥ इपिशामान सममीसमर्थासंस्कृतं भक्षा इत्येतस्मिन्नर्षे ठक् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ . Bk. IV. CH. II. $ 21. ] 
703 
Lion. 
18. The affix of comcs, in the sense of prepared food, after the word dadhi' ending in the locative case in construction. 
Thus pita HFNT= a 'made of coagulated milk'. This form will be evolved by IV.4. 3, but the formed by that rule mcans rur d i e anything prepared or seasoned with curd ; while the * of this sdtra means 'curd itsell seasoned with salt or, pepper'. 
उदश्वितोभ्यतरस्याम् ॥१९॥ पदानि । उदश्वितः, अन्यतरस्याम् ॥ कृतिः ॥सभिडमान् वामी समर्यान् संस्कवं भसारत्येतस्मिन्नर्यज्यतरस्या प्रत्ययो भवति । 
19. The affix of comes in the sense of “prepared food', optionally after the word separa ending in the locative case in construction. 
Thus (VII. 3. 51), or rarere by my in क्षीराड्दम् ॥२०॥ पदानि । क्षीरात ॥ चिः ॥ भीरपनासममीसमर्थात्संस्कृतं मला इत्येतस्मिन्न गम् प्रत्ययो भवति 
20. The affix y comes in the sense of prepared food', after the word "Kshîra' cnding in the locative case in construction. 
This debars on Thus it ha:=fiat 1714'milky gniel' सास्मिन्पर्णिमासीति संशायाम् ॥ २१॥ पदानि । सा-अस्मिन्-पौर्णमासी-ति संज्ञायाम्। वृतिः ॥ सति पयमासमा भस्मिन्निति साम्यय यथाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवात, यनवयमासमय पोर्णमा forfa N 
21. The affix au comes after the name of a full moon-night, to denote the division of time in which the night falls. 
The word # means that'. It is in the nominative case, therefore by IV. 1. 82 it means that "after a word in thc first casc in construction". 'in it'i.e in the sense of a seventh case. rfareita "if the word in the first case in construction is the name of a full-moon night ". The word for after Trorrat is used for the sake of clearness. The word rare does not occur in the original såtras of Panini; but is added by a Vartika; and means if the word so formed is an appellative', i. e. if it is the name of a month, a half month and a year. The whole sätra therefore literally translated means "the affix soy alrcady ordained (IV. I. 83) comes in the sense of a 7th case affix, after a word in the ist case in construction, if that word is the name 
704 
[ BK. IV.CH. II.S23 
of a full-moon-night, provided that the whole word so formed is an appella tion of a month, a half-month or ayear". 
Thus ant araret for at are: 'the month Paus i. c that month in which the moon is full in the asterism Pushya'. Similarly are: and पोषः संवत्सरःn But not so in the following पोपी पोर्णमासी मस्मिन् पराये, because daSaratra is not a month or a fortnight or a year. 
The words to and frere have the same force here, namely, they make the word an appellative. The word tarare added to the satra by the Vartika is a redundancy. 
. The word पार्णमासी is formed by adding भण to पूर्णमास ॥ Or it may be evolved in this way:-पुणों मा:-पूर्णमाः, पूर्णमास इयम् पौर्णमासी ॥ The word माः 
means " moon". 
आग्रहायण्यश्वत्याक् ॥ २२ ॥ पदानि ॥ आग्रहायणी, अश्वत्थात्-ठन् । वृत्तिः॥सास्मिन्पोर्णमासीति पर्वमनुवर्तते । भापहायणीयम्दावस्थपदापमयमाखमपौर्णमास्युपाधि का अस्मिन्निादि साम्य उक्प्रत्ययो भवति । 
22. The affix ठक् comes in the sense of the loca tive case after the words 'agrahảyani' and 'asvattha' ending in the first case-affix in construction and being the name of a full-noon night. 
The words सास्मिनपार्णमासीति of the last sitra govern this also. This debars भण्॥ Thus भापहायणिको मासः - the month called Agrahayanikaie in which the moon is full in the asterism of Agrahayana. Similarly भावत्यिक . 
विभाषा फाल्गुनीश्रवणाकार्तिकीचैत्रीभ्यः ॥२३पदानि । विभाषा, फाल्गु नी, श्रवणा-कार्तिकी चैत्रीभ्यः। वृत्तिः ॥ फाल्गुन्याश्वः पौर्णमासीमास्ते यो विभाषा ठक् प्रत्ययो भवति, खास्मिन पौर्णमासीति संज्ञाया मित्येतस्मिन् विषये ॥ 
23. The affix ya optionally comes after the words ' Phalgunt', ' Sravana', 'Kartiki' and 'Chaitri' being the names of full moon nights, the whole word so formed being a Name denoting a division of time (a month, a fortnight or a year) in which the moon is full. 
___ Thus फागुनः or फाल्गुनिक प्रावणः or भावणिक, कार्तिकः or कातिकिक, पेत्रः or पैत्रिकः॥ This optionally ordains ठक् instead of भण।। ___ सास्य देवता ॥ २४॥ पदानि । सा-अस्य, देवता. 
इतिः ॥ सति प्रथमासमीदस्योत षष्पर्य यथाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति, यत्मथमाखमय देवता पेत् सा বরি। 
..... 
. 
. 
BK. IV. Ch. II.S7.1 
। 
705. 
24. The affix m (IV. 1. 83) is added to the name of a deity when someting is to be spoken of as his. 
· H="after a word in the 1st case in construction' why 'in the sense of a sixth case'. Trat if the word in the first case is the name of a deity'. Thusrन्द्रो देवताऽस्य ऐनम् 'oblation sacred to Indra'. Similarly मादित्यम् 'oblation belonging to aditya'. So also वाईसत्यम, प्राजापत्वम् ॥ Why do we say after the name of a deity? Observe, कन्यारेषतास्व, no affix is added to कन्या॥ In the sentnces ऐनोमन्त्रा: and भाग्नेयो ब्रह्मणोदेवतयात the affix is added by analogy. . 
The whole phrase ETSFP governs up to sūtra IV. 2. 35. Though the word a was understood in this sutra by anuvritti from sutra IV. 2.21, its repetition is for the sake of indicating that the anuvritti of car does not extend to it. The affix ordained by this sätra has the force of indicating 'lord of oblations like Purodasă &c offered in a sacrifice'. 
कस्येत् ॥ २५ ॥ पदानि । कस्य, पत् चिः॥ कस्य इकारादेवो भवति प्रत्ययसन्नियोगेन। 
25. The short is the substitute of the final of , when the affix is added., 
Thus n+भ कि +मण्=के+म-कार्य “oblation sacred to Ka". As कार्य हविः, कार्यमककपालं निपेत् ।। 
शुक्रादू घन् ॥ २६॥ पदानि । शुक्रात्-घन् । निः॥ शुक्रवात्सास्य देवतेत्यस्मिन्न पम् प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
26. The affix at comes in the sense of “that its deity", after the word 'Sukra... 
This debars भण (IV. 1.83). Thus क पन् प्रक्रियम् इतिः (VII. I.) 'an oblation belonging to Sukra'. Thus शुक्रियोऽध्यायः॥ 
अपोनप्पान्नप्तृभ्यां घः ॥ २७॥ पदानि । अपः नप्त, अपाम् नप्तृभ्याम् घः। वृत्तिः ॥ भपोनप्त अपान्नप्त इत्येताम्यां घः प्रत्ययो भवति सास्य देवतेत्यस्मिन्निपये। 
27. The affix घ comes after the words 'aponaptri' and 'apannaptri', in the sense of 'that its deity'. 
This debars भएThus भपोनत्रिय हविः or भपानपियम् ॥ The words TTT and 91995 are the names of two deities; these words irregularly assume the form ending in 797 when the affix is to be added. 
छ च ॥ २८॥ पदानि । छ, च॥ वृत्तिः । अपोनप्त भपान्नप्त हत्येताभ्यां छकारः प्रत्ययो भवति सास्य देवतस्यस्मिन्विषये. वार्निकम् ॥छपकरणे पैङ्गाक्षीपुत्वादिन्य उपसंख्यानमः ।। वार्निकम् ॥ हातरुद्राच्या 
706 
[ BK IV. CH. II. I. 32. 
28. Also 'Chha' is added to Aponaptri' and * Apannaptri' in the sense of that its deity'. 
The affix 5 also comes in the sense of "that its deity" after the word Aponaptri and Apannaptri. This debars भए ॥ Thus भपोनपणी or मपानबीयर * oblation sacred to Aponapat or Apannapat'. This is made a separate sútra, in order to prevent the application of rule I. 3. 10. For if it was included in the last, the sūtra would have rùn thus: "The affixes q and come after Aponaptri and Apannaptri", the meaning of which according to maxim I. 3. 10 would have been the affix q comes after Aponaptri, and after Apanna. ptri". But this is not what the author intended. Hence two distinct såtras. 
Vist:—The affix 5 comes after the words fritur &c As, forft पत्रीयम, वार्षविन्दवीयम्।। 
Vårt :- The word tau takes 4 and 5 both: c. g. urotan and सवद्रियं । . महेन्द्रादू घाणी च ॥ २९॥ पदानि । महेन्द्रात, घ, मणौ च । 
वृत्तिः॥ महेन्द्रबहाद पाणी प्रत्ययो भयंता, चकारच्छम, सास्य देवतेत्यस्मिन्विपये ॥ 
___29. The affix घ, and अण् as also the affix छ, come after the name Mahendra, in the sense of "this its deity". 
___As महेन्द्रीयम, महेन्द्रियम् and माहेन्द्रम् 'oblation sacred to Mahendra'. 
सोमा ट्यण् ॥ ३०॥ पदानि । सोमात्, व्यण् । . त्तिः ॥ सोमपना पण्प्रत्ययो भवति सास्थदेवतेत्यस्मिन्विषये ॥ 
30. The affix ट्यण् comes after the name 'Soma', in the sense of "this its deity". 
This debars sai1 The qof 199 causes Vriddhi. Thc z causes the affixing ofली in the feminine. Thus सौम्य हविः, सोम्यं सत्तम, सौमी फक॥ सौम्य+ जीए (IV. I. 15) सौग+ (VI. 4. 150)= सोमी . 
घायवृतुपित्रुपसो यत् ॥ ३१॥ पदानि । वायु-ऋतु, पितृ-उपसः, यत् ॥ कृत्तिः ॥ वाय्वारिभ्यः पन्यो यसत्ययो भवति सास्य देवतेश्यतस्मिन्विपये॥ 
31. The affix यत् comes after the names - Vayu', * Ritu'. Pitri' and `Ushas', in the sense of this its deity". 
This debars अण | As, वायव्यम्, अतष्यम्. पित्र्यम् and उपस्यम् ॥ The form पित्र्यम् is thus evolved पितृ+यत्-पित् + +यत् (VII. 427)-पित्र्यम् (VI.4148) 
Thc 19 has udatta on the first syllable by VI. 1. 213. ___ द्यावापृथिवीशुनासीरमरुत्त्वदग्नीषोमवास्तोपतिगृहमेधाच्छ च ॥ ३२ ॥ पदानि । 
घावा, पृथिवी, शुनासीर, मरूत्यद्, अनी-पोम, वास्तोपति-गृह, मेधात्--छ, च। 
[ BK. IV. CH. II. S. 35. 
म्। 
707 
वृधिः॥पावापयिष्यादिभ्यः प्रत्ययो भववि सास्वबिस्वस्मिन्धिपये। 
32. . The affix v comes also in the sense of this its . deity', after the names 'Dyava Prithivi', 'Sunasira', 'Ma ruttvat', 'Agnishoma', ' Vastoshpati' and 'Grihamedha': 
This debars 77&c. Thus ar rretary or art form belonging to the Gods Heaven and Earth'. yritftar or yuretera 'belonging to Suna (Wind) and Stra (Sun). मालतीयम् or मरुत्पत्यम् ॥ भमिपोमीयम or भारिपोम्यम्॥ पाल्वोपवीयन or वास्तोष्पत्यम् ॥ गृहमेधीयम् or गृहमेपन । 
असे ॥३३॥ पदानि । भने, हा पृरितः । ममियदाक्प्रत्ययो भवति सास्य देवतेस्यस्मिन्विपदे वार्निकम् ॥प्राएदीग्यतीवेषु सद्धितायेंषु सर्वनामिकालियां पकाया। 
33. The affix comes in the sense of this its deity', after the name Agni. 
Thus भनिदेवतास्व-मायोटकपालः। Vart:-The affix 'dhak' always comes after the words Agni and Kali, in the various senses of the affixes called Pragdivyatlya. Sec IV.2.8 
कालेभ्यो भववत् ॥३४॥ पदानि ॥ कालेश्यो-भववत्। वृत्तिः ॥ कालविधेपवाचिभ्यः पनेभ्यो भवत्यत्यया भवन्ति सास्व देवतेत्यस्मिन्विषये। कालादाभितिम करणे भवे प्रत्यया विधास्यन्ते से खास्य देवतेल्यस्मिन्नथे सयवेन्यन्ते, तपर्थमिदमुच्यते। 
34. After words expressive of time, the affixes denoting who stays there' (IV. 3. 11 to IV. 3. 63), come also in the sense of this its deity'. 
Thus by IV. 3. II (read with IV. 3. 53), the affix 7 comes after the words expressive of time, in the sense of who stays there'. The same affix will also come in the sense of साऽस्यदेवता॥ Thus मासे भ%मासिकम् (मास+एमाब. 
एक VII. 3.50); ममासिकम्, सांवत्सरिकम्, वासन्तम् (IV. 3. 16) प्राइण्यम् (IV.3. 17): meaning monthly', 'half monthly', 'annual', 'vernal', and 'rainy'. The words will also mean 'an oblation sacred to a month i.c' as माखो देवतास्व मासिकम् ॥ &c. . 
महाराजप्रोष्ठपदाम् ॥ ३५ ॥ पदानि ॥ महाराज-प्रोष्ठपदात, उ ।। वृत्तिः ॥ महाराजशब्दारपोष्टपदचाप उम्प्रत्ययो भवति सास्य स्वतेत्यस्मिन्विपदे। वार्तिकम् ॥ उमप्रकरणे तस्मिन्वर्ततहति नवयज्ञादिध पसंख्यानम्।। . वात्तिकम् ।। पूर्णमासारण।। 
35. The affix on comes, in the sense of this its deity', after the words “Mahârâja' and · Proshthapada'. 
Thus महाराजो देवताऽस्य - महारानिकम, प्रोधपरिक। 
708 
वस्व सम्हः। 
[ BK. IV. CH II. S. 37 
Vart :-After the words 48 &c the affix e comes in the sense of 'that exists in it'. As मवयज्ञोऽस्मिन् वर्ततेनापयशिकः कालःu So also पाकयनिक:&c. 
Vart:-After the word OOTATE, the affix mo comes in the same sense. As gatetsfai =trareft fafi: 'the day in which the full-moon occurs.' 
पितृव्यमातुलमातामहपितामहाः ॥३६॥ पदानि ॥ पितृव्य-मातुल-मातामह, 'पितामहाः॥ 
इचिः॥ पितृल्यायो निपात्यन्ते। पातिकम् ।। भवेदग्धे सोरसमरीसपोवनप्याः॥ पाकिम् ॥ विलान्निष्फलालिमपेजो प्रत्ययो वनम्यो॥ पार्मिकम् ॥ पिम्जन्छन्दवि नि 
36. The words 'pitrivya, a father's brother', 'matula, a mother's brother', 'matamaha, a mother's fa ther' and 'pitamaha, a father's father' are irregularly formed. 
We can infer from these forms, what were the affixes, having what indicatory letters, employed in what sense and coming after what cases of the base. Thus if any rules need be formed, we may ennunciate the following rules :-Fagarasani wraft 13 " the affixes ou and my come respectively after the words pitri and måtri in the senseof his brother'. Similarly the second rule will be ताभ्यां पितरि डामहाच, मातरिपिष 'and the affix damahach comes, in the sense of their father; and their feminine is formed as if the affix had an indi catory | Thus पितृष्या, मातुलः, पितामहः (. पितामही), मातामह (मातामही). 
___Vart :--The affixes सोर, पूस, and मरीस come after the word भवि, in the sense of milk'. As मर्दुग्धम् अविसोटमू or भविसम् or भविमरीसम्॥ 
Vart:The affixes fan and is come after the word far, in the sense of fruitless. As निष्फलस्सिलः-तिलपिम्म:and तिलपेमः। 
. Vårt: The affix fgy is treated like for in the Chhandas. As तिल्पिम्मा 
तस्य समहः॥३७॥ पदानि ॥ तस्य, समहः॥ वृत्तिः॥ तस्येति षष्ठीसमर्यास्समूह हत्येतस्मिन्न यथाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति । वाचकम् ॥ गुणादिभ्यो मामवक्तव्यः॥ 
37. An affix is added to a word, when the sense is a collection thereof'. 
The affix mur (IV. 7. 83) already taught, is added to a word in the 6th case in construction, in the sense of collection. What is the example of this? In order to apply the affix 0, we must apply it to those words only, to which the special rules hereinafter taught do not apply. In other words, the affix spy is added in the sense of collection thereof, to a word which denotes a conscious being, which has udatta accent on the first syllable, which 
BK. IV. CH. II. 3. 391 
709 
does not end with a Gotra-affix, and which is not a word specifically men tioned in the subsequent stras For, a word expressing a non-conscious being, will take the affix re by IV. 2. 47, a word having anudatta on the first syllable will have the affix e IV. 3. 44. a Gotra word will take a IV. 2. 39 and especial words like कर &c take ae &c. Making all these exclu sions, the example we ... ! is:-काकानां समू-काका 'a collection of crows' पाकम् ।। The phrase सय of this aphorism governs all the subsequent sotras up to sūtra IV. 2. 51 inclusive 
__Vart:-The affix पामर comes after the words गुप् &c. As गुणमामः । collection of qualities', करणमामः &c. The following is some of such words: गण, करण, तल, पप, इन्द्रिय, &c. Itis an akritigapa . 
भिक्षादिभ्योऽण ॥३८॥ पदानि ।मिक्षा आदिभ्यः, भए । वृधिः। भिक्षेप्येवमारिया रामेभ्योऽण प्रत्ययो भवति तस्व समूह हत्येतस्मिन्विषये. . 
38. The affix my comes, in the sense of collec tion thereof', after the words. bhiksha' &c. 
The repetition of the word way in this sätra, though its anuvritti was here, is for the sake of removing the operation of any obstructing rule. 
Thus forntori : what is collected in the shape of alms'. So also गर्भिणी+भण्: गर्भिण्+मण (the masculine form of a Bha is substituted, when a Taddhita affix follows without an indicatory , भस्याटेतदिवे)-गर्मियः (VI.4. 164), In the case of युवति, the word however is not changed to its masculine form. Thus युपतीनां समूहः-योवतम् ' a collection of young women'. 
1 भिक्षा, गर्भिणी, ष, 4 करीष, 5 ममार, 6 चर्मन् (पर्मिम् according to some texts) 7 सहन, 8 युवति, 9 पति , 10 पनवि, भथर्वन, (also भर्वम् K) 12 इक्षिणा, 13 मत, 14 विषय, 15 भोष.lso 16 धर्मिन् 
गोत्रोक्षोप्टोरभ्रराजराजन्यराजपुत्रवत्समनुप्याजादू घुश् ॥ ३९॥ पदानि ॥ गोत्र, उक्ष, उष्ट्र, उरभ्र, राज, राजन्य, राजपुत्र, वत्स, मनुष्य-अजादू-घुम्॥ वृत्तिः ॥ गोत्रारियो दुम् प्रत्ययो भवति तस्व समूहलेवस्मिन्निपये॥ पातिकम् ।। वृद्धापति नष्यत् ॥ 
39. The affix बुर comes in the sense of 'collection thereof', after a word denoting a patronymic, and after 'uk. shan', 'ushtra', 'urabhra', 'rajan', 'rijanya', 'rajaputtra' 'vatsa', 'manushya' and 'aja'. 
The word nie is used here in its popular and not technical sense, meaning any descendant or offspring. Thus भोपगवकर,भोसकर, (VI.4 144) मोदकम, भोरमकम्, राजकम, (VI.4.144) रामन्यकम्, राजपुषकम्, पात्सकम, मानुन्यकर, भाजकम् ॥ The final य of मनुष्य and पजन्य is not elided when the affix भए is added (VI. 4. 150) 
.. 
. .. . 
. 
. . 
. . .... 
710 
वस्व बन्दः । 
BK. IV.CH. II. 5.42.1 
Vart:-Also after the word r eg.बाईकम् ' a collection of old men'. केदाराचम्य ॥४०॥ पदानि । केदारात, याच॥ इतिः ॥ केशारदा यस्प्रत्ययो भवति, पकायद् घुम् च, तस्व समूह इत्येवस्मिन्निपवे. वार्रितकम् ॥गणिकायाम यम्बकम्पः। 
40. The affix qs as well as the affix g, comes after the word केदार, in the sense of ' collection thereof'. 
This debars s of IV. 2. 47. Thus केशराणाम् समूहः- कैार्यम् or कैसरका॥ 
Pat:-The affix यम् comes after गपिकाg.गाणिक्यम् । ठञ् कवचिनश्च ॥४१॥ पदानि ।। ठ कवचिन, च। परिवः ॥ कपषिनधन्दाम् प्रत्ययो भववि वस्य समूह हत्येतस्मिन्विपये ॥ 
41. The affix ठञ् comes, in the sense of 'collection thereof', after the word 'Kedara', and also after the word 
Kavachin'. 
Thus कावधिकम् (VI.4144); and कारिक We read the anuvritti of केदार in this Sutra, by virtue of the word च 
ब्राह्मणमाणववाडवाद्यन् ॥४२॥ पदानि ॥ ब्राह्मण, माणव-वाडवात-यन् । इत्तिः । ब्राह्मणादिभ्यः पदेन्यो यन्प्रत्ययो भवति तस्य सह इत्येतस्मिन्निपये। पातिकम् ॥ यन्त्रकरणे पठारपसंख्यानम् ॥ बारितकम् ॥ भाः खः क्रती॥ वाविकम् ।। पर्धा स्वक्तव्यः॥ पार्रितकम् ॥ वातादूलः ।। 
42. The affix यन् is added, in the sense of 'collection thereof, after the words 'brâhmana', 'månava', and 'vådava'. 
The indicatovy o of a makes the word take udatta accent on the first syllable (VI. I. 1070Thus ब्राह्मण्यम, माणष्यम, वारध्यम् ॥ 
Vart:-Also after the word que g. 989: 11 
Vart:-The affix ख is added to महान, in the sense of a 'sacrifice'.eg. महीन: 'a collection of days of sacrifice'. Otherwise the form is माहुः by भम् see IV. 245. 
Vart:-The affix जस् comes after पर्श,eg. पार्श्वम् 'a collection of axes'. The final y of qg is not changed by guņa into sit before the affix, because the word of is treated as a pada-word (1. 4. 16) and not a Bha-word. 
Vårt:-The affix an is added to ala e. g. : 'a collection of winds or a mad-man'. __ग्रामजनबन्धुसहायेभ्यस्तल् ॥४३॥ पदानि ॥ प्राम, जन-बन्धु-सहायेभ्यातल् ॥ 
वृस्तिः ।।मामादिभ्यस्तप्रत्ययो भवति तस्य समह इत्यवस्मिन् विषये। पातिकम् ॥ गजापति वक्तव्यम ॥ 
BR. IV. CH. II. 345] 
वस्व समाः 
.. 
Tir 
43, The affix 'tal' comes, in the sense of 'collection thereof', after the words 'grama', 'jana', 'bandhu' and 'sahaya'. 
Thus grant 'a collection of villages. The words ending in an are all feminine So also ममता 'a collection of persons', बन्धुता'a collection ofrela. tives', and सहायता 'a collection of allies. 
____Vart-The affix tat comes after गय also eg.गता 'a collection of clephants. __ अनुदात्तादेरम् ॥४४॥ पदानि ॥ अनुदाचादे, अम्॥ 
पृस्तिः ॥ ममामा पापम् प्रत्ययो भवति तस्य समूहहत्येतस्मिन् विपये। 
44. The affix म comes, in the sense of 'collection thereof", after the words having anudatta on the first syllable. 
Thus कपोतानां समूहः- कापोतम, मासूरम, नेतिरम्.. सण्डिकादिभ्यश्च ॥ ४५ ॥ पदानि ॥ खण्डिकादिभ्यः च । इतिः । सण्डिका इत्येवमादिन्यः पन्नेन्यो जम् प्रत्ययो भवति सत्व सम्र हत्येतस्मिन्विषये। 
Kerike भमसिद्धिरमतातारः कोयनकमालवात् । 
गोपादन पोतदन्तान बसवः। झापक स्यात्तदन्तले क्या चापिघलेविधिः। 
सेनायां नियमाय च यथावाप्येव पाम्मा । पाक्षिकम् ।। भुकमालवात्सेनासंज्ञाकार। 
45. The affix अ comes, in the sense of 'collection thereof' after the words 'Khandika &c. 
This satra applies to words having anudatta on the first syllable, and being names of non-living things.eg. खाण्डिकन, वारवम् ।। 
The word 
is included in this list. It is a Dvandva com pound of two words and 4, denoting tribes of Kshatriyas. The Tadraja affixमम् (IV. I. 168) is elided after the first, and भ्यर (IV. 1. 171) after the second word which is a Vriddham When these two words form a com pound, the acute falls on the final (VI. I. 223), the initial of this compound is therefore, anudatta : and therefore by the last sitra IV. 2. 44, this word would have taken f; where is the necessity of its being included in this list?. It is to exclude the cry of IV. 2. 39 which comes after a Gotra word. But will not the subsequent भर (IV. 2.44) debar the preceding पुम् (IV.2. 39) by the rule of paratva ? Moreover, a collection or aggregate of two Gotra words will not be called Gotra, as an aggregate of countries is not called a 'country' for the application of janapada rule, as काधिकोसलीयाःdoes not take पुस and there will not apply tadanta vidhi to the compound word सुहकमालय, which ends in a gotra word?. To this wc rcply, that the fact of the inclusion 
[ BK. IV.CH. II. I. 47. 
of this word in the list, is an indication of the existence of these two rules : (1) that your affix supersedes a subsequent affix in cases of conflict. Thus भोपगव and कापटव are anudattadi words because formed by भए (III. I.2), and require therefore we by IV. 2. 44, but y supersedes it, and we have misure कम् and कापटपकम् ॥ The second rule is: (2) that in सामहिक affixes there is tad. antavidhi in spite of the prohibition contained in vartika under I. 1.72. As पानहरितक, गोधेनुकम् ॥ The complete sentence in the Ganapatha is क्षुद्रकमालवात् सेनासंज्ञायाम्, the first portion denotes the existence of the above two rules, the second portion &c restricts the application of the rule The affix is added when it is the name of a comparmy' and not otherwise. As ir मालवी सेना, otherwise सौद्रकमालव ॥ The existence of above corollaries is proved by the sutra of the Grammarian Apisali also धेनुरनमि टकमुलापयति 'the affix se comes after in denoting collection thereof, when not preceded by the negative particle F, therefore, when preceded by any other word, the affix will apply. 
1 खण्डिक (खण्डिका K.), 2 परवा, 3 क्षुद्रकमालवासेनासंज्ञायाम् (. Varttiks to 42,45), * भिक्षुक, एक, 8 ग्लूक, 7 धन, 8 महन, 9 युगवरण, (परमा-v. युग, परमा 
K), 10 हलबन्ध (बधा), 
चरणेभ्यो धर्मवत् ॥४६॥ पदानि ॥ चरणेभ्यः धर्मवत् ।। स्तिः ॥ चरणशयाः कउकलापाण्या, वेभ्यः पठीसमर्षेभ्यः सम्हे धर्मवन् प्रत्यया भवन्ति। वास्तिकम् ॥ चरणाद्धर्मामाययोरिति 
46. After the name of a Vedic School, the affixes which denote the rule of that School, come also in the sense of collection thereof'. 
The Vedic Schools or Charanas are like कठ, कलाप &c. The affixes de noting the rule of the School are those taught in Sutra IV. 3. 126 &c. The word धर्म does not occur in the Sutra IV. 3. 126, or any where else, but it oc curs in the following ishti under that Satra:-चरणद्धर्मामाययोः॥ Thus कानां धर्म 
काठकम्, so also कगनां समूहः = काठकम् ॥ Similarly कालापकम्, छान्दोग्यम्, भौधिक्यम् and भायणम् ॥ 
__ अचित्तहस्तिधेनोष्ठक॥४७॥ पदानि ॥ अचित्त-हस्ति-धेनो-ठक्॥ वृत्तिः॥ चित्ताभ्यो हस्तिधनुशवाभ्यां च ठक् प्रत्ययो भवति तस्य समूह इत्येतस्मिन्विपये ॥ वास्तिकम् ॥ धनोरनम इति वक्तव्यम्। 
47. The affix ठक् comes, in the sense of 'collec tion thereof', after the names of things without consciousness, and after thasti' and 'dhenu'. 
__ This debars अण् and मम् ॥ The भपूपानां समूहः =भापूपिकम् ॥ The affix उक् is replaced by इक् (VII. 3. 50) or क (VII. 3.50), Thus हास्तिकम्, धेनुकम्, चार कुलिकम BK. IV.CH. II. S.51] 
- 
13 
Vart:-Not so, if the word धेनु is preceded by the negative particle TEL As MITTE(See IV. 2. 45) 
केशाश्वाभ्यां यम्छावन्यतरस्याम ॥४८॥ पदानि । केश-अश्वाभ्याम्-यम-छो अन्यतरस्याम् ॥ वृरितः ॥ केय भश्व हस्वेताभ्यां यथासंख्य या छ त्यती प्रत्ययो भवतो ऽन्यनरत्या वस्व समूह हवेतस्मि विपये। 
48. The affixes 'yan' and 'chha' come optional ly in the sense of 'collection thereof', respectively after the words केश and भव। 
Thus केशानां समूहः = कैदयम् or कैधिकम् (IV. 2.47) मवानां समू-मानम् (IV... 63) मधीवर। 
"पाशादिभ्यो यः॥४९॥ पदानि ॥ पाशादिभ्यः यः प्रतिः॥पाचादिभ्यो वःप्रत्ययो भवति सस्थ समूहस्यतस्मिन्विषये।। 
49. The affix 'ya' comes, in the sense of 'collec-. tion thereof', after the words qru &c. . 
Thus पाश्या, तृण्या &c. These words are feminine 
1 पाच, सण, धूम, + वात, महार, 6 पाडल (पालका K), पोत, गल,9 पिटक, 10 पिाक, 1 कर, 12 इल, 13 मर (नर K.), 14 पन. also 15 बालक. ___ खलगोरथात् ॥५०॥ पदानि ॥ खल-गो-रथात्-य॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ लगोरयायो यः प्रत्ययो भवति तस्य समूह हत्येतस्मिन्विषये ॥ 
. 60. The affix tya' comes in the sense of 'collec tion thereof', after the words Khala', 'Go' and 'Ratha'. 
Thus erat, rear and a# These three words have not been includ. ed in the Tury class, in order that rule IV. 2. 51 should apply to them. 
इनित्रकट्यश्च ॥५१॥ पदानि । इनि-प्र-कटयचा, च॥ वृत्तिः ॥ सलगोरणानेभ्यो यणसंपयन इनि कप हत्येते प्रत्यया भवन्ति तस्य समुह इवेवस्मि विषये। 
पातिकम् ॥ खलादिभ्य इनिर्वतयः॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ कमलादिन्यः खण्टरमत्ययो भवति । पातिकम् ।। नरकरितुरगाणां स्कन्पा प्रत्ययः ।। वानिकम् ।। पूर्वादिस्या का प्रत्ययो भवति । 
51. The affixes ‘ini', 'tra' and 'katyach' come in the senses of 'collection thereof', respectively after the word 'khala', 'go' and 'ratha'. 
Thus सलिनी, गोवा, रपकया। . Vart:-The affix इनि comes after the words खल &c. Thus राकिनी, कुण्ड लिनी, कुटुम्बिनी, 
714 
. 
[ BK. IV.CH. IIISS4 
Vart: -The affix pour comes after the words Kamala &c. As खण्यम, भम्भोजखण्डम् ॥ कमल, भम्भोज, पधिनी, कुमर, सरोर, नलिनी, कैरविणी belong to this class. These are भाकृतिगणः 
___Vart:-The affix स्कन्धच comes after the words नर, करि, and तुरण As नरस्कन्धः, करिस्कन्ध: and सररास्कन्धः।। 
_Varti-The affix काण्ड comes after the words पूर्व &c. Thus पूर्वकाण्डम्, तृणकाण्डम्, कर्मकाण्डम् । 
विषयो देशे ॥५२॥ पदानि ॥ विषयः, देशे॥ वृत्तिः॥ समूह इति निवत्तम् । षष्ठीसमर्थविभनिरनवर्तते । तस्येति पष्ठीसम विपद इत्येतस्मिन्न थाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति, योखो विषयो देशमेस भवति. 
52. The affix tu (IV. 1. 83) comes after a word in the sixth case in construction, in the sense of any body's sphere', if a country is indicated by such sphere. 
The anuvfitti of : (IV. 2. 37) does not extend further : but the anuvritti of तस्य (IV. 2. 37) is to be read into it. The whole sutra thus becomes तस्य विषयो देखे 'his sphere-in denoting a country'. The word विषय *sphere, topic' has many significations. Sometime it means an estate, as विषयो लब्धः 'a village has been acquired'. Some time it means an object of per ception, as पक्ष विषयो रूप 'color is the object of sight &c. Therelore the word 
has been used in the Satra, in order to fix the particular meaning of the word fra # 
Thus faratat fournit u:= : "The country within the sphere of the Sibi'. So also mie: &cWhy do we say 'if a country is meant'? Observe देवदत्तस्य विषयोजवाकः। 
राजन्यादिभ्यो घुम् ॥५३॥ पदानि ॥ राजन्यादिभ्यः, धुन। पतिः ॥राजन्यादिभ्यः पन्ने यो पुम् प्रत्ययो भवति विषयो देशइत्येतस्मिन्न। 
53. The affix gsr comes after the words rajanya &c, in the same sense. 
This debars भण| Thus राजन्यानां विषयो देवः राजन्यक, देवायनकः। It is an भाकृतिगणः । 
1 राजन्य, 2 भातृत', 3 पाभ्रष्य', 'शालकायन, 5 हेवयात (देवयातय देवयान.), 6 मवीड, 7 वरमा', 8 जालंधरायण, 9 राजायन', 10 तेलु', ll भालकामेव, 12 भम्बरीप पुष, 13 पसाति, 14 बेल्वयन. 15 लूप, 16 उदुम्बर, 17 सीयू, 18 बेल्बज (बेल्वा ) 19 भाईनायन, 20 संपिय, 21 पालि, 22 कर्णनाम. 23 भाप्रीत, 24 पैतिल, 25 वाचक, ॥ 
भौरिक्याथैषुकार्यादिभ्यो विधल्भकलौ ॥ ५४॥ पदानि ॥ भौरिफ्यादि, पेषु कार्यादिभ्यः, विधल्, भकलौ॥ 
BK..IV.CH. II. Sss) 
113. 
वृत्तिः मौरिष्यादिप ऐषकादिषष पणन विपत् ममा हत्येतो प्रत्ययो भवतो, विषयो रेष स्वेतस्मिन्विपदे. 
54. The affixes vidhal' and bhaktal' come respectively after the words Bhauriki', and • Aishukari &ci in the sense of 'sphere of country'. 
This debars भए ॥ Thus मौरिकिविधः, पेवविध &c ऐपुकारिनका बारस्या पनमनः &c 
1 भौरिकि, १ भोलिकि, ३ चौपयन, पैटयत (बोटबत काणेय, 6 वापिसका पालिकाञ्च (वाणिकाज्य: वालिम, वालिज्यक), 8 सेकयस कियत.), कयद. 10व 
1ऐपुकारि, सारस्यायन (सारसावन, 3 पानावण, पाक्षावण, पपासावण (पायण), 8 भोरावन, 7 मोलायन, 8 खासयन, 9 पासमिषि, 10 समिपावण, 1 पीड़ा वण (पोद्राण) 12 रामायण, 13 घायण्डायन', 14 चावण, 15 चौमावण, 16 सौवीर 17 पीवीण्यप', 18 पयर, 19 पोर, 20 ण्यार, शवमानस, 22 पेवनय, 23 मर (मर) - दुरदेष, 25 विधदेव (विधदेव and ष, 26 नापिण्डि. 27 पोष, 28 
सायटि, 29 मलायत, 30 मोबाायव. 
सोस्यादिरितिच्छन्दसः प्रगाथेषु ॥ १५॥ पदानि ॥ सः, अस्य, आदिः, इति छन्दस-प्रगायेषु॥ वृत्तिः ॥ स इति पथमासमरस्यति पाठप यणपिहित प्रत्ययो भवात, यवमासम उनमेनारिन पति, बरखास्येवि निर्दिष्ट मगाणचे भवन्ति। 
पातिकम् ॥ अन्नसः प्रत्ययविधानेनएसके स्वार्थ उपसंक्वानम् ॥ 
55. The affix sur (IV. 1. 83) added to the names of Metres, indicates a Pragatha beginning therewith. 
The words of this sätra require a little explanation. #: 'that'ia a word in construction in the first case. Her 'its. 1. ethis gives the meaning of the affix. भादिः 'beginning': this qualifies the base or prakriti. The word इति is added for the sake of precision. छन्दस: after the name of a metres. This points out the base or in the sense of Pragatha. This qualifies the meaning of the affix. To put it in other words, the sätra means, that the affix moy is added to the name of a metre, when that metrc is the beginn ing of a Pragatha, and the whole word so formed means a Pragatha beginn ing with that metre. Thus it is the name of a metre, adding more to it we get gith which means "a Pragatha beginning with the metre Pankti". Simil arly माननुभः, भागवः &c. 
Why do we say "beginning"? If the metre is in the middle or end of a 'Pragatha' the affix will not be employed. Why do we say after the 
ru 
2.0 
( BK IV.CH. II.S. 37. 
name of a metre'? The affix will not be added to a word which is in the beginning of a Pragatha Why do we say 'in the sense of a Pragatha'? The affix will not be added, if the metre is the beginning of an Anuvaka &c and not of a Pragatha. Pragatha is the name of a particular kind of Mantra or Hymn याची प्रगयनेन तिसः क्रियन्ते, सप्रगावमान पकर्पगानात्वा प्रगाय च्यवे. 
Vårti-The affix an is added to the name of a metre in a self-des criptive sense without changing the meaning of it; and the word so formed is in the neuter gender. As, पेटुभम् 'the metre Trishtubha', आगतम् &c. : संग्रामे प्रयोजनयोद्धृभ्यः ॥५६॥ पदानि । संग्रामे, प्रयोजन, योग्यः । 
अनिः॥ प्रयोजनवाधियो योपवाधियब पम्नेभ्यः पयमासमभ्योऽत्यति षष्ठप संभामेऽभिधेये यण. विहिवं प्रत्ययो भवादि। 
66. The same affix for indicates, when it is added to a word which denotes either the object of a battle or the war ‘rior of a battle, a battle fought for that object or by that 
warrior as a leader. 
The phrase atsky is understood here; showing that the word in con struction to which the affix is to be added must be in the first case: and must be the name of the "object" प्रयोजना, or of the warrior" योग ॥ The whole word so formed must denote a "battle'. Therefore, the word to gives the meaning of the affix. . This मद्रा प्रयोजनमस्य संपामस्थमा : "A battle fought for Bhadra". So also सौभाद्रः "a battle fought to gain Subhadra". Similarly महिमाला योद्धारोऽस्य संपामस्थ 
माहिमाल: 'battle led by Ahimala warriors' So also स्यान्दनाश्वः , भारतः॥ 
Why do we say in the sense of a battle?" Observe मुभद्रा प्रयोजनमस्थ दानस्व 'Subhadra is the object of this gift'. Here no affix is added. Why do we say aftera word denoting anobjectorawarriorr Observe,सुभद्रा प्रेक्षिकाऽस्य संग्रामस्थ । 
सदस्यां प्रहरणमिति क्रीडायो णः॥ ५७॥ पदानि ॥ तत्-अस्याम, प्रहरणम्, इति-क्रीडायाम, . वृत्तिः ॥ तदिति प्रथमासमावस्यामिति सप्तम्य मा प्रत्ययो भवति. वरतादिति निर्दिष्ट पहरण घेत्तरपति, यदस्यामिवि निर्दिष्ट क्रीडा वेत्ता भवति ॥ . 
• ... 57. The affix ण added to the name of a weapon, indicates a game played with that weapon. 
The sätra literally translated means: 'that is the weapon in this, denot. ing play; the affix w is added '. c. to a word in the first casc in coostruction, 
BK. IV. Ch. II. $ 59. ] 
denoting the name of a weapon ; « is added to denote a play. Thus ro 
THEY Tratare "a game played with sticks". So tu "a game played with fists* 
Why do we say 'a weapon'? Observe 
a rag the garland Is an ornament in this play. Here no affix is added to Why do we say 'in denoting a game? Observe:-*{T: A frutarry 'the sword is the we apon in this army'. These words are as a rule in the feminine gender (IV. 1. 4 and 15), the feminine being formed by PT 
घमः सास्यां फियोति मः॥५८॥ पदानि । घमासा-अस्याम् क्रिया-ति-मः। प्रविः॥ पमन्तारिक्रयावापिनः प्रथमासनदस्यामिति साम्य बीलिनेमा प्रत्ययो भवति । 
58. The affix , added to a noun of action ending in the affix af, denotes an action occurring in that. 
These words are also feminine. The meaning of the words of the aphorism is: 4: "after a word ending in the affix "; a'that', i 'in it, the feminine gender shows that the word is also feminine four "action"; this qualifies the sense of the affix. To put it in other words, the sätra means "After a word ending in y, expressing an action, being in the 1st case in construction, the affix is added in the sense of a 7th case-affix, the resultant word being in the feminine gender". 
Thus येनपासोऽस्य पत-व्येनंपाता, so alsoलंपाता॥ The nasal is alded.by VI. 3. 71. Thus agama AW 'a chase with hawks to bring down or fell the prey'. THT 1797 "an oblation to the ancestors in which sesamum is thrown". 
The repetition of errad in this sitra, though its anuvritti could have been obtained from the last s@tra, indicates that this is a general rule, a not one confined to "games" only. Thus rustratski forurada = yrat fara मोखलपाता तिथिः॥ 
तदधीते तवेद ॥ ५९॥ पदानि ॥ तद्-अधीते-सद-वेद । कृतिः ॥ तदिति वितीयासमर्थस्थीते व हवेतयोर गोर्यधाविहिलं प्रत्ययो भवति। 
59. The affix my (1V. 1. 83) comes after a word denoting 'some subject of study', in the sense of 'who has studied that or who understands that.. 
In others words, the sätra means that the affix is added to a word in the accusative case in construction, denoting a person who studies or knows, that. As wirsuta =OTE: 'who studies Prosody. Tro: (VII. 3. 3) 'who knows grammar'. So also ton, fyrr: 'who knows the causes'. Arora, teta: 4 
718 
( BK. IV. CH. II 9 60. 
The word 7% is repeated in this sætra, in order to show a distinction between one who studies and who understands. __ऋतूफ्थादिसूत्रान्ताद्वक् ॥ ६०॥ पदानि ॥ ऋतु-उक्थादि-सूत्रान्तात्-ठक् ॥ वृत्तिः । ऋतुविशेषणचिभ्य रक्याविभ्यश्च सूत्रान्ताच ठक्प्रत्ययो भवति तदधीते तोदेस्यस्मिन्विषये । भणोपवादः ॥ 
वार्तिकम् ।। सूत्रान्तारकल्पावरिष्यते ॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ विद्यालक्षणकल्पान्तादिति वक्तव्यम् ॥ वाकिम ॥ विद्या च नाङ्गक्षवधर्मसंसर्गत्रिपूर्वा ॥ वार्तिकम ॥ झाख्यानाख्यायिकतिहासपुराणे यष्ठरवक्तव्यः । वाचकम ।। अनुसूर्लक्ष्यलक्षणे च ॥ वार्तिकम् ।। इकन्पहोचरपदात् ।। वार्तिकम् ।। शतषष्ठेः षिकन् पथो बहुलम् ॥ 
60. The affix ठक् comes in the sense of 'one who studies or one who understands', after the name of a sacrifice, after 'uktha &c', and after a stem ending with the word 'sutra'. 
This debars अण् ॥ Thus आग्निष्टोमिकः 'who understands or studies Agnishtoma Sacrifice'. वाजपेयिकः, औकाथकः, लोकायतिकः, वास्तिकमात्रकः,साग्रहसत्रिकः॥ 
Ishti ;--If a word ending in 'sûtra', begins with the word 'Kalpa', the affix अण is added and not ठक्. Thus : काल्पसत्रः 'who studies Kalpa-sutra'. 
__Vart :-This affix comes after words ending in विद्या, लक्षण and कल्प, as वायसविधिकः, सार्पविधिकः, गौलक्षणिकः, आश्वलक्षणिकः, मातृकल्पिकः, पाराशरकल्पिकः॥ 
Vart :-Not so if the word विद्या is preceded by the words अड, क्षत्र, धर्म, संसर्ग and त्रि॥ As अंगविद्यामधीते आङ्ग विद्यः, क्षात्रविद्यः, धार्मविद्यः, सांसर्गविद्यः. विद्यः । 
All these are formed by अण् and not ठक् ॥ 
Vårt :-The affix 3 comes in the same sense after names of stories (आख्यान), narratives (आख्यायिका), and after the words इतिहास and पुराण ॥ As यावक्रीतिका, प्रयङ्गविका, वासवदत्तिकः, सौमनोत्तरिकः, ऐतिहासिक, पौराणिकः ॥ 
___Vart:-The affix ल comes in the same sense, after words beginning with सर्व, and स, and after Dvigu compounds. As सर्ववेदः, सर्वतन्त्रः, सवातिका, ससंग्रहः, द्विवेदः पंचव्याकरणः ॥ 
Vart :--The affix टक् comes in the same sense after the words अनसू, लभ्य, and लक्षण; As अनसर्नामग्रन्थ स्तमधीते - आनुसुकः, लाक्षिकः, लाक्षणिकः ॥ 
Vart:--The affix 14 comes in the same sense after a compound word ending in पद् ; as, पूर्वपदिकः॥ 
Vârt:«The affix 1977 comes diversely in the same sense, after the compound words शतपथ, and शष्टिपथ. As तपथिकः f. शतपथिकी IV. I. 41), षष्टिप थिकः (. षष्टिपथिकी). By the force of the word diversely' we get the affix अण, as 
शातपथ: and षाष्टिपथः ॥ 
___1 उक्थ, 2 लोकायत, 3 न्याय, 4 न्यास, 5 पुनरुक्त, 6 निरुक्त, 7 निमित्त, 8 लि. पश, 9 ज्योतिष (द्विपदी, ज्योतिषि ) 10 अनपद, 11 अनुकल्प, 12 यज्ञ, 13 धर्म, 14 पर 
BK. IV. CH. II. 
4] 
. 
- 
ची, 15 मेवर 16 माय, 1 हिता, 18 परन (परमन) 19 सपा संघात also पर) 20 पति, 21 परिपर, 22 संग्रह, 23 मण, 24 गुण (गुणागुण at नक, गुण) 28 भावर. 28 मगध 
क्रमादिभ्यो धुन् ॥११॥ इतिः ।। मम हत्येवमादिन्यः धनेन्यो बुन्प्रत्ययो भवति बाधीते बोदेवलिन्विषये। 
___61. The affix बुन् comes, in the sense of "who studies or who knows", after the words Krama &c': 
This debars was n Thus **** (VII. 1. 1) TT &c. The words i mine २ पर, 3 पिसा, 4 मीमांसा, 5 सामन belong to this class 
अनुप्राह्मणादिनिः॥ ६२, पदानि । मनु, ब्राह्मणात निः। इतिः॥ ममुमायणपनाशिनः प्रत्ययो भववितरपीते परेरेस्यास्मिन्विपदे 
62. The affix 'ini' comes in the sense of "who studies or who knows", after the word 'anubrahmana'. . 
This debars 19 The word maturat means 'a book in the imitation of or similar to a Brahmana book'. He who studies an मनुब्राह्मण is called मनु मायणिन्, which word is thus declined:-मनुब्राह्मणी, मनुवााणिनी, मनमाणिनः & The affix इनि also has the force of मतुए, and by Sutra V. 2. 115 भव इनि उनी, this word une might have taken both the affixes fa and to in the sense of Hal; but as a matter of fact, it only takes a in that sense. 
घसन्तादिभ्यष्ठक् ॥ १३॥ पदानि वसन्तादिभ्यः, ठक् । वृत्तिः । वसन्त दयेवमादिभ्यष्टकमत्ययो भवति तदधीवेवोदयस्मिन्विपये।मणोपचार। 
63. The affix it comes in the sense of “who stu dies or who knows", after the words. vasanta &c.' . 
This debars मण। As, वासन्तिक 'who studies the book relating to Spring'. वार्षिक: &cn 1 पखन्त, वर्षा, पद हेमन्त शिपिर, 6 प्रथम, गुण, 
परम, मनगण, 10 मपर्वन, मीन 12 श्रीन | पोक्ताल्लुक ॥ ६४ पदानि । प्रोक्तात-लुरू। 
वृत्तिः मोनमत्ययान्तारध्येतवेदियोरुत्पन्नस्य हुम्भवति। 
64. After the title of a work, which is named after the Announcer thereof, the affixes denoting " who stu dies or who knows that" are elided by luk'. 
This sätra may be rendered in the following way also :-" There is ma of these affixes after a word ending with an affix denoting announcer". The affixes denoting or the first propounder are taught in IV. 3. 101 & Thus पाणिनिना मोना-पाणिनीयम् 'the system of Grammar enounced by Papini': 
720 
Ath-LUK-ELISION. 
I BK. IV. CH. II. 966 
पाणिनीयमधीते-पाणिनीयः, so also मापिघलः॥ The difference between the word 
forfra meaning the system of Grammar, and more formed with Hy, meaning who studies that Grammar, would consist in the accent, and the formation of the feminino. As fattar Atao u For had there been no elision expressly enjoined by this sútra, in forming the feminine, he would be required by IV.1.15, as the word would end in spark; and the accent of the word would be finally acute (Hot being acute by the universal rule of affix-accent III. 1. 3) But when the affix is elided, the feminine is formed by Ty, the accent is on the middle, owing to the 5 affix. (Phit Su 11. 19) . 
सूत्राच कोपधात् ॥६५॥ पदानि ॥ सूत्रात्-च-कोपधात्-लक)। वृत्तिः॥समवाधिमा ककापेपधावुत्पन्नस्य मत्ययस्य मुग्भवति । वार्तिकम् ॥ संख्यामकतोरीति वक्तव्यम्। 
65. The affix denoting "who studies that or who knows that” is elided by luk, after the title of a sâtra work, having as penultimate. 
. Thus He is the title of Paņini satra. Those who study and will be called also se, as meant foram: those who study, the Ashtaka'. So also दयका यामपदीया, पिका. काशकत्स्ना।। 
VartsThe elision takes place only where the title is formed by a numeral: as in the examples above given. Thus TET 
= arra, so also a 1977: 
Why do we say 'having for its penultimate"? Observe geanta =eta: This sūtra applies, of course, to those words which are not formed by affixes denoting or the Announcer. 
छन्दोब्राह्मणानि च तद्विपयाणि ॥ ६६ ॥ पदानि ॥ छन्दो-ब्राह्मणानि-च-तत्-विष amor () N. . वृत्तिः ॥ प्रौनग्रहणमनुवर्तते । छन्दांसि ब्राह्मणानि ष प्रोक्तप्रत्ययान्तानि सविषयाण्येव भवन्ति । 
66. The affixes denoting the announcer, when added to Chhandas and the Brahmanas, express this relation only. 
The word is to be read into this satra. The force of the affixes denoting announcer (IV. 3. 101), when used after a word denoting a Vedic Text or a Brahmana, is that of expressing “one who studies" or "one who knows". afirufus means "this relation", i.e. the subject treated or in this Section, namely, the relation of size or after 11 In other words, the affixes, which ordinarily denote .announcer', have the force of " one who studies or one who knows" when added to Veda-Text or Brahmaņas. That is, a fi affix should not be added to a Veda or a Brahmana, except when an mac or 
BK. IV. CH. II. $ 67.] 
vgiformes 
721 
y affix follows it, and as such latter affixes are always elided by IV. 2 94. it follows that a niin affix when added to a Veda or a Brahmapa, means "he who studies or knows the Veda anounced by". In fact there is no affix which can denote merely the announcer of a Veda, perhaps because the Vedas are eternal and no one can be its announcer only, but must be one who has studied it and known it, in order to qualify him to promulgate it 
Thus from the wordsthe name of a Veda-Text, we get ons meaning those who study or know Katha Veda'. The word is thus formed. To the word nie we add the affix parar denoting announcer, by IV. 3. 104 : then we elide it by IV. 3. 107, leaving the bare word me, then we add more which again we elide by IV. 2. 64. Hot forta= to (IV. 3. 107) : 564 
(IV. 2. 64) Plural T: "those who study the Veda announced by Katha". 
Other examples to illustrate this sätra are: A: (IV. 3. 101) 'who study the Veda announced by Muda'. YTT:, ANA: (IV. 3. 104) Trade fga: (IV. 3. 106) “who study the Veda announced by Pippalada, Richava, or Vajasaneya ". Similarly with words denoting a Brahmapa-Text. Thus: frfota: (IV. 3. 104) Nerea: (IV. 3. 105), urardiaa: (IV. 3. 105) gaifa (IV. 3. 105) “who study the Brahmaṇas announced by Tandya, Bhallava, Satyaya na, or Aitareya ". 
Why is the word Brahmana which is also Chhandas, used separately in this sätra ? In order to include only a certain limited number of Brahmana Texts to the benefits of this rule, and not all Thus it will not apply to the Brahmana announced by Yajnyavalkya. Thus याज्ञवल्क्वे न प्रोनानि ब्राह्मणानि: al f a 1 Similarly bra ut These Brahmapas being of recent origin, the presumption of eternity does not apply to them, Sec IV. 3. 105. 
The word y meaning "and" is employed in the søtra. It has the force of applying this rule to some other cases not specially mentioned in the sútra. Thus it will apply to some Kalpa Texts and Sotra Texts also. Thus arron, Tur"who study or know the Kalpa texts announced by Ka. byapa or Kusika' so also sätra : as, raufint fiet: "the Bhikshus who study the Sotras promulgated by Parasara". A pr. * T:, Gufen & 
Why do we say “Chhandas and Brahmaņas"? Because the sits affix after any other word will have its own significance, pure and simple; as 
forata e ora nga di 
The Quadruply-significant affixes. तदस्मिन्नस्तीति देशे तन्नानि ॥ ६७ ॥ पदानि ॥ तद्-अस्मिन्-अस्ति-पतिदेशे तत्-नानि न्तिः ॥ सदिति प्रथमासमारस्मिन्निति सप्तम्यर्षे यथाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति, यस्मयमासमर्थमस्ति पत. TO, Effata farge TT TT wafa al 
727 
statutos I 
[ BK. IV. CH. II. 8 69 
67. (An affix is placed after a word expressive of anything) in the sense of_"that thing is in this"--the place taking a name therefrom. 
The words of this aphorism require a detailed examination. F 'that', ie the word in construction to which the affix is to be added must be in the nominative case of a "in this"_this gives the meaning of the affix; of "is* this qualifies the sense of the base. Ta is added merely for the sake of distinct. ness, serving the same purpose as quotation marks in modern writing. Igazati "a country having that name"; this qualifies the sense of the affix. The sense is:-"the affixes already taught or to be taught, come after a word being in the nominative case in construction, in the sense of the location, when the whole word so formed denotes the name of a country in which that thing exists". 
This sätra and the three subsequent s@tras are in fact one, though divided into four, for purposes of convenience. The affixes having the sense of these four sūtras,are called aftra "quadruple significants". . 
Thus it for a a ratat: Audumbara--the country in which there are glomerous fig trees. Similarly Twi, ara: &e, all these words are formed by the universal affix (IV. 1. 83) 
This satra debars the reputar affixes, तेन निवृत्तम् ॥ ६॥ पदानि । तेन-निवृत्तम्। वृतिः ॥ नेवि तृतीयासन्निरसमित्यस्मिन्विषये यथाविहिवं प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
. 68. After a word in the third case in construction, an affix is added, in the sense of 'completed by him', when the whole word so formed is the name of a country. 
The phrase o ator of the last sätra governs this and the two sub sequent sâtras. By these four sotras the names of countries are formed from various substantives. Thus gumia fe=arurat que "the city of Kausambi, completed by Kusamba". Similarly weat aftur "a mote completed by a thousand (gold coins) or persons". A place is named after the means or the. person, by which or through whom it is established. 
तस्य निवास ६९॥ पदानि ॥ तस्य-निवासः। वृत्तिः। तस्येति पष्ठीसमर्यान्निवास इत्येतस्मिन्नथें यथाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति देखनामधेये गन्यमाने।।। 
. 69. After a word in the sixth case in construction, an affix is added, in the sense of his dwelling-place'; the whole word expressing the name of a country. 
The søtra literally means "his dwelling place'. A place is some times named after the people whose habitation it is, Thus :"the coustry of BK. IV. Ch. II. 32. 
पातुर्यक-मम्। 
723 
the Sibis*, मौषितः बनावान्निवासी रेषमा गापः ॥ The word Teमामी मौजूप 
अदभवन । ७०॥ पदानि । भदरमवा-म। हस्तिः ॥ पूर्ण समर्थ विभकिरमपर्वत । तस्येति पीसमर्थारभवस्यस्मिन्नर्येवयाविहिवं प्रत्ययो भवदित 
70. And lastly a place is named after whatever is found near it. 
In this aphorism the word, to which the affix is to be added, is not shown. The word Thu must, therefore, be supplied from the last sūtra. It mcans, therefore, "an affix is added to a word in the genetive case in cons. truction, in the sense of not far off the whole word being the name of a place 
Thus fafquru PT Wizay is the city in the neighbourhood of which the river Vidisa Aows. So also हेमवतम्॥ 
- The has the force of combining the sense of all the three previous aphorisms with this; so that the four satras 67, 68, 69 and 70 form but one complete sotra, and the meaning denoted by these will be understood in the subsequent aphorisms 
ओर ॥ ७१॥ पदानि । ओ:-अ. हरिः। खांन्सानातिपदिकापयाविहिवं समर्थविभाकियुनावम् प्रत्ययो भवति, तस्मिन्नस्तीत्येवमारि बयपुरमणोपवा. 
71. The affis eps comes after a stem ending in or ऊ, (in the four-fold senses given above). 
This of course debars the universal affix opus (IV. 1. 83). Thus HTCTT* from भर 'a tribe of Kshatriyas'; काशतवम् from कसत, and कार्कटलवम् from कर्क रेलू ॥ But from rj we have rgमती 'the river lkshumatt, named after the sugar. canes near it'. Here we add the affix IT taught in the subsequent satra IV. 2. 85, which debars pe by the rule of a subsequent debarring the prior 
· when both are of equal force (1. 4. 2) The affix 2 governs the six sätras upto IV. 2. 77. The difference between om and stor consists in the accent. 
मतोश्च बहुजनात् ॥ ७२॥ पदानि । मतो-च-घवच्-अङ्गात् अझ). पृत्तिः ॥ बहर भर यस्यासौ बहको मतुर तदन्तावातिपदिकारम्प्रत्ययो भवति चातुरर्थिकः । भणी. 
72. The affix अञ् comes in the quadruple sense after a word which ends in the affix GF, and whose stem is polysyllabic. 
The word F is a compound of a meaning literally many vowels' i. c. polysyllabic, and of By: meaning stem. A word which, exclusive 
724 
. 
चातुर्थन मम्॥ 
[ BK. IV. CH. II. 575 
of the affix मनुए, consists of more than two syllables, takes the affix भम् ॥ This debars मण्॥ Thus ऐशकायतकाववर। 
Why do we say "after apolysyllabic stem"? Observe माहिमतम् थावमतम् ।। Here though the word met ends in the affix my, yet the for the stem viz. f, is a word of two syllables only, hence these words take au in form ing names of countries. In fact, the word qualifies the word ", as it stands without the affix Hay, and not the word inclusive of that affix. There fore मालावतां निवास मालावतम् by भ . 
बहुचा कूपेषु ॥ ७३॥ पदानि । बहुचः-कूपेषु-(अ). इत्तिः बहुपः प्रातिपदिकार प्रत्ययो भवति चातुराका कृपेवाभिधेयेषु ।। 
73. The affix at comes in the quadruple sense, after a polysyllabic Nominal stem when a well’ is to be designated. 
___This debars भग्. Thus शीर्षवरषेष नित्तः कृपा दैवरण: * a well completed by Dirghavaratra. So also कापिलवरपर। ___ उद च विपाशः॥ ७४॥ पदानि । उदक्-च-विपाशा-(अ)। पतिः ॥ विपाश उतरे कूले ये पाचवभिधेयेवम् प्रत्ययो भवाति चातुरधिकः ॥' 
74. The affix H comes in the quadruple sense, after any Nominal stem in denoting "a well' situated on the northern bank of the river Vipasa. 
This debars spot; and it applies to all words whether polysyllabic or not. Thus #4: "a well completed by Datta", ir &c. 
Why do we say on the northern bank"? Because if a well is situate on the southern bank of the river Vipasa, then the affix my will apply as : and :, the difference being in the accent. This satra illustrates the refined distinctions drawn by the author, and the importance attached to accents in former times. 
संकलादिश्यश्च ।। ७५॥ पदानि । संकलादिभ्यः-च-(अर)। वृत्तिः ॥ संकल इत्येवमादभ्यो ऽम् प्रत्ययो भवति चातुरधिकः । भणोपवादः ॥ . 
75. The affix at comes after the words sankala. &e, in the above four-fold sense. . 
This debars भण्॥ The word संकल: is equivalent to संगतः कलः ॥ Thus सीकलः, पाकला &c 
. संकल, पुष्कल, 3 उसम','उपउप (उदप), उत्पट, कुम्भ, 8 निधान (विधान), सुरक्ष, 10 सुदान, 11 सभूत, 12 सपूत', सुनेन, 14 सुमङ्गल', 15 सपिङ्गल, 18 सूत', 17 सिकत (सिकता), 18 पमिक (तिका पूतीकी), I9 पूलास, 20 कुलास, 51 पलाश, 22 निवेश, 23 गफ 
BK. IV.CH. II. S78.] 
. चातुरपिंप-मर 
725 
24 गम्भीर, 25 इतर, 28 मार, महन, 28 लोमन् 29 मम्, 30 वरुण (परब), बहुल, 320 योग, 33 मभिषिक.30 गोमत, 35 पचभूत, 38 भल्स,.37 मल्ल', 8 मान. abo 39 पर्नर, 40 गृह, 41 भवः 
स्त्रीषु सौवीरसाल्वप्राच ॥ ७६ ॥ पदानि । स्त्रीषु-सौवीर-शाल्व-प्राच-(अ) । मिः ॥ ब्यापानिपरिकारम् प्रत्यये भरदिपातकः सोपीर बीलिपाखाले प्राषि। 
76. So also when the place is situate in the lands of the Sauvira, or Salva or of the Eastern people; and the word in these cases is always feminine. 
___The word सौवीर &c, are attributes of देवन्नानि (IV.2.67): so also the word algul Thus fint "the city founded by Dattamitra" (in Sauvira) So also मामी (in Salva) काकन्दी, माकन्दी, माणिपरी, भारुपी (in Eastern countries), ___ सुवास्त्वादिभ्यो ऽए ॥ ७७॥ पदानि । सुवास्वादिभ्यः (अप), 
इत्तिः ॥ सुवास्तु सत्येवमादिभ्यो ऽश् प्रत्ययो भवति चातुर्यकर।। 
77. The affix अण comes after the words सुवास्तु &c, in the four-fold sense. 
This debars the affix my which would have otherwise come by IV.2,71 and 73. Thus सुबास्तोरदूरभवं नगर-सोवास्तवम् ।। So also वार्णवम् ॥ The use of the word for, though its anuvritti came from IV. J. 83, is for the sake of indicating that this sätra debars sūtra IV. 2. 85. Thus titeter og 
सपास्त, 2.वर्ष, 3 भण्ड, + खण्ड (कण्ड, 3 सेवालिन् (संचालिन) 6 करिव 7 पिण्डिन, 8 गर्न, 9 कर्कर, 10 एकटीकर्ण (टीकर्ण), कणकर्ण (कन्य), 12 कर्क, 13 ककन्धुमती (कर्कन्ध 14गोह (गोड and गाडि), 15 महिसमय 16 वृत्। 
रोणी ॥ ७८॥ पदानि रोणी-(मण)। वृत्तिः ॥ रोणीमावण्प्रत्ययो भवति चातुपका। 
78. The affix pur comes after True in the fourfold .sense. 
This debars y of IV. 2. 74 This sätra consists of one word doft in the nominative case. As a general rule all words to which affixes are to be added are put in the ablative case in these sätras. The fact of this ex ceptional treatment of the word croft indicates that this word takes more under all circumstances, whether alone, or forming part of a compound. In fact, the nominative case in this sätra is a very ingenious explanatory artificiality. Thus रोणः, मानकरीण or सैहिकपणा .. 
कोपधाश्च ॥ ७९ ॥ पदानि । कोपधात्-च-(मए)। 'पत्तिः॥ककापधाय प्रातिपदिकादमस्ययो भवति चातुराधिक 
726 
पानुपर्थक-पुम् &c. 
[ BK. IV.CH. IIssi 
79. The affix sty comes in the fourfold sense after a 
· stem having for its penultimate. 
This debars 7? which would have come by IV. 2. 71 and 73. Thus कार्णच्छिनिक कूपः।। कार्णवेष्टकः ॥ कार्कवाकवम् शक्यम् । 
बुञ्छकठजिलसेनिरढण्ययफफिनिध्यकष्ठको ऽरीहणकृशाश्वश्यकुमुद काशतृणप्रेक्षाश्मसखिसङ्काशवलपक्षकर्णसुतङ्गमप्रगदिन्वराहकुमुदादिभ्यः ॥८॥ पदानि । बुट-छा-क-ठ-ल-श-नि-रस्ठ-ण्य-य-फ- 
फिर-ए-ज्य-कक्-उको अ. रोहण-कृशाश्वऋश्य-कुमुद-काश-तृण-प्रेक्ष-अक्ष्म-सखि-सङ्काश-बल-पक्ष- कर्ण- मुत अम-प्रागदिन्-वराह-कुमुदादिभ्यः।। निः॥पमादयः सदय प्रत्यया, भरीहणादयोऽपि सप्तवयव प्रातिपरिकगणाः । भाषिपदा प्रत्येकमान संबध्यते । स यथासस्वं समस्या प्रातिपदिकगणेभ्यः सदा प्रत्यया भवन्ति चातायिकाः॥ यथाः (1) भरीहणादिभ्यो बम प्रत्ययो भवास ॥ (1) कृपावादिभ्य छप्रत्ययो भवति ॥ (3) श्यादिभ्यः का प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ (३) कुमुदादिभ्यधमत्ययो भवति ।। (3) काशादिस्य इला प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ (6) हणा. दिन्याचा प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ (1) प्रेक्षाविधानिप्रत्ययो भवति ॥ (8) भरमादिभ्यो । प्रत्ययो भवति । (७) सण्यादिम्यो रम् प्रत्यया भवति ॥ (10) खंकाशादिभ्यो ग्ब प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ (11) बलादियो यःम. त्ययो भवति ॥ (12) पक्षादिन्यः फक् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ (13) कर्णारिभ्यः फिम् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ (14) ससामादिश्च वम् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ (15) प्रदिन्नादिभ्यो भ्यः प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ (16) पराहा दिभ्यः कक् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ (17) कुमदादिम्याचक् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
80. In the above four senses are added the follow ing 17 affixes after the following 17 classes of words respec tively : 
1. वश (म्भ क) after मरहण &c. 2. छ (ईय) after कपाच &c. 3.after. कश्व &c. 4.४ ( क) after कुमुद &c. 5.इल after काश &c. 6. स (or ) after तण &c. 7.नि (इ) after प्रेस &c. 8.rafter भश्मन् &c. 9. उस (= एय) after सखि &c 10. प्य () alter संकाश &c. He after बल &c. 12. फक् (=भावन) after पक्ष &c 13. फि (भायनि), after कर्ण &c 14 (6)after सुतंगम &c. 15.ज्य () after प्रगदिन 
&c. 16. का (क) after वराह &c. 17.3क् (क) after कुम &c. 
The above affixes &c. are applied to the above classes of words. me is to be added to every one of the above seventeen words. The first part of the stra upto gives the seventeen affixes, and the latter part gives the seventeen word-class. The allotment or assignment of affixes is made by I.3. 
The examples of the above are: 
(1) मारहणकम, पिणकम् () कार्याधीवः, मारटीयः, (8) कश्यका, न्यमोधकः, () कुमुदिकम्, शर्करिकम, (5) वाशिलम्, कार्शिलम्, (G), तृणसः, नरस, ( मेसिन, हलाकिन, (8) मम्मरः, (७) सखिया, सांखिदत्तेयम्, 10 सांकाभ्यन, काम्पित्यम्, (11) पल्यः, कन्यम्, (12) पा सायर्णः, नौपायर्णः, (13) कोयनिः, पासिष्ठायनिः, (14) सौतमिः, मॉनिचिन्तिा, (as) मागय (16) वाराहकम, पालाशकर, and (an lastly कोमुरिकन् ॥ 
BK. IV. CH. II. S 80] 
चार्षिक पुश &cn 
737 
The word fority will be seen, by referring to the above lists, to occur in three classes viz भरीहणादि,(36),कुमुरादि(14),and वराहादि Moreover it is gover. ned by thegeneralaffix 19 also in the quadruple sense, according to the opinion of Patanjali. And because it occurs in the matt class (IV. 2. 82), therefor this universal 7 (IV. 1. 83) will be elided after it. As we have already shown - before under I. 2. SI when पिरीपवन was formed from घिरीपा॥ 
मरीहण, पण, दुहण', भगल, 5 लन्न, किरण, खापरावण, 8 कोष्टावण, मो. ष्ट्रावण', 10 गायन, 11 मेमायण, 12 भाखायण, 13 पेमतायन (also मस्तायन), 14 गोमतावन (गो) 15 सौमतायम, 18 सोसायन, 17 धीमतायन', 18 सोमावन'.19 ऐनावण',20 कोन्द्रावण', 
खासयन, 22 शाण्डिल्यावन, 23 पयस्पोप, 24विपय, 25 विपास, 26 गण्ड, 27 पन, 28 खाण्डवीरण (खाण्ड), 29 बीरण, 30 कायकस्त्र (क) 31 माग्ववव (पन्ध, 32 चिपा, 33 रेवत (रेषत) 94 बिल्व (देवर.) 35 सुया, 36 पिरीष, 37 बधिर,.38 अम्ब 39 सरिर 40 सधर्मन (सुधर्म K.), 41 लत', 42 भलनन',43 
ख क नल' (कलम) 45वशदत्त'. 46 बार,47गावण (sic) and 48 लापन. 
. तरुणप, भरिट, मरिचम (भरीश्च वैमन, विशाल, मध, रोमप', रोमक, 9 लोमक', 10वल, कर, 12 वर्षल', 13 सर्वपल', 14 सुकर, 15 सकर, 16 प्रसर (पावर), 17 सय, 18 पुरग, 19 पुपग', 20 सुख, 4 धूम, 28 भजिन, 28 विनव (विनता, निता), 24 भवनस, 25 विकुमास (r.1. कुविधास; विकुषास), 26 पराघर', 27 मरुस, 28 भवस्', 29 मोर त्य, 30 एकर (मोमल्याकर). 31 रोमन, 32वर, 33 भवयास and भवापर 
य, न्यग्रोध, 3 घर (शिरा), निलीन, 5निवास, 6 मिवात, निधान, निबन्ध (r.1. निबन्धन; निवर) 9 दिवस, 10 परिएड, पिण्ड, 12 भसनि, 13 सित, 14 मत', 15वेक्षमत 16 उत्तराश्मन, 17 ममम्', 18 स्यूल, 19 माह (स्थूलबार), 20 खदिर, शर्करा, 2 मन, 23 मरर',24 परिपंच, 25 वेणु, 28 वीरण, 7 खण्ड, 28 दण्ड', 29 परिहन, 90 कर्दम, मं. 
1कुमुद, 2 धर्करा, 3 म्यपोष, 4 हफट (कर, रस्कट, 5 सहर, 6 कार, ? गत, बीज, परिवाप, 10निर्यास', 11 कर', 12 कप', 13 मधु', 14 घिरीप, 15मप', 16 भश्चत्य, 17 बल्बम, 18 यवाप, 19 कप, 20 विकत, 1 पपमान. 22 कण्टक, 23 पल्पस, 4 विक, 25 कद. 
काश, 2 पाप (पाच) मश्वत्प, पलाध, 5 पीक्षा (पीयूष), 6चरण, 7 पास, 8 मर 9वन, 10 कर्दम, कच्छल , 12 काट, 13 गुहा, 14विस (विष and विस), 15रुण, 16कर, 17. पर्वर', 18 मधुर', 19 मह (ग्रह) 20 कपित्य', अतु, 22 जीपाल: 23 मर, 24 कंटक 
1 हण, 2 मड, 3 मल', वन, 5 पर्ण, 6 वर्ष, 7 राण', 8 विल', 9 पुन', 10 फ ॥ भर्सन', 12 भर्ण, 13 सुपर्ण'"बल, 15 चरण, 16 स. 17 जन, 18 mr.. 
1 प्रेक्षका, 2 हलका (फलका), बन्धुका. 4 Uषका, शिपका न्यमोध, 7 पट (हर्कट) 8 काट (कर्कटा), संकट, 10 कट', 11 कप', 12 बुक', 13 पुक', 14 पुट', 15 मह (महा), 16 परि बाप", 17 वाप' (d.i. यवास)18 धुवका', 19 गतं, 20 कृपक (कपका) 21 हिरण्य'.२पकर, 23 सका , 24 महट, 25 मुक. 
1मश्मन, 2 यूथ (also युष), रुप (रुप and रुष), मीन, 5 मद, 6 , इन्द,87र, खण्ड, 10 नग, 1 शिखा, 12 कोट (कार), 13 पान (पांन!), 14 कन', 15 कान', 17 गर',18 पुर', 19 कूण्डल , 20 पीन' 21 मा.. 
7.28 
चातुरर्थिक-R &c. 
- [ BK. V.CH. II. IST 
R. 
सखि, भग्निदस, 3 वायुदल, ससिदन, 5 गोपिल (गोहित and गोहिल), 6 मल्ल .7 प.ल (भल्लपास st. मल्ल, पाल), 8 चक्र (चर्क), चक्रवाक', 10 छगल, ll भगोक, 12 करवीर, 13 पास',14वीर', 15 पूर', 16 बज', 17 कुधीरक', 18 सोहर (घोहर सोकर), 19 सरक (सकर), 20 सरस, समर', 22 समल, 23 सुरस, 24 रोह, 25 जमाल, 28 करल, 7 सप्सल, 28 पक्रपाल, 29 चकवाल, 30 वक्रपाल, रवीर 
संकाश, 2 कम्पिल, 3 कश्मीर (कमर), समीर, सरसेन (घर), सरक' सर',8 सुपान्यन् (rightly सुपायिन), पन्य (समय) च, सूप (यूथ), 10 भच, भा', 12 नासा', 13 . पलित', 14 मननाच', 15 मम्मन्, 16 कूट, 17 मलिन, 18 इश', 19 कुम्भ', 20 शी',21 विरत (चिरन्त विरत!), 22 समल', 23 सीर', 24 पम्जर', 25 मन्थ', 26 नल',27 रोमन', 28 लोमन्', 29 पुलिन', 30 सुपरि', 31 कटिप', 32 खकर्णक', 33 दृष्टि', तीर्थ, 35 मगस्ति, 36 विकर', 
अनासिका, 38 एग, 39धिकार, 40विरह 
1बल, जुल (कुल), 3 नल', 'बल', बट', 6 लकुल', 7 उरल', 8 पुन , मल', 10 रल, 11 इल, 12वन, 13 कुल, 14 सुल, 15 कपल, 
1पक्ष, 2 तुम', 3 तुप, 4 कुण्ड', 5 भण्ड, कम्बालिका (कम्बनिक), पलिक, पिन भस्ति', 10 पयिन् पन्य च (also पान्यायन), कुम्भ, 12 सीरक (सीरज), 13 सरक, 14 सकल (सलक), 15 सरस, 16 समल, 17 अतिश्चन् (स्वन्). 18 रोमन्, 19 लोमन, 20 हस्तिन, 21 मकर', 22 लोमक, 23 शीर्ष', 24 निवात', 25 पाक', 26 सिंहक, 27 अकुष', 28 सुवर्णक, 29 हंसक (हंसका), 30 हिंसक, 31 कस्स', 32 बिल', 33 सिल', यमल, 35 हस्त, 36 कला, 37 सकर्णक (सकण्डक), 38 भश्मन, 39 मस्तिबल। 
1कर्ण, वसिष्ठ, ३ मर्क, मर्कल्प (प), पर (उपद), 6 मानहरा (मन), पाञ्चजन्य 8 स्फिन, कुम्भी', 10 कुन्ती', 11 जिवन् (जिस्व), 12 जीवन्त (जीवन्सी), 13 कुलिछ, 14 माण्टी पत (भाण्डीवत), 15 जब', 16 जत्र, 17 मानक, 18 भन्छ,19ल, 20स्थिरा॥ 
सुसंगम, 2 मुनिषित (चिस), 3 विप्रचिव (चित्त), 4 महाधिच', 5 महापुष, स्वम', 7 वेत, 8 खडिक (गरिक) शुक्र, 10 विष, 11 वीजवापिन, 12 अर्जुन, 13 श्वन, 14 मभिर, 15 जीक, 16 खण्डिन', 17 कर्ण', 18 विमह', 
1प्रगदिन, 2 मगदिन, 3 मददिन, (परदिन), 4 कविल (कलिब), 5 खण्डित (खडिय), 6गदित (गदिव), 7 चूडार, 8 मार (मार्जार), ७ मन्दार', 10 कोविवार । 
वराह, पलाश, 3 गिरीप, 4 पिनख, निवद्ध, 6 बलाह', स्थूल (स्यूज), 8 विदग्ध, विजग्ध, 10 विभग्न, 11 निमग्न, 12 बाह, 13 खदिर, 14 शर्करा, 15 विनन्द्र, 16 विरुद्ध 17 मूल । 
कुमुह, 2 गोमय, 3 रथकार, दमाम, मश्वत्थ, घालमति (ली), 7 घिरीप, 8 मुनि स्थल, (स्यूल), कुण्डल, 10 कट, 11 मधूकर्ण, 12 पासकुन', 13 शुधिकर्ष, 14 मुधुकर्ण, 15 कुन्द ।। 
जनपदे लए ॥ ८१॥ पदानि ॥ जनपदे उप । इत्तिः ॥ देशे तन्नानीति यातुरार्थिक प्रत्ययो भवति, तस्य देशविशेषे जनपहेभिधेये लुइभवति ।। 
___81. The name of a kingdom is formed by the lup elision of these affixes, (when the name of the people without the change of number and gender, is at the same time the name of the kingdom). 
The words within bracket in the above sätra are added by the read ing together of this sutra with satra I. 2. 51. Dr. Otto Bohtlingk the learned 
BK. IV. CH. II. $ 83) 
ELISION OF Tutta. 
720 
. 
translator of Panini in German, has done so, and I think this addition is necessary for the elucidation of the satra. The aphorism literally means : (The quadruply significant affix) is elided, when the place (f) to be named is a kingdom (TTT) Thus tri firarat 1944:aut i So also mar, 4*, FT, IT, T, Jan, 12:11 
Why is there no lup-clision of the affix in the following examples : MAO 1996: 'the Kingdom in which there are fig-trees'. W 745&c? Because here the words t o and fro: are not names of Kingdom, but are used merely as cpithets. In fact the phrase T is understood here alsa 
वरणादिभ्यश्च ॥ २॥ पदानि वर्णादिभ्य। पतिः ॥वरण इत्येवमादिश्च ग्लन्नत्वचासुरधिकस्य प्रत्ययस्य लए भवति । 
82. Also after the word qu &c, the affix denoting locality becomes elided, but the number and gender are not changed. 
After the words to the quadruply significant asfix is clided by Mr The origination of this rulc is for the sake of what is not a kingdom (or ), to which the last rule applies. Thus Tor F U T: "the city (not a kingdom) not far from the place Varaga", So siso 9A, UF : 11 . 
The word in the satra implies that this rule applies even to words other than those which are given in the list of cont# As 1970 "a city near to bitter Badari tree". 
144, (E), 2 , 3 urma, 4 Toi", 5 varit', 6 quif, 7 arauf, 8 aire (grant that, to stret, Tor art), 9 fe , 10 *1944 (AF44; 9) 11 12 st, 13 YAT, 14 qr47, 15 t, 16 haft (Tofant), 17 741, 18 ayu, 19 
HTUST, 20 WAT (HU) 21 irato, 22 tt, 23 450 ( with o), 24 futs: 25 arseft, 26 apoi, 27 afu , 28 ffure, I. an aretamoro 
शर्कराया वा ॥८३॥ पदानि शर्कराया-या (लए)। sfera: 1 VKUTATE ligurimity UT 15 TON 
83. Optionally after the word verty, the quadruply significant affix is lup-elided. 
Why do we say "Optionally? The word mit occurs in the classes AT () and creme (14) (IV.2.80 classes 4 and 16), and must necessarily take the affixes Ty and taught therein: for had it not taken thosc affixes absolutely, their would have been no necessity of inserting this word in those classes. The present rule, therefore. teaches by implication, that the word nie takes the general affix stl, besides the above two especial affixes, denoting locality 
730 
पातुर्थिक मतुक 
| BK IV. CH. II. 5.86 
And when the word takes this universal affix (IV 1. 83), there the option is, allored, not otherwise. Thus धर्कय+म-पाकरण, धर्कप+मण - एकंप। 
ठक्छो च॥८॥ पदानि । ठक-छो-च। परितः ॥ सरायमा छात्थती प्रत्ययो भवनमातुरधिको। 
84. The affix ठक् and छ come after the word शर्करा in the quadruple sense. 
Thus of the word as there are altogether six forms denoting locali ty, namely two formed by this sotra, two by the last, and two by the sutra IV. 2&a Thus धर्करा, पार्करम, धर्करिकम् (formed by , चाकरकम् (formed by कक), शार्करिकम् (formed by sक्) and धर्करीयर (bys) __ नद्यां मतुः ॥ ५५॥ पदानि ॥ नद्याम-मतुए। वृदिः । नामभिधयायां मतुप्पत्ययो भवति चातुरधिका ।। 
85. The affix मतुए is added in denoting a river. When the name of a river is to be designated by something which is found near it we add the affix मतुर (मत् and वन), Thus उदम्बरावती, मशकावती, वीरणावती, पुष्करवती, सुमती, मती॥ See VI. 3. 119 by which ther is lengthened in these words, and VI. 1. 219 by which the udatta is placed on this vowel. See VIII. 2 10 by which मत् becomes वत् । 
The affix al is not however employed in forming the river-names भागीरथी and भमरथी, which are formed by भर added under IV.2.68. 
मध्वादिभ्यश्च ॥८६॥ पदानि ॥ मध्वादिभ्यः च। पब्दिः ॥ मधुइस्येवमादिभ्यः पन्देन्यो मसुष्मत्ययो भवति चातुपयकः। 
86. The affix मतुए is added to the words मंधु &c in the four senses given above. 
The origination of this rule is for the sake of what is not a river. As मधुम्मन, विसझन् &c. 
मधु, विस, 3 स्थाशु, पेण, कर्कन्धु, शमी, करीर (किरीर)8हिम, 9 किशरा, 10 पर्यष (चर्पणा) II मरुत, 12 पार्शली', 13 घर, 14इटका, 15 भामुति, 16क्ति , 17 भासन्दी, 18 
1,19 शलाका, 20 मामिषी (भामिधी) 21, 22 पेमन, 23 संटि (मुष्टि हटि) 24 रुप्य 25 तक्षशिला, 26 सर (खा) 27 वट, 28 वेद (वेय) 29 रम्य, 30 पथ, 38 मरुव, 32 वार्वापार. 
कुमुदनडवेतसेम्यो ड्मतुए ॥८७॥ पदानि । कुमुद नड-चेतसेभ्यः-इमतुए। इलिः ॥ कुमुद नर वेतस इत्येतेभ्य सम्मेभ्यो इमता प्रत्ययो भववि धातुर्यिका . . . पाक्षिकम् ॥ महिपाति पत्नयर ॥ 
____87. The afix व्यतुए comes after the words कुमुद, नड and ear, in the above four senses, and the final of these words is elided before this affix. 
BK. IV. CI. II..91] 
चातुराधक-कुद। 
73 
. Thus महान महान बेतवान 
___Vart:-So also after the word महिष, मरणान् ॥ __ नशादाद् डलर ॥ ८॥ पदानि । मड-शादान-डुलम् ।। 
वृत्तिः ।। माशायदाभ्यां इल प्रत्ययो भवति चातुरपिकः। 
88. The affix ges comes after his and 172 in the four senses given above, the final of the words being elidcd. : 
Thus मडलम् and शादल शिस्त्रायां घलच ॥ ८९ पदानि । शिखाया-घलन् । वृत्तिः ॥ विखारामाइलचं प्रत्ययो भवति चानुरार्थिकः । यथासंभवमर्यसंपन्धः ।। 
89. The affix घलच comes after the word शिखा in the above four-senses. 
Thus fatertag 'the city Sikha-vala' lit.'crested as a peacock': The word four takes one by V. 2. 111, the alix having the same force as HD V. 2. 94, ("whose it Is' or 'in whom it is, That you should be distinguished from the present, in as much as, the latter is employed in making names of locality, not so the affix taught in Book v. ___ उत्करादिभ्यश्छः ॥ १०॥ पदानि ॥ उत्करादिभ्यः(उ.)। 
वृत्तिः रकर इत्येवमारियश्छः प्रत्ययो भवति चातुरर्थिकः ।। 
_____90. The afix , comes after the words उत्कर &c, in the four senses: 
As करीयम्, पारीयम्। ___1 उल्कर, 2 संकल, 3 अफर, 4 पिप्पल, 5 पिप्पलीमूल, 6 मम्मन्, 7 सुवर्ण (सुपर्ण) 8 खलाडि न, निक, 10 कितव, मणक', 12 श्रवण', 13 पिघुक, 14 अश्वस्थ, 15 काच, 16 क्षुद्र (एकाद Rt. काश, क्षुद्र ) 17 भस्वा, 18 पाल, 19 अन्या, 20 मजिर (जिन) चर्मन, 22 उत्कीच, 23 क्षात (शान्त) 24 दिर, 25 पूर्पणाय, 26 च्यावनाय, 27 मेवाकर (नेव, पंक) 28 सूत', 29 Jh 30 पाक', 31 पराध, 32 विजिगीपा, 33 अंक, 24 माक्षप, 35 पल', 36 सं. पर, 37 भर्क, 38 गर्त, 39 ग्रि, 40 पैराणक', 41 डा, 42 भरण्य, 43 निधान्त', पर्ण, 45 मीच थक', 46 शंकर, 47 अवरोहित, 48 भार', 49 विशाल, 60 वेष, 51 भरोहण', 52 खण्ड, 53 पासागर 5- मन्त्रणाई, 35 इन्द्रवृक्ष, 56 नितान्त वृक्ष, (नितान्ताक्ष; निसान्त, वृक्ष) 7 भादृम. 58 सणव, 50 शान्य, 60 मडेच, 61 अर्जुनवल. __ नडादीनां कुक च ॥ ९१॥ पदानि । नडादीनाम, कुक्-च (छ). मृत्तिः ॥ नह विमानांगागमो भवति, छव प्रत्ययवासुरार्थिकः। यथासंभवमयंसंबन्धः ॥ .. पातिकम् ॥ कूञ्चाया इस्पबंध । तमन्नलोपत्र। 
:01. The augment comes after the words * &c, when the affix s follows in the above four. senses. 
732 
tout&re 
(BK. IV. CH. II. §. 92. 
e sens 
To the words * &c. the same affix is added, with the insertion of an after the stem. As T+ t5e a n; eta, &C. 
The words set and at belong also to this class. In the case of at the long vowel is shortened, and in the case of any the is elided : c. g. रुपकीयम,क्षसकीयम् । 
177, 27, 3 forf, 4 , 5 17, 6 , 7 ty, 8 *18,9 16, 10 , 11 ( o ) FT , 12 a preu.. 
शेषे॥ १२॥ पदानि । शेषे॥ -- gft: In one reafirantarei after w eergere, diset from: * 
92. The affixes taught hercafter, have senses other than those mentioned above. 
The suffixes that will be taught now have senses other than those already taught in the previous aphorisms. "Let a meaning, other than those of which progeny (IV. 1 92) was the first mentioned, and the quadruple signification', the last, be called up or the remainder'-and in that remaindes of senses, too, let there be the affix per &c. Thus visible' viz colour which is appreher.ded by vision' from qr; 19799: 'audible' viz. sound, from 494, MIFIT: 'treated of in Upanishad' i. c soul, r: from my, 'ground on a stone'i. e. flour of a fried corn, tai 'ridden in by four person' viz a cart; GIGT, who is seen on the fourteenth day of the moon' riz a goblin ; oir 
pounded in a mortar' viz. barley: art drawn by horses' viza chariot (Adapted from Dr. Ballantyne's Laghukaumudi) 
The regulating influence of the expression od "in the remainder" ex tends from this aphorism forward as far as IV. 3. 134. The affixes & &c taught hereafter, do not come in the sense of progeny &c, but they have, every one of them, all the senses of ra 'bcing born' (IV. 3. 25), TT (IV. 3. 101), ATTE: (IV. 3. 74) &c. A T: (IV. 3. 89), &c : &c (IV. 3. 38) . Thus arg: means " born in Srughna (IV. 3. 25), or done in Srughna, or bought io Srughna, or obtained in Srughna, or skillful in Srughna (IV. 3. 38), or abundant in Srughna (IV. 3. 39), or suited to Srughna (IV. 3. 41), or staying in Srughna (IV. 3. 53), or what has come from Srughna (IV. 3. 74) or which has its rise in Srughna (IV. 3.83), a road icading to Srughna (IV. 3. 85) a messenger going to Srughna (IV. 3. 85), a gatc facing Srughna or from which men go out to Srughna (IV. 3.86) a book relating to the History of Srughna (IV. 3:87), an inhabitant of Srughna (IV. 3. 89), a person whose ancestral home is at Srughna (IV. 3.90) . 
• राष्ट्रावारपाराद् घसौ ॥ ९३॥ पदानि राष्ट्र-अवारपारात्-घ-खौ इतिः॥ राष्ट्र भवारपार त्यताम्यां यथासंख्यं पखातिरयेना प्रत्यया भवतः ।। BK. IV.CH. IL.595] 
09-AFFIXES 
733 
पार्मिकम् ॥ विग्रहीतापीयते । वार्षिकररिपरीनाम। 
93. The affixes gha and kha are respectively add ed after the words राष्ट्र and भवारपार । 
The affix fois substituted for y, and for for (VII. 1. 2) This गदिय: born &c.in a country',भवारपारीणः 'who or what goes or extends to both banks'. 
Vart:-The affix comes also when the words UK and are taken separately: as well as when compounded inversely: eg. भवारीपा 
belonging to this bank of the river', qoy: ' belonging to the other bank'. पारावारीण: ' belonging to the other bank as well as to this. Here as well as in sereral of the subsequent aphorisms, merely the stems and their appropriate Affixes are given; the sense of these afixes are those of being born' &c to be taught hercafter in IV. 3.25 and satras that follow it, 
“There shall not be mentioned derivatives which end with those alfixes the first whercof is y, and the last where of are (IV. 3. 24), with specification of the original term to which the application of those affixes is appropriate; and their varietics of meaning, such as being produced there from IV. 2, 25, and the like, shall be mentioned; and the declensional cases in connection with which the afíxes are appropriately applicable". (Dr. Ballan. tyne's Laghu Kaumudi) 
प्रामाद्यखनी ॥ १४॥ पदानि । प्रामात, य-खो। चिः॥ मामयनाय खात्येतो प्रत्ययो भवतः ।। 
94. The affixes य and खम् (ईन) come after the word 'grima'. 
As gpa and gritor, 'a rustic': कत्रयादिभ्यो दकम् ॥ ९५ ॥ पदानि । कति-आदिभ्यो सका। . .. प्रतिः॥ कपि स्येवमारियो रकम् प्रत्ययो भवति पार्निकम् ।। कुल्याया बलोपव 
____93. The affix दकम् (एयक) comes after the words कत्रि &c. 
As कायका, भोम्मयकाः &c 
कवि, 2 रम्भि, 3 पुष्कर, 4 पुष्कल, मोदन, 6 कुम्भी, 7 कुण्डिन, मगरी (मगर)9 हिमती, 10 वर्मती, (पर्मण्ववी) ख्या, 12 माम, 13 कुडपाया (कुल्याया) चलोपब, 14 पम्मी. 15 भनि 
कुलकुक्षिग्रीवाभ्यः श्वास्यलकारेषु ॥ ९६ ॥ पदानि ॥ कुल-कुक्षि-ग्रीवाश्या, प. भास-अलङ्कारेषु। 
738 
- 
प-AFFIXES. 
PK. IV. CI. II. 3.99"] 
अधिः ॥ कुलक्षिमीवाशने यो वयावं धन् मषि मलकार इत्यतेषु जातारिचर्येषु रकम् प्रत्ययो .भवति ... 
96. The same affix कञ् is added to the words :कुल, कुक्षि and प्रीवा, when the whole words sQ formed mean 
respectively, ‘a dog', 'a sword' and 'an ornament'. 
The force of the amx, as already told above, is to denote 'produce: &c. (IV. 3. 25 &c): but tho whole word has specific significance. As a 
wa dog (lit. pertaining to a family); कोशेयका%a sword (lit. remaining in a .sheath), अश्य a necklace. When not having these meanings; the regular 
derivatives from these words are formed by भण् as, काला, काक्ष: and it . - मधादिभ्यो ढक ॥ ९७॥ नद्यादिभ्यः, हक। 
वृषितामसी इत्येवमादिभ्यो मत्ययो भवति । 
. 97. The affix ढक (एय) comes after the words 'nadi &c, in the remaining sonses (i. e. IV. 3. 25. &e). . Thus नादव, 'pcrtaining to a river', माहेयम् carthen', &c. . 
1मरी, 2 मही, 3 वाराणसी, 4 श्रावस्ती, 3 कीशाम्बी, 6 वनकौशाम्बी (वनको) कापरी' कायफरी (फारी)खादिरी, 10 पूर्वनगरी, 11 पाग (पावा) 12 माया (मावा) 13 घाल्या (सा: स्वा)14 दाया', 15 सेतकी (वासेनकी) 16 परवाया षे. 17 दाल्या, .. 
The word get occurs in the above list. Its derivative will be 474 अगरेम।। But some say, it is composed of three words पर-पन-गिरि and apply the amx to each of therm separately. As परियम, थानेयम् and गरयम् ॥ 
. दक्षिणापश्चात्पुरसस्स्यफ् ॥९८॥ पदानि । दक्षिणा, पश्चातू, पुरसः, त्य।. . शिरा दक्षिणा पश्चात् पुरस् इत्येतेभ्यस्त्यक् प्रत्ययो भवति धेषिकः॥ 
' 98. After the words 'dakshina', 'paschat' and'puras! the affix 'tyak' (2) is added in tho remaining sonses. 
___As शाक्षिणात्या 'pertaining or produced in the south'; पावास्यः 'accidental', girera: 'oriental'. 
कापिश्याः फक् ॥ ९९ ॥ पदानि ॥ कापियाः, फक् 
• वृत्तिः ॥ कापिशीयात् फक् प्रत्ययो भवति ऋषिकः ॥ , . . प्राधिकम् ॥ पाहायुर्विपश्यितिषतष्यम् ॥ . 
99. After the word 'Kapisi', the affix 'shphak' is addod in the remaining seses: (the feminine being formed by डाए IV. 1. 41):. . . 
Thus कार्पिशायनं मधु, कापिशायनी द्वाक्षा'a liquork . . . . .. . 
'( BK. IV. CH. II. $. 101. 
. 
-AFFIXES. 
733 
. 
Vart:--So also after ea, off and off as, Tamaraft, etiraft, great. This debars of IV. 2 125. . 
glagosur poot annat ti-MAGU-- ( ). FH (FOT wegen TA, TATUT Orent sources 
100. After the word to the same affix 'shphak'as well as the affix au is added, in the remaining senses, when the meaning is a non-human being. 
As treat ott: or forget th: but ogranicent (IV. 2 134) 
Q. The word belongs to the class (IV. 2. 133); and when a human being is to be denoted, then by IV. 2 134, it will take the affix and when a non-human being is to be designated, then it will take to by rule IV. 2. 133; then where is the necessity of the present sotra by which is cnjoined when a non-human being is to be designated ? To this the reply is that the force of the negative asfix in amanuysha is that of a; bestera = ATT: "a being like man, but not man". The word gedoes not mcan 'anything which is not a man'. For had this becn its meaning, then a blankct is also a thing which is not a man, and in denoting a blanket, wo should add ; but we never do so. When blanket is to be denoted we add iment of IV. 2. 133, as FT: "a woolen blanket". When we want to denote a living being other than man, then we add 4 and any of this sitra. The me is repeated in this sätra, for the purpose also of showing that otherwise my would have been debarred by the special affix II 
The word is is the name of a country, it would have taken soy under the universal rulc IV. 1. 83, but this is debarrcd by al of IV. 2 125, and F is debarred by of IV, 2, 119, and 5g is debarred by mor of IV. 2. 132, as it has as penultimate, the present sätra debars that and ordains and a - घुप्रागपागुदप्रतीचो यत् ॥ १०१॥ पदानि ॥ धु, मार-भपाग-उदन्-प्रतीचो 
यत्। पतिः ॥ त्मिभपाधू उवच प्रत्यप इत्येतेभ्यो बत्प्रत्ययो भवान षिकः । 
101. After the words 'div', 'prach', 'apach', 'udach' and 'pratyach', the affix is added in the remaining senses. 
Thus दिप्यम्, प्राप्यम्, भपाच्यम्, उदीयन, (IV.4130) and प्रतीच्यम्॥ For . accent sce VI. 1. 213. When these words are used as Indeclinables, and de note time, they take also the affixes 'tyu' and 'tyul', c. 8, TTT (IV. 3.25) The word were means south. 
कन्थायाप्ठ ॥ १०२॥ पदानि कन्थाया ठक। पत्तिः ॥ कन्याशाक्प्रत्ययो भवशिषिकः। 
736 
-AFFIXES 
[Bx. IV. CH II. S. 104 
102. After the word 'Kantha', comes the affix ठह in the remaining senses. 
____As कान्धिका 
वर्षा बुझ् ॥ १०३ पदानि । वर्णी-पुर। वृत्तिः। कन्यावा इत्येव । वर्णी या कन्या वस्या वृक् प्रत्ययो भवति पिकः।। 
103. To the same stem is added the affix when it trents about some thing which is to be found in the land of Varnu. 
The Varnu is the name of a river, and the country near it is also called Varpu,.the affix denoting country being elided by IV. 2.81. Thus कान्यकर। 
• अव्ययात्यप् ॥ १०४॥ पदानि । अन्ययाव-त्यर। 
वृत्तिः । मन्ययात् त्या प्रत्ययो भवति पिकः। Karikl 
भमहस्वतसिषेभ्यस्यविधियों ययात्मवः। 
निनिभ्या वगल्योग प्रवेषो नियमे क्या। वानिकम् ॥ त्वन्ने ॥ पानिकम । निसी गते ॥ पार्तिकम् ॥ मारिसश्छन्दति। वार्चिकम् ॥ भरण्याण्णोवतम्यः ॥ वारिकम ॥ दूरादेयः॥ पार्चिकम् ॥ रचरादहम् ॥ 
104. The affis 'tyap' comos after an Indeclina.. ble, in the remaining senses. 
This rule is too wide. The affix mag is restricted to the following Indeclinables:-ममा 'together', 'here', 'where', those that end in aसि (V. 3.7) and T (V. 3. 10). As भमास्यः 'a minister',इहरयः, कुत्यः, सतस्या , तपस्यः &c 
Why do we say 'its application should be restricted'? Observe: भोपरित पौरस्तः, पारस्त: formed from the Indeclinables परिपुर, and पार moreover, the Indeclinables, that are Vriddha (i. e. having 1, f and ait in the first syl. lable), take the affix s in the same sense. As, Arrata 
Vårt:-The euc is added to fa, in the sense of " fixed." as, ya भवम्।। 
Vart:-The त्य' is added to निस् in the sense of 'going.. As निष्टपः "Chandalas &c who have gone out of the caste". 
Virt:-The स्यए is added to the word माविम् in the Vedas: As भादि. पोवईवे। 
Vart:-The affix comes after भरण्यःcg. मारण्याः सुमनसः॥ Vart:-The affix एe comes after reg.रेत्यः पायक Vart:-The affix भाहर comes after सर.g.भोनराहा . .... 
DR IV. CH. II. $. 107) 
--AFEIXES. 
71 
. ऐषमोहः श्वसोऽन्यतरस्याम् ॥१०५॥ पदानि ॥ ऐषमस-सासू-श्वसो-अन्यत 
रस्याम्। पतिः ॥ ऐपमस् यत् अस्त्व योज्यतरस्यांबा प्रत्ययो भवति पिका। 
105. The affix my is added optionally after the words 'aishamas', 'hyas', and 'svas'; in the remaining senses. 
Aऐषमस्त्यम् or ऐपमस्तनम् (IV.3.23. हपस्स्थम् or पस्तनम् (IV 3.23):शवा or वस्तनम् (IV. 3.23) or शास्तिकम् (IV. 3.15) The word 'svas' takes the ang ment R also, hence the above three forms 
तीररुप्योत्तरपदावी ॥ १०६॥ पदानि । तीर-सप्य-उत्तर-पदाव-अ-औ। वृतिः। वीरोनरपतार रूप्योचरपदाच प्रातिपरिकापयास्यमम्मरत्यता प्रत्ययो भवतः पिकां। 
___106. The affix अ comes after a word ending with Arc, and the # comes after a word ending with your; in the remaining senses. 
This debars भण्॥Thus काकतीरम, पालतीरन, पार्करुप्यन्व रूप्यम्. The words formed by w, take the affix it in the feminine (IV. 1. 15); those in . take thcaffix ग (IV. 1.4). The sotra is not enunciated as तीररूप्यान्तान for had it been so, the asfix would apply to (162 also, where is final, but cannot be called uttara-pada, as bahu' is not a pada but is an affix V. 3.68 Therefore, we have पाहरूप्यम् formed by भण् । 
दिपूर्वपदादसंज्ञायां मः ॥ १०७॥ पदानि । दिक्-पूर्वपदात, असंशायाम्-.. वृरितः ॥ मसंज्ञायामिति प्रकृतिविशेषणम् । 
दिपावातिपदिकाइसंज्ञा विपया मा प्रत्ययो भावि पोषिक . 
. 107. The affix st comes in the remaining senses, after a word preceded by another that significs " direction', provided the compound is not a Name. 
. . To a stem, whose first member is a word denoting direction, and which is not a Name, the affix is added, forming the feminine in FIT # The word भसंज्ञायाम qualifies the 'base'. This debars भण् ॥ Thus पर्यशाला म =4rur: (VI. 4. 148, VII. 2. 117) who is in the castern hall'. Similarly पाक्षिणशाला, भापरशाला 
Why do we say " when not a Name"? Observe, from the word de कामशमी (II. I.So) we have पूषकामधर्मः (VII. 3. 14). The example illustrates how first a compound of Tatpurusha kind is formed by the words - कामशामी; "Ishukamshamt-in-the-Last"; the whole being the name of the city. 
738 
.. 
orka-wg 
- 
(BK. IV. CH İL S II 
Then when the Taddhita affix is added to this word, the first vowel is not vriddhied, as is the general rule VII. 2. 117; but the first vowel of the second member of the compound is vfiddhied, vit the letter g of Tayt by rule VII. 3. 14. Similarly w i UH: "who is in Ishukamashamt-in-the-West". 
The word '44' is used in the sđtra for the sake of percision, for had the sätra been feestart, there would rise the doubt, whether the the word-form fren was meant, or words denoting Fan were meant In fact the F16far is debarred by the use of the word . 1 For had it meant fore; the rule would have applied to words like forei &c. 
भद्रेश्योऽ॥ १०८॥ पदानि मद्रेश्यो-अ. त्तिः ॥ दिपूर्वपरान्मद्रधनावम् प्रत्ययो भवति पिकः॥ 
108. The affix it is added to the word hq, pre ccded by a word denoting direction ; in the remaining senses. 
Thus at: f. ; atque f.* Here contrary to the examples in the preceding sâtra, the initial votvel is vriddhied by VII. 3. 13 which makes a special exception in the case of the word og . उदीच्यग्रामाचवहुचन्तिोदात्तात् । १०९। 
शत्तिः ॥ दिग्ग्रहणं निवचम् । उदीच्यग्रामवाधिनः प्रातिपदिका बढ़चोऽन्तोदात्ताभए प्रत्ययो भवति. 
. 
109. The affix H comes in the remaining senses, after a word consisting of more than two syllables, having udatta accent on the final, being the name of a village of the peoples of the North. 
The governing force of the word fie ceases here. Tlic org debars Ball Thus & gta iragraut . 
Why do we say " village of north-folk? Observe hiyła formed by pot; difference in accent 
Why do we say "consisting of more than two syllables 7 Obseve 8-98 
Why do we say "being oxytonczos Obscrve uristina u Here 4 is udatta by VI, 1, 194, taking fast accent. . प्रस्थोत्तरपदपलद्यादिकोपधादण् ॥ ११॥ . 
वर्ति: प्रयोचरपरात् पलयादिभ्यः ककारोपधाच प्रातिपरिकारण प्रत्ययो भवति धेषिकः। 
110. The affix my comes, in the remaining senses after a word ending with ey, after the words reseft &c, aud 
BK. IV. CH. II. $111.) 
bir-para 
739 
after a word having a penultinate + whether these words ex. 
- This debars the 7 of the last aphorism. Thus HFT., 
f reer TAT:, myri, Sfarmin C 
In the class Paladyadi, those words which denote villages of sretari will not take on or rits affix of IV. 2. 117; but will take the affix pot of this rule. Such as the words गोष्टी and भेतकी। 
The word that occurs in Paladt class, and consequently it does not take the affix (IV. 2. 123) which it would otherwise have taken by reason of its being a Vriddha word ending in long * . 
.Tle wor] area has a penultimate *but it is rccited in Paladt class, showing that it docs not take the affix of IV. 2. 114 though it is a Vriddha word. 
The affix spot is repeated in this sdtra, (though its anuvritti comes from IV. 1. 83), in order to exclude the application of any rule which might have debarred the general & 
1 groot, 2 qft , 3 , 4 , 5 pite () Tante (etc) 7 ** it, 
8 C , 9 itt, 10 port, 11 ngt, 12 (79**), 13 fat, 14 Toy, 15 797, 16 q60, 17 974 ( 41 ) 18 TH, 19 PERMET # 
कण्वादिभ्यो गोत्रे ॥ ११ ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ गोत्रमिह न प्रत्ययार्यों न प प्रकृतिविशेषण, नाव संरभ्यते, फवारियो गोरे व अध्ययो विहि तस्तरन्तेभ्य एवाण प्रत्ययो भवति पिक॥ 
111. The affix nu comes after the patronymics formed from a &c. 
Here the word te does not qualify the sense of the base, nor docs it give the sense of the affix. It simply means "that after a word ending with the affix which has been ordained after the words Kaņva &c, in denoting a Gotra or Family-name; the affix an is employed in the remaining scnscs.This debars the affix o (IV. 2. 114) Thus fit"the pupils of Kanva". Tena: (IV. 1. 105) 
Why do we say " when denoting Family-names?" Thus the word Tuy, when it means #oriarsku, forms its secondary derivative ratan by in 
The Kanva-class is a sub-class of Gangadi. The Family-names from and try are store and Herzy by rule IV. 1. 105. To this, the affx is added. 054 +999 = 10: (VI. 4. 148 and VI. 4. 151). 
इनश्च ॥ ११२॥ पदानि ॥ इy:, च-(अण)। sfer: 1 maga ftizara pararaqitorya na ufan: 
740 
ofen-8.1 
.(Bk. :V. CH. II. $ 114 
112. After & Family-name formed by ry, the affix so is added in the remaining seuses. 
This debars Huu Thus from a we have Patronymic , from which T: "the pupils of Dakshi" ; at T., TART: 1 The final x is elided before by VI. 4.148 
Why do we say 'denoting a family-name'? Observe ata :, a word formed by r of IV. 2. 80, not denoting a family, but having the four-fold sense of IV. 2. 68-70 The further derivative from this will be orariter by 
(IV. 2. 114) 
नव्यचः प्राच्यभरतेषु ॥ ११३॥ पदानि ॥ न-मृत्यचा, प्राथ्य-मरतेषु( अण)। fa: 11 Wy: wafenelemente tepe 
113. The affix smart is not however added to a word which, though ending in thc Patronymnic afffix , con sists of two syllables, when it is the family panic of Eastern people or of Bharata 
This sūtra debars to which would have come by the last sätra. The result being, that the words answering to the description given in this aphor rism, form the 10 derivatives by the affix 5 (IV. 2. 114). Thus utat, Hrútarni from in, miù Why do we say "consisting of two syllables"? Observe पान्नागाराः formed by भण from पाम्नागारि॥ 
do we say "when it denotes the family-names of East folks or Bharata"? Observe: ht: from Afu 
Q. How do you form Tuta when by rule IV. 2. 116, the proper form would be atat or TVAT? 
Ans. The word alfy of søtra 116 refers to a country because it occurs with aft, while the art of the example under the present aphorism is a Family-name 
The Bharatas belong also to the East-Folk or Prachyas. Their sepa rate mention here indicates by Jhapaka or inference, that whereéver Prachya is used in these sätras, it does not include the Bharatas. See II 4. 66. 
103: 13881 la Il Tartu: 3 वृरितः ॥ वृद्धात्यातिपदिकाच्छा प्रत्ययो भवति चषिकः। 
114. After a word called Vriddlra, the affix y is added in the remaining senses. 
The word does not govern this sūtra. This is a gcncral rule. The Vriddha is defined in. l. 1. 73 &c. This debars 9 Thus from právo 
BK. IV. CH. II.S6] 
प्रेषिका 
: 
741 
. 
ता 
: 
. 
have मार्गाव(VI.4148& 12) Soalso पानसीब चालीव, मालीब.. 
This rule being a subsequent ons, debars the following preceding rules, in case of conflict of rules (I.+2)I. The rule relating to Indeclin. ables (104) 2. The rule relating to words ending in fr and can (106) 3. The rule relating to Villages of North-folk (109) 4 The rule relating to xnultimate < (110) Thus. 
स-महत्य; but भारान-भारतीय करवतीर-कारवतीरम: but पायसतीर-पावसतीरीवा पणारकच-याणाररूप्यम: but माणिकच-माणिरूप्यकः (IV.221) शिवपुर-शेवपुरमः but als. 
का--बाडकीय, नितीनक-मेलीनक; but मोह-मौलूकीक। ___ भवतष्ठक्छसौ ॥ ११५॥ पदानि ॥ भवतः, ठक्-छसौ । 
पतिः ॥ भान्छनार खान उक्सा प्रत्ययो भवतः ऐपिको 
116. The affix ठक् and छस come after the Vriddha word 97, in the remaining senses. 
The word w17 is a Vriddha word because it belongs to tyadadi class .( I. I.74), This rule debars s of the last aphorism. In the affix, BF, the. final g is indicatory, showing that the word w47 before this affix gets the de-. signation of Pada पर (I. 416) Thus भवन+ठकम्भावस्कः भवत् स्भ वतीयः. 
But when the word *HT is not treated as Vriddha, then it takes the general affix भण, as भाषवः ॥ This is the case when is derived by affix. ing uy to 
काश्याविश्यष्ठभूमिठो ॥ ११६ । पदानि । काश्यादिभ्यः-उ-मिठी। हरितः ॥ काशिरस्येवमादिस्यहम् भिदायती प्रत्ययो भवतः ऐपिको। वार्मिकम् ॥ भापरिपूर्वपरास्कालान्तात् ।। 
116. The affixes ठम् and भि come, in the remain ing senses, after the words काारी &c. 
In the affixes and in, theç is replaced by , the other letters are anubandhas. The form in both cases will be the same, but there is a dis tinction in the feminine. Those formed by T will take it (IV. 1. 15), the others will take यर (IV. .47 Thus काधिका or काधिकी, वैरिका or वैरिकी। . 
The word art is to be read in to this satra. Those words in the list which are not a will take the affixes, by virtue of being so classified. 
The word TTTT: occurs in the list of words. It gets the designation of r by I. 1. 75. Thas TET: # But when it is the name of a Vahika village, it is not a Vriddha word. The secondary derivative then will be देवरतः 
2. In the Mahabhashya it is said that a Proper name is optionally 
242 
पिक-म्॥ 
[ BK. IV.CH. IISG 
treated as a Vriddha, and it gives example of lar: or TTFTTH So then देवता is aVriddha word and will take these affixes, : Ans. No. In that very passage of Mahabhashya it is further stated that the option in the case of Proper Names is allowed only for the purposes of the application of the afixछ (IV. 2. 14) and not the affix si and भिद ।। 
Vårt :-This affix comes after compound words ending in oras and preceded by मापन, अपं and at: as भापतकालिकी or "का, मौर्धकरिकी or "का, साना कालिकी or °का 
1काधि, 2 चेदि (वैदी ) 3 सांयाति', संवाह, भव्युत, 6 मोदमान (मोहमान) 7 अकुला. १,हस्तिक, नामन, (करामन, 10 हिरण्य, 11 करण, 12 गोवासन (गांधापन) 13 भारती', 14 भरिदम. 15 मरिच', 16 देवदन, 17 घमाम (शाखमाम) 18 जीवावतान (सीधावतान) 19 युवराज, 20 उपराज,श देवगन, 22 मोइन', 23 सिन्धुमिच, 24 दासमित्र, 25 सुधामित्र', 26 सोममिष', 27 छा गमित्र', 28 सपमित्र', 29 मापदादिपूर्वपरात् (भापद, कर्म, वडू) कालान्तान, 30 संज्ञा, 31 भौरिकि, 82 भोलिनि, 33 सर्वमित्र, 34 साधुभिव। . 
वाहीकमामेभ्यश्च ॥ ११७ ॥ पदानि । वाहीक-ग्रामेभ्यः च, (ठ भिटी)। . 
• वृत्तिः ॥ वाहीकपामवाचिभ्यो वृद्धेश्यष्ठम् भिटी प्रत्ययो भवतः ऐपिको। 
117. The affixes * and fare come, in the remain ing sensos, after the Vriddha words denoting the villages of Vahika. 
The word car is to be read into this sätra. This debars the affix F(IV. 2. 114). Thus शाकलिकी or शाकलिका. मान्यविकी or मान्यपिका ॥ 
विमापोशीनरेषु ॥ ११८॥ पदाति ॥ विभाषा-उशीनरेषु (ठ-विटी)। इत्तिः ॥ उशीनरेए ये वाहीकपातास्तथाषिभ्यो वृद्धेभ्यः प्रातिपदिक यो दिभाषा उम् प्रिटी प्रत्ययो भवतः । 
118. The affixes as and iste come optionally in the remaining senses, after Vriddha words denoting Vâhika pillages situated in Usinara. . Thus भाद्वशालिकी, 'लिका and "लीया; so also सौदर्शनिकी, सौदर्शनिका and at: प्रमीया। ___ मोदेशे तु ॥ ११९ । पदानि ॥ ओ, देशे, ठम्। 
वृत्तिः ॥ उवर्णान्ता देशवाधिनः प्रातिपदिकात् उम् प्रत्ययो भवाति पिकः । . 
119. The affix , comes in the remaining senses, after a Nominal-stem donoting a locality and ending in उ॥ . 
The phrase 'ret' does not govern this søtra. For had it been understood in this aphorism, there would have been no necessity of repeating it in the next 
Thus नेपारकर्षक, शावरजम्बुका ॥ Why do we say t dengting a coun: try'? Observe TTi'the pupils of formed by 
. . BK. IV. Ch. II. 8122.] 
शेषिक मुम् । 
. 
743 
दा 
In the previous sutras, the anuvritti of 8 and fore, both were current ; hence the repetition of in this sQtra, because we could not take the anuvritti of ra from the last sätra without drawing the anuvritti of My # 
वृद्धापाचाम् ॥ १२० पदानि ॥ वृद्धात-प्राचाम-ठा)। वृत्तिः ॥ भोध इत्येव । उवर्णान्ता वृद्धावागदेशवाधिनः प्रातिपदिकाम् प्रत्ययो भवति षिक। 
120. The affix y comes in the remaining senses after a vriddha word endding in 3 and denoting a locality of the East-folks. 
The phrase मार्द is here understood. "Thus भाडकामुक, चाकम्बुकर नापितवास्तुका । 
The affix sy would have been valid by the last sätra also, the present sätra makes a face or restriction, showing that in the case of words denoting places of East, the rule applies to those words only, which are Vriddha. There fore it does not apply to मालवास्त, from which we have मालवास्तवः। . धन्वयोपधावु ॥ १२१॥ पादानि धन्व-य-उपधात्-घुश् । 
पुस्तिः ॥ धन्यवाधिनो यकारोपधाच देशाभिधायिनो वृद्धाप्रातिपरिका शुभ प्रत्ययो भवति पोषिकः ।। 
121. The affix gt comes in the remaining senses, after a vriddha word donoting a locality, which has the letter y as its penultimate, and after a vriddha place-namo denoting a waste or desert place.. . 
The words art and a are understood here. The word means a waste or desert. Thus पारधन्दका, ऐरावतक: are examples of धन्द Similarly सांकाश्यकः and काम्पिल्यक: are examples of a penultimate 
प्रस्थपुरवहान्ताच्च ॥ १२२॥ पदानि । प्रस्थ-पुर-वहान्तात्-च-(धुन)। वृत्तिः ॥ प्रस्थपुर वह इत्येवमन्तादेशवाधिनः प्रातिपदिकार वृद्धार प्रत्ययो भवति पिक 
122. The affix a comes, in the remaining senses, after a Vriddha word denoting a locality and ending with प्रस्थ, पुर or वद.. 
___This debars r (IV. 2. 114), Thus मालाप्रस्थक, मानीपुरकः, कान्तिपुरकः, पैलु पहका, फाल्गुनीबहका।। 
The words ending in fr would have taken the affix rx by the next sútra also, but as that sätra is restricted to the countrics of the East, this sätra is general in its scope 
रोपधेतो. प्राचाम् ॥ १२३॥ पदानि ॥र-उपधा-ईतोः-प्राचामः। परितः ॥ रोपधारीकापन्ताच प्रागरेशवाचिनो वृद्धास्व प्रत्ययो भवति प्रषिका ॥ 
MM 
744 
teeN 
(BK. IV. CH. II. $ 125. 
123. The affix e comes iu the remaining senses, after a Vriddha word denoting a locality of the East-folk, the word having a penultimate r or ending in a 
This debars 5# Thus qrefour, * # So also with words ending in fr As, 41*-- , --14 : (VI. 4. 148) 
Why do we say YTL of the East-folk'? Observe u ra: formed by . The e in fe in the søtra is for the sake of distinctness 
जनपदतदवध्योश्च । १२४. पदानि ॥ जनपद-सद्-अवयोःच-घुम्म)। वृतिः ॥धाजनपदवाधिनस्वरवाधिवापिनमा प्रातिपरिकाम् प्रत्ययो भवति पिकः॥ 
124. The affix gs comes in the remaining senses, after a Vriddha word denoting an inhabited kingdom, or a limit of such kingdom. 
The phrases cera and tū are understood here, being qualified by अनपर and aवधि॥ This debars the affixs. Thus भाभिसारक: and भावर्षक: are examples of अनपर And भोपटकर and यामायनक from भोपुट and श्यामायन two uninhabited countries, are illustrations of wayway 
The more or limit of an inhabited country or 9947 must be a country and not a village. This is so, in order to prevent, by anticipation, the appli. cation of y by IV. 2. 137 to words like fried which is an arid desert: as 
en The word artery means either "the boundary of that (744)" or " that which itself is a boundary ".. 
__ अवृद्धादपि यहुवचनविषायत् ॥ १२५ ॥ पदानि । मासात-अपि-बहुववन 
faturala) u epita: Il sangere Taranan mátaregatan open mara Or# # 
125. The affix ga comes in the remaining senses, even after a word which is not a Vriddha, and which is always plural, when it denotes an inhabited country or a limit of such country, as well as after such Vriddha words. 
The words state and a rt are to be read into the aphorism. This debars and 9 Thus from T, LT: and a fost: which are non-Vriddha Kingdom denoting words, always having a plural form, we have s9, TF#: and TFT I Similarly ftet: and are non-Vriddha always plural words, denoting boundary of kingdom; we have from them to and are 
The affix will apply, of course to Vriddha te word by the last sätra, though these be always plural in form. Thus M and m from af: and 
BK. IV.CH. II.Sm) 
पिक 
745 
TIETT: # So also to Vriddha words denoting limit of a Kingdom: tranh कालंगरकः, कुलिया-कुनिएका 
The word for is used in the sotra to indicate that the word should be plural in essence, having no corresponding singular form. Therefore the rule will not apply to torm: plural of taft The derivative from it will be पार्दनः। 
The word 79 is used in the sätra to indicate that Vriddha-words tvhich would have taken by the last sätra are not debarred by this sätra, when they are plural in form. This debarring would have taken place, by the rule of Interpretation known as तक्रकीमियन्यान%; but for the use of the word of a This maxim or nyaya is thus explained in Padamanjari: हिमपरसामान्ये यात्म विहितः, पपारायणसामान्य दधिरान बहुवचनविपरिशेपेशवार पर, यथा फोण्डिन्तमपान, तलबबहुपचनापपिरामिमारभारम्धमाणोमवापुर पूजारमा पापका स्वादिस्यपि यमन समुपीयवे वर्षः। - कच्छानिवपतगोचरपदात् ॥ १२॥ पदानि । कच्छ-आमि-धक्स-गर्म-उत्तरप 
दाद घुश्)। इत्तिः ॥ कच्छागुन्तरपा देशवाधिनः भारिपरिकाचा पृद्धावृद्धापन प्रत्ययो भवति षिकः । 
126. The affix get comes in the remaining senses after a word, whether Vriddha or not, denoting a locality and having as its second term the words •kachchha', 'agni', 'vaktra' and 'garta'. 
___ This debars v and भण्॥ As मास्कच्छक, पप्पलीकच्छक, कामकः, भुशाप्रकर ऐन्द्राकः, बन्धुपकवक, वाहगर्नकः and चाकगर्दक 
. The word met in the sotra should be read with every one of the words &c. 
धूमादिभ्यश्च । १२७ पदानि धूमादिभ्यः-च-(पुत्र)। एलिः॥धूमादिभ्यो देवाधिदः प्रातिपरिक यो पुम् प्रत्ययो भवति पोषिकः । 
. 127. The affix g comes, in the remaining sense cs, after the words dhůma &c, denoting country. 
This debars भण् &c. धामका साण्डक &c. The word पायेयं occurs in the list. It would have taken दुम् by IV. 2. 121 as it has ias penultimate. Its mcntion here shows that it need not denote a locality for the application of this affix. Similarly the words hot and FT being names of 797 would have taken by 124 ante; here in this list, therefore, they do not denote country. Thus विहानां सत्रियाणां स्व-देहकम् “ the property of Vidcha Kshatriyas'. So also a Thc word at occurs in the list. It takes the affix when the 
. 
740 
चापकम् 
[ BK IV. CH. II. I. 129 
. 
derivative word means a 'ship or a 'sailor:: Thus सामादिका मा and सामुद्रको मनुष्यः ॥ Otherwise not : सामुद्रम् “Oceanic water". 
1 धम, 2 पर (खus and खण्ड) गंधारन, म नाव (मार्जुनार) 5 माहकस्थली, 6 मानकस्थली', 7 माहिषस्थली',8 मामस्थली (मापस्थली) भदृस्थली', 10 माकस्पली', 11 समा स्थली, 12 दाण्डायनस्थली, 13 राजस्थनी, 14 विदेह, 15 रामगृह, 16 साबासाह, 17 शष्प, 18 (शिष्य) 18 मित्रव (मित्रवर्ध: मिच, बल) 19 भक्षाली', 20 मद्रकल, माजीकल (माजीकल) 22 घाझाव, 23 अमाहाक, 24 संस्फीय (संहीय) 25 बर्बर, 26 वर्ण्य, 27 गर्व (वर्चगर्व) 28 मानत, 29 माठर, 30 पायेय, 31 पोष, 32 पल्ली (बी) 33 भाराझी, 4 धाराशी, 35 भावय, 36 सीर्य (मवयात तीर्य) 37 कूलात्सौवीरेषु, 38 समुद्रान्नावि मनुष्ये घ, 39 कुाक्ष, 40 अन्तरीय (अन्तरीप) 41 दीप, 42 भरुण, 43 उज्जयनी, (उज्जयिनी) * पहार', 45 दक्षिणापथ, 46 बाकेव. 47 घोपस्थली, 48 भक्षास्थली,. 49 गर्तकल, 50 मानवल्ली, 31 सुपक्षी॥ ... नगरात्कुत्सनप्रावीण्ययोः ॥ १२८॥ पदानि । नगराद-कुत्सन-प्रावीण्ययो-(भ) 
वृरितः ॥ नगरशम्दा प्रत्ययो भवति पौषिकः कुत्सने प्रावीण्वे च गम्यमाने । 
· A. केनायं मुपितः पन्या गाये पक्ष्मालिधुसरः ? B.इह नगरे मनष्येण ॥ . संभाव्यतएतन्नागरकेण - चौराहि नागरका भवन्ति ॥ A.केने लिखितं घिर्ष मनानेत्रविकागि यत् ? B. इह नगरे मनष्येण। A. संभाव्यतएवन्नागरकेणे ॥ प्रवीणा हि नागरका भवन्ति ।। 
__128. The affix g comes after the word 'nagara' in the remaining senses, when censure or praise is implied. 
The word nii which is equivalent to pass or blame or censure'; and aretov which means agoy " dexterity", qualify the sense of the affix. 
Thus नागरकः 'aknave, a cunning person, or a skillful person':. The word literally means 'a town-born, or town-bred', but by the usage of language, it always denotes a person having the vices or virtues of a town, such as a thief or an artist. 
Why do we say " when censure or dexterity is implied "? Observe नागपः ब्राह्मणाः 'the Nagara Brahmanas".. . ___ अरण्यान्मनुष्ये ॥ १२९ ॥ पदानि । अरण्यात-मनुष्ये-(बु). 
इत्तिः। भरण्यशब्दादम् प्रत्ययो भवति शेषिको मनषभिधेये। पार्रितकम् ॥ पथ्यध्यायन्यायविहारमनुषष हस्तिष्विति वक्तव्यम् ॥ . . 
-129. The affix at comes, in the remaining senses, after the word toe, in the sense of a man. . 
This debars the affix m. Thus मारण्यकः मनुष्य: a forester'. 
Vart:-It should be stated rather that the afix बुभ् is added to भरण्यः in the sense of 'away' 'a lesson, or doctrine (Upanishad)' 'a maxim' 'a play or game' 'a man' and 'an elephant'. Thus भारण्यका पन्याः , अध्यायः, न्यायः विहार, मनुष्यः or हरती. 
BK. IV. CH. II. S133] 
. 
पिक-म। 
Vårt:-Optionally when the sense is that of a cow-dung'as Hrva: or भारण्बका गोमवाः॥ 
Why do we say 'when having these senses's Otherwise the affix wilt be vण. As मारण्याः पय: ' wild beasts'. 
विभाषा कुरुयुगन्धाभ्याम् ॥१३०॥ पदानि॥विमाषा-कुरु-युगन्धयन्यांम-(बु) हस्तिः॥कुरु युगपर येताभ्यां विमापा प्रत्ययो भरवि पिक। . 
___130. The affix चुश् comes optionally in the re maining senses, after the words 'Kuru', and 'Yugandhara'. . Thus कौरव or कौरवयोगम्भक or गोगन्धरः ॥ These words denote sनपर or inhabited countries, and therefore by sūtra IV. 2. 125 thcy would always, have taken the affix . The present sätra makes the application of green optional and not obligatory. The word 7 occurs in the list of sin class (IV. 2. 1334 By virtue of its being so classified, it will take ng also. And when it means man or something found in men, it will take necessarily, not optionally, the affix g by virtue of sotra IV. 2. 134. As कौरवको मनुष्या, कोरवक TRT TOT! This aphorism therefore, tcaches option regarding with these restrictions, while it teaches option absolutely with regard to the word jगन्धरः। __ मद्रवृज्योः कन् । १३१॥ पदानि । मद्र-ज्यो-कन् । 
लिः ॥ मदनियाभ्यां कन् प्रत्ययो भवति प्रेषिका 
131. The affix that comes in the remaining serises, after the words 'madra' and 'vrji'. 
This debars , though the words denote inhabited countries. Thus मंद्रकः born in Madra', पिकः॥ 
__ कोपधादण् । १३२॥ पदानि । क-उपधात्-भम् । परितः । ककारोपवान् मातिपदिकारण प्रत्ययो भवति पिका।। 
132. The affix sue comes in the remaining senses after a word denoting a place and having the letter * as its penultinate. 
This debars set in the case of words which denote with or inhabited countries. Of course the words which do not denote *747, will have taken even without this rule. Thus भाषिक: "born in ऋषिकाः" So also माहिषिक: ।। . 
The ashx one will apply even when the word ends in T, and would have othenvise taken rp by IV.2.119 Thus ऐस्थाकः "born in tवाक" | The word देवे is understood in this satra 
कच्छादिभ्यश्च ॥ १३३॥ पदानिकच्छादिभ्यः-च-(भए)। पत्तिः ॥ कण्ड इत्येवमादिभ्यो देशवाधियोऽणमत्ययो भवति । 
748 
. 
पिक-अम। 
. 
[ BK. IV. CH. II. F. 136. 
mmmmmmmmmmm 
133. The affix comes, in the remaining senses, after the words kachchha &c denoting places. 
The word To is understood here. This debars &c. Thus 4*, सेन्धवः, वार्णवः &c. The words कच्छ &c. are not invariable plural words, because by the next sätra, it is shown that these words may signify men and their habits &c. The word F1occurs in this list. It would have taken by the last sätra ako, because it has # as its penultimate. Its mention in the list is for the sake of the subsequent satra by which it takes Talso ander certain conditions. 
1 कच्छ, सिन्ध, वर्ण, 4 गन्धार, मधुमन, 6 कम्बोज, 7 कश्मीर, 8 साल, कुरु, 10 मं. नुमण्ड (मण, मण्ड, खण्ड) पीप, 12 मनूप, 13 ममवार, 14 विमापक, 15 कलूतर (कुलून)16 ।। 
मनुष्यतत्स्थयोर्तुम् ॥ १३४॥ पदानि । मनुष्य-तत्स्थयोः बुन । . तिः ॥ मनुष्ये मनुष्यस्ये च जाताना प्रत्ययायें कच्छापियो वम् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
134. The affixes comes after the words kachchha &c. in the senses of born &c. when the meanining is a 'man' or what exists in man'. 
This debars भण| Thus काच्छक: a man born in Kutch', काछकमरय हसितं जल्पितम् ॥ His joke or talk is of Kutch or a Kutch-laughter'. काण्डिका बडा | Similarly सैन्धवको मनुष्या, सैन्धवकमस्य हसितं गल्पितम, सन्धविका पडा .. 
Why do we say " when meaning man or what exists in man?" Ob serve कान्छो गोः 'The cow of Kutch:. सैन्धयो वार्णकः॥ ___ अपदाती साल्वात् ॥ १३५॥ पदानि ॥ अपदाती-साल्वात्-(धुश्). 
वृत्तिः। भपातादेव मनुष्ये मनुप्यस्ये सावधवा पुन् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
135 The affix Fr comes after the word in the senses of being born &c when denoting & man or what exists in man, provided that it does not mean a foot-soldier. 
The word hy which occurs in the 191 class, would have taken by the last sätra, when the sense was that of a man or some human attribute. The present satra makes a restriction. Thus सालको मनुष्यः, सानुक्रमस्य हसितं अल्पितं &c. But ty qera na'the Salva foot soldier goes.' 
- गोयवाग्वीश्च ॥ १३६॥ पदानि गो-यवाग्वोः-च-(वर)। इतिः॥ गवि यवाग्यां च जातादौ प्रत्ययायें सास्वयमा वम् प्रत्ययो भवति ऐषिकः ॥ 
136. The affix e comes in the remaining senses. of being born &c, after the words end, when the word signi fies 'a cow' or a barley grueli 
Bx. IV. CH. II. §. 138) 
AF 
::. 
749 
This debars wa of IV. 2. 133. Thus erga : "the cows born in Salva". Bifant gry: 'the barley gruel of Salya'. In other cases we have बार __ गौत्तरपदाछः ॥ १३७॥ पदानि ॥ग-उत्तरपदाद छ। 
Y si aterratuur: fourt gaat om a ll 
137. The affix 3 comes in the remaining senses after a Nominal-stem denoting & place and having the word sed as its second term. 
. This debars a u The word so is to be read into the sotra. This rule bcing a subsequent one debars the affixes and is of sötra 117 ante. Thus 
statt, foreffen, gurefu 'born in porcupine's hole &c'. The word 7 4 is used in the sQtra, so as to prevent the application of the rule to a word which ends in , but is preceded by the asfix ], as 8 Here is an afñx (V. 3.68) and not a pada. 
Terlu 11825 1 l Tela -a() yfa: il territoranlarat: Arfarin g med tria Ofta: 11 
138. The affix g comes in the remaining senses after the words gaba &c. 
This debars *&c. Thus treta: , belonging to a cave'. fairefteri &c. 
In the list of गहारि occurs the following "मध्यमधर्म धाण चरणे'. It mcans" The word nie becomes changed into one when the affix is to be added. Thus itt: ! But when the sense is that of a Veda-school or Charaņa, the affix sur is added instead of as an HT" W. The word om here has the restricted sense of the middle of the earth', and not any middle generally. Thus Anania: means for I So also when the affix opere is applied in the case of a, it has the sense of farmre of sätra IV. 3 89 and not all the other senses. Thus ra: T:, a irtoat:, TÜT AT TAT: "three Charanas dwell in the East, three in the West, and three in the Middle". The words FIETTA and qrafa: occur in the list. They have the affix ĦR, but before the affix the pl of ra is elided. Thus Acretary and retired # 
The augment is added to va and at before the affix 5# As the कीयम्, परकीयम् ॥ The same augment is added to the word देव also as, देवकीयम् ॥ 
The affix yor comes after the words are &c. No list of such words is given. It is an artaqill Thus fatalni tertiam, wiatriatga, trental AT124rqali &c. 
750 
चैपिक- 
. [ BK V. CH II.S.141 
: 1यह, मन्नास्थ, , विपम, मधमाधम चारपरलेतम, 7 मा. बामगध, 10 पूर्णपक्ष, परपक्ष, 12 मधम घाख 13 उत्तमशाख,1" एकशाख, 15 समानमख, 16 समानमान', 17 एकमाम, 18 एकहन, 19 एकपलाच, 20पप, शनीक (अपनी) 22 भवस्यन्दन ( भवस्यन्दी and अवस्कन्द) 23 कामप्रस्थ, 24 सागवन (शारिकाडायनि सारापनि and सागायनी) 25 काडे रणि (कावणि and कामणि) 26 वरणि', बौमिति, 28 गिरि, 29 माइन्', 30 देवर्मि (देवधर्मन ) 31 मोति, 32 भाहिषि, 33 भामिनि, प्याति, 35 बेजि (दजि), 36 भाष्यपि, अमा. नषि, 38 शानि39 मानिमि, (मानिधर्मन्) 40 भौषि, 4 पारायकि (माराटकि), 42 वाल्मीकि, 43 निधि (भेमवृद्धिन) 44 माचरिष, 45 भोगाइमानि', 46 ऐक, 47 बिन्दवि', 48 बल्ताप', 49 ईस', 50 तन्ला ', 51 उत्सर, 52 अनन्तर (भन्तर) 53 मुखपातसोलोपः (also मखसीय and पार्थ लीय), 54 जनपरयोः कुक् च (also अनकीय And परकीय / 55 देवस्य 7, 58 वेणुकाविश्य छप. 57 भामुरि, 58 सौवि, 59 पारकि. It is an माइतिगष। 
प्राचां कटादेः ॥ १३९ ॥ पदानि ॥ मात्राम-कटादे। वृतिः ॥ प्रादेशवाधिनः कादः प्रातिपदिकाथ्यः प्रत्ययो भवति प्रेषिका . . 
___139. The afir छ comes in the remaining senses; after the words begiņning with me denoting the places of the East-folk. 
The word fe is understood here also. The word or of the satra qualifies देगे॥ This debars मम्॥ Thus कटनगरीयम, कल्पोपीयन, कटपल्लीवम् ।। 
राक्षः क च ॥ १४॥ पदानि । राक्षा-क-च-छः)॥ मृतिः । रातः ककारमान्तदिशो भवति उप प्रत्यकः . 
140. The letter & is the substitute of the final of the word That, when is added. 
This sotra only teaches substitution: for would have taken Gby IV. 2. 114. Thus राजकीयम् ॥ The word देणे does riot govern this satra, not being appropriate 
वृद्धादकेकान्तखोपधात्॥ १४१ ॥ पदानि ॥वृद्धा-अकरक-अन्त खोपधात (छः) वृतिः॥ वृद्धादेवाचिनो ऽक हक हत्येदमन्तात् खकारोपधा प्रातिपदिकाथुछ प्रत्ययो भवाति ॥ 
___ 141. The affix छु comes in the remaining.senses after a Vriddha word denoting a place and ending with ** or get or having a as its penultimate 
The word it must be read into the shtra This debars the mor or Satra !32 ante: as well as the affixes ordained by Satras 17 and 123 
Thus भक:-मारोह कीवर द्रौपणकीयम् ॥ एक-भावपयिकीयम, पाल्मलिकीयम् ।। खोप धान्ः- कौरिशिषीयम्, मायोमुखी ॥ 
[ BK. IV.CH. II. I. 145 
कि 
. 
751 
Vart.---The words t o &c. are also governed by this rule though they end in sa | Thus सोमुकीवर, मौसकीय ऐनकीबन्। 
कन्थापलदनगरप्रामदोत्तरपदात् ॥ १४२॥ पदानि ॥ कन्या-पलद-नगर-प्रामा इद-उत्तरपदात्-(छ)। पतिः ॥ कन्यापुरतरपदाधिवापिनो हावातिपदिका प्रत्ययो माविक - 142. The affix i comes in the remaining senses after the Vriddha words, having the words kantha, palada, nagara, grama and hrada, as second terms. . 
This debars the other affixes such as oy and Art Of 117 ante Thus साभिकन्पीदम्, माहिकिकम्पीयन , रासिपलदीयम्, माहिकिपलदीयम्, समिमपिवं माझिकनावर पानिमामीयन, माहिकिमानीय, रातिस्पीयम्, मासिकिहीवर 
पर्वताय ॥ १४३॥ पदानि ॥ पर्वतार-च-()॥ हतिः। पर्वतयारपुः प्रत्ययो भवति पिका। 
143. The affix 3 comes after the word great in the remaining senses. 
This debars n Thus gratat au "the hill-king". raata gari "the hill man'. 
विभाषा ऽमनुष्ये ॥ १४४॥ पदानि ॥ विभाषा-अमनुष्ये (छ), कृषिः॥पवयम्दा प्रत्ययो भवति नमुने पाये। 
144. The affix छ optionally comes in the remaining senses after the word qed when it does not denote a man.. 
__Thus पर्वतीयानि or पार्षतानि फलानि 'hill fruits', पर्वतीयमुहकर or पातमुहबम् hill water'. 
Why do we say ममनुष्य 'not-human? Observe पर्वतीये मनुष्यः where there: is no option allowed. . रुकपपर्णाद्वारद्वाजे ॥ १४५॥ पदानि ॥ कण-पर्णातू-मारवाजे-(उ.) . 
वृतिः ॥ कणपणंघमायां भाराभरण्याषिभ्यां छः प्रत्ययो भवति पिक। 
__145. The affix छ comes in the remaining senses after up and gof when denoting the country of Bharad vaja. 
The word ta is understood here also. The word MTCT does not henė mean Gotra, but country. Thus रुकणीयम् and पीवम् ।। 
Why do we say "denoting country of Bharadvajasza Observe पार्णम् &c . 
ओ३म् । अथ चतुर्थाध्यायस्य तृतीयः पादः। 
BOOK FOURTH. - CHATTER THIRD. 
युष्मदस्मदोरन्यतरस्यां खञ्च ॥१॥ पदानि । युष्मद्-अस्मदो-अन्य तस्याम सञ्च । वृचिः । युष्मदस्मदो ख प्रत्ययो भवति पिक पकागच्छा। 
1. The affix es also comes optionally in the re. maining senses, after the words 'yushmad' and 'asmad.' 
The regulating power of the word to ceases. The word indicates that the affix may be x as well. The word "optionally " shows that the gene ral affix o may also be employed. Thus there are three affixes, , 5 and भए, and hence there being no equal enumeration, the rule of mutual corres. pondence (I. 3. 10) does not apply. 
The words and Care Vriddha, as they belong to Tyadadi class (I. 1. 74), and would have taken by IV, 2. 114; the present sätra en joins three affixes for each. Thus मद्-भण्-युग्माक+मण (IV. 3. 2)-योमाका शुष्मद्-- युष्मद् नय-युष्मदीयः (VII. I. 2) शुष्मान खम्युग्माक--न (IV.3.2.) योमाकी 
मः (VII. I. 2; and VIII.42). So also मास्माका, भस्मदीय; and मास्माकीनः । 
तस्मिन्नणि च युप्माकास्माको ॥२॥ पदानि । तस्मिन् अणि-च-युष्माक-आ. स्माको वृतिः ॥ तस्मिन्नित साक्षारिहितः खम् निश्यिते न चकारामकुष्ट छः । तस्मिन्सनि अपि च युप्मदस्म. कार्ययासंख्यं युष्माक भस्माक इत्येतावदियो भवता । 
2. When this affix gq is added and when muis added, then युप्माक and अस्माक are the substitutes of युष्मद् and 
अस्मद 
The pronoun afet refers to the visible affix up, and not to the under stood affix which was drawn into the last satra by the word # 
Why does the rule of mutual correspondence (I. 3. 10) not apply here, there being two affixes, two words, and two substitutes ? This, however, is not BK. IV.CH. HI1.8.31 
पिकचन्। 
753 
- 
done, because the sotra can be divided into two separate aphorisms : as (1). मस्मिन् खामि मास्मयोयुष्माकास्माको भवतः (७) वसोऽणि aui e(when खम् sadded, gara and fry are the substitutes of gate and respectively (2). So also when the follows. 
As for illustrations, see the preceding Sotra, e g. Agarettor, torta: with , and : and FT: with you This substitution does not take place when ris added, as शुष्मरीयः and भस्मदीया।। 
तषकममकावकवचने ३॥ पदानि तवक-ममको-पकवचने। . पतिः ॥ एकाचनपरयोर्युष्मदस्मदोस्तवक ममक इत्येतावादेपो भवतो बयासंख्वं तस्मिन्समि मणि 
.3. In expressing one individual, तवक and ममक are the substitutes of 'yushmad' and 'asmad' respectively,when खम् and follow. 
As anta: 'belonging to thee', $nta: "belonging to me." and #TF*: U But when the affix is , the form will arta, tra 
The word 977 should not be construed as meaning the affix of the singular number, as the affix Because the affix of the singular is always elided (लक) after these words, and by rule I. I. 63 there will not be the application of this rule. This difficulty is, however, got over by explaining the word एकवचने as equal to एकार्थे॥ ___ अर्धाचत् ॥ ४॥ पदानि । अर्धात्-यत् । 
वृधिः॥ मना यत् प्रत्ययो भवति ऐषिक 
4. The affix va comes after the word om in the remaining senses. 
This debars to Thus würa belonging to hall.'. 
Vart:-When it has a prior term the affix is used. As बालयाका (बल्ययवस्तबालय)॥ गीतमादिकर।। 
परावराधमोत्तमपूर्वाच॥५॥ पदानि । पर-अवर-अघम-उत्तम-पूर्वातच... वृत्तिः ॥ पर भवर मधम उत्तम इत्येवंपूर्वावापत् प्रत्ययो भववि ऐषिकः। . 
5. The affix # comes, in the remaimng senses, after the word 'ardha', when preceded by 'para', avara', 'adh ana', and 'uttama'. 
Thus परार्धम, भवरायम्, मधमाझम, रममार्थम् ॥ 
Q. Why do we say gig 'prcceded by's Its use seems to be super flucus. If the satra stood as परावराधमोत्तमेन्यः , it would have given the same scnse. For the more being supplied from the last sætra, the whole sútra 
754. 
पिक-म. 
BK. IV. CH. III.S:7.1 
would have been परावराधनोलनेयोऽधार बत् which must mean 'preceded by para &c. 
Ar The words and then have meanings other than that of f or direction. As पसखं 'highest pleasure' भवरं सुखं 'lowest plcasure! There fore, when these words qr and 4 denote direction, then by the subsequent rule, the affix would have been always of and a The employment: of the term gf in the sitra, prevents the application of the affixe even when the words denote direction. 
According to the Vartika Es given under the last sūtra, the word preceded by any word would have taken op, hence the necessity of this søtra ordainig an, when the first terms are qe &c. 
दिपूर्वपदाच ॥ ६ ॥ पदानि । दिल्-पूर्व-पदात-उन-च। इतिः । दिपूर्वपदार्धान्तावातिपदिकात् म् प्रत्ययो भवति षकाराप पिक। 
6. And the affix.gst also (as well as T) comes in the remaining senses after the word 'ardha,' when the prior term denotes a direction. 
By , the afixes is also used. This debars भण् ॥ Thus पूर्वार्थ पौर्वा पिकम, दक्षिणायम् or दाक्षिणार्दिकम् ॥ 
The word ge is used in the sätra in order to prevent ambiguity. Had the satra stood merely as विकृपा सच, it might have meant (I.1.68),Ardha preceded. by the word for takes also', for then prayers would have applied, and TFT *T&: would have taken the affix. 
ग्रामजनपदैकदेशादष्ठभौ ॥ ७॥ पदानि ॥ प्राम-जनपद-एकदेशात्-अञ्-ठभौग इतिः ॥ दिकपर्वपदादित्येव । पामेकदेशवापिनो मनपदेकदेशवाधिनम प्रातिपदिकारिकपूर्वपदारन्तार मडनी प्रत्ययो भवतःचपिको यतापवाद। 
7. The affixes and on come in the remaining senses after the word ardha', preceded by a word denoting direction, when a particular portion of a village or an inhabi ted country is meant. 
The phrase दिकपूर्वपदान is to be read into the satra. This debars यत् ।। Thus हमे खलस्माकं प्रामस्थ जनपदस्थ वा पौर्वार्धाः or पौर्वाधिका: “Those verily belong to the eastern half of our village or country". So also दाक्षिणार्धाः or दाक्षिणा पिका॥ The word पोवा - प्रामस्य पूर्वस्मिन्न भवाः and is a Taddhitartha com pound. 
मध्यान्मः॥८॥ पदानि । मध्यातू-मः। त्तिः॥ मयशम्दान्मा प्रत्ययो भवति षिक: . पार्मिकम् ॥ भादति बतष्यन् ।। वार्निकम् ॥ भयोधसोलापब ।।.. 
BK. IV. CH. III. $11) 
do-r 
755 
8. After the word that there is the affix # in the remaining senses. 
This debars y # As Hen: "middlemost ". 
Vari:-So also after the word. * As alten: * Adam, or born in the beginning". 
Vars: So also after the words te and copyri, the final & being elid. cd. As tra, ma ___मसांप्रतिके ॥ ९॥ पदानि । म-साम्प्रतिके। 
गिः ॥ भकारः प्रत्ययो भवति मधयाखांप्रतिके मातासमपया। 
9. The affix e comes in the remaining senses after the word 'madhya', the meaning being 'filt' or 'proper.' 
Thc' word grafa means 'equity,propriety,right, fit. As tifa that if que *1974 "the proper piece of wood--neither too long nor too short". heraron " the fit Grammarian, neither too refined nor too dull". Trat "a proper wife". 
द्वीपादनुसमुद्रं यम् ॥१०॥ पदानि ॥ द्वीपात् मनुसमुद्रम्-य। . दृषिः ॥ समुद्रसमीपे थोडीपस्तस्मा थम् प्रत्ययो भवति ऐपिका। 
10. The affix 4 comes, in the remaining senses, after the word are, which is near the sa. 
The word f occurs in the list of Kachchhadi (IV. 2. 133), and would have taken fro; and by sūtra IV, 2. 134, it would have taken also. The present sätra debars both those affixes, when the word dit means 
or incar the sea'. 
Thus fara' living on or relating to an island'. As the w ay for TERE U 
Why do we say what? Observe an org (IV. 2. 133 and 134) The word 'anu-samudra' is an Avyayibhava compound (11. I. 15) __ काला ॥ ११॥ पदानि । कालात्-श् । 
त्तिः॥ कालविरोषवाषिनः मातिपदिकात्म्प्र त्यया भवधि पिका। 
11. The affix 5 comes in the remaining senses after the words denoting time. 
This debars at The affix v which comes after Vriddha words is prohibited by this satra. Thus hire monthly' thi, bi-monthly, HİVEIT: 'annual'. 
The words which denote time even indirectly, also take this affix. As कारबपुष्पिकं. हिपलातिकम् ॥ The word काल governs all the subsequent sutras upto 25. (ay :) 
TI 
.236 
पिक-उम्। 
. [ BK. :V. CL. III. SIS 
आये शरदः ॥ १२॥ पदानि ॥ श्राद्ध-शरदः। वृत्तिः ॥ घरच्छमात् उम् प्रत्ययो भवति श्राद्धे ऽभिधेये पिक 
12. The affix on comes in the remaining senses after the word शरद, when expressing श्राय ॥ 
This debars toy (IV. 3. 16). The word "rà means the 'funeral ob lation'; and not श्रद्धावान् पुरुष: 'afaithful or believing person'. Thus चारदिक 
पानं 'the autumnal Sraddha'. When not meaning 'Sraddha', it will be शारदम् ॥ 
विभाषा रोगातपयोः ॥ १३॥ पदानि ॥ विभाषा-रोग-आतपयोः (अ). वृत्तिः ॥रोगे भातपे चाभिधेये घरच्छाहर प्रत्ययो वा भवति पिकः ॥ 
__13. The afix ठञ् comes optionally in the remain ing senses after the word srcę when expressing illness or heat. 
Thus धाराको रोगः 'the autumnal disease', शाररिक भातपः 'the autumnal heat or sunshine'. 
Why do we say "when denoting sickness or heat"? Observe, शारद पाप 'the autumnal curd'. This a debars the ऋतु अम् (IV. 3. 16). 
निशाप्रदोषाभ्यां च ॥ १४॥ पदानि ॥ निशा-प्रदोषाभ्याम्-च (ठ)॥ कृरितः ॥ निधाप्रदोषशब्दाभ्यां विभाषा ठम् प्रत्ययो भवति षिकः ॥ 
14. The affix ठम् comes optionally in the remain ing senses after the words 'nisâ', and 'pradosha ': 
This makes optional, where by sätra IV. 3. 11 ante, the art would have been obligatory. Thus नैशम् or नैशिकम् nocturmal'. प्रादोषम् or प्रादोषिकम् ।। ___ श्वसस्तु च ॥ १५॥ पदानि ॥ श्वस:-तुद-च-(ठ)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ श्वः शमादिभाषा ठम् प्रत्ययो भवति, तस्य प सुडागमो भवति ॥ 
15. The affix 35 comes optionally in the remain ing senses after the word and it takes the augment to 
· The word wat takes the affix rulo by sätra IV. 2, 105. This sätra ordains a 11 When free from the scope of these rules, it takes tyu and tyul affixes also by IV. 3. 23. Thus वस- तद्न-उम्-शौवस-तू-क (VII. 3. 3)%3 शौवस्तिका "belonging to to-morrow or ephemeral". Othenvise श्वस्यः and श्वस्तनः।। 
संधिवेलाघृतुनक्षत्रेभ्योऽण् ॥ १६ ॥ पदानि ।। सन्धि-वेलाद, ऋतु-नक्षत्रेभ्यः, आए वृत्तिः ॥ सन्धिवलादिन्य ऋतुभ्यो नक्षत्र या कालवृत्तिभ्योऽण प्रत्ययो भवति षिकः । 
16. The affix to comes in the remaiuing senses, 
BK. IV. CL. III. 19) 
भपिकम् । 
797 
after the words — sandhi-vela' &c, and the words expressing ' season' and 'asterism.. 
The word Art is to be read into the sotra. All the words must be expressive of time. This debars I The repetition of debars also in the case of those words, which are Vriddha ia this list (IV. 2. 114) Thus (1) साधिवेलम, हास्यम् (2) प्रेमम, धधिरम (3) तेपम, पोपम् are examples of sandhivela scason and asterisms respectively. 
The affix ng is added to & Ter when denoting 'fruit' and 'festival, as सावत्सर फल or पर। 
संधिवेला, संस्था, 3 ममावास्या, 4 पयोदशी, चतुर्दशी, 6 पचणी पौर्णमासी, 8 प्रतिपक संवसरात्कलपणाः । 
प्रावृष एण्यः ॥१७॥ पदानि ॥ प्राइषः-एण्यः॥ हरितः ॥ मापनादेण्या प्रत्ययो भवति पिकः ।। . 
17. The affix que comes in the remaining senses after the word प्राषष्॥ 
This debars the way of the last sötra, though 'právpish' is a season denoting word. Thus प्राण्यो बलादकः “the doud belonging to the rainy season." 
घर्षाभ्यष्ठक् ॥ १८॥ पदानि ॥ वर्षाभ्यः-उक् । परितः ॥ पांगमा प्रत्ययो भवति ऐपिकः । 
18. The affix o comes in the remaining senses after the word वर्षा॥ .. 
____This debars मम् of IV. 3. 16. Thus र्षिकमनुलेपनम् । The + has the force of साधु &c of IV. 3.43 here. 
छन्दास ठञ् ॥ १९॥ पदानि । छन्दास-(उ)। परितः ॥ वर्षाशमा छन्नसि विषये डम् प्रत्ययो भवति पिक 
_____19. In the Chhandas, the word 'varsha' takes the affix म् in the remaining senses. 
This debars . The form will be the same, but there will be differ ence in accent As नभश्च ममस्यश्च पार्षिकावत् ॥ The word RT here means "month," i, e. Nabha and Navasya are two rainy months. 
. बसन्ताच ॥२०॥ पसन्तात्-च-(उ) . वृत्तिः । वसन्तशाच् छन्दसि विपवे ठम् प्रत्ययो भवति ऐपिकः ॥ 
158 
पिक मम्॥ 
[BK. IV.CH. III. 5 23. 
20. In the Chhandas, the affix ठम् comes in the remaining senses after the word ' vasanta.' 
___This debars मण (IV. 3. 16), Thus मधुध माधव वासन्तिकात ॥ - हेमन्ताच ॥ २१॥ पदानि । हेमन्तात्-च-(ठ)। 
वृणिः । हेमन्त शनाप नास विषये वन प्रत्ययो भवति षिकः । 
21. In the Chhandas, the affix dos comes in the re maining senses, after the word 'hemanta.' 
This debars मण (IV. 3. 16). Thus सह सहस्यश्चमान्तकावत || The mak. ing aftwo separate Sutras of 20 and 21, is for the sake of the subsequent satra, in which the anuvritti of vvord that only is taken __ सर्वत्राए च वलोपश्च ॥ २२॥ पदाने सर्वत्र-अण-च-तलोप-च। पत्रिः ॥ हेमन्त शब्दारण प्रत्ययो भवति तस्सन्नियोगेन चास्व तकारलोपः । 
22. — The affix अण् comes always after the word 'he manta,' and (before this affix) the letter a of hemanta' is elitled. 
Thus हमनम् वासः 'wintery residence' हेमनमुपलेपनम् ॥ 
The word ay is used to show that the søtra applies in the Chhandas as well as in the secular literature 
The word हेमन्त will take मण by sotra IV. 3. 16 as हेमन्ती पक्तिः but there is no elision of a there. Thus there are three forms हेमन्तः (IV. 3. 16), हेमान्तिकं (IV. 3. 21)and हेमनम् ।। 
सायंचिरंप्रादेप्रगेव्ययेभ्यष्ट्युट्युलौ तु च ॥ २३ ॥ पदानि ॥ सायम्-चिरम-मा. ढे-प्रगे-अव्ययेभ्यः-ट्यु-ट्युलो-तुद-च-. इनिः ॥ सायमित्यादिभ्यमतुभ्योऽव्ययेश्यम कालपाधिभ्यप दुपलौस्तस्तयोस्तच ॥ वानिकम् ॥ पिरपरुत्परिभ्यस्त्रो वक्तव्यः॥ पार्मिकम् ॥ प्रगस्य छन्दसि गोपथ ॥ बाचिकम् ॥ अपमामि ॥ वार्निकम् ॥ भन्दापति वनप्यम् ॥ 
23. After the words pri'at eve', fat for a long time', प्राहे 'in the fore-noon', प्रगे 'at darn', and after In declinables espressing time, there are the affixes ay and quant and their augment is ok ! 
The word कालात् is understood here also. Thus सायं- सायं-न-मुद्न-ए सायंतनम् (VII. I. 1) 'belonging to the evening'. चिरंतनम, lasting', प्राणेशनम् 'what is of the forenoon', मागेतनम् “what is of the early morn". 
The word arú is a word ending in and is an Indeclinable. These 
BK. IV, Ch. III. 25.] 
759 
- 
- 
affixes would also come by virtue of its being an indeclinable, after that ari Thc present erg is derived from the root by adding the affix per It Always ends in when these affixes are added. The word fort always ends in gil bar and gì aļways end in pli 
As regards Indeclinables, the examples are दोपावनम् 'belonging to the night'. दिवाननम् 'belonging to theday'. 
Vårt :-The affix « comes after the words ATT, TT and ruft. As पिरखा, परुवम् , and परितम्॥ 
Vart :-The ot of get in elided in the Chhandas before this affix . as, पवम् ।। 
. Vart:-The affix रिम comes after मन, मादि and पार; as, मपिमन्, भादिमम् and पमिमम. 
Vari:-So also after मन्त, मन्तिमम . The defference between tyu and tyul is in accent, Thus area and सायन्तन, चिरन्तन and चिरन्तन, प्राणेन and पाणवन, प्रगतन, प्रगतन, दिवातन and दिया. बन, दोपासन and होगवन 
विभाषापूर्वाद्वापराहाभ्याम् ॥ २४ ॥ पदानि । विमाषा-पूर्वाह-अपराहाभ्याम् (टुप-टुयली-तुद-च)। वृत्तिः ॥ पूर्वाणापराणामान्यां विभाषा दुपटुपली प्रत्ययो भवत, सुषमयोपगमः । 
24. Optionally after the words पूर्वाड and अपराह, there are the affixes स्यु and अल and their augment is तुर । 
in the alternative or of IV. 3. 11 also occurs. As gigána, operettata with tyu, or पापार्णिकम् भापराहिणकम् with than. With tyul. we have पारणेम and भपराहणतन | The sign of the locative is not elided by rule VI. 3. 17. When the word is taken as incapable of having the case-affix, we have, पवादपवनं or पूर्वाहणतनः। 
तत्रजातः ॥ २५॥ पदानि । तत्र-जातः। दृत्तिः ॥ भणादयो पादयन प्रत्ययाः प्रकमास्लेपामतःप्रभूत्वाः समर्थविभक्तयव निरिपर्यन्ते ॥ क्षति सामीसमाजात त्यतस्मिन्नथें यथाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति। 
25. The affixes ordained above or here after, come after a word in the 7th case in construction, in the sense of .born or grown or originated thore or then'. .' 
The affixes भण् &c. &c. have been taught, but no particular sense was assigned to them. See IV. 2.92. This sotra gives one of the senses, and also declares the particular case in which the stem must be, to which the affix is to be added. Thus प्रजातः बुध+मण-बोर: 'born in Srughna'. So also माथुर born in Mathura', भोसः born in Utsa', भीरपान: born in Udapana'. 
760 
.. 
वसमात-पुन् । 
[ BK IV. CH. III. F.29 
राष्टिक (IV. 2.93), भवारपारीण (IV. 293) शाकलिका (IV. 2. 117), माम्बः (IV. 2.947 मामीणः (IV. 2.94), काषेयक (IV. 2.95) भोम्भेयकः (IV. 2.95). . 
प्रावृषष्ठम् ॥ २६ ॥ पदानि ॥ प्रावृषा-उए । पृतिः ॥ प्राइदशामात्सप्तमीसमर्याजातल्येतस्मिन्नयें उप प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
26. After the word are being in the 7th case affix, there is the affix oy in the sense of produced therein. 
This debars you of sätra IV. 3. 17. The g of rg is for the sake of accent. प्रापि जावः-माहापका 'produced in the rainy season'. 
संज्ञायां शरदो धुज् ॥ २७॥ पदानि ॥ संज्ञायां-शरदाः-तुमा पतिः ॥ घरच्छन्नासामीसमर्याज्जात इत्येतस्मिन्न पुम् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
27. The affix er comes after the word Tee in the 7th case-affix, in the sense of born therein,' the whole word 
& name. 
This debars open u Thus u nir paf: 'the grass called Saradaka'. una अमाः 'the pulse called Saradaka.'. 
Why do we say संज्ञायां! Observe धारदं सस्यम् : the autumnal crop' 
According to some, thc word dhui governs all the succeeding sätras up to IV. 3. 38. 
पूर्वाद्वापराणा मूलप्रदोषावस्कराद् बुन् ॥ २८ ॥ पदानि । पूर्वाण-अपरा इण-आर्द्रा-मूल-प्रदोष-अवस्करादू-चुन् ॥ . शस्तिः ॥ पूर्वाणादिन्यः पन्ने यो कुन् प्रत्ययो भवति सब जात हत्येसस्मिन्त्रिपये संज्ञायां गम्यमानायाम ।। 
28; The affix धुन् comes in the sense of 'born therein' after the words पूर्वाण, अपराहण, आद्रो, मूला, प्रदोष, and 
अवस्कर, the whole being a Name. 
Thus पूर्वाहणकः, अपराहणक: This debars IV. 3. 24 माईका, मूलकः ॥ This debars भश् of IV. 3. 16. प्रदोषक: This debars of IV. 3. 14 भवस्करक: This debars the general भण् affix.. 
When it is not a Name, the other affixes are employed. पथः पन्थ च ॥ २९ ॥ पदानि ॥ पथः पन्ध-च (खुन्)। स्तिः ॥ पपिशमान प्रत्ययो भवति वा कम मात इत्येतस्मिन्विपये। 
29. The affixt comes after the word 94, in the sense of 'produced therein', and thereby in the room of पय, the substitute is proud 
Thus पथि जातः-पन्यकः 'produced in the way:: 
BK. IV. CH. III. 3 33.J 
.बामात-मम् । 
761 
This debars the N अमावास्याया वा॥३०॥ पदानि । ममावास्याया-वा-(वन)। पतिः ॥ ममावास्याणमाम् प्रत्ययो भवति वावर मात इत्येवस्मिन्निए। 
30. The affix 5 comes optionally after the word amavasya, in the sense of 'born therein'. 
This debarsभए of IV. 3. 16. Thus भनावास्थकः or भामावास्यः। This 
• affixse is applied to the word ममावस्व also. on the maxim एकोविकसस्थानन्यवाद "That which has undergone a change in regard to one of its parts, is by no means in consequence of this change, something else than what it was before the change had taken place". Thus अमावस्यक: or भामारस्व. 
भच॥३१॥ पदानि मन्ब. इतिः॥भमावास्यापदायकाः प्रत्ययो भवति वा पात इत्येतस्मिन्विषये। 
31. And the affix « also is added to the word amavasya, in the sense of 'born therein'. 
This adds a third affix to the it and prey already given. Thus war वास्या, ममावास्यका, मामावास्थः॥ Soalso after the word अमावस्थ, as ममावस्वाभमा. यस्थकः and भामावस्यः । 
सिस्वपकराभ्यां कन् ॥ ३२॥ पदानि । सिन्धु-अपकराभ्याम्-कन् । इलिः॥ सिन्धुपारपकरपाच कन् प्रत्ययो भवति वर मात इत्येतस्मिन्निपये। 
32. After the words 'sindhu' and 'apakara', there is the affix for in the sense of born therein'. 
The word fan occurs in the Kachchhadi class and takes more and (IV. 2. 133); and wait would have also taken at under the general rule. This satra debars these affixes. Thus forretni, 4416 
अणजी च ॥ ३३॥ पदानि । मण-अञो-च हस्तिः । सिन्धपकरपन्नाभ्यां ययासंख्यमणमा प्रत्ययो भवतस्ता जात हत्येतस्मिन्विषये ॥ 
33. And the affixes by and come respectively after the words • sindhu' and 'apakara', in the sense of 'pro duced therein'. 
Thus सैन्धवः and भापकरः । श्रविष्ठाफल्गुन्यनुराधास्वातितिष्यपुनर्वसुहस्तविशाखापाढाबहुलाल्लुक् ॥ ३४॥ पदानि ॥ श्रविष्ठा-फल्गुनी-अनुराधा-स्वाति-तिष्य-पुनर्वसु-हस्त-विशाखा-अषाढा-. हुलात्-रुक। वृरितः॥ अविष्ठादियः शदे या मान्य मागताय मातायें छग भवति॥ . . बातम् । मुमकरणे चिपारवतीरोहिणी-या स्त्रियामुपसंख्यानम् ॥ .. ... . 
तममात- 
[BK. IV.CH. IIIS 36. 
कालो बनायों। वारितकम् ।। फल्गन्यपाडाभ्यांनी वनायो। 
. . 
. . पास्तिकम् ।। अविधापागम्यां छणपि वतयः ।। 
34. The affix denoting born therein' is elided by luk, after the words 'sravishthân', 'phalguni', 'anuradhâ', 
• svati', ' tishya', 'punarvasu', ' hasta', 'visakha', 'ashadha', and — bahula' all denoting asterisms. 
The feminine affixes are also elided after these, words by I. 2. 49. Thus प्रविष्ठासु जातः-प्रविष्ठः 'produced under Sravishtha'. So also फल्गाना, मनराधा, स्वातिः, वियः, पुनर्वसः, हस्तः, विशाखः, भपाः बहला ॥ The 'Bahula' is another Name of the asterism कत्तिका ॥ 
Vart:-So also the affix is elided after the asterisms चित्रा, रेवती and argoft when the word is feminine. Thus farmi star'a woman produced under Chitra' will be called पिंधा | So also रेवती, रोहिणी ॥ The feminine afix . which would have been elided after the two words Revati and Rohini, by I. 2. 
49. is reordained by IV. 1. 41, because these words belong to start class. 
Vart-The affixes t and come respectively after for at and भषा in forming the Feminine derivatives. As फल्गुनी (IV. I. 15) and अपाग। The difference is in accent and mcaning. 
Vart:-The affix of also comes after 'Sravishtha' and 'ashadhe' As प्राविडीयः and भापाटीयः॥ . : स्थानान्तगोशालखरशालाच ॥ ३५॥ पदानि ॥ स्थानान्त-गोशाल-खरशालाद 
चलिक) वृत्तिः ॥ स्थानान्तायातिपदिका गोशालापरवालानाजानार्ये प्रत्ययस्य लग् भवति । 
35. There is luk-elision of the affix denoting born therein after a word ending in 'sthåna', and after the words 'gosala' and ' kharasala'. 
___Thus गास्थाने जावः गोस्थानः, मश्वस्यानः, गोशाला, खरचालः ॥ - वत्सशालाभिजिदश्वयुक्तभिषजो वा ॥३६॥ पदानि ॥ वत्स-शाला, अभिजि 
त्-अश्वयुक्-शतभिषजो-वा (लक) स्ति। वत्सशालारिभ्यः परस्य जातायें प्रत्ययस्य जुम्वा भवति ॥ 
36. There is optionally luk-elision of the affix: denoting born thercin' after the words 'vatsasâla', . abhijit', "asvayuk', and 'satabhik'. 
As बत्सवालायां जात:- वस्तशाल or पासशाला, मभिजित् or भाभिजितः, भवयुक् or भाश्वयुजा, शतभिक् or धामभिपजः॥ The two words वसवाल and पसशाला are both to be taken. These are all diversities of Tong as used in the next satra. BK. IV. CH. III. F. 41] 
. 
संभूते। . 
763 
नक्षत्रेभ्यो बहुलम् ॥ ३७॥ पदानि । नक्षत्रेभ्यः-बहुलम (लुक). . . वृत्तिः । नक्षवेच उत्तरस्य गातार्ये प्रत्यवस्थ बहुलं लग्भवति ।। 
37. There is diversely luk-elision of the affix denoting 'born therein ', after an asterism. 
Thus रोहिणः or रोहिणः (IV. 3. 16) मगशिप or मार्गशीर्मः (IV. 3. 16), कृतलब्धक्रीतकुशलाः ॥ ३८॥ पदानि ॥ कृत-लब्ध-क्रीत-कुशलाः ।। वृतिः ॥ सप्तमीसमर्यास्कृतादिवर्येषु यथाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति । 
38. An affix (one of those already taught) comes after a word in the seventh casc-affix, in the sense of 'done there', 'obtained there' ' bought there' dexterous therein'. 
Thus #: may mean “done in, or bought in, or obtained in, or skille ful in Srughna". So also the words मायुरः, राष्टियः॥ . 
प्रायभवः ॥ ३९॥ पदानि । प्राय-भवः। वृत्तिः ॥ सप्तमीसमर्थान् ब्याप्मातिपदिकायायभव इत्येतस्मिन्विषये ययाविहिसं प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
39. After a word being in construction in the 7th case, an affix (one of those ordained already) comes in the sense of generally found therein'. 
The word gra: mcans something less than all i. c. abundant. Thus सोमः 'what is abundant or mostly to be found in Srughna',-छुने प्रायेण बाहुल्वेन भवति. So also मायुरः, राष्ट्रिय: &c.. 
This sätra may appear to be superfluous as being covered by the more comprehensive sutra सबभवः (IV. 3.53). If मायभवः be explained as मनि स्यभवःi.e. what sometimes is to be found and sometimes not, still it will make little difference. . ___ उपजानूपकर्णोपनीचेष्ठक् ॥ ४०॥ पदानि ॥ उपजानु-उपकर्ण-उपनीवे ठक् । 
वृत्तिः ॥ उपजान्दादिभ्यः शब्देश्यः सममीसमर्थेभ्यः प्रायभव हत्येतस्मिन्विषये ठक् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
40. The affix ठक् comes in the sense of ' mostly to be found there,' after the words 'upajânu,' 'upakarna,' and upanivi,' being in the 7th case in construction. 
This debars मण &c. Thus भोपजानुकः, मोपकर्णिक भोपनीविकः । __ संभूते ॥४१॥ पदानि । सम्भूते। वृत्तिः ॥ सप्तमीसमर्थान् च्याप्प्रातिपदिकात् संभूतात्येतस्मिन्नर्थे यथाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
41. After a nominal-stem or a word ending in the feminine affix st and ag, being in the 7th case in coustruç. 
764 
: 
TH-affix: 
[BK. IV. CH. III. 5. 43. 
tion, an affi, comes in the sense of adapted therein.' 
Except the word 'adapted' which is the meaning of the word or , all the other words of the sätra have been supplied from the previous aphorisms, The word dit does not mean in this sotra 'origin' or 'existence', for the word ora and we already express that notion. It here means 'suitableness' 'adequacy'ie.भवक्लप्तिः and प्रमाणातिरेकः ॥ 
Thus TO= F: 'what is suited to the country of Srughna.' So also eye, mga u The word ay is understood here also 
1657 || 82 vata ua-T#. चिकोघान्दार र मत्ययो भवति तत्र संभूतहत्यस्मिन्विपये। 
.. 42. The affix gsr comes after the words in the sense of adapted to that.' 
This debars भण् ॥ Thus को संभूतं = कोषयं वस्त्रम् 'silken clothes' . 
: The word hy means 'cocoon.' m eri may literally therefore mcan 'anything suited to the cocoon, and may apply to the caterpillar as well as to the silk made out of cocoon. The word e n is however air and means 
silken.' Nor does it mean 'suited to the sheath,' as a sword, though koša means sheath' also. This sūtra would have been more properly placed after IV. 3. 134, under the heading of farmine rather than of at: 
In fact after the sâtra poatere (IV. 3. 159), the addition of arten would have been more appropriate 
कालात्साधुपुष्प्यत्पच्यमानेषु ॥४३॥ पदानि ॥ कालात-साधु-पुष्प्यत-पच्यमा नेषु । इतिः॥ कालविशेषवाषिभ्यः सप्तमीसमर्येभ्यः साध्वादिष्वर्येषु यथाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति । 
43. An affix comes after a word denoting time, being in the 7th case in construction, in the sense of 'being good,' 'flowering' or ripening therein'. 
Thus fra Fry: 'what is good or pleasant in autumn' as TATT: OTTHIA 94 So also toa gora es remar: 'vernal creepers i. e. which flower in spring', पेण्यः पाटलाः ॥ So also परदिपच्यन्ते - शारदाः पालवः “the grains that ripen in autumn'. WAT297: 'the barley that ripens in summer'. 
This satra teaches the base and the sense of the affix. It does not directly teach the affix. The above illustrations are examples of the affix #4 &c. 
उत्तेच॥४४॥ पदानि । उत्ते, च। stei lui arenefa Tianitautentia: fagfaigh agrarea terrafen . 
BK. IV. CH. III. 3.481 
44. An affix comes after a word denoting time, being in the 7th case in construction, meaning.' sown there in'. 
Thus हेमन्त रप्यन्ते-हमन्ता बवा: 'the barley sorn in autumn.' पणा वीहवः । 
The separation of this sötra from the last, is for the sake of the sub sequent sätra in which the anuvritti of many only goes, which could not have been the case had this word been included in the last sätra 
माश्वयुज्या घुम् ॥४५॥ पदानि । माश्वयुज्याः, धुम् । हतिः॥ भाभयुनीयाधम् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
45. The affix ge comes in the sense of sown' after the word aangaft i 
This debars ou Thus that Hi-T41TH ANYT: 'the pulse sown in Asvayujt.' It is the name of the full-moon in the Asterism of Abvini 
Aarayujand Aivini are the same. Some texts read भश्वनी instead of अश्विनी 
प्रीप्पयसन्तादन्यतरस्याम् ॥ ४६॥ पदानि । प्रीप्म-घसन्ताव-अन्यतरस्यामः (पुत्र), पतिः ॥ भीमवसन्तपदाभ्यामन्यतरस्यां कुर प्रत्ययो भवति रमे । फलणोपमा 
46. The affix gay comes optionally after the words 'grishma' and ' vasanta', in the sense of 'sown'. 
. This debars मम् (IV. 3. 16). Thus tणम् or पमका सस्थम् 'the crop sown in summer : वासन्तम् or वासन्तकम् । 
देयमृणे ॥ ४७॥ पदानि । देयम-ऋणे । पतिः ॥ सामीसमर्थास्कालवाधिनः प्रातिपदिकारयमित्येतस्मिन्नये ययाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति यायमूर्ष पेन्स भवति । 
47. After a nominal stem being in the 7th case in construction, denoting time, an afhx comes in the sense of :- being then due'; provided that the thing due be debt'. 
__ Thus मासे यमर्ण मासिकं "a debt due in a month'. मार्टमासिकम्, सांवत्स. रिकम् ॥ Why dowe say tणे 'it being a debt. Observe मांसदया भिक्षा where no 
affix is added. 
कलाप्यश्वत्थयवसाधुन् ॥४८॥ पदानि ॥ कलापि, अश्वत्थ, यव, सात,बुन्। वृत्तिः ॥ कलापि भवत्य यास इत्येतेभ्यः कालवाधियः सप्तमीसमर्षे यो देयमणमित्येतस्मिन्नर्थे कुन् .. स्पयो भवति 
48. The affix get comes in the sense of debt then due, after the words कलापिन्, अश्वस्थ, and यववुस denoting time 
प्याहरतिमृगः ॥ 
BK. IV. CH. HII. S. 51.] 
and being in the 7th case in construction. 
· The words rit &c are words which indirectly denote time. Thus the time in which the peacocks mate and make noise is called fordt u The time in which the aśvatha tree fructifies is called Y: 1 The time in which barley is thrashed out is called यास 'barley-chaff? Thus कलापि निकाले देयमणं-कलापकम् 'a debt to be paid when the peacocks make noise 
(i.emating or rainy season) tails.' भश्वस्थकम् and य सकम् ।। 
प्रीष्मावरसमावुश् ॥४९॥ पदानि ॥ प्रीष्म-अवर-समात, वुश् । वृत्तिः ॥ पीष्मावरसमद्यशम्यां पुम् प्रत्ययो भवति यकृणहत्येतस्मिन्न । . 
49. The affix e comes in the sense of debt-due' after the words 'grishma' and 'avarasama'. 
This debars the भण and म्॥ Thus ग्रीष्मेश्यमण-प्रेमकम् ॥ So also HTTEET u This affix causes Vriddhi, while or would not have done it. Hence the separate affix. The word is synonymous with a year. The word मावरसमकम् means either भागामिनां संवत्सराणामाधवस्सरे देयम् or भतीने वासरे देवं यपपिन 
संवत्सराग्रहायणीभ्यां ठच ॥५०॥ पदानि । संवत्सर-आग्रहायणीभ्यां-3. 
वृत्तिः ॥ संवत्सराग्रहायणीधनाभ्यां उम्प्रत्ययो भवति, धकारापुञ्चदेयमणमित्येतस्मिन्नथें । वार्तिकम् ॥ संवत्सरालालपर्वणोरिवि पन्यते॥ 
50. The afix ठञ् also (as well as बुझ्) comes after the words 'samvatsara' and ' agráhayari' in the sense of 'debt due.' 
Thus सवत्सरे देयमणं सांवत्सरिक, and सांवत्सरकं ॥माप्रहायणिकं or भाग्रहायणकं ।।. 
The word संवत्सर occurs in Sandhivcladi Class (IV. 3. 16) and takes भण् when 'fruit' or 'festivity' is meant. The present sätra enjoins when 'debt' is indicated. 
व्याहरति मृगः ॥ ५१ ॥ पदानि ॥ व्याहरति मृगः। वृत्तिः ॥ कालवाधिनः सममीसमर्थासातिपदिका व्याहरात मगः इत्येतस्मिन्विषये यथाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति । 
· 
61. An affis comes after a word in the 7th case . in construction, denoting time, in the sense of who then 
wanders', and the word so formed refers to a wild beast. 
Thus fratai szankcia 90:-À0:" an animal that wanders at night," So also प्रारोप: or माशोषिका (IV. 3. 14)'a brute that yells in the morning.' 
[ BK. IV. CH. III. S. 54 
सामान्य 
761 
Why do we say मृगः a beast ? Observe निधावां प्याहरावि र Here there is no affixing. The word camera also mcans 'to make noise.' The Satra may, therefore, also be translated as : "After a word denoting time, an affix (IV. 1.83) comes in expressing a wild beast who makes noise at that 
time". 
सदस्य सोढम् ॥५२॥ पदानि । तद्-अस्य-सोढम्॥ समिः ॥ तरिति प्रयमासमर्यास्कालवाधिमा प्रातिपदिकारस्येति षष्ठवर्षे यथाविहित प्रत्ययो भवति यतमय भासमय खोरम्पेत्तरदि। 
52. An affix comes after a word in the 1st case in construction denoting time, in the sense of this is his habit or endurance'. 
The word T is understood here also are that : E -fware or भन्यस्तं "endured or habituated". Thus निशा सहचरितमभ्ययनं-निशा “reading by night". सम् सोरमस्व छापस्थ-भः or नैधिकः 'a student who is habituated or enured to reading by night'. So पारोषिक: Or मारोषः। 
तत्रभवः ॥ ५३॥ पदानि । तत्र, भवः । . निः॥ति समीखमान् चापमातिपरिकार इत्येतस्मिन्न क्याविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति । 
53. An affix comes after a word in the 7th case in construction, in the sense of 'who stays there'. 
The anuvritti of 4141 ceases. The sense of * here is 'existenice', and not that of birth': because the sense of birth' is taught in sotram जातः (IV. 3. 25), Thus, बो भवः-मीपः who stays in Srughna'. माथुरः, राष्ट्रियः । 
The repetition of my in the stra though its annuvritti could have been drawn from the previous sūtras, is for the sake of stopping the annu vritti of तदस्य। 
दिगादिभ्यो यत् ॥ ५४॥ पदानि । दिगादिश्या-यत् । वृत्तिः ॥ दिए हस्येवमादिभ्यः प्रातिपदिकेन्यो यत्सत्ययो भवति तब भवत्येतस्मिन्विपये। पार्शिकम् ।। उपकासंज्ञायाम् ॥ 
4. The affix यत् comes in the sense of who stays there', after the Nominal stems दिक् &c. 
___ This debars भण् and s| As विधि भव-विश्यम् :lying in a particular quarter', पर्यम् ।। 
The words and we which ordinarily mean mouth' and 'hip respectively, have not this meaning when this affix is to be added. They 
must refer to non-corporeal or abstract objects. As सेनामुख्यं 'who stays in the van of the army'. सेनामपन्यन who stay's in the rear of the army'. In 
. 
768 
वसभामा 
[ BK. IV. CH III.S.58. 
fact, the words 'mukha' and jaghana' here mean the 'van' and the 'rear' of an army. The word 796 takes this affix, when the word so formed is a 
Name As क्या रजस्वला, otherwise we have भोरको मत्स्य . 
पविध, वर्ग, 3 पूग, गण, 5 पक्ष, धाय्य (पाय्या)7 मिच, 8 मेधा, भन्तर, 10 पथि. 11रहस12 भलीक, 13 रखा, 14 साक्षिन्, 15 , 16 मादि, 17 मन्त, 18 मुख, 19 अपन, 20 मेष, धूथ, 22 रदकारसंतायाम, 23 न्याय, 24 छ, 25 पेश (विष) 26 काल, 27 भाकाच, 28 
भनुबंध.. 
शरीरावयवाच॥५५॥ पदानि । शरीर-अवयवात-च। इत्तिः॥शरीरावयववाधिनः प्रातिपरिकाद्धयत्ययो भवति वा भवत्येतलिन्विषये ।। 
55. The affix ac comes in the sense of 'what stays there' after a word denoting a part of the body. 
___ This debars भए | As इन्तेषु भव-इन्स्यम् 'dental i.e what stays there कार्यम, भोग्यम् ॥ So also पादे भव- प (VI. 3.53), नासिकायां भर्व - नत्यम् ।। 
दृतिकुक्षिकलशिवस्त्यस्त्यहेर्दम् ॥ १६ ॥ पदानि ॥ इति-कुक्षि फलशि-वस्ति स्ति-महेः ढम्॥ वृतिः ॥ इत्यादिभ्यः प्रातिपदिकेन्यो उम् प्रत्ययो भवति बन भर इत्येतस्मिन्निपये ॥ 
56. The affix comes in the sense of 'what stays there', after the words driti'. 'kukshi', 'kalasi', vasti' 'asti and 'ahi'. 
Thus पातेयम् 'what stays in a leathern bag', कोयम्, कालण्यम, वास्तेयम् भास्तयम् and माहेयम् ॥भाहेयम् is the name of a poison. The word भरित is a noun and not a verb here. Its use as a Noun is to be seen in phrases like minetto 
गोर, भस्तिमान-धनवान् ॥ 
प्रीवाभ्योऽण च ॥ ५७॥ पदानि ॥ प्रीवाभ्यः-अण-च। वृत्तिः ॥ श्रीवासमादप्रत्ययो भववि चकाराच, ता भव इत्येतस्मिन्विषये ॥ 
57. The affix अण also (as well as ढ) comes after the word 'grîva' in the sense of 'what stays there'. 
This debars वन (IV. 3.55) पीवास भव-प्रवेयम् or प्रैवम् ॥ The word प्रीषा means blood-vessels, and as they are many, the word is used in the plural in 
the sotra. ___ गम्भीरायः ॥ ५८॥ पदानि । गम्भीरात्-ज्यः॥ 
इतिः॥ गम्भीरशम्दा ज्या प्रत्ययो भवति तष भव इत्येतस्मिन्विषये भणोपवादः॥ पातिकम् ॥ बहिर्देवपञ्चजनेभ्योति वक्तव्यम् ।। वार्तिकम् ।। चतुर्मासाद यज्ञे ज्यो वक्तम्बः।। 
58. The affix su comes in the sense of 'who stays there', after the word 'gambhira'. 
BK. IV.CH. III. 360] 
सामा-भव। 
769 
This debars भण्॥ गम्भीरे मर-गाम्भीर्य 'gravity. 
Vart:-Soalso after पहि, and पंचजन. Asपायम, देयम् and पांचसम्बन्। The final of or is elided by the vartika under IV. 1. 85. The word 'daivya' could be also formed under another Vartika of the same 
Vart:-The affix Nya comes after chaturmása in the sense of a sacri fice; as चातुर्मास्यानि दूतानि, चातुर्मास्यो यज्ञा, otherwise पातुमांस। 
अव्ययीभावाच॥ ५९॥ पदानि ॥ भव्ययीभावात्-च (भ्यः)। वृधिः। मध्ययीभावसंझकात् प्रातिपरिकाप म्बः प्रत्ययो भवति तय भव हत्येतस्मिन्निपये। 
59. After an Avyayibhava Compound, the afix भ्य is employed, in the sense of ' who stays there.' 
This debars ago The affix however, does not come after every Avyaylbhava Compound, but only after the words included in the list of qft मुखादि as given in the Ganapatha . . Thus परिमुखं भव-पारिमुण्यम, So also पारिहनम्यम् ॥ Not so मोपकलन, the word उपकुल not belonging to the class परिमुख 
परिमख, 2 परिहनु, ३ पयाँछ, पर्वल, भोपमूल, खल, 7 परिसीर, 8 मनसीर, १ उपसीद, 10 उपस्थल, 11 उपकलाप, 12 भनुपथ, 13 मनुखड्ग, 14 मनुतिल, 15 मनुचीत, 16 मनमाष, 17 म. मुयम, 18 ममयप, 19 मनुबंध, 20 मनुगङ्ग, प्रनिशाख, 22 ममसाव। ___ अन्तःपूर्वपदाञ् ॥ ६॥ पदानि ॥ मन्तः-पूर्व-पदात्-ठम। 
वृतिः ॥ मध्ययीभावावित्येव । मन्तःपग्दो विभक्त्यर्य समस्यते । तत्पूर्वपदारव्ययीभावाम् प्रत्ययो भर विता भवत्येतस्मिविषये। 
पाशिकम् । समानधन्दाम्प कम्यः॥ वार्तिकम् ॥बरादेव। पा.॥भप्यास्मादिया। 
पा.बदमाषम्पकपः।। पा.॥ कर्मदेहाय॥ 
पा.॥ लोकोतरपाप। वामपपाशाभ्यां तसन्ताभ्यामीवः प्रत्ययो वक्तपः॥ 
वा.॥जनपरयोः कुका।। 
पा०॥ मध्यपदादीवः। पा.॥ मण्मीयोपप्रत्ययो वक्तव्यो। पा। मध्यो मध्य दिनर पास्मात् ॥ पा.॥स्थानो लुग्वनमः ॥ . पा.॥भचिनान्तार॥ Karikd समानस्थ तराग मध्यामादिषु पेष्यते। 
बदमाष देहार लोकोतरपदस्थ मुखपातसोरीयः कुग्मनस्य परस्य। ईवः कार्योय मध्यस्य मण्मीयो प्रत्ययो तथा ॥. मप्यो मध्य दिन चास्मास्यानो लुगजिनालण। 
60. After an Avyayibhava compound, having the word traps as prior term, the affixos is cinployed, in the sense of ' who stays there.' . 
270 
[BK. IV.CH. III. 862 
साभार-ए। 
This debars भण् ॥ Thus मान्तशिमकम, मान्त, हिकम् । Vart:-The affix v comes after समान, as समाने भवं-सामानिकम्॥ 
Vart:-So also after a word beginning with समान, as, सामानमामिकम्, सामान देधिक. 
Vart:-So also after the words अध्यात्म, &c as, भाष्यामिकम, भाधिदैविकर, माधिभर्तिकम् ॥ The class मध्यातूमारि is Akritigana . Vart:-So also after कन्दमः as, भोयन्दामिकः ॥ The word 'ardhva' is a synonym of अर्धम् ॥ . 
Vart:-So also देह, as मोदकम् ॥ 
Vart:-So also after a compound having the word with as second term; as, ऐहलौकिकम्, पारलौकिकम् ॥ 
_Vart:-The words मुख and पार्श्व ending in सस्, take the afix te; as, मुखतीयम्, पार्वतीयम्॥ 
. Vart :-The affix fa comes after 7 and FT with the augment , as जनकीयम्, परकीयम्॥ 
Vårt:-Tne affix fa comes after that, as, quia: # 
__Vart:-So also the affix मण् and मीय come after मध; As. माध्यमम्, माभ्यमीयम् ॥ 
Vart:-So also the affix दिनम् (दिनम् in Padamanjari) comes after मध, whereby it becomes मभ्यम् as माध्यन्दिनम् in माध्यन्दिन उपगायति। . 
Vart-There is luk-elision of the affix after the word fyrh, as, भम्पत्यामा ॥ 
Vart:-So also there is elision after the words ending in भगिन, as काजिनः, सिंहाजिनः 
प्रामात्पर्यनुपूर्वात् ॥ ६१॥ पदानि ॥ प्रामात्-परि-अनु- पूर्वात् । वृत्तिः॥ मामशब्दान्तादण्ययीभावात्परि मनु इत्येवंपूर्वाद्वम् प्रत्ययो भवति तय भवस्येतस्मिन्विषये ॥ 
61. After the word 'grama', preceded by 'pari' or 'anu', (the whole. being an Avyayibhava), there is the affix ठञ् in the sense of 'who stays there'. 
This debars भण् ॥ Thus पारिपामिक, भानुपामिका । जिह्वामूलागुलेश्छः ॥२॥ पदानि । जिह्वामूल-अगुले:- छः । सचिः ॥ जिह्वामूलशब्दारङ्गलिशब्दापछः प्रत्ययो भवति तय भव इत्येतस्मिन्निपये ॥. 
62. After the words “jihvâmâla', and 'anguli' there is the affix छ in the sense of what stays there'. 
BK. IV.Ch. III.3661 
This debarsat (IV. 3.55) Thus बिहाभूमीवर, मंगुलीयन् ।। धर्गान्ताध ॥३॥ पदानि । वर्गन्ताद-प(3) शनिः वर्गधनान्ताच माविपरिकार प्रत्यो पनि परमपरत्वेतस्मिविपये मनोपपार. 
63. After a word ending with varga', the affix vis employed in the sense of what occurs there'. 
This debars in As करायम्, पविय। भशन्दे यस्लावन्यतरस्याम् ॥६४। पदानि । भशब्द-यत्-खो-अन्यतरस्याम् । पनिः । वर्गान्तारित्येव । पनारम्यस्मिपत्नवा पर्गान्तावातिपदिकारन्यतरस्यां मनखी मत्यवी मरवः। 
64. After a word ending in ' varga', but not meaning a letter or word', the affixes Ta and are option ally employed, in the sense of 'who stays there'. 
As बासुदेशवः (by या पासुदेववर्गीय:, (by m. and वासुदेषवर्गीय (bs). भूपिटर वर्गीण: or गया। 
___ or course, when the word means 'प' it takes one affix only ier; as कमर्गीय वर्ष: a letter belonging torclass'. 
फर्णललावात्कनलंकारे॥६५॥ पदानि । कर्ण-ललाटातू-कन् मलशरे। निःकर्णलतारमाभ्यां का प्रत्ययो भवति व भव इत्येतस्मिन्विषयेऽलहारेभिवे ॥ 
65. The affix कन् comes in the sense of what occurs there', after 'karna' and 'lalat', the word denoting an ornament. 
This debars या (IV. 3.58) Thus कर्णिका 'an ear-ring', ललाटिका । 
• Why do we say 'denoting an ornament, > Observe our 'what is in the ear', समापन 
तस्य म्याण्यानइति च व्याख्यातन्यनानः ॥६६॥ पदानि ॥ तस्य-व्याख्याने इतिच व्याख्यातल्यनामा कृषिः ॥ तस्येति षष्ठीसमर्थात् म्याण्यातप्यमानः पतिपरिकाम्याण्याने ऽभिधेये यथाविहिवं मत्वो मा विवाभो. 
66. After the name of a subject of commentary, an affix comes in the sense of its commentary', as well as, in the sense of 'what occurs there'. 
That by which a thing is explained is called or 'commentary. The name ofathing explainable is called व्याख्यासम्बनाम | After suchaname being In the 6th case in construction, the affix is added. The affix means तत्वयाख्यान as well as any, the latter being read into the sotra by virtue of 
___ Thus सुपा व्याख्यानः-सोपो प्रन्यः 'Saupa,a book on the explanation of case. affixes'. So also ar: 'Tainga--a Commentary on Verbal affixes' : 'Karta--a Commentary on krit affixes'. सोप &c. may also mean मप्र भ &c. 
तस्वयल्याने। 
[BK. IV. CH. III. $ 68 
Why do we say y o 'after the name of the thing explainable? The thing to be explained must be a Book, therefore, the affix will not apply to the name of a city &c. For example, if a model be made to describe the city of Pataliputra, such a model will not be named after Pataliputra by the addition of affix. Thus tiger is a modal giving a description of Pataliputra. 
This will not be called Pataliputran. 
The anuvfitti of " and sent runs simultaneosly in all the subsequ ent apavada satras, and hence we have read the anuvfitti of into this satra also. ___ बहुचोन्तोदात्ताम् ॥ १७॥ पदानि ॥ धवचः-अन्तोदात्तात् ठ॥ 
इनिः । बहुचो व्यापयातस्यनावः प्रातिपदिकादन्तोदानाबवष्याण्यानयोष्टम् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
67. The affix a comes in the senses of 'staying' and 'a commentary', after a polysyllabic word having udatta on the final, (the word being the name of a thing to be explained). . 
- This debars wou Thus C Etapa la commentary of the rules of changes of & and a into & and opt argrafering a commentary on (48) udatta and anudatta (aa) The radicals Tore and mana are acutely accented on the final by the rule of a compound having accent on the final (VI. 1. 169) 
Why do we say : 'polysyllabic? Observe &194,178 * &c. A word of two syllables will take (IV. 3. 72). So the counter example must be of words of one syllable. 
Why do we say 'having acute accent on the final? Observe iftar from ticar N This word has acute accent on the initial by the rule of Gati accent (VI. 2. 49) 
Agustupan Tuan Fagurt, ( ). ... वृभिः ।। क्रतुभ्यो यज्ञेभ्यब भ्याएयातल्यनामन्या प्रातिपदिके यो भवव्याख्यानयोरर्थयोष्ठम् प्रत्ययो भवति॥ 
68. The affix comes, in the senses of occurring', and 'a commentary', after the name of a work to be explained, provided that such work relates to a kratu or a yajna. 
This debars op 11 Kratu :- ftaetha: 'a commentary on a work on Aginshţoma sacrifices? 974*, TREF: Il yajña:- 
, TT # ! This sätra refers to words which are not antodatta. The words "vaja. peya' and 'rajasůya' are acute in the middle 
The words me and y mean generally the same thing ie 'a sacrifice', but the separate mention of 4F implies that the rule applies to yajñas other than Soma-yajñas because the word "kratu' is technically applied to Soma-, 
sacrifices only, Thus mi, frutera4: 11 BK. IV. CH. III. $ 71). 
Neturat 
: 
7773 
The sätra is in the plural to prevent the application of the affix to the word-forms 'kratu' and 'yajna' (I. 1. 68) 
मदशायेम्वेवर्षेः ॥ ६९ ॥ पदानि मध्यायेषु-पव-अष, (ठ)। प्रतिः पियमाः परमानवानि देशपिचमेको भवम्यास्यानोरर्ययोशम् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
69. The affix est comes after the name of an ex plainable work called after a Rishi, in the senses of 'occurring therein' or '& commantary thereon', when it refers to an Adhy aya only. 
The word it is the name of and those Rishis are only meant whose names are in the Pravara list. The word so formed means always an Adhyaya or Chapter of the work. The phrase regale: is understood in this satra, hence the word it means "a work the author of which is a Rishi". 
Thus वसिम्स्य व्याख्यानस्तक भवोपा-वासिटिकोभ्यायः "Vasishthika-achapter containing commentary on Vashishtha ". TRI 'a chapter of com mentary on Visvamitra'. 
Why do we say meaning chapter'? Observe afasts: पौरोडाशपुरोडाशात् छन् ॥ ७० ॥ पदानि । पारोडाश-पुरोडाशातु-छन् । अन्तिः ॥ पोरोगमायुरोगपदाच भवव्याख्यानयोरर्ययोः अन् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
70. The affix 57 comes in the senses of occurring therein' and 'a commentary thereon',after the words 'paurodása! and purodasa'. 
The verses on thc purification &c of Purodasa 'a sacred cake', are called ararstu, the commentary on such paurodasa mantras will be called fun. Its feminine will be fustfurt (IV. 1. 41). A book on Purodasa cake is called पुरोडा; a commentary there on will be पुरोराधिकर पुरोराधिकी (IV. 1.41) The of the affix indicates that the feminine is formed by A (IV. 1. 41). The commentary here refers to the mantras' or verses relating to Purogasa, and not to the sacrifice. 
छन्दसो यदणी ॥ ७१॥ पदानि ॥ छन्दसम्-यत्-अषो। वृत्तिः ॥ छन्दः घमानवम्याख्यानयोरययोवरणी प्रत्ययो भवतः। 
71. The affixes ua and nu come in the senses of occurring therein' and 'a commentary thereon', after the word Chhandas. 
This debars of the following satra. As : or TTE: N 
774 
पब मागव 
। 
[BK.IV. CH. III. S.75. 
इधव्राह्मणप्रथमावरपुरश्चरणनामाख्याताद ठ॥७२॥ पदानि । चन्.. ऋत्-म्राह्मण-र-प्रथम-अध्वस्पुरधरण-भाम-माख्याता-उक। त्तिःपमांदिया मातिपदिकेन्यो व्याख्यातल्यमामयो भवम्याप्यानयोरर्पयोक्प्रत्ययो भवति। 
72. The affix ठप comes in the senses of 'occurring therein' and 'a commentary thereon', after a word of two syllables, and a word ending in short xg, and the words brah mana', 'rik', 'prathama', 'adhvara', 'purascharana', 'nama', 'akhyata' and 'namakhyata', being the names of explainable works. 
This debars भण् and rम्॥ I. Dissyllabic:-ऐटिका, पाएकः॥ 2. End. ing in y-यातहोतकर, पांचहोतकः So also माणिक, भाषिक, प्राथमिक, भापरिका, पोरमरणिका, मामिकः, भाण्यातिकः, मामाययातिक ___ मणगयनादिभ्यः॥ ७३॥ पदानि । अण-अगयनादिभ्यः । 
वृत्तिः ॥ गयनादिभ्यः मातिपदिके यो भवस्याश्यानयोरर्ययोरण प्रत्ययो भवति । 
__78. The affix अण् comes in the senses of occurring therein'and'a commentary thereon'after the words'rigayana'&c. 
This debars , and ॥ मार्गयनः, पादप्याख्यान: ।। .. 
The repetition of our in the sQtra, though the annuvritti of this affix was coming from before, is for the sake of preventing the application of any subsequent apavada rule to the words in this list. Thus वास्तुविद्यः॥ . 
गयन, 2 पदण्याख्यान, 3 छन्दोमान, छन्दोभापा, छन्दोविधिति, न्याय, पुनरुन, 8 निरन, ब्याकारण, 10 निगम, वास्तविया, 12 अपविया, 13 भरिया, 14 विधा, 15 उत्पात, 16 सत्पाद, 17 उद्याय, 18 संवत्सर, 19 महत, 20 उपनिपर 21 निमिन, 22 शिक्षा, 23 भिक्षा, 24 छन्दोदित धिनी 25 व्याव.॥ 
तत आगतः ॥ ७४ पदानि ॥ ततः, आगतः। एशिस इति पञ्चमीसमर्यादागत इत्येतस्मिन्नर्षे ययाविहित प्रत्ययो भवति । 
74. An affix (IV. 1. 83 &c) comes after a word being in 5th case in construction, in the sense of what has come thence'. 
Thus शुमागतः सोध्न: what has come from Srughna'. माधुरः, राष्ट्रियः । ठगायस्थानेभ्यः ॥७५ ॥ पदानि ।। ठक्-आयस्थानेभ्यः॥ इतिः॥भावरति स्वामिमायो भाग रयते स यस्मिन्नुलयते तवायस्थानमा मायस्थानवाधिधः प्रा तिपदिकेन्यधक् प्रत्ययो भवति तत मागत इत्येतस्मिन्विषये ॥ 
75. After a word denoting sources of revenue, there is the affix 2 in the sense of come thence'. 
BK. IV.CH. III.378] 
15. 
The word wra means what is the share appropriated by the lord. The source of ma is called HTEYTU N 
This debars and # Thus true what is derived from custom house'. माकरिकन 'revenue derived from mines'. 
The plural in the sutra prevents Svarupavidhi (I. 1.68), शुण्डिकादिभ्यो ऽण् ॥ ७॥ शुण्डिकादिभ्यः-अम् ॥ हरिः ॥ पुष्टिकरस्येवमाविका प्रातिपरिक पोऽम् प्रत्ययो भवति यत माग स्वेतस्मिनिपने 
76. The affix ou comes in the sense of thence. come', after the words शुखिक &c. 
This debars r. Thus चोण्डिकः 'excise-revenue'. काकः ।। 
The repetition of we serves the same purpose as in IV. 3.73 बाप मानापम् ॥ As मौरपान 
. 1 डिक, रुकप, स्थण्डिल, पान, पल. तीर्य, भूमि, 8 तृण, पर्ष.॥ 
विद्यायोनिसंबन्धेश्यो दु॥७७॥ पदानि । विद्या-योनि-संबन्धेभ्यः-पुन्। इनिः॥वियायोनिकतः संबधी येषां वे रियायोनिबन्धाताधिका पन्ने पर मत्वको भवति पद भागवतस्मिनिपये . 
__77. The affix बुर comes, in the sense of 'thence come,' after a word denoting a person connected through the relationship of learning or family origin. 
Persons related (sambandha) through learning (such as teacher and pupil), or through blood (yoni, e g. father and son, are called fraram4ATN Words denoting such persons take the affix ry. This debars wat and . Thus सपाध्यायाागतम्-मोपाध्यायकम् "knowledge derived from a spiritual teacher.' मकर भाचार्यक्रम् ॥ So also योनिसंबन्ध: as मातामहक: ' wealth derived from a maternal grand-father.' पितामहक, मातुलकः॥ 
ऋतष्ठञ् ॥ ७८॥ पदानि ॥ ऋतः-५॥ इतिः॥ विद्यायोनिसंबन्धेन्वयेष। पकारान्तेभ्यः प्रातिपदिक यो रियायोनिसंबन्धवाचिभ्याम् मण यो भवति ततभागत इत्येतस्मिन्विषये 
78. The affix ठञ् comes in the sense of 'come thence,' after a word ending in short #, and denoting a person related through learning or blood. 
This debars पम् ॥ Thus होतरागतम् - होलकन 'derived from Hotri: पोतकम् ॥ So also of blood, as:-भातकम, स्वासकर, मातृकर। 
The in is for the sake of facility of pronunciation, there being no such word ending in long ul. 
176 
# ATT 
( BK. IV. CH. III 88r. 
When the words do not denote relationship through learning or blood, this affix is not employed. As, urften : fogta live in a fa il fog:-17-all 
इमिः ॥ पितृयवाद् यत् प्रत्ययो भवाते चकाराडञ्च तत भागव इत्येतस्मिन्निपये। 
a. 79. The affix TTL as well as sy comes, in the sense of come thence,' after the word 'pitri.' . 
Thus Page 404 or rasta (VII. 4. 27. and VI. 4. 148) * paternal-i.e. wealth inherited from father.' 
Star 11 Coll Taria Il tra- ra 11 वृतिः ॥ गोषप्रत्ययान्ताव्यातिपदिकारवयत्ययविधिर्भवति तत मागत इत्येतस्मिन्विषये॥ 
80. After a word ending with a patronymic affix, the rule of affix in the sense of 'thence come,' is like that relating to the affix denoting its mark.' 
The word in in the satra does not mean the technical Gotra of Grammar, but a descendant-denoting affix in general. The affixes denoting 
are taught in IV. 3. 126 and 127. The affix e of IV. 3. 126 which comes after Gotra words, in the sense of 'this is his,' is refered to in this sätra, not merely the affix yor of IV. 3. 127, denoting, 'this is his mark. 
Thus औपगवानामा -भोपगवकः the mark belonging to the descendants of Upagu.' So also 4148707, T14 , Pretoras: ll The same words will also denote come there from' as prarasa macar474 414994, TTT4 arapan (formed by 39 IV. 3. 126). 
. Similarly , rfi, ry: formed by my of IV. 3. 127 mean not only the mark belonging to the Vaidas, thc Gårgyas, the Dakshis,' but also that which comes from the Vaidas &c. The word has the force of complete similarity,' as in maat 771 (IV. 2. 34), Torneo ya IV. 2. 46). - हेतुमनुष्येभ्योऽन्यतरस्यां रूप्यः ।।८१॥ पदानि ॥ हेतु-मनुष्येभ्यः,अन्यतरस्या 
T-72: 
. 
, fer: 1 tra ngomare 600 feet #art ta Arta raffae. 
81. The affix for denotes that which from some thing has originated, when it is added to a word denoting 
cause,' or to the name of a man viewed as a cause. 
The word water is used mcaning 'men as causes.' means cause or instrument. Thus F TTT-96744 or eteru by of IV. 2. 138 meaning "what proceeds from a like cause.' So also feryaharu or inviterer i So of men 
BK. IV. CH. III. 383.1 
. पगला. 
777. 
also रेवतरप्पर 
लानम् (IV. 1.83) what originates with वरना,सागरप्पा 
The word lowane is in the plural in the satra, indicating that sva rupavidhi (I. 1. 68).does not apply here 
In denoting there is employed the Instrumental case as taught in 11. 3. 23: and according to the jnapaka in the present sätra, the Ablative case may also be employed in denoting at a Or the use of the ablative case in the sense of may be explained by 11. 3. 25. 
मयद् च ॥ २॥ पदानि ॥ मयद-च॥ पिः॥ हेतुभ्यो मनुष्य याम मय प्रत्ययो भवति यस मागत इस्खेतस्मिन्दिप .. 
82. After & word denoting a cause or a man viewed as a cause, there is the affix 'mayat' in the sense of 'come thence'. 
Thus सममवम्, विषममय देवरसमवन, परचमवम् ।। 
The 7 of the indicates that the feminine of these words are formed by AT (IV. 1. 15), as, II The separation of this sūtra from the last is for the sake of preventing the application of the rule of mutual correspondencc (1.3. 10) which would have been the case had the rule stood as तुमनुष्येभ्योऽन्यवरस्य कप्यमयरो॥ 
प्रभवति ॥ ३॥ पदानि । प्रभवति । पनि तत हत्येवा पञ्चमीसमर्यान् च्याप्मातिपदिकालभवतीत्येतस्मिन्विषये बयाविदित प्रत्ययो भवति। 
83. After a Nominal-stem which is in the 5th. case in construction, an affix (one of those already taught) comes in the sense of what appears for the first time'. 
The word aai is undersood in the satra. The word mit means what manifests itself, or appears for the first time. Thus हिमवतः प्रभवति-हमरती "The Haimavatt", a name of the Ganges, meaning 'which manifests itself for the first time or appears in the Snowy Range, its source being unknown'. So also r# "The Daradi" i.e the Indus appearing for the first time in Dar distan. The word o f has not the sense of myft, because that is included in ayात; it therefore means प्रकायते, प्रथमतः उपलभ्यते, the source or origin be. ing unknown. 
विदूराशयः॥४॥ पदानि । विदात्-व्यः॥ . वृणिः ॥ विदूरपनाम् भ्यः प्रत्ययो भवति ततः प्रभवतीत्येतस्मिन्निपये। 
· Karika पालवायो विरं च प्रकस्यन्तरमेवा। 
मसति घेल्याजिस्वरीवापाचरेत् ॥ . 
778 
. 
mittemarau 
[BK. IV. CH. III. $ 86 
84. The affix y comes, in the sense of 'what ma nifests itself there', after the words 'vidūra'. 
This debars por 1. Thus for safer 'a kind of gem found at Vidora'. The gem as a matter of fact is not found at Vidora, but in a moun tain called ara u Viddra is the city where the rough stone is worked upon. In other words, it may be said that the affix is really added to sera, when the latter word is replaced by fat; such substitute being only shown in the satra, the appropriate sthani (válavaya) being left to inference. Or the word Vidora may denote both the city as well as a mountain. If it be said that there is no mountain known as Vidora, then we say that the Grammarians call Valavaya by the name of Vidara, as the merchants call Benares by the name of Jitvart. 
• तद्गच्छति पथिदूतयोः ॥५॥ पदानि ॥ तद्-गच्छति-पथि-दूतयोः। 
वृणिः ॥ तदिति दितीयासमर्याद्गच्छतीत्येतस्मिन्विषये ययाविहिवं प्रत्ययो भवति योऽसौ गच्छति पन्याए चेत् स भवति तो ना 
85. An affix (IV. 1. 83 &c) comes after a word, .being in the 2nd case in construction, in the sense of 'what goes thereto', provided that, that which goes, is a road or a messenger. 
Thus atauga- 87: a road or a messenger that goes to Srughna." So also ET 1 The road may either lead to Srughna, or being in Srughna, be used for going. 
Why do we say queat: "meaning a road or a messenger". Observe po ufa arf: 'he goes to Srughna for his own sake'.. ___ अभिनिष्कामति द्वारम् ॥८६॥ पदानि ॥ अमि-निष्कामाति-द्वारम् ॥ 
इनिः॥ द्वितीयासमर्यादभिनिष्क्रामतीत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे यथाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति यत् वदभिनिष्क्रामविहार 
86. An affix comes, after a word in the 2nd case in construction, in the sense of a door which looks towards that'. 
• Chus nig: 'a gate which looks towards Srughna',-as a gate of Kanyakubja. So also an, urarn 
Objection. The satra would have stood better as fafaragot art, for by using h amfe, you make the word aari as if it was a being endowed with sense. 
Ans. This objection may be answerd by saying that the gate is the well-known instrument ( 7 ) to the action of sförfaran; and an instrument may te used as an agent to a verb: as am u afa'the sword cuts nicely;' 
BK. IV. CH. III. S.88 
धन्ये 
। 
Why do we say ay " when it is a gate"? Observe parfare TIT:'a person faces towards Srughna'. . 
अधिकृत्य कृते प्रन्थे।७३ पदानि । अधिकस्य-फते-प्रन्थे। कृतिः ॥ तरिति वितीयासमर्थावधिकत्व तात्येतस्मिन्न वयाविहित प्रत्ययो भववि मतको अन्यो। स भवति पानिकम् ॥ मुबाक्यायिकायस्व प्रत्ययस्व बलम् ।। 
87. An affix comes after a word in the 2nd case in construction, in the sense of 'made in relation to any subject," when the thing made is a book.. . 
The word africa mcans'aiming at alluding to, referring ta' Thus सुभद्रामाधिकृत्य कृतीमन्यः-सोमहः 'Saubhadra or a book relating to the history of Subhadra. So also गौरिमिका, याबासः, किरातार्जुनीयन् ।। 
Why do we say मन्ये 'when meaning a book? Observe सुभद्रामधिकृत्वकपः STATT: 'a palace built in memory of Subhadra'; where there is no affix, 
Vårt:-The affix is elided diversely when the book is a story. Thus बासपदरतामधिकस्य कतारुण्याचिका-वासपाता "Vasavadatta, a story relating to Vasavadatta." समनोगरा, उर्वशी ॥ Sometimes the elision does not take place, as 
भमाधी॥ 
शिशुकन्दयमसमवन्येन्द्रजननादिभ्यश्छः ॥ ८८ ॥ पदानि ॥ शिशु-ऋन्द-यमस.. भ-वन्ध-न्द्र-जननादिभ्यः-श्छ। पृत्तिः ॥ धिएकन्दादि यो वितीयासमन्यवः मत्ययो भवति मधिकृत्य कते मन्ये । मापदाः ॥ मात्तिकम् ॥रने देवासुरादिभ्यः प्रतिषः । 
88. The affix o comes in the sense of 'a book made relating to a subject', after the following words in the 2nd case in construction, via 'sisukranda,' 'yamasabha, the Drandva compounds, and the words “indra-janana' &c. 
The word o(IV. 3. 85) and often qu should be read into the sotra. This debars molt Thus fare : ' a book treating of the crying of infants.' बमसम: 'a book relating to the court of Yama'. A Dvandva-Compound: as, भप्रिकाश्यपीयः, श्येनकपोतीयः, पदार्थसंबन्धीयम् प्रकरण, वाक्यपदीय 
There is no list of af words. They are akritigapa, and must be determined by usage. Thus इनमननीय, प्रद्युम्नागमनीयम् &c. 
Vart:-Prohibition should be stated in the case of the Dvanda-Compounds देवासुर &c. As देवासुरम् 'the book of the wars of the Gods and Demons.' पक्षोसुरम् गाणमुख्यम्॥ 
• 76 
सोस्थानिधन 
BK. IV.CH. III. S.9.] 
. The words found and they might have been included in the inchoate classनमननादि ॥ The separate enumeration of these words in the sutra, is merely for the sake of amplifcation 
सोस्य निवासः॥९॥ पदानि स-मस्य-निवासः. वृत्तिासति प्रयमासमावस्येति पठषय यथाविहिवं प्रत्ययो भवति यत्पथमासमय निवासस भवति। 
89. After a word in the 1st case in construction, an affix comes in the sense of this is his dwelling place! 
The word & shows that the word to which the affix is to be added is in the nominative case TR4 'his' shows that the meaning of the affix is that of a genitive case. निवास, shows that the first word in construction must signify a dwelling place. Farure mcans "a country i. c. where a person lives (nivasanti asmin)*. . 
सुनो निवासोऽस्य-सौनः a present dweller of Srughna', माथुर, राष्ट्रियः &c. अभिजनध॥९॥ पदानि भमिजन:-च। वृत्तिः ॥सोस्येत्येव । इति मयमासमावस्येति षष्ठपयें यथापिहित प्रत्ययो भवति यषयमासमर्थमभिः अनमेन्स भवति । 
90. After a word in the 1st case in construction, an affix comes in the sense of this is his mother-land'. 
The difference between fasts: and 99: is this. Where a person lives himself for the present, that is his far8 or dwelling-place. Where his ancestors (भभिजना) have lived, that is his भभिजन 'native country, home or ancestral abode'. Thus RIETI 'a person whose ancestral home is in Srughna'. मायुरः, राष्टियः॥ The separation of this sutra from the last is for the sake of the subsequent satra, in which the anuvfitti of abhijana' only runs. . आयुधजीविभ्यश्छः पर्वते ॥९१ . पदानि । आयुधजीवियः-छ:-पर्वते। 
प्रत्तिः। सोस्याभिजन रति वर्तते । भायुधजीविय इति तापथ्ये चतुर्थी, पर्वतहति प्रकृतिविपणम् । पर्वतवाषिनः प्रयमासमर्थादभिजनावस्येति पाठपयामव्ययो भवति । 
91. The affix 3 comes after a word denoting mountain, in the sense of this is his mother-land', when it is 
a person who lives by arms. 
The word nigrutit means a person who earns his livelihood by arms. The phrase सोऽस्याभिजनः is to be read into the sutra. Thus हरगोलः पर्वतोभवन 
पामायुधजीविना-होलीयाः 'the mercenary soldiers whose ancestral abode is the Hridgola mountain'. So also भन्धकपीथा, रोहितगिरीया 
Why do we say mreusitrag:? Observe emite gur: “ the Brahmanas whose nativeplace is Rikshoda mountains". Why do we say 'mountainst Observe सांकाश्यकामायुषमीधिनः।। 
[ BK. IV.CH. III. 5.94 
सौरवामियन-मा। 
78. 
शशिकादिभ्यो न्यः ॥ १२॥ शाण्डिकादिया, म्यः। पनि परिक हत्येपमाविका प्रातिपरिवो म्यः प्रवदो मवाद खोस्थानिजनात्ववस्मिन्निपये. 
92. The affix sa comes in the sense of this is his native-land', after the words शण्डिक &c. 
This debars spent &c. Thus gran, artger &c. . 
चिण्डिक, सनसकेप, एक, ए, (सर),रकापरत. पोष. सिन्धुतक्षशिलादिभ्यो ऽणी।९३॥ पदानि सिन्धु-तक्षशिलादिभ्यः, भए अभी। इतिः मारिएमा प्रत्यकमाभिसंवध्यते । सिम्मादिन्या प्रातिपरिक पत्तमधिलारियन बयासंबमणमा मत्ययो माता सोस्पानियन यस्मिनिपये। 
93. The affixes and come respectively, after the words Sindhu' &c and 'Takshasila' &c in the sense of this is his native-land'. 
Thus सन्धयः, पार्षद 
Many of the words occurring in Sindhu-class, are found in Kachchh adi class (IV. 2. 133) also. Those words would have taken for by sūtra IV. 2. 133. The present sätra prevents the affixing of (I-V. 2. 134) to those words under circumstances mentioned in sätra IV. 2. 134, when the further significance of mirrt: is added to them. 
So also तासपिला, वात्सोखरणः &c 
1सिन्ध, वर्ण,3 मधमत, कम्बोग, सास्थ, कदमीर, गन्धार, 8किष्किन्धा रखा (ख), 10वर (पर) गादका (गणिका), 12 कुलून, 19 दिरखा.॥ 
. तिक्षशिला, पत्तोद्धरण, 3 कमेंदूर (कोमेवर), भामणी, उगल', कोष्टकर्ष (कर्णको), 7 सिंहकर्ण (सिंहकोष्ठ), 8 संकुचित, किनर, 10 काण्डधार (काण्डवारण), 11 पर्वत', 2 भक्तान, 13 पर. 14 कंस, 15 सालक. 
तूदीशलातुरवर्मतीकूचवाराड्ढक्छण्डज्यकः ॥ ९४ ॥ पदानि ॥ तूदी-शलातुर वर्मती-कूचवारातू, ढक्-छण-द-यकः ॥ कृत्तिः ॥ तूचादिभ्यश्चतुर्यः शब्दभ्यो यथासंख्य पवार एव ठक् छ म् वक् इत्येते प्रत्यया भवन्ति सो. याभिजन इत्येतस्मिन्विषये । अणोपवादः ।। 
94. After the words तूदी, शालातुर, धर्मती, and ववाद come respectively the affixes ढक छण, ढ, and यक् in the sense of this is his native land'. 
__ This debars भम् ॥ Thus तोरेयः, पालातुरीयः, वामतेकः and कोषवार्यः । 
भक्तिः॥ १५॥ पदानि । भतिः। पुतिः ॥ समयविभक्तिः प्रत्ययार्थचानुवर्तते । मभित्रन रवि निहनम् । परति अपमासमावस्येति पार में यथाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति, यययमासमय भनित्तरपति ॥. .. 
784 
सोऽत्व भनि-पुत् ॥ . 
[ BK. IV. CH III. 1.98. 
95. An affix (IV. 1. 83) comes after a word in the first case in construction, in the sense of this is his object of veneration or love'. 
. . The word भक्ति in the satra means 'serving'" worshipping' or 'loving'. 
Thus gो भनिरस्य-मौतः a person who is loyal to Srughna'. So also मायुरः, राष्ट्रिया &c. 
The anuvritti of the word भभिमनः ceases. The word : and मस्थ should be read into the satra. 
अचित्ताददेशकालाक् ॥ ९६ ॥ पदानि ॥ अचित्तात, अदेश-कालात, ठक् ॥ त्तिः ॥ देशकालव्यतिरिक्तापित्तवाधिनः प्रातिपरिकामव्ययो भवति सोस्य भक्तिरित्येतस्मिन्विपये; भणोपवा॥ 
96. After a word denoting a thing not having consciousness, but not being the name of a country or time, the affix 8 is employed, in the sense of this is his object of devotion or love'. . 
This debars opg; and g also. Thus surrorRegio 'a person who loves cakes'. .शाकुलिक, पायसिकः॥ .. 
Why do we say not having consciousness'? Observe देवः ॥ Why do we say not being the name of a country'? Observe wig: Why do we say 'not denoting timel'? Observe got: 'who loves Summer'. 
महाराजा ॥९७॥ पदानि ॥ महाराजात, ठ॥ । वृत्तिः ।। महाराजशब्दार म प्रत्ययो भवति सोस्य भनिरित्येतस्मिन् विषये। भणोपवादः ।। 
97. The affix ysy comes in the sense of this is his object of veneration', after the word महाराज । 
___ This debars भण्॥ As माहाराभिक 'who loves or serves the Maharaja: The difference between this sy and the 87 of the last aphorism, is in accent only. 
वासुदेवार्जुनाभ्यां धुन् ॥ ९८॥ पदानि ॥ वासुदेव-अर्जुनाभ्याम, खुन् । वृषिः ॥ वासुदेवा नशाभ्यां वुन् मत्ययो भवति सोस्य भनिरिस्येतस्मिन्विषये। छाणोरपवादः॥ । 
98. The affixat comes in the sense of this is his object of veneration,' after the words "Vasudeva' and Arjuna.' 
This debars and भण् ॥ Thus वामदेवकः, भर्शनका। 
Q. The word are being the name of a Kshatriya would have taken by the next sätra, and there is no difference here between and y, why then include the word वासुदेव in this sotral . . . . . . . . . . . BR. IV. CH. III. 3. 100 ] . 
सोऽस्य मान-म् । 
783. 
A. The word वासरेव here is the name of God (in which all dwell सवि. uffin) and not the designation of a Kshatriya. 
By the general rule of compounds (II. 2. 34) a word of fewer vowels is placed first, and so Arjuna ought to have been placed first. The not doing 
गोत्रक्षत्रियाख्येभ्यो बहुलं पुश् ॥ ९९ ॥ पदानि । गोत्र-क्षत्रियाख्येभ्या-बालम. खुम्॥ पतिः ॥ गोपाक्ये या सपियाख्येभ्यष प्रातिपदिकेभ्यो बहुलं पुम् प्रत्ययो भवति सोल मन्तिारित्वेतस्मिन्नि पये। भणोपचार 
99 The affix gg comes diversely, in the sense of 'this is his object of veneration,' after a word denoting Gotra or, a Kshatriya. 
This debars भर and s. Thus: ग्लोचकायनक 'who loves or serves &e Gluchukayani. So also भोपगवकः, कापटपकः ॥ Kshatriyas:--माकुलकर, साहरेषकः, साम्बका। 
The word wroperi in the sdtra indicates that the words should be the names of well-known cr. famous Kshatriyas, and not of any body who is a Kshatriya by profession. 
The word shows the non-universality of this rule. Thus garant भक्तिरस्य-पाणिनीयः, पोरवीयः॥ 
The word in does not mean here the Grammatical Gotra, but a word formed by a patronymic affix in general. 
जनपदिनां जनपदवत्सर्वे जनपदेन समानशब्दाना बहुवचने॥ १०॥ पदानि । जनपदिनाम, जनपदवत, सर्वम्, जनपदेन, समान, शब्दानाम, बहुवचने । कृतिः ।। अनपरिनो ये बहुवचने जनपदेन समानपदास्तेषां जनपदवत्सर्वे भवति प्रत्ययः प्रकृतिब खोस्व भनिरिस्येतस्मिन्विपये॥ 
_____100. of words denoting Princes (lit. who are lords of janapada) the base and affix meaning 'this is his object of veneration'are the same, in every respect, like those of a word denoting kingdom, provided that, the Prince-denoting words have,inthe plural,the same form,as the kingdom-denoting words. 
The words of this sutra require a detailed analysis. अनपदिनाम् gen. plural of gfic meaning "Iord of an inhabited country' i eKhsatriya Princes, बहुवचने 'in the plural', अनपदेन समान अशनां 'the same form as the jana pada denoting word',जनपदवत् सन् 'every thing is like jana-pada'. In other 
784 
TU 
[ BK. IV.CH. III. §. 1or 
the same forms as the names of the countries, the affix in the sense of veneration will be the same as will come after a janapada word.' Now the affixes denot ing *** as regards Fir words are given in Sätras IV. 2. 124 &c. and those affixes will apply here. Thus मा मनपदो भनिरस्व-मानक: formed byg of Sotra IV. 2.' 125, meaning 'who loves the country of Angas' Similarly F, arra 
Similarly WT: V T TR117: formed by the same affix a. with this difference of meaning 'who loves the Kshatriyas called Angas'. So 
IT*, Dua &c 
Why do we say 'of Kshatriya Princes'; (janapadinam). Observe, HOUT AFFECF9 - PİTT: N Here the general affix eq is employed. 
The word of is used in the satra to show that not only the affixes are the same, but the bases to which the affixes are added will be the same. In the plural, the Kshatriya and the Janapada bases have the same form, but ia the singular and dual, the forms of Kshatrya-bases are different. Thus Herrar a sing. HT: (IV. 1. 170) dual, het pl. 7T: The formur: denotes both the Kings or Kshatriyas of Madras' as well as the country called Madras'. Thus मद्रो भक्तिरस्य-मदकः॥ So also in the singular and dual, मद्राः will be the base to which the affix will be added. Thus Hrin nitra T T SFX 
-मद्रका | Similarly वार्य (from गये IV. 1. 171), as वाज्यों का भनिरस्य पाग्यों पार. किरस्य-शिका 
Why do we say 1949 ar the word having the same sound as the janapada word '? Thus aquat 7747, ARCT CAT ficko fta: il Here Paurava and Anushanda have not the saine sound. 
The word 949 is used in the sitra, to indicate, that, though the air Vph or the similarity of word-form', occurs in the plural number only, yet this atidesa rule applies to the same words in the singular and dual also. For in the plural, the form will be same, because there the Tadraja affix is elided : but in the singular and dual, the Tadraja affix is not elided, and therefore, the word denoting a principality and the word clenoting a prince will not have the same form; but this rule applies there alsa As F or rent HTMER 
तेन प्रोकम् ॥ १०१॥ पदानि । तेन,प्रोकम् । इतिः ॥ सनोति हतीयासमोनामियस्मिन्मथे यथाविहितं मत्ययो भवति। 
101. After a word in the 3rd case in construction, an affix (IV. 1. 83 &c). comes, in the sense of 'enounced by him'. 
The word means that arti 'preeminently spoken'. It should be distinguished from the word 59 meaning 'donc or made'. For the sense of a 
BK. IV. CA III. $ 102) 
Part-1 
785 
has been already taught in the satra non (IV. 3. 16). Thus water sur uyla मामा-मायुरीषिः ॥ पाणिनीवर 'the system of grammar enounced by Panini' भाषियलम,कापकत्स्लम।। 
Works like Chhandas which were made () by nobody, but which were promulgated (*) from time of time by inspired commentators, may be quoted as examples of the application of this sitra Or it may apply to the case of a book whose author is another, but whose promulgator or expour der is another. In short, speaking roughly, it is a 'revelation', and ør: is a *composition', onc a revealer or prophet, the other an author. . 
According to some, this sätra is almost a superfluity. They argue thus: The word on is formed by adding #tors and means to lecture'ho teach', and also the 'means of such teaching &c. In the first sense of lectur ing or teaching', the affix is not found. For in every village there are persons who teach or lecture upon Katha, Kalapa &c. For example may be such a lecturer, but we do not say Fun T v Tu Moreover, where we find this affix employed, it is with regard to Books, for which the rule qot is sufficient. If it be said that it sbould be taught for the Chhandas: that is also unnecessary, as the Vedas are not a but eternal, the agent only remem 
applies as to the first. But the letter of the Veda is not cternal, it is the sense that is eternal. Therefore the Rishis who revealed, for the first time, at the beginning of a Kalpa, the sense of the Veda, in appropriate language will be called its promulgators, and the works so revealed will be named after such Rishis, as 411044, 07H144 and The This sūtra, however, is confined to those cases where the author of the book is one person and its promulgator is another : as Argð fy: # 
तित्तिरिवरतन्तुखण्डिकोखाच्छण् ॥ १०२॥ पदानि । तित्तिरि-परतन्तु-चण्डिक उखात्-उए । 
पातिकम् ॥ पौनकादिभ्य छन्दसीयवास्थानाने न्दोधिकारविहितानां च सपियवेप्यो । 
. 102. The affix su comes in the sense of 'enoug. ced by him', after the words 'tittiri', 'varatantu', 'khandika', and "ukha'. 
Thus fardars those who learn (IV. 2. 64) the Veda enounced by Tittiri'. maraftar, unforturi, iar: # 
fore it will not apply to secular Slokas, as faftfto grab # The word Chhandas is drawn from sätra IV. 3. 106. and firear from IV 2 66. 
786 . 
तेन पाणिनि 
[BK. IV. CH. III. 5 104 
काश्यपकौशिकाभ्यामपियां णिनि ॥ १०॥ पदानि ॥ काश्यप-कौशिकाभ्याम, ऋषिश्याम णिनिः॥ पतिः ।। काम्पपकोशिकसम्मायामूपिवाचिभ्यां णिनिः प्रत्ययो भवति देन मोकमित्येवस्मिन्निपये । - स्थापबार॥ 
103. The affix forrar comes in the sense of 'enounc ed by him', after the words Kasyapa' and • Kausika' when denoting Vedic Seers. 
This debars . The o of forft is for the sake of Vriddhi (useful in the subsequent sotra), This is confined, like the last, to the Vedic works Thus Tara: 'those who study (IV. 2. 64) the Kalpa enounced by Kafyapa', काधिकिनः ॥ Why do we say “Vedic Sages"? Observe वानीन्सनेन गोषकाश्यपन 
- ustan "a work enounced by a modern Kasyapa,-onc belonging to the Gotra Kasyapa: not a Rishi'. 
कलापिवैशम्पायनान्तवासिभ्यश्च ॥ १०४॥ पदानि ॥ कलापि-धेशम्पायन-अ .. न्तिवासिभ्यः,च (णिनि)। 
वृशिः।। कलाप्यन्तेवासिनां वैशम्पायनान्ते पासिनांप वाचकाः दास्त यो णिनिः प्रत्ययो भवति म प्रोक्तमित्येतस्मिन्विषये।मणोपवादः॥ 
हरिद्ररेषां प्रथमस्ततम्गलितुमका .. उलपेन चतुर्येन कालापकमिहोच्यते ॥ मालम्बिभरका प्राचां पलाकमलावुभी। . . . . . 
पाभारणिताण्डधाम मामीयाचयो ऽपरे । श्यामायन नदीच्येषु रक्का कठकलापिनोः। 
104. After words denoting the pupils of 'Kalapt, and • Vaisampâyana,' the affijx fora is employed in the sense of 'enounced by him.' . 
This debars og and out There are four words which express pupils of Kalapa: as, हरिख, छगली, सम्मुरुः, उलपः ॥ There are nine words expressing pupils of Vaisampayana: as, मालम्बि, पल, कमल, चाम, भारणि साय, श्यामायन, कम, कलापी। 
Thus frufrot: 'those who study (IV. 2. 64) the works enounced by Haridru'समरविणः, मालपिनः and छगली takes dhinuk IV. 3. 109॥भालम्बिनः, पालगिनः, भारणिना, भाामिनः, कामलिनः, ताण्डनः, श्यामायनिनः ॥ The affix is elided after कर (IV. 3. 107) and is replaced by भा (IV. 3. 108) after कलापी । 
The pupils must be direct ones, and not pupil of pupils. For had that been the meaning, Kalapt being a pupil of Vaisampayana, the words 'pupils of Vaisampayana' would have included the 'pupils of Kalapi.' But 
BK. IV.Ch. III.31061 
देन मोम-गिनि । 
787 
also Katha is a pupil of Vaisampayaga, and Khadayana is a pupil of Katha and had the sätra applied to pupil's pupil also, then the affix fora would have applied to part also. But that is not the case, Khadayana being mentioned. in Saunakadi class. (IV. 3. 100). 
The word चरकः means शम्भावनः, hence परका means pupils of वैषम्पादन पुराणप्रोक्तेषु प्राह्मणकल्पेषु ॥ १०५ ॥ पदानि । पुराण-प्रोकेषु-ब्राह्मण-कल्पेषु , (णिनिः) 
प्रकल्पास्वे भवन्ति । - 105. The affix णिनि comes in the sense of 'enounc ed by him,' after a word in the 3rd case in construction, when 
it denotes a Brâhmana or a Kalpa-work enounced by ancient .sages.. . This sutra further gives the sense of the affix. पुराण means 'Ancient: Sages.' equivalent to gua. Or.Brahmana literature, the examples are, ur एवरायणः ॥ Kalpa work: as पेडीकल्पः,भारणपराजी। 
Why do we say garnis 'announced by ancient sages.'? Observe याज्ञवल्कानि ब्रायणानि, भावमरपः कल्पः ॥ (VI. 4151) Yajnavalkya &c being sages of modern times. The me fara affix (IV. 2. 66) will not also apply to these, bet cause the word om in IV. 2. 66 is restricted to grow of the present sätra 
शौनकादिभ्यश्छन्दसि ॥१०६॥ पदानि ॥ शौनकादिभ्यः छन्दसि-(णिनिः). पगिः । शौनक रत्येवमादिभ्यो णिनिः प्रत्ययो भवति देन प्रोन्नमित्येतस्मिन्विपये छनस्यभिधेये। छाय पवारा॥ 
106. The affix fora comes in the sense of enounc ed by him', after the words शौनक &c, in denoting Chhandas. 
This debars & and you Thus erat mig drarat: who study (IV. 2.64) the Chhandas enounced by Saunaka.' वामसनेविनः &c 
Why do we say 'in denoting Chhandas? Observe immater fra the orthography of Saunaka." 
The word uit occurs in this list. This must always be taken as a compound for affixing this affix. After the single word ** the affix is elided (IV. 3. 107), Thus कन्धाभ्यां प्रोतामधीयते - कारणाटिमः । 
शोनक, 2 वाजसनेय, 3 शारिस, 4 शापेय (सांपेय), बाप्पेय (शाखेब) 6 खाडावन, 7 स्तम्भ (स्कम्भ), 8 स्कन्ध, 9 देवदर्शन, 10 खुमार, जुकण्ठ, 12 कशात, 13 कपाट (कथा) 14 तल', 15 एण्ड', 16 पुरुषांसक (पुरुषासक), 17 अश्वपत्र (अश्वपेय), 18 सारस, 19 वन, 20 देवनड, तलबकार. 
788 
तेनमान-गिनु । 
[ BK. IV. CH. III. 109 
. 
कठचरकाल्लुक ॥ १०७॥ पदानि । कठ-चरफात्-सन्। निः॥ करचरकादाभ्यां परस्य मोकपत्यवस्था भवति । कम्पनदिएम्पायनान्तवासिय प्रति मिने 
107. The affix denoting enounced by him' is elided, by luk-substitution, after the words Katha and Charaka. 
The word he would have taken णिनि as it is a वैशम्पायनान्तवासी word: and on would have taken the affix for Both are elided. Thus r. who study the Chhandas enounced by Katha'. परका:&c 
The word 'Chhandas' qualifies this sūtra. Observe at: ht: श्लोकाः॥ 
कलापिनो ऽण् ॥ ८॥ पदानि । कलापिन:-अण् ॥ . निः॥ कलापि शब्दावण प्रत्ययो भवाति सेन प्रोनमित्येतस्मिन्विषये देशम्पायनान्तवासिस्वाणिनेरपवार वार्मिकम् ॥ नान्तस्थ टिलोऐ सब्रह्मचारिपीठसर्पिकलापियमिततलिमामलिजाकलिलाइलिशिलालिभिख ण्डिसंकरसपसुपर्वणामपसंख्यानम् ॥ 
108. The affix मण comes in the sense of 'enounc ed by him ', after the word Kalapi. 
This debars forfar of IV. 3. 104 Thus ry: 'wbo study the work enounced by Kalapi'. 
The word कलापा: is thus formed:-कलापिन+मण| Here comes in force Satra VI.4.144 which declares that इन of कलापिन् should be elided before the taddhita affix. This clision is, however, debarred by satra VI. 4. 164 which declares that words ending in the affix a retain their form when or not denoting a progeny follows. Therefore it would have retained its but for this Vartika. 
Viart The R portion of the following words is elided when a Taddhita follows:-सब्रह्मचारिन, पीठसर्पिन, कलापिन्, कुयुमिन, तेतिलिन्, जाजलिन्, बाङ्ग लिन्, लाइनिन्, चिलालिन् विखण्डिन्, मूकरसपन, सुपर्वण ॥ Thus ईन् being elided, we 
have कलापाः॥ 
छगलिनो दिनु ॥ १०९॥ पदानि । छगलिना-दिनुका इनिः ॥ छगलिनधनाव दिनुक् प्रत्ययो भवति लेन मोनमित्येतस्मिन् विषये । कलाप्यन्तेवाक्षिखाणिनेर 
___109. The affix दिनुक comes in the sense of 'enoune ed by him', after the word 'Chhagalin'. 
The word gofos being a word denoting the pupil of art would have taken णिनि (IV. 3. 104), This debars that Thus छागलायनः 'who study the Chhandas enounced by Chhagall, 
Bx. IV. CH. III. Jum] 
नेकरिए। 
सा 
189 
पाराशर्यशिलालिन्यां मिथुनटसूत्रयोः ॥ ११० ॥ पदानि ॥ पाराशर्य-शिलालि भ्याम्-मिक्षु-मट-सूत्रयोः (णिनि)। पनि णिनिरिहानगवे, मारिनन् । पापचयधिलानियां गिनिः प्रत्ययो भवति सेन मोनमित्येवस्ति भिपये 
110. The affix forcat comes in the sense of 'enounc ed by him ', after the words Påråsarya and Silalin, the works enounced being Bhikshu-Satra and Nata-Sätra respectively. 
The affix forft is to be read into the satra and not Rent The os and H y are works treating of the duties of for religious mendicants' and नर: 'jugglers dancers'. 
Thus पारा +णिनि-पारापर+णिनि (VI.4 152)-पारापरिन्, 'the treatise, of Parasarya on the duties of Bhikshus'. Similarly frastru These words, of course, have the additional sense of 'he who studies the works so enounced by Parasarya and Sailalin'. See IV. 2.66. As पाराधरिणो मिक्षवः, खेलालिनी भरा। According to some, it always expresses this relation (afirvaar IV. 2. 66) and never a pink alone. These are treated metaphoricallyas Chhandas, 
Why do we say denoting Bhikshu and Nata Sotras'? Observe पाराधरणलालम। ___ कर्मन्दकृशाश्वादिनिः ॥ ११ ॥ पदानि । कर्मन्द-कृशाश्वात-निः। 
निः॥ मिनटसूत्रयोरित्येव । कमन्दकपाधशास्यामिनिःप्रत्ययो भवति । भणोपायः॥ 
111. The affix शनि comes, in the sense of 'enounc ed by him', the thing enounced being Bhikshu Sätra and Nata-Sutra, after the words Karmanda' and ' Krisāsva'. 
Thus aparat foreta:, 'the mendicants who study the Bhikshu-sQtra of Karmandin'. faf STATT HET: 'the actors who study the Nata Satra of Krisasvin." Otherwise कामन्दकम् and काशम् ॥ See IV. 2.66 __ तेनैकदिक् ॥ ११२ ॥ पदानि ॥ तेन-एकदिक। 
वृणिः ॥ वेनेति तृतीयासमर्यादेकदिगिस्येतस्मिन्न वधाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति । 
112. An affix (IV. 1. 83 &c) comes after a word in the third case in construction, in the sense of in the same direction with that.' . The word एक दिक means तुल्य दिक i.ea common direction. Thus सदाम्ना एकदिक सौदामनी विद्यत् "a lightening, literally that which is in the same 
The repetition of 19, though it could have been supplied by anuvritti from IV. 3. 101, is for the sake of indicating that the anuvritti of the वर 
790 
. 
कले पन्ये ॥ 
[ BK IV CH. III.'. I16 
which regulated all the preceding ten sätras, does not extend to this aphorism, and therefore the तदिपयसा of IV.2.66 which was applied in those sutras does .not apply here .. 
तसिश्च ॥ ११॥ पदानि । तसिः, च। वृभिः ॥ तसिब प्रत्ययो भवति सेनेकदिगित्येतस्मिन्निपये। पूर्वण पारिषु प्रणाविष्ट व प्राणयमपरंभ. त्ययो विधीयते॥ 
. 113. The affix are comes in the sense of 'in the same direction with that.' . : This ordains another affix in addition to the previously taught me &c प&c. The words formed by this affix are Indeclinables (I. I.37). Thus हिमवतः 'in the same direction as Himavat' पीलुमूलतः, सुदामतः । 
. उरसो यश्च ॥ ११४॥ पदानि ॥ उरसो-यत्-च। वृत्तिः। सशदायत प्रत्ययो भवति षकारानसिक तनकदिमित्येतस्मिन् विपये। 
114. The affix a as well as the affix aff comes in the sense of in the same direction with that,' after the word उरस्। 
Thus aut prafen-appy or th: 11 The me is read into the sätra by force of the word # ___ उपशाते ॥ ११५॥ पदानि ॥ उपक्षाते । वृतिः ॥ तेनेत्येव । तृतीयासमर्यादुपज्ञासहत्येतस्मिन्नथें यथाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति । . . 115. After a word in 3rd case in construction, an affix is employed in the sense of discovered by him'. . Knowledge acquired by oneself without being taught is called उपवास, i.e. an intuition or self taught knowledge. Thus पाणिनिनोपज्ञातं - पाणिनीयम् भकालक व्यकरण 'the law of Grammar discovered by Panini'. So also काशकास्नम् गुरुलापवम, मापिशलम् दुष्करणम् ॥ Compare II. 4. 21. The Panini's Grammar is called भकालकं as it does not define काल or tenses; गुरुलाघव is the name of the sciences of wealth (यत्रोपायाणां गौरवं लाघवं चिन्यते)॥ The word Duskarana is the name of a Grammar, so-called because of the technical term occurring in it. Some say it means कामशाखः॥ . कृते प्रन्थे ॥ ११६॥ पदानि ॥ कृते-ग्रन्थे । 
निः ॥ तेनेस्येव तृतीयासमास्कृतात्येतस्मिन्नर्थे यथाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति, यमकृतं मन्यस भवति॥ 
116. An affix comes after a word in the 3rd case in construction, in the sense of 'made', the thing made being ka book', . . . 
BK. IV. CI. III. 19] ' 
तेवकनेसंशावां-मम् ॥ 
Tor 
Thus पररूधिमा सा-पाररुचा: प्रेकाः “the verses composed by Vara ruchi'. So also कपारो प्रायः, भकुराये प्रग्यः, मालूकः। 
Why do we say sa book'? Observe सकस प्रासादः 'the palace made. by Taksha'. 
That which one originates is called and is therefore an 'art', while knowledge of laws &c. that already exist, but are discovered for the first time by some one, is called Tar 11 
संज्ञायाम् ॥ १७॥ पदानि ॥ संज्ञायाम्। 
117. An affix comes after a word in the 3rd case in construction, in the sense of 'made by him', when the whole: word is & Name. 
Thus मलिकाभिः कतम्-मानिकम, कार्मकम्, सारपम्, पौनिकम् ॥ All these are. names of honey', literally made by a bec', मलिका, सरपा and पुमिका meaning 'a bee'. मसिका+भण्-मासिक (VI.4148), The anuvritti of "मन्य" does not, of. course, apply here. 
. कलालादिभ्यो वा ११८॥ पदानि । कुला-लाविश्यः, पक्ष वृत्तिः । तेन कृते संज्ञायामिति तत्सर्वमनुवर्तते । कुलालादिभ्यो पर प्रत्ययो भवति न कतमित्वसस्ति न्न संज्ञायां गम्यमानाया। 
___118. The affix g comes in the sense of ' made by him', after the words Kulala &c. the whole word so form ed being a Name. 
Thus airesan'a porcelain' lit. "made by a potter'. So also art रकमम् ॥ - कलाल, 2 वर, पण्डाल, निषार, 5 कार, 6 सेना, 7 सिरिध्र (सिरिन्ध), 8 सेरिना (सेन्निय), देवराम, 10 परिषद् (पर्पद), पy, 12 मधु', 13 रुस, 147, 15 मनाह, 16 ब्रह्मन् 17 कुम्भकार, 18 श्वपाक, 15ष.॥ 
क्षुद्राभ्रमरवटरपादपादश् ॥ ११९ ॥ पदानि । क्षुद्रा-भ्रमर-बटर-पादपात सञ्। दृभिः ॥ तेन कृते संज्ञायामिति सर्वमनुवर्तते । खुद्रादिभ्यो ऽम् प्रत्ययो भवति तेन कसरत्येतस्मिन्विपदे ज्ञायां गम्यमानायाम् । भणोपरार 
. . 119. The affix अञ् comes after the words •kshu dra', 'bhramara', 'vatara', and pâdapa' in the sense of | made by him', the whole word being a Name. 
This debars so, there being difference in accent between spa and सम्॥ Thus भुद्राभिः कृतम् -भाद्रम् 'honey lit made' by a small bee'. So also भामरम, पाटरम् and पादपम् ॥ . 
79 
तस्वर-यात्॥ 
[ BR. IV. CH. IIIS122. 
तस्येदम् ॥ १२१॥ पदानितस्यनाम । मिः ॥ सस्थति पठीसमर्यादिमित्येतस्मिसि पवे बयाविहित प्रत्ययो भवल्याणादयः पम्प महोत्सर्गाः । पादवम प्रत्यया ययाविहितं विधायन्ते। 
वारिकम् ॥ बहेस्तरणि च ॥ पामनीषः परपे रण में च॥ पा. समिधामापानेण्यम् ॥ 
____120. After a word in the 6th case in construction, an affix (IV. 1. 13 &c) comes, in the sense of this is his'. 
The five universals भy &c. (IV, I. 83) and the affixes &c. (IV. 2.93) come in this sense Thus उपगोरिदम्-मोपगवम्, 'of Upagu'. कापटपम्, राष्ट्रियम्, मवारपाराणं.. The affixes, however,.do not come when the word governed by the possessive case, is भनन्सर &c. Thus देवदत्तस्थानन्तरम् ॥ In short the thing possessed must be property, village kingdom or men. . 
Vart:-The verbar takes (तण and ar) and मण preceded by an दर As, संवोःसं-सांवहिषन । . Vart:-The affix रम् comes after भनीधः, in the sense of house', and the base gets the designation of * As woh I The word wat being treated as a Bha and not as a Pada, they is not changed tor (VIII. 2. 39), 
____Vart:-The affix 'shenyan' comes after सामधा, in the sense of placing. Thus सामिधेन्यो मन्त्रः 'the verses (recited while) placing the fuel on fire', सामिधेनी (IV. I.41) अक। 
रयाध ॥ १२१॥ पदानि । रथात्-यत्। - . दृचिः ॥रयायत् प्रत्ययो भवति तस्येवामित्येतस्मिन्विषये।मणोपवाए। बार्तिकम् ।। रथसीताहले यो बाधापति सरन्तविधिपसंण्यायते ॥ 
121. The affix यत् comes after रथ, in the sense of ' this is his.' 
This debars que o Thus typ= belonging to the chariot-i.es wheel or the axle.' The word nu is confined to describe the parts of chariot. This rule applies also to compounds ending with रथ, as, परमरध्यन, उत्समरभ्यम् because of the Vartika रपसीताहले यो विधी, after रथ, सीता and हल in. applying the affix a there is tadanta-vidhi. 
पत्रपूर्वादश् ॥ १२२॥ पदानि ॥ पत्रपूर्वात-अम्. . वृतिः ॥ पपपूर्वाद्रयशनावम् प्रत्ययो भवति तस्येदमित्येतस्मिन् विपये। 
122. When preceded by a word denoting 'a draught animal', ry takes the affix in the sense of this is his.'. 
_____ This debars यत् ॥ Thus भाववरयं च 'the wheel of a horse-cart' मोष्ट्ररथम् ।। गार्दन ॥ - The word पy means that by which anyonegoes' or adraught-animal, like camel. It is formed by the affix (111. 2. 182) BK. IV.CH. III. S16] 
उत्तम पुम् । 
793 
. पत्रावयुपरिषदमा १२३, पदानि । पत्र-अध्वर्यु-परिषदः, च। कृतिः ॥ पर्व वाहनं ताधिनः प्रातिपदिकारपर्युपरिपच्छना चाम्प्रत्ययो भवति स्वमित्येतस्ति विपये ऽपोपवादः॥ वार्चिकन् । पनामा 
____123. After a word denoting a draught-animal, and after the words 'adhvaryu' and 'parishad, the affix भइ is added. 
This debars po il The means 1641 When the sense is that of a thing to be carried, then is we added to a word denoting 'a draught-animal' Thus भश्वस्येवम् पहनीयस्-भाववम् a load to be or suited for being, carried by horse' So also भौष्ट्रन्, गरिमम् ॥ So also भाभार्यवम् and पारिपन् । 
हलसीराद्वक् ॥ १२४॥ पदानि हल-सीरा-उक्॥ पतिः॥इलवीरपाभ्यां इक्मत्ययो भवति तस्येमित्यस्मिन्विषयेऽणोपवाः ।। 
124. The affix comes in the sense of this is his,' after the words 'hala' and 'sira.' 
Thus हलस्येदम् - हालिकम, सेरिकन् । द्वन्द्वान् पैरमेधुनिकयोः ॥ १२५ ॥ पदानि । द्वन्द्वात-पुन्-और-मैथुनिकयो। निः॥ इन्दसंज्ञकार हुन् प्रत्यया भवति तस्येमित्येतस्मिन्विपये, वैरमैयुनिकयोः प्रत्ययाविशेषणयो । भणोपवायः॥ 
वार्तिकम् ॥रे देषामुरादिन्या प्रतिषेधो वनमः॥ 
___125. The affix पुन comes in the sense of this is his', after Dvandva compounds of words denoting 'mutual enmity', or 'matrimonial relationship' 
This debars भम् and ॥ Thus of 'enmity' बाभग्यशालडायनिका, काकोर किका | Similarly of married couples as, मणिभरवामिका, करसकशिकिका। 
The Dvandva compounds of words denoting natural enemies will be singular neuter by II. 49. Their secondary derivatives, however, are feminine 
Vart:-Prohibition must be stated of the word देवासुर &c. As देवासुरम् । राक्षोऽसुरम और॥ ___ गोत्रेचरणाखुश् ॥ १२६ ॥ पदानि । गोत्र-चरणात-बु । 
प्रनिः॥ गोपवाचिभ्यारणवापिन्ध प्रातिपदिके यो सत्ययो भवति तस्येदमित्येतस्मिन्विपये,ऽणोपचार 
126. The affix धुश् comes, in the sense of this is his', after the words denoting Family-names or names of Vedic Schools.. 
This debas भण as wells. Thus gotra:-लोचुकायनकम्, भोपगवकम्। According to Patanjali, the word om which ordinarly means Vedic School, - 
gen 
wou 
(BK. IV. CIL III. $ 127 
means here duties or doctrines (dharma), and traditions (amnaya) Thus 
OTTI V prat og 'the dharma-Sutras or the tradition belonging to the school of Kathas'. .So also TM1945, 120, 79514477# 
Famous Hung20n refer il 48-7- -7-7 इमां, अंण् । 
Til Garles Therefferdatangang ating naar strauranter og grant wafa gert मित्येतस्मिन् विपये। पूर्वस्य पुमो सवार।। 
वानिकर ॥ पोपमहणमा कर्तव्यम्। 
127. The affix hot comes in the sense of this is his', after a Patronymic word ending with the affix 244, 45 or , the words 80 formed expressing a multitude, a mark or & sign. 
The word be means 'congregation'. The word of and should be distinguished. For means a mark which is the property of that person and forms a distinguishing feature of that person, as fast "learning' is a my of the clan of Bidas, the Bidas being famous for learning. The word my is a mark which sho:vs that the thing so marked is the property of another : as a mark on a cow showing to what person or clan that cow belongs. The e though occurring in a person or thing does not belong to that person or thing, as the mark of a cow does not belong to the cow, but the is a mark which belongs to the person or thing wherein it is found. 
This sätra debars of the last aphorism. 
Vårt :- The word as 'a cow-pen', should also be read along with &c. Thus the words so formed denote four things (1) congregation, (2) mark (3) sign (4) a hamlet or cowpen. This being so, the rule of mutual correspondence according to order of enumeration (I. 3. 10) does not apply.' 
Thus TT (IV. 1. 104) : 'a congregation, or mark or sign or a hamlet of the Bidas!. YTT (IV. 1 105) + : (VI. 4. 148, 151) ** a congregation, or a mark, or a sign or a hamlet belonging to the Gangyas ? 
Dakshis'. 
The o of one could not serve the purpose of Vriddhi here, for all the words to which this affix is added, have Vriddhi by virtue of the affixes 
or in which they end. The would have served the purpose as well, so far as Vriddhi is concerned, but is used to show that the feminine.is formed by (IV. 1. 15), Thus alla It further prevents in compounds 
BK. IV. CH. III. F. 130] . 
बले 
798 
शाकलामा । १२८ ॥ पदानि ।। शाकला था। इनिः॥ शाकलनापारिपु मत्ववाविशेषणेषु वामवयो भवति वस्वामित्वेतस्मिन्विषये । पुमो 
. 
__128. The afix अए optionally comes, in the sense of this is his congregation, mark, sign or hamlet,' after the word शाकला 
This debars Tu Thus arena oranta-14**: (IV. 3. 101 and IV. 2.64), शाकलामार संप:-पाकल: or धाकलका (IV. 3. 126) meaning 'a congregation, &c of the students of the science revealed by Sakala' . छन्दोगौथिकयाशिकषड्चनटामध्यः ॥ १२९ ॥ पदानि । छन्दोग-औयिक 
याशिक- 
यच-नटात, भ्यः। पतिः ॥ संघाइयो निता सामान्येन विधानम् । छन्दोगादिभ्यः पन्ने योभ्यः प्रत्ययो भवति तस्येवामिले 
129. The affix mi comes in the sense of this is his Law or Tradition,' after the words, 'chhandoga,' aukthika," 'yajnika, bahvricha' and 'nata.' 
The anuvritti of N &c ceases. The debars and The phrase परणाएषमाम्नाययोः from sutra IV. 3. 126 is understood here and applies even to the word नरा। 
Thus आन्दोगानां धमों वाम्नायोपा छान्दोग्यम् 'the Law or Tradition peculiar to the Chhandoga. So also भाषिक्यम्, याशियम, बावच्यम् and भाग्यम् । 
. Not having this sense we have : छान्दोग कुलम् 'the family of Chhandoga.' 
नदण्डमाणवान्तेवासिषु ॥ १३०॥ पदानि न, दण्ड-माणव, अन्तवासि। . पुलिः ॥ण्डप्रधाना माणवा ण्डमाणवाः, मन्तेवासिमः शिघ्या, स्तेप्वनियेषु पुम् प्रत्ययो न भवति । 
130. The affix gs is not used after a Family-name, when it denotes a beginner pupil', and 'a boarder pupil.' 
The word caror: means a little naughty boy (Arr), the only means of instilling knowledge in whom is the rod (खण्ड), or whose principal sign of studentship is the 'danda' and nothing intrnisic. i.e.a mere beginner. The 
is changed to o in Arary by IV. 1. 161 karikaturaa: are pupils or boarders who live in their teacher's house. The word 'gotra' is understood here. Thus THT: "the junior or the senior pupils of Dakshi.' HEAT: N So also tri ण्डमाणवा मन्तवासिनोवा 
रैवतिकादिभ्यश्छः ॥ १३९ । पदानि ॥ रैवतिकादिभ्यः,... इतिः ॥रेवतिकारिय-प्रत्ययो भवति तस्यामित्येतस्मिन्त्रिपये। 
79 
तस्थ विकारः 
BK. IV. CH. III. S. 1341 
131. The affix 3 coines in the sense of this is his', after the words रेवतिक &c. 
All these words end with Gotra affixes, and require (IV. 3. 126), is brdains instead. Thus रेवतिकीयः, स्वापिशीय &c 
परवतिक, 2 स्वापिपि, 3 समवृद्धि गोरमीवि (गौरपीव), मोदमेघि (मौदयि), 8 मौर. वापि (मारवाहि मवापि. 
• कौपिजलहास्तिपदादए ॥ १३२॥ पदानि ॥ कौपिञ्जल-हास्तिपदात्-आण ॥ 'वृत्तिः॥ कौपिनलहास्तिपरशम्माभ्यामण प्रत्ययो भवति तस्येदमित्येतस्मिन्विषये । गोषवनोपवादः ॥ 
· 132. The affix my comes in the sense of this is his', after the words ‘kaupinjala' and 'hastipada'... 
This debars gम् (IV. 3. 126), Thus कौपिजला, हास्तिपः ॥ This satra is really a Vartika. . . आथर्वणिकस्येफलोपश्च ॥ १३३ ॥ आथर्वणिकस्य, इकलोपः, च ॥ 
इत्तिः ॥ भणिस्येव । भायर्वणिकपदादण प्रत्ययो भवति तत्सन्नियोगेन घेकलोपः, तस्येदमित्येतस्मिम्बि पये । चरणोपवा. 
133. The affix any comes, in the sense of 'this is his', after the word 'atharvanika', and the penultimate ‘ika' is elided. 
This debars gम (IV.3: 126). Thus माथर्वणिकस्यायम् -मायर्वणो धर्म भाम्ना. grat "the Atharvana i.e. the Law or the Tradition of the Atharvanikas". The phrase चरणादू धर्माम्नाययोः is understood here. This satra is also a vartika. - तस्य विकारः॥ १३४॥ पदानि ॥ तस्य, विकारः . 
पत्तिः॥ तस्येति षष्ठीसमर्यादिकार इत्यतस्मिन्विपय यथाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति । 
134. An affix (IV. 1. 83 &c) comes after a word in the sixth case in construction, in the sense of a modification thereof. 
· . The word Paranit means the change of condition of the original. The word fry, though its aunivritti could have been supplied from the previous sútras, has been repeated here, in order to show that the governing force of the (IV. 2. 92) does not extend further. The affixes taught, therefore, under ut (IV. 2.92 &c), such as ष, ख &c have not the sense of तस्य विकार ॥ 
No affix has been tanght here in this sätra: the general affix ga (IV. 1. 83) therefore will come in this sense, as well as the affixes to be taught hereafter. To give an example under this satra, we must take such a word which is not governed or provided for, by the subsequent satras, That is the 
[ BK. IV. CH. 111. §. 136 
geftaruresentare un 
797 
word must not denote a living animal for to it wy (IV. 3. 154) applies; it must have udatta on the first syllable, for an anudattadi will have (IV. 3. 140); it must not have a Vriddhi vowel m, , or nt in the first syllable, to which FTUR (IV. 3. 144) applies; and it must not be a word specifically mentioned in any one of the following aphorisms. Thus it applies to the words 4*47 and *FIT formed by f (UQ IV. 146, 145) and to the formed by fear (V.4. 39) which are adyudatta owing to form accent Thus wait for it:H1947: The R is sometimes clided.(VI. 4. 144 Vart) As T*** # So also : and af 
अवयवे च प्राण्योषधिवृक्षेभ्यः ॥ १३५॥ पदानि ॥ अवयवे, च, प्राणी-मओषधि Tag: पतिः ॥ प्राण्योपषिक्षणाधियः पदभ्यः पीसमय यो भवरे ययाविहित प्रत्ययो भवति चकागति 
135. An affix comes after a word denoting an animal, a herb and a tree, in sixth case in construction, in the sense of this is its part', (as well as 'this is its' modifica-. tion'). 
the satra 
Thus the freista T141 (IV.3.154)# So also more, n 'a modification, product or part of a peacock &c-viz a fan &c.' So also a as, ita 'product of Murva i.e. ashes or the stalk of Murva'. So also go as, firett meaning "the stalk or the ashes of Kartra tree". 
In the subsequent sätras, both the words frame and i have governing force. But after words which denote non-animals, non-plants or non trees, the affixes have only the sense of fra H This is a rather unique case of double anuvritti, not co-extensive in every respect. 
विल्वादिभ्यो ऽण् ॥ १३६ ॥ पदानि ॥ बिल्वाविभ्यः, अण् । वृत्तिः ॥ बिल्ल इलेवमादिभ्यो ऽण प्रत्ययो भवति विकाराषयवयोरर्ययोः । यथायोगममयटोरपवारः। 
136. The affix puc comes in the sense of its mo dification or its part,' after the words farera &c. 
This debars psy and Hapu Thus in the modification or part of Bilwa' The word TTT: occurs in this list. It would have taken 'am' by the next sätra also; its inclusion in the class of Bilwadi is for the sake of prevent ing the application of 797 to this word. 
I forex, 2 alie, 3107, 4 94, 5 AETC, 6 vinya, 7 r5, 8 , 9 yet, 10 net 11 967; 12 ay, 13 pt. .. 
798 
नस्परिकारापो -मम्॥ 
[ BK. IV. CH III. 1. 140 
कोपधाच । १३७॥ पदानि ।क, उपधात्-च (मण)। पतिः ॥ कारोपधावातिपदिकारण प्रत्ययो भवति यथायोग विकाराषयपयोरर्ययोः ममोपायः॥ 
- 137. After a word having as penultimate, the . affix my comes, in the sense of modification or a part, or both, as appropriate. 
This debars मम्. Thus a; सावम, तितिरीक, तिरीक; माण्डका रुका 
• अपुजतुनो पुष । १३८ ॥ पदानि । अपु-अतुनो-पुक् । निः॥पपुरानाम्यामा प्रत्ययो भवति विकार,सत्सन्नियोगेनलयोपुगागमो भवक्षिामारपोपमः। 
138. The affix it with the augment.ge comes in the sense of its modification,' after the words 'trapun' and jatun'. 
This debars मम् (IV. 3. 139), As, पुणो विकारः-पापुपम; मातुपम " mo 
2 
-tutti 
. 
11. 
of भवयव is not denoted by the affix. 
ओर १३९ । पदानि । मो-अ॥ इतिः ॥ रवर्णान्तात्मातिपदिकारम् प्रत्ययो भवति विकारावयवयोरथयो, रणोपवा. 
139. The affix अ comes after a word ending in short i, in the sense of 'modification or part,' (provided that the word has not grave accent on the first syllable). 
Thus देवदारयम्, भाद्रवारबम् ॥ The words dans and भतार aready-udatta owing to Phit Su. II. 14 (पीतादानाम्-the trees denoting soft timber trees have acute on the first) 
अनुदात्तादेव ॥ १४॥ पदानि ॥ अनुदात्तादेः, च (अ). वृतिः ॥ अनदात्तादः प्रातिपदिकारम् प्रत्ययो भवति विकारावयश्योरर्ययो, रणोपवादः॥ 
140. The affix comes in the sense of modi fication or part', after a word having anudâtta accent on the first syllable. 
This debars भण् ॥ Thus दाधिस्थमं, कापिस्थम्, माहिस्थम् ॥ The word दधिस्थर is an upapada-samasa of fa+fu, the æ being changed to ; and it is finally ' acute by कपुत्तरपर प्रकतिसर 
. पलाशादिभ्यो वा ॥ १४१॥ पदानि ॥ पलाशादिभ्यः-धा (अ). पतिः ॥ पलाशादिभ्यः मातिपदिके यो चाऽम् प्रत्ययो भवति विकायरवायोरपंवोः । 
पा 
BK. IV.CH. III. S. 143] 
विकारापवायोरा 
799 
141. The affix # comes optionally in the sense of 'modification or part', after the words पलाश &c. 
Thus पॉलाप or पाना so also लोहिर जाहिर, बावाला बाबाद। 
This sotra is an example of prapta and aprapta vibhasha. The words qatq, afire fuit and perut being gravely accented on the first syllable the affix f was obligatory by the last aphorism. This makes it optional, and is prapta-vibhasha. In the case of others it is aprapta- vibhasha. 
पलाप. सरिर, पिपा, स्वलन (समान), पूलाक,6करीर शिरीर, मवावं, पिकव. 
शम्याटलपू. १४२, पदानि । शम्या-दलम् । पतिः। एमीयमा लम् प्रत्ययो भवति विकारावययोरर्ययोः । ममोपरा 
142. The affix of comes in the sense of its modification or part', after the word शमी. . 
This debars on Thus पामील मल्ल, पामीली मुङ (IV. 1.60), मयदे॒तयो षायाममस्याच्छादनयोः ॥ १३ ॥ पदानि ॥ मयद-चा-एतयोः, मा. पायाम, अमस्य-आच्छादनयोः । वृभिः । प्रकृतिमाधादां मवर प्रत्ययो भवति भण्याच्छादनभितयोपिकाराबवायोरर्ययोर्भापावां विषये बपायर्य प्रत्ययेप मा । 
143. The affix per comes optionally after any base, in those two meanings of product and part, in secular language, when neither food nor clothing is spoken of. 
Thus 1944974 or rewra '(IV. 3. 134)' gabad or #ta (IV. 3. 135) .Why do we say भाषायाम् 'in secular language'? Witness लालादिया 
Why do we say 'when neither food nor clothing is spoken of '? Observe मोरः सपः 'a soup made of kidney beans'. कापांखरमाच्छादनम् । 
Why the word gaat: 'in those two meanings' is used in the satra, 
Its use indicates that the special affixes, such as taught in IV. 3. 135, 136 &c are replaced also by मयर ।। Thus कपोतमवम् or कापोतम् (IV. 3. 135) लोहमयन् or लोहम्॥ 
नित्यं वृखशरादिभ्यः ॥ १४४॥ पदानि । नित्यम्, पर-शरादिभ्यः (मय). प्रतिः ॥ भाषायाममस्याच्छावनयोरित्येवा देयमातिपदिकेन्यः परादिश्वमानस्वाछारमयोर्विकारापन पापायां विषये निस्वं मय प्रत्ययो भवति। 
जाना 
800 
विकारापवायो-मवर 
( BK. IV. CH. III. 1. 184 
... 144. The affix मय comes in the sense of its pro duct or part, when neither food nor clothing is spoken of, in variably after Vriddha words, and after शर&c.. .. . . Thus after Vriddha-भासमयम, बालमयम, शाकमयम् ॥ After परादि words: 
धरमयम्,हमयम, मृन्मयम् । 
" Why do we use the word fateat: 'invariably' in the satra, when by the mere fact of making a separate satra, the affix would be obligatory. The affix at, according to Patanjali comes invariably after words of one syllable. 
That is done by using the word force in the sætra. Thus, 
N 1 , 6*244, বা । 
__ 1 पर, बर्म, 3 मृत्, 4 कुटी. 5 तृण, 6 सोम, 7 बल्वन (पास) 
गोश्च पुरीपे ॥ १४५॥ पदानि । गो, च-पुरीये। पचिः ॥ गोधमापुरीपे ऽभिधेये मयद् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
145. affix मय comes after the word गो in the sense of its dung.' 
Thus 1144'cow dung' Dang' is neither a modification nor a part of cow. Therefore this separate sätra for au Why do we say meaning 'its dung'? Observe - milk. The affix T here comes in the sense of product or part. (IV. 3. 160), though strictly speaking ‘milk' also is not an "avayava' or a 'vikara' of ou : पिष्टाच॥ १४६॥ पदानि । पिष्टात्-च। 
वृचिः॥ पिष्टशब्दान्नित्यं मयर प्रत्ययो भवति तस्य विकारहत्येतस्मिविषये, ऽणोपवादः॥ 
146. The affix frue invariably comes in the sense of its product or part, after the word POEN 
This debars stoli Thus forte TFTH Otherwise was, as det go in the sense of तस्येवम् ।। - संज्ञायां कन् ॥ १४७॥ पदानि । संक्षायां-कन्। 
पिटशदाकन् प्रत्ययो भवति विकारे संज्ञायां विषये। मयटोपवायः॥ 
147. The affix कन् comes in the sense of product, after the word fre, the whole word being a Name. 
___ This debars मयद् ॥ As पिष्टकः। 
धीहेः पुरोडाशे ।.१४८ ॥ पदानि । धीहे:-पुरोडाशे (मयद) । . शंसः ॥ वाशिबान्मय प्रत्ययो भवति पुरोडाचे विकारे । बिल्वापणोपवाः ।। 
: : 148. The affix my comes after the word fint in the sense of a Purodása.' 
BK. IV. CH. III. 100] 
कारावनी: बर।। 
&o 
This debars अप (IV. 3. 136). Thus श्रीहिमवः पुरोगधः 'a sacred cake made of barley. Otherwise 
__ असंज्ञायां तिलयवाभ्याम् ॥ १४९ ॥ पदानि । भसंज्ञायाम, तिल-यवाभ्याम् ॥ पतिः ॥ तिलवषयमा धामसंज्ञाविपये मवर प्रत्ययो भवति रिकाराषवषयोरर्ययोः॥ 
149. The afix मय comes in the sense of its pro- . duct or part,' after the words ' tila' and 'yava'--the whole not being a name. 
Thus formation, 07444, # Why do we say manara "it not being a Namesto Observe the same oil,' : formed with 1 (aritmet V. 4. 29) 
चयश्छन्दसि ॥ १५० ॥ पदानि । प्रच:-छन्दसि (मयद)। . अमिः ॥ यः प्रातिपरिकाच् छम्पास विषये मय प्रत्ययो भवति विकारावयवयोरर्पयोः॥ 
150. In the Chhandas, after a dissyllabic word, the affix Here comes in the sense of its product or part.' 
This ordains Tuk in the sacred literature also, secular literature being dealt with in IV.3143. Thus पर्णमयः, पर्भमयः, परमय in the following बस्य पर्णमयी जापति, पर्ममयम् पासो भवति, घरमथम् हिमवति । . नोत्त्वद्वबिल्वात् ॥ १५१ ॥ पदानि ॥ न-उत्वत्-बर्द्ध-पिल्वाद (मय)॥ 
वृत्तिः॥ रस्वतः प्रातिपरिकारविल्वयम्दाभ्यां च मयर प्रत्ययो न भवति । 
151. The affix here does not come in the Chhandas after the dissyllabic words, having a short vowel 5 in them, nor after the words 'vardhra' and bilwa.' 
Thus मौन शिक्यम from मुम्न by मण् । गात पक्रम, पार्षी पालप्रमथिता भपति बल्यो ब्रह्मवर्षसकामेन कार्यः। 
The word TTT means 'having Th or short u (I. 1. 70)' The rule does not apply to words containing long a, as भूममयान्यवाण. Ther in रत्वत् shows that the rule applies not only to words ending in , but also to words having 7. Had not been used, the tadanta-vidhi would require the application of the rule to words ending in , but not to those which had 7 in any other part of their form. So that the prphibition applies to m also, as वेणवीयटिः (IV. 3. 136), 
The word sy is ady-udatta by morniai (Phit II. 4): and therefore it takes the universal भण् (IV. 3. 134). The word गर्म is formed by the affix उत् plus the augment मर (मप्रातः , पाम Un I.94 and 95), and is finally acute and therefore it takes We by IV. 3. 140, and forms true w This word has 
Box' : 
विकाराववषयोः-मम्॥ 
(BK. IV. CH. III. S IO4 
acute on the inal also, as सस्था एवं गार्म पर निर्दयत् ॥ The word पर्भ is ady. 
नगर (IV. 1. 15) 
तालादिभ्योण् ॥ १५२॥ पदानि ॥ तालादिभ्यः, मण् । निः॥ वालापियःप्रातिपदिके यो ऽण् प्रत्ययो भवति विकारावयश्योरर्ययोः । मयादीनामपवादः ।। 
152. The affix per comes in the sense of its pro duct or part', after the words "tala &c'. 
This debars मय &c. Thus ताल धनुः, बाहिणम्, ऐनालियम् ॥ 
तालाबनुषि, बाहिण, इन्द्रालि, हिन्द्राध, उन्नायुध, 6षय (पाप, वर्ग), 7 या. माक, 8 पीयूसा. 
जातरूपेभ्यः परिमाणे ॥ १५३ ॥ पदानि ॥ जातरूपेभ्यः-परिमाणे (अ)। वृत्तिः॥ जातरूप सुवर्णम् । बहुपचमनिशास्तशाचिनः सर्वे प्रयन्ते । मातरूपवापिन्छः प्रातिपदिके यो ऽम् प्रत्ययो भवति परिमाणे विकारे । मयादीनामपवारा॥ 
____153. The affix मण् comes after a word denoting gold', when the sense is a weight or measure. 
The word arany means 'gold'. It is used in the plural in the satra, indicating that all words synonymous with gold are to be taken. 
This debars मय &c. Thus हाटको निष्कः, हाटकं कार्पापणम्, मातरूपर, ताप 
Why do we say meaning a measure': Observe यष्टिरिय हाटकमयी । - प्राणिरजतादिभ्यो ||१५४॥ प्राणि-रजतादिभ्यः-अभ. 
सिः॥मामिवाषिभ्यःप्रातिपदिके यो रजतादिस्यमाम् प्रत्ययो भवति विकारावयवधोरर्ययोः ।भणारी भामपवारा॥ 
. 154. The affix भम् comes in the sense of its pro duct or part', after words expressing living beings, and after रजत &c. 
This debars vry &c. The affix has been ordained to come' after those words that have anudatta in the beginning. This sätra applies to words other than those having anudatta in the beginning -. Thus:-कापोतम् , मायूरम्, निरम् ; राजतम्, सैसम् ; लोहम्, &c. In the class रजतादि those words like रजत, कण्टकार &c, which have anudatta on the beginning and would have taken by IV. 3. 140, have been enumerated to prevent the application of free to them. 
रमत, सीस, 3 लोह.4 उदुम्बर, उनीप (मीच, मील), 6.बार, रोहतक (रोहितक). 
रायपयार BK. IV. CH. III. 156] 
विकारापवायो-मम् ।। 
भितम तत्प्रत्ययात् । १५५॥ पदानि । मिता-स-सत्-प्रत्ययादा इतिः॥भप्रित्येष रिति रिकारापरबोरर्पयोः प्रबदमभिपोषिकापवयमस्ववस्तरन्तावादित रिकाम्प्रत्ययो भवति विकारापयवयोरेगा नवोपचार 
155. The affix it comes in the sense of its pro duct or part', after a word which ends with an affix having an indicatory s such affix denoting 'its product or part'. 
The affixes having indicatory # denoting product or part, are (IV. 3. 139) लम् (IV. 3. 142) भम् (IV. 3. 154) पुम् (IV. 3. 157) (IV. 3. 159), भर, पम् (IV.s. 168) When a tertiary derivative of a word ending with these affixes is to be made, the affix भम् is used. Thus पदारपस्व विकारोजवतो पा-बसरख , so also धिल्पन, पालघर, धामीलर, कापोवन भीष्टकर ऐणेवर, कांस्वम्, पारधर 
Why do we say mo? Witness trait. Here he is used after the and the derivative is formed by मर of IV. 3. 136. So also हमवत् ॥ . 
क्रीतवत्परिमाणात् ॥ १५॥ पदानि क्रीतवत्-परिमाणात् ।। इतिः ॥ प्राग्वतष्ठभियत भारथकीतायें ये प्रत्ययाः परिमाणादिहितास्ते विकारप्रविदिश्यन्ते। परिमाणात क्रीत प्रत्यया भवन्ति तस्व विकार हत्येतस्मिन्विषयेभणादीनामपचार 
166. After a word denoting 'a measure', the affix expressing its product or part' is the same as the affix having the sense of purchased. . 
The affixes taught in V. 1. 18 &c are the affixes that have the force of क्रीत (V. I.37). These affixes come also after words denoting measure (V. 1. 19) The same affixes are employed to denote fart, after words denoting परिमाण॥ This debars मा &c. Thus निष्केन कीतम्- मेकिकम् (V. I. 20); It will denote vikara also, निकस्य विकार:-मैम्किका formed by s(V.I. 20) As पतेनकीतं-प्रत्वं or सिकन् (V. 1.21), so घसस्व विकार-स्व. or प्रतिक by re and यत् (V. I. 21), सहलेणी -साहबन् (V. .27) so सहमस्व विकारः-खास: (V. I. 27 by भ). 
The word " in miru indicates that the similarity is complete throughout. Thus Satra V. 1. 28 also applies, by which the affix is clided. As fia: or farge: (V. 1. 29), fifaa: or financial The word aftator in this satra includes संख्या 'the, numerals' also; while the technical word परिमाण does not include sankhya. See IV. 1. 22 and V. 1. 19 &c. The similarity extends even to the elision of affix (V. 1. 28) as, fiach, farm: &c. . . उष्ट्राम् ॥ १५७ ॥ पदानि ॥ उष्ट्रात, खुम् ॥ 
पतिः ।। उदामाद्यम् प्रत्ययो भवति विकारावयवयोरथयो । प्राण्यमोपचार . .. : :: 
: . फले मु 
[ BK. IV. CH. III. 162 
mum 
AAAAAAAAI 
157. The affix rt comes in the sense of its product or part', after the word 'ushtra. 
___This debars मम् (IV. 3. 154), उष्ट्रस्य विकारोऽवयवो वा-मोष्ट्रका . उमोर्णयोर्वा ॥ १५८॥ पदानि ॥ उमा-ऊणयो-वा (खु)॥ । 
वृषिः॥ उमाशापूर्णाधम्दाप पा इम् प्रत्ययो भवति विकारावयपयोरर्ययोः। .. . 158. The afix वुम् comes optionally in the sense 
of its product or part, after the words उमा and ऊर्णाः 
___Thus मोमम् or मोमकर, मौर्णम् or मौर्णकम् ॥ . एण्या हम् ।। १५९ ॥ पदानि ॥ एण्या, दम्॥ पत्तिः ॥ एणीभन्दा राम् प्रत्ययो भवति विकारावयवयोरर्ययोः । प्राण्यमोपवादः॥ . . .159. The affix est comes in the sense of 'its pro duct or part,' after the feminine word dit a 
Thus ऐणेयं मांसम् 'the flesh of a female black deer.' But एणस्य मासम्-ऐ णम् 'the flesh of a male deer', formed by म ॥ 
गोपयसोर्यत् ॥ १६०॥ पदानि ॥ गो-पयसोः, यत् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ गोपयः शयां यत् प्रत्ययो भवति विकारावयवयोरर्थयो। 
160. The affix यत् comes in the sense of its pro duct or part, after the words गो and पयस् । 
Thus गध्यम् (VI. I.79), पयस्यम् ॥ द्रोश्च ॥ १६१॥ पदानि ॥ द्रो, च॥ निः॥ दुखदायत्रत्ययो भवति विकारावयवयोरर्ययोः। मोरमोपवाद . 
161. The affix ha comes in the sense of its pro duct or part' after the word ' dru.' 
This debars भम् (IV. 3. 139), Thus t+यत्-द्रव्यम् (VI. 1.79), - माने वयः ॥ १२ ॥ पदानि ॥ माने-चयः॥ 
कृत्तिः ॥ दुशब्दान्माने विकारविशेषे वयः प्रत्ययो भवति । यतापवादः 
162. The affix वय comes in the sense of its pro. duct,' after the word dru,' the word meaning a measure.' 
___ This debars यत् ॥ As दुवयम् ' a measure.' 
लक्॥१६३॥ पदानि ॥ फले, लज॥ वृत्तिः॥विकारयवयोरुत्पन्नस्य फले ताधिषे विषक्षित हुन् भवति ॥ . 
A 
BK. IV. CL. III. 3166.1 
फले श... 
805 
- 
___163. The affix denoting 'product or part' is elided . by luk, when such product or part is a fruit.' 
_Thus मामलस कर्म-मामलकी + मय स-मामल+ the fruit of Myrobolans. So also परम् ॥ The fruit is a product" as well as a part of a fruit-bearing tree. 
पक्षादिभ्योए ॥ १६४ ॥ पदानि ॥ पक्षादिभ्यः-मण् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ फलहत्येव । एक्षारिधः शविपरिक यः पले विकायपवलेन विवक्षिते ऽ प्रत्ययो भवति । म. मोपचार॥ . 
164. The affix hue comes in the sense of its pro duct or part, it being a fruit,' after the word 'plaksha &c. 
___ This debars भम् ॥ Thus प्लान मेवोपमा 
सन्यपोष, ३ मश्वत्य, मुदी, 5 गिम, 6 रूरू, 7 कमनु ( कर्कन्ध, कर्वन्तु पान) हवी.. 
जम्या वा ॥ १६५ ॥ पदानि ॥ जम्याः -घा (अ)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ फलहत्येव । अग्रवालले भिधेये पाय प्रत्ययो भवति । ममोपवादः॥ 
• 165. The affix stere comes optionally in denoting a fruit, after the word 'jamba'. 
This debars मम्॥ Thus अनु+मण-जाम्बवं as मानवानि फलानि . But when the general affix भम् is added, it is elided by IV. 3. 163. As अम्+भम् (IV. 3. 139)- मा, as अम्पनि फलानि (VI.48). 
लए च ॥ १६६ ॥ पदानि ।। लप-च ॥ वृत्तिः॥ वेत्येव । अम्बाः फलेभिधये प्रत्ययस्थ वा लन् भवति । अनारदाने विशेषः। पातिकम् ॥ लुप्पकरणे फलपाकपुषामुपसंख्यामम् ।। वार्निकम् ॥ पुष्पमूलेषु बहुलम् । 
166. The affix denoting fruit is optionally elided. by lup after the word 'jamba'. 
The word " is understood here. The difference between luk' and lup' elision is that in the case of 'lup', there is concordance of gender and number. 
• See satra I. 2. SI. Thus जबभिमूलुए-जम्मू:, as, जम्मूः फलं ॥ Optionally अम्बार फलं-अम् फलं, or जाम्बवं 
Vårt:--There is lup-elision of the affix denoting fruit, after the words .expressing deciduous plants which wither away as soon as the fruit ripens: 
Thus ब्रीहिः-नीहयः, यवा, मापा, ममाः, तिला 
Vart :-Diversely so when the affix denotes flowers and roots : as. मालकायां प - मलिका, नवमलिका जातिः, so also विदार्या मूल-विरारी॥ ममती रहती। 
8o6 
[ BK. IV.CH. III. 8 168 
In the above example there is concordance. By using diversely', this con cordance does not sometime take place As पाडलानि पुमाणि, मालानि मूलानि ॥ So कदम्ब पुणं, मधोकम, करवीरम, शानि फलानि &c. .. हरीतक्यादिभ्यश्च ॥ १६७ ॥ पदानि ॥ हरीतक्यादिभ्यः-च॥ 
वृतिः ॥ हरीतकी इत्येवमादिभ्यः पन्दभ्यः फले प्रत्ययस्य र भवति । लुकिमाने लपो विधाने पुकारावे श्रीमत्ययश्रवणे विषपः॥ 
__. 167. The affix denoting fruit' is elided by लप, after the words 'Haritaki' &c. 
Here also there is concordance (I. 2.51), As हरीतस्याः फल-हरीतकी instead of all So also iturrat, Tacuri According to Patanjali, the concordance is with regard to gender only, the number will be governed by the sense, as हरीतकी फल, हरीतक्यः फलानि । 
हिरीतकी, 2 कोशातकी, 3 नखरजनी (नखरजनी) कण्डी (पाकण्री) री, 6 पोडी, 7 श्वेतपाकी, भर्सनपाकी, द्राक्षा, 10 काम, पासा (पाक्षा)12 गभीका (गगरिका) 13 कण्टकारिका, 14 पिप्पली', 13 चिम्चा (चिम्पा), 16 फालिका, 174.. 
कंसीयपरशव्ययोर्यानो लुक् च ॥ १६८ ॥ पदानि ॥ कंसीय-परशम्ययोः, यत्रः अनौ, लक्-च । वृत्तिः ॥ प्राक्कीताच्छेन कंसीयः । रगवादिभ्यो यत् । परमभ्यः । कंसीयपरशष्यशश यां यथासंख्य ब भनौ प्रत्ययो भवतस्तस्य विकार इत्येतस्मिविषय, तसंनियोगेन प कंसीयपरपथ्ययोलग् भवति । 
! 168. The affixes Ty, and are come respectively in the sense of its product', after the words 'kansiya' and 'paras avya', and there is luk-elision (of the 3 and a affixes of those words). 
The word uta: is formed by 5 (V. 1. 1), and grey is formed by adding बत् (V. 1. 2). These affixes r and an are elided when the affixes यम् and भम् are added. Thus कंसीय+य-कंख+ यम्-कांस्थ: so also पारश from परशष्य thus .परणय भम् पर+भम् पारशः । 
The words *** mean there shall be elision'. Of what? Certainly not of the primitive, for at is never applied to the elision of a base, but of an affix only (I. 1, 61, It follows therefore that the clision is of the affixes of wella and qug # Now these words have two affixes, thus. To the root ang is added first the Unadi affix स (Un III.62)and we get कंस ; next to कंस is added छ. So also to पर+yis added the affix3 (Un I. 33) and we have परण, to which is then added an and we have it The question arises, should these affixes स and r be also elided. The answer is 'no'. The word प्रातिपदिकात् of IV. 1. ! is understood is this sätra ; so the clision will take place of those affixos only 
BK IV CM III § 168. ] 
807 
which follow a prátipadika. But and are added to a Dhatu and not a pratipadika, hence those affixes are saved from the operation of u 
The word goed being gravely accented on the first (VI. 1. 185) irould have taken up by IV. 3. 140. The present sätra teaches the elision only of its affix being already obtained. 
Q. The final # of titta and a will be elided by VI. 4. 148 before these taddhita affixes, and after such clision, the final will be elided by VI. 4. 150, where is then the necessity of this stra? 
A. The final u will not be elided, because VI. 4. 150 will apply only then, when an affix beginning with long follows, which is not the case here. 
ओ३म् । अथ चतुर्थाध्यायस्य चतुर्थः पादः । 
BOOK FOURTH. 
CHAPTER FOURTE. 
प्राग्वहतेष्ठक ॥ १॥ पदानि ॥ प्राक्-वहतेः, ठक् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ तदहति स्ययुगमासमिति पश्यति । प्रागतस्मादहति संघदनाबानाननुक्रमिष्यामः, ठक् प्रत्य यस्तधिकतो वेदिवष्यः । 
वार्तिकम् ॥ उपकरणे ताहोत माशब्दादिभ्य उपसंख्यानम् । पा०॥ भाहोमभूतादिभ्यः ॥ पा०॥ पृच्छतो सुस्मातापियः॥ पा०॥ मच्छतो परतारादिभ्यः॥ . 
1. The affix 5 comes as a governing affix, in the senses enumerated hereafter up to sutra IV. 4. 76. 
This is an adhikara satra. The affix bears rule from this one for ward to the satra Hurta &c. Thus in the next sätra it is said ; "After a word in the third case in construction, in the sense of "who plays, digs, con quers, or is conquered." Now this sotra is incomplete. We must read the word into it. Thus fegra STT: " who plays with aksha-a dicer.' 
मक्ष+क्-माक्षिका (VII. 3. 50) 
____Vart:-After the words माशब्द &c, the affix thak' comes in the sense " he said that' Thus H F FRITG = ATUTETT: who says 'don't make noise,' ar 
शामिकः ॥ This is the case of an affix added to a sentence 
Vart:-So also after प्रभूत &c in the sense 'he said': as प्रभूतमाह-प्रातिका, पायर्यापिकः ॥ These are examples of affixes added to an adverb. 
Vart:-So also after सुस्नात &c in the sense 'he asks,' as, सस्नानं पृच्छति -सोनातिका “Who asks, have you bathed well". साखराजिका, सोखचायनिकः ।। 
Vart:-So also after परदारा &c in the sense of the goes to, or commits adultery with: as परदारान् गच्छति-पारवारिका, गौरतल्पिक | The word तल्प here refers to " wife". 
तेन दीव्यति खनति जयति जितम् ॥ २॥ पदानि ॥ तेन-दीव्यति-खनति-जयति जितम् ॥ इपिःसनेति सतीयासमाई दीव्यति खनाति जयति भितमिलेतेपर्येषु ठक् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
BK. IV. Ch. IV.. 
. 
809 
MAHARAM 
2. The affix it comes after a word in the third case in construction, in the sense of, he plays', 'he digs', ' he conquers' or 'he is conquered'. 
Thus waffare -- who plays with dice-a dicer'. Traian माया खनति-माधिकः, कावदालिका, भर्जयति-भाक्षिक, मजित-मासिकम् ॥ मालाकिकम् । 
Though the rule is couched in universal terms, yet the affix docs not come after every instrumental case. Thus देवरत्नेन जितम् will not give rise to any affix, for the word is not found in usage having this sense. So also भंगल्या खमति gives rise to no affix. Though the verbs 'divyati' &c, are in the 3rd Person Present Tense, Singular number, the derivative is not limited by these conditions. Thus m ht and what are also valid, and so also भारतीयत् will give also भाक्षिका; so also भातिकस्वम् मासकोहम् ॥ Though in a sentence the verb is generally the principal word (कियामधान), here owing to the Taddhita affix, the instrument is taken as the principal. ___ संस्कृतम् ॥३॥ पदानि । संस्कृतम् (उह)॥ 
पतिः । तेनेति तृतीयासमयसंस्कृतमित्येतस्मिन्न सत्ययो भवति । 
3. The affix 7 comes after a word in the third case in construction, in the sense of refined thereby'. 
The word dat means refining or enhancing the quality of a thing. Thus ना संस्कृत-पाधिकम् 'refined or made tasteful by curd'. So also शाईवरिकर, मारीषिकम् ॥ 
The separation of this sūtra from the last, is for sake of the next sätra, in which the anuvritti of ra only runs, 
कुलत्यकोपधादण् ॥ ४॥ पदानि कुलत्थ-कोपधाद-अण्॥ वृणिः ॥ कुलस्यपदास्ककारोपवाछवाय प्रातिपदिकादम् प्रत्ययो भवति संस्कृतमित्येतस्मिन्निपये । उकोपवा. 
4. Ofter the word 'kulattha', and after words hav ing a penultimate F, the affix sur is added in the sense of 'refined or prepared therewith'. 
___ This debars ठक् ॥ Thus कोलस्यम्, तेसिडीकर, हाईभकम्, the two latter be ing examples of words ending in &u __तरति ॥५॥ पदानि । तरति (ठक)। 
वृतिः ॥सेनेति तृतीयासमर्थात् तरसास्येतस्मिन्नये क् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
5. The affix 59 comes after a word in the third case in construction, in the sense of he crosses there by over the waters'. 
810 
भाजपानसात् ॥ 
[ BK. IV. CH. IVIS 
UP 
Thus काण्डप्लनतरति-काउप्लविका, मोषिक: •who crosses with a raft:. . गोपुच्छा ॥६॥ पदानि गोपुच्छाद-उम्॥ इत्तिः ॥ गोपुछपना सत्ययो भवति तरतीत्येतस्मिन्मर्षे कोपर 
6. The affixus comes after the word 'gopuchchha', in the sense of the crosses thereby'. 
The difference between 8 and 9 is in the accent. Thus Higros : नौयचष्ठन् ॥७॥ पदानि ।। नौ-चच-उन् । वृत्तिः । नायबार न्याय प्रातिपदिकारन् प्रत्ययो भवति वरतीत्येतस्मिन्मयः। कोपवायः॥ Kdrika भाकत्तिारमारिया कसीरसचाया 
मवासथास्किपरा:पितः परेनेगधिकारे। 
7. The affix of comes after the word it and after bases having two syllables, in the sense of he crosses there with': 
___This debars ठक्॥ Thus मावा तरति माविका 'a sailor'. So also after dissyllabic words: as, पटिका, प्लविका, माहुकार ॥ 
The ins in the satra is not part of the affix, but comes through sandhi rules. The feminine of 18 being at it In fact the indicatory occurs in these sätras only IV. 4. 9, 10, 18, 53 and 74, in this book. 
· चरति ॥८पदानि । चरति (उ) . . वृतिः ॥ देनेति तृतीयासमर्थापरतीत्येतस्मिन्न डक्प्रत्ययो भवति । 
8. After a word in the third case in construction, comes the affix 69 in the sense of he goes on by means thereof'. 
The word चरति means both togoon and to eat. Thus धारति हाधिक 'who gets on, with being fed on curd, हशीस्सका 'who travels by an eliphant'. पाकटिक 
आकर्षान्छल ॥९॥ पदानि । माकांत-छल । हतिः ॥ भाकर्षमान छन् प्रत्ययो भवति परतीत्येतस्मिन्न । कोपगाः॥ 
9. The affix gay.comes in the sense of 'he goes on, by means there of' after the word 'âkarsha.' 
.. This debars s|| Ther is for accent (VI. I. 193). The cof here is a part of the affix, contrary to what it was in sâtra 7 ante. To remove the doubt where is the part of an affix, and where it is not, the following mre monic verse has been composed : "माकापत पपविभन्नादिभ्यः कुसीदसवाच, भावसपार 
BK IV.CH. IV. 
J 
नपाति-म् । 
. 
किशोपितः परेणाधिकारे In the six Sotras 9 10, 16, 31,74,and s3, the affix es have indicatory 'sh' Herer being the feminine is formed by my (IV. 1.41) Thus भाकक्प ति-भाकर्षिकभार्षिकी भावर्षsatouch-stone by which gold is tested. 
पादिभ्यः पन्.१०॥ पदानि । पपादिभ्यः ।। पनिः॥पयेषमारिया छत् प्रत्ययो भवति परतीवेतस्मिन्मये। कोपगा। 
10. The affix BT comes, in the sense of he goes on, by means there of" after the words 'parpa' &c. . 
This debars on the of ra is for accent (VI. 1. 1o9h and (IV. 1.41), Thus पर्पिकः पर्पिकी, मनिका भधिकी। परिका परिकी, The 977 is changed to y before this affix (VI. 3. 52) 
1 पर्प, भय, भव्य, 'त्य, शाल, न्याख, स्याल, पाप . भ्यगणाच॥ ११॥ पदानि । श्वगणात ठम। पनि भगषणमादाम् मत्ययो भवति, पकान, परतीत्येवलिन कोषाः 
11. The affix ठञ् as well as the affix gन्, comes after the word gevor, in the sense of "he goes on by means there of 
This debars # Thus wordra Te m poranea 'who lives by dogs: शागणिकी । , अंगणिका गणिका । . The form भागणिक: is evolved by the breach of rule VII. 3.4 Thus भगव+म्॥ Here by VII. 2117, requires Vriddhi ofw ofy. But rule VII. 3. 4 says that instead of Vriddhi, the letter at comes before in the case of &c. The proper form, therefore, would have been utrus: # The irre gularity is, however, explained by saying that thc prohibition contained in VII. 3. 8 which applies when is followed by applies also to follow ed by In fact, the rule VII. 3. 4 does not apply, whenever the word te is followed by an affix beginning with the letter å 
घेतनादिभ्यो जीवति ॥ १२॥ पदानि । धेतनादिया, जीवति । पतिः ॥ सेनेति हतीयासमय-धो पेतनादिन्यः पदेथो मीवमित्येतस्मिन्न प्रत्ययो भवति। 
12. The affix is comes in the sense of the lives thereby', after the words 'vetana &c', being in the third case in construction. 
Thus पेतनेन जीवति-वैतनिक: 'who lives upon wages-amenial servant: . In the case of the word who the affix applies to the compounds, as well as 
to the words forming the compound. Thas भानुण्डिकर, पानुष्का, तायिक 
82 
नाविता 
. 
BK. IV..CH.. IV. P. 16.] 
. . वेतन, वाहन (वार),मवाहन (मवार) धरः उमाल, 6 वेध (पेस), " अपवेध (उपवेष, उपख),प्रेषण, पपस्ति (पति),10 सुख, शय्या, 12 कि, 13 पनि पए, 14 उपरेध, 15 किर' (स्किन), 16 पार, 17 उपस्थ, 18 उपस्थान, 19 उपहल, 20 महः । 
पस्नक्रयविक्रयान् ॥ १३॥ पदानि वस्न, क्रय, विक्रयात्, उन्। शनिः ॥ वनक्रयविक्रययम्वाभ्यां तृतीयासमर्या या उन्मत्ययो भवति भीवतीत्येतस्मिन्विषये । कोपाः 
13. The affix It comes in the sense of he lives thereby' after-the words 'vasna', 'kraya', and ‘vikraya', being in the 3rd case in construction. . This debars s " Thus वस्नेन जीवति-पस्निका 'who lives by hire--hire ling'. In the case of 6 and for the affix is applied to the words separately, as well as to their compound. Thus कयविक्रयिका कयिका, विऋषिक: a trader'. 
आयुधाच्छ च ॥ १४॥ पदानि ॥ आयुधात, छ, च । इतिः ॥ भायुधधमाच्छमत्ययो भवति, चकाराम जीवतीत्येवस्मिन्विपये। 
14. The affix 3 as well as ot comes in the sense of he lives thereby', after the word 'ayudha'. . . 
Thus मायुधेन जीवति -मायुधीयः (formed by s), or भायुधिकः (by म्) '. mercenary soldier'. ___ हरत्युत्सङ्गादिभ्यः ॥ १५॥ पदानि । हरति, उत्सङ्गादिभ्यः। 
पतिः ॥ तेनेत्येव । उत्सङ्गादिभ्यस्ततीयासम यो हरतीत्येतस्मिन्नये ठक् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
. 15. The affix ठक comes in the sense of the con 
• veys thereby', after the words utsanga &c. being in the third case in construction. 
The word fra means 'to take away to or cause to reach another place'. Thus मौसनिक 'borne upon the hip'. मौपिकः 'borme or transported on a raft'. 
1 उत्सक उडप, ३ उपुत (उत्पत), लन्न, रखुट',6पिटक, पिटाक, प. भखादिभ्यः छन् ॥ ११ ॥ पदानि । भस्त्रादिभ्यः, छन् । वृत्तिः ॥ भवेत्येवमादिभ्यस्तृतीयासमय यो हरतीत्येतस्मिन्न अन्यत्ययो भवति 
16. The affix gt comes, in the sense of he con veys', after the words 'bhastra &c' being in the third case in construction, 
___ Thus भखया हरति भषिकः "who conveys by means of . a leathern bag, acarrier". The feminine will be भस्त्रिकी (IV. 1.41). So भरटिका भरटिकी| The 
1. [ BK. IV. CH. IV. 3.19 
न निक 
8iz: 
word opp means a leathern bellows by which the iron is heated, or a leathern bag in which grain &c, is carried 
1मबा, भरत, 3 भरण (भारण), पीर्षभार, चोभार, 6 मसभा, मेखबार.. विमाषा विवधीवधात् ॥१७॥ पदानि । विभाषा, विवध, धीषधाद। । पिरतीत्येव । विधवीरपणा या हतीयासमर्यान्यां विभाषा छन् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
17. The affix yet comes optionally in the sense of 'he conveys', after the words 'vivadha', and vivadha', being. in the third case in construction. 
In the altemative, the general affix re will apply. Thus frata da -विधिक विवधिकी; so also पविधिक पीवधिकी, when the affix is s, we have देवधिक in both cases, the feminine being देवाधिकी। 
The word for and for 'are synomyms both meaning "a piece of wood carried on the shoulders to carry loads, on the road.' विवधिक meaning 'a carrier of loads, a pedler'. The real sutra is विमापा विधात, the Kasika hai added for from a Vartika __ भएकुटिलिकायाः॥ १८॥ पदानि । भए, कुटिलिकाया। 'पतिः॥ हरतीत्येव । कुटिलिकायनात् तृतीयासमवण प्रत्ययो भवति हरतीत्येतस्मिन्न : 
18. The affix भण comes, in the sense of 'he con veys', after the word stafoot in the third case in construction. 
Thus कुटिलिकया हरति मृगी प्या-कौटिलिको मृगः 'adeer which carries (or entices away) into crooked ways' or 'a hunter who hunts by coming stealthily on his prey'. कुटिलिकया इरति भारान-कोटिलिकः कारः 'a blacksmith,-who carries burning coals on an iron forge'. 
The word gefragt means 'crooked motion, and the iron-forge of the blacksmiths'. 
निवृत्ते क्षयूतादिभ्यः ॥ १९॥ निर्वृत्ते, अक्ष, पूतादिभ्यः । वृधिः ॥ तेनेत्येव । मातादिश्वस्तृतीयासम-यो भिईशान्येतस्मिन्नर्थे डक् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
. . 19. The affix ठन् comes, in the sense of 'comple ted thereby' after the words 'akshadyota &c',being in the third case in construction. . 
Thus मक्षएतेन निईनम् -भासयतिकं वरम् 'enmity-which was growing but has been completed by gambling'. So मानुमहतिकम् ॥ 
1मभात,मानुपहत (भहत ), 3 अपापहत ('प्रहूत), अपामात' : पारस्वेदन, 6 कण्टकमर्दन, 7 गतानुगत',8गतागत, मातोपमान, 10 भगव.।। 
-814 
नसोदा 
[ BK. IV. CH IV. 1.2.. 
नित्यम् ॥ २०॥ पदानित,मए, नित्यम् । पतिः ॥ निपात्येव, दिना निरित्यवं विधम्मो गयो । पन्नाम्नित्वं मा प्रत्ययो भवति 
20. The affix ng comes always after the words ending in the affix ro, the in sense of 'completed thereby', 
The fo here refers to the affixktri' (III. 3. 88). Thus the root takes it and forms grin, which is not a complete word, but must take the augment म, to form a full word. Thus पर+दिन+म-पश्चिमम् 'what is completed by being cooked'. So from दुपए we have q+कि+म-राक्षिम (VI. I. IS): from उकए we have कपिमम् । 
The word pen in the satra indicates that the affix ft never comes singly by itself, all words ending in Ktri are invariably followed by it also In fact # way be regarded as an invariable augment of the affix Ktri'. 
Vart:-After a word ending in an affix denoting 'condition', the affix हमर is added. Thus पाकन निईन-पाकिमम् (पर+पम् IIL. 3. 18+इम) 30 त्यागिमम्, किमन, कहिमम् ।। 
अपमित्ययाचिताभ्यां ककनौ ॥ २१॥ पदानि । अपमित्य-याचिताभ्याम, क मिः ॥ नितहत्येव । भपमित्ययापिताम्वाभ्यां थयासंख्य कक् कम् इत्येतो प्रत्ययो भवतो, निवृत्ताचे तस्मिन्मथै 
21. The affixes “kak' and 'kan' come respective ly after the words 'apamitya' and 'yachita', when the sense is that of completion. 
Thus मापमित्यकम 'debt', and चापिसकम् ' a thing begged for use'. The word wife is formed from the root with the prefix y, and the suffix ir (III. 4. 19. The r is changed to run, and r substituted for T (VI. 4. 70). The word is an Indeclinable, and therefore the anuvritti of my does not run here. 
संसटे ॥ २२॥ पदानि ॥ संस्ष्टे, ठक पतिः ॥ देनेत्येव । हतीयासमर्थात्संसृष्टात्येतस्मिन्नर्षे उक् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
22. The affix conies, after a word in the third case in construction, when the sense is mixed therewith.' 
The word ay is understood here. The word are means unification, mixing &c. Thus मा संसर-दाधिकम् 'smeared with curds' मारिषिकम, धाईरिकर पैपालिकम्॥ The word 'sanskrtam' (IV.43). and 'sansrshtam' should be distinguished. The former refers to a case where by the combination of two things, a something better is produced ; no such idea of bettering is to be found in HIFT * 
BK. IV. CH. IV.. 
पर्वते । 
815 
पूर्णादिनिः ॥ २५॥ पदानि पूर्णव, रनिः।. .. पतिः पूर्णम्मासिनि प्रत्ययो भवति संसटे । कोपाः । 
23. The affix a comes after the word "charna' when the sense is mixed therewith.' 
This debars re # Thus proteger foran s gar: •cakes sprinkled with powder.'मार्णनो पानाः। 
लवणाल्लुरु ॥ २४॥ पदानिलवणात, लुन्। इतिः ॥बस्टरव्यनेनोसन्मस्वरको वनमाला भवति। 
24. The afir ठक meaning 'mixed therewith', is elided by luk, after the word lavana.' 
____ Thus लवणेन संसार:-सवण: 'mixed with salt asपणः सुपर 'soup mixed with salt' Soलपर्ण पार्क, लवणा यपगः (I.1.51), Theopelision takes place when the word maar is used as a noun, and not as an adjective 
मुद्गादण् ॥ २५॥ पदानि मुद्गाद, मम्। पतिः ॥ पदारए प्रत्ययो भवति संस्थास्येसस्मिन्दिपये। कोपवार. 
25. The affix मण् comes after the word :mudra' when the sense is 'mixed therewith.' 
This debars veu Thus att titta 'rice mixed with mudga-pulse.' ta न्यजनरुपसिक्के ॥ २॥ पदानि । व्यञ्जनः, उपसित () अनिः । नेत्येव । बम्बममापि यः प्रातिपदिके यस्तृतीयासमयप पसिनरत्येवस्मिन्न प्रत्वको भवदि। 
26. The afir ठक् comes, after a word denoting a condiment, being in the third case in construction, when the sense is 'sprinkled therewith.' 
Thus rzा पसिन-पाधिकम् ' sprinkled with curd, सौपिकर, खारिकर - Why do we say denoting a condiment'? Observe केनोपसिन भोपनः । ___ ओजः सहोम्भसा वर्तते ॥ २७ ॥ पदानि । भोजः, सहः, अम्मसा-धर्वते (उक)। 
पतिः ॥ भोमस् सहस् भम्भस् हत्येते यस्तृतीयासमय यो पर्ववाल्व क् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
27. The affix og comes in the sense of it exists," after the words ojas," sabas,' and 'ambhas' being in the third case in construction. . Thus मोजसा वर्तते-मौलसिका पूरः 'a hero' lit. possessed with energy. 
So also :-urfers: 'a thief.' TEATE# 'a fish' 
816 
प्रयच्छति गयर 
[ BK. IV. CH. IV. 3. 36' 
तत्प्रत्यनुपूर्वमीपलोमकूलम् ॥ २८॥ पदानि ॥ तत्, प्रति-अनु-पूर्वम्, प-लोम गतिः ॥ तरिति वितीया समर्यविभक्तिः। पति मनु इत्येवपूरे धईपलोमकूलगन्ने यो बितीयासमय यो र वास्येतस्मिन्न क् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
28. The affix e comes, in the sense of it exists,' after 'ipa,' 'loma,' and kala,' preceded by 'anu' and 'prati,.. the word being in the second case in construction. 
The word a shows that the words must be in the second case in cons truction. The verb ta is intransitive, how can it take an object, and how can it be in construction with an objective case? The words in the accusative after the verb & are not its objects, but are used as adverbs qualifying the sense of the verb, and adverbs are always put in the accusative case. Thus qatt पर्सदे-मातीपिकः (प्रतिगता भापोऽस्मिन्, the मा changed tok V.474 and VI. 3.90 retrograde i. c. which is unfavourable.' So ir irgeni 'favorable.' femrat 
• inverse' मानलोमिकः 'direct.' पासिलिकः, भानकलिक: The two words मातीपिक and मान्वीपिक mean unfavourable' and favourable' respectively. __ परिमुखं च ॥ २९॥ पदानि ॥ परिमुखम, ध (क)। । अनिः॥ परिमुखचना दितीयासमाहर्सतहव्यस्मिन्न प्रत्ययो भवति॥ 
29. The affix or comes in the sense of it exists,' after the word 'parimukha,' being in the second case in con struction. 
Thus परिमुख पर्वते-पारिमुखिक: being before the face, being near or pre sent'. 
The word in the sotra implies that the affix applies to other words also not mentioned. As पारिपार्दिकः ॥ The word परिमुख is an Avyayibhava compound (II. I. 12), पिरि has the.force ofexclusion (I.4.88), then पारिमखिक will mean a servant who always avoids the face of his master Fitratù wet पयित्वा सेवको पते," and if परि means 'all round, then the word will mean ka servant who is always in the presence of his master-यतः स्वामिनो मुखं वयस्ततो पवे"॥ 
प्रयच्छति गहम् ॥ ३०॥ पदानि ॥ प्रयच्छति,गद्यम्। कृतिः ॥ तरिति रितीयासमवयच्छतीत्येतस्मिन्न ठक् प्रत्ययो भवति, यसद्धितीयासमय ग रे. परवति॥ 
बा.॥इजेषिभावों पतयः ।। 
30. The affix ठक् comes after a word in the second case in constrution, when the sense is the gives', the motive being mean.. 
Bx. IV.CH. IV.5331 
सहमदिलर 
___819 
Thus far grofu-fitymar: 'a usurer who gives for the sake of double i, e who charges cent per cent interest. The word fegra means fart for the sake of double'. Similarly for: # 
Vart:-The word fia is changed to rest before this affix. As, TE प्रयच्याति-पातिक 'a usurer who gives for the sake of increase' Or the word yit may be taken as a separate word synonymous with t 
Why do wesay गर्भन 'with a mean motiver Observe दिएवं प्रबछवि भपका 'the debtor gives double'. 
फुसीददशैकादशात् छन्छचौ.॥ ३१॥ पदानि । फुसीद, पश, एकादशाव, छन् एचौ. पतिः ॥ प्रयच्छति गर्यमित्येव । कसी हाधि, स्तपणे तय कुसीन् । एकारचा चा, कारपो अन्वे । कुखीकारणामान्य ययावं एस्यतो प्रत्यको भवतः । 
31. The affixes Et and go come respectively after the words • kusida' and 'dasaikâdasa', when the sense is he gives for a mean motive'. 
The word gery means 'interest'. The lending of ten (*) on a condi. .tion that the borrower will pay eleven (एकादप) after a month is called कारण 
This satra debars Tell The difference between the two affixes & and r is in the accent (VI. 1. 197 and 163) Thus gene+59-guitia: fem..grerat (VI. 1. 41), Soकारशिक: fem की॥ . 
उम्छति । १२. पदानि । उम्छति। निःवरिति वितीयासमदुम्जवीत्येतस्मिन्न ग्क् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
____32. The affix ठक comes, after a word in the ser cond case in construction, when the sense is .' who gleans that'. 
Thus पररायुम्छतिवारिकर 'who picks up jujubes'. यामाविक काणिक To pick up every grain (कण) fallen on the ground is called रम्छ। 
रक्षति ॥ ३३॥ पदानि ।। रक्षति । वृमि ॥ वरिति रितीयासमवसतीत्येतस्मिन्न उक् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
33. The affix on comes after a word in the second case in construction, when the sense is “he aids or protects that'. ' 
____Thus समाज मति-सामाजिक 'a spectator', lit. 'who alds an assembly by his presence'. So also सांनिषेधिकः । 
88 . 
पावति 
. 
IBK. IV.CH. IV.836 
- शम्बदईर करोति ॥ ३४॥ पदानि । शब्द-चर्तुरम,करोति । . . 
हानिः । तदिति बिनीयासमर्यायां रयदायां करोतीत्येतस्मिन्न उक् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
34. The affix on comes after the words "Sabda' and .dardura', being in the second case in construction, when the sense is "who makes a sound or a croaking' 
Thus tretira-wiferents who makes a sound' i. c a Grammarian, So pren: 'who makes a croaking noise like a frog (dardura)' i. e, a potter. ..पक्षिमत्स्यमृगान्हन्ति ॥ ३५॥ पदानि । पक्षि, मत्स्य, मृगान, हन्ति (ठक). 
वृधिः ॥ तदित्येव । पत्याविन्यो द्वितीयासम यो हन्तीत्येतस्मिन्नयें डक् प्रत्ययो भरति ॥ 
35. The affix at comes after the words in the second case in construction denoting birds, fishes, or wild beasts, when the sense is 'who kills that'. 
Thus पति हन्ति-पाशिक: a bird-killer. The affix applies not only to the word-forms पति &c, but to words denoting birds &c. (Sec I. I. 68) 
Therefore, we have forms पाकनिका, मायरिका, सिरिकः, So also with मत्स्थ, as, मात्स्यिका, मेनिक, ग्राफरिक, धाकलिक So also with मृगा, as मार्गिका, हारिणिक, सोय रिका, सारङ्गिका 
परिपन्थञ्च तिष्ठति ॥ ३६॥ पदानि । परिपन्यम्, च, तिष्ठति। वृत्तिः॥ परिपन्यवातापिति द्वितीयासमर्णत्तिष्ठतीव्येतस्मिन्न ठक् प्रत्ययो भवति॥ 
36. The affix ठक comes also in the sense of " who stays", after the word 'paripantham', the word being in the second case in construction, 
Thus परिपन्यं विराति-पारिपन्यिका यः पन्थानं पर्जयित्वा तिष्ठति, यो वा पन्यानं ध्यान räsra 'a thief' lit. " who stays at roads, a high way man". The in the satra indicates that the sense of stay who kills' of the last, is to be connected with this satra by the conjunction and'. Thus परिपन्यं हन्ति-पारिपन्यिकः। 
The phrase "being in the second case in construction' is understood in this satra, why has then the word of been shown in the second case in the shtra, for it is a mere superfluity? No, it shows the secular form of the word. The word fra is synonymous with fire, the latter, however, having other senses also ___ मायोत्तरपदपदव्यनुपदं धावति ॥ ३७॥ पदानि । माय-उत्तरपद, पदवी, अनुप 
दम, धावति। 
Bx. IV. CH. IV. 5.40 
मावि 
अनि मायादोगरपाबाविपरिकालावी मपरतावा भारतीवेतस्मिन ए मलको 
37. The affix in comes, in the sense of "who runs", after a word having #ru as its second term, and after the words 'padavt' and 'anupada'. 
Thus इण्डमार्य पावति-पाण्डमाथिका 'who runs on a high way. So also पोल्कमापिका Similarly पारविका, भानुपदिका. The word माप means a way'. 
माकन्दाश्च ॥३८॥ पदानि । माक्रन्दा, ठा, चn . पतिः माक्रन्दन्त्येतस्मिन्नित्याऋन्दो देशभपता पसरल्याक्रन्द, मार्तावनमच्यते विशेषानावर 
योरपि महणम् । मानधनानावि दितीयासमर्यादावधीरयेतस्मिन्नम्मन्ययो भवति, पकाय 
38. The affix e as well as a comes after the word ' akranda', being in the second case in construction, in the sense of who runs'. 
The word भाक्रन्द means a place where persons weep' eg.a battle field. It also means 'weeping' 'invoking' &c. The difference between tv and His in the accent Thus माकन्द धारति-माकन्दिक or भारन्तिका मानिकी 'a person who runs to a place where cries of distress are heard:. . 
पदोत्तरपदं गृलाति ॥ ३९॥ पदानि । पद, उत्तरपदम्, ग्रहाति (ठक). वृत्तिः । परधन रत्तरपद यस्य तस्मात्पावरपरयष्यात परिति द्वितीयासमर्याणातीयवस्लिम्म गह प्रत्ययो भवति। 
39. The affix ठक् comes in the sense of who takes', after a word having 'pada' as its second member, the word being in the second case in construction, 
Thus पूर्वपरं गाणाति-पौर्वपरिका, so also भौतापदिकः The word रचरws used in order to prevent the application of the rule when qy is preceded by the affus IN 
प्रतिकण्ठार्यललार्म च ॥ ४०॥ पदानि ॥ प्रतिकण्ठ, मर्य, ललामम, ॥ चिः॥ प्रतिकार्यललामयम्ने यस्तरिति रिवीयासमर्येभ्यो गणातीव्यवस्मिन्न क् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
___40. The affix ठक् comes in the sense of who takes' after the words 'pratikantha', 'artha', and lalama' being in the second-case in construction. 
Thus प्रतिकार ग्रहणाति-पातिकण्ठिकः। So also मार्थिक, लालामिक: The word afaraus here is an Avyayt-bhava meaning out ofa, and not afra' 
को प्रतिकण्ड, for to the latter no affix is added. 
.820 
समवावान समवेति-या 
BK. IV. CH. IV. 1.44] 
: . धर्म चरति ॥४१॥..पदानि ॥धर्मम्-चरति (उ०)॥. . . . 
पतिः॥धर्मपदात्तरिति रितीयासमर्थापरतीत्येतस्मिन्मर्षे उक् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ वार्मिकम् ॥ अधर्मावति पमप्यम् । . .. :... . . . 41. The afix in comes after the word 'dharma', being in the second case in construction, in the sense of who practices.that'. . ... Thus धर्मम् परति पार्मिक: "religious". So also मार्मिक' “ irreligious undutiful", by a Vartika 
• प्रतिपथमेति च ॥४२॥ पदानि । प्रतिपथ, एति, ठन्-च। 'चिः ॥ प्रतिपयमा वितीयासमर्याद् एतीयस्मिन्नर्ये ग्न् प्रत्ययो भवति, धकाराच॥ 
42. The affix ot as well as on comes after the word 'prati-patham', in the second-case in construction, in the sense of 'who goes'. 
Thus प्रतिपयमेति-प्रतिपथिकor प्रातिपथिर्का “who goes along the road. the causes Vriddhi (VII. 2. 118) whilst on does not 
• समवायान् समवेति ॥४३॥ पदानि ॥ समवायान्, समवैति (उक) , दृचिः॥समवायवाचिभ्यः शब्देभ्यस्तदिति द्वितीयासमर्थेभ्यः समवैतीत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे ठक् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
43. The affix son comes after words in the 'second case in construction, denoting combination, in the 
sense of 'who assembles there'. 
The word 4914 means "combination, collection &c'. The word समवायान is in the plural number in the satra, indicating that the svarupa-vidhi (1. 1. 69) does not apply; the affix being applied not only to the word-form समवाय but to its synonyms also. समवैति means coming totgether. Thus समवा यान समवैति-सामवायिका 'who assembles in an assembly'. So also सामाजिक, सामू हिक, सान्निवेशिकर। . 
परिषदो ण्यः॥४४॥ पदानि । परिषदः, ण्यः। चिःपरिषदो या प्रत्ययो भवति समवायान्समवतीत्येतस्मिन्विषये। कोपवार . 
44. The affix ण्य comes after the word 'parishad' in the sense of 'who assembles there', 
This debars ठक् ॥ Thus परिपदं समवेति- पारिषयः 'one present in a council, an assessor, a councillor". 
सेनाया था। ४५॥ पदानि । सेनायाः, वा (ज्य:). . . . चिः ॥सेमाचदा पाण्यः प्रत्ययो भवति समवायान्समवेतीत्येतस्मिन्नर्षे कोपवाद . ...। 
( BR. IV. CH. IV. 1.48 
पर्व। 
.. 
• 82t: 
45. The affix va comes optionally in the sense of 'who assembles there, after the word sena. . 
_____ This debars tv which comes in the alternative. Thus सेनां समवेति Braai or draag 'a soldier, a member of an army!. 
संक्षायां ललाटकुक्कुट्यो पश्यति॥४६॥ पदानि संज्ञायाम, ललाट, कुक्कुट्यो पश्यति (उ). वृतिः ॥ ललाटकुक्कुटीमाभ्यां नरिति वितीयासमा यो पश्यतीत्येतस्मिन्न ग्क् प्रत्ययो भवति संज्ञा बांविषये। 
46. The affix 8 comes in the sense of 'who sees that,' after the words lalita' and 'kukkutt', in second case in construction, the whole word being a Name. 
Thus para grabar item' a non-attentive servant' lit 'who alway looks at the fore-head of his master from a distance, keeps himself aloof, does not come near to perform any work. So also कोषकुटिकः 'a religious mendic: ant, a Bhikshu.' The space of ground over which a hen can fly without fall ing, is to be understood here by the word " In other words, a small space of ground, for hens cannot sustain their flight for a long distance. Therefore, owing to the smallness of space, the mendicant walks looking down over the ground, and hence he is called arranco N The word also means 'a hypocrite with down-cast eyes' 
तस्य धर्म्यम् ॥४७॥ पदानि । तस्य, धम्य (उद)। इग्निः । तस्यति पठीसमर्थाद्धयमित्येतस्मिन्न उक् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
47. The affix 84 comes after a word in the sixth case in construction, in the sense of its usage'. . 
. The word धम् means 'usual, 'relating to custom'. The word sea shows the case of the word. Thus कशालाया धन्य-पोस्कपालिकर 'the custom-house laws or usages.' So also भाकरिकम, भापणिकम, गोल्मिकम् ॥ ___ अण् महिष्यादिभ्यः ॥४८॥ पदानि । अण्-महिण्यादिभ्यः॥ 
निः ॥ महिषीत्येवमारियो ऽण् प्रत्ययो भवति तस्य धर्यमित्येतस्मिविषये। कोपमा 
48. The affix au comes in the sense of its law,' after the word 'mahishi' &c. 
This debars thak. Thus trecut Y AUX 'the usages of queens.' So प्रामावतम्। 
1 महिषी, प्रजापति, प्रभावती, मलेपिका, विलेपिका, 6 मनुलपिका, 7 पुरोहित, 8 मणिपाली, अचारक (मनुवारक), 10 होत, यजमान. . 
. 
san 
सदस्य पवन-उद। . 
[ BK. IV. CH IV. F.6t. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
तो ॥४१॥ पदानि ॥ऋतः, म 
... वृत्तिः । अकारान्तावातिपदिकादम् प्रत्ययो भवति तस्य धर्म्यमित्येतस्मिपये । उकोपवारः। वार्मिकम् ॥ नराधेसिवनप्यम् ॥ ॥ विचलितुरिलोप । on विभाजयितुर्णिलोपन । 
· 49. The affix y comes in the sense of its law,' after a nominal-stem ending in . . . . 
This debars sक् ॥ Thus पति धर्म्यम्-पौत्रम् the office of a Pothi: मौसाय *the office or duties of an 
c office or duties of an Udgatri' Padamanjari gives the example of - Eta Srin under this sūtra, though the word to occurs in the list given in the preceding satra. The Hotri of the preceding sätra means a Ritvik, here it means an invoker. 
_Vart:-So also after the word नर: As नरस्य धया-नारी ॥ 
Vart:-Soalso after the word विधासित, there affix being elided. Thus विसित+मम्-वैद्यनम् ॥ . 
Vart :-So also after the word Ferraraq, its for affix also being elided. Thus विभाजयित+मम्-वैभाजिषम् ॥ 
• अवक्रयः॥५०॥ पदानि ॥ अव क्रयः (ठक) निः॥ तस्येत्येव । पष्ठीसमयादवक्रय इत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे ठक् प्रत्ययो भवति । भवक्रीणीत ऽनेनेस्यवक्रया । 
50. The affix 8 comes in the sense of its tas,". after a word in the sixth case in construction. 
The word ng means 'Government-tax," price,' wages,' 'rent' &c, coming from the root भपकी 'to purchase' Thus कशालाया मवक्रया-पोस्कचालिका .So also भापणिकः, गौस्मिकः, माकरिक । 
Are not धर्म्य (IV.447) and भवक्रय the samer No. Dharmya is a legal due, and religious%3; while an 'avakraya' may be a tax exacted from a people by oppression, and so transgressing dharma. 
तदस्य पण्यम् ॥५१॥ पदानि ॥ तद्, अस्य, पण्यम् । वृनिः॥ तरिति प्रथमासमास्योत पाठपर्थे ठक्प्रत्ययो भवति यसमयमासमर्थ पण्यं घेताववि 
51. The afix ठक comes in the sense of this is .whose saleable commodity, after a word in the first case in 
construction denoting the thing to be sold. 
Thus अपूपाः पण्वं भस्य-आपूपिका 'a cake-vendor. So also शाकुलिकः, मोरकिक-&c. 
लवणाट्ठञ् ॥५२॥ पदानि : लवणात, ठम् ॥ बानः ॥ लवणादाम् प्रत्ययो भवति तस्य पण्यमित्येतस्मिन् विषये । कोपवान BK. IV. CH. IV. S.56] 
व शिल्पा-मम् 
83 
L 
. 
52. The affix gp comes, in the sense of this is whose saleable commodity,' after the word 'lavane. 
This debars rs, the difference being in accent. Thus वर्ष पण्यमस्व m 'a salt-vendor.' 
फिशरादिभ्य छन् ।॥ ५३॥ पदानि । किशरादिभ्यः, छन् । वृतिः ॥ किपर हस्येवमाथिएन मत्ययो भवति तस्य पश्यमित्येतस्मिन्विषये। कोपवाः । 
63. The affix छन् comes in the sense of this is whose saleable commodity,' after the words kisara' &c. 
This debars ru The word four &c all denote perfumes. Thus किया पबमस्य-किंपरिक किरिकी (IV. 141), नपरिक मिररिकी। 
___1किसर (किपर), मरा, 3 नलर, 'स्थागत', 5 नगर, 6 गुग्गुल, 7 सीरहरिणा, . एि', 10 पर्णी', मङ्गल, 12 हरिणावणी. 
शलालनो ऽन्यतरस्याम् ॥ ५४॥ पदानि । शलालनः, अन्यतरस्याम् । पतिः ॥ पलालुपवारन्यवरस्यां इन मस्ययो भवति तरस्व पण्यमित्येतरिपवे । कोपकारः । पोखोपि 
54. The affix yt comes optionally, in the sense of 'this is whose saleable commodity' "after the word 'salálun'. 
This debars of which comes in the alternative game is a kind of sweet scent. Thus पलानु पबमस्य-लालका लानुकी॥ la the alternative with , गालालक / चालानुकी हैं। 
शिल्पम् ॥ ५५॥ पदानि ॥ शिल्पम् (ठक)॥ पत्तिः॥ वरिति प्रथमासमर्णदस्यवि पधप क्पत्ययो भवति यसलयमासम पिल्प चरस ॥ 
55. The affix 84 comes in the sense of this is whose Art, ' after a word denoting Art, in the first case in construction. 
Thus महङ्गवारन घिल्पमस्य-मानिक: Madrummer", "an expert in playing on mridangadrum". So also पाणविकः, पेणिकः। - मड्डुकररावणन्यतरस्याम ॥५६॥ पदानि ।। मड्डुक,सईरात,अल्, अन्यत 
रस्याम्॥ वृत्तिः । मड्डुकारामाभ्यामन्यतरस्यामा प्रत्ययो भवति तत्स्य शिल्पमित्येतस्मिन्त्रिपवे। कोपवा. 
56. The affix my comes optionally in the sense of this is whose Art', after the words 'madduka', and 
jharjhara'. 
This debars s which comes in the alternative. Thus महर्कपादन पिल्ल मस्व-माइडुकः or माइकिका, सासरः and झाझरिकः । 
84 
सरस्व मतिः- 
.[ BK. IV. CH. IV. .66 
प्रहरणम् ॥५७॥ पदानि ॥ प्रहरणम् (क) पतिः॥ वदवेत्येव । वरिति प्रथमासमादस्वेवि पप ठक् प्रत्ययो भवति वचषयमासमय प्रहरण. नरवात 
67. The affix ठक् comes in the sense of this is whose weapon', after a word denoting 'a weapon', and being in the 1st case in construction. 
Thus मसिः प्रहरणमस्य-मासिका 'a swordsman'. So मासिक, पाक्रिका, धानुकः॥ 
. परश्वधाञ्च ॥५८॥ पदानि ॥ परश्वधाव, ठम, च॥ मिः ॥ परश्वधधम्मात् प प्रत्ययो भवति, चकारात् क् ॥ 
58. The afix ठञ् as well as cr comes in the sense of this is whose weapon", after the word परश्वध। 
This affix des is added by 7, the difference being in accent. Thus पारश्वधिः or परिवधिकः॥ पर वध means 'an axe'. 
शकियट्योरीकक् ॥ ५९॥ पदानि ॥ शक्ति-यष्टयोः, ईकन् ॥ . वृत्तिः ॥ नियष्टियम्हाभ्यामीकक् प्रत्ययो भवति सदस्य प्रहरणमित्येतस्मिन्निपये। कोपवार 
59. The affix** comes in the sense of “this is whose weapon", after the words 'sakti' and 'yashti'. 
This debars sक् ॥ Thus प्रति प्रहरणमस्य-पानीकः, So also याष्टीकः॥ __ अस्तिनास्तिदिष्टं मतिः ॥६०॥ पदानि । अस्तिनास्ति-दिष्टम्-मतिः (ठक) n. वृत्तिः ॥ तदस्यत्येव । तदिति ममासमभ्यो ऽस्ति नास्ति दिष्ट इत्येवेभ्यः पन्वेन्यो त्यति पटपर्ये ठक मस्ययो भवति यत्नवथमासमय मतिमेतदवति । 
60. The affix it comes in the sense of this is whose belief', after the words 'asti', nasti and dishta'. 
Thus भस्तिमातिरस्य-भास्तिकः who believes that It is' i.e.a here after. मास्तिकः 'whose belief is that there is no Here after', an athiest. दैटिकः 'whose belief is that it is fate', a fatalist, fez 'fate'. 
The affix does not apply in the sense of belief in general, but to a par ticular sort of belief. Thus परलोकोषस्ति इति यस्थ मतिरस्ति ख मास्तिका, an Astika is he who believes that the Hereafter is. Contrary to him is a fifa who does not believe in a Hereafter. A person who believes what is demonstrated by proof, and nothing else, may also be called them a positivist'. These various other senses are to be found from dictionary and general literature, 
BK. IV. CH. IV. 563] तत्त्व कायमीना 
.825 
. 
. 
शीलम् ॥ १॥ पदानि । शीलम् (उद)। 
• पतिः ॥ तस्यत्वेष । समिति प्रण्मासमस्येति पपणे ठक् प्रत्ययो भवति बलायमासमय पीने के 
- 61. The affix ठक comes in the sense of whose habit is this ', after a word in the first case in construction.. 
Thus मपूपमाणं पीलमत्व-मापूपिकः 'one whose habit is to eat cakes: Similarly पाकुलिका, मोदकिका - The act of eating, and its habit are qualities understood in the sense of the affix. 
छत्रादिभ्यो णः ॥२॥ पदानि । उत्रादिभ्यः, ना. 'पत्तिः ॥ परदेवमारिभ्यः प्राविपरिभ्यो पा प्रत्ययो भवति वरवधीलमित्येतस्मिन्विषयाडकोप . 
62. The affix or comes in the sense of whose habit is this', after the words : chhatra &c'. 
This debars Fu Thus ut AF-Unr: 'a pupil', lit. 'whose habit is to cover (chhadan) the defects of his master'. The word FIT occurs in the list. It must always be prefixed by some upasarga; thus HTRAT, ART, मवस्पा &c. 
. According to Patanjali gry means 'a pupil, because, p r out frem छपवत् छादयः "a preceptor is like an Umbrella, the preceptor covers or protects the pupil like an umbrella ". Or foey T TUTTE YTTET: 'a pupil ought to maintain or protect his Preceptor, as an Umbrella'. 
15, शिक्षा प्ररोह (पुरोह), 'स्था (भास्था, संस्था, भवस्था), भुसा, 6 , 7 तितिक्षा', 8 उपस्थान, कृषि (कृषि), 10 कर्मन्, पविभधा, 12 सपर, 13 सत्य, मनत, 15 विधिया', 16विधिका (विका), 17 मला', 18 रदस्थान',19 पुरोरा, 20 पिक्षा' चु. 
सा',22 मनः 
कर्माध्ययने वृत्तम् ॥ ६॥ पदानि । फर्म, भध्ययने, वृत्तम (ठ)। वृत्तिः ॥ तस्येत्येव । तदिति प्रयमासमर्थावस्येति पठपय क् प्रत्ययो भवसि बनवयमासमर्षे कर्म के 
चमध्ययनविषयं भवति। 
63. The affix or comes, in the sense of this is his act; occuring in study" after a word in the first case in 'construction, if such a word is an act (karma) which has 
occurred (vrittam) in study (adhyayana). 
Thus एकमन्याप्ययने कर्मणामस्य-ऐकान्थिका 'a pupil who commits one (एक) error (अन्य ) in reading', &c. literal translation being something like one errorist". Similarly यन्यिकः यन्यिका &c. He whose, in recitation, at the time of examination, there is the occurrence of one mistake or false reading, 
826 
वरले हीयते नियुन 
(BK. IV.CH. IV.568 
is called ऐकान्यिकः ॥ So who commits two mistakes is called सन्धिकः ॥ In short, in giving explanatory analysis of taddhita words like ऐकान्तिका &c, the 
whole phrase मप्षयने कर्मवृत्तम् must be employed. ___ घड्वचपूर्वपदाच ॥ ६४॥ पदानि । पर्च, पूर्व पदात, ठच ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥बह पूर्वपरं यस्य तस्माद्बरपूर्वपदावातिपारिका इमत्ययो भवति सदस्थ कर्माप्षयने इन मिस्येतस्मिन्नर्थे । कोपवार, 
. 64. The affix a comes, in the sense of this is whose act occurring in study', after a compound having & polysyllabic word as a prior member. : This debars हक्॥ Thus:-भादधान्यानि कर्माण्यभ्ययने पानि मस्व-पारण न्धिका 'an examinee who commits twelve mistakes in his reading'. Somयोरणा यिका, चतुर्दशान्यिका ॥ The word भन्यत् in these satras means the error', especi. ally in accent, i. c he who makes an accent TFT which ought to be udatta, or vice versa. 
हितं भक्षाः॥६५॥ पदानि ॥ हितम्-मक्षाः (ठक)। . वृणिः ॥ सदस्यत्येव । तदिति प्रयमासमर्यादस्थति पश्पर्षे उक् प्रत्ययो भवति यत्सवयमासमय हित पेच. स्पति तपमक्षाः 
___66. The afix ठक comes after a word expressing food, in the first case in construction, in the sense of "this is wholesome diet for whom". . 
The words ag and RT (IV. 4. 5I) are understood. The word for governs dative (II. 3. 13. Vart), But the sotra is सदस्य हिवं भक्षाः, the word मस्व being in the genitive case, how is this? Here should be changed to dative viz. सदरमै हितं मनाः 'this for whom is wholesome diet. The best way however, to remove this objection is to read sätras 65, and 66 in this wise : -65 हित महासरस्मे and धीयते नियुक्त। Thus भपंभक्षणं हितमस्म-भाषिक: "He for whom cake is good food' i. e who cats cakes with benefit, or who is fond of cakes. So also argia, Arrain In analysing these taddhitas, such as wrotams &c, the word fee or its synonym, and a verb denoting eating should be employed. ---- 
तदस्मै दीयते नियुक्तम् ॥६६॥ पदानि ॥ तत्-अस्मै दीयते-नियुक्तम्-उक् ।। पतिः ॥ तदिवि प्रथमासमर्या भस्माहति चतुर्थ्य क् प्रत्ययो भवति यत्तमयमासमय: सहीयते नि. उक्तम्॥ 
___66. The affix ठक् comes in the sense of "to whom this is to be given right fully", after a word expressing the thing to be given, in the first (tad) case in construction, the force of the affix being that of a dative (asmai). 
BK IV CH IV.S 68.); 
stort fra 
827 
The word tua Aga means farena ia m enter fra 'to be giveni by appointment or rightfully'. Thus भय भोजनमस्म नियुक्त दीयते-भाममोनिकः 'a Brahmaņa always entitled to occupy the foremost seat at dinner". So also 
ror: 'entitled to get cakes!, no 11 Some say that the word for means for always'. According to them morrent would mean more me 
tard to whom always cakes are given'... . 
श्राणामांसोदनाठिन् ॥ ६७॥ पदादि । श्राणा-मांस-मोदनात, विठन् । T: A M IFTUETZ Rosu ya wape ud again afget i 1947€ I 
67. The affix feat comes in the sense of 'to whom this is to be given rightfully', after the words smurt and मांसौदन। 
This proq debars to * The r of fe is for the sake of pronunciation, the r indicates that the feminine is formed by T (IV. 1. 154 Thus tropp fagri 4 = fura f. surust who is entitled to get rice gruel'. So also HIGTET : f. steterarent. i The difference between you and foot is in accent, the former having udatta on the final (VI. 1. 165), the latter on the initial (VI. 1. 197). The feminine of om and from will both be formed by (IV. 1. 15) Now the affix resembles from both in accent (VI. 1. 197) and in feminine (IV, 1. 15) Why was not used instead of fog, for it would have produced exactly the same forms ? True, as regards the words Art and HTT the affix a might have been employed instead of froga According to some, however, the affix for applies to HTC and a separately also. But on cannot be applied to rent as it would cause Vriddhi (VII. 2. 117) which Rere does not. Thus +269-7fi, f. raparat With on the form would have been मोदनिक: which is not wanted. 
The word pro is a Past Participle () of met 'to cook.' The T is not changed to as required by VI. 1. 27. This is an anomaly. The nistha is changed to " (VIII. 2. 43. The form mar is also found, as in VI. I. 36, and the regular form is 7- a (VI. 1. 27) 
HoteurTaching II &C11 Tra il 1-my-race 1 : त्तिः ॥ मनायशदा प्रत्ययो भवत्यन्यतरस्यां तस्मै शयते नियुक्तमित्यतस्मिन् विषये कोपवायः॥ 
68. The affix a comes optionally after the word bhakta, in the sense of 'to whom this is to be given right fully. 
This debars on which comes in the alternative. Thus it for fyri=*7TH. In the alternative prin 'a regularly fed'. e. a retainer, i 
828 
828 
. 
. 
अवहरति 
। 
[ BK. IV.CH. IVS12 
• तंत्र नियुकः । ६९॥ पदानि । तत्र-नियुका ठक)। . इतिः ॥ सति सप्तमीतमयान्मियुक्त इत्येवस्मिन्नये ठक प्रत्ययो भवति । नियको भी 
रिव थर्पः॥ 
69. The affix to comes, in the sense of appointed there,' after a word in the seventh case (tatra) in construc-. tion.. 
Thus gल्कालायां नियुक्त-धोल्कमालिका 'a superintendent of custom-house' So also माकरिका, भापार्णकः, गौमिका, पारिका॥ The word तपनियुक is a Tat. purusha compound formed by 11. 1. 46. The word niyukta here has a differ ert meaning from that in IV. 1. 60, hence its repetition here. 
भगारान्तान् ॥७॥ पदानि ॥ अगारान्तात, ठन्। पृणिः ॥ भगारवान्तावाविपदिकाइन् प्रत्ययो भवति त नियुक्त इत्येतष्मिन्विपये। कोपवाद। 
___70. The affix ठन् comes in the sense of "appointed there," after a word ending with 'agâra.' 
This debars | The difference is in accent and want of Vriddhi. Thus देवागारे नियुका देवागारिक, कोठागारिका, भाण्डागारिकः । 
अभ्यायिन्यदेशकालात् ॥ ७१॥ पदानि ॥ अध्ययिनि-अदेशकालात (उद)। वृणिः ॥ तत्रेत्येव । सप्तमीसमर्याददेशवाधिनः प्रातिपदिकादकालवाधिनमाप्यायिन्यभिधेये ठक् प्रत्ययो भवति। 
. 71. The affix 3 comes in the sense of “who stu dies there," after a word in the 7th case in construction, de noting an improper place or time. 
The word Burt means the time or place of study, which is pro hibited by sacred institutes. atas means one who studies. Thas मधानेऽधीते-माशानिका 'who reads in a funeral ground. चतुष्पयिकः 'who stu. dies where four roads meet' So also चतुर्दश्यामधीते-पाधकः, 'who reads on the 14th lunar day. So also भामावास्थिका। 
Why do we say "improper time and place Observe gosta, at ऽधीते 
कठिनान्तमस्तारसंस्थानेषु व्यवहरति ॥ ७२ ॥ पदानि ॥ कठिन-अन्त, प्रस्तार संस्थानेषु, व्यवहरति (ठह)। 
त्तिः ॥ तपेत्येव । कग्निशम्दान्तावामीसमर्थात् प्रस्तारसंस्थानमाभ्यां च ठक् प्रत्ययो भवति __ व्यवहरतील्येतस्मिन्नयें। 
72. · The affix. comes, in the sense of “who transacts business there in,"after compounds ending in kathina 
BK. IV.Ch. IV.375] 
वादि-। 
. 
. 
829 
and after “praståra' and 'sansthana,' being in seventh case in construction. 
Thus tuntiarer - divanitate'whose occupation is in a bamboo thicket' or 'who does what is proper to be done in such a place' Laufen 
या क्रिया बणनाया वो वामविष्ठति ॥ So also प्राधिकनिकः। So also मास्वारिका खांस्थानिक 
निकटे पसति ॥७३॥ पदानि । निकटे-धसति (ठक)। दृषिः॥ निकटयम्दावामीसमरसतीत्येवस्लिम्न मत्ययो भवति । 
___73. The afix in comes in the sense of who dwells', after the locative word 'nikata.' 
This rule applies in forming epithets, denoting such persons, who are allowed under the Sacred Institutes, to dwell near buman habitations. Thus भारण्यकाः are those ascetics who are ordained to dwell in forests, at least two miles away from human habitations hartati are those ascetics who are allowed 
•by the rule of their Order to live near human habitations Thus मिकडे खास -कटिक 'an ascetic 
भावसथात् छन् । ७४॥ पदानि । मावसयाटल। निवरेत्येव । भावसयामासामीसमर्थात् पसतीत्येतस्मिन्न छन् प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
74. The affix gros comes in the sense of who dwells there,' after the word 'âvasatha' in the seventh case in construction. 
The of ge is for accent (VI. I. 193) theç is for Ag (IV. 1, 41) Thus भावसये वसति-भावसयिका 'who dwells in a house' iea domestic person as opposed to an ascetic. The feminine will be mrtafurat So far was the scope of as ordained in IV. 4. 1. Henceforward other affixes will be ordained. 
प्रागन्धितापत् ॥ ७५॥ पदानि । प्राग्-हितात, यत् । वृत्तिः । तस्मै हितमिति पश्यति । प्रागेवस्माद्धिवसंघमनापानित कर्णमनुक्रमिप्यामो यात्यवते. वधिको विवम्पः। 
75. In each aphorism from this one forward to 'tasmai hitam' (V, 1. 5), the affix यत् bears rule. 
Thus in the next sätra agerar rug Tarefa we must read the affix # रथ्या, युन्यः, प्रासापः॥ 
तहति रथयुगप्रासङ्गम् ॥ ७६॥ पदानि । तद्-घहति-रय-युग-प्रासकम (यत। वृत्तिः ॥ तदिति द्वितीयासमय यो रययुगपासच्या बहतीत्येतलिन्नय बलत्ययो भवति। 
830 
( BK. IV. CÉL IV: $ 78 
lin. 76. The affix a comes in the sense of what bears it', after the words ratha', 'yuga', and 'pråsanga", being in the second case in construction. 
• Thus to the what bears a car' a carriage-horse. Similarly fras'a yoke-bearing ox', arirat: being trained in a break'. Ey is a piece of wood placed on the neck of colts, at the time of breaking. This rule applies to compounds ending with ratha, as, Tarla II See IV. 3. 121, 123 also. That which carries will be called 'carrier' or is therefore there will get the affix un by IV. 2. 120. read with IV.3.121.Its special mention here indicates that the affix will come, even after Dvigu .compounds and will not be elided by IV. I. 88. Thus tuta fa : The tadanta-vidhi applies to this word as we have - shown under 1.3. 121. The word ure has been already formed by the krit affix (III. 1. 121) that Tra differs from the present, in accent when the word takes the negative particle, for that was by rug and this is by , and therefore by VI. 2. 156, w ie will be finally acute when formed by ATT # The word or must mean "the portion of a car' for the application of this rule, and not a cycle of time &c. Therefore not here युगं वहति रामा कति वापरा . 
gd won wala ngri-tao वृत्तिः ॥ ताहतीत्येव ।धुर इत्येतस्मात् वितीयासमावहतीत्येतस्मिन्नय यत् एकहत्येतो मस्ययो भवतः। . 77. The affix yo and 4 come iņ the sense of ! what bears it', after the word 'dhura' in the second case in 
construction, ;" Thus gi TEFAF YF: (formed by TT) the lengthening ordained by VIII. 2. 77 is prevented by VII. 2. 79 because yr is Bha-stem, or aria (formed by TE VII. 1. 2) 'a beast of burden'. This sätra might have stood as yù , for any would have been read into it from IV. 4. 75. . . ___ खः सर्वधुरात् ॥ ७८॥ पदानि । खः-सर्वधुराद। 
: paketi erfaring frafraremetyeatsaarempio: aut eft * 
78. The affix •kha' comes in the sense of what bears it', after the word sarva-dhurâ', being in accusative construction. . . .. Thus Etyti Tafa-atytto: (VII. 1. 2). The affix or applies to other compounds also ending in धुर,eg. उत्तरधुरीणः, दक्षिणधुरीणः॥ The word सर्वधर isa . compound of ast + V (II. 1. 49), the samasånta m being added by V. 4. 74 The word y being feminine, the whole compound would be feminine by II. 4. 26. The word m an in the satra should not be taken, therefore, as regulate 
BK. IV. CH. IV.18] 
संज्ञाय-बान्॥ 
831 
ing the gender, for though it is in the masculine gender, the affix comes after the feminine word. In fact art in the sätra should be taken as a nominala stem or pratipadika equal to सबधुप। 
एकधुराल्लुक च ७९पदानि । एक-धुराव-लक्ष । पतिः॥ वाहतीत्येव । एकभुगमनाहितीयासमावहतीत्येतस्मिन्न समस्ययो भवति वस्व गमवाति 
79. The affix .kha' comes in the sense of what bears it', after the word 'eka-dhura' in the second case in construction, and the affix is optionally elided also. 
The elision is optional. Thus एकधुरां पहदि- एकधुरीणः or एकधुरः॥ The compounding is taddhitartha (एकांपुरवहति) to which is added thesamasanta 
भ, and then the affix an . 
शकटादण ॥८॥ पदानि । शकटाव-अ. पतिः मातीत्येव । पकटशम्मा दितीयासमाहतीत्येतस्मिन्न ऽ मत्ययो भवति । 
80. The affix au comes in the sense of what bcars it,' after the word 796 in the second case in construc tion. . . . Thus कई पाति-पाका 'an ox'ie what bears a car. This could be evolved by तस्येवम् मण as शाकटस्थ पोर-पाकरः ॥ The specification indicates that tadanta-vidhi applies here, as प्रकटे पहाविधकरः, and the affix is not clided (IV. 1. 88) 
हलसीरा ॥१. पदानि । हलसीरातूक वृत्तिः । ताहतीत्येव । हलसीरपाभ्यां द्वितीयासमर्याभ्यां बहतीत्येतस्मिन्न एक प्रत्ययो भवति । 
81.. The affix on comes in the sense of what bears it,' after the words 'hala' and 'sira,' in the 2nd case in construction. 
Thus हल बहति-हालिका a ploughman सारिका 'a plough ox: There would have come by IV. 3. 124, the specification shows tadantavidhi and non. elision, as हालिका, सीरिक __संज्ञायां जन्याः॥२॥ पदानि ॥ संज्ञायाम-जन्याः (यत्)। 
वृतिः ॥बहतीत्येव । अनीयदाद वितीयासमर्यावहतीत्येतस्मिन्न यत् प्रत्ययो भवति समुदायेन चेल. ज्ञा गम्यवे. 
82. The affix 47 comes in the sense of what bears it after the word 'jani, being in the 2nd case in con truction, the whole word being a Name. 
833 
पंचगव:॥ 
. [ BK. V.CH. IV.886 
Thus समीपति-जन्यः 'a friend of a bridegroom, fem. अन्या: 'a brides. maid. The word सनी means 'bride' भन्या lit means 'what bears the bride. i e. who carries the coy bride to the bride-groom at the time of play & Co 
विध्यत्यधनुषा ॥३॥ पदानि । विभ्यति-अधनुषा (यत)। अतिः ॥ तरिति दितीयाखमा पिडातीत्येतस्मिन्न यत् प्रत्ययो भवाति म पेजमुकरणं भवति । 
83. The affix Ta comes in the sense of what pierc es it,' after a word in the accusative case in construction, pro vided that, it is not a bow, with which anything is pierced. 
Thus are forefa-far: (VI. 3. 53) veftri, 'what pierce the feet'ia pebbles. करप्याः कण्टकाः 'thorns' ie what pierce the thigh. . 
Why do we say "provided it is not a bow, a ng Observer विष्यति धनपा, no afix is added here. This exclusion of धनुर indicates that the act of piercing must be such as not to be done by a bow &c Therefore the affix does not apply to cases like these चोर विष्यति, विभ्वात. 
धनगणं लग्धा ॥en पदानि । धन-गणम-लग्धा (यत्) । वृत्तिः । तदित्येव । धनगणमान्यो रिसीयासमर्णभ्यां लभेत्येतस्मिन्नये यत् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
84. The affix to comes in the sense of who obtains it,' after the words “dhana,' and 'gana,' being in the second case in construction. 
___ Thus धन ला-धन्यः, so also गण्या, लम् is formed from लम् by तन, hence it takes the accusative . अन्नाण्णः ॥ ८५॥ पदानि । अन्नाद-मः। 
कृत्तिः ॥ मन्नादासरिति दिनीयासमानन्धेत्येतस्मिन्नय का प्रत्ययो भवति । 
85. The affix or comes in the sense of who obtains it, after the word अन्न, in the second case in construction. 
... Thus मन्न लाथा-मान्नः • fed'"who has obtained food. __वशं गतः॥८६॥ पदानि । वशम्-गतः। 
इतिः। वयशासात रितीयासमा गत इत्येतस्मिन्न यवल्ययो भवति । 
36. The affix यत् comes in the sense of gone,' after the word vasa, 'control' being in the second case in construction. 
Thus fum:* ' come under control' I. e. subdued i. e a dependant or servant. पयः काम छा तां प्राय: i.eपरेच्छानगामी। BK. IV.CH. IV. 1901 
एलविना-मा 
833 
पदमस्मिन् श्यम् ॥ ८॥ पदानि । पदम्-अस्मिन्-रश्यम् (यव) । इतिः । निर्देशादेव मयमा समरिमनिपरनालयमाखमा श्वापोंपाधिकारलिन्निाव सम्बर्वे बनव्यको भादि। 
87. The affix पद comes in the sense of in it is visible, after the word 'pada,' being in the first case in con: struction. 
___Thus परायमास्मिन्-पमा कम 'mud' lit. soft mud in which foot-mark can be seen at every step. It describes mud which is neither very hard nor very fluid, but having sufficient consistency to take the impression of the foot So gen giet: 'dust' for in it also the impression of the foot can be secu. It also means 'the foot-path' The word 79, means you this being the force of the kritya affix ya'in reu 
मूलमस्याबाई ॥८॥ पदानि । मलम-मस्य-मावासियत) वृत्तिः । मूलपम्दाबपनासमर्यादावत्येवमुपाधिकारस्यति पटपर्ये बलत्ययो भवा । मूलमेपामावलि 
88. The affix ha comes in the sense of 'whose root is eradicated,' after the word 'můla,' being in the first case in construction. 
The word aruit from 'to up root,' means 'uprooting,'-TOUCH 3 इनमेपामावहि-मल्या. 'akind of pulse'cg.मापा । ममा These cereals cannot be harvested without uprooting the whole plant. According to Padamanjari the word should be wraft and not prxft, with a 4 and not ru 
संशायां धेनुप्या पदानि ॥ संशायर्या-धेनुया-यत् । इनिः॥धनुष्येति निपात्यते संज्ञायां विपये । संशापहणमभिषेवनियमार्यम् । 
89. The word धेनुप्या is irregularly formed, being a Name. 
This word is formed by adding and to u It has udatta on the final. Tot means that cow (W) which is given to a creditor in dis charge of a debt or as a pledge to satisfy the debt from her milk. It is also called पीतयुग्धा | As धनुष्यां भरने हानि । 
गृहपतिना संयुक्त व्यः ॥ १०॥ पदानि ॥ गृहपतिना-संयुक्के-ज्यः । पृत्तिः ॥ निर्देशादेव तृतीया समर्थविभक्तिः । गृहपतिशास्तूतीयासमत्संयुक्तात्येवस्मिन्न मः अस्क यो भवति॥ 
90. The affix se comes in the sense of joined with', after the word 'grahapati' in the third case in cons truction. 
834 
(BK. IV. CH. IV. $ 91 
Thus far - en: 'the Garbapatya Fire': i ca Fire parti cularly consecrated by the Householder. The word warud of the last sätra should be read into it, thus 1999 means a particular Fire, and not every thing relating to a retra N The Fire in which husband (grihapati), together with or joined with his wife, performs sacrifice is called Garhapatya. That sacrifice cannot be perforined in Dakshinagni. Or that fire in which Grihapati hymns are recited is called Garhapatya. 
नौषयोधर्मविषमूलमूलसीतातुलाभ्यस्तार्यतुल्यप्राप्यवद्ध्यानाम्यसमसमित सम्मि तेषु ॥९१॥ पदानि नो-चयो-धर्म-विष-मूल-भूल-सीता-तुलाध्य-तार्य-तुल्य प्राप्य 
• पद्धर-अनाम्य-सम-समित-सम्मितेषु । इतिः ॥ नावादि यो भ्यः पन्ने यो लेव तार्याविवर्येषु क्यासंख्यं यत् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
: 91. The affix ta comes after the words i 'a boat', षयस् 'age', धर्म 'merit', विष 'poison', मूल 'a root', मूल 
capital', fitar & furrow', and Tom & balance', in the senses respectively, of “to be crossed ", "like", "attainable ", " to be put to death", "to be bent down", "equivalent to", “ united with” and “equally measured". ✓ The words in the above must be all in the Instrumental case in cons truction, for the sense of the affix shows that it should be so. Thus. . 
.1, 147 rue water' 'a river', lit what can be crossed by a boat.. 
2 The JET: 46 'a friend', lit. one alike in age. 3. w 414-444 'what is attainable through dharma. Could not this 
form have been evolved by the next sätra yarpaga (IV. 4. 92) ? No, pa formed by that aphorism means "what is consistent with dharma' 'what is just'. The present ya refers to the 'fruit', the 
other to the act'. 
4. O Tes from: 'who deserves to be put to death by poison'. . 
· 5. marra "price" lit. or to be overpowered or bent by the root". 
The word na (which is formed from the root 7h to bow' by the affix ont contrary to rule III. 1. 98 which reguired ), means it witang 'what ought to be overpowered': hence Arty means the price, worth, cost', because articles like cloth' &c are produced by the out-lay of stock or capital (); 'price' being a thing which, because it is capital plus profit, is superior to capital, and thus by 
price or malyam, the capital or mola is overpowered. 6. in 1 74: purchasable' lit, equivalent to capital' ag. cloth ga: 
i. e. equivalent acquisition resulting from the employment of capital 
BK. IV. CH. IV. $.93] 
. 
835 
7. tarafat - Stand a field'. lit. 'measured out by furrows' according 
to Dr Ballantyne The word of is equivalent to mind 'united with according to Kasika. Of therefore literally means 'a ploughed 
field'ic what is united with surrows'. The affix will apply also to 
words ending with stat, eg. tuetan, pati, for 8. Sigar efter "equal" lit. 'meted by the balance'. Ha means 
ATI, N . 
Nola :-The fruits of good doodo, liko happiacon &o, which aro attainable or priipya through dharma', may be soid also dharmed anapotam bocanos un effect must have . amma Henco arison the doubt us to wbat is the difforoace between this and the past sain The 
anapotam' in the part sdt means tho fulfling or following the Law ostablishod by the Shishthus, and has no referoace to its fruits. Because the effect of dharma in to destroy dharmemmi. atoo fruita in the shape of happinen &o lesson, and ultimately extingaish the derma. Therefore, the fruit of dharme, which is to be taken in this sdtra, us roferred to by the word prapya, ia diametrically opposed to the practising of dharma, referred to by the word anapota of the neat satria 
धर्मपथ्यर्थन्यायादनपेते ॥ ९॥ पदानि । धर्म-पथि-अर्थ-न्यायात-अनपेते(यत्)। पतिः ॥ निर्देशादेव पम्पमी समर्थविभक्तिः । धर्माधिः पञ्चमीसमभ्यो ऽनपेवास्येवस्मिन्न ववव यो भवति। 
92. The affix cemes in the sense of 'not deviat ing therefrom', after the word dharma,''pathin,' 'artha' and nyâya' being in the ablative case in construction. . 
The ablative construction is inferred from its employment in the satra itself. Thus inga fruta 'just not deviating from merit. Similarly 
24 u vraient . 
qui, fil m : 'wholesome diet,' thug'at, hozta 'just, suitable.' The word carut (IV 4.89) governs this satra also, and hence the derivatives must have the above meanings . ehit Rafta 1838 te u 399:-Gatta () . . 
fa: Il yearferaretoze gafferaft: 159: Trapraturtintage are tapete verme स्ययो भवति। 
93. The affix a comes in the sense of made," after the word 'chhandas,' being in the Instrumental case in coustruction. 
Thus Orar Pafta: - FT'made at will. The word ORF is here synonymous with you will, wish, desire, lancy' &c, and does not mean 'mctre or Veda' 
836 
Bk. IV.CH. IV. 5.91 . 
___ उरसो ऽण च ॥ ९४॥ पदानि । उरसः, मण, च। 
इत्तिः ॥ र प्रदास्मृतीयासमान्निर्मित इत्येतस्मिन्नण प्रत्ययो भवाविषकारायब 
. 94. The afix भए as well as यत् comes after 'uras', in the 3rd case in construction, in the sense of 'made.' 
The यत् is drawn into the satra by the particle च नरसा निर्मितः-मीरस * own son not adopted, lit. produced through the loins,' With at the form will be TTF # These words denote son, and not anything produced from the loin, because the word darat (IV. 4. 89) governs this sūtra also. 
हदयस्य प्रियः ॥ ९५ ॥ पदानि ॥ हदयस्य-प्रियः (यत्). निः । निर्देशादेव समर्थविमनिःशक्यचन्दालडीसमर्थात् प्रिय इत्येतस्मिन्नथें बवत्ययो भवारी ।। 
95. The affix यत् comes in the sense of 'loved, after the word 'hridaya,' in the genitive case in construction. 
The construction is shown by the aphorism itself. Thus 464 furg: - 'pleasant to the heart' eg. इयो देश एवं वनम् ॥ But. we cannot say यः पुष, the word संज्ञायां (IV.499) governs this satra also, and thus restricts the meaning of the word. 
यन्धने चर्षों ॥ ९६॥ पदानि बन्धने-च-ऋषी (यत)। .. अगिः॥ हदयस्येत्येव । बन्धन रति प्रत्ययार्थः । नविशेषणमृपिमहणम् । बयते येन वपन्धनम् । यश नात्यष्ठीसमर्थाबन्धने पापभिषेवे यत् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
96. The affix Te comes in the sense of a bond, after the word 'hridaya', being in the genitive construction, when the word denotes a 'hymn'. 
The word tara is understood in the sätra. The word my gives the sense of the affix and is qualified by the word . That by which a thing is bound is called out # The word eft means here the Veda or the Vedic bymn. Thus हण्यस्य बन्धनमृषि-हेयः 'the Mantra by which the heart of another can be brought under one's control',icaपशीकरण मन्त्रा। 
मतजनहलात करणजल्पकर्षेषु ॥ ९७॥ पदानि । मत-जन-हलाद, करण जल्प कर्षेषु (यत)। वृत्तिः ॥ मतादिभ्यविन्यः पये यतिवेव करणाविषयेषु यथासंख्यं यत् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
97. The affix यत् comes after words 'mata', jana', and 'hala', in the senses respectively of 'means', 'gossip', and drawing', the words being in the sixth case in construction. 
[ BK. IV. CH. IV. S. Non 
सरसा॥ 
837 
Thus मवस्व र -भैरव the means of acquiring knowledge'. मनस्व अल्पः-न्या 'a rumour'. इलस्थ कर्षः-इम्य: 'ploughed'. So also दिल्यः , पिहल्या the tadanta vidhi appliesपवीताहले यो परिधी. 
तत्र साधुः ॥९८ पदानि । तत्र-साधुः। पनि कवि सामीसमर्थात् माधुरित्येतस्मिन्न पचत्ययो भवति. 
98. The affix urc comes after a word in the loca tive construction, in the sense of 'excellent in regard there to'. 
Thus Etat : ATT (VI. 4. 168) conversant with the Sama-Veda'. Soalso मन्दः, कर्मण्या , परम्ब: &c. The word any here means प्रवीण, or योग्य 'ex. pert' and 'fit', and does not mean उपकारक 'a benefactor or agood person'. 
When the sense is that of good', the sotra स्ने दिवम् (V. I.S) will apply. . 
प्रतिजनादिया खन। ९९॥ पदानि । प्रतिजनादिभ्यः-स इतिः॥पतिममारिका पनेक खपत्ययो भवति तप साधुरिष्येतस्मिन्नर्थे । यतोपवायः॥ 
99. The affix w comes in the sense of excellent in regard thereto', after the word 'pratijana' &c. 
This debars यत् ॥ Thus प्रतिमने साधुः-प्रानिमनीनः (VII. I. 2) 'suitable against an adversary', or 'who is excellent for every person'. So also gi guita, सांयुगीनः। 
प्रतिजन, युग, संयुग, खमयुग, परयुग, 6 परकुल, परस्यकुल, ममुप्यकुल, सर्व मन, 10 विधयन, 11 महामन, 12 पम्पयन." 
भकाण्णः ॥ १०॥ पदानि ।। भक्तात, यः॥ इतिः॥ मनचना का प्रत्ययो भवति व साधुरित्येतस्मिन्निपये। बसोपवार, 
100. The affix or comes in the sense of 'excellent with regard thereto', after the word 'bhakta'. 
This debars य: thus, भन्ने खाधु:-मानः प्रालिः 'rice' lit. suitable or excel lent for food. भाका स्वकुलाः। 
परिषदोण्यः॥१०१॥ पदानि ॥ परिषदः, प्यः॥ चिः ॥ परिषद्माण ण्वः प्रत्ययो भवति का साधुरित्येतलिन्विषये। यतोपका 
101. The affix ण्य comes in the sense of 'excellent with regard thereto', after the word 'parishada'. . . 
This debars यत् ॥ Thus परिषदि साप: पारिषयः॥ The affix is also employed here Thus परिपदि साधुः-पारिप 'one versed in the affairs of a coun cil''a minister! 
838 
. 
व साध:-..[ BK. IV. CH IV: F. 105 
.. कयादिभ्यष्टक ॥ १०२॥ पदानि ॥ कथादिभ्यः, ठन् । 
अधिः ॥ कयादिभ्यः पन्नेभ्यष्टक प्रत्ययो भवाविषय साधुरित्येतस्मिविपये । यसोपवादः । 
___102. The affix ठक comes in the sense of excellent with regard thereto', after the words kathå! &c. 
___Thus कथायां साधु:-कायिकः (कया+क्क य् + VI. 4. 148 -कायका VII. 2. 116) 'a narrator of stories'. So traum: &c. - 1कया, विकया, 3 विश्वकया', संकया', 5 विवण्डा, कुछवि (कुट विद, कुष्टचिन्) । जनवाद, 8 अनेवाद, मानोवाद (1) 10 नि, II संग्रह (समह), 12 गुण, 18 गण, "भायुद. ॥ . गुडादिभ्यप्ठम् ॥ १०३॥ पदानि ॥ गुडादिभ्यः,ठ॥ 
वृत्तिः । गुरादिभ्यः पम्मेभ्यष्ठम् प्रत्ययो भवति वा साधरित्येतस्मिन्निपये। यतापवा. 
103. The affix gst comes in the sense of excellent with regard thereto', after the words 'guda &c.' 
This debars यत| Thus गुडे साधुः गाडिकः 'sugar-cane' lit. 'excellent in making sugar'. So कोलमाषिक: a kind of pulse' lit. 'excellent for making 
gruel'. सानुकः 'barley' lit suitable for making saktu. 
गुर, कुल्माष, सक्त, मपूप, 5 मांसोदन, शु. 7 वेणु, 8 संग्राम, 9 संघात, 10 संक्रा म. 11 संवाह, 12 प्रवास, 13 निवास, 14 उपवास.. .. __ पथ्यतिथिवसतिस्वपते ॥१०४॥ पदानि ॥ पथि-अतिथि-वसति-स्वपतेः 
वृत्तिः॥ पथ्यादिभ्यः रामेभ्यो म् प्रत्ययो भवति वा साधुरिष्येतस्मिन्विपये। यतोपवायः॥ 
104. The affix yo comes in the sense of 'excel lent with regard thereto', after the words 'pathi', 'atithi', 'vasati' and 'svapati'. 
___This debars यत् ॥ Thus पणि साधुः पायेयम् (VII. I. 2) 'provision for jourmey'. भातिथ्यम् hospitality', पासतेयं 'habitable' as पासतेयी पनि, स्थापतेय :wealth, property'. 
समाया यः ॥ १०५॥..पदानि ॥ समायाः, यः॥ चिः॥ सभाशदायः प्रत्ययो भवति सत्र साधुरिल्येतस्मिन्विषये यतोपवाद। 
___105. The afix यत् comes after the word 'sabha' when the sense is 'excellent with regard thereto.' 
This debars यत् the difference being in accent (III. I. 3, and VI. I. 185) Thus सभायां साधुः-सभ्यः 'refined' lit. fit for society. 
दश्छन्दसि ।। १०६॥ पदानि ॥ढा, छस्दासे || शचिः ॥ सभाशम्नाइप्रत्ययो भवति तत्र साधुरित्येतस्मिन्विषये छन्दास । यस्यापवाद । 
BK. IV. CH. IV.S.10] 
भवे उन्मसि। 
____839 
106. The affix comes in the chhandas after the word 'sabha, in the sense of 'excellent with regard thereto.' - This debarsan Thus सभेवः in समेवोस्थ युवा वनमामस्व वीरो भावताम् leta refined, youthful hero be born to this sacrificer'. 
समानतीर्थे वासी ॥ १०७॥ पदानि ॥समानतीय, वासी (यत)॥ कृतिः ॥ साधुरिति निचम् । वासीति प्रत्ययार्यः, समानतीर्यपदाचरति सामीसमर्यावासीत्येतस्मिन्वयक पत्ययो भवति। 
107. The afir यत् comes in the sense of 'resident, therein', after the word “samâna-tîrtha', in the locative cons truction. 
The anuvritti of ory: now ceases. The word ofron means here re 
• Preceptor'. Thus अमाने तीथे वासी-सतीर्घः (VI. 3. 87)-'a fellow-student', who both dwell under the same preceptor. 
समानोदरे शयित ओ चोदासः ॥ १८॥ पदानि ॥ समान-उदरे-शयिता, ओ च-उदात्ता (यत्)। वृमिः ॥ खमानोदरपासममीसमर्याच्छयित इत्येतस्मिन्नये यवत्ययो भवति मोकारो 
108. The affix ha comes in the sense of who sleeps, after the word 'samanodara' in the locative construc tion, and the udatta falls on the letter भो। 
The word ofera: is equal to fuo: 'remain'. Thus garin afat: मानो पर्यः 'uterine brother' ie. who has slept in the same womb. See VI.3.88 
सोदराय ॥ १०९। पदानि ॥ सोदरात्,यः॥ चिः ॥ सोदरशनासामीसमर्थात् पयित इत्येतस्मिन्न या प्रत्ययो भवति । 
___109. The affix य comes after the word 'sodara' in the sense of who sleeps,' the word being in the 7th case in construction. 
By sūtra VI. 3. 88 er is optionally changed to a before the word उदर when यत follows. Thus समानोरे वितः-सोईयः॥ Here भो is not udatta, as it was in the last ; the udatta here falls on a # । भवे छन्दसि ॥११०॥ पदानि ॥ भवे-छन्दसि ॥ . 
इतिः ॥ तस्येव । खामीसमर्यादव इत्येतस्मिन छन्दसि विषये यवत्ययो भवति । मणादीनां पादीनां चापवाद 
110. The affix ha comes in the Chhandas, after a word in the locative case in construction, in the sense of 'what stays there.' 
840 
मोचन 
[ BK. IV. CH. IV. S. 14 
This debars , &c (IV. 3, 53) Those affixes also are employed in the alternative, there being much latitude of grammatical rules in the Vedas. Thus the words its and further in the following hymn of the Yajur Veda (16. V. 38): ममा मेयाय च पित्याव | All the sutras henceforward up to the end of the chapter, are Vedic sūtras, the word of being understood in them all. The word a governs all the satras up to IV.4. 118 
पाथोनदीभ्यां ज्यण ॥ १११॥ पदानि ॥ पाया-नदीभ्याम्-ड्यण् । वृत्तिः ॥ पायघनामदीयबाप पश् प्रत्ययो भवति तब भवत्येतस्मिायें । यतोपचार 
111. The affix इयण comes in the Chhandas, in the sense of what stays there,' after the words 'pathas' and 'nadi,' wherby the last vowel, with the consonant following, is elided. 
___This debars यत् ॥ Thus पासि भवः-पाध्या, so also मायः॥ As in the following hymns : नमुखा पाभ्या अपा, चनो स्थीत भायो गिरो मे॥ पाथः means firma. ment 
वेशन्तहिमवद्भ्यामण् ॥ १२॥ पदानि ॥ शन्त-हिमवत् भ्याम, मण। वृतिः ॥ शन्तशम्शद्धिमवच्छम्माचार प्रत्ययो भवति तब भव इत्येतस्मिन्विषये । यसोपवार । 
112. The affix to comes in the Chhandas in the sense of 'what stays there' after the words 'vesanta' and 'himavat: 
___This debars यन् ॥ Thus वैयन्तीभ्यः स्वाहा, हेमवती या स्वाहा ॥ 
स्रोतसो विभाषा व्यड्ड्यौ ॥ ११३ ॥ पदानि । स्रोतसः विभाषा, व्यत्-ज्यौ । शनिः ॥ लोतएपन्नाद्विभाषा उपत् उप हत्येती प्रत्ययो भवतस्तत्र भव हत्येतस्मिन्विषये । यतोपवाद 
113. The affixes इयत् and ड्य come optionally in the Chhandas in the sense of 'what stays there,' after the word 
srotas', and before these affixes the final syllable F of srotas is elided. 
This debars on which comes in the alternative. As itafa wiare or are the difference being in the accent (III. 1. 3 and VI. 1. 185). The anubandhar causes the elision of मस् of मोतस् ॥ When यत् is added the form is सोसा 
सगर्मसयूथसनुताद्यन् ॥ ११४॥ पदानि ॥ सत्रर्म-सयूथ-सनुतात, यन् । शनिः ॥ सगर्मसयूथसनुताब्देभ्यो यन् प्रत्ययो भवति तब भव इत्येतस्मिन्विषये । यतोपवादः ॥ ' . 
___114. The affix यन् comes in the sense of what stays there,' after the words 'sagarbha," "sayůtha' and sanuta.' 
BK. IV. CH. IV. SI] 
. 
प 
. 
841 
This debars in the difference being in accent (VI. 1. 197) Thus मनुभाता सर्ग: a younger brother'. मनुसखास 'a younger friend'. So also. बोमा समय खवा जिप thief lit. 'who stays in a concealed place', sanuta meaning 'concealed. (see Rig Veda II. 31.9). The word समान is always changed into & in the Chhandas (VI. 3. 84) 
तुप्रात् धन् ॥ १९५॥ पदानि । तुपात, पन् । . वृत्तिः । हुपदा पन् प्रत्ययो भवति तत्र भव इत्येतस्मिन्निपये। बतोपगार, 
116. The affix धन comes in the Chhandas in the sense of 'what stays there,' after the word, tugra.” 
This debars पत् ॥ Thus तुपिया as स्वमने अपभर एमिक्षाणां ॥ Which assumes the form दुप्प tugrya also. As भारः पम पम तमपास (Rig Veda l. 34 15) Tugrya meaning "sunk in the waters'. The word gu means "food, firma. 
ment, sacrifice and varishtha'. 
अप्रायत्। ११६॥ पदानि भप्रात्-यत्। पतिः ॥ ममान्दायत् प्रत्ययो भवति तब भव इत्येतस्मिनिपये। 
___116. The afffx यत् comes in the Chhandas in the sense of what stays there', after the word "agra', . . 
Thus भो भर-मंग्यम् ॥ Why this separate rule for यत् would have come after 74 by the general rule IV.4 1107 The repetition is to show that un is not debarred by q and 5 of the next sätra, which would have been the case, had this sotra not existed. . 
घच्छौ च ॥ ११७॥ पदानि । घच-छो-च। वृनिः ॥ अपयशयत् पच्छो प्रत्ययो भवस्तव भव इत्येतस्मिविषये। . 
117. The affixes 'ghach and 'chha' come in the Chhandas in the sense of 'what stays there', after the word 'agra.' 
- Thus मंग्यूम् (by धन्, ममीयम् (by s) and ममिय (by पर), And मैमिनम् (by ) from IV.4. 115. See R. V. I. 13. 10 (Sayana) sepercargarnu : ___ समुद्राभ्राद्धः ॥ ११८॥ पदादि । समुद्र-अभ्रात-घ 
. . वृत्तिः । समुद्रसम्भ्राय पः प्रत्ययो भवति तत्र भव हत्येतस्मिन्नथे । यतापवार 
___ 118. The affix 'gha' comes in the Chhandas in the sense of 'what stays there', after the words — samudra' and 'abhra'. . 
. तिने दीयते नियुक्त। 
[BK. IV.CH IV.5124 
This debars ॥ Thus समद्रियः and भधियः, as in समुड़िया मप्सरसो मनीषि णम् and नामदतो भत्रियस्येव पोपा ॥ The word 'abhra' being a word of fewer: syllables than 'samudra' ought to have come first. Its coming as a second member is an irregularity. 
बर्हिषि दत्तम् ॥ ११९॥ पदानि । यहिषि-दत्तम् (यव) ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ भव इति निवृत्त । बहिः घमासामीसमर्यानिमित्येतस्मिन्न यत् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
119. The affix यत् comes in the Chhandas in the sense of 'given', after the word "barhis' in the 7th. case in construction. 
The anuvritti of any **: ceases. Thus affecte paragraag i § V. 10 15'5 दूतस्य भागकर्मणी ॥ १२०॥ पदानि । दूतस्य-भाग-कर्मणी(य) . इत्तिः ॥ निर्देशादेव समर्थविभक्तिः तादात् षष्ठीसमर्यादागे कर्माण चाभिधेये यव्यत्ययो भवति । 
120. The affix on comes in the Chhandas after the word 'data' in the genitive case in construction, in the sense of its share' or 'its duty.' 
Thus there the share of a messenger or the work of a messenger'. As यत्ते भने पूस्थम् ॥ According to VI. I. 2.3, the accent will be यम, but the accented Text reads geplan ___ रक्षोयातूनां हननी । १२१॥ पदानि ॥ रक्षः-यातूनाम्-हननी (यत् ॥ 
वृत्तिः । निर्देशादेव समर्थविभक्तिरसम्पदायातुशब्दाचषष्ठीसमर्याद्धननीयेतस्मिन्नर्ययत्यत्ययो भवति । 
121. The affix ug comes in the Chhandas in the sense of killer', after the words 'raksha' and 'yatu' in.the sixth case in construction. 
That by which anything is killed is called grafte Thus thet and a meaning that which kills the demons called Rakshas and Yatus'. As यात भने रक्षस्या सनःie रक्षसां हननी 'O Agni thy bodies are killers of Rakshas'. So यातव्याः तनूः ॥ The word is in the plural as a mark of respect. 
रेवतीजगतीहविष्याभ्यः-प्रशस्ये ॥ १२२॥ पदानि ॥ रेवती-जगती-हविष्याभ्यः प्रशस्ये॥ पत्तिः ॥ रेवत्यादिभ्यः षष्ठीसमय यः प्रचस्ये पाध्ये यत्पत्ययो भवति ।। 
122. The affix T comes in the Chbandas in the sense of 'praising' after the words 'revati', 'jagati' and ' havishya' in the 6th case in construction. 
The word tur means in 'praising, extolling', formed by adding the Kritaffix क्या to the root, with the force of भाव or 'condition'. Thus खस्यो, जगत्वम् BK IV CL IV:15.1 
पत्... 
843 
and find praising of Revati, Jagati or Havishya'. The word oor is thus formed हविष हिता-हरिया: 'things fit for offering'ie butter &c (हविर+यत् . 1. 4) हविष्यानाम् प्रसन-हविष्यम् (हविष्य+यत् IV.4 122 = हविष्य + यत् the final म being elided by VI.4 148 - इपिए+ यत् ther being elided by VIII. 4.64), 
असुरस्य स्वम् ।। १२३॥ पदानि ।। असुरस्य, स्वम् । निः॥ ममुरपन्नापटीतमर्यास्वमित्येतस्मिन यवत्ययो भवति । भणोपवादः.. 
123. The affix al comes in the Chhandas in the sense of 'property', after the word 'asura' in the 6th case in construction. 
This debars भण् ॥ Thus भसूर्यम् ' belonging to the Asuras. As मनु पा एतन पायचकतं कुलालकतन् 'this vessel made on avheel by apotter belongs to the Asuras'. माय देवेभिर्धायि विषम् ॥ Sce Maitrs.I.83 
मायायामए ॥ १२४॥ पदानि ॥ मायायाम-अण् । पनिः ॥ ममुरणावटीसमर्यान्मायायां स्वविणे प्रत्ययो भवति । पूर्वस्व यतोपवादः। 
____124. The afix भण comes in the Chhandas in the sense of glamour',. after the rord 'asura' in the 6th case in construction. 
This dcbars यत् ॥ ममुरत्य मायामासुर: feminine भारी As मासुरी मावा सधया कतासि । __ तद्वानासामुपधानो मन्त्र इतीएकासुलु च मतोः ॥ १२५ ॥ पदानि ॥ तद्वान् 
आसाम-उपधानः-मन्त्र-ति-नएकासु-लक-च-मतोः॥ त्तिः ॥ सदानिति निर्देशादेव समयविभक्तिः मतबन्सामातिपदिकास्मथमासमर्यादासामिवि परपथै बम. स्ययो भवति । यत्मथमासमर्थमुपधानोमन्वयेत्स भवति । यत्तदासामिति निर्दिष्टमिष्टकाना भवन्ति । लकर चमतोरिति प्रतिनिह सः इतिकरणस्तरियता । सदानित्यवयपेन समायोप्यादिश्ववे। 
125. The affix यत् comes in the Chhandas, after a uominal stem, in the 1st case in construction, ending with the affix 'inatup', when the sense is "this is their mantra of putting up", provided that, the things put up are bricks: And the affix matup is elided by luk. . 
This sätra requires analysis. Here is formed by adding any to mcan. ing 'having that', and refers to a noun formed by the affix Huyn The word भासाम् is genitive plural fem. oft meaning of them'; the pronoun refers to the word FEAT 1 The word 349 means 'putting up', and technically means 'used as a Mantra in the putting up of sacrificial bricks, pots &0'. मन्त्र "sacred hymn".इएका 'bricks'. The whole shtra means "the affix 'yat' is used with 
.844 
[BK, IV. CH. IV % 127. 
the force of a genitive (asam), after a word which ends with matup (tadvan), and denotes a mantra used in putting up of sacrificial objects; when such mantra refers to bricks : and when this affix yat is added, the affix matup is elided'. Thus refer is a Mantra containing the word # The bricks put up or collected (artua) with the recitation of an Mantra, will be called a (FYRTE+7=48+ the affix T (09) being elided e , fem ext) Thus area Fifa 'he collects Varchasya bricks i. e. on which Varchasvan mantra has been pronounced'. So जिस्या उपरधातिS० पयस्या, रेतस्थर . Why do we say more? The affix is not to be added to the whole Mantra. Why do we say, mint putting up'? The affix is not to be added to other Mantras such as those used in praying etc. e. g. TETETAT FET ETHESTAR, here there will be no affix. Why do we say Mantra? Observe Hafenrept BRITTER these bricks are collected with hand having fingers', here there will be no affix. Why do we say reg? Observe FETETT HAN Pai 1914, here there will be no affix, the thing collected being potsherds and not bricks. 
afsahrgur II 88€!! afsafrT-90 11 . f: al safe afsta E tiopneu gest tá i geta ITT: 1 
126. The affix comes in the Chhandas, after the words asvimân, to denote bricks put up with the Mantra con taining the word Asvin, and the affix matup is elided. 
_____ Thus अमिमानुपधानो मन्त्र भासामिष्टकानां भाभिन: fem. भाचिनीThe word is thus formed a HR + 2702= **+ Hor the matup being elided IV.4 125 
धन+अण VI. 4164-माश्विन ॥ Thus आचिनीरपदधाति 'he collects Asvin bricks i. e. bricks at the time of collecting which Mantras containing mitt were uttered. See Yajur Veda Tait S. 5. 3. 1. 1. . वयस्यासुमों मतुए ॥ १२७॥ पदानि ॥ वयस्यासु-मूर्भ-मतुए॥ . 
वृत्तिः ॥ ययस्वानुपधानी मन्त्रो यासां मा वयस्यास्सास्वभिधेयाम मा मतप् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ . 
127. The affix 'matup' is added in the Chhandas, to the word 'mûrdhanvat', in expressing bricks collected with, the Mantra containing the word 'vayas'. 
The word parit mcans the bricks, the Upadhana mantras of which con tain the word Tere N . The affix Hay debars TH A mantra which contains both the word op and main, that Mantra is both in and around Now in denoting sacrificial bricks put up with such a mantra, the affix at would have comc by IV, 4. 125 after both these words ter and FITT I The prçsent 
BK. IV. Ch. IV. $ 129. )' 
and 
845 
lu 
satra ordains ममुप् after मूम्बार ॥ Thus पूर्वम्नतीसाभावि he colleets Mordhanvatt bricks'. The words that and mit denote the same object. See VI. I. 176 
Why do we say TAFE? The affix 'matup' will not be added to mordhan', if the Mantra contains only the word mördhan and not vayas' alsa. In that case it will be the form, meaning bricks collected with the Mantra containing the word ', while her means 'bricks collected with the Mantra containing the words mordhan and vayas'. 
The satra contains the word TW: ablative singular of u It ought to have been tryi, for the affix matup is added to the r being elid ed then by IV. 4. 125. The author has mentally clided the affix 7, and shown in the aphorism the last stage of the word to which work is to be added. 
मत्व मासवन्वोः॥ १२८॥ पदानि । मत्व-मास-तन्योः (यव)। पतिःबस्मिमय महापिहितस्तस्मिन्दसि विपये पयत्ययो भवति माससन्योः प्रत्ययार्थ विशेषणयोः। पाकिम ।। मासदम्पोरमन्तगर्येवा. पातिकम्। हुगकारकारोफाम सम्बार 
128. The affix Te comes in the Chhandas with the force of matup, after a word in the first case in construction, the word so formed meaning a month or a body. 
This debars the affix foil and those having the sense of Art Thus hift from afany 
'the month of clouds' i. e. Junc-July. So also REFTE, T E her, being the names of the months Pausba (Nov-Dec), Phal guna (Feb-March) and Vaisakha (April-May) The word proti is thus form: ed:- + 0 = + T (VI. 4. 146)- (VI. 1. 79) 'the month of honey Similarly EFT : 'the bodies full of vigour'. 
Why do we say "in denoting a month or a body * ? Observe praat पाषण परति here मनुस् is used. 
Vårt :-The affix ay is optionally employed when the sense is 'in mediately after'. .As मपस्मिन्नस्ति मनस्मिनन्तमिति पा-माधयः or माधवी माता ॥ 
Vart: Sometimes the affix is elided, and sometimes the letters x, r and r serve the same purpose as this affix. Thus at: or तपस्या, ममम् or ममस्वर, HF or E64., all in the neuter gender in the Chhandas. Sometimes serves the same purpose, e. g. nt , *TATET N Sometimes y, as ofertas. Somc times re. g.yat 
मधोत्रं च ॥ १२९॥ पदानि । मधो-अ-च। TET U HUPETT Freit war madan 
129. The affix as well as to comes with the force of matup, in the Chhandas, after the word . 
246 
. 
.. 
बन्- 
. . . .[ BK. IV.CH. IV. 132 
i. Thus antar or red u Sometimes the affix is elided, as Hys, all these mean the month of Vaisakha. So also माधवा, मषम्या and मधु: meaning a or body.. 
• ओजसो ऽहनि यत्सी ॥ १३० ॥ पदानि ॥ मोजसा-अहनि-यत्-सौ. . . वृत्तिः॥ मलयहत्येव । मोजः पम्दान्मल बत्यो प्रत्ययो भवतोऽन्यभिषेवे । 
130. The affixes यत् and a come with the force of matup, after the word 'ojas', when a day is meant. 
Thus भोजत्यम् or भोजलीन-भहः the day ' lit. full of heat. वेशोयशआदेर्भगाद्यल् ॥ १३॥ पदानि ॥ वेशा-यश:-आदेः-भगातू-यलू। वृत्तिः ॥ मत्वर्थरस्येव । वेद्योवासी भाव यस्य मातिपरिकस्य सस्मारेघोयामादेभंगान्तामातिपदिकान्न खये याल प्रत्ययो भवति । 
131. The afffix ans comes in the Chhandas, with the force of matup, after the word bhaga, having the words 
vesas' or 'yasas' in the beginning. 
The of ame shows that the accent falls on the vowel preceding the affix (VI. I. 193). Thus वेशोभगो वियते यस्य स-देशाभग्यः 'strong-fortune' so also 
ürtra: 'famous-fortune'. The word ou means strength': * means 'for tune, desire, effort, greatness, virility and fame' The word पेशोभगः may be taken as a Dvandva compound of Que 'force' and pot: 'fortune.' The word qutqy: would then mcan possessed of power and fortune', . खच॥ १३२॥ पदानि ॥ख-च॥ . 
वृणिः ॥ वेशोयचमादेर्भगान्तामातिपरिकानमलय खः प्रत्ययो भवति । योगविभागो ययासंख्यनियसार्य उत्तरार्यमापकापयत्।। 
132. The affix o also comes after the words 've sobhaga' and 'yasobhaga', in the Chhandas, with the force of matup. -- Thus देशोभनीनः and यशोभगीनः॥ This satra has been separated from . last in order to prevent the application of the greita rule (I. 3. 10). For had · the sutra been पेशोया मादेर्भगार यलयौ, as it occurs in Siddhanta Kaumudi, then the affix यल् would apply to वेशोभग, and the affix ख to यशोभग: which is not what is intended. Another reason for making it a distinct aphorism is that the anuvritti of a runs in the next satra, not so of बल्॥ 
पूर्वेः कृतमिनयो च ॥ १३३॥ पदानि ॥ पूर्व-कृत-न-यो-च॥ वृत्तिः ॥ मत्वर्य इति मिवृत्तम् । निर्देशादेव समर्यविभक्तिः । पूर्वशष्मान् तृतीयासमास्कृतमित्येतस्मिमय इन घाइत्येती प्रत्ययो भवतः। चकागलच . . 
BK.IV. CH. IV.:3137] . 
: . 
॥ 
&49 
133. The affixes इन and eas weHas a come in the sense of ' made by them', after the word 'purva' (fore fathers) 'in the Instrumental case in construction. 
· The u is read into the satra by force of the word y; the anuvritti of were ccases. Thus at: megffor: 'made by the ancestors' {. e a road. So also uN: and पूर्वाणः॥ The word पूर्वः in the plural means पूर्व पुरुषाः "past gener. ations, ancestors. These words occur generally in the plural, and mean "roads widened by the forefathers". Thus गम्भीरभिः पथिभिः पूर्विभिः ॥Shalso, a rut: afrat gotat (Rig I. 35. 11 ) Another reading of this sätra is to कतमिनियोच; the affixes then will be rनि (न), and t; and a will be drawn in by virtue of all The examples then will be ; 3rd pl. gfift: (with rich as पपिभिः पूर्षिभिः, or पूर्वाण (ख) or पूः (ON ___ अनिःसंस्कृतम् ॥ १३४॥ पदानि । मन्दिः-संस्कृतम् (यत)। 
पनि निशादेव समर्थ विभक्तिः । मापदातृतीयासमर्यात संस्कृतमित्येतस्मिायें ययययो भवति । 
134. The affix to comes in the Chhandas in the sense of 'sanctified', after the word 'apas' in tbe 3rd case in construction. . 
Thus भप्यम् 'offering purified with water'. As यस्येवमय इकि The case of construction is indicated in the satra itself. 
सहस्रेण समिती घः॥ १३५ । पदानि । सहस्रेण-संमिती-ध। इतिः ॥ निर्देशादेव समर्थविभक्तिः पहलमातृतीयासमर्यान्सम्मिताइत्येतस्मिम पःप्रत्ययो भवति । 
___135. The affix 'gha' comes in the Chhandas, in the sense of like', after the word 'sahasra'; in the 3rd case in construction. . . - 
The case of construction is indicated by the sQtra. Thus the W: fay: 'like unto thousand'. As in the following verse:-atturareitset fram. वः॥ भयममिः सहलिया The word संमित means सल्ब 'equal to'. Some read the word after instead of af, but the meaning will be the same 
मतौ च ॥ १३६॥ पदानि । मती-चा पत्तिः । मलये च बहसराब्दा पः प्रत्ययो भवति। 
136. The affix 'gha' comes in the Chhandas with the force of matup, after the word 'sahasra'. 
___As सहलयस्य वियते -सहमियः ॥ This debars the भवर्य afixes विनि and इनि and 9 of V. 2. 102 and 103. . 
सोममर्हति यः॥१३७॥ पदानि ॥ सोमम्-अहतियः। वृत्तिः । निर्देशादेव समर्यविभक्तिः। सोमशधाद्वितीयासमर्थापईतीवेतस्मिनकामत्ययो भवति।. 
cas 
Ji 
# and a 
. [Bk. V. CH. IV. 141 
.. 137: The affix य comes in the Chhandas, after the word 'Soma', in the second case in construction, when the sense is that of who.deserves that'. 
. Thus सामनहन्ति-सौम्या ब्राह्मणाः “The Brahmanas who deserve Soman i c honorable and learned, and worthy of performing sacrifices. The differ. : ence between up and q is in accent. 
मये च ॥ १३८॥ पदानि । मये-च (य)। इत्तिः । सोममहण, बचानुवर्तते । मय इति मयडयों लभ्यते । सोमधनान्मयडयें या प्रत्ययो भवति । मा गतविकाराषवाकसा मयरर्या । 
_138. The affix य comes in the Chhandas, after the word 'Soma', with the force of the affix mayat. 
The force of the affix मयर is that of ततः भागत: (IV. 3.74 and 82), सकारापया (IV. 3. 134 and 143)and प्रकृत (V.4.21), The case in construction will vary according to the sense. Thus सोम्यं मधुः पिबन्ति -सोममय मथा। 
मधोः। १३९ । पदानि ॥ मधोः (यत) वृत्तिः ॥ यानो निहत्तः । मधुमनामयड यत् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
139. The affix a comes in the Chhandas, after the word 'madhu', with the force of the affix mayat. 
Thus मपण्यान स्सोकान-मधुमयान् ॥ .. . बसोः सम्हे च ॥ १४०॥ पदानि । घसोः-समूहे, च॥ कृत्तिः ॥ वसुधमासमूहे वाच्ये यत्सत्ययो भवति पकायन्मय च । यथायोग समर्थविभक्तिः। पातिकम् ॥ भक्षरसमूह छन्दसः स्वार्थडपसंख्यानम् ॥ पा. वसुधन्दापि यामष्यः॥ 
140. The affix " comes in the Chhandas after the word 'vasu', when a collection is meant, as well as with the force of mayat. 
Thus पसब्यासह 'a collection'. 
Vart:-The affix 'yat' comes without changing the sense, after the Ford 52 when reference is made to the collection of letters. Thus the word छन्दस्वः in the following sentence: "समादशाक्षर-छन्दस्यः प्रजापतियज्ञो भन्ने विहिवा". The 17 letters here referred to being मो श्रापय, four; मस्तु श्रीपद, four; बन, two वेबमा 
five; and a two # 
Vårt: The affix un comes after without changing the sense. As हस्ती गहीतस्य हुभिर्षसम्मे Here पसभ्यः is equal to वसुभिः॥ Similarly ममिव पख व्यवसो 
। नक्षत्राद्घः ॥ १४१॥ पदानि । नक्षत्राव, घः। 
तिः ॥ नक्षपदापः प्रत्ययो भवति स्वायें। 
BK. IV.CH. IV. 81441 
ताति 
. 89 
। 
141. The affix 'gha' comes in the Chhandas after the word 'nakshatra', without altering the meaning. 
The anuvritti of one does not extend to this sotra. Thus muftimp स्वाहा नपवा स्वाहा। 
सर्वदेवात्तातिल ॥ १४२॥ पदानि सर्व, देवान, तातिल पतिः॥ सर्वदेवमान्यां सातिर प्रत्ययो भवति नाति विपये स्वार्थिकः । 
142. The affix 'tatil' comes in the Chhandas after the words 'sarva' and 'deva', without altering the 
meaning. 
As erfaria: and frafa: in the following hymns: eft ? gautanen and प्रदक्षिणिरतातिर्मुगमः। 
शिवशममरिएस्य करे । १४३॥ पदानि ॥ शिव,शम्, अरिएस्य, करे (तातिल)। वृतिःकरोतीति करः प्रत्ययार्थः । सामवल या पडी समर्थविमतिः। विवादियः पनेक पठीसमय पाकर त्वतस्मिम तापित् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
143. The affix 'tâtil' comes, in the Chhandas, after the word 'siva', 'sam', and 'arishta' in the sixth case in construc tion when the sense is 'ho .docs'. 
The word कर is equivalent toकरीति formed byभ (III. I. 134) 
This shows that the construction must be genitive. With a krit-form cd word, it has accusative forcc, as, शिवस्वरः -किरोति। . 
Thus पिवस्य करा-शिवतातिः, So ताति: and भरिटतातिः। As यामिन्ताती भयो बापु (Rig I. 112. 20) जंतासी being dual of घन्ताविः, and meaning मुखस्व कारी; so also भयो मरिहता । 
भावे च ॥ १४४॥ पदानि । भावे-च (तातिल) इतिः ॥ मार पाय छन्दसि विपये शिवादिभ्यस्तातिर प्रत्ययो भवति । 
_144. The affix 'tatil' comes in the Chhandas, after the words siva', 'sam' and 'arishta', being in the 6th casc in construction, the sense being that of condition. 
Thus forth 119:- futaifa: 'the condition of blissfulness'. Trata: the state of happiness or peace', भरिटताविः ॥ Here these words have the forcc of Verbal nouns.