 ओ३म् । अथ सप्तमाध्यायस्य प्रथमः पादः । 
BOOK SEVENTH. 
CHAPTER FIRSr. 
युवोरनाकौ ॥१॥ पदानि ॥ यु-चोः, अन-अकौ । वृतिः ॥ इत्यतयोरुत्सृष्टविशेषणयोरनूनासिकयणोः प्रत्यययार्महणं तयोः स्थाने यथासङ्ख्य मन भक इत्येतावादेवी भवता । 
Karikt युवोद् दिलनिशो दिले यण्तु प्रसज्यते । अय देकवडावः कय पुबइवेदयम् ॥ 
हित्ये नैगमिको लोप एकखे नुमनित्यता । माशिष्यवान्दि लिङ्गस्य पुंस्त्वं हि समाश्रितम । 
1. For यु and तु (nasalised) in an affix, are substi tuted respectively अन and अक॥ 
g and g are taken here as stripped of all other indicatory letters, and the semi-vowels are also to be understood to have been nasalised. The भन re places यु, and मक replaces दु ॥ Thus स्यु (III. I. 134)-मन, as नन्द + ल्यु- नन्दनः 
:11 So also on and on (IV. 3. 23), as Ardani, Portaat: 11 I we find in dernis (III. I. 133), as क+ण्वुल - कारकः, हारकः ॥ So also बुन् (IV. 3.98) as वासुदेवकः, भर्जुनका ॥ 
Why do we say nasalised g and u? Observe soft Te (V. 2. 123) Here the यु is not replaced by मन, and we have अर्णायुः ॥ So also in मुजिभ्यां पुक्रस्युको | Here the यु of युक् and युक् (Un III. 21) are not replaced by भन; as भुज्युः and मृत्युः ॥ In the affixes above mentioned, the semi-vowel is not con. sidered to have the nasal. There are no visible marks of nasality on any affixes, but the maxim is प्रतिज्ञानुनासिक्याः पाणिनीयाः ॥ 
The word gat: is the Genitive Singular of ye considered as a single word, i.e. a Samahara Dvandva compound in the singular, and such com pounds are always neuter (II. 4. 17), The Genitive Singular of ty is therefore युवुनः the augment being added by VII. I. 73. The anomalous form युयो shows the existence of the maxim that a rule ordaining an augment is not universal ly valid (भनित्यमागमवासनम्) | Or the युद्ध may be considered as masculine Dvandva, and then it proves the maxim that the gender need not be taught, the usage of the people settles the gender of a word (लिङ्गमशिष्य, लोकाश्रयस्वाल लिङ्गस्य)॥ If, however, युवू be considered an itaretara-yoga Dvandva compound, then its Genitive dual will be sht:, one is clided as a Chhandas irregularity, or the F is clided, and we have the T+371: =T: an anoinalous dual. 
1316 
SOME SUBSTITUTES. 
[BK. VII. Cu. 1. & 2 
Kartka :-If It is taken as a dual, then there ought to be a semi-vowel (i.e. year:); if it is considered as Aggregate Singular, then it ought to be neuter, how is then : masculine? (To this we answer), if it be taken as dual , then there is elision of the tu (i.e.); if it be taken as singular 
, then the augment on which comes in the Genitive Singular of Neuters, does not come here, proving that the rule of 14 augment is Anitya (not of universal application). Or the word is taken as masculine, because the Gender depends upon usage. 
__ आयनेयीनीयियः फढखच्छयां प्रत्ययादीनाम् ॥२॥ पदानि ॥ आयन्-पय-ईन् 6-89, 67-9-3-9TH, TT4-34retara वृत्तिः ॥ भायन एन ई ई इत्येते भादेशा भवन्ति ययासंख्य कख छ । इत्येतेषां प्रत्ययारीनाम् । 
2. आयन्, for , एय् for द्, ईन् for स्व ईय् for छ, and 6 for y, are substituted, when these consonants stand in the beginning of an affix. 
Thus ** (IV. 1. 99) - 746, as 57+* - FR147, treo: N. (IV. 1. 120)-2 as atqutai, mara: 11 (IV. 1. 139) fa, as a reventati, ragtat: it 
(IV. 2. 114)- 84, as mitai, arata u (IV. 1. 138)=57, as fra: 11 
Why do we say 'of an affix'? Observe ta, draa, wafa, fornia and wota, where these consonants are in the beginning of a roof. Why do we say ' in the beginning'? Observe 7 H, where is in the middle of the affix; and remains consequently unchanged. 
These are &c, substitutions should be understood to have taken place at the very time the affixes * &c, are taught, and these substitutions being made, the rule of accent, which makes an affix acute on the first syllable, applics. Thuse is not acute, but of a substituted for it. Similarly in IV. 4. 117, the affix taught is ry with an indicatory , showing that the final of the affix rt will be acute (VI. 1. 163), and not of q, for a would have been acute by the general rule affix. 
. In qui: (Uņ 1.99), : U (Uņ I: 102), the affixes and remain unchanged, and we have que, and to: 11 This is explained on the maxin of zout Tro (III. 3. 1). In the satranda (III. 1. 29), the affix fus has been taught and not of, this shows that the rule of substitution herein taught does not apply to the affixes to be added to the verbal roots. Thus * TL (III. 2. 28), 14737TTCTW T (III. 3. 16). Here the u and are not be re placed by fa and all In fact, they cannot be regarded as affixes, but only as a or servile letters. By I. 3.8, the gutturals are except in Taddhita : therefore, the substitutions take place in Taddhita affixes, where the er and a are not cu 
The final 2 in $ren and should not, however, be considered as sesvile () though they be final consonants. This we infer from the satra 
BK. VII. CH. IS5.] 
SOME SUBSTITUTIONS. 
1317 
प्राचामवृखान फिन् बहुलम् ॥ Here the t of फिन् is indicatory, showing the position of the accent. But ñ is replaced by 997, so if the 7 of man were also to be indicatory (इन्) there would have been no necessity of adding - in फिन् । Hence the fact of this a in shows that the rin mraq and ro are not trul 
झो ऽन्तः ॥ १॥ पदानि ॥ झा, अन्तः, ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ प्रत्ययावयवस्य सस्य भन्त इत्ययमारेशो भवति ॥ 
3. spray is substituted for the y of an affix. ___ The word प्रत्यय is understood here, but not so the word मादिः ॥ Thus सिं becomes भान्ति aud a becomes अन्त (III. 4.78). As कुर्वन्ति, सुन्वन्ति and चिन्वन्ति, so also यान्तै, the लेट् of धीह॥ Thus शी+ लेट् -भी+शप् + माद् + (III. 4.54)-पी 
+शप् +मा+से (III. 4.79)-धी+श+मा+झे (III. 496)-शी+श+मा+मन्तै (VII. 1. 3)-r+मा+मन्तै - शयान्ते (after guna): as अथ श्वो विजगिष्यमाणाः पतिभिः सह प्रथा ते॥ So also in the Unadi affix सच (Un III. 126): as g+स-अरन्तः, वेद्यन्तः॥ This substitution docs not take place when it is not part of an affix: as FSHAT, aft , grapasztalt IIere also the accent falls on the substitute, according as it is real or otherwise. Thus the substitute Bay of pis first-acute by the rule 111. 1. 3; but the substitute of He is final acute because of the indicatory T (VI. I.763)॥ . 
अदभ्यस्तात् ॥ ४॥ पदानि ॥ अतू, अभ्यस्तान, ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ मभ्यस्तारङ्गादुत्तरस्य सकारस्य मरित्ययमादेशो भवति ॥ 
4. अत् is substitute for s after a reduplicated verbal stem. 
As देवति, दस्तु, स्थति, धतु; जाति, जातु: जापति, जापतु ॥ This भत् is replaced by. Ty, as st!:, 79: 11 Here also the accent will be on the firstsyllable of the substitute. Thus अति, मत, मते, अतु, भताम् in the subsequent sutras. The accent 
of the reduplicates, however, is governed by VI. I. 189, (अभ्यस्सानामादिः)॥ 
मात्मनेपदेवनतः ॥५॥ पदानि ॥ आत्मनेपदेषु, अ नतः, (अत्)॥ वात्तः ॥ भात्मनेपदेषु यो झकारस्तस्थानकारान्तारलादुत्तरस्थादित्ययमारेयो भवति ॥ 
5.277 is always substituted for the # in the Atm ancpada, when it is not preceded by a verbal stem ending in ॥ 
Thus पिन्वते, चिन्वताम, भचिन्धत सुनते, नुनताम्, भलुनत | Why in the At. manepada? Observe Ton, Fafia II Why "when not preceded by an "? Observe च्यवन्ते, प्लवन्त, in which, though the roots are च्यु and प्लु, they assume the form out and when the Vikarana Ti is added; the vikarama is added first, because it is nitya ; and then the substitution of an or sa for , as the case may be. The word 47: qualifies , the should be immediately preced ed by a stem ending in a non-97; if some other letter intervenes, the rule will not apply. Thus from ar-48, here between eft and #, intervenes the qug ment माद् , therefore s is not preceded by a stem ending in nonw, but by भार।। 
1318 
SOME SUBSTITUTIONS. 
( BK. VII. CH. If 8 
Pistollell tenta il afrs:, CI fe: il FTFIFA programa ETHI U 
6. The se substitute of h, gets the augment nee after the root oft il 
Thus ich, dama, The augment is added at the beginning of the affix, making w= 11 Had this been an augment of p, then like the ar augment in arm, it would have intervened between the oft and p, and 
not immediately following a non- stem, w would not have been substi tuted for at all. Therefore it is made the augment of the substitute mu, and not of 11 The root dit is read in the sätra with its anubandha z in order to indicate, that there is no a augment when there is elision of the Intensive affix यह, nor any Guna. As व्यति शेश्यते ।। 
It is a general rule that an operation applying to a root which is ex hibited with an anubandha, will not apply to the same root in its Intensive-yan luk form. The following verse shows when operations applying to simple roots will not apply to their Intensive forms:-- 
शितपा शपानुबन्धेन निर्विष्टं वाणेन च। 
यत्रकार महणं चैव पंचेतानि न बङ्लकि । "These five sorts of operations will not apply to Intensive-yan-luk forms: 1. When the simple root is exhibited in the satra with fag as w in VII. 4- 73 is shown as were 11 In Intensive, the perfect will be 
i n and not 797444 1 2. Where the root is exhibited with yr, as the root zin VII. 2. 49 is shown as #T# There is after the Desiderative of simple root but not in Intensive. 3. When a simple root is exhibited with an anubhancha, as do here. 4. Where a gaña is mentioned in a rule, as 47 is taught after Divadi roots ( III. 1. 69). It will apply to simple roots of Divadi gana, and not to their Intensive. 5. Lastly, where the word en is used in a sútra. As VII. 2. 10. That rule will apply to pary simple roots and not to their Intensives. 
af TT II na ilari, far TT 11 वृत्तिः ॥ पेसरणादुतरस्य झारेशस्थातो विभाषा रूहागमो भवति । 
7. The stat substitute of optionally gets the augment रुट after the verbal stem विद (जेति॥ 
As graagt or eftà; Hiftore or iferna; Hath or aften The fear is the Adadi root here, and does not apply to fint, fara, fan, which belongs to the Rudhädi classfare forret) 
There is no augment in uro here also, as safairtrat u :: To soft 51 Varat l oh, gole, ( 7 ) 
तः।। छन्दसि विपये बहुलं डागमो भवति। 
BK. VII. CH. I. 8.91 
SOME SUBSTITUTES. 
1319 
8. The augment that is diversely applied in the Vcda. 
Thus fak; ara START GE! Here is the Imperfect (PT) plural of all Thus +7 +7= 31, the being elided by VII, 1. 41. Sometimes, the augment does not take place, as I Owing to the word 
, 'diversely', the augment r is added to other affixes also, than I As 
na in preparati || This is the aorist in T of the root cu by II1. 1. 57, the guņa ordained by VII. 4. 16, does not 'diversely' take place. 
Bat FE DE 11 Ell vara li a:, He:, वृत्तिः ॥ अकारान्ताबजादुत्तरस्व भिस ऐसित्यवमादेवी भवति। Karika ॥ एवं मिसि परवायेदत ऐसय भविष्यति । कुतोले भीतपूर्वावस्तु नित्यस्तया सति ॥ 
9. After a nominal stem ending in a, de is subs tituted for the case-ending the 
As Ti, Ni, wame: Why do we say ending in 3? Observe stafai, rgfa: ul Why 'short *? Observe ugra:, HATTA: H The adhikara of 4647:" (after a short m'), extends up to VII. 1. 17. 
The form ofare: illustrates some important principles of grammar. B + 0* (THIAT:) ( being shortened by 1. 2. 48). The word otta sit ends in , and there fore forms its Ins. pl. by Oru Thus shi +T 11 Now we apply VII. 2. 101, which says for He is substituted my before vowel. beginning case-endings. It should not be objected, that the substitution is ordained for HT and not sit; for the maxim TUTTARITT E (a tail-less dog is still a dog) applies here. Having made this substitution, we get alasa:11 Nor should you object that it was the # of which had given occasion to the existence of ge, and that should not be destroyed, on the maxim f o nt fai r at franara, for this maxim is not universal, as Panini himself shows in employing the form 2 (III. I. 14), in which g of the Dative is changed into a by VII. 1. 13, and then this very y causes the destruction of and makes it m (See VII. 1. 13 also). 
Karikå :-If there be substitution of g for the final m before the affix für by the subscquent sätra VII. 3. 103, where will then the present sätra, causing the substitution of QR for fræ after stems ending in a, find its scope, (because there will be no stem lest ending in m)? If even after changing a into q, you change the printo greh, because they was once (Masa); then the rule of changing for into the becomes a nitya rule, because it takes effect even after the application of rule VII. 3. 103, and being nitya it debars that rule. Thus + f 1 Here the subsequent rule VII. 3. 103, requires the # to be changed into pl Thus +9: Now the present rule cannot apply because there is no 877 stem. However, is considering that are once 
1320 
SOMS SUBSTITUTES. 
[ BK. VI. CI. II. 12. 
.............. 
was at, we change 74: to in then the rule becomes a nitya rule. In fact, it is a nitya rule and debars the application of VII. 3. 103, within its jurisdic tion, VII. 3. 103, finds its scope in T+Trung 11 
ago gaufr Il poll reifa il , Eyrare, (CE) वृतिः ॥ छन्दसि विषय बहुलमैसारेपो भवति । 
10. In the Veda the substitution takes place diversely. 
That is one is substituted for fore even after stems which do not end in short s; as :; and some times the substitution does not take place even after stems ending in short , as, 1974: aftra il 
c oma (Rig Veda I. 1.4). RECHTFITT: 11 888 Cara Il 7, 94, ht:, , :, (HE DE) H वृत्तिःवम् भाव इत्येतयारककारयोर्भिस ऐम भवति ।। 
11. This substitution of Ce does not take place after इदम् and अदस, except when they end in क॥ 
As gráti, wat, but I : 11 By VII. 2. 102, H is substiuted for the final of th, as 79+*- (VI. 1. 97). By VII. 2. 113, the ris elided before fore, and the only portion lest is , which becomes & according to VII. 3. 103. For the final of stem is simlarly by VII. 2. 102, 4 substituted, and + 
= (VI. 1. 97), and according to our present sätra, the form in Ins.pl. would be saft, but is changed to by VIII. 2. So, and q to f by VIII. 2. 81. 
The exception made with regard to these forms ending in , shows the existence of the following maxim : जदूमध्यपतितस्तद्ग्रहणेन गृपते " Any term that may be employed in Gramınar denotes not merely what is actually de noted by it, but it denotes also whatever word-forın inay result when some thing is inserted in that which is actually denoted by it." 
The sätra has not been made as : Amt, for had it been so con structed the rule would have applied to the ending and me and to no other ending pronoun, and we could not get the forms , lll Moreover such a construction would have made to applicable to me and PT also in their simple states : i. c. we could not have got the forms grir: or Hifa: il Therefore the negative construction a nti is used in sutra in order to prevent the rule of contrariety. 
TefayatHarrem: 118811 F II ET, F, FATH, 59, ICT, RAT:, ! वृभिः ॥मकारान्तावलादुत्तरेषांटासिडसाम्न भात् स्थ इत्येते भादशा भवन्ति यथासंस्थम् ।। 
12. After a stem ending in sy, arc substituted 67 for the Instrumental ending; 4 ta for the Ablative endir.g 2, and Fy for the Genitive ending FH II 
Thus वृक्षण and प्रक्षण; वृक्षात् and प्रक्षान् ; and वृक्षस्य and प्रशस्थ ॥ After stems not ending in we have the original ending, as RT, FUT Some 
BK. VII. Cl. I. S. 15] 
SOME SBBSTITUTIONS. 
1321. 
would have the forms मतिजासिन and मसिमरसात् from भतिजर ॥ This is on the analogy of भातजरतः [See Satram ante]. Thus भति+अरा- मतिजर (I. 2.48), Then by VII. 2. 101, जरस् is substituted for जर before the vowel-affixes. These forms are not supported however by Patanjali. According to him the forms will be either भतिभरण, भतिजरात्, or मंतिमरसा and भतिजरसः but never भाति अरसिन and मसिमरसात् ॥ 
Wः ॥ १३॥ पदानि ॥ के, यः, (अतः अङ्गस्य) निः॥रिति चतुभ्यंकवचनस्य ग्रहणम् अकारान्ताबहादुसरस्य के इत्येतस्य य इत्ययमादेशी भवति । 
13. After a stem ending in अ, there is substituted y for the Dative ending all 
Thus वृक्षाय, सक्षाय, the wis lengthended by VII. 3. 102, in spite of the maxim संनिपातलक्षणो विधि रनिमित्तम् तद्विधातस्य ॥ “That which is taught in a rule the application of which is occasioned by the combination of two things, docs not become the cause of the destruction of that combination". Thus g is substituted here, because the preceding word ends in a short , thus this short of occasioned the existence of , therefore this a cannot occasion the des truction of # But that however it does, for it is on account of this 4, that the preceding is replaced by T 11 
The *: is the anomalous genitive case of the Dative ending ; this asfix is exhibited without any vibhakti in VII. 1. 28. The ai should not be taken as the Genitive singular of the affix of the Locative singular. 
सर्वनाम्नः स्मै ॥ १४॥ पदानि ॥ सर्वनाम्नः, स्मै, ( अतः डे)॥ वृत्तिः॥ मकारान्तात्सर्वनाच उत्तरस्य । स्मै इत्ययमादेशो भवति ॥ 
14. After a Pronominal stem ending in 2, Å is substituted for the of the Dative. 
As सर्वस्मै, विश्वस्मै, यस्म, कस्मे, तस्मै ॥ But भवते where the Pronoun does not end in all When my is substituted for 74 (II. 4 32) in anvädesa sentences, then we have the form भस्मै ॥ But in मष दरम् +D-भर म+ए-मना+ए, here the preceding word ends in m1 and we could not have g replaced by Therefore we infer that being an antaranga operation should be substituted first, and the sandhi afterward and we get मधास्मै ॥ (See VII. 2. 102 for the change of यद्, तद् &c into य, स &c). The change of ए into स्मै is antaranga as it depends upon one word, while the gaita long s is bahiranga because it is an operation depending upon two words. 
असिङयोः स्मास्मिनी ॥ १५॥ पदानि ॥ सि, ज्योः, स्मात, स्मिनी, (मतः सर्वनामः॥ वृत्तिः ॥डसि डि इत्येतयारकारान्सात्सर्वनान्न उत्तरयोः स्मात् स्मिन् इत्येताबादेशौ भवतः ॥ 
16. After a Pronominal stem ending in अ, स्मात् 
1322 
SOME SUBSTITUTES. 
[ BK. VII. Cl. I. S. 18. 
is substituted for the Ablative ending i and fit for the Locative ending 11 . Thus सर्वस्मात्, विश्वस्मात्, यस्मात् तस्मात् and कस्मात् ॥ सर्वस्मिन्, विश्वस्मिन् यस्मिन्, तस्मिन् and भन्यस्मिन् ॥ But भवत: and भवति from भवत् ending in a non-म, and वृक्षात् and वृक्षे in non-pronouns. See VII. 2. 102 for यद् तद् &c. 
पूर्वादिश्यो नवभ्यो वा ॥ १६ ॥ पदानि ॥ पर्व-आदिभ्यः, नवश्या, पा, (सर्व नाम्नः सियाः स्मात् स्मिनी)। 
वृत्तिः ॥ पूर्वादिभ्यो नवभ्यः सर्वनाम उत्तरयोसियोः स्मात् स्मिन् इत्येतावादेशी वा भवतः ॥ 
16. स्मात् and स्मिन् are optionally substituted for the Ablative and Locative endings, after get and the eight that follow it (I. 1. 34). 
___Thus पूर्वस्मात् or पूर्वान्, पूर्वस्मिन् or पूर्वे, परस्मात् or परात्, परस्मिन् or परे, भवरस्मात्, or भवरात, भवरस्मिन् or भवरे, दक्षिणस्मात् or दक्षिणान, दक्षिणस्मिन् or दक्षिणे, उत्तरस्मात, or उत्तरात, उत्तरस्मिन्, or उत्सरे, भपरस्मातं, or भपरात्, भपरस्मिन्, or भपरे, अधरस्मात्, or भधरात्, भधस्मिन्, or मधेरे, स्वस्मात्, or स्वात्, स्वस्मिन् or स्वे, भन्तरस्मात् or मन्तरात्, भन्तस्मिन् or मन्तरे ॥ मयभ्य इति किम्, त्यस्मात् , त्यस्मिन् ॥ 
Why do we say 'nine only'? Observe त्यस्मात् and त्यस्मिन्, no option is allowed here. 
जसः शी ॥ १७॥ पदानि ॥ जसः, शी, ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ भाकरान्तात्सर्वनान्न उत्तरस्य जसः शीत्ययमादेयो भवति ॥ 
___17. After a Pronominal stem ending in अ, tis substituted for the nominative plural असू॥ 
__ Thus सर्वे (सर्व+ई), विश्वे, थे, कं, ते ॥ Though सर्व +r would have also given at, the long i is taken for the sake of subsequent sätras, in forming पपुणी, अतुनी ॥ 
औङ आपः ॥ १८॥ पदानि ॥ औङः, मापः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ भावन्तारादुत्तरस्यौन शीत्ययमादेवो भवति ॥ 
Karika-मोकारोवं शीविधी हिद्गृहीतो हिचास्माकं नास्ति कोयं प्रकारः । 
सामान्यार्थस्तस्य चासंगनेस्मिन्छिस्काय ते श्यां प्रसनं स दोषः ।। निवे विद्यार्णनिर्देशमा वर्णे यत्स्यालय विद्यासदादौ । 
पर्णायं तेन डिखेप्योपो निर्देशोयं पूर्वसूण वा स्यात् ।। 
18. After a stem ending in the feminine affix 'मा, t is substituted for the dual endings औ of the Nominative 
and Accusative. - Thus खट्टे तिष्ठतः, खट्टे, पश्य, बहुराज (IV. I. 13), कारीपगन्ध्ये ॥ Ther in भीड is for the purposes of included się also. There is, in fact, no such affix as site taught by Panini any where. The following Karika raises this question and certain doubts in the first verse and then answers them in the second. 
BK. VII. CH. I S. 20.) 
F 
SUBSTITUTION. 
1323 
Karlka :- In this rule about it, the letter it has been enunciated with an indicatory Ę; but we have no eft. with a , taught any where. What sort of satra construction is this? If you say, the use of is to form a cominon term for the two affixes air and €, then by so doing, en operations inust be performed with regard to this ot of yours, and this is an error. [ot replac ing for me will be considered as on, and being far, it will take the aug ment are by VII. 3, 113: and the form will be già and not all 
Ans:--The should be considered here as merely indicating the letter wit, and as not an 17, so that whatever will apply to the letter w will apply to any form beginning with it, by the maxim una form TT, AFO 11 Or we may be considered as merely the letter i and not any particular affix, and is added only for the sake of facility of pronounciation, like in G m being merely a letter, will include all affixes having the letter opt as their significant part: and thus the is not being a fon affix the rule VII. 3. 113, will not apply: and so there is no anomaly. Or the forın nie may be considered as the affix of the dual, for Nominative and Accusative in the terminology of Ancient Grammarians, and will not produce fer effects, because the anu bandhas of the Ancients do not produce their effects in this Grammar of Panini: i.e. the rules regarding anubandhas made by Påņini refer to the anubandhas made by him and not by older authors. 
a u IIPEII Tata Il agjenta, ( His: aft) . वृत्तिः ॥ नपुंसकारङ्गादुत्तरस्य भीड: शी इत्ययमादेशो भवति ॥ वार्तिकम् ।। श्यां प्रतिषेधो वक्तव्यः ॥ 
19. After a neutral stem, & is substituted for the oom. and acc. dual stil 
Thus gor: faga, quis qui $0$+*- 7, the my of your required to be elided by VI. 4. 148. This is, however, not done by the following 
Vårt:-Prohibition should be stated in the case of the affix at of Therefore the # is not elided. 
Similarly इधिनी, मधुनी, पुणी, जतुनी ॥ The augment = is added by VII. 1. 73. 
pret: fet: 11 2018 tantat ll Te, TFT:, fæti, II वृत्तिः ॥ नपुंसकारङ्गादुत्तरयोर्जासोः शि इत्यथमादेशो भवति ॥ 
20. After a neutral stem, x is substituted for the endings of the Nominative and Accusative Plural (FF and are) 11 
Thus gotta fargli qogfa , IT, RUTH, Tofor, wafa 11 The augment qis by VII. 1.72, The word 9 in thc sâtra being read along with a 
1324 
ELISION OF U AND STT II 
( BK. VII. CI. I. 5. 23. 
denotes the Accusative Plural ending of and not the Taddhita affix or (V. 4. 43); as कुण्डशो ददाति, वनशः प्रविशति ।। 
अष्टाभ्य और ॥ २१॥ पदानि ॥ अष्टाभ्यः, और, ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ अष्टाभ्य इति कताकारोऽशमो पृयते तस्मादुत्तरयोशसारोशित्ययमावेशो भवति । 
21. After the stem aur (the forın assumed liy मष्टन VII. 2. 84), और is substituted for the endings of the Nominative and Accusative Plural. 
As मी तिष्ठन्ति, मठों पश्य | Why have we taken the form भाटा and not भाट? Observe मष्ट तिष्ठन्ति, मष्ट पश्य ॥ This peculiar construction of the present satra (mera: instead of a:) indicates, that the wr substitution for the 7 of भटन् is optional. This satra is, moreover, an exception by anticipation, to the following satra, by which the plural Nom. and Acc. endings are elided after the numerals called षण् ॥ The elision of case-endings taught by II. 4.7I, is not, however, barred by this rule; the elision taught therein will take place, whether this rule applies or not. Thus भष्टपुषः, भष्टभार्यः ॥ 
The present rule applies even when me is at the end of a compound, as परमाटी, उत्तमाटी ॥ But in प्रियाष्टाना, भो does not come, as मष्टन् has not assumed the form mer here i.e. it has not lost its qui 
बझ्यो लुक् ॥ २२॥ षड्भ्यः , लुक, ॥ वृतिः॥ पद्संज्ञकेभ्य उत्तरयोश्शतोलुंग्भवति ।। 
22. The Nom. and Acc. Plural endings are elided after the Numerals called षष् (I. 1. 24). 
As षट् तिष्ठन्ति, षद् पश्य, पञ्ष, सप्त, नव, दश | The rule applies even to compounds ending with 'shash' words : as परमषद्, उत्तमपद, but the 'shash' should be the principal; if it is only a secondary member of the compound, the rule will not apply: as' fame, forargs 477:11 For the elision of I see 
VIII. 2.7, 
स्वमोनपुंसकात् ॥ २३ ॥ पदानि ॥ सु, अमोः, नपुंसकात, ॥. वृत्तिः ॥सुभम् इत्येतयोर्नपुंसकादुत्तरयो ग्भवति ॥ 
23. The nom. and acc. singular case-endings सु and są are elided after a Neutral stem. 
As दधि तिष्ठति, दधि पश्य, मधु तिष्ठति, मधु पश्य ॥ So also and अतु ॥ In माणकलम the word तद् has lost its nom. sing. ending by this rule, which has thus superseded the subsequent rule VII. 2. 102, by anticipation, by which replaces the final of 1 Or this luk rule of the present s@tra is a Nitya 
Rampared with VII. 2. 102. How can this be a nitya rule when it is cat side by the next rule waist ll We still call this rule nitya, on the maxim BK. VII. CH. 1. 5. 25 } 
MIT SUBSTITUTE. 
· 1325 
a ura falari farà a ra "an operation) the cause of which would, (after the taking effect of another operation that applies simultane ously), be reinoved by another (third rule), is not, (on that account regarded as) not nitya". For here the cause which is luk-elision, is removed by the following aphorism arsa which ordains an 4 instead of luk, and not by VII, 2. 102. For the application of rule VII. 2. 102, the necessary condition is that a case-affix should follow he &c. But when the case-affix itself is luk-elided, the substitution taught in that sätra cannot take place. 
at sa ll 2411 ora 11 07:, 7, 11 af: il ar an garat: FPÄTTATAHT na II 
24. After a Neutral stem in 1, 2 is substituted for and wh the endings of the nom. and acc. sing. 
As कुण्ड तिष्ठति, कुण्डं पश्य | So also वनम्, पीठम् ॥ Why do we not say "mt is substituted'? 3+= 37, thus there would be lengthening is only an was taught (VII. 3. 101), while g +7= 4 (the single substitution of the form of the antecedent by VI. 1. 107). 
: 9999: 1124 | Ufa 11 * , at Ferti, per a वृत्तिः ॥ उतरादिभ्यः परयोः स्वमारदह इत्ययमादेशो भवति ॥ 
Karika अपृक्तदमो दोषी निवृत्ते इतरादिषु । मडिवाइसरादीनां न लोपो मापि दीर्घता॥ 
25. area is substituted for the Nom. and Acc. singular endings and an after the five Pronouns gac &c. (i. e, the stems formed with the affixes 1. 30, and 2. Oh, and the stems 3. $82, 4. 4 and 5. rat). 
These are the five pronouns, which in the list of Sarvanamans are read together (See I. 1. 27):747, , HT, ER and munt! Thus TT+ 897= (the st of katara elided by ): as a forefa, T T So also an, Fata, B ata and want 11 Why alter these five only ? Observe à fagfa. Full Why do we make the affix have an indicatory ? In order to prevent the lengthening of the vowel in the nominative singular : as + 70 = it by VI. 1. 102. In the case of the accusative, or being the substitutc of $4 will be sthånivat, and give us go by VI. 1. 107 even without ! Why not make the affix merely and not t; it would give STT &c without the application of any rule of Sandhi? The simple would not give us the Vocative at, The final would have' been elided in the Vocative, as being an aprikta. See however VI. 1. 69. . 
Karikå :-If in the satra VI. 1. 69, there is the anuvritti of the word 'aprkta', then there is fault with regard to a (i. e. the vocative of members in a will not be elided, yozg will be the form required and not ) 
1326 
SOME SUBSTITUTIONS. 
( BK. VII. CH. I $. 28. 
however, the anuvritti of aprkta ceases, there will be anomaly with regard to pronouns कतरन् &c (i.e. we shall not have the form हे कतरा but कतर) 
Therefore, by reading the affix it with an indicatory i.e reading it as 
3, we get out of this dilemma, and so there is not the elision of wat in कतरन् &c in the vocative; nor is there lengthening of the vowel (कतरात्, which would have been the form had there been no ). 
। नेतराच्छन्दसि ॥ २६ ॥ पदानि ।न, इतरात, छन्दसि, ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ इतरशदादुनरयोः स्वमो छन्दसि विपवे भरावेजो न भवति । 
26. In the Veda, अत् (or अद्) is not the substitute of F and भम् Nom. and Acc. Sg. endings, after इतर ॥ 
__As इसरमिसरमण्डममावत; पार्थमितरम् ॥ Why in the Vedas? See बतात काष्ठम्, इतरत् कुज्यम् ॥ Had this sutra been placed immediately after मतो (VII. I. 24), we could have made it simpler by saying तराच्छन्दसि; the present position of the sätra indicates that we should divide it into two, to include other cases. In the case of pain, the substitution does not take place, either in the Veda or in the Common Language. As एकसरं तिष्ठति, एकतरं 
पश्य ॥ 
युष्मदस्मद्भयां उसो ऽश् ॥ २७॥ पदानि ॥ युष्मदस्मद्भधाम, उसः, अश् ॥ इतिः। युष्मदस्मदित्येताभ्यामुत्तरस्य सोऽधित्ययमादेयो भवति । 
27. अश् (I. 1. 55), is substituted for the Genitive ending अस, after युष्मद् and अस्मद् ॥ 
Thus #9 and 777 The indicatory T of 7 shows that by I. 1. 55, the whole of the affix orą is to be replaced : otherwise it would have replaced only the first letter of the affix; and the affix not being a substitute-affix, rulc VII. 2. 89, would not be applicable to it. The te is substituted for yop, and मम for मस्मद् by VII. 2.96; and a+म (भा), and मम+म-तब and मम् by VI. I. 97. 
प्रथमयोरम् ॥२८॥ पदानि ॥, प्रथमयोः, मम्, ॥ वृतिः ॥ त्यविभक्तिको निर्देश त्यतस्य प्रथमयोध विभत्तयोः प्रयमाहितीययोर्युष्मदस्मरपामुगरयो रमित्ययमादेवो भवति । 
28. भम् is substituted for the Dative ending ए and for the endings of the nom. and acc. in all numbers, after the stems युष्मद् and भस्मद् ॥ 
The i the ending of the Dative is exibited anomalously in the sutra without any case ending (compare VII. 1, 13, F:) hat: means of the first and second cases. Thus युष्मद् +3-तुभ्यदू +(VII. 2.95)-तुभ्य+रे (VII. I. 102) - तुभ्य+मम् (VII. I. 28)-तुभ्यम् (VI. I. I07 or 97); similarly मह्यम् ॥ So also एमा +दुस्व (VII. 2.94)= स्व+सु (VII. 2.91)-व+7 (VII. 2. 102)- भिम 
BK. VII. CH. I. $. 30 ] 
SUBSTITUTION OF CASE-AFFIXES. 
1327 
(VII. 1. 28)= (VI. 1. 97 or 107). Similarly 4541 So also y and arra by VII. 2. 92 and VI. 2. 88; ora and tom by VII. 2. 93 and VI. 1. 97 or 107, FM and Hra by VII. 2. 97 and VII. 2. 87; and yang and wrta as before. 
Teta I RE II Toua ll TF, 7, 11 वृत्तिः। युष्मदस्मनपामुत्तरस्य शसो नकारादेशो भवति ।। 
29. wis substituted for the # of at the affix of the Accusative Plural after युष्मद् and अस्मद् ॥ 
As you and T elided by VII. 2. 90, and lengthening by VII. 2. 87). JETE ATEMET I THIT ANOTTI YH17 Autut: 1 79TL Taloft: I At I अमान्कुलानि ।। 
STT II so gefa Il PTFE, part 11 वृतिः ॥ शुष्मदस्मनपामुत्तरस्य भ्यसो स्थमित्ययमादेशो भवतिः ।। 
30. This substituted for the Dative 7h after yushmad' and 'asinad.' 
As you and I As the stra is constructed (AT ) it is not easy to say whether the substitute is or 949 il If it is , then we have two cases, (1) eliding the final [ of yushmad and asımad, by VII. 2.90; and adding (2) eliding any of yushinad and asmad by VII. 2. 90, and adding *7411 It will be shown hercaster that VII. 2. 90, is capable of two cxplana tions, one by which yushmad and asmad lose their only, and by another 
1 Similarly with 3 we have also two cases : Thus we have four cases, as (1) yushma + bhyam, (2) yushm+bhyam, (3) yushma +abhyam, (4) yushm+abhyam. In the case of the first (yushma + bhyam) we can get the proper form, though it may be objected that yushma+bhyam should be equal to guzte by VII. 3. 103: this g substitution will not take place, how ever, by force of the maxim भगवृत्त पुनर्वृत्तावविधि निर्दिष्ठितस्य "when an operation which is taught in the angadhikara has taken place, and another operation of the angadhikara is subsequently applicable, this latter operation is not allowed to take place." 
The second case is an impossibility, namely, yushm+bhyam can give us no form. The third case yushina + abhyain will give us the proper form goza (+** by VI. 1. 97). Moreover the accent also will be on the middle earth by VI. 1. 161, the udatta en of yushma being elided by the anudatta w of a , the acute will be on the anudatta It should not be objected that in VI. I. 161, the word om of VI. 1. 159 is understood, and the accent will be on the final. We have shown in that sätra, that the udatta will fall on the się (beginning) of the anudatta terin which causes the elisi n The fourth alternativc yushm tabliyam is free from all objections, 
1328 
भो SUBSTITUTE OF ण ॥ 
[ BK. VII. CH. I. . 34. 
पञ्चम्या अत् ॥ ३१॥ पदानि ॥ पञ्चम्या, अत् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ पञ्चम्या भ्यसो युप्मरमरपामुत्तरस्य मरित्ययमादेशो भवति । 
31. अत् is substituted for the Ablative श्यस, after युष्मद् and अस्मद् । 
As युष्मत्, भस्मन् ॥ The is elided by VII. 2.95, before the case end. ing भ्यस, and युप्म + मत्- युष्मत् by VI. I. 97. . एकवचनस्य च ॥ ३२ ॥ पदानि ॥ एकवचनस्य, च । 
वृत्तिः ॥ पश्चन्या एकवचनस्य युग्मदमंडपामुत्तरस्यावित्ययमादेशो भवति । 
32. This substitution of अत् is made in the singu lar number also of the ablative, after yushmad and asmad. 
As hy and fill For the substitution of man and see VII. 2.97 ; and m and म+मत्ल and मत् by VI. I.97. 
- साम माकम् ॥ ३३॥ पदानि ॥ सामः भाकम् ॥ वृतिः ॥ साम इति षष्ठीबहुवचनमागतसुदकं गृह्यते, तस्य युष्मदस्मानपामुत्तरस्थाकमित्यवमारियो भवति ॥ 
33. माकम् is substituted for the Genitive plural alix arh(VII. 1. 52), after yushmad, and asinad. 
ere is the affix 19 of the Genitive plural with the augment au Thus पुमाकम् and भस्माकम् ॥ Why is it read साम् and not माम्. when there is no स् at the time when the substitution is ordained ? It is read as er in order to indicate that it will not get the augment , for otherwise 'yushma' and * asma' having lost their 'd' by VII, 2.90, end in 5, and so by VII. 1. 52, would cause the genitive affix to get the augment *; the present sätra re moves that also. The substitute is exhibited with a long 47, in order to make म+मा-भा in घुम+भाकम् , had it been short s, then there would have been no lengthening but म+म-म by VI. I. 97. If you say the very fact that भकम् was taught and not कम्, would prevent para-rapa and cause lengthening'; we reply, that the of would find its scope in preventing & substitution. 
For without w, we should have युष्म + कम् - युष्मेकम् (VII. 3. 103). 
आत औ णलः ॥ ३४॥ पदानि । भाता, मी, णलः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ भाकारान्तारकासरस्थ णल भौकारादेशो भवति ॥ 
34. it is substituted for ora, the affix of the first and third person singular of the perfect, after roots ending in long आ॥ - Thus पपी, तस्यौ, अग्लो, मम्लो, from पा, स्था, ले (ग्ला) and Vले (म्ला) ॥ The form पपी is thus evolved, पा+पल्-पा+भ Here three operations simultane ously present themselves for application, namely; 1. Reduplication, 2. Leng 
BK. VII. CH. I. . 35 ) 
FUE SUBSTITUTION. 
1329 
thening; by the single substitution of one long vowel HT, for I +97; and 3. The substitution of it for at by the present sätra. In what order should these operations be then performed? First the asfix should be replaced by KT. then the single substitution of it for ar+ ; and then treating it as sthanivat, and then rcduplication. For if the single substitution of 1 for 24T + had taken place first, then there would be no scope for hi substitution, therefore the wt substitution, should take place first. Thus we have IT + AT =r; this vriddhi-ekadesa, is treated as sthanivat by I, 1. 59, and it causes reduplication. The vriddhi-ekadeba should first take place (i. e. 91 + = ) and then the reduplication, because the former rule is subsequent to the latter. 
तुझोस्तातकाशिघ्यन्यतरस्याम ॥ ३५॥ पदानि ॥ तु, होः, तातक, आशिषि, अन्यतरस्याम्॥ 
निः॥ तु दि इत्येतयोराशिषि विपये सातादेवो भवत्यन्यतरस्याम् । 
35. araç is optionally substituted for the affixes y and fe of the Imperative, when benediction is meant. 
As TANE **TA, ATAKE TH, ng , sofern # The prevents Guña and Vriddhi, (I. 1. 4), and the substitute replaces the whole affix (I. 1. 53 notwithstanding). The substitute is not sthanivat fort, though it re places a fin affix, because it has its own indicatory letter F, and for does not become fq; and consequently in att f is not added to the affix, by VII. 3. 93. being added only to for affixes alter H When not denoting bene diction, we have not this substitution : as urh regg TT or uw aan 
The assix aras being a substitu e of me is like f, and, therefore, rules propounded with regard to fit, will apply to are also. Thus VI. 4. 105 says that after stems ending in short *, the fo is elided: therefore, after such words Araç should also be elided. Therefore we cannot get the form strane na for 
Total This objection, however, is futile ; for, in the s@tra FATI (V1.4. 105), there is the anuvritti off from sätra VI. 4. 101 ( 
:) ! So that what should be construed as meaning "there is the elision off when it is of the form fg, and not when it assumes the form MIAT"! 
The object of in mraz is, as we have said above, for the sake of preventing Guza and Vriddhi. It should not be said that the object of in are is for the sake of manfy: by the application of satra fe (1. 1. 53), just as the substitutes me &c (VII. 1. 93 and 94 ) apply to the finals. For by so doing, Har would replace only the zorgand the forfe, which is not desired. And the case of Art is to be distinguished from $77, for in we the has no other object but to prevent sarvadesa; but in art we see that has another object, namely, the prevention of Guņa and Vriddhi ; and having thus found scope, the gra substitute will be governed by the general rule ar to FT ( I. 1. 55). 
1330 
Faq SUBSTITUTE. 
(BK. VII. CH. I. $. 37. 
The Karikå given below raises tliese points. Kiiriká :-araft f5th 
H armat foto aya हेरधिकार हेरधिकारो लोपविधी तु ज्ञापकमाह ।। सातही हिस्वसामर्थ्यानायमन्स्यविधिः स्मृतः। 
नसावनबादीनां तेन ते ऽन्त्यविकारजाः॥ Karika:-in aras the is for the sake of preventing Guña and Vri ddhi (संक्रम-गुणवृद्धिप्रतिषेधः)॥ If it be said, it is for the sake of भरवावीध by I. 1. 53; we say it is not so. (If you say that after roots ending in short , ata should be elided, by VI. 4. 105 read with I. 1. 56, we reply): when the anuvytti or adhikara or fi was already existent in the sätra VI. 4. 105 from sạtra VI. 4. 101, the express employment of it in VI, 4. 105, indicates that the lopa rule does not apply to atap 11 (The lopa-rule not applying to alaa, it follows that it replaces the whole of and not only its final). The in a finds its scope in preventing Guņa and Vriddhi, therefore, it is not for the sake of antya vidhi (I. 1. 53). The feet in ae &c has no other scope, therefore, these subs titutes replace the final only. 
· fara soare: 11 € 10 fat n fali, argi, ag: 11 वृत्तिः ॥ विद ज्ञानात्येतस्मादातोरुत्तरस्य धतुर्वसुरादेशो भवति । 
36. ag is substituted for the Present Participle affix my after the root faç 'to know'. 
Thus free (n. s. ), FUIFT, FFT: 11 The words formed with affixes having an indicatory s ore (araat) add a q in their strong cases (VII. 1. 70), and form their feminine with unaccented § u ro is an affix having an indicatory , therefore its substitute would also be considered as having an indicatory te, the 3 of me therefore is not absolutcly nccessary for the purposes of afira operations. To is so written, in order that in the sotra greit 
tarTO ( VI. 4. 131.), both ag and ag should be included. Nor can we ob ject that in the above mentioned sätra, with one indicatory letter being taken, cannot include an affix like $ having two indicatory letters, on the maxim एकानुवन्धकमहणे न म्यनुबन्धकस्य-for if that were so, there was no necessity of a in ny i Some read the anuvšitti of the word optionally into this : and we have विदन्, विवन्ती, विन्तः formed with शत् (see V. 4. 38). 
FATË Satana nay911 full gana Il FHÊ, 2001, , : 249 | वृत्तिः ॥ समासे निपूर्वे करवा इत्येतस्य स्यवित्ययमादेशो भवति ॥ 
37. In a compound, the first member of which is 'an Indeclinable but not नञ् ; ल्यए is substituted for का॥ . Thus RT, FORT II The två is added by III. 4. 21, the compounding is by 11. 2. 18, and by VI. 1. 71.9That RT, The två is added by III. 4. 61. and compounding is by II. 2. 22. arrant; fear The två is added by III. 4. 62. Why do we say 'in a compound'? Observe arr. Here the counter exam. 
BK. VII. CH. I S. 38 ) 
FOO SUBSTITUTION. . 
· 
1331 
ple is t,which is preceded by an Indeclinable set, but as it is not compound ed, there is no substitution. Why do we say 'not preceded by 's Observe 
T, HEAT, THAT, Hell The word means 'other than 70', and means words of the same class às 19, i. e. Indeclinables : and does not mean words which are not Indeclinables. The compounds like 
F 
contained in the class of agria &c (II. 1. 72.), do not take an anomalously. Or the word FATE is in the Locative with the force of specification : and means those compounds which are specifically formed with an and not any compound in general. 
Now by the rule I. 1. 72, ktvå would denote a form ending with ktva; and would include the case of a compound ending in ktva. But this general rule is modified by the maxim qe 980 TL FACE FATTET 499 "an affix denotes, whenever it is employed in grammar, a word-form which begins with that to which that affix has been added and ends with the asfix itsell." But the affix ktvå is never ordained after a compound. Therefore, the case of compounds ending in ktva, would not be covered by the mere employment of ktva. Then comes the imaxim कर महणे गति कारक पूर्वस्थापि ग्रहण 'a krit affix denotes whenever it is employed in grammar, a word-form which begins with that to which that kşit affix has been added and which ends with the kşit affix, but moreover should a gati, or a noun such as denotes a case-relation have been prefixed to that word-forin, then the kit affix must denote the same word-forin together with the gati or the noun which may have been prefixed to it." By this a compound also may end in ktva. This maxim will cover cases like प्रकल्प पार्श्वतः कस्य but not ः कृत्य &c because उचः is neither agati nor a ka raka. Hence the employment of the word #AT# in the satra, and also of the word meg, for 4 is neither a Gati nor a Karaka. 
__ In the case of प्रधाय and प्रस्थाय this maxim applies :-अन्तरङ्गानपि विधीन बहिरङ्गो ल्यप् पाधते "a Bahiranga substitution of ल्यप् supersedes even antaranga rule". What are these antaranga rules superseded by the substitute faq? (1) f*--the substitution of for ut (VII. 4. 42). Thus far but a and not FEAT II (2) the substitution of for it (VII. 4. 46).-as fer, but cara and not eat # (3) as required by VI. 4. 42: as atent, wer and gear un (4) F1-as ferrer but YTE II (5) fes by VI. 4. 66, as often but 94 H (6) fteter by VI. 4. 15, as शान्वा but प्रशम्य ॥ (7) शुद by VI. 4. 19, as पृष्टा but भापृच्छय ।।(8) 
mas qorri (9) (VII. 2. 56)- but com 
Fotografer II 3511 Taifa il CT, afa, syreff II . वृत्तिः ।। समासेऽनपूर्वे क्लाइत्येतस्यक्त्वाइत्ययमादेशो भवति मपिशब्दाल्ल्यवपि भवति छन्दसि विषये। 
38. In the Veda the frat also, as well as any, is substituted for at, after an Indeclinable compound, other than one preceded by tho Negative as 11 
1332 
.. VEDIC CASE-AFFIXES 
[BK. VII. CI. I. S. 39 
Thus कृष्णं वासो यजमान परिधापयित्वा, प्रत्यचर्मक प्रत्यर्थविस्वा ॥ So also we have न्यप, as उडत्य जुहोति ॥ The sutra could have been made shorter by saying merely a gia; not doing so indicates that conditions and limitations are set aside in the Vedas in applying this affix. Therefore pup is applied even when there is no compound, as, भर्य तान् देवान् गतः ॥ The word छन्दसि governs the following sotras upto VII. I. So, inclusive. 
सुपां सुलझपूर्वसवर्णाच्छेयाडाड्यायाजालः ॥ ३६॥ पदानि ॥ सुपाम, सु, लुक, पूर्वसवर्ण, आ, आत, शे, या, डा, ड्या, याच, मालः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ छानसि विपये सुपां स्थान सु लुक् पूर्वसवर्ण मा मात्काया राड्या या माल इत्यते भादेया भवन्ति ॥ 
वार्तिकम् ।। सुपा सुपो भवन्ति इति वक्तव्यम् ॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ तिडांतिडी भवन्तीति बनायम् ।। वार्तिकम् ॥ इयाडियाजोकाराणामुपसंख्यानम् ॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ भाड्याजयारामुपसंख्यानम् ॥ 
39. The following irregular endings are substi tuted for the various case endings in the Veda : (1) of the Nom. Sg. for at of the Plural, (2) the luk-elision of the case endings, (3) the single substitution of the homogeneous long vowel for the end vowel of the stem, (4) आ, (5) आतू, (6) ए (शे) for the ending of the Nom. Plural, (7) या, (8) आ (डा), with the elision of the last vowel and the consonant, if any, that follows it in the stem, (9) T (HUT) with the similar shorten ing of the stem (10) या (याच्) and ा (accent of ल)॥ 
Thus (1) अनृक्षरा जवः सन्तु पन्थाः (for पन्थानः) Rig Veda x. 85.23. 
Vart:--It should be stated that case-endings replace case-endings promiscuously, as, धुरि दक्षिणायाः (for दक्षिणायाम् Rig I. 164.9). 
VårtOne personal ending replaces another personal ending in the Vedas चपालं ये अश्वयूपाय तक्षति (for तक्षन्ति) Rig I. 162. 6. 
(2) लक-elision:-As भाद्र वर्मन, लोहिते पर्मन् for वर्मणि ; हविर्धाने यत् सुन्वन्ति, तत् सामिधेनोरन्वाह (यदु for यस्मिन् and सद् for तस्मिन्)। 
(3) Lengthening:-धीती, मती, मुष्टुती for धीत्या, मत्या and मुष्टुत्या ।। (4) भाउमा यन्तारी (for उभौ)॥ (5) भात-मताद ब्राह्मणाद् निन्दामि for तान् ब्राह्मणान् ॥ 
(6) प्रे-न युष्मे (for यूयम्) वामवन्धवः, Rig VIII. 68. 19. भस्मे (for ) नद्रा हस्पती; Rig IV. 49.4, the यूय and वय substitution has not taken place as a Vedic usage. 
(7) या-उरुया, धृष्णुया for उरुणा and धृष्णा ॥ (8) डा-नाभा (for नाभी) यिष्या: Rig I. 143.4 
(७) ज्या-अनुध्या च्यावयतात् for मनुष्टुभा Ait Br. II. 6. 15. ... (10) वाच-साधुयो for साधु, there was required the elision of g" 
BK. VII. CH. I. S. 43] 
VEDIC SUBSTITUTIONS. 
1333 
(II) भाल-वसन्ता यजेत for वसन्ते ।। 
Vart:--The following substitutes should also be enumerated, (a) स्था, (8) डियाच् with elision of the final vowel and the consonant, if any, that follows it, and (c) long | As (a) उर्षिया परिधानम्, for उरुणा, so also दार्षिया for हारुणा ॥ (6) सुभाषिया for सुक्षत्रिणा, and सुगाषिया for मुगात्रिणा ॥ (0) इति न शुष्क सरसी शयानम् for सरसि॥ 
Vart:-So also (a) माइ, (6) भयाच् and (6)भयार: as प्रवाहवा for प्रवाहुना, (8) स्वमयों सच सेवनम् for स्वमेन, (6) सिन्धुमिव मावा for नावा। 
The word nie in the satra is compounded of three words + TTT+ , the word भात - मा+भात् ।। ____ अमो मम् ॥ ४०॥ पदानि ॥ अमः, मश् ॥ 
मुनिः । भम् इति मियादेशो गृह्यते । सस्य छन्दसि विषये मशादेशो भवति॥ 
40. For the Personal ending of the First Person Singular (in the Aorist) म (I. 1. 55) is substituted in the Veda. 
The sa here is the substitution of fag, and not the accusative singular affix. As वर्धी वृत्रम् (for अवधिपम्) Rig I. 165.8: कमीम वृक्षस्य शाखाम् ॥ . The मद् augment is diversely elided (VI. 4. 75). The indicatory of TV shows that the whole of the affix ma is to be replaced. The substitution of for is to prevent the change of p into anusvara as in VIII. 3. 25. . 
लोपस्त आत्मनेपदेषु ॥४१॥ पदानि ॥ लोपः, त, आत्मनेपदेषु ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ भात्मनेपदेषु यस्तकारस्तस्व छन्नसि विषये लोपो भवति । 
___41. In the Veda the त of the Atmanepada Per sonal ending is elided. 
___As देवा मह and गन्धर्वा भप्सरसो भदुह for अदुहन् (see VII. I. 8); दुहाम (for टुग्धाम् ) अश्विभ्यां पयो भन्येवम ।। Rig I. 164.27. दक्षिणता ये for ते ॥ Owing to the anu. vșitti of ra from VII. 1. 38, this substitution sometimes does not take place; as: भारमानमनृतंकुरुत ॥ Why in the Atmanepada ? Observe वत्सं दुहान्त कलशं चतुर्विलम् ॥ 
ध्वमो ध्वात् ॥४२॥ पदानि ॥ ध्वमः, ध्वात् ॥ वृतिः ॥छन्नास विषये ध्वमो ध्वादिस्थयमादेशो भवति ।। 
___42. In the Veda, ध्वाद is substituted for the Per sonal ending ध्वम् ॥ 
___As अन्तरवामाणं वारयध्वात् for वारवध्वम् ।।. Ait Br. II. 6. 14. . ... 
यजध्वनमिति.च ॥४३॥ पदानि ॥ यजध्वैनम्, इति, च॥ वृत्तिः ॥ यजध्वमिस्येतस्य एनमित्येतस्मिन्परतो मकारलोपो निपात्यते वकारस्य च यकारछन्दसि विषये। 
43. यजध्वनम् is irregularly formed in the Veda for यजध्वमेनम् ॥ 
The word of followed by paloses its final , in the Veda. As पमध्ये नियमेधा (Rig VIII. 2. 37). The Kasika adds ".that is also irregularly 
1334 
VEDIC SUBSTITUTES 
[BK. VII. Ch. I. §. 48. 
changed into य" : the form would then be बाध्यैनम् ॥ This is, however, a mistake as pointed out by Bhattoji Dikshit. 
तस्य तात् ॥४४॥ पदानि ॥ तस्य, तात् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ सदस्य लोमध्यमपुरुषबहुवचनस्य स्थाने सादित्ययमादेशो भवति ॥ 
44. For the ending त of the 2nd Pers. Pl. Im perative is substituted any in the Veda. 
As गावं गाबमस्या नूनं कृणुसात् (lor शुत), and ऊपध्ये गोहं पार्थिवं खनसात् (for खनत) Ait Br. II.6. 15, 16. भस्मारक्ष संजतातू (-संमजत), सूर्य चक्षुर्गमयतात् (गमवत). 
तप्तनप्तनथनाश्च ॥ ४६॥ पदानि ॥ तप, तनप, तन, थनाः, च ॥ दृतिः ॥ तस्यति पते । छन्दसि विषये तस्य स्थान तप तनप् तन यन इत्येते भादेशा भवन्ति ।। 
45. Also r and तन (before both, on account of the indicatory q the preceding vowel of the verbal stem is strengthened, or if weak not shortened), ma and va are subs tituted for the त of the 2nd Pers. Pl. Imperative in the Veda. 
This भृणोत मावाणः (for भृणुत), मुनोत (-सुनुत), संवरचा धातन (for पत), शुक्षु एन (for जुषत) the ilu vikarana being added as a Vedic irregularity; बदिष्टन for afya il The indicatory q makes 79 and q non-for affixes (I. 2. 4). 
'इदन्तो मसि ॥४७॥ पदानि ॥ इदन्तः, मसि ॥ वृत्तिः ॥छन्दसि विपये मासित्ययं शब्द इकारान्तो भवति । मसः सकारान्तस्य इकारागमो भवति स च तस्था न्तो भवति ॥ 
46. The Personal ending her becomes in the Veda Arer ending with an il 
Thus पुनस्वां दीपयामसि (for दीपयामः) शलभं भज्जयामसि (for भज्जयामः), स्वचिराणि पासयामसि for वासयामः ॥ 
कोयक॥४८॥ पदानि ॥ का, यक्॥ वृत्तिः ॥ तवा इत्येतस्य यगागमो भवति छन्दसि विषये ॥ 
47. In the Veda, the Absolutive affix it gets at the end, the augment य॥ 
Thus इस्वाय सविता धिया (for दवा), This sutra is not read immediately after VII. I. 38, as in that satra, the anuvritti of samasa is understood, while there is no such anuvritti here. 
पष्टीनमिति च ॥ ४६॥ पदानि ॥ीनम, इति, च ॥ वृत्तिः॥ष्ट्रीनमित्यवाद निपावते छन्दास विषये । बजेस्वामत्यवान्तस्य ईनमारचोन्यस्व निपात्यते ॥ पातिकम् ॥ पीत्वानमित्यपीयते ॥ 
48. In the Veda, the Absolutive पीनम् is irre gularly formed for II 
To the root is added that, and the final sy is replaced by fall As चीनम् देवान् for Eष्ट्वा देवान् ॥ The e in the satra indicates that there are other forms like this, as पीवीनम् for पीस्था । BK. VI.I CH. I. S. 52] 
VEDIC SUBSTITUTIONS. 
1335 
मात्ल्यादयश्च ॥ ४६॥ पदानि ॥ सात्वी-आदयः, च ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ स्नास्वी इत्येवमात्यः शमा निपात्यन्ते छन्दसि विषये ॥ 
49. स्नात्वी &c. are irregularly formed in the Veda. 
Thus माली मलातिव, for माला पीवी सोमस्य वावधे for पीस्वा ॥ The word भादि 'et cetera' means of the form of", namely words having form like मावी, as fieft &c. 
आजसेरसुक्॥५०॥ पदानि ॥ आत्, जसेः, असुक्॥ वृत्तिः । भवर्णान्सावादुत्तरस्य नसेरसुगागमो भवति छन्दसि विपये ॥ 
50. After a stem ending in a or at, the affix ma of the Nom. Pl. gets, in the Veda, the augment अस् (अमुक) at the end. 
Thus ब्राह्मणासः पितरः सोम्बास: for ब्राह्मणा: and सोम्याः ॥ Rig VI.75. 10. थे पूर्वासो व उपरासः (Rig x. 15. 2) for पूर्व and उपरे | So also पुतासः (R. I. 3.4) Why is not, after the adding of the augment भमुक्, the जस् changed to शी in the last example, as required by VII. I. 17, and on the maxim पुनः प्रसर विज्ञानात? No, the maxim that applies here is सकृद् गती विप्रतिषेधे यहाधितं, सदाधितमेव ॥ 
अश्वक्षीरवृषलवणानामात्मप्रीती क्याचि ॥ ११॥ अश्व, क्षीर, वृष, लवणानाम, मात्मा प्रीती, क्यचि॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ छन्नसीत्यतःप्रति निवृत्तम् । भश्व भीर वृष लवण इत्येतेषामानामात्मप्रीतिविषये क्वचि परतो ऽसुगागमो भवति ॥ 
वार्तिकम् ॥ अश्ववृपयायुनेच्छायामिति वक्तव्यम् ॥ वा०॥ क्षीरलवणयोलालसायामिति वक्तव्यम् । वा॥ समातिपदिकम्यो लालासायामसुग्यक्तव्यः ।। वा॥ सुग्वतम्यः ॥ 
51. The suime augment असुक् is added after the words अश्व, क्षार, वृष and लवण before the Denominative affix क्यच, when the delight of the subject in these things is to be expressed. 
The anuvfitti of gate does not extend to this sätra or any further. Thus मश्वस्यति बडवा, क्षीरस्यति माणवका, वृषस्थति गौः, लवणस्यत्युष्टः ॥ अश्व+मस+यनि मश्वस्यति (VI. 1. 97). Why 'when the delight of the subject is meant'! Ob.. serve भश्वीयति, क्षीरीयति, वृषीयति and लवणीयति ॥ 
Vart:-After अश्व and वृष, the force of the augment is that of desir. ing sexual connection. Vårt :-After att and it has the force of ardent ly wishing for, i. e. an intense thirsting after the thing. The augment is not added, though the sense may be that of delight, if it has not the above mean ings. Others say Vart :-अमुक should be added after every nominal stem when the sense is that of intense yearning after that thing: as भ्यस्यति, मध्य. स्थति &c. Others say Vant:-That the augment सुक् should be added, as दधि स्थति, मधुस्थति &c. 
मामि सर्वनानः सुत् ॥ ५२ ॥ पदानि ॥ आमि, सर्वनाना, सुत् ॥ बत्तिः ॥ भाविति वःते भवर्णात्सर्वनाम उत्तरस्यामः सुडागमो भवति । 
1336 
नु AUGMENT. 
[ BK. VII. CII. I. S. 55 
52. After a Pronominal stem ending in a or मा, the affix of the Genitive Plural gets the augment at the beginning. 
The word भात of the last sotra is understood here. Thus सर्वेषाम्, विश्व पाम, येषाम्, तेषाम्, सर्वासाम, यासाम्, तासाम् ॥ But भवताम् of भवत् ॥ The भाम् of the sotra is the Genitive Plural ending !, and not the w of thc Locative Singular ordained by VII. 3. 116; for that भाम् takes the augments बाद, भाट् or स्यात् (VII. 3. 112-114), while the present भाम् takes सुद् or नुत् ॥ Nor the भाम् of the Perfect Tense (III. I. 35 &c), because that refers to verb and Sarva nama nor the भाम् of V. 4. II, for the same reason. The word भामि is exhibited in the sätra in the locative case, for the sake of the subsequent satra VII. I. 53. For the purposes of the present satra, it should be construed, as if it was in the Genitive case (मामः सर्वनानः सुद), because सर्वनाम: being in the Ablative case, the augment or will be added at the beginning of the affix following it, on the maxim तस्मादित्युत्तरस्य ॥ 
प्रेस्त्रयः ॥ ५३॥ पदानि ॥, प्रयः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ वित्येतस्य भामि परे पयत्ययमादेषो भवति । 
63. अय is substituted for त्रि before the Genitive Pl. affix. 
As पयाणाम् ॥ वीणाम् however appears in the Veda: as बीणामपि समुद्राणाम् ॥ - हस्वनद्यापो नुट् ॥ ५४॥ पदानि ॥ हस्व, न दी, आपः, नुट॥ वृत्तिः ॥ ह्रस्वान्तानचन्ताशवन्ताचोत्तरस्यामो नुडागमो भवति ॥ 
54. The angment or is added before the Genitive Pl. ending ara, after stems ending in a short vowel, after stems called Nadi (I. 4. 3 &c), and after the stems ending in the Feminine affix आ॥ 
___As वृक्षाणाम्, प्रक्षानाम् , भग्नीणाम , पायूनाम, कर्तृणाम् ॥ नद्यन्तात् । कुमारीणाम् , किशोरी णाम्, गोरीणाम, पारिवीणाम, लक्ष्मीणाम, ब्रह्मवन्धूनाम, वीरबन्धूनाम् ॥ मावन्तानः-सहानाम, मालानाम्, बहुराजानाम, कारीगरध्यानाम् ॥ 
The lengthening of the short final vowel takes place by VI. 4. 3. 
· षट्चतुर्थ्यश्च ॥ १५॥ पदानि ॥ षद, चतुर्व्यः, च ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ पद्संज्ञकेभ्यपतुर्थपशब्दापोत्तरस्वामो नुडागमो भवति॥ 
55. The augment & is added before the Genitive pl. ending are after the Numerals called 'shash', and after चतुर ॥ 
As पण्णाम् , पञ्चानाम् , (VI. 4.7), सतानाम्, नवानाम्, दशानाम्, चतुर्णाम् ॥ Anu. meral ending in t is not shash', hence the specific mention of चतुर ॥ .. . 
BK. VII. CH. 1. 8. 58 ] 
TA AUGMENT. 
1337 
This rule applies to compounds ending with these numerals, when these latter are the principal member, as परमपण्णाम् , परमपंचानाम्, परमचतुर्णाम्, but faggate, 2 14, fort where the Numerals are secondary (upasarjana). 
श्रीग्रामण्योश्छन्दसि ॥५६॥ पदानि ॥ श्री, प्रामण्योः, छन्दसि ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ श्री प्रामणी इत्येतयोश्छन्नास विषये भामो नुडागमो भवति ॥ 
56. In the Veda after the words it and arroft, the Gen. Pl. of gets the augmenti! ' 
| As শীগাম্ভব্য অগী খেলা, গল্প মামলীলা। This satra could be well dispensed with: by I. 4. 5. mit is optionally a Nadi in the Genitive plural. We make the option of that sätra a vyavasthita-vibhasha, by saying eft is always Nadi in the Veda, and optionally every where else. As regards सूतपामणीनाम् , we have सूतश्च प्रामणीच-सूतप्रामणि, the Genitive Pl. of which by VII. 1. 54 will be notare il 
The necessity of this sQtra will, however, arise if the compound be सूताच ते मामण्यन सूतप्रामण्यः ॥ 
īt: qrere I go ata al siti, ardele वासः ॥ गो हत्येतस्माहरुपादान्ते वर्तमानादुत्तरस्यामो नुडागमो भवति ।। 
57. After it, when standing at the end of a Rik verse, the augment a comes before the Gen. Pl. T II . As विद्याहि वा सत्पति शूरगोनाम् ; but गवां गोत्रमुरसजा यझिरः in the beginning of a rada. "All rules have exceptions in the Vedas" is an established maxim, so at the end of a Pada, sometimes this rule does not apply, as vari 
TONI ESTET TISÍ 7911! 
· Grant Th unt: 11451 anat ara, H, grat: 11 वृत्तिः ॥ इदितो धातोर्नुमागमो भवति । 
58. & is added after the vowel of the root, in a root which has an indicatory s in the Dhâtupåtha. 
Thus from - 1957, sfogh, so sacan; from region, groth, इण्डितष्यम् &c. But पचति, पठति wherer is not इन् ॥ The e is added to the root from its very inception, and they must be considered to have got a 7, for the purposes of the application of the grammatical rules. Thus III. 3. 103 says that is added in the feminine to a root which ends in a consonant and has a prosodially long vowel. The root oft must be considered to be such a root and st, gost are thus formed. Similarly though the roots in the Dhåțupatha are file and aft, in applying affixes we must consider them as for and out, as the author himself has indicated in III. 1. 80. In short, in adding affixes, these roots should be considered as having a 711 Moreover the root (dhatu) should have , and not the stem (anga). The affixes mig (l'uture) and in (Aorist) whicn added to roots, will not inakc thosc roots 
1338 
7 AUGMENT, 
[BK. VII. CH. 1. $. 60 
m; for the rin ata and farm is merely for the sake of pronunciation, and is not to be considered as it in the strict sense of the word: in fact it should be considered as non-nasalised. If you say that "ther in for should be considered as 17, for because of its being xa, the of is not elided by VI. 4. 24 in FET", we reply, "not so, the T is not elided, because sätra 54: for 1. 2. 14 makes para a facut after only, the result of which is that only loses its 7 by VI. 4. 37, and no other root". In HHT* FTTL+ aire +-77 +{+ HT (the mo is elided VI. 4. 143). For the purposes of the elision of q, the elided TT would be considered as asiddha (VI. 4. 22), for both VI. 4. 143, and VI. 4. 37, requiring the elision of are abhiya sůtras. In rar, 
ar from fire and for the whole combination is , and not and sepa rately, and hence ti is not added. But even if these roots be considered as ther, the syllable ! having an , yet they will not get the T augment, be cause the word opa of (VII. 1. 57) is understood here in this sätra also, so that the roots must have a final as for the application of this rule. 
शे मुचादीनाम् ॥ ५॥ पदानि ॥ शे, मुचादीनाम् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ को प्रत्यये परतो सुचादीनां नुमागमो भवति ॥ पार्तिकम् ॥ हम्फादीनामुपसंख्यानकर्नव्यम् ।। 
59. In a &c, before the characteristic 7 of the Tudâdi class, the q is placed after the vowel of the root. 
Thus 
fa, hala, fara, fagyfa, fesefa, E, ferma, Mure II Why “before a"? Observe Årh, HT, H E Why “of 9&c"? Ob serve fa, Ifall 
Vart :-The Time &c should be also enumerated. These are the following roots of Tudâdi class : 24. (gw), 25. ART, 26. g4 g, 27. * Th, fearr., 28. ET (E), 29. Et ū, 30. * (T), M (RA), Farara, 31. Yo, TP Hill, 32. 377 grot, 33. TU, U U 11 or these, those which have a nasal, lose it by VI. 4. 24, and then get the T4 augment by the present rule, which being specifically ordained, cannot be again dropped. Thus profa, Thia, gora, raft &c. Those which have no nasal, are conjugated as , तुफति, हफति राफति, उमति and शुभति ॥ 
AFECTATS II Col qatfa l afest, :, for at वृत्तिः ॥ मस्जि नशि इत्येसयोरङ्गयोसलादी प्रत्यये तुमागमो भवति ॥ 
60. The augment yn is added after the vowel of the root in #45 and 4t, before an affix, beginning with any consonant, other than a semi-vowel or a nasal, 
As CRT, + (no re by VII, 2. 10), add = @ *+, elide & by VIII. 2. 29, change x to , and a to anusvara, which then becomes TI HEA, महनष्चम, नंदा, नंष्टुम and नष्टव्यम् ॥ But मजनम् and नधिसा, and मन (VI. 4.32). In Hi and #H&TA, the T is supposed to be placed the last consonant in Akut, in 
order that it ma get elded. 
BK. VII. CH. I F. 64.] 
नुम् AUGMENT. 
रधिजभोरचि ॥ ६१ ॥ रधि, जभोः, अचि ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ रघि अभि इत्येतयोरजादौ प्रत्यये नुमागमो भवति ॥ 
61. The augment नुम् is added after the root vowel in tu and 77, before affixes beginning with a con sonant. 
Thus रन्धयति, धका, साधुरन्धी, रन्धो वर्तते ॥ अम्भवति, सम्भका, साघुजम्भी, जम्म मम्मम्, अम्भो वर्तते ॥ Though the वृद्धि rule is subsequent, it is superseded by the augment. Why do we say before an affix beginning with a vowel'? Observe रद्धा, अन्यम् ॥ 
नेव्यलिटि रधेः ॥ १२॥ पदानि ॥ न, इदि, अलिटि, रधेः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ इडापावलिटि प्रत्यये परे रघेर्नुमागमो न भवति । 
62, The augment नुम् is not added to रथ्, before an affix beginning with the augmenta, except in the Perfect. 
As रधिता, धितुम् , रधितष्यम् , but रन्धनम, रन्धक: before Anit affixes, and ररधिव, ररधिम in the Perfect. When नुम् is added r becomes a root ending in a conjunct consonant, and therefore the लिट् affixes after it are not कित् (भसंयो गात लिद कित I. 2.5), and therefore the v is not elided by VI. 4. 24. But when the affix बसु of the Perfect is added, we have tधिवम् Nom. Sg. ऐधवान् ॥ Here the affix being expressly taught with an indicatory of the q is elided. The reduplicate is elided, the changed into , then it is added, then 14, and then the नुम् is elided by the expressly taught कित् ।। 
Why was not the sđtra made as it point when by so doing, the augment would have been added only in the Perfect when it liad rc and no where else? This form of sätra would have also meant that u would be added in that Perfect which took r and in no other Perfect, while cases other than Perfect imight take it. That being so, there would be no नुम् in रन्ध, while that would require III See, however, the Mahabhåshya for the contra. __रभेरशब्लिटोः ॥ ६॥ पदानि ॥ रमेः, अशए, लिटो॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ रमेरङ्गस्य पालड्वर्जिते ऽमारी प्रत्यये परतो नुमागमो भवति । 
63. The augment 4 is added after the vowel of the root TH before an affix beginning with a vowel, but not before the vikaraña yo or the affixes of the Perfect. 
Thus भारम्भयति, भारम्भकः, साध्यारम्भी, भारम्भमारम्भम् , भारम्भो वर्तते ॥ But भार• मते in शए, and भारेभे in लिट्, and मारधा belore an affix beginning with a con sonant. 
लभेश्च ॥ १४॥ पदानि ॥ लभेः, च ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ लमेबाजादौ प्रत्यये शलिडजिते नुमागमो भवति ॥ 
1340 
5 AUGMENT. 
(BK. VII. Cn. 1: 8.67. 
64. So also of ga, before an affix beginning with a vowel, with the exception of 279 and fore, there is the aug 
ment नुम् ॥ 
As manyna, Tai, arreft, my TE, artit that it Bute with og, and am in the Perfect, and you before an affix beginning with a consonant. The separation of this from the last, is for the sake of the subsequent aphorisms. 
15 fou Cyll of ll 9:, Roll वृत्तिः ॥ मा उत्तरस्य लभर्यकारादिप्रत्ययविषये नुमागमो भवति । 
65. The augment Jh is added to y preceded by 2T, before an affix beginning with Tu 
As present : 11 The Te is added before the addition of the affix, and by so doing becomes more and thus loses its character of having a penultimate , and therefore by III. 1. 124, we shall have our affix, and not un affix by III, 1. 98. Had the been added after the addition of the affix, then at would be added by III. 1. 98. Though in both cases the form will be arraar, the difference will be in the accent: a would throw the acute on the first syllable (adisara: ) while the word has svarita on the final; thus instead of small (by VI. 1. 213 and VI. 2, 139), which a gives, we have 
Tomat (face svar). 
Why do we say 'when preceded by T'? Observe all How do you explain after a progner:? All rules are optionally applied in the Vedas. Or 
Anyag may be explained by saying that the having been added, is again dropped. 
CARTETTHEE I That I YT, TIETYTH 11 वृत्तिः ॥ उपादुत्तरस्य लभः प्रशंसायां गम्यमानायां यकारादिप्रत्ययविषये नुमागमो भवति । 
66. The augment is added to preceded by 59, before y, when the reference is to something praise worthy. 
AS उपलम्या भवता विद्या, उपलभ्यानि धनानि ॥ These words are formed by 097 and have svarita on the final. Why do we say 'when referring to some thing praise worthy?Observe उपलभ्यमस्माद् वृषलात् किचित्, this is formed with the यत affix (III. 1.98). 
g iacent: ll E Il rafa il go mia, , qt: 11 वृत्तिः ॥ उपसर्गादुत्तरस्थ लमः खल्धमोः परतो नुमागमो भवति ॥ 
67. The augment gh is added to preceded by a Preposition, before the affixes (III. 3. 126) and tell 
BK. VII. CH. I. S.70] 
नुम् AUGMENT. 
1341 . 
___ Thus ईपत्प्रलम्भः, सुप्रलम्भः, दुष्प्रलम्भः, प्रलम्मा, विप्रलम्भः ॥ This is a Niyama rule, and restricts the scope of VII. 1. 64. Before the vowel affixes ch and घम्, the root लम् gets the augment नुम् only then when it is preceded by a Preposition, and not otherwise, as पिल्लभा, लाभो वर्तते ॥ 
न सुदुभ्यां केवलाभ्याम् ॥ ६८॥ पदानि ॥ न, सु, दुाम, केवलाभ्याम् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ दुरित्येताभ्यां केवलाभ्यामन्योपसर्गरहिताभ्यामुपसृष्टस्य लमेखल्यमोः परतो नुमागमा न भवति । 
68. The augment is not added to y before खल and धञ् when सु or दुः alone (without another Preposition along with them) precede the root. 
Thus सुलभम्, दुर्लभम् , सुलाभो, दुलामा ॥ But सुप्रलम्भः, दुष्पलम्भः ॥ The word केवल is used in the satra because मुदुयो is in the Instrumental case and not in the Ablative. Had it been in the Ablative, there would have been no neces. sity of using the word om, for the rule would not have applied, when a preposition intervened between these and the root. In mage, the word मति is not an Upasarga but a Karmapravachaniya; when मति is used as an Upasarga, we have magnet: 1 If the words gran be construed as Ablative, then also the use of them is for a purpose similar to that as above. 
विभाषा चिण्ळमुलोः ॥ ६ ॥ पदानि ॥ वि भाषा, चिण, णमुलोः॥ वृत्तिः ॥चिम् णमुल इत्येतयोर्षिभाषा लभेर्नम्भवति । 
____69. The नुम् is optionally added to लम् not pre ccded by a Preposition, before the faru Aorist and the Absolutive णमुल् ॥ 
Thus मलामि or भलम्भि, लाभलामम् or लम्भलम्मम् ॥ This is a Vyavasthita. vibhasha, the option is allowed where there is no Preposition along with the root; and no option is allowed but I must be added, when a Preposition 
precedes: as प्रालम्भि, प्रलम्भम् ॥ 
उगिदचा सर्वनामस्थाने ऽधातोः॥ ७० ॥ पदानि ॥ उगित, अ चाम, सर्वनाम स्थाने, अधातोः॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ उगितामानां धानुवर्जितानामयतेम सर्वनामस्थाने परतो मुमागमो भवति ॥ 
70. Whatever has an indicatory उ, ऋ and , (with the exception of a root), and the stem अच् , (अञ्चति) get the augment u in the strong cases. 
Thus #40 has an indicatory a, formed by the Uņadi affix it, and it is declined as भवान्, भवन्ती, भवन्तः ॥ Similarly ईयमुन्-श्रेयान, श्रेयांसी, श्रेयांसः, न -पचन्, पचन्ती, पचन्तः ॥ मम्च-पाङ्, प्राची, पाचः॥ 
Why do we say thaving an indicatory उक् vowel or the stem भच'! Observe पत्, हपदी, दृषकः ।। 
• 1342. 
नुम् AUGMENT. 
[ BK, VII. CH. I 8. 73. 
Why do we say in strong cases? Observe भवतः पश्य, प्रेयस पश्य ॥ भम्च् root is mentioned for the sake of niyama, i.e. of the roots, only मञ्च gets नुम् and no other root. Therefore उखामत, पर्णध्वत् formed from the roots बंसु and ध्वंस having indicatory | (See III. 2.76, IV. 1.6, VIII. 2.72). For the leng thening in भवान् &c, see VI. 4. 10, 14: the is elided in माइ by VIII. 2. 23, and 7 becomes by VIII. 2. 62: and in an by VIII. 2. 72. 
Why do we say 'with the exception of a root' when by the mere fact of including one root sex all other roots would have been excluded from the scope of this satra? The specific mention of Surat: shows that the prohibition applies to original roots, and not to those roots which are derived from nouns. Thus गोमन्तमिच्छति -गोमत्यति formed by क्यच् ॥ Here गोमत्य is a derivative root, in its primitive state it was a noun. The prohibition of anat: will not apply to this root and नुम् will be added. Thus गोमत्य + कि- गोमत्य +• (the wis dropped by VI. 4.48)= गोमत् + (the is elided by VI. 4. 50). Now is added नुम् and we have गोमान् ॥ 
युजेरसमासे ॥ ७१ ॥ पदानि ॥ युजे, असमासे ॥ वृत्तिः । युजेरसमासे सर्वनामस्थाने परतो नमागमो भवति ॥ 
71. The nominal stem gs gets before the strong cases the augment 1, when it does not stand in a compound. 
Thus युद्ध (VIII. 2. 23, 62) युजी, युजा; but मश्वयुक, अश्वयुजी, भश्वयुजः in a compound. The root युज समाधी (Divadi 68) is not to be taken here%3B therefore not here युजमापना ऋषयः ॥ But युजिर योगे (Rudhadi 7) is to be takers. 
नपुंसकस्य झलचः॥ ७२॥ पदानि ॥ नपुंकस्य, झल, अचः॥ वृत्तिः। नपंसकस्य सलन्तस्याजन्तस्य च सर्वनामस्थाने परतो नुमागमो भवति ॥ पार्तिकम् ॥बहार्जि प्रतिषेधो वक्तव्यः ॥ वा०॥ अन्त्यापूर्व नुममेकरच्छन्ति । 
72. The augment ya is added in the strong cases to a Neuter stem ending in a consonant (other than a nasal or a semivowel), or ending in a vowel. 
Thus उश्चिन्ति, शकुन्ति (VI. 4. 10) यशांसि, पयांसि ; कुण्डानि, वनानि (VI. 4.8), safer ara al Why 'of a Neuter's Observe franare Aragot: 11 Why do we sav not ending in a semivowel or a nasal'? Observe बहुपुरि, बहुधुरि, विमलदिवि, पवारि, माहानि (VII. I.98). A neuter having an indicatory उक् vowel gets नुम् by this satra and not by VII. I. 70, as that is superseded by this, this being the subsequent. As श्रेयांसि, भूयांसि कुर्वन्ति कृषन्ति ब्राह्मणकुलानि ॥ 
Vart:-Prohibition should be stated with regard to बहर्जि; as बहूजि ब्राह्मणकुलानि ॥ Some would have added between t and s of this word, as बाजि ब्राह्मणकुलानि ।। See I. 4. 13. 
नोचि विभक्ती ॥७३॥ पदानि ॥ इका, अचि, विभको॥ पत्तिः ॥ गन्तस्य नपुंसकस्थास्थाजादो विभक्तो नुमागमो भवति ।। 
BK. VII. CH. 1. 8.73 ) 
· I AUGMENT. 
1343 
Kárikd- 5H T L TT: FIT: 41 
स्वरो वै श्रूयमाणो पि लुमे किं न भविष्यति ॥ 
यावं तिसृभावन व्यवधानानमा भाप । 
नुवाच्य उत्तरायें तु यह कि चित्रपो इति ॥ 
73. The augment is added to a Neuter-stem ending in a simple vowel, except a, before a case-affix begin ning with a vowel. 
Thus throff, net, put, por, sah, Teto it Why "with the ex ception of o"? Observe got, 47 11 The phrase "before an affix beginning with a vowel" is employed here for the sake of the subsequent sutras like VII. 1. 75. Here we could have dispensed with it: for before affixes beginn ing with a consonant, I would be elided by VIII. 2.7. The only object that it serves here is that we can form 11 or Ty! in the Vocative sin gular. For had we 75+# in the vocative, the form would have been t he like , for a would not be elided here, see VIII. 2. 8. 
If it be objected that by the sätra # hare? (I. 1 63) when the affix is elided in the Vocative, it will leave no trace behind, and there being no affix at all, and will not be added in the Vocative. We reply: that this very employment of the word so in this sûtra indicates (jña paka) that the rule prohibiting the cssect of an assix (1. 1. 63) does not apply herc. Therefore, though the affix is elided, it produces its effect in spite of I. 1. 63, and we have the guņa of the vowel in thic Vocative, as gar ly VII. 3. 108. 
Why have we used the word fan it when a case-affix follows'? Observe de gufa, where the laddhita affix is added to go by IV. 3. 139. 
Kårikå :The employment of the words are in the s@tra shows. that an will not come when the affix begins with a consonant, as hai, TTA: 11 An objector says, the employment of me in the satra is useless for I may be added even before an affix beginning with a consonant, for having added it, it will be elided by a fiarreataifa (VIII. 2. 7). We reply, yes it can be so done, but how will you then manage the accent? For in ai, tua: the accent is regulated by the rule VI. 2. 29 which says that in a Dvigu com pound, the first member preserves its original accent if the second member ends in an vowel. But if there was a 1h, then the second member would not end in ya but in 7: and the elision of this n by VII. 2.7. is asiddha for the purposes of accent. To this the objector answers, that even where a is not elided the accent is governed by VI. 2. 29, namely the accent of pro or 99 : is by VI. 2. 29, why should it not be so when 7 is clided. So the objection about accent has no strength. 
1344 
T AUGMENT. 
[ BK. VII. C11. I. $. 74. 
Well if an be added even before consonant-affix, then there will arise this anomaly: saft + zie faria+ mai ( by adding ). Here rule VII. 2. 85 cannot apply: because a intervenes between fand zi, therefore r or fi is not changed to ®, and therefore we cannot get the proper from matumaini More over in forura + 21, the fa cannot be changed to fax if there be rh, and so we cannot get the form forecapai uma l 
To this it is answered, the change of into 8 in the case of it, and the substitution of fag for f will take place even when the Ta intervenes, on the maxim विभक्तिविधानवशायां यदानन्तय तत् तत्राधीयते न स्वादेशविधानवशायाम् ॥ And this is done in this way: मतिरि+भ्यां, and प्रियात्र+भ्यां, here नुम् is superseded by the subsequent rule requiring and fast respectively, 
If this be so, then the employment of 84in the sätra is for the sake of the supersession of Th by (VII. 1. 54). Thus F has unrestricted scope in groftat, frai, and 79 has unrestricted scope in ergür and steall But in Foroig and say, both ac and present themselves. Here however it is superseded by a by purva-vipratishedha and so there is lengthening of the vowel by VI. 4. 3. This supersession is indicated by the employment of my, for az and are being both anitya and of equal force, had there been no r. og would have come and not rul 
But this is also not valid, for it would have to be added, even if there had been no se in the satra. 
The employment of my is for the sake of the subsequent sätra VII. 1.25. The only object that serves in this sätra, is in forming the vocative 
as shown above. 
तृतीयादिषु भाषितपुंस्कं पुंवद्गालवस्य ॥ ७४॥ पदानि ॥ तृतीयदिषु, भाषित पुंस्कम, पुम्वत, गालवस्य । वृत्तिः ॥ तृतीयादिषु विभनिनजादिषु भाषितपुंस्कनपुंसकलिङ्गमिगन्तं गालवस्याचार्यस्य मतेन घुबडवति । वथा पुंसि इस्वनुमा न भवतस्तारवापि न भवत इत्यर्थः। 
74. A neuter stem ending in a vowel, except 27, of which there exists an equivalent, uniform masculine, is treated like the masculine, in the opinion of Gálava, before the vowel beginning affixes of the Instrumental and the cases that follow it. 
As in the Masculine there is no shortening, nor the addition of ra, so here also. As rooft is the equivalent, uniform masculine of the neuter form TTATOT, we have either Ins. OTHÔTar or ar499 miliar, the Ins. Sg. of ग्रामणि n. Similarly Dat. मामणिने or मामण्ये ब्राह्मणकुलाय; Abl. ग्रामणिनो or ग्रामण्यो era, Gen. Sg. a rt or armout 
, Gen. Du. ATATÜRITMigugma or प्रामण्योः; Gen. Pl. मामणीनां or मामण्यां ब्राह्मणकुलानां ॥ Loc. मामणिनि or मामण्यां ATTUTTI II Similarly : Ins. Ular (same form in mas, and neu.), Dat. yg or sta; Abl. and Gen. Trei or fra: Gen. Du. Te or Ulri: Loc. Tutor fuftul BK. VII. CH. 1. 8.76] 
TE SUBSTITUTION. 
1345 
Why do we say after the 3rd case and the rest ? Observe rifort Touren, and urer Nom. dual. Why do we say having an appropriate masculine of the same form and incaning? Observe got, | Why have we only one form पीलुने फलाय, when पीलुर्वक्ष: and पीलुफलं show that पालु has a masculine form also. The word fre is masculine wlien it applies to 'trees', and gry is neuter when it refers to 'fruits'; so this word they cannot be said to be arragh, the masculine dry not having the saine meaning as the neuter orgu See VI. 3. 34. 
Why do we say "ending in a vowel except "? Observe ब्राह्मण: and कोलालपं ब्राह्मणकुलं; the Ins. &c of कीलालपा will not be the Ins. &c of कीलालपं ॥ The latter will have only one form कीलालपेन ब्राह्मणकुलेन ॥ &c. 
Before case affixes beginning with a consonant we have one form only, as unforgi Arsa Tara 11 
अस्थिदधिसक्थ्यश्णामनकुदात्तः॥ ७५॥ पदानि ॥ अस्थि, दधि, सक्थि, अ FUTA, E, TU: 11 
वृत्तिः ॥ मस्थि दधि सपि मति इत्येतेषां नपुंसकानां तृतीयाविष्यमादिषु विभक्ति परतो ऽनहित्ययमा देवो भवति, स चोदालो भवति ॥ . 
75. The acutely accented 7 (775) is substi tuted for the finals of asthi, dadhi, sakthi and akshi, before the affixes of the Instrumental and the cases that follow it, which begin with a vowel. 
Thus set, FIT, Hit, it', ut, it, want, omnino The words after &c have acute on the first syllable, the substitute 76 would have been also anudatta, but for this sätra. The stem getting the designation , we elide the # (VI. 4. 134), the udatta e being thus elided, the case-ending, which was anudatta before, now becomes udatta (VI. 1. 161). The stems ending with 
asthi &c' and though not neuter, are governed by this rule. As PATEYTT AWTA, FRANTII Why before the affixes of the Instruinental and the rest ?' Observe miferat, fimt i Before affixes beginning with a consonant, we have 
मस्थिन्थाम, दधिभ्याम् ॥ 
yapafu qua Il ve Il Taifa il gra, mig, rouail वृत्तिः ॥ भस्थिवधिसभ्यपणामनह छन्दस्वपि दृश्यते । या विहितस्ततोन्यत्रापि दृश्यते ।। 
76. In the Veda also, the stems 'asthi', dadhi', sakthi' and 'akshi', are found to take the substitute 76, before endings other than those mentioned above. 
Thus the substitute is ordained before endings beginning with a vowel. In the Veda it comes before affixes beginning with a consonant. As Ch Ria, Tetry: 11 The substitute is ordained to come after the Instrumental &c. In the Vedic literature it is found in the Acc. &c. As rofa in future tra The substitute comes before case-endings (vi 
1346 
मुम् AUGMENT. 
[ BK. VII. Cl. I. S. 80. 
bhakti), in the Vedic literature it comes before affixes which are not case-end. ings, as भभवता लालन, भस्थन्वन्तं यदनस्था विति ॥ See VI. I. 176. 
ईच द्विवचने ॥ ७७॥ पदानि ॥ ई, च, द्विवचने ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ द्विवचने परतभ्न्दसि विषयेऽस्थ्यादीनामीकारादेशो भवति, सचोदात्तः ॥ 
77. The acutely accented & is substituted for the final of asthi, dadhi, sakthi and akshi, in the Veda, when the case-affixes of the dual follow. 
As भक्षी ते इन्द्रपिाले करिव ॥ भक्षीभ्यान से नासिकाम्याम् ॥ In भक्षी the aug ment is not added to the stem before the vowel-beginning ending, because VII. 1. 73, which ordained , is superseded by the present satra, and being once superseded, it is superseded for good. (सकृदू गती विप्रतिषेधे यवाधितं सदाधितमेव) । 
नाभ्यस्ताच्छतुः ॥ ७८॥ पदानि ॥ न, अभ्यस्तात, शतुः ॥ वृत्तिः ।। अभ्यस्तारबाबुत्तरस्य चतुर्नुम्न भवति ।। 
78. The Participial-affix शतृ (भत्-अन्त), does not take the augment after a reduplicate stem. 
Thus दस्त, दपती, पता, ममत, जाती, जमसः, जामत्, भापती, जामतः ॥ This is an exception to VII. 1. 70, and applies of course to sarvanamasthana or strong cases. The गुम् is to be read into this satra from VII. I. 70%; for the negation of this sūtra cannot apply to f taught in the preceding sūtra, for is never ordained after satri : therefore, though several other operations inter vene, yet T is to be read here, 
वा नपुंसकस्या ७६ ॥ पदानि । वा, नपुंसकस्य ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ अभ्यस्तारादुत्तरो यः शतप्रत्ययस्तदन्तस्य नपुसकस्य वा नुमागमो भवति ।। 
79. The Participial-affix शतृ optionally takes the augment yh after a reduplicate stem, in Neuter nouns. 
Thus ददाति or दरन्ति, कुलानि पति or षन्तिकुलानि, अक्षति or अक्षन्ति कुलानि, जापति or माणन्ति कुलानि॥ This of course applies to sarvanamasthana or strong cases. 
___ आच्छीनचोर्नुम् ॥८०n पदानि ॥ आत्, शी, नधोः, नुम् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ भवान्तारादुत्तरस्य धनुर्वानुमागमो भवति शीनयोः परतः ॥ 
80. When the affix शतृ comes after a verbal stem ending in a or मा, it may optionally take the augment नुम, before the neutral case-ending aft and before the feminine affixf॥ 
Thus तुदती कुले or तुदन्ती कुले, तुवन्ती ब्राह्मणी, तुवती ब्राह्मणी, वाती कुले, यानी कुले यासी ब्राह्मणी, थान्ती ब्राह्मणी, करिष्यती कुले, करिष्यन्ती कुले, करिष्यती ब्राह्मणी, करिष्यन्ती ब्राह्मणी ।। अपान्तरणखादेकादेशे कृते व्यपवर्गामायादवर्णान्तारादुत्तरस्थ चतुरिति न युज्यते वक्तुम् , उभयत भाप्रये मान्तादिवदित्यन्तादिवसायोपि नास्ति भूतपूर्वगत्याश्रयणो वा ऽस्तो प्रतीत्येवमादिष्वतिप्रसङ्गति, भव समाधि 
BK. VII. CH. 1 9. 81 ) 
... 
AUGMENT : 
1347 
के चिाहा, तुरवयवे शतृशब्दो वर्तते, भवर्णान्ताबहादुत्तरोया पनवयक इति ॥भपरे पुनराहः, मादित्येतेन पीनद्यावेव विशेष्यते, अवर्णान्तादादुनरे ये शीनद्या सयोः परतः रात्रन्तस्य नुम्भवतीति,तत्र बेन नायव धानं तेन व्यवहितपि वपनममाण्यादिति तकारेणैव व्यवधानमाश्रयिष्यते ।। भानिरिति किम्, कुर्वती, सुन्वती। चीनद्योरिति किम्, तुरताम् , नुक्ताम् ।। 
The formaat is thus evolved. I+T+94 +679 11 The vikarana y is added by III. 1. 77, & frc by IV. 1. 6. This is cqual to + + + 
at the + af becoming # by the rule of 954 ekadeśa (VI. 1. 97). This ekådesa operation being antaranga, now there is no ug aflix coming after a stein ending in B, and therefore this sätra will not apply. If you say the ckadcía will be considered as the final of Tt by VI. 1. 85, we reply, that the antáchvadbhava of that sätra will not apply when simultaneous operations are to be performed, for a cannot be said at one and the same time as the final of gt and the beginning of sy (ug). If you say the maxim migraine Wage: (when a word cannot denote something which actually is what is expressed by the word, it must be understood to denote something which formerly was what is expressed by it), will apply here, and that will be considered to end in s because it formerly did end in the affix e of y; we reply that then the present rule should apply to forms like apat wat &c. For here also we have w+शप लोप+त+डीए; and मा should be considered to end in , because it had the affix y after it, though it was afterwards elided. The maxim quoted, therefore, proves too much. 
To solve these objections, some say, that the word me in this sätra means 'a portion of the affix €, such as x' and the sätra means 'after a stem ending in 7, to the portion of the affix the there is added ' Others say, the word Art in the sätra qualifies tîr and st and not yt; and the sutra means "is added to a stem ending in ug, when it or i affixes follow after a stem ending in ." Therefore in year the asix & is considered to come after the of of 07, the intervening ( not debarring it. 
Why do we say “after "? Observe tät and gat, no optional is added here. Why do we say "ît and af following"? Observe para and मुक्ताम् 
· 1934aer 1158 11 WTA 11 279, pati, facra 11 Tu T9 237 piatr: us: atatūti gear ARA TAITA I 
81. When the affix my comes after a verbal stem ending in the vikaraņas 27° and 947, it invariably takes the augment 94 before the neutral case-ending off ($), and the feminine ending & (Nadi). 
. ___Thus पचन्ती कुले, पचन्ती ब्राह्मणी, दीयन्ती कुले, दीयन्ती ब्राह्मणी, सीव्यती कुले, सीम्यन्ती argoft II The word force stops the anuvšitti ol 1 (VII. 1. 79). 
1348 
* AUGMENT. 
. 
[BK. VII. C1. I. g. 85" 
FIATGT: 1152 11 Celta Il , aga: 11 वृतिः ॥ सो परतोऽनहुहोगस्य नुमागमो भवति । 
82. mag gets the augment ju before the ending of the Nom. Sg. (and Vocative). 
By VII. 1. 98 magu gets the augments after r in the strong cases, and st in Vocative Singular (VII. 1.99). It thus becomes 873 and I By the present sūtra q is added after this mand ! The case-ending is elided by VI. 1. 68, and the fival by VIII. 2. 23. Thus we have masra Nominative Singular; and in the Vocative Singular. The augments 0977 and 2 (VII. 1. 98, 99), do not supersede 14, nor are they superseded by 11 
In this sätra, some read the annvritti of MIT from VII. I. 80; and by so doing they add to that form of a where there is an or 9, namely, after the word has taken the augment me in the nominative singular 
by VII. 1. 98, and om in the Vocative by VII. 1. 99. Therefore, the one does . not debar 9 or STA, nor is it debarred by AA or all Others hold that though one is a general rule and the other is a particular rule, yet in this ins tance, nu ( or *) and go are applied simultaneously, one not debarring the other, there is no relationship of frezy and my among them, just as in fetara the rule of lengthening (VI. 4. 16) and reduplication are applied simultaneously, one not debarring the other. In air ma ta, we add first 979 because it is subsequent, and them we add or by VII. 1. 72 on the maxim or gat: Team &c II 
हास्ववस्स्वतवसां छन्दसि ॥५३॥ पदानि ॥ हक, स्ववस्, स्वतवसाम, ETET I 
वृत्तिः ॥ हा स्ववस् स्वतवसइत्येतेषां सो परतो नुमागमो भवति छन्दसिविषये ॥ 
83. दृश, खवस and खतवस take the augment नुम् before the affix 5 (Nominative and Vocative Singular) in the Veda. 
Thus (EC, E, F, 96, FAIR, FEAT. The T of fre (formed by III. 2.60), is elided by VIII. 2. 23; and substituted for 7 by VIII. 2. 62. 
The lengthening in art and Fiqer is through VI. 4. 14. 
a bat 158 11 Taifa ut ferati, sita il वृत्तिः ॥ विवित्येतस्थ सौ परतो भौदित्ययमादेषो भवति ॥ 
84. is substituted for the final of face before a (Nom. Sg. and Voc. Sg). 
As ar: 11 There is a nominal-stem in which is taken here. It has no 
• indicatory letters annexed to it. The root fer is not to be taken here, as it 
BK. VII. CH. I. §. 89 ) 
F 
SUBSTITUTION. 
1349 
has the indicatory letter & and is exhibited in the Dhatupadha as f il The nominal-stem derived froin fag, does not take it, but 5, the Nom. Sg. of which is y: as ming: (See VI. 4. 19, and VI. 1. 131). 
पथिमध्यभुक्षामात् ॥ ५॥ पदानि ॥ पथि, मथि, ऋभुक्षाम, आत् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ पथिन् मथिन् कामाक्षन येतेषामझानां सा परत भाकार भादेशो भवति ॥ 
85. आतू (आ) is substituted for the final of 'pa thin' ' mathin' and 'rbhukshin', before the ending सु (of the Nom. Sg). 
As पन्थाः , मन्थाः , कभुक्षाः ॥ Though the sthanin here is a nasal (i.e.), yet the substitute or is not to be nasalised, but to be pronounced purely. For न्य see VII. I. 87. The nasal भा is not to be taken on the maxim भाष्यमानेन सवर्णानां ग्रहणं न भवति ॥ " A letter which is taught in a rule does not denote the letters homogeneous with it.' 
इतोत्सर्वनामस्थाने ॥८६॥ पदानि ॥ इतः, अत्, सर्वनामस्थाने ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ पथ्यादीनामिकारस्य स्थाने आकारांशो भवति । 
86. is substituted for the s of 'pathin, mathin and fbhukshin,' in the strong cases. 
. Thus पन्याः, पन्यानी, पन्यानः, पन्थानम्, पन्थानौ, मन्याः, मन्यानौ, मन्यानः, मन्यानम् , मन्यानी, कभुशाः, मुशाणी, कभुक्षाणः, कभुक्षाणम् , मुलाणी। भाविति वर्तमाने पुनरदूषनं षायन, 
भुक्षणमित्यत्र या षपूर्वस्य निगमहति दीपविकल्पः ॥ 
Though thc anuvritli of syn was here, the scparate mention of ma is for the sake of VI. 4.9: by which in the case of IT we have two forms, ऋभुक्षाणम् and मुक्षणन् ।। 
थोन्थः ॥ ८७॥ पदानि ॥ था, अन्थः ॥ वृणिः ॥ पयिमयोस्थकारस्य स्थान न्य इत्ययमादेशो भवति सर्वनामस्थाने परतः ।। 
87. r7 is substituted for the x of pathin and ma thin in the strong cases. 
____As पन्थाः, पन्यानी, पन्थानः, मन्याः, मन्यानो मन्थानः ॥ 
भस्य टेर्लोपः ॥८॥ पदानि ॥ भस्य, टेः, लोपः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ पथ्यादीनां भसंशकानां टेलोपो भवति । 
88. The last vowel, with the consonant that fol lows it, is dropped in pathin, mathin and rbhukshin, before a weak case-ending beginning with a vowel (before which the stem is called Bha I. 4. 18). 
__As पयः, पया, पये, मयः, मया, मये, प्रभुक्षः, कभुक्षा, कभुक्षे॥ The anuvritti of sarvanamasthana, of course, is inappropriate here: though its anuvritti is current as will be seen in the next sätra. 
'पुंसोऽसुङ्॥८६॥ पदानि ॥ पुंसः, असुङ्॥ वृत्तिः ॥ पुंस इत्येतस्य सर्वनामस्थाने परतो ऽसुङित्ययमादेषो भवति ।। 
1350 
fora OPERATIONS. 
( BK. VII. Ch. I. $. 91. 
89. मसुङ (भस्) is substituted for the final of पुंस in the strong cases. 
The word is derived from (to protect) + (Uņ IV. 178), the being changed to anusvåra. So when of ga is replaced by me we get the form yar, the 5 of mye indicates that should be added in the strong cases after 37 (VII. 1. 70), so we have gar, FATET, Gaia: 11 
This substitution must take place in its incipient stage before the affixes are added, (399CF:): otherwise the accent will be wrong. The compounds have acute on the final, (VI. 1. 223), therefore, the has acute on g. and in the Nominative Singular qayarq the acute will remain on y, but it is intended that it should be on मा, thus परमपुर्मान् ॥ The simple word पुमान् of 
course, has accent on gul 
Mat fora Il coll Tata Il Tiaì, fora il af: 11 Tpegi Faruri foratu. 
90. The endings of the strong cases are force after गो॥ 
That is, these affixes produce all the For operations : such as Vriddhi &c. As fit:, TT, mta: Why have we added a t after tì? The rule applies to the form it, and not when it assumes the form , as in it:, TEMU: !! 
How do you explain the forms fortit, i Taipt:? This is done on the maxim भावने पुनर्वृत्तावविधि निटितस्य, (when an operation which is taught in the Angadhikara VI. 4.-VII. 4. has taken place, and another operation of the Angadhikara is subsequently applicable, this latter operation is not allow ed to take place). For when Guņa once takes place before the Vocative and the Nominative Plural affix by VII. 3. 108-109, the foret operation of this rule will not again take place. Or vin in the stra may be construed as Sam bancha-lakshana Sasthi (a Genitive denoting a general relation): ar.d the meaning will be "that sarvanamasthana affix, denoting singular, dual, plural, which refers to the meaning of the or'cow.' While in format, the sarvanamas thana affix does not refer to cow' but to another object, namely to a 'person' who possesses brindled cows. Tin Tina in this view is for specification only. 
Some read the satra as a for, so that the rule will apply to g also: as A: , : # If the reading be taken iai, then we extend this rule to malso, by taking it as merely illustrative of all words ending in t; and this is done by the letter or in tira, for the #9 rule applies to letters, and not to words, so that ha: means and includes ud and words ending in Bil 
UTGEHT ET 11881 ara llores, 34:, ET II " निः ॥ उत्तमो जल्वा णि भवति णित्कार्य तत्र या भवतीत्यर्थः॥ 
BK. VI.I CH. 1. $.95 ) 
SOME SUBSTITUTIONS. 
1351 
91. The ending of the First Pers. Sg. in the Per fect optionally acts as fora II 
___ The Vriddhi is optional, as महंगकार or चकर, महं पपाच or पपच ॥ 
सख्युरसम्बुद्धी ॥ ३२॥ पदानि ॥ सख्युः, अ सम्बुद्धौ ॥ निः॥ भसंबुन्द्रीय सखिशम तस्मात्परं सर्वनामस्थानं णिजवाते। 
92. After सखि, the endings of the strong cases, with the exception of the Vocative singular, are fora #1 
That is, they causc Vriddhi. As सखायी, सखायः, but हे सखे ॥ _ अनङ्सौ ॥ ६३॥ पदानि ॥ अनङ्, सी.॥ वृत्तिः ॥ सखिशमस्य सौ परतो ऽनडिस्ययमादेशो भवति स पेस्तुशमः सबुद्धिर्न भवति ॥ 
93. अनङ् (अन्) is substituted for the r of सखि before सु of the Nominative Singular, (but not in the Voca tive Singular). 
As सखा, but हे सखे ॥ ऋतुशनस्शुरुदंशोनेहसां च॥६॥ पदानित. उशनस् , पुरुदंशः अनेहसाम चं॥ त्तिः ॥कारान्तानामानामुशनस पुरुशत रयतेचासंबुद्धो सो परतानाशां भवति। वार्तिकम् ॥ उशनसः सम्बुद्धावपिपक्षेऽनङ्इष्यते । म डिसंबुखारित नलोपप्रतिषेधोपि पक्षाव्यते ॥ 
Karikd:-संवोधन तूशनसस्त्रिरूपं सान्तं तथा नान्तमयाप्यन्तम् ॥ 
माध्यं तिनिर्वष्टि गुणं विगन्त नपुंसके व्याघ्रपदां वरिष्ठः ।। 
94. Anan (अनू) is substituted for the final of the stems ending in #, as well as for the final of ušanas, purudansas, and anehas, in the Nominative Singular (but not in the Vocative Singular). 
As कर्ता, हर्ता, माता, पिता, भ्राता, उशना, पुरुशा, अनेहा ॥ In the Voc. Sg. we have हे कर्तः, हे मातः, पितः पुरुषः, अनेहः and उशनः ॥ 
Vart:-अनक is substituted for the final of उशनम् in the Voc. Sg. also. as 1977, the final a not being elided (See VIII. 2. 8). Otherwise we have 
उशन! Thus it has three forms in the Vocative Singular : as उशनस्, उसननं, and T उशन! ॥ 
Kariki:- In the vocative, the word 7974 has thrce forms, (1) ending in स् when मन is not added, (2) ending in न् , when न is not elided, (3) ending in a when q is elided. This is the opinion of the Acharya Madhyandini. So also according to the Acharya Vaiyaghrapadya, (the best of the Vyaghra. padas,, there is Guņa in the Neuter of the stems ending in vowels; as हे प्रपो॥ 
The pin en is for the sake of distinctness. . सृज्वत्कोटुः ॥६५॥ पदानि ॥ तृज्यत्, कोष्टः॥ वृत्तिः॥ोषदुशमस्तुन्प्रत्ययान्तः संज्ञाशनः सर्वनामस्थाने संनुन्द्री परत उज्यवाति ॥ 
1352 
• 
AUGMENT. 
[BK. VII. CH. I. S. 97 
; 
95. The word nie 'a jackal' is treated in the strong cases (with the exception of Vocative Singular) as if 'it ended in तुच (त)॥ 
The word g is declined like aire in the strong cases. As wet, ameldt, कोष्टार, कोरिम, क्रोशेरी ॥ But क्रोन in weak cases, and कोष्ठो in the Vocative Singular. The accent in the strong cases is also that of the reg affix, i.e. acute on the final. The word alg is formed by the affix (Uņ faalaa &c, 1. 69). 
ferui all Ep11 arifa il feui, ni fa llora TEATERFATTHIETAT TE TEFFA TKI 
96. The word me is treated as if it ended in re, in the feminine, before all case-endings. 
This sätra is commenced for the sake of cases other than strong ones. In strong cases, whether of masculine or feminine, the former satra ap plies; but in the feminine, in other cases also there is tsich-treatment. Thus कोष्टी, कोष्टीभ्याम, कोष्ट्रीभिः ॥ Some read the word कोटु in the Gauradi class (IV. 1.41), and they treat it is a ry ending word before the feminine affix , as ATET II According to them, in formning the Taddhitartha compounds like Q1 : Ang*: afta:=o rgaft , we could not get the form quaeft:, bc cause when the affix ce is elided by V. 1. 28, the feminine is also elided by 1. 2. 49, and the stor being thus luk-elided, there would be no T, because the affix leaves no trace behind I. 1. 63. To get out of the difficulty, we can only say, that the form is so, in spite of the apparent inconsistency. 
Those who do not read any in the Gaurádi class, they explain this sätra by saying that the word fori indicates the sense, namely, ag is treated like a re word, when it denotes a female, wherever it may occur. 
And because there is treated as if it was at, the feminine will be for med by the affix tg by IV. 1, 5, and the form el will be end-acute by VI. 1. 174. So that whether argt be formed by it under Gaurâdi class, or by ng under IV. 1. 5, the accent remains the same: while under this second view, we have not to face any such difficulty as in the first. 
विभाषा तृतीयादिष्वचि ॥६७॥ पदानि ॥ विभाषण, तृतीयादिष, अचि॥ वृत्तिः ॥ तृतीधादिषु विभातिष्पमादिषु कोर्विभाषा तुज्वरवति ॥ पार्तिकम् ॥ तृवडापात् पूर्वविप्रतिषेधेन नुम्नुटौ भवतः ।। 
97. g may optionally be treated as Kroshtr, before the endings beginning with a vowel, in the Instru mental and the cases that follow it. 
As sagt or gat, i gor wea, or meti, ent or iter, align: or gt: " But it in the Accusative Plural, and angrai before consonant-begin ning affixes. 
BK. VII. CH. I. S. Ion] 
7 SUBSTITUTION, 
1353. 
Vårt:-14 and Kangments come in supersession of the Trich-vad bhava ordained by the preceding satras. Thus the Dative of the Neuter noun प्रियको will be प्रियक्रोएने ऽरण्याय, हितको ने वृषलकुलाय, and not °कोष्टे ॥ Sini larly with नुन, as क्रोष्टूनाम् ॥ 
. धतुरनडुहोरामुदात्तः ॥८॥ पदानि ॥ चतुर, अनडुहोः, आम्, उदात्तः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ चतुर अनडर इत्येतयोः सर्वनामस्थाने परत भामागमो भवति, स बोदात्तः॥ पातिकम् ॥ भनडुहः स्त्रियां वेति वक्तव्यम् ।। 
98. चतुर und अनडुह get the acutely accented aug. ment आ (आम) after the उ in the strong cases. 
Thus पारः, भनडान्, मनाही, मनोहः, मनोहम् ॥ The rule applies to compounds ending with पवार and मनहर, as प्रियवस्थार, प्रियवस्वारी, प्रियवयास महान्, प्रियानडाहो, प्रियानडाहः ॥ 
Vårt:- In the case of stage there is option in the feminine, as maget, OF अनडाही॥ This would be so, because it occurs in Gauradi class IV. I. 4I. - अम्संबुद्धौ ॥ ६ ॥ पदानि ॥ अम्, सम्बुद्धौ । वृत्तिः ॥ संयुद्धौ परत चतुरनडोरमागमो भवति ॥ . 
99. चतुर and अनडह get the augment म after the उ in the Vocative Singular. 
This debars the previous rule, as हे प्रियचखः (a Bahuvrihi), हे मियनइन् ।। 
त खातोः ॥ १०॥ पदानि ॥ ऋतः, इत, धातोः॥ . वृत्तिः ॥कारान्तस्य धातोरणस्य इकारादेशी भवति । 
100. For the final long ऋ of a root, there is substituted इर् (I. 1.51). 
As किरति, गिरति from p and Tof the Tudadi class. भास्तीर्णम् विस्तीर्णम् from Fre, the lengthening by VIII. 2. 77. Why do we say of a root? Observe पितृणाम्, मातृणाम् ॥ 
This substitution will apply to Derivative roots also, as faria from F'to scatter'. 
उपधायाश्च ॥ १०१॥ पदानि ॥ उपधायाः, च।। पतिः ।। उपधायामकारस्य इकारादेशो भवति ॥ 
101. इर् is also substituted for the penultimate long * of a root. 
__As कीर्तयति, कीर्सयतः, कर्तयन्तिः ; from कृत् ॥ Lengthening by VIII. 2. 77. उदोष्ठ्यपूर्वस्य ॥ १०१॥ पदानि ॥. उत्, ओष्ठ्य, पूर्वस्य । वृत्तिः॥ शोधपः पूषों यस्मा नकारादसायोग्यपूर्वस्तदन्तस्य धातोरणस्य उकारादेशी भवति ।। बार्तिकम् ॥वोस्वाभ्यां गुणवृद्धी भवतो विप्रतिषेधेन । 
2. 77. The rule applies when the dento-labia! « precedes: as ruara 1934 froin ; so also credia Tre The labial consonant must be the consonant of the root. Therefore when 'to go' is preceded by #, the rule will not apply, for # is not part of the root: as atvia by VII, 1. 100. 
Virt:- The Guņa and Vriddhi do take place in supersession of and T substitution. Thus भास्तरणम् and भास्तारकः (from Ke with ल्युट् and ण्वुल), farrone, T: froing, facon, farma: from all 
यहुलं छन्दसि ॥ १०३॥ पदानि ॥ बहुलम, छन्दसि ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ छन्दसि विषये अकारान्तस्य धातोरणस्थ बहुलमुकारादेशो भवति ॥ 
103. In the Veda, the substitution for of a root-stem is diverse. 
That is, it takes place even when the preceding letter is not labial, and does not take place even when the letter is labial. Thus far out agfti, a 
er tuft:, 99794 (no change), and gyft:, from . T and gu All these words Nah, Tuff and gry are formed by the affix fan(III. 1. 171). ओ३म् । अथ सप्तमाध्यायस्य द्वितीयः पादः । 
- BOOK SEVENTH. CHAPTER SKCOND. 
सिचि वृद्धिः परस्मैपदेषु ॥१॥ पदानि ॥ सिचि, वृद्धिः, परस्मैपदेषु ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ परस्मैपदे परे सिधि परत इगन्तस्याङ्गस्य वृद्धिर्भवति ॥ 
1. Before the Aorist-characteristic # (f ), Vrid dhi is substituted in the Parasmaipada, for the final of a stem ending in इ, उ, ऋ (long or short, I. 1. 3). 
The word for is to be read into this sätra by virtue of I. 1. 3. As अवैषीत, अनैषीत, मलावीत, अपावीत, भकार्षीत्, महार्षीत् (VII. 3.96 and VIII. 2. 28) The antaranga guna substitution is superseded by the express mention of Vri ddhi. Ir the antaranga guna is superseded by this vsiddhi, why is not the antaranga उब also superseded in न्यनुवीत्, न्यधुषीत् ? The Vriddhi does not take place, as these roots belong to कुगदि class, after which this affix is डिन्त (I. 2. 1). The Vșiddhi being thus superseded, we have 6 substitution. Why do we say in the Parasmaipada? Observe अच्योष्ठ, भप्लोष्ट ॥ ___ अतो लान्तस्य ॥२॥ पदानि ॥ अतः, लान्तस्य ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ रफलकारी यावत: समीपौ तदन्तस्याङ्गस्य मत एव स्थाने वृद्धिर्भवति । 
2. Vriddhi is substituted for the short , when it is immediately followed by the final I or a of a root, before the Parasmaipadla s-Aorist. 
As क्षर्-अक्षारीत्, त्सर्-अत्सारीत्, जल-अज्यालीत्, झल्- ब्रह्मालीत् ॥ This debars the option of VII. 2.7. Why 'short w'? Observe न्यखारीत न्यमीलीत ॥ Why do we say "ending in r or ल"? Observe मा भवानशीत्, मा भवानटीत् ।। The word अन्त means here 'proxiinity', as in the sentence उस्कान्तं गतः - उपकसमीपं na: N Theo must be in thc proximity of the r and All Therefore the rule does not apply to अवधीत, अश्वल्लीत, for though र and ल are here final of the stem, yet are not in the proximity of म ॥ 
चदब्रजहलन्तस्याचः ॥३॥ पदानि ॥ वद, व्रज, हलन्तस्य, अचः ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ वस्त्रजालन्तानां चाङ्गानामचः स्थाने वृद्धिर्भवति सिचि परस्मपरी परतः ॥ 
1356 
AORIST VRIDDHI. 
(BK. VII. CI. II S. 3 
3. In the Parasmaipaila s-Aorist there is Vriddhi of the w of ac, 451, and of any vowel, without distinction, of the stems ending in a consonant. 
As मवादीत्, भवाजीत् ॥ This debars the option in the case of these two roots, which would have otherwise obtained by VII. 2.7. So also of stems ending in consonants: as prita, set, weet, itata 11 By the split ting up of the sotra (yoga-vibhaga) these forms could be evolved without using the word any in the sūtra. Thus (1) frase: "In the room of them of 
and there is Vșiddhi", (2) T: "In the room of the vowel of the stem there is Vriddhi". The word "stem" is understood throughout these chapters. If the vowel be at the end of the stem, there would be Vșiddhi by VII. 2. I, and if in the middle of the stem, then the verb ends with a consonant, and still there will be Vriddhi by our rule. The use of the word ook in the sätra indicates that the rule applies when more than one consonant even is at the end : as MUEHİR, utt 
Had the word party not been used in the shtra, then the following maxim would have applied "येन नाण्यवधानं तेन व्यवहितेऽपि वचननामाण्यान" | The rule would have applied where only one consonant intervened between the vowel and the affix, but not when more than one consonant intervened. But it is intended that the rule should apply to such cases also. 
The form varan is thus evolved. To the root are we add to in the second Person singular. Thus + N Now there appears the Vriddhi rule on the one side; and the rule requiring the change of to a (VIII. 2. 31 ) the rule requiring the elision of (VIII. 2. 26), the rulc requiring the change of a into y(VIII. 2. 40 ), then the rule requiring the change of # into t, and then the elision of one a (VIII. 3. 13 ) on the other. What rule is to be appli ed first-the Vriddhi or the other rules? The Vriddhi rule is to be applied first, because the other rules are considered as asiddha (VIII. 2. 1): and after that we apply the other rules : and afterwards on account of the cision of t, we change the Vriddhi al into si (VI. 3. 112). The equation will be something like this:-4+t9Tg = TK + far. (VII. 2. 3)- 7+ FITA (VIII. 2: 31 ) – 27+ ATE (VIII. 2. 26) TE+7 (VIII. 2. 80 ) - TIT+T! (VIII. 4.41)=7+7(VIII. 3. 13 )= TE (VI. 3. 112). This with the upasarga and the augment becomes उदयोगम् ॥ Similar is the evolution of उपयोढम् with स्तम् ।। Once the has been Vşiddhied into MT, there is no Vșiddhi of BTW Had we not first Vriddhied the into 9ng, but applied the vșiddhi rule last, then there would have been vriddhi of sit, as aromuwhich is wrong. In fact where there has not taken place vriddhi first, there or is vriddhicd, as ren artean 
araha: 11 
ix. VII. CH. II S. 5.) 
AORIST VRIDDHI. 
1357 
नेटि॥४॥ पदानि ॥ न, इति । वृत्तिः । इडावी सिधि इतन्तस्याङ्गस्य वृद्धिर्न भवति । 
4. The vowel of a stem, ending in a consonant, does not get Vriddhi, when the pa takes the augment !! 
. As भदेवीत, असेवीत, अकोपी, ममोपीत, but भलाषीत् where the root ends in 
wel. Will not by taking Guņa (which is an antaranga operation) and the substitution of spe, become a root ending in a consonant? No, though Guņa is antaranga, it is superseded by the express Vriddhi. 
भयन्तक्षणश्वसजागृणिश्व्योदताम् ॥५॥ पदानि ॥ ह, म, र, अन्त, क्षण, श्वस जागू, णि, शिव, एदिताम् । 
वृत्तिः ॥कारान्तानां मकारान्तानां यकारान्तानामानां क्षण श्वस मागृ णि वित्येतेपामोदितां चागरी सिधि परस्मैपदे परसो वृद्धिर्न भवति । 
5. The Vriddhi of the vowel of the following stems, docs not take place before the x augment s-Aorist in the Parasmaipada; namely -the stems ending in ह, म् or य, the roots क्षण , श्वस, जागृ, a stem formed with णि, the root partnerand the roots having an indicatory in the Dhatunatha. 
Thus ग्रह,tocatch' गमहीत, त्यम, to sound'भस्यमीत्, व्यय, 'tocxpend'गव्ययीत, दुवम् , to vomit' अवमीत् , क्षण to hurt' भक्षणीत्, श्वम् 'to breathe' अश्वसीत् , जागृ 'to be avakc' जागरीन,णि, ऊन (churidi) to losc' जनयीन, ईल् 'to send' ईलयीत, श्वि, अश्वयीत्। एदिताम्, रगे to cover' भरगीत. कखे, भकखीन् । 
प्रयन्तक्षणश्वसामरितां च मतो हलालघारिति विकल्पे प्राते प्रतिषेधः ॥ जागृणिश्वीनां तु सिधि वृद्धिः पाता, सा च नेटीतिं न प्रतिषिध्यते, नवान्तरसारण पूर्व गुणो भवति सिधि वृद्धरनवका घवात् ॥ यदि पूर्व गुणः स्यादिवणिश्चिपाहणमनर्थकं स्यात् ।। गुणायादेशयोः कृसयोर्यकारान्तस्वादेव प्रतिषे. धस्य सिखस्यात्। तस्मादिदमेव णिश्विग्रहणं ज्ञापकं न सिच्यन्तरङ्गमस्तीति॥भय बागृमहणं किमर्थम् ॥ मानो विपिण्णल्टिस्तुं इति जागर्तेर्गुणो वृद्धरपवादो विधीयते ॥ स यथा भची णितीति वृद्धिबाधते, तथा सिषि वृद्धिमपि बाधिष्यते ।। नैतस्ति ।। कृते गुण तालान्तस्थेसिया वृद्धिःप्रामोति सा प्रतिपिध्यते ॥ भय रणवि धानसामादुनरकालभाविन्यपि वृद्धिर्वाध्यते ॥ यथा आगरयतीत्यपात उपधाया इत्यपि वृद्धिर्न भवति, तथा धिण्णलोः प्रतिषेधार्थवान्भवति इति शक्यमिह जागृमहणमकर्तुम् ॥ मस्तु क्रियते विस्पष्टार्थम् ॥ 
In the case of roots 57 and fas in the above examples, the one is pro hibited by III. I.SI. This is an exception to VII. 1.7:so far as stems in e, यू and q are concerned. There is no option allowed here. In the case of sly, for roots, and चि, the Vriddhi would have taken place by VII. I. IBand VII. I. 4, could not have debarred Vriddhi, hence the special mention of these roots. 
Nor can it be said, in the case of these roots, that "they will take first guņa, on account of its being an Antaranga operation", because, then the rule of Vriddhi ordained by VII. I. I will find no scope. Moreover, if the guna 
1358 
AORIST VNDDHI. 
(BK. VII. Cu. II. $. v. 
took place first and then Vriddhi, the mention of rô-roots and reg in the stra would be redundant. For in ata and gara, having gunated the roots of and roa to 37 and , and then substituting ara (which is also antaranga ) for g before it, we have a + fa, and nye+ Now these are roots which end in q and would be covered by the first portion of the present så trâ, viz, "h-m y-anta", so the especial mention of fo-roots and for would be superfluous, if guņa was to take place first. The very mention of for-roots and rout in this sütra, is a jnåpaka (indicator) of the following maxim a PEC S PATE II 
Why have we used the root apt in the sutra, when the special sätra VII. 3. 85 will cause guna by superseding Vşiddhi in the case of any? This supersession will take place on the analogy of swara (VII. 2, 115); for as this vșiddhi rule VII. 2. 115 is superseded by VII. 3. 85, so will the present Vriddhi rule VII. 2. 1. Ans. No, this is not so. No doubt VII. 3. 85 does supersedle the vșiddhi rulc VII. 2. 1 and we have guņa, as MI+ 711 Thien comes in VII. 2. 2, which would cause vsiddhi, because now it is a root ending in t; this second vriddhi is prohibited by the present satra. You can say, that by the very fact that the guņa rule VII. 3. 85 takes effect, will prevent every future Vșiddhi, as in totala there is no penultimate vșiddhi by VII. 2. 116 [ sy trô - Fimo+ro (VII. 3. 85 )= f the rule VII. 2. 116 does not apply after guna ] You can, of course, say so, and there is no answer to this but by saying that the mention of sy is only for the sake of distinctiess. 
In case the reading of stay in the satra be held necessary, then the operations which it undergoes, are shown below: 
siry+FE+&! Now appears (1) the rule VI. 1. 77. requiring the change of into ril (2) This M y is however, debarred by the rule VII. 3. 84 which causes guņa of the finals of verbal stems before all sårvadhatuka and ardhadhatuka affixes, because this guņa rnic is an apavada to JTN'3) But this guņa in its turn is dcbarred by the rule VII. 2. I requiring the vpisuhi. (4) But this vşiddhi is, however, superseded by VII. 3. 85, which causes the guņa of the final of IT II Now having gunated it, we get this form : 
MT+T+fall Now appears Vii. 2. 3 which requires vriddhi, be cause it is a root ending in a consonant. (2) But that vşiddhi is superseded by VII. 2. 4 because the affix fe has taken the raugincnt. (3) Tlien appcars the rule VII, 2. 7 requiring optional vriddhi, (4) But that optional vriddhi is superseded by the compulsory vsiddhi requirred by VII. 2. 2, because it is a root ending in c(5) And this last vsiddhi is prohibited by the present sûtra VII. 2. 5. These nine stages through which the form an is evolved, is abbreviated in the following mnemonic verse :-Ui Tha Gora: son arany 
The i go fra miguisat meget: GTA 77 
Futang TT II & II TFT II gura:, farina II पत्तिः ॥ अतरिडारी सिथि परस्मैपरपरे परतो सि... [ वृद्धि भवति । 
BK. VII. C11. 11. 8.71 
AORIST VRIDDIII. 
1359 
6. Before an e-beginning 8-Aorist of the Paras maipada, there is optional Vriddhi of the vowel of niet 
As storiain or stórtia il This option applies when the pay is not treated as fot! But after cos, fag is optionally foc, (I. 2. 6): when it is fort, there being neither guņa nor vriddhi; we have 79€ substitution, as arrita (VI. 4. 77). 
wat E SET: ll ll la 11 mai, ea a:,mat: 11 वृत्तिः ॥ इलादेरङ्गस्य लपोरकारस्य पारी सिधि परस्मैपरपो परतो विभाषा वृद्धि भवति । 
7. Before an ra-beginning s-Aorist of the Paras maipada, the short a of the root gets optionally Vriddhi, when the stem begins with a consonant, and the eq is prosodially short by being followed by a simple consonant. 
Thus straura or samofit, sprostat or area. Why do we say of BT's Observe tista, tai Besides this patci:t objection, there is another, not so manifest. If we had not taken sa, the sotra would have ordaincd Vriddhi of every vowel (: VII. 2. 3), the Vșiddhi so ordained would be an er pertaining Vriddhi, and not an F-pertaining Vriddhi. Therefore ifn affixes will not debar such Vșiddhi, for the facta « (I. 1. 5), debars only f or Vriddhi. Therefore it roots after which it is for (I. 2. 1), will get Vriddhi, which is not desired. Therefore we have only one forın or 75 #ta, nyata 
Why do we say 'beginning with a consonant'? Observe ar 479uia, HT WEITEN from Hy and H 11 Why do we say 'prosodially short'? Observe Baia, 
ma u 
But why does not vriddhi take place in your ita from the root Tate (Ad. 65 )? Thc vsiddhi docs not take place on the maxiin ta 77 627946 staigas 497 99pur; for the rule applies to short st only when a consonant in tervenes between it and the affix, and not when both consonants and vowels intervene. In It not only the consonants # and a intervene but also the vowel af 1 Hence there is no vriddhi. Moreover, the 5791 can be by one letter and not by more than one letter. Therefore, applying this maxim, the word our: might have been omitted from the satra without any detriment. In that case, the form want from the root (Bhu 685) will be explained by saying that rule VII. 2. 7 does not apply to it, because two consonants inter vene between a and the affix. In this view of the case, the employment of the word 91: in the sû tra is for the sake of distinctness only. 
The word re is understood in this sätra, so that the rule applies to re aorist. The rule therefore, does not apply to Anis aorist, as wrtą !! 
The form arfagrara thic aorist of thc Dcsidcrativc root, is explaincd by saying that the long sm of vriddhi is clided by VI. 4. 64. 
1360 
हद AUGMENT. 
[ BK. VII. CI. II. 8.9 
beci 
नेशि कृति ॥८॥ पदानि ॥ न, इद्, वशि, कृति ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ शादी कृति प्रत्यये परत डागमो न भवति । 
8. The augment इद् is not added to a krit-affix g with a sonant consonar pratyahara). 
The Tų pratayâhâra is rather vague. The rule really applies to Krit affixes beginning with व, र (ल) म and न, and no कृत् affix begins with any other letter of वश् class. Thus ईशिता, इशितुम् non-vas letters get the augment, but not ईश्वरः, (III. 2. 175) so also दीपिता, दीपितुम् but not दीप्रम् ( III. 2. 167) भसिता, भसितुम् but not भम, (III. 2.75. मनिन्) यतिता, यतितुम् but not यत्रः (III. 3.90 नह) 
The Vartika ने वरमनायो कृति gives the rule in a more definite form, or course, in the Unadi Krit-affixes, there is diversity. There we get the affix r, for example, which of course does not take the augment, as दम् +3-दण्डः (Un I. 113). Why do we say कृत् affixes? Observe रुदिव, रुदिम ।। 
__Here by VII. 2.76 the Sarvadhatuka affixes beginning with a वल con sonant take r augment after the roots &c; but this rę will also be prohibi ted by the present sätra, is the word ia be not read in the satra. So that rule VII. 2. 76 would find scope before those que affixes only which do not begin with a as letter; as रुदितः ॥ In some texts of Kasika the counter-exam ple is रुरुदिम in the Perfect. This is wrong, according to Padaimmjari (क्रातिनि यमादेव इटः सिद्धत्वात्) because इद् always comes in the Perfect except after the root कु &c. (VII. 2. 13): so the counter-example from the Perfect Tense is not valid. This sotra is an exception to VII. 2. 35. The Krit-affixes beginning with ar letters as given by Panini are the following: यन् (वनिए, कनिए, उपनिष), पर (वरच and करप्), वम् (कसु), रु (कु), लुक् (क्लुकन्), मन् (मनिन्), मर (क्मरम्) न (नह, नन्), ना (नजिड्), नु (क्नु) ॥ This list will show the truth of the above vārtika. 
तितुत्रतथसिसुसरकसेषु च ॥६॥ पदानि ॥ ति, तु, त्र, त, थ, सि, सु, सर, क, सेषु॥ 
वृत्तिः॥ति तुगत यसि सुसर क स इत्येतेषु कुस्सु डागमो न भवति । पातिकम् ॥ तितुषु अमहाशीनाम् इति पत्नष्यम् ॥ 
9. The są augment is not taken by the following Krit-affixes :-ति, तु, त्र, त, थ, सि, सु, सर, क and स ॥ 
Thus (1) निम्-सन्तिः but सनिता, सनितुम्, निन्-दीप्तिः but पिता, दीपितुम् ॥ (2) तुन् (Un I. 70)-सत्नुः but सविता, सचितुम् ॥ (3) ष्ट्रन (III. 2. 182)- but पतिता, पतितुम्, so also Unadiष्ट्रन् (Un IV. 158), as तन्त्रम् from तन् ॥ (4) तन् (Un III. 86)-हस्तः but हसिता, हसितुम् ; so also लीतः, पीतः, धूर्तः from लू, पू, धूर्वि forming से लविता, पविता, धूर्षिता ॥ The त affix mentioned in the sutra refers to this Unadi त (Un III. 86), and not to the s (क) of Nishtha, for the Nishthan takes the augment, as इसितम् ॥ (5) क्यन् (Un II. 2)----कुष्ठम but कोषिता, कोपितुम, काठम् but काशिता, काशितुम् ॥ (6) सि (Un III. I55), as कुक्षि: but कोषिता, कोषितुम् ॥ (7) कसु (Un III. 157) क्षु: but एपिता, एषितुम् ; (8) सरन् (Un III. 70)-गक्षरम् , 
BK. VIL. Cl. II. S. 10] 
इद् AUGMENT. 
1361 
but भधिता, अपितुम् ॥ (9) कन् (U III. 43)-ल्का but पालिता, लितुम् ॥ (10) स (Un III. 62)-वस: but वविता, परितुम् ॥ 
Vårt :-The asfix ja, g and for take E augment aster a3 and words of similar formations :-as विगृहीतिः, उपस्निहितिः, निकुचिति निपगितिः ।। 
Before non-krit ति &c, we have , as रोरिति, स्वपिति ॥ एकाच उपदेशे ऽनुदात्तात् ॥ १०॥ पदानि ॥ एकाचः, उपदेशे, अनुदात्तात् ॥ त्तिः ॥ उपदेशे य एकाच् धातुरनुत्तश्च तस्मादिडागमो न भवति । 
10. The augment is not added to that affix which is joined to a root, which in the Grammatical system of Instruction (i. c. in the Dhatupatha) is of one syllable, and is without accent (anudatta). 
A list of such roots has been collected by the Anit-Kariks. They are given below. 
Karika :-भनिट्स्वरान्तो भवतीति दृश्यतामिमांस्तु सेटः प्रवदन्ति तद्धितः । 
भवन्तभवन्तमृतां च वृद्धवृषौ विडीहिवणेष्वय शीश्रिप्रावपि ।। गणस्थमूदन्तमुतांच रुस्नुषी क्षुबन्तयोोंतिमयो युगुणवः । 
इति स्वरान्ता निपुणैः समुचितास्ततो हलन्तानपि सन्निबोधतः ।। As a general rule all monosyllabic roots ending in a vowel except #, long and long #arc anudatta, and do not take augment: as reg, Ag, , स्तोत, कर्त, हर्ड ॥ The following are the exceptions: 
(1) All roots ending in short m are Udatta and take r; as भवधिष्ट । (2) All roots ending in long we are , as a - aftur or adatli 
(3) All roots ending in short we are fac except u (IX. 38 the references are to the class and number in the Dhatupatha) and वम् (V. 8,X. 271): as निर्वरिता or निर्वरीता, प्रवरिता or प्रवरीता ॥ 
____ (4) All roots in short rare Anit, except चि (I. I059), 'to grow' and श्रिम् 'to attend' (I. 945), as वीयता, प्रथिता ॥ 
(5) All roots in long f are Anit, except the 'to rest' (II. 22), and डीड़ 'to fly' (I. 1017. IV. 27), as शयिता, उड्डयिता ।। 
(6) All roots in long Fare es, as efTar, afar from and g 11 
(7) All monosyllabic roots in short arc Anit, except, रुङ् 'to sound' (II. 24, I. I008), स्नु 'to flow' (II. 29), क्षु 'to sound (II. 27), यु 'to mix' (II. 23) नु 'to praise' (II. 26), क्ष्णु 'to sharpen', (II. 28); and अणूम् 'to cover' (II. 30, though consisting of more than one syllable, is treated like I for the pur poses of यङ्)| Thus रविता, प्रमविता, क्षविता, यविता, नविता, क्षणविता and प्रोर्णविता ।। 
or the roots ending in consonants, all are are except the following : Kariki:-इति म्बरान्ता निपुणैः समुचितास्ततो हलन्तानपि सन्निबोधता 
शकिस्तु कान्तेष्वनिक इष्यते घसिथ सान्तेषु पसिःप्रसारणी॥ रभिस्तु भान्तध्वय मैथुने यभिस्ततस्तृतीयोलभिरेवनेतरे।। 
1362 
6. AUGMENT, 
[ BK. VII. Cl. II. S. 10 
यमिर्यगन्तवनिडेक इष्यते रमिश्र यश श्यनि पञ्चते मनिः। नमिश्चतुर्थों हनिरव पञ्चमो गमिश्च षष्ठः प्रतिषेधवाचिनाम् ।। दिहिर्दुहिमहतिरीहती वहिनहिस्तु षष्ठो दहतिस्तथा लिहिः । ईमे ऽनिटाटाविद मुक्तसंशया गणषु हान्ताः प्रविमग्य कीर्तिताः ॥ विशि पशि दंशिमयो मुर्शि स्मृशिरिशि हशि कोशतिमष्टगं विशिम् । लिशं च शान्ताननिटः पुराणगाः पठन्ति पाठेघु दशैष नेतरान् । रुधिः सराधियुधिवन्धिसाधयः क्रुधिक्षुधी शुध्यालिबुध्यतो व्यधिः। इमे तु धान्ता दशा येऽनिटो मतास्ततः परं सिद्ध्यतिरेव नेतरे॥ शिषि पिर्षि शुष्यति पुष्यती लिपि विर्षि ग्लिषि तुष्यतिदुष्यती विषिम। इमान्नशवोपविशन्त्यनिधिो गणेषु षान्तान्कृषिकर्षती तथा ।। तपि तिपि चापिमयो वार्प स्वापि लिपि लुपि तृप्यति दृप्यती सृपिम् । स्वरेण नीचेन शापि छुपि क्षिपि प्रतीहि पान्तान्पठितांस्त्रयोदश ॥ शदि हरि स्कनिभिविच्छिरिक्षुतरीन शादि सहि स्तियातेपद्यती खिदिम् । तुर्दि नुदि विद्यर्यातविन्त इत्यापि प्रतीहि शान्तान्दश पञ्च चानिटः ॥ पचिं वचि विचिरिचिरज्जिपृच्छतीन निचि मिचि मुधिभजिभजिज्जतीन् । 
याज यनि गुजिजिसजिमजतीन् भुजि स्वजिसृजिमृजी विद्धपनिट्स्वरान् ॥ (1.) क-शक 'to be able' (IV. 78, V. 15). ना, शक्ष्यति 
(2.) स्-घस् 'to eat' (I. 747, and also substitute of अदू), as, घस्ता ; वस् 'to dwell' (I. I054), as वस्ता ॥ The वस् which takes Samprasarana by VI. I. I5, is meant here, and not वस् 'to cover' (II. 13), which does not vocalise, as वासिता पत्राणाम्, but उषितः from वस 'to dwell' (VII. 2. 52). 
(3.) भ्- Three roots : रम् 'to desire' (I. 1023), as, भारब्धा , यम् coire (I. 1029), यधा, लम् 'to take' (I. I024), लब्धा । 
(4.)मू-Four roots, यम् 'to cease' (I. 1033), यन्ता; रम् 'to play'(I. 906) रन्ता, नम् 'to bow'.(I.867, 1030) नन्ता, गम्त to go' (I. 1031) गन्ता॥ 
5. न्-Two roots मन् 'to think' (IV.67), मन्ता, हन् 'to kill' (II. 2), हन्ता ।। The Divadi मन् should be taken, otherwise मनिता from मन् - मनुते (VIII. 9). 
(6.) -Eight roots :-दित् 'to smear' (II. 5), देग्धा ; दुह् 'to milk' (II. 4), दोग्या; मिड् 'to sprinkle' (I. 1041) मीन, रुह् 'to grow' (I. 912) रोग; वत् 'to carry' (I. I053) वोडा, नह 'to bind' (IV.57) नद्धा; वह 'to burn' (I. I041) दग्धा, लिड् 'to lick' (II. 6) लेगा॥ In other collections संह (I. 905, IV. 20), मुह (IV. 89), रिह (VI. 23), 
(?), are also enumerated; of these te takos optionally beforc affixes beginning with त, so also मुह because it belongs to the class of धादि (VII. 2.45) the other two are not found (?) in root-collections, hence the Karika uses the words मुक्तसंशयः ॥ 
(7.) श्-Ten roots :-विश् 'to show' (VI. 3), दृश् 'to see' (I. I037), दए “to bite' (I. I038), मृश् 'to rub' (VI. 131), स्पृश् 'to touch' (VI. I28), रिश (VI. 126), रुश् (VI. 126) both meaning to hurt', विश् 'to enter'(VI. 130), लिश् 'to be small' (IV. 70, VI. 127). As वेष्टा, द्रष्टा, दंष्टा, भाम्रष्टा or मामी, स्पर्टी or स्मा, The roots with a penultimate F short, which are anudatta in the dhatupațha, with th exception of मृञ् and , take optionally the augment रम् (VI. I. 59), ॥ रो, रोष्टा, कोष्टा, प्रवेष्टा, लेष्टा ।। 
BK. VII. CH. II. . 11 ] 
E AUGMENT. 
1363 
(8.) - Ten roots:- with TT,'to love'. 'to obstiuct' (IV.65) iratury 'to accomplish' (IV. 71, V. 16) Tar; JY 'to fight' (IV, 64 ) Aral; Tu 'to bind' (1. 1022), ; an 'to accomplislı' (V. 17 ) Arati Fu 'to be angry' (IV. 80) #, Ty 'to be hungry'(IV. 81 ) war; yy 'to be pure' (IV. 82) 16, gy 'to be aware' (IV. 63) ral; y 'to pierce' ( IV. 72 ) 01;fay 'to be accomplished' (IV. 83 ) w The roots TV and rhy are exhibited in the above Karikå with भ्यण vikarana (बुद्धाति, सिद्धाति); therefore बुध् and सिध् take इद् in other ganas than the Fourth ; as a war and afyat ! There being want of prohibition with regard toनिष्ठा, we have बुधितं and सिधित ॥ 
(9.) q-roots. Ten. fag 'to distinguish' (VII, 14) ter ; 'to pound' (VII. 15 ) de, u 'to become dry' (IV. 74) TTTET ; qq 'to be nourished' (IV. 73), NET, RTE 'to shine' ( I. 1050) AUT, fg 'to pervade, to sprinkle' (1.729, U11. 13, IX. 54 ) aer, fimq 'to embrace' ( 1.734. IV. 77) MET; I 'to be satished' (IV. 75 ) alet, gy 'to be sinsul' ( IV. 76) gtet antara, rag to hate' (II. 3) DET, 
I T, w 'to draw ( 1. 1059, VI. 6 both Bhuadi and Tudádi are taken, as the karika uses the two forms), net and let it 
(10.) q-Thirteen roots : 'to burn' (1. 1034, IV. 51) 71, p ra, fa 'to distil' ( 1. 385) Thr, er 'to obtain' (V 14, X. 295 ) FETAT; 'to sow (1. 1052) THT; RTY 'to sleep' (11. 59 ) FIAT; Frog 'to anoint' (VI, 139 ) SRT; FT (VI. 137) 'to break', am I The roots gg and optionally take , as they belong to the class (VII. 2. 45, Divadi 84-91 ). The special mention of these two roots in the karika, is for the sake of indicating that these roots take 974 auginent; as far or not, or affar; EAT, or Af or roar The ag and TT belonging to Tudâdi class, are Udatta and the II T (I. 1032) 'to creep' A, anf; ng 'to curse (1. 1049 ) TA; UT 'to touch' (VI. 125 ) TH; farg 'to throw' (IV. 14 ) ITHT II 
(u.) -Fifteen roots. T 'to eat' [ 11. 1 ] 97T; K 'to void excrement' (1. 1026 ) Far; Fina'to leap' ( I. 10:8 ) Frat; FATE 'to break' (VII.2) war, For "to cut' (VII. 3) 37T; 'to pound' (VII, 6) Tat, fara, ut 'to perish' ( I. 008. VI. 134) OTT, a 'to sink' (1. 907, VI. 133 ) #TI, FETT, 'to sweat' (IV. 79 ) 
ar! The root is exhibited as fronte in the above karika, showing that the Fourth class root is to be taken, and not the Bhuadi (1.780 ), which is udatta and takes TC ITU 'to go' ( IV. 60 ), qat; ftrc 'to be troubled' (IV. 61, VI. 142, VII, 12 ) CT, 'to strike' (VI. 1) Qar; 'to impel' (VI. 2) FITTIT; TT (IV. 62 ) FT II The'root fee is exhibited in the kårika, as farã and f , there fore, the rule applies to frame and at FAT !! The Adadi (af) and Tudadi (fa ) farise, as far farin, ang ) 
(12.) T-six roots :-99 'to cook' (I. 187) Ehit, b a ; v 'to speak' (II. 54 ) Sent, Ay 'to separate' (VII. 5) it; fe 'to make empty (VII. 4) ott: fe 'lo sprinklc' (VI. 140 ) TRT; 99(VI. 136 ) 'to loose' ATTITUD 
(13.) -Onc root hy 'to ask' (VI. 120 ) AUT, HATA II 
1364 
TC AUGMENT. 
[ BK. VII. Ch. II. §. 13. 
(14.) - Fifteen roots :- 'to colour' (I. 865. 1048 ) ; fe 'to cleanse' (II. 11) fadini, yara ; ** 'to honor (1. 1047) TRT; 75* 'to break' (VII. 16) *T; YTH 'to fry' ( I. 181 ) HET or wet; as 'to quit' ( 1. 1035 ) ; up 'to sacrifice' (I, 1051) QET, TT 'to join' (IV. 68, VII. 7) unt; ry 'to break' (VI. 123 ) ; 'to adhere' (I. 1036) #6TH, 45*to be immersed' (VI. 122) 1677; 'to bend' (VI. 124) 'to enjoy' (VII, 17). AT, F 'to embrace' (1. 1025 ) FT ETT; * 'to emit''to create' (IV. 69, VI. 121 ) FUT; ** 'to cleanse' (1. 269, 11. 57), Aref, har i The root is exhibited in the Dha tupatha with a long indicatory 5, e-s, i Ja (11. 57). It, therefore, optionally would take i Nor does this root take sa augment. The inclusion of this root in the above list is, therefore, questionable. Others read to instead of uit The faune root fasis Anit (111, 12) i. e. fast 'to separate the face of Rudhadi takes 11 
Why do we say "a monosyllabic root"? Observe of The root is taught as with a final # (I1. 4. 42 ) in order to prevent vriddhi. Why do we say "in upadeśa or Dhatupatha"? 
The rule will not apply to roots which have become anudatta during evolution i. e. when taking affixes. Therefore, we have foora and m with r , but not here, कर्ता कटान, कर्तुम् ।। 
T: fenfa il 8811 Taifa l Bft, 59, fata il fill run fattaraiy Fanfe grau Ta GT 7 mai 
Kiriki:-*7*** The rafafa: sirsa I T Paymuno64487711 
11. The augment r is not added to an affix having an indicatory 4, when it comes after the root fw, or after a monosyllabic root ending in 3, 5, por me in the 
Dhatupåtha. 
As श्रिया, श्रितः, पितवान् | So also with roots ending in उक् vowels : as grout, gai, #47; T T, I, 747 ; ERAT, TT, TT; etet, ajoti, atubara il 
Why'riq and an ending roots only'? Observe farga: 11 Why having an ir.dicatory ? Observe अयित, प्रयितुम, अवितव्यम् ॥ Some read two 's in the sätra and would apply it to the indicatory of also, as you (III. 2. 139). 
This rule applies to those roots, which have not been enumerated above. In the case of g the Nishtha will not take even by VII. 2. 49 read with VII. 2. 15. 
When two a are read in the s@tra, one standing for r; there arises a little difficulty of combination. Thus T coming after the visarga of would require that the visarga be changed to aby VI. 1. 114. If u be changed to 
(VIII. 4. 55) then also, the visarga required to be changed into upadhmani ya by VIII. 3. 37. If the change of T into (VIII. 4. 55) be considered asiddha BK. VII. C11. II S. 13 ) 
AUGMENT 
1365 
(VIII. 2. 1.), then also the visarga must be changed to y (VI. 1, 114), and the sätra should be worrara1 This, however, is not done as an anomaly allow ablc in sätra construction. According to Kasika, this difficulty would not at all arise, is in the satra SEOTEFT (III. 2. 139 ), the For + T be taken as com pounded into Fut; so that that rule would apply to that for which ends in HT, and not to that for whose final is changed to t; so that the form FTET: is evolved without anomaly: and the affix will be an (PE) and not fira (Te). The affix being for, the above sandhi difficulty will not arise at all. 
The word is understood here also, so that the rule will apply to roots which end in the vowel, in their original states and not to the transform ed base before the affix. Thus is a h-ending root, which is transformed to or before the Nishtha au The rule will apply to it, as atro: 11 If you object saying, that ends in long and its Desiderative optionally takes re by VII. 2. 41, and thereforc, its Nishtha will always take no rę by VII. 2. 15. we reply, that the option taught in VII. 2. 41 applies to roots ending in long T; but when the root vowel is clianged to f, it is no longer a tending root. Ir you say, the rule of sthanivad bhava will apply: we say, that that rule is not applicable to 
m , and this is an mehry II Therefore, the word you should be read into this s@tra. If this be so, the rule ought to apply to ury, and we cou ld not get the forms otra : and s tart! To explain this we should also read the anuvšitti of rire into this sätra. The root gy, however is an exception and is governed by this rule, in spite of its consisting of more than one vowel. Thus groga: and gromara u 
Karik! :-55 is treated as if it was I, when the affix F is to be applied, wp is to be prohibited, or r is to be debarred. 
T IT II 8211 Tall fa, 46, TET:, all वृत्तिः ॥ मह गुहा इत्येतयोरुगन्तानां च सनि प्रत्यये परत डागमो न भवति । 
12. The Desiderative affix en does not get the augment , not only after roots ending in 3, 5, #and , but also after ग्रह and गुह ॥ 
As pula, ia, Taft, fa 11 The anuvritti of ra is not drawn into this satra, as option is allowed regarding it by VII 2. 49. would al ways get TE, TE (1. 944) being fan (in the Dhatupa tha), would have optionally taken (VII. 2. 44) 
The forms yra and Tyna are thus evolved :---147+ (the affix is ha by I. 2. 8 ) - TE+#7 (VI. I. 16 )-T8+ # (VIII. 2. 31 )=Y+FT (VIII. 2. 41 ) fura (VIII. 2. 37). So also with U rdt, the era is fint here by 1. 2. 10. 
FETEIGER OF 18311 tall , J, T, ET, , , , fall 
1366 
इद् AUGMENT. 
[ BK. VII. CI. II. S. 15 
वृभिः ॥ कृसु वृस्तु सु श्रुहत्येतेषां लिटि प्रत्यये बागमो न भवति । पार्निकम ॥ कृमीमुद इति वक्तव्यम् ॥ 
13. The Personal endings of the Perfect do not get the augment , after कृ, सु, भू, वृ, स्तु, दू, , श्रु॥ 
Thus कृ-चकृव, चकम ; सू, ससृव, समृम; भू, अश्व, बभृम ; वृम्, पवृव, ववृम ; वृक्ष, पवृवहे, ववृमहे; स्तु, तुष्टुव, तुष्टुम ; दु, दुद्रुव, दुद्रम मु; सुनुव, सुसुम शु; शुश्रुव, शुश्रुम ॥ सिद्ध सत्यारम्भो नियमार्यः, कादय एव लिव्धनिटस्ततोन्ये सेट इति ।। 
These roots with the exception of a are Anit by rule VII. 2. 10; their special mention here is for the sake of niyama, namely, these roots alone are Anit in the Perfect, other roots are all Set in the Perfect. Thus विभिदिव, विभिदिम, खलविव, लुलुविम | All anudatta roots of the Dhatupatha are to be understood, by this rule, to get ri! The affix y of the Perfect gets after F, as the irregular form rau in VII. 2. 64, indicates that in the Veda, y does not get r after , but in the secular literature it does. By VII. 2. 63, the y would have got after स्तु, हु, and ; that is also prohibited by the present satra. As तुष्टोय, दुद्रोय, 
खोय, शुश्रोथ ॥ 
Vart:- is added when takes the सुद augment : as संचस्करिव, संचस्क रिम || The rule VII. 2. 63, applies here also, as संघस्करिय॥ 
श्वीदितो निष्ठायाम् ॥ १४॥ पदानि ॥ शिव, ईदितः, निष्ठायाम, ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ श्वयतेरीदितच निष्ठायामिडागमो न भवति ॥ 
14. The Participial affixes त and तवत् (kta and ktavatu), do not get the r augment after isa, and after the root which has an indicatory en ___As शन:, शूनवान; भोलजी (VI. I0), लग्न, लगवान् ; भोविजी (VI.9), रविमा, उबिम वान् ॥ The t is changed to a because of the indicatory भो (VIII. 2. 45). So also दीपी (IV. 42), दीप्तः, दीप्तवान् ॥ In the Dhatupa tha, डीड (IV. 27), is classed among sifanc roots, and it indicates that the Nishtha is anit after it: and his for a-change (VIII. 2. 45) as, उडीना, दीनवान् ॥ The word निष्ठायाम् governs the following satras upto VII. 2. 35. 
यस्य विभाषा ॥ १५॥ पदानि ॥ यस्य, विभाषा वृत्तिः ॥ यस्य धातोर्विभाषा क्वचिदिङक्तस्तस्य निष्ठायां परत इडागमो न भवति। 
15. The Participial-affixes do not take , after those roots, to which another suffix can optionally be added, with or without this augmenten 
That is, a root which is optionally Set before other affixes, is invariably anit before Nishtha. Thus by VII. 2. 44, वल consonant beginning affixes are optionally are after the roots y &c. The Nishtha aster y &c, will be invariably anit. Thus विधूता, विधूतवान् ; गूदा, गूढवान् ॥ By VII. 2. 56, the roots having an indicatory a, optionally are followed by Set T1 The Nishtha after fart roots will invariably be anit : as वृद्धः, वृदयान् ॥ 
BK. VII. Cu. 11. g. 18 ] 
KT AUGMENT. 
- 1367 
By the vartika सनि पदि वारदाणामुपसख्यानम् the roots तम्, पत and परिशा take optional e in thc Dcsidcrative (VII. 2. 49). Though 4 is a root which thus optionally takes re in the Desiderative, yet its Nishtha is always hf, for Panini himself has employed the word ran in Sätra II. I. 24, 38. According to Padamanjari this rule of UFU FAIT is anitya and not of universal application. Because had this rule been of universal application then the root of which is optionally anit by VII. 2. 57, would be universally anit by the present sätra : and there would be no necessity of reading it with a long in the Dhatupatha, as moi (VI. 141) to make its nishtlâ anit under VII. 2. 14. 
आदितश्च ॥ १६॥ पदानि ॥ आदितः, च, ॥ वृत्तिः ॥भादित धातोनिष्ठायामिडागमो न भवति । 
16. The Participial-affixes do not get a augment after a root which has an indicatory at 11 
As FAQ-AH, PAHATL; AT-f4pool, fitooring; -ffini, PETIT! The implies that other roots not enumerated are to be also in cluded, as #TFT, : 
This and the sotra following it could have been made into one, as भादिसम विभाषा भावाविकर्मणोः॥ The separate making of two sutras indicates that the rule of afy EHRT (VII. 2. 15), applies with the restrictions and limitations of the rule ordaiving option', i.c., thc prohibition of g augment, with regard to the participial-assixes is limited by the same conditions, which apply to the optional employment of F before other affixes in the Fur rules (aggruffTET, ay: fagyi) | Thus VII. 2. 68 ordains of optionally to the affix ag aster the roots a. , far and fargli The root face there is the Tudadi root mean ing 'to acquire'. The rule ofy fan will apply to this face with this ineaning : and not to for meaning to know, the Past Participles of which are fifa, fara era il 
विभाषा भावादिकर्मणोः ॥ १७॥ पदानि ॥ विभाषा, भाव, आदिकर्मणोः । वृत्तिः ॥ भावे भादिकम्मणि च भादितो धातोर्विभाषा निधायामिडागमो न भवति । 
17. The participial affixes after roots having an indicatory ea, may optionally take the augment se, when the affixes have an Impersonal sense, or denote the begin ning of an action. 
Thus मिन्नमनेन or मेदितमनेन, प्रमिन्नः, अमेरितः ॥ The Saunagas optionally make thc Nishtha sct after the root 7, when the asfix has a Passive significance even, as चकितो घटः कर्तुम् or शनी घटः कम्॥ Not so, when the affix has Impersonal force, as a " The root 2* 'to throw' (sprala), is followed by a Nishtha, when the sense is Impersonal: as minha; but not when the begin ning of action is meant, as TFT: "T: 11 
क्षुम्धस्वान्तध्वान्तलमलिष्टविरिन्धफाण्टबाढानि मन्थमनस्तमः सकाविस्पष्टस्वरा 
1368 
RAUGMENT. 
[BK. VII. CH. 11. 8. 19 
www 
. 
GT1YE 
ATITETNE II 8C II Tana Ilu, mara, tara on, fou, fafcout, , Ereifa, Fry, #:, ahi, Fre, afety, FIT, WATATE, TIG II 
वृत्तिः ॥ शुग्ध स्वान्त ध्वान्त लग्न लिए विरिन्ध फाण्ट बारात्येते निपात्यन्ते बयासंखवं मन्य मनस्तमः UPTOFTE Praeterya ragut 
18. The following words are made without a augment in the senses given against them : 
1. : 'a churning stick', 2. Fara: 'the mind', 3. sarra: darkness', 4. a: 'attached', 5. Pret: 'indistinct or unintelli gible', 6. fartext: 'a note or tone', 7. que: 'made without an effort or by an easy process', and 8. arc: 'excessive'. 
When the words have not the above sense, we have 1. antidisturbed or agitated'. The phrase your fafti or pet is a metaphorical use of the word. 2. Frhai as praar Tofi, FTET HTET HI 3. STATT WF or what HTET I 4. Esfirat, 5. ग्लेच्छित (-भपभाषित) 6. विरोभित from रेप 'to sound', or विरिभितं from रिभि ।। 7. 
for 11600€ is a decoction, prepared without much trouble, by simply slightly heating the substance with some water, without powdering or pasting it. (graafd949149 T ITE POT Angvai) a medicine for any disease may be adıninistered in five forms : : or essence, 8: paste or powder, ua: decoction or extract, fra: cold extract prepared by throwing pounded drugs into cold water, and keeping that all night to soak. This watery extract, to be drunk in the morning, is so called. 1707 is a similar hot preparation, but for immediate use, when the drugs are put in boiling water and the decoction after purification is ready for use as a drink. 8. uriga from my 'to strive'. 
EPOTE II 88 il retra il gfa, Teft, art, 11 पत्तिः ॥ वियातस्य भावी वैयात्यम् प्रागल्भ्यमविनीतता ॥ताराम इत्येतयोनिष्ठावामिरागमोम भवति। 
19. The Participial affix does not get a augment, after the roots and vĘ, wheu meaning 'bold, impudent and arrogant'. 
As yr, fare: il The root ry is exhibited in the Dhatupatha as f ar 'to be impudent' (V. 2 2), and as it has an indicatory m, its past participle would be one by VII. 2. 16. Te is re in the Dhåt upåtha (1.763 ), and as it has an indicatory # by VII. 2. 56. read with VII. 2. 15, its Nishtha is also Anit. The special mention of these roots here, is for the sake of making a niyama rule; namely, she only then when meaning 'impudent', and as in other senses : as धार्षिता, पिशासितः "धष never forms past participle with the force of भाव (Impersonal action) or a (beginning of action), and therefore VII. 2. 17 cannot apply to it"_This is Kasika. According to Bhattoji Dikshit who 
I 
REGULA 
Lune 
1369 
W 
quotes Haradatta and Madhava, y forms participles in those senses, when option is allowed, as, e or yo. e: or not meaning 'impudent'. 
: FYCEUT: Il Roll Tarla II G:, um, at:, 11 * N * & A rte la proti 20. The ir 
med Past Pa 
means #stout' and 'strong'. 
It is derived from tę with affix. In other senses, the forms are tream or gie1 There are two roots one (1.769) without nasal, and the other b (1.770 ) with the nasal. g can be derived from any one of these by cliding e, and the nasal, and changing to #, and not adding the augment ça 11 
The difference between us and is that a man may be stout or without being strong ( a ) and vice versa. The word w in the satra is equal to ; in fact, the word en is formed by my affix. The irregularity in the formation of a consists in the absence of and the clision of (and of a. if the root er be taken ) : and the change of a into * This irregular elision of 
is for the sake of preventing the application of the rule ata (VIII. 2. 1). The form could have been obtained in the regular way by the elision of x. thus : + 6+# (VIII. 2. 31)-67+*+&+*++*(VIII. 3. 13) - EU But then when & is elided, the rule raat will apply, and the forms of a81an, qara could not be obtained. For me is changed to by VI.4. 161 only when it is laghu or light, but -lopa being considered asiddha, the would be heavy as standing before a conjunct consonant. So also the form f orsto: could not be obtained: for the for would not be changed to me before maru when the is not light or laghu (VI. 4- 56). So also, ficaraTV fich the daughter of Paridraha ) could not be formed. For being considered guru or heavy, the affix 6€ would have come in the feminine ( IV. 1.78). 
mit fec: 118811 E l Ht, fec: | T: u yfie na Arrasata al 
21. The irregularly formed prięc means 'Lord'. 
This is formed, like , from ar or 11 When not having the sense of 'Lord', we have greqianq and yigitavu 
The x is elided first as an anomaly. By so doing we can get the forms like weala, recea; qiftagal The form oftana is formed by fag instead of ktvå v Though the full noun is. rice and foe is added to such a noun, yet for the purposes of ktvå it is considered as a compound verb, having of as upasarga. In fact, for is added to y, and the root, becomes an, and then ktva is added to this root, and then there is compounding off with this word ending in ktya, and then by the regular process the ktvå is replaced by fue The general rule is that Derivative roots formed from nouns, like oftere. TT , T T &c which have an upasarga as one of their formative elements. 
VTT 
1370 
6 AUGMENT. 
[ BK. VII. CH. II. §. 23 
are treated as if they were compound verbs having those upasargas. The result of this is, that though the full noun is 47, yet in the derivative verb, I will be treated as an upasarga, as in ordinary compound verbs. Thus the augment # in the Imperfect is added after y and not before it, as FATTA, 38 मनायत | The rule is उपसर्गसमानाकारं पूर्वपदं धातुसंज्ञाप्रयोजके प्रत्यय चिकीर्षिते पृथक् क्रियते ॥ The Participial form of these words is therefore with fo and not at, as yrary and are 11 The only exception to this rule is the noun 9A, in which the upasarga wn is not considered as a separate member in the Derivative verb. This being the general rule, in fatura the portion oft is treated as an upasarga, and reara as the verb, and its accent is governed by fags faz (VIII. I. 28 ) i. e. it becomes altogether unaccented and af retains its accent. So also qrarea, where is oft is compounded with the Participial form atal, and then Ky is changed to pelo by VII. 1. 37. 
DETTETUT: 49: 11 22 11 Tau Il goes, teret:, :, !| वृत्तिः ॥ कृच्छू गहन इत्येतयोरर्थयोः कषेर्दातोनिष्ठायामिडागमो न भवति ॥ 
22. The Participial affix does not take the aug ments after the root +, when the participle means 'difficult' and 'impenetrable'. 
As aets , Geltui, atats i Entforama u "Difficult is Fire-sacrifice i. e. it is difficult to completely master the ritual connected with the worship of fire;and difficult enough is Grammar, but the Samans are worst of all". Fieta pariat 'impervious forests. Ther: qúar: 11 When not havig these senses, we have 
fra Gall 
घुषिरविशन्दने ॥ २३॥ पदानि ॥ घुषिः, अविशब्दने ॥ वृगिः ॥ घुषेद्धोतीरविशदने] निष्ठायामिडागमो न भवति । 
23. The Participial affix does not take the aug mentre, after the root ge in any sense other than that of ‘proclaimed'. 
As yet (FT, GET TOT but wayfa 79975 H 1987 f 'assertion, affirmation, agreement'. gfer 
s a is' Bhvadi( 1. 683 ), and gray from is Churadi (X. 187), both of these are referred to in the satra. The prohibition of fue in the satra, indicates by jnapaka that the fore added to the root in the Churâdi class in the sense of FATEA is anitya. So the following construction becomes valid:-as महीपालवचः श्रुत्वा सुघुषुः पुष्पमाणवाः “expressed their opinions in words", 
In short the fore is optionally added to the giart of the Churadi class. 
Some say the Churâdi fora is anitya generally and not only after grare (fara orangtra:) 11 This is inferred from thc mention of the root pa FEATH (X. 2 ) in this class. The indicatory F in fata shows that the augment 
BK. VIL.CH... 
AUGMENT 
1371 
u will be added to the root, which will thus become part and this will be retained throughout and never dropped. ( VII. I. 48 ). Now had the णिच् been nitya, then the root ought to have been taught as चिन्त स्मृत्याम् , be cause no rule would have caused the elision of the T of forca when fore was added. The enunciation of the root as porta, therefore, indicates that the churadi poenis anitya, and thus we get the forms like fatti, Parrand, fort, चिन्तति, चिन्तेतू &c. 
बईः सनिविभ्यः ॥२४॥ पदाति ॥ अहेर, सम, नि, विभ्यः ।। दतिःख नि विइत्यतथ्य उत्तरस्यादेनिष्ठायामिडागमो न भवति ।। 
24. The Participial afix does not take the इट्, after the root afę when it is preceded by F, fat or fer le 
___As समर्णः, 'plagued' न्यर्णः, व्यर्णः ॥ Why of भई'? Observe समेधितः ॥ Why 'सम, नि or वि? Observe मर्दितः ॥ 
अमेधावियें ॥ २५॥ पदानि ।। अमे, च, भाविय्ये ।। वृत्तिः ॥ अमिधदादुत्तरस्याराविर्येचे निष्ठायामिडागमो न भवति ।। 
25. The Participial affix does not take the ra, after we preceded by , when the meaning is that of 'near'. 
Asmauliem, wzof all Why' when meaning near'? See sparent TF: a meaping stiça:il gi means fremote,' that which is not remote is ma 
'non-remote, the state of bcing non-remote is माविर्य'non-remote-ness.' The affix is added irregularly, in spite of the prohibition contained in V. 1. 121. 
रध्ययने वृत्तम् ॥२६॥ पदानि ॥णेः, अध्ययने, वृत्तम् , ॥ त्तिः ॥ मन्तस्यवृत्तनिष्ठायामभ्ययनाथ वृत्तामताडभावाणिलुक्च निपात्यते ॥ 
26. The word qy is formed from the causative of घृत, in the sense of 'studied through or read.' 
There is absence of the and luk-elision of the causative sign. As it गुणो देवरसेन Devadatta has read or gone through Gupa.' (एणः पाठः पवक्रमसंहिता रूपोऽध्यनविशेष:)॥ वृत्तं पारायणं देवदत्तेन ॥ When the sense is not that of 'read', we have acil The root t is intransitive, and becomes Transitive when employed in the Causative. The participle is formed from this Transitive causative verb, otherwisc it could not have governcd an object as shown above. * The affix ff is added with a Passive force to IT as we find the author himself 
using this form in नित्तम् in satras IV. 2.68, and V. I. 79; on the analogy of निर्वत the word वृत्तः could also have been formed vithout this satra." 
वा दान्तशान्तपूर्णदस्तस्पष्टच्छन्नमस्ताः ॥२७॥ पदानि ॥ वा, दान्त, शान्त, पूर्ण, दस्त, स्पष्ट, छन्न, सप्ताः ॥ 
वृत्तिः रित्यनुवर्तते । एम् धम् पूरी इस सपूछद ज्ञप इत्येतेषां ण्यन्तानांधातूनांया भनिद्वं निपात्यत। 
1372 
- 
AUGMENT. 
BR: VII, CH. 11. 9. 29 
M 
. 
.. 
27. The following irregularly formed Participles, from the causative roots, may optionally take , namely, a, Tra, got, (ET, FTE, VA, T II 
: These words are formed either from the causative base or from the pri mary roots &c. The other forms are e, f , gftar, maT :, Mifta :,gta: and arraill The words are &c. are formed by the luk-elision of for(Causative), and not taking the Augment. By VII. 2. 49 FTC optionally is er and, therefore, by VII. 2. 15, its Participle would have been always was, hence, this satra makes an option. 
THEKHyraph 112511 Ela Il af, HA, Tac, age, arata u वृत्तिः । ति वर्तते । रूषि मम स्वर संपुष भास्वन इत्येतेषां निष्ठायां वा इडागमो न भवति ।। *.. . 28. The Participial affix may optionally get a augment, after रुष, अम: त्वर, संधुष, and आस्वन् । 
As resor Fa: 11 By VII.2.48, the affixes after or are optionally dr, and therefore by VII. 2. 15, the Nishtha after this verb would have been always anit; hence this optional rule. अभ्धान्तः or अभ्यमितः; सूर्ण : or चरितः ॥ The पर is exhibited in the Dhatupațha as fat (I. 812) i.e. with an indicatory long st, and hence by VII. 2. 16. would have been anit always, this rule makes it op tionally anit. So also, eget grat, or error rat, Age or largo TRMTE, eget or benar til gv preceded by a will be optionally anit, even when having any sense other than that of proclaimed', as this subsequent sätra supersedes VIL 2. 23 so far. So also FTET: or spratat fy:, HTFT or TRITA 47: II PTI when preceded by 91, though denoting 'mind,' is optionally anit, in spite of VII. 2. 18, that rule being superseded so far by this subsequent rule. 
THE II RE IL Tana Ili, JHE, 11 वृत्तिः॥ लोमसु वर्तमानस्य हनिष्ठायां वा बडागमो न भवति । पातिकम् ॥ विस्मितमतिघासयोति वक्तव्यम् ॥ .... 29. The Participial affix optionally takes , after 
6 when the word m. or its synonym is in construction with it. 
Asiana na orala MTHITA; EET: an organ Rutine or ATE or : 'to lie' (I. 741 ) is exhibited with an indicatory 3 in the Dhatur patha, and would have been consequently always anit, in the Nishtha (VII.2.15) because it was optionally anit before ktvå ( VII. 2. 56 ) hence this rule. r 'to be delighted' (IV. 119) is also included here, this verb is N The option appertains to both these verbs. The word a means the hair of the body as well as of the head: as in the sentence THEO T angan The sense of in connection with or will be that of bristling up, horipillation. Why do 
BK. VII. CA: IF..8..33') 
AUGMENT. :) 
1373 
- 
we say "in connection with लोम?" Observe wष्टो (bhuadi), देवदत्तः "the deceived Deva Datta' and हापता (Divadi) देवदत्तः the delighted Devadatta. 
Vart: The option is allowed also in the senses of 'astonished' and beaten back', as दृष्टो or हषितो देवदत्त 'theastonished D'. हटाः or दूषिता इन्ताः the bent or destroyed teeth. .. अपचितश्च ॥ ३०॥ पदानि ॥ अपचितः, च,॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ अपचित इति वा निपात्यते । अपपूर्वस्य चायतनिष्टायामनिटलं विभावश्च निपात्यते। . . पातिकम् ॥ तिनि नित्यमिति वक्तव्यम् ॥ 
30. And अपचित has also a second form with the augmentar . The word safra is formed with the preposition sro added to the root चार (I.929) to honor, to fear, to see' and चाय changed irregularly toधि before कृ॥ The other form is अपधायितः, as अपचितो or अपचायितो ऽनेनगुरुः 'the teacher is seared by himn'. This example is given when the sense is that of 'fear'; when the word means 'honor', then the participle must govern the genitive case, as re quired by III. 2. 188. i Vart:-Before तिन् affix, चार is always changed to चि, as अपचितिः 'Loss, destruction, showing reverence'. The affix fannt is added to try, by considering it as belonging to the class of IT &c. See III. 3. 94 Vårt. Otherwise it would take the affix भ by III. 3. 103. . हुहरेश्छन्दसि ॥ ३१॥ पदानि ॥ दु हरेः, छन्दसि ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ हरते तोनिष्ठायां छन्दसि ए इत्ययमादेशो भवति । 
___31. हु is substituted for हुर् (I. 978) in the Veda, before the Participial-affix. 
As हुतस्व चाहतस्य च, महुतमसि हविर्धानम् (Vaj San. I. 9). But दूतम् in secular literature. ___ अपरिहवृताश्च ॥ ३२॥ पदानि ॥ अपरिहवृताः, च ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ भपरिवृता इति निपात्यते छन्दसि विषये । हु इत्येतस्यादेशस्थाभावो निपात्यते । 
32. The word 'ap hvrita.' is in in the Veda. 
"The substitution required by the last sätra, does not take place here. As अपरिहताः सनुयाम वाजम् (Rig I. 100. 19). 
सोमे हरितः ॥ ३३॥ पदानि ॥ सोमे, हरितः॥ 
• वृत्तिः ॥ हरित इति हरनिष्ठायामिडागमो गुणश्च निपात्यते छन्दसि विषये, सोमशेजवति । 
33. हरित is irregularly formed from t in the Veda, by guņa substitution and a augment, when it refers to Soma. 
As मा नः सोमो हरितो वितरितस्वम् ।। 
1374 
R AUGMENT. 
[ BK. VII.CH. II.S. 34. 
प्रसितस्कभितस्तभितोत्तभितचत्तविकस्ता विशस्तृशंस्तुशास्तृतरुततस्तवस्तृष. मातृवात्रीरुज्ज्वलिति क्षरिति क्षमिति पमित्यमितीति च ॥ ३४ ॥ पदानि ॥ प्रसित, स्कमित, स्तमित, उत्तभित, पत्त, विकस्त, विशस्तु, शस्त, शास्तू, तरुत, तकन, धरुत, वरूत, वरूत्रीः, उज्ज्वलिति, मरिति, क्षमिति, वमिति, अमिति, इति, च ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ मसित स्कभित स्तभित उत्तभित वन विकस्त विज्ञास्त शस्त या स्तृ तरुत तकनु बरुत वकतवंकषी उभयलिति क्षरिति शामिति पमित्यमिति इत्येतानि छन्दसि निपात्यन्ते । 
34. In the Veda, the following irregular forms are found, some with, and some without the augment 8-1 grasita, 2 skabhita, 8 stabhita, 4 uttabhita, 5 chatta, 6 vikasta, 7 visastri; 8 sanstri, 9sastri, 10 tarutri, 11 taratri, 12 varutri, 18 varatri, 14 varatrih, 16 ujjvaliti, 16 kshariti, 17 kshamiti, 18 vámiti and 19 amiti. 
of the above nineteen words, 1, 2, 3, and 4 are from roots WE, 'to swallow' (I. 661) स्कम्भु to stop' (I. 414) and स्सम्मु (I.413) all having an indicatory 7, and therefore by VII. 2. 56 read with VII. 2. 15, their Nishtha would not have taken बट् ॥ Thus मसितं (ver. मस्त) वा एतत् सोमस्य ॥ विष्कभिते भजरे (-विकधा); बेन स्वस्ताभितम (=स्तग्धम् ), सत्येनोसभिता भूमिः ( उत्तप्पा) ॥ The irregularity is only with the preposition ya , with other prepositions, the form स्तमित is not employed. Similarly (5) चना (-चतिता) वर्षेण विपुत् from चते याचन।। (6)उत्तामाया दृपयं यदू विकस्तम् (-विकसितम्) The forms, 7 8, and 9are from the roots धनु हिंसायाम् and सु स्तुती, and शानु भनुशिष्टी with the affix तुच् and no augment; as एकस्वष्टुरवस्थाविशस्ता (-विशासिता), उस स्ता मुविमः (-सिता), प्रशास्ता (-प्रशासितम्)। The forms IO, II, 12, 13 and 14 are from the roots r and q (वृ and वृह), with the affix year, and the augment and GE! As eart or mari cat माम् (तरितारम् or तरीतारम), वरुतारम् or वरूतारम् रथानाम् (-परितारम् or वरीतारम); परूपीटा देवीविश्वदेव्यावती ॥ पत्री ' is exhibited in this form of Nom. pl. of the feminine merely for the sake of showing one form in which it is found : another form is महोरामाणि वरुपयः ॥ Here the plural is formed irregularly, by taking the word as i t The feminine form could have been easily obtained from 753, by adding g, the special mention is explanatory. The rest 15, 16, 17, 18 and 19 are from नत्-अचल, भर, क्षम्, पम् , and भम्, formed with the vikaraña yo and the affix of the 3rd Per Sing fary, r being substituted for 
of ye, or yg is elided and the augment is added 1 As m osta (-3 बावलति), स्तोम क्षमिति (समति), स्तोकं भरिति (भारति), यः सोम पमिति (-बमात, मधमिति वरुणः (-मभ्यमाति) | Sometimes we have मन्यमाप्ति, as रांवमधमीति ।। 
मार्चधातुकस्येलादेः॥३५॥ पदादि ॥ आर्द्धधातुफस्य, इद, पलादेः॥ वृत्तिः॥छनतीति निवृतम् । मार्सवातुकस्य पलादस्यिगमो भवति । BK. VII. CH. ÎI S- 36) 
AUGMENT 
1375 
+1.. 
. 
35. An ardhadhâtuka affix (III. 4. 114 &c) begin ning with a consonant (except =), gets the augment ta (in 
these rules ). 
Thus ferat, f , 9504, fat, frau, afall Why 'ardhadha tuka'? Observe ora, TFT II The niyama rule of VII. 2: 76 ordaining & augment to sarvadhatuka affixes of Rudadi verbs, would prevent re aug ment before sarvadhatuka affixes when coming after other roots. The employment of ardhadhatuka here can be dispensed with. Why before affixes beginning with a पल-consonant? Observe लम्यम्, पव्यम् , लवनीयम, पवनीयम् ॥ Though the anuvritti of re was understood here, its repetition is for the sake of preven ting the prohibition of the foregoing sätras like VII. 2. 8. 
स्नुक्रमोरनात्मनेपदनिमित्ते ॥३६॥ पदानि ॥ स्नु, कमोः, अनात्मनेपदनिमित्ते॥ वृत्तिः॥नियमार्थमिदम् । स्नुकमोरार्द्धधातुकस्य वलाइरिडागमो भवति, न पेस्नुक्रमो भारमनपरस्य निमि 
वार्तिकम् ॥ कमस्तु कनर्यात्मनेपदविषयावसस्यात्मनेपदे कति प्रतिषेधो वक्तव्यः॥ 
36. The augment is added to årdhadhatuka valádi affixes after eat and #7, only then when they do not oc casion the taking of the Personal endings of the Atnanepada. 
The roots fg and an are udatta, and will get augment naturally, the sQtra makes a restriction or niyama. The restriction is that when the roots themselves occasion atmanepada asfixes, then they do not take re, otherwise they will. 
When do rootsgive occasion to Atmanepada affixes? The roots occasion atmanepada affixes when employed in the Impersonal, Passive, and Intensive senses. Sutras I. 3. 38-43, teach us when takes Atmanepada affixes. Thus 
FIAT, FACH, Ff74, TATAT, Tg, wara El Why do we say 'when not the occasion of getting the Atmanepada asfixes'? Observe, yfirle, fiere, F , Fmitad, peaa, grana u In all these examples and 
have become the causes of taking the Atmanepada asfixes. The Desi. derative is also Atmanepadi because of I. 3. 62. 
Why have we used the word fra in the stra? Would it not have been simpler to say TATTATHAT? This form of sätra would have indicated that whenever an åtmancpada afhx followed, then there would be no raug. ment. Now the rule is that all words exhibited in the Locative case in this Grammar, have the force of an, i. e. when that word follows. Therefore 
MTOTO would mean when an atmanependa'affix followed. If then this "atm anepada" be taken as qualifying and Hi, then it must follow immediately after those roots, as in widte and w ire; but we would not get the forms fritata and arra, becanse fa intervenes between the atmanepada and the 
1370 
FE AUGMENT. 
f BK. VII. Ch. 1:1::$: 38. 
affix. On the other hand is "atmanepada" be taken to qualify the word "ardha dhatuka affix" understood, viz, if the sotra ment Faria queintramago start then the forms filoza and mua would be valid, but we should not get the forms geirdre and wäete, because the augment erre is a portion of the atmanepada affix, and there is no ardhdhatuka affix here. If the s@tra be taken to have both the above senses, then we could not get the form the in the Desiderative, because here the atmancpada does not follow immediately after the sarvadhatuka affix that follows a ll Therefore, the word fafter should be taken. For by so doing, there takes place prohibition with regard to niye &c, and also with regard to that after which comes the atmanepada, as the fa in rerafaga, and also with regard to that which precedes the latter, as the सन् affix in the above. In प्रस्नवित्रीयते (प्रस्नवितेवाघरति), the root स्नु has not occasioned the atmanepada affix, but the affix #46, hence the prohibition of this sätra does not apply. 
Vart:-Prohibition of r augment should be stated with regard to a when an Krit-affix, with active force, follows not in the atmanepada, though in the Active voice such a was subject of Atmanepada. When it takes no upasargas, we have according to one view two forms are and afa (1. 3. 43) because the atmanepada here is optional. According to the other view there will be only one form, as MAAT 1 But with y and we have gain and 8949 | Why do we say 'the Krit-affix should have an active force'? Obs erve garasza, amesema ll Why do we say "when it was subject of Atma nepada"? Observe farvan hart Here there is augment ; for by I. 3. 42, 54 is subject of atmanepada, when the upasargas and go precede, but not otherwise. 
With regard to fi, it will take no re in the Desiderativc, and before a fifin affix, by virtue of VII. 2. II and 12. Therefore, we have the forms Horrela, 706, PENTATIEI 
net sofa fra: 11 poll Tall 6:, fora, is: n. वृत्तिः ॥ ग्रह उत्तरस्य इटः भलिटि दीर्थो भवति । 
37. The augmente added to validi ardhadhatuka affixes, becomes lengthened, except in the Personal endings of the Perfect, after the root ura 
As AUNT, US, atareil Why not in the Perfect? Observe munca gura u The lengthening takes place of the 7 taught in VII. 2. 35, and does not refer to the पिणवद् इद् of VI.4.62 : as पारिता, पहियत ।। 
ar ll 35 | I T ET II वृत्तिः । वृति वृत्तमोः सामान्येन महणं तस्मादुत्तरस्य प्रकारान्तभ्यश्चटो वा दीर्घा भवति । 
38. The r is optionally lengthened after , and after roots ending in long *, except in the Perfect. 
BK. VII. CH. 11, 9:41) 
AUGMENT. 
1377. 
As परिता । परीता । प्रावरिता । प्रावरीसा॥ प्रकारान्सेभ्यः । सरिता । सरीता । भारतरिता । भारतरीता । पूरा इति किम् । करिष्यति हरिष्यति । भलिटीत्येव । ववरिय । तेरिय॥ Why do we say 'aster q and long ending roots'? Observe aftsara and gris it Why do we say exccpt in the Perfect? . Observe quity and aita u 
मलिजि ॥ ३६॥ पदानि ॥म, लिङि॥ : वृतिः ॥ वृत उत्सरस्य इटो लिडि दीर्थो न भवति । 
39. The r is not lengthened after the same roots T, and ending roots, in the endings of the Benedictive. 
As विवरिपीष्ठ, प्रावरिषीष्ठ, भास्तरिषीठ, विस्तरिषीष्ठ ॥ .. सिधि च परस्मैपदेषु ॥४०॥ पदानि ॥ सिचि, च, परस्मैपदेषु॥. . वृत्तिः । परस्मैपदपरे सिधि त उत्तरस्य इटो दीर्घो न भवति । 
___40. The इद् is not lengthened after g and rending roots, in the s-Aorist of the Parasmaipada. 
_. As भावारिष्टाम, पावारिषुः, भतारिष्टाम्, from नवनतरणयोः॥ भास्तारिष्टाम्, भास्तारिषुः, from स्तुम् भाच्छादने; but प्रावरिष्ट, प्रावरीट in the Atmanepada. 
इद् सनि घा ॥४१॥ पदानि ॥ इद्, सनि, वा॥ वृत्तिः । वृत्तः सनो या इडागमो भवति । 
___41. The Desiderative स् may optionaly take इट (which is optionally lengthened also) after the said.g and . 
ending roots. 
.. As पति । विवरिषते । विवरीपते । मायुर्षति । प्राविवरिषति । प्राविवरीपति । मकारान्तेभ्यः। तितीर्षति । तितरिषति । तितरीपति । भासिस्तीति । This Parasmaipada form is not valid, according to Padamanjari. भातिस्तरिषति । भातिस्तरीपति । सनि महराहक्षेति प्रतिषेधे प्राप्त पक्षे डागी विधीयते । इटम वृत्तो घेति परीर्घः । चिकीपति जिहीर्षति इत्यत्रोपदेशोधिकाराल्ला णिकवाच इडागमो न भवति ।। 
There was prohibited by VII. 2. 12, in case of the Desideratives, hence this sutra : when इद् is added, it may be lengthened by VII. 2. 38. The augment however is not added in foreitfra and fustofa, as they are formed from x'to do' and p'to lose', which do not take at all. Because here, though the short n is lengthened before सम्, by VI. 4. 16, yet such leng thening will not make the roots long ending roots. Because the anuvritti of the word upadesa is understood here from VII. 2. 10, so that the rule applies to those roots only which in upadeśa' or Dhatupátha end in longs and not those whose is lengthened by some Grammatical rule. Moreover, the long rin and is temporary only, as it is replaced by long ft (See VI. 4. 16, for lengthening). The Desiderative of fiftyfd, however, does not lengthen its vowel (VII. 2.75). 
1378 
AUGMENT. 
[ BK. VII. CH. II. S. 44 
लिसिचौरात्मनेपदेषु॥४२॥ पदानि ॥लिज, सिचोः, भात्मनेपदेषु॥ पतिः ॥ लिहि सिधि प भामनेपदे परे मासिगो भ्रयति । 
___42. The इन is optionally added to the endings of the Atmunepada Benedictive and s-Aorist, after the T and * ending roots. 
As वृषाष्ट or वरिषीष्ट, प्रादृषीष्ट (I. 2. 12 no guna) प्रावरिषीष्ट,भास्तरिषीट,भास्तीटि। सिधिखस्वपि, भवृत, भवरिष्ट, भवरीट, मावृत, प्रावरिष्ट, पावरीट, भास्तीर्ट, भास्तरिष्ट,भास्तरीया मालनपदे ग्विति कि, प्राधारिष्टान, पावारिपुः। लिहः प्रत्युवाहरणं न दर्शितमसंभवाविदो ऽवलादिस्वामिति ॥ 
.. Why in the Atmanepada? Observe मावारिष्टाम, मावारिषुः ॥ No counter examples of Benedictive Parasmaipadl are given, as the affixes not being app , thc r can never be added to them. 
ऋतश्च संयोगादेः॥४३॥ पदानि ॥ अतः, च, संयोगादेः॥ . वृत्तिः ।। परन्ताखातो संयोगादेरुसरयोर्लिइसिपोरात्मनेपदेषु वा राममो भवति । 
43. The इद् is optionally added to the endings of the Atmanepada Benedictive and S-Aorist, after a root, which ends in short , which is preceded by a conjunct consonant. 
A वृषीट or ध्वरिषीष्ट ; मषीष्ट, or सरिपीटभध्वृषाताम्, or भरिपाताम् ; भासपाताम, or भमरिषाताम् ॥ त इति किम् । च्योषीट, प्रापीटाभच्योट, भलाष्ट ।। संयोगादेरिति किम्। कृषीर, हपीट प्रकस, महत ॥ मात्मनेपदेत्रित्येव । मध्याति, भमार्षीत् ॥ संस्कपीर समस्कृतेत्यझोपदेशाधिकापदमत पाप मुहागमो न भवति ॥ 
Why ending In short s? Observe च्योषीट, भच्योट, धोषीट and भोट ।। Why beginning with a conjunct consonant'? Observe कृषीट, हपीट, भकत and माहत | Why in the Atmanepada, Observe मध्वार्षीत, मसात् ।। In संस्कृषीट and then there is not e, first because the form assumed by 5 with aug. ment) is not so enunciated in the Dhatupatha; the word upadesa VII. 2. 10, is understood here; so that the rule applies to those roots only which in the Dhatupatha arc sending and preceded by conjunct consonant; and secondly मद augment is considered as not attached to the root (VI. I. 135), and there fore & is not considered a root beginning with a conjunct consonant. 
स्वरतिसूतिसूयतिधूभूदितो वा ॥४४॥ पदानि ॥ स्परति, सूति, सूयति, धूज, ऊदितः, वा॥ वृत्तिः॥ स्वरति सूति सूयति धृहस्थतेभ्य अविस्वोत्तरस्य वलादेरार्द्धधातुकस्य वाररागमो भवति । 
44. A Valadi-ardhadhatuka. affix optionally takes , after suri, after the two roots & (süti and sûyati), after धून , and after a root which has an indicatory long का 
As स्वरिता or स्व ॥ प्रसोता, प्रसविता ॥ मूति, सोसा, सविता ।। धूम्, धोता, पविता ।। कदिवा खल्वपि। गादू, विगाग, विगाहिता; गुपू, गोमा, गोपिता। वेति वर्तमाने पुनर्वापदणं लिखि धोनिवृत्यर्थम। मूतिमूथत्योर्विकरणनिर्देशः पूप्रेरणइत्यस्य निवृत्यर्थः । धमिति सानुबन्धकस्य निधो धू 
BK. VII. CH. 11. $:47) 
KAUGMENT. 
1379 
विधूनमात्यस्व निदरवर्यः। सविता पवितेत्येव नित्यमेतबार्भवति । स्वरतेतमारिकल्पाबमोः स्यात्येतर. पति विप्रतिपर्धन । स्वरिष्यति । किति तु प्रत्यय शुषका कितीति नित्या प्रतिषेधो भवति पूर्वप्रतिषेधेन ।। स्वस्खा, सूखा, धूवा॥ 
Though the anuvritti of op was current, the second employment of a is to stop the anuvritti of the Benedictive and the S-Aorist. The roots of Adadi (21) and Divadi (24) are to be taken, as the special forms पूति and qura indicate, and not the g of the Tudadi (115) class. They is exhibited with the anubandha , in order to exclude ५ विधनने of Tudadi (105). In the case of these latter the augment is invariable, as eff and धषिता॥ The root स्यू takes invariably द in the Future, by virtue of the subsequent superseding rule VII. 2. 70, as fufteafar # And before fra affixes, the prior rule VII. 2. II, invariably debars se, as स्खला, सूखा, धूवा ।। 
_रधादिभ्यश्च ॥४५॥ पदानि ॥ रघ-आदिभ्यः, च। पत्तिः ॥ रथ हिंसासंसिवारित्वेवमादिभ्यो टाबरतरत्व पलादेराधातुकस्य वा डागमो भवति । 
45. A valadi-ardhadhatuka affix optionally takes इद् after r and the seven roots that follow it (Divadi.84 to 91). 
As धिता or रद्धा; नष्टा, (VII. I.60 नम्) मशिता; पता, (VI. I. 59 भम् ) सर्मा, तर्पिता: प्रसा, बर्मा, सर्पिता प्रोग्या, द्रोग, (VIII. 2. 33) द्रोहिता; माग्धा, मोग, मांहिता मोग, साहिता, मोग्धा, सेग्धा, मेग, मेहिता ॥ :: Some hold that the cent roots optionally take rc in the Perfect Tense also, because the present satra being subsequent to VII. 2. 13, debars that sQtra so far. Others hold that the rufe roots will always take r in the Perfect, because the former rule VII. 2. 13 is stronger than the present, in as much as that is a prohibitory rule. So they form रन्धि and सन्धिम ।। - निरः कुषः ॥ ४६॥ पदानि । निरः, कुषः॥ 
वत्तिः ॥ निरहस्यपूषात् कुष उत्सरस्य वलादेरार्डधातुकस्य पाइरागमो भवति । 
____46. A valadi-ardhadhatuka affix gets optionally the augment इe, after कुए when it is preceded by निर॥ 
As निकोष्टr or निष्कोषिता, निष्कोदुम् or निष्कोपितम् , निष्कोरध्वम् or निष्कोषितव्यम् ।। But only कोषिता, कोषित, कोषितव्यम् without निर ॥ The exhibition of निर् instead of fe indicates the existence of a separateand distinct preposition faç, besides निस् ।। It is the of this निर् which is changed tor by VIII. 2. 19, in निलयनम् । 
for the of fate being asiddha could not be changed to i -इग्निष्ठायाम् ॥४७॥ पदानि ॥ इद, निष्ठायाम् ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ निरः कुषो निष्ठायामिडागमो भवति । 
47. The augment a is added to the Participial affixes त and तवत्, after कुष preceded by निर॥ 
As निष्कुपितवान्, निष्कुषितः ॥ The special mention ofr in the shtra is for the sake of inaking its addition invariablc, otherwisc it would have becu 
11380 
PE AUGMENT. 
[BK. VII. CI. II. ६. 19 
optional, or debarred by VII. 2. 15. In the subsequent satra, the addition becomes again optional. 
तीषसहलभरुपरिषः॥४८॥ पदानि ॥ ति, इष, सह, लुभ, रुष, रिषः ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ तकापावाधातुके इषु सह लुभ रूप रिप इत्येतेभ्यो वा रागमो भवति । 
48. An ardhadhatuka affix beginning with a a may optionally take the इद्, after the roots इष, सह, शुभ, रुष and रिष्॥ 
As get or great ll There to wish' (VI. 59 ) is taken here, and not the ए (IV. 19. IX. 53) of the Divadi and Kryadi class. Of the Divadiry to send, togo ' we have invariably प्रेषिता, प्रेषितुं, प्रेषितव्यं; and there to repeat' of the Kryadi is governed also by this rule and has the same forms. Therefore some read the anuvritti of उदित into this sutra. सह। सोना । सहिता । लुभा लोभिता। लोधा । रूपारोटा । रोषिता। रिष् । रेटा । रेषिता| Why do we say beginning with a 
'? Observe grosura il . सनीवन्तर्द्धभ्रस्जदम्भुधिस्वयूर्ण भरणपिसनाम् ॥ ४६॥ पदानि ॥ सनि, इवन्त, ऋध, भ्रस्ज, दम्भ, श्रि, स्व, यु, ऊर्ण, भर, शपि, सनाम् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ इवान्तानाम धातूनाम् । का भस्म सम्भु श्रि स्व भर सपि सन् इत्येतेषां च सनिवाइडागमो 
भवति। 
49. The desiderative & may optionally tako rę, after a root ending in इव, and after ऋधु, भ्रस्ज, दम्भु, भि, स्थ, यु, ऊर्ण, भू, ए, and सन् ॥ 
Thus दिविषति or दुयूपति, सिसेविपति, सुस्यूपति ॥ कर, माधिपति, सति ॥ भस्म, विभ्रजिपति, (VI. 4.47) विभक्षात, (VIII. 2. 36 and 41) विभार्जिपति, विमति ॥ यम्मु. विद भिषति, धिप्सति, (VII. 4.56) धाप्सति, श्रि, वाच्छिश्रयिषति, उच्छिश्रीपति ॥ स्तु, सिस्वापिति, सुस्वर्षति ॥ यु. यियविषति, (VII. 4.80) युवपति, अणु, प्रोणुनविषति, प्रो[नुविषति, प्रोणुनपति, ॥ The root of the Bhuddi class is to be taken, as the form with ge in the shtra indicates. विभरिषति, बुभूपति,॥ज्ञपि, जिनपयिषति, शीप्सति ।। सन्, सिसनिषति, सिषासति ।। केचिदनभरज्ञपिसनितनिपतिशरिद्राणामिति पठन्ति, ॥ तितनिषति, तितंसति, तितांसति, पिपतिपति, पित्सति, दिदरिद्रिपति, दिदरिद्रासति।। सनीति किम, देविता, भष्टा ॥ 
Some add सन्, पत् and दरिद्रा also, as तितनिषति or तितंसति or तितासति, (VI. 4.17) Fargfagra or forfa (VII. 4. 54, VIII. 2. 29. VII. 4. 58) formagra or ftoft 
सति | Why do we say 'Desiderative? Observe पेविता, भ्रटा॥ The form भर्ति foto is thus evolved. The Desiderative root is m e, the being gunated by VII. 3.86 before सन् ॥ Now we reduplicate it, and the second syllable धिस् will be reduplicated by VI. I. 2. and the रेफ is not duplicated by VI. I. 3: so we get fit to reduplicate, and y is changed to ! The form fara is thus evolved. By VII. 4. 55, the is changed to long t, which is followed by t by I. 1. 57. Thus we have this as root, and ca is reduplicated, and the reduplicate is elided (VII. 4. 58). The forms firefa and af are similarly formed. 
BK. VII. CH. II. S. 54] 
इद् AUGMENT. 
1381 
क्लिशः क्त्वानिष्ठयोः॥५०॥ पदानि । क्लिशः, स्का, निष्ठयोः ॥ ५० ॥ वृत्तिः। वियः कानिष्ठयोर्वा इडागमो भवति । 
50. The affixes ktva, and क्तवतु, may optionally take इद् after क्लिश ॥ 
As लिष्ठा or क्लिशिवा, किटः or विशितः, किटवान् or क्लिपितवान् ॥ क्लिा (Ix. 50) having an indicatory would have optionally taken before ktvå by VII. 2. 44, but then the Nishthå affixes by VII. 2. 15 would never have taken the augment. किश (Divadi 52) उपताप, being anudatta would always have taken It before ktvà and Nishtha. Hence this rule ordains option with regard to ktva. 
पूश्च ॥ १॥ पदानि ॥ पूङः, च॥ वृत्तिः ॥ पूडम स्कानिष्ठयोर्वा इडागमो भवति । 
51. The affixes ktva, क and कवतु optionally get इट् after पू॥ 
As पूस्खा or पवित्वा, सोमोतिपूतः, सोमोतिपवितः पूतवान् or पवितवान् ॥ This allows option where by VII. 2. 11 there would have been prohibition. See I. 2. 22. 
वसतिक्षुधोरिट् ॥ ५२ ॥ पदानि ॥ वसति, क्षुधोः, इद् ॥ . वृत्तिः ॥ वखतेः क्षुधेब यानिष्ठयोरिडागमो भवति । 
52. The affix ktva, kta and ktavatu always receive the augment इट् after वस् (वसति) and क्षुध ॥ 
As उपिस्ता, उषितः and उषितवान्, क्षुधिया, क्षुधिता, क्षुधितवान् ॥ The वस् of the Adadi class will get re as it is enumerated in the list of free roots. The repeti. tion of shows that the rule is invariable, the 'optionally' of the preceding sätra does not affect it. 
अचेः पूजायाम् ॥ ५३॥ पदानि ॥ अञ्चे, पूजायाम् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ मधेः पूजायामयें तथानिष्योरिडागमो भवति । 
53. The affixes ktva, kta and ktavatu take the augment sa after the root **, when meaning 'to honor or do something to show honor'. 
As मरिचला जानु जुहोति, मञ्चिता अस्य गुरवः (III. 2. 188, VI.4: 30, II. 3.67) By VII. 2. 56 958 would optionally have caused rę to come before ktva, and hence by VII. 2. 15 never before the Nishtha. This satra ordains invariable addition of this augment. Why do we say when meaning 'to honor? Observe उत्तमुवक कूपात, the water is raised from the well'. 
लुभो विमोहने ॥ ५४॥ पदानि ॥ लुभः, विमोहने । वृत्तिः ॥ लुभो विमोहनेर्थे वर्तमानात् कानिष्ठयोरिडागमो भवति।। 
64. The affixes ktva, kta and ktavatu take se after the root gy (Tud. 22) wlicu incaning 'cntangled or confused'. 
1382 
DE AUGMENT. 
[ BK. VII. CH. II. S.58 
As लुभिस्वा and लोभिल्ला, यिनुभिताः केशाः, विलभितः सीमन्तः, विलुभितानि पानि । विमोहनं - माकुलीकरणं ।। By VII. 2. 48 लुभ would have optionally caused r to come before ktvå, and then by VII. 2. 15 the Nishtha would never have been TE II Hence this satra. Why do we say when meaning 'to entangle'? See लुब्धः वृपला - पीतेन पीडितः, ॥ लम् 'to be greedy' (Div. 128 ) is not governed by this rule, but by VIL. 2. 48. As लध्या or लोभित्या and लुभिला (I. 2. 26)॥ 
जवश्वोः कि॥ ५५ ॥ पदानि ॥ ज़, व्रश्चोः, ति॥ वृत्तिः ।। जवधि इत्येतयोः कामत्यये जागमो भवति । 
55. The affix ktvå takes the augment E, after and प्रश्च ॥ 
As जरिया or जरीवा, (VII. 2..38) and प्रमिला ॥ज was prohibited by VII. 2. II. and would have been optionally , as it has an indicatory long क, by VII. 2. 44. Hence this rule. The special mention of ktva, stops the anuvritti of kta and ktavatu. 
उदितो वा ॥ ५९॥ पदानि । उदितः, वा ॥ 'वृत्तिः ॥ उदितो धातो कामन्यये परतो पारागमो भवति । 
56. The इद् is optionally the augment of ktva, after a root which has an indicatory short Jl 
____As मु-मित्या or शान्त्याः समु-तमिला or सान्त्वा; पमु-पमित्या or शान्ता । 
से ऽसिचि कृतचूतच्छुदतदनृतः ॥ ५७॥ पदानि ।। से, असिचि, कृत, घृत, छूद, तृद, नृतः॥ 
वृत्तिः ।। सकारादावसियार्द्धधातुके कृत घृत र तर नृत इत्येतेभ्यो धातुभ्यो वा डागमो भवति । 
57. An ardhadhatuka affix beginning with a स् (except for the characteristic of the s-Aorist) may optionally take the augment इट्, after the verbs कृत, (Tud 141, Rudh. 11) 
घृत, (Tud. 35) थैद् (Rudh. 8) तृदु (Tud. 9) and नृत् (Div. 9). 
As कर्त्यति, भकय॑त, चिकृत्सति कतिष्यति, भकर्तिश्चत् पिकनिषति । घृत, चपति भाचल्यंतविवृत्सति, चतिष्यति, भर्तियत्, षिचर्तिपात । छुर, छय॑ति । मच्छर्यत, पिच्छल्स ति।छाष्यिति, भच्छाप्यत् । पिषिति । सूद, तवति, भतय॑त् तितृत्सति, तर्रियति । भाष्यत्। तितलिपति । नत, मय॑ति, मनयंत, निनृत्सति, नर्तियति । भनतिष्यत् । निनर्निपति । 
Why do we say 'beginning with a '? Observe all Why man? Observe मकरीत् ॥ 
गमेरिट् परस्मैपदेषु ॥ १८॥ पदानि ॥ गमे, इ, परस्मैपदेषु॥ वृत्तिः ॥ गमेातोः सकारादेरार्दधातुकस्य परस्मैपदेविडागमो भवति । इष्टिः । भारत्मनेपदेन समानपदस्थस्य गमेरयमिडागमोनेप्यते॥ 
58. An ardhadhatuka affix beginning with a स् gets the augment, after th in the Parasmaipada. 
As गमिष्यति, भगमिष्यत्, जिगमिषति ॥ Why of गम् ? Observe पेप्यात ॥ The repetition of re shows that the rule is invariable. Why 'in the Parasmaipada'? Observe संगसीट, संगसीट, संगस्वते, सनिगसते, संभिगसिष्यते, भधिभिगांसते, भधिभिगांसिप्यते ॥ 
BK. VII. C11. II S. 59. ) 
AORIST VRIDDHI. 
1383 
The lengthening takes place by VI. 4 16 when ta is the substitute of the root 
(11. 4. 48) Why before ? Observe TEUTH, STIFTE, TAIPT: 
Ishti: This rauginent is not desired of the root fra standing in the same pada with an atmanepada affix. But it occurs every where else. As famaraar 
f a r f are tua, here there is r augment, because atmane pada affix is not in the same pada with TA, but is bahiranga. Compare VII.2. 36 vart, It occurs before kşit affixes, and even where is luk-elsion of Parasmaipada affix, and where therefore the affix generally would have left no trace behind by I. I. 63. As संजिगामिपिता and भधिनिगमिपिता व्याकरणस्थ | So also जिगामिप 19, licrc there is luk-clision of the Imperative allix The opinion of the author of Padaseshakära is that the employment of the term Parsmaipada in the sotra is illustrative. He explains it by saying:- # Tanta fit FrTur chia e fai According to hiin we have the forms piraat and offrant Shop II 
a u x *: Il Gell fall a, T., :, 11 वृत्तिः ॥ वृतादिभ्यश्चतुर्थ उत्तरस्य सकारारार्द्धधातुकस्य परस्मैपदेषु इडागमो न भवति । 
59. The Parasınaipada ardhadhâtuka affixes be ginning with e do not get the augment after an and the three roots that follow it. 
Thus Tapereira, grafi, 
P I tara i tri farmara i svi THAT I BTUNUT PI I FART I F RA I DTEX*XATI 
The gate roots are four 47. TV, LU and Fyr ( Bhu. 795-798). In the examples, thc Parasmaipada forms are showni, because these roots are option ally Parasmaipadi by I. 3. 92 before fa and all 
Obi:«The word oot: may conveniently have been omitted from the satra. A reference to the Dhatupatha will show that the care roots form a subdivision of game roots, and stand at the end of Dyutadi class. So that the sätra Fa: would have been enough, and there would have been no uncer. tainty or vagueness about it, for the word at would mean the roots &c. with which the Dyutadi class ends'. Thus we shall get the five roots 795 r 
fra 796 , 797 TY T Tana; 798 Ft and I am As regards the last root on, we shall find froin the next sútra, that the present sätra applies to this root also. Or we can change the order of the roots, putting F 
first, and T. &c after it, so that part will mean four roots only. Whether vritadi be taken to mean the five or the four roots, the word as: is redundant. 
Ans:--The word : is used in order that the prohibition contained in this sätra may debar the 'option' which the root farming would have taken, because of its indicatory long (VII. 2. 44). For this 'option' is an antaranga operation, because it applics to all Ardhadhatuka affixes; whilc the 'prohibition' of thc prcscnt sätra is a bahiranga, because it applies to those affixes only which 
1384 
RAUGMENT. 
[ BK. VII. CI. II. S. 61 
begin with a 1 So that the 'prohibition of this sätra would not have debarred the 'option' of VII. 2. 44: and in the Parasmaipada Fat would have had two forms; which, however, is not the case because of the word as by which the *prohibiton' is extended to furry also. Thus in the Parasmaipada, we have only one form, as, स्थन्स्यति; but in the Atmanepada we have two forms स्थन्दिप्यते or स्टन्स्यते ॥ 
The word 'Parsinaipada' is understood in this sätra, so that the prohi bition does not apply to atınanepada affixes: as freie, pracud, priser, TT faccia, fate or FaceTE Moreover, with regard to Atmanepada also, the r is added to these roots when they stand in the same 'pada' with the affixes. But when the Atmanepada affixes are added not to the roots 'vrit &c', but to the roots which are derived from the nominal bascs formed from 'vșit &c', then the 'root' is not in the same pada with the affix, and the prohibition of this sätra will apply. As a real i Moreover, the rule applies, as we have said, to the affixes standing in the same 'pada' with the 'roots'; therefore it will apply to Desiderative roots, as fargera, though to here intervenes be tween the ardhadhatuka asfix 67 and the Parasmaipada rag; so also, an eka dcía though sthanivat and therefore an intervention, will not be considered so for the purposcs of this rule, as they fara; so also in ramurall Thic prohi bition, moreover, applies to an affixes, and where there is luk-elision of Par asmaipada affixes. As Tuar; and 4 where the Imperative fe is luk elided, and being so elided, the force of Parasmaipada does not here remain by 
TFT (I. 1. 63); hence the above Ishti. are Faq: 11 € | Eura Il arter, a, FT: II वृत्तिः ।। कृप उत्तरस्य तासेः सकारदेभार्द्धधातुकस्य परस्मैपदेषु बागमो न भवति । 
60. The Parasmaipada ardhadhâtuka affixes beg inning with #, and the affix area ( the sign of the Periphrastic Future ) do not get the augment 7, after the root caran 
Thus ETAT, Popara, TFA PET lat w But THTET, Fedte, era sa, fegrun, runferent in the Atmanepada. 
In the case of foo also, the rc is added to the ardhadhatuka affixes in the Atmanepada, when the root stands in the same pada with the affixes and there is prohibition everywhere else. So also there is prohibition before krit. affixes, and the luk-elision of Parasmaipada. As e F at, perfe t 
According to Padamanjari, these two sätras could have been shortened thụs:-(1) na: qua:, (2) arrên F; and "PRET:" could well have been omitted. The ATE comes only after fing and not after other roots of Vritadi class, in Parasmaipada [l. 3. 92 and 93). Therefore, there is no fear that the prohibi tion arts will apply to the other roots of vfitadi, but only to 'klip', because BK. VIII. C11., 11 $: 62] 
R AUGMENT. 
1385 
the word Te is understood here; and as no roots of vfitadi class take Parasmaipada in the Periphrastic Future except klip, there is no fear of any ambiguity. 
अचस्तास्वत्थल्यनिटो नित्यम् ॥११॥ पदानि ॥ अचः, तास्वत, थलि, अनिटः, Farra, a 
वृत्तिः ॥ नासा ये नित्यानिटो धामवोऽजन्तास्तेभ्यस्तासाविव थलीडागमा न भवति। 
61. After a root, which ends in a vowel, and after which the Per. Fut. affix tâsi is always devoid of the augment 
; (after such a root) as the persoual ending of the Perfect, like are, does not also get the augment fall 
Those vowel-ending roots in Dhatupațha which are invariably anit before the affix ATH ( Peri. Future), are also anit before the Perfect ending in II As qat (Peri-Fut.), 4414 Per), dar, forry, far, faar; gar U 11 Why 'ending in a vowel'? Observe * It, fartfy! Why 'like ap? Observe et but tv, 
Why 'थल? Observe याता but यायिक, ययिम | The word नित्यंqualifies भनिन,if there fore are be optionally anit, then they will be he always. As arę - urat or forufitar; the ur is feugi 
Here R is optional before pre by VII. 2. 44. Similarly 4, for is anit in atmauepada, and more in Parasmaipada. In fact, whereever there is want of K, whether by complete prohibition or optional prohibition, all that is rcgulated by VII. 2. 13: this is the view adopted by the Kasika. But an other view is that the prohibition of this sätra applies to the of VII. 2. 13 only, but does not debar the option of VII. 2. 44; so they have two forms विदुधोय and विदुधविथ ।। This view is applied by them to VII. 2.46,as सस्वर्थ or 
FETTU (VII. 2. 44). 
Why have we used the word art in apa? The force of ra is that the root should have a form in arg and then be anit; and if a root has no Periphr astic Future forın, and thus its are is anit,, such a root is not governed by this satra. As Frares and strayil Here the roots qp and the substitutes of 
and respectively have no Periphrastic Future form, and hence this rule does not apply to them. 
gratiscaa: 11.49'11 Tata Il guat, arat: || वृत्तिः ।। उपदेशे यो धातुरकारवान् तासौ निस्यानिट तस्मानासाविषयलीरागमो न भवति । 
62. After a root which possesses a short as its root-vowel in the origiunl enunciation (tho Dhatupatha), and after which the Peri-Tut. area is always devoid of the augment , un the Personal ending of the Perfect, like ara, does not get the augment इट् ॥ 
1386 
V? AUCMENT. 
(BK. VIII. Cor. 11. $. 65 
WOMANAMAN 
As Fut. 47, Per. 97*, CET, F#, r, *11 Why do we say 'in the Original Enunciation'? Observe Fut whef Per. meter in which the way of "karsh is the result of guna substitution. Why do we say 'having an ar'? Observe Fut A Per früfeu, here the root-vowel is # Why do we say "short mm * ? Observe Fot. tra ler. COTY from (# the root-vowel being long WT II The word fear is understood here also. Therefore we have fua, fwree 11 Here the root wis aniç before (VII. 2, 12) and not before are so it will not be anit before on The words fare for are also understood here. Therefore the rule does not apply to suf (VII. 4. 71.72). For the root ***(VII. 21) takes optionally re before IT (VII. 2. 44) as is star and # 11 
at HTCTTer III en II , HTCGHT 1 
Caragua ta are faceT TETTI 
63. In the opinion of Bhâradvaja, it is only after a root which ends in short , and after which the Peri-Fut. ere is always devoid of the augment , that was also, like तासू, does not take the augment rद ॥ 
As i, f, * The roots are covered by VII. 2. 6r; the specification of these roots makes a restriction, so that all other roots, are not anit, though the Peri-Fut in sa be anit. So that according to Bhärad waja, we have forms like afuu, fay, gry, full Thus this sätra makes the preceding two sūtras optional, except so far as short -ending roots are concerned. 
As a general rule, all roots ending in long are hyg; therefore, the sutra mentions short *. in order to debar its application to long ending words. Had it not been so, this rule would have been a vidhi rule and not a niyama: because rule VII. 2. 61 does not apply to long ending roots, and so is the present såtra were to include long term also, it could not be called a niyama (restriction) of VII. 2. 61. 
wyurduHTFaura farth || 8 | Vallah, waru, ů, gra, facan T: 11 99 W1177 pax rewara R 
64. In the Veda are found the irregular forms au, , TTF and 
. As wif ETET TEHTUU (= 1 ); RIICHETARF ( F ), ***T 
(=HTE ), if suna YT (=entu ). See VII. 2. 13. This is also a niyama rule with regard toglor by VII.2.13 the root was already anit, andits Perfect wouldhave been 94 by that rule. The special mention of this form shows that in secular literature this root is always are before y of the Perfect. 
BK. VII. CH. 11 9.69] 
AUGMENT: 
1387 
fahren erstatt: 11 86 1 farart, afstant: # वृत्तिः ॥ मृमि दशि इत्येतयोस्थाल विमापा इरागमो न भवति । 
65. El the Personal ending of the Perfect, option ally gets the augment & after and TH 
As gay or Ferra, me or parte it See VI. 1. 58 for wa augment. 
Tutorial | Ella Ir, ard-araman पत्तिामति मति व्यथति इत्येतेषां थलीरागमो भवति। 
66. The affix Tra gets always the augment after *, * and sure it 
As miru, mfty, and tipsufry The roots is Hot changed to bar (VI. 1. 46) in the Perfect. By VII. 2. 63, the roots in and would have optionally been one, and never, therefore, the present sätra makes the re aug ment compulsory. The ris repeated in the aphorism for the sake of clearness, the rule could have stood without it, for the anuvfitti of 'optionally could not have run into it from the last satra: for if it was an optional sotra, the enu. meration of my and was useless, as they were already provided for by VII. 2. 63. Therefore, this sotra makes an invariable rule. 
STEFTH NEU II Tata Ilarg, -217-ENG II qft altivariatet urgare AuraTrai TH THEMAT ** 
67. The Participial affix it (at) gets the augment E only then when the reduplicated root before it consists of one syllable, or when it comes after a root ending in long 
आ, and after घसू ॥ 
Thus omani, sigara, of , TPM In the first two of these, the rcduplicate stems site and any become of one syllable by the coalescence of 
and all In and the reduplicate is elided and the vowel changed to g, and thus the reduplicate has become of one syllable. Of roots ending in मा we have, ययिवान् , तस्थिवान्, of पम्-जसिवान् ।। This वस् would have taken the augment by the general rule of re increment, the present sätra makes a niyama, so that the roots which are not monosyllabic in their reduplicate form are anit: as farm, 
f ra, a, 
f a 1 The niyama is made with regard to the roots which would have taken generally, as not being governed by the prohibition in VII.2.13. The roots ending in long at may consist of more than one syllable in their reduplicate form, as ar +Te, hence their separate enumeration: as a matter of fact, however, these reduplicates also become mono syllabic ultimately by losing their st! The root great is not governed by this rule, for its l'ersect will be forined periphrastically by 111. 1. 35 Vart, because 
1388 
E AUGMENT. 
(BK. VII. CI. 11. S. 69 
it consists of more than one syllable: as miga 11 And when she is not added, there also afar loses its final a before ardhadhatuka affixes by the vårtika under VI. 4. 114. So the T being elided before the adding of any asfix, this becomes a root which no longer ends in 2, and so the cause of add ing under this sūtra no longer exists, and so no te is added. Thus we have prigra, for before ardhadhatuka affixes pret loses its on (VI. 4. 114 Vårt), and this elision being considered as siddha, (VI. 4. 114 Vart), no occasion remains for the augment a The ere becomes in its reduplicate form (a stem of one syllable), but had it not been separately mentioned, then by VI. 4. 100, the penultimate of or would have been elided first, before reduplication, because VI. 4. 100, is subsequent in order to the rule ordaining reduplication. (VI. 1. 14 &c). The e being elided, we should have ap only, which not having any vowel, could not be reduplicated. By its separate enu meration here, the augment r being ordained by a subsequent rule (VII. 2. 67), prevents even the rule of elision (VI. 4 100). Having, therefore, first added , we then elide the penultimate by VI. 4. 98, this elided , how ever, becoines sthaoivat for the purposes of reduplication only by I. 1. 52 
Thus yra +FIT = XT +78 (VI. 4. 98)=377 +3464FETATE A 
frant Theafargfaara 11851 ata u HTT, TH-69-fac.ferung वृत्तिः ॥ गम इन विद विश इत्येतेषां धातूनां वसौ विभाषा डागमो भवति । qira u TETRA 41049 11 
68. The affix th (Star) optionally takes after TH, ET, rare and farar I Astra- Hart or FTATE (changed to t by VIII. 2. 64 ); - - 
or recurg, (VII. 2. 54 and 55) 
F a rmor , T-ATO or info Agra II The root facto acquire belongs to the Tudâdi class, as it is read here with the Tudadi tu ni The root it to know' (II. 55. IV, 62), forms invariably farmer because it is atmanepadi and cannot take augment before e affix. 
Vårt.The root o should also be enumerated. As IT and TERATAI __ सनि ससनिवांसम् ॥६६॥ पदानि ॥ सनिम-ससनिवांसम् ॥ 
वृत्तिः । सनोते. सनतर्वा धातोः सनिससनिवांसमिति निपास्यते । 
. 69. The form Featen with an is irregularly formed. 
• This is derived from सनोति or सनति root. As मजिस्खाग्ने सनि ससनिवांसम् ।। The augment is added, there is no change of sp of a to , nor the elision of the reduplicate before Fill The other form is ATTIRE when not preceded by fall This form afie is Vedic, in secular literature we have 
सैनिवांसम् ।। 
BK. VII. CH. II S. 74.] RAUGMENT:: 
. 389 
- ऋखनोः स्ये ॥ ७०॥ पदानि । त-हनोः, स्ये॥ वृत्तिः ॥कारान्तानां धातूनां हन्तम स्याडागमो भवति । 
. 70. स्य the sign of the Future and Conditional gets the augment , after a root ending in short x and after all 
As करिष्यात, हनिष्यति, हरिष्यति ॥ The root स्व takes always इट् before स्थ, though it does so optionally before other affixes (see VII. 2.44): as स्वरिष्यति । 
Similarly भकरिष्यत् , महरिष्यतू , महनिष्यत् &c ॥ 
अशेः सिचि॥ ७१॥ अजेः, सिचि॥ वृत्तिः ॥ मज्जा सिधि इडागमो भवति । 
71. The # of the s-Aorist always takes the g after अञ्ज (Rudh. 21). 
As भाजीत, भाजिष्टाम् , माजिषुः॥ But भक्ता or अजिता in tenses other than Aorist. . The root having an indicatory long optionally takes 7 (VII. 2.44) ___ स्तुसुधूभ्यः परस्मैपदेषु ॥ ७२ ॥ पदानि ॥ स्तु, सु, धूम्यः , परस्मैपदेषु ॥. 
वृत्तिः ॥ स्तु सु धूम् इत्येतेभ्यः सिषि परस्मैपदे परत इडागमो भवति । 
72. The fear of the s-Aorist gets the rain the Parasmaipada after the roots स्तु, सु and धन ॥ 
___As जस्तावीत, असावी, अधावीत् ॥ But मस्तोष्ट, असोष्ट, मोष्ट or अधाविष्ट in Atmancpada. Exception to VII. 2. 10 and 44. 
यमरमनमाता सकच ॥७३॥ पदानि ॥ यम, रम, नम, आताम, सक्, च॥ : वृत्तिः॥ यम रम नम इत्येतेषामानामाकारान्तानां च सगागमो भवति परस्मैपदे सिधि डागमय । 
73. The fear of the Aorist in the Parasmaipada takes the augment after यम, रम, नम् and roots ending in long आ, and सू (सक) is added at the end of these stems. । 
Thus भयसीत्, भयसिष्टाम्, मयसिषुः॥व्यरंसीत्। व्यरंसिष्टाम् । व्यरसिषुः ॥ The root रम is Parasmaipadi when preceded by वि or मा (I. 3.83). अमंसीत् । मनसिष्टाम् मनसिषुः ।। भाकारान्तानाम् । मयासीत् । अयासिष्टाम् ; भयासिषुः । यमादीनां हलन्तलक्षणा वृद्धि प्राप्ता सा नेटीति प्रतिषिध्यते । परस्मैपदेबित्येव । भायंस्त । अरस्त । मनस्त ।। 
____ The Vriddhi in the case of यम् &c. ordained by VII. 2. 3, does not take place by VII. 2. 4. In the Atmanepada we have stiff II The root ng is átmane padi, as it is precedled by मा (I. 3.75) भरंस्त, मनस्त (III. I.85). Exception to VII. 2. 10, 44. 
स्मिपूज्वशां सनि ॥ ७४॥ पदानि ॥ स्मि, पूङ, ऋ अजू, मशू सनि ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ स्मिक पूर्वक भy इत्येतेषां धातूनां सनीडागमो भवति ॥ 
74. Tho Desiderativo ha gets the augment after the roots स्मिङ, पूछ, ऋ, भज्जू and अशु॥ 
1390 . 
इद् AUGMENT. 
[ BK. VII. CH. II. 8.78 
-- 
Thus सिस्मयिषते, पिपविषते (VII.4.80) भरिरिषति, मजिजिपति (VI. I.2 and 3) and भशिशिषते ॥ The root पूम् is not governed by this rule, as पुपूषति ॥ The मा (V. 18). of Suadi class is taken here, and not (IX. 51) of Kryadi class, for the latter always has f, while the former having an indicatory long has optionally ril 
किरच पञ्चभ्यः ॥ ७५॥ पदानि ॥ किरः, च, पञ्चभ्यः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ किरादिभ्यः पञ्चभ्यः सनि इडागमो भवति ॥ 
75. The desiderative for takes after and the four roots that follow it (Tud. 116-120) 
Thus चिकारिषति, जिगरिषति, दिदरिषते, विधरिषते, पिच्छिषति (I. 2. 8; VI. I. 16). But fata not included in the five. The roots and I would have optionally got in the desiderative by VII. 2. 41, which would have been optionally lengthened by VII. 2. 38. But the इद् here being specifically ordained, does not get lengthened by VII. 2. 38. ___ रुदादिभ्यः सार्वधातुके ॥ ७६ ॥ पदानि ॥ रूददिभ्यः, सार्वधातुके । 
वृत्तिः ॥ रुदादिभ्य उत्तरस्य वलादेः सार्वधातुकस्य डागमो भवति ॥ 
76. A shrvadhatuka affix beginning with a conso nant other than a y, gets the augment r after the root er and the four that follow it (Ad. 58-62) . . Thus रोदिति, स्वपिति, श्वसिति, प्राणिति, जक्षिति ॥ But जागर्ति which is beyond the five, and Prat before ardhadhatuka affixes, and a part before a vowel begin. ning affix. 
ईशः से॥ ७७॥ पदानि ॥ ईशः, से॥ वृत्तिः ॥ ईश उत्तरस्य से इत्येतस्य सार्वधातुकस्य इडागमो भवति ॥ 
77. The sarvadhātuka affix से (the ending of the second Person Present and Imperative Atmanepada) gets the augment after ईश (Ad. 10) 
As शिष and शिरुष ॥ से becomes a by III. 4.9r and 80. The से is exhir bited in the satra without any case-ending. 
ईडजनोद्धे च ॥ ७८॥ पदानि ॥ ईड, जनोः, ध्वे, च ॥ वृत्तिः॥रजन इत्येताभ्यामुत्तरस्य वे इत्येतस्य स इत्यंतस्य च सार्वधातुकस्यारागमो भवति । 
78. The saryadhatuka affix से and ध्वे, (the endings of the Present and Imperative Atmanepadi) get the augment KE after the roots ईड (Ad. 9) and जन् ॥ 
. Thus ईडिवे, ईडिध्वम्, ईडिषे, ईडिष्व, अनिध्ये, अनिश्चम, अनि, जानिय ॥ The root 
IV.al) is taken here, The Vikarana श्यन् has been elided in this case, as a Vedic irregularity, and so also there is not elision of the penultimate, 
BK. VII. CH. II. S. 80 ) 
AUGMENT 
1391 
In the secular literature the form is true I Here the 2 would 'prohibit Kali ways. The 77 of the third class (III. 24) is also to be included, thus we have erasi. Saara, sua , saat in karma vyatihara. Otherwise this 
root is Parasmaipadi. 8 takes f after falso, as from 
For this purpose, some read the sätra as m y ; and stands here for having its Locative dropped, and therefore the force of q in the sätra, according to this reading, is to draw in the anuvfitti of fa from the previous satra. Those who do not follow this reading, draw the whole of the last sởtra by force of all from these it may be asked, what is then the necessity of two satras ? Could not one satra, like this, iris tai ere, have sufficed, as being shorter and more general? To this there is no better valid answer than this ap p TFT pra: qiroa: u 
The form of being taken in the satra, the rule will not apply to the of (Imperfect), which will not take 1 But will apply to the of the Imperative on the maxim एकरेशविकृतस्यानन्यस्थात् ॥ 
fas: HOTH SHARAFT | VE II TETTI E, A, T, TARIFT II are: II ETTEktra a, attura o forç aru WRIFA APITFU FITTI a II 
79. In the sârvadhituka Lin (i. e. Potential ), the which is not final (i.e. the # of the augments a and Fire), is elided. 
What is the # which is not final? The of the augments age, and all Thus greit, gutara, 89, Tin tranh, rau Why 'not the final'? Observe : 1 Why in the Sarvadhatuka? Observe (FTA, Farges, ie, patareira, astra in the Benedictive. 
wat orar: || 50 TETAN , UT, FT: 11 वृत्तिः ॥ भकारान्तावलादुत्तरस्य या इत्येतस्य सार्वधातुकस्य इरत्ययमादेशो भवति । 
80. After a Present stem ending in short , fuis substituted for the sârvadhâtuka a (i.e. for the or of the augment üret of the Potential). : Thus et, rear and query: 11 The 7 of ro is elided before affixes beginning with a consonant by VI. 1. 66. In the case of qey, the pararapa of VI. 1. 96 is prevented. Why 'ending in a short !? Observe parar, gaa!! Why 'short'? Observe erant # Why sårvadhatuka? Observe चिकीर्ष्यात् ॥ 
The objector may say, the form for iraia will be so by the elision of 6 under VI. 4. 48, and so there is no necessity of reading the anuvștti of sarvadhatuka in this sutra; for when is elided by Har : VI. 4. 48, in the case of Ardhadlatuka at the present rule cannot apply, as there is no base left 
1392 
KAUGMENT. 
[BK. VII. CH. II. $. 81 
which ends in T H To this we reply, this is not a good reason: for then in the case of qima and also, the rule war of arsy (VII. 3. 101) would apply, and the 87 of qe would require to be lengthened. But that is not so. The fact is that the present sätra debars rule VII. 3. 101. Therfore, as this r substitute debars the lengthening of VII. 3. 101, so it would debar the lopa of VI. 4. 48. Therefore, if the anuvfitti of sarvadhâtuka be not read into this satra, the substitute would apply to ardhadhatuka also, and the lopa-elision VI. 4. 48 would not help, as that would be superseded by this special rule. Therefore 
the aunvșitti of "sarvadhatuka" should be read into this sätra. 
The above is stated on general grounds. But if the maxim quisqaret: पूर्वान् विधीन वाधन्ते नोत्तरान् (Apavadas that are surrounded by the rules which teach operations that have to be superseded by the apavåda operations, supersede only those rules that precede, not those that follow them) be applied here, then the present sätra would supersede only the preceding satra VI. 4. 48 and not the following sâtra VII. 3. for which would not be superseded by the present søtra. In this view also, the lopa being superseded at all events, the anuvšitti of 'Sarvadhâtuka' must be read into this satra. 
. In the fr rule VII. 3. 101, the word 'sarvadhatuka' is understood from VII. 3. 95. But according to some, the word fare of VII. 3. 88 is also under stood there, so that they would lengthen the , before a sårvadha tuka personal termination (as) only, and not before every sarvadhatuka affix in general. According to this view, the present sätra will debar only the dirgha rule (VII, 3. 101) and not the lopa rule (VI. 4. 48), on the maxim a T LTH &c. 
The word in: in the satra is formed by a +7; and an is exhibited without any case-termination. Others say, the word is # the sixth case of a formed on the analogy of rape by the elision of HT (VI. 4. 140). Then : + 14:24 + 74: (VIII. 3. 19) after this elision, there ordinarily would take place no sandhi; as this elision is considered asiddha (VIII. 2. 1) for the purposes of VI. 1. 87. Contrary to this general rule, however, the sandhi takes place here and we have : by VI. 1. 87. The 8 in : is for the sake of pronunciation only. The real substitute is 11 
Some read the sätra as u nall So that the sthani is aig and not ar, and area: is a genitive compound. 
fra: | 
fa il si , fra: 11 वृत्तिः ॥ भाकारस्थ दिवयवस्य प्रकारान्तारादुत्तरस्य सार्वधातुकस्व इय इत्ययमादेशो भवति ॥ . .. 81. For the app being a portion of a sarvadhâtuka 
Personal ending which is for (i.e. ara, Sret, strata and Th), coming after a Verbal stem ending in short at, there is substi-, tuted इयं ॥ tuted go ... ........... . .: . i . . . i. 
BK VII. C11. II. §. 82 ) 
AUGMENT. 
: 1393 
Th 
. 
Thus ea, qu, gera, Urg, aha, art, a rt, TFÖTÜ, TE I The u or drops by VI. 1.66. Why do we say "the long 7"? Observe tant, af, पचन्ते, यअन्त ॥ Why do we say 'a डित् affix? Observe पचाबह, पचामह (I. 2. 4). Why do we say 'ending in short *? Observe fata, ratail Why'short'? Observe Ara, ATU II 
. All sarvadhatuka affixes which have not an indicatory q are form by I. 2.4 Now Frugal (I. 2. 4) is a sūtra in which the word it is under stood froin I. 2. 1. But the grammatical construction of the word for in the two sūtras I. 2. I and I. 2. 4 is not the same. In the first satra, it ineans fafa f 697, i. e. thc roots &c are treated in the same way as they would have been treated, had a far asfix followed. But in the second sätra I. 2. 4, the word i t is equal to fan "like of FET"!The sätra I. 2. 1. is so explained in order to evolve the form 1993 II For when the 67 is added to , the root is treated as if the art was a fra allix, and so there is no guņa. But if ez itself had become fa then the Desi derative root gray, being a fort root would require atmancpada affixes by HTTIER HIM (1. 3. 12). In the case, however, of sårvadhatuka-apit affixes, the affixes themselves become like 17, and are treated as far affixes, not only with regard to the stem preceding them, but with regard to their own selves also, as we see in the present sätra. 
Tall 521 Eura il ma, # वृत्तिः॥ आने परतोगस्यातो मुगागमो भवति ।। 
82. Before the Participial ending mta, & verbal stem ending in sliort , gets the augment il 
Thus 94417, 4 : II 
This ga is part and parcel of 07 only, and not of the anga. For if be considered as part of the anga, then it will be an intervention, and make the anga end in a consonant and so there will be anoinaly in accent. For by VI. 1. 186, the sarvadhatuka asfix is anudatta after a stem ending in an; so if gan be considered part of the anga, the stem no longer ends in ar but #; but if it be considered as a portion of only, then the anga still remains 59 (VI. 1. 186). So the accent of 2017: and 19: is governed by VI. I. 186. 
An objector may say, "isthis be so, then the stem 99 is still consi dered as ending in af, and therefore in q*+19, we should apply the pre vious sätra VII. 2. 81, and change into " To this we reply, 'no, it con not be so; for the q in BTT (VII. 2. 80) shows that the a consisting of one matoi is to be taken, but when he is added, this #becmes one måtrd and half, so the rule VII. 2. 81 will not apply; because it applies only to of one mitra' The objector:-"If this is so, then the anudatta of VI. I. 186 will not also hold good, for there also the ata means the 9 of onc matra." This is no valid objcction. For therc thc word gay is takcı, so that a stein which at the tiine 
1394 
iR AUGMENT. 
[BK. VII. Cit. 11. 8. 86 
of upadesa or first enunciation, ends in a short w of one matra, is governed by that rule; though after the enunciation, the short w may be lengthened in its matra. It is for this reason that the rule VI. 1.186 applies to 496 and : ; though the short w is subsequently lengthened before # and # by VII. 3. 10t. 
Or the sđtra may have been made as MTETE, and the augment would then be added to mm and not to the verbal stem. All the above difficul ties would be removed by this view. But then the final o of qy &c would require to be lengthened before #r* by VII. 3. 101. This objection, however, is not insuperable, for one view of VII. 3. 101 is that the word fait is under stood there, so that the lengthening would take place only before a ine affix beginning with a my vowel : and not before any other affix. 
ETE: 11 53 1 Fall fa, stre: पत्तिः ॥ भास उत्तरस्थानस्य ईकारादेशो भवति ।। 
83. is substituted for the 37 of that, after we II 
Thus aretat avait (See I. 1. 54 by which the first letter of the second term after RE: which is exhibited in the Ablative is taken here). The 
a which is in the 7th case in the last aphorism, should be taken in the 6th case in this. " 299 an fauzanit 158 11 qera il 289, , fermentul 
पतिः॥ भष्टमो विभक्तो परत माकारादेयो भवति । 
84. T is substituted for the final of Man before a case-ending. 
Thus steni, mera, FETTA, ETEN 10 Why 'before a case-ending's Observe TEE, maar 11 The rule of this sätra is an optional one, and we have in the alternative spefiti, perg: I The on in the satra indicates the individual letter 1, and not try belonging to the general class B II For the generic or would include the nasalised sat also, and as the letter replaced (77) is a nasal, the substitute would have been also nasal 07, but it is not so. See VI. 1. 172 and VII. 1. 22. This rule applies also when the word stands at the end of a compound, as fearerai or forutet: (VII. 1. 22). The word Tafiti governs the subsequent sätras upto VII. 2. 114. 
trot af I 544# fa 1 tror, fe il वृत्तिः ॥ इत्येतस्य हलादौ विभक्तो परत भाकारादेशो भवति । 
85. Before a case-ending beginning with a conso nant, a is substituted for the final of tll 
As tag, 4:, ! But reit, tra: before affixes beginning with a vowel. Why 'a case ending'? Observe ten, tar II ___ युष्मदस्मदोरनादेशे ॥८६॥ पदानि ॥ युष्मद, अस्मदोः, अनादेशे। 
वृत्तिः । युष्मदसदित्येतयोरनादेश विभक्तो परत भाकारादेयो भवति ॥ BK. VIL. CH. II.S. 89] 
.PRONOUNS. 
1395 
86. आ is substituted for the final ofयुष्मद् and-अस्मद before & case-ending, beginning with a consonant, when it is not a substitute. 
The substitute case-endings are given in VII. 1. 27 &c. Thus cana: भस्माभिः, युद्धमानु, भस्मासु, Why do we say 'when it is not a substitute'? Observe शुष्मत् and भस्मत् (VII. I 31). The anuvrittiof हलि need not be read into this satra from the preceding, for if that were so, the mention of it would become redundant, because as a matter of fact no substitute case-ending begins with a consonant. However, reading this søtra with VII. 2. 89, we find that the scope of the present sotra is before consonant beginning affixes. 
द्वितीयायांच॥७॥ पदानि ॥ द्वितीयायाम,च॥ इतिः ॥ रितीयायां च परतो युष्मदस्मदोराकारादेशो भवति । 
87. आ is substituted for the final of युष्मद् and अस्मद beforo tho ondings of the Accusative 
AS खाम, माम् , युवाम् , भावाम , पुष्मान and भस्मान् ॥ This rule applies to end. ings which are even substitutes, otherwise the last rule would have been suffi cient. See VII. 2. 28, 29, and VII. 2.92 and 97. 
प्रथमायाश्च द्विवचने भाषायाम् ॥८॥ पदानि ॥ प्रथमायाः, च, द्विवचने, भाषायाम् ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ मयमायाच दिवचने परतो भाषायां विषये युष्मदस्मदोराकारादेखो भवति ।। 
88. आ is substituted for the final of युष्मद् and अस्मद before the ending of the Nom. Du. in the Secular literature. 
As युवाम् , भावाम् ॥ Why of the nomnative? Observe युवयोः, भावयोः॥ Why in the Dual ? Observe खं, मह, यूथ, पयं ।। Why in the secular literatured Observe 
धुर्व पबाणि पीवसा वसाये in the Veda, so also भावम् ।। __ योचि ॥८९॥ पदानि ॥ यः, अचि ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ भजारी विभक्तावनादेो युष्मदस्मदोर्यकारदेखो भवति । 
89. य is substituted for the final of युष्मद् and अस्मद before a case-ending, which is not a substitute, and which begins with a vowel. 
Thus लया, मया, लयि, माथि, युषयोः, भावयोः॥ Why do we say beginning with a vowel? Observe युवाभ्याम्, भावाभ्याम् ॥ Irin the satra VII. 2.86,. we read the anuvfitti of Ps, we need not use spre in the present sūtra. For then this sotra will be a general (utsarga) aphorism, ordaining y before all non-substi tute case-endings; and the satra VII. 2. 86, will be considered an exception (apayada) to this, with regard to those case-endings which begin with a con 
sonant, where at will be ordained. In this view of the case, the use of my here si explanatory, Why when the ending is not a substitute'?. Observe गच्छति, मद् गछति ॥ 
1396 
PRONOUNS. 
( BK. VII. C1. II. S. 91 
itet 779: 11 gol qifa il sito, atq: il वृत्तिः ॥ शेषे विभक्ती युष्मदस्मदोलोपो भवति । 
90. In the remaining cases where a ory is not. substituted) there is elision of the final of yushunac and asmad. 
This elision finds scope in the Singular and Plural of the Ablative, Dative, Genitive, and the Nominative. Thus g. 44, un, 1h, q2, 10, you, T, 1971, 77, , 78, 79, 44, go , FT1411 The following sloka gives the cases which are included in the word : 
पञ्चम्याम चतुर्थ्याध षष्ठीप्रथमयोरपि । 
यान्यद्विवचनान्यष तेषु लोपो विधीयते ॥ The word ge is employed in the sætra for the sake of clearness. For there will be elision universally before all case-affixes. This is the general rule. To this there is the exception that before non-substitute case-affixes there will be a (VII. 2. 89). To this latter, there is an exception that before non-substitute case-endings beginning with a consonant, o comes. Thus without any confusion, the st, the , and the lopa find their res pective scopes. 
When there is elision, why is not org added in the Feininine; in mi Tuot; PraQoft? The ang is not added on the maxim GAYE TUTT F uraforat # Tae 'a rule which is occasioned by a certain combination, does not becoine the cause of the destruction of that combination.' Because the ending in sy of yote and many was occasioned by vibhakti combination, if this latter occasion ETC, then it will destroy its own fruit. 
Or the words she and we may be taken to have no gender, and equally applicable to both masculine and feminine. 
In order to avoid all this difficulty about to some would elide the (or pe portion) of gure and 87FHk under this satra. They argue that by the next sätra VII. 2.91, the portions 'yushm' and 'asm', namely the portions upto 
qe of you and w e are replaced by substitutes. The portion that remains ( ) is sy and it is this me which is to be elided. : Why is this “lopa' taught again, when by VII. 2. 102, all partie pronouns have a substituted for their finals before case-endngs; and so would yushmad and asmad, lose their finals and become yushma and asma by that rule? That rule does not apply to yushmad and asmad, because by an ishți that rule is restricted to tyadadi pronouns upto , thus excluding 
युष्मद, अस्मद् , भवतु and किम् ।। 
मपर्यन्तस्य ॥६१॥ पदानि ॥ म पर्यन्तस्य । वृत्तिः॥ मपर्यन्तस्वस्थयमाधिकारो, यरित अर्वमनुक्रमिष्यामो मपर्यन्तस्येत्येवं तदेदितव्यम् । 
91. The substitutions taught hereafter upto VII.2. 98 take effect with regard to the portions of quę and upto th, i. e, the substitutes replace yra and STEH !!. . 
BK. VII. Cl. II. .92 ] 
PRONOUNS. 
1397 
Thus VII. 2. 92 teaches that 34 and 8 are substituted for yushmad and asmad in the dual. The substitutes replace gon and 764. Thus gam, भावाम् ॥ Why 'uptoम'? Observe युक्काम्, भावकाम् ॥ The क (V. 3.71), is not replaced. Similarly VII. 2. 97 teaches that and replace 'yushmad' and 'asmad' in the singular ; by this sotra 'yushm' and 'asm' are only replaced. Thus खया, मया, the भदू portion remains for which य is substituted by VII. 2. 89. Had the whole been replaced, then ther of स्व and म would have been replaced by य (VII. 2.89), and given us undesired forms like या and म्या ।। 
Why is the word पर्यन्त employed in the sotra and not the word मन्त, as मान्तस्थ? In the first place thic word sa is ambiguous, it may mcan ending with but ex cluding 4,or ending with and including an In the second place, the word quia is used to indicate the limit, or portion taken out of the whole. The word मान्त would have meant, that forın of yusmad and asmad which ends with 11 Now these words have a form which ends in c, as युष्मानाचष्टे or भस्मानाचटे-युष्मते or ममते formed by fort (the fa portion ng is clided by VII. 4. 155, vårtika). Now a noun formed from this derivative root युष्मि and भस्मि by विप् affix will be युष्म् and F# These are the two forns of yusmad and asinad which are com plete words ending in all the present sätra does not apply to these words. 
In declining these nouns gern and it, we shall apply the rules VII. 2.89 and 86, thus: 
Sing. Dual. Plural. 
Sing. Dual Plural. Nom. वं शुषां पुयं Acc. पुषां युषां शुषान् Ins. युष्या युष्याभ्यां युपाभिः Dat. तुभ्यं युषाम्यां शुषभ्यं Abl. युषत् युपाभ्यां युपत् Gen. सब युष्यो युषाकं Loc. शुध्यि युष्योः युषासु ॥ (Padamanjari). युवानी द्विवचने ॥६२॥ पदानि ॥ युव, आवौ, द्विवचने ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ द्विवचनात्यर्थमहणम् । द्विवचने ये युष्मदस्मदी पर्याभिधानविषये सयोर्मपर्यन्तस्य स्थाने युष भाष स्यताबादेशी भवतः ॥ 
92. In the Dual, युव is substitute for युष्म् and आव for अस्म् ॥ 
Thus युवाम्, भावाम् , युवाभ्याम् , भावाभ्याम् , युवयो, भावयोः ॥ This substitution takes place even in compounds, where the sense of duality is prominent, if some other substitute like VII. 2.94&c.does not intervene. As भतिक्रान्तं पुवाम् 
असियवाम, so also प्रत्यावाम् भतियुवान्, अत्यावान् (अतिक्रान्तान् युवाम् &c.) भासियुषया and भारयावया (भतिक्रान्तेन युवाम) Similarly अतियुवाभिः॥(अतिक्रान्तर्युवां) मत्यावाभिः, भतियवस्थम, (मतिकान्तभ्योयुवां) अत्यावभ्यम्, भतियुवत्, (भतिकान्तादू युवां) भत्यापन, अतियुवाकम्, (मतिकान्तानां पुषां) अत्यावाकम, भतियुवाय, (भतिकान्ते युवा)भत्यावयि, भासयुवासु,भतिकान्तेषु युवां भत्यावास But where a &c are to be substituted, there those will be substituted, as भासिस्थम (-भतिकान्तो युवाम्), भत्यहम्, भतियूयम् , भतिययम् तितुभ्यम् , अतिमह्यम् , भतिसब, मतिमम ॥ This substitution does not take place when 'yushmad' and 'asmad' denote one or many ( more than two ), though the compound may denote a duality: as 
मासिकान्सी खाम् सिल्वाम् , भतिगाम , भतिशुष्मान् , भत्यस्मान् ॥ 
1398 
PRONOUNS. 
[ BK. VII. CH. II. 8.95 
Pl.. 
Sing. 
Pl. 
Ins. 
If in a compound, the words yushmad and asmad are employed in a dual signification, though the compound as a whole may have a singular or plural number, for the number of a compound does not depend upon the number of the words composing it, yet even in such a compound the yy and are substitution should be made for the dual-significant yushmad and asmad: unless such substitution is debarred by some other substitutes like and are (VII. 2.,94 &c). Thus भतिकान्तं गवां-मतियुवाम्, similarly भाति-भावाम | The whole declension is given lelow: 
Sing. Nom. भतित्वम् 
भतियूयम् . भत्यहम् 
भतिवयम् Acc. 
अतियुवाम् 
भतियुवाम् 
भत्थावा 
भयावान् भतियुषया 
भतियुवभिः भत्यावया 
भन्यावाभिः Date. 
भतितुभ्यं 
भतियुवभ्य भतिमाम 
अत्यावश्थं Abl. 
मतियुवत् 
भतियुवत् भयावत् 
मायावत् Gen. . भतितक . . अतियुवाकम भतिमम 
मस्यावाकम् Loo. 
भतियुचवि 
मतियुषानु मयावधि 
भत्यावामु But when the words yushmad and asmad denote singular or plural .nbt the compound denotes a dual, then the yuva and ava substitutions do not take place. As अतिक्रान्ती स्वाम-भतिस्वाम्, so also भतिकान्ती युग्मान् = मतियुष्मान् so also अत्यस्मान् ॥ Soon in other cases. 
यूयवयो जसि ॥६३॥ पदानि ॥ यूय, अयो, जसि ॥ वृत्तिः । युष्मदस्मदोर्मपर्यन्तस्य असि परतो यूब वय इत्येतावावेशौ भवतः ॥ 
93. In the Nom. Pl. यय is substituted for युष्म् , and घय for भस्म् ॥ 
As यूयम्, वयम् , परमयूयम् , परमवयम् , भतियूवम् , भतिवयम् ॥ The Tadanta-vidhi applies here. That rule applies in this angadhikara on the maxim भाधिकारे तस्य च सत्तरपदस्थ च॥ See also VII. 3. ro. In यूयम् and अयम् , the final is elided by VII. 2. 90, and we have यूय and qय+म+भम् (VII. I. 28)- यूयम् and वयम् (VI. 1. 97 and 107). 
त्वाही सौ ॥६४॥ पदानि ॥ त्व, अही, सौ॥ इत्तिः ॥ शुष्मदस्मदोर्मपर्यन्सस्य सौ परेब भह इत्येतावादेषो भवतः ॥ ... 94. In the Nominative Singular man is substituted for युष्मू and अह for अस्म् ॥ 
Thus स्वम् and महम् , परमस्वम् , परमाहम् , भतिस्वम् and भत्यहम् ॥ See VII. I. 28, VI. I. 97 and 107. 
तभ्यमयी जाय ॥६५॥ पदानि ॥ तुभ्य, मह्यो, यि ॥ बत्तिः । युष्मदस्मदोर्मपर्यन्तस्य तुभ्य मा इत्येतावादशौ भवतो यि परतः ॥ 
95. In the Dative Singular 7 is substituted for युम and मा for अस्म ॥ . .. 
. As तुभ्यम, मह्यम्, परमतुभ्यम्, परममह्यम् , भतितुभ्यम् , मतिमह्यम् ॥ 
BK. VII. CH. II S. 98 ] 
PRONOUNS.' 
1399 
तवममौ सि ॥६६॥ पदानि ॥ तव, ममी, सि ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ शुष्मदस्मदोर्मपर्यन्तस्य तव मम इत्येताबादेयौ भवतो सि परतः ।। 
96. In the Genitive Singular तब is substituted for युष्म and मम for अस्म् ॥ 
As तब, मम, परमतव, परममम, मसितव, मतिमम | The is elided by VII. 2. 9o, and aR and मम+ +भ (VII. I. 27)-तब and मम by VI. I. 97. 
त्वमावेकवचने ॥ ९७॥ पदानि ॥ त्वमी, एक वचने ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ एकवचनात्ययनिर्देशः । एकवचमे थे युष्मदस्मदी एकार्याभिधानविपये तयोर्मपर्यन्तस्य स्थानेख म इत्येतावादेखी भवतः ॥ 
97. In the remaining cases of the Singular, त्व is substituted for युग्म and म for अस्म् ॥ . 
As स्वास्, माम् , खया, मया,खत्, मत् , स्वयि, मवि ॥ The compounds also take this substitution according to the sense: as भातिक्रान्तस्त्वाम् - भतित्वम्, भत्यहम् , भातिकान्ती मम-मतिमाम, भतिखाम्,अतिक्रान्तान् साम्-भतिस्वान, भतिमान्, भतिक्रान्तावाल-भतिस्वाभ्याम, मतिमाभ्याम् , भतिक्रान्नस्त्वाम् -भतिस्वाभिः, मतिमाभिः ।। 
When in a compound, the words yushmad and asmad denote one, though the compound may denote two or many, thereeven the # and # substi tutions must take place. And as regards different substitutes, like and m. before y &c, those prior taught substitutes debar this latter by the rule of पूर्वविप्रतिषेधः॥ Some examples have already beengivenabove,others are भति यूयम्, भतितुभ्यम् , मतितव ॥ So also with asinad. Similarly भतिस्यां पक्ष्य, भतिवान्, भतिला भ्वाम, मतित्वाभिः, भातिवन्यम्, प्रतिस्पत, भासिखयोग,मातिस्थाकम्, भातवाय, भतित्वयोर,भतित्वामु॥ 
प्रत्ययोत्तरपदयोश्च ॥ १८॥ पदानि ॥ प्रत्यय, उत्तरपदयोः, च॥ वृत्तिः ॥ एकरचनात्यनुवर्तते । प्रत्यये उत्तरपदे च परत एकले वर्तमानयोर्युष्मदस्मदोर्मपर्यन्तस्व व म इत्येतावादेवी भवतः ॥ 
98. त्व is substituted for युष्म and म for अस्म्, when they signify a single individual, even when an affix follows, or a word is in compositiou. 
As स्वदीयः, मदीयः, with the affix छ (IV. 2. II4, I. I.74) वत्सर (-भतिशयेन वं), मत्तरः, खपति (स्वामिच्छति), मपति स्वपते (स्वमिवाचरते), मयते ॥ Similarly when a second member of the compound follows. As तब पुन:स्वत्पुनः, मनपुनः ॥ त्वं नायोऽस्य खन्नाथः, मनायः ॥ When more than one individual is signified, the substitution does not take place, as युग्मदीयं (-युष्माकमिदं), भस्मदीयं; युष्मत्पुनः ( युष्माकं पुषः), भस्मतपुत्रः ।। 
The sätra VII. 2. 97 referred to the vibhaktis or case-endings, as that word from VII. 2.84 governs these satras, the present satra refers to other affix es,and to compounds. It might beobjected,that even belore otheraffixes and com. pounds these words had in thiem vibhaktis, though those vibhaktis were elided when these affixes were added or wlien the words became part of a compound; 
1400 
PRONOUNS. 
[ BK. VII. Ch. II. S. 100 
and that having in them suppressed vibhaktis, the substitutions would take place in spite of this satra. This objection is not valid, for there the vibhaktis have been elided. But is not elision a Bahiranga and the substitute an antaranga process; and should not, therefore, the substitute come first and then the vibhakti elided? The substitution specially taught in this sotra is, therefore, ajnapaka and proves the existence of the following maxim :-मन्तरतानपि विन्ि बहिरङ्गोलुग्वाधते 'a bahiranga substitution of लुक supersedes even antaranga rules'. Thus गोमान मियोऽस्य-गोमतप्रियः, here the antaranga नुम् augment is super seded by the bahiranga 11 This sûtra further indicates, that all other subs titutes of 'yushmad' and 'asmad' which take place in the singular, such as T, मम, तुभ्य, माय, ख, महdo not take effect, before general affixes or in compounds, but that a and म are the only substitutes there even. As तुभ्यं हितं - स्वद्धितं, मद्धितं । सा पुचः - वपुषः, मत्पुवः ॥ 
त्रिचतुरोस्त्रियां तिसृचतस् ॥ ६॥ पदानि ॥ त्रि, चतुरोः, स्त्रियाम, तिस्चतस्॥ वृत्तिः । बिचतुर् इत्यतयोः स्त्रियां वर्तमानयोस्तिम चतसृ इत्येतावदिशौ भवतो विभनी परतः । पातिकम् ।। सिमभावे सज्ञायां कन्युपसंख्यानं कर्तष्यम् ॥ वा०॥ चतसर्या गुदात निपातनं कर्तव्यम् ।। 
99. तिस is substituted for त्रि. and चतस for चतुर in the feminine, when a case-ending follows. 
Thus तिवा, पतला, तिमृभिः, पतमृभिः ॥ Why in the Femininc'? Observe भवः, चत्वारः, बीणि, चवारि॥ The word बियाम् qualifies and चतुर and not the word or 'stem' which is of course understood here. Therefore, the substitution will take place even where the anga refers to a Masculine, or a Neuter; when rand चतुर् refer to a Feminine; as प्रियास्तिखो ब्राह्मण्योऽस्य ब्राह्मणस्य-भिवतिसा ब्राह्मण: (VII. I.94)प्रियतिखी, प्रियतिखः॥ The guna of VII. 3. Ho is debarred in anticipation by VII. 2. Ioo ordaining ॥ प्रियतिसृ ब्राह्मणकुलं, प्रियतिस्णी , प्रियतिमूणि॥ Similarly मियचतसा.चतमी, चसखा, प्रियचसस, चतसृणी, चतसणि || The samasanta affix कर (V. 4. 153) is however not added in the above, because fare &c are bahiranga substi tutions. Conversely, the anga may be feminine, but if for and a refer to Masculine or Neuter nouns, the substitution will not take place: as farfarsfar: or प्रियाणि मीणि वा भस्था ब्राह्मण्या-प्रियषिः 'a Brahmant to whom three are beloved.' dual. प्रियबी, प्रियवयः ॥ Similarly प्रियवस्वाः, प्रिवचलारी, प्रियचस्वारः ॥ 
Vårt: The substitution of fare for for takes place before the affix ; as तिमृका नाम पामः ॥ 
Vårt:- has acute on the first, as tra# 999 Rule VI. 1. 167 does not apply. But पतसृणाम् according to VI. I. 179: the हलादि debars the निपातन accent. 
अचि र ऋतः ॥ १०॥ पदानि ॥ अचि, र,ऋतः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ तिस चसम् इत्येतयातः स्थाने रेफादेशो भवति भजादी विभक्ती परतः । 
100. r is substituted for the reg of fa and at before case-affixes beginning with a vowel. 
BK. VII. CH. II. 9. 101 ] 
PRONOUNS. 
1401 
Thus fra:, (in fauft , f : 922) affaT, THA: 99 il forura ta, faha; faufa: PA, 4# Ful foare farü, 
f a fauft! This supersedes VI. I. 102 (ordaining the single long substitution of the form of the first), VI. I. III (substitution of or for #), and VII. 3. 110 (the substitu tion of guņa). The last rule VII. 3. I10, though subsequent in order, is how ever superseded by this rule. Why 'before the affixes beginning with a vowel?' Observe तिमाभः, चतमृभिः ॥ The ऋत: of the satra refers to the r of तिस and way and not to a fe ending stem in general: and had it not been used in the sútra, the latter would have stood thus si: "is substituted for the final of the words above-mentioned before an affix beginning with a vowel." So I would have been substituted for the final of fe and also. 
जराया जरसन्यतरस्याम् ॥ १०१ ॥ पदानि ॥ जरायाः, जरस, अन्यतरस्याम् ॥ वृत्तिः ।। जरा हत्येतस्य जरसित्ययमादेशो भवति भन्यतरस्याममादी विभक्तो परतः। 
101. FTA may be substituted for tu, optionally before a case-affix beginning with a vowel. 
As car or FCAT, in aT or His: retail or Me (C or more Amig:) ! But only onen, wafa: before an affix biginning with a consonant. The en substitution takes place in the Neuter plural, when the augment नुम् is added: as भसिजरासि ब्राह्मणकुलानि ॥ In भतिजरसं माणकलं 999 the affix is not elided. The form is thus evolved: f + Here three rules present theinselves simultaneously; first, luk-elision of the affix om by VII. 1, 23, (2) then the # substitution by VII. 1. 24, (3) and thirdly, A for by this rule. Of these -elision is superseded by sy of VII. 1. 24 which is an exception to VII. 1. 23; and in its turn is replaced by the inter of this satra. Wer being substituted for *, we have mana, now luk cannot again appear and cause elision, as it has already lost the oppor tunity: and we are left with * alone, and have a few II In the Nom. Sg. and Ins. P'I we have masti and sfarsit: according to the opinion of Gonardiya. The reason being सनिपातलक्षणा विधिरनिमित्त तद्विधातम्थ 'that which is taught in a rule the application of which is occasioned by the combination of two things, does not become the cause of the destruction of that combination! Because 99* was added to HH because it ended in (VII. 1. 24), and similarly ft: was replaced by TF (VII. 1. 9). Now or has caused the production of ot and de therefore, these latter affixes, though beginning with a vowel will not cause to be substituted for or by this rule, for then the produced will cause the des truction of the producer. Others hold that the above maxim is anitya, and we have Nom. Sg. fast, and Ins. Pl. mfFTE: 11 
The form faire is thus evolved +71 Here is the naug. ment be added first, it will be a portion of the anga, and will not be an inter vention to anything which is to be added or operated upon the anga. But this 
1402 
PRONOUNS. 
BK. VII. CH. II. §. 104 
augment will be an intervention with regard to ty which is but a portion of the word sferat II So that an operation applicable to it will not take effect, because of this a intervention. And though tadantaviddhi applies in these chapters (पदाधिकारे तस्वच तरतस्थ ), yet the maxim is that the substitutes only replace those which are specifically exlibited in a rule (निर्दिभ्यमानत्वमाशा भवन्ति), therefore we would not replace are which forms only a portion of a full word ofera il Even if the substitution does take place, the cou would be found after the of Tell Therefore, the mag substitution should be made first, because this is a subsequent rule; and having done so, the TI should be added after wards under VII. 1.72. 
The form wash is thus evolved. We have for +TEN Here on the maxim patur W T C, we substitute Tip for me also, (for it and star are considered as one). Then appears VII 1.23 ordaining the luk of op and VII. 1. 24, teaching me u The latter rule is preferred for the reasons given above. 
त्यदादीनामः ॥ १०२॥ पदानि ॥ यदादीनाम,मः॥ वृत्तिः॥ त्यदित्येवमादीनामकापदेची भवाति विभत्तो परतः । 
102. For the final of ac and the rest, there is substituted 37, when an affix, called vibhakti, follows. 
Thus , T, -:, , at; ~ :, , ; - , puit, pa; 
94, FAT, 9; 1797-STET, 97, stift, O, regn 11 The tyadadi words extend upto fit, in the list of the pronouns, for the purposes of this substitution. There fore, the substitution does not take place here in #494 which forms *17 al When the word 2&c are employed as names, or as a secondary member in a compound, the substitution does not take place, as , , :, marre, giore, marr See also l. 1. 27 coinmentary. But when they form the principal member of a compound, the substitution takes place, as :, qal, Tau For case affix (vibhakti) see V. 3. I. also. Those affixes are also 
called vibhakti and cause these substitutions. 
किमः कः॥ १०३n पदानि । किमः कः॥ पतिः॥कित्येतस्व कात्ययमादयो भवति विमला परतः । 
103. His substituted for fort before a vibhakti affix. As mi, t, u The substitution takes place even when the augment 
is added. Therefore, the substitute is here and not #which latter would have been sufficient for fall For off being replaced by (VII. 2. 102), the would be left, which would be replaced by m, had the sQtra been 
HIST and the forms would have been the same (+*+ VI. 1.97). See V. 3. 1, 13 &c. . fact: Il 8081 Terra Il F, faut:, !! 
त्तिः॥तकारारी हकारारीच विभको परतः किमित्यतस्थ कात्ययमादेशो भवति । 
BK. VII. CH. II. 107] 
PRONOUNS. 
1403 
- 
- 
__104. कु is substituted for किम् before a vibhakti affix beginning with a त or a ह॥ 
Thus कुतः, का, कुह (V. 3. 13.7). Ther in ति means beginning with an | . काति॥१०५॥ पदानिक, मति॥ 
बनिः ॥ भतीत्येतस्यां विभक्ती परतः किमित्येतस्य इत्ययमादेशो भवति । 
105. is substituted for fast before the vibhakti अत् (V, 3. 13). 
Asक गमिष्यसि, भोस्यते ॥ The substitute of the last rule, before the affix # would have become , but that it would have caused guna, hence this separate substitute. Had the satra been paarsyt it would not have included the भकच् augmented किम् ॥ 
तदोः सः सावनन्त्ययोः ॥ १०९ पदानि ॥ तदो, सा, सी, मनन्स्ययोः ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ त्यवादीनां सकारदकारयोरनन्ययोः सकारादेशो भवति सो परतः । 
___ 106. For the non-final r and of स्यदू &c. there is substituted in the Nominative Singular. 
As त्य+सु-त्य+म+मु (VII. 2. 102)-स्य+म+j (VII. 2. 1o6)= स्थः (VI. 1.97). Similarly सः from सद, एषः from एसद् as एत+सुन एत+a+स (VII. 2. 102) - एस+म+स् (VII. 2. 106)- एषः (VI. I. 97). So मसौ from दस by the following satra. Why do we say 'non-final? Observes से, सा Had not this word been used, the case-affix would not be elided in the vocative, as then there would have been no short vowel, as required by VI. 1. 69. 
अदस मी सलोपश्च॥ १०७॥ पदानि ॥ अवसः, औ, सुलोपश्च ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ भदसः सौ परतः सकारस्य मौकारादेयो भवति सोम लोपो भवति । वार्तिकम् ॥ भोस्वप्रतिषेधः साककादा वक्तव्यः सादुत्वं च ॥ पा०॥ रत्तरपदभूतानां त्यवादीनामकससन्धीनामादेशा वनव्याः ॥ 
Karika भदसा सोमवेदीलं कि सुलोपो विधीयते । 
इस्वाल्लुप्यत सबुद्धिर्न इला प्रकृतं दिसत्॥ भाप एवं भवेत्तस्मिन्न झलीत्यनुवर्तनात् । 
प्रत्ययस्थाच कादिलं शीभावमा प्रसज्यते ॥ 
107. For the t of अदस there is substituted भो, whereby the Nom. affix सु is elided. 
As मरम् +सु-र+मो+सु (VII. 2. 107)=अस+भी (VII. 2. 166)-मसी। 
Vårt:When the augment my is added, the st substitution is op tional, and in that alternative ris added after स् , as मसुक or मसकी। 
Vart:~When यद् &c. form second members of a compound, the above mentioned substitutions take place before the application of sandhi: as परमार, परमायम्, परमानेन। 
The form मसुकः is thus evolved :-भदकम् +मु; now भो substitution of the present satra is prohibited; therefore, the BT substitution of VII. 2, 102 takes 
1404 
PRONOUNS. 
[BK. VII. C1. 11. $. 108 
place, and the g is changed to by VII. 2. 106, and the sofy after & is changed to all 
The following observations may be made with regard to the forms TAIVA &C A substitute would be a bahiranga with regard to a case-affix that should be added to a compound. Therefore, being an antaranga rule, the ekadesa should be made first, and this ekadefa being considered as the beginn ing of the subsequent word, we should get erroneous forms like 948H. 9648 instead of gour and &c. Hence the necessity of the above vârtika. 
Kariki:-Let the sätra be met T without the words amna The word RT Is understood here from the preceding aphorism. The word me: is in the ablative case, the word at which is in the 7th case, should be changed here into the 6th casc सो॥ The shtra would then mean भास उत्तरस्य सरोकारो भवति it is substituted for the g after I Then the final one of my is changed to e by VII. 2. 102, and ę is changed to by VII. 2. 106, and we have matu So where is the necessity of using the words onitaw in the sútra. 
Obj: If ott be substituted for , then in the vocative this ont should be clided by VI. 1. 69, as it comes after a short vowel or VII. 2. 102. Ans. mi will not be elided by VI. 1. 69, for that rule refers to the elision of a conso nantal affix only, the word om being understood in that sätra, from the pre ceding satra VI. 1. 68. 
Obj: If this be so, then in the Feminine Vocative we have HET+ wit, and by the rule VII- 3. 106, the should be changed to y before this to Ans. No, this will not be so, for the substitution takes place only before a Hry beginning affix, for the word as is understood in the satra VII. 3. 106 from the sätra VII. 3. 103. 
Obj: If this be so, then in the feminnine with me, we have, I + it, and here rule V11. 3. 4* shows itself and requires the of & to be changed to s (m at) before the of an affix. Ans. That rule VII. 3. 44 applies where the feminine affix st is audible and remains unchanged, but here it is changed to mr (Vrddhi 671+ ofte Bilj in Seri II 
Obj: But then in mar + sir, the aft would require to be changed to at by VII. 1. 13. Ans. This objection is parttal only, for free in VII. I. 18 is explained by some, to be the common name given by ancient grammarians to the att of Dual; and not to this sir; moreover, in tire masculine no objection can apply. Hence the words görgu may well bc omitted. 
FAĦ: 11 805) Tefall #, #: 11 वृत्तिः इनमः सी परतो मयारोन्तादेशो भवति । . 108. His substituted for the final # of gh in the Nominative Singular. 'BK. VII. CH. II. F. 113] 
। 
PRONOUNS. 
1405 
As part, 2011 The substitution of forç is to prevent the 17 subs titution of VII. 2. 102. The case-ending is elided by VI. 1.68, and a substituted by VII. 2. 110. 
- वध ॥ १०६॥ पदानि ॥ दः,च, ॥ वृत्तिःसारमा पकारस्य स्थान मकारादेवो भवति विभनी परतः । 
_109. And म is substituted for the दू of इदम् before a. case-affix. 
. — As इमी, इमे, इमम् , इमी, इमान् ॥ Thus इदम् + मम् इदम + भम् (VII. 2. 102) हमा+मम् (VII. 2. 109) आमम् (VI. 1. 97, 107). 
यः सौ ॥ ११०॥ पदानि ॥ यः,सौ ॥ वृत्तिः । इदमो मकारस्थावकारादेवो भवसि सौ परतः । 
110. य is substituted for the दू of इदम in the Nom. Sg. in the feminine. . . As faa'ul This is confined to the Feminine, as the following sätra re lates to the masculine; and in the Neuter, the g is om elided by Fahrgent and so leaves no trace behind. - इदोज्य पुसि ॥ १११॥ पदानि ॥ इदः,अय,पुसि ॥ 
वृत्तिः । इदम हड्पस्य पुंसि सौ परतो ऽय् इत्ययमादेशो भवति । 
111. अय् is substituted for the इदु of इदम in the Nom. Sg. masculine. 
As भयम् ॥ In the Feminine यम् ॥ As मयं ब्राह्मणः, and इयं ब्राह्मणी ॥ .. 
वृत्तिः । इसमो ऽकारस्य दूपस्थ स्थाने मन इत्ययमादेो भवति मापि विमनी परतः। .. 
... 112. . अन is substituted for the इदू of इदम् in the Instrumental singular and the cases that follow, provided that the augmont akach is not added. . . . As भनेन, अनयोः॥ Why do we say "not when his added by V. 3.71"? 
Observe 4*, HW: I The word BTT ( 549 ) in the satra is a pratyahara, formed with the pr of a (Ins. Sg), and g of one (Loc. PI ). 
हलि लोपः ॥ ११३॥ पदानि ॥ हलि, लोपः, ॥ वृत्तिः । इलादो विभनी परत दरमो ककारस्य सपस्य लोपो भवति । 
113. The G of 4 is elided before a case-affix beginning with a consonant. . As भाभ्यार, एभिः, (VII. I. II) एभ्यः एपाम् , एषु ।। For म् is substituted by VII. 2. 102, and for w+w= by VI. I. 97. The rule: I. I. 52 by which a substitute replaces only the final letter, does, not apply here, on the maxim araya Arsecurry: ll lor no purpose is served by eliding mercly the final 
1406 
TADDHITA VRIDDHI.. [BK. VII. Cui. 11. . 117 
of rok 11 Hence is elided. Or it may be said that the satra does not teach the elision of re, but of me which was substituted for by the preced ing sutra. 
मृजेर्वृद्धिः ॥११४॥ पदानि ॥ मृजेः, वृद्धिः॥ वृत्तिः॥ विभकाविति निवृत्तम् भूजरङ्गस्यको दृद्धिर्भवति ।। 
114. The Vriddhi (भार् ) is substituted for the root vowel (ऋ) of the stem मृज् before an affix. 
As मार्श, माटुम् , मार्टव्यम् ॥ The se here is a root, and the affixes before which this Vriddhi takes place are those which come after roots, and not which come after Pratipadikas. Therefore, not before the affixes भ्यां &c,as सपरिमाभ्याम, घडमिः ॥ The anuvritti of the word vibhakti has ceased. This sutra debars guna of VII. 3. 84. 
अचो णिति ॥ ११५॥ पदानि ॥ अचा, भ, णिति॥ वृत्तिः ॥भजन्ताङ्गस्य मिति णिति च वृद्धिर्भवति ॥ . 
115. Before the affixes having an indicatory s or ण, Vriddhi is substituted for the end-vowel of a stem. 
Thus एकस्तण्डुलनिचावः, (III. 3. 20) ही पूर्वनिप्पावी, कारः and हारः (with धम्); गावोगावः, सखायो, सखायः where the case-endings arera by VII. I. 90, 92. to sia with the Uñadi gurun from fx and gllara with an and means 'strength. It is an obsolete Vedic word. 
अत उपधायाः ॥ ११९ ॥ पदानि । अतः, उपधायाः॥ वृत्तिः ॥महोपधाया भकारस्थ स्थान मिति णिति च प्रत्यय वृद्धिर्भवति ॥ 
116. In a stem ending in a consonant with an भ immediately preceding it, the Vriddhi is substituted for such भ, when an affix having an indicatory ञ् or follows. 
AS पाक, त्यागः, यागः with पम्, पाधि with the causativeणि, पाचक with खल| Why do we say 'm'? Observe wafat, ami with guņa only from fire where is nenultimate and not 11 Why do we say 'penultimate'? Observe TATA सक्षकः॥ 
अतितलि भिति णिति च प्रत्यये परतीस्थाचामादरचःस्थाने इद्धिर्भवति ॥ 
117. The Vriddhi is substituted for the first vowel of the stem, when a Taddhita-affix having an indicatory s or m follows. 
AS गायः from गर्ग+वम्, so also पाल्यः॥ शतिः ( म्), मालिः, भोपनवः 
from उपर), कापठकः &c. This debars the Vriddhi of VII. 2. IIS and 116. as पाष्ट: from N and जागत: from जगत ॥ 
ओ३म् । 
अथ सप्तमाध्यायस्य तृतीयः पादः । 
- BOOR SEVENTH. 
CHAPTER THIRD. 
देविकाशिशपादिस्यवादीर्घसत्रश्रेयसामात् ॥१॥ पदानि ॥ देविका, शिशपा, दित्यवाद, दीर्घसत्र, श्रेयसाम, आत् ॥ 
भपति मिति णिति किति तद्धिते परतः ॥ 
पातिकम् ॥ वहीनरस्थापनम् ॥ 
___ 1. When a Taddhita-affix having an indicatory , up or æ follows, aut is substituted instead of Vriddhi for the first vowels of the following: devika, simsapa, dityavat, dirghasatra, and sreyas. 
Thus दाविकम् (-देविकाय भवम् ) in दाविकपकमदाविकाकूला चालयः (-देविकाकले भवाः), पूर्वताविक: from पूर्ववर्विका 'the name of a village of the Eastern people'. Here the vriddhi of the second member ordained by VII. 3. 14, becomes मा । Similarly मांशपथमसः (-शिशपायाधिकारः)" The word belongs to the Palasadi class (IV. 3. 141), and takes मण or भम् , the difference being in accent. So also पांचपास्थला: (-शिशपास्यले भवा), and पूर्वशांप from पूर्वशिशप: the name of a village' See VII. 3. 14. Similarly दात्योहम् from दिन्यश, (दिल्योहार) and दासपम् (यसो भवं) and पावसम् (श्रेयसि भयं)॥ 
Vårt:-The Vriddhi of oftar under similar circumstances is with and as ife was वि, as बहीनरस्थापण्यं वहीनरिः॥ Some say the original ward itself is विहीनर (विहीनीनरः), and so its taddhita derivative is regular. 
केकयमित्त्रयुप्रलयानां यादेरियः ॥२॥ पदानि ॥ केकय, मित्त्रयु, प्रलयानाम, 
पतिः ॥ केकय मित्वयु प्रलवत्येतेपी थकापौरिय इत्यवमारणो भवति तद्धिते मिति निति किति च परतः ।। 
BK. VII. CH. 111. $.41 
TADDITA CHANGES. 
ry 
1 
an 
pred 
2. When & Taddhita affix with an indicatory sy, e or follows, T is substituted for thic # and of , and সুস্থ ! 
Asia ( TTE), with the affix (IV. 1. 168): similarly #erat y formed with me (V. 1. 134) in the sentence that you The word Gotra in that sätra V. 1. 134 means a Rishi name, for in ordinary parlance the name of a Rishi is called Gotra. Similarly ( TEST). As gi 10 
tai tarsi rota arki CAT 117, net , qui TATS , a, g, arra, স্থাবর ও অহ্মামখাৰাক্ষ্মন্তুদ শান্ত থান খুব সধান; শাখা নু ক্ষাংখা পূজা WAT HT a fora fara 
c&: #1 স্বাক্ষি গ্রাল শলা হিসাখা। 
3. Before a Taddhita affix having an indicatory #, or, the Vriddhi is not substituted for the first vowel in a compound, when it follows a word ending in or a, but # and # are respectively placed before the semi-vowels. 
That is is placed before y, and before As trann from w : (Heat *) : from u (n a ) * from : (enamed) II Wlay after or only? Observe 4: son of th: # Why do we say or afinal of a pada or word"? Observe a from it, ( Comen ) IV.4. 59 
লা from অলি {জয় »াহ্মা or এর মূল কাঙ্গাঃ) । The tule does not apply to স্বার্থ and på, for no rule ordains the Vșiddhi of the or 4, and so no occasion for the prohibition of this rule arises. These are Patronyms formed by (IV. 1. 95) from 1 and 2 (frasa &c). The present rule applies to that Vriddhi also which takes place in the second member of the compound by VII. 3. 10 &c. As mart: from us (asuta II But this prohibition does not apply whicre the 7 or are not the parts of the sccond member, as arum (= welat , at T) v 
arcai ll ama il art, pratara, 7, 11 qft OTC T ri TL TOEFINITI FUIT ft gat a ani sir 2017: 
4. Boforo a Tuddhita-affix with an indicatory , 
PERS 
UR 
Tora, but cand at are respectively pluced before these semi vowels in arc &c. 
As y agri- :, u from IT !! The Tadadi rule applies here. T: froin 697,(WATUHU Orgy:) So also errussa, erre: re: re: 
14ro 
PECULIAR VRIDDHI. 
(BK. VII. Ci. III: 9.7 
। 
+ 
____Vart:-The last vowel, with the consonant, if any, which follows it, is elided in the Indeclinables : as सौवर्गमिका (= स्वर्गमनमा) ॥ 
Some read the word freuna also in this list, but it is unnecessary, as it would be governed by the last rule, because it is a compound of +भध्याय (घो Warscara), or it may be a compound of FT + vary, then also it is unnecessary, as w is separately mentioned, in this list, and therefore when he begins a word it would get this peculiar substitution then also. Similarly स्फेयकतः from स्फ्य कृत; सौवादुमदुम् from स्वादुमदु, यौवनम् from श्वन् the prakriti-bhava is by (VI. 4. 167) while शौवम् from श्वन् where there is no prakritibhava (by मम् IV. 3. 154): धौवा संष्ट्रः (वारंष्ट्रयां भव:). Similarly सौवम् from स्त्र (-स्वस्थेत); सौवमामिकः from स्वमाम with the affix उम् (मध्यात्मदित्वात् उप). This satra is made because the and here are not finals of a mor word, as they were in the preceding satra. The following is a list of Dváradi words. 
1वार, 2 स्वर, 3 स्वाध्याय, ध्यल्का , स्वस्ति, 6 स्वर (स्वर), 7 सबकत, 8 स्वादुम, श्वस*, 10 श्वन्, ll स्व। 
न्यग्रोधस्य च केवलस्य ॥ ५॥ पदानि ॥ न्यग्रोधस्य, च, केवलस्य, ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ न्यमोषधदस्य केवलस्य यकापदुत्तरस्याचामादरचारयाने वृद्धिर्न भवति तस्माच पूर्वमैकार भागमो भवात॥ 
6. ऐ is placed before the य of न्यग्रोध, instead of Vriddhi, when the word stands alone, and is not a member of a compound, and is followed by a Taddhita affix with the indicatory , ण् or क्॥ 
As नयमोधनमसः (-न्यग्रोधस्य विकास). Why do we say when it is alone'? Observe न्यमोधमूले भवाः शालयःन्यमोधमूलाः ॥ न्यिग्रोध is a derivative word (from म्यमोहयति-नीचेगतो परोहर्वधते), then it would have been governed by VII. 3. 3, this separate, satra is then for the sake of making a restrictive rule (niyama) with regard to this word. If it is a primary word, then this sätra makes a Vidhi rule. The word ons is a jñapaka that the rule of Tadadi applies in this section. See VII. 3. 8, also. 
न कर्मव्यतिहारे ॥६॥ पदानि ॥न, कर्मव्यतिहारे । वृत्तिः ॥ कर्मष्यतिहार यदुक्तं तम भवति ।। 
6. The prohibition and the augment, ordained by VII. 3. 3, do not apply to a word which expresses the reci procity of an action. 
___As व्यावक्रोशी, व्यावलखी, प्याववत्ती, व्यावहासी ॥ See III. 3. 43 and V. 4. 14. 
स्वागतादीनां च ॥७॥ पदानि ॥ स्वागत, मादीनाम्, च, ॥ : बत्तिः ॥ स्वागत इत्येवमादीनां यदुक्तं सम्म भवति ॥ . 
. 
BK. VII. CH. 111. g. 10) 
VRIDDHI." 
14 
: 
7. The prohibition and augment taught in VII.' 3. 3 does not upply also to स्वागत &c. 
As स्वागतिकः, (=स्वागतमिति भाह) स्वाध्यरिका, (- स्वधरेण परति) स्वाङ्गिः, व्याङ्गि, ध्याडिः (sons of Svanga, Vyanga and Vyada). व्यावहारिक' and स्वापतयः (स्वपतो साधुः)॥ The word व्यवहार does not mean reciprocity of action, for then it would have been governed by the last sâtra. 7797 being a compound with 
स्व, would have been governed by VII. 3.4 as it is included in the Dvaradi list, hence its specific mention here. The foilowing is the list of svågatâdi words. 
1 स्वागत, 2 स्वध्वर, 3 स्वा, ध्या, 5 व्यड, 6 व्यवहार, 7 स्वपति ॥ श्वादेरिभि ॥ ८॥ पदानि ॥ श्व, आदेः, इत्रि॥ वृत्तिः ।। श्वादरजस्य इमि परतो यदुनं तन्न भवति । बार्तिकम् ॥इकरादिग्रहणं कर्तव्य पूर्वगणिकायर्थम् ॥ 
8. A compound beginning with em, and followed by the Taddhita affix 67, is not governed by the prohibition, nor takcs the augment, taught in VII. 3. 4. . Thus the descendant of श्वभन is इवाभत्रिः , so also वादष्टिः॥ The word sra is included in the list of Dvarádi words VII. 3, 4., the present sâtra im plies that the rule VII. 3. 4 applies not only to those words, but to compounds beginning with those words. . Vart: This rule applies when any Taddhita affix beginning with.s follows; as श्वगणन घरात श्वागणिका, श्वाधिकः (IV. 4. 11). 
The prohibition applies, when other Taddhita affixes follow such a 
एवाभत्रम् (वाभस्वरिद) ।। . पदान्तस्यान्यतरस्याम् ॥ ६॥ पदानि ॥ पदान्तस्य, अन्यतरस्याम् ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ श्वादरणस्य पदशनान्तस्यान्यतरस्यां यदुक्तं तन्न भवति ।।। 
"9. The rule VII. 3. 4. is optionally applied to श्वन followed by पद ॥ 
• As श्वापस्या -श्वापदम् or शौवापदम् ॥ .. उत्तरपदस्य ॥ १०॥ पदानि ॥ उत्तर पदस्य॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ उत्तरपत्स्यत्ययमधिकार, हनस्ताघिण्णलोरिति मागतस्मात् । यदित अर्ध्वमनुकामप्याम उत्तर. पदस्यत्येवं तहदितव्यम् ॥ 
10. Upto VII. 3. 31 inclusive, tlie substitution of Vriddhi will take place, for the first vowel of the second mem ber in a compound. 
This is an adhikara sūtra, and exerts governing influence upto VII. 3. 32 exclusive. The phrasc" of the second ineinber of the compound" should 
1412 
VRIDDHI. 
[BK. VII. CI. III. $. 12 
be supplied in all those satras, to complete the sense. Thus in VII. 3. 11, the word TATTF should be supplied. As geri R, 999 cm , 47, 46474, 11 
'In those sotras, where the word denoting the first member is not ex hibited in the Ablative case, as in VII. 3. 18, 19, 20, 21, the present sutra is absolutely necessary for causing the vșiddhi of the second member. But in those sätras, where the first member is exhibited in the ablative case, as in VII. 3. 11 (ar ), there this satra is only explanatory (and not absolutely necessary), and serves also the purpose of placing such vşiddhis under the category of 'uttarapada-vșiddhi'. This peculiar vriddhi is liable to certain rules of accent, as in VI, 2. 105. Hence the importance of the present aphorism in those stras also, where the word is exhibited in the fifth case. 
अवयवाहतोः ॥ ११ ॥ पदानि ॥ अवयवातू, ऋतोः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ अवयववाधिन उत्तरस्थ फतुवाचिन उत्तरपदस्थाचामादरचो वृद्धिर्भवति तद्धिते मिति णिति किति च परतः॥ 
11. Before a Taddhita affix having an indicatory q, of or 5, Vriddhi is substituted for the first vowel of a word denoting season, when it is preceded by a word denot ing a part. 
As raga, AE, 19A , 11 The composition with grand and 9 &c takes place by 11. 2. 1. and then by IV. 3. 18 there is an after a, and my after man with the elision of x by IV. 3. 22. The Tadanta-viddhi, as a general rule, does not apply to compounds, so that a rule made applicable to a particular word, will not apply to a compound which ends with that word: but tadanta-viddhi applies to a word denoting season when it takes an aflix causing Vriddhi, and is preceded by a word denoting a portion. We draw this rule from the present satra, for being formed from empt by a vriddhi-causing affix (IV. 3. 22), the affix stor will be applied to an even when it is the second member of a compound, the first member of which de. notes a part. (alera AITYTT I. 1. 72 Vart. Mahabhashya). 
Why do we say 'denoting a portion'? Observe quer parar with a (IV. 3. 11). The tadanta-vidhi applies only when the first member denotes a portion. 
सुसा ज्जनपदस्य ॥ १२॥ पदानि ॥ सु, सर्व, अति, जनपदस्य । वृत्तिः ॥ सु सर्व भर्द्ध इत्येतेभ्य उत्तरस्य जनपश्वाधिन उत्तरपरस्याचामादरचो वृद्धिर्भवति तद्धिते मिति णिति किति च परतः ॥ 
12. After a, pare and are, the first vowel of the name of a country gets the Vriddhi, when a Taddhita affix with an indicatory . , ut or follows. 
BK. VII. Cn. III. . 14 ) 
VRIDDHI. 
1413 
YWNERALM 
V 
WWWWWWWWWWW 
INHALT 
V 
As খাচা , খাখাল and ধ্যাক্ষলক্ষ, forrred with (Iv.2.1 25}, This sotra also gives rise to the following rule gurtit 155 1976" "The tadantavidhi applies to words denoting country, when the first member is g. ** m* or a direction-denoting word". As shown in the above examples, and for direction denoting words see the following satra (1. 1. 72 Vart. Malabhashya). 
ET S UTEI * TE NI TET, A TUTTI স্খলি: দ্বিান্ধি স্কুল কাশ্বিনী গল্প স্বলঞ্জাৱস্পঞ্জ 
মিষ্টি গন্ধ Fala Ta: 14 
13. After a word denoting direction, the first vowel of the name of a country, with the exception of #, gets Vriddhi before & Taddhita-affix having an indicatory su, or su 
As ts *, HTC9* , 
*, * 
(IV. 2. 125, 107, 108. VI. 2. 105 accent). The Tadanta-vidhi applies here, as shown in the preceding sâtra. Why do we say 'denoting direction'? Observer: MRTİ ques :, * **:, tasak , 797934 11 With we have frame, emprar 
sake of the subsequent sotra. 
sai WOITTUTTE II 9811 TA I TEA, ETA, FATTTUTTTT 11 ar y gryia wereTopi BU TATA Taifa riza fara casa ? 18 
14. After a word denoting direction, the first vowel of the name of a village or city in the land of the eas tern people, gets the Vriddhi before a Taddhita alfix having an indicatory st, u or il 
Thus T*Y*:, 8909***#, Turf , Treffer: (IV. 2. 107). These are village names. furty , 7ytura g arn 57, R182: II 
The word gret in this sdtra, as well as in V11. 3. 24, does not here mean 'the eastern grammarians', but 'the eastern countries', because of the context. যুগাগ: is this formed, দুম্বী জু ক্ষয়ী যুদ্ধাশী = 
ঘু মাগী The compounding takes place by 11. 1. 50. Then the afx ø is added to.it, in the sense of 47: by IV. 2. 107. In qatarla: the allix is added by IV. 2. 124. Though Pataliputra is the name of one city, Purva-påfaliputra means the Eastern por 
. That place is called 'gråma', where people reside, and a 'nagara' is also a 'gråma' in this sense. Therefore, the rules which good. men observe with regard to 'grama', are obsered by them in 'nagara' also. Thus the rule is 
* W4992, therefore, the NTT cock is also not eaten. So also go ang is applicd to nagara also. In this grammar also, we sec that 'grama' includes 
1414 
VRIDDHI 
BK. VII. CH. III. $. 16 
'nagara' also, as in IV. 2. 109, 117, VI. 2. 103. Therefore, where is the necessity of employing the word for separately in this aphorism? The two words are separately used, in order to indicate the separate nature and relation of the two kinds of words. The full word 794 is the name of a 'grama', and not the portion sकामसमी ॥ But in पूर्वपाटलिपुष, the word पाटलिपुष itself is the name of the 'nagara'. In the present sätra, there is the adhikara of Fry and of Aryara II We apply these separately to these two classes of words: name ly मामवाधिनाम् भङ्गानाम and नगरवाधिनाम् उत्तरपानाम् ॥ This we could not have done without employing these words in the sätra. Therefore, in the case of 'grama' word, the vşiddhi takes place in that portion of it which follows a direc tion denoting word (PATATTO TRY frageSF Tanita). While a nagara word itself gets vsiddhi when it is preceded by a direction denoting word (दिशः उत्तरेषां नगराणाम्)॥ In पूर्वेषुकामशमः, the vriddhi of इषुकामशमी takes place first, and then the combination by sandhi. See on this point VII. 3. 22. 
• Getur: NareHOTET 11 89 aria Il Heart:, Gerec, er 
RT, lll 'वृत्तिः ॥ सख्याया उत्तरपदस्थ संवत्सरशन्नस्य संख्यायावाचामारेरचः स्थान वृद्धिर्भवति तद्धिते मिति 
णिति किति च परतः॥ 
15. After a Numeral, the first vowel of framfar and of a Numeral, gets the Vriddhi, before a Taddhita having an indicatory s , h, or 1 
freigas et seier på IT T 11 fanafaa: ll The words ft, vet &c when applied to (VII. 3. 16) and Numerals give rise to the affixes taught under kaladhikara (V. 1.78-97). The special mention of per here, (though this is a g ry word and would have been included in the sätra VII. 3. 17) implies that the word oftarot in that sätra does not mean the measure of time, but a measure of any other thing than time. Therefore, with other time-words than samvatsara, the Vșiddhi takes place in the regular way: as tafa, HATI I Similarly in sotra IV. 1. 22, the word utara does not mean the measure of time or numerals, as farist, fruf all ll In short, the word ofiaror in these satras (and elsewhere III. 2. 23, II. 3. 46 &c.) means “mass or bulk", and not a measure in general. 
Gerhana 118€ il qana Il 4, 2-farea, 11 । वृत्तिः ॥ संख्याया उत्तरस्य वर्षपदस्थाचामादरचो वृद्धिर्भवति तद्धितेमिति णिति किति च परतः, सचेत. जितो भविष्यन्वये न भवति । 
16. After a numeral, the first vowel of a gets the Vriddhi, before a Taddhita affix having an indicatory st, v or 
, when the affix does not refer to a Future time. BK. VII. CH. III. . 191 
VRIDDHI. 
141. 
• As शिवर्षे मधीटो नो भूतो वा-शिवार्षिकः, विवार्षिक: ॥ But when denoting future time, we have देवर्षिकः, वर्षिक: "calculated to last two or three years" as in the sentence यस्य श्रेयर्षिकं धान्यं निहितं मृत्यवृत्तये मधिकंवापि वियेत स सोमं पातुमर्हति ॥(= श्रीणि वर्षाणि भावी). The word अभविष्यन does not qualify the words अघाट and भत (V. I. 80), the sense of futurity is there denoted by the sentence and not by the taddhita-affix: ast वर्षे अधीटो पता वा कर्म करिष्यति-दिवार्षिको मनुष्यः॥ 
परिमाणान्तस्यासंशाशाणयोः ॥१७॥ पदानि ॥ परिमाणान्तस्य, असंज्ञा, शोणयोः।। वृत्तिः ॥ परिमाणान्तस्याङ्गस्य संख्यायाः परं यदुत्तरपदं सस्थाचामादरचो वृद्धिर्भवति तद्धित भिति णिति किति च परतः, संज्ञायां विषये शाणे चोत्तरपदे न भवति । 
17. After a numeral, the first vowel of a word denoting mass in its widest sense (with the exception of Trut) gets the Vriddhi before a Taddhita affix having an indicatory 
u or y, when the word so formed does not mean a Name. . Asो कुडवी प्रयोजनमस्य-दिकौडविका (V. 1.109) दाभ्यां सुवर्णाभ्यां कीत-सिौवार्णकम (V. 1. 37), frutaroria 11 The taduhita asfix is optionally elided, see vartika to V: 1, 29. When the affix is elided there can be no Vriddhi, as ferröra i Similarly दिनकिक्रम, निष्किकम् (V. I. 30). Why when it is not a name', Observe पाचलाहितिकम् , पाञ्चकपालिकम् (पञ्चलोहित्यः or कपलानि परिमाणमस्य V. I. 30) The whole word is a Naine here. Why with the exception of ort? Observe 
शाणम.शाणम formedl vith अण (V. I, 35 and 36). Some read the satra as भसज्ञाशाणकलिजानाम् so that कुलिन is also excepted, as कालिजिकः (V. 1. 55 रेकुलिंग प्रयोजनमस्य)॥ 
जे प्रोष्ठपदानाम् ॥ १८॥ पदानि ॥ जे, प्रोष्ठपदानाम् ॥ पतिः ॥ जाति जाताओं निर्दिश्यते । तब यस्तद्धितो विहितस्तस्मिन् मिति णिति कितिच परत मोष्ठ. पदानामुत्तरस्याचामादरचो वृद्धिर्भवति ॥ 
18. In प्रोष्ठपद and its synonyms, the first vowel of the second member gets the Vriddhi, before a Taddhita affix meaning 'born in that time', and having an indicatory sp, vi or क॥ 
The word s means 'born', the affixes denoting 'born under that as terism' are meant here. Areg is the name of an asterism, the time appertaining there to is also called प्रोष्ठपद (the affix भण् of IV. 3. 3, is elided by IV.aa) प्रोपवास मातः-प्रोष्टपादो माणवक: (with अण IV. 3. 16). Why do we say 'born in that time? Observe यदा प्रौष्ठपोमेषः (-प्रोटपशसु भवः) धरणीमभिवर्षति ॥ The plural number प्रोष्ठपदानां indicates that the synonyms of प्रोष्ठपद such as भद्रपाद. are also to be included. 
हद्भगसिन्ध्यन्त पूर्वपदस्य च ॥१६॥ पदानि॥ हृदू, भग, सिन्धु, अन्त, पूर्वपदस्य च। वृशिः ॥ हुन भग सिन्धु इत्येवमन्तेथे पूर्वपत्स्योत्तरपदस्थाचामावरचो वृद्धिर्भवति तद्धिते मिति णिति किति च परतः॥ 
1416 
VRIDDIII. 
[ BK. VII. CI. III. S. 20. 
19. The Vriddhi is substituted for the first vowels of both (the first and second) members in a compound ending with हृदू, भग, and सिन्धु, before a Tuddhita affix having an in dicatory st, u or $11 
___As सुहस्यस्य - सौहार्दम्, सौभाग्यम्, भाग्यम् सौभागिनेयः (-मुभगाया अपत्य), गर्भागि. मेयः (IV. 1. 126). The words सुभगा and दुर्भगा occur in the Kalyanadi class (IV. 1. 126), and the affix rp and se augment are added. सुभग also occurs in Udgatri class (V. 1. 129). That word, however, does not get the Vriddhi in the second member, As महत सौभगाय ॥ This is a Vedic anomaly. Similarly from सनसिन्धव: (-सतप्रधानाः सिन्धवः) we have साक्तसैन्धवः (=सक्तसिन्धुषु भवः) so also पानसिन्धवः ।। The word fang occurs in Kachchhadi class, and oy: is formed by grow The Tadanta-rule applies to words forined there-under. 
The words ou and get are anomalously formed by V. 4. 150. But the reading adopted by Kasika is सुहत्वस्येवम ; so the word hridaya is changed to hrid by VI. 3. 50 or VI. 3. 51. The word sindhu means 'a country', 'a river' or 'an ocean'. ___ अनुशतिकादीनां च ॥ २०॥ पदानि ॥ अनुशातकादनिाम् , च ॥ 
पतिः ॥ अनुशतिकात्येवमादीनां चामानां पूर्वपदस्य पोनरपदस्थाचामावरचः स्थाने वृद्धिर्भवति तद्धिते मिति णिति किति वा परतः ॥ 
पार्तिकम् ।। कल्याण्याशनामिनहितिनह॥ 
20. Before a Taddhita affix having an indicatory ज, p or , the Vriddhi is substituted for the first vowel of both members of the compounds अनुशतिक &c. 
Thus (1) भानुशातिकम् (भनुरातिकस्येवम् )V.1.2I and IV.3.1203;(2) भानुहोडिका (-अनुहोडन चरति IV.4.8). (3) भानुसांवरणम् (अनुसंवरणे दीयते V.I.96). (4)मानुसांवत्सरिकः (IV. 3.60 formed by & from अनुसम्बस्सरेण दीयते) (5) भांगारवणवः (son of भारवेलु). (6) भासिहास्यम् (मसिहत्ये भवं). Some read this word as भस्यहरव; this will also take भण् as belonging to विमुक्तादि class. As भास्थहास्यः (=भस्यहत्यपन्नोऽस्मिन्नध्यायेऽस्ति) Others read this as भस्यहतिः, as भास्यतिकः (-अस्यहतिः प्रयोजनमस्य). The word भस्य in these is treated like a Pratipadika, its case-affix is not elided. (7) EHITT: ( योगस्य अपत्य). It belongs to Bidadi class. (8) पुस्करसदांपत्यं-पास्करसादिः ।। This belongs to Bahvadi class. (9) भानुहारत from भनुहरत् ॥ The same as above. (10) a: belongs to Gargadi class. Its partonymic is : (11) ATENT म्चालः (कुरुपस्चालेषु भवः)| The affix ge is not added here, because जनपदसमुदायो जनपदमहणेन राह्यत ।। 
(12) भौदुकशोद्धिः (son of उदकशुद्धिः)॥ (13, 14) ऐहलौकिकः, पारलौकिकः, from "इहलोक: and परलोकः by adding in the sense of तब भवः (लोकोत्तरपदस्य न)॥ (15) सावलौकिक: from सर्वलोकः by under V.I, 44: (16) साईपौरुषम् from सर्वपल्पः in the 
BK. VII. CH. III.S. 22] 
VRIDDHI. 
1417 
sense of मस्येवम् ॥ (17) सार्वभौमः (-सर्वभूमेनिमिन संयोगो or उत्पातो वा V 1.41)॥ (18) प्रयोग:--प्रायोगिकः (तत्र भवः, प्रयोगाधिदेवाधिभतत्यध्यात्माश्यः) (19) परस्त्री-पारणेयः lorined 
by इनव (IV. I. 126). 
(20) So also of राजपुरुष before the affix व्यज्ञ, as राजपौरुष्यम् ॥ Why do we say before व्यङ् only? Observe राजपुरुषस्थापत्यं-राजपुरुषायणिः; forined by फिश (IV. I. 157). 
(21) शतकुम्भे भवः - शातकोम्भः, (21 a) सौखशायमिकः from सुखशयन (21 b) पार वारिकः from परवर ॥ (22) सोमनाडि - सूत्रनडस्यापस्यं ॥ 
This is an Akritigana class; therefore, we have forms like these, भाभि गामिकः (अभिगममईति), माधिदैविक्रम् (अधिदेवेभवः, भाधिभौतिकं चातुर्वद्यम् (चतम एवं विद्या)। The affix 64€ is added in svärtha. 
भनुपतिक, 2 भनुहोड, 3 अनुसंवरण (अनुसंचरण), अनुसंवत्सर, 5 मारवेणु, 6 मसिहत्य (मस्याहत्य), 7 भस्यहति, 8 वध्योग, 9 पुष्करसद, 10 अनुहरन, 11 कुरुकन, 12 कुरुपञ्चाल, 13 उत्कशुद्ध, 14 इहलोक, 15 परलोक, 16 सर्वलोक, 17 सर्वपुरुष, 18 सर्वभूमि, 19 प्रयोग, 20 परस्त्री, 21 राजपुरुषात् ज्यामि 22 सूत्रनड । माकृतिगण, 23 अभिगम, 24 अधिभूत, 25 मधिदेव 26 चतुर्विद्या, 27 मुखशयन 28 शतकुम्भ 29 परदर ।। 
देवताद्वन्द्वे च ॥ २१॥ पदानि ॥ देवता-द्वन्द्वे, च॥ वृत्तिः ॥ देवताइनेच पूर्वपदस्योत्तरपदस्य पाषामादरच: स्थाने वृधिर्भवति तद्धिले भिात णिति क्रिति . वा परतः॥ 
21. Before a Taddhita affix having an indicatory , y or, the Vriddhi is substituted for the first vowels of both members a Dvanda compound of the names of Devas. 
As भग्निमारुती in भग्निमारतीमनहाहीमालभेत् ॥ भाग्निमारुतं कर्म ॥ The rule applies to Dvandas relating to hymns (सक्त) and sacrificial offerings (हावे). There- . fore, not here, स्कान्दविशाखौ देवतेऽस्य-स्कान्दविद्याखः (IV. 2. 24). So also ब्राह्यमनाप स्थम् by ण्य from ब्रह्मप्रजापती॥ See VI. 3. 26. . 
The short in the माग्नि in भाग्निमारुत, भाग्निवारुणम् is by VI. 3. 28. A compound relates to a sokta, which worships a deva through hymns; and that by which a 'havis' is determined, is a compound relating to sacrificial offering. 
नेन्द्रस्य परस्य ॥ २२॥ पदानि ॥न, इन्द्रस्य, परस्य ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ इन्द्रशम्यस्य परस्य यदु तन भवति ।। 
22. But the Vriddhi of the first vowel of Iudra, when it stands as the second member of a Dvanda compound, does not take place before a Taddhita affix having an indica tory श, ण or क्॥ 
As सोमेन्द्रः, भाग्नेन्द्रः ॥ Why "when it stands as the subsequent member"? Observe ऐन्द्राग्न मेकादशकपालं धरूं निवपेत् ॥ There are two vowels in the word इन, and when a Taddhita asfix is acılcd, then one of thesc i, c. thc et or thc last vowel is clided by VI. 4. 148, and the other (i. e. thes, coalesces with the last 
1418 
VRIDDHI. 
[ BK. VII. Ch. III.S. 25 
vowel of the first term, as सोम +म+भ सोम+न+म-सामे+ +म | Now, no vowel is left of pay when it gets the form 7, so what is the necessity of the present prohibitory rule? This prohibition indicates the existence of the folloving maxim : बहिरङ्गमपि पूर्वोत्तरपण्यापूर्व कार्य भवति, पमादेकादेश' or in other words पूर्वोत्तरनिमित्तकार्यान् पूर्वमन्तरशोऽप्येकादेधा म॥ "The substitution of one vowel for the final of the first and the initial of the second member of a compound does, even when it is antaranga, not take place previously to an operation which concerns the first or the second member of the compound”. It is on this maxim that the forms पूर्वघुकामशम (VII. 3. 14) &c are constructed, otherwise 7 being the first vowel of the second member ( of ry having merged in ), would have been vriddhied. 
दीर्घाव परुणस्य ॥ २३॥ पदानि ॥ दीर्घात, च धरुणस्य ॥ पतिः ॥ीपदुसरस्व वरुणस्य यदुक्तं तम भवति । 
23. Before a Taddhita affix having an indicatory. भ, or क, in a Dvandva compound of god-names, the vriddhi is not substituted for the first vowel of grout, when a long vowel precedes it. 
As ऐनावरुणम् , मेषावरुणम् from इन्द्रवरुणो &c. (VI. 3. 26). But भाग्निवारुणीम in भाग्निवारणीमनहाही मालभेत् when a short vowel precedes it. This word is derived from the compound word prirout the offen being lengthened by VI. 3. 27. But in forming a Taddhita-derivative from this word, the long $ is shortened by VI. 3. 28, and therefore, it cannot be said that a long vowel precedes वरुण ॥ 
प्राचां नगरान्ते ॥ २४॥ पदानि ॥ प्राचाम, नगरान्ते ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ प्राचां देणे नगरान्त पूर्वपदस्यांत्तरपरस्याचामादरचो वृद्धिर्भवति सद्धिते मिति णिति किसिच परतः ॥ 
24. Before a Taddhita affix having an indicatory 4, v or 6, the Vriddhi is substituted for the first vowels of both menibers of the compound, which is the name of a city of the Eastern People, and which ends in the word नगर ।। 
___As सामनागरः (= मुद्धनगरे भवः), पौण्डनागरः ॥ Why do we say of the Eas. tern people'? Observe # 
T TT:, from Frant: the city of the Northern people. - अङ्गलधेनुवलजान्तस्य विभाषितमुत्तरम् ॥ २५॥ पदान ॥ जङ्गल, धेनु, बलज, अन्तस्य, विभाषितम्, उत्तरम् ॥ 
वृत्तिः । जाल धेनु वलग इत्येवमन्तस्यास्य पूर्वपदस्याचामादरचो वृद्धिर्भवति विभाषितमुत्तर सुत्तरपदस्थ विज्ञापितं तद्धित प्रिति णिति किति वा परतः । 
25. Before a Tahhita affix having an indicatory अ, ण् , or , the. Vriddhi is substituted for the first vowel of 
BK. VII. CH. III. S. 28 ] 
VRIDDHI. 
1419 
the compound ending in जङ्गल, धेनु and बलज, and optionally for the first vowel of these second members also. 
As कौरुणालम or कोरुजाङ्गलम् , वैश्वधनवम् or वैश्वधेनवम् , सौवर्णवलजः or सौवर्णवाला।। अर्थात्परिमाणस्य पूर्वस्य तु वा ॥२६॥ पदानि । अर्थात्, परिमाणस्य, पूर्वस्य, तु, वा॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ मर्जशापरस्थ परिमाणवाधिन उत्तरस्याचामादरचः स्थाने वृद्धिर्भवति पूर्वस्थ तु वा भवति सद्धि मिति णिति किति वा परतः । 
26. Before a Taddhita affix having an indicatory अ, ण, or , the Vriddhi is substituted for the first vowel of the second member, denoting a mass in its widest sense, when the word as precedes it, but optionally for the first vowel of मधे॥ 
___As मणिकम् or भाद्रौणिकम् , अर्धकौडविकम् or भार्धकौडविकम् with ठम् (V... 18). Why do we say when denoting a masst Observe भाकोशिकम् only (=भई क्रोशः प्रयोजनमस्य)॥ 
नातः परस्य ॥ २७॥ पदानि ॥ न, अतः, परस्य। निः॥ म परस्य परिमाणाकारस्य वृद्धि भवति, पूर्वस्य तु वा भवति, सद्धि मिति णिति किति या परतः ॥ 
27. When the first vowel of the second member, preceded by and denoting mass is short *, the Vriddhi is not substituted for this a, before a Taddhita affix having an indicatory # , u or ş; and optionally so for the first vowel of the first member (i.e. अर्ध)। 
Thus भर्धपस्थिक: or भाधप्रस्थिकः (V. I. 18)॥ अर्धकंसिकः or मार्धकंसिकः ॥ Why do we say when it is a short भ'? Observe भार्धकौडविकः ॥ Why 'shortal Observe अर्ध खार्या भवः - भखारी || Here Vriddhi is substituted for the मा ofणारी. and though the formn remains the same, the power of this word is changed. For 
furt being formed by a Taddhita affix causing Vriddhi, in forming a Bahu vșihi compound, this word will retain its feminine form and will not be changed into masculine under VI. 3. 39. as अर्धसारीभार्यः (-अर्धखारीभार्यायस्यादिलि. निमित्तस्य च तद्धितस्य &c.) Whereever Vriddhi is prohibited with regard to a Tad. dhita affix, that affix cannot be called वृद्धिनिमित्त, and a word formed with such an affix will become masculine in a Bahuvrihi compound referring to a male person, वैयाकरणी भार्या अस्य-वैयाकरणभार्यः ॥ The word वैयाकरण is formed by Prohibition of Vriddhi. See VII. 3. 3. 
प्रवाहणस्य ढे ॥ २८॥ पदानि ॥ प्रवाहणस्य, दे॥ पतिः ॥ प्रसारणस्य हे परत उत्तरपनस्थाचामावरमा वृद्धिर्भवति पूर्वपरस्य वा भवति । 
1420 
VRIDDHI. 
BK. VII. CI. III. S. 30] 
28. Before the affix a (एय), the Vriddhi is substi tuted for the first vowel of the second member of प्रवाहण, but optionally so for the first vowel of the first member (i.e. प्र)। 
Thus geFITTA rarpota: or ripora: 11 The affix Tren IV. 1. 123, is added, similarly प्रवाहणी भार्याऽस्य-प्रवाहणेयीभार्थः (VI. 3. 39, masculation prohi bited). Or we may translate the sūtra as "Before the affix 3, the vowel of g in quru optionally gets Vriddhi", and omit the rest. The masculation will still be prohibited by VI. 3. 41, (जात)। . तत्प्रत्ययस्य च ॥ २६ ॥ पदानि ॥ तत्प्रत्ययस्य, च॥ 
वृक्तिः ॥ प्रवाहणस्येति वर्तते, तदिति प्रत्ययस्य प्रत्यवमर्षः, बक् प्रत्ययान्तस्य प्रवाहणशब्दस्य तद्धितेषु परत उसरपरस्याचामादरचो वृद्धिर्भवति पूर्वस्य तु वा ॥ 
29. Even so in a new derivative from this stem ending in , formed with a Taddhita affix having an indi catory 1, u or, there is vriddhi substitution for the first vowel of the second member, and optionally for the first vovel of the first member, in प्रवाहणेय and प्रावाहणेय ॥ 
___As प्रवाहणेयस्यापत्यं प्रावाहणेयिः or प्रवाहणेयिः, मा or :-वाहणेयकम् ॥ 
नमः शुचीश्वरक्षेत्राकुशलनिपुणानाम् ॥ ३०॥ पदानि ॥ नमः, शुचि, ईश्वर, क्षेत्रज्ञ, कुशल, निपुणानाम् ॥ वृतिः ॥ नम उत्तरेषां शुचि ईश्वर क्षेत्रज्ञ कुशल निपुण इत्येतेषामचामादरचो वृद्धिर्भवति, पूर्वपदस्य वा भवति तद्रित मिति णिति किति वा परतः ॥ 
30. Before a Taddhita affix haring an indicatory , " or , the Vriddhi is always substituted for the first vowel of शुचि, ईश्वर, क्षेत्रह, कुशल and निपुण when preceded by the Ne gative particle, but this substitution is optional for the vowel of the Negative particle. 
As भशीचम् or भाशौचम्, भनैश्वर्यम् or भानश्वर्यम्, भक्षेत्रश्यम् or मात्रयम्, भकी शलम् or भाकौशलम्, भनैपुणम् or भानपुणम् ॥ Some say the optional vriddhi of the negative particle is an aprapta-vibhasha, no other rule would have caused its vșiddhi had this rule not existed. They argue that by V. 1. 121, all affixes denoting *7 are prohibited after a Tatpurusha compound with the negative particle; therefore, the words ufo &c, should be first developed by the addition of 74-affixes, and then they should be compounded with the negative particle, which may be optionally vriddhied by this rule, which would apply to it, though it is not an anga, because the rule teaches vsiddhi. Others controvert this opinion, and hold that other affixes causing vriddhi than 74-affixes, also come alter negative-Tatpurusha compounds, such as affixes denoting des. 
BK. VII. CH. III 8.32) 
VRIDDHI. 
5421 
cendant &c: and wr4-affixes are added to Bahuvrihi negative compounds also, therefore, the force of the anuvritti off, which is understood up to the end of the Seventh Adhyâya (VI. 1. 1), and a fortiori in this sūtra also, should not be set aside as the above interpretation would do. Moreover the full Taddhita compounds W TF and water are read in the list of Brahmanadi words (V. 1. 124), and as such they take the #14 affix cam which would have always caused the vşiddhi of w, but for this sätra which makes it optional. 
Therefore it is a prapta-vibhasha. ___ यथातथयथापुरयोः पर्यायेण ॥३१॥ पदानि ॥ यथातथ, यथापुरयोः, पाण॥ 
वृतिः ॥ अथातय बयापुर इत्यसयोनम उत्तरको पर्यायेणाचामावरचो चिर्भवति सचिसे मिति णिति fra allt 
31. Before a Taddhita affix having an indicatory म्, ए or , the words अयथातथ and अयथापुर may have vriddhi of the first vowel of their first member, or that of the second member, in alternation. 
That is, when the Negative particle gets the vfiddhi, the words remain unchanged; and when these words are vriddhied, the negative particle remains unaltered. As wryuta 14" or "TUT24, Su n or saturgafar el The words in and more should be considered to belong, as negative compounds, to Brahmaņādi class (V. 1. 124): and take 6 11 In the stra the compounds any and urge arc exhibited and are Avyayibhavas (II. 1.7), and being ncuters, the mi of au and you are shortened. According to Patanjali tnis sätra is superfluous When the negative particle takes Vriddhi; the compound should be analysed as, 1 TOT UUTUUT, MOUTAYT 17: STOUT 
199! When the second member gets the vriddhi, the compound should be analysed as, quaUT TT-TTL, m l - BaruTĦUR ! 
ETT s ourcht: lll Be ita il :, :, 7, fer : हात्तिः सिद्धितेविति निवृत्तम् । सत्संबचं कितीत्यपि । णितीति वर्तते । इनस्तकारादेशो भवति शिणति प्रत्यये परतः पिण्णलो वयस्वा ॥ 
32. ais substituted for the ot of the root be forc an affix with an indicatory w or u, which causes also the vriddhi of the penultimate at, but the augment is not added before the Aorist-sign Fau, nor before the Personal ending oral of the Perfect. 
The anuvritti of "Taddhita' ceases, and with it that of an also which causes Vsiddhi in Taddhita only. The fort and fo do govern stili Thus पात: (with धम्), घासयति ( with णिच् ), घासका (with ण्वुल), साधुषासिन with m. grågan with all! But wu and 2017 with fore and all This sõtra je 
1422 
VRIDDIII. 
ODHI. 
[BK. VII. C.1. 111. §. 34 
reference to roots, and refers to those affixes only which come after roots (urge pray), therefore not here ani: from TNI 
a yafanuaa: 11 gol atat li ara:, 1%, feu, at: 11 वृत्तिः ॥ भाकारान्तस्थास्य चिणि कृति णिति युगागमो भवति । 
33. A root-stem ending in a receives the augment (5), before the Aorist sign fou, and before a kfit-affix with an indicatory sy or yt, which causes also the Vriddhi of the root-vowel. 
As a, Tan with porn, pra: and 7*:, 179, 77: with o and aggas il Why pay and ksit only? Observe , mi in the Perfect, and fri, manat: with a Taddhita affix (IV. 1.96). So also ATITUT 97F4 -5:11 
नोदात्तोपदेशस्य मान्तस्यानाचमेः ॥ ३४॥ पदानि ॥ न, उदात्तोपदेशस्य, मा TFT, Baran वृत्तिः ॥ शनोपरेशस्य मान्तस्यास्याचमिवर्जितस्य चिणि कातच ज्यिात यदुक्तं तन्म भवति । 
TO 11 AM tarifa 176 
34. The Vriddhi is not substituted before the Aorist fou or a krit-affix with indicatory sor y for the vowel' of that root which ends in # and is uutely accented in its original enunciation (Dhâtupåtha), but not so in after a : 
The vriddhi of the penultimate w takes place before run and fine affixes (VII. 2. 116), that vriddhi does not take place in the case of udatta roots ending in N Thus UIA, BRIA, and Asia in fruit Compare VI.4. 92, 93. Similarly with my affixes, as *i, 77, 4*, F#, *: H: # Why do we say 'acutely accented'? Observe, 4r4*, : || How do you ex plain 794 and 3967? These are irregular forms exhibited by Panini himself in the Dhatupațha mtuA (Bhu. 380), y qÀ (Bhu. 1033) Why do we use "in the original enunciation or upadeśa"? So that the rule may apply to writ पमी, समी, but not to याममः, रामकः ॥ Here to the root शम्, सम् and e is added the affix foa (III. 2. 141). The words ari &c. get the affix-accent, namely acute t; and thus the root-vowel becomes anudatta. Though the root now becomes anudatta, yet because in its upadeśa it was udatta, the present sätra will apply and prevent vriddhi. The roots un, are anudatta in upadeśa, but in ***, Uhr: they become udatta by force accent. This accent is a secondary accent and not the 'original' accent; and hence the present rule does not apply and there is vriddhi. Why do we say ending in ? Observe : 9789:11 Why with the exception of भाचम्? Observe भाचामकः॥ 
Vårt:—Prohibition must be stated in the case of the roots - and yo, as 17:, irai and 1974: In the case of 8, the affix on is added 
BK. VII. C11. 111 $. 36. ] 
TE AUGMENT. 
·1423 
in that alternative, when the root does not take the affix forge (111. 1. 31). It thus gets vriddhi. 
The word A is formed from the Churadi , which with the affix fog gets Vriddhi, because forç is not a kşit-affix, and is not therefore governed by this rule. If you say "let there be vriddhi of Forey, but this vriddhi will be shortened by VI. 4.92 because it is a fan root", we reply "this root is not fart" II The fare roots are those enumerated in Bhuâdi class, subdivision gar: (800). No doubt, there it is said that the roots ending in my are far (in war). But a root is rcg arded rame only with regard to the Causative forex affix, and not with regard to that fore of the Churådi class where the sense of the causative is not involved in it. Therefore this root is not FAR (VI. 4. 93). 
The phrases PATTSTAT : and others like it are incorrect. Why do we say for and kşit only'? Observe qu*, TA, YY11 
suf I 34 11 ura llafar, suti, all पतिः ।। अनि वधि इत्येतवोषिणि कृति च मणिति यदुक्तं तन भवति । 
35. The Vriddhi is not substituted for the vowels of ra and er before the Aorist-sign fay and the krit-affixes with an indicatory s and it 
. As para and want with from, and *: and my*: (with opty), **, qy: 11 This rulc rcfers to the separate and the distinct root ry and not to the substitute of a This we see in the line * fùa thugafrua u The form froin a will be grad Moreover the substitute fy ends with pl. e. it is of two syllables 'badha', and as such it also does not admit Vriddhi. (See 11. 4 42). The prohibition refers to fear and krit-affixes, therefore not here, as a masarafugl 
अत्तिहीब्लीरीक्नूयीमाय्यातां पुणौ ॥ ३६॥ अत्ति, ही, ब्ली, री, क्नूयी, Farft, arata, ges, o वृत्तिः ॥ सर्वे निवृत्तमङ्गस्येति वर्तते । मति ही प्ली री कमयी स्मायी इत्येतेषामामामाकारान्तानां च पुगागमो भवति णी परतः। 
36. The augment ge () is added to the roots , ही, प्ली, री, मनुस् , माय, and to a root ending in long आ, when the affix for (the Causative) follows. 
As start, qara, gara, imara, ATTAra, rara Il The anuvšitti of every word other than " (VI. 4. 1.) ceases. The soft and me drops by VI. 1, 66. The guņa takes place by VII. 3. 86. Or the roots ending in long ar, we have mur, gura 11 The root (Bhu. 983) fruti, and are (Juhotyadi 16) TAI are both meant hcrc. Similarly & includes AF #TÔ (Di Aadi 30), and i aigür: (Kryadi 30). The auginent is added at the end of 
1324 
शुक AUGAI ENT. 
[ BK. VII Cl. III. S. 38 
the preceding stem of root, and not to the asfix. Being added to the root it becomes part of the root-stem, and in forming the reduplicate Aorist of such stems, the vowel before प् is shortened by VII. 4. I. If were not the part of the stem, that vowel would not be shortened. Thus from runt; we have Aorist अदीदपत् ।। 
शाच्छासाह्वाव्यावेपां युक् ॥ ३७॥ पदानि ॥ शा, छा, सा, हा, व्या, वे पाम, युक॥ 
वृतिः ॥ सा छा सादा ध्या वे पा इत्येतेषामङ्गानां युगागमो भवति जी परतः ।। पार्तिकम् ।। लुगागमस्तु तस्य वक्तव्यः॥ पा०॥ धुश मीभोवतव्यः ॥ 
37. The augmentयक (य)is added tothe verbalstems शा, छा, सा, हा, वे and पा before the affix vण (Causative). 
As निशाययति, भवच्छाययति, भवसाययति, हाययति, संव्याययति, वाययति, and पाययति। The word or includes the root at 'to drink'. (Bhu 972) 'to dry' (Bhu 968). but not ar 'to protect' (Ad. 47): because the latter looses the aq vikaraṇa. 
Vart:--The root पा to protect' takes the augment लुक before णि, as पालयति ।। 
Vart:-The roots go and fry take the augment before for, as धनयति, भीणयति ॥ 
__All these augments are added to the roots, in order that VII. 4. I. should cause the shortening of the vowel preceding these. Thus the Aorist of the above are: मशीशयत्, भपीपल, अधुनत, भपीपिणत् ॥ 
The roots T, ST, ET, FT, su and q are exhibited as ending in long AT their Dhatupatha forms are , शो, छो, से, सो, है, ध्ये and ॥ This indicates that these roots would have taken yon by the last sätra, the word om 'ending in long a' means the roots which actually end in long -7, as well as those which get long af by VI. 1. 45. This also indicates, that in this subdivision or sec tion, the maxim of lakshana protipadokta &c does not apply. Therefore when the roots e with माप, and assume the form भधि-मा and जा before the affix णि by VI. I. 48, the augment पुक् is added to them, thus अध्यापयति, जापयति । 
वो विधूनने जुक् ॥ ३८॥ पदानि ॥ वः, विधूनने, जुक् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ वा इत्येतस्य विधूनन वनमानस्थ जुगागमो भवति णी परतः। 
38. वा gets the augment जुन (ज) before the affix for when the Causative has the sense of 'shaking'. 
As पक्षणोपवाजयति ॥ But मा वापयति केशान् when the sense is not that of shaking. This form could have been obtained from the root Tu 'to move", (Bhu 271) with the affix for in the ordinary way without any augment. The special augment y to indicates that this root will not take parte, which it would have otherwise done by the last satra. The root it belongs to Bhu. 969(मोर शोषण)। BK. VII. CH. III. S. 421 
SUBSTITUTE. 
. 
1425 
लीलार्नुग्लुकावन्यतस्यां स्मेहविपातने ॥ ३९ ॥ पदानि ॥ ली, लोः, नुन्, लुफी, अन्यतरस्याम, स्नेह विपातने ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ ली लो इस्येनयोरङ्गयोरम्थतरस्यां नुक लुक इत्येतावागमौ भवतो गी परतः सोहविपातनथे । । 
39. The roots लो and ला get optionally नुक् and एक augment respectively, before the affix for, when the causative means 'the melting of a fatty substance'. 
As विलीनयति, विलालयति, विलाययत्ति, or विलापयति घृतम् ॥ The augment मुक् is added to oft when the root ends in long f, and that also optionally. When the augment is not added, the regular causative mara is formed. But wlien it gets the form by VI. I. 51, it does not take the augment III The root 
includes both it and of Kryadi and Divadi The root my includes a 'to give' (adadi 49), and ला the form assumed by ली under VI. 1.51. When लुक is not added to ला, पुक is added by VII. 3. 36. Why do we say when meaning to melt fat'? Observe only लाई विलापयति, जटाभिरालापयते (I. 3.70). 
मियो हेतुभये षु ॥४०॥ पदानि ॥ भियः, हेतुमये, एक ॥ . वृत्तिः ॥ भी इत्येतस्य हेतुभयऽर्थे षुगागमो भवति णी परतः ॥ 
40. The augment yg is added to the root it before the affix for, when fear is caused immediately owing to the agent of the Causative. 
• As पुण्य भीषयते, जटिलो भीषयते ।। See I. 3.68. Herealso भी with longf beine cmployed in the sotia, indicates that.gen is added then only, when theroot has the form भी, but when it assumes the form भा by VI. I. 56, the proper augment पुक will come: as मुण्डो भापयते ॥ Why do we say when the agent of the causative.is himself the direct cause of fear'? Observe कुञ्चिकयैनं भाययति, for here कञ्चिका causes fear and not the agent of the verb. Theof is vriddhied and mu subs tituted. 
स्फायो वाः॥४२॥ पदानि ॥ स्फायः, षः। पतिः ॥स्कार इत्येतस्याङ्गस्य पकारादेशो भवति जो परतः ॥ 
41. For the final of the stem titor is substituted a in the causative. 
___As स्फापयति ॥ 
शदेरगतौ तः॥४२॥ पदानि ॥ शदेः, अ गतौ तः॥ इत्तिः ॥ पद रजस्थागतावर्षे वर्तमानस्थ सकारादेशो भवति जो परतः ॥ 
42. For the final of the शदू is substituted तू, in the Causative, when it does not mean 'to drive'. 
As पुष्पाणि पातयत्ति, फलानि शातयति, but गाः शाश्यति गोपालकः ॥ 
1426 
r SUBSTITUTION. 
[ BK. VII. Cl. III.S. 44 
रुहः पोन्यतरस्याम् ॥४३॥ पदानि ॥ रुहः, पः, अन्यतरस्याम् ॥ पतिः ॥ हरजस्थान्यतरस्यां पकारादेवो भवति णी परतः ।। 
43 q may optionally be substituted for the final of are in the Causative. 
As बीहीन रोपयात or राहयति ॥ According to Padamanjari this sotra could be dispensed with. The form irqah could be obtained from the root fe of Divâdi class : which though meaning Apat may be taken to mean 'grow' also; भनेकार्थवादू पाठूनाम् ॥ 
प्रत्ययस्थात्कात्पूर्वस्यांत इदाप्यसुपः ॥४४॥ पदानि ॥ प्रत्ययस्यात, कात्, पूर्वस्य, अतः, इत, आपि, असुपः ॥ 
निः॥ प्रत्येव तिष्ठतीति प्रत्ययस्थः तस्मात् प्रत्यवस्थाककारात् पूर्वस्थाकारस्थ इकाराणो भवति मापि परतः, सचदाप्सुपः परो न भवति ।। 
पातिकम् ॥ मामकनरकयोरुपसंख्यानं कर्तव्यममत्यस्थत्वात् ।। पार्मिकम् ॥ प्रत्ययनिषधे त्यक्त्यपाधोपसंख्वानम्॥ 
44. ris substituted for the x which stands before the s belonging to an affix, when the Feminine-ending मा follows, provided that, it does not come after a case-affix (i.e. when such a word in ** does not stund at the end of a Bahuvrihi). . That which stands in an affix is called प्रत्ययस्थ, i.e. must be the part of the affix. The भक् is changed intor in the feminine in मा ॥ As अदि. लिका, मुडिका, एणिका, पलिका, कारिका, झारिका | So also एतिका from एतद् +मक +भाए एतक+भा॥ The ris then replaced by में (VII. 2. 102). The must belong to the affix, therefore, not in शंका from शक कीति ॥ The स्थ in प्रत्ययस्थ is for the sake of distinctness, there is no affix which is only a u The rule applies to , therefore. not toनन्दमा, रमणा ।। Theris substituted for the w which precedes (परस्थ) n. and not the w which follows , as पदुका, दुका | The must be preceded by short w, therefore, not here मोका, नोका, nor in राका, धाका ॥ The substitution takes place when मा follows, therefore, not in कारकी ॥ The word मापि qualifies क॥ The t should be followed by भा॥ Obj. But in कारिका from कारक+भा,क is not directly followed by मा, but by भ? Ans. When भ+भा=मा there is ekadesa, the mis followed by oT, there being no third letter intervening then. Obi. But an ekadeśa is sthanivat to what it replaces when a purva-vidhi is to be applied, therefore there still exists the intervention. Ans. The express text of this sutra vill remove the intervention. Obj. Then t should be subs tituted in रथकव्या and गंगकाम्या ॥ These words are formed by the affixes कम्पन and काम्य, as स्थानां समूहः, (IV. 2. 51) and गर्गमिच्छनि भाममः (III. I. 9) पथका and all Here also before the age of the affix, they should be replaced 
BK. VII. C11. III. §. 45 ) 
Por FEMININE. 
1427 
by (, when the feminine affix is added: for there is no intervention between 
and (the intermediate letters being non-existent, as you say). Ans. We say that intervention is no intervention, when it consists of only one letter, which even does not actually exist, but only through the fiction of sthanivat. Therefore, the feminine of the above words will not take as is not followed iminediately (in the sense above expressed) by 10, as that and 
TAIT, because in these actually many letters are heard as intervening between the s and भाप् ॥ 
Why do we say wig: 'provided that the feminine affix mig does not come after a case-affix? Observe Tex: tarsi FTT HYTTYi-tofn T HYTTI Here are comes after the noun Tin which ends in a case-affix, and hence the of His not changed to " The case-affix is elided by II. 4. 71, and it still exerts its influence by I. 1. 62. The word wat is a thagam (a simplc prohibition of the particular matter specified without mentioning what is different froin it): and not a gara: or exception. Had it been a Paryudása, (grisa: *:) then my coming after a full word not having a case-affix, would have caused the substitution in the last example. Nor should 99: be explained as that in which there exists no case-affix. Had it been so, then in बहूनि धर्माण्यस्यां-बहुचर्मिका not ought to be added. 
Vart: #777 and the should be enumerated, for the age of these is not part of the affix: as Anant, after 11 Here is substituted for ## before the affix my (IV. 3. 3), to which is then added ag The word takes long of in the feminine only when it is a Name or in the Vedas (IV. 1. 30): therefore though Arar ends in ma, it does not take frg (IV. 1. 15) but 29 (IV. i. 4), 
tra araf formed with the affix *(* 111. 2. 3). 
Vårt:-The rule applies to the words ending in € (IV. 2. 98) and 79, (IV. 2. 104) in spite of the prohibition in VII. 3. 46. As of T, TEMATII 
The word in the satra is FTTT the fifth case of an ending in it I1 tlien this be the condition, that the affix inust end in ka and not in k , then the rule will not apply to plant !! Because here the augment is $9 ( ) with *; the final w in # is for euphony only, and not a portion of the affix, as we find in froutin, frufani, For The word *therefore, is construed to mcan ending in the consonant it 
HOTEÌ: 11 84' E 11 A, TI, Fut: If वृत्तिः ॥वा सा इत्येतयोरिकारांशो न भवति ॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ यंत्तरी प्रतिषेधे त्यकन उपसंख्यानम् ॥ वा० ॥ पावकादीनां छन्नस्युपसंण्यानम् ।। 
To li ma nema 11 0 11 Ting TTĖTT 11 
o fartai IrTFCT! Toll RFT farma 
! *Toll to ap=#7 ITT !! pro li Hat Ta Tengahan po il rear foar II 1911 TARIF MISTEVA II 
1428 
5.0F FEMININE. 
(RK. VII. C1. 111. $. 46 
... 45. Ther is not substituted for the अ of य and स, with the augment 5, when the feminine s follows. 
____ As यका. सका ॥ The या and सा simply stand for बदू and a, and the prohibition is not confined to the nominative case only, as the forms of and et may lead one to think. न यत् सरोः would have been a better satra. The prohi bition applies in every case, as बकामधीते. सका पचामहे ॥ Or यकायकामधीमहे (i.e. चां गाथांब), and तक तकाम्पचामहे (i. e. औषधी शाकिनी वा) 
Virt:-The aflix ज्यान (V. 3.34) should beenumerated also along with यत् and सद| As उपत्यका, भधित्यका ।। 
Vårt: - The feminine of quam &c in the Veda does not take for it As हिरण्यवर्णः शुचयः पावकाः, यासु म लामकाः, कक्षकाः &c. But पार्विकाः, भलामिका: in secular litcrature. 
Vart:-So also in the affix वुन् used in benediction: as जीवताद जीवका, मन्दता नन्दका, भवताद् भवका || See III. I. 150 
____Vart:~-So also when the second member is elided in a compound: as देवका, यज्ञका, the second member दत्त is elided, the fuller forms being देवदामिका, यज्ञत्तिका (अनजाश च विभाषा लोपो वमव्यः) See V. 3.83 Vart. 
Vart:-क्षिपक &c should be enumerated in this prohibition : as क्षिपका, 
• ध्रुवका, धुवका, चटका।। : . Vart:---तारका is formed when it means 'stars', bat तारिका'a maid-servant' 
from सारयति । 
Vart:-वर्णका is formed when it means 'a mantle or mask', but वर्णिका'an expounder': as वर्णिका भागुरी लोकायते 'Bhaguri is a commentary of Lokayata' 
. .. Virt:-वर्तका 'a bird' according to the Eastern grammarians, but वर्तिका according to the Northern authorities. Why do we say 'when meaning a bird? 'Observe वर्तिका भाएरी लोकायतस्य ।। 
Vart:-मटका when meaning a पितृदेवत्व ceremony, but मटिका खारी ॥ The ceremony related to Pitridevata is called Pitridaivatya, the affix is an in The former is derived from the root भy with the affix तकन् (भइनान्त प्राणा भावनमस्थां), the other is derived from the numeral भट by the affix कन् (V. I. 22). 
: Vart:-Optionally सूतका, पुषका and वृन्दारका, the other forms are:तिका, पुषिका, and वृन्दारिका ।। 
उदीचाम.तः स्थाने यकपूर्वायाः ॥ ४६॥ पदानि ॥ उदीचाम, आतः, स्थाने, यक, पूर्वायाः, ॥ 
वृत्तिः । उनीचागाचार्याणां मतेन यकारपूर्वावाः ककारपूर्वायाबातः स्याने योऽकारस्तस्वातः स्याने इकारा. देशो भवति । 
वार्मिकम् ।। चकत्वे धावन्सप्रतिषेधः ॥ . 
46. According to the opinion of Northern gram marians, r is not substituted for that * which is obtained by 
BK. VII. CH. III. §. 47 ] 
THE FEMININES 
1429 
shortening the long at of the feminine (under rule VII. 4. 13 before the affix *), which is preceded by a cor a lll 
The mention of 'northern grammarians' makes this an optional rule. As part or ran, fant or fin, y or **, ***, farm Why do we say preceded by yor ? Observe 
w 
t only (from 'n The word yarar: is exhibited in the feminine, in order to indicate that the rule applies when the feminine affix o is shortened to #1 Therefore not here शुभयिका from शुभया (राभवाति). So also मयिका from भद्रया, where मा is part of the root a (see III. 2. 74). 
Vårt :-Prohibition must be stated of the pand being finals of a root. When the o or x preceding this *, is the final of the root, the prohibition contained in the satra, does not apply: as garut, guram, GMT, and still 
Why do we say 'of long AI? Observe hi ha i n The word sy is formed from my by the affix 03 ( 
) | Then is added the affix (IV. 2. 121). Here there is no shortening of a long w, and hence no option is allowed. But in gta47 or in the long s has been shortened. Because this word is thus derived: * Pa (Postirara: V. I. 66). To this is added, and the long or is shortened. 
Why is the word for used in the sotra, when by the general rule or fait ür: this word would be understood here? The special mention is for the sakc of pointing out that the of which takes the place of or is intended here: i. e, the replaces this short *r; but had the word for not been used in the sOtra the { would have replaced the long 9 11 
THETETRI 799 FTATO II 840 ll eta II PENT, CUT, IT, PT, OT, FAT, 75, aiuth, anal 
पतिः । उनीधामात स्थान इति वर्तते ॥ मातः स्थाने योकारस्तस्य स्वं न भवति उरीयामाचार्याणांमसेन । 
47. According to the opinion of Northern gram marians, < is not substituted for that a which is obtained by shortening the st (before * by VII. 4. 13), of Hat, qat, **T, DT, AT (VII. 2. 102), and FIT; even not then when the negative particle precedes them. . As went or RT, RT or a, pent or fra, horn, It or farat, R T or fin, or free, FinT or fernt, hit or FCT 1 Of get and there are no examples with the negative particle. For is the com. pounding with takes place after the addition of the , or on the con trary, if first to be added and then the compounding takes place, in both alternatives, the case-affixes must be added in order to substitute for the final by VII. 2. 102: and it is only whcu this H is substituted that the sco 
1430 
The FEMININE X 
{BK. VII. Ch. III. §. 49 
minine zng can come. So that the case-affix is the principal ingredient, and 
ere comes after yg, and therefore by the prohibition of neg: in VII. 3. 44. there can arise no occasion for the substitution of Til Therefore open and 
are the invariable forms of these words with the negative particle. meaning agnates and property, takes the negative particle. Var is a word which has no corresponding masculine form, and as such, by the following rule VII. 3. 48 it would not have taken t; its special mention here indicates that it should be the secondary member of the compound here: as fantai 
FAT T , the Diminutive of which is w hy or RT II Here first the He is shortened as it is a secondary member (upasarjana), then when the Bahuvrihi is made, the feminine affix erg is added to this wing word, then this 4 is shortened before * by VII. 4. 13. This short' (VII.4. 13) does not come in the room of the m which is ordained to come after a word having 110 corresponding masculine. 
The force of oft shows that the rule applies, when words other than 7 also precede, and even when no words precede. As fortion or for, 164 fernt or roll 
". Note: The form is from the word ufati, dual number, the final is changed to m (Ryan), then the feminine PTT (ETC) is added (r), and then it is substituted for pri 
surfagfre 11 801l gentã Il , Hidayet, , il वृत्तिः ॥ भभाषितपुस्काविहितस्यातः स्याने योकारस्तस्योतीचामाचार्याणांमतेन हकारादेशो न भवति ॥ 
48. According to the opinion of Northern Gram marians, r is not substituted for an a obtained from the shor tening.of the Feminine art (VII. 4. 13), when to the feminine in long st there is no equivalent masculine, even when the Negative particle precedes. 
As ugnt or urgat, warga or pagat, achegar or 99CPCPT N When before the affix me, the stem is shortened in a Baluvrihi, this rule will apply (VU. 4. 15). There also, the must be substituted for the HT of a feminine word which has no corresponding masculine. But this rule does not apply when the negative compound is the synthesis of maghrat UEFAT Megt, 
ET BEHUISAT I Similarly ART agra - Hagi, MT MUST Áfragt . . 
Note: The word war is always feminine and has no corresponding mascnline. आदाचार्याणाम् ||४६ ॥ आत, आचार्याणाम् ॥ i ll Torajhagrati fura AS Trear 
T yranitar sa ! 
BK. VII. CH. 111. 8.51] 
.. 
.. 
1431 
Note. 
49. According to the opinion of other Teachers, at is substituted for the which arose from the shortening of the feminine at of a word which has no corresponding mas culine form. 
As T, Sagrant or 94@gifill : 
Note: The "Teachers" referred to here are eithor those other than the Northern Giammarians, or it may refer to the Teacher of Pånini, the plural being for the sake of respect. Thus there are three forms भखड्का ,भखाहिका, and मखडाका ॥ 
J : 11 Yol qira I FU,:11 वृत्तिः ॥ भङ्गस्य निमित्तं यष्ठः, कमाङ्गस्थ निमिन, प्रत्यय, स्तस्य प्रत्ययस्य क इत्ययमादेशो भवति ॥ 
50. For g in the beginning of a Taddhita affix there is substituted all 
As 
m i, am (* IV.4.1), ATHIO*: (XIV.4.52). In the affix es 5, 9 &c, if the affix is the consonantg, and ar is only for euphony, the here also the m is for pronunciation only: but if on the contrary, the aggregate 
(+57) is the affix, then the same is the case here. This rule does not apply in Unadi affixes always, as 09 Tipos: (Uņ l. 103), for there is diversity () in the Uņadi. 
Atfufa: (-rur power IV. 4. 51) is thus formed afura +-for+ (VI: 4. 148 them is dropped). Now arises the doubt, should be replaced by was tauglit in the next aphorism VII. 3. 51, as it comes after a li This substitution, however, does not take place, because it was which caused the clision of w, and now which becaine final by such elision cannot cause the destruction of rm its producer (सनिपासलक्षणो विधिरनामित सहिषासस्म). Or the elided *(VI. 4. 148) may be considered as sthanivat, and would thus prevent * substitution. 
There are two views about this il Some say that the consonant only is the sthånî, and the p is only for the sake of pronunciation. The others hold that o, the consonant and the vowel are sthani in the aggregate. In the first view, the rule would apply to the consonant at the end of roots like ga in पठिता, पटितं; in the other view the rule would apply to the affix मा in कर्मः । Hence, the commentary uses the word, that s must be the cause of 971 
Tuuntare: 11 4811 Tara I FA, JH, 54, , Brata, , 11 वृत्तिः ।इस उस इत्येवमन्सानामुगन्तानां सान्तानां चाहानामुतरस्य ठस्य क इत्ययमादेशो भवति ॥ arfalle zein I 
• 51. is substituted for y after a stem endiiz in te JE, 3 or F, and all 
As mitai, Tapi, ayon; 99777**i, ****ST:; 1994, ; ori fara 
1432. 
GUTTURALISATION 
[BK. VII. C11. III. $ 53 
नकः, पाक्रनक, याकरकः॥ There and Tv are the affixes of that name, therefore not here, माशिपिकः (= भाशिषा पति), भीषिका (= उपा परात)। 
varts-So also after दोम, as वोकः (शेभ्यो चरात)। 
The word and is formed by w of arra gog, (IV. 4. 51) and a is. changed to r by :(VIII. 3. 39). भानुक: is by उकof पहरणं ॥ याशुष्क is by एक् of दीव्यात नेपारकर्षक&c by rofभवादावर्षे मोशे उम्। मातृका by g of तत भागता, पंतरम ॥ भोवाचनका by डन (IV. 2. 19) धाकृल्कः by उप of संसृष्टे (IV. 4. 12). 
घजोः कुपिण्ण्यतोः॥५२॥ पदानि ॥ चजोः, कु, धित्, ण्यतोः, ॥ पतिः ॥ चकारमकारयोः कवर्गास्यो भवति षिति यति प प्रत्यये परतः ॥ 
62. For the final u or ज of a root, there is subs tituted a corresponding guttural, betore an affix having an indicutory घ, and before ण्यत् ॥ 
As पाक, भ्यागः, रागः with घन, and चाक्यम्, पाक्यम् and रेक्यम् with ण्यत् ।। Compare VII. 3. 59. .. व्यङ्कादीनां च ॥ ५३॥ पदानि ॥ न्यथै, मादीनाम, च, ॥ . 
पत्तिः ॥ ग्यइकु इत्येवमारीनां कवर्गादेशो भवति । 
53. The guttarul is substituted in न्यङकुand the rest. Thus 47$: from a +*5€+a; So also hry: 11 
(1) By the sotra ime: (Uņ I. 17), the affix is added to the root मग्न preceded by नि ॥ (2) मदूर is formed by adding to the root मज (Un I. 7) (3) TT:, is formed by the affix r added to the root Wix, the x is elided, and tis vocalised (Un I. 28). (4 and 5) रेषाका, फलेपाकः formed by the म affix of पचादि class, (-दूरे पच्यंत हायमेव, फले पच्यते सबमेव ॥ The vriddhi is by nipatana. The seventh case-affix is not elided in these compound words by VI. 3. 14. (6) सणेपाकः ॥ This word is read by sorne. Others read these as रेपाका, फलेपाका with an A third reading is रेपाकुः फलेपाकु, by the affix x added irregularly. ( and 8) and I These are formed from the roots sy and or with the affix 'Uņ 11. 13). (9) sfF: formed from safara with guna 2 11 (10) भनुपरः ॥ (II) भवसर्गः ॥ (13) उपसर्गः ॥ (13) मषः ॥ (14) श्वपाकः ॥ (15) मांसपाकः ।। (16) कपांसपाका ।। (17) उलूकपाकः ॥ (18। पिण्डपाका formed by the affix भण् with an accusative word in construction as upapada. (19) apr: when it denotes a name meaning 'price'. This is formed from the root with the asfix g1 When it is not a name, the form is भईः ॥ (20 and 21) भाषा and निराधा, when they are names meaning "Summer or Hot season". These are formed from the root preceded by me and fit it But when they are not names, the forms are मंगवाह, निदाहः ॥ (22) न्यग्रोध: formed from the root रुह preceded by म्बर and by adding the qचादि अन्॥ Thesis changed toध ॥ (23) वीरुत् ॥ Formed from बह with fe and the affix विपए, and changed toध ॥ म्ययोहयति and विरोहयति॥ 
.. पिकमह, भूरा, 4 दुरेपाक, 5 फलेपाक,6सणेपाक, दूरेपाका, फलपाका, 9 रेषा, 10 फलेपाका तक, 12 बक, 13 व्यतिपत्र, 14 भनुषा, 15 मवसर्ग, 16 उपसर्ग, 17 वपाक, 18 मांसपाक, 19 लपाक, 20 कपीसपाक, 21 लवापाका, 22 संज्ञायां मेपनिवापावापाः मेष 23 न्यबोध, वीर। 
BK. VII. CH. 111. 54561 
GUTTURALISATION. 
1433 
ordufsteg i 48 infat i , =:, fiora, ng, वृत्तिः ॥ हन्तहंकारस्थ करगांधी भवनि मिति णितिं प्रत्यय परतो मकारे । 
54. A guttural is substituted for the x in ret before an affix having an indicatory st. or ot and before til 
As teard with forty, aff*: with other, anya rama with a friera with जमुन्न, पातः with धन, प्रन्ति, अन्तुम, and भान् before | Why do we specifyr? Otherwise the substitute would replace the final letter. Why or map Obserye OTT:, EITH: 11 and qualify the affixes, and means the 4 of 4 which be. comes joined with { when the intermediate mis dropped. This comes in immediate contact with because it is heard in pronouncing, and in writing. If the eliced be consid red as sthanivat, then can never le followed by a for there will exist the intervention of this latent w, but by virtue of the special text of this sötra, such an elided st should not be considered as an intervention. And if you and 7 be all considered as qualifying the form, still on the maximन माव्यवधानं तम व्यवहितेऽपि पचनमागाण्यात् thereforen or rare considered to come after though a portion of the root intervenes. But not so here. हननमिच्छति हननीयति, add ण्वुल to this Denominative root, and we have हननायकः।। .. ure || 44 11 ha 11 PIETI,,N 
FF: 1 *UTETEATRO PATRIKA T OT I 
55. A Guttural is substituted for the gin after ..a reduplication also.. 
As जियांसति, अधन्यते, महं अधान ॥ The rule applies when such an afix follows which causes the reduplication of the stem (anga) m, therefore not herealfagitusfo=faatfagra ! 
staf 14€ II eta I :, , fed वृत्तिः ॥ हिनातेईकारस्याभ्यासादुनरस्थ कवर्गादेवो भवति भचाहि ॥ 
66. A guttural is substituted for the of it (rifaafter a reduplication, but not in the Reduplicated Aorist. 
As जिघीपति,म जेघीयते, प्रणिधाय; but प्रामीहय दूतम् in the simple Aorist. Obj. The word of could be dispensed with from the sätra, in as much as or can never come after the simple root fo, but after the causative. of fo, and the causative stem of fo is a different verb than, fr. Ans. The fact of this word 
of being employed in the satra indicates the existence of the following maxim: प्रकति मजण्यधिकस्यापि महणम् " A radical denotes whenever it is employed in Grammar, not only that radical itself, but it denotes also whatever stem may result from the addition to it of the causative affix for " Therefore we have সবিধা ববি। 
1434 
GUTTURALISATION 
BK. VIL. CI. III. S. 6 
The word strant is the Aorist of the causative of it. with TT, the elision of ra, the shortening of the penultimate the redupplication, guttural change by कहाश्चु, and lengthening by दीर्घोलघोः ॥ 
सन्लिटोर्जेः ॥ ५७॥ पदानि ॥ सन्, लिटोः, जेः, ॥ बत्तिः ॥ सनि लिटिच प्रत्यय जरङ्गस्य योभ्यासस्सस्मादुनरस्य कवर्गादेशो भवति ॥ 
57. A guttural is substituted for the F in for after a reduplication before the Desiderative affix it, and in the 
Perfect. 
AS जिगीपति, जिगाय ॥ Why in the Desiderative and Perfect only? Observe systego Though the root 41 also assumes the form for by voca lication (VI. I. 16, 17) yet that मि is not to be taken here. That will form विश्यतु, मिन्युः॥ 
विभाषा चेः॥५॥ पदानि ॥ विभाषा, चेः ॥ वृत्तिः॥चिनोरङ्गस्य सन्लिटोरभ्यासादुत्तरस्थ विभाषा कवर्गादेशो भवति । 
58. A guttural is optionally substituted for the of fe after a reduplication in the Desiderative and Perfect. 
As prentarar or fortama, prur or frata u But furtant in other cases. .. न कादेः॥५६॥ पदानि ॥ न, कु, आदेः॥ वृतिः ॥ कवर्गाव तोमजोः कवरेणो न भवति । 
59. A guttural is not substituted for the finalen of a root which begins with a guttural, before an affix hav ing an indicatory घ and before ण्यत । 
As कूमा, खर्चः and गर्ज: with घम् ; कुज्या, खWः and गज्य: with ग्यत् ॥ This is an exception to VII. 3. 52. - अजिव्रज्योध॥१०॥ पदानि ॥ अजि, प्रज्यो, च॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥भभिवधि इत्येतयोग कार्यादेशो न भवति । 
60. A guttural is not substituted for the final or 5 of ws and ay before an affix having an indicatory s and . before ण्यत् ॥ 
This is an exception to VII. 3. 52. Thus समाजा, उपाजः, परिवानः and परिवाश्चम् ॥ There is no example of भ with the affix ण्यत्, because by II.4. 56, वी replaces मम् before all ardhadhatuka affixes except घम् and भए ॥ The 
of the sotra implies that the rule applies to other roots also not mentioned, as वामः, वाग्यम् from वज॥ 
भुजन्युवजी पाण्युपतापयोः॥११॥ पदानि ॥ भुज, न्युवजी, पाणि, उपतापयोः,॥ वृत्तिः॥ भुभन्युज इत्येतो ही निपात्येते वधासंख्या पाणावुपतापेथ ॥ BK. VII. CH. 111. S. 641 
GUTTURALISATION 
1435 
61. भुज 'an arm', and न्यु ज 'a kind of bodily disease', are irregularly formed, without any change of their ज before घश्॥ 
The word भुजः- मुख्यतेऽनेन, with uk (III. 3. 121). The irregularity con sists in the absence of Guna, as well as of gutturalisation. what atasien -म्युग्म from the root उसमय (Tudadi 20). The irregularity consists in the non-changing of * When not meaning an arm' and 'a disease', we have भोगः, समुद्गः ॥ 
प्रयाजानुयाजी यशाङ्गे ॥१२॥ पदानि ॥ प्रयाज, अनुयाजी, यक्ष, भने। वृत्तिः॥ कुत्वप्रतिषेधोनुवतते । प्रयाज मनुयाज इत्येतो निपात्यते यहाभिधेये ॥ पूर्वस्य बर्षभि कुल्लाभावो निपात्यते ॥ 
62. प्रयाज and अनुयाज are irregularly formed with घ, when meaning a portion of a sacrificial offering. 
These words are derived from us with 7 without the guttural subs titution; as पञ्च प्रयाजाः, योनुयाजा, स्वमग्ने प्रयाशाना पथात् स्वं पुरुस्तात् ।। But प्रयागः and mult: when not referring to portions of a sacrifice. The fans and muru are illustrative only. The guttural change does not take place with other prepositions &c. also, as उपयाजः, पशुयोमा, संयाजा, तुयाल, as in the sen tences एकादशोपयाजाः, उपांशु याजमन्तरा यमति, भटो पनी संयामा भवन्ति, तुयाजेपरन्ति । 
पञ्चेती ॥ ६॥ पदानि ॥ वञ्चेः, गती, ॥ बत्तिः ॥ पम्पेरणस्य गती वर्तमानस्य कवर्गादेखो न भवति । 
63. A guttural is not substituted for the palatal of पञ्च in the sense of going'. 
A मध्य पञ्चन्ति वणिजा, but वाक्य काई कुटिलं ॥ Why is गतो used, when we kn« w from the Dhatupatha (Bhuadi 204) that means 'to go? The speci fication shows that the roots possess many meanings other than those assigned to them in the Dhatupatha. . 
भोक उचः के ॥ १४॥ पदानि ॥ भोकः, उचः, के,॥ त्तिः ॥ उर्दातो के प्रत्यय भोकरति निपात्यते ॥ 
64, ओक is irregularly formed from the root उन with the affix क (अ)॥ 
The change of g into it, and the Guņa are the irregularities As tim? 'a bird, a tree'. The affix क is added. under III. I. I35. Thes is added with the force of up the Karaka relation being that of Location &c. The qw affix would have given the form regularly, but then the word would have been acutely accented on the first syllable, but it is desired that the acute should be on the last. The words शियोकसः, अलोकसः &c are also irregular, 
1436 
GUTTURALISATION 
(BK. VII. CH. III. S. 69 
formed with the Ugadi affix on the being substituted for all as an Ugadi diversity (bahulam). 
प्यावश्यके॥५॥ पदानि । यः, मावश्यके, ॥ पतिः ॥भावश्यकऽर्थे यो ग्यमत्यवस्तमिम् परभूते पन कुल न भवति । 
65. A guttural is not substituted for the palatal, before the affix , when it means to do as absolute neces sity'. 
___As भवस्य पाच्यम, अवश्य पाध्यम, मषक्योच्चम, but पाम्ब, पाक्दै and ऐ when the sense is not that of necessity. 
यजयाचरुचप्रवचर्चध ॥१९॥ पदानि ॥ यज, याच, च, प्रवच, चा,च,॥ पतिः ॥ यत्र वापरुष प्रवचमा हत्येतेषां वे परता कपषी न भवति। पार्मिकम् ॥ ग्यति प्रतिषेधे यरूपसंख्यामम् ।। 
66. A guttural is not substituted for the final palatals of यज, याच, रुच, प्र-प, And before the affix ण्यत् ।। 
___As वाग्यम, बाथम, रोच्या प्रवाध्यम, and भर्यम् ॥ Though G has a penultimate and therefore by III. 1. I10 would have taken 79, it takes wat by force of this satra. 47 shows that the present sūtra applies to it, though it means 'a word or speech', and the prohibition or VII. 3. 67 does not apply. 914 is the name of a particular book. Others say that the prohibition applies to only when it is preceded by y, and does not mean word or speech (VII. 3.67) and not when it is preceded by any other preposition. As मविवाक्क werdet qofs it This even in a very restricted sense, namely on the tenth day of the Dasaratra ceremony. In other places we haveमविवाच्य ॥ 
Vårt :- should he enumerated in this connection i. c. before oan, the remains unaltered, as 1922 11 
बचोऽशब्दसंशायाम् ॥७॥ पदानि । वचः, म, शब्द, संहायाम्। पतिः ॥ण्याति वर्तते वापदसंज्ञायां यति परतः कवर्गों न भवति ।। 
67. The guttural is not substituted for the final of a before ea, when it does not mean a word or speech', 
As वाच्यमाह, भवाच्यमाह, but मवधुपितं नाक्यमाह॥ प्रयोज्यनियोज्यौ शक्याथें ॥ ६८॥ पदानि ॥ प्रयोज्य, नियोज्यो, शक्य, भय,। त्तिः ॥ प्रपूर्वस्व निपूर्वस्य च युजः प्रयोज्य नियोध्यरत्येतो तो शक्याथै निपात्यते ।। - . 68. rutry and frestru preserve their palatal in the sense of 'capable to do this'. 
____As प्रयोज्या-प्रयोशाक्यः नियोग्यः-नियोक्या , but प्रयोग्य and नियोग्य in other senses. 
भोम्यं भस्ये ॥ १९॥ पदानि ॥ भोज्यम, भक्ये,॥ . पतिः ॥ भोग्नं निपात्यते भाभिषये ॥ भग्मति कुताभाषी निपात्यत प्रयायें । 
BK. VII. CH. III 5.7%. ) 
E AFFIX. 
1437. 
69. He preserves its palatal in the sense of . eatable'. 
The word is derived from with an in the sense of able'. As 17 : 'eatable rice', 189 419 eatable barley-gruel'. per here means anything which is fit for being caten. When not having this sense, we have भोग्यः कम्बलः । 
weint of TI VON a 11 siti, atq:, fa, 97, II निः॥संज्ञकानां ले परतो पालोपो भवति॥ 
. 70. The final of T and a (g roots) may op tionally be elided in the Subjunctive () 
As NEUT TU Rig I. 35.8. TT TTC at Rig X. 85. 41. But also iftara IPT II The form it, however, may also be deduced even when the final of t is elided, for then by the ar augment (II1.4.94) we get this form. The word is therefore employed in the satra only for the sake of distinctness, for the sätra without y would have also given the above forms, as we have shown. Or the T is used to remove the doubt which one may entertain to this effect "at is the form which may be deduced by the general rule, since it is taught, this form will be excluded altogether and will never appear". 
The form is thus evolved. We add for to the root yt; then ther of fat is elided (III. 4. 97). M -amar Tafaqurt 11 Others say, the pit is the form of the root with the ug affix. For is from the root Ty! 
Some say that an is jnapaka and indicates the existence of the follow ing maxim :- PAITAUITE "the rule about augments is anitya". So that the augment are being anitya, we could not have got the form MT Hence the employment of the word ! 
mia: fa un renta il ma, rafa, il TN Maafar a fa cat sit wala 11 
71. A stem ending in t loses its final before the Present characteristic garer of the Dividi class. 
As farata from a, u t from ot, male from it, and operate from The in ute is for the sake of euphony or ease of pronunciation. 
According to Padamanjari, the sotra should have been iru: fura, and thereby there would be the saving of half a matra, and also there would be no necessity of repeating the word fufa in VII. 3. 75. 
क्सस्याचि ॥ ७॥ पदानि ॥ क्सस्य, अचि, ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ सस्माजास प्रत्यये लोपो भवति ।।। 
72. The # of the Aorist characteristic ye is elid ed before an aslix beginning with n vowel... . 
1438 
LENGTHENING. 
[ BK. VII CH. III.S.15 
As मधुमासाम, मधुमायाम, मधुमि from the root दुह् ॥ Had the not been elided before marg and more, then ro must have been substituted for it according to VII. 2.81. Why dowesay before an affix beginning with a vowel? Observe मधुमन, मधुमताम् ॥ Why do we say क्स and not only a? So that the elision should not take place here, as उत्सी, उत्साः , वस्सो, बत्साः, इणसी, हणतः ॥ 
लग्वा बुदिहलिहगुहामात्मनेपदे दन्त्ये ॥७३॥ पदानि ॥ लुक्, वा, दुह, दिह, लिह, गुहाम, आत्मनेपदे, दन्त्ये, ॥ 
पतिः॥ दुइ दिह लिह राह इत्येतेषामात्मनेपदे पन्याशे परत क्सस्य वा लुग्भवति ॥ 
. 73. The whole of the affixe is elided optionally before the personal endings of the Atmanepada beginning with a dental, after दुह, दिह लिह and गुह ॥ 
As भदुग्ध or मधुक्षत, मदुग्धाor मधुमयाः, भदुग्धम् or मधुमध्यम, भवहि or मलापति, भविग्ध or मधिक्षत, मलीद or भलिक्षत, व्यराड or म्यधुक्षत ॥ 
. Why दुद् &c. only Observe व्यत्यक्षात | Why in the Atmanepada? Observe U only. Why before an affix beginning with a dental? Observe मधुक्षामादि only. Though the anuvritti of लोप was understood in this sotra; the employment of the term e indicates that the whole of the affix is to be elided. For 9 would have elided only the final of u But even with the elision of m alone we would have got all the above forms, except those in, art # For * being elided, we have x between (a consonant of pe class) and a dental (which is also a letter of class). This situate between two 
will be ellded by VIII. 2. 26. Nor can it be objected that the elided #i's sthanivat, for by पूर्वजासिलं VIII. 2. I, such an elision cannot be sthanivat. Though is a dento-labial, yet it is included in the word dental.' Had it not been meant to be so included, ft (letters of # class) would have been taken in the satra. See III. I. 45, for this Aorist-affix. 
शमामष्टानां दीर्घः श्यनि ॥ ७४॥ पदानि ॥ शमाम, अष्टानाम, दीर्घः, श्यनि, । पतिः॥धमादीनामटानां दीयों भवति श्यनि परतः ॥ 
74. Before the Present character श्यन्, a long is substituted for the root-vowel in 74 and the scven roots that follow it, 
Anान्यति, ताम्यति, साम्यति, प्राम्यति, भाम्यति, साम्यति यति and भाचति ॥ Why of these eight only? Observe भस्थति ॥ Why before श्यन् ? Observe धमति; the भ्या being optional after this root by III. I.70. 
क्लिम्याचमा शिति ॥ ७५॥ पदानि ॥ ष्ठिवु, क्लमु, भाचमाम, शिति, ॥ रतिः पर्ष इति पर्तते । दिवसभामत्येतेषां दीपों भवात घिति परता॥ 
78. Before any other Present character (ra), the roat vowel of छिप, फ्लम, and मा-धम् is lengthened. 
BK. VII. CH. III 8.78] 
SOME SUBSTITUTES. 
1439 
Asीवति, पलामति, and मा चामति लम् lengthens its vowel before »यन by the last rule, the present rule produces this change before the affix up also, which it gets by III. 1.70. FA lengthensits vowel only when it is preceded by ot; therefore not here: Ta, frit or 11 The sQtra is exhibited as the F iora in the original text of Panini; the present form, owes its existence to the insertion of it from the vārtika ETITE TAIN 
HA: 
O g ni vil gertat ll **:, QTEATE, I पतिः ॥दोष इति वर्तते ॥ क्रमः परस्मैपरपरे शिति परतो दीपों भवति ॥ 
76. The long is substituted in , before a fara alfix, in the Parasmaipada. 
As haft, #1, Frafra il Why in the Parasmaipada? Observe ** T: How do you explain the lengthening in seara and BATH (Imperative 2nd Per. Sg.)? For when is elilled by , (V1.4. 105) then by I. 1. 63, the affix being dropped by a g-elision, it would produce no effect and so there ought to have been no lengthening? This is no valid objection. The prohibition of l. I. 63, applies to the way stem after which the affix is elided. Here is not a stem or anga with regard to f, but it is a stem with regard to yy, as + 7 +fu Therefore, though is elided, the lengthening will take place by I. 1, 62, (gery UTA) H 
TAI : Il 011 Il ty, TA, TATL, 3:, ! पतिः ॥ धितीति वर्सते ॥ इषु गमि वम इत्येतेषां शिति प्रत्यये परत कारादेयो भवति ॥ 
77. g is substituted for the final of rg, th and the before a Present-character (Farca) II 
. As rofa, fa, yeyta ut The rg with the indicatory 7 is taken here, (Tud, 50), and not go of Divadi (19) class or of Kryadi class (53). There we have foafer and confa respectively. Those who do not read the sotra as ro &c, but as T A &c, read the anuvšitti of the word olie from VII. 3. 72 into this sätra ; so that the fun is qualified by the word op, i.e. a fare affix which is merely a vowel, and has no consonant in it; (and not a fua affix which Begins with a vowel). Therefore though it is a fer affix beginning with a vowel, yct as it contains a consonant, the g substitution does not take place. as rotori (111, 1. 83) The reading of the text according to Patanjali and Katyayana is an AT U, and hence the necessity of the above explanation. 
The reading , though convenient, is not arsha. 
पाघ्रामास्थानादाणदृश्यर्तिसतिशवसदां पिबजिघ्रधमतिष्ठमनयच्छपश्यर्छौशी GHET: Il 06 11 tarfar II 9T, ET, SHT, FUT, FT, TU, TET, af, eifer, , para fora, FATET, WA, fag, 7, 763,99, 50, uit, fra, T: 11 
1440 
SHORTENING. 
[BK. VII. CH. III. 9.80 
an 
operation is not allo 
o 
the substitute for is 
acutely accent 
वृत्तिः ॥ पापा धमा स्था मामा पिमति सति परसावतेषां पिब भित्र पम विध मन वाउ पपय कच्छ धोपीय सीव हत्येते भावेण भवन्ति मिति परतः॥ 
78. Before a Present-character iflct), the following substitutions take place :-raw for at, Forrar for et, yh for T, तिछ for स्था, मन् for सा, यङ् for दा (दाण), पश्य for e, ऋu for ut for a Îry for pc and price for Free in 
As foufa, Prufa, wafar, fagfar, mit, ruft, fa, fa, raft, ah and etapa w for +479 +faq required Guņa of the r of A by VII. 3. 86, it however does not take place on the maxim i rurfer: "when an operation which is taught in the angadhikara, has taken place, and another operation of the angadhikara is subsequently applicable, this latter operation is not allowed to take place". Or the substitute fre is one which ends with #, and is acutely accented on the first. It must be acutely accented on the first; other. wise by VI. 1. 162, the acute will be on the last 1 Then when there is ckadesa with yg, the acute will be on the middle in fift, which is not desired. it is substituted for when the sense is 'to run, move quickly'; in any other sense, we have प्रसरति, मनुसरति॥ 
raita Il ve Il valfa 11 , mit:, alt, 11 पतिः॥ज्ञा बन इत्येतयोनियो भवति चिनि परतः ॥ 
79. Before a fare affix, ut is substituted for me and all 
As Mafat and a ll The There belongs to Divadi class, meaning to be produced', and not of the Juhotyadi class. Why (long) and not y, for this u would assume the form or by VII. 3. 101? This long of indicates the existence of the maxim given above in VII. 3. 78; and had a been the substitute, VII. 3. 101, could not have lengthened it. 
प्वादीनां स्वः॥॥ पदानि ॥ पू, मादीनाम, स्वः, ॥ पतिः ॥प्रत्येवमादीनां वो भवति चिति परतः ॥ 
80. A short is substituted for q &c, before a fora affix. 
The Pvadi roots form a subdivision of the Kryadi class, beginning with g oa (2) and ending with what (32). The roots (VIII. 2. 44) are a portion of an (nos 13 to 32). Others hold that upto the end of the Kryadi class are Pvadi. Thus gain, I T, mountat i Those who hold that Pvadi roots are upto the end of the Class, explain the non-shortening of 
fi (for it would also then become Pvadi), by saying that the express 
BK. VII. CH. III. 5.84] 
... GUNA. 
1441 
text of VII. 3.79, substituting long मा prevents the shortening. They say had it been also shortened, then merely * substitute would have been enough and not *T; and this I would have been lengthened in the case of wat by VII. 3. IOI, to form भावते ॥ 
मीनातेनिगमे ॥ ८॥ पदानि ॥ मीनाते, निगमे, ॥ पतिः ।। मीनातेरजस्व घिति प्रत्यये परता स्वो भवाति मिगमविषय ।। 
81. In the Veda At is shortened before a fra affix. 
As प्रमिनन्ति व्रतानि Rig. X. I0. s. The becomes (प्रमिणन्ति according to Kasika) by VIII. 4. I. Why in the Vedar Observe : मीणाति ॥ 
मिदेर्गुणः ॥ २॥ पदानि । मिदे, गुणः, ॥ इतिः । मिरणस्यको गुणो भवति शिति प्रत्यये परतः ।। 
82. For & in faq, there is substituted a guna before aशित् affix. 
As मेपति, मयता, मेपन्ति ॥ Why मिदू only Observe वियन्ति, क्लियन्ति । 
· The root fragt belongs both to the Bhvadi and the Divadi classes. The Bhvadi 
AÇ will get guņa before re by virtue of VII. 3. 86, but the Divadi pare would not have got guna before पवन, as this affix isडित (I. 2.4): hence the necessity of this sotra. Before non affixes there is no guna, as मियते, ममियत ।। 
शुसि च ॥३॥ पदानि ॥ जुसि, च, ॥ पतिः ॥ शुसि च प्रत्यये परत इगन्तस्याङ्गस्न एणो भवति । 
83. Before the personal-ending जुस (उस) of the Imperfect, gupa is substituted for the final ,ई, उ, ऊ, ऋ, and 
, at of the stem. 
As अजुहः, भविभयुः, भविभका, भजागरः ॥ This Personal ending is हित according to I. 2. 4, and would not have caused guna (I. I. 5), but for this satra. The ending जुस (III. 4. I08)comes in the rलह also. There, however, it does not cause guna. As चिन्युः, मुनुयुः ॥ Here there are twor affixes, the augment age, and the sarvadhatuka Ts; and the arge prevents guņa. The इक is read into the satra from I. I. 3. 
सार्वधातुकाबंधातुकयोः॥४॥ पदानि ॥ सार्वधातुक, माधधातुकयोः, ॥ बत्तिः ॥ सार्वधातुके माधंधातुके च प्रत्यये परत गन्तस्थागस्य गुणो भवति ॥ 
84. The Guna is substituted for the final st vowel of a stem before the affixes called sårvadhâtuka and ardhudha tuka (III. 4. 113 &c). 
1442 
. GUNA. 
BK. VII. CH. III. S. 85) 
As pra, tafa, AFT, 8, trg, mara, # Why sarvadhatuka and ardha. dhatuka affixes only? Observe optakte waarna For had the satra been uit then the rule would have applied to affixes like any &c which go to form Denominative verbs. He includes all affixes beginning with an and ending with AFTU If the satra had been ateria, then the rule would have applied to the affixes like a &c. To exclude these cases, the two words sarvadhatuka and ardhadhatuka are used. For exceptions See I. 1. 4. 5. 6. 
Houtstafererate 15411 qera | Fa:, x, faz, faru,ura, ferien fer: li wira TNTESTET UUT HQ for our na: 11 
85. The Guna is substituted for the # of the stem ry, except before the affix fa, before the Aorist-character farve, before the Personal ending, ora of the Perfect, and before an affix with an indicatory Fil . As scena, with fore, Mm : (with g) tigamA, MITEN (with जाल)मागरो पतले (with पम्), जागरितः (with क), जागरितवान् (with क्तवत) ॥ This is an exception to the Vriddhi rule of VII. 2. 115, and to the prohibition in I. 1. 5. When this guna is substituted, there does not take effect that rule, which causes Vriddhi of the penultimate short # of TTT; (@ hat: VII. 2. 116) Had that been the case, then the guņa substitution would become simply useless, and the prohibition with regard to itpur and opes superfluous. Why do we say not before fa, roos and opens and for? Observe oma: (with the affix fora Uñadi) 
art with roup which causes Vriddhi, and H TT with upcy, and stra: and atori with a fa (I. 2. 4) affix. Some hold that the r in A is for the sake of pronunciation only, and the prohibition applies to all affixes beginning with a o, such as my, as Frare, here there is no guņa. In Tg: with y# the guņa takes place by virtue of VII. 3. 83: for though it is a fer affix also, the prohibition frag of this sätra does not affect it. Similarly i m with or the optional guņa VII. 1. 91 is also not prohibited by the up of this satra. In fact the phrase after the frag is a Paryudasa prohibition : for had it been a prasayya-pratishedha, then the guņa before 17 and the ist Pers. Ofre would also have been prohibited. In short this søtra positively ordains guņa of smo besorc every affix, other than Frore, ug and for, and if by any other rule these latter would cause guņa, that guna is not prohibited. That is the result of Paryudasa negation. 
But if the sätra be construed as a Prasayyapratishedha, then we shall apply the maxim Tea Forforaf wara gratis TH The prohibition is therefore stated with regard to ma in connection with the affixes ft, for, ofis and FTTH But the Guņa ordained by VII. 3. 84, 83 is not prohibited.. 
bki Vit. C1. tit. . 861 
GUNA 
14430 
पुगन्तलघूपधस्यं च ॥८॥ पदानि ॥ पुक् अन्त, लघु उपधस्य च ॥ .. भिः ॥ पुगन्तस्याङ्गस्थ लघूपधस्य व सार्वधातुकार्दधातुकयारणी भवति ।। 
Kariká:- TFÉFIUI go frate! 
विध्यपेक्ष लपोचासो कय कुण्डिन दुष्यति ।। धातोहिनुमं कथं रम्जे, स्थविनथ्योर्निपातनात् । 
funt fata faun: 11 मस्तस्य बाहाचिलाये तत्कसं भवेत् । 
नुसनो बकस किप शापकं स्यानपाणे ॥ 86. Guņa is substituted before a sárvadlatuka and än årdhadhâtukta affix, for the tif vowels of the Causative stems which take the auginent (VII. 3. 36), and for the short pe nultimate vowel of a root which ends in a single consonant. 
As mentafa, tarktÁTTU, 1974, 1970, ##, biru Of course thie vowel should be laghu or light, before the addition of the affix; the heaviness caused by the addition of the affix, will not prevent gutia. Thus far +, though (+*+ causes the to become heavy, that will not prevent guņa: for f6494 hy l Obj: If this be so, why the forms fogy, grogg are not incorrect, for in them also the vowel is laghu (the roots are $ and ), and the augment 
is added afterwards by a Vidhi rule? Ans. The augment is added to the root, and becomes upadesivat. (See VII. 1. 58). Obj. If so, how do you çause Vriddhi in (5, as in ti with #f; ds 5*+ = + (the being dropped by VI. 4. 27), for it is after the elision of , that the # of 3 becomes penultimate and can admit of Vriddhi by VII. 2. 116? Ans. The exceptional forms a: from fam+ , and put from you + E, taught in Vl. 4. 28; 29 teach by implication that roots of this form take Vriddhi as a general rule. Obj. If the frau maxim is not of universal application: though by VI.4. 134, the most &e. is elided in bla stems, like a thus tait; yet the or shoud not be elided if you be consistent, in a augment added by VII. 1.75 to try, we &c. In fact, you could not get the forms Mint &c. Moreover though there can be the lengthening of the penultimate in सामन्-सामानि (before for affix Nom. Pl). yet not in the case of ata from $* for here q is added by another rule Vit. 1.72. If you say, the maxim is not of universal application, then there can be no guiña oft in fe to form a Ans. The guņa takes place in forms like * &c, because the prohibition of the following rule VII. 3. 87. with regard to the affixes beginning with a vowel, proves by implication that before affixes beginning with a consonant, as , the guna also takes place. Obj. The prohibiton in the case of vowel beginning affixes is for the sake of E, to form shu. This is derived from AP (Juhotyadi 11), in the Imperfect, as *+as+q*,+ at their rcduplication (VI. I. 10), then guna of the redupll. 
1444 
GUNA. 
BK. VII. CH. III. $. 87] 
cate, (VII. 4. 75), then which had become in the imperfect, is elided by VI. 1. 68. Thus 
+ +falates + (VI. 1. 10) o PP+ (VII. 4. 75) - AM (VI. 1. 98)-**79. The elided in produces its cffect, the guņa by VII. 3. 86. This is why ma is taken in s@tra VII. 3. 87, namely strit affixes do not cause guna, the mi affixes like it cause guņa. You cannot therefore say that it in VII. 3. 87 is a jnapaka. Ans. The satra meryfirytare: F:(111. 2. 140) teaches the addition of 7 to 9€ &c, as Tek:; if this had not tended to cause the guņa of the penultimate vowels of these rools, what was the necessity of making this affix a 147? Similarly I. 2. 10 teaches that (Desiderative) is the after roots ending in consonants. These rules show that words like a &c get guņa, and the final consonant of the root plus the initial consonant of the affix, does not make the root vowel heavy. Obj: The Fort of an is for the sake of the elision of the nasal, in furnia, wren (VI. 4. 24). Ans. Let it be so: still the rent offer is enough for us. 
The "upadha short" must be the vowels of the re pratyahara. There fore in fain, the penultimate is short (of 274) and it does not take guņa. In fact, the word penultimate qualifies the word of understood. Others explain it by saying that gran is to be analysed by gf "in the vicinity of "11 The word a means ofre, and means the ph vowel in the proximity of 
Il The word mogu should be analysed as try and is a Karmadharaya compound, and means "a short or light penultimate". The word gamuty is a Samahara Dvandva. 
ATTerenfa pfat eratung Il soll gestor del a, astelpa, spa, fofa, Free वृत्ति । मभ्यस्तसंशकस्याङ्गस्य लघूपधस्थामापी पिति सार्वधातुके एणो न भवति ।। affretul gå göretfa Thou 
87. The guņa is not substituted for the penulti mate light of vowel in the reduplicated form of a root, before a Sárvadhâtuka affix beginning with a vowel and having an indicatory q11 . Asarana, sarasa; fiftfor, guiria 11 Why of a reduplicated root? Observe all Why beginning with a vowel ? Observe Hill The word for is read here for the sake of the subsequent stras like VII. 3. 92. For here in cases other than पित् , guna will be prevented by is because of सार्वधातुकमपिन् । Why a sarvadha tuka affix? Observe part in the Perfect, the affixes of which are ardhadhatuka (III. 4. 115). Why do we say a penultimate light vowel? Observe waifa, 917 01 :::: Vårt:- There is diversity in the Vedas. As y thc and of TE 1 
The forms parem, Truth, Trelat: are irregular. my+ FT+ =FT8 tor ta =qfTua 11 BK: VII. CI. III. 8. 89] 
GUNA 
1445 
The above forms are thus evolved. 1. f ft is fire (Imperative ist Per Sing). the mis changed to fy, the augment are is added which is it (TT 
Fame III. 4. 92), *y is substituted for y, then there is reduplication, then guņa by VII. 4- 75. 2. warm is m* , the rat is changed to m* 11 3. qa is ist Pers. Sing. Imperative of t il 4. is 3rd person singular of the Present. 5. Mu is the Perfect with or which is ardhadhtuka III. 4. 115. 6. Tre is the per of yet GTETTİT: (Tudádi 8), in the Parasmaipada, the tor far is eli ded (I11.4.97), then is added the augment (III. 4.94) then yg is irregularly replaced by x, then reduplication. 
In the words qrura &c. the reduplicate has been shortened, as a Vedic form, in the Intensive यदलक्॥ चाकशीत is from काशंतो there is (बलु, लद,ति, and r augment by ABT (VII. 3.94), rdrat: is from tht, in the Intensive (AFF*), FF, TH, Fe and ro i. e. it is the Accusative plural of the Feminine Present Participle from the Intensive root of poll The reading in the Kasika is ruira I In these two oy and ag the roots have been shortened. Or the above forms may be derived regularly, without shortening, from the roots 0 and पशु ।। 
halffaf 11 55 || garatu gat:, fare il ITT: I garantert en Arg Tur u 
88. Land get no guņa before an immediately following Personal ending which is Sarvadha tuka. 
As ., WY, WYTRF F DI The e refers to the Adadi root (21) in which the Present character is dropped, and does not refer to Dive adi (24) or Tudadi (115) roots, because there the Present character xa and a intervene between the Personal endings (as) and the root: and inoreover the affixes 244 and u are rau (I. 2. 4) and would not cause guņa. Why do we say before f#? Observe and where the guņa takes place before gi! Why before a sarvadhatuka asfix? Observe safe wirfly, where the Benedictive is not a Sarvadhatuka (III. 4. 116), and the augment is of course considered as a portion of the personal ending. Why the guņa is not prohibited in that when the Intensive is dropped, and the Personal ending is added directly to the root. Because the form are in VII. 4.65 indicates by implication that guņa takes place in F9F except in re 11 
But of we have figata where guna has been prohibited in the Intensive, because there is no jnapaka with regard to it 
The forms gt &c are the 1st Per. Imperative of g 11 at gefragrante Il 52 l vara lll 58:, grec, of, the निः॥ सार्वधातुके पितीति वर्तते ॥ उकारान्तस्वागस्व वृद्धिर्भवति लुकि सति हलादौ पिति सार्वधातुके। 
89. A root ending in short J, which has no Present 
1446 
GUNA. 
(BK. VII. CII: 111. $ 92, 
characteristic (i. e. the vikáraņa is dropped by luk elision ), gets vriddhi, before a fora Sarvadhatuka affix beginning with a consonant, but not if the stem is reduplicated, 
Thus Atra, tric, dir; h , i, fila, fita, kutig, FITA Why ending in ti Obserye gri, gry, fu Why do we say whose yikaraŋa is elided by 
? Observe paire, rife, F I Why beginning with a ? Observe 7, 1976), the First Person of the Imperative is to by III. 492, Why before पित् affix? Observe युतः, रुतः ॥ The augment मासुर being हित (III. 4.103), prevents पित् action in भपिस्तुयात् राजानम् ॥ The phrase मा बसस्थ should be read into the satra from VII. 3. 87: therefore Vriddhi dges not take place here in 
mai Here there is luk-elision of u 
gofalant II EO | what I mutai, fermer अतिः ॥ मोंतर्विभाषा वृद्धिर्भवाते इलावी पिति सार्वधातुके।। 
90. Before a fora Sarvadhâtuka affix beginning with a consonant, the final y of gets optionally vriddhi.. 
___As प्रोणाति or प्रोणाति, प्रो!पि or भोगोपि, पोर्णोमि or मोणोमि ; but प्रोर्णवानि before an affix beginning with a vowel. - गुणोऽपृक्ते ॥ १॥ पदानि ॥ गुणः, अपृके। .वृत्तिः ॥ गोतेदातोरपने लिपिति सार्वधातुके एणो भवति । 
:"91. Before a mesma Saryadhậtuka affix which is A single consonant, Guņa is substituted for the final of 
As atota, 794: Though the anuvritti of man was understood in this satra from the last aphorism, the employment of the term wam implies the existence of the following maxim :- 
ETT Por " when a term which denotes a letter is exhibited in a rule, in the form of a Locațive case, and qualifies something else which likewise stands in the Locative case, that which is qualified by it must be regarded as beginning with the letter which is denoted by the term in question, and not as ending with it". ... E FIER! ha il Tua, 5411 
अतिः ॥णहत्येतस्याजस्थमागमो भवति हलिपिति सार्वधातुके। 
92. Before a fac Sarvadbatuka afsx beginning with a consonant, r is added after w of the verbal stem U ll 
As ufr, gore, waru, n e ! In the last example though the affix vanishe's altogether, yet it produces its effect. Why beginning with a can conant? Observe forfa u Why a fa affix?. Observe go: with #8 !! The stem on is formed from the root (Rudhadi) with the vikaraṇa 'my, and is so 
d in the satra in order to indicate that the augment is added after the vikasaņa par has been added, and that the root of Tudadi class is not to be taken. 
'BK. VII. CH. III S.951 
I AUGMENT. 
The above forms are thus derived : 
हनिम् + तिम्-तृण + +ति-हणा+ति-हणेह+ति (VI. I. 87)-प्रणेना-त (VIII. 2. 31)हणे +षि (VIII. 2 40)-हणेर+शि (VIII. 4.41)सणेडि with the elision of one r (VIII. 3. 13). The form होस is similarly formed by VIII. 2. 41, the being changed to क belore सि of सिप् ॥ महणट् is the लड 2nd and 3rd Per. Sing. : व इंद्र ॥३॥ पदानि ॥ध्रुवः, ईद ॥ 
वृतिः इत्येतस्मादुत्तरस्व हलादेः पिता साधातुकत्व ईरागमो भवति । 
93. Before a पित् Sarvadhatuka affix beginning with a consonant, the augment is placed after i 
As प्रवीति, वीषि, प्रवीमि, भवतीत् ॥ But प्रवाणि before such an affix be: ginning with a vowel, and ga: before an alfix which is not an al 
योषा ॥६४॥ पदानि ॥ यः,धा,॥ . वृत्तिः । बा उत्तरस्थ इलादेः पिता सार्वधातुकस्वागमो भवति वा। 
94. The faa Sārvadlatuka affixes, beginning with a consonant, optionally get the augment in the Intensive. 
As लालपीति in शामिको लालपीति, so also दुन्दुभिर्वावदीति, विधाययो वृषभो रोरवीत मलदेवोमस्यों भाविवेध ॥ (Rig. IV.58. 3). Also not, as पति चक्रम् and वर्मि | These are all examples of the Intensive with the elision of AF I When the stem retains , there can be no fon Sarvadhatuka affix beginning with a consonant after it, because then pq will intervene between the allix and the stein. Hence no examples of the same can be given.. . तुरुस्तुशम्यमः सार्वधातुके ॥६५॥ पदानि ॥ तु,रु,स्तु, शमि, अमः,सार्वधातु के। 
वृतिः ॥ इति सौषोयं धातुः रु सम्मेष्टुम् स्तुती धम उसने मन गत्याविष हत्यसेवा परस्य सार्वधातुकरण हुलादेर्वा सागमो भवति । 
95. A sarvadhatuka affix, beginning with a con sonant, optionally gets ईद augment, after the roots तु, रु, स्तु, शम and अम् ॥ .. The root तु (Adadi 25) means to increase', ह (Adadi 24) to make a sound', स्तु (Adadi 34) 'to praise', पम् 'to be satisfied', and मम् 'to go'. According to Kasika तु is a Sautra dhatu. Thus उत्तीति or उत्सवीति, उपरीति or उपरवीति, उपस्तौति or उपस्तवति, पाम्यवम् or मीयम, भवमति or अभ्याति ॥ शम् and can then be followed by a consonant beginning sarvadhatuka affix, when they lose their Present character (vikaraņa ) as a Vedic anomaly ( bahulam chhandasi). . . The Apisalas read the satra as तुरुस्तुपबमा सार्वधातुकासुच्छन्दसि ॥ This will then become a rule for the Vedic sorms. The word erf is here exhibited in the femininc. 
1448 
FEAUGMENT 
[ BK. VII CH. III. 8:98 
The repetition of 'sarvadhatuka', though its anuvsitti was present is for the sakc of stopping the anuvritti of for, and this rule applies to mine affixes also, as मुवीत, रामाध्वम् ।। ___ अस्तिलिचोम्पृक्त ॥ ६॥ पदानि ॥ अस्ति, सिचा, भ, पृत। 
पतिः॥ मत्सरका सिप्रताप परस्वापकस्य सार्वधातुकस्वसगमो भवति । वार्मिकम् ॥ माहिमुवारीवि प्रतिषः । 
96. A single consonantal sarvadhatuka affix gets the augment ईद , after भस (अस्ति) and after the Aorist cha racter सिच।। 
As माखान, मासी'; भकाति, मसापीन् ॥ Why do we say a single-con. sonant affixt Observe भात, मकापम् ॥ 
Vart:-Prohibition of the sthanivad-bhava must be stated when भार is substituted for , (III. 4.84), and भू for भस् (II. 4.52), before the augment 
॥ Therefore not here भात्य and मभूत् ॥ The word भाद्र is thus formed. भाइ+सिं-भार+थल् (III. 484)-भाय+थ (VIII. 2. 35)-मात+4 (VIII. 4.55) -भारथ ॥ 
बहुलं छन्दसि ॥ ९७॥ पदानि ॥ बहुलम, छन्दसि ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ भस्तितिघोरपूनस्य सार्वधातुकस्वरागमो भवति बहुलं छन्दसि विषय ।। 
. 97. In the Veda, a single consonantal Sarvadhi. tuka affix gets diversely the augment it, after wer and fare u 
As भाप एवेदं खालल सवमाः ॥ Here मा is used instead of मासीत; but also मारवासीन राषिः (See Maitr. S. I. 5. 12). So also with s-Aorist, as गोभिरक्षाः (Rig IX. 10%. 9), 434A6T: (Rig X. 28. 4). And widtaf ger, the maker is not clided though ar is added (VI. 4. 75) HT: and Hea: are examples of four without . 
Compare VIII. 2.73. 
The word nt: is the more of we, there is added fry, then uç is elided, then F is changed to , and it is turned to visarjaniya. The words wh: and भRTare derived from the roots भर (सबलने) and सर (उप्रगती), in the Aorist, the fora is elided (VI. 1. 68), the lay is elided by VIII. 2. 24, and the r of the roots 
is changed to visarga. The augment is not added as a Vedic irregularity, ... दध पञ्चभ्यः ॥ ९८॥ पदानि ॥ रुदः, च, पञ्चश्यः॥ 
इति ॥ कादिभ्यः परस्य सार्वधातुकस्व हलादेपास्वगगमो भवति । . . 98. After रुद् and the four roots that follow it,. 
comes the augment to a sárvadhátuka affix consisting of a single consonant. : ' Asभरावीत, भगदी, भस्वी and भस्वपी, भावसीत मवसीः, प्राणी, प्राणी, मासीत. ममती॥ Why of these five only? Observe भनागर भवान् ॥ Why an aprikta affix? Observe ni fa u The word Ti is singular, though it ought to have been plural. 
BK. VII. CH. III S. 102.] 
LENGTHENING. 
1449 
अगायेगालवयोः ॥ ९९॥ पदानि ॥ अद्, गार्य, गालवयाः ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ रुवादिभ्यः पञ्चम्या परस्य जपूतस्य सार्वधातुकस्यारागमो भवति गार्यगालवयोमतेन ॥ 
99. According to the opinon of Gårgya, and Gålåva, the augment ng comes before a Sárvadhâtuka affix con sisting of a single consonant, after the above five roots 5 & 
As भरावत, भरोक, भस्वपन, भस्वपः, मश्वसत् भवसा, प्राणत् प्राणः, भमक्षा, ममक्षा The names of Gargya and Galava are mentioned for honoris causa. 
The mention of these naines is not for the sake of "option" (ferriparra. Because the very injunction about me, would make the of the preceding sætra optional. The mention of more than one Acharya in the satra is also for this very reason. 
भदः सर्वेषाम् ॥ १०॥ पदानि ॥ भदः, सर्वेषाम् ॥ इति ॥ मर भक्षणे मस्मादुसरस्थापृक्तस्य सार्वधातुकस्वारागमो भवति सर्वेपामाचार्याणां मतेन ॥. 
_____ 100. After अद् 'to eat', comes the augment अद before a Sárvadhâtuka affix consisting of a single consonant, according to the opinion of all grammarians. 
As मावत् and भावः ॥ Before a non-aprikta we have मत्ति, मसि ॥ The word e ra makes it a necessary rule and not optional, like the last. ____ अतो दधिों यति ॥ १०१॥ पदानि ॥ अतः, दीर्घः, यत्रि। 
पतिः ॥ भकारान्तस्थाजस्थ दीर्थों भवति बमारी सार्वधातुके परतः । 
101. The long as is substituted for the final of, a Tense-stem, before a Sárvadhatuka affix beginning with g or म (lit.a consonant of यम् pratyahāra). 
As पचामि, पचाया, पचामा, पश्यामि, पस्यावा, पक्ष्यामः ॥ Why for the only.? Observefबनुवः, चिनुमः ॥ Why before a यम consonant (semivowels, nasals and Hand म) only? Observe पषत::, पचयः॥ Why a :Sarvadhatuka'? Observe 
सना, केशवः॥ Some read the anuvritti ofति into this sotra, from VII. 3. 88 so that the lengthening takes place only before Personal-endings. According to them before कुसु there is no lengthening, as भववान् ॥ 
The word भववान् is thus formed. To भू. is added कुसु, then comes.np, treating kvasu as a sarvadhatuka under III. 4 II7; the reduplication of the root ending in my is prevented, because the word dhatu is used in VI, 1. 8 which ordains reduplication of a root only, and not of a root plus a vikaraña. like the form * (-1-79) 11 Those who do not read the anuvfitti of fare in this satra, but only of the word entugħ, they explain the form ita as a Vedic anomaly. 
सुपि च ॥ १०२॥ पदानि ॥ सुपि, च॥ वत्तिः ॥ गतो वीपी यमीरयनुवर्तते । सुपि च यमागे परतो कारान्तस्थास्यों भवति ॥ 
1459 
. 
:. SHORTENING. 
[BK. VII. CI. III. 103: 
. 102. Before a case-ending beginning with य or म (lit a'consonant of Ts Pratyahara), the final a of a Nominal stem is also lengthened. . The whole of the phrase mit at ang is understood here. Thus TT, कक्षाम, वृक्षायाम, प्लक्षाभ्याम् ॥ But भग्निभ्याम् where the stem ends in r, and सस्य 
Yr where the affix docs not begin with a consonant. 
बहुवचने सल्येत् ॥ १०३॥ पदानि ॥ बहुवचने, झलि, एत् ॥ पतिः॥बहरापने सलारो अपि परतोऽकारान्तस्वास्थ एकारारंपो भवति । - 
103. Before a case-ending beginning with wor (lit. a gre consonant), in the Plural, c is substituted for the final म of a Nominal-stem. 
. . As लम्बा, पोवा, इलेषु, प्लोषु॥ Why in the Plural? Observe साधान warg n Why before a case-affix beginning with a prin consonant? Observe ताणाम् (the lengthening here is by VI. 4.3). Why a case-affixt Observe बजयम, पचवम् ॥ 
भोसि च ॥ २०४॥ पदानि ॥ भोसि, च। पतिः ॥ मोति परतोकारान्तस्वास्थ एकारादेणे भवति ।। 
.. 104. Before the case-ending भोस, is substituted: for the final w of a Nominal-stem. . .As.qसया (Gen. dual) स्वं, लायो स्वर, लो (Loc. dual) as सपोनिधेहि, प्लायोनिधहि ॥ 
. माजि चापः॥ १०५॥ पदानि ॥ माडि,,, आपः॥ पत्तिः ॥मानिति पूर्वापानिन तृतीवेकवचनं गृह्यत । तस्मिनाडि परतणकारादोसि च भावन्तस्यार स्वैकारणे भवति । : .. 106. Before the case-endings भोस् and before मा of the Instrumental, is substituted for the final at of the Feminine-affix. . E is the name given to the affix at, the Ins. Sg. by the ancient grammarians. • As खड़या, मालवा, बडवार, मालबोः, बहुरामथा, कारीपगग्ध्यवा, बहराजमी, का' 
T : NI Why the up of the Feminine affix only? Observe astray mgóra witati milyorasüre il Where ever 71 or erg is employed in Grammar, they mean the long forms ( and nt, and not when they are shortened, therefore, not here, भतिखन ब्राह्मणकुलेन । 
The word कीलालपा is derived from कीलाल पिवति with the affix विच् (III. 14). In the Ins. Sing. the final मा is elided by VI. 4. 140. Had therefore, BTI only been used in the sâtra, instead of org, there would have been suby. titution in the case of कीलालपा also; for the rule VI. 4. 140 would find its scope in meq:9*&c, and would be debarred here by the present strą, 
A 
BK. VII. CH. III. $ 108) 
GUNA IN FEMININE 
1451 
. The maxim Fortasirere is necessary, because otherwise on the maxim of sthanivadbhava, the short substitutes of # and are would also be Included. In fact, in the sutra prohibiting sthanivad bhava, we find this vartika rपार ग्रहणशीर्ष: "A short (not long) substitute of at and भाए is not sthanivat". __ संबुद्धी च ॥ १०६॥ पदानि । सम्बुद्धी, च ॥ 
इतिः ॥ भाप इति पते । संबुद्धौ च परत मावन्तस्वारस्व एवं भवति ॥ 
106. Qis substituted for the final art of a Feminine stem, in the Vocative Singular. 
- Asखहे. हे बहुराण, हे कारीपगन्ध्य ।। 
मम्बार्थनचोईस्वः ॥ १०७॥ पदानि ॥ अम्बार्य, नयोः, स्वः ॥ वृतिः ॥ संयुद्धावति वर्तते । भम्बार्यामानानां नपन्तानां इस्लो भवति, संबुद्धी परतः ।। पार्तिकम् ॥ उलकपतीनां प्रतिषेधो वक्तव्यः॥ पा०॥छन्दसि पैति वक्तव्यम बार्तिकम् ।। सलो इस्त्रो वा हिसंचारिति वनष्यम्॥ पाकम् ॥ छन्दस्येव इस स्वमिष्यते ।। मानणां मातच् पुस्मार्यमईते ॥ 
107. A short vowel is substituted in the Voc. Sg: for the मा of the feminine, in the sense of 'mother, mother dear', as well as for the long vowel of the Feminines called 
Nadt (I. 4. 3 &c). 
As अम्मा मकर मनकुमारि सावि बन्धुहवीरवन्धु । 
Vårt:----Prohibition must be stated when the endearing terms denoting mother have an uncombined ,ल or क, as अम्बाडी मम्बाल! भाम्बक! Butt 
p and to where the and are conjunct. 
___Vart:-Optionally so in the Veda: as हे मम्बाsi or ऐभम्बा! हे मम्बाल! or हे मम्बाले, हे भाम्बिक मम्बिके ।। 
Vårt:-A feminine stem formed with the affix are optionally becomes short before the Loc. Sg: arid Voc. Sg. As देवत भात or देवतायां भक्ति देवत! or 
देवते ॥ This shortening takes place in the Veda only. 
Vart:-In a Bahuvrihi compound ending with tra, there is substituted w for free in the Voc. Sg. when the word means a son worthy of such a mother. As गागामात ! - मात्रा व्यवंशमहति इलाघनीयवाद यः पुत्रः॥ This debars the कप् affix of V.4 153. They of मातच makes the final acuter , 
हस्वस्य गुणः ॥ १०८॥ पदानि । हस्वस्य, गुणः, ॥ पत्तिः । संडदारिति वर्ग है । इस्वान्तस्थाजस्व गुणो भवति सबुद्धा परता। 
__108. For short r and उ final in a riominal-stem, a guna is substituted in the Vocative Singular. .. As हे भग्ने, हे पायो, हे पटौ॥ But there is no guna in हे कुमारि, है ब्रह्मबन्धु, because were shortened specifically, and to substilulu guna sur them 
1452 
GUNA OF FEMININE. 
[BK. VII. CH. III. S. III 
would make their shortening a useless operation. Moreover, had guņa been intended in the case of these nadi words, the sotra would have been भम्बार्यानांहस्था, २ नदीइस्योरणः ॥ 
जसि च ॥ १०९॥ पदानि ॥ जसि, च . वृत्तिः ॥ असि परती इस्वान्तस्याङ्गस्थ एणी भवति । वार्तिकम् ।। असादिषु छन्दसि वावधन प्राक् णौ चड्युपधाया इस हत्येतस्मात् ॥ 
__109. Before the affix असू of the Nom. Pl., Guna is substituted for the final short vowel of a nominal stem. 
As भग्नयः, वायषः, परयः, धेनवः, उद्धवः ॥ 
Vårt:-All these rules upto the cnd of this chapter are of optional application in the Veda. As भन्ने or भम्ब, पूर्णा पर्वि or पूर्णा दी, भषा शतक्राय: or पासक्रतवः, पश्च मृत्यः or पपवे नृत्यः, किकिदीष्या or किकिपीविना ।। 
The forms of and pot could have been regularly obtained by the op tional use of डीए (कार्दिकारासक्तिनः)। तक्रया is formed by adding मस् to शतक्रतु with out guņa of a, and being changed to . The rule of lengthening the prior vowel (VI. 1. 102) which would have otherwise come, in the absence of guņa does not take place, as a Vedic option (VI. I. 106). किकितव्या is the Instrumen tal singular, the मा of VII. 3. 120 does not come. The word किकिपीhिis formed by Uñadi nipatan (frufe &c Uņ IV. 56). 
तो डिसर्वनामस्थानयोः ॥ ११॥ पदानि ॥ ऋतः, जि, सर्वनामस्थानयोः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ एण इति वर्तते ककारान्तस्थाजस्थ ने परतः सर्वनामस्थाने ष गुणो भवति ॥ 
110. Guna is substituted for the final of a stem, in the Locative singular and in the Strong cases. 
As मातरि, पितरि प्रातरि, कर्तरि; मातरी, पितरो, भातरी, कर्तारी, कर्तारःFor the long in matū and matc: see VI. 4. 11. The x in & is for the sake of facility of utterance.. 
Because before fr and strong cases, it is impossible for a stem to end in a long vowel #nor a dhatu noun can so come, since in that case, long E would be changed to sx by VII. I. 100, and in forms like करीन there is दुम् ।। 
घेति ॥ १११ ॥ पदानि ॥ घेः, डिति, ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ ध्यन्तस्यास्याडिति प्रत्यये परतो एणां भवति । 
111. For the rand 5 of the stems called to (1.4 Guņa is substituted in Dative, Ablative and Genitive Singular, 
As भग्नये, वायवे, भग्न, वायोः (VI. I. II0). Why of घि stems? Observe सख्ये, पत्ये Why in the Singulars of the Dat. Abl. and Loc. only? Observe भग्नि: भ्याम् ॥ The word case ending (इपि) is understood here also, as the counter-ex amples are पट्टी, कुरुतः॥ 
i The word oft is formed by adding rig to (IV. 1. 44). Aty is not a case-affix, though it is डित and is added to पड which is पि । कुरुत: is no proper example: for though w which is added to his fell, it is only so by atidesa (सार्वधातुकमपित), and moreover कुरु is not पि ।। 
BK. VII. CH. III. S. 116] 
माम् AUGMENT. 
1453 
माण्नयाः ॥ १२॥ पदानि ॥ आत्, नद्याः, ॥ . इतिः॥ मयन्तारादुसरस्व डिन्तः प्रत्ययस्यारागमो भवति ।। 
112. The augment ara is added to the case-end ings of the Dat. Abl. and Gen. Sg. after the stem called Nadi (I. 4. 3. &c.). 
As कमायें, कियोयें, ब्रह्मबन्ने पीरबन्दै, कुमाः, कियो, प्रबध्वाः, धीरवमाः ॥ . याडापः ॥ ११३॥ पदानि ॥ याद्, भापः, ॥ 
पतिः ॥भावन्तावादुसरस्व डिसा प्रत्ययस्य वाडागमो भवति ।। 
____ 113. The augment याट् is added to the Dat. Abl. and Gen. Sg. after a Feminine stem ending in all 
___As खदाय, बहुराजाय, कारीगरध्याक खदायाः, बहुराजायाः, कारीगन्ध्यायाः ॥ But in the compound भतिखट ( from खडामतिकान्तः), this rule does not apply, on the maxim पाद महणेऽदीर्घः as the मा has been shortened here. Even when the word no assumes the form m ust in the Dative by VII. 3. 102, the affix does not take the augment ar, because this long at is a lakshanika mr only, while the मा of the satra is a pratipadokta (लक्षणपतिपदोक्तयोः पतिपदस्येव). . 
सर्वनानः स्यादृस्वश्च ॥ ११४॥ पदानि ॥ सर्वनाम्नः, स्याद्, हस्वः च,॥ ... पतिः ॥ सर्वनाम भावन्तादादुत्तरम्ब हिता प्रत्ययस्य स्यारागमो इस्वच भवति । 
__114. Atter a Pronominal stem ending in long मा of the Feminine, the Dat. Abl. and Gen. Sg. receive the augment Fire and the ar of the stern is shortened. 
As सर्वस्ये, विश्वस्थ, यस्ये, तस्वे, कस्मे, भवत्य, भवत्याः, सर्वस्याः, विश्वस्वाः, बस्याः, तस्याः, कस्थाः, मम्बस्थे भन्यस्याः ॥ 
But age where the stem does not end in long at of the Feminine. विभाषा द्वितीयावृतीयाभ्याम् ॥ ११५॥ पदानि ॥ विभाषा, द्वितीया, तृतीया श्याम,॥ 
वृतिः ॥ द्वितीया हतीया रत्येताभ्यामुत्तरस्य स्तिा प्रत्ययस्व विभाषा स्याडागमो भवति ॥ .. 
115. After facial and caret the Dat. Abl. and Gen. Sg. may optionally get the augment Forg before which the m is shortened. 
As द्वितीयस्य or द्वितीयाय, कृतीयस्यै or तृतीयाय, दितीयस्थाः or बितीयावा, एतीवस्याः or तृतीयायाः ।। 
केराद्यानीभ्यः ॥ ११९ ॥ पदानि ॥ , भाम, नदी, माए, नीभ्यः॥ इतिः ॥ नबन्सावायन्सानीत्येतस्माचोतरस्थ व्यमित्यवमादेवो भवति ॥ 
116. For the ending of the Loc. Sg. there is substituted आम, after a stem calle ] Nadi (I. 4. 3. &c), after the Feminines in at, and after off ll . 
1454 
GIT DECLENSION. 
BK. VII. CH. III. $. 119 
As praia, fürja, AI, antama, ara, ogram, 144, 14 TOT , if-wang, harrera 11 :: The word Arroft is formed by fery affix added under III. 2. 61, the # is changed to or by any; and the que substitute in the Locative is by VI. 4. 82, 
rura Il Sple 11 a 10, F1A, !! [P: 11 Pa Tai MGPTFE FTATEūt ara i 
117. After the Feminine nadí words ending ing and short, ara is substituted for the r of the Loc. Sg. 
As amarg, TA!! See 1. 4.6. 
The word 9 is understood here also. Obj. If this be so, it is not a really separate sætra, because it is included in the last, and these forms could be obtained by the last sätra : so that we ought to make only one sätra of 117 and 118, as TARE II Ans. We could not have done so, for then in the case ofera and is the oft would have come and not mr, in this way. The man would have found scope in nadî words like her, the # would have undisputed scope in grut and fait; but in the case of Fra when getting the designation All the T would have come, being subsequently taught, and the form would have been कस्यो instead of कग्याम् ॥ 
• all 88611 reifa il वृत्तिः ॥ इदुपामुत्तरस्य रोकारादेषो भवति।। 
118. After a stem ending in for short, and which is not a Nadi or a Ghi, pis substituted for the f of the Loc. Sg. 
As agar geet 
In the case of af words ea is taught by the previous sūtras; in the case off words preceded by m substitution of letters will be taught in the next sätra, so by the rule of exclusion, the present sätra applies to words other than nadi and ghi. 
quàt: 11 Spel qual , 7, 6:, | वृत्तिः ॥ भौमिति वर्तते पिसंतकादुत्तरस्व कारागो भवति तस्य च घेरकारादेशो भवति ॥ 
119. After a Ghi (I. 4. 7) stem ending in short og or y, al is substituted for the ç of the Loc. Sg. and 2 is subs tituted for the final of such Ghi stem. 
As soft, sr, mat, war, get The short s is substituted, in order to prevent the aty affix in the Feminine. Those who read 118 and 119 combi ned as reg: translate it thus: "After every other stem ending in f and 7 (i. e. which is not a Nadi), ir is substituted for the Locative Singular 1, whereby for the final of Ghi stems, is substituted". They do so on the analogy of the sotra g Fu qu (!!! 1, 11). of the application of VII. 1. 73, and as my cannot take h, it will take or by this rule. Why do we say "not in the Feminine ?" Observera, TN 
97891 
... 372 Ha 
rpa aget: 476: 1 
BOOK SEVENTH. 
CHAPTER FOURTH. 
ott 
EFT: 118 11 Pura oft, , :, Fa:, 11 पतिः ॥ भास्येति वर्सते परपरे जो बदङ्ग तस्योपधाया इस्यो भवति । बार्तिकम् ॥ उपधाइस्वस्खे जोणिच्युपसंख्यानम्॥ 
1. A short is substituted for the vowel, standing in a penultimate position, in the Causative stem, when the affix 
(sign of the Reduplicate Aorist of the Causatives) follows. . As 
w e 
, 14. sfoll Here the rules of reduplica tion and shortening of the penultimate both present themselves simultaneously. The rule about shortening, being subsequent in order, is applied first, and then the reduplication takes place. Thus hift + $7017 + HTC (fa being elided VI. 4. 51)=(+ PPL (shortening VII. 4. 1)- [+mW (VI. 1. 11)- T + 2 (VII. 4. 93, 79)=f a (VII. 4. 94). The necessity of maintaining this order will appear from the following considerations. The Causative stem of me is nie; the Aorist of which is one ++=IE+ (VI. 4. 51). Now if reduplica tion took place first we shall have emec + (I. 1.59 the elided will be present for the purposes of reduplication) and as the penultimate is short already, the form will be भाटिटत, which with the augment w will be w+मारिटमाटिटत् ।। This is a correct form, so far as it goes; but when the augment is elided in connection with the negative at, the form will be HT ATT TETTE, the correct form however is 77 4990 HIECT with a short a, which can be formed if we shorten first and then reduplicate, as we +377(+37€ +WaRRE+ BELL, which with the augment , will be em 11 In fact, though the reduplication of the second syllable (VI. 1. 2) is a nitya rule, because it applies even where a penultimate is shortened and where not, yet the rule about shortening takes effect first, because the author has himself indicated this, by making the root 
BK. VII. CI. IV S. 1] 
AORIST SHORTENING. 
1457 
grot have an indicatory in the Dhatupatha (See VII. 4. 2 about her verbs). For had the reduplication taken place first in the case of any (Bhu. 482), as 
forur, there would be no long vowel to be shortened, and there would be no necessity of the probibition (VII. 4. 2). 
Obj: Why do we say 'in the Causative'? The Aorist is formed of Causatives only (See III. I. 48), the only exceptions being the simple roots fy, I, J, and pra, none of which have any vowel in the penultimate and an and Uy have already short upadha. The sotra o TUTTIFT: would have been enough. Ans. Had the satra been, as proposed, then it would have meant, 'that which is penultimate when I follows, should be shortened': There. fore in the Aorist of the Causative of , we have +f+15-+-+-++. We here the penultimate with regard to IT is , which would be shortened; debarring Vriddhi and or substitute, and there would have come the 79T substitute instead. But that is not the case. We have tasan, and not HET I Similarly, in the Aorist of the Causative of we shall have +8+ , and being shortened we have *+&+ , so that we cannot add the augment gate (VII. 3. 36), and form wtar Andtho forms like antaa (94+--#) would not at all admit of shortening. 
Why do we say when to follows ? Observe cara, mara where there is no shortening in the Present Tense. Why do we say of the penultimate? Observe T T from TV, and from T3, where the penultimate being a consonant, there can be no shortening. Had the word penultimate been not used, the vowels of these would be shortened. And the word 'upadha" is also absolutely necessary for the sake of the subsequent sätras like VII. 4. 4, and it prevents shortening in the above case, which would have otherwise taken place, on the maxim न माव्यवधानं तेन व्यवहितेऽपि वचन प्रामाण्यान which qualifies I. 1. 67. 
Vart:-The rule of shortening of the penultimate applies to the Te Aorist of the Causative of the Causative i. e. to the double Causative even. Thus **TT (= anat afwa ) ofroni granata 11 Otherwise are 
+8+897 = ++22= ++ 1 Here the elided or being sthanivat, will prevent shortening, or because the stem has lost a simple-vowel ( ta), it will not be shortened. The present vårtika makes it so however: 
a ftur fara || Tara Hat, , fa, surg, * arh II. f#: ll wajifatigrat de faire regur KPI atau 
2. The shortening of the penultimate of the stem, before the causative affix, in the reduplicated-Aorist, does not take place, when it is a (Denominative) stem, which has lost 
1458 . 
AORIST SHORTENING. 
[BK. VII. CH. IV. 5.4 
- 
- 
a simple (end vowel of the Nominul-stem), before the Causative sign and also not, when it is the verb aret, or a root which has an indicatory 
. The word restron means literally a stem, in which a simple vowel ( mare pratyahaça ) or a portion containing an te vowel has been dropped. As the final vowels of Denominative stems are so elided before the Causative sign जि, the satra has been translated accordingly. Thus भममाल-मालामाच्या मम मातरम्-मातरमास्यात्, मत्यरात्मानमतिकान्तवान, मबलुलाम-लोमान्बटवान् ॥ Where a simple a vowel alone is elided, as in the case of MT, there the elided a being sthanivat, would prevent the shortening, the mi of af not being then considered penultimate. So that 
w e could be spared from the sûtra, since the sthanivad-bhava would prevent shortening. But where an 4 vowel plus a consonant is dropped, as in an and 192, there the sthanivad-bhava does not apply ( I. I. 57 ), hence the necessity of employing the term भग्लोपिन् in the sutra. Similarly भणासन् with शास्; and भवबापत् from वा, भनवापत् from बापू, and भागेका from डोकSee III. I. 21 and 25. 
भ्राजभासभाषदीपजीवमीलपीडामन्यतरस्याम् ॥३॥ पदानि ॥ भ्राज, मास, भाष, दीप, जीप, मील, पीराम, मन्यतरस्याम्॥ 
वृत्तिः॥ भाजभास भाषशप जीव मील पीर इत्यतेषामझानांणी पस्युपधाया इस्यो भवत्यन्यतरस्थान “पार्मिकम् ॥काण्यापीतां वेति पतम्बम् ॥ 
3. The shortening of the penultimate of the Cau sative stem, in the reduplicated Aorist, is optional in the follow ing:-bhraj, bhas, bhash, dip, jiv, mil and pid. 
As भविभजत् or भवभाजन, मवीमसत् or भवनासत, मवीमपत् or भबभापत, भदी विपत् or मदिदीपन, भजीशिव or भनिनीवत्,भमीमिलत् or भमिमीलन्, भपीपिन् or भपिपीरत्॥ The Dhatupatha reads भार(Bhu. 194)and भास ( Bh. 655). The indicatory 
is unnecessary and not countenanced by Påņini, as shown in this satra. Had they been at they would have been governed by the last aphorism. 
Vast:- The words काणि, वाणि, गणि, हेलि, लीपि should be enumerated: as भचकाण or मचीकण, मरराणन् or भरीरणत्, भयत्राणत् or भधित्रणा मरमाणत or भवीमणतू, मजीठित, भनिहत्, भलुलोपत् or मलूलुपत् ।। 
लोपः पिबतेरीवाभ्यासस्य ॥४॥ पदानि । लोपः, पिवतेः,ईत, चमन्यासस्य। त्तिः ॥ पिवतेरस्य जी चड्युपधाया लोपो भवति भभ्यासस्वकारादेशो भवति । 
. . 4. The penultimate vowel, in the Causative stem of a 'to drink' is elided in the Aorist, and for the vowel of the Reduplicate there is substituted long ई॥ 
BK. VII. CH. IV G. 8. ] 
Short # SUBSTITUTE. 
1459 
As पा+णि+मत्-पार+r+मत् (VII. 3. 37)-पाय+मत् (VI. 4.51)-प्य् + मा (VII. 4. 8)-पप्य् +मन् ( I. I. 59)-पीन्यत् (VII. 4.4). Thus अपीप्यत्, भपी. प्यताम्, पीप्यन् ।। When the penultimate मा is elided, there remains which cannot be reduplicated as having no vowel, but the elided * is considered as sthanivat and thus qr is reduplicated. Sätra VII. 4. 80 establishes by impli cation the principle that the substitutes caused by r are sthanivat. Thus भू+णि-भाषिin reduplicating, this भा will not be reduplicated, but y, as सुभावि, मा-भू by sthainvad-bhava. 
तिष्ठतेरित् ॥५॥ पदानि ॥ तिष्ठतेः, इत् ॥ पत्तिः ॥ तिष्ठतेरणस्य जो चन्युपधाया इकारादेशो भवति । 
6. Short ris substituted for the penultimate vowel of the Causative stem of Fe in the Aorist. 
Thus मतिविपन्, भतिष्ठिपताम, and भतिष्ठिपन् ॥ The form is thus evolved. स्था+ णिच् + मत्स्याप् ++मत् (VII. 3. 36) स्था+भत् ( VI. 4. 51) स्थिर+मत् (VII. 4.5)-तिष्ठिपत् ।। 
जिघ्रतेर्वा ॥॥ पदानि ॥ जितेः, वा॥ वृत्तिः ॥ जितेरणस्य जो चन्युपधाया इकारादेशो वा भवाति ॥ 
6. Short ris optionally substituted for the penulti mate voivel of the Causative stem of an in the Aorist. 
As जिप्रिपत् or मित्रपत्, भजिभिपताम् or मभिप्रपताम्, भनिप्रितम् or जिप्रपम् ॥ Thus प्रा+णि+मत्-प्राप् ++भत् (VII. 3. 36)-त्रि++भा (VII. 4.6)-निए+ मत् (VI.4.51)-विधिपत् ॥ When ris not substituted,भाis shortened by VII.4.1. 
उत् ॥ ७॥ पदानि ॥ उः, ऋत् ॥ पतिः ॥ जो पापधाया कवर्णस्य स्थाने या कारादेशो भवाति ॥ 
7. Short x is optionally substituted for the penul timate # and of a Causative stem, in the reduplicated 
Aorist. 
This debars thern (VII. 3. 101), भर (VII. 3.86), and भार (VII. 2. 114) substitutes. Thus भधिकीर्तन (VII. I. Ior) or अधिकिर्तन from a (Chur III): भव. वर्तत (VII. 3.86), or भवीवृत्तत् ; भममार्जन (VII. 2. 114) or भमीपूजत्॥ Though the TI, 94T and it substitutes arc antaranga operations, they are prohibited by the express text of this satra. The short is substituted even for a long 
+: the t of फत् shows that, as in मधीकृतत् (VIII. 2.77). In fact, thise substitute does not take place after the operations of , art and a substi tutions have taken effect, but it is a form which suspends the operation of all those rules. 
नित्यं छन्दसि ॥ ८॥ पदानि ॥ नित्यम, छन्दसि ॥ निः ।। छन्दसि विषये जो चापधाया ऋवर्णस्य स्थाने प्रकारादेशो भवति नित्यम ।। 
1460 
GUNA. 
BK. VII. CH. IV. S. 11] 
8. Short # is invariably substituted in the Veda, for the penultimate # or * of a Causative stem, in the Redu plicated Aorist. 
___As भवीवृधत्, भवीवृधसाम and भवीवृधन् । . दयतेर्दिगि लिटि ॥९॥ पदानि ॥ दयतेः, दिगि, लिटि ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ प्रयतरस्य लिटि परतो विगीत्ययमादेशो भवति ॥ 
9. दिगि is substituted for दे (दयते), in the Perfect. 
As भप विग्ये, भव दिग्याते, भव दिग्यिर ॥ The root देर 'to protect' (Bhu. 1011) is to be taken, and not a 'to give' (Bhu. 510), for that root forms its Perfect by भाम् (Periphrastic Perfect) as taught in III. I. 37. The substitute दिगि debars reduplication. 
ऋतश्च संयोगादेर्गुणः ॥ १०॥ पदानि । ऋतः, च, संयोग-आदेः, गुणः ॥ वृत्तिःकारान्सस्याङ्गस्य संयोगादेर्गुणो भवति लिटि परतः ।। पातिकम् ।। संयोगालणविधाने संयोगोपधग्रहणं कृपये कर्तव्यम् ।। 
10. A root ending in short , and preceded by a conjunct consonant, gets Guņa in the Perfect. 
___As सस्वरतुः, सस्वरः from स्य, ध्वरतु, वध्वरः from Lq, सस्मरतुः, समरूः from | Why do we say ending in ? Observe fantasi, famig: il Why do we say beginning with a conjunct consonant? Observe पक्रतुः, चक्रुः॥ This satra ordains Guna where there was prohibition by I. 2. 5 read with I. I. 5. But this does not debar the Vriddhi caused by णल (VII. I. II5),. In fact, that prior rule supersedes this posterior rule, as सस्वार, दध्वार, सस्मार || The word लिटि is to be supplied in the sotra, the rule does not apply to Nishtha &c., as स्मृतः, स्मृतवान् । 
Vart:-For the sake of gry, the guņa should be stated even where the double-consonant is in the penultimate position and not in the beginning. As समस्करतुः, संघस्करः ॥See VI. I. 135. On the maxim पूर्व धातुः साधनेन युश्यते पादुपसर्गेण "a root is first developed fully and then the preposition is added to it'; we first develop pin the Perfect by reduplication, which gives us चक+भतुस् , then we add the preposition as संचक+भतुः, then we add मुद् though the reduplicate intervenes, by VI. I. 136 and 137, as संचस्का -मतुः, now the root assumes a form in which the penultimate begins with a double consonant, and applying the vartika we make guna, and get संचस्करतुः ।। 
. It is by this consideration that in संस्कपीए, उपस्कृषीष्ट, the मुद् augment being Bahiranga and consequently considered as non-existent (asiddha), there 
is no r augment added by VII. 2. 43. 
ऋच्छत्यताम् ॥ ११॥ पदानि ॥ ऋच्छति, ऋताम् ॥ वात्तः॥तुच्छतेरास्वपात्येतस्थकारान्तानां च लिटि परतो एणो भवति । 
BK. VII. CII. IV. g. 13 ] 
SHORTENING. 
1461 
11. There is guņa in the Perfect of *, * and roots ending in long . 
As 10, 9190T', amo: from , TT, ry:, ST6: from fe, and white;, *18:, FFina:, ha rre: from and Time not having a light vowel in the penultimate, would not have received guņa by VII. 3. 86, this sätra ordains it; roots in long never received guņa, but o substitution; this ordains guņa. The Vriddhi of VII. 2. 115 supersedes this rule, within its own juris diction, a prior superseding the posterior: as f**, A WONT 11 
Tai pat e 1182 II eta Il 1, , TA, FE, UT, II वृत्तिः ॥ शपत्येतेषामङ्गानां लिटि परसो वा इस्वो भवति ।। 
12. In T, 'to. injure' (IX. 18) 'to tear' (IX.23) and g to protect' (IX. 19) the vowel may optionally be shortened in the Perfect. 
As a rug: by shortening or TTE:, by guņa, which prevents and abhyasalopa (VI. 4. 126) Tur or frugt, ferrag: or formy:, fit: or Fras; faque: or fã 9977:, fa qg: ora 976 !! Why is the word 'short' made optional in the satra, and not the word 'guna'; for in the absence of guņa, the long would have become before we by :, and we would have got the forms fang:, feug: by the regular rules of 'sandhi? The word 'short' is used in the sätra, in order to debar the r and r alternatives. Had the satra been "! of "the alternative examples would have been with ri (VII. 1. 101) as farar: faftig: and ot (VIII. 2. 77) as fager: 11 Some say this sätra is unnecessary. The above forms like for rug:, raus:, &c. can be regularly obtained from the roots 
'to cook', a'to abuse', and at to fill' and as the roots have many other senses, besides those assigned to them in the Dhatupatha, the roots , T and 9T will give the meanings of y, !, and "il If that were so, the form ATT with the affixe could not be formed, for we should have either frauf from 
q root or farrait froin root but never gang 11 So the rule about shorten. ing is necessary. 
sur: 11 8811 4E11a 1 , suri, l वृत्तिः ॥के प्रत्यये परतो ऽणो इस्यो भवति । 
13. Before the affix *, the preceding at, & and are shortened. 
As FAT, (VII. 3.47) BATT, FRUTTET, OTT I Why HT, f and only? Observe गोका, नोका ॥ The words राका, धाका are irregular being formed by Unadi diversity, with the affix # added to g and uT (Un Ill. 40 ) By the following sätra, the rule does not apply to the affixes; it therefore implies that thing is governed by this rule, though it has the anubandha çu Ka tyayana would confine this rulc to the Taddhita , and not the krit of the 
1462 
SHORTENING. 
[BK. VII. CI. IV. & 17. 
Unadi, asmका, धाका; but Unadi words are not derivatives (उणादयोऽयुत्पमानि मातिप दिकानि), and hence no necessity of reading Taddhita into the satra. 
न कपि ॥ १४॥ पदानि ॥ न, कपि, ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ कपि प्रत्यये परतो ऽणो इस्लो न भवति ।। 
14. But before the samisanta affixe coming after Baluvrihi compounds, the aw vowels are not shortenel. 
As बहुकुमारीक, बहुपलीकः, बहुवधूकः, बहुलभीकः ॥ The shortening ordained by I. 2. 48 even does not operate when a follows. 
___For had there been upasarjana shortening (I. 2. 48), the present satra would be useless. Therefore, the very existence of this satra debars every sort of shortening. Obj. The present sätra would not be useless, for it will find scope where there is no shortening of the upasarjana by I. 2. 48: namely before non-feminine affixes, as बहुववागकः; but there should be shortening in feminine affixes. Ans. The shortening of I. 2. 48 will not take place beforefa affix. Because the affix my will first be added to the second member in the sense of the compound, and then the word so ending in 4 will be coinpound ed with the first member. So there is no prdtipadika left which ends in a feminine affix, and therefore I. 2. 48, does not apply, because the pratipadika now left is one ending in the affix 47 and not in a feminine affix. - आपोन्यतरस्याम् ॥ १५॥ पदानि ॥ पापः, अन्यतरस्याम् ॥ 
वृतिः ॥ भावन्तस्थास्य कपि इस्यो म भवत्यन्यतरस्याम् ॥ 
___ 15. Optionally the feminine stem in आ is not short ened before कप्॥ 
___As बहुखदाकः or बहुखइका, बहुमालकः or बहुमालाकः ।। 
ऋडशो कि गुणः ॥ १९ ॥ पदानि ॥ ऋशः , माडिः, गुणः॥ वृत्तिः॥वर्णान्तानां रोष माहि परसो एणी भवति ॥ 
16. Guna is substituted for the vowel of the root, before the affix €, in the roots ending in or *, as well as in श 
As शकलाइष्टको करन्, महंतेभ्योऽकरं नमः, भसरतू,भारत, भाशत् भवताप,भान्॥ The affix wt means the Aorist-character of which the above examples are given.. It also is the krit-affix (III. 3. 104). of which we have x-जरा ॥ 
The word मकरत् is मा Aorist formed from p by III. I. 59. The word मसात् is from E (III. I. 56). भवर्णन by VI. I. 57. 
अस्यतेस्थुक् ॥ १७॥ पदानि ॥ अस्यतेः, धुन्, ॥ बतिः ॥ भस्थतेजस्व थुगागमो भवत्यहि परतः ।। 
- BK. VII. CH. IV. S. 22] 
भव॥ 
1463 
17. The stem अस (अस्यते) gets the augment धुक before this Aorist अड। 
As मास्थल, भास्थताम्, भास्यन् ॥ See III. I. 52. ___ श्वयतेरः ॥ १८॥ पदानि ॥ श्वयतेः, मः॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ वयसरणस्थाकारादेशो भवत्यहि परतः ॥ 
18. The # is substituted for the final of fear in the भए Aorist. 
As अश्वत्, मचताम्, भश्चम् ॥ For the म of the stem and the w of the affix, there is the single substitute of the last by VI. 2.97. See III. I. 58. 
पतः पुम् ॥ १९॥ पदानि ॥ पतः, पुम् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ पसरणस्य पुमागमो भवत्यहि परतः ।। 
19. The augment g is added after the vowel of the root va in the s-Aorist. 
ASHTRA, भपताम, अपमन् ॥ The पत् takes the w Aorist as it has an indicatory in the Dhatupatha (III. I.55). 
वचउम् ॥ २०॥ पदानि ॥ वचः, उम् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥वचेरणस्य महि परत उमागमो भवति । 
20. The augment 3 is added after the # of aw in the अङ्-Aorist. 
As भवोचत्, भवोचताम् , भयोचन | See III. I. 52. शीः सार्वधातुके गुणः ॥२१॥ पदानि ॥ शीङः, सार्वधातुके, गुणः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ शीडोगस्य सार्वधातुके परतो गुणो भवति । 
21. For the vowel of aft, there is substituted guna, when a Sårvadhdtuka affix follows. 
रोते, शयाते, शेरते, but घिश्ये before the ardhadhatuka affix (III.4 115). Though these sarvadhatuka asfixes were fra (I. 2. 4) and would not have caused guņa (l. 4. 5), they do so by virtue of the present sätra. The word nie is read in the satra with the anubardha F, in order to indicate that the rule does not 
apply to यह लुक् as पीतः, शेश्यात ॥ 
अयडयं कडिति ॥ २२॥ पदानि॥ अवैड.यिकरितति ॥ वृणिः ॥ यकाराती करिति प्रत्यये परतः पीडोङ्गस्याडित्ययमादेशो भवति ।।... 
22. Before an affix beginning with y and having an indicatory For F, there is substituted for the of aft II 
A प्यते with यक्, शाशय्यते with यह प्रशय्य and उपाय्य with ल्यप् which beiog the substitute of meer is !! But font where the affix is y, and Tau where the affix is यत् (neither कित् or डित). 
उपसर्गाहस्थ ऊहतेः ॥ २३ ॥ पदानि ॥ उप सर्गात, हस्वः, ऊहतेः ॥ 
1464 
LENGTUIENING. 
[ BK. VII C1. IV. . 26 
fr il 
T e atre Te *4410ft afrika 
23. The short is substituted for the 5 of 5 when a Preposition precedes it, and an affix beginning with y with an indicatory or s follows. 
As e , gua, 811, ppa, 
m il But da without Preposition. Why do we say of ? Observe ritare il Why do we say 'before a'? Observe FATT Why do we say having indicatory mor? Observe : with 
!! Of course the shortening takes place of 5 (or su vowel, the word wo being understood here from VII. 4. 13), and not when it assumes the form wt as भा जयते मोयते, समोधत ।। 
Raff ll P4 fall ga:, fors il वृत्तिः । एसेरणस्योपसर्गादुत्तरस्य लिडि बकारादौ मिति परतो इस्वी भवति ॥ 
24. The short is substituted for the vowel of the stem (a) before the augment up in the Benedictive, when a Preposition precedes it. 
As arrang, afarg, STUTT This is an exception to the following sätra by which a long would have been substituted. But one without a Preposition. The sta (VII. 4. 13) is understood here also. Therefore & form of I will not be shortened, as 07-1-419=para, aiure 
durgautet: 11 24 11 Tanâ llawna, aretaget, stå, ! वृत्तिः ॥ भयकारे मसार्वधातुकयकार च द्धिति परतीजन्तस्थाङ्गस्थ दीर्थो भवति । 
25. A long is substituted for the final vowel of the stem, before an affix beginning with a y having an indica tory or , when it is not eitlier a Krit or a Sârvadhâtuka affix. 
Thus भवायत, सुखायते, and दुःखावंत with the Denominative affix स्वर .according to Ill. 1, 12 and 18. fra and man with the Passive 975, 
and neue with the Intensive up, and frame and are in the Bencdictive (See 111.4.116). But and see where the affix ais krit, and had the vowel been lengthened by this subsequent rule, the antecedent 14 augment would have been debarred (VI. 1.71). And fegant and young where the Personal endings of the Potential are sarvadhatuka. The phrase xftie is understood in this sätra, so there is no lengthening before non-kit and non-nit affixes, as, 73, year, formed by my under VII. 1. 39. 
til Rell a la 1 वृत्तिः ॥ विमत्यये परतोअन्तस्थानस्थ शीर्थो भवति ॥ 
26. A long is substituted for the final vowel of the stem, before the Adverbial affix fe (V. 4. 50). BK. VII. CH. IV. S. 29] 
GUNA. 
1465 
___As शुची करोति, शुची स्गत, शुची भवति, पदूकरोति, पदू स्थात्, पदू भवति ॥ They draws in the anuvritti of the phrase 'non-krit, and non-sarvadhatuka' from the last sätra, which though not of any direct use in this aphorism, is necessary for the sake ol subsequent ones. See VII. 4.32 for words ending in म॥ 
रीऋतः ॥२७॥ पदानि ॥री, ऋतः॥ वृत्तिः ॥धाविति वर्तते ॥ भकत्सार्वधातुकयोरिति च ॥रकारान्तस्याङ्गस्य भकपकारेऽसार्वधातुके यकारे चौ च परतो रीडित्ययमादेवो भवति । 
27. री is substituted for the final short ऋ of a stem, before an affix beginning with य, when it is not a Krit nor u Sarvadhatuka affix, and before the adverbial affix वि॥ 
The anuvritti offeff is, however, not understood in this sätra; that of t and अकृतसार्वधातुकयोः is present. Thus मानीवति and पित्रीवति with क्यच (III. I. 8), मात्रीयते, पित्रीयते with क्या (III. I. II). चक्रीयते with यह, माजीमत: with थि॥ The कित् and डित् not being understood here, we have पितुरागतं-पित्र्यम् (IV. 3.79), which is thus formed पिता-यत्-पिनी+य-पिष-!-य (f being elided by VI. 4. 148). Why do we say short ? Observe data, from fore, with ac, 
सहदू धातो. and हलिप lengthening. निगेगिल्यते from pand yu 
रिशयग्लिक्षु ॥२८॥ पदानि ॥ रिङ्, श, यक्, लिङ क्षु॥ वृत्तिः ॥ कापन्सस्याङ्गस्थ व यक् इत्येतयोलिपियकाराम मसार्वधातुके परतोरिहित्ययमारेयो भवति । 
28. For the final short g of a root, there is sub stituted रि, before the Present-character अ (श), before the Passive-character , and before the augment are in the 
Benedictive. 
The word is in the aphorism is qualified by the phrase cat wart धातुके || A Lin affix which begins with a and is not a Sarvadhatuka, is neces. sarily the augment यास् of the Benedictive. Thusy-भा द्रियते and मा भियते (ther comes by VI. 4.77). यक-क्रियते, हियते। लिह-कियात andहियात| This short fe debars the long # of the last. The word non-Sarvadhatuka being under stood, the rule does not apply to the Potential, as विश्यात् ।। The यि (VII. 4.22) is understood here also, therefore when the Benedictive affix does not begin with e, the rule does not apply, as कपीट, हसीट ॥ 
गुणोसिसंयोगाद्योः ॥ २९॥ पदानि ॥ गुणः, मर्ति, संयोगायोः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ पता थकि लिहि इति वर्तते ॥हत्यासमवानानुवर्तते । गुणा भवत्यः संयोगादीमामकारान्तानां थकि परतो, लिहिप यकारादावसार्वधातुके। 
29. Guņa is substituted for the final x in the root ऋ (अत्ति), and in those roots ending in ऋ, in which 
1466 
GUNA 
[ BK. VII. CH. IV. $ 30. 
the vowel is preceded by a conjunct consonant, when the Passive character y or the Benedictive auginent a follows. 
The words 5*, af and parts are understood here. Not so the word ras its anuvritti is impossible. Thus भर्यते, भात, मर्यते and स्मात् ॥ This is an exception to I. 1. 5. In a fearga and iftum (VI. 1. 135), there is no Guna, either because in for the augment is considered as Bahiranga and therefore asiddha, or because it is considered as no part of (or non-attached to), and therefore & is not a root beginning with a conjunct consonant. See however VII. 4. 10, where in forming ARTE, is considered as a root beginning with a conjunct consonant. See also Mahabhashya on VI. 1. 135. The (VII. 4. 22) is understood here also; the Benedictive affix must begin with 7, therefore not here FUTE, ENE ! The word non-sarvadhatuka is also understood here, the rule does not apply to the Potential, as 411, there is slu substitution of sap, reduplication, then there is substitution in the reduplicate by VII. 4. 77, then re by VI. 4. 78. 
of all soll veta il ofs, all af: 11 afet qrar sam a n vult fall affran 1. FTfair preferuarat Prirea Tenu पा०॥हन्तेहिंसायां याति प्रीभावो पतष्यः ॥ 
30. Guna is substituted for the final of the root (ata) and in those roots, ending in short , in which the vowel is preceded by a conjunct consonant, when the Intensive character as follows. 
As screw, Firea, remen, Ere The 'root takes of according to a Vartika under Satra III. 1. 22, with Guņa we have €1-478 11 By VI. 1. 2, the second member is reduplicated, in spite of the prohibition in VI. 1. 3, for according to Patanjali į followed by a is not governed by that prohibi tion. So we have ord, and according to VII. 4. 60, the Q is dropped, and we have med, and by VII. 4. 83, we get wird. This is an exeeption to I. 1. 5. : Vårt: In the Intensive of my 'to kill', wat is substituted for pas INTAN II The substitute is with a long f, had it been with a short , that might also have been lengthened by VII. 4. 25. Not doing so, however, indicates the existence of the maxim para 
"A rule is not universally valid, when that which is taught in it is denoted by a technical term". It is through this that friya: is formed from fiux; because the Guņa taught by VI. 4. 146, does not take place here before the Taddhita affix p9, in as much as that rule VI. 4. 146, is taught by employing the technical term to: in siror: instead of sita, hence that rule is anitya, and we have 797 11 
BK. VII. CH. IV. $ 35 ) 
LONG fo 
1467 
Why do we say when meaning 'to kill'? Obscrve rom where it means to do. 
ई घामोः ॥ ३१॥ पदानि ॥ई, घ्रा, ध्मोः ॥ पत्तिः ॥ त्रामा इत्येतयार्यहि परत किारादेशो भवति ॥ 
31. Long & is substituted for the vowel of the roots et and an in the Intensive. 
As würuh, ostad The long f is for the sake of the subsequent sätra, short would have, by VII. 4. 25, given the same forms also. 
मस्य ची ॥३२॥ पदानि ॥ अस्य, चो, ॥ त्तिः॥ति वर्तते भवर्णान्तस्याङ्गस्य चौ परस ईकारादेखो भवति । 
32. Long is substituted for the final mor of a Nominal stem, before the Adverbial affix foar (V. 4. 50). 
AS शझी करोति, शुक्री भवति, शझी स्मात् ॥ खद्दी करोति, खदी भवति and खट्वीस्थात् ॥ क्यचि च॥३३॥ पदानि ॥ क्यचि, च, ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ भस्येति वर्तते क्यषि परतोवर्णान्तस्याङ्गस्य ईकारादेपो भवति ।। 
33. Long fis substituted for the final अ or आ of # Nominal stem, before the Denominative affix preti 
As पुनीयति, पटीयति, खट्टीयति, मालीयति ।। This is an exception to VII. 4. 25. The separating of this aphorism from the preceding, is for the sake of the subscqucnt aphorisın. 
___ अशनायोदयधनाया बुभुक्षापिपासागर्खेषु ॥ ३४॥ पदानि ॥ शनाय, उदम्य धनाया, बुभुक्षा, पिपासा, गडेषु, ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ भवनाब उदन्य धनाय इत्येतानि निपात्यन्ते बुभुक्षा पिपासा गई इत्येतेष्वर्येषु ।। 
.. 34. The Denominative roots अशनाय, उदन्य and garu are irregularly formed, when they respectively mean 'to be hungry', ' to be thirsty', 'to be greedy'. 
Thus भशनायति from मशन--क्यच, मा instead oft; the other form being Taigia who is not hungry at the time, but wishes to get food for some future occasion, and therefore when not meaning to be hungry'; उपन्यति 'he is thirsty', an being substituted for *; in any other sense we have armara, who wants water for purposes of bathing &c. धनायति 'he is greedy'; in any other sense, धनीयति who is poor, and therefore wishes to get riches. 
नच्छन्दस्यपुत्त्रस्य ॥ ३५॥ पदानि ॥ न, छन्दसि, म, पुत्त्रस्य ।। वृत्तिः॥छन्वसि विपये पुस्त्रवजितस्यावर्णान्तस्याङ्गस्य क्यापि यदुनं सन्न भवति । वार्तिकम ॥ अपुत्वादीनामिति वक्तव्यम् ॥ 
35. In the Veda, the above rules causing leng. .thening, or the substitution of long for the final vowel of the stem, do not apply, except in the case of पुत्र ॥ 
1468. 
KYACH AFFIX. : 
[ BK. VII. Cl. IV. 8.39 
.. Thus मिपयुः, संस्थत्यु, देवाम् भिगाति मुम्नुयुः ॥ But पुनीयन्तः, मुसामा (Rig VII. 96. 4). . 
Vart:-It should be rather stated पुष and the rest: as अनीयन्तोऽन्वयः ।। See III. 2. 170, for the affix 7 ।। - दुरस्युर्द्रविणस्युवृर्षण्यति रिषण्यति ॥ ३६॥ पदानि ॥ दुरस्युः, द्रविणस्युः, पृ. पण्यति, रिषण्यति, ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ दुरस्युः द्रविणस्युः वृषण्यति रिपण्यति एतानि छन्दसि निपात्यन्ते ॥ 
36. In the Veda तुरस्यु, द्रविणस्यु, वृषण्यति and रिषण्यति are irregularly formed. 
As भवियोना दुरस्युः,(-दुष्टीयति with the affix क्यच added to दुष्ट), द्रविणस्यु विपन्यवा (प्रविणीयति, here द्रविणम् is substituted for द्रविण similarly). वृषण्यति-वृषीयति (पण् substituted for वृष), रिषण्यति-रिष्टीयति (रिपण substituted for रिट)॥ 
अश्वाघस्यात् ॥३७॥ पदानि ॥ अश्व, अघस्य, आत् ॥ पतिः ॥ भश्व मध इत्येतयो क्यचि परतः छन्दसि विपये भाकारादेयो भवति॥ 
37. In the Veda, long sa is substituted for the final of अश्व and अघ, before the Denominative क्यच् ॥ 
As मवायन्तो मघवन् (Rig VII. 32. 23), मा त्वा वृका भघाययो विदन् ॥ This also indicates that other words do not lengthen their vowel in the Veda before क्य, as taught in VII. 4. 35. See Vartika to III. I. 8. The word भषायु occurs in Rig I. 120.7,27; 3. 
देवसुनयोर्यजुषि काठके ॥३०॥ पदानिदेव सुम्नयोः, यजुषि, काठके,॥ वृतिः ॥ देव सुत्र इत्येतयोः क्यचि परत भाकारादेशो भवति यजुषि काठके। 
38. Long ar is substituted for the final of ga and # before the Denominative fra in Yajush Kathaka. 
As देवायन्तो यजमानाः सुखायन्ती हवामहे॥ Why in the Yajus? Observe देवाज्जिगाय सुनयुः ॥ Why do we say in the Kathaka? Observe अनयुरिदमासात् ॥ 
कम्यध्वरपृतनाच लोपः ॥ ३९॥ पदानि ॥ कवि, अध्वर, पृतनस्या, ऋचि, लोपः॥ 
वृत्तिः। कवि भध्वर पृतना इत्येतेषामजानां क्वचि परतो लोपो भवति कषि विषये ॥ 
39. In the Rig Veda, the final of कवि, अध्वर and gaar is dropped before the Denominative premu 
As कम्यन्तः सुमनसः (not in the Rig Veda), मध्वर्यन्तः (not in this case in the Rig Veda), पृतन्वन्तस्तिष्ठन्ति (not in this connection in the Rig. Veda). The examples given above are of Kasika : according to Pro. Bohtlingk none of them are from the Rig Veda. The following are given by Bhattoji Dikshita in his Siddhanta Kaumudi:स पूर्वया निविदा कन्यतायोः (Rig I.96. 2).मध्ययु वा मधुपाणिम् (Rig X. 41. 3), दमयन्तं पृतन्युम् ।। . 
BK. VII. CH. IV. F. 42] 
हि SUBSTITUTION. 
'1469 
घतिस्यतिमास्थामित्ति किति ॥ ४० ॥ पदानि ॥ धति, स्यति, मा, स्थाम, इत, ति, किति ॥ 
वृत्तिः॥पति स्यति मा स्था इत्यतेषामजानामिकारादेशो भवति सकारावो किति प्रत्यये परतः ॥ 
40. Short t is substituted for the final of दो, सो, H and Fun, before an affix beginning with 7 and having an indicatory = 11 
As निर्दितः and निर्दितवान् ; भवसित: and भवसिसवान् , मित: and मितवान् ; स्थितः and स्थितवाम् , all with n and कवतु ॥ Why before t? Observe भववाय | Why before a कित् affix? Observe भवदाता with त ।। 
शाछोरन्यतरस्याम् ॥४१॥ पदानि ॥शा, छोः, अन्यतरस्याम् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥शा छा इत्येतयोरन्यतरस्यामिकारादेशो भवति तकारादी किति प्रत्यये परतः ॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ श्यतेरिवं व्रते नित्यमिति वक्तव्यम् ॥ 
Karika:-देवत्रातो गलो प्राह इतियोगेच सविधिः । 
मिथस्ते न विभाष्यन्ते गवाक्षः संशितव्रता॥ 41. Short & is optionally substituted for the final of शा (शो) and छा (छो), before an affix beginning with तू and having an indicatory क॥ 
As निषितं or निशातम्, निशितवान् or निशासवान् भवच्छित, भवच्छितवान् or मष छातं, भवच्छातवान् ॥ The ar always takes ther when it means a vow : as संशितो ब्राह्मणा- संशितवतः ॥ The rule of this satra thus becomes a vyavasthita vibha sha. Other examples of such vyavasthita vibhasha are to be found in VIII. 2. 56, where yra and for past participles are formed with a or o, but is only employed in names as देवनातः &c, and never पाण, while in denoting action both forms are valid: similarly by VIII. 2. 21, गल and गर are both formed, but may alone is used when 'neck' is meant, and m alone when 'poison' is indicated; optionally both when an action is meant. Similarly by III. I. 143, माह and मह are formed, but पाहः is only used when 'a crocodile' is meant, and महः alone is employed when a 'planet' is indicated. Similarly the addition of the Present Participle affix and her under III, 2. 126, is debarrėd when ति is added,as हन्ति इति पलायते, वर्षतीति धावति ।। In all the above examples, the option though taught generically, should be limited to specific cases; as also in the examples गवाक्ष: 'a window', and गोताम्' 'cow's eye' (VI. 1. 123) and संशितव्रतः॥ In short, we should limit ageneral vibhasha to a vyavasthita. vibhasha, on the maxim व्यवस्थितविभाषा विज्ञानात् सिद्धम् ।।.. . वधातेर्हिः ॥४२॥ पदानि ॥ वधातेः, हिः ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ धारणस्य हीत्ययमादेशो भवति सकारावो किति प्रत्यये परतः ॥ 
___42. हि is substituted for धा (दधाति) before an affix beginning with a and having an indicatory Fill 
1470 
GIU DECLENSION. 
[BK. VII. CI. IV. 8.46 
As हिता, हिसवत्, हित्वा ।। जहातेश्च ति॥४३॥ पदानि ॥ जहातेः, च, ति॥ इतिः ॥ जहातङ्गस्थ होत्ययमादेशों भवति काप्रत्यये परतः ॥ 
43. हि is substituted for हा (जहाति) before क्त्वा ॥ 
As हिला राज्यं वनम गतः, हिला गवति ॥ The rule does not apply to ar निहीते ॥ There we have हास्वा गतः ॥ 
विभाषा छन्दसि ॥४४॥ पदानि ॥ विभाषा, छन्दसि ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ जहातेरङ्गस्य विभाषा हीत्ययमादेशो भवति छन्दसि विषये नाप्रत्यये परतः ।। 
44. हि is optionally substituted for हा before क्त्वा in the Chhandas. 
As far eitt arasi, or pray also. The long f of VI. 4. 63 does not take place also as a Vedic irregularity, ' सुधितवसुधितनेमधितधिष्वधिषीय च ॥ ४५ ॥ पदानि ॥ सुधित, पसुधित, ने. 
मधित, धिव, धिषीय, च॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ मुधित वसुधित नेमधित विष्व धिषीय इत्येतानि छन्दसि विषये निपात्यन्ते । 
45. These five Vello forms are irregularly formed, सुधित, घसुधित, नेमधित, धिs and धिषीय ॥ 
of these five, सुधित, मुधित and नेमधित are formed from the root धा with the affix n, preceded by सु, पसु and नेम | As गर्ने माता धितम् (-मुहितम्), वसुधित मग्नी हेति (वसुहितं), नेमधिता बाधन्ते ( महिला), विष्ष is Imperative 2nd Per, Sg. of धा, there is no reduplication, as विष्व सोमम्-धत्स्व ॥ चिपीय is Benedictive 
Atmanepada Ist Per. Sg. of धा, the regular form being पासीय ।। . दो दद् घोः ॥४६॥ पदानि ॥ः, दत, घोः॥ 
वृतिः ॥ इत्येतस्थ घुसंज्ञकस्व परित्ययमादेशो भवति सकारारी किति प्रत्यये परतः ॥ 
46. For दा, when it is a Ghu (I. 1. 20), there is substituted पद before a कित affix beginning with त् ॥ 
___As दमः, पत्तवान, दन्तिः ॥ Why of पा? Observe धीता, धीतवान् from घेद। and the long tis by VI.4.66. Why when it is a Ghu? Observe तंबहि: from पाए 'to cut', and भवदातं मुखं from दे “to cleanse', The substitute is दय् ending in y, according to an Ishti. 
___Karika:--सान्त दोपो दीर्थ स्वाद , वान्ते शेपो निष्ठा मखम् । 
धान्न दोषो धत्व प्रापिम्, थान्तेऽदाप स्तस्मात् थान्तम्। If the substitụte be m ending in , then it would require tho lengthening taught in VI. 3. 124 (N. B. The safra fest should be interpreted as the vowel of the Preposition is lengthened before a substitute of which ends int', in qrder to make this objection applicable. That søtra however is capable of another interpretation). If the substitute be ending in then the Nishtha a would be changed to म by VIII. 2. 42: as in भि+त 
Fiat If the substitute be ending in , then by VIII. 2. 40; the Nishtha would be changed to Hence the substitute iş mall If 
BK. VII. CH. IV. $.48] 
GHU DECLENSION. 
1471 
TW 
however, the satra VI. 3. 124, is interpreted as "the vowel of a preposition is lengthened before a substitute of T which begins with a ", then the substitute may be ea also without any harm. Even if the substitute be o or Fy, the apprehended and substitutions will not take place, on the maxim सनिपातलक्षणां विधि रनिमित्त तद्विघातस्य । 
The following are exceptions to VII. 4. 47, 48, fan, AFT, ETT, HOT and 74711 Or the words 99 &c, here are not Upasargas. See I. 4. 57. 
Käriki:- TİF TE KOTI 
सुदत्तमनुदत्तं च निदत्तमिति चेष्यत ।। The word animira qualises pradatta only. The word shows that regular forms TT, TT, 471, &c also are valid. 
• gtarter: 11 80 l qana il 22:, Tea, a: 11 
धृत्तिः ॥ भान्सादुपसर्गादुगरस्य वा इत्येतस्य धुसंतकस्यत इत्ययमादेशो भवति सकाराौ किति ॥ पार्तिकम् ॥ यतेरिवारपस्त इत्यताति विप्रतिषधेन । 
47. is substituted for the ghu before a fifa affix beginning with a, when a Preposition ending in a vowel precedes it. 
The examples under the present sätra are , vi, pht, a l For the lengthening see VI. 3, 124. Why do we say ending in a vowel'? Observe the il Why 'after an Upasarga only''? Observe tri 99, HY # Why 'the er called Ghu'? Observe m i get from all 
Obj. The word 79era in the søtra is in the Ablative case, and by 1. 1. 67, the substitute or should replace only the first letter of T, how does it replace the whole ? 
Ans—The word : is to be repeated in the sdtra, one or being in the Ablative case and qualifying Eyrft, and the other 9: being in the Genitive case, showing the sthanin to be T, as "after an Upasarga ending in 4 vowel, r is substituted for the vowel or ". Or the word offy may be read into this satra from VII. 4. 32. Orga : consists of three it's, the substitute being 7, and being a substitute of more than one letter, it replaces the whole of T (1. 1. 55). In the following sätra sefa, the 4: in the Ablative case is understood, and therefore a replaces only qui 
Vart :-After a Preposition ending in a vowel, a is substituted for ( , when would have been substituted otherwise for its final by VII. 4. 40. As 07977, Tula and off, A llt 
But f 1185 11 qera il 9, fy: वृत्तिः ॥ भइत्येतस्याङ्गस्य भकारादी प्रत्यये परतस्तस्ययमादेशो भवाति ।। 
48. g is substituted for the final of the stem se besoro a casc-çuding beginning with Tu 
1473 
ELISION. 
[BK. VII. CI. IV. S. 53 
As 29, wÍKI, ST19: I Why beginning with a v? Observe YYE #1 
In the Veda, तू is substituted before भ, for the final of स्ववस्, from सु + अ + असुन्; meaning सोभनमायेषां स्वतवस from the root तु meaning स्वं सयो येषां; मास and उपम् , as स्वद्धिः, स्वतवद्धिः, माडिरिटा इन्द्रा वृनहा, समुषधिरजायथाः॥ The word मास becomes मास by VL. I. 63. . सास्याचधातुके ॥ ४६॥ पदानि ॥ सा, सि, आर्द्धधातुके ।। 
वृत्तिः ॥ सकारान्तस्याङ्गस्य सकारात वार्डधातुके परतस्तकारादेशो भवति । 
49. त् is substituted for the final सू of a root before an Ardhadha.tuka affix beginning with स॥ 
As वस्यति, भवस्या, विवत्सति, जियासति ॥ Why do we say 'when ending in स'? Observe पश्यति ॥ Why do we say 'beginning with स'? Observe घासः, पासः॥ Why an ardhadhatuka? Observe भास्से, पस्से, from भास् 'to sit' and वम् "to cover'; both Adadi roots. 
तासस्स्योर्लोपः ॥५०॥ पदानि ॥ तासूअस्त्योः , लोपः॥ पत्तिः ॥ तासरस्तष सकारस्य सकारावी प्रत्यये लोपो भवति । 
· 
50. The final of art (the character of the second Future) and that of a to be', is elided before an affix beginning with स् ॥ 
As कर्नासि, कर्नासे, स्वमसि, व्यति से॥ See VI. 4. III. In से they and v both of भस् have been elided, ther by VI.4.III,and e by the present sutra,so that the mere suffix Ê remains, which however here is a finite verb: hence the F, is not changed to fill See VIII. 3. 111. 
रिच॥५१॥ पदानि ॥ रि,च॥ वृत्तिः ॥ रेफारीच पत्यये परतः तासस्त्योः सकारस्थ लोपो भवति ॥ 
51. The æ of are and per is dropped before an. affix beginning with aro 
As कारी, कारः, भध्येतारी, मध्यतारः॥ Ther of भस् 'to be' is elided in the Perfect, because it is there that a beginning affix can follow it. Thus ofat (See VI. 4. ITD). According to the reading of Padamanjari, there can be no example of भम् ॥ मस्तेरुवाहरणं न प्रदर्शितं, २फाहिरसम्भवात् ॥ 
हएति ॥५२॥ पदानि । हः, एति ॥ पतिः ॥ तासस्त्योः सकारस्यहकारागो भवति एति परतः॥. 
52. For the # of art and there is substituted 'g before the personal-ending gll 
As it, and pura from a ll See VI. 4. III. The substitution does not take place before the Personal ending एए (III. 4.8), as धामासे॥ The reason of this is that the g referred to in this sätra, is that y which can come after yig; and that very should also come after PT The y that can 
BK. VII. C11. IV 8.551 
. 
LONG € 11 
1473 
come alter Fre is the ist Person singular ; and not this p of the Perfect 3rd Person singular. Others say, this even sårvadhatuka, and thercfore not here मुप्तोऽहं स्वां प्रक्षामासे ॥ 
यीवर्णयोर्दीधीवेव्योः ॥ ५३॥ पदानि ॥ यि, स्वर्णयोः, दीधी, घेव्योः । वृत्तिः ॥ यकारावाविवारीच परतो दीधीयव्योलोपो भवति ॥ 
53. The final of arft and det falls before an affix beginning with , rorful 
Thus मादीध्य and भावष्य गतः, भादीध्यसे, and भावेष्यते before स् ॥ भावधित, भा वेषित; भारीधीत and भाववीत | Why before ब, Fort? Observe भाशीध्यनम् and भावष्यनम् ॥ The long tin यी is a sotra वैचित्र, forयिवर्णयोः would have been enough. 
सनि मीमाधुरभलभशफपतपदामच इस ॥ ५४॥ पदानि ॥ सनि, मी, मा, घु, रभ, लभ, शक, पत, पदाम, अचः, इस॥ 
वृत्तिः ।। सनि प्रत्यये सकारावी परतो मी मा घुरभ लभ क पत पद इत्येतेषामझानामचः स्थाने इसित्यय. भादेशो भवति । 
वार्तिकम् ।। सनि राधो हिंसायामष इस्वक्तव्यः ।। 
64, इस is substituted for the root-vowel of मी, मा, दा and धा (घु), रम, लभ, शक्, पत् and पदू when the Desiderative सन् beginning with स् (i. e. not taking the augment r) follows. 
The मी includes मीनाति ( Kryadi 4), and मिनाति (मि of Svadi 4) for a assumes the form मी by VI. 4. 16 Thus मित्सति, प्रमिस्सति ॥ The मा denotes all the roots which assume the form मा, on the maxim गामाता महर्णवविशेष: "The terms mT, AT or when they are employed in Grammar denote both the original roots गा, मा and ar and also the roots which are changed to गा, मा and a"॥ They are मा and मामाने,and मे मणिदाने | Thus मिस्सते, मप मिस्सते ॥ घु--दित्सति, पि. 
सति रम्-भारिप्सते, लभ-मालिप्सते, शक-शिक्षति, पत्-पिस्सति, पद-प्रपिसते ॥ In the roots that end in a vowel, the of ra is changed to t by VII. 4. 49, and in the roots that end in a consonant, this is dropped, according to VIII. 2. 29. The reduplication falls by VII. 4.58. 
Why do we say 'when the Desiderative follows'? Observe afat in The word for is understood here from VII. 4. 49, so the rule will not apply when the Desidcrative takes the augment , as प्र पतिषति ॥ Here पत op tionally takes इट under the vartika सनिपतिवरिद्राणामुपसंख्यानम् ॥ 
Vart:—The comes after the root-vowel of try in the Desiderative, when the sense is that of to injure. As afer preta it. Why do we say when the sense is that of'to injure'? Observe sirf TAPA 11 
आएक्षप्यधामीत् ॥ ५५॥ पदानि ॥ आए, नए, ऋधाम, ईत् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ भाप ज्ञपि ध इत्येतेषामझानामष ईकारविशो भवति सनि सकारास परतः ॥ 
1474 
REDUPLICATE ELISION 
(BK. VII. CH. IV. $. 58 
65. For the vowel of the roots sarg, eft and a there is substituted long before the fit of the Desiderative, when it begins with . 
Thus q- gara, af g efa, Fy-fri (I. 1. 51.). The redupli cation is dropped by VII. 4. 58. In the Causative stem it there are two vowels, the (for) is dropped by porva-vipratishedha (the prior debarring the subsequent) according to VI. 4. 51, and ( substituted for according to the present s@tra. The word eq is to be read into the sotra, otherwise RT II The must begin with #i.e should not take the augment, as in ferrafaeft, uffrafall The roots arg and Ev are optionally it in the Desiderative by 
VII: 2. 49. 
# Te 114& # gaat ll 739, , पत्तिः ॥ दम्भेरष इकारादेवो भवति चकारादीप सनि सकारावी परतः ॥ . 56. For the vowel of the root hy there is substi tuted & as well as f before the era of the Desiderative, when it begins with स्॥ 
As धीप्सति or चिप्सति ॥ But विभपीत before the सेसन् ॥ The redupli cation falls off by VII. 4. 58. 
मुचोऽकर्मकस्य गुणो वा ॥५७॥ पदानि ॥ मुचः, अकर्मकस्य, गुणः याः॥ वृत्तिः ।। मुधोकर्मकस्थ एणो वा भवति सनि सकारावी परतः ॥ 
57. When pre has an Intransitive signification, Guna is optionally substituted for its vowel before the anit FT of the Desiderative. 
By I. 2. 10, aster a root ending in a consonant, the # is like fan and does not cause Guza. The present sdtra ordains it optionally. As Ava or 
TE: FURTHI In the Transitive there is one form only, as PT TREE T: I becomes Intransitive when it has a Reflexive significance, or when it expresses a mere action. The reduplication is elided by VII. 4. 58. 
TOTEUTETET 11 45 il a lly, , PRITETET II वृत्तिः ।। वदेतत्यकान्तं सनि मीमत्यादि सुचीकर्मकस्य गणेति यावत् भवान्यासलोपो भवति ॥ 
58. The reduplicate is dropped under the circums tances mentioned in the foregoing sđtras VII. 4. 54 to VII. 4. 57. 
. The examples are given under the above-mentioned sätras. The word of the reduplicate' parerea is to be supplied in all the subsequent sutras upto the end of the chapter. Thus Sätra VII. 4. 59, says 'a short is to be substituted', we must supply the words for the reduplicate' to com BK. VII. CH. IV 5. 60. ) 
REDUPLICATE. 
147.5 
LW 
R 
plete the sense: as gafanh, nh! The word my in the sotra indicates that the reduplication is not to be elided, when an affix is treated like ay but is not actually all Thus T-Aorist is treated like a by VII. 4.93 ; but the reduplication will not be dropped there : as pothua, mtaa il Some say the word my here indicates that the whole of the reduplicate is dropped, and not only its final letter. Others elide the whole of the reduplicate on the maxim 
T S :) "The rule I. I. 52, by which a substitute should take the place of only the final letter of that which is exhibited in the Genitive case, is not valid, where what is exhibited in the Genitive is meaningless". 
हस्वः॥५६॥ पदानि । हस्वः॥ वृत्तिः॥ इस्त्री भवत्यभ्यासस्य। पार्मिकम् ॥ मम्बासस्थानषि ।। पातिकम ॥ परिपलि पति पदीनां वा शिवमच्याक्चान्यासस्य इति वनम्बम् ।। ..... 
59. A short is substituted for the long vowel of thic reduplicate. As gara, 
a h, gata, saia, 1977, haina Vart:--The shortening takes place before affixes other than ou (111. 1. 134) Before ry, the roots 7 , 97 and 1 are reduplicated, and the augment * added to the reduplicate. See VI. 1. 12 Vårt. This augment when added to the reduplicate, is not to be shortened by this rule: and be cause this is not to be shortened, also indicates that the consonants of the reduplicate other than the first are also not dropped: as 79T, , tar 
TETE, TTTT: 
ofe: : || Coll i a :, ite: 1 त्तिः ॥ अभ्यासस्य इलादिशिष्यते अनादिषुप्यते । 
60. Of the consonants of the reduplicate, only the first is retained, the remainders are dropped. 
As port, , 9974, 9977, , 616, MIS This rule ordains the retention of the initial consonant, if any, and elision of the non-initials in the reduplicate. If the root begins with a vowel as t, there being no initial 
sonant, in 7 €, they will be elided of course. The word gift should not be construed as a Genitive Tatpurusha 'first among the consonants', for then in 87+1+PRE STY 07, the only would be elided, and a retained. 
The word og: or forsaa herc means there is retained'. The word mit: is not a compound. For had it been a compound, then if it is a Karma dharaya, the word of should stand first ; if it be a Genitive compound then the first among compound consonants would be retined and we could not get the form may from . The word abhyasa is to be taken in the sense of jati or kind, i.e. in the jati which is collectively called abhyasa, the consonant that stands first in rcspcct to abhyasa, is retained, and not thc consonant standing 
1476 
REDUPLICATE. 
(Bk. VII. C11. IV. 5.63 
in any other portion of it. So that all consonants, where ever they may be situate in the body of an abhyasa, whether in the begnning or middle or end, are dropped, except one with which the abhyasa begins. Thus if the abhyasa begins with a simple consonant, it is retained ; if it begins with a conjunct consonant, the first is only retained ; and if the consonant or con sonants are not in the beginning they are all dropped. 
Others say, the word om here means "retention along with the ces sation of others". Therefore, tbough literally the word în or retention appears to be the principal word in this sätra, yet as a matter of fact, it is secondary, because the injunction is not with regard to retention, but with regard to cessation. The rule is not “Retain the first consonant"; bat "Drop every consonant but the first, is there be a first consonant". Or the sa tras 59 and 60, may be combined and read thus : PITSE" The abhyasa becomes short and also without consonant". Aftet: “The first consonant is retained". Or the s@tras may be divided thus : 
(1) 'A short vowel is substituted in the abhyasa'. 
(2) 'The consonants of abhyasa are all elided'. 1. (3) The first is retained. 
The satras 59 and 60 must be joined by sandhi "Feitseraua: ", and then we shall be able to read an elided between th and h, as if it was a compound of er and store 
gat: at: 11 && ! qanat n gat:, :n वृत्तिः ॥ सभ्यासस्यशपूर्वाः खया शिष्यन्ते। वासिकम् ॥ खपूर्वाः खय इति वक्तव्यम् । 
61. Of a reduplicate, the hard consonants (aspi rate and unaspirate) when preceded by a sibilant, are only re tained, the other consonants are elided. 
. As retrage, from schyutir ksharaņe, ferrafa, peranai Why do we say when preceded by a sibilant? Observe 91H Why do we say hard consonants? Observe rol 
Vart: It should be said rather, a hard consonant preceded by a hard consonant or a sibilant is only retained : and the ot consonants are elided : as in af fagfa, here ay becomes us by the augmenta (); in the reduplicate the or should be elided, and retained out of us; and not only retained and a elided ; for the represents , and if this were retained, it would be r and not q that would be heard : for by VIII. 2. 1, the change of 
to is asiddha for the purposes of this rule. 
SITE: 11 6 11 erfall :, : वृतिः ॥भभ्यासस्य कवर्गहकारयोषषरितो भवति ।। 
-BK. VII. CH. IV. 8.65] 
REDUPLICATE. 
1477 
62. For the Guttural and r of a reduplicate there is substituted a Palatal. 
As चकार, पखान, जगाम, जपान, जहार, जिहीपति, जहौ । नकवतेयेडि॥३॥ पदानि ॥न, कवतेः, यकि॥ पतिः ॥ कबसेरम्बासस्व यडि परतश्चुर्न भवति ।। 
63. The Palatal is not substituted for the Gut tural of the reduplicate of कु (कवते) in the Intensive. 
As कोयते उष्टः, कोकूवते खरः ॥ The कु here is कुङ (Bhu. 999), and nots 'to make sound' (Ad. 33, कौति), nor कुर (Tud. I08, कुपति)॥ Of those two, we have पोयते ॥ Why do we say in the Intensive? Observe करे ।। 
कृषेश्छन्दसि ॥४॥ पदानि ॥ कृषः, छन्दसि । वृत्तिः ॥ कृषेश्छन्दसि विषये बडि परतोम्बासस्व पुर्न भवति ।। 
64. The Palatal is not substituted for the Gut tural of the reduplicate of in the Veda, when in the Intensive. 
As करीकृष्यते यज्ञकुणपः ; otherwise चरीकृष्यते कृषीवलः ॥ .. दार्धात्तदद्धतिदचर्षिबोभूतुतेतिकेलापनीफणसंसनिष्यदत्करिकत्कनिक्रदद्भ-. रिम्रइविश्वतो दविद्युतत्तरित्रतः सरीसपतंवरीवृजन्मम॒ज्यागनीगन्तीति च ॥६५॥ पदानि ॥ दाति, दत्ति, दर्षि, बोभूतु, तेतिक्ते, मलर्षि, आपनीफणत, संसनि ध्य दत् , कारिफत् कनिक्रदत, भरिनत्, दविध्वतः, दविद्युतत्, तरित्रतः, सरीसृपतम्, घरीवृजत, मर्मज्य, आगनी गन्ति, इति, च ॥ 
त्तिः ॥साधर्ति इति वर्षियोभतु तेतिक भर्षि भापनीफणत् संसनियरत् करिकत् कनिकाह भरिधत् विषता रविपुतत्वरिषत सरीनृपतं वरीमत् मनमागनीगन्ति स्वतानि भारत छन्दास विषवे निपात्यन्ते ।। 
65. In the Veda are found the following eighteen irregularly reduplicated forms :-1 dadharti, 2 dardharti, 3 dardharshi, 4 bobhůtu, 5 tetikte, 6 alarshi, 7 à panipha pat, 8 sam sanishyadat. 9 karikrat, 10 kanikradat, 11 bhari bhrat, 12 davidhvataḥ, 13 davidyutat, 14 taritrataḥ, 15 sarf xpatam, 16 varivrjat, 17 marmrjya and 18 aganiganti. 
The word die is drawn in to this satra, by force of. The form जापति, is either from the Causative of the root ड्भ वस्थाने or from धूम्, in the upor , there is lengthening of the abhyasa and clision of for it (2) So also ránt is the form in slu, with a augment of the abhyasa. (3) mirt if it be a form of बह लुक् , there is no irregularity. (4) पोस्तु is from v in the Inten. sive (बहलुक्), Imperative, irregularly without guna. Q. There is no necessity of including this, because there would be no guņa regularly even under VII. 3. 
1478 
REDUPLICATE. 
[BK. VII. C1. IV. & 67. 
887 Ans. The inclusion of the is a jnapaka, indicating that in every other case, the guna is not prohibited in the Intensive (पए लुक्), as गोभीत मोमीन (लद् with 
VII. 3.94) (5) fri is from ferry in the Intensive yan luk, atmanepada is irregular. Q. The quis fra and therefore by pratyaya lakshaņa rule (1. 1. 62) read with I. 3. 12, the ar will be atmanepadi, where is the necessity of reading this nipatan? Ans. The atmanepada nipatan is a snapaka, that in the Intensive yan luk the atmanepada asfixes are not employed. (6) ott is from the root (rut ), In Present, and Person, the c of abhyasa is not elided, though required by VII. 4. 60, and this is changed to go irregularly. This form is found in the 3rd Person also, as fh FH H (7) HT Toto is from 
Tout with augment, and a affix is added to acu, and in the reduplicate oft is added. (8) Ara is from party with the Preposition e, in the Inten sive yan luk, with us affix, fit being added in the abhyasa, the root is changed to gl The Preposition is not absolutely necessary, with other Prepositions also we have this form, as marami (9) flanne is from ( m ), in tho Intensive yan luk, with up, in the abhyasa there is no palatal change(VII. 4.62). and it is added to the reduplicate. (10) may from me in the Aorist with WC, reduplication, there is no chutva ( VII. 4. 62 ) of the reduplicate, and the augmenta is added. In the secular literature, the form is for it (11) w from fruft) in yan luk with yy, without g of VII. 4. 76, without jastva, and it is added to the reduplicate. (12) ff from ( ) in the yaņ luk, satr, plural number Nominative. The fis added to the reduplicate, tho 
is elided, rima (644: RO1 (13) 6974 is from dyut, yan luk with lats, there is no vocalisation of the reduplicate, with a change and no augment, (14) aftur: from (atra) with blu, sats, genitive singular: and fit added to abhyasa. (15) attern from Twith blu, satr, Accusative with & added to abhyasa. (16) a w from with slu, satr and 8 augment. (17) HEN from with for ( Perfect ) , x added to abhyasa, and q added to the root, and there is no vriddhi, because there is no short penultimate now. In fact VII. 2. 114 is to be qualified by the words many from VII. 3. 86. (18) a 
Tf is from my with the Preposition at, in the Perfect, with slu, there is ng chutva ( VII. 4. 62 ), and augment it is added. and in timpu 
The word of in the aphorism indicates that other forms, similar ta these, are also to be included. 
. 1, 11 FCI T all Jl, C II पतिः॥पान्तस्वाभ्यासस्थाकायदेपो भवति॥ . 
.: 66. (I. 1. 61) is substituted for the w ork of the reduplicate. 
1. As TT, TTT, Jå, men, mitaff mitaff The (is elided by VII. 4. 60, In the Inten slvcs VII.4.90 &c, are applied, by which after the substitution of PT 
BK. VII. CH. IV. 5.70] 
REDUPLICATE. 
1479 
by the present sutra, we apply those sutras and add कि रुक.रिक्&c: for the ma xim is भ्यासविकारेषु भपवारो मात्सर्गान विधीन् बाधते "so far as the changes ola redupli cative syllable are concerned special (apavada) rules do not supersede the general (utsarga) rules". 
पुतिस्वाप्योः, संप्रसारणम् ॥ १७॥ पदानि ॥ पुतिः स्वाप्योः, सम्प्रसारणम् ॥ पत्तिः ॥ शुति स्वामित्यतयारभ्यासस्य सप्रसारणं भवति ॥ 
67. There is vocalisation of the half-vowel of the reduplicate of घुत् and स्वापि (Causative of स्वए)। 
As विविरासत, विदियोतिषसे, वि वितिषते, (I. 2. 26) विदयुत्यते ॥ स्वापि-मुना Facial The Causative of Fig is taken here, and the vocalisation takes place then only, when it is immediately followed by an affix which causes reduplica tion. Therefore not here, स्वापि+बुल-स्वापका; स्वापक + क्य-स्थापकीय, स्वापकीय + सन्-सिधापकीथिपति ॥ 
The simple root pry will get vocalised in its reduplicate by VI. 1. 15, 17 in the Perfect. The Desiderative of Fig is print by I. 2. 8, and therefore the reduplicate of Fig will be vocalised before or by VI. I. 15. The reduplicate of Fre will be vocalised in the Intensive also by VI. 1. 19. 
· Quere :--Does the reduplicate of the Desiderative of the Denominative verb.योतकीयति get vocalised or not. 
व्यथोलिटि॥ ॥ पदानि ॥ व्यथ:, लिटि॥ वृतिः ॥ ध्ययेलिटि परसोभ्यासस्व संमसारणं भवति ।। 
68. There is vocalisation of the half-vowel of the reduplicate of 874 in the Perfect. 
As fou, festa, faraft ! This ordains the vocalisation of a, which otherwise would have been elided as being a non-initial consonant (VII, 4.60). The vocalisation of is prevented by VI. 1. 37. Why do we say in the Perfect? Observe वायभ्यते ॥ 
दीर्घणः किति ॥ १९॥ पदानि ॥ दीर्घः, पणः, किति॥ वृत्तिः ॥ होगस्य योभ्यासस्तस्य दीर्षो भवति किति लिटि परतः ॥ 
69. A long vowel is substituted in the reduplicate of the root (पति), before a Personal ending of the Perfect, which has an indicatory 
. As parti, fi ll ' These are thus formed r+91-9forgi ( substitut ed fort by VI. 4.81). Then there is reduplication, the a becomes sthanivat to. by I, I.59, and we have r +मतुः and then by the present rule यतः ।। 
Why do we say belore a कित् affix7 Observe याय, ययिय ।। ___ अत भावः ॥ ७॥ पदानि ॥ अतः, भादेः ॥ . ... . 
वृत्तिः॥मन्यासस्यादरकारस्यों भवति लिद परतः॥ . 
1480 
REDUPLICATE. 
[ BK. VII CH. IV 5.74 
70. A long vowel is substituted in the Perfect for the initial of a reduplicate. 
This debars the single substitute of the form of the subsequent or dained by VI. I. 97. Thus भाट, मातुः, भादुः ॥ Why do we say 'the initial"? Observe पपाच and पपाठ ॥ Thus भट् + भतुः-मद् भ + मतुम म+मतुः मा मर + मतुः ।। 
तस्मान्नुइ द्विहलः ॥ ७१ ॥ पदानि ॥ तस्मात्, नुन, द्वि-दलः ॥ पतिः ॥ तस्मादसोभ्यासाभूतादुनरस्थ निहलोगस्य नुडागमो भवति ॥ 
71. After such a lengthened at of the reduplicate, there is added the augment T(m) to the short of the root which ends in a double consonant. 
As from भग्न्-मा भरभान् भम्, which with the affixes of the Per fect gives us, भानरग, मानगातुः, भामदः ॥ From मम्म-भानज, मजा , मानमुः। 
Why do we say 'containing two consonants'? Observe भाट, भारतुः, भातुः ।। 
With regard to augment, & is considered like, as HITTE, IN: 11 This proceeds on a vartika to be found under the Pratyahara sotra ऐ भोच् ।। The vartika is मुविधि-मादेश-विमामाषु पकारे प्रतिषिपातम्यं ॥ The examples of मारे are aRः, क्लासवान् ; (See VIII. 2. 18) and of विनाम are कर्मणाम् and भर्मणाम् ॥ 
अमोतेध ॥ २॥ पदानि ॥ ममोते, च॥ वृतिः ॥ भरिहलर्थ मारमा ॥ मातेबपीभूतान्यासावुनरस्थ नुरागमो भवति ।। . . 72. After the lengthened at of the reduplicate of भश (अमोति),comes the augment नुन (न) before the short w of the root in the Perfect. 
This applies to a case where the root does not contain a double con sonant. Thus व्यामणे, ज्यामशाते, ज्यामधिरे ॥ The rule applies to भए (Svadi 18) and not to T (Kryadi 51); there we have pit, plug:, HIT: 11 
भवतेरः ॥७३॥ पदानि ॥ भवते, मः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ भवंतरभ्यासस्थाकायदेशो भगाते लिटि परतः ।। 
73. Wis substituted for the vowel of the redupli cate of भू in the Perfect. 
As भव, बनूप, बभूवन, पर्व ।। Why do we say in the Perfect'? Observe इमपति and पोभूयते ॥ . 
The word भवते: is shown in the sutra in the Active Voice, therefore the rule will not apply to Passive and Reflexive forms%3; as भनुभव कम्बलो देव 
सेन ॥ This opinion of Kalika, however, is not endorsed by later Gram marians 
ससूवेति निगमे ॥ ७४॥ पदानि ॥ ससव, इति, निगमे ॥ वृत्तिः॥समवइति निपात्यते सूतलिटि परस्परं दुगागमोऽभ्यासस्वचावं निपात्यते॥ . . . 
BK. VII. CH. IV. 8. 991 
REDUPLICATE. 
1481 
HE 
74, In the Veda Free is irregularly formed in the Perfect. 
___It is derived from vThus लसूद स्थविर विपषिताम् otherwise मरे | Rig. IV. 18 10. 
This word ei* might well have been included in sàtra VII. 4. 65. निजां त्रयाणां गुणः लौ ॥ ७५॥ पदानि ॥ मिजाम, प्रयाणाम, गुणः, लो। पतिः ॥ निमावीमांपवाणामभ्यासस्य गुणो भवति ली सति ।। 
75. Guna is substituted for the vowel of the re duplicate, in tlie Reduplicated Present form (R) of fay, fary and विष् ॥ 
Thus fit, and it The word raron could have been spared in this sätra, as these three roots stand at the end of a subdivision, and formi would have denoted these three without the word traya ņam. The word is however used here for the sake of the subsequent sQtra. Why do we gay in the redu plicated Present form? Observe fou in the Perfect. 
भृक्षामित् ॥ ७९ ॥ पदानि ॥ भृक्षाम, इत॥ इतिः॥पमादीनांपवाणामभ्यासस्थकारादेवो भवतिलो सति ॥ 
76. In the Reduplicated Present-form of the three roots भृ, मा (मा) and हा (मोहाङ), r is substituted for the vowel of the reduplicate. 
As fauffe, futa. (VI. 4. 113) Pin it The word 'three' is understood here, therefore not in भोक्षाक्-जहाति ॥ The rule applies in the Reduplicated Present system (बलु) only: therefore not in बमार ॥ 
भक्तिपिपत्योश्च ॥ ७७॥ पदानि ॥ मस्ति-पिपत्योः, च॥ वृतिः ॥ भाति पिपति इत्येतयोरभ्यासस्येकारावो भवति लो। 
77. is substituted for the vowel of the redupli cate of and g in the Reduplicated Present-form, 
AS यति (VI.4.78) धूमम्, विपति सोमम् ॥ बहुलं छन्दसि ॥ ७८॥ पदानि ॥ बहुलम, छन्दसि ॥ इतिः॥ छन्दसि विपवे ऽभ्यासस्य लो बाहुलमिकायदेपो भवति ॥ 
78. ( is diversely substituted in the Veda, for the vowel of the roduplicate, in the Reduplicated Present form. 
.. As पूर्ण विहिं (from पर), अमिमा विवक्ति (from पा), वत्सं न माना सिपातिक (from a), and जिपति घाम ॥ But also पाति, मजनम पधनात् as in दातासे बात wwİ FAT ati var yfET ! All these three roots belong to Juhotyadi class. 
सन्यतः॥ ७९ ॥ पदानि । सनि, भतः ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ सनि परतोकारान्सा चारास्थकारादेशो भवति ॥ 
1481 
REDUPLICATE. 
(1K. VII. CH. IV. & 81. 
79. ris substituted for the final short m of the reduplicate in the Desiderative. 
AS W , fawit, (VIII. 2. 36, 41) fatet, forve Why do we say in the Desiderative? Observe core Why do we say "for them"? Observa Man Why do we say 'short op'? Observe artera the Desiderative of the Intensive 99% 
mt: gun | com ara 1 :, q-u-frantul স্কুল গুলাদি এ স্কুলশিক্ষায় কাল কা কা কাৰখী গুম্বই হাই স্কুল 
80. x is substituted for the final or of a re duplicate, before a labial, & semi-vowel and before *, when * or at follows these consonanta, in the Desiderntive, 
The word. - - is the Locative singular of the samáhára dvandva compound of those three words.., 4 and 2 The samásánta affix (V. 4. 106 ) does not come, as these affixes are anitya. The word 
m e ans that after which is the letter ! Thus: 1. Labial 
, fourefact, manfast; 2. Semi-vowel : ferare, dar fara, farfacra, infatt; 3. * faath from the root yn 
The word Art is from , which gets Raugment in (VII. 2.74), then there is guņa, and substitutions, but these latter being sthanivat for reduplication (1. 1. 59), is doubled: and for there is substited y by the present satra. f efuata is the Desiderative of the Causative of formera 
ha is the Desiderative of the Causative of * Patafuata is the Desiderative of 'to mix', which is ac by VII. 2. 49. marecía is the Desiderative of the Causative of this root. The words fecrafter and female are the Desi derative of the Causatives of ara and a 
This sätra indicates the existence of the following maxim:- Afro 
For f , though not the cause of reduplication, the substitute which takes place when for follows, becomes like the original". Thus in fumefreit we have far from + Por+ , here the substitute caused by fo is sthanivat to *, otherwise there would be no x in the reduplicate to be operated upon by the present sdtra. · See VI. 1. 31 also. Why do we say " for the or "? Observe eread, the Desiderative of which will be erfoton Why do we say * followed by a labial, semi-vowel or '? Observe afteft, according to Padamanjari it is ** U na from the sautra root To Tu Why do we say when these consonants are followed by an '? Observe w at 
अधतिगृणोतिषतिप्रषतिग्लबतिच्यवतीनां धा॥१॥ पदानि ॥ सवति-शृणो fa-ara-wara-gala-guardara ঋক্ষিঃ কাল খুলালি স্কুল ঘঞ্জি সুস্থ স্বল্প মূলজ্জা- গাজবং জাজি খায় স্কুঞ্জ # M: N 
8 
" 
BK. VII. CH. IV. g. 81] 
· REDUPLICATE. 
1483 
81. ris optionally substituted for the final 3 of the reduplicate of E, , , , and sy when the semi-vowel is followed by m or at in the Desiderative. 
Thus fawrafata or crafuafh; fortafusfa or Tarafunt; for fusta or urtragf; foarafuata or ghrafanía; forful or grafugte; parfagra or qonufa fa t1 All these are Desideratives of the Causatives of the above roots. Here though a letter like *, D. &c, intervenes between the semi-vowel and the preceding of the reduplicate, yet the substitution takes place owing to the express text of this sotra. In the preceding aphorism, the seini-vowel followed immediately after the of the reduplicate. The option of the present sätra is, therefore, an aprapta-vibhasha. The word is understood here also: therefore not in ufu, una 
yout : 521 Taifa il gruri, T : 11 . पनि ॥ यह यहालकिपरगन्तस्याभ्यासस्य गुणो भवति ।। 
82. Guna is substituted for the x und 5 (with their long) of a reduplicate, when the Intensive character of follows and also when it is elided. 
Thus eftet, naat with sp, and singatia with a " The fe is added in the latter by VII. 3. 94.' So also dira from $0 (VII. 3. 94 and 87). 
statnia: | 11 qera li ti, 49: 11 वृतिः ॥मकितोभ्यासस्य वीर्षो भवति बनि बलकि च परतः ।। 
83. A long .vowel is substituted for the s of the reduplicate in the Intensive (with expressed or elided FF), when the reduplicate receires no augment having an indi catory क॥ 
The reduplicate receives augments like , U* by the following satras. Thus पापच्यते, and पापचीति, यायज्यते and बायजीति | Why do we say " when it gets no augment'? Observe uria, pia, in, trifa u 
Obj:-When the a augment is added, the reduplicate will end in a consonant, and as it does not end in a vowel, there will be no occasion for lengthening; hence the employment of the term : is useless.' . . . 
Ans..The employment of this term by the Acharya indicates the existence of the following maxim : अभ्यासविकारेवपास मोत्सर्गान् विधान वाधन्ते "so far as changes of a reduplicative syllable are concerned, rules which teach thosc changes do not supersede one another". What is the necessity of this 
1484 
REDUPLICATE. 
[BK. VII. CH. IV: 8.85 
indication (jnapaka)? Observe डोक्य ते, here the rule of lengthening of this sätra, does not supersede, though it is subsequent, the rule of shortening in VII. 4. 59; so the diphthong stt is shortened to y, and it is then guņated by VII. 4. 82. Secondly observe भचीकरत्, here r is substituted in the redu plicate by VII. 4.79plus 93, and then this is lengthened by VII. 4.94, the latter not superseding the former. Thirdly observe मीमांसते &c, where in मान् + 
सन् (III. I.6), the reduplicate is lengthened, but that does not prevent ther of VII. 4.79. Fourthly observe भनीगणन्, where the substitute (VII. 4.97) does not supersede the shtra VII. 4. 60, by which the cof गण is elided. 
नीग्वञ्चुनसुध्वसु_सुकसपतपदस्कन्दाम् ॥ २४॥ पदानि ॥ नीक्, वञ्चु-बंसु चंसु-भ्रसु-कस-पत-पद-स्कन्दाम्॥ वृत्तिः ।। वञ्चु सुध्वंसु भंसु कस पत पर स्कन्द इत्येतेषामभ्यासस्य नीगागमो भवति यडियलुकि च ॥ 
84. The augment after is added to the reduplicate of the Intensive (with the expressed or elided yy) in the following :-पञ्च्, संस्, ध्वंस्, भ्रंश, कस्, पत्, पदू and स्कन्दू ॥ 
Thus धनीवच्यते and वनीवचीति : सनीलस्यते and सनीवंसीति; नीध्वस्यते and बनीसांति; बनीभ्रस्यते and बनीभ्रंसीति, (बनीभ्रश्यते and बनीभ्रशीति), पनीकस्य and चनी कसीति ; पनीपत्यते and पनीपतीति, पनीपयतें and sनीपरीति; घनीस्कयते and पनीस्कन्दीति ।। The nasal is elided in one alternative by VI. 4. 24, 
नुगतोनुनासिकान्तस्य ॥ ५॥ पदानि । नुक, अतः, अनुनासिक-भन्तस्य। वृत्तिः ॥ भनुनासिकान्तस्याङ्गस्य योभ्यासस्तस्याकारान्तस्य नुगागमो भवति यड्यालकाः परतः ॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ पदान्तवचति वक्तव्यम् ।। 
85. The augment नुक (न्) is added after the short w of a reduplicate in the Intensive (with or without ), when the root ends in a Nasal. 
As तन्तन्यते and तन्तनीति; जाम्यते and अजनीति, यंयन्यते and चंयमीति ; रम्यते and रमीति | The augment = here should be considered as anusvara, be cause an adeša is indicated by the nature of the sthanin which is replaced; and therefore in jyra, it remains anusvāra. Had it been 7, it could not have been changed to anusvara in यंयम्यते, रम्यते (See VIII. 3. 24). In सन्तन्यत &c, the anusvara is changed to , F &c, by VIII. 4.58; the other forms संतन्यते तंतनीति, जंगम्यते, अंगमीति are derived by the following : 
Vart :- This anusvåra should be treated as if it was at the end of a Pada or word. That being so, VIII. 4. 59applies, and we have the anusvara unchanged, as in तंतन्यते &c. . 
Why do we say "after a short "? Observe aforera 11 The u in my indicates that the augment will not be added to a reduplicate which once was long मा but became short by VII. 4.59 as from भाम to be angry', is वामान्यते. BK. VII. CH. IV. g. 89 ) 
REDUPLICATE. 
1485 
(the second lengthening takes place by VII. 4. 83). Why do we say ending in a nasal? Observe पापच्यते ॥ 
जपजभदहदशभअपशां च ॥८६॥ पदानि ।। जप-जम-दह-दश-मज-पशाम, च॥ पतिः॥अपजभ दहा मज पश इत्येतेषामभ्यासस्य नुगागमो भवति यड्यङ्लुको परतः ॥ 
86. The augment नुक् comes after the redupli cates of जप, जभ, दह, पश, मजा, and पश in the Intensive (with or 
without यस्) - Thus अंजप्यते and जंजपीति अंजभ्यते and जंजनीति, वयते and पछीति; वश्यते and smallfa II The root is oŲ, but it is exhibited in the satra as my, showing that even in यह लुक, the root loses its nasal, Similarly भग्यतें and भजीति, and पंपश्यते and पंपशीति ॥ This last is a sautra root. 
चरफलोध ॥७॥ पदानि।चर-फलोः , च॥ वृतिः ॥पर फल हत्येतयोरभ्यासस्य नुगागमो भवति यस्यालको परतः ।। 
87. The augment TF comes after the reduplicato of ay and in the Intensive (with or without TF) 
Thus sportant and judin (the lengthening of is by VIII. 2. 77) igat and पंफलीति ॥ See the following satra. 
उत्परस्याता ॥८८॥ पदानि । उत्, परस्य, अतः॥ पत्तिः ॥ परफलोरभ्यासात्परस्यात उकारादेशो भवति यड्यालको परतः ॥ 
88. For the subsequent a (i.e. for the ar of the root and not of the reduplicate), there is substituted in the Intensive (with or without यङ्) of घर and फल । 
The examples have been given above, as चंचूर्यते, चपीते and पंफुल्यते पं. Afta 11 Why do we say 'the m which stands subsequent to the reduplicate'? The substitute does not replace the of the reduplicate. Why do we say 'of '? The substitute should not replace the final letter, which it otherwise would have done by I. I. 52. The t in उत् debars guna (VII. 3. 86) in चंचूर्ति and पंफुलीति, for though ris lengthened by VIII. 2. 77, in चंचूर्ति, yet that lengthening is considered as non-existent or asiddha (VIII. 2. 1) for the purposes of Guna (VII. 3. 86). Quere. If the r in n debars guna, why should it not debar leng. thening also of VIII. 2.777 
ति च ॥८९॥ पदानि ॥ ति, च॥ पतिः ॥ तकरारी प्रत्यये परतभरालोरकारस्थ उकारादेशो भवति ॥ 
89. उ is substituted for the vowel of चर् and फल before an affix beginning with all 
Thus पतिः (-चरणं or ब्रह्मणः), प्रफुषिः and प्रफुलाः ॥ The anuvritti of पर उकोरयासस्य does not apply here, though present. See VIII. 2. 55. 
1486 
REDUPLICATE. 
[ BK. VII. CI. IV. $. 92 
रीगृदुपधस्य च ॥ ६ ॥ पदानि ॥रीक्, ऋतू-उपधस्य, च ॥ वृत्तिः॥कदुपधस्याङ्गस्थ योऽभ्यासस्तस्य गागमो भवति बलुकोः परतः ॥ पानिकम् ॥ रीगृवत इति वक्तव्यम् ।। 
90. The reduplicate of a root, which has a in the penultimate position, gets the augment A in the Inten sive (with or without यङ्)॥ 
As वरीवृत्यते and परीवृत्तीति, वरीयते and परीकृधीति, नरीनृत्यते and नरीनृतीति ।। 
Vårt:-It should be rather stated 'a root which contains a r': when as follows, whether this be of upadesa, or obtained by samprasarana, so that the augment may come in q ed and havifa where the me is of vocalisation, and not penultimate also. 
रुनिकौ च लुकि ॥ ९१॥ पदानि ॥ रुक्-रिको, च, ला॥ वृत्तिः ॥ यलुकि दुपधस्याङ्गस्य योभ्यासस्तस्वरुमिकावागमो भवतभकाराद्रीच॥ वार्तिकम् ।। मर्मज्यंत मर्पश्यमामास इत्युपसंख्यानम् ॥ 
___91. The augments रीक, रुक and रिक् come after the reduplicate of a root which has a x in the penultimate, only when the re of the Intensive is elided. 
Thus नति, मरिनर्ति, and मरीनति पर्वति, परिवर्ति, परीवति॥ Ther in sr is for the sake of pronunciation, the augment is il 
Vart:-मर्मज्यते and मर्मज्यमामासः should also be enumerated. These have taken augment, though the up is not elided here. 
ऋतश्च ॥ ९२ ॥ पदानि ॥ ऋतः, च ॥ वृत्तिः॥पकारान्तस्थानस्य योभ्यासस्तस्वरूमिकाबागमो भवतो क्षयहलुकि। 
Karikk:-किरति चर्करीसान्तं पचतीत्यन यो नयेत् । 
प्रापिझं तमई मन्ये मारग्धस्तेन संग्रहः ॥ 92. The reduplicate of a root, which ends in short *, gets, in the Intensive without re, the above augments fr, इ, and रि॥ 
Thus reitit, aftant, and rent, transformat and witra il Why do we say 'which ends in a short '? The rule does not apply to roots ending in long ras, पाकर्ति, चाकीर्तः, पाकिरति from n | The word पतः qualifies the word A, and not the word are, for an abhyasa is always short, so the in Key would become meaningless is the word qualified reduplicate. Therefore ending in long does not get , and fi augments in the reduplicate. 
Karted:-He who can conjugate, in . the Present tense, the yan-luk Intensive of and of other roots ending in long, is considered by ine to 'hc a person who has attained to the right knowledge of the employment of the 
BK. VII. CH. IV 8.93 ) 
REDUPLICATE. 
1487 
WN 
augments (, a, &c: and he has obtained the right use of words. 
The word partier in the Karika is illustrative of all roots like (Partit) ending in longu r is the name given to the ar form of the Intensive, by ancient grammarians. matara means, therefore, a form ending in yan-luk. Tufo is illustrative of mę or Present tense. 
__ सन्वल्लघुनि चपरेऽनग्लोपे ॥ ९३॥ पदानि ॥ सन्धत्, लघुनि, घा-परे, मन् metall 
वृत्तिः ॥ लघुनि धास्वक्षरे परतो योभ्यासस्तस्य चपरे णौ परतः समीव का भवति भनगलोपे। . 
93. In the reduplicated Aorist of the Causative, the reduplicate adapts itself to that of the Desiderative, when the vowel of the root is light, and the root has not lost its end-vowel before the Causative affix. 
The words of this sätra require a little detailed explanation. The word man means "like unto my or Desiderative"; i. e, as the Desiderative is treated, so should the 4 Aorist of the Causative. The words yra and it are both in the Locative case, but not in apposition with each other, but re fer to different objects. magrat means 'when a light vowel follows', namely that reduplicate which is followed by the light root-vowel. The operations to be performed on such a reduplicate, in the 7 Aorist, after the for are the same, as on the reduplicate of the Desiderative. 79.99 na "provided that a simple vowel of the Pratyahara me has not beed elided". We read the word 'causa tive' into this sotra, because there can be no other root which will form F Aorist. Causatives form such Aorist. (III. 1. 48), as well as the simple roots 
4, I and The words arit qualifies the word of understood: that stem which is followed by FF; therefore, it refers to the Causative stem, and not to the simple roots sri, dru and sru. The light vowel, therefore refers, to the light vowel of the Causative stem before II 
The word want is in apposition with it Thus 879 +POTE (III. 1. 30).=mama++ (III. 1. 48)-77+ (VI. 4. 51)+ (VII:4.1) = **+ . (VI. 1. 11)-1 4+AT (VII. 4. 79 read with VII. 4. 93) - 
AT (VII. 4. 94). 
Thus VII. 4. 79 teaches the substitution of form in the reduplicate of the Desiderative. The same substitution will take place in the reduplicate of the Aorist: as it, 4790! Thus by VII. 4. 80, r is substituted for the 7 of the reduplicate in the Desiderative, the same will be the case in the reduplicate of the Aorist, as मपीपवत् and भलीलवत्, and भजीजवत् ॥ Thus by VII. 4.81, r is optionally substituted for in the Desiderative reduplicate of g &c, the saine will hold good in the Aorist-reduplicate, as mi or PIT, KTX 
1488 
REDUPLICATE. 
(BK. VII. CH. IV. $. 93 
or WYTRITT or TT, TT or myan, 9777 or HTT, 
f wyer It Why do we say 'having a light vowel'? Observe HTL, 
TITUTI 
or , 
Some say, that in m ama, the syllable x is light, and therefore, the san-vat rule would apply : for a light vowel no where immediately follows a reduplicate; therefore, though a long syllable at intervenes, yet the rule will apply, because of the express text. This reasoning is wrong. The maxim বলে দাবখান অনিবি মাশাআ cannot be extended to cases like this. It applies only when the intervention consists of one letter and not of more than one. Obj. If so, how do you form afron for here two letters and (#) intervene between the reduplicate and the light vowel. Ans. The author indicates by implication in VII. 4. 95 that these roots like my do take g in the reduplicate; for had it not been so, what was the necessity of making an ex. ception in favor of roots like . ETC, F, FTC in VII. 4. 95. So that a conjunct consonant is not considered an intervention for the purposes of this rule. Therefore, &c would have taken or in the reduplicate by VII. 4. 79, read with the present satra, and so the Acharya enjoins instead in VII.4.95 with regard to these. 
Why do we say 'when pe follows? Observe 99 Why do we use the word me "followed by"? The rule would not apply when me alone follows without for, as a where one has taken in under the vartika - पसंख्यानम् ॥ 
Why do we say 'when an * vowel has not been droppod'? Observe Ayam from the Churadi root my which ends in , and this m is elided by VI. 4. 48. Obj. This lopa being considered sthanivat, will prevent the appli. cation of the present rule, as there will be an intervention. Ans. We shall give another example, TV from aro4ITT I Here fory is added to y under the Vartika a dlant, and the for portion is elided by 161, here a vowel and a consonant have been elided, and so the lopa is not sthanivat, 
In the double causative Aorist in the present rule applies, though one to has been elided. भवीवरम् -पादितवन्तं प्रयोगितवान् ॥ In fact, the elision of one for when followed by another for is not considered as an ak-lopa; the latter refers to the elision of any other vowel than full Therefore we have far after all In fact, this exception rests on the following vârtika TTC वर्ष नियुपसंख्यानम् ।। 
The lopa of the reduplicate which takes place before or of the roots to &c( VII. 4. 54 ) does not, however, take place in Aorist. The an alogy does not extend so far. In fact, the present sätra teaches a to 
BK. VII. CH. IV. $ 96 ) 
REDUPLICATE. 
1489 
namely the form which a reduplicate has in Desiderative, will be the form in the Aorist. But as At, T &c have no reduplicate forın in the Desiderative, the analogy stops. Therefore, we shall have AYT' Moreover the word # here means the operations that depend solely on TV Now the total elision of the reduplicate by VII. 4. 54 does not depend upon pay alone, but upon the augment also of VII. 4. 54. But as there can be no re in the Aorist, so there will be no elision also. In fact, an atidesá should be confined to general cases and not to particulars. 
atat mat: 11 EX II ma il 75, gt: 11 वृत्तिः । वीर्षो भवति लघोरभ्यासस्य लघुनि जो चपरे ऽनग्लापे । 
94. In the reduplicative syllable, . a prosodially short vowel is lengthened in the Reduplicated Aorist of the Causative, when the vowel of the root is light, and the root has not lost its end-vowel before the Causative für 
Thus wfc, the ( VII. 4.79) is lengthened. Similarly women, भलीलवन, भपीप बत् ॥ Why do we say which is prosodially light? Observe भार. WH Why do we say when the vowel of the root is light? Observe , 
TECHTEN Why do we say in the reduplicated Aorist? Observe mi 9991 The word qr is understood liere also, so the rule will not apply to simple roots as *HT II The words 'anaglope' are to be read here, therefore not so in 4441 
TITHEFTETIH 11 8411 qana Il Ma, Focat-fu-, FT-ETITA I 
FF: U FIE TUTTET ATT rata rarefiferanto et Trap air Cart I 
95. Short an is substituted for the vowel of the reduplicate in the Reduplicated Aorist of the Causative, of the roots smri, drf, tvar, prath, mrad, střf and spas, 
Thus HE, TI, ETTI, 9847, HTC, EFFTTH, W9E91 11 This debars the which would have come under VII. 4. 93. The short i indicates that it is not to be lengthened by VII. 4. 94, as MTT 11 
fara Ortayat: 11 88 11 qera il ferit, are, yht: 1 वृत्तिः ॥ वेटि बेटि इत्येतयोरभ्यासस्व विभाषा भक्त्यियमावेशो भवति वक्षरे णौ परतः ॥ 
96. Short His optionally substituted for the vowel of the reduplicate in ag and eng in the Reduplicated Aorist of the Causative. 
1490 
REDUPLICATE. 
(BK. VII. CH. IV. 8.97 
Thus भववेटत् or भविषेट, भरपेट and भचिपेटत् ॥ In one alternative there is shortening of the reduplicate (VII. 4. 59), and after such shortening, there is substituted in the other alternative. 
fa mur: Il gull rana 11 f, a, Tor: 11 'वृत्तिः ।। गणेभ्यासस्य इकारादेवो भवति वापर णो परतः ।। 
97. In the Reduplicated Aorist of the Causative, is substituted optionally for the vowel of the reduplicate in the ai 
As warrant or w rotu ta is a root which ends in , and this op being elided by VI. 4. 48 before the Causative for, the rule VII. 4. 93. does not apply to it, because there is an ak-lopa here, so in the other alternative, it has its natural que 
Printed at the Tara Printing Works, Benares City.