 ओ३म् 
अथ तृतीयाध्यायस्य प्रथमः पादः ॥ 
BOOK THIRD. 
CHAPTER I. 
-:: प्रत्ययः ॥१॥ पदानि । प्रत्ययः ॥ पृत्तिः ॥आ पञ्चमाध्यामपरिसमासेबानित ममनुकमिण्यामः प्रस्वबसंज्ञास्त वेदितव्याः, प्रकृत्यु पपदोपाधिविकारागमान्वर्जविस्वा ।। 
1. An affix. This is an aphorism intended solely to regulate the sense of others. From this place forward up to the end of the Fifth Book, whatsoever we shall treat of, will get the name of 'Pratyaya' or an affix, except the 'prakriti' or basc (such as गुप, तिम्, कित् in III. I. Sare bases, the affix being सन्), the 'upapada' or dependent word (such as स्तम्ब, धकृत in III. 2. 24 are upapadas), the 'upadhi' or attribute, the special cause that occasions changes (such as पy in III. 2. 25 is an upadhi); in the satra, III. 2. 25, the word Fora is a prakriti, fa and are arc upapadas, पशु is an upadhi, the affix being se, the substitute and the augment. Such as the affixes तव्यत्, सब्य, मनीयर् taught in III. I. 96, as कर्तव्यम्, करणीयम् 'to be done'. 
परश्च ॥२॥ पदानि ॥ परः, च, (प्रत्ययः)॥ पत्तिः ॥ परभ स भवति धातीर्वा प्रातिपदिकादा वः प्ररववसंतः॥ 
2. And subsequent. . This is also an adhikara' or regulating sutra, and is understood in all subscqucnt aphorisms; or it might also be called a 'paribhasha' or interpreting aphorism. That which is called an affix comes after, or is placed after, the 'dhata' or root, or the 'pratipadika' or crude form; as कर्तव्यम् and तिरीवम. 
The force of the word 'and' in this satra is to indicate that the affixes here treated of, are to be placed after a root &c.; not so, however, the affixes not taught in this Adhyaya. These latter, such as Unadi affixes, may sometimes, be placed in the beginning or the middle of a word. 
आयुदात्तश्च ॥ ३ ॥ पदानि ॥ आदि-उदात्तः, च, (प्रत्ययः) । पत्तिः ।। भायुदात्तव स भवति यः प्रत्ययसंतः॥ 
3. That which is called an affix, has an acute accont on its first syllable. 
This sätra may also bc treated as a Paribhasha or an Adhikara sätra. The udatta accent falls on the affix, and if it consists of more than one vowel, then on the first of the vowels. Thus the affix 64 has udatta on the first *, as. in on. This general rule of accent applies only where there is no special 
348 
THE DESIDERATIVES. 
[BK. III. CH. I. 84-5. 
rule laid down. Thus, rule VI. I. 163, declares that affixes having an indica tory # will have udatta on the final ; those having an indicatory s have accent on the middle (VI. 1. 217); those that have an indicatory q are a nudatta ; thosc having an indicatory 7, throw the acute accent on the syllable immediately preceding the affix (VI. 1. 193) ; the affixes having an indicatory and t throw the acute accent on the first syllable of the word to which they are added (VI. 1. 197); the taddhita affix having an indicatory takos acutc accent on the final (VI. 1. 165); and the affix having an indicatory is svarita (VI. I. 185). 
____ अमुदात्ती मुप्पितौ ॥ ४ ॥ पदानि ॥ अनुदात्ती, सुप्-पिती, (प्रत्ययः)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ सुपः पिता प्रत्यया अनुदात्ता भवन्ति । 
4. The case-affixes (sup) and the affixes hav ing an indicatory (pit) are anudâtta. 
This is an exception (apavada) to the last aphorism. As the 'two stones' ; the case-affix t is anudatta; so also तृपदः; so also पचति; The third person singular affix तिप् has an indicatory प, and is anudatta. But not पचत:. 
गुपतिकिद्भ्यः सन् ॥ ५॥ पदानि ॥ गुप्-तिज-किद्भ्यः, सन् (प्रत्ययः)॥ 
वृत्तिः । गुप गोपने, तिज निशाने, कित निवासे, एतेभ्यो धातुभ्यः सन् प्रत्ययो भवति। वार्तिकम् ।। निन्दाममाष्याधिमतीकारपु सनिष्यतेऽन्यन यथामा प्रत्यया भवन्ति ।। 
6. After the verbs गुप्, तिन and कित, comes the offix सन्. 
. This affix is to be added to the above verbs, whicn they mean to 'des pise', 'to endurc' and 'to hcal respectively, though thcy ordinarily incan 'to hide', to whet' and 'to dwell'.. As जुगुप्सते 'he censures or despises'; तितिसत 'he endures patiently'; forama 'he heals'. But starala 'he protects'; astafa 'he sharpens'; संकेतयति 'he makes sign'. 
When सन् is added, there is reduplication of theroot, by VI. I.9. Thus, गप+सन्म गुप +स (VII. 4.62)= जुगप्स् to which is added the third person singular termination भते-जगुप्सते. 
___मानबधदानशानभ्यो दीर्घश्चाभ्यासस्य ॥ ६॥ पदानि ॥ मान् बध-दान-शानभ्यो, दीर्घः, च, अभ्यासस्य, ( सन्, प्रत्ययः)। 
वृत्तिः ॥ मान पूनायाम्, बध बन्धने, पान भवखण्डने, शान भवसेजने, इत्येतेभ्यो धातुक सन् प्रत्ययो भवति, भाभ्यासस्वकारस्य वर्षावधो भवति ।। 
पातिकम ॥ भवापि समर्थविशेषग्यते ।। 
BK. III. CH, I. $ 6-7] 
THE DESIDERATIVES. 
349 
6. The aflix HT comes after the verbs Art 'to honor', o'to biud', 'to cut' and { 'to whet', and long is the substitute of the r (VII. 4. 79) of the redu. plicative (VI. 1.4) syllable. 
The is to be added only then, when the sense of the desiderative verb is as below : iad 'he investigates', tha 'hc loathes', tetan 'ho straightens', sirina "hc sharpens'. The verbs given in this and the preceding sätra, are Desiderative in form, but not in meaning. The word 'optionally' in the next sätra, may be read into this also, whereby the addition of a becomes optional. Thus मानयति, बाधयति, दानयति and निशानयति are also valid forms. , 
धातोः कर्मणः समानकर्तृकादिच्छायां वा ॥७॥ पदानि॥ urati, **, Tara- 
H TE, FETT, , ( , cu: ) . वृत्तिः ॥ इषिकर्मको यो धातुरिपिणेष समानकर्तृकस्तस्मादिच्छावामय वा सन् प्रत्ययो xxfull 
The 11 OTU TATATERTII पार्तिकम् ।। इच्छासमन्तारमतिषेधो वक्तव्यः॥ 
7. The aflix #7 is optionally attached, iu tho seuse of wishing, after a root expressing the object wishi ed, and having the same agent of the action as tho wisher thereof. 
As, x 'to do'; paitsfotofperafer 'ho wishes to do'. This is the Desiderative proper. It is optional to employ the desiderative affix, the same sense may be expressed by a phrase. The root must also be simple and not compounded with any upasarga, when the affix # is to be added. Thus 
Why do we say mu: 'aster (a root expressing) an object'? The affix will not come after an Instrumental case. Thus it fet ; here there is no affix. But गन्तु मिच्छति will be जिगमिषति. 
Why do we say ma 'when the subject of the verb to wish, is also the subject of the verb denoted by the object wished' ? Observe to TEU 
rafosta 4 . Here Yajsladatta is agent of the verb roula; but he is not agent of the action ira; hence there is no affixing. 
Why do we say regruty 'when the sense is that of wishing'? Ob scrve a rta he knows how to make'; here the sense being that of know ing, there is no affix. 
The word at 'optionally' shows that a sentence may also be employed to express the same idea. Thus कतमिच्छति or चिकीर्षति. 
350 
THE DENOMINATIVES. 
[BK. III. CH. 1. & 2. 
The word yait: being especially used in this sätra, shows that this #7 is an ardhadhatuka affix, while they taught in the two preceding satras, will not get this designation. 
Vart: The affix is added, when the sense is that of 'in imminent danger'; as T yffufa morfoqrafa 'the bank is in imminent danger of falling down'. So also in. 
Vart: There is no affixing of # after a verb which has alrcady taken #7 in the sense of wishing. As fatframefa. But the # of III. I. 5, 6 not denoting wishing, we have itfpqa, taifera. 
सुप आत्मनः क्यच् ॥८॥ पदानि ॥ सुपः, आत्मनः, काच, (vrat:, **a!, Toetat, a) 
त्तिः ॥ इषिकर्मण एपितुरेवास्मसंबन्धिनः सुबन्तादिच्छायामय वा क्यन् प्रत्ययो भवति ।। ha llary Arangu ft 76: 11 af 4 11 5 qiegrufaa 775644 11 
8. The asfx.is optionally employed, in the sense of wishing, after a word ending in a case-affix expressing the object wished as connected with the wish er's self. 
This forms the Denominative verbs, i. e., verbs derived from nominal bases. As, qw'son', gerar 'he wishes for a son of his own gw+7 =gH+ 
#=qxlu) (II. 4. 71, VII. 4. 33). 
Why do we use the word ? The affix should not come after a whole sentence, but only after the particular word ending in the case-affix. Thus in महान्तं पुअमिच्छति, the affix comes only after पुनम् and not महान्तं पुत्रं. 
Why do we say dtmanak? Observe trufqugfa 'he wishes a son for the king'. Here there is no affixing as the wishing is for another and not for one's own self. 
The o in ante is for the sake of classing kyach, kyan and kyash in one common group by simply using the word **, as in søtra a: a I. 4. 15; while 
distinguishes kyach from kyan &c., and is not for the sake of accent, the affix will be udatta by III. 1. 3. 
Vart :-In affixing kyach, prohibition must be stated of pronouns in Hand of Indeclinables. Thus in fiecara, ordfresfa, there is no affixing. 
Vart :- In the Vedas, the affix is added even when the wish is with re gard to another. As मा वा पका भघायको विन्. Here भघायु (pl. भाव:) is 
BK. III. CH. I.& 9-10.] 
KAMYACH AND KYACH. 
*351 
formed by kyach, of being added by III. 2. 170, and an is added by VII.,4. 37. See Rig Veda I. 120.7; 27. 3 &c. 
काम्यच ॥ ॥ पदानि ॥ काम्य, च, (सुपः, आत्मनः, धातो:, कर्मणः, इच्छायां, वा) ॥ 
वृत्तिः ।। सुबन्तास्कर्भण भात्मनेच्छायां काम्यच् प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
9. And the affix काम्बच् is also employed, in the souse of wishing, after a word onding in a case alix, expressing the object wished as counccted with the wisher's self. 
Thus, Tarafa 'he wishes for a son of his own'. 
The making of this a separate satra instead of adding it with the last aphorism and making one sätra of them both, is for the sake of the subsequent satra, where the anuvșitti of kyach only runs, and not that of kamyach. The क of kamyach is not indicatory. but is a part of the real affix. Here, there. fore, rule I. 3. 8 which would have made the letter an indicatory, does not apply ; because no particular purpose would be served by making indicatory. Or the affix kamyach may be considered to have an indicatory before it ie, the affix being chakamya. 
उपमानादाचारे ॥ १० ॥ पदानि ॥ उपमानाद्, आचारे, ( धातोः, कर्मयः, सुपः, वा, क्यच् ) ॥ 
वृत्तिः ।। उपमानास्कर्भणः सुपन्सादाचारऽय वा क्यच् प्रत्ययो भवति ।। वार्तिकम् ।। भधिकरणाच्चेति वक्तव्यम् ।। 
____10. The affix क्यच् is optionally employed, in the sense of treatment, after a word ending in a case alix deuoting the object of comparison. 
Thus, पुषमिवाचरति छात्र- पुत्रीयति छात्रम् 'he treats the pupil as a son' 
Vart: So also in a locative case. As granfrafat t'he dwells in hut as ifit werca palace'. पथकीयसि मंचके in a cot he lies down as if he were on a royal bedstead; he trcats a cot as a royal bedstcad'. 
कर्तुः क्पड सलोपश्च ॥ ११॥ पदानि ॥ कर्तः, पड़, स लोपः, च, (उपमानाद्, आधारे, सुपः, धातोः, वा)॥ 
तिः। उपमानास्कर्तः सुबन्तादाचारऽये वा क्यङ् प्रत्ययो भवति, सकारस्य च लोपो भवति ।। पार्मिकम् ।। भाचारऽवगल्भक्लीयहोयः क्विव्या वक्तव्यः ।। पार्मिकम् ।। सर्वप्रातिपदिकम्यहरवेके।। : 
352 
KYAN 
[BK. III. CII. I. $ 12. 
11. The afbx 4* is optionally employed in the sense of behaving, after a word ending in a case. affix, denoting the object of comparison of the agent; and there is elision (lopa) of the final # of the noun; if it ends with a स. 
Thus, श्येनेवाचरति काकः, श्येनायते, the crow behaves like a hawk'; अप्सरायते 'she behaves like an Apsara'; पयस्यते or पयायते 'it becomes milk'; (श्येन 
+4= + = så414, VII. 4. 25). 
In the words भोमस् - भीमायते, and भप्सरस् - अप्सरायते the final e is in. variably elided when forming the denominative verb: but not so in the case of पयस् where the elision is optional, as पयायते or पयस्थते. 
The clision of refers to the final a and not when it is followed by any vowel. Thus हंस-हंसायते; सारस-सारसायते ; here the स is not elided as it is not final. See. I. 1. 52. 
Vart:- After the words H F , eta, and ng, the affix fing is op tionally added in the sense of behaving like some one or some thing. As 979 Tera or waterua, eta or terre, era or trad. The alternative forms are derived by the affixing of kyan. 
Vart :-According to the opinion of some Grammarians, the affix fing comes optionally in this sense after all crude nouns. As भवति or भश्वायते, गर्दभति or गर्दभायते. 
fait pour sa tragu TTT: Il galiogaforul 29-01 fani, ufa, ota:, 19:, , ,( ) # 
वृत्तिः ।। भृश इत्येवमादिभ्यः प्रातिपतिको यो च्यन्तेभ्यो भुवि भारवयें क्या प्रत्ययो भवति, हलन्तानां च लोपः ॥ 
12. The affix ***, in the sense of becoming what the thing previously was not, is employed after the crude forms and the rest, which do not end with the alix fex (V. 4. 50); and there is elision (lopa) of the final consonant of these words, if they end in a conso nant. 
. Thus, Ut fa=xUrgê 'he becomes much (from a little); afturga "he becomes swift (from being tardy)". All these roots will be Atmanepadi (1.3.12). 
The phrase yea: 'not ending in the adverbial affix',' refers to every one of the words belonging to the class fugife. It may be objected, what was the necessity of adding this condition, since the affix fe itself denotes that something has become what it was not before; and therefore a word which has 
BK. III. CH. I. 13.) 
· 
KYASH. 
353 
taken the affix fog, will not again take aac, in that very sense. The repetition of fun here shows that the words yų &c. never take the affix rog, in the sense of 'something becoming what it was not before'. Thus the present sätra is an exception to sátra V. 4.50 which ordains peg. 
File: 1 yu, afir, 474, 7964, YUECH, , 3FATE, HATĘ, GATE, CATE, TE ira, Txea, TEGL, ATTE, ITU, TFT, UT, 8, , (fara T, TYT, TTS, 69, 1 fee, CHA) 
लोहितादिडाजभ्यः क्यष् ॥ १३ ॥ पदानि ॥ लोहित-आदि Tapi, , (yra) u 
afer : Il arraferazit tra i t ang team HTPAT LI 
13. The affix 840 in the sense of becoming what the thing previously was not, is employed after the words plea, &c. and after those that end with the affix n (V.4.57), when these words do uot take the affix free (V. 4. 50). 
Thus लोहितायते or लोहितायति 'he becomes red'; पटपटायते or पटपटायति 'he makes a noise like patapata'; Gilfre + ariffar + a fara, VII. 4. 25). 
The word 974274d is forincd by adding tlic asfix dach to the word e which is first reduplicated, and then takes the denominative asfix kyash. The asfix dach is added to express inarticulate sounds. 
There is no special class called lohitadi. The Vårtika, therefore, pro poses that the satra should read without the word ddi, as gjigarfext: 494.; 'the asfix kyash comes after lohita, and words ending in ddch'. 
This rule applies to words other than farfe which are always in variably Atma nepadi owing to the fra, asfix #E, while #19 is optionally both. (I. 3. 90). Thus turer or niga, frafa or Farmaa, Turufa or rura. कपायति or कपायते. The lohitadi is an भाकसिगण, the following being some of the words of this class ; alfga, 17, fta, 42, 43, 4 and T. 
The indicatory at in any is not for the sake of prohibiting guna and vriddhi (I. 1. 5). For guna or vriddhi takes place in a dhatu followed by a sår vadhatuka or ardhadhå tuka asfix. The asfix 999 is not added to a dhëtu but to a nominal stem : hence there is no scope for the operation of guna &c. The # is for the sake of grouping 4,745 and 49 in one class as ; as in sotra T: (I. 4. 15). There is, however, no word ending in a among those enumer ated above. 
354 
.. KYAN. 
[BK. III, CI. I. 8 14-16. 
The affix गच् (V.4.57) comes when the verb following is one of the three अस्, भ, or क; as पटपटाकरोति, भवति or -स्यात. The present sutra teaches by implication that when 944 follows 7, the above restriction, that the verb should be , nor #, is not applicable. Here ty comes without the ad dition of क,भ or अस्ति . 
The anuvšitti of spet: comes from the last sätra ; and hence the affix मयप is added in the sense of भभूतताव it. something becoming that which it was not before. 
कष्ठाय क्रमणे ॥ १४ ॥ पदानि ॥ कष्ठाय, क्रम, (पड)। पत्तिः ॥ कटशब्दाच्चतुर्थी समर्थात् क्रमणये नावे क्या प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ वार्मिकम् ।। समकष्टकमकृच्छगहन यः कण्वचिकीर्षायामिति वनव्यम्।। 
14. The affix क्यद, in the sense of exerting in dishonesty, is employed after the word 'mischief”, when the latter has the fourth case-affix in construc tion. 
Thus, कटाय कर्मणे कामति-कष्टायते 'he is assiduous for trouble, ie. he is assiduous in the commission of dishonesty, or hc plots'. 
Vart:--The affix ayr, comes in the sense of exerting in evil, after the words सम, कष्ट, कत, कच् and गहन; as, समायते, कष्टायते, कलावते, कृच्छावते, and गहनायसे। 
When the sense is not of 'evil', the affix is not added, as मनः कर्षमामति. 
कर्मयो रोमन्यतपोभ्यां वर्तिचरोः ॥ १५ ॥ पदामि ॥ कर्मशः, रोमन्यत-पोभ्यां, वर्ति-चरोः, (पङ) 
वृत्तिः । रोमन्यातपःशवाच्च कर्मणो वाक्रम वर्निचरोरर्ययोः क्यमवयो भवति । वार्मिकम् ॥ हनुचलन इति वक्तव्यम् ।। वार्तिकम् ।। तपसः परस्मैपरच॥ 
15. The affix ** is employed after the words, रोमन्य 'ruminating' and सपस 'austerity', when they are used as the objects of the action of repeating and performing respectively. 
Thus, रोमन्यं वर्तयतिन्नोमन्यायसे गोः 'the cow ruminates.' 
Vart: This is restricted to the word signifying movements of the jaws. Therefore there is no affixing here; as, कीटो रोमन्यं वर्तवति. 
Vart: The Prasmaipada affixes are used after the word तपस; as साधरतितपस्वति, the performs austerity'. 
BK. III. Cl. I. 516-18.] 
KYAN. 
355 
- बायोमभ्यामुद्वमने ॥ १६ ॥ पदानि ॥ बाष्प-बमयां, उद्वमने, (कर्मसः, क्या)। 
वृत्तिः॥ वापशम्बाकूमशनाच्च कर्मण उखमने क्या प्रत्ययो भवति ।। वार्तिकम् ।। फेनाच्चेति वनव्यम् ।। 
16. The affix fe is employed in the sense of ejecting, after the words 474 'vapourand 'heat' as the object of the action. 
Thus, arran 'it cmits vapour'; strah 'it sends out heat'. So also फेनायते 'it ejects froth'. 
शब्दवैरकलहायकश्वमेघेभ्यः करखे ॥ १७॥ पदानि ॥ शब्द-वैर कलह-अब-करव-मेघेभ्यः, करने, (क्य) 
वृत्तिः । शब्द वैर कलह अभ करप मेघ इत्येतेभ्यः करणे करोत्ययें क्या प्रत्ययो भवति । वार्मिकम् ॥ सुदिनदुनिननीहारयति वक्तव्यम् ।। वार्तिकम् ।। अटादाशीकाकोटापोटासोटाकष्टामहणं कर्तव्यम् ।। 
17. The affix क्याए, in the sense of making, comes after these words, as the object of the action, viz :-शन 'sound', र 'hostility', कलह 'strife', भन 'cloud', कण्य 'sin' and मेघ 'cloud'. 
Thus, शर्म करोति - शमायते 'he makes a noise'. So also वैरायते, कलहा. यते, अभ्रायसे, कवायते, मेघायते । 
____Vart:-It should be stated that the affix comes after सुदिन, दुर्विन and मी हार; as, सुविनायसे, मुर्दिनायते, नीहारायते । 
Vart:-So also should be included the words भटा, भट्टा, शीका, कोटा, पोटा सोटा and कष्टा; as भटायले, भट्टायते, शीकायते, कोदायते, पोटायते, सोसाय and कटा यते। 
The word alu in the satra is not the Grammatical Karana or the Ins trumental case, but has here its primary meaning of 'doing'. 
सुखादिभ्यः कर्व वेदनायाम् ॥ १८ ॥ पदानि ॥ मुख-आदिभ्यः, कर्तृ-वेदनायाम, (कर्मणः, क्य) ॥ 
पृत्तिः ॥ सुखात्येवमादिभ्यः कर्म यो बहनावाम ऽनुभषे वयद् प्रत्ययो भवति वेदवित्तुथे. रकर्नुः सम्बन्धीनि सुखादीनि भवन्ति ।। 
18. The affix in the sense of feeliug, comes 
Comm 
356 
KYACII AND NIN. 
[BK. III. CII. I. 
19-20. 
after the words सुख 'pleasure' &c., when the pleasure &c. belong to the agent as feels thereof. 
Thus सुखायते ' he feels pleasure'; दु:खायले 'he feels pain'. 
Why do we say 'when the sceling belongs to the agent'? Observe are arafa yena 197162 the valet knows the happiness of his master Deva datta.' Here the agent viz. a valet, is not the percipient of the 'happiness,' which belongs to his master; hence there is no affixing. 
सुखादिः। सुख, दुःख, सप्त, गहन, कच्छू, भस्, भलीक, प्रतीप, करुण, कृपण, सोट। 
नमोवरिवशिचत्रका क्यच् ॥ १९ ॥ पदानि ॥ नमस्-वरिवस् चित्रका, क्यच, ( करणे) ॥ 
वृत्तिः ।। नमस् परिवस् चित्र दायेतेभ्यो वा क्यच् प्रत्ययो भवति करणविशेष पूजादी। 
____19. The affix यच, in the sense of making, comes after these words as the object of the action viz: नमस् 'adoration', वरिवस् 'honor' and चित्र 'wonder'. 
.. Thus नमस्थति देवान्, 'he worships the gods' ; परिवस्यति गुरून्, 'he honors or serves the elders'; ferrata 'he astonishes ( makes it wonderful)'. The & in चित्र indicates that it takes the affixes of the Atmanepada. (चिन + य चिनी+व (VII. 4. 33) = चित्रीय). . 
पुच्छभारडचीवराविङ् ॥ २०॥ पदानि ॥ पुच्छ-भारत-चीवरात्, चिड, (करणे) ॥ 
त्तिः ॥ पुच्छ भाण्ड चीवर इत्येतभ्यो पिड प्रत्ययो भवति करणविशेषे ।। वार्तिकम् ।। पुष्ठापसने पर्यसन वा ।। पार्मिकम् ।। भाएसमाचयने ।।। वार्तिकम् ॥ चीपरावर्जने परिधाने वा। 
20. The alix fur, in the sense of making, comes after these words as the object of the action, viz:-पुच्छ tail', भाण्ड 'pot' and चीवर 'rag'. 
Thus resea hc lists up the tail', (thc scnsc must bc that of lifting or throwing about); सम्भाएडायते 'he collects pots in a heap'; संचीवरावते भिक्षुः 'the beggar collects or wears rags'. Of the affix for, the effective portion is the other letters are servile. Ther indicates Atmanepada (I. 3. 12)and userves the purposes of the application of the rule VI. 4. 51 which applies generally to all affixes containing for, such as fur, fuq &c. 
Vart :-After the word gee the sense of the affix is that of lifting or throwing about. BK. III. CH. I, H 21. 
NICH AND YAN. 
357 
.. 
. 
Vart :-After pop the sense of the affix is that of accumulation in a heap. 
Vart:-After efter the sense of the asfix is that of acquiring or wear. ing. 
मुबहमित्रश्लखलवणव्रतवस्त्रहलकलंकततस्तेभ्यो णिच् ॥२९॥ पदानि ॥ मुबह-मित्र-श्लम-लवस-व्रत-वस्त्र-हल-कल-कृत-तस्तेभ्यः, खिच, ( करणे )। 
वृतिः॥ मुएड मिश्र इलक्षण लवण मत वस्न हल कन कृत तूस्त इत्येतेभ्यः करणे णिच् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
21. The affix निन्, in the sense of making, comes after these words as the object of the action viz : मुएड 'shaving', मिश्र 'mixture', श्म ण 'soft', लवण 'salt', प्रत 'vow', वस्त्र dress', हल 'plough', कल 'strife', कृत 'done', and सस्त 'matted hair'. 
Thus मुण्डवति he shaves'; मिश्रयति he mixes'; इलक्षणयति 'he softens or alleviates'; लवणयति 'he salts'; पयोमतयति 'he fasts on milk'; संवनवति 'he covers with clothes it. dresses'; हनयति 'he ploughs'; कलयति the makes war'; कृतमति 'he appreciates kindness'; वितस्तवति he combs the hair, or disentangles matted hair or delivers from sin'. 
The affix after the word ay has the sense of 'cating' or 'abstaining therefrom'; as पयो व्रतयति 'he drinks milk, पलान्नं व्रतयति 'he abstains from the food prepared by a low caste'; after the word get the affix denotes the sense of covering. After हलि and कलि the sense is that of taking as हनि गहाति-इल. बति. The words in the satra are हल and कल and not हनि and काल. This anomalous form shows that in forming the Aorist of these by adding the affix चह (III. I. 48) the reduplication takes place, but not in the same way as if the affix were सम, ie. the सन्यद्भाव does not take place here in the Aorist (VII. 4. 93). Thus the Aorists are भजहल and भचकलदand not भनीहलत् and भचीकलत् which would have been the forms by the application of rules VII.4.79. & 94. if there was सन्वभाव. 
The word aan means either hair, or matted hair, or sin. 
धातोरेकाची हलादेः क्रियासमभिहारे यह ॥ २२ ॥ पदानि । धातोः, एक-अचः, हल-आदेः, क्रिया-समभिहारे, यह 
वृत्तिः ।। एबम् यो धातुईनादिः क्रियासमभिहारे वर्तते तस्माया प्रत्ययो भवति, पोनःपुन भशार्यों का क्रियासमभिहारः । 
358. 
YAN 
[Bx. III. CI. I. 8 22-24. 
वार्मिकम् ।। सचिसूचिमूल्यस्ववपूणेतीना पाहणंबर विधावनेकामालापर्थम् ॥ 
22. The afix वद, in the sense of repetition of the act, comes after a root, having a single vowel and beginning with a consonant. 
The phrase kriyd-samabhihdra means repetition of the act or its intensity. As पच् 'to cook', पापच्यते 'he cooks again and again'; जाज्वल्यते 'heshines with great intensity'. The root must be a simple root, and not compounded with any upasarga. We cannot therefore make Intensives of verbs like or 'to go', (because the root me, is preceded by the upasarga 9); or arī to be awake,' (because it contains two vowels); or for 'to see' (because it begins 
with a vowel). 
and out, though some of these contain more than two vowels and others begin with a vowel. 
As, सोसूच्यते, सोसून्यते, मोमूख्यते, अटाट्यते, भरायते, भशाश्यते, and पोर्णनयते. 
The affix is not added in these cases भूशं शोभते or भृशं रोचते, as it is against usage to make Intensive forms of these verbs on the sense of intensity, though in the sense of repetition we have रोरुच्यते and शोशुभ्यते. 
In making the Intensives, the root is reduplicated and it takes the ter minations of the Atmanepada as the root is हित. 
नित्यं कौटिल्ये गतौ ॥ २३ ॥ पदानि ॥ नित्यम्, कौटिल्ये, गती, (यङ्) । 
वृत्तिः॥ गतिवचनाद्धातोः कौटिल्छ गम्यमाने नित्यं वद प्रत्ययो भवति ।। । 
23. The afix यह invariably comes, in the sense of crookedness, after a simple verb expressing motion. 
Thus कम् 'to move', चंक्रम्यते 'he moves crookedly'. So also दन्दम्यते. After a verb of motion, the u never expresses intensity or repetition; so if the latter sense is to be expressed, a phrase must be employed; as u vrafer 'he wanders much'. This is inferred from the word forre used in the satra i e. To always has the sense of crookedness and no other sense after a verb of motion. 
लुपसदचरजपजमदहदंशगृभ्यो भावगर्हायाम् ॥२४ ॥ पदानि ॥ लुप-सद-चर-जप-जभ-दह-दंश-गृभ्यः, भाव-गायाम् , (या) ॥ 
वृत्तिः । नुप सर पर अप नम दह वंश गइत्येतेभ्यो भावगर्हावा पाल्वर्थगर्दावा वर प्रत्यवो भवति ॥ 
... 24. The affix at, when it is intended to can. vey the sense of contempt (mt) in respect of the souse 
Thue 
BK. III. Cii. I. § 25.] 
NICH. 
359 
of the root (1) comes always after the following roots, viz:- 'to cut off', ar 'to sit', 'to walk', 59 'to mutter silently any sacred formula', 'to gape or yawn', 'to burn', aq 'to bite' and I 'to swallow'. 
Thus लोनयतं 'he cuts off badly'; सासयते 'he sits badly'; चंचर्यते 'he walks badly'; ta 'lic recites badly' ; so also #mua, fara, r ad, fatefyd. The affix 45, does not come in the sense of repetition &c. after the above verbs, but only in the sense of censurable performance of the action denoted by the verbs. Separate words must be used to express the intensive or the frequentative meaning. As fri for 'he cuts off much'. 
Why do we say 'when contempt in regard to the sense of thc root is meant'? Observe en nyfe 'he recites well. There is no asfixing as no con tempt is denoted. Why do we say 'in regard to the action denoted by the root'? When the contempt is not with regard to the sense of the root, but with regard to the action as accomplished, the affix is not employed. Thus 
** hfa 44: thc Sodra recites the sacred mantras'. The word free of the last aphorism is understood here also. 
सत्यापपाशरूपवीणातूलश्लोकसेनालोमस्वचवर्मवर्णचर्यचुरादिभ्यो fer u n lugtfa FATT-917-19-tut-crew-in-1917-07 74-a-ad-9-offmi, full 
वृत्तिः ॥ सत्याविन्यपूर्णपर्यन्सभ्यधुरादिभ्यश्च णिच् प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
* 11 se aratararargrisar: Il 
25. The aflix fuu is employed after these words, viz:-#12 truth' (which then takes the form of 
249 as exhibited in the sûtra), TTT 'a fetter', " 'form', ftur 'a lute', 'cotton', la celebration', ar 'an army', ära 'the hair of the body', 'the skin', 'mail', u'cele. bration', 'powder and the verb of the Churâdi class. 
Thus parufa "he spcaks truly'; Feryaraia 'he unfetters or liberates'; रूपयति 'he looks'; उपवीणयति 'he sings with the lute'; भनुतलयति 'he makes a brush'; 3981 ala 'lc praises in verse'; fonfa 'he advances with the army'; spat भयति 'he rubs over the hair'; खचयति 'he feels of the skin'; संवर्मयति 'he puts on the mail arinour'; quafa 'he celebrates or colors'; v ara he pulverises. The roots of the Churddi class belong to the tenth conjugation, for a list of which sce the Dhatupatha. After the verbs of the Churddi class, the affix foxy is em ployed without alteration of the sense ; as otrafa 'he steals'. So also farrufa. 
360 
NICH." 
[BK. III. Cl. I. 8 26. 
. Vart:--The words भर्थ, वेद and सत्य take the augment भाप before the affix णिच् ; as, सत्यापयति, अर्थापयति, वेदापयति. The whole cquation is thus shown भर्थ + भापुक् +लिए+शप् + ति -भर्थ+ भाप्+ +भति- भयापि+भति = भर्यापयति (VII. 3. 85). The final syllable called is not elided in this case, i.e. of stuia the syllable or is not elided before fun, as it would have been by VI.4.155. The reason is that if it was to be elided, there would have been no necessity of adding it. The affix for has the sense of 'unsettering' after the word IT, of 'sceing' after 69, of 'singing in accompaniment after aftur, of 'brushing' after तल, of 'praising' after श्लोक, of 'leading' after सेना, of 'rubbing' after लोम, of 'taking after स्वच, of 'putting on after वर्म and of taking' after वर्ण. 
हेतुमति च ॥ २६ ॥ पदानि ॥ हेतुमति, च, (धातोः, णिच) ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ हेतुः स्वतनास्थ कर्तः प्रयोजकः तदीयो व्यापार: प्रेपणादिलक्षणे हेतुमान् तस्मि अभिधये धातोर्णिच प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
वार्तिकम् ॥ तस्करोतीत्युपसंख्यानं सूत्रयस्थाचर्यम् ।। 
वार्तिकम् ।। भाख्यानास्कृतस्तदाचष्ठ इति णिच् कृमक प्रकृति प्रत्यापत्तिः प्रकृतिकच्च कारकम् ॥ 
वार्तिकम् ॥ भाब्लोपच कालात्यन्तसंयोगे मर्यादायाम् ।। 
पार्तिकम् ।। चित्रीकरणे प्रापि॥ : पार्सिकम् ।। नक्षमयोगे हि ॥ . 
26. The affix णिच् is employed after a root, when the operation of a causer is to be expressed. 
___The hetu (I. 4.55) means the mover of the independent agent; an operation relating to the hetu, such as directing &c. is called hetumat; as atio कारयति 'he causes to prepare a mat'; भोरनं पाचवति 'he makes the ricc to be cooked'. In other words, the affix for forms thc causative verbs. 
. Vart:-The affix comes also in the sense of the does that' after the words सब&c. Thus सनं करोति = समयति 'he makes sutra' So also मनयति. 
Vart:-After words ending in aq asfixes and describing legends, comes the affix fuy, when the sense is ‘he does that'. The affix is cli ded, the word reassumes its basic (orylirani) form, and the basc is as if the agent, thus कंसवधिमाचष्टे - कंसं पातयति पनिवन्धमाचष्टे अलि बन्धयति; रामागमनमाचष्टे = 
रामानम् भागमयति. 
Vart:-Under the conditions mentioned in the last वार्तिक, the upa sarga o is elided, when duration of time is meant expressing limit. Thus भारामिविवासंभाचष्टे = रात्रि विवासयति ; here the भा of आरामि is elided. 
Vart:-Under the conditions mentioned in the second vartika thic affix णिच् has the sense of 'making wonderful', meaning attaining that'. Thus 
BK. III. CI. I. $ 27-28.] 
YAK. 
"360 
उज्जयिन्याः प्रस्थितो माहिष्मायो सयोगमनं सभावयते सर्यमुद्गति 'going from Ujjain he finds the sun risc in Mahismati (wonderful speed). 
Vart :-When an asterism is in composition and the sense is that of knowing, thicrc coincs thc affix fut after a word ending in asfix, the ay affix is clided, the word rcassumes its basic forin and the base is as if the 
agent. Thus पुष्ययोगं जानाति = पुष्येण योजयति. So also मघाभियोजयति. 
करडवादिभ्यो यक ॥२७॥ पदानि ॥ कराड-आदिभ्यः, (यक) वृत्तिः ॥ कण्डम् इत्येवमारियो यक् प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
27. The aflix an is employed after the roots कएडु 'to itch', &c. 
Thus, Focufat or maya 'he itches or scratches'. This word takes ter minations indicatory. The words कण्डु &c. are both roots and nouns, and are placed therefore in a separate list by themselves and are not included in the general list of verbs. The affix applies to those words as roots and not as nouns. 
कएड्वादिः। कण्डूम, मन्तु, हणीम्, बल्गु, मन, मनस्, मही, ले, लोन, परस्, दरम्प रम, वर, मेधा, कुषभ, मगध, सन्तस्, पम्पस, सुख, दु:ख, सपर, भर, भिषन, भिष्णन, पुष, चरण, पुरण, भुरण, सुरण, गगर, एला, केला, खेला, लिट् and लोट् । 
गुपधपविच्छिपणिपनिभ्यः आयः ॥२८॥ ॥ पदानि ॥ गुप-धूप विच्छुि-पणि-पनिभ्यः, आयः ॥ 
वृतिः ॥ गुपू रक्षणे, धूप सन्तापे, विच्छ गसो, पण व्यवहार स्तुतौ च, पन च, इत्येतेभ्यो धातुभ्य भाय प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
28. The affix*comes after IL 'to protect', 'to heat', freg 'to approach', qu 'to contract or praise' and पन 'to praise'. 
Thus farafa 'lic protects'; grafa 'he heats'; so also, frerafa, qurala, and पनायति. 
The verb qu being read along with qq 'to praise,' has here the sense of praise only ; so that the affix does not come after the verb ru when it means 
to make a contract'; as तस्य पणते, सहनस्य पणत. 
Thc verbs in Aru do not take Atmanepada asfixes, as there is no indi catory letter to show that. 
ऋतेरीयङ्॥ २९ ॥ पदानि ॥ ऋतेः, ईयङ्॥ वृशिः ।। ऋतिः सौनो धासुघणायां वर्तते लत ईयड प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ .. 
362 
.. 
AYA &c. 
[BK. III. Cl. I. $ 29-32 
Th 
29. The afix fae, oomes after the sätra root fa 'to reproach'. 
The indicatory shows that the verb will take the affixes of the Atmanepada ; as marca 'he pities or reproaches'; so also, Fatura, matera. 
fue el 30 ga u FÀ:, fue u FT: 11 Àviatorget all. 
30. The affix fue comes after the root * 'to desire'. 
The o indicates vriddhi (VII. 2. 115) and shows Atmanepada ; as, कामयते 'he desires'; so also कामयेने and कामयन्ते, 
- मायादय आर्द्धधातुके वा ॥३१॥ पदानि ॥आय-आदयः, आई wiga, at, (arra:) ! . .qfar: 11 ayranlage M uraraquararapen: steyen ay **fra il 
31. The affixes art and those that follow it, (i.e, opra, 76 and fus) are optionally added, when it is desired to express one's self with an ardhadhâtuka affix. 
Thus at 3rd. sing. of the Future is an ardhadhatuka affix. It is optional to retain the aya of gopaya before this asfix. So we have tirarfear or गोमा 'he will protect'. So also भर्तिता or तीयिता; कमिता or कामयिता. 
But for this sátra, the ashxes are &c. would have come always even when ardhadhatuka asfixes were to be applied. This makes it optional. Therefore proper ardhadhâtuka affixes should be applied when we retain spre &c. and when we do not retain them. Thus the ardhadhatuka fii (III. 3. 95) will be employed in forning th: feniminc noun froin the simple root, but the ardhadhatuka s (III. 3. 102 ) will be employed in formning. the feminine when भाव &c. are retained. Thus गुप्तिः or गोपावा. 
Aga ura: Alt Luerra Il 44-471f-watti, ce: # 
gyfer: 1 aarama: mar yrgdar **fAT !! 
32. All the words ending with the affixes ar and others are called Dhậtu. 
This extends the sphere of Dhatu or roots already defined in sätra I. 3. 1. These roots may be called derivative roots. They are separate independent roots, and have all the functions of a root, as taking tense-affixes &c. as shown in the above cxamplcs. Thus familief 'to wish to do', ufc 'to 
... 
I. CH. I. 8 33-35] 
SYA AND TAST. 
363 
rause to do'; क्रिय 'to do repeatedly' are separate roots and not the same asy to do' and thus take शप् &c. 
स्थतासी लुलुटोः ॥ ३३ ॥ पदानि ॥ स्व-तासी, ल-लुटोः, (धातोः)। 
वृत्तिः ॥ नरूपमुत्सहानुबन्धं सामान्वमेकमेव तस्मिन् लुटि च परतो धातोर्वथासंख्य स्वसासी प्रत्ययो भवतः ।। 
33. When न and लुद follow, then स्व and सासि are respectively the alixes of a verbal root. . 
is the common expression for at and formed by reject ing their special anubandhas, and means therefore the 2nd Future and the Conditional tenses. mo is the ist Future also called the Periphrastic Future, Thus करिष्यति भकरिषयत्, कर्ता. Thes of सासि is indicatory and shows that the nasal of the root is not to be dropped before this; as मम् to think', मन्ना the will think'. 
सिबलं लेटि ॥३४ ॥ पदानि ॥ सिप, बहुलम्, लेटि, (धातोः)। वृति ॥ धातोः सिप् प्रत्ययो भवति बहुल नेटि परतः ।। 
34. Ferq is diversely the affix of a verbal root when gię follows. 
The tensc called for subjunctive is found in the Vedas only. When the subjunctive tense is employed, the affix fer is diversely added. 
Thus wiferat, Arfina, afya. Somctimes this augment is not employed; thus पताति विद्युत् उदाधि ज्यावयाति. Thus in Rig Veda I. I. 2, वत्सति is an example of me with fuqu 
कास्प्रत्ययादाममन्त्रे लिटि ॥३५ ॥ पदानि ॥ कास्-प्रत्ययाद्, आम्, अमन्त्रे, लिदि, ( प्रत्ययः, धातोः)॥ 
पतिः ॥ कास शम कुत्सायो, ततः प्रत्ययान्त यस धातुभ्य भाम् प्रत्ययो भवति निहि परतोमिन्नविषये ॥ 
वार्तिकम् ।। कास्यनेकाच इति वक्तव्बम् चुलुम्मायधम् ॥ 
36. भाम् is the affix of the verb कास 'to cough', and of those roots that are formed by affixes (i. e. the derivative verbs), when for follows, except in the Mantra. 
This forms the Periphrastic Persect. The Perfect of Fre, will be ATHTH, after which the terminations of the Perfect are all elided (II. 4. 81 ) and instead, the perfect tense of the auxiliary verby or TEL or is added. As कासांचा 'he coughed'; चोरवामास 'he stole'. So also लोजवांचा. 
364 
AM. 
. 
BK. III. CI. I. 8 36-38. 
· This rule however does not apply to the Vedas; as FUT ATT Rig. Veda I. 79.2. 
Vart:-This rule also applies where the root is polysyllabic con sisting of more than one vowel ; as चुलुम्पाञ्चकार, हरिद्राम्चार ।। 
The final c of भाम् is not indicatory. 
इजादेश्च गुरुमतोऽनन्छः ॥३६॥ पदानि॥ इच्-आदेः, च, गुरुमतः, अनन्छः, (लिटि, आम्) ॥ 
वृतिः॥ जातियों धातुर्गुरुमान् अच्छतिवर्जितस्तस्माच्च लिटि परतः भाम्प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ ऊतिश प्रतिषेधो पत्कष्यः॥ 
. 36. The affix आम् is used when लिद् follows, after a root beginning with a letter of r pratyâhâra and hav ing a heavy vowel, excepting the root aच्छ 'togo'. 
Thus KE to try', हिचके 'he tried' ; so also जहाच 'he guessed', एधाश्चत 'he grieved'. 
But forms 'he failed or went'. This applies to mono syllabic roots which begin with any vowel prosodially long, except 9 or 97. The verb su 'to cover' is, however, an exception; its perfect is uit 'he covered'. 
Why do we say 'beginning with or any vowel except for spr'? Observe भर्द, Perfect भान (VII. 4.71). Why do we say 'heavy vowel' ? Observe उख्, Perf. उपोख (VI. 4.78) अखतुः, ऊखुः. Why do we say 'vowel' ? Observe कुर्द, Perf. चुकरें ; पू, Perf. सुपूरे. 
दयायामश्च ॥३७॥ पदानि ॥ दय-अय-आसः, च, (लिटि, आम्)॥ 
वृत्तिः ।।दय दानगतिरक्षणेषु, भय गती, भास उपवेशने, ए यच लिटि परतः भाम्प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
37. After the verbs merito give', 'to go' and 'to protect', भय 'togo', and भास 'to sit', there is the affix भाम्, when लिट् follows. 
Thus याञ्चके 'he gave'; पनायाचक 'he ran away'; भासांचक्र 'he sat'. 
उपविदजागृभ्योन्यतरस्याम् ॥ ३८ ॥ पदानि ॥ उष-विद. जागृभ्यः, अन्यतरस्याम, (आम, प्रत्ययः, लिटि) ॥ 
पतिः ॥ उप पाहे, विद ज्ञाने, भाग निद्राक्षये, एतेभ्यो लिटि परतोन्वितरस्थामाम् प्रत्ययो भवति॥ 
38. The affix HT is optionally employed after these, viz :-रम् 'to burn', विद 'to know', and भाग 'to wake', when we follows. 
BK. III. CH. I 8 39-41.] 
AM OPTIONAL. 
365 
Thus भोपाञ्चकार or वोष, विवाचकार or विवेद, जागराञ्चकार or जनागार. As there is an agreement in the present instance to regard the verb far as ending in a short , guna is not substituted, as it would otherwise have been by rule 
VII. 3. 86. 
भीड़ी हुवां शुलुषञ्च ॥३९ ॥ पदानि ॥ भी-ड्री-भ-हुवां, लुवत्, च, ( आम्, लिटि, अन्यतरस्याम् ) ॥' 
दन्तिः ॥ मिभी भये, ही नमायाम्, डुम् धारणपोषणयोः, दानाहानयोः, एतेभ्यो लिटि परतः भाम्प्रत्ययो भवरवन्यतरस्थान्, ग्लाविव चास्मिन्कार्य भवति ॥ ३५॥ 
39. भाम is optionally affixed, when लिए follows, after these verbs भी 'to fear', ही 'to be ashamed', 'to nou. rish', 'to sacrifice'; and when is affixed, the effect is as if there were melision and the roots belouged to Ivadi class. 
The effect of 7 is to cause reduplication by rule VI. 1. 10. As निभवानकार or विभाय, मिहवाञ्चकार or निहाय, बिभराधकार or बभार, जुहवाम्बकार or 
जुहाव. 
कच्चानुप्रयुज्यते लिटि॥४०॥पदानि,क, च, अनुप्रयुज्यते, लिटि। पतिः ॥ भाम्प्रत्ययस्य पश्चास्कृमनुप्रयुज्यते लिटि परतः, कमिति प्रत्याहारेण वस्तयो गयन्त तरुसामध्याहस्ते भावो न भवति । 
40. After a verb which ends with भाम्, the verb a'to do'is annexed, when we follows. 
After the above verbs formed by taking the augment the perfect tense of Te is added to form their Perfect. This has already been illustrated in the above examples. The word includes also the verbs 7 and 976. All thesc thrce may be used as auxiliaries. The verb wę when uscd as an auxiliary, is not replaced by X (III. 4. 52) before the fate affixes which are ardhadhatuka affixes. Thus पाधयाम्पकार, पाचयाम्बभूव, पाचयामास. 
विदाकुर्वमितवत्यन्यतरस्याम् ॥४१॥ पदानि ॥ विदाकर्वन्तु, इति, अन्यतरस्याम् ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ विशंकुनिवत्येतदन्यतरस्याम् निपास्यते ॥ 
___41. The form विदाकुर्वन्तु is optionally employed as an irregular form. 
This irregular form is obtained by adding the affixury to the root for 'to know,' when followed by fire or the Imperative tense ; the tense affixes of dit are then elided by luk; moreover there is no substitution of guna 
366 
CHLI. 
[BK, III. Cl. I. 642-43. 
मक 
as required by VII. 3. 86; and when we have thus obtained the form विधाम, we annex to it the eोर of the verb क; thus we have पिताकर्षन्तु or सिम्त 'let them know. The third person plural is not only intended to be spoken of by the employment of the form factory in the aphorism ; on the con trary, the word for shows that all the numbers and persons of the Imperative may be so employed; as विदारोतु विशंकुरुताम् &c. 
अभ्युतसादयांप्रजनयांचिकयांरमयामकः पावयांक्रियाद्विदाम क्रनिति बन्दसि ॥ ४२ ॥ पदानि ॥ अभ्युतसादयाम्-प्रजनयाम-चिकयान रमयामकः, पावयांक्रियाद्-विदामक्रन, इति, छंदसि, (अन्यतरस्याम् ॥ 
वृतिः ।। मथुत्सादयामित्येवमायः छन्दसि विपवेऽन्यतरस्यां निपात्यन्ते ॥ 
42. The forms भम्युल्सादवामकः प्रजनवामकः चिकवामकः रमया Haf: 94alfmart fagrama are irregularly formed in the Chhandas. 
The first two of these and the fourth are the Aorists of the causatives of the roots. सन् 'to sit', मन् 'to be born', and रम् 'to sport': to which the affix sra is added. The third is the Aorist of the root for 'to collect', to which ST has been added after the reduplication and the change of 
into a of the root. The auxiliary 970: is added to all these four. The fifth is derived from the root 'to blow, to purify", by adding the causative affix णिच, annexing the affix भाम् before the terminations of the Potential (निर) and then using after the form so obtained, the auxiliary firan. The last is the Aorist of fate 'to know', to which wrx is added and the auxiliary mi is em ployed. These are the archaic forms; their modern forms are as follow : भन्युरसीपरत्, पानीजनन्, भपीस, भरीरमत्, पाण्याए, भवेरिपुः । 
चिल लुङि॥ ४३ ॥ पदानि ॥ लि, लुछि, (धातोः, प्रत्ययः) ॥ वृतिः ॥ धातोः नि प्रत्ययो भवति लुहि परतः ॥ 
43. When yr follows, the aflix ftar is added to the verbal root. 
The y of form is for the sake of articulation, the is for the sake of accent (VI. I. 162.) showing that an affix which has an indicatory च has udatta on its final. Then remains only for, which after all, is to be replaced by other affixes, as we shall show below. In fact funt is the common name for all 
Aorist afixes. 
लेः सिच्॥४४॥ पदानि ॥ लेः, सिन् । वृत्तिः । सिनादेशो भवति ॥ पार्मिकम् ।। समशकपदपा सिंज्या पनमः ।। BK. III. CH. I. $ 44-46.] 
SUBSTITUTION OF CHLI. 
"367 
44. Of नि, सिच् is the substitute. The r of fair is for the sake of pronunciation, the is for accent, and the real affix is स्; as भकात् 'he did'. When सिच is added, the termina tions of the Aorist assume the following forms. 
स्माधि 
Parasınaipada. 
Atmanepada. sing. dual plural sing. dual plural Ist pers. सं स्व एम 
सि स्वहि 2nd pers. सीः स्तं, त स्त त । स्थाः,थाः साया 3rd pers. सीत् स्तो, तो सुः . स्त, स साता सत 
The substitution of former is optional in the Aorist of the roots en 'to touch', र 'to rub', कष् to plough', हप् 'to become satisfied', and कृप् 'to light'. Thus the Aorist of has three forms%3; भरमाजीत, भस्पासीत् or भरपात्. Similarly we has भाक्षात्, अमानीत् or भक्षत ; कृष, भकापीत् मकाक्षीत् or भकशत; ब, भतासीत , भवाप्सीत , or मतपत । इप, भवाप्सी, भदासीत् or भनृपत् । 
शल गुपधादनिटः क्सः॥४५॥ पदानि ॥ शलः, इग-उपधात्, मनिटः, क्सः, (बलेः, लुडि) ॥ 
वृत्तिः । शलन्तो यो धातुरिगुपवस्तस्मात् परस्व लेरनिटः, क्स भावेशो भवति । 
45. After a verb that ends in a la consonant, and has an a vowel for its penultimate letter, and does not take re (VII. 2. 10), कुस is the substitute of ग्लि, 
The forms of the terminations of the Aorist with are as follow: 
Parasmaipada. 
Almanepada. sing. dual plural sing. 
plural Ist pers. सं साथ साम् 
सीवहि सीमहि 2nd pers. सः सतं 
सथाः, था: साथाम् सम्पन, ध्वम् 3rd pers. सत् ससा 
सन् । 
सतत साता As, म and कृषु in the last satra have their Aorist with us as भरक्सत् and भकषत् ; so दुह 'to milk forms मधुसत् the milked', निस् 'to lick' भनित्तत्र 
Why do we say 'when ending in I, 4, and '? Observe Hurta, भ त्सीत; here सिच् is employed. Why do we say thaving for its penultimates, Se or न? Obscrveभधातीत. Why do we say 'not having an intermediate 
'? Observe water and wattia. See VII. 2. 4 and VIII. 2. 28. 
शिलष आलिंगने॥४६॥ पदानि ॥ शिलषः,आलिंगने, (पलेक्सः )॥ वृत्तिः ॥ स्लिपर्धातोरानिजनक्रियावचनात, परस्थ च्नेः स भावेशो भवति ॥ 
46. * is the substitute of first after the verb fire, when it is employed in the sense of embracing. 
dual 
सि 
368 
SUBSTITUTION OF CHLI. 
[BK. III. C1. I. $ 47-49. 
This is a restrictive aphorism. As s era, aran 'he embraced the girl'. But समाश्लिषज्जतुकाष्ठम् the glue joined the wood'. 
न दूशः ॥४७॥ पदानि ॥न, दृशः, (पलेः, यसः)॥ पतिः । शेर्धातोः परस्य च्नेः क्सादेशो न भवति ।। 
47. क्स is not the substitute of चिन after the verb 'to see'. . 
___ This is an exception to the satra III. 1.45. enjoining क्स. The root दृश will form its Aorists by III. I. 57. and will take भE. and सिन्; as भवति or भवातीत 'he saw', 
हिनिदुख़ुभ्यः कर्तरि बङ् ॥४॥ पदानि ॥ खि-नि-द्र-सुम्यः, कतरि, चा, (ग्ले, लुडि) ॥ .. 
• वृत्तिः ॥ ज्यन्तेभ्यो धातुभ्यः भिवू इत्येतेभ्यश्च परस्व लेवाशो भवति कनवाचिनि नहि परतः ।। . 
वार्निकम् ।। कमेरुपसंख्यानम् ॥ 
48. After a root which ends in fu (III. 1. 20, 21, 44, &c.) and after the verb' for 'to serve', { 'to run, and a 'to drop', is the substitute of fert, whon * follows signifying an agent. 
The prevents guna and vriddhi and q is to distinguish it from he. When qe is added. there is reduplication (VI. 1. 11). The usual terminations of the Imperfect are employed after the root, when us is used ; as भचीकरत 'he caused to make'; भशिधियत् he served or went'; भद्रवत् 'he ran'; भसुषवत् 'it flowed'. This form is not used in Passive ; as, armaty. 
The root * 'to love' should also be included in this rule. #, when it takes the affix fur (III. 1. 30) will of course be included in this satra, by virtue of its ending in fw; the Vartika makes the additional statement that even when the root does not take the affix fut, the present aphorism 
must apply to it. Thus we have भचकमत 'he loved'; when it takes पिड, the Aorist will be भचीकमत् (VII. 4. 93, 79,94.) 
विभाषा घेट ख्योः ॥ ४ ॥ पदानि ॥ विभाषी, घेट-व्योः, (पले., पङ, कतरि, लुछि) ॥ 
वृत्तिः ।। धेट् पाने, दुभोशिष गतिवस्याः , एताभ्यामुत्तरस्व लेर्विभाषा चादेशो भवति ॥ 
49. After the roots _ 'to suck', and शिव 'to grow', पर is optionally the substitute of नि, when जुन follows siguifying an agent, 
BK. III. CH, I. $ 50-52.]. 
SUBSTITUTION OF CHLI. 
369 
As, भवपत, 'he sucked'. When it takes the alternative. सिच, then rule II. 4. 78. comes into operation, and we have hyra, and mytera 'he sucked'. So also of शिव, we have भशिश्वियत 'he grew'. It also takes the भा, (III. I. 58) and then its form is भश्वत or भश्वयीत. 
गुपेश्छन्दसि ॥ ५० ॥ पदानि ॥ गुपेः, छन्दसि, (ग्ले, घड़, विभाषा, कर्तरि, लुडि)॥ 
वृत्तिः॥ गुपे : परस्य म्लेच्छन्दसि विषये विभापा चनादेशो भवति ॥ 
___50. After the verb गुप् 'to protect', चर is op tionally the substitute of fear in the Chhaudas. . 
This rule applies where the root It does not take the affix atra (II. I. 28). As इमान् नो मित्रावरुणौ यत गहान् भ गुपसम् 'Mitra Varuna protected these our houses'. The other forms are अगोप्तम्, भगोपिष्टम् or भगोपाथिप्टम्. In the secular literature, the latter three forms are used, but not the first. 
नौनयतिध्वनयत्येलयत्यर्दयतिभ्यः॥५१॥ पदानि ॥ न, जनयति भवनयति-एलयति-अर्दयतिभ्यः, (च्ले, चकि, वंदसि) ॥ 
वृत्तिः॥ ऊन परिहाणे, ध्वन शये, इन प्रेरणे, भई गती वाचने च, एनेग्यो धातु भयो प्यन्तेभ्यः पण च्नेश्वड प्राप्त छन्दसि विषये न भवति । 
5.1. After the causatives of the verbs *7 'to de creasc', धन 'to sound', इन 'to send', and भई 'togo or to beg', 
is not the substitute of feat in the Chhandas. 
Thus we have eft: in the Vedas ; Militare in the classical literature; so also नयीत, ऐलथी and भयीत् ; their classical forms being अदिध्वनत् , ऐलिलत, and anfferat. See Rig Veda I. 53, 3, I. 162. 15. and Panini VII 2. 5. 
___ अस्यतिवक्तिख्यातिभ्योग् ॥ ५२ ॥ पदानि ॥ अस्यति-वक्ति ख्यातिभ्यो, अङ्, (ब्लेः, कर्तरि, लुङि) 
वृत्तिः ।। भसु क्षेपणे, वत्र परिभापणे, भूमावेशो वा, क्या प्रकयने, पसिनादेशो वा, एभवः परस्व लेरमदेशोभवति कर्मवाचिनि नुपिरतः ॥ 
62. After the verbs भस् 'to throw', वच् 'to speak', and ma 'to speak', 6 is the substituto of foot, when gr. follows signifying the agent. 
व may be either the root, or the substitute of D (II. 4. 53) and so also pur may be the root, or the substitute of T (II. 4. 54). The root He belonging to the fate or the Fourth conjugation, falls under the subdivision qera, and therefore it would have taken we in the Parasmaipada 
370 
SUBSTITUT.ON OF CHLI. 
[BK. III. CI. I. $ 53-55 
by rule III. 1. 55. The repetition is to indicate that it takes ut, in the 
Atamanepada also; as पर्यास्थत (VII. 4. 17), भवोचत् and भाक्यत . In the Passive, we have पर्यासिषासाम्. 
. लिपिसिचिवश्च ॥ ५३ ॥ पदानि ॥ लिपि-सिचि-हवः, च, (चलेः, अङ्, कर्तरि, लुडि)॥ 
बत्तिः ॥ निप उपरो, सिच तरणे, हे स्पर्द्धयां एतेभ्यश्च परस्थ, प्रकाशो भवति ॥ 
___53. After the verbs लिप् 'to paint', सिच् 'to sprin kle' and t to call', भ, is the substitute of ग्नि when नुन, follows signifying the agent. 
___ Thus भलिपस, 'he painted or wrote' ; भविचत, 'he sprinkled' ; and भारत, 'he called or challenged'. 
आत्मनेपदेष्वन्यतरस्याम् ॥ ५४ ॥ पदानि ॥ आत्मनेपदेषु, अन्यतरस्याम, ( चलेः, अड, लिपि, सिचि, हवः ) ॥ 
वृत्तिः॥ लिपिसिचिह भात्मनेपदेषु परतः प्लेरडावेशो भवति भन्य तरस्वाम् ।। 
64. After the verbs निपू, सिच and है, भर is op. tionally the substitute of foot when the affixes of the Atmanepada follow. 
Thus भनिपत or भलिप्त 'he painted' ; भसिचत or भसित 'he sprinkled'; भारत or भहारत 'he challenged'. 
पुषादिद्युतालुदितः परस्मैपदेषु ॥ ५५ ॥ पदानि ॥ पुषादि द्युतादि-लद्-इतः, परस्मैपदेषु, (लेः, अङ्) ॥ 
वृत्तिः॥पुपादिम्यो गुतादिभ्यः सरिभ्यश्च धातुयः परस्य चनेः परस्मैपरभु परतो भगाशो भवति॥ 
55. 7, is the substitute of ro, after the verbs पष, 'to nourish', and the rest, पुत 'to shine', an and the verbs having an indicatory , wheu the affixes of the Parasmaipada follow 
The verbs classed as qeria, are a sub-division of the 4th conjugational verbs ; and युतादि verbs belong to the Ist conjugation. As पुष, भपुषत् 'he nou rished'; गुत, भयुतत् 'he shone'; गम्ज, भगमत 'he went'. But not so in the Atma. nepada jas स्वयोतिर, मनोनिष्ट. 
सर्तिशास्त्यतिम्यश्च ॥ ५६ ॥ पदानि ॥ सर्ति-शास्ति-अर्तिभ्यः, च, (घले, अ )॥ 
पतिः॥ व गतो, शानु भनुशिष्टो, क गतो, इस्येवेश्वः पराय पनेरगोशो भवति । 
BK. IIL. CH. I. § 56-58.] 
SUBSTITUTION OF CHLI. 
· 371 
56. After the verbs a 'to go', qe 'to order', and 'to go', H7, is the substitute of fe in the Parasmai pada as well as in the Atmanepada.' 
Thus NACE'ha went'; TT, 'he ordered'; TTC1, he went'. This sätra has been separately enunciated in order to make the rule applicable to Atma nepada; as AC (I. 3. 29). The u in the text is for the sake of drawing the anuvritti of the phrase 'in the Parasmaipada' of the last sætra, into the pre sent and its anuvriti will extend to future sätras also. 
fiat at 11 49 il ucrfa u TE-TT, TT, ( VI, ) 11 FT: I tretirer: 969 totesi yafet il 
57.95, is optionally the substitute of rem after that root which has an indicatory K, when the Parasmai pada terminations are employed. 
Thus from forfer (fare ) 'to divide', we derive offwees or warra. But we have afya in the Atmanepada. So from fefers - Megan or reafter. 
जस्तम्भुमुचुम्लुचुचुग्लुचुग्लुचश्विभ्यश्च ॥ ५८ ॥ पदानि ॥ ज FH-7- -5- -2 -fatt, (:, 376, a1) I 
वृत्तिः ॥ स्तम्भु झुत्रु म्लुत्रु मुचु ग्लुत्रु ग्लुचु शिव, एतेभ्यो धातुभ्यः परस्य ब्लेर्वा METIST fa 11 
3. 58. And, optionally 15, is the substitute of Perm after the verbs sy 'to grow old', Epp 'to stiffen' vand se 'to go', am and song 'to steal, sy 'to go' and fear to grow, when the terminations of the Parasmaipada are em. ployed. 
Thus ca, or purch 'he grew old'; ita or writte 'he stiffen ed' ; अबुचत् or भम्रोचीत् 'he went'; अम्लुचत् or भम्लोषीत् 'he went'; अमुचत् or भयो चीत the stole'; भग्नुचत् or भग्लोचीत् 'he stole'; भग्लुचत् or भगवंचीत् 'he went': भश्वत्, भरवयीत, or भशिश्वियत_ 'he grew'. The roots ग्लुच् and ग्लुंच both give rise to the same three forms, viz. भग्नुबत्, भग्लु चत् and अग्लबोत. The use of onc root would, tlicrcforc, liave served thic purpose. The employment of both indicates separateness of thcir meanings. Others say that the use of both roots indicatcs that in the casc of me the nasal is never elided. Thus the Aorist of roce will be stay and Healta. 
gafemper il y en a aqufa il 5-7-5-affiti, era ( FT :, * ) 
372 
SUBSTITUTION OF CHLI. 
[BK. III. CH. I. 559.62. 
पतिः ॥ कमरुहि इत्येतेभ्यः परस्य च्नेः छन्दसि विपये देशो भवति ॥ 
59. After the verbs * 'to do', 'to die', 'to tear, and to rise', " is the substitute of Fen when used in the Chhandas. 
Thus अकरत् 'he did'; भमरत 'he died'; भारत् 'he tore'; भारुहत् 'he rose'. See Rig Veda X. 85. 17, X. 44. 6. The classical Aorist of these verbs are भकाति, भमृत, भदारीत, and भरुभत्. 
चिस् ते पदः ॥ ६० ॥ पदानि ॥ चिल् , ते, पदः, (:)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ पर गतो भलाद्धातोः परस्य प्लेषिणादेशो भवति सशब्दे परतः ॥ 
60. fu is the substitute of fem after the verb पर 'to go', when the affix a follows. 
The affix # here means the third person singular tense-affix of the Atmanepada Bas भपादि he went'; but not so in the dual and plural; as भपसात 'they two went'; अपत्सत 'they went'; भद+पद+चिण+त + पार+ भपादि (the affix of being elided by rule VI. 4. 104). 
दीपजनबुधपरितायिप्यायिभ्योऽन्यतरस्याम् ॥ ६१ ॥ पदानि ॥ दीप-जन-बुध-पूरि-तायि-प्यायिभ्यः, अन्यतरस्याम् , (ले, चिण, ते)॥ 
.. वृत्तिः ॥ दीप जन बुध पूरि तायि प्यायि एतेभ्यः परस्य प्लेस्तशब्द परतोन्यतरस्यां चिणा गो भवति । 
**" 61. Fou is optionally the substitute of few, when , the third person singular of the Atmanepada follows, after the verbs की 'to shine', अन् 'to be produced', बुध् 'to teach or know', 'to be full', 14. 'to extend or protect and प्वाय 'to smell'. 
Thus भदीपि or भदीपिट he shone'; भनि or भजनिट he was produced'; भबोधि or भयुद्ध he knew'; अपरि or भपरिष्ट 'he was full'; भताथि or भताविष्ट 'he ex tended'; scarfa or scarpe 'he grew'. 
अचः कर्मकर्तरि ॥६॥ पदानि ॥ अचः, कर्म-कर्तरि, ( ते, चिख)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ भजन्तादधातः परस्य बनेः कर्मकर्तरि सशये परतधिणादेशो भवति॥ 
62. fern is optionally the substitute of fun when in the third person singular of the Atmanepada follows, after a root which ends with a vowel, and when the ob. ject itself is spoken of as the agent. 
.. A reflective verb is one in which the object is spoken of as the agent. In reflective verbs therefore, four is employed after roots ending in 
BK. III. CH. I. $ 63-65.] 
PROHIBITION OF CHLI. 
.373 
vowels%3 as भकारि कटः स्वयमेव 'the mat became made of itself. This is an optional rule (प्रास विभाषा). Therefore we have also भकृत कटः स्वयमेव ; similarly भनाविor भलविष्ट केदारः स्वयमेव 'the embankment broke of itself. 
But in verbs other than those that end in vowels, i. e. in those which cnd with a consonant, the fou is obligatory in the reflective voice, and not optional; as अमेदि काष्टम् स्वयमेव the wood split of itself. So also in verbs other than reflexives ; as भकारि कटी देवरसेन. 
दुहश्च ॥ ६३ ॥ पदानि ॥ दुः, च, (ले, चिव, अन्यतरस्थाम्, कर्म-कर्तरि) ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ धुह प्रपूरणे, भलात्परस्व लेशिणशो भवति भन्यतरस्याम् ॥ 
63. चिए is optionally the substitute of नि after the verb or 'to milk', when it is used reflexively, and when a follows. 
Thus भोहि or भग्ध गोः स्वयमेव 'the cow milkcd of itself. In verbs other than reflexive, the चिए is compulsary, t.g.भदोहि गोर्गापालकैन 'the cow was inilked by the cowherd'. 
न रुधः॥ ६४॥ पदानि ॥ न, रुधः, (चलेः, चिण, कर्म-कर्तरि)। वृतिः ॥ रुधिर भावरणे, भस्मास्परस्थ ग्लेः कर्मकर्तरि चिणादेशो न भवति। 
64. fay is not the substitute of fent, after the verb sy to obstruct', when used in the reflexive senso in the third person singular of the Atmanepada. 
Thus मन्ववारुद्ध गौ स्वयमेव 'the cow was obstructed of itself'. In verbs other than reflexive, चिण is employed, e. g.भन्दवारोधि गौर्गापानकेन. 
तपोग्नुतापेच ॥६५॥ पदानि ॥ तपः, अनुतापे, च, (न, में, चिख, कर्म-कर्तरि)। 
पतिः ॥ तप संतापे, अक्षात्परस्य लेभिणारेजो न भवति कर्मकर्तरि भनुतापे च ॥ 
65. feu is not the substitute of Friesent after tlie verb aq 'to suffer', when used reflexively, and when the sense is that of experiencing remorse. 
This prohibition applies even to the passive and impersonal voices of the verb सप; as भतप्त तपस्तापसः 'the ascetic performed austerity'; अन्वतप्त पापन कर्मणा 'he repented from evil deeds'. 
चिस् भावकर्मणोः ॥ ६६ ॥ पदानि ॥ पिण, भाव-कर्मयोः, (ने, चिय, ते) 
374 
YAK, SAP AND SYAN. 
(BK. III. CH. I. $ 66-69. 
वृत्तिः॥धाता: परस्य इलेक्षिणाशो भवति भावे कर्मणि परतः ।। 
66. fque is the substitute of front when r of the third person singular Atmanepada follows, denoting the action (भाव) or the object कर्म. .. 
A verb is said to denote an action when it is used impersonally ; and it is said to denote an object when used in the Passive sense. As wife भवता 'it was lain by you ie. you lay'; भकारि कटो देवदत्तेन ; the mat was made by Devadatta'. The repetition of fou here is for the sake of distinctness. 
सार्वधातुके यक्॥६॥ पदानि ॥ सार्वधातुके, यक, (भाव-कर्मयोः)। वृत्तिः। भावकर्मवाचिनि सार्वधातुके परतो धातार्यक् प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
67. The affix वक् comes after a root, when a सार्वधातुक (III. 4. 113) follows, denoting the action on the object. 
In forming Impersonal and Passive verbs, this affix is employed in the conjugational tenses. Thus in Impersonal verbs भास्यते भवता 'you sit', शय्यते भवता 'you lie'. So in passive verbs, as क्रियते कटः and गभ्यते मामः. The क of यक is servile, and prevents guna and vriddhi. This affix is also used in reflective voice (कर्मकर्तरि); as क्रियते कटः स्वयमेव 'the mat becomes made of itself: 
कर्तरि शप् ॥६॥ पदानि ॥ कर्तरि, शप, (सार्वधातुके, धातोः)। प्रत्तिः ॥ कदाचिनि सार्वधातुके परतोधातोः शप् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
68. The affix शप् comes after a root. when a सार्वधातुक follows, signifying the agent. 
In active voice, ty is employed in the conjugational tenses. This affix, which is technically called a faTTU comes after roots of the class and after compound roots formed by सन् &c. (III. I. 32). The indicatory v makes सार्वधातुक affix by III. 4. II3, the e indicates that the vowel has anudatta ac cent (III. I. 4). As भू+श+तिप्-भू+म+ति-भो+ +ति-भवति. (VII. 3.84). So also पति . 
दिवादिन्यः श्यन् ॥६॥ पदानि॥ दिव्-आदिम्यः, श्यम्, (मार्व धातुके, कर्तरि,)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ दिव इत्येवमादिभ्यो धातुभ्यः श्यन् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
69. The affix श्यन् comes after a root of the Di- . vadi class, when a sårvadhâtuka affix denoting the agent follows. 
This debars st. The servile ot of this for the sake of accent (VI. 1. 197), showing that the udatta accent falls on the radical verb and not on the afix ; and the indicatory makes the affix sarvadhatuka; as दिव+श्वन + 
BK. III. CH. I. $ 70-73] 
SYAN AND SNU. 
375 
लिए - +4+ति (VII. 2. 77) - वीम्यति ; so also सीव्यति. The Divadi verbs belong to the Fourth conjugation. 
वा भाशालाशचमुकमुक्तमुत्रसित्रुटिलषः ॥ ७० ॥ पदानि॥वा, भाश-भलाश-भभु-मु-कम-असि त्रुटि-लषः, (सार्वधातुके, कर्तरि, श्यन् ) ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ श्राश भ्लाश अमु क्रम लमु पसि अटि लप एतेभ्यो वा श्यन् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
70. The affix tut, is optionally employed in the active voice after the following verbs; ry 'to shine', भ्लाश् 'to shine', भ्रम् 'to whirl', क्रम् 'to walk', क्लम, 'to be sad', अस् 'to fear', नुर् 'to cut', and लम् 'to desire'. 
Thus भ्राश or भ्राश्यते 'he shines'; ग्लाशते or भ्लाश्यते 'he shines'; भ्रमति or भ्राम्यति 'he whirls'; कामति or क्राम्यति 'he walks'; कामति or काम्यति 'he is sad'. So also अस्वति or सति ; बुटपति or पति; लष्यति or लपति. 
यसोग्नुपसर्गात् ॥ ११॥ पदानि ॥ यसः, अनुपसर्गात, ( श्यन, वा, सार्वधातुके, कर्तरि)॥ 
वृत्तिः ।। यशोग्नुपसर्गाश श्यन् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
71. The affix श्यन् is optionally employed after the verb यस् 'to strive', when it is employed, without a preposition, and when a sârvadhâtuka affix denoting an agent, follows. 
Thus arrara orqafa 'he strives'. But no option is allowed in sprerafa, प्रवस्वति. The root यस् belongs to the Divadi class. 
___संयसश्च ॥ ७२ ॥ पदानि ॥ सं-यसः, च, (श्यन, वा)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ संपूच्चि यसैा.श्यन् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
____72. The affix श्यन् is optionally employed after the root me to strive', when it is preceded by the pre position ay, and wheu a sarvadhâtuka asfix deuoting an agent, follows. " 
Thus संयस्यति or सयसति 'he strives'. . . 
. स्वादिभ्यः नुः ॥ ३ ॥ पदानि ॥ सु-आदिभ्यः, नुः, (सार्वधातुके, कर्तरि)। 
वृत्तिः।। षुम् अभिपये इत्येवमादिन्यो धातु ग्यानुप्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
. 73. The afix comes after the roots of Svadi class when a sårvadhâtuka affix denoting an agent follows. 
376 
SNU, SA AND SNAM. 
BK. III. Cil. I. 3 74-78 
. This debars शप्.. Asसु+नु+तिप् = सु+नु+ति-सुनोति 'he presses out'. These are roots of the Fifth class. 
श्रुवः शू च ॥ १४ ॥ पदानि ॥ ध्रुवः, शु, च, (नुः)। वृत्तिः । भुवः इनुप्रत्ययो भवति तस्संनियोगेन श्रुवः श इत्ययमावेशो भवति ॥ 
74. And T is the substitute of y, and there is the asfix after it, when a sårvadhâtuka affix denoting an agent, follows. 
Thus s+नु+तिप् = श+नु+तिशणीति 'he hears';शणुप्त: 'they two hear'. 
अक्षोऽन्यतरस्याम् ॥ १५ ॥पदानि ॥ अतः, अन्य तरस्याम, (श्नः)॥ - वृत्तिः ।। अक्ष व्याला भोवादिकः भस्मादन्यतरस्यां नुप्रत्ययो भवति । 
. 75. The affix o is optionally employed after the root sa 'to pervade', when a sårvadhâtuķa affx deno ting an agent, follows. 
Thus भषणोति or भक्षति 'he pervades or obtains'. 
तनकरणे तक्षः॥ ७६ ॥ पदानि ॥ तन-करणे-तक्षः, (अन्यतरस्यां, श्नः)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ स लभ सनुकरणे, अस्माननकरणे वर्नमानादन्यतरस्यां नु प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
76. The affix is optionally employed after thie root an 'to bore or hew' when a sâryadhâtuka asfix demoting an agent, follows. 
Thus तक्षति or सपोति काण्ट 'he hews the wood'. But संतक्षति वाग्भिः 'he cuts with speech'. 
तुदादिभ्यः शः ॥ ७७ ॥ पदानि ॥ तुद-आदिभ्यः, शः ॥ वृत्तिः ।। तुद ध्ययने, इत्येवमादिभ्यो धातुभ्यः शमस्ययो भवति । 
77. The affix g is employed after the roots of the Tudådi class, in denoting the agent when a sarvadhâ tuka affix follows. : This debars 79. The indicatory y makes this affix a sarvadhâtuka alfix. As Te+श+ति = तु++ति = तुति (I. 2. 4) he pains or torments'. 
रुधादिभ्यः श्नम् ॥ ॥ पदानि ॥ रुघ-आदिभ्यः, श्नम् ॥ वृत्तिः ।। रुधिर् भावरणे, इत्येवमादिभ्यो धातु-यो श्नम् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
___78. The affix श्नम् comes after the roots of the Rudhâdi class, in denoting an agent when a sårvadha. tuka affix follows. BX. III. CH. I. $ 79-81) 
"EU, A 
AND SNA. 
37 
This debars 974 The indicatory of the asfix 574 shows that the affix it is to be placed after the last vowel of the root; see sätra I. 1. 47. As FY+ #+f#=F4+*+F = 5+7+4+fo Turq'he obstructs'. So also f ar 'he splits'. The indicatory T is for the sake of satra VI. 4. 23. 
afce STJ: 11 gen llora u 79-TFERTI, 3: 11 fa: Il a fafart, reagonferit a aq u i 
79. The affix # comes after the roots of the Tanádi class and after the verb 'to make when a sárva dlatuka atix follows, siguifying the agent. 
This debars my. As 7+3+ = ATT 'he cxpands'; +3+ == of 'he makes'. Though the root is included in the list of the Tanádi verbs, for which see Dhatupatha, yet its separate enunciation in the present satra is for the sake of making a restrictive rule with regard to this verb; that is to say, the root is a Tanádi root only for the purposes of taking the affix a ; all the other operations of Tanádi verbs are not to be performed upon it. Thus the rule II. 4.79. does not apply to a. Thus HF and sprea: ; the fa q elision being compulsory and not optional. 
fufcatoare I BONI ETF II pufaa-erT:, 34, a, (8:) # 
वृत्तिः ॥ हिवि घिवि मिति प्रीणनायोः कृषि हिंसाकरणयोः इत्येतयोस्विोरुमस्ययो भवस्यकारश्चान्तादेशः ॥ 
80. The afix , comes after the roots fufe 'to please', and 6.0T to hurt', when a sarvadhâtuka affix denoting the agent follows , and in these verbs w is the substitute of the final T. 
The root fry or funnet belongs to the Bhudi class. Thus fat *+ = fa+*+ 7 + 7 = fiat + + fir (VI. 4. 48) = (alla 'ne pleases'. It might be asked, why there is no guna of the off by rule VII. 3. 86 which requires the base to be gunated before a sårvadhatuka or an ardha dhatuka affix. The answer is to be found in satra I. 1. 57; the substitute of * which is a blank, is like the former occupant (sthanivat), and thus prevents guna, 
FATERT: TT 115 # ustfa il stooftu, GTI f: 
N i safarlarini pettarfanat, siasa zarurat Yale il 
81. The affix w comes after the roots of the Kryadi class when a sarvadhâtuka affix follows denoting the agent. 
378 
SNU, SNA AND SAYACH. 
[BK. III. CH. I.82-83 
This debars 99. As *+ Fit + fuq = mutfa 'he buys'. So also xirurfer ‘he pleases'. 
स्तम्भुस्तुम्भुस्कम्भुस्कुम्भुस्कुअभ्यः नुश्च ॥ ८२ ॥ पदानि ॥ स्तम्भ-स्तुम्भ-स्करभु-स्कुरभु-स्कुअभ्यः, नुः, च, (श्ना) ॥ 
वृत्तिः । स्तम्भु स्तम्भु स्कम्भु स्कुम्भु स्कुम् एतेभ्यः इनामस्ययो भवति अनुश्च ॥ 
.. 82 And there is the affix sना after स्तम्भ, स्तम्भ, स्कुम्भ or स्कुम्भ 'to hinder', 'to be dull or insensible', 'to support', and स्कु 'to go by leaps', as well as the affix नु, when a sarvadhâtuka affix follows, in denoting the agent. 
As स्तम्नाति or स्तम्नोति, स्तुभ्नाति or स्तुभ्नोति, स्कभ्नाति or स्कभ्नोति, स्कुम्नाति or स्कुम्नोति, स्कुनाति or स्कुनोति. The first four of these roots are not found in the Dhâtupåtha and are to be found in the stras, and hence called Sadtra roots. 
हलः श्नः शानझो ॥३॥ पदानि ॥ हलः, श्नः, शान-हो। वृत्तिः ॥ हल उत्तरस्य श्नाप्रत्ययस्य शानमादेशो भवति हो परतः ।। 
83. The affix 197 is the substitute of at after a loot ending with a consonant, when fe follows. 
The affix fe is the 2nd person singular of te or the Imperative mood. Thus पुषाण 'do thou nourish', गृहाण do thou take', from roots पुष् and मह which end with consonants. But we have कोणीहि'do thou buy'; here there is no substi tution of Ty, because the root ends with a vowel. The repetition of the in the satra shows that m y, is a mere substitute and not an independent affix. 
छन्दसि शायपि ॥ ८४ ॥ पदानि ॥ छन्दसि , शायच् , अपि, (हलः, श्नः, शानच, हो)॥ 
पत्तिः ॥ छन्दसि विषये श्नः शायमावेशी भवति शानमपि ॥ 
84. In the Chhandas, शायच् is also the substi. tute of sना after. roots 'ending in consonants, when हि 
follows. 
Thus गभाय जिवा मध, (Rig Veda VIII. I7. 5.) The affix शानच् is also employed ; as बधान पशन 'kill the beasts'. 
व्यत्ययो बहुलम् ॥५॥ पदानि ॥ व्यत्ययः, बहलम्, (छन्दसि, शवादयः)॥ 
वृत्तिः । यथाययं विकरणःशवायो विहितास्तेषां छन्दसि विषये बहुलं व्यत्ययो भवति ।। 
85. In the Chhandas there is diversely an interchange of the various vikaranas 74 and the rest. 
BK. III. C1. I. $ 86.] 
An. 
379 
which have been previously ordained under special cir. cumstances. 
The word 274 means transgression of the fixed rule, or inter change, taking of two vikaraņas at a time, and so on. Thus era = f + TT+ fa) instead of firafe from the root fire 'to split, belonging to the Rudhadi class; 6.g. YEART HISTfor fera (Rig. VIII. 40. 11.) 'He (Indra) break the eggs (children) of Shushma ; so also, the fa: (Rig. X. 86. 11); here there is ath=+19+ a) instead of fond; the root y belonging to the Tudádi class. So also there are two vikaraņas at one and the same time, in the following. Fra FFT 
ya 'May Indra lead by this abode' ; here there is a 3rd. per. sing. of the Imperative e of the root op 'to lead' ; there are two vikaraņas farq and ta instead of 79 +19+#) ;TU YA 850 TTA (Rig. VII. 48. 1). The word Frohn (+3+f9 +19 +99) is the ist. per. sing. of the Optative ( ) of the root 2, the classical form being Hea or aaien 'may we cross'. 
In the Vedic literature we have many apparent irregularities with re gard to the ruics of declension of nouns, conjugation of verbs, application of Parasınaipada or Atma nepada affixes; rules of gender, person or tense, rules of interchange of consonants, or of vowels, rules of accent, rules relating to 
in and arou affixes and rules relating to the affixes included in the pratya hâra 48 (III, 1, 22 to III. 1. 86). 
faeurope it can I ucrful fatis, fufa, 33 ( fo) 
f#: il opfstro faqet ut fra AHATATERTE FIRST TRY TT II वार्तिकम् ।। दृशेरग्वनण्यः।। 
86. The affix He is employed in the Chlandas when the affixes of the Benedictive (strate) follow. 
This debars yq. The affixes of the Benedictive are ardhadha - tuka by III. 4. 116; but in the Vedas they are sarvadhatuka as well; sce Rule III. 4. 117. The scope of the present rule is confined to the Benedictive of the verbs RUT, TT, 74, 75, 76, T and T;as 7Tfa ; #9 3 ;. mai 17,477 वोचेमामये । विदेयमेनां मनसि प्रविष्ठा ; व्रतम् चरिष्यामि तच्छकेयम् । स्वर्ग लोकमारुया. 
: The affix 97 is employed in the Chhandas after the verb ET in the Benedictive. Had there been 4, it would have caused guna by rule VII. 4. 10.; to prevent this, 877 is ordained; as featu Hate May I see the father and the mother'. .... macantat genfina: .11 09 #retat ll ***, **OT, grea-fasa: 
380 
REFLEXIVE AFFIX. 
[BK. III. CH. I. $ 87, 88. 
Fa: 11 maro (9 m, Fm foruen grafaka: Termotara 11 
87. The o denoting the agent, when the action affecting the agent is similar to the action which affects the object, is treated as if it were a denoting the ob. ject. 
This rule applies to reflexive verbs. "This direction implies the substitution for the operations incident to a tense-affix or a, denoting an agent, of all the operations, which fall to be performed when the tense-affix or a denotes the object. Hence there shall be the affixing of 2 (III. 1.67) the cmployment of Atmanepada terminations (I. 3. 13), the substitution of fou for free (III. 1. 66), and the treatment of the word as directed in satra VI. 4. 62." (Dr. Ballantyne). Thus fra 18H 'the wood splits of itsell; ptfe and HÀq 'the wood splits of itself". 
When an action is participated by or affects the agent in the same way as is done by the object, the agent is treated like an object. 
When in an object, though it stands as an agent, the action is perceive cd to take place as in an object, then that agent becomes like an object; and all grammatical rules applicable to the object apply to such an agent. 
The word 'like' in the satra signifies that the rules which apply to an agent also comc into operation; thus faran qadar 
The word our 'with the object' in the sätra indicates that the tulya kriya or similarity of action must be with the object, and not with the instru inent or the location. Thus farenhet 'the sword cuts well'; here 'sword' is not agent but instrument. So also a farolt tary 'the pot cooks well'; here funeft is a location. 
: This 'karma-vad-bhava, the passive-like-construction takes place only in cases of some verbs. 
4au: a la llargura Il 9:, 09:, *Hey, ga, ( art, wifi) u 
a: 11419 Tah, ram a rarla, 79: Tantata 
.: 88. The agent of the verb 79 'to heat,' be. comes similar to the object, only when the object is the word itself. 
Thus pret TEHTCH: 'the devotee performs austere devotion'; but not so in zarafa yü GTU ATC: 'the goldsmith heats the gold'. 
gwarai wafat Corfa il *, gri, ww-foret, (tannie, water) 
BX. III. CH. I. § 89-91.] PROHIBITION OF YAK AND CHIN. 
3&5 
वृत्तिः ॥ दुइ स्नु भम् इत्येतेषां कर्मकररियचिणो कर्मपद्भावापविष्टौ न भवतः ।। पातिकम् ।। याचिणीः प्रतिषेधे गिभन्यिमान्यप्रास्मनेपदाकर्मकाणामुपसंख्यानम् ।। 
89. The affix यक (III. 1. 67) and चिए (III. 1. 62) are not employed in the reflexive voice of the verbs 'to milk', स्नु to fall in drops' and नम् 'to bow'. 
Thc affixes * and fou are used in forming the reflexive verbs, when the action affecting the agent is similar to the action which affects the object. With regard to the root , the affix # is only prohibited by the present satraj the rp being optionally employed by rule III. I. 63, as gro, भदग्ध or भोहि गोः स्वयमेव the cow flows or flowed of itself प्रस्नुते or प्रास्नोष्ट गौः स्वयमेव 'the cow flows or flowed of itself'; नमते or अनस्त रण्डः स्वयमेव 'the stick bends or bent of itself. 
This prohibition of the employment of the affixes uran and fuu is ex tended to the verbs that take the affix fu (such as causatives &c.), to the verbs ypu 'to loosen', ry 'to compose' and 'to speak', and to the Atmanepadi. Intransitive verbs. As कारयते 'it is caused to be made of itself'; भवीकरत् 'it was caused to be made of itself ; ratta 'it loosens of itself ; late 'it loosened of itsell' ; poftat ; TALAE 'it composes or composed of itself; wat and 479199 'it speaks and spoke of itsell' ; भाहत and भावधि मापावकः स्वयमेव. 
कुषिरखोः प्राचांश्यम्परस्मैपदं च ॥ ॥ पदानि ॥ कुषि-खो, प्राचाम्, श्यन्, परस्मैपदं, च, (कर्मकर्तरि )॥ 
त्तिः ।। कुप निष्क, रख रागे, भनयोर्धातोः कर्मकर्तरि प्राचामाचार्याणी मरीन प्रवन प्रत्ययो भवति परस्मैपरं च ॥ 
90. The affix श्यम् comes after the roots कुम् 'to pull, and रख 'to colour', in the reflexive voice, according to the opinion of the Eastern Grammarians, and these verbs take the affixes of the Paraşınaipada... 
This debars the affix them and the Atina nepada terminations. , As कम्यति पादः स्व मेव 'the foot draws up of itself'; रज्यति व स्वयमेव 'the cloth colours of itself. 
The phrase 'in the opinion of the Eastern' shows that it is an optional rule; so that we have also the forms कुप्यते and रज्यते. 
धातोः ॥९॥ पदानि ॥ धातोः । वृत्तिः ॥ धातोरिल्लवमधिकारो देविसम्यः, भा वतीया बायपरिसमाप्ते हित ममनुका मियामो पातोरियेवं ताक्सिम्यम् ॥ . 
91. As far as the end of the Third Book 
382 · 
VERBAL AFFIX ES. 
[BK. III. CH. I. $ 92,-94. 
reckoning from the present aphorism, the affixes treated of are to be understood as coming astor' somo vorbal root. 
This is an Adhikara Satra. All these verbal affixes are broadly divid ed into two parts he and a affixes, which will be described later on. 
. iraus enter lunetfa i an, 74€, usit *, ( urat:) 
FT: Ir talentirani ante tranft forfae agreea ..:: 92. Here in this Third Book of Grammar re. ferring to verbal roots, the word implied in a term exhi. bited in the locative case, is called 'upapada' or depell. dant word. 
Thus in satra III, 2. u4 the word affu is exhibited in the 7th case; therefore the word implied by the word fu, namely, the word having the accusative case, will be called उपपद. Thus कुम्भम् +क+भए-कुम्भकारः 'a potter'; here the word aat4 is an upapada, 
sofas u ucrfa ut eng, 3-fas, ( urant: ) u Fa: sferPunafuate foarta: grau a afer il 
· 93: In this portion of the Sůtras in which there is a reference to verbal roots, any affix except for (tense-alfixes), is called me. 
Thus the affixes may &c. are . All affixes up to the end of this Book belong to this class. These are affixes by which substantives are form ed from verbal roots; and they have, therefore, most aptly been termed primary asfixes. Words formed by thesc affixes will be Pratipadikas or crude forms or nominal bases (I. 2. 46). Thus Ti + mooi =. Why do we say 'except fire affixes'? Observe frata 'may he collect', gure 'may he praise' which form verbs and not nouns. 
वासरूपोस्त्रियाम् ॥ ४॥ पदानि॥ वा, असरूपः, अस्त्रियाम, (urat: ) 
पतिः ॥ भस्मिन्धावधिकार सिमानरूपः प्रत्ययो ऽपवादो वा बाधको भवति सयधिकार विहितमाययं पजेयित्वा ।। 
94. In this portion of the Sûtras, in which there is a reference to verbal roots, an affix which is calculated to debar a general one, not being of the same 
::. 
BK. III. CII. I. $ 94) 
VERBAL AFFIXES.. 
. 
383 
form, optionally debars it; but not so in the case of femi. nine affixes (III. 3. 94 &c.) 
Thus the affixes wat and a (III. 1, 133) are general affixes applicable to all roots in forming nouns of agency ; and the sätra III. 1. 133 which ordains these affixes, is an utsarga or a general rule ; while the stra III. I. 135 ordaining the affix * after verbs having a penultimate a vowel, and the roots MT, sft and is an apavada or a special aphorism. In the latter case, therefore, optionally we may have the affixes and also. Thus fore is a root that has a penultimate belonging to the pratyahara yang and therefore, in forming the noun of agency from it, the affix o will have to be applied by rule 135 of this chapter already mentioned ; thus fofstet farm+#=fafia:; but this special rule however does not debar the operation of the general rule, and we have optionally ffer +00=fak : ; and fafa 
+< forma nom. sing. For one. 
Why do we say 'not being of the same form' ? Because if two affixes have the same form, the present rule will not apply ; and in the case of such affixes, the special affix will debar the general affix. Thus the affixes Hu! and are, when stripped of their indicatory letters, affixes having the same form i. 6. 87; and therefore the satra . III. 2. I. ordaining are as a general rule, will be always debarred by sátra III. 2. 3 ordaining , as the latter is a special sätra applicable only to those roots which end in long 01, or which are simple roots not compounded with any preposition. Thus ift + 7 + = fire: 'giver of cows'. So also *1979: 'blanket-giver'. In these cases we cannot have the affix 
It follows from this sätra as a necessary corollary, that the addition of indicatory letters does not make two or more affixes dissimilar in form (@ky) when their essential effective element is the same. Thus the affixes . nu, ry, U &c. are similar. 
Why do we say 'but not so in the case of feminine affixes'? Be cause in the case of feminine affixes, a special affix will debar a general affix, though they may be dissimilar in form. Thus satra III. 3. 94 ordaining for in forming feminine nouns from roots is a general or utsarga rule, while sätra III. 3. 102 ordaining * after roots that have already taken some asfix is a special or apavada rule, and though 27 and fa are dissimilar in form, they being femininc affixes, the former will always debar the latter. Thus the compound desiderative roots Ruraits and fee will form feminine nouns in MT and not by f . Thus ferater and farief and not familie fot &c. 
PRET: ATERR: It se u orgfa II HT:, ura, T: 10 
384 
KRITYA AFFIXES.. 
[BK. III. C1. I. $. 95, 96. 
fa: #grabe na radu Taarnaayemaranta maafatata: कत्यसंज्ञकास्ते देदितम्याः॥ 
95. From this aphorism, as far as the ap horism qale! (III. 1. 133), all the affixes treated, will get the name of Kritya. 
This defines the class of affixes known as kritya, a subdivision of krit asfixes. These are certain affixes like H4, afro &c, which may be treated as declinable verbal terminations. (III. 4. 70). The following 38 sotras treat of these asfixes. These verbal adjectives correspond in meaning to the Latin par ticiples in udus conveyng the idea that the action expressed by the verbs ought to be done or will be done. The word formed by them may be called Passive Potential Participles or Future Passive Participles. The illustra. tions will be given hereafter. under each affix as taught. The word kritya occurs in satras II. 1. 33, II. 3.71 &c. 
3 . Touretuitat: la locura ut oma--spotati, ( urat: ) . 
पतिः ।। धातोस्तष्यत्तध्यानीय इत्येते प्रत्यया भवन्ति । वार्तिकम् ।। घसस्तष्यत् कर्तरि पिच्च। कार्तिकम् ।। केलिमर उपसंण्यानम् ॥ 
96. The affixes pour le 1967 and Hiftas come after verbal roots. 
The phrase "after verbal roots' is understood in this aphorism by anu vritti from sätra 91. The final letters of social and rofarlat are for the sake of indicating accent, being merely diacritical letters. The letter indicating svarita accent (VI. 1. 185) and the letter r indicating penultimate udatta ac cent (VI. 1. 217); these being exceptions to the general rule of accent given in sätra 3 ante of this chapter. 
Thus+quod , and a +254 =* # 'must be done';+ atat = trurug 'must be done. In these cases the sense being that of the action itself, there is neuter gender singular number. 
Vant: The affix any when coming after the verb q 'to dwell in marking the agent, is treated as if it had an indicatory u. The force of us is to cause vriddhi. Thus fa. troy Tag: 'a dweller'. Here the word is in the masculine gender, as the force of the affix is that of the agent, and not as it generally has that of an act or object (III. 4. 70). ..... 
Vart:The affix affer should be enumerated in addition to those al ready enumerated in this aphorism. Thus queat arar: 'kidney beans fit to be 
BK. III. CH. . $ 97, 98.]: 
YAT. 
385. 
cooked'; Faroeste erf 'the woods are apt to be split::. e: fragile'.. This affix is to be employed when it is intended to express an object alone (i. e, in the passive and reflexive sense) and cannot be employed like those 'enumerated above, to denote also the action. 
ar va ulogu Tarliu **, wa, ( urat ) . fer: alernitat fait 
Til araufwafah 
1 T 11 97. The affix comes after a root that ends iu a vowel. 
The letter of this affix is indicatory showing that the udatta accent falls on the first vowel (VI. I. 213); thus ann +7=14, noun sing. 1a 'what is to be sung'; so also 'what is to be drunk'; ** 'what is to be conquer ed'. The w of at and q is changed into g by VI. 4. 65. Why do we say 'that ends in a vowel'? By satra 124 of this chapter, a root ending in a con sonant takes or asfix instead of 20 ; reading these two apliorisms togсther, the conclusion to be drawn is that the affix y comes after roots which prima rily end in a vowel, though in the course of development they may end in a consonant by the application of other rules. Thus from a 'to cut', we have the desiderative root feet, which ends in a vowel 8. This » is elided before 'ardha. dhâtuka affixes and thus the root becomes fora, which ends in a consonant; neverthelcss we shall have the aflix qx and not **. Thus forear 'what is wished to be cut'i freux 'what is wished to be placed'. Similarly before ar dhadhatuka asfixes becomes at, the ai is changed into a before a (VI. 1. 79) and the form then is 74. The root of however takes 4 and not mai as नब्यो , पज्यम्, &c. 
Vari:-The verbs ang 'to fly!, Ty 'to leap', 'to ask', 'to attempt' and to be born', should be enumerated in addition, that is to say, these verbs, though ending in a consonant, take you and not **0; as 4, TF44, ****, 744, and 3**. . 
Vart :-Ånd of the verb 'to kill' ay is the substitute when it option ally takes the affix . Thus we have 2 or ryk. The latter form is evolved by stras VIL 3.32 and 54. The affix ya comes only after the r. substitute; aster the affix a comes which changes the into y, and into 
and causes vriddhi. 
freguerall açta u ui, or-47, (vrat: 47,) fr: 11 Tamargret ICTIVE 240 xuan 
98. The affix e comes after a root, which ends in a labial letter preceded by a short . 
C 
: 
DON 
G 
3 
386 
Yar. 
Bx. III. CH. 1. $ 99, 100. 
This debars out; thus 14+49 * 'to be sworn'; my 
t 
u ry 'to be acquired'. 
Why do we say 'which ends in a labial'? Because if a root ends in any other consonant, though .preceded by a short H, the root will take mynt; thus y out=gram, what is to be cooked'; arata 'speech'. 
Why do we say 'when preceded by a short op'? When preceded by any other vowel, it will take out; thus 9 + = way to be angry'; so also an 'to be concealed'. 
The word so is used in the satra in the original. The force of here is, by I. 1. 70, that short w having one matrå or prosodial length is to be taken and not long . Therefore, after the root opty 'to obtain', we have uz and not al; thus Haema 'to be reached 3.e. attainable'. 
marunta il pe locura u sfaturti, 1,( :, *) il fe: 11 TERYTİ, ETE HTU, Hethit reftaurant safet I 
99. The affix un comes after the roots Te to be able', and are to bear. 
Thus gaan 'possible'; amy 'endurable'. 
गदमदचरयमानुपसर्ग ॥ १० ॥ पदानि ॥ गद-मद-पर W7, 4, 4979, (CET) # 
sfer: 11 TT ATT TT AH, qazura eta garrant for in 
* 11 pret 
100. The affix comes after the roots te 'to speak', 'to be mad', 'to go, to eat', and 24 to restrain', when these roots do not take any proposition. 
Thus om 'what is to be spoken, i.e prose' ; 497 'wine'; Fax 'what is to be followed ; Tuy 'what is to be restrained'. 
Why do we say 'when not preceded by a preposition'? When com pounded with an upasarga, these roots will take ण्यत् ; thus प्रगावम् प्रमाचम् &c. 
The root # would have taken the affix ze by sátra 98 also, as it ends in and is preceded by ; its separate enumeration in this satra is in order to show, that the compound verb u will not take the affix . Therefore with regard to 44, this is a niyama or restrictive rule and not a vidhi or original rule. 
Vart :-The root or when preceded by the preposition are takes the , affix when the sense is not that of a preceptor ; thus *Tat it: 'an apa 'proachable or communicable country'. But when the sense is that of a teacher 
the root takes to; thus wrea: 'a preceptor'. Bx. III. CH. I. $ 101-103] 
IRREGULAR FORMATIONS 
387 
अवद्यपश्यवर्या गर्यपवितव्यानिरोधेषु ॥ १०१ ॥ पदानि ॥ भवद्य-पण्य-वर्याः, गहर्य-पखितव्य-अनिरोघेषु ।। 
वृतिः ॥ भवय पण्य पर्वा इत्येते पमा निपात्यन्ते गर्दा पणितव्य भनिरोध हावतेपर्येषु पथासंस्थम् ॥ 
101. The words #na, you and raf are irregularly formed, having the sense of 'condemnable', 'saleable' and 'unobstructable respectively. 
Thus, भवयं पापं 'censurable sin'. Another and regular form is भनुपम्. This is formed by adding the affix #9 to the root or by III. I. 106. So also पवः कम्बलः 'saleable blanket'; पण्याः गोः 'saleable cow'. The other and regular form is पाण्यम्, formed by the addition of ण्यत्. So also शतेन पर्या 'unobstructed by hundred'; सहमेण वर्धा 'unobstructed by thousand'. The other and regular form is yrat from the root q 'to choose'. caf means a girl choosing her own husband and is non-obstructable by any body. The word of in the satra is in the feminine gender, and it is in this gender only that the word is so form cd. In the masculine gender, the word is regularly formed ; thus erat feriti. 
वायं करणम् ॥ १०२ ॥ पदानि । वड्यं, करणम्, (यत्) ॥ वृत्तिः । वर्धातोः करणे वल्पत्ययो मिपास्यते ॥ 
___102. The word वायं is irregularly formed, when the meaning of the word is an instrument of carrying. 
The word as is derived from root op 'to carry' and means 'a vehicle', it, that by which a thing is carried; as वयशकटम्. When it does not mean acarriage, the root takes the affix पस् ; thus वायः 'an ox'. 
अर्यः स्वामिवेश्ययोः॥ १०३ ॥ पदानि ॥ अर्यः, स्वामि-वैश्ययोः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ गतो, भस्माण्ण्यति पाते, स्वामिवैश्ययोरभिधेययोर्यस्पस्वयो निपास्यते ॥ वार्तिकम् ।। बतो ऽनाव इत्यायुदात्तस्थे प्राक्षे, स्वामिन्यन्तोदात्तत्वं च वक्तव्यम् ।। 
103. The word opz' is irregularly formed when meaning lord' and a 'Vaisya'. 
The root a to go', would have taken ग्बत् by satra 124 of this chap ter ; but it takcs on when the sense of the word formed by it is that of a 'lord' or a man of Vaisya' caste. As भय थामी, 'honored lord', भयों वैश्यः 'honored Vaisya'. 
Vart: Though by VI. 1. 213, the affix 7 makes the udatta accent fall on the first syllable of the word, yet in the case of the word so, when it means lord', the accent falls on the last syllable.. 
Why do we say 'when it means a lord or a Vaisya'? Otherwise the root takes the affix बत: as भार्या मागण: the respectable Brahmana'. 
388 
IRREGULAR FORMATIONS. 
(Bk. III. CH. I. $ 104-106 
उपसर्या काल्या प्रजने ॥ १०४ ॥ पदानि ॥ सपसर्या, काल्या, 
प्रणने। 
पत्तिः । उपसर्वेति निपात्यते काल्या चेलमने भवति।। 
104. The word उपसर्या is irregularly formed when meaning what has reached the time favorable to conception, or ripe for fruition. 
The word noul is formed by adding na asfix to the root 'to move', compounded with the preposition 4. The word meat means having reach ed the time. The word means the first conception. Thus praat ot: 'the cow fit for the bull' उपसर्या पडवा 'the mare fit for the horse'. 
Why do we say 'when meaning what has reached the time favorable to conception? Otherwise the affix ण्यत् will be used; as उपसार्या शरहि मधुरा 'Madhura is approachable in Sarat season'.. 
__ अजयम् संगतम् ॥ १०५॥ पदानि ॥ अजयम, संगतम् ॥ वृतिः ॥ भनी मिति निपास्वत संगतं पति 
___106. The word भगर्वम् 'imperishable' is irre. gularly formed when qualifying the word simama 'friend. ship' expressed or understood. 
The word spray is formed from the root by the addition of ea, and affixing the negative particle भ; as w+ + यत् = भमयं. 
. Thus भज मोऽस्तु संगसम् let our friendship be imperishable'. So also भनमायसंगतम्.. 
Why do we say when qualifying the word संगतम? Observe भारिता कम्पनः 'undecaying blanket'. 
बदः सुपि क्यप् च ॥ १०६ ॥ पदानि ॥ वदः, सुपि, पप, च, (यत, अनुपसर्ग)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ वर्धातोः सवन्तरपपरे भनुमसगी क्या प्रायवो भवति चकारायच्च ।। 
106. After the root a 'to speak', governing a case-inflected word as its upapada, and not having a preposition annexed to it, there comes the afix u also. 
The phrase 'not having a preposition' is to be read into this sätra by anuvritti from sätra 1oo ante. The force of the word 'also' is to indicate that the affix 44 is also employed. The word for means 'in construction with an upa pada that ends in case-affix'. 
___Thus warta+क्यप - ब्रह्म+व+य योयम् प्रय+पर+यत् = अमवयम् 'told by the Vedas or Brahman'. Similarly सत्योपम् or सत्यपयम् 'truth-mouthed'. 
Why do we say 'when it has a case-infected word as upapada'? Other. wisent+यत् पापम् a musical instrument', 
BK. III. CH. I. 
I07, 108] : ' 
KYAP. . . 
. 
. 
389 
Why do we say 'not having a preposition'? Observe qiray'a rumour' formed by the affix ण्यत् and not by यत् or षयप्. 
भुवो भावे ॥ १०७ ॥ पदानि ॥ भुवः, भावे, ( अनुपसर्ग, सुपि, पप) । 
• वृत्तिः ।। भवर्धातोः सुबन्तउपप अनुपसर्गे भावे ववप् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ . 
107. After the root y'to be', in construction with a case-inflected word as its upapada and when used without a preposition, the affix ** is employed to de. 
mote coudition (bhava). 
The words ofo and TOTHO of previous sàtras are understood in this. The anuvritti of यत् does not cover this aphorism. As ब्रह्मभुयं गतः - ब्रम गतः 'gone to or arrived at Brahmahood; देवभुवं-देवत्वं गतः 'gone to divinity'. . The word bhava of this sutra governs the succeeding ones. 
Why do we say 'in construction with a case-inflected word'? Other wise it will take यत् ; as भू+यत् = भो+यत् = भव्यम् (VI. I.79). 
Why do we say 'not taking a preposition'? Observe प्रमण्यम् । 
हनस्त च ॥१०८ ॥ पदानि ॥ हनः, त, च, (सुपि, अनुपसर्ग, पप, भावे)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ हन्तर्धातोः सुषन्त उपपदे अनुपसर्ग भावे क्या प्रत्ययो भवति तकारशान्तादेशः ।। 
108. After the root हन् 'to kill', when in cons. truction with a case-inflected word as its upapada, and when used without a preposition, comes the affix #49 in deuoting conditiou, and the letter is the substitute of its final. 
The phrases सुपि अनुपसर्ग and भाये are understood in this sutra. 
__As मझ हन+वयप ब्रह्म+हत्+ प्रमहत्य, (VI. I. 71) ममहत्या 'Brahman. murder'. So also अश्वहत्या 'killing a horse'. 
When not in construction with a noun, the form is पात: a blow' (हन+ णि +पम् ). This verb does not take the affix ग्यत in denoting condition, there being ng example of such formation. 
Why do we say 'when not taking a preposition'? Observe प्रपातो वर्तते 'there is a combat'. 
एतिस्तुशास्पदजुषः पप् ॥१०६ ॥ पदानि ॥ एति-स्तु-शास् व-दू-जुषः, क्यप् ॥ 
वृत्तिः ।। एति स्तु शास् शुषः परतेभ्यः ववप् प्रत्ययो भवति । वार्मिकम् ॥शंसितुहि गुहि-बो मेति वक्तव्यम् ।। बार्तिकम्।। भार पारख संतावामुपसंश्वानम् ।। 
390 
KYAP. 
[BK. III. CH. I. $ 109, 110 
109. After the verbs & 'to go', dy 'to praise', tirer sto govern', 'to choose', ç 'to respect and Ty'to pleasc', 
comes the affix थप. 
The anuvritti of afq, yatay and does not extend to this aphorism. The present sätra ordains generally the affix anar after the above verbs. Thus 
+ +*+q (VI. 1.71) = yea: 'to be gone'. The letter being added by Rule VI, 1.71 which declares 'a is the augment of a short vowel when a way asfix, with an indicatory q follows'. So also FL +444 = fra: 'to be praised'; mę+*4=fuata (9 being changed into y by VI. 4. 34) = fursa: 'to be ins tructed i.e. a pupil'. So also tag 49: 'to be chosen'; HTT+ T="FRA: 'to be honoured';79 +9=you: 'to be served'. 
Though the anuvritti of war was coming from the previous satra 100, its repetition in this aphorism is to indicate that other rules such as 125 of this chapter should not take effect in the above verbs. Thus Rule 125 requires ** 'after the verb es, but the present rule prohibits that. Thus we have H a egra: 'must be praised'. 
By in the satra the root fis intended to be taken, and not the root पह. The equivalent derivative of the latter is वार्य: as वार्या विजः. 
Vart:-The roots te 'to praise' 'to milk' and To 'to cover' optional ly take the affix gent As Vraq or CRT (VI.4. 37); 50mg or fun, Thor गोयम्. 
Vart: The verb mit 'to anoint', preceded by the preposition HIE takes the affix wara when used as an appellative. As oT +* + = "189 meaning clarified butter. The nasal is elided by VI. 4. 24. 
Obj.--How do you explain the form 477 which is evidently formed from the root or by adding a? According to the present sätra, the affix 
4 ought to have been added. Ans. The r in otaq is a different root from that taken here. The root in this satra is ru of the Adadi class. 
gartenfora: 1 ppo alacrita u 46-9997, , fa-ça:, ( 19 ) 
वृत्तिः ॥ सकारोपधाच्च धातोः कवयू प्रत्ययो भवति कृषिवृती वर्गविण ॥ वार्निकम् ।। पाणणे होयरक्तायः॥ पार्तिकम् ॥ समवपूर्वाच्च ॥ 
110. After verbs having a penultimate short , the affix an is employed, with the exception of the verbs q 'to be able', and quito hurt'. 
Thus + 9=44277; so also q1am. But Ey and n will form , and a 
Why have we used the letter or in ? It is to indicate that short 7 
BK. III. CH. I. § 111-113.) 
KYAP. 
391. 
is meant and not long # (1. 1. 70). Therefore the root will take -97 and form and 
Vart :-The root on takes the affix a when compounded with the word mw. Thus quaruf ( 'a rope'. 
Vart:-The root 4 when preceded by both # and #takes can as graf. 
f a : 1 88911 Carfor $, 7, 7:,( 79 ) F: Il tutat: *9947447 pratitirar : 11 
111. The affix*74 is employed after the root 'to dig', and long ® is substituted for the final of the root. 
Thus octane=a+*+= 'to be dug'. The long is used in the satra for the sake of euphony. The same purpose would have been served by using short , tlus ' T '. But the long $ indicates that the rule VI. 4. 43 does not apply here. By that rule the 24 of uw would have been lengthened into भा before the affix क्वप. 
MATTSSTTUTE u sprungufa A:, F-TYTTA, (***) वृत्तिः । भूम्रो धातोरसंज्ञायां विषये क्यप् प्रत्ययो भवति ।। f yu kitaifunga 11 
112. The affix w is employed after the verb 'to bear when not used as a name. 
Thus +479= 12 Pl. frat: 'those who ought to be supported' i. e. 'ser vants'. Why do we say 'when not used as an appellative'? Observe tour *17: a Kshatriya', 
Vart :-The use of kyap is optional when this verb takes the preposi tion सम्. Thus संश्त्या : or संभार्थाः 
मुजेर्विभाषा ॥ १९३ ॥ पदानि ॥ सुजेः, विभाषा, (पप )॥ वृत्तिः ॥ मृर्धासोर्विभाषा क्या प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
113. The affix #44, optionally comes after the root 'to clearise'. . This is an example of Prdpta-vibhdshd. By rule 110 ante, the root n having a penultimate would have necessarily taken kyap; this sötra dc clares an option. As aftyfa: or afraid: 'to be cleansed'. The second form is thus evolved : 
aftet og (III. I. 124) = aferrata (VII. 3. 52) = alegraf (VIL 2, 114) 
• 392 
. 
KYAP, 
[BK. III. CH. I. 
114-116. 
... राजसूयसूर्यसृषोद्यरुच्यकुष्यकष्टपण्याव्ययाः ॥ ११४ ॥ पदानि ॥ राजसूय-सूर्य-मुषोद्य-रुच्य-कुप्य-कृष्ठ-पच्य-अव्यायाः, (क्यप्)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ राजसूब सूर्य पृषोय उच्च कुप्य कुट पच्य भव्यध्य इत्येते शप्पाः क्यपि निपारयन्त ॥ 
___ 114. The words राजसूय सूर्य सपोद्य रुच्य कुष्य कृष्ठ पच्च and भव्यथ्य are irregularly formed by the addition of the afix क्यप्. 
___Thus राज्ञा सोसण्यः or राज्ञा इह सूयते, राज+स+क्वप् रामस्यः 'the Rajasaya or coronation sacrifice. 
Similarly For +क्यप् = सूर्य: 'the sun', literally that which moves (सरति) in the sky; or that which impels (सुवति) creation to action. भूप+पद+वयप - 
0x 'false speech'; this is an exception to rule 106, by which would also have been applied This rule prevents it. Thus To SAT, tary 
on agreeable lover'. So also गुप्+वयप् = कुप्यम् 'a base metal (other than gold and silver); the other form is गोप्यम् । कट+पच् = कटपण्याः that which ripens of itself in cultivated ground'. 7 suya = 9164124: 'a snake (what does not move by lcgs)'. 
भिद्योदयी नदे ॥ ११५ ॥ पदानि ॥ भिद्य-सहयो, नदे, (क्यप)॥ पत्तिः।। भिवेरुण्यश्च क्या निपात्यने नहेभिधेये ॥ 
115. The words fra and 69 are irregularly formed by the affix 444, when meaning a 'river'. 
. Thus fare t = fra: 'a river that breaks its banks by the rush of its water', the name of the Bhidya 'river. 
अजम+क्यप- उद्धय 'a river whose waters overflow the banks', name of the Uddhya river; the p is changed into y. 
When not meaning or qualifying the river, the regular forms are used : thus भेत्ता and उज्झिता. .. पुष्यसिद्धधौ नक्षत्रे ॥ १९६ ॥ पदानि ॥ पुष्य-सिद्धधौ, नक्षत्रे॥ 
वृत्तिः ।। पुषे सिधेनाधिकरणे वयम् निपात्यले नक्षत्रेऽभिधेये ॥ 
116. The words gear and farm are irregularly formed by the affix any, when used as names of asterisms. 
Thus g9+ 9 = gou: 'the Pushya asterism'. It is so called because ob jects are nourished under the influences of this asterism, fa +*4=fare: 'the asterism Siddhya' another name of Pushya, so-called because things are accom plished under the influence of this star. . 
. When not the names of asterisms, the forms are tra 'nourishing', मेधनम् 'accomplishing'.. . . . . . . . 
BK. III. CH. I. , 17-119.] 
KYAP. 
. . 393 
विषयविनीयजित्या मुञ्जकलकहलिषु ॥ ११७ ॥ पदानि ॥ विषय विनीय-जित्याः, मुज-कल्क-हलिषु ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ विपूर्व विनीय नित्य इण्डते शब्द निपावरले बयासंबवं मुखकल्कहनि इत्येते पर्येषु बोध्यंषु ।। 
117. The words faqa, Farare and fou are irregular ly formed when they mean, the 'munja grass', the 'sedi ment' aud the 'plough' respectively. 
Thus forta +249 = four: etymologically 'that which has to be purified 
· to make rope'; वि+नी+वयप -विनीय 'a sediment or sin'; जि+पवाजिस्थ 'aplough that which is to be conquered by strength'. 
The regular derivatives are विपाम्बम्, विमेवम् and जेवम्. . 
. प्रत्यपिभ्यां ग्रहश्वन्दसि ॥ १८ ॥ पदानि ॥ प्रति-अपिम्यां, ग्रहः, छन्दसि, (पप्)। 
_वृत्तिः ॥ प्रति भपि इत्येवं पूर्वाद् महेः प्रवप् प्रत्ययो भवति छन्दसि विपये ॥ 
___118. The verb पह 'to seize', preceded by the prepositions afer and hf, takes the affix aq in the Vedic li. terature. 
Thus मत्तस्य न प्रतिगृष्यम् । समानापिगम्यम् ।। In the classical Sanskrit the proper forms are प्रतियाधम् and भपिमायम्. 
पदास्वैरिवायापत्येषु च ॥ ११९ ॥ पदानि ॥ पद-अस्वैरि बाहया-पत्येषु, च, (ग्रहः, पप)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ पदे स्वैरिणि बाह्यायां पक्ष्ये चायें पोर्धातोः क्यप् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
119. The root मह takes the affix कब , when it meaus a 'word', a 'dependent','outside', or a 'partisan'. 
Thus 'the Pragrihya words that do not admit of sandhi, already defined in satra I. I. II. So also भवगा . 
The word met means dependent upon others, not free to provide for himself. Thus Toa: Tat: 'the captive parrots'. 
The word to means 'situated outside'. Thus ATHITAT ET 'an army lying outside the village'. The word toe being in the feminine gender indicates that the derivative word formed from a must also be feminine in gender to have this sense. 
The word 974 is derived from a 'a side, a party', and means a par tisan, follower or friend. Thus वासुदेवगल्याः siding with or being the partisans of Vasudeva'. So also WSITIKT: 'belonging to the party of Arjun', 
394 . 
KYAP. 
[BK, III. CH. I. $ 120-122. 
faret ont: 1 970 l Terfa u farur T, -q8:, (*79)u 
Fa: 11 qoy forretar40_4e4et malet it . .. 120. After the verbs 'to do', and qo'to rain' 
the afti x 749 is optionally employed. 
The root would have taken the affix o, by 124, and the verb av would necessarily have taken 44 by 110; the present sätra therefore declares an optional rule. Thus: +99 = quy'to be done'; or + = 478. So also arrazor aztą 'stimulating'. 
gri u Tu PRP u Terfor u r4*, , orell FAT: 11 grafatit forment qui a fare il 
: 121. The word gren is irregularly formed meaning a vehicle. 
The word cu means that by which a thing is carried. Thus ar at 'the carrier bull or the yoked bull'. grant at the harnessed elephant ready to carry'. +39 = gr. The is changed into 1. When not meaning a carrier or a carriage, it has the form rret. 
para crea ATT UPPRILOGTfal Streere, eta erald T: Ni 
s cr: ariza, F 998 Thurat: Aristato parametrapper MUFTTETİ Era fireas of 
: 122. Optionally the word varaat is irregular ly formed. 
The word TAT means 'along' or 'together'. war in composition with the root te 'to dwell", takes the affix • in the sense of location of time. Op tionally the Vriddhi is not substituted in such a case. The time or the day on which the sun and the moon dwell together in the same constellation is called भमावास्या or भमावस्या. 
The final in STATTFIT is indicatory and is for the sake of showing where should the proper accent fall. 
The two forms Marcar or war ere are the same word, and a fortiori a rule made with regard to one will be made applicable to the other. And to this cffect there is a paribhasha which declares gaipfa ramana ; 'that which has undergone a change in regard to one of its parts, is by no means in conse quence of this change, something else than what it was before the change had taken place'. Therefore sätra IV. 3. 30, though it, in terms, says Hargretar 
iş made applicable to the form PATIENT also, 
BK. III. CH. I. 5 123, 124] 
NYAT. 
395 
छन्दसि निष्ठर्यदेवड्यप्रणोयोनीयोबिष्यमर्यस्तर्याश्वर्य खन्य खान्यदेवयज्यापुण्यप्रतिषीव्यबलवाद्यभाव्यसताव्योपचाग्यपृडानि ॥ १३ ॥ पदानि । छन्दसि, निष्ठळ-देवहूय-प्रखीय-उन्नीय-उपिछष्य-मर्य-स्तर्या-श्वर्य खन्य-खान्य-देवयन्या-आपण्य-प्रतिषीव्य-अलवाद्य-भाव्य-स्ताव्य उपचाग्य पहानि ॥ 
पतिः॥ निटकर्याहयः शम्बाश्चन्दसि विषये निपास्यन्ते ।। बार्तिकम् ।। हिरण्य इति वक्तव्यम् । 
__123. In the Vedas the following words are found which are formd irregularly :-निष्टवयं, वह य, प्रणीय, उन्नीय, उच्छिष्य, मर्य, स्तर्या,पर्व, खन्य, खान्य, देवयज्या, भापच्छप, मतिषीण्य, मनाथ, भाष्य, साध्य and उपचाचपड. 
The formation of the above words are extremely irregular and they are all met with in the Vedic literature only. Thus the word fact is derived from the root कुत् 'to cut', with the preposition निस्, and the affix ण्यत्, instead of अयप which is the regular affix, by 110%; निः+कत्+ण्वत् = निः +4 (the root का transformed into ह by transposition) = निवर्ष. As निटक्ये चिन्तीत् पशुकामः, 
The above is apparently a guess-work etymology of grainmarians. 
So also feat is formed by adding to the root gent 'to call' or 'to in voke, the affix any and the upapada ky; the vowel of the root is then leng thened and the augmenta (VI. I.71), is not allowed, देव+ort+क्यप् = देवह यः So also r+नी (to lead)+वय-प्रणीयः ; उत्+नी+क्यप् - उन्नीयः, उत् +शिष् (to leave)+ क्या-छियम् ; सु (to die)+वत् = मर्यः । स्व (to cover)+वत् - स्तों ; it is always feminine.५ (to bend)+यत् = अर्यः ; खन् (to dig)+यत् = खन्यः खन्+ण्यत् -खान्यः; देव (God)+यन् (to sacrifice)+ यत् = देवयज्या; always used as feminine. भा+पच्छ (to ask)+क्य - भापपः , प्रति+सीव )to sew)+क्यप् = प्रतिषीयः; ब्रमण+वर (to speak)+ज्यत् -प्रमवायः भू (to be)+ण्यत् = भाष्यः ;स्तु (to praise)+ण्बत् = स्ताव्यः; उप+चि (to collect)+ण्यत्+पूर - उपचाप्याडम्. This last word is formed then only when the word 7 follows: and when the sense is that of 'gold'. When it does not mean 'gold', the form is उपयपूडम् । 
हलोर्ण्यत् ॥ १२४ ॥ पदानि ॥ ऋ-हलोः, ग्यत् ॥ वृतिः ॥ वर्णन्ताद्धातोहनन्ताच्च ण्यत्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
124. The affix van comes after a verb that ends in a (loig or short), or in a consonant. 
The phrase : is in the genitive case dual number, the force of geni tive here bcing that of ablative. As क+पयत् = कार्यम् 'to be made's+सत् == 
396 
NYAT. ' 
[BK. III. CH. I. 125, 126. 
हार्य nom. sing. हार्यम् 'to be taken'; यत् = धायें ; to be held'; वच्+ज्यत् = नक् + ण्यत् (VII. 3. 52)= वाक्यं (VII. 2. I16) 'to be spoken'; प + ण्यत् = पावयम्. 
- ओरावश्यके ॥ १५ ॥ पदानि ॥ ओः, आवश्यके (ग्यत) ॥ 
पत्ति. ॥ उपन्तावातोपर्यतप्रत्ययो भवति आवश्यके पोत्ये ॥ 
125. The affix ण्यत् comes after a root that ends in the letter , long or short when the sense is that of necessity. 
This debars the affix यत्. Thus लु+ग्यत = लो+4= लाग्यं (VII. 2. 115 and VI. I.79) 'must be cut'; so also पु+ण्वत - पाष्यम् 'must be purified'. 
When 'necessity' is not indicated we have the form og 'to be cut' The satra as given in the original is rather ambiguous; it may be construed to mean, ist when the word 
o m or a word having the sense of this term is in construction as upapada, the affix ण्यत् is employed : or 2ndly when, the sense of the affix is that of 'necessity', the ण्यत् is employed. There are ob jections to both these interpretations taken separately. For in the first case, though we could form the words अवश्यनाम्यं &c., we could not form the word 
164 by itself. In the second case, though we could form the single word 97752', we could not form the compound. The best solution is to take the second in terpretation and form the compound by the universal rule of Tatpurusha con tained in II. I. 72, which would also regulate the accent. 
आसुयुवपिरपिलपित्रपिचमश्च ॥ १२६ ॥ पदानि ॥ आसु-यु-वपि -रपि-लपि-त्रपि-चमः, च, (ग्यत्)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ भाइ, पूर्वक सुनोतः यु पपि रपि नपि अपि चम् इत्येतेभ्यश्च ण्यत् प्राययो भवति ।। 
126. The affix oui, comes after the verbs ara to distil', यु 'to join', पप, 'to sow', र 'to speak distinctly' लप् 'to prate', अप् 'to be ashamed', and चम् 'to drink'. 
The verb ore is a compound verb formed by the preposition site, and the root . This sQtra debars at, that would otherwise have come by sůtra 97 and98. 
Thus आसु + ण्यत, भासाज्यम्, (VII. 2. IIS and VI. I. 79); so also याव्यम्, बाप्यम्, राप्यम्, लाप्यम्, बाप्यम् and भाचाम्बम्. 
The force of the word 'and' in the sâtra is to indicate that the roots not included in the above enumeration should also be taken. Thus *+9 == पाग्यम् ।। 
आनाग्यानित्ये ॥ १२७ ॥ पदानि ॥ आनाग्यः, अनित्ये ॥ वृत्तिाभानाध्य इति निपात्यले भनित्येऽभिधेये । नयराज पण्विदावाद्यो निपात्यते ।। BK. III. CH. I. $ 127, 128] 
IRREGULAR FORMATIONS. 
. 
397 
127. The word "rea is irregularly formod when meaning 'impermanent'. 
This word is thus formed :—997€+ft+00= +*+8= Tarca, (the is being changed into my by the analogy of VI. 1. 79). 
As treat thiyuIH:. This is a species of Dakshiņagni fire. As this fire is brought from the Garhapatya fire and is not permanently kept alive, therefore it is called anayya. This however, is not co-extensive with Dak shiņagni. It is that fire which is brought from the Garhapatya, and has the same source with the Dakshiņagni and Ahavaniy âgni. A Dakshinagni fire may be taken from different sources, as from the family of a well-to-do Vaishya, or from a frying place, or from Garhapatya fire. When it is taken from the last i. e. from Garhapatya fire, it is anâyya Dakshiņágni. Ahavaniya is also taken from Garhapatya. 
It is not every thing, that is not lasting, which is called anayya ; for a fragile pot will not be called so. It applies only to the consecrated fire. When it has not this sense, the form is one meaning 'what ought to be brought'. 
AUTôsorar a pas al garfo u putra, mari. gia: 11 guru sfar farqnan seter STUDII 
128. The word gurra: is irregularly formed when mcaning 'disapproved'. 
The word waafa is a negative word meaning 'non-agreement'. It means also 'disrespect'. 
Thus fuUNIT: 'the thief is to be disliked'. 
Why do we say when meaning 'disapproved'. Because otherwise the regular form is # + 'to lead' +9=0u: 'tractable', 
The word in the sàtra is wearn which we have translated as 'dis approved'. But the word are also means w ar or 'desire'; and whafa would therefore, mean 'free from desire or worldly attachment'. Therefore the word warfa means also 'free from attachment', as in the following sentence: 
FOBTT gare foar ETO, qurbaru 
H a TIFTEA a 'let the father teach the Secrct Doctrine to his eldest son, or to such pupil who is free from worldly attachment, and to no one clse'. 
पाग्यसानाट्यनिकाय्यधाग्या मानहविर्निवाससामिधेनीषु ॥ १२९॥ पदानि ॥ पाग्य-सांमाग्य-निकाग्य-धाग्याः, मान-शविः-निवास-सामि धेनीषु ॥ 
7: 11 greate*: trop frarrete guretat HÀ fara fata arfaural fine 
waratan 
398 
IRREGULAR FORMATIONS. 
[BK. III. CI. I. , 129-131 
- 
MAHAR 
129. The words पाप्य, सामाग्य, निकाय्य and धाय्या are irregularly formed meaning a measure', 'an oblation to fire', 'a dwelling', and 'a sacrificial prayer', respectively. 
These words are supposed to be formed thus:-AT (to measure) +09 * पाय्यम्, the म being changed into and another e being added by VII. 3. 33. The regular form is मेयम् 'to be measured (मा+यत् = मे+य VI. 4.65 = मेव). सम् +नी (to lead)+ ण्यत् = सान्नाग्यम् the oblation'. It being a crude form applies to a par ticular kind of oblation. The regular form is सनेयम् । नि+चि (to collect) + यत् =नि+चे+य%=नि+चाय+य-निकाय्यः 'a dwelling'. The regular form is निश्चेव । धा (to put)+पयत = धाय्या (fem.). The samadheni is the name of certain Rik hymns used as supplemental verses in a Litany. The other form is धेय । 
तो कुस्खपाग्यसंचाग्यौ ॥३०॥ पदानि ॥ क्रतो, कुण्डपाय संचाग्यौ ॥ . 
वृत्तिः ॥ कुण्डपाय्य संचाप्य इत्येतो शब्दो निपात्येते कतावभिभवे ॥ . 
· 130. The words quica: and ea: arc irregular'. ly formed meaning a sacrifice. 
These words are thus formed: कुण्ड+पा (to drink)+यस = कुण्ड+पा+a+ य (VII. 3.33) = कुण्डपाच्यः the sacrifice in which Soma isdrunk with a bowl'. The accent falls on the first syllable by VI. I. 213. सम्+चि (to collect)+ यत् = संचाय्यः 'the sacrifice in which Soma is collected'. 
____ If not applied to sacrifices, the forms will be कुण्डपानम् and संवेयः. 
___अग्नी परिचाग्योपचाग्यसममाः ॥ १३९ पदानि ॥ अग्नी, परिचाग्य-उपचारय-समयाः ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ परिचाय्य उपचाप्य समूष इश्वेते शम्मा निपास्यन्ते भग्नावभिधेये ॥ 
131. The words परिचाय्यः, उपचाप्यः and समयः are irre gularly formed when they are names of fire. 
. These words are thus formed:-परि+चि+ण्वत् परि+चे+ पर+चाय+ g=qfranca: 'sacrificial fire arranged in a circle' (the being changed into any by the analogy of VI. 1. 79. This peculiar sandhi before the semivowel has been illustrated in the previous examples also). So also उपचाव्यः 'a kind of Sacred fire'. सम्+व+ ण्यत् = सम+क+य-समयः a kind of fire'. समय चिन्धीत q m : let him kind!e the Samdhya fire desirous of a victim'. . 
: Why do we say 'when they are names of fire'? Observe otherwise, परिचयम् 'to be heaped', उपचेयम् 'to be increased', संवायम् 'to be carried'. 
BK. III. CH. I. $ 132-134.] 
LYU NI AND ACH. 
399 
- 
- 
चित्याग्निचित्ये च ॥ १३२ ॥ पदानि ॥ चित्य-अग्निचित्ये, च ॥ वृत्तिः । चिस्यशमोगग्निचित्याशब्दच निपात्यते ॥ 
132. The words free and sfiafea are also irre gularly formed. 
The word fra: comes from the root friend to collect', and means fire i. c. that which is collected. As fareitsfon: 'the funeral pile fire'. The word afraferar means, arranging the fire. The affix y has been added to denote condition, together with the augment a (). These words have udatta accent on the last vowel. The regular form is धेयम् 'to be gathered'. 
गवुल्तवी ॥ १३३ ॥ पदानि ॥ स्वुल-वृची, (धातोः) ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ सर्वधातुभ्यो ण्वुनचौ प्रत्ययो भवतः ॥ 
133. The afixes agr(*) and (a) are placed after all verbal roots, expressing the agent. 
The word 'root' is understood in the above aphorism. Thus m'to do' +धुन - कार+(VII. 2. I15) = कार+भक (VII. I. I)= कारक nom. sing. कारकः 'doer.' क+च्-कर+ट (VII. 3. 84)= कर्स nom. sing. कर्ता. So also हारकः and हा. 
The of is not indicatory, but distinguishes this affix from न् ; the simple x includes both Ty and Tt, as in V. 3. 59, and VI. 4. 154. 
नन्दिग्रहिपचादिभ्यो ल्युमिन्यवः ॥ १३४ ॥ पदानि ॥ नन्दि ग्रहि-पचादिभ्यः, ल्यु, णिनि, अचः॥ 
. वृत्तिः॥ विभ्योगणे यस्त्रयः मस्यया यथासंभयं भवन्ति, नन्याकिन्यो म्युः, ग्रहादिभ्यो पिणनिः, पचारियोक ॥ 
134. After the verbs classed as stap 'to be happy!, ग्रह 'to take' and पच् 'to cook' there are the affixes न्यु (भन) णिनि (इन) and भच (भ) respectively. 
The word ddi meaning etcetra, is to be joined with every one of the above three words. These three affixes come respectively after the verbs of the abovc three classcs. Thus after the verbs of नन्द class, comes the affix न्यु, after the verbs of class, comes the affix fuit; after the verbs of quan class, comes the affix H . 
The Framit verbs will not be found in one place in the Dhatupatha. The list of the words formed by these affixes have, however, been collected in the Ganapatha. Thus नन्द ल्यु नन्द +यु (I 3.8)=नन् +भन (VI. I. I)= नन्दन nom. sing. नन्दनः 'son' (lit. what gladdens). So also from the following causa. 
400. 
THE AFFIX KA. 
BK. III. CH. I. $ 135. 
tive roots, nouns are formed, meaning names :-वासि-पासनः or वाशनः ; मदि-मदनः; दूषि-षण: (or भूषणः); साधि-साधनः ; वधि-वर्धनः ; शोभि-शोभन: and रोपि-रोचनः. 
The following derivatives are names :-सहि- सहनः ; तप-तपनः ; दमि दमन: . So also the following words:-~जल्पनः, रमणः, दर्पघः, संक्रन्दनः, संकर्षणः, संहर्षणः, जनार्दनः, यवनः, पवनः, मधुसदनः, विभाषणः, नाणः (them in लवण is irregular), चित्तविनाशनः, कुलदमनः and शत्रुतमनः. 
The una verbs are also nowhere enumerated in a group. The fol lowing are, however, those verbs:-मह-महिन् nom. माही ; उत्सह-उत्साहिन nom. उत्साही ; उस्-उपासिन्; उद्धास्-उद्धवासिन्; स्या-स्थायिन् ; मन्न-मस्जिन्; संमई-संमन्.ि So also the verbs-रक्ष, श्रु, वस्, वप् and शा preceded by नि; as, निरक्षिन्, निमाविन्, निवा सिन्, निवापिन्, निशायिन्. The verbs याचि, व्याह, संध्याद, बन, वद and बस take पिन .when preceded by the negative particle : as, भयाधिन्, अव्याहारिन्, भसंख्याहारिन्, भवाजिन्, भवादिन् and अवासिन्. So also after verbs ending in a vowel when agents are non-conscious beings : as, भकारिन, भहारिन्. So also, भविनायिन्, भविशायिन्, विशविन्, विषयिन् (meaning a place) विशायिन् and विषायिन, अभिभाधिन् भपराधिम्, उपरोधिन्, परिभविन् and परिभाषिन् । 
The following are पचादि words:-पच, वच, वप, वक, चन, सप, पत नवद्, भषद, क्स गरद प्लवद, सरदा, चीरद, माहट, जर, मर, क्षर, तम, सद, देवद, मोरद मेव, मेष, क्रोध, द्रण, वंश, पश, दम्भ, मारभर, स्वपच, मेघ, कीप, तप, मद, रज, दीषद, परन् । 
Thex in Te &c., shows that the feminine of these is formed by long (IV. I. 15). The पचादि class is an भाकृतिगणः । 
भनिधिः सर्वधातुभ्यः पव्यन्ते च पचादयः । 
· · भए वाधनार्थमेवं स्यात् सिध्यन्ति श्वपचादयः ।। 
In fact the affix ory comes after all verbs, and is not exclusively con fined to the verbs above enumerated. The affix भव, therefore, debars भण and may be taken to be the universal affix, and by its help the forms like 
1994 &c. may be explained. 
इगुपधानीकरः कः १३५ ॥ पदानि ॥ इग-उपध-जा-प्रो-किरः, 
. वृत्तिः ॥ गुपधेभ्यो मानाः प्रणातेः किरतेश्च कास्ययो भवति ॥ 
135. After a verb ending in a consonant but preceded by , 3 or long or short), and after the verbs m'to know', oft'to please', and 'to scatter', comes the aflix क (भ). . Thus fafeitarfaffe nom. sing. Fafeg:. So also for fore: 'inscription'; वृष: 'who knows'कशः 'lean'; ज्ञा+क-सः 'who knows' (VI. 4. 64); भी+क 
BK. III. CH. I. $ 136, 137) 
THE AFFIX SA. 
_ 
faa: 'what pleases' ;*+ = F + ( VII. I. 100 ) = fatit + (1. 1.51 )=fair: 'who scatters' i. e. 'a hog'. . 
The words + 'God', 'service and te 'ram', should be read in the qarle class of the last sútra, being formed by the affix 874 and not by * 
stragatavent pze ni ogrta a spra:, , , ( *:) ! वृत्तिः ॥ भाकारान्तभ्यो धातुभ्य उपसर्ग उपप कमस्ययो भवति । 
136. Also after a verb ending in long up when there is a preposition along with it, the afix # is placed. 
This is an apavåda of III. 1. 40, and debars the affix U. Thus yeytt * = q*U +91=#F4: (VI. 4. 64). Tra+#=grat+=era: 'very weary'(ATT substi tuted for by VI. 1. 45.) + gar+H=& : 'very languid'. 
The final u is dropped before the affix a by rule VI. 4. 64. There is clision of long str when an ardhadhatuka affix follows beginning with a vowel and liaving an indicatory of or F. 
UTETEATHE TU: T: 4 239 11 octa u 97-97-77--TW, 9:,( 98 ) 
पत्तिः ।। पादिभ्यो धातभ्य उपसर्ग उपप शमस्ययो भवति । erfa** o fwya: barat afarduint 7789: 11 
137. The affix » (0) is employed after the roots of 'to drink', qo'to sinell', 44'to blow', e suck', and çı 'to see when there is a preposition along with these roots. 
Thus +1+1=30+ fra +(VII. 3. 78)JiTT nom. sing. afory: ; so also focare ; : and forfait : I +67+T=37+19+8= (VII. 3. 78); 1994:; fona: ; * +++T=307:; fra: ; so also +IT+T=39TU:, (VII. 3. 78). so also fortu: ; 
Some commentators do not read the word 'upasarga' into this sät ra. According to them the forms like ra: &c., can be formed also. 
Thc affix , of which a is indicatory, the real affix being 04, causes the root to undergo all those changes, which it undergoes in special tenses ; for it is a sarvadhatuka affix there ; see sätra III. 4. 113 and VII. 3. 78. 
Vart:-Prohibition must be stated of the root et, when the word to be formed is a name. As it tortor + = serg: 'tiger' (an animal that goes about smelling). Here there is an and not the affix g. 
402 
THE AFFIX NA. 
BK. III. CH. I. $ 138.1.10. 
m 
अनुपसर्गालिग्पविन्दधारिपारिवेद्यदेखि चेतिसातिसाहिम्यश्च ॥ १३८॥ पदानि ॥ अनुपसर्गात, लिम्प-विन्द-धारि-पारि-वेदि-उदेजि-ति साति-साहिभ्यः, च (शः) ॥ 
वृत्तिः । अनुपसर्गभ्यो लिम्पादिभ्यः शमत्ययो भवति ।। पार्निकम् ।। नौ निम्पेरिति वक्तव्यम् ।। वार्तिकम् ॥ गवादिषु विन्द संज्ञायाम् ।। 
138. The affix श is employed after the follow. ing verbs when used without a preposition : लिम्प, विन्द and the causatives धारि, पारि, वेदि, उनि, चेति, साति and साहि. - Thus लिम्पः 'smearing'; विन्दः 'acquiring'; धारयः 'holding' पारयः "ferry. ing; ara: 'knowing' ; 31 4: 'shaking';994: 'perceiving' ; ATHU:, and argu:. 
Why do we say 'when used without a preposition'? Observe gfag: ; here the affix is 
Vart :--The verb fare with the preposition for takes the affix v. As faler at the name of certain deities', 'a cow'. 
Vart :- The affix y is employed after for a when compounded with the as ut &c. and when the word to be forined is a proper noun. As offer: 'Krishna' (protector of cows); भरविन्दः 'a lotus' (having petals like spokes). 
. ददातिदधात्योर्विभाषा ॥ १३९ ॥ पदानि ॥ ददाति-दधात्योः, विभाषा, (शः) 
वृत्तिः ॥ वामो धाम विभाषा शमस्ययो भवति । 
139. The affix श is optionally employed, after the root 'to give', and 'to hold', when used without a preposition. 
This debars U. Thus : 'giving'; or gre: 'inheritance'; : 'holding' or yra: 'having'. 
When a preposition is used, the affix nis not employed ; as प्रदः, प्रधः. 
स्वलिति कसन्तेभ्यो वः ॥ १४०॥ पदानि ॥ अवल-इति-कसन्तेभ्यः, 
___वृत्तिः ॥ अनदीमावित्येवमादिभ्यो धातुभ्यः कसगतावित्येवमन्तेभ्यो विभाषा एमत्वको 
- वार्तिकम् ॥ तनोतर्ण उपसंख्यानम् ॥ 
140. After the verbs beginning with वल 'to shine' and ending with कस 'to go', when used without a 
preposition, the affix w is optionally employed, 
BK. III. CH. I. § 141, 142.) 
THE AFFIX NA. 
403 
The word rfa in slaba indicates beginning. These are about 56 verbs, all belonging to the Bhvadı class. See No. 804 to 860 in the Dhatupa tha, Bombay Edition in the Appendix to Sidhanta Kaumudi. 
This debars the affix अच्; as वालः or ज्वलः; चालः or चलः. 
The affix o () having an indicatory U, causes the vriddhi of the pen ultimate 9. When the affix U is not used, then ay is used and we have the other form. But compound verbs take ; as #879: 'luminous'. 
Vart.-The verb a 'to stretch' must be included in this list, and it takes the affix u; as war. The conditions 'option' and 'without preposition' do not apply in this case. The verb at necessarily takes this affix, though compoun ded with an upasarga. 
श्याउदघधासुसंस्वतीयबसावहलिहश्लिषश्वसश्च ॥ १४॥ पदानि। 241-275-673-org-ja-ermita-saat-sac-fore-F2414-tak:,, (:) 
gfa: 11 The spati=a*ura: 644 STHEn Q naar wat for las que paaraw umutit xala 11 
. 141. The affixu is employed after the follow. ing verbs also :— to go', verbs ending in long PT, caly to pierce', wa 'to pain', 'to flow, wala 'to pass on', 'to complete', 4TK 'to take away', forry to lick', ftova 'to em brace', and 'to breathe'. 
The root , before affixes, becomes Thr, (VI. 1.45) and is thus included in the phrase 'verbs ending in long 87. What is then the use of its separate enumeration? The separatc enumeration is for the sake of excluding the ap. plication of every other rule which might have prohibited u. Thus III. 1. 136 enjoins * when a compound verb ends in Hr. But that rule docs not apply to the verb श्या.. 
Thus TTART: 'frost', qfarara: 'catarrh', fra: 'inheritance', yry: 'having', 14: 'pain', rarti 'wound', waTT: 'flow', way: 'transgression', Hara: 'conclu sion', waBIT: 'taken away', : 'licking', a: embracing', TIE: 'breath'. See VII. 3. 33. 
garguerita pepo ugna u g-arti, erguerit, (u: ) वृत्तिः । दुनोते यतेभानपसगें एमस्ययो भवति । 
142. The affixo is employed after the verbs s'to burn', and off to lead', when used without a prepo. sition.. . . . . 
404 
THE AFFIX SIIVUN. 
[BK. II. CH. . $ 143-45. 
'. Thus turet + (VII. 2. 115) – **: (VI. 1. 78) 'burning'. So also +0= f**=74: 'leading'. 
Why do we say 'when used without a preposition'? Observe 'burning'; qU4: 'friendship'. 
ferrut TT: 11 per il açrfa u farat, :,( : ) gf#: il forurar qurtad qazt wala li offet !! FAT 174274 11 
143. The affilx o is optionally employed after the verb ng 'to seize'. 
This debars the affix spy. Thus &+u = , +7 (VII. 2. 116) — 976: 'seizing', 'a crocodile' ; or 4T+ =78: 'a planet'. 
The option allowed by this aphorism is a vyavasthita-vibhasha or de finite option, that is to say, the affix u is always used when the word to be formed means a water-animal, such as a crocodile, shark &c., and in that sense the word is T. But not so, when heavenly luminaries are meant; there the yord is मह. 
Vart :- This rule should be extended to the root * 'to be also. Thus :--*: 'condition' and **: 'existence'. 
**: 11 88 ll erfall T, *, (TE: ) वृत्तिः ॥ महेर्धातोः कास्ययो भवति गेहे कर्तरि॥ 
144. The affix * is employed after the verb 9 when the agent so expressed denotes a house. 
. Thus #*+ *(VI. 1, 16) = 75 'a house'. The r is changed into by the rule of samprasarana. The plural forma TpT: means 'wife', as she is especial ly the person that constitutes the house; while the plural of Ti meaning 'house" will be refu. 
शिल्पिनि वन ॥ १५५ ॥ पदानि ॥ शिलिपनि, वन् । Far: IT erat: m ezeit at forfa for fe 1 **** 11 forefatefona: afout of freepy 11 
145. The affix TT (4) comes after a verb; when the agent so expressed denotes an artist. . 1. Vart :-This affix should be confined to the verbs 'to dance', 'to dig' and ('to dye'. 1. Thus +91 97 +7 (VII. 1. I) = a: 'dancer'. The letter r is indicatory (1.-3.6) and by Rule IV. 1.41, it denotes that words formed by pre fixes having indicatory q form their femininc gender by the affix ) . Thus 
BK. III. CH. I. § 146-148.] 
THE AFFIX NYUT. 
405 
the feminine of ** is Tiit; so also T*: 'miner', fem. ant ; *: 'washer man', fem. Tat. 
In the case of the root of the nasal is elided. According to the opi nion of the author of Maldbhashya, only two verbs are governed by this satra namelý 7 and . According to him, the verb takes the asfix . Thus TT+2+ = +(VI. 4: 37) = 1T+7 (VII. 1. 1) = tmi, jemi 
T. 
गस्यकन् ॥ १४६ ॥ पदानि ॥ गः, थकन् (शिल्पिनि)। पतिः ॥ गायतेस्यकन्प्रत्ययो भवति शिल्पिनि कर्तरि । 
146. The affix 477, (427) comes after the verb of to 'sing', when the agent so expressed, deuotes au artist. 
As, of+4477 a 1*: (VI. 1. 45) 'a singer', sem. mfarar. 
The 1989 II agra u E, ( T:, fefeafa ) u ght: n street og greit sparer Farleyft mafft II 
147. The affix oer is also employed after the verb 'to sing', when the agent so expressed denotes au; artist. 
By the word u 'also', the word me of the last sátra is drawn into this. Thus 11 +0=11+27 (VII. 1. 1)=rat: fem. Tront; the is added by VII. 3.33 
The scparation of these rules (yoga-vibhaga ) relating to it is for the purpose of the sotras that follow. Had m any and one been made one aph orism, the anuvritti of both these asfixes would have run into the subsequent sutras. But it is intended that the anuvritti of "E should only run, and hence this yoga-vibhaga or division of one sätra into two. 
FI feet: #1985 11 actfall X, , afaverit, ( more ) 
वृत्तिः । अहातेनिहीतेश पातोयट प्रत्ययो भवति माहौ काले च करि॥ 
148. After the verb 1, also the affix is employed when the agent so expressed deuotes 'rice' aud 'time'. 
The verb denotes two verbs from 'to abandon' and 'to go both belonging to the Third Conjugation, forming Tailor and fagra as 3rd per. sing. Thus fto =F : 'a kind of rice' (that which jahati 'leaves off all water) 2147: 'a year' (that which jühtte 'goes through all conditions.) 
110W'anu 10 cuu, vie aux 17 18 employeu, wuen repe. tition is meant. 
As, #+ = +977 (VII. 1. 1)-97*:; so also, T ., :, and 99* 
The word samabhihira in the sotra indicates that the action done by the agent must be well performed. The asfix vun being thus ordained for the action, when it is well performed, it follows, that it will not be employed wher the action is repeatedly ill performed. The asfix will be employed even wher there is no repetition but the action is well performed even at the first attempt 
una Tul g4e at agría al ofia, , (T) u fa: il perfor m a yra T IT praat palat II 
150. The aflix gt is employed after all verbs When benediction is intended. 
As, sftp +97= 77#: 'may he live' ; I*: 'may he be happy'. 
· The word srift: means a sort of prayer; and it relates to action. Thi force of this affix is that of an agent with the addition that the action is sim ply the object of a prayer of some one who wishes that that may be the ac tion of that agent'. ओ३म् 
अथ तृतीयाध्यायस्य द्वितीयः पादः॥ 
BOOK THIRD. 
CHAPTER 1I. 
marra nga acra u , T, ( uraft: ) u त्तिः ॥ सर्वत्र कर्मण्युपप धातोरणप्रत्ययो भवति ।। वार्सिकम् ।। शीलिकामिभक्ष्याचरिभ्योप: पूर्वपदप्रकृतिस्वरवं च वक्तव्यम् ॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ईभिक्षमिभ्यां चेति वक्तव्यम् ।। 
1. The aflix Hycomes after a verbal root when the object, (of whatever sort it may be), is in composition with it, (as an upapada). 
The object or karma is of three sorts, namely nivartya, vikarya and prapya. 
The object which has a material cause, but such cause is however unexpressed in the sentence, is called nivartya object; as Harifa 'he makes a pot, here ga 'mud' the material cause of m is unexpressed, therefore 
** is nivartya object. Wlicrc thc matcrial cause itself is changed, by a modification, into something else, such an object is called vikarya object; as arogant: 'the branch-cutter'. While the object which cannot be approached by any action, and is not affected by it, but is always constant, is called the pragya object; as a prera: 'the reading of Veda'; the Veda is always the same. 
They will be illustrated by the following examples :.Of the first kind, we have minart: 'a potter' and T TT: 'a city-builder'; of the second, we have " IT: 'a branch-cutter' and Urary: 'a reed-cutter'. Or the third, murg: 'the learning of Veda' and it: 'the reading of Charcha'. But compound nouns cannot be formed of such sentences as gri fa 'he goes to the village', Arfi cst qrafa 'he sees the sun', 'firata yulfa 'he hears the Himavat. The reason is that it is against the usage of the language to form nouns out of these. 
___Vart:-The affix g comes after the verbs शील, काम, भक्ष्य and भाचर and the noun in composition with it, retains its original accent. As afasthet: 'addicted to flesh', sem. Hladiat ; HIHINTA: ‘loving flesh', fem, TAT; HE: 'carnivorous', sem. l ; and fellurit: 'good-conducted', fem. FOTOT TTTI 
408 
I 
THIE AFFIX KA. 
[BK. III. Cri. II. § 2-4. 
Vart:—The affix o comes after the roots in 'to look' and a 'to fur. bear' under similar circumstances. As qugft:, fem. aut 'expecting 
happiness'; : fem. *? 'much forbearing'. 
Tarane 11701 agita ut TT, TT, #i, , (a) u fa: 1129, 51, ne, gamay koyqri saracenit safe in 
• 2. The affix my comes after the roots to call'; a 'to weave', nie 'to measure', when the object is in composition with it. 
This debars the affix * (III. 2. 3); as part + +HU =R +FT+87= Fritt Ty+ (VII. 3. 33) = patiara: (the is added by rule VII. 3. 33, 'when a křit affix with an indicatory u or # follows, the augment y is added after the verbs that end in long :). So also star, rear: 1 
eratura : 113 acrfa il drai, huet, *i, ( f) ..वृत्तिः ॥ भाकारान्तेभ्यो धातु योग्नुपसर्गेभ्यः कर्मण्युपपर्व कप्रत्ययो भवति । 
3. The affix a comes after a verbal root that ends in long s when there is no upasarga preceding it and when the object is in composition with it. 
This debars Hu; as t+1+*= Ti+*+87 = 11: 'Giver of cows', (the long T is elided by VI. 4. 64, =So also, 2014: 'who gives a blanket'; qfU 'what protects the rear'; for 'what protects the finger' (a thimble)'. 
. Why do we say 'when there is no upasarga'? Witness larg: 'who ceremoniously gives a cow', TripRT 'who ceremoniously gives a mare'. Here the compound verb aig takes the affix yu. 
afa tu: 1801 oglan aría, pui, ( *: ) u : . qfar: ll OT-9998 Pazã: *1748azit afer 
4. The affix # comes after the root ear when in composition with a word ending in a case-affix, as an upapada. 
In the three previous sätras, the word in composition was always in the accusative case. This sätra declares that with regard to the verb fint, the upa pada may have any case not necessarily the accusative. As afrT:=HÀ fagfa 'who dwells in accessible position'; and fracy: 'having an inaccessible position': ..... 
BK. III. CH. II. § 5]. 
THE AFFIX KA.. 
409 
This sátra should be divided into two stras (yoga-bibhaga). Thus: (1) aftu The affix # comes after every root ending in long T, when in compo sition with a case-inflected word; as anat fafar fæ+1+*=f64: (VI. 4. 64) 'who drinks with two organs' i.e, the proboscis and the mouth, an elephant'. So also 9794:' a plant' (what drinks through the foot). 9'a tortoise' (that always protects its mouth by drawing it in, at the approach of danger). (2) arger. 11 The affix e comes after the root far when in composition with a word ending in a case-affix. Why do we make this two-fold division, when we see the second rule is included in the first as the verb for also ends in a long T? The reason is that the first rule applies where the agent is indicated, while the second rule applies where condition is to be denoted. As we e r =ore : 'a swarm of rats'; so also gertat:' a swarm of locusts'. 
Both the words affu and go are understood in the satras that follow: vis: the word miru in satras that relate to transitive verbs, and the word pro everywhere else. 
- Touteret: oft garagist: H 4 H actfall attenti, ufty- sti, ( ** , *: ) 
पत्तिः ॥ तुन्दशोकयोः कर्मपोरुपपत्योः परिममापनदोर्धातोः कात्ययो भवति ।। वार्तिकम् । भालस्यसुखाहरणयोरिति वक्तव्यम् ।। वार्तिकम् ।। कपकरणे मूलविमुनादिभ्य उपसंख्यानम् ।। 
5. The affix a comes after the verbs fra 'to wash out' and say 'to drive away', when in composition with the words yt navel and the 'grief', as objects, res. pectively. 
___As तुन्द परिमृज भास्ते 'he lay lazy'. So also शोकापनुवः पुनो मातः 'a son, des. troyer of sorrow is born'. 
Vart.-This affix is to be applied only then, when the meaning of the word to be formed is 'lazy' and 'giver of happiness'. 
Vart.-The epithet afg: is applied to a lazy person; while gfrur: means who clears his navel. So Tamar: means giver of happiness, while 
Tagile: means 'removal of sorrow'. 
Vart. The words that a chariot' and the rest should be in cluded in the subdivision of words formed by the affix a. The words belong ing to this hcad can only be recognised by their form, there being no list of them to be found anywhere. Thus fafti 'a chariot', per: 'a bow,' 1177 'sesamums', a17 (at nå) 'a lotus' 
410 
: 
• THE AFFIX TAK. 
[BK. III. C1. II. $ 6-8. 
#CIT: 11€ lluerfau , -,( wife, #:) u fi ni garantire um sorry forgrad aveazit popfer 11 
. 6. The affix a comes after the root 'to give' and a 'to know', when taking the preposition 4 and in composition with a word in the accusative case. 
We applied by såtra 3 the affix a after verbs that ended in long et and had no upasarga, Now begins the case of verbs with upasarga. This debars the affix su; as 4: (VI. 4. 64) 'giver of all; liberal', qf947: (VI. 4. 64) 'acquaint ed with roads'. The long sp of qr and it is elided by VI, 4. 64. 
Why do we say 'when taking o'? With any other upasarga these verbs will take the general affix spy; as directa. 
afhen: 11 9 u gorfa ofa, Fi, ( fa, *:) वृत्तिः ॥ संपूर्वात् ख्या इत्येतस्माद्धातोः कर्मण्वुपपदे कमत्वयो भवति ॥ 
7. The afix * comes after the root pa 'to tell', when preceded by the preposition #, and when the object is in composition with it. 
The verb or ends in long w and by III. 2. 3 when compounded with an upasarga, it would have taken the affix ara. This debars Hu; as truar (VI. 4. 64) 'a cowherd' (ere). 
Trotec Ell Terfor u t-oti, cn, (**fa, sem) u f#: Il mah: Fatin Trent: HogarisTTEŤ Taat afat 11 पार्तिकम् ॥ सुराशीध्वोः पिवतेरिति वनव्यम् । पातिकम् ॥ बहुलं छन्दसि इति वक्तव्यम् ।। 
8. The affixer comes after the verbs al 'to sing' and a 'to drink' when used without a preposition, and when the object is in composition with it. 
The phrase anupasarga is to be read again into this sätra by anuvritti from sätra 3, though this anuvritti had temporarily lain dormant in sätra 6 and 7. as being unnecessary. This debars ; of this affix and an are indicatory the & showing among others that the feminine is formed by the affix T (IV. 
1. 14) 
As, T rafo = T+T+22=TAT: (VI. 4. 64) 'who sings Sakra hymns'. सामगः 'singer of Sama'. fem. शागी and सामगी। 
Vart. The affixat comes after the verb q when it means to drink and only when it is in composition with the words ay and its as its object, 
BK. III. CI. II.89.] 
THE AFFIX ACII. 
4U 
MARARAMARARA 
हरतेरनुद्यमनेऽच् ॥६॥ पदानि ॥ हरतः, अनुद्यमने, अच्, 
This is an important modification of the general satra. Thus सुरापः fem. सुरापी 'wine-bibber'; tftyg: fem. glyrat 'spirit-drinker'. 
Why do we say 'when in composition with sura and sidhu' ? Observe भीरपा मासणी 'the milk-drinking Brahmani'; formed by the affix a and the femi nine, therelore, not formed by the affixt but by भा. 
Why do we say 'when qr means to drink'? When a means 'to protect this affix is not used; as सुरापा 'who protects wine'. 
When these words are compounded with an apasarga they do not take टक but भष्ण ; as शक्रसंगायः, सामसंगायः। 
Vart.-There is diversity in the Chhandas as to the employment of these affixes;as था मामणी सुरापी or सुरापा भवति मैना देवाः पतिनोकं नयन्ति 'the gods do not carry that Brahmaņi to the regions of her husband who drinks wine'. 
- ( कर्मणि)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ हरतेर्धातोरनुयमने वर्तमानात् कर्म प्युपपरेऽप्रत्ययो भवति । वार्तिकम् ।। भचप्रकरणे शक्तिनांगनांकुशयष्टितोमरपटपटीधनुष्प ग्ररुपण्यानम् ।। पार्विकम् ।। सूत्रेच धार्यये ।। 
9. The affix t? comes after the verb i when it does not mean 'to raise up', when the object is in com. position with it. 
This debars Ho. The word 347 means 'to raise a load'. Thus wti srfa="IIFT: 'who takes a share, or sharer' ;so frauer: 'an heir.(+ 0= 
इर+भ-हर:) (VII. 3.84). 
Why do we say 'when it does not mean to raise up'? For then the affix भए will be employed; as भारहार: 'a burden-bearer, a porter'. 
Vart.-This asfix comes after the verb or when in composition with the words शनि 'spear', लाजल 'plough', अंकुश 'goad', यष्टि 'staff', तोमर 'an iron club', घट 'jar', पढी 'a small jar', धनुष् 'a bow' ; as शक्तिमहः 'a lancer', लाङ्गलमहः 'a plough-man', stuur: 'an elephant driver', aftag: 'a staff-bearer', HIRTE: 'a club bearer', पटमहः, घटीमहः 'a jar-bearer', धनुग्रहः 'a bow-bearer'. 
Vart-This assix coincs after the verb 9 when the word hy is in composition with it and the sense is that of 'holding'; as ETT: 'a thread holder'. When it has not this meaning we have सूत्रमाहः 'a thread-taker'. . 
वयसि च ॥ १०॥ पदानि ॥ वयसि, च, (हरतेः, कर्मणि, अच) । वृत्तिः ॥ श्यसि गम्यमाने हरतेः कर्मण्युपपरे प्रत्ययो भवति । 
412 
THE AFFIX ACH. 
[BK. III. CH. II. $ 11, 12. 
10. The affix ww comes after the verb हम् when the object is in composition with it and when the mean ing of the word to be formed is descriptive of age. 
In this sátra the verb ry has the sense of udyamana which was speci fically excluded in the last. The word ogę means the condition of human body as dependent upon time. This rule applies to those words which indicate the attainment of appropriate age for the accomplishment of objects described by the upapada, or the reaching of that age in which the thing described by the upapadu naturally takes place; as wieITT: 'the dog that has reached the age when it can chew bones' (lit. when it can raise it up); कवचहरः भनियकुमार: 'the Kshatriya boy old enough to wear (lit. 'to raise up or bear) the shield'; so that the verb here has the sense of 'raising up'. 
___ आडिताच्छील्ये ॥१९॥ पदानि ॥आडि, ताच्छील्ये, (कर्मलि, ह रतः, अच)॥ 
पत्तिः ॥ भार पूर्वाद्धरसे: कर्मण्युपपरे प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
11. The affix भच् comes after the verb हम (when the object is in composition with it), the root taking the preposition 574, and the sense of the word to be formed is inclination or accustomed occupationi. 
The word retra means a natural inclination or habitual occupation; as पुष्पाहरः (पुष्प+भाहरतिपुष+भाहर) 'he who has a natural tendency towards fetching flowers or whose habitual occupation is to collect flowers'; so also फलाहरः। 
Why do we say when denoting inclination'? Otherwise the affix will be भए; as भारमाहरति-भाराहारः 'who brings load'. 
___ अहः ॥१२॥ पदानि ॥ अर्हः, (कर्मणि, अच) ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ मई पूनायो, भस्माद्धातोः कर्मप्युपपग्प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
12. The aflix comes after the verb pe to respect', when the object is in composition with it. 
This debars arut. The words so formed are cspecially of scminine gen der. As पूजाहाँ 'deserving of respect' ; so also गन्धाहो, मानार्दा। 
___ स्तम्बकीयो रमिजपोः ॥ १३ ॥ पदानि ॥ स्तम्ब-कर्षयोः, रमि जपोः, ( मुपि, अच् ) । 
तिः ॥ स्तम्बकर्ण इत्येतयोः सुबन्तवोरुपपरयोथासंभवं रमिजपोर्धापोरमत्थयो भवति ।। 
बार्तिकम् ।। हस्तिस चकयोरिति बाध्वम् ।। . . . . . . . . 
BK. III. CII. II. $ 13, 14] 
THIE AFFIX ACH. 
413 
13. The affix per comes after the verb ry 'to sport' and 'to whisper' when the case-infected words *** a clump of grass' and wu 'ear are in composition with them respectively. 
The verb Tv is intransitive and the verb or can take an object under very limited circumstances, only namely when the object denotes Sabda ; there fore in the case of both these verbs, the object cannot be in composition as an accusative case; therefore, the upapada here must be a general case-inflected word. Hence we have read the anuvritti of the word er from sâtra 4 into this, the anuvsitti of the word of being inapplicable here. 
Vart.--The words to be formed must have the sense of elephant and a 'tale-bearer". Thus fact= rca: 'an elephant (lit. who sports in cluster of grass)'d #fa= ÜFT: 'a slanderer (lit. who whispers in the ear). 
The affix ay is not employed when the words to be formed do not mean an 'elephant' and a 'traducer.. Thus H &who plays in clusters of grass'. XU HƯA *. 'the mosquito that hums near the car'. 
sa wat: jur u ucrfa 11 qfa, wrat:, - TUTA, ( 3 ) 
वृत्तिः ॥ शम्युपपड़े धातुमानामसंज्ञायां विषय मरथयो भवति ।। 
14. The affilx ay is employed after the verbal roots when my 'well, is in composition, and the word to he formed denotes a name. 
As +6+ =ar lit. 'who does good'. So also xT: #TF: 1 All these are proper nouns. 
Why have we repeated the word dhaiu in this aphorism, when it was understood by anuvritti from sätra III. 1.91? To this the reply is, that the re petition of the word dhdtu shows that there is prohibition of the affix z, that comes after the verb in certain senses (III. 2. 20), when the word TY is in coinposition. The affx ary will be employed after the verb x and not the affix y, when yg is an upapada, even when the sense to be indicated in that of cause, habit &c. (III. 2, 20). The result is that the feminine of hare will be 
ACT, and not rikt, which, had the affix been , would have been the proper feminine (Sce IV. 1. 14). İNTI means a female ascetic,' 'a vulture' and 'one have ing the habit of doing good'. 
phone that is qu u ogrla umfuath, ai, (fam)! 
OS 
3 
414 
THE AFFIX TA. 
[BK. III. CH. II. § 15, 16. 
· वृत्तिः ।। शेर्धातोरधिकरणे सुबन्तरपपरे प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
arfait 11 auffaggapapatya sifall forargata 1 
af&*il garaileg meg .: appartenant fort megfe !! 
15. The affix va comes after the verb eft to lie down' when in composition with a case-inflected word indicating location, i. e., in the locative case. 
The word aq (III. 2. 4) a noun ending in a case-affix is understood in this aphorism. Asa ga=019: 'who lies in the sky'. 
Vart. The affix up comes after the verb it when in composition with the words to 'ribs', &c., though not necessarily denoting location; as पावभ्यां शेसे पावशयः 'who reclines on his sides', उदरंशयः . who lies on his stomach', Tema: 'who lies on his back'. 
Vart.-And when the verb It is preceded by the word final; as fra arte = fanpage: 11 . 
Vart.--So also when the words am &c. are in composition with it de noting agent and in the nominative case. As in: jä=E U4: I TE gå=htua: 1 
Vart.-In the Chhandas the affix y comes after the verb when in composition with the word forft in the locative. As Firet Ta=fifty: 'who lies on the mountain'. 
The letter of is 'indicatory denoting that there is elision of the final vowel with what follows it (I. I. 64). 
TE: U pe u orgTfa Il Ti, Ti, ( erfurth, gra ) u i fer: il cufatio (9 3998 Parent afer 11 
16. The afixa comes after the verb 'to go' when a case-infected word in composition with it, de. notes location. 
The word adhikarana of the last sätra is understood in this. As aty & a r: 'who goes among the Kurus'. *T: 'who goes among the Madras'. 
of the affix the real affix is , the letter being indicatory, showing that the feminine of these words is formed by the affix #79. (See. IV. 1. 14), as 
act, 94911. i. .ii.. 
BK. III. CH. II. 
17-20.] 
THE AFFIX TA. 
. 
415. 
भिक्षासेनादायेषु च ॥ १७॥ पदानि ॥ भिक्षा-सेना आदायेषु, च, (चरेः, टः)॥ 
पतिः ।। भिक्षा सेना भादाय इत्येतेपूरपदेषु चरेर्थातोटप्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
17. The affix t is employed after the verb चर् to go', when the words in composition with it are far 'alms', सेना 'army' and भावाय 'having taken'. 
The anuvritti of the words 'in the locative case' does not extend to this aphorism, and hence the necessity of making a distinct and separate satra. 
Thus भिक्षाचरः 'a beggar' (who goes for aims); सेनापरः 'one who goes with an army'; praerT: 'one who goes after having taken'. 
पुरोग्यतोग्ग्रेषु सत्तः ॥ १८ ॥ पदानि॥पुरस्-अग्रतस्-अग्रेषु, सतेः, (टः)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ पुरस् भमतस् भमे इस्येतेषापतेषु सनर्धातोरपाययो भवति ॥ 
18. The affix: comes after the verb to move' when the words in composition with it, are पुरः, भमतः and wi, all meaning 'iu frout of or before'. 
As gr: eft=r:ET: 'who goes in front, a harbinger'. So also ***: सरः and भमसर: 'going in front, a leader'. 
पूर्व कर्तरि ॥ १९ ॥ पदानि ॥ पूर्व, कर्तरि, (सत्तः, ४०)॥ वृत्तिः॥ पूर्वशब्दे कवाचिन्युपपदे सातोष्टप्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
19. The alix : comes after the verba 'to go', when qef is in composition with it, denoting the agent. 
. Thus पूर्वः सरति = पूर्वसरः 'going in front'. 
Why do we say 'denoting the agent'? Otherwise the affix su will be employed. As पूर्वटेशं सरति = पूर्वसरः 'going to the east'. 
कमो हेतुताच्छील्यानुलोम्येषु ॥ २० ॥ पदानि ॥ का, हेतु-ता. पछील्य-आनुलोम्येषु, (कर्मणि, टः) ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ कर्मण्युपपदे करोतेर्धातोटमस्ययो भवति हेसो ताच्छोल्चे भानुजोम्ये च गम्यमान ।। 
20. The afnx t comes after the verb कम् 'to make when the object is in composition with it deuot ing cause, habit and going with the grain (concession). 
The word ga of this sátra means the final or conclusive cause, and is not the grammatical हेतु meaning agent. ताच्छील्य means habit, and literally, the 
416 
THE AFFIX TA. 
[BK. III. CH. II. $ 21. 
act of being accustomed to that. sratre comes from w ith meaning 'with the hair', that is to say, regular, in natural order, successive, and hence favourable, and agreeable complaisance, acquiescence &c. Of jy, we have a t man the daughter that causes sorrow; यशस्करी विद्या 'honorable science':; कुलकर धन 'the family making wealth'. Of Futra, we have at: 'who performs obse quies' ; spar: 'who amasses wealth'. Of ergotea, we have fair: 'who prompt ly does what he is directed'; 99r: 'who regularly does what he is told'. 
Why do we say 'when having these. scnses'? Otherwise the affix will be spor. As parc: 'potter', TTFIT: 'city-maker'. 
दिवाविभानिशाप्रभाभास्कारान्तानन्तादिबहनान्दीकिंलिपिलिबि बलिभक्तिकतचित्र क्षेत्र संख्याजधाबाहवर्यत्तद्धनुररुष्षु ॥ २१॥ पदानि । fear-@T-TOT-OTHT-TE-TT-377-79 -37f-e- et-F#-fafa ferra-afen--rai-fea-9-tem-1501-01-3-2-1--99 Fing, (**fa, gra, :, z:) # 
f#: 11 farfaqueig atauiate 97277) Hari 11 वार्तिकम् ॥ किं यत्तबापु कनोज्विधानम् ।। 
21. The affixz comes after the verb 'to make when the following words are in composition with it : ferest 'by day!, fax 'light', Faan 'night', 'splendour', *: 'light', *TT 'work', ya 'end', ay 'endless', one 'beginning', r 
many', trift 'benediction', fanaa 'what', farra 'writing, fara 'writing', afer oblation', afir'devotion', n'agent', [m 'paint ing', ** 'field', words denoting numerals, per 'thigh', are 'hand', भहः 'day', यत् 'what', सत् 'that', धनुस् 'bow' and भरुस् 
wound'. 
Both the words 'karma' and 'suip' are understood in this aphorism; that is to say, sometimes these upapadas stand as accusative case and sometimes they have other cases, as the construction may require. This affix & comes when the sense is not that of cause &c., as it was in the last satra. 
Thus farar: 'the sun.' The word fear is an indeclinable and means 'in the day time. There the upapada, therefore, is in the locative case. The sun is so called, because it makes creatures active in the day time. 
So farat: 'the sun' (light-maker); furat: 'the moon' (the night-ma ker); 
F T: 'the sun'; ERT: 'the sun' (the letter is not changed into visar ga, as it has been so read in the satra); ATAT: 'agent'; T: 'death" (end maker); ** *T: 'magnifying to any extent'; opriat: 'the creator'; TET: 'the busy'; Trat: 'the speaker of benediction', faianti'a servant'; fafert: 'a BK. III, C1. II. $ 22, 23) 
THE AFFIX TA. 
417 
scribe' ; afar: 'a scribe'; wiat: "offering sacrifice' ; *T: 'a devotee' ; waar: 'an agent'; f or: 'a painter'; : la cultivator' ; Teat: doing only one thing', fant: 'doing two things'; formir: 'doing three things'; RET: 'a runner, an express'; anat: 'a hero', 'a manual labourer"; FFT: 'the sun'; T: 'doing that'; Otkr: 'doing that'; vooxt: 'bow-maker'; WiFT: 'causing or inflicting wounds'. 
Vari.—The affix sere comes after the verb 5 when fait, 07, me and are in composition with it. The speciality of z affix is that the feminine of words derived from it is formed by long; while the feminine of words derived by भwis formed by long भा. Thus किंकरा, यस्करा, तस्करा and बहकरा; these words might be said to belong to the warfa class (See IV. 1. 31). 
fe wat 1177.11 atau **fa, war, (**ft, ortrai, 
T:)" 
#: 11 *** 1994 * artisanat para sa OFWATAKAT I · 
22. Tho affix e comes after tho verb f 'to make', when the word *is in composition with it, and the sense of the word to be formed is that of wageş. 
The word fra means service for hire, wages. The word * does not mean the grammatical object but the word-form **; as **T: 'a hired las bourer' (not a slave); otherwise the affix is wa; as #ant: 'an artisan'. 
न शब्दश्लोककलहगायावैरचादुसूत्रमंत्रपदेषु ॥ २३ ॥ पदानि।। a, 9-14-16-179--919-19-84-999, (mitai, T: ) u 
qfet: il tarfeqatig tidurant atufet ! 
23. The affixo does not come after the verb 'to make', when the following words are in composi tion with it:-9787 'sound', walan 'verse', *** 'qnarrel', er (praise', 'eumity', 'flattery', an thread', wat 'hymns' and qq 'word', 
This prohibition relates even when the sense is that of cause, habit &c. The affix < being prohibited, the general affix su takes its place. As . 
g rr: 'sounding, sonorous'; T: 'a verse-makcr"; FATT: 'one who foments quarrels'; mr ratt: 'a writer of Gathas or prakritee verses'; drait: 'an enemy'; TITT: 'a flatterer' ; FIT: 'an author of sotras'; 4 TT: 'a composer of Maa tras'; Tart: 'an author of Padapatha'. 
- 418 
THE AFFIX IN. 
[BK. II. CH. II. ६ 24-26. 
स्तम्बशकतोरिन् ॥ २४ ॥ पदानि ॥ सतम्ब-शकतोः, इन्, (क. मणि) ॥ 
वृत्तिः ।। स्तम्ब शकृत् इत्येतयोः कर्मणोरुपपरयोरिन्प्रत्ययो भवति ।। बार्तिकम् ॥ श्रीहियन्सयोरिति वक्तव्यम् ॥ 
24. The affix इन् comes after the verbs when the objects in composition with it, are the words स्तम्ब 'a sheaf, and शकृत् 'ordure'. 
Thus स्तम्ब++बन -स्तम्बकरि nom. sing. स्तम्बकरिः; so also शकृत् करिः. 
Van.--This rule is applicable when the sense of the words to be form. ed, is that of 'rice' and 'a calf respectively. Therefore स्तम्बकरिः means 'rice', and unft:, 'a call. 
When the words have not the senses of 'rice' and 'a call', the affix भण is employed. As सम्बकार: 'sheal-maker', शकतकारः 'ordure-maker'. 
हरतेयूँतिनाथयोः पश ॥२५॥ पदामि॥ हरतेः, दूति-नाण्याः , पशी, (कर्मणि, रन् । 
वृत्तिः ॥ इति नाय इत्येतयोः कर्मणोपपत्योः हरतेर्धातोः पशो कसरिन् मत्ययो भवति ।। 
25. When the agent indicated is an animal, the affix recomes after the verb 'to tako', the object in composition with it being the words that 'a leather-bag' and नाय 'a master'. 
Thus इतिहरिः 'a dog' (a carrier of skin); नायहरिः 'a beast' (that carries its master). 
When the words formed do not denote an animal, the affix hu is em. ployed; as faeTT: 'a water-carrier a carrier of a leather-bag for holding water). नापहारः 'a carrier of his master'. . .. फलेगहिरात्ममभारिख ॥ २६ ॥ पदानि ॥ फलेग्रहि:-आत्मसमरिः, 
वृत्तिः॥ फलैयहिः भात्मम्भरिः इत्येतो शमी निपास्येते ॥ 
26. And the words फलेपहि and भामम्भरि are irre. gularly formed. . The word फलेमाहिः is formed by adding the affix इन to the verb ग्रह and making the upapada end in the vowel ए. Thus फलानि गृहपाति-फलेमहि: the fruit-bearing i. e. a tree'. 
BK. III. CH. II. § 27, 28.] 
THE AFFIX KHAS. 
419 
MA 
The word opregnfc: is formed by adding the augment (A) to the upa pada भाग्म, and the affix म् to the verb q. Thus भास्मानं विभर्सि - भास्मम्भरि: 'sel fish' (one who fccds his own self). 
The word 'and' indicates that there are other such irregularly-formed words. As textfr: 'gluttonous, selfish' (caring to feed his own belly). Tyfr: 'gluttonous, selfish'. 
af alle HUT II 79 il a fa i re, ata-u fy-#06#, ( **fa, a) 
Fa: 11 TT 47 **, 
T rat, fe fanisi, AT: **077ae safer forget to प्रस्थयो भवति ॥ 
27. In the Vedic literature, the affix it comes after the verbs. 7 'to honor' AT 'to worship' re 'to pro tect' and 74 'to agitate', when the object is in composition. 
Thus #tfü OTT 3194 (Vaj. San. I. 17., V. 12., VI. 3); 79 #1 sigra (Rig. Ved. VI. 53. 10)# carattafora(Rig. Ved. X. 14. II) Fe 976*TA, ATTEITT RITA dara (Rig. Ved. VII. 104. 21). 
yüt: WIN 75 l wara li ga, um, ( **fu) u वृतिः॥ एन कम्पने इरयस्माद् ण्यतारकर्मण्युपपा खापत्ययो भवति ।। affan ll angry ararajaftfarticTAT T argrepart 11 
28. The allix en comes after the verb er to tremble' when ending in fu (III. 26.) and when the object is in composition with it. 
This affix comes after the causative of gt. Of the affix way the letters E and n are indicatory, the real affix is 8. The q indicates that the augment 
A is added to the upapada ending in a vowel (VI. 3. 67). The y indicates that this is a Sarvadha tuka asfix (III 4. 113), and therefore the vikaranas like my &c. (III. 1. 68.) will be employed here. Thus 8757 - M ÀY: (995 +FT+ 19 +0 =W +#+84 +81) 'who awes the limbs'; 97 T: 'who awes man kind'. 
Vart:-The affix or comes after the verbs 'to go', ut 'to suck', 'to strike', x 'to leave' when in composition with the words to 'wind', at la bitch', fan 'sesamum' and sta 'flatulence'. As I: EiTT: 'swist antelopes' (going with the wind); fra: 'a bitch-sucker'; faoi ga: 'an oilman'; #ret: 'a kind of bean' (that causes or cures flatulence). The long f of nat is shortened by VI. 3. 66. 
420 
__ THE AFFIX KHAS. 
BK. III. CH. II. $ 29, 30. 
मासिकास्तनयो धेटोः ॥ २९॥ पदानि ॥ मासिका-स्तनयोः, मा-धेटोः, (कर्मणि, ख) ॥ . वृत्तिः ॥ नासिकास्तनयोः कर्मणोरुपपश्योर्मा,टोर्धास्वोः खमत्ययो भवति । 
वार्तिकम् ॥ स्तने धेटः ।। मासिकायांतु मश्च धेटश्च ।। 
29. The affix खम् comes after the verbs मा 'to blow and to suck' when faar 'nose' and eam 'breast, are in composition with them as object. 
The rule of yathasankhya as given in L 3. 10 does not however, apply here. For स्तन is compounded with अंद; as (स्तन++खण् = स्तन+ मुम्+ + शप्+ख = रतन+म् +ध+म+भ)= स्तनन्धयः 'an infant' (sucking the breast). 
But नासिका is compounded with both ध्मा and धे; as नासिका+मा+खश == नासिक+म+धम+भ (VI. 3.66 and 67; VII. 3. 78) नासिकंधम: 'blowing and breathing through the nose'. So also ifanya: 'drinking through the nose'. 
That the rule of fathasankhyd does not apply here, is indicated by the irregular construction of the Dvandva compound नासिकास्तनयोः. By rule II. 2. 84. the word (at containing fewer syllables ought to have stood first; one irregu larity lets in another. 
The feminine of Er.नंधयः is सनधयी, as the verb | has an indicatory द्। 
नाडीमुष्टयोश्च ॥ ३०॥ पदानि ॥ नाडी-मुष्टयोः, च, (कर्मणाः, sमा-घंटोः, ख)। 
पत्तिः॥ नाडी मुहि इत्येतयोः कर्मणोरुपपदयोमधिटोः लग् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
30. And when the words नाडी 'a. tube' and मुष्टि 'fist' are objects in composition with the verbs मा and 
, the aflix an is employed. 
Here also the irregularly-formed Dvandva compound are showes the non-applicability of the rule of yathåsankhyå ; for are being a for ought to have stood first (II. 2. 32). 
Thus allona: 'blowing through the tube'; AfryR: 'blowing through the fist' ; नादिग्धयः 'sucking through the tube', an infant; मुष्टिन्धयः 'an infant'. 
The word 'and' in the aphorism indicates that there are other words also so formed. Thus पटिन्धमः, परन्धयः, खारिन्धमः, खारिन्धवः, वासन्धमः, वातन्धवः, 'a mountain'. 
This sätra is not Panini's, but is really a Vartika, raised to the rank of a sätra by the author of the Kasika. The Vartikakara divides the last så tra in this way: (1) स्तने घंटः ॥ (2) सतो मुटो मच ।। (3) नासिका म ध ।। (4) नारी मुष्टि पटोखारीविति वक्तव्यम्।। 
BK. III. CH. II. $ 31-34.) 
THE AFFIX KHAS. 
21 
. उदि कूल रुजिवहोः ॥ ३१ ॥ पदानि ॥ उदि, काले, रुणि-वहोः, (ख)॥ 
वृत्तिः।। जो मन, वह पापणे, एता-यामुत्पूर्वाभ्यो कूले कर्मण्युपपहें परमत्ययो भवति॥ 
31. The afflx un comes after the verbs. 5* 'to break into pieces' and वह 'to carry', when preceded by the upasarga ge and the word 'bank' is in composition 
with them as the object. 
Thus कूलमुजाति-कूलमुवुनः 'breaking down banks' (such as a chariot, river, elephant, &c.); कूलमुहः 'tearing up or carrying away the bank'. 
वहाने लिहः ॥३२॥ पदानि ॥ वह-अधे, लिहः ॥ (खए ) ॥ पत्तिः ॥ वह भच इत्येतयोः कर्मणोरुपपरयोः निर्धातोः खगमस्थयो भवति ॥ 
32. The affix a comes after the verb निg to lick' when the object in compositiou with it, is the word वह 'the shoulder of an ox' or भन 'a cloud'. 
As TiToet ott: 'the shoulder-licking cow'; w ant dit: 'the cloud-licking 
· wind'. 
परिमाणे पचः ॥ ३३ ॥ पदानि॥ परिमाणे, पचः, (कर्नति, सश)। वृतिः ॥ परिमाणं प्रस्थावि, सस्मिकर्मण्युपपदे पचेः खप्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
33. The affix खe comes after the verb पच् 'to cook' whou the object in composition with it deuotes & measure. 
Thus प्रत्यं पचति प्रस्थंपचा 'a pot having the capacity to cook a prastha of food'; so also द्रोणम्पचः, खारिम्पच: 'a kettle'. 
मितनखे च ॥३४॥ पदानि ॥ मित-नखे, च, (पषः, खश )। निः ।। मित नख व्यसयोः कर्मणोपपत्योः पचेः खण्प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
. 34. The aflix an is employed alter the verb पच्, when मित 'a measured partition' or नख 'a mail' is the word in composition with it as an object. 
The aphorism has its scope when the words formed do not denote measures, which was the case in the last satra. Thus मिसम्पचा मामणी the Brahmani who cooks a little i. a. niggardly Brahmani' ; नखम्पचा यवागः the nail-scorching barley grucl'. 
विश्वरुषोस्तुदः ॥ ३५ ॥ पदानि ॥ विधु-अरुषो, तुदः, (कर्मणि, खश्)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ विधु भास् इत्येतयोः कर्मणोपपदयोः सुर्धातोः समस्ययो भवति । 
422 
THE AFFIX KHAS. 
[BK. III. CH. II. 5 35-37. 
. 35. The affix un comes after the verb 'to strike', when विध 'the moon' or भरुस 'a. wound' is the word in composition with it as object. 
As विधुन्ततः राह: the Rahu that eclipses the moon; भरुन्तुर: 'corrosive, wounding the vital parts'. For the addition of the augment qq after the word 
भगम्, see VI. 3. 67. 
असूर्यललाटयोईशितपोः ॥ ३६॥ पदामि ॥ असूर्य-ललाटयाः, दृशि-तपोः, (कर्मणि, ख) ॥ 
पत्तिः ॥ भसूर्यललाट येतयोः कर्मणोरुपपत्योः वृशितपोर्धास्वोः समाययो भवति ॥ . . 86. The affix ww comes after the verb हए 'to see' and 'to heat when we and we are the words in composition with them respectively as objects. 
Thus भसूर्य+ +खा-भसर्यम्पश्यः ;as भसूर्यम्पश्या राजवारा 'the king's wives not even seeing the sun' (being shut up in the harem, and so having no oppor tunity of seeing the sun, that is, they are so well protected that even the sun cannot see them, much less any irreverent gaze). 
So also req: 'heating the fore-head' (such as the sun). 
The word way is an incomplete or impossible compound, as the negative * applies to the verb Et and not to the word age. This is in oppo sition to the rule of samartha pada vidhi (II. I. 2). 
उग्रम्पश्येरग्मदपापिन्धमाश्च ॥ ३७ ॥ पदानि ॥ उग्रम्पश्य हरम्मद-पाणिमधमाः, च ॥ 
पतिः ॥ उमम्पाय परम्मद पाणिग्धमत्येते शघ्या निपात्यन्ते ।। 
37. The words उपम्पश्य, दरम्मद and पाणिन्धम are irre gularly formed. 
Thus पश्यति उसम्पाय: 'fierce-looking'रया मथति दरम्मत: 'delighting in drinking an epithet of Agni, a flash of lightning'. So muryaT: grena: 'chilly roads'. 
प्रियवशे वदा खच् ॥ ३८ ॥ पदानि ॥ प्रिय-वशे, बदः, खच ॥ पतिः ।। प्रिय वश इत्येतयोः कर्मणोरुपपदयोवेर्धातोः खप्रत्ययो भवति।। बार्तिकम् ॥ बचप्रकरणे गमेः सुप्पसंख्यानम् ।। पार्तिकम् ॥ विहायसो विह च।। . पार्मिकम् ।। खच्च रिता वनव्यः ।। पार्मिकम् ।। ३ च विहायसो विहावेशी वक्तव्यः ।। 
BK III. CH. II. $ 38, 39.]. 
THE AFFIX KHACH. 
423 
38. The affixer comes after the verba 'to speak' when four or is the word in composition with it as an object. Thus froi 
a rquitt: 'who speaks kindly' ; tire: 'who prosesses sub mission'. 
or the affix u, the letters and are indicatory ; Ę indicates the in sertion of the augment n (VI. 3. 37), and shows that there is shortening of the vowel in certain cases (VI. 4. 94). 
In the case of fire and at with the affix it would have given the same result as the affix 07. Making a separate affix in this sátra is for the sake of the aphorisms that follow, where this affix will produce different effects than T. 
Vart The affix e comes after the verb ta 'to go' when a word end ing in a case-affix is in composition with it. As TRTAT Feat 'the slow moving i. e. an clcphant'; TAHTAT fenat 'the slow.moving i. e. a she-elephant': 
Vart. This asfix comes under similar circumstances when the word in composition with Th, is force; and the letter is then replaced by the word for. As faran Toge=FETTA: 'a bird (that which goes through the sky)'. 
Vart.- In the Vårtikas above given, the affix u may optionally be considered as if it had an indicatory 3. The force of 3 is to cause elision of the final vowel with what follows it. As frer: or forrita: a bird'. So also HİTA: or # 'a serpent' (what goes crookedly). 
Vort--fre, is replaced by far when the affix ? (III 2. 48) comes after the verb Th; as facer: 'a bird'. Thus we have three forms: farm, far, for 
faqquzdra : a peu a terra o faca-tittis, cara, 
P: il facuercet: mototapetertutat: oturmant safet II 
39. The affix up comes after the verb ere, 'to heat', when face or is the word in composition with it as an object. 
The verb q belongs both to Bhd and Chur classes. Both are meant in the satra.. In the case of Bhvadi, the verb ffo is the causative ending in fu of aq ; while in Churidi, all verbs take fu. 
Thus farra angula=f&#9: (VI. 4. 94) 'one who destroys his encmies', so also 96-99: 'one who subdues his enemies, a hero'. . 
:424 
. 
THE AFFIX KHACII. 
BK. III. CH. II. 440-42, 
This affix however, will not apply when the above upapadas are in the feminine gender. In this case the general affix yu will be employed; as रिपती सापयति = दिपतीसापः। 
चाचि यमी व्रते ॥४०॥ पदानि ॥ वापि, यमः, व्रते, (ख)॥ निः ॥ वाक्शाने कर्मण्युपपदे यमेर्धातोः खप्रत्ययो भवति व्रते गम्यमाने । 
40. The affix खच comes after the verb थम् 'to curb when the word gray speech' is in composition with it as object, and the sense indicated is that of a vow. 
The word a means a vow taken according to the rules of Dharma : sastra. Thus पायम भारत "he has taken the vow of rigid silence'. 
Why do we say 'vow'? Otherwise the form is part: 'restraining 
• speech' (VI. 3.69). 
पः सर्वयोरिसहोः ॥ ४॥ पदानि ॥ पू:-सर्वयोः, दारि-सहोः, 
पत्तिः ॥ पुर सर्व इत्येतयोः कर्मणोरुपपदयोर्ययासंबयं पारिसहोर्धाल्योः खमत्वको भवति ॥ 
वार्तिकम् ।। भगे चहारेरिति वक्तव्यम् ।। 
· 41. The affix 49 comes after the verbs rift 'to split' and 'to bear when respectively in composition 
with the words पुर 'a city' and सर्व 'all', as objects. 
As पुरधारयति- पुरन्दर: 'name of Indra (who splits asunder cities) (VI... .69 and VI.4.94); सर्वसही राजा 'the king who is all-forbearing'. 
Vart.--So also when the word of is in composition with the verb eft; as भगन्दरः 'a listula in the anus'. 
सर्वकूलाधकरीषेषु कषः ॥ ४२॥ पदानि ॥ सर्व-कूल-अब-करीषेषु, कषः, (सच्)। 
. वृत्तिः ॥ सर्व कूल भन करीप इत्येतेषु कर्मस्पपाषु कर्धातोः खच प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
42. The affix uy comes after the verba 'to rub' when the words सर्व 'all', ल 'bank', भन 'cloud' and करीष 'a dry cow.dung', are in composition with it as object. 
. As सर्पकपः खलः a villain, a rogue' ; कलकपा नदी 'a river'मकपी गिरिः amountain'; करीपंकपा वाल्या 'a strong wind'. 
BK. III. CH. II. ६ 43-45.] 
THE AFFIX KHACH. 
425 
मेघर्तिभयेषु रुनः ॥ ४३ ॥ पदानि ॥ मेघ-ऋति-भयेषु, कुमः, 
पतिः ॥ मेघ अति भय इत्येतेषु कर्मसूपपदेषु कमः खच् प्रत्ययो भवति ।। वार्तिकम् ।। उपपदविधो भवादिग्रहण सवन्तविधि प्रयोगवति ।। 
43. The affix खच् comes after the verb क 'to make' when the words मेष 'cloud', शनि 'misfortune' and भव 'fear are in composition as objects. 
As मेषंकरः 'producing clouds' ; र्विकरः 'giving pain' ; भयंकरः frightful'. 
Vart. The tadanta vidhi applies in the case of upapadas like भय. &c. This is an exception to the vertika under 1. 1. 72. by which, in the case of affixes, tadanta-vidhi was prohibited. Thus we have opret#T: 'who causes security'. 
मप्रियमद्रेग्य च ॥ ४४ ॥ पदानि ॥ तेम-प्रिय-मद्रे, अख, च, 
. 
rucd. 
पशिः। म प्रिय मद इत्येतेषु कर्मसूपपवेषु करोसेरणास्वयो चकारात् बच्च। 
44. And the afix wu, as well as recomes after the verb क 'to make' when the words सेम 'happiness', प्रिय 'pleasant' and 'joy' are iu composition as objocts. 
The word 'and' denotes that the affix up is also to be included. 
Thus क्षेमकारः or क्षेमकर: 'propitious'; प्रियकार: on प्रियंकरः 'showing kind. ness'; मद्रकारः or मकरः 'causing delight'. 
The repetition of the affix re, when its anuvrilli could have been read into this sätra by using the word 'optionally', indicates that these words never take the affix t of satra 20 though cause, habit, &c., may be denoted ; so that the feminine of those words is formed by भा and not by t;as भम्पारम्भाः क्षेमकराः 'small beginnings lead to or cause prosperity'. 
आशिते भुवः करणभावयाः ॥४५॥ पदानि ॥ आथिते, भुवः, करा भावयोः, (खच, सुपि) ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ भाशितशब्द सुषन्ते उपपदे भवसेर्धातोः करणे भावे चायें खन् माययो भवति ।। 
45. The affix my comes after the verby to be' when in composition with the case-inflected word of 'satisfied hy eating' and the seuse is that of instrument or condition. 
The word 'af' of satra 4 is understood here. 
426 
• THE AFFIX KHACHI. 
BK. III. CII. II. 846, 47. 
॥ 
भवति 
Thus भाशिसंभवः meaning food', literally that by which onc is satiated. भाशिती भवती भनेन. Here the word denotes instrument. And भाशिनंभवः also means 'satiety', which denotes condition. 
संज्ञायां भतनिधारिसहितपिदमः ॥ ४६ ॥ पदानि ॥ संज्ञायां, भ-त-व-जि-धारि-सहि-तपि-दमः, (कर्मणि, सुपि, खच्) । 
वृनिः ॥ भृह वृनि धारि सहि तपि दम इत्येतेभ्यो धातुभ्यः संज्ञायां विषये खच् प्रत्ययो 
46. The affix un comes after the following verbs when the words to be formed denote a name :--Viz. 
'to bear', 'to cross over', q'to choose', fs 'to conquer', धारि 'to hold', सहि 'to bear', तपि 'to heat' and म 'to subdue'. 
Both the words allu and are of sūtra 1 and 4 are understood here and should be applied as the occasion requires. Thus farct 'earth' (that which supports all); रथंतर 'the Rathantara Sama'; पर्तिवरा 'a girl lit. (who is about to choose a husband) ; para: 'an elephant' lit. (who conquers the enemy); युगंधर: 'a mountain' or the pole of a carriage to which the yoke is fixed' ; qarac: 'Satrunsaha' (withstanding an enemy) ; TAT: 'Satruntapa' (des 'troying an enemy); भरिदमः 'Arindama' (victorious). 
Why do we say 'when denoting a name' ? Observe ITT: 'he who supports his family'. 
गमञ्च ॥ ४७ ॥ पदानि ॥ गमः, च, (सुपि, संज्ञायां, खच्) ॥ वृतिः ॥ गर्धातोः सुप्युपपरे संज्ञायां विषये खच् प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
47. And the affix comes after the verb गम् 'to go' when in composition with a word ending in a case-affix, and when the word to be formed denotes a name. 
As सुतंगमः 'Sutangana'. Though the verb गम could well have been in cluded in the last aphorism, the separation serves the purpose of carrying the anuvnitti of my into the subsequent sâtras. 
अन्तात्यन्ताश्वदूरपारसर्वानन्तेषु ॥ ॥ पदानि ॥ अन्त अत्यन्त-अध्वन्-दूर-पार-सर्व-अनन्तेषु, हः॥ 
पत्तिः ॥ भन्त भस्यन्त भवन् र पार सर्व भनन्त इत्येतेषु कर्मस्पूपरेषु गमेमस्ययो भवति ॥ 
पार्मिकम् ।। उ प्रकरणे सर्वमपनयोरुपसंख्यानम् ॥ पार्मिकम् ।। उरखी नोपय। BK. III. CH. II. § 48.] 
THE AFFIX DA. 
. 
427 
vif**411 cifrantu II 
11 fatto I. बार्तिकम् ॥ रमकरणेऽन्येष्वपि दृश्यते ॥ 
48. The affix + comes after the verb 'to go' when in composition with the following words as its objects :-** 'end', pretty 'excessive', ***** "road', 'far', ar across', as all' and Ham 'endless'. 
Thc anuvritti of the word er does not extend to this. As **#: 'having gone to the end, thoroughly conversant'; Marry: 'going too fast' ; METTT: 'a way-farer' ; : 'going to a distant place' ; GITT: 'completely familiar'; 
T: 'going everywhere, the Supreme Being'; *777T: 'going to infinity, moving for ever'. 
or the affix the letter is indicatory, the real affix being 8. The indicates that the fa portion of the word to which this is added, must be elided (VI. 4. 143); as **#+1+3=778 +1 +* (the fè portion 877 of ota is eli ded). Now though the rule VI. 4. 143 says 'when that which has an indica tory 7, follows, there is elision of the fe of a r; yet in the present case, such clision takes place, although the word in here is not one of those called # (l. 4. 18); because the presence of x as an indicatory letter must not be un meaning 
Vart.—The is also cmployed when the words in composition arc &* 'everywhere' and go 'creeping'; as TT: 'Supreme Spirit'; qut: 'snake.' 
Vart.-So also when the word in composition is TTĘ breast', and there is elision of its final. As ITĘ +14+3= 'moving on breast, a snake'. 
Vari..So also with the words y 'well' and yc 'bad', when the result ing words denote location. As yt: 'that in which one goes easily, easy of access'. F: 'difficult of access, a fort'. 
Vart. So also with the preposition fore, the word to be formed meaning country; as fart: 'a country'. 
Vari. Others say, that this is added when other words besides the above stand as upapadas. Thus F T: (at + TIT+T4+) 'who goes to the women's compartment'; 9149T: 'going to the village' ; TG474T: 'who pollutes the bed of his guru'. 
off Fa: 11 per un actf lll ourfura, , (:) . Far: il opfylla satararat frautai: *4ogoai 3 gezreit af in बार्तिकम् ।। धारावाहनोग्पान्तस्य च टः संज्ञायाम् ॥ a ll ar an A l fu afa og til 
428 
TIIE AFFIX DA. 
[BK. III. CI. II. $ 49-51. 
49. The afix comes after the verb 'to kill', when the object is in composition with it, and when benediction is intended. 
The affix 3 is understood in this sútra. Thus fari aunt=fafax: 'may hę kill the whale' ; TUR: 'may he kill the enemy'. 
Why do we say 'when benediction is intended'? Otherwise we have Trin: 'who kills his enemy'. 
Vart-The affix su comes after the verb 167 when the word no 'wood' is in composition with it, and the final letter of the word so formed is changed into ą, when the word so formed denotes a name. As 5 HIEF= 
Tatiz: ( + HO) 'the wood-pecker', 
Vart... So also optionally when the word as 'beautiful is in compo sition under the circumstances detailed in the last vårtika: as artare: or nata: 1 
Vart...So also, when the verb is preceded by the preposition , and is in composition with a word in the objective case, the affix my is em ployed; and the final is replaced by <; as quit refre=auer: or Turqia: 'the alphabet'; पदानि संहन्ति -पदसंघाट: or पदसंघातः 'connecting the words that are separated, an annotator'. 
eru at: u yeu geta vera, -auft:, ( mifa, Tai, 7:) 
FT: Il yangfari T: **Utolpertura al mar! 
: 50. The affix * ccmes after the verb 'to kill' when it is compounded with the preposition 479, and when the object in composition with it, is the word TT 'pain' or the darkness'. :: As, ÈTITTE: TH: 'the pain-allayer i. e. the son’; Krator: all the dark ness-destroyer i. c. the sun'. . This aphorism has its scope when the sense is not that of benediction. 
ruldärfila: il 48 # agrlo Fare-gtlar:, fafati, (Fa:) 
Ferill are sito průHTE19941: T: graut Hati 
51. The affix fofa comes after the verb I 'to kill' when the word in composition with it is wait la child', or afie 'head'. 
BK. III. CH. II. § 52, 53.] 
THE AFFIX TAK. : 
429 
IN 
Thus are +9+fuftraret qata (VII. 3. 54 and VII. 3. 32) = KARL M nom. sing. artarat'child-killer'. So also A nom. sing. th. ordt 'head-killer'. 
The word stref is an irregular form of the word Plei 
· F orum W 4P II arfa Ward, orauti, 44, (*) 
वत्तिः ॥ इन्तेर्भाधापरयोः कर्मणरुपपरयोर्लक्षणेवतिकर्तरि कमाययो भवति ॥ 
52. The asfix it comes after the verb o 'to kill whin it is in composition with the word ard 'wife' or qía husband' as object, and when the word so formed denotes the agent possessed of that attribute (or when the word so formed denotes a mark). 
The word AFTU of this sätra gives rise to the doubt whether it means ano ant or Formatfr. In the former case the meaning will be 'when the agent is itself the mark'; as Frara: 'a mole' (a mark on the body indica tive of the death of one's wise). In the latter case the meaning will be 'when the agent is possessed of the attribute denoted by the word'; as sure: 'the murderer of his wife'; qfari 'the murderer of her husband'. 
of the asfix cx the letters & and are indicatory. The shows that the feminine is formed by, and a causing elision of the penultimate # of FT. Thus Arar +7+= F741+ +(VI. 4. 98) = Arra: (VII. 3. 54). 
pagunea y nucrfer il 27-47909-, , (an, 7:) 
वृत्तिः ॥ भमनुष्यकन के वर्तमानाबन्तेसोः कर्मन्युपपदे टक्प्रत्ययो भवति । 
53. And the aflix comes after the verb 'to kill' when the object is in composition with it, and when the word to be formed denotes an agent other than a human being. 
As Hornaftarit : 'the mole' (literally that which indicates the death of onc's wife); frecat futur the line of the palm of the hand' (that which indicates the death of one's husband). These two forms were deducible also from the last aphorism. 
'honey' (literally that which has the property of destroying the phlegm). Bagi qaclarified butter (lit. that which destroys the bile). 
Why do we say 'when the agent is not a human beingo? Observe sreea: Tx: ‘a Sadra' (literally one who kills the mice). Here the affix is opv. 
430 
THE AFFIX KIYUN. 
IBK. III. Cl. II. $ 54, 55. 
Why is the affix g not employed in the following? चोरपातोहस्ती 'an elephant' (i.e. who kills a thief.) Here the word is formed by the affix भए on the analogy of sátra III. 3. 113 which allows a diversity in case of kritya affixes, which diversity is extended in this case to a krit affix. 
शक्ती हस्तिकपा(वा)टयोः ॥ ५४ ॥ पदानि ॥ शक्ती, हस्ति-कपा (वा)टयोः, (हनः, टक) 
वृत्तिः ॥ शनो गम्यमानायां हस्तिकपा(पादयोः कर्मणोपपदयोन्ते रमत्वयो भवति ॥ 
64. The afix टक् comes after the verb हन् 'to kill' when the word in composition with it as its object is हनी 'elephant' or कपाट 'gate' and when the sense indi cated is that of power. 
This sutra applies where the agent is a human being. As हस्तिनं हन्तुं शक:-हस्तिपनः मनुष्यः a man who is strong enough to kill an elephant'; so also कपाटनः 'a burglar' (who is capable of breaking open the doors). 
Why do we say 'where power is indicated'? Observe Frau fara fin हस्तिपात: 'who kills the elephant by poison'. Here the affix is भए. 
पाविधताही शिल्पिनि ॥ ५५ ॥ पदानि ॥ पाखिघ-ताहौ, शिरिपनि । . . वृत्तिः ॥ पाणिप ताइप इत्येतो शब्द निपारवेत शिल्पिनि कर्तरि ॥ 
पार्तिकम् ॥ रामप सपसंख्यानम् ॥ 
55. The words are and my are irregularly formed when denoting an artificer. 
These forms are thus evolved. The affix it is employed after the verb हन् in composition with पाणि 'hand' and ताड 'a blow' as abject; then the टि portion of हन् i...भन् is elided, and e is changed into प irregularly. Thus पाणि+न+क-पाणि++भ-पापिषः 'adrummer' (workman or handicraftsman); 4734: 'a smith'. 
Why 'when denoting an artificer'. Observe Ticara: 'boxing' ; TTTT: 'hammering'. 
Vart:-The word रामपः should be enumerated in this connection; राग 'q: 'a regicide'. 
___ आढमसुभगस्थलपलितनानाम्धप्रियेषु व्यर्थेष्वव्या रुगः करणे स्यन् ॥ ५६ ॥ पदानि ॥ आढप-सुभग-रूपल-पलित-नग्न-अन्ध-प्रियेषु, वि-अ. 
मेषु, मच्ची, कभः, करणे, स्युन् । 
BK. III. CH. 11 $ 56.] 
THE AFFIX KHYUN. 
431 
WWW 
. 
मिः ॥ भापारिषु कर्मसूपपतेषु व्यापच्यन्तेषु करोते तिः करणे कारके स्युन्प्रत्ययो TII 
56. The affix vna, when the sense of the word to be formed is that of an instrumental agent, comes after the verb 'to make', when the following words are in composition with it as objects :----TEJ 'rich', y 'fortunate', Fun 'big, afera 'grey', 7H 'naked', ** 'blind' and fra pleasant', provided that these words have the sense of the words formed by the affix fe, though not actually ending in the affix for. 
The affix fox (V. 4. 50. ) is added to a noun when it is in composi tion with the verbs x 'to becoine', a 'to make' and op 'to be'; its force being that a thing attains to a condition in whic' it previously was not. The per being an optional affix, its sense is two-fold; namely, words ending in fer and words not ending in for. Both may have the force of ftr. [In the present satra, however, the words that actually end in (have been excluded, while words which do not take the affix fer, but have the force of fer are included in the present satra. 
Thus strategy MTQ +*+*77= TU 'that by the instru mentality of which the poor becomes rich, viz., wealth, prosperity, means of enriching' ; C #TU, 'making happy'; Fiz #TUR 'by which one becomes big'; qfGOUF 'rendering grey'; prahu 'making naked' ; HPIRTU, 'mak ing blind"; fquaTox 'showing kindness'. 
Why do we say 'when the force is that of the affix f'? Otherwise way' wa ai e spent they anoint with oil. Here though something is joined with what it previously was not joined, namely with oil, yet as the radical word is not prominent ficre, the sense is not that of fegy and hence this counter-example. 
Why do we say 'when not ending in the affix pup'? Observe pred w a wa 'they make rich by this'. Here the affix wyn is not employed. 
It might be objected : 'well if it is not used, then the affix Fat must be used (III. 3. 117) as there is no difference between 1 and Fut; both having the efficient portion 7 ; what is then thc use.of prohibiting fem? We reply, because there is this prohibition, when the affix any is not employed the affix fee will also be not employed. Thus by implication the affix fer is also prohibited. The prohibition of for in this sätra is for the sake of the ap horisms that follow'. 
432 
THE AFFIX KVIN.: 
[BK. III. CH. II. & 57, 58. 
: Patanjali observes this prohibition as superfluous, because there is no distinction between rus and out. For the word formed by any one of these affixes have the same form and the same accent. Nor there is any distinction in the feminines of their derivatives. For the word formed by 7, FTE, fa, and wat take in the feminine as well as the words 7 and A. Nor there is any distinction in their samdsas. For in both the cases it will be nitya sa. mdsa. Nor is the prohibition made for the sake of the augmentar For it being an indeclinable, 99 cannot come after it. The prohibition therefore is of no use to this satra but it is inserted here for the sake of the following satras, 
कर्तरि भुवः खिण्णुचखुकजी ॥ ५५ ॥ पदानि ॥ कर्तरि, भुवः, farer-gest, ( Taufu ) 1 
पतिः ।। भाब्यादिषु सुमन्तेपूपपतेषु व्यवन्यन्तेषु भवतेयसोः करि कारके लिए खुकम् इत्येतो प्रत्ययो भवतः ॥ 
57. The affixes fepyy and qm, when the word to be formed denotes an agent, come after the verb 'to become', when it is in cornposition with words were &c., provided that these have the sense of the words formed by the affix for though notending info. 
Thus ografong: 'becoming rich (who was not rich before)' ; HTTT আৰু: becoming rich';মামনু; or -মা : ‘becoming happy';মুশঝিনু: or -T14: 'becoming big'; qfare fro: or **: 'becoming grey'; fang: or - 77*: 'becoming naked'; poftur: or ry*: 'becoming blind' ; foqrafarer: or -*77*: 'becoming an object of affection, amiable'. 
Why do we say 'when denoting the agent'? Not so when it denotes the instrument. The affixes will apply when the sense of the upa pada is that of fey, otherwise not; as Medt feat 'he will be rich'. 
These affixes will not apply when the upa pada ends in fay; Hreeft iftari 
स्पृशोऽनुदके किन् ॥ ५ ॥ पदानि ॥ स्पषः, अनुदके, छिन् । : 11 equutilan 1999 fageant taferele . 
58. The affix fer comes after the verb try 'to touch', when it is in composition with a case-inflected word other than 3* 'water'. 
. By sátra 4 of this chapter, the anuvritti of the word afo is to be read ioto this satra. It might be objected 'why do we not read the anuvritti of the word instead of gre, because the verb ry is a transitive verb, and after 
BK. III. CH. II. 
59.) 
THE AFFIX KVIN: :: 
433 
such verbs, the anuvritti of ought to come by sátra 4'? To this we say there is no harm in reading the anuvritti of gfe in this case ; because the word 
aft of the last sätra is also, in a way understood here, and indicates the collection of all sorts of agents whether objects, instruments &c., and this can only be when the first member of the compound is a word in general. . . 
Thus पतं सशति-पतस्मग, nom. sing. तसक् 'he who touches clarified butter'. [+f E= + o (VI. 1. 68)=F +O (VI. 1. 67, and VIII. 2. 62). So also HÌU FTU = 'who touches with hymns'; palat egyfa= HOVET 'who touches with water'. But a fanfa=Test: ; here we have the general affix भए. 
The Toffort is to distinguish this affix from asfixes like fist &c. For, had it been merely f, then in satra VIII. 2. 62. we should have used for prueU om, and it would have been ambiguous, for fit might be explained as meaning both ff and 154, as a means ay, 24° &c. To remove this ambiguity, qis added to make a distinctive affix. The cannot be for the sake of accent. (VI. 1. 117), the verb being monosyllabic would of itself have taken that accent. 
ऋत्विगदास्रगदिगुण्क्षिगंधुयुजिकुचां च ॥ ५॥ पदानि ॥ fan-y6-**-*-ufow-9759-gf-Fara, 
fa: 1 #ferT14:959%84T: (05422car 1 fat rattet med tant praft faff Tash ll 
59. Tho words wife ang 'a domestic priest', ya 'impudent', ar 'a garland', faz a direction and arouk 'a quatraiu' are irregularly formed by adding the affix fufit; and so also after the verbs 'to worship', qfn 'to join' and 'to approach', the afix fint is employed. 
The first five words are irregular forms. Thus +*+fterfer the who performs sacrifice in the season (at) or to the season (F ). This word, however is a la word in which it is fruitless to search for its etymological meaning. 49+ft= . Here there is reduplication and the final has acute accent. छन् किन प्रक्. Here there is augment भम्. वृ+किन् -दिक. So also उत् +fErg, + =3,TUK. All these are in fact crude nouns, their current meaning having little traces of their root meaning. 
The affix ft comes after the three roots 57, 48, and . Bco ing read along with the five above-mentioned irregularly-formed words, there is some irregularity in the application of fint to these verbs. Thus the affix first comes after w e only when a word ending with any case-affix precedes it in composition. As 9+48 +69=9159 nom. sing. ore (VI. 4. 24 ; VII. I. 79, VIII. 2. 23 and 62) 'east'; so also feat 'west'; T5 north', 
434 
THE AFFIX KAN. 
[BK. II. Cui. II. 60. 
The affix fty comes after afarç and sy when these are uncombined. Thus it fine . In nominative singular, 4*+ = +q (VII. 1.71) = 
9, to (VI. 1. 68) = (VIII. 2. 62) 'who joins'. When the root or is in com position with an upapada, it takes the affix ferq (see sutra 61). As muun 'yoked with horses'. 
So also + FT = , nom. sing. 5, 'a curlew'. The non-elision of the (VI. 4. 24) of 5 is an irregularity, as this word has been taught in connection with other irregular words. 
त्यदादिषु दृशोनालोचने कञ्च ॥६०॥ पदानि ॥ त्यद्-आदिषु, TT:, Rita, , , ( featur) 1 
वृत्तिः॥ स्वातीपपरेषु शेर्धातोरनालोचनेऽयं वर्तमानात् कम्प्रत्ययो भवति चकारात् 
60. And the affix Fry comes after the verb az 'to see when it is in combination with a &c, and does not signify perception. : The force of 'and' is that the form also comes under similar circumstan ces. Fur &c. are pronouns, for a list of which see I. 1. 27. Thus pares nom. sing. surya, 'such-like' when it is forined by fat; and TTT: 'such-like' when the affix is . So also +y+fix= ETT (VI. 3. 91) nom. sing. Ar (VI. 1. 68, VIII. 2. 36 and 62, VIII. 4. 56); and aręy: when ay is the affix. So बाइक् or यादृशः 'what-like'. 
What is the force of the letter of ? It is for the sake of accent ; the udatta is on the first syllable of those words which arc forincd by an affix having an indicatory or at (VI. 1. 117). But the indicatory would have given the same accent, there being no difference between and any in this respect. The indicatory then serves only the purpose of distinguishing the affix it from m in sätra IV. 1. 15 in which is taken and not ft. Had we not formed this separate affix, then for at of that sætra, we should have read so that the feminine of words formed by it would have also taken' long e, so that the feminine of 4**: (arati V. 4. 29) would have been *t instead of algar. 
Why do we say 'when not signifying perception'? See ot fa=und: 'who sees that. The words anym, ar &c. are crude nouns, in which the ety mological sense of the root not being visible, the act of seeing can never be de noted by these words. 
Vart.This rule applies also when the words art and Hra are in composition with rų. 'As ay or TTTT: 'like'(aart++ =#tyy VI. 3. 89); 60 also HUTTT: or warram 'of another kind'. 
BK. III CH II. $ 61] 
THE AFFIX KVIP. 
435 
= *+(VIII. 
. Vart...The affix at comes also after the root xa. As TETT:, UIEW:, WATEW: and 
+ + + (VI. 3. 91.)= YTE (VI 2. 36) = Aiga+a (VIII. 2. 41) = 217 +(VIII. 3. 59) =WIEĦ: 1 
सतमद्विषद्रहहयुजविदभिदच्छिदजिनीरानामुपसर्गेऽपि विप ॥ Puurft u a--fu - -fac-fire-fe-for-aft-ITUTA, 95, ofa, fara, ( gfa ) ! 
før: 11 Franzit naxa: 997 STUTT Scaratsa forquestral part 
61. The afix fing comes after the following verbs when in composition with a word ending in a case affix, though it may be an upasarga, viz:- 'to sit, a 'to bring forth', fic 'to hate', t 'to bear malice', 'to milk', Ft 'to join', 'to concentrate the mind', for 'to kuow', 'to be. come', 'to consider', fore 'to divide', fate 'to cut', fo 'to con. quer', 'to lead' and ( 'to shine'. 
The phrase 'the word ending with a case-affix' is understood in this sätra. The anuvritti of ** is not to be taken in this sátra for the same rea sons as in satra 58 ante. The upasargas are also words ending in a case-affix i. e. they are also subanta words Their special mention in this scction, indi cates by implication (jnapaka, that wherever in the previous satras, the word subanta (a case-infected word) is used, it does not include an upasarga (III 1. 100). 
The rootą being read in conjunction with for shows that we class verb is meant here, and not a class. The verb y includes, both of 'to join' and 'to concentrate one's mind'. The verb for includes the three verbs having the sense of 'to know', 'to become' and 'to consider', but does not include the verb fe 'to gain', because that root has an indicatory (utc) while all these verbs have indicatory 24. 
Thus, सत्-शुधिपत् 'dwelling in purity'; अन्तरिमसत् 'dwelling in the skies', 'epithets of Brahma' (Kath. 5. 2); 39 'serving'. -** 'oviparous'; T : bringing forth hundred'; 96: 'parent'. far-farfaz 'treacherous'; afers "hostile'. For a 'treacherous'; * 'hostile' (VIII. 2. 37). - 'cow milkcr'; gy 'milker' (VIII. 2. 32. and 37). 41-95 carriage'; 4 'in pulse'. fare for 'knower of Veda'; ofre 'knower' ; fra 'knower of Brahma'. fre- fart 'wood-cutter'; afara 'cutter'. 15-12 'rope-cutter' ; 'a cutter'. fw-T 'enemy-conqueror'; 9.777.conqueror'. -#nt: 'leader of an army' ; qor: 'a leader'; 919ot: 'hcad-borough' ; qut: 'first'. (Why is there cerebral u in these words ? Because the word arut has a cerebral o in 
436 
THE AFFIX NYUT. 
BK. III. CI. II.462-63. 
sutra V. 2.78 and that indicates that these words will havem, as also by sutra VIII. 4. 3). राम्-विराट् 'splendour'; सबाद 'emperor (the letter म is added by sutra VIII. 3. 25).. 
This satra is a continuation and expansion of sátras 75 and 76 sup. 
भजो शिवः॥६२॥ पदानि ॥ भजः, स्विः, ( उपसर्ग, अपि, सुपि)॥ वृतिः ॥ भजेोतोः सुबन्त उपपते उपसर्गेऽप्यनपसगंऽपि विपश्ययो भवति ॥ 
62. The affix वि comes after the verb भम् 'to share' when in composition with a word ending in a case-affix whether it be an upasarga or not. 
The words 'upasarga' and 'supi' are understood in this satra. As or भजते-भर्द्धभाज् nom. sing. भ भाक् 'sharing a half. So also when in composi tion with a preposition; as प्रभाक् 'division'. 
___ छन्दसि सहः ॥ ६३ ॥ पदानि ॥ छन्दसि, सहः, (उपसर्ग, सुपि, रिवः) ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ छन्नसि विपये सहेर्धातोः सुबन्त उपपई विप्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
63. In the Chhandas, the affix fora comes after the verl) सह 'to benr' when it is in composition with a word ending in a case-affix. 
The words 'upasarga' and 'supi are understood here. As Tr+#&+* -तुरासाह_nom. sing. तुरापट 'name of Indra'. The dentals is changed into cere bral by VIII. 3. 56, and the x into a by VIII. 2. 31. The finals of qr is. lengthened by VI. 3. 137. Sce Rig. Veda. I. 175. 2, III. 48 5. 
वहश्च ॥ ६४ ॥ पदानि ॥ वहः, च, (छन्दसि, शिवः, सुपि) ॥ कृत्तिः ।। वहेर्धातोश्छन्दसि विषये सुबन्त उपपदे विप्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
64. The affix वि comes after the verb वह 'to carry', in the Chhandas, when a word ending with a case ashx is in composition with it. 
As प्रष्ठवाह Ist sing. प्रष्ठवाद् 'carrying aprashtha measure'; so, दित्यवाद । 
Thic division of this sūtra from the last is for the sake of the subsequent sätras, into which the anuvritti oft only is carried and not of a.. See Ya'ur. Veda. XIV. 10,XVIII. 26. 
कव्यपुरीषपुरीयेषु ज्युट ॥ ६५ ॥ पदानि ॥ कव्य-पुरीष-पुरीष्येषु, ज्युद, (छन्दसि, सुपि, वहः)॥ 
'वृत्ति. ॥ कम्ब पुरीप पुरीज्य इत्येतेषु उपपपुछन्दसि विषवे वहेर्धातोर्युदप्रत्ययो भवति॥ 
66. In the Chhandas the afix g comes after BK III. CH. II. $ 66, 67.] 
THE AFFIX VIT. 
• 
437 
the verb ge.when it is in composition with the words fra 'oblation of food to deceased ancestors', gita 'fæces' and 
** 'water'. 
As 44157: pogum (Yajur. Ved. II. 29) 'fire that carries the oblation to thc pitris'; T TT: carrier of water' ; qu :( Vaj. Ved. XI. 44). The feminine of these words is formed by adding long si 
resa:979 € 11 acıfa ! , w :-17TH, ( fo, agi, sic) 
वृतिः ।। हव्यशम्ब उपपठे बन्दसि विषये वहेर्धातोप्रात्ययो भवति, भनन्तःपाई चाहि # 11 
66. The affix se comes in the Chhandas, after the verb or 'to carry' when it is in composition with the word 54 an oblation to gods', provided that the word so formed does not occur in the middle of a påda (fourth part of a stanza). 
As w 1644187: 'fire, the carrier of oblation to the gods'. (Rig. Ved. I. 44.2). 
When this word occurs in the middle of a pada, or at the beginning, the form is 5630, which is derived by adding the affix fox (satra 64). As F5217, T: (qat 7: 'the never-decaying agni or fire that carries oblation to the gods, is our father'. (Rig. Veda. III. 2. 2.) 
*747& TAT fæc 11 89 u orfo n -w-ta *5#-7, fac, (avera, gau 
ffe: il fat fauzit 177*: 0783448 orer forget fapaparat va fer in 
67. The afix Farr (the whole of which is elided) comes in the Chhandas after the verbs a 'to be born', at 'to bestow', 'to dig', *4 'to pace' and 'to go', when a word ending in a case-afilx is in composition, and tlo final nasals aro changed into long #T. 
The words arra, thi and i are understood in this satra. The verb 9 includes two verbs mcaning 'to be born' and 'to happen'; so also a means both 'to give' and 'to worship'. 
. Of the affix fare the letter is indicatory, and is qualifying, as in VI. 4. 41, by which rule the final nasal of , &c. is replaced by long vi when the affix for follows, and the whole aflix is clided by VI. 1. 67. 
438 
THE AFFIX Kap. 
[BX. III. C11. 11. $ 68, 70. 
As * + -t for West: (Rig. Ved. VII. 34. 16) 'born in water' (V1. 4.41); fiat: 'born in the heaven i.e. God' (Rig. Veda IV. 40.5). So also from 
7-tar: 'acquiring or bestowing cows' (VIII. 3. 108); Ter Ter wfe 'O Indra bestower of cows! thou art lover of mankind' (Rig. Veda IX. 2. 10). From a 
: 'digger of lotus stalk'; aver: 'digger of well'. From HiFit: 'who gets milk' (Rig. IV. 39. I and 40.5). From 77.-- aqur 'the leader'. 
sreta u 65 II oft u ergi, s , (gra, fare) u मुनिः ॥ भर्धातोरनन्न सुप्युपप विप्रत्ययो भवति । 
68. The affix fare comes after the verb 'to eat, when in composition with a case-infected word other than a 'food'. 
The an uvritti of the word 'Chhandasi' does not extend to this satra, Thus भाममति =भामात् 'eating raw food' ;शस्वात् 'granivorous'. 
But with w as an upapada, we have perf: eating food', which is formed by the general affix my (III 2. 1.) 
# vuell gefa al tea, , (gi, fac ) 1 fF99: 11 7497 opettaifafanuut vafall 
69. The affix for comes after the verb I 'to eat,' when the word 464 is in composition with it. 
As af 3 'carnivorous'. 
Why has it been made a separate sätra, when this form could have been obtained by the last sätra also? To this the vartika replies: "This has been made a separate sätra in order to indicate that the rule of 169 (III. 1. 94) docs not apply here. Therefore the affix ou will not apply in the alter native. · If the affix mul does not apply, how then we get the form anty: which is evidently formed by the affix au ? The affix nu comes after the root when the word formed means the eater of meat which has been cut, dress ed and cooked'; thus mery: means a man who eats meat cooked and prepared, i. 6. a meat-eater as opposed to a vegetarian, while 176477 means an animal which eats raw flesh; the word 6479: in fact may be regarded as an irregular form falling under Tortile class of satra VI. 3. 109. 
JT: TI 9011 gei, *9-7:, , ( gfa) 10 gfa: ll giutat: gay 9944992anit arsT: 11 
70. The afix 2 comes after the verb c 'to milk' when in composition with a word ending in a case 
affix and the letter replaces its final. 
BK. III. CH. II. $. 71, 72] THE AFFIX NVIN. . 439 
As fragar wh: 'a milch cow, giving abundance of milk”; so also odigar, 
*** canarinunggarit fram u sp ut etre ut mih, saar-3996-97Ty, foran al 
17: 11 mm TK 34400 GATUIT redetment for rent safer at foreill t e li vjerenstart Tented Fa 163711 
71. In the Mantra literature, the affix fort. comes after the words श्वेतवह, उक्यशम and पुरोडाए । 
The above words contain both the verb and the upapada ; the fact of their being so given indicates that there is some irregularity in the application of the affix. 
Thus the affix fora comes after the verb preceded by the upa pada win as denoting an agent, while the force of the whole word so formed denotes an object. As mat fra fare want nom. sing. wan: 'a name of Indra' (whom white horses carry). 
The affix fort is applied to the verb stą 'to praise' when preceded by the word *4 as object or instrument ; and then the nasal is irregularly dropped. As yra ut def= TEL, nom. sing. J ur: (Rig. Ved, II. 39. 1.) 'a reciter of hymns, the name of the sacrificer'. 
Thic fuqa, is applicd after the verb er 'to give', preceded by got, and is changed into 3, the force of the whole word denoting an object. As got rufa garam , nom. sing. TrsT: (Rig. Ved. III. 28. 2) 'an offering'. 
Vart:--The augment 7x is added to the words war &c., when the pada affixes follow. Thus before pada terininations wat becomes TiTTEI 
Therefore its Instrumental dual is ratham, pl. Thaifr: 1 
The augment 7e is not applied before pian and * termina tions. As tail, Thamy: 1 
à TW: 81 92 llogifat u ea, :, (Faern, b) or FT: 11 ***997 astetaracant. ** fra II 
72. Iụ the Mautra literature, the affix fora comes after the verb 4 'to sacrifice' when in composi tion with the word 47. 
As steist, nom. sing. Har: (Rig. Ved. I. 173. 12) 'name of a Vedic priest'; as via TUFTTT YF 'Thou art the priest of Varuņa in the sacrifice'. 
The division of this aphorism from the last in which it could have been included, is for the sake of the subsequent sätras in which the anuvritti of 3 
Ming. 
440 
. 
THE AFFIX VICH. 
BK. III. CH. II. 473, 74. 
only runs. This word is thus declined : 
sing. 
dual 
plural. 
• 1st. भवयाः , 
भववागी, 
भरवाजा 2nd. भवयानं, 
भववानो, 
भगवाजः 
• 3rd. भवयाजा, 
भवयोभ्यां 
भववाभिः विजुपे छन्दसि ॥ ३ ॥ पदानि ॥ विच, उपे, छन्दसि ॥ वृत्तिः । उपउपपदे यजेसि विषये विप्रत्यया भवति॥ 
73. The affix foray comes after the verb when a precedes, in the Chhandas. 
As उपयामिरू वहन्ति 'they carry it up with the उपनम् formulas'. उपवम् is the name of eleven formulas at a sacrifice. 
The word 'Chhandas' has been repeated here though the anuvșitti of the word 'mantra' was present in it, in order to include the Brahmana literature also. 
The x is indicatory and is useful in including the affix fory in the larger group called fo (which includes fing, forn, fua, fare), as in the satra IT ET (VI. I.67). 
Why has this satra been made, since the affix for would have been valid even by aphorism 75? The satra has been separately made to show 
that it is a restrictive rule here. The form 74484 is found in the Chhandas only, and not in the ordinary literature. 
आतो मनिनवनिम्बनिपञ्च ॥ १४ ॥ पदानि ॥ आतः, मनिन् कमिप-वनिपः, च, (छन्दसि, सुपि, विच)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ भाकारान्तभ्यो धातुभ्यः सुप्युपपरे छनसि विषये मनिन् क्वनिप् वनिप् इत्येते प्रत्यया भवन्ति चकाराविपि ॥ 
74. The affixes मनिन् (मन), कमिप(वन्), वनिप(वन) and विच come in the Chhandas, after verbs which end in long , when a case-inflected word or an upasarga is in composi tion. 
The force of 'and' is to include विच्. Thus सुहा+मनिन्-सदामन, Ist. sing. सुदामा (Rig. VI. 20. 7) 'one who gives liberally'; भश्व+स्था+मनिन् = भश्वत्थामन, Ist. sing. भावस्थामा 'the name of Asvatthaman'; सुधा+कनिष्-सुधी+वन् (VI.4.66)= सुधीवन्, Ist. sing. सुधीवा 'having good understanding'; सुपा+कनिप्-सुपीपन, Ist. sing. सुपावा 'a good drinker'. भूरि+ +वनिए- भूरिदावन, Ist. sing. भरितावा (Rig. II. 
27. IT) liberal'; घृतपावन Ist. sing. घतपावा (Yaj. VI. 19) ghee-drinker'. 
. The affix विच is also included in this aphorism. As कीलाल+पा+विच 
ETT: (Rig. X. 91. 14) 'nectar-drinker'; gar: (Rig. IV. 3. 6. and Paņini VII. 
BK. III. CH. II. $ 75-77.] 
THE AFFIX KVIP. 
441 
3.46) 'beautifully going' ; (Thera: 'an offering of Rama.' (see sätra III. 3. 106 and Yajur. Ved. XXX. 9). 
__अन्येभ्योपि दृश्यते ॥ १५॥ पदानि ॥ अन्येभ्यः, अपि, दूश्यंते, (मनिम्, कनिम्, वनिए, विच्) । 
वृत्तिः । भन्थेभ्योपि धातुभ्वीमाकारान्त यो ममिन् वनिप् पनिप् इत्येते प्रत्यबा दृश्यन्ते, विच्च ॥ 
76. These affixes viz. मनिन , कानिए, पमि, and वि are seen after other verbs also besides those ending in long #r. 
The word orfe is not understood here. As + x 'to injure' +4FA7 = सुशर्मन्, ist. 'sing. सुशर्मा 'who destroys well i.e.destroys sin or ignorance'. प्रातर+r to go'+क्यनि-प्रातर+इस+वन् (VI. I.71)= प्रातरिमन, Ist. sing. भातरिया 'who goes early'. वि+जन्+वनि-वि+मा+पन् (VI. 4.41) विजावन्. Ist. sing. विजाया 'who brings forth'. भांगावा 'who goes before'. रिप+विचरे (VII. 3.86) Ist. sing. रेड 'who injures'; as in रेडसि पर्ण नयेः (Yajur. Ved. VI. 18). 
The word 'also' in this aphorism has the force of removing all condi tions under which these affixes were employed in the previous aphorisms, that: is to say, these affixes come even when there is no upapada. As पीवा; धीवा. 
The words 'are seen in this satra show that all verbs do not admit of these affixes indiscriminately. It is only when we see a particular form that we can infer the existence of these affixes. 
किप च ॥ ७६ ॥ पदानि ॥ किप, च॥ पत्तिः ॥ सर्वधातुभ्यः सोपपवेभ्यो निरुपपतेभ्यश छन्दसि भाषायां च क्विप्मत्ययो भवति ।। 
76. And the affix fa is also seeu after all verbs, whether having an upapada or not in the Vedic as well as in the modern Sanskrit. 
As खायाःसते = उखासत् (VI. 4. 24) "falling from the pot'; पर्णवर falling from the leaves'; बाहार प्रायति-पाहाश, Ist. sing. वाहाट. falling from a car'. The çr is long by VI. 3. 137. See Rig. Ved. I. 3. 8. 
स्थः क च ॥७॥ पदानि ॥ स्थः, क, च, (सुपि, उपसर्ग, हिप) पतिः ॥ स्था इत्येतस्मादातोः सुप्युपपा कमत्ययो भवति सि च ॥ 
77. The afixes and fare come after the verb for when it is in composition with a word euding in a case-affix or an upasarga. 
Why has this aphorism been made, when by rule III. I. 4, स्था would have taken aand by rule III. 1.75, it would have taken fare also ? This repetition is for the purpose of prohibiting the prohibition, that is to say, the 
1442 
THE AFFIX NINI. 
(BK. III. -CI. II. § 78, 79. 
satra III. 2. 14 prohibited the sátra III, 2. 4, and the present sätra removes that prohibition. Thus sier: and HEUT: 1 But for this sátra, this form could not have been evolved ; for, with the upapada 11. the verb Ezt would have taken the affix it by III. 2. 14. 
reputar furarerpatva u sal agtfall gfa, morrent, fufari, aresta 
वृत्तिः ॥ भजातिवाचिनि सुषन्त उपपरे ताफील्ये गम्बमाने धातोशिंनियत्ययो भवति ।। नातिकम् ॥ उत्पनियामादि सरुपसंख्यानम् ।। पार्तिकम् ।। साधुकारिणि च॥ पार्मिकम् ।।मणि वः ।। 
78. When habit is to be expressed, the alfix ruft comes after a verh, provided the word with a case. affix in composition with it, does not mean: a genus. 
Thus To+*+fuf u ff, ist. sing. ouitat 'who eats his meal hot'. So also afronist &c. 
. Why do we say 'when it does not mean a genus'? Witness muU17 faar 'the inviter of Brahmaņas'. We cannot form NTRUMlinat 
Why do we say 'when habit is to be expressed'? Witness TU FR asif m'he sometimes eats hot'. 
Though the anuvșitti of the word 'supi' was understood in this ap horism, its repetition here declares that upasargas are not included. This is contested by the author of the Siddhanta Kaumudi. According to him this affix comes even with upasargas. As भनुनायित भनुजीषिन, उपजीविन &c.: 
Vart-The verb wie in composition with the prepositions or gfa should be enumerated as taking this affix. As उदासारिन्, fem. उदासारिणी, Ist. 
plural aften:. So also raftut, pl. aereft: 1 
Vari.-So also when the sense is 'having skill in such and such action'. As aryardt 'excellent worker'; anal 'giving liberally'. 
Vart-So also after the verb mi preceded by W. As marfa, in natreat ofrer 'the knowers of Brahma say'. 
antguarra et genucifer it ift, Juha, (fafa:) o f#: 11 m etrarft 34414899 ratio forterell gafat II 
79. The afix fufor comes after a verb when it is in composition with a word denoting an object of compari son, expressing the agent, the sense of the affix being doing something like that', that is to say, when the 
BK. III. CH. II. $ 80, 81.) 
THE AFFIX NINI. 
443 
upapada agent is the standard of comparison of the agent denoted by the word to which the sense of the alix re fer3. 
Thus Jok TT tilta=360mfort 'who makes a noise like a camel'; wher rifera 'who makes a noise like a crow'. 
This sätra applies where 'habit' is not indicated : or where 'genus' is denoted in opposition to the last aphorism. 
Why do we say 'when expressing the agent? Witness as per tratar afa Anna, 'he eats måsha like appa'. Here are is object and not agent, and hence no composition takes place. 
Why do we say 'denoting a standard of comparison? Otherwise therc will be no composition. As : ilufa 'the camel makes noisc'. For the accents of these words, see VI. 2. 80. 
ga u cou ogifa naa, (urati, fa, fufa:) o वृत्तिः । ब्रसे गम्यमाने सुबन्त उपपदे धातोर्णिनिःप्रत्ययो भवति । 
80. The afhx fuit comes after a ver com. position with a word ending in a case-aflix, 
The word a means a 'vow' as regulated and ordained by the Scrip tures. This condition 'when vow is expressed applies to the completed word, that is to say, when the complete word made up of the root, the upapada, and the asfix, dcnotes a vow. As farfegatifaq 'the vow of sleeping on bare ground (and nowhere else) or a person who has taken this vow', WAT 'who has vowed not to eat during the performance of a Sraddha ceremony. 
Why do we say 'when vow is to be expressed' ? Otherwise there is no composition. As pufoca vad : 'Devadatta sleeps on bare ground. 
This sätra is also an exception to III. 2 78 applicable when habit is not meant, or when genus is to be expressed. 
amaruterali SP nuerfa II Guerritara, (fafa:) ! वृत्तिः ।। भाभीक्ष्ण्ये गम्बमान धासोबहुलं णिनिप्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
81. The affix for comes after a verb diversely when continued repetition of an action is to be expressed. 
Thc word oftpony incans continued rcpctition, that is to say, zealous 
ctice or assiduous performance of anything, but does not mean habit. As arafuut Tartr: 'the people of Gandhara are kashaya-drinkers'. TT+ 
4T+fufa = 9 +9+9 +fura (VII. 3. 33). So also sharfau sutart: 'the people of Usinara are milk-drinkers'. alatt-erfaut a cottant: 'the people of Bahlika are sauvira-drinkers'. 
By using the word 'diversely' in the sätra, this affix is not applied in other places, as in the following :- Aran: 'a grain catcr'. 
444 
THE AFFIX KILAS. 
[BK, III. CH. II. $ 82, 83. 
#: 1157 u ogrla i a, (efu, farfa:) u offer: 1l predata 398 fofagrazit oala II 
82. The fix fufer comes after the verb 'to think when there is a word with a case-affix in compo sition with it. 
The word 'supi' is understood in this sátra. As margarit 'who thinks himself handsome': U mat 'who thinks himself beautiful'. 
The verb #belonging to the 4th conjugation is taken here and not that belonging to the 8th conjugation ; because the anuvritti of the word 'diversely' is understood here. In the present aphorism, whether we take the Divadi or Tanádi 57 the resulting form would be the same, namely Atlq. But not so in tlie next aphorism, where before the affix a there wduld be difference of form owing to the vikaraņa. . e., in the 4th conjugation at would be added, but not so if the verb belonged to the 8th class. 
OTTO WATCH H23 nacrta u STCHATA, TT,, (fufa:)lt 19: 11 AA TATAY: gra q98 etapelt fa, qacrolina li 
83. And the aflix on comes after the verb 'to think when the word in composition with it is a word with a case-afix, and when it is employed to sig. nify thought, whereof the object is self (the sense of the afix being 'thinking himself as such"). 
The word m ary mcans thinking of one's own self. By the word 'and it is meant that the affix fuft may be employed in the same sense. This rule applies where the agent, indicated by the sense of the affix, thinks him self possessed of the qualities of 'handsomeness' &c., denoted by the upapada. As raffrenza: or ariant 'who thinks himself handsome' ;. gfuerara: or quart 'who thinks himself learned'. 
Why do we say 'when employed to signify thought whereof the object is self? Witness priatunt f a u : Yajñadatta is thought handsome by Devadatta. 
Of the affix un the letter causes i augment by VI. 3. 66 ; and T makes it a sârvadhatuka affix, which brings in the proper vikaranas. The affixes so far treated or are applicable in all tenses. The others that follow denote some particular time. 
watu sy i netrau watu 
वृत्तिः॥ भूत इत्यधिकारी वर्तमाने नहिदि वायत्, बरित कमनुकमिवामः भत इत्येवं तवेदितव्यम् ॥ 
. 
2 
BK. III. CH. II. $ 84-87.) 
THE AFFIX KVIP. 
445 
84. All the affixes to be treated of hereafter should be understood to come in the sense of past time. 
The phrase 'with tlic sense of past time' is an adhikara or governing aphorism and exerts its influence up to aphorism 123 of this chapter ; that is to say, thiese affixes give a signification of the past tense to the verb whose anuvritti is also understood throughout the subsequent s@tras; see III, 1. 91. 
Thus it will be taught in the next aphorism: 'after the verb 497, when the word in composition is in the instrumental case, the affix fula is employ ed'. Here to complete the sense we must read into the satra, the words 'with the sense of past time'. . As oportâĀCIR= THAT 'who has sacrificed with an Agnishțoma or a five-day series of offerings'. 
Why do we say 'with the sense of past time' ? Otherwise these affix es will not be employed. As offraeta t'he sacrifices with Agnishţoma'. 
*TE THE LI CY I vetra u RTW, TH, (Forfati, wa): fe: 11 giutat: atuandfulaturatit para mante 
85. The alix fuit comes after the verb an 'to sacrifice' with the sense of past time, when the word in composition is in the instrumeutal case. 
The anuvșitti of fuit and not of t is to be read into this satra. As TRAUE'who has sacrificed with Agnishtoma. Hcrc Agnishfoma is the instrument for the attainment of the desired fruit. 
**fo Fa: 11 € Nagulat u miru, yai, (fofa:) पृत्तिः ॥ कर्मणि उपपदे हन्तर्धातोपिनिप्रत्ययो भवति भूते काले।। 
86. The affix fuit comes after the verb 7 'to kill, with the sense of past time, when the word in 
composition is ill the accusative case 
As पिवृष्यघातिन् 'who has killed his paternal uncle'; मातुनपातिन् 'who has killed his maternal uncle'; +fufa = 1 +fuia (VII. 3. 54)=40+fura 
(VII. 3. 32)=qft. (VII. 2. 116). 
This affix is employed only when censure is implied. Therefore it is not employed in the #479, he has killed the thief. 
The anuvritti of the word ilu of this aphorism extends up to satra III. 2. 96. 
aang farq u es unerfat u 44-Yu-ràng, fan, (**fa, ya:) ! 
gfa: i waring diagra prestat: fwrqueant stalo na 
87. The alix fare comes after the verb q 'to 
446 : 
THE AFFIX KVIP. 
[BK. III. CH. II. $ 88, 89. 
. 
. 
kill' with the sonse of past timo, when the following words in the accusative case are in composition: Why la Brâhmana', qu'a fætus' and qu'Vșitra'. 
As AUTOT, ist. sing. FHET 'who has killed a Brahmaņa'; WURT 'who has killed a fætus'; ETET 'who has killed Vșitra, a name of Indra'. 
Since by sätra 76 ante, the affix farrg was ordained to come after all verbs, and therefore would have come after the verb also, where is the ne cessity of the present aphorism? This aphorism makes a niyama. i. c. the verb 
T takes the affix fat only when it is in composition with the words ha &c. Four-fold restriction is here intended. 
(1) When has, as upapada, the words to &c., and not any other word; as go yaar 'he has killed the man'. 
(2) When the words TK &c. are upapadas of any other verb than me then this affix is not employed; so that the verb must be ; thus frontare "he has read the Veda'. 
(3) The fare is the only affix to denote past time in the case of preceded by a &c., and no other affix can be employed in this sensc. 
(4) This is employed only in the past tense and not in any other tense ; as ARTiOj pa or pfarrafa 'he kills or will kill thc Brahmana'. This sätra anticipates the diversity taught in the next sätra, and is an example of 
Ei use of the affix. 
बहलं छन्दसि॥८॥पदानि ॥ बहलम, छन्दसि, (हनह, विप)॥ sta: 11 gefa ferpentiniaifa wa 1972 II 
88. In the Chhandas, the affix*q diversely comes after the verb 57. 'to kill' with the sunse of past time, even when the word in composition with it is other than those mentioned in the last aphorism. 
This aphorism ordains fata in cases which are not governed by the restrictive rule contained in the last aphorism. As RICCFT T Tra afront 'may the matricidc enter the scventh hell'; so also featur fpatricide'. 
Diversely we find also मादधातः and पिघातः। 
मुकर्मपापमंत्रपुण्येषु काः ॥ ॥ पदानि ॥ सु-कर्म-पाप-मनन gray, 94, (ma) u 
fa: 11 tarfer anlayang alaga: ParqArt Yafa il 
89. The affix fang comes after the verb c 'to make' with the sense of past time, when the following words in the accusative case are in composition: well', art action', na 'sin', w 'hymn' and guar "virtue'. Bk. III. CH. II. $ 9092.) 
THE AFFIX KVIP. 
447 
ce 
The phrase 'in the accusative case' is understood in this aphorism, and applies to all the above-mentioned words, except , which being an attributive word, of course, cannot take any case-terminations. As 957 (VI. 1. 71) 'who has done well'; mrt 'who has done all works'; ay 'who has committed sins'; **5"who has made a mantra'; gou 'who has done virtuous actions'.' 
This sätra also ordains a restrictive rule or niyama. Three-fold restriction is intended here : namely, restrictions with regard to time, upapada, and affix; but not with regard to verbs. See III. 2. 87. There being no res triction with regard to the root, this affix is employed when words other than thicse are upapadas. As, TEK 'who has made Scriptures ; 125 'who has made a cominentary'. The x is added to the root by VI. 1. 71, 
Era yat: # V ogtfat u Pra, ya, (**fe, fea) : वृशिः। सोमे कर्मण्युपपरे सुनोतेर्धातोःविाप्पत्ययो भवति ॥ 
90. The affix fang comes after the verb 'to press out juice', with the sense of past time, when the word di, in the accusative case, is in composition. 
As, they 'who has pressed the soma juice, or soma-distiller'; Ist. dual ant ; Ist. plural aten: 1 
This sätra is also for the sake of making a niyama or restrictive rule. The four-fold restriction is here intended. i.t. as regards the verb, the tense, the upa pada and the assix. 
prosta: ut op u geura u sport, 8:, (**fa, fena) # निः ।। ममी कर्मन्युपप सुनोतेर्धातोः किमत्ययो भवति । 
91. The afix fare comes after the verb fa 'to collect' with the sense of past time, when the word ufa, in the accusative case, is in composition. 
As, friame 'one who has kept the sacred fire'; ist. dual simfont; Ist. plural HiiTn: 1 
Here also, as in the last aphorism, four-fold restriction is intended.' 
antara Tera NCP Erfa Il mifa, afra-rer ara, (**fa, ti, fana) 
sfar: 11 atorgrad fiftia: *fra farqaradt *tfit sprearearura ni 
92. In expressing an object the afix fara comes after the verb f'to collect' with the sense of past time, when in composition with a word in the accusative case, provided the word so formed is the name of fire. 
The words &: and who are understood in this sátra. The Name is 
448 
THE AFFIX KVANIP. 
(BK. !II. CH. II. $ 93-95. 
expressed by taking the complete word consisting of the verbal root, thc upa pada and the affix. As twafaa 'a fire which has bocn arranged in the shape of a hawk'; fan 'fire arranged like a heron'. 
The word car indicates that these words are rudhi words, their sense depending upon usage rather than etymology. The arrangement of bricks for sacrificial purpose with regard to fire, gets these various names ; that is, when the bricks are arranged like a falcon, it is called canfan, and so on. 
fortfa farosa: u u sifat ulofu, fa, fafana: par: 1) ** TFerquin turistattfigrati nafasi 
93. The afix far comes after the compound verb fap'to sell', in the sense of past time, when in com 
position with a word in the accusative case. 
The repetition of the word *fo in the satra, though its anuvritti might have been drawn from the last aphorism, indicates that when the object carries with it a sense of censure on the agent, then only this affix is employed and not with every and any object. As enfanfaat 'the seller of soma plant'; ref . 'the seller of liquors'; employing disapproval of the action of those persons who carry on these mean professions. But not so in afara: 'the seller of paddy'. : 
: afera u % naarfa il gi, afora, (**fo) fa: 11 çoiutat: augai alirazit referir 
94. The affix #lit comes after the verb u 'to seo' in the sense of past time, when in composition with a word in the accusative case. 
As Ho7, Ist. sing. Hou 'who has seen the Meru'. T ARTTTT 'who has seen the hereafter.' 
Though the affix affire was valid by sátra III. 2. 75 its repetition here shows that no other affix" comes in this sense after this verb. 
Tufa grasa: H uerba u trenfot, grü-enni, (**fe, qarora) 
fer: THE TOT **ogari qiaa: atlav amfarquant el 28 
95. The affix for comes after the verbs ry 'to fight' and 'to make' with a past signification when the word (a 'king' is in composition, in the accusative case. 
. How can the verb or, which is an intransitive verb, govern an object ? It is a transitive verb, inasmuch as it is taken to be a causative verb, with the fur affix latent. As thyro, Ist. sing. T en (VIII. 2. 7) 'who has caused the king to fight'; , Ist. sing. (VI.1.71.) 'who has made a king', 
BK. III. CH. II. 696-100.]. 
. THE AFFIX DA. 
449 
सहेच ॥६॥ पदानि ॥ सहे, च, (युधि, कला, क्वनिप्) । वृत्तिः । सहशब्द चोपपड़े युधिकृमोतोः कामिप्यत्ययो भवति ॥ 
96. The affix asiat comes after the verbs quand F, with a past signification, when the word he 'with', is in composition, 
The word सह, being a particle, and not denoting a substance, is incap able of taking any case. As सहायुध्धन 'who has made to fight with'; सरकपन, 'who has done any thing along with another'. 
सप्तम्यां जनेईः ॥ ७ ॥ पदानि ॥ सप्तम्यां, जनः, हः॥ पत्तिः । सप्तम्यन्त उपप जन प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
97. The affixe comes after the verb जन 'to be produced', with a past signification, when the word, in composition with it, is in the locative case. 
As उपसरे जातः= उपसरमः । जन्+3 +भ (VI. 4. 143) 'born of the first conception'; मन्दरजः 'born in the stable'. 
पञ्चम्यामजातौ ॥ पदानि ॥पञ्चम्याम, अजाती, (जने:, :)। पतिः ॥ पञ्चम्यन्त उपपदे जातिवर्जित जन :प्रस्बयो भवति । 
98. The affixr comes after the verb जन., with a past signification, when the word in composition with it, is in the ablative case, which does not denote a genus. 
As बुद्धिजः 'born through understanding'; संस्कारज: born of habit'; दुखनः 'born through pain'. 
Why do we say 'when not denoting a genus'? Observe हस्तिनी मातः 'born of elephant'; भवाज्जातः 'born of horse'. 
उपसर्गेच संज्ञायाम् ॥ ॥ पदानि ॥ उपमर्गे, च, संधायान, (जनेः, इ.)। 
पशिः। उपसमें चोपपदे अमेः प्रत्ययो भवति संज्ञायां विषये।। 
99. The affix. comes after the verb जन with a past signification, when an upasarga is in composition and when the sense is simply appellative. 
The term here being simply appellative, and not descriptive, cannot be explained by giving the signification of its component elements. As प्रजाः 'people', or a son'; as in the sentence भर्थमा मानवी प्रजाः । 
___ अनी कर्मणि ॥ १० ॥ पदानि ॥ अनौ, कर्मसि, (जने:, :) । वृत्तिः ।। भनुपूर्वाजनेः कर्मण्युपपदे प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
100. The alixr comes after the verb जन् with 
450 
THE NISIITHA AFFIXES. 
(BK. III. Cir. II. $ 101, 102. 
a past signification, when the root takes the proposition Hy and is compounded with a word in the accusative case. 
As TATTOTT a girl born after the male child i, e, a girl having an elder brother' ; f f*: 'a boy born after the female child i. c. a boy having an elder sister'. 
- spotrafo ma il pop al certa u stanu, safa, gora, (wai, v:) ll. 
पतिः ॥ भन्येप्पप्युपपदेषु कारकेषु भने प्रत्ययो दृश्यते ॥ 
101. The afix ? is seen to come after the verb par with a past siguification, though it be in composition with other nouns, having cases other than those mention ed in the previous satras. 
Thus the locative case has been dealt with in sátra III. 2.97 ; but the affix comes when the upa pada has any other case than the seventh. As a = WT: 'unborn'; fera:=fax: 'twice-born'.. 
Thus, it is said in sátra III. 2.98 that the upa pada may be in the ablativa casc, when genus is not denoted. We see, however, the affix employed when genus is denoted. As pinost *: ; fun 
It is declared in sätra III. 2. 38 that when appellative is meant, the asfix I comes after the compound verb ma We find, however, the asfix employed when the sense is not simply appellative; as w at: or for: 'born or produced all round i.e. hair'. 
It is declared in sátra III. 2. 100.. 'When an object is in composition with the verb way this ashx is employed'. But it may also be employed when no object is in composition. As Hot 'born aster i e. younger brother'. 
The force of the word of 'though' is to free this rule from all restric tions and conditions. So this affix comes after other verbs and other cases in composition with such verbs. As afcr: GTI =qftar'a moat' (literally that which has been dug all round); MIOT "a pond'. 
first I pop u ucila u forest, (a). . f 11 faena f en*: Fra start 11 
Alla ut planifu Free TheUT IT 
102. The affixes called forest come after a verb. al root, employed with the sense of past time. 
The affixes # and I are forest (1. 1. 26). As «t = 'made'; +7147= 7*, Ist. sing. 419, 'done'; so also a 4 and 4914 eaten'. 
Vart.-The Nishtha affixes come when ddi-karma is meant. For a fuller description of what constitutes ådi-karna see sätra III. 4. 71, and the illustrations under it. Thus ana: :, 17 ** tart; 1 
BK. III. CH. II. § 103-106.) 
THE AFFIX KANACH. 
450 
सुयजावनिप् ॥ १०३ ॥ पदानि ॥ सु-योः, स्वनिप् ॥ सनोतर्थानेश्ववनिप् प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
103. The affix zulara comes after the verbs o'to press out or extract juice' and a 'to sacrifice', with a past signification, 
As a tetty = 1 + (VI. I 71)=LIT. Ist. sing. Om 'who has pressed out or extracted juice' ; FT, ist. sing. 28 'who has sacrificed'. The m is added by VI. 1.71. See Rig. Ved. I. 3. 1. 
जीर्यतेरवन् ॥ २०४॥ पदानि ॥ जीर्यतेः, अवन, (भते)। वृत्तिः । जीरहन् प्रत्ययो भवति भूते ।। 
104. The affix at comes after the verb 'to grow old' with the sense of past time. 
As +177 = T(+(VII. 3. 84)=*, ist, sing. 14, Ist. dl. arcat, ist. pl. TFH: 'grown old' (VII 1. 70). 
By the rule of Tea (III. 1.94), the Nishtha affixes also come after this verb. As to: and furtit =fit (VII. 1.100 and I. 1.51) -fwe+ (VIII. 2. 42)=sito (VIII. 2. 77 and VIII. 4. I) 'grown old'. 
Trefor fee u pou l uerfor u tenfor, fore, (wa) un fe: il gaplar faqat salate, grazit stafor it 
105. In the Chhandas, the affix fere comes after a verb with a past signification. 
As Hi H uat mo 'I saw the sun from both sides'; U grafuar mara 'I stretched the heaven and the earth'. Here the words of and oral have the force of nishtha. See Yaj. Ved. VIII. 9. 
Why this separate satra, when by aphorism III. 4. 61, in the Chhandas the lun, lan and lit come in all tenses ? That rule is made with regards to two or more verbs when in syntactical relation (urgery) with each other (III. 4: 1). The present rule is general, and without any such limitations. 
Lit is the affix of the Present Perfect and will be fully treated of in the conjugation of verbs. 
forc: HTTVET II PoE il terfatul Fere!, #777, 2; (wefa) 19:ll pre fora: orar la qr il 
106. Iu the Chhaudas the aflix far is optional ly replaced by the alix #ng! 
Asufrat frapant: 'he consecrated the fire'; ara q u : 'he pressed the somia juice'. This being an optional affix, is sometimes not employed; as in the examples in the last aphorism. 
453 
THE AFFIX KVASU 
(BK. III. CH. II. { 107-109. 
Why has the word lit been repeated in this satra, when its anuvsitti could have been drawn from the last sätra ? The substitute any replaces not only the special for of sútra III. 2. 105, but the general for which comes after the roots in forming the perfect tense ; so that the aflix y forms verbal ad 
jectives as well as the perfect tense. 
This affix comes after those verbs only which take Atmanepada termi. nations. See I. 4. TOO. तनुजान (Rig. Ved. I. 3. 6). 
कसुध ॥ १०७ ॥ पदानि ॥ क्वसुः, च, (छन्दसि, लिटः) ॥ पत्तिः ॥ छन्दसि निटः कसुरादेशो भवति । 
107. In the Chhandas the affix arg is option. ally the substitute of for 
_As जसिवस् Ist, sing. अतिवाम् 'eaten' (Yaj. VIII. 19) पपिपस् Ist. sing. पपिवान् 'drunk'. 
Sometimes it does not come, as in the example under sätra III. 2. 105; भहं सूर्यमुभवतो वर्ष. 
The division of this sätra from the last, in which it could well have been included, is for the sake of the subsequent sätras, into which the anu vșitti of ra only runs, 
भाषायां सदवसभुवः ॥१०॥ पदानि ॥ भाषायाम, सद-वन-अवः, (लिटः, क्वसुः)॥ 
वृतिः ॥ सापस अपत्येतेभ्यः परस्थ लिटी भाषायां विषये वा कसुरादेशो भवति।। 
108. In the modern Sanskrit, the affix * optionally replaces for after the verbs at, rą and u with a past signification. 
This being a substitutc only, the original asfix fare also comes aster these verbs. As, उपसेदिवान् कोसः पाणिनिम् 'Kautsa served Panini'. In the alter. native, the proper affixes of the past tense will be employed. As सासरत् 'he served' ; उपासीवत् and उपससाद. 
___So also भनूषिवान, कोसः पाणिनिम्. In the alternative we have भन्यवासीन्, . भन्वरसत् and भनूवास. 
So also उपशु पान, कोत्सः पाणिनिम्. In the alternative we have eपात्रोपी। पागणोत् and पशुभाव. 
• The affix * is employed with the force of so, and we also. 
उपेयिवाननाश्वाननचानश्च ॥ १० ॥ पदानि ॥ उपेयिवान अनाश्वान्-अनचानः, (च) ॥ 
पतिः। उपेयिवान् भनाश्वान् भनचान रयते शम्मा निपास्यन्ते ॥ 
.. 109. The forms रविवान् भनाधान् भनुचान् are irregu larly formed. 
BK. III. CH. II. $ 110.) 
THIEAFFIX LUN. 
453 
These forms are thus evolved :-To the verb 'to go with the pre position 79, the affix ay is added: as 3++Tg. The root is reduplica ted: as 79+*+r+ary. The reduplicatc is here long by VII. 4. 69. This long does not coalesce with the short by the rules of sandhi; for then the rule by which this was introduced would have no scope. Now we add the augment contrary and in opposition to the rule VII. 2. 67: and this is the irregularity. As +&+*+ + . Then the root y is replaced by a by sätra VI. 4 81. As 79+&+*+8, + 9=39fage ist, sing. afar. The aug inent is however dropped in those cases (M) where qe, is changed into on ; becausc the insertion of was itself an exceptional case of limited scope :- for while the general rules VII, 2.75 &c. ordained it, the special rule of VII. 2. 67 prohibited it ; and it was by prohibition of this prohibition that was em ployed before re. Therefore in accusative plural we have 494 ; instrumental sing उपेषा &c. 
This irregular participle is not limited to the upasarga 74; we find such irregular forms with other upasargas and without them also; thus mutfagi, and tयिवान् as well. 
By the anuvritti of the word read in this aphorism, we have t &c. in the alternative. As in Aorist उपागात, Imperfect स्पेत, Perfect उपेवाय। 
The word wann is thus formed :-To the verb 4T 'to enjoy' we add the negative particle ; apply the aflix me and donot insert the augment ; So, we have 49 +973 ta Ę , Ist. sing. wire. In the alternative we have Aorist prila, Imperfect tar and Perfect TTT. 
The word wat is thus derived :—The affix my is added in expres sing the agent to the verb to preceded by ". In the alternative we have Aorist भन्योचस्, Imperfect भन्वमवीत् , Perfect भन पाच. 
llppo ir uçrra a , (a) u gfalt yasū qaraberalas, afet il वार्निकम् ।। वसतलुंड राविशेष जागरणसन्ततो वक्तव्यः॥ 
110. The aflix e comes after a verb in the sense of past time. . The forms what is known as aorist. It is in fact the name of the aorist, as the whole of this affix is replaced by other personal terminations. See III. 1. 43 and subsequent sätras. 
The aorist has reference to a past time indefinitely or generally, with out reference to any particular time. An action done before today is express ed by the perfect or imperfect; whatever remains for the aorist is, therefore, to express a past action, done very recently, say, in the course of the current day or having reference to a present act. Aorist, therefore, merely implies the coinpiction of an action at a past time generally, and also an action donc at a 
454 
THE AFFIX LUN. 
[BK. III. CH. II. $ 111. 
very recent time, as during the course of this day. The imperfect and perfect are used in narrating events of past occurrence, generally in remote past time; the aorist is used in dialogues and conversations which refer to recent past actions, but it is not used to denohe past specified time or to narrate events. Apte's Composition. As warsta 'he did'; $Totą 'he took'. 
Vart. The affix ne comes after the verb reg 'to dwell, when 'end of the present night' is indicated. Supposing a person rising from his bed at the proper time of rising (not in the middle of the night, but in the early morn ing) and finding another near him were to ask that one, 'where did you dwell 3. . pass the night'? That person so asked should answer in the go and not in . As भमुभावासम् I dwelt there'; and not भमुनावसम्. 
Vart.-The above rule applies only in connection with waking after regular sleep. He who has not slept the whole night, but only for half an hour or so, should reply भमुनावसम्. 
भनद्यतने लड्॥ १९९ ॥ पदानि ॥ अनद्यतने, लङ् (भते) ॥ यत्तिः ॥ भविद्यमानायतने भूतेऽयें वर्तमानाबातील प्रत्ययो भवति ।। पार्तिकम् ।। परोक्षे च लोकविज्ञाते प्रयोजनविषये लद बतष्यः ।। 
111. The affix He comes after a verbal root employed in the sense of past before the commeucement of the current day. 
The word araan is a Bahuvrihi compound, meaning that which has not occurred during the course of the current day (adyatana). The whole of this affix is replaced by conjugational terminations, and the affix ax by itself denotes the Imperfect tense. As ** T'he did'; ***t 'he took'. 
Why have we explained anadyatana as a Bahuvrihi compound ? Be cause when there is a doubt as to the time, whether it was to-day or yester day, there the Imperfect should not be used. As a Topf 'we ate to-day or yesterday'. In such a case the affix is ge. 
Vart :-The affix off is also employed in signifying what is not wit nessed by the narrator, when it relates to a well-known public event which can form the object of perception by the narrator. Thus in speaking of a recent public occurrence we may say:-BYTUT TYT: grana 'the Yavanas have besieged Saketa'; FUE *: nafiant 'the Yavanas have besieged Madhyamika'. 
Why do we say 'not witnessed by the speaker? Observe T afeg: 'the sun arose". Why do we say 'a popular public event' ? Observe qarr . Iner: 'Devadatta has made the mat. Why do we say 'which is the object of perception by the speaker'? Observe per te forte eta: 'Vasudeva killed Kansa'. 
अभिजावचने लृट् ॥ १९२ ॥ पदानि ॥ अभिधा-वचने, तृद्, (na, emocra) 11 
BK III. C1: II. § 112, 114.] 
THE AFFIX LRIT. 
455 
TFF: 1 star TERRUTT 7991 AirTan grazit pofer 
112. When a word implying 'recollection' is in connection with it, i vorb takos the allix (2nd future) in the sense of the past before the commencement of the present day. 
The word w at means 'recolleetion'. This rule sets aside the affix 25. As hare 2477 24tq peura: 'rememberest thou, Devadatta, we were dwelling (lit. we will dwell) in Kashmir'. 
The word 9 meaning 'signification' in the satra, denotes that the construction is thc same when the synonyms of oftar are used; as fofa 'dost thou remember' ; quae dost thou know'; tace dost thou reflect'; and the like. 
of u pra u raufa u A, off, (oftetara, T) u वृत्तिः । यच्छम सहितेऽभिज्ञावचन उपपदे नप्रत्ययो न भवति । 
113. The affix on the 2nd futuru) is not appli al in the sense of the past. when the upapada donoting recollection has in connection with it the particle oma 
This prohibits on which the verb pe obtained from the last satra. As भभिमानासि देवदत्त यत् कश्मीरेष्वासाम 'thou rememberest Devadatta how we did dwell in Kashmir'. Here the mere fact of dwelling is recollected, there being no other idca implied; therefore the subscquent aphorism has no scope here. That aphorisın has its scope, when with recollection, is added another dependent idca or action, without which the sentence is not complete. 
fattat FTRİB N PPP u Terfa u faTT, Fiù, (TE, अभिज्ञावचने)। 
pret: 11 ****0994 76 alph may ftaret garant safer araier WarTT 11 
114. The affix or is optionally applied in the sense of the past, when a word implying 'recollection'is in connection with it, and whether such word has the par. ticle 6 or is employed simply; provided that the two vorbis, occurring in the samo complex sentence, are so connected together, that each is necessary to the other, to complete tho scuse ot the speaker, 
· The word araigh means the relation between the sign and the thing signified, wished for or wanted by the speaker, or in other words, when the first verb is related to another verb used in the same sentence, as a sign is to that which is indicated by the sign. As Hinrife 797 FACIT T OTA:, ** ITT 
456 
The AFFIX LAN. 
[BK. III. CH. II. $ 115 
STEZIY: Or wassif# faser au 701, #TATT FTTH, 'do you reincinber Devadatta we went to Kashmir and there did drink Saktu'. 
This option is allowed whether the particle rą is or is not used. As Msifa raqa fqOUTA: (or rotter T5TH,) a turn 
(or y a ITA aft) 'Do you recollect, Devadatta how we went to Kashmir and how we ate rice there'. 
In the above examples, the verb 'to go is the sign, and the 'eating or 'drinking', in the second sentence, is the thing really signified; the first verb is necessary as an introduction to the thought of the speaker which dwells more upon the second verb. Here the second sentence or proposition is used as com pletion or complement of the first proposition. 
uita fare il 984 Il asta al foc, (wa, w aa) वृत्तिः ।। म सानद्यतनपरोक्षेऽयं वर्तमानाद्वानोनिग्रन्ययो भवति ॥ वार्त्तिकम् ।। भत्यन्तापहवे चलिड्वक्तव्यः । 
115. The affix for comes after a verb in the sense of the past before the commencement of the cur. rent day and unperceived by the narrator. 
The word 9774 'unperceived' qualifies the words per 'past' and 'non-current day' understood in this aphorism. 
Well, are not the senses of verbs all unperceived, since they are mere words, and words cannot be perceived ? Exactly so; but in popular phraseology, the perception is imagined to attach to the agent with regard to certain verbs; this rule relates to cases where such perception does not take place. As, 
Carr 'he did' ; Fer 'hc took'. 
'It is evident that the fore, (perfect) should not be used in the first per son, i. e. wlien the agent of the action is the speaker or writer himself ; for it is impossible that the action should not have been witnessed by him. But if by reason of some distracted, unconscious or absent state of mind, it is possible for the agent to speak of the action as one, of which he was not a conscious witness, the perfect may be used even in the first person. As ETATSN fear factory 'indeed I prated while asleep'. 
Vart :- The perfect should be employed (in denoting past time simply, whether of the current day or otherwise, and whether the action has been wit nessed personally or not) if the sense is total denial of the action. As anfang स्थितोऽसि? नाई कलिगम् जगाम 'did you live in the Kalinga country Idid not even go to the Kalinga country'; furu ofaretsfa? The fourrei afara. 
poradte Tipp€ll açıfat I 7-wat:, , , (ua, Hayaa, oh, fare) u 
वृत्तिः ॥ भूतानपतनपरोऽय लिटि मा इरावतोरुपपरयोहमस्ययो भवति चकारालिद् च ।। BK. III. CII II. $ 116-118.] 
THE AFFIX LAT: 
457 
116. And the affix at comes after a verb when the particles & and Ty are in connection with it, and when ilo verb deuotos past action imperceived by tho speaker, and before the commencement of the current day. 
The force of 'and' is that the affix for (perfect) may also be employ ed in similar construction. As far att imperfect), or via fire (perfect) 'Alas I he did it'. Tatą or 
T T 'again and again he did it'. od o r oppe it agtfat u , , SITUUTET, (ua, sagna, utaw, fert) | 
वृतिः। भासनकाने पच्छधमानो भनानयतनपरोक्षे ये पर्तमानाद्धातोर्ननिटी प्रत्ययो भवतः॥ 
117. The affixes * (imperfect and fa. (perfect) come after a verb (in expressing a past time not belong. ing to the current day and unperceived by the speaker) when the past time referred to is recent, and the sentence is interrogative. 
This sutra also qualifies the words a, un and ATT understood in this satra. The word gw means 'what should be asked'; and write 'time close at hand': As, some one may ask another, 1773, 747: or FTTH #TFC: 'did Devadatta go or has Devadatta gone (just now)? भयमा देवदसः or इयान 59971: 'Did Devadatta sacrifice or has Devadatta sacrificed? 
Why do we say 'in asking question? Otherwise there would be Per fect tense only. As, S H 1977: 'Devadatta has gone'. 
Why do we say 'when the past time referred to is imminently recent? Observe goro, era aid faciat TET: 'I ask you, did Krishna indeed kill Kansa in days of yore'. 
FT TA u gps na Gra o TT, FA, (na, muna, usta) afër: il fasta 1979 1979aa9tht , gagant are 
118. The affix #7, (present) comes after a verb, when the particle is in connection with it, (and de notes a past time not belonging to the current day and unperceived by the speaker). 
All the words within brackets are understood in this aphorism This dcbars for, or thic perfect tense. Thus unfo ** ET: 'Yudhishthira sacrificed'; so also नलेन म पुराधीयते । उणंया स्म पराधीयते ।। 
अपरोक्षे च ॥ १९ ॥ पदानि ॥ अपरोक्ष, च, (भूते, अनद्यतने, FA, ME) 
458 
THE AFFIX LAT. 
BK. III. CH. II. HI19-122. 
वृत्तिः ॥ अपरोक्षे च भूतानपतनेऽर्थे वर्तमानादातोः स्मउपपवे लद् प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
119. The affix लट् (present) comes after a verb when the particle to is in connection with it, and denotes a past action not belonging to the current day, and when the action is perceived by the agent. 
. As एवं स्म पिता ब्रवीति 'thus said the father' इति स्मोपाध्यायः कपवति 'thus said the preceptor'. 
मनी पृष्टप्रतिवचने ॥ १० ॥ पदामि ॥ मनी, पृष्ट-प्रतिवरने, (भते, लट्॥ 
वृत्तिः । ननुशन उपपवे प्रभपूर्वक प्रतिवचने भूतेऽयें लमत्ययो भवति ।। 
120. The afix नद् is employed after a verb in denoting past action, when the word 79 is in connection with it, and an answer is given to a question. 
The anuvritti of the words 'anadyatana' and 'Paroksha' does not ex tend to this satra. This declares a rule with regard to past time in general. This debars लग (the Aorist tense). As भकार्षीः कटं देवदत्त -मनु करोमि भोः 'Deva. datta, did you make the mat? O, yes, I did make it'. भवोचस्तन किंचिद् देवदत्त,- नन मवीमि भोः 'Devadatta, did you speak there anything? O, yes, I did speak'. 
Why do we say 'in reply to an interrogation'? Observe parata मायकः 'certainly, Manavakadid it'. 
मन्बोर्विभाषा ॥ ११ ॥ पदानि ॥न-वोः, विभाषा, (भते, पृष्ट प्रति-वचने, लट्) । 
वृतिः ॥ मशब्ने नुशब्दे पोपपदे पृष्टप्रतिषचने विभाषा लप्रत्ययो भवति भूते ॥ 
121. The affix and comes optionally after a verb, in denoting past time, in reply to an interrogation, when the words न 'not' and नु 'what of that are in commec tion with it. 
___As, अकार्षीः कट वदस-न करोमि भोः or नाकार्षम् -मनु करोमि or भई न्वकाम् 'Devadatta, did you make the mat ?-No I did not;- what of that, I did'. 
पुरि लुक चास्मे ॥ १२ ॥ पदानि ॥ पुरि, लु, च, अस्मे, (भते, अनद्यतने, विभाषा, लट्)। 
वृत्तिः ॥ पुराशब्द उपपड़े स्मशब्दवर्मिते भूतानयतन यें विभाषा नुमत्ययो भवति लद् च ॥ 
122. Optionally the affixes ac and of come after a verb, in denoting past time not belonging to the current day, when the word go is used in the sentence, provided that the word F is not used, 
Bk. III. CH. II. § 123, 124.] 
THE AFFIX SANACH: 
459 
The anuvșitti of the word anadyatana which had come to a stop with III. 2. 120 manifests itself again in this satra by a process of jumping over the two intermediate aphorisms. This sort of anuvritti is technically called man duka-pluti 'the leap of a frog'i, e. skipping of several sätras and supplying a word from a previous sátra. 
This is an optional rule, so that when lat and lun are not used, the proper tenses, as the case may be, must be employed. As Tarihe go TTT: 'the pupils lived here formerly'. So also, Aorist, wer: GO 7: ; Imperfect, HTEPOTE giratut: ; Perfect, after TT EIT: 1 
Why do we say 'when thc word is not used'? Obscrve auf FgTT yfufer: 'Yudhishthira did perform a sacrifice .formerly'. Here rule 118 ante exerts its influence. 
वर्तमाने लट् ॥ १३ ॥ पदानि । वर्तमाने, लट् ॥ P: Al HiToutSafuan TATATERT PETTE Tara sa PAARETA Tait afar it 
123. The affix at comes after a verb when de uoting a present action. 
The word means that which is begun and which has not yet come to an end. The action denoted by a verb in the present tense is yet con tinuing and has not stopped. As rurat he is cooking'; gefa 'he is reading'. So also whatever is constant, regular, uniform, is represented by the Present In definite. As faria qfar: 'the mountains stand'; hafta: 'the rivers flow 
लटः अवशानचावप्रथमासमानाधिकरणे ॥ १४ ॥ पदानि लटः, T- U, HAYAT-Arafata 
Fler: 1167: UNIT fardandu) **T: HAWAIT KYOTTI rasual efa li 
a li heyat 
124. The affixes me and my are substitutes of hy when agreeing with what does not end with the first case-afflix. 
As quari da qu 'behold Devadatta who is cooking'; qua *7 'or qurta 1979 done by one who is cooking'. qer , 42+7 + M (III. 4. 113, III. 1. 68)=94+*+9 +UTT (VII. 2. 82)=97877 So also 9 +09+ = 99+#*#=9611 
Why do we say 'when agreeing with what does not end with the first case-affix ? Observe PTFT: qfa 'Devadatta cooks', 
Since the term for might have been supplied from the last aphorism, its double citation is for the sake of larger application of this rule ; that is to : say, this rule applies sometimes even when the word is in concord with a nominative case. As a prug: 'who is a Brahmaņa' - MTEC AINU: ; so also 
460 
SATRI AND SANACH. 
[BK. III. CI. II. $ 125, 126. 
food Ru: and forgarit Hu: ; IKT and gafa ; and inftar: and stati 
Vart.-These affixes are employed after a verb, when the particle Ang is in composition, and censure or curse is implied. As a term and AT TUTT: 'may he not cook'; AT 797 T: TEIT: 
U itsfa starfa 'cursed be he (lit. may he not live) who though smitten by the pain of the contempt of others, still lives'. Some commentators read the anuvšitti of the word 'option' from sätra 121 into this. That option, however, is a limited option (vyavasthita-vibhd shd) and not of universal application. Whenever a particular form is found as differing from the general form, there it should be understood that the option has been allowed, and not everywhere. 
gratu ito 74 Il tea Il tritud,, (ETC., TOUT Fat) a 
पत्तिः॥ सम्बोधने व विषये लडः शरशानची प्रत्ययो भवतः ।। 
125. The affixes ya and are are the substitutes of woven when agreeing with what ends with a first case-aflix, provided that it is in the vocative case. 
This aphorism declares when these participles may be employed even in the first case; asp or 946T 'O thou who art cooking'. 
ruant: SUTAT: 1197€ 1l agtfall woo-tati, forati, (WC, T-mat) a 
F: IT pri Triharge: 96T FR2: TCUT : U atria 11 G utma:(urat: TU BYER 11 वार्तिकम् ।। तस्वाण्याने च ।। 
126. The affixes Tą and ny are the substi tutes of me and come after a verb, in expressing an at. tendent circumstance or characteristic, and the cause 
of an action. 
The word au means that by which a thing is recognised or known i. e, an attribute ;&# means producer or cause. Both these words are attributes of the word fiat. Or lakshana:-as, par: : 'the Yavanas take their meals lying down'. fastsaTrafa Tuar: 1 Of hetu ;-as fi riu pead by (reason of) seeing Hari, he gets absolution'; w ant refer 'for the sake of study he dwells here': 
.. Why do we say 'when denoting a characteristic or a cause'? Observe quoniam the cooks'; qafa 'he reads'. 
Why do we say 'of the action'? Not so when the participle is the characteristic or cause of a substance or a quality. As a: inget angrer: 'that which is shaking is the Aswattha'; quae 'whatever floats is light'; qindrata not that which sinks down is heavy'. 
BK. III. CH. II. $ 127, 128.] · THE AFFIX SANAN. 
461 
Vart. This participle also defines the agent of an action as, un MIETT : 'he is Devadatta who sits studying'. 
Vart. This participle is also used to state a general truth: as part वर्ष 'the Darva grass grows in a recumbent position'; भासीनं वर्धते विसं 'a lotus stalk grows in an upright position. The compound UCENT: of the sätra contradicts the rule by which a word of fewer syllables stands first (II. 2, 14). This shows that the rule II. 2. 14. is not universal. 
1 979 lloquft u A, T, (99-06 ) gfer: 11 * tam arazit van 
127. These two re and any are called ar. 
These participial affixes get collectively this name; and as such they are not limited by the conditions enumerated above; so that they replace not only the affixes of the Present tense but sometimes of Future also (III. 3. 14.), as well as other tcnscs. Thus uea front, riu:, frogatu: 1 
The word to occurs in sátra II. 2. II. &c. 
Suht: arall Pipe au ucrfa 75-9:, that I . af#: 11 T y t: 19 Huat fat H 
a nni fy: Taf To II 
128. The affix maricomes after the verbs q 'to purify' and 'to sacrifice'. 
As TATT: 'purifier (fire or air)*; : sacrificer. 
It might be asked 'is the art with others that follow, an affix suo generis, or is it merely a substitute of 77, as Tx and Try? Why we ask this question is this. If they are affixes and not substitutes of 07, then they should govern genitive case by rule II. 3. 65. instead of nominative or the accusative. If, on the other hand, they are substitutes of 97, then by rule II. 3. 69. they should not govern the genitive case. But evidently they are not the substitutes of at, as they are not so taught. How is it then that we have such forms as 
HTTART: 'drinking Soma'; and TERTAIT:? These forms can be explained on other grounds than supposing that TMT &c. must be the substitutes of a. The term av in sätra II 3. 69. is not the affix taught in this Chapter satra 135; but it is a pratyahan including several aslixes. It is a pratyahara formed by taking the of va in sätra 124; and T of u in 135; and thus it means all the affixes from trg in 134 down to 27. in 135. Thus though 777, PTTU &c. are not substitutes of 4, still the rule II. 3.69. applies to them, as they are in cluded in the term वृन्. . 
Vart. The rule II. 3. 69. applies only optionally when the verb fey takes the affix pe. As tea or are from 'hating the thief. 
462 
THE AFFIX SATRI. 
[BK. III. CH. II. § 129-132. 
ताछोल्पवयोवचनशक्तिषु चानम् ॥ १२ ॥ पदानि ॥ताच्छीलय वयः-वचन-शक्तिषु, चानम् ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ साच्छीन्यादिषु धातोशानमत्ययो भवति ।। 
. 129. The affix चानम् comes after a verb in ex. pressing 'habit', 'standard of age' and 'ability, 
The word metry means 'habit' or 'disposition'; 79: means the con dition of body such as 'infancy', 'youth' &c; This means 'capacity to do a thing'. As wint om: 'habituated to enjoy'; vi fru: 'wearing an armour (of the age at which armour may be worn)'; To THIT: 'able to destroy his foe'. So also, कतीह मुण्डयमानाः, भूपवमानाः, कवचं पर्यस्थमानाः, शिख वहमानाः and पवमानाः। 
बधार्योः शत्रतिषि ॥१३०॥ पदानि ॥ इन-धार्योः, शव, अदिति॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ इहो धारेष धाल्योः शवप्रत्ययो भवति भकृषिणि कर्तरि ।। 
130. The affix re comes after the verbs re 'to go' and unft 'to hold' in denoting that the agent does the action without trouble. 
The word opus means that which is accomplished by the agent with case and facility. As भधीयन् पारायणम् the facile reading of the Purana'; धारवन.प. faqen easily mastering the Upanishad'. The root oft is causative of y and means here 'to master'. 
Why do we say when facility is indicated'? Otherwise unto the 'reads with difficulty'; कृच्छण धारयति 'he remembers with difficulty'. 
द्विषोऽमित्रे ॥१३॥ पदानि ॥ द्विषः, अमित्रे, (शव)॥ पत्तिः । भमिले कर्तरि द्विर्धातोः पादपाययो भवति ।। 
131. The affix शE comes after the verb दिए when the agent indicated means an enemy. 
The word wfawr means 'enemy'. As fara, 'enemy', favent 'two enemies, favorit: 'enemies'. 
Why do we say 'when denoting an enemy'? Observe aft wrap a fora 'the wife hates her husband'. 
सुनो यजसंयोगे ॥ १३२ ॥ पदानि ॥ सुगः, यत्र-संयोगे, (चव)। वृत्तिः ।। वससंयुक्तऽभिपणे वर्तमानाल्सुनोतर्धातोः शवप्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
132. The affix xx comes after the verb g 'to press out juice' when the sense is that of association with sacrifice. 
BK. III. CH. II. $ 133, 134] . 
THE AFFIX SATRI. 
463 
The word dit is an instrumental compound, meaning association or connection (संयोग) with sacrifice. As सु+नु+शE (III. I.76, III.4.113) सुनु+ भत् (1.2.4.)=सन्धत् (VI. I.m), Ist. sing. सुन्वन, Ist. pl. सुन्वन्तः 'the sacrificers'; as in i gram: 'all are interested in, or partake of, or share in the sacrifice'. 
The word संयोग indicates that the principal sacrificer. it. the यजमान is meant and not every person who is associated in the performance of a sacrifice in a subordinate capacity ; such as ##T: 'the sacrificing priests'. 
When connection with sacrifice is not meant we have the arra 'he distils liquor'. 
अहः प्रशंसायाम् ॥ १३३ ॥ पदानि ॥ अहः, प्रशंसायाम, (शव)। वृत्तिः।। भहस तो प्रशंसायां शवमस्ययो भवति ॥ 
___ 133. The afnx शट comes after the verb भई in expressing praise. 
As offee #Tif Tur, 'thou art worthy of this knowledge here'; spf forg भवान्ममाम् 'thou art worthy of honor in this place'. 
Why do we say 'when meaning to praise' ? Witness nefat eta 944 'the thief deserves death'. 
__ आ जस्तच्छीलतदुर्मतत्साधुकारिषु ॥ १३४ ॥ पदानि ॥आ,के, तच्छील-तद्धर्म-तत्साधुकारिषु ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ भाएतस्मात् किसंशब्दाद्यानित अर्द्धमनुक्रमिष्यामस्तच्छोलादिषु कर्टषु से वेषितव्याः॥ 
134. From this sutra as far as किम् in sutra 177 inclusive, the affixes that we shall treat of, are to be un. derstood in the sense of agents having such a habit, or na ture, or having skill in such and such action. . 
The force of or in this sätra is limit inclusive, and includes fart also. The term fotot means "the natural inclination towards an action not prompted by a contemplation of its fruit or result'. The term सद्धर्म means 'who enters upon an action not from habit but thinking that it is his duty'. The term kraft means 'who does the action expressed by the verb in an excellent way'. Illustrations of these will be given under the subsequent 
aphorisms. 
खम् ॥ १३४॥ पदानि ॥ तन, (तच्छील-तद्धर्म-तत्साधुकारिषु)। वृत्तिः ॥ सर्वधातुभ्यस्टन्प्रत्ययो भवति तच्छीलादिषु कर्टषु ॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ सन्विधावृरिवा चानुपसर्गस्य । वार्सिकम् ।। नयतेः षुक्च ॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ विषेषतायामकारबोपधाया भनिद्रपञ्च ।। पार्शिकम् ॥ देव नियुक्त। पार्निकम् ॥ धनसि बच्च॥ 
464 
THE AFFIX ISHNUCH. (BK. III. CH. II. § 135, 136. 
135. The afix comes after all verbs in the sense of 'agents having such a habit &c'. 
The Toraq is indicatory, and regulates the accent (VI. 1. 197). As +7= , ist sing. af. This affix denotes habit in the following; as, a 
'who is accustomed to make mats. Nature:-as, yo fanit: 48147 tafa THAT 'the family of Sravishtayana shave the heads of their widows' ; MUTAT Farte P TT y la vie pad 'the Ahvarakas steal away food as soon as Sraddha is accomplished'; सारस्तोल्पनाचना भवन्ति पुनेमा 'the Taulvalayanas become elated on the birth of a son'. Skill :-as, 
skilful maker of mats'. TAISSEEH 'skilful hunter'. 
Vart :-The simple verbs, without upasargas, take the affix aq, when the words so formed are names of sacrificial priests. Asta , Ist. sing. grar 'the Hotri priest'; so also olc 'the Potri priest'. 
Why do we say 'when not taking the upasargas'? Observe TEC 'the Udgatri priest'; graced 'the Pratihartri priest'. Here the affix is Ty. 
Though the form is the same, there is difference however in the accent ; i.e. at places udatta accent on the first syllable (VI. I, 197), while places it on the last (VI. 1. 163) 
Vart :--The augment ya is added when oft takes the affix Aias oft +*+ =ite, ist. sing. aer 'the Neshfri priest'. 
Vart :- When signifying diety, the verb farq takes ; the letter w is the substitute for the r of the root; and the affix does not take the inter mediate r augment; as, for m ę, ist. sing. Fer 'Tvashtri'. 
. Vart:The root ay takes 09, when the word to be formed means an officer; as Fra'an attendant, a door-keeper'. 
Vart :- In the Veda, the root fit takes To, as pre. The form is the same as the last, but there is difference of accent. 
अलंकग्निराकमजनोत्पचोत्पतोन्मदरुण्यपत्रपतुवधुसहचरः Tout pag ul uçrra ut sina-face-077-8014-saya-907 
fe-047-ng- -:, ugy, (avetenfey, may) 1 
वृत्तिः ॥ भनकमादिभ्यो धातुभ्यस्तच्छीनारिषु कर्वषुहष्णुप्रत्ययो भवति ।। पार्मिकम् ।। भनंकृमोमण्डनार्थायुषः पूर्वविप्रतिषेधेनेषज्वक्तव्यः ।। 
136. The affix per comes after the following verbs in the sense of the 'agents haviug such a habit &c'; viz.—Hain 'to adorn', farcra 'to expel', in 'to be born', 7944 "to be ripe', ma 'to fly!, na 'to be mad', 54'to shine', 1979 'to be ashamed', 'to he', me to grow', 'to bear' and 
FE'to walk'. 
same a 
BK. III. CH. II. § 137-139.) 
THE AFFIX KSNU. 
465 
bus 
As safrag: 'decorating, Freira: 'repudiating', qua: 'procrea tive', sefag: fapt to ripen', fars: 'flying, fy: 'mad', ofers: 'bright', **forg: 'bashful, : 'revolving', SUU: 'growing', orect: "patient', 
freu: 'moveable'. 
Vart:-The affix pay debares by anticipation the affix or III. 2. 151, after the root is, though it has the sense of decorating'. 
aren 8391 Erfarne, fa, (autumiey, ) ক্ষিকা: স্বীকান্তি খিষ্ট মূৰি ৰূল মনুস্ময়ী মলি ?? 
137. The affix ay in the sense of 'the agent having such a habit &c', comes in the Ohhandas after a verb that ends in the causative fu, 
The Causatives take this affix in the Vedic literature. As a ficu : 'who hold the stones' ; : fery: 1 
भुवश्च ॥ १३८ ॥ पदानि ॥ भुवः, च, (छंदसि, तश्छौलादिषु, 
SA 
সৃষি: মীৱি যি বৰঞ্জীৰাপ্তি স্থমন্ত্রী মরি 
138. The affix t in the sense of the agent having such a habit &c', comes in the Ohhandas, after the verb X 'to be also. 
Thus wreau: 'becoming', 
The yoga-vibhaga or the division of this satra from the last, with which it could well have been read, is for the sake of the subsequent sätras. 
The word 'also' indicates the existence of other verbs not included in the above two sotras ; as, 
w at meer 
T EL # Pages ut uretfat u 1847-for-*:, , , (Austurgo) 
fa: tar fent gran WATT farley #:47ae **f 11 af EFTER 
139. The afilx comes after the following verbs in the sense of the agent having such a habit &c." vizer to be weary', fi 'to conquer and cur 'to stand', as well as after x 'to bo'. 
As, Fern: 'languid'; ficut: 'victorious'; Rre: disposed to stand firm, immoveable"; yor: 'being'. 
The anuvșitti of the word Chhandasi does not extend to this sátra. The indicatory letter of this affix is really or and not #, and therefore, there is 
1 
. 
466 
THE AFFIX GHINUN. 
(BK. III. CH. II. $ 140, 141. 
no substitution of long for the ot of , which would otherwise have taken place, had the affix been fait (VI. 4. 66). 
In the sotra l. 1. 5. (afefa a) the letter o is also included; for com ing before hi, is changed by the rules of sandhi into and is not therefore visible. This affix therefore does not cause guna. 
So also in satra VII. 2. II (: fanfar), the augment F does not come after the verb , or a monosyllabic verb ending in the pratyahara , when an affix having an indicatory of follows. Here also an includes T; and there fore in your we have no intermediate augment ri 
Vart. In the Chhandas this affix comes after the verb dy'to bite ; as TUT: 974: 'the beasts that bite'. 
forfarafa: : 01980llutfall afe-tha-fa-farai, , (austerica) 
तिः ॥असालियो धातुभ्यस्सन्छीलादिपु कामत्ययो भवति ।। 
140. The affix comes after the verbs TE 'to tremble', Ty 'to be greedy', yo'to be bold' and for 'to throw' in the sense of 'the agent having such a habit &c'. 
As, reg: 'trembling'; TT 'greedy'; yag: bold; and farm: 'throwing'. 
TRETOT fogli pyp u urfa u r-fa-gri, favo, (matata) 
वृत्तिः ॥ शमादिभ्यो धातुभ्योटा-वस्तच्छीलारिषु घिनुप्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
: 141. The affix fra comes after the eight verbs beginning with yq 'to be calm', in the sense of the agent having such a habit &c'. 
The word ffa in the aphorism indicates beginning. These eight verbs begin with T4 and end with in the list of verbs. Of the affix fay the real affix is ri, the other letters are servile; the x is for the sake of substituting guttural for the final palatals ; x is for the sake of euphony, or for the sake of rule VI. 3. 45; and the letter or causes vriddhi (VII. 2. 116): which in the case of roots ending in # is prohibited by the rule VII. 3. 34, the only verb taking vriddhi' being ! 
As ufatt ist. sing. Tot 'calm'; likewise it 'desiring'; put 'taming'; of 'laborious'; poft'whirling', 'moving round'; it'fatiguing'; wat 'forbearing'; parft 'mad' and Hift 'mad'. Though by rule 136, the verb takes the affix rary, it also takes the affix fogy by the rule of ITSEKT (III. 1 94). 
All these verbs belong to the Divadi class. After other verbs than these eight, we have other affixes; as minat BK. III. CI. II. 4 142, 143.]. THE AFFIX GHINUN. 
467 
संपचानुरुपायमापसपरिससंसनपरिदेविसंज्वरपरिशिपपरिरट परिवदपरिदहपरिमुहदुषद्विषद्हदुहयुजाक्रीहविविधत्यजरजभजातिचरापचरा मुषाम्याहनश्च ॥ १४२ ॥ पदानि ॥ संपच-अनुरुध-आल्यम-आयस-परिस संसज-परिदेवि-संज्वर-परिक्षिप-परिरट-परिवद-परिदह-परिमुह-दुष-द्विष-दूह दुह-युज-आक्रोह - विविध-त्यज-रज-मज-अतिचर-अपचर-आमुष-अभ्याइनः, 
च, (तच्छीलादिषु, पिनुण)। . वृत्तिः ॥ सम्पचादिभ्यो धातुभ्यो घिनुप्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
142. The affix fang comes after the following verbs, in the sense of the agent having such a habit &c'. viz :- सम्पच्, भनुरुध्, भायम्, भायम्, परिस, संघन्, परिवेव, संजर, परिशिप, परिरद्, परिवर, परिवह, परिमुहर हुए, विष्, दुइ ए वन, भाक्री, विवित्र, स्य, र, भग, भतिच, भपचर, भामुष and भाभ्याइन . 
The root city is to be taken as belonging to the Rudhadi class, and not as belonging to Adadi, because the vikaraṇa is elided in the latter. The root afrafo belongs to Bhvadi class, the simple verb being a 'to sport. The verb fery to throw is common both to Tudadi and Divådi, and both are taken here. युन् 'to concentrate' is Divadi, and युभ to join' is Rudhadi 3 both are meant here. The verb or 'to color has lost its nasal in this sätra, irregularly. 
Thus संपच्+पिनुए - संपर्कमि (VII. 2.52)- सम्पकिन Ist. sing. सम्पी mix ture'; siimilarly, भनुरोधी 'compliant'; भायामी 'one who restrains'; भायासी 'one who exerts'; परिसारी that which flows round'; संसर्गी 'united'; परिदेवी 'lament ing'; संवारी 'greatly heating'; परिक्षेपी 'moving about'; परिराठी 'crying aloud'; परिवादी 'reviling'; परिवाही 'burning'; परिमोही 'beguiling'; दोषी 'guilty'; हेपी 'hat ing'; द्रोही 'quarrelling'; दोही 'milking'; योगी 'uniting or concentrating'; भाक्रीसी 'playing'; f ant 'discriminating'; varft 'renouncing'; croft 'yearning after'; roft 'sharing'; भतिचारी 'transgressing'; अपचारी 'offending'; भामोपी 'a thief'; भायापाती 'attacking'. (VII. 3. 52 and 54). 
The indicatory y of the affix shows that the final palatal is changed into a corresponding guttural before this affix. 
वो कषलसकत्यस्तम्भः ॥ १४३ ॥ पदानि ॥ वैी, कष-लस-कत्थ सम्मः (पिनु न, तच्छीलादिषु) ॥ 
पतिः ।। कपलस करय सम्म एतेभ्यो धातुभ्यो विशम्पपपई पिनुणप्रत्ययो भवति । 
143. The affix fang comes after the verbs कम् 'to injure', नस् 'to embrace and sport', कल्य 'to praise' and 
* 'to believe', wheu these are in composition with the preposition for 
468 
THE AFFIX VUN. 
BK. III. CI. II. S 144-146. 
As frardt 'injuring; fonte 'sportivc, a sensualist'; freedt 'vaunting'; and fraft 'confiding'. 
अपेच लषः ॥ १४४ ॥ पदानि ॥ अपे, च, लषः, (घिनए) ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ जप कान्सो, भस्मादातोरपउपपदे चकारामौ च घिनुएप्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
144. The affix forgy comes after the verb o'to wish' when compounded with the preposition Hand for 
As भपलाषी thirsty'; विलापी. The term दि is to be read into this sutra by the force of the word 'and'. 
मेलपसद्मथवदवसः॥ १४५॥ पदानि ॥ प्रे, लप-स-दु-मय-वद वसः, (घिनुण)॥ 
पनिः॥ उपपदे नपादिभ्यो घिनुपमस्ययो भवति ।। 
145. The affix furry comes after the verbs may चाइमय, व and क्स when compounded with the preposition कि. 
As yordt 'prattling'; TITI 'extending around'; saraft 'running away, fugitive'; ममाथी 'tormenting'; प्रवादी 'reporting', प्रवासी 'a traveller'. 
The root here is the Bhvadi qe meaning to dwell' and is not Adadi meaning to cover', because in the latter the vikarana is elided. 
निन्दहिंसक्तिशखादविनाशपरिक्षिपपरिरटपरिवादिव्याभाषासूयो दुन् ॥ १४६ ॥पदानि ॥ निन्द-हिंस-किश-खाद-विनाश-परिधिप-परिरट-परि वादि-व्याभाष-असूयः, बु, (तच्छीलादिषु)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ निन्दादिभ्यो धातुभ्यस्तच्चीलादिषु कदंषु बुभमत्ययो भवति । 
146. The affix v is added to the following verbs in the sense of 'the agent having such a habit &c':-- निन्, हिन्स्, विश, खार, विनाग, परिक्षिप्, परिरद्, परिवाहि, व्यभाप् and भसूव । 
In this sátra the whole phrase ending with srey has taken the termi nation of the first case; which, however, has the force of the ablative here. 
___ As निन्द + - निन्दकः (VII. I. I) 'blaming'; so also हिंसकः injuring'; शक: tormenting or troublesome'; खादक: 'eating'; विनाशकः 'destroying': परिम पक: 'surrounding'; परिराटकः 'who cries aloud'; परिवादक: a plaintiff'; प्वाभाषक: 'detracting'; and भसूयक: 'detracting'. 
The same forms as the above would have been obtained by adding the affix ou taught in III. 1, 133, as by adding niits separate enunciation indicates the existence of this paribhasha : 
"The rule of III. 1.94 by which an apavdda-affix which is not uni form with an utsarga-affix should supersede the latter only optionally, has no concern with apavdda-affixes added in the sense of 'having such a habit' it with the affixes taught in III. 2. 134-177". Therefore the affixes इन् 
&c, are not added in the sense of having such a habit &c. . 
BK. III. CH. II. 147-149] 
THE AFFIX YUCH. 
469 
देविकुशोशोपसगै ॥ १४७ ॥ पदानि ॥ देवि-कुशोः, च, उपसर्ग, 
पत्तिः॥ देवयते: काशीपसगें उपपम्प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
147. The affix 17 comes after the verbs afor 'to lament' and Qग 'to cry', when an upasarga is in compo. sition with them. 
As भादेवकः 'one who sports or laments'; भाक्रीशकः 'vociferous, a revi ler'; परिविकः 'one who laments'; परिकोशक: a reviler'. 
Why do we say 'when in composition with an upasarga'? Observe jefarm and 678t formed by an (III. 2. 135). 
चलनशब्दार्थादकर्मकाद् युच ॥१४८ ॥ पदानि ॥ चलन-शब्दार्यात, अकर्मकाद, युच, (तच्छीलादिषु)॥ 
वृत्तिः ।। चलनान्यः शब्दाभ्यश्चाकर्मकेभ्यो धातुभ्यस्तछीलादिषु कर्तृषु युष्प्रत्ययो भवति। 
148. The affix y comes, in the sense of the agent having such a habit &c'. after intransitive verbs denoting 'motion' or 'sound'. 
As, चन्+ - चलनः 'moving' (VII. I. 1); चोपनः 'creeping'; शमनः 'soun. ding'; tu: 'roaring'. 
Why do we say 'intransitive'? Observe afar fun. 
अनुदात्ततश्च हलादेः ॥ १४ ॥ पदानि ॥ अनुदात्ततः, च, हला दे, (युष, अकर्मकात्)॥ 
पतिः॥ भनुवासेयो धासुः हनादिरकर्मकस्ततश्च युच प्रत्ययो भवति । 
149. The afflix comes in the same sense after such intransitive verbs as are Atmanepadi and begin with a consouaut aud are Anudåttet i. e. have a gravely accented vowel as indicatory. 
As वर्तन: 'being'; वर्द्धनः 'growing'. Why do we say Anudattet'? Observe भविता. 
Why do we say 'beginning with a consonant'? Observe gruar, which though Atmanepadi, takes बन, 
Why have we used the term wife 'beginning' in the satra? Observe जगप्सनः 'censuring'; भीमांसनः 'an investigator. For without the word भाषित the rule would have stood thus :---अनुवात्तेतच हल: which by I. I. 72. would mean 'the asfix y comes after the verbs which end with a consonant'; so that even after y we shall have t; and there would be no y after one which ends with a vowel. 
This rule will not apply if the root is transitive; as सिता पस्म। . . 
THE AFFIX YUCIL. 
[BK. III. CH. II. 
150-152. 
जुषकम्यदन्द्रग्यसधिज्वलशुचलषपतपदः ॥ १५० ॥ पदानि ॥ y-venta-78*4-3-f-van-yu -ya-04:,(4, poatenfag) 
पत्तिः ।। जु प्रभृतिभ्यो धातुभ्यो युच् प्रत्ययो भवति सछीलादिषु कर्वपु 
150. The affix n comes after the following verbs in the sense of 'the agent having such a habit &c', viz:-, ma, 1974, E, TY, 77, 74,679, qa and T. 
The verb is not to be found in the Dhatupatha, and is taught in the aphorisms and is hence called a sau tra dhåtu. It means 'to go', 'to be quick'. As y+00= +HT (VII. 1. 1. and VII. 3. 84)= **: (VI. I. 78, II. 3.46) a courser, a swift horse'. imza+ = +H*(II. 4. 74)= 18T: 'moving about'; so also danu: 'wandering'; aru: 'flowing'; T: 'greedy'; 77677: burn ing'; T : 'grieving'; 9799: 'desiring'; qat: 'falling'; 969: 'moving'. 
The enumeration of the word op in the above, indicates that this sa tra applies to the transitive verbs; otherwise the sätra III. 2. 148 would have been sufficient, as is a on verb. Others say that the inclusion of qe in this aphorism indicates the existence of the paribhashd already given under satra III. 2. 146 1. 6. the rule of III. 1. 94 has no concern with affixes added in the sense of having such a habit &c. The asfix for which by III. 2. 136 is added to i , supersedes therefore not merely the addition of Et to me (III. 2. 135), but also the addition of a to the same. Ifa tachchhilika apa vdda were to supersede only an atáchchhilika utsarga, it would have been 
superfluous for Panini to teach in this sátra the addition of to qç, because in that case the addition of to qe by III. 2. 154 would not have debarred the addition of g to qe by III. 2. 149. The repetition is for the sake of jAdpana, therefore, and it indicates the existence of the above-mentioned maxim. The jfdpaka is not, however, of universal application; for sometimes both affixes are applied concurrently; as, TT CC faoaga: 1 
marine u pupuuerfauna-8- :, (TV) वृत्तिः ॥ध कोपे, मण्ड भूषायाम, इत्येतस्य यश्च धातु-वो युच् प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
151. And after the verbs having the sense of y "to be angry' and more to adorn', the afix ry is employed. 
As w : 'wrathful'; (40: irascible'; 10 : 'adorning'; gur:'ornament', But not so after the verb ein to which sätra III. 2. 136 applies. 
7: # pull utfall, di, () u वृत्तिः । यकारान्तादातोयं च पाययो नमति ॥ 
152. The affix ay is not employed after those verbs which end in the letter 7. 
This debars III, 2, 149. As aparat 'making creaking sound'; prima Strembling. In these cases the affixat is employed (III. 2. 135). 
BK. III. CH. II. F 133-155] 
THE AFFIX SHAKAN. 
470 
सूददीपदीक्षच ॥ १५३ ॥ पदानि ॥ सूद-दीप-दीक्षः, च, (युच, न)। वृत्तिः ॥ सूबतीपदीका इत्येतेभ्यश्च युचप्रत्ययो न भवति ॥ 
153. The alfix hy does not come after the verbs सूद 'to strike', दीप् 'to shine' and बीम् 'to initiate'. 
These three verbs are anudattat, and by sůtra III. 2. 149, would have taken बुच्. The present sotra prohibits that. Therefore they take al. As, सवित Ist. sing सता 'one who strikes'; दीपिद 'one who shines'; दीक्षित 'one who initiates'. 
Now, it might be objected "We find that sätra III. 2. 167 specifically enjoins the asfix rafter 79; this apavada rulc will thereforc, superscde the general rule ; where is then the necessity of the present rule? If you say that the affix 7 is also obtained by the rule of non-uniformity (III. 1. 94), we re ply that the Paribhasha given under sätra 146 and 150 will prevent that." This objection is answered by saying that the above-mentioned Paribhasha is not of universal application; there are exceptions to it, as कना बुवति: and कमना यतिः 'a young girl' which are both valid forms derived by adding r and युच to the verb कम, So also कम्मा and कमना शाखा 'a shaking branch'. 
If we prohibit y after the root of, how do we get the forms ## and Rपसदन? This objection may be answered in three ways: (1) the present is an anitya ruic, not of universal application, which can be inferred from finding this satra separated from the last (yogavibhaga), when it was easier to inakc them onc, (2) the worls मधुसूदन &c bclong to the मन्दादि class (III. I. 134) taking the affix fy or (3) they are forined by III. 3. 113 by the affix far. 
. लषपतपदस्थाभवृषहनकमगमशृभ्य तक ॥ १५४ ॥ पदानि॥ लष. पत-पद-स्था-भ-वृष-हन-कम-गम-शृभ्यः, उकज, (तच्छौलादिष)॥ 
पतिः ॥ जपादिभ्यो धातुभ्यस्तच्छीलादिषु कदंषु उकास्ययो भवति ॥ 
154. The affix उकम् comes after the following verbs, in the sense of the agent having such a habit &c':-लए, पत्, पद्, स्था, भू. वृष्, हन्, कम्, गम् and ।। 
As अपना पलसंगतं, प्रपातुका गर्भा भवन्ति, उपपादुकंसावं, उपस्थायुका एनं पशवी भवन्ति, प्रभावुकमनं भवति, प्रवपकाः पर्जन्याः, भाषातकं कापानिकस्य शलम्, कामुक एन लियो भवन्ति, भागामकं वाराणसी रत भाहः, किंशाक सीक्षणमाः । The e is added after स्या in उपस्थाबुक by VII. 3.33, The हन् is changed into पात् by VII. 3.32 and 54. 
जल्पभिक्षकहलुण्टबडः पाकन् ॥ १५५ ॥ पदानि ॥ जरुप-भिक्ष कुह-लुण्ट-वङः, षाकन, (तच्छीलादिषु) ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ नम्पादिन्यो धातुभ्यस्तछीलाविषु कर्टषु पाकन्प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
166. The affix पाकन comcs, in the sense of the 'agent having such a habit &c', after the following verbs:--मन्प, भिम, कु. अष्ठ and । 
472 
THE AFFIX ALUCH. 
[BK. III. CH. II. S 156-158. 
The gis indicatory showing that the femininc of the words so formed take the affix iq i. c. long (IV. 1. 41). As 9747: 'talkative'; FF: 'a beg gar'; कुहाकः 'who or what cuts'; गुण्टाकः a thief or robber'; बराक: low, mis. erable'. In the feminine stettait &c.. 
प्रजोरिनिः ॥ १५६ ॥ पदानि ॥ प्रजोः, इनिः, (तच्छीलादिषु)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ प्रपूर्वाजवतेस्तच्छीलादिषु कर्टषु इनिःप्रत्ययो भवति । 
156. The affix fit comes in the sense of the agent having such a habit etc'. after the verb प्रजु 'to has ten forward'. 
___As प्रजविन्, Ist. sing. प्रभवी 'an express, courier', Ist. dual प्रभाविनी &c. 
जिदूतिवित्रीयवमाव्यथाभ्यमपरिभप्रसूभ्यश्च ॥ १५७ ॥ पदानि । 'जि-दू-शि-विधि-इण-वम-अव्यय-अभ्यम-परिभ-प्रसूभ्यः, च,(इनिः, तच्छी०)। 
वृत्तिः ॥ भिमभूति यो धातुभ्य इनिःप्रत्ययो भवति तच्छीलादिषु कर्दप ।। 
157. The affix for comes, in the sense of 'the agent having such a habit &c', after the verbs fs 'to con. quer', < 'to respect', fe 'to waste, to dwell, to go', farfar 'to shelter', 'to go', tha 'to vomit', spiere 'not to give pain', भभ्यम 'to injure', परिभू 'to humiliate' and असू 'to beget'. 
As :नथिन् Ist. sing. नयी 'cohquering': similarly, दरी 'respecting'; सयी 'wasting'; farvet 'wasting'; Heereft 'exceeding'; poft 'vomiting'; youtuft 'frce from pain'; Borgaft 'not injuring'; afert 'humiliating' and qaft 'procreating'. 
पहिगहिपतिदयिनिद्रातदाबहाभ्य आलुच ॥ १५८॥ पदानि । स्पहि-गहि-पति-दयि-निद्रा-तन्द्रा-श्रद्धाभ्यः, आलुच, (तचछीलादिषु)॥ 
पृत्तिः ॥ स्पहिगृहिपतिवयिनिहातमाभदा एतेभ्यस्तच्छीलारिपुकत भानुप्रत्ययो भवति ।। वार्तिकम् ।। भानुचि शीहो महणं कर्त्तव्यम् ।। 
158. The affix भालच comes in the sense of the agent having such a habit &c', after the following words: सह 'to desire', गृह 'to seize', पत 'to go', स्व to give, to go, to protect', निद्रा 'to sleep', सम्दा 'to be tired' and श्रद्धा 'to venerate'. 
The word faar is formed by adding the preposition for to the verb 'to go crookedly'; so also at is formed by adding a to n, and then irregularly changing the into a The term ya is formed by adding to the verb उधाम् 'to hold'. The first three verbs belong to Churadi class and take पिच. 
As, स्पहयानुः 'disposed to be desirous of'; गहयानुः 'disposed to catch hold of or seize'; पतयानु: tending or prone to fall'; दयालुः 'compassionate'; निद्रानुः 'dis. posed to sleep'; ATC: 'slothful'; vgl9: 'full of faith'. See VI. 4. 55 for adding m o 
BK. III. CH. II. 
159-162.] 
THE AFFIX KURACH. 
473 
Vart:-The affix भानुच् comes also after the root शीद to lie down'; as शयानुः 'disposed to lie down'. 
दाधेट्रिशदसदोरुः ॥१५॥ पदानि ॥दा-धेट-सि-पद-सदः, रूः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ वा धेट् सि शर सर इत्येतेभ्यो प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
159. The affix comes after the verbs 'to give', धेट् 'to suck', सि 'to bind', शव 'to fall' and सब 'to sit'. 
As, Tra munificent man'; धारुर्वस्सी मातरम् 'a sucking child of the mother'. The genitive case is here prohibited by II. 3. 69, the r being ta as equivalent to J. As : 'binding'; T: 'falling'; and #: 'resting'. 
सघस्यदः कारच ॥१६॥ पदानि ॥ स-पसि-अदः, कारच,(तची०)। पतिः ॥छ पसि भर इत्येते यो धातुभ्यः सच्छीलादिषु कर्ट पुकार प्रत्ययो भवति । 
160. The affix oमरच् in the sense of the agent having such a habit &c', comes after the verbs & 'to flow', घसि 'to eat' and भर 'to.eat'. 
As धमरः 'going, a kind of deer'; घस्मरः 'gluttonous'; अमरः 'voracious'.' 
भञ्जभासमिदो पुरच ॥ १६१ ॥ पदानि ॥ भञ्ज-मास-मिदः, पुरच, (तच्छीलादिषु) ॥ 
वृत्तिः । भन्न भास मिद इत्येतेभ्यो पुरमत्ययो भवति तच्छीलादिषु कर्वषु ॥ 
161. The afix धुरन् comes in the sense of the agent having such a habit &c.', after the verbs मज 'to break', ATV 'to shine', and for 'to be fat'. 
As भं +धुर भंग+सर (VII. 3. 52)- भंगुरः 'brittle'; the palatal being changed into guttural, because of the indicatory प. So also मेरः पशः 'a fat beast'; prgi sulfa: 'splendid light': 
After the verb this affix gives a reflexive signification that which naturally breaks of itself. 
विदिभिदिछिदेः कुरच् ॥ ९६२ ॥ पदानि ॥ विदि-भिदि-विदे, कुरच, (तच्छीलादिषु) ॥ 
वृत्तिः। विक्षादि-यो धासुम्यस्तच्छोलारिषु कर्वम् कुरप्रत्ययो भवति ॥ . . पार्मिकम् ।। व्यधेः सम्प्रसारणं कुरच्च रक्तम्बः ।। 
162. The affixury comes, in the seuse of 'the agent having such a habit &c', after the verbs विद् 'to know', भिस् 'to divide' and छिन् 'to pierce'. 
As fact: 0.0**: 'a knowing Pandit'; fargt flot 'a splitting or fragile wood'; छिडरा रउनु : 'a cutting or breaking rope'. The affix is employed in a rcilexivc scnsc after the verbs भिe and छिर. 
474 
THE AFFIX UKA. 
[BK. II. CH. II. 
163.166. 
Vart :-The affix कुरष comes after the verb ज्यy to kill'; and there is vocalisation of the semivowel; as faut: 1 
इन जिसर्तिभ्यः करप् ॥ १६३॥ पदानि ॥ इ-नश्-जि सर्तिभ्यः, करप, (तच्छौलादिषु)॥ 
वृत्तिः । इण नश् नि सति इत्येतेभयो धातुम्वरमच्छीलारिषु कर्टषु कम्प्रत्ययो भवति । 
163. The afix करप् comes, in the sense of the agent having such a habit &c', after the verbs s 'togo', नग 'to destroy', for 'to conquer', and 'to flow'. 
The q is indicatory in order to introduce the augment between the verb and the affix (VI. I.71). Thusr+करप् +त्+परइवरः, fem. स्वरी 'a tra. veller'; mari, femrat 'transitory'; fornti, sem. fregat 'victorious"; ENT: fem. earth 'going, a river'. 
Though the affix begins with a letter of 40 pratydhdra, and ought to have taken the intermediate इद (VII. 2. 35) yet it is prohibited by VII. 2. 8. 
___ गत्वरश्च ॥ १६४ ॥ पदानि ॥ गत्वरः, च ॥ पत्तिः ॥ गरवर इति निपारयते, गमेरनुनासिकलोपःकरप्रस्थयथ ।। 
And the word that is irregularly formed. The word Tere is formed by eliding the off and adding the affix करप्. As गस्वरः, fem. गस्वरी locomotive, transient'.. 
जागुरुकः ॥ १६५ ॥ पदानि ॥ जागुः, ककः, (तचडीलादिषु)॥ पत्तिः ॥ भागरूकःमस्ययो भवति तच्छीलादिपु कत॥ 
165. The affix or comes after the verb wrt'to be awake' in the sense of the agent having such a habit'. 
As ST**: 'wakeful'. 
यजजपदां यह ॥१६॥ पदानि ॥ यज-जप-दशाम, यकः (त. पछीलादिषु, सकः)॥ 
वृत्तिः । बजादीनां वहन्तानामूकःप्राययो भवति सच्छीलाविष कतषु ।। 
166. The affix v comes in the sense of the agent having such a habit &c', after the verbs वन, गप् and 
[ when they end in the affix य. 
... The intensives of these verbs take कक. As यावजक: a performer of frer quent sacrifices'; अंजपूकः 'a mutterer of prayers repeatedly; दशक: 'a snake (what bites frequently)', 
___ ममिकम्पिस्यजसकहिंसदीपोरः ॥१६॥ पदानि ॥ नमि-कम्पि. स्मि-अजस-कम-हिंस-दीपः, रः, (तघडीलादिष) । 
BK. III. CH. II. 
167-170.] 
THE AFFIX ए. 
475 
पतिः॥नम्यादिभ्यो धातुभ्यस्तच्छीलादिषु कर्वपुरत्प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
167. The affix r comes iu the sense of the agent having such a habit &c' after the verbs नम 'to bow', कम्म् 'to shake', स्मि 'tosmile', भजस् 'not to cease', कम 'to desire', हिन्स 'to injure', and द्वीप 'to shine'. 
Thus, नवं काष्ठं 'soft wood'; कम्पा शाखा shaking branch'; मेरं मुखं 'smiling face'; भश अहोति 'he sacrifices perpetually'; कमा युवती a beautiful maiden'; हिं रतः 'the injuring Rakshas'; दी काष्ठं 'brilliant wood'. 
The word ofte is an adverb, and is derived from the root ste 'to set free', with the negative particle भ, and the affix r; as भ+म +र भम। 
सनाशंसभिक्ष उः ॥ १६८ ॥ पदानि ॥ सन-आशंस-भिक्षा, सः, (तच्छौलादिष)॥ 
वृत्तिः ।। सन्नन्त यो धातुभ्य भासेभिश्च तच्छोलारिषु कर्दषु उप्रत्ययो भवति । 
168. The affix comes after roots that have taken the affix सन्, and after the verbs भाशंस् 'to wish and मिश् *to beg' in the sense of 'the agent having such a habit &c'. 
The term or in the aphorism means Desideratives in the affix 57, and not the verb, सन् because the verb सन् is never seen with this affix. 
As, चिकीर्ष: 'desirous of doing'; जिही: desirous of taking'; भावंसु: 'de. sirous'; formy: 'a beggar'. 
The verb brug with the upasarga or is the verb het 'to desire' and not the verb fe 'to praise'. 
विन्दुरिच्छुः ॥ १६॥ पदानि ॥ विन्दुः, इकु, (तच्छी० ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ विशनुमागम इश्वत्वमुकारश्च प्राययो निपात्यने तच्छीलादिषु कर्टषु॥ . 
169. The words farg and r are irregularly formed by the addition of the affix s, in the sense of the agent having such a habit &c'. 
To the verb विदि we add the augment नुम् and then the affix 33; as, विद +नुम् +3%Dविन्दुः (I. I. 470वेनशीलः 'intelligent'; so of rm to wish', the is re placed by छ, and we have इच्छुः एषणशील: 'desirous'. 
क्याच्छन्दसि ॥ १० ॥ पदानि ॥ क्यात्, छन्दसि, (तलील०)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ ववप्रत्ययान्ताद्धातोश्छन्दसि विपये तच्छीलादिषु कर्तपु उकारप्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
__170. The allix comes in the Ohhandas, after the roots that have taken the Denominative alix in the sense of 'the agent having such a habit&c'. 
The term includes the three affixes a , me and my (see sätras III. I. 8, II, 13, &c). As मिनयुः, संस्वेदयुः, सुभयुः (Rig. Ved. I 3.4). . 
476 
THE AFFIXES KI. AND KIN. 
[BK III. CH. II. & 171, 
In the modern Sanskrit ga will be cmployed. As faithuar. By stra VII. 4. 33, the long replaces the final *, when you follows; as que पुषी+व-पुनीय. Why then in the case of मिपयुः there is not the substitution of long for the H of f«*? Because the rule VII. 4. 33 is set aside by VII. 4. 35 which declares that in the Chhandas the long & is not substituted for the mi 
T he awa: fanfanart facull pop lt Gefa II 9Tg-- TA-TH-HA:, fefferat, farc,, (agaienfig) 
वृत्तिः । भाकारान्तेग्य सवर्णात यश्च गम हन जन इत्येतेभ्यश्छन्दसि विषय सच्चीलाविषु affamat gout TH:, forgiu 7:11 
a li fafara atafa erformit than ! वार्तिकम् ॥ भापायर्या धाकृवननिगमिनमिभ्यः किकिनी वक्तव्यो।। enfeli 11 aferfperetelmat 4 : Fantatt ut i 
171. In the Chhandas, the affixes for and fat in the sense of 'the agent having such a habit &c' come after the verbs that end in long "T, or short or long #, and after the verbs 'to go', 'to kill', and 1 to be pro duced', and thesè affixes operate like fore causing redupli cation of the root. 
The after a is either for the sake of euphony, or for the sake of pre cision. Had it been then by the rule of 19€ (I. 1. 70) short would only be included and not long #. But the present rule is applicable to long as well. 
Thus qtfo=f: 'drinking'; as qrir: H 'drinking the soma-juice'; fami: 'giving cows' (Rig. Ved. VI. 23.4). Hulyot aft: (Rig. Ved. IV. 39.2, VI. 68. 7). Ti si sft:(Rig. Ved. X. 108. I). + Far f a: 'being in constant motion, wind'; #iHYT (Rig. Ved. II. 23. 11); 84, +4219 1 7: ‘killing, a weapon offensive'; wo (Rig. Ved. IX. 61.2); 74, + = wfa: as oferta (T.S, VII. 5. 20. i). 
The letter in these affixes is indicatory. It might be said “it is su perfluous to make thesc affixes fine, because these being treated like fat will be fear by rule 1. 2. 5'. True, they would be fare by the rule I. 2. 5, but then the rule VII. 4. 11. (when. lit follows, guna is the substitute of the verb e and of those that end in the long ) would also have applied to these affixes, and would have caused guna. It is to prevent this guna of the letter that we have annexed an indicatory is to these affixes. 
Vart-The affixes far and fat are of universal application in the Chhandas, and not confined to the verbs enumerated in the satra, as we see them in a &c.; as efe: (Yaj. Ved. XII. 105); 4: (Rig. Ved. II. 5. 3). 
Vart:—The affixes fan and fail, come after the roots 1,191, , , BK. III. CH. II. & 172-175.) 
THE AFFIX VARACH. 
477 
गमि, and ममि in the secular literature also; as, रधिः, चकिः, समिः, अक्षिः, जग्मिः ,नमः । 
Vart:-The affixes fin and fit come after the Intensive (rr) ronts of सह, यह, पन्, and यस्. As, सासहिः, पावहिः, चावलिः, थायतिः (VII. 4.83). 
स्वपितृषी जिङ् ॥ १२ ॥ पदानि ॥ स्वपि-तुषोः, नजिक (तचडीलादिषु)॥ 
वृत्तिः । सपेस्टपेष सच्छीलादिषु कर्दषु नमिङ्माययो भवति ।। पातिकम् ।। षेति पक्कण्वम् ।। 
172. The affix it comes, in the sense of the agents having such a habit &c', after the verbs स्वप् 'to sleep' and ya 'to be thirsty'. 
As स्वप्+नमिड-स्त्रमन् Ist. sing. स्वम 'sleeping, drowsy'; तण Ist. sing. तष्क 'covetous, thirsty'. 
Vart :----So also after the verb 'to insult, be bold'; as, EUR Ist. sing. you 'bold, impudent'. 
शवन्द्यौरारुः ॥ १३ ॥ पदानि ॥श-वन्द्योः, आरुः, (तळी०) ॥ वृत्तिः ।। शुहिंसायाम् वन्ति भभिवादनस्तुत्योः एताभ्यो तच्छीनादिषु कर्तवारमग्ययो भवति।। 
____173. The affix भारु comes in the sense of the ageuts having such a habit &c' after the verbs q 'to in jure' and वन्द 'to praise', 'to salute'. 
As शराः 'noxious, a mischievous animal'; पन्ना: 'praising, a bard'. 
भियः कुलकनौ ॥१७४ ॥ पदानि ॥भियः, कु-झुकनौ, (तच्छी०) ॥ वृत्तिः । मिभी भये भस्माद्धातोस्तच्छीलादिषु कर्ट लुकमी प्रत्ययो भवतः ।। वार्तिकम् ।। कुकमपि वक्तव्यः ।। 
174. The affixes and 4 come in the sense of 'the agent having such a habit' after the verb 'to fear'. 
As, fro: 'fearful, timid'; from: 'timorous, a bear, a tiger, a jackal'. 
Vart: The affix कन, should also be stated ; as भीरुकः । 
स्धेशमासपिसको वरच् ॥ १७५ ॥ पदानि ॥ स्था-ईश-भास पिस-कसः, घरच, (तच्छीलादिष)॥ 
पत्तिः स्थाश भास पिस कस एतेभ्यस्तछीलादिषु कर्टषु वरच्प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
176. The affix वरच् comes, in the sense of the agents having such a habit &c' after the verbs स्या 'to stand ईश 'to rule', भास् 'to shine', पिस् 'togo' and कस 'to go'. 
As स्थावर: 'immoveable'; ईश्वरः 'ruler, God'; पेस्वरः 'going, destructive'; विकस्वर: 'opening, expanding'. 
यच यः॥१६॥ पदानि॥ यः, च, यङः, (तच्नीलादिषु, वरच्)। 
478 
THE AFFIX KVIP. 
BK. III CH. II. S 116-178. 
पतिः ॥ या प्रापणे भस्मायान्तात्तच्छालादिषु कर्वप परप्रत्ययो भवति । 
176. The affix परन् in the sense of the agent having such a habit &c' comes after the verb when it ends with the affix यद. 
With the affix यद, the intensives of verbs are formed; as बापावर: 'a vagrant, an ascetic'. See sätra I. 1. 58. 
भाजभासधुर्विद्युतोर्जिपजुग्रावस्तुवः विप् ॥ ११७ ॥ पदानि ॥ धाज-भास-धुर्वि-द्युत-सर्जि-प-जु-ग्रावस्तुवः, क्विप, (तच्छीलादिषु) । वृत्तिः ।। भाजादिभ्यो धातुभ्यस्तीलादिषु कर्तषु किप्प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
177. The affix किम् comes, in the sense of the agent having such a habit &c.' after the verbs 119 to shine' भास 'to shine', धुर्व 'to injure', युत् 'to shine', अर्भ 'to be strong', q'to fill', 'to move rapidly' and 'to praise', when it is preceded by the word मावन् 'a stone'. 
Thus, विधान् Ist. sing. वित्राद् 'splendid'; भास् Ist. sing. भाः 'light'; धुर्व+ कि -धुर (VI. 4. 21), Ist sing. धू: 'who injures'; विद्युत् 'lightening'; कर्म Ist. sing. कर्क 'strength'; पुर् Ist. sing. प: what fills'; : 'swift'. In the case of j, a long vowel is the substitute of जु; मावस्तुत् (VI.I.71) 'a stone-worshipper'. Though by the universal rule III. 2. 76, the affix forty would have come after these verbs also, the repetition of the affix shows that ISEGIR does not apply in tdchchhilika affixes. 
अन्येभ्योपि दृश्यते ॥ १७ ॥ पदानि ॥ अन्येभ्यः, अपि, दृश्यते, (तच्छीलादिषु, किप)॥ 
वृत्तिः ।। भन्येभ्योपि धातुभ्यस्तीलादिषु किप्प्रत्ययो दृश्यते ।। पार्निकम् ।। किवचिच्यावतस्तु कमजुश्री दीपॉऽसम्प्रसारणंच ।। पार्तिकम्।। धुलिगमिजुहोतीनांच॥ वार्तिकम् ।। जुहोतेदश। पार्तिकम् भवत्वस्थ इवध च।। पार्मिकम् ॥ध्यायतेः संप्रसारणं च।। 
178. The affix Farry is seen after other verbs also, besides those mentioned above, in the sense of the agent having such a habit &c'. 
As gt, ist. sing. 'joining'; for 'piercing'; fore 'dividing'. 
By using the words 'is seen' in the aphorism, it is implied that other rules also apply concurrently with fine. Thus in some cases we find lengthena ing of the vowel; in some, there is reduplication of the root; in some instances there iş samprasdrang of the semivowel; and in other cases there is not. 
BK. III. CH. II. $ 179, 180.] 
THE AFFIX DU. 
479 
Vart:-When foto follows, the long vowel is the substitute of my 'to spcak', प्रच्छ to ask', भायतस्तु to praise long', करघु to move through a mat', जु 'to move rapidly', and of 'to serve', and there is no substitution of a vowel for the seinivowel (VI. 1. 16). 
As, anam 'the voice'; re fo-991+finq (VI. 1. 10)=$*+finy (VIII. 2. 36)= P(VIII. 4 56) 'who asks'; wrote: 'who praises long'; 29: 'a worm'; #: 'swist'; vt: 'the goddess Lakshmi'. 
The word which was mentioned in the last sátra is redundant here. 
Vart:-There is reduplication of the verbs qa 'to shine', ta 'to go' and 'to invoke', when fang follows. As, Fray 'shining'; TTC 'going, the world'. 
Vart:—There is lengthening also of the vowel of nu as T: 'a crescent shaped wooden ladle used for pouring the sacrificial ghee into the fire., 
Vart:--The rootą 'to tear' is shortened also; as FER 'tearing'. Vart:--The verb ta 'to think' has samprasarana; as uit: 'thinking'. 
a: Samt: upgen ogifau a:, On-Sitat:, (Feria) # वृत्तिः ॥ भवतेर्धातोः संज्ञायामन्तरे च गम्यमाने किप्पत्ययो भवति ।। 
179. The afflix ferq comes after the verb 'to be' when the word so formed deuote3 a name or a surety. 
As, forma person called Vibha'; farat'a surety i. e. he who stands intermediate between the debtor and the creditor'. 
fareitit grinera u pre ili uçrra a fa-19-tit, y, MENUTA, (**:) u 
वृतिः ॥ विप्र सम् इत्येवं पूशिवसेर्धातोः डुमाययो भवति न चेत् संज्ञा गम्यते ॥ पार्मिकम् ।। प्रकरणे मितवादिस्य उपसंख्यानम् ।। 
180. The aflix ? comes after the verb when it is preceded by the upasargas fa, # and provided that the word to be formed does not meau an appellative. 
As fax: 'all pervading'; ax: 'lord'; #4: 'Creator'. 
Why do we say 'when it is not a proper name? Observe Fax: 'a person called Vibha'. 
Vart:--The words fras &c, also are formed by this affix. As far. 'the sca'; *: 'causing happiness'. 
Why have wc applied and not firmy to this root, as the forms would have been the same in cither case? We have done so for two purposes: (1),To prevent the rules relating to dhdtus from applying to this. (2) To prevent the insertion of a augment. Thus the ist, dual of fnac is faat, ist. pl. is fancy:1 Here there is no substitution of The which the rule VI. 4. 77 required, if g had retained its dhatu characteristic; so also this rule of accent in VI. 1. 175 
480 
THE AFFIX SHT RAN. 
[BK. III. CH. II. $ 181-183. 
does not apply to Instrumental sing. मितद्वा &c, (2.) We have no a which rule 
VI. I. TI required. मितं द्रवति-मितनुः । 
घः कर्मणि ष्ट्रन् ॥ ११ ॥ पदानि ॥ धः, कर्मणि, ष्ट्रन् । वृत्तिः ॥ अयोधाताव कमणि कारके उन्प्रत्ययो भवति । 
181. The affix si comes, in denoting the ob. ject, after the verb धा 'to feed'. 
The indicatory a denotes that the feminine is formed by my (f) affix. As yraft 'a nurse whom the children suck (dhayanti)'; and 'Amalaki fruit which holds (dadhiti) all medicinal properties'. 
दात्रीशसयुयुजस्तुतुदसिसिचमिहपतदशनहः करणे ॥१८२॥ पदा नि॥ दाप-नी-शस्-यु-युज-स्तु-तुद्-सि-सिच-मिह-पत्-दश-नहः, करणे,(ष्ट्रन)। 
वृतिः ॥ पाप नी शस वु युज स्तुतुद सि सिच मिह पत पश नह एतेभ्यो धातुभ्यः करणे कारके ट्रन्प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
182. The affix रन्, with the sense of instru. ment, comes after the verbs राप 'to cut', नी 'to lead', शस 'to hurt', यु 'to join', युन् 'to Join', स्तु 'to praise', तुम 'to inflict pain', सि 'to bind', सिच् 'to sprinkle', निह 'to urine', पत् 'to fall', पश 'to bite' and नह 'to bind'. 
___As दात्र, Ist. sing. neuter दानम् a sickle' (lit. that with which one cuts); नेत्र rst. sing. नेत्रम् eye'; शस्त्रं (VII. 2.9) a weapon'; योनं 'the tie that fastens the yoke'; योकम् the tic of yoke'; स्तोत्रं 'a penegyric'; तो 'a goad', संE a ligament'; सेकं 'a sprinkling vessel'; म म् the penis'; पत्रम् 'a vchicle'; हा 'a large tooth'. 
The word met belongs to the Ajddi class and hcncc forms its feminine in टा(भा) and not in ई (IV. 1.4). 
The root ou is read in the aphorism without its nasal i e. as . This indicates by implication that I loses its nasal before some affixes such as Face; thus we have पशनम् 'tooth' 
And lastly नह+इन् = नवध fem. नी (VIII. 2. 34 and 40), 'a thong'. 
हलसूकरयोः पुवः ॥१३॥ पदानि ॥ हल-सूकरयोः, पुवः,(ष्ट्रन् । वृतिः ॥ पू पर पवने, भस्माद्धातोः करणे कारके इन्प्रत्ययो भवति सच्चेत् करणं हनसू करयोरवययो भवति ।। 
___183. The afnx द्रन् is employed after the verb with the sense of instrument when denoting a member of the body of a plough or of a log. 
___ The verb पू. includes both पूर and पूनः as पोत्रम् 'a plough share'; पोष 'the snout of a hog'. 
BK. III. CH. II. $ 184-187.] . 
THE AFFIX KTA. 
481 
भर्तिलधसूखनसहचर इत्रः ॥ ९८४॥ पदानि ॥ अर्ति-ल-ध-सू खन-सह-घर:, पत्रः॥ 
पतिः॥ भर्ति नधुसूखन सह पर एसेम्बो धातुभ्यः करणे कारके ममत्ययो भवति । 
184. The aflix comes after the verbs # 'to go', नू 'to cut', धू 'to shake', स् 'to bring forth', खन् 'to dig', सड् 'to bear', and घर 'to go' with the sense of instrument. 
Thus, भरि 'a rudder'; लवि 'a sickle'; धषिवं 'a fan'; सविन 'cause of production'; खनिजे 'a spade'; स.हर 'patience'; चरिणं 'an instituted observ. ance or a narrative'. 
पुवः संशायाम् ॥ १५॥ पदानि ॥ पुवः, संज्ञायाम्, (इत्रः)॥ वृतिः॥ परसेर्धातोः करणे कारके इनपत्ययो भवति समुदायेन चेत्संज्ञा गम्यते ॥ 
185. The affix it comes after the verb q 'to purify' with the sense of the agent so expressed being the instrument; when the sense of the complete word is simply appellative, and not descriptive. 
The verb includes two verbs 95 and both meaning 'to purify', but belonging to two different conjugations; as qiqx an instrument for clean sing or purifying, such as a sicve or a strainer; and in this sense it means two blades of Kusa grass uscd at sacrifices in purifying and sprinkling ghee'. It also means the sacred thread, the clarified butter, &c. . 
कर्तरि चर्षिदेवतयोः॥१८६ ॥ पदानि॥ कर्तरि, च, ऋषि-देवतयोः, (पत्रः, पुषः)॥ 
पतिः । पुषः करणे कर्तरि चाइनमत्ययो भवति, षिदेवतयोर्ययासंण्यं संबन्धः ॥ 
186. The affix comes after the verb q 'to purify' in the sense of the agent or the instrument' when it is respectively employed in connection with a sage or a diety. 
That is to say, when applied to a Rishi the force is that of an in strument, and when applied to a Devald the force is that of an agent. As, gfarasurfa: 'this sage is sacrcd' through whose instrumentality one is sanctifieu); MF: HET PT Tire 'thc God Agni is sacred' (one that purifies), 'let him purify 
me'. So also, वायुः सोमः सूर्य इन्द्रः पवित्र मा पनन्त । 
गीतः कः ॥ १७ ॥ पदानि ॥ गि-हतः, कः ॥ वृतिः ।। मीसो धातोर्वर्तमान में कमस्ययो भवति ।। 
187. The verbal roots, marked with an indica. tory fw, take the afix th, in denoting the present time. 
qur . v wwHOW VI TIL powrot, walau sur 13 vuua raven 111, wios. 
pargis garotaru pain uerfaru afa-use-yur-sporti, 4, (:) 
पत्तिः ॥ मतिरिच्छा, पुद्धिनिम्, पूजा सत्कारः, एतार्येभ्यश्च धातुभ्यो वर्तमानार्ये कान्यवो #afri 
188. And after roots denoting inclination, un derstanding, or respect, the affix it is employed with the force of the present. 
The word fa means 'wish' or 'desire'; fx means 'knowledge'; and a means 'worship', 'honor' or 'respect', As Thi Ha:, -5:,- ,-- #, fora:, &c. 'the king wishes, desires, thinks, knows, honors, respects &c'. 
The force of the word is to include other kinds of verbs not included in the above satra. Thus the following participles have their senses confined not to the past time only: sftfora: 'practised'; xfa: protected'; FAX: 'forbear ing'; BETE: 'censured'; le: 'pleased'; : 'angry'; for: 'angry'; uiteerika: 'uttered'; gr: 'happy'; gg: 'satisfied'; *T**: 'favourite'; Hida: 'restrained'; JOH: ready'; # 'evil, misery' (with a future signification); and siya 'immortal. So also :- 8: 'sleeping'; forn: 'lying down'; Hifara: 'catcn'; for: 'smeared'; gg: 'satisfied'; all these have a present signification. 
ओ३म् अथ तृतीयाध्यायस्य तृतीयः पादः ॥ 
BOOK THIRD. 
CHAPTER III. . 
उखादयो बहुलं ॥१॥ पदानि ॥ उख-आदयः, बहुलम, (वर्तमाने)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ रणादयः प्रत्यया वर्तमानेऽयें संज्ञायां विपये बहुलं भवन्ति ।। 
1. The affixes 'Un and the rest, with the force of the present, and with a sense simply appolla tive, are attached diversely. 
The phrase 'with the force of the present' (implying neither past nor future time) and 'with a sense simply appellative' (and not descriptive) must be read into this sätra by anuvritti from sätras III. 2. 123 & 185. By using the word 'diversely it is indicated that these asfixes are, of course, applied after roots about which they are ordained, but they come also after roots about which they are not ordained. Sometimes we must infer their applica. tion by seeing actual words. Some affixes, though there be no express injunc tion regarding them, are to be inferred to belong to this class. The maxim in regard to tlic Unddi alixcs is that when, in appellatives, wc find the forms of verbal roots and affixes coming after them, then we may know, from the result as presented in the word, what are the indicatory letters which the affix must be possessed of in order to produce the result. i 
These allixes are not given in Paņini's work, but they have been sepa rately collected. The asfix zu is the first of these. The first sätra of Unddi affixes is the following 
traffefTETLUTTET 30 ||| 
The affix Tu comes after the verbs 'to make', 'to blow', 'to drink', fo 'to overcome', for 'to scatter', 'to be pleasant to the taste', EN 'to accomplish', and HIT 'to pervade'. 
Thus 5+59 16: 'an artisan'. So also, ar 'the wind'; ora: 'the organ of cxcretion'; Art: 'a drug (which overcomes diseasc)'; Ary: 'the bile'; HRT: 'sweet'; an: 'who accomplishes the object of another, hence virtuous'; and wry: quickly'. 
These Unddi affixes come after a limited number of roots, and not after every root, as the affixes taught in this grammar whose application is general; hence the word hy has been employed. Moreover there has been no exhaustive cnumcration of the several roots after which these asfixes come: 
484 
THE UNADI AFFIXES. 
[BK. III CH III. $ 2, 3. 
only some of them have been collected in works trcating of Unddi affix es. Thus though the affixes Tory is ordained after 4, it comes also after ya as dia. In fact there is a long discussion and it was a moot point at the time of Panini whether these words said to be formed by Unådi affixes were really derivative, or primitive ones. Moreover all the operations of these asfixes have not been shown, that is, their effects are not without remainder (ans). They are valid and good if found in sacred Scriptures or secular literature. The authors of Niruktas and grammarians of the school of Sakatayaņa, consider all nouns and substantives (ATH) as derivative words from simple roots (as). Therefore where the derivation of a word is not apparent, one should infer the existence of proper base ( fa) or affix (974) to form such a word. 
The following slokas will be of some use to the student for ascertaining the Unådi affixes : 
बाडुलकं प्रकृतेस्सनुदृष्टः प्रायसमुच्चयनादपि वेषाम् । ordenafig ang Her fe gent 1191 नाम च धातुजमाह निरुक्त व्याकरणे शकटस्य च सोकम्। 
या पाविशेषसमुत्यं प्रत्यवतः प्रकृतेश तापम् ॥२॥ EME V785410 4201 na: q7 araffeammainen torjurfag 11 811 
wasta geure un pulucrfa u wa, erfù, gaya, (Terca:) fer: 1 YERTAA TU142: 4th quan 
2. The 'Unådi' afixes are seen also attached with the force of the past time. 
By the last sâtra, it was taught that the Unddi affixes come with the force of the present time. The present aphorism teaches that they come with the force of the past also, not as a general rule, but in special cases. The force of the words 'are seen' being that no general rule can be laid down about it, but on finding that certain words have a past significance, we conclude that the affix in that particular case has the force of the past time. 
Thus tifaq=pillar 'a way, road' (that which has been established as a rule); TT+fr 'skin' (that which is lived in); so also went 'ashes' (that which has been reduced to ashes). 
भविष्यति गम्यादयः ॥३॥ पदानि ॥ भविष्यति, गमि-आदयः॥ : n afarafer front searca: Trzęt: arvattaforma पार्तिकम् ।। भनपतन पसंख्यानम् ।। 
3. The words 'gami', &c. are valid forms, hav. ing the sense of the future time. 
The force of the futurc time is in the affix, and is so ordained, and not in the original word which takes the allix. Thus we see that the Unddi 
BK. III. CH. III. $ 4, 5.] 
THE UNADI AFFIXES. 
485 
affixes, in a way, do come with the force of not only present, but past and future also, though in the latter two cases its scope is very limited. As tot ग्रामम् 'intending togo to the village'; भागामी 'that which has to come' So also grurit 'departing' ; FFACHT 'an opponent, (who is going to obstruct). afaant 'going to be awakened'. So also पतियोधी 'an adversary'; मतियोगी 'an enemy'; 
प्रतियावी; भावाची, भावी, &c. 
Vart :-The Future, for the purposes of this rule, must be anadyatana future i. e. the affix should come in the sense of what will happen but not in the course of the current day. In other words, the force must be of the first future लद, and not of the second future न. As धो गमी पामम् 'he intends to 
go to the village tomorrow'. 
__ यावतपुरानिपातयोलेट् ॥ ४॥ पदानि ॥ यावत्-पुरा-निपातयोः, लट, (भविष्यति) 
वृत्तिः ॥ यावत्पुराशययोनिपातयोरुपपदयो विग्यति काले धातोनंमन्ययो भवति ।। 
4. The affix 'Lat' comes after a root, with the force of futurity, when it has in construction with it the particles 'yavat' and 'pura'. 
The present tense has the force of the future when the adverbs army and तावत are used. The phrase futurity &c' is to be read into this satra from the last. Thus भालोके ते निपतति पुरा 'he will surely fall in the range of your sight'. यावदस्य दरास्मनः समन्मलनाय शमपनं प्रेषयामि. I shall send Satrughna to cxterminate this wretch'. 
These words art and I must be used as adverbs (nipätas), and not as relative pronouns. Therefore not here, यावर हास्थति तावद भोक्ष्यते 'as long as he will give, so long he will eat'; पुरा अमिष्यति 'he goes along the city'. Here यावत is a relative pronoun; and for is the Instrumental singular of qr city'. 
विभाषा कदाकोः ॥ ५॥ पदानि ॥ विभाषा, कदा-कोर, (भविष्यति, लट् ॥ 
वृत्तिः।। काकर्मि इत्येतयोरुपपदयोर्विभाषा भविष्यति काले धासोलमस्ययो भवति ॥ 
5. The affix 'Laţ' is optionally employed after a root with the force of the futurity, when it has in con struction with it, the adverbs 'kada' and 'lkarhi'. 
As का भुत 'when will he eat', or का भोल्यते or भोक्ता ; so also का भुको or भोक्ष्यते or भोक्ता 'when will he eat'. . 
किंवृत्त लिप्सायाम् ॥ ६ ॥ पदानि ॥ किम्-पत्ते, लिपसायाम, (भविष्यतिकाले, विभाषा, लट्)। . 
वृत्तिः ॥ किंवृराउपपदे लिप्मायां भविष्यति काले धातोर्षिभापा जनस्थयो भाति ।। 
486 
THE UNADI AFFIXES. 
[BK. III. CI. III. $ 6, 7. 
6. When the word 'kim' or its derivatives are in construction with the verb, the affix Lat' is employed optionally after a root, in denoting future time, provided that the sentence expresses a desire of gaining on the part of the speaker, 
The word 'optionally' is understood in this satra. By using the word T along with fan it is meant that the rule applics even when for takes the affixes car and 367. The word forcer means the desire of gaining or acquir ing, a wish to have something or an intention of begging'. 
As a paret terra or itaat: 'whom will you feed'? It implies a re quest on the part of the questioner to feed him also. So also cart firent Freifa, ma, mat, or a t format prezfa &c, 'Which of the two or which of these all, will he give alms? Will he give something to me'?. 
When no desire of gain is implied, the future tense must be employed as i Treforçu Thirufa 'who will go to Pataliputra'. : : ferqeriale 9 uerta u freehra-fast, a, (Haufatana, ferrat, C) : 
पतिः ॥ लिप्स्यमानसिद्धौ गम्बमामा भविष्यतिकाने धासीर्विभाषा मट्प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
7. And when the success, that would accrue to another by fulfilling the desire of the speaker, is indi cated in a sentence, the present tense may optionally be employed with the force of the futurity, 
The word optionally is also understood here. The word forreuungfefer: is equal to force ATT fare, an Ablative-Tatpurusha Compound, signifying siddhi or success, that would be acquired by another by complying with the request of the speaker. The difference between this and the last sätra is, that whereas the last related to interrogative sentences having fat in construction, the present relates to sentences in general. As यो भक्त पति, स स्वर्ग गच्छति 'he who gives food, goes to heaven'; यो भक्त शस्थति or ता, सस्वर्ग गमिष्यति or गन्ता. 
Here the speaker encourages the giver to the act of charity by hold ing out the hope, that from rice which is the object desired (FGCFTATT) the success (afp), in the shape of svarga, will accrue to the giver. 
In other words, 'the present is sometimes used for the future in condi tional sentences, i. e, it is employed in connection with a sentence declaring the compensation or reward which follows from the granting of the wish'. 
tomar Splugula u m - - , , ( fare. foretat, farat, E). BK. III. CH. III. $ 8-10) 
THE AFFIXES TUMUN AND NVUL. 
487. 
वृत्तिः ॥ नीर: पारिश्वते येन स नोरलक्षणी धावः, तब वर्तमामादासोभविष्यति काले विभाषा लट्प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
8. The affix 'Lat' is optionally employed with the force of the futurity, after that root, which in a con. ditional sentence, is the condition precedent for the ac tion indicated by another verb having the sense of the imperative mood. 
The word nou means 'having the sense of the aflix air or impera. tive mood'. The force of lot is to command, direct, invite &c' as given in III. 3. 162 and 163. The sotra, translated literally, will mean the present tense may optionally be employed when the action denoted by the verb is related to an other action denoted by another verb in the imperative, as a sign () is to the thing signified (लक्ष्य). Thus उपाध्यायशेवागण्छति (भागमिष्यति or भागन्सा) भय स्वं छन्दोऽधीय if the professor comes (e. e. will come) then read you prosody'. Here the coming of the professor is the lakshana of the direction as to reading. 
लिङ् चोर्श्वभौहूर्तिके ॥ ॥ पदानि ॥ लिङ्, च, कवं-मौहर्तिके, (भविष्यतिकाले, विभाषा, लट्, लोहर्थलक्षणे) ॥ 
वृत्तिः अर्बमौहनिक भविष्यसिकाने जोनला वर्समानादासोर्विभाषा निदमस्ययो भवति, चकारालद् ॥ 
9. The 'Lat' (present) or the 'Lin' (potential) is useil wider similar conditions in denotiug futurity, when the future time is future by a'muhûrta' (48 minutes). 
All the conditions of the last s@tra apply here also, namely 'when the action denoted by the verb is related to another action denoted by another verb in the imperative, as a sign is to the thing indicated'. By force of the word a we read the anuvritti oflat also into this aphorism. The word अर्थ मोहर्तिक is a secondary derivative from अर्वमुहर्त, meaning that which exists in time above a muhůrta'. This is an irregular compound; and the vșiddhi takes place irregularly of the 3 of and not of 5 as the general rule required. The whole word thus formed qualifies the word future'. Thus मर्न महत्तापरि मुहर्तस्य उपाध्यायदागच्छत् (भागधति, भागमिष्यति or भागन्सा), भय र छन्दोऽधीव If the lea. chcr comcs after an hour (of 48 minutes), you had better read the Prosody'. 
तुमुनगवुली क्रियायां क्रियायाम् ॥ १०॥ पदानि ॥ तुमन, ग लौ, क्रियायां, क्रियायाम, (भविष्यति काले)॥ 
बत्तः ॥ निवार्थायां क्रियायामुपपदे धातोर्भविष्यक्ति काने तुमुन्धुलो प्रत्ययो भवतः ।। वार्निकम् ॥ क्रियार्थायां क्रियायामुपपहें वासरूपेण नादयो न भवन्ति ।। 
10. The affixes tumi'' and 'nvul' are placed after a verbal root, with the forco of the futuro, when the 
488 
THE AFFIXES GHAN &c. 
[BK. III. CH. III. $ it. 
word in construction therewith is another verb, denoting an action performed for the sake of the (future) action, 
As a 'he goes to eat'; oftet ama 'he goes to eat'. Here the upapada or the verb in construction is tofa; it denotes an action performed for the sake of the future action (minut), namely, eating. 
Why do we say 'denoting an action'? The upa pada must be an action and not a substantive; as Fifered the street: 'matted hair is for the purpose that he should beg.' Here the affixes are not employed. 
Why do we say 'performed for the sake of another action'? Observe UTTAT qfarafa yax: 'running, thy stick will fall'. 
Now, it might be asked why got is taught a second time, when it was already taught generally by rule III. 1, 133; and that being a common rule, would have applied to this subjeet also? If you reply that the future affix me would have prevented its application, in conditional sentences like the above, we say that the rule of 'non-uniform affixes applying simultaneously' given in III. 1, 91 will step in and will conduce the application of ora in spite of . 
Vart. The repetition of the affix og ordained. to come after a ver bal root, when the word in construction therewith is another verb denoting an action performed for the sake of the future action) is for the sake of prohibit ing the application of the affixes like Ty &c. in denoting the above sense; that is to say, the rule of TSE164 (III. 1. 94) does not apply here and we can not optionally employ any other affix, with this gerundial sense. Thus we can. not say w as 'he goes to do'; but we must say an instead. 
Thiese affixes form the gerund of the infinitive of purpose. 
Tuppuraçtfarli Hra-0701, , (aifafa, Ta, क्रियायां, क्रियार्यायाम् ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ भापति प्रकृत्य ये घमादयो विहितास्ते च भाववचना भविष्यतिकाले क्रियायामपपते forurat **a! 
11. And the afixes that are ordained to come after a root with the force of denoting the mere action of the verb, such as &c. (III. 1. 13.) have also the force of the future, when the word in construction therewith, is another verb denoting an action performed for the sake of the future action. 
i · As 
'he goes to cook'; e asfa 'he goes for the sake of suc cess'; g alai 
Now it might be asked, why make this rule at all, when those affixes have already been ordained ? It has already been said that the TSAKY rule 
BK. III. CH. JII. & 12] 
THE AFFIX AN. 
-489 
AN 
does not apply in regard to infinitive; and hence it would have prevented the application of other affixes. So the making of the prescnt sätra. 
Why the word 97 has been employed in the sätra ? The meaning is that the words should be expressive or ora. How do the affixes become 
77 ? When affixes which are ordained after certain bases, are employed after those bases only, then they are said to be an , not when they are em ployed after other bases, or are even after those bases, but not in the mode as directed. So that, in short, those nouns only which have been especially form ed by the 1974 affixes, &c, can be employed with the force of gerund, and not every noun. The 19ta nouns correspond to the nouns of action or 
verbal nouns. 
अप कर्मणिच ॥ १२॥ पदानि ॥ अख, कर्मणि, (भविष्यति, काले, faarui, fasuratura) 
पतिः ॥ धातोरएमग्ययो भवति भविष्यतिकाने कर्मण्युपपदे किवायां च क्रियायाम्।। 
12. The aflix 'an' comes after a root with the force of the future, when the word in coustruction with it is in the accusative case, and when the action is per formed for the sake of another action. 
The word 'future' is understood here. The force of y is merely that of a connective particle. By rule III, 2. 1. the affix yu comes after a root when the word in composition is in the accusative case. That is a general injunction; and the rule of lary not applying, the affix at would have de barred it as already said ; hence this repetition. This rule being an apavada rule (an exception or a special rule with regard to those verbs which have the accusative case in composition) will thus, within its own jurisdiction, prevent the application of la of III. 3. 10; and by the rule of Tre given in I, 4.2, it will debar the affixes like a &c. Thereforc this yu comes after even those verbs also which were especially exempted from its operation by rulcs like III. 2. 3. Thus by rule III. 2. 3 the Ho of III. 2. I could not have come after simple verbs ending in long Mr, such as a 'to give' &c. But the present nu with a gerundial force will come even after such verbs. As far ana 'he goes to give cows', and not opa: 1 So also 7919Tutaala 'he goes to give blanket'; 
Trend TAT I + 9=ert: (VII. 3. 33). 
So also allegit qafe 'he goes to cut wood'. In this case Hu would have been applicd cvcn by III. 2. 1. 
लुट् शेषे च ॥ १३ ॥ पदानि ॥ लुत्, शेषे, च, (भविष्यति, क्रियायां, faurului, sat:wt) | 
f#: 11 À facafatit HTCT ferat af margfat prevent प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
490 
THE AFFIX LUT. 
(BK. III. CH. III. $ 13-15. 
13. The affix 'Lrit' is employed after a verb, in the remaining cases, where futurity pure and simple is indicated; and also where there is in construction with it another verb denotiug an action performed for the sake of the future action. 
This is what is well-known as the Second Future. As a firala fet afa 'he goes that I will do'; efiverfa sfa w a 'he goes that I will take'. So also, afroafa 'he will do'; forefa 'he will take'. Thus the Second Future is used both in dependent sentences as well as to denote simple Future. 
WT: UT II P8 lugtfall i, u, at # वृत्तिः। बट स्थाने सत्संज्ञो पटशानची वा भवतः ।। 
14. The affixes called Sat' i. e. (satri' and 'Sanach' are optionally the substitutes of Lșit'. 
The aq has been defined in III. 2. 127. This option is a regulated op tion; that is to say, the affixes re and replace og under the conditions in which they replace of; thus by III. 2. 124, these affixes will replace or when agreeing with what does not end with the first case-affix. In these cases will invariably replace . In other cases it will optionally replace is. In these cases they will form what is known as future participles. As frakt देवर पश्य 'behold Devadatta about to do; करिष्यमाणं देवदत्तं पश्य 'behold Deva. datta being about to be done'. हे करिप्वन् or करिष्यमाण. Besides simple futu rity, it denotes intention or purpose, as wtfeuchiul cafe 'he dwells intending to earn his livelihood'; vyhty: aut T er 'intending to furnish his bows with arrows'. 
When, however, it agrees with the nominative case, it is optionally em-. ployed. As afroat, fremu:, afirafa or affroad 1979: 'Devadatta will do'. 
The form exfreya is thus evolved. As + = +FT+ (III. 1. 33) कर+ +स्य+शट-करिष्यत् nom. sing. करियन। In other words the participial affixes भत् (भन्त) and मान, technically known as शट and शाम, also come after a verb that has taken the personal ending Fu of the Future. 
specat e N1 94 ulagafat u opastaa, ye, (Herefa) a gfa: fi aferrattun sū tariraretinianust vafell पार्मिकम् ॥ परिपने स्तनी भविष्यदर्थे वक्तव्या ॥ 
15. The affix 'Luț comes after a verbal root in the sense of what will happen, but not in the course of 
the current day. 
This debars 'Lșiț. As w: a af he will do tomorrow'. 'he will cat tomorrow'. 
BK. III. CH. III. $ 16-18.] 
THE AFFIX GHAN. 
491. 
The word 'anadyatana' is a Bahuvrihi compound. Therefore in cases where there is not pure futurity beyond today, but a mixture of the two, we will be employed and not an As 10 ir yfirule 'it will be today or tomorrow'. And where there is doubt, the second Future should be employed. 
Vart.-The First Future (GF) is employed with the force of the Second Future () when sorrow is expressed. As a q=1, #art fara I 'Oh when will she go, who places her feet in such a way (who is such a slow walker) We arsedar, 
: 'when will he learn, who is so inattentive'l arrafavent y peu urfa u ve-fu-fay-tuu!, 259 
" f#: 11 garlament present arqueant tafat If 
16. The affx'ghan' comes after the roots 'pad' (to pace), 'ruj'(to pain), 'vis' (to enter), and 'spris' (to touch). 
The anuvšitti of 'future' does not extend to this sátra. The affixes hereinafter taught come in all the tenses. 
As 9+9=: 'foot'; 5 + = th: 'disease'; so, A9: 'entrance'. 
Vart :--The verb to takes it when the sense is that of 'distress'; as forf: 'disease' or 'warmth'. The word fust meaning 'touch' is formed by adding the affix my, under rule III. 1. 134; as fulf #47:1 There is difference in accent between these two words. 
#fet 1891 ugefa u #, fer, (95) पत्तिः। सर्दातोः स्थिर कर्तरि घम् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ omfaq 11 suf fifa 169 
17. The affix 'ghafi' comes after the verb 'sri' (to move) when the agent is permanently fixed. 
The word four means an object remaining steady throughout any pcriod of time. That which thus remaining permanent moves through any interval of time, will apply to the agent of the verb. Thus, æ+9=E: 'an essence'; as TETT: 'the essence of sandal', ufcert: 'the essence of catechu'. 
Why do we say 'permanently fixed'? Observe a 'moves', ATTE: 'that which Aows'. 
Vart:-The word so formcd also applies to disease, fish and strength. As sfeer: 'dysentery'; fpart: 'a fish'; #re: ‘strength'. 
Hra el pallatfa II Hra, (9) u fer: 11 TTÀ ETT U 231t ** 
18. The affix'ghañ' comes after a root when merc action is devoted. 
492 
THE AFFIX GHAN. 
[BK. !II. CH. III. $ 19. 
. 
Thus, 9t 9 7*: 'cooking' (VII.2. 116 and VII. 3. 52); rata: 'aban doning'; : 'colouring' (VI. 4. 27). An action expresses a general state; so that all roots denote 'action' when their meaning is to be expressed. And as the meaning of the root can be expressed by the root itself, therefore, the affixes 49&c. come after all verbal roots, when the sense of the root is denot ed as having attained to the completed state. It is not necessary that the words so formed should be always of the masculine gender, singular number. They may take any other gender or number. As yfi, 941, tant, qrar: 1 These asfixes form, in short, verbal nouns, or abstract nouns being names of action. 
theft ATC duro Il peut acto # sy-arift, 7, FTW, crara, () 
पतिः। कर्ट पर्मिले कारक संज्ञायां विषये धातीर्घम् प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
19. And the affix 'ghañ' comes after a root, when the sense is that of an appellative, the word being related to the verb from which its name is deduced, but not as agent. 
Thus are: (i. c. are far ) 'a dart, lit. that which men throw'; qey: (i.e. herauta ) 'a sack, lit. that which men stitch together'; wiert: (1. c. wrotfan HETER, 'food, lit. that from which men take out the juice to nourish themselves'. 
As HYTTEIT:, HETSUGTETT: 1 
Why do we say 'not related as an agent? Observe #4: 'a sheep, lit. that which looks helplessly'. Here the word go is related to the verb fara as agent, and the affix is consequently not 7. 
Why do we say 'when denoting an appellative? Observe ava: #: "the mat must be made'. 
The force of q in the sotra is to indicate that may be applied irre gularly in cases where appellative is not meant: as mit 4 rata: 'what gift was given by you'; at Thanit qat: 'what gain was gained by you'. 
The word Arct is used in the satra for this purpose. The word ** af is a compound word formed by the negative T The word means a non agent. Now the word 'non-agent has two-fold significance; either it means any other käraka which is not an agent-käraka; or it may mean any thing in general which is not an agent. That is to say, the former negative, called gere, points out, by implication, the objects which are different from the thing prohibited; and in fact, makes the rule applicable to those objects, while the second sort of negative called 454 gay is a simple prohibition of the particular matter specified, without mentioning what is different from it. Giv ing the former interpretation to the word wadft, the word Art becomes redundant, because 'non-agent' would mean any käraka other than an agent. 
BK. III. CH. IIL $ 20.] 
THE AFFIX GHAN. 
493 
But the very fact, that can is used, indicates the existence of the following rule which is nowhere expressly taught by Paņini:-That is compounded cven with the force of 14 gay. (VI. I. 45). 1, non-sit'. 
Both the phrases, 'when denoting mere condition (779)' and 'a karaka 'which is not an agent' are understood in the succceding aphorisms. See II 2., 6 about to Compound. 
afinrurenai gana: Ii 70 vetfa l afha-HET TH, :,() 1 
वृत्तिः ॥ परिमाणाण्यायो सर्वेभ्यो धातुभ्यो घम् प्रत्ययो भवति । पार्निकम् ॥ हारजारो कर्तरि दिनुक् च ॥ 
20. The affix 'ghañ' comes after all roots when the word so formed is the name of a measure. 
Thus, fa+f+7 =** (VII. 2. 115)=faTTA(VI. 1. 78) 'a heap'; as paremagalan; at seraqat 'to scatter' +9= 1T: 1 ICT; 147: ITT: 1 
By using the word 'all' in the satra, it is indicated that the affix ypg (III. 3. 57) is also superseded when this sense is to be indicated. Otherwise the affix He would only be prohibited by the Paribhasha:—"Apavadas that pre cede the rules which teach operations that have to be superseded by the apavd da-operations, supersede only those rules that stand nearest to them, not the subscquent rules". Thus we being taught in III. 3. 56 would be superseded, but not so oro taught in the subsequent aphorism III. 3.57. 
Why do we say 'when they are the names of measures? Observe firma: 'ascertaining'. 
The word soa: has been used in the aphorism in order to indicate that the words so forined are not Primitive words (fa). The numerals are also there included, and not only measures like Prastha, Pala &c. 
We have said above, that the force of the word **: in this sätra is to indicate that the affix must be used after all verbs (not excluding even such verbs as require są or 79 by sátras 56 and 57), when we want to express mcasure. This must be taken however, with certain limitations. The word fäng: is not after all so wide as at first sight it may appear. If we wish to form a word indicating measure, in the feminine gender, we cannot use ; we must use the affix 19 (III. 3. 94). In other words, the feminine affixes arc not superseded by 9 when it supersedes 4 and 879. Thus in forming a feminine noun denoting measure, we have gafasilienfi,qeat &c. 
Vart:- The affix 9 comes after the causative verbs erfr and Hift, and there is lyk elision of the causative affix fun; when the word so formed is re lated to the verb as agent. Thus frafra fer: 'a wise' (lit 'who divides brothers' a wise brcaking up the brotherly lovc); rare = alt: 'a paramour', 
THE AFFIX GHAN. 
[BK. III. CH. III. $ 21-24. 
m 
इछ ॥ २१॥ पदानि ॥ इडः, ष, (पा) ॥ अतिः । इडगे धातोर्धम् प्रत्ययो भवति । बार्तिकम् ।। भपादाने नियामुपसंख्यानम् सन्ताव था डीए । क्षार्तिकम् ।। शवायुवर्णनिवनेषु ॥ 
The affix 'ghan' comes after the root. 'in' (to study). 
This debars अच् (III. 3. 56). As भधि++प = अधि+ऐ+भ - अध्याय 'a lesson or lecture'; उपाध्यायः (उपेस्यामाधी) 'a teacher'.. 
Vart ---When the word to be formed is related to the verb pe as an ablative, the word is feminine also and optionally takes the affix 1. As उपेत्याधीयतेऽस्था र उपाध्याया or उपाध्यायी 'a female teacher'. 
Part.---The affix e comes aster the root 1, when the word so formed means 'vind', 'color', or 'cessation'. As शार: 'wind', 'green colour' &c. गोरिवाकृत. नीशारः प्रायेण शिशिरे कशः। 
उपसर्ग रुवः ॥ २२॥ पदानि ॥ उपसर्ग, रुवः, (घ) ॥ वृत्तिः । उपसर्ग उपपड़े रौसेर्धातोप प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
22. The affix 'ghañ comes after the verb fra' (to roar), when it has an upasarga in composition with it. 
This debars 49 (III. 3. 57). As arry: 'clainour', 7 4: &c. Why do we say compounded with an upasarga'? Observe c*: 'sound', 
__समि युद्रदुवः ॥ २३ ॥ पदानि ॥ समि, यु-द्र-दुखः, (घश )। वृतिः ॥ सभि उपपले शुभहस्ये शेभ्यो धातुभ्यो धम् प्रत्ययो भवति ।।। 
23. The affix 'ghan' comes after the roots 'yu' (to join), 'dru' (to run) and 'du' (to burn), when in com position with the preposition 'sam'. 
As संयावः, संद्रायः, संक्षा But प्रयकः where the preposition is not sam. 
निखीभुवोऽनुपसर्गे ॥ २४॥ पदामि ॥ त्रि-शी-भवः, अभपसर्ग,(घ)। अतिः॥ भिणीभू इत्येतेभ्यो धातु छोऽनुपरागें यो धम् प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
24: The affix 'ghan comes after the roots 'sri' (to go to) !ņi' (to lead) and 'bha'(to be), when not in com position with an upasargy. 
. This debars the affix भए (III. 3. 56). As श्राय: 'shelter', माब: a means', भावः a condition'. 
But with upasargas, we have v2: 'respect', qua: 'love'; **T: ‘source'. 
How do we explain the form प्रभाव in प्रभावो राशः the splendour of the king'? Here the word warm is not made from the compound root tv, but by compounding # with are by the rules of samása, meaniug 'excellent condition', 
BK. III. CH. III. $ 25-29.) 
THE AFFIX GHAN. 
495 
How do you explain the form भय in 'नयो रातः! Here the root at has taken the affix or diversely by III. 3. 113. 
वौ पुश्रवः ॥ २५॥ पदानि ॥ वौ, पु-युवः, (घ) ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ वावुपपदे भु श्रुत्वेताभ्यो धातुभ्यो पम् प्रत्ययो भवति॥ 
25. The affix 'ghañ' comes after the roots 'kshu' (to sneeze), and 'sru' (to move and hear) when the preposition 'vi' is in composition. 
This debars the affix ** (III. 3. 57); as, frara: 'cough'; fornata: 'flowing forth', 'celebrated'. But when without preposition, we have wq: and 27: 1 
___ अवोदोर्नियः ॥ २६ ॥ पदानि ॥ अव-उदोः, नियः, (घन)। पत्तिः । भव उत् हरयेतबोरुपपरयोर्नवर्धातोपप्रत्ययो भवति । 
26. The affix 'ghan' comes after the verb 'nt' (to lead) when the prepositions 'ava' and 'ut' are in com. position. . 
As Htta: 'throwing down'; 8192 'elevation'. 
How do you explain उजयः in समयः पार्थानाम् ? Here the affix is 'ach' by III. 3. 13. 
ने गुरतस्त्रवः ॥ २७॥ पदानि ॥ प्रे, दु-स्तु-खुवः, (घ)। वृत्तिः ॥ प्रेशप उपपले हु स्तुनु इत्येतेभ्यो धातुभ्यो पम् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
27. The allix 'ghai' comes after the roots 'dru', 'stu' and 'sru', when the word in composition is 'pra'. 
As प्रद्रायः, प्रस्तावः, प्रमावः। But not so in द्रवः, स्त: and भवः। 
निरभ्योः पल्वोः॥८॥पदानि॥ निर्-अभ्योः, प-स्वोः (घ) वृतिः ॥ निरभिपूर्वयोः पल्वोत्योर्षम् प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
28. The affix 'ghañ' comes after the roots 'pa' (to purify) and 'lu' (to cut) when 'nir' and 'abhi' are res pectively in composition. 
___The word - refers to both पूर and पू. The rule I. 3. 10. must be applied here, and thus farc comes before y, and wfår before af As fagara: 'win nowing'; भमिलावः 'moving'. But पवः and नवः, without these prepositions. 
__उम्न्योः ॥ २९ ॥ पदानि ॥ उत्-न्योः, ग्रः, (पश) ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ अन्योरुपपत्योः गृहत्येमस्मादासोप मरथयो भवति ॥ .. 
29. The affix 'ghañ' comes after the root 'gri' when the upasargas 'ut' and 'ui' are in composition. 
The verb q here resers to both the verbs q 'to make sound', and 'to swallow'. As उदगार) समुद्ररव the roaring of the sca'; निगारोवसरव 'the swallow 
496 
THE AFFIX GHAN. 
(BK III. CH. III. $ 30-33. 
ing of Devadatta'. But when without these prepositions, we have गरः। 
कधान्ये ॥३०॥ पदानि ॥ क, धान्ये, (घन, उन्न्योः )। पतिः ॥ इत्येतस्मादातोऊन्न्योरुपपदयोम मन्ययो भवति धान्यविषवज्ञापयों भवति । 
30. The affix 'ghan' comes after the verb 'Kri', when the prepositions 'ut' and 'ni' are in composition and when the sense of the verb relates to grain. 
The verb here means 'to scatter', and not 'to injure', because no words formed by this affix are found in Sanskrit in that sense. 
As उस्कारो धान्यस्य 'the winnowing of corn';निकारोधान्यस्थ the winnoving of corn'. But when not referring to grain, we have भेक्ष्योरकरः a heap of alms', gofratit: 'the essence or heap of flowers'. 
यो समि स्तुवः ॥ ३१॥ पदानि ॥ यजे, समि, स्तुवः, (घज)॥ वृत्तिः॥ यज्ञविपये प्रयोगे संपूर्वारस्तोते प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
31. The afix ghain' comes after the root 'stu' when it is preceded by the upasarga 'sam' and the word refers to sacrificial subjects. 
As संस्तावश्छन्दोगानाम् 'the Sanstava of the Chhandogas; संस्ताव(समाय स्तुवन्ति यस्मिन् शबंदोगाः सदेश:) means 'the place which the Brahmanas repeat ing hymns and prayers, occupy at a sacrifice'. 
But when not referring to sacrifice we have संस्तवरछापयो: 'the praising together of the two pupils'. 
प्रे स्त्रोग्य ॥ ३२ ॥ पदानि ॥प्रे, स्त्रः, अयो, (घ)। - वृत्तिः । स्वम भाच्छापने भस्मादासोः भानउपपले धन प्रत्ययो भवति, नशेयज्ञविषयः प्रयोगो भवति। 
32. The affix 'ghan' comes after the root 'stfi'. (to cover), when preceded by the preposition 'pra'; provi ded that the word so formed does not refer to sacrifice'. As, steryeart: 'a bed of conch'; afu TETT: 'strewing of gems'. 
प्रचने वावशब्दे ॥३३॥ पदानि ॥ प्रयने, वौ, अशब्दे, (स्त्रः, घन) वृत्तिः ॥ हम भाच्छादने भस्माद्धातोपिशनापपरे पम् प्रत्ययो भवति अपने गम्बमाने तच्चे अपनं शनाविप न भवति ॥ . . 
33. The affix 'ghan' comes after the root 'stri' (to cover), when the preposition 'vi' is in composition with it, when the sense is that of extension, and when such spreading does not refer to words. BK. III. CH. III. $ 34-36.) 
THE AFFIX GHAN. 
497 
The word gyot means 'extent, circuit, range'. As gueu FORTIT: 'the ex tension of the garment'. 
Why do we say 'when meaning extent'? Observe, quftent: 'a col lection of grass'. . Why do we say 'not referring to words'?'. Observe faract war 'prolixity of words'. 
A THRYN 07:, fa, , (år, **:, TO) fill faqatala undanfaa t yh 11 
34. The affix 'ghañ' comes after 'stri' with the upasarga 'vi', when the word so formed is the name 
of a metre. 
The word here means prosodial metre such as Gayatri &c; and not the Vedas; otherwise the word T would not have been used. Thus fort Fet. 
+6+ (VIII. 3. 94)=fireit: 'the name of a metre called Vishțara-Pankti', 
The whole word ferro is the name of a metre, and is not a word en ding with the affix ghan; only a member of this word, i. e. the first part ends with ghafl. The seventh case-affix in the word a an has the force of lo tion i. e. when the word so formed occurs in a portion of a name of a metre; it is not the full name, but it is in the name i. e. forms a portion of the name 
of : ! Y lluita il ofe, mi, (o) वृत्तिः ॥ उयुपपदे आहेढातोपप्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
**All offer for ghadiran maTiRaT: II 
35. The affix'ghasi'comes after the verb'gral' (to seize), wlicn the proposition 'ut' is in composition. 
This debars the affix 879. As 2001: 'listing up'. 
Vart:- In the Vedas this affix is applied even when the word q is preceded by fa; and the is changed into w; the sense of the two words being 'to lift up' and 'throw down' respectively of the sacrificial ladle; as, tary faard. चमदेवा भवीवृधन्। 
aft T U BE Nogta u apa, t, (uti, 90) #: दतिः ॥ सम्धुपपते पहातोपप्रत्ययो भवति मुष्टिविषय धात्वयों भवति ॥ 
36. The affix 'ghan' comes after the root grah' when in composition with the preposition "sam' when the sense of the root refers to fist. 
The word gfe means 'boxing', 'fist'; as, MT AMTEU are: 'Ol the clench. ing of the fist of the athlete'; Pet frana dark: 'Ol the seizing of the boxer', meaning grasping firmly. 
Why do we say 'referring to fist'? Observe Bank Trafy 'a collection of grain'. 
498 
THE AFFIX GHAN. 
[BK III. C11. III. $ 37-39. 
परिन्योनीमाताषयोः ॥३७॥ पदानि ॥ परि-न्योः, नी-, चूत-अवेषयोः, (५०). 
पत्तिः ॥ परिशब्ने निशमे चोपपरे चयासंपवं निव इणय धानोर्षम्प्रत्ययो भवति, भयो पवादः, यूनाभ्रेषयोः॥ 
37. The affix 'ghañ' comes after the roots 'ni' (to lead), and 'i' (to go), when the prepositions 'pari' and 'ni' are respectively in composition with them, 'and when the words so formed respectively mcan'a game' and 'propriety or arrangement or law'. 
Here again we take help of I. 3. 1o in interpreting this sátra. The verbs ofc+oft and for ty, take my when respectively meaning 'gambling' and 'itness'. As परिणायेन शारान् हन्ति 'he kills (or takes) many pieces by moving a chessman.' Here परिणव समन्तात्रय means the moving of chess-pieces from every side, and so winning the game'. So also नि++प नि ++भ-नि+ Marry: 'justice', 'propriety', 'logic'. 
But when not having these senses, we have aftura: 'marriage', and ज्ययं 'decay'; as ग्यवतः पाप: 'the sin has been destroyed'. The word भवेष 
means पदार्थानामनपचारो वथापापकरणम् । 
परावनुपात्यय इणा ॥३॥पदानि। परी, अनुपात्यये, बस, (५०)। पत्तिः ॥ परिशन उपपवे जो धातोपंम्प्रत्ययो भवति भनुपास्यये गम्यमाने ।। 
38. The afix 'ghan' comes after the root 'i' (to go) in composition with the word 'pari' when the sense is that of following in regular succession. 
As gata: 'turn, succession'; my gutor: 'thy turn'; * gala: 'my turn'. 
Why do we say 'when meaning turn? Observe apparator: 'the lapse of time'. The word अनुपास्ययः कममासस्वानतिपातः 'not breaking the series or order'. 
युपयोः शेतेःपर्याये॥३लापदानि वि-उपयोः, शेते, पर्याये,(प.) पतिः॥विस इत्येतयोरुपपदवीः शेर्धातोम्प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
39. The affix 'ghan' comes after the root s" (to lie down) when the prepositions 'vi' and 'upa' are in composition with it, and when the sense of the word so formed is that of 'regular succession'. 
As, a fatura: 'thy turn of sleeping' (i. e. the rest enjoyed in rotation by the sentinels on watch); मम विशायः 'my turn of rest'; तव राजोपशाव राजानमु atfermata: 'thy turn of sleeping the king'. 
: Why do we say "regular succession'? Observe our: 'lying by the side of or ambush'; fruy: 'doubt'. 
BK. III. CH. III. 5 40-42.] 
THE AFFIX GHAN. 
499 
- 
- 
- 
हस्तादाने रस्तेये॥४०॥ पदानि हस्तादाने, चे, अस्तेये, (धन)। वृतिः ॥ हस्तादाने गम्यमाने चिनोते तोपप्रत्ययो भवति, नत्रेत् स्तेयं चोर्ये भवति । बार्तिकम् ।। उच्चयस्य प्रतिषेधो वक्तव्यः॥ 
40. The affix 'ghañ' comes after the root 'chi' (to collect), when the sense expressed is that of taking by hand, provided it does not refer to stealing. 
By saying 'taking by hand the close proximity of the person taking to the thing accepted or taken is indicated. As पुष्पमचायः 'gathering flowers 
by hand'; फलमचायः 'gathering fruits by hand'. 
Why do we say taking by hand'? Observe qक्षाप्रस्थानां फलानो वाटपा 992 itfa 'he gathers with the stick the fruits hanging on the top of the tree'. 
Why do we say 'when not meaning to steal ? Observe gogorrido 'the gathering of flowers by theft'. 
Vart-Prohibition must be stated in the case of the word चयः 'gathering', as geitet: 'gathering of flowers by hand. 
निवासचितिशरीरोपसमाधानेष्वादेश्च कः ॥४९॥ पदानि ॥ नि वास-चिति-शरीर-उपममाधानेषु, आदेः, च, कः,(घ) .. 
वृतिः ॥ निवास चिति शरीर उपसमाधान, एतेष्वर्येषु चिनोतर्षमा प्रत्ययो भवति धातोरादेश ककार भावेशी भवति ।। 
41. The affix 'ghañ', comes after the root'chi (to gather), and 'k' is the substitute of the initial 'ch' in these senses viz.'a dwelling', 'a fire on the funeral pile', 'the body' and 'collection, 
That in which people dwell (निवसति) is called निवासः or 'dwelling'. That which is gathered together (चीयते) is called चिति or funeral pile'. शरीर mcans the body of all living beings; and ZTETT means making a heap. Thus frita: 'a dwelling'; as in artifarry: 'Kasi-dwelling'; ifra fasta let him arrange the akaya fire i.e. the sun-ral fire'; arg: 'body', as erfärea: 47: 'a perishable body; महान् गोलनिकायः 'a heap of cow.dung'. . 
Why do we say 'when having these senses'? Observe 'gathering'. Why is not this rulc applied in मसान् काष्ठनिघयः 'a large heap of wood? Here multiplicity is expressed and not collection or aggregation. 
संघे चानात्तराधये ॥ ४२ ॥ पदानि ॥ संघे, च, अनोत्तराचार्य, (चे, आदेश्व, कः, घन्) । 
वृतिः ॥ संघे वाध्ये चिनोतेातोपप्रत्ययो भवति भावेश्चकः ॥ 
42. The affix ghai' comes after the root chi' (to gather) and 'r' is the substituto of the initial 'ch' in 
500 
THE AFFIX NACH. 
(BK. III. CII. III. $ 43. 
bula 
the sense of a multitude or assembly' (of living beings possessing some common characteristics), but not merely a confused crowd of men. 
The word riy means a collection or assembly of living beings. It is of two sorts :-either by collection of persons possessing common qualifications, or a mere confused crowd of men. The collection denoting a confused crowd is here excepted and by paryuddsa negation the other is taken. Thus forte faasta: 'the assembly of beggars'; Firuare: 'the assembly of Brahmaņas'; Garantufara: 'the assembly of Grammarians'. 
But acfaat: 'a herd of hogs'; because it is a mere collection. So also कृताकृतसमुच्चयः 'the collection of what is done and not done'; प्रमाणसमुच्चवः *the collection of proofs'. Here there is no p in either of the two senses, 
it not being a collection of living animals, the affix ghaft is not employed. 
.. wheferente a fare in you get for at afareti, , fizera 
sfer: 11 AGO FATTO tempo real performirare great 
43. The affix inach' comes after a root in de noting reciprocity of action, and the word so formed is 
in the feminine gender, 
The word ** means 'action' and is not the technical "Karma' meaning the accusative case. cufatrs means reciprocity or interchange of action. The word so evolved is feminine in form and denotes mere 'action' (1) also. The anubandha pin ocis qualitative and is added to distinguish this affix from other affixes: thus in sutra V. 4. 14 this particular affix is meant. 
Thus ***+at+or+* +6 =sarroft (V.4. 14, and VII. 3. 6) 'mutual abuse'. So also caret, niet. The affix uq forms only an im aginary stem; for this stem must take the affix or by V.-4. 14, which even 
does not form the complete word until the affix sty of the feminine is added. 
Why do we say 'in the feminine'? Observe safarit gadi 
The making of this a separate sätra by itself and not reading it in the subdivision of feminine affixes beginning with fatit (IIL. 3. 94) is for the sake of removing the obstructing aphorisms that would otherwise have prevented the application of this rule. 
For, had it been taught in connection with finit &c, then the affixes that would have debarred ft &c, would a fortiori have debarred this also. But by keeping it separate from that class, it is indicated that those obstruct ive affixes which debar fin &c, do not debar this. Thus surgalt, r efti Here or being a class root would have taken (III. 3. 107) in the ferni. 
BK. III. CH. III. $ 44, 45.] 
THE AFFIX GHAN. 
50r 
nine, as itu; and you would have taken up by III. 3. 104, as Hf. The roots fu and is, by III. 3. 102 & 103, take up by debarring i This debar ring affix up, however, is not dcbarred by this rule; as tu.HT, furtot are the proper feminine forms, and not a t &c. The form surget is, however, an apparent exception. All these exceptions, counter-exceptions &c. are examples of the taught in III. 3. 113. 
wurfarur Hra tra 1880 astfall affarit, pra, Thu 11 वृतिः ॥ अभिविषौ गम्यमाने धातोभावे इनएपल्ययो भवति ।। 
44. The aflix 'inun' comes after a root in de noting condition, when co-extensiveness is meant. 
The word ufafafy means co-extensiveness, that is to say, the complete comprehension or relation between the action and the quality. Thus ait fox'a general or tumultuous uproar; # +6 +574-80 (V. 4. 15. and VI 4. 164) - Firanya general confusion'; so erat UH 'a general flow or stream'. 
Why do we say 'when meaning co-extensiveness'? Observe it!, HITT, TT: 1 
Why do we use the word 974 again in this sätra, when its anuvšitti. was already flowing from sätra III. 3. 18? The object is that the aishar rule (III. 1. 94) should not apply here and hence never comes in this sense, Patanjali says that the repetition is for the sake of indicating that in neuter gender, when co-extensiveness is expressed, the affixes &c. are prohibited; so that the affixes hi &c. should not come in the neuter with the force of PTI 
The separateness of this satra is for the same purpose as the last horism. The affix ryte is not, however, prohibited; as . See rule freeyat H (III. 3. 113). The affix ryu (the operative part being ) forms but an imaginary stem, which does not become real and complete till it takes the affix Ho by V. 4. 15, as shown above. 
Tito Samide: 1184119tfa U STATH, paauit:, 78:() वृत्तिः ॥ भव नि इत्येतयोरुपपदयोग र्धातोपस्बयो भवति भाको गम्यमाने ॥ 
45. The aflix 'ghan comes after the verb 'grah' (to seize), in composition with 'ava', and 'ui'; when malediction is meant. 
Though you is immediately, near, we take the anuvritti of 7 (III. 3. 16), because we see that its anuvșitti is possible. 
The word *It means 'cursirig'. As BTAIRT FAR Û Tortare 'cursed be thou, O! sinner'. So also FAQ Man' 
Why ‘when meaning cursing'? Observe 4:qffa ; facercari 
i ferqerara u Banaterra de forqurara, (:, ) 
502 
TIL AFFIX GIIAN, 
[BK. III. Cui. III. & 46-49. 
: re: 11 ataque durante unauzt warfar farmerara araharura il 
46. The afli 
i' comes after the root 'grah', when the word 'pra' is in composition, and the sense denoted is the desire of acquisition. 
As 774920 atfa for: foorui 'the beggar walks for the sake of alms, carrying a vessel in hand'; 2487U na faste oferumt carrying a sacrificial ladle, the Brahmaņa walks about for his fee'The word fattat means the wish to have something'. . 
Why do we say 'when meaning desire of gain? Observe met ATTET I 
ott a 49 of astfall o, a, (918, 79) FT: 11 afwan Togaat spelet 
47. The affix 'ghañ comes after the rootógrah', in composition with 'pari' when it relates to sacrificial subjects. 
As Fortune: "the northern fencing of the sacrificial altar'; mr. Trans: 'the southern fencing of the sacrificial altar'. 
Why do we say 'when relating to sacrifices'? Observe qfche: 477812a 'the fencing of Devadatta'. 
Ar g rad at y lll ata o 1, 3, 7, (3) gfa n fantaarne ragacarereintrafresh rangpaat arafer il 
48. The afix 'ghañ' comes after the verb 'vri' preceded by 'ni'; when the sense is that of grain. 
The y here means both e and . This debars the affix 89. As arct: 'rice growing wild or without cultivation'. 
Why do we say 'meaning grain'? Observe format at 'a virgin girl. 
fe afateraca: Il y en aqrfa u ofa, rafa-ora sai, (19) 
pfer: li pa rar y Toerforazit 99 482037 starlet !! 
· 49. The affix 'ghañ' comes after the verbs sri', 'yu', 'pa' and 'dru', when the preposition 'ut' is in composition. 
This debars the affix ach (III. 3. 56). Thus pura: 'rising of a planet'; var: 'mixing'; RT4: 'purifying ghec'; and 779: 'flight'. 
How do you explain the form समुथा यः in पतनान्ताः समुपवाः? The word for trent 'optionally' in the next sútra, exerts a retrospective effect on this satra, and the form is an optional one. This is a most unusual thing and is 
BK. III. CI. III. $ 50-52.] 
THE AFFIX. GHAN. 
503 
NARA 
RAM 
called सिंहावलोकनन्यायः the maxim of the lion's backward glance'. It is used when one casts a retrospective glance at what he has left behind, while at the samc time hic is procceding, just as the lion, while going onward in search of prey, now and then bonds his neck backwards to see if any thing be within its reach. 
विभाषा सहिरुपलवोः ॥५०॥ पदानि ॥ विभाषा, आकि, रु पलुवोः, (घ) ॥ 
वृत्तिः भाडि उपपदे रौतेलबतेश विभाषा पम्प्रत्ययो भवति । 
50. The affix 'ghañ' is optionally employed after the verbs 'ru' (to roar) and 'plu' (to float), when the preposition an' is in composition. 
As भारावः or भारवः 'noise'; भासावः or भातकः 'bathing'. 
__ अवे ग्रहो वर्षप्रतिबन्धे ॥१॥ पदानि ॥ अवे, ग्रहः, वर्ष-प्रति वन्धे, (विभाषा, पा) ॥ 
पत्तिः ॥ भव उपपदे महेर्धातोर्चप्रत्ययो भवति विभापा वर्षप्रतिवन्धेऽभिधे।। . 
51. The affix 'ghan' is optionally employed after the root 'grah', when the word 'ava' is in composition, the sense being witholding of rain, 
The word 'optionally' is understood herc. The word goaferary means the absence of rain, from some cause or another, when the season has arrived ; as भवमाहः or भवग्रहो देवस्व 'the draught of rain'. 
Why do we say 'when meaning obstruction of rain'? Observe भवमहः पदव। 
प्रे वणिजान् ॥ १२॥ प्रे, वणिजाम, (विभाषा, ग्रहः, घन) ॥ वृत्तिः। प्रशद उपपदे हेर्धातोर्विभाषा पम्प्रत्ययो भवसि प्राययान्तवाच्य वणिजा सम्ब न्धी भवति ।। 
52. The affix 'ghañ is optionally employed after the verb 'grah’iu composition with 'pra', when the word so formed relates to commerce. 
Both the words grah and vibhåshå are understood here. By 'relation to commerce' is mcant here the string of the balance; and not commerce in general. That string by which a balance is held is called तुलामग्रहः or तुलाप्रयाहः, as तुलामग्राण घरति or तुनाममण चरति; and this may be said of any person whether he be a trader or not. 
Why do we say 'when belonging to commerce? Observe qaret dana the whip of Devadatta'. 
रश्मी च ॥ ५३ ॥ पदानि ॥ रश्मी, च, (महः, विभाषा,ने, पन) ॥ वृत्तिः। प्रशदउपपः महेर्धातोर्षिभाषा धम्मस्ययो भवति रश्मिशेत्भत्ययान्तेनाभिधीयते ।। 
504 
TIIE AFFIX ACII. 
(BK. III. C1. III. $ 53-56 
. 
. 
53. The affix 'ghan' comes optionally after the verb 'grah' in composition with 'pra', when the word 
so formed means 'a rein'. 
The word rich means here the bridle by means of which horses &c. joined to the carriage, are held under control; as 498: or garg: 'a rein'. 
वृक्षाराच्छादने ॥ ५४॥ पदानि ॥ वृक्षोतेः, आण्छादने, (वि. भाषा, ग्रे, घन) ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ प्रशब्दउपपले वृणोतेर्धातोर्विभाषा धम प्रस्थयो भवति प्ररवयान्तं न चेदाच्छादनविशेष उच्यते ॥ 
___b4. The affix 'ghan' comes optionally after the verb 'vri' (to choose), when 'pra' is in composition, and the word so formed means 'a sort of covering'. 
As $1977: or get: 'a cloak, a veil'. Why do we say 'when it means a covering'? Observe qimit 
परी भुवो ऽवाने ॥५५॥ परौ, भुवः, अवजाने, (विभाषा, घ)। वृत्तिः ।। परिदउपपवे विभाषा पम्मत्ययो भवति भवज्ञाने गम्यगामे ॥ 
65. The allix 'ghañ' is optionally employol after the verb bha', the word 'pari' being in construction, and the sense of the word so formed being 'disregard'. 
The word HT means 'contempt', 'neglect', 'disregard' &c. As fitry: or परिभवः 'insult, humiliation'. 
Why do we say 'when meaning disregard'? The word gfrat: may be then construcd to mean सर्वसोभवन-परिभवः 'surrounding'. 
एरच ॥५६॥ पदानि ॥ एः, अच, (अकर्तरि, संज्ञायाम, भावे) ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ वर्णान्ताद्धातोर्भावभकर्तरिच कारके संज्ञायाम मस्ययो भवति ।। बार्शिकम् ॥ भविधौ भवादिनामुपसंख्यानम् ॥ वार्तिकम्।। भवसवी छन्दसि वक्तव्यो।। 
56. The afix 'ach comes after a root ending in 'i' or '' (when mere action is denoted, or when the sense is that of au appellative, the word being related to the verb from which its name is deduced, but not as an agent).. 
The words within brackets are to be supplied from sätras 18 and 19: and these words are to be supplied in every subsequent sätra as far as stra 113 of this chapter. This debars 4. The u in uris qualitative, in satras like VI. 2. 144. 
Thus, **: 'collecting'; sa: 'going'; a: 'victory'; Fa: 'wasting, 
BK. III. CH. III. $ 57, 58.] 
THE AFFIX AP. 
505 
Varl.--In this connection the words 7 &c. should also be enumer. ated. As ft+ y=*24 'lear'; qd 'rain'. These being neuter words, otherwise would have taken the affix it &c. brit for this Vartika. 
Vart.-The words and # are formed by this affix, and occur in the Vedas. As a free #FT, TTT: I These roots and a would have otherwise taken the affix orq. The form would have been the same, but there would be difference of accent. See Rig. I. 112. 21, and Yaj. XI. 2. 
ta ni yg lagrla il 711-5ft:, ora i 07:11 **RIFT TTO=5V 34747931 afar II 
57. After a root ending in long 'hi, short 'u', or long ‘û', there is the affix 'ap'. 
This debars 97. The qis indicatory for the sake of accent (III. 1. 3) ; as, +87= T: 'scattering'; T-TT: 'beveragė, poison'; --IT: 'arrow'; ý : 'barley'; 27: 'reaping'; 4--07: 'winnowing corn'. 
The x in 7. is merely for the sake of euphony: it is not a changed into t; for then by the rule 'that which follows a is also called Har" short only would have been taken and not long # (I. 1.70). 
489&f MAT 11 45 ut uerfa ok--r-fafa-0, , (a) 
A: ll qerformant urgail sqarazil na fa 11 at 11 of TOFTH FAIR !! वार्तिकम् ।। घायं कविधानं स्थास्नापावधिहनियुध्यर्थम् ॥ 
58. The affix 'ap' comes after the verbs 'gral', “vri', 'dri', 'nischi' and 'gam'. 
This debars and in the case of fify the affix ye is debarred. As *: 'a planet'; ar: 'a boon'; FT: 'tearing, a cave'; Fraga: 'certainty'; TA: 'march'. 
The verb fan would have taken stą, but takes in which causes differ cnce of acccnt. 
Vart.-The roots ry and to should also be included in this; as #y: 'obedient'; qu: 'battle'. 
Vart. When the sense is that of the affix it is directed to be employed, after the following verbs :-स्था, स्ना, पा, व्यध, हन् and युध्। As प्रस्थः 'a table-land' (on which they move); T: 'a vessel for bathing' (in which they bathe); 991: 'a place where water is distributed to travellers' (that out of which they drink); T1/TT: (VI. 1. 16) 'an awl, a drill' (that by which they pierce); forn: "an obstacle' (in which they are obstructed); ray: 'battle' (where they fight). 
rasa: Il yer un certo il gutt, :, (era) Il वृत्तिः ।। उपसर्ग उपपर्धातोरप्प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
506 
THE AFFIX AP. 
[BK. III. CH. III. 459-63. 
59. The affix 'ap' comes after the verb 'ad' (to eat) when an upasarga is in composition. 
As fare: (11. 4. 38) 'half-chewed morsel; WA: 'voracious'. 
Why do we say 'when compounded with an upasarga'? Observe are: 'grass'; अ+प घस्+भ (II. 4. 38). 
नो सच ॥६० ॥ पदानि ॥ नौ, ण, च, (अदः, अप)॥ पत्तिः ॥ निशब्द उपपदे भवर्धातोर्ण:मत्ययो भवति चकारात्प् च ।। 
60. And the affix 'na' as well as 'ap', comes after the verb 'ad' (to eat), when the upasarga ni' is iu composition. 
As नि+भ+पनि+भाव+अन्याः (VII. 2. 116) "fceding'; नि+भ+अप नि+घस्+भ (II. 4.38)=निषसः 'eating, food'. 
व्यधजपोरनुपसर्गे॥६॥पदानि॥ व्यध-जपोः, अनुपसर्ग, (अप)। वृत्तिः । व्यष जप इत्येतयोरनुपसर्गयोरप्मत्ययो भवति ।। 
61. The affix 'ap' comes after the verbs'vyadh' and 'jap', when no upasarga is in composition with them. 
This debars . As 644: 'wound'; 19: 'muttering'. Why do we say 'when upasarga-less'? Observe Hrsurar, Thran 
स्वनहसोर्वा ॥६॥ पदानि॥स्वन-हसाः, वा, (अप, अनुपसर्ग) ॥ सिः॥स्वनहसोरनुपसर्गयोर्वा भमत्वयो भवति ।। 
62. The affix 'ap' comes optionally after the verbs 'svan' and 'has' when no upasarga is in composi. tion with them. 
Thus Fry: or FTT: 'sound'; #: or ETH: 'laughter'. But with upasargas, we have only one form; प्रस्थानः 'a loud noise'; महासः 'a loud laughter'. 
यमः समुपनिविषु च ॥६३॥ पदानि ॥ यमः, सम-उप-नि-विषु, च, (अनुपसर्ग, वा, अप) ॥ 
वृत्तिः । सम् उपनि विइत्येतेषपपदेषु भनुपसर्गेऽपि यमे भमत्ययो भवति ।। 
. 63. And the affix 'ap' comes optionally after the verb 'yam', when the upasargas 'sam', 'upa', 'ni' and 'vi' are in composition; or even when it is upasarga-less. 
This debars पम्. As खंयामः or संयमः 'restraint'; उपवामः or उपवमः 'mar. riage'; frary:or fran: 'restrictive rule'; forent. or farmin: 'check, distress"; 74: or 44:1 
नौ गदनदपदस्वनः ॥ ६४ ॥पदानि नी, गद-नद पठ-स्वनः, (अम्, वा)। Bk. III. CH. III. | 64-67.) 
THE AFFIX AP. 
507 
वृतिः॥निराब्द उपप गद गद पठ स्वन इत्येतेभ्यो धातुभ्यो वा अप्परबंदो भवति ॥ 
64. The afix 'ap' comes optionally after the verbs 'gad' (to speak), 'nad' (to sound), 'path' (to read), 'svan' (to sound), wheu the upasarga 'ni' is in composi tion with them. 
This debars 4. Thus fare: or fara: 'recitation'; farar: or fratre: 'noise'; faqa: or farars: 'reading'; fiya: or foregra: 'a noise'. 
font statui un llarfa u FT:, alur4r, , (AT, 27, got, a) : 
बत्तिः । तेसोर्निपर्वादनुपसर्गाच्च वीणा वा भप्प्रत्ययो भवति ।। . 
65. The afix 'ap' comes optionally after the verb 'kvan'(to jingle), when 'ni' is in composition with it, as well as when it is without any upasarga, or when 'flute' is meant. 
This debars the affix . Thus fatur: or FKTU: 'a musical tone'. Ku: or mu: 'sound'. When it refers to 'Aute', it must have some upasarga not necessarily fat; as Faronun tur. 
But not so here, wfahrut da, where the upasarga being of and the word not referring to 'a flute', no option is allowed. When flute is not meant thc upasarga must be fa or no upasarga at all, for the optional application of the asfix 19. To sum up, and takes 979 optionally under three conditions:-Ist when preceded by fat, or 2ndly when having no upasarga, or 3rdly when it rcfers to 'flute', and then it must have some upasarga. 
forei va: oftar IC I agro a forzi, ww:, afleira, (ra) 
fer: 11 TU SOTT FTA , warzmaieraquat nafaqi TATU penal 
66. The afix 'ap' comes invariably after the Yerb 'pan' (to barter), when the sense is that of measure. 
The word fara 'invariably' is used in the aphorism in order to stop the anuvșitti of the word optionally. Thus workiTU: 'a handful of radishes'; 
qu: 'a handful of vegetable'. These words secondarily have come to mean a measure equal to a handful, irrespective of any thing. 
When not meaning measure, we have qu: 'trade'. 
taistuent u 9 lugtfa 1 #qi, tuent, (a) इतिः ।। मवेर्धातोरनुपसर्गारपरययो भवति । 
67. The afix 'ap'comes after the verb 'mad', when not in compositiou with an upasarga. 
308 
THE AFFIX AP. 
(BK. III. CH. III. 
68-70. 
This debars . As for: 'pride of knowledge'; v9: 'pride of wealth'; AT: 'pride of family'. When compounded with upasargas, we have 
: 'mad'; 4978: 'error or carelessness'. 
manat pull of u 476- f#:n um petat ayat Gagroda gösforta 
68. The words 'pramada' and 'sammada' are irregularly formed, meaning joy'. 
As part 494:'the joy of girls'; alfani ne: 'the rejoicing of cuckoos'. 
Why do we say 'when meaning delight? Observe qor: 'carelessness'; HAT: 'frenzy'. 
Instead of saying 'the verb mad preceded by pra and san takes the affix ag' which also would have given the above forms, the full forms have been used in the satra to indicate that these words are so in this sense; for the sense of the root is not visible in these words. 
tut: ENTET -4:, :, (ra) na वृत्तिः ।। समुशरोरुपाक्योरमसे तो पाविषये धात्वयें प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
69. The alix cap comes after the verb 'aj' (to go), whon tho prepositions 'sam' and 'ut' are in compo sition, and the word so formed refers to beasts. 
This debars 97. The root ** 'means to go, to throw. When preced ed by #4, it means 'a collection'; and preceded by q it means 'driving'. As **:quat a herd of cattle'; 74: qr 'driving forth of cattle'. 
Why do we say 'when applying to cattle ? Observe en port, 09757: oraruti 
Tag : Il 90 il utla u stog, on: it वृत्तिः ।। लह इति निपास्यते भविषवद्धालयों भवति । 
70. The word "glaha' is irregularly formed, when the sense of the root refers to gambling. 
This word is derived from the root 45. The verb or takes the affix w and thus forms at, and then irregularly r is changed into ff; as YTTEE GT: 'cast of the dice'. 
Why do we say 'when referring to gambling'? Observe 4: I 
Others say, this word is derived regularly from the root n. 'to gam ble', by adding the affix *79, and thus debarring 9. They suppose, therefore, 
existence of the root 15, to explain the form : 1 The counter-example which they would give, is my 'receiving', formed by adding the affix a 
BK. III. CH. III. 6 71-74] 
THE AFFIX AP. 
509 
प्रजने सत्तः ॥ १॥ पदानि ॥ प्रजने, सत्तः, (अप) ॥ पतिः। ससेंधातोः प्रमने विषयेभप्प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
71. The affix 'ap' comes after the verb 'sri' (to flow), iu the sense of impreguating (the covering of cows &c). 
This debars . The word wat means 'the first covering of a cow by a bul'. As गवामुपसरः 'impregnation of cows'; पानामुपसरः impregnation of cattle'. 
हवः संप्रसारणं च न्यम्युपविष ॥ १२ ॥ पदानि ॥ एवः, संप्रसारणम्, च, नि-अभि-उप-विषु, (अप) ॥ 
इनिः॥नि भभि उप वि इत्येतेषु उपपतेषु हवयतेदातोः संप्रसारणम् मप् प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
72. The affix 'ap' comes after the verb 'hve' (to call), when the preposition 'ui' abhi' "upa' and 'vi' are in composition with it, and its semivowel is changed into the corresponding vowel. 
This debars . As fa +8+4= + + (VI. 1. 108)=fa+1+#(VII. 3. 84)=7* (VI. 1. 78) 'invocation'; VTET: 'invocation';. 3984: 'invitation; विस्वः 'calling'. But प्रहावः a summons'. 
आकि युद्धे ॥३॥ पदानि ॥ आकि, युद्ध, (हवः, संप्रसार, अप्)। वृतिः ।। भार उपपले हवयतेोतोः संप्रसारणमा प्रत्ययो भवति बुद्धेऽभिधेये ।। 
73. Tho aflix 'ap' coincs after the verb 'hve' when the word in composition is the upasarga "an', and the semi-vowel of the root is changed into its corres. ponding vowel, when the word so formed means battle. 
As area: 'battle' (where they challenge each other). But otherwise Mikla: 'calling'. 
निपानमाहावः ॥ ४ ॥ पदानि ॥ निपानम्, आहावः, (आकि, हवः, सम्प्रसारणम्, अप)। 
- वृशिः ॥ भारपूर्वस्य इषवर्धातोः संमसारणमपप्रत्ययो वृद्धिश्च निपात्यते निपानं चरनि धं भवति ।। 
74. The word 'âhåva' is irregularly formed Whion moaning a trouglı. 
The word a t: is irregularly formed from by the prefix 47, then samprasarana, and the vriddhi of the vowel. Thus भा+ +भप-भाह+भ-भाहो 
#=HTETT: 'a trough near a well for watering cattle'. Otherwise wer: 'calling'. Even in the word spra: the sense of calling is understood. It is that place near a well, containing water, where cattle are called or invited to drink water. 
510 
THE AFFIX AP. 
[BK. III. CH. III. 975-77. 
भावेऽनुपसर्गस्थ ॥५॥ पदानि ॥ भावे, अनुपसर्गस्य, (हवः, संप्रसा रखम्, अप)॥ 
पतिः।। भनुपसर्गस्थ रयतेः संप्रसारणमप्प्रत्ययो भवति भावेऽनिधये ॥ 
75. The affix 'ap' comes after the verb 'hve' and.there is the change of the semi-vowel to its corres. ponding vowel, when the root is upasarga-less, and mere action is denoted. 
AS : 'calling'; हवे हवे सुहवं शरमिन्द्रम् । 
Why do we say 'when no upasarga is in composition with it ? Observe HITA: Though the anuvsitti of the word Ty was understood in this aphorism from sutra 18, its repetition here shows that the anuvritti of sutra 19. which was running, must not be taken ; so that.this word applies to agent-karaka also. 
हनश्च वयः ॥ ६ ॥ पदानि ॥ हनः, च, वधः, (भावे, अनुपसर्ग स्य, अप)॥ 
पतिः॥ हन्तेातोरनुपसर्ग भावे भप्माययो भवति, तत्संनियोगेन च वधादेशः, सचान्तोदामः। 
___76. The affix 'ap' comes after the root 'han' when upasarga-less, iin the sense of mere action, and 'vadha' is the substitute of 'han' before this amx. 
Thus ry has udatta accent on its final. The affix sta which is anu datta generally (III. I. 4) thus becomes udatta. 
As TNTTOTY 'the killing of thieves"; qvFUGTE 'the killing of robbers'. When action is not denoted, the affix घम् applies; as पातः 'a blow. So also when an upasarga is in composition with it; as प्रघातः. पातः । 
The word in the aphorism does not connect T with the substitute पथ, there being no co-ordination, it refers to the affixes under discussion. Thus we have the affix पम् also; as पात: 'killing'. 
मत्तौ घमः ॥ 99 ॥ पदानि ॥ मत्ती, घनः, (हमः, अप) पतिः ॥ मविभिधेयायां हन्तरमाययो भवति, पभादेशः॥ 
77. The affix 'ap' comes after the verb 'han', when the word so formed means solidity, and 'ghan' is the substitute. 
The word are means 'hardness', 'solidity'. Thus OT: 'a mass of cloud'; पधिपन: 'solid curd'. How do we say धनं दधि Here the quality is taken for the thing qualified. 
. अन्तर्घनो देशे ॥७॥पदानि । अन्तः, घनः, देणे, (हनः, अय), पतिः ॥ भन्तःपूर्वाद्धन्तेरप्परवयो भवति पनादेशल भवति अभिषय।। 
Bx. III. CH. III. 978-82.] 
THE AFFIX AP. 
SI 
78. The verb 'han' preceded by the word 'an tar' takes the affix 'ap', and 'ghan' is the substitute of the word 'han', when the word so formed means 'a country'. 
As भन्तर+इन् अप्भ न्तर=धन्+भ-अन्तर्षन: 'name of a country of Ba. hika'; (a porch or court, an open space before the house between the entrance door and the house). Some write the word with au as a du:, that is also valid. 
Why do we say 'when meaning a country'? Observe saronat 'strik ing in the middle'. 
अगारैकदेशे प्रघणः प्रघासच ॥ ७९ ॥ पदानि ॥ अगार-एकदेशे, प्रघमः, प्रघासः, च, (हनः)॥ 
पत्तिः। पूर्वस्थ हन्ः प्रषण प्रपाण इत्येतो शब्दौ निपात्यते भगाकरेचे वाच्थे । 
79. The words 'praghana' and 'praghana' are irregularly formed meaning'a portion of a dwelling house'. 
Thus qu: or you: 'a porch before the door of a house, a portico'. This is formed from हन् with z, irregularly. 
Why do we say 'when meaning a portion of a house? Observe seta: 1 
उद्घनोत्याधानम् ॥०॥ पदानि ॥ उद्घनः, अत्याधानम्, (हनः, अप)। 
पतिः ।। उत्पस्य इन्रुत्पन इति निपात्यतेसवाधान चे भवति ॥ 
80. The word 'udghana' is irregularly formed in the sense of 'bench', 
This is formed from उत् +हन् irregularly. Thus उपनः 'a carpenter's bench' (the wood on which placing other planks &c. the carpenter carves &c). 
When not having this sense, we have gra: 'uneven'. 
अपघनोरङ्गम् ॥ ८१॥ पदानि ॥ अपघनः, अङ्गम्, (हनः, अप)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ भपपूर्वस्व हन्तेरपधनति मिपाल्य, भङ्ग चेत्तभवति ।। 
81. The word 'apaghana' is irregularly formed meaning 'a member of the body'. 
This is formed irregularly from 179 +67. Thus spren: 'a limb or member of thc body'. The word sy means a portion of the body, such as hand or foot, and not the whole body. Otherwise we have TOTA: 1 
करज्योविद्रुषु ॥ २ ॥ पदानि ॥ करणे, अयः-वि-टुघु, (हनः, अप, घनः) ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ अयस् विष्ट इत्येतेपूपरेषु हन्तेर्धातोः करणे कारकेपरययो भवति, पमावेश ।। 
82. The aflix 'ap' comes after the verb 'han' 
512 
THE AFFIX AT: 
[BK. III. CH. III. $ 83-85. 
when the words 'ayas', 'vi' or 'dru' are in composition with it, when the word so formed is related to the verb as an instrument, and 'ghan' is the substitute of 'han'. . As setan: 'a forge-hammer' (whereby the iron is destroyed); ferea: 'a mallet'; 197: 'an axe'. Some writc nu:, the being changed into u cither by rule VIII. 4. 3. or by including this word in the class of SITTEUTE (IV. 2. 80). 
Fara FTC3 11 ugifa u face, *, *, ( , 57, ora) u ofer: 11 ETT 3994 FTÓ FTC Fa: **: Trattafa gamall 
83. The affix ka' also comes after the verb 'hau', when 'stamba' (a clump) is the word in composition, and the relation of the word so formed to the verb is that of an instrument. .. The word in the satra draws in sry from the last aphorism and in that case 9 replaces #t. Thus Farah: or taat: 'a small hoe for weeding clumps of grass'. In the feminine gender, the forms are fino al as well as Faragati When an is added, we have fran: 1 Thus + 7+87 (VI. 4. (38) = (VII. 3. 54). When she is added, 6 is totally replaced by si When in. strument is not meant, we have fara ora: 1 
ut 7: 11 cy #agufa u odt, :, (*Tū, :, e7a) . F: II finaa97anatatcquait yta FTUATR TURNT: 
: 84. The affix 'ap' comes after the verb 'han', "When the upasarga 'pari' is in composition, and the rela tion between the word so formed, and the verb, is that of an instrument, and 'gha' replaces 'han'. 
Thus after: or qfa: (VIII. 2. 22) 'an iron beam used for locking or shụtting the gate, an iron club'... 
rape ore Il y el actor u 698, 49, (sta, Fa:) * वृत्तिः । उपपूर्वस्य हन्तरप्प्रत्यय उपचालोपश्च निपारयते ।। 
85. The word 'upaghna' is irregularly formed meaning 'an inclined place for leaning or support'. i It is formed by adding wq (III. 3. 76) to the verb preceded by the upasarga 39, then eliding the penultimate 9 of 8; this is the irregularity. Then by sandhi rules 6 is changed into qa: 1 This form would have been given by the alfix o also, without any irregularity, 
The word 81172 refers to proximity, contiguity.' Thus niagaat: 'thic declivity of the mountain'; so also qr996: 'bordering the village'. 
: Why do we say 'when meaning 'support? Observe materia: 1 
BK. III. C11. III. $ 86-88.) 
THE AFFIX KTRI. 
.'513 
- संघोद्घौ गणप्रशंसयोः ॥८६॥ पदानि ॥ संघ-उधौ, गण-प्र शंसयोः, (अप, घत्वं)॥ 
___वृत्तिः। स वोरुपपदयोईन्स हातोरप्मस्ययष्टिलोपो पर च निपारयते, यथासक्यं गणेऽभिधेये प्रशंसायों गम्यमानायाम् ।। 
86. The words 'sangha' and 'udgha' are irre gularly formed in the sense of a collection', and 'a praise' respectively. 
These words are thus formed; सम् +हम् +भप-सं++भ-सं+घ.+भ-संघः। Thus संघः पशनाम "a herd of cattle'; so also उदघे मनुष्यः 'an excellent man'. The word 'respectively' is inserted from I. 3. 10. When not used in these senses, we have #ra: 'union'. 
. निघो निमितम् ॥ ७ ॥ पदानि निघः, निमितम, (हनः, अप ) 
वृत्तिः । निष इति निपूर्वाद्धन्तेरप्रस्थवष्टिनोपो घावं व निपारयते निमितं चेदभिधेयं भवति । 
87. The word 'nigha' is irregularly formed in the sense of 'as higlı as broad'. 
The word forfata means 'measured all round' i.e. 'as high as broad ET TFIT: 'trees as high as broad'. Fer Trou: 'square or cubic or circular halls'. Otherwise, when not meaning 'as high as broad', we have fora: 'a blow'. The word निमित-समन्तान्मितं, समारोहपरिणाहम् । It may be derived from मा or from मि। In the first case it will incan 'measured' and in the other, 'erected, built'. Professor Bothlingk refers to Apastamba Dharma. I. 20. 30 for the meaning of this word. 
डिवतः त्रिः ॥ ८ ॥ पदानि ॥ हु-इतः, वित्रः, (भावे, अकर्तरि, कारके)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ यस्य सलाप दिवतो धातोः किः प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
88. The affix 'ktri' comes after the verb which has an indicatory 'qu', when denoting mere action &c. 
The phrases 'when the sense is that of mere action', and 'when the sense is that of an appellative, the word being related to the verb from which its name is deduced, but not as agent', are of course understood in this, as in all the pre vious aphorisms. Then by IV. 4. 20, (of the affix कि, म is always the aug ment) we must add #, for we can not use the asfix fer alone; but we must al ways use निम. Thus डुपचष् to cook-पश्रिमम् 'what is ripe'; डुक्प-उपनिमम् 'sown' (VI. I. 15); डुम्-कृषिमम् 'artificial'. 
द्वितोऽयुच् ॥ ८ ॥ पदानि ॥ दु-इतः, अषुच, (भावे, अकर्तरि, कारके) ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ यस्य तमाम दिवतो धातोरयुच् प्रत्ययो भाति भावारी ॥ 
514 
THE AFFIX KI. 
[BK. III. CI. III. 8 89-92. 
89. After that verb which has an indicatory 'tu', the affix 'athuch' comes with the force of denoting 
mere action &c. 
___Asgवेष-पेपयुः a trembling'; दुभोधि-ययुः 'swelling'; दुभु-सवथुः 'sneez ing: दु-वयुः 'burning'. 
यजयाचयतविक प्रखरतो नङ्॥०॥ पदानि ।यन-याच-यत विण्ड-प्रम-रक्षः, नड़, (भावे, अकर्तरि, कारके)॥ 
वृत्तिः । यज्ञादिभ्यो धातुभ्यो नारा प्रत्ययो भवति । 
90. Atter the verbs 'yaj' (to worship), 'yach' (to ask for), 'yat (to strive), 'vichchh' (to shine), 'prachchh' (to ask) and 'rnksh' (to preserve), comes the affix 'nan' with the force of denoting mere action &c. 
The conditions of satras 18 and 19 are understood here also. The ofन is for the sake of prohibiting guna or vriddhi(I. I. 5); as यतः 'sacrifice'; ureyr 'solicitation'; aa: 'effort'; fa: (VI. 4. 19) 'lustre'; v4: 'a question'; THU: protection, 
The root ra, by VI. 1. 16, ought to have changed its r into # before the foc affix c. Its not doing so must be taken to be an irregularity countc nanced by Paņini, as we know from the fact that Panini himself uses the form प्रमः in III. 2. II7. . 
स्वपो मन्॥ ९ ॥ पदानि ॥ स्वपः, नन, (भावे, अकर्तरि, कारके)। वृत्तिः । स्वपेर्धातोर्नन् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
91. The allix 'nan' comes, untler similar cir cumstances after the verb 'svap' (to sleep). 
The final [ is indicatory and regulates the accent (VI. i. 197); as FTA: 'a dream'. 
उपसर्ग घोः किः॥पदानि ॥उपसर्ग, घोः, किः, (भावे, अ. कर्तरि, कारके) ॥ 
वृत्तिः।। उपसगें उपपठे घुसतकेग्यो धातुभ्यः किःप्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
92. The affix 'ki' comes under similar condi. tions, after a 'ghu'verb (I. 1. 20), when an upasarga is in 'composition with it. 
The wis indicatory, by force of which the final w is elided (VI. 4. 64). Thus 8+9+ fan off: 'a present'; for: 'the periphery of a wheel"; fy: 'fraud'; . भन्सद्धिः 'vanishing'. 
.. कर्मण्यधिकरणे च ॥३॥ पदानि कर्मणि, अधिकरणे, च, (पोः, भावे, अकर्तरि, कारके)। 
BK. III. CH. III. $ 93, 94) 
THE AFFIX KTIN. 
315 
पतिः ॥ कर्मण्युपपदे पुसंज्ञक यो धातुभ्यः किःमध्ययो भवति, भधिकरणे कारके। 
93. The affix 'ki' comes after a 'ghu' verb, when a word in the accusative case is in composition with it, and when the relation of the word so formed to its verb, is that of locatiou'. 
As wort: 'the ocean (in which water is held)'; utfu: 'a quiver (that in which arrows are put)'. 
The word 'location' in the aphorism indicates that the words so formed should have no other significance. The words in the aphorism draws in the affix fix from the last sätra. 
fonai Papa Hay arata u fatura, firma, (ura, sif, *) * 
fa: Il airesi aparat vrat: 
f ara To II वार्निकम् ॥ तिन्नावादियश वक्तव्यम्। arfiili yafienaz: TO II 
TRA 11 G IFT T for: 11 पार्मिकम् ।। नाकारल्यादिभ्यः क्तिनिष्ठावपति इति पतष्यम् ॥ 
** 11 4 act: fengi 
94. To express an action &c. by a word iu the feminine gender, the affix 'ktiu' is added to the root. 
The conditions of rules III. 3. 18. and 19 are understood here also. This supersedes 77,879 and or affixes. Thus fa: 'action'; rafa: 'a gathering'; ala: 'understanding'. 
Vart.—The affix ktin should be declared to come after the verbs 9714 'to get' &c. There is no list of these words given anywhere, but by seeing the form, we can inser the affix. Thus af: 'getting'; ther: 'accomplishment'; 
fa: 'shining'; per: 'a slip'; æfen: 'destruction'; afort: 'gain'. 
Vart.So also after the verbs 'to hear', 4T 'to worship' and 'to praise', when instrument is meant; as xfa: 'ear' (that by which we hear)'; so rre: 'a sacrifice'; erfa: 'a praise. 
Vart. The affix fit comes after the verbs em to be exhausted', 'to sade, 'sal 'to grow old' and 'to leave'; as ift: 'exhaustion'; Fift: 'fading', Farfy: 'old age'; gia: 'loss'. 
Vart.-The affix fit coming after verbs ending in long and the verbs &c. is like a Nishtha. Thus atid: 'scattering': This form is thus cvolved: +fit=fi + fa (VII. 1. 100)=fay+-F# (I. 1. 51)= a + f(VIII. 2. 77). At this stage, a is changed into 5 by the affix being treated as a Nishtha (VIII. 2. 42), and this T is changed into U by the ordinary rules of sandhi; so 
516 
TIIE AFFIX KTIN. 
[BK. III. CH. III. $ 95, 90. 
also offfdd: 'praise'; sfird: 'old age'; aftfut: 'drying'; 77: (VIII. 2. 44) 'cutting'; af: 'joining'; : 'agitation'; aff: 'destruction'. 
Vart.-The affix ferit comes after the verbs aira &c; as a 'prosper ity'; foreo 'a calamity'; qfaqa 'access'. The affix fint is also employed after these verbs:--as aoferi, fargfa: 1 The verbs ar &c. are 21 verbs of kryadi class. 
FIMITATGUT #Ta ut my u Ogra Il 47-777-07-44:, Hra, (qui, f ) 
तिः ।। स्थादिन्यो धातुभ्यः स्त्रीलिङ्गे भावे तिन् प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
95. After the roots 'sthå (to stand), 'gå' (to sing) på' (to drink) and 'pach (to cook), the affix 'ktin' is employed, when a word in the feminine gender denoting a 'mere action' is to be expressed. 
This debars the affix (III. 3. 106) which generally supersedes format in cases of compound verbs ending in long HT. Thus gífufa: 'a journey' (VII 4. 40); amfa 'a singing aloud'; # + =+1+fa (VI. 1.45)= ift+fa (VI. 4.66); Ettifa: 'a concert'; antia: 'a cistern'; astiat: drinking together'; of: 'cooking'. 
The repetition of the word T4 in this aphorism, in spite of its anuvșit. ti being understood from sätra 18 is to exclude every other significance. 
How do we get forms like HreyT and EEST? Panini himself, in his sátras, has used forms like 84TR4T &c. See I. 1. 34. This is enough justification for us to derive forms like TTFIT, Rear &c. by applying the asfix at under rule 10 spite of the present sätra, which requires us to apply for at only. 
___मन्त्र वषेषपचमनविभवीरा उदात्तः ॥ ६॥ पदानि ॥ मन्त्र, 24-89-94--fac-7-01-17, GIT, (Hra, ferra, fan) o ga: 11 * fera parlament una f uerat afa 29/7:11 
96. In Mantra literature, ‘ktin' acutely accent ed comes after the following roots, forming words in the feminine gender, denoting a mere action:-'vfish'(to rain), 'ish'(to wish), 'pach' (to cook), 'man' (to think), 'vid' (to know), 'bhů'(to be), 'vi' (to go, to consume) and 'rå' (to give). ... The construction of this sutra is anomalous. Instead of the bases be ing put in the ablative case, they are put in the nominative casc. Thus cft: 'raining'; rit: 'wishing'; qfi 'cooking'; afa: 'thinking'; forfer: “knowing'; *far: 'being'; fifa: 'consuming'; tfa: 'giving'. 
... The affix fay has been generally ordained by sátra 94 after all verbs. The present satra is made for the sake of regulating the accent in the case of these nouns. From we have also an irregular noun mar (III 3. 101), and BK. III. CH. III. $ 97, 98.] 
THE AFFIX KYAP. 
517 
another by the general rule 94 having acute accent on the first syllable, al together 3 forns. Sce Rig Veda I. II6. 12; II 5.6%; 1.62. 3, 57.23; IV. 24.73 III. 39. I; I. 6. 5, 60. I; X. 95. 17 for these words. 
अतियतिजतिसातिहेतिकीर्तयश्च ॥ ७ ॥ पदानि ॥ अति यति-जूति-साति-हेति-कीर्तयः, च, (उदात्तः) ॥ 
वृत्तिः॥ उत्थाश्यः शब्दा निपाम्यन्ते । 
97. And these words viz. 'ati' (preservings sport), 'yati' (joining), jati' (velocity), 'sati', (destruction), 'heti' (a weapon) aud 'kîrti' (fame) are anomalous forms, acutely accented. . The anuvritti of the word i does not exist in this but the word उदात of the last syllable is understood here. The word that is thus formed :-** 'to protect' + =5+fa: (VI. 4. 20) =* : 1 this form is •regular and could be cvolved from satra 94 also ; but not so the accent. The irregularity in पतिः and fa: consists in the lengthening of 7 into *; in Arfa: the ur of the root which becomes ar by VI. I 45, is not changed into y, as rule VII. 4. 40 required, and this is the irregularity. This form may also be derived from the root en with perfect propriety, except as to the accent which would be regulated by the present sutra: thus सन्+क्तिनसा +क्तिन् (VI. 4. 42) साति. The form tति may by derived either from हन् or हिनोति । 
इन्द्र पानेषु नोऽव सहसंप्रधषु चाउमाभिरतिभिः। (Rig. I.7.4) 'o Indra, mayst thou mighty, defend us in battles and in fights of a thousand duels, with thy mighty protections'. 
वजयजो वे क्यप् ॥ ॥ पदानि ॥ ब्रज-यजोः, भावे, क्यप, (उदात्तः)॥ 
निः । ब्रजयगोर्धात्वोः स्त्रिनिगे भावे क्यप् प्रत्ययो भवति, उदात्तः ॥ 
98. The afix 'kyap' comes after the roots 'vraj' (to go) ani yaj' (to worship) acutely accented in forming a word in the feminine denoting action. 
This supcrscdes Fiting. Thus 41 'wandering about'; 159 (VI. 1. 15) 'worshipping'. The qof 99 is indicatory, and though it serves no purpose in this sátra, it is, however, necessary in the next, for it is by force of are having q. that we add a # by VI 1. 71, in the words formed in the next aphorism. 
संक्षायां समजनिषदनिपतमनविदाशीभृशिणलापदानि॥ संज्ञायां, समज-निषद-निपत-मन-विद-षुञ्-शीङ्-भूत-हसः, (स्त्रियां, काप, 
उदात्तः)॥ 
518 
THE AFFIX SA. 
BK. III. CH. III. 199, 101 
पतिः।। सममादिभ्यो धातुभ्यः निया क्यप् प्रत्ययो भवति तदात: संज्ञायां विषवे. 
99. The affix 'kyap' comes after the follow. ing verbs in forming a word in the feminine denoting an appellative' and is acutely accented viz:-'sam-aj' 'ni shad', 'ni-pat', 'man', 'vid', 'sun, sin', 'bhrin' and 'in'. 
. Thus समज्या 'an assembly'; निपचा 'a small bed or couch'; निपस्या 'slip pery ground'; wat 'thinking'; four 'knowledge'; gaur (VI. 1. 71) 'extraction of soma juice, parturition'; शय्या 'bed'; भस्या 'wages, service'; इज्या 'a litter, palanquin'. . Here a question arises as regards *. By rule III. 1. 112, I would have taken 944, and we could have got the form yrat by that rule also. But the 
iar formed under that rule would not have denoted an appellative which the present rule does. It would be said that rule III. 1. 112 when it used the words भसंज्ञायां, was rather too wide, for क्या does come in denoting संज्ञा in feminine nouns by the present rule; so that the word waarat there, must be qualified by the phrase, 'cxcept in the feminine'. The test whether rule 112, is too widely worded or not, has been made to hinge on the forming of the term wrai mean. ing 'wise'. This word is formed by the affix ter to the exclusion of auqu 
संज्ञायां पंसि दृष्टरुवा न से भार्या प्रसिध्यति । स्त्रिया भावाधिकारोऽस्ति नेन भार्या प्रसिध्यति ।। 
The word भावाधिकार: is explained by the author of Kasika as भावग्यापारी, पायन विवक्षितः, नतु शास्त्रीयोऽधिकारः। 
कृनःश च ॥१०० ॥ पदानि ॥ कृषः, श, च, (स्त्रियां, पप)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ करोतेर्धातोः स्त्रियां शः प्रत्ययो भवति चकारात् कयप् च ।। 
____100. And after the root 'Kri' comes the affix sa.' in forming a feminine, as well as the affix 'kyap'. 
By the force of the word y we draw the affix apery into this sátra, and by the process called M T we can split up this aphorism into two : ... (1) कुमः 'after the root n there is the affix किन्' 
(2) 'and the affix y as well as arq'. Thus final, firar (VI. 1. 71) and कृतिः । When the affix श is added, the root assumes the form क्रिय by III. 1. 67. 
इच्छा ॥ १०१ ॥ पदानि ॥ च्छा , (श)॥ पतिः॥पर्धातोःशः प्रत्ययो यागभाव निपात्यते॥ 
पार्तिकम् ।। परिचर्यापरिसर्यागयाटाटयानामुपसंख्यानम् ।। पातिकम्।।जागतरकारी पा॥ 
101. The form 'ichchhå' (desire) is irregular, The word is thus formed : +श-अच्छ+भाच्छा. The wordained 1.67 is not added, this is the irregularity. 
BK. III. CH. III, S. 102-104.) 
THE AFFIX AN. 
519 
Vart. The following words are also irregularly formed :- fragt 'perambulation'; afraf 'attendance, service'; estat 'hunting'; weg 'the habit 
of roaining about as a religious mendicant'. 
Vart.-From the root fry we have cither HITTI ON TOT 'waking'. The first is formed by the affix a, the latter by sy which brings in ga (III. I, 67). 
sq 124 11 por un ugutor u 37, arrara, (farura) 11 वृत्तिः ॥ प्रत्ययान्त यो धातुग्यः नियामकारः प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
102. After the verbs that end in an afix, thcre is the affix 'a', the word being feminine. 
The verbs that end in an affix are derivative roots, such as Desidcra tives, Causatives, Intensives and Denominatives. Though taking affixes, they 
called yr (III. 1. 32), after thesc verbs the affix 87 is used in forming the feminine noun. 
Thus + =fald, 'to wish to do'; this is a Derivative root; after this root चिकीर्ष, we add भ । Thus चिकीर्ष +भ (VI.4.48)=चिकीर्ष । Then we addar by IV. 1.4.and get raitor 'the desire to do'; so also fshof 'the desire to take"; qutar 'the desire to be like a son'; 17e 'desire of a son’; fiqur 'much cut ting'; Hogar 'itch'. The satra is also found as of: ari 
te FM: U pozu u grlo i tit:, , :, (ferat, ) 11 पुतिः ।। हलन्सो यो धातुर्गुरुमान् ततः स्त्रियामकारः प्राययो भवति ।। 
103. The affix 'a' comes after that verb which has a prosodially heavy vowel and ends in a consonant, when the word to be formed is feminine. 
This debars fifti Thus for'an adulteress'; voer 'a tigress'; *r 'effort'; per 'supplying an ellipsis'. 
Why do we say 'which has a prosodially heavy vowel'? Observe fiti devotion'. Why do we say 'which ends in a consonant' ? Observe ftit 'polity'. 
forreçrfç TSE " pou li uerforu foa, fr-ferui, 376, ( 
fr) 
पतिः ।। पिडपो भिवादिश्यच स्त्रियामप्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
104. The affix 'au' comes after, those. verbs that have an indicatory'sl', and after 'bhid' &c, when the word to be formed is feminine. 
Thus it has an indicatory q, the real root being 1:1 From it we have Her 'old age' (VII. 4. 16); 94- 97'bashfulness'. 
So also from verbs of Bhidddi class we have for breaking'; in the al ternative we have fp, 7:1 So also for 'cutting'; fare: 'cutting'; wit'a knife, an 
520 
THE AFFIX YUCH. 
BK. III. CH. III. , IoT-107. 
iron instrument'; effa: 'distress'; yit 'a stream'; ufa: 1 The list of Bhidddi verbs will not be found given in one place in the Dhatupatha. They have been col lected from different Ganas, and are the following: 
भिदा, छिवा, विदा, क्षिपा, गुहा (गियोषध्योः), श्रद्धा, मेधा, गोधा, भारा, हारा, कारा, लिया, भारा, धारा, लेखा, रेखा, चूडा, पीडा, वपा, वसा, मृजा, सजा, कृपा, (कपःसंप्रसारणं च)॥ 
चिन्तिपजिकथिकुम्बिचर्चच ॥१०५॥ पदानि ॥ चिन्ति-पूजि-कथि कुम्बि-चर्चः, च, (स्त्रियां, अङ्)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ चिन्ति पूजि कथि कम्बि चर्च एभ्यो धातुभ्यो थुचि प्रा स्त्रियामा प्रत्ययो भवति।। 
105. The affix 'an' as well as the affix 'yuch' comes after the following: verbs, forming feminine words:-'chint' (to think), 'puj' (to worship) 'kath' (to marrate), 'kumb' (to cover) and 'charch' (to learn). 
The force of is to include the affix qy into this sätra (see III, 3. 107). All these verbs belong to the Churidi or loth class, and would have exclusively taken युच् by III. 3. 107.. 
Thus चिन्ता 'thought'; पुजा 'worship'; कथा 'narration'; कुम्बा 'a covering', 'a thick petticoat'; ef 'recitation'. 
When the affix is युच, the forms are चिन्तना &c. (VII. I. I). 
आतचोपसर्ग ॥१०॥पदानि ॥ आतः, च, उपसर्ग, (स्त्रियां, अड)। पतिः ॥ भाकारान्तेभ्य उपसर्गे उपप लियामा प्रत्ययो भवति ।। वार्तिकम् ॥ भदन्तरोरुपसर्गरवृत्तिः ।। 
106. The affix 'an' comes after those verbs 'which end in long 'a' when an upasarga is in composition, 
and when the word to be formed is feminine. 
This supersedes किन्. Thus प्रदा, मधा, उपदा, उपधा, &c. 
Vart.-For the purposes of this rule the particles rą and are should be treated like upasargas, Thus श्रद्धा faith' भन्सी (I. 4.59). 
गयासश्रन्थो युच्॥१०॥ पदानि सि-आस-अन्यः, युच, (स्त्रियाम)॥ पत्तिः ।। ग्यन्त यो धातुभ्य भासअन्य इत्येताभ्यां च त्रियां युच्प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ वार्तिकम् ।। पट्टिवदिविदिस्य उपसंख्यानम् ॥ वार्तिकम् ।। षेरनिच्छार्यस्थ युवतयः ।। वार्तिकम् ॥ परे। 
___107. After verbs ending in 'ni', and after as' (to sit) and 'Sranth' (to loose), there is the affix 'yuch' when the word to be formed is feminine. 
This excludes the affix भ (III. I. 102). Thus +पिचकारि, कारि+च कारण (ther is elided by VI. 4.51) the causing to do'; हारा 'the causing to 
BK. III. CH. III. 108.) 
THIE AFFIX NVUL. 
521 
take'; 'the sitting'; 'the loosening'. How do we get the form भास्या? It is the feminine of भास्य formed by adding यस् to the root भास् by III. S. 124. Is not that rule made non-applicable by rule III. 1.94, which declares that 15869 rule does not apply to Feminine affixes? Yes, that is, however, not total exclusion. The phrase hier in III 1.94 is to be interpreted thus:-"Non-uniform affixes prohibit each other, when they belong to the class of affixes especially ordained for the feminine nouns; such as the affix fisi (III. 3.9), 40 (III. 3-98), M (III. 3. 102): That is to say, an utsarga-feminine affix will be always superseded by an apavåda-feminine affix; but a feminine affix in general will not supersede another affix which is not enjoined in the semi nine gender especially. In other words, feminine affixes inter se supersede each other totally, but not so with regard to general a affixes". Now by the present sätra the root of takes ; this totally excludes other feminine affixes like $ (III. 1. 102); but it does not exclude the non-feminine affix 
The root ofre taken here belongs to the Kryddi class, meaning 'to loosen' and is not the pry of Churadi class, for the latter would be included, as a matter of course, by belonging to the Churadi class which class of verbs take the affix पिच् । 
Vart. The verbs ng 'to move', te 'to praise', and for 'to feel', should also be enumerated, as taking . Thus ETT 'shaking', 'praising', amar 'knowledge, feeling, pain'. The verb og here belongs to the Tudadi class, and incans 'to move and not qe of the Churadi class, for that is already included by being funa í 
· Vart. The affix comes after pr when it does not mean 'to desire'. Thus spogul solicitation'; saqur 'the searching after'. 
Varl.–So also optionally when 7 takes the upasarga aft; as, ququr or qete: 'investigation by reasoning'. 
रोगाख्यायां गवुल्बहुलम् ॥ १८ ॥ पदानि ॥ रोग-आख्यायाम, 1, a (feTura) # 
Far: di arretrat n araral prataga oganual app for et arfi ll prepufaint AT153T: 11 वार्चिकम् ।। इश्तिपी धातुनिशे इति वकण्यम् ।। af 11 quinaTT: 11 arretai 0 5 :11 पार्तिकम् ॥ मत्पर्याच्छः ।। are Il Titlu: 11. arr li fasulfaat: 11 
108. The affix invul' comes diversely after verbs when the word to be formed is a feminine uous, begin the name of diseases'. 
522 
THE AFFIX NVUL 
[BK. III. CH. III. $ 109, 110. 
So also, 
in merely on the 
This debars and all the rest. By using the word oprerear in the satra it is meant that the word so formed by this affix should be the appel la tion of the disease. The word 'diversely' shows the usual licence in the applica tion of all the rules of grammar. Thus farfar (VII. 1. I) 'vomiting'; parfar *diarrhea'; faardat 'itch, scab'. Sometimes this affix does not apply; as farar: 'head-ache. 
Vart. The affix nvul is employed also in simply pointing out the meaning of the roots; thus, vifitant to enjoy', wat to‘lie down' &c. 
Vart.--The affixes and flare (that is T9 and fw) are also employed in merely pointing out the roots; as Forte, forti, ai, gofa: &c. The constant use of these affixes is to be found in these very sátras. In the aphorisms the roots are exhibited in various ways; thus in sætra 49 of this chapter we have the root fs and q exhibited as safe and arfa:1 These latter forms indicating no thing more than the simple roots. So also, see VIII. 4. 17; VI. 4. 49. 
. Vart.—The affix an is employed in merely pointing out letters; as mar: means 'the letter **; so also start: 'the letter of'; FAIT: 'the letter i 
• Vart. The affix is employed in pointing out the letter t; as is 
Vart. The affix a comes after the word or in merely pointing it out, and there is elision of the final s; as facuta: 1 
Vari.The affix comes after the verbs 477 &c; as HT, WTF, 974: Vart. The affix it comes after the verbs 59 &c; as, foi, faft:, &c. 
Juuru pace u orifa UUTH, (TE, FETTH) # वृत्तिः ॥ संज्ञायां विषये धातोवुनमाययो भवति । 
109. The affix invul' comes after the verbal roots, when the word to be formed is an appellative. 
As an angeforent 'a sort of game played by the people in the castern districts in which uddalaka flowers arc broken or cruslied'. Truye. 991 'a sort of game'; mraefat; 
m argtfat; Tipifat; meriti विभाषाख्यानपरिप्रश्नयोरिच ॥१९० ॥ पदानि॥ विभाषा, आ. BTW-aftutarati, 7, 9, 99, fequi) 
वृत्तिः ॥ परिममे भाण्याने च गम्यमाने धातोरिम्प्रत्ययो भवति । 
110. And the affix 'in' comes optionally after a root, wheu a question and answer is expressed, as well as nvul' and other afixes ordained by other rules). 
The word oft9h means 'question' and are means 'answer'; in the sutra, in making the compound of these words, the logical sequence is not obscrved. The compound 44 mqft# may, however, be justified on the ground that in a Compound a word consisting of smaller nunber of syllables should stand first (II. 2. 34,) and hence dkhyana is put first. 
BK. III. CH. III. $ 111, 112.) 
THE AFFIX ANI. 
523 
The force of is to draw the anuvşitti of the word om from the last into this. By the word 'optionally, it is meant that those affixes which would otherwisc present themscives from the subsequent rules, should also be applied; thus: Q.-ni mafceret: 'What work did you do'? A.- arrara 'I did all work'. Optionally we may have instead of fr the following also. 
Q.-**wirfræl, fai, fa, feriert, warnt: A.-aft fcxt or great or ifa or feat 
* Similarly, Q.—*(munt, mfumt &c.) TU: A. tifu &c. OTUR. So also at afax or aft; at man or arfi &c. 
Why do we say 'in question and answer? Observe #fa: and gift! 
पर्यायाईोत्पत्तिषु ण्वुच् ॥११॥ पदानि॥ पर्याय-मई-ऋण-उत् ufera, a, (fanart) u 
वृत्तिः । एतेपर्येषु धातोयंचमस्ययो भवति । 
111. The affix'nvuch'comes optionally after a loot in the sense of succession, merit, debt or production. 
The word qata means turn or order of succession; i means worthy of respect; U means debt owed to another; and Trier means birth or produc tion. This rule supersedes # and other affixes. Thus: (1) *44: ufaal 'your turn of sleeping': THIS HET 'your turn of eating first. (a) orifer ** T*T* 'you deserve to have a neal of sugar and molasses'. (3) 
T a i yrrufe thou owest me a mcal of sugar and molasscs'; ifm 'a mcal of ricc'; 84:9179*t a drink of milk'. (4) Fat Hair 
The word 'optionally' is understood in this sátra also; as fantaregger 
The forms given by and on, are the same, the difference is only. in the accent. (VI. 1. 193, and VI. 1. 163). 
TOTO Tyfa: lllppp lagufa in ead, st, opfa: Il पतिः॥भाक्रोशे गम्यमाने नम्युपपदे धातोरनिःप्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
112. The affix 'ani' comes after a verb when the particle 'nañ' is in composition with it, and the seuse 
implied is that of cursing. 
The anuvșitti of the word 'optionally' does not extend to this aphorism. The word is means to curse. This supersedes the affixes finit &cThus NT TURA TCH HOI'inay failure be to thce, O sinner'l a fula trucarea ''may he be disappointed'. 
Why do we say 'when meaning to curse? Observe INTENET FRA 'the non-making of his mat'. 
Why do we say 'when try is in composition'? Observe afateh gan para 'may death be to thee, O! sinner'! 
permet a u pan oerfa II 69, TI, a u 
. 524 
THE AFFIX LYUT. 
[BK III. C1. III. $ 113-115. 
पतिः । त्यसंशकाः प्रत्वया न्युट चबहुलमयेंषु भवन्ति ।। 
113. The affixes called 'kritya' (111, 1. 95) and the affix lyut, are diversely applicable and have other senses than those taught before. . 
The anuvšitti of the phrases 'when denoting action' and 'when the rela tion of the word formed to its' parent verb is not that of an agent', which began with sätras III. 3. 18 and 19, docs not extend to this sätra or further. By saying 'diversely' we mean that they occur in other places than those where ordained by the rules. Thus the kritya affixes are ordained to come when 'act' or 'object' is to be expressed, but they come also when the kdraka is other than the objective. Thus Etrafla un 'powder for bathing'; erat ATKU: 'a Brahmana' to whom a donation is to be made'. In the first of these examples the 'powder' is the 'instrument expressible by the 3rd. case, and in the second the 'Brah maņa' is the recipient expressible by the fourth case; so that in both cases the afix is applied without any express rule. 
Similarly, fut is ordained to come in denoting instrument, location, and a verbal noun (III. 3. 115 and 117). But it is applied in other senses also. Thus triaT: Ther: 'halls for the eating of kings'; Tr afo Praifa 
dresses to be worn by the king'. . 
By using the word 'diversely', even the krit affixes are applied in places other than those expressly ordained. Thus at tren, framra: 1 tot 
y=notam: For accent see VI. 2. 150. 
नपुंसके भावे क्तः ॥११४॥ पदानि नपुंसके, भावे, क्तः, (धातोः)। पतिः।। नपुंसकलिन्गे भावे धासोः कःप्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
114. The afix kta' is added to tho root, whicu action is expressed, the word being in the neuter gender. 
These are neuter abstract nouns: thus, reng 'laugh”; nfqet 'speech'; Tifaa 'sleeping'. So also ma, afer &c. 
well ppy at a Grauone, , (agar, Hra) - पतिः ।। नपुसकलिङ्ग भावे धातोयंमस्ययी भवति ।। 
115. The affix lyuț' is added to the root, when the name of an action is expressed, in the neuter gender. 
Thus Fhai TFT the laughter of the student'; sin beauty'; stay 'speech'; por 'sleep'; MTWTH 'seat'. 
The separation of this satra from the last, in which it might well have been included, is for the sake of the subsequent aphorisms, in which the anu vritti of lyut only runs, and not that of all 
are a ta sieunta 
rigenippel carrar 
BK. III. .CH. III. $ 116, 117.1 
THE AFFIX LYUT. 
-525 
**fw, s, ta, fruta, :, dit- 
g ambaran, pra, Yt) वृत्तिः । येन कर्मणा संसायमानस्य कर्तुःशरीरसुखमुत्पयते सस्मिन्कर्मपयुपपधासोनं'. 
सकलिंगे भावे ल्युमित्ययो भवति 
116. The alix 'lyut is added to a root, when the name of an action is expressed in the neuter gender; provided that the verb has in construction with it, such a word in the accusative case, as indicates the thing, from the contact with which, there arises a pleasant sensation corporally to the agent. 
This satra is thus translated by Bohtlingk:-“The affix ray comes in connection with an object, when through the contact with that, the agent of the action fcels a lively pleasure". Though the affix lyut would have present ed itself by the last aphorism, under the circumstances mentioned in this satra, the framing of this sàtra, is really for the purpose of teaching, that the com pound so formed is a fu or invariable compound i. e. a compound which cannot be analysed into its component members:--for every 599 compound is a force compound. (II. 2. 19) Thus 94: Arge'the pleasure of drinking milk'; ini 
'the pleasure of cating rice'. 
Why do we say 'when the word in construction is in the accusative casc'? Obscrve feratat 341 * 'rising from a bed of down is pleasant'. Here there is no compounding as the upa pada afat is in the ablative case. 
Why do we say 'from the contact' ? Observe fraseuraa yer'it is pleasure to sit near by a fire-hearth'. Here there being no contact between 'fire' and 'body', there is no compounding. 
Why do we say 'to the agent'? Observe TFT: Free' 'to the teacher it is pleasure, when he is made to bathe'. Here the word 78: is not the agent, but the object of the verb स्नापयति । 
Why do we say 'corporally'? Observe greu af 
embracing of the son is a pleasure'. Here the pleasure is a mere mental satisfaction and not a physical one. 
Why do we say 'a pleasant sensation'? Observe animal i 'it is painful to rub thorns'. In all the above counter-examples there is no com pounding; see II. 2. 19 and the connected satras. 
ftutfurtuta i pogulaatfot u py-ofortuniti, , (BIT) 
qier: 11 Frusunto ATTRITA ' carazit inferir 
117. The afix 'lyut' comes after a root, when 
526 
TIIE AFFIX GIIA. 
(Bk. Ill. CH. III. $.118, 119. 
the relation of the word to be formed to the verb is that of an instrument or location. 
Thus 990197: 'an axe (lit. an instrument for cutting wood); CATTURA: 'palasa-cutter'; orienta milk-pail' (a vessel into which milk is milked); so also n otti In other words, this affix expresses also the idea of the instrumental case (a tool), and of the locative case (a repository). 
पुंसि संज्ञायां घः प्रायेण ॥ १९ ॥ पदानि ॥ पुंसि, संज्ञायाम, 9:, ardu, (curfu tutt:) .1 
वृभिः॥ पुंलिङ्गयोः करणाधिकरण योरभिधेययोर्धातोः प्रत्ययो भवति समुदायेन चेत् संज्ञा गम्यते ।। 
118. The affix 'gha' generally comes in the sense of an instrument or location after a root, when the word to be formed is a name and is in the masculine gender. 
The force of the word gou 'generally' is to show that this rulc is not a universal rule. Thus fact: 'the lip'. afą to cover' +(VI.4. 96) = 4 lit. 'that by which the teeth are covered'; so also 9 'a breast plate'; : i These dcnote instruments. 
So also in denoting 'location. Thus 3T+T=HT: 'a mine', so named because men work (akurvanti) in it, HTCTT: 'a house that in which men settle down. 
Why do we say 'in the masculine gender'? Observe paryan 'a comb'; (lit. that by which men decorate). Here the affix is lyut. 
Why do we say 'when the complete word so formed is merely an ap pellative? Observe arrut pot: 'the beating stick'. 
The indicatory is merely qualifying; for the application of sätra VI. 4. 96. by which after the causative auf, when q is added, the long up is shortened. 
गोचरसंचरवहब्रजव्यजापणनिगमाश्च ॥ १९ ॥ पदानि ॥ गोचर UT-16--827-54196-FATHT:, (a:) ! 
वृत्तिः ॥ गोचरादयः शब्दा पत्यवान्ता निपात्यन्ते पूर्वस्मिन्नवार्ये ।। 
119. And the words 'gochara', 'samchara', 'vaha' 'vraja', 'vyaja', 'åpaņa' and 'nigama' are anomalous. 
These words are irregularly formed by the affix o with the same force as in the last aphorism. This is an apavdda or exception to rule III. 3. 121, by which after roots ending in consonants, the affix is added. Thus that: 'pasturage', (lit. that in which the cows graze); T: 'a passage', (it. through which they move ); 48: 'a vehicle' (lit. by which men are carried); 5: a cowá pen' (by which they go); 59: 'a fan' (by which they move the air); the anomaly BK. III. CH. III. $ 120, 121.] 
THE AFFIX GHAN. 
527 
in this consists in not replacing the st of sun (+47) by the substitute oft as required by sátra II. 4. 56; MAU 'a market' (lit. that in which men come and trafic); fara: 'the Veda', 'a markct' (that into which they enter). 
The force of the word q in the aphorism is to include other words also, which have not been already mentioned. Thus #9:, fragt: 'a touch-stone', (lit. that on which they rub). 
wa mita u pre il Terfarura, g-siti, wa, (Figurfa करमयोः संज्ञायाम)। 
gyfa: Il 879 7997 ora Urhet: Krullatunt: emrat w isi wafa 11 
120. The affix 'ghai' comes after the roots "tri' (to cross) and 'stri' (to spread), when the upasarga 'ava' is in composition with them, and when the word so formed is an appellative related to the verb either as an instrument or as a location. 
This supersedes i The F is indicatory and causes the vșiddhi of (VII. 2. 115) and is also for the sake of regulating the accent (VI. 1. 195, 197). The indicatory is useful in the subsequent aphorism where it changes the palatals into gutturals. Thus 87 TITIT: 'the descent (or incarnation of a diety); MTFRIT: 'a screen round a tent'. 
How do we apply hare also in phrases like YTTRICI tar: the descent of rivers', for here the word avatara is not an appellative? This use is also allowed, because the anuvșitti of the word fra is understood here also ; so that those words avatdra &c. may be employed in senses other than appellative. 
pha ll poput ogroll *:, , (gifs, imui, urf quoti, 9) u 
: narararat: *Turfracundaraat para 11 
121. Aud after a verb ending in a consonant, comes the affix 'ghañ',(when the word to be formed is mas culine, and related to the verb as an instrument or a loca tion, and thereby the palatal is changed into a guttural). 
The whole of the phrase within brackets is to be read into this satra froin sätra III. 3. 118. This excludes e. Thus me: 'a writing' (that in which something is inscribcd); 44: 'the Veda' (that by which all is known); #9: 'dress' (that which is entered into); y: 'obstruction'; Apof: 'a way' (that on which they seek); orart: 'a plant' (that by which disease or the like is clear ed away); TTA: 'Rama' (i. e. in which the devout delight). 
अध्यायन्यायोद्यावसंहाराधारावायाच॥ १२॥पदानि ॥ अध्याय न्याय-उद्याव-संहार-आधार-आवायाः, च॥ 
528 
. 
THE AFFIX CHAN. 
[BK. III. Cl. III. ६ 122-124. 
वृत्तिः ॥ भध्यायादयः शमा पमन्सा निपास्वन्ते । 
122. And the words 'adhyâya', 'nyâya', 'udya. va', 'samhara', 'adhara' and avaya' are anomalous. 
These words are formed by adding the affix to the exclusion of 'which would have come by rule III. 3. 118. All these words are derived from 
roots which end in vowels. Thus of+9+9 =Hora: 'a chapter or book' (lit. that in which they read); नी-न्यायः 'logic, justice', (lit. that by which men are lead); उत्-यु-उधाव: 'mixture' (lit. that in which they blend); सम्--संहारः 'des truction' (lit. by which they are destroyed); भा-ध-भाधार: 'support' (lit. in which anything is held); भा.दि-भावायः-भावयन्ति भस्मिन् । 
The force of is to include others not enumerated above; as, HEIT: 1 
उदवोग्नुदके ॥ १३॥ पदानि ॥ उदकः, अनुदके ॥ वृत्तिः ।। उदहक इति निपास्यते भनुहक विषवत् धात्वयों भवति ॥ 
123. The word 'udanka' is anomalous, when the sense of the root refers to subjects other than 'water. 
The word is thus formed: 0+01 +q =JIF: 'a vessel, 
Would not the affix y have come by satra III. 3. 121, why then this aphorism . This is made a separate aphorism in order to prohibit the applica tion of the asfix, where the word to be formed means 'water', 
Thus daites: 'a leathern vessel for oil'. 
• Why do we say 'when not referring to 'water', Observe उसकीचनः 'a bucket for drawing water' (उ+मा+युद). 
Why do not we give the counter-example by adding the affix o to the root da? Because the forın evolved by applying , would be the same in every respect as that evolved by og i even the accent would be the same. For by sutra VI. 2. 144, the udatta accent, in the case of घम्, vill fall on the final. 
जालमानायः ॥ १४॥ पदानि ॥ जालम, आनायः॥ . वृत्तिः ।। भानाय इति निपास्यते भालं चेतावति ॥ 
124. The word "ânåya' is irregularly formed when meaning 'a niet'. 
The word is thus formed in the sense of instrument. मा+नी+धम भानायः 'a net' (by which they are caught); as भानायो मत्स्यानो 'a net for fish'; Hitrat Prurg'a net for wild deer &c'. 
खनो घ च ॥ १५ ॥ पदानि ॥ खनः, घ, च, (करसाधिकरहे, घन)। पतिः।। खनते तीः करणाधिकरणयोःप्रत्ययो भवति, चकाराद च ।। पार्तिकम् ।। डो वक्तव्यः ।। वार्तिकम् ॥ डरो वक्तव्यः ।। पार्तिकम् ॥ इको बत्तव्यः ।। 
BK. III. CH. III. $ 125, 126.] 
THE AFFIX KHAL: 
529 
qata il ****1964: 11 
125. The affix 'gha' as well as 'ghan' comes after the verb 'khan' (to dig), (when the word to be form ed is an appellative related to the verb as instrument or location). 
The affix o has been read into the sätra by force of the word of Thus Hrint: or wry: 'a spade, a hoc'. 
Vart.-The affix 7 also comes in this sense after the verb . Thus Hret +3=HTE: 'a spade'. The indicatory showing that the final portion called for should be elided. 
Vart.-The affix or also comes in the same sense; as Terr: a spade'. Vart. So also the affix amo; as refra: 'a spade'. Vart...So too the affix any as 179: 'a spade'. 
tag: Ford TT u Pre nacrta u 4-59 39, 5-*-org, BET 
..वृतिः ॥ईपत् एस् मुरवतेप्पपवेषु कमाणापु धातोः खल प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
126. In the sense of hard and difficult or 'light and easy', the affix 'khal' is added to a verb, when 'ishad', and 'dur' and 'su' are combined with it as u papadas. 
The anuvritti of the phrase 'when related as instrument or location ceases with this aphorism. The word means heavy, and yr has the force of conveying that sense. The word means 'light, casy'; and the words 
quand & convey that sense. Thus faqaT YURT **: 'a mat is made easily by you'; so also acar: 'made with difficulty'; T: 'made with ease'. Simi larly पीजः 'cating pleasantly': दुभागः and सुभोनः । 
· Why do we say 'aster fra &c. ? Sce 1946 u ard: 47: 'the mat which is made with difficulty'. 
Why do we say 'when meaning 'hard or light'? Observe faire 'a small work. 
of the affix 06, the letter and are indicatory ; & causing the in sertion of a nasal (technically called 94 augment, VI. 3. 67); and regulates the accent (VI. 1. 196). Thc augment ya will be added in the subsequent satra, 
thc u thus having no work in this satra. 
ale fate 3: 11 pz9 al verfat ul #-*für:, , * 691, (6-5:-9, UT) 11 
ofer: 11 998; 10 watteriet eft mifu 1994 partitarlas gaat fall 
530 
THE AFFIX YUCH. 
(BK. III. Cl. III. 
127-130. 
वार्तिकम् ।। कर्ट कर्मणोश्यवर्थचोरिति वनग्यम् ।। 
127. The afix 'khal' comes after the verbs 'bha' and 'kri', when the upapadas in composition with them are 'agent' and 'object' respectively, preceded by the words 'Ishad' &c. in combination with them, meaning 'hard or light'. 
Thus m'a m'being enriched easily'; guida por 'to be enriched with difficulty'; durant tappirnar 'Devadatta can be made rich by you easily'. 
Vart. It should be stated that the agent and object in composition should be, as if they ended in the affix fag (V.4. 50). Compare III. 2. 56 and III. 2.57. &c. Therefore we do not have it here : स्वाईपन भूयते or भाडेपन सुभूयते ॥ 
आतो युच् ॥ १०॥ पदानि॥ आतः, युच, (ईषःमधु, कृष्द्रा कृच्छ्रार्थेष)॥ 
वृत्तिः॥ध्याकलाप पारिपपाषु भाकारान्त यो धातुभ्यो वुच् प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
128. The affix 'yuch'comes after roots ending in long '8', (when 'Ishad', 'dur' and 'su' are combined as nipapadas, in the sense of easily or with difficulty). 
The word fr&c. are to be read into this sätra, not so the words and कमेण &c. This supersedes the affix खन्. Thus पानः सोमो भवता 'the soma juice can be lightly drunk by you'; दुप्पामः 'difficult to be drunk'; सुपानः 'easy to be drunk. परवानो गोर्भवता 'the cow can be given with ease by you'; पर्शनः, सदानः &c. 
बन्दसि गत्यथैन्यः ॥ १० ॥ पदानि ॥ छन्दसि, गति अर्थेभ्यः, (षदुःसुषु, कन्द्राकन्द्रार्थेषु, युच्)। 
.. वृत्तिः ॥ ईपादिपु कच्चाकणापूपरेषु गरवर्षेभ्यो धातु धावन्दसि विपर्व बुच् प्रत्ययो भवति॥ 
129. The affix 'yuch' comes in the Chhandas, after roots having the sense of 'to go', when the word 'Ishad' &o. meaning 'lightly' or 'with difficulty'are in com. position with such verbs. 
___This debars the affix खन्. Thus सूपसदनोऽग्निः । सूपसरममम्तरिक्षम् । See T.S. 7.5.20... - अन्येभ्योऽपि दृश्यते ॥ १३० ॥ पदानि ॥ अन्येभ्यः, अपि, दृश्यते, (गत्यर्थेभ्यः, युच्)। 
वृत्तिः ॥ भन्यग्योऽपि धातुभ्यो गत्वर्य बाछन्नसि विपये धुच् मत्ययो दृश्यते ।। बार्तिकम् ।। भाषायां शासिवु धिवृशिधषिमृपिग्यो बुज वक्तव्यः।। 
130. The affix 'yuch' is seen to come in the Vedas, after other verbs also, than those meaning to go', 
BK. III. CH. III. § 131.] 
PRESENT TENSE AFFIXES. 
532 
Thus gate 14 FUTE TAU ; so also 776 FWIT, WHU 11 (Rig. Veda. X. 112. 8). 
Varl.-In the modern Sanskrit, the affix 'yuch' comes after the verbs TĘ, TV, 97. 94, and re; as : TT: 'Duhsasana'; gärna: 'Duryodhana'; gåstai, gadu: and gådo: 1 
। वर्तमानसामीप्ये वर्तमानवद्वा ॥ १३१ ॥ पदानि ॥ वर्तमान सामीप्ये, वर्तमान-वत, वा, (भते, भविष्यति)। 
वृत्तिः । वर्तमानसमीपे भूत भविष्यति च वर्नमानाबातोर्वर्तमानवत्मत्वया वा भवन्ति ।। 
131. The afixes which are employed when the sense is that of preseut time, may, optionally in like manner, be employed when the seuse is that of past or 
future time not remote from the present. 
The words wife and art are the words with the same signification, the latter being derived from the first by adding the affix cur. This affix is added with a self-descriptive force, without making any modification in the ineaning. We learn thus incidentally from Panini's using the word argita, that the affix che also comes with a sell-descriptive (svartha) force, and the words 
tota: &c. are thus formed. 
The affixes which begin with sätra III. 2. 123 (TA ) and end with III. 3. I (TUTU #) are affixes which come in denoting the present time. Thcsc affixes come also with the force of the past or future time, when the sense is that the action has just taken place, or will immediately take place. Thus, to the question af ITTaistaifa 'when didst thou come Devadatta', it may, be replied, either भवमागामि I come now', or भागच्छन्तमेव मां विद्धि know me even to have come'; or ATAT I have now come'; or Earta: 'I have come now'. So also to the question * STEFT facere 'when will you go Deva datta', it may be replied, either gy 'I go now' or Toy at farge or pe afacute or Traffen &c. 
The phrase 'in like manner' () has been employed to indicate com plete resemblance; that is to say, with whatever qualifcations, the asfixes have been enjoined to denote present time, namely, with whatever bases (Hkfa), and words in compositions (1996), and restrictive significations (Eh), certain affixes have been enjoined;-the same asfixes under those conditions and those circumstances, only will dcnote also immediate future and recent past. Thus T19 by rule III. 2. 128 comes aster the praksitis q and 2 in forming present participles; this affix, to dcnote past and future, must: come only after and 
*, and so on. Thus qTHIT:, 461, Hoi frag: (III. 2. 136) &c. 
Why do we say 'not remote from the present, (aria)'? This rule will not apply when distant future or distant past is intended to be expressed. 
532 
THE AFFIX Lrit. 
(BK. III. C11. III. $ 132, 133. 
As 95 MTU are forget the went day before yesterday to Pataliputra'; año offsefer 'he will go in a year'. 
One may say that "the word ser can denote by itself nothing but the present tense, and it is because it occurs in a sentence in connection with other qualifying words, that it is made to denote any other time; and it is a well-known fact that a tense which a sentence as a whole may indicate, has no bearing on the question as to what tense a verb must take, when we are preparing it for taking a grammatical tense ; and hence the present sätra is superfluous". To such wa reply that the present sätra and those that follow 
are not meant for those who know the proper idioms of Sanskrit language; but for those only who do not know this. 
Dr. Bohtlingk translates this sátra thus:-- Whatever is near to the present time, may be expressed as a present tense, 
आशंसायां भतवञ्च ॥ १३२ ॥ पदानि ॥ आशंसायाम्, भतवत्, , (faefa, anataram) u 
वृत्तिः ॥ भविष्यति काले भाशंसायो गम्थमानायां धातोर्वा भूतवत् प्रत्यया भवन्ति चकारा ATTI 
132. The affixes which are employed, when the sense is that of the past time or of the present time, may, | optionally, in like manner, be employed, after a root iu 
denoting future time, when hope is expressed. 
The word optionally is understood here also. The phrase 'not remote from the present is not valid in this aphorism. The word dat means the wish or expectation of getting an object not yet obtained, and consequently this can refer only to future time. The force of is to draw the word 
area from the last sátra in this aphorism. This sátra has been thus put by Mr. Apte:--"When hope is expressed in a conditional form, the Aorist (6), the Present, or Simple Future is used in both the clauses to denote a future time. Thus जाध्यायधेगमस् or भागतः, or भागछति or भागमिष्यति वा एते व्याकरणमध्यगीमहि, or भधीतवन्तः or भधीमहे or भध्येण्यामहे if the teacher were to come, we should read grammar'. . This construction is possible only when the past tense is expressed by GE (Aorist); and not by me or fe. For denotes past time in general, while we and for denote particular forms of past time; (see III. 2. 110, 111 and 115). The phrase "e making an analogy with time in general, will not therefore, refer to face or which refer to past time in special. 
Why say 'when hope is expressed'? Observe Hrafirafer he will come'. ... fraude maan açtfa u fa-an, me, (ontziarai)u 
BK. III. CII. III. § 133-135.). PROINIBITION OF SECOND FUTURE. 
'533 
वृत्तिः ।। निप्रवचन उपपरे भासावां गम्यमामायां धातोनंद प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
133. When the word 'kshipra' (quickly) or its synonym is in construction with the verb, tbe future affix, 'Lrit is employed after the root, when 'hope' is expressed in a conditional form. 
This supersedes the last rule by which Aorist could also have been employed. By the present rule the Second Future can only be employed. Thus सपाध्यायवेक्षिप्रमागमिष्यति (or उपायावधेशागत:-Apte.) सि व्याकरण न येण्यामहे 'if the teacher were to come soon, we shall soon learn grammar'. 
By force of the word in the aphorism, we take the synonyms of तिम also, such as शीघ्र,भाश, स्वरितम्, &c. 
An objector might say, "the use of the word in the satra is redundant; for Future tense is the natural tense to be used, whenever hope is indicated. Satra III. 3. 132 was merely an exception to this rule; so that the present sätra re-enacting the gencral rule, ought to have been worded thus;- * *not so when a word expressing quickness is employed'; for such a rule debar ring the past tenses given by III. 3. 132, would have, of necessity, given scope to the Future tense which is the natural tense to express hope". To them we say, that there are two future tenses, Ex and 31 By specifying #we mean that should not be employed even where it would otherwise have come, such as in the following:-*: f7YHETETT'to-morrow we shall learn soon'. 
आशंसावचने लिङ॥ ३४ ॥ पदानि ॥ आशंसा-वचने, लिङ्॥ बत्तिः ॥ भासा येनोच्यते सवासावचनं सलिनपपदे धासोनिकाययो भवति॥ 
134. The affix of the Poteutial is employed in den oting Futurity, after a root, when the upapada in composition with it, is a word expressing 'hope'. 
This is also an apavdda of rule III. 3. 132, and teaches the employ. ment of the Potential with a future force. Thus उपाध्यायदाग , भासे युक्तोऽ fra 'is the teacher will come, I hope, you will study with diligence'. This being a subsequent rule, will apply even when the words expressive of 'quick ness' are in composition. Thus OTTIÊ Crafteta 'I hope, you will learn soon'. So also, w 
ilsuftafia, &c. 
नानद्यतनवत् क्रियाप्रबन्धसामीप्ययोः ॥ १३५ ॥ पदानि ॥ न, ayaw-ara, faut- put- out: l 
वृत्तिः ॥ भनयतनवत् प्रत्ययविधिन भवति क्रियाप्रवन्धे सामीचे च गम्यमाने । 
135. When coustant continuance of action or a near Past or Future is meant, the Past and Future are uot denoted as taught in III. 2. 111 and III. 3. 15, through 
W 
:534 - 
PROHIBITION OF SECOND FUTURE. 
[BK. III. CII. III. $ 136. 
the Imperfect and the Second Future, but through tho Aorist and the First Future. 
The affixes we (Imperfect Past) and (First Future), have been or dained to come, when past time not belonging to the current day, and future time not belonging to the current day, are respectively indicated. The present satra prohibits these two affixes. The word forint: means 'performing an action with continuity'; and arata means 'not remoteness of time, immediate ness, without the intervention of anything of thc samc genus'. Thus results भशमनमदास (not भपात) 'hegave food throughout his life'; or भशमनं सरवति 'he will give much food'. वावजमीवं पुनोध्यापिपत् 'throughout his life he taught',or बावजजीवन. sarafusafe 'throughout his life he will teach'. In both these cases the Aorist and the Second Future are used instead of the Imperfect and the First Future. 
So also when recent past or immediate future is meant, the Aorist and the Second Future are employed, instead of the Imperfect and the First Future. Thus ud ho neufatal, Thearg marativa or three or any form during the full-moon that has just past, the teacher consecrated the fire, or perforned the soma-sacrifice or gave a cow'. Here the Aorist is for the Imperfect. TUHATTI Forssafat, paretariateua or ata arua, or a ti prega 'on the next new-moon day, the teacher will perform the fire-sacrifice or the soma-sacrifice, or he will give a cow'. Here the Second Future is employed instead of the First Future. 
The double negative * 'not non-today' implies the proper cor responding tenses which indicate adyatana. 
भविष्यति मर्यादावचनेश्वरस्मिन् ॥ १३६ ॥ पदानि ॥ भविष्यति, मर्यादावचने, अवरस्मिन, (नानद्यतनवत)॥ 
: u sferafer is nuleister for SONITE #Tafafu wafer il 
136. The Futurity is not expressed, as taught in III3. 15, through the Second Future, but through the First Future, when a statement is made of a limit on this (ayara) side of another place. 
The phrase nana is valid in this sätra also. The two conditions of the last aphorism, namely, 'continuity of action' and 'immediateness', how ever, do not apply here. Thus बोबमध्वागन्तव्य भापाटलिपुत्राशस्य पदवरं कोशामवास्तमोदन भोल्यामहे, तब सकपास्यामः 'on this side of the road from the city of Kosambi to the city of Pataliputra, there we will eat rice, and there we will drink saktu'. 
Why do we say 'in denoting future time'? Observe samTTE MITTE faire 
TETT ET Afg'on (this side of the road that leada from the city of Kosambi to the city of Palaliputra, we read together &c. ... Why do we say when signifying limit'? Observe as afirglun 
BK. III. CH. III. $ 137 ) 
PROHIBITION OF THE FIRST FUTURE. 
535 
T 
EUTET ITT H A ENTITO TIET, TOTEA: ! Here the First Future is employed. 
Why do we say 'when the word or is in construction'? Observe atsanieronta rerefarga HTC Ong atrasaran HIRTEA& &c. 
The examples of limit given in this aphorism, refer to local limit; in the subsequent satras examples will be given as to the limit of time and some difference will be observed therein. 
FEHTA TERTUTUT 839 of a Gyfa HTH-FeHTW, 5, 77-98:-7#tur, (feafa, putaran, warfa, , gan48) 
fer: 1 plantataferunt #art #forsafer ETFSHQATITE Tarafuat *fe, TEIKT-vt fyrteat foot ofany: 11 
137. The Second Future is employed instead of the First Future, iu deuotiug Future time uot belong ing to the current day, when the word 'ayara' is used together with a word expressing division of time, but not when it is a word giving the sense of 'day' or 'night'. 
The whole of the last satra should be read into this. The difference between this and the last sätra is, that sätra III. 3. 136 referred both to the limit of space and tims, while sa tra III. 3. 137 refers to the limit of time only; inoreover with regard to time, there is exception with regard to the portions of day and night. The yoga-vibhaga, the separation of this satra from the last, is for the sake of subsequent aphorisms. Thus tsat strat amat ay HITTATYTACUIFHT AT Spaszta'in the month of Chaitra, the year after next, we shall read together'; loat IFAT 'we shall eat rice then &c'. 
This construction is, of course, only valid in denoting future time, otherwise not. Therefore not here: योऽयंवत्सरोऽतीतस्तस्य यदबरमामहायण्यास्त बक्ता TAIT 'in the month of Chaitra, the year. before last, we had together'; #a 
'we ate together &c'. 
Why do we say limit'? Observe यो निरवधिकःकाल भागामी तस्य पावर. महायएयास्सन युक्ता भध्येतास्महे-समोदन भोकास्म। 
The limit must be on this side i. c. ** side'. With the reside limit, this rule will not apply. With the word qr, this construction is optional. Sec the next sátra. 
Why do we say 'when not divisions of day and night'? There are three sorts of counter-examples in this case; as, atsUI FIE WITH TFT IST: 6 TCST: or else HUIT H AT HET UISTITEą: or asa fäTUITE AT ** utst: VITITET 4751 WidART ASTF qra : 1 Here Lut; or First Future has been employed and not the Second Future. 
536 
LRIN IN THE FUTURE. (BK. III. CH. III. $ 138, 139. 
oefena fawrat u pasul Tafat u ocena, farurat, (* facfa, nararana, Arafarmra, SMETTITUTA) u 
qft: il propratęsformat aft afarafat are arfer afar farrastamata quafari yfir, Terra afrT: 11 
138. Optionally so, when a declaration is made with regard to that side of a limit of time 
of the last aphorism must be read into this: The sQtra will then stand thus: "The Second and the First Futures are optionally both em ployed in denoting future time, not belonging to the current day, instead of the First Future alone, when the word qr is used signifying a limit of time on that side of a fixed period, provided that this word does not give the sense of day or night". 
This rule allows an option when the time refers to the qr side of a starting limit. Thus otse TOUT IT OF UK a Oures na sum or m ar 'we will read together in the month of Chaitra, the year after next'. 
All the counter-examples given under the last aphorism, are also valid here by substituting the word or instead of HIT. 
fete fafti og farfaunt u pacem un arcifor a fer fafara, e, f 4-3 fetaut, (ufamfa) 
grat: ingegnefitfortaalfen Fant fafant, ara fata Fafaret fortales are लापरवयो भवति, क्रियातिपतो सत्याम् ।। 
139. Where there is a reason for affixing Liu' the afix'Lyin' is employed iu the Future tenso when the non-completion of the actiou is to be understood. 
: The words 'in denoting future time' are here. The reasons for affix foto are such as cause and effect &c. mentioned in sätra III. 3. 156 and 157 &c. The is called the conditional tense. "It comes in the conditional sentences in which the non-performance of the action is implied; or where the falsity of the antecedent is implied as a matter of fact. It usually corresponds to the English Pluperfect Conditional, and must, in Sanskrit, be used in both the an tecedent and the consequent clauses". Aple's Guide. 
Thus सुटिपभविष्यत् तदा सुभितमभविष्यत् if there had been good rain, then there would have been plenty of food; or if there were to be good rain then there would be plenty of food'. It is implied that there was not good rain, nor consequent plenty: or that the occurrence of good rain is dubious, and the desirable consequence equally so. 
So also here, दक्षिणेन चेदायास्या शकरें पर्याभविष्यत् if he were to go by the right side, the carriage would not be upset'; यदि कमलकम् भादास्थन् न शकर BK. III. CH. III. § 140.) 
THE AFFIX LRIN." 
537 
w 
qalxf97a 'if he were to call Kamalaka (which he will not), the carriage would not be upset'; भाभोल्यत भवान् पतेन यदि मत्समीपम् आगमिष्यत 'you would cat food with clarified butter, if you (were to) come to me (but you will not come). 
All these sentences refer to future time. The non-upsetting is a future contingency and is an effect the cause of which is the 'calling of Kamalaka. The speaker---having apprehended the cause and effect, and having also learned from other sources that such an effect will not take place, that is to say, that Kamalaka will not be called, and the carriage will be upset. has employed this conditional tense to express his idea. The whole sentence of 440* &c. really gives this sense:-That both actions, the calling' and 'the non-upsetting', which are subjects of a future time, and which are related as cause and effect, will not be completed; that neither Kamalaka will be called, nor the impending fate averted from the carriage. The s@tra may also be thus rendered according to Professor Bohtlingk:- In a conditional sentence, which would require a Potential according to III. 3. 156, is used, if the sense is that of Future time, the Conditional Tense, when the action is not complete. 
na y al pre il raufar i va, a, (fre forte, yo, क्रियाति पत्तौ)॥ 
fa: ut Toh farfafatit foarferat a ra caraat start in 
140. Aud (where there is a reason for allfix. ing 'Lin', the affix 'Lrin' is to be employed, when the non completion of the action is to be understood) if the sense is that of past time. 
The whole of the last aphorism is understood in this. The last satra enjoined as in the Future tense; this sátra ordains it in the Past, the Condi tional tense having both these significations. The reasons for affixing love are given in satras III. 3. 152 and those that follow it. In sätra III. 3. 141 and those that follow, as far as III. 3. 152, optional rules for the employment of the Conditional tense will be given. Thus:- YTJ Iskut #Q: भारभ विजोमानार्थी, यदि स तेन इटोभविष्यत्, सदाऽभोक्यत, न तु भुनवान, भम्येन पथा स गतः। *I saw your son, wandering about in search of food, I saw also a twice-born in search of a Brahmaņa (whom he would feast); if he (your son) had been seen by him (the twice-born), then he would have been fed; but as a matter of fact, he has not been fed, he went by a different road'. - The conditional sentence यदि सतेन इष्टोऽभविष्यत् सदाभोश्यत is employed under circumstances set out above. It refers to a past time, there is the relation of cause and effect existing, one being in search of food, and another in search of a' guest to feed; and the action is not completed; both taking different roads, did not come across each other. 
538 
THE AFFIX LAT. 
(BK. III, CH. III. § 141, 142. 
statut: ut pyp ur octor H 21, 877-Tart:, (wa, ferafa मिते, क्रियातिपत्तौ)। 
gfer: 11 Farrelt: anuatreffe for rrafo antera arrieren ufagna curti, Forefafaet for arra T r ansfer afgasa 1 
. 141. From this point as far as sútra IlI. 3. 152 (the whole of the following sentence is to be taken as exerting a governing influence on the sûtras that follow: where there is a reason for affixing 'Lin', the 'Lrin may be) optionally (employed in denoting past time, when the non-completion of the action is to be understood). 
All the words within brackets must be supplied from the previous sätras to complete the sense. This s@tra consists of three words 'optionally, #I 'as far as' and iTT: (the satra III. 3 152). The words 1+4+3 form at by the rules of conjunction. The particle sp in this aphorism has the force of limit exclusive and not that of limit inclusive. The optional use of the conditional tense will be illustrated in the following aphorisms, where, in addition to the special tenses to be employed by those rules, we may employ the conditional also under those very circumstances, in the alternative, pro vided that the non-completion of the action is understood. Prof. Bohtlingk 
translates this aphorism thus: "optionally so, in connection with 7 and 079, the conditional tense may be employed". 
गर्दायां लहपिजात्वीः॥१४॥ पदानि॥ गर्दायां, लट्, अपिजात्यो। वृत्तिः ।। गायो गम्यमानायाम् भपिजास्वोरुपपस्योर्धातीलमाययो भवनि ॥ 
. 142. The affix 'Lat' is employed after a root, 
· when it has in composition with it the words 'api' or 
jâtu', the sense implied by the sentence being that of 'censure'. 
The word Tit means 'censure, 'blame'. The affix it has been enjoined to come with a present signification, and would not have come to denote' time in general, which, however, it does here, for here the Present tense is employed in preference to the tense required by the tlme of thie action, which is totally excluded. Hence the present sdtra. 
Thus *fo y par a hafa 'even your honor sacrifices (or sacri ficed or will sacrifice) to a Sûdra'; ma na malori neler net 96, ET S ITÀCTE ''possibly your honor sacrifices for a Sadra'; the sense implied being that such 
conduct on the part of those men are blameworthy. s '. In the present case, there being no occasion for the application of fore, of course, we cannot employ ak to denote the non-completion of the action 
BK. III. CH. III. $ 143, 144.) 
THE AFFIXES LIN AND LRIT. 
539 
So also oft or wra oral tante 'Fiel you abandon (or abandoned or will abandon) your wife'l 
fwytat afa fare per lloreta o format, fa, faz, -, (metat, me, staran:) 
fat: llama metat sommarat pentru al *rfer, TaTTHON 
143. The affix 'Lin' as well as 'Laţ' is option ally employed after a root, when the word 'katham' is in coustiuction with it, and censure is implied. 
The word 'censure' is understood, and by we draw from the previous satra into this. By using the word 'optionally' in the aphorism, it is indicated that this rule does not exclude the application of the alternative tenses which would otherwise have been required by the time of the action. It is not total exclusion like the last. Thus कई नाम तब भवाम् वपलं याजयेत् or याजयति or #facafe 'Indeed, how your honor can (or will) sacrifice for a Sadra'. 
So also ano 14 *17 91 Huur, or any am I 
Here there is an occasion for the application of the Potential mood (FGTE); therefore when we intend to express non-completion of action in the past time, we can optionally employ the Conditional also (ET). As a **** $494 warfare or arsrity 'Indeed, why did your honor (attempt to) sacrifice for that Sadra (in vain)'. 
Under similar circumstances, in denoting future time, the Conditional (as) must invariably be employed (III. 3. 139); as, *v våą vifita: 'why will you (attempt to give up your duty'. 
faut fere et n.988 il Terfor a fan-en, fore-Te, (T ptura, starat:) #1 
निः ॥ किंवृत्तउपपडे गर्दायां गम्बमानायां धासोनिडलूटी प्रत्ययो भवतः ॥ 
144. The affixes 'Lia' and 'Lfit' come after a verb, when the interrogative words like 'kim'&c, are in composition with it, and censure is implied. 
Herc also the Potential and the First Future are employed in preference to the time required by the action. 
The word 'censure' is understood here; not so, however, the word 'optionally. This excludes all other tense-alfixes. The repetition of the word fore in this satra, is for the sake of excluding , whose anuvšitti would also have run into this satra, had we taken the anuvșitti offers from the last sútra, instead of repeating it. Thus : Teff faran froula of 'who will censurc Hari ? 
540 
THE AFFIXES LIN AND LRIT. 
[BK. III. CII. III. $ 145. 
In the Past tense, when the non-completion of action is implied, we may optionally employ the Conditional (HD); and in the Future tense, under similar circumstances, we must employ the Conditional necessarily; as ont a 
पली यंता भवानथाजयिष्यत् 'who is the Sudra for whom your honor did sacrifice (in vain)'. This sætra may be rendered thus also:—" In connection with an Interrogative Pronoun, when censure is implied, may be employed the Poten tial or the First Future", 
ramoteuttamasta il 284 lugtfa un anaenfa--- Halati, sprain, safa, (ferant, feuch, starost:) ! 
वृतिः ॥ किंवत्तेविने चोपपतेऽनवपत्यमर्पयो तोलिंगनी प्रत्ययो भवतः ।। 
145. When it is to be expressed that some body holds that something is not likely to take place, or is uot to be tolerated, the Potential and the First Future are employed, even without the Interrogative Pronoun. 
The anuvșitti of the word 'censure' ceases. The word Haft: means 'impossibility, not to be believed'. The word op: means 'not endurabic or not to be tolerated'. This excludes all other tenses, the Potential and the 2nd. Future coming in preference to all other tenses required by the time of the action. In the Dvandva Compound -Tak t:, the word enfor ought to have stood as second member of the compound as it contains larger number of syllables than the word #44 (II. 2, 14). The non-compliance with rule II. 2. 14. indicates that the rule of THCT, (I. 3. 10) does not apply here, which would otherwise have applied the sense of the sätra then being "that the Potential should be employed when the act is not likely to occur, and the end. Future to be used when the act is not to be tolerated'. This is not, however, the interpretation which we should put upon the satra. 
Thus pregunta, T FTATA, T , YTT A Hot Frau or Trsforata 'I do not believe, or think it possible or trust that your honor sacrifices (or sacrificed or will sacrifice) for a Sadra'. Tatarfar TWITT aliu or an fayla 'I can not tolerate that your honor does (did or will) sacrifice for a Sadra'. 
When past time together with the non-completion of the action is to be expressed, we may optionally employ the Conditional (7), but necessarily so, when Future time is to be expressed. Thus 1994 YTT TT Torn Hatufaszą 'I do not believe that your honor did or will sacrifice for a Sadra'. 
किंकिलास्त्यर्थेषु लट् ॥ १४६ ॥ पदानि ॥ किंकिल-अस्त्यष, लट्, (taract:, atarai:). 
.. वृत्तिः ।। किंकिमास्त्वये पूष्पतेषु भनवकत्वमर्पयोर्धातीमत्ययो भवति । 
BK. III. CH. III. § 146, 147.) 
THE AFFIX LIN. 
541 
146. The affix 'Lfit' (the First Future) is used after a root, when the words 'kimkila' or those having the sense of 'asti' (he is) are in construction with it, (when the action is not likely to occur, or is not to be tolerated). 
The words within brackets must be supplied from the last aphorism. The whole word for frict is to be taken as an upapada and not the word for and Penghant separately. This word expresses anger. The words having the sense of asti are Mfen, Tpfa and forget i This rule supersedes the Potential (HE). Thus Farfare or wfe or vafa or farga RT 977 grani arsfirafa, no fa, un 'Is it possible that your honor will (or did or does) sacrifice for a Sodra ? I can not believe or tolerate it'. 
As there is no occasion for fore here, we cannot have the Conditional (T) required by rule III. 3. 141. 
Another example is न भवन मर्षय वा किंकिल वंशवानम् भोल्यो I do not believe or can tolerate that thou shouldst eat the food of Sodra'; msen stofa fqud i Toale 'Is it possible that thou shouldst go to a female Sadra'. 
argue treute si qy9 u orgufa ni -Teti, fere, ( g auti, atarat:) #1 
वृत्तिः । मातु यहिश्यतयोरुपपरयोरनवकृप्तयमर्षयोर्गम्यमानयो तोनिमत्ययो भवति ।। allefaim u stigadiffeuri anadoreioana 
147. The affix 'Liu' comes after a root, the words 'jätu' and 'yat being in construction with it, when the seuse is that the action is not believed to be likely, or is not to be tolerated. 
This excludes the First Future or 'Lřit'. A *1# Team antaa, or बनाम तम भवान् वपलम् वाजयेत्, न श्राधे, न मर्पयामि। 
Vart.---The words ay and afe should be enumerated along with the words मातु and यत् in this rulc. As या or यदिवा खाशो हरि निन्नावकल्पयामि T arfa 'neither do I think, nor do I tolerate that one like you should blas. 
pheme Hari'. 
Here also when the non-completion of the action is implied, the Condi tional (m) is necessarily employed in denoting future time, and optionally so in denoting past time. As sig, 70, ug or afe TTU efi fartą or warraren Thequrfa, T ara a 'neither do I believe, nor do I tolerate that one like you did attempt to blaspheme Hari'. fe acfTATEA 
FRENTE TA fue queria fannfent'if you had felt (which you clearly have not) the fra. grant smell of her breath, would you have liad any liking for this lotus'?.. 
542 
THE AFFIX LIN. 
(BK. III. CH. TIL $ 148-150. 
यञ्चयत्रयोः ॥ १४ ॥ पदानि यच्च-यत्रयोः, (अनवलपत्यमर्षयोः, 
लिङ)॥ 
वृत्तिः। बच्चयन इग्यतयोरुपपरबोरनवरुपयमर्पयोर्गन्यमानयोर्धातोनित्यत्वयी भवति ।। 
148. The affix 'Lin' comes after a root, the words 'yachcha' and 'yatra' being in construction, when the sense is that the action is not believed to be likely, or not to be tolerated. 
This supersedes the First Future. The scparation of this aphorism from the previous one, is for the sake of the rules that follow. The rule 1. 3. 10 does not also apply here. Thus यच्च वा वा स्वमेवं कुर्याः म श्राधे,न मर्षवामि I do not think, nor can I tolerate that thou wilt do so'. 
The Conditional (cy) will also be employed under its own proper con ditions as shown in the last aphorism. 
गर्दायां च ॥ १४ ॥ पदानि ॥ गर्दायाम, च, (यच्चयत्रयोः, लिक, बोताप्यो)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ बच्चयन हरवेसयोरुपपदवोर्धातोनिमाययो भवति गर्दाथाम् गम्यमानाचाम् ॥ 
149. The affix 'Lin' comes after a root in all tenses when the words 'yachcha' and 'yatra' are in com position with it, provided that censure is implied. 
The governing force of the words anavaklipti and amarsha ceases. This debars all other tense-affixes. Thus am or यत्र सम भवान् वपनं वानवेत् करो वृदः सन् बामणः, गहमिहे, भहो भन्वाय्वमेतत् 'we blame you who being an opulent, old Brahmana (who ought to know better) olliciate as a sacrificial priest for a Sadra, O 1 It is improper'! 
When the non-completion of the action is indicated, the Conditional tense must be employed under the rules given in III. 3. 139-140-141. As ry or TT fi forre: or affaf72, the 'we censure that you should (have attemp ted to) blaspheme Hari', &c. ...... चित्रीकरच ॥ १५ ॥ पदानि ॥ चित्रीकरो, च, (यश्चयत्रयो, 
लिक, बोताप्योः)। 
पतिः ॥ बच्चवनयापपरयोचित्रीकरणे गम्यमाने धातोलिंबप्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
150. The affix 'Lin' comes in all tenses after a root, when used with the words 'yachcha' and 'yatra' and the sense implied is that of 'wonder'. . . . . The word चित्रीकरणं means 'wonder, astonishment, strangeness &c. This debars all the other tense-affixes. Thus वच्च or चनसब भवान् वपलं बाजवेन भा. पर्वमेतत् this is a wonder that you should sacrifice for a Sadra'. 
BK. III. CH. III. $ 151, 152.] 
THE AFFIX LIN. 
543 
When the non-completion of the action is indicated, the Conditional is employed under the rules III. 3. 139, 140 and 141. Thus 3TVHTT quy or 
TER : or san. 204: 'it is a wonder that you should (have attempted to) perform a sacrifice for a Sadra'; भार्थमेतत् यच्च or या भयाजयिष्यः 'it is a wonder that you should (hereafter attempt to) make a Sadra perform a sacrifice. 
glayustu pulp i astra u 18,, 27077, (Araca) u f: 11074d faptu ra*WTA raitoje aparent that arenaria agrad il 
151. In all other cases, when wonder is impli ed by other words than 'yachcha' and 'yatra', the affix 'Lrit' is employed after a root, except when the word 'yadi' is used. 
In all other cases, that is to say, in cases where the words you or arc not employed, as well as where the word dit is not uscd, the First Future is used in preference to the Potential, 
Thus eryt, f , M 9UT TIA TEATTTeufa, TTCTTTH GUTTU spologa 'it is wonderful, strange and astonishing that the blind man should ascend a mountain, or a deaf person should read grammar'. .... 
Not so, when the word af is employed. Thus ară afe surate a wonder, if he study'. und oft # 331.H 'a wonder, if he eat'. 
As there is, in this case, no occasion tò cmploy the Potential, we cannot cmploy the Conditional as directed in sQtras III. 3. 139, 140 and 141. 
Saturd an gur u gerra Il Ta-ponti, alati, fare u 
वत्तिः । उत भपि इत्येतयोः समर्थयोतिोनिमत्ययो भवति ॥ 
152. The affix 'Lili' comes after a verb in all 
· tenses, when the words 'uta' and 'api', both having the same meaning, are in composition. 
This excludes all the other tense-affixes. The meaning which is com. mon both to Fa and Hy is that of ar 'assuredly, certainly, surely, really'. Thus उत कुर्यात् 'certainly he does'; भपि कुर्यात् 'assuredly he does' उतापीयीत 'cer. tainly hc studies (will study &c)'; conftata 'surely he studies &c. . 
Why do wc say 'when they mcan certainly'? Obscrvc da : glasafar 'will the stick fall'? of are una fa 'he shuts the door'. Here Ja is employed in asking questions, and it with yr means 'to shut'. The option allowed by rule III. 3. 141. ceases. Hereafter the Conditional (F) must invariably be used even in indicating Past action, when action is not completed, and there is reason for the cmployment of Ge (Potential). In indicating Future time, of course, per 
544 
THE AFFIX LIN. 
[BK. III. CH. III. # 153, 154. 
| must necessarily be employed as before. Hencelorward, therefore, no option is allowed, but must be employed where sätras III. 3. 139 and 140 require it. 
कामप्रवेदने कञ्चिति ॥ १५३ ॥ पदानि ॥ काम-प्रवेदने, अकञ्चिति, (लिङ) ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ काम इच्छामिलाप इत्यर्थान्तरम्, तस्व प्रवेरनं प्रकाशनम्, तस्मिन् गम्यमाने कच्चि दुपपड़े धासोलिदमत्ययो भवति ।। 
153. The affix 'Lin' comes after a root, in ex pressing or making known of a wish, except when the word 'kachchit' is in composition with it. 
The phrase argiya means the expression of one's wish. This debars all other tense-affixes. As कामो मे भाजीत भवान् =अभिलाषी में भुजीत भवान् 'it is 
my wish that you will eat'. 
: Why do we say 'except the word afega'? Observe wifestafa # माता कश्चिन्जीवति से पिता। माराविंद स्वा पृच्छामि कश्चिन्जीवति पार्वती॥ I hope thy mother is living, I hope thy father is living, I ask thee,o maravid ! (Parrot), I hope that Parvati is living'. 
संभावनेग्लमिति चेत् सिद्धाप्रयोगे ॥ १५४ ॥ पदानि ॥ संभावने, अलम्, इति, चेत्, सिद्ध-अप्रयोगे, (लिङ्)॥ 
वृत्तिः॥संभावन, क्रियासु योग्यताध्यवसानशक्तिश्रद्धानम, सदिक्षानीमनमन विशेष्यते, सच्चेत संभावनं पर्यातमवितयं भवति, सिद्धाप्रयोग इत्यलमो विशेषणं, सिद्धधरलमोऽप्रयोगः, कचासी सिद्धः, वन गम्यते चाया नचासो प्रयुज्यते, सदीको सम्भावनोपाधिकेऽयें वर्तमानादातीनिह प्रत्ययो भवति।। 
154. The aflix Lin' is employed after a root, when the expectation (of a person or thing being able or competent to do or suffer the action denoted by the verb) is implied (or expressed by any other word used along with them) than 'alam'. 
The word fee is understood here. The word #177 means supposi tion and expectation in the power or ability of another to perform any action. This word is here qualified by the sense of the word want. The word stort means adequate'; so that the above-mentioned #itat must be completed, full and true it. realised. .The phrase सिद्धामयोगे qualifies भलं, and means if the non employment or omission of ste is valid or unobjectionable. When is that unob. jectionable, when the sense of saf is implied by the sentence, but this word itself is not used? The Potential Mood is employed when the expectation is of the kind above described. This rule debars all other tense-affixes. Thus भपि पर्वत शिरसा मिन्यात् l expect he will break even the hill with his head'; भपिद्रोण. grafi #ta 'I expect you will eat away even a drona of cooked food'. : : . . Why do we use the word भलं 'competent to do'? Observe, विशस्यावी 
BK. III. Cit. (II. $ 155, 156.] 
THE AFFIX LIN. 
. 
545 
7 tru sufa 2794 'I expect Devadatta who is living in a foreign country, will some day go back to his country'. Here though expectation' is expressed thic idea conveyed by mas, namely, the power to do something or adequacy to do is not present; and hence the Futurc is employed instead of the Potential. 
Why do we use the phrase frageri 'when the actual result does not take place'? Observe, so I EHT Farafa 'Devadatta is in a position to kill the elephant, and he will carry it out also'. 
Under similar circumstances, in past and future times, when non-com pletion of action is indicated, the Conditional tense ( ) must be invariably used in preference to every other tense. Professor Bohtlingk translates the så tra thus: “The Potential is employed when it is expressed that some one is believed to be capable of doing something, pre-supposing that the actual per formance of the action does not take place'. 
विभाषा धातौ सम्भावनवचनेग्यदि ॥ १५५ ॥ पदानि ॥विभाषा, urât, HT - a, pofs, (prara, verfafa, a, fugterstal, fore) il 
afari 11 *17779 Tharayi guarita wafafyrt fag gra! **fait 
155. The aflix 'Lin' is optionally employed after a verb when it has another verb which expresses 'expectatiou', in construction with it, but not so when the word 'yat' is used. 
The whole of the last sátra qualifies this stra; the 'expectation' indi cated here being of the kind mentioned in the last satra and governed by the conditions laid down in that aphorisnt. The word by which an 'expectation' is expressed such as संभावय भपि, or भपिनाम, is called संभावन-वचन. This satra enjoins an option where by the last aphorism, there would have been necessa rily the Potential Tense. Thus **TTUA sa ora 'I expect you will cat'; अवकल्पयामि भुजीत or भोल्यते भवान् I hope you will eat'; अराधे भुनीत or wroga *#19 'I believe you will cat'. But no option is allowed, and the Poten. tial must necessarily be used, when the word op is employed. As farfa 
la van 'I expect you will cat'. 
The sätra may also be rendered thus. "The Potential is not necessari ly employed where there is in connection with it a verb in the sense of 'to hold as possible', but not when is employed." 
gta TITRE 1 P4€ Il erf uita-igrati, fare il वृत्तिः ॥ हेतुभूते हेतुमति चा वर्तमाना धातोलिए प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
156. The afix 'Lin' is optionally employed after both those verbs which express the condition and its consequence. 
546 
THE AFFIXES LIN AND LOT. 
[BK III. CH. III. $ 157. 
The word la means 'cause or "condition' and gamcans consequence or effect'. This supersedes all other tensc-affixes; in other words, 'in condi tional sentences in which one statement is made to depend upon another as its reason or ground, the Potential is used in both the antecedent and the con sequent, otherwise called the protasis (a) and apodosis ( a), the former con taining the condition or ground of argument, and the latter the conclusion based upon it. Thus:- Toam TKTĄ TEIXIT 'if he go by the right side, the cart will not be upset'; af WHAT MIETET VT aita'if he calls Ka malaka, the cart will not be upset. Here 'going by the right side' is the protasis (68), and 'not-upsetting' the apo.losis ( .). 
This is an optional use of the Potential; we may use the Second Future in the alternative; thus दक्षिणेन च यास्वति न शकटं पदोभविष्यति 'if he goes by the 
south, the cart will not be upset'. . 
The word for 'optionally' used in the sa tra immediately preceding is also understood here. 
. Though the anuvšitti or far could have been taken from the last aphorisms, its repetition here is for the sake of pointing out the particular time, namely, the Future, in which the Potential should be employed. There fore it is not employed in the following sentences: saatiot qalga 'he kills, therefore he flics'; o fa fa refa 'it rains, therefore he runs'. 
It, of course, follows that when the non-completion of the action is indicated, the Conditional (ar) should be employed, under these very circum stances. Sec examples under sätra III. 3. 139. 
इण्यार्थेषु लिलोटौ ॥ १५७ ॥ पदानि ॥ एखा-अर्येष, लिड़ mlet 
वृत्तिः ॥ इच्छायेंषु धातुपपपदेषु धातोनिग्लोटो प्रत्ययो भवति ।। पार्सिकम् ।। कामप्रवेदनइति वक्तव्यम् । 
157. The affixes 'Lin' and 'Lot are employed after a root; when another verb having the sense of wishing, is in coustruction with it. 
This supersedes all other tense-affixes. When words expressing 'wish', such as ry, 4, ar &c, are used, the Potential or Imperative is used; thus of कामये or प्रार्थये भुजीत भवान् or भुषको भवान् I wish, desire or pray that your honor may eat'. 
Vart. It is only when a desire is expressed that Potential or Im perative should be employed and not merely when the verb 'to wish' or its synonyms are in composition. Therefore the Potential or Imperative are not used here: un autre 'wishing, he docs'. 
The sätra may be rendered thus: 'In connection with a verb in the sense of 'wishing the Potential or the Imperative may be employed'. BK. III. CH. III. $ 158-160.] 
THE AFFIX LIN. 
547. 
_ समानकर्व केषु तुमुन् ॥ १५८ ॥ पदानि ॥ समान-कर्तृकेषु, तुमुन्, (इच्छार्येषु)। 
पत्तिः॥इच्छायेंषु धातुषु समानकर्ट के पूपपदेषु धातोस्तुमुन् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
158. The affix tumun' comes after a verb, when another verb meaning 'to wish' is in construction, provided that the agent of both the verbs is the same.. 
Thus इच्छति, बटि or वांछति भोतम् he desires to eat'; कामयते भोक्तम् 'he wishes to eat'; पिनाकपाणिं पतिम् भानु जति 'desires to obtain for her husband the Pinaka-handed God Siva'. 
But why do we say 'when the agent of the Infinitive and the verb are the same? We can not say देवदतं भोक्तुम् इच्छति यज्ञरसः 'Yajfiadatta wishes Devadatta to cat'; for here the agents of yn and rare not the same. We 
must say, भुखानम् instead of भोक्नुम् । 
Why do not we use it here:-च्छन् करोति 'wishing.he does'? Becausc the Infinitive is never found in such constructions, In other words, the Infinitive ing is employed when both the verbs have the same agent. 
लिङ्च ॥ १५९ ॥ पदानि ॥लिङ, च, (इकार्येषु, समानकर्तकेष)। पतिः॥ इच्छायेंषु समानकर्ट केषु धातुप्पपदेषु धातोनिमत्ययो भवति ।। 
159. The affx 'Lin' is used after a verb when verbs mcauing 'to wish' aro iu construction with it, and the agent of both the verbs is the same. 
Under similar conditions, with words implying 'wish', the Potential is used in the sense of the Infinitive; Thus मुखीय इति इच्छति 'he wishes that he may eat'; orfistaa sfa 'he wishes that he will read'. 
When the non-completion of the action is implied, the Conditional must be employed under rule III. 3. 139. 
इच्छार्थेभ्यो विभाषा वर्तमाने ॥९६०॥ पदानि इच्छा-अभ्यः, विभाषा, वर्तमाने, (लि)। 
वृतिः॥ इच्छायेभ्यो धातुभ्यो पर्समाने काले विभाषा निमत्ययो भवति ॥ 
160. After roots meaning 'to wish', the Poten tial (Liù) is optionally used in denoting tho present time. 
This ordains as wherd there would have been otherwischt. Thus इति or इच्छेत् the wishes'; यदि or गया; कामयते or कामयेत । 
विधिनिमन्त्रणामन्त्रसाधीष्ट संप्रश्नमायनेषु लिङ्॥१६१॥ पदानि॥ विधि-निमंत्रण-आमंत्रण-अधीष्ट-संप्रश्न-मार्यनेषु, लिङ्॥ 
कृत्तिः ।। विध्यापर्येषु धातोलिहमस्ययो भवति ।। 
548 
THE KRITYA AFFIXES. 
[BK. III. CII.- III. $ 161, 162. 
__161. The affix 'Lin' comes after a verb, when the agent either commands, invites, permits, politely expresses a wish, asks questions, or prays. 
The word fofu: means 'commanding or directing a subordinate'; farq TO means 'giving invitation'; भामन्मj means 'expressing permission to do as one likes'; 118: means 'to politely express a wish'; **: means 'a question'; and प्रार्थना means 'a prayer'. 
This excludes all other tense-affixes. Thus:-- 
(1) कटं कुर्यात् let him make the mat'; मामम् भवान् भागच्छेत् 'you come to the village'; 
(2 and 3) इह भवान् भुखीत 'you will or may dine here'; यह भवान भासीस 'here you will or may sit'; 
(4) भधीच्छामो भवन्तं माणवकं भवानुपनयेत 'we wish that you should con descend to initiate this boy'; 
(5) किं भी व्याकरणमधीयीच उत तर्कम् ? 'Sir, what shall I learn, the Grammar or the Logic'? 
(6) भवति में प्रार्थना व्याकरणं भधीयीय 'this is my prayer that I should learn Grammar'. 
- लोट् च ॥ १६२ ॥ पदानि ॥ लोट, च, (विधि-निमन्त्रण-आमंत्रण अधीष्ट-संप्रश्न-प्रार्थनेषु)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ जोदप्रत्ययो भवति धातोर्विध्याविष्वयेंषु ।। 
___162. The affix 'Lot also is enmployed after a root in the sense of commanding, &c. 
The Imperative Mood is employed also under the circumstances men tioned in the last aphorism. The division of this aphorism from the last, is for the sake of subsequent satras in which the anuvritti of air only runs and not those of others. Thus : 
(1) कट तावर भवान् करोतु 'make the mat'; प्रामं भवान् भागच्छतु। (2 and 3)भमुम भवान् भास्ताम् 'there you are invited to, or you may,sit'. (4) पुषम्भवान् अध्यापयतु 'you will teach, I hope, the son'. (G) कि मा वेदमध्यये उस सके Sir what shall I learn, the Veda or the Logic'? 
(6) भवति में प्रार्थना व्याकरणमध्ययै छन्दोऽध्यये this is my prayer that I may learn the Grammar, or that I may learn the Prosody'. 
प्रेषातिसर्गप्राप्तकालेष कत्याच ॥ १६३ ॥ पदानि ॥ प्रेष-अतिसर्ग मासकालेषु, कत्याः , च, (लो)॥ 
• वृत्तिः । प्रेषणं पः, कामचाराभ्यनुज्ञानमतिसर्गः, निमित्तभूतस्य कालस्यावसरः प्राप्त. काला, एतेषषु धातोः कस्यसंशकाः प्रत्यया भवन्ति । 
BK. III. CH. III. $ 163, 164.] 
THE AFFIX LIN. 
549 
103. The affixes called 'Kritya', and the affix Lot' come also after verbs, in the sense of direction, granting pormission, and proper (particular) time. 
The word is means 'direction'; naar: means 'permission to do as one likes'; mra: means 'arrival of appropriate occasion or time for the doing of an action'. The force of is to introduce the word Art into this aphorism. 
Thus far a: tulu:, *i, u: or art: 'you must, (may, or it is proper. time for you to) make the mat'. . 
So instead of the Passive Potential Participles, for such the Kțitya affix (III. 1. 95 &c) may properly be called; we may have the Imperative also. Thus att *** 'you must (may or it is the appropriate time to) make the mat'. 
It might be asked 'Why the kritya affixes are enjoined to come with the force of direction, permission &c. They have been ordained most gener ically to come in denoting action in the Abstract (14) and object (**) and a fortiori they will come in denoting the senses of direction, permission &c; for the latter are but a species of action. If you say that it being ordained in these special senses, will (on the principle, that an apavada or special rule ex cludes an utsarga or general rule within the jurisdiction of such special rule) exclude kritya affixes; we would reply, that kritya affixes will not be exclud-, ed, for the rule of non-uniform affixes (III. 1.94) will apply'. 
To this objcction we answer the special mention of the word kritya in this satra, indicates the existence of the following inaxim : 
'Thc rule of non-uniform affixes (III. 1. 94) does not necessarily apply in all cascs after sätra III. 3. 94 treating of primary affixes by which feminine nouns are formed'. 
Q. What is the difference between the words fafy and g? Some say for means a precept enjoining something for the first time; while ty means merc 'direction'. 
for the largfal per la certa u fare, T, FE-A1 fatih (darfari-ATHERITAT, PITE, WIT) 
वृतिः ॥ षादिषु गम्यमानेषु ऊर्वमौहर्ति के वर्तमानाद्धातोर्लिङ प्रत्ययो भवति चकाराव्यथा माप्तम्च॥ 
164. The afix 'Liu' (as well as the 'Kritya' and 'Lot') is used (under similar circumstances in the sense of direction, permission &c.) when the time is future by a Muhûrta (48 minutes or an Indian hour); (or the Po tential may be used as well, when it signifies 'at this very moment), 
350 
THE AFFIX TUMUN. 
[BK. III. CH. III. S 165-167. 
The words ia &c. of the last sätra must be read into this. The force of is to introduce the words Fire and it from the last sætra, into this. Thus अर्व मुह परि मुहर्सस्य भवता खनु कहा कर्तव्यः, करणीयः, कार्यः, or भवान् खल कटं कुर्वात (Potential) or micia (Imperative). You may make the mat after an Indian hour'; or 'you must &c', or 'it is proper time for you to make a mat just now'. Compare III. 3. 9." 
स्मे लोट् ॥ १६५ ॥ पदानि ॥ स्मे, लोद, (प्रैषातिसर्गप्रातकालेषु, अर्ध्वमोहर्तिके)॥ 
वृत्तिः । म शपउपपदे भैषादिषु गम्यमानेषर्वमोहूर्तिकऽयें वर्तमानादातोलोमस्ययो भवति । 
165. The affix 'Lot comes after a verb, when the word 'sma' is in composition; (when the sense is that of direction' permission) &c. and referring to time future by a Muharta). 
This supersedes the Potential (Far) and Potential Passive Participles (कल्या), Thus अध्र्षम् मुहर्ताद् भवान् कटं करोतु म, मामं गच्छतु म, भावकमध्यापवतु सम 'you (may, must, or it is proper time to) make the mat, or go to the village, or teach Manavaka just now'. 
अधीष्टे च ॥ १६६ ॥ पदानि ॥ अधीष्टे, च, (स्मे, लोट)। वृतिः ॥ स्मशउपपवेधी गम्यमाने धातोोट् प्रत्ययो भवति।। 
166. And when 'wish' is meant (the Impera tive may be used when the word 'sma' is in composition with the verb). 
The word is understood here. The word spre has already been explained in satra III. 3. 161. This rule supersedes the Potential. Thus भरा स्म राजन मावकमध्यापय or भज म रामग्निही झुधि 'OIKing! I wish that you teach the boy or make Agnihotra sacrifice'. 
कालसमयवेलासु तुमुन् ॥ १६७ ॥ पदानि ॥ काल-समय-वेलासु, 
वृत्तिः।। कालादिष्पपदेषु धातोस्तुमुन्मस्ययो भवति ।। 
. 167. The affix tumun' comes after a root, when the words 'kåla', 'samaya', and 'vela' (all meaning time) are in composition. 
Thus कालो भोक्तम् 'time to eat'; समकः खन स्नानभाजने सेवितुम् 'it is time to bathe and take food'; बेला भोक्तम् 'time to eat'. In short, Infinitive in समुन् may be used with words meaning time'; as भवसरोग्यमात्मानं प्रकाशयितुम् 'this is, indeed, the time to show myself. 
Why do not we use the Infinitive here? कालः पचति भूतानि 'time de 
BK. III. CH. III. $ 168-170.] 
THE AFFIX NINI. 
: 551 
vours all creatures'. The sense of 'direction &c'. is understood in the satra; so when 'direction &c' is not meant, the Infinitive will not be used. 
Why do not we use the Infinitive here, at V FX 'proper time to eat'? Because, by the rule of non-uniform affixes (III. 1.94), we can use also the affix Fee (by which the word ta is formed). As we have already 
in sätra III. 3. 163 that after sätras III 1. 113 and forward, namely, in other sQtras than those treating of feminine affixes, the rule of III. 1. 94 may be employed as an Anitya or a non-universal rule. 
लिङ् यदि ॥ १६८ ॥ पदानि । लिङ, यदि, (कालसमयवेलासु)॥ वृत्तिः । यच्छन्ने उपप कालादिषु धातोलिन् प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
168. The affix 'Lin' comes after a root, when the word 'yad' is in composition, and the words 'kâla', &c. occur in construction. 
. This ordains the Potential and supersedes the Infinitive in 'lumun'. Thus 19., II, al 41 9 919 sata 'it is time that your honor should take your meals'. 
real per la Gift I ST, F2-4, , (fere) वृत्तिः ॥ भहें करिवाच्ये गम्यमाने वा धातोः कस्यतयः प्रत्यया भवन्ति ।। 
109. Tho allxos kritya', and the aflix 'trich' are added to a root, when fitness as regards the agent is implied, as well as the affix 'lin'). 
The force of is to introduce the Potential (wa) into this, from the last. Thus भवता खनु कन्या वोठव्या वाह्या or पहनीया, (kritya); or भवान् खलु कन्यया बोटा 
(trich); or war r at Tha (lin) 'your honor is fit to marry the girl'. 
Why specifically enjoin'kritya' and 'trich' in the sense of fitness? They being enjoined universally, would a fortiori, be applied when fitness is to be des noted ? Because the fos being specially enjoined to denote fitness, and being an Apavada, would have debarred kritya and trick, which being universal affixes, would give way. Nor can we, to prevent this contingency, take shel ter under rule III. 1. 94 of 'non-uniform affixes', for we have seen that that rule is not universally valid. 
PatyTyrtarafa: 11 pga lugtfat i prapy- ##T:, fufa: at 
afar: 11 949irfifte argoufafè amiftare santforget tafe 
. 170. The affix nini' is added to the root in denoting ageut, showiug that there is some 'necessity 
552 
THE AFFIX LIN. 
[BK. III. CI. III. $ 171, 172. 
or indebtedness or obligation on the part of the agent in connection with the action denoted by the verb. 
Thus HTTU Art 'must be done'. The compounding here takes place by II. 1. 72. So also a fat 'ought to be given a hundred'; ara qat; ficut 
alt &c. 
RE II 999 lt ugyfa H SRET:, , (TELY 1987:) | दनिः।। कत्यसंज्ञका प्रत्यया भावश्यकाधमण्येयोरुपाधिभूतयोर्धातोर्भवन्ति ।। 
171. The affixes called 'kritya' also come after a root when the sense to be indicated is that of 'necessi ty or obligation'. 
Thus itar a 
: 4:, Turai, r: or 4: 'you ought to make the mat'; pat yra graedt, 131, &c, 'you ought to pay a hundred'. 
Q.-Where is the necessity of this aphorism ? The kritya affixes, being enjoined universally without any limitation would, of course, come under these special circumstances also. 
A.--They would be excluded by the special asfix fun of the last satra, which comes especially with the force of 'necessity' and 'obligation'. 
. Q.Not so, for sola comes in denoting the 'agent' (mal), whilc kritya denotes the 'action' (Hr) and the 'objcct' (*); so their scopc being different, how can one supersede the other ? 
A.-Well, to remove this objection, some say, that kritya words like 964, TT &c. (III. 4.68) which especially refer to the agent, are the proper ex amples to be given under this aphorism; and not examples of kritya-formed words in general. 
yfer ff H 292 li agrat ut tim, fore, , ( :) # पतिः॥ शमोत्ययोपाधिक धात्वर्ये निमत्ययो भवति चकारात् कृत्याच ॥ 
172. And the affix 'Lin' as well as the 'kritya" affixes come after a verb, when the sense is that of 'capa bility' 
The word 'capability' qualifies the root so that the sense of capability must be inherent in the root ; Thus A Art frecati, oftai, R: (kritya), or भवान् खलु भारंवत् 'you can carry the load'. 
Though ksitya-affixes would have come in this sense, even without any special rule, for they are general affixes, their special mention in this satra is to guard against their being superseded by foto, for rule III. 1. 94 is not universally valid. 
arrafa facetet i 893 ogra u opfafa, forefretu वृतिः ।। भाग्रीषिशिटे थे वर्तमानाद्धातोनिलोटौ प्राययो भवतः ॥ 
BK. III. CH. III. $ 173-175.) 
THE AFFIX LUN. 
553 
173. The affixes 'Lin' and 'Loţi come after a verb by which 'benediction' is intended. 
The word arutą means the wish to obtain an object which one de sires, a blessing, an expression of one's good wishes. The fas here referred to is what is known as the writime or the Bencdictive tense. Its conjugation is different from the conjugation of the ordinary far, which we have called the Potential or Optative; as चिरं जीण्यात भवान् or चिरंजीवतु भवान् 'may you live 
long'! 
Why do we say 'when denoting benediction'. Observe per: sprefer TEH: 'Devadatta' lives long'. 
funderara w psy u gera u 
f l -, ara, (snifupa) 
TIT: lf operatie fait via: fitilgeret *T: aqurta Tim Tatli 
174. The affixes 'ktich' and 'kta' are employ. ed after a loot, when benediction is intended, provided that the whole word so formed, is an appellative. 
The affixes therefore, 'give the sense of the agent, with the addition that the action is simply the object of a prayer of some one who wishes that that may be thc action of that agent, the sensc bcing simply appcllative. Thus तन्तिः = तमुसात् 'a weaver' (lit. may he weave); सातिः or सतिः = सनुतात् (VI. 4.45) 'wealth or gist'; *a: =*TAR 'success'; :ERTAT 'respect'. These are exam ples of words formed by the affix f i Of words formed by Ti in this sense, we have 997:=in ga dap: Devadatta (lit. may the Gods give him). Though the affix hi has already once been generally ordained, its repetition here is to pre vent its being superseded by feti i The coffing is qualifying only, distinguish ing it from fit &c. and is useful in sđtra VI. 4. 39. 
are all 994 in octar u Arte, ya n FF: Il A1699 vielas uztuala il 
175. The affix 'Lui' comes after a verb when the word 'man' is used in connection with it. 
This sets asidc all other tense-affixes. As a refę 'let him not do #1 greta 'Ict him not take'. 
How have wc then the Imperative and the Future tenses in the follow: ing sentence instead of the Aorist ? AT 479 FT 90 AT Wirafari This sentence is against good usage. Or, we may explain it by saying that there is another AT which has not the indicatory F; and with that at, other tenses may be used.. Thc augmcnt is clidcd astor tlic prohibitive particlc , by. VI. 4. 74. 
अथ तृतीयाध्यायस्य चतुर्थः पादः॥ 
BOOK THIRD. 
CHAPTER IV. 
-:0: wiga varat Arut: 11 pilogra u Nig-grow, ApaT: 11 
F: si urarutal Angalit pa r, frilufastsenara:, nifqrafe sayfa भपि प्रत्ययाः साधवो भवन्ति ।। 
1. When there is a syntactical relation be. tween the senses of the verbs, the affixes are valid, even in denoting time other than that for which they have been specifically enjoined. 
The above satra is thus translated by Professor Bohtlingk:-"Words formed with affixes stand, (in reference to the time) in closer relation to the verb (with which they are allied)". Thus III. 2. 85 has taught that words like Ifraeserts have a past significance, s. . they denote a person who has already performed the ceremony of Agnishtoma. According to the present sätra, in spite of this past significance, inherent in the word, one may use this word with a future tense, whereby it is reduced to a future-denoting word. Thus 
froFUF4 q r af means 'to him a son will be born who will perform the said Agnishtoma sacrifice'. 
The above is not a literal translation but rather an adaptation. The literal translation will be something like this. "Affixes are employed in de noting relation (atu) between the senses of verbs". The word you is a Genitive Compound meaning 'relation of root'. The word yra 'root' is figur atively used for you 'sense of root'; so that the above compound means 're lation of the senses of roots'. In other words, the relation between the roots should be that of qualifier and the qualified. When there exists such a rela tion between the senses of two verbs, namely, that of qualifier and the thing qualificd, then the affixes inay bc cmployed in denoting other times than that specifically ordained for them. In other words, to quote from the Guide to Paņini: "It is to be observed, that when primitive words are joined with verbs so as to qualify them, the time of the verbs being mainly the time that con trols the sentence, any time denoted by the primitive affixes, by which the former words have been formed will be subordinate to and regulated by, but need not correspond to, the time of the verbs, so far as the form of those words is concerned." 
55 6 
TIIE AFFIX LOT. 
[BK. III. CII. IV. 2. 
MM 
Thus तत्र वसन् वा living there, he saw'; भग्निष्टोमयाज्यस्व पुगी अनिता 'to him a son will be born, a performer of the Agnishtoma sacrifice'; 17:47: staan 'he will be to-morrow maker of the mat'; sifarraurea 
Here, though the time of the action of living denoted by this present, (III, 2. 124), this action is present only in relation to the action of seeing, and though because the latter action is past, the former action also is past with reser ence to the speaker or writer, this circumstance does not affect the form of a which therefore may remain as it is. In other words, 'affixes are related direct ly to the root, and not to the whole sentence' 
Similarly the word wireltaraft is formed by an affix (III. 2. 85) denoting past time, while the word later is in the Future tense. Now, this link ing together of a word in the Past tense with a word in the future is a valid usage. Here the time of the qualified verb waar does not affect the special time of the qualifier Agnishtomaydjt. 
Q. Why has the word 444 been repeated in this satra, when it was understood in this from III. 1.0? Ans.—The repetition is for the sake of indica ting that affixes which are not ordained to come after roots (ITE), but which are enjoined to come after nouns &c. such as Taddhita affixes, are even valid in other tenses than those in which they have been specifically enjoined when related to a verb. Thus partiet "he was possesscd or a cow'; 77817 
fant 'he will be possessed of a cow'. Here the Taddhita affix way is added to the. noun 'cow', with a present signification (V. 2. 94), the word fra meaning 'who has cows' or 'in which there are cows.' This word itaq, however, is related and validly so, to the words area and waar-one in the Past tense and the other in the Future. 
. PAUTAR E Grafrat at avait: npn actforu four- TETT, tc, a, ferat, ut, 7, 7-verar:, (gerarme) 
fa: Il safaretra fe t argiaitrerent tafe ETC arity, adH INIUF 474772: 664 e Fiat For en roderatègit *Tai, antgarfareg 27 998: 
2. When the (frequency or) repetition of an action is indicated, the affx 'Lot' is added to the root, and the verb is repeated. And the affixes 'hi' and 'sva', or the affixes 'tá' and 'dhvam' are the substitutes of 'Lot'. 
Professor Bohtlingk translates this as follows: "When the repetition of an action is expressed, the Imperative is used, and though the second person singular is used, it may also stand for the second person plural." 
The phrasc Taqay of the last satra is understood here also. The fre quency or repetition of an action is called a FETT: 1 This word qualities the sense of the original. In other words, "when the sense of frequency &c, is under BK. III. CH. IV. $ 3.] 
THE AFFIX LOT. 
557 
stood in connection with the action, this sense not being included in that of the verb, as it may be in the case of a verb from frequentative roots." 
This limperative mood is employed in all Tenses and Persons in con nection with all moods. But this peculiar use of the Imperative is confined to the 2nd. pcrson singular and plural Parasmaipada (Fe and w); and 2nd. person singular and plural Atmanepada (FT and 679). In other words, “the Imperative second person (Parasmaipada and Atmanepada) is repeated, though the subject of the main verb be different and the verb be in any tense." Thus til sa 
pret a 'he cuts repeatedly', as if some one was always calling out to him 'cut thou, cut thou'. tifo patirtasta tsita: or to gafa 'they cut often and often'. So also a greater t ara, ir gatty: or un contra 'thou or you two or you all cut repeatedly' as if some one was calling out to you 'cut you, cut you'. 
So also notranaca u ritmu, gara, hirtel &c. 'you cut, I cut, he has cut repeatedly', as if some one was calling out to us 'cut ye, cut ye'. Similarly with Atmanepada, roots; as murari a , at anfrara, # 
fiqh &c. 'he or they study hard' as if some, one was calling out to them 'study thou, study thou'. 
So also attenta EU tha &c. Similarly in every tense, mood and person; as, +7 
TIGAVIT, 1977, TAYARI The Intensive verbs in 45 also have this meaning of frequency, but thcrc thic verb is not rcpycated, as the sense of frequency there is inherent in the verb; in this case we must repeat the verb to express frequency. See VIII. 1.4. 
This use of the Imperative is not found in Literature (Bohtlingk), but in Marathi. 
precuma Horfa ui , HATTEUTA, (MTE, mat, feat, at, gerät:) #1 
वृत्तिः ।। समुच्चीयमान क्रियावचनाखातोरन्यतरस्या नोट् प्रत्ययो भवति, तस्व नोटो हिस्सा prezit ***: 11 
3. The afix 'Lot' is similarly added to the root optionally, when several themes follow one after another. 
In this case also the terminations of the second person singular and plural Atmanepada and Parasmaipada are employed, namely, fe, f, or a and 4711 Thus #IXATHTHT UITH EarrafNYTTHüdruhla or Threa:, or FASTEI 
Similar examples can be formed as in the last aphorism; only the Im perative is not doubled as in thic last casc. 
Similarly FISH754, surton , Fathianata, or Terard or raspad 'he or they two or they all learn, learning Prosody, learning Grammar, learning Nirukta'. 
This being an optional rule, we have these forms also; surronto, 
538 
LUN LAN AND LIT. 
[BK. III. CII. IV. $ 4-6. 
छन्दोऽधीते, निरुक्तमधीते, इत्येवायमधीते, रमावधीयाते, इमेधीयते । बन्दोधीष, व्याकरणमधःपे, निहक्कमधीषे, इत्येव त्वमधीचे, युवामधीया, यूवमधीवछन्दोधी व्याकरणमधीये, निरुकमधीवास्ये वाहमधीये, भावामधीबळे, पयमधीमहे । 
यथाविध्यनुप्रयोगः पूर्वस्मिन् ॥ ४॥ पदानि ॥ यथा-विधि, अनु प्रयोगः, पूर्वस्मिन् ॥ 
वृत्तिः ।। पूर्व स्मिन् लोविधाने यथाविध्यनुप्रयोगो भवति ।। 
4. In the first case (comprised under satra III. 4. 2), the same verb must be used in the subsequent clause, as the verb which was put in the Imperative mood. 
The examples have already been given under sätra III. 4. 2. We cannot say ननीहि लुनीहीरयेवायं छिनत्ति; we must use a verb from the root न to cut'. Such as quaifa, &c. So also planira takes orita only after it and not a synonymous verb like qafe &c. 
समुच्चये सामान्यवचनस्य ॥ ५॥ पदानि ॥ समुच्चये, सामान्य-व चनस्य ॥ 
वृत्तिः। द्वितीये नोड् विधाने समुच्चये सामान्यवचनस्य धातोरनुप्रयोगः कर्तव्यः ।। 
5. In the second case (III. 4. 3) whoro many actions are spokeu of together, the verb that is made to follow, should be such as has the sense common to all those verbs. 
Thus भोदन भनव, सक्तपिव. धानाः खादेत्येवायमभ्यवहरति 'he takes his meals, eating rice, drinking saktu, and tasting fried corn'. Here the verb भभ्यवहरति has a sense common to all the verbs in the Imperative mood. The object of taking the second verb, having the senses common to all the antecedent verbs, is to prevent the repetition of all the previous ones. In the secular vernacular, 
the brevity, however, is often not approved. ... छन्दसि लुङ्लङ्लिटः॥६॥ पदानि ॥ छन्दसि, लुङ-लङ्-लिटः, (धातुसम्बन्थे)। 
वृतिः ॥ छन्दसि विषये धातुसम्बन्धे सर्वेषु कालेषु जना निटः प्रत्यया भवन्ति । 
.6. In the Vedas, the Aorist, Imperfect and Perfect are optionally employed in all tenses, in relation to verbs. 
The words धातुसम्बन्ध and भन्यतरस्याम् are understood here also. By saying 'optionally', other tense-affixes may be similarly employed. 
Thus देवो देवेभिरागमत् (Rig. I. I. 5.) 0 God Agnil come hither with the gods'. Here the Aorist भागमत् has the force of the Imperative. भतव मचेतस 
BK. III. CH. IV. 879] 
THE AFYIXES SE &c. 
. 
339 
इतेभ्योऽकरं नमः I make salutation &c. &c. (Rig.x.85.17). Here भकर is Aorist 
(a) and has the sense of the Present. 
So also भग्निमय होतारमवृणीसायं यजमानः। Here aris used instead ofलद । So also भया ममार=भय नियते। Here लिद is used instead of लट् । 
लिङथै लेट् ॥ ७॥ पदानि । लिङथै, लेद्, (छन्दसि, अन्यतर 
स्याम्॥ 
...पका पाता 
पतिः ॥ नित्यं यत्र जिन विधीयते, विध्यारित हेसुमतोर्निहित्यवमादिस्तक छन्दसि विषय ऽन्यतरस्यो नेट प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
___7. The affix 'Let' is optionally employed in the Vedas, wherever the Potential can be used. . . . 
Thus in the sense of 'command' &c., he may be employed instead of Fors. This is called the Vedic Subjunctive and is peculiar to the Vedas only. Thus जोषिपत् (Rig. II. 35. 1) 'may he make us beautiful'. तारिषत् (Rig. I. 23. 12) 'may he increase'. पसाति विद्युत् (Rig, VII. 25.1) 'may the thunder-bolt fall'. भवाति (Rig. V. 37.5) 'may he become'. So also मन्दिषत्, नेता, नेषस्, सतिषत् उदर्षि च्यावयाति। 
उपसंवादाशङ्कयोच ॥८॥ पदामि ॥ उपसंवाद-आशंकयोः, च, (कंदसि, लेट) 
वृत्तिः ॥ उपसंपाद भागंकायां च गम्बमानायां छन्दसि विषये जेर प्रत्ययो भवति । 
8. Whore a contiugout promise (a reciprocal agreement), or apprehension is implied, the affix Let' is employed after a root, in the Ohhandas Literature. 
The word avere means 'reciprocal agreement, contracting to do'. Thus यहि मे भवानि कुाद भहमपि भवत पास्यामि If you do this for me, I will give this to you'. Agreements like these are called उपसम्वाद; while guessing or in ferring the result from a cause is called MTET 'apprehension or fear'. 
___Thus भहमेव पशूनामीशे । मदमा एष वो ग्रहा गप्पान्स ।। मावल्यान्येव वः पानाण्यु च्यान्स ।। नेन्जिमायन्तो (or नेन्जिमायनयो) नरकं पताम || (Nir. I. II. Bohtlingk)-जिमाचरणेन नरकपास भाशंक्रयते ॥ All the above examples have the sense of Potential, but the Subjunctive (Let) must be employed necessarily in these senses and not option ally, which anuvritti was understood in the last sætra. 
तुमथै सेसेनसेअसेनक्सेकसेनध्यैअध्यनकथ्यकध्यैनशध्येशध्यैन्तवे सवेड्-तवेनः हा पदानि ॥ तुमर्थे, से-सेन्-असे-असेन-बसे-कसेन-अध्य-अध्येन् कथ्य-कध्येन-शध्यै-शध्यैन्-तवै-तधेड-तवेनः, (छन्दसि)॥ 
तुमुनोऽस्तुमर्थः, सन छन्दसि विपये धामोः अयादयः प्रत्यया भवन्ति ।। 
9. In the Vedas the following aixes come 
560 
TITE 'AFFIXES KAI AND ISIIYAI. 
[BK. III. CII. IV. $ ro. 
after roots with the force of the alix 'tumun', viz: 'se', 'sen', 'ase', 'asen', 'kse', 'kasen', 'adhyai', 'adhyain', ‘kadhyai', 'kadhyain', 'sadhyai', sadhyain', 'tavai', 'taven' and 'taven'. 
In the Vedic literature the Infinitive is formed by the above 15 affixes. These, when stripped of their indicatory letters, will be found to consist of the following five asfixes (1) a=#, aa and II (2) =Mê, ve and near II (3) d = ona, spa, la, 277, Tid and mail (4) (5) = and anal 
The difference in the affixes is made by four indicatory letters, viz. 7, , TĮ and I The forces of , T and have already been explained ; the indicatory a makes the word take the adatta accent on the first syllable (VI. 1. 197). Thus è is acute (III. I. 3); has acute on the first syllable of the word (VI. 1. 197); He has accent of the affix (III. I. 3); vay throws the accent on the first syllable of the word; the indicatory I makes the numbers 11 and 12 Sarvadhatuka, and the root takes the proper Vikaraña of its class before these affixes; while before it, the acute falls both on the first syllable and the last syllable simultaneously (VI. 1. 200, VI. 2. 51). 
Before going to give examples of these affixes, let us explain what is meant by Thef 'the sense of the affix The word au is here equivalent to *T* or 'action'; for the pratyayas or affixes, to which no meaning has been as signed in grammar, convey the meaning of the bases to which they are added. Thus no special meaning having been attached to th, it will convey the mean ing of the root to which it is added, i. e. it will denote the 'action' of the verb, or Infinitive mood. (1) 8 04:1 (2) e- råd timą (Rig. V. 66. 3). (3 and 4) fra and H -ME TE TRIP TO (Rig. III. 36. 10). So also in a 
TN (Rig. X. 57. 4). With oral the word will be withi (5) mai 6) 489-4rfaqe fat (Rig. V. 59. 3). It has not the fara accent (VI. 1. 197) which would have given us forte i 67 and 8) pa, m -argiai (9) 28- at B7390 (Rig. VI. 60. 13). (10) 22a --Parazzi (11 and 12) sta, mita-(Rig. IV. 27. 5); the accent however is on foi ar arata (Rig. VI. 60. 13). (13) -Wafamily art (14) - ME FUÀ arfa ana (Rig. X. 184. 3). (15) =stad (Rig. I. 46. 7); meat (Rig. 1. 85.9); Fifa 1 
प्रयै रोहिण्ये अव्ययिष्ये ॥ १०॥ पदानि ॥ प्रये, रोहिण्ये, erofura, mhit, sqfo) II 
वृत्तिः ।। मयै रोहिष्ये भव्ययिष्य इत्येते शमा निपात्यन्ते छन्नति विपये ।। 
10. The words 'prayai', 'rohishyai' and 'avya thishyaï are irregular Vedic Infinitives. . 
BK. III, CH. IV. § 11-14.] 
THE AFFIXES TAVAI &C. 
.564 
Thus (1) प्रवे देवेभ्यो महीः (Rig. I. 142.6);+या+के-प्रय-प्रयातुम्। (२)मपामो षधीना रोहिल्यै । रुपये रोहिप्यरोहणाय । (3) भ+व्यय +ध्ये = भव्ययिष्य-भव्ययनाय। 
दृशे विख्ये च ॥११॥ पदानि ॥ दूशे, विख्ये, च, (तुमथै, छन्दसि) वृत्तिः।। वृशे विख्ये इत्येतो छन्दसि विषये निपात्यते ।। 
11. The words 'drise' and 'vikhye' are ano malous Vedic Iufinitives. 
Thus वृशे विधाय सूर्यम् (Rig. I. 50. 1) इन्दुम् । विख्ये स्वा हरामि-विण्यातुम् । 
शकि समुल्कमुलौ ॥ १२॥ पदानि॥ शकि, णमुल्-कमुलौ, (तुमर्थे, छन्दसि)। 
वृत्तिः। शकतो धातापप छन्दसि विषये तुमयें यमुनमुन इत्येतो मस्ययो भवता ।। 
12.. The affixes 'namul' and 'kamu' are added to roots in the Chbandas to form Iufinitives, when they are governed by the verb 'sak' (to be able). 
Of the affix una the real affix is #9; the letter y causes vșiddhi (VIF. 2. 115); and a-regulates the accent (VI. I. 193).. So also of कमुन्, the letter क prevents guna and vriddhisubstitution (I. I. 5). 
Thus भग्नि देवा विभा नाशनुवन् 'the Gods were not able todivide Agni'. विभम् +णमुन्-विभाज-विभक्तम् । So also अपलप नाशकान्, instead of भपनीम् । 
ईश्वरे तोसुनकसुनौ ॥ १३ ॥ पदानि ॥ ईश्वरे, तोसुन-कसुनी, (तुमथै, छन्दसि).॥ 
वृत्तिाराम सपो छनसि विषये तुमय धातोस्तोन्कसुम्माययों भवतः । 
13. The affixes 'tosun' and 'kasun' are added to roots in the Ohhandas, to form: Iufinitives, when the word 'îs vara' is.in composition. : 
____Thus ईधरोऽभिचरितो अभिचरितुम् । ईश्वरो विनिखः-विलिखितुम् । ईश्वरो विवः = वितर्षितुम् । 
___ सत्यार्थ तवैकेन केन्यत्वनः ॥ १४ ॥पदानि ॥ कृत्य-अ, तवैकन केन्य-त्वनः, (छन्दसि)। 
वृत्तिः ॥ कृत्यांनामयों भावक्रम, सस्मिन् कृत्वाय छन्दसि विषये सबै केन् केन्य लन् इग्बे. ते प्रत्यया भवन्ति ।। 
14. Tho affixes tavai', 'ken', 'kenya' and 'tyair' are added to roots ių the Ohhandas, in the sense of the 'Kritya-affixes'. 
The force of kritya affixes is to denote 'action* (171) and 'object' ( ). Thus भन्स अन्तव्यमा परिधात-परिधातभ्यम्; नायगाहे-नावगाहिलव्यम्दिवृक्षवः (Rig. I. 
562 
TIIE AFFIX KASUN. 
[BK III. CI. IV. § 15-17. 
146.5)-विहशितष्यम्; पुभूपेण्यः - शुभूषितम्यम् ; कर्यम्; (Rig. I. I0. 2) - कर्तव्यम् । 
The affix na was mentioned in satra III. 4. 9 also; there it has the force of the Infinitive, and here that of the Passive Participle. For its accent, see VI. I. 200%; 2.SI. 
अवचक्षे च ॥ १५ ॥ पदानि ॥ अवचने, च, (कत्या, छन्दसि) । वृत्तिः । भवपूर्वाच्चक्षिक एमत्ययो निपात्यते ॥. 
15. The word 'avachakshe' is an anomalous passive participle in the Vedas. 
Thus:रिपुण नावचने (Rig. IV.58.5)=नावण्यातव्यम् । भव+च+एग-भवपक्षी The sutra II. 4.54 is not applied here. 
. भावलक्षणे स्पेकश्वदिचरिहुतमिजनिभ्यस्तोसुन् ॥१६॥पदानि ॥ भाव-लक्षणे,स्था-इल्-कन्-वदि चरि-हु-तमि-जनिम्यः, तोमुन, (कत्याथै, छन्दसि)। 
___ वृत्तिः ॥ भावो महयते येन तस्मिन्नये वर्तमानेभ्य स्थापि-यो धातुभ्यास विषये तुभयें तोसुन् प्रत्ययो भवति ।। .. 
16. The affix 'tosun' comes in the Vedas after the following verbs, when mere name of the action is in. dicated, viz:--'stha' (to stand), 'in' (to go), ‘kriñ' (to make), 'vad' (to speak), 'char' (to walk), 'hu' (to sacrifice); 'tam' (to grow tired) and “jan (to produce). 
These are also Infinitives. The phrase parut is not to be read into this satra. The word भावलक्षण qualifies the sense of the root (भावो लक्ष्यते थेन), Thus, स्था-भा संस्थातोतयां सीदन्ति = भासमाः सीदन्ति ।इए-पुरा सूर्यस्योत्तोराधेयः। कम् पुरा वत्सानामपाकतोंः । वर-पुरा प्रवदितोरग्नो प्रहोतष्यम् । चर-पुरा प्रचरितोराग्नीधीये होतव्याः। (Gopatha Brahmana II. 2. 10)। -भा होतोरप्रमत्तस्तिष्ठति । तम्-भा तमिसोरासोत (Taitt. Br. I. 4. 4. 2)जिन्-भा विमनितोः सम्भवाम (Taitt. S. II. 5. I.s). 
सपिवदोः कसुन् ॥ १७ ॥ पदानि ॥ सपि-वृदोः, कसुन्, (तुमर्थे, छन्दसि)। 
वृत्तिः ।। पिरोलिर्भावलक्षणेऽय वर्तमानवीरवन्तसिविषये तुमय कसुन्प्रत्ययो भवति।। 
17. In the Vedas, the afix 'kasun' comes after the verbs 'srip' (to creep) and trid' (to injure), in the sense of Infinitives indicating name of action. 
Thus विधपः । पुरा करस्य विक्षपः (Yaj. I. 28.); भारः (Rig. VIII. I. 12); पुरा मनुम्म भावर (Rig. VIII. I. 12). These words are Indeclinable by I. I. 40. 
... अलंखल्वोः प्रतिषेधयोः प्राचां क्त्वा ॥१८॥पदानि ॥ अलं-खसवोः, प्रतिषेधयोः, प्राचां, क्त्वा ॥ . 
BK. III. CH. IV. $ 18, 19:] 
THE AFFIX KTVA. 
563 
F: 11 9 9 reiterat: afaisaippalotaufent: Tur Hazt tafel 
18. According to the opinion of the Eastern Grainmariaus, the affix 'ktva' comes after a verb, when there are in combiuation with it, the words 'alam' and 
khalu', expressing the sense of prohibition. 
The anuvșitti of the words 'in the Vedas &c' does not extend further. Thus भलं कृत्वा 'do not make';खन पीरखा 'do not drink'; भलं माने रुदिल्या 'do not weep, O girl ! 
Why do we say 'when there are mai and '? Witness Aranet: 'do not make'. Why do we say 'when expressing prohibition'? Observe YTT: 
decoration'. 
The phrase 'in the opinion of the Eastern Grammarians' shows that it is an optional rule. Therefore we have soittaa 'do not weep. Or if rule III. 1.94 be applied, then the use of the word atat is for the sake of merely showing respect (pajärtha); the rule could have stood without it. 
__ उदीचां माझे व्यतीहारे॥९॥ पदानि ॥ उदीचां, माः, व्यती ETT, (ET) 
पतिः ।। माडो धातोऱ्यातीहारे वर्तमानातीचामाचार्याण मसेन तमामत्ययो भवति ॥ 
19. According to the opinion of the Northorn Grammarians, the affix 'ktvå' is added to the root'men' (to exchange), wlien the sense is that of interchange, (though the action deuoted by the former word is not prior to the actiou denoted by the latter word). 
Thus mr arra 'having offered an exchange, he asks' 49+*+7 =879+T+F49=979 +A+ + (VI. 1. 45 and 71) -479+frat (VII. 4. 40). This is an optional rule, as the phrase 'according to the northern' indicates. So we have in the alternative, artista 'having asked he exchanges'; and this is the more general use of ktvå; namely, it comes after that verb which is concerned about a time antenor to that of the other; see rule 21. The present sätra is an exception to III. 4. 21. 
The root e has been exhibited in the sätra as Ats, with the vowel ut instead of g. This indicates thc cxistence of the following Paribhasha: 
"A root, which, when destitute of anubandhas, ends in either g, sitor , must not be considered to have ceased to end in either g, 47, ord, when an anubandha has been attached to it." By this Paribhasha &q must be regard ed as ending ind, and as therefore or may be substituted for the vowel & (VI. 1.45), even whilc q rcmains, docs assumc thc form gry and is conscqucntly; by the prohibition or in satra I. 1. 20, forbidden to be termed i 
564 
THE AFFIX KTVA. 
[BK. III. C1. IV. 20, 21. 
- 
actereta u doll warfa il 97-980-ara, , (RTT) H : 11 giu per art t ra tu & ytat: T1 qua mfa 
20. The affix 'ktyå' is added to a root, to denote what is situate on that (para) side or on this (avara) side of somethiug. 
The situation on the tr 'the other side and set 'this' side, is called 479TUM: 1 Thus pares tata gia: feyn: 'the mountain is situate without having reached the river i. e. on this side of the river, the river being on the other side. Here the word oor is qualified by the word met which is the point from which the situation is taken; and which in this case, is on the other side of the mountain. Similarly भतिक्रम्य तु पर्वतं नदी स्थिता 'the river is situate on the other side of the mountain'. Here the relation between the mountain' and the 'river' is of and ori 
. In other words:-"The gerund of a root may be used to imply the situation of a thing with reference to the situation of another spoken of as the agent of the action denoted by that root and of the action donoted by another verb or primitive word used along with the gerund; though the action rcfcrrcd to in the gerund is not prior to the other action"-G. P. 
समानकर्तकयोः पूर्वकाले॥२९॥ पदानि ॥ समान-कर्तृकयोः, पूर्व HETAT, (FCAT) 
वृशिः। समानःकता ययो वर्थयोस्तन पूर्वकालेधारयें वर्तमानाद्धातोः कलाप्रत्ययो भवति । पार्तिकम् ।। भास्य व्यापाय स्वपिति सम्मील्य हसत स्युपसंख्यानमपूर्वकालस्वात् ।। 
21. When two actions have the same agent, the afix 'ktvå' comes after that verb which takes place in a time anterior to that of the other (i. e, the Absolu tive in 'tva' refers to that action which precedes in time). 
Thus it for having eaten he goes'; efter fe 'having drunk, he 
goes'. 
The rule is not confined to the case of two verbs: thus, FITFIT, ET, XAT, AT 'having bathed, drunk, eaten and given, he goes'. 
Why do we say 'having the same agent'? When the agents are different, the gerund cannot be used, but the Locative Absolute construction will have to be used to express the same sense, Thus TTF WTHO a 147: the 'Brahmana having been fed, Devadatta gocs'. 
Why do we say 'which denotes prior action'? For, if the actions are co-eval, the gerundial construction will not be employed. Thus af stofu he goes and chatters'. 
BK. III. CI. IV. $ 22, 23.] 
THE AFFIXES KTVA AND NAMUL 
565 
Vart.---The phrase भास्यं ज्यादाय स्वपिति, संमील्य हसति 'he sleeps, with his mouth open, and laughs with his mouth closed', is valid, though the affix करवा is not added to the verb denoting prior action, 
आभीक्षण्ये णमुल च ॥ २२॥ पदानि ॥ आभीतपये, मुल, च, (समानकर्तकयोः, पर्वकाले) ॥ 
, वृत्तिः ॥ भाभीक्ष्ण्यविशिष्टेऽयें वर्तमानाद्धातोर्णमुन् प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
22. The affixes 'namui' and 'ktva' come after a root, when re-iteration is to be expressed. 
The phrases 'when the agent of both the verbs is the same' and after the verb whose action occurs first in time' are to be read into this satra to complete the sense. The force of is to introduce the affix or into this satra. The affixes ktva and namul express 're-iteration' then only when the verb is doubled, and not singly. See rule VIII. I. 4. Thus भो भोज मति thaving eaten repeatedly, he goes'; similarly भुक्त्वा भुक्त्वा ब्रमति, पायं पायं ब्रमति 'having drunk repeatedly he goes'. 
न यद्य नाकाङ्क्षे ॥ २३ ॥ पदानि ॥ न, यदि, अनाकाने, (क्त्वा , णमुल)। 
यच्छब्वउपप धातोः कल्याणमुनी प्रत्ययो न भवतोऽनाकांक्ष वाक्ये।। 
23. The allixes 'ktvá' and 'namul' are not add ed to a root, when the word 'yad' is used, iu a simple Neutence, which does not depend upou another to com plete the sense. 
The word Maint means 'inter-dependence or the inability of a word, phrase or sentence, to indicate the intended sense in the absence of another word, phrase, or sentence. In other words, when there are two actions one prior and another subsequent, and they complete the sense of the sentence, without standing in need of any other verb ; in such a case, ktvå and namul are not used, when the word yad is in composition. This sätra prohibits the allix kiva also, though the affix namul is in immediate context. Thus यदय भक्त ततः पति , यदयमधीते ततः शेते, having eaten, he cooks ; having read, he sleeps'. 
But when there is inter-dependence or भाकांना, we have बदयं भुक्ता समति, अधीत एव ततः परम् । Professor Bohtlingk translates it thus : "In connec. tion with 44, the abovc-mentioned Absolutives will not be applied, unless the two verbs required one more as complement." . 
विभाषाप्रथमपर्वेषु ॥ २४ ॥ पदामि ॥ विभाषा, अग्रे-प्रथम पूर्वेषु, (समानकर्तृकयोः, पर्वकाले, समुल्) ।। ... वृत्तिः ॥ भने प्रथम पूर्व इत्येतेषपूपरेषु समानकर्टकयोः पूर्वकाले धासोः कवाणमुली प्रत्ययौ 
566 
TIE AFFIX NAMUL. 
(BK. III. Cır. IV. $ 24-26. 
24. The afixes 'ktvâ' and 'namul' come op tionally after that verb which denotes the prior action, when both verbs have the same agent, provided that the following words are in composition :-'agre', 'prathama' and 'pürya'. 
This is an Aprapta-vibhd shd. The word 're-iteration is not under stood here. Thus s77, , * * 
fa 'having first eaten he goes'. By using the word 'optionally it is indicated, that the regular Tenses, such as the Present &c, may be employed also. Thus 270 ME : *a 'he eats first and then goes'. 
Q-The affixes of Lat (Present tense) &c. would have been applied by the rule of 95864 (III. 1. 94); why then use the word'optionally'? 
Ans. --The very use of the word 'optionally' in this sätra indicates the existence of this Paribhashd :-"The rule III. I. 94 has no concern with the affixes ktvå and 11amul, when both these affixes are enjoined at one and the same time by a single rule." 
Therefore, we cannot apply III. 1. 94 and use the affixes Lat &c, when "re-iteration' is meant That is the exclusive province of any and organi 
Why is not here the Upa pada compounding by rule II. 2. 207 For an answer to this, see the commentary on II. 2. 20. Had only UAC been enjoined by this sätra, and not agent also, then we could have formed the 3999 HATH, for such is the force of the word go in that satra. 
TATUTETT #: ll pyn agtfall far, spiral, 14, 
वृत्तिः ।। कर्मण्युपपते कृमो धातोः खमुम् प्रत्ययो भवति भाको गम्यमाने। 
25. The affix 'khamun' is added to the verb 'kri' (to make), when a word in the accusative case is in construction with it, if the sense intended implies 'abuse'. 
Of the affix u , the efficient portion is $#; the indicatory intro. duces the augment 4 (VI. 3. 67). Thus TT ATTATUR 'he reviles him as thief, 1. c. he calls out in abuse 'thou art a thief., thou art a robber, &c.' The person is not really made a thief, but making him a thief is to express one's indignation. 
Fargf# THE HOTTI TUTE, TIM, (54) पतिः ।। स्वार्येषपपरेषु कमो मुन्मत्ययो भवति । 
26. (When the actions, signified by the verbs kri' and another, have the same agent), the affix iņamul' is added to the verb 'kri' (which is concerned BK. III. CH. IV. $ 27.] 
The affIX NAMUE. 
1567 
about a time anterior to that of the other), provided that a word signifying 'sweet' is in composition. 
The words within brackets are to be read into the satra by anuvritti froin III. 4. 21. Thus en or TURT, 'he eats, having made his food sweet or seasoned'. 
In the sätra, the word Tog is used ending with a x. It is an anome alous form, and indicates that a must be added to the upapadas in these cases the object served by this form being that rule IV. 1. 44, by which feminine of words like Fit ending in z is formed by long , docs not apply here. Thus ETTA FIT HET = ENTER TA * Here though any is scminine, the attribute is still Fin and not erat 
It might be said 'why not use the previous affix up? That will solve all difficulties ; and will give us the augment t'i To this, however, there is a fatal objection. The augment n will, no doubt, come in the last example, but it will not come when the word to be formed is an Indeclinable (VI. 3. 67), such as, when the sense is of the affix fun and all chvi-ending words are Indecline ables (I. 4. 61). Therefore, the affix us will not remove the difficulty in the following case; भरवाही स्वाहों कृत्वा मुक्त स्वारं भुक्त 'he eats, having first sweetened what was not sweet before'. 
By applying rule III. 1. 94, we have the affix or in the alternative. US FTH THT YETTI All these afixes form abstract nouns (19) as they have the scnsc of the asfix ata (III. 4. 16). In conocction with Ugal, the Instru mental case can not, however, be used, i. e. we cannot use the Passive cons truction ; 6. 8. FTIG ATT UTRTH FAITTEIT will be wrong. . . 
अन्यथैवंकथमित्थंसुसिद्धाप्रयोगश्चेत् ॥२७॥ पदानि ॥ अन्यथा-एवं nam- g, fa- VT:, Tí, Kaw, ) u 
Dia: 11 *=aytlęgnyag huga arent worla frequentlåtarfar ni 
27. When the words 'anyatha' (otherwise), 'evam' (so), ‘katham' (how) and 'ittham' (thus) are com. pounded with the verb, then “namul comes after kļi' (to make), if it be such that its omission would be uuobjec 
tiouable, 
When is the non-employment of 5 valid ? When the same sentence will remain correct by omitting , i. e. when withoạt employing it, the same idea will be expressed. Thus भन्यथाकार, एवंकार, कथंकारं or हरयंकारं भक्त 'he eats otherwise, he eats so, how does he eat, or he eats thus'. In fact, the sentence More is equivalent to MyT JE I 
Why do we say 'if the non-cmployment would be valid'? Witness 
568 
THE AFFIX NAMOL. 
[BK. III. CI. IV. $ 28-30. 
4=2377 at fyret 'lic cats, having turned his head aside'. l'Icrc 67 could not be spared. 
यथातथयारस्याप्रतिवचने ॥ ८॥ पदानि ॥ यथा-तथयाः, अ. सूया-प्रतिवचने, (कञः, णमुल)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ यथा तथा शब्बयोरुपपायोः कृत्रो एमुन् प्रत्ययो भवति, असूवा प्रतिबनने गम्यमाने । 
28. The affix 'namul' is added to the root kri' (to make), the words 'yatha' and 'tatha' being compoun. ded with it, when an angry reply is made : (if the omis sion of krin' is unobjectionable). 
When one questions or replies in indignation, displeasure or anger, then is this construction valid. Thus तथाकारं भोये, किं तवानेन 'l will cat in that 
way; what is that to you'? Similarly ययाकारं भोक्ष्ये, किं तवानेन । : Why do we say 'when an angry reply is made'? Observe UFIRITSE भौक्ष्य तथा द्रक्ष्यसि 'in what way I will eat, that thou wilt see'. 
Why do we say 'when the omission of would be valid'? Witness यथास्वाऽहे शिरो भोक्ष्ये किं तवानेन 'what is that to you, in what way turning my head I will eat'? 
. कर्मणि दूशिविदोः साकल्ये॥२९॥ पदानि ॥ कर्मणि, दूशि-विदोः, साकल्ये, (णमुल्) । 
पतिः ॥ कर्मण्युपपदे साकल्यविशिष्टेऽयं वृशिविदो योर्णमुल् प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
29. When the object is compounded with it, the verb 'dris' (to see), or 'vid' (to know), takes the affix "namul', to denote the total number of such objects. 
Thus कन्यादर्श वरयति 'he woos every girl that he sces it. all the girls scen'. Fikua aftsrafa 'he feeds as many Brahmanas as he knows, i.e. all'. 
Why do we say 'when denoting the total number of such objects' ? Observe AIHO EAT ithala 'having seen the Brahmana he feeds him'. 
यावति विन्दजीवोः ॥ ३०॥ पदानि ॥ यावति, विन्द-जीवोः, (खमुल)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ यावच्छब उपपदे विन्दतेभीवतेच मुन् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
. 30. The affix 'namul' comes after the verb 'vid' (to get) and 'jiv', (to live), when the word 'yávať is combined with them. __... - As यावश्वे भुक्त 'he eats all that he gets'. यावज्जीवमधीते 'he studies as long as he lives, i.e. throughout his life'. 
Bk. III. CII IV. § 31-33.) 
THE AFFIX NAMUL. 
869 
so 
WOM 
चोदरयोः पूरेः ॥ ३१॥ पदानि ॥ चर्म-उदरयाः, परः, (कर्मणि, यामुल)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ धोवरयोः कर्मणोपपत्योः पूरयतेमुन् प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
31. The affix 'namul' comes after the verb 'Dûr (to fill), when the words 'charman' and 'udar are compounded with it as object. 
Thus उदरपुर भुंक्त 'he eats so as to fill his belly' ? चर्मपूर स्वाति 'he spreads so as to cover the skin'. 
वर्षप्रमाण कलोपश्चास्थान्यतरस्याम् ॥३२॥ पदानि वर्ष-प्रमाणे, ज-लोपः, च, अस्य, अन्यतरस्याम, (कर्मसि, बमुल) ॥ 
वृनिः ।। पूरयतेर्धातोर्णमुल् प्रत्ययो भवसि कनोपश्चास्य पूरयतरन्यतरस्या भवति समुदायेन चेदर्षस्य प्रमाणमियत्ता गम्यते । 
32. The affix 'namul' comes after the verb 'pur' (to fill), when the word so formed expresses a mea sure of rainfall; and optionally the long 'a' of this 'pur' 
is elided. 
Thus गोष्पदपर or गोष्पदमं वृष्टो देवः 'it rained filling up small puddles (lit. the impression made by the foot of the cow on the soil)'. parte or alara aet *: 'it raincd filling up all furrows'. 
Why have we used the word MET 'of this par' in the satra ? The long Fof qç is to be elided, and not the long 5, if there be any, of the upapada. Thus fantlaqt oralighi a 25:1 Here the long rof q is not shortened. 
चेले कनापेः ॥ ३३ ॥पदानि॥ चेले, कनोपेः, (कर्मणि, समुल, वर्ष प्रमाणे) 
वृत्तिः ॥ क्यो शो उन्हने च, भस्माण्ण्वन्तादातोभेनायेंषु कर्मसु उपपतेषु णमुल् प्रत्ययो भवति वर्षप्रमाणे गम्यमाने । 
33. The affix 'namul' comes after the causa tive of the root 'knûy' (to wet), when there is compound ed with it a noun denoting 'clothing', in the accusative case, as an upapada, if the whole word so formed express. es a measure of the rain-fall. 
The verb miro is the causative root formed from the simple root 'to wet'. Thus चेलकोपं वृष्टो देवः or वस्त्र. or क्सनकोपं &c. 'it rained so as to wet 
the clothes'. 
. निमलसमलयोः कषः ॥ ३४ ॥ पदानि ॥निमल-समलयोः, कषः, (कर्मणि, समुल्) । 
570 
TIE AFFIX NAMUL 
[BK. III. CII. IV. $ 34-37. 
वृत्तिः । निमूल समूल शब्दयोः कर्मवाचिनोरुपपत्योः कर्द्धातोर्णमुन् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
34. The affix 'n:imul' comes after the verb kash' (to rub), when the words inimüla' and 'samûla' are compounded with it in the accusative case. 
Thus निमलकापं कपति 'he scrapes down to the roots'; समलकाप कषति 'he scrapes up to the roots'. In fact, the gerund of the root and the root itself denote the same thing; the whole sentence निमलकापंकपति being equal to निमलं कषति. From this satra up to sutra III. 4. 46, the subsequent verb governing the previous word, must be derived from the same root from which the gerund is derived; see satra III. 4. 46. 
शुष्कवर्णरूक्षेषु पिषः ॥ ३५॥ पदानि ॥ शुष्क-वर्ण-रुक्षेषु, पिषः, (कर्मणि, णमुल)॥ 
वृत्तिः ।। शुष्कादिषु कर्मवाचिष्पपदेषु पिषे तोर्णमुल् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
35. The affix 'namul' comes after the verb 'pislı' (to grind), when the words 'sushka (dry), 'chûrna' (powder), and ruksha' (dry), in the accusative case are compounded with it. 
Thus the loafe = Tak foafe 'lie grinds it dry'; quod foarfe 'he grinds to powder';सपेषं पिनष्टि 'hegrinds it dry'. Here also an appropriate verb from the same root fou must be used to govern the gerund. 
समलाकतजीवेषु हनग्रहः ॥ ३६ ॥ पदानि ॥ समल-अकत. जीवेषु, हन-क-ग्रहः, (कर्मणि, खमुल) ... वृत्तिः ॥ समूल भकृत जीव इत्येतेषु शब्दषु कर्मस्पूपरेषु यथासंभव हन् कम् पह इत्येतेभ्यो धातुभ्यो मुन् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
30. The affix 'namul' comes after the verbs "han' (to kill), 'kri' (to make) and grah (to seize), when the words 'samûla', 'aksita' and 'jiva' in the accusative case are respectively coinpounded with them. 
. Thus समूलपातं हन्ति (VIII. 3. 32 and 54) 'he destroys so as to tear up by the roots it. he totally extirpates'; भतकारं करोति 'he does a thing which was not done before'; संजीवमा गृहाति 'captures him so as to preserve his life, i. c. captures him alive'. Here also appropriate verbs from the same roots are used to govern the gerund. 
करणे हनः ॥ ३७ ॥ पदानि ॥ करणे, हनः, (णमुल) ॥ बत्तिः । करण अपडे हन्तातोपमुल् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
37. The affix 'namul' comes after the verb 
BK. III. CH. IV. $ 38, 39.) 
TIIE AFFIX NAMUL. 
571 
'han', when a word in the Instrumental case is in compo sitiou with it. 
Thus Tifuand of the (VII. 3. 32 and 54)= qua afghan the strikes the Vedi with the hand'; qara xfa pfizer 'he strikes the ground with the foot'. Reading this sätra along with III. 4. 48, we find that here does not mean 'to kill, and the further difference between this aphorism and that is, that in the case of this sätra a cognate verb from the same root must be used, as the gerund; not so in sátra III. 4. 48; or this sätra may be for the sake of form ing Invariable compounds with the upapadas, such as area 
According to Patanjali, this affix comes after r under this aphorism, cvcn wlien mcans 'to injure'; thus counteracting rule III. 4. 48, by antici pation, and in opposition to the general principle of interpretation enunciated in rule I. 4. 2. Thus waq xfiu 'he kills with the sword'; TOT fra 'he kills with arrows'. 
Rule III. 4. 46 applies here also, and an appropriate verb from the same root is employed to govern the gerund. 
ara fora: 11 35 H aerfa un mica, fora:, (m2, u u वृत्तिः ।। स्नेहनराचिनि करण पपरे पिपे तोर्णमुन् प्रत्ययो भवति॥ 
38. The affix 'namul' comes after the verb 'pish' (to grind), when a word in the Instrumental case denoting 'liquid' is in composition. 
Thus उदपेपं पिनष्टि = उपकेन पिनधि (VI. 3.58.) 'he grinds with water'; लपेष faaft 'he grinds with oil'. Here also III. 4. 46 applies, and an appropriate verb from the same root is einployed to govern the gerund. 
a afaunt: ut i Tarfa u ra, afa-arti, (, 10) H 
afa: 11 gener *TU ST9è con una grant tafe 11 
39, The affix 'pamul comes after the verbs 'varti' (causative of vrit) and 'grah', when a word deuo. ting 'hand', in the Instrumental case, is in composition. . 
Thus इस्तवत, करवत or पाणिवतै पर्तयति - हस्तेन वर्तवति 'he revolves by the hand'. So also, 96 KEANEH TRUTH 'he takes him by the hand': so TUTTA, març &c. 
Here also rule III. 4. 46 applies and appropriate verbs from the same roots must be employed to govern the gerund. 
ang ga: 11 yo u nerfor ta, gai, (we, wy) वृत्तिः ॥ सवाचिनि करणे उपर पुषेर्धातोर्णमुन् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ . 
572 
. 
THE AFFIX NAMUL. 
[BK. III. CI. IV. 8 40-43. 
... 40. The affix 'namul' comes after the verb 'push' (to feed), when a word in the Instrumental case, having the sense of 'sva' is in composition, 
The word it means 'self', 'kinsmen' and 'property'. Thus ford goutlet the feeds himself';भारमपोष, गोपोष, पिटपोषं, मावपोष, धनपोष, रेपोषं &c. See I. 1.68. 
Rule 46 applies here also. 
अधिकरणे बंधः ॥ ४९ ॥ पदानि ॥ अधिकरणे, बंधः, (णमुल) ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ अधिकरणवाचिन्युपपते बनाते तोर्णमुल् प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
41. The affix 'namul' comes after the verb 'baudh'(to bind), when a word expressing location is in construction with it. 
Of course, rule III. 4.46 applies here also, and the gerund must be gov. erned by a verb from the same root bandli. Thus चक्रवन्धं नानाति 'he binds to the wheel'; करबन्ध बम्नाति 'he binds in a snare'; मुष्टिवन्धं बध्नाति the binds in the fist'. चोरकबन्धं पनाति चोरके बध्नाति। 
__ संज्ञायाम ॥ ४२ ॥ पदानि ॥ संज्ञायाम, (बंधः, जमुल)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ संज्ञायाम् विषय बनातेदातीर्णमुन् प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
42. The affix 'namul' comes after the verly 'bandh' (to bind ) when the word so formed denotes an 
appellative. 
Thus क्रौंचवन्धं बध्नाति 'he binds in the manner called krauncha-bandhan or 'heron-knot'. Haftaran aatha or au: 'he binds or is bound in a 'peacock knot'. भट्टालिकावन्धं वरः 'bound in a knot called attalika-bandhan'. 
____ All the above, krauncha bandhan &c. are names of various sorts of 'bonds or knots'. The rule III. 4. 46. also applies here. 
. कीर्जीवपुरुषयोर्नशिवहोः ॥ ४३ ॥ पदानि ॥ कर्नाः, जीव-पुरु षयोः, नशि-वहोः, (णमुल)॥ . 
पतिः॥ जीवपुरुषयोः कर्दवाचिनोरुपपदयोःवयासंख्या नशिवहो वीर्णमुल्मत्ययो भवति । 
43. The afix 'namul' comes after the roots 'nas' (to perish) and 'vah' (to carry), when the words 'jiva' 
(life) and 'purusha' (person) expressing the agent of ‘these verbs, are respectively in construction with them. 
. Thus far pala= lat trafa 'perishes, so that his life perishes i.e. dies away'; पुरुषवाहं वहति 'the man carries, it. the man becoming a servant, carries another on him = पुरुषःप्रेन्यो भूत्वा वहन्ति । 
Why do we say 'when denoting an agent'? Observe, so r: 'des. troyed by life'; greuta: 'carried by a man'. 
BK. III. CI. IV. 844-46.] 
THE AFFIX NAMUL. ' 
573 
कर्वे शुषिपूरीः ॥ ४४ ॥ पदानि ॥ सर्व, शुषि-पूरोः, (काः, 
यामुल)॥ 
वृतिः ।। कार्यशब्द कटवाचिन्युपप शुपिपरो स्वोर्णमुन् प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
44. The affix 'namul' comes after the roots sush' to dry), and 'pûr (to fill), when the word 'ürdhva', denoting an agent, is in composition with them. 
Thus ruesito grafa 7: = nezra 'the tree is dried up while it is still standing'. Compare यहीशोपत्रणवविशष्कः 'or wither like the up-heaved grass drying up' (Bhatti. III. 14); 17389 'is filled full to the brim'. Rule III. 4. 46 applics herc also. 
तपमाने कर्मति च ॥ ४५ ॥ पदानि ॥ उपमाने, कर्मणि, च, (कत्री, खमुल)॥ 
'वृत्तिः ॥ उपमाने कर्मण्युपपदे चकारात् कर्तरि धातोर्णमुन् प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
45. The afix 'namul' comes after a root, when an object or an agent, denoting similitude, is in composi. tion with it. 
The word 'agent' is read into the satra, by virtue of the word 'also'. That with which any thing is compared is called 3966 or 'object of comparison or similitude'. As पतनिधावम् निहितम् मनम् 'water was kept as ghee would be kept'. सुवर्णनिधायम् निहितः 'was kept as gold'. The force is that of 
; thus पतनिधायम् निहितः = पतमिव निहितः । So also when the object of comparison is as agent: thus, भजनाश नटः 'he perished like agoat'. So also घरकनाशम् 
दन्तनाराम, &c. 
कषादिष यथाविध्यनुप्रयोगः ॥ ४६॥ पदानि ॥ कष-आदिषु, यथा-विधि, अनुप्रयोगः ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ निमलसमलयोरित्येतहारभ्य कपादयः, एतेषु यथाविध्वनुप्रयोगो भवति। 
46. The same verb should be employed after the gerunds formed from the verbs 'kash' &c; as the verb from which the gerund is derived. 
From sätra III. 4. 34 up to sätra III. 4.45, a verb from the same root must be employed in the subsequent part, as anuprayoga, from which the gerund in namul was formed. This rule has been illustrated in the examples under the previous aphorisms. 
The present is a restrictive or niyama rule. This chapter deals with affixes employed in denoting syntactical relation between twoverbs (पातसम्बन्ध Haar:) | See III. 4. 1 : so a gerund in namul, would, of course, be followed by some verb as anuprayoga; the present sätra declarcs that the other verb must be from the same root as the gerund. 
574 
THE AFFIX NAMUL 
[BK. III. CH. IV. $ 47-49. 
उपदंशस्तृतीयायाम् ॥४॥ पदानि ॥ तपदंशः, वतीयायां,(लमुल)॥ पतिः॥ शमशने, भस्माद्धातोरुपपत्हितीयान्त उपपदे एमुन् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
47. The affix 'namul' comes after the root 'dans' (to bite) preceded by the preposition 'upa'; when a word ending with the third case-affix is in composition with it. 
The Upapada samdsa is optional in this case (II. 2. 21). Thus Anat पर्व शम् भडक or मूलकेनोपवंशम् भुदत 'he eats after having relished the food with radish'. Similarly भाद्रकोपशम् or भाईकेणोपवंशम् "relished with ginger'. 
The words 77 &c in the above examples are the 'objects' of the verb उपदंश, and instruments' of the verb भुज । 
By the rule of वासरूप (III. I. 94) the affix तवा (or its substitute जयप) may be optionally used, wherever we may use the affix षमुन। Thus मलकनो पाश्च भुक्त। 
हिंसानां च समानकर्मकाणाम् ॥४॥ पदानि॥ हिंसा-अर्थानां, च, समान-कर्मकाणां, (णमल, तृतीयायां)॥ 
वत्तिः।। हिंसा प्राण्युपपासः, सार्थानां धातनामनुप्रयोगधातुमा समानकर्मकाण तीवान्त उपपदे मुन् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
48. The affix 'namul comes after roots hav. ing the sense of hins' (to strike), when the object of this gerund is the same as the object of the main verb, and when the noun with which it is compounded ends with the third case-affix, 
Thus दण्डोपपातम् गाः कालवति 'he collects together cows, beating them with a club'. The compounding is optional (II. 2. 21.) Thus we bave also point पघातम् । Similarly with other verbs having the sense of हिंस; thus, उपवारम् or इण्डेन ताउम् । 
Why do we say when the object of the gerund is the same as the object of the main verb'? When the objects are different, who will not be employed. Thus चोरम् इण्डेनोपहत्व, गोपालको गाः कानयति 'having beaten the thiel with the club, the cowherd collects together the cows'. 
सप्तम्यां चोपपीहरुधकर्षः ॥ ४ ॥ पदानि ॥ सप्तम्यां, च, उप पीड-रुध-कर्षः, (वतीयायां, समुल)। 
वृत्तिः ।। उपपूर्वेन्यः पीहरुधकर्षेभ्यः सप्तम्यन्त उपपदे चकारातृतीयान्त उपपड़े मुन् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
.. 49. The affix 'namul' comes after the roots 
ress), 'rudh' (to obstruct), and krish' (to draw), 
BK. III. Cl. IV. 
50-52.] 
THE AFFIX NAMUL. 
.. 575 
when they are preceded by the preposition 'upa', and when they are compounded with nouns ending with the '7th case-atix or the 3rd case-affix. 
The phrase '3rd case-affix' must be read into the satra by virtue of the word ! Thus gård stat 'he sleeps pressing on his sides'. The com pounding is optional (II. 2. 21); so we have in the alternative, aratandten or पाधाभ्यामुपपीडम् । 
So also व्रजोपरोधम् (or बजे उपरोधम् or ब्रमेनोपरोधम्) गाः स्थापयति the stations the cows so that they are all in the fold'. पाण्युपकर्षे (or पाणपकर्षम् or पाणिनीप कर्षम्) धानाः संगणति । It is Bhvadi pm here, and not Tudadi. 
समासत्तौ ॥ ५० ॥ पदानि ॥ समासत्ती, (सप्तम्यां, तृतीयायां, 
वृतिः ।। समासत्तो गम्यमानायां वतीयासतम्बोरुपपदयो तोर्णमुन् प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
50. (The affix 'namul comes after a root, when a word in the Locative or Iustrumental case is in compo sition with it), and when immediate contiguity is inten ded i. e. 'to fall together by the ears'. 
The word समासत्ति: means immediate contiguity'. Thus केशमाहम (or कोष माहम् or के हिम्) युध्यन्ते 'having closely caught each other by the hair, they fight.' Sinilarly हस्तपाइम् or हस्तेषु पाहम् or हस्तहिम्; so also यष्टिमाहम् taking a stick'; नोष्ट्रमा &c. See II. 2. 21. 
प्रमाणे च ॥ ११ ॥ पदानि ॥ प्रमाणे, च, (तृतीयायां, समग्यां; शमुल) ॥ 
पतिः ॥ प्रमाणे गम्यमाने बतीयासप्तम्योरुपपायोतीर्णमुन् प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
51. The affix 'namul' comes after a root, wheu a noun in the Instrumental or Locative case is in compo sition with it, and when measure of length is intended. 
The word parUA means 'length or extension'. Thus 1950nra (दवंगुले उत्कर्षम् or बंपगुलेनोत्कर्षम्) खण्डिको छिनति 'he cuts pieces of the length of two fingers'. See II. 2. 21. 
___ अपादाने परीपसायाम् ॥ ५२ ॥ पदानि ॥ अपादाने, परीप्सायां, (ख मुल) ॥ 
वृत्तिः ।। परीप्सायो गम्यमानायो भपादाने उपपदे धातोर्णमुन् प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
62. The affix 'namul' is added to the root, when a noun in the Ablative case is in composition, and when 'lasto' is iutonded. 
THE AFFIX NAMUL.. 
[BK. III. CH. IV. § 53, 54. 
The word other means 'haste, hurry'. Thus carrers (or teater myra) urria 'having risen from bed, he runs away'. That is to say, he runs with such a haste that he does not perform even the necessary ablutions &c, but as soon as he rises from the bed, he runs off. Similarly 
a qu: feratu 'he drinks milk from a hole in the vessel, he being in such a haste, that he does not care to drink from the proper aperture. भ्राष्ट्रापकर्षमपुपान् भक्षयति 'he eats cakes hot from the frying pan', not waiting till they are placed on a dish. 
Why do we say 'when meaning hurry'? Observe, MIATA PTT refa 'having risen from the seat, he goes'. Here 'haste' not being intended, the affix 1 (F20) is employed. See II. 2. 21. 
facturai Tu U ut uçta i fedtetui, a, (atqurui, 
TOT) 
वत्तिः ।। द्वितीयान्त उपपदे परीप्सायां गम्यमानायां धातोमुन् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
: 53. The aflix 'namul' comes after a verb, when a word in the Accusative case is in composition, and when 'haste' is intendecl. 
Thus afegir (or a fee 1764) 9441 "they fight, having hastily taken up sticks'. That is, they arc in such a hastc to fight, that they do not tarry to take up the proper weapons, offensive and defensive, but engage in fight with anything. that is at hand, such as sticks, stones &c. Similarly g et or DIE TITEL 
farisa ll noethau fars, warra, (fantarei, amel) वृत्तिः ।। भ६वे लागवाचिनि द्वितीयान्त उपपहे धातोर्णमुन्न् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
54. The affix namul' comes after a root, when a word in the Accusative case is in composition, signi fying the limbs of one's own body, when the limb is such that its loss will not destroy life. 
Thus i gyfer 'he narrates, throwing his eye-brows (glances) about in all directions'. H T UT Eqfar 'he prattles, having closed the eyes'. 
The Fi word is "a word denoting a thing which not being liquid or gaseous, and being capable of being perceived by the senses, and not being one produced by a change from the natural state, exists in a living being, or though found elsewhere actually or at any particular time, had previously been known as existing in only a living being, or is found to have actually, (not figuratively) the same relation to the being it is in, as a similar thing has to a living being." 
The word sy means 'non-vital organ', or a limb which even being cut off, does not necessarily destroy life. Therefore, we cannot use the affix BK. III. CH. IV. $ 55, 56.] 
THE AFFIX NAMUL. 
577 
04 in the following, as head is not an *7 limb:- FCE for: wyafe 'he narrates, having thrown the head on one side'. Compare VI. 2. 177. . 
___ परिक्तिश्यमाने च ॥ ५५ ॥ पदानि ॥ परिक्तिश्यमाने, घ, (स्वाथे, fantarei, wur) 
वृतिः ।। परिविश्यमाने स्वागवाचिनि द्वितीयान्त उपपदे धातोर्णमुन् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ " 
55. The affix 'pamul' comes after a root, when a word in the Accusative case denoting a limb of one's own body, which is completely afflicted by the action, is in composition. 
The word after means 'completely hurt or affected'. Thus TT: afacer or riga qar=m ar: 473&: 'they fight so as to afflict their whole bosom'. So also feriad or fur: faggi 
The difference between this and the last sûtra consists in this, that this sätra applies cven to vital organs, such as 'breast', 'head' &c; while the last aphorism applies 'non-vital organs' only. . 
विशिपतिपदिस्कन्दां व्याप्यमानासेव्यमानयोः ॥ ५६ ॥ पदानि॥ fafw-ofa-afe-faci, HTA- 
oemaradt; (featuri, wa) वृत्तिः ।। द्वितीयान्त उपरदे विश्यादिभ्यो धातुभ्यो णमुन् प्रत्ययो भवति व्याप्यमाने भासेव्य मान चायें गम्यमाने ।। 
56. The affix pamulcomes after the verbs 'viš' ito enter), 'pat' (to fall), 'pad' (to go) and 'skand' (to leap), when a word in the Accusative case is in composi. tion, and when the sense devoted is that of complete pervasion and total absorption. 
The word sofo (or ECUATT) means the full and complete pervasion of the substances with the actions (denoted by the verbs form, &c). The word HET means 'assiduous performance of any action, or absorption into it. In other words, 'frequency of an action is a The word safe therefore refers to the noun (in the accusative case) and wait to the verb (such as vis &c). Thcsc two words havc the same significance here as the words forre and fear in satra VIII, 1. 4. and by the application of that rule, both the noun and the verb require to be répcated. That rule, however, will not apply here, when there is compounding by II. 2. 21. But when there is no compounding, (for rule II. 2.21. makes composition only optional) then there is repetition of the noun if satin 'all' is meant; and of the verb, if aprIT 'frequency or assiduous per formance' is meant. Thus गेहानुप्रवेशमारले, (or गेहंगेहमनमवेशमास्ते or गेहमनुपशमनुप्रवेश. area) 'having cntered the house, he sits down', meaning either, 'having en 
578 
TIIE AFFIX NAMUL. 
[BK. III. CH. IV. § 57. 
tered evecy house in succession, hc sits down', or 'having repeatedly entered the house, he sits down'. 
. Similarly with the root , we may have three examples as in the last, and so also with the roots पर and स्कन्द । Thus गेहानुप्रपातमास्ते (or गेहंगहमनुप्रपातमास्ते or T49977499978 ); 781T AIR (or its 15 or 677997**999144); TETTE PATCH (or TFTFATER or 1 6*7T967 ) 
Why do we say 'when the sense is that of all or frequency? Observe, 19479912 'having entered the house, he eats'. 
Q. By sútra III. 4. 22, nanul would have been valid, when abhikshna was meant; and abhikshna and asevå mean the same thing i. e, 'frequency'. Why then ordain namul again, by the present sätra, in the sense of dsevå ? If you say, "we repeat it, in order to prevent the coming of the affix Ir”, that is not so. For at would coine by afsæ59 rule; (see III. 1. 94 and Ill. 4. 47). 
A.-The repctition is for the sake of Upapada-samdsa with a word in the accusative case. Under ryle 22, there was no upapada, while in the present case there is an upapada. 
Professor Bohtlingk translates this s@tra thus:-"Fant, 90,4%, and 67 in composition with an accusative, form the absolutive gerund in sr (namul), when one wishes to express that every object of that name is completely affec tcd by the action, or that the action is constantly repeated in that object." 
अस्यतितृषीः क्रियांतरे कालेषु ॥ ५७ ॥ पदानि ॥ अस्यति-वृषोः, fer-stat, ateid, (facturat, men) # 
F#: it fara a famT:, farbati, farzad yra naranar Healaarasztfeftari eranturfqq98g utal terat afar II 
57. The affix inamul' comes after the verbs 'as' (to throw) and 'trish' (to thirst), when it is intended to express an intermission of the action denoted by the root, provided that a word in the accusative case denot ing time, is in composition. 
The word for grant means 'the interval between two actions'. Thus पहास्यास or sपहमस्यासम् गाः पाययति 'he gives drink to the cows, after an interval of two days, i. e every third day'. So also g o or T TT: qayfa 'having kept the cows thirsty for two days, he makes them drink'. That is to say, ,'having given them a drink today, he gives them another drink after an inter 
val of two days'; &c. : Why do we say 'after the verbs wa and '? Because the affix una will not be applied after other roots, though the sense be that of interval of time. Thus a re having fasted for two days, he cats'. . 
BK. III. CH. IV. § 58, 59, 
TIE AFFIXES KTVA AND NAMUL. 
579 
Why do we say 'when denoting an intermission of action'? Observe HTTOETIC TH: ; here there is no intermission in the action of 'going'. 
Why do we say 'denoting time' ? Observe HTHEGEU TI: quafa allow ing an interval of four miles to pass, he gives drink to the cows i. e. he wa ters the cows at every four miles'. Here the interval is that of 'space' and not of 'time', and hence the affix is faq and not ugal 
नाम्न्यादिशिग्रहोः ॥ ५ ॥ पदानि ॥ नावि, आदिथि-ग्रहो, (fatarai, wher) 
far: 11 mm farraina 7991 Hrqadin writun nequit afer II 
58. The affix 'namul' comes after the roots '& dis' and 'grah', when the word 'nàniau' (name) in the AC cusative, is in composition. 
Thus TTATOTTATTÈ 'he mentions it, telling his name'. HYTE WHrufa 'he calls rac by taking my name i.e. by my name)'. 
अव्ययेग्यथाभिप्रेताख्याने कमः कृत्वाणमली ॥ ५९ ॥ पदानि ॥ aa, eu-Ha-HTEATR, ST:, dan mental 
#T: 01 47647 7918 STUFAarot *Ta mota: mutat Vaa: 11 
59. The affixes 'ktvå aud 'namul' come after the root 'kri' (to. make), when an Indeclinable word is in composition with it, and the meaning is the com munication of anything in a disagreeable or undesired 
way. 
The word ranfortaregn means literally 'to denote the expression of that which is not really intended' i.e. a manner not suited to the proper communication of that news, such as communicating a bad news in a loud voice and good news in a low voice. The compounding being optional, the affix it may be replaced by far. Thus we have three iforms fremtu, नीचे:वस्था, or मीर्चःकार. Thus if one had communicated an agreeable news like the birth of a son in a low voice, the other may retort "fantafe quo frat: ar, fra: 427 or CATVE"; and so, if one had communicated an unpleasant news as मायण कण्यावे गर्भिणी in a loud voice, the other may reply "किंतहिं पलीकस्वा, Tee , or 
T H UMI (See II. 2. 22 for compounding). 
Why do we say 'communicating in an undesired manner'? Observe 7:41975 CET 78:1 Here only prt is added. Why have we repeated 
*T in this satra, when in this chapter, by the rule of TSH 54 (III, 1. 94), ktvd would have presented itself in the alternative? The repetition is for the sake of samdsa or composition, by the application of II, 2, 22. The repetition 
580 
KTVA AND NAMUL. 
[BK. III. CH. IV. $ 60-61. 
of uge is for the sake of the subsequent satras, into which the anuvšitti of ktvå and namul runs concurrently. 
तिर्यज्यपवर्ग॥ ६० ॥ पदानि तिर्यचि, अपवर्ग, (कशः, कत्वा 
खमली)। 
वृत्तिः। तिर्यशम्द उपपः कृतः नवाणमुनी प्रत्ययो भवतोऽपवगें गम्यमाने ।। 
60. The affixes ktva' and 'namul' come after the root kri', when the word 'tiryak' is in composition in the sense of 'carrying to the end'. 
The word भपवर्ग means 'completing or finishing'. Thus तिर्यक काय, तिर्यक करवा or तिर्यकारंगतः - समाप्य गतः 'having completed, he went away'. 
Why do we say when meaning completion'? Observe तिर्यक् कस्वा काहं ta: 'having placed the wood obliquely, he went away'. Here ons is not employed. See II. 2. 22 for compounding. The word तिर्यचि is the locative of the word-form तिर्थन्, and not of the word तिर्यच् । Other examples are: एतदोग (V. 3.5); भदसो मात् (I. I. 12). 
स्वारे तस्प्रत्यये कन्वोः ॥ ६१ ॥ पदानि ॥ स्वाङ्गे, तस्-प्रत्यये, क-भ्योः, (कत्वा-मुली)। 
वृत्तिः ।। मरमत्यये स्वागवापिनि उपपड़े करोतर्भवतेश पासी ताणमुलो प्रत्ययो भवतः ।। 
__61. The afnxes 'ktvia' and 'namul' are added to the roots 'kri' (to make) and bha' (to become), in composi tion with a word denoting a member of one's own body; when the affix tas' is joined thereto. 
The word fif has already been defined in sútra III. 4. 54. The svånga word in the present case must be such as should end in the'affix - a tadahita affix technically called ससि and तसिन (V. 3.78 &c). Though here there are two roots and y, and there are two affixes to be applied i. 6. PTT and मन: yet the rule of 'respective allocation' (I. 3. 10) does not apply here. Both the affixes are applied to each of the roots. Thus मुखतः करय गतः or मुलतः बस्वा गतः or मखतः कारंगतः। Similarly पटतःभय तिष्ठति or पटतः भस्वा तिष्ठति or पृटतः भावं तिष्ठति। 
Why do we say 'a word denoting a limb of one's own body'? Ob serve सर्वतः करवा गसः । 
· Why do we say 'ending in the affix a'? Observe getana Tati, get भय गतः । 
Why do we use the word 'the affix'? If He is not an affix, but a verb, the rule will not apply. Thus मुखेतस्थति = मुखतः throws in the mouth'. . With this मुखतः so formed, we cannot apply the rule. Thus मुखतः कत्ला गतः। 
BK. III. CI. IV. § 62, 63 ] 
THE AFFIXES se &c. 
581 
नाधार्थप्रत्यये व्यर्थे ॥ ६॥ पदामि ॥ ना-धा-अर्थ-प्रत्यये, tal-spot, (Fatti, ital-UE) 
वृतिः।। नाधार्थपरयये शो व्यर्थउपप कन्वोर्धारयोः ताणमुनी प्रत्ययो भवतः ।। 
· 62. The affixes 'ktvå' and 'pamul' are added to the roots 'kri' and 'bha', when a word ending in the affix 'nâ' (V. 2. 27) or in an affix having the force of dha' (V. 3. 42), or having the sense of the affix'chvi' (to make or to become something what it had not been before, V. 4. 50), is in composition. 
Two words, Ar various and foratr 'without' are formed by the affix AT (V. 2. 27); affixes having the force of yr are NT, 177, yq and THT (V. 3. 42 to 46) which are added to numerals in the sense of 'part or 'fold' &c. The force of chvi has already been explained. 
Thus भनाना नाना कस्वा गतःमाना कत्य गतः Similarly नाना कुस्था or मानाकार गतः । So also विना कस्य, विना कस्ता or विनाकार गतः। So also नाना or बिना भूव-भसा or Hr Tai With words formed by yr and cognate affixes, we have:-fry or to 
-- --- -7-- or TT TO: 1 But not so in fra FET, MM 
Why do we use the word 'affix (9240)' in the satra? Without it, the søtra would have run thus: TTÜ syi, and then any word, having the sense of 71, which has the force of 'except', 'various' or the sense of which means 'part or fold', when in composition with or would have taken the affix Ugand #T. But that is not so. Thus the words (66 'except and qua 'scparately' have the sense of an and of respectively; as from out, or gera 
Why do we say 'when the upapada has the force of the affix chvi'? Observe TTT TETRA TA: 1 
The word and in ante qualifies only the term yt, and not at, for there are no other affix having the sense of t, which is a single affix taught in V. 2. 27; while, as shown above, there are other affixes having the force of Ti The composition optionally takes place by II. 2. 22. 
outfit ya: 1930 oratlar u toutta, yai, ( T-ugat)i gfer: 11 neuitant morbundent: #TULAT **T: 11 
63. The affixes 'ktvå' and 'pamul' are added to the root 'bha, when the word 'tûshqim' (silently) is in composition. 
Thus media, TOP eat, or portaraq 'having become silent. The repetition of in this satra, shows that the anuvritti of docs not run into it and altogether ceases. 
582 
THE AFFIX TUMUN. 
[BK.' III. CH. IV. $ 64, 65. 
अनवच्यानुलोरये ॥ ६४ ॥ पदानि ॥ अन्वचि, आनुलोग्ये, (भुवः, oper-orgatt) u 
f#: 11 saya99. montananzil UHET TW: 11 
64. The affixes 'ktvå' and 'namul come after the root 'bhu', when the word 'anvak', in the sense of be ing favourably disposed, is in composition. 
The word o ota means 'agrecable, friendly or favourably disposed, or doing according to the wish of another'. Thus W TY-WATCHufr or a YTTAT he is favourably disposed'. 
Why do we say 'when meaning friendly' ? Observe HITHET A 'he remains behind. 
शकषताग्लाघटरभलभक्रमसहाहरिस्पर्थेषु तुमुन् ॥६॥ पदानि ॥ 74-99-97-71-97-TH-4-6--et, fa-strong, Jual qfi ll Tifoqada perug af HTW Trauit yafar is 
65. The affix 'tumuu' is added to every verb, when another verb having the sense of sak' (to be able), 'dhfish' (to make bold), jña' (to know), 'glai' (to be wearied), 'ghat' (to strive), 'rabh' (to begin), labh' (to get), ‘kram' (to set about), 'sah' (to bear), 'arb' (to be pleased or to condescend), and "as' (to be), is in construction. 
The use of the Infinitive in Tho formed by this rule, differs from that given in sätra III. 3. 10. In that sätra the Infinitive had the force of 'purpose and here there is no such force. Moreover in this case there is an upapada in construction, though that upapada is a verb; in rule III. 3. 10, there was no such upapada. 
Thus Tarife 'I am able to eat'. Similarly foorumOER - pra w -ara-mefa-area- fr-or faad he knows', he is wearied, he strives, he begins, he gets, he proceeds, he bears, he con descends or he is, to eat. 
This satra presents a knotty point. Bhattoji Dikshita says earu मस्तिने सम्बध्यते भनन्सरव्यात् i... the sutragives roots from शक toभई and roots having the same sense as er 'to be'. But this is hardly consistent with the almost overwhelming evidence of usage. According to Dikshita's interpre tation, are to be able' cannot be used with the Infinitive, but yearfa Firir faqa (S. 4), grefTTEYTTIGHTTIER (M. 3.) are instances from a standard author; similarly fare, 'to know cannot be used with the Infinitive; but de AFTE TE (R. VI. 30) is as good an instance, We must, therefore, suppose 
BK. III. CI. IV. 8 66-68.] 
THE KRITYA AFFIXES. 
583 
that the søtra indicates the existence of an interpretation connecting or with all the preceding roots; otherwise we shall have to condemn as wrong, all such constructions as those given above. Taking this vicw I have interprcted the shtra, connecting अर्थ with all the above roots.-Apte's Composition. 
पर्याप्तिवचनेष्वलमर्येषु ॥ ६६ ॥ पदानि ॥ पर्याप्ति-वचनेषु, अलम् अर्थेषु, (तुमुन्)। 
पतिः ।। पर्याभिवचनेषनमयेंषपपतेषु धातोस्तुमुन् प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
___66. The affix tumun' comes after a verb having in composition with it, 'alam' and its synonyms, when these words express 'to be capable of something'. 
The word पर्याप्ति means 'capability, ability, fulness'. Thus लिखितमपि ललाटे प्रोभियतुम् कः समर्थ : (Hitopadesa) 'who is able to avoid that which is stamped on his forehead'. लोकान् भने दग्धुम् हि तत्तपः (Kumara II.56) his penance is able to burn the worlds'. अस्ति में विभवः सर्व परितातु (Vikramorvasi 2) I have power to know every thing'. भोक्तम् प्रवीण कुशलः पर्वा 'skilful in eating', 
Another interpretation of the satra is "the affix tumun is added to a verb, when it has in composition with it, the word F or at or a synonyme 
lam having the sense of paryapti. Thus पयोमो भोक्तुम, भलं भोक्तम्, भोक्तम् पारयति 
Why do we say 'having the sense of capability'? Observe stop hari 
Why do we say having the meaning of ममम्'? Observe पर्याप्नुम् भुक्त। The word Tæ in thc prcccding satra las not the senscol port in that aphorism. With the sensc of अन्नम्, the present satra will apply: as शवयमेवं कर्तुम् । 
कर्तरि कृत् ॥ ६॥ पदानि ॥ कर्तरि, कृत् ॥ वृत्तिः । कृत्संतकाः प्राययाः कर्तरि कारके भवन्ति ।। 
67. The afixes called 'krit' are used in the sense of an agent. 
. The words formed by krit affixes have the sense of agency; when no other special sense has been assigned to them by any rule, then this rule will apply, and fix the force of the affix. This rule will not, therefore, apply to krit affixes like we (III. 2. 5 and 6) to which a special sense has been assigned, but aflixcs like ma and a &c, (III. 1. 133). Thus at: means a 'docr'; *f'an agent'; नन्दनः 'one who causes happiness'; पाही 'who seizes'; पचः 'who cooks'. 
भव्यगेयप्रवचनीयोपस्थानीयजन्याप्लाव्यापात्या वा॥ ६ ॥०॥ भव्य-गेय-प्रवचनीय-उपस्थानीय-जन्य-आण्लाव्य-आपात्याः, वा, (कर्तरि)॥ ..वृतिः॥ भव्यादयः शम्माः कर्तरिया निपात्यन्ते ।। 
68. The words bhavya', 'geya', 'pravachaniya', 
584 
THE LA AFFIXES. 
[BK. III. CH. IV. $ 69. 
'upasthåniya', janya', '&plavya' and apatya' may option ally be used to denote the agent. 
These words are formed by kritya affixes and therefore by rule III. 4. 70, they would generally denote an action in the abstract, and the object, but not the agent. The present sätra, however, makes them denote optionally the agent also. In the alternative they denote the action-name and the object also. Thus you may mean 'existed', 'existence', or 'one who exists'; ta means 'a singer', 'a song', or 'singing'; fata means 'one who explains', 'what ought to be explained', or 'an explanation'; Juegrata means 'who waits upon', 'what ought to be waited upon or served', or 'waiting upon or attendance'; stry = yasal or a means 'one who gives birth i. e. a father', 'birth' or 'what is born'; 078754 78TS or e ngaiat means 'who immerses', one 'im 
mersing', or 'what ought to be iminersed';भापारय = भापतत्यसो or भापारयमनेन means 'what falls upon', 'falling upon', or 'what ought to fall upon'. Thus TTT ATUT: wat 'the boy is the singer of the Sama'; or starfa flor erfor 'the boy ought to sing the Sama'; प्रवचनीयो गुरुः स्वाध्यायस्थ 'the guru is the expounder of the lesson'; agulat For F ury: 'the lesson ought to be explained by the teacher'; #Teyrutstate TCT: 'thc pupil is the servant of the teacher'; JTerra: furiu T6: 'the teacher ought to be served by the pupil'. .... लः कर्मखिच भावे चाकर्मकेभ्यः ॥६॥ पदानि ॥ लः, कर्मति,च, wra, , per ** *Ti, ( f) II 
gfær: 11 FAKT: **Ufrcan nafas, otra af 7, **vierne * fae, quatre empire il 
69. The tense-affixes called 'la' are used in de noting the object and the agent; and after intransitive verbs, they denote the action as well as the agent. 
The term a means the ten affixes known as ag, fat, &c; q is the common element of them all; and these affixes, when stripped of all indicatory letters, leave behind only the letter which is thus common name for them all. The a: in the satra, is the nominative plural of a I By the word yin the satra, we draw in the word aaf or 'agent from the last sätra into this. The force of these tense-affixes, when placed after transitive verbs is to denote the object and the agent; and when placed after intransitive verbs, is to denote either 'action' (*) or it may denote the 'agent. 
The verb itself denotes the action; to be or to do, generally; or to be or to do, in a particular manner. In the active voice the affix marks the agent; in the passive voice of a transitive verb, it marks the object; but in the passive form of an intransitive verb, the action itself. Thus, ad mat 
"the village is gone to by Devadatta'; here # of sad denotes the object 
BK. III. CH. IV. $ 70.] 
THE KRITYA AND KTA AFFIXES. 
585 
and is in passive construction. Toga ora : 'Devadatta goes to the village'; here the asfix fat of regra denotes the agent, and the sentence is in active con struction. The verb Ty being a transitive verb, can take both the active and passive constructions or, to use the Sanskrit technical phraseology, the tense affixes, after transitive verbs, denote the agent and the object. They can never denote ry or action after transitive verbs, that is, transitive verbs cannot be used impersonally. Let us now give examples of Intransitive verbs; HIET 1947 'it is seated by Devadatta'; the verb preud here denotes merely IT or 'action'. In other words, we may call this an impersonal construction. The OTT: 'Devadatta sits'; here the verb rem denotes the agent or is in the 
active voice. 
Professor Bohtlingk translates the sätra thus:-"A finite verb expresses the agent as well as the object; but the Intransitive verbs denote, in addi tion to that, the Impersonal idea of the action". The word Ty means action considered in the abstract. 
Fara Faustat: 11 90 lligator u arri, Ta, 64- खलाः ॥ 
gfer: li pretot Ty**ot: puritat: Pflanruf arany safer it 
70. The affixes called 'ksitya' and the affix 'kta' and those that have the sense of 'khal', have only these last two sonses, namely, au action and an object. (bhava and karma). 
The word at: 'of those two' refers to a San Impersonal act', and *, 'object'. The word gy 'only' is used in the sutra to exclude the word 'agent' from it. Thus masa: # TU 'the mat must be made by you"; var: SİTETT HAT 'the rice must be eaten by you. Here the 'affix 4 has the force of denoting the object; we may, therefore, call it the Potential Passive Participle affix, So also erfitai yra 'thou must eat'; yfa Hai Yaar 'thou must lie down'. Here the sense of the affix you being that of the action itself, which being Im personal, is in the singular number, as it is one only, and neither male nor se male, there is, from the nature of the case, a singular affix, and the neuter gen 
der is employed. 
Similarly the affix im denotes both the object and the action; 68: et ya 'the mat is made by you'; * HT Wat 'the rice is eaten by you'. Here 
is used with the force of denoting the object and may be called the past pas sive participle. 
Similarly w may be used in denoting the mere act; are *'you sat'; yfan TA 'you lay down'. 
Similarly the affixes having the sense of UG (III. 3. 126) denote both 
586 
THE AFFIX KTA. 
[BK. III. CI. IV. $ 71, 72. 
the object and thic Impersonal act. In the following cxamples the allixcs dcnote the object; OT: 'this mat is made, by little at a time, by you'; at: 'what is made with ease'; wahr: 'what is made with difficulty'. In the following examples the affixes denote the act; q ** ear and friq* 4901 I. 
After transitive verbs, the kritya, the kta and the khalartha affixes only denote the object, but never denote the iry or 'an Impersonal action'. 
आदिकर्मणि क्तः कर्तरि च॥७१ ॥ पदानि ॥आदि-कर्मणि, का, wafi, , (Hral, #fa) al 
वृनिः॥ आदिकर्मणि यःको विहितः स करि भवति चकारात् यथाप्राप्त भावकर्मणः ॥ 
71. The affix 'kta'also denotes the agent, when it expresses a beginning of an action. 
The word opratio means 'the beginning of an action' or when the action signised by the roots, is intended to be expressed merely as having been simply begun. The force of in the satra is to indicate that even when the beginning of an action is intended to be expressed, the may be used to denote the act and the object as well. Thus sa: min: here the agent is denoted. प्रकृतः कटी देवदत्तेन; here the object is denoted. प्रकृतम् देवदत्तेन; here mere action is denoted. Similarly मभक्त भोदनं देवानः (agent); प्रभुक्तभोदनो देवपत्तेन (object); p** a (act). 
गत्यर्याकर्मकश्लिषशीड्स्यासवसजनरुहजीर्यतिभ्यश्च ॥७२॥ प Tra II T I-***-fera-sto-141-3974-278-619--oftalfami, , (Thi, welft, Hra, a ) a 
grer: il teatre yramitsamatefafenava: :mi tafel, tarragui serem OT: 
72. The affix kta' is employed in denoting the agent as well as the act and the object, after verbs implying motion, after intransitive roots, and after the verbs 'blish'(to embrace), '61' (to lie down), 'stha' (to stand), 'âs' (to sit), 'vas' (to dwell), 'jau' (to produce), ruh' (to mount) and 'jri' (to grow old). 
The phrase 'the act and the object' has been added into the satra by virtue of the word 7. Thus at OTEFT 9797 'Devadatta is gone to the village (agent); TTTT : Ta: 'the village was gone to by Devadatta (object); TTE IT 
79 'Devadatta went' (act). The past participle forms from Intransitive verbs, denote the agent and the act only ; or in other words, they are used imperson ally and in the Active voice, but never in the Passive voice or denoting the 'object. Thus TT TT you were wearied' (agent), Ariyar (object); Hle BK. III. CH. IV. $ 73, 74.] 
THE AFFIXES KTA &c. 
587 
TTI 'you sat' (agent), urfarm **HT (object); WET TE 1 'you embraced the teacher' (agent), TW T5: Tat 'the guru was embraced by you' (object), · 
a ta 'you cmbraced (act); 39graat 164 17 'you lay near the guru' (agent), उपशवितो गुरुः भवता (object), उपशयितं भवता (act); उपस्थितो गुहम् भवान् (agent), उपस्थितो गुरुः भवता (object), उपस्थितं भवता (act); उपासितो गुरुम् भवान् (agent), ayat 15: *tar (object), 391fea stat (act); wafar 167 *977 (agent), waiat T8: year (object), fet qaract); Myrat HOPE Aufar (agent), भनुजाता माणवकन माविका (object), भनुभातं माणवकेन (act); भारुतो वृक्ष भवान् (agent), HIETT T *tar (object), 416€ tai (act); TUTTA ITT: (agent), wasthof अपनी देवदत्तेन (object), अनु जीर्ण देवदत्तेन (act). The verbs शिलप् &c, become tran sitive with certain prepositions or upasargas, hence they have been men tioned here. Otherwise there was no necessity of mentioning them separate ly; as they, being intransitive verbs, when without prepositions, would be in. cluded in the word akarnaka of the sætra. 
storitat sagra u 93 H GIf I gra-tit, dugta 11 वृतिः ।।दाशगोपी शब्दो सम्पदान कारके निपात्येते ।। 
73. The words 'daśa' and 'goghna' are irregu. larly formed, and the affix in these denotes the idea of the Dative or Recipient. 
The word TT comes from the root FM] 'to give' by adding th: affix v under rule III. 1. 134. This being a word would have ,other wisc denoted the agent by rulc III. 4. 67 of this chapter.' The present sätra makes it denote the recipient or have the force of the dative case. Thus means 'to whom something is given i. e. a servant'. Similarly goghna does not mean 'the killer of cow' but 'he on whose coming the cow is killed in order to give him, that is to say, a guest'. It is this irregularly-formed word goghna which is made applicable to tlie priests, guests, sons-in-law &c, and not the re gularly-forined word goghna which means 'a killer of cow' or a 'Chandal'. Thus. 
TT: - Tyfer ari; 119:-WA ni ni nina II 
__ भीमादयोग्पादाने ॥ १४ ॥ पदानि ॥ भीम-आदयः, अपादाने ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ भीमापयः शब्दा भपासाने निपात्यन्ते ।। 
74. The words 'bhima' &c. are irregularly fornied and denoto ablation, 
These words are formed by Unddi affixes. Thus #t+4=*7 (Un. I. 145, 148); ft + + 725H (Uņ. I. 148) &c. By the next sätra, Unddi words do not denote ordinarily the recepient and the ablation. 
The present sätra makes them do so in the case of tanie words. The following is a list of Bhimadi words :-fi, ftomi, : (Uņ. III. 82), 77, 78, 
588 
. 
THE AFFIX KTA. 
IBK. III. CI. IV. 875, 76 
- 
(Un. I.T), भूमिः (Un. IV.45), रमः (Un. IV. 217), संस्कारः, संक्रन्दनः, अपतमः, समुह, सुपा, or बुवः (Un. II. 61),मक (Un. II. 62) खलतिः । 
साभ्यामन्यत्रोणादयः ॥७॥ पदानि ॥ ताभ्यां, अन्यत्र, उखादयः॥ वत्तिः।। रणादयः शब्दास्ताभ्यामपादानसंप्रदाना यामन्यत्र कारके भवन्ति ।। 
___76. The words formed by 'Unadi' affixes denote other ideas than these two, i. e., recepient and ablation. 
The Unddi affixes being a subdivision of krit affixes, would have, by rule III. 4. 67, denoted the agent. By the present satra they are made to de note the object, the instrument and the location also. The word annat has been used in the satra in order to include the word sampradana also. For, had the sutra been भन्यमोपायः, only the Apadana karaka would have been excluded, as being the nearest; but not so the Sampradana karaka. Thus fesat afr: (Un. IV. 120) agriculture it. what is ploughed' (object); तन्यत इनितन्तः (Un. 1.69) a thread it. what is drawn out'; वृत्तमिति वर्म (Un. IV. 145) a way i... 
what is established'; चरितं == चर्म (Un. IV. 145) 'skin' (in which they live). 
तोरधिकरणे च ध्रौव्यगतिप्रत्यवसानार्थभ्यः ॥ ६ ॥ पदानि ॥ कः, अधिकरणे, च, ध्रौव्य-गति-प्रत्यवसानार्थेभ्यः, (क्तः, भावे, कर्मणि, कर्तरि)। 
वृत्तिः ।। प्रीव्यगतिप्रत्यवसानायें यो यः को विहितः सोऽधिकरणे भवति चकारापयामासंच प्रोग्यायें यः कर्ट भाषाधिकरणेषु गत्यर्येभ्यः कई कर्मभावाधिकरणेषु, प्रत्यवसानायेंन्वः कर्मभावाधि. करणेषु। 
76. The affix 'kta which is ordained after roots denoting fixedness (to cling to a place), motion and taking, gives the sense of location as well.. 
The verbs denoting oy or 'persisting in a place' are Intransitive verbs. Thc word pratyavasana means 'eating' also; the force of in the satra is that the aflix kta expresses other relations also. Thus after verbs denoting 'fixed ness' or dhrauvyártha it denotes the agent, the act and the location; after verbs denoting 'motion' it gives the sense of agent, object, act and location; after verbs denoting 'taking or eating', it has the sense of object, act and location. Thus भासितो देवदत्तः 'Devadatta sat'; भासितं तेन 'sitting by him (act); इदमेपामासितम् 'this was their seat' (location); थाती देवदत्तो मामम् 'Devadatta went to the village' (active); A IT ATA: (passive); printit (abstract); TTHC An 'this is their place of going' (location); भुक्तभोदनो वदन (passive); मुक्त भोपनं देवदतः (active); देवदतेन मुक्तम् (abstract); रमेषां भुक्तम् (location); कथं भुक्ता भासणाः । पीता गापः । The भाin भुक्ता and पीता has the force of मतुप् (IV.2.85). भुकमेपामति or पीतमेषामस्ति। 
लस्य ॥ ७ ॥ पदानि ॥ लस्य । एतिः॥जस्वेश्ववमधिकारः, यदि कर्वमनुकमिवामी जस्वस्व तररिसबम् ॥ . 
BK. III. Cor. IV. $ 77, 78.] 
SUBSTITUTES OF LA 
589 
77. In the place of 'la' will be substituted the 0x which we shall announce hereafter. 
This satra consists of one word of meaning of m'. It is an adhikdra satra. The word ata is the genitive singular of a, the o in m being for the sake of pronunciation. The means the ten affixes: at present, perfect, 
first future, second future, it imperative ste Vedic subjunctive, at imperfect, for potential and benedictive, or aorist, conditional. Six of these tenses have indicatory, and four have indicatory I 
Professor Bohtlingk translates this sätra thus. In the following sätras, the word afy should be supplied to complete the sense, i.e. the phrase 'in the place of all thosc endings which are known as the Personal endings of va. rious tenses and moods, and are known in their totality as a'i 
तितमिसिप्पस्पमिग्वमस्तातामझपासापानण्वमिडवहिनहिस् # 36 lt orafa u færa-tre-fit-foq-78.4-f89-48-88-9-MITA-* 
TE-SATA--TT-af-afte, (wen) 
fe: 11 prea ftrarea HD Tafall 
78. The following are the substitutes of 'la': - 'tip', 'tas, jhi'; 'sip', 'tlas', 'tha; 'mip', 'vas', 'mas'; 'ta', 
atåm' 'jha'; 'thås', åthåm', 'dhvam'; 'iť, 'vabi', mahin. 
These are the well-known Conjugational-affixes, called also Personal endings, and are ordained generally after all the ten tenses. But as a matter of fact, they undergo various additions and alterations in the different tenses. Some of these changes have already been mentioned before; see sätra II 4. 85, III. 1. 33, &c. Others will be mentioned hereafter. It is only in the present tense or pay that the affixes as above given, may be applied to the root, in some cases, without any alteration. 
The q in farq, feq and fam is for the sake of accent (III.1.4); the x in for distinguishing it in the sätra rūs (III. 4. 106); and the Fin af for form ing the Pratyahara fire which is the general name of the above 18 conjuga tional or personal affixes. Stripped off their indicatory letters, the following table shows the conjugational affixes as added under various tenses : 
PRESENT TENSE.-Ai Parasmaipada. 
Atmancpada. Sing Dual. Plural. Sing, Dual. Plural. Ist. pers. Fir TE HEEL 2nd. fe 3rd. » 
तस् भम्ति 
भन्ने 
भावे 
590 
THE TENSE AFFIXES. 
[BK. III. Cl. IV.578. 
ध्वम् 
भाये 
IMPERFECT OR FIRST PRETERITR.-MCI Parasmaipada. 
Atmanepada. Sing. Dual Plural. Sing. Dual. Plural. Ist. pers. भम् . 
महि थाम् 
भाथाम् 3rd. , 
.साम् 
भाताम् भन्त POTENTIAL OR OPTATIVE.---विधिलिन। Ist. pers. The 
महि 2nd. 
, बास् 
बातम् बात ईथा 3rd. , वात, पाताम् बुस् 
बाता IMPERATIVE.-लोट् । Ist. pers. भामि 
भाम 
भाव भामरे 2nd. . हि पम्त 
भाषाम् 3rd. 
साम भन्तु ताम् 
भाताम् 
भन्सान PERFECT OR SECOND PRETERITE.- fori Ist. pers. 2nd. " य 
भथुस् 3rd. , म भनु र 
भासे FIRST FUTURE OR DEFINITE FUTURE.-पुर। Ist. pers. साक्षि तावस् वासस् 
साखरे सासि . वास्थम् वास्य वासे तासाये 3rd. , ता तारो तारस् । ता 
SECOND FUTURE OR INDEFINITE FUTURE.-A1 Ist. pers. स्वानि स्वारम् स्वामस् । स्पे 2nd. 
स्वथ स्पष 
स्वसे 3rd. स्थति स्पस स्वन्ति स्पते स्व स्वन्त 
AORIST OR THIRD PRETERITE, GEJ Ist. pers. and. वीस् तम् त 
खायाम् 3rd. खीतू स्ताम् सुन् 
साताम् PRECATIVE OR BENEDICTIVE. F I Ist. pers. बासम् पान याक्ष सीय .सीव सीमहि and. , 
मास्तम् यास्त सीजस सीवास्याम् सीपम् 3rd. वात् बास्ताम् बासुस बीड श्रीवास्वाम् वीरन् 
CONDITIONAL-लए। Ist. pers. स्वम् 
स्वाम 
स्थामहि 2nd. " 
स्वम् । स्थतम् सवत स्मया स्थान 3rd. स्वत् स्वताम् स्वन् । स्व । 
स्थत. 
2nd. 
" 
ता 
तारो 
स्वसि 
स्वये 
सम् 
सि 
स्खे 
स्वेताम् 
BK. III. CH. IV. $ 79-82.] 
SUBSTITUTION IN THE PERFECT. 
. 
591 
टित आत्मनेपदानां टेरे॥ ॥ पदानि ॥ टितः, मात्मनेपदा नाम, टेः, ए, (लस्य)॥ 
वृतिः॥टितो नकारस्य स्थान पान्यात्मनेपदानि तेपो रेकाराशी भवति ।। 
79. The substitute 'e' replaces the last vowel, with the consonant that follows it, of the 'Atmanepada' substitutes of that 'la' which has an indicatory 't. 
The or the tense-affixes that have an indicatory y are six जिद, जद, जद, नीटने । In these tenses the final portion called Eि of the Atm nepada affixes is changed intoए । Thus a becomes , भाताम् becomes भाले, becomes &c, as shown in the foregoing table. 
The affixes gry, and IT are also Atma nepada asfixes. Why are not their finals changed into a as in 44477:, FATIT: ? Because the word wint qat in the sätra refers by context to the Atmanepada affixes included in the Pratyahara लिए। 
चासस्से ॥८॥ पदानि ॥ यासः, से, (लस्य, टितः) । पतिः॥हिती नकारस्य यस्यास्तस्य सेशब्द भावेशी भवति । 
80. The word 'se' is the substitute of 'thảs' in those tenses that have an indicatory t. 
In the six tenses already mentioned in the last satra, the Atmane pada yrę is replaced by #, as we have already shown in the preceding table. 
Thus पपस, पेचिषे, पन्नासे, पक्ष्यसे । 
लिटस्तझयोरेशिरेच ॥२॥ प० लिटः, त-झयोः, एम, हरेच ॥ पुतिः ॥ जिराशयोस्तसयोर्ययासंबवणारेचस्येतावानेशो भवतः ॥ 
81. The words 'es' and 'irech' are the substi tutes of ta' and 'jha' respectively in the Perfect tense. 
The r of po indicates that it replaces the whole of the affix a (I. 1. 55). The of peer is for the sake of accent (VI.4I. 165). Thus da, da 
पेचिर। See the foregoing table of tenses for the Atmanepada. 
परस्मैपदानां गलतुसुस्थलघुसखलवमाः॥२॥ पदानि ॥ परस्मै पदानां, खल-अतुस्-उस्-चल-अधुस्-अ-साल-व-माः, (लिटः) । 
वृत्तिः ।। निराशानों परस्मैपासनकानां यथासंभवं तिवादीनां एनादयो नवापेशा भवन्ति ।। 
82. Iu the room of the Parasmaipada affixes, the following are substituted in the Perfect tense: 
nal (भ) 
thal (0) 
ņal (H) Dual. 
atus (HE:) 
athus (भयः) va (c) Plural, 
us (1) 
a () 
ma (A) 
Sing. 
592 
THE AFFIXES OF THE IMPERATIVE. 
(BK. III. CH. IV. 883-85. 
The indicatory # in me and yet is for the sake of accent (VI. 1. 193). The indicatory एए is for the sake of causing वृद्धि (VII. 2.25). Thus पपाच, पेचतुः, पेयुः, पेचिथ or पपक्थ, पेययः, पेच, पपाच or पपच, पेचिव पश्चिम । 
विदो लटो वा ॥३॥ पदानि ॥ विदः, लटः, वा,(परस्मैपदानां, सलतुसुस्पलघुसणलवमाः)॥ 
पत्तिः ॥ विदज्ञाने, भस्माडामोः परेषा लादेशानां परस्मैपदानां पनादयो नव विकल्प. नादेशा भवन्ति ॥ 
83. The above nine affixes of the Perfect tense are optionally added iu the Present tense also after the verb 'vid'. 
Thus: Singular. वेद or वेत्ति 
त्य or वंस्सि घेद or वेभि Dual. विस्त : or वित्तः विवयु: or विस्थः . वि or विद्वः Plural. विदुः or विन्ति विr or विस्य विभ or विमः 
..अवः पञ्चानामादित आहोब्रुवः॥४॥ पदानि ॥ ब्रुवः, पञ्चानाम्, आदितः, आहः, बुवः, (परस्मैपदानां, सलतुसुस्थल०, लटः, वा) ॥ . . . . वृत्तिः ॥ बुवः परस्व लटः परस्मैपाना पंचानामादिभूतानां पंचव एनापय भावेशा भवन्ति, सत्सलियोगेन च मुव आहशन भावेशो भवति ॥ 
84. Instead of the first five tense-affixes, in the Present tense coming after the verb 'brû' (to speak), theremay optionally be the affixes of the Perfect; 'aha' be: ing, at the same time, the substitute in the room of brû'. 
Thus spre 'he says'; mreg: 'they two say'; v8: 'they say'; reer thou sayst'; org: 'you two say'; the rest like a, as shown below: 
Singular. भाह or प्रवीति भास्थ or प्रवीषि 
प्रवीमि Dual. 
भाहतुः or मूतः भाइयुः or भूयः Plural. 
भाहुः or ब्रुवन्ति प्रथ . The word surfea: 'first' is used in the satra to indicate that the substi. tution should not take place in the case of the last four affixes. The repetition of the word in the satra indicates the original expression which is to be re placed ; and shows that this change occurs in the Parasmaipada affixes only. ; . . . . . लोटो लङ्वत् ॥५॥ पदानि ॥ लोटः, लड्चत् ॥ .. .... बत्तिः॥नोटी जपत्कायें भवति ।। 
: 85. The personal endings of the Imperative are as those of the Imperfect, 
This is an ufatt sätra; as in the Af there are the affixes ary, 77, , and म, $0.alsasin the जोद। Thus.५चसान, पचतम, पचत, पचाय, पचाम । 
BK. III. CH. IV. $.86-88.) 
SUBSTITUTION IN THE "IMPERATIVE.·:593 
e-If ante is like wir, why have we not the augment 97, 98, or the substitution of y, for ff (see III. 4. 111) in the case of it also ? 
A.-The It of satra III. 4. 83 is understood in this sätra also, so that the analogy between site and he is a limited analogy and does not make all the rules which are applicable to ale, cqually applicable to hit also. 
TF: 11 Eu qarfa 11 T:, :, (utc:) 11 gf#: 11 GrifHatte TATTTI TT ala 11 वार्तिकम् ।। हिन्योरुत्वप्रतिषेधी वनव्यः ॥ 
86. In the Imperative, 'u' is substituted for 'i'. Thus fe becomes , fra becomes HPI, as have already been given in the above table. 
- Vårt.- Prohibition must be stated in the case of affixes fe and a of HE I In the case of these two affixes, the r is not changed into a, either because they have been so taught in the sâtras, or because the et of satra III, 4. 83 is understood here also and makes this rule an optional rule of limited scope as in the last sátra (637f€Un f er). Thus 446, 498 
In fact, this satra is confined to fe and fun only, and does not apply to fe to which the next sätra applies. 
era u 9 u 8:, ft, opfora, , (witc:) . . far: 11 milionea ere fra GROTTT Rafet 
87. In the Imperative, 'hi' is substituted for 'si', and this has not the indicatory 'p' of 'sip', i. e., it is acutely acceuted. 
The substitute being like the original expression (1. 1. 56), pe substitu ted for far, would have been a far affix, but for this sätra, which clearly states in its latter portion that this fe is not to be regarded as having an indicatory at 
Thus नीहि पुनीहि, राभुति, साहि; and as this affix is भपित्, rule 1. 2.4 makes it fra also, and thereby no guņa takes place. 
T ra i call ugra u , fa, lagufaa, ett:) 01 F#: 11 MOTTER fe fuga f t sexyft. 11 
88. In the Vedas, the substitute ‘hi' is optiou ally treated as not having au indicatory 'p'. 
The result is that in the Chhandas the second person singular of the has two forms as rurfe or stuifit; Thor I, f being substituted for ft in the Vedas, by rule (VI. 4. 103) as in the following verse: 
भन नर्य सुपारायेऽभस्माविश्वानिदेव वयनानिविद्वान् । बुयोध्यस्मज्महराएमनोभूयिष्ठान्त नमाक्तिम्विधेम ॥ 
- Rig 1. 189. !: Yajur Veda. 40, 16. 
594 
SUBSTITUTION IN THE IMPERATIVE. [BK. III. CH. IV. § 89-93. 
मेमिः ॥ ९ ॥ पदानि ॥ मेः, नि:, (लोटः) । पत्तिः ॥ लोगशस्य मेनिरादेशो भवति॥ 
89. In the Imperative, 'ni' is substituted for the affix 'mi'. 
This supersedes the rule relating to the change of into 7, and the rule of lopa ; see the table; thus पचानि, पानि। 
आमेतः ॥ ॥ पदानि ॥ आम्, एतः, (लोटः)। वृतिः॥ नोट सम्बंधिन एकारस्य भामिस्थवभावेशो भवति ।। 
90. In the Imperative 'am' is substituted for what would have substituted otherwise te' by III.4.79. 
This relates to the Atmanepada affix ए. In the Atmanepada, भाम् is substituted for ए in the Imperative; see the table; पचताम्, पचेताम्, पचन्ताम् । 
सवाम्यां वामौ ॥९॥ प० ॥ स-वाम्या, व-अमी, (लोटः, एतः)। पृत्तिः । सकारवकाराभ्यामुनरस्य नोट सम्बन्धिन एकारस्य यथासंभवं व भम् इत्येतावावेशी भवतः ॥ 
91. For such an 'o' coming after 's', is substi tuted 'v', and for that coming after 'v', is substituted 'am', in the Imperative. 
This supersedes the ora substitution of the last sätra. Thus, for & we have ey, and for wat we have 174; see the table; thus 4 9,9914 
माहुत्तमस्य पिचापदानि॥ आद, उत्तमस्य, पित, च, (लोटः)। वृतिः॥नोट सम्बन्धिन उनमपुरुषस्यारागमो भवति स चोत्तमपुरुषः पिबति ।। 
92. In the Imperative at' is the augment of the affixes of the first person and the terminatiou is as if it had an indicatory 'p'. 
This is clear. Thus in the Parasmaipada, we have भानि, भाव, भाम । Thus करवाणि, करवाय, करवान; करवे, करवाय, करवामहे । 
एत रे॥३॥ पदानि ॥ एतः, रे, (लोटः, उत्तमस्य)। पतिः ॥ जोशमसम्बन्धिन एकारस्थ ऐकाराशो भवति । 
93. The 'ai' is substituted for 'e' forming part of the affixes of the first person of the Imperative. 
This relates to the Atmanepada affix. Thus करने, करवायह, करवामहे । 
But the resulting from sandhi, is not to be changed into Q1 Thus creare +वम् पचावेदन, पचाम+इदम् = पचामेतम् । Here, no doubt, the e belongs to the Im. perative by VI. 1. 85, being the substitute of Mt of and T. But this is not to be changed into on the maxim that this g is the result of a fit rule, for 
-Ye. 
BK. III. CH. IV. $ 94-97.) 
ELISION OF 'p.. 
: 
.:"" 
595 
WENN 
P 
. 
the rule of sandhi (VI. 1. 87), is a ty rule, while the present satra is an W TF rule; because of the following Paribhasha, where ECR 'that which is Bahiranga is regarded as not having taken effect, when an Antaranga rule is to be applied. 
ET SETÈT I Y II WETU WE, W-UTI prer: 11 Faserererrat ya: qatau 11 
94. The augments 'at' and âț' are added to the personal endings of the Vedic Subjunctive. 
The augments we and we are not to be added at once, but by turns. Thus *** * ***+= fra; Tua, fac similarly +48 + perfe; 
arraf See III. 1. 34 for the addition of fær in the above. 
fra Y N TET I STA:, (ME:) ! : 11 Az auf H E* TARTOM afasi 
95. In the Subjunctive, 'ai' is the substitute of a' in the first and second person dual of the Atmanepada. 
Thus a, rau, ara, Why is not the augment are changed into ? Because otherwise the rule enjoining Mr would be superfluous, . 
Pata Nerf #1 , Tai, a, (HT:) ! 
fer !! The forway ACE e Q&TTTt er een paar faradi 18 #Ealavat 
g efall 
96. In the Subjunctive, 'ai' is optionally the substitute of 'e', in other places than those mentioned in. the last s@tra. 
Thus ya, su, &c, in the following examples:- 
, et umat, 4 TITR, 
Hrafi # T an And in the alterna tive we have simply c, as **URA W PETIT 
Why do we say 'in other places than thase governed by the last satra'? Observe wall, 
. au uta: urriture Collector II Tinta:, or rek, (we:) u 
af: 11 gefa ata q* 
f c4 wit afsta: Ufafat 11 97. In the Parasmaipada asfixes the 'i' is op tionally elided in the Subjunctive. 
The up of the last sätra is understood here also. Thus wife (Rig. II. 35. I). M er (Rig. I. 25. 12), (I In the alternative, it is not elided as warfer forge (Rig. VII. 25. 1). af arrafer The of af and if of the Atmanepada arc not elided. 
396 
SUBSTITUTION Or 'TAS', "THAS', &c. [BK. III. CH. IV. 198-101. 
स उत्तमस्य ॥ ॥ पदानि ॥ सः, उत्तमस्य, (लेटः, वा, लोपः)। पतिः॥दसम्बन्धिन उत्तमपुरुषस्य सकारस्थ पानोपो भवति।। 
98. The 's' of the first person is optionally elided in the Subjunctive. 
___As करवाय or करवाक, करवाम or करवामः | The first person is used in the satra to indicate that the y is not elided in any other person. 
नित्यं डितःप०॥नित्यं, हितः, (लस्य, उत्तमस्य, सालोपः)। पत्तिः ॥ तिलकारस्य व उत्तमस्तस्य नित्वं सकारस्थ जीपो भवति ।। 
99. There is always elision of the 's' of the first person of the affixes that come in the room of that 'la' which has an indicatory n'. 
The tense-affixes having indicatory are four, namely, Flo, Faro, ar and 1 In their case, the elision of & is not optional as was the case in the last sQtra, but compulsory. See the table already given. In other words, in the Imperfect, Potential, Aorist and Conditional, the æ is elided in the ist person. Thus अपचाय, भपचाम। The word नित्यं 'always' is used in order to stop the anuvritti of the word 'optionally'. 
बतच ॥ १०० ॥ पदानि ॥ इतः, च, (डितः, नित्यं, लोपः, लस्य) त्तिः॥ हिलकारसम्बन्धिन इकारस्य निस्व लोपो भवति । 
100. And there is elision of the 'i' of that Pa. rasmaipada afkx which is the substitute of a la' having an indicatory 'i'. 
Thus, for fo we haver, for fæ we have ą, &c, as in the above table The rof Atmanepada is, however, not elided, because the anuvritti of Paras. maipada is understood here from sutra III. 4.97. Thus भपचन, भपासीत, but भपचावहि and भपचामहि। 
तस्थस्थमिपां तान्ततामः ॥११॥ पदानि ॥ तस्-यस्-थ-मिपान, तां-तं-त-आमः, (डितः) ॥ 
पतिः । जिलकारसम्बन्धिनां चतुर्ण बयासंस्वं वामादव भावेशा भवन्ति ।। 
101. The affixes 'tåm', 'tam', 'ta' and 'am' are the substitutes of the four affixes tas', 'thas', 'tha' and mip' respectively, of any 'la' which has an indicatory 'n'. 
This we have shown in the above table. Thus भपचतान. भपचतम, अपचत, भपचम्, भपाताम्, भपाकम्भ पात,भपातम्। 
लिस्मीयुट् ॥ १०२ ॥ पदानि ॥ लिड, सीयुट । चिः॥ जिनशानां सीबुरागमो भवति। BX. III. CH. IV. | 102-104.] 
THE AUGMENT YASUT. 
. 
597 
102. The personal eudings of the Potential and the Benedictive take the augment 'siyut'. 
Thce of drie is indicatory and shows that this augment is to be pla ced before the affixes (I. 1. 46). The r is for the sake of pronunciation; this rule applics to thc Atmanepada affixes. In the Potential, the ę of this aug ment is clided by VII. 2. 79, and they also, before a personal-ending begin ning with a consonant, is dropped according to VI. 1. 66. In this way, we have qa, qorary, and by III. 4. 105, qatti In the Benedictive, the augment retains its full form, only so far as it is not geverned by VI. 1. 66. Thus पनीर, पसीयास्ताम् पत्तीरन् । 
यासुट परस्मैपदेषदात्तो किच्छ ॥ १३॥ पदानि ॥ यासुद, पररम o, o 19:, feat, , (fere:) ! 
पत्तिः।। परस्पाविषयस्य निडो वासुडागमो भवतिसीयुटोऽपवादःसचोदातीभवविनिच 
103. When the Parasmaipada affixes of the Potential follow, then 'yåsut acutely accented, is their augment, and the termination is regarded as having an indicatory ''. 
This debars agt; the of digz is indicatory; the real augment is Org. All augments being anudatta, the present satra therefore especially uses the word udatta to show that this augment is an exception to the general rule, Though for has an indicatory 7, and therefore by the rule I. I. 56, its substi tutcs would also be regarded as having an indicatory , thc repetition of the word for in this sätra shows the existence of the paribhasha "that the be longing to or does not influence its substitutes;" in other words, the substitutes of c, fotos, and we are not to be regarded as having an indicatory. (hte TurTTAUTATI **). In the Potential, the of aree is elided by VII. 2.79. So we get the forms aic, art, and by applying III. 4. 108 and VI. 1.96, p. For the Benedictive fore, the following satra applies. 
facritto un pox il nerfor a fe, effa, (fers, arge, 17:) 
वृत्तिः ॥ भाशिपि बोलिर सग्य वासुडागमो भवति सचोदासः किारयति । 
104. The augment 'yåsut comes after that liū'also which denotes benediction, and it is acutely accented, and the substitutes of this 'lin' are as if they had an indicatory 'k'. 
The fact of this sätra refers to the personal affixes of the Benedictive mood and not to the augment arge, for that would have been unnecessary, 
598 
THE AUGMENT SUT. 
(BK. III. CH. IV. $ 105-107. 
being already for by the last rule. free and fac are equal in prohibiting guna and vșiddhi, but feet is distinguished from fara inasmuch as feu causes the guņa of STIT (VII. 3.85), and also there is distinction between them with regard to the change of semi-vowel to vowel (VI. 1. 15 and 16). Thus fare, reci, इण्यासु:, and नागर्यात, जागर्यास्ताम् and जागर्यासु: In the Potential, पथ्यात् (no samprasarana); in the Benedictive, guar (vocalisation). So also srpan in the Potential. 
Her er tall poy at nerfor ul Hory, , (fre :) ! पृत्तिः॥सस्य लिहावेशस्य रमित्ययमावेशी भवति ।। 
105. The affix 'ran' is the substitute of 'jha' in the Lin' (Potential and Benedictive). 
The # in other places, is replaced generally by R (VII. 1, 3), but in लिह, It is replaced by रन् । Thus पवेरन्, यजेरन्, कपीरन् । 
Team 11 poe ut ocrta il rei, a, (fare:) # f#: HI FGETATTET asfarger ut fer it 
106. Short 'a' is the substitute of 'i' of the At manepada first person singular in the Potential and Benedictive. 
Thus qua, Tita, tra, gita i 
Q. In the sätra, the word he is used, and the final y belongs to the farefit, therefore by rule 1. 3. 4, this is not indicatory; why is it made so ? 
4. This is not any portion or member of the substitute we; it is added to # merely for the sake of euphony, 
The r refers to the regio affix of the first person singular; and not to the augment on the strength of the maxim muqaro trpava A combination of letters capable of expressing a meaning denotes, whenever it is employed in grammar, that combination of letters in so far as it possesses that meaning, but it does not denote the same combination of letters void of a meaning, 
Et faut: #pogul warfare, fa-utti, (fars:) #1 fa: 11 pontos apartameyanet: gamat tahat 
107. The augment 'sut' is added to the affixes sta' and tha' when part of the affixes of the Potential and Benedictive. 
The letters and are the objects to which the augment is to be ádded; provided that the # and are the initial of the affixes employed in fase 
The augmenter is applied to fore as such; in other words, for is 
BK. III. CH. IV. § 108-110.] 
SUBSTITUTION OF 'JHI', 
599 
there the arrat; but in the case of a fat is not the wirft, but a and q are the småt The scope of age and being thus different, one does not debar llic other, 
In the satra, the word for is used; the offer is merely for the sake of 
Thus tr, arrenik urrt, Fatti, frater in the Po tential, the æ is elided by VII. 2. 79. 
Ho pos llargfa , , (FTE:) 11 afer: 11 PETETA UFA THE HOTTT TT 
108. In the Potential and Benedictive, jus' is the substitute of jhi', the ending of the first person plural Parasmaipada. 
This debars भन्त (VII. I. 3); thus पचंदुः, यो बुः । 
formerarempangocu Fy-per-fafema:, , () 7:11 fax: 479 opacar sa TATTET TATTU Tfu 11 
109. (In those tenses which are marked with an indicatory 'u') 'jus' is the substitute of 'jhi', when it comes after an Aorist in 'sich', or the Irnperfect of a re duplicated verb, or the root 'vid' (to know). 
This applics to tcnscs having other than that of fats, namely, the 5 and 1 
fer is omployed in forming the first Aorist. The reduplicated verbs, as well as the verb fart, form their third person plural in Tg, in the tenses other than fors, and those that take fai The word fra: of sátra III.4. 99, is under stood here also; and therefore this rule is restricted to the Imperfect (a ) of the reduplicated verb. Thus offey, we have **:, ra:Similarly, after the Imperfect of the reduplicated verbs, we have भविभः , भमिहयः, भगागः। In the case of far, we have sfar: 1 
ora: lllppoul açtfall 476:, ( f) u af: il fermoar area area Haarah wafat 11 
110. (When 'sich' is elided), 'jus' is the substi. tute of jhi', after an Aorist stem which ends in long 'a'. 
The fer is elided by rule (II. 4.77). Thus us:, :, MEY: 1 In other words, in those cases, where fery is elided by rules II. 4.77, 78 and 79, only ya is the substitute of fer where the verbs end in long I In other words, this satra restricts the scope of the last satra, by which after every feq. भुस् was to replace सि। 
Thc Prescnt sätra says that after verbs in which (am has been elided, 
600 
SARVADILATUKA AFFIXES. 
[BK. III. C11. IV. § 111-113. 
I does not replace fw in the case of any other verb than that which ends in long ar; it is thus a niyama rule. 
Thus, by rule II, 4.77, fer is elided after the verb , but as a does not end in long wr, its 3rd person plural Aorist will not be in Tai Thus, arjati Here, by the last rule, and on the maxim that 'though fee is elided, yet its force remains (I. 1. 62)', * would have replaced fæ ; but the present sätra prohibits that. But where the far is not elided, there, of course, re does come. Thus sain, H814:1 
TE: THETATI 889 ulugtfa I 6:, UTATUR, (i, Te, sa:) ! 
fa: 11 HariFargareT OTGTÈTICH ÅTTANTTI HT THE REU 711 
111. In the opinion of Såkațâyana only, 'jus'is the substitute of jhi', in the Imperfect of the roots which end in a long 'a'. 
Thus भयुः, भव.In the alternative, we have भवान् and अवान् । 
Why is me repeated here, when the context would have supplied this word; for the satra applies to fratenses, of which qo, being dealt with in the last, would Icave os, only to be dealt with by this aphorism, sur no other fora tense (like fore or 6) can end in 1? The repetition shows that the rule applies to those affixes which come after 15, as 618., and not to those which come after another tense which is treated like mc, Thus it is treated like 96,, but for the purposes of this rule, ple would not be so treated. Thus the fe of T?, will not be changed into Te by III. 4. 109. Thus favor, 199, fara i The word ge has been used in the satra, for the sake of the subsequent sâtra. 
faut nggallagafa ufi, 7, (8:, Hcrear, Hall fa: 11 for: 9767 FIFTTTTET ÅRut vafa recrutelarea that 
112. In the opinion of Såkațâyana only, jus' is the substitute of 'jhi', in the Imperfect after the verb dvish'(to hate). 
Thus afeg: But according to others, affasti 
faefecardige ppp ur ne u fao-fata, prurgau चिः॥ तिः शितश्च प्रत्ययाः सार्वधातुकसंज्ञा भवन्ति ॥ 
113. All personal endings (III. 4.78) and all affixes with an indicatory 's', are called 'sarvadhâtuka'. 
Of course, this applies to the affixes which have been already treated before, namely, the affixes which relate to verbal roots and not to are affixes &c. Thus, erafa, triffa, 44:, 92417: I fare and s tor are exceptions, 
BK. III. CH. IV. § 114-116.] · ARDHADHATUKA AFFIXES. 
. 
. 601 
BITSVIT* În: 12p8ll a GIRU SHTEUTT**, FUN 
T: Il fag: fyw artears+4: 4144: 141 yrgatan farge erga wura 
114. The remainder, i. e. the affixes other than tin', and those with an indicatory 's' subjoiued to a verbal root, are called 'árdhadhâtuka'. 
Thus the affixes a, T, 7504 &c are our affixes as in the follow ing wordsmont, af 74, 115241 Here the augment is added, because of thesc asfixes being callcd ardhodhdtuka by VII. 2.35. 
The word yrat: whose anuvșitti began with sätra III. 1. 91, is understood here also. So that the affixes in relation to the verbal roots get the name of sårvadhatuka and ardhadhá tuka; the asfixes applied to nouns do not get these naines. Thus the case-asfix when added to the noun g, is not called an arthadhe inka aslix, and thercfore we liave mar, aft: &c. Had these affixes been drdhadhdtuka, they would have caused the guna of the base (VII. 3. 84). Sinilarly the asfixes ti and at in the words TFTER and war are not drdha. dhdtuka asfixes. Had they been so, there would have been the insertion of the augment F. (VII. 2. 35). 
Similarly in sätra III. I. 5, the alfix is used without changing the sense, after the roots Tg, fast and final But as this affix is added with out the cnunciation of the word vrat: as it is in shtra III. 1.7, this az is not called Andhadhatuka, and does not take the augment as TCI 
fore I ppy al agtfa u fat, , ( UTC**) U. F: 11 fate TAFITTA Atala in 
115. The personal endings of the Perfect are also called 'årdhadhâtuka'. 
This debars them from being called sarvadhd luka and, being drdha. dhå tuka, some of them take the augment pas afu, tfag i Moreover by their being drdhadhd tuka they do not admit of the Vikaranas Ty &c. 
So from Tas (var, VI. 1. 45) we have pront; here the mi is clided by VI. 4 64, the asfix being treated as drdhadhdtuka; similarly we from man 
fethufa uppelt agtfa u fete, erfufa, ( VIT) u वृत्तिः ॥ भाशिषि विषये यो लिइ स भार्द्धधातुकसंज्ञो भवति ।। 
116. When the sense is that of Benediction, the substitutes of 'liü are called 'ârdhadhatuka', i. e. the personal endings of the Benedictive are 'ârdhadhâtuka'. 
This debars these affixes from being called sarvadhatuka Being ar. dhadhatuka they take the augmcnt , and before these affixes the root does 
ardhadhatuka affixes. Sometimes the fas and fur are treated as if they were ardhadha tuka. Thus pie : 1 Here the affixes of the ait arc treated as drdhadhdtuka and consequently there is the elision of the fur by rule VI. 4. St; the proper form of this word would be pini Sometimes ar dhadhd luka affixes are treated like sarvadhëtuka affixes; as fagfat; here the asfixes of the force are treated as sårvadhdtuka and so there is the Vikarana # 
and the is changed into a 1 Thus, for+*+&+Ti=fa+T+I+ (III. 1. 74) -fa+T+*+ (VI. 4. 87)=fryfoad Similarly, afii The fee is some times treated in the Vedas both as sarvadhdtuka and ardhadhatuka at one and the same time; as 84€ūT IU 491 Here, by treating the affix as sarvadha tuka, there is elision of in the fore (VII. 2. 79) and by treating it again as drdhadhdtuka, the 7 of or is changed into gi So also in partea the affix is treated as sårvadhatuka and there is no substitution of x for W& as required by II. 4. 52.