 URE - GOVE 
VERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
5 
295 
SL 
FIGUR 
A8-001577 
तिसरकार 
THE 
ASHTADHYÁYÍ OF PÁNINI. 
TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH 
BY 
ŚRÍŠA CHANDRA VASU, B. A., 
Vakil, High Court, N.-W. P. 
142) 
40 
--:-0-: 
:-0-:-- 
Allahabad: 
INDIAN PR'ass. 
1891. 
(All rights r" 
cserveri.) 
URE • Goy 
COVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY OF 
NT OF INDIA 
स्कृति मंत्रान 
सत्यमेव जयते 
रत सरकार 
491.2 V K32 A 
Br. Fr 
Allah a bad: 
PRINTED BY THE INDIAN PRESS. 
491.25 
Pan – A 
bles In TV 
30 MAR 1953 
VERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
संस्कृति मंत्राला 
सत्यमेव जयते 
भारत सरकार 
TO THE 
HON'BLE SIR JOHN EDGE, Kt., Q. C., 
CHIEF JUSTICE OF THE NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES, 
THIS WORK 
IS, 
WITH HIS LORDSHIP'S PERMISSION, 
AND IN RESPECTFUL APPRECIATION OF HIS LORDSHIP's 
SERVICES TO THE CAUSE OF ADMINISTRATION OF 
JUSTICE AND OF HIGH EDUCATION 
IN 
THESE PROVINCES, 
BY HIS LORDSHIP'S HUMBLE SERVANT 
THE TRANSLATOR, 
URE.GOV 
OVERNMENT 
SF CULTURE 
ENT OF INDIA 
उस्कृति मंत्रालय 
en 
* 777 
PREFACE. 
INCE the advent of the British rule and the peace and prosperity that have 
followed in its train, and especially since the foundations of the Arya Samaj and the Theosophical Society, India has witnessed, a glorious revival of her ancient literature, in which is embodied some of the highest philoso phies and religions of the world. Our schools and colleges are annually turn. ing out hundreds, nay. thousands of scholars, who have entered upon the study of Sanskrit literature, and have thus learnt to appreciate the beauties of this language. Many Europeans too are taking pains to have some knowledge of the immortal literature of this ancient language. Very few of them, how ever, have the opportunity of studying the language with that depth and fulness with which it was and is mastered by the Pandits of the old school. To pro berly understand Sanskrit language, and especially that portion of it in which ure locked up the highest aspirations of the ancient Aryan hearts, vis., the Vedas, the Brâhmanas, the Upanishads &c, it is absolutely necessary to have 
complete knowledge of the Grammar elaborated by Panini. 
Further, as a master-piece of close reasoning and artistic arrangement, ought to be an object of study with every one who wants to cultivate his tellectu al powers. In fact, what the Geometry of Euclid has done towards 
al development of the western intellect, the Ashtadhyâyî of Panini ed the same purpose in India. No one who has studied this book in from praising it. It has evoked admiration even from the Sanskrit of the west. Professor Max Müller thus gives his opinion about the { this excellent Sanskrit Grammar:-" The Grammatical system ela by native Grammarians, is in itself most perfect, and those who have Panini's work will readily admit, that there is no Grammar in any e, that could vie with the wonderful mechanism of his eight books of itical rules." Unfortunately, however, for our college and school students, and also vast majority of English-reading gentlemen, whose number is daily on ease, and who depend for their knowledge of what is contained in Sans ks, on English translation of Sanskrit authors, no translation of this 
t work exists in English. To supply this want, we have undertaken ate Pânini's aphorisms, as explained in the well-known commentary, e Kasika. Though it is not a close translation of the whole of e regarded as a free rendering of We have closely followed 
URE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
TRY OF CULTU 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
• 
सत्यमेव जयते 
51 
uia 
4777 
Cary, and in short, making the work a help to the student, desirous o 
ng the Kasíkâ in the original. 
The Ashţådhyâyí, as indicatet by its name, is divided into ashị dhyâyas, i. e., eight Books. Each of these Books again is divided into fou pädas or chapters. It has thus been found suitable to publish the work in 3 parts without causing any inconvenience to the reader. The complete wor) will cover about 2,000 pages Royal Octavo. The task of translating, printing and publishing such an enormous work will entail great labour and expense We are, therefore, forced to appeal to the generous public for their patronage so that this undertaking may be brought to a successful termination, 
The rates of its subscription are as follow : (Indian) Rs. 20-0-0 in advance for the complete work including postage. (Foreign) £. 2-0-0 Price per set of 4 parts, i. e., one Book or Adhyâya bound in one volume, in cluding postage-Rs. 3 (Indian); 6s. (Foreign). 
Any encourager of Sanskrit learning subscribing for ten or more copies of this work will be thankfully registered as our Patron and his name will be made immortal with that of the book by giving it a prominent place ir the front of the book when it is completed. 
Our hearty thanks are due to the Honourable E. White, C. s., Directo of Public Instruction, N.-W. P. and Oudh, for his kindly subscribirig for 1 copies of our work, and to all those gentlemen who have hitherto subscribe for any number of copies or in any way encouraged us in our underta 
Panini Office 1 
THE PUBLISI Allahabad. 
URE • GOVE. 
TRY OF CULT 
MINISTRY 
ANMENT OF IN 
OF INDIA 
सरवमय जयत 
तसरकार 
THE 
ASHTADHYAYI OF PANINI. 
ओइन परमात्मने नमः Salutation to the Supreme Spirit. 
39 TITATIFF II Now an explanation of words. The term "now" in the sûtra indicates a commencement, and points out that a dissertation is to be offered on the science of words, viz. Grammar and Philology. The term TINHA means explanation of any system. This is an T T sútra, and introduces the subject. 
An aphorism or sûtra is of six kinds, Fat or 'a definition,' Titre or the "key to interpretation,' fare or the statement of a general rule,' fareth or'a restrictive rule,' state or a head or governing rule, which exerts a direct ing or governing influence over other rules,' and it or extended application by analogy.' 
The Pratyahara Sûtras. TEJOT IHC I peits i geri qualcı GUT I ASUTA! STI 767 I aretat i helyuta i 494 1 917 01 
The above fourteen aphorisms contain the arrangement of Sanskrit alphabets for grammatical purposes. The anusvåra and the visarga, the jihvâ-muliya and the upadh mâniya are not contained in the above list. The final in the consonants , &c., is merely for the sake of articulation. The final pure consonants in the several aphorisms as T, T, &c., are non efficient or ca. The EET is a grammatical symbol or abbreviation and is formed by taking any letter which is not a non-efficient letter and joining it with any non-efficient letter that follows it. This gives a name which stands for the former non-efficient letter and for all the other letters intervening between it and the non-efficient letter. Thus a means all the vowels, Er means all the con sonants, stat means all soft unaspirate consonants, means all hard unaspirate consonants. Though numerous pratyâhâras could be formed, practically however, there are only 42 pratyahâras ; as given below: 
E! TITIGT TETT 137T | STORI 18 STIFTITETA 471&TITTITTITTI I TIHTIHTI I TITT I UTIC STT ITT! 
TITTIT I TT I TT 11ST I GOT IT! 115 1 
The same letter T is made use of as to or an indicatory letter both in the sixth sâtra and in the first EU. There arises consequently 
URE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY ON 
NT OF INDIA 
सत्यमेव जयते 
INTRODUCTION. 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
. 
तसरकार 
bt, whether the pratyâhärast and i when they are employed in i's Grammar are formed with the T of the former or with the T of the 
sútra, and one might, on that account, consider it impossible to ascertain at Pânini intended to denote by TT and TT when he employed these rms. To remove this doubt there is the following paribhâsha : 
"The precise meaning of an ambiguous term is ascertained from in terpretation, for a rule, even though it contain an ambiguous term, must never the less teach something definite." 
Accordingly, we learn from interpretation that the term TT except in Sutra I. 1. 69, is formed by means of the ag of the first sûtra, and that the term ct is formed by means of the ot of the subsequent sútra. 
:0: 
REGOVS. 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY OS 
NT OF INDIA 
सस्कृति मंत्रान 
सत्यमेव जयते 
H 
. 
रत सरकार 
आइम 
quruciale urlala:ll 
BOOK I. CHAPTER FIRST. 
afgrey ugu açılar il ait, etia-T! वृत्तिः ॥ वृद्धिशब्दः संज्ञात्वेन विधीयते प्रत्यकमाईचां वर्णनां सामान्येन तद्भावितानामतदा faria II 
1. ST, T and si are called vriddhi. 
This defines the word vriddhi. The letters , and it are vřiddhi letters. The sûtra consists of three words vriddhi , ât and aich. IT means the long 1, the final being indicatory only, and is for the sake of the pratyâhâra aich, and the pratyâhâra te means the letters and ot. 
The indicatory in Se serves the purpose of showing that the very form T having two mâtrâs or prosodial measure, is to be taken. This also 
pins with the succeeding vowels ĉ and it by the rule of T (I. 1.70) or that " which precedes or succeeds T," and indicates that these vowels must be taken as having two mâtrâs only, though they may be the result of the combination of vowels whose aggregate mâtrâs may be more than two. A short vowel has one mâtrâ, a long vowel has two, and a consonant has half a mâtrâ. Thus by a rule of सन्धि or euphonic conjunction of letters आ+पा=आ, as महा+आशयः = FETITT:. Here T has two mâtrâs and not four. So also in agsh: the vowel E the resultant of it has only two, not four, mâtrâs. 
Thus the initial vowels in the following secondary derivative nouns are vriddhi forms of their primitive vowels. :"bodily", from ; 'body' graaf: " optional”, from get"option"; 1979:"the son of Upagu", from the word art: meaning "a sage called Upagu." Similarly in trefter: "belonging to the house" the car is radical, and is also called vriddhi. The word vriddhi occurs in sâtras like fag 
(VII. 2. 1.) "Let the final ch of the base get vriddhi substitute before the affix feet of the Parasmaipada". 
अदेड गुणः ॥२॥ पदानि ॥ अत्-एड्, गुणः ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ गुणशब्दः संज्ञात्वेन विधीयते प्रत्येकमदेडों वर्णानां सामान्येन तज्ञावितानामतझा. FEAT 
2. , x and i are called guna. 
Each one of the letters, and at whether radical or secondary is called a guna letter; as the initial vowels in the following:- fer," he 
QE • GOVER 
CULTURE 
VERNMENT O 
MINISTRY 
AT OF INDIA 
NOVA 
संस्कृति मंत्राल 
सत्यमेव जयते 
GUNA VRIDDHI PARIBHASHA 
[BK. I. CH. I. §. 30 
मालय भारत 
रत सरकार 
; fra "he comes", piga "he goes." Here the initial vowels of the #, F, and say have been respectively gunated into 7, T, and it before hird person singular termination rat. 
The term Guna occurs in sûtras like freu: (VII. 3. 82). "Let there 2 guņa substitute for the ik of the root "to melt." 
get that 3 nocifern ges: 1 megt, (aici, ya:) ! वृत्तिः ॥ वृद्धिगुण स्वसंज्ञया (वृद्धया गुणेन वा) शिष्यमाणाविक एव स्थाने वेदितव्यो। 
3. In the absence of any special rule, when ever guna or vriddhi is enjoined about any expression by using the terms guna or vriddhi, it is to be understood to come in the room of the ik vowels only (i, u, ri, and li long and short,) of that expression. 
This is a paribhâshâ sâtra, and is useful in determining the original letters, in the place of which the substitute guna and vriddhi letters will come. The present rule will apply where there is the specification of no other particular rule. 
Thus satra VII. 3.84 declares:--"when a sârvadhâtuka or an ardhadhâ tuka affix follows there is guņa of the base." Here the sthani or the original expression which is to be gunated, is not specified, and to complete the sense, the word "ikah" must be read into the sûtra. The rule then being, "when a S. or an A. affix follows there is guna of the ik vowels of the base." The gupa of ror & is g; of g or 5, is of Form is , of is 97; and their Vrddhi is egt, wie and si respectively. Thus eft + = 
+ grâ= "he leads." 
Therefore, wherever in any rule in this Grammar, gura or vriddhi is ordained by employing the terms guņa or vriddhi, there the word "ikah" in the genitive case, meaning "in the place of ik”, is to be supplied to complete the sense. 
The word 'ik' is thus understood in the following rules, and is there qualified by the term or base':--refu: (VII. 3. 82) stafe: (VII. 2. 114) 
&c., (VII. 3.86); 
R A TE (VII. 4.11) PESISIJU: (VIP 4.16) Furaya &c., (V1. 4. 156). 
In the following sâtras, the term 'ik' is understood and qualifies the word ânga or base, (VII. 3, 83), Tar a ft: (VII. 3, 84). 
These sâtras will be explained in their proper places. 
The word 'ik' has been used in the sûtra to show that the long , or the diphthongs and e or the consonants, are not to take guna or vriddhi by this 
URE 
GOVE. 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
ENT OF INDIA 
SR. 1, "CH. I. $. 4.1 
EXCEPTION TO GUNA AND VRIDDHI. 
सस्कृति मंत्रान 
7772 
rule, as in the following examples ant"a carriage", Girafa "he feels a star" confined." 
Here serata is formed by adding the affix færą, third person singula omination, with the class a affix it, to the root o; as gT+T9+faq= 
J S . ra. At this stage, rule VII. 3. 84, would require the guna substitution of the vow of the base before the sârvadhâtuka termination ; the guņa substitute û being , there would be + = TOETA. But this is wrong, the letter Ê, being not included in the pratyâhâra ik, is not affected by rule VII. 3. 84, and there is no guna substitution in this case. Similarly there is no change in the long T of 1979. Thus OT + Fe (III. 3. 115)=47H (VII. I. I). Here had there been gupa by Rule VII. 3. 84, the T of yT, would have been changed into 5, and the form would have been which is wrong. But it is not so, as is not an vowel. So also ** + gar = fa. Here, there is no guna substitution in the place of the consonant. 
The repetition of the words guna and vriddhi in this sûtra, (though by por or the supplying of a word from the previous sûtra, these words followed from the two preceding sutras) is for the purpose of indicating that, this is a restrictive rule applicable only there, where guņa or vriddhi has been ordained by the employment of the words guna or vriddhi. Therefore, it is not so in the following cases :- : "sky", TEETT: "way" #: "he," TH "this." at: is the nominative singular of the base feq. It is formed by rule VII. 1. 84, which declares that "in the nominative singular the letter at takes the place of fer." Here the letter sgt is no doubt a vșid dhi letter, but as this substitution is not enjoined by the enunciation of the term vriddhi, ai does not take the place of the vowel of red, but it replaces the final . Thus fe + 1 +=ut:. 
Similarly rule VII. 1. 85, declares that of the word Tiert, g is the substitute. The T is a vriddhi letter no doubt, but not being enunciated by the term vșiddhi, it takes the place of of fire and not of . Thus we have TEUT:, the being added by VII. 1. 87. 
Similarly #: from a, which is formed by VII. 2. 102 "short is the substitute of tyad, &c.," Here y takes the place of . Thus we have a, which is changed again into by VII. 2. 106. 
7 TT&TT & 188 uçan , wa-dia , erg unga, (Tuerst) 
वृत्तिः ।। धात्वेकदेशो धातुस्तस्य लोपो यस्मिन्नार्द्धधातुके ततार्द्धधातुकं धातुलोपं रात्र ये गुणवृद्धी प्राप्नुतस्ते न भवतः ।। 
4. The Guna and vriddhi substitutions, which otherwise would have presented themselves, do not URE • Gove 
MINISTRY 
VERNMENT OS 
RY OF CULTUR 
OF INDIA 
. 
„XCEPTION TO GUNA AND VRIDDHI. 
[BK. I. CH. I. 84 
सिस्कृति मंत्राल 
सत्यमेव जयते 
place, when such an ardhadhâtuka (III. 4. 114) 
follows, which causes a portion of the root to be ted. 
This is an exception to sûtra 3. By that sûtra iks were to be unated or vriddhied and by sûtra VII. 3. 84, the root is to be gunated before all ardhadhâtuka terminations. All primary affixes, that are applied directly to roots in Sanskrit, are divided into two broad classes, called sârva dhâtuka and ardhadhâtuka. The affixes marked with an indicatory T (called fara ), and the conjugational affixes, such as fat, 7: &c., (called faç ) are sarvadhâtuka; all other affixes are called ârdhadhâtuka. 
Though by the general rule, VII. 3. 84, the root is to be gunated before ardhadhâtuka terminations, yet it is not to be so, before those affixes which cause the FIT 'lopping off or ellipses' of a portion or a member of the original dhậtu Thus the termination FEITA is a first person singular termination of the future tense ( ) and is an ardhadhâtuka termination; when this is added to root 'to excel' the offer becomes guņated and we have ir setia "I shall or will excel.” But in those cases where there is a lopa of the member of a root form, caused by an affix, there is no guņation. Thus in ACT: "a great cutter," the original root is al "to cut" which forms the Intensive verb sice. In forming the noun of agency from the verb FIGUET, an ardhadhâtuka suffix 
III. 1. 134, is added. Thus FIELU + 7. At this stage, by force of sâtra II. 4. 74. which declares that “before the affix TT (III. I. 134) the 3 of the Intensive verb must be suppressed," the ya is dropped and we have G T + T. Here by the general rule VII. 3. 84, the final 5 would have been gunated. But by virtue of the present sûtra, no guna takes place, be. cause here on account of the ardhadhâtuka affix y , a portion of the root, namely, a, has been elided ; therefore no guna takes place. Thus we have GOTT: "a great cutter." 
The word eg “root” has been used in the sútra, in order to indicate that the exception does not apply where there is an elision of an anubandha or of an affix. As in st+Ter=T + garrafaat. Here the indicatory letter 
has been elided, but that does not prevent gunation. Similarly in te the affix fat is added to the root frer "to injure." Thus fra+ (III. 2. 75.) =fo+ (1. 3. 2. and 3.) = fiq+. (VI. 1. 67) Here the affix ris elided, but nevertheless, the guna substitute must take place in four. Thus we have frytezia (VII. 3.86 and I. 1. 62)=7€ (VIII. 2. 39). 
The word ardhadhâtuka has been used to indicate that a sârvadha tuka affix which causes the elision of a portion of a root, does not prevent guna or vriddhi as in fretta, (Rig Veda IV. 58.3) "he roars much." +TE - (III. 1. 22). T+Fax = 0 +fa (II. 4. 74.). Here the sârvadhâtuka 
GURE 
GOVE 
GOVERNMENT 
v OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
ENT OF INDIA 
SR 1.CH. I. §. 5.) 
EXCEPTIONS TO GUNA AND VRIDDHI 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
रतसरकार 
affix fêtre causes the elision of 7, a portion of the root. The guna substitution however takes place, and we have TTTT+6+(VII. 3. 94)= rena, the augment being added by sûtra VII. 3. 94. 
The word "ikah” of the previous sûtra is understood in this sûtra also. The ik letters only are not gunated or vriddhied before such ârdhadhâtuka affixes; the other vowels may do so. Thus in as the equation is as follows:- +*T+FT + T+5 (VI. 4. 33). Here the ardhadhâtuka affix 
T has caused a portion of the root 2757, to be suppressed, vis., the letter has been elided. But nevertheless the T of 7 is vșiddhied before ? because o is not included in the pratyâhâra ik ; and the exception contained in the present sûtra only applies to the ik letters. So also TT+(11. 3.18)=15+T (VI. 4. 27.) =TT4: (VII. 2. 116. and VII. 3. 52). 
eft fan al ucifa il foram-fact-f57- (guagt, a) वृत्तिः॥ किनिमित्ते ये गुणवृद्धी प्राप्नुतस्ते न भवतः ॥ 
5. And that, which otherwise would have caused guna or vriddhi, does not do so, when it has an indica tory क् ग् or . 
Thus the past participle terminations and 49 are ardhadhâ tuka affixes, which would, by the general rule VII. 3. 84, have caused guņa, but as their indicatory letter at is , the real terminations being, and as they do not cause guņa. Therefore, when these terminations are added to a root, the ik of the root is not gunated. Thus with the root foto collect " we have Fa: ordert,, "to hear," a:, a t ; ft; "to fear" fra:, ftaar. 
Similarly the terminations #ug TH, T KITT, ST, , &c., are all rena terminations the indicatory letters of all being the real affixes being 7, CGTH, TH &c. &c. &c. Before these, the root is not gunated. Thus we have from y "to bear" yes, from fare "to pierce" TEIGTH. 
The terms rana &c., of this sûtra are in the locative or seventh case. The force of this case termination here is that of fara or cause, that is the guna or vriddhi which would otherwise have been caused, does not take place, if an affix is fea, fora, s . Thus all ardhadhâtuka and sarvadhâtuka affixes cause guņation of the final ik of the inflective base (VII. 3. 84.) Thus the Sârvadhâtuka affix 979 (T) in the following: 
+ 9 + 9 = 1+ + fare "he is.' Similarly sârvadhâtuka and ardhadhâtuka affixes cause the guna substitution of the short penulti mate ik of the inflective base (VII. 3. 85.) Thus Tv + TT + fag = arufcr. 
The general force of the locative case in an aphorism is to cause the operation directed, on the expression immediately preceding it (I. I. 66.) If the force of the locative case in the present sûtra were also that as 
MRE • GOVEA 
OVERNMENT 
TRY OF CULT 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
74914 
HE EXCEPTION TO GUNA AND VRIDDHI. 
[BK. I. CH. I. $. 5. 
176 
explained in I. 1. 66, then the interpretation would be this:--An affix having an indicatory k, g ori, would not cause the guna substitution of the vowel ik, immediately preceding it. The case of the penultimate short ik will not be covered by it. Then though the rule may apply to f+fa: "collected" it would not apply to fata+act; there would be nothing to bar the guna subs titution of the penultimate of fire. This however is prevented by explaining the locative as one of occasion" and thus far + 9 = PT: "broken." 
Similarly from the root is we have a word sot:'victorious,' in which the affix ग्रस्नु has an indicatory गू Thus जि + ग्रस्नु = जिष्णु : "victorious" (III. 2. 139), so also feTEJ : " durable," 
Similarly the affix, 75 is a fer affix, the real suffix being , the being merely indicatory. Therefore when yg is added to a root, there is no guņation or vriddhing. Thus we have from fere "to know'. fare: 
Similarly by I. 2. 4, all sârvadhâtuka affixes that are not marked by an indicatory g, are treated as fra. Thus the second person singular termi nation तस् is डिल , and we have चिनुत : “ they two collect,” similarly चिन्वन्ति, "they collect," " + = : "cleansed," qala" they cleanse." 
The phrase "when indicated by the term ik” is understood in this sûtra. The prohibition, therefore, applies to ik vowels only, and not to all vowels in general. Thus by III. I. 30, the root at“ to desire" takes the affix FUE; of this affix the letters 7 and are indicatory, the real affix is 7. The force of or is to cause vriddhi (VII. 2. 116). The indicatory does not prevent such vriddhi, as the letter of an is not included in ik. Thus we have + = + =antha "he desires." 
According to the wish of the author of the Mahâbhâshya, the verb * optionally takes vriddhi, before kit or nit affixes beginning with a vowel. As tarea or Transfer "they rub." Here in this sûtra there is prohibition of the guņa of the short penultimate ik also. 
The indicatory of the verbal tense affixes i.e., G , For , , , is an exception to this rule of fg . This is an inference deduced from III. 4. 104 which declares " when the sense is that of benediction, then the augment af of fais as if it were distinguished by an indicatory ." There would have been no necessity of making at a fer, if fere were a fier, but the very fact of making it a fan indicates by implication or is 
* that the final of AS, AC &c, does not make these tense affixes জিন, Thus in কাজ or Imperfect tense we have স্মলিন “ he collected” (মন্দি 
+ 7 = + 7 = 1 + 7 = 1979.). 
ut adat nen verfat u aat-ci (quarta) fe: # facutrzy tune a &# 
IRE 
GOVE 
VERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
संस्कृति मंत्राल 
BK. I. CH. I. $ 6, 7.] 
SANYOGA DEFINED. 
2154 . 
6. Theguna and vriddhi substitutions, which would otherwise have presented themselves, do not however come, in the place of the vowels of dîdhi'to shine,' and vevî' to go,' and of the augment called a. 
The roots eft and at never take the guna or vriddhi substitutions under ordinary circumstances. Thus the affix oge generally causes vșiddhi subs titution when added to any root; and so the affix e causes guņa. But these affixes when applied to the verbs didhi and vevî, never cause vriddhi or guna substitution. As preret + ac = tretet + T (VII. I. I) = fruch: (VI. 1.77). So also great + rur = tréreft + T (VII. 1. I) = TEETH. Similarly from at we have shown and grace . In the Vedas, however, these verbs take guņa. Thus terug (Rig Ved. X. 98. 7), and steny: (Rig Ved. V. 40.5). These two verbs are confined generally to the Vedic literature, and the present rule therefore, seems to be an unnecessary prohibition; as they take guņa in spite of such prohibition. 
Of the augment the real affix is F. In the general tenses, it is added to certain terminations beginning with consonants of the art class, i.e., all consonants except I (VII. 2. 35). Thus the future termination, first person, singular is FTITAT ; this when added to the root ay " to move" requires an intermediate 5, and thus we have the form afTEETTA, I shall walk.' This g is never gunated or vriddhied, though according to the general rule, coming before an ârdhadhâtuka termination, it ought to have been gunated. 
The augment , could under no circumstances have taken vriddhi, the prohibition therefore, is in the case of the guņa substitute of . 
EST SHITT: para: 90 UGIH EF:, Taar:, Fra: वृत्तिः । भिन्नजातीयैर जूभिरव्यवहिताःशिलष्टाचारिता हलः संयोग संज्ञा भवन्ति समुदायः aft 11 
7. Consonants unseparated by a vowel are called conjunct consonants. 
This defines the word sanyoga. The sûtra consists of three words, Hi, the plural of the pratyâhâra , denoting all the consonants, Wert: means “without any separation or space" and TTT: which is the word defined, and means "conjunct consonants.' So that the stra means, conjunct consonants are those consonants between which there is no heterogeneous separating vowel and which are pronounced jointly, such as 
in the word gere:, * cock. The word "sanyoga" applies to the whole of the conjunct consonants jointly and not to them separately. The plural number shows that the conjunction may be of two or more consonants. 
URE - GOVE 
GOVERNMEN 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
OF INDIA 
ANUNASIKA DEFINED. 
[BK. I. CH. I. 9. 8. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
Why do we say " consonant"? If two vowels come together they will not be called " sanyoga". Thus was “a sieve umbrella," the two vowels and have come together unseparated by any consonant; yet they are not called sanyoga, otherwise the final 3 would have been rejected by VIII 2. 23" there is elision of the final of that pada which ends in a sanyoga letter." Why do we say "unseparated by a vowel"? If consonants separated by a vowel were also called sanyoga, then in the sentence Taa TEH, the syllable TTT would be called sanyoga, and by VIII. 2. 29, the initial # would be elided. 
मुखनासिकावचनो ऽनुनासिकः ॥८॥ पदानि ॥ मुख-नासिका. 297, taifa : 1 
वृत्तिः। मुखसहिता नासिका मुखनासिका, तया य उच्चार्यते वर्ण: सोज्नुनासिकसंज्ञो भवति । 
8. That which is pronounced by the nose along with the mouth is called Anunásika or nasal. 
This defines the word anunâsika. The sûtra consists of four words मुख "mouth" नासिका " nose" वचनः " utterance or pronunciation and अनुनासिकः u nasals." Though the words 0 + TTHCET (II. 4. 2) will by the rule of com position form मुखनासिकं and not मुखनासिका, yet the latter form might be held to be an irregularity; or the phrase Jet raga may be regarded as a compound of geraten + 999, the word avachana meaning "partial utterance. That is a letter partially uttered by the nose and partially by the mouth would be called anunâsika. Therefore the nasals are those letters which are pronounced from two organs or places, i.e., the mouth and the nose. The pure nasal is anusvâra, while anunasikas are different from this, in as much as, that in pronouncing these, the breath passes through the nose and the mouth. 
The vowels are generally so nasalised. If, instead of emitting the vowel sound freely through the mouth, we allow the velum pendulum to drop and the air to vibrate through the cavities which connect the nose with the pharynx, we hear the nasal vowels (anunasika).' Thus 31. 1. In the Vedas, the particle re is anunâsika. As HT T: (Rig Veda. V. 48. 1), so also af fra stafit i sega (Rig Ved. VIII. 67. 11). 
The consonants , 37, IT, and T are also anunâsika. Thus is pronounced by the throat along with the nose, by the palate and nose, u by the upper palate and nose; Tby the teeth and nose, and by the lip and nose. 
The semi-vowels 3, 4 and at are also nasalised and are then called anunasika. The term anunâsika is used in sâtra V.1. 126 &c. 
Why have we used the word " by the mouth"? This definition will not include anusvåra or the pure nasal, which is pronounced wholly through 
URE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
ov OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
उस्कृति मंत्रालय 
BRI, CH. I. $ 9] 
SAVARNA LETTERS. 
3 
277 
the nose. Why have we used the word " by the nose"? In order to exclude the consonants a, a, a, 7, T &c. &c., which are pronounced wholly and solely through the mouth. 
Terenuri Fava ugn og fan Toy-37TR-Tah, Fatau वृत्तिः॥ तुल्य प्रास्ये प्रयत्नो यस्य वर्णस्य येन वर्णेन सह स समानजातीयं प्रति सवर्णसंज्ञो yarat II 
Tildren 11 *errett: TURATI THOT * | 
9. Those whose place of utterance and effort are equal are called savarna or homogeneous letters. 
This defines the word savarņa or a homogeneous letter. The sutra consists of four words :- "equal or similar," STIET "mouth or place of pronunciation," TTT" effort" and TU" words of the same class." 
The Tree or places or portions of the mouth by contact with which various sounds are formed are chiefly the following :-1. Fils "throat" 2.' ei palate,' 3. , 'head,' 4. Fra: 'teeth,' 5. Tret lips,' 6. treat' nose.' 
The tea or quality or effort is of two sorts primarily, retet: ''inter nal" and aren: "external." The first is again sub-divided into five parts: 
1. Egy or complete contact of the organs. The twenty-five letters from a to #belong to this class. In pronouncing these there is a complete contact of the root of the tongue with the various places, such as throat, palate, dome of the palate, teeth and lip. 
2. STEDET or slight contact. The letters J, T, 7, 9 belong to this class of contacts. "In pronouncing these semi-vowels the two organs, the active and passive, which are necessary for the production of all consonantal noises, are not allowed to touch each other, but only to approach." 
3. faza or complete opening. The vowels belong to this class. 
4. $7 raga or slight opening. The letters T, 7, 8, 5 belong to this class. Some however place the vowels and sT &c., into one group and call them all vivrita. 
5. Tag or contracted. In actual use, the organ in the enunciation of the short or is contracted but it is considered to be open only, as in the case of the other vowels, when the vowel is in the state of taking part in some operation of grammar. 
The âbhyantara prayatna is the mode of articulation preparatory to the utterance of the sound, the bâhya-prayatna is the mode of articulation at the close of the utterance of the sound. 
The division of letters according to abhyantra prayatna has been already given. By that we get, 1. the sparsa or mute letters, 2. the antastha or intermediate between sparsas and ushmans, or semi-vowel or 
GOVERNMENT 
TURE - Goi 
STRY OF CU 
MINISTRU 
NT OF INDIA 
स्कृति मंत्रालय 
SAVARNA LETTERS. 
BK. I: CH. 1. $ 9: 
7777 
liquid letters, 3. the svaras or vowels or vivrita letters, 4. the ushmans or sibilants or flatus letters. 
The division of letters according to bâhya prayatna gives us first surds or aghosha letters, 2. sonants or ghosha letters. The aghosha are also called svdsa letters, the ghoshas are called nâda letters. 
The second division of letters according to bâhya prayatna is into; 1. Aspirated (mahậprâna). 2. Unaspirated (alpaprapa). 
The vowel y has eighteen forms. The acute # (udâtta), grave (anudatta) and circumflexed (svarita). Each one of these three may be nasalised (anunâsika), or not (niranunâsika). 
Then lastly everyone of these six may be short, long, or prolated. Thus:-37, 37, s', 3*, s*, *, 3T, 3T, sat, sit, sit, Át, 379, 37a, sta, sia, 
Similarly the letters y, and have also eighteen forms. The letter has no long form; it has therefore 12 modifications. The diphthongs have no short forms, they have therefore, only 12 forms. The antastha or semi-vowels with the exception of have two forms each viz., nasalised and un-nasalised. The semi-vowels have no homogeneous letters corresponding to them. All letters of a varga or 'class' are homogeneous to each other. 
Thus then the homogeneous or savarna letters must satisfy two condi tions before they could be called savarna. First, their place of pronunciation or TT must be the same. Secondly their tea or quality must be equal. If one condition be present and the other be absent, there can be no savarna-hood. Thus Tand sy are both palatals, their street or place of pro nunciation being a palate,' but still they are not savarna, because their suar is different, the gra of being sprishta and that of being vivrita. 
Similarly and though their yua is the same i.e., sprishta, yet their e being different, one being guttural and the other palatal, are not savarna. 
There is exception to this rule in the case of and , which though having different stear are still called savarna by virtue of the vârttika of Katyâyana; "the homogeneousness of and a, one with another, should be stated." Thus it + TT:= grant ; here and a have coalesced into long by rules of sandhi, on the assumption that they are savarna letters. 
The word savarpa occurs in sûtras like : U : (VI. 1. 101). 
Why do we say "the place of pronunciation"? So that there may not be homogeneous relationship between tea and q whose prayatna is the same but whose âsya is different. What is the harm if we make them savarna? Then in words like an and the q would be elided, if it be held homo geneous with a, by VIII. 4. 65, " there is optional elision of t, preceded by a consonant, when a homogeneous ar follows." 
URE · GOVE 
STRY OF CUL 
MINISTRY 
NMENT OF IN 
OF INDIA 
BR. 1.CH. I. $ 10, 11 ] 
PRAGRIHYA DEFINED.. 
04.17 
रल सरकार 
Why do we say "effort"? That there may be no homogeneity between and the palatals, and u and T, whose organ of pronunciation is the same, but whose prayatna is different. What harm if it be so ? Then in eit aid, the it would be elided before a by the rule already referred to, VIII. 4.65. 
ATT MET II 90 Fifa 11 a, 77er, ( gaun ) 11 वृत्तिः । तुल्यास्य प्रयत्नावपि अजूझनौ परस्परं सवर्णसंज्ञो न भवतः ॥ 
10. There is however no homogeneity between vowels and consonants, though their place and effort be equal. 
This sûtra lays down an exception to the former sûtra. There can be no homogeneity or savarna relationship between vowels and consonants, though their area and qua may be the same. Thus & and st have the same STT namely ara 'palate,' and the same gata : namely vivrita, but still they are not to be called savarna. Thus in xsara, Eritrai &c., the letters and in the first example, and g and st in the second not being homogeneous letters; there is no combination or sandhi, which would otherwise have taken place. 
Similarly if at and 5 be held homogeneous, then f@+ TU (IV. 3. 53)=9T+TT (VI. 4. 148 ; here it would be elided by VI. 4. 148, but it is not so and we have IT: "belonging to vipâsâ or born therein." So also in AE 
ox-skin," the & would have been omitted, if held homogeneous with T. 
seurata JR 1 99 ogla - - fa , IN 
वृत्तिः ।। ईतू जतू एतू इत्येवमन्तं द्विवचनं शब्दरूपं प्रगृह्य संशं भवति ।। 
11. A dual case affix ending in for 5 or tis called Pragrihya, or excepted vowels which do not ad mit of sandhi or conjunction. 
As a general rule, Sanskrit allows of no hiatus in a sentence. If a word ends in a vowel, and the next word begins with a vowel, the two vowels coalesce, according to certain rules. This is called sandhi. But pragřihyas are exceptions to this sandhi," they are certain terminations, the final vowels of which are not liable to any sandhi rules." (VI. 1. 125). This sûtra gives three of these terminations, viz., the duals of nouns or verbs ending in (T), (5), org (r). Thus:- Tir "these two poets," so also वायू इति "two winds;" माले इति “ these two garlands." पचेते इति “ they two cook" resta "you two cook." Here according to the general rule of sandhi, the final g of act and the initial of ought to have coalesced into an , but it is not so, because he is the nominative dual of me 
ORE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
UT OF INDIA 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
PRAGRIHYA. 
[BK. I. CH. I. § 12,13. 
421679. 
472 
Why do we say ending in i, u and e? Because when the dual ends in any other vowel this rule will not apply. As Fit + TT= TT," these two trees" (VI. 1.78). Of course it follows from the definition, that $, 5, or of the dual number only are pragřihya; if these vowels terminate any other num ber they will not be pragřihya but will follow the general rule of sandhi, as Earé (1. .) + 7 = apareert," the girl is here" (VI. 1. 77). 
Várt: The prohibition of fra &c., should be stated in treating of the pragrihya nature of $, &c. Thus Hoft (two gems) + 7 = Hafra" like two gems." So also errára "like a couple," a "like man and wife," TETET " like heaven and earth.” Some say that this vârtika is unneccessary. Because the final member of the above words is not ya, but the particle only; which has the same meaning as iva. 
Carava 92 llugija u 07ça, #ra, ( a nie ) वृत्तिः।। अरसः सम्बन्धी यो मकारस्तस्मातू पर ईदूदेतः प्रगृह्य संज्ञा भवन्ति ।। 
12. The same letters) after the Tof the pro noun 79 are Pragrihya. 
In the pronoun , the dual termination in §, 5 ore will be pra grihya by force of the last sûtra, but the present sûtra makes this addition, that in the case of , all terminations ending in , 5 ore and preceded by #, of whatever number they may be, will be pragrihya. As a matter of fact, there are only two such terminations satisfying the above conditions name ly saft and . The rule may therefore be put in the following words of Dr. Max Muller:-"The terminations of fÁr and are nom. plur. masc. and nom. dual of the pronoun TT are pragrihya." As ÁTT: "Those horses," and ra. There is no example of the word adas ending in E. 
Why do we say of the word adas"? The letters & F, T following after the of any other word will not be pragrihya. As mat + 7 = 1 “this sami tree." 
Why do we say "after the letter "? Because in the example TI + = 8 T,"those here," the preceded not by but by the ch of an (V. 3. 71) is not pragrihya, which it would have been by the influence of shtra II, which includes E as well as and 5, and from which the word dual is not supplied here, else this rule would be useless. 
at I 93 of us. ( T ) u T: I taa ya TG 
13. The affixit, (the Vedic substitute of the case-affixes), is a pragrihya. 
In the Vedic Sanskrit, the declesion of nouns sometimes differs some what from the ordinary Sanskrit. One of the peculiar Vedic terrainations, which 
URE - GOVE 
GOVERNMENT 
MINISTRY OF 
ENT OF INDIA 
177777 
EK. 1. CH. I. $ 14.] 
PRAGRIHYA. 4.47** replace the ordinary declensional terminations is called (VII. 1. 39.) 
Thus TÀFITTEETAT. 
Of this substitute Î, the initial sy is indicatory, the real suffix being T. This final is a pragļihya. 
In the sacred literature there is only one example of this pragřihya, as given above; while in imitation of this, we have in secular writing phrases as, cigra, y gra, À fa &c. 
faara (TATE: 198 ugifer fagra: , 937, tagi ( ) 11 
वृत्तिः ॥ एकश्वासावच एकाचू निपातो य एकाचू पाडूजितः स प्रगृह्यसंज्ञो भवति ।। 
14. A. particle I. 4. 56 consisting of a single vowel, with the exception of the particle 7e is a Pra grihya. 
This sûtra consists of three words :- ra: "particle," part "con sisting of one vowel," "with the exception of 16." 
All such particles technically called nipata (I. 4. 56) which con sist of a simple vowel without any consonant, are pragrihya and therefore are not liable to the rules of sandhi. As 55. "Oh, Indra" EFTE" O arise." 
It follows from the above definition that those nipatas which consist of two or more letters, vowel and consonant, are not pragrihya, e. g. sin rrah वाचमीरय. 
Is which is not a pragrihya, has four significations: As a diminutive particle when joined to adjectives and nouns, as A+ TUTA = UTE"little hot, tepid" (2) as a prefix to verbs, it expresses the senses of "near" "nearto," and with verbs of "motion," "taking" &c., it shows the reverse of the action, as TT'to go,' r 'to come;' TT +re=r@, (3) as showing the limit inceptive ( 
F ) "from," "ever since," as #7: "ever since his birth," (4) as showing the limit exclusive (Hier), "till" "until" as T + TUTTE Tuerra," until the reading begins." When the particle T has not any one of the above four senses and is used in expressing regret &c., it is a pragrihya, as TT fènoireita "Ah! such there once was," s TA FÊ. “Oh! do you think so." 
The word part in this aphorism has a peculiar meaning. It means "consisting of one vowel and nothing else." In other words, the vowels them selves when used as farrat, e. g. ,, &c. But the term wory has a wider signification than that given to it in this sûtra. It means "a word or a portion of a word consisting of one vowel which can be pronounced at once"-in other words This means a "syllable.” In that sense the words fra &c., will also be an, but not so here. Therefore the rule of sandhi will apply URE - GOVE 
GOVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
ENT OF INDIA 
PRAGRIHYA. 
[BK. I. CH. I. § 15 T8 18. 
177 2231 
to them, thus i arrattat. See sûntra VI. 1. I. where the word genre means a monosyllable. 
Why do we say " a nipâta ?" Because if the single vowel is not a par ticle, but something else, an affix &c., then it will not be a pragrihya, as the final #in Tar" he did," is the affix of third person perfect tense, and is liable to sandhi ; as चकारान. 
sita il gigi ucifa u sita, ( ) वात्तः ॥ ओदन्तो यो निपातः स प्रगृह्य संज्ञोभवति ॥ 
15. The final 7 of a particle is a pragrih ya. This sûtra consists of one word Tia the final a is a surplusage. The words "pragrihya" and "nipâta" are to be supplied from the preceding sâtras to complete the sense. The meaning is that those particles which end in ei though consisting of several letters, are pragrihya. As TET TOTE"Halloo, go away." 
सम्बुद्धौ शाकल्यस्येतावना ॥१६॥ पदानि ॥ सम्बुद्धी, शाकल्यस्य, at, paid, (TE ) 
वृत्तिः । सम्बुद्धि निमित्तो य ओकारः स शाकल्यस्याचार्यस्य मतेन प्रगृह्य संज्ञो भवति , इति शब्दे ऽनार्षे अवैदिक परतः ॥ 
16. The final Ti of the vocative singular (II. 3. 49) before the word sa according to Sâkalya, in secular or non-vedic literature, is pragrihya. 
This sûtra gives the opinion of the Rishi Sakalya, so that it is an optional rule. Thus both forms arreta (formed according to the general rule of sandhi) and areigre (where jr is pragrihya) are correct. 
In ârsha literature the sandhi is imperative, not optional, as gar TT ब्रह्मबन्धवित्यब्रवीत् . 
The mention of the name of any sage, such as that of Såkalya in this sûtra, serves generally one of the two purposes :-(1) either it makes the rule an optional one, vibhâshârtham, or (2) the mention is merely for the sake of showing respect to the particular sage, the rule would have stood as well without such mention ; pujártham, as the word Kâsyapa in sûtra I. 2. 25. 
: n 99 usta u 4: , ( ITEM TRUOTTA ) वृतिः ॥ उञः प्रगृह्य संज्ञा भवति इतो शाकल्यस्याचार्यस्य मतेन ॥ 
17. The particle on before iti, according to Sakalya is a Pragrihya. 
This sátra consists of the single word meaning . According to the same Rishi Sakalya, is a pragrihya, before ma, in modern Sanskrit. This is also an optional rule. Thus or fara 
TURE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
NISTRY OF C 
ENT OF INDIA 
• 
BEI: CH. I. $ 18, 19.] 
PRAGRIHYA. 
u 96 # agiftu , ( Isel, 93: , MEH ) वृत्तिः ॥ उन इतावनार्षे ॐ इत्ययमादेशो भवति दीघोऽनुनासिकः शाकल्यस्य मतेन प्रगृह्य FETHN 11 
18. The particle 8 replaces a in non-vedic literature, and it is a pragrihya in the opinion of Sakalya. 
Before the word gra the word gs is replaced sometimes by the long nasal 4. Thus $ + gre = $ gre or safe. 
In some authorities the sâtras 17 and 18 form but one søtra, and then it is divided by the method of yoga-vibhága, the division of a single søtra into two separate sûtras having two distinct rules. 
cat u arrón gę u aarfa fa-rat, , unit-up वृत्तिः ॥ईदन्तसूदन्तञ्च शब्द रूपं सधन्यर्थे वर्तमान प्रगृहासंज्ञं भवति । 
19. The final fand 5 of words giving the sense of the locative case are pragrihya. 
This sûtra finds its scope in the Vedic literature generally. There is a satra (VII. 1. 39) which declares that in the Vedic Sanskrit, the case-affixes sup are often replaced either by (1. s.), or are altogether elided, or they are changed into a letter homogeneous with the prior letter, or TT, or it, or st, or 21, or gr, or GT, or ry, or or takes their place." Let us take the example where a case-affix is changed into a letter homogeneous with the prior. Thus the case-affix of the seventh case is f (T). In forming the 7. s. of I "body," we have 1+5. The will be changed into a homogeneous letter with 3 and we have तनू+ऊ-तनू " in the body," as, अध्यस्यां मामकीतनू (for मामक्यां तन्वां). This is the Vedic form, the secular form being at. Similarly air +3=ret "on the Gauri," as arī ir grupa: (Rig Veda IX. 12. 3). It is in such cases, therefore, that the long í and are used in the sense of locative, and are pragrihya. 
It is only long i and i which are pragrihya, and not any other vowel, though used in the sense of locative. Thus by the same aphorism (VII. 1. 39) da (a) may be employed to denote the seventh case-affix. Thus far + F 
+37=gtar in the fire,' as, fa: a atrama u Gare racirt aratat (Rig Veda V. 37. 5). Here your though in the locative case, its final is not pragrihya. Therefore eT+re = a. 
The & and 5 must be of the 7th case. Therefore afa + ET (3rd s.) = 
(letter homogeneous with the prior) =a 'with wisdom'. Here i is in the sense of the instrumental case and is not pragrihya. Thus it + grat = TOIT 
URE - GOV. 
OVERNMENT 
FCULTURE 
JISTRY OF CU 
MINISTA 
NT OF INDIA 
GHU DEFINED. 
[BK. I. CH. I. $ 20, 21. 
सरकार 
The word set is used in the aphorism, in order to exclude the appli cation of this rule to cases like the following. Thus in forming the compound of ac " in the well" and "horse," the case-affix is elided, and we get erit + 1. Here, no doubt, the word art is in the locative case, though the case-affix is elided; but we cannot say that the long $ of vâpî has the sense of the locative. Here, therefore, we shall have sandhi; as, Trat:" the horse near the well." In other words, the present aphorism is not to apply to the final for of words standing as the prior member of a compound term (pûrva-pada); for words like Tüt &c., in the above example, can never, by them. selves and alone, denote the locative case; while words like fret, formed in the way described already, give the sense of the locative, even alone, though they be placed anywhere in a sentence. 
TITETETT I RI açta II GT, ET, , grau वृत्तिः॥ रूपाश्चत्वारोधातयो धारूपौ चहौ, दाब्दैपी वर्जयित्वा घुसंज्ञका भवन्ति ।। 
20. The verbs having the form of dà 'to give' and dha 'to place,' are called ghu. 
This defines the word ghu. Four verbs have the form of er, or assume it by the application of VI. 1. 45, and two, of er; they are called y. The ghu verbs have certain peculiarities of conjugation to be described hereafter. 
The e verbs are the following:-GET" to give," as gitreeria ; ETT "to give," as, prae; er "to cut," as, g aia; "to pity"as, siurrea, GyT "to place" as fruta, to "feed "as, gitara 
In the above examples, because of the verbs being y, the 7 of ra is changed into a by VIII. 4. 17. 
Similarly ETT "to cut and T " to clean" not being called y, rules VII. 4. 46 and 47 do not apply to them. Thus i + = grå 'what is cut,' as, yra aft :. So also tarETE"washed" as, Tata "a bright face." But wither" to give," &c. ET + i =?? +7 (VII. 4. 46) = :"given;" so also we have 9+ + 7 = (VII. 4. 47). The word y occurs in sûtra VI. 4. 66, &c. The word dåp includes also daip by the paribhâshân given under III. 4. 19, # changed into or by VI. 1. 45. 
eta fac u 29 l actie Il Sifcia-da, #TEHTII T : ! terfit T Tafenarra ante para 11 
21. An operation should be performed on a single letter, as upon an initial or upon a final. 
This is an atidesa sútra and consists of four words, the beginning," T "end," "like, a "in one;" the literal translation being "beginning is end-like in one." The affixa has the force of the locative, and the 
REGOVE. 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
कृति मंत्रालय 
99 
BK. I CH. I. $ 22, 23. ] 
GHA DEFINED 
4.4173 
meaning is "on the beginning," and "on the end," i.e., let an operation be performed on a single letter, as upon an initial or upon a final. Thus by III. 7. 3. an affix has udatta or acute accent on its initial vowel. Thus the affix tavya has accent on the first T, and we have a lot. But when an affix consists of a single vowel, it is itself the beginning and the end, and, as such, will have the accent. As in 1994 aupagavam the last á has the accent, which a represents the affix 77. 
Similarly, by VII. 3. 102, the final of a base ending in short is lengthened before a case-affix beginning with a consonant of a class. Thus राम+भ्याम् रामाभ्याम्. This rule will apply when the word consists of one letter only, and that letter is a short . Thus T + = para " by those two." Here it must not be objected that the solitary is initial, and cannot be final. 
Why do we say " in one"? If a word consists of more than one letter, then the beginning is not like the end. Thus in the word trap the initial short is not like the final long Ti; otherwise erit would get the name of T (I. 1. 73), and the secondary derivative from TTT would be formed by the affix 5 (IV. 2. 114). But this is not so, the affix Tris employed in stead, and the form is FhHT:. 
athaat : 13 agifall ata-anat, : 1 TfT: 1) FTTTTT chat perair et FETT 1:11 
22. The affixes tarap and tamap are called f. This sûtra defines e affixes. They are two, and 7, the q in them being ca. The special use of these affixes will be described later on. These affixes are useful in forming the comparative and the superlative degrees respectively of adjectives, adverbs, &c. The base undergoes certain changes before these terminations, which will be treated of in its proper place. 
Thus the words amaritatt and Aftar are formed by adding the affixes art and an to the word or a girl,' whose long is shortened before these affixes by sûtra 43 of the third chapter of the 6th Book. 
बहुगणवतुडति संख्या ॥ २३॥ पदानि ।। बहु-गण-वतु डति, FUT 
वृत्तिः॥ बहुगणवतुति इत्येते संख्यासज्ञा भवन्ति ।। 
* 
T ry Trusteet: HELST weira 6, TT fazer 
23. The words bahu 'many,' gana 'class,' and the words ending in the afix vatu (V. 2. 39), and dati (V. 2. 41) are called numerals (sankhya). 
URE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
TRY OF CULT 
MINISTRY 
AT OF INDIA 
SANKHYA. 
[BK. I. CH. I. $123 
751 
74.17 
w 
This sůtra defines the word sankhya, or numeral. 
These are certain words, besides the ordinary numerals, having some peculiarity of declension. The words like af many, and to 'class', and those that have the affixes ata and are after them, belong to this class. The letters 
and of ag and ca are 7, or indicatory, the actual affixes being at and stra. 
The word sankhya means numerals;" and this class contains, among others, the Sanskrit numerals. The words formed by adding 7 are generally compound pronouns, e.g. तावत "so much," यावत् "as much," एतावत् "so much," similarly words formed by the affix erat, e.g. mira" how many," arat * so many," sra as many." 
Thus बहु+कृत्वसुचूV. 4. 17)= बहुकृत्वः “many times' the affix कृस्वसुचू being added only to sankhyâ words in the sense of the repetition of the action. So also ae + UT (V. 3. 42)=afur" in many ways." Here also the affix up is added by virtue of a being a sankhya. Similarly agen: (V. 1. 22) "purchased for a big sum," TET: (V. 4.43)"manifold." So also turca:, TUYT, TUT, TUST: ; so also attract: , araer, 1925: ; filterica: , affat , : , 
T:. 
When the words 7 and TU mean "abundance” and “multi tude” they are not sankhya. It is only when they are expressive of numbers, that they get the designation of sankhyâ. The necessity of defining sarkhya arose in order to exclude such words as, tie "numerous," &c., which though they express numbers, are not to be treated as "numerals," technically so called. 
Vart:--The word "half” when standing as a first term in a com pound number which takes an affix giving the sense of an ordinal, gets the designation of sankhyâ, for the purposes of the application of the rules of samasa and of the affix . The ordinal affixes or púrana pratyayas are like (V. 2.48), (V. 2. 49), (V. 2. 51), &c. Thus faire : "eleventh,' MH: "fifth," sau "fourth," &c. Similarly we have TTT: "purchased for 43 baskets" (a dvigu). Here +1H (an ordinal)= T, a bahuvrihi compound meaning 41, vis., that in which half is the fifth term. gad: 14:afra: == : the taddhita affixes 35 and 3 required by V. 1. 19 and 26 being elided by V. 1. 28. 
Here, there is compounding (dvigu) by taking up as a sankhyâ, and then applying sûtra II. I. 51. The samâsa here is in the sense of taddhita, and this compounding is only possible by rules (II. 1. 50 and 51), when he gets the appellation of sankhya. Having got this name, it forms dvigu compound in the sense of the taddhita affixes i and 354 (V. 1. 26). The word to takes both these affixes in the sense of being 
ORE 
GOVA 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
T OF INDIA 
क्रांति मंत्रा 
Bk. ICH. I. $ 24, 25.] 
SHAT. 
21 
bought with." Thus sira and frere both mean "bought with a measure called sürpa." In the above compound of yeary: the sense is that of the above-named taddhita; but the affixes have been elided by V. 1. 28 after dvigu compounds. So also we have $27: by applying the affix Ext. For these two purposes, namely samasa and the application of at, compounds of ardha, like ardha-pañchama are treated as sankhya. 
tirat ac ligu actfall 7-07-377877, uc, (eat) a वृत्तिः॥ षकारान्ता नकारान्ता च या संख्या सा षद्संज्ञा भवति ।। 
24. The Sankhyâs having tort as their final are called shat. 
This sûtra defines the term which is a subdivision of the larger group sankhya. Those sankhyâs which end in g or are called . The word sankhyâ is understood in this sûtra, because the word curat is in the feminine gender, showing that it qualifies sankhyâ which is also feminine. 
The numerals that end in 9 or 7 are six, namely 19'five,' te 'six,' 1, seven,' T 'eight,' 777'nine,' FITT'ten.' 
It is one of the peculiarities of a words that they lose their nomina tive and accusative plural terminations (VII. I. 22). Thus fare card, पंच गच्छन्ति । 
The word me in the sûtra shows that the letters y and I must be aupadesika i.e., must belong to the words as originally enunciated and not added afterwards as affix &c. Thus in manâ 'hundreds, Faro 'thousands,' 
Tip of eights' the at is not radical, but an augment, and therefore they are not ve and the nominative and accusative plural terminations are not elided; as art + 5 = gtaifa &c. 
fall utfall efa, , (ant, az ) TT: 11 gear CET ET TETETT para II 
25. And the sankhyâs ending with the affix dati are called shat. 
This sûtra enlarges the scope of the definition of by including in it, words formed by ea. By sûtra 22, words in an are already san. khyâ; by this they are also ge. Therefore we have it total, how many are reading,' ora 957 see how many. Here arfer has lost its plural termina tion by VII. 1. 22. 
तत्तवतू निष्ठा ॥२६॥ पदानित-क्तवतू, निष्ठा ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ कच क्तवतुमकक्तवतू प्रत्ययो निष्ठासंज्ञौ भवतः ।। 
26. The affixes kta and ktavatu are called 
Nishtha. 
TURE 
GOVER 
OVERNMENT 
STRY OF C 
MINISTA 
NT OF INDIA 
• संस्कृति मंत्रा 
NISHTHA. 
[BK. I. CH. I. $ 20, 242 
सरकार 
.47721 
.'" 
This defines the nishtha affixes, that is to say, the affixes of the past participle. The actual affixes are a, ara, the chi and being indicatory. They being ang are liable to all the rules applicable to fara affixes, such as rule 1. 1.5. Thus we have, :, TT, 77, art. 
The force of the indicatory 3 in ktavatu is, by IV. 1. 6, to indicate that in forming the feminine of nouns ending in an affix having an indicatory vowel of ûk pratyahára (T, , ), the affix it () must be added. Thus 
ata (masc.), ha (fem.). The word nishthâ occurs in sûtra VII. 2. 14. 
gatetra Herrafa 139 11 OCI I Fa- tfr, arafan 
वृत्ति: ॥ सर्वशब्द आदियेषां तानीमानि सर्वादीनि सर्वनामसंज्ञानि भवन्ति ।। 
27. The words sarva, 'all,' and the rest are called sarvanâma or pronouns. 
This defines sarvanâma or pronominals. To know what are the other words comprised in the phrase "and the rest' we must refer to Pânini's Ganapatha where a list of all groups referred to in the sûtras, is given. Thus we know from it, that the following are sarvanâma: 
all,' 'all,' 'two,' 374 both,' words formed by the affix 34T such as a 'which of two,' words formed by the affix ah as a 'which of many,' e 'other,' au 'either,' gy 'other,' another,' 'other,' नेम ' half,' सम 'all,' सिम 'whole,' त्यत् 'he, she, it,' त 'he, she, it, यद 
who,'एत 'this,' इदमू 'it,' अदसू "that,' एक 'one,' हि "two,' युष्मद 'you,' अस्म 'I,' 2799 'you,' fan 'what.' So also e' east,''prior,' qe subsequent,' a 
west or posterior,' THU 'south or right,' TIT 'north or inferior, subsequent, 
TT other or inferior,' r 'west or inferior,' are sarvanâmas when they im ply a relation in time or place, as shown above, and not when they are names. So also 17 when it does not mean a 'kinsman or a treasure, but means 'own.' So also eat when it means 'outer,' or 'an under or lower 
garment' is a sarvanâma. 
There are certain peculiarities in the declension of sarvanâma words. Thus though ending in , is not declined like T which also ends in , the plural of being that of Fr being :. Similarly the dative singular T a r; the abl. sing. ETIT, ATT ; the loc. sing. 7, ent; the Gen. pl. 
TETUR, Art &c. 
The compounds (with certain exceptions) ending in these words are also sarvanâmas. The word as 'both' is always used in the dual number as 
är, pur The object of its being inserted in the list of pronominals, ( whilst its declension does not differ from that of t), is its taking the augment are (V.3.70) which it could not have taken, if it were not a pronominal 
URE • GOVA 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
B 
. ch. 1. & 28] 
SARVANAMA. 
94 
रत सरकार 
as garant. Another object gained by its being so called, is the application of II. 3. 27, by which a pronominal may take the case-affix of the 3rd case or the 6th case in denoting cause. 
There are two ay in the above list, namely can anda, having the same meaning, and both ending in . But the final of one is udâtta, and of the other anudatta. Some give one wa only and not the other, and say that both have anudâtta accent. The word ay is a sarvanâma, when it is synonymous with the word pre 'all,' and not when it means "equality.' When it has the latter sense of 'equality,' it is declined like 7 i.e. like ordinary words ending in T, as Panini himself indicates in I. 3. 10, where he uses the regular genitive plural Tur, meaning among or of equals. As a pronominal the genitive plural would have been समेषाम् . 
The above words sarva &c. are not to be treated as pronouns when they are used as appellatives. For example, if we be the name of a person then it will be declined like ordinary nouns, as are cre give to Sarva (a person'). Here the dative singular is regularly formed. Similarly when these words are so compounded with others as to lose their original independent character, namely when they are Tata, they are not treated as sarvanama, but follow the regular declension, as fara ere give to (him who is, above all.' Here in the compound Above-all'or Supreme Being,' the word 
a loses its independent character and defines and determines the sense of another word. Fuller explanation of the word upasarjana will be given later on in I. 2. 43. This term #fant is an UHET that is a term the appli cation of which accords with its meaning. 
fahar foarte agaikt u 368 UT I TWAINT, fes#rê, agatat, ( Fietra, para ) 
वृत्तिः॥ दिशां समासो दिक्समासो दिगुपदिष्टे समासे बहुव्रीही विभाषा सर्वादीनि सर्वनाम FIFTH ETI! 
28. The above words are optionally sarva náma when they occur in a bahuvrihi compound signi fying direction (II. 2. 26.) 
This is an exception to sútra 29 which follows. As a general rule (see sûtra 29), in bahuvrihi compounds, these words sarva &c. are declined like ordinary nouns. The present sûtra declares an option to this, in special cases relating to compounds signifying direction. Thus the bahuvrihi compound of direction at north-east' may form its dative case as a pronominal, e.g. or it may form its dative like ordinary words ending in T. . e. उत्तरपूर्वाय..So दक्षिणपूर्वस्यै or दक्षिणपूर्वाय, 
URE • GOVE. 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
SARVANAMA. 
BK. I. CH. I. 
29. 
संस्कृति मंत्र 
सत्यमय जयत 
agen 
Why do we say "when signifying a direction"? The next sûtra will enjoin that in bahuvrîhi compounds, these words are not treated as pronomi nals. Therefore, if in the present sûtra, we had not used the word f , it would have been impossible to know where there was option and where prohibition. By employing the word "direction," it is thus determined, that in a samâsa, relating to direction (II. 2. 26), there is allowed option, while there is prohibition in all other kinds of bahuvrihi compounds. 
Why do we say “in compound"? So that the option may be in that bahuvrihi which is purely samâsa, and in no other bahuvrîhi. There is no option allowed in that bahuvrîhi where there is a semblance of bahuvrihi but not exact bahuvrîhi. 
The quasi-bahuvrihi, or analogical bahuvrihi compounds, or to use the Sanskrit phrase, bahuvrîhi-vadbhava, is taught in sûtra VIII. 1.9. where words in repetition are treated like bahuvrîhi. Thus got + h = got one and one, each one.' Bahuvrîhi compounds are possessive compounds, but in the above example, no idea of possession enters. However the compound here is treated like a bahuvrihi, for the purposes of the elision of the case-affix of the first member, and the whole compound gets the designation of prâtipadika. In compounds like this, therefore, which are bahuvrihi-vat, but not exactly bahuvrihi, the present rule and the succeeding sâtra do not apply. Thus 
the give to each one,' GUITUR II 
Why do we say “in the bahuvrihi"? So that there may be no option in the dvandva compound. Thus C TUTTITOR of the south, north and east.' The prohibition in the case of dvandva by rule 31 is absolute and invariable. 
agter n 38 11 gefa 17, agritet, ( parietta, peto aara, hê ) 
वृत्तिः । वहुव्रीही समासे सर्वादीनि सर्वनामसंज्ञानि न भवन्ति । 
29. The words sarva &c., are not sarva nama when occurring in a babuvrihi compound. 
As a general rule (see sûtra 72), when any definition, rule, operation &c. is made applicable to a particular word, the same would also apply to any other word which ends in that word. Thus the plural of man being 'men' in English, the plural of blackman will be blackmen. So the definition of sarva nama given to sarva &c., separately, will also apply to the words ending in sarva &e. 
This sutra introduces thus an exception to sútra 27. In bahuvrihi or possessive compounds, the nature of which compounds will be described 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
BK. I. CH. I. $ 30.] 
SARVANAMA. 
4. 
78 
later on, the above mentioned words are not pronominals, and must follow the ordinary rule of declension. Thus the compound füalar meaning 'beloved of all' is a bahuvrîhi compound of her beloved,' and att all,' (which is a sarvanâma). The declension of this compound will follow the general rule. Thus, in the dative singular, we have FETETETT, though the dative singular of fate by itself is asach, like other pronominals. So also प्रियोभयाय “to him who is beloved of both.” So also धन्याय, व्यन्याय &c. 
Similarly in bahuvrîhi compounds, these words not being treated as pronominals, they do not take also the special affix 570 , but the general affix Chr. As, creatitaaniT, ACROTECT (V. 3. 70). 
Though the word bahuvrîhi was present in this sûtra by anuvșitti from the last aphorism, the object of using the word bahuvrihi again in this sâtra, is this :--that the prohibition may apply to those expressions also which are no longer bahuvrîhi, but whose original components were once bahuvrîhi. Thus the words alatt and a ratr are bahuvrihi compounds; but when these two words are further compounded into a dvandva compound, the present rule still applies. As, वस्त्रान्तरावसनान्तराः ।। 
तृतीयासमासे ॥३०॥ पदानि ॥ तृतीया-समासे, (सर्वादीनि p arfa, 7, ) 
वृत्तिः। दृतीयासमासे सर्वादीनि सर्वनामसंज्ञानि न भवन्ति ।। 
30. In Instrumental Determinative Com pounds the words sarva &c. are not sarvanama. 
This is another exception to the definition of sarvanâma. There is a class of compounds in Sanskrit called tatpurusha compounds, in which the last word governs the preceding one. The word governed may be in any one of the six cases: when it is in the third or instrumental case, the com pound is called tritîyâ tatpurusha. When, therefore, there is such a samâsa, the words mentioned in sâtra 26 are not to be declined like pronominals. Thus the word Fraga is a compound of ra and te meaning prior by a month,' where the word mâsa is in the instrumental case. This compound will be declined like ordinary words, e.g. its dative will be arguett, though the dative of पूर्व, . when standing by itself, is पूर्वस्मै ; so also संवत्सरपूर्वाय ।। 
The třitîya-samasa of the present sûtra has reference to the special tritiyâ-on masa ordained by the particular sûtra II. 1. 31. namely, that which ends with the 3rd case affix, is compounded with the words pûrva, sadrida, Sama, &c." and has not reference to the tritiyâ-samâsa in general, such as one ordained by II. 1. 32," that which ends with the 3rd case-affix when it denotes the agent or the instrument is compounded diversely with what ends in a E 
. GOVER 
ev OF CULTUR 
ERNMENT OF 
DISINIW 
OF INDIA 
SARVANAMA. 
[ Bk. I. ch. I. $ 31, 32. 
fa 
14.17 
तिसरकार 
krit affix." Therefore, in phrases que no done by thee,' Herant met done by me,' these words are treated as pronominals, though in the instrumental case followed by a word ending in a krit-affix. In other words, reading this sûtra with II. 1.31, we find that pârva is the only sarvanâma which is so com pounded, and to which only the present sâtra would seem to apply. 
The word Tre may appear to have been mentioned redundantly, as it has already been mentioned in the previous sûtra, the primary object of the sûtra authors being to shorten the rules by the keeping out of every un necessary word. But here, the word FATE has been repeated, to show that even in phrases like Areat TETT, though not a compound, but used in construc tion with an instrumental case, the word is not a sarvanâma, that is to say, the prohibition extends even to phrases, which bear the sense of the instrumental compound, though not exhibited in the form of the instrumental compound. 
1 39 il ogifail , T. (aeretfa, parafa, TÊ, a) 
वृत्तिः ।। बन्दे च समासे सर्वादीनि सर्वनामसंज्ञानि न भवन्ति ।। 
31. And in Collective Compound, II. 2. 26 the words sarva &c., are not sarvanâma. 
This sûntra mentions another exception. In collective compounds the above words are not sarvanâma. Dvandva is a compound in which two words are simply joined together, the compound taking the terminations of the dual or plural according to the number of compounded words, or the terminations of the singular, being treated as a collective term. Thus, the compound 
Urher means, Tu the castes,'TISH 'the orders' and got the others'. The word rar in this compound is not to be treated as a sarvanâma, but an ordinary word. Therefore, in the genitive plural we have: PÄRTTUTH and not ac . So also arcot of the priors and the posteriors. 
The word = 'and' in the sûrta indicates that it closes the list of exceptions or prohibitions that began with sutra. 29. 
Fahret af Haifa u fautur, efe, ( Faiętfer, dan, , ) 
वृत्तिः॥ इन्हें समासे जसि विभाषा सर्वादीनि सर्वनामसंज्ञानि न भवन्ति ।। 
32. (Their dvandva compounds) are option ally sarvanama when the nominative plural termina 
tion jas follows. 
This is a proviso to sâtra 31, and declares that before the termina tion (which is the termination of the nominative plural, as we shall find later on, and which in the pronominals is replaced by sft), the dvandva 
URE - GOVE 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY ON 
RNMENT OF 
OF INDIA 
SKX.CH. I. § 33, 34.] 
SARVANAMA 
compounds may be treated either as sarvanâmas or as ordinary words. the plural of TUPITÄ ETT may be either qUT À FITT: or oat, that is, the wor take either जसू or शी. 
This sûtra governs the four succeeding sûtras. The option allo in the case of the application of the affix sie ist pl. to the dvandva compour. of pronominals, does not extend to the dvandva compounds of pronomina which take the affix 2 (V. 3. 71). There the sûtra 31 is absolutt 
Thus, anal:+ T : = tanah ter: in the plural. This affix 310 (49 ) comes before the last vowel, with what follows it, of the pronominals and indeclinables. 
#Hati utafaquanta 1133 11 ugifa il 946 7TH-94-9779-18-faaz-a#1:, + (faHarste, wafetfa, vaataifa) 
वृत्तिः । प्रथम चरम तय अल्प अर्द्ध कतिपय नेम इत्येतेजसि विभाषा सर्वनामसंज्ञा afe !! 
33. And also the words prathama 'first; charama "last,' words ending with the affix taya (V. 42); alpa' few' ardha "half 'katipaya 'some,' and nema 
half are optionally sarvanâma, before the nom. pl. termination. 
Thus we have qe or a: , T or arat:, T or 991: , or 16:,harge or fagett: , STA or THT: , face or faaet: 1! 
The words "optionally when the affix th follows” are understood in this sûtra. The governing force of the word "dvandva" does not extend to this, and stops at this. By the word as in the aphorism, is meant words ending in the affix 71. The rest are prâtipadikas or crude bases. The 
ra 77 has already been enumerated among the pronominals, therefore, € option in its case, is what is called prâpta-vibhâsâ, the result of which 
be that though in the nom. pl. it may be declined like 777, the rest of its clension is like sarva, while in the case of prathama &c. the nom. pl. may 
Ke Sarva, but the rest of their derlension must be like that of nara. The ord ubhaya, has been formed by the addition of the affix er, and it is ready enumerated in the list of pronominals, therefore, by the present utta its nom. pl. admits of two forms. 
The application of the affix kan or akach must depend upon the nature of these words, if pronominals, then akach, otherwise kan. 
geuttattfaraTTATTATIFU a 11 ESTETT # 38 Wetter i ge-07-3197-cf -377-870T-37VTU, 0677917, Test 
(farar, sfa, puiçta, Hafet ) 1 वृत्तिः। पूर्वाहीनि विभाषा जसि सर्वनामसंज्ञानि भवन्ति व्यवस्थायामसंज्ञायाम् ।। 
IRE - GOVE. 
OVERNMENT 
FCULTURE 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
ST [BK. I. CH. I. $ 35. 
स्कृति मंत्रा 
सत्यमेव जयते 
SARVANAMA. 
तसरकार 
34. The words půrya prior para after,' ra' posterior,' dakshina south,' uttara'north.' apara her,' and adhara inferior,' when they discriminate lative position, not when they are appellatives, are ptionally sarvanâma before the affix jas. 
These seven words have already been mentioned in the list of sarvanâ mas. They are always sarvanâmas, when they have the meaning given to them in the list, i. e., when they imply a relation in time and space, but when used in any other sense than the one which has been determined or fixed for them, they are not sarvanâmas, nor are they so when they are used as appel latives (HF). Thus, when the word retur means 'clever, it is not a sarvana ma, as, UT FÅ Trat: 'these clever minstrels,' similarly in 37: at: 
the northern Kurus,' the word 3 is not a pronominal, for though it declares a direction, it is a proper noun. 
When these seven words are sarvanâma, they are declined like sarva, except in the nominative plural, when they may be declined either as sarva namas, or as ordinary nouns. The option allowed in the case of these words is a prâptavibhâsâu. 
That there is a 'specification' (niyama), or tacit implication, of a determinate point (avadhi), with reference to which something is to be describ ed by the word itself, is what we mean when we say that a relation in time or place (avasthâ) is implied." For example, if we wish to describe Benares as being southern (dakshina), to do this, we may specify some point, say one of the peaks of the Himalayâu with reference to which Benares may be des cribed as a "place to the southward." Again we in the north may thus speak of the people to the south of the Vindhyâ mountains, as being southern, not with reference to the inhabitants of Ceylon, but with reference (as every one here understands by tacit implication) to us ourselves, who live to the north the Vindhya range. Thus, ( ve or tat, gator sar:, qt or Tr:) GIU or efetu: ; ator : ; 797 or TT:; Tt or TTTT:. 
| Trang TTĐT 7 8 | vệIT 11 , Cata-v TOT, ( HTT, ofa, waleta wafa) 
वृत्तिः । स्वमित्येतच्छब्दरूप जसि विभाषा सर्वनामसंजं भवति न चेजू ज्ञाति धनयोः संज्ञारूपेण वर्तते ।। 
35. The word sya own,' when it does not mean a kinsman or property is optionally sarvanama before the affix jas. 
The word when it does not mean a kinsman' or ya 'property or 'wealth' is always a sarvanama, in every number and case, as it has been 
URE . Govo 
OF CULTURE 
TAINISTRY 
MENT OF IN 
OF INDIA 
SRA: CH. I. $ 36, 37.] 
AVYAYA DEFINED. 
enumerated among the pronominals, except in the nominative plural who optionally so. Thus स्वे पुत्त्राः or स्वाः पुत्राः 'one's own sons,' स्वे गावः or र 'one's own cows'. 
But when it means "kinsmen ' or 'articles of property' Fat: alo the nom. pl. As, FaT FTTTTT these kinsmen' guar: FaT: 'much riches'. 
अन्तरं बहियोगोपसंव्यानयोः ॥३६॥ पदानि ॥ अन्तरम-बहि 9101-3faragt: ( fahiai, Fre, Fateter, faaraita ) 
वृत्तिः ॥ अन्तरमित्येतच्छब्दरूपं विभाषा जसि सर्वनामसंज्ञं भवति बहियोंग उपसंव्याने TFTTTÀ IT 
TFT 11 *Tyrirâ 77766TT* 11 TOT I *@ATTET TATU dierea a ISEE TATTFETTÉCarra* II 
36. The word antara being always a sarvana ma, when meaning "outer” or “a lower garment," is optionally so before the affix jas. 
The word eat when it means aigart, viz., 'outer' is always sarvanâ ma, so also, when it means ÅETT or 'a lower garment.' Thus, ya TET: or TeaTT TET: 'outer houses, the residence of Chandal, and other low castes.' So eat or trace: STEFT: 'the inner garments, such as petticoats worn under the upper garments." The word gear when used in the above sense is always sarvanâma, but in the nominative plural, it is optionally so. But, when it is not used in the above senses, it is never a sarvanâma, e. g., para que he lives between the two villages,' where the regular locative is tartē. With this sûtra ends the section on sarvanâmas, which began with sútra 26. 
Vart: -The word gear when qualifying the word git 'a city,' is not to be treated as a sarvanâma, and is, therefore, declined like ordinary nouns. As, Teatri gft qara 'he lives out of the city.' 
Vart :--The words formed by the affix तीय such as, द्वितीय and ढतीय, are optionally declined as sarvanâma before the case-affixes having an indi catory (sa), which are the singular terminations of dative, ablative, geni. tive and locative, as, feature or federer, er or ata 
Pitig fæuia#1999 39 ETA I ET-1f&, faara, अव्ययम॥ वृत्तिः ॥ स्वरादीनि शब्दरूपाणिनिपाताश्चाव्ययसंज्ञानि भवन्ति ॥ 
37. The words svar "heaven,' &c., and the parti cles (I. 4. 56) are called indeclinables. 
This defines avyaya or indeclinables. The words FTT &c. must be found out from the Ganapatha; they are the following: 
स्वर - heaven,' अन्तर् ' midst,' प्रातर 'in the morning,' पुनर fagain,' सनुतर in concealment,' उबैसू high, aloft ' नीचैसू low. down,' शनैस ' slowly,' धक 
URE - GOVER 
VERNMENT 
v OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
+ AVVAYA 
[BK. I. CH. I. 
38. 
स्कृति मंत्रा 
सत्यमेव जयते 
1974.913 
4777 
y, separately, aside, singly, particularly, truly,' ä 'except, without,' 
at the same time, at once,' Scra 'near, far from, directly.' TUF'sepa y, apart,' a yesterday,' Tito-morrow,' feat' by day,'trìby night i the night,' a 'at eve,' for long, long since, a long time,' which a Lle,' statslightly, a little,' Taa' ever,' First gladly,' quin silently,' area outside,' a 'below, without, outside. The near,' parent near, hard, close by,' F F of one's self,' zer'in vain,' 7 ' at night, by night,' 7'negative particle, not,' at 'for this reason, by reason of,' or 'truly, really' ET 
exclamation,' r 'evidently, truly,' ATA half,' q a enclitic like, as Brahmanavat, priestly,' #Ta Farg'perpetually,' 392T ' division,' TE 'crooked ly, awry, over,' ratt, Tratu 'except, without first, üren 'long,' a 'expletive particle,' TE 'ease,' HET 'perpetually,' FEAT 'suddenly, hastily,' fail with out,' FIAT 'variously,' are greeting, peace,' 71' exclamation, oblation to Manes,' a 'enough,' 'exclamation,' sir, TT (interjection) 'oblation of butter,' a 'again, moreover, otherwise.' Then being present,' Fit in a low voice, secretly, privately,' Frar patience, pardon,' frater' aloft in the air,' दोषा — at night or in the evening,' मृषा, मिथ्या 'falsely,' मुधा 'in vain,' पुरा 'formerly,' At or mutually, together,' Ta frequently, almost,' 
again, repeatedly' TIET or aner at the same time,' METAI -violently' अभीक्ष्णम् 'repeatedly, साकम् or सार्धम् — with' नमस, ' reverence, fica without,' repren 'fie!' T 'thus, Tart with fatigue,' TIT 'alike, 
a widely,' AT, 15 do not.' 
So, also the words formed by the affixes ktvå tosun, kasun, by the ksit affixes ending in or TT, s, ir or , and the avyayibhâva compounds, are indeclinables. So, also the words formed by the affixes beginning with are (V.3.7) and ending with orang (V 3.47), by the affixes beginning with sta (V. 4.4.2) and ending with Faraja: (V. 4. 68), by the affixes eau, and or by the affixes having the sense of the affix fea, or by the affixes or ম্মম্ , নলি or নি , ন or না are also indeclinables. 
The words called nipata will be given under søtras, I. 4, 56 to 61. Thus a word which changes not (Tea), remaining alike in the three genders and in all cases, and in all numbers, is what is termed an out or indeclin ables. 
aigardania: 33 Hugfar u afga:, aenea-faufen: (2x ) 
fer: 1 FET: Kertaraf 
fa 38. And the words ending in taddhita or se condary affixes (IV. 1. 76.) which are not declined in all the cases are also indeclinables. 
URE - GOVE 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY OF 
CRNMENT OF 
OF INDIA 
BK. I. CH. I. $ 39, 40.] 
AVYAYA 
44.4177 
This expands the definition of avyaya. There are three words in the sâtra taddhitah, cha and asarva-vibhaktih. Taddhitas or secondary affixes are certain affixes, by which nouns are derived from other nouns, such as, from #3 we have arac:, sárva-vibhaktis are those words which take all case-terminations, asarva-vibhaktis are those which do not take all vibhaktis but some only. Thus the adverb a: is declined in the singular ablative only, and does not take the dual and plural terminations. 
Those derivative words which do not take all the case-terminations, but only some of them and which are formed by the addition of Taddhita alfixes are indeclinables. As an: thence,' a 'there. Both these words are formed by taddhita affixes from the pronoun that,' the one is used in the ablative case only and the other in the locative. So also 2:, 217, TET, TET, TET, HET &c. 
FÀFR: #38 # agafa l 57, #-97-377 ( 97044 ) वृत्तिः ॥ कृयो मकारान्न एजन्तश्च तदन्तं शब्दरूपमव्ययसंजं भवति ।। 
39. The words formed by those krit or pri mary affixes, (III. 1. 93) which end with a or in g, it, Ê and 
are also indeclinables. 
All affixes for the formation of nouns are of two kinds:-1. Those by which nouns are derived directly from roots: Primary affixes. 2. Those by which nouns are derived from other nouns: Secondary affixes. The former are called kțit, the latter, taddhita. 
Words formed by křit affixes which end in or E, I, , or st(connot ed by the pratyahara ) are avyayas. Thus the affix ga (technically JHT) and 
(technically UTYT, IN. 3. 10) are affixes which end in . The words formed by the addition of these affixes will be indeclinables. Thus ETH 'to give,' and FATTT remembering' are avyayas. So also words like sfigê 'to live,' eta 'to drink,' are also avyayas as they end in , &c. 
Thus, in the following examples, the words within quotation are avya yas Fitcr, Harare," TUTC ,' , he eats first having made it relishing' (III. 4. 26). "TT" TIT: (a + È III. 4. 9 = ); ar ,' Tyrargaie GEELITÄT (5 + = Rig Veda V. 66. 3). TE JETfrae ET TETTE ŠE PYT (Rig Veda III. 36. 10). Etra: Tufra Ti pa ga 
I Feira ETT, (Rig Veda I. 25. 21, o + ata III. 4. IITTI. 
The word is used in this sûtra for the same purpose, as it was employed in sūtra 24, showing that these terminations must be 'aupadesika," and not derivative. Therefore the following words are not avyayas : (d, s.), TÙ: (g. s.) eta Irati: 1 | OTTAY: 11 
anagrda: iyon ucifer u zi, aig7-459:, (aut) re: 1 T EST FET gedaan yaşayu pereterare il 
MINISTRY ON 
aY OF CULTU. 
BENT OF INO 
OF INDIA 
SARVANAMASTHANA. 
[ BK. I. CH. I. $ 40, 41. 
40. The words ending with ktva, tosun (III. 4. 16, and kasun are indeclinables. 
As ear having done' gear: 'having risen,' : 'having spread.' Thus in the following examples the words within quotation are indeclin ables :- Ferie i rije: 1 TraceCT 9977 :' I TORTET FEET' ÊTÍCHF Erre qui praeit! (Yajur Veda. I. 28) a remarraT: YTT Têt ree' (Rig Ved. VIIIa. I. 12). 
couat Taa 11 89 l agtfa il Baytara:-* ( 7079 ) af: 11 goteft-TTTHATET SEZOTEFTTTTTT 11 
41. (The compound called) Avyayibhava (Il. 1. 5) is also indeclinable. 
The Avyayibhava or adverbial or indeclinable compounds are formed by joining an indeclinable particle with another word. The resulting compound, in which the indeclinable particle forms generally the first element, is again indeclinable, and generally ends, like adverbs, in the ordinary terminations of the nominative or accusative neuter. Thus i t upon Hari,' q 'after the form i., 6., accordingly.' 
The word in the sutra shows that here ends the definition of avyaya. The avyayas, therefore, are all those words which are comprised in the above five søtras. 
What is the object gained by making the avyayibhava compounds avya yas? Three objects are gained, by making these compounds, indeclinables, viz., we can apply to them (1) the rule relating to the elision (1) of the case affixes and feminine affixes, i.e., sâtra II. 4.82 thus, in the following example, the words upågni and pratyagni though qualifying the word salavah, do not take the gender and number of the latter, उपाग्नि प्रत्यग्नि शलाभाः पतन्ति (2) the rule relating to accent when an avyaya is compounded with the word mukha, (FC ETC), i.e., sutras VI. 2. 167 & 168. Thus, garra , here, sutra VI. 2. 167, required the final vowel to take the udatta accent, but the preceding word being an avyaya, sätra VI. 2. 168, intervened, and the first word retains its natural accent: (3) the rule relating to the change of visarga : into T, this change being technical ly called TT: thus 3TTTT:, ETTA:, as compared with TIETT: Here, the compound sty: being treated as avyaya sätra VIII. 3. 46, applies and prevents the change of: into . 
The four sutras 38,39,40, and 41 have all been enunciated under the svar adigana. see sutra 37. These sutras properly, therefore, belong to the gana patha; their repetition here in the Ashtadhyâyi indicates that these rules are 
T or not of universal application, viz., all rules relating to avyayas in gene ral, do not apply to them. Thus II. 3. 69. declaring that the genitive case is not used along with an avyaya is not a rule of universal application, for we see 
ARE • GOVE 
MINISTRI 
ISTRY OF CUL 
RNMENT OF 
OF INDIA 
BOL CH. I. 542, 43.] 
पिस्कृति मंत्रालय 
SARVANAMASTHANA. 
भारत सरकार 
indeclinables like jęci: governed by the genitive case as, Hafetreat:; or TFT विसृपः . 
शि सर्वनामस्यानम् ॥४२॥ पदानि ॥ शि, सर्वनामस्थानम् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ शि इत्येतत्सर्वनामस्थानसंज्ञम्भवति ।। 
42. The affix शि (VII. I. 20) is called sarva namasthana. 
This defines the word sarvanâmasthâna. The affix is the nominative and accusative plural termination of neuter nouns. It replaces the ordinary nominative and accusative plural affixes te and se used in every other gender. The of Fat is servile, and the actual termination is g; the peculiarity of the affix it is that it lengthens the penultimate vowel (VI. 4. 8) and adds a T (VII. 1.72). Thus the plural of 'fruit' is फलानि fruits. So also कुण्डानि तिष्ठन्ति , and कुण्डानि पश्य. Here, there is no difference of form in the nominative and the accusative cases. So also मधूनि , पूणि , जतूनि. The word sarvanamasthāna occurs in sutra VI. 4. 8. 
सुडनसकस्य ॥४३॥ पदानि ॥ सुट, अनपंसकस्य, (सर्वनामस्थानम) वृत्तिः ॥ सुडिति पञ्च वचनानि सर्वनामस्थानसंज्ञानि भवंति नपुंसकादन्यत्र॥ 
43. The first five case affixes comprised in the pratyahara sut. (i. e., the three case-terminations of the nominative, and the singular and dual of the accusative) are called also sarvanamasthâna; except the case-affixes of the neuter gender. 
This defines further the word sarvanamasthana. The case-termina tions in Sanskrit are 21 as arranged below : 
Singular Dual Plural. Nominative प्रथमा 
सु (स्) औ जस् (अस्) Accusative द्वितीया अम् 
शस् (अस) Instrumental टतीया वा (आ) भ्याम् 
भिस् Dative 
चतुर्थी के (ए) 
भ्यस् Ablative पंचमी उसि (असू) Genitive षष्ठी उस् (अस्) ओस् आम् Locative सप्तमी डि (इ) 
सुपू (सु) The above are the 21 vibhaktis, the st of Th, the T of stel, the of siia &c. are indicatory. All these vibhaktis are included in the pratyâhâra Fy formed by taking the first vibhakti and the last letter of the last vibhakti. Similarly the first five terminations (सु. औ, जसू, अमू and औद) are represented by सुद and are called sarvanâmasthâna in the masculine and feminine genders. In the declension of nouns, it will be seen, that some nouns have two bases, one before these sarvanâmasthậna and the other before the rest. 
औद् 
URE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
SAMPRASARANA. 
[BK. I. CH. I. $ 44, 45 
सत्यमेव जयते 
कृति मंत्रान 
भारत सरकार 
Sing. 
Thus the word 'king' has the base Trstra before the T vibhaktis, while in the remaining cases, the base is try and Trstas : 
Dual. 
Plural. Nominative TTFTT 
TIETTI 
হলান: Accusative TFT 
राजानी Instrumental राज्ञा 
राज-यां 
राजनिः But in the neuter nouns there is no such difference. 
qafa fanTET II 88 11 OCTA na, at, fa, famTOT IN वृत्तिः॥ नेति प्रतिषेधो वेति विकल्पस्तयोः प्रतिषेधविकल्पयोर्विभाषेति संज्ञा भवति ।। 
44. May or may not" is called vibhâsha or option. 
This sûtra defines the word feat. We had already had occasion to use this word in sûtras 28 and 32. Where there is a prohibition as well as an alternative course left open, it is called option or vibhâshâ. The commen tators mention three kinds of vibhâsha:- prâpta-vibhâsha., aprâpta-vibhasha and prâptâprâpta-vibhâshâ. The first occurs where there is a general rule already given, and then follows the optional rule; the second belongs to that class where there is no such general rule, but there is an optional rule, the third is intermediate between the two. 
Thus the root fit to swell,' by virtue of the rule fra TI (V. 1. 30), forms its perfect tense, either by samprasarana, or in the ordinary way. Thus the third person singular is either शुशाव or शिश्वाय. 
yag: DOUTUH U y ni agifan , qu:, HATTUTTO ga: 11 gros rur: Fyra rat at T U FFETTUACHT #FT Tafel 
45. The ik vowels which replace the semi vowels yan are called samprasarana. 
This defines the word samprasarana. It is the name given to the change of semi-vowels into vowels. The pratyâhâra ik includes the four simple vowels ,, anda, and their corresponding semi-vowels are 7,7,7, and included in the pratyahara yan. The word samprasarana is properly the name of the vowel which has replaced the semi-vowel. Thus the past participle of eng 'to sleep,' is formed by adding the nishțhâ affix) 7 (see shtra 26). So that we have 7 + 7. But there is a rule (VI. 1. 15) by which there is sampragáraņa of the ap of fag before the faner affixes, and we have the form era: 'slept.' Similarly from -urea, ST-FET, urg, E-TECTT-T5 Ter. The term samprasarana is also employed to designate the whole pro cess of the change of the semi-vowels into vowels as in VI. 1. 13; VI. 4. 131. 
eget erat ngen utfall feat, a-rata fell erfarewafar fan fer uef Fafeer 
REGOVA 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
ENT OF INDIA 
BR. . Ch. I. $ 46, 47.] 
AUGMENTS ea, fara, AND MAT 
भारत सरकार 
46. Of whatsoever the augments enunciated are distinguished by an indicatory a or , they precede or follow it accordingly. 
This sûtra explains the special use of two of the indicatory letters and af. Where the indicatory letter of an augment is that augment is to be placed before the word in the genitive case with regard to which it is en joined ; while a lana augment is to be added after the word exhibited in the 6th case with regard to which it is enjoined. Thus, there is a sûtra (VII. 2 35) which says "ârdhadhâtuka affixes beginning with a consonant except , have ". The question may arise where is this ye to be added, in the beginning or the end or the middle of the ardhadhâtuka affix? This sûtra answers the question. The indicatory shows, that it is to be placed before the ardha dhâtuka affix. Thus the future termination Furra, is an ardhadhâtuka affix: when this is added to the root, it takes the augment F. Thus +59 + Fara= praefat, 'he will be.' Similarly rear he will cut'. 
Similarly by sûtra VII. 3. 40. the root sfr takes the augment gh in forming the causative. This having an indicatory is to be added after the word aft, as, aft +Te+fu += afraid 'he frightens.' 
मिदोऽन्त्यात्परः ॥४७॥ पदानि ॥ मिदू, अचः, अन्त्यात्, परः। वृत्तिः । अचां सन्निविष्टानामन्यादचः परोपियति ॥ 
47. The augment that has an indicatory comes after the last among the vowels, and becomes the final postion of that which it augments. 
This sûtra explains the use of the indicatory . The augments hav ing an indicatory , technically called a augments, are placed immediately after the final vowel of a word. Thus there is an augment called T4, in which 3 and I are ga, and the actual augment is T. When, therefore, it is said "let at be added to the word," the letter 7 is added after the last vowel. Thus the plural of To'milk' is formed in the following way :-TIT +7+7 (VII. 1.72) = T E (VI.4.8). Here is added between and a i.e. after the y of t, which is the final vowel of the word: and before this at the preceding short vowel is lengthened. Similarly + + Fe (III. 1. 77) = 7 + 7 + y + fa (VI. 1.59) = ela! Similarly Furs. 
The word : is in the genitive case, having the force of nirdhara na or specification; it has the force of the plural, though exhibited in the singular, being taken as representing the class. The meaning is 'among the vowels.' This sûtra is an exception to søtras I. 1.49 and III. 1. 2, by which an affix is added at the end of the word exhibited in the 6th case. 
There is, however, an exception, in the case of the root en, in EURE 
STRY OF CU 
MINISTRI 
VERNMENT OF 
OF INDIA 
THE SHORT OF DIPHTHONGS. 
[BK. I. CH. I. $ 48, 40 
1977 
which the augment is added not after the last vowel 3 of 7, but between # and 3. The result of adding the augment Th between # and T is, that sútra VIII. 2. 29. applies, and the is elided. Thus HFT + AT = TEST + T + at (VII. 1. 60) = 975T + T = 453T + TT (VII. 2. 29)= 457T" He will im merse". So also 479: 'immersed,' 4726T, 4514. 
Ta gigga n yg 11 ugifa ni pa:, 57, Te-get u बृत्तिः ॥ एचो इस्वादेशे कर्तव्यहगेव इस्वो भवति नान्यः ।। 
48, Of Ty vowels, * is the substitute, when short is to be substituted. 
This sûtra points out the sea substitutes of TT. We know there are short and long vowels in Sanskrit, but properly speaking the Tor vowels have no corresponding short vowels. Therefore, when, in any rule, a vowels are told to be shortened, this sûtra declares that the short vowels of T and I, and st, for the purposes of the rule, will be g and respectively. Thus, I. 2. 47 declares:--"the short vowel is the substitute in the neuter of a crude form provided it end in a vowel." Therefore in compounding tha + $, the è must be shortened. Properly speaking i has no short vowel corresponding to it, but by virtue of this sûtra, g supplies the place of such a short vowel, and we have fare extravagant' so Ti, sia disembarked or landed,' TTT, 545 near a cow. All avyayîbhava compounds are neuter (II. 4. 18). 
Why do we say of T'? Because the short of other vowels will not be . Thus the short of ar ist. As, vrâncer = TEE: , stía + Aa = 
te: 1 
Why do we say when short is to be substituted?' Because when 50 or prolated vowels are to be substituted for the go will not be the substitute. As देवदत्त O Devadatta ! देवदत्त! 
tot laat ly nucifa ni aigt, te-ÈTOTT II 
वृत्तिः । इह शास्त्रे या षष्ठी अनियतयोगा श्रूयते सा स्थानेयोगैव भवति नान्य योगा स्थानेयोगनिमित्तभूते सति सा प्रतिपत्तव्या॥ 
49. The force of the genitive case in a sutra is that of the phrase "in the place of” when no special rules qualify the sense of the genitive. 
This sútra explains the mode of interpreting words used in the posses sive case (sixth case) in the søtras of Panini. The genitive case or shashthi denotes many sorts of relations in Sanskrit, such as causation, possession, rela tion in place, comparison, nearness, proximity, change, collection, component member, &c. So that when a word is in the genitive case in a sûtra generally, the doubt may arise in what sense that genitive is to be used. This aphorism 
URE - Gov 
TRY OF CULT 
MINISTRY 
NMENT OF IND 
OF INDIA 
BODI. CH. I. $ 50.] 
The LikesT IS THE SUBSTITUTE. 
तस्कृति मंत्रा 
सत्यमेव जयते 
परत सरकार 
lays down the restrictive rule for the interpretation of such words. It says that the force of such genitive is to convey the meaning of in the place of.' 
Thus in the sâtra 3, the word of is in the genitive case; the literal translation being :-"of ik there is guna and vșiddhi.” But “of” here means by virtue of the present rule of interpretation "in the place of.” So that the sútra means in the place of 5. Similarly in the sâtra immediately preceding this, vis. 48, we have the word rt in the genitive case and the sûtra means of P.' Here also “of” means in the place of.” 
Thus in sutra East (VI. 4. 36) of hanti, there is the word , is the genitive of gla; this genitive is used generally and its force is that of " in the place of." Therefore, 5T displaces the verb in die or imperative mood, and we have the kill thou.' 
This sûtra is also thus translated by Dr. Kielhorn :-Only that which is enunciated in a rule, i.e. that which is read in a rule or rather that which in the real language is like that which is read in a rule in a genitive case, or that which forms part of that which is enunciated in a genitive case, assumes the peculiar relation denoted by the word FETT 'place'i.e, is that in the place of which some thing else is substituted, but some thing suggested by the former does not assume that relation. 
The word for here is synonymous with her or 'occasion. Thus in the sentence carui era : Farao, the word sthâne, means 'prasange' i. e. wherever there is occasion to spread darbha grass, spread there the sara instead. Similarly in sûtras : (II. 4. 52), or at aft: (II. 4. 53), the words 'asti,' and 'brû' are in the genitive case, and mean, wherever there arises occasion to use the verbs T or use there the verbs aor instead respectively. Thus steel, agu, sramot, are the future, gerund, and pas sive participle respectively of असू ; so slso, वक्ता, वक्तुम् and वक्तव्यम् are the same forms of a 
The word FITTÀ STTTTT is a bahuvrihi compound of two words, not in apposition, (vyadhikarana bahuvrihi, see II. 2. 248 35), and it qualifies the word shashthî. The compound means for STTTTSFAT,' that which assumes the peculiar relation denoted by the word sthâna.' Consequently the seventh case-affix is not elided in this compound; on the analogy of compounds like omogen : &c. 
FIRSATUA: I go ucifa il Faa-erata: 11 git: 11 FETT STATUTOFTETT TT TT FESTTAT: 11 
50. When a common term is obtained as a substitute, the likest of its significates to that in the place of which it comes, is the actual substitute. 
URE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
. MINISTRO 
UT OF INDIA 
THE FOUR SORTS OF PROXIMITY. 
[ Bk. I. ch. I. $50 
DA 
This sûtra also lays down another rule of paribhâsha. To explain this we must take an example. The guņa of , 3, , and a, is 57, 8, str. There is nothing to specify what letter is the guna of what. It might be said that or is the guņa of because the definitions as laid down up to so far, do not say anywhere that sit is not the guņa of 5. So that when in a word like we are told let there be the guņa of we do not know what specific guna letter is to be substituted, whether it is T, or TT. To clear up this doubt, this sûtra declares that the likest of its significates is to be subs tituted. Now the nearest in place to g is g, both having their place of pro nunciation, the palate. Similarly air is the guņa of 3, because both are labials, 
There are four sorts of proximity or nearness :-(1) nearness in place or FIT (i.e. palate, throat &c.); (2) nearness in meaning or stü (such as, singular terminations to be used after words used in the sense of singular); (3) nearness in quantity or FHIU (such as a short vowel to replace a short vowel, a long vowel, a long one); (4) nearness in quality or TTU (such as aspirates to re place aspirates, and sonants to replace sonants). Of all these approximates the first vis., the nearness in the organ of utterance has preference, in the selection of proper substitute. 
(1). Thus in applying rule VI. 1. 101, "when a homogeneous vowel follows ak, the corresponding long vowel is the substitute for both," we must have recourse to the present sûtra for finding the proper vowel. Thus 
3 + = agri ; here the substitution of the long , for the two short t's, is an example of substitution by nearness of place, for both and are gutturals. 
(2). A good example of substitution by the sense of the word is afforded by VI. 1. 63:-"The words rę, , &c., are the substitutes when the case-affixes Tu (acc.-pl.) &c., follow." Here, we know the substitutes, but we do not know of what they are the substitutes. We apply the maxim of ra: "that only can become a substitute which has the power to express the meaning of the original, i, e., a substitute takes the place of that the meaning of which it is able to express." Thus we find that qe is the substitute of पाद, बतू ofन्त,नसून नासिका, &c., which convey the same meaning and con tain almost the same letters. Another example of this is afforded by VI.3.34, by which feminine words in a compound are changed into masculine. Thus araost (fem) + = agafa. 
(3). An example of prosodial substitution (AUT) is afforded by rule VIII. 2. 80, " is the substitute of what comes after the ofre not ending in and in the room of there is . Thus spa + = + 
# = 9 ; *+919 = 4 +379 (VII. 3. 102)=+32 = T2TT. Here, short replaces the short w, and the long replaces the long T. 
GOVERNMEN 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
ENT OF INDIA 
151. CH. I. $ 51.] 
THE 
SUBSTITUTES OF 
. 
39 
14.418 
जसरकार 
(4). An ill stration of qualitative substitution is afforded by VII. 3.52, "a letter of the guttural class is substituted for and sT when an affix having an indicatory y follows." Applying the rule of Un: we find that penting which is an. alpaprâna and aghosha letter replaces having the same 
quality; while sT which is ghosha, and alpaprâna is replaced by the letter possessing similar quality. Thus + T (III. 3. 18)=977:; beter + = EITT: ; T531+3=TTT: 11 
Though the anuvșitti of the word sthâna was understood in this sûtra from the last, the repetition of this word indicates the existence of the follow ing paribhâshâ : 
Wherever there exist several kinds of proximity between that for which something else shall be substituted, and its possible substitutes, there the proximity as to the organ of speech is weightier than the rest, i. e., there that only is substituted which is nearest as regards the organs of speech with which both are uttered. 
Thus in finding the guna substitutes of and out of the three guna letters ST, T and , we find that is a proximate substitute having regard to prosodial measure, i. e., and and have all one mâtrâ ; while having regard to the proximity of the organ of utterance, we get g and ; the latter however prevails to the exclusion of the first; as, ar, taar. 
Why do we use the word "likest" in the superlative degree? Where there are many sort of proximities, the likest must be taken. Thus ara + gurarea. Here, by VIII. 4.62," after a letter of a class, is changed into a letter homogeneous with the preceding," must be changed into a letter of the class . Out of the five letters of this class, and are both aspirates, but u is hard, and is soft; so T and are both soft, but is unaspirate, and is aspirate, therefore these must be rejected; the only letter which has the nearest approach to , is t, which is both soft and aspirate. Similarly in fragrafa, the has been changed into a. 
TTU TUT: U 998 , TT, TTT: gia: 11 : (CET) FATEST T ATT TYTT Tęgo. Il 
51. When a letter of TT pratyahâra comes as a substitute for F it is always followed by a t. 
This sátra consists of three words viz., 3: which is the genitive singular of F and means literally of ' or 'in the place of '; the second word is y, a pratyâhâra denoting T, and = long and short, the third word is tyr: which qualifies yr and means 'having a rafter.' 
This sätra is useful in fixing the proper substitutes of . Thus, there 
URE.GOV 
TRY OF CULTU 
ERNMENT OS 
TOF INDIA 
SINIW 
• 
SUBSTITUTE REPLACES THE FINAL 
(BK. I. CH. I. $ 52, 534 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
TEEN 
. 
17 
are only three guna vowels , T and ir. Of these what i the proper guņa for F? By the application of the rule of 'nearness of place' we see that is the nearest substitute. So that sy is the guņa of ; and further by this rule, this a must have a after it. Thus though technically speaking is the guņa of the actual substitute is . Thus + ar = tit; similarly car. 
So also when F is replaced by 5 as by sûtra VII. 1. 100, this subs titute & must be followed by a I. As $+ i = f +T+ farrocha 'he scatters;' similarly fitta 'he swallows.' 
So also when is replaced by 3, as by sutra IV. 1. 115 this must be followed by a I. As fa + FIT + 1 = garga: 'son of two mothers! 
This is to be added only when is replaced by , 3 or (TTT) vowels, and not when it is replaced by any other letter. 
Thus by IV. 1. 97, "the F of the word aure is replaced by € (tech nically as ) when the affix is added." Thus, FUIT + T = a + 
6 + g = eura : , 'a descendant of Sudhâtsi' Here the substitute of F, that is to say, the syllable is not followed by T. 
The in the text has been taken by some to be a pratyâhâra formed by the letter r and y of TT; and thus it includes the letters and . In that case the sútra would mean that T substitutes of = and are always followed by r and a respectively. Thus guna of ti=ar, of li = al. 
TO TECURI H 42 # gefa Il 0731, SYRIR, (1997:) FT: 11 Teta gera gregt: WIFESTEST: Fra algozt: 
52. The substitute takes the place of only the final letter (of that which is denoted by a term exhibited in the genitive or sixth case). 
The rule of substitution by nearness of place applies to the last letter of the word which is exhibited in the genitive case and not to all its letters. Thus by sutra VII. 2. 102, it is declared uTETETT: "in the place of zur &c., there is . It does not mean that the whole word Eye, is replaced by 
; though at first sight it may appear to mean so ; but it means, by virtue of the present explanatory sûtra, that the last letter of care, namely is to be replaced by t. 
So also in sûtra I. 2. 50 TT T: the short 5 replaces only the final letter of viror and not the whole word, as itt: purchased for five goņis. Traitfor: 
fey 143 actfa il ta, 7, ( 
S T:, 018, TT) : I four : Sache 
a safari 
GURE 
OF CULTURA 
VERNMENT 
MINISTRY 
OF INDIA 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
BR. ICH. I. $ 53, 54.] 
SUBSTITUTES. 
4 
. 
17 
53. And the substitute which has an indica tory 5 (even though it consists of more than one letter) takes the place of the final letter only of the original expression. 
This sûtra is an exception by anticipation to sûtra 55. By that all substitutes, consisting of more than one letter, replace the whole word. 
Thus in forming the dvandva compound of Art and fre there is a rule (VI. 3. 25) by which it is declared:- In the place of words ending in #there is the substitution of 175 in forming dvandvas.' Now the substitute 
TITE is a fra substitute, and therefore it applies to the last letter of the word and not to the whole word, vis, the # of het is only changed into St and not the whole word ; and we have the compound मातापितरौ, so also होतापोतारो. 
There is an exception, however, in the case of the substitute aras (VII. 1. 35) which, though it has an indicatory , yet replaces the whole expressions T and fe and not only their finals. As siqare 'may he live, or may you live'; instead of sitas may he live,' or sit live thou.' 
ente: OTRT II 98 og fellene:, TRI, ( 973: ) वृत्तिः ॥ परस्य कार्य शिष्यमाणमादेरलः प्रत्येतव्यभू ।। 
54. That which is enjoined to come in the room of what follows is to be understood as coming in the room only of the first letter thereof. 
When any operation is to be made in a word following another, such -operation is to be made in the initial letter of such subsequent word. To give an illustration:-there is a rule (VI. 3. 97) by which it is declared : "In the place of 79 used after the words rê and rat and the particles called staf there is s." This rule may be stated in other words as:- In the place of yg there is & when 7 follows tê or at. Now it is clear that f is not to replace all the letters of 4 but only one. By sútra 52 that letter would have been the last letter of ry, but this sûtra makes an exception, namely, where an operation is directed to be made in a word, simply by reason of its being placed after another word; such change is to be made in the beginning of such second word. Therefore, the g replaces the st of 29 and we have f + 9 =ér (the final y is added by V. 4. 74) 'an island,' acto 
promontory.' So also in the sûtra fare: (VII. 2.83) long is the substi tute of a when the latter comes after the root re.' Thus TT + 1 = 
T + $a = rata: . Here also the replaces the initial sy of y. 
How can we find when an operation is to be performed on a subse quent word? When the previous word is exhibited in the 5th or ablative case, see sutra 67. 
KURE - GO 
OVERNMENT 
ex OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
. 
PETE SUBSTITUTES. 
[ Bk. I. CH, I. $ 55, 56. 
कृति मंत्रालय 
1778 
Staig farger les llogta u Spa 5-975, fara, R, ( errea: ) 
fa: 11 STÖRT TITT: fet a tot ferfekt for a 11 
55. A. substitute consisting of more than one letter, and a substitute having an indicatory s take the place of the whole of the original expression exhibited in the sixth case. 
This sûtra is an exception to sâtra 52 by which it was declared that an adeśa or substitute replaces only the last letter. This sútra on the contrary enjoins that an âdesa consisting of more than one letter replaces the whole ex pression in the genitive case, and not only its last letter. Even where an adesa consists of a single letter, but if it has a y as its indicatory letter, it re places the whole word. 
Thus, there is a sútra gigi: (II. 4. 53) which means in the place ofy let there be . Here the âdeśa 4 consists of three letters (more than one), and therefore, it replaces the whole word and not only the last letter 5. That is to say in forming certain tenses the verb is replaced by ra. Thus the future tense of is THT he will speak.' 
So also there is a sûtra (V. 3. 3.) by which it is declared:"In the place of get there is Ten." Here the âdeśa is an adeśa having the y for its indicatory letter, and though it consists of only one letter, it replaces the whole word 67, and not only its last letter . 
Of course, it must be understood that the phrase 'consisting of more than one letter' applies to the actual substitute, and not to the substitute with its indicatory letters, the latter being for the purposes of counting regarded as mere surplusages and not to be taken into account. To see whether an affix is 
e or not, the indicatory letters must not be counted; and the affix must be stripped of all its a letters, 
fraşteaptsaera 114en ugira nl egyfa-aas, enests, 
-fauti 
वृत्तिः ॥ स्थानिवदेशो भवति स्थान्याश्रयेषु कार्येष्वनलाश्रयेषु स्थान्यलाश्रयाणि कार्याणि वयित्वा ॥ 
56. A substitute (adesa) is like the former occupant (sthani) but not in the case of a rule the occa sion for the operation of which is furnished by the letters of the original term. 
This is an explanatory satra, or this may be considered also as an atideśa sutra, in as much as it declares that the operations to be performed 
GOVERNMENT 
TURE - GOVE 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY ON 
ENT OF INDIA 
(ST 
SE I. CH. I. $ 56.] SUBSTITUTE IS LIKE THE PRINCIPAL. 
F 
.17 
गरत सरकार 
on or by the original, may be similarly performed on or by the substitute, but with certain restrictions. The words of this sûtra require some detailed exposition. Sthâni is the word or the portion of a word which is replaced. Adeśa is the expression which replaces something. Al-vidhi is a compound of 'al' meaning alphabet, or letters in general, and vidhi' rule i. e. any rule applicable to letters. 
There is an exception, however, to this rule in the case of rules, the occasion for the operation of which, is furnished by the letters of the original term. That is to say for the purposes of orthographic rules, an âdeśa is not like the sthâni. A rule which is applicable to the letters of the sthâni, need not be applicable to the letters of the âdesa. 
Thus the gerund of verbs is generally formed by adding the affix 1 e. g. TE + ar. Now VII. 2. 35. prescribes the insertion of an intermedi ate se before ârdhadhâtuka affixes beginning with any consonant except t. This rule is clearly an al-vidhi, because the occasion for its application is con ditional on the letters of the affix. The affix car begins with and is an ârdha dhâtuka affix and fulfils all the conditions of the rule. Therefore, we have 
TE + + r = ficar (VI. I. 16; VII. 2. 37). 
Now in compound verbs the affix car is replaced by 5 (tech. FTI). Thus #TE + 1. This âdeśa at which takes the place of ear has all the func tions of car viz. it has the power of making gerunds; it makes the word an indeclinable (see rule 41 ante), as the affix car does. But the affix car takes an intermediate ; should, therefore, the âdesa T take also the or not? Now the augment which can takes is by virtue of VII. 2. 35, because it be gins with a consonant of te pratyâhâra ; while J is the only consonant which is not included in this pratyâhâra. Therefore, for the purposes of taking a by rule VII. 2. 35. the âdesa y is not like aar; since that rule is one which has its scope when there are certain initial letters; or an al-vidhi. Therefore, we have a 
Substitutes replace either a groot,' or an 'base,' or a krit affix 'primary affix,' or a taddhita affix'secondary affix,' or an avyaya 'inde clinable,' or a fi affix'case affix,' or a fãs affix 'conjugational affix,' or lastly the full word or pada. 
The substitute of a dhậtu becomes like a dhâtu. Thus sūtras II. 4. 52 and 53 declare :- is the substitute of the root a, and as of the root 
when an ardhadhâtuka affix follows.' Here the substitutes and as are treated as dhátu, and as such get the affixes out &c. by III. 1. 96, &c. Thus argar, aylaga, agua; TH, 7 , SH. 
The substitute of an anga becomes like an anga. Thus VII. 2. 103 declares: is the substitute of the base for when a case-affix follows." 
GOVERNME 
CULTURE 
ISTRY OF C 
MINISTO 
NT OF INDIA 
SUBSTITUTE IS LIKE THE PRINCIPAL. [BK. I. CH. I. $ 50. 
2774 
रित सरकार 
Here, gets the designation 'base' and so rules applicable to base, are applied to also. Thus in aña, FTTT, &c., we have , the lengthening of the vowel, and ċar substituted by VII. I. 12, and VII. 3. 102, and VII. 1.9. 
The substitute of a krit affix becomes like a křit affix. Thus VII. I. 37 declares:-'art is the substitute of the krit affix at when the verb is a com pound, the first member of which is an indeclinable, but not 7' Here, mely is also called a křit affix, and as such, sâtra VI. 1.71 applies, and an is added. As 56 +2y = + + 7 = heur; similarly TETT &c. 
The substitute of a taddhita affix is like a taddhita. Thus VII. 3. 50 declares :- is the substitute of the affix s' as ar + s (IV. 2. 18) = arrit, here, 5 being treated as a taddhita, sûtra I. 2.56 applies and the word formed by it, gets the name of prâtipadika, and is so declined. 
The substitute of an avyaya is like an avyaya. As, FEGET ; eu. The affix # makes avyayas (I. 1. 40), its substitute rug will also make the word an avyaya, and as such sûtra II. 4.82 applies, and the case-affixes are elided after these words. 
The substitute of sup-affixes becomes like sup. Thus VII. 1. 13 de. clares:-'y is the substitute of the sup-affix î after an inflective base ending in short T.' Here, y is treated as a sup-affix, and therefore sútra VII. 3. 102 applies, and there is lengthening of the vowel, as, TerT; TETIT. 
The substitute of tin becomes like tin. Thus III. 4. 101 declares : TL, 7, 7 and 5 are substituted for 7, 7, 4, and it when tense-affixes having indicatory follow. Here the substitutes are &c., also make the words ending in them pada by rule 1. 4. 14 as, 7*74, 76 &c. 
The substitute of a pada is like a pada. Thus VIII. 1. 21 declares: er is the substitute of grain, 964375, 76 , and 7 of 4, and get.' Here, 7 and 8 are treated as pada, and the final a is changed into visarga, as :, :. 
Why have we used the word to in the sâtra? Without it the aphorism would have been a TIT Sale it, and this being a chapter treating of defi nitions, the meaning would have been, 'an adesa is called sthâni.' This certainly is not intended, for had it been so, then all operations would be per formed by or on the substitute, but none by the original. But this is not so. Thus rule 1. 3. 28, says the root preceded by it is atmanepadi! ay the substitute of a will be atmanepadi, as grae; but also will be so in its proper sphere, as, sie. 
The word adesa is used in the sâtra to indicate, that the rule applies even to partial substitutions : as changing the off into 3 (III. 4.86) in the Imperative e.g. , 
The word al-vidhi is used in order to indicate that the substitutes of fat, 
URE 
MINISTRY 
ISTRY OF CU 
JERNMENT OF 
OF INDIA 
GL 
BEE CH/I. $ 57.] 
SUBSTITUTE IS LIKE THE PRINCIPAL. 
स्कृति मंत्रालय 
FIT, ETE &c., such as the change of into a (VII. 1. 84), Tinto ST (VII. 1. 85), into 7(VII. 2. 102, are not to be treated like the original : as ar:, FUT:, # Had these substitutes been treated like the original, rule VI. 1. 68 would apply, and the case-affix a would have been elided. 
39: atfergarahr 1199 1 azifa 079:, afha, gan faali, ( Farfaaa stream: ) u 
वृत्तिः ॥ अजादेशः परनिमित्तकः पूर्वविधौ कर्तव्ये स्थानिवद्भवति ।। 
57. A substitute in the room of a vowel caused by something that follows, should be regarded as that whose place it takes when a rule would else take effect on what stands anterior to the original vowel. 
This sátra consists of three words:- 7: genitive of the pratyâhára meaning of a vowel,' and means an adeśa which takes the place of a vowel. The words âdesa and sthânivat are understood and are to be supplied from the preceding sûtra. The second word is 'parasmin' loc. sing. of 'para' meaning in the subsequent.' The locative has the force of 'on account of or by reason of. The third word is purva-vidhau loc. sing. of pûrva-vidhi mean ing'a rule applicable to a preceding thing. The whole sútra thus comes to mean that an âdeśa which replaces a vowel, becomes sthânivat (like vowel), Pro vided that the substitution has been occasioned on account of something to lowing and when a rule is to be applied to anything preceding such an adeśa. 
Thus there is an affix called run the actual affix being 7; the other letters Tandą being ga. The peculiarity of every affix having an indicatory 7 is to cause the vșiddhi of the penultimate ; (sútra VII. 2. 116) as पच+इ=पाचि. Now in forming the denominative verb from the word पदु, we have to add the affix fus. Thus + y; but before nich, the of Te is substituted by a 'lopa' or blank, and this blank takes the place of the vowel 3 of ge and becomes sthânivat by force of the present sútra. The result of becoming sthânivat is that though the stof is really a penultimate and ought to be vriddhied before 'nich' it is not so, the lopa-substitute not allowing the y tobe regarded as penultimate, and thus we have the form qe the present tense third person singular of which is caufa. The equation being + +, the zero preventing the of from becoming penultimate. So also in the word gera, the aorist (s) of ay. Thus T +4 + 3++ots. Here, the of 94 is elided by VI. 4. 48. (when an ardhadhâtuka affix follows there is elision of the short of that which ends in short :) this elision is thus caused by something which follows (parasmin.) Now there is a rule (VII. 2. 7.) which de. ctares 'vriddhi is optionally the substitute of a laghus preceded by a consonant when fer (aorist) follows.' However in the present case the zero is consi. RE • GOVER 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY ON 
NT OF INDIA 
SUBSTITUTE IS LIKE THE PRINCIPAL. 
[BK. I. CH. I. 957 
त सरकार 
dered as sthânivat, and prevents the application of sûtra VII. 2. 7; otherwise we get the formarea which is inadmissible. 
Similarly ages + y = ace: Here, the short y is the substitute of the long r of aan by VII. 4. 15; because of the subsequent (parasmin) affix ‘kap'. However, the word aaeg will not be considered as a word ending in a short vowel, for the purposes of the application of rule VI. 2. 174, (the udâtta accent falls on the last vowel but one of a word that ends in a short vowel and is the last member of a bahůvrîhi compound followed by the affix kap). On the contrary the short is regarded as sthânivat to long . Thus 
TE : 
It is needless to say that this rule applies only to vowel adeśa, there fore, where an âdeśa replaces a consonant, the previous sûtra 56 has its scope and prevents its being sthânivat. Thus there is a křit affix called Fly, the real suffix being 7, the and being diacritical letters. Before this y the verb orta (to come) loses it, and lopa or blank takes the place of t. Here then lopa or blank is an âdeśa and a consonant is sthâni. 
Now there is a rule which says (VI. 1. 71), that before krit affixes having an indicatory , the letter a is added after verbs ending in light vowels. Now in T+ , when is omitted, the y of of becomes final; and therefore a ry is required before I (which is a fa affix). Thus we have girer. 
But had lopa or blank become sthânivat to # then the st of would have remained penultimate as it was when it was it; and not would have been required. But it is not so. 
Similarly in forming the word . Thus gert + 76 (III. 3. 90) + T (VI. 4. 19). Here, is substituted for y; this will not be sthånivat to g; though this substitute is caused by something that follows (parasmin. Were it to be sthânivat, there would come the augment 7 (a) by VI. 1.73. 
Similarly TT, the aorist of . Thus ++ 9+a17=7+ ++ (VIII. 2. 26). Here the is elided on account of what follows, but still the lopa substitute here is not sthânivat for the purposes of VIII. 2.41. Had it been sthanivat, of is would be changed into a 
Moreover this rule applies where a vowel is changed on account of something which follows (parasmin). Therefore, where the change has not been occasioned by anything subsequent, the adeśa (though of a vowel) is not sthanivat. Thus the words युवजानिः and बधुटीजानिः 
The word that is a bahuvrihi compound of safe and at, mean ing he who has a young wife. In forming this compound, the st of er is re placed by tech. Pro ) by sátra V. 4. 134. This will not be stha nivat to e, as it is not caused by anything which follows. Had it been regarded as sthånivat, the could not be elided by VI. 1. 66 (“there is elision of 
URE • GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
STRY OF CU 
NT OF INDIA 
BR. 1.CH. I. § 57.] 
SUBSTITUTE IS LIKE THE PRINCIPAL. 
ल सरकार 
and a when any consonant except or follows'). Thus, Far+FT = 99 ATT + 0 + For (V. 4. 134) = Tail: (VI. 1. 66). 
Similarly the word वैयाघ्रपयः , "a descendant of व्याघ्रपात' also illus trates this rule. Ture is a bahuvrîhi compound of TT and , meaning 
whose foot is like that of a tiger.' Now the final = of pâda' is elided in such compounds by V. 4.. 138. This lopa substitution is not caused by anything that follows, therefore, this lopâdesa will not be sthânivat for the purposes of the application of sútra VI. 4. 130 (T5 is the substitute of the word are when part of an inflective base ending in the word ore and entitled to the name of Bha. I. 4. 18'). Therefore, PTTTT +41 (IV. 1. 105)= TETT:. Had the lopa been like the original, there could not have been the substitution of 'pad' for 'pad. 
Similarly the word tree, ist per. sing. atm. present tense of the root het 'to shine. Thus rée += éreft + (III. 4. 79). This change of 3 into C is not caused by anything that follows, hence is not sthânivat to, for the purposes of the application of rule VII. 4. 53 ("the finals of didhî and vevî are elided when an affix beginning with e or follows'). Had been sthânivat, the final ş would have been elided. 
Similarly an âdeśa though of a vowel, and even though occasioned by a subsequent something, would not be sthânivat, if there is not the applica tion of a rule to something that precedes the âdesa (pôrva-vidhi). If the rule is to be applied to something subsequent to the âdeća ; it will be applied to the exact adeśa without considering what was the letter which the âdeśa had replaced. It is only when a rule is to be applied to a prior object, that it becomes important to consider whether the âdeśa is sthânivat or not. Thus the vocative case of it is TT: 1 The vocative is formed from the nominative case (II. 3. 49). The nominative of ti is formed by chang ing | into 1 and adding the case termination . Here the âdesa , replaces it, on account of the subsequent termination #. Now there is a rule applicable to vocative cases which declares that the final & is drop ped after short vowels and T and TI (VI. 1. 69). 
Now is the or of sit to be regarded as sthânivat to it, which it re places; for the purposes of this rule of elision of finals? If so, the conse quence would be that the final # would have to be dropped in the vocative. But it is not so. Because the rule VI. 1. 69, which ordains the dropping of EL after short vowels and T and applies to a letter, which is not anterior to the âdeśa ir, but to one which follows it, and consequently there being no parva-vidhi here, the final ais retained and we have the vocative at: 1 
Similarly the word anret: 'the pupils of Båbhravya.' The word बामव्य is derived from बक्षु in this wise. बक्षु + ब (IV. I. I05) = बायो। 
OVERNMENT 
RY OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
SUBSTITUTE IS LIKE THE PRINCIPAL. 
[BK. I. CH. 1. 3 58. 
777 771 
+ TSI (VI. 4. 146 and VII. 2. 117) = a1 + (VI. 1. 79) = 160:. From this is formed वानवीय in this wise :-बाभ्रव्य + छ (IV. 2. 114) = 
1955TT (VII. 1. 2) = arst + fer (VI. 4. 148) = a + Fe (VI. 4. 150). Here, had the substitute 7 which replaced the i of aut, been sthânivat to sir, rule VI. 4. 150 ('there is elision of the y of a taddhita affix coming after a consonant, when long & follows'), could not have applied. But this sub stitute is not sthânivat for the purposes of rule VI. 4. 150, inasmuch as that rule does not apply to any letter that precedes the substitute 7, but to the very letters of the substitute itself. 
Similarly the word teret:, which is evolved from the root et, in this wise for + 7 + (III. 3. 92)= + x + (1. 3. 8)=få + y +o+7 (VI. 4.64) = F . Let us then form a secondary derivative from the word fare applying 
* (IV. 1. 122), the whole of which affix is replaced by TT (VII. 1. 2). Thus F + 5y = f + 52 (VI. 4. 148) = T (VII. 2. 118). Here, the lopa substituted for the i of ett by VI. 4. 64 is not sthànivat for the purposes of the application of IV. I. 122 by which the affix is added. Rule V. 1. 122 says, 
dhak is added to a word ending in g, provided it be a word containing two vowels.' Now far ends in and contains two vowels; but if the lopa were sthânivat to the elided it, then it would be a word of three syllables. That is however not so ; because the rule enjoining the affix ach is not applicable to anything preceding the lopadeśa, but is enjoined with regard to something after this substitution. 
न पदान्तद्विर्वचनवरेयलेोपस्वरसवर्णानुस्वारदीर्घजञ्चविधिषु ॥१८॥ utfall ,919-faa-a-TT--eau-orgente-a7-97 
farwy, ( utrata ) 
वृत्तिः ।। पूर्वेणातिप्रसक्तः स्थानिवद्भाव एतेषु विधिषु प्रतिषिध्यते ।। 
58. Not so, in rules relating to the finals of words, to the doubling of letters, to the affixing of varach, to the elision of ya, to accent, to homogeneous letters, to anusvára, to the lengthening of vowels, and to the substi tution of jas and char letters. 
This sūtra lays down an exception to the previous sútra, by which it was ruled that an âdesa which replaced a vowel becomes sthânivat under cer tain conditions. This sûtra says that a vowel adeśa is not sthânivat under the following circumtances. 
1. Tereafarer- A rule relating to the last letter of a word.' Thus the a of sya is elided before the terminations of dual and plural numbers (VI. 4. III). Thus we have strea 'he is, ta: 'they two are,' area they are. Now in the technical phraseology of Sanskrit grammarians, the y of : and en is 
URE - GOVE 
OF CULTURE 
SAINISTRY 
ERNMENT OF 
AT OF INDIA 
SEC. I. CH. 1. $ 58.] 
SUBSTITUTE IS LIKE THE PRINCIPAL. 
स्कृति मंत्रान्य 
तिसरकार 
replaced by an adeśa called airt, the peculiarity of which is that the whole of it vanishes. So that before the word eat: there is this âdesa existing, though it is in an invisible form. This invisible âdeśa will be sthânivat, as it replaces a vowel, by reason of something that follows, i. e. the affixes a: and so being GT (I. 2, 4); and it will have all the powers of by the last sûtra, in the absence of any rule to the contrary. Therefore, in the sentence ont fa: 'who two are the final fr of ant and the invisible of Fa: ought to coalesce by rules of sandhi into 9 (VI. 1. 78). But this incongruity is prevented by the pre sent sâtra, by which the change of printo sia is a mere fare or a rule relating to the finals of a word, therefore, we have chat Fat: So also in qua area, rule VI. 1. 77 is not applied. 
2. FESTI : a rule relating to the doubling of letters. In the sandhi of ar y we have purt. Here is changed into T. If this were sthânivat to , then the rule by which y could be doubled before y would be inappli cable. But y is not equivalent to 5, though its substitute ; and we have the doub ling of and get the form agat. Therefore, in rules relating to the doubling of letters the âdeśa is not equivalent to the sthânî. 
3. वरेविधिः a rule relating to the affix वरचू.' The affix वरचू is a krit affix which is added to certain roots to form nouns of agency; thus from $ 'to rule' we have STTT: 'ruler.' So from the intensive verb rere we have STARTT: 'a vagrant.' It is formed in this wise gart+T(III. 2. 176) = FTTT+ 
+7(VI. 4. 48). Here the st of has been dropped and replaced by lopa, on account of its being followed by the ardhadhâtuka affix act. The next step is to drop the y by rule VI. 1. 66 which declares that the letters a and I are dropped before affixes beginning with any consonant except 
1. e., beginning with consonants of a pratyâhâra. Thus atat + 0 + . Now there is a rule (VI. 4. 64) which declares that the final long up of a base is dropped before ârdhadhâtuka affixes having an initial vowel. Here there fore, if the âdeśa 'lopa,' which replaced the vowel T, be considered as sthanivat, and er be considered as an affix having a latent initial vowel, then the st of 
rent requires to be dropped. But this sútra prevents this and we have the form यायावर; as, अप्सु यायावर: प्रवपेत पिण्डानू । 
4. Tiara: a rule relating to the dropping of ya.' Thus there is a verb a 'to scratch'. In forming an abstract noun from it, the affix par (tech. f ) is added. Thus fuga +ra= 3+o+fo, the ot of y being dropped by VI. 4. 48. Now there is a rule (VI. 1. 66) already mentioned above which requires the elision of y before consonantal affixes. Now if the lopa substitute be considered as sthânivat to t, then the affix fa is not an affixe having an initial consonant and the rule, which requires the dropping of would not apply. The present sútra, however, provides for this, and we have the form ogía: scratching.' 
TURE 
GOVE 
GOVERNME 
OF CULTURA 
NAINISTRY ON 
NMENT OF IN 
OF INDIA 
जयते 
SUBSTITUTE IS LIKE THE PRINCIPAL. 
[BK. I. CH. IN 95&. 
5. Fitrag: 'a rule relating to accent.' There is a sâtra (VI. 1. 193) which says that when a word is formed by an affix that has an indicatory 7, the vowel that immediately precedes such an affix has the udatta accent. Now car is an affix that has an indicatory 7, the real affix being a (VII. 1. 1.). It is an affis used in forming nouns of agency. Adding this affix to the desiderative verb fais desirous of doing' we have:--- 
+ = + + , the being dropped by VI. 4. 48. Now if the zero be considered as sthânivat, then the accent must fall on this latent es but it is not so. The accent falls on the of ont; and we have Fuente: , so also fatte: 
6. FITUEIT: a rule relating to the substitution of homogeneous letters. To explain this, let us form the second person singular of the verb Pity in the imperative mood. The affix Ę is the sign of the second person imperative singular; and the verb firm belongs to the seventh-class of verbs called Rudhâdi. This class of verbs take the vikarana (III. 1.78) the T and # being indicatory the real affix is 7. This 7 is inserted between the radical vowel and the final consonant (I. 1.47). Therefore we have the follow ing equation:-ferg + T74+y=PT+7 +T+re=fT+7 + 0 ++ ff. The at of ar is dropped by VI. 4. III, which declares that the T of 777 is dropped before those sârvadhâtuka terminations which are rea or is . By I. 2.4 all sårvadhâtuka terminations which have not got an indicatory s are consi dered as a The affix fe therefore is a ga sârvadhâtuka affix, and by rule TII. 4. 87, lê is to be regarded as feat, not having an indicatory . The next stage is :-- + +o+e+f; the fe being changed into fu by rule (VI. 4. 101) which says that 'ę is changed into re, when it follows a root which ends in a consonant of a pratyahára:' here and are changed by general rules of sandhi into 3 and a and we have foT + 7 + + 3 + f (VIII. 4. 41). Then there is a rule (VIII. 3. 24), which says that in the body of a word the 
is changed into anusvâra when followed by a consonant of a pratyahara.' Therefore we have :-- + + + 3 + fe. This is the form to which the present rule is applicable. Thus, there is a rule (VIII. 4. 58) which says that an anusvåra followed by a letter of a pratyahara i.e., any consonant except E, T er and is changed into a letter homogeneous or savarna to the letter that follows. Therefore, if we regard zero as sthånivat to the which it replaces, the anusvâra cannot be changed into or as homogeneous to . But it is not to be so regarded, and we have the form foT + 7 + 7 + f = og or ; so alsoपिण्टि 
9 entrar a rule relating to anusvara.' The above example will serve the purpose here + 7 + 3 + . This by the rule al ready mentioned (VIII. 3. 24) requires them to be changed into anusvara: 
TURE 
GOVE 
STRY OF CUL 
MINISTRY 
NMENT OF INC 
OF INDIA 
BR. 1. CH. I. $ 58.] 
SUBSTITUTE IS LIKE THE PRINCIPAL. 
921678. 
Now if zero be considered as sthânivat, then is not followed by a letter of pratyâhâra , and cannot be changed into anusvâra. However, the zero is not regarded as sthânivat, and we change the into anusvåra. Other examples are fèt + 7 + + + yiga = fitatea; so also füze u 
8. carat:' a rule directing the substitution of long vowels for short vowels.'. Let us form the Inst. sing. of the noun grareat. The ter mination of the Inst. sing. is at or sr. Therefore, we have fêTETL + tr=raan 
+-+*+r. Here the st has been elided by rule VI. 4. 134, which teaches that words ending in s lose their sy before terminations technically called Bha. The termination of Inst. sing. is a Bha termination by force of rule I. 4. 18. The next rule that now comes into operation, is VIII. 2. 77, which requires the lengthening of the short penultimate vowels, of the gen pratya hâra, of words that end in Ţ or and are followed by a consonant. Here fez is a root that ends in T; and if the zero be considered as sthânivat, then this is not followed by a consonant, but by a latent vowel, and so the short of lea will not be lengthened. This rule, however, provides for such length ening, and therefore we have :-iare + + 7 + T = Tamil 
9. Taar: a rule requiring the substitution of soft unaspirate consonants, of pratyâhâra stat, in the place of hard consonants' In this case also the âdeśa that takes the place of a vowel is not sthânivat. 
Let us add the affix her to the root 'to eat,' compounded with the word # or PT. In Vedic literature ze is replaced by ca, (II. 4. 39); so we have, #+ET + T = +EE+ =+ + ++(VI. 4. 100) = + + + o+fà (VIIL 2. 26)= + + + +(VIII. 2. 40). 
w It is at this stage, that rule VIII. 4. 53 requires the x to be changed into T. This is a ty rule, and teaches that in the place of letters of a class, the letters of st class are substituted, if followed by letters of get class. If the zero which was obtained by dropping the 7 of et, be considered as sthânivat, then the is not followed by a consonant of a class, and cannot be changed into it. But it is not so. Therefore FT +o+o+r=Aft:(Yaj. Ved. XVIII. 9). The various rules, by which first is omitted, and then is dropped, have been referred to in brackets, and will be explained in their proper places. 
Similarly the word at which is the Imperative (lot) 2nd per. dual of the root 276, and is thus evolved. This root belongs to the Juhutyadi class, and therefore, there is reduplication. Thus Tart=T + TT + ETET = 21 + 7 + ATT = + + 2 = 1 + + + + FIT (VI. 4. 100) = a + + + + aa (VIIL 2. 26) =a + + + + Eur (VIII. 2. 40) = + 
+ 6 + 4 = ar 1 Here the change of ar into a is by the applica Lion of VIII. 4. 53, which is a jas rule, and therefore, the zero is not sthanivat. 
GURE 
GOVE 
OF CULTURE 
ANISTRY OF 
QNMENT OF A 
MINIST 
OF INDIA 
SUBSTITUTE IS LIKE THE PRINCIPAL. 
[BK. I. CH. IA 3 59. 
संस्कृति मंत्राल 
4 
. 
78 
10. TETET: 'a rule requiring the substitution of the letters of s pratyâhâra instead of other consonants.' In the application of this rule, also the substitute that replaces a vowel is not sthânivat. 
Let us form the 2nd pers. sing. perfect of the verb 75 'to eat.' TO is replaced by TE (II. 4. 40) and tge is the termination of the second person singular of lit or perfect tense. E + t = a + E + 97 (VI. 1. 8) = 6 + TE + uga (VII. 4. 60) = + 6 + (VIII. 4. 54) = 37 + T + + + vga (VI. 4. 98) = 3TT + + #. 
At this stage comes the rule in operation, which says that the letters of a pratyâhâra are replaced by those of the pratyâhâra, when follow ed by letters of ar pratyâhâra. Here is a letter of ter class, and if zero is not sthànivat, it is followed by which is a letter of ur class, and there forest is required to be changed into of qr class. By the present rule, zero is not sthânivat and thus we have :- + FTCh = 37979: (VIII. 3. 60). 
Similarly ETT the 3rd per. plural aorist of ta is thus formed:- + 95T + f + 1 = 1 + 7 + 7 (II. 4. 80) = x + 7 + + + TT (VI. 4.08). Here had the lopa been sthânivat, rule VIII. 4. 55 could not have applied. But it being a char rule, the lopa is not sthânivat. Therefore we have, FT. 
When lopa is the substitute of a vowel, it is not sthânivat, for the purposes of the application of the rules of accent, rules relating to the double ing of letters, and the rules relating to the elision of ya. In other places, with the exception of the above three; the lopa substitute of a vowel is, and must be treated as sthânivat. Thus : , farat: , Fireit, arat:. In these cases the lopa-âdesa being sthânivat, the rules relating to accent, lengthen ing and the elision of ya, do not apply. 
fara sfa cu ustfa u faza, ofa, ( afaraat, one at:, :) 
वृत्तिः। द्विर्वचननिमित्तेऽचि प्रजादेशः स्थानिवद्भवति द्विवचन एव कर्त्तव्ये॥ 
59. Before an affix having an initial vowel, which causes reduplication, the substitute which takes the place of a vowel is like the original vowel even in form, only for the purposes of reduplication and no further. 
This sutra has been explained in different ways by the authors of the Kasika and of the Siddhanta Kaumudi. According to the latter, the sutra means when an affix beginning with a vowel follows, that is a cause of re duplication, a substitute shall not take the place of a preceding vowel, whilst the reduplication is yet to be made : but the reduplication having been made, 
TURE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY ON 
NT OF INDIA 
• B6). CH. I. $ 59.] 
SUBSTITUTE IS LIKE THE PRINCIPAL. 
सत्यमय जयते 
Now 
the substitution may then take place. The explanation given by Kasika is more in harmony with the Great Commentary. For all practical purposes, the two explanations lead to the same conclusion. According to Kasika, the vowel-substitute is sthânivat, in the sense, that it is exactly of the same form as the original, and retains this form only for a fixed time vis., so long as the reduplication is being made; but as soon as the reduplication has been made, the substitute takes its proper form. This rule has its scope in the rules relating (a) to the elision of long 71, (b) to the elision of the penultimate, (c) to the elision of the affix fut, (d) to the substitution of semi-vowels for vowels, and lastly (e) to the substitution of TT, TT, gry and it for , ir 
and or respectively by the rules of sandhi. 
(a). Elision of T. Let us form the 2nd person perfect tense of the root at 'to drink. The termination of 2nd person perfect is 79. This is, therefore, a termination beginning with a vowel, and it causes the redupli. cation of the root. The conditions of the present sâtra all exist in this. Thus we have gr + TCE = + + 7 (VI. 4,64). Here the g is elided by VI. 4. 64. which teaches that the T of the root is elided before ardha dhâtuka affixes beginning with a vowel and which are first or ca and before TE' The affix ga is such an affix (I. 2. 5, III. 4. 115). 
Now comes the rule about reduplication which is contained in sûtra VI. 1. 8, and teaches that a root consisting of a single vowel is reduplicated before the terminations of the perfect. Here, by the elision of q, the only visible root left to us is q which is a consonant without any vowel. The rule of reduplication, therefore, would not have applied to it, because there is no vowel in it, but for the present sútra, which solves the difficulty. Here the vowel-substitute zero must be considered sthànivat i. e. as if it were the very 7 itself. Thus we have qT + I + 6+ yer = TEH (VII. 4. 59). The long yir of the reduplicative syllable has been shortened by VII. 4. 59. So also 49:1 
(6). The elision of the penultimate. Let us form the same tense of ET'to kill.' T + 19 = x + + + 75€ (VI. 4. 98). 
Here also the preliminary conditions are all fulfilled, the affix begins with a vowel and it causes the reduplication of the root. The penultimate 
of 7 is replaced by the substitute lopa by VI. 4. 98, which teaches that the roots us to go' 'to kill' and a few others lose their penultimate before affixes beginning with a vowel and which are also para or fca. We know age to be such an affix. For the reasons already given, we can not redupli cate the consonants as they have no vowel. However, this reduplication is effected by virtue of the present rule, and we have:- + 6 + = STAT: (VII. 4.62, VII. 3. 55). The first is changed into s by VII. 4. 62 and the second into g by VII. 3. 55. 
TURE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
STRY OF CUT 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
SUBSTITUTE IS LIKE THE PRINCIPAL. 
[BK. 1. CH. I. $59. 
सत्यय जयते 
(C). The elision of the affix it . Let us form the Aorist (luni) of the causative form of . The causative is formed by adding the affix rüt to the root; and the aorist takes the augment . Thus we have :-) + E +FT += 7 +5+= I2+3+25+. The affix 5 (III. 1. 48) is added. in forming the aorist of causatives. The letters and are indicatory, the real affix being . Now by VI. 4. 51, the affix fue is elided before an årdhadhâtuka affix that does not take the intermediate . Now qe is such an affix. Therefore we have TE + + a. 
At this stage, comes into operation another rule (VI. 1. 11), which de clares that 'the root is reduplicated before the affix 5. The is, thus, an affix which causes reduplication; it is an affix which also begins with a vowel. Therefore, it satisfies the conditions of this sûtra. Therefore, the zero which was a substitute in place of the vowel , becomes sthânivat to ; as if it were the very g itself. Thus we have the reduplicative syllable Ë, by rule VI. 1. 2, which says that a verb beginning with a vowel reduplicates its second syllable. But as soon as the reduplication is over, the âdeśa takes up its original form of zero. Thus Tig + o + ta = gireza. 
(d). The fourth class of cases, where this sûtra has scope, is the substitution of our for vowels. Thus let us form the perfect and person singular of 'to do' :- + g = a + get, the semi-vowel taking the place of by the general rule of sandhi VI. 1.77. Now we have already learned that Th is an affix which causes reduplication and it begins with a vowel. Now I is a substitute which comes in the place of a vowel (i.c., ), it will therefore be sthânivat by this sûtra. Had it not been sthânivat, the consonants could not be reduplicated, as they have no vowel. The substituter being taken equal to , we reduplicate si n reduplication the ch is changed into by VII. 4. 62, and into y by II. 4. 66. Thus we have:- : ; similarly 70: ! 
(e). The fifth case is the substitution of T &c. Let us form Ist person singular of the perfect of f 'to lead:' f + t = a + T = TIT + 
p. The is vriddhied before the termination of the perfect (VII. 2. 115), and then changed into one by the general rule of sandhi (VI. 1. 78). Now the 
of the perfect causes reduplication, and it is an affix which begins with a vowel. It satisfies the conditions of this sútra. Therefore the gry which was a substitute for it, being a vowel substitute, becomes sthânivat tog in form. In reduplicating the word , we reduplicate as if it were still #. Thus we have the form निनाय and not ननाय. Similarly निनय, लुलव, and लुलाव. 
Why have we used the word "dvirvachane" in the sûtra? Without it, the aphorism would have stood thus:-"Before an affix having an initial vowel which causes reduplication, the substitute which takes the place of a vowel 
SURE - Goy 
GOVERNMENT 
ov OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
ENT OF INDIA 
BAI CH. I. $ 60.]. 
LOPA DEFINED. 
is like the original vowel." Let us form shoot the 3rd per. sing, perfect tense (FETE) of the root om "to be exhausted,” in the atmanepada. The affix of 3rd per. sing. atm. of lit, is TJ (III. 4, 81). Thus t + TET = JFT + TT (VI. 1. 45). Now here is is changed into it, on account of the affix get; this affix causes reduplication, but still r is not to be considered as sthânivat to t. For if I be considered so, then in the next stage GT + TIT = FT + + TaT (VI. 4. 64) the lopa will be regarded as sthânivat to and the reduplicative syllable will be ist and not Ft; the form being forcat and not sitt. But y is not sthânivat to è, because for the purposes of reduplication, the change of it into it is immaterial; it is the second and further change of it into zero which is directly connected with reduplication, (for if zero be not considered sthânivat, there can be no reduplication); and therefore, this substitute zero should be regarded as sthânivat to T. 
Why do we say "which causes reduplication?" Without these words the sâtra would have stood thus :-"Before an affix having an initial vowel, the substitute which takes the place of a vowel is like the original vowel, for the purposes of reduplication. In that case we could not get the form TT, 3rd per. sing, desiderative present tense of fag 'to shine, to play.' This form is thus evolved :-fa+FT (III. 1. 7) = € +5+ FIT (VI. 4. 19) =7+3+377 (VI. 1. 77). Here, the change of g into y is caused by 5 (tech. 58), which begins with a vowel; is this to be regarded as sthânivat tog? No, because does not cause reduplication, it is a which causes reduplication. Therefore the equation is :- + FT = TUTE (VI. 1. 9) =TETC. If I could be regarded like , then the form would have been leana. 
Why do we say "beginning with a vowel”? Otherwise the sûtra would have run thus:--"Before an affix which causes reduplication, the subs titute which takes the place of a vowel, is like the original vowel, for the purposes of reduplication." The affix 5 of the Intensive verbs causes re duplication (VI.1.9); but as it does not begin with a vowel, the substitute will not be sthânivat. Let us form aigā the 3rd per. sing. Intensive of the root 'to smell.' Thus ET+6 = sfr +36 (VII. 4.31)=statera (VII. 4. 82). Here, or is changed into ß on account of 76 ; but is not sthânivat to : had it been so, the form would have been statut. Similarly cente. 
ata TT: On agitata 21a, əra: 11 वृत्तिः । अदर्शनमश्रवणमनुधारणमनुपलब्धिरभावो वर्णविनाश इत्यनर्थान्तर मेसैः शब्दै योथोऽभिधीयते तस्य लोप इतीयं संज्ञा भवति ।। 
60. The substitution of a blank (lopa) signi fies disappearance. 
This defines elision. When a letter or word-form becomes latent, OF CULTURE 
INISTRY OF 
ERNMENT OS 
PRATYAYA-LAKSHANA. 
[BK. I. CH. I. 
a is neither heard, nor pronounced, nor written, it becomes lopa or is said to be elided. Lopa is the term for the disappearance of anything previously apparent. 
In Sanskrit Grammar, this “lopa” is considered as a substitute or âdesa, and as such this grammatical sero has all the rights and liabilities of the thing which it replaces. This blank or lopa is in several places treated as having a real existence and rules are made applicable to it, in the same way as to any ordinary substitute that has an apparent form. The Grammarians do not content them. selves with one sort of blank, but have invented several others; there are many kinds of them, such as lopa blank, slu blank, lup blank, and luk blank, which like different sorts of Zeroes of a Mathema tician, have different functions. 
The word lopa occurs in sûtras VI. 1. 66 and VI. 4. 118 &c. "The lopa substitute is a sense substitute, and not a form substitute. Thus when we say 'let the substitute lopa take the place of such and such a letter or word,' we do not mean that the letters 5, 1, qand should be substituted there, but the sense of the thing, namely 'disappearance.' 
प्रत्ययस्य लुकलुलुपः ॥ ६ ॥पदानि॥ प्रत्ययस्य, लुक्-श्लु-लुपः, ( 19 ) 
वृत्तिः । प्रत्ययादर्शनस्य लुक शन्नु लुपू इत्येताः संज्ञा भवन्ति ।। 
61. The disappearance of an affix when it is caused by the words luk, ślu or lup are designated by those terms respectively. 
When an affix is elided by using the term luk, that disappearance gets the appellation of luk, similarly when an affix is elided by using the terms ślu or lup, the disappearance gets the name of ślu or lup. 
Thus in अद+शप्लुक +ति= अत्ति 'he eats. Here the vikarana शपू has been elided by using the word luk (II. 4.72). Similarly in Tara 'he in vokes,' the vikarana sy is elided by the word ślu (II. 4. 75), so in tut: 'a city in the vicinity of weeds called varana.' Here the Taddhita affix indicat ing vicinity has been elided by the word lup.(IV.2.82), 
Why do we use the words of the affix"? Without these words, the sâtra would have run thus:- "The disappearance is called luk, slu or lap.” So that the disappearance of a base would also be caused by the use of these terms. Thus in II. 4. 70, there wonld have been luk' of the bases agnstya, and kaundinya ; which however is not intended. In that sútra, theluk' of the affixes is only intended. So also in sátra IV. 3. 168 there would have been the substitution of "luk' for the bases of the words, 
प्रत्ययला प्रत्ययलक्षणम् ॥६२॥ पदानि ॥ प्रत्यय-लोपे, प्रत्यय BAUH 11 
वृतः ।। प्रत्ययलोपे कृते प्रत्ययलक्षणं प्रत्ययहेतुकं कार्य भवति ।। 
62. When elision of an affix has taken place (lopa), the affix still exerts its influence, and the opera tions dependant upon it, take place as if it were present. 
GOVERNME 
CULTURE. 
MINISTRY 
T OF INDIA 
| BT. CH. I. $ 62.] 
. 
PRATYAYA-LAKSHANA. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
4.47 
सरकार 
This satra declares that when an affix disappears by lopa-elision its potency does not disappear. Thus the term 'pada' is defined to be that which ends in a case-affix or a conjugational-affix. But after certain bases, these affixes vanish; still those bases become 'pada' in spite of the vanishing of the whole affix. How can an operation directed by an affix take place, when the affix itself vanishes, is a doubt which may naturally arise. This sûtra answers the question. Though an affix may be elided by lopa, yet an operation of which such an affix was the cause, must take place. Thus thig is a pada though the case-termination has been elided. Simi larly the word 'he milked;' which is the Imperfect (F15) of , and is thus formed. erg +faty=Teig +a (III. 4. 100) =TETE +(VI. 1. 68)=7€ + (VIII. 2. 32) (here is changed into s by taking the word 'aduh' as a'pada') 
TETET +. (VIII. 2. 37)=TIT (VIII. 2. 39)= C. 
Why have we used the word gezet in this aphorism again, when its anuvritti was understood in this sûtra from the last ? This repetition indi cates that the present rule applies where the whole of the affix is elided, and not when a portion of an affix is elided. The present sûtra, therefore, does not apply to forms like they and STAT. These forms are the 1st person sing. लिडू Atmanepada of हन and गम्. Thus आहन + इ = आहन + अ (III. 4. 106) = NIET + pige + 7 (III. 4. 102) = ET +4+54. Here, y a portion of the affix xiya is elided by VII. 2. 79; now there will be no TECTETU Of this partial elision of an affix. Had it been so, the final nasal of IT would have been elided by VI. 4. 37: but that is not so: and we have straffet (VII. 3. 54 and VI. 4.98). 
The word FTU means that by which a thing is recognised. The word SETERUT, therefore, means the effect by which an affix could be recog nised. The orthographical changes, like the following, are not however pratyaya-lakshaņa. In forming the genitive singular of 'wealth,' we have * + 6 = TTT:, here, the change of into gry by the rules of sandhi, though caused by the affix ye; is not such an effect, which the affix causes, by virtue of being an affix, but it is an effect caused by the accidental fact, that the affix begins with a vowel, and thus gives scope to the euphonic rule VI. 1. 78. Therefore, when in forming the genitive compound of T: + act, we elide the case-affix , we get the form . Here the elided affix. will not cause the peculiar orthographic change mentioned above, which is dependent upon its letters, and not upon the affix as such. 
agager 11 83 11 azifa 11 a, gat, erge, ( U19 390) 11 
वृत्तिः॥ लुमसा शब्देन लुसे प्रत्यये यदजतस्य प्रत्ययलक्षणं कार्य न भवति ।। 
MRE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY ON 
NT OF INDIA 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
रमेव जयते 
PRATYAYA-LAKSHANA. 
[BK. I. CH. I. 63 
रतसरकार 
63. Of the base (anga), whose affix has been elided by the use of any of the three words containing 7, the operations dependent on it do not take place, re garding such base. 
This sûtra is a special exception to the previous aphorism which was too extensive. It declares, that when an affix is elided by using the words , T, or St, then the 'sign' or FetU or the peculiar virtue of the affix also vanishes. Thus there is an important difference in the elision of an affix by force of the words 7 &c.; and by the word Trg. In one case the virtue of the affix subsists inspite of the elision, in the other it does not. 
The word 15 in this sûtra requires some explanation. “A root, followed by a suffix (pratyaya), is raised to the dignity of a base (prâtipadika), and finally becomes a real word (pada) when it is finished by receiving a case-termination (vibhakti). Every base, with regard to the suffix which is attached to it, is called Anga, body." 
Thus the word ursit: is the plural of the word 75:. The word are: is formed by adding the affix a to orf (IV. 1. 105); the force of the indica tory s being to cause the vriddhi of the first vowel of the word (VII. 2. 117), But in forming the plural of Tre, rule II. 4. 64 presents itself, which declares that there is luk of the affix y when the word takes the plural. Here the affix tt is elided by the word luk, which means not only the elision of the e of på but also the shortening of f into 1, that is, the affix being elided, it vanishes altogether, leaving no trace behind, in the shape of the vșiddhing of the first vowel, which the affix was competent to cause. 
Similarly re: is the 3rd per. dual present tense of us to clean. It belongs to Adâdi class in which the vikarana yg is elided by 'luk' (II. 4. 72); and hence there is no vriddhi substitution, which would have taken place by VII. 2. 114, (the ik of the base al is vriddhied before verbal affixes). 
Similarly ga: 'they two sacrifice'; here the vikarana ge has been elided by using the word ślu' (II. 4. 75, let ślu be substituted in the room of sap after the verbs hu &c). The effect of this elision is that there is no guna substitution of the vowel of the base, which she was competent to cause. 
When an affix is elided in any other way than by the enunciation of the three terms containing , it is competent to cause its proper effect. Thus + + +åt = ht+n+e= T +1 = area. Here the elision of the affix nich is by 'lopa,' (VI. 4.51) and hence though the affix vanishes, its effect remains. Why do we say 'in respect of an Anga or inflective base' Observe quafive,' F# 'seven,' i 'milk,' r 'sâma veda. Here in the word pancha, the plural case-affix is elided by VII. I. 22 
GOVERNMENT 
TURE • Go 
OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY O 
NT OF INDIAN 
. BW. CH1, I. $ 64, 66.] 
T1 DEFINED. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
79.97 
(after the words called shat, the Fia and ma are elided by luk'). Here the affix is elided by enouncing the word "luk,' the result is, that the affix cannot produce any change which it would otherwise have caused, in the anga or inflective base ; such as lengthening, as in râjan, 'a king,' I. p. râjânaḥ kings.' But though it is inoperative as regards the anga, the elided affix is not altogether inactive. It retains the virtue of rais ing the base to the dignity of a pada. Thus:--1977 +15=197+ o, (luk VII. 1. 22). The word pañchan is now a pada, and as such, it drops its final 7. 
Statseit FC II Ex li agiG 11 79:, Epacatfę, fe in वृत्तिः । अचां संनिविष्टानां योऽन्त्योच तदादि शब्दरूपं दिसंशं भवति ।। 
64. The final portion of a word, beginning with the last among the vowels in the word, is called ê. 
This sûtra defines ĉ. It is that portion of a word which is included between the last letter and the nearest vowel. Thus in the word af the portion so is fa; so also in Fraga the portion 3. The word ê occurs in sûtra III. 4. 79. 
The word 77: in the sûtra is in the genitive case, which has the force of nirdhârana or specification; and though it is in the singular number, it represents class name, meaning 'among the vowels.' 
STÊTsealTS JUET UIT agila in 27., 1ta, ga:, Jahr 11 
वृत्तिः ॥ धात्वादौवर्ण समुदायेन्त्यादनः पूर्वोयो वर्णः सोऽलेवोपधा संज्ञो भवति ।। 
65. The letter immediately preceding the last letter of a word is called the penultimate. 
This defines उपधा or penultimate. Thus in the words पच, भिद् , बुध, वृत the letters ,,, and are 5TET. 
The word 'upadhâ'occurs in sâtra VII. 2. 116. 
तस्मिन्निति निर्दिष्टे पूर्वस्य ॥ ६६ ॥ पदानि ॥ तस्मिन् , इति, 
fafera, går i 
'वृत्तिः । तस्मिन्निति सप्तम्यर्थनिर्देशे पूर्वस्यैव कार्य भवति नोत्तरस्य । 
66. When a term is exhibited in the seventh case in these sutras, the operation directed, is to be understood as affecting the state of what immediately precedes that which the term denotes. 
This is a declaratory or interpreting sâtra. When in a sútra, a word is used in the locative case, the operation ordained by that sutra is to be per 
URE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
Y OF CULTUR 
. MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
THE FORCE OF ABLATIVE CASE. 
[ BK. I. CH. I. $ 67, 68. 
संस्कृति मंत्रान 
सत्यमेव जयते 
754.4171 
तपरकार 
formed on the word preceding it. Thus in the sûtra za UB (VI. 1.77) the word Tra is in the locative case, which sútra, therefore, means that 7, 5, F a followed by a vowel (1) are changed into , , , , (FT). The literal translation of the sûtra being:- Of a there is in 1. The force of 'in' or the locative case being to induce changes in the letter preceding the vowel. Thus era + 3 = ETEC ; So Art , Teen !! 
The word nirdishța (meaning 'exhibited ') has been used in the sútra to indicate immediateness. Thus in area, the g of the is not direct ly followed by the of fea, there being the letter intervening, therefore, rule VI. 1. 77, does not apply here: and we have no sandhi. 
QATÇCITITE II C II ucifa il 12, gfa, JUTRI, ( ferfere ) 
वृत्तिः ॥ तस्मादिति पञ्चम्यर्थनिर्देश उत्तरस्यैव कार्य भवति न पूर्वस्य॥ 
67. An operation caused by the exhibition of a term in the ablative or fifth case, is to be understood to enjoin the substitution of something in the room of that which immediately follows the word denoted by the term. 
This sûtra explains the force of words in the ablative case when employed in these aphorisms. As the locative case refers to a preceding word, so the ablative refers to a succeeding word. 
Thus sûtra VIII. 4. 61 declares that after 7, of stha and stambha, the substitute is a letter belonging to the class of the prior.' Thus 39+ FTTT. Here the word g: is exhibited in the original sâtra in the ablative case, and by the present sâtra it means that a dental letter y must be substituted in the place of sthâna, and by I. 1. 54 ante, this dental takes the place of Tiwe have + LUTTL=T-TTA. Similarly in sâtra faig cras: (VIII.2. 18, a word ending in a conjugational affix, when following after a word ending in a non conjugational affix, becomes anudatta.') Here the word 'atinah' is exhibited in the ablative case, therefore, the operation directed by this aphorism, namely, the substitution of anudatta accent, must take place in the word that follows. Thus virea tera; but not so in regafra il 
I EV TERTITETUT # 8C II Uçfor WU, ata, T UT 
वृत्तिः ॥ शास्त्रे स्वमेव रूपं शब्दस्य ग्राह्य वोध्यप्रयाय्यं भवतिनवाह्योऽर्यः शब्दसंज्ञा वर्ज fereert 11 
ar * FITTTT Terra ** 
URE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
aY OF CULTUA 
MINISTRY 
ST OF INDIA 
BEN), CH. I. $ 68.] 
SVAM-RUPA RULE. 
रकृति मंत्रा 
सत्यमेव जयते 
सरकार 
arfiah 11 * fueTTTTTTTT FTTETTE * !| वार्तिकम् ॥ * जित्पर्यायवचनस्यैव राजाद्यर्थम् ॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ * झित्तद्विशेषाणाञ्च मत्स्यायर्थम् ॥ 
68. In this Grammar, when an operation is directed with regard to a word, the individual form of the word possessing meaning is to be understood, except with regard to a word which is a definition. 
This is a rule of interpretation. The word te which means 'one's own' denotes the meaning,' and the word hy denotes 'the individual form of a word.' The sense of the sûtra is that a word denotes both things ex pressed by those two words i and Enq, viz., its meaning, and its form. Thus a rule applicable to star will be applicable to the word composed of 7, T, 7, and not to the words synonymous with agni, such as, TFT, FTTT: &c. 
In this science, therefore, the very word-form is to be taken, and understood and operated upon, and not external sense: with the exception of words which are definitions, in the latter case the things defined are to be taken. 
This sûtra is begun in order to remove the difficulty which might otherwise arise from a consideration that a word connotes a certain meaning, and as no grammatical operation is possible in a concrete object, we must take the words having the same meaning. As when a person is called to bring a 'cow,' he brings the animal cow, and not the letters c, o, w. It may therefore be said, that as no grammatical operation is possible in a material thing, we may take all the names synonymous with the word and operate upon them; this sûtra removes that doubt. 
Thus the sâtra pagar (IV. 2. 33) declares :-"that the affix dhak comes after the word 'agni'." Thus frat + T = " belonging to agni," as in the following sentence #FATHENG faqa. Here the word con indicates the individual word-form and not its synonyms. Simi larly sûtra IV. 2. 19 declares :- let there be optionally an after pa.' As Threren (VII. 3. 50 and 51) or repat. The rule applies to the word-form 'udaśvita' meaning 'curd-milk' and not to go, E, CITIT, Posted and Area, which are synonyms. 
There is an important exception to this rule, and that is in favour of terms which are technical terms of Grammar and have been so defined. 
Thus prereqerg (1. 1. 20) and air : (I. 1. 22). Here the words'g' and 'e' denote the words connoted by those terms and not to their word-form. There are, however, some sûtras in Panini which are ap 
OVERNMENT 
TURE 
GO 
STRY OF CULT 
MINISTON 
NT OF INDIA 
Ches 
• 
SVAM-RUPA RULE. 
[BK. I. CH. 1.3 69/ 
FILE 
कृति मंत्रान 
parently exceptions to this rule. These exceptions have been arranged under four heads, technically called fa, fa, fera, and 119. When there is a rule about a word, it may mean that very word-form, or words represent ing species falling under that word, or words which are synonymous with it. Thus rule II. 4. 12 declares, " 'tree' a 'deer,' TU 'grass,' &c., may optionally be compounded as dvandva." Here the word stands as a generic name for the species falling under it, and does not represent the word-form, F. Thus we have dvandva-compound of TT + FITTE, as F 
or Ferrur: 1 Such sûtras are called fec. 
Then in sûtra III. 4.40, we have an example of fra. That sûtra means "the word get 'to feed' takes the affix tua (TE) when compounded with the word ta." Here the word 'F' means both the word-form Eat, as well as the synonyms of #9 and the species of Fa. Thus fy and 'wealth' are synonyms; while wealth' and TT 'cow' are genus and species. Thus 
T + TT + 1 = FATTA. Similarly TITA, TT, TTTTTA, TTT. Such sutras are called पितू . 
Then in sâtra II. 4. 23, we have an example of fra. “A Tatpurusha compound ending with the word #arcourt' is neuter, provided that it is preceded by the word râjâ, or by a word denoting a non-human being." Here the synonyms only of the word 'râjâ' are taken, and neither the word form 'râjâ,' nor the special instances falling under it. Thus 5T 'king'+ ET=574 'king's assembly,' TT + F*T=STATERTE 'king's assembly. But not F L, but TrFTIT. Nor can we take particular kings, such as Ta or yafat. In their case we must have goq , TSEITET. 
Then in søtra IV.4. 35, we have an example of fea. The sûtra means "the words of bird' TEEZT 'fish' deer,' take the affix 3 when the meaning is the killer thereof." Here the words are &c. denote both the word-forms qrat &c. as well as the species denoted by those terms, but not their synonyms. Thus +5 = TCH: 'a bird-killer,' TIEFENF:, 'a fish catcher.' TagfaT + 3 = stra : 'a vulture-killer.' But we cannot take the synonyms of qfet,' &c. except in the case of 'FET,' when we may take the word 'मीन. As मात्स्यिकः and मैनिक: a fish killer.' 
eryferie T IT: Se açıfa u 701, afga, , , ETT: ( Fia) वृत्तिः। अण् गृह्यमाण उदिच सवर्णानां माहको भवति स्वस्य च रूपस्य प्रत्ययं वर्जयित्वा । 
69. The letters of the Pratyahara Tt i. e. the vowels and semi-vowels, and a term having for its indi catory letter, refer to their own form as well as to their 
URE • GOVE 
VERNMENT 
QY OF CULTUS 
OF INDIA 
. MOI, CH. I. $ 70.3 
TA-PARA RULE. 
सस्कतिमा 
सत्यमेव जयते 
27512 
homogeneous letters, except when they are used as pra tyâyâs or affixes. 
The pratyâhâra FT in thus sûtra includes all the vowels and liquids. This is the only instance where stt pratyâhâra refers to the second 7 of TT. The letters included in 17, and the letters having an indicatory 3, refer to, and include their homogeneous letters also. Thus refers to all the five gutturals , , , , , similarly T,,g, and g, as in sûtra 1.3.8. Similarly includes short, long and protracted . The words 'its own form' are understood in this sûtra, being drawn from the previous sûtra. Thus sûtra STU: (VI. 1. 87), 'when a vowel comes after , guna is the single substitute for both. Here though the rule mentions only short , we take the long yr also. Thus not only 7 + $9:= FTĪST: ; but weT+ŠET:=HT: 1 So also in sûtra se sai (VII. 4. 32), 'there is long in the room of a when the affix chvi' (V. 4. 50) follows.' Here long x is also included; thus 
SUT+Tifa = UTCTTTT, and ear+attfargitilat. So also in sûtra TETIT (VI. 4. 148). When long & follows, there is elision of the or of the base,' the rule applies to the bases ending in long and str also. 
This rule of course does not apply to affixes. Thus sûtra III. 2. 168, says, after words ending in the affix san, and the words âśansa and bhiksha, there is 3.' Here is an affix and therefore does not include long . Thus foret: 'a beggar.' So also in IV. 3. 9, the short only is to be taken and not the long one. 
तपरस्तत्कालस्य ॥ ७० ॥ पदानि ॥ त-परः, तत्-कालस्य, (स्वं 
वृत्तिः ।। तपरो वर्णस्तत्कालस्यात्मनातुल्यकालस्य गुणान्तरयुक्तस्य सवर्णस्य ग्राहको भवति स्वस्य च रूपस्य ।। 
70. The letter which has 7 after or before it, besides referring to its own form, refers to those homo geneous letters which have the same prosodial length or time. 
By the previous sûtra it was declared that a vowel standing by it self included all the letters of its class. Thus includes tr; and , $ ; &c. This sutra lays down the rule by which the very form of the letter is taken and not all the letters of its class. This is done by placing a n either after or before the letter. Thus a means the very letters and not all its homo geneous letters. Similarly y means short only and not long or protracted 3. We had to refer to this sûtra, in our very first sûtra, in explaining the tem গাল, 
URE - GOVS 
GOVERNMENT 
STRY OF CUL 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
TADANTA-RULE. 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
[BK. I. CH. I. $ 77, 72. 
लय भारत 
(तसरकार 
The sûtra consists of two words 47: and Feat GIFT. Taparaḥ means that which has a T after it or that which is after a. Tat-kala means having the same time. According to time the vowels are divided into short, long and protracted. Short vowels have one measure, long vowels two, and protracted vowels three. A consonant lasts half the time of a short vowel. Therefore a letter preceded or followed by a refers to its own form as well as to those only of its homogeneous letters which have the same time. Thus the letter a will include the udatta, anudatta, svarita (both nasalised and non-nasalised) st and not the long and protracted forms. 
This sûtra declares an injunction. The anuvritti of STT of the previ ous sûtra does not run into this sûtra. Any other letter than Tu may be followed by a and the rule of this sûtra will apply to that also. This rule qualifies the previous sûtra which would therefore mean that an HT letter which is not followed or preceded by a a includes its homogeneous letters also. 
Thus in the sûtra VII. 1. 9 Variata FE. 'After words ending in STOL (i. e. short =), Êt takes the place of Fat.' Thus :. But in aer which ends in long or and whose prosodial time is different from , this rule will not apply, and we have come: . 
entfgtreda aiat ul 99 il ugifa l afg, warta, , gar, ( 994 ) 
वृत्तिः॥ आदिरन्त्येनेत्संज्ञकेन सह गृह्यमाणस्तन्मध्यपतितानां वर्णानां माहको भवति स्वस्यच रूपस्या 
71. An initial letter, with a final a letter as a final, is the name of itself and of the intervening letters. 
This sûtra explains the mode of interpreting pratyâhâras. Thus the pratyâhâra y means those letters whose beginning is stand whose final 5 is . 
Why do we say with the final indicatory letter?' Because a pra tyahara like he would be otherwise ambiguous. It might be doubted whe ther it is formed with the final of trg and refers to the first five case-affixes, or whether it is formed with the initial of an and therefore refers to the first seven case-affixes. The present sûtra clears up the doubt. A pratyâhâra is formed with the final ga and not with the initial ra. 
a fafuraçage II 97 H agafa u da, fafes, at- ri, 
वृत्तिः॥ येन विशेषणन विधिविधीयते सतरन्तस्यात्मान्तस्य समुदायस्य ग्राहको भवति 
OREGOVA 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
SR. I. CH. I. $ 72.] 
TADANTA-RULE. 
भारतसा 
(7971 
वार्तिकम् ।। * समास प्रत्ययविधौ तदन्तविधेः प्रतिषेधो वक्तव्यः ।।* autant II *GFITETUTUTS! * TOT I * FRETE ETETETTOYEÚ * 
72. An injunction which is made with regard to a particular attribute, applies to words having that attribute at their end as well as to that attribute itself. 
This sûtra consists of three words :- 'by what (attribute),' Fata: 'rule,' FIFT having that (attribute) at its end.' 
This is a rule of interpretation. When a rule is made with regard to a particular attribute or letter, it means also words having those attributes or letters at their end. Thus there is a rule (III. 1. 97) declaring "let there be the affix ya after the vowels." Here the phrase "after the vowels" means and includes “after the roots ending in vowels, as well as roots con sisting of a single vowel." Thus f + ga = her. Therefore, this sûtra means that when a rule is laid down in this grammar with regard to a parti cular attribute, that rule, besides being applicable to that particular attribute, is also applicable to words ending in that particular attribute. Thus a rule laid down generally with regard to vowels, will apply to words ending in vowels; a rule laid down with regard to certain forms, will apply to words ending in those forms. 
Thus the sûtra Pre(III. 3. 56) 'after there is 7'declares that the affix ach would come not only after , but after any expression that ends in . Thus + T = 7 :, FFT + = 7:11 
Vart: The present rule, (called tadanta-vidhi) must not be applied to rules relating to compounds (samâsa), and to pratyayas (affixes). Thus sútra II. 1. 24, declares that a word in the accusative case is compounded with the words śrita, atita &c. As cré + fra: = testa: involved in pain.' The present sûtra must not be applied here, and we cannot say that a word in the accusative case would be compounded with another that ends in srita ; for tadanta-vidhi does not apply here. Hence we cannot form a compound of a + Tafa: 11 
Similarly, in rules of affixes. Thus sûtra IV. 1. 99 declares that the words 7 &c., take the affix**." Thus 975 + = FTSTY: 1 But we can not apply the affix phak to the word T5, the tadanta-vidhi not being appli cable here. The descendant of TS will be called nails and not as above. 
The above vârtika is however qualified by the following: Vart:--The above vârtika does not apply to words formed by affixes URE 
GOVE 
GOVERNMENT 
STRY OF CUL 
MINISTRY 
OF INDIA 
संस्कृति मंत्र 
VRIDDHAM DEFINED. 
[BK. I. CH. I. $ 73. 
#74. 
73 
72 
that have an indicatory 3 (E, , ), short or long, or where a rule is pro pounded with regard to letters. Thus the affix ktavatu (I. 1. 26) has an indica tory 3, and we have ea. A rule which will apply to ksitavat will apply also to the word which ends in kritavat. Thus the feminine of kțitavat is maat (IV. 1. 6), the feminine of sukțitavat will be sukțitavatî. Similarly rule IV. I. 95 7 9 says "after 7 there is the affix 73." This is a rule relating to pratyayas, but as it is propounded by mere letters, the rule of tadanta-vidhi will apply here. Thus FT + 3 = TFT the son of Daksha.' 
Vart :-When a term, which denotes a letter, is exhibited in a rule in the form of the locative case and qualifies something else which likewise stands in the locative case, that which is qualified by it must be regarded as beginning with the letter which is denoted by the term in question, and not as ending with it. 
Thus sûtra VI. 4. 77, achi śnu dhâtu bhruvâm yvor iyan uvanau, means "iyan and uvan are the substitutes of what ends with the pratyaya śnu and what ends in a verbal root in g or 3, whether long or short, and of the inflective base bhrû, when an affix beginning with a vowel follows." Here the word 'achi' is exhibited in the seventh case, which literally means 'when a vowel follows;' but by virtue of the present vârtika it means, when an affix beginning with a vowel follows,' as. Pret:, : || 
वृद्धिर्यस्याचामादिस्तद् वृद्धम् ॥ १३ ॥ पदानि ॥ वृद्धिः, यस्य, Te, enfe:, ag, 79 
वृत्तिः ।। अचांमध्ये यस्य वृद्धिसंज्ञक आदिभूतस्तच्छब्दरूपं वृद्धसंज्ञं भवति ।। arena u *Fara acheteit vaata 9779* 1 aran T* a TUTET TE BETT 477h521: 11 * 
1 * FEATHETETCHETCT TSA 1* 
73. That word, among the vowels of which the first is a vriddhi, is called vriddham. 
This defines the word ge. The sûtra consists of five words : are the vriddhi vowel;' TFT whose,' a 'among the vowels,' stufe: 'is first;' that; 68 'is called vșiddham.' 
If a word consisting of many vowels, has a vșiddhi vowel coming first in the order of vowels, that word is called vșiddham. Thus the words 
T , THT &c., have the first vowel or a vriddhi vowel, therefore, they are called vriddham 
H 
URE - GOV 
GOVERNMENT 
OY OF CULTUR 
. MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
BESS. CH. I. 874, 75.] 
VRIDDHAM DEFINED. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
नालयमा 
सरकार 
The word vșiddham has been defined in order to make applicable to these peculiar words certain taddhita. affixes. Thus there is a rule (IV. 2. 114) by which the affix छ is added to vriddham. Thus माला + छ = मालीयः।। 
Why do we say “ the first?" Because a word like सभासनयनः, which is not a vsiddha word, will not admit of the affix . Its corresponding deri vative will be साभासंनयनः ।। 
Vart:-A proper noun, though not coming under the above defini tion, may yet be regarded optionally as a vriddham. Thus देवदत्त + छ = देवदत्तीया, or we may have देवदत्ता. 
Vart:-A compound ending in a Gotra word, is regarded for the purposes of the addition of this affix, as if it was not compounded. Thus राढि is a Gotra word and also vriddham. Its compound धृतरोढि will be re garded as a vriddham too, for the addition of the affix. As घृतरादि + छ = धृतराढीयाः 'the students of Ghritaraudhi. So also ओरनपाणिनीयाः, वृद्धाम्भीयाः वृद्धकाश्यपीयाः &c. 
Vart:-Exception must be made in the case of जिवाकात्य and हरितकात्य। They do not take छ. Thus जैहवाकाता and हारितकाताः . 
त्यदादीनि च ॥ १४ ॥ पदानि ॥ त्यद्-आदीनि, च ॥ वृत्तिः । त्यहादीनि शब्दरूपाणि वृद्धसंज्ञानि भवन्ति ।। 
'74. The words tyad &c., are also called Vriddham. 
The cut &c. have been given in the list of sarvanâmas. See sútra 27. These words are also called vriddham. Thus त+छ =तरीयम्, एतदीयमू, मदीयम् इदमीयम् , अल्सीयम् , त्वादायनिः, मादायनिः &c. 
एड प्राचां देशे ॥ १५ ॥ पदानि ॥ एङ, प्राचाम् , देशे, (यस्या चामादिः, वृद्धम् )॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ एङ् यस्थाचामादिस्तत्माग्देशाभिधाने वृद्ध संज्ञं भवति ॥ 
75. A word that has the letters and as the first among its vowels, gets also the designation of vriddham, when it is the name of Eastern coun tries. 
As he is a country of the east, it is a vriddham word and we have गोन+छ-गोनीयः; similarly एणीपचनीयम्, भोजकदीयः । 
URE - Gove 
GOVERNMENT 
av OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
ENT OF INDIA 
VRIDDHAM DEFINED. 
[BK. I. CH. I. 375. 
सस्कृति मंत्रान 
सत्यमेव जयते 
त सरकार 
The word prâk in the sûtra has been differently interpreted. The Grammarian Kuņin takes the word prâk as an epithet qualifying the word âchârya, 'professor' understood. In that case the sûtra will be thus trans lated :- In the opinion of the Eastern (or ancient) professors, a word that has the letters e and o as the first among its vowels, and is the name of a country, is called vșiddham.' Under this interpretation, this will be an optional rule only, giving the opinion of eastern or ancient grammarians. 
Others however take the word prâk as qualifying the word desa and the meaning then is as given in the text. 
Why do we say 'having the letters g and r'? If a simple vowel is first among the vowels, of a word, that word will not be called vriddham: and as such will not take the affix ; as IEEET:, FF25FT:. 
Why do we say of Eastern country'? Because this rule does not apply to a word like to which is the name of a town in the Punjab, which is not an eastern country. Its secondary derivative will be €7:, born in 
Devadatta. 
Why do we say 'country'? The rule will not apply to rivers &c. Thus from Trafa we have acT: ' fish born in the river Gomati.' 
URE - GOVE 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
ANMENT OF A 
OF INDIA 
सत्यमेव जयते 
IT 
ओ३म् er fedit: q: 11 
BOOK I. CHAPTER II. 
E FETCatia fursa f 1 giler | 1115-FT-YG+: , visuais, all 
gía: 11 MEHETEaqp2 pisfera: Heter fra alea, 
f arditet: 11 afft u * sê: griecanaella 475 
1. All affixes after the verb gân 'to study' and the verb kut to be crooked,' and the rest, are as if they had an indicatory (nit), except those affixes which have an indicatory ñit) or o (nit). 
This is an atides'a sútra, and makes certain affixes, though not having an indicatory , to produce the same effeat as if they were really fea. 
The root sie is substituted for the verb ge in certain tenses, in which the verb 3 is defective (II, 4. 49). The Gathe verbs are roots belonging to the Tudadi class of verbs, and they are forty roots beginning with her to be crooked' and ending with is to groan.' 
After these roots all affixes are treated as if they were marked with a with the exception of those affixes which are a or fora. 
Thus from 5 we have in the aorist the form spezifie; which is thus evolved. S + 6 + 6 + 7 + = 4 + otr + + a(II. 4. 50.) = eta + f + fa (VI. 4. 66) = tegutie 'he studied,' segniarai they two studied'; serga they studied." Here by VI. 4. 66, the T is changed into before the affix it, which is regarded as fed 
Similarly, after the verbs 5 &c., all affixes are treated as fta, with the exceptions already mentioned. 
Thus c + (III. 1. 133) = m + 5 + 49 (VII. 2. 35) = sica, nominative singular mean who acts crookedly.' Here the affix 77 being, regarded as ist does not cause the guna substitution of the 3 of , by I. I. 15. 
Similarly with the affixes it and ea, we have nicas and siiasuh. So on with all the forty roots of kutadi class : e.g. Fagfcat, उत्पुटितुम्, उत्पुटितव्यम् 
GREGOVE 
WERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
ENT OF INDIA 
AFFIXES LIKE डिन्त. 
[BK. I, CH. II. 3, T. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
तिसरकार 
** But the affixes marked with or or will not be so treated. Thus fore by which causatives are formed, is such an affix; e.g. 3 + foir + 99 + fag = che + 3 + 5T + for = creara. Here there is guņa of the 3 of me. So also before the affix ans of the perfect tense, we have उच्चुकोट, and before the affix ण्वुल we have उत्कोटकः। 
Vârtika:-The root sa 'to deceive,' is also treated like kutà di verbs, except before the affix sa. As fargar 'he shall deceive, arah 'for the purpose of deceiving'aroya &c. Here there is samprasarana before the nit terminations at, and you and the y of 629 is changed into 
by rule VI. I. 16. 
But the affix ste is not nit and consequently there is no samprasarana before it. Thus 360tr: 'an imp.' 
FEST EUR 1 GIFT fast:, , (rea) il वृत्तिः ॥ ओविजी भयचलनयोः अस्मात्पर इडादिः प्रत्ययो डिद्भवति ।। 
2. An affix that begins with the augment (VII. 2. 35) is nit after the root vij., 'to fear, to move.' 
The root fi does not strengthen its vowel before the affixes that take the intermediate , because those terminations are treated like fa affixes. The root fast belongs to the Tudâdi class. Thus iti AT 
he will be agitated,' Tierras for the purpose of being agitated," Digique 'ought to be agitated.? 
But those affixes, which are not preceded by the augment ge, are not like fa, and they consequently produce their own proper action, such as gunation &c. As 38 + f + g = 337, 3 starts that which ought to be agitated.' 
faqataloT: 11 3 11 Tra il fHTT, SUT: 1 (FET,)' वृत्तिः ॥ ऊर्ण आच्छादने अस्मात्पर इडादिः प्रत्ययो विभाषा भिवति । 
3. After the verb ûrna 'to cover, the affix beginning with the augment is regarded optionally like nit. 
Thus before the sett termination far of the future, we may have cither súrarar or soffat he will cover." 
The equation of the form is :- 5 + 5 + 5 + = + a + SAT (VI. 4. 77) = äraan. When the affix is not regarded as ta, it produces guna, and we have the second form w aar u 
Of course there is no option allowed before those affixes which do not take the augment re, and before those terminations, consequently, we have only one form : as 10+ y< = + 7 = a , 'covering,' grofaaraa 
which ought to be covered.' 
URE 
GOV 
GOVERNMENS 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY OS 
OF INDIA 
· BOR. Ci 11. $ 4,5.] 
AFFIXES LIKE fina. 
जसरकार 
Eraignarna 11 811 Tarlar Il FETT 14, 9-ea, (TEL) 11 
वृत्तिः ॥ सार्वधातुकं यदपित्तन्भिवति॥ 
4. A Sârvadhâtuka (III. 4. 113) affix not having an indicatory q is like nit. 
The terminations which are added to roots are either Sårvadhaluka or ârdhadhátuka. The Sårvadhâtuka terminations are all those that are marked with a y and also the tense terminations called fag, the latter are the following: 
सि 
मस् 
sing. dual. pl 3rd Pers. 
तस् झि 2nd Pers. 
यस् 
Parasmaipada. ist Pers. मिए 3rd Pers. 
प्राताम् झ 2nd Pers. 
थास् 
TTTTTT Atmanepada. ist Pers. 
वहि महि Except the terminations marked with a such as fafe and , &c., all the other Sârvadhâtuka terminations are sa The para terminations like TT, 1972, &c., are also Sârvadhâtuka terminations. These affixes are also ca, unless they have a gas indicatory, as ty. Thus the affix as, being an yiga Sârvadhâtuka affix, is a fea, and before it the vowel is not gunated e. g. 657: 'they two do. The equation is :- +3+ae (the 3 is added by Rule III. 1. 79) - +5+ (VI.4. 110) = 555 + 8= 5a: il Similarly are they do.' 
Here the sofort is changed into 3 and we haver, by virtue of rule VI. 4. 110, which declares that the y of the verb or is changed into 3 before those Sârvadhâtuka affixes which are fea or fona. Here aa is a Sârvadhatuka to affix by the present rule, and hence the change. 
These four sûtras describe the fea terminations. 
Why do we say 'a Sarvadhâtuka affix'? Because an ardhadhatuka affix, though not being marked with an indicatory will not be af. As कर्ता 'doer,' कर्तुम् 'to do,' कर्तव्यम् 'duty.' 
Why do we say not having an indicatory '? If a Sárvadhatuka affix has an indicatory y it will not be nit. As 5+3 + Fag=ana he does ata 'thou doest,' 'I do.' 
Tiga Pernet 114 | Te Rra, fee,ia, (act) IL 
वृत्तिः ॥ असंयोगान्ताद्धातोः परो लिए प्रत्ययोऽपित किदभवति ।। 
URE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY ON 
NT OF INDIA 
A 
AFFIXES LIKE FA. 
OT [Br. I. CH. II. 9. 5.6 
सत्यमेव जयते 
संस्कृति मन 
सरकार 
5. The affixes of Lit (Perfect Tense) not coming after a conjunct consonant, are as if they had an indicatory 
(kit). 
With this sâtra begins the description of affixes which are regarded as fara though not actually having a co to mark them as such. The termina tions of fre (Perfect) not being fra terminations, are fha, after verbs that have no compound consonants. The phrase aria (not being marked with T) qualifies this sûtra also, being drawn from the previous sátra by the rule of Anuvritti. 
Thus from FE to tear' the Reduplicated non pit second person perfect is FLET: 'thou hast torn.' FETAG:They have torn.' 
Similarly चिच्छिदतुः thou hast divided' ; चिच्छिदुः 'you divided'; ईजतुः and fat. 
This rule will not apply if the root ends in a conjunct consonant. Thus खेस् 'to fall down' forms its second person Perfect :-ससंस्+अतुस् = सस्रंसतुः, Here the affix is not treated as kit; for had it been so treated, it would have caused the elision of the penultimate nasal (anusvāra) of Fiat by Rule VI. 4. 24. Similarly from ध्वंस we have दध्वंसे. 
The pit terminations of the Perfect are not kit ; and therefore we have parte he has divided,' where the root is gunated before the 3rd person singular termination which is a fre termination, because it being the substitute of fat is regarded like farg by I 1. 56. 
fruthafnt The Il fall fast-Hafaz , a, (fez Fene) il 
वृत्तिः ॥ इन्धिभवतीत्येताभ्यां परो लिट् प्रत्ययः किद्भवति ॥ 
वार्तिकम् ॥ * श्रन्थिग्रन्थिदम्भिस्वञीनामिति वक्तव्यम् ॥ 
6. The Lit or Perfect Tense affixes after the roots indhi' to kindle,' and bhu' to become,' also are kit. 
After these two roots the terminations of the Perfect are farat.. These roots have been especially mentioned, because the root gray ending in a compound consonant will not be governed by sâtra 5; and the root 
is mentioned because all the terminations of the Perfeet are rea after , not excepting the roa terminations. Thus the verbs für and sū are illustrations of Perfect Tense from the root ou as in the following examples :- watu 
TER, (Rig Veda VI. 16. 15), and ya T T:, (Rig Veda VI. 16. 14). Here the nasal of the root is dropped by regarding the affix as fcha Similarly from the root , we have Tu, 
Vart.:--This rule should be applied also to the verbs st'to loosen,' to fasten,' e'to injure' and First to embrace. As a thou hast 
URE - GOVE 
OF CULTURE 
JERNMENT OF 
B 
. CH. II. $. 7, 8.] 
AFFIXES LIKE fara. 
संयमय जयते 
74.97 
RE 
loosened,' sjet+ TT = 73+ TCT. (The 7 is elided by the rule already men tioned in the last sutra, vie. VI. 4. 24). 
= 9++STF = Terg: (VI. 4. 120), Similarly ug: ; TT, TTTETI, YTTETstia 
मृडमृदगुधकुक्लिशवदवसः क्ता ॥ ७ ॥ पदानि ॥ मृड-मृद-गुध 7-lat-TG-TF: , TT (fona)! 
वृित्तः ॥ मृड भृद गुध कुष क्लिश बद वस् इत्येतेभ्यः परः त्वाप्रत्ययः किद्भवति ॥ 
7. The affix ktva is kit after mrid to be gracious,' mrid ' to squeeze,' gudh 'to wrap up,' kush 'to tear, klîs' 
to suffer,' vad 'to speak' and vas 'to dwell.' 
After these seven verbs, the gerundial ktvå is kit. It might be said, what was the necessity of this satra? The affix ktva is clearly a kit affix, as it is marked with the diacritical letter on, and it was useless to call it a kit affix after these verbs. The reason of this apparent repitition is this. Though ktvå is a kit affix generally; yet there is a later søtra in this chapter (I. 2. 18) which declares that the prefix Far is not only if it is preceded by the intermediate 3. Or in other words, if far is added to those verbs, which are called verbs, viz., that take an intermediate , it is not then kit, Thus the verb für 'to sleep' is E. Therefore efi ++ = +*+ECT = tifeCar. 
Now it happens that all the seven verbs mentioned in the sûtra are ac verbs, and take an intermediate . The far before these verbs would have lost its kitness by virtue of sûtra 18; therefore arose the necessity of this sûtra, to provide in anticipation an exception to that sûtra, in favour of these verbs, where the affix ktva is necessarily kit. Thus we have to eat 
being gracious,' grecar 'having squeezed,' gheer having wrapped' gert 'having torn,' fra having suffered,' feca 'having spoken,' TÍTETT having dwelt.' The Tv of and get are changed into 3 by the rule of Samprasarana (VI. 1. 15). 
Moreover in the case of the verbs T. gr and fg, sutra 26 would have made for optionally hit; the present satra makes it necessarily so. 
रुदविदमुषग्रहिस्वपिप्रच्छः संश्च ॥८॥ पदानि । रुद-विद-सुष Fit-afy-738- , ( 77 ) 
वृत्तिः॥ रुद विर मुष महि स्वपि प्रच्छ इत्येतेभ्यः संश्च त्वा च किती भवतः।। 
8. The affixes ktvâ and san (III. 1.) are kit, after rud to weep, vid to know, mush" to steal,' grah 
to seize,' svap' to sleep,' and prachchh' to ask. 
RE - GOVE 
OF CULTURE 
WURYON 
NERNMENT OS 
OF INDIA 
AFFIXES LIKE fara 
[BK. I. CH. 11. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
After the above mentioned verbs the ktvà though taking an inter mediate y, and the affix hat are fana. The affix az is employed in forming desiderative verbs. The of Er is ga, the real affix being . The root is reduplicated before this at affix. Thus gerai 'having cried,' FETETTA * he wishes to cry'; falcat having known,' fer Tie 'he wishes to know'; qreret (VI. 1. 16.) having taken,' FESTA he wishes to take'; Einar 
having stolen,' gerara 'he wishes to steal'; gear (VI. 1. 15) having slept,' सुषुप्सति 'he wishes to sleep,' पृष्ट्वा (VI. I. 16) having asked' पिपृच्छिषति she wishes to ask.' The verb ग्रह is changed into गृह, स्वप् into सुप्, प्रच्छ् into पृच्छ before kit affixes by samprasarana (VI. 1. 16.) 
The ktvå and san would have been optionally kit after the verbs FO, fare and get by virtue of Rule 26 of this chapter, but this sûtra makes them necessarily so, after these three verbs. In the case of the verb , these affixes are kit by virtue of this sûtra only. In the case of the verbs Fit and tes the affix Far is of course kit, because these two verbs are anit, that is, they do not take the intermediate ; and therefore the frat being directly affixed to them, and rule 18 not applying, the indicatory k would make it kit. In reference to these verbs, therefore, the present sätra teaches something new, only with regard to the affix F, by making that also kit. The verb qes takes the intermediate when the affix 6 follows, by virtue of sútra VII. 2. 75 
HT 2 lucrfa II *: , ( F, Fenet ) 
ITT: 1 FIFAEITIS: TĪ Ate: Ferrara ul 
9. The affix san beginning with a letter of the Pratyâhâra jhal is like kit, after verbs ending in ik vowels. 
In this sûtra there is the anuvritti of an only and not of Fr. The satra literally translated means :-"After ik the jhal." The Pratyahára a contains the four letters , 3, . The Pratyâhâra a contains all the consonants, except the nasals and the liquids. After the verbs ending in çare the desiderative suffix Ez is kit, when it is stię, that is to say when the affix ea does not take the intermediate . The affix ha is an affix (which begins with a letter of the class. But if the intermediate is added before it, it is no longer a patre affix, and in that case it is not rea. Thus from f 'to conquer," which is a verb ending in fe, we have istiga "he wishes to conquer', y to mix' yara; so also 'to do,' f tra, y 
to cross' faardta, 'to be' ia 
If however, verbs ending in or or or , take an intermediate , they likewise take guna. As:-FER 'to smile' takes guna, and makes its desiderative fee 
CURE 
GOVE 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY ON 
ERNMENT OF 
Bm I. C. II. $ 9, 10.] 
AFFIXES LIKE fang 
कृति मंत्राय 
.4178 
रतसरकार 
The Stig FT is not kit after verbs ending in any other letter than the 75. As farafa (from 'he wishes to drink.' So from Fit We have faetata. 
The object of making the affix ft kit affix after verbs ending in ik vowels, is to prevent the guņa of the vowel of the root, as in fata 
wishes to collect', gera wishes to praise.' To this it might be objected "this cannot be : for rule VI. 4. 16 (when Fr beginning with a jhal, i.e., not preceded by the augment gg follows, a long vowel is the substitute of verbs ending in a vowel, and of the verbs and T) would prevent guņa by substituting long vowel.” To this it may be replied: "if rule VI. 4. 16, enjoining long vowel, debars rule VII. 3. 84 requiring guma, it should a fortiori debar rule VI. 4. 51 which requires the elision of the affix fu before Ardha dhâtuka affixes not taking the augment . But evidently that is not so; for the elision of fu is not debarred by VI. 4. 16. Therefore, the present sútra is made, so that even by giving scope to the rule of lengthening, the affix fat be treated as faran." Thus in fata scope is given to rule VI. 4. 16, and the vowel is lengthened. But this rule in its turn will be debarred in those cases where rule VI. 4. 51 will apply : in such cases the maxim contained in I. 4. 2 is our guide, and a subsequent rule will debar a prior rule of Paņini when both find their scope in a single case. Thus in forming the desiderative of the verb 19 'to inform,' both the rules VI. 4. 16 and VI. 4. 51 present themselves, but the latter prevails. The verb Fry belongs to the churâdi class of verbs, and takes the affix fly. Thus 
C + fue + + fag; here the present sûtra comes into force, and a being treated as far, the guņa of the of Fig is prevented. Thus sutra VII. 3. 84 requiring guņa being set aside, sûtra VI. 4. 51 comes into play, and causes the elision of णिच् and we have ज्ञ+स+तिज्ञीप्सति (VII. 4.55 
( changed to b) he wishes to inform.' 
Cate188 Il TGIFT II - a, , (, 7, *i, fanat) 
वृत्तिः ॥ इगन्तादिक्समीपाद्धलः परः सन् झलादिः किवति । 
10. And after a root ending in a consonant, and preceded by a vowel of the pratyâhara ik, the affix san beginning with a jhal consonant, is like kit. 
Thus from fore 'to pierce' we have fafarcera 'he wishes to break,' here the root fare contains the ik vowel ; it ends in a consonant ; the affix Free is directly added without taking an intermediate y, and therefore it fulfils all the conditions of the sutra ; and the vowel is not gunated. URE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
NT OF INDIA 
* ATTIEX LIKE FORMAT 
[BE. I. C. 1. 
*** If the final consonant of the verb is not preceded by a vowel of the ik class, the affix an is not kit after such a verb. As E t à =faa wishes to sacrifice.' Had the affix - been here a kit affix, there would have been samprasârana by rule VI. 1. 16 which declares that there is samprasarana of the verbs a, ay, and 35T &c., before kit affixes. 
If the san takes the intermediate g and is then no longer a wife Fat it is not kit; and causes guņation etcetera. As a + 5 + FrT=FeaTa 
he desires to be. Here there is guņa of ri. 
Roots like FIAT, NE &c., are governed by this rule, though they end in conjunct consonants, for the word of the sûtra means játi or class; thus +at+fay= +ara (VI. 4. 24, the m being elided by treating a as fast )= BİLG or fecha (VII. 4. 56). 
लिङसिचावात्मनेपदेषु ॥ ११ ॥ पदानि । लिङ्-सिचौ, आत्मनेपदेषु ( te ) 
वृत्तिः ॥ इगन्तादिक्समीपाद्धलः परौ झलादी लिङ्सिचौ अात्मनेपदेषु परतः कितौ भवतः ॥ 
11. After roots ending in a consonant, that adjoins a vowel of ik pratyâhâra, the substitutes of lin (III. 3. 161) and sich (III. 1. 44) when they begin with a consonant of jhal pratyâhâra, are kit, when the âtmane pada affixes follow. 
The sätra consists of two words free and tratèg, literally meaning " the aflixes lin and sich in the Atmanepada." The other phrases, given in the above text must be supplied from the previous sätras, to com plete the sense. The anuorilti of the word 7, that began with sâtra 8, does not extend further. As:- e may he break' and refie may he know,' T'he broke', una he knew.' 
Thus the root ne ends with a simple consonant, is preceded by a letter of ik pratyahara ; after this root the jhaládi affix fe of Benedictive in the Atmanepada is treated like fehas; therefore there is no guna sub stitution of the vowel of the root before this affix. fir + Efte=fare. Simi larly in the Aorist we have = + FE+FT+a, the # of the Aorist being elided by VIII. 2. 26. So also state =a+aite (VIII. 2, 37) = PERTE. 
If the final consonant is not preceded by an il vowel, this rule will not apply. Thus Ben. 35 + efle - Te + ate (VIII. 2. 36) = 6 + afe (VIII. 2. 41) = TEE (VIII. 3. 58). Similarly its Aorist is Te Had the allixes efe and a been hit, they would have caused samprasarana of by VI. 3. 16. 
URE . Govo 
ev OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
VERNMENT OS 
BEMUT. CA. II. $ 11, 13.1 
AFFIXES LIKE R. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
44.478 
रत सरकार 
This rule will not apply, if the Benedictive and Aorist affixes are Parasmaipadi. Thus the Aorist of to let off,' is 7 + 7 + ara = 7+ T + + +aita (VI. 1. 58) = + Fra (VI. 1. 77) = maafia (VII. 2. I). Similarly from iT we have Aorist Parasmaipadi Traia. Had the Aorist been raat, rule VI. 1. 58 ( is the augment of the verbs as and when an affix beginning with a jhal and not having an indicatory to follows), would not have applied. 
This rule will also not apply, if the verb ends in a vowel. Thus of the verb f, we have ben. Tale, Aor. e. Had the affixes been rana, there would have been no guņa substitution of i into e. 
The rule will not apply, if these affixes are not jhaládi, but take the augment इ. Thus Ben. वृत+इषीष्ट-वर्तिषीट, so also Aorist अवर्तिट. Had they been fahar, there would have been no guņa substitution. 
This rule, of course, is confined to the Benedictive and the Aorist. Other tenses will not be affected by this rule. Thus the ist and 2nd Future of द्विष is वेष्टा and वेश्यति. 
उश्च ॥ १२॥ पदानि ॥ उः, च, (लिङसिची आत्मनेपदेषु भल कित्) वृत्तिः ॥ ऋवर्णान्ताद्धातोः परौ लिङ्सिचावात्मनेपदेषु झलादी कितौ भवतः ॥ 
12. And after verbs ending in the substitutes of lin and the affix sich, are kit, when they begin with jhal, and the Atmanepada affixes follow. 
As from 'to do' the benedictive is te 'may he do.' So also सिच्, as अकृत ' he did.' So also हृषीष्ट and अहत. 
Of course this rule would not apply if these terminations take the intermediate ; as 1+ gore = arcait may he choose,' (Benedictive): T+7+3=TTCZ or walce 'he chose or covered,' the z being lengthened by VII. 2. 38. 
af A: | 83 | Gta Il ar, FTA:, (fesihat, haag * fara ) 
वृत्तिः ॥ गमेर्धातोः परौ लिङ्सिचावात्मनेपदेषु झलादी वा किती भवतः ॥ 
13. Optionally after the verb gam, the lin and sich beginning with jhal consonants, in the Atmanepada, are teit. 
The verb ter to go' is Atmanepadi after the preposition by Rule I. 3. 29. 
The result of its being kit is that the nasal is dropped in the Atmane pada, in forming the Aorist with it, and the Bencdictive. Thus we have 
URE - GOVE 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
MENT OF A 
OF INDIA 
Affixes LIKE fans 
[Br. I. CH. 11.10 
the forms :-संगसीष्ट or संगसीष्ट in the Benedictive%3; and समगत or समगस्त in the sich Aorist. These forms are thus evolved : 
* + 5 + ais = 7 + 7 + Afisa (VI. 4. 37) = Errere may he combine.' Here the nasal # of T is elided by treating the affix si as Tana by Rule VI. 4. 37. In the alternative we have a state. 
So in the aorist +T+rnata=48+16+a+a (VI. 4. 37)=FATA. The as being elided by VIII. 2. 27 (after a short inflective base, there is clision of firer, if a jhal follows). So when # of Th is elided by VI. 4. 37, there remains only at which is a base ending in short , hence, the elision of खिच्. But in the alternative we have समगंस्त. 
a feall 88 || GIFT II 09:, fati (Fanat) 
वृत्तिः ।। हन्तेर्धातोः परः सिच् किद्भवति ॥ 
14. The sich Atmanepada affixes are kit after the root han 'to kill.' 
As ाहत, प्राहसाताम, ग्राहसत are the aorist of हन, When a सिच or second aorist is kit the verb loses its nasal, by Rule VI. 4. 37. After the verb the 13 is only kit and not the Benedictive fos terminations, as was the case in the previous sätra; hence the repetition of the word sich in this sûtra. The sûtras 12 and 13 were governed both by his and feat; from and after this sûtra, the govern ing power of fag ceases. The governing power of the word "Atmanepada" in sûtra 11 does not however cease, and its anuvritti runs through the succeeding sütras; though as regards this sûtra, its anuvritti is redundant, inasayuch as before the Parasmaipada terminations, the root is always replaced by 
a in the aorist, there is no necessity of making the affix sich a kit. For the object served in making sich, kit, after the verb 7, is to elide the nasal, while in the case of T, no such purpose can be served. 
VAT Teae Il 84 Hlagtfat ll UA, trta, (FETT Hiragey rara ). वृतिः।। यमेर्धातोगन्धने वर्तमानात्परः सिच प्रत्ययः किन भवति आत्मनेपदेषु परत:।। 
15. The affix sich before Atmanepada affixes, is kit after the verb yam, when meaning to divulge.' 
The word gandhana means 'to divulge,'to make known that which had been concealed.' The verb pe has various meanings. 
The result of kit is that the nasal is elided. The verb e becomes Atmanepada when preceded by the preposition wie by rule 1. 3. 28. Thus 
a + 7 + +a=FETUE='he divulged, That, serata, the sich is elided by VIII. 2. 27 and # by VI. 4. 37. When the verb h has any other meaning than 'to divulge,' then the farm in the Atmanepada is not kit; as friFT CA 'he raised the foot,' So also seria T he raised water from the 
URE · GOVE 
VERNMENT 
OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
BAMI. CH. II. § 16, 18.] 
AFFIXES LIKE 
. 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
सत्यमेव जयते 
51 
7 
.417 
well. Though here the verb yan is in the transitive form and takes an object after it, yet it is Atmanepadi by Rule I. 3.75 which declares "after the verb yam to strive, preceded by , 37 and are when it does not refer to a book, the Atnanepada is employed." 
विभाषोपयमने ॥ १६ ॥ पदानि ॥ विभाषा, उपयमने, (यमः सिच आत्मनेपदेषु कित्)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ यमर्धातोरुपयमने वर्तमानात् परः सिच् प्रत्ययो विभाषा किवति आत्मनेपदेषु परतः । 
16. The sich before âtmanepada affixes is kit optionally, when yam means 'to espouse.' 
Thus उपायत कन्याम् or उपायंस्त कन्याम् ' he espoused the girl,' उपायत or उपायंस्त भार्याम् ' he espoused his wife.' 
The word. Upayamana' in the sûtra means 'to accept in marriage,' to espouse.' The verb s preceded by the preposition T is Atmanepadi when it means 'to espouse' by Rule 1. 3. 56. 
waalfe Il gell i lll HT, sajt:, , (Festaaeg fanat) 
वृत्तिः ॥ तिष्ठतेर्धातोः धुसंज्ञकानाञ्च इकारश्चान्तादेशः सिच किद्भवति आत्मनेपदेषु परतः ।। 
17. The affix sich before Atmanepada affixes, is kit after sthâ" to stand” and ghu (I. 1. 20) verbs, and these verbs change their into before these termi nations. 
The roots FETC to stand,' a 'to give,' e' to place', 'to pity', & to feed', ar to cut' change their vowels into & before the terminations of the Aorist of the Atmanepada ; and those terminations are also kit. As GUIET,' he worshipped', FUTTATATA, ETTEICIT; fa'he gave', afeta 'he fed.' 
7 TT ET II XC ll TGT II , FI, H, (f ) 
वृत्तिः । त्वाप्रत्ययः सेणन किद्भवति ।। 
18. The affix ktvâ when it takes the augment FE (i.e. when it is sét) is not kit. 
We had had occasion to refer to this sûtra in explaining sûtra 7. The affix ktvá (the actual affix being två, the k being merely it or indicatory letter) is on the face of it a kit affix. This sûtra however limits its kitness to cases where it is not sét. If it is sét, i.e. has before it the intermediate it will not be treated like a kit affix. Thus in FPT, GETT, the affix et is added directly to the root 'to do' and 'to sacrifice,' without an intermediate and therefore the root has not been gunated, the affix here being kil. But in 
URE - GOVA 
GOVERNMENT 
ISTRY OF CU 
ENT OF INDIA 
AFFIXES LIKE किन् । 
[Bx. I. CH. II. 5 19, ao. 
et areal afgreat, from fee, fea and a 'to sweat,''to shine,' 'to be,' the affix is not kit, because there is an intermediate y before car and the root has been consequently gunated. 
Of course this sútra relates to far ktvå only. Other affixes though having an intermediate y will be treated as kit, if they have an indicatory 6. Thus the affix th (III. 3. 94) by which feminine nouns are formed from roots is a कित् affix. This affix when सेट् , will remain कित् , as नि+यह+इद् +ha=fT+TE+3+ fa (VI. 1. 16) = faTatig: (VII 2. 37). Here there is sampra sarana by treating klin as kit. So also in gefeiera: and f aâ: there is no guna. After 7 &c., the affix that takes the augment 56 by a Vârtika under sutra VII. 2, 9 which see. 
निष्ठा शीविदिमिदिक्ष्विदिधृषः ॥ १९ ॥ पदानि ॥ निष्ठा, शीङ्-स्विदि fhfg-feaic-79 (T, ET, Ferna) 
वृत्तिः ॥ शीङ् स्विदि मिदि स्विदि धृष् इत्येतेभ्यः परो निष्टा प्रत्ययः सेण न किद्भवति ॥ 
19. The sét Nishthâ affixes are not kit after the verbs s'h to lie down,' svid 'to sweat,' mid 'to melt,' kshvid to be unctuous,' and dh rish to offend.' 
The Nishthâs are kta and ktavalu (see sútra 26, Chapter I). They are obviously kit affixes. But in the case of the above five roots they are not kit, and the vowels take guņa. Thus tha: slept, niagara, geren:, gürca:, 
arer: ; fata, cara, garaar, guitar, guigaala &c. in all the above roots the Nishtha affixes are also sét, 
The roots feng (FETTET), (TCT), fer (FEET) and yr (FY) have all long s as indicatory, as well as the syllable fx. These roots therefore by Rule VII. 2. 16 are generally anit, and consequently beyond the scope of the operation of the present sútra. As a:, f at. But when the Nishtha affixes denote 'a state or condition, bhava,' or beginning of action,' then the above four roots optionally become set. (VII. 2. 17). It is in that case that the present sûtra is applicable to them. 
मृपस्तितिक्षायाम् ॥ २०॥ पदानि ॥ मृषः, तितिक्षायाम् (निष्टा सेट् न कित)। 
वृत्तिः ॥ ऋषेर्धातोः तितिक्षायामर्थे निष्ठासेण न किद्भवति ॥ 
20. The sét. Nishtha is not kit after the verb mrish when meaning 'to forbear.' 
Thus area: 'forborne', afecara forbore.' 
Why do we say when meaning to for bear?' When it has not this sense, the set nishtha will be fame. As u TUHE'he spoke unintelli gible language. 
URE - GOVE 
OF CULTURE 
RNMENT OF 
SŁ 
tum, 1. CH. 11. §. 21, 22. 
Arrixes LIKE fana. 
सिस्कृति मंत्राल 
सत्यमेव जयते 
. 
तिसरार 
उदुपधाद्भावादिकर्मणेरन्यतरस्याम् ॥ २१ ॥ पदानि ॥ उत्-उपधात, Hte-of-a :, PRIATELIAI (Fagr a fonet) ll 
वृत्तिः ॥ उदुपधाद्धातोः परो भाव आदिकर्मणि च वर्तमानो निष्ठाप्रत्ययः सेडन्यतरस्यांना fakara II 
21. The sét Nishthâ is optionally not kit, after the verbs with a penultimate if used impersonally or denoting the beginning of action. 
According to some the sét Nishtha suffixes are not kil after the verbs having a penultimate 3 if those verbs are used impersonally (bhava) or denote the beginning of action (adi-karman). Thus ya 'to shine', yianna or arraaaaa 
it has been lighted.' Similarly quiraa: or geraa: 'he first illumined. The word penultimate or upadhá has been defined in sûtra 65 ante. 
If the vorb has any other vowel than 3 as penultimate, then the rule does not apply. As fra a t 'written by him.' Here ş is penulti mate; and therefore no option is allowed. 
This rule has no application where the Nishtha does not express either 17 condition' or 'Impersonal action'; or i f beginning of action', but is used as a verbal adjective. As ac artigo pena he gives a shining coin (called kârshapaņa).' Here the word ta shining is used as adjective. 
The rule applies to the Nishtha which takes the intermediate and not to others as qui 11a: the rice that has been eaten.' Here no option is allowed. 
This optional form of past participle is restricted in its scope. Those verbs which take the vikarana yg i.e., the verbs of the Bhu class &c., admit of this option. Thus it to wrap up' belongs to Divâdi class and therefore, its participle has one form only as गुधिते. 
95: F all 22 I Gta Il T5, TT, , ferie, fargt) 
qə: 11 : Tifter yzza: 491 gua lewatau 
22. The sét Nishthâ and the sét ktvâ are not kit after the verb pûn 'to purify.' 
The word 'optionally 'of the previous sútra 21 does not govern this sotra, because the word optionally' has been again used in the next sútra 
of which there would have been no necessity had the word 'optionally proverning force in this sûtra, for then this would have also governed the next satra. The anuvrili of however is to be read in this sutra, 
OVERNMENT 
TURE.GA 
• MINISTRI 
NISTRY OF C 
OF INDIA 
A FIXIS LIKE বিন 
[BK-I. CH. II. $ 23, 24, 
. 
सरायमंड जपती 
PRE 
1777 
**** By rule VII. 2. 51, after the verb the affixes Nishtha and feat ktvå take the intermediate . So that mear ktvå being sét (by virtue of Rule VII. 2. 51) would have been non-kit by Rule 18; and it might be asked what is the necessity of repeating it in this sútra, when sûtra 18 comprised the case. The reason of this repetition is that by mentioning far kl vâ in this sûtra, it has governing force over the succeeding sâtras. As qra: ,gfart. 
नोपधात् थफान्ताद्वा॥ २३॥ पदानि । न-उपधात-थ-फ-अन्तात ( ez a ferat) 
वृत्तिः ॥ नकारोपधादातोस्थकारान्तात्फकारान्ताच्च परः क्त्वा प्रत्ययः सेड् वा न किडवति ।। 
23. The sét ktvâ is optionally kit, after the verbs having a penultimate and ending in x anda. 
The sét ktvå may or may not be kit after the verbs ending in y or preceded by a nasal. The result of being kit will be that nasal will be dropped. In other words the dropping of the nasal is optional in such verbs. Thus from ग्रंथ we have अथित्वा or प्रन्थित्वा 'having twisted,' गुफित्वा or jer having tied round', stirear or tragar. 
The word "Nishtha" does not govern this sûtra, and comes to an end with the last sûtra. 
This rule does not apply to verbs that have not a penultimate though they may end in y or . As the 'having reviled', iritacar 'hav ing tied.' Here by rule 18, the ar två being non-kit, the vowels of the root Freand re have been guņated. 
A verb may have a penultimate T, but if it has not final y or 6, the rule does not apply. As संस् + इत्वा = सिवा 'baving dropped', ध्वसित्वा “having killed." Had it been kit, the nasal would have been dropped. 
esanaa l TGIFE II afsagt fara:, T, ( 
वृत्तिः ॥ वञ्चि लुञ्जि कर इस्तेभ्यः प्रत्ययः सेवा न किजवति ॥ 
24. The sét h is optionally kit, after the verbs vañch to cheat' luñch 'to pluck' and ritto dare or abhor.' 
After the above three verbs, the klvå affixbeing sét, may or may not Beit. AS चिस्या or पाचवा having cheated. So also लुचित्वा or लुचित्वा 
having plucked', arrest or offent'having dared. 
When the verb e rit takes the affix fag it is not governed by this satra. See sutra III. 1. 29. 
REGOVER 
GOVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
WIRYON 
ENT OF INDIA 
. 1. Ch. II. $ 25, 26] 
AFFIXES LIKE' Fahrt. 
पात मंत्रान्त्य 
सत्यमय जयत 
SEAN 
When the ktva is not sét, but anit, then there is no option allowed. As qe + FIT = 1. 
तृषिमृषिकशेः काश्यपस्य ॥ २५ ॥ पदानि ॥ तूषि-मृषि-कृशे, काश्यपस्य, (क्ता सेट न कित्)॥ 
वृत्तिः । तृषि मृषि कृषि इत्येतेभ्यः परः क्त्वा प्रत्ययः सेद् काश्यपस्याचार्यस्व मते वा न lagiat 
25. The sét ktvå is optionally kit, according to the opinion of Rishi Kâs'yapa, after the verbs trishto be thirsty,' mrishoto sprinkle,' and kris' to become lean. 
As grasar or airear'having thirsted,' rear or ETT 'having sprin kled,' hear or arcat 'having become lean.' By sûtra 18, the sèt kivâ is never kit. This sûtra adds another exception to that general rule. 
The special mention of Kasyapa is for the sake of showing respect. The ar is already understood in this sûtra by Anuvsitti from sútra 23. 
रला व्युपधाद्धलादेः संश्च ॥ २६ ॥ पदानि ॥ रलः, उ-इ-उपधादू, -pre:, , (The fra ) 
वृत्तिः॥ उकारोपधादिकारोपधाचधातों रलन्ताद्धलादेः परः संशतवाच सेटी वा कितो 7: U 
26. After a verb which begins with a conso nant, and ends in a letter of Ral pratyâhâra, and has as its penultimate ş or $, or 5, the ktvå and san affixes are optionally kit. 
The wording of this sátra requires a little explanation. It consists of the following words : 
I. : ralah, ablative of (after the consonants included in the Pratâyâhara ral i.e., all the consonants except 3 y and TV) :-Verbs having their final letter any single consonant except y and 0. 
2. 1999 means “after penultimate f." It is a compound of ar + ra. The itself is a compound of 3 + = fa, in the duala. Therefore the phrase means after (verbs) having for their penultimate either 
ior u long or short." 
3. re: means "beginning with a consonant." All these three words qualify the word "verb" understood. 4. means and san," 
The sutra means, those verbs which have a r letter in the end, a es in the beginning, and an , for 3, F in their penultimate, may optionally treat the affixes klud and san as a... 
REGOVS. 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
NMENT OF IN 
OF INDIA 
SHORT, LONG AND PROLATED VOWELS. 
[Bk, I. CH. II. $ 27, 28. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
सरकार 
Thus दयुत् 'to shine,' makes द्युतित्वा or घोतित्वा ' having shone,' लिख 'to write' makes लिखित्वा or लखित्वा. 
Similarly in san affix we have लिलिखिषति or लिलेखिपति ' he wishes to write', reegraga or jęciraTà'ne wishes to shine.' 
The rule does not apply if the verb ends in a letter other than . As दिव् + तथा = देविवा; its desiderative will be विदविषति. No option is allowed here. 
Similarly there is no option when the penultimate vowel is not g or As att + 7 = int. Des. santa cat. 
The rule also does not apply if the verb does not begin with a con sonant. As treat and gistista. There is no option allowed here. 
The rule does not apply if the तवा and सन् are anit. As भुक्त्वा , बुभुक्षते. 
In these 26 sûtras the description of affixes which are treated like a and font is comprised. 
ऊकाला हस्वदीर्घप्लुतः ॥२७ ।। पदानि ॥ ऊ-कालः अच्, हस्व 78-ga: 11 
fer: 1 75 53 ET FS 221** praescoger ei autê li 
27. A vowel whose time is that of short u, long a and the prolated u, is called respectively hrasva short, dirgha long, and pluta prolated. 
The Ju having one måtrâ or measure is short, having two measures is long, having three measures is pluta. This sûtra defines the three kinds of vowels according to their matra. The letter 5 û has been taken to illustrate the rule. The phrase peaaecea: is a Dvandva compound, in the Singular, and is exhibited in the masculine gender, contrary to the gener al rule II. 4. 17. 
The word kála means measure of time required for pronouncing a vowel. 
As eru "curd', ay 'honey'. Here and are short. ra, tra, here is long. TTR A Devadatta! Here ar a is pluta or prolated. 
These words are used in the following sútras: 1, 2. 47 ; VII. 4. 35 : VIII. 2. 82. 
T R CII TGTfa il va a, (gra eta ga:) !! 
वृत्तिः ॥ हस्व दीर्घ प्लुताः स्वसंज्ञायाशिष्यमाणा अचएवस्थाने वेदितव्याः॥ 
28. The short, long, and prolated, when enun ciated as such, by using these terms, are to be understood to come in the place of vowels only. 
This is a paribhasha satra, and declares the object to which the terms short, long' and 'prolated' are to be applied. When in this book short' 
ARE • GOVE 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
WMENT OF INOA 
P 
, CH. II. §. 29.) 
UDATTA DEFINED. 
संस्कृति मंत्रान 
OUR 
44.417 
"long' or 'prolated' are taught by using the words hrasva, dirgha or pluta, they must be understood to apply to vowels. As will be found in the stra 1. 2. 47.1 "there is the substitution of hrasva or short in the neuter gender of the crude-form." The word 'vowel' must be inserted in this sútra to com plete the sense. That is :-the hrasva is substituted for the final vowel of the crude-form. As fart, faT, TT 99. 
The substitution must take the place of vowel and not consonant. As Earl GIEUSH. 
Similarly sûtra VII. 4. 252 teaches " There is the substitution of dirgha or long vowel' before all affixes beginning with the letter y, except krit and Sârvadhâtuka affixes." Here also the word vowel' must be read into the sútra which will then be " of an inflective base ending in a vowel, the long vowel shall be the substitute &c." As fertugtartere it is collected'; 
+a+a= Tè 'it is heard.' Why do we say "in the place of vowels only"? The substitution must take place in the room of a vowel and not of a consonant. As भि + य+ते = भियते ' it is divided, विद्यते it is pierced.' 
So also in the case of pluta substitution. Thus rules VIII, 2. 82 and 84, declare that in calling from a distance, pluta is substituted for the fa por tion of the word in the vocative. (The word fe is defined in I. 1. 64). Here also the phrase of the vowel' must be read into the sútra to complete the sense. The sâtra will then read :-" Pluta is substituted in the place of the vowel of the fè &c." Thus į 3, O Devadatta ! TFT T O Yajñadatta ! 
Wy do we say "in the place of vowels only”? The substitution must be in the place of the vowel of the Ê and not of the consonant. As अग्निचिश्त , सोमसुश्त. Here the syllables इत् and उत् are दि, and the vowels s and have been prolated and not the consonant a. 
The substitution must be enunciated as such by using the terms, hrasva, dîrgha, and pluta. Therefore it is not so here; ür:, Teatr:, :, yazma, yra: 
See I. I. 4, 
JELEGIT: || 88 | Tra ll stali, 3G1T:,( ) वृत्तिः ॥ उचैरुपलभ्यमानो योअच् स उदात्तसंज्ञो भवति ।। 
29. The vowel that is perceived as having a high tone is called Udâtta or acutely accented. 
With this sútra begins the description of the three sorts of vowel ac cents. The accent placed on a vowel by raising the voice is called udátta or acute accent. As a: agnih, here i has the acute accent. The udatta is not marked 
(9) ÝTT TETTERET () 
T ataarele: 1 (") FTTE: प्लुत उदात्तः ॥ दूराद्भूतेच ।। URE 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY OF 
VERNMENT ON 
OF INDIA 
ANUDATTA DEFINED. 
[BK. 1. CH. II. $ 30, 31, 
सत्यमेव जयते 
सरकार 
in writing. The word vowel ' of the previous sûtra is understood in this also. These accents are the qualities of letters, and are well known in the sacred and secular literature. The vowel which is perceived as having a high tone is called udatta. This tone depends upon the organ from which the vowel is pronounced. In the various organs, such as the throat, palate, &c., if a vowel is pronounced from a higher part of that organ, it is called udatta. The vowel in the pronouncing of which there is the restraining and checking of the bodily parts, and in which there is dryness and roughness of tone as well as a contraction of the larynx, is said to have the acute accent. The word is used in sûtra III. I. 3.2. "The first vowel of an affix has the udatta accent." As + T = ahocera kartâvyam. 
a cra: 1 30 ll CGT dl afrai, uoga!, (*) वृतिः ॥ नीचैरुपलभ्यमानो योऽच् सोनुदात्तसंज्ञो भवति ।। 
30. The vowel that is perceived as having a low tone is called Anudâtta or gravely accented. 
The word "vowel" of s. 28 is understood in this sútra. As ara: agnih, here has the grave accent. The vowel accent known as grave or anudatta is pronounced by lowering the voice. In writing, the anudatta is marked by a line underneath the vowel. The vowel which is uttered from the lower portions of its special place of pronunciation gets the grave accent. 
This word is used in sûtra III. 1. 4.? "the case terminations called 4 and those affixes that have an indicatory y are anudatta" &c. As aul, Tua 
In pronouncing an anudatta vowel, there is slackening of the organs, and mildness, as well as softness and sweetness of tone: while there is expansion and widening of the larynx. 
FAIETT: karta: Il 38 lugtfall FAIETT:, Falta: (WFTI, 3ta, ca: 11 
वृत्तिः । उदात्तानुदात्तस्वरसमाहारी योऽच स स्वरितसंज्ञो भवति । 
31. The vowel that has the combination of Udatta and Anudatta tones is said to be svarita or circum flexly accented. 
The word "vowel" of s. 28 is understood here also. The svarita or circumflexed accent is pronounced by the combined raising and falling of the voice. It is marked by a perpendicular line on the top of the letter, 
The word is used in sätra VI. I. 185.8 " The affixes having an india catory at have svarita accent." As a kanya, u s'ikyàm, kvd. 
() waarna (*) para grogate fegeftae 
URE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT O 
OF CULTURA 
Ry 
m. 1. CH. II. $ 32, 33.] 
OF INDIA 
THE SVARITA DEFINED. 
8 
संस्कृति 
170 are 
This sûtra is not to be understood to mean that a svarita is the resul tant of the combination of two vowels, an udatta vowel with an anudatta vowel. It means the accent midway between the two well-known qualities of letters known as acute and grave accents. 
तस्यादित उदात्तमर्द्धहस्वम् ॥ ३२ ॥ पदानि ॥ तस्य, आदितः, उदात्तम्, अर्द्ध-हस्वम् ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ तस्य स्वरितस्य आदावर्द्ध स्वमुदात्तम् भवति ॥ 
32. Of it (svarita) the first portion is udâtta, to the extent of a half measure, of prosodial length. 
It has been defined that svarita accent is a combination of udatta and anudatta. It remained doubtful what portion was acute and what grave. The present sûtra clears up the difficulty, by declaring that in svarita, the first half is accute and the other grave. 
The phrase ardhahrasva is used to indicate half the measure of a short vowel. Thus if a short vowel is svarita, its mâtrâ being one, half will be událta and the other half anudatta. If a long vowel, whose matrås are two, be svarita then I will be udalta, i will be anudatta. If a pluta (protracted) vowel be svarita, then first half measure will be udatla, and the remaining 2 measures will be anudatta. In short, the udatta portion of a svarita must not occupy more time than is taken in pronouncing a half short vowel. Thus in festa s'ikyam, the a is svarila, half being acute, the other half grave or monotony; in chier kanyâ, the long â is svarita, its first half measure is acute, the remaining it is grave; in #1793 mânavaka, here a prolated is svarita, its first is acute, the balance 2 measure is grave. 
एकश्रुतिदूरात्सम्बुद्धौ ॥ ३३॥ पदानि ॥ एकश्रुति, दूरात्, सम्बुद्धौ ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ एकश्रुति वाक्यं भवति दूरात्सम्बुद्धौ सति ॥ 
33. In addressing a person from a distance, the tone is called Ekas'ruti or monotony. 
Monotony or Ekas'ruti is that tone which is perceived when a person is addressed ; in it there is an absence of all the three tones mentioned above; and there is no definite pitch in it. It is, therefore, the ordinary recitative tone. 
The word 'Sambuddhi' means here addressing a person from a dis tance; and has not its technical meaning of the singular number of the voca tive case. As eTITES 1 Huren 0 boy Devadatta! come.' There is vanishing of all the accents in the above case; and the final short vowel of Devadatta is changed into pluta by the rule already referred to in s. a8 ante VIII, 2. 84 T ) 
URE 
GOV 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRI 
RNMENT OF 
OF INDIA 
EKASRUTI DEFINED. 
fBK. I. CH. II. $ 34, 35. 
जसरकार 
If the person is not addressed from a distance, then the word will get its proper accent. As TITTEES TE TTT come, o boy 
Devadatta.” 
यज्ञकर्मण्यजपन्यू सामसु॥ ३४ ॥ पदानि ॥ यज्ञ-कर्मणि, अज C- 
PSE-ETHY, (Talla:) 
वृत्तिः ॥ जपन्यूजसामानि वर्जयित्वा यज्ञकर्मणि मन्त्राणामैकश्रुत्यं भवति । 
34. In sacrificial works, there is Monotony, except in japa (silent repetition of a formula), Nyünkha vowels (sixteen sorts of om) and the Sâma vedas. 
In "sacrificial works" or on occasions of sacrifice, the mantras of the Veda are recited in Ekas'ruti or monotony. But on occasions of ordinary reading, the mantras are to be recited with their proper three-fold accents. 
"Japa" is the repetition of mantras, and their recitation in a low voice or whisper. Nyünkha is the name of certain hymns of the veda, and the names of 16 sorts of " Om.” Some of these are pronounced with udatta and others with anudatta accent. Sâmas are songs, or the musical cadence in which some vedic hymns are to be uttered. As:- TAEGIET: cheqra: frog 87441 794 Tatia fsaara (Rig Veda VIII. 14. 16). 
When a mantra is recited as a japa, then it must be pronounced with accents :- As farà a Facasted (Rig Veda X. 128. ). 
When not employed on occasions of sacrifice, but are ordinarily read, the mantras must have their proper accent, and there will be no Ekas'ruti. 
In the sâma chanting, the mantras should have their accent, there can be no Ekas'ruti there. As garazi Afro 13. Here there is no Ekas'ruti. 
salati a 99341T: Il 24 u ogrla Il STARIH, ar, 9934: , ( ifu, cefa:) 
वृत्तिः । यज्ञकर्मणि वषट्कारः उच्चस्तरां वा भवति एक अतिर्वा । 
35. The pronunciation of the word vashat, may optionally be by raising the voice (acutely accented), or it may be pronounced with monotony. 
The phrase "yajña-karma" is understood here. Even in yajña-karmas or sacrifices the word may optionally be pronounced in a raised tone. The word 796 in the satra signifies age. But why was not the word are used in the text? It could have been used with as much case as a . To this natural query, the only answer is, fare : TEU 
a: afort: strange and wonderful is the structure of Panini's aphorisms, Thucसोमस्याग्ने बीटी वाइषद् or समस्याग्ने वीही३ पौषद् 
TRY OF CULTU 
MINISTRY 
ERNMENT OF 
Bami. Cæ. II. $ 36, 37.] 
EKASRUTI DEFINED. 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
74.9177 
1997 
विभाषा छन्दसि ॥ ३६॥ पदानि ॥ विभाषा, छन्दसि, (एकश्रुतिः) 
वृत्तिः ॥ छन्दसि विषये विभाषा एक श्रुतिर्भवति पक्षान्तरे स्वर्यमेव भवति ।। 
36. The Monotony is optional in the recita tion of the Vedas, or they may be recited with accents. 
In the Chhandas or the Vedas there is option either to use the Ekas'ruti tone or the three tones. Even on the occasion of ordinary reading, the Chhandas might be uttered either with the three accents or monotonously. Some say this is a limited option (vyavasthita-vibhasha). 
The option allowed by this sûtra is to be adjusted in this way. In reading the Mantra portion of the Veda, every word must be pronounced with its proper accent: but in the Brâhmaņa portion of the Veda there might be Ekas'ruti; while some say there must be Ekas'ruti necessarily and not 
optionally in the recitation of the Brahmaņas. 
Thus :-अग्निमीले पुरोहितं or simply अग्निमीले पुरोहितं. I praise Agni the purohita." 
The word ar " optionally" of the last sútra could easily have been read into this sûtra by the rule of anuvritti; why then use the word farer" optional" again ? To this we reply, this apparently redundant repe tition is for the sake of indicating that the anu vritti of the word Art, which was understood in the last sûtra, does not extend to this. Had we taken the anuvritti of , the other word also would have been attracted ; hence the separate use of the word faster. 
न सुब्रह्मण्यायां स्वारतस्य तूदात्तः ॥३७ ॥ पदानि ॥ न, सुब्रह्मा VYTETH Faithez, 3 , gla: , (ala:) 
वृत्तिः ॥ सुब्रह्मण्यायामेकश्रुतिर्नभवति । यस्तु लक्षणप्राप्तः स्वरितस्तस्वोदास आदेशो भवति ॥ 
37. There should be no Monotony in the re citation of the Subrahmanya hymns and in those hymns, the vowels, that would otherwise have taken the svarita accent, take the udâtta accent instead. 
The subrahmanya hymns are portions of the Rig Veda mentioned in the s'atapatha Brahmana, 
This sátra prohibits Ekas'ruti in the case of certain prayers called subrahmanya. By rule 34 read with 36 ante, prayers might be optionally uttered with Ekas'ruti accent. This ordains an exception to that rule In subrahmanya prayers there is no ekas'ruti; and in these hymns, a vowel which otherwise by any rule of grammar would have taken a svarita accent, takes an udatta accent instead. 
As regos fegmeg gia Teg. Here the word 8103 is formed by the addition of the affix up to the word TOETU, and this will get svarita 
RE - GOVE. 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRE 
NT OF INDIA 
SUBRAHMANYA HYMNS. 
[BK. I. CH. II. 
. 
accent by VI. 1. 185, (farafia ) as it has an indicatory ; by the present sútra, this nascent svarita is changed into udatta. In the phrase 95 TTTET, the word Indra being in the vocative case, is udatta, the st of Indra is anudâtta VI. 1. 1981. The anudalla preceded by an udatta is changed into svarita (VIII. 4. 66). 
Thus the st of must become svarita, but by the present sûtra this nascent svarita is changed into an uddatta. Thus in 5, both vowels be come udâtta. In the word Tray, the str is udatta ; the next letter which was anudätta becomes svaritta, and from svarita it is changed to udátla by the present rule. Thus in the sentence STITE3 the first four syllables are all acutely accented, the fifth syllable is only anudatta. So also in PET SITT=g, for the reasons given above, the letters and = are anudatta, the rest are all acutely accented. 
agrega: 11 36 1 TGIFE II 9-a : , aggia: , u 
Tín: 11 THTETUT: FETTFETIT EITT SITE rafa al 
38. The word deva and Brahmâna in those hymns have anudatta accent. 
By sûtra 37, it was declared, that in subrahmanya hymns, svarita accent is replaced by udátia accent. This søtra makes an excep tion in favour of the words and are occurring in those hymns. These words have anudálta accent. As ear TETT STEGT 'come ye Devas and Brahmaņas. Here the word tar gets udatta accent on the first syllable by rule VI. J. 1981. (in the vocative the accent is on the beginring): at va has originally an anudatta accent which by rule VIII. 4. 66' (an anudatta following an udäita is changed into svarila) would have been changed into svarita. This svarita, by the previous sûtra required to be changed into událta ; but by this rule, it is replaced by anu datta. In other words, the original anudatta remains unchanged. 
स्वरितात्संहितायामनुदात्तानाम् ॥ ३९ ॥ पदानि ॥ स्वरितात्, dearth, acaan , ( gara:) 
वृत्तिः ॥ संहितायाम् विषये स्वरितात्परेषामनुदात्तानामेकश्रुतिर्भवति ॥ 
39. The Monotony takes the place of the anudâtta vowels which follow the svarita vowels, in close proximity (sanhita). 
Sanhita is the joining of two or more words in a sentence, for the purposes of reading or reciting. When words are thus glued together, then 
(") PATA 
C) Falta 
OF CULTURA 
NMENT OF IN 
1. Brn, Ch. II. $ 40, 41. ] 
SANNATARA DEFINED. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
सरस्पर 
7. 
78 
the anudatla accents become Ekas'ruti if they are preceded by svarita vowels; and are pronounced monotonously. As a HTS TEA TETAT (Rig Veda X. 75. 5) O Ganga, Yamuna, Sarasysti ! this mine. 
Here the word ge has udatta on the last syallable: the word # is originally anudatta, but by rule VIII. 4. 661 following an udåtta, it is changed into starita; after this svatrita all anudatta like T5, &c., are replaced by ekas'ruti. All the vowels of the words T, &c, had anudatta accent by rule VIII. 1. 199 (all vocatives get anudatta if standing in the middle of a sentence and not beginning a stanza.) 
The word "sanhita" has been used in the sûtra to show that when there is a hiatus between the words then there is no change of anudatta into 
· ekas'ruti. The word sanhitâ will be defined in sûtra I. 4. 109. 
उदात्तस्वरितपरस्य सन्नतरः॥ ४० ॥ पदानि ॥ उदात्त-स्वरितपरस्य , Faat:,( IgtataTH) !! 
वृतिः ॥ उदात्तपरस्य स्वरितपरस्य चानुदात्तस्य सन्नतरमादेशो भवति ।। 
40. The accent called Sannatara is substituted in the room of an anudâtta vowel, which has an udatta or svarita vowel following it. 
In the previous sûtra it was said that an anudatta preceded by a svarita becomes Ekas'ruti. If, however, such an anudálta is followed by an udatta or a svarita, it does not become Ekas'ruti but becomes sannatara, i.e. lower than anudatta. 
The sannatara is therefore that accent which was originally anu dalla, and which is preceded by a svarita and is followed by an udatta or a svarita. 
This is one explanation of the sûtra. There is another explanation which does not take the anuvritti of Ekas'ruti in this satra. The auudatta is replaced by sannatara when such anudatta immediately precedes an udatta or a svarita, The sannatara is also called anudâtta. As AT HET: ITE=TATTTTT: I 
Here the word wat is anudatta. The word at: has udatta on the Jast syllable by VI. 1. 171. In the phrase a : (ATAT:+27:) the syllable T Is anudatta, because anudatta + anudatta = anudatta. This anudatta , preceding the udatta T:, is changed into sannatara, 
अपृक्त एकालप्रत्ययः॥४१॥ पदानि ॥ अपृक्तः, एक-अल, प्रत्ययः॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ अपृक्त इतीयं संज्ञा भवति एकाल् यः प्रत्ययस्तस्य । 
(') SETTETITE Farca: (") freeray-z: 11 
() T 
ETET 
! 
() 
: 
raahat: 
feat It 
URE - Goys 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY ON 
CRNMENT OF 
OF INDIA 
KARMADHARAYA DEFINED. 
[BK. I. C. 1. 6 . 
स्कृति मंत्रान 
सत्यमेव जयते 
41. An affix consisting of a single letter is called an Aprikta. 
This defines Aprikla affixes. They are those affixes which consist of only one letter of the alphabet. Thus the affix at in hala is a one lettered suffix and is an Aprikta. Similarly, the affix sehat kvin is an Aprikta, because the letters , 5, and I are merely indicatory, the real affix is a v. This v being a single letter, and therefore an Aprikta, when added to a base, is elided by rule VI. I. 67? (the Aprikta a v is elided). Thus FTTT+ feha= aega + = (III. 2. 58)' = TED 11 SİTH . + rtZ = FİTHT Ch co-sharer.' (111. 2. 62).: An affix which consists of more than one letter is not an Aprikla. Asia'a ladle' formed by the Uņādi affix faa (ei saa). 
तत्पुरुषः समानाधिकरणः कर्मधारयः ॥ ४२ ॥ पदानि ॥ तत्पुरुषः, EHTITETU: , FETTT: , || 
वृत्तिः ॥ तत्पुरुषः समानाधिकरणपदः कर्मधारयसंज्ञो भवति ॥ 
42. A Tat-purusha compound, the case of each member of which is the same, is called karmadhâraya or Appositional Determinative compound. 
"Karmadharaya or Appositional Determinative compounds form a sub-division of the determinative compounds (Tat-purusha). In them the first portion stands as the predicate of the second portion, such as in black-beetle, sky-blue." (Max Muller). 
The compounds like a creat 'the blue lotus", THEAT the supreme spirit' &c., are examples of karmadharaya compounds. "The component words, if dissolved, would stand in the same case, (samânâdhikarana), whereas in other Tat-purushas, the preceding word is governed by the last." 
As, 
q 94, is a karmadhâraya compound meaning "the best Govern ment." Had it not been a karmadhâraya compound, the událta accent would have fallen on the syllable or by rule VI. 2, 130,* (the word Tue has udátta on the first syllable in Tat-purusha compounds, except in karmadharaya). 
Similarly पाचिका+वृन्दारिका-पाचकवन्दारिका (VI. 3.142s the feminine adjective is changed into masculine in the karmadharaya). 
Each member of a compound may have the same case, but if it is not a Tat-purusha compound, it won't be karmadharaya. As TT+rar = 
Cate: 'He who has a wife for a cook! This is an example of a Bahuvrihi compound, and therefore the word of Tehr retains its gender sign 
() e () Eyrirsze aki () sirfira: 11 (1) AUTÈ TUTTO () gecontare aratairangi 
GURE 
GOVE 
MINISTRY 
STRY OF CU 
CRNMENT OF 
I. Ç.1. II. $ 43, 44.] 
UPASARJANA DEFINED. 
जसरकार 
T 
: 
A compound may be a Tat-purusha, but if its component parts do not refer to the same thing and are not in the saine case, it won't be karmadhà raya:-DEU TFTUT Brâhmaņa rajyam, 'a Brahmana kingdom.' Here To gets udatta on the first syllable by the rule already mentioned (VI. 2. 130). 
TOTALTIEGE PATEITHIAE lll 83 | Gia II Tar-faiaea, FATET, SIASA, II 
वृत्तिः ॥ प्रयमया विभक्तया यनिर्दिश्यते समासशास्त्रे तदुपसर्जनसंजं भवति ॥ 
43. In this book, in the sûtras relating to) com pound, the word that is exhibited in the first (Nominative) case, is called upasarjana or the secondary word. 
This defines or rather describes the Upasarjana. In the søtras refer ring to compounds, the words that have the case termination of the no.nina tive, are called Upasarjanam. 
Thus sútra II. 1. 24 (fe fra Ferrara Tratat TENTATTA:) is a samâsa sútra enjoining composition. In this sûtra the word fee is exhibited in the nominative case, and the remaining words are in the Instrumental case. The sutra means: "An accusative (Tata) is compounded with the words 
a dia. gera. a. . . and ia and forms Tat-purusha. There fore, in forming accusative compounds, the word having the accusative case will be called Upasarjana. Thus 's + fea: = Chefsta: Here the word of being Upasarjana, stands first in the compound, by Rule 11. 2. 3o. 
T'S TA. (in a compound the Upasarjana should be placed hirst). She larly in rules relating to the formation of instrumental, dative, ablative, genia tive and locative Tat-purusha, the words standing in those cases will be Upasarjana. Thus CIG:, TETE, OCTA, TTTTET: , TATS: 
Upasarjana is, therefore, that word which either by composition or derivation loses its original independent character, while it also determines the sense of another word called car or principal. 
Talaalat anyaga | 88 | Grier # 94-THIET, 27, gef-fatura , ( ) 
वृत्तिः ॥ एका विभक्तिर्यस्य तदिदमेक विभक्ति, समासे विधीयमाने यन्नियतविभक्तिकं वितीये सम्बन्धिनि बाहुभिर्विभक्तिभिर्युज्यमानेप्येकयैविवभन्या युज्यते तदुपसर्जनसंजं भवति, अपूर्वनिपात, पूर्वनिपातं पूर्वनिपाताख्यमुपसर्जनकार्य वर्जयित्वा ।। 
44. A word which has one fixed case, (while the word compounded with it may vary its case) is also upasar jana, except for the purposes of the rule which requires the upasarjana to stand first in a compound. 
RE-GOVE 
OF CULTURE 
RNMENT OF 
18. SINIW 
OF INDIA 
PRATIPADIKA DEFINED. 
[BK. 1. CH. II. 
SOE 
14. A word which in the analytical statement of the sense of a compound has one fixed case, whilst the word with which it is compounded may vary 
its case, is also called upasarjana, but does not necessarily stand first, 
That which has one fixed case-termination is called eka-vibhakti, i.e., a word whose case termination has been determined by a rule of samâsa i.e., while the second word in composition with it may take many case affixes, it takes only one case affix; apûrva-nipâte, such a word will be an upasarajana for all purposes, except for the purpose of the rule (II. 2. 30) which requires an upasarjana to stand first in a compound. 
Thus the prepositions &: &c, when meaning across &c., are com pounded with another word in the ablative case. Though the first word may have any one of the several case terminations, the second member must always be in the fifth (abiative) case, when analytically stated. Ex: femach: + rTaT - F RET:, FTSEFTER + garaan = PETE, fara + entrar = fashia . fassatearet + are T = POFIIRTO , Asta + EFTZTET = fanartert 
Similarly the word rafrua: 11 
If the word, when analytically stated, does not retain the one and the same case, it will not be called upasarjana, as the word art in the compound T ATA, 'the king's daughter,' because : + = 77eart; T: + कुमारीम् = राजकुमारी; राज्ञः + कुमार्या = राजकुमार्या, राजः + कुमार्ये = राजकुमार्ये. 
Had it been an upasa jana, the long of û would have been shorten ed into as in the previous example. 
This upasarjana, however, contrary to the general rule (II. 2. 30) cannot stand first in the compound, because there is no such form as r ata: 
अर्थवदधातुरप्रत्ययः प्रातिपदिकम् ॥ ४५ ॥ पदानि ॥ अर्थवत्, C: , TETT, tragical 
वृत्तिः ।। अर्थवच्छब्दरूपं प्रातिपदिकसंज्ञ भवति धातुप्रत्ययौ वर्जयित्वा ।। 
45. A significant form of a word, not being a verbal root (dhâtu), or an affix (pratyaya) is called a prati padika or crude-form. 
This defines the word "prátipadika" or crude-form. The prâtipadika is the intermediate stage in the development of a full word (pada), from the undifferentiated ore called the dhatu or root. It is that part of a word which is capable of receiving the case-terminations. 
The word means having signification. With the exception of verbal roots and affixes, a word-form having a significance or meaning is called 
(1) TE 
URE 
Gove 
OF CULTURE 
ABISINIW 
RNMENT OF IN 
BIAYAT. CH. II. $ 46.] 
PRATI PADIKA DEFINED. 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
सत्यमेव जयते 
17 
a prâtipadika, as reay: 'a wooden elephant,' afgezt 'the wood-apple tree,' 5°9# 
a bowl,' isa'a seat.: 
Why do we say "significant"? Of course it must have some meaning, . Thus of the word , we cannot say that the portion at is prâtipadika; as it has no meaning, and had it been a prâtipadika, the final 7 would have been dropped by Rule VIII. 2.71 (the final at of a prâtipadika is dropped). 
The word must not be a verb, as the word as the third person sing. number, imperfect tense of a) he killed. Had it been a prátipadika, the would bave been dropped. 
The word must not be an affix or ending in an affix:-as as 'in the bowll' Here the word ends in the affix ş of the locative case, and is conse quently not a prâtipadika' or crude form, but a complete word. Had it been a pratipadika, the T would have been shortened into g by rule 47 succeeding, 
A nipata or particle though not a significant form of a word, yet gets the designation of prâtipadika in the opinion of the author of the Maha bhâshya. As 87€Tegra, 754īt. 
TETEAETE II Bę ll Tgila II 5-TI -HATE: , 7., ( gyga) 
वृत्तिः ॥ कृतस्तद्धिताः समासाश्च प्रातिपदिकसंज्ञा भवन्ति ।। 
46. The forms ending in Krit affixes, or. Tad dhita affixes, or compound are also called Prâtipadika. 
This further explains the use of the word prâtipadika. "Suffixes for the formation of nouns are of two kinds. Those by which nouns are derived direct from roots, primary suffixes. Those by which nouns are derived from other nouns, secondary suffixes. The former are called Krit, (I11. 1. 93), the latter Taddhita (IV. 1. 76). Thus 17 jana, man, is derived from the root sa jan by the krit suffix sr ; but stára janina, appropriate for man, is derived from Tajana by the Taddhita affix fa ina. The name prátipadika would apply both to 17 jana and safra janina, as nominal bases ready to receive the ter minations of declension " (Max Müller). 
Of the compounds, of which there are six varieties, we had occasion to refer to five already, vis. Tat-purusha, Karmadharaya, Dvandva, Baluvrîhi and Avyayîbhâva. They will be fully dealt with in their proper places. 
In the last sâtra, the words "not ending in an affix" were too exten sive; this søtra makes an important provision in favour of words ending in Krit or Taddhita affixes. So also compounds are also called pratipadika. Being restricted to compounds only, it, of course, does not apply to sentences. 
() TÄIT: sira retras (") ago (araar: E • GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
TRY OF CULT 
MINISTE 
ENT OF INDIA 
SHORTENING OF THE NEUTER BASES, 
[BK. I. CH. IS 
सत्यमेव जयते 
The words formed by krit affixes are prâtipadika, as 5 (to do)+ogn= 5 + 7 = IT + 377 = 147. The affix ogas is a krit affix, and it is added to the root to form agent by Rule III, 1. 133. The letters of and 3 are indi catory, the force of or being to cause the vridhi of the vowel of the root. The real affix is changed into 377 by VII. 1. 1o the affixes y and g are replaced by 37 and 37 respectively. Thus the form 1 is a prâtipadika, and is capable of declension by receiving case terminations, as : 1 Similarly 5+7 (III. 1. 133)' = cho ; nom. case ahal. 
The word formed by Taddhita affixes are also prâtipadika ; ETT+ STUT = sirtar + 37 = sirata the son of the Rishi Upagu': nom. case silno:. Similarly 92a. 
In fact in the chapters treating of these affixes, the derivative sub stantives formed by them are always shown by the Indian Grammarians in the nominative case singular number. The examples of nouns given in this book will be always declined nouns and not prátipadikas, except in peculiar cases. So also in the chapter of samasa or compounds. 
The words ending in compound are prâtipadika: as Tri+g6:=T3 gu, nom. case TTTT:. 
हस्वो नपंसके प्रातिपदिकस्यः ॥ ४७ ॥ पदानि ॥ हस्वः , नपुंसके , प्रातिपदिकस्यः॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ नपुंसकलिङ्गेऽर्थे यत्प्रातिपदिकं वत्तते तस्य इस्वो भवति आदेशोलोन्त्यस्याचः ॥ 
47. The short vowel is substituted in the neuter, for the final vowel, of a prâtipadika. 
In the neuter gender, the prâtipadika that would have ended in a long vowel, changes it into short. Thus stía + = START.extravagant', as sialt= कुलम् ' an extravagant family'; अति लो= अतिलु very hairy', अतिलु कुलं a very hairy family 
There is no substitution of short vowel, if the noun is not in the neuter gender, as H + = hoft, nom case oft: the leader of a village or head-borough.' Similarly rar: the leader of an army.' 
A word may be in the neuter gender, but if it is not a prâtipadika, the vowel is not shortened. As art faa'two cantos remain.' Here the 
of ot is formed by the coalescence of st (of the prâtipadika aros) and 
(the dual case termination); thus eros +3=anos. Now it might be urged that here one letter replaces two letters y and s. Therefore this substitute is equivalent to each of those letters separately, and consequently y is the vowel of the prâtipadika and ought to be shortened. But this is not 
au 
O gitar 
URE 
GOVE. 
TRY OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
RNMENT OF IN 
OF INDIA 
FAN, I. 11. II. $ 48, 49.] 
A RULE OF LUK-ELISION. 
रत सरकार 
to be so, because the word pratipadika has been especially mentioned in the text, and therefore this ekâdés'a is not treated as the final of the form which precedes it, 
Arieiraefari ll 84 || GIFT I A-f@hi, FTASARI, (UGT) 
वृत्तिः ॥ उपसर्जनगोशब्दान्तस्य उपसर्जनस्त्रीप्रत्ययान्तस्य च प्रातिपदिकस्य इस्वो भवति ॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ ईयसोबहुब्रीहेः प्रतिषेधावक्तव्यः ॥ 
48. A short vowel is the substitute of prâti padika which ends with the word 'a cow,' and of that which ends with what has as its termination a feminine affix; when regarded as upasarjana. 
The word upasarjana has been defined in sûtra 43. In compounds the word IT becomes shortened when it stands last and is an upasarjana. 
Thus FAT+Tr=rate: possessed of a brindled cow. This is an ex ample of a Bahuvrîhi or possessive compound. So also I 'a spotted cow.' Similarly in those prâtipadika upasarjanas which end in feminine suffixes having a final long vowel, there is a shortening. Thus fa: + gift 
=faarif:. Here the final long is shortened. So also FETTUA:. 
The word prâtipadika of the previous sûtra is understood in this. The word or in the sutra means the form sir and not other words synonym with it. The word air means "a word ending in a feminine affix," because it has the svarita accent. The word upasarjana qualifies both these words, 1. e. when Ti is an upasarjana and when a word having a feminine terminas 
tion is an upasarjana. 
Other examples are:- atacat=greea: 'without a bed-stead' TEATE: 'surpassing a necklace in beauty.' 
If such a word is not an upasarjana, there is no shortening, as, T ant 'the king's daughter. Here the word is upasarjana, and not the word mart which latter is therefore not shortened. The word must be a derivative word formed by the addition of an affix, which makes it femi nine. Thus the words aft, eft &c. are feminine originally, and are not de rived from the masculine nouns, by the addition of any feminine affix. There fore we have अतिलक्ष्मी: 'surpassing Lakshmi in beauty', अतिश्रीः ।। 
Varl:-In Bahuvrihi compounds, exception must be made of femi nine nouns ending in the affix fteft, as TETETT, fraire ! 
gaisagras se ll Tria lgh, aiga gihi, (, USET) 
वृत्तिः ॥ तद्धितलुकि सति स्वप्रित्ययस्य उपसर्जनस्य लुग्भवति ।। 
TURE 
GOVA 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY ON 
ERNMENT OF 
OF INDIA 
A RULE OF LUK-ELISION 
[BK. I. CH, L S 49. 
FECT 
रित सरकार 
49. When a Taddhita affix is elided by the word luk, there takes place the elision by luk of the feminine affix of the upasarjana, 
The word – defined in sûtra 61, Chapter I, is twice used in this stra. Where a Taddhita affix is elided by the word 7, there the feminine suffix of the prátipadika is also dropped, or becomes luk. Thus there are certain Taddhita suffixes by which patronymics are formed (one of them being ) from other nouns. Before this the initial vowel of the word is vriddhed and the final is gunated. Thus for 'ocean', forms + TU= deit + = a' born in ocean or oceanic.' But there are certain words, e. g. sinet, Tut &c., which are all feminine gender (see sútra IV. 3, 34) after which the patronymic suffix is totally elided, without leaving any trace of its action, by using the word luk. Thus stūT + (TUI)=sig: ! Here then the present sútra finds its scope. The l'addhita suffix being luked; the original feminine termination or also becomes luk. Therefore the 'patrony mic derivative of stage is not a longer word, as might have been expected) but actually a shorter word, namely 8: ; similarly from heatif we have Teat: &c. 
Thus there is a feminine suffix called to (actually f) and certain words like &c., (IV. 1. 49)' take an additional suffix called 16 (actually grat. Thus the feminine of 99 will be a + C + = 5 + 9 + 
= arut. Now in forming Dvigu compound (Numeral Determinative compound), the 'Taddhita suffixes are dropped. Thus Tam: an offering (purodash) made in a dish with five compartments.' In this compound the Taddhita sufix sur is dropped Otherwise the form would have been at 7: II Similarly when the word o f forms a Dvigu compound, the Taddhita suffixes are dropped But not only that, even the original radical affixes are also dropped by force of the present sâtra. Thus , which means the cake sacred to the five goddesses ut. Here the full form was t+egrat + r. (The suffix que has the force of "sacred to God." Thus 5 + T = To sacred to God Indra). In the above expression, first the Taddhita suffix ay is luked by rule contained in sûrra IV. 1. 88 S relatinu to Dvigu compounds: we have the remaining + Foerut. In this stage, the present sûtra comes into force and declares that where a Taddhita suffix has been luked. the final feminine suffixes of the upasarjana pratipadika are also luked. Therefore, the feminine suffixes T1 and are also dropped, and we have in which means "cake sacred to the five Indranis (goddesses)." 
(?) 
() sheet muraenafacer gara F ETTET TETTE Taleh भवर्शवरुद्रडीहमारण्ययवयवनमातुलाचार्यायामानुक॥()द्विगोलुंगमपन्ये ।। 
OREGOVA 
ISTRY OF CUL 
MINISTRA 
VERNMENT OG 
BION. CM. II. $ 50, 51.] 
A RULE OF LUK-ELISION. 
Hala er 
सत्यमेव जयते 
सरकार 
The word eft and upasarjana of the last sûtra are understood in this. By the last sútra, a word ending in a feminine affix was told to be shortened when it was an upasarjana; this sútra teaches the total suppression of such an affix in special cases. To take another example: Thus Rule IV. 3. 163 declares adoh "luk takes the place of an affix signifying modification or product when fruit is meant." Thus ea is an affix which means modification. Thus TT + 2a = TOOLT cow's milk or the product of cow. This affix is sup. pressed when applied to a tree, in the sense of the fruit of the tree. Thu the fruit of the tree gaat will be called Th . i e, first the Taddhita affix is luked, and then the feminine affix is also dropped. Similarly fruits of Tect or a trees are act or T . 
This rule only applies when a Taddhita affix is elided; and not so when any other affix is luked. Thus truf: + g = tris su 'the family of Gârgî.' Here in forming the samâsa, the case affix of the word gârgi is luked by II. 4. 71). But this suppression of the genitive termination does not necessitate the elision of the feminine affix g of gârgi. 
This rule would not also apply if there is no elision by luk of a Tad dhita affix, as in T h . 
Nor will the rule apply when the word is not an upasarjana. As arer, sidi, he: 
NOTE: Il yo lll Torfa il ca, drozti, (aigagies)! 
वृत्ति ॥ गोण्यास्तद्धितलुकि सति इकारादेशो भवति॥ 
50. The short is substituted in the place of gonî, when Taddhita affix is elided by luk. 
By the former sútra when a Taddbita is elided, the long f of the femi nine also required elision. But this rule makes an exception in favor of the word Trürs in which, under similar circumstances the short g replaces the long f, as in the compound a ft: 'purchased for five goņis.' Here the Taddhita suffix which couveys the meaning of "purchased for," has been rejected after it by V. 1 28.9 Therefore by previous sútra, the feminine suffix ş also required rejection. But this sûtra intervenes and changes the long into short . 
This sûtra is divided into two separate rules by the process called yoga-vibhaga. Thus ga is made one sûtra by itself, and then it means, when there is a suppression of Taddhita aflix by , then the long is replaced by short . Thus purchased with five needles of: authwa:=TET, a . 
This is restricted to such examples of purchase only. 
() g 
r anit: 1 (°) ea facraru 
URE - GOVE, 
VERNMENT O 
OF CULTURA 
HUIRY ON 
OF INDIA 
A RULE OF LUP ELISION. 
[Br. I. CH. II.5 
KO 
ON 
सत्यमेव जयत 
तसपकार 
gfu ghaziaga Il 48 | 
ÇIFT II gru, yaa, 
वृत्तिः।। लुपीति लुप्संज्ञया लुप्ततस्य प्रत्ययस्यार्थ उच्यते तत्र लुपि युक्तवव्यक्ति वचने भवतः ॥ 
वार्तिकम् ॥ हरीतक्यादिषु व्यक्तिः ।। वार्तिकम् ॥ खलतिकादिषु वचनम् ॥ 
51. When a Taddhita affix is elided by using the word ay, then the gender and number (of the deri vative word) agree with those of the original word. 
This sûtra consists of four words: 1. aft, 'where there is a rejection by using लु'; 2. युक्तवत् 'appropriate to the same;' 3. व्यक्ति 'gender; 4. वचनं 'num ber.' The form vyakti vachane is dual. 
When a Taddhita affix is luped, then the derivative word retains the gender and number of the primitive word. Note the difference between the rejection of a Taddhita by saying let there be a go' and let there be a '11 The direct action of both words is the rejection of the suffix; but a derivative formed by luk rejection may not retain the number and gender of the original word; while a derivative formed by lup rejection does retain the number and gender of the original word. 
Thus in the secondary derivative word foritat:, meaning a village not far away from farta trees', the masculine gender and plural number of the original word has been retained, though made applicable to a village, which is in the singular number and neuter gender; similarly the word 97: is masculine plural in form though applicable to a single province. 
This sûtra is not an approved rule; as will be mentioned by Panini in sâtra 53 following and is consequently of little practical importance. 
Thus re: are a class of Kshatriyas. As such it is masculine gender and plural number. The country in which Panchalâs live is also called Pan chalas; similarly a, : &c. There is a rule stategy (IV. 2. 81, the lup takes the place of an affix when signifying the proper name of a country or kingdom). Thus : + Fu (this is one of the affixes forming country) =ye: 
This rule does not apply when the affix is suppressed by the word &c. and not 79. Thus aqu: T: salted soup', maar: 'salted gruel.' a greh 'salted vegetable.' Here the affix on has been elided by the word luk, by IV. 4 24. 
F edon (after the word lavana the affix is luked) These derivatives retain only the gender and number of the original, but no other quality. Thus as we have already seen that fart, s'irîshah, is the name of a village and is formed by the lup of the affix. Now com pounding it with as we have fareigas, the forest of the village Sirisha. Here 
URE - GOU 
GOVERNME 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY ON 
OF INDIA 
DEDI. CH. II. $ 52.1 
RULES OF LUP-ELISION. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
the word fiert: means village, and not trees. Had it meant trees called s'irîsha, then the 7 of a would have become y optionally by Rule VIII. 4.6. (HITTAT FETTET: 11 The of the word is optionally changed into u when preceded by words signifying annual herbs and trees). 
Vart :- In the case of the words Haritaki &c., the gender only is retained and not the number. As far a 'the fruits of Haritaki. Here This is neuter in form, while attacht is feminine. 
Vart :--The words aga &c. retain their number only but not gen der, as arraCTITET 'mountain forests, i.e. forests in the vicinity of mountains. Here Emrah is singular and a plural, but the gender of both is the same vis. neuter. 
faatquni tistà: il 42 II UGIAT felst utale, , walà, (gro) 
वृत्तिः ॥ लुबर्थस्ययानि विशेषणानि तेषामपि व्यक्तिवचने भवतो जाति वर्जयित्वा ।। 
वार्तिकम् ॥ मनुष्यलुपि प्रतिषेधो वक्तव्यः ॥ 
52. And of adjectives, (the gender and num ber are the same as of the word formed by lup elision of the Taddhita and which they qualify) so far as the jâti (or kind or species) is concerned ; (or when not expressing jâti.) 
When a Taddbita is luped, the adjectives which qualify such secondary derivatives agree with them in number and gender. This is a rule of syntax. Thus 
Tat: Tuet: TETTE, Gatteat: JE 41: 'the pleasant Pañchâlâs having plenty of food, plenty of milk and butter. Here the adjective tuuter, pleasant &c., agrees in number and gender with the Pañchâlah; being also in masculine plural. But when such a derivative is used as a jâti word then the adjective does not agree in number and gender, as at: 399€!, JITSI DIT:. Here 39€ though qualifying Pañchala does not agree with it in number and gender, as it is a noun of class. All attributes of such words formed by the lup of Taddhita agree with their substantives in number and gender: provided that such an attribute is not a common noun used as an ad jective. Similarly adjectives which do not directly qualify such Taddhita. formed nouns, but do so through the medium of a noun of class, do not agree in gender and number with the Taddhita-word. Thus : s er maith Tat:, 'the country of Pañchalâs is pleasant and fertile.' Here the words Tira: and Tatt: qualify directly the word 'STATTE:' and indirectly the word Pañchâlâs, and therefore do not agree with the latter. 
GURE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
STRY OF CUL 
. MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
LUP-ELISION NOT APPROVED. 
[BK. I. CH. II. 
3. 
RE 
• संस्कृति मंत्रा 
लसरकार 
The explanation of this sûtra as given by Patanjali in the Maha bhashya is somewhat different from that of the Kâs'ika. The phrase ista: is analysed by him as and stra:, the sense being "and as far as the jati goes.” The word jâti is thus explained : 
A word expressing whatever is distinguishable by its form or figure, or which begins the name of an individual is easily found applicable to others without any further teaching, (a common name) provided it is not a word used in all genders, (common noun geusa genus); and (only for the purpose of grammar as coming under the rules relating to the abovementioned words), a word expressing descendants by their parentage as well as a word expressing a person by the branch of the Vedas (RTTET) which the family to which the person belongs is competent to read geteg (s'âkhâdhyetri) (irusta ) = sigarh: (jâtivâchakâh) tenta TEUTUTETOVIRAT PHTCH 1 सकृदाख्यात निग्राह्य गोत्रं च चरणैः सह ।। 
The following examples will illustrate the meaning of the above de finition:-(1) Te is a játi word because it denotes what is distinguishable by its form, i. e. by its being contiguous to a place covered with water, (2) T is such a word, because when given as the name of an individual, is applicable to other s'adras (common name), (3) iqa is such a word, and (4) e a person belonging to the family competent to read the branch of the Vedas called katha is also such a word. But è n is not such a word, because it is a proper name applicable to only one individual and his likewise not such a word, because it, though a common name, is used in all genders. 
Vari:-Prohibition must be stated in the case of nouns formed by the y elision of an affix relating to man. Thus the Taddhita affix ha (h) is employed in denoting representation by imitation. Thus 57976: means a figure like a horse (in wood or clay or paper). But when the imitation is that of a man, this affix is elided. Thus a means a "doll of straw." But when we want to say a doll in the figure of a man, we will have thang (n e V. 3.98) = 27. Here this word is formed by the elision of an affix relating to man. Adjectives qualifying this word will not agree in gender and number. Thus 
q: the delightful straw figure of man.' afuer: agrefter: 'a beautiful representation of an eunuch.' 
तदशिष्यं संज्ञाप्रमाणत्वात् ॥ ५३॥ पदानि ॥ तद्-अशिष्यम् , संज्ञा 
प्रमाणत्वात् ।। 
वृत्तिः । तदशिष्यं न वक्तव्यं कस्मात्संज्ञाप्रमाणत्वात् ।। 
TURE 
GOVE 
GOVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY ON 
ENT OF INDMA 
AI. CH. II. $ 53, 54.] 
LUP-ELISION NOT APPROVED. 
रकृति मंत्राद्ध 
सत्यमेव जयते 
777 
53. This (concord of gender and number, of primitive and derivative nouns, and of attributes and substantives) need not be taught (or approved), because it has the authority of sam jñâ (or conventional term or idiom). 
The agreement between the number and gender of the nouns and attributes; of primary and secondary words formed by suffix rejection, is not an approved syntax. The gender and number of particular deri vatives or adjectives are not blindly to be fixed by the primary words or the governed substantives; but it is a matter more or less of usage or idiom: and no hard and fast rule can be laid down for it. Thus the word erer: 'wife' has the form of masculine plural, but is always applied to females, similarly TT: 'water' is always feminine plural in form, so also Ter: 77: fanar: This sútra, therefore, modifies the former sûtras and leaves the whole question of syntactic agreement to be decided by usage and idiom. 
The words like Pañchâlâs, Kaurava, &c, should not be considered as derivative words formed by the lup elision of Taddhita; but they must be taken as proper nouns and appellatives of certain countries, consequently the gender and number of such words are fixed by the nature of such words and not by any rule of grammar. 
ET OTT tata il 98 per il go, Etat- Teha, ( TTC) 
TT: UI ISÍ SITT T Tropriazda sta se poat:rch Etruf Eros ख्यानात् नहि पञ्चाला वरणा इति योगः सम्बन्धः प्रख्यायते तदुपलभामहे बृक्षयोगानगरे qui sia u 
54. The sûtras declaring lup elision need not also be taught, because of the non-currency of the etymo logical meaning of the words supposed to be formed by lup elision. 
In explaining certain words, it is a round-about way of going to work to say that there was a suffix after them, which has been rejected, without pro ducing any effect. It is easier to say that the form is what we find it to be, and that its peculiar meaning depends upon usage. Moreover, in many cases, the would-be etymological meaning is not in fact that the current meaning which the word has in ordinary language. It is therefore a useless circumlocution to presuppose the existence of a suffix, to add it to a word, and, then after all, to make it vanish. 
FURE 
GOVO 
COVERNMENT 
STRY OF CU 
MINISTRI 
LENT OF INDIA 
PRADHANA AND PRATYAYA. 
[BK. I. CH. II. $ 56,56 
सवमदायत 
भारत सरकार 
'Thus ator: Varanah is the name of a city. To say that it is derived from aco: a kind of tree, because the city is situated near such trees, and the trees gave the name to the city, is a cumbersome process. Because there might be no trees are at all near the town Varana. Let us therefore call words like वरणा, पञ्चाला, &c., as simply proper nouns. Therefore there is no occasion for the application of the Taddhita affixes given in IV. 2. 69 and 70 (तस्य निवासः, अदूरभवञ्च) relating to residence and vicinity; much less of rules relating to 'lup' elision contained in IV. 2, 81 and 82 (जनपरेलुए, वरणादिभ्यश्च). 
योगप्रमाणे च तदभावग्दर्शनं स्यात् ॥ ५५ ॥ पदानि ॥ योग प्रमाणे,च, तद्-अभाचे, आदर्शनम्, स्यात्, 
वृत्तिः ॥ पञ्चालादयः संज्ञा शब्दा न योगनिमित्ताइत्युक्तं तचावश्यमेवाभ्युपगन्तव्यं योग प्रमाणेहि तदभावेऽदर्शनं स्यात्, यदि पञ्चालादि शब्दो योगस्य प्रमाण योगस्य वाचकः स्यात् ततस्तद भावऽदर्शनमप्रयोगः स्यात् ॥ 
55. And if the etymological meaning be held authoritative, then when such meaning is absent, the word also should vanish. 
This sûtra strengthens the former sätra, If it be said that a word always retains its etymological meaning in current language; then when there is an absence of such etymological meaning, then the word itself ought to vanish. But we know, as a matter of fact, that, there are words which have altogether lost their etymological sense, and connote a thing different from their radical meaning. Therefore to explain such words by lup elision of affixes is improper, because they do not retain the meaning of their primitive words, 
It has already been said that words like पंचाला: &c. are not deriva tive words, &c. but are appellatives. If these words be taken as proving their etymological meaning, that is, as expressing or dependent upon, the sense of the original word, then when there is a loss of the original word signification, the secondary word must also cease to be employed. Thus if Pan châlâs be the name of the country in which the Kshatryas called Panchalas live, then when they cease to live in this country, it should cease to be called Parichalas. But we know, as a matter of fact, these words are now used without any reference to the people who once inhabited the countries. These words are consequently not derivative, but their sense is determined by usage. They are what may be called रूढि words. 
प्रधानप्रत्ययार्थवचनमर्थस्यान्यप्रमाणत्वात् ॥५६॥ पदानि ॥ प्रधान-प्रत्यय, अर्थ-वचनम् अर्थस्य, अन्यप्रमाणत्वात् (अशिष्य)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ प्रधान समासे किचित्पदं प्रत्ययस्तव्यदादिः ताभ्यामर्थवचनमर्याभिधानमनेन प्रका रेण भवतीति पूर्वाचार्यः परिभाषितम् प्रधानोपसर्जने प्रधानार्थसहबूतः प्रकृति प्रत्ययोसहार्थ बृत इति। सत् पाणिमिराचार्यः प्रत्याचष्टे अशिष्यमेतत् अर्थस्यान्यनमाणत्वादिति । अन्य इति शाखापेक्षया लोकोव्यपदिश्यते, शरराभिधाने स्वाभाविक न पारिभाषिकमशक्यत्वात् । लोकत एवार्थावणतेः ।। 
URE - GOVO 
OVERNMENT 
Y OF CULTUR 
VISTRY 
BMI. CH. II. $ 56, 57.) 
KALA AND UPASARJANA 
सत्यमेव जयते 
kte 
56. (Nor need be taught) the rule relating to the dependence of the meaning of a word on the princi pal (pardhana, in a compound) or on the affix (pratyaya), because the authority of the meaning of a word, com pound or drivative) consists in something else. 
This sûtra may be divided into two parts. The first part stating the proposition and ending with the word vachanam. The second part giving the reason. The first part consists of four words; Pradbâna: Principal in a compound.' As in the compound 71959: 'king's man,' the word raja is Upasarjana ; and ggg: is pradhâna. 2. Pratyaya: 'affix.' 3, mean ing.' 4. 'word or sentence.' 
In the time of Panini, there were some grammarians who held the opinion, that the meaning of a word is determined, if a compound word, then by its principal word, and if a derivative word, then by the suffix. Pâņini controverts this opinion by declaring that inasmuch as the meaning of a word is fixed by usage and idiom, therefore the proofs for the meaning of a word are not to be searched either in the affixes which go to form it; or by its principal word, if it is a compound. Because, says Panini, the proof of the meaning of a word is in something else, that is to say in the usage of a people and not in the suffixes, &c. A person who has never heard the name of grammar, understands full well when told to bring a Raja-purusha. He brings an official and not a king, nor even any person in general. Similarly when told to bring an t he brings a cowherd's child, not a cowherd, nor a child in general, nor both. When, therefore, the sense of a word is determined by usage, there is no use to strive to find out the sense by grammatical rules. 
| alo em a Gel || 9 || GIỜ || cafe-3 GI, , Jah, ( uto ) 
वृत्तिः ॥ कालोपसर्जने चाशिष्ये कस्मादर्थस्यान्यामाणत्वात् ।। 
57. And a rule fixing the meaning of Tense (kala) and Upasarjana (sequence) is equally (unnecessary, and need not be taught). 
Here Pâņini controverts the opinion of those grammarians who would even define time and sequence. Thus there were authors who de fined pluperfect as a tense relating to time hundred years past, others said a thousand years past, &c. Pâņini declares that these are redundant definitions and reprehensible, for the same reason as given in the previous satra. GOVERNM 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
OF INDIA 
SINGULAR DENOTES THE PLURAL. 
[BK. I. CH. U. 8 58. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
7 
. 
1 
To give another example. Thus 1977: Ter: or the period of the current day, has been thus defined by some Acharyas :-"The period of time beginning from the point when one rises (or ought to rise) from his bed, according to the law, and ending with the point when one goes to bed, according to rule, is called adyatana." Others say "from midnight to midnight is the period of the current day." Similarly others have explained the Cupasarjana' to mean "that which is not the principal word in a com pound is called upasarjana." The sage Pâņini has not thought it worth his while to define such word as upasarjana, inasmuch as their sense is well understood by all as a matter of usage. Thus common people who have never heard of grammar, also know the correct use of tenses; they say: "This is to be done by me to-day, this wiil be done by us to-morrow, this was done by us yesterday." 
Similarly common people also know the use of the word upasarjana, for they say:-"999 TETT AT THE 'we are secondary or unimportant persons in this house or village,' meaning that they are not the principal persons. Therefore that which is valid according to the usage of the people is needless to be taught. 
Why was not this sūtra included in the last ? Wnat is the necessity of making a separate rule of this? The answer is that it is an illustrative sutra, and does not exhaust the subject. There are other rules made by former sages which are also not taught by Paņini. Thus the following rules of old Rishis are not taught herein, they being supposed to be well-known. "A Bahuvrîhi compound connotes ownership." "In Dvanda compounds the sense of both the members of a compound are principal" " In Avyayîbhava compounds the sense of the prior word is the principal'' &c. 
- जात्याख्यायामेकस्मिन्बहुवचनमन्यतरस्याम् ॥ ५८ ॥ पदानि ॥ जाति-आख्याम् , एकस्मिन् , बहुवचनम् , अन्यतरस्याम् ॥ 
वृत्तिः । जात्याख्यायामकस्मिन्नर्थ बहुवचनमन्यतरस्यां भवति ।। 
वार्तिकम् ॥ संख्यानयोगे प्रतिषेधोवक्तव्यः ।। 
58. In (a common) name (expressive of) class, in denoting the singular, the plural is optionally em ployed. 
The words of this sätra require some detailed explanation. The name of a jati or species, always denotes one, since it is a collective noun, and will naturally take the singular number; by the present sûtra such words may take the plural number also. In such nouns of class, the plural number has also the force of the singular. The anuvritti of as'ishyam does not go further. 
. Go 
TURE 
TRY OF CULTY 
ERNMENT OF 
HOUSININ. 
NT OF INDIA 
CH. II. $ 58-60.] 
DUAL MAY DENOTE PLURAL. 
सत्पडि जयते 
It follows from this that adjectives which are not themselves common noun, such as संपन्नः &c., agree with the noun and will also get the plural number. Thus संपन्नो थवः or संपन्ना यवाः; " Full grown barley " पूर्ववया ब्राह्मणः प्रत्युत्येयः or पूर्ववयसो ब्राह्मणाः प्रत्युत्येयाः ॥ 
Why have we used the word jâti in this sûtra ? For this aphorism does not apply to Proper Nouns. Thus देवदत्तः Devadatta, यज्ञदत्तः Yajnadatta. 
Why have we used the word आख्यायाम? A word may be a class noun or jati, but it may not be the appellation of a class. Thus the statue of Kâsyapa may also be called kas yapa: this is a class noun; but as it is not the appellation 
Teet or name of a class, such words cannot take the plural form and still denote a singular sense. 
Why do we say 'ekasmin'? When two or more class names are compounded as airgeat the rice and barley': the rule does not apply. 
Vart:-An exception must be made when a class noun is qualified by a numeral adjective. As एको ब्रीहिः संपन्नः सुभितं करोति. 
अस्मदो द्वयोश्च ॥ ५९॥ पदानि ॥ अस्मदः, द्वयाः, च, (एकस्मिन् , बहुवचन अन्यतरस्याम्) 
वृत्तिः ॥ अस्मदो यो ऽर्थस्तस्यैकत्वे द्वित्वे च बहुवचनमन्यतरस्याम् भवति ॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ सविशेषणस्य प्रतिषेधो वक्तव्यः ॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ युष्मदि गुरावेकेषाम् ॥ 
59. The plural of the pronoun asmad, 'I,' is used optionally, though the sense requires a singular or dual number. 
Thus "I speak " or "we speak" (अहं ब्रवीमि or वयं बुमः ), may be spoken by one person; similarly two persons may either use the dual case or the plural case ; thus ावां बवः 'we two speak' or वयं ब्रूमः 'we speak.' 
Vart :-There is prohibition when the pronoun of the ist person is qualified by an attribute :-as अहं देवदत्तो ब्रवीमि, I Devadatta am speaking.' अहं गायों ब्रवीमि, 'I Gargya am saying. Here we cannot use the plural. 
Vart :-The word Temaster' may have plural form though referring to one person, when following the word युष्मद; as त्वं मे गुरुः or यूयं मे गुरवः, Thou art my master,' or you are my master.' 
फल्गुनीप्रोष्ठपदानां च नक्षत्रे॥६॥ पदानि ॥ फल्गुनी-प्रोष्ठ पदानां च नक्षत्रे॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ फल्गुन्योईयोः प्रोष्ठपदश्च योर्नक्षत्रयोर्बहुवचनमन्यतरस्याम् भवति ।। 
60. And the dual of Phâlguni and Proshtha pada, when signifying asterisms, (also connotes option ally plural). 
EURE 
GOVO 
GOVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRI 
NT OF INDIA 
SOME RULES OF NUMBER. 
[BK. I. CH. II. S96. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
कृति मंत्रालय 
सरकार 
The word = in this aphorism draws in the anuvritti of the word : from the last. Of the stars phalgunî and proshthapada, the forms may be either dual or plural. As उदिते पूर्वे फल्गुन्यौ (dual); or उदिताः पूर्वाः फल्गुन्यः (plural.) So also पूर्वे प्रोटपदे or पूर्वाः प्रोष्टपद | There are two pairs of stars of the name of phalgunî and proshthapada, both being of feminine gender, and their logical number being 'dual.' The present sûtra ordains plural optionally. If phalguns and proshthapada are not names of asterisms, they must have their proper number : as फल्गुन्यौ माणविके ।। 
छन्दसि पुनर्वस्वोरेकवचनम् ॥ ६१ ॥ पदानि ॥ छन्दसि, पुनर्वस्वोः , एक-वचनम्, (अन्यतरस्याम् )॥ 
वृत्तिः॥ बयोईिवचने प्राप्त पुनर्वस्वोश्छन्दसि विषये एकवचनमन्यतरस्यां भवति । 
61. In the Vedas, the two stars, Punarvasû, may optionally be singular (and connote a dual). 
In the Vedas, the star punarvasú which is always dual in form, may be in the singular form and connote a dual meaning. As yagaad or पुनर्वसू नक्षनमदितिर्देवता॥ The option is only allowed in the Vedas and not in secular literature. In the latter it must be in the dual, that is, पुनर्वसू | Similarly when it is not the appellation of an asterism but of a man, there is no option. As पुनर्वसू माणवका. 
विशाखयोश्च ॥ १२॥ पदानि ॥ विशाखयोः, च (छन्दस, अन्य तरस्याम् )॥ 
वृत्तिः॥ द्विवचने प्राप् छन्दसि विषये विशाखयोरेकवचनमन्यतरस्यां भवति ॥ 
62. In the Vedas, the two stars Visakhamay optionally be in the singular number. 
The word farer is in the dual number as a rule. In the Vedas, it is found sometime to have the singular form, denoting duality. Thus विशाखा नक्षत्रम् or विशाखे नक्षत्रमिन्द्राग्नी देवता ।। 
तिष्यपुनर्वस्वोनक्षत्र द्वन्द्व बहुवचनस्य द्विवचनं नित्यम् ॥६३॥ पदानि॥ तिघ्य-पुनर्वस्वोः , नक्षत्र-इन्छे, बहुवचनस्य, द्वि-वचनम् , नित्यम् ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ तिष्यपुनर्वस्वोर्नक्षत्रविषयेवन्ने बहुवचनप्रसङ्गे निन्यं द्विवचनं भवति ।। 
63. In the Dvandva compounds of the stars Tishya and Punarvasû, the dual constantly comes in the place of the plural. 
When there is a collective compounding of the words Tishya and Punarvasi (meaning two groups of stars), the final compound is always in the dual. Thus उदितौ तिष्यपुर्नवसदृश्यते 'the Tishya and Punarvasu having risen are scen (dual).' 
GURE 
GOVO 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
MENT OF IN 
Bime. Cit. II. $ 64.] 
EKASESHA. 
O 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
74. *7** There is one star called Tishya; and there are two stars called Punarvasû. As the Dvandva compound of these stars refers to more than two stars, it ought to have been in the plural number. This rule teaches that there should be a dual number, where otherwise there would have been a plural number. Why do we say Tishya' and Punarvasü'? Observe FÊTETT TET: 'the stars Visakha and Anuradha.' The compound is in plural number. 
This rule would not apply if these words do not connote stars but are used in any other sense. As ficarág FTOTETT:, 'Boys called Tishya and Punarvasûs.' 
Why is the word 'star' repeated in the sûtra, when the previous sútras and the context show that stars were being treated of. The repetition is for the sake of including the synonyms of Tishya and Punarvasů. As तिष्यपुनर्वसू ; पुष्यपुनर्वसू, सिद्धपुनर्वसू ॥ 
The rule only applies when these words form a Dvandva compound, and not when they are compounded in any other way. Thus facilita is an example of Bahuvrîhi compound meaning "persons who confound the 
Tishya with the Punarvasů." 
The rule only applies to the plural Dvaudva. If the Dvandva takes the singular termination, this rule has no application. As far og fara. 
This sûtra indicates by implication (jñapaka) that "every Dvandva compound may optionally take the terminations of the singular" for otherwise the employment of the term 699 TFT in the sûtra would be superfluous. 
The word 'always' has been used in the text to show that the governing power of "option" stops here with this sûtra and does not extend to it or any further. 
सरूपाणामेकशेष एकविभक्तौ ॥६४॥ पदानि ॥ सरूपाणाम् , एक 19, TF-fel, 
TITT I HTETUT Toetati para Tra gaat wara 
64. Of the words having the same form, and all in the same one case-termination, the last one is only retained. 
This is a very important sutra, and deals with what is technically called Ekas'esha (or retention of one). When there are two or more words of the same form, and the same case termination, standing together, one is retained and the rest are dropped. Thus : + : = Toit (trees, in dual) 
G+ :hts :=3G, 
Every individual thing requires an individual word to express it ; one word therefore could not express many things; to prevent the repetition of 
URE - GOVE 
OF CULTURE 
SAINISTRY OF 
NMENT OF IN 
OF INDIA 
EKASESHA. 
[BK. I. CH. 11. $65. 
EN 
संस्कृति मन 
सरकार 
the same word to express many objects of similar form, is the purpose of this satra, by which one word is only retained. 
This applies only to words having the same form and not if they have different forms; as ga FTT: the plaksha and nyagrodha trees. 
The word "form" is used in the text to show that even if two words have different meanings, but the same form, the rule of Ekas'esha will apply, as 75: (die) + 7 (eye) + (axle) = 91:. Similarly yer: and 19T:. 
The present rule only applies to the retention of one, and prevents the retention of two or more. 
The word in (retention) is used to show that there is not a substitution (ades'a) of one for many, but the retention of one out of many. 
The rule will not apply if the two words are in different case-termi nations, though they may have the same form. As a: (1. s. ) FİT (2. s.) strafatareai (3 d.) TE A UT-a (4. d.) me. 
Et qat gauzatea ferata: Il 89 II Gift II Tai, Ta, 2-3yu, ga, fakta: 11 
वृत्तिः ॥ वृद्धोयूनासहवचनेशिष्यते युवानिवर्नते तल्लक्षणञ्चेदेव विशेषः ॥ 
65. The vriddha (or patronymic Gotra word becomes ekas'esha, and is retained, when compounded) with a patronymic word called yuvan, provided that the specific difference in form between them be in their signs (affix) only. 
The word s'esha of the previous sútra is understood here. The word "yûna" in the text is in the instrumental case. The yuvan word is dropped when read along with a Vriddha word. The word Vriddha means gotra: the old acharyas (grammarians) used the word Vriddha for gotra. The vriddha (or in other words, the gotra) word designates a person between whom and original head of the family a son (or a word formed by an apatya affix) inter venes. In using together two words, one formed by a gotra afix and the other by a yuvan affix, the Vriddha is retained, where the difference between those words is in their affixes only. These two words, gotra and yuvan, are defined in satras IV. 1. 162 and 163. (T a tara ahli strare a avea ) Roughly speaking a gotra word is formed from the original noun which is the name of the head of the family when a son of such person is living; and a vriddha word represents thus a grandson, or lower than that, but not a son ; while a yuvan word is derived from such last mentioned gotra word by another affix and thus represents persons lower than grandsons. 
ORE - GOVE. 
OF CULTURE 
MISTRY ON 
WENT OF INDIA 
BEIMU. CH. II. $ 66.] 
EKASESHA. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
सात मंत्रालय 
सरशार 
The word 'tad' in the sutra refers to the gotra and yuvan affixes. The word lakshana 'sign' in the sûtra is synonymous with cause' or occasion'; meaning the specific difference is caused or occasioned by the gotra and yuvan affixes. The word om in the sútra means 'if.' The word 57 'only' is used to exclude others. The word fais: in the sûtra means the 
dissimilarity of form.' 
Thus गार्ग्यः + गाायणः = गाग्यौँ. Here the first word denotes a clan called Gárgya (the offspring or grandsons of Garga formed by the affix (IV. I. 105) the second word denotes a younger branch of the same, and is formed by the Taddhita affix 5denoting a secondary derivative. In this then, the first or " Vsiddha" remains; the second or the yuvan is dropped ; and the form "Gârgyau" means both the old and the new clan, Similarly areat: + TTTTTT: वात्स्यौ ॥ 
This Ekas'esha is to be done only in those cases, where the two words have the same radical form, the only difference between them being in their derivative formation, 
The words must differ only by their affixes, but their radical element must be the same. The rule therefore does not apply to :- #: (a Vriddha word + arrut: (a yuvan word)=trafaretagatu 
This rule of ekas'esha does not apply if one of the words be not a Vriddha word. Thus crit: + TTTTTTT: =UTFITUTII 
Similarly vice versa urf: + ayat: = rfpafsteif Here the one word is Vriddha, but the other is not yuvan. 
The word "only" is used in the sûtra in an exclusive sense, the force being, that two words may stand in the relation of Vriddha and yuvan, their radical element, i.e. form may be the same; but if the secondary word has another sense over and above the sense of a yuvan affix, this rule is not applicable. Thus rule IV. 1. 1489 says a “Vriddha word may optionally take the affix a to form a yuvan word and to indicale contempt and born in the country of Sauvira." Thus TET: + TUTTO= profafafaffiat. Here the second word, though a yuvan word, connotes the additional sense of contempt and degradation. The affix is not merely a yuvan affix but conveys the other sense also, the pure yuvan word being propea. 
N. B.-The system of domestic economy among the ancient Aryas was considerably difter ent from the prevalent one. The surnames or the gotras represented the patriarchal system. Three torms of surnames are constantly met with in ancient literature. The first was most important: it was the patronymic by which the lord of the united family, the patriarch, was known. For example, Garga or Gargâcharya was the recognised head of all the Gargas who may be a hundred. His eldest son and heir was called Gîrgi. This is the first form of the patronymic (apatya). The grandsons or song of Gargi were named Gárgyas (Vriddham or Gotra). On the decease of the old patriarch, Gargi began to be called Garga; and the eldest of the grandsons was called Gärgi; and those great-grandsons who belonged to the family, and were designated Gärgâyanas (yuvan) were now called Gárgyas." 
(°) Taat 
11 (°) 
() Ecocardig aan 
URE - GOVE 
MINISTRU 
STRY OF CU 
VERNWENTOS 
NT OF INDIA 
• संस्कृति मंत्रा 
सत्यय जयते MY 
EKASESHA. 
[Br. I. Ch. 11.967. 
तिसरकार 
ali ga le ll Tifa l at, gag, (579&yat age fão ) वृत्तिः ॥ स्त्री वृद्धा यूना सहवचने शिष्यते तल्लक्षणश्चेदेव विशेषो भवति ॥ 
66. And so also a feminine word, ending with a vriddha affix, when similarly spoken along with the same word but which ends with a yuvan affix, is only retained ; and it is treated like a masculine. 
When a word denoting gotra and in the feminine gender is compound ed with another word denoting a yuvan, the first is retained and the last is dropped ; and the feminine noun so remaining is then treated like the masculine. This aphorism makes an addition to the previous sûtra and is governed by all the conditions mentioned in that sûtra. Thus soif + Tutu: =fit. Here note that the resultant form is the same as in the former sätra, namely the masculine. 
Similarly craft + EFTET: - erat (masculine dual of tria). 
Vart.---The word stri in the sûtra means Vriddha strî, that is the eldest daughter of a grandson, or a further descendant considered as the female head of the family. The words 'tal lakshanas' chedeva vis'eshah' of the previous sûtra govern this sûtra also, i.e. the distinction between the two words must be in their formative element and not in any thing else. 
TATI feet & ll GT I gata, fag (sti, Tg क्षणश्चैदेवविशेषः)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ स्त्रियासहवचने पुमान् शिष्यते स्वीनिवर्तते नपुंसलक्षण श्वेदेवविशेषो भवति । 
67. A word in the masculine gender, similarly spoken along with the same word, but ending with the feminine affix, becomes ekas'esha, and the latter is drop 
ped. 
When two words of different genders differ only in their derivative elements but not in their radical elements, that is to say, one is masculine and the other feminine because of certain affixes, the masculine only is retained and the feminine is dropped. 
The governing force of the words vriddha' and 'yuvan,' of sútra 65, does not extend to this sútra, but the remaining portion of sútra 65 is to be read into this satra. When a masculine word is read along with a femi nine word, the feminine word is dropped and the masculine is retained, when the difference between the two words is caused only by the feminine and masculine asfixes: as ITT: + zar = pterit the Brâhmana and the Brahmani'; p:+ nét = het. 'the cock and hen.' 
BE 
GOVED 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
ERNMENT OF A 
OF INDIA 
CH. II. 568,69.] 
EKASTSHA. 
सत्यमवजयन 
भारत सरकार 
But not so in the following :- कुक्कुट: + मयूरी% कुक्कुटमयूर्यो the cock and the peahen. Similarly गणकः + गणकी = गणकगणक्यो. Here the feminine affix ir, by which the word gañaki is formed from ganaka, in addition to its feminine signification, has the further signification given to it by Rule IV. 1. 48, पुयोगालख्ययाम् , meaning the "wife of" a ganaka and not a feminine ganaka%B so also इन्द्रश्च इन्द्राणी चेन्द्रेन्द्राग्यौ | Similarly आर्यः + आर्या = आर्यों but आर्थः + 
आर्याणी = आ र्याण्यौ . Because the feminine affix in aryani conveys more than its feminine signification. See Rule IV. 1. 49. 
This rule does not, of course, apply when it is not a masculine noun which is compounded, but it is a noun without any gender or neuter noun which is compounded with a feminine noun. Therefore प्राक् + प्राची प्रामाच्या. The word = is an indeclinable and is without any gender. 
भ्रातृपुत्री स्वसृदुहितृभ्याम् ॥ ६८॥ पदानि ॥ भ्रातृ-पुत्रौ, स्वस् दुहितृभ्याम् , (शेषः)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ यथासंख्यं भ्रातृपुत्रशासौशिष्येते सहवचने स्वमृदुहितृभ्याम् ॥ 
68. The words bhrâtri, brother,' and putra, son,' when spoken of along with svasri, 'sister' and duhitri' daughter' respectively are only retained, and the latter are dropped. 
With this sûtra ceases the governing force of the remaining condi. nons contained in sutra 65. Even where the radical elements of two words are different there may be an ekas'esha under special circumstances. Thus धात् + स्वस = भातरी (brother and sister or brothers), Similarly पुत्र + दुहित= पुत्री, (son and daughter or sons). 
N. B.---The practical application of this sûtra is very neatly illustrated by the following example. There is a verse in Yâjyanvalkya smriti पर्व दुहितरइश्चैव पितरौ भ्रातरस्तथा which declares that on the death of a sonless per-- son his property passes to his wife, daughters, parents and bhràtarah. 
Here the word bhrataraḥ, if it be taken as simply the plural of bhratri, it means "brothers" and excludes sisters. But if it be interpreted according to this sûtra, it means "brothers and sisters"; and thus gives sisters a right to inherit property of their brothers. 
नपुंसकमनपुसकेनैवश्चास्यान्यतरस्याम् ॥१९॥ पदानि । नपुंसकम् , अन सकेन, एकवत् च अस्य, अन्यतरस्याम् , (शेष, तल्लक्षणश्चेदेवधिशेषः )॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ नपुंसकानपुंसकमात्रकृते विशेषेऽनपुसंकेन सहवचने नपुंसकशिष्यते; एकवचास्य कर्वे भवति मन्यतरस्याम् ॥ 
COVERNMENT 
TURE 
GOVE 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY ON 
NT OF INDIA 
EKASESHA, 
[Br. I. CH. II. $ 70, 
ter 
14.97177 
तसरकार 
TL 
69. A neuter noun, which has the same form, only differing in affix, is optionally retained, and the other is dropped, and it is like a singular number. 
A neuter prevails over a masculine or feminine noun when spoken of along with them, provided that the words differ in gender signs only; but radically they be the same. Thus timer i fage ogara Barata 'Idleness, lust, and sleep, indulged in, increase.' Here the adjective sevyyamânam'is in the neuter gender, though it qualifies the words alasyâ' which is in the masculine, 'maithunam' which is in the neuter, and nidrâ' which is in 
the feminine gender. The rule, therefore, may be stated in these words, that where one adjective qualifies several nouns, in different genders, but one of which must be neuter, the adjective agrees with the neuter. 
The above illustration also shows that the neuter ekas'esha may be in the singular number. 
If the neuter is compounded with another neuter, this rule does not apply. Thus y + y + y = 1 Fire ; the word is in the plural; there is no ekavadbhava. 
The words Fee FETT: of sûtra 65 governs this sútra also: thus J T 77, 7 qera ir, E. "The white (masc.) blanket, the white (fem) wrapper, and the white (neut.) garment," may all he spoken of collectively as y# ineul.). 
far Hi II 90 llogtat o foar, ATT (19, TRITTERTITEL) IL 
वृत्तिः ॥ मात्रासह वचने पितशब्दः शिष्यते अन्यतरस्याम् ॥ 
70. The word pitri, 'father', is optionally only retained when spoken of along with mâtri, 'mother.' 
Thus FTET + rai = taer father and mother, or parents' or arattaci. The verse quoted under sûtra 68 illustrates this sûtra also. There the word 
pitarau' has been explained by all commentators as "father and mother." The word "ekavad" of the last sätra does not govern this sûtra; though the anuvritti of optionally' is to be read into this. 
sayt: # 9 # actfa il sagt, a , (1, a ) 
pier: 1 STE 7 Erre: Festa Pereira 
71. The word s'vas/ura "father-in-law,' is op tionally only retained, when spoken of along with s'vas'rû, 
mother-in-law.' 
GOVERNMENT 
TURE - Goy 
TRY OF CULTI 
MINISTRY 
ENT OF INDIA 
I. CH. 11. $ 71-73.] 
EKASĒSHA. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
सरकार 
Thus TETT: + VET may be either gazi 'father-in-law and mother in-law,' or aka II 
त्यदादीनि सर्वैर्नित्यम् ॥ ७२ ॥ पदानि ॥ त्यदु-प्रादीनि, सर्वः Face (19) 
वृत्तिः ॥ त्यदादीनि शब्दरूपाणि सर्वैः सहवचने नित्यं शिष्यन्ते त्यदाभिरन्यैश्च ।। 
वार्तिकम् ॥ त्यदादीनां मिथोयद्यत्परंतत्तच्छिष्यते ॥ 
72. The pronouns 'tyad &c. when spoken of along with any other noun, (pronoun other than 'tvad &c.') are always retained as ekas'esha, (to the exclusion of others) 
The list of 'tyadadi' pronouns has been given under sūtra I. 1. 27. They are 12 words beginning with 'tyad' and ending with 'kim;' when these tyadâdi pronouns are compounded with any other noun, (or a pronoun, which does not belong to their class), they prevail, the rest are dropped. The word 'sarva' is used in the aphorism to indicate universality '; i. e. what ever may be the word in composition with them, the 'tyad &c.' are retained to the exclusion of others. The word nitya' is used to indicate that this is an obligatory rule, and not optional, as were the last rules. 
Thus #: (he)+ : (Devadatta)- at (they two). 
Vart.---When the words are compounded among themselves, the word which is read last in the order given in the Ganapatha remains, the rest are dropped. Thus : + 8 = t; T: + i = op 1 Thus is read after HTC (see I. 1, 27). So ze will be retained and not Similarly any is read after ty, and therefore fana is retained to the exclusion of any. 
PIUTüècadoug at I 3 | Gta llarga, Haug, eft, (TE) 
वृत्तिः ।। माम्याणां पशूनां संघाः प्राग्यपशुसंघाः; एतेषु सह विवक्षायां स्त्री शिष्यते ॥ 
वार्तिकम् ॥ अनेकशफेष्वितिवक्तव्यम् ।। 
73. The feminine noun is only retained, when denoting a collection of domestic animals, not being young 
As a general rule, when there is a compounding of masculine and feminine nouns, the masculine noun is retained (see 67). The present sútra is an exception to that rule. It ordains that when there is a com pounding of words denoting group of domestic animals, of different genders, URE - GOVs 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
EKASESHA. 
[ Bk. I. CH. 11. $ 73 
सत्यमेव जयते 
PिANIरकार 
the feminine noun is preferred; provided that the words should not relate to the young of such animals. The word 'ataruņa' in the aphorism qualifies the word pas'u' with which it is in construction, and not the word sangha.' As 77 ga: 'these cows (and bulls) ;' FT FAT: these goats' (both males and females). 
The rule only applies to domestic (grâmya) animals and not to wild animals; and only to beasts (pas'u) and not men. As E FÀ, these wild deers' (male and female) ; TTT FÀ, these antelopes' (male and female); OTEUT:, 'the Brāhmaṇas (male and female); TTAT:,'the Kshatriyas.' In all these the masculine noun is retained by Rule 67. 
Vari.-This rule must be confined to domestic animals having divided hoof. Therefore star #, these horses' (male and female). Here the masculine noun is retained, because horse has no divided hoof. 
Why have we used the word (sangba) "collection"? Observe par oh KT:' these two cows are grazing.' Here the word 'gâvau' does not 
connote. bull' also. 
Why do we say “not being young''? TEET FÀ 'these calves', Thir# these kids. Here the masculine noun is retained by the applica tion of Rule 67. 
URE - GOVS 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
संस्कृति मंत्रान 
सवय जयते 
तिसरकार 
पो३म् 11 FT TAUTEU dari: qic: II 
BOOK I. 
CHAPTER III. 
YEGİT Ora: 8 11 TGIFT II Ta-FGT: , Taa: 11 वृत्तिः ॥ भू इत्येवमादयः शब्ता क्रियावचना धातु संज्ञा भवन्ति । 
1. The words beginning with bhû 'to become, and denoting action, are called dhâtu or verbal roots. 
This defines the word dhậtu or root. The list of Sanskrit verbs begins with the root bhù 'to be.' Sanskrit grammarians have divided all verbs into ten classes, according to certain modifications which their roots undergo before certain terminations. The ten classes are as follows: 
1. Bhù class. 2. Ad. 3. Hu. 4. Div. 5. Su, 6. Tud. 7. Rudh. 8. Tan. 9. Kri. 10. Chur. 
There are about two thousand verbs, and they are conjugated in two forms, some taking the Parasmaipada terminations only, the others the Atmanepada terminations and some both. The present chapter deals mostly with rules determining the nature of the verbal root, whether it is Parasmaipadi or Atmanepadi or both. A verb expresses action. The word dhatu is a word coined by older grammarians than Panini and they employed the term in denoting a word expressing action. Here also, therefore, the word dhâtu means a word which expresses action. 
The ar in the sûtra is for the sake of auspiciousness; for the regular sandhi of + Brig is aire and not ware; while Dr. Ballantyne considers that ar is a separate root : he translates the sûtra thus:-"Let the verbal roots bhu 
be,' và 'blow' and the like be called dhatu." 
Jugastigare ll GTFT eat, a, ul aius: , 
वृत्तिः। उपविश्यतेऽनेनेति उपदेशः, शास्त्रवाक्यानि सूत्रपाठः खिलपाठश्च तत्र योऽजनुनासि : Cat af U 
2. The nasalized vowels are in Upades'a, or original enunciation, 
CULTURE 
ISTRY OF C 
ERNMENT OF 
• MINISTE 
OF INDIA 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
INDICATORY LETTERS. 
[BE. I. Cn. III. 33, 4 
. 
Anunâsika or nasalized vowels are a that is indicatory, when occur ing in technical words. Thus in fena, FTC, at the anunâsikâ & is ga. The original sútra contains the word ' upades'a' which we have translated as technical term. "Upades'a' literally means instruction' or the first mentioning of a thing either in a sútrapâtha, or ganapâțha, or dhatu patha, &c. 
From this sûtra up to sûtra 9, there is a description of servile or india catory letters called ga. "In Pâņini's Grammar there is no visible sign of the nasality of a vowel --hence we can know a vowel to be nasalized only from Panini's explicitly asserting that it is so, or from our finding that he treats it in such a way that we must conclude he regarded it as nasal." An upades'a is defined as signifying an original enunciation, that is to say, an affix (pratyaya), or an augment (agama), or a verbal root (dhâtu), or in short, any form of expression which occurs only in technical treatises of grammar, and which is not a word ready for use, but one of the supposed original elements of a word. Thus in the root Tu to increasc,' the final ay is indicatory, the real root is Ty. So also the final 37 of EU is get 
If the word is not an upades'a, then the nasal vowel is not gou As TOP TT: A word may be an upades'a, and nasal, but if it is not a vowel, it need not be इत् as the affix मनिन् in sutra III. 3.74. (आतो मनिन् क्वनि वनिपश्च) It is only the nasal vowel of an upades'a that becomes and not all the vowels. The word g occurs in sûtras V. a. 16. (STAT &c.). 
E 
) 
TT A 3 Trail G-T4H, ( suga 
वृत्तिः ॥ धावादः समुदायस्थ यवन्त्य इल् तदित्संज्ञं भवति ।। 
3. 
In upades'a, the final consona nt of roots, &c. is 37. 
All the final consonants of roots, affixes, &c., are indicatory. As in the pratyaharashtras अइउण्; here ण् is इत् ॥ कलक; here is इत् ॥ ए भोड्; here is a lar; here is ! It is only in upades'a, that a final consonant is ga. Not therefore, in orenga or fragt, which are complete words. 
fara JEAT: | 8 llafar la ferat, 7-2-87: II 
निः॥ पूर्वेण प्राप्ताथामित्संज्ञायां विभक्तो वर्तमा नानां तवर्ग सकार मकाराणां प्रतिषेध 
# and aflixes. 
4. The final dental consonants, and the final are not a in affixes called vibhakti or inflective 
IRE 
GOVE. 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
SINIW 
MOT. CH. III. $. 5.] 
INDICATORY LETTERS. 
119 
स्कृति मंत्रालय 
सत्यमय मयते 
This is an exception to the previous sûtra which declared all final consonants to be ca. In case terminations, the final a , , , , , , and I, are not a. Thus the case termination of nominative plural is . Here the final , though a consonant is not an ga; and is not rejected, as in alt: AL The word in the sûtra means the letters of the class of by virtue of sätra 69 Chapter I. (see ante). The word vibhakli will be defined later on in sûtra I. 4. 104. These are terminations applied to nouns in declining them through various cases; and to verbs in conjugating them. Thus in sútra:VII. 1. 12, (EIGIĒTATATTEETT:) the vibhaktis ga, tra and Fg replace er, íg and ca. Here the final a of the affix sia is not indicatory and hence not rejected, as TETIT. Similarly verbal terminations तस् and थस् as पचतः, पचथः ॥So also the final #as arg and qu in 379 para and 37497 il. 
This exception applies only to vibhaktis and not to affixes in general. Thus the finals of a (III. 1, 97 gg:) Ja (V. 2. 123, STIAT YE) and sa (III. 1.78 Franz W1 ) are ga and are rejected. This exception, however, does not apply to the vibhakti ga (in V. 3. 12 Fanaisa or III. 4. 106, FEST). In those two, sûtras the final a of the vibliakti is ga. The reason of this is, that the present sûtra is an anitya sûtra, i. e. a rule not of general application. In sûtra V. 3. 24. (SAETT:) we find, the word gea takes the vibhakti yg in the sense of mode ord manner,' As + T=gea, in this manner.' Now ya is a vibhakti by V. 3. 1. (Trier : ), the x is a, the real vibhakti is a Now had the present sûtra been of universal application, then there would have been no necessity of adding this as indicatory letter, which has been evidently added to save the # of ye from becoming an ga. This sûtra is conse quently an antiya sûtra. 
pçisi asa: 14 Il Gel : , for-3-59, (a) It वृत्तिः ।। जि टु ड इत्ये तेषां समुनयानामादितो वर्तमानानामित्संज्ञा भवन्ति ।। 
5. The initial ñi, tu, and du are all 
The syllables , and 3, standing at the beginning of a root are indi catory; as raat 'to have affectionate pleasure. The real root is faç, the fe is servile. Sogareto rejoice; be glad the real root being 77. So gia 'to give' the real root being at 
The fy shows that the past participle has the power of the present III. 2. 187 (fra: 75:). As f l- e*: ' blown'; -fra: 'fat'; fas e : 
bold,' Sit a t: soft,' sçauf-56: kindled.' 
The 3 subjoined to a root serves to show that it admits the affix 073 to form a noun indicative of the act (III. 3.89 EPISYT); as ga y : 
shaking'; say : 'swelling.' 
The g indicates that the root to which it is subjoined admits of the affix # (III. 3. 88, fea :) to form a noun or adjective attributive of the act 
GOVERN 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY ON 
NMENT OF IN 
OF INDIA 
INDICATORY LETTEES. 
[BK. I. CH. III. $ 6,7 
IL SL 
TUR 
by which the substantive thing has been produced, as 3 - 'artificial' 5997-175 'ripe'; 577--1 'sown.' 
If these three syllables do not stand in the beginning of a verb, they are not indicatory; as पटूयति, कण्डूयति, &c. 
q: TERETRI, & ll GTA II 9:, TETORT ( ) वृत्तिः । षकारः प्रत्ययस्यादिरित्संज्ञो भवति ॥ 
6. The initial g of an affix is indicatory. 
The initial of an affix gets the name of ga and is rejected. Thus by Rule III. 1. 145 (TIETÊ Gaz) the affix og is added to a verb to indicate proficient in the art expressed by the verb. The ç and a are 57 and 57 takes the place of बु (VII. I.I, युवोरनाको). Thus नृत+वुन-नर्त+अक-नर्तकः "a dancer' (by profession); fem. adiant (IV. 1. 41, igartig words formed by affixes having an indicatory take the affix to in the feminine '): so also , fem. stat. 
The initial of an affix only is ga and not every initial r. Thus not in is: 'six,' or gitar: They must be initial, therefore it is not go in the affix faqe in starTET, (Uņ I. 45) as Hig: an ocean', HIỆT: ' a buffalo.' 
El llgorfar Il & (TARRAG:, ) वृत्तिः॥ चवर्ग दवर्गों प्रत्ययस्यादी इत्संज्ञो भवतः॥ 
7. The initial palatals and linguals of an affix are indicatory. 
The consonants , , , , , , , , , and or, are always and are rejected when initial in affixes. The word 'affix' of the previous sutra governs this also. 
As the affix em chapan in sutra (IV. 1. 98 straa31999). Here is indicatory, as, alatuz: 11 The initial & chh of an affix is always replaced by &a (VII. 1. 2 h aftlica: 6 geggi tualetara). The initial 31 of an affix is a. As, se (Nom. Pl. term) ZETT: The initial p of an affix is always re placed by beat , as +9+ig aica 1 (VII. 1. 3 Saa:). The initial 5 of an affix is a as in sy which comes after the words ariuST &c. As og (IV. 3.92 Tischizita:). The indicatory s causes vriddhi by rules VII. 2. 115, 116 and 117: (TTTA, A&Taar: argacqarle:). 
The initial ? t of an affix is ga as in III. 2. 16 (Te: the root to takes the affix a when compounded with a noun in the locative). As ETT: who goes among the Kurus. The feminines of words formed by this affix take 
(IV. 1.15 act 
&c.) As T, T. The initial & of an affix is always replaced by (VII. 3. 50 g :). The initial of an office is it. as in III. 2.97 (egati as: the root or takes the affix when in composition 
RE • GOVE 
CULTURE 
NISTRY OF CA 
CRNMENT OF 
BIMA, I. CH. III. $ 8.] 
INDICATORY LETTERS. 
I 21 
सत्यमेव जयते 
तरकार 
with a word in the locative, as T&TT:, :. The 5 indicates that the final of the word called & should be elided when an affix having indicatory d is added. The initial of an affix is replaced by re (VII. 1. 2.) 
The letter is always an ga when initial. As in the aphorism IV. 4 85 (EETE:) the affix y comes after the word na 'food.' As YT + U=HT: The ņ causes Vriddhi. 
This sûtra could very well have been included in the last aphorism, Why has it then been made a separate aphorism? The reply is that the present sûtra declares an anitya rule--that is to say, a rule which is not uni versally true. The initial palatal or lingual of every affix is not indicatory. Thus in the affixes say and try the initial is not indicatory but forms part of the real affix. As fast: Faru: famous for one's learning. See S. V. 2. 26. IT F ETTSTY Tur. Similarly the initial z of the affix ate (V. 2. 31 yaraneTTEET, JO TIEFEIT: GETINT 
: ), is not it. As with flat nosed.' 
Of course it is the initial palatal and lingual which are servile; if these letters occur in the middle of an affix, they will not be indicatory. As 7 of the affix अठच् is not indicatory in sutra V.2.35(कर्मणि घटोऽठच )कर्मठः 
dexterous.' 
Zwalca la lucra lll 5-57-, walea, ( azur, hrig: a) 
वृत्तिः ॥ तद्धितवर्जितस्य प्रत्ययस्यादितो वर्तमाना लकार शकार कवर्गा इत्संज्ञा भवन्ति । 
8. The initial 1 and s', and the gutturals of all affixes, except taddhita, are indicatory. 
The initial , , , , , , , of affixes are indicatory, except in Taddhita affixes. Thus the initial c in ल्युट is इत् (III.3115 ल्यु च)। चि+ल्यु: rah (VII. 1. I)' collecting. The initial y in try is ga (III. 1. 68. aaft TT ) 
+ y + y = +*+f=yara'he is.' The initial ea is ga as in and a (1. 1. 26), as 
H eating' ara. The initial ois sa as in 04 (III. 2. 38 प्रियवशे वदः खच the word वद takes the affix khach when compounded with प्रिय and a) foa: 'speaking kindly'. ITT: submissive.' The initial T is a as in the affix Tea (III 2. 139 FISTES ET ), TET: 'languid', first: 'victorious, FOTĖT: 'unmoveable. The inital e is ga as in ga (III. 2. 161 TETTE 917) 7531 + 7 = 'brittle.' The initial is , as in sfa (termina tion of the ablative sing.) re ditto of genitive sing. (IV. 1. 2), as an + 
a = a + ya = 6: 'of a well minded.' In Taddhitta affixes however, these initials , and gutturals are not şa; and are therefore not elided. Thus it + = 54: (V, 2. 96. TUTT&TT STREET) 'crested'; A+ 
URE • Goy 
MINISTRY 
ay OF CULTUA 
JERNMENT OG 
OF INDIA 
A RULE OF ASSIGNMENT. 
[Br. I. CH. III. 
9, 10, 
सत्यमेव जयत 
=TATT: (V. 2. 100 JAIETANETTET: RIT) hairy;' 7 + 19: V. 3 81-86 STIFTA: 1)'a small tree.' 
Tegory: I llaha Il get, jer:,( ) ll 
वृत्तिः ॥ तस्येत्संज्ञकस्थ लोपो भवति ॥ 
9. Of this, (namely of that which has been called ra), there is elision. 
This sûtra declares the function of a ; namely it is a mere indicatory letter, and must be rejected. It is useful only as a mnemonic and is not a part of the term. 
The word tasya in the sûtra indicates that the substitution of lopa must be in the place of the whole term called ga, and not only in the place of the final letter, which last is the general rule (see. I. 1. 52). Therefore, the whole of fel, z and 5 is rejected and not only their finals. 
TOTT TERJAGET: Efra il soll uglia Il T -5R, 97: , FAITH II 
वृत्तिः । समानां समसंख्यानां समपरिपठितानामुद्देशिनामनुदेशिनां च यथा क्रममुद्देशिभिरनुदेशिनः FI 
10. When a rule involves the case of equal numbers of substitutes and of things for which these are to be substituted, their mutual correspondence or assign ment of each to each, is according to the order of enum 
eration. 
Thus sûtra III. I 134 (AFT E FTURTT:) declares- the affixes et, fra and are applied to free, and T class of words. It means the aflix al is applied to the words of a la class, the affix jufar to words of arg class, andyz to words of class. The application must be respec tively according to order, and not hap-hazard. Similarly in VI. 1 77 Fant यणचि (if a vowel follows) in the place of इ, उ, ऋ,ल there is यण ।.., य, र, ल, all So also see S. IV. 3. 94 (aetaragraadsans ta gu :) where the four affixes dhak, chhan dhañ, and yak are applied respectively to the words tadi, s'alatura, varmati and kûchavara; i.e., the first affix in the order of enumeration to the first word, the second affix to the second word, &c. As तौवेयः, शालातुरीयः, वामतेयः and कोचवार्यः ।। 
Why do we say of equal members '? This rule will not apply if the number of substitutes and of things for which these are to be substituted are unequal. As in satra 1. 4. 90, mawe ATCer c are fr : for here the words lakshana, &c., in the first part of 
TUREGOM 
STRY OF CUI 
MINISTRY 
WHENT OF INO 
OF INDIA 
· BEACH. III. $ 11, 12] 
ATMANEPADA VERBS. 
TO 
the sútra are four in number, while the words prati &c. are only three. That sútra therefore must be read as thus. "The words a, Tijand sta are karma pravachanîya, whenever they indicate either lakshaņa (a mark), itthambhuta khyana (a statement of mere circumstance) ; bhậga (division) ; or vipsa (desire)." 
स्वरितेनाधिकारः ॥ ११ ॥ पदानि ॥ स्वरितेन, अधिकारः॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ स्वरितो नाम स्वरविशेषो वर्णधर्मः तेन चिह्ननाधिकारो वेदितव्यः । 
11. In these aphorisms, when a word is marked with a svarita accent, by that an adhikâra or a governing rule is to be understood. 
When in this collection of grammatical sûtras, there is any sútra that has a circumflex accent, it denotes that it is either the beginning of a subject and the subsequent sâtras are governed by it, or that it ends a sub ject and separates the previous sûtras from the following. 
As a rule, the sûtras are not marked with accents; it is therefore from commentaries that one has to learn whether a sútra has a svarita or not. Thus the following sûtras must evidently have svarita as they are go. verning sûtras ; gere: (III. 1. 1.) yrat: (III. 1. 91), Tea (VI. 4. 1), FH (VI. 4. 129). 
अनुदाङित आत्मनेपदम् ॥ १२॥ पदानि ॥ अनुदात-ङ्-इतः आत्मनेपदम् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ अनुवानेतो ये धातवोडितच तेभ्य एव आत्मने पदं भवति नान्येभ्यः ।। 
12. After a root which has an indicatory anu dâtta vowel (anudâttet) or an indicatory n (nit), the affixes are those of the Atmanepada. 
The word 'atmanepada' here governs all the subsequent sútras up to sû. 77 inclusive, and is understood in them all; and will not therefore be re peated. Thus of the verb spre the final or is anudâtta and is ca. It is there fore an âtmanepadi verb. As tea. So T- a, afiş ta. 
Fantūr: 11831 agiia 3719-7AUT:, (WATGH) II 
स वृत्तिः ॥ भावे कर्मणि चात्मनेपदम् भवति ।। 
13. An atmanepada affix is the substitute of the affix (III. 4. 69) when it denotes the action of the verb or the object of the verb. 
Sätra III. 4. 69 declares the "letter me, fac &c.,) is placed after transitive verbs in denoting the object also as well as the agent ; and after intransitives in marking the condition (ie, the action itself which the verb imports) also as well as the agent." The Paras, and Atman, affixes would 
URE - GOVE 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
ERNMENT OF 
OF INDIA 
ATMANEPADA VERBS. 
[Br. I. CH. III. $ 13, 14. 
कृति मंत्रान्न 
have come, therefore, generally after all these verbs. The present sútra re stricts Atman. affixes to bhava and karına verbs, 
This is clear. Impersonal verbs and passive verbs as a rule are conju gated in the atmanepada and take the terminations of that pada. These ori ginally were verbs expressive of states rather than of actions. As of 19 we have tua qar you dislike' (lit. 'it is disliked by you '), Ecuà Tag you sleep.' Similarly passive verbs as Erga as: 'the mat is made '; IFTTT TTT: 
the load is carried.' 
All verbs in Sanskrit may have three voices, viz, active, passive, and middle or impersonal; active voice is generally parasmaipada. The reflexive verbs known as कर्मकतरि are also atmanepadi. Thus लूयते केदारः स्वयमेव ' the wood cuts of itself.' See sútra 78. 
afft TER II 88 | GIFT # aft, Agfa ER ( HTC ) 1 
वृत्तिः ॥ कर्म व्यतिहारे तविशिष्ट क्रिया वचनाद्धातोरात्मनेपदं भवति॥ 
14. In denoting the agent, when reciprocity of action is to be expressed, the affixes of the Atmanepada are employed. 
The active or taisy verbs when denoting reciprocal action are atmanepadi. As, salaqaca, 'they cook for each other,' sgragad 'he performs cutting of wood which was the appropriate office of another.' 
The words "reciprocity or interchange of action" of this sútra govern and are understood in the two following sûtras also. 
The word karma in the sûtra means action and not the technical karma' meaning object' and the word vyatilara means reciprocity or interchange. When an action which was appropriate to one person is performed by another, whose duty it was not, that is called 'interchange of action.' When such in terchange is not meant Paras. is used. As in they cut. The word kartari here is used for the sake of the subsequent aphorism 78, which see. 
a fgereza: || 84 qgfa l a, ia-FEET - : II ( 9 Habaer ) 
वृत्तिः ॥ गत्यर्थेभ्यो हिंसार्थेभ्यश्च धातुभ्यः कर्म व्यतिहार आत्मनेपदं न भवति॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ प्रतिषेधो हसादीनामुपसंख्यानम् ॥ 
* ETE Hay: 
15. After verbs having the sense of motion, or injury,' when expressing interchange of action, the Atmanepada affixes are not used. 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY ON 
ERNMENT OF 
BAIN. Ců, III. $ 16, 17.) 
THE ATMANEPADA VERBS 
5770 
This aphorism prohibits Atmanepada affixes in certain cases where by force of the last søtra Atmanepada affixes would have been obtained. As व्यतिगच्छन्ति 'they go against each other,' व्यतिहिंसन्ति they injure each other.' surasta'they fight together.' 
The word 'not' of this sûtra is understood in the subsequent sútra. 
Vart.---This prohibition extends to the verbs 'to laugh,' and the rest. As GACH, 521a, Jaafall 
Vart.--Prohibition must be made of the verbs ca 'to injure,' as TET Thirat: 11 
reactRRITTET I gę N OTET I ETT-ETIT, FT:-TRT:, ITIGIE, T, ( 520 Fiato a ) 
वृत्तिः ॥ इतरेतरोऽन्योन्य इत्येवमुपपदाद्धातोः कर्मव्यतिहारे आत्मनेपदं न भवति ॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ परस्परोपपदाच्चेति वक्तव्यम् ॥ 
16. And after the verbs which take the words itaretara each other, and anyonya 'one another, as upapada (or dependant qualifying words), the affixes of Atmanepada are not used, though reciprocity of action be denoted. 
Thus इतरेतरस्य व्यति लुनन्तिthey cut each other ' अन्योन्यस्य व्यतिलुनन्ति they cut one another.' 
Vart.---This rule must also be applied when the word eye is in com position with the verb, as an upapada. As TCETTEET SAGT. 
arerat: 11 go nagra 1 à:, faat:, ( H AYGH ) 
वृत्तिः ।। नेः परस्माद् विश प्रात्मनेपदं भवति ॥ 
17. After the verb vis' to enter,' when pre ceded by the preposition ni, the Atmanepada affixes are employed. 
As farura 'he enters, but afara 'he enters in. 
Even when the augment re of the imperfect, Aorist and Conditional tenses intervenes between the root and the preposition, terminations are of the atmanepada. As fara' he entered in.' 
The F of the sůtra must be an upasarga, because that has a sense, and not any नि. On this there is this paribhasha:-अर्थवग्रहणेनानर्थकस्य "a combination of letters capable of expressing a meaning denotes, whenever It is employed in grammar that combination of letters in so far as it possesses that meaning, but it does not denote the same combination of letters void of a meaning." Thus in fer fra at the beetles enter the honey flowers." URE • GOVE 
OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
NWENT OF INC 
OF INDIA 
THE ATMANEPADA VERBS 
[Br. I. CH. III. $ 18, 19 
कृति मंत्राना 
सरल सरकार 
Here the fer is a part of the word hyfa and has no sense by itself, and there fore the verb is in the Parasmaipada and not in the Atmanepada. 
परिव्यवेभ्यः क्रियः ॥ १८ ॥ पदानि ॥ परि-वि-अवेभ्यः, क्रिया, ( ०)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ परिव्यवेभ्य उत्तरात् क्रीणारात्मनेपदं भवति ।। 
18. After the verb kri 'to purchase,' when preceded by pari, vi or ava, the Atmanepada affix is em ployed, even when the fruit of the action does not accrue to the agent. 
The verb gerist to buy or barter,' has an indicatory and therefore, by sûtra 72 it will be Atmanepadi when the fruit of the action accrues to the agent. The present sutra, therefore, refers to cases where the fruit of the action does not accrue to the agent. 
The root to buy' as a general rule takes the terminations of both padas, but when it is preceded by pari, vi, or ava, it is restricted to Atmane pada terminations, As परीक्रीणीते he buys'; विक्रीणीते 'he sells'; अवक्रीणीते "he buys.' 
The word pari, vi, and ava must be upasargas, therefore, in the follow ing example, there is no Atmanepada termination, because the vi there is not a preposition but a noun, as, बहुविक्रीणाति वनम् . 
विपराभ्यां जेः ॥ १९॥ पदानि ॥ विपराभ्याम् , जेः (आ.)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ वि परा पूर्वाज्जयतेर्धातोरान्मनेपदं भवति ।। 
19. After the verb ji 'to conquer,' preceded by vi or parâ, the Atmanepada affix is employed. 
This sútra debars S. 78 by which the root for is generally Para smaipadi. 
AS विजयते 'he conquers', पराजयते 'he conquers. The words vi and para must be upasargas (prepositions), for the application of this rule. In the following examples, they are used as substaintives बहुविजयात वनम् , पराजयति सेना।। 
आङो दोनास्य विहरणे ॥ २०॥ पदानिः ॥ आङ, दः, अना क्या-विहरणे, (आ)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ आइ पूर्वाददातेरनास्यविहरणे वर्तमानावात्मनेपदं भवति ।। वार्तिकम् ।। प्रास्यविहरणसमानम्झितादपि प्रतिषेधो वत्तव्यः॥ नातिकम वा कर्मकाच्चति वक्तव्यम् ।। 
URE - GOVE 
VERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY ON 
3.1. CH. III. $ 20, 21.] 
The ATMANEPADA VERBS. 
20. After the verb dâ' to give,' preceded by an, and when not meaning to open the mouth,' the At manepada affix is used, even when the fruit of the action does not accrue to the agent. 
The root er is generally both Parasmaipadi and Atmanepadi (see S. 72). But when preceded by the preposition atr, it is restriced to the atamanepada AS विद्यामारते he acquires knowledge.' But when it means to widen the mouth" whether actually or metaphorically, it is parasmaipadi. As BTTFÉL व्यावसाति. 'He expands his own mouth.' 
Vart :--The prohibition also applies when the action is similar to the act of opening the mouth. As farrei burqanla he opens the tumour. कूल व्यावहाति नरी ' the river breaks the bank.' 
Vart:-When the action does not affect the agents' own body the verb is atmanepadi, as व्यावर तेपिपीलिकाः पतंगस्य मुखम् , "the ants open the mouth of a locust.' 
क्रीडाग्नुसंपरिभ्यश्च ॥ २१ ॥ पदानि ॥ क्रीडः , अनु-सम्-परिभ्यः , च,(प्राङः ,आत्मने प०) 
वृत्तिः ॥ क्रीड़ विहारे एतस्माद् अनुसम्परि इत्येवं पूर्वाद मा पूर्वाञ्चारमनेपदं भवति ।। वार्तिकम् ॥ समोऽकूजने इति वक्तव्यम् ।। वार्तिकम् ॥ आगमेः क्षमायामात्मने पर वक्तव्यम् ।। वार्तिकम् ॥ शिक्षेजिज्ञासायाम् ।। वार्तिकम् ।। आशिषिनाथः ॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ हरतर्गतताच्छील्ये।। वार्तिकम् ।। किरतेहर्ष जीविका कुलायकरणज्विति वक्तव्यम् ।। वार्तिकम् ।। माडिनुप्रच्छोरुपसंख्यानम् ॥ वार्तिकम् ।। शप उपालम्भन इति वक्तव्यम् ।। 
21. After the verb krîd. 'to play' preceded by anu, sam or pari, as well as an, the Atmanepada affix is used. 
The words भाड़" is to be read into the sutra by virtue of the conjunc tion च in the text As आक्रीडते संक्रीडते मनुक्रीडते, or परिक्रीडते he plays.' 
Vart.--When the verb are compounded with a means to make a rattling or creaking noise,' it does not take atmanepada terminations. As throica e 'the carts rattle or creak.' The word anu, pari &c., being taught along with sam, indicates that the upasargas anu, pari, &c., are to be taken and not the karmapravachanîya anu pari, &c. Therefore, when these prebixes are used as karmapravachaniya, they do not cause the verb as to 
RE - GOVER 
MINISTRY 
STRY OF CU 
WERNMENT ON 
OF INDIA 
THE ATMANEPADA VERBS. 
[BK. I. CH. III. $12- 
संचय जयते 
take the atmanepada terminations as tu a sie 'he plays in imitation of the boy' For the definition and action of karmapravachanîya, see. I. 4. 83 and II. 3. 8. 
Vart.-The verb s takes the atmanepada terminations when mean ing 'to wait for', 'to overlook', 'to have patience', as, TTT ara apua ! 
• Have patience with the boy.' 
Vart.--The verb faa takes âtmanepada terminations, when meaning to enquire':-as, faare FETETÀ.he investigates sciences. 
Vart.-The verb 2 when meaning to bless,' takes atmanepada terminations, as,सर्पिषो नाथते - he blesses with clarified butter.' मधुनो नायते। Why do we say when meaning to bless'? Observe, gaya, he begs of Manavaka. 
Vari.-The verb pria takes atmanepada terminations when meaning to take after the nature of the parents.' As AXAT STIETÀ 'the horses resemble their father.' argah TTTSIFT a 'the cows always imitate their mother. But when not having this meaning, we have hatala'he resembles his mother.' 
Vart.--The verb rahtia takes âtmanepada terminations when meaning "to scratch out or scatter with joy, for abode or food.' As sofisha 
uit te: the happy bull scratches with joy.' STTTET T Truf the cock scratches in search of food,' eta TSS Treff the dog scratches to make his abode.' When not having these senses we have strientra 'he scatters about the flowers,' The dental a in apaskirate is added by sâtra VI. 1. 142. Ba r cafacare era !! 
Vart.---The verbs 'to cry' and yes to ask' take the atmanepada terminations when preceded by the preposition 15, as ITA ita: the jackal howls,' siqaya TER"he questions the Guru.' 
Vart.-The verb erg when meaning to touch the body by the word' takes atmanepada affixes. As 
a 'he promises by oath to Devadatta.' Otherwise we have gifer "he curses.' 
Sa e: 2 Tila Il 24-7a-4-faz: , : # 
वृत्तिः॥सम् भव प्रवि इत्येवं पूर्वात तिष्ठते रास्मनेपदं भवति ॥ 
S: EU:star a 750 U 
22. After the verb stha to stand,' preceded by sam, ava, pra, vi, the Atmanepada affix is used. 
As eager he stays with,' stalaga 'he waits patiently, sada 'he sets forth, Parerala' he stands apart.' 
URE 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY ON 
VERNMENT ON 
RAUT. CH. III. $ 23-25.] 
THE ATMANEPADA VERBS. 
सारवर्गवाजयते 
जसरकार 
Varl.--The verb fer when preceded by pre and meaning "solemn declaration' takes atmanepada terminations; as अस्ति संस्कारमात्रमातिष्ठते ॥ Or to take another example, जलं विशं वा तव कारणादास्थास्ये 'for thee I shall surely have recourse to water or poison.' 
प्रकाशनस्थेयाख्ययोश्च ॥ २३॥ पदानि ॥ प्रकाशन-स्थेय-आख्ययो, च, (स्था, आत्मने) 
वृत्तिः ॥ प्रकाशने स्थयाख्यायां च तिष्ठतेरात्मनेपदं भवति॥ 
23. After the verb sthâ when meaning to indicate one's intentions to another,' or 'to make an award as an arbitrator,' the Atmanepada affix is em ployed. 
The word prakâs'ana means disclosing one's intentions. The word stheyâkhya is a compound of stheya 'arbitrator; and âkhya'name. 
As तिष्ठते जायापत्ये 'the wife expresses her wish to the husband; त्वयि तिष्टते 'he refers to thee for settlement; संशय्य कर्णादिषु तिष्ठते यः, who, when he is in doubt, has recourse to Karņa as his judge or umpire.' 
उदोग्नूर्ध्वकर्मणि ॥ २४ ॥ पदानि ॥ उदः, अनूर्व-कर्माण, (स्था, आत्मनेपदम्)॥ 
वृत्तिः॥ उत् पूर्वात् तिष्ठते रनूर्ध्वकर्मणि वर्तमानादात्मनेपदं भवति ।। वार्तिकम् ॥ उद ईहायामिति वक्तव्यम् ॥ 
24. After the verb stha, preceded by ut, when not meaning 'to get up or rise,' as from a seat, the At manepada affix is employed. 
The word 'karma' in this aphorism means action, and does not mean the grammatical karma or object,' 
As गेहे उत्तिष्ठते 'he strives for the house' so also कुटुम्ब उन्निष्ठते ।। But आसनादुनिष्ठति"he rises up from the seat.' 
Vart.-The force of the preposition ut must be to express ईहा, "effort, exertion, wish or desire, to surprise or excell.' If this be not the force of ut, the terminations are those of the Parasmaipada. As अस्माद् ग्रामात् शतमुत्तिष्ठति a hundred is yielded by this village. The word al qualifies the word anardhakarmani,' and does not debar the latter. 
उपान्मन्त्रकरणे ॥ २५ ॥ पदानि ॥ उपात्र मन्त्र-करणे, (खा, 
वृत्तिः ।। उपपूर्वावतिष्ठतमन्त्रकरणेऽर्थेवर्तमानादात्मनेपदं भवति॥ वातिकम् ॥ उपादेवपूजासंगति करणमित्री करणपथिविति वाच्यम् ।। वार्तिकम् ॥ वा लिप्सायामिति वक्तव्यम् ।। 
URE 
GOVE 
OF CULTURE 
. MINISTRY 
ONMENT OF 
OF INDIA 
The ATMANEPADA VERBS. 
[Br. I. CH. III. 8,25-27. 
25. After the verb sthâ, preceded by upa, when meaning to adore,' the Atmanepada affix is used. 
As FIM TAE haga 'he approaches with prayers or worships the Gârhapatya fire with aindra hymns.' 
If it does not mean praising with hymns' the terminations which the verb takes, are those of the Parasmaipada, as attiecara rashe ap proaches the husband through youth.' 
Vart.-The verb fer after the preposition 54 takes the terminations of the atmanepada when meaning worshipping a deity,''to approach for in tercourse or uniting or joining,'' to form friendship with,' and to lead to as a way.' Thus:- 1st Deva pujà ferged he worships the Aditya.' 2. Sangati karana पतिमुपतिष्ठते नारी 'the wife approaches the husband, रथिकानुपतिष्ठते "forms union with charioteers.' 3. Mitrî karana Tauragð gret: 'the good man approaches the saints to make friends with.' What is the difference between Sangati-karana and Mitri-karana ? Sangati-karana means drawing near and approaching together in space, as it RTF tega 'the Ganges joins the Jumna. While the friendly relations may be established without coming in physical contact. 4. Patha:- Tayl: netfagà 'this road leads to Srughna.' 
Vart.-It must be stated that the Atmanepada is optional when the sense is desire of getting.' As GT FETT ragà or rara 'a beggar waits at the place of a Brahmana with the desire of getting something.' 
Hare Re Nagta l iha, 7, (STE HO TO ) | 
वृत्तिः ॥ उपपूर्वात् तिष्ठतेरकर्मकादकर्मकक्रियावचनादात्मनेपदं भवति ।। 
26. After the verb sthâ, preceded by upa, when used intransitively, the Atmanepada affix is used. 
As भोजनकाले उपतिष्ठते he stands ready at the time of dinner,' यावदभुक्तमु पनिष्टते he is present whenever it is dinner time,' यावदोदनमुपतिष्ठते he is present whenever there is food, that is he comes at the time of dinner.' The word bhukta is formed by adding the affix kta to the root, and has the force of condition' here. 
The phrase. when used in the Intransitive' governs the three suc ceeding sutras also 
If it is transitive; the verb upastha takes the parasmaipada termina tions. As fagarbe approaches the king." 
sferat ac o go l a ll 3-fazena, 29:,( - o qe ) 
वृत्तिः॥ उद विइत्येवं पूर्वार सपतेरकर्मकक्रियावचनादात्मनेपदं भवति ।। af FIETT 13 
URE - GOVE 
RY OF CULTU. 
MINISTRY 
VERNMENT OS 
AT OF INDIA 
III. $ 27, 28.] THE ATMANEPADA VERBS, 
•संस्कात मंत्रा 
सवय जयते 
भारत सरकार 
27. After the verb tapa 'to shine,' when used intransitively, and preceded by ut or vi, the Atmanepada affix is employed. 
As उत्तपते or वितपते विद्याया विद्यार्थी ' The scholar shines with knowledge.' But in transitive verbs, it is Parasmaipadi. As EFTIÊ Taufgquanit: 'the gold smith heats the gold,' faceta TË Ficar the sun heats the back.' 
Vart.-It must be stated that the terminations are of the atmanepada, though the verb ut-tapa or vi-tapa be transitive, when the object is some linıb of one's own body. As a TIT or anya TIT or yg 'he heats his own hand or back.' The word Faly means one's own body and not the pâribhâshika or the technical Flig meaning "a thing which not being liquid or gaseous and being capable of being perceived by the senses, and not being one produced by a change from the natural state, exists in a living being and though found elsewhere actually or at any particular time, had previously been known as existing in only a living being, or is found to have actually (not figuratively) the same relation to the being it is in, as a similar thing has to a living being." (See IV. 1. 54. 67TFITSATEHTITITEIT). Therefore not so in the following acTT FLETTET TETT@Devadatta heats the back of Yajñadatta.' When the preposition is other than ut or vi, parasmaipada affix is employed ; as, aeria 
आङोयमहनः ॥ २८ ॥ पदानि ॥ आङः, यम-हनः, (अकर्मकात् To go ) II 
वृत्तिः॥ यम उपरमे, इन हिंसागत्योः। ताभ्यामकर्मक क्रिया वचनाम्यामा पूर्वाभ्यामात्मने qe tau 
28. After the verb yam 'to stop,' and han to injure' when used intransitively and preceded by ân, the Atmanepada affix is employed. 
The word intransitive of s. 26 is understood here also. Both these verbs are generally parasmaipadi. When they take the affix at they become atmanepadi. Yam belongs to Blivadi class; and han to Adâdi class. Thus 
+93 +9+ =371 + JES+sā (VII. 3. 77 TITTAUTAI : chh is the substitute of the finals of ish, gam and yam, when an affix having an indicatory s follows) =B ETE it spreads.' Streea and TEGET; so also ar+a+ = +*+ (I. 2. 4 and VI. 4. 37) BOTIFITTafaaärarerar ca 
sa = BATET, he strikes.' BTT =Fq+strā=3i+ + atra (I, 2.4 and VI. 4. 98 erdam Tiếp Tí Hi II : ches ciề) = STT FIC (VII. 3. 54), GT g ây sẵg) P1. BIETET. 
Not so when these verbs are used in the transitive, as s ota - 
he draws up the rope from the well,' STIET=et 46 in they kill the sinner with the foot.' 
URE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
ENT OF INDIA 
THE ATMANEPADA VERBS. 
[Br.]I, CH, III. $ 29, 30. 
Vart.-When the object is some member of the agent's own body these verbs take the Atmanepada terminations though transitive. As BITTEGET Trora'he puts forth his own hand.' Iga tatt he hurts his own head.' When the object is some limb of another's body, the terminations are of the Para smaipada, as are farc: qa they hurt others' head.' 
समागमृच्छिच्छिस्वरत्यतिविदिभ्यः ॥ २९ ॥ पदानि ॥ समः . TRA-STEP-gfos-carla-efa-et-fafc22: ( 790 o go ) 
वृत्तिः ॥ संपूर्वेभ्यो गमि कच्छि मच्छि स्वरति अतिश्रुविदिइत्येतेभ्योऽकर्मकेभ्यो धातुभ्यः 
ata u tereta BETH II 
29. After the verbs gam 'to go,' richchh 'to become hard,' prachchh to ask,' svar to find fault,' ri 
to go,' s'rû 'to hear,' and vid 'to know,' when used in transitively and preceded by sam, the Atmanepada affix is employed. 
The above seven verbs when preceded by the preposition # and used in the intransitive, take the terminations of the Atmanepada. As caso (VII. 3.77) he joins,' Tat he becomes hard or goes.' eigagat 'he asks,' 
eta "he blames,' 798 they are attained. In the case of this last verb which belongs both to Bhvadi and Juhutyadi classes it is Atmanepadi only in the Aorist. As €*+ +377 +a (III. 1. 56 Ela Trez ) = EUA, as ar aga (VI. 4. 75 METEGSTISC) F + E + 376 + ste = a (VII. 4. 16 eristyo:). This occurs generally in the Vedas. The verb fee must have the meaning of 'to know,' and not that of 'to acquire.' udhe hears,' 
'he knows, 
Vari. --The root E (to see) after the preposition or when used in transitively takes the terminations of the Atmanepada as agaà 'he sees.' But when transitive, it takes Parasmaipada terminations as ara he sees the town,' 
निस मुपविभ्यो हः ॥३०॥ पदानि ॥ नि-सम्-उप-विभ्यः हः, (Toyo) 
वृत्तिः ॥नि सम उप वि इत्येवं पूर्वाद्य ते तोरात्मनेपदं भवति । वार्तिकम् ।।उपसर्गातस्यत्यूयोर्वा वचनम् ॥ 
30. After the verbs hve to call,' preceded by ni, sam, upa, and vi, the Atmanepada is used, even, when the fruit of the action does not accrue to the agent. 
REGOVs. 
OF CUL 
RNMENT OF 
in I. Cal. III. $ 31, 32.1 
THE ATMANEPADA VERBS. 
संस्कृति मा 
सत्यमेव जयते 
81314 3179 *The verb : 'to call' whether transitive or intransitive is Atmanepadi after the above prepositions. The condition of being Intransitive does not apply to this sûtra, and from this sûtra forward general rules of Atmanepada are treated of. As Aaga, FETT, TETI 
The verb is marked in the Dhâtupâţha [with a = and therefore, by sútra 72 of this Chapter, it will take the terminations of the Atinanepada when the direct fruit of the action accrues to the agent. But even when the direct fruit of the action does not accrue to the agent, the verb hve takes the termina. tions of the Atmanepada when preceded by the above prefixes. 
Varl.-The verbs F# 'to throw' and 57 'to note' take optionally Atmanepada affixes when compounded with upasargas, As farraioa 'he casts out,' - 'he collects.' 
FYERTAIS: | 38 | Geria l ain, #s: , ( 910 90 ) 
वृत्तिः ॥ स्पर्धयां विषये प्राङ् पूर्वाद् ह्वयतेरात्मनेपदं भवति । 
31. After the verb hve, when meaning to challenge' and preceded by ân, the Atmanepada is used, even when the fruit of the action does not accrue to the agent. 
As et Tartuà an athlete challenges another athlete in order to conquer him)'; 51 qarg 'one student emulates with another student. 
This sûtra is also for the purpose of showing that the root hve takes the Atmanepada termintaions even when the direct fruit of the action does not accrue to the agent. 
The word spardha means to emulate, to vie, to desire, to conquer another. When the verb hve has not the above signification, it takes the terminations of the parasmaipada. As farZJFT igra: 'the cowherd calls the cows.' 
गन्धनावक्षेपणसेवनसाहसिक्यप्रतियत्नप्रकथनोपयोगेषु कृतः ॥ ३२ ॥ पदानि ॥ गन्धन-अवक्षेपण-सेवन-साहसिक्य-प्रतियत्न-प्रकथन-उपयोगेषु, कृषः, ( TO CO ) | 
वृत्तिः ॥ गन्धनादिष्वर्येषु वर्तमानात् करोतरात्मनेपदं भवति । 
32. After the verb kri when meaning to di vulge,' 'to revile,' 'to serve,' 'to use violence,' 'to cause change, to recite,' and to do an act tending to effect a desired purpose,' the Atmanepada is used, even when the fruit of the action does not accrue to the agent. 
URE • GOVE 
GOVERNME 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
MENT OF IN 
OF INDIA 
THE ATMANEPADA VERBS. 
[Bk, I. CH. III. $ 33. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
a 
*** 
भारत सरकार 
The verb by sutra 72 would take the affixes of the Atmanepada when the direct fruit of the action accrues to the agent. This sûtra has been begun to show that this verb takes the Atmanepada terminations under certain circumstances even when the direct fruit of the action does not accrue to the agent. 
The word gandhana comes from the root gandh 'to injure,' of churadi class and means to inform against another maliciously with the object of injuring such person. Avakshepana means 'to revile', 'to over-come,' sevana means 'to obey and serve,' sâhasikya means ' an act of violence,' pratiyatna means, 'im parting a new quality or virtue,' prakathana means 'to narrate fully,' upayoga means the disposal of a thing for the object of attaining nierit &c.' 
Thus 3 . a means he informs against ; (2) peat affrontera the hawk overcomes or reviles a snail,' (3) Trurora T o he serves the prosti. tures, महामात्राननुकुरुते ' he serves the mahamatra,' (4) परजारान प्रकुरुते 'he outrages another's wife,' (5) PUTECEITE 'the fuel gives a new quality (boils) to the water (or he prepares the wood and water for a sacrifice). The object of the verb kri takes the affix of the sixth case 7. e. genitive, only when the verb means pratiyatna, see S. II. 3. 53 ( t a ) Therefore udakasya, though an object, has genitive form. The verb takes the augment ye only when it is preceded by upa and signifies pratiyatna, see VI. 1. 139. (Ta team 
party)! Therefore, there is the insertion of sibilant in upaskurute. (5) TTT: he recites stories,' angarera nga 'he recites slander, (0) T T a'he devotes a hundred pieces of money, for the sake of merit. सहस्र प्रकुरुते 'he devotes a thousand.' 
Why do we say in these senses? Witness the autre he makes a mat.' In this case the atmanepada affix is not employed. 
The verb kri is understood in the three succeeding sûtras. 
: TETER | 33 | UGTfal , tea, ( 54: #10 qo) | 
वृत्तिः ॥ अधि पूर्वात् करोतेः प्रसहने वर्तमानादात्मनेपदं भवति ॥ 
33. After the verb kri preceded by adhi, when the sense is that of overcoming or defeat,' the Atmanepada is used, even when the fruit of the action does not accrue to the agent. 
This sútra is commenced to show that kri may take the atmanepada aflix even when the direct fruit of the action does not accrue to the agent. The word prasahana means to overcome, to be not defeated,' As aan 'le overcame him or he was not defeated by him.' 
Why do we say, ' in the sense of to overcome?' Witness traininta he learns the meaning' in which example the atnanepada asfix is not employed. 
OVERNMENT 
FCULTURE 
STRY OF C 
LSINIW 
BUMI. CÁ. III. $ 34-36.] 
THE ATMANEPADA VERBS. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
ति मंत्रालय : 
भारत सरकार 
na wan The necessity of making a separate sutra of this rule, instead of including it in the last aphorism, arose with the object of giving a distinctive meaning to the prefix adhi. 
वे शब्दकर्मणः ॥ ३४ ॥ पदानि ॥ वेः, शब्द कर्मणः, (कृजः प्रा०प०) 
वृत्तिः ॥ वि पूर्वात करोतेरकभिप्राये क्रियाफले शब्दकर्मण आत्मनेपदं भवति ॥ 
34. After the verb kri preceded by vi, even when the fruit of the action does not accrue to the agent, and when the sense is that of making sound,' (liter ally, having sound' for its object) the Atmanepada is employed. 
The word karma in the sûtra indicates objective case or kâraka; and does not express 'action,' as in some previous sûtras such as 24 ante. 
LAs क्रोष्टा विकुरुते स्वरान् 'the birds are making noise,' ध्वांक्षो विकुरुते स्वरान्॥ 
The word f governs the succeeding sâtra. 
Why do we say " when governing a word expressive of sound in the objective case"? Witness चिनविकरोति कामः love affects the mind.' 
अकर्मकाच ॥ ३५ ॥ पदानि ॥ अकर्मकात्, च, (कृजः प्रा०प० वेः)॥ 
वृत्तिः । वि पूर्वात् करोखरकर्मकारकर्मकक्रियावचनादात्मनेपदं भवति ।। 
35. After the verb kri preceded by vi, when used intransitively, the Atmanepada is used. 
As विकुन्वन्ते सैन्धवा 'the horses move gracefully,' अोहनस्य पूर्णाश्छात्रा विकुर्वते the students being full of food are acting as they will or are aimlessly wander ing about.' 
समाननोत्सचनाचार्यकरणशानभृतिविगणनव्ययेषु नियः ॥ ३६ ॥ पदानि ॥ संमानन-उत्सजन-आचार्यकरण-ज्ञान-भृति-विगणन-व्ययेषु नियः, (आत्मनेपदम्)॥ 
वृत्तिः॥णी. प्रापणे इत्येतस्माद्धातोक भिषायक्रियाफलेरात्मनेपदं भवति, सम्माननाविषु विशेषणेषु सत्सु ॥ 
36. After the verb ni 'to lead,' when used in the sense of 'to guide so as to render the person guided worthy,' 'to lift up,' 'to make one a spiritual guide,' to determine the true sense,' to employ on wages," URE - Gove 
OVERNMENT 
FCULTURE 
MINISTE 
OT OF INDIA 
THE ATMANEPADA VERBS. 
[BK. I. CH. III. $ 
7 
7 
to pay as debt,' and 'to give as in charity,' even when the fruit of the action does not accrue to the agent, the Atmanepada is used. 
This sûtra is begun in order to show that the verb aff may take the terminations of the Atmanepada, even when the direct fruit of the action does not accrue to the agent, in the following cases, vis, when it means to respect' &c. 
Sammânana means to respect; as ren a trai Traa 'the Chârvi gives instruction in the Lokayata s'astra.' The word chârvi primarily means intelli gence, and by secondry use it has been extended to the preceptor also; such a preceptor gives instruttion, in Lokayata Sastra, that is to say, having estab lished the truth of the doctrines of that philosophy by argumentation, imparts them to the pupils. Those doctrines being thus established by reason, be come respected (Sanmânitâ) and honored. 
Utsanjana, 'to throw up, or lift up,' as Alutaraua he lifts up Manavaka.' 
Acharya-karana 'acting as a teacher,' that is to say, to bring a boy near oneself in such a way, that being so brought near (upa-neta), he may himself become an acharya, As Aranaca 'he initiates Manavaka (i.e. making himself the preceptor he brings the boy near himself.') 
Jñana means 'knowledge, a demonstrated verity. As a retargil Jā 'the Chårvî investigates the truth of the Lokayata doctrine.' 
Bhriti means 'wages.' As FRITT 'he employs the servants on hire or wages.' 
Viganana means the paying off as a tribute, debts &c. As HET frate, the Madras pay the tax due to the king, that is, they discharge the debt.' 
Vyaya means 'allotment of money on works of merit &c.' As a raya he expends a hundred pieces on religious acts.' se faasia 'he devotes a thousand, 
Why do we say, in these senses? Witness yaitu TAT'he carries 
not any one of the above significations, 
to a t af gull fall hje,T, atae, ra, (FU UTO 10 ) 
वृत्तिः । नयतेः कर्तादेवदत्तादिलकारवाच्यः कर्तृस्थे कर्मण्यशरीरे सति नयतरात्मनेपदं 
37. After the verb ni, when it governs an incorporeal object existing in the agent, as its object, the Atmanepada is used. 
URE - GOVE 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY OS 
ANMENT OF IN 
B 
. Cu. 111. $ 38.] 
THE ATMANEPADA VERBS. 
सिति जान्न 
सत्यमेव जयते 
4.9178 
ल सरकार 
The verb at is Atmanepadi when governing an object which has no material body, but is an abstract noun, that is an object which has abstract but no concrete existence; and when such an object has its seat in a portion of the agent of the verb. As a farea 'he subdues his own anger, मन्यु विनयते ' he suppresses anger.' 
The word s'arîra means the body of living beings, any portion of such body is also called s'arîra. 
The object must reside in the agent, (kartristha), otherwise the verb will be parasmaipadi. As ACTIT FITTIFT FTA Gata Devadatta removes Yajnadatta's anger.' 
The object moreover must be immaterial, otherwise the afix will be of parasmaipada. As गडं विनयति 'he removes his own wort.' घायं विनयति 
he bows his neck.' 
Why do we say in the case of an object ?' Witness Tea Falche is submissive through knowledge,' ar fara. Here the verb fela has not taken an accusative case, but is in construction with an instrumental case, and therefore the present rule does not apply. 
gratiaràg : || 36 || TETE II afa-khi-arrag, :, (PO TO ) 
वृत्तिः ।। वृत्याविष्वर्येषु क्रमेर्धातोरात्मनेपदं भवति ।। 
38. After the verb kram 'to move' when used, in the senses of continuity,' energy and development,' the Atmanepada is employed. 
The word 'kram' governs the succeeding sâtras up to 43 and is understood in them all. 
The verb kram by sútra I. 3. 78 (after the rest, let the parasmaipada affixes be employed in marking the agent), would have taken the affixes of the parasmaipada; the present aphorism enjoins Atmanepada affixes in cer tain cases when the verb means to have a taste for &c. 
Vritti continuity' means unobstructed, or want of interruption (i. l., a taste for, or facility in, anything), sarga 'energy' means application, resolution and determination. Tayana 'development' means increase and growth. 
As (1) TFT :- his reason proceeds unobstructed through the Rig. scriptures i. e., he can easily comprehend the Rig.' (2). sarah TITTEN arama the pupil shows energy or exerts to study the grammar. (3). Har 
TETT ** the shastras are developed in him.' 
Why in these senses only? Witness Tarafa 'he runs away.' 
URE GO 
VERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY OF 
OF INDIA 
The ATMANEPADA VERBS. [Bk. I. CH. III. $ 19-41. 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
सत्यमेव जयते 
3712 
39873TA 3 | Tier II 39-7772277, (las TartagħA: TT: 90 ) 
वृत्तिः ॥ उपपरापूर्वात् क्रमतेर्वृत्त्यादिष्वर्थेषु वर्तमानादात्मनेपदं भवति ॥ 
39. After the verb kram, preceded by upa and para, when used in the senses of continuity, energy and development, the Atmanepada is employed. 
The words vritti &c., of the last sûtra are understood here also. Why has this been made a separate sûtra and not included in the last ? The reason is to make a restrictive rule in the cases of upasargas; that is to say, only in the cases of the upasargas upa and parâ, there is âtmanepada affix; but not so when any other upasarga precedes the verb kram, though the sense may be of continuity &c. Thus T he commences to advance,' Tristã 'he marches to attack.' 
Why do we say after the upasargas 'upa and para '? Because, after any other preposition the affix will be of the parsmaipada ; as FEFTAsa he makes progress. If the sense is not that of "continuity " &c., parasmaipada will be employed, as ATTI, TETAFA. 
Wertha Il 80 || TGIFT II Disi, gatha ( FH, WO TO ) | 
FET: I SIG ATT TAG HETETT FATICA TÈ stata in वार्तिकम् ॥ ज्योतिरुदूगमने इति वक्तव्यम् ॥ 
40. After the verb kram, preceded by án, the Atmanepada is employed, when used in the sense of the rising of a luminary. 
As s a Fer: the sun rises.' T Taparthe moon rises,' a Hea sara' the stars rise.' 
Vart.-This ascending must refer to heavenly bodies. Therefore in S TAAT TEFara ,' the smoke rises from the surface of the terrace,' the verb A is parasmaipadi. Why do we say in the sense of “to ascend"? Witness 
AUI: 'the boy assails the ox.' a: grglaro 8 l utfor li a:, -laatu, (FA: go ) | 
वृत्तिः ॥ विपूर्वात् क्रमतेः पारविहरणेऽर्थे वर्तमानादात्मनेपदं भवति । 
41. After the verb kram, preceded by vi, the Atmanepada is employed, when used in the sense of 
placing of foot-steps.' 
As 
'the horse is pacing. The term vikramana is applied to the special movements of horse &c. 
URE - GOVE 
GOVERNMEN 
OF CULTURA 
WENT OF INDIA 
Brum. Cré. III. $ 42, 43.] 
THE ATMANEPADA VERBS. 
Though in the Dhatupatha (catalogue of verbal roots), the verb si and may have the meanings of pâda-viharaṇa and pâda-vikshepa, that is " throwing or placing of foot," and so it might be objected that the present sútra is a useless repetition, yet as verbs have various other meanings than what is assigned to them in the dhâtupatha, the present sútra is not un necessary. 
Why do we say "in the sense of throwing of foot"? In any other sense, the terminations will be those of the parasmaipada. As fatia FaerT: 
the fold of the antilope skin is ruptured.' 
SPIT FETTA 82 || TEMA | 7-39721 , FA PRITET, (FA: HOCO ) 1 
वृत्तिः ॥ प्र उप इत्येताभ्यां परस्मात् क्रमतेरात्मनेपदं भवति ॥ 
42. After the verb kram, the Atmanepada is employed when it is preceded by pra and upa, both con veying the same sense; viz. that of " beginning an action." 
As प्रक्रमते भोक्तुम् , उपक्रमते भोन्मुम् ' he commences to eat ' &c. 
The prefixes pra and upa are synonyms, when they denote the com mencement of an action 
Why do we say," when they are synonyms." Witness the following qiq: Tasyarat he goes during the first part of the day and he comes back during the latter part of the day.' Here in one case the sense is "to go," in another it means "to return." 
Why in the latter case of 'aparedyur upakrâmati' there is not At manepada by virtue of sûtra 39 ante, as there is the upasarga upa here? The answer is that Rule 39 is not applicable, as that rule is limited by the condition of the sense of continuity' &c. while in the present sútra, that limitation is not applicable. 
WEITETET I 83 || 9Gta | 42-34 arna, at (A: 0 TO ) || वृत्तिः ।। उपसर्ग वियुक्तात् क्रमतरात्मनेपदं भवति ॥ 
43. After the verb kram, the Atmanepada is optionally employed, when it is not preceded by any preposition. 
The root kram' may always be conjugated as Atmanepadi when not having any upasarga. The upasarga will be defined in I. 4. 59. The option allowed by this søtra is an example of what is technically known as apràpta vibhâså vis., an option which is not an alternative limitation to a general rule already found or known. 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
NERNMENTO 
T OF INDIA 
THE ATMANETADA VERBS. 
[Bk. I. CH. III. $14346 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
सत्यमेव जयते 
754.5172 
17 272517 
Examples: ah or mafa'he goes over.' Why do we say when it is without any preposition ?' For no option is allowed when it takes preposition. As ETHET. 
aay: 11 88 || Totia taa:, :,( 0 TO ) | वृत्तिः॥ जानातेरपह्नवे वर्तमानादात्मनेपदं भवति ॥ 
44. After the verb jña, when used in the sense of 'denying,' the Atmanepada is employed. 
The root jña which ordinarily means to know' and is parasmaipadi by rule 78, becomes Atmanepadi when through the virtue of any prefix it means to deceive:' as estrata 'he deceives,' anthraita 'he denies the debt of a hundred rupees,' ETETT Taradenies a thousand.' 
Why do we say when meaning "to deny ?" Observe :- hafer are thou knowest not anything.' 
FAITEET | 's il Torfer Il FÅha, (,710 q ) वृत्तिः ॥ जानातेरकर्म कादकर्मकक्रियावचनादात्मनेपदं भवति । 
45. And when used intransitively, after the verb jna, the Atmanepada is employed, even when the fruit of the action does not accrue to the agent. 
As ardor tror wyf strafra'he engages in sacrifice by means of clari fied butter or honey.' (See II. 3. 51). 
This Atmanepadi form of jña is employed when the fruit of the ac tion does not accrue to the agent. From sâtra 76 it will be seen that when the fruit of the action accrues to the agent, the verb is Atmanepadi. 
How in the above example the verb jña is intransitive? Because the word sarpih is not the object of knowledge, but it is an instrument of sacrifice, into which one engages from complete knowledge (jñana); and it (sarpishah) is in the genitive case by virtue of II. 3. 51 ( Fisia GET FIT ) by which the instrumental karaka of the jña is put in the genitive case. 
Why do we say of " Intransitive"? Because in the transitive it is parasmaipadi, as varu rara'he knows (recognizes) the son by his voice.' 
संप्रतिभ्यामनाध्याने ॥ ४६॥ पदानि ॥ सम्-प्रतिभ्याम् अन्-आध्याने, (: To go ) 
वृत्तिः ॥ संप्रतिइत्येवं पूर्वाजानातेरनाध्याने वर्तमानादात्मनेपदं भवति । 
46. After the verb jña, precede by sam, and prati, the Atmanepada is employed, when not used in the sense of" remembering with regret.'' 
CURE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
Y OF CULTUR 
MUSTRY 
BANCÀ. III. $ 46-48.] 
The ATMANEPADA VERBs. 
संस्कृति 
सत्यमेव जयत 
ET 
4774.9173 
The word jña is understood in this sútra: and the aphorism applies to that jña which is used in the transitive. As a rira 'he looks for a hundred,' So सहसं प्रतिजानीते ' he promises a thousand.' 
Why do we say when 'not meaning remembering with regret?' Because it is not Atmanepadi, when it conveys that meaning. Thus is: 
strana 'he remembers with regret his mother,' FTT: Tistrana 11 
भासनोपसंभाषाज्ञानयन वमत्युपमन्त्रणेषु वदः ॥४७॥ पदानि ॥ HTET-JUE HTC-HA-G-Cara-394-u, a: , ( TO GO ) 
वृत्तिः ॥ भासनादिषु विशेषणेषु सत्सु वदतेरान्मनेपदं भवति ॥ 
47. After the verb vad, the Atmanepada is employed, when used in the senses of "showing brilliance, or proficiency in," "pacifying," "knowledge," "effort," "difference of opinion,” and “flattering." 
By sûtra 78, vad generally takes the terminations of the Parasmai pada. By the present sûtra, it takes also the affixes of the Atmanepada when having certain meanings. 
Bhâsana, (shining) means to illumine as aga trailerea. The chârvi illumines the Lokayat shastras, by his discourses and clear exposition. 
Upasambhasha (persuasions) means to appease, to conciliate, as aha Tritaca he conciliates or cajoles the servants.' 
Jñana (knowledge) means to know completely, as qe qiat serà 'the charvi knows completely to discourse upon Lokayat shastra.' 
Yatna (endeavour) means energy, as a Tea 'He toils in the field, To aca he toils in the house." 
Vimati (disagreement) means dissension, want of unanimus opinion As a faged, they disagree over the field,' i.e., holding different opinions they talk diversely. 
Upamantrana (enticing) means to coax in secret, as, garatutaec 'he entices the wife of a respectable family (i.e., seduces her in secret), ' TERTEH 
dhe flatters another's wife.' 
Why in the above senses only ? See ja raittura 'he says something'. 
garai haru # 8C # GTia Il Fath, 24-JET , ( :, Ho To ) 
वृत्तिः ॥ व्यक्तवाचां समुच्चारणं सहोचारणं तत्रवनमानाबदतेरात्मनेपदं भवति ॥ 
48. After the verb vad, the Atmanepada is employed when used in the sense of speaking articulately in a similar manner." 
SURE - GOV 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY ON 
NWENT OF INA 
T OF INDIA 
THE ATMANEPADA VERBS. 
[BK. I. CH. III. $ 49 
सत्यमेव जयते 
कृति मंजन 
As संप्रवदन्ते ब्राह्मणाः 'the Brahmanas are speaking.' But in संप्रवदन्ति ET: 'the cocks are crowing' it is properly Parasmaipadi. 
The sense of the sûtra is that when men, who are only capable of articulate speech, speak all in one and the same time, then the verb vad takes the affix of the Atmanepada. When lower animals make a chorus of noise, the verb does not take the Atmanepada. 
There must be samuchcharaņa for the application of this rule; when there is no samuchchâraņa or speaking in a chorus, this rule does not apply, as EU TE 'the Brâhmaņa speaks.' 
garanta II 8 Il Gira Il tè: , pofta, (eg: , To go ) merari Il 
gia: Il gaigeacciareeafaqat THÀNÉ PRE IL 
49. After the verb vad, preceded by anu when it is intransitively used, the Atmanepada is em ployed, when the sense is that of “speaking articulately in a similar manner." 
P As अनुवदते कठः कलापस्य katha is echoing or imitates kalapa. He reutters exactly what the kalapa-reader or the teacher says. The word anu here means similarly. 
Why do we say 'in the Intransitive'? Because when it is used in the transitive it takes the affixes of the Parasmaipada. As पूर्वमेव यजुरुदितमनुवदति, 
he repeats the yajurveda which he had learned before.' 
The words 'uttering of articulate speech' are understood here also. Otherwise ratia after the lute resounds,' here it is Parasmaipada. 
Fernat fagara #4 # agar Il fant, fasteru, (ag: o go hai ) 1 
वृत्तिः। विप्रलापात्मके व्यक्तवाचां समुच्चारणे वर्तमानातूदतेरान्मनेपदं भवति विभाषा॥ 
50. After the verb vad, the Atmanepada is employed optionally, when the sense is that of "con tradicting each other." 
As विप्रवदन्ते or न्ति वैद्याः (the doctors are at variance). The words vyaktavachâm (articulate utterance) and samuchcharana (speaking together) are understood in this sútra also. 
No option is allowed when the sense is not that of contradiction or wrangling as, great TT, the Brahmanas are speaking together.' 
The phrase "articulate utterance is necessary in this also. Because as finale : 'the kites are quarrelling,' the verb is in the Parasmaipada. 
URE - Gov. 
Y OF CULTUR 
10LSININ 
VERNMENT OF 
( 
1) CH. III. S. 51, 52.] 
THE ATMANEPADA VERBS. 
संस्कृति मात्रा 
सत्यमेव जयते 
नालय भारत 
तितरकार 
The wrangling must be by talking at one and the same time, otherwise this rule will not apply. As क्रमेण वैद्या वैयेन सह विप्रवदन्ति, "the doctors contradict by turn another doctor.' 
अवादनः ॥५१॥ पदानि ॥ अवाद ,मः, (प्रा०प०) 
वृत्तिः ॥ अवपूर्वाद गिरतेरात्मनेपदं भवति ।। 
51. After the verb grî 'to swallow,' when pre ceded by ava, the Atmanepada is used. 
As Safita (he swallows). The root grî to swallow preceded by the preposition ava is Atmanepadi. The verb grî taken in this sûtra means to swallow and belongs to the Tudâdi class. It is not the gri 'to make sound which belongs to the kryâdi class, because there is no word formed with the latter verb by affixing the preposition ava to it. By sûtra 78 this verb grî 
to swallow' would have been Parasmaipadi; the present sûtra debars that. 
When it is not preceded by ava, it is Parasmaipadi, as forara 'he swallows.' 
समः प्रतिज्ञाने॥५२॥ पदानि ॥ समः, प्रतिज्ञाने, (प्रा०प०)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ संपूर्वाद गिरतेः प्रतिज्ञाने वर्तमानादात्मनेपदं भवति ॥ 
52. After the verb grî preceded by sam, the Atmanepada is used, when employed in the sense of 
promising.' 
As शनं संगिरते, 'he promises to paya hundred rupees. If it does not mean to promise or acknowledge, it takes parasmaipada terminations. As संगिरति मासम् , ' he swallows the mouthful,' 
उदश्चरः सदर्मकात् ॥ ५३॥ पदानि ॥ उदः, चरः। सकर्मकात् ॥ (प्रा०प०)॥ 
वृत्तिः ।। उत्पूर्वातूचरते सकर्मकक्रियावचनात्मनेपदं भवति ।। 
53. After the verb char to walk' preceded by ut, when used transitively, the Atmanepada is employed. 
As गेहसुखरते 'he strays away from home; गुरुवचनमुञ्चरते' he transgresses the commands of his preceptor.' 
Why do we say “when used in the transitive "? Observe aruara the vapour is rising.' Here it is parasmaipadi. 
समस्तृतीयायुक्तात् ॥ ५४॥ पदानि ॥ समः, तृतीया- युक्तात् । (चरः प्राप०)॥ 
त्तिः ॥ संपूर्वाधारतस्तृतीया युक्तावात्मनेपदं भवति । 
URE.GOV 
STRY OF CUL 
MINISTRY 
JERNMENT OS 
OF INDIA 
THE ATMANEPADA VERBS. 
[BK. I. CH. III. $ 54, 55 
सत्यमेव जयते 
.संस्कृत 
20 
54. After the verb char, preceded by sam, and connected with a noun in the Instrumental case, the Atmanepada is employed. 
As a Gara 'he rides on the horse-back.' 
The rule does not apply when it is not in composition with a word in the instrumental case. As IT ÉTTE FÅ Tha ! O Devala! thou wanderest through both regions, this and that.' Here though the sense of the Instrumental case is implied, yet as it is not expressly stated, we use the parasmaipada terminations. 
ÇTUST EI Selezja 11 441 GGTfa II qru: , 5, ET , erat, geff-8, ( HET TO TT: 10 (0) 
वृत्तिः ॥ वाणराने परस्मैपदी ततः संपूर्वाद् तृतीयायुक्तादात्मनेपदं भवति खाचेत् तृतीया चतुर्यर्थे भवति। 
Tu U STÍTE STEFit garen gaua vaata 77644 11 
55. And after the verb dâ to give, preceded by sam, and connected with a noun in the Instrumental case, the Atmanepada is employed, provided this Instru mental case have the sense of the Dative case. 
When is the 3rd case used with the force of the 4th case? That is answered by the following 
Vart: -The Instrumental has the force of the Dative when immoral conduct is implied. Aaस्या or वृषल्या संप्रयच्छते 'he gives with the object of enticing to the female slave or prostitute.' 
The verb da to give is generally parasmaipadi, it becomes atmane padi under the above conditions. 
Why do we say " when it has the force of the dative case"? Because when it has not the sense of the dative, parasmaipada terminations will be used, as for TOEF, he gives with his hand.' 
It might be asked how the atmanepada terminations are employed when the preposition sam is not directly applied to the verb, but another pre position pra, intervenes between sam and the verb. The reply is that the word samah in sutra 54 is not in the ablative case (which would have required its being placed immediately before the verb), but it is in the genitive case, and is used as an attribute. 
SE#: 8 lugar II SUTE, TA: , fara, (ge to ) 
. GOVERN 
ULTURE.GA 
STRY OF CU 
MINISTON 
NMENT OF IN 
OF INDIA 
$ 56, 57.] 
THE ATMANEPADA VERBS. 
. 
कृति मंत्राद्ध 
56. After the verb yam, to give, preceded by upa, when used in the sense of “espousing," the Atmane pada is employed. 
This is clear. As syrargyzesed 'he espouses or knows his wife. But not so when another's wife is meant; there it is parasmaipadi. 
By rule 78, the verb yam would have been parasmaipadi, but the present sûtra makes an exception, when the root takes the preposition upa and means "to marry, to espouse, or to accept." The meaning of sva-karana is confined to accepting in general. This is according to Kasika ; according to Mahâbhâshya, sva-karana means to make one's own what was not previously his own. 
Why do we say in the sense of "marrying"? When it has any other sense, prasmaipada affixes will be employed, as TACTICHETTFT igrala, 
Devadatta has illicit intercourse with the wise of Yajñadatta.' 
TIPEEESTI FA: ll que ll CGIA I ETT-PT-F-ETH , ETT: , ( To To ) Il 
वृत्तिः ॥ ज्ञा श्रु स्मृ दृश् इत्येतेषां सन्नन्तानामात्मनेपदं भवति ॥ 
57. After the Desideratives formed by the affix san, of the verbs jñâ to know, s'ru to hear, smri to remember, and dris' to see, the Atmanepada is employed. 
The above four roots are atmanepadi when in the Desiderative form, the suffix "san" being the pratyaya by which desideratives are formed. 
The verb jñâ takes the terminations of the atmanepada when used in the senses indicated by the three sûtras 44, 45 and 46 already explained. The desiderative form of jña would ex necessitate take atnianepada affixes when used in the above senses: see Rule 62. The present sutra however enlarges the scope of atmanepada, by declaring all desideratives of jña to be atmanepada, in whatever sense they may be used. 
Similarly by sutra 29 ante and the vârtika under it, the roots s'ru, and dris' take the terminations of the atmanepada; when preceded by sam, the desideratives of those would of course have taken âtmanepada affixes by 62, but the present sútra makes it general. 
The present sûtra however enunciates a new rule in the case of the root smri. 
Asyi FETETET'he wishes to know (i e. enquires after) religion,' शुश्रूषते he serves the teacher,' नष्टं सुस्मूर्षते he wishes to remember the lost.' नृप feeda 'he wishes to see the king.' 
Why do we say, when taking the affix san? Because the primitive verbs will take the parasmaipada terminations as an 'he knows,' weira 
be hears,' taifa 'he remembers' qana he sees.' URE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
aY OF CULTUR 
. MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
THE ATMANEPADA VERBS 
[BK. I. CH. III. & 58-60. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
aara; I 96 l TGTE Il a , wêr: , : , (FTAT: ST9C) | 
वृत्तिः ॥ अनुपूर्वाज़जानातेः सन्नन्तादात्मनेपदं न भवति । 
58. After the desiderative of jñâ when pre ceded by anu the Atmanepada is not employed. 
This is an exception to the last sûtra. The desiderative of jña with the prefix anu is not âtmanepadi. 
This sûtra read with sútra 45 limits the scope of parasmaipada to the transitive, desiderative verb anu-jña. As yagirala 'he enquires after the son.' 
Why do we say when preceded by anu ? Because otherwise it will take the atmanepada terminations. As y FFETTÄ 'he inquires after religion.' 
प्रत्याभ्यां श्रुवः ॥ ५९॥ पदानि ॥ प्रति-आभ्याम् , श्रुवः , (E: TOTO ) II 
वृत्तिः ॥ प्रति प्रा इत्येवं पूर्वाचकृणोतेः सन्नन्तादात्मनेपदं न भवति ।। 
59. After the desideratives of s'ru when pre ceded by prati and ân the Atmanepada is not used. 
The verb s'ru when taking the prefixes prati and ai, is not âtmanepadi, though taking the desiderative "san." This is also an exception to the rule of sutra 57. Thus REITG and all 
The word prati and an must be upasargas ; if they are used as karma pravachaniyas (see 1.4.-83) then the rule will not apply, as 29 TIGRICT IN 
te: fara: Roll Tall , faza: , ( O TO ) 1 
aft: il ged: frati citar at TEACTHATË Tara II 
60. After the verb s'ad to decay, when it has one of the affixes with an indicatory s' (s'it) the Atmanepada is used. 
The root 'sad' when taking any affix which is marked with an indica tory , is conjugated in the atmanepadi. In connection with this must be read sutra VII. 3. 78. TEXTEFFECTETENTEU Harare CITTSTUMA +Tue afterefter: by which the root ng is replaced by fat before the affixes having an indicatory . Thus grę + T + = títe + T = tflera 'he decays or withers, sirea they two decay, retea they decay, 
Why do we say before affixes having an indicatory ? Before other affixes it is not atmanepadi, As S a 'if he decayed,' secara 'he will decay,' Frarea 
The well-known vikaranas like gry , T &c., the affixes like yra &c., are fara affixes. In other words the root s'ad is atmanepadi in all conjuga tional tenses. 
URE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
XT OF INDIA 
BEAR. CA III. $ 61, 62.] 
THE ATMANEPADA VERBS, 
सत्यमय गते 
ferrassfagiaat ll ll ferrà, 35-fest: , (farar: STITO TO ) 
वृत्तिः ॥ म्रियतेलुंलिडोः शितधात्मनेपदं भवति अन्यत्र न भवति । 
61. After the verb mri to die, when it has one of the affixes having an indicatory , as well as when it takes the affixes lun (aorist III 2. 110) add lin (Benedic tive III. 3. 159) the Atmanepada is used. 
This is a restrictive sútra, the root 75 (to die), is marked with a as an indicatory letter; so by sûtra 12 it would be always Atmanepadi. But the present aphorism restricts it to 15 lun (Aorist) and fs lin (Benedictive) tenses as well as to those tenses which are fara. It will be found hereafter that out of the ten tenses, those that take fra affixes are the special tenses, 1, e., the Present, the Imperfect, the Potential and the Imperative. 
It is only before these three affixes, namely, lin, lun, and s'it affixes, that the root mri takes the terminations of the atmanepada. Thus the aorist erta amrita he died ; Benedictive Tote mrishîshta may he die.' Similarly before sit affixes : thus fera. he dies,' = + 7 + (VII. 4. 28 fie mase ) ra + + g = aa (VI. 4. 77. A TETTHET saritua76) fa, fara The root belongs to the sixth class of verbs called Tudadi which take the vikarana yr in the conjugational tenses (III. 1. 77). 
In other tenses, viz., the two Futures, the Perfect and the conditional, this verb is parasmaipadi. As #frga he wili die. ThiszE. 
gerecha: 11 & 1 CGTi Il geraa , FFT:,( ITO TO ) वृत्तिः । सनः पूर्वो यो धातुः आत्मनेपदी तत्सन्नन्तादात्मनेपदं भवति । 
62. The verb which is Atmanepadi in its primitive form before the taking of the affix san, will also be Atmanepadi when it ends in the affix san. In other words ; after a desiderative verb, Atmanepada is employed, if it would have been used after the primitive verb. 
If the primary verb is parasmaipadi, its desiderative will be also parasmaipadi; if the primary verb is Atmanepadi, its desiderative will be Atmanepadi. This is the general rule. Some exceptions to it have already been mentioned in sutras 57, 58, and 59. A root which was atmanepadi, before taking the Desiderative affix a san, will be atmanepadi even when it takes the affix a san. In other words, that by reason of which the atmanepada affixes were ordained in the primary verb, will cause the same terminations 
URE - Go 
ay OF CULTUA 
MINISTRY 
ERNMENT OF 
OF INDIA 
THE ATMANEPADA VERBS. 
[BK. I, CH. III, 5 6 
7 
संस्कृति मंत्र 
सरकार 
to be applied when the verb ends in a san. Thus it was said in sutra 12, that roots having an anudatta accented vowel as indicatory or a un as their indicatory letter take the terminations of the atmanepada. Thus 
rea he sits down' and ta 'he sleeps.' The verb Tą (to sit down) and at (to lie down) will remain atmanepadi, even when they are used as Desideratives. Thus terega "he wishes to lie down.' Similarly satra 17 declared that the verb fara is átmanepadi, as fragra. This will be atmanepadi also in the Desiderative form, as Fareragà he wishes to enter.' So also by sätra 40, ana is atmanepadi, the Desiderative and will also be atmanepadi, 
But though by 60 and 61, stea and faca are atmanepadi, yet Parale 'he wishes to lie down,' gulê he wishes to die,' are parasmaipadi. Because the atmanepada affixes were ordained after the roots ge and z only under exceptional conditions and not generically, and as those conditions do not exist in the desiderative, the latter does not take atma nepada terminations. 
Of course that which in its primary state would not have taken the terminations of the atmanepada, there being a prohibition to that effect, will not allow them in its Desiderative form. As vrachlara 'he wishes to imitate. Tundra. Here the root sy by rule 79 has been especially declared to be parasmaipadi, to the exclusion of atmanepada affixes which would otherwise have come by Rules 32 and 72, and therefore its Desiderative is also parasmaipadi. The force of causing atmanepada is counter acted by 79. 
Now it might be asked :-True, this rule provides for those cases where a root is conjugated in two forms, one a Primitive and another a Desiderative conjugation. But what provision do you make for those partial verbs which take the affix #7 even in their primitive form; and in whose case we have no prior form to look upon as a guide in the application of atmanepada affixes. And there are at least 7 such quasi-roots which take ga in this way, called also the self-descriptive ea. Those quasi-roots are yy.FTET Pena, , 4, ra, and ra. What are we to do with these quasi-roots, which are always conjugated with the affix and have no simpler conjugation ?" To this we reply; "In the case of these partial verbs which take the self descriptive a the pada will be regulated by the indicatory letters which 
these quasi-roots have. For though the full roots are TTCH, fafa, fare, sar, TT, aftree and ere, yet by the maxim Team ETERTEST Fark at, "a sign made in a portion of a thing, qualifies the whole thing;" the sign made in the expression yo &c., will qualify the whole verb शप्स &c." Thus we have जुगुप्सते he despises, चिकत्सते he cures%3; मीमांसते he investigates, &c. 
GOVERNME 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY OF 
1. C1.III. $ 63. ] 
THE ATMANEPADA VERBS. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
4 
.417 
1778 
आम्प्रत्ययवत्कृोग्नुप्रयोगस्य ॥६३॥ पदानि ॥ आम्-प्रत्ययवत् , Fa: , URTE ( UT TO ) | 
T: 11 37/FTETTFUTurar: asinsapüreenTTE vara all 
63. Like the verb that takes the affix âm, if the verb be conjugated with the Atmanepada terminations, so of the verb kri when subjoined thereto as an auxiliary, the terminations are of the Atmanepada, even when the fruit of the action does not accrue to the agent. 
This sûtra applies where the fruit of the action does not accrue to the agent. There are in Sanskrit two forms of the perfect tense (he): one formed in the ordinary way by the reduplication of the root and adding the terminations; the other called the periphrastic perfect, is formed by adding 914 to the root, and then affixing to it the perfect tense of the roots 5 (to do), I (to be ) or T. ( to be ). These latter verbs are called anuprayoga or auxiliary verbs, as it is with their help that the perfect tense is formed. The question then arises, what conjugation, parasmai or âtmanepada, do these auxiliaries take in forming the periphrastic perfect ? This sûtra supplies the answer :--the auxiliary follows the conjugation of principals, the other auxiliaries do not. Thus the root re (to increase, prosper) is átmanepadi, therefore in forming the periphrastic perfect, the verb 
will be also in the atmanepada, Thus Tei (he prospered). Similarly 3T (to appear with great splendour) is parasmaipadi and the auxiliary after it will be parasmaipada, as IT (he appeared with great splendour). 
But the other auxiliaries and st® retain their own peculiar conjuga tion and are not influenced by the conjugation of their principal. Thus एधाबभूव , एधामास. 
The word âm-pratyaya of the sutra means that after which the affix am (III. I. 35 and 36. DETETAT744 face ) comes. Of the verb kriñ, when subjoined to another as an auxiliary, the termination is that of the atmanepada like the verb that takes the affix âm. If this sútra enjoined a rule of injunction (vidhi), then there would be the termination of the atmanepada even in examples like i t and rear where the fruit of the action accrues to the agent. This is no valid objection to the present sutra. It is to be interpreted in both ways, that is, both as a vidhi (a general injunc tion) and a niyama (a restrictive injunction). How is that to be done? Be cause the word purvavat of the last sútra is to be read in the present aphorismi also. The second explanation in that case will be for the sake of establishing a niyama or restrictive rule. 
URE - GOVE 
OF CULTURE 
NISTRY OF C 
MENT OF INO 
TOF INDIA 
THE ATMANEPADA VERBS. 
[ BK. I. CH. III.604 
7 
361 
. 
1 
It has already been said above that the auxiliary verbs , and se are used in forming the periphrastic perfect. This is done by force of the aphorism III. I. 40, haritsua falë, meaning, the verb kriñ is annexed in the perfect tense, to verbs, that take âm. In this sûtra II. I. 40) the word kriñ is a pratyâhâra, implying the verbs s, and . It might be asked how is this pratyâhâra formed? The word kri is taken from the fourth word of søtra V. 4. 50, BT TOE G ETTT &c., and the letter ñ is taken from sätra V. 4. 58 gara &c. This is the way in which the commentators explain how not only the verb kriñ is used as an auxiliary in forming the periphrastic perfect, but also the verbs and . These three verbs denoting absolute action unmodified by any especial condition have in all languages been fixed upon as the best auxi liaries. 
It must, however, be noted that the word kriñ in this sûtra is not used as a pratyahara and consequently does not include the verbs and se. 
प्रोपाभ्यां युजेरयज्ञपात्रषु ॥६४॥ पदानि ॥ प्र- उपाभ्याम, युजेः, 4 .( 70 T ) 
वृत्तिः ॥ प्र उप इत्येवंपूर्वाद् युजेरयज्ञपाचप्रयोगविषयातास्मनेपदं भवति ॥ 
वार्तिकम् । स्वराधन्तोपसृष्ठादिति वक्तव्यम् ।। 
64. After the verb yuj to join the Atmanepada is used, when it is preceded by pra and upa except with reference to sacrificial vessels even when the fruit of the action does not accrue to the agent. 
The verb ist to join' is svaritet, and consequently-by satra 72 it is always atmanepadi, when the fruit of the action accrues to the agent. The present sutra declares when this verb may take the termi nations of atmanepada, even when the fruit of the action does not accrue to the agent. After the verb e preceded by the prepositions 4 and 59 the terminations are of the atmanepada, when not employed in reference to sacrificial vessels. As yg t'he joins or employs'; Tug 'he fits or uses." 
Why do we say "when not employed in reference to sacrificial vessels" Because there the terminations will be of the parasmaipada. As अनन्यजि पाजााण भयुनक्ति. 
Vartika :-It shall be rather stated that the root takes the terminations of the atmanepada when preceded by any preposition beginning or ending with a vowel. This is an important modification of the above rule. Thus 
and Parafii. In fact, all upasargas, with the exception of 7, far, and 
either begin or end with a vowel, and therefore the Vârtika amounts to the inclusion of all prepositions with the above exception. 
SURE 
GOVE 
aY OF CULTUR 
AINISTRE 
RNMENT OFIA 
T OF INDIA 
BOCH. III. $ 65-67. 
THE ATMANEPADA VERBS. 
4769.4778 
तिसरकाले 
With F, far and , however, the root will take parasmaipada termi nations; as संयुनक्ति. 
EA: eua: Il 84 | Tota l FA: , aya: , ( pro qe ) 
वृत्तिः ॥णु तेजने परस्मैपदी ततः संपूर्वादात्मनेपदं भवति ॥ 
65. After the verb kshņu, to sharpen, pre ceded by sam, the Atmanepada is employed. 
The verb auto sharpen, whet, or grind,' is generally "parasmaipadi, but it is atmanepadi, when it is preceded by the prefix सम् ; as संक्ष्णुते शस्त्रम् he whets the weapon', u 'they two whet', auth. they all whet.' 
It might be objected, why has a separate aphorism been made of the verb kshņu, when it could well have been included in the søtra 29 ante, which also speaks of the force of the prefix sam, when used with the verbs gam, richchha, &c. To this the answer is that, that sätra treats of intransitive verbs, the word akarmaka being understood therein, while the present sutra, as is evident from the example we have given above, treats of transitive verbs, 
ZGITTEET 
TTIT IL JST: , ea, ( o C ) I वृत्तिः ॥ भुजपालनाभ्यवहारयोरिति रुधादौ पठधते । तस्मादनवनेऽपालने वर्तमानादात्मने पदं भवति ।। 
66. After the verb bhuj, the Atmanepada is used, except in the sense of protecting. 
The root bhuj when it does not mean to protect, is at manepadi. This root belongs to the rudhadi class and has several meanings, as, to feed, to cherish, to preserve, to eat, and to enjoy. As j'he eats or enjoys'; also bhunjate, bhuñjâte &c. But gara ya far the father cherishes the sons, Warranea: 
The root bhuj belongs also to the tudâdi class, but there it has the sense of being curved or crooked. The bhuj belonging to the tudâdi class is not to be taken in this sâtra, because that bhuj has never the sense of protecting. Therefore y a ue 'he bends the hand,' is in the para smaipada. 
गरण यत् कर्मणे चेत् स कर्त्तानाध्याने ॥६७॥ पदानि ॥णे:, , , , , , a: , at , Fateh , ( 30 q ) 
वृत्तिः ॥ ण्यन्तादात्मनेपदं भवति, कथम् अणौ यत्कर्म गौ चेत् तदेवकर्म, स एव का safet I want, rearaj aferrari! 
67. After a verb ending in the affix ni (causal) the Atmanepada is employed, provided that when the object in the non-ni or non-causal sense becomes the 
URE 
GOVE 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
RNMENT OF IN 
OF INDIA 
THE ATMANEPADA VERBS. 
MANEPADA VERBS. 
[Bk. I. CH. IN S 
m 
agent in the causal; and when it does not mean to re member with regret;' even when the fruit of the action does not accrue to the agent. 
The causatives (FIT) are conjugated in the atmanepadi, when they are used in the passive voice, that is to say when a word which was an objective case in the ordinary verb becomes nominative case in the causa tive; and the nominative case of the ordinary verbs becomes objective case in the causative. In short when casuatives are used in the passive voice, they are ärmanepadi. This round-about phraseology has been employed, because the base of the active and the passive causatives do not differ in form; asriegā TT raft. 
The phrase ": (after the causatives)' of this sàtra governs the four succeeding sâtras and is understood in them The søtra consists of the follow ing words:-i: 'after the causative;' tur 'in the non-causative;' t'what ;' 
object; 'in the causative;' t' if;' a 'that;' Haf nominative ;' Tartara 'except to remember.' 
In general, by sûtra 74, the causative verbs take the terminations of the atmanepada, when the fruit of the action accrues to the agent. The present sutra applies to the case where fruit of the action does not accrue to the agent. 
After the verbs that take the affix it, the terminations are those of the atmanepada How? When that which was the object when the primi tive verb was used non-causatively, becomes also the object when the deriva tive verb is used causatively; and even that object becomes also the agent as well. There is exception, however, in the case when the verb means to 
remember with regret. As gritaren arai greater the elephant-keepers mount the elephant.' Let us paraphrase this sentence by transforming the primitive non-causative verb TETEP into a causative form. The sentence then will be, gun ge Th 'the elephant makes itself to be mounted.' Similarly 
fra e r: the elephant-keepers sprinkle the elephant'; and उपसेच यते हस्ती स्वयमेव 'the elephant makes itself to be sprinkled; पश्यन्ति मृत्या 
rate the attendants see the king'; and are treat the king makes himself to be seen.' 
Why do we say after the causatives ? Because the rule of this satra, will not apply, if the verb though conveying the sense of a cau. sal verb, is, however, not formed by the affix fer; as srirea great great : the elephant-keepers mount the elephant;' and SIEHT Eeeft eeartea the elephant that is being mounted, mounts gracefully'. Here the termina tions are of the parasmaipada in the second case also, 
URE - GOVE 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
NMENT OF IN 
OF INDIA 
BEST C11. III. $ 67.] 
THE ATMANEPADA VERBS. 
53 
Why do we say 'in the non-causative non-ņi '? For this rule will not apply when the primitive verb itself is formed by the affix fora; such are the roots of the tenth class or churadi in which the nich is added in the self-descriptive sense, and not for a causative purpose. Thus the root TT belongs to churâdi class; whose causative and primitive forms are the same. As atuara si Trgre the cowierd counts the herd;' and the causative form is गणयति गणः स्वयमेव ' the herd makes itself to be count ed.' The terminations in both cases are those of the parasmaipada. 
Why do we say 'when the object (karmı) becomes the agent?' Be cause the rule will not apply, when any other käraka or case, than the karma or object, of the primitive verb becomes the agent in the causative. Thus 
Arc erat'he cuts with the scythe,' ha ara f a the scythe is made to cut of itself. Here the word dâtra was the instrument of the primitive verb which became agent in the causative, and therefore in the causative the termi nations are of the parasmaipada only. 
Why do we say 'if in the causative' in the sûtra ? It is for the purpose of indicating that the verb must be one and the same, both in the primary sentence and the causative sentence. Therefore the rule does not apply here where the causative verb à Tara in the second sentence was not used in the first sentence; raz@T Tt 569 4: the elephant-keepers mount the elephant;' and TTTET ATTUTT Frår-frarat hara qaror the elephant that is being caused to mount is made to sprinkle with urine the frightened men'. 
The word that' is employed in the aphorism to show that the objects in both sentences must be the same and not different. Therefore in the following example where the objects are different, the terminations of parasmaipada are only used. BTICEPEAT erat Ere TTT: the elephant-keepers mount the elephant'; and EZART Erat ty A cięga HTCIT the elephant, that is being caused to mount, makes men mount on the land." 
Why do we use the word kartâ (agent) in the søtra ? If the former object is not the agent in the second case, the terminations of the parasinai pada only would be used. As strirarea eita á eitt: the elephant-keepers mount the elephant;' and ararrara FETANT: 'the elephant-driver makes it to mount.' 
Why do we say 'except when meaning to remember with tender ness?' Observe, fra ugara : the dove remembers, with regret, the forest tree;' and 
e 
y e: FTAT the forest tree is made to be remem bered of itself, 
GOVERNMENT 
TURE - Gou 
ISTRY OF C 
NT OF INDIA 
THE ATMANEPADA VERBS. 
[Br. I. CH. III. $ 68-69. 
70 71 
HIERECHT | Cll agafar II -Epi: , - , ( 0 , To To ) 
वृत्तिः ॥ विभेतेः स्मयतेश्वण यन्तारात्मनेपदं भवति हेनुभये॥ 
68. After the causatives of the verbs bhî to fear, and smi to wonder, even the fruit of the action accrues not to the agent the Atmanepada is employed, when the fear is produced directly by the causative agent. 
The phrase of the causative ending in fot is understood in this sätra and is to be supplied from the previous aphorism. This sutra is also restricted to cases where the fruit of the action does not accrue to the agent. The word ea in the aphorism has been defined later on in sûtra I. 4. 55 (ETT Ti); it is the agent which is the mover of another's agent. When a fear is caused by a ce it is called it. The word 'fear' in the aphorism is illustrative, and includes by implication fãe 79 astonishment also. As la s TR the jatila, the cock-headed frightens.' ptr praga "the munda, the shave-headed frightens '; si arttà 'the jatila astonishes, got fearTa the munda astonishes' ie., the very fact of matted-hair or shaven-head frightens,' &c. 
Why do we say ? For if the fear or astonishment is not the direct result caused by the agent, but arises from something else, then the atmanepada will not be used. As grana za "he frightens him with the kunchika,' ETT Tercura. he astonishes with his form'. Here kunchika and rupa are the instruments, which cause fear or astonishment, and are not the hetu thereof. 
en sitter le lingua i fuqi: , qan, ( o go ) 
वृत्तिः ॥ गृधु अभिकाक्षायाम् वञ्चु गतावित्येतयोWन्तयोः प्रलम्भने वर्तमानयोरात्मनेपद afara 
69. After the causatives of the verbs gridh to covet, and vañch to go, the Atmanepada is employed, when used in the sense of deceiving, even though the fruit of action does not accrue to the agent. 
The phrase 'of the causatives ending in for' is to be supplied here from sätra 67. This satra is also restricted to the cases where the fruit of the action does not accrue to the agent. The word at of the sutra means deceiving, As enter he deceives the boy,' 7* 
T h e cheats the boy. 
GREGOVE 
VERNMENT 
TRY OF CULTU 
• MINISTRY 
BACH. III. $ 70-71.] 
The ATMANEPADA Verbs. 
सत्वयि जपते 
लि सरकार 
Why do we say when it means deceiving,' For these verbs have not this meaning, their causatives take parasmaipada. As garo ara 'he causes the dog to bark,'Ta rghe avoids the serpent.' 
लियः संमाननशालीनीकरणयोश्च ॥७०॥ पदानि ॥ लियः, ÉATA-rosta-asureT: , , ( : TOFIT TO 90 ) 
वृत्तिः ॥ लियो ण्यन्तात्संमानने शालीनीकरणे च वर्तमानादात्मनेपदं भवति च शब्दात 9 th II 
70. After the causative of the verb lî to melt or stick, the Atmanepada is employed, when used in the sense of showing respect, subduing and deceiving, even though the fruit of action does not accrue to the agent. 
The phrase of the causative ending in fu' is to be supplied here from sútra 67. This sûtra has its scope only when the fruit of the action does not accrue to the agent. In the Dhâtupâtha, there are two roots at, one is technically called it and means to stick, and belongs to divadi class. The other of meaning to 'melt' belongs to kryâdi class. As there is no specifi cation in the sûtra what it is to be taken, both are therefore taken. 
The force of the word in the sûtra is to include the word gera 'to delude' of the last sútra into the present. The word a means to show respect. The word graafiator means to subdue. As a TOT 'he gets respect or causes respect to be shown to him through or on account of his matted hair.' श्येनो वर्तिकामुल्लापयते "the hawk subdues the partridge', कस्त्वामुळापयते who deceives thee.' 
The satra fram afich: VI. 1. 51 declares that the fof eft is optionally changed into sti before certain terminations. But there is no option allowed when the root at has any of the above three senses : in these cases the substitu tion of g is necessary and not optional. For the option allowed by sátra VI. 1. 51 is a stateUSTAHIT and not a general ter applicable every where. 
Why do we say when it has the meaning of 'to show respect, &c.'? Because otherwise there is parasmaipada. As atste refa. 
मिथ्योपपदात्कृतोऽभ्यासे ॥ ७१ ॥ पदानि । मिथ्या-उपपदात्, 3, wird , ( u: Po v ) 
वृत्तिः।। ण्यन्तात् करोतेर्मिथ्योपपदादात्मनेपदं भवाति अभ्यासे ॥ 
71. After the causative of the verb kri, the Atmanepada is used, when it has the word mithya, incorrect, as an upapada or dependent word, and is CURE - GOVE 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
RNMENT OF 
OF INDIA 
THE ATMANEPADA VERBS. 
[Br. I. CH. III. S 
. 
सत्यमवजयत 
कृति चीन्न 
751 
employed in the sense of repeated wrong utterance' even when the fruit of the action does not accrue to the agent. 
The phrase of the causative ending in fy' is to be supplied from sutra 67. The aphorism is restricted to the cases where the fruit of the action does not accrue to the agent. The word abhyâsa means doing again, or repetition; as qe fator CITETET means 'he repeatedly pronounces the word incorrectly, that is with wrong accent, &c., not once but constantly'. 
Why do we say when the word mithya is used as an upapada? The causative of kri will take parasmaipada when it has any other upapada. Thus TÊ ESTA filtera 'he pronounces the word correctly.' 
Why do we say of the verb ma'? Because the causative of any other verb used along with the word mithyâ will not have âtmanepada; as që FACUT T 'he repeatedly utters the word wrongly.' Here at takes para 
smaipada. 
W!y do we say repeatedly'? For if the incorrect utterance is not habitual, then parasmaipada will be used; as rá fazercreata 'he pronounces wrongly, not always but once.' - 
Fantasia: O farehe 92 | TGIFT Il rafra fora, FOSFAT, ET ( : go ) 
वृत्तिः ॥स्वरितेतो ये धातयोजितश्च तेभ्य आत्मनेपदं भवति कर्तारं चेत् क्रियाफलमभिप्रेति। 
72. After the verb marked with a svarita, (svaritet) or which has an indicatory ñ ñit), the termi nations of the Atmanepada are employed, when the fruit of the action accrues to the agent. 
The anuvritti of the phrase to: does not go further. The word frath is a compound, meaning 'fruit of the action.' When the principal object for the sake of which the action is begun, is meant for the agent indi cated by the verb, there the atmanepada is used after verbs having an indicatory s or a svarita accent. As the sacrifices for himself '; 
T h e cooks for himself. Here the verb and are are marked with svarita accent in the Dhatupatha, and therefore they take the atmanepada terminations. 
Similarly Tua 'he presses the soma-juice,' a 'he does.' Here the verbs Ex and have an idicatory 7. 
In all the above cases, the principal object of the action such as getting heaven by performance of sacrifices, eating of food, &c., is meant for the agent. That is to say, he sacrifices in order that lie himself may attain heaven, be cooks in order that he himself may eat, &c. 
SURE 
GOVE 
STRY OF CULT 
MINISTRY 
RNMENT OF IN 
BRANCH. III. $ 73, 74.] 
The ATMANEPADA VERBS, 
सत्यमय जयते 
Why do we say when the fruit of the action accrues to the agent'? Otherwise it will have parasmaipada. As y sea EIFT: 'the priests sacrifice, (not for themselves, but for their clients)' Tai rah: 'the cooks cook (for their masters)'; $rea FCT: the menials work (for their masters).' Here though the fees and the wages are the fruits which the agent gets, yet as that fruit is not the principal object for which the action was begun--the principal object of the sacrifice was not that the priest should get his fee, but that the sacrificer may go to heaven--the verb takes the terminations of the Parasmai pada. Here the principal fruit of the action does not accrue to the agent, but to a third party. 
96: | 03 || Giler | 9918, ac: , ( fare for all o to go ) 1 
वृत्तिः ।। अपपूर्वावदतेः कभिप्राये क्रियाफले आत्मनेपदं भवति ॥ 
73. After the verb vad to tell, preceded by apa, when the fruit of the action accrues to the agent, the terminations are of the Atmanepada. 
The phrase "when the fruit of the action accrues to the agent," is understood here. The sûtra is clear. As yaFÀI TT, the wealth-seeker forsakes justice, that is to say, he wishes to acquire wealth at the sacrifice of justice. But when the fruit of the action does not accrue to the agent, the parasmaipada is employed. As suara. 
fuaza 8 l aga o fua, 7, ( HÀ fanaties TOTO ) 
वृत्तिः ॥ णिजन्तादात्मनेपदं भवति कत्रभिप्राय क्रियाफले ॥ 
74. After a verb ending in affix ni (causal) when the fruit of the action accrues to the agent, the Atmanepada is employed. 
The phrase "when the fruit of the action accrues to the agent" is to be supplied from sútra 72. The verbs that take the afhx o nich are gene rally causatives. As are T he causes the mat to be made for himself'; sira 
T 'he causes the food to be cooked for himself. When the fruit of the ac tion does not accrue to the agent, the parasmaipada is used. As a cura veea 'he causes another's mat to be made. 
FACIET JA Sore lo lll Tata T-37-TEXT:, A: , ( 'far )! 
वृत्तिः ॥ सम् उद् आङ् इत्येवं पूर्वायमेः कर्मभिप्राय क्रियाफले आमनेपदं भवति ग्रन्थ free wafa 
CURE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
जय जयते 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
THE ATMANEPADA VERBS. 
Bk, I. CH. III. $ 75016 
75. After the verb yam to strive, preceded by sam, ut and an, when it does not refer to a book, the Atmanepada is employed, when the fruit of the action acerues to the agent. 
The phrase 'when the fruit of the action accrues the to agent' is read into this aphorism by anuvritti from sútra 72. As ciri ciri he gathers rice'; भारमुद्यच्छते 'he lifts up the load'; वस्त्रमायच्छते he draws out the cloth.' The root yam preceded by the preposition 15 takes the terminations of the Atmanepada by virtue of aphorism 28 ante ; but in that aphorism the verb was intransitive, here it is transitive, and this explains the necessity of making two different sutras for one compound verb sun. 
Why do we say 'when it does not refer to a book.' For otherwise the verb will take the terminations of the parasmaipada. As geregia f eat aa: 'the physician diligently studies medicine.' 
When however the fruit of the action does not accrue to the agent, the above compound verbs are parasnaipadi. As gasgfa, Telegra, siesta. 
ugravista: Hell Taifa l ugyarita, T: ( STOT TO TO) 11 
वृत्तिः ॥ अनुपसर्गाज्जानातेः कत्रभिप्राये क्रियाफले मात्मनेपदं भवति ॥ 
76. After the verb jñâ when not preceded by any upasarga, the terminations are of the Atmane 
pada, when the fruit of the action accrues to the agent. 
The phrase "when the fruit of the action accrues to the agent' is understood in this sútra also. Thus ei rara 'he recognises the cow as his own'; rara 'he recognises the horse as his own.' 
Why do we say when not preceded by any upasarga ? For when compounded with prepositions, it may take the Atmanepada terminations; as fail * i *: 'the fool does not know the heavenly regions.' 
When, however, the fruit of the action does not accrue to the agent, the simple root takes parasmaipada terminations. ETTE OTT T A 'he recognises Devadatta's cow.' 
विभापोपपदेन प्रतीयमाने ॥ ७७॥ पदानि ॥ विभाषा, उपपदेन, seat ( 10 ) 
fe: ll TT TITAT499977 weer a a n GS समपरं भवति।। 
REGOVE 
OF CULT 
ERNMENT OF 
OF INDIA 
BEOGH. III. $ 77, 78.] 
THE PARASMAIPADA VERBS. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
रिल सरकार 
77. The Atmanepada is optionally used, when the fact of the fruit of the action accuring to the agent is indicated by an upapada, i.e. by a word used along with the verb. 
By the preceding five sûtras 72 to 76, Atmanepada terminations were ordained to come after verbs which implied the accrual of the fruit of the action to the agent, that is to say, where the verb by itself denoted this. But when the same idea, instead of being inherent in the verb, is expressed by an upapada, that is by a word governed by the verb, the necessity of using the Atmanepada affixes, to denote the same idea, is obviously removed, and in such a case it is optional whether we use the Atmanepada or the Para smaipada terminations. As fi UF Ea or d 'he sacrifices for his own yajña'; et en attra or sitä he makes his own cot.'; F 97499 or 99%; स्वंमोदनं पाचवते or पाचयति, &c. So on with all the above five sutras. 
ana maht UFÀTGH II OC NI TETET I stara, ait, परस्मैपदम् ॥ 
TIT:Ergranateteate HafT ETTETEATEATEATTET ATT 
78. After the rest, i.e. after all those verbs not falling under any one of the previous provisions, the terminations of the Parasmaipada are employed in marking the agent (i.e. in the active voice). 
The rules of Atmanepada have been declared in the preceding 66 sotras, 12 to 77. The terminations of the Parasmaipada, which are the general verbal terminations, will come everywhere else, that is to say, where its operation is not debarred by any one of the preceding aphorisms. The present sutra declares this universal rule. The word s'eslia or the rest, means that which is the residue after the application of all the previous restrictive rules. Thus it was declared by sūtra 12 ante that a root having an Anudâtta vowel or a 5 as it, will take Atmapepada termisations. As ea 915. The converse of this will take parasmaipada terminations, namely all verbs which do not have an anudatta accent or a 5 as it. Thus arra he goes,' aria 'it blows. It has been declared by sûtra 17 that the root fait when preceded by f takes Atmanepada terminations, as far . When not preceded by but any other preposition, it will take the parasnaipada termination. As faría, 
ragna 
Why do we say " when marking the agent"? For when used in the passive voice the root will take the Atmanepada termination. As per 'it is cooked', za 'it is gone. 
CURE - GOVE 
COVERNMENT 
TRY OF CUL 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
THE PARASMAIPADA VERBS. 
[Bk. I. CH. III. $ 79, 8. 
यमय जयते 
• संस्कृतिमा 
तसरकार 
Why is not parasmaipada used when the verb is employed reflexively ? As in the following example :-qea ta: Fat 'the food cooks of itself.' Because in the present sâtra the word daart of sūtra 14 ante is to be read in by anuvritti, so that, in fact there are two it in this aphorism which thus means " when the agent of the verb is an agent pure and simple then paras. znaipada is einployed." While when a verb is used reflexively ( Chart) the agent of the verb is also, in one aspect, the object of the verb; and it is there fore, that in reflexive verbs the At nanepada terminations are employed. 
yazit: Ilse # GET A -TUPITEHT 1 : 1 ( CH ) 
वृत्तिः ॥ अनुपरा इत्येवं पूर्वात करोतेः परस्मैपदं भवति । 
79. After the verb kri to make, preceded by anu and para, parasmaipada is employed, even when the fruit of the action goes to the agent, and when the sense is that of " divulging," &c. 
By aphorism 32 ante, the root took the terminations of the Atmane pada when the sense denoted was that of "divulging, reviling, &c., and it also took Atmanepada termination when the fruit of the action accrued to the ament by virtue of sâtra 72, because the root has an indicatory st. The present sätra makes an exception to those rules, and ordains parasmaipada. Thus habe imitates,' hra 'he does well.' 
watafapt: 6979: Il coll aga 1 4 -via-ufszt: fag: u ( o ) 1 
वृत्तिः ॥ अभिप्रति प्रतिइत्येवं पूर्वात् तिषः परस्मैपदं भवति । 
80. After the verb kship, to throw, coming after abhi, prati and ati, parasmaipada is used, even though the fruit of the action goes to the agent. 
The root far to throw, is svariteta therefore by sátra 72 ante, it would have taken Atmanepada termination, when the fruit of the action accrued to the agent; this aphorism ordains prasmaipada instead. As a 'he throws on, waren he turns away or rejects,' a 'he throws beyond.' 
Why do we say when coming after abbi, prati, and ati'? Because when compounded with any other preposition, it will not take parasmai pada, but will be governed by stra 72. As arraca 'he throws down.' 
The second as of satra 14 is also understood here, so that when the verb is used reflexively, the agent not being purely an agent, the present sutra will not apply. As araraca u it is thrown on of itself 
GOVERNMEN 
TURE - GOL 
OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
ENT OF INDIA 
*CH. III. S 81-83.] 
THE PARASMAIPADA VERBS 
प्रकृति मंत्राना 
917 
परत सरकार 
TET 116 II TGIFT II ITT: (TTO TO ) 
वृत्तिः ॥ प्र पूर्वाद वहतेः परस्मैपदं भवति । 
81. After the verb vah to bear, coming after pra, parasmaipada is used, even though the fruit of the action accrues to the agent. 
The root 7 to carry is svaritet, and by sutra 72 it would have taken the Atmancpada termination when the fruit of the action accrued to the agent. But the present sûtra ordains parasmaipada instead. As guía' it flows.' 
Why do we say " when coming after pra"? Because after any other preposition it will not take prasmaipada, as 3r7a 'he brings.' 
qizia: Il ca 11 TGIFT | DT: 1 : 1 (To go ) || 
वृत्तिः ॥ परिपूर्वाद् मृष्यतेः परस्मैपदं भवति । 
82. After the verb mrish to bear, preceded by pari, parasmaipada is used, even when the fruit of the action accrues to the agent. 
The root TT"to suffer" is svaritet, and by sutra 72 it would have taken Atmanepada termination when the fruit of the action accrued to the agent. This ordains parasmaipada instead. As gruā 'he endures or he becomes angry.' When not preceded by this preposition, it takes Atmanepada termination. As srca 
According to some authors, the root Tf of the last aphorism is said to be understood in this, so that he preceded by it will also take prasmaipada terminations; as परिवहति 
215 TUTA: || 3 GIFT II fa-D -uri: I TH: 1 (TTO TO ) ! 
: FESTETTFETT Cuierat: T aía 
83. After the verb ram to sport, preceded by vi and an, parasmaipada is used. 
The verb means 'to sport. It is anudattet and therefore by sútra te it would have taken Atmanepada terminations; the present sutra ordains parasmaipada instead, as faraia he takes rest'; wahe delights in,' gritara 
• he sports. 
With other prepositions than these, it will take atmanepada termina tion. / s strā 
URE • GOVS 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
NMENT OF IN 
OF INDIA 
THE PARASMAIPADA VERBS. 
[Bv. I. CH. III. $ 
TOUR 
17 
3978 Il C8 || acta II 391 (TH: TEÁG) 
-वृत्तिः ॥ उपपूर्वाद्रमतेः परस्मैपदं भवति ॥ 
84. And also after upa, the verb ram takes the affixes of the parasmaipada. 
As TETTHÍA 'he causes Devadatta to refrain.' The sense of the verb uparamati is causative here, as if it was tha. This is an example of a verb involving in it the force of the causative affix fur et. 
It might be asked why was not the preposition 34 read along with the other preposition in the last aphorism, instead of making this a separate sûtra. The answer is that the necessity of making a separate sutra with the preposi tion upa arose from the exigencies of sätra making. It is desired, that the next sutra 85 should apply only to the root upa-ram, and not to other com pounds of ram; and this could only be done by making these two distinct sätras. 
THITTÀTIC | || agria Il Father I ( TA: o q ) 
वृत्तिः । उपपूर्वाद्रमतेरकर्मकाद्विभाषा परस्मैपदं भवति ।। 
85. After the verb ram preceded by upa, parasmaipada is optionally used, when employed intran sitively. 
The last aphorism ordained parasmaipada absolutely. This declares an option under certain circumstances. As 193 t a or it, he desisted from or was quiet while it was eaten. 
बुथयुधनराजनेप्रद्रनु भ्योणेः ॥ ८६॥ पदानि ॥ बुध-युध-नश-जन 18-ST-ETRT: : ! ( To go ) 
वृत्तिः ॥ बुधयुधनशजन एड्दु स्खु इत्येतेभ्योज्यन्तेभ्यः परस्मैपदं भवति ।। 
86. After the verbs budh to know, yudh to fight, nas' to destroy, jana to be born, in to go, pru to move, dru to run, and sru to flow, ending in the aflix ni i.e. when used in the causative), parasmaipada is employed, even when the fruit of the action goes to the agent. 
By sátra 74 ante, causatives took the atmanepada termination when the fruit of the action accrued to the agent. This makes an exception to that and ordains parasmaipada. As arrasa he expands ; situata he causes to fight; terasa he causes destruction, stere he begets, Teatara he teaches; spura he causes to obtain; ama le causes to melt; wiara he causes to trickle 
URE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY ON 
en 1. CH. III. $ 87.] 
THE PARASMAIPADA VERBS. 
103 
सत्यमेव जयते 
4. 
72 
Of the above eight roots, those which are intransitive would have taken the parasmaipada terminations under the conditions mentioned in sûtra 88 sub, that is to say, when the agent is a being endowed with reason. The present aphorism in the case of such intransitive verbs makes this additional statement, that those intransitive verbs will take parasmaipada, even when the agent is not a being endowed with reason. As quera he makes the lotus to expand, fragia argra he makes the woods to strike each other, TTT यति दुःखम् he destroys sorrow, जनयति सुखम् he produces pleasure. 
Again of the above eight roots, those that have ordinarily the sense of "moving" will get parasmaipada by sûtra 87. The present sútra, in their case makes this additional statement, that they will take parasmaipada termina tions even when the sense is not that of moving. Thus g means both to move' and 'to obtain,' means 'to run' as well as 'to melt,' and a nieans 'to flow' as well as to 'to trickle.' As tai be obtains; igara the iron melts ; groet Fara the water-vessel drips. The examples in the first paragraph have there fore been thus translated. 
The root ge is always compounded with . 
forucify Il coll TGIFT II farcu-107-13 I(u: TÄUGEL ) 
a: tl fauteur=2 arenz TTTTTTTT: TETE Haral वार्तिकम् ॥ अदेः प्रतिषेधोवक्तव्यः । 
87. And after the causatives of verbs which have the sense of the eating or swallowing' and 'shak ing or moving' parasmaipada is employed, even when the fruit of the action goes to the agent. 
The phrase "when used in the causative (w:) of the last sâtra is to be read into this also. The parasmaipada is ordained as an exception to sûtra 74 by which atmanepada was ordained when the fruit of the action accrued to the agent. The word fTTU means eating,' and it means moving,''shaking.' As fateh he causes to swallow; Trafa he causes to eat; भोजयति he feasts ; चलयति he moves ; चोपयति, कम्पयति he shakens. This aphorism applies to transitive verbs, and to verbs whose agents in non-causa tive state are inanimate objects, i. e, not possessed with reason. 
Vart :-The prohibition of the root * to eat, must be mentioned. The causative of tę to eat, takes atmanepada. Thus 8: Devadatta eats; eg a he is made to eat by Devadatta. 
अणावकर्मकाञ्चित्तवत् कर्तकात् ॥ ८८ ॥ पदानि ॥ अणौ । अक al fanaa 1 a ( To go ) 
वृत्तिः । अण्वन्तो यो धातुरकर्मकश्चित्तवन्कनुकशतस्माद्ययन्तात् परस्मैपदं भवति ।। 
URE . Govs 
GOVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY ON 
OF INDIA 
THE PARASMAIPADA VERBS. 
[Br. I. Cl. III. 
88. The affixes of the parasmaipada are em ployed after the causal of that verb, which in its non causal state was intransitive and had a being endowed with reason for its agent; even when the fruit of the action accrues to the agent. 
The phrase u: is understood here also. The Atmanepada was ordained by sûtra 74 when the fruit of the action accrued to the agent. This aphorism is an exception to that, and ordains parasmaipada. As grea देवदत्तः Devadatta sits ; प्रासयते देवदत्तं he makes Devadatta to sit; शेते देवदत्तः Devadatta sleeps ; 
t a ana he causes Devadatta to lie down. 
Why do we say 'in its non-causal state'? For if the causative root is from another causative root, and not from a simple non-causative root, then the parasmaipada will not be employed. Thus' if one person such as Deva datta, causes another person Yajñadatta, to cause a third person Ramadatta, to do an act denoted by an intransitive root, as mounting' for instance, though Ramadatta mounts for his own benefit, the verb to be used in such a case is rath, in the Atmanepada, from the root 75% to mount; and not 
rozari.' (lengar's Guide to Panini). 
Why do we say which was intransitive"? This rule will not apply if the verb in its non-causative state was transitive. Thus from arft the causative from , if the person caused to do the act denoted by the verb does it for his own use, comes only after though the person has a will, for the original root though a non-causative root, is not an intransitive root.' (Ibid). 
Why do we say 'having a being endowed with reason for its agent'? For if the agent is a non-sentient object, the verb will be Atmanepadi. Thus from urat the causative from IT to dry if that which dries is a thing not possessed of a will as frea: 'paddy,' for instance, though the fruit of the action, ie, the drying, affects only the paddy itself, comes tirgua in the atmanepadi, though to dry' is an intransitive root; e. g., pirgaa anatarat: the sun-shine causes the paddy to dry.' Ibid). 
न पादस्याङ्यमाङ्यसपरिमुहरुचिनृतिवदवसः ॥९॥ पदानि ॥ * -TA-USTA-FETA-TITHE-Efen-ama-aa-a: I (d: 1 EX TH) 
पतिः॥ पावनि पाड्यम प्रायस परिमुह रुचि वृति वदवसः इत्येतेभ्योण्यन्तेभ्यः परस्मैपद TH 
TETTÉTT 
URE - GOVER 
VERNMENT 
TRY OF CULT 
• MINISTRY 
ENT OF INDIA 
B 
CA III. $. 89-91.] 
THE PARASMAIPADA VERBS. 
ent 
89. But the affixes of the parasmaipada are not used after the causals of the verbs på to drink, dam to tame, ayam to extend, âyas to exert oneself, parimuh to be bewildered, ruch to shine, nrit to dance, vad to speak, and vas to dwell. 
The last two aphorisms had ordained parasmaipada instead of Atmane pada, even when the fruit of the action accrued to the agent, thus debarring the latter's action which would otherwise have taken place by virtue of sutra 74. This sûtra prohibits the last two sútras, and re-instates Atmanepada of sútra 74. Thus root or to drink, has the sense of nigarana or swallowing, the roots 7 &c., have sentient beings as their agent; the root za to dance has the sense of 777 or moving, but still these verbs have âtmanepada affixes, and do not take parasmaipada in the causative. As groaa he causes to drink, TATA he causes to be tame, atraraga he lengthens, Graza he troubles, परिमोहयते he entices, रोचयते he makes agreeable, नर्तयते he causes to dance, वाक्यो he makes to speak, वासयते he causes to dwell. 
Vart :--The root is should be enumerated along with a &c. Thus wrea TTÀ* afat. The doe suckles a young infant. 
atria: Il Coll Gallai 19:1( PCTGH) 
वृत्तिः ॥ क्यषन्ताद्धातोर्वा परस्मैपदं भवति ॥ 
90. The affixes of the parasmaipada are used optionally after the denominative verbs ending in the affix kyash. 
The affix ay is ordained by sûtra III. 1. 12 TIF Yuraqay: after the words wirga &c. These roots take optionally parasmaipada. As लोहितायति or ते he reddens. पटपटायति or the makes pat pat. 
Tags i S ogia II : IgE I ( a otet TH) 
TI: Il garanzir ais ar T T atât un 
91. After the verbs dyut to shine, &c. the terminations of the parasmaipada are optionally employed, when the affixes of lun (aorist) follow. 
The Dyutâdi verbs are 22 in number, to be found in Dhatupatha in the Bhuadi class. By the use of the word goa: in the plural in the satra, the force is that of &c. These verbs are anudatta and so by sa tra 12 they would have been invariably átmanepadi, this aphorism makes them optionally URE 
GOVER 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
The PARASMAIPADA VERBS. 
(Bk. I. CH. III. $19.93. 
7 
.17 
सरल सरकार 
so in the aorist. Thus ana or Tuirea he shone. In other tenses than the aorist ( 5 ) these verbs are invariably Atmanepadi. As circa he shines. 
For a list of Dyutadi verbs see Dhatupatha. 
IT:: RTET: Il 82 Il TGIA : I -Fan: I ( TEĀTO ) 
art: il TCI, TY S Fare thy gazte erT-4: FETA I ET TEHG ai i 
92. After the verbs vrit to exist, &c., Parasmai pada is optionally employed when the affixes sya (Future and conditional) and san (Desiderative) follow. 
The catre verbs are five in number and are included in the garrę sub class. They are a to be, qy to grow, Ty to fart or break wind; ezek to ooze, and sy to be able. As ist Future Tier or affroja, it will be ; conditional भवस्यत् or अवर्तिष्यत; Desiderative विवृत्तति or विवर्तिषते &c. 
In other tenses than the above, they are always Atmanepadi. As वर्तते it is. 
लुटिचक्ल पः ॥ ९३ ॥ पदानि ॥ लुटि । च क्लपः । (स्यसनो वा TATO) 
वृत्तिः ॥ लुटि च स्यसनोंश्च कृपे परस्मैपदं वा भवति ॥ 
93. After the verb klip to be fit, Parasmai pada is optionally employed, when lut, (1st Future) is affixed, as well as when sya and san are affixed. 
The verb c is one of the five verbs of the sub-class panie of the last aphorism. Therefore it will take both parasmaipada and Atmanepada, when the aflixes fu or a follow. The present sûtra makes the additional declar ation in the case of ist Future or a. Thus in Lut we have it or 
eura thou wilt be ; in ist Future we have :-aegs, or hocard he will be ; in the Desiderative we have :- 
f ie or forrit ; in the conditional we have :-Briza or searca. 
Indian Press, Allahabad. 
URE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
ev OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
ENT OF INDIA 
त सरकार 
PART IV. 
The 
Ashtadhyayi 
of Panini. 
Reprinted at the "Upper India Preso," Allahabad, 
COVERNMENT 
TURE - Gov 
Y OF CULTUS 
• MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
7 
.91721 
134 #74 FTATZRIFT za: 017: 11 
BOOK I. CHAPTER IV. 
Anette Fr Baru Buat TETTE, TAT-TT u 
yfa: U FETTT: ** Ta afar awafa ser vakare Turaifea spre SAFETTET: सत्र एकासंजाभवतीति बेदितव्यम् ॥ 
1. From this sûtra up to the aphorism Ka làrah Karma dhåraye (II. 2. 38) only one name of each thing named is to be understood. 
What is that name then? That which comes last, where the claims are otherwise equal (I. 4. 2.) and that which were its claim disallowed, would have no other opportunity of conducing to any result, would be the recognised name. As a short vowel is called 'light' by I. 4. 10. and it is also called 'heavy' when it precedes a conjunct consonant (I. 4. 11.) Thus a short vowel has two namus 'light' and 'heavy.' But it will not be called 'light' when it precedes a conjunct consonant, but will have only one name, i.e.. 'heavy.' Thus in fe to divil, fa to split, the is light' while the same letter is 'heavy' in ftv teaching fra beggings 
Thus in the root aa the is 'heavy' and therefore in forming its aorist we have the form waard. Similarly out. The rule VII. 4.93 nob applying here as that rule is applicable to laghu vowels only. 
विप्रतिषेधे परं कार्यम् ॥२॥ पदानि ॥ विप्रतिषेधे, परम्, कार्यम्। aferu (gerafettet farfadu:) afewa farerfaaa peatug afar un 
2. When rules of equal force prohibit each other, then the last in the order herein given is to take effect. 
The word faufae means 'opposition of rules of equal force.' When two topics having different objects in view find scope of action simultane ously in one particular case, that opposition of equal forces is called vipratishedha. A general rule (utsarga) and its exception (upavada, or an invariable (nitya) and an optional (anitya) rule, or an antaranga and 
GURE 
GOVE 
GOVERNMENT 
USTRY OF CU 
ENT OF INDIA 
NADI DEFINED. 
[Br. I. CH. IV 33 U 
a bahiranga rule, are not rules of equal force. There the stronger prevails against the weaker. As an example of rules of equal force, see VII. 3.102. and VII. 3. 103. The first rule declares, when a case-affix beginning with a letter of yañ pratyâbâra follows, the long vowel is substituted for the final of an inflective base ending in a short y. As Vriksha+bhyâm= Vrikshabhyam. The next rule declares :-When a plural case-affix beginning with a letter or jhal pratyâhâra follows, is the substitute for the final shorts of an inflective base.' As Vřiksha + su=Vriksheshu. But when the plural case-afis bhyah follows, what rule are we to apply? For the letter bha belongs both to the pratyâhâras yañ and jhal. Are we to lengthen the short , or substitute t? The present sûtra gives the reply, v is to be substituted because VII.3 103 ordaining follows next to VII 3. 102. Thus Vriksha+bhyah =Vșikshebyah. 
Teut et uz natra -, *t-steel, atm ufes u TTTTTTTT T T Tecar is wala a 
3. Word-forms ending in long i and û being names of females are called Nadi. 
The word g is compound of f+ The word stryakhya means that which by itself denotes the name of a female. These words must be always feminine, having no masculine of the same form, as the word gramani has. As the words yuê Kumârî a virgin, TaTT, yavâgâh rice gruel. The declension of nouns of nadî class is somewhat peculiar which will be treated of later. As see Rule VII. 3. 112 WE is the augment of the case-affixes having an indicatory when they come after a word ending with a Nadi. 
Why do we say ending in & and ? Because feminine nouns not ending in these vowels will not be declined like Nadi words. Thus whilo She dative of कुमारी will be कुमार, the dative of दुहितु will be दुहिन. 
Why do we say 'which are feminine'? Because if they are names of males, they will not be called Nadi. As its leader of a village ; ê te leader of an army; a sweeper ; their dative being a paraca 
Why have we used the word akhya 'name' in the text? Because feminine gender must be denoted by the word itself and not by any other epithet usod along with the word. Thus if the head-borough or the sweeper should be of the female sex, the Dative Singular would still be 
for and auta fra 
Texturatu guva 
UE- Fit, eit, ( 4) for even the freagreen #wetent was 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
. IV. § 4-6). 
NADI DEFINED. 
NO 
177 27551 
4. Feminine words ending in i and û which admit the substitute (975) iyan and (593) uvan (VI. 4. 77) are not called Nadi; except the word stri, (which is called nadi) notwithstand. ing its substituting iyan.) 
The definition of Nadî given in the last sûntra was rather too wide, this limits the scope. Thus it, happiness, y brow, admit the substitutes iyan and uva în respectively, and are not nadî. Their vocative singular is fit:, : &c., while the vocative singular of stri is fa. 
atssfu ya uçt Il aT, SIA, augat-et) u वृत्तिः ॥ इयवस्थानौ यू धामिपरतो वा नदीसंज्ञो न भवतः ॥ 
5. Feminine words ending in i and û, though admitting iyai and uvan substitutes, are optionally termed Nadi, when the affix âm (Gen Pl.) follows, but not so the word strî, which is always Nadi. 
sit+1= 1 TT5 +15= ; Y+ T=YTT; or ft+ =tge +41 (VII. 1. 54 )=S T; +ST=YTY. But strî is always nadi. and we have a strînâm. 
To the absolute prohibition enjoined by the last sûtra, this allows an option in the case of Genitive Plural. 
fofa EEU U astfe u fefa (F-sfa) TT, 7, (I F4-et-qua-a1- ait) 
कृत्तिः ॥ डिति परतो हस्वच वो सम्बन्धी या व्याख्यो इयडुवङस्यानो वा नदीसंत्री 
6. When a case-affix having an indicatory ů (nit) follows, then feminine words ending in short i and û are optionally termed Nadi, as well as feminine nouns in long i ard û which admit of iyan and uvati; but not so the word strî, which is always Nadi. 
Feminino words in long i and û have been defined as nadi, words in short vowels can never be termed nadi, while even some words in long vowels have also been excluded from the scope of the definition if they take iyait and uvai The present sûtra declares an option in the case of all the above words, when a case-affix having an indicatory follows. 
The case-affixes having an indicatory ñ are the Dative, Ablative. Geni tive and Locative singulars. Thus we have:-- 
URE · Govg 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
RNMENT OF 
OF INDIA 
GHI DEFINED. 
[BK. I CA IV.1.0 
ETTER 
Dative water or 122, arra orra, fard or fa; Ablative and Genitive was or mars, dator fram, fax: or Fa: ; Locative wat or ty, or aut, fafa or farat. So also ya orta &c. But strî is always så &c. 
fiat fe 11 9 1 urfa 11 sha:, fe, ure, (2) 
fe: u ar sa furiat Wafa feto afif faceti TIT: ? Traina Tautas बन्नस्याख्यं व्याख्यं च यन्ननदीसंतकं स शेषः ॥ 
7. The rest of the words that end in short and y are called ghi with the exception of the word sakhi. 
This defines the word ghi. The peculiarity of the declension of ghi words will be treated later on. The word hrasva is understood in this sâtra. The word sesha or the rest' implies the words ending in short 
or which are not the names of females, or if they are feminine names they are not nadi words.' 
As you fire. Before case affixes having an indicatory i, the ghi nouns gunate there vowel VII. 3. 111. As safa+ = +2= ad to the fire. So also aty + = to the wind. But the declension of sakhi in these causes is :-দাওয়া ব্যক্তই ব্যস্ত and সুখী , 
ufar: TT Ta ulutra ufa:, FAT, Ta, (f) are sau: 19 w fuist vafa u 
8. The word pati is called ghi only when it is in a com pound. 
The word pati would have been ghi by the last sîtra ; the present stra is therefore a niyama rule, restricting the use of ghi in the case of pati to its occurring in composition. The word eva 'only' is used in a restrictive sense. 
As wat by the lord but wargfa by the lord of creatures. So also e and out; ry: and worea: , ut and worvat &c. When yra is ghi, there is gun of the vowel before the four fra affixes by VII. 3. 111. 
met yraf T oftugt-ra, af, at, (afa: fun g era ym: ww: wafer farra ut, fet wala 
9. The word pati wben used in connection with a noun ending in the sixth or genitive case, is ghi, optionally, in the Chhandas (veda). 
The word pati is understood in this satrad By the last sutra, pati would have not been gli when not in composition. This sutra makes an excmption to that when this word occurs in the Vaidic literature. 
ARE 
GOVE 
VERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
OF INDIA 
संशति मकान 
BR. I/CE. IV. S 10-12]. 
LAGHU AND GURU. 
पमानय . 
फुलवानां पतये or पत्ये नम: salutation to the lord of the Kulunchas. 
Why do we say when used in connection with a noun in the genitive case '? Observe मया पत्या जरदृषियथासः . 
Why do we say in the Chhandas? Observe ग्रामस्य पत्ये. 
हुवं लघु ॥ १० ॥ पदानि । हुवम् , लघु॥ वृत्तिः ॥ हस्वमक्षरं लघुसं भवति ॥ 
10. Â short vowel is called 'light' (laghu). 
This defines the word Laghu. A hrasva vowel which has already been defined (I. 2. 27), is under certain circumstances called laghu or 'light'; thus the i of fire to break, is laghu , and by being laghu it is gunated before the affix ता+आ, as भेत्ता he will break, by virtue of the rule VII 3. 86, which declares that a laghu penultimate vowel is gunated before a Saravadhatuka or an ardhadhatuka affix. So also देता, अचीकरत and जीहरत. 
संयोगेगुरु ॥ ११॥ पदानि ॥ संयोगे, गुरु, (हवम्) ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ संयोगे परतो इस्वमक्षरं गुरुस भवति ॥ 
11. When a conjunct consonant follows, a short vowel is 
•termed 'heavy' (Guru). 
A hrasva vowel however is not to be called 'light' when it is followed by a conjunct consonant. As the i of fwat 'learning' is a heavy vowel. Thus far is derived from fuu + (111. 3. 103, let the affix** come after that verb which has a heavy vowel and ends in a consonant when the word to be formed is feminine). So also कुण्डा and भिषा. 
दीर्घञ्च ॥ १२ ॥ पदानि ॥ दीर्घम्, च, (गुरु)॥ पतिः॥ दीपंचाक्षरंगुरुसंगं भवति ॥ 12. And a long vowel is also termed heavy, (Guru). 
This is clear the anuvritti of the word conjunct is not understood in this sutra. Ast of ईहांचक्र he endeavoured, ईवाचक्र he saw. Here the letter is guru, and because of its being called guru, the rule III. 1. 36 is applied in forming the perfect tense by the addition of the augment . Thus all long yowels, and short vowels followed by conjunct consonants are guru or heavy. All other short vowels are laghu. 
यस्मात् प्रत्ययविधिस्तदादि प्रत्यये ङ्गम् ॥१३॥ पदानि ॥ यस्मात्, प्रत्यय-विधिः, तद्-वादि, प्रत्यये, अङ्गम् ॥ 
बत्तिः ॥ यस्मात् प्रत्यया विधीयते धाताव प्रातिपदिकाहा तदादि शब्दसत्यये परत पाच भवति। 
URE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
T OF INDIA 
SU 
ANGA DEFINED 
(BK. I. Ca. IV. 10 
13. After whatsoever there is an affix enjoined, whether verbal root or crude-form, that which begins therewith in the form in which it appears when the affix follows it, is called an Inflective base (aiga). 
The words of this sûtra require some explanation. Yasmat after whatsoever ; pratyaya-vidhih compound of pratyaya meaning an affix and vidhih, a precept i.e. a rule enjoying an affix; tadadi, 1. S. that which begins therewith pratyaye 7. S.=in a pratyaya i.e. when a pratyaya follows (1. 1.) is called a base. 
After whatsoever there is an affix enjoined, whether it be a verbal root (Dhâtu) or a nominal base (prâ tipadika), the word form having that as its beginning, is called an afga, with regard to the affix that follows. The word yasmát is used in the aphorism to point out the thing named, as anga; because the word tadâdi follows it. This defines the word anga. The word base' is thus a relative term with regard to its affix. Thus *+at=wat he will do Tat he will lose. #feafa, frezfa. Here because the root and gets the name they are guņated by (VII. 3. 84). Similarly because guy &c. get the name Anga, their vowel is vriddhied in sit : &c. 
The words kri hri are anga with regard to the affix tâ &c. + sta = w ; 10. Herc upagu and kapatu are anga with regard to an. Similarly ++a=fu+ = freuta!. Here the whole word form. Karishya is regarded as afiga, and as such the short a is lengthened by VII. 3. 101; because though the affix vah is en joined after the word kri, the form which begins with kri i.e. karishya will also be called anga when the affix is to be added. The word tadadi, therefore, has been used in the sútra, to make the definition of Anga applicable to the forms which a word may assume after taking the intermediate affixes like sya &c., or before the final affixes. Thus gu+++= + =ytetf (VII. 1. 72 and VI. 4.8) kunda +-num+1=kundan+i akundani, bowls. Here the whole form kundan is called anga, and as such it lengthens its vowel before the case-affix î by VI. 4. 8. 
Why have we used the word pratyaya? Without it the rule would bave run thus : After whatever there is anything enjoined &c., is called Anga.' Then in t udt=ut. Here sandhi of vowels is enjoined babween - If it was here an Anga, then its last last vowel would have been replaced by we (VI. 4. 77). the form being farfarura. 
Why have we used the word far? Had we omitted it the rule would have run thus. After whatsoever there is an affix, whether roob or prati dedika is Anga." Thus in fut, though the affix adhuna is placed aftre 
REGOVS 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
कायते 
V. S 14, 15] 
PADA DEFINED. 
तिसरकार 
the word dadhi, it is not enjoined by any rule, and the word is not called anga. Had it been so called, then the of dadhi should have been elided by rule VI. 4. 148. 
The word pratyaya has been repeated twice in this sâtra in order to show that when an affix is elided, the term anga will not apply to what sstood before it. Thus in the compound word fro =Fqu for the sake 
of the woman. Here in forming the Tat purusha compound the dative case-affix after the word at has been elided, for as a general rule case affixes are elided in forming compounds. If the word it after its affix had been elided, still retained its old designation of Anga, the otty would 
been try, the augment iyan being added by the rule already referred to above. 
सुप्तिङन्तं पदम् ॥ १४॥ पदानि ॥ सुप-तिङ अन्तम्, पदम् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ सुबन्तं तिङन्तं च शब्दरूपं पदसं भवति ॥ 
14. That which ends in sup (case-affix) IV. 1. 2; or in tiä III. 4. 78 (tense-affix), is called a pada or inflected word. 
The sup or case-affixes are those by which nouns are declined ; and tin are tense-affixes by which verbs are conjugated. They have already been given before. Thus TET + =UTT UT: the Brâhmanas putea they cook. 
It might be asked by a caviller why the word sea bas been used in the aphorism. for by the rule of tadanta given in Sûtra l. 1.72 a rule Teams to sup will mean and include also that which ended with a sup-affix. To this we reply, that the very fact that the word anta is used in this satra, indicates by implication (jñâpaka) that the Tedanta rule of Sûtra 72 Chapter I does not apply to rules of sanjña (definition) made with regard to affixes. Thus tarap and tamap affixes are called gha by Sutra I. 1. 22. The tadanta-vidhi will not apply here; words ending with these affixes will not be called gha. Thus mafaatr will not be called gha, for had it been so called, the long will be shortened in a grafect. In short, 
an affix when employed in a rule which teaches the meaning of a techni cal term (sanjña) does not denote a word-form ending with the affix.' 
T: Àngu usifa a:, , (u ) युतिः ॥ नान्तं शब्दरूयं क्ये परत: पदसंबई भवति । 
15. The word-form ending in n, is called pada, when kya follows (ie.) the affixes kyach, kyan and kyash). 
These are affixes by which denominative verbs are formed from nouns. See III.1.8, 11, and 13. A word ending in is called pada, when these affixes follow. Thus 
ita 3rd Per. 8. croitofa he behaves like 
RE-GOVE 
VERNMENT 
GY OF CULTUS 
. MINISTRY 
T OF INDIA 
PADA DEFINED. 
[Br. I. CH. 1V. S 16, 
सरचय गायत 
a king. So also 74-UE=Torta (VII. 4. 5.) 7+ =uara or जयति. The result of its being called pada is that the न of राजन्, चर्मन् &c., is elided by Satra VIII. 2. 7. (there is elision of final in a pada which is entitled to the designation of prâtipadika). Thus tu +7 =7a+ = crata (VII. 4. 33). 
These three affixes #4 &c., come after case-inflected words (i.e., words ending in sup), and though, before these affixes, the case terminations are elided, still by Satra I. 1.62 such words would have retained the name of pada which they got by Rule 14 of this Chapter. The present sâtra how ever makes a restriction (niyama). It declares that only words ending in 
retain the name of pada ; while all other case-infected words before these affixes do not retain that designation. Thus the words at speech, शुचa ladle are not treated as pada and we have वाच्यते and तु व्यते. Had they been pada, the I would have been changed into by VIII. 2. 30. 
fara ug - fa, 7, (TE) afer: n farfa sett at gå wafau 
16. When an affix having an indicatory follows then that which precedes it is called pada. 
The sutra 18 of this chapter teaches that before certain affixes, tho preceding word is called bha. This sûtra declares an exception to that by anticipation. Thus Rule IV. 2. 115 declares: -- Affixes and come after the vriddha (I. 1. 74) word waa." Here the affix GT has an indica tory , therefore the word C, standing before it, will be called pada. Thus wat+ = eta: VII. 1. 2, belonging to you. The result of being pada is that a is changed into 3 (VIII 2. 39). Smilarly is wa in I (After the word ârnâ there is yu : V.2 123). Tausiy: ; so also ve V. 1. 106, has e as indicatory. Thus fau: There is no guna because of its being pnda 
Erfra Hamnet pouf grey, 
, ( ) af nearfa wa T 
naffag ga ada wafa u 17. When the afflxes beginning with (IV. 1. 2) and en la ing in " (V. 4. 151). follow, not being Sarvanamasthana (I. 1.13) then that which precedes is calied pada. 
The affixes beginning with su and ending with kap are meant by the above sutra. Thus the case-affix w e (Ins Dual) is an affix included in the above. Thus tru e = ar, , Free, maat, trade, TV3 
he wis elided by being pada URE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
ISINIW 
NT OF INDIA 
BK L CH. IV. $ 18, 19.) 
BHA DEFINED. 
175 
Why do we say when not a Sarvanâmsthâna'? Observe + Tut two kings. STUT7: kings. The - is not elided. 
yfe n = n uçtfor T-sf, , ( Farferanto) fez u Tatramanet Earet saumauffa nega aca: v nie tafan arran u sferagat ay ticWE पातिकम् ॥ वृषण्वस्वश्वयो। 
18. And when an affix, with an initial y or an initial vowel, being one of the affixes, beginning with su and ending In k, follows, not being Sarvanâmasthâna, then what precedes, is called Bha. 
This debars the application of pada. Thus i +45 (IV. 1. 105)= a grandson of Garga. So also TETT. The affix yañ begins with a ya and the word garga being treated as Bhe its final v is elided before the affix by VI. 4.148. 
So also FT +7=EFT: (IV. 1.95) grandson of Daksha wifes. Here the affix vs begins with a vowel the word standing before it being Bha, it causes elision of the final of Daksha. 
The word afy is in the 7th case meaning when I or follow; and by the last Vart of Sätra I 1.72, it means 'when an aflix beginning with ya or ach follow.' 
Vart.--The words , suffre and we should be treated as Bha when the affix u follows. Thus eam like the sky. Feat like the Angiras, 
you like the man. By being Bha, they is not changed into t, which it would have been, had it been a pada (VIII. 2. 66), 
Vari --The words muy is treated as Bha in the vedas when the words 
and follow. Thus qua; TTET Here had the word vrie shen been treated as pada, the would not have been changed into (See Rule VIII. 4. 37); and this would have been dropped before the afix vasu by VIII. 2.7. 
at ca u gençfar l a-et, 6-78, (PU) sferu i Tera vai nu vtat rett wafa 
19. The word-form ending in t or in s is called Bha when an affix with the force of matup (whose is it,' for in whom it is' V. 2. 91) follows. 
The word Bha is understood in this sâtra. Thus is the word weer having butter milk Nom. Sing. ucreant as the herdsman having butter milk, the eart h the cloud full of thundev. So lalso vedt famous 
. 
GOVERNMEN 
RY OF CULTI 
. MINISTRY 
ENT OF INDIA 
BHA CASES 
(BK I. CH. 1V. 920,21 
wurdt full of milk. Thus gefratag=referaa, + faför (V.2.121)=; wurt. By making these Bha, the operation of pada rule is debarred in their case. That is to say the final a of uda svit &c., and the F of yasası &c., are not changed into & and respectively, which had they been pada. words would have been the case by the action of Sûtra VIII. 2. 39, and VIII. 2. 66. viz., gefraga and zifa which are incorrect. 
अयस्मयादीनि च्छन्दसि ॥ २० ॥ पदानि ॥ अयस्मय-नादीनि , af, (*) 
faxu 
s ate for tranfer gfe force syfer yafua a 20. Words like ayasmaya &c., are valid forms in the chhandas (veda). 
These words being taught here in the topic relating to pada and Bha, show that they have been properly forced in the chhandas by the application of the rules of Bha and pada. Thus TTT+7=764 made of iron. Here the word 57is treated as Bha and hence the r is not changed into 
. Thus me iron-made coat of mail. suert for graf iron vessels. The present form of this word is T. In some places both these pada and Bha apply simultaneously. Thus in the word formed by 7, the T is first changed into by treating the word rich as a pada. Then the word is treated as bha, and therefore them is not changed into I before . For had it been pada, the form would have been a Rigvat. These irregularly formed words occur only in the chhandas or Vedic litera ture. Thus स युद्धमास शुक्वता गोन. 
y nu nuca nagy, ay-a778 u TF: 9 wafa a 
21. In expressing multeity, a Plural case affix is employed. 
When it is intended to denote multeity those affixes should be employed after nouns and verbs, which denote plural number. Thus #tet: Teira, The Brahmins read. 
This rule applies to words which are capable of expressing numbers. Indeclinables (Avyaya) do not admit of numbers, and consequently they are always in singular number which is the general form. 
डोकयो विर्ववचनैकवचने ॥२२॥ पदानि ॥ द्वि-एकयोः, द्विवचन एकवचने ॥ 
ferta forradaluarea waa: * 
URE - Govs 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY OR 
NT OF INDIA 
x. 1. CH. IV. $ 22-24.] 
NUMBERS KARAKA. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
.संस्कृतिमा 
273511 
22. The dual and singular case-affixes are employed severally in the sense of duality and unity. 
This is also clear. When duality is to be expressed, a dual case-affix should be employed, and in the case of unit, the singular case-affix. Thus Hrant tva: the two Brahmins cook. T: Tafa the Brahmin cooks. 
Th ocifer u en al वृत्तिः ॥ कारक हत्यधिकारी वेदितव्यः, यदित जई. वनानुमानिध्यामः कारक इत्येवं तहे. दितव्यम् ॥ 
23. The phrase 'kâra ka' (meaning in the special rela tion to a word expressing an action') is to be understood in the following aphorisms. 
Any thing that helps towards the accomplishment of an action is & kâraka. Tnus in cooking,' the fire, the furnace, the vessel, the cook are all helpers in the accomplishment of the action. Thus 'Rama cooks food in a vessel, by the fire from the furnance for his master.' Here Rama is agent kâraka'; 'food' is object kâraka ;' vessel' is a locative kâraka, fire is an instrumental kâraka, furnace' is the ablative karaka and 'master' is the dative kâraka. 
The word ' karaka' thus is synonymous with the word cause (hetu) and occasion (nimitta). All the various causes and the occasions that are required to complete an action will be kârakas. Out of the seven cases in which a sanskrit noun is declined, six represent such relation with an action. The Genitive or the sixth case can never be directly related with an action, and thus can never stand in the relation of a kâraka to a verb 
धु वमपायेऽपादानम् ॥२४॥ पदानि ॥ध वम्, अपाये, अपादा (R ) 
M पत्तिः ॥ध्रुवं यदपाययुक्त नपाये साध्ये यदवधिभूतं तत्कारकमपादानसं भवति । of u guratec TrafigUTTA 
24. A noun whose relation to an action is that of a fixed point from which departure takes place is called a pâda na or Tablation. 
This defines the Ablation or Apâdana käraka. Thus granufa he comes from the village. Jaargairefa he descends from the mountain. 
retata: lost his object. The sfaa: fallen from the chariot. The Apådana, takes the 5th case-affix (II. 3 28) and the above examples show this. When therefore this relation is to be expressed, the fixed point (like gråma, purvata &c., in the above) which is the limit denoted by a word dependent on a verb, is called ablation.' 
VERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
AT OF INDIA 
THE ABLATION. [BK. I. CH. IV. $ 250 
19 
Vart.-The objects of verbs denoting 'aversion,' cessation and negligence are also called ablation. Thus:- T isgraa he dislikes injustice; suvaffacafa be ceases from injustice. wferhafa he neglects justice. 
statutai utc: uzy nacrt u it-T-FUTTI, - fa:, (Fren AÇTE) I 
afsu fantezulti staruriai Tigai ar weg FTOHTC TEMi vafa u 
25. In the case of words implying 'fear' and 'protection from danger' that from which the danger or fear procedes is called Apådana karaka. 
The verbs signifying' fear' or protection' govern the object feared of, or the danger to be protected from, in the ablative case. Thus strat furafa he is afraid of thieves, Toy gfgra he is agitated because of the thieves, urua or tufa. He protects or saves from the thieves. 
Why do we say the cause of fear (bhaya-hetu) is put in the ablative case? Observer forafa or sua he fears or protects in the forest. 
U Teta: € ustfa a T, Tate: , (FT0 अपादानम्)॥ 
ofTs a great worêt eraserer seg et WETTIG wafa 
26. In the case of the verb paràji, to be tired or weary of,' that which becomes unbearable, is called Apadana käraka. 
When the verb for to conquer, with the prepos tion para has the sense of becoming tired or unbearable' it governs the ablative case of the thing become unbearable. As stua rota he finds study unbearable. 
Why do we say that which becomes unbearable.' Observer w a he defeats the enemies. 
urtuetar atfiua: # 9 # ostfr narsan, Ertura: (TO TUTTO) 
খুলি। আধ্যাহ দাঁ গাজী মাজী য খুঁখিষনায়ঃ সন্ধ্যাযজনকা ঝালক্ষ্মী পলি ? 
27. In the case of verbs having the sense of preventing", the desired object from which one is prevented or warded off is called Ablation or Apâdana karaka. 
The obstruction to one's natural inclination is called vêrana or pre vention. As we si urcafa or faa for he wards off or withholds the com from the barley. 
ORE 
Govs 
OVERNMENT 
Y OF CULTUR 
VISIR 
IT OF INDIA 
1. ON IV. § 28.-30.] 
THE ABLATION. 
1775 
Why do we say the object desired' is put in the ablative case ? Observe faafa 38 he wards off the cow in the field. 
att hanterior frafa n 5 d ucrfa u sast, ga, AGITTI, safe, (ETO SIGT) 
qi: a safe fafiri 
W T 47faeque UETTE vafa u 28. When concealment is indicated, the person whose sight one wishes to avoid, is called Apâdâna kâraka. 
Thus उपाध्यायादन्त or निलीयते he conceals or hides from the teacher : so that the teacher may not find him out or see him. 
Why do we say when concealment is indicated? Observe the #fogva he does not wish to see the thieves. Here the term chauran is in the accusative case. 
Why has the word ichchhati been used in the text? The apâdâna karaka is to be used there only, where one desires that he should not be seen, yet he shows himself. 
yreutatuata a pieno di a f 11 -TAT, 39-419, (To TTO) 
वृत्तिः ॥ उपयोगे साध्ये य श्राख्याता तत्कारकमपादानसंघ भवति । 
29. The noun denoting the teacher is called A pada na or ablation, in relation to the action signifying formal teaching, 
The word startat means teacher, and it means acquiring know ledge in the regular way. Thus H e uta or maafa he learns from the preceptor. 
Why do we say 'when meaning to learn? Observe eeu serta he hears the player. 
sfarer's reptes ut u ustia a far-prys, wafai, (TO TUTO) 
fa: u marteauTie werf (17: TETET Ergfa: arcu eg: He t e wafa e 
30. The prime cause of the agent of the verb jan to be born, is called Apadana. 
That which is the Agent (af) of the verb jan, is called s frut. That which is the prime-cause (sofor) of the agent (or product) of the 
URE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
STRY OF CUL 
NT OF INDIA 
(405080. 
THE DATIVE 
BRI.OR. IV.S3132 
. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
• संस्कृति 
मंत्रालय 
सरत सरकार 
root jan is put in the ablative case. As Trout it, the arrow is pro duced from horn. गोनवाद् वृतिको जायते the scorpion is produced from cowdung. 
भुवः प्रभवः ॥ ३१॥ पदानि ॥ भुवः, प्रभवः, (का पा०)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ भूक प्रभवो य स्तरकारकमपादान भवति॥ 
31. The source of the agent of the verb bhu, to become is called Apadana.in 
The phrase of the agent (karuth)' is understood here. The word प्रनय means the source or that from which anything arises. As हिमवतो गंगा अभवति the Ganges has its source in the Himalayas. काश्मीरेभ्यो वितस्ता wwufa. The Hydaspes has its source in Cashmere. 
कर्मणा यमभिप्रेति स संप्रदानम् ॥ ३२ ॥ पदानि ॥ कर्मणा, यम्, अभिप्रेति, सः, संप्रदानम् , (का)॥ 
वृत्तिः । कर्मपा, करणभूतेन कर्चायनमिति तत्कारकं संप्रदानमंचं भवति । बार्तिकार ॥ क्रियाग्रहण मपि कर्तव्यम् ॥ पार्तिकम् ॥ कर्म या कारणसंशा वक्तव्या संप्रदानस्य च कर्नसंवा॥ 
32. The person whom one wishes to connect with the object of giving, is called Sampradâna or recipient. 
Though the word or in the sutra is indefinitely used meaning with the object yet it is not every object of any verb. The object must be of the verb to give.' 
As उपाध्यायाय गां ददाति he gives the cow to the teacher. माणवकाय मिशान tarfa he gives aims to the boy. Here the words 'cow' and 'alms' are the object of the verb.give', the persons connected with this object are the teacher and the boy respectively. These latter are in the Dative case and take the 4th case-affix. 
Vart: The person whom one wishes to connect with the action should also be called recipient. AS साहाय निगहते he censures for the sake of Sraddha. युडाय समझते he prepares for battle. पत्ये शेते she sleeps for her husband. 
Vart:--2. After some verbs (especially to sacrifice), the object (Ararma) gets the name of Instrument (karana) and the recipient (Sam pradana) is called object (karma). 
Thus पशुजा रुद्रं यजते or पणुद्वाय दादति he sacrifices with an animal to Rudra, which is equivalent to, hegives an animal to Rudra.' 
रुच्यर्थानां प्रीयमाणः ॥३३॥ पदानि ॥ रुचि-अर्थानाम् , प्रीयमाणः, (का० संप्रदानम्) 
वृत्तिः ॥ बच्चर्यानां चातुर्मा प्रयोगे प्रीयमाणो योउर्व स्तवकारकं संप्रदागर्स भवति । 
SURE 
GOVE 
V OF CULTUR 
ISTRY 
MENT OF IN 
OF INDIA 
BERI. CA IV. $ 33-35.1 
THE DATIVE. 
1 
.4178 
33. In case of verbs having the signification of the root ruch to like,' the person or thing that is pleased or satis fied, is called Sampradana or recipient. 
The verbs having similar meaning (artha) as the word ruchi or 'liking' are tart. A desire or longing caused by something else, is called ruchi. As देवदचाय रोचते मोदकः the sweet meat pleases Devadatta. यज्ञदत्ताय Faça sga: Yajnadatta likes Apupa. Here modaka is the agent that draws out the longing which is latent in Devadatta. 
Why do we say 'the person pleased'? Observe auto grea Area: ofa. Devadatta likes modak in the way. The word pathi being in the 7th case, 
बाघल्हुस्थाशपां जीप्स्यमानः ॥ ३४॥ पदानि ॥ साय-महुङ् FIT-TUTH, TCFUHT: , (FTO FAÇT) I 
afT: UT FTT ETT TT daai stentar atså Fra FTCE Ugadi wafan 
34. In the case of verbs slágh to praise, hnu to take away sthå to stand, and sap to curse, the person whom it is intend ed to inform of or persuade by, these actions, is called Sam pradana. 
The word vir means whom it is desired to make known or in form. As aqu a rua he praises Devadatta, ile, while praising Deva datta, he wishes that he should know this praise. So also with other verbs. As a t Ta he hides from (wishing that Devadatta should know of it) Devadatta, agitt favā she offers herself to Devadatta (for sexual em brace, wishing that he should know, of it). Cana wa he reviles Deva datta. 
Why do we say the person whom it is intended to inform '? Observe Quata tarafa afy. Here pathi is in the Locative case. 
UTP : # 4 lugtfat et:, :, (FTO BUGTO) 1 
वृत्तिः ॥ धारयतेः प्रयोगे उत्तमरी योऽर्थ त्वत्कार प्रदानसं भवति ॥ 
35. In the case of the verb dhâri to owe,' the creditor is called Sampradana. 
The word en is compounded of two words your best and stu debu meaning (whose debt is best) creditor, as opposed to w debtor. As 
a va ofa he owes hundred to Devadatta. 
Why do we say the creditor is called Recipient'? Obser ve a ucufa he owes hundred to Devadatta in the village. Here village is in the Locative case. 
TURE 
GOVO 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
THE DATIVE. 
Bk. I. CH. IV. $ 30-35 
सरकार 
स्पृहे रीसितः ॥ ३६॥ पदानि ॥ स्पृह, ईप्सितः, (काल संप्रदा०)॥ 
पत्तिः ॥ स्पर ईप्सायो, पुरादावदन्तः पदयते, तस्य इपिसतो योऽयस्तत्कारकं प्रदानसंच भवति ॥ 
36. In the case of the verb sprih to desire, the thing de sired is called Sampradâna karaka. 
The verb er to desire, belongs to the churâdi class. The word governed by this verb takes the Dative case. As ged : Eyraf be desires flowers, फलेभ्यः स्पृहयति he desires fruits. 
Why do we say the thingdesired. Observe पुष्पेभ्यो बने स्पृशयति he desires flowers in the forest. Here an is in the Locative case. 
कुधदहा सूयार्थानां यं प्रतिकोपः ॥३७॥ पदानि ॥ध-दह इयां-असूय-मर्थाना, यं, प्रतिकोपः (का० संप्र०)॥ 
वृतिः ॥ पादार्थानां प्रयोग में प्रतिकोषस्तरकारकं संप्रदानसंखं भवति । 
37. In the case of the verbs having the sense of krudh to be angry, druh to injure, irshya to envy, asûyâ to detract, the person against whom the feeling of anger do., is directed is called Sampradana. 
Krudh means non-tolerance, droha means doing wrong or hurt, îrshya jealousy; and asûya means to find out the faults lof another. The word kopa. includes all the above four sorts of actions. As देवदत्ताय यतिवसति fifa or swafa he is angry upon, (i. e. with) or bears malice to, or is jealous of, or finds out the faults of Devadatta. Here Devadatta is in the Dative case. 
Why do we say 'against whom the feeling of anger is directed.' Be couee if there be no feeling of anger, then these verbs will not govern the dative case, but the accusative. Thus warteota he is jealous of his wife, i.ee, does not wish her to be seen by others. Here the word bhâryâ is in the accusative case. 
ऋधद्रहो रुपसृष्टयोः कर्म ॥ ३७॥ पदानि ॥ बुध-द्रहोः, उप सृष्टयोः, कर्म (का० यं प्रतिकोपः)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ पत्रुहर रूपसृष्टया कापसर्गसंबन्ध यो यं प्रतिकोपस्तत्कारकं कर्णसं भवति । 
38. But in the case of the verbs krudh and druh, when preceded by prepositions, the person against whom the feel ing of anger &o., is directed is called karma karaka or objeot. 
OVERNMENT 
av OF CULTUR 
AMASININ 
T OF INDIA 
N 
BK. I. CK. IV. 839-40]. 
SAMPRADANA KARAKA. 
138 
rm 
.. 
This aphorism is a proviso to the last, and enjoins accusative case, where by the last, there would have been dative. The word upasrishta 
means having upasarga or preposition. As देवदत्तममिक्रुध्यति अभिद्रुपति. When used simply, those verbs of course govern the Dative case by the last aphorism. As देवदत्ताय क्रुध्यति. 
राधीच्योर्यस्य विप्रनः ॥ ३९ ॥ पदानि ॥ राधि-ईयोः, यस्य, विप्रश्नः , (काय संप्रदा०)॥ 
हात्तः ॥ राधेरीक्षेधकारकं संप्रदानसंगं भवति कीदृशं यस्य विप्रश्नः, विविधः प्रश्नः, विप्रश्नः सकस्य भवति बस्य शुभाशुभ पृश्यते ॥ 
39. In the case of the verbs ràdh, to propitiate, and iksh to look to, the person about whose good or bad fortune ques tions are asked is called Sampradana. 
The word vipraśna means literally asking various questions; and denotes questioning about the good or bad luck of another. Thus देवदसाय राध्यति-ईसते गर्ग: Garga is favorable to or looks to Devadatta, the sense is that being casually asked by Devadatta, he reflects upon the good or bad fortune of Devadatta. 
Another explanation of this sûtra is, the agent that puts various quesa tions is put in the dative case, As शिष्याय राघ्नोति or ईषते वा गुमा meaning, the pupil asks the teacher various questions to resolve his doubts, and the teacher answers those questions to the pupil. 
प्रत्याभ्यां व वः पूर्वस्य कर्ता ॥४०॥ पदानि ॥ प्रति-वाङ्मयाम्, शवः, पूर्वस्य, कर्ता (काः संप्रदा०)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ प्रतिनाङ्इत्येवं पूर्वस्य शृणोतेः कारक संप्रदानसंखं भवति कीदृशं पूर्वस्य कर्ता। 
10. In the case of the verb Sru preceded by the pre positions prati and an; and meaning to promise' the person to whom promise is made (lit: the person who was the agent of the former verb) is called Sampradana. 
The compound verb afay and i means to promise. A promise is made on the motion or at the instance of another. The person so propos ing who was the agent of the former action becomes the recipient of the promise in the latter case. As देवदत्ताय गां प्रति गति-प्राणाति he promises acow to Davadatta. 
अनप्रतिगृणश्च ॥४१॥ पदानि ॥ मन-प्रति-गृणः, च, (का० संप्रदा० पूर्वस्य, कर्ता)। 
वृत्तिः ॥ अनुपूर्वस्य प्रतिपूर्वस्य च ऋणातेः कारकं पूर्वस्याः क्रियायाः कृतृभूतं संमदानीगा 
URE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
RY OF CULTUS 
NT OF INDIA 
SINIW 
1843 
सरकार 
INSTRUMENT KARAKA. 
[BK. I. CH. IV. 841-43. 
41. In the case of the verb gri, preceded by anu and prati, aud meaning to encourage by repeating', the person who was the agent of the prior action, which is repeated, is called Sampradana. 
The phrase pûrvasya kartâ of the last is to be read into this aphorism. As tā sgua. They encourage the Hotri, i.e. the Hotri priest in vokes first, the others then follow him in invocation and by so doing en courage him. The word "Int: and sfat: mean encouraging the invoker. 
Tak Tung nagtfarn Fuh, (arch) n वृत्तिः ॥ क्रियाप्रसिद्धी यत् प्रकृष्टोपकारकं विवक्षितं तत्साधकतम कारक करणसं भवति ॥ 
42. That which is especially auxiliary in the accomplish ment of the action is called the Instrument or karana karaka. 
A दात्रेण लुनाति he cuts with the sickle. परशुना छिनत्ति he divides by the axe. The instrument takes the third-case affix. 
Why do we say especially'? Because in the case of the other kârakás, the non-mention of the word especially makes it possible for us to use those cases, in not their strict sense. Thus though the locative case should be used where strictly a thing is located in another, yet we may gay fairy: the herdeman in the Ganges, not strictly in, but on the banks of the Ganges. T ap the family of frogs in the well, i.e, on the sides of the well. 
fea: un uogifer fa: , , , (7 तमम् करणम्)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ दिवः साधकतर्न पत्कारकं वत्कर्मसंगं भवति चकारात् करणसं च ॥ 
43. That which is especially auxiliary in the accomplish ment of the action, of the verb div to play, is called karma object, as well as karana, Instrument. 
The present så bra ordains accusative case, where by the operation of the last aphorism thore ought to have been Instrumental case. The force of in the sa tra is to indicate that karana is also to be read into this. As 
a fa or fara he plays the dice or with the dice. aftra fuauaceat n 98 u fall of 
p, s ake (TO Era ) fsfora urval 
w aai enero waru 
W URE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
I. . IV. $ 44-471. 
ADHIKARANA KARABA. 
सत्यम्य जयते 
ल सरकार 
44. In the case of hiring on wages, that which is especi ally auxiliary in the accomplishment of the action of the verb parikri, employing on stipulated wages, is optionally called Sampradâna or recipient. 
This ordains dative case, where there would otherwise have been In strumental case. The word uited means to engage for a limited peried on payment of wages, and not absolute purchase for all time. As wara wfcatat syafe wao vicatat syafe. 
ADHIKARANA. SHTETËSET HET I STUTT:, sau, (FTO) 
वृत्तिः ॥ कर्तृकर्मणोः क्रियान्वयभूतयोर्धारण क्रियां प्रति य आधारस्त त्कारकधिकरण सं भवति । 
45. That which is related to the action as the site where the action is performed by reason of the agent or the object being in that place is called Adhikarana or the Location. 
That in which the action is supported or located is called adhâra. As कटे आते he is seated on the mat. कटे शेते he is sleeping on the mat. स्याल्या ufa he cooks in the pot, The Adhikaraṇa takes the 7th case-affix. 
salgetTTTT n 8€ lograf-afto-IT-HTETE #, (HTO STUTT:) ga: fugatui site FIT FIT E TT TETACH Warfa u 
46. That which is the site of the verbs si to lie down, stha, to stand, as to sit, when preceded by the preposition adhi, is however called karma kâraka or object. 
This ordians accusative case, where otherwise by the last sâtra there would have been the Locative case. As para fagra or seue he lies down, occupies or lies in the village. 
safafafanu u 19 lugtfe xf-fil-faat:, , ( TUTT: ) 
of safragteu futud US977 wafa 
47. That which is the site of the verb abhinivis to enter, is also called karma-karaka. 
ORE 
OF CULTURE 
VERNMENT O 
MINISTRY 
T OF INDIA 
TO 
KARMA KARAITA. 
(Bk. I. CA. IV. § 48-49. 
. 
As fafowa he resorts to the village. This is an optional rule, as the word " option " of sâtra 4,4 should be read into it. Thus we have the following forms also पापेऽभिनिवेश: resorting to sin. कल्यायोऽभिनिवेष: re sorting to good. The rule here is that of vyavasthita vibhasa. 
Faracats : 11 ya ni açta u 39-547--54TS-a7i, (FTO TUTT: 0) 
TFT U TE SE U TE a garg gacoret qe m e vafa un af m ade afecat atat: 
48. That which is the site of the verb vas to dwell, when preceded by upa, anu, adhi, and an, is called karma-kâraka. 
As Tintuara OTT the army dwells in the village waagvaara-ga fa রাঘিমনি or শ্রাবনি, 
Vart:-Prohibition must be stated when the verb Ty means " fasting," or does not denota lying in a locality. As yra gaafa he fasts in the village. Here the verb upavasati governs the locative case and not the accusative. 
KARMA. EFETTA 1X U TETRA , ffraan, en (FTO) 
वृत्तिः ॥ कर्तुः क्रियया बदामुनिष्ट त में तत्कारकं कर्मसंहं भवति । 
49. That wbich it is intendel should be most affected by the aot of the agent is called the object or karma. 
That which is especially desired by the agent to be accomplished by the action is called karma, As कटं करोति He makes the mat. ग्रामं गच्छति ho goes to the village. Why do we say "desired by the agent”? Observe wraca otra he ties the horse in the gram field. Here gram is no doubt most desired by the horse, but as the horse is not the agent of the verb, the word we takes the locative case. Why do we use the word "most" ? Observe wastani he eats the food along with the milk. Here milk is me donbt desired by the agent, but not being the principal object desired, 
takes the Instrumental case. 
Though the word en was understood in this sûtra by anuvritti from the last sutra, the repetition of this word here is to indicate that the anu vritti of the word âdhåra does not extend to this sûtra, because as we do not take the anuvritti of the word karna into this sůtra, we do not take 
URE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
v OF CULTUR 
. MINISTRY 
ENT OF INDIA 
BEI. CH. IV. § 50-51] 
KARMA KARAKA. 
21 
. 
1174 
the anuvritti of any word of the previous sûtra into this. Had we taken the anuvritti of the word karma from the last sätra, then we could use the accusative case in those limited instances, where the word is capable of taking the Locative case also, but not in other cases. Thus while we could very well say if faufa he enters the house, we could not say sau yufa he cooks the food, i faafa he drinks saktu. By repeating the word karma in this sûtra, such examples be come valid everywhere. The karma-karaka, takes the second case-affix. 
at go Tratfugay nyo lugtfa a aet, J , waitfonat, (FTO ) 
वृत्तिः ॥ येन प्रकारेण क रीप्सितत क्रियबा गुण्यते तेनैव चेत् प्रकारेण बदनीसितं युक्त मावति तस्य कर्मसंजा विधीयते ॥ 
50. If that which is not intended to be most affected by the act becomes however similarly connected with the action it also is called karma. 
That which is not desired by the agent is anîpsita or object of a version. Thus faci fa he eats poison, 1174 Tafa. He sees the thieves. 79TTEET TUTU yua fa going to the village, he plucks the roots of the trees, 
na yp Etfall afera, 7, (FTO #) वृत्तिः ॥ बकथितं च यत्कारक तत्कर्मसंनं भवति । 
51. And that karaka which is not spoken of as coming under any of the special relations of ablation &c., is also called 
karma 
There are some verbs in Sanskrit which take what is called an akathita object, in addition to their usual direct one. As its name indi cates, it is that object which is not otherwise kathita or mentioned by way of any of the other case relations, such as TIGT ATT &c. and is, there fore optional. If the noun capable of taking this akathita object be not intended for any other case, it is put in the Accusative case with such verbs; as, a afu tu: he milks the cow (her milk) HTETfa i'he confines the cow to the fold.' Here is and ho are akathita or optional objects. If the speaker does not intend to have this object, the words will be put in their natural cases; as, at: (ablative) üretia, à (locative) auf u. 
The roots that are capable of governing two accusatives are mentioned in the following kårikå :-- TYTUTTE vara e for Tu बागुल याकथितं सपा स्यानाकृष् बहाय ॥ 
GOVERNME 
OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
NMENT OF IN 
OF INDIA 
सत्वर्गिय जयनx 
KARMA KARAKA. 
[Br. I. CH. 17.952. 
जसरकार 
In the case of the roots IL 'to milk' TT ' to beg,' TE 'to cook,' IT'to punish,' 'to obstruct or confine to ask, foto collect' 5 to tell wrस् - instruct' जि 'to. win' (as a prize of wager) भन्य to churn' जुम् to steal,' and also in the case of नी, ह, कृष , and वह all mean ing to take or carry' and others having the same signification, that noun which, besides the direct object, is affected by the verb, is put in the Accusa tive case; as, गां दोग्धि पयः (S. K.) he milks the cow'; वलिं याचते वसुधां. He begs the earth of Bali's similarly तंडुलानोदनं पचति, गर्गाज शतं दण्ड यति, माजमवरणद्धि गांभाणव पंथान पुति, वृषनवचिनोति फलानि, नाणवकं धम ब्रते-शास्तिवा, शर्त जयति देवदत्त, सुधीरनिधि नयनाति, देवदत्तं यतं शुष्णाति; ग्राममजां नयति-हरति-कर्ष ति. जहति या are examples of the other roots in order. माणवकं धर्मभाषते वक्ति बा, शालिवां नियते, तां त्वां संवरणस्यायें बरयामि विभावसो are instances of this kind of object, because HTC or Utr and more or have the same meaning as 7 and 479, the roots given in the Kâsikâ. 
HObs.-The roots पि, पु, पन् नयू, कप, जि, कृष् च and ever वह are of every rare occurrence as governing two accusatives, in the classical litera ture, though given in the above list. 
The roots mentioned above and others having the same sense, take two objects. One of them is principal, and the other, secondary. In the case of the firsb twelve roots from दुइ toनुष्, the nouns पयः, वसुधा, फलागि, सुधा, &c. are principal objects, and यां, बलिं, वृक्ष, पीरनिधि &c. are gecondary objects, for they can, according to the speaker's volition, be put in other cases. And in the case of the last four roots at, is the principal object and or the secondary. Thus that which is necessarily put in the accusative case in order to complete the idea of the verb, is the principal object, and that which may be put in the Accusative case, depending upon the speaker's will, is called the secondary object. 
गति बुद्धि प्रत्यवसानार्थशबद कर्माकर्म काणा मणिकर्ता स णौ ॥ ५२ ॥ पदानि ॥ गति-बुद्धि-प्रत्यवसान-मर्थ-शब्दकर्मा-कर्मकाणाम् , 
अणिकर्ता, सः, णी (कारके कर्म)॥ 
वत्तिः ॥णत्यर्थानां पुढघर्यानां प्रत्यव सानार्यानां च धातूला वयाशद कर्मकाणा नकर्मकाणा अपयन्तानां यः कर्तास रयन्तानां कर्मसंनो भवति ।। 
धार्तिकर ॥ गत्ययेषनी बमोः प्रतिषेधो बक्तव्यः॥ बार्तिकम् ॥ बहेर नियन्त्रक कल्येति वक्तव्यम् । बार्तिकम् ॥ शादि खायो प्रतिषेधो वक्तव्यः॥ बार्शिकम् ॥ शेर हिवार्थस्य प्रतिषेध वक्तव्यः। 
52. Of the verbs having the sense of motion know ledge or information and eating,' and of verbs that have 
CURE Gow 
GOVERNMENT 
OF CULTUR 
TAINISTRY 
ENT OF INDIA 
AG 21 
V. 52.] 
KARMA KARAKA. 
18 
7 
.17 
some literary work for their object, and of intransitive verbs that which was the agent of the verb in its primitive (non-ni or non-causal state), is called the object (karma) in its causative state (when the verb takes the affix ņi). 
In the case of the roots that imply 'motion,' knowledge or informa tion' or some kind of eating,' and other roots having a similar sense ; also of roots that have some literary work for their object, and of intransi. tive roots, that which is the subject of the verb in its primitive sense is put in the Accusative case in the causal, the object remaining unchanged ; e. g. 
PRIMITIVE. 
CAUSAL. पत्रवः स्वर्गमगर 
WIT FUTUTETTE स्वे पदार्थमविदुः 
ঘল স্বামী অর্থবল देवा तमाश्नर 
UTH TAHTUUT fafugaacaa 
faf agayTIT पृथ्वी पलिते जास्त 
पुच्ची वशिले बासमत But in mufa crit atferre (Rama makes Govind go) if some body else (torey ta) prompts Ráma to do this, we shall have to say fargfuit te 
tiare, afa 'Vishnu mitra prompts Ráma to cause Govind to go.' Here Ráma' is not put in the Accusative case, because it is the subject of the Verb, not in its primitive, but causal, sense. 
Patanjali, in his Mahâbhâshya, adds this explanation on the meaning of the word Team in the sutra ufagft &o. tegu may be either wat aaf 
format or Trost sai 44. 
When we take the former interpretation, the roots caufa ( ) #*#fa (**) and regiya (denom. of uru) have to be excluded from the rule; as, geria CUcu uruara Cacha; 'Tfa-woera accus; meufa-Tetaufa-ee. And the roots T, T with far and 7 with ye must be included in the rule; as, gafa fartafa- a açt: taafa-fagnafa-Tarafa-2aat. When we adopt the second interpretation, the roots ro, HTC with sit and we with ta, must be included in the rule; mufafaefa-petua-tu, want farrafa- TaTfa-27. 
There are several exceptions and counter-exceptions to the preceding rule, which are important. 
Vart:-The causals of oft to lead and to carry,' do not govern the Accusative, but the Instrumental; e. g. west o wala ut A. gervant carries a load. It oruula reala UT (S. K.) (He) causes a servant to carry a load. 
RE-GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY ON 
NT OF INDIA 
KAKMA KARAKA. 
[BK. I. Ca. IV.S 5%. 
1176 
Vart.-But , when it has for its subject in the causal a word signi fying a driver,' obeys the general rule; as, ETET Tagfa. Horses draw the chariot. si fa care facf:. 
Vart.-(b). The causals of the roots we and me,' to eat,' govern the Instrumental case; e.g. urfa arafa 7. The boy eats bis food. TCTT 
teafa uigufa . (He) causes the boy to eat his food. 
Vart.-(c). TU, when it has not the sense of fear injury to a mentient thing,' governs the Instrumental; as, ufa füst aan, wala पिंडी देववन; but भयति यवान् बलीबर्दाः, भषयति वली वर्दान यवान्. 
By 'intransitive' roots mentioned above is meant such roots as are not by their nature capable of governing an object other than that of 
time,''place' &c., and not those roots which, though transitive, may some times be used intransitively according to the speaker's volition, or when their meaning is, quite evident; as, fast: Tafa. Here yufa, though transitive, is used without an object, because it can be easily understood ; hence fato fa and not feat; but atafa 226. 
In forming the passive construction of causal verbs, the principal objeot in the causal, which is the subject (agent) of the verb in its primi tive sense, is put in the Nominative case, and the other object remains unchanged; e. g. PRIMITIVE. 
CAUSAL ACTIVE. CAUSAL PASSIVE. TOT fa. 
e mafa. 
Tarra. Roma goes to a village. (He) causes Râma to Rama is caused to go &c. 
go to a village. Teut fr. 
पत्वेन भूत्यं वा कर्ट कारयति. अत्यः कट कार्य ते. The Mervent prepares a mat. (le) causes the servant The servant is made to 
to prepare & mat. prepare &c. गोविंदो भासमारते. 
गोविंदं मासमासतिगाविदोभासमास्यते. Govind sits for one month. (He makes Govind sit &c.) Govind is made to sit &c. 
(a). But in the case of roots that imply 'knowledge' 'eating,' and those that have a literary work for their object, the principal object is put in the Nominative case, and the secondary in the Accusative, or vice versa e.g. 
rwafa he make Mananaka know his duty; at area or 
Tarura 'M, is made known his duty' or duty is made known to M.'; ara arafa' be makes the boy eat food: 'Hera ana or पोदनां भाज्यते (S. K.) 
With regards to roots that govern two accusatives, the rules mentioned above bold good in their case also ; i.e., those roots that imply motion &c., govern the Accusative of the subject of the primitive Case, and others, the Instrumental case, sometimes; as, w* wgwatwa; (rar) wa afa 
RE - GOV. 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
ENT OF INDIA 
SR. I. CH. IV. F53-54.] 
AGENT DEFINED. 
मंत्रालय 
चराधा याचति (God) makes Vamana ask Bali for Earth.' योपोजा नगरं हरति; (स्वानी) गोपं गोपेन बरजां नगरं हारयति. (The master) makes the cowherd take the sheep to the town.' 
इक्रोरन्यतरस्यास् ॥ ५३॥ पदानि ॥ हृ-क्रोः, अन्यतरस्याम् , (का० अणि कर्त्ता स णो कर्म)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ हरते करोतेश्वरयन्तयोर्य करी स यन्तयो रण्यवरवां कर्मसंनो भवति । पातिकम् ॥ अभिवादि हथोरात्मनेपद उपसंख्वानस् । 
53. The agent of the verb in its non-ni (primitive) form in the case of hri to lose and kļi to make, is optionally called karma or object when these verbs take the affix. 
mi (CAUSAL ). PRIMITIVE. 
CAUSAL. As हरति. भारं माणवकः 
हारयति भार माणवर्क or माणवोन The boy takes the load. He causes the servant to take the load. करोतिकटं देवदत्तः 
कारवति कटं देवदतं or देवदत्तेन, Devadatta makes the mato He causes Devadatta to make the mat. 
Vart.---The subject of the primitive verbs afrag and go when used in the Atmanepada, is either put in the Accusative or instrumental case in the causal; as, 
PRIMITIVE, 
CAUSAL अभिवदति गुरु वदतः 
अभिवादयते गुरु" or देवदर्शन Devadatta bows down to the Guru. He makes Devadatta bow down to the 
Guru. पश्यन्ति भूत्या राजानत. 
दर्शयते सल्यान राजानं or दर्शयते भूत्यैः The servants see the king. He makes the servants see the king 
KARTRI. स्वतन्त्रः कर्ता पदानि स्वतन्त्रः को। (का) त्तिः ॥ क्रिया प्रसिद्धौ स्वातल्येण विवश्यते तत्कारकं पातु संकं भवति ॥ 
54. Whatever the speaker chooses as the independent, principal and absolute source of action is called karta or agent. 
The agent is absolute and unconditioned, as a wafa Devadatta cooks. eutel tof the pot cooks. 
RE - GOV. 
GOVERNMENT 
OY OF CULTUR 
18ASININ 
ENT OF INDIA 
कृति मंत्रालय 
1922 
NIPATA DEFINED 
[BE. I. CH. IV. $ 15-51 
तत् प्रयोजको हेतुश्च ॥ ५५ ॥ पदानि ॥ तत्, प्रयोजकः, हेतुः, च, (FTO Fara: TI) 11 
वृत्तिः ॥ स्वतन्त्रस्य प्रयोजको योऽर्थः तत्कारक हेतुसंच भवति चकारात् कर्तृ संतं च ॥ 
55. That which is the mover thereof, i. e., of the inde. pendent source of action, is called Hetu or cause, as well as kartå or agent, 
Thus strefa he causes to be made, trufa he causes to be taken. When hetu is employed as agent the verb is put in the causative form (III. 1. 26). 
The force of the word is to give both names to the mover of an agent, viz., Hetu and kartâ ; otherwise by sûtra 1 of this Chapter only one name would have been given. 
Nipâta. 
THE PARTICLES. anittarctfurat: nyen açtfort, deata, farurat: 11 afers fara yfa wufa siasataaffare eagate: fruta u पेदितव्याः ॥ 
56. From this point forward upto the aphorism Adhiri. švare (I 4. 97), all that we shall say is to be understood to have the name of Nipâta or Particles. 
The word sun of this sûtra serves the same purpose as the word cha of the last ; namely, it makes the words Gati, upasarga and karmapra vachniya take two names, i.c., their one name as well as the name Nipâta. The letter in s torita is to remove doubt, i.e., aphorism I. 4.97 should be taken as limit and not sutra III. 4. 13 which has the word iswari also. 
gut seca u yg l uçtf - STC: seca, (fruar) पुत्तिः ॥ चादयो निपावसंता भवन्ति न घेत्यस्वे वर्चन्ते ॥ 
57. The word cha' and, &c., are called Nipata or Par ticles, when they do not signify substances. 
The following are partioles (nipata) and 'or a n expletivo VTT vocative particle'a 'onlyexactly.' T so thus,' 17 'certainly,' 
una continually,' gu'at once, TT repeatedly,' T 'excel lently,' graabundantly,' a 'if' if, [the n is indicatoryl, whero, there,' a 'what if ?,' no,' a'ah,'! fere [ 1] orfurt do not,' un'indeed !'do not,'s not,' utara as much as," are so much,' ed a 'perhaps, disrespectful interjection) ter 
URE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY OS 
NT OF INDIA 
BK.I. CH. IV. 8 58.] 
PREPOSITIONS DEFINED. 
193 
EUTET (interj.) oblation to the gods,' ETET ‘oblation to the nanes,' forefathers 
9€ oblation to the gods,' sa (mystical ejaculation typical of the three great deities of the Hindu mythology), TT thouing,' auf 'thus, introduc ing an exposition, (9' certaihly,' for 'indeed,' sste 'now' auspicious inceptive), JE 'excellent,' ** (attached to the present tense gives it a past signification), T'fie' TU a sit. The vowels a, a, i, i, u, ll, e, ai; o, au, when, as interjections, they indicate various emotions, differ from the ordinary vowels. 
ut, vu, darote, TETETT, TUT. TT, aa, fal, git, T, (TEC), fra, FIUT, TT, (TT), TTE, CIC, UTËT, varit, tr, t7, atr, (ait), sir, 70, 70, fut, fu, fe , J, xfa, Ta, TT, TT, TT, TT, TT, TT, TT, F , ) TINE, GFE, ( 97 ), 
, , TI, TATT, Tac, T, UT, IT, HET, 1GT, OT, PT, T, C, 191. gat, 49, A, T, TT,, (), saftfaac, 71, T, U, FUNT, TY, 6, TV, (HUT), 79 , 37, E, ATTE, (TE). , ?, UTE, (TE), FT, TT, TT 94, t, ut, fa, faz, a. 
To the list of indeclinables belong also what have, without the reality, the appearance of an upasarga (No.59), of a word with one of the termina tions of case or persons and of the vowels. In the example act avadat tam given away,' the sta is not really an upasarga, for if it were, the word (by VII. 4. 47) would be tayt avattam. In the example ahanyuh say: 
egotistic,' the ahan is not identical wi h the aham 'I,' terminating in a case affix--because a pronoun, really regarded as being in the nominative caso, could not be the first member, in such a compound. In the example saferatat astikshîrâ, a cow or the like 'in which there is milk,' the asti stret must be regarded as differing from the word asti, is,' which ends with the affix of the third person singular, otherwise it could not have appeared as the first member in a compound. 
UTC:n ya uagtfor n 4-ACT:, (farurat tara) fe: Agar sara firataiat Wafra u 
58. The words pra &c, are called Nipata when not signifying substances. 
The following is the list of stea: or prepositions:' , , , , , w, fax, go, fa, e, f, g, sf, afa , , , Trafa, aft, 
The making of this a distinct aphorism, when it could well have been included in the last, is for the sake of giving the Pra &c., words two names, namely, those of Nipâ tas, as well as upasargas under certain circumstances, 2. e., when they are in composition with verbs. Not so however the cha &c., words. They never get the designation of upasargas. 
When these words signifying substances they are not Nip&tas. As a afa au the excellent army conquers. Here the word uit is not a Nipata. 
REGOVS 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
ERNMENT OF 
OF INDIA 
UPASARGA AND GATI 
(BK. I. CH. IV. 8 59-60. 
Tati: fakuatan yer usta u Tur:, fakatuta (HTC:) 
at tag: faut frå vara in 
আমি অন্য যায়নি জঘন্য । watu EFOTT TENTTI 
59. The words pra &C., get the designation of upasarga or prepositions, when in composition with a verb. 
As to fasta. Here the dental 7 is changed into cerebral 7, because of the = getting the designation of upasarga (See sâtra VIII. 4. 14). Similarly Tirata, iai, TTTTET. 
Why do we say when in composition with a verb? When in compo sition with a noun they are not called upasargas. As corat SEATG CUTT 
aus a country destitute of a leader. Here is not changed into 7. Thus while sama: means' a leader the term atuh means destitute of a leader; though both have the same radical elements :--pra in one is an upawarga, in the other a Nipata pure and simple. 
Vart:--The word should be included in the list of upasargas. As i s given by Marut. +7+ 45+ (VII. 4. 47.5 Here Marut being treated as an upasarga, though it does not end with a vowel, the ft is replaced by a by rule VII. 4. 47 which declares 'a the substitute of T which is called ghu when it is preceded by an upasarga that ends in a vowel, and is followed by an affix beginning with which has an indicatory k.' 
It might be objected, that as tad does not end with a vowel, sâtra VII. 4. 47 does not apply. To this we say that otherwise the giving the designation of upasarga to ma is superfluous; and in order that this should not be so, the fact of its not ending with a vowel, is overl voked. 
Var: The particle we should be included in the list of upasargas. Thus +9+ =SET (III. 3. 106). Here because wais treated as an 
pasarga, that sutra III. 3. 106 is made applicable. 
was on for at afai, T, (ucu: forurata) খালিঃ ॥ নিয়ন্ধোয় গান্ধা ফন্নি জিয়ার্কাতী ৪৮ af et To 
und get per fare trufe TT 
60. The words pra &c., are called also Gati, when in composition with a verb. URE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
ENT OF INDIA 
2 1 CH. IV. 8 61.] 
GATI. 
• 
1950 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
? 
KRI 
As 1964, Now he gerund of the simple root I would have been meat. but as it is compounded with a gati word (II. 2. 18) the cat is replaced by van see II. 2. 18 and VII. 1 37. #+*+ =unen (VI. 1. 71). Here pra being called gati we have compounding by rule II. 2. 18; and then we apply VII. 1. 37. Similarly was. Here pra being a gati word retains its own accent by rule VI. 2. 49.' a gati retains in a compound its own accent when it immediately precedes a second member that ends in kta, provided the latter denotes the object of the action which is expressed by the root to wbich kta is added.' 
Similarly marfa, here pra being treated as gati gets annudatta accent by rule VIII. 2. 71, 
The yoga-vibhaga or the separation of one aphorism into two, is for the sake of the subsequent aphorisms. The annuvritti of gati only runs through the latter sûtras and not of upasarga. So that while pra &c., have two names upasarga and gati ; uri &c., have only one name, namely, gati. 
Thus in antay and surface, by treating the words and ufer as upa sargas we change the 7 and # into and by rule VIII. 4. 14 and VIII. 3.87; and again treating them as gati we regulate the accent. 
Vart.-The words atitit should be included in the list of Gati. As (1) TTT (2) #iftatuas (3) ETICHT Erfa. In the first by taking it as gati we have samasa (II. 2. 18) and re (VII. 1. 37) The other two cases illustrate accent. 
Vart:-The words yat and are treated as Gati in the Vedas. As gtatandarhr 20. Here the word got being gati, causes ega to take annu dâtta accent (VIII. 1. 70) vârfcas. Here also the accent is regulated by VIII. 2. 71. 
mift feast kaup 11 uçtfa il l-ati fsa-ETT, T, (Fararh Tù fa:) 1 
afa: a waita Teat: 78q+at stasaray manera facut wafuan 
61. The words uri, assent, &c., and those that end with chvi(V. 4.50), and those that end with dâch (V. 4. 57), (when in composition with the verb bhû, kri or as) are called Gati. 
The affixes chvi and dâch are ordained when the verb in composition is either , orya (V. 4. 50 and 57) dri &c., being read along with chvi and dach, shows that the verb in composition with them must also be any one of the above three verbs, and none else; in order to entitle to the name of gati. 
GURE 
GOVE 
VERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
T OF INDIA 
बमयजयजा 
GATI. 
[BK. I. CH. IV.868-680 
जय . 
The words जरी and उररी mean to assent and spread. As जरीकृत्य (II.2. 18 and VII. 1.37) जरीकृतम् (VI. 2. 49), पदरीकरोति (VIII. 2.71). So with the word utt. The following is a list of these words : 
पापी. 
धूसी. 
भ्रंशकला. 
फली. 
शकला. 
गुलुगुधा. 
ताली. 
आताली. 
विली. प्राली. 
संशकला. 
पैताली. 
ध्वंसकला. 
The words ending in chvi are also gati. As guitare having made white what was not white. 
So also words ending in डाच् as पटपटाकृत्य having made the sound pat. 
अनकरणं चानिति परम् ॥६२॥ पदानि ॥ अनुकरणम्, च; अनिति-परम् , (क्रियायोगे गतिः)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ अनुकरणमनिति परन् क्रियायोगे गविसं भवति । 
62. A word imitative of sounds is also called Gati, when it is not followed by the word iti. 
The phrase अनितिपरस् is a Bahuvrihi compound; अन्-इति-परम् = that which has not the word gfa after it 
As खाकृत्य having made the sound khat. खाट्कृतम् (VI. 2. 49), यतखाट करोति (VIII. 2.71). 
Why do we say when it has not the word far after it?' Observe खाहितिष्कृत्वा निरष्ठीवत्. 
सादरानादरयोः सदसती ॥६३ ॥ पदानि ॥ नादर-अनादयोः, सद्-असती, (क्रियायोगे गतिः)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ जादरा नादरया यथाक्रमं सदसच्छब्दो गतिसंज्ञो भवतः ॥ 
63. The words sat and asat when in composition with a verb are called gati, when used in the sense of respect or love,' and disrespect or indifference. 
AS सत्कृत्य having-honored (II.2.18 and VIL 1.37) शसत्कृल्श, सत्त र or शतकृतम् (VI. 2.49) बत् सत् करोति or बयस परोति (VIIL 2.71). 
GURE 
GOVO 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
BHI CH. IV.864-66.] 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
GATI. 
197 
Why do we say when ineaning 're-pect or disrespect'? Observe सत्कृत्वा काण्डं गतः . 
भूषणेऽलम् ॥ ६४ ॥ पदानि ॥ भूषणे , मलम् , (क्रि० गतिः)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ भूषशे यो ऽलम शब्दः स गतिसंबो भवति ॥ 
64. The word alam when in composition with a verb is called gati, when used in the sense of 'ornament.' 
The word so is an indeclinable and has four meanings :- prohibi tion, competent, enough and ornament.' The term is gati when it means ornamento As अलंकृत्य (II. 2.18, VII. 1.37); अलंकृतं (VI.2.49) यदलं करोति (VIII. 2.71) when it does not mean ornament we have प्रल yarat yufa he goes having eaten enough. 
अन्तरपरिग्रहे ॥६५॥ पदानि ॥ अन्तर-परि-ग्रहे, (क्रि०, गतिः॥ वतिः ॥ अन्तः शब्दोउपरिग्रहे उगतिसंबो भवति ॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ अन्त: शब्दस्या विविधि णत्वेषपसर्गसंज्ञावक्तव्या ॥ 
65. The word antar is called gati, when used in the sense of non-accepting,' in composition with a verb. 
The word gitas means 'taking' or 'accepting,' uftus means there fore the opposite of this namely rejecting,' abandoning. As acau Teta: he went away having abandoned home ; अन्तर्हतमन्तम falsehood being aban doned. 'बदन्त ईन्ति. 
Why do we say when meaning to abandon? Observe अन्तईत्वा af varta: the hawk went away taking hold of the mouse. 
Vart.-The word wat is treated as an upsarga for the purpose of the application of the following rules ; III. 3. 106 by which is added 3 rule III. 3.92 by which कि is added ; the rule VIII. 4. 14 by which a is changed in to . As अन्तर्द्धा, अन्तर्डि: and अन्तर्णयति, 
कणेमनसी श्रद्धामतीघाते ॥६६॥ पदानि ॥ कणे-मनसी, श्रद्धा प्रती-घाते, (गतिः)॥ 
त्तिः ॥ कणेशब्दो ननस्शब्दश्च श्रद्धा प्रतीपाते गतिसंज्ञो भवतः ॥ 
66. The words kane and manas are gati when in com position with a verb and used in the sense of reaction by satiation.' 
ORE GOV. 
VERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
. MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
GATI. 
Bk. I. CH. IV.S 36-38. 
The word - Tura means satisfaction of desire." As ocaat qui fuafa he drinks milk to his heart's content or till he is satisfied ? So also rezu : frafa. That is to say, he drinks so much till his desire ( T ) is satisfied by revulsion of feeling. When not having this sense wo have or Tea: he went away satisfied 
git sau 1169 OTT II GT:, , ( fa:) 1 afere u sfanegare gt: TueT56aT wiatt veta u 
67. The word purah in front of, when indeclinable, and in composition with a verb, is called gati. 
The pronoun afront' with the affix se forms yter, and by I. 1.38 it becomes an Avyaya. (See V. 3. 39 pur being snbstituted for púrva). The object by making it gati is threefold (1) compounding by II. 2. 18 (2) accent by VI. 2. 49 (3) to change the: h into y by VIII. 3. 40. As geeget, yregar and a gcertifa, when not an indeclinable we have T', gtt, gt: greeT HTTÉT. 
ng 11 || GTGT I ST, 7, ( đá: SC ) 11 sfera u s urat creatset gratuit la sfarsit wafa 
68. And the indeclinable word astam'at home,' is called gati, when in composition with a verb. 
The word wat is an indeclinable as it ends in (1, 1. 39); and means 'not visible.' As Se Tea faar gara the sun having set, rises again wirerfor entfor riches that have vanished. Titofa, when not ap indeclinable it is not gati as SITE the arrow has been thrown. 
Tracy una llar 1199, fa-y-acy, (ta: 6 ) 
oferte retsetunforeari da, eta urge at a faith wafan 
69. The indeclinable word achchha, meaning before in the presence of,' is called gati, when used in composition with verbs denoting motion or with the verb vad' to speak. 
The word is an indeclinable and has the force of the word s far. As হয়, জ্ঞান, and যজঅহমি. So also সন্ত্রায় ভিট্রাল and যৰ সড় 
a when not an Avyaya, we have a fe. 
et suei 11 90 lugtfr 97, , (fa:) u वृत्तिः ॥ माया गावदी गुपदेशे गतिसंशे भवति ।। 
VRE - GOVE 
VERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
XT OF INDIA 
SP 1. ČA. IV. 70-73.] 
GATI. 
198 
त सरकार 
70. The word adas' that' is calledigati when in com. position with a verb and not implying a direction to another. 
The word upadesa means a direction to another. When a person cogitates within himself and does not address another, that is anupadesa. That is when it is not a demonstrative pronoun. As अदः कृत्य, अदः कृतए and बददः करोति when used as a demonstrative pronoun we have अदः कृत्वा कारं गता 
तिरो ऽन्तरौ ॥ ११॥ पदानि ॥ तिरः, अन्त , (गतिः) पृत्तिः ॥ अन्तर्व्यिवधानस , तत्रतिरः शब्दो गतिसंज्ञो भवति । 
71. The word tiras when used in the sense of disappeare ance,' is called gati when in composition with a verb. 
As तिरोभूय, तिरोभूतन and यत् तिरोभवति why do we say when meaning disappearance? Observe faat yatfeua: i.e., standing apart. 
विभाषाकृजि ॥ ७२ ॥ पदानि ॥ विभाषा, कृजि, (गतिः अन्तद्वैर) ॥ पृत्तिः ॥ तिरः यदा करीवी परतो विभाषा गतिसंज्ञो भवति ॥ 
72. The word tiras meaning disappearance' is optionally called gati, when the verb kri follows. 
This is an example of ate-fat. As fat: pea or face eu (VIII. 3. 42): fats near or face car (VIII. 3. 42). The change of visarga into is optional VIII. 3. 42. When not meaning disappearance we have fact कृत्वा काष्ठ तिष्ठति he stands having laid aside the stick, 
उपाजेन्वाजे ॥ ७३ ॥ पदानि ॥ उपाजे-धन्वाजे, (विभाषा कृषि गतिः )॥ 
पतिः॥ उपाजेऽन्याजेशन्दी विभक्ति प्रतिकपको निपाती दुर्बलस्य शानापाणे वार्तते दी कृषि विभाषा गतिसंही भवतः 
78. The words upaje and anvaje both meaning-support ing or assisting the weak,' are optionally called gati when used along with the verb kri. 
AS उपाजे कृत्य or उपाजे कृत्वा having given support, बाजे कृत्य or अनुबाजे कृत्वा 
साक्षात्मभूतीनिच ॥४॥ पदानि ॥ साक्षात, समृतीनि, च, (गतिः विभाषा कृजि)। 
पुतिः ॥ शाशास्त्रभृतीनि शब्दरूपाणि कृषि विभाषा गतिसंज्ञानि भवन्ति । पार्तिवाच ॥ साधारयतिणु ज्व्यर्थ बचना ।। 
TURE 
GOVO 
GOVERNMENT 
o OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
GATI. 
BE I. CH. IV.87AVM 
• संस्कृति मा 
समाजय भारत 
रित सरकार 
74. The words sâkshat, 'in the presence of' &c., are optionally called gati, when used along with the verb kri. 
Vart:-In the words state &c. the force of the affix fee is understood, namely making a thing what it was not before, As साक्षात् कृत्य or कृत्वा fraterea facut green making evident what was concealed before. 
अनत्याधान उरसिमनसी ॥ ७५॥ पदानि ॥ मनत्याधान, उरसि मनसी, (विभाषा कृजि गतिः)॥ 
वृत्तिः॥ अनत्याधान मुपश्लेषणं तदभावे ऽनत्याधाने उरसिमनसी शन्दौ विभाषा कृत्रि विसंधौ भवतः॥ 
175. The word urasi, 'in the breast,' and manasi 'in the mind' are optionally gati when the verb kri follows, provided 
that they are not used in the sense of placing.' 
As रसिकृत्य or उरसिकृत्वा मनसिकृत्य or ममासिकृत्या. When it has the Bense of placing we have उरसिकृत्वा पाणिं शेते he lies down having clasped thorthand on the breast, मनसिकृत्वा वचनं ध्यायति he ponders having placed the word in his mind. 
मध्ये पदे निवचने च ॥ ७६ ॥ पदानि ॥ मध्ये पदे, निवचने, च, (विभाषा कृजि गतिः अनत्याधाने)। 
वृत्तिः ॥ मध्ये पदे निषचने इत्येते शब्दा, अनत्याघाने विनाषा कृजि गतिसंक्षा भवन्ति । 
76. And the words madhye 'in the middle,' pade in the foot' and nivachane 'speechless' are optionally gati, when kri follows, the sense not being of 'placing.' 
Aध्ये त्य or कृत्या. पदे कृत्य or कृत्वा ; निवचने कृत्य or कृत्या. 
But when it has the meaning of placing we have them qe near fute aa he lies down having put his head under the foot of the elephant. 
नित्यं हस्ते पाणावुपयमने ॥ 9 ॥ पदानि ॥ नित्यम् , हस्ते-पाणी उपयमने (गतिः कजि)॥ 
पृत्तिः॥ हस्ते पाणी इत्येती शब्दो कृषि नित्यं गतिसंती भवत उपयभने । 
77. The word haste 'in the hand,' panau' in the hand are always and necessarily called gati when used with the verbkri in the sense of "marriage.' 
A. पाणी कृत्व or हस्ते कृत्य having married. But इस्ते कृत्वा कापणं गतः he went out having taken in his hand akarshapana (a coin), 
RURE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
CRY OF CULTU 
HOUSINIV 
ENT OF INDIA 
. 
ETICE. IV.578-81.] 
GATI. 
4.भारतस 
प्राध्वं बन्धने ॥ ८ ॥ पदानि ॥ माध्वम्, बन्धने, (गतिः कृमि नित्यम्)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ माध्यमिति मकारान्तमव्ययमानुकूल्ये धर्तते, तदानुकूल्यं बन्धनहेतुकं यदा भवति सदामाध्वंशब्द: कृजि नित्यं गविसंतो भवति । 
78. The indeclinable word prâdhvam followed by the verb kri, is always called gati when used in the sense of binding.' 
The word tray ends in and means 'favourably suitably.' When however it means bound ' it is a gati: as, प्राध्वंकृत्य having bound. But when not meaning to bind, we have:-प्राध्वं कृत्वा शकटं गतः having made the carriage agreeable, he is gone. 
जीविकोपनिषदावीपम्ये ॥ ७ ॥ पदानि ॥ जीविका-उपनिषदौ, सौपम्ये, (गतिः कृजि) ॥ 
धृत्तिः ॥ जीविका उपनिषदित्येती शब्दो औपन्ये विषये कृषि गतिसंज्ञी भवतः । 
79. The words Jivikà and upanishad followed by the verb kri are called gati when used in the sense of likeness or resem blance.” 
AS जीविकाकृत्य having made it as if it was a means of living; उपनिषत् कृत्य-having made it like an upanishad. But जीविका कृत्वा गतः having made his livelihood he is gone. 
ते प्राग्धातोः ॥८० ॥ पदानि ॥ ते, प्राग , धातोः, (गतिः उपसर्गः)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ ते गत्युपसर्गसंज्ञकाः धातोः प्राक् प्रयोक्तव्याः॥ 
80. The particles called gati and upasarga are to be eme ployed beforo the verbal root: (that is to say, they are prea fixes). 
The word a has been employed to include the term ef also. The preceding examples all illustrate the application of this rule. 
छन्दसि परेपि ॥ ८॥ पदानि ॥ छन्दसि, परे, अपि, (गति: उपसर्ग प्रा०) 
वृति छन्दसि विषये गत्युपसर्ग संवका; परेऽपि पूर्वेपि प्रयोक्तव्याः ॥ 
81. In the chhandas (veda) these gati and upasarga aro employed indifferently after the verbalroot as wellas before it. 
As.-बायविन्द्वय सुन्धत जायातमुपनिष्कृतम् ॥ माशिवत्था धिया भरा (Rig.I.2.6), 
TURE - GO 
GOVERNME 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY ON 
ENT OF INDIA 
सत्व संगति 
KARMAPRATACEANIYA. 
[Br. I. Ch. IV. 82-8. 
ETT 
In this we have stras instead of straat 'vayu and thou Indra, ya horoes, come ye both quickly to the soma of the worshipper by this sincere prayer.' 
afcarka 1411 ahau wafgat:, , (TTO f) afe u stafara regTaTET! Trafeguaza w - 82. In the chhandas (veda) these gati and upasarga are also seen separated from the verb by intervening words. - 
As:-- 4g Th Gar y saficat a rear ar gyfrafe (Rig. I. 2. 4). "Indra and vậyu, here are somna---hubations for you. Approach, ye with pleasures for us. For the libations are desiring you." Here is separated from the word aa by the intervening word raft:. 
KARMA PRAVACHANIYA. कर्मप्रवचनीयाः॥ ३ ॥ पदानि । कर्मप्रवचनीयाः ॥ fe n arhia og EUTT: m uita con arqaout: a 
83. From this point as far as aphorism I. 1. 97 the parti cles treated of, are to be understood as having the name of karma-pravachaniya 
These particles govern a substantive and qualify a verb and differ from other particles termed upasarga and gati. As ter waar well praised by you. I fanaat you have sprinkled. Here is a karma pravachaniya and qualifies the sense of the verb, i. e. it is an adverb. It is not an upa barga, for bad it been so, it would have changed the Tinto (VIII.3.65). The term karma pravachaniya is a big term compared with other technical terms such as, fe, fo, y &c., which generally do not exceed more than two ayllables. The word karmapravachaniya is not however merely a techni cal term; it contains within itself a definition of itself. It means that which qualities or speaks about (@rmara) an action ( ) is so called. 
av ny u OCTA n , (Finanatat:) it वृत्तिः ॥ अगदी लक्षणे होत्ये कर्मप्रवचनीयसतो भवति 
84. The word anu when it denotes a sign, is called karma-pravachaniya. 
The word lakshana means a sign; an attendant circumstance an invaria able concomitant or accident in its logical sense and not merely an occa Bional concurrence. The force of us in this case is that of after,' in con sequence of, because of, or being indicated by.' As 
it rained 
TURE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
Y OF CULTUR 
TS 
OF INDIA 
. $ 85-86). 
KARMAPRVAOHANIYA. 
2013 
A 
472 
after or in consequence of the muttering of prayers. To put it in other words, anu is a karmapra vachnîya when it governs the word which indi cates the cause or the attendant circumstance of an action. 
So also crnaFT farnu trada= nen gaafi&faragfase a: aada. The God (clouds) rained having listened to the well performed reading, by Såkalya. The force of a karma pravachaniya, therefore, when fully ang lysed will be found to be that of an upasarga whose verb is not expressed in the sentence but is understood ; and because of its being so understood, the particle itself seems to govern the noun which in fact was governed by the unexpressed verb. Thus in the above example fear is in the accusa tive case, apparently governed by the preposition wu, but really governed by the verb first understood. 
So also 5 Tuwafava. The Taurus sprikled water after the sacrifice, precumafeve was the people began sprinkling water after the rising of the canopus. 
Why make unnecessarily this sů tra, when ty would have been called karma pravachanîya even by force of sutra 90 following, where also the word lakshana occurs? This is for the sake of indicating that the karma pravachanîyas should always govern the accusative case (II. 3. 8) even in expressing to (II. 3. 23). Otherwise Rule 23rd of the third chapter of Book II would have set aside Rule 8 of the same by the maxim of te 1. 3.2: and would have caused a karana pravachaniya to govern an Instrumental case where the sense was that of hetu. 
zature u cy n ugfar il aat-T, (: ***) वृत्तिः ॥ अनुशन्द स्तृतीया मोत्ये कवचनीयसंक्षो भवति ॥ 
85. The word anu is karma-pravachaniya when it has the force of the third case. 
The meaning of sy in this case will be that of with' or along with. As नदीमनु अवसिता सेना the army lying along side the river. पर्वतमनुशासिता 
1 lying along the slopes of the mountain. 
A len utro u gra, (+: #00) II वृत्तिः ॥ हीने झोत्येऽयमनुः कर्म प्रवचनीय संज्ञो भवति ॥ 
86. The word anu is karma-pravachaniya when it is used in the sense of inferior or subordinate to. 
The word of means inferior,' and being a comparative term requires the other term with which comparison is made and which is superior ; to complete the sense. In other words su governs the person to which others are inferior, in the accusative case. As T RETTIGHT: 'all grammeri ans are inferior to Sakatâyana.' 
URE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRI 
TOF INDIA 
सत्यदाय 
•संस्कृति मना 
KARMAPRAVACHANIYA. 
[Br. I. CH. IV. 8 8790. 
रत सरकार 
उपोधिके च ॥9॥ उप, अधिके, च, (हीने कर्म प्र०)॥ उत्तिः ॥ उपशक्षा अधिक हीनेच दोत्ये कर्मप्रवचनीयसंबो भवति॥ 
87. The word upa when it means superior' or 'inferior to' is karma-pravachaniya. 
That is when the sense is that of 'over, above,' or 'inferior as y खाद्रोण: a Drona is above a khari. उप निडके कार्षापण: akarshapana is more than a Nishka. In this sense y governs the Locative of the thing which is inferior (II. 3.9). So also उप शाकटायनं वैवाकरणा:"all grammari ans are inferior to Sakatâyana.' In this sense se governs the accusative caso.' 
अप परी वर्जने ॥८८ ॥ अप-परी, वर्जने, (कर्मप्र)। पित्तः ॥ अथ परी शब्दी वर्जनेदोत्ये कर्मप्रवचनीयतंची मक्तः ॥ 
88. The words apa and pari are karma-pravachantya when meaning "exclusion.' 
The force of svand oft is in this case that of with the exception of.' As arestat qür a: it rained outside of or with the exception of Trigarta. So also oft fara var geraas. In this sense they govern the noun excluded in the ablative case (II. 3. 10). When not having these senses, they are not karma-pravachanîya. As iet uffagfa. He waters the rice. Here it is an upasarga, and hence changes the स into प. 
श्राङ् मर्यादा वचने ॥ ॥ पदानि ॥ माङ, मर्यादा-वचः, (कर्मप्र०)॥ 
बत्तिः ॥ आज इत्येषमन्दः मर्यादावचने कर्मप्रवचनीयसो भवति ॥ 
89. The word ar as far as, is karma-pravachanîya when it expresses limit (e. g. when it means as far as inclusive of or, as far as exclusive of.') 
The word in the text shows that both sorts of limits are here meant. As the Fagare Tiaa: it rained as far as (but excluding) Pataliputra श्रापाटलिपुत्रं वष्टो देव: it rained as far as (including) Pataliputra चाकुभारं यः पाणिनेः मासांकाश्यात, अमयुरायाः when it means little ' or is a verbal prefix it does not get this name. 
लक्षणोत्थम्भूताख्यानभागवीसासुमति पर्यनवः ॥ ९॥ पदानि । लक्षण-इत्थभूताख्यान-भाग-वीसासु, प्रति-परि-अनवः, (कर्मप्र०)। 
त्तिः । सो हत्यंभूताख्याने भागे बीपसायां विषयञ्चवायां प्रति परि झनु इत्येते मार्चमवचनीयसंचा भवन्ति ।। c 
. GOVED 
CULTURE 
NT OF INDIA 
B 
1. CH. IV S 91-92.]. 
KARMAPRAVACHANIYA. 
205 
कृति मंत्रा 
7777 
90. The words prati, pari and anu are karma pravach aniya when used in the sense of sign in the direction of) mere statement of circumstance' (as regards') division share of' and pervasion' severally. 
As (1) qe afa-oft or sy faataa faqa' the lightening is flashing in the direction of the tree.' (2) gygacat at afa-fagy Devadatta is a good man as regards his mother.' (3) Afa FEITE the poison fell to the share of Hara.' 16#*i fa curt that it may fall to my share. So with afc and sig. (4) Ceafa fagfa he sprinkles one tree after an. other. So with ft and sy. 
SHTETÀ It op or açila u safi, wt (wat - wareute ) 
af: atfesa a traffasura: tut walau 
91. The word abhi is karma-pravachaniya, in the above senses of in the direction of,' as regards, and each severally' but not when it means division, 'share of, 
The illustrations given under the last sûtra mutus mutandi apply here also, with the exception of those given under head (4). As auf fagitaa; maaft &c. But it is not karma-pravachaniya when it is meant. 47T means the share which is allotted to one as his own. As 
warfar GTE UE eraard give that which falls here to my share. Here abhi is an upasarga, and therefore of Ez is changed into . 
प्रतिः प्रतिनिधि प्रतिदानयोः ॥ १२ ॥ पदानि ॥ प्रतिः, प्रतिः fafu-ufacttat, ( 10) 
प्रतिः ॥ प्रतिनिधिविषये मातिदाने विषये च प्रतिः कर्मप्रवचनीयसो भवति ॥ 
92. The word prati is karma-pravachaniya when used in the sense of representative (representative of') or exchange ('in exchange for.') 
That which is like to the principal is called staforte. Giving in return for what is obtained, is a facta. As safety ra: ufa Abhi-manyu is the representative of Arjuna. Te fara su: afaqsafa he exchanges Mâshas for these sesamum. In these senses prati governs the Ablative (II. 3. 11.) 
sfauit sunt 1 ogni aerft u sferuat, sunt, (***) 
aferen for et suet wint matracenfeat winter we 
URE • GOV 
COVERNMENT 
ay OF CULTURA 
NT OF INDIA 
• 
सत्यमेव जयते 
fo 
154. 
17 7777 
206 
KARMAPRAVACHANIYA. 
[BB. I. CH 1V. 3 93-96. 
93. The words adhi and pari are karma-pravachaniya when used as mere expletives. 
As gārstafa whence has he come? or ga: Tuffa. These words though mere surplusages, have been called karmapravachanîya so that they may not get the designation of upasarga or gati and thus produce results peculiar to those words. 
: T UT 11 8 11 og fant U: , TOUTH, (*490) আমিঃ ॥ দ্য ছিঃ ঘ্রাব্দী জলসঅঘলীয়া ময়নি। 
94. The word su is karma-pravachaniya in the sense of respect, (when it means 'excellently'). 
As sfermare, sera aar excellently sprinkled by your honor. Well praised by your honor. By not being an upasarga, it does not change the 
into (VIII. 3. 65). 
Why do we say when respect is meant? Observe gref TH has this your place been well sprinkled to-day. 
sfatfak my lastfall afa:, fall,, (ROTATE) 
fer fa Tres surfama ATT UTTRY myfturit vefat n 
95. The word ati in the sense of super-abundance ('excessively) and excellently' is karma pravachaniya, 
The word safat means to do more than what is necessary for the accomplishment of an object. The force of in the aphorism is to draw in the word geture from the last. As sufafar a . It has abundantly been sprinkled by your honor, अतिस्तुतमिव भवता so also शतिस्तुतं भवता excellently praised by your honor, sfa fenaar. 
fa: Tor tureringfagsvag 11 de UETET I sfas, 7-**72-stari--stay (*) 
पत्तिापदायें संभावने उन्बवसर्ग गर्दायां ससुच्चये च वर्वमानः अपिः कर्मप्रवचनीयसंधी 
96. The word api is karma-pravachaniya, when it implies, the sense of word understood somewhat') or possibility (e. g., even in the sense of such a great person), or permission to do as one likes, if you like'), or censure (even in the sense of what is disgraceful); or collection (and'). 
ORE .GOV 
COVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
TANISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
*BK. I. CH. IV.S 97-98.] 
KARMAPRAVAOHANIYA. 
207 
4.79 
The word word means the sense of another word which is not expressed but has to be supplied. As affars fe fata there may be perhaps & drop of ghee TSTY FOTE. Here some word like vindu'a drop,' stoka a little matra, a measure &c., has to be understood. The word gaan means pos sibility, a supposition. As, swf fac pe viat possibly may sprin kle a thousand trees in one moment; af FTSTE Toi he may praise pos sibly, a king. In the above cases it is used with the potential mood. S ET means indifference on the part of the speaker where he permits another to do as he likes. It is used with the Imperative mood. As ir tie you may sprinkle if you like. af cafe you may praise if you like. The word TET means censure, contempt or reproof. As forte agafa fa TATTET. The word suu means cumulative. As we wi-fufas praige as well as sprinkle. 
In all the above instances, the word not being an upasarga, does not change the into T. 
suferitzat i ng lugtfall saft:, facere I (HHO) 11 
Tas 
TTT: Cam T 
utar 1 ach Eureuf 
ou 
tiga wafa 
97. The word adhi is karma pravachaniya when used in the sense of lord" ( being as a lord” or “having as a lord"). 
The word dat means master,' and it therefore requires another cor relative word denoting property of which one is master. The word adhi governs a Locative case. Sometimes locative of the person possessing, sometide locative of the property possessed: as sqfU U TTS or the virag ut al. Brahmadatta rules over Panchalas. 
fattar of 11 e il gefa ni farurat, f 
o sfat) 
of u afus erat faut inquit afa o 
98. The word adhi is optionally karma pravachaniya when the verb kri follows. 
Ag afy #freyfa. Here the word afy may be treated either as ara or a tu. When it is a fa the accent will be regulated by 
S. VIII. 1. 71, otherwise not. 
URE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
नियम 
PARASMAIPADA AND ATMANEPADA. 
[BK. I. CH. IV. & 99-100. 
LCOरका 
लः परस्मैपदम् ॥ 
॥ पदानि ॥ लः, परस्मैपदम् ॥ 
पतिः ॥ लादेशाः घरस्नैपदसंबा भवन्ति । 
99. The substitutes of u are called parasmaipada. 
The word ल: is in the genitive case, and means of ल.' The word शादेश substitutes' must be supplied to complete the sense. The term is a generic word for verb in general, viz., लद् , लि, लु, लु, लेट् , लोट् , लज, fag, 79,75. The substitutes of at are the well known personal termina tions by which the verbs are conjugated in those tenses. Namely the following 
PARASMAIPADA. 
Sing. 
Dual. 
Plural. 
भस् 
1st Pers. f 2nd Pers. सिप 3rd Pers. तिप् 
थ स् 
And the affixes up and a9 (III. 2. 107, and 124, and III. 4. 78). 
तङानावात्मनेपदम् ॥१०० ॥ पदानि ॥ तङ्-मानौ भात्मनेपदम्, 
वत्तिः ॥ पूर्वेण परस्मै पद संज्ञायां प्राप्तायां तहानयारात्मनेपदसंज्ञा विधीयते ॥ 
100. The nine affixes comprised under the Pratyahara tan and the two ending in any (Sân ch and Kânach', which are substitutes of are called Atmanepada. 
The following are the Atmanepada affixes: 
Dual 
Plural, 
Sing. ist इटू 2nd थास् 
वहि 
महिक 
शायाम् 
Brda 
माताम् 
And the affixes भाव and ज्ञान (III. 2.106), 
URE 
GOVE 
GOVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY ON 
NT OF INDIA 
BE. I. CH. IV. $101-103] 
PERSON DEFIN ED. 
209 
तिङस्त्रीणि त्रीणि प्रथम मध्यनोत्तमाः ॥ १०१ ॥ पदानि ॥ तिङः, त्रीणि, त्रीणि, प्रथम, मध्यम, उत्तमाः ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ तिङोऽष्टादश प्रत्यया: नव परस्मैपद संखकाः नवात्मनेपदसंबकाः तत्रपरस्मैपदेव चयस्त्रिकाः यथाक्रमम् प्रथममध्यमोत्तमसंज्ञा भवन्ति । शात्मने पदेष्वपि त्रयास्त्रिका प्रयममध्य मोत्तमसंज्ञा भवन्ति ॥ 
101. The three triads in both the sets Parasmaipada and Atmanepada, of conjugational affixes (comprised under the general name tin, a pratyâ hâra formed of the first and last of them, viz., tip and mahin) are called, in order, Lowest (3rd person of European Grammar,) the middle (2nd person), and the highest (1st person). 
Of the 19 conjugational affixes, above given ; 9 are Parasmaipadi and 9 are Atmane padi. Each of these two classes is subdivided into three classes, according to person, as shown in the above list. 
तान्येकवचन द्विवचन बहुब चनान्येकशः ॥ १०२॥ पदानि ॥ तानि , एकबचन-द्विवचन-वहुवचनानि एकशः, (त्रीणि २)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ तान्येकवचन द्विवचन बहुवचन संबनि भवन्ति एकशः रुकैकं पदम् ॥ 
102. These three triads of conjugational affixes, which have received the names of Lowest &c, are called (as regard the three expressions in each triad) severally the expression for one" (singular) " the expression for two" (dual), and the expression for many" (plural). 
Of the six triads thus formed, each is divided according to number into three classes, vizo, singular, dual, and plural. 
सुपः ॥ १०३ ॥ पदानि ॥ सुपः, (त्रीणि २ एकवचन द्विवचन बहु वचनानि एकशः)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ सुपञ्च त्रीणि त्रीणि पदानि एकस एकवचन द्विवचन बहुवचन संज्ञानि भवन्ति । 
103. Of sup (which is a Pratyahara formed of suthe first of the case affixes and the final p of the last of them, the three expressions in each successive set of the three, are also beverally called singular, dual and plural. 
PURE - GOM 
av OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
NMENT OF IN 
OF INDIA 
सरवादलयात 
सरकार 
[BKI.CHIV.8104-106, 
VIBHAKTI DEFINED. 
भान्वय 
The sup or the case-affixes by which nouns are declined are 21 in number corresponding to the seven cases, see shtra IV. 1.2. They also have three numbers singular, dual and plural. 
विभकतिश्च ॥ १०४ ॥ पदानि ॥ विभत्तिः , च, (त्रीणि २ सुपः तिङ)॥ 
त्तिः॥ त्रीणि त्रीणि विभक्ति संज्ञाश्च भवन्ति सुपरितच ॥ 
104. The traids of conjugational affixes and case affixes are also called vibhakti or Inflective affixes. 
The word विभक्ति means a complete triad. Thus सक्षमी विभकति means the three affixes of the seventh case, i.e., the locative singular, dual, and plural. So 7 fufth means the third person, singular, dual, and 
plural. 
युष्मद्युपपदे समानाधिकरणे स्थानिन्यपि मध्यमः ॥१०॥ पदानि॥ युष्मदि, उपपदे, समान-अधिकरणे, स्थानिनि, अपि, मध्यमः ॥ 
वत्तिः॥ युद्धमा पपदे सति व्यवहिते चाव्यवहिते सति समानाधिकरणे समानाभिधेये तुल्य कारके स्थानिनि प्रयुज्यमानेऽप्यप्रयुज्यमानेऽपि मध्यम पुरुषो भवति ॥ 
106. When the pronoun yushmad, thou" understood, and also when the same expressed, is the attendant word in agreement with the verb, then there is the verbal termin 2 tion called the middle (2nd person). 
This defines the 2nd person of conjugational affixes. As a rufa thou cookest or पसि; पूवां पयः or पथ: you two are cooking ; पूयं पचय or पाषष you cook. 
महासेच मग्योपपदे मन्यतेरुत्तम एकवच्च ॥ १०६ ॥ पदानि ॥ प्रहासे, च, मन्य-उपपदे, मन्यतेः, उत्तमः, एकवत, च, (मध्यमः) । 
चिः ॥ प्रहाले गन्यमाने भन्योपपदे धातो मध्यमपुरुषो भवति, मन्यतेश्चोत्तमः स चैक अरपति। 
106. When joke is implied with reference to an action, the verb denoting it is used in the 2nd person; provided that the word manya 'to think' is the attendant word (upapada) of such verb, and of the verb manya itself, the affix must be of the 1st person and singular number. 
REGOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
SIRY 
ENT OF INDIA 
(or 
कृति मंत्राथ 
"Bk. I. CH. IV. 107-109. 
J 
A VASANA DIFINED. 
211 
The word प्रहास means joke, sport. As एवं मन्ये मोदन भोक्षयसे इति; नहि भिषयसे, भुक्तः सोऽविथिमिः . Thus thou thinkest "I shall eat rice, thou shalt 
not eat, that has been eaten by a guest. रहि नन्ये रथेन यास्यति नहि बास्थति, urar a far. I think thou wilt go by the chariot, no, thou wilt not, thy father has gone before thee on it. When joke is not intended, the proper persons should be used : as, रहि मन्यसे शोदनं भावयेThus thou thinkest'I shall eat rice.' 
अस्मद्युत्तमः ॥ १०७ ॥ पदानि ॥ अस्मदि, उत्तमः, (उपपदे समा नाधिकरणे स्यानिन्यपि)॥ 
दृचिः ॥ अहमदा पपदे समानाभिधेये प्रयुज्यमाने प्यप्रयुज्यमाने ऽपि उत्तमपुरुषो भवति ॥ 
107. When the pronoun asmad “I," understood and also when expressed, is the attendant word in agreement with the verb, then there is the verbal termination called the Highest or the 1st person. 
This is clear. As अहं पचामि I cook, or merely पचामि-भावां पचाव: or merely पचाव: 
शेषे प्रथमः ॥ १० ॥ पदानि ॥ शेषे प्रथमः ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ यत्र युध्मदस्मदी समानाधिकरणे उपपदेन स्तवशेष प्रयमपुरुषो भवति॥ 
108. In the other cases, namely where, thou" or "I" are not the attendant words in agreement with the verb, there is the verbal termination called the Lowest (or 3rd person). 
As yufa he cooks, as they two cook. Tofa they cook. 
परः संनिकर्षः संहिता, ॥ १० ॥ पदानि ॥ परः संनिकर्षः, संहिता॥ 
त्तिः॥ परी या संनिक वर्णाना मई मानाकालव्यबधान स संहितासंबो भवति।। 
109. The closest proximity of letters, there being the intervention of half a mâtra or prosodial length between them, is called contact or sanhitâ.. 
Co 
When words are in sanhita, they are glued together by the rules of sandhi, As इवनदधिमत्र, 
TURE - Gol 
GOVERNMENS 
Y OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
ENT OF INDIA 
स्कृति मंत्रान 
212 
ATASANA DEFINED. 
(BK. I. CH. IV. $ 110. 
विरामो ऽवसानम् ॥ ११० ॥ पदानि । विरामः अवसानम् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ विरति विरामः । विरम्यते ऽनेनेति वा विरामः । रोऽवसानसंतो भवति ॥ 
110. The cessation or the absence of succeeding letters is called pause or avasâna. 
The word avasêng occurs in sa tra VIII. 3. 15 &c. 
URE 
GOVE 
ev OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
NMENT OF IN 
OF INDIA 
O NA 
सत्यमेव जयते 
. संस्कृति मंत्र 
277 . 
777 
ओ३म् 
Il 
fadriaPAT TYA: 45: 1 
BOOK SECOND 
CHAPTER FIRST 
F T: graft: il. QETÊ II TAS: , TG-a: वृत्तिः ॥ परिभाषेयम् , यः कश्चिदिह शास्त्रे पदविधिः श्रयते स समर्थो वेदितव्यः ॥ 
1. A rule which relates to complete words (and not to the roots and affixes out of which the words are construct ed) is to be understood to apply only to those words the senses of which are connected. 
1. This is a paribhâsha or interpreting aphorism. Wherever in this Grammar a veiara is found, that must be understood to apply to all words. A rule relating to e or complete words is called yefar. The word frafe is formed by adding fa to the root ; that which is ordained (and) is called fara. What are those rules which are ordained with regard to complete words? They are as follows:-(1) Rules relating to art or compounding of words; (2) Rules relating to fanfmi or the application of declensional and conjugational affixes; (3) and the rule by which one word is considered as if it had become a constituent member of another word (पराङ्गवद् भाव). 
The word y means capable; that is to say, that which is capable of expressing the sense of a sentence on analysis, is called ; or the word må may mean that which depends upon words as connected in sense ; that is to say, a rule relating to words whose senses are connected together. 
Thus it will be taught in sûtra 24 'a word ending with the second case affix is optionally compounded with the words fua , wéia, &c., and forms tatpuru sha compound; as, one fara: = nerima: 'who has had recourse to pain.' But when these words are not an or connected in sense there can be no compound ing; as, uma das artes, far falan yorul see 0 Devadatta, the pain, Vişnumitra has taken recourse to his teacher's house. Here the words me and frm though read in juxtaposition are not compounded, as they are not i. 
Similarly, it will be taught in sûtra 30 a word ending with the 3rd case affix is optionally compounded with what denotes that the quality of which is 
URE GOVE 
MINISTRY 
STRY OF CU 
VERNMENT O 
OF INDIA 
• संस्कृति मन 
SAMARTHA WORDS. 
BK. II. CH. 1.1. 
4. 
Ayat 
instrumentally caused by the thing signified by what ends with the 3rd case-affix and with the word 'wealth ;' as, ziraat + gus: = sigerade: 'a piece cut by nippers.' Here also when the words are not connected in sense there is no com position; as, accufa sikater, avgi qagai thou shalt do it with the nippers, Devadatta is cut by the stones.' 
Similarly, sútra 36 declares, a word ending with the 4th case-affix, is com pounded optionally with what denotes that which is for the purpose of what ends with the 4th case-affix, and so too with the words zi, ara, &c.' 
Thus यूपाय + दारु = यूपदारु 'wood for a stake.' But when these words are not connected in sense, there is no composition; as, 17 rá agra , era aaaari at 'go thou for the stake, the wood is in Devadatta's house.' 
Similarly, sútra 37 declares 'a word ending with the 5th case-affix may be compounded with the word मय ; as, बुकेभ्यो + भयं = बुकभयं ' fear by reason of a wolf.' But when these words are not connected in sense, there is no composition; as, गच्छ त्वं मां बकेन्यो, भयं देवदत्तस्य यज्ञदत्तात् 'corne thou to me from the wolves, there is fear to Devadatta from Yajñadatta.' 
Similarly, sûtra II. 2. 8 declares 'a word ending with the 6th case-affix is optionally compounded with what ends with a case-affix;' as, ts: gant = Tragat: 
the king's man.' But when the words are not 994, there is no composition: as, prezi 79:, yet eacairan 'the wife of the king, the man of Devadatta.' 
Similarly, sútra 40 declares: 'A word ending with the 7th case-aflix is optionally compounded with the word fra skilled ;' as, ang fre: = muz: 
skilled in dice.' But when the words are not connected in sense, there is no composition; as, aerata, frug: Paafa thou art skilled in dice, the gambler drinks in the tavern.' 
Why have we used the word we'a complete word' in the sûtra? So that this wayfarer may not apply to arrara, i.e., rules relating to letters. 
Thus rules of efa conjunction of letters are acfafa and" not gafara; and therefore the condition of being connected in sense, does not apply here. Two words however disconnected in sense, must be glued together by the rules of sandhi, if those rules are applicable. Thus sûtra VI. I. 77 declares: 'instead of a letter denoted by the pratyâhâra en there is one denoted by the pratyahâra au, in each instance, where one denoted by the pratyâ hâra u immediately follows; as, gru+ = . This substitution of for x will take place, whether the words are in construction or not, as fast aga ra grana let the curd remain, eat thou with the vegetable curry.' So also fast and e aaeria let the girl be, take the umbrella from Devadatta.' Here the augment ga (a subsequently changed into a) comes between ware and ar, though the two words are not connected in sense ---VI. 1 76. URE 
GOVE 
OF CULTURS 
ERNMENT OF 
BAN II. CH. I. § 2. ] 
PARANGAVAT Words. 
सत्यमेव जयते । 
WELT 
सुबामन्त्रिते पराङ्गवत्स्वरे ॥ २॥ पदानि सुप , आमन्त्रिते , पर-अडवत् , वृत्तिः ।। सुबन्तमामन्त्रिते परतः परस्याङ्गवद् भवति , स्वरे , स्वरलक्षणे कर्तव्ये ।। वात्तिकम् ।। सुबन्तस्य पराङ्गवद्भावे समानाधिकरणस्योपसंख्यानमनन्तरत्वात् ।। वात्तिकम् ।। अव्ययानां प्रतिषेधो वक्तव्यः ।। 
2. A word ending in sup or a case-affix, when follow ed by a word in the vocative case, is regarded as if it was the anga or component part of such subsequent vocative word, when a rule relating to accent is to be applied. 
In other words, the word ending in a case-affix enters, as if, into the body of the vocative (âmantrita) word; as it will be taught in sûtra VI. 1. 198 which declares 'a word ending in a vocative case-affix, gets the udatta accent on the beginning, i. e., first syllable. Now, this rule will apply even when a word end ing with a case-affix precedes such word in the vocative case. Thus the word van 
O two lords!' has udâtta on the first syllable. Now, when this word is preceded by another inflected noun as 47 -- of prosperity,' the accent will fall on y, the two words being considered as a single word; as:-haar vahireur gaat het gaat ! YEYOT THEYTIL ?-Rig. I. 3. I. 'O Asvins, riding on quick horses, lords of pros perity, and bestowers of plenty of food, eat the sacrificial offerings to your satis faction.' So also in the following :-- TEREO thou wandering with a bowl. HTTT 2197 'O thou cutting with an axe.' FETT 1197 'O thou king of Madras.' efîcrura 2147 'O thou king of Kashmir.' 
Why do we say 'a word ending with a case-affix?' If the preceding word ends with any other affix than a case-affix, this rule will not apply. As 
9167 169714 'O thou who art pained, I am pained because of this thy pain.' 
Here is being a fe (a verb)' is not considered as an anga of the vocative word. 
Why do we say 'when followed by a word in the vocative case ?' This rule will not apply when the subsequent word is not a vocative. As a reen: 'Gârga is at home.' 
Why do we say 'of the subsequent ?' It will not be a part of the vocative word which precedes. As 2997 FICO Devadatta, wandering with a bowl.' Here guga has not become part of Devadatta but of the subsequent word wen. 
Why do we say 'an anga or component part ?' Both must be considered as one word for the application of the rule of accent, so that the first syllable of each word separately may not get the udâtta. 
Why do we say 'as if or an.' It is not altogether the body of the subse quent word ; ruies depending upon its own separate independent existence also take effect, 
TURE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
GY OF CULTUA 
MINISTRY 
AT OF INDIA 
12 
सहयगया 
SAMASA DESIGNATION. 
[BK. II. CH. I. $3,4. 
779 
Thus rule VIII. 1, 55 declares 'a word ending in the vocative case is not anud âtta when it follows the word of there intervening a word between itself and मान; as, आम कुण्डेनाटन् ! Here kundena is considered a separate word for the purposes of Rule VIII. 1. 55 and is said to intervene between #9 and the vocative word WT. 
Why do we say for the purposes of the application of rule of accent '? For the purposes of the application of any other rule, it will not be the anga of the subsequent word; as, a fim 'O thou sprinkling in the well.' 797. Here had and been the angas of the subsequent words for all purposes, their and 7 would have been changed into 9 and u respectively by Rules VII. 4. 2, &c. 
Vart.-When a word ending in a case-affix becomes, as if, the component part of the subsequent word, it becomes so even when there are several words in apposition with it which intervene between it and the vocative word ; because that, of itself, does not constitute want of immediateness. Thus aiguar geet erant O thou sewing with a sharp needle' तीक्ष्णेन परशुना बुश्चन्. 
Vart. -- Prohibition must be stated of indeclinable words. As seraiera 'O thou reading loudly.' Fiaturea. 
51645TTIAATE: 131 TGTĀ Il gia, FEITICE, FAIET: II 
वृत्तिः ॥ कडारसंशब्दनात् प्राग यानित अद्ध्व मनुक्रमिष्यामस्त समाससंज्ञा वेदितव्याः ॥ 
3. From this point up to the aphorism kadarakarma dhâraye (II. 2. 38), all the terms that we shall describe will get the designation of samâsa or compound. 
Thus it will be stated. The indeclinable word am when not meaning like unto.' Here the word are must be read into the sûtra to complete the sense. In fact this chapter and the second chapter treat of compounds and therefore the word compound must be read in all those aphorisms. 
The word pråk is employed for the same purpose as it was used in I. 4. 56 that is to give the designation of Fire to various technical terms like taratara &c., which otherwise would not have got the name of #98. 
A 99 I TGIÀ I TE , ET (ET AHIA: ) 11 
वृत्तिः ।। सुबिति सहेति सुपेति च त्रयमप्यधिकृतं वेदितव्यम् यदित ऊदृव मनुक्रमिष्याम स्तत्रेदमुपस्थितं द्रष्टव्यम् ।। 
4. The words' saha supâ' meaning 'with a word ending in a case-affix,' are to be understood in each of the succeed ing aphorisms. 
In this aphorism the word og is understood from sútra 2, so that it consists of three words, viz., 99, #, . All these three words jointly and severally, one 
URE - GOVER 
VERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
SR: II: Ch. I. 5, 6.] 
SAMASA DESIGNATION. 
स्कृति मंत्रालय 
at a time or two at a time, should be understood as governing the succeeding aphorisms, as the contingency of each sâtra may require. This aphorism will constantly be applied in translating the sûtras that follow. 
Why have we used the word we? Well, without it the sûtra would have stood thus pygg ' a noun may be compounded with another noun.' But this overlooks the case of a compounding with a verb. The word he is therefore used so that we may be able to break this composite sûtra into two separate and simple sûntras, namely : 
(1) FE, 99, und ha' a case-inflected word may be compounded with a word with which it is connected in sense. Here the word ee with the help of the three words go taken from sâtra 2, à from sâtra 3, and Fall from sûtra 1, forms one complete aphorism, and applies to compounds like gama aparata. The accent will depend upon these being considered as samâsa. 
(2) The gg aarà a sup-inflected word is compounded with another sup-inflected word. The compound which does not fall within any of the various sorts of compounds to be treated of hereafter, will fall under this general head of compounds; as, yragaci areti gafisat : This also is for the sake of accents. 
अव्ययीभावश्च ॥५॥ पदानि ॥ अव्ययीभावः , च॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ यानित ऊद्ध्व मनुक्रमिष्यामोऽव्ययीभावसंज्ञास्त वेदितव्याः ।। 5. From this forward whatever we shall describe will get the name of Ayyayîbhâva samâsa or adverbial compound. 
This is also an adhikâra aphorism like the last. As far as sûtra 21, the compounds treated of, will get the designation of Avyaibhava. The word yayîtaa like the word w arria is a self-descriptive term, and not an arbitrary term like , fi &c. When that which was not an indeclinable becomes an indeclinable, it is called yeatura or becoming an indeclinable. In the Avya yibhava compound the sense of the first of its elements is the main one or the independent one on which the other depends. 
अव्ययं विभक्तिसमीपसमृद्धिव्यद्धर्थाभावात्ययासम्प्रतिशब्दप्रादुर्भावपश्वाध थानुपूर्व्य योगपद्यसादृश्यसंपत्तिसाकल्यान्तवचनेषु ॥ ६ ॥ पदानि ॥ अव्ययम्, fafe-afto-ugie-fe-qfhia-Peri-ha- Tagatgafa-TarÇ-2781-919 पूर्य-योगपद्य-सादृश्य-सम्पत्ति-साकल्य-अन्त-वचनेषु, (सुप सुपा अव्ययीभावः समासः) (Fach:) II 
वृत्तिः ॥ विभक्तयादिष्वर्थेषु यदव्यय वत्त ते तत् समर्थेन सुबन्तेन सह समस्यते अव्ययीभावश्च समासो भवति । 
6. An indeclinable (avyaya) employed with the sense of an inflective-affix (vibhakti) or of near to, or prosperity, 
GURE 
GOVE 
OF CULTURE 
NISTRY OF C 
NMENT OF IN 
OF INDIA 
AVYAYIBHAVA DESIGNATION. 
[BK. II. Ch. 1. $ 6. 
17997 
or adversity, or absence of the thing, or departure, or not now, or the production of some sound, or after, or accord ing to, or order of arrangement, or simultaneousness, or likeness, or possession, or totality, or termination, is invari ably compounded with a word ending in a case-affix which is connected with it in sense, and the compound so formed is called Avyayibhâva. 
The words ay and gar are understood in this sûtra. The word aan should be read as connected with every one of the above phrases. 
1. farmaan ;-as, affer etiâ 'a story relating to women.' ufanira 're lating to a girl.' 
2. 99947 ;-as, 34#*#*?' near to the jar.' gun cui near to the gem.' 
3. समृद्धिबचन ;-as, सुमद्रं ' well or prosperous with the Madras'; सुमगधं 'well with the Magadh.' 
4. aga ;--as, zoaleri ‘ill with the Gavadikas ;'zuat 'ill with the Yavanas.' 
5. 2297 ;-as, falfam 'free from flies ; ' printeri 'free from mosquitoes.' 6. 4799 ;-as, fafcha on the departure of the cold weather"; fasini 
7. maigaan ;-as, arcidiech past (not now) the time of wearing quilts. 
18. शब्दप्रादुर्भाववचन;-as, इति हरि - the exclamation Hari' (thus वैष्णवगृहे इति हरि वर्तते .in the house of the Vaisnava there is the cry of Hari Hari).' 
9. पश्चाद्वचन ;-as, अनुरथं पादातम् 'the infantry after the chariots.' 
10. urian ;-The meaning of the word aan is four-fold, viz., correspond ence, severality or succession, the not passing beyond something, and likeness; thus (1) agen'in a corresponding manner.' (2) in' according to each or several object or signification. (3) 2011th "according to one's ability.' 
11. saya ;---as, macacs fagra 971: 'let your honors enter in the order of seniority. 
12. Brama;---as, efe simultaneously with the wheel.' 13. 1299*;-as, were like a friend.' 14. feraan 3-as, 'as warriors ought.' 
15. 1999;--as, fan 'even to the grass,' i. e., the whole, not leaving even a serap. 
16. paan:-as, ara as far as the chapter of fire (i. e., the whole Veda). 
RE • GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY ON 
ENT OF INDIA 
- BII. CH. I. S7, to 9.] AVTAYIBHAVA DESIGNATION. 
समय जयते । 
AYIBHAVA 
GNATION. 
che PRELE 
लय भारत 
भारत सरकार 
यथाऽसादृश्ये ॥ ७॥ पदानि ॥ यथा , असादृश्ये , (समर्थः सुप सुपा अन्य भा०स०)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ ययेत्येदतव्ययमसादृश्ये वर्तमानं सुपा सह समस्यते , ऽव्ययीभावश्च समासो भवति ।। 
7. The indeclinable word yathâ when it does not signify “likeness' is invariably compounded with a word ending in a case-affix which is in construction with it and the compound is called an Avyayibhâva Samâsa. 
Thus यथाबद्धम् ब्राह्मणानामन्त्रयस्व invite every old Brahmana. So also यथाध्यापकम् . 
Why do we say 'when not signifying likeness.' For there is no composition when likeness is indicated. As यथा देवदत्तस्तथा यज्ञदत्त: As is Devadatta so is Yajia datta. 
This Samâsa could have been included in the last sûtra clause 10, but mak ing a separate sûtra shows that the word at there, must be limited by the present sûtra, to first three meanings of the word 221 given there and not to its fourth meaning, viz., there is no compounding when it means likeness. 
यावदवधारणे ॥ ८॥ पदानि ॥ यावद् , अवधारणे, (स सुपा अव्य०भा० समास)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ यावदित्येतदव्ययमवधारणे वत्त मानं सुपा सह समस्यते अव्ययीभावश्च समासो भवति ॥ 
8. The indeclinable word yâvat when it signifies limitation, is invariably compounded with a word ending in a case-affix which is in construction with it, and the com pound so formed is called Avyayîbhâva. 
The word werey means accurate ascertainment, restriction or limitation. As यावद् मन्त्र ब्राह्मणानामन्त्रयस्व 'invite so many Brahmanas only and not more as there are pots, i.e., if there are five pots then invite five Brahmanas; if six pots, then invite six Brahmanas. 
Why do we say when meaning limitation'? Observe यावदत्त तावद् भुक्तम् 'Late so long as it was given to me,' i.e., I do not know for certainty how much I have eaten. 
सुपप्रतिनामात्रार्थे ॥ ९॥ पदानि ॥ सुप, प्रतिना , मात्रा-अर्थे , (अव्य भा० समासह)॥ 
वृत्तिः ।। मात्रार्थे । वत्त मानेन प्रतिना सह सुबन्तं समस्यते अव्ययीभावश्व समासो भवति ॥ 
9. A word ending in a case-affix is compounded with the indeclinable word prati, when meaning ' a little' and the compound is called Avyayîbhậva. 
GOVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
स्कृति मंत्रालय 
OPTIONAL COMPOUNDS. 
[BK. II. Ch. I. $ 10, N. 
.4170 
97701 27017 
The word rat means ' a drop,' 'a little,' 'a wee bit,' as, renula 'a little of vegetable,' qura' a little of soup.' 
Why do we say when meaning a little '? Observe as afa Fazalag Faggia 'it lightens in the direction of the tree.' Here it is not compounded. 
Though the word sup was, by anuvritti from sâtra 2, understood in this sútra, its repetition in the text is for the purpose of indicating that the anuvritti of the word gera which began with sâtra 6 does not extend further into the subsequent sûtras. 
The word sfant being exhibited in the 3rd case-affix is not an upasarjana (I. 2. 43) and therefore, it comes as the last member of the compound (II. 2. 30.) 
PATOFÅEIT: TRUT go || GGTÀ II 787-7619T-ÉGTT, gror, (TOETOFE) 1 
अक्षशब्दः शलाकाशब्दः संख्याशब्दश्च परिणा सह समस्यन्ते अव्ययीभावश्व समासो भवति ॥ 
10. The words akşa, 'a die for playing with,' salâkâ ‘an ivory piece used in gambling,' and samkhyâ? 
numerals' are compounded with the word pari, and the compound formed is called Avyayîbhâva. 
This yra is restricted to terms applicable to gambling. Thus there is a game called pañchikâ which is played with five dice or five ivory pieces. When all these five pieces fall with faces turned upward, or all with faces turned down, then the thrower wins the game. But when the fall is otherwise, he loses. Thus wur'an unlucky throw of dice. Teaterop, an unlucky throw of ivory pieces '; so also wufa'an unlucky throw by one over 'gur, fagfes and lastly agur' This is the maximum. But when five are of one form, then of course, he wins. 
FEHTAT II 3 UGTË I PRACTII वृत्तिः ॥ यदित ऊद्वमनुक्रमिष्यामस्तद्विभाषा भवति ।। 
11. The word vibhâşâ or option governs all suc ceeding sûtras. 
This is an adhikâra sûtra. All the rules of compounding given hereafter, are optional. The same sense can be expressed by the uncompounded words as by them when compounded. But not so are the compounds which have been treated of, before. Compounds like , curca , wyr, &c., mentioned above are invariable compounds (FEA 4478 ), the sense conveyed by the compound term, not being capable of analysis, by taking the senses of the separate members of the compounds, or at least not capable of expressing any sense without inserting extraneous words on analysis, 
SURE - GOVS 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY ON 
NT OF INDS 
. $ 12 to 14.] OPTIONAL AVYAYIBHAVA COMPOUNDS.. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
मालय भारत 
अपपरिवहिरञ्चवः पञ्चम्या ॥ १२॥ पदानि ॥ अप-परि-वहिः-अञ्चवः, पञ्चम्या (स०प्र० सह बि०)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ अप परि वहिस अञ्च, इत्येते सुबन्ताः पञ्चम्यन्तेन सह विभाषा समस्यन्ते अव्ययीभावश्च समासो भवति ॥ 
12. The words apa, pari, bahiḥ and indeclinables ending in añchu may optionally be compounded with a word ending in the fifth case-affix, and the compound so formed will be Avyayîbhâva. 
As अपविगतम् वृष्टो देव: 01 अपत्रिगर्तेभ्यो वृष्टो देवः ‘it rained away from Trigarta. So also, परित्रिगर्तन् or परित्रिगर्तेभ्य: 'round about Trigarta,' वहि मम् or वहिर्यामात् 'outside the village' प्राग ग्रामन् or प्राग्ग्रामात् 'east of the village.' 
Words formed from the verb tigto go,' are get' north ' sig' east,' &c. 
From this sûtra we learn by inference (jñâpak) that the word are: also governs the ablative case (see II. 3. 29). 
आङमयादाभिविध्योः ॥ १३ ॥ पदानि ॥ आङ , मर्यादा-अभिविध्योः (स०अ० वि०पञ्चम्या सह)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ आङिस्येतन्मादायामभिविधौ च वर्तमानं पञ्चम्यन्तेन सह विभाषा समस्यते, अव्ययी भावश्च समासो भवति ॥ 
___13. The word an when signifying limit exclusive or limit inclusive, may optionally be compounded with a word ending in the fifth case-affix and the compound so formed is called Avyayîbhâva. 
As, urgrefayai or marcfegata aet da: 'it rained up to Pâ taliputra.' w or पाकुनारेभ्यो यशः पाणिने: 'the fame of Panini extends even to the boys.' 
लक्षणेनाभिप्रती आभिमुख्ये ॥१४॥ पदानि ॥ लक्षणेन , अभिप्रती, आभिमुख्ये, (स०अ०वि०सु०॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ लक्षणं चिह्न तद्वाचिना सुबन्तेन सहाभिप्रतीशब्दावाभिमुख्ये वर्तमानौ विभाषा समस्य ते अव्ययीभावश्च समासो भवति ॥ 
14. The words abhi and prati when implying direc tion (towards), are optionally compounded with a word ending in a case-affix denoting the limit, or the goal which regulates or marks the direction ; and the resulting com pound is Avyayîbhava. 
URE • GOVE 
MISTRY OF C 
VERNMENT ON 
OF INDIA 
OPTIONAL Å VYAYİBHAVA COMPOUNDS. 
[ BK. II. CH. I. § 15, 16. 
• संस्कृति मंत्र 
The word laksana means a sign goal. See also I. 4. 84 and 90 for a further explanation of this word. As tal or again yani: qalm the moths fall in the direction of fire.' So also srafia or an ura, the sense being, that making the fire their aims ( 764 ) they fall towards it. 
Why do we say when meaning laksaņa"? Observe 7 wrā ta: 'he turned back and went towards Srughna, i.e., having turned back he went only towards the direction of Srughna but not to that place itself. 
Why do we say the words abhi and prati? Observe alfanaa na: ' he went in the direction of the fire.' 
Why do we say when meaning direction towards ? Observe agt ma: or start tha: 'the recently marked cows.' 
Hair IT || 3 || GIF II MT , Ji-HBT(GotTale@o dun) 3 वृत्तिः ॥ अनुर्यस्य समीपवाची तेन लक्षणभूतेन सह विभाषा समस्यते अव्ययीभावश्च समासो भवति । 
15. The word anu near to 'is optionally compounded with that word, nearness to which is indicated by the particle, and the resulting compound is Avyayibhâva. 
As, uganathaia: 'the thunder-bolt fell near the forest.' Why do we say ? Observe at **' near the forest.' 
Why do we say 'when compounded with the word, nearness to which is indicated'? Observe zawaraamaa faza 'it lightens towards the tree.' 
Though this compounding was valid even by sûntra 6, because nearness is mentioned there also; it is repeated here in order to show that an Avyayibhâva compound mentioned here is an optional compound after all, and not an invari able compound like others. 
YR TOTA: 188 1 TTA I E, T, ETA: , ( Togo-logo लक्षणे न अनुः)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ अनुर्यस्यायामवाची तेन लक्षणभूतेन सह विभाषा समस्यते अव्ययीभावश्च समासो भवति ।। 
16. The word anu alongside of' is optionally com pounded with the word indicative of that whose length the particle expresses, and the compound so formed is called Avyayîbhâva. 
As, wait, a ten the city of Benares extends alongside the river Ganges' apapangan 8 Mathura, alongside of the Yamuna, the length of Mathura being mea. sured by that of the Yamuna.' 
Why do we say 'length'? Observe a fantaa fazla. 
URE - GOVE 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY ON 
NMENT OF IN 
OF INDIA 
S 
सस्कृति मंत्रान 
BKP11. "Cm. I. $ 17 to 19. ] 
IRREGULAR FORMATIONS. 
लय भारत 
तिष्ठद्गु प्रभृतीनि च ॥ १७ ॥ पदानि ॥ तिष्ठद्गु प्रभृतीनि , च (अव्ययी भावस०)॥ 
वृत्तिः ।। तिष्टद्वादयः समुदाया एव निपात्यन्ते, तिष्टद्गुप्रभृत नि शब्दरूपाणि अव्ययीभावसंज्ञानि भवन्ति ॥ 
17. And the words tisthadgu, 'at the time when the cows stand to be milked,' &c., are Avyayibhava com pounds. 
The words faceed, &c., are all irregularly formed Avyayîbhâva compounds, Most of these words are epithets of various times. The force of in the sûtra is restrictive, that is to say, these words always form the Avyayîbhâva compound and nothing else. They are as follows : 
तिष्ठद्गु, वहद्गु , अायतीगवम् , खलेयवन् , खलेबुसम् , लूनयवम् , लूयमानयवम् , पूतयवम् , धूप मानयवम् , संहूतयवम् , संह यमाणयवम् , संहुतबुसम् , संहियमाणबुसम् , समभूमि , समपदाति , सुषमा, विषमन् , दुष्पमम् , निष्पमम् , अपरसमम् , आयतीसमम्, प्राणम्, प्ररथम , प्रमृगम् , प्रदक्षिणम् , अपरदक्षिणम् , संप्रति , असंप्रति, पापसमम् , पुण्यसनम्, इच् कर्मव्यतिहारे - V. 4. 127, e.g., कचाकचि ॥ 
पारे मध्ये षष्ठ्या वा ॥१८॥ पदानि ॥पारे, मध्ये, षष्ठ्या, वा ( स०अ०वि० स०)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ पारमध्यशब्दौ षष्ठ्यन्तेन सह विभाषा समस्यते अव्ययीभावश्च समासो भवति । 
18. The words pâra, across,' and madhya, 'middle,' may optionally be compounded with a word ending in the sixth case-affix, when they take the forms pâre and madhve. and the compound so formed is Avyayîbhâva. 
Ordinarily these words would have formed Possessive Tatpurusha com pounds. The present sûtra ordains Avyayibhava instead. The force of a in the text is that the Genitive Tatpurusha compounding also takes place in the alternative. As पारगंग 01 गंगापारम् ' across theGanges.' मध्येगंगन् or गंगमध्यम् 'middle of the Ganges. 
Of course according to the option allowed by sâtra II. 1. 11, this compound ing need not take place at all, the same sense being expressed by a phrase; as, पार गंगाया: or मध्यं गंगाया: 
संख्या वंश्येन ॥ ११॥ पदानि ॥ संख्या, वंश्येन, (स०वि०स०)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ वशे भवः वश्यः, तद्वान्चिना सुवन्त न सह संख्या समस्यते अध्ययीभावश्च समासो भवति ॥ 
19. A numeral may be compounded with a word denoting 'one belonging to a family' and the resulting com pound is Avyayîbhâva, 
IRE - GOVE. 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY ON 
VERNMENT 
NT OF INDIA 
संस्कृति मंत्रान 
त मंत्रालय 
IRREGULAR FORMATIONS. 
[BK. II. CH. I. $ 20, 21, 
सरकार 
415 zen 
The word a means uninterrupted descent of persons from a common source whether through birth or knowledge. A succession of teachers and pupils, of ancestors and descendants, &c., would constitute a ag' family.' One born in or belonging to such a is called a ára or descendant, 
As, leyla alla curt of the Vyâkarana,' which has two sages as its principal expounders, viz., Pâņini and Patañjali. So farfaracter having three representa tives, viz., Pânini, Patañjali and Sakatāyana or Kātyâyana.' 
When we desire to express their equality as regards knowledge, then both the words are put in the same case : as, द्विमुनि or त्रिमुनि व्याकरणम्. 
So also when the relationship is by birth: as, vafa sía Hrgia, Twenty-one Bhâradwâjas. These subsequent compounds are like Drigu. 
aan 120 | TGIA II FCIRE, ET, (FOTOCÉEN ) वृत्तिः । नदीवचनैः शब्दैः सह संख्या समस्यते, अव्ययीभावश्च समासो भवति ॥ 
20. A numeral (samkhyâ) may be compounded with names of rivers and the resulting compound is Avyayî bhâva denoting an aggregate. 
According to Patañjali, this refers to their Aggregate ( FATETT ); as, Frugt at the meeting of the seven Ganges,' qurga' at the ineeting of the two Yamunâs,' jane where the five rivers meet,' aparerate 'where seven Godavaris meet.' See II. 4.. 17. 
अन्यपदार्थे च संज्ञायाम् ॥ २१॥ पदानि ॥ अन्यपदार्थे, च, संज्ञायाम, ( स०अ० विनदीभिः)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ नदीभिः सह सुबन्तमन्यपदार्थे वर्तमानं संज्ञायां विषये समस्यत' अव्ययीभावश्च समासो भवति ॥ 
21. A word ending in a case-affix is compounded with words denoting the names of rivers, when the compound word denotes a thing other than that expressed by the terms of the compound, and is an appellative; the compound so formed being an Avyayîbhâva. 
The anuvritti of the word samkhyâ does not extend to this sûtra. Though this rule is given in the sub-division relating to optional compounds it is, however, a Nitya-samasa rule : for no Name ( ) can ever be expressed by a sen tence, and that being so, these compounds can never be analysed. As as the country called Unmatta Ganges.' So also anfange, agt; Jan II. 4. 18. 
Why do we say 'when it denotes a thing other than that expressed by the component parts of the compound'? Observe mean the river Krishnavena." 
Why do we say when it expresses an Appellative'? Observe a hat: 'the country where the Ganges moves rapidly. URE • GOVE 
GOVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY ON 
NT OF INDIA 
सस्कृति मंत्रान 
. $ 22, to 24 ] 
TAT-PURUSA. 
OR 
4.4178 
रतसरकार 
Tegaq: Il R2 U GCIÊ Il Tegot: || वृत्तिः ॥ तत्पुरुष इति संज्ञाधिक्रियत प्राग्बहुब्रीहे, र्यानित ऊद्ध वमनुक्रमिष्यामस्तत्पुरुषसंज्ञास्ते वेदितव्याः ॥ 
22. From this aphorism as far as aphorism II. 2. 23, the word Tat-purusa is the governing word, and is under stood in all the following sâtras. 
From this sûtra as far as the sûtra II. 2. 23 relating to Bahuvrîhi com pounds, the word Tat-purusa should be read into each sûtra. This big term 18 of older coinage than that of Pânini, being in fact, made by older grammarians. In the Tat-purusa compound, the sense of the last of its elements is the main one, and governs the preceding one. The karmadhâraya (Appositional Determinative Compound) and Dwigu (Numeral Determinative Compound) are also sub-divisions of this class of compounds. The rest of this chapter and 22 sûtras of the second, deal with this. 
faut 11 83 || TGTË I eu , a, (Tg69 ) वृत्तिः ॥ द्विगुश्च समासस्तत्पुरुषसंज्ञो भवति ॥ 
23. And the kind of compound called Dwigu (Numer al Determinative Compound) is also called Tat-puruşa. 
The object of making Dwigu a sub-division of Tat-purusa Compound is that the antara affixes and rules given in V. 4. 68-160 should apply to Dwigu also. Otherwise we could well have dispensed with this sûtra; as sûtra 52 of this chapter already defines Dwigu. Thus 1975 V. 4. 91 fem. tatri (IV. I. 15., 21), "an aggregate of 5 princes' :, V. 4. 89, vanat' an aggregate of 5 cows.' *4974 an aggregate of ten cows.'-V. 4. 92. 
द्वितीया श्रितातीतपतितगतात्यस्तप्राप्तापनः ॥ २४॥ पदानि ॥ द्वितीया श्रित udtagiaa-a-TRA-TA-FET:,( TOETOFOTOak agar ) 11 
वृत्तिः ॥ द्वितीयान्तं सुबन्त श्रितादिभिः सह समस्यत', तत्पुरुषश्च समासो भवति । वाति कम् ॥ श्रितादिषुगमिगाम्यादीनामुपसंख्यानम् ॥ 
24. A word ending with the second case-affix is compounded with the words srita, 'who has had recourse to,' atîta, 'gone by,' patita,' who has fallen upon,' gata, 'who has gone to,' atyasta, who has passed,' prâpta,' who has obtained,' and âpanna, who has reached,' and the resulting compound is called Tat-puruşa. 
As + Fa:=mfra: "who has had recourse to trouble.' cefwa:, So also :-- salaircicima; 'who has passed over the dreary forest.', 779aa: "fallen into hell,' 
GURE 
GOVERNM 
GOVE 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY ON 
NMENT OF IN 
OF INDIA 
CL [BK. II. CH. I. $ 25, 26. 
TAT-PURUSA. 
तसरकार 
ग्रामगत; gone to village.' तरङ्गात्यस्त: 'passed the waves.' सुखप्राप्त: 'who has reached pleasure.' gatua: 'who has obtained happiness.' 
Vart:-The words , &c., should also be included. As terri, mereit; 
Ferya Il 24 II GIÀ I FAITH, ha, ( Edonogo ) 1 वृत्तिः ॥ स्वयमित्य तत्सुबन्त तान्त न सह समस्यते तत्पुरुषश्च समासो भवति ॥ 
25. The indeclinable word swayam'oneself' is com pounded with a word ending in the affix kta, and the result ing compound is called Tat-puruşa.. 
The anuvritti of the word radiar from the last aphorism into this, cannot take place; though, however, it is understood in the next sûtra. The word 4947 being an indeclinable, cannot take any case-allis. As tai atat tei' feet washed by himself' fai falsafareta. 
In this compounding, the two words do not appear to have undergone any change after their composition. They are the same as they were before the composition. But by calling their juxtaposition, 'a compound,' two indirect advantages are gained. Namely, these two words are regarded as one word, and their accent is also similarly regulated. See Rule VI. I. 223. 
The words ending in kta which is a Nistbâ affix, are past participles. 
ata o 38 H GIA | eat, a, ( Fotografo) (featu ) 
वृत्तिः ॥ खट्बाशब्दो द्वितीयान्तः क्तान्तेन सह क्षेपे गम्यमाने समस्यत', तत्पुरुषश्च समासो भवति ॥ 
26. The word khatwâ in the accusative case is com pounded with a word ending in the affix kta, when censure is implied, and the compound so formed is Tat-purusa. 
The word aq means 'censure,' 'blame' and this sense can be connoted only by the compound word as a whole and not by any of its constituent elements. This compound is also, therefore, a Nitya Compound, though it occurs in the sub-division relating to Optional Compounds :--because it is impossible to analyse such a compound and express, by means of a sentence the sense conveyed by the function of the compound word. 
As v rea: or reanga: (literally lying on a bed); silly, stupid, going wrong or astray. 
There is no compounding when 'censure is not meant.' As earned: lying on a bed, 
URE .GOV 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY ON 
ERNMENT ON 
( B 
I. CH. I. $ 27, 28.] 
ACCUSATIVE TAT-PURUSA. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
सस्कात 
Wby this word should have this opprobrious meaning, will be understood from the consideration of the following facts :-a person under the Aryan social polity, could only then enter the married state or the life of a house-holder, as it was called, when he had completed his Brahmacharya, i.e., the prescribed period of bachelor studentship. All Brahmachâris were bound to sleep on ground and not on wear or cots, so long as they were Brahmachâris. A person who without completing his studies, and without obtaining the permission of his teacher, entered into matrimony, was originally called, in reproach, neares: 'who had ascended the couch in an improper way.' Then the term was extended to all persons guilty of vile action. 
ETH II 2011 TGI@T | Arh, ( FOTOT OFT 9 ) (radiat) !1 
वृत्तिः ॥ सामीत्येतदव्ययमद्ध शब्दपर्यायस्तस्य सन्त्रवाचिवाद् द्वितीयया नास्ति संबन्धः तत् सुवन्त तान्तेन सह समस्यते तत्पुरुषश्च समासेा भवति ॥ 
27. The indeclinable word sâmi meaning half' is compounded with a word ending in the affix kta, and the resulting compound is Tat-puruşa. 
The word af being an avyaya, and not denoting any substance, cannot take the affixes of the second or any case. Therefore the anuvritti of the word would be inapposite in this aphorism. 
As entrenan "half-done,' fan 'half-drunk,' arrautain 'half-eaten.' 
The object attained by this samâsa is the same as in II. 1. 25, namely, making them one word and taking one accent. 
कालाः ॥ २८ ॥ पदानि ॥ कालाः, ( स० वि० त० स० द्वितीययाक्तन )। वृत्तिः ॥ कालवाचिनः शब्दा द्वितीयान्ताः क्तान्तेन सह समस्यन्ते विभाषा तत्पुरुषश्च समासो भवति ॥ 
28. The words denoting time, being in the accusative case, are optionally compounded with a word ending in the affix kta, and the resulting compound is Tat-puruṣa. 
This rule applies when duration of time is not connoted by the compound, which is provided for, in the next aphorism. The word on: does not mean here, as it would otherwise mean by Sâtra 1. 1. 68, the word--form unta but special words denoting Star 
Ag Firguinagurat: 'the new moon,' (literally, the moon that has begun to measure the month) Similarly, we sa:, tant : applied to six Muhurtas (of 
8 minutes each) which are called and 797 which sometimes occur in day time in the summer month) and sometimes in the night in the winter). 
EGOVED 
CULTURE 
NISTRY OF 
VERNMENT O 
MINISTA 
NT OF INDIA 
INSTRUMENTAL TAT-PURUSA. 
[BK. II. Ch. I. $ 99, 30. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
सरकार 
SPRITET TIL & Blogrê Il 
F M , 57, ( O fato do ETO Fra: Ear fao) 
वृत्तिः ॥ कालवाचिनः शब्दा द्वितीयान्ता अत्यन्तसंयोगे गम्यमाने सुपा सह समस्यन्ते विभाषा तत्पुरु षश्च समासो भवति ॥ 
29. Words denoting time being in the accusative case, are optionally compounded with a word ending in a case-affix, when used in the sense of complete connection throughout with the time (i.e., duration of time) and the resulting compound is called Tat-puruşa. 
The word me is understood in this aphorism; but not so the phrase ending with the affix i 
The word gratiâ means uninterrupted connection. For accent of these words see VI. 2. 2. 
As gerigar a momentary pleasure.' påtazheri, FÅTTA ATH71, 
तृतीया तत्कृतार्थेन गुणवचनेन ॥ ३०॥ पदानि ॥ तृतीया. तत्कृत-अर्थेन, गुण वचनेन, (सावि० त०सु० सुपासह)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ तृतीयान्तं सुबन्त गुणवचनेन अर्थशब्देन च सह समस्यन्ते तत्पुरुषश्च समासो भवति ॥ 
30. A word ending with the 3rd case-affix is option ally compounded with what denotes quality, the quality being that which is instrumentally caused by the thing signified by what ends with the third case-affix and with the word artha 'wealth,' and the compound so formed is called Tat-puruşa. 
The words 99, 99 are understood here : and the whole of this sûtra is an epithet of those words. A noun in the instrumental case is compounded with a word expressing quality, and with the word su: provided that the word express ing quality is itself the result produced by the sense of the word in the instru mental case. As शंकुलपा खण्ड: शंकुलाखण्ड: 'cut by nipper ' किरिकाण: "made blind of one eye by a hog,' stata: 'wealth acquired by grain.' For accent of these words, see VI. 2. 2. 
Why do we say when caused by the word in the instrumental case '? Observe the ite: "blind of one eye. Here were in the 3rd case is not the instru mental cause that produced blindness and hence no compounding, 
Why do we say 'a word expressing quality ?' Observe :-rautart 'sowing with the cows. Here though sowing' is instrumentally caused by the cows, yet it does not qualify cows but the sower, and hence no compounding. 
URE - GOVE 
GOVERNMENS 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY ON 
MENT OF INDIA 
1BEI. CH. I. $ 31, 32. ) 
İNSTRUMENTAL 'TAT-PURUSA. 
सस्कृति मंत्राना 
सत्यमेव जयत 
भारत सरकार 
Gupa-vachanas are those words which, not being words formed by primary or secondary affixes, or other words entitled to the name of samkhyâ, or sar vanâma, or jâti, or compound words, are words denoting qualities and capable of being used as adjectives qualifying substantives. 
पूर्वसदृशसमोनार्थकलहनिपुणमिश्रश्लक्ष्णैः ॥ ३१॥ पदानि ॥ पूर्व-सदृश-सम ऊनार्थ-कलह-निपुण-मिश्र-श्लक्ष्णैः, (स० वि० त० तृतीया स०)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ पूर्व सदृश सम ऊनार्थ कलह निपुण मिश्र श्लक्ष्ण एतैः सह तृतीयान्तं समस्यते तत्पुरुषश्च समासेो भवति ॥ 
वात्तिकम् ॥ पूर्वादिष्ववरस्योपसंख्यानम् ॥ 
31. A word ending in the third case-affix is compound ed with the words pûrva, 'prior,' sadrisa, 'like,' sama 'similar, ûnârtha, 'words having the sense of less,' kalaha, 'quarrel,' nipuņa, proficient,' misra, 'mixed,' and slakshna, ‘polished, sleek' and the resulting compound is called Tat-purusa. 
From this sûtra, we learn incidentally that the words wa, &c., govern the instrumental case. 
As, prêa na = fraga: 'prior by a month,' saratya: 'prior by a year,' areagt: 'like the mother,' पितृसदृश: 'like the father,' मातसम: similar to the mother,' पितृसन: 'similar to the father,' माषोनम्, माषविकलं 'less by a masha,' सिकलह: a fight with the swords,' वाकलहः bandying words,' वाङ निपुण: 'proficient in speech,' आचारनिपुण: ' proficient in the obser vances of sacred duties,' faalan:-- :' mixed with sesamum or jaggery,' UNICETOT: "polished in behaviour.' 
Vart :-The word वर should be enumerated in the list, as मासावर: later than a month.' 
कत करणे कृता बहुलम् ॥३२॥पदानि ॥ कत करणे, कृता बहुलम् , (सावि० त० तृती० स०) 
वृत्तिः । कर्तरि करणे च या तृतीया तदन्तकृदन्तेन सह समस्यते बहुलं, तत्पुरुषश्च समासो भवति ॥ 
32. A word ending with the third case-affix, when it denotes the agent or the instrument (II. 3. 18) is com pounded diversely with what ends with a křit affix; and the compound so formed is called Tat-puruşa. 
The word ge shows that there is a general relaxation of all the rules and conditions. As अहिमा हतः= अहिहतः killed by the snake,' नखनिर्मि: divided by the nails.' ayran: 'cut by the axe.' 
URE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY ON 
NT OF INDIA 
İNSTRUMENTAL TAT-PURUSA. 
(Bk. II. CH. I. $ 33,34, 
संस्कृति मंत्रान 
यापति 
नालय, भारत 
तिसरकार 
Why do we say 'when denoting the agent or the instrument '? Observe मिक्षाभिरुषितः 'dwelt with alms.' Here the force of the 3rd case is that mentioned in sutra II. 3.21 and not that of II. 3. 18. 
Why do we say diversely? Observe दात्रेण लूनवान् 'cutting with the sickle,' atyar fawara 'cutting with the axe.' Here there is no compounding. But there is compounding where otherwise there ought not to be, because of the word बहुल: as पादहारक: and गले चोपकः . 
कृत्यैरधिकार्थवचने ॥ ३३ ॥ पदानि ॥ कृत्यैः , अधिक-अर्थ-वचने, (स० वि० त० कर्तृ करणेत) 
वृत्तिः ॥ कत करणयोर्या तृतीया तदन्त सुबन्त कृत्यैः सह समस्यते अधिकार्थचने गम्यमाने विभाषा, तत्पुरुषश्च समासेो भवति । 
वात्ति कम् ॥ कृत्यग्रहणे यत्रायताहणंकर्तव्यम् ॥ 
33. A word ending with the third case-affix when it de notes the agent or the instrument, is compounded optionally with a word ending in a kritya affix, when an exaggerated statement (whether of praise or of censure) is implied, and the compound is Tat-purusa. 
WAS काकपेयानदी 'a shallow river' (so shallow that a crow may dip his beak into it and touch the bottom and drink). caga: mu: 'a shallow well' (so that a dog can lick water from the brink of it). वाष्पच्छेझानि तुणानि 'thin grass' (so fragile that it can be cut by vapour) कण्टकसंचेय आदनः .. 
This sûtra is in a way a prolongation of the last. 
Vart.-The phrase words ending in kritya affix' must not be taken univer sally, only the kritya affixes za and a are meant in the above sûtras. The fol lowing are the kritya affixes :-तव्य, अनीय, यत्, क्यपू, ण्यन, (see stutra III. I.95.132). Therefore there is no compounding when the word ends in तव्य as in काकैः पातव्या, 
अन्नेन व्यञ्जनम् ॥ ३४ ॥ पदानि ॥ अन्नेन, व्यञ्जनम्, (सवित तृ० सु०स०)॥ 
वृत्तिः । व्यञ्जनवाचि तृतीयान्तमन्त्रवाचिना सुबन्तेन सह समस्यते विभाषा, तत्पुरुषश्च समासो भवति । 
34. A word ending with the third case-affix and de noting a condiment, is optionally compounded with a word ending in a case-affix, signifying food, and the resulting compound is called Tat-purusa. 
URE • GOVE 
GOVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY ON 
ENT OF INDIA 
: BREEL. CH. I.S 35, 36.7 
DATIVE TAT-PURUSA. 
रिकृति मंत्रालय 
सत्यमेव जयते 
बारत सरकार 
That which is to be prepared is called अश, and that which prepares is व्यजन as, दध्योदनः दध्ना उपसिक्त ओदन: rice prepared or made relishable with curd. So also frame. The words 'food' and 'condiment' as represented in the above com pounds are connected in sense by a verb understood, 
भक्ष्येण मिश्रीकरणम् ॥ ३५॥ पदानि ॥ भक्ष्येण, मिश्री-करणम् ( स०वि०तक तृसु०स०)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ मिश्रीकरणवाचि तृतीयान्त भत्यवाचिना सुबन्तेन सह समस्यते, तत्पुरुषश्च समासो भवति ॥ 
35. A word, ending with the 3rd case-affix and de noting a relish giving or refining ingredient, is compounded with a word meaning, victuals, and the compound is Tat purusa. 
Anything eatable, whether hard or soft, is called HEU; its refinement is called मिश्रीकरणं . As गुडधाना: ' barley prepared with jaggery;' गुडप्पथुकाः 'flattened parched rice prepared with jaggery.' 
The connection here also between the two words is established by a verb understood. 
चतुर्थी तदर्थार्थबलिहितसुखरक्षितैः ॥३६॥ पदानि ॥ चतुर्थी, तदर्थ-अर्थ-बलि हित-सुख-रक्षितैः ( स०वि०त सु०स०)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ तदर्थ अर्थ बलि हित सुख रक्षित इ.येतैः सह चतुथ्यन्त समस्यते, तत्पुरुषश्च समासो भवति ॥ 
वात्तिकम् ॥ अर्थेन नित्यसमासवचनं सर्व लिङ्गता च वक्तव्या ॥ 
36. A word ending with the 4th case-affix is com pounded with what denotes that which is for the purpose of what ends with the 4th case-affix and so too with the words artha 'on account of,' bali' a sacrifice,' hita 'salutary, sukha' pleasure,' and rakshita 'kept,' and the compound is called Tat-puruşa. 
The words are understood in this stra: and the whole sâtra qualifies these words. 
By the expression agad for the purpose thereof,' the special relation of a material and its modification alone is by Patañjali here held to be intended. As गूपाय दाम:= युपदारु: - wood for stake' (Chat is, wood which by modification will be changed into a stake). कुण्डलहिरण्यं gold for ear-ring. But not so here, रन्धनाय स्याली - 
ARE - GOVES 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
RNMENT OF IN 
OF INDIA 
A BLATIVE TAT-FURUSA. 
[BK. II. CH. I. SB7, 28/ 
"कृति मंत्रालय 
सय. भारत 
'pot for cooking.' अवहननायेालूखलम् - the wood mortar for threshing.' From this sutra we may also infer that the Dative case conveys also the sense of 'for the purpose thereof.' The word mesire is taken as one word by some, meaning a thing serviceable thereto.' See VI. 2. 44. For accent, see VI. 2.45. 
Vart:-With the word अर्थ the compound so formed is a Nitya compound (an invariable compound) and agrees in gender with the word which it qualifies ; as, ब्राह्मणाम् पय: "milk for the sake of Brahmans; and ब्राह्मणार्थी यवागू: 'gruel for the Brahmanas. So also कुवेरवलि: 'a sacrifice for Kuvera,' महाराजवलि: 'a sacrifice for the great Raja.' गाहितं 'what is good for cows.' अश्वहितं "what is good for horses.' 
गोमुख' what is pleasant for cows.' गारक्षितं 'what is kept for cows,' (as grass). 
पञ्चमी भयेन ॥ ३७ ॥ पदानि ॥ पञ्चमी, भयेन, (सन्त०वि०म० सुपा सह)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ पञ्चम्यन्त सुबन्त भयशब्देन सुबन्तेन सह समस्यते विभाषा तत्पुरुषश्च समासो भवति ॥ 
वात्ति कम् ॥ भय भीत भीति भीभिरिति वक्तव्यम् ॥ 
37. A word ending with the 5th case-affix is optional ly compounded with the word bhaya 'fear,' and the com pound is Tat-puruşa. 
The phrase ay 99 is understood here, and the sûtra qualifies it. 
As वृकेभ्योभयं = कभयं ' fear from wolves,' चौरभयं ' fear from thieves,' दस्युभयं ' fear from robbers.' 
Vart:-So also with the words भीत, भीति, and भी: as कभीतः, वृकभीतिः, बुकभी:. 
This sûtra is an expansion of sútra 32 and an exposition of the word wat there. So that we may have the following compounds also: ria: 'gone out of the village.' अधर्म जुगुप्सुः . 
अपेतापोढमुक्तपतितापत्रस्तैरल्पशः ॥ ३८॥ पदानि ॥ अपेत-अपोढ-मुक्त-पतित अपत्रस्तैः , अल्पशः , ( स०वि०त सु०पञ्चमीस०)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ अपेत अपोढ़ मुक्त पतित अपत्रस्त इत्ये तैः सह पञ्चम्यन्त समस्यते तत्पुरुषश्च समासो भवति ॥ असश इति समासस्यात्मविषयतामाचष्टे ॥ 
38. A word ending with the 5th case-affix is com pounded with the words apeta 'gone away,' apodha carried awav,' mukta 'freed,' patita ' fallen,' apatrasta, 'afraid of,' when the event takes place in a gradual manner, and the compound is called Tat-purusa, 
URE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY ON 
BKP. CH. I. $ 39, 40. ] 
ABLATIVE TAT-PURUSA 
सत्यमेव जयते 
EST 
. 
W 
As, varda:' gone away from pleasure.' Hymurs: 'carried away by imagination' चागुक्त: ' freed from the vheel.'' स्वर्ग पतित: ' fallen from heaven.' तरकापत्रस्त: 'afraid of the waves.' This is an expansion of II. 1. 32. 
By using the word *: 'in a gradual degree,' is shown the limited range of this kind of compounds. Not every ablative word can be so compounded. Hence there is no compounding at all in the following cases :-- steigia ufaa:, 'fallen from the mansion.' #AAIGYALET: ' afraid of eating. For here the fall, &c., is violent and sudden, and not gradual and slight. 
Fatal gardenerwu tia ll 26 ll Tata Il FTTH- -- - Hostf, *, ( Fonofogonserat ac ) 1 
वृत्तिः ॥ स्तोक अन्तिक दूर इत्येवमर्थाः शब्दाः कृच्छ शब्दश्च पञ्चम्यन्ताः क्तान्तेन सह समस्यन्ते, तत्पुरुषश्च समासो भवति ॥ 
वात्तिकम् ॥ शतसहस्रौ परेणेति वक्तव्यम् ॥ 
39. Words with the sense of stoka "a little,' antika near,' dûra 'far,' and also the word krichchhra 'penance,' ending in the 5th case-affix are compounded with what ends in kta, and the compound is Tat-purusa. 
As, Frient m: 'loosed from a little distance.' 
So also, अन्तिकादागत: 'come from near,' अभ्याशादागत: 'come from near,' दूरादागत : 'come from far,' fagenermaa: 'come from a distance,' Fifth : saved with difficulty, 
auren Tou: obtained with difficulty. 
By rule VI. 3. 2 the case-affix is not elided in compounds of this kind. 
Vart :- The words ta 'a hundred,' and sea 'a thousand,' are similarly compounded with the word . As, Tatent=Taar: 'beyond a hundred.' So also utapa: beyond a thousand.' In these examples the word sa and ora being exhibited in the 1st case and thus being upasarjana ought to have stood as the first member of the compound (II. 2. 30); But these compounds are supposed to fall under the class of coreae &c., (II. 2. 31) and hence the upasarjana stands as the second member of the compound. Irregularly is also the augment a ( 9 ) interposed between these two words. 
Anaft Stroe: Il 80 | TGIÊ | Eat, Eros: ( FOTOOFTOTT ) 1 
fa: il app strEIENT: HE Hd hayata Thièr hafa il 
40. A word ending with the 7th case-affix is com pounded with the words saunda skilled,' &c., and the com pound is Tat-puruşa, 
TURE 
GOL 
GOVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY ON 
ENT OF INDIA 
LOCATIVE TAT-PURUSA. 
[Br II. CH. I. $ 41, 43. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
परत सरकार 
The word fro: in the sûtra being in the plural number indicates a class of words beginning with saunda. 
As, अन्तेषु शौण्डः = अक्षशौण्ड: skilled in dice,' अधूर्त: 'cunning in dice,' अक्षकितव : Hagamester in dice.' 
The following is the list of शौण्डादि words :--(1) शोण्ड, (2) धूर्त, (3) कितब, (4) व्याड, (5) प्रवीण, (6) संवीत, (7) अन्तर when meaning place, (8) अधि, (9) पदु, (or अधिपटु), (10) पण्डित, (11) कुशल, (12) चपल, (13) निपुण, (14) संव्याड, (15) भन्थ, and (16) समीर. 
सिद्धशुष्कपक्कबन्धैश्च ॥ ४१ ॥ पदानि ॥ सिद्ध शुष्क पक्क-बन्धैः, च, (सत० वि०सप्तमी)॥ 
वृत्तिः । सिद्ध-शुष्क-पक्व बन्धैः इत्य तैः सह सप्तम्यन्त समस्यते, तत्पुरुषश्च समासो भवति ॥ 
41. A word ending with the 7th case-affix is com pounded with the words siddha perfected,' suşka dried,' pakva 'cooked,' and bandha . bound,' and the resulting com pound is Tat-purusa. 
As, साकाश्यसिद्धः ' perfect in sankasya.' काम्पिल्यसिद्धः " perfect in Kampilya.' आतपशुष्कः 'dried in the sun.' छायाशुष्क: - dried in the shade.' स्थालीपक्व: cooked in pot.' कुम्भीषक्व: 'cooked in an earthen jar.' चक्रवन्ध: 'bound on the wheel.' For their accent, see 
VI.2.32. 
These are also further illustrations of the word aga in sûtra 32. 
ध्वाङ क्षेण क्षेपे ॥ ४२ ॥ पदानि ॥ ध्वाङ क्षेण क्षेपे, (सातवि सु० सप्तमी)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ ध्वाङतवाचिना सह सप्तम्यन्त सुबन्त समस्यते, तत्पुरुषश्च समास भवति, क्षपे गम्यमाने। 
42. A word ending with the 7th case-affix is com pounded with the word dhvanksha, a crow,' (and with synonyms of crow) when contempt is implied; and the result ing compound is Tat-purusa.. 
As, tirare: 'a crow at the sacred bathing place,' i.e., a very greedy person; as a crow in a bathing place does not remain long, anywhere, so a person who goes to his teacher's house and does not tarry there long, is called a तीर्थकाक: or a तीवायसः 
When it has not this meaning, there is no compounding: as, ata sarafnista There is a crow in the sacred bathing place." 
कृत्यैत्रणे ॥ ४३ ॥ पदानि ॥ कृत्यैः, ऋणे, (सन्त सुव्स सह ) ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ कृत्य प्रत्ययान्तैः सह सप्तम्यन्त समस्यते, तत्पुरुषश्च समासो भवति ।। COVERNMENT 
TURE - GOL 
OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
SL 
BR H. Ch. I. $ 43, 45. ] 
LOCATIVE TAT-PURUSA. 
"कृति मंत्रालय 
79. 
78 
"11701 
43. A word ending with the 7th case-affix is com pounded with words ending with a kritya-affix (a fut. pass. Participle) and the resulting compound is Tat-puruşa, when 
debt is implied. 
This compound is confined to the words formed by the kritya affix ma and not to every ksitya-formed word. 
As, Freei 'a debt repayable within a month.' So tardigi payable within a year.' aecat 'repayable within three days.' 
By using the word hy we indicate by implication any appointed time in general, and not merely a time for the payment of a debt. Therefore we get compounds in the following cases also :-garçêr er 'the Sâma that should be sung in the morning.' race at spara: 'the chapter that should be studied in the morning.' 
Why do we say debt'? Observe fire dar foar 'the alms that should be given each month. 
are II 88 I OGIA I HETTA, (FOTOBOERE ETT ETE ) 1 
वृत्तिः ॥ संज्ञाया विषये सप्तम्यन्त सुपा सह समस्यते, तत् पुरुषश्च समासो भवति ॥ 
44. A word ending with the 7th case-affix is invari ably compounded with a word ending in a case-affix, when the compound thus formed is used as an appellative, and is called Tat-puruşa samâsa. 
A sanjñâ is expressed by the complete word, hence it is an invariable (nitya) compound; for we cannot express an appellative by a sentence. 
As, urch facient: 'wild sesamum' yielding no oil; anything which does not answer to one's expectation. So also wurm:, Tahiriya: 'anything found unex pectedly.' So also an arcanti, maanrant: 
The case-affix is not elided, in this case, in accordance with sútra VI. 3. 9. (The 7th case-aflix is not elided afterwards ending in consonants or in short a when the compound denotes appellative.) 
#atèriaavat: ll 84 | QGta lla, 6-er-vaztat, Erofeso JOAO ) 01 
वृत्तिः ॥ अहरवयवा राज्यवयवाश्च सप्तम्यन्ताः क्तान्तेन सह समस्यते, तत्पुरुषश्न समासो भवति ॥ 
CURE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
TRY OF CULTURA 
MINISTRU 
OF INDIA 
. 
TUR 
कृति मंत्राद्ध 
LOCATIVE TAT-PURUSA. 
[Bk. II. Ch. I. $ 45-47. 
V 
. 
जसरकार 
45. The names of divisions of day or night ending with a 7th case-affix are compounded with words ending with the affix kta; and the resulting compound is Tat puruşa. 
As, wafewniany done in the morning. Teu am done in the afternoon.' पूर्वराजकृतम् - done in the first part of the night.' अपररात्रकृतम् ' done in the last part of the night. 
Why do we say 'members or divisions of day and night ?' Observe with eaten in the day,' tentera 'occurring in the night. 
This being a continuation of sâtra II. 1. 32, we have diversely there and Garda 
arge II TETÊ II JET ( Fofono AFFE) 11 वृत्तिः । तत्रेत्येतत् सप्तम्यन्त क्तान्त न सह समस्यते,तत्पुरुषश्च समासो भवति ।। 
46. The word tatra 'there,' which is a word ending with the 7th case-affix, (V. 3. 10) is compounded with a word ending in kta, and the resulting compound is Tat puruṣa. 
Thus तत्वमुक्तम् 'eaten there,' तनकृतम् 'done there,' तत्रपीतम् 'drunk there.' By making this a compound, the same purpose is served as in sûtra II. 1. 25, namely, these two words form one word and get one accent. eta il 99 | TGTÊT 11 919, ( feromo 
. वृत्तिः ॥क्षपे गम्यमाने सप्तम्यन्त तान्तन सह समस्यते, तत् पुरुषश्च समासो भवति ॥ 
47. A word ending with a 7th case-affix is compound ed with a word ending with the affix kta, when, 'censure' is implied, and the compound is Tat-puruşa. 
As, wanawafai a tre they are as if an ichneumon standing on hot ground (metaphorically said of the inconstancy of man) Tad 
So also a fare dried in water, (figuratively used for anything unheard of or impossible.) 
So also warto fame (lit.) 'making water in a stream,' (fig.) doing a useless action' en gaat "offered oblation in ashes,' (fig.) 'a fruitless action, 
The 7th case-allix is not elided in the case of this sâtra also. See sûtra VI. 3. 14. 
URE - Gov 
STRY OF CULD 
VERNMENT OF 
T OF INDIA 
B 
IT. •CH. I. S 48, 49.] 
IRREGULAR TAT-PURUSA. 
2371 
17कृति मंग्राम 
सत्यमेव जयते 
भारत सरकार 
पात्रे संमितादयश्च ॥४८॥ पदानि ॥ पात्रे, संमित-आदयः, च, ( स० तक्षेपे)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ समुदाया एव निपात्यन्ते, पात्रेसंमितादयः शब्दास्तत्पुरुषसंज्ञा भवन्ति पे गम्यमाने ॥ 
48. The words like pâtre-sammita 'a dish-companion (a parasite), &c., are Tat-puruşa compounds, when con tempt is implied. 
All these are irregular compounds. Some of the words contained in this list are compounds formed with the past-participle (Th); they could have been formed by previous aphorism also. Their inclusion in this list is for the purpose that their first member should have udâtta on the beginning; because all the words belonging to this class, are a sub division of a larger class called 'युक्तारोह्यादि Class' treated of in sûtra VI. 2. 81. 
The following is the list of the words :-(1) पात्र समिताः, (2) पात्र बहुला: 'a parasite' (constant at meals or dinner time), (3) उदुम्बरमशकः, (4) उदुम्बरकृमिः, (5) उदरकृमिः, (6) कूपकच्छपः, (7) अवटकच्छपः, (8) कूपमण्डूकः, (9) कुम्भमण्डूकः, (10) उदपानमण्डूकः, (11) नगरकाकः, (12) नगरवायस: (13) मातरिपुरुषः, (14) पिण्डीशूरः, (15 पितरिशूरः, 16) गेहेशूरः, (17) गेहेनदी:, (18) गेहेक्ष्वेडी, (19) गेहेविजिती,(20) गेहेव्याडः, (21) गेहेमेही, (22) गेहेदाही, (23) गेहेहप्तः, (24) गेहेष्ट:, (25) गर्भेतृप्त:, (26) आखनिकबकः, (27) गोष्ठेशूरः, (28) गोष्ठेविजिती, 129) गोष्ठेदवेडी, (30) गोष्ठेपटुः, (31) गोष्ठेपण्डितः, (32) गोष्ठेप्रगल्भः, (33) कर्णेदिरिदिरा, (34) कर्णेचुरुचुरा ॥ 
पूर्वकालैकसर्वजरत्पुराणनवकेवलाः समानाधिकरणेन ॥ ४९ ॥ पदानि ॥ पूर्वकाल-एक-सव-जरत्-पुराण नव-केवलाः समानाधिकरणेन, ( स० वि० त० सु० सु०स०)॥ 
वृत्तिः । पूर्व काल एक सर्व जरत् पुराण नव केवल इत्येते सुबन्ताः समानाधिकरणेन सुपा सह समस्यन्ते, तत्पुरुषश्च समासेो भवति ।। 
49. A case-inflected word denoting an action which naturally precedes in time (pûrvakâla), and the words eka 'one,' sarva 'all,' jarat 'old,' purâna 'ancient,' nava 'new,' and kevala 'only,' are compounded with their co-relative case-inflected words which are in the same case with them ; and the compound so formed is Tat-purusa., 
The phrase go go is understood here, the whole sâtra qualifying it. 
Words which separately can be applied to many distinct and different objects, when they apply to one common object, are said to be in apposition (समानाधिकरणं) or abiding in a common substratum. 
In the present sâtra the word-form pûrva-kâla is not to be taken (I. 1. 68) but its significates ; while of the rest एक, &c., the very word-form is to be taken. A word denoting action which naturally precedes in time, is compounded with 
IRE - GOY 
COVERNMENT 
FCULTURE 
MINISTRI 
NT OF INDIA 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
IRREGULAR TAT-PURUSA. 
[BK II. CH. I. $ 50, 51. 
रत सरकार 
a word denoting action which naturally succeeds it. As, Firataiaa: ' bathed and perfumed.' कृष्टसमीकृतम् 'ploughed and levelled,' दग्धप्ररूढम् 'burnt and healed.'' एकशादी 'having one petticoat.' एकभिक्षा — begging once in a day.' सर्वदेवा: 'All gods.' सर्वमनुष्या: 'all men.' जरदस्ती 'old elephant.' जरद् गृष्टिः 'an old cow.' जरवृत्ति: 'old occupation.' पुराणान्नम् 'old rice.' पुराणावसथम् 'an old habitation.' So नवान्नम् ; नवावसथम् ; केवलानम् 'only rice.' 
Why do we say when they are in the same case?' Observe एकस्या: शादी 'one's petticoat.' 
These and the subsequent compounds are Karmadhâraya Compounds (I.2.42). 
दिक्संख्ये संज्ञायाम् ॥ ५० ॥ पदानि ॥ दिक-संख्ये , संज्ञायाम , ( सात वि० सुपा समानाधिकरणेन)॥ 
वृत्तिः ।। दिग्वाचिनः शब्दाः संख्या च समानाधिकरणेन सुबन्तेन सह समस्यन्ते तत्पुरुषश्च समासो भवति ॥ 
50. The words expressing a point of the compass, or a number (samkhyâ) enter into composition with the word correlated to them by being in the same case, when the sense of the compound is that of an appellative ; and it is a Tat-purusa. 
The phrase ' being in apposition,' is understood in every one of these sâtras up to the end of the chapter. 
As पूर्वेषु कानशमी ' the town of Ishukāmasami-in-the-east.' अपरेषुकामशनी 'the town of Ishukamasami-in-the-west.' पंचाम्राः 'the five mangoes,' सप्तर्षयः the seven-sages' (the constellation of the Great Bear). 
Why do we say when the sense is that of an appellative ?' Observe 7777 ear: 'northern trees.' 9: ATEIT: 'five Brahmanas.' See IV. 2. 107. 
तद्धितार्थोत्तरपदसमाहारे च ॥५१॥ पदानि ॥ तद्धित-अर्थ-उत्तरपद समाहारे, च ( स० त० वि० दिक्संख्ये स० सु०)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ तद्धिताथें विषये उत्तरपदे च परतः समाहारे चाभिधेये दिकसंख्ये समानाधिकरणेन सुपा सह समस्येते, तत्पुरुषश्च समासो भवति ।। 
51. In a case where the sense is that of a Taddhita affix, or when an additional member comes after the com pound, or when an aggregate is to be expressed, then a word signifying a point of the compass or a number, enters into composition with a case-inflected word which is in agreement 
URE • GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
C 
II. C. I. $ 51, 52. ] 
DVIGU. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
ent 
with it by being in the same case, and the compound so formed is called Tat-puruṣa. 
First let us take the case where the sense is that of a Taddhita-affix. Thus when a compound is formed out of the words yari sarei na: 'that which is in the eastern ball' [in which analytical exposition of the compound in question, the word *(IV. 2. 107) serves to represent the force of a Taddhita-affix], the compound having reached the form of waf + Fre, the feminine termination of the wal is rejected, because Patañjali declares that the masculine state belongs to a pronominal when exercising any of the five functions belonging to a word ; we have :-98 + grar + (IV. 2. 107)=arágra: (VII. 2. 117 and VI. 4. 148) who is in the eastern hall.' 
So also when an additional member comes after the compound (uttar-pade). As garantia: or cimanfaa: 'loving the eastern or western hall.' These Uttarpada Compounds are invariable (Nitya) compounds, so that they cannot be resolved into their component elements. 
When a TATETT "aggregate' is to be expressed, it is of course impossible to use a word expressing points of the compass (feate words). The following com pounds are formed with numbers (Fe), when employed with the force of a Tad dhita ashx; as, vistifa: 'relating to five barbers.' qie; 'relating to an oblation offered in five cups' (nyra) (IV. 1. 88). So also a: (V. 4. 92) 'whose wealth consists of five cows,' दशगवधन: 
The following are examples of aggregates : - 46 the collection of five fruits' (IV. 1. 21), Eugen an aggregate of ten bundles,' facient the aggregate of the three worlds,' qanun 'an aggregate of five virgins;' this word is neuter by II.4 17. and the long is shortened by 1. 2. 47. 
enaf feg: 11 4 11 TETÊ II ET-ge:, feu, ( o foaigarent TUGEATER) 
• वृत्तिः ॥ तद्धितार्थोत्तरपदसमाहारे चेत्यत्र यः संख्यापूर्व: स द्विगुसंज्ञो भवति ॥ 
52. In a case where the sense is that of a Taddhita affix, or when an additional member comes after the com pound or when an aggregate is to be expressed, the com pound, the first member of which is numeral, is called Dvigu or Numeral Determinative Compound. 
First to take an example of Taddhitârtha :--as, tag waren argia:=1999ra: 'an offering prepared or offered in five cups.' So also urua: 'prepared in ten cups.' These are names of Prodása offerings, and are formed by adding the aflix sur in the sense of 'refining an object of food' by sûtra IV. 2. 16; then this affix is elided (5*) by IV. 1. 88. 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRI 
RNMENT OF 
OF INDIA 
IRREGULAR TAT-PURUSA. 
[BK. II. CH, İ. $ 52, 53. 
संस्कृति मंत्राल 
1772.18 
279513 
To take an example when an additional member comes after the compound, As Tarta: 'loving 5 ships. f Heaven 'money which has come by two ships.' (+*+aq V. 4.99 = qara) 
Of an aggregate we have way. The feminine is formed by IV. 1. 21. 
ATIA a: Il ya || TIA II ETTÄ tài, (Folono TOEIE OTTO) 
वृत्तिः ॥ कुत्सितवाचीनि सुबन्तानि कुत्सनवचनैः सुबन्तैः सह समस्यन्ते, तत्पुरुषश्च समासो भवति ॥ 
53. Case-inflected words expressing vileness are compounded with case-inflected words, expressing contempt, and the resulting compound is Tat-purusa. 
As atuen: 'a bad or dull grammarian.' Here it might be asked, is the word ni 'grammar' a word of contempt, or the word aanhou 'grammarian'? Neither 'Grammar' (it being a part of Vedan ga) nor the person who studies it, i.e., the grammarian, can be an object of contempt ordinarily. 
The word 'grammarian' is, however, the expression of contempt in an indirect way, thus :- The person studying grammar but not studying it well, becomes an object of contempt and such a despicable person becomes also conta minated. The word enre is a term of contempt per se. It literally means, a person who on being asked a question, and not possessing ready wit and intelligence to answer it, scratches his head and contemplates vacancy (zefa) and tries to divert the questioner's attention by exclaiming 'how beautifully clear is the sky,' such a person is called खसूचिः. 
Such compounds are confined to cases where the reason for the use of any particular term is to express contempt with regard to the signification of that term. So we cannot form a compound of the sentence aytehtuzat: 'the thief gram marian;" for, contempt is not expressed with regard to the signification of the word 'grammarian.' But when the term 'grammarian' itself is used in a contemp tuous signification, then a compound will be formed. 
This aphorism is commenced in order to introduce an exception to sutra 57, by which an adjective stands as the first member in a compound. By the present sûtra, however, the attributive word will stand as the second member. 
Other examples of such compounds are: aftalaa:' one who hankers after performing sacrifices for persons for whom one ought not to perform sacrifices; ofreien-ge: ' an unbelieving logician,'' an atheist.' 
No compound can be formed under this aphorism, if both the words are not used in an opprobatory signification as such. Therefore it is not in the following case gremament: 'the bad Brahmana,' &c. 
URE - GOVO 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
SL 
BEDII. CI. I.154-56.1 
IRREGULAR TAT-PURUSA. 
सस्कृति मंत्रा 
सत्यमेव जयते 
आरत सरका 
पापाणके कुत्सितैः ॥ ५४॥ पदानि ॥ पाप-अणके, कुत्सितैः, (स० त० वि० सु० सह)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ पाप अणक एते सुबन्ते कुत्सितवचनैः सह समस्येते, तत्पुरुषश्च समासो भवति ॥ 
54. The case inflected words pâpa 'sin,' and anaka 'insignificant,' are "compounded with words expressive of vileness, and the compound is Tat-puruṣa. 
Both the words पाप and अनक are words of contempt (कुत्सन) ; by the laet sutra they would have stood as second members in the compound, the present sûtra, however, is so framed with regard to sûtras I. 2. 43 and II. 2. 30, that they will stand as first. As पापनापित: or अणकनापित: 'a contemptible barber,' पाप 01 अणक-कुलाल: 'a contemptible potter.' 
उपमानानि सामान्यवचनैः ॥५५॥ पदानि ॥ उपमानानि, सामान्यवचनैः, (स० त० वि० सु० सु० स०)॥ 
वृत्तिः ।। उपमानवाचीनि सुब-तानि सामान्यवचनैः सुबन्तैः सह समस्यन्त, तत्पुरुश्च समासो भवति ॥ 
55. Case-inflected words denoting objects of compari son, are compounded with words denoting what is likened to them, by reason of the latter possessing qualities in com 
mon with the former, and the compound is Tat-purusa. 
That by or to which a thing is compared is' upamâna' and the upameya' (the thing compared) is called समान्य or common.' Thus धनश्याम कृष्ण : 'cloud-black Krispa' (Krisna black as a cloud). Here zert is a quality common to Krisņa and cloud: therefore 'cloud' which is the start is compounded with it. So also कुमुदश्येनी lily-white,' हंसगदग्दा ' Swan-sounding,' न्यग्रोध पारिमंडला globular as Nyagrodha tree.' For accent, see VI. 2.2. 
But not so in देवदत्ता श्यामा - black Devadatta' or फला इब तन्दुला: 'the rice are like fruits,' पर्वता इव बलाहकाः 'clouds like mountains.' 
उपमितं व्याघ्रादिभिः सामान्याप्रयोगे ॥५६॥ पदानि ॥ उपमितम् , व्याघ्र-आदिभिः, सामान्य-अप्रयोगे, (स० त० वि० सु०स० उपमानानि स०)॥ 
वृत्तिः । उपमेयमुपमित तद्वाचि सु बन्तं व्याघ्रादिभिः सामर्थ्याद् उपमानवचनैः सह समस्यते, तत्पुरुषश्च समासो भवति,नचेसामान्यवाचि शब्दः प्रयुज्यते ॥ 
56. A case-inflected word denoting subject of com parison is compounded with the words vyāghra "tiger,' &c., the latter being the standard of comparison, and in 
IRE • GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
UT OF INDIA 
IRREGULAR TAT-PURUSA. 
[BK. II. CH. I. $ 50, 57, 
सत्यमय जयते 
संस्कृति मंत्री 
777 77 
IDO 
construction with the former ; and the compound is Tat puruşa; provided that any word expressing the common characteristic(ETArra)as explained above, is not employed. 
This is a modification of sûtra 57, by which the objective would have stood first; by the present, the attribute stands second As goats cata=gayola: ' a person-tiger' (in strength) yagfele: . 
In the last sûtra, the compounding was between the sun and the common quality. In the present, the compounding is between the syfta and certain gusta but never with aria 499. Therefore we cannot form this kind of compound from the following sentence :--- gaur eta ga : ' a man strong as a tiger.' Similarly मुखपदाम् , मुखकमल, करकिसलयम्, पार्थिवचन्द्रन् । 
The words 4a, &c., are w ort:, i.e., this is a class of compound words, the fact of a word belonging to which, is known by its form, a posteriori and is not discoverable by any consideration of its constituent parts a priori. 
The following is the list of such words : 
(1) m=A tiger. (2) fe=A lion. (3) F=A bear. (4) 29 = 1 bull. (5) 4FH =Sandal. (6) a=A wolf. (7) au = A bull. (8) ate=A boar, hog. (9) im=An elephant. (10) 2=A tree. (11) 334T=An elephant. (12) 4 =A kind of deer. (13) yan=The spotted antelope. (14) goedia=A lotus flower. (15) =A tree Butea Frondosa. (16) Fa=A rogue, cheat. 
आकृतिगणोऽयम् 1. 964999 
A lotus-like face. 2. 
) 3. recreme=Sprout-like hand, a tender hand. (4) vifaars: . विशेषणं विशेष्येण बहुलम् ॥ ५७ ॥ पदानि ॥ विशेषणम्, विशेष्येण, बहुलम् ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ विशेषणवाचि सुबन्त विशेष्यवाचिना समानाधिकरणेन सुबन्तेन सह बहुलं समस्यते, तत्पुरुषश्च समासो भवति । 
57. A case-inflected word denoting the qualifier (the Adjective), is compounded diversely with a case-inflected. word denoting the thing thereby qualified, (the Substantive), the latter being in agreement (same case) with the former : and the compound is Tat-puruşa. 
The discriminator' is called fage and the discriminated' is called face as नीलोत्पल 'a blue lotus,' रक्तोत्पलं a red lotus.' 
By using in the rule the expression ana 'diversely 'it is meant that in some cases it is imperative to make a compound (faragara) as yonga: 'a black snake.' 
TURE - GOV 
GOVERNA 
OF CULTURA 
AINISTRY OF 
NMENT OF IN 
OF INDIA 
ABRS P. Ch. I. § 57-59.] 
IRREGULAR TAT-PURUSA. 
मंत्रालय .भा 
भारत सरकार 
TE-न 
लोहितशालि: ' red rice':-and sometimes it is forbidden ; as, रानो जामदग्न्यः 'Rama called also Jamadagnya' (as being the son of Jamadagni) : अर्जुन: कार्तवीर्य:-and in some cases it is optional, नीलमुत्पलं or नीलोत्पलं 
Why do we say qualifier?' Observe ततक: सर्प: : the Taksaka snake.' Why do we say qualified.' Observe लोहितन्तक्षक: 'the red Taksaka.' 
पूर्वापर प्रथमचरमजघन्यसमानमध्यमध्यमवीराश्च ॥५८॥ पदानि । प्रथम-चरम-जधन्य-समान-मध्य-मध्यम-वीराः, च (सन्तवि०सु०स० समानाधिकरणेन)। 
वृत्तिः ॥ पूर्व अपर प्रथम चरम जघन्य समान मध्य मध्यम वीर इत्येते सुबन्ताः समानाधिकरणेन सुपा सह समस्यन्ते, तत्पु रुषश्च समासो भवति ॥ 
58. The case-inflected words pûrva prior,' apara other,' prathama 'first,' charama 'last,' jaghanya 'hindmost,' samâna 'equal,' madhya 'middle,' madhyama'middle,' and vira 'hero,' are compounded with words ending with a case affix and which are in agreement (same case) with thein; and the compound is Tat-purusa. 
As पूर्वपुरुष: 'ancestor,' (anyone of the three, father, grandfather and great grandfather), अपरपुरुष: 'successor,' चरमपुरुष: ' last person,' जघन्यपुरुष: ' hindermost person,' समानपुरुष: 'equal person,' मध्य or मध्यमपुरुष: 'middle person,' वीरपुरुष: 'heroic person. 
श्रेण्यादयः कृतादिभिः ॥ ५९ ॥ पदानि ॥ श्रोणि प्रादयः, कृतादिभिः, (सन्त०वि०सुब्स समान)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ श्रेण्यादयः सुबन्ता कृतादिभिः समानाधिकरणैः समस्यन्ते, तत्पुरुषश्च समासेो भवति ।। वात्तिकम् ॥ श्रेण्यादिषु च्व्यर्थवचनम् ॥ 
59. The case-inflected words śreņi 'class,' &c., are compounded with words krita 'made,' &c., which are in agreement (same case), with them; and the compound is Tat-purusa. 
Vart :--The words मेणि &c., for the purposes of this sutra, are supposed to have the force of the affix चि (chvi). Thus आनणयः श्रेणयः कृताः =श्रेणिकृताः 'made into classes ' (those who were not classified before). 
The class of words called maile are akriti-gana and cannot be known a priori. The Samâsa is also an invariable Samasa by reason of sûtra II. 2.18, since all words that end in chvi (Feat) are called gati (I.4 61.) 
(1) श्रेणि = A line, a series. (2) एक = One or ऊक, (3) पग = A heap, collection, | multitude. (4) मुकुन्द = Name of Krisna or कुन्द. (5) राशि=DA heap, mass collection, 
URE 
GOVE 
TRY OF CUIR 
MINISTRY 
NMENT OF IN 
OF INDIA 
IRREGULAR TAT-PURUSA. 
BK. II. CH. I.S5060. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
तिसरकार 
(6) "निचय = A collection, heap. (7) विषय = An object or विशेष. (8) निधन=Poor, indigent or विधान, निधान, (9) पर= Distant. (10) इन्द्र=The god of rain. (11) देव=Divine, celestial. (12) मुण्ड= Shaved, bald. (13) भूत = Become, being. (14) श्रमण = Sraman or श्रवण. (15) वदान्य= Liberal minded. (16) अध्यापक = A teacher. (17) अभिरूपक = Hand some. (18) ब्राह्मण = Brahman. (19) क्षत्रिय = Ksatriya. (20) विशिष्ट = Distinguished, distinct. (21) पदु=Clever, skilful, dexterous. (22) पण्डित= Learned, wise. (23) कुशल = Right, proper, good. (24) चपल = Shaking, trembling, tremulous. (25) निपुण 
= Skilful, dexterous. (26) कृपण = Wretched, helpless. 
आकृतिगणोऽयम् (1) कृत = Done, performed, made. (2) मित=Measured. (3) मत = Thought, believed, supposed. (4) भूत = Produced, performed. (5) उक्त = Said, spoken, uttered. (6) युक्त =Joined, united. (7) समाज्ञात == Knoivn or understood thoroughly. (8) समाम्नात =Repeated, recited. (9) समाख्यात = Reckoned up, counted, summed up. (10) संभावित = Considered, supposed, imagined. (11) संसेवित = Served. (12) अवधारित = As certained, known. (13) अवकल्पित = Corresponded with, ansvered. (14) निराकृत = expelled, banished. (15) उपकृत = Assisted, benefited, served, &c. (16) उपाकृत = In vited. (17) दृष्ट = Seen, looked, perceived. (18) कलित = Counted. (19) दलित = Broken, torn, rent, burst. (20) उदाहूत = Said, uttered. (21) विश्रुत = Well-known. renowned. (22) उदित=Risen. 
तेन नविशिष्टेनाना ॥६० ॥ पदानि ॥ क्तेन, नञ्-विशिष्टेन, अनज , (सन्त०वि०ससमानाधि०)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ नजैव विशेषो यस्य सर्व मन्यत् प्रकृत्यादिकं तुल्य तन्नविशिटं तेन नञविशिष्टेन क्तान्तेन समानाधिकरणेन सह अनन क्तान्त समस्यते, तत्पुरुषश्च समासो भवति ॥ 
वात्तिकम् ॥ कृतापकृतादीनामुपसंख्यानम् ।। १ ।। वात्तिकम् ॥ समानाधिकरणाधिकारे शाकपाथि वादीनामुपसंख्यानम् , उत्तरपदलोपश्च ॥ २ ॥ 
60. A word ending with the affix kta, and not having the negative augment nañ is compounded with the same word ending with the affix kta but which is distinguished from the former, by having the augment naõ; and the com pound is Tat-purusa. 
Thus कृताकतन् 'done and not done,' भुक्तामुक्त' eaten and not eaten,' पीतापीतं ' drunk and not drunk,' उदितानुदेतं 'spoken and not spoken, 
The intermediate augment 7 or the x as in the following two examples, do not make the forms dissimilarअशितानशितेन जीवति, क्लिष्टाक्लिशितेन वर्तते ॥ 
Vart :--The compounds कृतापकृत, &c., should also be included, URE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
Br. I. CH. I. S61-63.] 
IRREGULAR TAT-PURUSA.. 
ति मंत्रालय 
भारत सरका 
प्राकृतिगणोऽयम् (1) कृतापकृत. (2) भुक्तविभुक्त, (3) पीतविपीत. (4) गतप्रत्यागत. (5) यातानुयात. (6) क्रायानायिका, (7) पुढापुटिका. (8) फलाफलिका. (9) मानोन्मानिका. 
Vart: - The compounds like vrhuurgra should also be enumerated, and there is elision of the second member in these compounds. As शाकप्रियः पार्थिव:=शाकपार्थिवः 
the king beloved by the people of his era,' i.e., an era-making king. 
(1) शाकपार्थिव. (2) कुतपसौश्रुत. (3) अजातौल्वलि. 
सन्महत्परमोत्तमोत्कृष्टाः पूज्यमानैः ॥ ६१ ॥ पदानि ॥ सत्-महत्-परम-उत्तम उत्कृष्टाः, पूज्यमानैः॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ सत् महत् परम उत्तम उत्कृष्ट इत्य ते पूज्यमानैः सह समस्यन्त, तत्पुरुषश्च समासो भवति ॥ 
61. The words sat good,' mahat 'great,' parama 'highest,' uttama 'best,' and utkrista 'excellent,' are com pounded with the words denoting the person deserving of respect; and the compound is Tat-purusa. 
As सत्पुरुष: 'a good person ;' महापुरुष: a great man ;' परमपुरुष: 'the highest person ;' उत्तमपुरुष: 'the best person ;' उत्कृष्टपुरुष: 'the excellent person.' 
Why do we say 'with words denoting the person deserving of respect ?' Observe उत्कृष्टः गाः कर्दमात् 'the ox was pulled out of the mud.' 
वृन्दारकनागकुञ्जरीः पूज्यमानम् ॥ ३२ ॥ पदानि ॥ वृन्दारक-नाग-कुजरैः, पूज्यमानम् ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ वृन्दारक नाग कुञ्जर इत्येतैः सह पूज्यमानवाचि सुबन्त समस्यते, तत्पुरुषश्च समासो भवति । 
62. A case-inflected word denoting object deserving of respect is compounded with the words vrindâraka 'emi nent,' nâga 'serpent or elephant,' kuñjara 'elephant'; and the compound is Tat-purusa. 
As arereita: 'an excellent bull or cow,' yaaraita: 'an excellent horse.' So also arom:, almenorc: , &c. Why do we say 'when meaning the objects deserving of respect?' Observe सुसीमोनाग: the serpent Sushma.' 
कतरकतमौ जातिपरिप्रश्न॥३३॥ पदानि ॥ कतर-कतमी, जातिपरिप्रश्न वृत्तिः ॥ कतर-कतमौ जाति-परिप्रश्ने वर्तमानौ समर्थेन सुपा सह समस्येते , तत्पुरुषश्च समासो भवति । 
63. The words katara 'which or who of two' and katama 'which or who of many,' when used in asking ques tions about the genus or class, are compounded with other 
GOVERNMEN 
TRY OF CULT 
MINISTRY 
ENT OF INDIA 
संस्कृति मात्र 
IRREGULAR TAT-PURUSA. 
[BK. II. Cn. I. $ 63-65. 
ETS 
. 
197912 
case-inflected words with which they are in construction, and the compound is Tat-puruṣa. 
As eache: and naturala: 'which of the two is katha, and which kâlâpa ?' Cated: and intera: ' which of these is katha, &c. 
It might be objected, what is the use of employing the word orfaylucat in the aphorism; since the word na is especially employed in asking such questions ; (see V. III, 93) and the word wat will get the same signification by being read along with it?' The very use of this phrase in the aphorism shows that the word et has other meanings besides that of an interrogative pronoun, of determining jâti; as, at tadigaert: 'which of you two, Sirs, is Devadatta,' and PPT yani aaga: 'which of you, Sirs, is Devadatta.' Here there is no questioning about jâti, all belonging to the same genus, hence there is no compounding. (Accent VI. 2. 57.) 
Pero ni $8 | TETÀU PH, ETA, ( FOTOFOLAATATŪa fêto ) | वृत्तिः ॥ किमित्येतत् क्षेपे गम्यमाने सुपा सह समस्यतो, तत्पुरुषश्च समासो भवति । 
64. The word kim' what,' when implying contempt,' is compounded with a word ending in a case-affix, and the compound is Tat-purusa. 
As fi TTT OT 7 tara 'he is a bad king who does not protect his subjects.' कि सखा योऽभिद्रुह्यति he is a bad friend who hates.' किं गौ: यो न बहति 'it is a bad ox that| does not carry. 
The affix aq (V. 4. 91) does not come after this compound as in Troti, #ra: , &c., by force of Rule V. 4. 70. Otherwise the form would have been ficat and not ferieron 
Why do we say 'when censure is implied?' Observe 9 Tat=fi Trst: whose king ;' fare: 
पोटायुवतिस्तोककतिपयगृष्टिधेनुवशावेहवष्कयणीप्रवक्तश्रोत्रियाध्यापकधूतैर्जा fa: il es II Ga Haret-gala-kita-laa-tie-sa-qatraeg- 
a yo-Tata श्रोत्रिय-अध्यापक-धूतः , जातिः , ( स० सह वित०वि०स०)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ पोटादिभिः सह जातिवाचि सुबन्त समस्यते , तत्पुरुषश्च समासो भवति ॥ 
65. A case-infected word denoting a genus (jâti) is compounded with the words potâ 'a hermaphrodite,' yuvati, a young female,' stoka 'a little,' katipaya 'a few,' grişti a cow which has had only one calf,' dhenu 'milch-cow, vasa a barren female, vehad, a cow that miscarries, 
URE . Govo 
MINISTRY 
WNISTRY OF C 
NMENT OF IN 
BKL. CA. I. $.65-67.7 
IRREGULAR TAT-PURUSA. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
सरकार 
başkayanî 'a cow that has a full-grown calf,' pravaktri “an expounder,' śrotriya 'a learned Brâhmana,' adhyâpaka 'a teacher,' and dhûrta 'a cunning fellow '; and the result ing compound is called Tat-puruṣa. 
As suitet 'a young female elephant,' fugarà a female elephant.' So also feil: 'a little fire,' serian urt 'a little butter milk,' rife: , Arag: , Frag: , traea, atractiuft, fishathir 'an expounder of Katha,' FATA, a Brâhmaṇa who has mastered the Katha branch of the Yajur Veda, '3729: 'a teacher of the Katha branch of the Yajur Veda.' 
Why do we say 'when denoting a genus or a common noun ?'Observe 2aen: Ham 'Devadatta expounder. 
The word ya has not a bad signification here. Hence a means 'a Brâhmana well versed in the Katha branch of the Yajur Veda.? 
Faialat II & II TGIÀ Il giar-aga:, , ( TOTOOFTHE Chare) 1 
वृत्तिः ॥ जातिवाचि सुबन्तं प्रशंसावचनैः सह समस्यते , तत्पुरुषश्च समासो भवति ॥ 
66. A case-inflected word denoting a genus (jâti) is compounded with a word denoting praise and the com pound is Tat-puruşa. 
The words denoting praise should be rûdhi (fa) words like wargant, &c., which retain their specific gender though used along with words of other genders, in apposition with them, as, 714216'an excellent cow,' waarge an excellent horse,' referent an excellent cow.' These words are generally used at the end of a compound to denote 'excellence' or 'the best of its kind.' 
Why do we say when denoting genus?' Observe mâ taigent an excellent virgin.' 
agaieaalsartan: 1 89 || TGTÀ Il Jal, asia-giea वलिन-जरतीभिः, (सविस्त०स०सहसमानाधिकरणेन)॥ 
2वृत्तिः ॥ खलत्यादिभिः समानाधिकरणोः सह युवशब्दः समस्यते , तत्पुरुषश्च समासो भवति ॥ 
67. The word yuvâ 'young,' is compounded with the words khalati, obald headed,' palita "grey-haired,' valina L'wrinkled, jarati 'decayed,' when they are in agreement |(same case); and the compound is Tat-puruşa. 
The word aim is exhibited in the feminine gender, in the aphorism, - with the object of indicating the existence of the following maxim of inter 
,pretation wurde fagrafagurfa ETH 
ARE - GOVE 
FCULTURE 
ASTRY OF C 
ERNMENT OF 
OF INDIA 
SINIWCस 
IRREGULAR TAT-PURUSA. 
[BK. II. Cn. I. S 68-7 
रकृति मंत्रान 
सत्यमेव जयते 
भारत सरकार 
A Prátipadika denotes whenever it is employed in grammar, also such a crude form as is derived from it by the addition of an affix denoting gender.' 
As, युवा + खलतिः = युवाखलति:. So also युवतिः खलती = युवखलती in the feminine : 'bald in youth.' So युवपलितः, fem. युवपलिता "grey-haired in youth,' युबवलिन: fem. युववलिना 'wrinkled in youth,' युवजरन् fem. युवजरती 'appearing old in youth' (prematurely old.) 
कृत्यतुल्याख्या अजात्या॥६८॥ पदानि ॥ कृत्य-तुल्य-आख्या, अजात्या, (स० वित ससु०) 
वृत्तिः ॥ कृत्य-प्रत्ययान्तास्तुल्यपर्यायाश्च सुबन्ता अजातिवचनेन समस्यन्त , तत्पुरुषश्च समासो भवति ॥ 
68. Words ending with a kritya affix, and the word tulya 'equal,' and its synonyms, are compounded with words which do not denote genus (jâti) being in the same case with them; and the compound is Tatpurusa. 
As, भोज्योष्णम् ' hot food, भोज्यलवणं — salt food, पानीयशीतलं 'cool drink,' तुल्यश्वेत: equally white,' सदृशश्वेत: 'equally white,' सदृशमहान् ‘equally great.' 
Why do we say 'when not denoting a genus'? Observe #15a: ma: eatable rice.' Here the word area is used as an Adjective and not as a common noun Hence there is no compounding even under II. 1. 57. 
वर्णा वर्णन ॥ ६९ ॥ पदानि ॥ वर्णः , वर्णन , ( सन्त विसह समानाधि०)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ वर्णविशेषवाचि सुबन्त वर्णविशेषवाचिना सुबन्तन समानाधिकरणेन सह समस्यते , तत्पुरुषश्च समासो भवति ॥ 
69, . A case-inflected word denoting colour' is com pounded with another case-inflected word which is in agree ment with the former, and also denotes colour, and the com 
pound is Tat-purusa. 
AS कृष्णसारङ्गः 'spotted antelope,' लोहितसारङ्गः 'antelope dappled with red,' कृष्णशवल: dappled with black spots,' &c. For accent VI. 2. 3. 
कमार: श्रमणादिभिः॥ ७० ॥पदानि ॥ कुमारः, श्रमणः-प्रादिभिः, (सणवन्तब्स समा०)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ कुमारशब्दः श्रमणादिभिः सह समस्यते , तत्पुरुषश्च समासो भवति । 
70. The word kumâra 'a boy' is compounded with co ordinate words sramanâ 'an ascetic,' &c., and the compound is Tat-puruşa. 
In this list of w , and the rest, with the words which are feminine such as मणा, प्राजिता, कुलटा, the werd कुमार must also be in the feminine gender ; with the words 
ORE 
GOVE 
GOVERNMEN 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
WENT OF INO 
BRIONI. CH. I. $ 71, 72. ] 
IRREGULAR TAT-PURUSA. 
सिस्कानिमत्रा 
सरवमय जयते 
सरकार 
• भारत 
which appear as masculine, e.g., अध्यापक, अभिरूपक, पंडित 'the word कुमार must also be masculine, because 'a Pratipadika' denotes, whenever it is employed also such a crude form as is derived from it by the addition of an affix denoting gender, 
As कुमारीश्चमणा and कुमारअमणा 'a virgin ascetic or a bachelor ascetic.' 
श्रमणादिः (1) अमणा = Labouring, toiling. (2) प्रबजिता=Gone abroad or into exile. (3) कुलटा=An unchaste woman. (4) गर्भिणी =A pregnant female. (5) तापसी = A hermit, 
devotee. (6) दासी = A female servant. (7) बन्धकी =An unchaste woman. (8) प्राध्यापक A teacher. (9) अभिरूपक-Handsome. (10) पण्डित = Learned, wise. (11) मृदु = Soft. (12) कुशल = Right, proper, good. (13). चपल = Shaking, trembling. (14) निपुण = Clever, sharp, skilful. 
चतुष्पादो गर्भिण्या ॥ ७१ ॥ पदानि ॥ चतुष्पादः , गर्भिण्या , (सन्तसु० स०)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ चतुष्पादवाचिनः सुबन्ता गर्भिणी शब्देन समस्यन्त, तत्पुरुषश्च समासो भवति । वार्तिकम् ॥ चतुष्पाजातिरिति वक्तव्यम् ॥ 
71. A case-inflected word denoting a quadruped is compounded with the co-ordinate word garbhinî, and the compound is Tat-purusa. 
गोगर्भिणी 'a pregnant cow,' अजागर्भिणी 'a pregnant she-goat.' Vart :-It should be stated that the rule is confined to the words denoting genus of quadrupeds. So not here :--कालाक्षी गर्भिणी or स्वस्तिमती गर्भिणी - the pregnant cow called Kâlâksî or Svastimati.' 
Why do we say quadruped' ? Observe ब्राह्मणी गर्भिणी . मयूरव्यंसकादयश्च ॥ ७२ ॥ पदानि ॥ मयूर-व्यंसक-श्रादयः, च , (सन्त०वि०)। वृत्तिः ॥ समुदाया एव निपात्यन्ते मयूरव्यंसकादयः शब्दास्तत्पुरुषसंज्ञाश्च भवति ॥ 
72. And the words mayûra-vyamsaka 'cunning like a peacock,' &c., are Tat-purusa compounds. 
These are irregularly formed Tat-purusa compounds. The force of the word in the aphorism is that of restriction. For though the compound like भयरव्यंसक is allowable, we cannot form a compound like परम मयूरव्यंसक. 
The following is the list of such compounds : 
मयूरव्यंसकादयः (1) मयूरव्यंसक, (2) छात्रव्यंसक. (3) कम्बोजमुण्ड, (4) यवनमुण्ड, (5) हस्तेगृप or हस्तगृह्य in nivedals. (6) पादेगृह्य or गादगृह्य. () लाङ्गलेगृह्य or लागलगृह्य. (8) पुनर्दाय ॥ रहीडादयो ऽन्यपदार्थ 
URE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY O 
ENT OF INDIA 
(25654 
IRREGULAR TAT-PURUSA. 
[Bk. II. CH. 1972, 
सत्यमेव जयते 
कृति मंत्रान 
१.भारतमा 
तिसरकार 
as. (9) रहीडं वर्तते, (10) रहियवं वर्तते ॥ (11) रहिवणिजा (क्रिया). (12) अपेहिवाणिजा (13) प्रेहिवा णिजा .. (14) रहिस्वागता . (15) अपेहिस्वागता . (16) रहिद्वितीया . (17) अपेहिद्वितीया , (18) प्रेहिद्वि तीया (19) रहिकटा. (20) अपेहिकदा . Or अपोहकटा . (21) प्रेहिकटा . or प्रोहकटा . (22) आहरकरटा . (23) मेहिकर्दमा . (24) प्रहकर्दमा . (25) विधमचूड़ा . (26) उद्धमचूड़ा . (27) उद्धरचूड़ा . (28) अाहर चेला . (29) बाहरवसना . (30) (आहरसेना). (31) आहरवनिता . (32) (आहरवितना) (33) कन्तवि चक्षणा . (34) उद्धरोत्सना . (35) उद्धरावसजा . (36) उद्धमविथमा . (37) उत्पचनिपचा . or विपचा. (38) उत्यतनिपता (39) उच्चावचम् . (40) उचनीचम् . (41) आचोपचम् , (42) आचपराचम् . (43) नसप्रचम् . (44) निश्चप्रपन . (45) अकिंचन . (46) स्नात्वाकालक . (47) पीत्वास्थिरक. (48) मुक्त वासुहित . (49) भोज्यपापीयान् (50). उत्पत्यपाकला Or व्याकुला . (51) निपत्यरोहिणी . (52) निषणश्यामा . (53) अपेहिप्रघसा . (54) रहिविघसा (55) इहपञ्चमी . (56) इहिद्वितीया ॥ जहिकर्मणा बहुलमाभीक्षप्ये कतारं चाभिदधाति , (57) जहिजोड़ः . (58) जहिजोड़न . (59) जहिस्तम्बम् . (60) (जहिस्तम्ब:). (61) उज्जहिस्तबम् or ठम्ब ; भारव्यातमारव्यातेन क्रियासातत्ये (62) अश्नीतपिबता . (63) पचतभृज्जता (64) खादतमोदता . (65) खादतवमता (66) सादताचमता . (67) बाहरनिवपा (68) आहरनिष्किरा . (69) भावपनिष्किरा . (70). उत्पचविपचा (71) भिन्धिलवणा . (72) कन्धिविचक्षणा. (73) पचंलवणा . (74) पचप्रकूटा , 
आकृतिगलोऽयम् . (1) अकुतोऽभयः . (2) कान्दिर्णकः . (3) कन्दिशीकः . (4) आहापुरुषिका . (5) अहमहमिका . (6) यदृच्छा . (7) रहिरेयाहिरा . (8) उन्मजावमृजा . (9) द्रव्यान्तरम् . (10) अावश्यकार्यम् . 
URE 
GOVER 
VERNMENTA 
ISTRY OF CM 
MINISTA 
T OF INDIA 
• 
सत्यमेव जयते 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
ओम 
॥ अथ द्वितीयाध्यायस्य द्वितीयः पादः॥ 
BOOK SECOND. 
CHAPTER II. 
पूर्वापराघरोत्तरमेकदेशिनकाधिकरणे ॥१॥ पदानि ॥ पूर्व अपर अधर-उत्तरम्, एकदेशिना , एकाधिकरणे, (सन्तवि०म०स०) । 
वृत्तिः ॥ एकदेशीऽस्यास्तीत्येकदेशी अवयवी तद्वाचिना सुबन्तेन सह पूर्वापराषरोत्तर शब्दाः सामर्यादेकदेशवचनाः समस्यन्ते तत्पुरुषश्च समासो भवति ।। 
1. The words pûrva front, apara "near,' adhara 'lower,' and uttara 'upper,' are compounded when in construction with a word signifying a thing that has parts, provided that the thing having parts is distinguished numerically by unity; and the compound is Tat-purusha. 
The word 'ekâdhikarana' (the unity of substance) is the attribute of or qualifies the word 'ekadesin.' This debars the Genitive Tat-purusha compound ordained by sûtra 9; which would have placed the words 'pûrva' &c., last in the compound, whereas being here exhibited in the nominative case (I. 2. 43 and II, 2. 30), they take the precedence. 
पूर्व + कायस्य = पूर्वकायः the front of the body'; अपरकायः 'the back of the Goay; अधरकायः 'the lower part of the body'; and उत्तरकायः the upper part of the body. 
Why do we say what signifies a thing that has parts ? Observe पूर्वनामे: कायस्य. But not so in पर्व छात्राणामामन्त्रय invite the fore-most of the pupils': because here the substratum (adhikarana) is not unity (eka), But how do we get the compounds like मध्याह्नः 'noon'; सायाहः 'evening? The word 'ahna' is compounded with every word signifying its parts, because we learn this by inference from sâtra VI. 3. 110. 
अर्द्ध नपुंसकम् ॥२॥ पदानि ॥ अर्द्धम् , नपुंसकम् , (स०वि०तसुक स०एकदेशिना एकाधिकरणे)॥ 
वृतिः ॥ अर्द्धमित्येतन्नपंसकमेकदेशिनकाधिकरणेन समस्यते तत्पुरुष समासो भवति ॥ 
URE - GOVE 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTA 
NMENT OF IN 
OF INDIA 
EKADHIKARANA TAT-PURUSHA. [BK. II. CH. II. 
संस्कृति मित्रा 
सत्यमेव जयते 
तिसरकार 
2. The word seardha when it signifies ex actly equal parts i. e. halves, is always neuter, and is compounded with a word signifying a thing that has parts, provided that the thing halved is numerically one; and the compound is Tat-purusha. 
The word is neuter when it means exactly equal parts or bisec tion. 
The word graieria and Tarantu are understood here. This sûtra also debars sutra 9; as अर्द्धपिप्पल्या: = अर्द्धषिष्पली 'a half of the pepper'; अर्द्ध 
Igaram a half of the Kośátakî.' 
Why do we say when it is neuter?? Otherwise we have ang half the village'? Tghalf the city.' 
The word ekadesin' must also be taken here. Thus in the sentence recome acerca a half of the animal is of Devadatta'; we cannot compound the word 'ardha' with 'Devadatta.' 
The word 'ekâdhikarana' must also be taken here. So we cannot com pound we fecretary 'the half of the peppers.' 
द्वितीयतृतीयचतुर्थतुर्याण्यन्यतरस्याम् ॥३॥ पदानि ॥ द्वितीय. pato-wa-jutio, fruatria, (acaefaegas-r) ! 
वृत्तिः ॥ द्वितीयादीनि शब्दरूपाणि एकवेशिनकाधिकरणेन सहान्यतरस्या समस्यन्ते सम्पुरुषश्च समासो भवति ।। 
3. The words dvitiya, 'second,'tritîya'third,' chaturtha fourth,' and turya 'fourth,' are optionally compounded with that word which signifies a thing that has parts, provided that the thirig having parts is distinguished numerically by unity. The compound so formed is called Tat-purusha. 
This also debars sätra 9. By the force of the word 'optionally used here, H. 2. 9. also applies. The prohibition contained in II. 2. 11. as to the compounding of a genitive with an ordinal, does not apply here ; for that rule can find its scope in other ordinals than those mentioned here. 
Aहिती भिक्षायाः = द्वितीयभिक्षा 'second begging. When we apply A nswe have मिक्षाद्वितीयं. So also with the words हतीयभिक्षा, चल भिक्षा, 
Tart:-The word aétu 'fourth should also be included. As farfir tror atrafe 
URE • GOVA 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY ON 
NT OF INDIA 
सत्यमेव जयते 
Bk, II. CH. II. $ 4-6. 1 
IRREGULAR TAT-PURUSHA, 
But we cannot form compounds, for reasons given in the last sätra, of the phrases द्वितीयं भिक्षाया भिक्षुकस्य or द्वितीयं भिक्षाणाम् . 
प्रासापन्चे च द्वितीयया ॥४॥ पदानि ॥ प्राप्त-भापन्ने, च, द्वितीयया , ( सात०वि०स०म० ) ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ प्रात आपन्न इत्येतो द्वितीयान्तेन सह समस्यते तत्पुरुषश्च समासो भवति । 
4. The words prâpta obtained,' and âpanna 'obtained' are optionally compounded with words ending in a second case-affix and form Tat-purusha compound. 
The anuvritti of the words 'ekadesin' and 'ekadhikarana does not exist here. This aphorism states an alternative course to rule II. 1. 24. Thus we have प्रासजीविकः ( प्राप्तो जीविक) or जीविकाप्राप्त: ' obtained his livelihood. So also आपन्नजीविकः or जीविकापन्नः . 
कालाः परिमाणिना ॥ ५॥ पदानि ॥ कालाः, परिमाणिना , (स. विस्तम्मुस) 
वृत्तिः ॥ परिमाणमस्यास्तीति परिमाणी तदाचिना सुबन्तेन सह सामर्थ्यात् परिमापवचना: कालशब्दाः समस्यन्ते तत्पुरुषश्च समासो भवति ।। 
5. Words denoting time are compounded when in construction, with words denoting the object whose duration is measured by the time, and the com pound is Tat-purusha. 
15 This is also a kind of genitive compound. As मासो जातस्य = मासजासः * a month old' (born a month ago.) So also संवत्सर जात: a year old.' 
पहजात: two-days' old.' &c. 
नज ॥६॥ पदानि ॥ नन्, (समर्थःस०वि०त)॥ वृत्तिः ।। न समर्थन सुबन्तेन सह समस्यते तत्पुरुषश्च समासी भवति ।। बार्चिकम् ।। नत्री नलोप,स्तडि क्षेपे॥ 
6. The negative word nañ is compounded with a case-inflected word with which it is in con struction, and the compound is Tat-purusha. 
As न ब्राह्मणः = अब्राहाण: 'who is not a Brahmana (though a man). The of Er is elided by VI. 3. 73: 
Vart-The 7 of a is also elided even when the second member is a verb, provided that censure is implied as 974affet se thou cookest wol Oknave: 
URE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY ON 
NT OF INDIA 
(SI 
सस्कृति की 
IRREGULAR TAT-PURUSHA. 
[BR. II. CH. II. $ 7, 8. 
भारत सरकार 
The word = has six senses:-(1) ETETT 'likeness or resemblance'; as warnt: 'one like a Brâhmana and wearing the sacred thread &c., but not a Brahmana, but a Kshatriya or a Vaisya.' (2) Spate absence,''negation,' want,' or 'privation,' as Sathy 'absence of knowledge.' (3) se difference' or distinction,' as &qz: 'not a cloth, but something different from or other than a cloth'. (4) spacer smallness,' diminution' used as diminutive particle, as seer 'having a slender waist.' (5) STYTTET 'badness,' "unfit ness,' having a depreciative sense, as 37 ' wrong or improper time.' (6) fatt'opposition,' 'contrariety,' as sailfa: 'opposite of morality,' 'immora lity' 
G T 1 o N açila u , 7991, ( Feaefaegesen वृत्तिः ॥ ईषदित्ययं शब्दोऽकृदन्तेन सुपा सह समस्यते तत्पुरुषश्च समासो भवति ।। वार्तिकम् ।। ईषद् गुणवचनेनेतिवक्तव्यम् ।। 
7. The word îshat'a little,' is compounded with a case-infected word which does not end with a krit-affix; and the compound is Tat-purusha. 
Vart:-It should be stated that the word fra is only compounded with words expressing qualities (adjectives), as crc: 'a somewhat proud.' 
ya: 'a little brownish.' gereaz: a little hideous.' : 'a little rais ed.' fa ' a little yellow. ust a little red.' 
Why do we say 'with words expressing qualities'? Observe fare : ; there is no compounding here. 
weest en ofan vet, (refacaogope ) u वृत्तिः ॥ षष्टयन्तं सुबन्तं समयेन सुबन्तेन सह समस्यते तत्पुरुषश्च समासो भवति ।। बार्तिकम् ।। कृयोगा च षष्ठी समस्यत इति वक्तव्यम् ।। 
8. A word ending with a sixth case-affix is compounded with a case-inflected word with which it is in construction, and the compound is Tat-purusha 
As trat: 61 = t e 'the king's man' Th 7 the Brahmana's blanket.' 
Payt.When a word takes the genitive case because of its connec tion with a word ending in a krit affix; that word may be compoundedwith such a krit word. Rule II. 3. 65., states the conditions when a krit-formed GURE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
सत्यमेव जयते 
BK. IK CH. II. $ 8, 9.1 
IRREGULAR TAT-PURUSHA. 
259 
17 
word governs the genitive case. Thus T TTT: 'a hatchet' (a fuel cutter), TESTETITTAA: 'Palâsadestroyer. 
Why do we say so ? The very fact that a special rule has been made for the compounding of genitive cases governed by kțit-nouns, shows that other words which take genitive case by some special rule, are not so com pounded. Such as the genitive cases ordained by II. 3. 38, 51, 52. In fact the genitive case ordained by any rule of Pâņini, other than II. 3. 51, is a 'prâti padavidhâna' genitive; and a word taking genitive case according to those 
rules, is incapable of composition; see vårtika under II. 2. 10. 
TIGB T g 0 TIẾT 10 Thí sinh , ( đen aofaaga EAUTI 
वृत्तिः ।। याजकादिभिः सह षष्ठी समस्यते तत्पुरुषश्च समासी भवति ॥ atay ni aterům To: cet a#FUR TÍT TETT 11 
वार्तिकम् ॥ गुणोत्तरेण तरलीपश्चेति वक्तव्यम् ।। 
9. A. word ending with a sixth case-affix is compounded with the word yâjaka 'sacrificer' &c., and the compound is Tat-purusha. 
The compound which was ordained by the last aphorism, would have been prohibited by Rule 16 in the case of yr &c.; hence the necessity of the present aphorism to guard against such a prohibition. As hua: 'a Brâhmana's sacrificer.' TTTET: 'one who sacrifices for Kshatriyas. 
( tai ). 1. Epista. 2. STCW . 3. ar . 4. gitarom. 5. tfiah. 6. Farrek or Fra 7. STUTTER. E. Search or area. 9. gada. 10. Fr. 11. 12. TUTUR. 13. ORTIUT. 14. re. 15. FC 16. a. 
Vart:--A word in the genitive case is compounded with a word expressing a quality which abides in the former word. As purur: Brâh mana-caste.' 139: ' sandal-scent.' afgert 'the wood-apple juice.' 
Vart-So also with an adjective in the comparative degree ; and the sign of comparison of is elided. Thus erigi aat: = a: the whitest of all' at JET: F ETT the greatest among all! This 
vârtika' is an exception in anticipation to the next sûtra which prohibits composition, when the genitive has the force of specification. Thus e rat : 
a cow whitest among all." 
URE.GOV 
GOVERNMENT 
STRY OF CUL 
MINISTRI 
T OF INDIA 
सस्कृति मकान 
प्रस्वामन जयते 
COMPOUND PROHIBITED. 
(Bk. II. Ch II. $ 10, 1 f. 
74.9173 
रत सरकार 
a fagico il 99 il azifa in a, fagitâ, (agafaoge. geugt) 
F: 11 fagfru gi et al 7 fara il वार्त्तिकम् ।। प्रतिपदविधाना च षष्ठी न समस्यत इति वक्तव्यम् ॥ 
10. A word in the genitive case is not com pounded with another, when the force of the sixth case affix is that of specification (nirdhârana). 
With this sûtra, begins a series of exceptions to the composition of words in the genitive case. The separation of one from the many, on account of its genus, attribute and action, is called 'nirdhârana.' As Fra g raf TCH: 'the Kshatriya is the most powerful amongst men.' SUTI Tai siqarea: the black cow is the most milk-giving amongst cows.' Uri fraag: 'the runner is the swiftest amongst walkers.' This form of genitive meaning 
amongst,' is ordained by sûtra II. 3. 41. 
Vart:-A word taking a genitive-case by force of any rule other than sútra II. 3. 50, is never compounded. See sútra 8. Thus the following words are never compounded POTENTE, ATTEITA. 
garagfara a auga prawacha 1 9901 acila u 9791-70-efga-374-77-3214-74-rataiftarha ( gta ) 
वृत्तिः ।। पूरण गुण सु हतार्थ सद् अव्यय तव्य समानाधिकरण इत्येतैः सह षष्ठी न समस्यते ।। 
11. A word ending with a sixth case-affix is not compounded with a word having the sense of an ordinal, an attribute, or satisfaction, or with a participle ending in the affix called 'sat? (III. 2. 127) or an indeclin able, or ending with the aflix tarya, or with a word denoting the same object (i. e., when they are in apposi tion). 
The word 'artha' joins with all the first three words, as (1) 494. fifth amongst the pupils ;' OTTOTTEITA (2) Frane Edit 'the blackness of the crow,' resila. (3) mai arra: satisfied of fruits;' erat a: . (4) आमएस्य कुर्वन् 'the daing of a Brahmana;'ब्राह्मणस्य कुर्वाण: "the doing of a Brahmana. (5) BIETET hear being done of Brâhmana, JCIT Ear. (6) प्राणस्य कर्तव्यम् . When however the affix is तव्यम् having the indicatory त् 
(III. 1. 96.) there is compounding as agus of the Brahmana's duty.' (7) TIST: We of the king Pataliputraka' mùa: F of the sûtra composer 
URE .GOVA 
OVERNMENT O 
Y OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
OF INDIA 
BREI. CH. II. $ 12-14.7 
COMPOUND PROHIBITED. 
• संस्कृति मंत्राट 
Panini.' We can however form a compound like the following Faithfu: I By the general rule relating to words in apposition contained in sûtra II. 1. 57, the difference between that sûtra and the present, is as to position of the words. In the genitive compound the genitive word would have stood first of compounded ; not so in the other, there the quality stands first. 
ar 9971915 # 92 agita uña , , 98191A , ( 7o ugt a ) 
वृत्तिः ॥ तो यः पूजायां विहितस्तेन षष्ठी न समस्यते ।। 
12. A word ending with a sixth case-affix is not compounded with a word ending with the affix 'kta,' when the force of kta’ is to denote respect' &c. 
The affix 77 is added in the sense of inclination, understanding or respect by sûtra III. 2. 188. The present sûtra alludes to that aphorism when it uses the word TFT: and půjâ itself is used only as an illustration and includes the other two significations of 'kta' also, namely mati 'inclination,' and buddhi 'understanding.' 
As Trai #9:- :- : 'the king wishes, understands or respects.' 
Why do we say 'when meaning respect ? When 'kta' has not this signification there is compounding. As Ertarea pupil's laughing.' 
situatiaatr # 93 lll ogifail of atom-agar, ( poudt aan 
वृत्तिः ॥ अधिकरणवाचिना क्तन षष्टी न समस्यते ॥ 
13. A word ending with a sixth case-affix is not compounded with a word ending with the affix 'kta, when the force of the latter is to denote locality in which something has happened. 
When the affix is attached to roots denoting 'fixedness, motion or eating', it gives the sense of agent and of location in connection with the action denoted by the roots i. e., that the action is located by the agent in this or that site (III. 4. 76); as ATI a 'here they have gone.' HTİYA 'here they have eaten.' 
U II 98 o aifa ni for, , ( Fouet ) पतिः। कर्मणि च या षष्ठी सान समस्यते । 
14. A word ending with a sixth case-aflix is not compounded with another, when the force of the genitive case is that of the accusative. 
VERNMENT 
ov OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
AT OF INDIA 
COMPOUND PROHIBITED. 
[BK. II. CH. II. $ 15 16. 
संस्कृति मंत्रात 
सत्यमेव जयते 
ET 
The anuvritti of does not extend to this aphorism. The word karma qualifies shashthi. Sätra II. 3. 66 declares the conditions when, instead of the accusative, the genitive may be employed i. e., when the agent and the object of the action denoted by the nouns formed by krit affixes, are both used in a sentence, the object is put in the genitive case and not the agent; as suarai tai ETET Statisha the milking of cows without a cowherd is a wonder.' trà sire TEY PİST ET 'eating of rice agrees with Devadatta.' Ang ESI TUE: 9 देवदत्तेन 'the drinking of milk by Devadatta is indeed excellent.' विचित्रा सूत्रस्य mia: roar 'wonderful is the structure of sûtras by Páņini.' 
T rai gal # 99 llogra u 24-361*219, walt, (Herrgt ) 
वृत्तिः ॥ कर्तरि या षष्ठी सा दृचा किन च सहन समस्यते॥ 
15. A word ending with a sixth case-afix is not compounded with a word ending with trich' or 
aka,' when the force of the genitive case is that of an agent. 
The word 'kartari' qualifies the genitive-case. The affix z is taught in sûtra III. 1. 133, and the affix an is not a single affix; all affixes that have an element y are ; such as cats or a or (sůtra VII. 1. 1.) Thus भवतः शायिका 'your honor's repose' भवत आशिका 'your eating' भवतोश्वगामिका 
your going in front. 
The affix is employed always in forming nouns of agency; hence there can be no example of a word in a genitive case having the force of an agent, governing another word also having the force of an agent. The therefore serves no purpose in this aphorism, but applies to the sâtras that follow 
The genitive has the force of an agent under conditions mentioned in II. 3. 65. 
Why do we say 'when it denotes agent'? Observe T ani # rafa. 
aft 98 nuaifa wafe, (Hugtu7372718) fa: lidt garat e TT Tahun 
16. A word ending with the sixth case-affix is not compounded with a word ending with 'trich' or 'aka' affix when the force of these latter affixes is that of an agent. 
The word 'kartari' qualifies the word 'aka' only and not trich,' for the latter always denotes the agent and nothing else. 
VERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
BR. II. CH. II. 516-18.] 
NITYA TAT-PURUSHA. 
• संस्कृति मा 
02031 
मालय . भारत 
As अपां er the creator of waters' पुरा भेत्ता 'the destroyer of cities" पजस्य भा 'the holder of thunderbolt.' 
It might be suggested that the word met being read in the class of यामक (sutra 9) ought to be compounded. The word भt there means hus-- band,' while in the example we have given, it means 'holder.' 
The above are examples of words formed by 7. Now we shall give examples of words formed by अक; thus ओवनस्य भोजक: ' the eater of rice,' सतूर्ना पायक: 'the drinker of saktu.'' 
नित्यं क्रीडाजीविकयोः ॥ १७ ॥ पदानि ॥ नित्यम् , क्रीडा जीविकयोः, (तषष्ठी) ॥ 
वृत्तिः ।। क्रीडायां जीविकायां च नित्यं षष्ठी समस्यते तत्पुरुषश्च समासी भवति॥ 
17. A word ending with a sixth case-affix is invariably compounded with a word ending with aka, when these affixes denote a sport or a livelihood, and the compound is Tat-purusha. 
This is a Nitya-sama sa incapable of analysis. This anuvritti of the word 'na' which began with sútra 10, does not extend further. The affix I never has the sense of sporting or livelihood; the only examples possible are of 'aka.' Thus उहालकपुष्पभजिका 'a sort of game played by the people in the eastern districts in which uddalaka flowers are broken or crushed. So also वारणपुष्पप्रचायिका 'a play of gathering flowers.' 
So aiso वन्तलेखकः 'one who earns his bread by painting or marking the teeth.' नखलेखक 'a nail-painter by profession.' 
Why do we say 'when meaning sporting or livelihood.' Observe भोपनस्थ भोजकः . 
कुगतिप्रादयः ॥ १८ ॥ पदानि ॥ कु-गति-प्र-आदयः, ( स०त नित्यसमर्थःसह)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ कुगति प्रादयः समर्थन शब्दान्तरेण सह नित्यं समस्यन्ते तत्पुरुष समासो भवति ।। 
वार्तिकम् ।। प्रादयो गतायथं प्रथमया ॥ बार्तिकम् । अत्यादयः क्रान्तापर्ये द्वितीयया ॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ अवारयः क्रुटायर्थे ढतीयया ।। वार्तिकम् ।। पर्यादयो ग्लानाबा) चतुर्था । पार्तिकम् ।। निरामयः कान्तायें पञ्चम्या ।। बार्तिकम् ॥ इवेन सह निस्यसमासो विभत्तवलोपः पूर्व परप्रकृतिस्वरस्य च पकायम् ॥ बार्तिकम् ॥ माविप्रसङ कर्मप्रवचनीयानां प्रतिषेधो बलम्यः ।। 
URE - Govo 
TRY OF CULT 
MINISTRY 
RNMENT OF 
OF INDIA 
NITYA TAT-PURUSHA. 
[ Bk. II. CH. 11. 
18. 
18. The indeclinable word kubad, the par. ticles called gati, and the prepositions pra, &c., are in variably compounded with other words with which they are in construction; and the resulting compound is Tato purusha, 
The word ku means 'badness or sin'; as, 95T: 'a sinful man'; (2) Gati (I. 4.60) as, atéland having asserted'; (1. 4.61.) Tartaifa II 
So also with the words &c., when they are mere particles and not used as 'upasargas,' or 'gati'; as I meaning 'bad,' in 6964: 'a bad man'; so also 
and safe meaning 'respect' in Eget: 'honorable man'; sfa464: 'excellent man'; at means a little' as si : 'brownish." 
Generally these are attributive words but they are found elsewhere also, as कोष्णं or कष्णम् or कवीष्णन् 'tepid. So also दुष्कृतम् , अतिस्तुतम् and भावद्धम्।। 
Vart:--The words , &c., when the sense is that of 'gone' or the like, combine with what ends with the first case-affix. Thus grar'a here. detory teacher'; so also wraeter. 
Vart:-The words sta &c., when the thing denoted has the sense of gone beyond' or the like, combine with what ends with the second case affix. As fanat: = straaz: (I. 2. 44 and 48) 'without a bed-stead,' SACHAT: * exceeding the necklace in beauty.' 
Vart:-The words 377 &c., when the thing denoted is 'cried out' &c., are compounded with what ends with third case-affix as an: ifanciar = 877 
fare: what is announced by the cuckoo' i. e., the Spring, 
Vart:--The words oft &c., when the thing denoted is 'weary' &c., are compounded with what ends with the fourth case-affix as qfTFITSJETTET 
peszperar: 'weary of study.' 
S ATT: 'wealth' (sufficient to support a maiden). Vart:-The words FIT &c., when the thing denoted is 'gone beyond &c., are compounded with what ends with the fifth case-affix, as facertatiles: 
who has gone beyond Kausâmbi'; so also perfcroft: . 
Vart:-A word enters into composition with y 'like'; and there is no elision of the case-affix, and the first member of the compound retains its natural accent, as refrin' like a word and its meaning,' Traitse like two garments 
Vart:--Prohibition must be stated of y&c., when they are Karma pravachaniya'; as regra Farara itu the lightening flashes in the direction of the tree. Ter Ter af "Devadatta is good towards his mother.' 
URE 
GOVE. 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
AINISTRY OF 
NT OF INDIA 
सत्यमेव जयते 
Bk. H.Cn. II. § 19, 20. ]. 
NITYA TAT-PURUSHA. 
guacafa, ge agira u 99957, efas ( goale fregatik ) 
FT: 11 594fGF HAUT gratur UE stresa ALETY FAT fait 
19. An upapada or attendant word (III. 1. 92), which does not end with a tense-affix (III. 4. 78) is in variably compounded with that with which it is in con struction. The compound thus formed is Tat-purusha. 
Thus T: 'one who makes pots,' oront: one who makes cities. 
Why do we say 'which does not end with a tense-affix'? Observe एधानाहारको व्रजति 'he goes to bring fuel. 
It might be objected, that the question of compounding with a word ending in a tense-affix is irrelevant; since the anuvšitti of the words ay tres is understood here, so that fas will find no scope. To this we reply that we should infer that the words FTT # should not be read into this and the last aphorism. The following Paribhâsha also arises from this sûtra. 
गतिकारको पपदानां कृद्धिः सह समासबचनं प्राक सुबुत्पत्तेः ।। 
"It should be stated that Gatis, Karakas, and Upapadas, are compound ed with bases that end with ksit-affixes, before a case-termination or feminine affix has been added to the latter." 
The result is that Upapadas and Gatis are not compounded by sâtras 18 and 19 with case-inflected nouns, but they are compounded with pri mary nouns before a case-termination or feminine affix is added to the latter. The same considerations apply to kârakas also. Thus standit a female brought in exchange for a horse,' is formed correctly. Wat witga er = STILE 
ita; add sty (IV. 1. 50) and we have anlat. If on the other hand, the feminine affix att had been added to sta previous to its composition with 
59 the form would have been ar, and we should have had no base ending with short of and in that case y could not have been added by 
IV. 1. 50. 
Falagua 1 Roll agira ni par, Ta, aga ( Tae निरसा उपदम् ) 
art: teadainau FT 3T: HE: Arsa T rait 
20. When an upapada is compounded with an indeclinable then it is compounded only with those avyayas which end in the affix sa 
TURE - GO 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY ON 
VERNMENT ON 
OF INDIA 
CT [BK. II. CH. 11. § 20, 21 
OPTIONAL TAT-PURUSHA. 
संस्कृति मंत्रान 
ER 
177 
This makes a restriction to the general compounding of upapadas with avyayas as ordained by the last rule. As fargard 'he eats having made his food sweet.' So also not having seasoned. The avyayas ending in sa are formed by the affix thea (III. 4. 26) &c. 
Why do we say 'with avyayas ending in a'? Observe erit 175 the time of eating. Here the avyaya ends in of the affix it added by rule III. 3. 167 (the affix tumun may be applied, when the word in con struction is not a verb, but I , ET or 'time.') 
The force of the word only is to indicate that this composition takes place in those cases where a rule ordains 87 only, after any root with regard to any upapada; so that no composition will take place where the affix spy as well as another affix is ordained after a root with certain upapadas. Thus sûtra III. 4. 24, declares: “ the affixes and part come after a verb when the words sā, to and Te are upapadas.” Here the 97 (affix ) is not the sole affix ordained; but there is a co-ordinate affix with it namely r. Therefore in airert 'having first eaten' there is no composition because *74* is not the only form we can have; for, sūt is also used in the same sense. 
ataranetaatan TI # 29 u cena u aalto-wwalian paraten (FOTO Matada ) 
वृत्तिः ॥ उपदंशस्टतीवाथामिन्यतः प्रभृति यान्युपपदानि तान्यमैवाव्ययेन सहान्यतरस्या समस्यन्ते तत्पुरुष समासो भवति।। 
21. An upapada ending with a third case-affix (III. 4. 47) &c., is compounded optionally with an inde. clinable formed by the affix 34 and the compound is Tat purusha. 
The term A is understood here. The upapadas ending with a third case-affix &c., are given in sâtra III. 4. 47 and the sûtras that follow. As मनकोपरंश मत or मूलकनोपर मुडके he eats after having relished the food with radish.' So also g rate or TTEETtea sa (III. 4. 49) he lies pressing on his ribs. For upapadas ending with other cases, see sûtra II 1.4 52 &c. This being an optional rule, it is not necessary that the upapada should be tulya-vidhâna with the ; so that this optional compounding may take place even under rule III. 4. 59 where is not the only affix enjoined, but there is fr as well. This vibhashå may therefore be called both grå and ar vibhasha. It is with regard to those rules where is the only affix employed; and it is 98 with regard to those where is not the only 
COVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY ON 
ENT OF INDIA 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
वजयते 
CH. F%22-24.] 
BAHUBRIHI. 
Sainamuitor च ॥ २२ ॥ पदानि ॥ नाच, (सत तृतीयाप्रमतीन्य न्यतरस्याम् उप०) 
वृत्तिः ॥ काप्रत्ययेन सह दृतीया प्रभुतीन्युपपदानि अन्यतरयां समस्यन्ते तत्पुरुष समासो भवति ॥ 
22. An upa pada ending with a third case-affix or any other of the remaining four cases, is optionally compounded with a word ending with the afix ktva; and the compound is Tat-purusha. 
This rule provides for avyayas ending in on which the last two rules did not provide. Thus we have a great or añar. Here the affix r is added by sûtra III. 4. 59, In the case when there is composition, the pris replaced by the substitute ल्यप् ; otherwise not. See VII. I. 37. 
The condition of the upapadas being in the 3rd case &c., applies here also. Therefore there is no composition in अलं कृत्वा or खलु कृत्वा . 
शेषो बहुब्रीहिः ॥२३॥ पदानि ॥ शेषः बहुब्रीहिः (स.)॥ वत्तिः ।। शेषः समासो बहनीहिसंज्ञी भवति ।। 
23. The remaining compound is called Bahu. vrihi. 
A compound which does not fall within any one of the rules given above, will be Bahuvrihi. This is a governing aphorism and extends up to satra 28. Thus चित्रगुः 'possessed of a brindled cow.' 
अनेकमन्यपदा२४॥ पदानि ॥ अनेकन, अन्य-पद-अ (स बहुधीहि) 
वृत्तिः ॥ अनेकं सुबन्तमन्यपदाथे वर्तमान समस्यते बहुव्रीहिच समासी भवति ॥ वार्त्तिकम् ।। बहुनीहिः समानाधिकरणानामिति वक्तव्यम् ।। वार्त्तिकम् ॥ अव्ययानां च बत्रीहिर्वक्तव्यः ।। वार्तिकम् ।। सप्तभ्युपमानपूर्वपदस्योत्ररपदलीपञ्च वक्तव्यः ॥ वार्त्तिकम् ।। समुदायविकारषष्ट्याश्च बहतीहिरुत्तरपदलीपश्चेति वक्तव्यम् ।। वार्त्तिकम् ॥ माविम्यो धातुजस्योतरपदस्य लोपश्च वा वह ब्रीहिर्वक्तव्यः ॥ बार्तिकम् ॥ नमोऽस्त्यर्थाना बहुव्रीहिर्वा चोत्तरपदलीपश वक्तव्यः॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ तुबधिकारोऽस्तिक्षीरादीनां बहुव्रीहिर्वक्तव्यः ॥ 
24. Two or more words, ending in any case. affix, form a compound, denoting another new thing, not connoted by those words individually; and the com pound is called Bahuviihi. 
URE. GOVE 
VERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
LSINIW 
T OF INDIA 
BAHUVRIHI. 
[BK. CH. 1.3.-24. 
Bany 
The Bahuvrîhi compound comes with the force of all the affixes but the first; as strange THT = gravant am: 'a water-reached village.' TETUT STGIE 
a bull by whom a cart is drawn.' 39catara: 'Rûdra to whom cattle is offered.' उतौदना स्थाली a vessel in which rice is placed.' चित्रगुर्देवदत्तः 'Devadatta pos sessed of a brindled cow.' atg : 'a village possessed of heroic men.' 
Bahuvrihi compound is not formed with the sense of the first case. As te aa ta 'gone when it had rained.' 
Why do we say more than one'? So that there may be compound. ing of many words, as in the following verse : 
TEFFETTA TATTTETI I TT CSETTIFTET in Barangar 11. 
Why was the daughter of the king of the mountains married by Siva possessed of beautifully-delicate-locked-hair, and cheap-deer-skin-dress.' 
Vart:--Bahuvrihi compounds are formed of words having the same case, so that words not being in apposition are not so compounded; as an 
FT. 
Vart :--The compounds of indeclinables are Bahuvrihi; as reager: possessed of raised mouth.' So also atac: &c. 
Vart:--The second member is elided in a Bahuvrihi compound of which the first member is a word in the locative case, or a word with which comparison is made (TTTT). As, aos feya: ATIJFT = aos a : 'in whose throat there is blackness (Siva).' TRAFİR: 'who has hair on his chest.' FETET T TT TETT : = atau 'he whose face is like that of a camel.' ag: 
ass-faced. 
Vart: --Bahuvrihi compound may be formed after eliding the second member with a word in the sixth case denoting collection or modification.' As chitrat Tert: = a : , a CISET = as: 'he who has a collec tion of hair as crest.' Eta TACTS ATT SET = Tila: 'he who has orna ments made of gold.' 
Vart :-The optional compounding of what arises from a verbal root coming after 9 &c. should be stated, and the elision of the subsequent term. As wefaret q e = won'a tree of which the leaves are all fallen.' So also. TIGHT: 
Vart:-The compounding of words signifying what exists, coming after the negative a should be stated, and the optional elision of the second of the terms. As, oferur Til T = 279*: childless.' So also sparcet: wife less.' 
Vart-Compounds like ufafter should be stated as Bahuvrihí. As wefror ku a Brahmanf having milk. These words are indeclinables 
The word 'asti here is an indeclinable though appearing as a verb. URE 
Gove 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
BR. 11. CH. 11. $ 25, 26. ] 
BAHUVRIHI. 
209 
ent. 
CasuSagiriasient: jaja u 24 l PETRO telur, tala-w18a-ngT-sfø#-FTET: , siend, (Teaganfa:ak ) 
वृत्तिः ॥ संख्येये या संख्या वर्तते तया सहाव्ययासनादूराधिकसंख्याः समस्यन्ते बहुव्रीहिन्ध Flat fall 
25. Indeclinable words and the words âsanna near,' adura near,' adhika 'more' and the words called sankhyâ (Numerals) are compounded with another san. khyâ word, when the sense is that of a numeral or san khyâ. The compound is Bahuvrihi. 
Thus 39+TTT: (V.4.73) 'those who are near ten i.e. nine or eleven.' Similarly sufit: 'nineteen or twenty-one' (VI. 4. 142). So also SETETIT: 'nine or eleven.' spatag: 'nine or eleven.' Street: 'eleven.' 
So also two'numerals' may be compounded; as, FET: 'two or three.' façant:' twenty 
Why do we say with a numeral? Observe T ATT: 'five Brah manas.' 
Why do we say with an Indeclinable &c'? Witness FTTT: 94. Why do we say 'when denoting a numeral'? Observe stva fála 474 
of cows more than twenty.' 
fegarramate u Re agtfar u fes-aratia , ata ( Tage ) 
वृत्तिः ।। दिङ्नामानि सुबन्तानि अन्तराले वाच्ये समस्यन्ते बहुव्रीहिश्च समासी भवति ।। arfiant llar T rì Gara: 11 
26. Words which are the names of the points of the compass are compounded, when the compound signifies the intermediate point, and the compound so formed is Bahuvrihi. 
Thus letra dakshina-půrva, south-east,' (the direction midway between south and east.) T TTT 'north-east.' 
The word is introduced in the satra to indicate that no compound ing takes place when the words denoting direction are derivative words whose primary signification is not indicative of direction; as le a rn 
ograje COTA the point between east and north. Here the words Qual' east and are north though denoting directions, are derivatively so, and hence no compounding. 
MRE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
SI [BK. 11. CH. II. $ 27, 28. 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
BAHUVRIHI. 
2764.9179 
TER 
" 
Vart:-Whenever a Bahuvrihi gets the designation of Sarvanaman (1. 1. 28, 29), the first term becomes masculine, by VI. 3. 34; as f54 + q* = fererea nr 
aaaacrifa en un 26 11 ogifar l az, aa, , fa, 5 ( Hayatę: ) 
पृत्तिः । तत्रेति सतम्यन्त सरूपे पड़े तेनेति चतुतीयान्ते इदमित्येतस्मिनर्थे समस्यते utafta FATET Taal 
27. Two homonymous words both being in the locative case or both being in the instrumental case) are compounded, the sense being this happens therein or with that.' The compound so formed is Bahuvrihi. 
The word means a word in the locative case,' and ar 'a word in the instrumental case.' The word ETET or similar form' applies to both. The word far indicates that the meaning of the compound so formed should be learned from popular usage, therefore it means, 'seizing, striking, fighting. All these senses are implied by ra. The word is exhibited in the locative case, if the sense is that of seizing; and the word is exhibited in the instrumental case, when the sense is that of striking; the word indicat ed by the word gelaat is g; as a garg = TETETT T T i = niet (VI. 3. 137 and V.4. 127.) 'hair to hair, fighting by pulling each other's hair'; 
A hair against hair'; quca TICY SET TO JE Ti = Grets stick against stick, fight with stick and stave;' so also cratet. In the above examples the samásånta affix T is added at the end by rule V. 4.127; and all such words are Avyaya or indeclinable. The final vowel of the first term is lengthened by Rule VI. 3. 137. 
Why do we say 'having the same form? We cannot form such a compound from the following: par ECU TI TE TETT. 
rafa Teata u Reu agrau da, ur-gfa, 24 , ( agafe: ) 
art: 11 atras064 Jean Tata gara Tatra Te ayd qatfoy afat 11 
28. The word saha 'together is compounded with a word ending with the third case-aflix and the compound is Bahuvrihi; provided that, the companion and the person accompanied are equally affected by any action or thing, in the same manner. 
W 
URE 
Gove 
GOVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRI 
NT OF INDIA 
सारचमव जयत 
BR. IL CH. II. $ 28-30.] 
PURVA-NIPATA IN DVANDVA. 
9 
.17 
Thus fa qara:= 99T: (VI. 3. 82, He changed to 8 ) he has come accompanied by his son'. FT: 'accompanied by the pupil.' Faiar: 'accom panied by the servant.' 
Why do we say 'tulya-yoga'? Witness FÈT EFT: Taiff gefa eft 'the she-ass carries the whole burden, though there exist her ten sons. 
How do we get the forms like tha: , Feira: , 779770: &c., in which there is no 'tulya-yoga'? It shows that this condition is of limited operation ( 774 fra FC ). 
26 27: 1120 u aqifa l -278, 279: , ( salah ) वृत्तिः ॥ अनेक सुबन्तं चार्थे वर्तमान समस्यते इन्दश्च समासो भवति ॥ 
29. When a set of several words ending with case-affixes stands in a relation expressible by and the set is made into a compound, and the compound so form ed is called Dvandva. 
The meanings that may be indicated by and' are four, (1) FETT: community of reference,' (2) SETET 'collateralness of reference, (3) gataceit: mutual conjunction' and (4) HAFETT: 'aggregate.' In the first two cases vis. community of reference, and collateralness of reference, composition does not take place, because the words are not directly related to one another 
. I. 1). Composition is enjoined therefore, when the sense of is that of mutual conjunction and lumping. Thus we cannot compound TTC TTT TRT' reverence God and thy Guru' or FTETHETTI 'go for alms and bring ne cow. But we can compound the following प्लक्षच न्यग्रोधच = प्रक्षन्यग्रोधी the Plaksha and the Nyagrodha trees.' So t-ar-TESTI: , , TOUTAI 
suasja gaia il 30 nl Eife n 5990197, går (278) * TFT: 11 F431FEAT EATËT TË TÍTETTEN 
30. The upasarjana (I. 2. 43) is to be placed first in a compound. 
The word È is understood here. The upasarjana being the word bited in the nominative case in the rules relating to samasa, must stand 
The constant application of this rule has been illustrated in the pre vous aphorisms. Without this rule, there would have been no fixity as to the position of words. 
TIG TITYỆg TTH 1 B3 IU gan || TiểG-TIỀN, TH, ( weggaiah ) 
IT: H Tistararfeq TYATA TOITEZA 
URE • Gove 
TRY OF CULT 
NMENT OF A 
OF INDIA 
. 
जस्यमाटाजयते 
PURVA-NIPATA IN DVANDVA. 
[ BK. II. CH. II. $ 31433! 
• संस्कृति मंत्रा 
सरकार 
'भारत सरव 
31. the upasarjana is to be put last in the words Rajadantar &c. 
Thus राजदन्तः ( दन्तानां राजा)' achief of teeth ' (i.e., an eyetooth). It is not merely the upasarjana that is placed last in these examples; but words which by some other rules would have stood first, stand in this list as second. 
I. राजदन्तः . 2. अग्रवणम् . 3. लिप्तवासितम् . 4. ननमुषितम् . 5. सिन्नास मुष्टम् . 6. मष्टलुञ्चितम् . 7. अब क्लिन्नपक्कमें. 8. अर्पितोतम् . 9. (अर्पितीप्तम् ). 10. उसगाढम् . 11. उलूखलमुसलम् .. 12. तण्डुलकिण्वम् . 13. दृषदुपलम् . 14. आरडा यनि. 15. (आरग्वायनबन्धकी). 16. चित्ररथवान्हीकम् . I7. अवन्त्यश्मकम् . 18. शनार्थम्.19.स्नातकराजानो . 20. विष्वक्सेनार्जुनौ . 21. अतिध्रुवम् . 22. दारगवम् . 23. शब्दार्थो. 24. धर्मार्थो.25. कामार्थों. 26. अर्थशब्दौ . 7. अर्थधर्मों . 28. अर्थकामौ. 29. वैकारिमतम् . 30. गाजवाजम् .31. (गोजवाजम् . 32. गोपालि धानपूलासम् . 33. (गोपालधानीपूलासम् ). 34. पूलासकारण्डम् .35, (पूलासककु. रएडम् ). 36. स्थूलासम् . 37. (स्थूलपूलासम् ). 38. उशोरबीजम् . 39. (जिज्ञास्थ ). 40. सिल्लाथम् , 4 (सिञ्जाश्वत्थम्).42. चित्रास्वाती . 43. (चित्रस्वाति). 44. भार्यापती. 45. दम्पती. 46. जम्पती. 47. जायापती. 48. पुत्रपती .4g. पुत्रपशू. 50. केशश्मभू or श्मश्रुकेशौ. 51. शिरोविजु.52. शिरोवीजम् .53. शिरोजानु,54. सर्पिर्मधुनी. 55. मधुसर्पिषी. 56. आयन्ती.-57. अन्ताही. 
58. गुणवृद्धी.59. वृद्धिगुणो. 
द्वन्द्वे घि ॥ ३२ ॥ पदानि ॥ द्वन्द्वे , घि , ( स०उत्पूर्वम् ) ॥ वृत्तिः । द्वन्द्व समासे ध्यन्तं पूर्व प्रयोक्तव्यम् ।। 
32. In a Dvandya compound, let a word called घि (I.4.7) stand first. 
As हरिहरौ — Hari and Hara. So also पटुगुप्तौ and मृदुगुप्तौ. Where there are more than one such fo words in a compound, any one may be fixed upon as first member, and the rest to follow no fixed rule. As TETET: or पदुशुक्लमृतवः . 
Why do we say "Dvandva? Observe FETETE: which is Tat-purusha. 
अजाद्यदन्तम् ॥ ३३ ॥ पदानि ॥ अज-आदि-अदन्तम् , (म० उ०पूर्वन्द्वन्द्वे) ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ अजायदन्तं शब्दरूपं द्वम् समासे पूर्व प्रयोक्तव्यम् ।। बार्तिकम् ।। बहुध्वनियमः ।। वार्तिकम्।। हुन्ध्य जाघदन्तं विप्रतिषेधेन ।। 
33. In a Dvandva compound, let what begins with a vowel and ends with a short s be placed first. 
TURE 
GOVO 
GOVERNMENT 
OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
II.833, 34. 
J 
PURVA- NIPATA IN DVANDVA. 
va Pari 
रतसरकार 
| Thus, उखरम् ' the camel and the ass.' उष्ट्रशशकम् - the camel and the hare.' 
Varf:--When there are may such words there is no fixed rule. As भश्वरयेन्द्राः or इन्द्ररथाश्वाः . 
Vart: In the Dvandva compounds the fer would stand first only then, when the rule of अजायदन्त does not prohibit it, Thus इन्द्राग्नी or इन्द्रवायू . Here Spa and try though rêr, do not stand first, because we beginning with a vowel and ending in short अ, by the rule of vipratishedha takes precedence (I. 4. 2). 
Why do we say 'अत् with a त्' (I. I. 70)? This rule does not apply when it is long आ as अश्वा + वृषः = अश्वावृषो or वषाश्वे. 
अल्पाचतरम् ॥ ३४ ॥ पदानि ॥ अल्पान्तरम् , (सम्वन्द्वेपूर्वम्) । वृत्तिः ।। अल्याचतरं शब्दरूपं द्वन्द्व समासे पूर्वप्रयोक्तव्यम् । बार्तिकम् ॥ ऋतुनक्षत्राणामानुपूर्येण समानातराणां पूर्वनिपातो वक्तव्यः । बार्तिकम् ।। लघवक्षरं पूर्व निपततीति वक्तव्यम् ।। वार्त्तिकम् ।। अभ्यर्हितं च पूर्व निपततीति वक्तव्यम् ।। वार्तिकम् ।। वर्णानामानुपूर्येण पूर्व निपातः ।। वार्त्तिकम् ॥ भ्रातुश्च ज्यायसः पूर्वनिपाती वक्तव्यः ॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ संख्याया अल्पीयस्याः पूर्वनिपातो वक्तव्यः । 
34. In a Dyandya compound, that word-form which has fewer vowels, is to be placed first. 
Thus प्लक्ष + न्यग्रीध = लक्षन्यग्रोधी; and धबखदिरपनाशाः ।। When there are many words, there is no fixed rule. As signiförarer: or वीणशंखदुन्दुभयः . 
Vart:--Names of seasons and stars consisting of equal number of syllables should be arranged in the compound according to their natural order of succession. As हेमन्तशिशिरवसन्ताः; चित्रास्वाती ; कृत्तिकारोहियो. 
When they do not consist of equal syllables, the shorter should be placed first; as ग्रीष्मवसन्ती. 
Vart:-A word consisting of light (laghu) vowels is placed first. As, कुशकाशं; शरशादम् . 
Vart:-The more honorable of the two is placed first; as, मातापितरौ " mother and father,'श्रद्धामधे faith and intelligence' सातपसी initiation and austerity'. 
TRE - GOVE 
FCULTURE 
MINISTRY 
NMENT OF INO 
OF INDIA 
परति मंत्रालय 
प्रत्यय जयते 
PURVA-NIPATA IN BAHUVRIHI. 
[BK. II. CH. II. $ 34, 35. 
Vart: The castes are placed according to their order: as, FITUATËT UT विद् शूद्राः 'Brahmana Kshatriya Vaisya and Sudra.' There is no limitation of equality of syllables here. 
Vart:--The name of the elder brother is placed first; as gryfaciat Yudhishthira and Arjuna.' 
Tart:-Among numerals, the less in value is placed first; as far 'two; and three'; त्रिचतुरा' three and four.' 
सप्तनी विशेषणे बहुव्रीहौ ॥ ३५ ॥ पदानि ॥ सप्तमी, विशेषणे , बहुव्रीहौ , ( स०पूर्वम् ) 
वृत्तिः ॥ सप्तम्यन्तं विशेषणं च बहुव्रीहिसमासे पूर्व प्रयोक्तव्यम् ।। वार्तिकम् ।। सर्वनामसंख्ययोरुपसंख्यानम् ।। वार्त्तिकम् ।। वा पियस्य पूर्वनिपातः ।। वार्तिकम् ॥ ससम्याः पूर्वनिपाते प्राले गड्वादिभ्यः सप्तम्यन्तं परम् ।। 
35. A word with the seventh case-affix and an epithet are to be placed first in the Bahuvrîhi compound. 
In a Bahuvrîbi, all words are upasarjana, and hence there is no rule for their arrangement. The present aphorism declares that rule; as कण्ठेकाल: 'who is black in the throat. So also उरसिलोमा , चित्रगुः , शवलगुः , 
Vart:-The sarvanāmas and the numerals stand first; as सर्वश्वतः, सर्वकृष्णः , विशः , द्विकृष्णः . In a compound formed by the composition of sarva. nama words with a sankhya word, the latter should stand first; as, दूधल्यः , 
धन्दाः &c. 
Vart:-The word प्रिय may optionally stand first; as गुडप्रियः or मियगुडः । 
Vart-After the words गडु &c., the word in the 7th case-affix comes as subsequent; as गबुकण्ठ: 'a hump-necked'; गडुशिरा: &c. 
How is then the word re: hump in the shoulder to be explained? This is governed by the general rule, and not the excep tional vårtika. 
निष्ठा, ॥ ३६ ॥ पदानि ॥ निष्ठा, ( सम्बहुब्रीही पूर्वम् ) ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ निष्टान्तं च बहुव्रीहिसमासे पूर्व प्रयोक्तव्यम् ।। वार्तिकम् ॥ निष्टायाः पूर्वनिपाते जातिकालसुखारिभ्यः परवचनम् ।। वार्तिकम् ।। प्रहरणार्येभ्यश्च परे निटाससम्यौ भवत इति वक्तव्यम् । 
GREGOVS. 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
STRYA 
NT OF INDIA 
वरवमयजयत 
Bk. II. CH. II. 
36-38.7. 
OPTIONAL PURVA-NIPATA. 
275 
१.भारत 
36. What ends with a Nishtha (I. 1. 26) shall stand first in a Bahuvrîhi compound. 
Thus युक्तयोगः 'one who is devoted to devotion'; कृतकठ: ' one who has made the mat'; rarezaFTfT: 'one who has begged alms.' 
Vart:-A word expressing jati (genus), time, or pleasure, is placed subsequent; as, शाजग्धी , मासजातः , and सुखजातः &c. 
Vart:--The words ending in Nishtha or in the locative case stand subsequent, when coming after words denoting striking '; as sterug 'ready with sword'; दण्डपाणि: ' holding sceptre in hand.' 
वाहिताग्न्यादिषु ॥ ३७॥ पदानि ॥ वा, आहित-अग्नि-आदिषु (निष्टा पूर्वम् ) ॥ 
वृत्तिः ।। आहिताग्न्यादिषु निष्ठान्तं पूर्व वा प्रयोज्यम् ।। 
37. In the compounds Ahitâgni and the like, the Nishthâ-formed word may optionally be placed first. 
Thus 9eutea: or strigarria: 'one who has consecrated fire.' 
1. आहितामि . 2. जातपुत्र 3. जातदन्त , 4. जातश्मश्रु .5 तैलपीत 6. घृतपीत .7. मद्यपीत .8. ऊढभार्य. 9. गतार्थ . 
भाकृतिगणोऽयम् . 
1. गडुकण्ठ , 2. अस्युद्यत् . 3. (अरमुद्यात).4. दण्डपाणिप्रभृतयोपि. 
This seaf class is akritigana; so that words like yg &c., must be looked for in this class. 
कडाराः कर्मधारये ॥ ३८ ॥ पदानि ॥ कडाराः , कर्मधारये, (समासे पूर्वम् ) ॥ 
वृत्तिः ।। कडारात्यः शब्दा: कर्मधारय समासेवा पूर्व प्रयोक्तव्याः ॥ 
38. The words kadârah and the like, are optionally placed first in the karma-dharaya, 
Thus कडारजैमिनिः or जैमिनिकडार: Kadarajaiminih or jaiminikadarah. "The tawny Jaimini.? 
URE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
AT OF INDIA 
OPTIONAL PURVA-NIPATA. 
[BK. II. CH. 11.$38. 
तिसरकार 
1. ST. 2. gr. 3. E . 4. Eits. 5. I. 6. F . 7. u . 8. tit. 9. T. 10. Foretak. II. . 12. fg. 13. (9 ). 14. . 15. . 16. TIC. 17. art. 18. . 19. a 20. der. 
This sûtra enjoins an option where by general rule guņa words being attributes would have invariably stood first. 
Why do we say 'in the karmadhâraya compound'? Observer 960 F: a village of tawny men,' which is Bahuvrîhi. Here ends the force of I. 4. 1 and II. 1.3. 
URE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY ON 
ENT OF INDIA 
सत्यमय जयत 
PART VII. 
The 
Ashtadhyayi 
of Panini. 
Re-printed at the "Upper India Prous," Allababede 
CURE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
ENT OF INDIA 
• संस्कृति मन्त्रा 
सत्यमेव जयते 
रत सरकार 
ओ३म् ॥अथ द्वितीयाध्यायस्य तृतीयः पादः॥ 
BOOK SECOND. 
CHAPTER III. 
अनभिहिते ॥ १॥ पदानि ॥ अन्-अभिहिते ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ अनभिहित इत्यधिकारोऽयं वेदितव्यः । यदित उर्दवमनुक्रमिष्यानोऽनभिहित इत्यैर्व बहेदितव्यम् ॥ 
1. The word 'anabhihite' meaning not being specified' is to be understood as the governing word. 
Whatever will be taught from this point forward, should be under stood to apply to those cases which have not been specified otherwise. The case-affixes like those denoting object' instrument' &c., are applied to a noun, only then, when the force of the case-affix is not otherwise denoted or mentioned or exhibited. The force of a case-affis may be so denoted either by first, the conjugational affixes fars; secondly, by the Primary affixes or y, thirdly, by, the secondary affixes afga; or lastly by compounds. Thus sutra 2 declares that the second case-affix is applied in denoting the object, as कटं करोति 'he makes the mat'; ग्राम गच्छति ' he goes to the village.' But the object can otherwise be denoted. Taus by the passive conjuga tional affix, as कृयते कट: "the mat is made.' Here the termination of the verb denotes the object. See statra I. 3. 18. and III. 4. 69. So also by the krit affix, as ga: Fa: the mat is made,' see Satra III. 4. 70. So also by a Taddhita affix as weu or yra: meaning purchased with a hundred' -शतेन नीतः, Similarly by samāsa, as प्राप्त मुदकं ग्रामम् =ग्रामोद को ग्राम ॥ 
कर्मणि द्वितीया ॥२॥ पदानि ॥ कर्मणि, द्वितीया ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ कर्मणि कारक या संख्या तत्र द्वितीया विक्तिर्भवति॥ वार्तिकर ॥ उभसर्वतसे कार्याधिगुपर्यादिषु त्रिषु । द्वितीयामोडितान्तेषु ततोऽन्यत्रापि दश्यते ॥ बार्तिकम् ॥ अभितः परितः-समया-निकषा हा प्रति-योगेषु च दृश्यते ॥ 
2. When the object is not denoted by the termination of the verb, i e. when the verb does not agree with it, the second case-aftix isattached to the word. av OF CULTUR 
• MINISTRY 
VERNMENT ON 
T OF INDIA 
ACCUSATIVE CASE... IBK. II. CH. III.8 24. 
The terms dvitiya &c., are technical phraseology of older grammarians, wod hence not defined by Panini; they apply to the triads of yr affixes, 
irfa he makes the mat,' ' trefa 'he goes to the village.' 
The words was, wafat, free and the double forms o f, wt, w , when they have the sense of nearness, govern the accusative. Sometimes other cases also, as quatr on both sides of the village'; सर्वतो ग्राम 'on all sides of the village'; धिग्देवदत्त 'fie to Devadatta'; उपर्युपरि T'just over the village'; sef or TT 'just below the village.' 
Vart:-The words was, ofca: both meaning 'round', THOT, for both meaning near', and 'woe be to,' and sfato,' govern the accusa tive case; as, fait m 'round the village,' TOT 'near the village'; te'woe be to Devadatta'; gefa w afarrfa fafat' to a hungry person nothing occurs to his mind.' See I. 4. 49 &c. 
gatat cu u netfa u qatar, , , efe, ( fr ) # 
पुत्तिः ॥बन्दसि विषये होतेः कशि कारके तृतीया विभक्ति भवति द्वितीया चा 
3. In the chhandas (veda), the object of the verb hu to sacrifice' takes the afflix of the third case, and of the second as well. 
This ordains the third case-affix, and by force of the word = 'ando the second case-affix is also employed as varafoneti gitfa' he satisfies ox pleases Agni with barley-powder,' or qe fati ytfa'he throws barleypowder into the fire as oblation.' 
Why do we say ' in the vedas?' In the classical Sanskrit, the accusa tive only must be used and not the instrumental. 
sa Tsina u 8 n TG TTT, TT, ya, ( gfaatar ) 
ferta specialmet for rent orvog raw ata factar form for अंधति॥ 
4. A word joined with (or governed by) the word antara, or antarena takes the second case-aflix. 
The antvritti of dvittyø is understand here and not that of tritiya. Both these words antara and antarena are Nipâtas. They govern the ac cusative. This debars the genitive case. The word antara means 'ba tween' while antarena means 'besides that, without,''exception, with reference to 'regarding.' As, water goure fufue a nothing can be 
RE • GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
AT OF INDIA 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
BK. H. CH. III. 95-61 
ACCUSATIVE CASE. 
.1 
gained without exertion. act or sweate auf T ug' the bowl is between thee and me.' उन्यस्त्वां मांतरेण शक्तः प्रतिकर्तुम् 'who else bub thee is able to retaliate. 
Why do we say when joined with ?' Observe tatt aufuatu refays TUTET HTETT. 
ratsua ara nyn agtfat tersaniti, Fanta, ( gfaatar ) 
Trauma Têxârstuu afgatur fufen Hafa yra para que 
5. After a word denoting time, or length, the affix of the 2nd case is employed, when denoting full duration. 
remata he reads for a month,' he studies full one month,' rearat prosperous during the month' (uninterruptedly), at yeu Aowers during the year continually, mis great at the river winding for one kos without any break,' mit Taa: the hill through one full kos.' 147 à T T TadoraTTAT O ki ng the hall of Visravana is 100 yojanas in length. 
The word weg asiat or full continuity' means the complete relation of time or space with its action, attribute or substance. 
Why do we say'atyanta-sanyoga or complete continuity'? Observe मासस्य विरथीते or क्रोशस्यैकदेशे पर्वत 
sayani aatat non agriau want, aatar, (Feat रत्यन्तसंयोगे) 
rasa at maaarit P aattava arat gater forfetafar a 
6. The third case-aflix is employed after the words denot ing the duration of time or place, when the accomplishment of the desired object is meant to be expressed. | ফাৰণৰাজ্জাখীলঃ “ he learnt the Anuvaka In & month,' জীয় নাযা ফখীয়ঃ 
he learnt the Anuvâka by going over a kos. 
The word sur means the finishing of an action, on the attainment of the object intended by the action, but not before. Thus vietinget Gruta: means. Anuvaka was persaveringly and effectually read by bim in the whole year.' 
When the idea of a pavarga is not intended, the accusative case is eni ployed, as towarsgare learnt for a month, but not yet completed, the Anuvika' 
TURE 
GOVO 
GOVERNMEN 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
OF INDIA 
पति मंत्रानय 
ACCUSATIVE CASE, 
[BK. II. CH. III, ST-9. 
सप्तमीपञ्चम्यौ कारकमध्ये ॥ ७ ॥ पदानि ॥ सप्तमी-पञ्चम्यौ, कारक-मध्ये, (कालाध्वनोर०)॥ 
अत्तिः ॥ कारकयोर्मध्ये यो कालाध्वानौ ताभ्यां सप्तमी पञ्चम्यौ विभक्ती भवतः ॥ 
7. A noun denoting time or place gets the affix of the seventh or the fifth case, when the sense implied is that the time or space is the interval between one action and another action (or implies an interval of time and space between two 
karakas). 
Ex. अझ भुक्ता देवदत्तो दावहे दाबहावामाता' having dined today, Devadatta will dine in or after two days.' Here the time' is the interval between the agent and his power of eating. So also इहस्योऽयनिवासः क्रोशात जोरी वा सय विध्येत standing here, he will hit a mark at the distance of one kos., Here kos is the interval between the agent and the object or the object and the ablation, or the object and the location. The rule 1. 3. 10 does not apply here. 
कर्मप्रवचनीय युक्ते द्वितीया ॥८॥ पदानि ॥ कर्मप्रवचनीय युकी, द्वितीया ॥ 
वृत्तिः । कर्मप्रवचनीययुको द्वितीया विभक्तिभवति ॥ 
8. The second case-affix is employed after a word which is joined with a karmapravachanîya (I. 4. 83). 
Dx. माकल्यस्य संहितामनुप्रावर्षत 'Itrained on (hearing) the reading of the Veda by Sakalya.' So also utrecarrafa ya HUTU 
यस्मादधिकं यस्य चेश्वरवचनं तत्र सप्तमी॥६॥ पदानि ॥ यस्माद अधिकं, यस्य, च, ईश्व र-वचनं, तन्त्र, सप्तमी, (कर्मप्रवचनीययुक्त्ते ॥ 
अतिः ॥ यस्मादपिकं शल्य धेश्वरवचन कर्मप्रवचनीययुक्त तल सप्तमी विभक्तिर्भवति ॥ 
9. Where a word is governed by a karmapravachaniya in the sense of more than' (I. 4 87) or 'lord of' (I. 4. 97) there the 7th case-aflix (loca tive) is employed. 
Ex. उपसार्याच दोषा: 'A Drona. is more than a Khari, अधिनहा दत्ते चंचासा: Brabradatta is the lord of Panchalas.' The phrase pe r indicate that both the thing owned and the owner may be in the locative. Se 1.4.97. 
This aphorism debars the accusative, 
QE 
GOVEA 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
RYO 
NT OF INDIA 
स्कृति मंत्रा 
*BK. TI. CH. III. S 10-12.] 
ABLATIVE CASE. 
281 
पञ्चम्यपाङ्परिभिः ॥१०॥ पदानि ॥ पञ्चमी, अप-नाङ् परिभिः, (कर्मप्रवचनीययु०)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ अपाङ् परि इत्येतैः कर्मप्रवचनीयैोंगे पञ्चमी विभक्तिर्भवति ।। 
10. The fifth case-affix (Ablative) is employed when a word is governed by the following karmapravachaniyas i.e., apa, an and pari, 
Ex. अप or or परि पाटलिपुत्रादाबष्टो देवः 'It rained off or upto or with the exclusion of, Pâtaliputra. 
The परि here has the meaning of 'exclusion' (I. 4.88) being read along with me, therefore, not here e ft fareitaa faat (I. 4. 90). 
प्रतिनिधिप्रतिदाने च यस्मात् ॥ ११॥ पदानि ॥ प्रति-निधि प्रतिदाने, च, यस्मात् ( कर्मप्र०) ( पञ्चमी)॥ 
वृत्तिः॥ यस्मात्प्रतिनिधिर्यतच प्रतिदान तत्र धर्मप्रवचनीययुक्त पञ्चमी विभक्तिर्भवति ॥ 
11. The 5th case-affix (ablative) is employed after what soever is governed by a karmapravachaniya in the sense of 
substitute' or exchange' (I. 4.92). 
Ex. अभिमन्युरर्जुनतः प्रति Abhimanyu is the representative of Arjuna.' 
facta: ufafa he exchanges mashâs for this sesainum.' See I. 4.92 for an explanation of प्रतिनिधि and प्रतिदान, 
गत्यर्थकर्मणि द्वितीयाचतुर्थी चेष्टायामनध्वनि ॥ १२ ॥ पदानि ॥ गत्यर्थ-कर्मणि, द्वितीया-चतुर्थी, चेष्टायाम् , अनध्वनि ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ गत्यर्यानां घातूनां चेष्टाक्रियाणां परिस्पन्द क्रियाणां कवि कारोऽध्यवर्जित द्वितीयाचतुये। भवतः 
12. In the case of roots implying motion, the place to which motion is directed takes the affix of the 2nd (Accu sa tive) or the 4th (Dative) case in denoting the object,' when physical motion is meant, and the object is not a word ex pressing 'road'. 
Ex. yr or TTTT vye&fa he goes to the village. But not so in er eft era (the verb not denoting physical motion)' he goes mentally to Hari' 
T eafa he goes over the way' (the object being the way'). But not co in शोदन पचति he cooks rice; (the verb not denoting motion') nor in 
tufa (the verb not denoting the object.') 
URE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
DATITE CASE.A 
BK. IL.CH. HI.520, 18 
मंत्रालय . 
Note.The word adhvan includes the synonyms of road (1. 1. 68) as जन्मान गति, गाणं गाति. 
Note. The prohibition applies with regard to the going over or ouou pying the road; so that where a person from a wrong road goes to the right road, there the fourth case-afiz will be employed as पथे गति 
चतुर्थी संप्रदाने ॥ १३ ॥ पदानि ॥ चतुर्थी, संप्रदाने । 
पृत्तिः ॥ संप्रादाने फारके चतुर्थी विभक्तिर्भवति ॥ जाकिर ॥ चतुर्थी विधाने वादयं उपसण्यानम् ॥ बार्चिकम् ॥ पिसंपझमाने चतुर्थी वक्तव्या । पातिकम् ॥ उत्पावन पायवाने चतुर्थी पकया। 
बार्तिकम् ॥ हितयोगे चतुर्थी वक्तव्या ॥ 13. In denoting the sampradana-käraka (I. 4. 32.) the fourth affix or the Dative is employed after the noun. 
Ex. उपाध्यावाय गाइडाति 'He gives a cow to the teacher 'देवदत्ताय रोचते it pleases Devadatta ' (I.4.33) पुष्पेभ्य: स्पायति (I. 4.36) he desires flowers, 
Vart --The fourth case-affix should be employed when the sense is that of for the purpose thereofas पाय दार wood is for making posts.' कुगरलाय frora gold used for the purpose of making ear-ring.' watu ureft 'pot for the sake of cooking.' TTTTTTTTI'mortar for the sake of threshing.' 
Vart.--The verb T and other verbs meaning 'to be fit or adequate for, result in, bring about, accomplish, produce, tend to,' govern the dative case: as, 14 eta arrats' the barley gruel tends to produce urine.' So elso माय संपवरते जावते या बवाणः। 
Vart-The fourth case-affix is employed with the force of indicating * portent or calamity.' as. 
भाताब पिला विशु दासणायाति तोहिनी । 
पीता बर्षाव विडेया दुर्भिवाय सिता भवेत् । The reddish lightening portends wind, extremely red indicates beat, yellow portends rain and white lightening prognosticates famine.' 
Vart. The fourth case-affix should be employed in connection with the word हित: as गोभ्योहितं good for cows.' 
कि यार्थीपपदस्य च कर्मणि स्थानिनः ॥ १४ ॥ पदानि ॥ क्रिया अर्थ-लपपदस्य, च, कर्मणि, स्थानिलः, (चतुर्थी ) ॥ 
वृतिः ॥ क्रियापपहरूप समाविलोऽमनुष्यमानस्य धातोः फर्नवि कारले जी विमति अंगति 
URE - GOVS 
GOVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
Ry 
F INDIA 
VI: CH. III § 14-15.) 
DATIVE OASE. 
जसरकार 
14. The fourth case-affix is employed in denoting the Object (karma) of that verb, which is suppressed (sthâni) in a sentence, and which has in construction (upapada) there with another verb, denotiong an action, performed for the sake of the future action (kriyârthe III. 3. 10.). 
In other words, when the sense of an infinitive of purpose formed by 'tumun' and 'nvul' (III. 3. 10,) is suppressed in a sentence, the object of this infinitive is put in the Dative 
case. 
awat Tafa=farateyrafa. he goes for fruits i. e., to bring fruits.' This debars the accusative case. So also we have in: Tufa be goes for fuel. The words fmarattaea and Farfan: are in apposition. The first is & Bahuvrihi compound of fir + Toe and means 'a verb whogo upapada denotes the purpose of the action (kriyârtha).' Thus in 
'to bring fuel'; the infinitive verb e is fmarafTue, the object of this verb is eu when this verb is suppressed, it becomes Eurfwe; the object of this verb takes the fourth case-affix. 
Why do we say of the verb whose upadada denotes the purpose of the action? Observe for fifc. 
Why do we say 'in denoting the object." Witness er wafer with for frel he goes with a cart. 
Why do we'when suppressed'? Observe med qua. 
TATTET terava u pyn agtfat u gawula, Ta uta, ( Tauf) 
TFTTEN 
J UTTATTUTTITE Ufa faragot forfer ufafara 
15. The fourth case-affix is employed after a crude. form which ends in an affix denoting 'condition' (abstract noun, III. 3. 11 ) and having the force of the affix tum (or Infinitive of purpose). 
Ex. arata rufa' he goes to offer a sacrifice w a . So also FUTTTT sofa, at wwf. 
The word gue means' means having the same significance as the afix 
नमःस्वस्तिखहावधालंवषड्योगाच्च ॥ १६ ॥ पदानि ॥ नमः fe-ITET-2017-14-498-titra, T, ( erret ) fere w afell era ne reaafa gef fofwafa 
URE - Gove 
RY OF CULTUS 
MINISTRY 
ERNMENT OF 
OF INDIA 
. 
84 
DATIVE CASE. 
[BK. III. CH. 11. & 16-11 
क्रांति मंत्रान्ध 
16. The fourth case-affix is employed in conjunction with the words namah 'salutation,' savusti peace,' svaha, svadha (terms used in offering oblations to Gods and Pitris respectively), alam a match for' sufficient for and vasbat a term of oblation. 
Ex. war art, afer : , FUTETSTTT, ETT frava: , 44 TET TATU "Salutation to Gods'; 'peace to the people'; svâhâ to fire'; 'svadha to the Pitris'; 'an athlete is a match for an athlete' &c. The word wat includes its synonyms also, as sy:, * &c.; so wf5sta, H. 
The indicates that the Dative will debar Genitive, in spite of II. 3. 73, in the case of these words, though used benedictivley; as fuffrora भूयात् ॥ 
pueTTHET FHTATS TRITO 1 29.11 actfor ul proy-marau, Çe, fautur, Taig, tet যাগিঃ । ফায়জন যি এবিষভিন লিমা ঘা অথবা বিলি অমনি মা যান। afanyacaferafa aktarfeitara a mai 
17. In denoting Itho indirect object, which is not an animal, of the verb manya to think, the dative case is optionally employed, when contempt is to be shown. 
Ex. न त्वा तृणं तृणाय वा मन्ये I do not consider thee worth a stra w.' न स्या * TETA UT 'I do not consider thee worth a chaff.' Why do we use the word wat? Observe o cara f ufH. The optional dative will not be employed with the synonyms of the verb trafa. So also the sûtra uses the form 99 with the vikarana tu, indicating that it is Divândi that governs a dative, and not the Tanádi ; for the latter governs the accusative only, as * i TT wà. 
When oontempt is not meant, the verb does not govern the Dative, 
WEWT , TUTTI I SUTAT gá W TEU par tauf . I consider a rock to be a stone, I consider mortar but as wood, I con wider him to be the son of a blind woman whose mother cannot see.' 
So also when the object of comparison is an animate being, it will not take the dative:-as tui y a # 'I do not consider thee even as a jackal.' The case of a cui v is an exception. 
Vart:-Instead of using uring in the sûtra, the word s atice should be used. The following words belong to Navâ di class, they are always in the accusative after the word aa, never in the Dative :-- ship,' T crow, food,' parrot,' and 419 jackal.' 
URE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
SL 
Sh. II. CH. III. $ 18-21.) 
INSTRUMENTAL CASE. 
2861 
कर्तृ करणयो स्तृतीया ॥ १८ ॥ पदानि ॥ कर्तृ-करणयोः तृतीया ॥ पृत्तिः ॥ कर्तरि वारयो च क्षार तृतीया विभक्ति भवति ॥ चार्तिकम् ॥ तृतीया विधाने प्रकृत्यादीनामुपसंख्यानम् ॥ 
18. In denoting the agent (I. 4. 54) or the instrument (I. 4. 42), the third case-affix is employed. _Ex. देवदत्तेन कृतं ' done by Devadatta,' दानेण चुनावि 'he cuts with the sickle. So also यज्ञदत्तेन भुक्तम्, परशुमा बित्तिा 
Vart:-The following words take the 3rd case. प्रकृति "original,' प्राय "almost,' पात्र gotra,' सम —equal,' विषम 'unequal,'विद्रोणा, पंधक and साहन as प्रायेण बानिका , गाग्योऽस्मि गात्रेण, अनेन or विषमेश धावति, विवोणेनमीणाति &c. 
सहयुक्त्ते प्रधाने ॥ १९ ॥ पदानि ॥ सहयुक्त्ते, अनधागे (तृतीया)। वृत्तिः ॥ सहान पुतऽप्रधाने तृतीया विक्तिर्भवति ॥ 
19. When the word सह 'with,' is joined to a word the latter takes the third case, when the sense is that the word in the third case is not the principal but the accompaniment of the principal thing. 
Ex. yau ectora: fuar' the father has come with the son.' 
The same will be the result with the synonyms of ur as, पुत्रेण पा "with the son'. So also when the word or is understood, as Panini him seif uses in I. 2.65 पडो युना &c. 
Why do we say when not the principal.' Observe, शिरमेण सहोपाध्या. भण्यगी.. 
येनाविकारः ॥ २०॥ पदानि ॥ येन, अङ्ग-विकार, (ततीया)॥ वृत्तिः॥ येनाङ्गेग विकृतेनाझिनो विकारो लगयते ततस्तृतीया विभक्ति भवति ॥ 
20. By whatsoever limb, being defective, is pointed out the defect of the person, after that the third case-affix is employed. 
As, अक्षणा का 'blind of one eye' पादेन खंज: lame of foot.' पाशिमा कुण्ठः &c. The word anga in this sutra applies to the whole body, whatsoever by reason of being a member of the body is defective is indicated here. 
इत्थंभूतलक्षणे ॥ २१ ॥ पदानि ॥ इत्यंभूत-लक्षणे, (तृतीया) ॥ यत्तिः ॥ कंचित्कार प्राप्त इत्यंभूत, स्तस्यखक्ष नित्या भूतल हवं, ततस्तृतीया विभक्ति यति। 
RE - GOVER 
NERNMENT O 
GY OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
सवालिया 
. Dia 
INSTRUMENTAL CASE. 
[Bk. II. CH. III. $ 21-2 
स्मत मंत्रालय 
17717817 
21. Any mark or attribute, by which is indicated the existence of a particular state or condition, is put in the third case to express this relation. 
TETRTETTTT: 'he is an ascetic by (the fact of his having) matted hair.' বি ঘষাল ফলন্ত লা জান্নাঘীৰ your honor might see the student by the fact of his having a kamandalu.' So also ergaste' a teacher by the fact of having students.' fuu furn'a Parivrâjaka by a tuft of hair.' But not so here, Tyftara: ' a student has kamandalu in his band. Because here in the compound, t ufy is hidden the mark. Why do we say ittha-bhuta? Observe e afa faatan. 
Fiftsfuate afTu II GT 7-, igatput, haft, (qatat) 
aferu vighet ware for a featurat atau Tanateat gator fara fer afa u 
22. After the verb sam-jsâ the third case-affix is option ally employed in denoting the object. 
form or forat durata he knows his father.' IST or at sina. 
at nan atau bat, qatar) afa maarun180: teref ar grupa; tgtfu tegera feraf vafa u 
23. When a word denotes cause,' it takes the third case afiix. 
format by learning there is produced fame.' watu wa 'by wealth, family;' muar * 'by daughter there is grief.' 
The word is here is used in its popular sense and not the grammati cal hetu (I. 4. 55). Any thing capable of accomplishing a desired object is 
called hetu. 
saa uutnu ocrfer war, ww, wt, (C ) 
wfara wa ufust got h ug it for vafa 
24. A word, implying debt, considered as a cause' but not as a kartri or agent, takes the fifth case-affix. 
Ex : "be has been bound on account of a debt of a hundred pieces.' 
URE 
GOVE. 
GOVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
ENT OF INDIA 
BESIT. CH. III. & 24-27.] 
CASE-AFFIXES. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
सरल सरकार 
Why do we say when not denoting the agent ?' Observe aufreras; a debt of hundred has thrown him in prison'; here ya being considered as a prayojaka hetu, is an agent and takes the third case-affix. 
विभाषा गुणखियाम् ॥ २५ ॥ पदानि ॥ विभाषा, गुणो, अखियाम् , हितौ पञ्चमी)॥ 
त्तिः॥ गुणे हेतापनीलिङ्गे विभाषा पचनी विभक्तिर्भवति । 
25. The fifth case-affix is employed optionally when the noun expresses an attribute, being the cause of an action, and not being of the feminine gender. 
Ex. जाड्यने जाडपताम् वा बद्धः ' he has been bound by reason of his dullness.' पांडित्येन or पांडित्या मुक्त: 'saved through learning.' 
Guna-vachana nouns are generally abstract nouns. Therefore not here चनेन कुलस . If an abstract noun is of feminine gender, this rule will nob apply, as वुद्ध्या or प्रबया मुक्त he was set at liberty on account of his skill or wisdom.' 
षष्ठी हेतुप्रयोग ॥ २६ ॥ पदानि ॥ षष्ठो, हेतु-प्रयोगे ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ हेतुशब्दस्य प्रयागे हेती मोत्ये षष्ठी विभक्तिभवति ॥ 
26. The sixth case-affix is employed after a noun imply ing the cause of an action, when the word hetu is used along with such a word. 
Ex. अन्नस्य हेतो वसति 'he dwells for the sake of food.' 
सर्वनाम्नस्ततीया च ॥ २७ ॥ पदानि ॥ सर्वनाम्नः तृतीया, च, (हेतुप्रयोगे) (षष्ठी)॥ 
वत्तिः ॥ सर्वनाम्ना हेतुपन्दप्रयेागे हेती योत्ये तृतीया विभक्तिभवति षष्ठीण। पार्तिकम् ॥ निमित्तकारणहेतुषु सर्वासां प्रायदर्शनम् ।। 
27. After a sarvanaman (I. 1.27) when it signifies the cause of an action, and the word hetu is used with it, the third case affix is employed, as well as the sixth 
Ex. hu or Ega vafa for the sake of what does he live?' यस्य or येन हेतुना वसति । 
Vart :-When the words निमित or कारया are so used, almosh all the case affixes may be employed; as fa fafi or han 
f o r et farfar eta or afraferera or wea fufe or few far wafa. Similarly with URE - GOVS 
OF CULTURA 
VERNMENT 
MINISTRY 
OF INDIA 
ABLATIVE OASE. 
BR. II. CH. III. $ 27-2 
जसरकार 
the words karana and hetu. Here also the word is does not mean the word-form hetu (I.1.68) bub its synonyms also ; as कि प्रयोजन केन प्रपोजनेन Or स्मै प्रयोजनाय &c., परति 
अपादाने पञ्चमी ॥रू॥ पदानि ।। पादाने, पञ्चमी । पृत्तिः ॥ अपादाने कारके पचमी विभक्तिर्भवति॥ पार्तिक । पञ्चतीविधाने बसोपे कर्मषायुपसंख्यान যনি জন্ম । ক্লথিংখী যাত্ব, . पातिकम् ॥ प्रणाख्यानाच पञ्चमी बलज्या॥ पार्तिकर यवक्षाध्यकासनिर्माणं तत्र पञ्चनी वाया। बार्तिक । तदा काकाले सहमी पाया । জালিঙ্ক ॥ এলঃ এঘষা মন্সী আ হা ॥ 
28. When the Apâdâna-karaka (I 4. 24) is denoted, the fifth case-affix is employed. 
Ex. प्रामादागवति'he comes from the village' (I.4.24); वृकेभ्यो विमति (1.4,25), अध्यवनात पराजयते (1.40 26) &c. 
Vart:-The fifth case-affix is employed in denoting the object, when the verbal participle ending in या is elided ; as मासादमाकप प्रेषते = प्रासादात sahe sees from a palace." 
Vart :-And under similar circumstances in denoting the location the place where an action is performed is put in the ablative case, as, आसने उपशिस्य मेधते = शासनात मेणवे 'he sees from a seat.' 
Vart :-In questions and answers, the fifth case-affix is employeds-पुती भवान् ? पाटलिपुत्राटु whence is your Honor coming? From Pataliputra' 
Vart: That point of time or space from which distance in time or space is measured is put in the ablative case:-as, गवीधूमत: सांकारयं चत्वारि योजनानि 'Sankisya is from Gavidhuma four yojanas.' कार्तिक्या भाग्रहायणी नाणे 
Agrahayana is one inonth from Kartika. The word denoting the distance in time isput in the locative case,as पासे 
Vart :- In the above the word denoting the distance in space may be put either in the nominative or locative; as armas yiazd reafe tranf or भर्प योजनेषु। 
नग्यारादितरत्तदिकशब्दानचूत्तरपदाजाहियुकत्ते ॥ २९ ॥ पदानि ॥ अन्य--भारात-इतर-ऋते-दिकशब्द-अञ्चु-उत्तरपद-याच -प्राहियुकत्ते, (परचमी)॥ 
त्तिः ॥ अन्य जारात इतर पाते विकण्य अत्तरपद शाच आदि इत्येतोगे पञ्चनी विभक्ति 
URE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
RY OF CULTU 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
. B 
I. Or. III. & 29-81.] 
GENITIVE CASE. 
19 
सत्यमेव जयते 
सरकार 
29. When a noun is joined with words meaning 'other than' or with arât 'near or remote' or itara different from or site without,' or words indicative of the directions' (used also with reference to the time corresponding to them) or with words having añchu 'to bend' as the last member of the com pound (and expressive of direction), or with words ending with the affix âch or ahi (V. 3. 36 and 37) the fifth case-affix is employed. 
Ex. srat, format, ratt, safari, facut ET U Ta different from Devadatta' TE PUTETIT 'remote from or near to Devadatta. The word &rêt meaning near or remote' would have taken the sixth case-affix by sūtra 34, but this enjoins 5 th case-affix. sya ? 
a c 'excepting Devadatta.' शवों ग्रामात 'east of the village,' उत्तरी ग्रामात 'north of the village,'पूर्वाग्रीमाव rovan: 'the spring is prior to summer' ATT SEUTAT YTTTT to the east or west of the village' दक्षिणा दक्षिणाहिया ग्रामात' to the south or in the eastern direction of the village.' 
The words like ut &c. , formed from the verb afichu are also F ; their separate enumeration shows that the sixth case-affix ordained by the next sätra does not come after them. 
argaadartha u go luctfot u get, garazada u रत्तिः ॥ अतसर्थेन प्रत्ययेन युक्त षष्ठीविभक्तिर्भवति ॥ 
30. The sixth case-affix is employed when used in con nection with words ending with affixes having the sense of the affix a tasuch (V. 3. 28). 
The affix yayy is ordained by V. 3. 28. 
Ex ग्रामस्य दक्षिशत: उत्तरतः पुरस्तात् उपरिवा' to the south or north, fore most, in or above the village.' 
एनपा द्वितीया ॥ ३१ ॥ पदानि ॥ एनपा, द्वितीया ॥ f 
a cT982 grat fa uuufaa ya fgiten faf walau 31. With a word ending with the affix 'enap' (V. 3.35), the second case-affix is employed as well as the sixth. 
Ex. af 
EU UT south of the village.' 
URE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
TAINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
A290 
CASE-AFFIXES. 
BE. II. CH. III. $ 32-34. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
संस्कृति - 
पृथाग्विनानानाभिस्तृतीयाऽन्यतरस्याम् ॥ ३२ ॥ पदानि ॥ पृथंग विन:-नानाभिः, तृतीया, अन्यतरस्याम् , (पञ्चमी)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ पृथक् विना नाना इत्येनै योगे तुतीया विभक्ति भवति अन्वतरख्या पचनी ॥ 
32. When joined with the words prithak without, vina without' and nând without the third case-affix is employed, optionally (as well as the fifth and the second). 
Ex. 7 7 ur fra YUT ITT UT' without or different from Rama." 
This sutra may be divided into two parts:-(1) पृथग् विना नानाभिः (2) तृतीयाऽन्यतरस्यार. By this arrangement we can read dvitiya into the aphorism, 
विना वातं विना वर्ष विद्युतप्रपतन बिना। 
विना इस्ति कृतान्दोषान् केनेनो पातिती दुनी ।। करणे च स्तोकाल्पकृच्छकतिपयस्यासत्ववचनस्य ॥ ३३ ॥ पदानि॥ करणे, च, स्तोक-अल्प-कृच्छू-कतिपयस्य, असत्त्ववचनस्य, (तृतीया पञ्चमी-अन्यतरस्यां) 
वृत्तिः ॥ स्ताक अल्पकृष्ण कतिपय इत्येतेभ्योऽसत्ववानेभ्यः करणे कारवोऽन्यतरस्या तुतोवा অলি ঘর্থ আত্মীয়। 
33. When expressing an instrument-karaka, optionally after the words stoka little,' alpa "little,' krichchhra 
difficulty,' and katipaya 'some,' the fifth case-afix is used, when they do not denote material objects. 
Ex. लोकात स्तोकेन वा शुक्त: end अल्पान्मुक्त: or अल्पेनमुक्त &c, he got off easily &o. But स्तावेग विषेन हतः, अल्पेन मधुना मत: &c. killed by a little poison. No option allowed, as it qualifies a substance, Soalso स्ताकशुपति ' he loosens a little.' Here fate is used as an adverb and not as an instrument (TT). 
दूरान्तिकाथैः षष्ठयन्यतरस्याम् ॥ ३४॥ पदानि ॥ दूर-अन्ति ह-अर्थः, षष्टी, शन्यतरस्याम् , (पञ्चमी)। 
पत्तिः ॥रान्ति का शोग पठी विभक्तिर्भवति अन्यतरस्यां पानी । 
34. when in conjunction with words having the sense of dôra distant,' and antika 'near,' the sixth case-affix is options ally employed. 
Ex. प्रासाद यानस्य पान र विष्ट, अन्तिक, अभ्यास, निवर्ट बनी 'the forest is distant frona or near or to the villager 
COVERNMEN 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY ON 
NT OF INDIA 
ABEII. CH. III.34-36.] 
CASE-AFFIXES. 
291 
The force of the word warceat is to indicate that the 5th case-affix -employed in the alternative, would have run into this su tra, bad we not 
used ' anyatarasyam.' 
दूरान्तिकार्थेभ्योद्वितीया च ॥ ३५ ॥ पदायि ॥ दूर-मन्तिक अर्थेभ्यः, द्रवितीया, च, (पञ्चमी)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ दूरान्तिकार्येभ्यः पन्देभ्यो द्वितीयाविभक्तिर्भवति चकारात्पश्वनीवृतीयापि समुच्चीयते॥ 
35. After the words having the sense of dûra distant, and antika 'near,' the second case-affix is used as well as the fifth and the third. 
Ex. दूर दूराद्दूरेण वा ग्रामस्य and अन्तिकात , or शन्तिक्षेन अन्तिक ग्रामस्य . 
This rule applies only when these words have their original significa tion and do not denote a substance. Otherwise the proper case-affix should be employed, as हर पन्थाः , (राय पये देहि. 
सप्तम्यधिकरणे, च, ॥३६॥ पदानि ॥ सप्तमी, अधिकरणे, च. (दूरान्तिकार्थेभ्यः)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ सप्तनी विभक्तिर्भवत्यधिकरणे कारके चकारा दूरान्तिकार्येन्या । बार्तिकम् ॥ पानीविधाने तस्येविषयस्व कर्मण्युपसंख्यानम् ॥ बार्तिकम् ॥ साध्वसाधुप्रयोगे च ससनी बक्तध्या ॥ बार्तिकम् ॥कारकाशाचा कारकत्वे सप्तनी बक्तव्या॥ बार्तिकम् ॥ अकारकाणां चा कारकत्ये सप्तमी पतष्या । पातिकम् ॥ तद्विपर्या च सप्तनी वक्तव्या॥ बार्तिवर ॥ निमित्तात्यायोगे सप्तमी वक्तव्या ॥ 
36. The seventh case-affix is employed when the sense is that of location (I. 4. 45) as well as after the words mean ing distant'or near'. 
Ex. ca ea 'he sits on the mat' sfera ? UT UTTET near or distant from the village. Euteai vafa he cooks in the pot.' Thus the words & and अन्तिक take four case-affixes, namely the second, third, ifth and seventh, 
Vart:-Words like अधीलिन् 'who has learnt, दीतिन् 'who has com prehended;' i. e., words formed by adding to the past participle in w, govern the locative of that which forms their object:-as अधीती व्याकरयो 'versed in grammar, for at afue well versed in sacrificial rites, शामली शायरि" yell read in the Veda. See V.2.88. 
URE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
TAINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
प्रकृति मंत्रालय 
सत्यमेव जयते 
CASE-AFFIXES 
[BK. III. CA. II. S 36-38. 
Vart:--The words ary and smary govern the locative of that towards whom goodness or otherwise is shown; as fiaft TYTTY 7 well behaved or ill-behaved towards his mother.' 
Vart:-The Locative absolute is used in cases other than those specified in the next sûtra, namely, in cases where the action done or sufferod does not indicate the time of another action; as a rating feat wide the poor are sitting, while the rich are eating,' feeswetag sug tata the rich are eating, while the poor being seated.' So also vice versa. 
Vart :-The Locative is sometimes used to denote the object or pur pose for which anything is done; as. 
fitraat fa, attefrag TOTO 
i va farf# gou as Man kills the tiger for his skin, the elephant for his tusks, for chamari cow for her hair, and the musk-deer for its musk.' 
TEU T Taal HaraTI 11 39 il utfor II TETT, , , raam, ( at ) 
funt: fwat Teuraa er farifmatrat wa aar taa: Et fofoffa 
37. By the action (bhava) of whatsoever, the time of another action is indicated, that takes the seventh case-affix. 
This is Locative Absolute. 19 TAI TA'the cows being milked, he went away' STEUTTAR and returned when they were milked' sfery 
una vas, Teutta. 
Why do we say by the action of whatsoever'? Observe ar urerfora r . Why have we used the word ' action' twice? Witness area 
ogt utata # 3 1 umferat, , , (uit, waa taa) 1 
wfers it wortfua wa waat eragut fawit me 
38. The sixth case-affix is employed (as well as the seventh), when disregard is to be shown, after that by whose action the time of another action is indicated. 
This is Genitive Absolute. <a sera serata in spite of her weeping, be went away. The force of this genitive is that of the English word' not withstanding' in spite of for all,' &c., WETA Tant à trave the 
ORE GOVE 
VERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
T OF INDIA 
BKIT CA. III. S 38-41.1 
GENITIVE CASE 
298 
Nandas were killed like so many beasts Rakshasa looking on,' (not-with standing that Rakshasa was looking on). 
खामीश्वराधिपतिदायादसाक्षिप्रतिभूप्रसूतैश्च ॥ ३८ ॥ पदानि ॥ स्वामिन-ईश्वर-अधिपति-दायाद-साक्षिन-प्रतिभू-प्रसूतैः , च, (षष्ठी सप्तमी)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ स्वामिन् ईश्वर अधिपति दायाद साक्षिन् प्रतिभू प्रसूत इत्येतैर्योगे षष्ठी उतनी विभक्तीभवतः ॥ 
39. The sixth and the seventh case-affixes are used after words when they are joined with svâmin master,' isvara 
lord,' adhipati ruler,' dâyâda an heir, sâkshin witness, pratibhû 'a surety,' and pra sûta begotten'. 
गवां गोषु वा स्वामी or ईश्वर 'master of cows' So also गवामधिपतिः Or गोवधिपतिः, गवां दायादः or गोषु दायादा, गव or गोषु साधी प्रतिभूः &c. 
These words naturally would have governed the Genitive; the present stl.tra ordains Locative as well. 
मायुक्त्तकुशलाभ्यां चासेवायाम् ॥४॥पदानि ॥ श्रायुक्त्त कुशलाभ्यां, च, सेवायाम् , (षष्ठी सप्तमी)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ सायुक्तो व्यापारितः कुशलो निपुणः ताभ्यां यांगे मासेवायाँ गन्यमानायां बष्टी सप्सम्यो विमतीभवतः ॥ 
10. In conjunction with the words ayukta 'engaged, and kusala 'skilful, when meaning entire absorption in an engagement, the sixth and the seventh case-affixes are used after a word. 
Ex.मायुक्तः कुशले वा कटकरणे कटवारणास्य वा deeply absorbed in mat making.' 
When not meaning deeply absorbed,' the construction is different; as 3 m it * 'the cow is slightly yoked to the cart.' Here the seventh case-affix only is employed. 
यतश्च निर्धारणम् ॥४१॥ पदानि ॥ यतः, च, निर्धारणम् , (षष्ठी-सप्तमी)॥ 
त्तिः॥ यतो निर्झरण ततः षष्ठीसमयी विभक्तीभवतः ॥ 
41. The sixth and the seventh case-affiges are used after those words from which specification is made, (as of an india vidual from the whole class). 
REGOVA 
OVERNMENT, 
CRY OF CULTUA 
THISINI 
NT OF INDIA 
•संस्कृति मा 
CASE AFFIXES. 
[BR. II. CE. III.841044. 
मारवारका 
Ex. यहां गोषु वा कृष्पा बहुसीरा: 'among cows the black one gives much milk, मनुष्याणां or मनुध्ये छत्रियः शूरतमः । 
A nirdharana or specification is made by separating one from the many by reason of its genus, quality and action (II. 2. 10). 
पञ्चमी विभक्त्ते ॥४२॥ पदानि ॥ पञ्चमी, विभक्त्ते, (यतय निर्धारणम् )॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ यस्मिन्निारणाये विभक्तमस्ति ततः पञ्चमी विभक्तिर्भवति ॥ विभागो विभक्त । 
42. The fifth case-affix is employed when the thing speci. fied is different or divided from (and not included in) that from which specification is intended. 
This debars the sixth and the seventh case-affixes, as, माथुराः पादलि. पुनेम्यः शुकुमारत 'Mathura is more beautifal than Pataliputra.' 
साधुनिपुणाभ्यामर्चायां सप्तम्यप्रतेः ॥ ४३ ॥ पदानि ॥ साधु निपुणाम्यां, भर्चायम् , सप्तमी-प्रपतेः॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ साधु निपुण इत्येताभ्यां योगेऽर्चायां गम्यमानायां वानी विभक्तिर्भवति न त, प्रति प्रयुज्यते॥ 
43. In conjunction with the words sådhu 'good,' and nipuna 'skillful,' when they denote respect, the seventh case afix is employed ; provided that the word prati is not used.. 
Trafa urg: or färger: 'good behaved towards his mother'? But anyencut at afa 'Devadatta is good behaved towards his mother.' - 
Why do we say when respect is denoted? Observe, साधुयोराज्ञः the servant is good towards the king. Here it is a bare statement of a fact. 
The exception applies not only to ufa but to other prepositions, like परि, मनु &c., as, भातरं परि साधु वदतः ॥ 
प्रसितोत्सुकाभ्यां तृतीया च ॥४४॥ पदानि ॥ प्रसित उत्सुकाभ्यां , तृतीया, च, (सप्तमी)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ प्रसित उत्सुक इत्येताभ्यां योगे तृतीया विभक्तिर्भवति चकारात्सानी च ॥ 
44. In conjunction with the words prasita 'longing for, and utsuka greatly desirous of,' the third case-altix is used after a word, as well as the seventh. 
Ex.बिवायां मिनया मा उल्सक longing for sleep,'को केमेषु मसिता 
OF CULTURA 
VERNMENT O 
MINISTRY 
XT OF INDIA 
SI 
II/CH. III. $ 45-47.] 
CASE-ATFIXOS. 
P 
. 
11 
para o afor a uerfa um, w, ufu, (aatet Faat) a 
afin garat****TETT gatareyrat farmerara: u 
45. When an affix declaring the time of an Asterism is elided by lup (IV. 2. 4); the seventh and the third case-affixes are used after the word, whose affix is so elided. 
Ex, gtau gu T T ata 'when the moon is in the Asterism of Pushya, let him drink milk.' See Rules IV. 2. 4 and IV 2.5. So also 
utfit: ita ETF aata. But not so here arag aura he lives in Panchala'. Here the country is meant, and not a star, though here also there is elision of the Taddhita affix, 
Why do we say 'lup elision'? Observe UTT TT 'the planet in the Magha.' Here there is no elision. But why not in ways: , Tagfah. Be cause they do not denote location, which is understood. It is when location is expressed by such words that we may use the third case-atix in the alternative. 
utagtigere faguftaTTT" #1 HTV Urgell utfufce- -foto-UfTHIT-247-2713, TTAT 11 
वृत्तिः ॥ प्रातिपदिकार्थमाने लिङ्गमात्रे परिमाणमात्रे वचनमाने प्रथमा विभक्तिर्भवति ॥ 
46. Where the sense is that of the Nominalstem (I. 2. 45) or of gender only, or measure only or number only, the first case-affix is employed. 
Ex. yed: aloft,' a: below,' 'virgin,' qu: tree,' Owl," T a measure'. By 'number' grammatical number is meant; as *** 'one,' at two,' ga: 'many. 
The sense of a Pratipadika is to denote mere existence. Genders are three, masculine, feminine and neuter. Measures are such as drona, khâri, bdhaka &c. Numbers are singular, dual and plural. The Nipatas which do not denote anything are also Prântipadika. 
atan 89 11 JETfu utaa, (TAT) of: area ar fer frafa u 
47. And when the sense is that of addressing, the first case-affix is employed. 
Ex. O Ram' that, # : 
GOVERNMENT 
TURE - Go 
KRY OF CULT 
ISINIW 
NT OF INDIA 
VOCATIVE CASE. 
[BK. II. CH. III. $ 48-31 
• 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
सपाय जयते 
ल सरकार 
सामन्तितम् ॥ ४॥ पदानि ॥ सन्नामन्त्रिम् (सन्बोधने प्रथमा)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ संबोधने या प्रयमा तदन्तं शब्दरूपमामन्त्रितसं भवति ॥ 
48. The word ending with the first case-affix, in the sense of addressing, is called Amantrita or vocative (VIII. 2. 78). 
एकवचनं संबुद्धिः ॥ ४ ॥ पदानि ॥ एकवचनं सम्बुद्धिः, (आमन्त्रितम् प्रथ०)॥ 
बत्तिः ॥ शामन्त्रितप्रथमाया यदेकवचनं तत्संबुद्धिसंबं भवति॥ 
49. In the sense of vocative, the singular number of the first case-affix is called Sambuddhi. 
The vocative singular is called sambuddhi, when it is employed in the vocation. Thus VI. 1.69 declares after an inflectien base ending in एक or in a short vowel, a consonant is elided if it be that of Sambuddhi' as 
पाष्ठी शेषे ॥ ५० ॥ पदानि ॥ षष्ठी, शेषे ।। अन्तिः कर्मादिभ्योऽन्यः प्रातिपदिकार्थव्यतिरिक्तः स्वस्वामिसंबन्धादिः शेषस्तत्र षष्ठी विधिर्भवति॥ 
50. The sixth case-affix is employed in the remaining case, that is to say, where there is a sense, such as the rela tion between property and its owner, &c. different from that of a Nominal-stem. 
Ex. राशः पुरुषः the king's man' पण। पाद: " beast's foot पितुः पुत्र: father's son.' 
शोऽविदर्यस्य करणे ॥ ५१॥ पदानि ॥ जः, अविदर्थस्य, करणे, (षष्ठी)॥ 
वृतिजामातेरविदईस्यामानार्यस्य करणे कारकै पष्ठीविभक्तिर्भवति॥ 
51. Of the verbarjma, when not used in the sense of to know,' the instrument takes the sixth case-affix, 
Ex. wyöt ta 'he engages in sacrifice with honey. So also affar मानीत. The verbar when not meaning to know', has the significance of 
URE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
Y OF CULTURA 
ASINIW 
NT OF INDIA 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
Dk. II. Cæ. III. $ 51-54.] 
GENITIVE CASE. 
मान्वयमा 
to act, or to engage in ;'or it may denote false knowledge'; as afifa Tom प्रतिहतोवा. Compare I. 3.45. 
But not so here स्वरेगा पुत्रं जानाति' he recognises the son by the voice.' 
अधीगर्थदयेशांकर्मणि ॥ ५२ ॥ पदानि ॥ अधि-इक-अर्थ-दय-ईशां, कर्मणि, (षष्ठी)॥ 
वत्तिः ॥ अधीगर्थाः स्मरणार्याः । दय दानगतिरपणेष ।श ऐश्वस्य । एतेषां कर्मणियारों शेषत्वेन विवक्षिते षष्ठी विभक्ति भबति ॥ 
52. Of the verbs having the sense of remembering," (adlik) and of daya 'to give,' to pity to protect,' to move, and of isa to rule or be master of,' the object takes the sixth case-affix. 
Ex. मातुः अध्येति ' he remembers the mother,' सर्पिषो दयते 'he gives clarified butter,' नायं गात्राणामीष्टे ' he can not rule his limbs.' But not so here मातुगुणैः स्मरति because गुण here is not the object. The word शेष is also understood here. So that the cases not otherwise provided for, take this case. So that भातरं स्मरति is also allowed. 
कुनः प्रतियत्ने ॥ ५३॥ पदानि ॥ कृजः, प्रतियत्ने, (कर्मणि शेषे षष्ठी)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ करोतेः कर्मणि कारके शेषत्वेन विक्षिते प्रतियने गम्यमाने षष्ठीविभक्ति भवति। 
53. The object of the verb kri takes the sixth case-affix, when it means 'to impart a new quality or virtue (1. 3. 32). 
Ex. राधादकस्योपस्कुरुते ' the wood gives a new quality to the water' (or he prepares the wood and water for sacrifice). (By VI. 1. 139, is inserted). 
When sfat is not meant, the second case-affix is employed: as ve करोति. 
The word uष is also understood here. So that we have also पस्कुरुते ॥ 
चोदवानु 
रुणार्थानां भाववचनानामज्वरे ॥५४॥ पदानि ॥ रुज-अर्थानां, भाववचनानाम् , मज्वरे, (कर्मणि शेषे षष्ठी)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ मजार्थानां धातूनां भाववचनानाभाषकका वरिवर्जितानां कणि कारको शेवत्वेन विवक्षिते षष्ठीविभक्तिर्भवति॥ 
पार्तिकर ॥ अज्यरि संताप्योरिति बसाव्यर OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
RNMENT OF 
OF INDIA 
ON 
सत्यम्यगायन 
GENITIVE CASE. 
[Br. II. CA. III. S 5256. 
54. The object of verbs having the sense of ruj'to afflict', with the exception of the Causative verb jvaraya to be feverish,' takes the sixth case-affix, when the verb expresses a condition (i. e., when the subject is an Absract noun). 
Ex. treu vafa Ort: the disease afflicts the chief' attestafa I 
Why do we say when the subject is an Abstract noun'? Observe 777 warfa ofa the river breaks the banks.' So also not here te patula vac: the fever burns the thief.' So also when the verb viare is used, te arrafa atasi 
The word da is also understood here. Thus it safa Err: 
safafa Te: 1 uşafa arfarfer, TT: ( for wa watu 
future matvaretaafutig va), autote fruca wife wall fufragt forfer Hafen 
55. Of the verb nâth when meaning to bless'; the object takes the sixth case-affix, 
Ex, मधुनो भागते 'he blesses the honey. But माणवकामुपवायति , अंग पुत्री fe'he solicits mânavaka saying (child) son, study.' Here does not mean to bless, and so it takes the accusative case. 
strafragmertefuai for nye lugtfat u off FoU-TE-T-forat, featur, (Fafe agt) 
fere fe fareT TE FTU fag ratai yra, feu feugiat arra ut विभक्तिर्भवति॥ 
56. The object of the verbs jâsito strike'; 'to hurt,'han to strike' preceded by fa and T, nât to injure,' kràth,' and pish,' when they mean, to injure,' takes the sixth case-affix, 
trattarefa, faragfra, fafce, fra, oftefra, arcufa, moala, frwfgat,'he injures the thief.' 
The root ve belonging to the Churadi class should be taken, and not Divadi. with the prepositions pra and ni may be taken in any order. The root me takes in the causative vriddhi irregularly. The verb is Bhvodi and falls into the subdivision ghatadi, and is called there a fwa verb; all fax verbs shorten their penultimate before the causative aflix pore (VI. 4. 92). Thus it is an irregularity 
URE - GOVE 
VERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
ISTRY 
T OF INDIA 
6 
BK. II. C. III. S 56-59.] 
GENITIVE CASE. 
299 
Why do we say when meaning to injure? Observe : forfehe pounds the barley.' 
The word it is also understood here as it getaufa. Only these govern the genitive, not so here te fefer, si fagfrau 
TEUTT: mulent: yg u agrf u aag-uut, wat: (Fift out) 
Eft: U GOT TT TTT: Tat: Tat: fu are at faufti Harfa 
57. The object of the verbs vyavahri and pan when they are synonymous, that is when they mean dealing in sale and purchase transactions' or ' staking in gambling,' takes the sixth case-affix. 
Ex. TIET taufa o vya 'he deals in, or stakesi hundred.' 
Why does not the verb to take the affis surt? It takes or when meaning to praise or honor,' and not in the sense of gambling, or bartering' &c. Not so here garai warfa he throws the dice,' TUTTE TurTa'he praises the Brâhmanas.' The word te is also here understood, Bo that we have a ta'he stakes a hundred. 
free Uys u ustfa u fea: , auea i (agua: wat agt) u पन्तिः ॥ व्यवपणिसमानार्यस्य दीव्यतेः कर्मणि षष्ठी वित्तिर्भवति । 
58 The object of the verb div when having the above mentioned sense of dealing' or 'staking,' takes the sixth case affix. 
Ex. vara etsafa' he stakes or deals in a hundred.' But not in a faufa'he jokes with the Brahmana.' 
The yoga vibhaga when this root might well have been included in the last aphorism, is for the sake of the succeeding sâtras, in which the anuvş itti of fearuns, and not of others. 
fantotu u yo nugria Fantat, , (fat que afragt) n 
af: Unterfa feTEETTAT E veft ferrafa 
59. The object of the verb div when having the above mentioned sense of dealing or staking, optionally takes the sixth ease-affix, when it is preceded by an upasarga (or pre position) 
GURE 
GOV 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
(o [BK. II. CH. III. 859-62, 
सरकांतमान 
सारवटजयर 
300 
GENITIVE CASE. 
VITA 
जसरकार 
HD. भातस्य शतं वा प्रति दीव्यति'he deals in or stakes a hnndred. But no option is allowed when the verb is simple as in the last aphorism ; nor does this rule apply when the sense is not that of dealing or gambling. As, बताया मति दीग्यवि he throws the missile.' 
वितीया ब्राह्मणे ॥ ६० ॥ पदानि ॥ द्वितीया, ब्राह्मणे, (विवस्तदर्थस्य कर्मणि ) ॥ 
पत्तिः ॥ मात्र याविषये प्रयोग दिवस्त दर्यस्य कर्मणि कारके द्वितीया विभक्तिर्भवति । 
60. The object of the verb div when having the above mentioned sense of dealing' or staking takes the second case affix in the Brahmana literature. 
E.जामख्य सदा सभायां दीव्येयु: (Maitr.S.1.6.11) In the Vedic literature the simple verb div takes the accusative instead of the genitive. And with upasargas it is optional. The anuvritti of the word is does not extend to this sätra, or the following. 
प्रेषयन वोह विषोदेवतासंग्रदाने ॥६१ ॥ पदानि ॥ प्रेष्य-ब्र वोः, इविषः, देवता-सम्प्रदाने (षष्ठी कर्मणि)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ प्रेष्यनुवादविषः कर्मणः पठी विभक्तिर्भवति देवता संप्रदानेसति ॥ 
61. The object of the verb preshya and brāhi (imperative singular of Divadi verb, meaning 'send' and 'utter,') denoting sacrificial food, takes the sixth case-affix, when making offer ings to deity is meant or when deity is the recepient. 
Ex. ये बागल्य इविशवपाया मेदोऽनुनहि प्रेष्य वा ' send to fire as oblation, the goat, the fat, and the marrow. But not here - grof tradit अधि . Because the verb is not preshya or bruhiSo also not here अप्रये गोमयाग प्रेच्य, Because it is not an oblation. Not here too माणायकाय पुरोडा Bw. Because the recepient is not a diety. Compare VIII.2.91. 
Varts-This rule does not apply when the word sfera set out ' quali fies the word नि: as शानियां बार्ग हविवाद प्रस्थितं प्रेध्य ' send to Indra and Agni the oblation set out for them' &c. 
चतुर्यर्थ बहुलं छन्दसि ॥ ६२॥ पदानि ॥ चतुर्थी-अर्थ, बहुलं, बन्दसि (षष्ठी) 
वृत्तिः ॥ सदसि विषये चातुर्य में पट्टी विभक्तिर्भवति बहुलम् ।। बार्सिवर ॥ पर गर्यो चतुर्थी पकच्या । 
GURE 
GOVO 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
ERNMENT OG 
OF INDIA 
STE 
Br. II. CH. III. $ 62-64.] 
CASE-ATFIXES. 
801 
62. In the chhandas the sixth case-a fix is employed die versely with the force of the fourth case-affix. 
Ex. पुरुषगचन्द्रमश: or चन्द्रमसे 'to the moon, a male deer.' गोधा काल का दार्श VICE ate ataty or are fax: , to you lords of the forest, are lizard, kalaka bird, &c. So also TETEHT UUT #UT (R. Ved X. 136. 7). 
Why do we say 'diversely?' Observe attità, fenaar teit. 
Vart :-In the Veda, the 4th case-affix is employed in the sense of the sixth : as या खवैण पिवति तस्यै खाजायते ' who soever woman drinks withe woman in her courses, gets herself in menstrua. So also 7 TT yrafa aed श्यावदन who cleans her teeth, her teeth become black.' या नखानि कृन्तति तस्ये **T!' who pairs her nails, her nails become ugly.' So on, in tema FTTE TTSTE Tarigant, Grafaufa qe uafa u ETTÄ TTT: (T. S. 2.5.1.7.) 
gia và tu sp | ranh giới: , , a , ( g ) . fu chafar: Hà TT grafer og opt fait afa u 
63. The sixth case-affix is diversely employed in the chhandas in denoting the instrument of the verb yaj 'to sacri fice. 
Ex. Tas or q ua' he sacrifices with butter.' Het or staa wa 
prescueta Frasferth II EVITETET I sat suunta, mre, sfecê ( agt) 
FT: granarsafai Tata T18 rêtsfoto opt forfetara a 
64. The sixth case-affix is employed in denoting location (adhikarana) after a word denoting time (kala) when used along with a word ending with an affix having the sense of kritvasuch (V.4,17) so many times.' 
Ex.tuaisrityshe eats five times a day.' In short, 'words mean. ing so many times, or the numeral adverbs of frequency, govern the genitive of time in the sense of locative. As farista' he studies twice in a day.' 
Why do we say 'having the force of FET? Observe fra 'be sleeps in the day.' 
This rule will not apply when the adverb of frequency is understood, not expressed (prayoga) as in 
. Nor when the time is not means, as fg: Mistura y he eats in two brass vessels.' So also when 
URE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
GENITIVE CASE 
[BK. II. CH. III. 864-66. 
लय, भारत 
तसरकार 
location is not meant : as द्विरदनों भुक्त. The tष being understood we have विरहन्यधीते. 
कर्तृकर्मणोः कृति ॥ ६५ ॥ पदानि ॥ कर्तृ-कर्मणोः, कृति । (षष्ठी )॥ 
वत्तिः ॥ कृत्यायोगे कर्तरि कर्मणि च षष्ठी विभक्तिर्भवति ॥ 
65. The sixth case affix is employed after a word, in denoting the agent and the object, when used along with a word ending with akrit affix (III. 1.93). 
Ex, क्रियां कालिदासस्य the composition of Kalidasa.' माहता ऋतूनां ' the per former of sacrifice. So also wana: Tifuat' your turn of lying down.' qui खहा, पुरी भेत्ता वजस्य भर्चा. But nob in गने सभेत्ता 'cutting with weapon.' 
Why do we say 'krit?' Not so when a Taddhita-affix is employed as कुतपूर्वी कट, In other words, the genitive in Sanskrit is both subjective and objective. 
उभयप्रापतौ कर्मणि ॥६६॥ उभयप्रापती, कर्मणि, (कृति षष्ठी)॥ 
त्तिः ॥ उभय प्राप्तियस्मिन्कृति सोयमुभयप्राप्तिस्तलकर्मण्येव षष्ठी विभक्तिर्भवति, न कतरि॥ 
वार्तिकम् ॥ अकाकारयोः स्त्री प्रत्यययोः प्रयोगे नेति वक्तव्यम् । वार्तिकम् ॥ शेषे विभाषा 
66. When the agent and the object of the action denoted by the words formed by krit-affixes, are both used in a sentence, in the object only, the sixth case-affix is employed, and not in the agent (the object is put in the genitive case and not the agent). 
आ र्या गवा दोहोऽगोपाल केज 'the milking of a cow without a cowherd is a. wonder.' रोचते से ओदनस्य भोजन देवदत्तन. The eating of rice by Devadatta pleases me:' पयसा पानं यशदान the drinking of milk by Yajnadatta.' 
Vart:- When the agent and object are both used, the agent is pui in the instrumental, or genitive case, when, as some say, the krit terminations are of the feminine gender, or as others say, when the terminations are of any gender: as, विचित्रा जगत कृतिहरोहरिणा वा the creation of the world by Hari is wonderfall' WETTEUTETTUCETATUTO ETETT the dissertation on words by the acharya's father et afat atas or wff97beautiful is the structure of sutra by Paniii. Apte, 
कत्तस्य च, वर्तमाने ॥६॥ पदानि ॥ कत्तस्य, च, वर्तमाने (पष्टी)॥ 
अधिः ॥ साक्ष्य बनामशाल विहितस्य प्रोगे पटी विभक्तिभवति ।। 
TRY OF CULT 
MINISTRY 
ERNMENT OF 
TOF INDIA 
Sir. II. CH. III. 567-69.] 
CASE-ATFIX. 
503 
• संस्कृति मा 
सालय , भारत 
वार्तिकम् ॥ नपुंसके भावउपसंख्यानम् ॥ बार्तिकम् ॥ शेषविज्ञानात सिद्धम् ॥ 
67. The past participle ending in n when used in the sense of the present tense, (III. 2. 187 and 188) is used with the genitive. 
Ex. erst gfra: 'honored by kings,' hat atra: 'I alone am re garded by the king.' 
Why do we say 'त? Observe झोदनं पचमानः 'rice is cooked. Whydo we say when denoting the present tense 7 Observe ग्रानं गत: gone to the village. 
Vart :-When used as abstract neuter nouns, past participles are used with the genitive, as मयूरस्य नतं'the dancing of a peacock'बावस्य हसितं the laughing of the student'. कोकिलस्य व्याहूतम् the screaming of the cuckoo.' When, however, agent is desired to be particularised, the instru 
mental case is employed : as खात्रेण हसितम् . 
This sâtra debars sû tra 69 by which genitive is prohibited after Nishtha affixes. This is an exception to that sutra. 
अधिकरणवाचिनश्च ॥६॥ पदानि ॥श्रधिकरणवाचिनः, च, (षष्ठी)॥ 
वत्तिः ॥ तोधिकरणे चेति वश्यति तस्य प्रयोगे षष्ठीविभक्तिर्भवति ॥ 
68. The past participle in is used with the genitive when the former expresses location (III.4.76). 
This also is an exception to the prohibition about Nishtha contained in II. 3.69. As इदमेषामासितम् ' this is their seat.'इदनेषां शयित this is their sleeping.' 
In connection with verbs taking two objects, both take the geni. tive case, when a word ending in krit-affix denotes the agent, as they would have taken the accusative : as, नेताऽश्वस्य ग्रामस्य चैत्र 'Chaitra is the leader of the horse of the village.' When, however, one is the principal, then the object takes the genitive : as, नेताजखस्य ग्रामं चैत्रः, "Chaitra leads the horse to the village.' 
न लोकाव्य यनिष्ठाखलर्थतनाम् ॥ ६॥ पदानि ॥ न, ल-उ-उक अव्यय-निष्ठा-खलर्थ-तनाम्, (षष्ठी)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ल उ उक अव्यय निष्ठा खलबतन इत्येतेषां प्रयोगे षष्ठीविभक्ति भावति ॥ पार्मिकम् ॥ उक प्रतिषेधे कनेर्भाषायामप्रतिषेधः ॥ बार्तिकम् ॥ अव्ययप्रतिषेधे वासुन्कसुनारप्रतिषेधः ॥ बार्सियाम् ॥ द्विषः पातु वचनम् । 
URE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
DISINIW 
UT OF INDIA 
GT 
CASE-AFFIXES. 
[BR. II. CH. III. 69-70. 
69. The sixth case-affix is not used to express the agent or the object, when the word is governed by an Active Parti ciple ending in the affix , ors, or sh, or by an Indeclinable, or by a Past Participle in th and , or by a word ending in an affix having the sense of r or by a Noun of agency formed by a 
After these words, the Instrumen tal case must be employed to denote the Agent, and the Accusative case to denote the object. This sûtra debars Genitive which would have come by II. 3. 65. The word as is formed by a+5+=a+n=ara. 
1. The word a means the substitutes of ai.l., the Present Participles in , T (III. 2. 124), TT (III. 2. 106) 5 (III. 2. 107) for and form (III. 2. 172). Thus ita 71, 7979:, auta: or afart, ofa: 2 8 . Trett: 
2. The affix sis enjoined by III. 2. 168, as, e frate: , site TUT: The prohibition applies when a word ending in regt (III. 2. 136) is the governing term, as, irafceye u 
3. The afix suis ordained by III. 2.154: as T u rret Tu 79: 
Vart:- But the word ty# in the classical Sanskrit, governs the Genitive, as TEUT: 15: "lusting for the slave.' 
4. Indeclinables formed by कृत affixes, as, कटं कृत्वा , ओदनं भुरुवा ।। 
Vart:--This prohibition, however, does not apply to the indeclinables forned by argi (III 4.16) and TTT (III. 4. 17), as, go aherattrat: GET ME faqar farafra (1. 1. 40. 
5. Nishtha i.e., and may; as a auga at. 
6. The words formed by us affixes (III. 3. 126), as, iran waar 6, 747 71 Vaat. 
7. The main the aphorism is a pratyâhâra, formed by taking the y of * (III. 2. 129) and the final of T (III. 2. 135), meaning the affixes 
** (III. 2. 128), 7777 III. 2. 129), va (III. 2. 130) and TV (III. 2. 135). As a watae, Eta, stan, 
T 
a f TT, afea TTTETTI Vart:-Optionally so, when the root fax takes the affix g, as, it or e fue 
matarit: u 90 ufan - T:, fa . 
tät: (ut) a fare e ufasafa were ferfereau wfurcafa farracu s a wewe wa 
ARE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY ON 
HT OF INDIA 
SL 
BK. II. CH. III. $ 70-72.), 
CASI-AFFIXES 
305 
14 
.418 
70. The sixth case-affix is not used when the word is governed by a verbal noun in tem denoting futurity, or in denoting 'futurity and indebtedness. 
The affix , such as tea, TE &c., denote futurity, and never denote indebtedness. The affix such as fuff (III, 3. 3 and 170) denotes both auhus कार्ट कारको वति he goes to make a mat.' अोदन भोजको जति he goes to eat rice.' So also with <T, as yet or the has to go to the village.' The groft he owes hundred.' 
Why do we say when denoting futurity or indebtedness ? Observe 
TE ' the cutter of barley.' i 196, ar uit hea way is the Genitive employed in the following a TaeT YC, gitaru <*:? The words yta and though formed by * (III. 1. 133), are not formed by that s which denotes futurity, viz., 11. 3. 10. present sutra relates to this latter , and not every in general. 
Taifa 98 atferuari, , a, (ugt) 
वत्तिः॥ कृत्यानां प्रयोग कर्तरि वा षष्ठीविभक्तिर्भवति, नकर्मणि ॥ a naurat e vet at man 
71. The sixth case-affix is optionally employed in denot ing the agent, (but not the object), when the word is governed by a Future Passive Participle (kritya). 
By II. 3. 65, verbal nouns, (krit-formed), always govern the Genitive in denoting agent or object. The present sâtra declares an option as to agent only, in the case of those verbal nouns which are Future Passive Participles. Thus waa: or a : 6 (III.1.95). 
Why do we say 'in denoting the agent'? In denoting the object, no option is allowedl; the Genitive is compulsory. As it : TRW 
Vart :--The prohibition of the Genitive should be stated in the case of the Future Passive Participles of those verbs which govern two ojo Thus musu UK aacha, aut 
au तुल्याधैरतुलोपमाभ्यां ततीयान्यतरस्याम् ॥ ७२ ॥ पदानि ।। gustu:, -ETREUT, Tetat, rg. 1 
वृत्तिः ॥ तुस्याः शब्दैग तृतीया विभक्तिर्भवत्यन्यतरस्यां , पो षष्ठीच, सुतीपमा बन्दी बगित्वा ।। 
72. The third or the sixth case-affix may optionally be employed, when the word is joined with another word meaning 
like to or resemblance'; excepting i and son 
RE - GOVS 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
T OF INDIA 
सस्कृति मंत्रा 
CASE-AFFIXES. 
[BK. HI. CH. III. 3723 
Thus तुल्यो देवदत्तेन or देवदत्तस्य , सदृशो देवदत्तन, or देवदत्तस्य | But with तुला and उपमा the Genitive must necessarily be employed. As तुला देवदत्तस्य मास्ति, उपमा कृष्णस्य नविनते ॥ 
Though the anuvritti of af was understood in this sûtra from the previous sûtra, yet the repitition of TaTETTE is for the sake of the subsequent sûtra. The word in II. 3. 73 attracts the word aaTEATE into that sûtra; but had the word yatatry not been used in this satra, then the word would have attracted the word qatar instead, which is not 
desired. 
On this sâtra, Professor Apte says:-- Pâņini says that the words get and oat can not be used with the Instrumental. But this is against good usage : as तुलां, यहारोहति दंतवाससा (Kum. Sam. V. 24), नभसा तुला समारोह (Raghuvemsa VIII. 15). स्फुठोपर्म भूतिसितेन शंभुना (MaghI. 4).' 
चतुर्थी चाशिष्यायुष्यमद्भद्रकुशलबुखार्थहितैः ॥ ७३ ॥ पदानि ।। चतुर्थी , च, याशिषि, आयुष्य-मद्-भद्र-कुशल-सुख-अर्थ-हितः, (अन्यतर स्याम् ॥ 
पति आशिषि गन्यमानायान मायुष्य पर भद्र कुशल सुख शर्य हित इत्येतेयोग चतुखी विभक्तिर्भवति । चकारी विकल्पानुकर्षणार्थः ॥ 
बार्तिकच ॥ अत्रायुयादीनां पर्यायग्रहणं कर्तव्यर। 
73. The fourth as well as the sixth case-affix may be employed, when blessing is intended in connection with the words ayusha long life.' madra joy,' bhadra good fortune,' kusala 'welfare, sukha 'happiness,' artha prosperity,' and hita 'good.' 
They in the sutra makes the omployment of Dative optional in the alternative we have Genitive. 
Vart:-In this sutra शायुष्य &c., include theirlsynonyms also.. 
Thus मायुष्यं देवदचाय भूयात् or शायुध्य देवदत्तस्य भूयात्॥ Similarly चिर छीवित, गर्व, भवं, कुशल, निरामचं, सुर्ख,,जों, प्रयोजन,हितं पश्यं देवदत्ताय or शव इतरत्र भूयात् ॥ 
Why do we say when 'benediction is intended'? Observer देवर शस्य तप 'the austerity is the cause of the long life of Devadatta.. Here there is no option allowed: and the Genitive case is only employed. 
URE - GOV 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
सत्यमेव जयते 
PART VIII. 
The 
Ashtadhyayi 
of Panini. 
Reprinted at the Upper India Press, Allahabad. URE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
ov OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY O 
NT OF INDIA 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
सत्यमेव जयते 
मान्य भारत 
प्रो३म् 
॥ द्वितीयाध्यायस्य चतुर्थः पादः ॥ 
BOOK II. CHAPTER IV 
READ 
द्विगुरेकवचनम् ॥ १॥ पदानि ॥ द्विगुः । एक-वचनम् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ द्विगु समासः एकवचनं भवति । 
1. The compound Dvigu (II. 1. 52) is singular 
in number. 
The word *197 is a genitive Tat-purusha compound meaning the expression for one,' that is to say, it expresses the sense of unity. the rule therefore, enjoins that the sense inherent in a Dvigu compound 
is that of unity. 
This is confined to Samâhâra Dvigu i.Co, an aggregate compound taken in a collective sense. As, पञ्चगवं 'an aggregate of five cow3, पञ्चपली (IV.1. 21.). The sense of Dvigu being that of one, it follows that it re tains the singular number even when further modified by other affixes, and used as an attributive and though no longer a Dvigu, as, VTT TIMOTH 
द्वन्द्वश्व प्राणितूर्यसेनाङ्गानाम् ॥२॥ पदानि ॥ द्वन्द्वः, च, प्राणि तूर्य-सैना-अङ्गानाम् ( एकवचनं)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ प्राण्यङ्गानां बद्ध एकवद्भवति, तथातूर्याङ्गाना सेनाङ्गानां च ॥ 
2. A. Dvandva compound too is singular in vor, when it is compounded of words signifying members of the animal body, plavers (or singers or dancers) and com ponent parts of an army. 
As, पाणिपादन the hand and foob'शिरोगी 'the head and neck" जादणकपाणविकम् players on the mridahga and panava (kinds of drums) सबकाश्वराहस' the soldiers on chariot and horse.' बीमावादकपरिवादकस्, रथिका पाहात 
This rule applies to cases of Samahara Dvandva or aggregate vandva Compounds only, and not to Itaretara Dvandva (II. 2. 29.) 
TURE - Goy 
GOVERNME 
OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
OF INDIA 
प्रकृति मंत्रालय 
सत्यमेव जयते 
DVANDVA COMPOUND. 
[BK. II. CH. IV. § 2-3. 
In the Dvandva Compounds of animals such as elephants, horses, &c., the singular is optional; (II. 4. 12.) The present rule also gives us an index as to where we must make Samâhâra Dvandva and where an Itaretara Dvandva. The Dvandva compounds of words signifying mem. bers of animal body, players or army, are always and solely Samâhâra Dvandva. The compounds of words like fuaet' curd and milk' (11. 4. 14.) are purely Itaretara Dvandva and can never be Samâbâra Dvandva; while compounds of words denoting tree, animals &c., (II. 4. 12.) are optionally either Sam&hâra or Itare tara Dvandva. 
agare TTTTTH 3 u ucifa il sagare, au ( :, The 
पृत्तिः। परणानां इन्छ एकवद्भवति अनुवादे गन्यमाने । Tan Färgavai Ofa ya 
3. A. Dvandva compound of words signifying persons belonging to the different Vedic Schools When the sense is that of repetition, is singular. 
The word you means a sehool or branch of any of the Vedas de signated by the name of the person whol founded such a branch and hence means such a person. The word tatt means repetition by way of ex planation, illustration or corrobora tion; that is to say, when a speaker demonstrates for some special purposes, a proposition which had already been demonstrated before, that is called anuvâda. 
This aggregate is used with the aorist of the roots ut and y only; as TTTTTTTTTg katha and kalapa arose (again, further demon strating their doctrines); TTT way t'katha and kauthuma estab lished again, 
Why do we say when meaning repetition'? Observe su us OTSTYTT: or wight, when demonstration for the first time is meant. Ib is the aorist of Eur and a which takes such a Dvandva and not any other verb or any other tense of these verbs; as: afreg: Whatts and স্ত থলি ফরজ লাঃ 
Note :- This satra is translated thus by Mr. Iyangar, Aggrega. tion alone is admissible between words dene ting persons belonging to the different charanas of the Vedas, when they are used along with the aorist derived from the roots stha and in in the sense of recitation of the charanas as already learnt, as distinguished from learning them the first time.' Prof. Bohthlingk's translation is, The Dvandva Compound of the names of Vedio-Schools is singular, when such a school is repeatedly mentioned equally along with another. 
GOVERNM 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY ON 
NMENT OF IN 
OF INDIA 
TIGER 
BR. II. CH. IV. § 4-6.] 
DVANDVA COMPOUND. 
309 
sasalagtayan ng nucrfar n streerd, ngi, yary 
(ra, yeah) fer: u svay mgafari vietai ag'anlagtat na temagatan 
4. A Dvandva compound of words denoting sacrifices (kratu) ordained by the Yajur (Adhvaryu) Veda, is singular, provided they are never used in the neuter gender. 
As,attaheruthe Arks and Asvamedha sacrifices,' TOTEUTTIGHT the Sâyâhna and Atirâţra sacrifices. 
Why do we say 'Yajur-veda sacrifices ? Observe you the lshy and Vajra ceremonies,' graçarpeta 
Why do we say when not in the neuter/gender" Observe t** Tot 'the Rajasûya and Vajapeya sacrifices.' 
Why have we 
? Because the word g: is a technical term applying only to Soma-sacrifices and not any sacrifices in general. Therefore, though Darsa and Paurnamâsa are Yajur-veda ceremonies, they not being Soma ceremonies, the present rule, does not apply. 
अध्ययनतोविकृष्टाख्यानाम् ॥५॥ पदानिध्ययनतः, प्रवि 58-EUTATE, ($&, 
वृत्तिः ॥ अध्यायनेन निमित्तेन येषामविप्रकृष्टा प्रत्यासमा प्राख्या तेषां बन्द समवद्वति ।। 
5. A. Dvandva compound of words denoting (persons who have studied) subjects, which in their order of study are not remote from each other, is singular. 
As, TNT'a person who has studied the pada arrangement and a person who has studied the krama arrangement; so also TUTTE 
Why do we say 'order of study? Observe fuargai 'father and son.' Why do we say 'not remote'? See the act sacrifice-knower and the grammarian.' 
Afacuta m açta o ofa: , surf , (Fe, Teate) 
geran urfaefni sem erufa, where i fareer 
6. A Dvandva compound of words signifying játi (genus) which are not names of living beings, is singular. 
URE - Goya 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
AINISTRY OF 
NT OF INDIA 
सत्यमेव जयते 
कृति मंत्रालय 
7777 278 
810 
DYANDVA COMPOUND. 
[BK. II. CH. IV. 3 6,7. 
Thus itufes the probe and the knife'; write yfer 'fried rice and barley cake. 
Why do we say 'words denoting genus'? Observe 7*66urat Nandaka and Pânchajanya.' 
Why do we say not of living '? See metafit “ Brahmaņas and the Kshatriyas.' 
This rule applies to the jâti or genus names of substances (caufa) and not the jati names of qualities and actions. (Tufaturfa), Thus - 
overal colour, savour, odour, and tangibility'; ET TAETTU 'going, contraction and expansion.' 
Even with jati names of substances, the Dvandva compound takes singular, only when the objects are spoken of collectively as a class; when, however, the individuals belonging to a class are indicated, the proper number should be employed; as, TT TT TTTTA Tfa fagra in this bowl are the badari and êmalaki fruits. 
The words oft'genus,' or 'substace,' TT 'quality and for action' are technical terms of Indian Logicians. Jâti has already been explained. Substances are nine : earth, water, light, air, ether, time, space, soul, and mind. Qualities are twenty-four: colour, savour, odour tangibility, number, dimension, severalty, conjunction, disjunction, priority, posteriority, weight, fluidity, viscidity, sound, understanding, pleasure, pain, desire, aversion, effort, merit, demerit and faculty. There are five ections: throwing upwards, throwing downwards, contraction, expension, and going 
farfareferat et esitsort: 1 9 ulaşifa farfarg-fay:, wat, 21:, :,(FOTO) 
त्तिः॥विशिष्टलिङ्गानां भिन्नलिङ्गानां नदीवाचिनां शब्दानो देशवाचिनां च शामवर्जितांना बन्द एकबद्वति॥ 
# SUTAT E ui afar CT: M were cautari sana u 
7. A Dvandva compound of words of different genders, denoting names of rivers and countries, but not of towns, is singulur. 
| 'Thus বলাগাঁয় জthe Ganges and the Sona. জযঃ + জ = মুজিব the country of the Kurus and the Kurukshetra,' sçcitaat u 
Why do we say of different genders'? Observe 
the Gangor and the Yamuna. Both being feminine gender, so also where 
TURE • GOVE 
GOVERNMA 
ev OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
T OF INDIA 
सत्यमेव जयते 
BK. II. CH. IV. S 7-9.] 
DVANDVA COMPOUND. 
311 
kuna Why do we say 'rivers and countries'? Observe you anyaf the hen and the pea. hen.' 
Why do we say 'not of a town? See osatraat Jâmbaba and Salukini, which are the names of two villages or grama. 
We have taken the word "river,' as the word country' does not include 'river.' So also mountains' are not included; as ASTUTETTEN the Kailasa and the Gandbamadana.' 
Vart:-The prohibition extends to villages and towns (grâma) but not to cities, (Nagara), as ngereiefagai 'the cities of Mathura and Patali putra. 
Vart :-When a compound consists of two words, one a town and the other a city, the prohibition applies; as viage the city of Saurya and the village of Ketavata.' 
trace: 15 m ucrfall -wrea: , ( Taur) n yf: & Ye* erfeni E nuguafa e 
8. A. Dvandva compound of words signifying small animals, is singular. 
Thus thrfa7e'the louse and the nil'; WHITE 'the bug and the mosquito. The word g af imeans an animal of a very small siz. Some say that animals not having bones are called st , (invertebrates); others say, those which are small in size; others say, all below the mon goose are ksh udrajantu. 
येषां च विरोधः शाश्वतिकः ॥ ॥ पदानि ॥ येषां, च, विरोधः, Trafa: ( :, Thale ) 
वृति ॥ येषां शाशयतिको बिरोधस्तद्वाचिर्ना शब्दानां बन्द एकवद्भवति ॥ 
9. A Dvandva compound of words signifying those animals only among whom there is permanent enmity se, natural and eternal antipathy or quarrel, is singular. 
The word feely means enmity: and wafa*: means permanent. 
Thus, watch the cat and the rat; WTTIUT the dog and the jackal'; sfarget the snake and the mongoose.' 
Why do we say "natural and eternal"? Observe o f HETOHTO atrava 'Gaupali and Salankayana are quarrelling.' 
The force of the word in the aphorism is that of only." Dvandva compounds of such animals only are invariably singular; 20 other role, even if otherwise applicable, would apply to such compoundo, 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY ON 
NT OF INDIA 
सरचमवाजयत 
DVANDVA COMPOUND. 
(Bk. II CH. IV. 9-11. 
Thus rulu 12 says that Dvandva compounds of beasts and birds, is optionally singular That rule (by I. 4, 2.) would have set aside the present rule But w prevents that, and no optional plural number is allowed in case of beasts or birds that are naturally at war; as vuaferu. the horse and the buffalo'; taart the crow and the owl.' 
grarefacereatar n po nugtfa n tatur, A-forcar facit, ( :, yra ) 1 
faustfarafratgafai TITITI gg Tongauf 
10. A Drandva compound of words denoting those classes of Südras who have not been expelled from the communion of higher classes, is singular. 
Thus, UTETET the carpenter and the blacksmith'; mwangatTV 'the washerman and the weaver." 
The word sufraffea means one not expelled (from the dish). 
A Sadra who can take food from the dish of a higher class, without permanently defiling that vessel, is called an Anirvasita Sûdra. 
Why do we say not expelled'? Observe cravat' the Chandala and the Mritapa, 
Tartu Tuatar sp narrar i erta-quatfa, ( at, &F:) 
gfore u margar for granagaratfa tevafe ary for waifa u 
11. The word gavāśva, and others are also Dvandva compounds which take the singular number. 
Thusater the cow and the horse. So also perfor 
1. W . 2. parfum. 3. v. 4. gorfant. 5. st. *. 6. g r . 7. groeter. 8. gada 9. mu . 10. gr. 11. T . 12. feat. 13. STUT. 14. S T . 15, P. 16. Như . 17 THG 6 18. wuwur19. UTO. 20. Tugetary. 21. yufuatur. 92. 
ava, 23. retr. 24. Felges, 25. mararaat. 
Vart :- In this list, the forms as given, are singular; but when the game words assume different forms they may take either number. Ag u s or ult. In this form of wt and ur the next "rule applies and 
option is allowed. 
TURE - GO 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTUS 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
BR. II. CH. IV. $ 12, 13.] 
DVANDVA COMPOUND 
St3 
-7 
.18 
fantur qarati-gaugaugarea paasagatatractar TUTAN PP Teria n fahtar, qa-Hw--74-99-99 arentaAbasa-ya-ATT-TUN-JKT, ( Foto ) 
FT: U TE FT TT YTT TT547 Ty Tg for quasa gatae vir graadi इन्दो विभाषैकवद्भवति ॥ 
वाकिर । बहुप्रकृति फलसेना बनस्पतिनगशकुनिद्रजन्तुधान्यतृणानार । 
12. A Dvandva, compound of words being the names of trees, wild animals, grass, corn, condiment, domestio beasts and birds, and the compounds aśva-vadava, purva-para and adharottara, are optionally singular. 
12. Thus, Juruter or TuttT: the Plaksha and the Nyagrodha trees'; Tayan or Tryvat: 'the Ruru-deer and the spotted antelopes', qu* or g rat'the Kusa grass and the Kâsa grass"; ftipat or feats the rice and the barley're or a the curd and the butter free or TTI 
the cow and the buffalo'; fafaftfusay or : the Tittiri (a kind of partridge) and the Kapinjala birds'; FTTHET or at the horse and the mare'; yfore or the first and the last '; sed or the upper and 
lower. 
Vart: The Dvandva compound of words denoting names of fruits, army, large trees, wild animals, birds, small animals grain and grass, is singular, when a large number or quantity of these is spoken of; that is when a large number of them is taken collectively, the compound is singu lar, otherwise not; as, a ra fagasa badari and an amalaki fruit are here'; faurare a charioteer and a horseman'; punit 'a Plaksha and a Nyagrodha tree'; euat'a Ruru and a Prishata deer'; premutat 
a Hanga and a Chakravaka bird'; yafa'a louse and nit', fruta brihi and yava grain'; sunt the kusa and kása grass, 
विपूतिषिलु चानधिकरणवाचि ॥१३॥ पदानि ॥ विपूतिषिहूँ, , safet-athe , (farat To T*) 
gras a fantafografai tertawaf trafamigerufat te verwafe fawrutyatarya u 
13. A Dvandva compound of words of contrary significations, but not being the names of concrete substances, is optionally singular. 
Thus water or was cold and heat'; gain or regia 'plea sure and pain '; ut ferate or forwa ' life and death." 
The word feuforfor means words of contrary significations, indi oatee the anuvritti of the word ' optionally from the last sätra, 
VERNMENTO 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
AT OF INDIA 
DVANDVA COMPOUND. 
[BK. II. CH. IV. 
संस्कृति मंत्राल 
सत्यमेव जयते 
सरकार 
Why do we say' of contrary significations'? Observe, Tamat lust and anger,' which are not of contrary significations. 
Why do we say not being the names of substances ? Observe शीतोष्णे उदके 'cold and warm waters, which denote substances. 
न दधिपय मादीनि ॥ १४ ॥ पदानि ॥ न, दधिपयः, श्रादीनि (दू०ए०)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ दधिपय मादीनि शब्दरूपाणि नै कबभवन्ति ॥ 
14. The Dvandva compounds like 'dadhipaya' &c., are not singular. 
Thus दधिषवसी' the curd and the milk'; सर्पिर्मधुनी or मधुसर्पिषी' the clarified butter and the honey.' 
With this sû tra begins prohibition of singular number which pre vious sûntras would have cau sed. 
The following is a list of such compounds :-- 
1. दधिषयसी.2. सचिर्मधुनी or मधुसर्पिषी.3. बसप्रजापती. 4. पिव विश्णी. 5. स्कन्दविशाखौ.6. परिवाट कौथिको. 7. प्रणयोपसदो. 8. गुहा कृष्णौ9. इमावहिंपी।निपातनाहीः ॥ 10. दीवातपसी. 11. अहातपसी. 12. पातपसी. 13. अध्ययनतपसी. 14. उस्लखलनुसले. 15. जादावसाने. 16 बडामे. 17. शुक्साने. 18. बाङ्मनसे। 
अधिकरणैतावत्वे च ॥ १५ ॥ पदानि ॥ अधिकरण-एता वत्वे, च, (नए) 
वृत्तिः ॥ अधिकार पनिषदार्थः, सविसमावस्याख्याधार तस्यैतापरवे परिमाणे गाव मागे बन्दों वावगावति ॥ 
15. A. Dyandva compound denoting a fixed num ber (etavatva) of concrete things (adhikarna) is not singular. 
As, दश दन्तोष्ठ:"ten sets of teeth and lips'; दशमार्दङ्गिकपाणविका: ten sets of drum and panavika. players' Compare II.4.2. 
विभाषा समीपे ॥ १६॥ पदानि ॥ विभाषा समीपे, (अधिकरणैता वत्वे, इन्द्वः एकव०)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ अधिकरणैतावरणस्य सनीचे विभाषा इन्च एकवद्भवति ॥ 
16. A Dvandvalcompound, denoting an approxi mate number of concrete substances, is optionally singular. 
URE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY ON 
NT OF INDIA 
सत्यमेव जयते 
Bs...II: UR. IV.816-181 
S AMASAS. 
315 
As, उपदशं दन्तोष्ठ उपदशा दन्तोष्ठा: "nearly ten i.ee, nine or eleven sets of teeth and lips 3; उपदशं मार्दङ्गिकपाणविकम् or उपदशा मार्दङ्गिकपाणबिका nearly ten (nine or eleven) mridaiga and panava players.'' 
An indeclinable, when compounded with a numeral, may either bə a Bahuvrihi or an Avyayibhava compound. When the compound is singu lar in form, it is Avyayibhava, and when it takes proper number-termina. tions, it is Bhuvrthi compound. As, उपदशं ; उपदशाः (II. 2. 25). 
स नपुंसकम् ॥ १७ ॥ पदानि ॥ स, नपुंसकम् (एकवचनम्, द्वन्द्वः, 
वृत्तिः ॥ यस्यायमेकवद्भाव विहितः स नपुंसकलिको भवति द्विगुन्विच॥ वात्तिकम् ॥ अकारान्ताच रपदो द्विगुः जियां भाज्यते ॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ वाऽबन्तः खियामिष्टः ॥ वार्चिकम् ॥ जनो नलोपश्च वा च हिगुः खिया । बार्तिकम् ॥ पानादिभ्यः प्रविधी वक्तव्यः॥ 
17. It, namely the Dvigu or the Dvandva compound, with regard to which singular number has been ordained by the above rules, is always a neuter gender. 
AS, दशगवम् ' an aggregate of ten cows, पाणिपादन hands and feet. शिरोमीवर 'head and neck.' 
This sûtra debars the operation of the rule by which a compound gets the gender of its subsequent member. See II. 4. 26. 
Vart :-A Dvigu, the last member of which ends in short s, is employed in the feminine gender only; as पञ्चपली, दशरथी. 
Vart:-A Dvigu, the last member of which is a feminine word end. ing in the affix, is optionally feminine; as, agueny or vaut. 
Vart :-A Dvigu, the last member of which is a word inding in अन्, is optionally feminine and the his elided : as पञ्चतक्षम or अञ्चतमी, 
Vart :-A Prohibition must be stated in the case of Dvigu com pounds ending in पान &c., पञ्चपात्रम; चतुर्युग; त्रिभुवनम् . 
अव्ययीभावश्च ॥ १८॥ पदानि ॥ व्ययी भावः, च, (नपुं 
वृत्तिः ॥ अध्ययीभाव समासो म सकलिङ्गो भवति ॥ वात्तिकर ॥ पुण्यसुदिनाच्यासह झीनतेच्यते ॥ शार्तिकम् ॥ पयः संख्याव्ययादेः रूकीवतेच्यते ॥ बार्तिक । क्रियाविशेषवानां कर्मत्वं न सकलिगताप यक्षाच्या ॥ 
TURE 
GOVER 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTUR 
ארטות 
NT OF INDIA 
सत्यमेव जयत 
SAMASAS 
[BK. II. CH. IV. § 18-20. 
18. An Avyayibhava (II 1. 6.) compound is also neuter gender. 
Thus, sufar pertaining to a woman; so also, thift, graine &c. 
But for this rule, an Avyayîbhava compound would have been either without any gender, if gender were to be regulated by its first member, which is generally an indeclinable, and which is the principal member in the compound; or it would have taken the gender of its subse quent member, like other compounds in which the last member is principal, 
The force of is to include cases not mentioned already. 
Vart:-Neuter gender is employed after the word preceded by पुण्य or सुदिन; as पुण्याहस् — sacred day'; सुदिमाहर lucky day. 
Vart: -The word Te is neuter when compounded with a numeral or an Avyaya; as format, TTTTT, favor, TUI. 
Vart :- Adverbs, qualifying verbs, are put in the neuter gender and accusative case; as 15 tufa' he cooks mildly,' Th yufa' he cooks 
well. 
angauts Turca: o per a una nacia: YTTE: (747 ) n 
वृत्तिः ॥ नसलास कर्मधारयं च बर्जयित्वाऽन्यस्तरपुरुषो नपुंसकलिङ्गी भवतीत्पतदधिकृतं a feu o 
19. A. Tat-purusha compound, with the excep tion of that which is formed by the particle nañ, and of the Karmadhârava compound, becomes neuter gender, in the cases explained in the following sûtras. 
This is a governing sa tra and regulates the sense of the succeeding aphorisms which show when a Tat-purush n may be neuter. Thas, terra or. w (II. 4.25); but ca Tu (the compound not being Tat-purusha); wa (it being a compound with 75 =); and taeat (it being Karma 
dharaya. 
urat tatarie W 30 utfall , UT, waitariy, (arga: **) 
a f forgettarega fagt wafa, e 
mi wara a 
20. When denoting an appellative, a Tatpuru sha compound ending with the word kanthê town,' is neuter in gender, provided that it is the name of a town situated in the country of tiie Usingras. VRE 
GOVE 
MINISTRY 
STRY OF CU 
NMENT OF IN 
OF INDIA 
BiG. IL CH. IV. 20-22.] 
SAMASAS. 
317 
y' the town of 
01DAs, etureuy the town of Sausami'; 
Ahwara. 
When not an appellative, the form is different; as, traut. So also if the town is not in the country of the Uśînaras, as gifeaT. 
This debars the rule (II. 4. 25.) by which a compound gets the gender of its subsequent term. (For accent see IV. 2. 124.) 
Jusituen agterCateTTH N R logifa 1 TUNT FUERA, 95-9fe-streTEUTETUTE ( agua: , 709) IN Job वृत्तिः ॥ उपक्षोपक्रनं तदन्तस्तत्पुरुषो नपुंसकलिङ्गो भवति तदह्याचिल्यासार्या वया TTTTTTTTTTTTTi 47** FTTUTTI 
21. A Tat-purusha compound ending with the words upajna' (invention) and 'upak rama' (commencement) is neuter in gender, when it is intended to express the starting point of a work which is first invented or commenced. 
As, TTTTTTTT ATTACTE 'the grammars Kalâpa &c., had their commencement with Panini's invention'; sigava a Vyadi, invened Dushkarana'; siel STETT: 'the palace is an invention of rich folks'; e r fathe measures are the invention of king Nanda.' 
Of course, when it has not this sense, the neuter gender is not em ployed; as actrit tu: the chariot made by Devadatta, C art 
the chariot commenced by Yajñadatta.' So also the sense may be that of invention &c., but when these words are not employed, the nenter gender is not used; as a faretat: the slokas invented by Valmiki.' 
N. P. Prof. Bohthlingk gives reg THAT SUTATT The Grammar omitting the time of day is the work invented by Paņini, (VI. 2. 14). 
are are 1 1 UGT i rat, aige, (acyaa!, 709) n 
gfers a Erat tereyait vraag wafa geet wat 
22. A Tat-purusha compound ending with the word chha ya 'shadow' is neuter in gender when the sense is that of profuseness of the thing indicated by the first term. 
Thus, was 'A crowd of locusts darkening the sky.' TUTTE the sugarcane shade i, e., groves of sugarcane,' Otherwise, UT the shadow of a wall.' (VI, 2. 14, accent.) 
URE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
STRY OF CULO 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
सत्यम जयर 
SAMASAS. 
BK. II. CH. IV. 23-25. 
लिय भारत 
तमाम 
Cr. IPS 
The sůtra 25 gives optional neuter; this rule enjoins invariable neuter when chhaya has the sense of profuseness. 
सभा राजामनुष्यपूर्वा ॥ २३ ॥ पदानि ॥ सभा, राजा-मनुष्य पूर्वा (तत्पुरु०नपुंसक ) ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ सभान्तस्तत्पुरुषो नपुंसकलिङ्गो भवति, सा चेत् सभा राजबूर्वा मनुष्यपूर्वा च भापति 
23. A Tatpurusha compound ending with the word sabha 'court' is neuter, provided that it is preceded by (a word synonymous with) the word Raja, or by a word denot ing a non-human being. 
AS इनसभस् 'the King's Court. ईश्वरसमस Lord's Court.' 
Bub in राणसभा 'the King's Court, the word is not neuter; for synonyms of राजा are only to be taken and not the word-form राजा; an apparent exception to Rule I. 1. 68. 
So also रणसभस् the Court of the Rakshasas ' पिशाचसभम् the Court of the Pisachas.' 
But in काष्ठसभा, देवदत्तसभा &c, the word is not neuter ; for the word non-human has a technical significance meaning Rakshasa or a monster, 
नशाला च ॥ २४ ॥ पदानि ॥ प्रशाला, च, (तत्पुरु० नपुंशक)॥ 
त्तिः ॥ अशालाच या सभा सदन्तस्तत्पुरुषो नपुंसकलिङ्गो भवति । 
24. A Tat-purusha compound ending with the word sabha, when it does not mean a house, but means con course, is neuter. 
AB, खीसभर, दासीससम् the concourse of ladies and slaves; other wise अनायसभा - the poor-house.' 
विभाषा सेनासुराच्छायाशालानिशानाम् ॥ २५॥ पदानि ॥ विभाषा, सेना-सर-छाया-शाला-निशानाम्, (नपुंसक, तत्पुरुषः) 
पति॥ सेला मुरा छाया शाला निशा इत्येवमन्त स्ततपुषी न सकलिङ्गे भवति विभाषा 
25. A Tat-purusha compound ending with the words sena army' surâ 'wine,' chhaya shadow', sala house, and nisa night, is optionally neuter, with the exception of that which is formed by the particle nañ (II. 2. 6) and the karmadhara ya compound. 
URE - GOVE. 
VERNMENT 
Y OF CULTUR 
ASS 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
• 
सत्यमदजयत 
BRIT. CH. IV.S 25-211 
SAMASAS. 
319 
HLAs बाह्मणसेना, बामणसेनम् the Brahmana army,' यव सुरस्, यबसुरा the barley wine,' ड्यच्छायम् , कुडघच्छाया 'the shadow of the wall,' गोशालम, गोशाला 'the cow house.' वनिशन , शवनिशा -to-morrow night.' But असेना ' non-army,' TCT good army,' the former being negative and the latter karmadharaya compound. For accent see VI. 2. 14. 123. 
परवल्लिङ्गं द्वन्द्वतत्पुरुषयोः ॥ २६ ॥ पदानि ॥ परवत्-लिङ्गम्, द्वन्द्व-तत्पुरुषयोः ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ परस्य यल्लियं तद्भवति बन्दस्य तत्पुरुषस्य च ॥ वात्तिकम् ॥ विगुप्राप्त पन्नालंपूर्वगविसमासेषु प्रतिषेधो वक्तध्यः॥ 
26. The gender of Dvandva or Tat-purusha com pound is like that of the last word in it. 
This applies to Itaretara Dvandva or coupling by mutual conjunc tion कुक्कटमर्याविने - those two (fem.) the cock and the pahen ' मयूरीकुछटाविमौ 
those two (mat.) the peahen and the cock.' The Samáhara Dvandva is always neuter. So also in Tat-purusha compound not especially mention ed in the previous aphorism: As farTUT, us forcat "half a pippali: लाई कोशतकी. 
Vart :---Prohibition must be made in regard to (1) Dvigu com pound, (2) compounds with प्राप्त, जापग्न and, जलं, and (3) compounds with Gati words; as, ara: 'Purodasa prepared in five cups '; wastfara: (HTET +जीविका) has obtained living,' शापन्नजीविका, अलंजीविका, निष्कौशाथि: "gone beyond Kausarbi. 
पूर्ववदश्व वडवौ ॥ २१ ॥ पदानि ॥ पूर्ववद्, अश्व-वडवी, (लिङ्गम् ) ॥ 
वृत्तिः॥ अशषडवयोः पूर्ववल्लिनं भवति॥ 
27. The gender of the compound of the word asva horse' and vadava la mare,' is like that of the first word in it. 
This applies where the compound is not an aggregate by rule II. 2012 ; in that case it will be neuter, अश्ववड़वावि मो; शश्ववडवान, शश्ववहवै c., (in every number and case) those two (mas.) the horse and the mare.' This is an exception to the last and general rule, by which the gender of the subsequent term, guides the gender of the whole compound. 
हेमन्त शिशिरावहोरात्रे च च्छन्दसि ॥ २८ ॥ पदानि ॥ हेमन्ते शिशिरी, अहो-रात्रे, च, छन्दसि, (पूर्ववत्, लिङ्गम् ) ॥ 
पृत्तिः ॥ हेनन्वशिशिरी अहोरा हत्येतयो प्रबदशि विषये पूर्वजल्लिाई भवति । 
URE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
V OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
ENT OF INDIA 
• संस्कृति मा 
SAMASAS. 
[BK. IJ. Ch. IV. & 2830 
28. Of the compounds hemantasigirau' and "ahora tre' the gender is like that of the first word; in the Chhandas, (vedas). 
*afufurragai situfa, Et Tau This aphorism debars the general rule given in II. 4. 26. 
This applies to these words in all cases and numbers, not being confined to them in the dual number, though exhibited in the sâtra in the dual number, as :-hautfana: , TTT: gavy, FTTETTUTERT: 'The white fortnight is fuel-wood, the black fortnight is the dung-cake, and days and nights are bricks (of the altar of sacrifice).' 
Why do we say in the Vedas"? Observe gra tuwafufu?, sertaifant gout. In the Vedas the ordinary rules of gender are often set aside; this an individual example of the universally exceptional nature of the Vedic language. 
TATE aTET: gf ngen ogifa 11 TA-TEZ-TET:, feu gf S T veda e for a off FIUTAT: fatra amatu 
29. The Dvandva and Tatpurusha compound ending with râtra and ahna and aha are spoken of in the masculine, 
These words refer to krit and Samásanta affixes. Thus the word Ts is formed by trfs +57 (V. 4. 87) is formed by V. 4. 88 and we by V. 4. 91. The general rule II. 4. 26 also does not apply here. 
facta: , face 'A space of two or three nights' gatea: , TE, TUTTE: the forenoon, the afternoon and noon', : 'two days' says, 
three days.' 
Vart:--The words wym &c., are masculine, as sya , gues, a do. 
van 20 nefern , 
wat we aferent wafer # 
30. The Tatpurusha word"apatham a bad road' is neuter, 
worry this (neuter) is a bad road' ufam : the fool roams on wrong roads." But surama (masc.) a roadless country." Here the compound being Bahuvrihi the word is masculine so; also 
URE • Gove 
GOVERNME 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
MENT OF IN 
OF INDIA 
सत्यमेव जयते 
BK II. Cn IV. 31] 
SAMASAS, 
321 
म अर्धर्चाः पुंसि च ॥ ३१ ॥ पदानि ॥ अर्धर्चाः, पुंसि, च, (नपुंसकम् ) ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ सईदयः शब्दा घुसि नपुंसके च भाष्यन्ते ॥ 
31. The words ardharcba' &c., are spoken of in masculine and neuter. 
AS, अर्ध: and अर्धर्चर half a verse,' गोमय: and गामयम् ' cow-dung.' These twofold genders sometime, convey different meanings, the masculine form having one meaning and the neuter, another. Thus पद्ध: "treasure, पद : or पदम - lotus, शंखs treasure, and शंखम् or शंख: - conch-shell,' भूत: or अतस् ghost.' But when it is a verbal noun, it takes the gender of the word it qualifies. सैन्धवः or सैन्धवर ' salt'; but when it is considered as a derivative word meaning born in or belonging to the sea' it takes the gender of the word it qualifies. सार: " best' सारं 'compendium. So धर्मः and धर्मर . 
1. अर्ध. 2. गोमय. . कषाय. 4. कार्षापण. 5. कुतप. 6. कुसष. 7. (कुणप), 8. कपाट. 9. . 10. गूय 11. भूय. 12. ध्वज. 13. कवघ. 14. पद्ध. 15. ह. 16. सरक. 17.कस 18. दिवस, 19. यूष. 20. अन्धकार.21. दण्ड. 22. कमण्डलु 23. गण्ड. 24. भूत. 25. द्वीप. 26. दात. 27. पत्र.28. धर्म. 29. कर्मन् 30. मोदक. 31. शतमान. 32. यान. 33. ख. 34, खर. 35. चरण. 36. पुच्छ,37. दाडिम. 38. हिम. 39. रजत. 40. बक्त. 40. पिधान, 41. सार. 42. पात्र. 43. वृत.44. सैन्धव. 45. औषध.46. आड़का 47. चषक. 48. द्रोण. 49. . खलीन. 50. पानिव.51. ष्ठि 52. बारवाण,53. (वारवारण) 54. मोय. 55. कपिरूणा. 56. शुष्क 57. शाम 58, शील.59. शूक60. (शुक्ल).66. सीधु.52. कवच 63. रेणु. 64 (ऋण) 65.1 कपट.66. शीकर.67 गुसल.68. सुवर्ण 69. वर्ण. 70. पूर्व.71. शमस 72. चीर. 73. कर्ष. 74. शाकाश. 75. स्रष्टापद.76. नगल.77. निधन. 78. निर्यास. 79. भ. 80. वृत्त.. 81, पुस्त. 82. बुस्त. 83. वैडित, 84. 85. निगड 86. (खल. 87. भूलकर 88. मधु.89. मूल.90. स्थल.91. शराब.92.बाल.93.वन. 94. विमान 95. मुख96, प्रग्रीव97. ल.98. बज.99.कटक. 100 करटक. 1010 (कट), 102. शिखर. 103.कल्क 104. (वत्कल). 105. नमक 1.060 (नाटसस्तक). 107. वलय. 108. कसुम, 109. तुण. 110. पड 111. कुण्डस. 112. किरीट.113. (कमुद) 114 प्रबुद. 115. आवश. 116, विमिर. 117. भाजन. 118. भूषण. II. हल्कस. 120. (इप्वाख). 121. मुकुल. 1220 बसन्त. 128. सटाक. 124. (तडाग), 125. विटक. 126. वि .विडा128. पिण्याक. 129. भाष, 130.कोथ, 131. फलक. 132. दिन. 133. दैवत. 1341. पियाक 135. पर. 136. वाशु. 137. शनीक. 138. उपवास. 139. शाक. 140. वर्षास, 141, (विशाल.) 142. पषाला 143. (पखाल.) 144 खण्ड,145. दर. 146 बिटप. 147. (रण), 148. (बल). 149, (भक), 150. भूपाला 151. हस्व, 152 भाई 153. हल. 154(वा.) 155.सापड, 156. गायडीया 
GOVERNMENT 
RY OF CULTU 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
संस्कृति मंत्रान 
SAMASAS. 
[BK. II. CH. IV. $ 31,921 
'भारत सरकार 
157. मपडप. 158. पटह. 159. सीध. 160. योध, 161. पार्व. 162. शरीर, 163. फल. 164. (छल) 165. पुर. 166. पुरा. 167. राष्ट्. 168. अम्बर. 169. बिम्ब. 170. कुहिम. 171. मण्डल. 172. (कुक्कट). 178. कुडपा. 174. ककद. 175. खरडल. 173. तोमर. 177. तोरण. 178, मञ्चक 179. पञ्चक. 160. पुख. 181. मध्य. 182. (बाल). 183. बाल. 184. घरनीक. 185. बर्ष. 186. वन. 187. वसु. 188. देह. 189. उद्यान, 190, उद्योग. 191. स्नेह, 192. स्तेन. 193. (स्तन). 194. (स्वर). 195. संगम, 196. निड 197. क्षेम 198, शूक. 199. क्षत्र. 200. पवित्र.201. (चौवन), 202. (कलह). 203. मालक 204. (पालक). 205. मूषिक. 206. ( मण्डल). 207. (वल्कल). 208. कुज.209 (कुज ) 210. विहार.211. लोहित. 212 (विषाण). 213. भवन. 214.अरण्य. 215. पुलिन. 216. हृढ़ 217. प्रासन,218. शेरावत 219. शूर्प 220 तीर्थ 221. लोमन. 222. (लोमश). 223. तमाल. 224. लोह.225. दण्डक. 226. शपथ 227 प्रति तर 228. दार. 229. धनुस् .230. मान. 231. वर्चस्क. 232. कर्च, 233. तगडक, 234. नद. 235. सहस्त्र.236. शोदन. 237. प्रवाल. 1 238. शकट. 239. अपराहण. 210. नीड. 241. शकल. 242. तण्डुल ॥ 
इदमोऽन्वादेशेऽशनुदात्त तृतीयादी॥ ३२॥ पदानि ॥ इदमः, अन्वादेशे, प्रश, अनुदात्तः तृतीयादौ । 
वृत्तिः ॥ इदमोन्वादेश विषयस्यदेशो भवत्यनु दत्तस् तृतीयादी विभक्तौ परतः ॥ 
32. In the room of idam 'this,' in case of its re-employment in a subsequent member of the same sentence and referring to the same thing (anvâdesa) there is the substitution of as which is anudatta i. e., gravely accented, when the third case-affix and the rest follow. 
The word अन्वादेश means literally saying (adesa) "after' (anu) or after-say or re-employment. 
शाश् (actually a) replaces दस lin all cases except the nominative and the accusative, when anvadesa or repetition is implied, wu replaces the whole of te by 55 and not only the final + Anvadesa means repeating in a second sentence with reference to the preceding in which it has already been used. Both prononns, the antecedent and the subsequent, must rofer to the some object. As, माभ्याम् पात्राभ्यास राभिरधीता, यो भाभ्यामहरयधीस 
Those students studied in the night and they have read in the day also." The substitutes will replace , even when the latter takes the affix अपचू (V.3.71.) 
RE • Goy 
GOVERNMENT 
QY OF CULTUA 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
सत्यमेव जयते 
II. CH. IV.532-31.] 
SAMASAS. 
328 
अस्मै बात्राय कम्बलं देहि, अयो अस्मै शाकटमपि देहि 'Give this student a blanket and give him also a cloth'. अस्य छात्रस्य शोभनं शीलस, आयो अस्य प्रभूर्व स्वम्, 'this student's conduct is excellent, and his wealth is great.' 
So also when the affix अकच् (V. 3.71) comes after the Pronominal as इमकाभ्यां छात्राभ्यां रात्रिरधीता, श्रयो नाभ्यानहरप्यधीतम. 
The mere mentioning in a subsequent sentences is now anvâdesa : it is the employment again of what has been employed to direct one operation, to direct another operation. Therefore the rule does not apply here :-देवदत्तं भोजय, इमंच यजदत्तस् • feed Devadatta and this Yajiiadatta.' 
एतदस्त्रतसोस्त्रतसौ चानुदात्तौ ॥ ३३ ॥ पदानि ॥ एतद्ः, त्र-तसोः त्र तसौ, च, अनुदात्ती, (अन्वादेशे, अश, अनुदात्तः)॥ 
वत्तिः ॥ एतदोऽन्वदेविषयस्य प्रशादेशो भवति अनुदात्तत्र तसोः परत ॥ तो चापि त्रत सावनुदात्ती भवतः ॥ 
33. In the room of Tag in case of its re-employ ment there is the substitution of the gravely accented 
when the affixes त्र (V. 3. 10) and तस् (V. 3.7) follow, and the affixes et and at are anudatta also (gravely accented.) 
Thus अत्र' here, and तस् hence' in the following :- एतस्मिन् ग्राने सुखं वसामः ; अयो अत्र युक्ता अधीनहे। We live in this (etasmin) village, hap pily, therefore let us read with full devotion in this (atra).' एतस्माच्छाबाच्छन्दो ज्धीव, अथो अतो व्याकरणमप्यधीव । 'Learn from this student Prosody and also learn from him Grammar." By rule V. 3.5. I is declared to be the substitute of rac; its repetition here is to indicate that this stof anvadesh is an udatta. 
द्वितीयाटोस्स्वेनः ॥ ३४॥ पदानि ॥ द्वितीया-टा-शोस्सु, एनः, (इदम्, एतद्, अन्वादेश, अनुदात्ते) 
वृत्तिः ॥ द्वितीया टा शोर इत्येतेषु परत इदनेत दोरम्बादेराविषययोरेनशब्दमादेशो भवति अनुदात्तः॥ 
वार्तिकम् ॥ एनदिति नपुंसकैकवचने वक्तव्यम् ॥ 
34. When an affix of the 2nd case or at (Ins. Sing.) or (Loc, dual) follows, ut which is anudatta is the substitute of *and tag in the case of its re-employicent. 
. GOVERNA 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRI 
QNMENT OFIA 
OF INDIA 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
T 
OR 
ARDHADHATUKA SUBSTITUTES. 
[BK. II. GR. IV. & 34-35. 
The word is also understood in this sûntra though it was not so in the last. This skipping is technically called 'frog-leap.' Thus: 
* or Ti Si Fetsua, wat sataTTTTTT teach this pupil Prosody, and teach him Grammar also,' gata or va gay tractar 
sot autas' this pupil studied in the night and he studied in the day also wants or taat: erat: ita ftat, pot port: nya fai' the family of these two students is respectable and their wealth is great.' 
Vart :--The word are neuter and singular, is also used in anvê deša: as, TGH STEHT Er b ring this bowl and wash it.' The above three Satra regulate the accent only of certain pronouns. 
Sigurgen uit zyn oerfa o 
re-gtgenen 
TT: 1 giga hay ThisITTET Giai qua 7 11 
35. The clause when the affix is Ardhadhâtuka' is understood in the following aphorisms up to aphorism 58 of this chapter. 
Thus it will be taught in sâ tra 42,' that ay is the substitute of TT when fare follows.' The words 'when the affix is ârdhadhâtuka' innst be read into the sûtra to complete the sense. The result will be that in the ardhadhâtuka fas namely the gutreis or the Benedictive mood, is re placed by a4, but not so in the Sárvadhâtuka fat i. e., the Potential mood ( Farfufae ). Thus, Benedictive qura may he kill '; but Potential Fute let him kill 
The word runga is in the 7th casa; the force of this case-affix here is not that given in l. 1. 66. i. e., the sâtra does not mean when an @rdbadhatuka affix follows. But the 7th case has the force of indicating the subject, the meaning of the sûtra being when the subject is an ardha dhatuka affix' The result of this explanation is, that the various substi tutions enjoined hereafter should be made first, and then the respective affixes should be applied. Thus whenever we want to affix any ardhadha tuka-affix to 'to be, we must first substitute for it, and then take the proper ardhadhatuka-affix which would come with regard to y Thus we can apply a to v by rule III. 1. 97 which says: "after verbs ending in vowels ua is applied.' But this affix could never have been applied to wa which ends in a consonant. Thus we have watt. So the substitution does not depend upon any particular affix, but ardhadhatuka-affixes as a class, 
TURE 
GOVE 
MINISTRI 
ISTRY OF CM 
ANMENT OF 
OF INDIA 
TDI 
HADHATUKA SUBSTITUI. 
7 
.417 
Bk. 11. CH. IV & 36-37.] ARDHADHATUKA SUBSTITUTE: 325 
Sast grupate feafar u 3 ugere u a:, ofisi, ata far, farfa, ( surg-ergen) 
वृत्तिः ॥ नदो जग्धिरादेशो भवति ल्यपि परत तकारादौ च किति प्रत्यये। 
36. The word ofore is the substitute of up to eat,' when the affix Fio (VII. 1. 37) or an àrdhadhâtuka fac affix beginning with a follows. 
STATTET. Having eaten.' ( + y + 5 = to per + a). So also u' eaten' ( 9 + 9 = TN + a). 
The x in gfu is merely for the sake of articulation and is not an anubandha, otherwise there would have been the insertion of the uasal 7 (91). So also the in ara &c, is merely for the sake of articulation. But she + F = yra: 'food' is an irregularity. 
The employment of 249 in this sûtra indicates the existence of this Paribhasha. 'A bahira nga substitution of fue supersedes even anta rañga rules.' Because in case this maxim did not exist, the substitution of up for a before 24 which is taught in this sû tra, would follow already from the word fofa (before that which is distinguished by an indicatory #') in this rule, i. e., The would (by muxim that which is bahiranga is regarded as not having taken effect, or as not existing, when that which is antaranga has taken effuct') first be substituted for it before and mu afterwards for h. 
Why do we say 'before affixes beginning with a'? Observe wed is eaten.' 
Why do we say before affixes having indicatory *'? Observe TCUT 
Suite 39 utfen - :, TFT (977, আর আe ) । 
afas u gfe Thutaset ya wao wafa u बार्तिकम् ॥ घस्लु भावेऽच्युपसंख्यानम् ॥ 
37. When lui (aorist) or san (desiderative) follows is the substitute of ye to eat 
TT, TTETE, t'he ate.' The pin we is servile and indi eates the substitution of ss for free of the Aorist (III. 1.55.) So also in desiderative, as, forud fa, fara: farcefra' wishes to eato' 
Vart :-The verb ste is replaced by gę when the affix s follows Thus # 9+ 9=4+ :'voracious." 
ARE - GOVE 
OF CULTURE 
AINISTRY OF 
VERNMENT O. 
AT OF INDIA 
सत्यमेव जयते 
ARDHADHATUKA-SUBSTITUTES. 
[BK. II. CH. IV. S38.40. 
घजपोश्च ॥ ३८ ॥ पदानि ॥ घज-अपोः, च, (अदः, घस्ल, मा०) ॥ 
वत्तिः ॥ पनि अपि च परतोउदो घस्तु आदेशो भवति । 
38. And when the affix us and we follow Te is the substitute of अद्, 
घास: - food, grass,' श्रद्+घञ् = घास+9 (III. 3. 19). प्रघसः 'voracity.1 प्र+अ+अ +घस. 
बहुलं छन्दसि ॥ ३८ ॥ पदानि ॥ बहुलं, छन्द सि, (अदः, घस्ल, प्रा०)॥ 
मृत्तिः ॥ बन्दसि विषये बहुलमदो घस्ल आदेशो भवति ॥ 
39. In the chhandas (Vedas), vem is diversely substituted for अद्. 
पस्तानमा । सग्धिशचने । (Yajur Veda Vajs.XVIII. 9). Sometimes it does not take place; as नातामा मध्यतो भेद उद्भतम् 
The word बहुलं is used in this sutra and the word अन्यतरस्याम in the next. There is evidently difference between the senses of these words; otherwise Pâņini would not have employed them in such juxtaposition, had they been synonymous. For then the anuvritti of age in the next Bû tra would have been sufficient. The following verse indicates that difference. 
क्वचिर प्रवृत्तिः क्वचिदप्रवृत्तिः, क्वचिदविभाषा क्वचिदन्यदेव । 
विधेर्विधान बहुधा समीक्षय , चातुर्विध बाहुलकं वदन्ति । 
Sometimes they are, where there is no express rule for their ap plication; sometimes they are not applied, in spite of an express rule for their application ; sometimes they are optionally employed or not, and sometimes there is some other result, licence permitted by the rule.' Thus in weate there is not elision of the penultimate. 
लिट्यन्यतरस्याम् ॥४०॥ पदानि ॥लिटि, अन्यतरस्याम् , (भदः, घस्ल, आः) ॥ 
पतिः॥लिटि परतोऽदोऽन्यतरस्यां स्लादेशो भवति ॥ 
40. When fae (Perfect) follows year is optionally the substitute of अद्, 
कपास or शाद 'heate, जातु: शादतु: they two ate, ज: or शादः they all ate' The word जनु: is thus formed:- + अतुम् = पस् + गम् + अनुष ARE 
GOVE 
OF CULTURE 
ANISTRY OF 
NMENT OF INA 
OF INDIA 
सत्यमेव जयते 
कतिपत्रात 
II C. IV. 40-42.] 
ARDHADHATUKA-SUBSTITUTES, 
निय भारत 
(VI.1.8) = घनघस् +अतुस् (VII. 4.60) =च+घस् + तुः (VII.462) = ज+घस् +तुम् (VIII. 4. 53) = ज+ घ् स् + अतुस् (VI. 4. 98.) = जक्षतुः (VIII. 3.60). 
वेजो वयिः ॥ ४१ ॥ पदानि ॥ वेजः, वयि, (लिव्यन्यतरस्याम् , 
वृत्तिः ॥ वेञो वयिरादेशो भवति अन्यतरस्यां लिटि परतः ॥ 
41. When fat follows, afer is optionally the sub stitute of 'वेञ् to weave.'. 
In the Perfect tense thus we have two roots: Let us first take वे . Then we have regulary वे+लिट् = वे + णल = बौ. The roots in ए, ऐ and नो are treated like roots ending in प्रा thus : 
Sing. Dual. Plural. 1. बबी 
विव विम 2. विथ or ववाय, वधयुः 3. वी 
घवतुः वचुः 
) | In this case samprasārana Fordained by VI. 1. 17 does not take place by VI. 1.40 
When however we take the base a, they being for the sake of urticulation only, we have the following forms:- बय् + गल = वय + वय + (VI. 1. 8)= उय् + बय् + (VI. 1. 17) = उवाय ; the य is not changed into r by VI. 1.38. In this dual we have वय् + अतुस = उय् +अतुः (VI.1.15) = 1+जय+ तुः (VII.4.60)= जयतु: The affix ऋतुस् being कित affix by rule I. 2.5 there is samprasarana before reduplication. Thus we have उयाय, जयतुः, ऊयु. Further by rule VI. 1.39 before कित् affixes a may be optionally substituetd for 7, i. c., eg: or Fag: and sy: or sig: 
हनो बध लिङि ॥४२॥ पदानि ॥ हनः, बघ, लिडि (शार्द्ध धातुके) ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ हन्तेर्धातोवध इत्ययमादेशो भवति लिडि परत श्राद्धधानुके। 
42. वधू is the substitute of हन् 'to kill when the årdhadhâtuka faz (Benedictive, follows. 
अध्यात्' my he kill,' अध्यास्वाम' may they two kill,बध्यासुmay they all kill.' 
The substitute w, ends with short this suis elided. This elision being like the original (sthanivat I. 1.-56), in forming the Aorist, लुङ, we hove say + 0 +te = sava. Here zero being stakenivat prevents the vriddhi of of a which otherwise would have take place by VII.2. 7. 
OVERNMENT 
TURE - GOV 
ev OF CULTUS 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
A RDHADHATU KA-SUBSTITUTES. 
[BK. ILCH. IV.848-46. 
माय .मा 
लुङि च ॥ ४३ ॥ पदानि ॥ लुङ्गि, च (हनो, बध, मा०)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ लुचि परतो हनो वध इत्ययमादेशो भवति ॥ 
43. And when t (Aorist) follows, w is the substitute of हन्. 
auta he killed,' sagte' they two killed.' The division of this aphorism from the last sûtra (yoga-vibhâga) indicates that the next rule applies to Aorist only and not to Benedictive as well. Thre is no option in Benedictive Atmanepada. 
आत्मनेपदेष्वन्यतरस्याम् ॥ ४४ ॥ पदानि ॥ प्रात्मनेपदेषु, अन्य तरस्याम्, (हनो, बध, लडि, आः)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ पूर्वेण नित्ये प्राते बिकल्प उभ्यते । शात्मनेपदेषु परतो हनो लुड्यन्यतरस्यां वध स्ययमादेशो भवति ॥ 
44. When Atmanepada affixes follow, बध् is optionally the substitute of न्ह in the लुङ (Aorist). 
Thus धाधिष्ट पाहत; भावधिषातास or शाहसावा; श्रावधिशत or साहसत. 
The verb हुन् becomes Atmanepadi when preceded by ा (I. 3. 28) By sûtra I. 1.14, the Aorist-affixes in the Atmanepada are face after it and by VI. 4. 37 the 7 is elided before fáa affixes then by VIII. 2. 27 the खiselided. Thus शाहन् + सिच् + त = माहत. 
इणो गा लुङि॥ ४५ ॥ पदानि ॥ इणः , गा, लुङि, (श्रा०) ॥ वत्तिः॥ इणो गा इत्ययमादेशो भवति लुडि परतः ॥ चार्तिकम् ॥ इरावदिक इति वक्तव्यम् ।। 
45. गा is the substitute of the roots when लुङ follows. 
भागात' he went' (II. 4.77) अगाताम् ' thay two went' is they all went.' The repetition of the words in this sâtra though is anuveiti was coming from the last aphorisms, indicates that there is no option allowed even in the Atmanepada, we being the invariable substitute in all the Padus. Thus नगावि भवता you, went. The form भागात् is thus evolved आ+गा+सिच् +=, जगात (II.4.77.) 
Vart :-- is the substitute of you to remember' in the Aorist as it isofm. Thus अध्यगात् he remembered.' अध्यागातास, शध्वगुThe roor belongs to Adadi class, 
URE 
GOVE 
COVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
खमेव जयते 
-Bk. II. CH. IV. § 46-49.] - ARDHADHATUKA-SUASTITUTION." 
329 
णौ गमिरबोधने ॥ ४६ ॥ पदानि ॥ णौ , गमिः, अबोधने, (इणः )॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥णौ परत इणोऽवोधनार्यस्य गनिरादेशो भवति ॥ 
46. When the affix for (Causal) follows, fe is the substitute of yu when the sense is not that of informing' but that of going. 
गमयति 'makes him go' गमयतः, गमयन्ति &c. But प्रत्यायचति 'causes to believe.' restaufa. The of fe is for articulation. So also ti to 'remember'; as, अधिगमयति ॥ 
सनि च ॥४०॥ पदानि ॥ सनि, च, (इणः, अवोधने , गनिः )॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ सनि परत इगोऽवोधनार्यस्य गमिरादेशो भवति । 
47. And when सम् (Desiderative) follows, गमि is the substitute of T when the sense is not that of 'informing.' 
जिगमिषति — wishes to go ' जिगमिषतः, जिगमिपन्ति, But नर्यान् प्रतीषिषति +he wishes to inform the meaning. So also with इक् , as अधिजिगमिषति. The yogavibhaga indicates that the anuvritti of ra only runs in the next satra and not of far. The form is thus evolved in the Parasmaipada; सन्+गम् = गम् + गम् + (VI. 1.9) = ग+ गम् + स (VII. 4.60) = + गम् + (VII. 4.62) = + गम् + इ + स (VII. 2.50) = जिगभिष, and then we add the personal terminations. 
इङश्च ॥ ४ ॥ पदानि ॥ इङः, च, ( सनि , गमिः ) ॥ 
पत्तिः॥ इच्च सनि परतो गमिरादेशो भवति ॥ 
48. And of r follows. 
to study,' fe is the substitute 
when 
अधिजिगांसते , ० ते, सन्ते he wishes to study. The root : is always preceded by the preposition sty. This will be Atmanepadi by 1. 3. 12 and I. I. 56. The form is similarly evolved by the application of rules VII. 2.58. and VI.4.16, 
गाङ् लिटि ॥॥ पदानि ॥ गाडू, लिदि, (इङः) । वत्तिः ॥ गाबादेशो भवतीको खिति परतः ॥ 
URE 
FCULTURE 
VERNMENT OS 
MINISTA 
OF INDIA 
ARDHADHATUKA SUBSTITUTION. 
[BK. II. CH. IV $ 49, 51. 
49. Tit is the substitute of 6 when fag (Perfect) 
follows. 
The substitute being like its original (I. 1. 68.) I would have been Atmanepadi, even without the indicatory, . Why has then this been added to it? The object is that in the sû tra 1.2.1. ttg there should mean this substitute is and not the verb ta' to go.' 
Thus we get fra he studied '. irati, fufit. See VI. 4. 64 and III. 4. 8. 
विभाषा लुङ्लङोः ॥ ५० ॥ पदानि ॥ विभाषा , लुङ्लङोः ( 6: , fa, TE ) 
वृत्तिः ॥ सुद्धि लडिच परत घडो विभाषा गाउदेशो भवति । 
50. Tg is optionally the substitute of 6 when (Aorist) and 5 (Conditional Future) follow. 
Let us take the case when the replaces 14. The affixes of gg and nu are treated as fra by 1 2. 1. and then by the Rule VI. 4. 66 (When an ardhadhatuka affix, beginning with a consonant and distinguished by an indicatory or follows, then let & be the substitute of long st of the verbs termed y and of #1, #OT, T, ET, aft), we get yenute ( + + + ), artarar, yaita. In the alternative we have হয় , গুইআনাস and ইমন , 
So also in 75; as rata, antstart, ittua, or in the alternative, ata , state and itsa, 
met, nyp en verran ml, 7, 77-797, (5, TE , fanta) 
aferu 2 + y2 Ta ve for thereut walau 
51. 9 is optionally the substitute of 7 in the causative fr, when that causative takes the aflix san (desi derative) and chan (Aorist.) 
affefafa or warfuaftafa 'he desires to teach.' The form is thus evolved : + f = (VII. 3. 36); then by the rules already stated, we get the above form with the atix . e or seaf 
he taught.' The t is changed into or by VI, 1.48. Thus t + fra T + farw = + = surfer. This rule applies to the desideratives of en usatives and aorist of causatives. 
OVERNMENT 
KRY OF CULT 
MINISTRY 
T OF INDIA 
SL 
समयमवाजता 
IV. § 52-54.1 
ARDHADHATUKA SUBSTITUTIONS. 
977 
stany u TGTGT n stra:, : वृत्तिः ॥ अस्तेर्धातो इत्ययनादेयो भवति लाई धातुके ॥ 
52. y is the substitute of the verb so 'to be, when an ardhadhâtuka aflix is to be applied 
faat'he will be,' fagy'in order to be 'faatre' must be. Now the Perfect tense affixes are also ardhadhâtuka affixes (III. 4.115). The Perfect of 5 is therefore the same as that of I, namely, Tua &c. There is, however, an important exception to this rule, namely, when we is em ployed as an auxiliary verb in forming Periphrastic Perfect of other verbs, In that case sta forms its Perfect tense regularly, ya HITT: stig: &C. This apparent breach of the present sûtra is explained by taking the term 
a in III. 1. 40 as a Pratyâbâra including and st, and if we could not form its Perfect in the regular way, its inclusion in this Pratyahára would be useless; hence we conclude, that as an auxiliary verb, ve forms its Perfect regularly. 
aat afu: 1 43 n ang ngai, aft:, (TTO) ! वत्तिः ॥ ब्रबो वचिरादेशो भवति आई धातुके विषये ॥ 
53. af is the substitute of to speak when any ardhadbâtuka affix is to be applied. 
m'he will speak,' wat in order to speak.' The of afy is for the sake of articulation only. The substitute being like the principal, ay is Atmanepadi when the fruit of the action accrues to the agent, as 
he spoke,' aaaà' he will speak.' 
TfETE: EUTSI # yeu ante il fas:, TUTT, (ATO) 11 af: o sfas: tusent wara tegu arfinu afectateu yca u बार्तिकम् ॥ वर्जने प्रतिषेधो वक्तव्यः ॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ असनयोच्च प्रतिषेधो वक्तव्यः ॥ arfinu a Tiegeftra amatu 
54. Test is the substitute of 
s t o perceive, to tell, when any ârdhadhûtuka alix is to be applied. 
traumat he will perceive or tell'; Enge' in order to tell ; eat at must be told. The substitute being like the principal, atut being alwaye Atmanepadi (I. 3. 12), it would have also been always Atmane 4. But in that case the letters would have no scope; it therefore fol 
*U ATT is not always Atmanepadi, but under conditions mentioned in I. 3. 72. 
QE. GOVEA 
OF CULTURE 
INISTRY OF C 
VERNMENT OF 
OF INDIA 
SONA 
• 
सत्यापन 
ARDHADHATUKA SUBSTITUTIONS. 
[By II. CH. IV.S 55-56. 
. संस्कृतिमा 
744.4176 
रत सरकार 
Vart :--This substitute is also said to begin with au instead of . Thus wa UTAT, SITO UTJE , T ad. 
Vart :-Prohibition must be stated when meaning 'exclusion '; 
: bad men should be excluded.' 
as got 
Vart:-Prohibition must be stated when the affixes spa and 57 follow : as TTTT TTET: the Râkshasas are cruel.' This is Vedic Sanskrit; modern 74. The meaning of the root ou here, is to injure.' So also fout: fear; here the affix is 17. 
Vart:--Substitutes are made diversely in denoting appellatives and not qualities and in the Vedic Sanskrit; as gata food' (here the substitute for does not replace t); ** ' killer" (au being substituted for at before ya ); body' ( TT is substituted for tv before the unadi affix हन्); विचक्षण: (here पक्ष is not replaced by ख्या before अन); sofort a court yard' (here to is not replaced by ot as the next sutra 55 requires.) 
at fefe ut yy it a stía u at, fafe, (fas:, 1919 
fet ufafe atayfa: 15@gt at hafa 
55. 5 is optionally the substitute of vier when fue (Perfect) follows. 
The fare also is an ardhadhâtuka affix and by the last sâtra tot would always have been the substitute of w; the present sûtra makes this substitution optional, as ruit, 176g: and straty: . In the alterative we have , and miut' he told &c. 
o ut: En ota yht: at, ut: (TO) n वृत्तिः ॥ अजेर्धातोर्वीत्ययमादेशो भवत्यार्द्धधातुके परतो घनपो वर्जयित्वा । af et saaa # C # बार्तिकम् ॥ बशादाबाईधातुके विकल्या इज्यते ॥ 
56. It is the substitute of the verb to drive to lead, when an ardhadhâtuka afix follows, with the exception of the affixes va (III.3.18.) and 2 (III. 3. 69). 
प्रवायक: driver,' प्रयायणीयः . 
Why do we say with the exception of and '? Observe va + + = society': driving out.' So also with , as ewon'a multitude or herd of animals &c., u driving out of cattle. See III. 3. 69. 
Why have we used it with a long? For the sake of forms like sort &c. 
URE - GOVE 
GOVERNMEN 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY ON 
ENT OF INDIA 
FOR 
BR, H/CH. IV. $ 57, 58,1 
ELISION OF YUVAN AFFIX. 
333 
Vart:--Prohibition must also be stated along with us and w) of the affix at, as a meeting, fame.' 
Vart:--The substitution is optional before ardhadhâtukas begin ning with a letter of aa Pratyâhâra (all consonant except ) as maat or anfaat naar or a fagy. See VI. 2. 144 for accent. 
ar ut ur yg lugtfall a57, (: at, FTO) 11 वृत्तिः ॥ यो परभूते अजेयं बी इत्ययमादेशो भवति ॥ 
57.at is optionally the substitute of w, when the affix (III. 3. 15 &c.) follows. 
This declares an option in case of the affix fic , the word y in the Sântra referring to this affix; as, Halt: or at ts: driving stick or whip. 
Waferaraferant fa rifuata ya nagtfon Tafe saro-fra:, gha, TT, T-yat: 11 
af: U T-ara ufattatt syrafaisag stuteftatyfa 7 wafa . aritinu STETS GAUTIFTTETTU 
58. After a word ending with the Gotra affix ra (IV. 1. 151) and after a Gotra word denoting the descendant of a Kshatriya or a Rishi (seer), and after a word a word ending with a Gotra aflix baving an indicatory st, the affix sy and ri employed in formning 777 (IV. 1. 163) descendants, are elided by the substitution of लुक् ॥ 
1. Thus by sûtra IV. 1. 151 (the affis to comes after * &c., in denoting descendent) we get + T = a: (VII. 2. 117) 'a grandson of Kurn.' This is a Gotra word (IV. 1. 162). Now in forming a word denoting a lower descendent than grandson, we add a Yuvan affix. Thus 
co + 2T (IV. 1. 95). Now this is elided by the present sûtra, and we get the formata which thus means both a Gotra and a Yuvan (IV. 1. 163) descendent of Kuru. So that at: is the name both of the father and the son. 
Now it may be objected : the word aan: belongs to the forefa class and by IV. 1. 154, it will take the afbx faner. Do we, what we may, the form will be contato: (VII. 1. 2.') To this we reply, the word a s which we see in that list of fair &c., is not the word stars which we form ed by adding under rule IV. 1. 151 ; that Tikadi word is formed by adding under rule IV.1.172, and is confined to Kshatriya. The tous 
Men we have baken, denotes a Brahmin Gotra formed by IV.1.15l. 
URE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
STRY OF CUL 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
सत्यमेव जयते 
जति मंत्राद्ध 
ELISION OF YUVAN AFFIX 
FBK II. CH. IV.S 58. 
2. Now to give an example of a word denoting the descendent of a Kshatriya. We take IV. 1,114. which tells us that 'the affix y may be added to the words which are the names of Rishis, or of persons belong ing to the family of Andhaka, or Vrishinis or Kuru.' The Andhaka family, is a Kshatriya family, and wash is a person of that family. Then w e + g = a **: 'a descendent of Svaphalka' This is a Gotra descendent. In forming Yuvan descendent we have them to 51. Now this a must be elided by the present sûtra. So that the means both father and the son. 
3 Now to give an example of Rishis family. The sâtra last mentioned IV. 1. 114. will also hold here. We take the word aft:; and afe + c = atfeu: ; the Yuvan affix a will similarly be elided after his; and thus the word atrag: means both the father and the son. 
4. Then to take the example of Gotra word formed by affixes having indicatory 54. Thu- sîtra IV. 1. 104. declares the affix at comes after the words fat &c., in denoting Gotra descendents.' Thus fare + 1 = :; Then add 1 to denote Yuvan descent, and we have aa: + . By the present rule this st is elided and thus we have aç: both for the father and the son. 
The above examples show the clision of the affix (s. Now we shall give example of the elision of the affix T. Now rule IV.1. 154 says the affix fer comes after the words far &c., in denoting descendent.' Thus fastfe =aaruft: (VII. 1. 2.) Then to form the Yuvan descende ent we add y by IV. 1. 83. Thus argfa + T. By the present sutra, this is elided, and we have derafar: both applicable to the father and the son. Other examples can be multiplied. 
Why do we say there is elision only after these words'? The Yuvan affix will not bu elided after other words. Thus rule IV. 1. 112 says:- The affix sur comes after fa&c., in forming Gotra. Es + su 
= e. Now this is neither a word formed by r nor is it the name of a Ishatriya or a Rishi ; nor any affix having goes to form it. Therefore the Yuvau alfix y will not be elided after this. Thus estes + 49 (IV. 1. 95) Ig: son of Kauhada. 
Why do we say aflix denoting Yuvan descendent is elided? An nfiix not denoting a Yuvan descendent will not be elided. Thus the pupils of area are called at teams which word is thus formed: TU + = actu 'a descendent of Vâmaratha' (IV. 1. 115). Then to denote pupils we ndil by IV. 2.111. Thus antea + T = TATTO: 'a pupil of Vâmarathva' 
Why do we say Yuvan aflix and rs are elided? The other Yuvan allixes under similar circumstances are nobelided. Thus the Yuvan 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
VERNMENT O 
OF INDIA 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
BRICH. IV. & 57, 60. EIISION OF YUVAN AFFIX. 
2. 
descendent of दाक्षि (grandson of दक्ष) will be दाक्षायण: Here the afix फक (IV.1. 101) is not elided. 
Vart :-All Yuvan affixes are elided after Gotra words not denot ing Brahmin Gotras; as atit: applies equally to father and son ; statia: father, afa: son; graft: father, sitcraft: son ; Tratarea: father, it Fra: son. Here, first re is added by IV.1. 173, then it to denote Yuvan descendent. Then this man is elided by the present Vart]ka, 
dariç que nye utuetfa u dm--tfxT:, + (gfa, - fust:) n 
वत्तिः ॥ पैल इत्येवनादिभ्यश्च युवप्रत्ययस्य लुग् भवति ॥ 
59 And after the words a&o. there is the at elision of the yaa affix. 
star + t = da: (IV. 1. 118). "The Gotra descendent of Paila.' aa: + 1937 (IV. 1. 156). Th: present role intervenes, and the Yuvan affic frst is elided; so ta is both a Gotra and a Yuvan word. Some say that the Paila &c. words are formed by the affix est;(IV. 1. 95) and then th: luk-elision of the Yuvan affix would be valid by the next rule 60. They would limit the scope of the present sâtra to cases where the Gotra of the people is not known, the Prachyas not being indicated. 
1. 9. 2. raf. 3. izafer. 4. TJHFH. 5. tefa. 6. Trafo. 7. press. 8. stafer. 9. sitgaf. 10. sitçerior. 11. staafus. 12. sayfvor. 13. gefa. 14. t. 15. TE wra. 16. straig. 17. TIT. 18. vicra. 19 stgreatfr. 20. sitf7617. 21. sayfs. 22. Tatsetu. 23. 5. 
T: HTT110 1 actfern 957, OTTY, (qia, T) 
वन्तिः ॥ गोत्रे य इज तदन्ताय बद्रत्ययस्व लुग भवति 
60. After a word ending with the Gotra affix (IV. 1. 95) there is luk-elision of the Yuvan affix, when the Gotra of the people called Prachya (Eastern) is denoted. 
177T + 1 = tft: 'the Gotra descendent of Pannagara'; after this the Yuvan affix ** (IV. 1. 101) is elided by the present rule, and yo fe is both the father and the son. So wydafus father and B00. The word in here qualifies the word Gotra understood and does not show that it is an optional rule in the opinion of Eastern Gramma rians. When the Gotra of Prâchyas is not denoted, there is no elision. Thus afts and a son of Dakshi.' 
GURE 
Y OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
VERNMENT OF 
OF INDIA 
प्रकृति मंत्रालय 
BLISION OF YUVAN AFFLX, [BK. II. CH. II.S61-62. 
भारत 
न तौल्वलिभ्यः ॥ ६९॥ पदानि ॥ न, तोल्वलिभ्यः, (यूनि, लुग) ॥ 
वत्तिः ॥ तौल्बल्यादिभ्यः परस्य युवप्रत्ययस्य न लुग भवति ॥ 
61. After tbe words ataafa and the rest there is not luk-elision of the Yuvan affix. 
ateafa: is the name of the father and tearra: is the son of the former, formed by the Yuvan affix फक् (IV. 1. 101). 
1. तोवलि. 2. धारणि.पारणि.4 राणि.5. दैलीपि. 6. दैबति.7. बार्कलि. 8. नैवति. 9. नैवकि, 10. ढेवमित्रि 11 देवमति, 12. देवति . 13 चाफदृकि 14. वैल्यकि. 15. वैकि . 16. वैडि. 17. शानुहारति. 18. भानुराहति. 19. पौष्करसादि. 20. सानुरोहति . 23. भानुति. 22. प्रदोहनि. 23. नैमित्रि. 24. प्राडाहति. 25. बान्धकि.. 26. वैशीति . 27. बासिनासिं. 28. शाहिसि. 29. आसुरि, 30. नैमिषि, 31. आसिबन्ध कि 32. पौष्पि . 33. कारेगुपालि.34. वैकर्णि, 35. वैरकि. 36. वैहति॥ 
तद्राजस्य बहुषु तेनैवास्त्रियाम् ॥ ६२॥ पदानि ॥ तद्वाजस्य, बहुषु, तेन-एव, अस्त्रियाम् , (लुग) ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ तद्वाजसंशस्य प्रत्ययस्य बहुषु वर्तमानस्य अस्त्रीलिङ्गस्य लुग भवति , तेनैव चेदगोत्रप्रत्ययेनकृतं बहुत्वं भवति ॥ 
62. There is luk-elision of the तदाज (IV.1.174) affix, when the word is used in the plural number, provided. that the plural number is taken by the base itself, and not by its standing as a compound epithet dependent upon another word, and provided that the base is not used in the feminine. 
17: = + 4 (IV. 1. 170) a prince of Anga'; plural FT: the princes of Anga.' The affix is elided by present rule, and the Vriddhih vanishes with it too (1. 1. 63); but it: the princesses of Anga, plural of swift. a princess of Aiga.' But fouait: 'be to whom the prince of Vanga is beloved' forms its plural favatar: they whose beloved is the prince of Valiga, there being no elision. 
यस्कादिभ्यो गोत्रे ॥ ६३ ॥ पदानि ॥ यस्क-आदिभ्यः, गोत्रेः (बहुषुः तेनैवाखियाम् : लुग)। 
वत्तिः ॥ बस्क इत्येवमादिभ्यः परस्य गोत्रप्रत्ययस्य बहुषु वर्तमानस्यास्त्रीशिङ्गस्यलग भवति तेनेव गोलाप्रत्ययेन कृतं बहुत्वं भवति । 
63. After the word en doc., there is the luk elision of the Gotra affix, when the word of itself and URE - Govo 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY OF 
RNMENT OF 
OF INDIA 
संस्कृति मंत्र 
सत्यमवजयन 
BRAII. CH. IV. 863,64] 
ELI ION OF GOTRA AFFIX. 
337 
not as part of a compound epithet dependent on another word, takes the plural; but not in the feminine. 
यस्क + अ = यास्क: a descendent of Yaska not nearer than grand son. In the plural, the affix is elided and the form is EFT: 'the decend ents of Yaska.' 
॥ यस्कादयः॥ 1. यस्क. 2. लहा. 3. ब्रह्म. 4. अयस्यण, 5. अयः स्थण.6. तृणकर्ण. 7. सदामत्त . 8. कम्बलहार. 9. बहिर्याग. 10. कढक. 11. पर्यातक, 12. पिण्डी जड. 13. बकसस्थ. 14. वकसक्य. 15. विनि. 16. कुद्रि. 17. अजबस्ति . 18. मित्रयु 19. रक्षोनुख. 20. जवारय,21. उत्कास . 22. कटुक,23. मथक. 24. मन्यक. 25. पुष्करटू. 26, वारसद्27. विषपुट. 28. उपरिमेखल. 29. कोष्टकमाग, 30. क्रोष्टमान. 31, क्रोष्टुपाद. 32. क्रोष्टमाय . 33.जीर्ष माय. 34. श्वरप, 35. पदका.36. बक. 87. भनन्दन.38 भडिल. 39. भरिडल.40. भडित.41. भगिडला. 
यजजोश्च ॥ ६४॥ पदानि ॥ यज-मजोः, च, (वहुषु, तेनैवालग)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ यजोनच गोत्रप्रत्ययस्प बहुषु वर्तमानस्यास्त्रीलिङ्गस्य लुम् भवति ॥ वार्तिकर ॥ यज्ञादोनामे कद्वयोर्वा तत्पुरुषे षष्ठ या उपसंख्यागम् ॥ 
64. And there is luk-elision of the Gotra affixes 751 (IV. I. 105) and (IV. I. 104.) when the word is itself and not as part of a compound epithet dependent on another, takes the plural but not in the feminine. 
गण+ य = गाय:; plural गर्गा: the male descendents of Garga'. So also a t the male descendents of Vatsa'; the singular being, TTEET Similarly, fera + y = (IV. 1. 104); plural faret: and not ans; simi larly ste singularly; diafs plural. 
But these affixes are not elided when the word forms part of a compound. Thus, fratrouts those to whom Gârgya is beloved ; tware: 
those to whom Baida is beloved.' 
These affixes will not be elided in the feminine. Thus, गाय, बैदा, feminine plurals, 
Of course these affixes must be Gotra or patronymic affixes, other wise there will be no elision. Thus are + 4 = ' living on the islaud,' plural ; here the affix si is not elided as it does not denotes Gotra. So get + sust = stens 'the pupil of Utsa,' plural seats, 
Vart :-In forming Tat-purusha compound of the singular and dual genitive, the aflix and arst are optionally elided. Thus बाल गायकुलं or गाकर गायी पुलमा or गाल 
URE 
GOVE 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY ON 
RNMENT OF A 
OF INDIA 
ELISION OF GOTRA AFFIXES. 
[BK. II. CH. IV. $ 65, 66. 
Similarly tea or act: gre=aaş or farge. 
Why do we say the affixes t or st'? Because other affixes will not be elided in forming aegat compound; such as 1971 
Why do we say 'singular or dual,? Because in the plural meget compounds, these affixes must necessarily be elided and not optionally; thus atiti ga =Tigai. 
Why do we say 'in forming gegee compound'? Because in form ing other compounds, these affixes will not be elided. Thus, Futtof which is an sweatura compound, meaning the ait. Of course, it is only in the Genitive gegee that this rule is applicable; it will not therefore apply in itu atgeo &c., as 767772: 1 
sufruchafftitahrişteanu yn usifa xfa IT-a-afhe-ita-stfe:, , (CT) m 
त्तिः ॥ अध्यादिभ्यः परस्य गोत्रप्रत्ययस्य बहुषु लुग भवति ॥ 
65. And after the words is, T , gey, afeg a iFe there is luk-elision of the Gotra-affix, when the word takes the plural, but not in feminine. 
Thus the plural of vas ( + * IV.1. 122.) the descendent of safer, is at, the regular plural of zis. So also, singular a:, plural भुगध , singular कोल्सः, plural कुत्साः ; so, वसिष्ठाः, गोतमा, अङ्गिरसः, In all these the asfix has been elided. Thus T + T = a: 'the descendent of Bhrigu. Of course, it is only in the plural number that the Gotra affixes a and are elided, not in any other number; so we have in singular watertafa: ; dual rattaat; plural iaa: yra: &C. 
But when these words are part of a compound, the Gotra affixes are not elided in forming their plural Thus fara : or fanta7: 
In the Feminine plural the affixes are not elided. Thus : : 
#1sthay 11 EEN TI ET:, : 9154 way, (aty ) 
gres 269 fagfene farrat me tatuaz TV जुग भवति॥ 
66. There is luk-elision of the Gotra-affix vsi (IV., I. 95) after a word containing many vowels (a polye syllabio word) which denotes the Gotra of the people called ar and wea when the word takes the plural. 
ORE - GOVE. 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
ONMENT OFIA 
OF INDIA 
जति मंत्रालय 
TUR 
B. II, CH. IV. 67, 68.) 
ELISION OF GOTRA AFFIXES. 
389 
The plaral of Traumfr: is TATTTT:, there being elision of : 80 also TTTTT: plural of Fracafu: ; so the plural of itfufgfe: is greiger' the descendents of Yudhishthira. But ain: and fou: not being polysyllabic, their plural will be å : and ea: . 
Why do we say when denoting the Gotra of Prâchyas and Bharat as? Because when denoting the Cotra of any other people, these a fixes will not be elided. Thus 159: plural of grafos, ferat: plural of 
faarfa:. 
Though the Bharatas are Prâchyas, its specification here is to indicate that, wherever Prâchyas' will be used, it will not include Bhâratas as in V. 4 60. Here the Yuvan affix of Bhâratas will not be elidede 
Thus strafft: father, grunta: son. 
tuanica: 1 894 UTETEN , -aa-aff T: (S), 1 
पत्तिः ॥ गोपवनादिभ्यः परस्य प्रत्ययस्य लुग्न भापति॥ 
67. After the words otaa, &c., there is not luk elision of the Gotra affix, when the word takes the plural. 
This prevents the application of II. 4. 64. Thus 99T+13= situas; plural :; singular waas, plural sat:. The 19an &C., belong to Vidadi class, vide IV.1. 104, and are the following:-1 , fuy, fars, 71, , saata, ***and turnt. The remaining words such as ita &c., should not be taken in this sub-class. In the case of yfta &c., the Gotra afix must be elided in the plural by Rule 64, Thus FEET: fare: &C. 
तिककितवादिभ्यो द्वन्द्व ॥ ६ ॥ पदानि ॥ तिक-कितव surfcu:, , (TEOTT) 
पत्तिः॥तिकादिभ्यः कितवादिभ्यच बन्दै गोत्रप्रत्ययस्य बहुषु लुग भवति ॥ 
68. After the words faz fenau dc. when used as Dvandva compound, there is the luk-elision of the Gotra affixes, when the compound word takes the plural. 
Thus fas + fast = arafa: (IV.1. 154). Its plural is a free d awn: 4- Baatu79: = fanfaat:1 There is elision of f . So also 
iaft plural iT (IV. 1. 95) + TUTUT: = date: ; there is elision of 1 (IV. 1.95). The following is a list of such compounds. 
1. fafanaats 2. Tem at: 3. HAFT: ( situata + ARTI. IV. 3. 99, elision of G) 4. T T &T: T + . 
URE - GOVEA 
OVERNMENT 
Y OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
सत्यमय जयत 
सरकार 
पसारत 
ELISION ORGOTRA AFFIXES. 
[BK. II. CH. IV. 869. 
IV. 1.95, elision of ), बतखगुदपरिणभा, 6. उब्जककुभा (ौब्जयः IV. 1.95. + काकुभा IV. 1. 112, then the elision of इञ् and अण). 7. लकशान्त मुखाः (the elision of इन IV.9.95 as in 4). 8. उरसलंकटा: (औरसायनयः IV. 1. 154 + लांकडय: IV. 1.95, elision of पिञ् and इज.9, भ्रष्टक कषिष्टला (alision of इज् as in 4). 10. कृष्णाजिनकृष्णसुदरा (elision of इज ). 11. अग्नेय-दावरका (जाणिवेश्य:IV.1.105+दासेरकवः IV, 1.95, elision of both 
बज् and हज). 
उपकादिम्वोउन्यतरस्यामद्वन्द्व ॥ ६ ॥ पदानि ॥ उपक-अदिभ्यः, अन्यतरस्याम्, अद्वन्द्व, (वहुषु लुग द्वन्द) ॥ 
चिः॥ उपक इत्येवमादिभ्यः परस्य गोलप्रत्ययस्य बहुष लुग भवति अन्यतरस्या द्वन्द्वेचा 
69. After the words उपक ., there is optionally luk-elision of the Gotra affix when the words take the plural whether they enter into a Dvandva compound, or pre used 
separately. 
Of the words belonging to this list, three have already been enu merated in the group of Tika-kitavândi of the last sûtra. The elision is invariable in the Dvandva compound of these three, but when used separately the elision is optional. As, उपकलनकाः , अष्टककपिष्ठला, कृष्णाजिन. कृष्णागुदरा But the plurals of घोपकायनयः, the Gotra-derivative of उपका (IV.I.99) is उपका: Or जीपकायमा; of लामकायन: is समकाः or लानकायनाः; of आएकि is नाटका: Or भाटकयः, The plural of कापिटलि: is कहिटला: Or कापिष्टलयः The plural of कार्णाजिनिः is कृष्णाजिना: Or कार्णाजिनयः, The plural of कृासुद्गर is कृष्णासुन्दरा: or का सुन्दरया. 
Of the rest of the words belonging to this group, there is option allowed, both when they occur in Dvandva compound or when used alone. 
They are as follow : 
1. पण्डारक.2. प्राडारण.3. पक्ष.4.सुपर्यक.. सुषिच. 6. पारवार्या .7. खारीजप,8. सलाबत.9. पतजरा, 10. पाठेरणि. 11. कुचीतक. 12. काशकृत्या. 13, निपाच. 14. कलशीकरठ.15. दानकापट 16. वृष्याधिगम, 17.पाक. 18. पक. 19. जटिलक, 20. धिरक, 21.चतुक. 22 जणुलोम. 23. पिंगलक24. प्रतिलोम 25. प्रताम 26. अभिहित , (27. डारक. 28. उदक 29. बुधायुक.80. अबन्धका. 
1. पदण 32.अगुपद. 33, शपजग्ध.34 कामक, 35 लेखान36. सामन्दक37, पिशल.38. नरकर्णः39. पदाच.40. कदामत.41, 
भागस्त्यकौण्डिन्ययोरगस्ति कुण्डिनच् ॥ ७० ॥ पदानि ॥ अगस्त्य-कौण्डिन्ययोर, अगस्ति-कुण्डिनच, (बहुषु लुग, भणी यजः)॥ 
तिः ॥ भागस्त्यकोरिडन्यशीरखो पाना बहुए लग भवति गरिशिष्टस्य प्रकृतिभागस्य भायागमन गस्ति कृषि इत्यतावादेषी पवन ॥ 
URE 
Gove 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRI 
ANMENT OF 
OF INDIA 
1:0. IV.5 70-72.] 
EL18ION OF CASE AFFIXES 
34. 
जसरकार 
70. There is luk-elision of the Gotra affixes and us of the words tine and aft, when they take the plural; and the words store and get are the substitutes of the bases so remaining after the elision. 
The plural of 17€T in STTTT: (as if it was the plural of safea) and of fresa: is great: The affix (IV. I. 114) after iteru and the affix as (IV. 1. 105) after itfrezu are elided. 
The vin fury is indicatory and regulates ths accent (IV. 1. 163); the word gfisa has udatta on the middle vowel; and its substi tute will also have the same accent. There is no elision however in ATTRATTAT (IV. 1 89) FETTET: (IV. 2. III.) 
सुपो धातुप्रातिपदिकयोः ॥ ११ ॥ पदानि सुपः, धातु-प्रातिपदि ait:, ( ) 
वृत्तिः ॥ सुपो विभक्तर्धातुसंज्ञायाः प्रातिपदिकसंजायाच लग् भवति॥ 
71. There is luk-elision of the case-affix of a word when it gets the name of a root, or as a crude form. 
A noun is changed into a root (0) when it is made a denomina tive verb. As gatofa (III. 1.8) he wishes for a son of his own. A noun which forms part of a compound becomes a crude-form (1.2. 46); as Ferra: 'having recourse to pain.' Tagu: king's man,' In all these examples, the case affixes have been elided. 
Thus ga Teafa = gaitafa, here the 2nd case-affix is elided. wafua:= ofa &c. 
Why do we say when it gets the name of : yo or attacie? 
Because when it gets any other name, such as a &c., the case affix is not elided. Thus Tu, T: 0 
staufera: QTT: 119R | TET fe- fax:, 270, 
f afanyfare Fetea wito wafara 
72. After the verb s' to eat' and the rest, there is luk-elision of the Vikarana w (III. 1. 68). 
Thug te + fa est fer be eats'; when he kills ; fe he envies. The Adedi verbs belong to the second conjugation. In this class of verbs, therefore, the terminations are added direct to the root. 
URE - GOVEA 
ASTRY OF C 
VERNMENT OR 
MINISTA 
OF INDIA 
संस्कृति मंत्रान 
ELISION OF SAP.' 
[BK. II. CH IV. 8 73-76. 
१.भारत 
बहुलं छन्दसि ॥ ३ ॥ पदानि ॥ बहुलम्, छन्दति, (शपः लुग) ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ इन्दति विषये शपो बहुलं लुग् भवति ॥ 
73. In the Chhandas (Vedas) there is diversely the luk-elision of the Vikarana शप् (III. 1.68). 
There is elision in other conjugations than Adadi; and there is sometimes even no elision in Adadi verbs. As वृनं हनति ' he kills Vritra.' हत्+शप +ति = हनति instead of हन्ति । So also, अहिः शवते instead of येते. (Rig.V.I.32.5). In these cases the Vikarana शप् has not been elided. 
In some cases the u is elided as प्राध्वम् नो देवा: instead of प्रायध्वम् । यङोऽचि च ॥ १४ ॥ पदानि ॥ यः, अचि, च, (लग बहुलम्)॥ 
चूचिः ॥ यलो लुग भवति शषि प्रत्यये परतः, षकारेण बहुलं ग्रहणमनुकृप्यते नतु बन्दखि एशि॥ 
74. And there is diversely the luk-elision of te (III. 1. 22) when the affix sty (III. 1. 131) follows. 
By using diversely' there is elision of a when other affixes than wv follow, both in the sacred and profane literature; as atyt: 'much cutter' ( +999); ga: 'much purifier'entia: from 7a 'to drop.' 
ai: from vas to fall,' the oft being added by (VII. 4. 84). 
So also te is elided b fore other affixes than 4: thus tigfaret लासपीति दुन्दुभिवीवदीति See also I. I. 4. 
जुहोत्यादिभ्यः श्लुः ॥ ५॥ पदानि ॥ जुहोति-नादिभ्यः, श्लुः, (शयः)॥ 
पत्तिः ॥ शुहोत्यादिभ्य उत्तरस्य थप एलर्भवति ॥ 
75. Ater the verbs y 'to sacrifice' and others, there is slu-elision of the Vikarana (III 1.68). 
These verbs belong to the Juhotyadi class. yetfa' he sacrifices' (VII. 1. 10). causes the reduplication of the root. So also fanfa' he fears, मिनेक्ति from निज 'to pu.ify, he purifies. 
बहुलं छन्दसि ॥ ६॥ पदानि ॥ बहुलम्, छन्दनि, (शपः म्लः) ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ नन्दसि विषये बहुखं शप; शलु भवति ॥ 
76. In the Chhandas there is ślu-clision of diverselv. 
Tblision dons not take place where ordained, and takes place where not ordained i firatie (instead of perfat)' he gives pleasant objects, for instond of धाति। 
GURE 
GOVO 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY OF 
NT OF INDIA 
TOETU 
343 
Bi. II. CH. IV. § 77-78.] 
ELISION OF 'Sich.' 
So also there is slu-elision of the vikaraņas after roots other than those belonging to the Juhotyâdi class. Thus; qui faalg, orfan faaf, 
गातिस्याघुर्याभूभ्यः सिचः परस्मैपदेषु ॥ 99 ॥ पदानि ॥ fa--9-97-37+2, FIT:, aceaeg, () 
yfers un tifa Eur 5 T rava: tree font to wafa erat ac, van fututa refercut fra 
77. There is luk-elision of the affix for (III. 1. 44) in the Parasmaipada, after the verbs 'to go,' ar to stand,' the verbs called (I. 1. 20), to drink and y to be.' 
is the substitute of TT (11.4. 45). fap the affix of the Aorist is elided after these verbs in the Parasmaipada as t he went, seura 'he stood,' stara' he gave,' 18' he held,' Hurt'he drank,' w ' he was.' 
Vart :--The verbs and Tt in the aphorism mean the ' to go' (which is the substitute of TT, and not to sing,') which also assumes the form it, and or to drink' and not ar to protect. The verbs 'to 
sing' and to protect' will form their Aorist with far without its elision ; thus fata "he sang,' wreta 'he protected.' 
In the Atmanepada the far is not elided ; thus ratai uraten. 
fa HTAT ETÊTentara ; n 95 u açtla u FW HTT, UT-17-AT ara: , (ft: at fa TT TT) 11 
वत्तिः ॥ प्रा घेट शाहासा इत्येतेभ्य उत्तरस्य सिचः परस्मैपदेष विभाषा सुग भवति । 
78. After the verbs ar to smell,' fe to drink.' UT ( TT) 'to pare,' or (at) to cut,' and (it) to destroy,' there is optionally the elision of for, when the parasmaipada term inations are employed. 
Thus ity or surat'he smelled;' 47. or it'he drank;' সয়ান ০r "খাৰীৰ ' he pared,' আহাৰ of ১ কাছান he cut and q or স্বাধীন 
he destroyed.' 
There is no option allowed in Atmanepada ; thus, uretat gaat 
auce 
The root or is a Ghu verb, and in its case, the fey would have been elided by the last rule also. The present declares an option. 
TURE - Goy 
MINISTRU 
STRY OF CU 
ERNMENT OF 
OF INDIA 
ECISION OF 
STOH.' 
[BK II.CHIV.S747 
सत्यमेव जयते 
तनारिभ्यस्तथासोः, ॥ 9 ॥ पदानि ॥ तन-पादिभ्यः, त-यासोः, (सिचःविभाषा लुग) ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ नादिभ्य उत्तरस्य सिवस्त यासोः परतो विभाषा लुग भवति ॥ 
79. After the verbs तन् 'to expand, and others there is optionally the luk-elision of for when the Atmanepada affixes a and are of the second person follow. 
Thusha (VI. 4. 37) or watery' he expanded,' satt: or stafargt: "thou didst expand.' Similarly असात or असनिष्ट hegave.' असाथा: Or असनिष्टाः - thou didst give.hind 
The roots ay and TT must both belong to the Atmanepada, and not to Parasn aipada. Hence in the Parasmaipada there is no elision of सिव. Thus, अतनिष्ट यूयम् you did expand.' 
मन्त्रे घसन्ह वरणशवृदहादाच कृगमिजनिभ्यो लेः॥०॥ पदानि ॥ मान्ने-घस ह वर-णश-वृ-दह-श्रात्-त्व-कृ-गनि-जनिभ्यः, (लुग)॥ 
वत्तिः॥ मन्त्रविषये घस हर यश व दह सात च कू गमिनि इत्येतेभ्य उत्तरस्य ले शुग भवति ॥ 
80. In the Mantra portion of the Vedas there is luk-elision of the sign of the Aorist (& Perfect), after the verbs ar 'io eat' t'to be crooked,' a 'to destroy to choose, 
to cover, दह 'to burn, verbs ending in long आ, वृष ' to avoid,' 'to make,' 'to go' and offer to be produced.' 
The word far is the name given by ancient grammarians to the affixes of Perfect tense as well as the Aorist, or it might be common term for all tense-affixes, Thus from पस we have अन in the sentence, अन् पितरो मी मदन्त पितरोऽतीतृपन्त पितरः पितरः शुग्धवम् (Yajurveda. XIX 36 so also Rig.1.82.2). 
From the verby. we have माहूर्मिनस्य स्वस. From नश we have प्रणा in the following verse मानः जसो घररुषो पूर्ति प्रणङ्मयस्य । रखा गोब्रह्मणस्पते । (Rig. 1. 18. 3.) 
The word in the sutra includes both qe and at, as the word बैन in the following मान अचमं पुर स्ताविसी' मतः सुरु वो वेन शायः । स धन्या पमाय बिनय योनि लविवः॥ (Yajurveda 13.3). 
Trom दw we have जाधक as in सरस्वत्य मिनो मेषि वस्यो भास्करी: पायेगा मान साधक्॥ (Rig.VI.61.14). The word सात means verbs ending in long at Is प्रा to fill. Thus, मिल देवानानुदगादतीकं चक्षुर्मिलास्य वरुणस्याहामा 
पावाप्रथिवी शास्तरिए सूर्य मात्मा जगतस्तस्यु ॥ (Rig. I.115.1.) 
The root r gives us as in the following verge:--- it for नहाच ने पदा पगू रिभक्षापा । संवर्ग परिचिं पयः ॥ (Rig. VIIL 75. 12), 
URE 
GOVE 
VERNMENT 
CULTURE 
NT OF INDIA 
(SL 
सत्यमयजयता 
345 
BKVITCA. IV. S 81-83.1 
ELISION OF TENSE AFFIXES 
From y we have tu as in the following verse 1957 ya: TT TTU et yati qat': ** Cated a Fuyu (Yajurveda III. 47, 
From T we have stro; as in the following vese: Tata बहुभिर्वसवी स्वेरनि जावांसो अनुग्मन् । शंतनग्नि पर्णतः वृहंत विहादीदिवांसं (Rig, VI. 1. 1.) 
From we have sua as suas Grat: This is an example from the Brahman literature, as the word in the sâtra refers also to the Brâhman literature. 
ATA: n 58 n uçtfall ., (:, 75) 11 af: 47: TEET 7 wafaa 
81. There is luk-elision in the room of that tense-affix (fa) which comes after it of the Perfeet. 
satu is used in forming Periphrastic Perfect fua 'he endea voured, Here, after the verb it all tense-affixes are elided, and the Perfect of g is added to form its Perfect. Similarly Fria tuicau 
TOUTTGTTTT: 1153 11 OCTA nouera, ATT-TT:,(ge:) u afe: o SETTIGACEAta: Ja TT rafa 
82. There is luk-elision of sig (the feminine termination) and yl (the case-affixes) after an Avyaya or Indeclinable. 
Thus, aa main in that hall'. Here the Indeclinable as there, does not take the feminine termination, although it is equivalent to DETTE 'in that.' So also feat Shaving done freut &c. Here the case affix is elided. 
touttatgat cautat: 143 n gif 11a, out Hala, na:, ,, 4 0T:, (TT: 7) 
Sfatu wanataratge 9717 wafer, staureuen wet 478 
83. There is not luk-elision of the case-affix after an Avyayi-bhava compound that ends in , wt, is the substitute of its case-affixes, but not went it is the fifth case allix. 
This debars luk-elision which was to have taken place by the last instead of luk-elisiop, we have s added to the words ending in 
for examples of this, see sutra II. 1. 6; as faga upakum bha 18 standing, 
see the upakumbha.' 
shorbs, for examples of this, sees 
CURE • Gov 
OVERNMENT 
Y OF CULTUR 
. MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
तमंत्रालय . 
751 
6 
SUBSTITUTION OF CASE ATTIXIB. [BK. II. Ch. IV. $ 84, 85. 
Why do we say 'after words ending in short s'? Because after A vyayibhâva compound ending in any other vowels there is not substitu tion, but there is total-elision of the case-affixes; as safaret, saf t . 
But tle ablative case-affix is not elided after Avyayîbhava com pound ending in short st, nor is there the substitution; as *777#*. 
aatat grutas U by u astra natat-currit: , ay 
( T utara) afat un guitar suratfeestigateutet wafa sastaja u wrff TOT safe wet #77 Écluavat faeuafafa UTU 
84. The change to y of the third and seventh case-affixes coming after an Avyayibhava compound that ends in , occurs diversely. 
उपकुीन or उहकुम्भव कृतं ' done by upakumbha'; उपकुम्भ निधेहि or 7 fulfinput it in the upakumbha.' 
Vart ---The substitution is invariable and not optional in the locative case when the Avyayibhava compound denotes prosperity (II, 1.6.) or a compound of rivers (II. 1. 20 and 21) or a compound having a numeral for its member (II. 1. 19); as, 514' well or prosperous with the Madras'; gay' well or prosperous with the Magadhas'; similarly TWTFT fear itafafaragt . The word 'diversely' estab lishes all these even without the Vartika. 
TE: THE ETETTE: 1 ay maçtfange:, HE ST-êt 
af TEU Fungene eretteurre te raamatut afva qarTD 
85, 37, and are substituted respectively in the room of the three-affixes of the third person of Te (First future), both in the Parasmaipada and the Atmanepada. 
Thus in the Parasmaipada waf he will do,' watot 'they two will do;' watc: they will do.' So also in the Atmanepade we have creuar, যালী, জনা?। 
Why do we say "in the 3rd person'? Observe : waffer wat va OREGOV 
GOVERNMENT 
FCULTURE 
OLSINIW 
OF INDIA 
SL 
. 
20 
13 
नोइम् 
अथ तृतीयाध्यायस्य प्रथमः पादः ॥ 
BOOK THIRD. 
CHAPTER I. 
प्रत्ययः॥१॥ पदानि ॥ प्रत्ययः॥ gia: O SET 75272ftrata affra en gafftTTT: Hautarea afgaati, प्रकृत्युपपदोपाधियिकारागमान्वर्जवित्वा ॥ 
I. An ailix. 
This is an aphorism intended solely to regulate the sense of others. From this place forward up to the end of the Fifth Book, whatsoever we shall treat of, will get this name of 'Pratyaya' or an affix, except the 'prakriti' or base (such as yy, fara, fast in III. 1.5 are bases, the affix, being 78),the 'upapada or dependent word (such as Fatuma in III. 2. 24 are upapadas), the upâdhl or attribute, the special cause that occasions changes (such as hy in III. 2. 25 18 an u pâdhi); in the sûtra, III. 2. 25, the word vafa is a prakriti, gia and nu are upapadas, ty is an upâdhi, the affix being , the substitute and the augment. Such as the affixes aan, aa, water taught in III. 1.96, as out, tout 'to be done 
R 1 ugifer 11 :, , (9094: ) m uf: TIT vara unitat Arfa iegt: Weaa # 
2. And subsequent. This is also an 'adhikâra' or regulating sâtra, and is understood in all subsequent aphorisms; or it might also be called a 'paribhasha' or interpreting aphorism. That which is called an aflix comes after, or is placed after, the dhâtû' or root, or the 'pratipadika' or crude form ; as wat and afactan 
The force of the words and in this sûtra is to indicate that the affixos here treated of, are to be placed after a root &o; not so, however, the affixes nob taught in this Adhyâya. These latter, such as Unâdi affixes, may sometimo be placed in the beginning or the middle of a word. 
1917 3 f n stfe- 17, ( :). fa: SZTATY wafa u: satu 
3, That which is called an affix, has an acute accent on its first syllable. 
The sûtra may also be treated as a Peribhâsha or an Adhikara sûre. The udatta accent falls on the affix, and if it consists of more than one vowe. ther on the first of the vowels. Thus the affix you has ndátta on the first set 03 in . This general rule of accent applies only where there is no special 
ARE - GOVs 
OVERNMENTO 
Y OF CULTURA 
· MINISTRY 
T OF INDIA 
TEE DESIDERATIVES, 
BK, IIT.CH. WE 
कमवायत 
त मंधानध . 
भारत सरकार 
rule loid down, Thus, rule VI, 1.163, declares that affixes having an indicar tory will have udatta on the final , those having an indicatory < have accent on the middle (VI. 1. 217); those that have an indicatory are anudatta ; those having an indicatory 7. throw the acute accent on the syllable immediately preceding the affix (VI. 1. 193); the affixes having an indicatory s and throw the acute acaent on the first syllable of the word to which they are added (Vl. 1. 197); the taddbita affix having au indicatory takes acute Faccent on the final (VI. 1. 165); and the affix having an indicatory a is svarital 
(VI.1, 185). 
जनदात्ती सुपिती॥४॥ पदानि ॥शनदात्ती, सुष-पिती, (प्रत्ययः) 
वृत्तिः ॥ सुपः पितश्च प्रत्यया अनुदाता भवन्ति । 
4. The case-affixes (sup) and the affixes having an indicatory (pit) are anuâdatta. 
This is an exception (apavâda) to the last aphorism. As guat 'two stones '; the case-affix it is anudatta; so also ge; so also cafa; The third person singuler affix ति has an indicatory प, and is anudatta. But nob पचत:.. 
गुप्तिकिझ्यः सन् ॥५॥ पदानि ॥ गुप-तिज-किझ्यः, सन् (प्रत्ययः)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ गुप गोपने, तिज निशाने, कित निवासे, रतेभ्यो धातुभ्यः सन् प्रत्ययो भवति । बार्तिकम् ॥ निन्दाक्षमाव्याधिप्रवीकारेषु सन्निध्यतेऽन्यत्र यथाप्राप्तं प्रत्यया भवन्ति ।। 
5. After the verbs गुप, तिज and कित् comes the affix सन 
This affix is to be added to the above verbs, when they mean to 'des pise, to endure' and 'to heal" respectively, though they ordinarily mean to hide', to whet' and 'to dwell'. As yra "he censures or despises '; fafava 
he endures patiently'; funera'he beals'. But harufa be protects'; aura fa 'he sharpens', संकेत यति 'he makes sign'. 
When सन् is added, there is reduplication of the roob, by VI. 1. 9. Thus, अपयन-जुगुपच (VII. 4.62.)=गुस् to which is added the third person singuler termination आते-जुगुप्सते. 
मान्बथदान्शानभ्यो दीर्घश्चाभ्यासस्य ॥६॥ पदानि ॥ मान् जांध-दान्-शानभ्यो, दीर्चः, च, शम्यासस्य, (सन्, प्रत्ययः)॥ 
वृतिः ॥ भान प्रणायाम, बच बन्धने, दान शवखण्डने, शाम जावतेजने, इत्येतेयो धातुभ्यः सन् प्रत्ययो भवति, अभ्यासस्व शारस्य दीर्वादशो भवति॥ 
वाधिकार ॥ अवापि सम्पर्य विशेष ध्यते । 
URE 
GOVE. 
OF CULTURA 
TRY OF 
NT OF INDIA 
BK. 11/. I. S 6-7] 
T#DESIDERATIVES 
6. The aflix comes after the verbs to honor', 9 "to bind', 'to cut' and uta 'to whet', and long is the substitute of the # (VII. 4. 79) of the reduplicative (VI. 1. 4) syllable. 
The Ta is to be added only then, when the sense of the desiderative verb is as below: fiaa he investigates', atwa 'he loathes', ia 'he straightens', stuiaa 'he sharpens'. The verbs given in this and the preceding sûtia, are Desiderative in form, but not in meaning. The word 'optionally in the next sûura, may be read into this also, whereby the addition of a becomes optional. Thus fara urvafa, anafa and fast hafa are also valid forms. 
stat: T: "17" Giftsarai alien werfer un wati, #T:, 7919- 19, 84TH, UT ( 27, ATUT: ) 1 
gia: u Tiomait a gfefeda ettimeentfecerata at sa wait wafa atfe 19taTY ESTIUTO 
uridayu Taiyurarea aut amou: a rufa er 
7. The affix yt is optionally attached, in the sense of wishing, after a root expressing the object wished for, and 
having the same agent of the action as the wisher thereof, 
As, 'to do'; fosfa= kafasafa 'he wishes to do. This is the Desiderative proper. It is optional to employ the desiderative affix, the same sense may be expressed by a phrase. The root must also be simple and not compounded with any upasarga, when the affix is to be added. Thus 
agarea=ufuata. 
Why do we say it: 'aster (a root expressing) an object"? The affix will not come after an Instrumental case. Thus amoufa; here there is no affix. But a fwegfa will be forfasfa. 
Why do we say 991747' HIT 'when the subject of the verb to wish, is also the subject of the verb denoted by the object wished'? Observe que 
toase fa quea. Here Yajñadatta is agent of the verb rura; but he is not agent of the action prud; hence there is no affixing 
Why do we say t hat when the sense is that of wishing'? Ob serve the raifa 'he knows how to make'; here the sense being that of know ing, there is no affix. 
The word at optionally shows that a sentence may also be employed to express the same idea. Thusu muafa or fateffa 
GOVERNMENT 
CULTURE. 
NISTRY OF C 
NT OF INDIA 
THE DENOMINATIVES. 
[Br. 111. CH. 14 
The word wat: being especially used in this sâtra, shows that this is an ardhadhituka affix, while the ot taught in the two preceding sa tras, will nob get this designation. 
Vart :--The affix is added, when the sense is that of 'in imminent danger' ; 3.9 facafa =fufa fa in the bank is in imminent danger of falling down'. So also zarya fa. 
Vart: There is no affixing of after a verb which has already taken in the sense of wishing. As fatfagfazala. But the ot of III. 1. 8,6 pot denoting wishing, we have जुगुसियते भीमारिषते. 
ya 1697: En agtf II Gu:, 1977, , (wat, , serat, e) u 
यन्तिः ॥ इषिकर्षण एपितुरेवात्मसंवन्धिनः सुबन्तादिच्छायामय वा क्यच् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥' w apo wafe wiatamuufaastamo: 
gefa Tiatifa umaut 
8. The aflix vis optionally empolyed, in the sense of wishing, after a word ending in a case-affix expressing the object wished for as connected with the wisher's self. 
This forms the Denominative verbs, i e, verbs derived from nominal bases. As, ya 'son', gafa 'he wishes for a son of his own' (9***1=ysitt 
=gia) (II. 4. 71,VII. 4. 33). 
Why do we use the word go ? The affis should not come after a whole sentence, but only after the particular word ending in the case-affix. Thus in 
** quierea, the affix comes only after you and not €1=& Ti. 
Why do we say atmanah? Oserve rugsfasura''he wishes a son for the king'. Here there is no affixing as the wishing is for another and not for one's own self. 
The win w is for the sake of classing Iyach, Iyan and kyash in one common group by simply using the word a, as in sûtra az I. 4.15; while 
distinguishes loyach from loyan do., and is not for the sake of accent, the aflix will be udatta by III. 1. 3. 
Part:- In affixing loyach, prohibition must be stated of pronouns in stand of Indeclinables. Thus in fe, safefe, there is no affixing, 
Vart:- In the Vedas, the aflix is added even when the wish is with re gard to another. As et zur Te s u fuer. Here (pl, wurua) is 
GURE 
GOVA 
GOVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
SL 
NB 
I: CH. I. $ 9-10.1 
KAMY ACE AND KYACH. 
formed by kyach, being arded by III. 2. 170, and T is added by VII. 4. 87. See Rig Veda I. 120.7; 27. 3. &C. 
@T4457 On va fer a FU, T, (ET, TA, erat, T:, seat, a) 
वृत्तिः ॥ सुबन्वारनगशालनेच्छार्या कान्यच् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
9. And the affix 06Ty is also employed, in the sense of wishing, after a word ending in a case afix, expressing the object wished for as connected with the wisher's self. 
Thus, gaitafa 'he wishes for a son of his own'. 
The making of this a separate sûtra instead of adding it with the last aphorism and making one søtra of them both, is for the sake of the subsequent sûtra, where the anuvritti of kyach only runs, and not that of kedmyach. The 
of kamyach is not indicatory, but is a part of the real afix. Here, there fore, rule I. 3. 8 which would have made the letter indicatory, does not apply: because no particular purpose would be served by making it indicatory. Or the affix ledmyach may be considered to have an indicatory before it i.e. the aflix being chakamya. 
TU11CT gen paifa 
n aiz, un , ( Wiati, , ga, at, 794) 
yf: HTTMATEUR : garantuar it wafan af u aceafa UTA 
10. The affix #is optionally employed, in the sense of treatment, after a word ending in a case aflis denoting the object of comparison, 
Thus, ওয়ালিঘৰৰ জাল == গালি জাম ‘he treats the pupil as a son 
Vart: So also in a locative cage. As rretafe he dwells in hut as if it were a palace', watafa s 'in a cot be lies down as if he were on a royal bedstead ; he treats a cot as a royal bedstead'. 
75 TT II 88 nucifa nay, UTE, 4 tu:,, ( TE, arna, ya, wat:, ar ) n 
TEEN TUTTE guatenuresu Teae weat afa, Tate wafan arfinu s esapewaitaartea: fequat uteoa: u बार्तिकम् ॥ सर्वप्रातिपदिकोश्या हत्ये॥ 
URE - GOVE 
OF CULTURE 
ERNMENT OF 
MINISTA 
OF INDIA 
KYAN. 
BK. III. C. 
121 
11. The affix is optionally employed in the sense of behaving, after a word ending in a case afix, denoting the object of comparison of the agent ; and there is elision (lopa) of the final of the noun, if it ends with a . 
Thus, waarufa , venta, 'the crow behaves like a hawk'; yatiga "she behaves like an Apsara'; vaca or watà it becomes milk”; ( a 
+= +=TOTT, VII. 4.25). 
In the words star-stata, and re- gate the final a is in variably elided when forming the deuominative verb: but not so in the case of पयस् where the elision is optional, as पयायते or पयस्यते, 
The elision of refers to the final and not when it is followed by any vowel. Tbus 7- ara; 14- aa; here the = is not elided as it. is not final. See. I. 1.52. 
Vart :-After the words waren, ate, and at the affix ffy is op tionally added in the sense of behaving like some one or some thing. As a गल्भते or अवगल्मायने, लीबते लीवायवे जोड़ते or होडायते The alternative forms are derived by the affizing of kyan. 
Vart:--According to the opinion of some Grammarians, the affix feny comeu optionally in this sense after all erude nouns. As guafa or w tua, Vefa or entaat. 
yetifexat you actueu a: u ga u uerfau -=TfEET:, yfa, ssa, 279, 7, 8, ( 145 ) 
fe: reaatfart: atfagierssafavar yfa Hak Ug war wafa, aratat e au 
12. The aflix ac in the sense of becoming what the thing previously was not, is employed after the crude forms and the rest, which do not end with the affix fua (V. 4. 50); and there is elision (lopa) of the final consonant of these words if they end in a conso 
mant. 
Thus, turut safa= he becomes much (from a little)'; l a he becomos swift(from being tardy)'. All these roots will be Atmanepadi(1.3.12). 
The phrase ss: 'not ending in the adverbial affix ', refers to every one of the words belonging to the class fafe, Io may be objected, what was the necessity of adding this condition, since the affix fou itself denotes that something has become what it was not before, and therefore a word which has 
URE 
Govs 
OVERNMENT 
Y OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
IOH. I $ 13.) 
KYASH 
सत्यमेव जयते 
संस्कृति मन 
token the affix fra, will not again take me in that very sense. The repetiton of fua here shows that the words &c. never take the affix fou, in the sense of something becoming what it was not before'. Thus the present sûntra is an exception to sâtra V. 4. 50. which ordains feq. 
y, a, #78 you, oftea, says, 575, 7, 9 , 3, TET, for, 47, TFT, OTT TT, TFF, 797, 71, 47, ( faraa, IT, TET, *. J fyr, wur) 
mfatfestua: 3 noçifo u afga-sufs 19*U: , ( uto ) 
वृत्तिः ॥ लोहितादिभ्यो डाजन्तेभ्यश्च भवत्यर्थ क्यष् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
13. The afix any in the sense of becoming what the thing previously was not, is employed after the words afea, &c. and after those that end with the affix sty (V. 4, 57), when these words do not take the affix fea (V. 4. 50). 
Thus afparga or atftatufa "he becomes red'; VETETT or Teetara he makes a noise like pata pata', (alfea +=atfpart=utfeara, VII. 4. 25). 
The word verta is formed by adding the affix «ldch to the word we which is first reduplicated, and then takes the denominative affix kyash. The affix dach is added to express inarticulate sounds 
There is no special class called lohitadi. The Vârtika, therefore, pro poses that the sûtra should read without the word adi. as afganic a: 0 : 
the affix kyash comes after lohita, and words ending in dach'. 
This rule applies to words other than faufa which are always in variably Atmanepadi owing to the fac affix put while au is optionally both. (I.8.90). Thus वर्मायति or वर्मायते, निद्रायति or विद्रायते, करणायति or धारणायते, कृपायति or कृपायते. The lohitaditis an शाकृतिगण, the following being some of the words of this class ; atfea, sita zica, oa, , , 
The indicatory rin ay is not for the sake of prohibiting guna and uriddhi (I.1.5). For guna or vriddhi takes place in a dhålu followed by a sdr. vodhatuka or ardhadhatuka affix. The affix w is not added to a dhdtu bub to a nominal stem: hence there is no scope for the operation of guna &c. The is for the sake of grouping TT, ate and in one class asm; as in sâtra 
(1.4.15). There is, however, no word ending in wamong those enumer atod above 
GREGOVE 
OVERNMENT 
MINISTRY 
STRY OF CU 
NT OF INDIA 
KYAN. 
[BK. III. CH. I S14 16. 
सत्यय जयते 
रस सरकार 
The aflis 39 (V. 4. 57) comes when the verb following is one of the three sy,, or ; as Tataratfa, or -afa -eart. The present sûtra teaches by implication that when u follows 517, the above restriction, that the verb should be , orwe, is nob applicable. Here 17 comes without the ad dition of कृभू or अस्ति. 
The anuvritti of sa: comes from the last satra, and hence the affix w is added in the sense of syaacuta i. & something becoming that which it was not before. 
FETT H 80 agift 1 FETT, TT, ( 25 ) af: CTEtiaugaf apata suusata que sair walau af u mhvegnata: stafaaitafafafa aweze 
14. The afix , in the sense of exerting in dishonesty, is employed after the word 
mischief", when the latter has the fourth case-aflix in construc 
tion. 
Thus, i wa fa= taa he is assiduous for trouble, i. e. he is ussiduous in the commission of dishonesty, or he plots'. 
Vart -The affix was comes in the sense of exerting in evil, after the words , E U, * and ; as, a, a, cura, tua, and Tea 
When the sense is now of 'evil' the aflix is not added, as suu: Te mwa 
कर्मो रोमन्चतपोभ्यो वर्तिचरोः ॥ १५॥ पदानि ॥ कर्मणः, -a rar, aft:,( 445 ) 
afera 17:verse 
faire magnah wafere arfu * tfa um afna E 
15. The asfix * is employed after the words, 2 ruminating' and 'austerity', when they are used as tlie objects of the action of repeating and performing respectively. 
Thus, a waafu tutt 'the cow ruminates'. 
Varl:- This is restricted to the word signifying movements of the jaws. Therefore there is no aflising here; as, et t u raufa. 
Vart:--The Parasmaipada affixes are used after the word ave: as autfra avtafa, the performs austerity'. 
GREGON 
TRY OF CULT 
ERNMENT OF 
HOUSINIW. 
OF INDIA 
SL 
OI:/CH. I. $16-18] 
KYAN 
रत सरकार 
वाष्पोष्मभ्यामुमने ॥१६॥ पदानि ॥ वाष्प-अभ्या , उद्वमने, (कर्मणः, क्यङ्) ॥ 
दृत्ति: बापशव्दादून शब्दाच्च कर्मण उनमनेऽथै क्यङ् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ वार्तिक । फेनाचेति वक्तव्यम् ॥ 
16. The affix aux is employed in the sense of ejecting, after the words at vapour and 367 'heat' as the object of the action. 
Thus, trata 'it emits vapour'; chia 'it sends out heat'. So algo नायते it ejects froth'. 
शब्दवैरकलहाभूकण्वमेघेघः पारणे ॥ १७॥ पदानि ॥ शब्द-वैर कलह-प्रभ-कराव-मेघेभ्यः, करणे, ( क्य)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ शब्द वैर कलह सभ कराव मेष इत्येतेभ्यः पारणे करोत्यर्थ क्यडू प्रत्ययो भवति । वार्तिकम् ॥ सुदिनदुर्दिननीहारेभ्यश्चेति वक्तव्यम् ॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ टाडाशीका कोटापोटासोटाकाष्टाग्रहणं कर्तव्यम् । 
17. The affix क्य, in the sense of making, comes after these words, as the object of the action, viz:- 'sound', at 'hostility', 'strife', 'cloud', me sin' and 'cloud'. 
Thus, शब्दं करोति = शब्दायते 'he makes a noise'. Solalso वैरायते, कलहा यते, अभायते, करवायते, मेघायते । 
Vart:--- It should be stated that the affix comes after gfew, grant and st. हार; as, सुदिनायते, दुर्दिनायते, जीहारायते । 
Vart:-So also should be included the words अटा, अहर, शीका, कोटा, पोहा सोडr and कष्टा; as अदावते, अट्टायते, शीकायते, कोटायते, पोटायते, सोरायते, and E 
The word tu in the sûtra is not the Grammatical Karana or the Ins trumental case, but has here its primary meaning of doing'. 
सुखादिभ्यः कर्तृवेदनायाम् ॥ १८॥ पदानि ॥ सुख-शादिम्यः, कर्तृ वेदनायाम, ( कर्मणः, क्यङ् ) ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ सुख इत्येवमादिभ्यः कर्मभ्यो पेरणायामऽशुभषे क्या प्रत्ययो भवति वेदयितुर स्वास सम्बन्धीनि सुशादीनि भवन्ति ॥ 
18. The affix क्या in the sense of feeling, comes 
URE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
MINISTRY 
STRY OF CU 
T OF INDIA 
KYACH AND NIN. 
[BK. III. CHI $ 19.-20. 
. 
after the words a pleasure', &c, when the pleasure do., belong to the agent as feels thereof. 
Thus gara he feels pleasure'; garaa he feels pain'. 
Why do we say when the feeling belongs to the agent'? Observe ye a ra a q uen the valet knows the happiness of his master. Deva datta'. Here the agent, viz, a valet, is not the percipient of the happiness,' which belongs to his master ; hence there is no affixing. 
gafe: 1 4, GT, OF, TT, F , 59, ita, satu, T, U, RTE1 
Arafteffas: 
M pen agafar l afian TRE, ,( ) . 
वृन्तिः ॥ नमस् वरिवस् चित्रा इत्येतेभ्यो वा क्यच् प्रत्ययो भवति करणबिशेष पूजादौ ॥ 
19. The affix *, in the sense of making, comes after these words as the object of the action, viz. 
47 adoration', after 'honor' and faa' wonder. 
Thus नमस्यति देवान्, he worships the gods' ; वरिवस्यति गुरुन्, he honors or serves the elders'; festa 'he astonishes (makes it wonderful)'. The in fue indicates that it takes the affixes of the Atmanepada. (f+ = fait +- (VII. 4. 33) = fuit. 
gehitlatura 30 nugtfarn g63-HITE-tarra, fur, ( ) 
of u gee my fax raadt fra utadt wafa safada a afa gestaat utf *TTETEATT atau placas ofcuratat 
20. The affixits, in the sense of making, comes after these words as the object of the action, viz:-98 
tail', pot' and 'rag'. 
Thus regrua 'he lifts up the tail', (the sense must be that of lifting or throwing aboul); सम्भाण्डायते 'he collects pots in a heap'; संचीवरायते भिक्षु: the beggar collects or wears rags'. Of the affix for the effective portion is t, the other letters are servile. The indicates Atmanepada(1. 3. 12) and serves the purposes of the application of the rule VI. 4.51 which applies generally to all aflixes containing for, such as fe fa &c. 
Vart :- After the word gee the sense of the affix is that of lifting ou throwing about. OVERNMENT 
TRY OF CUL 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
SL 
. 
सस्कृति मंत्रान 
सौरवि जयते 
I. S 21] 
NICH ANO YAN. 
Vart : ---After 
t3 the senge of the affix is that of accumulation in a 
hap. 
Vart :-After eat the sense of the aflix is that of acquiring or wear 
ing 
gTEf curusaunaa atau manage tar full utfor n gts-F#-TaT-*--a4---mia-arazzi, for, (TW) 
हतिः ॥ मुण्ड मिनरलक्षण-लवण बतपय इल कल कृतस्त इत्येतेभ्यः करणे शिघु प्रत्यया wafaa 
21. The affix fry, in the sense of making, comes after these words as the object of the action viz: gre, shaving', **** mixture', 'soft', 'salt, ta 'vow', TET, dress', teplough', 
strife', i done', and geamatted hair'. 
Thus goufe he shaves; faufa'he mixes'; matafa 'he softeus or alleviates'; लवणयति ' he salts'; पयोक्तयति ' he fasts on milk'; बसयति he covers with clothes, i. e., dresses'; paafa he ploughs'; waufa' he makes war'; zaufa 'he appreciates kindness'; fagkagfa'he combs the hair, or disentangles matted hair or delivers from sin'. 
The affix after the word wa has the sense of 'eating' or 'abstaining therefrom'; ag aar gaafa "he drinks milk,' quan caufa 'he abstains from the food prepared by low caste', after the word as the affix denotes the sense of covering. After era and of the sense is that of taking; as yra Tutfa= ufar. The words in the sâtra are and me and not to and fa. This anomalous form shows that in forming the Aorist of these by adding the affix 
6 (III. 1.48) the reduplication takes place, but not in the same way as if the afir were ; i.e. the graguta does not take place here in the Aorist (VII. 4 93). Thus the Aorists are su EET and 14 ; and not w ant and we are which would have been the forms by the application of rules VII. 4. 73.8 99 if there was सन्यद्भाव, 
The word ega means either hair, or matted hair, or sin. 
vtect sen: Em đang | 8 | vệ Tiến D. wat:, T#-#, se: fanat-Taftar 95 
TEST T Wire arfa futut a er gar nuta, ang yoyat at min HEITAI 
EUREGOVA 
OVERNMENT 
STRY OF CUL 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
• Farid 
YAN. 
TBK. III CH. I. $ 22-24. 
वार्तिकम् ॥ सूचिनिनग्यव्यवंशूपतीनां ग्रहणं यविधावनेकाजहलादपर्यम् ॥ 
22. The affixa, in the sense of repetition of the act, comes after a root, having a single vowel and beginning with a consonant. 
The phrase Wriyd-samabh ihåra means repetition of the act or its intensity. As to cook', ya'he cooks again and again'; waxaa' he shines with great intensity'. The root must be a simple root, and not compounded with any upasarga. We cannot therefore make Intensives of verbs like e 'to go', (because the root sag is preceded by the upasarga w); or arty' to be awake,' (because it contains two vowels); or to see' (because it begins with a vowel). 
Vart:--The intensive affix 7 comes after gra, fu, tft, wie, strat, and wt, though some of these contain more than two vowels and others begin with a vowel. 
As, a, #1 , #1 , Teta, sota, Tita, and stufua. 
The affix is not added in these cases भशं शोभते or भशं रोचते, as it is against usage to make Intensive forms of these verbs on the sense of intensiby, thongh in the sense of repeition we have freea and irguta. 
In making the Intensives, the root is reduplicated and it takes the ter mination of the Atmanepada as the root is fea. 
face erfere wat n Haifa il facaq, aferê, mat, (43) 
चिःगविवचनाद्धातोः कौटिल्ये गन्यमाने नित्यं या प्रत्ययो भवति । 
23. The affix au invariably comes, in the sense of crookedness, after a simple verb expressing motion. 
Thus to move', t a 'he moves crookedly'. So algo exaa After a verb of motion, the qe never expresses intensity or repetition ; so if the latter is to be expressed, a phrase must be employed; as t he wanders much'. This is inferred from the word prea used in the sûtra i. e. always has the sense of crookedness and no other sense after a verb of motion. 
लुपसदचर जपजभदहदंशगम्यो भावगहायाम् ॥ २४ । पदानि ।। - - - 9-7*:, *19-9f17 ( 45 ) 
fuga Har aka watafat wragautat maar *Tafe 
24. The aflix e when it is intended to con vey the sense of contempt (nl) in respect of the sense 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY OF 
NT OF INDIA 
PUT CH. I § 25.] 
Niuh. 
प्रकृति मंत्रान 
7 
.4172 
177 
of the root (7a) comes always after the following roots, viz:--- 
to cut off', z 'to sit', of 'to walk', weto mutter silently any sacred formula', sto gape or yawn', 'to burn', 'to bite' and I to swallow'. 
EThus लोलुपयते ' he cuts off badly'; सासटाते ' he sits badly'; चंचूयते "he walks badly'; ta 'he recites badly'; so also cria, errea, eta, Tvoraua. The affix te does not come in the sense of repetition, &c., after the above verbs, but only in the sense of censurable performance of the action denoted by the verbs. Separate words must be used to express the intensive or the frequentative meaning. As u gefa he cuts off much. 
Why do we say when contempt in regard to the sense of the root is meant'? Observe y sofa he recites well. There is no affixing as no con tempo is denoted. Why do we say in regard to the action denoted by the root'? When the contempt is not with regard to the sense of the root, but with regard to the action as accomplished, the affix is not employed. Thus 
ufa qua: 'the Sûdra recites the sacred mantras'. The word free of the last aphorism is understood here also. 
FRUITUTTET agatuarentacava addaatfazer fuery otra o Tro-T121-gu-aur-em-gaturar-star aw-aw-au--TT-I9=:, fra 11 
fazu saatfexag -asungtifade for acadi wafa u वार्तिकम् ॥ अर्थ वेदच्यानामापुरवक्तव्यः॥ 
25. The affix foe is en ployed after these words, viz, U truth' (which then takes the form of ERT 29 exhibited in the sûtra), a fetter', 'form', 'a lute', 
a cotton', tales celebration', 'an army', 'the hair of the body', a'the skin' an mail', a celebration, powder and the verb of the Churâdi class, 
Thus Tritura be speaks truly': faufa'he unfetters or liberates', रूपयति 'he looks'; उपवीण यति ' he sings with the lute'; अनुतुल यति' he makes a brush'; उपश्खोबर्यात 'he praises in verse' अभिषेणयति he advances with the army': अनुलो मयति ' he rubs over the hair'; त्वचयति he feels of the skin'; संवयति ' he puts on the mail armour'; vafa 'he celebrates or colors'; svagdafa he pulverises. The roots of the Churadi class belong to the tenth conjugation, for a list of which see the Dhå tupåtha. After the verbs of the Churd li class, the aflix fear is em proyed without alteration of the sense ; as antara he steals'. So also 
TURE 
GOVA 
OVERNMENT 
Y OF CULTUR 
alviSTRVA 
NT OF INDIA 
NICH. 
[BK. III. CH. 
6.1 
. 
सावरत 
Vart:--The words & and cu take the augment sut before the affix पिच ; as, सत्यापति, प्रर्यापयति, वेदापयति. The whole equation is thus shown अर्य+आधुक् + पिच् + +तिप् = अर्य+मा++अति-मर्यापि अतिप्रर्यापति (VII. 3. 86). The final syllable called fe is not elided in this case, i.e., of sute the syllable sig is not elided before fry, as it would have been by VI. 4. 156. The reason is that if it was to be elided, there would have been no necessity of adding it. The affix पिच has the sense of unfettering' after the word पाश, of ' seeing' after sप, of singing in accompaniment' after वीणा, of ' brushing' after तूल, of 'praising' after श्लोक, of leading' after सेना, of rubbing" after शाम, of 'taking after स्वच, of 'putting on ' after वर्ष and of taking' afvar वर्ण. 
हेतुमति च ॥२६॥ पदानि ॥ हेतुमति, च, (धातोः, णिच् )॥ 
त्तिः ॥ हेतु स्वतन्त्रस्य कर्तुः प्रयोजकः तदीयो व्यापार प्रेषणादिलक्षणो हेतुमान् तस्मि अनभिधेये घातोर्णिच प्रत्ययो भवति । 
वार्तिकम ॥ तत्करोतीत्युपसंख्यानं सूत्रायत्यावार्थम् ॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ श्राख्यानात्कृतस्तदाच इति णिचू कल्लुक प्रकृति प्रत्यापत्तिः प्रकृतिवच्च 
बार्तिकम् ॥ शालोपश्च कालात्यन्तसंयोगे मर्यादायाच॥ बार्तिकम् ॥ चित्रीकरणे प्रापि॥ वार्तिक । नपत्रयोगे शि॥ 
26. The affix णिच् is employed after a root, when the operation of a causer is to be expressed. 
The hetu (I. 4. 55) means the mover of the indeperdent agent; an operation relating to the hetu, such as directing, &c., is called hetumat; as कारांत 'he causes to prepare a mat': श्रोदनं पाचयति' he makes the rice to be cooked. In other words, the affix for forms the causative verbs. 
Vart:-The affix comes also in the sense of 'he does that' after the word w&c. Thus Tsi sifa= afa' he makes sê tra.' So also tauta. 
Vart :- After words ending in a affixes and describing legends, comes the affix for, when the sense is. he does that. The ya affix is eli ded, the word reassumes its basic (argfa) form, and the base is as if the agent, thus कं शवधिमाचष्टे - कसं पातर्थात ; बलिवन्धमाचष्टे अलि बन्धति राणागमनमाचष्टे 
राजानम् शागनयति 
Varts-Under the conditions mentioned in the last afara, the upa sarga is elided, when duration of time is meant expressing limit. Thus श्रारानिविवाशाचण्टे -रात्रिविधासयति: here the sofशारानिis elided. 
Vart:--Under the conditions mentioned in the second vârtika the alizey handhe sense of making wonderful meaning 'attaining thab. Thus 
TRE - GOVE 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY OF 
NMENT OF IN 
OF INDIA 
BHERU.CH. IS27-28] 
YAK 
361 
भारतस 
सरकार 
उज्जयिन्याः प्रस्थिती माहिष्मत्यां सूर्योद्गमनं संभावयते= सूर्यमुद्गर्यात 'going from Ujjain he finds the sun rise in Mahismati (wonderful speed). 
Vart :- When an asterism is iv composition and the sense is that of knowing, there comes the affix fry after a word ending in affix, the 
affix is elided, the word reassumes its basic form and the base is as if the agent. Thus पुष्य योग नाति = पुष्येण योजयति. So also भाभियोजयति. 
कण्डवादिभ्यो यक ॥२७॥पदानिकराडू-मादिभ्यः, (यक)॥ बृत्तिः ॥ कण्डूज इत्येवमादिभ्यो यक् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
27. The affix is employed after the roots पागडु 'to iteh', &c.. 
Thus, करडयति or काण्डूयते - he itches or scratches'. This word takes ter minations indicatory. The words कण्डु; &c , are both roots and nouns, and are placed therefore in a separate list by themselves and are not included in the general list of verbs. The affix applies to these words as roots and not as 
nouns. 
कण्डवादिः। कराडन, मन्तु, हणीज चल्गु, जस, मनस्, नहीङ्, लेट्, लोट् धरस् हरज, इरज, दुवस् , मेधा, कुषभ, मगध, तन्तस, पम्पस् सुख, दुःख, सपर, ए, भिषण, भिष्ण, इध, चरण, सुरणा, सुरवा, तुरण, गद्गद, एला, बोला, खेला, लिट् and लोट् । 
गुपूधूयविच्छिपणिपनिभ्यः प्रायः ॥ २८ ॥ पदानि ॥ गुपू-धूप विच्छि-पणि-पनिभ्यः, प्रायः॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ गुपू रक्षणे, धूप सन्ताचे, विच्छ गतो, पण व्यवहारे स्तुती च, पन च, इत्येतेभ्यो धातुभ्य जाय प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
28. The affix आय comes after गुपू' to protect', धूप-to heat', fue to approach', vu to contract or praise' and 'to praise'. 
Thug गोपायति 'he protects', धूपायति he heats' soalso, पिशायति, पणायति, and पनायति. 
The verb being read along with a 'to praise' has here the sense of praise only ; 80 that the affix does not come after the verb when it means 
to make a contract'3; as शवस्य पणते, सहस्स्य पणते. 
The verb in viu do not take Atmanepada affixes, as there is no indi-7 catory letter to show that. 
ऋतेरीयन् ॥ २० ॥ पदानि ॥ ऋतेः, ईयङ॥ ईन्तिः ॥ अतिः चीजो धाव खायां वर्च ते वावडू प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
RE - GOVE. 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
NISTRY OF 
NT OF INDIA 
MINIS 
ATA, &C. 
BK. III. CH. I. $120.3.2 
7 278517 
29. The affix t comes after the sûtra root fe to reproach'. 
The indicatory shows that the verb will take the affixes of the Atmanepada; as wataa he pities or reproaches'; so also, satarâ, ága. 
FIE 11 30 1 ugrfe ,fus वृत्तिः ॥ कमेर्धातोर्णिक् प्रत्ययो भवति॥ 
30. The affix fre comes after the root 'to desire, 
The indicates vriddhi (VII. 2. 115) and shows Atmanepada; as, कामयते'he desires'; so also कामयेते and कामयन्ते. 
pratęU Agu ar sugarfaru TTT-17:, - wa, at, (:) 11 
fe: « SICH a sugagafaa TUTAITTET: EITT UT afra. 
31. The affixes sis and those that follow it, (i e., stre, 78 and fue) are optionally added, when it is desired to express one's self with an ardhaduậtuka affix. 
Thus ar 3rd sings of the Future is an ardhadhâtuka affix. It is optional to retain the dya of gopdya before this a flix. So we have trafuar or गोता. he will proteet', So also अर्तिता or शुतीयिता; कगिता or कामथिता. 
But for this sûtra, the affixes Tu, &c., would have come always even when &rdhadhâtuka affixes were to be applied. This makes it optionale Therefore proper ardhadhâtuka affixes should be applied when we retain sa &c. and when we do not rebain them. Thus the ardhad bâtuka FET (111. 3. 95) will be employed in forming the fenimine noun from the simple roob, but the Ordhadhâtuka 3 (III. 3 102 ) will, be employed in forming the feminine when a &c. are retained. Thus urea: or irrat. 
1JFAT yaa: 137 # afer il 9-ff- , धातवः ॥ 
T 
ara: TIETOT W wafa 
32. All the words ending with the affixes i and others are called Dhâtu. 
This extends the sphere of Dhatu or roots already defined in stra 1. 8. 1. These roots may be called derivative root. They are separate independent roots, and have all the functions of a root, as taking tense-alli xes &to, as shown in the abovoxamples. Thus f uf' to wish to do', i to 
ARE 
GOVE 
RY OF CULTO 
ERNMENT OF 
. MINISTRY 
OF INDIA 
Ul) CH. I. $ 33-35.] 
SYA AND TASI. 
सत्यमवाजयते 
सरकार 
cause to do'; क्रिय'to do repeatedly' are separate roots and nob the same as 'to do' and thus take vy &c. 
स्थतासी लुलुटोः ॥ ३३ ॥ पदानि ॥ स्य-शासी, ल-लुटी, (धातोः)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ लरुपमुत्सृष्टानुबन्ध सामान्य मेकलेव तस्मिन् सुटिच परतो धातोर्यथासंख्य स्यतासी प्रत्ययो भवतः॥ 
33. When and gf follow, then fu and arfe are res pectively the affixes of a verbal root. 
is the common expression for 7 and Te formed by reject ing their special anubandhas, and means therefore the 2nd Future and the Conditional tenses ug is the 1st Future also called the Periphrastic Future. Thus frafa wafua, mal. The w of atfe is indicatory and shows that the nasal of the roob is not to be dropped before this; as पन् 'to think', सन्ता the will think.' 
सिर्बहुलं लेडि॥३४॥ पदानि ॥सिप, बहुलम्, लेटि,(धातोः) बुतिः ॥ धातोः सिप् प्रत्ययो सति बहुलं लेडि परत ॥ 
34. fag is diversely the affix of a verbal root when me follows. 
The tense called æg or subjunctive is found in the Vedas only. When the subjunctive tense is employed, the affix for is diversely added. 
Thus जोषिषत, वारिषत्, भन्दिषत् Sometimes this augment is not employed; thus warfa faatavi sarwarfa. Thus in Rig Veda I. 1 2, qufa is an example of लेट् with सिप्॥ 
कासमत्ययादाममन्ने लिटि॥३५॥ पदानि ॥कास-प्रत्ययाद्, भास्, भमन्त्रे, लिटि, (प्रत्ययः, धातोः)॥ 
त्तिः ॥ काल शब्द पुत्सायां, ततः प्रत्ययान्तेभ्यश्च धातुभ्य सार प्रत्ययो भवति विटि परत्योमात्र विषये ॥ 
वार्मिकम् ॥ कास्यनेका ति बसाव्य जुलुम्पाद्यर्थम् ॥ 
35. जाम् is the affix of the verb कास् 'to cough, and of those roots that are formed by affixes (i, e, the derivative verbs), when fat follows, except in the Mantra. 
This forme the Periphrastic Perfect. The Perfect of me will be कासा, after which the terminations of the Perfecb are all elided (II. 4.81) and instead, the perfect tense of the auxiliary verb y or ory is added. As कामांचके' he coughed'चोरयामा he stoleso also लोयांचो 
RE 
GOVES 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
UT OF INDIA 
Ax. 
BE, III. CH. I, 
86-88 
सत्यमेव जयते 
तमंचान्य 
सरकार 
This rule, however, does not apply to the Vedas; as कृष्णो नोनाव Rig Veda I, 79.2 
Vart :- This rule also applies where the root is polysyllabic consisting of more than one vowel; as चुलुस्पाऊचकार, दरिद्राचार॥ 
The final of 17 is not indicatory, 
इजादेश्च गुरुमतोऽनच्छः ॥ ३६ ॥ पदानि ॥ इच-यादेः, च, गुरुमतः, अनच्छः, (लिटि, माम् )॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ इजादियो धातुर्गुरुमान् अच्छतिबर्जिवस्तस्माञ्च लिटि परतः साम्प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ बार्तिकम् ॥ ऊतिर प्रतिषेधो वताव्य: ॥ 
36. The affix ay is used when faz follows, after a root beginning with a letter of u pratyahâra and having a heavy vowel, excepting the root sa 'to go'. 
Thus ईह 'to try',ईहां चक्र be tried'; 60 also जहाचक्रे ' he guessed', 'सधाचन "he grieved'. 
But I forms आमच्छ 'he failed or went'. This applies to momo syllabic roots which begin with any vowel prosodially long, except w or sar. The verb करो' to cover is, however, an exception; its perfect is जणुनाव' he covered'. 
Why do we say ' beginning with or any vowel except or s'? Observe अर्द, Perfect भामर्द (VII, 4.71). Why do we say ' heavy vowel' ? Observe उस्, Perf. उवोख (VI. 4. 78) जख तुः, ऊखु Why do we say vowel' ? Observe कुर्द, Perf. चुकुर्दै ; सूद, Perf. सुशदे। 
दयायासश्च ॥३७॥ पदानि ॥ दय-श्रय-मासः, च, (लिटि, माम् ॥ 
इतिः ॥दय दानतिर पोषु, शय गती, शास उपवेशने, एतेभ्यश्च लिटि परत: शाप्रत्यया भवति॥ 
37. After the verbs दय 'to.give', togo' and प्रास' to protect', 'to go', and ult, to sit', there is the affix me, when लिट् follows. 
Thus Targ he gave'; varias he ran away'; righ he sat'. 
उपविदजागृभ्यो मकरस्याम् ॥ ३८ ॥ पदामि ॥ उष-विद जागृभ्यः, शन्यतरस्याम् (श्राम, प्रत्ययः, लिटि)॥ 
तिः॥ उप पाहे, विदवाने, जानिहायचे, एवेभयो सिटि परतोऽन्यतरस्याचा प्रत्ययो 
38. The affisse is optionally employed after these, to burn', forry to know, and wito wake', when fue 
vic: follows. 
GOVERNME 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
OF INDIA 
SI 
BR. 11. CH. I. § 39-41.) 
AN OPTIONAL. 
Thus सोपाञ्चकार or उपोष, विदाजचकार.or विवेद, जागराञ्चकार Or जजागाAS there is an agreement in the present instance to regard the verb fac as ending in a short u, guna is not substituted, as it would otherwise have been by rule VII. 3.86. 
भीही हुवां श्लुबच्च ॥३६॥ पदामि ॥भी-ही-भू-हुबा, ग्लुवत, च, (धाम, लिटि, मन्यतरस्याम् )॥ 
वृन्तिः ॥ जिभी भये ही लज्जायार, डुकृञ् धारणपोषणयोः, दानादानये, एतेन्या लिटि परतः साम्प्रत्ययो भवत्वन्यतरस्यास, लाविव चास्मिन्काय भवति ॥ 
39. शाम् is optionally affixed, when लिट् follows, after these verbs भी to fear,' ही to be ashamed', 'to nour ish' हु' to sacrifice'; and when पास is affixed, the effect is as if there were ty elision and the roots belonged to Hvadi class. 
The effect of yy is to cause reduplication by rule VI. 1. 10. As विभयाच्कार विभाय, जिए याञ्चकार or जिहाय, बिमराञ्चकार or बभार, गुहवाञ्चकार or शुहाव. 
कृञ्चानुप्रयुज्यते लिटि॥४॥पदानि ॥कृज,च, अनुप्रयुज्यते,लिटि। 
वृत्तिः ॥ भान्प्रत्ययस्य पश्चात्कृजनुप्रयुज्यते लिटि परतः, कृिित प्रत्याहारेण कृवस्तया शुमान्त वत्सामा दस्ते भावो न भवति ॥ 
40. After a verb which ends with it, the verb 'to do' is annexed, when the follows. 
After the above verbs formed by taking the augment are the per fect tense of is added to form their Perfect. This has already been illustrated in the above examples. The word includes also the verbs and str. All these three may be used as auxiliaries. The verb 7 when used as an auxiliary, is not replaced by भू (III.4.52) before the लिट् affixes which are Ardhadhauka affixes. Thus पाचयाचकार, पाचयाम्बभूब, पापयामास. 
विदाङकुर्वन्त्वित्यन्यतरस्याम्॥४॥ पदाणि॥ विदाङकुर्वन्तु,। इति, श्रन्यतरस्याम् ॥ 
वृत्तिः॥विदांकुन्त्वित्येतदन्यतरस्याम पिपास्यते ॥ 
41. The form factura is optionally emploved as a irregular form. 
This irregular form is obtained by adding the affix sing to the root fox' to know,' when followed by its or the Imperative tense; the tenac affixes of site are then clided by luto; moreover there is no substitution of gui 
URE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
CALI. 
[BK. III. CH. I. 92.43 
TEST 
17 
as required by VII. 3. 86; and when we have thus obtained the form fare, we annex to it the ate of the verb ; thus we have fagregard or fuerg let them know.' The third person plural is not only intended to be spoken of by the employment of the form fatigat in the aphorism; on the contrary, the word afa shows that all the numbers and persons of the Imperative may be so employed; as factgeta facigratt &c. 
नभ्युस्सादयांमजनयांचिकयांरमयामकः पावयां क्रियाद्विदाम faff Il y nacifer il syarat-909919- 
f319 Turqi, eragift-fugt , fa, çf, (FTATETUI 
fe: wyrattatiaia: fe faci segategi faceva u 
42. The forms *TETETTY: TUTT* fa : wavifaung fu are irregularly formed in the Chhandas. 
The first two of these and the fourth are the Aorists (12) of the causatives of the roots to sit' u 'to be born', and < 'to sport": to which the afflix sue is added. The third is the Aorist of the root foto collect', to which are has been added after the reduplication and the change of 
into of the root. The auxiliary ses is added to all these four. The fifth is derived from the rooby to blow, to purify, by adding the causative affix fere, annexing the affix ure before the terminations of the Potential (fey) and then using after the form so obtained, the auxiliary fonata. The last is the Aorist of fag' to know, to which is added and the auxiliary may is em ployed. These are the archaic forms; their modern forms are as follow : 
to, aru , eta, vert, Tate, garags ! 
fogfen zu ucifa n fea, gfs, (arat, au:) * fa wat: Feu art wafa yigua: 
48. When we follows, the affix fou is added to the verbal root 
The r of fee is for the sake of articulation, the sis for the sake of accent (VI. I. 162.) showing that an affix which has an indicatory has udatta on its final. Then remains only for which after all, is to be replaced by othor affixes, as we shall show below. In fact feet in the common name for all Aorist affixes, 
for 8 for it , for fue funt refu eru e ne faut : D 
s URE - Gov 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
BIRHUNII. CH, I.544-46] 
SUBSTITUTION OF CHLI, 
सत्ववाजयते 
मालयभारत 
सरकार 
44. Of fea, far is the substitute. 
They offer is for the sake of pronunciation, the is for accept, and the real affix is ; as iffa he did'. When fuu is added, the termine tions of the Aorist assume the following forms: - 
Parasmaipada. 
Atmanepada sing dual plural sing. dual plural. ish pers, स्व स्म 
स्वहि महि 2nd p rs. सी. स्तं, तं स्त, त स्थाः , था: शायर्या 3rd pers शीत स्ता, ताः 
स्त,त 
साता The substitution of fun is optional in the Aorist of the roots to touch', 'to rub', कृष् 'to plough', तुप to become satisfied', and दृप 10 light'. Thus the Aorist of gu has three forms; seteta, seurata or sey T. Similarly वृश् has प्रजाक्षीत, अमाहीत or अमृत कृष, जकार्षीत बाधीत or कृषत् ; तुप, अताशीत, नासीत, or तृपत हप, अद्राचीत, अदापर्णात् or अद्वपत् । 
शल इगुपधादनिटः क्सः॥४५॥ पदानि ॥ शलः, इग-उपधात, अगिटः, कसः, (च्ले, लुङि)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ शलन्तो यो धातुरिगुपधस्तस्मात् परस्य उलेरनिटः, यसमादेशो भवति ॥ 
45. After a verb that ends in a tu consonant, and bas an a vowel for its penultimate letter, and does not take a (VII.2.10).क्स is the substitute of फिल. 
The forms of the terminations of the Aorist with ## are as follows: SParasmaipada. 
Atmanepada. sing. dual plural sing. dual plural ist pers. सं साव 
सार 
सीवहि-सीमहि 2nd pers लतं 
सुथा, था: साया सध्याग, ध्वर 3rd pers सत्ता 
सत, 
त साता सन्त As, and कुष in the last sutra have their Aorist with साक्षात् and अकृषत् 0 दुह 'to milk forms अधशत he milked, लिहु to lick' अतिशत, 
Why do we day when ending in 7, 4, 5, and t'? Observe ta, 
were 1918 emloyed. Why do we say 'having for its penultimate , 3, or ? Observe out. Why do we say not having an intermediate T? Observe sarta and rata. See VII. 2. 4. and VIII. 2. 28. 
शिष शालिंगने ॥४६॥पदानि ॥ श्लिषः, आलिङ्गने, (च्ले पासः)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ शिलषेर्धातोरालिकामक्रियावचनात् परस्यले परमादेशो भवति ॥ 
46. * is the substitute of five after the verb ere, when it is employed in tho sense of embracing, 
UREGOV 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
NWENT OF A 
F INDIA 
SUBSTITUTION OF CHLI. 
[BK. III. CL. I.SATED 
सरवमयाजयते 
जसरकार 
This is a restrictive aphorism. As TTEET TUTT'he embraced the girl'. Bub समाश्लिषज्जतुकास् - the glue joined the wood'. 
न दृशः॥४७॥ पदानि ॥न, दृशः, (ब्ले, कसः)॥ वृत्तिः॥ मोर्धातोः परस्य लेक्सादेशो न भवति ॥ 
47. * is not the substitute of fat after the verb इश् 'to see'. 
This is an exception to the sâtra III. I. 45. enjoining . The root u will form its Aorists by III. I. 57. and will take she and fuv; as sua or अनापीत 'he saw'. 
णिभिदुस्तुभ्यः कर्तरि चङ् ॥ ४॥ पदानि ॥णि-नि-द-स्नुभ्यः, कतरि, चड़, (च्ले, लुङि)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ यन्तेभ्यो धातुभ्यः निगुतुइपयेतेभ्यश्च परस्य च्लेश्चङादेशो भवति कर्तृवाचिनि तुति परतः॥ 
बार्तिकम् ॥ कमेकपसंख्याणम् ॥ 
48. After a root which ends in fr (III. 1. 20, 21, 44, &c.) and after the verb for to serve', 'to run', and to drop', we is the substitute of fua when y follows signifying an agent. 
The prevents guna and vriddhi and is to distinguish it from s . When is added there is reduplication (VI. I. II) The usual terminations of the Imperfect are employed after the root, when is used; as s ua 
he caused to make', uffage he served or went'; 19397 he ran '; 
w a Hit flowed', This form is not used in Passive; as, कार्यायवातास्. 
The root to love should also be included in this rule. Er when it takes the affix fore(III. 1. 30) will of course be included in this sûtra, by virtue of its ending in fer; the Vartóka makes the additional statement that even when the root does not take the affix fire, the present aphorism musb apply to it. Thus we have a he loved when it takes for the Aorisb will be चीकमत (VII. 4.93,79,94.) 
विभाषा थेटरव्योः ॥४९॥ पदानि ॥ विभाषा, धेट-शव्योः, (उले, चङ, कर्तरि, लुङि)॥ 
युतिः॥ घेट् पाने, दुशोभिव गतिएडयो, रताभ्यानुत्तरस्य तेर्विभाषा पढादेशो पर्वाता 
49. After the roots to suck', and fra to grow.?. w is optionally the substitute of fra, when y follows signifying an agent. 
URE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
Pinus. III. CH. I. $ 50-52] 
SUBSTITUTION OF CHLI. 
TO 
15173 
> As, que he eucked.' When it takes the alteroative few, then rule II. 4. 78. comes into operation, and we have ata and eta be sucked'. So also of fra, we have sfumaat 'he grew'. It also takes the se. (III. I. 58) and then its form is wat or guat. 
Tagfal yoll gefa uyu, refe, (sa:, T, fastat, auft, gre ) 
वृत्तिः ॥ गुपेः परस्य च्लेच्छन्दरि विषये विभाषा घडादेयो भवति । 
50. After the verb 'to protect', yz is optionally the substitute of fear in the Chhandas. 
This rule applies where the root go does not take the affix site (II. I. 28). As 4975 i 27agut a TETT UTH ' Mitra Varuna protected these our houses, The other froms are sীয়স্থ, ড্রীঘি or জীঘভি In the secular literature, the latter three forms are used, but not the first. 
itaufacaayacagafaxt: nygu agitaru, wafa suwafa-Teufafafaxa:,( :, aft, gref) 
: o afga, tan yte, , wę tat apa, ta ut ad शयन्तेभ्यः सर्वेश खेति प्राप्त छन्दरि विषये न भवति॥ 
51. After the causatives of the verbs to de crease,' van 'to sound', a'to send', and to go or to beg', 
is not the substitute of fear in the Chhandas. 
Thus we have gaat: in the Vedas; zifra in the classical literature, so also ध्वनयीत्, ऐशयी: and अर्दयीत ; their classical forms being अदिध्वनत, रेशिलत, and fee. See Rig Veda I. 53, 3, 1. 162. 15. and Panini VII 2. 5. 
wafaaruifa zÈTE II YR 1 ugift il serie-af surfait, 75, (5m:, aft, afc ) 1 
gia: usag , a sftatuta, asraut , at maa, suutut u, 4 স্বয়ে হয় ফানি জ্বলু এম্মিলি লুক্তি অবলেঃ ॥ 
52. After the verbs 597 to throw, to speak', and tur to speak', is the substitute of foa, when we follows signifying the agent. 
at may be either the root, or the substitute of 1 (II. 4, 58 ) and so also cut may be the root, or the substitute of T ( II. 4. 54.). The root or belonging to the fearfe or the Fourth conjugation, falls under the sub-division guife, and therefore it would have taken we in the Parnsmaipada 
CRNMENT OF 
av OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
OF INDIA 
SUBSTITUTION OF CALI 
[BE. III CH. I. 
सरकार 
by rule III. 1. 55. The repetition is to indicate that it takes se in the Atmanepada also ; as wateua VII. 4. 17), wat and stead. In the Passive, we have पर्यासिषासा 
लिपिसिचिहवश्च ॥ ५३ ॥ पदानि ॥ लिपि-खिचि-हवः,च, (ब्लोः, अड़, कर्तरि, लडि) 
हत्तिः ॥ लिप उपदेहे, सिय सणे, स्पडे यां तेभ्यश्च पदस्थ, ब्लेरडादेशो भवति। 
53. After the verbs fee to paint', fay'to sprinkle' and to call, s is the substitute of Fra when & follows signify 
ing the agent. 
Thus अलिपत् 'he painted or wrote'; असिचत् 'he sprinkled'; and भाबत he called or challenged'. 
धात्मनेपदेण्वन्यतरस्याम् ॥ ५४ ॥ पदानि ॥ प्रात्मनेपदेषु, अन्यतरस्याम्, (च्ले, भ, लिपि, सिचि, हवः)॥ 
अत्तिः लिपिसिधिमात्मनेपदेषु परतः प्लेराङदेशो मवति अन्यतरस्याम् ॥ 
54. After the verbs fet, fav and , is optionally the substitute of four when the affixes of the Atmanepada follow. 
Thus afava or sfere he painted' ; ufua or for 'he sprinkled ; जात or महारत 'he challenged'. 
पुषादिद्युतायुलदितः परस्मैपदेषु ॥ ५५ ॥ पदानि ॥ पुषादि द्युतादि-लद्-इतः, परस्मैपदेषु, (ब्लेः, अङ)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ पुपादिभ्यो दातादिभ्यः लूदिभ्यश्च धावस्या परस्य फले परस्ने पदेषु परतो बहादेवो भवति । 
55. He is the substitute of fom, after the verbs y to nourish', and the rest, 7 'to shine', and the rest, and the verbs having an indicatory y, when the affixes of the Parasmaipada follow 
The verbs elasgod as garfe, are a sub-division of the 4th conjugational verbs; and garfe, verbs belong to the 1st conjugation. As , ut he nourished', दात, अदा तत् he shond', , गमत् -he went'. Bub not so in the Atmanepada, as व्यक्षोतिह, अशोसिए 
सतिशास्त्यतिभ्यश्च ॥५६॥ पदानि॥ सर्ति-शास्ति-शर्तिभ्यः, 
रसिकागती, बाशु माथिही, पणती, इत्येतेभ्यः परत्व कोरलादेशो भवति ॥ 
URE - GOVS 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY ON 
UT OF INDIA 
1). CH, I. $ 56-58] 
SUBSTITU IION or CALI. 
371 
1931 
सत्यमेव जयते 
सरकार 
56. After the verbs 'to go', TT '10 order', and 'to go', is the substitute of four in the Parasmaipada as well as in the Atmanepada. 
Thus the went; safuta he ordered'; ga. he went'. This sà tra has been separately enunciated in order to make the rule applicable to Atma nepada; as a (1. 3. 29). They in the text is for the sake of drawing the anu vritti of the phrase 'in the Parasmaipada' of the last sû tra, into the pre sent and its anuvriti will extend to future gâtras also. 
grat at 11 49 11 uerfa II GT-CT, at, (5, 45 ) वृत्तिः ॥ इरितोधाते: परस्य च्लेरडादेशो चा भवति ॥ 
57. & is optionally the substitute of fear after that root which has an indicatory 7, when the Parasmaipada terminations are employed. 
Thus from furet (4) 'to divide', we derive share or aceta. But we have him in the Atmanepada. So from foret - et or cata. 
TEFT 
s afe ata 11 ya ui agaf 11 EFT-ET-T -5T-fgaru:, ( Fêti, 28, at ) 
त्तिः ॥ स्तम्भु चुचुम्लुचु चु ग्लुचु ग्लश शिव, एतेभ्यो धातुभ्यः परस्य चलेको सलादेशो भवति । 
58. And, optionally is the substitute of fra after the verbs w to grow old', Fiatto stiffen's and gu to go', quand 
'to steal, og' to go' and fra 'to grow', when the terminations of the Parasmaipada are emyloyed. 
Thus & or s he grew old', w or T'he stiffened'; शशुचत् or अनोचीत "he went'; अम्गुषत् or लोचीव ' he went'; अशुचत् or गोचीत 'he stole'; w u or soetata "he stole' ; aut or want he went'; STEET, wanita or safafrete 'he grew'. The roots toy and both give rise to the same three forms, viz. ; aut, Iya and meta. The use of one root would, therefore, have served the purpose. The employment of both indicates separateness of their meanings. Others say that the use of both roots indicates that in the case of 47 , the nasal is never elided. Thus the Aorist of ग्लु'च will be ग्लुचत् and अग्लुचीत. 
mugafexquacfe #ye naf ---tfel, ( , 15) 
GURE 
GOVE 
COVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
AJISININ 
NT OF INDIA 
SUBSTITUTION OF OHLI. 
[BK III CH I. S RO 
सत्यय जयते 
सरकार 
वृत्तिः ॥ कृदू बहि इत्येतेभ्य: परस्य च्ले छन्दसि विषयेऽबादेशो भवति ॥ 
59. After the verbs & 'to do', T. to dio', a to tear, and C to rise', 9 is the substitute of for wben used in the Chhandas. 
Thus अक्षरत् he did'; अमरत he died'; अदरत ' he tore'; आमहत् ' he rose'. See Rig Veda x. 85. 17, X. 44. 6. The classical Aorist of these verbs are अकाऊत, अमृत, अदारीत् and अरुक्षत. 
चिण ते पदः ॥६॥ पदानि ॥ चिण, ते, पदः, (च्ले :)॥ वृत्तिः॥ पद गती अस्माद्धातोः परस्य ब्लेशिचणादेशो भवति तशब्दे परतः ॥ 
60. fam is the substitute of fea after the verb 'to go', when the afix a follows. 
The affix a here means the third person singular tense-affix of the Abmanepada ; as पादि 'he wenb'; but not so in the dual and plural Bag शपसातार * they two went'; अपत्सत् 'they went', +पद+चिण+त +पाद्+ह=पादि (the affix a being elided by rule VI. 4. 104). 
दीपजनबुधपूरितायिप्यायिभ्योऽन्यतरस्याम् ॥ ६॥ पदानि । दीप-शाम-बुध-पूरि-सायि-प्यायिभ्यः, अन्यतरस्याम् , (ले, चिण, ते) ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ दीप जन बुध पूरि तायि प्यायि रतेभ्यः परस्य इलेस्तशब्दे परतोऽन्यतरवा चिणा था भवति ॥ 
61. f is optionally the substitute of for, when a, the third person singular of the Atmanepada follows, after the verbs दी 'toshine', जन् 'to be produced', बुथ् 'to teach or know,पुर to be full,ताय to extend or protect' and प्याय ' to smell'. 
Thus दीपि or अदीपिहhe shone; अनि or अजनिष्ट he was produced'; wife or mga 'he knew'; ufc or state' he was full'; safe or wafue 'he extend'; it or warfae 'he grew'. 
अचः कर्मकतरि॥१२॥ पदामि ॥ शचः, कर्म-पतरि, (ब्ले,ते, चिण)॥ 
वृतिः॥ आजन्ताद्धातोः परस्य च्ले कार्यशर्तरि वशब्दे परतश्चिणादेशो भवति । 
62. fer is optionally the substitute of four when a the third person singular of Atmane pada follows, after a root which ends with a vowel, and when the object itself is spoken of as the agent. 
A roflective verb is one in which the object is spoken of as the cont, Lo rofleotive verbs therefore, is employed after roots ending in 
URE • Goy 
GOVERNMEN 
RY OF CULTU. 
MINISTRY 
MENT OF INDIA 
KS II. CH. I. § 63-65.] 
PROHIBITION OF CALI. 
vovels; as अकारि कटः स्वयमेव 'the mat became made of itself. This is an optional rule (प्राप्त विभाषा). 'Therefore we have also अकृत बाटः स्वयमेव ; similarly 
Tanfo or safar Ero: fatha 'the embankment broke of itself. 
But in verbs other than those that end in vowels, i.e., in those which end with a consonant, the fat ie obligatory in the reflective voice, and not optional; ag sefe F197 EUITÀ 'the wood split of itself.' So also in verbs other than reflexives ; as अकारि बडो देवरतेन. 
दुहश्च ॥६३ ॥ पदानि ।। दुहः, च, (ब्ले, चिण, अन्यत्तरस्याम्, कर्म-कर्तरि) ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ दुह प्रपूरणे, अस्मात्परस्य च्लेश्चिणादेशो मति अन्यतरस्यार ॥ 
63 faT is optionally the substitute of fear after the verb c 'to milk', when it is used reflexively, and when a follows. 
Thus were or suga it: rauha 'the cow milked of itself. In verbe other than reflexive, the fat is compulsory, e. g., weife mafia the cow was milked by the cowherd'. 
नरुधः ॥ ६४॥ पदानि ॥ न, रुधः, (ले, चिण , वार्म-कर्तरि)। वृत्तिः ॥ रुधिर् लावरो, यस्मात्परत्व चले पार्मकर्तरि चिणादेशो न भवति॥ 
66. far is not the substitute of fea, after the verb es to obstruct', when used in the reflexive sense in the third person singular of the Atmanepada, 
Thus अन्धवाद्ध गौ स्वयमेव ' the cow was obstructed of itself. In verbs other than reflexive, चिण is employed, e.g., अन्धवारोधि गौगोपालकेन. 
सपोग्नुतापे च ॥६५॥ पदानि ॥ तपः, अनुतापे, च, (न, ब्ले, चिण, कर्म-पातरि) 
वृत्तिः॥ तप सन्तापे, अस्मात्परस्य च्लेशिषणादेशो न भवति कर्मकर्तरि अगुवाच॥ 
65. fo is not the substitute of fem after the verb an to suffer, when used reflexively, and when the sense is that of experiencing remorse. 
This prohibition applies even to the passive and impersonal voices of the verb at; as a ATEST: 'the ascetic performed austerity', waar कर्मणा'he repented from evil deeds.in 
चिण भावकर्मणोः ॥ ६६ ॥ पदानि ॥ चिण , भाव-कर्मणोः, (लेः, चिण, ते) 
TURE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
INISTRY OF 
NT OF INDIA 
YAK, SAP AND SYAN. 
BK III. CH. T. $ 66 
वृत्तिः ॥ धातोः परस्य चरिचणादेशो भवति भावे कर्मरि तश परतः॥ 
66. fe is the substitute of for when of the third person singular Atmanepada follows, denoting the action (72) or the object w*. 
A verb is said to denote an action when it is used impersonally, and it is said to denote an object when used in the Passive sense. As of vaat 
it was lain by you, i. e., you lay', varfe set each the mat was made by Devadatta'. The repetition of for here is for the sake of distinctness. 
Traure a 11€9119&tfall avarga 75, (+180-w : 10 वृत्तिः ॥ भावधर्मवाचिनि सार्वधातुओं परतो धातोर्यक प्रत्ययो भवति॥ 
67. The affix e comes after a root, when a UTC (III. 4. 113) follows, denoting the action or the object 
In forming Impersonal and Passive verbs, this affix is employed in the conjugational tenses. Thus in Impersonal verbs yeua wear you sit', wra भवता 'you lie'. So in passive verbs ; as क्रियते कट: and गम्यते ग्रामःThe n of एक is sorvile, and prevents guņa and vriddbi. This affis is also used in reflective voice (w****eft); as fua me: tua' the mat becomes made of itself 
ftarangan u nft, a, (ataugh, wreit:) of u arrefer gå urat satz ve saat wafa u 
68. The affix e comes after a root, when a staigh follows, signifying the agent. 
In active voice, is employed in the conjugational tenses. This aftix, which is technically called a fare comes after roots of the class and after compound roots formed by &c. (III 1. 32). The indicatory makes it a 
Teg aflix by III. 4. 113, the indicates that the vowel has anudatta ac cent (III. 1.4). As + 9+faq= +=+fa=t+3+ fa= fa. (VII. 3. 84). So also werfer 
fearferu: 497 ugerfor ul fa-tfct, 19, ( Taura, *ft,) 
गतिः॥दिय इत्येवमादिभयो धातुभ्यः जवर प्रत्ययो भवति । 
69. The affix w comes after a root of the Divadi olans, when a sarvadhatuka affix denoting the agent follows. 
This debarg . The ser vile # of zo is for the sake of accent (VI. 1. 197), showing that the udati accent falls on the radical verb and not on the affix and the indicabory w makes the affix sarvadhatuka; as fac t 
ARE 
GOVED 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
1,"CH. I. $ 70-73] 
SYAN AND SNU. 
मतमंत्रालय 
सिप् = दीव+य+ति (VII. 277)-दीव्यति; so also तीव्यति. The Divade verbs 
belong to the Fourth conjugation. 
या भाशमलाशभू मुक्रमुल्लमुत्रसित्रु टिराषः ॥ ७० ॥ पदानि ॥वा, भाश-भालश-भमु क्रमु-कम-अखि-त्रु टि-कापः, ( सर्वधातुके, कर्तरि, श्यन् ) ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ नाथ लाश धनु क्रनु लाजु अति त्रुटि लष रतेन्यो वा श्यन् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
70. The affix श्यन् is optionally employed in the active voice after the following verbs ; माश् 'to shine', भ्ला 'to shine', अर ' to whirl' नस् 'to walk', सर to be sad', अस् 'to fear', त्रुट "to cut' and लष ' todesire'. 
Thus प्राशते or भ्राश्यते he shines ; भलाशते or भलाश्यते 'be shines'; अति or भापति ' he whirls'; कामति or काम्यति ' he walks'; लापति or लाम्यति he is sed'. So also नस्यति or प्रति ; त्रुट्यति or चुटति; लज्यति or लपति. 
यसोऽगुपसर्गात् ॥ ११ ॥ पदानि ॥ यसः, अनुपसर्गात, (श्यन्, वा, सार्बधातुके, पारीरि ) ॥ 
वृत्तिः॥ यशोऽनुपसर्गाहा शयन् प्रत्ययो भवति 
71. The affix श्यन् is optionally employed after the verb pe to strive', when it is employed, without a pre position, and when a sarvadhâtuka affix denoting an agent, follows. 
Thus trenia or uefa'he strives". But no option is allowed in sareefa, प्रयस्यति. The root यस् belongs to the Divadi.class. 
संयसश्च ॥ ७२ ।। पदानि ॥ सं-वसः, च, (श्यन, वा)॥॥ वृत्तिः ॥ संपूर्वाच्च बसेर्वा श्यन् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
72. The affix is optionally employed after the root यस् 'to strive', when it is preceded by the preposi tion , and when a sârvadha tuka affis denoting an agent, follows. 
Thus सन्यस्यति or सन्यसति ' he strives'. 
खानिभ्यः शनुः ॥७३॥ पदानि ॥ सु-सादिभ्यः, शूनुः, (पार्वधातुके कर्तरि)॥ 
एतिः ॥शमिषदे इत्येवमादिभ्यो धातुभ्यः नुप्रत्ययो भवति॥ 
73. The affix 3 comes after the roots of Svadi class when a sarvadhâtuka affix denoting an agent, follows. 
ARE • Gov 
GOVERNMEN 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
OF INDIA 
स्कृति मंत्रान 
SNU, SA AND SN AME 
[BK. III.CH, IS44 
This debars सप. As सु+श्नु+तिप-सु-++ति सुनोति 'he presses out', These are roots of the Fifth class. 
वः श च ॥ १४॥ पदानि ॥ श्रुवः, श, च, (ः )॥ वृत्तिः ॥ अवः गुप्रत्ययो भवति तत्सन्नियोगेन भुवः गृ इत्ययमादेशो भवति । 
74. And I is the substitute of , and there is the affix u after it, when a sârvadhâtuka affix denoting an agent, follows. 
Thus +3+ fav=T+5+ fa=ruitfahe hears'; Tya: 'they two hear'. 
अक्षोऽन्यतरस्याम् ॥७॥पदानि॥ अक्षः, अन्यतरस्याम्, (शनुः)॥ एत्तिः ॥ शशू व्याप्ती भावादिक अस्मादन्यतरस्यां प्रत्ययो भवति । 
75. The affix ग्नु is optionally employed after the root sure to pervade', when a sârvadhâtuka affix denoting an agent, follows. 
Thus startfa or yufa'he pervades or obtains'. 
सनूपारणे तक्षः ॥ ६ ॥ पदानि ॥ तनू-करो-तक्षः, (अन्यतरस्या, 
त्तिः ॥ तत्वपू तनुकरणे, अस्मात्तनू कररी वत्त मानादन्यतरल्यां रनु प्रत्यया भवति ॥ 
76. The affix y is optionally employed after the root auto bore or hew' when a sârvadhatuka affix denoting an agent, follows. 
Thus तक्षति or तक्षणोति काट he hews the wood'. But सन्तपति बाविभः 'he outs with speech'. 
तुदादिभ्यः शः ॥ 99 ॥ पदानि ॥ तुद-श्रादिभ्यः, शः ।। वृत्तिः॥तुद बधने, इत्येवमादिभ्यो धाटुभ्यः अप्रत्ययो भवति॥ 
77. The affix is employed after the roots of the Tudâdi class, in denoting the agent when a sarvadhatuka affix [follows. 
This debars . The indicatory w makes this afix a sârvadhataka aflix. A + +तिद + +ति-तुदति (1.2.4)-he pains or torments'. 
रुधादिभ्यः मम् ॥ 9 ॥ पदानि ॥ रुथ-शादिभ्यः, भम् ।। पतिः ॥ धिर शावरण, इत्येवमादिभ्यो धातुभ्यो इनस् प्रत्ययो भवति॥ 
78. The affix comes after the roots of the Rudhadi class, in denoting an agent when a sarvadhatuka affix follows. TRY OF CULT 
MINISTRY 
ERNMENT OF 
SII, CA. I. $ 79-81.] 
U, A AND SNA. 
साधनय जयते 
This debars 4. Ths indicatory of the affix 77 shows that the affix is to be placed after the last vowel of the root; see sâtra I. 1. 47. AB 
+29+fa=T +7+ fa=+++ +fa= fs 'he obstructs'. So algo for 'he splits'. The indictory v is for the sake of sâtra VI. 4. 23. 
Garff size 3: 11 94 ll açıra 11 47-9f4-75EU:, : वृत्तिः ॥ तनु विस्तारे, इत्येवमादिभ्यो धातुभ्यः कृजश्च उप्रत्ययो भवति॥ 
79. The affix comes after the roots of the Tanâ di class and after the verb 'to make' when a sârvadhâtuk affix follows, signifying the agent. 
This debars ar. As +5+ fa=anita 'he expands'; +5+ fa=: ettfa' he makes'. Though the roots is included in the list of the Tanâdi verbs, for which see Dhâtupâtha, yet its separate enunciation in the present sûtra is for the sake of making & restrictive rule with regard to this verb; that is to say, the root is a Tanâdi root only for the purposes of taking the affix 3; all the other operations of Tanâdi verbs are not to be performed upon it. Thus the rule II. 4. 79. does not apply to . Thus a and ; the fay elision being compulsory and not optional. 
formandent II II ucifer un foru-storiti, s, 
वृत्तिः ॥ हिवि घिवि जिवि प्रीणनाया कधि हिंसाकरणयोः इत्येतयो त्वाकप्रत्ययो भवत्यकारश्चान्तादेशः ॥ 
80. The affix - comes after the roots fofas 10 please', and gira sto hurt' when a sârvadhâtuka afis denoting the agent follows; and in these verbs is the substitute of the final s. 
The root fura or fufra belongs to the Bhuâdi ciass. Thus fua+ fanft+ + + fa=f4+5+ fa (VI. 4. 48 ) = fatfa he pleases, It might be asked, why there is no gura of the of fut by rule VII. 3. 86 which requlres the base to be gunated before a sarvadhâtuka or an ardha dhatoka affix. The answer is to be found in sûtra 1. 1. 57; the substitute of which is a blank, is iike the former occupant (sthanivat ), and thus prevent guna 
muttgry: AT 1 C 1 Ugira nant-tfg+ , AT वृत्तिः ॥ दुली हव्यविनिमये इत्येवमादिभ्यो धातुभ्यः नाप्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
81. The affix TT comes after the roots of the Kryâdi class when a sârvadhâtuka affix follows denoting the agent. 
QY OF CULTUS 
CRNMENT OF 
181 SINIW 
OF INDIA 
Ninetri 
THE DENOMINATIVES.. 
[BK. III. CH. 1.882 
नाजय भारत 
This debars . As at +- tar+fas=situfa 'he buys'. So also afa 'he pleases'. 
स्तम्भुखुम्भुस्शम्भुस्कुम्भुस्कुजन्यः शुश्च ॥ २ ॥ पदानि ॥ स्तम्भु-स्तम्भु-स्कम्भु-स्कुम्भु-स्कुजभ्यः, नुः, च, (ना)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ स्तम्भु स्तुभुस्कम्भुस्कुन्भु स्कुण् एतेभ्यः शनाप्रत्ययो भवति नुश्च ॥ 
82. And there is the affix ना after स्तंभ, स्तुभ, कुम्भ or €9** to hinder', 'to be dull or insensible' 'to support', and es 
to go by leaps', as well as the affix 73, when a sârvadhâtuka afix follows, in denoting the agent 
A स्तनाति or स्तभ्मोति, स्तुभ्नावि or स्तुभ्नोति, स्कम्नाति or स्कमोति, स्कुनाति or aguafa, esarfa or gatra. The first four of these roots are not found in the Dhâtupatha and are to be found in the sûtras, and hence called Saîtra roots. 
हणाभःश नज्झी ॥३॥ पदानि ॥ हलः, नः, शानच है। ॥ त्तिः ॥ इल उतरस्य शनाप्रत्ययस्य धानजादेशो भवति है। परतः ॥ 
83. The affix शानच is the substitute of ना after a root ending with a consonant, when fr follows. 
The affix fe is the 2nd person singular of arte or the Imperative mood. Thus पुषाण' do thou nourish', गृहाण do thou take', from roots पुष, and ग्रह which end with consonants, But we have staffe' do thou buy'; here there is no substi qution of t, because the root ends with a vowel. The repetition of in the suura shows that is a mere substitute and not an independent affis. 
छन्दसि शायपि ॥ ४॥ पदानि ॥छन्दमि, शायच, शपि, (हलाः शानच हो) 
वृत्तिः ॥ सन्दसि विषये शमः शायजादेश भति शानपि । 
84. In the Chhandas, 4794 is also the substi tute of after roots ending in consonants, when fr follows. 
Thus माथ जिहव्या मधु. (Rig Veda VIII. 175.) The affix शाग is also omployed as बधान पशुन् kill the beasts', 
व्यत्ययो बहुलम् ॥८५॥ पदानि ॥ व्यत्ययः, बहुलम् । (इन्दसि, शधादयः)। 
तिः॥ यमाययं विकरणा: शादयो विहितास्तेषां छन्दति विषये बहुलं व्यत्ययो भवति॥ 
85. In the Chhandas there is diversely an intorohanga of the various vikaraans and the rest 
TURE • GON 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY OF 
VERNMENT O 
DA 111. CH. 1. $ 86.] 
AN. 
सत्यमय जयत 
which have been previously ordained under special circum. stances. 
The word sett means transgression of the fixed rule, or inter change, taking of two vikaraņas at a time, and so on. Thus afa=f* + + 
fa) instead of fafar from the root feto split', belonging to the Rudhâdi class; e. g. J ET SITTETfacra (Rig. VIII. 40.11) 'He (Indra) breaks the eggs (childe ren) of Shushma'; so also, acutata ofer: (Rig. X. 86. 11); here there is ata=(1+ 14+ a) instead of faca; the root belonging to the Tudâdi class. So also there are two vikaraņas at one and the same time, in the following. T T 
May Indra lead by this abode'; here there is a 3rd. per. sing. of the Imperative are of the roof to lead'; there are two vikaranas far andre instead of wag = + TT+7); ay goatda TT (Rig. VII. 48. 1). The word a (+5+ fag+T+) is the 1st per sing. of the Optative (fan) of the root g, the classical form being act or atatea 'may we cross'. 
In the Vedic literature we have many apparent irregularities with re gard to the rules of declension of nouns, conjugation of verbs, application of Parasmaipada or Atminepada affixes; rules of gender, person or tense, rules of interchange of consonants, or of vowels, rules of accent, rules relating to 
e and afga affixes and rules relating to the affices included in the pratyd. hâra 7 (III. I. 22 to III. I. 86). 
o sufcue cell agtfor a fefs, sufarfa, 75, 
afat: surfufa faca o fac aferazarafe feruise water wafa e atau gatama! 
86. The affix is employed in the Chhandas when the affixes cf the Benedictive (s ) follow. 
This debars ry. The affixes of the Benedictive are ardhadhatuka by III. 4. 116; but in the Vedas they are sârvadhâtuka as well, soe Rule III. 4. 117. The scope of the present rule is confined to the Benedictive of the verbs 41, TT, , ayat, 7 and st; as sut; stagia; taat , 7751 
ame ; faaaaa #wfe sagt; uitsatiaau ; cast starta. 
The affix sio is employed in the Chhandas after the verb in the Benedictive. Had there been , it would have caused gu by rule VII. 4. 16; to prevent this, is ordained; as face gta at May I see the father and the mother'. 
marriage fa: 1 9 n grfw wa, mar, 
URE .GOV. 
OVERNMENT 
TRY OF CULT 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
REFLEXIVE AFFIX. 
[BK. III. Co. 1. $ 87, 
वृत्तिः ॥ कर्मणि क्रिया कर्म कर्मस्यया क्रियया तुल्यक्रियः कर्ता कर्मववववि 
87. The e denoting the agent, when the action affecting the agent is similar to the action which affects the object, is treated as if it were a denoting the ob ject. 
This rule applies to reflexive verbs. "This direction implies the substitution for the operations incident to a tense-affix or a denoting an agent, of all the operations, which fall to be performed when the tense-affix or 
denotes the object. Hence there shall be the affixing of T (III. I. 67) the employment of Atmanepada terminations (I. 3. 13), the substitution of fem for four (III. 1. 66), and the treatment of the word as directed in sûtra VI. 4. 62.” (Dr. Ballantyne). Thus farà i fauna 'the wood splits of itself'; var T aura' the wood splits of itself. 
When an action is participated by or affects the agent in the same way as is done by the object, the agent is treated like an object. 
When in an object, though it stands as an agent, the action is perceive ed to take place ag in an object, then that agent becomes like an object; and all grammatical rules applicable to the object apply to such an agent. 
The word wa 'like' in the sûtra signifies that the rules which apply to an agent also come into operation; thus fata sam. 
The word 'with the object' in the sâtra indicates that the tulya. kriya or similarity of action must be with the object, and not with the instru ment or the location. Thus cafefanie the sword cuts well'; here. sword' is not agent but instrument. So also 14 urat cafa'the pot cooks well" here care is a location. 
This 'larma-vad-bhava, the passive-like-construction takes place only in onses of some verbs. 
atea: a tu uerfam , a:, ***, ya, (wua, waf) 
fra Taa, sweet awafa, ea au upea SETI 
88. The agent of the verb aq 'to heat, be comes similar to the object, only when the object is the word 
itself 
Thus va a ra: the devotee performs austere devotion', but not no in a gas gues' the goldsmith heats the gold'. 
मदहस्नुनमा यचिणी ॥ ॥ पदानि ॥न, दुह-स्नु-समां, **-fra, ( if, waa) 
ORE - GOV 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY ON 
NT OF INDIA 
s 
til. CH. 1. 89-91.) 
PROHIBITION OF YAK AND CHIN. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
नय. 
मातिरकार 
वृत्तिः ॥ दुह स्नु न इत्येतेषां कर्नकर्तरि यक्षिणी कर्मबद्धावापविष्टौ न भवतः ॥ वार्तिकच ॥ यचिसो प्रतिषेधे गिन्धिनात्मनेपदा कर्मकाणाशुपसंख्यानम् ॥ 
89. The affix क (III. 1.67.) and चि (ILL. 1.62) are not employed in the reflexive voice of the verbs 'to milk, 
स्नु' to fall in drops' and नस् 'to bow.' 
The affixes et and fat are used in forming the reflexive verbs, when the action affecting the agent is similar to the action which affects the object. With regard to the root gr, the affix za is only prohibited by the present sutra ; the चिम् being optionally employed by rule III. 1.63, as दुग्धे, अदुग्ध or दोहि गीः स्वयमेव 'the cow flows or flowed of istelf प्रस्नुते ॥ प्रारूनोट गोः स्वयमेव 'the cow flows or lowed of istelf'; नमते or अन ख्त दरख: स्पयनेब the stick bends or bent of itself'. 
This prohibition of the employment of the affixes 27 and far is ex tended to the verbs that take the affix for (such as causatives &c.), to the verbs अन्य - to loosen', ग्रन्थ ' to compose' and ' to speak', and to the Atmanepadi Intransitive verbs. As कारयते it is caused to be made of itself; चीकरत - it was caused to be made of itself; ta' it loosens of itself ; fence it loosened of itself'; ग्रटनीते or अग्रधिनष्ट' it composes or composed of itself; ब्रूते and अयोचत् 'it speaks and spoke of itself'; रहते and श्रावधिष्ट मा शावक स्वयमेव. 
कुषिरजोः प्राचांश्यन्परस्मैपदं च ॥ ९ ॥ पदानि ॥ कुषि-रज्जोः, प्राचाम्, श्यन, परस्मैपदं, च, (कर्मकर्तरि)॥ 
त्तिः ॥ कुष निष्कर्षे, रज रागे, जनयॉर्धात्योः कनकरि प्राधानाचार्याशा मतेन प्रयत् प्रत्ययो भवति परस्मैपद च ॥ 
190. The affix श्यन् comes after the roots कुल् 'to pull', and रज' to colour', in the reflexive voice, according to the opinion of the Eastern Grammarians, and these verbs take the affixes of the Parasmaipada. 
Thus debars the affix i and the Abmanepada terminations. As कुख्यति पादः स्वयमेव ' the foob draws up. of itself; यति प स्वयमेव ' the cloth colours of itself. 
The phrase in the opinion of the Eastern Grammarians' shows that it is an optional rule; so that we have also the forms कुष्यते and रज्यवे. 
धातोः ॥॥ पदानि धातोः॥ 
वृत्तिः॥ धातोरित्ययमधिकारी वैदितव्यः, या तृतीयाध्यायपरिसमाप्ोर्यदित जदयममुक शिष्यानो धातोरित्येवं तदितव्यम् ।। 
91. As far as the end of the Third Book 
CURE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT O 
ev OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
OF INDIA 
VERBAL AFFIXES. 
[BK. III. CH I. S 99 
स्कृति मंत्र 
TUR 
reckoning from the present aphorism, the affixes treated of are to be understood as coming after some verbal root. 
This is an Adhikâra Sabra. All these verbal affixes are broadly divid. ed into two parts and we allies, which will be described later on, 
aatuag aaran 11 gefa n 7, Tue, ugat 447, (weit:) 
कुन्तिः ॥ सतस्मिन्धात्वधिकारे तृतीये यत्सकसी निर्दिष्टं तदुपपदसंच भवति ॥ 
92. Here in this Third Book of Grammar re ferring to verbal roots, the word implied in a term exhi bited in the locative case, is called upapada' or dependent word. 
Thus in sûtra III. 2. 1. TT the word foris exhibited in the 7th case; therefore the word implied by the word #ffu, namely, the word having the accusative case, will be called TT. Thus ***++ *=***18 
a potter'; here the word g*t is an upapada. 
mfas u <3 n ustia 11 , -fas, (wat:) gfu sitafuard fazaffa: 57: kerta Tafa u 
93. In this portion of the Sutras in which there is a reference to verbal roots, any affix except fat (tense-affixes), is called t. 
Thus the affixes * &c. are ma. All affixes up to the end of this Book belong to this class. These are affixes by which substantives are formed from verbal roots; and they have, therefore, most aptly been termed primary affixes. Words formed by these affixes will be Pratipadikas or crude forms or nominal bases (1.2 46). Thus + ad= d. Why do we say except Tae affixes'? Observe 'may he collect', TTT may he praise' which form verbs and not nouns. 
Tautfer n erforat, **:, sien, ( wret:) 
a fewwwraafwat 
wegar svaret ut a wafa fuere. विहितप्रत्ययं वयित्वा ।। 
94. In this portion of the Satras, in which there is a reference to verbal roots, an affix which is calculated to debar a general one, not being of the same form, 
URE 
Govs 
OF CULTURE 
ONMENT OF IN 
DISINIW 
OF INDIA 
II. CH. I. S 94.] 
VERBAL AFFIXES 
अधिर्णय जय 
91 
.17 
optionally debars it; but not so in the case of feminine affixes (III. 3. 94 dc.) 
Thus the affixes gar and (Ill. 1. 133) are general affixes appli cable to all roots in forming nouns of agency; and the sůtra III. 1. 183 which ordains these affixes, is an utsarga or a general rule; while the sâtra IlI. 1. 135 ordaining the affix after verbs having a penultimate u vowel, and the roots 7, sit and is an apavâda or a special aphorism. In the latter case, therefore, optionally we may have the affixes Tga and also. Thus for is a root that has a. penultimate belonging to the pratyahâra ; and therefore, in forming the noun of agency from it, the afis will have to be applied by rule 135 of this chapter already mentioned ; thus fafo + = fafuat =raw; but this special rule however, does not debar the operation of the general rule, and we have optionally fafur + Tar ; and fafee +9=fahne nom. sing. farhaat. 
Why do we say not being of the same form'? Because if two affixes have the same form, the present rule will not apply; and in the case of such affixes, the special affix will debar the general affix. Thus the affixes T and are, when stripped of their indicatory letters, affixes having the same form, ie,; and therefore the sätra III. 2. 1. ordaining T as a general rule, will be always debarred by sûtra III 2. 3 ordaining , as the latter is a special søtra applicable only to those roots which end in long 1, or which are simple coots not compounded with any preposition. Thus +7+ =re: giver of cows'. So also aay: blanket-giver'. In these cases we cannot have the affix মত 
It follows from this sâtra as a necessary corollary, that the addition of indicatory letters does not make two or more affixes dissimilar in form (477) when their essential effective element is the same. Thus the affixes , 51, , T &c. are similar. 
Why do we say but not so in the case of feminine affixes'? Because in the case of feminine affixes, a special affix will debar á general affix, though they may be dissimilar in form Thug sûtra 11. 3. 99 ordaining fan in form ing feminine nouns from roots is a general or utsargu rule, while sûtra III 3.102 ordaining after roots that have already taken some affix is a special or apavdda rule, and though w and fa are dissimilar in form, they being feminine affixes, the former will always debar the latter. Thus the compound desiderative roots feate and forgetu will form feminine nouns in and not by ferty. Thus fuauf and forest and not fuaefa &c. 
eur: aleg: Il y a uci naT:, T, TET: 
URE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
ISTRY OF CH 
AT OF INDIA 
KRITYA AFFIXES. 
[BK. III. CH. I. $ 95, 
राध्यप्याजयते 
त्तिः ॥ वुल तृषाविति वसति प्रागतस्मागणवलसंशब्दनाद्यानित जदुर्वमनुक्रमिष्याम: अल्बसणास्ते वेदितव्याः ।। 
95. From this aphorism, as far as the aphorism rah (III. 1. 133), all the affixes treated, will get the name 
of Kritya. 
This defines the class of affixes known as kritya, a sub-division of krit affixes. These are certain affixes like aay, Fit &c, which may be treated as declinable verbal terminations. (III. 4. 70.). The following 38 sâtras treat of these affixes. These verbal adjectives correspond in meaning to the Latin par ticiples in adus conveying the idea that the action expressed by the verbs ought to be done or will be done. The word formed by them may be called Passive Potential Participles or Future Passive Participles. The illustra tions will be given hereafter under each affix as taught. The word kritya occurs in stras II. I. 33, II.3.71 &c. 
aantatur: non uerfa qua-aku-satars, (wrat:) 
त्तिः ॥ धातोस्तध्वत्तव्यानीयर् इत्येते प्रत्यया भवन्ति ।। u n gata af forse ufafaat uueTETHU 
96. The affixes asut, as and waitat come after verbal roots. 
The phrase after verbal roots' is understood in this aphorism by anu. vritti from sätra 91. The final letters of art and T of wrat are for the sake of indicating accent, being merely diacritical letters. The letter a indicating svarita accent (VI 1.185. and the letter indicating penultimate udatta accent (VI. 1, 217); these being exceptions to the general rule of accent given in sutra 3 ante of this chapter. 
Thus t-aort= ut, and +96= Tu must be done'; wat 
ur' must be done. In these cases the sense being that of the action itself, there is neuter gender singular number. 
Vart-The affix at when coming after the verb to dwell' in marking the agent, is breated as if it had an indicatory . The force of mig to cause veiddhi. Thus a3 + = a dweller' Here the word is in the masculine gender, as the force of the affix is that of the agent, and not as ib generally has that of an act or object (III. 4. 70). 
Vart -The affix afc should be enumerated in addition to those al rondy onu merated in this aphorism. Thus Taft TTT: : kidney beans fo toeb 
URE 
GOVE 
GOVERNMEN 
OF CULTURE 
ENT OF INDIA 
III. CH. I. $ 97,98.] 
YAT. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
INTETT 
cooked'; fue faftigt for the woods are apt to be split, i. c., fragile'. This affix is to be employed when it is intended to express an object alone (i. e. in the passive and reflexive sense) and cannot be employed like those enumerated above, to denote also the a ction. 
staan * 11 urfa 11 :, Ja, (prat: ) u fa: 0 araigtatagrir vafa un atau afufa faufagatangu#TUTT Taa 
97. The affix ha comes after a root that ends in a vowel. 
The letter of this afix is indicatory showing that the udatta accent falls on the first vowel (VI. 1. 213) ; thus - 57=ha, noun sing, 74'what is to be sung'; so also 77 'what is to be drunk'; 'what is to be conquer ed'. The site of T and is changed into t by VI. 4. 65. Why do we say 
that ends in a vowel'? By sû tra 124 of this chapter, a root ending in a con sonant takes tad affix instead of ac ; reading these two aphorisms together, the conclusion to be drawn is that the affix ya comes after roots which prima rily end in a vowel, though in the course of development they may end in a consonant by the application of other rules. Thus from et. to cut', we have the desiderative root feet, which ends in a vowel . This is elided before ardha dhâtuka affixes and thus the root becomes feea, which ends in a consonant; nevertheless we shall have the affix 7 and not rua. Thus faecat what is wished to be cut'; faceat what is wished to be placed'. Similarly before årdhadhâtuka affixes becomes it, the ait is changed into a before (VI. 1.79) and the form then is 7. The root en however takes ac and not ; as arrêt, at &c. 
Vart :--The verbs aua 'to ily', 'to leap', 'to ask', 'to attempt' and to be born', should be enumerated in addition, that is to say, these verbe, though ending in a consonant, take it and not ra; as aer, wat, TRT, um, and us. 
Vart :-And of the verb Ty' to kill' is the substitute when it option ally takes the affix ta. Thus we have it or NT. The latter form is evolved by sûntras VII. 3.32 and 54. The affix a comes only after the are substitute; after the affix a comes which changes the into , and into a and causes vriddhi. 
u guran n atfernt, 7- a, (wat: a) वृत्तिः ॥ पवर्गान्ताहाचोरकारोपवाद् यत् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
98. The affix comes after a root, which ends in a labial letter preceded by a short m. 
URE - Gove 
VERNMENTO 
QY OF CULTUA 
DISINI 
YAT. 
Bc. III. CI. I. $ 99, 
संस्कृति मन्त्रा 
This debars rac; thus + = * * to be sworn'; +=*10 to be acquired'. 
Why do we say which ends in a labial'? Because if a root ends in any other consonant, though preceded by a short , the root will take tu; thus + Tua=1T what is to be cooked'; Trg speech.' 
Why do we say when preceded by a short ? When preceded by any other vowel, it will take ; thus 39 + TTT= tto be angry'; so also 91978' to be concealed'. 
The word sa is used in the sâtra in the original. The force of here is, by I. 1. 70, that short y having one mâtrâ or prosodial length is to be taken and not long 1. Therefore, after the root stra'to obtain', we have tua and not to; thus soy' to be reached' i. e.' attainable'. 
fra non nuerfor n font :, 7, (urat, an feum , TT a, referencat wafa u 
99. The afix up comes after the roots us to be able', and 'to bear'. 
Thus taat possible': 'endurable.' 
75*TTTTTTT n po natha # 79-6- R: 7, 9a t(ga) 
fa: € TT t, varautuart Hati wafa u 
Teufs vructu 
100 The affix comes after the roots te to speak', to be mad', to go, to eat', and to restrain', when these roots do not take any preposition. 
Thus at what is to be spoken, i. e. prose'; 1998' wine', 'what is to be followed ; *n' what is to be restrained'. 
Why do we say when not preceded by a preposition'? When com pounded with an upasarga, these roots will take TT, thus GT; UT &c. 
The root at would have taken the affix 7 by sûtra 98 also, as it ends in and is preceded by s: its separate enumeration in this sûtra is in order to show, that the compound verb will not take the affix 7. Therefore with regard to this is a niyama or restrictive rule and not a vidhi or original rule. 
Vart:--The roots when preceded by the preposition takes the wa affix when the senge is not that of a preceptor ; thus saraf awanan proachable or communicable country'. But when the sense is that of teacher the root takes tu; thus red: preceptor". GOVERNMENT 
TURE - GO 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTA 
NT OF INDIA 
• 
1. I. § 101-103.1 
IRRIGULAR FORMATIONS. 
संस्कृति मंत्र 
सत्यमेव जयते 
अवधपण्यवर्या गद्य पणितव्यानिरीधेषु ॥ १०१ ॥ पदानि । te-up-areti, 77-afraou-afaritâng n 
वृत्तिः ॥ वद्य पण्य वर्या इत्येते शब्दा निपात्यन्ते गर्दा पवितव्य अनिरोध इत्येतेष्वर्येषु ययासंख्यम् ॥ 
101. The words saa, au and uut are irregularly formed, having the sense of condemnable', 'saleable' and 'une obstructable respectively. 
Thus, se censurable sin'. Another and regular form is 797. this is formed by adding the affix 9 to the root at by III. 1. 106. So also 
Ti yag: 'saleable blanket'; : :saleable cow'. The other and regular torm 1s पाण्यच, formed by the addition of रयत. So also शतेन वर्या'unobstructed by hundred'; TTT suf'unobstructed by thousand'. The other and regular form is Teut from the root to choose', auf means a girl choosing her own husband and is non-obstructable by any body. The word auf in the sutra is in the feminine gender, and it is in this gender only that the word is so form ed. In the masculine gender, the word is regularly formed; thus araf suresh 
aga noz ul utfo lag, TT,( ) वृत्तिः ॥ बहेर्धातोः कारणे यत्प्रत्ययो निपात्यते॥ 
102. The word or is irregularly formed, when the meaning of the word is an instrument of carrying. 
The word Te is derived from root as to carry' and means 'a vehicle', z. e., that by which a thing is carried ; as a mea. When it does not mean a carriage, the roob takes the affix Tat, thus aret:' an ox'. 
: fagyut: gez lll fans, ufauit: gfa:n tait, itafa Ta, aflatatir ea qar foruregea पार्तिकर ॥ यतो उनाव इत्यायुदात्तत्वे प्राप्ले, स्वामिण्यन्तोदात्तत्वं च वाकव्याए । 
103. The word is irregularly formed when mean ing lord' and a. Vaisya? 
The root to go', would have taken cua by sà tra 124 of this chap ter; but it takes to when the sense of the word formed by it is that of a lord' or a man of Vaisya' caste. As sparait, honored lord', 'honored Vaisya'. 
Vart:--Though by VI. 1. 213, the affix a makes the udatta accenu fall on the first syllable of the word, yet in the case of the word , when it means 'lord', the accent falls on the last syllable. 
Why do we gay when it means a lord or a Vaisya? Otherwise the roob takes the affix tua; as wat grut'the respectable Brahmana'. 
6 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
. MINISTRY 
AT OF INDIA 
• 
IRREGULAR FORMATIONS. 
[BK. III. CH. I. § 1664-16 
suuuf au ua n pos nugtfor usuf, UT, quên 
वृत्तिः॥ उपसर्येति निपात्यते बाल्या त्मजने भवति। 
104. The word staat is irregularly formed when meaning what has reached the time favorable to conception, or ripe for fruition. 
The word Trunf is formed by adding a affix to the rood to move'. compounded with the preposition 57. The word CTET means having reached the time. The word wat means the first conception. Thus yeuaf it: 'the cow fit for the bull'; vraf eut the mare fit for the horse." 
Why do we say when meaning what has reached the time favorable to conception'? Otherwise the affix TTC will be used; as yraf ef yn 
Madhura is approachable in Sarat season'. 
अजयंम् संगतम् ॥ १०५॥ पदानि ॥ अणर्यम्, संगतम् ॥ वृत्तिः॥ प्रणयमिति निपात्यते सततं चेदवति । 
105. The word 97 'imperishable' is irregularly formed when qualifying the word frag'friendship’expressed or understood. 
The word is formed from the root g by the addition of , and affzing the negative particle ; as +7+7=700. 
Thus wat u let our friendship be imperishable'. So also Surg . 
Why do we say when qualifying the word Ta'? Observe softar # w undecaying blanket'. 
uygfa TT poe n agtfor u ui, gfa, 1, 7, ( 76, 799) 
वृत्तिः ॥ वर्षातो सुबन्तउपपदे अनुपसर्गी का प्रत्ययो भवति चशाराया । 
106. After the root to speak', governing a case inflected word as its upapada, and not having a preposition annexed to it, there comes the affix* also. 
The phrase not having a preposition is to be read into this satra by anwuritti from sútra 100 ante. The force of the word ' also' is to indicate that the affix va is also employed. The word gf means in construction with an upapade that ends in case-affix'. 
Thus +3+ = +*+=utov; 
+TT T told by the Vedas or Brahman'. Similarly vete or reg truth mouthed'. 
Why do we say when it has a case-inflected word as u papada'? Othera wisowe+ UTET a' musical instrument'. 
IRE ' GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
v OF CULTURE 
& MINISTRE 
NT OF INDIA 
HTERT. THIS 107-108] 
KYAP. 
सरकार 
Why do we say not having a preposition'? Observe sramAy'a rumour formed by the affix एयर and nob by यह or क्या . 
भुवो भावे ॥ १०॥ पदानि ।। भुवः, भावे, (अनुपसर्ग, सुपि, 
वृत्तिः ॥ भवतेर्धात सुबन्तउपपदे अनुपसर्गे भाव क्या प्रत्ययो भवति । 
107. After the roots to be', in construction with a case-inflected word as its upa pada and when used without a preposition, the affix you is employed to denote condition (bhava) 
The words for and waTaT of previous sûtras are understood in this. The anuvritti of u does not cover this aphorism. As an a=que a: 'gone to or arrived at Brahmahood ; ay = aca ar gone to divinity'. 
The word bhāva of this sûtra governs the succeeding ones. 
Why do we say 'in construction with a case-inflected word'? Other wise it will take यत् ; ass+यत्-मो+यत भव्य VI. 1.79). 
Why do we say ' nob taking a preposition'? Observe प्रभव्यान 
हनस्त च ॥ १० ॥ पदानिशनः, त, च, (सुपि, अनुपसगे, क्य, भावे) 
वृतिइन्तर्घातो सुबन्न उपपदेऽनुपसमावेश्या प्रत्ययो भवति वखारश्चान्तादेश 
108. After the root to kill', when in construction with a case-inflected word as its upapada, and when used without a preposition, comes the affix in denoting condition, and the letter J is the substitute of its final. 
The phrases सुषि अनुपसर्ग and भाव are understood in this sutra. 
As Jह्म+हम् + क्या वास+हर+य= बह्महत्या, (VI. 1.71) बाहत्या Brahmana murder'. So also अश्वहत्या killing a horse'. 
When not in construction with a noun, the form is prats blow (Ct furtus). This verb does not take the affix cut in denoting condition, there being no example of such formation. 
Why do we say when not taking a preposition'? Observe surat ada there is a combat'. 
एतिस्तुशाखजुषः ॥ १९ ॥ पदानि ॥ एति-स्तु-शास् व-टू-जुषः, क्या । 
वृत्तिः ॥ पति स्त शाम पुषः इत्येतेभ्यः क्या प्रत्ययो भवति । गार्तिक शसि मुहियों वेति वक्तव्यच ॥ पारिबाड पर्वादण्जे संशावामुपसंख्यामा 
URE - Govo 
VERNMENT 
V OF CULTURA 
& MINISTRY 
T OF INDIA 
( 
KYAP. 
[BK. III. CA. I. § 109-111 
2 
2011 
. 
109. After the verbs 'to go', 'to praise', 'to govern', y' to choose', a to respect and go to please', comes the affix क्यप 
The apuvritti of gfe, ugun and ra does not extend to this aphorism. The present sutra ordains generally the affix it after the above verbs. Thus 
+ = +2 +3 (VI. 1. 71) =ya: 'to be gone'. The letter being added by Rule VI. 1. 71 which declares 'a is the augment of a short vowel when a affix, with an indicatory follows'. So also eT+91=egau' to be praised'; 
+ T=f7+ (being changed into by VI. 4. 34) = fout: to be ins tructed to a pupil'. So also T+ T=TET: 'to be chosen'; HTC + FUT=STETT: 
to be honoured'; vg+9=ET' to be served'. 
Though the anuvritti of #was coming from the previous sû tra too, its repetition in this aphorism is to indicate thab other rules, such as 125 of this chapter, should not take effect in the above verbs. Thus Rule 125 requires TTT after the verb but the present rule prohibits tha). Thus we have sara T 'must be praised'. 
By y in the sutra the roof wat is intended to be taken, and not the root T. The equivalent derivative of the latter is ass as araf arcare. 
Vart :-The roots un to praise' g' to milk' and JT to cover' optional ly take the affix 49. As tea or TETE (VI. 4. 37); ger or atat, or art. 
Vart:-The verb o'to anoint', preceded by the preposition site takes the affix up when used as an appellative. As 1--- -a9T = 7 meaning clarified butter. The nasal is elided by VI. 4. 24. 
Obj. :-How do you explain the form at which is evidently formed from the root v by adding ? According to the present sâtrao the affix w ought to have been added. Ans. The tin at is a different root from shab taken. The rood in this sûtra is TT of the Adedi class. 
HTTUTE foga: n po nugfar F-Jura, 7, wafa-va:,( ) 
u n WC vrat: ur seat safa y faza asfacat a 
for one was a 
Sugatan 
110. After verbs having a penultimate short r, the a fix is employed, with the exception of the verbs ar to be able', and gato hurt'. 
Thus t+ =e ; so also . But and a will form and অন্ত 
Why have we usod the letter in we? Ib is to indicate that short 
URE 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY ON 
VERNMENT 
T OF INDIA 
CASIL CE. I, 5 111-113] 
KYAP. 
891 
सत्यमेव जयते 
पर सरकार 
18 meant and not long ? (I. 1. 70). Therefore the root T will take part and form कीत्व स. 
Vart: The root takes the affix Tut when compounded with the word afu. Thus fuerat toy:' a rope'. 
Vart:-The root T when preceded by both and sa takes tua ag 10 gragut 
ई च खनः ॥ ९९१ ॥ पदानि ॥ई, च, खनः, (क्यप् ) ॥ gfe: o caufat:-* sahraatentateo: 
111. The affix. 4 is employed after the root 7 to dig,' and long & is substituted for the final of the root. 
Thug #7+ quy= +*+=@yto be dug'. The long t is used in the sutra for the sake of euphony. The same purpose would have been served by using short T, thus' :'. But the long & indicates that the rule VI. 4. 43 does not apply here. By that rule the 9 of u would have been lengthoned into st before the affix . 
SETH NPR un açıf T:, - TIH, (PU) afes us warte stui faci cat sett wafa u पाकिर ॥ संपूर्वाद्विभाषा। 
112. The affix my is employed after the verb 'to bear when not used as a name. 
Thus t+at=yet Pl. YRIT: 'those wbo ought to be supported' i. c. servants'. Why do we say when not used as an appellative'? Observe T+ TTS 
id: 'a Kshatriya'. 
Vart:-The use of kyap is optional when this verb takes the preposi tion , Ihus Teat: or rafs. 
Thamaru 998 nugtfa n Thi, farat, (T) afara gå viataTT att vara un 
113, The affix an optionally comes after the root U to oleanse'. 
This is an example of Prapta-vibhasha. By rule 110 ante, the root y having a penultimate u would have necessarily taken kyap; this sätra den clares an option. As altuus or of 'to be cleansed'. The second form is thus evolved : 
af rut (III, 1.124) ET43 (VII. 3.52)=f (VII, 2.114) 
URE 
VERNMENTO 
OF CULTURA 
T OF INDIA 
KYAP, 
[BK. III. OH. I. S 114-1 
24.11 
horasugungusatur; n 988 n gerra in TUEU-TU-TU-554-564-8-952- Ye:,( 90 ) n 
gfa taas na **a gw ya TTTer paa vaan wafer fragrau 
114, The words that TT gita su ga u Tu and we are irregularly formed by the addition of the affix 
Thus trat Orasu: or TTTT TT ya,, tru+ +, 1=77@is the Rajasûya or coronation sacrifice. 
Similarly or + T=48: 'the sun', literally that which moves (utfa) in the sky; or that which impels gafa) creation to action. ++ 9= UUTTT'false speech', this is an exception to rule 106, by which it would also have been applied. This rule prevents it. Thus trast, T + = st. an agreeable lover'. So also TT +91=go' a base metal (other than gold and silver ); the other forna is a FU +-41 = entute that which ripens of itself in cultivated ground'. 17 saa = stiuet: a snake (what does not move by legs). 
fruitgang ng4 ni warfon frugat, & () u far a facilita au forureua wasta 
115, The words free and u are irregularly formed by the affix , when meaning a 'river'. 
Thus the + =façala river that breaks its banks by the rush of its water', the name of the Bhidya river. 
to +7=ET'a river whose waters overflow the banks', name of the Uddhya river; the wis changed into 
When not meaning or qualifying the river, the regular forms are used; thus and ভিক্ষ, 
goufegatan 8€ lugtform goa-fegit, wat fery frienfrece un forat esforea 
116. The words you and ferrare irregularly formed by the affix , when used as names of asterisms. 
Thus gu 
t a ge: the Pushys asterism'. It is so called because ob jeolu are nourished under the influences of this asterism. for face the asterism Siddhya' another name of Pushya, Bo-called because things are accom. plished under the influence of this star. 
When not the names of asberisms, the formg are stau 'nourishing'. accomplishing, 
ARE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
ENT OF INDIA 
- 
. I. 5117-119] 
KIAP. 
17ति गंज 
सत्यमेव जयते 
विध्यविनीयजित्या पुज्जकल्कहलिषु ॥ ११ ॥ पदानि । विपूय विनीय-जित्याः, मुज-कल्क-हलिषु ॥ 
वृति: ॥ विध्य विनीय जिल्य इत्येते शन्दा जिपास्यन्वे बयासंख्यं जुजकल्कहलि इत्येते वर्षेषु बोध्येषु ॥ 
117. The words faga, fate and fures are irregularly formed when they mean, the muñja grass', the 'sediment and the plough' respectively. 
Thus fa+9+*T=farga: etymologically that which has to be purified to make rope'; वि+जी+पय-विनीय "asediment or sin'; जि+बयप =जिल्य a plough that which is to be conquered by strength'. 
The regular derivatives are विधाज्यम, विनेयम् and जयच. 
प्रत्यपिभ्यां ग्रहेछन्दसि ॥११॥ पदानि ॥ प्रति-नपिम्यां, ग्रहः, छन्दसि, (वपप)॥ 
वृत्तिः प्रविशषि इत्येवं पूर्वाद् अहः क्यप् प्रत्ययो भवति इन्दसि विषये ॥ 
118. The verb to seize', preceded by the prepositions ofa and fe, takes the affix w in the Vedio li terature. 
Thus भत्तस्य न प्रतिशमा बस्नायगापिसा॥ In the classical Sanskrit the proper forms are sfare and afare. 
पदाखेरिया ह्यापक्षयेषु च ॥ ११९ ॥ पदानि ॥ पद-प्रखैरि बाह्या-पक्ष्येषु, च, (ग्रहः, क्य) 
त्तिः॥ पदेस्पैरिविबाहायां पश्ये चार्षे हेर्षातो क्यम् प्रत्ययो भवति। 
119, The root w takes the affix wy, when it means a.word', a dependent','outside', or a partisan, 
Thug a'the Pragrihya words that do not admit of sandhi, already defined in subra. I. 1. 11. So also अवलं. 
The word wafe means dependent upon others, nob free to provide for himself. Thus Jह्मका शुका 'the captive parrots'. 
The word ut means 'situabed outside'. Thug Tatanan array lying outside the village'. The word are being in the feminine gender in dicates that the derivative word for med from yt must also be feminine in gen der to have this sense. 
The word vuu is derived from a side, a party', and means a partisan, follower or friend. Thns urgeat TTS siding with or being the partieans of Vasudeva', So also g belonging to the party of Arjana, 
TURE 
GOVE 
GOVERNMENT 
OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
КҮАР. 
[BE. III. CA $ 120 
सरकार 
fatat haut: ut pro n uçtfaTu fantur, aft:, (ru) वृत्तिः ॥ कृतो वृयश्व विमाषा क्यप् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
120, After the verbs 'to do', and to rain' the affix in is optionally employed, 
The root yn would have taken the affix tua by 124, and the verb TT would necessarily have taken up by 110; the present sû tra therefore declares an optional rule. Thus: + = 4y to be done'; or + = 14. So also you or stimulating'. 
gag n er u actfa il TRH, 7, त्तिः ॥ युग्यमिति निपात्यये पत्र पति 
121. The word gray is irregularly formed meaning a vehicle, 
The word means that by which a thing is carried. Thus yra the carrier bull or the yoked bull'. Tot seat 'the harnessed elephant ready to carry'. + 4=y . The e is changed into T. When not meaning a carried or a carriage, it has the form arve 
Tari FuaterniumTaRG, xuate was aus: array'a, a few gtat: asiasta TEHRT wafa aceai Tatater frareda 
122. Optionally the word water is irregularly formed. 
The word wat means along'or together. 7 in composition with the root s' to dwell', takes the affix rua in the sense of location of time. Op tionally the Vriddhi is not substituted in such a case. The time or the day on which the sun and the moon dwell together in the same constellation in called water or TTEUT. 
The final a in swael is indicatory and is for the sake of showing where should the proper accent fall. 
The two forms wat or e are the same word, and a fortiori rule made with regard to one will be made applicable to the other. And to this effect there is a paribhasha which declares aufugaeutacat ;' that which has undergone a change in regard to one of its parts, is by no means in cousequence of this change, something else than what it was before the change had taken place'. Therefore subra IV. 8.30, though it, in terms, says #TUTEUTAT w is made applicable to the formatuat also. 
GOVERNMEN 
OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
MOTI CH. I,5128-124] 
NYAT. 
396 
7सरकार 
छन्दसि निष्ठयंदेवहूय प्रणी योनीयोच्छृिष्यमर्यस्तर्याध्वर्य सन्य चान्यदेवयज्यापृच्छयप्रतिषीब्यब्रह्मवाद्यभाव्यस्ताव्योपचाय्यपडानि ॥ १२३ ।। पदानि ॥ छन्दसि, निष्ठय-देवहूय-प्रणीय-उन्त्री य-उच्छिष्य-मर्य-स्ता-ध्वर्य खन्य-खान्य-देवयज्या-मापच्छ्य-प्रतिषीव्य-ब्रह्मवाद्य-भाव्य-स्ताव्य-उपचाच्य 
पृडानि ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ निष्टकर्यादयः शब्दारन्दशि विषये निपात्यन्ते ॥ पातिकम् ॥ हिरण्य इति वक्तव्यम् 
123. In the Vedas the following words are found which are formed irregularly :-निष्टवर्थ, देवहूय, प्रणीय, उन्नीय, उच्छिष्य, जाये, तोध्वर्य, खन्य, खान्य, देवयज्या, आपच्छय, प्रतिषीव्य, ब्रह्मवादा, भाज्य, स्ताव्य, and उपचाव्यपृड. 
The formation of the above words are extremely irregular and they are all met with in the Vedic literature only. Thus the word faged is derived from the root कृत ' to cuti, with the preposition निस, and the affix शयत, instead of क्यषु Chich is the regular affix, by 110; निः+कृत+पयत् =निः+ वृक् + (the root कृत transformed into th by transposition) = fruat. As faca foate vy 17. 
The above is apparently a guess-work etymology of grammarians. 
So also aagt is formed by adding to the root gaa' to call' or 'bo invoke, the affix and the upapada 29; the vowel of the root is then leng thened and the augment a (VI. 171), is not allowed, ator & + 9=eugu: So also d+नी (to lead)+ क्यप - प्रणी उत+नी+क्या जन्मीयः, उत्+शिष् (to leave)+ जयप् = उच्छिष्वम् ; (to die)+यत= मर्यः स्तु (to cover)+यत् =स्तर्या; it is always feminine, g (to bend)+यत् = ध्वये ; खन् (to dig)+यत् = सन्या ख+पयत् = सान्यः देव (God)+ यज् (to sacrifice) + यत् = देवयज्या ; always used as feminine. जा+ च्छ (to ask)+क्य - सापछ्यः , प्रति+सीब (to sew) +क्यप् = प्रतिषीय वृद्धश+पद् (10 speak) +रयत् = वहावाद्यः भू (to be) +शयत् =भाव्यः ; स्त (to praise) +पय-स्ताव्या उप+चि (to collect)+एयत् + पृर्ड = उपचाय्यपउ. The last word is formed then only when the word is follows: and when the sense is that of 'gold. When it does not mean ' gold' the form is उपचेयपृडन् । 
हलोय॑त् ।। १२४॥ पदानि ॥ ऋ-हलोः, यत् ।। रत्तिः ॥ शुषर्यान्ताहातोहलन्ताच्च यत्प्रत्ययो भवति । 
124. The affix रयत comes after a verb that ends in (long or short), or in a consonant. 
The phrase it is in the genitive case dual number, the force of goni. tive here being that of ablative. As + एयत् = कार्यo be made शमत्व 
GOVERNMENT 
URE 
GOVE 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
NYAT 
(BK. III. CH. I. § INOL 
vre nom. siag. to be taken' ; + TUT = UIT ; to be held'; 7+TUTE 
Tra (VII. 3. 52) =27** (VII. 2. 116) 'to be spoken'; ' 7*+Tua=14€. 
icraqueñ Il gay li gerfi siti, statue (pra) fain cautargráttsentado wafa sterzgai ateite 
125, The affix rat comes after a root that ends in the letter long or short when the sense is that of necessity. 
This debars the affix ra. Thus + Tu= t+oT=7167 (VII. 2. 115 and VI. 1. 79) must be cut', so also 9+ TT=TTTT must be purified 
When necessity' is not indicated we have the form you to be cut. The sütra as given in the original is rather ambiguous, it may be construed to mean, ist when the word statue or a word having the sense of this term is in construction as upapada the affix tra is employed : or 2ndly when the sense of the affix is that of' necessity', the Tea is employed. There are oho jections to both these interpretations taken separately. For in the first cage though we could form the words yatur &c., we could not form the word 
roa by itself. In the second case, though we could form the single word met', we could not form the compound. The best solution is to take the second in terpretation and form the compound by the universel rule of Tatpurusha con. tained in II. 1. 72, which would also regulate the accent. 
saya furfuafa fuqhuge u ugurari sirg-y-afur for-fo-f-*, , (ra) 
T ITE The tas y of the safe fue veasaz4 T wear wafaa 
126. The affix tua comes after the verbs it to distil 3 'to join', to sow', 'to speak distinctly to prate', 
to be ashamed', and 'to drink.' 
The verb 919 is a compound verb formed by the preposition and the roob. This sutra debars that would otherwise have come by sûtra 97 and 98. 
Thus g+ = ETETT, (VIL. 2. 115 and VI. I. 79); so algo 13, wracter, 1992, 16 and 1 . 
The force of the words and in the satra is to indicate that roots nob included in the above enumeration should also be taken. Thus + 
दाच्या 
areutsfacen 79 #terfall STUTETT, sfera in एत्तिः॥ माया प्रशिनियायाने निस्पेशिधये । जयतेरा पूर्वापण्यदायादेशी निधास्यते॥ OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
VERNMENT ON 
KATI, DA. I. $ 127, 128.] 
IRREGULAR FORMATIONS. 
सरवमय मयत 
127. The word saated: is irregularly formed when meaning 'impermanent'. 
This word is thus formed:--T1++ TUT= +*+ 
u c u, (the being changed into tre by the analogy of VI. 1. 79). 
As a re s . This is a species of Dakshiņâgni fire. As this fire is brought from the Gârhapatya fire and is not permanently kept alive, therefore, it is called ânâyya. This, however, is not co-extensive with Dake shinâgni. It is that fire which is brought from the Garhapatya, and has the same source with the Dakshinagni and Ahavaniyâgni. A Dakshinagni fire may be taken from different sources, as from the family of a well-to-do Vaishya, or from a frying place, or from Garhapatya fire. When it is taken from the last i. e. from Gârbapatya fire, it is ânâyya Dakshinagni. Ahavaniya is also taken from Garhapatya. 
It is not every thing, that is not lasting, which is called anâyya; for a fragile pot will not be called so. It applies, only to the consecrated fire. When it has not this sense, the form is the meaning what ought to be brought'. 
uitzitsemat i P8 H ETT TTT:, sarat in एत्तिः॥प्रणाय्य इति निपात्यते ऽसंभतावभिधेये॥ 
128. The word n a: is irregularly formed when meaning disapproved'. 
The word seafa is a negative word meaning non-agreement. It means also disrespect'. 
Thus t i t: 'the thief is to be disliked'. 
Why do we say when meaning 'disapproved'. Because otherwise the regular form is to lead' + = tractable'. 
The word in the sûtra is wafe which we have translated as dis approved'. But the word arafa also means state or desire'; and useft would, therefore, mean free from desire or worldly attachment. Therefore the word wat means also free from attachment', as in the following sentence 
a gara feat TT, TTTT arfer arra a 'let the father teach the Secret Doctrine to his eldest son, or to such pupil who is free from worldly attachment, and to no one else'. 
पाय्यसनाययनिकाय्यधाग्या मानहविनिवाससामिधेनीषु ।। Peugi EU-aiateu- 
F EU-ITUT:, - fa:-ferat-ef og 
TE Teated T frateuca ule ufafe fuata ufaf for at 
URE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
DIONI ON 
IRREGULAR FORMATIONS. 
TBK. III C. I. $ 129 
TESTE 
ETT 
7 
. 
129. The words पाय्य, सान्नाय, निकाय and धाय्या are irregularly formed meaning 'a measure', 'an oblation to fire', 'a dwelling', and 'a sacrificial prayer, respectively. 
These words are supposed to be formed thus :- (to measure)+ = 757, the being changed into and another T being added by VII. 3. 33. The regular form is to be measured' (FT+Ta=*+VI. 4.65=7). 
+ (to lead) +- =T= Jy'the oblation'. It being a crude form applies to a particular kind of oblation. The regular form is at fa+fe (to collect) + = +=+ =+=+=+=+ =försica: 'dwelling'. The regular form is Fue ut (to put) + = UTCUT (fem) The sâ madbeni is the name of certain Rik bymns used as gupplemental verses in a Litany. The other form is oui 
क्रती कुण्डपाय्यसंचाग्यौ ॥ १३०॥ पदानि ॥ क्रतो, कुण्डपास्य संचाय्यौ। 
वृत्तिः॥ कुण्डपाच्य संचाय्य इत्येतो शब्दौ निपात्येते वातावभिधेये। 
130. The words Feet; and 977: are irregularly formed meaning a sacrifice. 
These words are thus formed : + (to drink)+7=FTE+ 47+3+ (VII. 3. 33) =TETT: 'the sacrifice in which Soma is drunk with a bowl'. The accent falls on the first syllable by VI. 1. 213. + foto collect) + TUT = 
uu: 'the sacrifice in which Soma is collected'. 
If nob applied to sacrifices, the forms will be you and T. 
sufianu: 838 11 astfel llit, -47-09:11 वृत्तिः ॥ परिवायय उपचाय समूहम इत्येते शध्दा निपात्यन्ते शनायभिधेये॥ 
131. The words haat, 4917: and as are irre gularly formed when they are names of fire. 
These words are thus formed:- + + Tut=wf+ + =uft +972 wforest sacrificial fire arranged in a circle' (the a being changed into ty by tho analogy of VI. 1. 79. This peculiar sandhi before the semivowel has been illustrated in the previous examples also). So also 
a kind of unored Gre a t = 5 +T : 'a lind of fire'. falla we let him kindle the SamQhya fire desirous of a victim'. 
Why do we may when they are names of fire'? Observe otherwise wire to be heaped', to be increased', U' to be carried'. 
URE - GOV. 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
VERNMENT OG 
OF INDIA 
I. Ch. I. § 132-134.] 
LYU NI AND ACH. 
पात मंत्रान्तर 
सत्यमेव जयते 
farathafazh II 835 l Etfa un fan-wafecù,711 yfer: a fenetsiafeutua franca u 
132. The words fort and safe are also irre larly formed. 
The word focus comes from the root fe 'to collect, and means fire é. 6. that which is collected. As foratsfer: 'the funeral pile fire'. The word affecut means, arranging the fire. The affix t has been added to denote condition, together with the augment (T). These words have udátta accent on the last vowel. The regular form is dit 'to be gathered'. 
Tomaat 833 in oerfat u angaaat, ( urat:) वृत्तिः ॥ सर्वधातुभ्यो पल तृषी प्रत्ययो भवतः॥ 
133. The affixes Tgl (5) and T. (T) are placed after all verbal roots, expressing the agent. 
The word 'root' is understood in the above aphorism. Thus 'to do' Ty= 1+1 (VII.2 115) = ***+ ** (VII. 1. 1) =#ith nom. sing. ETCH doer' +T1=1+(VII. 3. 84) = nom, sing, waf. So also great and cat. 
The 7 of Ty is not indicatory, but distinguishes this afix from 7 the simple includes both Trand 77, as in V. 3,59, and V. 4. 154. 
नन्दिग्रहिपचादिभ्यो ल्युणिन्यचः ॥ १३४॥ पदानि ॥ मन्दि uff-Tarfatti, , farfa, : 
afTu ttivaato: Heat qu&uz' fra, 7-artfedes, Terre a faft, पादिभ्योऽचः॥ 
134. After the verbs classed as a 'to be happy', to take' and 'to cook there are the affixes Ty (27) fun (TU) and (s) respectively. 
The word ddi meaning etcetra, is to be joined with every one of the above three words. These three afilxes come respectively after the verbs of the above three classes. Thus after the varbs of class, comes the affix y; after the verbs of g class, comes the affix fofar; after the verbs of a clasa, comes the affix . 
The perfe verbs will not be found in one place in Dhatupatha. The list of the words formed by these affixes have, however, been collected in the Ganapatha, Thug mee +3= 5+ (1. 3. 8) =***+ * (VI. 1 1) z powo uom. sing. w : 'son' (lit what gladdens), So also from the following cauga 
RE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
Car OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
*T OF INDIA 
ΤΗΣ ΑΙΓΙΣ ΚΑ. 
[BK. III.CH. 
पिरति माह 
रावटजरात 
करत सरका 
Foota, nouns are formed, meaning names:-मासि--वासन: or वाशनः; मंदि-मदनः दूषि-दूषपाः (or षणाः); साधि-साधना; बधि-वधनः शोभि--शोभन: and रोचि-रो 
The following derivatives are names :--सहि-सहनः तषि-उपनाद 
So also the following words :-जल्पना, रमणः, दर्पण संक्रन्दनः, संपार्षर रखं हर्षणः, जनाईगः, यवनः, पक्षणः, मधुसूदन, विभीषणः. लवणः (the m in लवण is irregular), पिविगायन:, कुलदमणः and शत्रुदमनः, 
The perfe verbs are also nowhere enumerated in a group. The fol lowing are however, those vrbs. 16-fez nom iet; TETT--Jeutitu nom. उत्साही ; उद-उदासिन् ; उदास -उदासिर ; स्था-स्थायिन् ; मन्त्र-सन्निन् ; सम्मर्द--सम्पार्दिन. 
So also the verbs रम, अ, बस् , बप , and nा preceded by नि; as, निरक्षिन्, निनाविन्, निवासिन्, निवापिन्, and निशायिस्. The verbs याचि, व्याह, संख्या वज, वद and ma take शिम् when preceded by the negative particle; as, याचिन, अव्याहारिम, खव्यापारिन्, 
for, afer and surfew. So also after verbs ending in a vowel when agents are non-conscious beings : as, अकारिन्, अहारिन्. So also, अविनायिन्, अविशायिन्, विशायिन्, विषयिन् (meaning a place) विशायिन् and विषाधिन्, अभिभाविन्, अपराधिन, उपरोधिन्, परिभविग् and परिभाविन । 
The following are पचादि words:-पच, बच, बप, जद, चा, तप, पत नद, भवन, वाम गरट ग्लव, तर, चीरद, शाहद्, जर, भर, घर, पाम, सूबद, देव , मोरट् शेव, मेष, शोध, युवा, दंश, दश, दम्भ, जारभर, स्वपच, मेघ, कीष, पप, नद, रज, दीवट चरद । 
The in &c. , shows that the feminine of these is formed by long & (1.1.15). The पचादि class is an शाकृतिगणाः । 
अविधिः सर्वधातुभ्यः पठ्यन्ते व पचादयः । ना वाचनाय नेवं स्यात् सिन्ति श्वष चादयः ॥ 
In fact the affix comes after all verbs, and is not exclusively con fined to the verbs above enumerated, The affix अच्, therefore, debars ] and may be taken to be the universal affix, and by its help the form like 
वपच &c.may be explained. 
गुपधज्ञानीकरः कः ॥१५॥ पदानि ॥ इग-उपध-शा-मी 
अन्तिः ॥ गुपयेभ्यो जामा पीणात विरतश्च प्रत्ययो भवति । 
135. After a verb ending in a consonant but proceded by , or (long or short), and after the verbs w' to know', 'to please', and 'to scatter', comes the affix 
Thue forfattafofue nom sing fafen. So also fefer 'inscription'; जुषा 'who knowl' lean';+ TE who knows' (VI.464); प्री+4= 
URE 
GOVE 
VERNMENT O 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
OF INDIA 
10:08. I. S 136, 137] 
TAE AFFIX SA. 
स्कृति मंत्रालय 
तसरकार 
Fra: 'what pleases'; += +(VII. 1. 100 ) = fat + ( I. 1.51 )=fets 
who scatters' i.e.' a hog'. 
The words ea 'God', 24'service' and #r'ram', should be read in the Tarte class of the last sâtra, being formed by the affix grand not by .. 
strazêtuat uten ugifer ni atai, 7, uit, (2) efe: Thirakat yig'T TT gr e at wafan 
136. Also after a verb ending in long at when there is a preposition along with it, the afix is placed. 
This is an apavada of III. 1. 40, and debars the affix Thus eur + = + = : (VI. 4. 64), yra + = + =972: "very weary' (ut substi tuted for by VI. 1. 45., yra+ ya+5=yka: very languid'. 
The final is dropped before the affix by rule VI. 4.64. There is elision of long sr when an ardhadhâtuka aflix follows beginning with a vowel and having an indicatory or 5 
12 SAT GT 79T: 97: # 39 Gif af-sr-ET-et gat:, :, (592) 
fa trfæxÀr urge yraf eure muuda wafae 
fået fasa: urat sara : 
137. The affix () is employed after the roots to drink', 'to smell, Eat to blow, 7 suck', and gt to see when there is a preposition along with these roots. 
Thus st+1+= +fas * (VII. 8. 78)=sfeua nom. sing. sfert so also fafca; sfum: and 11+ 1+ = +=+ = (VII. 3.78); CGT; fauw'; va+ + ==997: ; fuvas; so also ca+2+ =TETU, (VII. 8. 78). 90 also focus; 
Some commentators do not read the word "upaserga' into this aatre, According to them the forms like yua: &tc., can be formed also. 
The affix 7, of which is indicatory, the real aflix being causes the roob to undergo all those changes, which it undergoes in special tenses, for it is a sørvadbâtaka affix there; soe sûtra III. 4. 113 and VII. 3. 78. 
Vart :-Prohibition must be stated of the root w, when the word to be formed is a name. As fa+s+T+ = tiger' (an animal that goes about smelliag), Here there is and not the affix , 
B. GOVER 
OVERNMENT 
Y OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
ENT OF INDIA 
• 
THE ATTIX NA, 
[BK III. CH. I. S 13181 
रकृति मंत्रान 
भाजपा 
रस सरकार 
अनुपसर्गालिम्पविन्दधारिपारिवेद्युदेजि चेतिसातिसाहिभ्यश्च ॥ १३॥ पदानि ॥ अनुपसर्गात, लिम्प-विन्द-धारि-पारि-वेदि-उदे जि-चेति साति-साहिभ्यः च (श:) 
त्तिः ॥ अनुपसर्गभ्यो लिम्पादिभ्यः शप्रत्ययो भवति ॥ पार्जि कर ॥ नौ लिम्धेरिति वक्तव्यम् ॥ चार्तिकम् ॥ गवादिषु बिन्दे पंजायाम् ॥ 
138. The affix श is employed after the following verbs when used without a preposition : fara, face and the causa tives धारि, पारि, चेदि, उदेजि, चेति, साति and साहि. 
Thus fara: 'smearing'; fare: ' acquiring'; ITT: 'holding'; 77: 'ferry ing: वेदय: "knowing'; उदेणय "shaking'; चेतय: perceiving'; सातयः, and साहय 
Why do we say when used without a preposition'? Observe sats; here the affix is क. 
Vart:-The verb me with the preposition fr takes the affir- u. As fafar the name of certain deities',' a cow'. 
Vart :-The affix is employed after fare when compounded with the words ut &c. and when the word to be formed is a proper noun. As itfart: 'Krishna' (protector of cows), सबिन्दः a lotus' (having petals like spokes). 
ददातिदधात्योविभाषा ॥ १३ ॥ पदानि ॥ ददाति-दधात्यो, विभाषा, (शः)॥ 
वृत्तिः॥दाजोपाजश्व विभाषा प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
139. The affix is optionally employed, after the root to give', and to hold', when used without a preposition. 
This debars . Thus was giving'; or are inheritance'; 'holding' or प्राय: - having'. 
When a preposition is used, the affix is not employed; ag at, av:. 
ज्वालितिकासन्तेभ्यो णः ॥१४॥ पदानि ॥ ज्वल-इति-कसन्तेभ्यः, याः ।। 
इति बलदीसावित्येवमादिभ्यो चातुभ्यः फसगतापित्येशमन्तेषाय विभाषा याप्रत्यये। 
बातिधार ॥ तनावेर्ण उपसंख्थानम् ॥ 
140. After the verbs beginning with auto shine' and ending with to go', when used without a preposition, the afbx is optionally employed. 
URE • Gov 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY O. 
NT OF INDIA 
1. OR. I. 141, 142.1 
TAE AFFIX NA. 
MON 
2 
The word afer in vafafa indicates beginning. These are about 56 verbs, all belonging to the Bhuddi class. See No. 804 to 860 in the Dhôtupfe üha, Bombay Edition in the Appendix to Siddhanta Kaumudi. 
his debars the afix গ্রন্থ ; as ডঃ of ঃ ; ব্যঃ or এ 
The affix (ET) having an indicatory T causes the vriddhi of the pene ultimate 7. When the affix T is not used, then try is used and we have the other form. But compound verbs take 39 ; as na luminous'. 
Verb. The verb 'to stretch'must be included in this list, and it takes the affix ; as guate. The conditions 'option' and without preposibion' do not apply in this case. The verb at necessarily takes this affix, though compound Ied with an upagarga. 
TATS@TOTT TETTatraftatau menggarapefrit TAT-13-TU-TIET-E-sat-291-az-far-feau-Tae: , ,(:) 
ufa: a The Travan" igra: una suatu saat sau fare for श्व इत्येतेभ्यश्च प्रत्ययो भवति॥ 
141. The affix is employed after the following verbs also:- Sto go', verbs ending in long T, v 'to pierce', 'to pain', 'to flow, state to pass on', wwer to complete', wat 'to take away, far to lick', fans to embrace', and we 'to breathe'. 
The root ra, before affixes, becomes , (VI. 1.45) and is thus included in the phrase 'verbs ending in long st'. What is then the use of its separate enumeration? The separate enumeration is for the sake of excluding the ap plication of every other rule which might have prohibited. Thus III. 1. 136 enjoins when a compound verb ends in sit. But that rule does nob apply to the verb zu, 
Thns stutta: 'frost', sfatara: 'catarrh', ET: 'iuheritance', 'having! SUT: 'pain', serta wouud', futa: 'flow', suta: "transgression', 'conclu sion', sme taken away', acs licking', au: embracing rate: breath'. Seo VII. 8. 33. 
gruguau per a grut, ,( ) fengna attiva tuzgar wafer 
142. The affix is employed after the verbs 'to burn", and it to lead', when used without a propon sition, 
URE • GOVE 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
VERNMENT ON 
OF INDIA 
THE ATFIX, BHYUN. 
[BK. JII. Cs. I. 1404 
17ति मंत्रानुन 
सत्वगंदाजयते 
Tbus 3+= +(VII. 2. 115) =qra: (VII. 1. 78) burning'. So also + = + =778: 'leading'. 
Why do we say when used without a preposition'? Observe sca: , burning '; arus 'friendship'. 
fa HTUT UF: 11 per orçafa u fanta, 7E:,( : ) aferin fant fufatuazuat wafa u वार्तिकम् ॥ भवतेश्चेति वक्तव्यमा 
143. Tho affix is optionally employed after the verb to seize'. 
This debars the affix . Thus +=TT + 1 (VII. 2. 116) TTT: seizing,' a crocodile'; or 1 + 0=ut'a planet'. 
The option allowed by this aphorism is a vyavasthita-vibhasha or de finite option, that is to say, the affixt is always used when the word to be formed means a water-animal, such as a crocodile, shark &c., and in that sense the word is my But not so, when heavenly laminaries are meant; there the word is u 
Vert: This rule should be extended to the root to be also. thus:-- :condition' and wo: 'existence'. 
33 :11 89 11 Taifa , :,( 5:) uranufat: maar wala at mafc # 
144. The affix # is employed after the verb when the agent so expressed denotes a house. 
Thus + (VI. 1. 16) = ' a house'. The Tis changed into by the rule of samprasarana. The plural form : means wife', as she is especia lly the person that constitutes the house ; while the plural of Te meaning 'house will be of 
farfeufo ten 84 1 ugefa ul fatfufa, tatu वृत्तिः ॥ यात प्रत्ययो भवति शिल्पिनि कर्तरि। atau farufafaa: 175TR 
115. The affix gt (**) comes after a verb when the agent so expressed denotes an artist. 
Vari:-This affix should be confined to the verbs qa to dance', 'to dig' and 'to dyo'. 
Thug - 
(VII. 1.) we dancer'. The letter wig indicatory (L. 3. 6) and by Rule IV. 1. 41, it denotes that words formed by pre fizon having indicatory form their feminine by the afix . Thas 
URE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
NT OF INDIA 
SE 
1. •I. $ 146-148.] 
THE AFFIX NYUT. 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
. 178 
ल सरकार 
the feminine of this sit; so also ya miner', fem. ; : washer man', fem tot. 
In the case of the root fer the nasal is elided. According to the opi nion of the author of Mahabhashya, only two verbs are governed by this Bâtra namely 7 and , According to him, the verb is takes the affix Thus 753+=t+a (VI. 4. 37)= t - * (VII. 1. 1. )= , feminine 
feat. 
TETET II PUe ll Cafe , Tha ( Farfaaf) वृत्तिः ॥ गायतेस्थ कन्प्रत्ययो भवति शिल्पिनि करि॥ 
146. The affix at, () comes after the verb #. to sing', when the agent so expressed, denotes an artist. 
As, 9 +5=14: (VI. 1. 45) a singer', fem. arch. 
TC II 989 u uIf I TE , ( :, farfagfor) दृत्तिः ॥ गीयतेयुत् प्रत्ययो भवति शिल्पिनि करि॥ 
147. The affix the is also employed after the verb to sing', when the agent so expressed denotes an artist. 
By the word also', the word of the last sûbra is drawn into thise Thus *4-TTg = a1 + (VII. 1. 1.) = 177: fem. ait; the is added by VII. 3.83. 
The separation of these rules (yoga-vibhagd) relating to is for the purpose of the sûtras that follow. Had un and re been made one aple orism, the anuoritti of both these affixes would have run into the subsequent stras. But it is intended that the anuvritti of the should only run, and 
hence this yoga-vibhaga or division of one sûtra into two. 
Tafeaut: itays llogifan , , atfertig ( T ) 
fo: a sutafuatay wiatre gerar ret av fco 
148. After the verb , also the affix is employed when the agent so expressed denotes rice' and 
time'. 
The verb e denotes two verbs ero' to abandon' and are bo go' bobh belonging to the Third Conjugation, forming stufa and foreia as 3rd per. sing. Thus + TE =grum a kind of rice' (that which jahati leaves off all water) Sta: 'a year' (that which jihite goes through all conditions.) 
REGOV 
VERNMENT 
CGY OF CULTU. 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
THE AFFIX VUN 
[BR. III. Ca. I. 149 1 
सरकार 
1 
The accents are however different in the two. In one case the udatta is on the middle; in the other, on the last. 
(E) : PETE pee at uçtfit # 9--(E) ui, furt, 
Fa: us (9) T aat uigva: 9HTIR TT maar wafa u 
149. After the verbs to go', 'to move', 'to flow and to cut', the affix yt is employed, when repetition is meant. 
As, 3+ = 1- (VII. 1.1.)=79, so also, 75, 176, and 79, 
The word sa mabhihåra in the sûtra indicates that the action done by the agent must be well performed. The affix vun being thus ordained for the action, when it is well performed, it followe, that it will not be employed where the aotion is repeatedly ill performed. The affix will be employed even when there is no repetition, but the action is well performed even at the first attempt. 
strafe angyo ut uerf n stufarfa, , (97) fa: u safufer würat YTOINT GT Turafata 
150. The affix ge is employed after all verbs, when benediction is intended. 
As, ofte + =uam may he live'; ras' may he be happy'. 
The word suits means a sort of prayer; and it relates to action. The force of this aflix is that of an agent with the addition that the action is sim ply the object of a prayer of some one who wishes that that may be the ac tion of that agent's URE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
SL 
संस्कृति मंत्रान 
सत्यमय जयते 
47 
.17 
मोइस् 
अथ तृतीयाध्यायस्य द्वितीयःपादः॥ 
BOOK THIRD. 
CHAPTER II. 
- 0: Turn 11 açtfat fu, ,( prent: ) pfeu afar fara sacracyür wafa 
area sitraumfuatefovar : yuragfacutea FTTO वार्तिकर ॥ ईनिवमिन्या चेति वक्तव्य । 
1. The affix to comes after a verbal root, when the object, (of whatever sort it may be), is in composition with it, (as an upapada). 
The object or karma is of three sorts, namely nivartya, vikarya and prápya. 
The object which has a material cause, but such cause is however unexpressed in the sentence, is called nivariya object : as trahe makes & pot'; here yumud' the material cause of 4 is unexpressed, therefore, grew is nivartya object. Where the material cause itself is changed, by @ modification, into something else, such an object is called vilarya object; as 
REGTE: 'the branch-cutter'. While the object which cannot be approached by any action, and is not affected by it, but is always constant, is called the prapya object; as a grou: 'the reading of Veda; the Veda is always the same. 
They will be illustrated by the following examples --Of the first kiud, we have ETT & potter' and etc. ' a city-builder' ; of the second, we have STRUTT: ' a branch-endter' and IT a reed-cutter'. Of the third, we have 
water the learning of Veda' and quara: the reading of Charch&'. But com pound nouns cannot be formed of such sentences as Tra" he goes to the 
et vaata he sees the sun', femeia zutfa'he hears the Himavat'. The 18 a 10 is against the usage of the language to form noung oub of these, 
Part --The aflix comes after the verbs er, are us and w and the noun in composition with it retains its original acount. As wa t 
addicted to flesh', fem, sier ; loving flesh', fem, wit , 
vorous, fem, wiatr i and TTTTTTgood-conducted', fem weet TERI 
URE • GOVE 
VERNMENT 
RY OF CULTUS 
MINISTRY 
T OF INDIA 
THE AFFIX KA 
B L. NI. CH. ILU 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
1772 
Vart:-The affix + comes after the roots tu' to look' and 'to for bear' under similar circumstances. As guetes, fem guntur expecting happiness'; **: fem. aguar' much for bearing'. 
Tratate GIFT I ET, at, :, 7, ( ) yfants, as, tu vāxaza mieguvēsturadt Haía u 
2. The affix *y comes after the root is to call', as to weave', 'to measure', when the object is in composition with it. 
This debars the affix (III. 2. 3); as it + =U* +57 += +12= (VII. 3 33)=Easteras (the T is added by rule VII. 3. 33,' when & krit affix with an indicatory r or w folloows, the augment is added after the verbs that end in long ). So also aag 703, ya TTS 
stretsgaan a u ugrfor ti, sguai, F, ( fo) 
fe: Heirat #rgūtsgrafa: eguna euat wafa o 
3. The affix comes after a verbal root that ends in long, WT, when there is no upasarga preceding it, and when the object is in composition with it. 
This debars 1,; as ot to ar t ani+ + =itt: Giver of cows (the long w is elided by VI. 4.64) So also, 78: 'who gives a blanket for 
what protects the rear'; surfa ' what protects the finger' (a thimble'). 
Why do we say when there is no upasarga'? Witness igre 'whot ceremoniously gives a cow', water who ceremoniously gives a mare'. Here the compound verb der takes the affix * . 
gfu EU: Bu ustfugfu, 9:,( : ) चिः ॥ जुबन्त उपपदे विष्टवेः कात्ययो भवति । 
4. The aflix comes after the root eat when in composition with a word ending in a case-affix, as an upapada 
In the three previous stras, the word in composition was always in the accusative case. This subra declares that with regard to the verb eur, the upapada may have any case, not necessarily the accusative. As = fagfe who dwells in accossible position', and fauna 'having an inaccessible posibion, 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
T OF INDIA 
01.01. I. $ 5.] 
TEE AEFIX KA. 
गावग्यायत 
2 
This sûtra should be divided into two sâtras (yoga-bibhâga). Thus: (1) TT The affixa comes after every root ending in long 71, when in compo sition with a case-inflected word; as great foafa=f&+- + =fga: (VI. 4. 64) who drinks with two organs' i.e. the proboscis and the mouth, an elephant. So also sigt: a plant' (what drinks through the foot.) 45u: 'a tortoise' (that always protects its mouth by drawing it in, at the approach of danger). (2) TEU The affix a comes after the root Fut when in composition with a word ending in a case-affix. Why do we make this two-fold division, when we see the second rule is included in the first, as the verb fer also ends in a long ? The reason is that the first rule applies where the agent is indicated, while the second rule applies where condition is to be denoted. As T TECETTE 
igau: 'a gwarm of rats'; so also taurea: 'a swarm of locusts'. 
Both the words wife and are understood in the sůtras that follow : viz: the word of in sû tras that relate to transitive verbs, and the word gre everywhere else. 
Tanaht: TTFUTTET: 119 ate a t at, Tft -sugat:; ( fo, :) 
: neta: Toat: frunteustafcat: w at vafa u afa u UJCTETTiffa umaaru arfien u wanta afayufera TTT6177# 
5. The affix comes after the verbs fryer to wash out and we to drive away, when in composition with the words are navel' and on grief", as objects res pectively. 
As ge utgo s he lay lazy'. So also 1414 #gør ma: 'a son, des troyer of sorrow is born'. 
Vart:- This affis is to be applied only then, when the meaning of the word to be formed is lazy' and 'giver of happiness'. 
Vart:--The epithet gre oft is applied to a lazy person ; while que afarets means who clears his pavel. So rega: means giver of happines, while stata means' removal of sorrow'. 
Vart:--The words wafagus 'a chariot' and the rest should be in cluded in the subdivision of words formed by the aflix , The words belonge ing to this head can only be recognised by their form, there being no lieb of them to be found anywhere. Thus tafaya' a chariot,' ruga 'a bow,' TATU 
mesamums,' 
s a ara)' a lotus. 
URE - GOVO 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
THE ATFIX TAK. 
[BE, III. CH. 
6 
a 
on 
2919 
ūçis: 11 & 1 otfa nū, 57-5, ( fr, :) tie: n geta fraze urente STTTETE F u ndi wafan 
6. The affix on comes after the root or 'to give' and it to know, when taking the preposition and in composi tion with a word in the accusative case. 
We applied by sâtra 3 the affix after verbs that ended in long and had no upasargo. Now begins the case of verbs with upasarga. This debars the aflix ; as He: (VI. 4. 64) giver of all ; liberal', siqa: (VI. 4. 64) * acquainted with road. The long ti of er and et is elided by VI. 4. 64. 
Why do we say 'when taking s'? With any other upasurga these verbs will take the general affis ; as actu. 
ufreu: 11 9 11 ton aft, , ( TT, 7:) त्तिः ॥ सम्पूर्वात ख्या इत्येतसाहातो कर्मण्युपपदे कप्रत्ययो भवति । 
7. The affix e comes after the root var to tell', when preceded by the preposition , and when the object is in composi 
tion with it. 
The verb war ends in long stand by III. 2. 3. when compounded with an upasarga, it would have taken the aflix . This debars as a (VI. 4. 64)' a cowherd' ((ort ers). 
autocou cu greu 7-ot, a, (**ft, gut) fa u ra: fuam erat: grasguereqet af a arfema great faaffaa 
H a fa tfa urmare u 
8. The affix ce comes after the verbs to sing' and to drink' when used without a preposition, and when the objeot is in composition with it. 
The phrase anupasanga is to be read again into this satra by anuvritti from sobre 8, though this amuritti had temporarily lain dormant in stras 6 und 7 as being unnecemmary. This debars ; of this affis and are indicatory. the showing among others that the feminino is formed by the affix Ag (IV. 
AR, Twafara ** * (VI. 4. 64) 'sho vingo Sakra hytona', singer of Sama'. fem. wft and wit 
Vart -The aftr. in comes after the verb or when it means to drink and only when it is in composition with tho] wonds ysr and sy as its objoct, 
URE - GOVE 
VERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY ON 
T OF INDIA 
I. A. II. $ 9) 
THE APPIX ACL. 
सत्यम्य जयत 
26. 
TREET 
This is an important modification of the general sâtra. Thus gars fem. gcroft 
wine-bibber'; agt: fem. ayet 'spirit-drinker'. 
Why do we say when in composition with surâ and sidhu'? Observe 
• To muit' the milk-drinking Brahmani'; formed by the afix and the femio nine, therefore, not formed by the affix but by s. 
Why do we say when or means to drink'? When y means 'to protect' this affix is not used ; ag yetu' whe protects wine'. 
When these words are compounded with an upasarga they do not take but st; eta, TT4F1: 
Vart. There is diversity in the Chhanddas as to the employment of these affixes; ag y grunt garot or gear wafa Haint: fata fra the gods do not carry that Brâhmani to the regions of her husband who drinks wine, 
gråtagal nget i gre, sgua, , ( T) 
वृत्तिः॥ इरतेर्धातोरनुद्यनने वर्तमानात् कर्मण्युपपदेऽप्रत्ययो भवति । afy 1979 of maintaiguaftatavaeetus TTTTTTTT बार्तिकर ॥ जूष धार्य। 
9. The affix e comes after the verb T when it does not mean to raise up, when the object is in com position with it. 
Tbig debars . The word en means to raise a loads. Thus si fa= UTTI' who takes a share, or sharer?; so frete' an heir'.(+2= 
+ =t:) (VII. 3. 84 ) 
Why do we say when it does not mean to raise up' ? For then the affix str will be employed; as TFTC: ' a burden-bearer, porter', 
Vart.--This affix comes after the verb T when in composition with the word u spear', 17 plough', u'gond', afe'staff", a "an iron club', vejar', ut & small jar', 'a bow'; as fru & lancer' EFT 
a plough-man', que fan elephant driver', afTe:' a staff-bearer', act: a club-bearer', WETE, C : ajar-bearer', u 'a bow-bearer: 
Vart --This affix comes after the verb when the word is in composition with it and the sense is that of bolding'; as * : ' a thread holder'. When it has not this meaning we have : ' a thread-taker'. 
afon peut faut arafs, a, a, feu fes af w at we star wafa a 
GOVERNMENT 
SURE .GO 
OF CULTUD 
MINISTRY 
T OF INDIA 
THL AFFIX ACH. 
. संस्कान 
[Br. III. CH. II. SUDU 
सवस्टकायत 
2770 
10. The affix su comes after the varb er when the object is in composition with it and when the means ing of the word to be formed is descriptive of age. 
In this sû tra the verb rst has the sense of udyamana which was speci. fically excluded in the last. The word y means the condition of human body as dependent upon time. This rule applies to those words wbich indicate the attainment of appropriate age for the accomplishment of objects described by the upapada, or the reaching of that age in which the thing described by the upapada naturally takes place; as sfeart: in' the dog that has reached the nge when it can chew bones' (lit when is can raise it up); TET: USTUSTIT: the Kehatriya boy old enough to wear (lit, to raise up or bear) the shield'; so that the verb here has the sense of 'raising ap'. 
sifoniera pueteru aft, arom, (*fu; sta:, ) 
fan i gofera: eguvesquerwafa . * 
11. The affixer comes after the verb Ts (when the object is in composition with it), the root taking the preposition wit, and the sense of the word to be formed is inclination or aceustomed oocupa tion. 
The word ardei medns a natural inclination or habitual occupation; me qeret: 3T+ s farger+ ) he who has a natural tendency towards renching flowers, whose habitual occupation is to collect flowers'; go also 
E: 
Why do we say 'when denoting inclination'? Otherwise the affix will be ; as ofA=WTCTET: 'who brings load.' 
Se: Ruugif , ift, 7 ) yft ut atat, segrat: yqstar warfare 
12. The aflix comes after the verb 'to respect', when the object is in composition with it. 
This debars . The words so formed are especially of feminine gen dor. As gue deserving of respect', af, TUR 
fuerat f : 13 for li cat , fq writ:,( ufo ) 
*** wan gurueda ele xferiteteatamaran wa 
fif fe fer es 
URE 
GOVE 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY O. 
ERNMENT ON 
OF INDIA 
on IL CH I. $ 13, 14] 
THE AFEIX ACH. 
सरकार 
13. The affix y comes after the verb to sport' and 'to whisper' when the case-infected words 
*** 'a clump of grass and sear' are in composition with them respectively. 
The verb te is intransitive and the verb e can take an object under Very limited circumstances only, namely when the objecb denotes Sabda ; there. fore in the case of both these verbs, the object cannot be in composition as an accusative case ; therefore, the upapa la here must be a general oase-infected word. Hence we have read the anuvritti of the word TT froin gûtra into this, the anu vritti of the word being inapplicable here. 
Vart:--The words to be formed must have the sense of elephant' and a 'tale-bearer'. Thus carac = cran elephant (lit. who sports in cluster of grass) # afa= 'a slanderer (lit. who whispers in the ear)'. 
The affix's is not employed when the words to be formed do not mean an elephant' and a traducer? Thus fra t-ar' who plays iu clusters of 
grags'. Forfat *. 'the mosquito that hums near the ear'. 
af sprat: 1881 arfer el safa, vrati, - STRUM, ( T) 
yfas u tega EASTEdgai faca s etara a 
14. The affix 597 is employd after the verbal roots, when t'well', is in composition, and the word to be formed 
denotes a name, 
As vr +*+9=EC: lit. who does good'. So also y*wa: wat: 0 All these are proper nouns. 
Why have we repeated the word dhatu in this aphorisna, when it was understood by an vritti from sllora III. 1 91? To this the reply is, that the res petition of the word dhatu shows that there is prohibition of the affixe, that comes after the verb in certain sense III. 2. 20), when the word v1 19 10 composition. The affix sy will be employed after the verb & and not the affix 2, when yt is an upapada, even when the sense to be indicated is that of cause, habit &c. (III 2. 20). The result is that the feminine of will be TEST, and nob Teit, which, had the affix been , would have been the proper feminine (See IV.1. 14). To incang'a female-ascebie,' a vulture' and 'one having the habit of doing good'. 
sfracana: gaueatfrei sferi, na:, (ufu, suro) 
E 
.GOV 
RY OF CULTUS 
MINISTRI 
JERNMENT ON 
OF INDIA 
THE AFRIX TA. 
(BK. III. CH. II. S D 16. 
• 
सत्यय जयते 
सरकार 
yftu Davierefrata vrata stata wafa 
fan affageUTTU at få en ufouuugat u शार्तिकम् ॥ उचानादिषु कर्तृषु॥ पार्तिवान् ॥ गिरी उच्छन्दति ॥ 
15. The affix gu comes after the verb s 'to lie down' when in composition with a case-inflected word indicating location, i. e, in the locative case. 
The word yg (III. 2. 4) a noun ending in a case-affis is understood in this aphorism. As a g=yu: 'who lies in the sky'. 
Vart :-The affix 57 comes after the verb sit when in composition with the words a 'ribs', &c., though not necessarily denoting location; as or at ua: 'who reclines on his sides', qua: 'who lies on his stomach', TUTT' who lies on his back'. 
Vart.-And when the verb c is preceded by the word fazuar; as दिग्धेन सह येते-दिग्धपणयः॥ 
Vart. So also when the words at &c. are in composition with it de noting agent and in the nominative case. As 541a: ha=54109: 1 saat 
Vart.- In the Ohhandag the affix y comes after the yerb it when in composition with the word forft in the locative. As forte da = fifcu: 'who lies on the mountain'. 
The letter of Ty is indicatory denoting that there is elision of the final vowel with what follows it (1. 1. 64). 
TE: 11 gen UET 11 :, :,( sufi, ufor) ufa mtufatefuara gara v enegar vafa a 
16. Tho affix comes after the verb c 'to go' when a case-infected word in composition with it, denotes location. 
The word adhikarana of the last stra is understood in this. As fly w ho goes among the Kurus. who goes among the Madras' 
Or the affix the real affix is the letter being indicatory, showing Whos the feminine of these words is formed by the affix . (See. IV. 1.41.) as, 
GOVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
181 SININ 
NT OF INDIA 
: BEST .CH. II. S 17-20] 
THE AFFIX TA. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
सरकार 
भिक्षासेनादायेषु च ॥ १७॥ पदाधि भिक्षा-सेना-प्रादायेषु, च, (चरे, टा)॥ 
दृत्तिः ॥ भिक्षा लेना शादाब इत्येतेयुपपदेष परेर्धातोष्टप्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
17. The affixt is employed after the verb to go', when the words in composition with it are per alms', सेना army' and शादाय having taken'. 
The anuvritti of the words in the locative case' does not extent to this aphorism, and hence the necessity of making a distinct and separate sûra. 
Thus भिक्षाचर: a beggar' (who goes for alms); सेनापरः 'one who goes with an army'; जादायबर: 'one who goes after having taken 
पुरोग्यतोऽग्रेषतः ॥ पदानि पुरस-अग्रतस-अग्रेषु, सते, 
वृत्तिः ॥ पुरत अनवर अग्रे इत्येतेषूपपदेषु सतर्घातोष्टप्रत्ययो भवति । 
18. The affix comes after the verb 'to move when the words in composition with it, are 9:, : and शाग्रे, all meaning in front of or before'. 
As पुरः सरति = पुर: सर: 'who goes in front, a harbinger', So also at: and suit: 'going in front, a leader'. 
पूर्व कर्तरि ॥ १९ ॥ पदामि ॥ पूर्व, कर्त्तरि, ( सतः, टः) । वृत्तिः पूर्वशब्दे क वाषिन्युपपदे सर्तेर्धातोष्टप्रत्ययो भवति । 
19 The affix a comes after the verb u to go', when पूर्व is in composition with it, denoting the agent. 
Thus पूर्वः सरतिपूर्वसरः 'going in front'. 
Why do we say 'denoting the agent'? Otherwise the affix are will be employed. A पूर्वदेशं शरति-पूर्वपर: going to the east'. 
कृमी हेतुताच्छील्यानुलोस्येषु ॥ २० ॥ पदानि ॥ कृजः, हेतु-ता च्छील्य-धानुलोम्येष, (कर्मणि, टः) 
वृत्तिः ॥ चण्णुपपदे करीतर्घातोष्टप्रत्यया भवति तो वाहील्ये या गुलोम्ये च गन्यमाने । 
20. The affix e comes after the verb got to make when the object is in composition with it denoting cause, habit and going with the grain (concession). 
The word eg of this stra means the final or conclusive cause, and is not the grammatical a meaning agent. ad means habib, and literally, tha 
SURE .GOV 
OVERNMENT 
ev OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
4T OF INDIA 
THE AFFIX TA. 
BK, 111, Oh. I 
NO 
UGEOT 
abbi being accustomed to that. sia comes from sagita meaning with the hair', that is to say, regular, in natural order, successive, and hence favourable, and agreeable complaisance, acquiescence &c. Of ta, we have taget ut the daughter that causes sorrow; nit fugat 'honorable science'; * * the family making wealth'. Of arater, we have sigar:' who performs obse quies'; sit:' who amasses wealth'. Of nigata, we have at: who pro. mptly does what he is directed'; 96: 'who regularly does what he is told. 
Why do we say when having these senses'? Otherwise the affix will be As TT: potter", TTTTT:"city-maker'. 
farfa HTFTTICHTTEETTI at feugaitfefufufafa afafane feraha ETITE CITIGTING Traty u 9 ucrfer u 
four-fair-fa276-1-77*-*-*FA-maaf-ag-aract-fa fa fa-fafa-uforf-n-f7-49-RETT=130T-a15=3*5=42-4a 
T--Foy, ( *ifu, glu, ma:, :) 
fe: farfequêg rautatu eat wafa u antra u for tatt sitsfaumu 
21. The affix comes after the verb to make when the following words are in composition with it : fear by day', fant light', fat night', splendour', : light', *** 'work', wa 'end', we endless', af beginning, many', 4€ benediction', f*t 'what, fare writing', Peter writing', afa oblation', we devotion', agent', fex paint ing'. 'field', words denoting numerals, TEST thigh', IS 
hand', w day, w what', at that', age, bow', and se wound'. 
Both the words 'larma' and 'aupare understood in this aphoriem ; that is to say, sometimes these papadas stand as accusative case and sometimes they have other cases, as the construction may require. This affix comes when the sense is not that of cause 8., as it was in the last sutra. 
Thus featud 'the sun.' The word fear is an inde clinable and means in the day time'. There the upapada, therefore, is in the locative case. The sun is so called, because it makes crentures active in the day time. 
So fam.the sun' (light-makers; fic 'the moon' (the night-ma ker): the sun'; ten the sun' (the letter T is not changed in to visar ge, as it has been so read in the satra); 6 c agent'; vac: death' (end maker); 
magnifying to any extent'; was the creator': the busy'; 
w e 'the speaker of benediction', fag'a servant': fafcunt: 'a GOVERNMEA 
CULTURE. 
QY OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY OF 
WENT OF INDIA 
II. CA. II. $ 22, 23] 
TAE AFFIX TA 
सत्यमेव जयते 
संस्कृतिमा 
scribe'; feferat:' a scribe'; afast: offering gacrifice', fot: 'a devotee'; sig at an agent'; : 'a painter', 1957: a cultivator'; c'doing only one thing', faat: doing two things'; fuat: 'doing three things'; 07. 
a runner, an express', 13t: a hero', 'a manual labourer'; TEET: the sun', aadoing that'; TETT: doing that'; wat: bow-maker'; TETES 'causing or inflicting wounds'. 
Vart. The affix 5T comes after the verb y when fauna and agare in composition with it. The speciality of c affix is that the feminine of words derived from it is formed by long ; while the feminine of words derived by अच् is formed by long मा. Thus विवरा, यत्करा, तकरा, and बहुकरा ; these words might be said to belong to the wife class (See IV. 1.31). 
1afu wat u pa usifa alifu, wat, (afu, mài, 
T: n e you morfahrragutt hafa yat #47770118 
22. The affis & comes after the verb 'to make', when the word wat is in composition with it, and the sense of the word to be formed is that of wages. 
The word ufa means service for hire, wages. The wordt does not mean the grammatical object but the word-form ; as **: a hired la bourer' (not a slave); otherwise the affix is ; as wate: an artisan'. 
7 araçâTERTUTE1997g 11 23 agifer 1,975-T-U-TTT-919-97-777-19, ( a:, :) 
वृत्तिः ॥ शब्दादिपपदेषु करोते प्रत्ययो न भवति ॥ 
23. The affix = does not come after the verb to make', when the following words are in composition with it:-1 'sound', ata verse', U quarr ell, CT 
praise'j & enmity', flattery', 'thread', Toshymns' and word. 
This prohibition relates even when the sense is that of cause, habit &c. The affix & being probibited, the general affix sy takes its place. As w ur: 'sounding, sonorous'; zatenata: 'a verse-maker'; HTC one who fomenta quarrels'; 1T'& writer of Gathês or prakrita verses'; UTC 'an enemy'; *: 'fatterer'; : an author of sâtras'; 'a como poser of Mantras'; 'an author of Padapatha', 
VRE Goya 
NERNMENTO 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY OF 
OF INDIA 
रायम्य जयते 
THE AFFIX IN. 
[BK. III CH. I. § 29 
. 
sungafa ugy nagtfor u Fa-Fati, 47, ( fr ) 
afere u fata F dat: terreategear wafer # afa entrar difefa TT 
24. The affix comes after the verb when the objects in composition with it, are the words t'a sheaf, and 'ordure', 
Thus fara+5+TT=fafcafe nom. sing, eauft: ; so also insti. 
Vart.--This rule is applicable when the sense of the words to be form ed, is that of 'rice' and ' a calf respectively. Therefore cafeaft: means, rice', and wafe,' a calf'. 
When the words have not the senses of rice' and ' a calf' the affix sit is employed. As rasta: 'sheaf-maker', Fa: ordure-maker'. 
tag fawiuat: uait uyu açıfår i grå, gra-ritereit, aft, ( ft; ) 
resu ga ne udar nathratar: aastat: voit safe to tra fa u 
25. When the agent indicated is an animal, the affix ut comes after the verb t 'to take', the object in composition with it being the words gfa'a leather-bag' and we 
a master'. 
Thus gfagfe: 'a dog' (a carrier of skin); info: 'a beast' (that carries its master), 
When the words formed do not denote an animal, the affis ur is em ployed; as sfarra' a water-carrier' (a carrier of a leather-bag for holding water). : ' a carrier of his master". 
wufetamin B6 11 ugefa afe:-weeft, 
fra måterfie: wwwfesta forma a 
26. And the words wagfe and satenente are irregularly formed. 
The word wife is formed by adding the affix re to the verband making the apapada end in the vowel e. Thus water 
af the fruit-bearing i. e, a tree'. 
OF CULTUA 
VERNMENT OS 
BOMU TIL. CO. II. $ 27-28.1 
THE AFFIX REAS. 
सत्यद जयते 
The word src# ft: is formed by adding the augment yr () to the upa pade sa, and the affix ry to the verb vs. Thus are ta fala = muit: 'sele fish' (one who feeds his own self). 
The word 'and' indicates that there are other such irregularly-formed words. As giroft:' gluttonous, selfish' (caring to feed his own belly). Urt: 'gluttonous, selfish'. 
fonte TATE 39 Gifa naf, wa-27 E TF, (fa, un 
वृत्तिः ॥ वन सन संभत्तो, रख पालते, मय विलोडने, रतेभ्यः वानरयुपपदे छन्दसि विषये इन् प्रत्ययो भवति॥ 
27. In the Vedic literature, the affix comes after the verbs ar to honor' 'to worship'te to protect' and to agitate', when the object is in composition 
Thus trafi za u f- (Vaj. San. I. 17., V. 12., VI. 3); ca info (Rig. Ved. VI. 53. 10) a zarar vacht (Rig. Ved. X. 14. 11) T TETTU TITUCT Tinatate (Rig. Ved. VII. 104. 21). 
T: IRC I orfall Titi, vt, ( ) वृत्तिः॥ एज बाम्पने इत्यस्माद् यन्तात्कारयुपपदे खशप्रत्ययो भवति ॥ atfernt u tega atagalfagog calle Toutangverat 
28. The affix comes after the verb to tremble' when ending in fo (III. 26.) and when the object is in composition with it. 
This affix comes after the ca usative of on. Of the affix on the letters and I are indicatory, the real altix is . The indicates that the augment u is added to the upapada ending in a vowel (VI. 3. 67). The indicates that this is a Sárvadhâtuka affix (III. 4. 113), and therefore the vikaraņas like ste &c. (III. 1. 68.) will be employed here. Thus w uafa=1 T : ( + for+ 
T + TS 
+ + 5T) who awes the limbs'; 'who awes man lind'. 
Vart :-The aflix comes after the verbs to go', 'to suck', as to strike', 'to leave' when in composition with the words wa 'wind', wit a bitch', fag.sesamum' and flatulence'. As uar: YTT: Awift antelopos' (going with the wind); yfu' a bitch-sucker', frag'an oilman'; 
:' a kind of bean' (that causes or cures flatulence). The long to get in shortened by VI 3, 66. 
10 
FURE 
GOVO 
VERNMENT 
av OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
T OF INDIA 
TAL ATFIX KHAS. 
(BK. III. Ch. II. $ 294 
सवय जयते 
7751 
fenntafett: a peu eft u alfa-Faaruti, #ret:; ( FT, I) 
Tur naal: * Teatteafacriat: TTT afa afa gru : fatig T DETTI 
29. The affix on comes after the verbs var' to blow' and to suck' when fer nose' and can breast, are in com position with them as object. 
The rule of yathdganchyd as given in I. 3. 10 does not however, apply here. For 7 is compouoded with ea; as (ar + +7 =42 +9 ++ 
9 + =+*+7+7+3+)=4at : 'an infant' (sucking the breast). 
But after is compounded with both Eat and #; as fa+El+T = +*+- +*(VI. 3. 66 and 67; VII. 3. 78=truri' blowing and breathing through the nose. So also ifT: drinking through the nose'. 
That the rule of yatkasankchyd does not apply here, is indicated by the irregular construction of the Duantva compound #FETTETTE. By rule 11. 2. 89 the word so containing fewer syllables ought to have stood first; one irregu larity lets in another. 
The feminine of any is entiert, as the verb has an indicatory do 
etgceditur n po n wetfor u wet-geauti,, (*fet:, -det:, ) 
fat et afta radaan T eaterlaat u hear wafa 
30. And when the words wint a tube' and of fist' are objects in composition with the verbs spp andthe affix is employed. 
Here also the irregularly-formed Dvan dv a compound atgigit shows the non-applicability of the rule of yath deankhya ; for sfe being a fu ought to have stood first (I1. 2. 32). 
Thug of 'blowing through the tube'; y 'blowing through the fist'; t u suoking through the tube', an infant; fyrr ' an infant'. 
The word and in the aphorism indicates that there are other words also go formed Thus we , we , uit , feu, aru, ataua, 'a mountain' 
This satra is not Panini's, but is really a Vartika, raised to the ranle of a sfóra by the author of the Ksika. The Vertikalara divides the last stra in this way :(1) a DE # (2) ait ** (3) f ut ETT # (4) जुलि चटोपारीचिति बसायच ॥ 
TRE - GOVE 
VERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY OF 
OF INDIA 
BESTL: CE. IL. 31-34] 
THE AFFIX. REAS. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
अतिसंग्राम 
उदि कूले सजिवहोः ॥ ३१ ॥ पदानि ॥ उदि, कूले, रुजि-बहोः, 
वृत्तिः ॥जो भो, वह प्रापणे, रताच्यानुत्पूर्वाभ्यां कूले कर्मण्युपपदे खशप्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
31. Tbe affix, ख श् comes after the verbs ज ' to break into pieces' and वह to carry', when preceded by the upasarga उत्, and the word "bank' is in composition with them as the object. 
Thus कूल जुगुजति = कूलयुगुज: breaking down banks' (such as a chariot, river, elephant, &c.); FATT: tearing up or carrying away the bank'. 
वहालिहः ॥ ३२ ॥ पदामि ॥ वह-प्रभ लिहः ॥ (सश्)॥ वृत्तिः॥ वह अन्न इत्ये तयोः कर्मणोरुपपदयो लिहेर्धातोः खशप्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
32. The affix 9 comes after the verb fut 'to lick when the objeot in composition with it, is the word = 'the shoulder of an ox' or 'a cloud'. 
As atleet oft: 'the shoulder-licking cow'; fagt uty: 'the cloud-lick. ing wind'. 
परिमाणे पचः ॥ ३३॥ पदागिपरिमाणे, पचः, (कर्मणि, खश ) वृत्तिः ॥ परिमाणं प्रस्थादि, तल्लिकार्जर युपपदे पधेः खश्प्रत्ययो भवति । 
33. The aflix comes after the verb 'to cook' when the object in composition with it denotes a 
measure. 
Thus sed rufa= 'a pot having the capacity to cook a prastha of food'; so also द्रोणपच:, सारिपच: 'a kettle'. 
मितनखे च ॥ ३४ ॥ पदानिमित-नखे, च, (पचा सश्)॥ त्तिः॥मित नरा इत्येतयो कर्मयोपपदयोः पचे खप्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
34, The affix खम् is employed after the verb पच, when faa 'a measured partition' or wu 'a nail' is the word in composition with it as an object. 
The aphorism has its scope when the words formed do not denoto me eures, which was the case in the last sâtra, Th119 faarurust the Brahmani who cooks a little i.e. a. niggardly Brahmani'; TT UTT: the nail-scorching berley gruel'. 
विध्वरुषोस्तुदः ॥ ३५ ॥ पदानि ॥ विधु-अरुषो, तुदः, ( कर्मणि, 
शि ॥ विघु अब प्रत्येसया कार्यवीरपदयोः देतो समस्ययो भवति । 
CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
VERNMENT ON 
T OF INDIA 
TAE AFFIX REAS. 
[BK. III. CH. II. $ 193, 
गयन्दजयते 
• संस्कृति 
35. The affix comes after the verbl og to strike', when fug the moon' or set a wound' is the word in composition with it as object. 
As fuyrak: 752' the Rabu that eclipses the moon ; T: 'corrosive, wounding the vital parts'. For the addition of the augment y after the word शासा, 80 VI. 3.67. 
शसूर्य ललाटयो शितपोः ॥ ३६॥ पदानि ॥ असूर्य-लसोटयोः, द्रशि-सपोः, (कर्मणि, खश) 
कृत्तिः ॥ असूर्यललाट इत्येतयोः कर्मयोपपदयाः इशितपोर्धात्वोः खप्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
36. The affiix au comes after the verb go to see and a 'to heat' when se and are are the words in composition with it as object. 
Thus सूर्य+दृश+ख = सूर्यम्पश्यः; as सासर्यम्पश्या राजदारा 'the king's wives not even see the sun' (being shut up in the harem, and so having no opportunity of seeing the sun, that is, they are so well probected that even the sun cannot see them much less any irreverent gaze). 
So also creat: beating the fore-head' (such as the sun). 
The word wat is an incomplete or impossible compound as the nogativo su applies to the verb gur and not to the word ra. This is in opposition to the rule of samaratha pad a vidhi (1l 1. 2.) 
उग्रम्पायरम्मदपाणिन्धमाश्च ॥३७॥ पदानि ॥ उग्रम्पश्य परम्मद-पाणिन्धमाः, च॥ 
त्तिः॥ उग्रम्पश्य परमनद पाणिम्धम इत्येते चन्दा निधास्यन्ते ।। 
36. The words उग्रन्पश्य, इएस्मद and पारिन्धन are irregular ly formed.. 
Thus उपश्यति = उग्रव्यय: fierce-looking'; इरया नदाति= इरसाद ' delights ing in drinking an epithet of Agni, a flash of lightning'. So of : 71 chilly roads', 
प्रियवशे बदः खच् ॥३८॥ पदानि ॥ प्रिय-चशे, वदः, सच ॥ तिशियाशस्यतया कशारुप मधोनर्धातोख प्रत्यायो नापति धार्मिकम् ॥ प्रकारको गनः सुप्युपण्यान। बार्तियार ॥ विहाय सो विदचा बार्तिवान् ॥ खरच सिहर वक्तव्यः॥ पारि पबिहाययो बिहादेवो वाहव्यः 
MRE 
GOVE 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY ON 
QNMENT OFIA 
OF INDIA 
BK. II. CH. II. & 38, 39.] 
THE AFFIX KHACH. 
38. The affi.x He comes after the verb 'to speak when fire or 7 is the word in composition with it as an object. 
Thus fara affermat:' who speaks kindly'; 'ac: 'who professes gubmission'. 
Of the affix TT, the letters wand 7 are indicatory; a indicates the in sertion of the augment y VI. 3. 37), and shows that there is shortening of the vowel in certain coses (VI 4.94). 
In the case of fou and yu with me, the affix us wonld have given the bame result as the affix ay. Making a separate affix in this sa tra is for the sake of the aphorisms that follow, where this affix will produce different effects than an. 
Vart :---The affix at comes after the verb to go when a word enda ing in a case-affix is in composition with it. As fant Feat the slow moving i.e., an elephant'; fnat treat the slow-moving i.e. a she elephant'. 
Vart :This affix comes under similar circumstances when the word in composition with his fatua; and the latter is then replaced by the word fr. As f97375t neufa=fa : 'a bird (that which goes through the sky). 
Vart:- In the Vartikas above given, the affis *7 may optionally be considered as if it had an indicatory s. The force of 3 is to cange elision of the final vowel with what follows it. As fast: or farma: 'a bird'. So also years or yoitte'a serpent' (what goes crookedly). 
Varts - forore is replaced by far when the affix 3 (III. 2. 48) comes after the verb 7; as fuer: 'a bird'. Thus we have three forms: fart, force 
foarteara: 11 30 1 ugfa n fagauti, arā, 
trert u fever 
gettcaraajat 
afa 39. The affix or comes after the verb aty to heat when fra or p is the word in composition with it as an object. 
The verb u belongs both to Bhu and Chur classes. Both are mennt in the sûtva, In the case of Bhuddi, the verb afy is the causative ending in for of as; while in Churddi, all verbs take fo. 
Thas few arvata=f a : (VI. 4,94) 'one who destroys his enemies' so also cast one who subdues his enemies, a hero'. 
SURE - Gov 
OVERNMENT 
ay OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
THEATRIX KHACH. 
[Brr. III. CH. II. SDM 
सत्यमदजयते 
भारत सरकार 
This affix however, will not apply when the above upapadas are in the feminine gender. In this case the general affix अण् will be employed ; as द्विषती वापयति= द्विषतीतायाः । 
वाचि यमो वृते ॥४०॥ पदानि ॥ वाचि, यमः, वृते, (खच)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ वाक् शब्द पर्न गयुपपदे बनेर्धातोः खच प्रत्ययो भवति इते गम्यमाने ॥ 
40. The affix ww comes after the verb यस् to curb' when the word art speech' is in composition with it as object, and the sense indicated is that of a vow. 
The word wa means a vow taken according to the rules of Dharma sistra. Taus r a ' he has taken the vow of rigid silence. 
Why do we say vow'? Otherwise the form is वाग्याग: ' restrraining speech' (VIB.69). 
पू: सर्वयोरिसहोः ॥ ४॥ पदानि ॥ पू:-सर्वयोः, दारि-सहोः, 
वृत्तिः ॥ पुर सर्व इत्येतयाः पासपोपपदयोर्य यासंख्यं दारिसहोर्धात्यो खप्रत्यये। 
बार्तिकम् ॥ आगे पदारेरिति । 
41. The affix comes after the verb prie to split and to bear when respeotively in composition with the words पुर acity' and सर्व 'all, as objects. 
As gi yrafe=get name of Indra (who splits agunder cities)' (VI. 3. 69 and VI. 4. 94); TT TTUTT the king who is all forbearing' 
Vart-So also when the word 7 is in composition with the verb fe; DATKE a fabula in the anus'. 
सर्वकलाभूकरीषेषु कषः ॥ ४२ ॥ पदानि ॥ सर्व-कुल-अभ-करीषेषु, 
तिवर्ष कण न करीष इत्येतेषु कर्मसूपपदेषु कषेर्धातोः खच प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
42. The affix comes after the verby to rub when the words सर्व all', कूत bank', मन'oloud', and were a dry cow-dung', are in composition with it as object. 
AS स कथा villain, a roguo' : जूलकणादी 'a river'; यो गिरि 'mountain'; परीचया पाल्या 'aabrong wind'. 
URE - GOVE 
GOVERNMEN 
o OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
OF INDIA 
BISERII, CH. II. § 43 45,] 
THE AFFIX KHACH. 
Harry 
: 189 11 astron 80-ft-ag, 
:, 
yfa: sfer TT dan rum : aar warfa in बार्तिकम् ॥ उपपदविधी भयादिग्रहणं तदन्तविधि प्रयोजयति ॥ 
43. The affix comes after the verb 'to make when the words 'cloud' The misfortune' and 47 'fear' are in com position as objects. 
As het: 'producing clouds'; fast: 'giving pain', ': 'frightful 
Vart. The t adanta vidhi applies in the case of upapadas like a. &e, This is an exception to the nårtika under 1. 1 72. by which, in the case of affixes tadadta-vidhi was prohibited. Thus we have 4*: 'who causes security 
gaf Tag SU 188 11 agita ni Q-ful- , , , 
yfers a fou eda was attaat Tata 
44. And the aflix was well as u comes after the verb 'to make' when the words * 'happiness', faz 'pleasant and 
'joy' are in composition as objects. 
The word 'and' denotes that the affix is also to be included. 
Thug Tatt: or T: 'propitious'; fa 10 or foot: 'showing kind ness,, mt: or 'causing delight'. 
The repetition of the affix , when its anuvritti could have been read into this sûtra by using the word at 'optionally', indicates that these words never take the afix of sâtra 20 though cause, habit, &c., may bo denoted; so that the feminine of those words is for ned by sy and not by ; as satur: 
*c 'small beginnings lead to or cause prosperity'. 
surfata ya: Tuhat: ny noctfern sifata, :, Hatti, ( , gfu) 
yfer eigaga gara na waufats waardeer wufaa 
45. The affix 4 comes after the verb to be' when in composition with the case-inflected words 
satisfied by eating' and the sense is that of instrument or condition. 
The word 'gful of sutra 4 is understood here. 
GOVERNMA 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
OF INDIA 
THE APTIX KHACH. 
[Br. 111. CA. 1. 
47 
Thus situasi meaning food', literally that by which one is satiated. aufwet wit . Here the word denotes instrument. And swful also means 'satiety', which denotes condition. 
Tai vagferat fra fgafaca: un nofornit, -2-2-ft-urf-fe-afv-51, (aft, gfa, T.) u 
वृत्तिः ॥ तजि पारि सहि तपि दन इत्येतेभ्यो पातुभ्यः संज्ञार्या विषये खच प्रत्यया wafa 
46 The affix TT comes after the following verbs when the words to be formed denote a name:- viz. ' to bear', 
to cross over', 'to choose', for' to conquer', ufc to hold', it to bear, af to heat' and to subdue'. 
Both the words and gi of sâtra 1 and 4 are understood here and should be applied as the occasion requires Thus fazia exrth' (that which supports all); Teat' the Rathantara Så ma'; wract'a girl' lit. (who in about to choose a husband); TTT: an elephant' lit. (who conquers the enemy); gt: 'a mountain' or the pole of a carriage to which the yoke is fixed': 'Satrnnsaha' (withstanding an enemy); usa: 'Satrunta pa' (destroying an enemy); staa: 'Arindama' (victorious). 
Why do we say when denoting a name' ? Observe 5**TTT: 'he who supports his family 
# 89 n sifat i 74, 7, ( ufa, wrai, ry) शिः ॥ गोर्धातोः बुध्युपपदे सहायां विषये खणा प्रत्यया भवति । 
47. And the aflix comes after the verb to go when in composition with a word ending in a case-affix, and when the word to be formed denotes a ՂԱԹ. 
As 'Subanga ma'. Though the verb y could well have been in oluded in the last uphorism, the separation serves the purpose of carrying the an writti of tre into the subsequent sa tras. 
stareagtatatag : nye uefa - - --T-a, s ay, 3:n 
# * sera surt a 
stat 
u t 
w 
anauteri watu IRE 
GOVES 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
WR 
De (ii. Cr. II § 48.] 
THC AFFIX DA. 
रतसरश 
af uggattfra a of the factaa arfet hauafo puta u 
48. The affix 3 comes after the verb to go when in composition with the following words as its objects: waend', se excessive', a road', 'far', c.across', a 
all' and va endless'. 
The anuvritti of the word TTTT does nou extend to this. As yate: 'having gone to the end, thorougly conversant'; seuram: going too fast'; TEET: 'a way-farer'; Ett going to a distant place'; 'completely familiar': 
T 'going everywhere, the Supreme Being '; rast going to infinity, moving for ever'. 
Of the affix & the letter & is indicatory, the real affis being . The #indicates that the fe portion of the word to which this is added, must be elided (VI. 4. 143); as wa+-*+9= a + 5+5 (the fe portion of s ig elided). Now though the rule VI. 4. 143 says when that which has an indica tory 3, follows, there is elision of the fe of a t'; yet in the present case, such elision takes place, although the word 7 here is not one of those called (I. 4. 18), because the presence of 3 as an indicatory letter must not be un meaning. 
Vart-The 3 is also employed when the words in composition are utat 'everywhere'; and creeping '; ag : Supreme Spirit '; var: 'a enake 
Vari-So also when the word in composition is ur breast', and there. is eligion of its final. As scg + TT+3=UTT' moving on breast, a enako, 
Vart:-So also with the words y'well'and og bad. when the results ing words denote location. As gue that in which one goes easily, eagy of access'. 37: ' difficult of access, a fort'. 
Vart: So also with the preposition fars, the word to be formed means ing country; ag fa's 'a country'. 
Vart:- Others say, that this is added when other words besides the above stand as upapadas. Thus ESNTTT: ( + T+74+)'who goes to the women's compartment'; 17: "going to the village'; yeni 'who pollutes the bed of his guru, 
strata : 11 ya uçt II TFTO, T, (:) fra sauft warai pautett: iga 3 et af a greutate : 3 fo af for 
URE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
TRY OF CULTURA 
SI SINI 
NT OF INDIA 
TAS AFFIX DA. 
[BK. III. CH. II. S M25.1. 
. 
1770 71 
49. The afflix comes after the verb auto kill', when the object is in composition with it, and when benediction is intended. 
The affix is understood in this sûtra. Thus fafi JetT=fafres' may he kill the whale'; 'may he kill the enemy'. 
Why do we say when benediction is intended'? Otherwise we have uguras 'who kills his enemy'. 
Vart:--The affix y comes after the verb FIET when the word te wood' is in composition with it, and the final letter of the word so formed is changed into e, when the word so formed denotes a name. As gi siti grafute: ( 7*+ ** *) the wood-pecker'. 
Vart:--So also optionally when the word or beautiful' is in compo sition under circumstances detailed in the last vártika: as craintes or 
rafata 
Vart:--So also, when the verb c is preceded by the preposition , and is in composition with a word in the objective case, the affix vt is em ployed ; and the final is replaced by t; as वर्णान् संहन्ति वर्णसंघाट: or वर्ण संघात: 
the alphabet'पदानि संहन्ति = पदसंघाट: or पदसंघात: 'connecting the words that are separated, an annotator'. 
sd g ut: 11 yo ir ugifo II sra, 27-aat:; (wafu, 
resu mwgafavat awarets 
m u nerear wafer e 50. The affix comes after the verb to kill' when it is oompounded with the preposition *, and when the object in composition with it, is the word u pain' or any dark ревя, 
As rega'the pain-allayer, i. eo, the son'; : the dark ness-destroyer, e. e., the sun'. 
This aphorism has its scope when the sense is not that of benediction. 
tartuntfufa: ny utfor at arraituati, fufai, 
कृत्तिः ॥ कुमार भी इस्पेनयोरुपपदयोः शन्वेर्शिनिः प्रत्ययो भवति॥ 
61. The affix fufa comes after the verb vt to kill when the word in composition with it is a child' or w 
hend. 
GOVERNMEN 
ULTURE. 
TRY OF CULT 
MINISTRY 
ENT OF INDIA 
VII. C1. II. $ 62, 53.] 
THE AFFIX TAK, 
29 
. 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
सत्यमेव जयते 
177.417 
तरकार 
Thus FATT++ fafor t uratu (VII. 3. 54 and VII. 3. 32 )= Stufa nom. sing, garotat child-killer'. So also to say nom. sing ute. 
srat'head-killer. 
The word me is an irregular form of the word fuce I 
TW GoToRTua nya n utfor il gaw, Tu-uait, Eu, ( ) 
yfa: u graafutat: Targari aafandic cha wafae 
52. The affix cm comes after the verb pe to kill' when it is in composition with the word Get wife' or of husband' as object, and when the word so formed denotes the agent possessed of that attribute (or when the word so formed denotes à mark). 
The word ut of this sûtra gives rise to the doubt whether it means Tu wife or utafa shift. In the former case the meaning will be when the agent is itself the mark'; as parqu'a mole' (a mark on the body indica. tive of the death of one's wife). In the latter case the meaning will be when the agent is possessed of the attribute denoted by the word' ; as a the murderer of his wife'; pragat 'the murderer of her husband'. 
Of the afix at the letters & and are indicatory. The e shows that the feminine is formed by , and causing elision of the penultimate 3 of . Thus gar+T+E=197+7+ (VI. 4. 98) = TITT: (VII. 3. 54). 
wagcauc TH yg ni açta u 7- 
859-na on(TF, 
वृत्तिःशमनुध्यकत्र्त के धर्वजानाइन्वर्द्धातोः कर्मण्युपपदे प्रत्ययो भवति । 
53. And the affix au comes after the verb 'to kill' when the object is in composition with it, and when the word to be formed denotes an agent other than a human being. 
Ag uretaniena the mole' (literally that which indicates the death of one's wife); varit enfutar' the line of the palm of the hand (that which indicates the death of one's husband). These two forms were deducible also from the last aphorism. and honey (literally thab which has the property of destroying the phlegm). four a clarified btuter' (lit, then which destroys the bile). 
Why do we say when the agent is not a human being' ? Observa gura y la Sadra' (literally one who kills mice). Here the affix is 
REGOVE 
VERNMENT 
TRY OF CULTU 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
THE AFFIX KEYUN. 
Bk. III. CH. II. $ 
56 
सत्यमेव जयते 
17 
Why is tha affix on not employed in the following ? curat yeat 'an elephant' (ie, who kills a thief.) Here the word is formed by the affix s on the analogy of shtra III. 3. 113 which allows a diversity in case of kritya affixes, which diversity is extended in this case to a krit affix. 
Su feat(at)zut: 11990 og frugt, fed-war (at)cut, ( 37, 76 ) 11 
greumentai feas (at) eis The eat Hafa u 
54. The affix a comes after the verb 'to kill when the word in composition with it as its object is reaft Selephant' or une "gate' and when the sense indicated is that 
of power. 
The su tra applies where the agent is a human being. As fearr og stream ea: ' a man who is strong enough to kill an elephant'; so also e ' a burglar' (who is capable of breaking open the doors). 
Why do we say where power is indicated'? Observe for the tra= frutawho kills the elephant by poison'. Here the affix is su 
Tiforwatsat farfeoft il yy llogra fue-atest, Perfect 
fasury Treature forceda fufe for marca afecus TETTEN 
55. The word fore and atv are irregularly formed when denoting an artificer. 
These forms are thus evolved. The affix is omployed after the verb in composition with a hand' and arta blow' as object; then the fe portion of ri. 6. suis elided, and r is changed into irregularly. Thus ufu + = +*+-= ' a drummer' (workman or handicraftsman); u 'a smith 
Why 'when denoting an artificer' ? Observe fea boxing': asura hammering' 
Part:-The word sure: should be enumerated in this connection ; 075 w'a regioide'. 
T e fera para forang saitasail : @ * eft 89-944--afera-17-wa-ferêg, ful-t füg, wait, , , 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
BOILOA. II. $ 56.] 
THE AFFIX KHYON. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
• संस्कृति मंत्र 
सरकार 
Pfa: un argarf@gmaguêg, saa tascarag magtat: a) T TTHEIT भवति। 
56. The affix it, when the sense of the word to be formed is that of an instrumental agent, oomes after the verb 
'to make', when the following words are in composition with it as objects :- SITC 'rich', UH 'fortunate , big area 
grey', 7 naked', 46 blind' and fry pleasent', pro vided that these words have the sense of the words formed by the affix fou, though not actually ending in the affix fua. 
The affix rsa (V. 4.50.) is added to a noun when it is in composition with the verby to become', 'to make and sy to be'; its force being that a thing attains to a condition in which it previously was) not. The fa being an optional affix, its sense is two-fold ; namely, words ending in fsa and words not ending in fua. Both may have the force of fra. In the preseut sûtra, however, the words that actually end in fou have been excluded, while words which do not take the affix fea, but have the force of feu are included in the present sûtra. 
Thus TT+*+ TEST+T+ST=S ee that by the instru. mentality of which the poor becomes rich." viz., wealth, prosperity, means of enriching'; g TTT making happy' ; gay by which one becomes big' ufaastur rendering grey'; 
w a 'making naked'; sia 'making blind' ; 
f 'showing kindness. 
Why do we say when the force is that of the affix fa? Otherwise Faroe aan gå fra 1. e., situata they anoint with oil. Here though something is joined with what it previously was not joined, namely, with oil, yet as the radical word is not prominent here, the sense is not that of fua and hence this counter-example. 
Why do we say when not ending in the affix fra? Observe sea gafa saa 'they make rich by this'. Here the affix oyt is not employed, 
It might be objected : 'well if Egy is not used then the affix eye must be used (III. 3. 117) as there is no difference between art and eye; both have ing the efficient portion g; what is then the use of prohibiting for? We reply, because there is this prohibition, when the affix yt is not employed the affix 
te will also be not employed. Thus by implication the affix re is also pro hibited. The prohibition of fea in this sutra is for the sake of the aphorismig that follow 
RE • GOVER 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
THE AFFIX KVIN. 
[Br. III. CH. II, § 66.68. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
भारत सरकार 
Påta njail observes this prohibition as superfluous, because there is no distinction between ce and TT.. For the word formed by any one of these affixes have the same form and the same accent. Nor there is any distinction in the feminines of their derivatives. For the word formed by 25, 473, s and at take in the feminine as the words aga and aca. Nor there is any distinction in their samdsas. For in both the cases it will be nitya samāsas. Nor is the prohibition made for the sake of the augment ut. For it being an indeclinable, uv, cannot come after it. The prohibition therefore is of no use to this sûntra but it is inserted here for the sake of the following sâtras. 
wife wa: furgaga 1 49 11 ugif' weft, yai, face- 
g r, ( ficuifeg ) 1 
greu sanguinag garagareg soutaccarag waagtat: mafe arca fatyt खुकन इत्येती प्रत्ययो भवतः ॥ 
57. The affixes fregrand , when the word to be formed denotes an agent, come after the verb to be come', when it is in composition with words uit &C., provided that these have the sense of the words formed by the affix fex though not ending in feat. 
Thus sea ufacgy: becoming rich (who was not rich before)'; TT भावुक becoming rich' ; सुभगंभविष्णु: Or -मावुक: ' becoming happy'; स्थूलं भविष्णु: or trgu becoming big'; qfarfarty: or -79* becoming grey'? Wyrfarge or 
the ' becoming naked', ufurgt or -19** ' becoming blind'; forfaty: or 199 becoming an object of affection, amiable'.. 
Why do we say when denoting the agent'? Not so when it denotes the instrument. The affixes will apply when the sense of the upapadalis that of fear, otherwise nob; as seat waar he will be rich'. 
Those affixes will not apply when the upapadalends in fo; si faar o 
Fuaits 1195 11 agtfat 11 FTT:, h, faut efter eüvtava tua faeuar safa w 
58. The affix. fat comes after the verb eruto touch', when it is in composition with a case infected word other than syn water, 
By sutra 4 of this chapter, the anuvritti of the word gfu is to be read into this sû bra. It might be objected why do we not read the anuvritli of the word w inabend of gre, because the verb uw is a transitive verb, and after 
URE 
GOVE 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
NMENT OF IN 
OF INDIA 
BS111.CH. II 59.] 
TE AFFIX KVIN. 
44.79 
4779 
such verbs, the anuvritti of an ought to come by sûtra 4'? To this we say there is no harm in reading the anuvritti of gre in this case ; because the word ware of the last sûtra is also, in a way understood here, and indicates the collection of all sorts of agents whether objects, instruments, &c., and this can only be when the first member of the compound is a word in general. 
Thus घृतं स्पृशति घृतस्पृशु , nom. sing: घृतस्पृक् ' he who touches clarified butter.' Fau+ft+5=ETT+ feto (VI. 1. 68)=Fanto (VI. 1. 57, and VIII. 2. 62). So also use fa=#FTETT 'who touches with hymns'; geta gufa = JEET who touches with water'. But a fewfa=3GHT; bere we have the general affix . 
The 7 of fat is to distinguish this affixes from affixes like fat &c. For, had it been merely fat, then in sûtra VIII, 2. 62. we should have used fEA CUTE 5, and it would have been ambiguous, for fans might be explained as meaning both fan and far as a means T, AT &c. To remove this ambiguity, 7 is added to make a distinctive affix. The cannot be for the sake of accent. (V1. I. 117), the verb being monosyllable would of itself have taken that accent. 
ऋत्विदधृकस्नगदिगुष्णिगंचुयुजिक्रुज्चां च ॥ ५९ ॥ पदानि ॥ fran--7-f -ef6-557-yfa- *17, TII 
वृत्तिः॥त्विगादयः पशव्दाः किन्प्रत्ययान्ता निपात्यन्ते अपरे त्रयो धातबो निर्दिश्यन्ते । 
59. The words en feum a domestic priest', t impu dent', 'a garland', fent direction'and sfarar a quatrain' are irregularly formed by adding the affix fr; and so also after the verbs 59' to worship’, for 'to join' and seg 'to approach', the offix fart is employed. 
The first five words are irregular forms. Thus +11+fat= re "he who performs sacrifice in the reason (at) or to the season (50). This word, however, is a uft word in which it is fruitless to search for its etymological meaning. +fef= y. Here there is reduplication and the final has acute accent. Tl+FT=ET. Here there is augment sig. Fl+fo=fa. So also ca+feat+far=oftra. All these are in fact crude nouns, their cur rent meaning having little traces of their root meaning, 
The affix fat comes after the three roots , psy, and 4. Being read along with the five above mentioned irregularly-formed words, there is some irregularity in the application of fas to these verbs. Thus the affix it comes after my only when a word ending with any case-affix precedes it in composi tion. As x+y + =nom. sing. ATS (VI. 4. 24 ; VII. 1. 70, VIII. 2. 23 and 62) east'; so also neat' west ; north'. 
OVERNMENT O 
RY OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
IT OF INDIA 
संस्कृति मा 
7 
THE ATFIX KAN. 
BK. III. CA. II. $ 60. 
. 
The affix fait comes after yfare and so when these are uncombined. Thus Tul+fg =TEL . In nominative singular, Tl+y=10+(VII. I. 71) = 
+0(VI. 1. 68)=TE (VIII. 2. 62) who joins '. When the root gut is in compoposition with an upapada, it takes the aflix fon (see sû tra 61). As 
TL'yoked with horses'. 
So also +-&T= 1, nom. sing. e,' a curlew'. The non-elision of the st(V1. 4. 24) of unsa is an irregularity, as this word has been taught in connection with other irregular words, 
agricu gaitst a 1 e 11 agter II E-sifey, Tat:, surataa, 6, 7, (fa ) n 
वृत्तिः ॥ यदादीपपदेषु दृशेर्धातोरणालोचनेऽथै वर्तमानात वाञ्प्रत्ययो भवति चकारात 
60. And the affix come after the verb TT to see' when it is in combination with ag &c, and does not signify perception. 
The force of' and ' is that the fan also comes under similar circumstan ces fg &c. are pronouns, for a list of which see I. I. 27. Thus Figu nom, sing, g , such-like' when it is formed by fait; and Eatge such like' when the affix is . So algo 25+41+fra=alg! (VI. 3. 91) nom. sing. arga (VI. I. 68. VIII. 2. 36 and 62, VIII. 4. 56); and argu: when this the affix. So ator ugu: 'what-like '. 
What is the force of the letter of t? It is for the sake of accent; the udatta is on the first syllable of those words which are formed by an affis having an indicatory cor (VI. 1. 117), But the indicatory 7 would have given the same accent, there being no difference between 1 and in this respect. The indicatory r then serves only the purpose of distinguishing the affix from in sûtra IV. 1. 15 in which is taken and not . Had we not formed this separate affix, then for of that sätra, we should have read so that the feminine of words formed by would have also taken long so that the feminine of gre (TT- V. 4, 29) would have been पाषषी instond of शाषका, 
Why do we say when not signifying perception'? See # fa=all& "who sees that'. The words eu , aga &c. are crude nouns, in which the ety. mological sense of the root not being visible, the act of seeing can never be de moted by those words. 
VartThis rule applies also when the words am and so are in composition with 'Ae og or gw: 'like' ( +9+fRT=T+TL VI. 8,89); so also urgut or ways of another kind, 
URE - GOVE 
GOVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
BLA, III. CH. II. $ 61.) 
THE AFFIX KVIP. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
. 
सरकार 
Vart :--The affix 8 comes also after the root gg. As agu:, TET, Fatigu: and sign: ag+TI+ar=artottae (VI. 3. 91)=atgq+- (VIIL 2. 36) =arga +7 (VIII 2. 411 = alga + (VIII. 3. 59) = atga: 1 
Fagiguregeyafafaisagio traguaisfo fa, un en ogif u wa--f9-78---fare-f-fe-for-t-TRAH: 990, sfu, fēnu, ( gfa ) 
वृत्तिः ॥ सदादिभ्यो धातुभ्यः सुबन्ते उपपदे उपसर्गेऽप्यनुपसर्गपिक्विपमत्ययो भवति॥ 
61. The affix fag comes after the following verbs When in composition with a word ending in a case affix, though it may be an upasarga, viz : --TT to sit', 'to bring forth, THE 'to hate', TC 'to bear malice', TT to milk', got to join', 
to concentrate the mind', fag to know', 'to become', 'to consider', 'to divide', faz 'to cut, for 'to conquer', 'to lead' and ther to shine'. 
The phrase the word ending with a case-affix' is understood in this satra. The anuvritti of mis pot to be taken in this satra for the same rea sons as in sQtra 58 ante. The upasargas are also words ending in a case-affis 8. 6. they are also subanta words. Their special mention in this section, indi cates by implication (inapala ) that wherever in the previous sûntras, the word Bubanta (a case-inflected word) is used, it does not incalude an upagarga (III 1. 106). 
The root being read in conjunction with fgc shows that suite class verb is meant here, and not asif class. The verb gy includes, both yforg' to join' and got to concentrate one's mind'. The verb fag includes the three verbs having the sense of 'to know',' to become and to consider', but does not include the verb faç 'to gain', becaage that roob has an indicatory (gu) while all these verbs have indicatory s. 
Thus, 87-grama 'dwelling in purity; yaitu dwelling in the skies',' epithets of Brahma' (Kath. 5. 2); TTTT serving'. - #'oviparous's was: 'brioging forth hundred'; 'parent. fe-Fouge' treacherous'; s . hostile'. ge-fata treacherous'; ** hostile' (VIII. 2. 37). TE- TE COW milker'; y' milker' (VIII. 2. 32. and 37. 99- n.carriago', TL'ins pulse'. fag-aaraa knower; of Veda', ufu knower; trafora knower of Brahma'. forg-agha wood-outter' afacutter' fue-nieurope-cutter'; arcu facutter'. fosfora enemy-conqueror'; sfora'conqueror'. ita ts 
leader of army'; vot: a leader'; t o head-borough' ; first'. (Why is there cerebral in these words ? Because the word o ft has a cerebral in 
12 
URE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
THE AFFIX NYUT. 
[Br. III. OA. II $ 62.65 
रति मंगाना 
सत्यमेव जयते 
सरकार 
यथETom 
Then 
sabrav. 2. 78 and that indicates that these words will have ण, as also by sutra VIII. 4. 3), राज-विराट् 'splendour'; सम्राट् 'emperor' (the letter म is added by subra. VIII. 3. 25), 
This sutra is a continuation and expansion of sutras 75 and 76 8up. 
भजो शिवः ॥६२॥ पदानि ॥ भजः शिवः (उपसर्ग, शपि, सुपि)॥ अन्तिः ॥ भजेर्धातोः सुबन्त उपपदे उपसर्गेऽप्यनुपसर्गेऽपि शिवप्रत्ययो भवति॥ 
62. The affix fra come after the verb 'to share' when in composition with a word ending in a case affix whether it boan upasarga or not. 
The words' upasarga' and 'supi' are understood in this sût-a. As suo मजते = अर्द्धमाज_noma sing. ईभाक् ' sharing a balf. So also when in composition with a preposition ; as प्रमाक् 'division'. 
छन्दसि सहः ॥ ६३ ॥ पदानि ॥ बन्दसि, सहः, (उपगे, सुपि, दिवः)॥ 
रत्तिः ॥ बन्दसि विषये सहेर्धातो: सुबन्त उपपदे शिवप्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
63. In the Chhandas, the affix fta comes after the verb to bear when it is in composition with a word ending in a case-affix. 
The words frupasarga' and 'eup' are understood here. As तुर+सड्+रिक = GETTE nun sing. Terare' name of Indra'. The dental is changed into cere bral by VIII. 3. 56, and the into by VIII. 2. 31. The final s of or is lengthened by VI. 3. 137. See Rig Veda. I 175. 2, III 48. 5. 
वहश्च ॥६४॥ पदानि ॥ बहः, च, (छन्दसि, रिया, सुपि)॥ सुत्तिः॥ वर्षातोशखान्दसि विषये सुबन्त उपपदे शिवप्रत्ययो भवति । 
64. The affix fre after the verb a to carry', in the Chhandas, when a word ending with a case-affix is in composi tion with it. 
As gut 1st sing. Aytte 'carrying a prashtha measure'; so facuare 
The division of this satra from the last is for the sake of the subsequeno sû bras, into which the auuvribti of only is carried and not of T. See Yajur, Veda. XIV. 10, XVIII. 26. 
कव्यपुरीषपुरीष्येषु ज्युट् ॥ ६॥ पदानि ॥ कव्य-पुरीष-पुरीयेषु, ब्युद(छन्दसि, सुपि, वहः) 
अन्तिः ॥ कव्य पुरीष पुरीष्य इत्येतेषु उपपदेषु हन्दसि विषये बहेर्धातीयुट्प्रत्ययो भवति । 
65. In the Chhandas the afix sgc come aftesr ARE • GOVE 
VERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
AT OF INDIA 
BENI) OH. II. S 66, 67.1 
TALDAFFIX VIT. 
संस्कृति मंत्र 
सत्यमेव जयते 
R 
the verb at when it is in composition with the words oblation of food to deceased ancesters', går fæces' and gëttu 'water 
As fouater: fuary (Yajur. Ved. II. 29) 'fire that carries the oblation to the puris'; gauarea carrier of water; geteattt: (Yaj. Ved. XI. 44.) The feminine of these words is formed by adding long to 
cci GG: TG ( 56 | GIẾ, t so, :-TTG ) (afs, TE:, ya ) 
TETE U Tonga yuta eft fat afgfatsy that wafer, waraine afro afa. 
66. The affix sya, comes in the Chhandas, after the verb at 'to carry' when it is in composition with the word van an oblation to gods, provided that the word so formed does not occur in the middle of a pâda (fourth part of a stanza). 
As sfars getutga: 'fire, the carrier of oblation to the gods”. (Rig, Ved I. 44. 2.) 
When this word occurs in the middle of a pâda, or at the beginning, the form is state, which is derived by adding the affix fra (sâ tra 64). As Forfato frat the never-decaying agni or fire that carries oblation to thelgods, is our father. (Rig Veda III. 2. 2.) 
7974hrát fat n 89 m ogifa #-877-4797 5-79, fat, (afe, gua) 0 
वृत्तिः ॥ जनादिभ्यो धातुभ्यः सुबन्त उपपदे इन्दसि विषये विट्प्रत्यया भवति । 
67. The affix fac ( the whole of which is elided) comes in the Chhandas after the verbs are to be born', a to bestow, to dig', 'to pace' and to go' when a word ending in a case-affix is in composition, and the final nasals are changed into long set. 
The words, refe, eye and are understood in this satra. The verb or includes two verbs meaning to be born' and to happen; so also 
means both 'to give' and 'to worship'. 
Of the affix faz the letter & is indicatory, and is qualifying, as in VI. 4. 41, by which rule the final nasal of , &c. is replaced by long way when the aflix fae follows, and the whole affix is elided by VIL. 67. 
RE 
MINISTRY 
JERNMENT OF 
OY OF CULTUR 
TAD AFFIX KAP. 
[Br. III. OH. II. $ 68,70 
• संस्कृति 
मत मंत्रान 
As yra +7+fuc= T: (Rig. Ved. VII. 34. 16) born in water' (VI. 4.41); T: ' born in the heaven i, e., God' (Rig. Veda IV.40.5). So also from 
tar:' acquiring or bestowing cows' (VIII 3 108); ATT Terra. O Indra bestower of cows I thou art lover of mankind' (Rig. Veda IX. 2. 10). From 
-fa' digger of lotus stalk'; TTET: ' digger of well. From 1 TET: who gets milk' (Rig. IV. 39. 1 and 40.5). From 7- ÎTT FÀCTIE' the leader.' 
sretsans n ugifer n , , ( gfa, fac ) n वृत्तिः ॥ प्रदेर्धातोरनन्न सुप्युपपदे विप्रत्ययो भवति । 
68. The affix fac comes after the verb c 'to eat, when in composition with a case-inflected word other than yor 
• food'. 
The anuvritti of the word 'Ohhandasi' does not extend to this sûtra. Thus w e= 'eating raw food'; TUTT' gradivorous'. 
But with an as an upa pada, we have war: eating food', which is formed by the general affix (III 2. 1) 
sah #fen arfer 11 ani, T; (46, fac ) 1 feu Tu Tur se fatfag start a fan 
69. The affix fere comes after the verb sa 'to eat' when the word ma is in composition with it. 
As murafe= oara carnivorous'. 
Why has it been made a separate sû tra, when this form could have been obtained by the last sûtra also ? To this the vartika replies: This has been made a separate sâtra in order to indicate that the rule of wat(III 1.94) does not apply here. Therefore the affix sy will not apply in the alter native. If the affis does not apply, how then we get the form marga which is evidently formed by the affix ? The affix comes after the root when the word formed means the eater of meat which has been eut, dress. ed and cooked'; thus moete: means a man who eats meat cooked and prepared, 4. e., & meat-eater as opposed to a vegetarian, while ott means an animal which eats raw flesh; the word route, in facb may be regarded as an irregular form falling under ytaufe class of sutra VI. 3. 109. 
ge: 90 nge, -, ; ( gfa) fer gautas 
g 
u dr wafa reztrarau: 70. The affix* comes after the verb ge to milk' when in composition with a word ending in a case-affis and the letter wreplaces its final. 
RE.GOV 
GOVERNMENT 
TRY OF CULTU 
MINISTRY 
CCT 
men. IN. CA. 11. § 71, 72] 
THE ATTIX NVIN. 
सत्यमेव जयते । 
लटकार 
As 51#GUT : 'a milch cow, giving abundance of milk '; so also sagu, धर्मदुपा। 
Ha ganart utegte raft ftup 11 9p otra a, thaar-JFTH-WATET:, FTATII 
वृत्तिः ॥ श्वेतवह उक्यशस् पुरोडा इत्येतेभ्यो शिवन् प्रत्ययो भवति नन्ने विषये ॥ बार्तिकर ॥ श्वेतबहादीनां डस्पदस्येति वक्तव्यम् ॥ 
71. In the Mantra literature, the affix feat comes after the words taaat, Taur yetett 
The above words contain both the verb a'd the upapada ; the fact of their being so given indicated that there is some irregularity in the application of the affix. 
Thus the affix frat comes after the verb at preceded by the upapada qaa as denoting an agent, whil.. the force of the whole word so formed denotes an object. As taar tí atfa= aare nom. sing. Taats a name of Indra' (whom white horses carry). 
The affix feat is applied to the verb tal to praise' when preceded by the word u as object or instrument; and then the nasal is irregularly dropp ed. As scarf staf vefa=gqu, nom. sing. Jau: (Kig. Ved. II, 39. 1) 'a reciter of hymns, the name of the sacrificer'. 
The fram is applied after the verb ry to give', preceded by got, and is changed in to s, the force of the whole word denoting an object. As get grafa jagttt, nom, sing. gitst: (Rig. Ved. III. 28 2.) 'an offering: 
Vart:--The augment te is added to the words vaaute &c, when the pada affixes follow. Thus before pada terminations zart becomes tau Therefore its instrumental dual is श्वेतवोभ्यास, p, श्वेतवोमिः । 
The augment or is not applied before art and - terminations, As raatit, tante: 1 
à ys: n 92 naerf n xa, st, ( fag To ) वृत्तिः ॥ नवे उपपदे यजेर्धातोपियन प्रत्ययो भवति मंत्र विषये ॥ 
72. In the Mantra literature, the aflix free comes after the verb to sacrifice when in composition with the word 7. 
As satur , nom. sing, sat: (Rig. Ved. I. 173. 12) 'name of a Vedio priest', as a teatau sefa 'Thou art the priest of varung in the sacrifice'. 
The division of this aphorism from the lagt in which it could have been included, is for the sake of the subsequent s@tras in which the anwurst 
URE 
GOVE 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
NMENT OF INO 
OF INDIA 
TAE AFFIX VICE 
[BK. III. C. II $78,74. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
सरकार 
of Tv only rung. This word is thus declined : 
sing. 
dual. 
plural. 1st. 27, 
মগ্রযাভী, 
धावयाजः 2nd. TTT, 
satrat, 
থাঃ Srd. UTOTT, 
gantzat, 
अवयोभिः fayd ef i 9311 actre il fat, vù, feu Tu TITÈ Tandafe faut favurahi safa u 
73. The'affix far comes after the verb ge when we -precedes, in the Chandas. 
AS उपयभिरुध्वं पहन्ति " they carry it up with the उपयज formulas'. उपय is the name of eleven formulas at a sacrifice. 
The word Cbhandas' has been repeated here though the anuvritti of the word 'mantra' was present in it, in order to include the Brahmana literature also. 
The Vis indicatory and is useful in including the affix fore in the larger group called fæ (which includes fant, fa , fra, fac ), as in the satra aramet (VI. I. 67) 
Why has this sûtra been made, since the affix fac would have been valid even by aphorism 75? The sûtra has been separately made to show that it is a restrictive rule here. The form out is found in the Chhandas. only, and not in the ordinary literature 
yret aftrenfassfuLT II 98 nugtfal u grai, afor, f ufru, , ( fa, gra, fag) 
रतियाकारान्तेयो धातुभ्यः सुप्युपपदे छन्दसि विषये भनिन कनिए पनि इत्येते WEET wafua afgafen 
74. The affixes (7), fat (90), afne (T) and for come in the Chhandas, after verbs which end in long , when a case-inflected word or an upasarga is in composis tion. 
The force of and is to include fry. Thus Eqt+f = , Ist, sing, y (Rig. VI. 20.7.)' one who gives liberally'; ta+ Uttaraut 1st. sing. 17 the name of Asvatthaman'; 3+ yaforegut+ 2T (VI, 4. 66)= grey, 1st, sing, guter having good understaading'; 197+faq=gira, 1st sing or a good drinker". yfe+at+Ufare=yfeetart, ist. sing. fegrat (Rig. II. 27. 17) 'liberal'; qaeray 1st sing. vagrat (Yaj. VI, 19) ghee-drinker". 
The affix for is also included in this aphorism. As fara + 4+ fare w e : (Rig. X. 91.14) neobar-drinker", y*T (Rig. IV.8.6, and Panini VII, 
IRE • GOVE 
OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
ERNMENT OF 
OF INDIA 
POSIII. CA. II. $ 75-77.7 
TEATFIX KVIP. 
संस्कृति मान 
4.417 
3. 46). beautifully going' ; itaat:' an offering of Râmna.' (see sâtra III. 3. 106 and Yajur. Ved. XXX, 9). 
huaitto carta il g4 ni ETTUI :, sıfa, gata, (afra, ina, afia, far) n. 
बृत्तिः ॥ अन्येभ्योपि धातुभ्योऽनाकारान्तेभ्यो भनिन क्वनिप् पनि इत्येते प्रत्यया दृश्यन्ते, fasuo 
75. These affixes viz. निन्, क्वनिप, दनि. and विच are seen after other verbs also besides those ending in long si. 
The word were is not understood here. As 5+ ' to injure' + furt =gu*, Ist. 'sing yaf'who destroys well i. e. destroys sin or ignorance'. SITAT 1- 'to go'+1 =wiat+#7+27 (V1.1.71) = raftaat. Ist. sing.graítear 
who goes early'. fata+afay=fa + atta (VI, 4. 41) =fawray, 1st sing. fagrar' who brings forth'. vitat' who goes before' fee+fariVII. 3.86) 1st. sing. tc' who injures'; as in fact : (Yajur Ved. Vl. 18. 
The word also' in this aphorism has the force of removing all condi. tions under which these affixes were employed in the previous aphorisms hat is to say, these affixes come even when there is no upapada. As stat, var 
The words are seen in this sûtra show that all verbs do not admit of these affi ses indiscriminately. It is only when we see a particular form that we can infer the existence of these affixes. 
FETT 119€ 11 ugifer o fenu, Tul त्तिः ॥ सर्वधातुभ्य: सोपपदेभ्यो निरुपपदेवश्च छन्दसि भाषायां च विपप्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
76. And the affix fanit is also seen after all verbs, whether having an upapad or not in the Vedic as well as in the modern Sanskrit. 
As terrat: Fita =JUET (VI. 4 24.) falling from the pot' ; eta falling from the leaves'; TEIT vafa=TETYT, 1st sing. THE falling from car'. The en is long by Vl. 3. 137. See Rig. Ved, 1. 3. 8. 
FT: TI 99 1 ugefa I FT:, *, *, (ufo, spat, feu वृत्तिः । स्था इत्येतस्माद्धातो: सुप्युपपदे कप्रत्ययो भवति क्विपु च ॥ 
77. The affixes and fare come after the verbeut when it is in composition with a word ending in a case-affix or an uposarga. 
Why has this aphorism been made, when by rule III. 1. 4. EUT would have taken and by rule III. 1. 75, it would have taken fait also ? This repetition is for the purpose of prohibiting the probibition, that is to say, the 
URE • GOVE 
STRY OF CU 
ERNMENT OF 
OF INDIA 
THE ANTIX NINI. 
[BK. III. CA. II. $ 7 
h 
. 
4 
.417 
17 
alltra III.2 14. prohibited the sâtra III. 2. 4, aud the present sûtra removes thad prohistion. Thus TET: and at: But for this sâtra, this form could not have been evolved ; for, with the upa pada t, the verb fur would have taken the affix sty by III. 2. 14. 
gautat fuffrail II 95 u agra u gra, surat, fufa, anal 
yie: fafafar gasa Tie atsgica art wratres fasear wafa 
वार्तिकम् ॥ उत्पतिग्यामाडि नतेरपसंख्यानम् ॥ u n elyaftfell 
afeToTa : 
78. When habit is to be expressed, the affix fufæ comes after a verb, provided the word with a case affix in composition with it, does not mean a genus. 
Thus 357 +47 +fufa=yamatfu, ist sing. you wont who eats his meal hot'. So also stastant &c 
Why do we say when it does not mean a genus'? Witness THT ufuat. the inviter of Brahmaņas'. We cannot form aastat. 
Why do we say when habit is to be expressed'? Witness 35 E erfen he sometimes eats hot'. 
Though the anuvritti of the word 'supi' was understood in this aphorism, its repetition here declares that upasargas are not included. This is contested by the author of the Siddhanta Kaumudi. According to him this affix comes even with upasargas. As gafat, stavitfarm, susitiaw &c, 
Vart -The verb are in composition with the prepositions ou or afa should be enumerated as taking this affix. As sarufit, fem. outfit, its. plural = স্থাখিবে :. So also সামিযী, pl. সায়িয। 
Vart:-So also when the sense is having skill in such and such action'. As agatat 'excellent worker': agarit giving liberally'. 
Vart --So also after the verb ua preceded by u. As Tuafet in awarrant fra the knowers of Brahma say' 
Tall gen fer nift, Thia, ( fufa:) a दृषिः॥ कयाचिनि उपनाम उपपदेशासोर्णिनिप्रत्ययो भवति॥ 
79. The affix fefe comes after a verb when it is in composition with a word deonting an object of comparison, 
expressing the agent, the sense of the affix being . * doing something like that, that is to say, when the 
URE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
STRY OF CU 
MINISTA 
NT OF INDIA 
DEN 
80, 81.) 
TSE AFFIX NINI. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
. 
78 
जसरकार 
upäpada agent is the standard of comparison of the agent denoted by the word to which the sense of the affix re fers. - 
Thus yog na mufa =55mfua' who makes'a'noise like a camel'; it Crfaat 'who makes a noise like a crow'. 
This sûntra applies where 'habit' is not indicated : or where 'genus' is denoted in opposition to the last aphorism. 
Why do we say 'when expressing the agent? Witness as worraa eura 1977 'he eats måsha like apupa'. Here yuvis object and not; agent, and hence no composition takes place. 
Why do we say ' denoting a standard of comparison'? Otherwise there will be no composition. As gets here the camel makes noise'. For the accents of these words, see VI. 2. 80. 
gal.co 1 Ugufa nae; ( urat:, gfu, fufer:) वृत्तिः ॥वते गन्यमाने सुबन्त उपपदे धातोर्णिगि प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
80. The affix fua comes after a verb, in composition with a word ending in a case-affix. 
The word a means a 'vow' as regulated and ordained by the Scrip tures. This condition 'when vow is expressed' applies to the completed word, that is to say, when the complete word made up of the root, the upapada, and the affix, denotes a vow. As caftsaufat 'the vow of sleeping on bare ground (and nowhere else) or a person who has taken this vow'. Sigutfw who has vowed not to eat during the performance of a Sraddha ceremony. 
Why do we say 'when vow is to be expressed'? Otherwise there is no composition. As eufosa fa cata: Devadatta sleeps on bare ground, 
This sûtra is also an exception to III. 2. 78. applicable when habit is not meant, or when genus is to be expressed. 
aftatutari ng lugtfar l am, ara, (ftfr:) far: n mtata to watayat fefuscat wafan 
81. The affix fufor comes after a verb diversely when continued repetiton of an action is to be expressed. 
The word seratara means continued repetition that is to say, zealous practice or assi duous performance of anything, but does not mean habit. Ag matarratt uty: the people of Gâadhara are kashâuya-drinkers'. Tato T7+faf=913+ +*+fufer (VII. 3. 33). So also starter outartys the people of Usinâra are milk-drinkers'. alat-wfat giraitats the people of Bahlika are sauvira-drinkers'. 
By using the word 'diversely' in the sâtra, this affix is not applied in other places, as in the following are a grain eater'. 
13 
URE - GOVA 
GOVERNME 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY ON 
OF INDIA 
THE AFFIX KHAS, 
[BK. III. CH. II. S 
सत्यमेव जयते 
सरकार 
4: I CR uçtfa li a.; (gru, rofa:) a that a raa: yaa sute fofocuêr warfare 
82. The affix fun comes after the verb a to think' when there is a word with a case-affix in composition with it. 
The word 'ørpi' is understood in this sûtra. As if tot who thinks himself handsome', amit who thinks himself beautiful'. 
The verb 7 belonging to the 4th conjugation is taken here and not that belonging to the 8th conjugation ; because the anuvritti of the word 
diversely' is understood here. In the present aphorism, whether we take the Divadi or Tanâdi the resulting form would be the same, namely for T. But not so in the next aphorism, where before the affix at there would be difference of form owing to the vikaraña. i. e., in the 4th conjugation The would be added, but not so if the verb belonged to the 8th class. 
Samaa TT13 11 ucifer U HITTA, TT, 7, (forfor:). fer un site de rua: TV Trêt wafa, cifrafata 
83. And the affix comes after the verb 7 to think when the word in composition with it is a word with a case-affix, and when it is employed to signify thought, whereof the object is self (the sense of the aflix being thinking himself as such"), 
The word i n means thinking of one's own self. By the word and it is meant that the affix fufer may be employed in the same senge. This rule applies where the agent, indicated by the sense of the affix, thinks him. self possessed of the qualities of handsomeness' &c., denoted by the upapada, As wita: or twiat who thinks himself hand some'; sfogata: or ofera o' who thinks himself learned'. 
Why do we say when employed to signify thought whereof the objecb is self? Witness T o ut Eat 
Yajfiadatta is thoughů handsome by Devadatta. 
of the affix uut the letter causes augment by VI. 3. 66, and makes it a sarvadhatuka affis, which brings in the proper vikaranas. The silises so far treated of are applicable in all benses. The others that follow denote some particular time. 
va u yn fuan 
fesa a referent w afua war, wie wgmfum: n vraaf तस्वेदितण्यम् ॥ 
URE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
ov OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
ENT OF INDIA 
II. CH. II. S 84-87.) 
TER ATFIX KVIP 
सस्कृति मंत्रान 
सत्यमेव जयते 
51 
1979.45 
84. All the affixes to be treated of hereafter should be understood to come in the sense of past time, 
The phrase with the sense of past time' is an adhikara or governing aphorism and exerts its influence up to aphorism 123 of this chapter; that is to say, these affixes give a signification of the past tense to the verb whose anuvritti is also understood throughout the subsequent sûtras; see III. I. 91. 
Thus it will be taught in the next aphorism:' after the vorb Tt, when the word in composition is in the instrumental case, the affis fufer is employed'. Here to complete the sense we must read into the sâtra, the words with the sense of past time'. As sfrattagai=stataifa who has sacrificed with an Agnishotma or a five-day series of offerings'. 
Why do we say, with the sense of past time? Otherwise these affixes will not we employed. As sufragtaa wafa 'he sacrifices with Agnishtoma'. 
nữ sĩ: 1 G9 | GGT | G, 4G, (Tue, trà) n ufer: Tautat: & fafarafa ya u 
85. The affix par for comes after the verb to sacri fice' with the sense of past time, when the word in composition is in the instrumental case. 
The anuvritti of fu for and not of yz is to be read into this su tra. As framafort who has sacrificed with Agnishtoma'. Here Agnistoma is the instrument for the attainment of the desired fruit. 
wiru : n 11 af u waru, a, (fufa:) a वृत्तिःकर्मणि उपपदे हन्तेर्धातोमिनिमत्ययो भवति भूते वाले। 
86. The affix fufit comes after the verb 'to kill with the sense of past time, when the word in composition is in the accusative case. 
AS पितृव्यघातिन् 'who has killed his paternal uncle'; मातुलपाति' who has killed his maternal uncle', TT+ffett-fofo (VII. 3. 54)=utf-forfa 
(VII. 3. 32)= a (VII. 2. 116). 
This affix is employed only when censure is implied. Therefore it is not employed in ott taart 'he has killed the thief". 
The anuvritti of the word of this aphorism extends up to sâtre. 11. 2. 96. 
agu vang fun 9 n ogrla u v-aay, a 
त्तिः ॥ मादिषु कर्मापपदेषु एन्ते तो विप्रत्ययो भवति भूते ॥ 
87. The affix fat comes after the verb 
'to kill 
IRE 
GOVER 
WERNMENT 
ev OF CULTUR 
e MINISTRY 
T OF INDIA 
वीजयते 
• tenia 
THE AFFIX KVIP 
[BR. III. CH. 11. $ 88, 89. 
तिसरकार 
with the sense of past; time, when the following words in the accusative case are in composition: ra'a Brâhmana' y la foetus' and a)"Vritra'. 
AS TUTT, 1st. sing. WEET 'who has killed a Brâhmana'; wer 'who has killed a foetus'; her who has killed Vșitra, a name of Indra'. 
Since by sutra 76 ante, the affix ff was ordained to come after all verbs and therefore would have come after the verb az also, where is the necessity of the present aphorism? This aphorism makes a niyam. i. e othe verb er takes the affix fang only when it is in composition with the words av &c. Four-fold restriction is here intended. 
(1) When TT bas, as upapada, the words yw &c., and not any other word; as yra vaaru 'he has killed the man'. 
(2 When the words go &c are upapadas of any other verb than 7, then this affix is not employed ; so that the verb must be TT; thus uttaan 
he has read the Veda'. 
(3) The fag is the only affix to denote past time in the case of preceded by T &c, and no other affix can be employed in this sense. 
(4) This is employed only in the past tense and not in any other tense; as water fra or faufa 'he kills or will kill the Brahmana'. This sutra anticipates the diversity taught in the next sutra, and is an example of agri use of the affix. 
agai efe n c n ugifern , fa, (8 , far ) m वृत्तिः॥ बन्दसिविषये उपपदांतरेपि इन्तेहुलं वियत्ययो भवति ॥ 
88. In the Chhandas, the affix ft diversely comes after the verb 'to kill' with the sense of past time, even when the word in composition with it is other than those mentioned in the last aphorism. 
This aphorismlordains fent in cases which are not governed by the restrictive rule contained in the last aphorism. As TEET 9 A sfawa 'may the matricide enter the seventh hell: so also t ur patricide, Diversely we find alse मातृषातः and पितृषातः । 
Tanagrag : non ufan 3-5-79-4* grog, :,( fann 
न्तिः ॥ स्वादिषु कर्मसूपपदेषु पारोते तो विपप्रत्ययो भवति। 
89. The affix fac comes after the verb to make' with the sense of past time, when the following words in the accusative case are in composition:- well', action', 'sin' 
'hymn' and 'virtue." URE - GOVE 
GOVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
ENT OF INDIA 
( 
BE11. Ca. II. S 90-92.] 
TAE AFFIX KVIP. 
कृति मंत्रालय 
en 
37 
The phrase 'in the accusative case is understood in this aphorism, and applies to all the above-mentioned words, except y, which being an attributive word, of course, cannot take any case-terminations. As IT (VI. 1. 71)' who bas done well'; ma'who has done all works', 1957 who has committed sins',lsiant who has made a mantra'; grun' who has done virtuons actions'. 
This sûtra also ordains a restrictive rule or niyama. Three-fold restriction is intended here: namely, restrictions with regard to time, upapada, and affix; but not with regard to verbs. See III. 2. 87. There being no res triction with regard to the root, this afix is employed when words other than there are upapadas. As, TFT' who has made Scriptures ; HICHT' who has made a commentary. The 7 is added to the root by VI. 1. 71. 
ata ga: 1 On aerfuata, GA, ( ft, fea) 10 वृत्तिः ॥ सोने कनण्युपपदे सुनोतेर्धातोः विपप्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
90. the affix fent comes after the verb 'to press out juice', with the sense of past time, when the word fra, in the accusative case, is in composition. 
Ag, ThyT' who has pressed the soma juice, or soma-distiller' ; 1st. dual ergat, 1st. plural äraga: 1 
This sûtra is also for the sake of making a niyama or restrictive rule. The four-fold restriction is here intended. 2. e. as regard the verb, the tense, the upapada and the affix. 
wat d: 11 cop i astfer stat, :,( *#fr, feru) वृत्तिः ॥ अग्नौ कर्मण्युपपदे सुनातेर्धातोः किप्प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
91. the affix fait comes after the verb fe 'to collect' with the sense of past time, when the word aroa, in the accusative case, is in composition. 
As, safura 'one who has kept the sacred fire'; 1st. dual sprafat; 1st, plural swafaa: 
Here also, as in the last aphorism, four-fold restriction is intented. 
TETETT1 na nogiro naru, sia-sieu 1, ( fr, :, fan 
Treningura fertas de cafTucah wafar autoUTTT** 
92. In expressing an object the affix fat comes after the verb for to collect with the sense of past time, when in com positoin with a word in the accusative case, provided the word so formed is the name of fire. 
The words as and wife are understood in this gatra. The name is 
URE 
GOVE. 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY ON 
ONMENT OF IN 
OF INDIA 
THE AFFIX KVANIP. 
[BR. III. OF. II. S 92-96. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
रत सरकार 
expressed by taking the complete word consisting of the verbal roob, the upa. pada and the affix. As vafaa'a fire which has been arranged in the shape of a hawk'; fug'fire arranged like a heron'. 
The word uigut indicates that these words are rudhi words, their sense depending upon usage rather than etymology. The arrangement of bricks for sacrificial purpose with regard to fire, gets these various names; that is, when the bricks are arranged like a falcon, it is called å fat, and so on. 
fa farina: 13 II og fan #ft, for, farang: 0 वृत्तिः ॥ कर्नायुपपदे विपूर्वात प्रीणार्धातोरिनिप्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
93. The affix gft comes after the compound verb pas to sell', in the sense of past time, when in composition with a word in the accusative case. 
The repetition of the word hy in the sûtra, though its anuvritti might have been drawn from the last aphorism, indicates that when the object carries with it a sense of censure on the agent then only this affix is employed and not with every and any object. As arafanfat' the seller of soma plant'; 
utafa the seller of liquors'; employing disapproval of the action of those persons who carry on these mean professions. But not go in wrafare: the seller of paddy'. 
ga:afau a cya TETET :, anfaa, (F#fun TT: güfate hagane fregat wafa u 
94. The affix gfag comes after the verb zu to see in the sense of past time, when in composition with a word in the accusative case. 
As regni, 1st. sing. Pavar who has seen the meru'. Teataguet who has seen the hereafter'. 
Though the affix for was valid by sutra III. 2. 75. its repetition here shows that no other affix comes in this sense after this verb. 
tafa yfuma: non actforfa, fali, ( t, mi ) 
fe: u tu wa mara ya water #facrcar wafa u 
95. The affix for comes after the verbs yv to fight' and to make with a past signification when the word Tour 
king' is in composition, in the accusative case. 
llow can the verb , which is an intransitive verb, govern an object ? it is a transitive verb, inasmuch as it is taken to be a causative verb, with the fur affix lateni. As trugva, Ist. sing. Trava (VIII. 2.1) who has caused the king to fight'; , 1sb. sing. crura (VI. 1. 71.) who has made a king'. 
URE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
BM, ITH. CH. II. S 96-100.] 
THE AFFIX DA. 
सस्कृति मंत्राल 
सत्यमेव जयते 
TI 1 ugefa n ?, ?, (git, ai, ei fara ) 11 इत्तिः ॥ सहयब्द चोपपदे युधिकृतो तो क्वनिप्प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
96. The affix afate comes after the verbs TT and $, with a past signification, when the word with', is in composition. 
The word Tt, being a particle, and not denoting a substance, is incap able of taking any case. As Tegua who has made to fight with'; ec 
who has done any thing along with another'. 
| Tra : 1 09 ( qệ TC t đai, G: B: afat u agrava care a incât wafar 
97. The affix 5 comes after the verb to be produced', with a past signification, when the word, in composition with it, is in the locative case'. 
As eu a:=tra: 1 += +(VI. 4. 143) = born of the first conception'; wgras born in the stable'. 
Tamarautat nanucrfan TT*17, worat, (:,:)m afara a seva sfaafua watacuür wafa 
98. The affix a comes after the verb an, with a past signification, when the word in composition with it, is in the ablative case, which does not denote a genus. 
As grea: born through understanding'; *AITU: born of habit'; : * born through plain'. 
Why do we say when nov denoting a genus'? Observe feit was born of elephant'; saivata: "born of horse'. 
goed wat in me u getan , , , ( :, :) ! 
fan una staves seat afa aurat facto 
99. The aflix t comes after the verb or with a past signification, when an upasarga is in composition and when the sense is simply appellative. 
The term here being simply appellative, and not descriptive, cannot be explained by giving the signification of its component elements, As wat 
people', or a son'; as in the sentence 
s t at : softwafuu on rifer not, fer, ( , :) f ogata: revue tinegar wafer o 
100, The affix * comes after the verb w with a past 
GOVERNMENT 
TURE • GON 
v OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY ON 
NT OF INDIA 
THE NISHTIA AFFIXH. 
[Br. III. CH. II. $ 101, 102. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
त सरकार 
signification, when the root takes the preposition and is compounded with a word in the accusative case. 
As gayat'a girl born after the male child, i. e., a girl having an elder brother'; Faarga:' a boy born after the female child, e. e., a boy having an elder sister 
trecafa gà ngop ni uerfa u süg, siu, yra, 
वृत्तिः ॥ अन्येष्वप्युपपदेषु कारकेषु जनेड प्रत्ययो दृश्यते॥ 
100. The affix is seen to come after the verb with a past signification, though it be in composition with other nouns, having cases other than those mentioned in the previous sûtras. 
Thus the locative case has been dealt with in sutra III. 2. 97; but the affix comes when the upa pada has any other case than the seventh AS fra 
= 'unborn'; fata:= fgu: 'twice-born'. 
Thus, it is said in sutra III.2 98 that the upapada may be in the abla. tive case, when genus is not denoted. We see, however, the affix employed when genns is denoted. As weateret: ; ufus TTI 
It is declared in sutra III. 2. 98 that when appellative is meant, the affix comes after the compound verb . We find, however, the affix employed when the sense is not simp!y appellative; as : or uitat:' born or produced all round i. e. hair'. 
It is declared in sutra III. 2. 100. When an object is in composition with the verb 995 this affix is employed'. But it may also be employed when no object is in composition. As born after i. e. younger brother'. 
The force of the word sf though' is to free this rule from all restric tions and conditions. So this affix comes after other verbs and other cases in composition with such verbs. As ofcas utatufcuta moab' (literally that which has been dug all round); set' a pond'. 
fcct II qoz agtrat ii facci, (a) a वृत्तिः क्तवतू तिष्ठेत्युक्तं स निष्ठासंज्ञका प्रत्ययो भूते भवति॥ of a suferir fagt umat 
102. The affixes called fagt comes after a verbal root employed with the sense of past time. 
The affix and ma are fagt (I. 1. 26). As += 'made'; +सावतु =कृतवत, Ist sing. कृतवान ' done'; so also भुक्तम and भुक्तवान् "eaten'. 
Vart:--The Nishbhe affixes come when adi-karma is meant. For a fullor description of what constitutes &di-karma see sutra III. 4. 71, and the illustrations under it. [hus at 2 , water #1 
URE 
"GO 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY ON 
NT OF INDIA 
SL 
BR. 111./CH, II. $ 103-106.] 
THE AFFIX KANACH. 
guid argan poz u actiâ u g-uuti, gafaa il वृत्तिः ॥ सुपोतेर्यजतेश्च वनिप् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
103. The affix cufat comes after the verbs 'to press out or extract juice' and to sacrifice, with a past signification. 
As 5+ fo=9T+91 (VI. 1 71)=gray 1st. sing. year' who has pressed out or extracted juice'; 997, 1st. sing, quat' who has sacrificed'. The 
is added by VI. 1.71. See Rig. Ved. I. 3.1. 
wtearaat 1188 uçfa il stea, a , (a) in वृत्तिः ॥ जीर्य वेतून प्रत्ययो भवति भूते॥ 
104. The affix saīt comes after the verb to grow old with the sense of past time. 
AS + +T (VII. 3. 84)=407, 1st. sing. say, 1st. dl. seat, 1st. pl. area: 'grown old' (VII. 1. 70). 
By the rule of TTTET (III. 1.94), the Nishtha affixes also come after this verb. As : and uti + =fucta (VII. 1. 100 and I. 1. 51)=GT+7 (VIII. 2. 42)=sit (VIII. 2. 77 and VIII. 4. 1) grown old'. 
gefa fut u goy n ugifa li arcfe, fat, (a) u सुचिः ॥ इन्दसिविषये धातोलिट् प्रत्ययो भवति।। 
105. In the Chhandas, the affix fare comes after a verb with a past signification. 
AS अहं सूर्य गुभयतो ददर्श I saw the sun from both sides'; ईशावापूथिवी Saat stretched the heaven and the earth'. Here the words and wraata 
have the force of nishtha. See Yaj. Ved. VIII. 9. 
Why this separate sâtra, when by aphorism III. 4. 61, in the Chhandas the lun, lan and lit come in all tenses? Thab rule is made with regards to two or more verbs when in syntactical relation (atgeaa) with each other (111.4.1). The present rule is general, and without any such limitations. 
Lit is the afix of the Present Perfect and will be fully treated of in the conjugation of verbs. 
fe: a tat 190eul uçrfaru fore: , a, (aria) f ers fae: warten aie ara 
106, In the Chhandas the affix He is optionally replaced by the affix 141 
As fra feat he consecrated the fire'; ** TTT: 'he pressed the eoma juice'. This being an optional affix, is sometimes not enoployed; as in the Lexamples in the last aphorism, 
CURE - GOVE 
VERNMENT 
Y OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
XT OF INDIA 
THE AFFIX KPASU. 
O BK. III.OR, IITION 
सचिव जयते 
तसरकार 
Why has the word lot been repeated in this sâtra, when its anavritti could have been drawn from the last sû tra ? The substitute any replaces not only the special fee of sa tra III. 2. 105, but the general fut which comes after the roots in forming the perfect tense ; so that the affix a forms verbal ad 
jectives as well as the perfect tense. 
This affix comes after those verbs only which take Atmanepada termi nations, See I. 4.100. तुमान (Rig. Ved. 1.3.6). 
कश्च ॥१७॥पदामि ॥ कसुः, च, (छन्दसि, लिटः) ॥ एत्तिान्दखि लिटमुरादेवो भवति॥ 
107, In the Chhandas the affix yg is optionally the substitute of fag. 
A शिवस् 1st. sing, अषिवार eaten ' (Taj, VIII. 19); पपिबलू 1st. sing. afqa ' drunk'. 
Sometimes it does not come, as in the example under søtra II1. 2. 105; आई सूर्यनुभयत दर्श 
The division of this sûtra from the last, in which it could well have been included, is for the sake of the subsequent sû tras, into which the anuvritti of g only runs. 
भाषायां सदवसच वः ॥ १०८ ॥ पदानि ॥ भाषायाम् , सद-घस अधः, (लिटः कः)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ सब बस इत्येतेयः परत्व लिटो भाषायां विषये वा बासुरादेशी मवति। 
108. In the modern Sanskrit, the affix pug optionally replaces for after the verbs ce, T and with a past signifi cation. 
This being a substitute only, the original affix fag also comes after these verbs, Assafata uteps ufufua Kautsa served Panini'. In the alter native, the proper affixes of the past tense will be employed. As suuT'he served' उपाठीवत and उपससाद, 
So also wafuar seus fuere. ln the alternative we have stateste, न्यवचत and अनूवास 
So also उपशुशुधार कौत्व पापिलिय In the alternative we have उपायावीत, उपाशीर and उपाणाव, 
The affix my is employed with the force of ye and also. 
उपेयिवानमाश्वाननूचानश्च ॥ १०॥ पदानि ।। उपेथिवाजू नाश्वान्-अनचानः, (च)॥ 
कृति जयविधात् अगावान् अनूचान इत्येते शब्दा निपात्यन्ते। 
109. The forms safanna WETTU Tyre are irregularly formed. 
URE - GOVE 
VERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY ON 
T OF INDIA 
P 
ITI OR. II Ş 110.) 
TAS AFFIX LUN. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
97 
These forms are thus evolved :--To the verb v 'to go with the pre position 37, the affix way is added : as TT+1+wag. The root is reduplicated : as 5*+++way. The reduplicate is here long & by VII. 4. 69. This long does not coalesce with the short by the rules of sandhi ; for then the rule by which this # was introduced would have no scope. Now we add the augment re contrary and in opposition to the rule VII. 2. 67, and this is the irregularity. As 59+*+*+Te+way. Then the root v is replaced by # by sâ tra VI. 4. 81. As 4+*+1+6+ag=yafua& 1st. sing. Tafuary, The auge ment rç is however droppod in those cases (*) whore za is changed into a because the insertion of c was itself an exceptional case of limited soode :-for while the general rules VII. 2. 75 &0. ordained it, the special rule of VII. 2. 67 prohibited it, and it was by prohibition of this prohibition that re was em ployed before TEC Therefore in accusative plural we have agus ; instrumental sing उपयुषा &co 
This irregular participle is not limited to the upasarga y; we find such irregular forms with other upasargas and without them also ; thus uitfuatia and fraai as well. 
By the anuvritti of the word or read in this aphorism, we have us &c. in the alternative. As in Aorist Twita, Imperfect Tea, Perfect game 
The word gaat is thus formed:-To the verb 'to enjoy: we add the negative particle **; apply the affix yu and dono insert the augment tai So, we have 7+ +FT= 4 , 1st sing. warrane. In the alternative we have Aorist Tata, Imperfect AT TT and Perfect 777. 
The word wer is thus derived :--The affix wint is added in expres sing the agent to the verb at preceded by sy. In the alternative we have Aorist swaart, Imperfect gata, Perfect sta 
15 # 990 i uçtan 13, (a) 11 fare as 
a meurt vafa u atay ngays fa capat.satu. 
110. The affix y comes after a verb in the sense of past time, 
The us forms what is known as aorist. It is in fact the name of the aorist, as the whole of this affix is replaced by other personal termination.. See 111. 1. 43 and subsequent sû tray.. 
The aorist has reference to n past time indefinitely or generally, with out reference to any particular time. An aetion done before today is express ed by the perfect or imperfect; whatever remains for the aorist is, therefore, to express a past action, done very recently, say in the course of the current day or having reference to a present ecb. Aorist, therefore, merely implies the 
completion of an action at a past time generally, and also an action done ab a. 
URE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
TRY OF CULT 
• MINISTRI 
UT OF INDIA 
HR AFFIX NYUT. 
[BK. III. OH. II. 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
TOR 
ALE 
etj recent time, as during the course of this day. The imperfect and perfect are used in narrating events of past occurrence, generally in remote psat times the aorist is used in dialogues and conversations which refer to recent past actions, but it is not used to denote past specified time or to narrate events', Apte's Composition. As waterfa he dil'; prata he took '. 
Vart :-The affix Je comes after the verb a'to dwell', when end of the present night' is indicated. Supposing a person rising from his bed at the proper time of rising (not in the middle of the night, but in the carly morn. ing) and finding another near him were to ask that one,' where did you dwell 1. e. pass the night'? That person so asked should answer in the ge and not in un. As syaratata 'I dwelt there'; and not ayataar. 
Vart :--The above rule applies only in connection with waking after regular sleep. He who has not slept the whole night, but only for half an hour or so, should reply 93198. 
अनद्यतने लङ् ॥ ११॥ पदानि ॥अनद्यतने, लङ, (भूते)॥ चिः ॥ अविदामानादातने भूतेऽयें वर्तमानाडातील प्रत्ययो भवति।। afuu safata saranama: 
111. The affix 19 comes after a verbal root em ployed in the sense of past before the commencement of the current day. 
The word aawiga Rahuvrihi compound, meaning that which has nob occurred during the course of the current day (adyatano). The whole of this aflix is replaced by conjugational terminations, and the affix a by itself denotes the Imperfect tense. As ata he did'; ET'he took'. 
Why have we explained anadyatana as a Bahuvribi compound? Be cause when there is doubt as to the time, whether it was to-day or yesterday, there the Imperfect should not be used. As a syruafe' we ate to-day or yesterday'. In such a case the aflix is 7. 
Vart :The affixe is also employed in signifying what is not wit nessed by the narrator, when ib relates to a well-know public event which can form the object of perception by the narrator. Thus in speaking of a recent public occurrence we may say :- TE 4T ' the Yavanas have besieged Saketa'; e as w at dhe Yavanas have besieged Madhyamika'. 
Why do we say not witnessed by the speaker'? Observe sana sifat the sun arosc'. Why do we say a popular public event'? Observe WTCC 
Devadatta has made the mat', Why do say which is the object of perception by the speaker'? Observe a fee w a 'Vasudeva killed Kansa'. 
saraua Te 993 # uite a sfata, (wa, 
w at) 
GOVERNME 
OF CULTURE 
MENT OF IND 
BRUNIIT. OF. II. $ 112, 114.) 
TELAFFIX DA. 
पति मंत्रालय 
सत्यमेव जयते 
9. 
तसरकार 
resu frat egfatagan yote yaragraag geta vafa u 
112. When a word gimplying recollection is in connection with it, a verb takes the affix € (2nd future) in the sense of the past before the commencement of the present day. 
The word for means 'recollection'. This rule sets aside the affis . As gratfe eact witty TEUTTI rememberest thou, Devadatta, we were dwelling (lit. we will dwell) in Kashmir'. 
The word - meaning significatien' in the sûtra, denotes that the construction is the same when the synonyms of s et are used ; ag nefo dost thou remember'; quê dost thou know'; daga 'dost thou reflect'; and the like. 
ufę 11 883 n açtfall , uff, ( forada, 27) m वृत्तिः । यच्छन्द सहितेऽभिज्ञावचन उपपदे सुनत्ययो न भवति॥ 
113. The affix e (the 2nd future) is not applied in the sense of the past when the upapada donoting recollection has in connection with it the particle 17. 
This prohibits are, which the verb as obtained from the last sâtra. Ag আমি লাৰি বৰল অৱ জমলেৰীৰ স্ব thou rememberest Devadatta how we did dwell in Kashmir'. Here the mere fact of dwelling is recollected, there being no other idea implied, therefore the subsequent aphorism has no scope here. That aphorism has its scope, when with recollection, is added another dependent idea or action, without which the sentence is not complete 
favor Traian 888 ur ugutor u faatar, ria, (u; ufanyà) n 
gfau Tan Ou Teriguita wa futet neudr wala yafe TITETU 
114. The affix ye is optionally applied in the sense of the past, when a word implying recollcetion' is in connection with it, and whether such word has the particle Or is employed simply; provided that the two verbs, occurring in the same complex sentence, are so connected together, that each is necessary to the other, to complete the sense of the speaker. 
The word w at means the relation between the sign and the thing eignifled, whished for or wanted by the speaker, or in other words, when the first verb is related to another verb used in the same sentence, as a sign 18 to thay which is indicated by the sign. As suforutaifa ya Ucrain a 
URE • Gove 
OVERNMENT 
RY OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
AT OF INDIA 
TAE AFFIX LAN. 
[BE, III. OF. II. 
सत्यमेव जयत 
* or sufoarfe a air ter, The Four, do you rememben: Devadatta we went to Kashmir and there did drink Saktu'. 
This option is allowed whether the particle is or is not useds. Als Siuratfe anze itcr fcat(or wa uztart Tar) te vi (or 77 aatca sarf) 'Do you recollect, Devadatta how we went to Kashmir: and how we ate rice there'. 
In the above examples, the verb' to go ' is the sign, and the eating'or 
• drinking ', in the second sentence, is the thing really signified; the first verb is necessary as an introduction to the thought of the speaker which dwells more - upon the second verb. Here the second sentence or proposition is used as com 
pletion or complement of the first proposition. 
wita fat n ppuu asifat u uita, fale , (ua ngaa) ni वृत्तिः ॥ भूतानदरतनपरोज्थे वर्तमानाडातीलिप्रत्ययो भवति ॥ arreu e-arved fugama: a. 
115. The affix iat comes after a verb in the sense of the past before the commencement of the current day and unper ceived by the narrator. 
The word watu'un perceived qualifies the words na 'past and an non-current day' understood in this aphorism. 
Well, are not the sepses of verbs all unperceived, since they are mere words, and words cannot be perceived ? Exactly so; but in popular phraseology, the perception is imagined to attach to the agent with regard to certain verbs; this rule relates to cases where such perception does not take place. As, 
t'he did'; were he took'. 
It is evident that the fete (perfeet) should not be used in the first per. Bon, i. e. when the agent of the action is the speaker or writer himself; for it is impossibly that the action should not have been witnessed by him. But if by reason of some distracted, unconscious or absent state of mind, it is possible for the agent to speak of the action as one of which he was not & & conscious. witness, the perfect may be used even in the first person. As gârst fra fazata: 
indeed I prated while asleep. 
Vort:-The perfect should be employed (in denoting past time simply, whether of the current day or otherwise, and whether the action has been wit messed personally or not) if the sense is total denial of the action. As eff feuatsfa ? HE F* w did you live in the Kalinga country? I did not even go to the Kalinga country'; fa sagtsfa? g fuvar saau. 
patra atas 99€ uuerfi - taat, 1, (va, w aa, wia, Fee ) 
| বৃদ্ধি ॥ কালোদয়ৰ লক্ষীছ চঞ্জী ঝিল্লি চাকরি স্থথ খেলাঘরখীল কুমকে ফন্সেলি জন্ধাবাফি জা৷ KURE 
GOI 
OVERNMENT 
v OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
II. $ 116-118.) 
TAL AFFIX LAT. 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
116. And the affixe comes after a verb when the particles and viat are in connection with it, and when the verb denotes past action unperceived by the speaker, and before the commencement of the current day. 
The force of 'and' is that the affix fae (perfect), may also be employ ed in similar construction. As gfa prata (imperfect),or ofa T Vu (perfect) * Alas ! he did it'. Tanita or 795a&t'again and again he did it's 
Tutana n pp9 llura nga, saasta; (a, magar, orta, 15 , fac ) ! 
वृत्तिः ॥मासन्नकाले पृच्छयमान भूतानढातनपरोऽथै वर्तमानाडातोलेलिटी प्रत्यया भवतः॥ 
117. The affixes 7 (imperfect) and fug (perfect) come after a verb (in expressing a past time not belonging to the current day and unperceived by the speaker) when the past time referred to is recent, and the sentence is inter rogative. 
This s@tra also qualifies the words ya, at and were understood in this sûtra. The word it means' what should be asked'; and sea ratimo close at hand' As, some one may ask another, wisz2aa: or dame did Devadatta go or has Devadatta gone (just now)'? STUUT or at 2uqu: 'Did Devadatta sacrifice or has Devadatta sacrificed'? 
Why do we sayin asking question'? Otherwise there would be Per fect tense only. As, in act: Devadatta has gone'. 
Why do we say when the past time referred to is imminently recent'? Observe ua TuaTFA, EU a fra angea. 'I ask you, did Krishna indeed kill Kanga in days of yore'. 
WE F 1 895 01 TIFTE, FA, (ya, wagaa, uda) fe: EW Una wameam uat wala a 
118. The affix (present) comes after a verb, when the particle is in connection with it, (and denotes a past time not belonging to the current day and unperceived by the speaker). 
All the words within brackets are understood in this aphorism. This "debars fax or the perfect tense. Thus far er yfifer: Yudhishthira sacrificed'; po also wan e garga I TOTE uuela 
studamppen arfa umata,(a, a, 
ARE 
GOVE 
VERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY ON 
NT OF INDIA 
जयते 
प्रकृति मंत्रालय 
THE AFFIX LAT. 
IBE. III. OE, IL.8119-1223 
भारत सरन 
तिसरकार 
वृत्तिः॥ परोणेच भूतानातनेऽये वर्तमानाडातो नउपपदे लद् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
119. The affix लट् (present) comes after a verb when the particle en is in connection with it, and denotes a past action not belonging to the current day, and when the action is perceived by the agent. 
As va foar catfathus said the father'; fa tarata: caufa thug said the preceptor': 
ननी पृष्टप्रतिवचने ॥ १२॥ पदानि ॥ ननौ, पृष्ट-प्रतिवचने, (भूते, लट् ) ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ ननुशब्द उपपदे प्रश्नपूर्वके प्रतिवचने भूतेश्य लट्प्रत्ययो भवति। 
120. The affix it is employed after a verb in denot ing past action, when the word " is in connection with it, and an answer is given to a question. 
The anuvritti of the words 'amadyatana' and 'parolesha does not exe tend to this sûtra. This declares a rule with regard to past time in general. This debars शुक् (the Aorist tense). As कार्षीः कटं देवदत्त ?--जनु करोमि भो " Devar datta, did you make the mat ? O, yes, I did make it'. अबोचस्तत्र किचिट देवदत्त,-ननु sofort: Devadaita, did you speak there anything? O, yes, I did speak'. 
Why do we say 'in reply to an interrogation'? Observe waarifa नाणवा: " certainly, Manavaka did it'. 
नन्योविभाषः ॥ १२१ ॥ पदानि ॥ नमोः, विभाषा, (भूते, पृष्ठ प्रति-वचने, ट्)॥ 
चिः ॥ नशब्दे मुशब्द चोपपदे पृष्टप्रतिषचने विभाषा लप्रत्ययो भवति भूते 
121. The affix e comes optionally after a verb, in denoting past time, in reply to an interrogation, when the words not' and what of that are in connection 
with it. 
ASका पर देवदत्तन करोमि और or नावास-नई करोमि Or अहवाकार्षद Devadatta, did you make the mat?-No I did not ;-what of that, I did'. 
पुरि लुड्चास्मे ॥ १२ ॥ पदानि ॥ सुरि, लुङ्, च, अस्ने, (भूते, अनद्यतने, विभाषा लट)॥ 
चिः । पुराशबद उपपदे मशब्दवर्जिवे भुवानदावनेर्थे विभाषा लाटप्रत्यया भवति लट् च ॥ 
122. Optionally the affixes ve and come after a verb, in denoting past time not belonging to the current day, when the word gt is used in the sentence, provided that the word is not used, 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
NMENT OF IN 
B 
TIT. Cn. II. $ 123, 114) 
THE AFFIX SANACH. 
459 
सत्यमेव जयते 
सरकार 
The anuvritti of the word anadyatana which had come to a stop with III. 2. 120 manifests itself again in this sutra by a process of jumping over the two intermediate aphorismy. This sort of anuvritti is technically called anan duka-pluti 'the leap of a frog. e. skipping of several sûtras and supplying a word from a previous sûtra. 
- This is an optional rale, so that when lat 'and lun are not used, tho proper tenses, as the case may be, must be employed. As quatre guerre the pupils lived here formerly.' So also, Aorist, wareg: gir alat: Imperfect, 
eft get erat: Perfect, syfte GET 4771781 
Why do we say' when the word F is not used '? Observe auf engar gfufye: Yudhishthira did perform a sacrifice formerly'. Here rule 118 ante exerts its influence. 
adina me 11.933 u ugifa nadara, pe 1 frenarrautsaferniza tateafent TTST C#*Tetatia cata wafan 
123. The affix me comes after a verb when denoting a present action. 
The word a means that which is begun and which has not yet come to an end. The action denoted by a verb in the present tense is yet con tinuing and has not stopped. As rura.he is cooking '; vafa ho is reading So also whatever is constant, regular, uniform, is represented by the Present In definide. As fagfra var: the mountains stand'; fra van 'the rivers flow'. 
2: TTSTITUTUCAT at Thu m pap ni ET II : TC- at, ga at Cat II 
T: : TUTT7faedarareut waa: 90 EU Tranfeuerafan af gama 
124. The affixes ac and ara substitutes of , when agreeing with what does not end with the first case-affix, 
Ag qora Uge behold Devadatta who is cooking': Teo gal' or wataa gay doze by one who is cooking' +19= 1+9+ TTT (III. 4. 113, III. I. 68)=T4+4+4+ (VI . 2.82)= * So also Tu +49 +9= 4 +*+ =+*8 
Why do we say' when agreeing with what does not end with the first case-affix ? Obsorve daca vafa' Devadatta cooks'. 
Since the term ut might have been supplied from the last aphorium, its double citation is for the sake of larger application of this rule ; that is to say, this rule applies sometimes even when the word is in concord with a nominative cage. As 7 ICT who is a Brahmana'=fea mas; so also 
15 
URE 
Gove 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY ON 
NT OF INDIA 
SATRI AND SANACH. 
[BK III. CH. II. $ 125, 126 
PRETE 
V 
777 
विदाले ग्रामप: and विदानानो वासणाः रात and जुहोति ; and अधीयानs and अधीते। 
Vart.- These affixes are employed after a verb, when the particle pt is in composition, and censura or curse is implied. As AT TT and TI TEFTW 
may be not cook'; TT TTT: TUSIF:aret sie uitafa 'cursed be he (lit. May he not live) who though smitten by the pain of the contempt of others, still lives'. Some commentators read the apuvritti of the word option from sa tra 121 into this. That option, however, is a limited option (vyavasthita-vibha sha) and not of universal-application. Whenever a particular form is found as differing from the general form, there it should be understood that the option has been allowed, and not everywhere. 
watu upaya agafa l avatua, 7, (HT:, Taar Ft) n 
fe: u gwait face at: wgunet muut aa: * 
125. The affixes up and yr are substitutes of me even when agreeing with what ends with a first case-affix, provided that it is in the vocative case, 
This aphorisın declares when these participles may be employed even in the first case; as tutor 'O thou who art cooking'. 
ricat: for at9T: 11 gen utfall au- cat, 
f at, (ME: 917-a1a ) in 
ufas 
u n atste igrat: Tama: uguratate at wwas e बार्तिक ॥शश हत्या क्रियायाः गुण उपसंख्यानम् ॥ af antara 
126. The laflixes and are the substi tutes of me and come after a verb, in expressing an at tendent circumstance or characteristic, and the cause of an action. 
The word guy means that by which a thing is recognised or known e. an attribute; to means producer or conge. Both these words are attributes of the ward fort. Of lalcshanga , Taysara 497 the Yavanas take their moals lying down'. fagnatsynefa : Of hetu:-8 ft TTT yea by (reason of) seeing Hari, he gets absolution', tarot trafa 'for the sake of study he dwells here. 
Why do we say 'when denoting & characteristic or a cause? Observe asfa'he cooks'; vafa 'he reads'. 
Why do we say of the action'? Nob so wben obe participle is the charac teristic or cause of a substance or quality. As a: ma istezas that which is shaking is the Aswattha'; "Casa a y 'whatever floats is light'; fontafa ays that which sinke down is heavy'. 
URE • GOVE 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY OF 
ERNMENT OF 
BESALI OH. II. $ 127, 128.] 
THE AFPIX SANAN 
सत्यमेव जयते 
2205 
X 
Vart:--This participle also defines the agent of an action as, atstart sured Featu:'he is Devadasta who sits studying '. 
Vart :- This participle is also used to state a geceral truth: as a uwa gat'the Durva grass grow in a recumbent position'; na wa fua 'a lotus stalk grows in an upright position'. The compound uticate of the sâtra contradicts the rule by which a word of fewer syllables stands first (II. 2. 14). This shows that the rule II. 2. 14. is not universal. 
atau 039 ut uçrfor i at, a, (2T-TH ) 11 वृत्तिः ॥ तो शतृशानची सत्संधी भवतः ॥ 
127. These two to and 79are called to These participial affixes get collectively this name; and as such they are not limited by the conditions enumerated above, so that they replace not only the affixes of the Present tense but sometimes of Future also (III. 3. 14.), as well as other tenses. Thus FIE TEE gat, fat, gafts, TETATTI 
The word ga, occurs in sâtra II. 2. 11. &c. 
Taut: 177 11 895 ni agire il 99-gut, TT: NGT vize yat: 17 readr walau f rufga sugat ayun 
128. The affix 1197 comes after the verbs ato purify. and war to sacrifice 
As a purifier (fire or air)'; * sacrificer. 
It might be asked is the wint with others that follow, an affix suo generis, or is it merely a substitute of , as sug and unt? Why we ask this questions is this. If they are affixes and not substitutes of a, then they should govern genitive case by rule II. 3. 65. instead of nominative or the accusative. If, on the other hand, they are substitutes of T, then by rule II. 3. 69. they should not govern the genitive case. But evidently they are not the substitutes of a, as they are not so taught How is it then that we have such forms as 
* *** drinking Soma'; and 011777:? These forms can be explained on other grounds than supposing that 777&c. must be the substitutes of a The term in sâtra II. 8. 69. is not the affix yy taught in this Obapter sû tra 135; but it is a pratyáhára, including several affixes. It is a prabyáhoru formed by taking the 2 of ug in shtra 124; and 7 of 7 in 135; and thus it means all the afixes from u in 124 down to go in 135. Thus though 
I &C. are not substitutes of at, still the rule II. 3. 69. applies to them, as they are in cluded in the term at. 
Vari:The rule IL. 3. 69. applies only optionally when the verb. takes the affix w. As ex or ne fe 'hating the thief.' 
URE 
GOVE 
GOVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY ON 
NT OF INDIA 
THE AFFIX SATRI. 
[BK. III. CH. II. S 1294182 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
ACT 
रित सरकार 
ताच्छील्यवयोवचनशक्तिषु चानश् ॥ १० ॥ पदानिताच्छील्य 27:- -mitry, a 
yfa: u are tagfag urat tutur vafa u 
129. The affix it comes after a verb in expressing 'habit', standard of age' and ability', 
The word aratat means 'habit' or ' disposition '; : means the con dition of body such as 'infancy', youth' &c; means capacity to do a thing'. As AT 5077: 'habituated to enjoy'; # F IT: 'wearing an armour (of the age at which armour may be worn)'; y foreta: able to destroy his foe So also, wete yaTUTT, TTS, TEFTAT:, ivare afrati and 117: 
garat: metafe u pze u ogifer o 75-vêti, grą, waffen 
yfers a T VITT reatt varTot wafa hafa fenefcu 
130. The affix ug comes after the verb 'to go and safe tohold' in denoting that the agent does the action without trouble. 
The word sunt means that which is accomplished by the agent with ease and facility. As w a TTCITTT the facile reading of the Purâna '; 1777-ge. free easily mastering the Upanishad'. The root upft is causative of g and means here to master'. 
Why do we say when facility is indicated'? Otherwise no ta he reads with difficulty'; errafa' he remembers with difficulty'. 
fasfuan ni agifer u fi, ufà, (ata) n feu f fe fgutat: watu watao 
131. The affix ut comes after the verb for when the agent indicated means an enemy. 
The word af means 'enemy'. As fa 'enemy', faya'two enemies'. fquat onemies. 
Why do we say when denoting an enemy'? Observe are wat way the wife hates her husband'. 
går utan ger nucifa n 99, 79-ata, (sta) feu qug faca unegaraufat: wanawafan 
132. The affix. we comes after the verb 3 to press out juice' when the sense is that of association with sacrifice, 
GOVERNMENT 
IRE 
GOV 
CULTURE 
MINISTRY OF 
T OF INDIA 
( 
II. S 133, 134.] 
TAB AFFIX SATRI. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
मित्रान 
मारतसरकार 
The word it is an instrumental compound, meaning association or connection ( संयोग) with sacrifice. As सु+न+शतृ (III. 1.76, III. 4. 113)= सुनु+ मत (I2.4)= सुन्वत (VI. 1.77), 1st. sing. सुन्वन्, pl. सुन्वन्तः the sacrifices'; as in सर्वे सुन्वन्त: ' all are interested in, or par take of, or share in the sacrifice.' 
The word Putt indicates that the principal sacrificer. i. e. the ata is meant and not every person who is associated in the performance of a sacrifice in a subordinate capacity ; such as याजका ' the sacriticing priests.' 
When connection with sacrifice is not meant we have सुनोति मुरार he distils liquor'. 
महः प्रशंसायाम् ॥ १३३ ॥ पदानि ॥ अर्हः, प्रशंसायाम्, (शत)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ हवेति प्रशंसायां गतृप्रत्यया भवति । 
133. The affix at comes after the verb ut in express ing praise, A A अर्हन्निह भवान्विदयास् - thou art worthy of this knowledge here'; ईनिगाह 
भवान्यूजास् 'thou art worthy of honor in this place.' 
Why do we say when meaning to praise'? Witness शर्हति चौरो वधस् the thief deserves death'. 
मा केस्तच्छी लतद्धर्मतत्साधुकारिषु ॥ १३४ ॥ पदानि ॥ श्रा, के, बच्चील-तद्धर्म-तत्साधुकारिषु॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ या एतस्मात् विपशब्दादयानिव जई मनुक्रमिष्यामस्वच्चीलारिषु कर्तृघु वे वेदितव्या 
134. From this sûtra as far as far in sûtra 177 inclusive, the affixes that we shal treat of, are to be understood in the sense of agents having such a habit, or nature, or having skill in such and such action. 
The force of or in this sabra is limit inclusive, and includes fans also. The term तच्छील means 'the natural inclination towards an action not prompted by a contemplation of its fruit or result. The term aga means who enters upon an action not from babit but thinking that it is his duty.' The term aeriyer fc means who does the action fexpressed by the verb in an excellent way.' Illustrations of these will be given under the subsequent aphorisms, 
तॄन् ॥ १३५ ॥ पदानि ॥ वृन्, (तच्छो ल-तद्धर्म-तत्साधुकारिषु) ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ सर्वधातुभ्यस्तृन्प्रत्ययो भवति सच्चीलादिषु कर्तृषु॥ बार्तिकर ॥ विधायि चानुपसर्गस्य ॥ बार्तिकम् ॥ न यतेषु च ॥ गार्तिकच ॥ स्विषेदेवतायामकारश्योपचाया धनिटू स्वचा ॥ बात्तिक । देशच नियुक्त। पातिकच ॥ इन्दति तुच्या ।। 
URE 
GOVE 
OF CULTUR 
QNMENT OF 
. MINISTRY 
OF INDIA 
TEC AFFIX ISENUCH. 
BE. III. CH. II. § 13, 1961, 
सत्यमेव जयते 
सरकार 
135. The affix comes after all verbs in the sense of * agents having such a habit doc. 
The of 7 is indicatory, and regulates the accent (VI. 1. 197). As +9=#, 1st sing. Hal. This affix denotes habit in the following; as, Fat GEIT' who is accustomed to make mats. Nature:-as, yasitarti sufagiani wafa 
TTT the family of Stâvish tâyana shave the heads of their widows'; 99**. हरि शाहरका भवन्ति श्राद्ध पिढे the Ahvarakas steal away food as soon as Sraddha is accomplished'; vanatoarea it wafa ga a'the Taulvalâ yanas become elated on the birth of a son'. Slcill:as, Fat CT skilful maker of mats' manual skilful hunter. 
Vart:--The simple verbs, without upasargas, take the aflix T, when the words so formed are names of sacrificial priests. As g +7=ET, Ist. sing. etar 'the Hotri priest'; so also in the Potri priest'. 
Why do we say when not taking the upasargas'? Observe GTE the Udgâtri priest'; Aface the Pratihartri priesb?. Here the affis is at. Though the form is the same, there is difference however in the accent; i. e. 7 places udatta accent on the first syllable (VI 1. 197), while de places it on the last (V1. 1. 163). 
Vart:--The augment ya is added when it takes the affix TT; as at + 4+IT= , Ist. sing. Er the Neshtri priest'. 
Vart:-When signifying deity, the verb feat takes ; the letter is, the substitute for the of the root; and the affis does not take the inter mediate re augment; as, fer + TT=290,,1st sing. Tu Tvashtri.' 
Parts-The root r* takes , when the word to be formed means an officer; as yg an attendant, a door-keeper. 
Vort:- In the Veda, the root ve takes T. as up. The form is the same as the last, but there is difference of accent. 
feta atauiaatrege594 aagayaga: 
83€ uerfa n fact t-a-yaga-377-FC #f4-7770-273-?- E-TT, TTT, (aztafey, *g) 
वृत्तिः ॥ अलंकृतादिभ्यो धातुभ्यस्त च्छोलादिषु कतपुडणुच प्रत्ययो भवति ।। पाशिवाय मलं जोबनाया पूर्वविमतिधेनेच्युवतव्यः । 
136. The affix gut comes after the following verbs in the sense of the agents having such a habit &os viz... to adorn', face to expel', y to be born, Jack to be ripe', ta' to fly', to be mad', 'to shine', 79 to be ashamed', to move', TY to grow to bear and 
to walk'. 
REGOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
BENSIII. 06. II. 187.139.) 
THE AFFIX KINU. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
As salafioy: decorating', fattafog: repudiating', quitag: procre & bive', perfety: ' apt to ripen', geefaeg: 'flying', grafety: 'mad', afosys 'bright, syuafory: ' bashful', artisy: 'revolving', afgeg: 'growing'. frey: patient', 
fet:' moveable '. 
Vart :-The affix cote debars by anticipation the afix Jl of III. 2 151, after the root in, though it has the sense of decorating'. . 
hrefa 1939 n ucifa 1 :, fa, (alatieg, E TU gfa: u ruratgiarzgere fact asalarfes HOTFETTI vafa u 
137. The affix a y in the sense of the agent having such a habit dc', comes in the Chhandas, after the verb that ends in the causative fra 
The Causatives take this affix in the Vedic literatare. As an efter: who hold the stones'; stu: TifaTa 
yale PRS u ugifə #:, , ( fa; larg, 
faou waacfatte efe face gecenate TUTTERÀ wafa ! 
138.. The afix syy in the sense of the agent having such a habit &c. comes in the Chhandas, after the verb 4 
to be also. 
Thus #fasy: becoming'. 
The yoga-vibhaga or the division of this satra from the last, with which it could well have been read, is for the sake of the subsequent sâtra, 
The word also indicates the existence of other verbs not included in the above two sutras ; as भाजिष्णुना लोहितचन्दनेन । 
FOTOETTU : 1 zen agtfa u aat- fer-ET!, , , (azlafag) 
fan var for fur gedarar ei*7TTE yurvavarieg wegter water u atau meeTTT6917 
139. The affix key comes after the following verbs in the sense of the agent having such a habit dc.? viz-U to be weary, for to conquer' and eat' to stand', as well as after y * to be'. 
As, une languid'; Foreya victorious'; tege disposed to stand firm, immoveable ; :' being 
The anuvritti of the word Chhandasi does not extend to this satra. The indicatory letter of this affix is really up and nob , and therefore, there in 
URE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
TRY OF CULTI 
• MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
TAE AFFIX CHINUN. 
[BR. III. CH. Il 140, 141 
सत्यमेव जयते 
IT 
no substitution of long & for the strlof eat, which would otherwise have taken place, had the affix been faa (VI 4. 66). 
In the sûtra I 1.5. (afefa ) the letter - is also included; for 77 come ing before th, is changed by the rules of san lhi into and is not therefore visible. This atfix therefore does not canse guna. 
So also in sâtra V11. 2. 11. ( *: fafa), the augment te does not come after the verb e or a monosyllabic verb ending in the pratyâ hâra y, when an afis having an indicatory follows. Here also includes t; and there fore in Ys we have no intermediate augment te. 
Vart.-In the Chhandas this affix comes after the verb to bite; as a Tua' the beasts that bite'. 
afatferyfafena: anya ngonucifer afg-fu-cafa-feta:, :, (uztarfag 
greu afer IT pensataifa ya afuu 
140. The aflix son comes after the verbs sa to trem ble'y' to be greedy', u' to be bold' and fo to throw in the sense of the agent having such a habit &c.' 
As, aeg:' trembling' Tyq 'greedy'; yeg: bold', and frog: 'throwing'. 
faciat fagy 18 fa 19-cfe-21*, fogn, (awarfeg) 
Tu varierar sigvarsgriteeraturfe figura afa o 
141. The affix fugt comes after the eight verbs be ginning with t'to be calm,' in the sense of the agent having such a habit dc. 
The word ofa in the aphorism indicates beginning. These eight verbe begin with and end with in the list of verbs. Of the affix for the real affix is rt, the other letters are servile; the ris for the sake of substituting gutturul for the final palatale ; u is for the sake of euphony, or for the sake of rule VI.3.45 ; and letter causes vriddhi (VII. 2 116): which in the case of roots ending in - is prohibited by the rulo VII. 3. 34, the only verb taking Priddhi being मद् । 
As of 1st. sing. vt' calm ', likewise a ' desirings taming'; laborious'; 'whirling', 'moving round'; it 'fatiguing'; * 'forbearing'; 
'heedless' and y et 'mad'. Though by rule 136, the verb yon takes the affix vey, it also takes the affix fugt by the rule of a15*** (III 1 94). 
All these verbs belong to the divddi class. After other verbs than there eight, we have obher affixes; as ufuar, ARE - GOVE 
GOVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY OS 
ENT OF INDIA 
ABELI.CH. IIS 142, 142] 
-TET AFFIX GHIN 
कृति मंत्रालय 
भारत सरकार 
संपचानुरुधाङमाङ्यसपरिससंसृजपरिदेविसंज्वरपरिक्षिपपरिस्ट परिवदपरिदहपरिमुहदुषद्विषद हदुहयुजाक्रीडविवि वत्य जरजभजातिचरापचरा मुषाम्याहन श्च ॥ १४२ ॥ पदानि ॥ संपव-भनुरुध-प्रायन-मायस-परिस सलुश-परिदेवि-संज्वर-परिक्षिय-परिरट-परिवद-परिदह-परिमुह-दुष-द्विष-द्रह दुह-युज-माक्रीड-विविच-त्यज-रज-भज-अतिचर-अपचर-नामुष-अभ्याहनः, च, (तच्छीलादिषु, घिनुण)॥ 
पत्ति ॥ सम्पृचादिभ्यो धातुभ्यो धिनुण प्रत्यये। भवति ॥ 
142. The affix fugt comes after the following verbs, in the sense of 'the agent having such a habit &c. viz :--YY 
मुरुष, सायन, प्रायम्, परिस, संसज, परिदेव, संज्वर, परिषिप, परिरट, परिवद्, परिदहू, परिमुह, दुब, द्विष, छह, दुङ्, युज, साक्रीड, विविच्, त्यज, रज, भज , अतिच, पप, सामुष and अभ्याहन्. 
The root y is to be taken as belonging to the Rudhâdi class, and nov as belonging to Adâdi, because the vikarana is elided in the latter. The root vicea belongs to Bhva di class, the simple verb being ea 'to sport'. The verb for to throw is common both to Tadâdi and Divâdi, and both are taken here. युज' to concentrate ' is Divadi, and युज' to join ' is Rudhadi ; both are meant here. The verb रंज' to color ' has lost its nasal in this stu tra, irregularly, 
Thus संपृच्+घिनुण संपर्क+इन् (VII. 2.52)- पकिन् Ist. sing. सरूपार्की | "mixture'; similarly, अनुरोपो ' compliant'; शायरमी ' one who restrains'; बायासी 
'one who exerts'; परिसारी 'that which flows round'; संसर्गी 'united'; परिदेवी lament | ing'; संचारी'greatly heating', परिशेपो 'moving aboub'; परिराठी 'eryingaloud'; 
परियादी 'reviling'; परिदाही 'burning'; परिमाही 'beguiling'; दोषी 'guilty'; देषी 'hati ing' atat 'quarrelling'; art 'milking'; met 'uniting or conceabrating'; statt "playing'; विवे की 'discriminating'; त्यागी 'renouncing', रागी 'yearning after', भागी 'sharing'; sfaard transgressing'; svara 'offending'; et 'a thief'; *ut urat 'attacking'. (VII S 52 and 54) 
The indicatory of the afix shows that the final palatal is changed into a corresponding guttural before this affix. 
वी कपलसकत्वस्त्रम्भः ॥१४३ ॥ पदानि ॥बी, कष-लस-कत्थ सम्भः (घिनुण, तच्छीलादिषु॥ 
वत्तिाकारलस कत्थनमा एतेभ्यो पातुभ्यो विषब्द उपपदे धिनुण प्रत्ययो भवति । 
143 The affix पिन comes after the verbs पाम् 'to injure', to embrace and. sport', कत्थ 'topraise' and 'tober lieve', when these are in composition with the preposition for 
16 
GOVERNMEA 
CRY OF CULTU 
MINISTRY 
ENT OF INDIA 
THE AFFIX VUN. 
BK. III. CA. II. V 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
सत्यमेव जयते 
197979. 
As forat 'injuring'; faaret 'sportive, a sensualist'; faucet 'vaunting; and freut'confiding'. 
wa TT: 1188 u gara , T, :, (fugum yfasuar mat, tergrate vir SITTET faaTaeyr wafa u 
144. The affix fugt comes after the verb to wish' when compounded with the prepositions on and fa. 
As uute 'thirst'; faart. The term fo is to be read into this sûtra by the force of the word 'and'. 
#TUTUT: 1 289 o ograna, 9-7-5-HT 2 , (fag) 
Thus Tere erferit futtator vafa 
145. The afix fagt comes after the verbs , , , , and us when composinded with the preposition fa. 
As tarot 'prattling'; wert 'extending around'; it 'running away, fugitive'; tormenting'; varat reporting '; raret'a traveller'. 
The root sy here is the Bhvândi ay meaning 'to dwell' and is not Adadi meaning 'to cover', because in the latter the vikaraṇa is elided. 
मिन्दसिक्तिशखादविनाशपरिक्षिपपरिस्ट परिवादिव्याभाषासूची gst n enugtfor a far-fra-felt gra-farat-aftremofica-oft. atf-HT- , gt, (astuttg) 
ferru farerferit *18*tenegtarie e Stadt wafer a 
146. The affix ga is added to the following verbs in the sense of the agent having such a habit &c.': Fare, fart, fat, tie, far, wifery, ofere, ftatie, T14 and 1 
In this satra the whole phrase ending with a hag taken the terini nation of the first cage; which, however, has the force of the ablative here. 
As fane +=fa: (VII. 1. 1) 'blaming'; so also fece 'injuring': ' tormenting or trou olesome'; gras 'eating'; fam * 'destroying'; vice 
surrounding'; afetrest 'who cries aloud'; care a plaintiff'; STAT : 'detracting', and we'debracting'. 
The same forms as the above would have been obtained by adding the fix ga taught in III. 1. 133, as by adding q; its separate enunciation in dicates the existence of this paribhasha: 
The rule of III. 1. 94 by which an apavdda-affix which is not uni form with an utsarga-affix should supersede the latter only optionally, has no concern with a pavdda-afhxes added in the sense of having such a habit' i.e. with the effixes taughs in III. 2. 184-177". Therefore the affixes Buc, are not added in the sense of 'having such a habit &o'. 
URE .GOV. 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
ERNMENT OF 
OF INDIA 
st 
YM. Cn. II. 147-149, 
THE AFFIX YUCH. 
सात्वमय जयत 
कृति मंत्रालय 
सरकार 
e fumat muita ef n 999 n açtfa nafa-mante, w, but 
yfe u auta: integrua quartar vafa u 
147. The affix gt comes after the verbs for to lament' and 'to cry', when an upasarga is in composition with them. 
As suteen 'one who sports or laments'; want 'vociferous, & reviler'; oftaus: 'one who laments'; efcantaa: 'a reviler'. 
Why do we say 'when in composition with an upasarga'? Observe Cafear and mgr formed by IT (III. 2 135). 
TWTTTTTTTH ynys llocrfa 
n o taria, S TO, T, ( 
glutfag) fase vanava: mięri m a-ort stoutea atafay ng trafen 
148. The affix it comes, in the sense of the agent having such a habit &c.' after intransitive verbs denoting 'motion' or 'sound'. 
As, +39= 'moving' (VI. 1. 1.); tows 'creeping: nuen: 'soun ding': tuu: 'roaring'. 
Why do we say 'intransitive'? Observe wfsar facare. 
hace tie: ut per un garfo I startão, , TAT 4, (9, suara) in 
वृत्तिः ॥ अनुदात्तमो पातुः हलादिएकमवायतश्च युष प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
149. The affix y comes in the same sense after such intransitive verbs as are Atmanepadi and begin with a consonant and are Anudåttet i. e. have a gravely acconted vowel as indi catory, 
As a : 'being': ga: 'growing'. Why do we say 'Anudâttet'? Obserye mfuar, 
Why do we say beginning with a consonant'? Observe afar, which though Atmanepadi, takes it 
Why have we used the term wife 'beginning' in the sutra ? Observe TTTO: 'censuring"; vaiga: "an investigator. For without the word safe, the rule would have stood thusa-si traty Tw: which by I. 1. 72. would mean the affix y comes after the verbs which end with a consonant'; so that even after we shall have IT; and there would be no gr after yta which ende with a vowel. 
This rule will not apply if the roob is transitive; as sfaat we 
URE · Govs 
GOVERNMENT 
STRY OF CUL 
"MINISTRY 
OF INDIA 
THE AFFII Yuca., [B«. III. CH. II. $ 150, 2. 
HO 
. 
जुचक्रम्यदन्द्रम्यसधिज्वलशुचलषपतपदः ॥ १५०॥ पदानि ॥ -T561-*-- Tf-vau-TT-30-07-06:, (IT, a legg). 
ure: u gryfaxat yig at gaweat wafa asetarfes nagu 
150, The affix yt comes after the following verbs in the sense of the agent having such a habit &o.viz:- , **, 
yozva, , ,vaa, 97, 74, va and ve. 
The verb g is not to be found in the Dhâtupâtha, and is taught in the aphorisms and is hence called a sautra dhatu. It means to go', 'to be quick'. Ass+gr=ärta (VIII. 1 1. and VII 3.84)=1973 (VI. I. 78, II. 3. 46. 'a courser, a swift horse'. ***+y== m+FT (II. 4. 74)=*: 'moving about'; 60 also mu: 'wandering'; TTT: 'flowing'; TÊT: 'greedy'; 1927: burning ; & 'grieving'; : 'desiring' aa: 'falling', : 'moving'. 
The enumeration of the word in the above, indicates that this satra applies to the transitive verbs; otherwise the sû tra III. 2. 148 would have been sufficient, as v is a un verb. Others say that the inclusion of of in this aphorism indicates the existence of the paribhishú already given under sûtra III. 2. 146 1. e. the rule of III. 1. 94 has no concern with affixes added in the sense of having such a habit &c'. The affix royt which by III. 2. 136 is added to sea, supersedes therefore not merely the addition of gz to ist (III. 2 135), but also the addition of test to the same. If a atachchhilkı apa udda were to supersede only an atáchchhilika ulsarga, it would have been superfluous for Panini to teach in this sûora the addition of a to ve, because in that case the addition of swt to , by 1II2.154 would not have debarred the addition of yu to g by III 2. 149. The repetition is for the sake of jv.de pana, therefore, and it indicates the existence of the above-mentioned maxim. The indpaka is not, however, of universal application, for sometimes both alfixes are applied concurrently; as, eat a faca 
ATEITE g ypercifu -FT3-5**:, 7, (377) uferu sa ta, YTT, teaquara u 1 Tasar wafet e 
151. And after the verbs having the sense of my 'to be angry and as 'to adorn', the affix it is employed. 
As 'wrathful; 2 irascible'; $ 'adorning': 99: 'ornament'. But nob so after the verb as to which s@tra III 2. 136 applies. 
T: HRYR I Teter 1 T, U, (ga) afsu Pagtata 
wafa 152 The affix jy is not employed after those verbs which end in the letter . 
This debars III. 2. 149. As por fuer' making creaking sound'; varfer brembling'. In these cases the affix It is employed (III. 2. 135). 
PURE - GOVE 
GOVERNMENT 
Y OF CULTUS 
MINISTRY 
ENT OF INOM 
RALIT. 
I.8153-155.] 
TEE A F FIX SHA KAN. 
संस्कृति मंत्राल 
सत्यमेव जयते 
मालय .भारत 
सूददीपदीक्षश्च ॥ १५३॥ पदानि।। सूद-दीप-दीक्षः, च, (युच, न)। वृत्तिः ॥ सूददीपदीक्ष इत्येतेभ्यश्च युध प्रत्ययो न भवति ॥ 
** 153. The affix gy does not come after the verbs 7 to strike', दो 'to shine ' and द्वीस् 'to initiate'. 
These three verbs are anudattet, and by sutra II1. 3. 149, would have taken युच. The present sutra prohibits that. Therefore they take तृन्, As, सदित Ist. sing treat' ope who strikes'; strug' one who shines'; truy one who initiates'. 
Now,faight be objected-"We find that shtra III. 2. 167 specifically enjoins the affix after att; thus apavâda rule will therefore, supersede the general rule; where is then the necessity of the present rule? If you say that she affix युच् is also obtained by the rule of non uniformity (III. 1. 94), we reply that the Paribhâshâ given under sûtra 146 and 150 will prevent that." This objection is answered by saying that the above-mentioned Paribhasha is not of universal application ; there are exceptions to it, as सम्रा युवति: and यमना युवति: a young girl' which are both valid forms derived by adding and go to the verb फस. So also कम्मा and पाबना शाणा a shaking branch'. 
If we prohibit यु after the root सद, how do we get the forms मधुसदन and रिपुसदम? This objection may be a:swered in three ways: (1) the present is an anıtya rule, not of universal application, which can be inferred from finding this sutra separated from the last (yogavibhiga), when it was easter to make them one,(2) the words मधुसूदन &c. belong to the नन्दादि class (III. 1, 134) taking the affix ay or (3, they are formed by III. 3. 113 by the affix €. 
लषपत पदस्थाभूषहनकमगमगमशूभ्य उकञ् ॥१५४ापदानिलिष पत-पद-स्था-भू-वृष-हन-कम-गम-शभ्यः , उकज , (तच्छीलादिष)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ संपादिभ्यो धातुभ्यस्त छीलादिषु कर्तुषु उकजप्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
154. The affix at comes affter the following verbs, in the sense of the agent having such a habit kc:-शष, पत्, पद्, स्था, भ, वृष, हन्, कच, गm and 
Asञपलाषक ववलसंगतं, प्रपातुका गर्भा भवन्ति, उपपादुकसत्व, उपस्थ'युका रन पशवो भवन्ति, प्रभावुकमन्नं भवति, प्रवर्षकाः पर्जन्याः, शाघातुक कापालिकस्य शूखन्, कानुन र खियो भवन्ति, शागामुकं वाराणी रक्षा किंणायक तीक्षणनाहु | The य is added after स्था in ToutT" by VII.3 33. The TT is changed into a by VII. 3. 32 and 54. 
जल्पभिक्षकुलुण्टवृङ, पाकन् ।। १५५ ॥ पदानि ॥ जल्प-भिक्ष कुश-लुण्ट-वृङः, षाकन्, (तच्छीलादिषु) ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ प्रल्पादिभ्यो धातुभ्यस्तच्चीशादिष कर्तृप वाकन्प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
155. The affix पाकन् comes, in the sense of the agent 
96, having such a habit dc', after the following verbs --U, W 
पढ and go 
GOVERNMENT 
TURE - GOV 
OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
THE AFFIX ALUCH. 
[BK III. CA. II. $ 156, 158. 
• fifa 
सत्यमेव जयते 
The is indicatory showing that the feminine of the words so formed take the affix iri.. long $ (IV, 1. 41). As we 'talkative'; frete 'a beg. gar'; JER*: 'who or what cuts'; UTE : 'a thief or robber'; 967: 'low, miser able'. In the feminine brewrat &c. 
uhlfcft: il Qe I gefritasit:, ft, (awtarfcg) m fe: u ngatewadensaturfag og fatt hafa u 
156. The affix for comes in the sense of the agent having such a habit eto'. after the verb ng 'to hasten forward'. 
As safat Isto sing. wait an express courier', 1sb. dual sofaat &c. 
जिदूक्षिवित्रीण्वभाव्यथाभ्यमपरिभानसूभ्यश्च ॥ १५७॥ पदानि ॥ for-s-fe-fafe- -9-97697-57-9ftu- 
u 2:, T,(f:, 
a to) Tras a furufavit was aftsmeyer vafa asetafe 
157. The affix fw comes, in the sense of the agent having such a habit &c', after the verbs for 'to conquer,' to respect', for to waste, to dwell, to go. fuo to shelter', 'to go', We'to vomit', wo 'not to give pain', *to injure', they 'to hum iliate' and se to beget'. 
As sfer ist. sing wat 'conquering;", similarly, respecting'; wat 'wasting'; fait 'wasting'; wat exceeding; ut vomiting'; woeft 'free from pain'; vit' not injuring'; wfcwat 'humiliating' and avait procreating'. 
Fyferfgufafafagra in ITT II PUS nagtfan efe-to-fa-efa-fagi-at-71*:, it, (autogg) 
Tiene u euforfpura&faftur â gestufes un teqîr wafa o 
HET sro ser ve Tu 
158. The affix it comes in the sense of the agent having such a habit do', after the following words :--TT to desire', T'to seize', to go', 'to give to go, to protect', fast 
to sleep', west to be tired and up to venerate'. 
The word wat is formed by adding the preposition for to the verb gr 'to go crookedly'; so also use is formed by adding a tout, and then irregularly changing they into w. The term mgr is formed by adding to the verb VIST to hold'. The first three verbs belong to Churadi class and take for 
As, egere: disposed to be desirous of ; Trys disposed to entch hold of or seize'; 
w at tending or prone to fall'; Farge 'conapassionate', fara: dis poned to sleep'; : 'slothful's w at 'full of faith'. See VI. 4. 66 for adding 
URE 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY ON 
JERNMENTO 
EN TJK CH. II. § 103-106.] 
THE AFFIX KURACH. 
मदनयता 
भारत सरकार 
Vart:--The affix muy comes also after the root sits 'to lie down'; as vaty: disposed to lie down.' 
दाघेसिशदसदो रु। १५९॥ पदानि॥ दा-घेद-सि-शद-सदः, रु॥ त्तिः ॥दा धेट सिसद सद इत्येतेभ्यो वध्यत्यविभवति।। 
159. The affix a comes after the verbs ar to give', धे to suck', fo to bind', ze to fall and v 'to sit'. 
As, r'a munificent man'; yracat ATT a sucking child of the mother'. The genitive case is here prohibited by II 3. 69, the being taken as equivalent to s. As TR'binding'; गद् "falling' and सदुः 'resting'. 
सृघस्यदः कमरच ॥१६॥पदानि॥स-घति-भदः, कमरच, (तच्छी०॥ पुत्ति ॥ स पनि अप इत्येतेभ्यो धातुभ्यः तच्छीतादिष पाप कमरच प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
1160. The affix कमर in the sense of 'the agent hav ing such a habit &c.' comes after the verbs 'to flow', she 'to eat and wz'to eat'. 
As y 'going, a kind of deer '; WENT: 'gluttonous', ETT 'voracious'. 
भजभासनिदो घुरच ॥ १६१ ॥ पदानि ॥ भज-भास-निदः, घुरच, (तच्छीलादिषु)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ मज भास लिद हत्येतेभ्यो घुरच प्रत्यये। भवति बद्धीलादिषु पाषा 
161. The affix चुरचू comes in the sense of the agent having such a habit &c.', after the verbs a 'to break wie to shine', and मिद 'to be fat.' 
A भं +घुरच-मंग+पुर (VII.3.52)= भंगुर 'brittle'; the palatal being changed into guttural, because of the indicatory . So also act: Ey: 'a fat beast'; yt vatfas 'splendid light'. 
After the verb su this affis gives a reflexive signification that which naturally breaks of itself. 
विदिभिदिछिदेः कुरघ ॥ १६२ ॥ पदानि ॥ विदि-भिदि-विदेः, कुरच, (तच्छीलादिषु)॥ 
वृत्ति:॥ विदादिभ्यो धातुभ्यमादीलादिषष कुरष प्रत्ययो भवति बार्तिकर॥ व्यः सम्प्रसारण कुरञ्च वक्तव्यः ॥ 
Lo2. The affixकुरच_ comes, in the sense of the agent having such a habit &c. after the verbs fog to know farg 'to divide and fog' to pierce.' 
As fugt: Tirga: 'a knowing Pandit': FET TET'splitting or fragile wood TEGT : ' a cutting or breaking rope'. The affix is employed in a reflexive sense after the verbs for and fea. 
URE 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
VERNMENT ON 
. 
THE AFFIX UKA. 
[BK III CH II § 103.166 
PREDE 
मंत्रालय 
Virt: - the affix कुर comes after the verb व्यध 'to kill'; and there is vocalisation of the semivowel; as fayt: 1 
इणनजि सतिभ्यः करप, ॥ १६३ ॥ पदानि ॥ इण-न-जि सतिभ्यः, करप, (तच्छोलादिषु) ॥ 
वृत्तिः॥ इण न जि इत्येतेभ्यो धातुभ्यस्तच्छीलादिषु कषकरपप्रत्ययो भवति॥ 
163, The affix करप् comes, in the sense of the agent having such a habit &c,' after the verbs rito go', 'to destroy', for sto conquer', and 'to flow'. 
The is indicatory in order to introduce the augmentgh between the verb and the affix (VI. 1.71). Thus r+करय =+त+वर= इत्वरः, fem. इव्वरी 'a traveller'; "at:, fem. act 'transitory'; forcacy, fem. fra et 'victorious; at: fem react going, a river 
Though the affix begins with a letter of a pratyahara, and ought to have taken the intermediate re (VII 2. 35) yet it is prohibited by VII. 2. 8. 
गत्वरश्च ॥ १६४॥ पदानि ।। गत्वरः, च ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ गत्वर इति निपात्यते, गमेरनुनासिकलोपः करप्प्रत्ययश्च ॥ 
164. And the word गत्वर is irregularly formed. The tar is formed by eliding tue of ty and adding the affix simu: As गत्व, fem. गत्वरी locomotive, transient'. 
जागुरुकः ।।१६५॥ पदानि ॥ जागुः, ऊकः, (तच्छीलादिषु)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ जागरूक प्रत्ययो भवति तच्छीलादिषु कर्तृषु॥ 
165. The affix** comes after the verb in 'to be awake in the sense of the agent having such a habit'. 
As u : 'wakeful'. 
यजजपदशां यङः ॥ १६॥ पदानि ॥ यज-जप-दशाम्, यः(त चलीलादिषु, ऊकः)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ यजादीनां यङन्तानामक प्रत्ययो भवति तच्चीलादिष कर्तृप । 
166. The affix on comes in the sense of the agent having such a habit &c.' after the verbs #, and to when they end in the affix 
Do The intensive of these verbs talke ऊक. A यायक: a performer of fre quent sacrifices', w 'a mutterer of prayers repeatedly, *: 'a snake (what bites frequently')... 
नामिकस्विस्स्यजसकमाहिंसदीयो रः ॥१६॥पदानि।। नमि-कवि स्मि-नाजसमा हिंसदीपः, रः, (तचळी लादिषु) । 
TURE • Go 
GOVERNMEN 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY OF 
NT OF INDIA 
. BEIYOH. II. § 167-170.] 
THE AFFIX U. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
सरकार 
वृत्तिः ॥ नस्यादिभ्यो धातुभ्यस्तच्छोलादिष कर्तृष राप्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
167. The asfix comes in the sense of the agent having such a habit &c.' after the verbs 7* 'to bow', 'to shake', Ter 'to smile', ue 'not to cease', 'to desire', ferg 'to injure', and ats 'to shine'. 
Taus, 73 75 'soft wood'; $FIT TIET'shaking branch'; eni go'smiling face'; Set ytfa 'he sacrifices perpetually'; r gaat'a beautiful maiden'; frei ty: 'the injuring Rakshas : & brilliant wood'. 
. The word wat is an adverb, and is derived from the root up to get free', with the negative particle sy, and the affix ; as 7+ TE+=59€ 
Far&THE 5: Il PC GET IT HET STTTTTTET, 3, (asaturfag) 
वृतिः ॥ सन्मन्तेभ्यो धातुभ्य साशंभिक्षेश्च तच्छीलादिषु कर्तृषु उप्रत्यया भवति । 
168. The affix 5 comes after roots that have taken the affix a, and after the verbs ta' to wish' and fe 'to beg' in the sense of the agent having such a habit dc'. 
The term ou in the aphorism means Desideratives in the affis , and not the verb T7, because the verb 7t is never seen with this affix. 
As, fung': 'desirous of doing'; fueta: desirous of taking': T: 'de. sirous', fast: 'a beggar'. 
The verb te with the upasarga say is the verb pe to desire" and not the verb wife 'to praise'. 
fa-gfiye: n geen verfa un farge, 55, (asale) fernfaat T* FOTWAFFITT UT fretea astafet 
169. The words fast and so are irregularly formed by the addition of the affix s, in the sense of the agent having such a habit &c'. 
To the verb farę we add the augment and then the allix o; as, faa +77 ty=fart: (1 1. 47)=aastat: 'intelligent', so of y' to wish', the is replaced by and we have ysg: = urmatan: 'desirous'. 
PTUR 890 u açan ara, fa, (sale) gfe: u rautargreitteefo fai adatfeg eg Sachezar Hafen 
170. The affix e comes in the Chhandas, after the roots that have taken the Denomin tive affix win the sense of the agent having such a habit dc'. 
The term eu includes the three affixes 99. and l (Gue suras III. 1. 8, 11, 13, &c). As fora, a s, yung: (Rig. Ved. I. 3, 4). 
17 
URE - Gova 
OF CULTUR 
ERNMENT OF 
MINISTRY 
OF INDIA 
THE AFFIXES KI AND KIN. 
TBK. III. CA. IN 5 114, 
संस्कृतिमात्रा 
सत्यमेव जयते 
Ef 
.417 
रत सरकार 
In the modern Sanskrit T will be employed. As fatigar. By sâtra VII 4. 33, the long & replaces the final t, when it follows; as ga+ata gart +=ysta Why then in the case of fry: there is not the substitution of long & for the of f ? Because the rule VII. 4. 33. is set aside by VII. 4. 35. which declares that in the Chhandas the long is not substituted for the 
ETETTET: ffat fac 1999 acifo n - 77"-977:, fa-faat, fare, 7, (e tatufcg) n 
afg: u starci à va ativare T* 576 dàu terefy face astarfer कत विकिनी प्रत्ययो भवतः, लिड्वञ्च ती भवतः ॥ 
afa fafangastarfs egifexot TATU urbà TuTu T waf waves feferat ameaft पातिकम् ॥ सहिवहिचलिपतिभ्यो यङन्तेभ्यः किकिनी वक्तव्यो। 
• 171. In the Chhandas, the affixes fa and fo7 in the sense of the agent having such a babit do, come after the verbs that end in long ut, or short or long and after the verbs 75 'to go', 'to kill', and wa 'to be produced', and these affixes operate like fue causing reduplication of the root. 
The after sur is either for the sake of euphony, or for the sake of pre cision. Had is been , then by the rule of aat (1. 1.70) short sy would only be included and not long But the present rule is applicable to long st as well. 
Thus + For=tfe: 'drinking'; ag of: # 'drinking the soma-juice'; fanf'giving cows' (Rig. Ved. VI. 23. 4), fara a aa fts (Rig. Ved. IV. 39.2, VI. 68. 7). E quatuoft: (Rig. Ved X. 108. 1). 75+ + being in constant motion, wind', ufragat (Rig Ved. II. 23. 11); T7+f*T = srgfor: "kılling, a weapon offensive'; y =(Rig Ved IX 6.12); + fs=sfa: ag ofgals (T. S. VII. 5. 20. 1). 
The letter in these afises is indicatory. It might be said it is su. perfluous to make these affixes fat, because these being treated like fat will be fan by rule I. 2.5'. True, they would be fan by the rule I. 2.5, but then the rule VII. 4. 11. (when lit follows, guna is the substitute of the verb Tau and of those that end in the long ) would also have applied to these affixes, and would have caused gun). It is to prevent this gune of the letter that. we have annexed an indicatory to these affixes. 
Vart: The affixes fa and feet are of universal application in the Ohhaudas, and not confined to the verbs enumerated in the sútra, es we see them in a &c., asf: (Yaj. Ved. XII. 105); fa: (Rig. Ved. II, 5.8), 
Vort: The affixes to and fat come after the roots UTS, FL, URE 
GOVA 
OF CULTURA 
ERNMENT OF 
BROMII. CH. II. § 172, 175] 
TAB AFFIX VRADH. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
•भारत सर 
पात्रि भारत 
गोल, and नमि in the secular literature also; as, दधिः, चक्रि, सस्त्रि, जज्ञिः, जग्मिा नेमिः । 
Vart.-The affixes fs and for come after the Intensive (ayra) roots of , वडू, चल, and यत्. As, जासहित वावधिः, चाचलिः, गायतिः (VII. 4. 83. 
खपितषीनजिङ्॥ १७२ ॥ पदानि ॥ स्वपि तृषोः, नजिक (तच्छोलादिषु)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ स्वपेस्तृषेश्च तच्छीलादिषु कर्तृषु नजिङ्मत्ययो भवति ॥ वार्तिकस ॥ धृषेश्चेति वत्ताव्यस॥ 
172. The affix नजि: comes, in the sense of the agents having such a habit dc', after the verbs can 'to sleep' and q 'to be thirsty'. 
As स्वप् + नजिङ स्व 1st .sing. स्वण "sleeping, drowsy'; तृष्णाज् 1st. sing. तृष्णक "covetons, thirsty'. 
Vart:--So also after the verb y 'to insult, be bold'; as, ytro Ist. sing, घणक 'bold, impudent'. 
शूवन्द्योरारुः ॥ १७३ ॥ पदानि ॥शू-वन्द्योः , प्रारुः, (तच्छी०॥ वृत्ति.॥ हिसायाम् वन्दि अभिवादनस्तुत्यो ताभ्यां तच्छीलादिषु कर्तृप्या प्रत्यया भवति। 
173. The affix sur comes in the sense of the agents having such a habit dic' after the verbs to injure' and बन्द 'to praise', 'to salute'. 
As gue: ooxious, a mischievous animal'; apara: 'praising, a bard'. 
भियः कलकनी ॥१४॥ पदानि ॥ भियः, ककनी, (तच्छो०)। वृत्तिः ॥ जिभी भये अरूमाहातोस्तच्छीलादिषु कर्तृषु क्रुल्ला कनो प्रत्ययो भवतः ॥ बार्तिकार ॥ कन्नपि वक्तव्यः॥ 
174. The affixes and m* come in the sense of the agent having such a habit' after the verb vt 'to fear'. 
As, «t«: 'fearful, timid'; *: 'timorous, a bear, a tiger, a jackal'. Vart-The affix पान should also be stated as भीरका 
स्थेशभासपिसको वरच ॥ १५ ॥ पदानि ॥ स्था.ईश भास पिस-कसः, वरच, (तचलीलादिषु) ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ स्था ईश भास पिस कसरतेभ्यस्तखोलादि कवरचप्रत्यया भवति । 
175. The affix at comes in the sense of 'the agents having such a habit &c.' after the verbs cut to stand' u 'to rule 7er "to shine', for 'to go' and 'to gol. 
As eutate 'immoveable': fuata 'ruler, God'; aut: going, destructive' foueat: 'opening, expanding'. 
या पकः ॥१७६॥पदरणियः, च, यङः, (तच्लीवादिषु, बरच )। 
URE - Govs 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
NMENT OF IN 
OF INDIA 
THE AFFIX KVIP. 
[BK. III. CH. II. § 1 
176-178; 
सत्यमेव जयते 
तसरगर 
अन्तिः ॥ या प्रापयो अस्मासङन्तात्तच्छीवादिषु कर्तृषु वरच्प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
176. The affix वरच् in the sense of the agent having such a habit dc' comes after the verb fr when it ends with the affix 
With the affix यड, the intensives of verbs are formed; as यायावर vagrant, an ascetic'. See sutra I. 1.58. 
भाजभासधुविद्युतोर्जिपूजुग्रावस्तुवः क्विव् ॥ ११ ॥ पदानि । भाज-भास-धुर्विद्युत-उर्जि-पूजु-ग्रावस्तुबः, विप, (तच्छीलादिषु)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ प्राजादिभ्यो धातुभ्यस्वच्छीलादिषु कर्तृषु विपप्रत्ययो भर्वात ॥ 
177. The affix fit comes in the sense of the agent having such a habit &c.' after the verbs net to shine' 178 'to shine', ya 'to injure', at 'to shine', Fis to be strong', 'to fill', y 'to move rapidly' and 'to praise', when it is preceded by the word yat'a stone'. 
Thus, विनाज 1st. sing. विभ्राट splendid'; भास 1st. sing. भ. 'ligh.'; धुर्व+ fu=YT (VI. 4. 21), 1st. sing. : 'who injures'; for 'lightening'; cf let. sing, पार्क 'strength'; पुर Ist sing. 4: whab_fills'; Tः 'swift'. In the case of शु, a long vowel is the substitute of y; tlaegT (VI 1 71) 'a stone-worshipper' Though by the universal rule III. 2. 76, the affix fat would have come after thege verbs also, the repetition of the aff x shows that arsurate does not apply in 
Achchhilika affixes. 
अन्येभ्योपि दृश्यते ॥ १७ ॥ पदानि ॥ अन्येभ्यः, नपि, दृश्यते, (तचछीलादिषु, विय)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ अन्येभ्योपि धातु बस्तच्चीलादिषु विपप्रत्ययो दृश्यते ॥ वार्तिवम् ॥ विबधिप्रच्चायतस्तु कट जुत्रीणां दीजियप्रसारणं च ॥ पात्तिकम् ॥ दा तिमिजुहोतीनां वे ॥ पातिकम् ॥ जुहोतेीर्घश्च ॥ बार्तिकस् ॥ दमय त्यस्य इस्वश्च द्वेष। वार्षिकर ॥ ध्यायते संप्रसारणं च 
178 The affix विष is seen after other verbs also, be sides those mentioned above, in the sense of the agent having such a habit do.' 
A युज, Ish. sing or joining:बित piercing': मित् 'dividing'.. 
By using the words is seen in the aphorism, it is implied that other rules also apply concurrently with fg. Thus in some cases we find lengthen ing of the vowel ; in somne, there is reduplication of the root; in some instances there is samprasurana of the semivowel; and in other cases there is not 
OF CULTURE 
VERNMENTOS 
"SINIW 
III. CH. II. $ 179, 180.1 
THE AFFIX DU. 
. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
सरकार 
Vart :- When fan follows, the long vowel is the substitute of T'to speak', yo'to ask', w el 'to praise long', men to inove through a mat', 
to move rapidly', and 'to serve', and there is no substitution of a vowel for the semivowel (VI. 1. 16). 
As, at 'the voice'; gea+ fr=1= f (VI. 1. 10) =99+ft (VIII. 2.36)=TT (VIII. 456) 'who asks'; sluaeg: 'who praises long'; ta: 'a worm '; y: 'swift'; nits 'the goddess Lakshmi'. 
The word y which was mentioned in the last sâtra is redundant here. 
Vart:--There is reduplication of the verbs qa 'to shine', 7 'to go' and 'to invoke', when fat follows. As, fack a 'shining'; ETT 'going, the 
world'. 
Vart:-There is lengthening also of the vowel of go as Tu: 'a cres cent shaped wooden ladle used for pouring the sacrificial ghee into the fire. 
Vart:-The roota to tear' is shortened also; as T&T tearing'. Vart :-The verb wt to think' has samprasarana; ag ut: 'thinking. 
ya: Fatut: n poelgeifarn yai, intentat:, (fr) वृत्तिः॥ भवतेर्धातो: संज्ञायानन्तरे च गन्यमाने विप्प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
179. The affix fat comes after the verb y 'to be! when the word so formed denotes a name or a surety. 
Ag, fay'a person called Vibhu'; sfay: 'a surety i.e. he who stands intermediate between the debtor and the creditor'. 
विप्रसंभ्यो वसंज्ञायाम् ॥ १८० ॥ पदानि ॥ वि-प-सभ्यो, डु, SETTOTT, (ya:) n 
fa: u fa supa gatzaastat: Takht Hafa we area o बार्तिकम् ॥ डुम्रकरणे मितद्रवादिभ्य उपसंख्यानम् ॥ 
180. The affix y comes after the verb y when it is preceded by the upasargas Tev, s and provided that the word to be formed does not mean ar appellative. 
As fuys 'all pervading': 'lord', gs Creator'. 
Why do we say when it is not a proper namc ? Observe farer: 'a person called Vibhu'. 
Vari: The words fuas &c., algo ere formed by this affix. Ag tag 'the gea'; Ty 'causing happiness'. 
Why have we applied and not fit to this root, as the forms would have been the same in either case? We have done so for two purposug (1) To prevent the rules relating to dhatus from applving to this, (2) To prevent the insertion of a augment. Thus the 1st. dual of fag is fuae, Ist. pl.is Here there is no substitution of me which the rule VI. 4.77 required. 15 
ratu characteristic; so also the rule of accent in VI 1 175 
G 
VERNMENT 
oy OF CULTU 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
TAE AFFIX SHTRAN. 
(BK. III. C. II. $ 181-183 
जिस्कृति मंत्राट 
सत्यागय जयते 
सरल सरकार 
ses 
does not apply to Instrnmental sing. fragar &c., (2.) We have no T which rule VI. 1.71 required. मिति -निसनु। 
धः कर्मणि ष्टुन् ॥ १८१॥ पदानि ॥धः, कर्मणि, ष्ट्रन ।। वृत्तिः ॥धयतेर्दधातोश्च कर्मणि कारकेन्द्रन्प्रत्ययो भवति । 
181. The affix 'दन् comes, in denoting the object, after the verb धा to feed'. 
The indicatory denotes that the feminine is formed by sto (6) affix, As wat 'a nurse whom the children suck (dhayanti'; and 'Amalaki fruit which holds (dadhati) all medicinal properties'. 
दानीशसयुयुजस्तुतुदसिसिचमिहपतदशनहः करणे ॥१२॥ पदा नि ॥ दाप-नी.शस-यु-युज-स्तु तुद्-सि-सिच-मिह-पत् दश नहः, करणे, (ष्ट्रन् । 
त्तिः ॥ दाप नी यस यु युज चतुद सिविध मिह पत दश नह रखेभ्यो धातुभ्य: करणी बारके दन्प्रत्ययो भवति । 
-182. The affix ष्टन, with the sense of instrument, comes after the verbs दाप 'to cut नी to lead', शस ' to hurt', यु tojoin', युज 'to join', स्तु to praise', तुद 'to inffict pain', सि to bind', feer 'to sprinkle', FFT 'to urine', 'to fall', u 'to bite' and to bind'. 
As 7%, Ist. sing neuter 'a sickle' (lit. that with which one cuts ; नेत्रlsb sing. नेत्रम् eye'; शखं (VIL.29.) a weapon'; योनं 'the tie that fastens the yoke'; 'the tie of yoke'; eata 'a panegyric'; an'a goad', las 'a ligament'; से 'a sprinkling vessel'; मेक्ट्रम 'the penis'; पत्रम् a vehicle'; दंष्ट्रा a large tooth'. 
The word dat belongs to the Ajadi class and hence forms its feminine in टापू (आ) and not in ई (IV 1.4). 
The root kw is read in the aphorism without its nasali. e. as दश् This indicates by implication that दश् loses its nasal before some a fixes such as स्युः thus we have दर्शन 'tooth'. 
And lastly नह+दन् = नद्ध fem. नगी (VIII. 234 and 40), 'a thong'. 
हलसूकरयोः पुवः ॥१८३॥ पदानि ॥ हल सूकरयोः, पुषः, (ष्ट्रन)। 
अति ॥ पूजा पवने, शस्माद्धातोः कारयो कारको ष्ट्रन्प्रत्ययो भवति तच्चेत करणं हलसू कारयोरवयवो भवति॥ 
183. The affix sy is employed after the verb g with the sense of instrument when denoting a member of the body of a plough or of a hog. 
The verb gincludes both and yt; as n'a plough-share'; ita the amout of a hog. 
URE 
GOVE 
GOVERNMEN 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY ON 
ENT OF INDIA 
SKAN CA. II. § 134-187.) 
The affix KTA 
L 
संस्कृति मंत्रान 
174.57 
fagu TAHETT TT: 11 psy Il yaifa lifa--7-7 7-85-7, $T: 11 
fall få TV ET TEC Tarot #7: Tea Seth wafan 
148. The aflix comes after the verbs to go', 'to cut', y 'to shake', 'to bring forth', i 'to dig', t'to bear', and at 'to go with the sense of instrument. 
Thus, wfe 'a rudder'; afast "a sickle'; wiast 'a fan'; sfazi 'cause of pro duction’; ufarsi 'a spade'; afe'patience'; at 'an instituted observance or a narrative'. 
ya: FITOTT 01 gay n agifer o ga, sath, (47:) # ऋत्तिः ॥ पवतेर्धातोः करणे कारके छत्रप्रत्ययो भवति समुदायेन चेत्सबा गम्यते ।। 
185. The affix yo comes after the verb g 'to purify with the sense of the agent so expressed being the instrument; when the sense of the complete word is simply appellative and not descriptive. 
The verb g includes two verbs 92 and ysr both meaning to purify, but belonging to two different conjugations; aa rasi an instrument for cleansing or purifying, such as a sieve or a strainer; and in this sense ib means 'two bladeg of Kusa grass used at sacrifices in purifying and sprinkling ghee. It also means 'the sacred thread, the clarified butter, &c. 
कर्तरि चर्षिदेवतयोः ॥ १६ ॥ पदानि ॥ कर्तरि, च, ऋषि-देवतयोः, (T7, ga:) 
वृत्तिः ॥ पुष: करणे कर्तरिय इत्यप्रत्ययो भवति, अषिदेवतयोर्य थासंख्ययं संवन्धः ॥ 
186. The affix p comes after the verba 'to purify! in the sense of the agent or the instrument when it is respectively employed in connection with a sage or a deity. 
That is to say, when applied to a Rishi the force is that of an instru ment, and when applied to a Devata the force is that of an agent. As, Tfaatsugfr: 'this sage is sacred' (through whose instrumentality one is sancti fied) for ufat & the God Agni is sacred' (one that purifies), 'let him purify me' So also, attrava: qui : qfasi a nynogi 
sta: : ni pes n erfan for a :n fers a stat waraa s ) wafar 
187. The verbal roots marked with an indicatory for take the aflix s, in denoting the present time. 
ORE 
GOVES 
VERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY ON 
NT OF INDIA 
THE AFFIX KTA. 
[BK. III. CE II.S 188. 
सत्यवाजयते 
Ne 
The Nichthi affis hy as a general rule, is a past participial a fix and denotes past time, and is so ordained by rule III. 2. 102. The present sûtra thus makes an exception in case of those verbs which are marked with an in dicatory for in the Dhá upátha; as fafeer to be affectionately inclined'; f***** (FTE + =fag+a=fT+- (VIII 2. 42) 'being affectionately inclined'. So fatiari : sounding inarticulately'; ftuar : bold'. The anuvritti of Ja 'in the sense of the present', is redd into this sû tre fron III.2 123. 
afaar T T ENI PEG 11 orfa ul afecafe-T-***:, 
fe: ufaffsar, aigute Jat UTFIT., cativa vigeat adaur azaer wafaa 
188. And after roots denoting inclination, understand ing, or respect, the alix is employed with the force of the present. 
The word wfe means 'wish' or 'desire'; It means 'knowledge', and get means 'worship', 'honor' or 'resp ct'. As tai a: -19: -Trai,myfora, &c. the king wishes, desires, think, knows, honors, respects &c. 
The force of the word is to include other kinds of verbs not included in the above satra. Thus the following participles have their senses confined not to the past time only: straa: 'practised'; <rea: 'protected'; ara: 'forbear. ing'; : 'censired'; y pleased'; : augry'; sita: 'angry'; yfirarrea: uztvered'; : 'happy'; ga'satisfied'; #ira: 'favourite'; #ta: 'restrained'; s 2 rearly': 'evil, misery' (with a future signification ); and suga 'immortal'. So also :- : 'sleeping': ufaa: lying down'; ssfua'eaten'; fax: 'smeared'; que "satisfied'; all these have a present signification, 
URE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
OF INDIA 
मोइम् 
रकृति मंत्रान्नु 
सत्यमदजयत 
en 
1779 
570 qatareutzer qatar: ate: 11 
BOOK THIRD. CHAPTER III. 
उणादयो बहुलं ॥१॥ पदानि ॥ उण-मादयः, बहुलम्,(वर्तमाने । efT: U TTICE: 747 awase igrati facit a wafa u 
1. The affixes 'Un' and the rest, with the force of the present, and with a sense simply appellative, are attacbed diversely. 
The phrase 'with the force of the present' (implying neither past nor future time) and 'with a sepse simply appellative' (and not descriptivo) m.st be read into this sû tra by anuvritti from sâtras IIl. 2. 123 & 185. By using the word 'diversely' it is indicated that these affixes are, of course, applied after roots about which they are ordained, but they come also after roots about which they are not ordained. Sometimes we must infer their application by seeing actual words. Some affixes, though there be no express injunction regarding them, are to be inferred to belong to this class. The maxim in regard to the Unádi affixes is that when, in appellatives, we find the forms of verbal roots and affixes coming after them, then we may know, from the result as presented in the word, what are the indicatory letters which the affix must be possessed of in order to produce the resulte 
These affixes are not given in Pâņini's work, but thoy have been sepa. rately collected. The affix or is the first of these. The first sâtra of Unddi affixes is the following 
कुवापाजिमिस्वादिसाध्यशून्य उम्।। 
The affix ut comes after the verbs x 'to make', a to blow', 4T '10 drink', fa to overcome', for 'to scatter', etc'to be pleasant to the taste', eng 'to accomplish', and 'to pervade. 
Thus + =ure an artisan'. So also, atq: the wind', 7: the organ of excretion'; IT: 'a drug (which overcomes disease); wry: the bile', ames sweet'; 979: 'who accomplishes the obj .ct of another hence virtuous'; and urge quickly 
These Unádi affixes come after a limited number of roots, and not after every root, as the afixes taught in this grammar whose application 19 general; hence the word ura has been employed. Moreover there has been no exhaustive enumeration of the several roots after which these affixes come 
URE - GOVE 
STRY OF CUL 
MINISTRY 
NMENT OF 
OF INDIA 
THE UNADI AFFIXES. 
[BK. III CH. III. 2. 3. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
कृति मंत्रानुन 
a 
सरकार 
' 
oply some of them have been collected in works treating of Unádi affixes, Thus though the affix an is ordained after TT, it comes also after y as 
9 . In fact there is a long discussion and it was a inoot point at the time of Panini whether these words said to be formed by Unádi affixes were really derivative, or primitive ones. Moreover all the operations of these affixes have not been shown, that is their effects are not without remainder (1) 
They are valid and good if found in sacred Scriptures or secular literature, The authors of Niruktas and grammarians of the school of Sâk itâyaņa, consider all nouns and substantives (*) as derivative words from sinple roots (27%). Therefore where the derivation of a word is not apparent, one should infer the existence of proper base (safa) or affix (HETT) to form such a word. 
The following slokas will be of some use to the student for ascertaining the Unádi affixes : 
बाहुलकं प्रकृतेस्तनुदृष्टः हायसमुच्चयनादपि तेषाम् । कार्यमशेषविधेश्च तदुक्तं नेगमरूढिभवं हि सुसाधु ॥१॥ লাল ৰ ঘৰজলন্ধ লিল নযৰূৰে মথ অ লীত্ব ।। यम पदार्थविशेषसमुत्थं प्रत्ययतः प्रकृतेश्च तद्ब्रह्मस् ॥ २॥ ung vitae atu aa: do matfettamatianguig o su 
vasta quaran zaupanna, afa, gram, (FTTT:) yfers a gas TIFT: HETIT EU-a u 
2. The Unâdi' affixes are seen also attached with the force of the past time. 
By the last sutra, it was taught that the Unádi affixes come with the forge of the present time. The present aphorism teaches that they come with the force of the past also, not as a general rule, but in special cases. The force of the words are seen' being that no general rule can be laid down about it. bution finding that certain words have a past signfiicance, we conclude that the affix in that particular case has the force of the past time. 
Thus a # =acant 'a way, road' (that which has been established a rule); + = 'skin' (that which is lived in); so also we asbes (that which has been reduced to ashes). 
watafa FatCT: 3 uram nauafa, : free faufa wa TT: SET: T afan af an 
3. The words 'gami', &c. are valid forms, having the sense of the future time. 
The force of the future time is in the affix, and is so ordained, and nou in the eriginal word which takes the affix. Thus we see that the Undd 
URE 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
VERNMENT OG 
AT OF INDIA 
. BEII. CA. III. $ 4,5.] 
THE UNADI AFFIXES. 
सचमजयन 
affixes, in a way, do come with the force of not only present, but past and future also, though in the latter two cases its scope is very limited. As it UTTI intending to go to the village'; int 'that which has to come'. So also aurat 'departing';wfactat 'an opponent, (who is going to obstruct). Efaarit going to be awakened'. So also sfaarut an adversary'; sfarsit 'an enemy'; प्रतियायी; यायायी; भावी, &c. 
Vart:--The Future, for the purposes of this rule, must be anadyatana . e. the aflix should come in the sense of what will happen but not in the course of the current day. In other words, the force must be of the first future us, and not of the second future लुट्. As खो गनी ग्रामस् 'he intends to go to the 
village tomorrow'. 
यावतपुरानिपातयोर्लद ॥४॥ पदानि ॥ यावत्-पुरा-निपातयोः, लट्, (भविष्यति॥ 
बृत्तिः॥ यावत्पुराशब्दयोनिपातयोरुपपदयोर्भविष्यति काले धातालप्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
4. The affix 'Lat comes after a root, with the force of futurity, when it bas in construction with it the particles 'yavat' and 'pura'. 
The present tense bas the force of the future when the adverbs and get are used. The phrase "futurity &c' is to be read into this satra from the last. Thus नालोके ते निपतति पुरा 'he will surely fall in the range of your sight'. बावदस्य दुरात्मन: समुन्मलनाय शत्रुघन प्रेषयामि, I shall send Satrughna to exterminate this wretch'. 
These words yer and tu must be used as adverbs (nipatas), and not as relative pronouns. Therefore woh here, याबद् दास्यति ताबद् सोशयते 'as long as he will give, so long he will eat'; पुरा जिध्यति 'he goes along the city'. Here यावत 18 a relative pronoun; and get is the Instrumental singular of gt 'city. 
विभाषा कदाकोः ॥५॥ पदानि ॥ विभाषा, कदा-को, (भविष्यति, लट) 
वृत्तिः ॥ कदाकर्डि इत्येतयोरुपपदयोर्विभाषा भविष्यति काले धातोलेटप्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
5. The affix Lat is optionally employed after a root with the force of the futurity, when it has in construction with it, the adverbs 'kadà and 'karhi'. 
As कदा भुङले 'when will he eator कदा भोयते or मोता; so also कर्डिमुफत Or सोधयते Or भोक्ता 'when will he eat'. 
किंवृत्ते लिपसायाम् ॥६॥ पदानि किम्-वृत्ते, लिप्तायाम्, (भविष्यतिकाले, विभावा, लट् ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ किंवृत्तउपपदे लिपूसायां भविष्यति काले चासोविभाषा शटूप्रत्ययो भवति । 
STRY OF CUL 
MINISTRY 
VERNMENT ON 
OF INDIA 
TEE ONADI AFFIXES. 
(BK. I CH. III. 
17 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
सत्यमेव जयते 
सरकार 
6. Wben the word 'kim' or its derivatives are in con struction with the verb, the afix 'Lat' is employed optionally after a root, in denoting future time, provided that the sentence ex presses a desire of gaining on the part of the speaker. 
The word 'optionally' is understood in this sû tra. By using the word along with fan it is meant that the rule applies even when it takes the affixes gat and can. The word foet means the desire of gaining or acquire ing, a wish to have something or an intention of begging'. 
As a raffa or faart: 'whom will you feed? It implies a re quest on the part of the questioner to feed him also. So also sait fui greqfa, Taifa, Fiat, or wait fast greufa &c, 'Which of the two or which of these all, will he give alms ? Will he give something to me? 
When no desire of gain is implied, the future tense must be employed as का पाखिपुत्र गमिष्यति 'who will go to Fataliputra'. 
ferarrarafegir 9 ora n fourtara-far, ( facafara, fantut, JT ) 
fer a fereastra tatut fasafata atatá TTT EUROT wafa u 
7. And when the success, that would accrue to an other by fulfilling the desire of the speaker, is indicated in a sen tence, the present tense may optionally be employed with the force of the futurity. 
The word 'optionally' is also understood here. The word fateatuffe: is equal to face tata fare, an Ablative-Tatpurusha Compound, signifying silihi or success, that would be acquired by another by complying with the request of the speaker. The difference between this and the last sûntra is, that whereas the last related to interrogative sentences having fay in construction, the present relates to sentences in general As यो भक्तं ददाति, स स्वगं गच्छति 'he who gives food goes to heaven'; यो वक्त दास्वति or दाता, व स्वगं गमिष्यति or गन्ता. 
Here the speaker encourages the giver to the act of charity by holding out the hope, that from rice which is the object desired (faceaua) the success (fara), in the shape of syurga, will accrue to the giver. 
In other words, the present is sometimes used for the future in condi. tional sentences, i e. it is employed in connection with a sentence declaring the compensation or reward which follows from the granting of the wish'. 
antara nenotfout uel, T; (fava. Foreste, fatar, MC) URE - GOVE 
OF CULTURE 
NISTRY OF C 
JERNMENT OF 
MINISTA 
OF INDIA 
III. S 8.10.) 
TAB AFFIXES AND NVUL. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
पायालय . 
मारतपरका 
वृत्तिः लोडर्यः मेषादिलक्षयते येन लोडशक्षणो घावः, वन्न वर्तमानाडातीभविष्यति जाले विभाषा लम्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
8. The affix 'Lat' is optionally employed with the force of the futurity, after that root, which in a conditional sen tence, is the condition precedent for the action indicated by another verb having the sense of the imperative mood, 
The word as means having the sense of the aflix art or imperative mood. The force of lot is to command, direct, invite &c' as given in III. 3. 162 and 163. The sû tra, translated literally, will mean the present tense may optionally be employed when the action denoted by the verb is related to an other action denoted by another verb in the imperative, as a sign ( T) is to the thing signified लक्षय)' Thus 'उपाध्यायश्चेदागद्धति (श्रागमिष्यति or भागन्ता) जयवं Falsete 'if the professor comes (i.e. will come) then read you prosody'. Here the coming of the professor is the lalishana of the direction as to reading. 
लिङ् चोर्ध्वमोहूर्तिके ॥ ॥ पदानि ॥ लिङ, च, जब-मौहूर्तिके, (भविष्यतिकाले, विभाषा, लट्, लोडर्थ लक्षणे) mnia, 
वृत्तिः ॥ ऊर्ध्व भोहर्चिक भविष्यकाले लोडर्थशक्षणार्थे वर्तनागाद्वातर्विभाषा लिङ्प्रत्यय भवति, चकाराल्लट् ॥ 
9. The 'Lat' (present) or the 'Lin' (potential) is used under similar conditions in denoting futurity, when the future timo is future by a Mahurta' (48 minutes). 
Ali the conditions of the last sû tra apply here also, namely 'when the action denoted by the verb is related to another action denoted by another verb in the imperative, as a sign is to the thing indicated'. By force of the word * we read the anuvritti of lut also into this aphorism. The word egter is a secondary derivative from Fita' , meaning that which exists in time above & muhûrta'. This is an irregular compound; and the vriddhi takes place Irregularly of the sofy and no: of as the general role required The whole word thus formed qualifies the word future'. Thus जवहादुपरि मुहूतेश्य 
उपाध्यायरषेदागच्छेत् (आगच्छति, धागमिष्यति or शागता), अयत्वं बन्दोऽयो If the tea. cher comes after an hour (of 18 minutes), you had better read the Prosody. 
तुमुन्ण्वुली क्रियायां क्रियार्थायाम् ॥ १०॥ पदानि ॥ तुमुन्,खु. लो, क्रियायां, कियार्थायाम, (भविष्यति काले) ॥ 
वृत्तिः॥क्रियार्थायां क्रियायागुपयदे धातभविष्यति कारीतुनुगखुली प्रत्ययो भवः ।। पार्तिकल ॥ क्रियार्यायां प्रियायागुपपदे वासरूपेण तुणादयो न भवन्ति । 
10. The affixes 'tumun' and 'nvul' are placed alter & Verbal root, with the force of the future. when the word in conse 
TURE - GOV 
GOVERNME 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY ON 
OF INDIA 
TEE AFFIXES GHAN &c. 
[BR. III. 
11. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
भारत सा 
ससरकार 
truction therewith is another verb, denoting an action performed for the sake of the (future) action. 
As 19h afa 'he goes to eat; mercat rufa 'he goes to eat'. Here the upapada or the verb in construction is qafa; it denotes an action performed for the sake of the future action ( af), namely, eating. 
Why do we say denoting an action'? The upapada must be an action and not a substantive; as fufa cfa STET ETTT: 'matted hair is for the purpose that he should beg'. Here the affixes are not employed. 
Why do we say performed for the sake of another action ? Observe luaa sfatafa GTE: 'running, thy stick will fell'. 
Now, it might be asked why it is taught a second tims, when it was already taught generally by rule III. 1. 133; and that being a cominon rule, would have applied to this subject also ? If you reply that the future affix would have prevented its application, in conditional sentences like the above, we say that the role of 'nou-uniform affixes applying simultaneously' given in III. 1. 94 will step in and will conduce the application of Tea in spite of e. 
Vart --The repetition of the affix (ordained to come after a ver bal root, when the word in construction therewith ig auother verb denoting an action performed for the sake of the future action,) is for the of prohibiting the application of the affixes like Ty &c. in denoting the adove sense ; that is to say, the rule of ansatt (III. 1. 94.) does not apply here and we cannot optionally employ any other affix, with this gerundial sense. Thus we cannot say we ufa 'he goes to do'; but we must say instead. 
These affixes from the gerund of the infinitive of purpose. 
wataa maagitan na quat:, , (facufa, ait, कियायां, कियार्थायाम्॥ 
T: #wafa pied r a fafcata 
facufam ia faini yuva muutui a frau 
11. And the affixes that are ordained to come after a root with the force of denoting the mere action of the yerb, such as we do (III.1.13 ) bave also the force of the future, when the word in construction there with, is another verb denoting an action perfor- med for the sake of the future action. 
As 74 gufo he goes to cook'; yaa uufa he goes for the sake of suc cess'; gea auta 
Now it might be asked, why make this rule at all, when those affixes have already been ordained ? It has already been said that the age rule 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY ON 
VERNMENT 
T OF INDIA 
. 11. Ca. III. S 12] 
THE AFFIX AN. 
489 
सत्यमेव जयते 
रसरकार 
does not apply in regard to infinitive; and hence it would have prevented the application of other affixes. So the making of the present sûtra. 
Why the word 79 has been employed in the sâtra ? The maning is that the words should be expressive or 917. How do the affixes become area? When affixes which are ordained after certain bases, are employed after those bases only, then they are sai 1 to be a not when they are employed after other bases, or are even after those bases, but not in the mo le as directed. So that, in short, those nouns only which have been specially formed by the BUTT affixes, 9 &c. can be employed with the force of gerund, and not every noun. The wina153 nouns correspond to the nouns of action or verbal nouns. 
Turfy Tugurfant , fu, fata, , Fragt, outTTTT) 
fa: U UTOTETIC wafa facufanta ruta fonatat e mutafara u 
12. The affix 'an' comes after a root with the force of the future, when the word in construction with it is in the accusa tive case, and when the action is performed for the sake of another action, 
The word 'future' is understood here. The force of vis merely that of a connective particle. By rule III. 2. 1. the affis comes after a root when the word in composition is in the accusative case. That is a general injunction; and the rule of arsett not applying, the affix tga would have des barred it as already said, hence this repetition. This rule being an apavada rule (an exception or a special rule with regard to those verbs which have the accusative case in composition) will thus, within its own jurisdiction, prevent the application of oth of III. 3. 10; and by the rule of a given in 1. 4. 2. it will debar the affixes like &c. Therefore this it comes after even those verbs also which were especially exempted from its operation by rules like III. 2.3. Thus by rule III. 2. 3 the sy of III 2. 1. could not have come after simple Verbs ending in long yi, such as crito give' &c. But the present stor with a gerundial force will come ever after such verbs. As trerar que he goes to give cows', and not re: So also magrat qura 'he goes to give blanket's 
Tager Tufai TT+ T= 1T: (VII. 3. 33). 
So also teatat gufa 'he goes to cut wood'. In this case su would have been applied even by 111. 2. 1. 
T & TH P3 il yçfanya, ha, 7, (facufa;fonareari, fratelui, wat, me) 
तिः ॥ वे अड़े भविष्यतिकाले सकारातु क्रिया चोपपदे क्रियाणां धातोह प्रत्ययो भवति । 
URE - GOVE 
OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
ERNMENT OF 
OF INDIA 
THE AFFIX LUT. 
:"(BE IH CH III. S 8 
.1 
त सरकार 
13 The affix 'Lrit' is employed after a verb, in the remaining cases, where futurity pure and simple is indicated; and also where there is in construction with it another verb denoting an action performed for the sake of the future action, 
This is what is well-known as the Second Future. As aftsarft afa aufa 'he goes that I will do', fiecarfa gfa Tafa 'he goes that I will take'. So also, afecafa 'he will do'; Efteafa 'he will taka'. Thus the Second Fucure is. used both in dependent sentences as well as to denote simple Future, 
78: Gr 11 88 11 agtfa 1! T!, 57, at IT चिः॥ लट: स्थाने सत्संज्ञो शतृषानची वा भवतः ॥ 
14. The affixes called "Sat'i, e. 'satri'and sânach are optionally the substitutes of 'Lrit'. 
The <a has been defined in III. 2. 127. This option is a regulated op tion; that is to say, the affix and was replace it under the conditions in which they replace ca thus by III. 2. 124, these affixes will replace te. when agreeing with what does not end with the first case affix. In these cases a will invariably replace T. In other cases it will optionally replace ae. In these cases they will form what is known as future participles. As fara e t see "behold Devadatta about to do; sfren 2ay behold Deva datta being about to be done'. afecat or wear. Besides simple futu. rity, it denotes in tention or purpose, as wfactatutafa 'he dwells intending to earn his I velihood' ; ETAT: Tu * 'intending to furnish his bows with arrows'. 
When, however it agrees with tbe nominative case, it is optionally em ployed. As feat fecurus, meufa or area : Devadatta will do'. 
The form fe is thus evolved. As + TE= +*+38 (III. 1.) = ****** *+ =oftere nom. sing. *fert In other words the participial allixes * (** and a technically known as we and y, also come after a verb that has taken the personal ending e* of the Future. 
gaan pyn etter i gaa, t, (facafa) in fosfaasagrata at wala a af staan ranit afatet : 
15. The affix Lut comes after a verbal root in the sense of what will happen, but not in the course of the current 
day. 
This de urs 'Lrit'. As m eal tomorrow . 
he will do tomorrow'. 
r 'he will 
URE - GOVE 
VERNMENT 
MINISTRY 
ISTRY OF CU 
Bank IJE OH. III. $ 16-18.] 
The arrix GEAN. 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
TRI 
सरकार 
The word 'anadyatana' is a Bahuvrihi compound. Therefore in cases where there is not pure futurity beyond today, but a mixture of the two, . will be employed and not gt. As a zat a wiacia 'it will be today or to morrow'. And where there is doubt, the second Future should be employed. 
Vart:--The First Future (ya) is employed with the force of the Second Future (लु) when sorrow is expressed. AS इयं तु वादा गन्ता, ये दो निदधाति!Oh when will she go, who places her feet in such a way (who is such a slow walker) HT' Thaisedat, 7 tarafag: 'when will be learn, who is so inattentive' ! 
acaulfaatraat 79 € acufer u of w-fat-ETT:, 751 
वृत्तिः ॥ पदादिभ्यो धातुभ्यो घञ्प्रत्ययो भवति । 
16. The affix 'ghañ comes after the roots 'pad' to pace), ruj' (to paiu), 'viš' (to enter), and 'spris (to touch). 
The apuvritti of 'future' does not extend to this sûtra. The affixes hereinafter taught come in all the tenses. 
As TT+5=ures 'foot' cu +3=TIT: 'disease', so, at: 'entrance'. 
Vart:--The verb FY I takes us when the sense is that of distress'; as e is 'disease' or 'warmth. The word uit meaning touch is formed by adding the affix su, under rule III. 1. 134; as adf autu: There is difference in accent between these two words. 
u feriu po nocifa u , FETT, ( ) f u tat: feud eft . And wefan 
arferon catfuerequartafa a uru 
17. The affix Sghañ' comes after the verb 'sri' (to move) when the agent is permanently fixed. 
The word fear means an object remaining steady throughoub any period of time. That which thus remaining permanent moves through any interval of time, will apply to the agent of the verb Thus, +5=16: 'an essence', ag & 91T: 'the essence of sandal, focent: 'the essence of catechu'. 
Why do we say permanently fixed' Observe af moves', thal which flows' 
Vart:The word so formed also applies to disease, fish and strength As wfagra 'dysentery; faxit: 'a fish'; v1: 'strength 
ata n 95 augtfara, ( 79 ) afara ureyratis 
the adix 'ghañ' comes after a root when mere action is denoted. 
19 
URE 
GOVE 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY O. 
VERNMENT O 
T OF INDIA 
A 
THE AFFIX GHAN. 
[BE. III. CH. Ill, $ 19. 
FU 
Thus, 7++5=4* 'cooking' (VII. 2,116 and VII. 3. 52); ann aban doning'; +Tat: "colouring (VI. 4. 27). An action expresses a general state; so that all roots denote 'action' when their meaning is to be expressed. And as the meaning of the root can be expressed by the root itself, therefore, the a fixes WET &e come after all verbal roots, when the sense of the root is denoted as having attained to the completed state. It is not necessary that the words so formed should be always of the masculine gender, singular number. They may take any other gender or number. As of 111, Fiat, Fri These affixes form, in short, verhal noups, or abstract nouns being names of action. 
saft er greinar per qarfa Il Sariff, 7, 972, , ( 9 )n. 
त्तिः । कर्तुवर्जिते बारके संबायां विषये धातोघे प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
19. And the affix 'ghan' comes after a root, when the sense is that of an appellative, the word being related to the verb from which its name is deduced, but not as agent. 
Thus 977: (. e. seafta 1) 'a dart, lit. that which men throw'; aa: (ie. nativa a) a sack, lit. that which men stitch together'; $TEIT: (i. e. sie fra SEHTETU) 'food, lit. that from which men take out the juice to uourish them selves'. As YTTEIT, au fueTETT: 
Why do we say 'pob related as an agent'? Observe as 'a sheep, lit. that which looks helplessly. Here the word as is related to the verb fa fa as agent, and the affix is consequently not ust. 
Why do we say 'when denoting an appellative'? Observe was: me: the mat must be made'. 
The force of in the sâtra is to indicate that w may be applied irre. gulary in cases where aypellative is not meant: Ag fra artit FT'whað gift was given by you'; var avui usus' what gain was gained by you'. 
The word en is used in the sutra for this purpose. The word swie #fc is a compound word formed by the negative 57. The word means a non agent. Now the word 'non-agent' has two-fold significance; either it means any other karaka which is not an agent-kâraka; or it may mean any thing in eneral which is nob an agent. That is to say, the former negative, called 
e, points out, by implication, the objects which are different from the thing prohibited, and in fact, makes the rule applicable to those objects; while the second sort of negative called me say is a simple prohibition of the particular matter specified, without mentioning what is different from it. Give ing the former interpretation to the word waft, the word we becomes redundant, because non-agent would mean any kôraka other than an agente 
URE • GOVE 
GOVERNMEN 
OF CULTURE 
NISTRY OF COM 
MINISTA 
NT OF INDIA 
M 
IL . III. S 20 ] 
THE AFFIX GEAN. 
But the very fact, that it is used indicates the existence of the following rule which is nowhere expressly taught by Påņini :--That is compounded even with the force of sofaau'. (VI. I. 45). ssful, non-szt'. 
Both the phrases, 'when denoting mere condition (wra)' and 'a kâraka which is not an agent' are understood in the succeeding aphorisms. See II 2. 6 about a Compound, 
TFTATUTETTAT FÖze: 11 30 li agafar l afthry-w.aut grg, Faxa:,( 7 ) 
वृत्तिः॥ परिमाणाख्यायां सर्वेभ्यो धातुभ्यो पञ् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ दारजारो कर्तरि णिशुक्च॥ 
20. The alix 'ghañ comes after all roots, when the word so formed is the name of a measure, 
Thus, foto+792= fa + s (VII. 2. 115)=forare (VI. 1.78) a heap': as The Gafaa; a yefatuat 'to scatter' +5=1T: FIA; Fa: vers 
By using the word 'all' in the sâtra, it is indicated that the affix wa (III. 3. 57) is also superseded when this sense is to be indicated. Otherwise the affix » would only be probibited by the Paribháshar --"A pavá las that precede the rules which teach operations that have to be superseded by the apaváda-operations, supersede only those rules that stand nearest to them, not the subsequent rules". Taus being taught in III. 3. 56 would be superge ded, but not so s taught in the subsequent aphorism III. 3. 57. 
Why do we say 'when they are the names of measures'? Observe fare 'ascertaining'. 
The word seas has been used in the nphorism in order to indicate that the words so formed are not Primitive words (FT). The numerals are also there included, and not only measures like Prasthi, Pala &c. 
We have said above, that the force of the word was in this sûtra is to indicate that the alix at must be used after all verbs (not excluding even such verbs as require we or suc by sû tras 56 and 57), when we want to express measure. This must be taken, however, with certain limitations. The word 
**s is not after all so wide as at first sight it may appear. If we wish to form & word indicating measure, in the feminine gender, we cannot use vs; we must use the affix f* (III. 3.94). In other words, the feminine affixes are not super seded by us when it supersedes sw and . Thus in forming a feminine noun degoting measure, we have farfaaff, at &c. 
Vart -The affix we comes after the cusative verbs erfe and wife, and there is lak elision of the causative a fix for when the word so formed is re lated to the verb as agent. Thus arrafa TTT=ETC: 'a wife' (ho who uvide brothers' a wife breaking up the brotherly love); uitatis 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY ON 
NT OF INDIA 
THE AFTIX CHAN. 
(BK. III Ch. III. 
सत्वग्वजयते 
इडश्च ॥ २१॥ पदानि ॥ इङः, च, (घज)। मृतिः ॥ इदो धाताज प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ पात्तिकम् ॥ अपादाने खियामुपसंख्यानम तदन्ताच्च वा डीप ॥ बार्सियाम् ॥ श वायुवर्णनिवृत्तेषु॥ 
21. The affix ghañ' comes after the root (to study). 
This debars अच (III. 3.56). A अधि++घ अधि+से+ अध्याय Halesson or lecture'; उपाध्यायः (उपेत्यास्मादधीते a teacher'. 
Varto--When the word to be formed is related to the verb 7 as an ablative, the word is feminine also and optionally takes the affix ft. As उपत्यापीयतेऽस्या = उपाध्याया or उपाध्यायी'a female teacher', 
Vart.-The affix est comes after the root y when the word so formed means 'wind', 'color', or 'cessation', As Tit: 'wind', 'green colour' &c. Afraria. नीशार पायेगा शिशिरे कृणः । 
उपसर्ग रुवः ॥ २२॥ पदानि ॥ उपसर्ग, भवः, (घज)॥ त्तिः ॥ उपसर्ग उपपदे रौतेर्धातीर्घज प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
22. The affix 'ghan' comes after the verb rû' (to roar), when it has an upasarga in composition with it. 
This debars अप (III 3.57), AS संराव 'clamour', उपराब: &c. Why do we say 'compounded with an upasarga'? Observe ta: 'sound'. 
समि युद्दुवः ॥ २३ ॥ पदानि ॥ सनि, यु-द्रु-दुवः, (घा) ॥ गुत्तिः ॥ समि उपपदेशबुद्ध इत्येतेभ्यो धातुभ्यो धज प्रत्ययो भवति॥ 
23. The affix ghañ comes after the roots 'yu' (to join), dru' (to run) and 'du (to burn), when in composition with the preposition 'sam'. 
A संघाव, संद्रायः, संदाव: Bub प्रयवः where the preposition is not ram. 
शिणीभूधोग्नुपसर्गे ॥२४॥पदानि॥ त्रि-णी-भुवः, अनुपसर्ग,(घज)। वृत्तिः॥ त्रिणीभू इत्येतेभ्यो धातुभ्योऽनुपसर्गभ्यो पज प्रत्यया भवति ॥ 
24. The affix 'ghañ comes after the roots 'sri' (to go to) 'ni' (to lead) and 'bhû' (to be), when not in composition with an upasargn. 
This debars the afix 111. 3. 56). As ie: 'shelter, it: 'a means', wu'a condition'. 
But with upasargas, we have प्रायः 'respect'. प्राय: 'love'; प्रभव: source'. 
How do we explain the form प्रभाव in प्रभावो राज: 'the splendour of the king'? Here the word ma is not made from the compound root 9+ TS. but by compounding with T3 by the rules of samasa, meaning 'excellent condition'. 
URE 
Gove 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY ON 
NT OF INDIA 
EBSITCH. II.5147-149,] 
THE AFFIX YUCH. 
सत्यमवजयते 
सरकार 
How do you explain the form aय in नयो राज्ञः? Here the root his taken the afix अच divers:ly by III. 3. 11 3. 
वो तुनुवः ॥ २५ ॥ पदानि ॥ वो, क्षु-अवः, (घ)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ बावुपपदे हुन इत्येताभ्यां घञ्प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
25. The affix ghañ' comes after the roots kshu' (to sneeze), and 'śru' (to move and bear) when the preposition vi' is in composition. 
This debai's the affix (111. 3. 57); as, fasta: 'cough'; faptu: 'flowing forth', 'celebrated'. But when without preposition, we have sवः and श्रवः । 
अधोदोर्नियः ॥ २६ ॥ पदानि ॥ अव उदोः, नियः, (घ)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ अब उत इत्येतयोरुपपदयोन यतेर्धातो अप्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
26. The affix ghan' comes after the verb nt' (to lead) when the prepositions ava' and 'ut' are in com position 
As wante: 'throwing down'; sau: 'elevation'. 
How do you explain grau: in yo: varafany? Here the affix is 'ach' by II.3.113. 
प्रेद्रस्तुस्त्रवः ॥२७॥ पदानि ।। प्रे, द स्तुसूत्रः, (घ)॥ वृत्ति प्रेशन्द उपपदे वस्तु स इत्येतेभ्यो धातुभ्यो पज प्रत्ययो भवति । 
27. The affix 'ghañ comes after the roots 'dru', 'stu' and 'sru', when the word in composition is 'pra'. 
AS मद्रावः, प्रस्ताव प्रस्तावः। But not so in द्रवः स्तव: and सन। 
निरभ्योः पूल्वोः ॥२६॥ पदानि । निर्-अभ्योः, पू-ल्वोः (घज ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ निरभिपूर्वयोः पूल्बोर्धात्वोधन प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
28. The affix ghafi' comes after the rootsopa' (to purify) and 'ju' (to cut) when nir' and abhi' are respective ly in composition. 
The word y refers to both 99 and gs. The rule 1. 3. 10. must be applied here, and thus निर comes before y, and अभि before लू । As निषपाया "win nowing', afara: 'moving'. But ya: and at, without these prepositions. 
उन्म्योः ॥ २०॥ पदानि ॥ उत्-न्योः, ग्रः, (घ) ॥ वृत्तिः॥ उम्न्योरुषपदयोग इत्येतस्मातातीर्घजप्रत्ययो भवति । 
29. The affix ghai' comes after the root gri' when the upasargasut' and 'ni' are in composition. 
to The verb 
to make sound, and here refers to both the verbs swallow', AS TETTI FIGU 'the roaring of the sea'; fact 
The word thus fas. comes to and ***, 
OREGOVE 
VERNMENT 
O OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
T OF INDIA 
THE AFFIX CHAN. 
A 
BK, 111 CH. 111.53083, 
परति मंशा 
सत्यम्यागयत 
AN 
मा 
ing of Devadatta'. But when without these prepositions, we have गर । 
कधान्ये ॥३०॥ पदानि ॥क, धान्ये, (घन, उन्न्योः )॥ वृत्तिः॥क इत्येतस्माद्धातोरुन्न्योपपदयार्घ प्रत्ययो भवति धान्यविषयश्चेद्धात्वयों भवति ।। 
30. The affix 'ghañ comes after the verb 'kri', when the prepositions 'ut' and 'ni' are in composition and when the sense of the verb relates to grain. 
The verb here means 'to scatter', and not 'to injure', because no words formed by this affix are found in Sanskrit in that sense. 
As semet watet the windowing of corn'; FA ETT VIFTET 'the winnowing of corn'. But when not referring to grain, we have fentent: 'a heap of alms', geofrat: 'the essence or heap of fowers'. 
यज्ञ समि स्तुवः ॥ ३१॥ पदानि ॥ यज, समि, स्तुवः, (घज। वृत्तिः ॥ याविषये प्रयोग संपूर्वात्स्तोतेज प्रत्ययो भवति । 
31. The affix 'ghañ' comes after the root 'stu' when it is preceded by the upasarga 'sam' and the word refers to sacrificial subjects. 
As datang TATT the Sanstâ va of the Chhandogas ; sienta = TATU स्तुवन्ति यस्मिन् देशे इंदोगाः स देशः) means 'the place which the Brahmanas repeat ing hymns and prayers, occupy at a sacrifice' the orchestra. 
But when not referring to sacrifice we have संस्तवश्वानयोः the praising together of the two pupils'. 
प्रे स्त्रोग्य ॥ ३२ ॥ पदानि ॥ प्रे, स्वः, अयज, (घ ) ॥ त्तिः ॥ स्तृशावादने अमाहात प्रशब्द उपपदे पञ् प्रत्ययाभवति, नचेदाविषयः प्रयोग 
32. The affix 'ghañ' comes after the root stri' (to cover), when proceded by the preposition 'pra'; provided that the word so formed does not refer to sacrifice'. 
As, veure'a bed of conch'; FTANT: 'strewing of gems'. 
प्रथने वावशब्दे ॥३३॥ पदानि॥ प्रथने, बी, अशब्दे, (खः, घन )। 
त्तिः ॥ स्तृजनाच्छादने शरमाढातार्षिापापपदे धज प्रत्ययो भवति प्रथने गम्यमाने तच्चे रुपयन बन्दविषयं न भवति । 
33. The affix gkafi comes after the root 'stri' (to cover), when the preposition vi' is in composition with it, when the sense is that of extension, and when such spreading does not refer to words. URE - GOVE 
OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
ERNMENT OF 
BM III CH. III. & 34-36.] 
THE AFFIX UHAN. 
od 1 
सत्यमेव जयते 
he word uit means 'extent, circuit, range'. As part fEFTTT'the ex tension of the garment'. 
Why do we say' when meaning extent'? Observe, T FTT'a cole lection of grass'. Why do we say not referring to words'? Observe fact Tyurt'prolixity of words'. 
agt of T II 38 11 :, Alfa, T, (al, E, E10) yfa: u fagafafturâ teftatfus acuat wafa 
34. The affix ghañ' comes after stri' with the upasarga 'vi' when the word so formed is the name of a metre. 
The word here means prosodial metre such as Gayatri &c; and not the Vedas; otherwise the word 27 would not bave been used. Thus fa + 8 + q=fa +5+41 (VIII.3.94)=faure: the name of a metre called Vishtara-Paukti'. 
The whole word fagruit is the uame of a metre, and is not a word en ding with the affix ghan; only a member of this word, ie. the Grst part ends with ghan. The seventh case-affix in the word Getafe has the force of loca tion i. e. when the word so formed occurs in a portion of a name of a metre; it is not the full name, but it is in the name i. e. forms a portion of the name 
off re: 11 39 11 agift il gfs, ori, (E) पृत्तिः ॥ उदा पपदे ग्रहेताप्रत्ययो भवति॥ पातिवाम् ॥ चन्द निपूर्वादपीज्यते सुगुदाममनिपातनयो॥ 
35. The affix 'ghañ' comes after the verb grah' (to seize), when the preposition 'ut'is in composition. 
This debars the afix s . As egyre: lifting up. 
Vart :- In the Vedas this affix is applied even when the word ve is preceded by fa; and the is changed into w; the sense of the two words being * to lift up' and 'throw down' respectively of the sacrificial ladle; as, Teat a r 
ब्रह्मदेवा अवीवृधन् । 
afa get 11 3 11 azifa utafa, gel, (ug:, 90) वृत्तिः ॥ सभ्युपपदे अहेर्दातीर्घमत्ययो भवति मुष्टिविषयश्चेद्धात्वों भवति ॥ 
36. The affix ghai' comes after the root grah when in composition with the preposition sam' when the sense of the root refers to fist. 
The word gfe means 'boxing', 'fist'; as, T he 'O ! the clench ing of the fist of the athlete'; et ufoma ante: 'O ! the seizing of the boxer', meaning grasping firmly. 
Why do we gay referring to fist'? Observe de rea's collection of grair'. 
TURE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
TAINISTRY Os 
NT OF INDIA 
THE AFFIX CHAN. 
BK. III. CH. III. $ 3789. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
संस्कृति मुना 
pg 
सरकार 
ofertatuta araat: 13911 agtfall afisati, at-guiti, ya-5*uat:,(0) 1 
yferiu ofrose futa stage yurite for TETET wara g utt wafe, sat पवादा, वाताषयो। 
37. The affix ghañ' comes after the roots 'ni' (to lead), and 'i' (to gol, when the prepositions ' pari' and 'ni' are respectively in composition with them, and when the words so formed respectively mean a game' and propriety or arrange ment or law's 
Here again we take help of I. 3. 10 in interpreting this sâtra. The verbs efetuat and fa+w, take ysr when respectively meaning 'gambling and 
fitness'. As fouta Tere fra 'he kills for takes) many pieces by moving a chessman'. Here sicut=yuarat means the moving of chess pieces from every side, and so winning the game'. So also fa+=+ = +*+ = + 
T= 1T: 'justice', propriedy, logic'. 
But when not having these senses, we have afta: marriage', and 
decay'; as safa: 979'the sin has been destroyed'. The word w means arutatê TUTTE*** 
atraTTATU ET:1136110cifaru od, naala, F#, (0) fan situs uue vão vargstadt wara waaraa ** 
38. The nflix ghan' comes after the root 'i' (to go) in composition with the word "pari' when the sense is that of following in regular succession. 
As wuta: turn, succession '; a wafa: 'thy turn'; ** vafa'my turn'. 
Why do we say when meaning turn'? Observe 14 a Ta: 'the lapse of time. The word guita: = BATeutafara: 'not breaking the series or order'. 
aut:ja:watauzen erfan fast:, gà qute,() कृत्तिः॥वि उप हो तयारुपपद तेर्धाता अपत्ययो भवति । 
39. The affix 'ghas' comes after the rootsi '(to lie down) when the prepositions'vi' and 'upa'are in composition with it, and when the sense of the word so formed is that of 
regular succession'. 
Ag, za fara: 'thy turn of sleeping' (ie, the rest enjoyed in rotation by the sentinels on watch); म विधायmy turn of rest; तब राजोपमा = तब राहामनु quagua: 'thy turn of sleeping the king'. 
Why do we say regular succession'? Observe lying by the side of or ambusb': fawudoubt'. 
URE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
ENT OF INDIA 
B 
IL. CA. III. S 40-42.] 
THE AFFIX CHAN 
DE 
Eergia arrange n Eau Ecatera, ai, seda, (ast) वृत्तिः ॥ हस्तादाने गम्यमाने चिनोतेर्धातो प्रत्ययो भवति, नचेत स्तेय चोय भवति॥ after T57 sfalert am: 
40. The affix 'ghañ comes after the root 'chi' (to collect), when the sense expressed is that of taking by hand, provided it does not refer to stealing. 
By saying 'taking by hand' the close proximity of the person taking to the thing accepted or taken is indicated. As geva973: 'gathering flowers by hand'; it: 'gathering fruits by hand'. 
Why do we say 'taking by hand? Observe Tu treutat vanai 7 # Fifa 'he gathers with the stick the fruits banging on the top of the tree'. 
Why do we say 'when not meaning to steal? Observe greutatát the gathering of flowers by theft'. 
Vart --Prohibition must be stated in the case of the word 79978 'gathering'; as yee759T: 'gathering of flowers by hand'; 
fare fararttirahaturâtae : n89 11 vifau fer are fafa-TIT-JTHATàg, site:, 7, : (951) 
ara: a frare fafa JUFT*Ta, Tacave fepasst gaar af water ETC weat wafa 
41. The affix 'ghan,' comes after the root chi' (to gather), and 'k is the substitute of the initial 'ch' in these senses viz.'a dwelling'. 'a fire on the funeral pile,', the body, and 'collection' 
That in which people dwell (fraefa) is called frata: or dwelling'. That which is gathered together (aa) is called fefe or funeral pile'. ut means the body of all living beings; and yun menas making a heap. Thus fama: 'a dwelling'; as in iuftfatte 'Kasi-dwelling'; eta fuata 'let him arrange the akâya fire i. e. the funeral fire'; mta: body', as safoet wture 
a perishable body'; 17e staafuta: 'a heap of cow-dung'. 
Why do we say 'when having these senses'? Observe us 'gathering Why is not this rule applied in ETT mufa 'a large heap of wood'? Here multiplicity is expressed and not collection or aggregation. 
Fra waatteza ugo nazifala, 7, spitale, ( STIGTE, , 99 ) 
-वृत्तिः ॥ संघे वाच्ये चिनोते तोघेजप्रत्ययो भवति देश का । 
42. The aflix ghai' comes after the root chi' (to gather) and 'k' is the substitute of the initial ch' in 
20 
REGOVS 
CULTURE 
• MINISTAN 
DENT OF IN 
OF INDIA 
TÆE AFFIX NACH. 
[Br. 111. CH. III.3 13. 
467 EU 
the sense of a multitude or assembly of living beings possessing some common characteristics), but not merely a confused crowd of men. 
The word means a collection or assembly of living beings. It is of two gorts:-- ither by collection of persons possessing common qualifications, or a mere confused crowd of men. The collection denoting a confused crowd is here excepted and by paryudása negation the other is taken. Thus fagafatar 28 the assembly of beggars'; sema: 'the assembly of Brahmanas'; azrattina: the astembly of Grammarians'. - 
But unfo 'a herd of hogs '; because it is a mere collection. So also gatnay : 'the collection of what is done and not done'; TTTIST: 'the collection of proofs'. Here there is no se in either of the two senses, id not being a collection of living animals, the afix ghan is not employed. 
कर्मव्यतिहारे णच स्त्रियाम् ॥ ४३ ॥ पदानि ॥ कर्म-व्यतिहारे, रणच, स्त्रियाम् ॥ 
fashionfagra #gaia watu THUÊT wafa ona do 
42. The affix nach' comes after a root, in denoting reciprocity of action, and the word so formed is in the feminine gender. 
The word w*means 'action' and is not the technical Karma' meaning the aconsative case, salapit means reciprocity or interchange of action. The word so evolved is feminine in form and denotes mere 'action' (1a) also. The anubandha = in 7 is qualitative and is added to distinguish this affix from other affixes : thus in sûtra V. 4.14 this particular affix is meant. 
Thus far + + +74+51 + ata = a (V. 4. 14, and VII. 3. 6) mutual abuse'. So also sutaurot, quae eft. The affix forms only an im aginary stem; for this stem must take the affix 57 by V. 4. 14, which even does not form the complete word until the affix *t of the feminine is added. 
Why do we say 'in the feminine'? Observe safarat ada 
The making of this a separate shtra by itself, and not reading it in the subdivision of ferainine affixes beginning with fam(III. 3.94), is for the sake of removing the obstructing a phorisms, that would otherwise have prevented the applicntion of this rule. 
For, had it been taught in connection with fry &c, then the affixes that world bave debarred ft &c, would a fortiori have debarred this also, Bilt by keeping it separate from that class, it is indicated that those obstructa 
y affixes which debar Font &o, do not debar this. Thus eart, tata H ege being a class root would have taken . III. 3. 107, in the femi 
ARE 
GOV 
STRY OF CUL 
MINISTRY 
JERNMENT OS 
OF INDIA 
III. $ 44, 45.1 
TAC AFFIX GHAN. 
संस्कृति मान 
सत्यमेव जयते 
77 
nine, as out; and would have taken by III. 8. 104, as wal. The rootste and fe, by III. 3. 102 and 103, take by debarring f . This debar ring affix , however, is not debarred by this rule; as cuater, zatet are the proper feminine forms, and not saatet &c. The form sangat is, however, an apparent exception. All these exceptions, counter-exceptions &c. are examples of age taught in III. 3. 113. 
affertha GT 1981 ugifer ffaut, wra, gan yfa: fafant statuta gauri wafa u 
44 The affix inuņ' comes after a root in denoting condition, wlien co-extensiveness is meant. 
The word w rafo means co extensiveness, that is to say, the complete comprehens on or elation between the action and the quality Thus it. fermua ‘a general or tumultuous uproar'; * + + ++ * (V. 4. 15. and VI. 4. 164)= aikfant'a general confusion'; so aterrane'a general flow or stream'. 
Why do we say 'vhen meaning co-extensiveness'? Observe as, oras, ista: 
Why do we use the word wr again in this sûtra, when its anuyritti was already flowing from sû tra III. 3. 18? The object is that the aisee rule (III. 1. 941 should not apply here and hence v never comes in this sense. Patanjali says that the repetition is for the sake of indicating that iu neuter gender, when co extensiveness is expressed, the affixes &c. are prohibited ; so that the affixes TH &c. should not come in the neuter with the force of a 
The separateness of this sûtra is for the same purpose as in the last aphorism. The affix fgc is not, however, prohibited; as igata. See rule 
reget aga (III. 3. 113). The affis xgt (the operative part being vi forms bat an imaginary stem, which does not become real and complete till it takes the affix by V. 4.15, as shown above. 
ali sa urcia: ngyuugifau TT, waat: 18:,(991 1 fe: o sa fie atatractatutafatsstarter wafa venta #atan 
45. The affix ghan' comes after the verb.grah (to seize), in composition with ava', and 'ni'; when malediction is meant 
Though you is immediately near, we take the anuvritti of a (III. 3. 16), because we see that its annvritti is possible. 
The word to means 'cursing'. As y et ea a quara 'cursed be thou, O! sinner'. So also fãUIG NATTI 
Why 'when meaning 'cursing'? Observe sau: Tau; forea 
À faqe ne agafa mâ, fwa , ( 
a n 
ARE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY OF 
NT OF INDIA 
THE AFFIX GITAN. 
[B«. III. CH. III. ŚW.191 
13 
17 
S 
वृत्तिः ॥ प्रशब्दउपपदे ग्रहेर्धातीर्घशप्रत्ययो भवति लिप्सायास् गन्यमानायाम् ।। 
46. The afix 'ghañ' comes after the root grah', when the word 'pra' is in composition, and the sense denoted is the desire of acquisition 
As 77T sta fas: foreret the beggar walks for the sake of alms, carrying a vessel in hand'; TÊT qfa faut fattat carrying a sacrificial ladle, the Brahmana walks about for his fee'. The word fater means the wish to have something'. 
Why do we say 'when meaning desire of gain'? Observe que aqueu 
art as n 89 n oifat ul qil, 78, (06:, ) The #efchaoue versucht vafa u 
47. The affix gbañ'comes after the root grah'. in composition with pari' when it relates to sacrificial subjects 
As cruces the northern fencing of the sacrificial altar'; 514T afcat: 'the southern fencing of the sacrificial altar'. 
Why do we say 'when relating to sacrifices? Observe aftag: agree 'the fencing of Devadatta'. 
ita willys n uçrfuat, a, eta, ( 9 ) a वृत्तिा निशब्दउपपदे व इत्येतस्माद्वातोन्यविशेषेऽभिधेये घञ् प्रत्यया भवति॥ 
48. The affix ghañ' comes after the verb 'vri' preceded by 'ni'; when the sense is that of grain. 
The here means both as and 75. This debars the affix st. As PATET: 'rice growing wild or without cultivation' 
Why do we say 'meaning grain'? Observe faat 741 'a virgin girl'. 
of wafazifaga: u yeu aferul af, wafa-zilfa 95*, () 
T auruq urtfarar hafa 
49. The affix ghan' comes after the verbs sri yu', pû' and 'dru' when the preposition 'ut'is in composition. 
This debars the affis ach (III. 3. 56). Thus sugra frising of a planet'; geret 'mixing': Sanat purifying gree'; and ezta: 'flight'. 
How do you explain the form you in tamat: agu :? The word f or "optionally in the next sâtra, exerts a retrospective effect on this stra, and the form is an optional one. This is a most unusual thing and is 
URE · GOVE 
GOVERNMENT 
TRY OF CUL 
NT OF INDIA 
BEIIC1. III. S 50-52.] 
THE AFFIX GHAN. 
ST 
सत्यमेव जयते 
called fågratitutaulu: 'the maxim of the lion's backward glance'. It is used when one casts a retrospective glance at what he has left behind, while at the same time he is proceeding, just as the lion, while going on ward in search of prey, now and then bends his neck backwards to see if any thing be within its reach, 
fautiar suffeugat: n yo n açıfa u fauvar, atfs, F agat:, (TT) 
gfe: a) urls yua da: caaaza fautu TRT Hafa u 
50. The affix'ghan' is optionally employed after the verbs'ru' (to roar) and plu'(to float), when the preposition "ân' is in composition. 
As firma: or suitas 'noise'; gratar or syrtaa: "bathing'. 
yâ get adufaaah all of u ugifer o wà, ne, au-ufa aal, ( farat, TS ) 
वृतिः ॥ अव उपपदे अहेर्धातीर्घजप्रत्ययो भवति विभाषा वर्षप्रतिवन्धेऽभिधेये ॥ 
51. The affix ghañ' is optionally employed after the root grah', when the word ' ava' is in composition, the sense being witholding of rain. 
The word 'optionally is understood here. The word asutaafu means the absence of rain, from some cause or another, when the season has arrived: as atit: or saya auer the draught of rain'. 
Why do we say when meaning obstruction of rain'? Observe te ** 
û aftenen yan û, afuit, ( fautut, T:, 951) 
yfa: 1 Suê ciutatfamiut tanah wafa Trateaza a favŤ सम्बन्धी भवति । 
52. The affix 'ghañ' is optionally employed after the verb grah'in composition with pra' when the word so formed relates to commerce, 
Both the words grah and vibhúshe are understood here. By 'relation to commerce' is muant bere the string of the balance; and not commerce in general. That string by which a balance is held is called GUIT: OA TATATES, as तुलाप्रमाहेण घरति or तुलाप्रग्रहेण परति, and this may be said of any person whether he be a trader or not. 
Why do we say 'when belonging to commerce? Observe 7 a the whip of Devadatta'. 
TFT 43 m uerfa n Trut, , (08, fama,, ) त्तिः ॥ शब्दाउपपदे अर्थातोर्विभाषा बजप्रत्ययो भवति रशिम चेत्मत्ययान्तेगाभिधीयते ॥ 
GOVERNMENT 
SURE - Gov 
STRY OF CU 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
THE AFFIX ACHI 
[BK. III Cr. III. $ 03 56. 
1 
PR 
PER 
53. The affix ghañ' comes optionally after the verb grah' in composition with 'pra', when the word so formed means 'a rein'. 
The word eft means here the bridle by means of which horses &c. joined to the carriage, are held under control; as uta: or wire: 'a rein'. 
asiatica in 48 11 ugefa nautai, piarça, (far HT, , 4 ) 
yfa: u tra quaviatform a gaudir hafa staurar acreagafar 
54. The affix .ghari' comes optionally after the verb vri' (to choose), when pra' is in composition, and the word so formed means ' a sort of covering! 
As atait: or wat 'a cloek, a veil'. Why do we say 'when it means a coveringo? Observe sract oito 
it wat sasia 1991 rt, ya, tata, (fawa, Ta' prin cucina fama Hora wafa santa #a#tā n 
55. The affix ghan' is optionally employed after the verb bhû', the word 'pari' being in construction, and the sense of the word so formed being disregard '. 
The word wat means 'contempt', 'neglect', 'disregard de. As afcha: or for 'insult, humiliation'. 
Why do we say 'when meaning disregard'? The word fra: may be then construed to inean saatuat=urea: 'surrounding' 
TTT I n ucifer T:, 74, (**ft , ra वृतिः ॥ इवताडासो वे अकर्तरि व कारके संज्ञायामप्रत्ययो भवति ॥ बार्तिकम् ॥ अज्विधी भयादिनानुपसंख्यानम् ॥ कार्तिकम् ॥ जवसवी छन्दसि वक्तव्यो। 
56. The aflix ach comes after a root ending in ' i' or 'i' (when mere action is denoted, or when the sense is that of an appellative, the word being related to the verb from which its name is deduced, but not as an agent), 
The words within brackets are to be stipplied from sâtras 18 and 19: and these words are to be supplied in every subsequent sätra as far as satra 113 of this chapter. This debars . The r in 24 is qualitative, in stras like VI. 2. 144. 
Thug 'collecting'; : 'going'; v 'victory'; ** 'wasting'. 
TURE 
GOVO 
VERNMENT O 
OF CULTURE 
TAINISTRY 
OF INDIA 
ISO VII. CH. III. $ 57, 58 ] 
THE AFFIX AP. 
wa 
Vårt:- In this connection the words a &c. should also be enumer ated. As Ht+39=ut 'fear'; aux frain'. These being neuter words, otherwise would have taken the affix hi &c. but for this Vârtika. 
Vort:-The words ea and ca are formed by this affix, and occur in the Vedas. As जरिस्तु मे जवः, पंचौदन सघ । These roots जु and सु would have otherwise taken the affix . The form would have been the same, but there would be difference of accent. See Rig. Veda I. 112. 21, and Yaj. XI 2. 
metu nl 49 ugefa n a-sit:, qani वृत्तिः ॥ अकारान्तेभ्य उवर्णान्तेभ्यश्च अप्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
57. After a root ending in long 'ri', short'u', or long û', there is the affix 'ap! 
This debars 7. The q is indicatory for the sake of accent (III. 1. 3); as, + 1=mt: 'scattering'; T-77: 'beverage, poison'; 7-10: 'arrow'; y--*: 'barley'; a: 'reaping'; y-a: 'winnowing corn'. 
The in ug is merely for the sake of euphony: it is not a changed into Ę; for then by the rule "that which follows is also called art" short only would have been taken and not long 5 (I. 1. 70). 
Jeugfafan29 1 ya nugria 1 Tag fafta-7:, ET, ( 0) 
वृत्तिः ॥ ग्रहादिभ्यो धातुभ्यो ऽपप्रत्यया भवति ॥ afinu afucrate HeaTAT वार्तिकम् ॥ धार्थ कविधानं स्थानापाव्यधिहनियुध्यर्थम् ॥ 
58. The affix' ap' comes after the verbs gral', 'vri' dri', nischi' and gam'. 
This debars 9 ; and in the case of fafew the affix sy is debarred As t'a planet'; T: 'a boon'; <T: ,tearing a cave'; format: 'certainty ; : ,march'. 
The verb fufee would have taken , but takes say which causes differ ence of accent. 
Várt- The roots and T should also be included in this; as a obedient'; 'battle'. 
Vart.--When the sense is that of 5, the affix is directed to be employed, after the following verbs :-FOT, FAT, TT, TT, ET and yr Ag vreu: table-land' (on which they move); T: 'a vessel for bathing, (in which they buthe); T: 'a place where water is distributed to travellers' (that out of which they drinli); ufare: (VI I. 16) 'an awl, a drill' (that by which they pierce); fer an obstacle' (in which they are obstruited ; agu: battle, (where they fight). 
st: uynuzifan 5991, , ( s ) factuurvesaufattegat way 
ARE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
Y OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
XT OF INDIA 
जति मंधान्य 
506 
THE AFFIX AP. 
[BK. III. CH III. S.5g, ha/ 
मान्य 
59. The affix ap?comes after the verb ad' (to eat) when an upasarga is in composition. 
As fauo: (II. 4. 38,) 'half-chewed morsel'; v4: 'voracious'. 
Why do we say 'when coinpounded with an upasarga'? Observe ure: 'grass'; अ+घञ् = घस्+ (II. 4. 38). 
नौ ण च ॥६० ॥ पदानि ॥ नी, ण, च, (अदः, अप ) ॥ वृत्तिः॥ निशब्द उपपदे अदेर्धातोर्णःप्रत्ययो भवति चकारादप च ॥ 
60. And the affix 'na' as well as 'ap', comes after the verb 'ad' (to eat), when the upasarga ni' is in composition. 
As नि+अद्+गा=नि+मा+= न्यादः (VII. 2. 116) 'feeding'; नि+अद्+न नि+ष+ (II. 4. 38) =निघस: 'eating, food'. 
व्यधजपोरनुपसर्गे ॥ ६१ ॥ पदानि ॥ व्यध-जापोः, अनुपसर्गे, (अप)। कृति ॥ व्यच जप इत्येतयोरनुपसर्गयोरप्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
61. The affix ap' comes after the verbs 'vyadh' and jap., when no upasurga is in composition with them. 
This debars पञ्. As व्यघ: 'wound'; जपः 'muttering'. Why do we say 'when upasarga-less'? Observe $1897aT, THAT 
खनहसोर्वा ॥ ६२॥ पदानि ॥ वन-हसो, या, (अप, अनुपसर्गे)। चिः॥ स्वानहसोरनुपसर्गयोर्वा अप्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
62. The affix ap' comes optionally after the verbs svan' and has 'when no upasarga is in composition with them. 
Thus ea or cara: 'sound'; #: or tra: 'laughter'. But with upasargas, we have only one form; zeTT** 'a lond noise'; : 'a loud laughter'. 
यमः समुपनिविषु च ॥ ६३ ॥ पदानि ॥ यमः, सम्-उप-नि-विषु, च, (अनुपसर्ग, वा, अप ) ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ स उप नि वि इत्येतेषू पपदेषु अनुपसर्गेऽपि यमेर्वा अप्रत्ययो भवति । 
63. And the affix 'ap' comes optionally after the verb 'yam when the upasargas 'sam', 'upa'ni' and 'vi' are in composition; or even when it is upasarga-less, 
This debars As संयाम: Or संयमः 'restraint'; उपयान: or उपवन 'mar riage'; foratat or faza: 'restrictive rule', faara: or fua: 'check, distress'; 1 or 
नी गदनपठखनः ॥ ६४॥ पदानि ॥ नी, गद-मद-पठ-खनः, (शप, वा) ORE - GOVE 
TRY OF CU 
JERNMENT OG 
B 
III. 64-67.] 
THE AFFIX AP. 
सरवमय जयत 
सरकार 
fe: fata stanę va entregasit gött a S ułt wafa 
64. The affix 'ap' comes optionally after the verbs 'gad' (to - speak), 'nad' (to sound), 'path' (to read), 'svan' (to sound), when the upasarga 'ni' is in composition with them. 
This debars 95. Thus fare: or fartre: 'recitation'; fare: or ferata: 'noise'; for: or famig: 'reading': freaa: or facara: la noise'; 
till attini a 14 11 qerfa 11 :, aturar, 7, (ut, T, #yu, ) 
वृत्तिः ॥ कणतेर्धायोनि पूर्वादनुपसर्गाच्च वीणायां या अपप्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
65. The affix "ap' comes optionally after the verb 'kvaņ' (to jingle), when 'ni' is in composition with it, as well as when it is without any upasarga, or when 'flute' is meant. 
This debars the affix . Thus fas: or Prats, a musical tone'. : or T: 'sound. When it refers to 'flute', it must have some upasarga not necessarily fa; as UTTHET DITT. 
But not so bere, sofagrutaca where the upasarga being sfa and the word not referring to 'a flute', no option is allowed. When flute is not meant the upasarga must be fa or no upasaga at all, for the optional application of the affix ye. To sum up, it takes sy optionally under three conditions:--- 1st when preceded by for, or 2ndly when having no upasaga, or 3rdly when it refers to 'flute', and then it must have some u pasarga. 
face ut: aftari € II eft ut facut, qu:, of Art ( 9 ) 
fell TT Traegat , stentgratiaTheatr wafa oftara #r 
66. The affix 'ap' comes invariably after the verb pan' (to barter), when the sense is that of measure. 
The word faec 'invariably' is used in the aphorism in order to stop the anu vritti of the word optionally. Thus F 'a handful of radishes', T : 'a handful of vegetable'. These words secondarily have come to mean la measure equal to a handful', irrespective of any thing. 
When not meaning measure, we have T: 'trade'. 
Hetsga 1 69 11 agifa u #: aqua, (su) वृत्तिः ॥ मदेर्धातोरनुपसर्गादपप्रत्ययो भवति । 
67. The affix 'ap' comes after the verb 'mad', when not in composition with an upasarga. 
sure equal tof vegetabiptionally, is used in 
URE 
GOVA 
OVERNMENT 
ex OF CULTURA 
ISINIW 
NT OF INDIA 
THE AFFIX AP. 
[BK. III. CH. III 668 70. 
• 
आवमयजयत 
.संस्कृतिमा 
. 
78 
This debars w. As fare: 'pride of knowledge'; w e pride of wealth'; qua: 'pride of family. When compouuded with upasargas, we have 
#19: 'mad'; vare: 'error or careleness'. 
प्रमदसम्मदीहर्षे ॥६॥पदानि ।। प्रमद-सुम्मदी, हर्षे॥ वृत्तिः ॥ प्रमद सम्मद इत्येती शब्दी निपात्येते हर्षेऽभिधेये ॥ 
68. The words 'pramada' and sammada' are irregue larly formed, meaning 'joy. 
As कन्यानां प्रनद: the joy of girls'; कोकिलानां संमदः the rejoicing of cuckoos'. 
Why do we say 'when meaning delight'? Observe ure: 'carelessness'; e: frenzy'. 
Instead of saying the verb mad preceded by pra and sam takes the affix ap' which also would have given the above forms, the full forms have been used in the sûtra to indicate that these words are oft in this sense; for the sense of the root is not visible in these words. 
T: TUE CU OCT 11 7- t:, :, 99, (24) एत्तिः ॥ समुदोरुपपदयोरजतेख़्तो पशुविषये धात्वर्थेऽपप्रत्ययो भवति । 
69. The affix 'ap' comes after the verb 'aj (to go), when the prepositions 'sam' and 'ut' are in composition, and the word so formed refers to beasts. 
This debars . The root sou 'means to go, to throw. When preceded by 7, it means 'a collection', and preceded by sa it means 'driving'. Ag 97: want a herd of cattle'; agu: gai 'driving forth of cattle'. 
Why do we say 'when applying to cattle ? Observe at arounais, Ceru ufanii 
wag 8: 11 90 ni garfo in steg, m: 11 इत्तिः ॥ ग्लाह इति निपात्यते अक्ष विषयश्चेद्धात्पर्यो भवति ॥ 
70. The word "glaha' is irregularly formed, when the sense of the root refers to gambling. 
This word is derived from the root u. The verb TT takes the affix * and thus forms ; and then irrgularly is changed into ; agutu : 'cast of the dice'. 
Why do we say 'when referring to gambling'? Observe : TITETI 
Others say, this word is derived regularly from the root ang 'to ganable', by adding the office, and thus debarring 51. They suppose, therfore, the existence of the root tat to explain the form a The counter-example which they would give, is rare receiving', formed by adding the affix 
ORE 
GOVE. 
VERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY ON 
AT OF INDIA 
CBII. CH. IIT,871-74] 
THE AFFIX AP, 
15091 
सत्यमेव जयते 
सरकार 
प्रशने सतः ॥ १॥ पदानि ॥ प्रजने, सत्तः, (अप)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ सर्धातोः प्रजने विषये अप्रत्यया भवति ॥ 
71. The affis cap' comes after the verb sri' (to flow), in the sense of impregnating (the covering, of COWS &c). 
This debars 91. The word wat means the first covering of a cow by a bull'. As targyat: 'impregnation of cows'; TT 15ETT: impregnation of cattle'. 
हवः संप्रसारणे च न्यभ्युपविषु ॥ ७२ ॥ पदानि ॥ हवः, संप्रसारणम्, च, नि-अभि-उप-विषु, (अप)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ नि अभि उप वि इत्येतेष उपपदेषु हवयतेतोः संप्रसारणस् अच् प्रत्ययो भवति। 
72. The affix 'ap' comes after the verb 'hve' (to call), when the preposition 'ni "abhi 'upa and 'vi' are in composition with it, and its semivowel is changed into the corresponding vowel. 
This debars ध. As नि+हे+ प्=नि++(VI. 1. 108)=नि+हो+ (VII. 3. 84)=faga VI. 1. 78)'invocation'; ufuga: 'invocation'; coqu: 'invitation": fara: 'calling'. But seit: 'a summons'. 
साडि युद्धे॥७३॥ पदानि ॥ माङि, युद्धे, (हवः, संप्रसारणं, अप)। वृत्तिः ॥ नाङ उपरदे हयतेद्धातोः संप्रसारणमप् प्रत्यया भवति युडेभिधेये। 
73. The affix 'ap' comes after the verb 'hye' when the word in composition is the upasarga an', and the semi-vowel of the root is changed in to its corresponding vowel, when the word so formed means battle. 
SEASTER: battle' (where they challenge cach other). But otherwise शाहाय: 'calling'. 
निपानमाहावः ॥ १४॥ पदानि ॥ निपानम्, पाहावः, (प्राङि, हवः, सम्प्रसारणम्, नप) 
तिः॥ शापूर्वस्य हयते तो संप्रसारणमपप्रत्ययो वृद्धिश्च निदात्यते निपान चेदभि ये भवति॥ 
74. The word 'âhâva' is irregularly formed when meaning a trough. 
The word site is irregularly formed from by the prefix , then samprasarana, and the vriddhi of the vowel. Thus +3+4 = 15+3= 6+ ब-जाडाव: 'a trough near a well for watering cattle. Otherwise झालाय 'calling'. Even in the word swieta: the sense of calling is understood. It is that place near a well, containing water, where cattle are called or invited to drink water. 
URE - GOVE 
GOVERNMENT 
TRY OF CULT 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
TAE AFFIX AP. 
[BK. III. CH. III. $ 45 
सत्यमेव जयते 
सरकार 
भावेज्नुपसर्गस्य ॥ ७५ ॥ पदानि ॥ भावे, अनुपसर्गस्य, (हवः, संप्रसारणम्, भप)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ अनुपसर्गस्य दयतेः संप्रसारणमपप्रत्यया भवति भावेऽभिधेये॥ 
75. The affix 'ap' comes after the verb 'live' and there is the change of the semi-vowel to its corresponding vowel, when the root is upasarga-less, and mere action is denoted. 
As इव: calling'; हवे हवे सुहवं शूरमिन्द्रय । 
Why do we say 'when no upasarga is in composition with it'? Observe SITET: Though the anuvșitti of the word nia was understood in this aphorism from sutra 18, its repetition here shows that the anuvritti of sutra 19, which was running, must not be taken; so that this word applies to agent-kâraka also. 
हनश्च वधः ॥ ७६ ॥ पदानि ॥ हनः, च, वधः, (भावे, अनुपसर्ग स्व, शप)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ हन्ते तोरनुपसगै भावे अप् प्रत्ययो भवति, तत्संनियोगेन च वधादेशः, सचान्तोदात्तः। 
76. The affix ap' comes after the root han' when upasarga-less, in the sense of mere action, and 'vadha' is the substitute of 'han' before this affix. 
Thus वध has udatta accent on its final. The affix अ which is anu. dats a generally (III. 1.4) thus becomes udatta. 
As वधरचोराणास 'the killing of thieves'; बघोदस्यूनाम् 'the killing of robbers'. 
When action is not denoted, the affix घङ् applies; as घात: a blow. So also when an upasarga is in composition with it; as caras, prasi 
The word in the aphorism does not connect TT with the substitube बध, there being no co-ordination, it refers to the affixes under discussion. Thus we have the affix also; as ara: 'killing'. 
मूर्ती घनः ॥ 99॥ पदानि ॥ मूर्ती घनः, (हनः, अप)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ मविभिधेयायां हन्तेरप्रत्ययो भवति, पश्चादेशः॥ 
77. The affix "ap' comes after the verb 'han' when the word so formed means solidity, and 'ghan' is the substitute. 
The word मूर्ति means hardness', solidity'. Thus अनधन: a mass of oloud' दधिवन: 'solid'. How do we say चनं दधि ? Here the quality is taken for the thing qualified. 
अन्तर्घनो देशे ॥ 9 ॥ पदानि ॥ अन्तः, घनः, देशे, (हनः, अप)। बुतिःलापूढन्तेप्प्रत्ययो भवति धनादेशश्च भवति देशेऽभिधेये। 
RE • GOVE. 
VERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
(BSI, CE. III. $78-82.] 
THE AFFIX AP. 
तस्कृति मंत 
सत्यमेव जयते 
सरकार 
78. The verb 'han preceded by the word 'antar takes the affix 'ap', and 'ghan' is the substitute of the word 'han', when the word so formed means 'a country'. 
AS अन्तर+हन्+अप-शेन्तर= धन्+ अन्तर्घन: 'name of a country of Bi bika'; (a proch or court, an open space before the house between the entrance door and the house). Some write the word with a m as अन्तर्घणः, that is also valid. 
Why do we say when meaning a country'? Observe अन्तर्घातो 'strik ing in the middle'. 
अगारैकदेशे प्रघणः प्रघाणश्च ॥ ६॥ पदानि ॥ अगार-एकदेशे, मघणः, प्रघाणः च, (हनः)। 
वृत्तिः ॥ प्रपूर्वस्य हन्ते प्रषण प्रघाण इत्येतो शब्दौ निपात्येते अगारैकदेशे वाच्ये। 
79. The words 'praghana' and 'praghana' are irregu• larly formed meaning 'a portion of a dwelling house'. 
Thus प्रघण: or प्रघाण: 'a porch before the door of a house, a portico'. This is formed from with s, irregularly. 
Why do we say 'when meaning a portion of a house'? Observe seara: 
उद्घनोत्याधानम् ॥ ८॥ पदानि ॥ उद्धनः, अत्याधानम्, (हनः, अप) ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ उत्पूर्वस्य इन्तेल्धन इति निपात्यतेऽत्याधानं चेद् भवति। 
80. The word 'udghana' is irregularly formed in the sense of bench', 
This is formed from उत+हन irregularly. Thus उद्घन: carpenter's bench' (the wood on which placing other planks &c. the carpenter carves &c). 
When not having this sense, we have ggara: 'uneven'. 
अपघनोग्ङ्गम् ॥८१॥ पदानि ॥ अपघमः, नङ्गम्, (हनः, अप। वृत्तिः ॥ अपपूर्वस्य इन्ते रपचन इति निपात्येते, अङ्गं चेत्तद्भवति ॥ 
81. The word 'apaghana' is irregulaly formed meaning a member of the body'.. 
This is formed irregularly from अप+हन्. Thus अपन: 'alimp or member of the body'. The word means a portion of the body, such as hand or foot, and not the whole body. Otherwise we we have to : 
करणेज्योविद्रुषु ॥२॥ पदानि ॥करणे, अयः-वि-द्रा, (हनः अप, घनः)॥ 
वृतिः ॥ अयस विद इत्येतेषूपपदेव इन्तर्धातोः कारयो कारकैपप्रत्यया भवाति, धनादेशश्च ।। 
82. The affix Cap' comes after the verb han 
GOVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
THC AFFIX AP. 
[BK. III. CA III. 883-85. 
NOT 
प्रकृति मंगान 
सरकार 
when the words "ayas', 'vi' or 'dru' are in composition with it, when the word so formed is related to the verb as an instrument, and 'ghan' is the substitute of han'. 
As sait a forge-hammer' (whereby the iron is destroyed); fa73 'a mallet'; 997: an axe'. Some write yt, the being changed into T either by rulo VII. 4 3. or by including this word in the class of wietguife (IV. 2. 80). 
Fara T15311 Taifa li Efa,, , (HTW 77:, TU) af: n ea faut 392 m it grà: rear wafa TETIET U 
83. The affix 'ka' also comes after the verb'han', when 'stamba' (i clump) is the word in composition, and the relation of the word so formed to the verb is that of an instrument. 
The word in the sûtra draws in sty from the last aphorism and in that case w replaces TT. Thus car97: or causet: 'a small hoe for weeding clumps of grass'. In the feminine gender, the forms are ETFUTT as well as atut When is added, we have ea* : Thus ET + = +ST (VI. 4. 98) = VII. 3. 54) When sy is added, TT is totally replaced by T I When in strument is not meant, we have karavia: 
et : Il y li derfor i git, :,( FTU, FAT: STT ) 11 fan frigu? pagtattaa wafa tific UETTHET: 1) 
84. The affix 'ap' comes after the verb 'han', when the upasarga "pari' is in composition, and the relation between the word so formed, and the verb, is that of an instrument, and 'gha' replaces 'han'. 
Thus afte: or afa: (VIII. 2. 22.) 'an iron beam used for locking or shutting the gate, an iron club'. 
FUT I synnerfa 1199 , 9, (0.7:). fa: nugis a ut trataga faerca u 
85. The word 'upaghoa' is irregularly formed mean ing 'an inclined place for leaning or support. 
It is formed by ladding T (III. 5. 76) to the verb v preceded by the nupasarga , then eliding the penultimate w of ; this is the irregularity. Then by sandhi rales et is changed into : This form would have been given by the aflix also, without any irregularity. 
The word w refers to proximity, contiguity. Thus vate the declivity of the mountain'; so also a bordering the village'. 
Why do we way 'when meaning 'support'? Observe watan 
TURE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
ENT OF INDIA 
• BEIT. Ch. ill. $ 86-88.] 
THE AFFIX KTRI. 
सस्कृति मंत्र 
सत्यमेव जयते 
भारत सरका 
संघो। गणप्रशंसयोः ॥ ६॥ पदानि ॥ संघ-उद्घा, गण-प्र शंसयोः, (भप, घत्वं)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ ससुदोषपदयोर्हन्ते तोरप्रत्ययष्टिलोपो षत्वं च निपात्यते, यथासंख्यं गोऽभिधेये प्रशंसायां गन्यमानायाम् ॥ 
86. The words 'saigha' and 'udgha' are irregularly formed in the sense of a collection', and a praise' respectively. 
These words are thus formed; सर+हन्+प्=सं+ + = सं++ = संघः । Thus संघः पशूनास् 'a herd of cattle'; so also उद्घो मनुष्यः 'an excellent inan'. The word 'respectively' is inserted from I. 3. 10. When not used in these senses, we have संघात: 'union'. 
निघो निमितम् ॥८॥ पदानि॥ निघः, निमितम् ; (हनः, अप॥ वृत्तिः ॥ निघ इति निपूर्वाद्धन्तेरपप्रत्ययष्टिलोपो घत्वं च निपात्यते निमिते चेदभिधेयं भवति ॥ 
87. The word 'nigha' is irregularly formed in the sense of as high as broad'. 
The word fafha means 'measured all round' i. e. 'as high as broad' As furet qut: trees as high as broad'. Farat utana: 'square or cubic or circular halls'. Otherwise, when not meaning 'as high as broad', we have faara'a blow'. EThe word निमित= समन्ताम्मित, समारोहपरिणाहम् । It may be derived from an or from 
In the first case it will maen 'measured' and in the other, 'erected, built'. Professor Bothlingk refers to Apastamba Dharma. I. 20. 30 for the meaning of this word. 
डिवतः किनः ॥ ८८ ॥ पदानि ॥ डु-इतः, वित्रः, (भावे, नकर्तरि, कारके)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥बु इदास्य तस्माद् डिवतो धातोः क्तिः प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
89. The affix (ktri' comes after the verb which has an indicatory 'du', when denoting mere action dc. 
The phrases 'when the sense is that of mere action', and 'when the senso is that of an appellative, the word being related to the verb from which its name t is deduced, but not as agent', are of course understood in this, as in all the previous aphorisms. Then by IV. 4. 20, (of the affix fm, is always the aug. ment) we must add #, for we can not use the affix for alone ; but we must al ways use त्रिम. Thus डुपच to cook'-पक्तिमस् what is ripe'; बुवपू-उपनिमम 30 VI' (VI. I. 15); डकृज-कृत्रिम 'artificial'. 
दितोऽथुच ॥ ॥ पदानि ॥ दु-इतः, मथुच , (भावे, अवतरि, कारके) 
इत्तिः ॥ कास्य तस्मात् ट्वितो धातोरथुम् प्रत्ययो भवति भावादी॥ 
OVERNMENT 
by OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
"THE AFFIX KI. 
BK. IIICH III.S80921 
पाल सरकार 
89. After that verb which has an indicatory 'tu', the affix 'athuch' comes with the force of denoting mere action &c. 
PRAS दुवेप-वेपथुः a trembling'; दुसओशिव--स्ववयुः 'swelling'; दुधु-वयुः 'sneeza ing दुहु-दवयु: burning'. 
यजयाचयतविच्छमच्छरक्षो नङ॥०॥ पदानि ॥ यज-याच-यत विच्छ-प्रच्छ-रक्षः, नङ् (भावे, अकर्तरि, कारके)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ यजादिभ्यो धातुभ्यो नङ् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
90. After the verbs 'yaj' (to worship), 'yach' (to ask for), 'yat' (to strive), vichchh' (to shine), 'prachchh' (to ask) and raksh' (to preserve), comes the affix 'nań' with the force of denota ing mere action &c. 
The conditions of sâtras 18 and 19 are understood here also. The of नह is for the sake of prohibitingguna or vriddhi(I. 1.5); as यज्ञ: 'sacrifice'; बाजा solicitation'; यत्न : effort'; विश्नः (VI. 4. 19) lustre'; मन: a question'; रक्षणा protection 
The root प्रच्छ, by VI. 1. 16, ought to have changed its r in to I before the fra affix **. Its not doing so must be taken to be an irregularity counte nanced by Panini, as we know from the fact that Panini himself uses the form अजन: in III. 2117. 
खपोनन् ॥१॥ पदानि ॥ स्वपः, नन। (भावे, नकर्तरि कारके)। वृत्तिः ॥ स्वषेर्धातोर्नन् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
91. The affix 'nan' comes, under similar cir cumstances after the verb 'svap' (to sleep). 
The final tis indicatory and regulates the accent (VI. 1. 197); as each: a dream'. 
उपसर्ग घोः किः ॥२॥ पदानि ।। उपसर्ग, घोड, किः, (भावे,म पातरि, कारके)। 
वन्ति ॥ उपसर्ग उपपदे संबवेभ्यो पानुभ्यः किःप्रत्ययो भवति । 
92. The affix 'ki' comes under similar conditions, after a 'ghu' verb (1. 1. 20), when an upasarga is in composition with it. 
The is indicatory, by force of which the final sur is elided (VI. 4. 64), Thus t+का+कि= दिः 'a present', अधि: the periphery of a wheel'; उपाधिः 'fraud'; wafgvanishing 
कर्मण्यधिकरणे च ॥ ३ ॥ पदानि ॥ कर्मणि अधिकरणे, च, (पोः भावे, अकर्तरि, कारके)। 
Y OF CULTUR, 
ERNMENT OF 
7 BMIT, CH. III. 93, 94] 
THE AFFIX KTIN. 
सरसर्ति मंत्रान 
सत्यमेव जयते 
74.17 
3751 
वृत्तिः ॥ कर्मण्युपपदे घुसंजयो धातुभ्यः कि प्रत्ययो भवति, शधिकरणे कारके। 
93. The affix 'ki' comes after a 'ghu' verb, when a word in the accusative case is in composition with it, and wben the relation of the word so formed to its verb, is that of "location'. 
As cafus 'the ocean (in which water is held)'; af: 'a quiver (that in which arrows are put)'. 
The word 'location' in the aphorism indicates that the words so formed should have no other significance. The word in the aphorism draws in the affix for from the last sâtra. 
ferni fa i n urfa l fautt, fea, (uta, 
वृत्तिः ॥ त्रीलिङ्गे भावादी धातो: क्तिन् प्रत्ययो भवति॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ क्तिन्नाबाविभ्यश्ष वक्तव्यम् ॥ ardhu Ifwegia: afsu vairatuatgr at forsu बार्तिकम् ॥साकारल्यादिभ्यः क्तिनिष्ठाबद्धवति इति वक्तव्यम् । वार्तिकम् ॥ सम्पदादिभ्यः विप ॥ 
94. To express an action &c. by a word in the feminine gender, the affix 'ktin' is added to the root. 
The conditions of rules III. 3. 18. and 19 are understood bere also. This supersedes us, 577 and say affixes. Thus gfa: 'action', fafa: 'a gathering: 
fa: 'understanding'. 
Vart.-The affis Itin should be declared to come after the verbs sy 'to get' &c. There is no list of these words given anywhere, but by secing the form, we can infer the affix. Thus suifa: 'getting; tig: 'accomplishment'; afg: 'shining'; Efea: 'a slip'; cafes 'destruction', afout: 'gain'. 
Vart-So also after the verbs o'to hear, un 'to worship and to praise", when instrument is meant; as gras 'ear' (that by which we hear): 90 
tres 'a sacrifice'; eg fa: 'a praise'. 
Vart. The afix for comes after the verbs a 'to be exhausted', a to fade', 'wat 'to grow old' and 'to leave'; as refor: 'exhaustion'; *wife: 'fading': outfit: 'old age', Fifa: 'loss'. 
Voit. The affix for coming after verbs ending in long and the verbs &c. is like a Nishtbâu. fas: 'scattering': This form is thus evolved: +fen=f*+fa (VII. 1. 100)=fac+fa (I.1.51) + fa(VIII 2.77). At this stage, a is changed into → by the affix being treated as a Nishth& (VIII. 2. 42), and this 7 is changed into by the ordinary rules of sandbi; 80 
22 
URE 
OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY O 
VERNMENT 
OF INDIA 
THE AFFIX KTIN. 
[Br. IIT. OF. III. $ 65, 96, 
सत्यम्दजयते 
also :'praise'; oft: 'old age'; tiu: 'drying'; afa: (VIII. 2. 44) 'cutting'; gfa'joining'; tfa: 'agitation'; gra: 'destruction'. 
Vart.-The affix fat comes after the verbs #TC &c.; as in 'prosper ity': fat calamity'; afaca access'. The affis fit is also employed after these verbgs-as iufus, farefa: The verbs a &c. are 21 verbs of the kryâdi class. 
FUTOTTET Hâu ney n usifa a RETT-TT-01-9, via, (feat, faun 
वृत्तिः ॥ स्थादिभ्यो धातुभ्य: स्वीलिङ्गे भावे क्तिन् प्रत्ययो भवति॥ 
95. After the roots 'stha' (to stand), 'gâ' (to sing 'pa' (to drink) and Spach' (to cook), the affix 'ktin' is employed, when a word in the feminine gender denoting a 'mere action' is to be expressed. 
This debar3 the affix 375 (III. 3. 106) which generally supersedes fit in cases of compound verbs ending in long 1. Thus sfeafa: 'a journey' (VII 4.40; enfa'a singing aloud'; + fer=T7+fa (VI. 1. 45) =st+fa (VI. 4. 66); antra: 'a concert'; sofa: 'a cistern'; autfa: 'drinking together'; ofm: 'cooking. 
The repetition of the word wra in this aphorism, in spite of its anuvrit di being understood from sâtra 18 is to exclude every other significance. 
How do we get forms like saker and deat? Pâņini himself, in his satras, has used forms like suceUT &c. See I. 1. 34. This is enough justification for us to derive forms like sucean, ETT &c. by applying the affix #3_under rule 106, in spite of the present sâtra, which requires us to apply fe y only. 
मन्ने वषेषपचमनविद वीरा उदात्तः ॥ ६॥ पदानि ॥ मन्त्री, T-89---fae---at-tt, 551, (pia, feu, faham) 
वृत्तिः॥ मन्त्रे विषये वृषादिभ्यो धातुभ्यः तिन्प्रत्ययो भवति उदात्तः॥ 
96. In the Mantra literature, 'ktin' acutely accent ed comes after the following roots, forming words in the feminine gender, denoting a mere action :-'vrish' (to rain), 'ish' (to wish), 'pach' (to cook), 'man' (to think), 'vid' (to know), 'bhî (to be), 'vi' (to go, to consume) and fra' (to give), 
The construction of this sûbra is anomalous. Instead of the bases he. ing put in the ablative case, they are put in the nominative case. Thus arus Craiping'; wre: 'wishing': fen: 'cooking"; faz 'thinking'; fufa: 'knowing'; vfa: being'; effa: 'consuming'; erfas 'giving'. 
The affix fort has been generally ordained by sa tra 94 after all verbs The present sa tra is made for the sake of regulating the accent in the case of thene nouns. From we have also an irregular noun GT (III. 3. 101), and TREGOVS 
OVERNMENT 
TRY OF CULTON 
NT OF INDIA 
Sle 
( 
III) CH. III. $ 97, 98.) 
THE ATTIX KYAP. 
संस्कृति मंत्रालय 
सत्यमेव जयते 
27 
another by the general rule 94 having acute accent on the first syllable, al together 3 forms. See Rig Veda I. 116. 12; II. 5. 6; 1. 62. 3, 57. 2; IV. 24. 7; III. 59. 1; 1. 6. 5, 60.1; X. 95. 17 for these words. 
Sfagfagfaatfagraaltinga II 9 nucifa fa faofa-Fifafanu:, 1, (Ect:) m 
वृत्तिः । उत्यादयः शब्दा निपात्यन्ते। 
97. And these words viz., 'ûti' (preserving sport), yûti! (joining), jûti! (velocity), så ti' (destruction), heti' (a weapon) and kirti' (fame) are anomalous forms, acutely accented. 
The anuvșitti of the word ia does not exist in this, but the word in of the last syllable is understood here. The word Fifa is thus formed :-- sa 'to protect' ft=5+ fa: (VI. 4. 20.)=afa: this form is regular and could be evolved from sâtra 94 also; but not so the accent. The irregularity in gfa: and gra: consists in the lengthening of g into ; in Fifa: the wt of the root a which becomes Et by. VI. 1 45, is not changed into T, as rule VII. 4. 40 required, and this is the irregularity. This form may also be derived from the root op with perfect propriety, except as to the accent which would be regulated by the present sûtra: thus t+ = +FT (VI. 4. 42)=utfa. The form afa may be derived either from y or fentrai 
qe aid ata e GUETTH fam: n (Rig. Veda. 1. 7. 4) 'O Indra, mayst thou mighty, defend us in battles and in fights of a thousand duels. with thy mighty protections'. 
| as I sit in uv || các vị trí | Tin-art, HTC, HT, (517:) 
TFT: autateat: ferfer ata 17 meter wara, JETT: * 
98. The affix kyap' comes after the roots frais (to go) and 'vaj' (to worship) acutely accented in forming a word in the feminine denoting action. 
This supersedes ft. Thus foar 'wandering about'; TT (VI. 1. 15) worshipping'. The I of ury is indicatory, and though it serves no purpose in this sâtra, it is, however, necessary in the next, for it is by force of any having that we add a aby VI. 1. 71, in the words formed in the next aphorism. 
Farut #fafananafaggateufst: neugiau TUI, #w-fata-ferga-w-faş-ya-TI-1-ET, (faut, , 17:) ! 
URE 
STRY OF CU 
MINISTRI 
NERNMENTO 
AT OF INDIA 
THE AFFIX SA. 
(BK. III. CE. III. $ 99, 101. 
. 
1721 
उज.सरकार 
fa: TOTfFat yigit: funt aut futt yrafa sera: igrai facea 
99. The affix kyap' comes after the following verbs in forming a word in the feminine denoting an 'appellative' and is acutely accented viz: sam-aj''nishad', 'ni-pat', 'man', 'vid', ésuñ', 'sin bhriñ' and 'in', 
Thus thout an assembly'; faaet 'a small bed or couch'; facut 'slip pery ground'; wat 'thinking'; façar 'knowledge'; cout VI. 1. 71) 'extraction of soma juice, parturition'; 2T 'bed'; ya 'wages, service'; reut 'a litter, palanquin'. 
Here a question arises as regards . By rule III 1, 112, y would have taken my, and we could have got the form veut by that rule also. But the year formed under that rule would not have denoted an appellative which the present rule does. It would be said that rule III. 1.112 when it used the words Siri, was rather too wide, for why does come in denoting is in feminine nouns by the present rule; so that the word gerai there, must be qualified by the phrase, 'except in the feminine'. The test whether rule 112, is too widely worded or not, has been made to hinge on the forming of the term af mean ing 'wife'. This word is formed by the affix tua to the exclusion of 791 
uri g'fe guara afufaufero ferui wafuatatsfea e rafafafan 
The word werfv10: is explained by the author of the Käsika as per UTRICT, rear fuafuas, atsa: I 
A: Tangoo ni taifa ni mst:, , 7, ( faut, au) n त्तिः॥ करोतेर्धातोः खियांशा प्रत्ययो भवति चकारात् क्यप्च॥ 
100, And after the root 'kri' comes the affix 'sa' in forming a feminine, as well as the affix 'kyap'. 
By the force of the word we draw the affix up into this sâtra, and by the process called stafaut we can split up this aphorism into two: 
(1) 'after the root there is the affix fent' 
(2) and the affix was well as way. Thus far, it (VI. 1.71) and fee. When the affix v is added, the root assumes the form fra by III.1.67. 
nog n ugifTaT, (ST) faturitate 
w armate forarea u আলিঙ্ক ॥ থঘি অাঘষি-অলাভাহানাজ ॥ afya TTCT ET 
102. The form 'ichchh&' (desire) is irregular. The word is thus formed : 9+ = + = . The y ordained by III. 1. 67 is not added, this is the irregularity. 
URE - Govs 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY ON 
. BASTICH. III. § 102-104.] 
THE AFFIX AN. 
519 
1776 
Vart.-The following words are also irregularly formed :-uituat 'perambulation'; oftant'attendance, service'; gaat 'hunting'; HEIGU 'the habit of roaming about as a religious mendicant'. 
Vart- From the root nie we have either act or wraf waking'. The first is formed by the affix , the latter by y which brings in T (III. I. 67). 
ST FRITIA n pop II aftfa 1 ST, Arta, (feath) afTS I ATTTTraut wig T: furat #17: scaur vafa u 
102. After the verbs that end in an affix, there is the affix 'a', the word being feminine, 
The verbs that end in an affix are derivative roots, such as Desidera. tives, Causatives, Intensives and Denominatives. Though taking affixes, they are called wig (III. 1. 32), after these verbs the affix sut is used in forming the feminine noun. 
Thus +7=faat 'to wish to do'; this is & Derivative root; after this root fear, we add . Thus faites + 3 (VI. 4. 48)=free Then we add try by IV. 1. 4. and get fuatat 'the desire to do'; so also fattaf 'the desire to take'; gsitat 'the desire to be like a son'; g***TT 'desire of a son'; naar 'much cut. ting'; cat 'itch'. The sûtra is also found as : seara ! 
JOTE EM: a poz nagtfa un git:, , :, (farai, sar) n TfTu carat TI EITT FATE aa: fata: Serir vafa u 
103. The affix 'a' comes after that verb which has a prosodially heavy vowel and ends in a consonant, when the word to be formed is feminine. 
This debars for Thus your 'an adulteress'; gret'a tigress'; for 'effort'; Egy supplying an ellipsis'. 
Why do we say 'which has a prosodially heavy vowel'? Observe of devotion'. Why do we say 'which ends in a consonant'? Observe offfa 'polity, 
Fagfagifqualse i poy ur ozira na fora, fag-stfexu, 915. (RETAI) 
afsu fegat fastfexury FUTTATàr wafa u 
104. The affix 'ai' comes after those verbs that have an indicatory 'sh', and after 'bhid' &c. when the word to be formed 
is feminine. 
Thus og has an indicatory T, the real root being From ib we have GET 'old age' (VII. 4. 16), 97- 'bashfulness'. 
So also from verbs of the Bhidadi class we have fuer 'breaking'; in the al. ternative we have ffers i So also feat 'cutting': for 'cutting: G & knife, an 
ARE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
THE AFFIX TUCH. 
[Br. III. CH. III. S100-107., 
सत्यमेव जयते 
इति मंत्रान 
र सरकार 
iron instrument'; gife: distress'; vite 'a stream'; efası The list of the Bhidádi verbs will not be found given in one place in the Dhutupatha. They have been collected from different Ganas, and are the following : 
भिदा, छिदा, विदा, धिपा, गुहा, (गिर्योषध्योः), श्रद्धा, मेधा, गोधा, धारा, हारा, कारा, क्षिया, भारा, धारा, लेखा, रेवा, चूडा, पीडा, वपा, वसा. सृजा, सृजा, कृषा, (पेः संप्रसारणं च)॥ 
चिन्तिपूजिक थिकुम्बिचर्चश्च ॥१०॥ पदानि ॥ चिन्ति-पूजि-कथि कुम्बि-चर्चः, च, (स्त्रियां, नक) 
वृत्तिः ॥ चिन्ति पूजि काय कुन्नि चर्च रभ्यो धातुभ्यो युधि प्राप्त खियामड् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
105. The affix 'an' as well as the affix «yuch' comes after the following verbs, forming feminine words:--'chint' (to think), 'puj' (to worship) kath' (to narrate), 'kumb' (to cover) and 'charch' (to learn). 
The force of st is to include the affix gy into this sûtra (see III. 3. 107). All these vei bs belong to the Churádi or 10th class, and would have exclusively taken युच् by III. 3. 107. 
Thus चिन्ता thought'; पूजा 'worship'; कथा 'narration'; कुम्बा a covering', 'a thick petticoat'; च र्चा 'recitation'. 
When the affix is युच् , the forms are चिन्तना &c. (VII. 1. 1), 
आतश्चोपसर्ग ॥१०६॥पदानि प्रातः, च, उपसर्ग,(स्त्रियां, अङ)। वृत्तिः ॥ शाकारान्तेभ्य उपसर्गे उपपदे खियामा प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ बार्तिकम् ॥ दन्तरोरुपसर्गवृत्तिः ॥ 
106. The affix 'an' comes after those verbs which end in long 'a' when an upasarga is in composition, and when the word to be formed is feminine, 
This supersedes तिन्. Thus प्रदा, प्रधा, उपदा, उपधा, &c. 
Vart -For the purposes of this rule the particles a and wat should be treated like upasırgas. Thus T faith' saat (I. 4. 59). 
यासश्रन्थो युच् ॥१०॥पदानिाणि-पास-ग्रन्थः, युच, (स्त्रियाम् ॥ त्तिः ॥ ण्यन्तेभ्यो धातुभ्य भासमन्य इत्येताभ्यां पतियां युभत्यया भवति ॥ बार्तिकम् ॥ पहिन्दिविदिस्य उपसंख्यानम् ॥ बार्तिकम् ॥ इपेरनिवार्यस्य युज्वक्तव्यः ॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ पारेर्वा ॥ 
107. After verbs ending in 'ni', and after as' (to sit) and 'Sranth' (to loose), there is the affix 'yuch' when the word to be formed is feminine. 
This excludes the affix (III. 1. 102). Thus कृ+पिच = कारि; कारि+युच = KUT (the tis elided by VI. 4. 51) the causing to do'; ETCUT 'the causing ho 
QE • GOVED 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
SAINISTRY ON 
NT OF INDIA 
BELIN. CHIII. S 108.] 
THE AFFIX NVUL. 
सरचम जयते 
स सरकार 
take'; runt 'the sitting'; 97 the loosening'. How do we get the form STEUT? It is the feminine of SATEU formed by adding Tad to the root suig by III. 1. 124. Is not that rule made non-applicable by rule III. 1.94, which declares that atsast rule does not apply to Feminine affixes? Yes, that, is, however, not total exclusion. The phrase suferit in Ill. l. 94 is to be interpreted thus:-"Non-uniform affixes prohibit each other, wh n they belong to the class of affixes especially ordained for the feminine nouns; such as the affix f (III. 3. 9), T III. 3. 98), 5 (III. 3. 102). That is to say, an utsarga-feminine affix will be always superseded by an apavâda-feminine affix; but a feminine affix in general will not supersede another affix which is not enjoined in the femi nine gender especially. In other words, feminine affixes inter se supersede each other totally, but not so with regard to general y affixes". Now by the present sû tra the root stie takes gt; this totally excludes other feminine atfixes like 5 (III. 1, 102); but it does not exclude the non-feminine affix TITI 
The root ou taken here belongs to the Kryâdi class, meaning 'to loosen' and is not the you of the Churâdi class, for the latter would be included as a matter of course, by belonging to the Churâdi class which class of verbs take the affix for 
Vart.--The verbs ag to move', 77€ 'to praise', and fax 'to feel', should also be enumerated, as taking yy. Thus agat 'shaking', great 'praising', a 'knowledge, feeling, pain'. The verb at here belongs to the Tudâdi class, and means 'to move' and not one of the Churâdi class, for that is already included by being णिजस्त । 
Vart.-The affix you comes after we when it does not mean 'to desire'. Thus sedat 'solicitation'; w=auut 'the searching after'. 
Vart-So also optionally when to takes the upasarga eft; as, TUTTI or pitfgs 'investigation by reasoning'. 
रोगाख्यायां ण्वुल्ला हुलम् ॥ १०८ ॥ पदानि ॥ रोग-आख्यायाम, ught, ugah, (FETTIF) 
वृत्तिः ॥ रोगाख्यायाँ गन्यमानायां धातो हुलं गवुल् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ वार्तिकच ॥ धात्वर्थनिये गवुल वक्तव्यः॥ बार्तिकच ॥ इतिची धातुनि इति वक्तव्यम् ।। af aTMT: चार्तिकम् ॥रादिफः॥ আলি আঘ। লাভলুঃ ।। upo safera: # वार्तिकर ॥ इककृप्यादिभ्यः ॥ 
108. The affix 'nvul' comes diversely after verbs when the word to be formed is a feminine noun, being the name of diseases'. 
URE - GOVA 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
ENT OF INDIA 
THE AFFIX NVUL.. 
[BK. III. CH. III. $ 109, 1104 
सत्यमेव जयते 
27 
This debars for and all the rest. By using the word wat in the sâtra it is meant that the word so formed by this affix should be the appella tion of the disease. The word 'diversely shows the usual license in the applica tion of all the rules of grammar. Thus cfT (VII, 1. 1.) 'vomiting'; Fatra *diarrhoea'; faarder 'itch, scab'. Sometimes this affix does not apply; as fuafas "head-ache'. 
Vart --The affix nvul is employed also in simply pointing out the meaning of the roots; thus, wirect 'to enjoy', ufaxi to lie down' &c. 
Vart.-The affixes and feay (that is my and fat) are also employed in merely pointing out the roots; as farfes, feras, qafas, uofa: &c. The constant use of these affixes is to be found in these very sûtras. In the aphorisms the roots are exhibited in various ways; thus in sâtra 49 of this chapter we have the root fwand y exhibited as afas and it fas 1 These latter forms indicating no thing more than the simple roots. So also, see VIII. 4. 17; VI. 4. 49. 
Vart. The affix art is employed in merely pointing out letters; as COTT: means 'the letter *'; so also *TT: 'the letter s'; vart: 'the letter to 
Vart.-The affix ** is employed in pointing out the letter c; as 
Vart.--The affix comes after the word wat in merely pointing it out, and there is elision of the final s; as guita: 1 
Vart.-The affix rst comes after the verbs 37 &c; as sarfers, surfas, faro Vart.--The affix ver comes after the verbs &c; as, gfas, fufci, &c. 
1919 li gor nucife e ri, (qa, feTUH) वृत्तिः ॥ संवायां विषये धातोपवुल प्रत्ययो भवति॥ 
109. The affix 'nvul' comes after the yerbal roots, when the word to be formed is an appellative. 
As Ceramyeowforat 'a sort of game played by the people in the eastern districts in which uddalaka flowers are broken or crushed'. acoger 
utfort 'a sort of game'; wysurfear; artcafest; Travfurt; at fuum 
fataletaafuauifinom geo nggihan faytur, ufanit:, , , (Tg, feTTİ) 
fe ftata atau ant stratfisadi wafa 
110. And the affix 'iñ comes optionally after a root, when a question and answer is expressed, (as) well as fpvull and other afixes ordained by other rules). 
The word dit means 'question' and vitara means 'answer'; in the stra, in making the compound of these words, the logical sequence is not observed. The compound o fcou may, however, be justified on the ground that in & Compound a word consisting of smaller number of syllables should stand first (II. 2. 34,) and hence dlhyana is put first, 
REGOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
1. BASIL.CH. III, § 111, 112.] 
THE AFFIX ANI 
स्कृति मंगला 
सत्यमेव जयते 
The force of is to draw the anuvritti of the word get from the last into this. By the word 'optionally, it is meant that those affixes which would otherwise present themselves from the subsequent rules, should also be applied; thaus: "Q.- i cafea arat'What work did you do? A. t wife and 
I did all work'. Optionally we inay have instead of ufc the following also. Q.- af aftai, gaut, xfa', fonui, ref: A.-ctioni or get or gfa or forat game Similarly, Qo-ife (, fuai &c.) sa : A.- diafe &c. squitouy. So also mi urfte or at foret; af tifat or arfumi &c. 
Why do we say 'in question and answer'? Observe afas and fara 
पर्यायाहोत्पत्तिषु ण्वुच ॥१११॥पदानि॥ पर्याय-मई-ऋण-उत् uftig, 97, (FEAD) IN 
efen varaag watty autadt wufa u 
111. The affix 'nyuch' comes optionally after a root in the sense of succession, merit, debt or production. 
The word watu means turn or order of succession; we means worthy of respect; a means debt owed to another; and serfa means birth or produo tion. This rale supersedes fm and other affixes. Thus: (1) wat sfant 'your turn of sleeping'; भवतोऽनमासिका 'your turn of eating firsb'. (2) शार्हति भवानि भक्षिकाए, 'you deserve to have a meal of sugar and molasses'. (3) ruhumi wafe 'thou owest me a meal of sugar and molasses'; situatievani 'a meal of rice'; :trfyt 'a drink of milk', (4) Tunu g aia 
The word 'optionally' is understood in this sûtra also; as fenatua 
The forms given by rga and Tag are the same, the difference is only in the accent. (VI. 1 193, and VI. I. 163). 
FIRIN safat: n 398 nyif o atera, afs, sifar: fu: SHORT #THI 5gue watefiuit afat 
112. The affix 'ani' comes after a verb when the par ticle nai' is in composition with it, and the sense implied is that of cursing. 
The anuvritti of the word 'optionally does not extend to this aphorism. The word to means to curse. This supersedes the affixes ft &c. Thus watua ya TT 'may failure be to thee, O'sinner't Actatiotaleg inay he be disappointed'. 
Why do we gay 'when meaning to ourse? Observe reface *** the non-making of his mat'. 
Why do we say 'when 75 is in composition ? Observe taea at at 'may death be to thee, O! sinner'! 
कृत्यल्युटो बहुलम् ॥ १३ ॥ पदानि ॥ कृत्य, ल्युटः बहुलम् । 
23 
GOVERNMENS 
CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
TAE AFFIX LYUT. 
[BK. III Ou. III. $ 1 
सत्यमय जयत 
1422 
सुत्तिः ॥ कृत्यासंबकाः प्रत्यया स्युट च बहुल मर्येषु भवन्ति ॥ 
113. The affixes called 'kritya' (III. 1. 95) and the the affix 'lyut, are diversely applicable and have other senses than those taught before. 
The anuvšitti of the phrases 'when denoting action' and 'when the rela tion of the word formed to its parent Verb is not that of an agent', which began with sâtras III. 3. 18 and 19, does not extend to this sû tra or further. By saying 'diversely' we mean that they occur in other places than those where ordained by the rules. Thus the kritya affixes are ordained to come when 'act' or 'object' is to be expressed, but they come also when the káraka is other than the objective. Thus fanatt powder for bathing'; gritat agt: 'a Brâhmana to whom a donation is to be made'. In the first of these examples the 'powder' is the 'instrument'expressible by the 3rd. case, and in the second the 'Brah mana' is the recipient expressible by the fourth case; so that in both cases the affix is applied without any express rule. 
Similarly, ye is ordained to come in denoting instrument, location, and a verbal noun (III. 3. 115 and 117). Bat it is applied in other senses also. Thus ৰাজকীজলাঃ মাঃ ‘halls for the eating of kings'; Tজাভানালি অনুষি dresses to be worn by the king'. 
By using the word 'diversely', even the krit a fixes are applied in places other than those expressly ordained. Thus 1917715 frua=TICEICH: I na 
a asta: For accent see VI. 2. 150. 
a mà: uppen ugifern a n, ve, :,(arat:) 1 सुतिः ॥ नपुसकलिङ्ग भावे धातोः क्त प्रत्ययो भवति॥ 
114. The affix 'kta' is added to the root, when action is expressed, the word being in the neuter gender. 
These are neuter abstract nouns: thus, fua 'laugh'; wfegat 'speech'; w fazi 'sleeping'. So also ta, arra &c. 
FC 889 usifanye, #, (aga, ) m वृन्तिः ॥ नपुसकलिङ्ग भावे धातोल्युट्प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
115. The affix 'lyut' is added to the root, when the name of an action is expressed, in the neuter gender. 
Thus the "the laughter of the student'; * 'beauty', we 'speech'; want 'sleep'; 'seat'. 
The separation of this sû tra from the last, in which it might well have been ir cluded, is for the sake of the subsequent aphorisms, in which the anu. vřitti of lyut only cuns, and not that of 
for deuria sa': s n99€n ucrfati 
URE - GOVS 
OVERNMENT 
STRY OF CU 
NT OF INDIA 
BN211. CH. III. $ 116, 117.] 
THE AFFIX LYUT. 
सवय जयते 
रिकार 
fu, 7, 8, raatia, ma , ar-gat (ata, ofta, ya) 
is nga TT GETTY #THEU acujevaa afenauguratig सकलिंगे भावे ल्युट्प्रत्ययेा भवति ॥ 
116. The affix 'lyut' is added to a root, when the name of an action is expressed in the neuter gender; provided that the verb has in construction with it, such a word in the accusative case, as indicates thing, from the contact with which, there arises a pleasant sensation corporally to the agent. 
This sû tra is thus translated by Bohtlingk :-"The affix egg comes in connection with an object, when through the contact with that, the agent of the action feels a lively pleasure". Though the affix lyut would have present ed itself by the last aphorism, under the circumstances mentioned in this sûtra, the framing of this sûtra, is really for the purpose of teaching, that the com pound so formed is a forcu or invariable compound i. e, a compound which cannot be analysed into its component members :--for every une compound is a facut compound (II. 2. 19). Thus ta: rage the pleasure of drinking milk'; steauto go the pleasure of eating rice, 
Why do we say 'when the word in construction is in the accusative case'? Observe ufahat yan ye 'rising from a bed of down is pleasant'. Here there is no compounding as the upapada gfent is in the ablative case. 
Why do we say 'from the contact'? Observe fragezeaterang 'it is pleasure to sit near by a fire-hearth'. Here there being no contact between 'fire' and 'body', there is no compounding. 
Why do we say to the agent'? Observe yit: Et go to the teacher it is pleasure, when he is made to bathe'. Here the word To is not the agent but the object of the verb स्नापयति । 
Why do we say 'corporally? Observe garea ufuasma gay 'embracing of the son is a pleasure'. Here the pleasure is a mere mental satisfaction and not a physical one. 
Why do we say 'a pleasant sensation'? Observe CGT * 'ib is painful to rub thorns'. In all the above counter-examples there is no com pounding, see II. 2. 19 and the connected sûtras. 
TUT TE 999 utfall ETT SITT, 
ufen arasfuata were water encài wafere 
117. The affix lyut' comes after a root, when 
URE - Govo 
TRY OF CULT 
MINISTRY 
VERNMENTOS 
OF INDIA 
THE ATTIX GHA. 
[BK. III. CH. III. $ 113 119, 
सत्यम्वाजयते 
रत सरकार 
the relation of the word to be formed to the verb is that of an instrument or location. 
Thus ITT27: 'an axe' (lit. an instrument for cutting wood); a1714: 'palasa-cutter'; ontgat 'a milk-pail' (a vessel into which milk is milked; so also uteti In other words, this affix expresses also the idea of the instrumental case (a tool), and of the locative cuse (a repository). 
gfa estat : Trêu n pps ni agafar i gfe, TIR, 7. ATİT, (Tuftrat) n 
वृत्तिः ॥ पुल्लिङ्गयोः करणाधिकरणयोरभिधेययोर्धातोः प्रत्ययो भवति समुदायेग चेत ata 
M 113. The affix 'gha' generally comes in the sense of an instrument or location after a root, when the word to be formed is a name and is in the masculine gender, 
The force of the word grão 'generally' is to show that this rule is not a universal rule. Thus crasst: the lip'; eft 'to cover + (VI, 4. 96)= 7 lit. that by which the teeth are covered'; so also oTECT 'a breast plate'; T 1 These denote instruments. 
So also in denoting location'. Thus s1+&+9=SITET: 'a mine', no named bocause men work (akurvanti) in it, a: 'a house that in which men settle down 
Why do we say 'in the masculine gender'? Observe TET**a comb'; (lit. that by which men decorate). biere the affix is lyut, 
Why do we say 'when the complete word so formed is merely an ap pellative? Observe seat Ete: 'the beating stick'. 
The indicatory is merely qualifying; for the application of satra VI.4. 06. by which after the causative efę, when w is added, the long su is shortened. 
TUTTOECHCE Stafattungpeu vif tat - -*-TTT- TTAT:, (:) 
y 
: TEET Suur ar frazara gafe und 
119. And the words 'gochara', 'sa mchara', 'vaha' vraja', 'vyaja', 'âpaņa' and 'nigama' are anomalous, 
These words are irregularly formed by the affix with the same force as in the last aphorism. This is an apaváda or exception to rule III. 3. 121, by which after roots ending in consonants, the affix war is added. Thus : pasturage', (lit. that in which the cows graze); : la passage', (lib. through which they move), au: 'a vehicle' (lit. by which mea are carried); T: 'a cow pon' (by which they go); i 'a fan' (by which they move the aie); the anomaly DE 
GOVE. 
VERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
IT OF INDIA 
بیانا 
RUT: CH III. S 120, 121.] 
wala 
TAE AFFIX GHAN. 
. 
1 
in this consists in to replacing the 2 of 595 (fa + y) by the substitute eft as required by sûtra II. 4. 56; TT 'a market' (lit. that in which men come and traffio); FANTA: 'the Veda', 'a market' (that into which they enter). 
The force of the words in the aphorism is to include other words also, which have not been already mentioned. Thus #4, TET: 'a touch-stone' (lit. that on which they rub). 
sâ qvitat u gzon uçtla ngā, a-at, 97, (uifa Tit: STIUTH) II 
वृत्तिः ॥ अव उपपदे तरतेस्तृणातेश्च धातोः करणाधिकरणयोः संज्ञायां घञ्प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
120. The affix 'ghañ comes after the roots 'trt' (to cross) and 'stri' (to spread), when the upasarga ‘ava' formed is in composition with them, and when the word so formed is an appellative related to the verb either as an instrument or as a location. 
This supersedes s. The st is indicatory and causes the vșiddhi of sy (V1.2. 115) and is also for the sake of regulating the accent (VI. 1. 195, 197). The indicatory is useful in the subsequent aphorism where it changes the palatals into gutturals. Thus saate the descent' (or incarnation of a deity); STEIT: 'a screen round a tent'. 
How do we apply saait also in phrases like aard was the descent of rivers', for here the word mvatára is not an appellative ? This use is also allowed, because the anuvritti of the word is understood here also ; so that these words avatára, &c. may be employed in senses other than appellative. 
FILE UPR8 n gata u E, T, (uf, urat, for Tut:, ) 
qaro targret: ufatuit cuir vafa a 
121. And after a verb ending in a consonant, comes the affix 'gbañ', (when the word to be formed is masculine, and related to the verb as an instrument or a location, and thereby the palatal is changed into a guttural). 
The whole of the phrase within brackets is to be read into this sutra from sútra III. 3. 118. This excludes W. Thus ar 'a writing' (that in which something is inscribed); as: 'the Veda' (that by which all is known); 
'dress' (that which is ob'ered into); T: obstruction': 's 'a way (that on which they seek); $79797: 'a plant' (that by which disease or the like 13 clear ed away); 47:, Râma' (e. e. in which the devout delight). 
satyratga ETITIET01TuRangerton - 7914-seta-FIT-TT01T-Flatat, 7 N 
REGOVE 
OVERNMENT 
Y OF CULTUS 
• MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
THE AFFIX GHAN. 
[BK. III. Ca. III. $ 122) 24. 
विलायते 
75249. 
yfa: zimąU: 156 war fratera u 
122 And the words 'adhyâya', 'nyâya', "udyava', samhâra', âdhåra' and 'âvâya' are anomalous 
These words are formed by adding the affix 93 to the exclusion of which would have come by rule III. 3. 118. All these words are derived from roots which end in vowels. Thus stie + + 45 = ora: la chapter or book' (lit. that in which they read); -7--977: 'logic, justice', (lit. that by which men are led); -y-39ta: 'mixture' (lit. that in which they blend); 74.T-İETT: 'des truction' (lit. by which they are destroyed); 41-y- TUTT: 'support' (lit. in which anything is held); sa-fa- TUTT: = surauffa sufera 
The force of er is to include others not enumerated above; as, StarTO 
Eesti n.973 ugefa II 5, g an II ESTE#gia fagra och faqatag utcaaf hafa u 
123. The word 'udan ka' is anomalous, when the sense of the root refers to subjects other than 'water', 
The word is thus formed: 4+ *+7=U : 'a vessel. 
Would not the affix 7 have come by sûtra III. 3. 121, why then this aphorism ? This is made a separate aphorism in order to prohibit the applica tion of the affix, where the word to be formed means 'water'. 
Thus aitza: 'a leathern vessel for oil'. 
Why do we say 'when not referring to 'water'? Observe que fa bucket for drawing water '(ac+5+ ). 
Why do not we give the counter- example by adding the affix s to the root ser? Because the form evolved by applying , would be the same in every respect as that evolved by yst; even the accent would be the same. For by sâtra VI. 2. 144, the udatta accent, in the case of 77, will fall on the final. 
191919: n PP 11 Gta HEFU, Sar: 11 rasa mtu afa fetoga wier agafax 
124. The word 'ânâya' is irregularly formed wher meaning a net'. 
The word is thus formed in the sense of instrument. 47+t+ 9 = Tas 'a net' (by which they are caught); as star wearai'a net for fish': 
mure'a net for wild deer, &c. 
n954 na STTT!, , , (FUTA ATÊ, 75) E n wagtat: ufunuaita: saar wafa, VIETE 751 - 
वार्तिकर । डो बत्ताव्यः । 
urfurat 
: 
URE 
GOVE 
GOVERNA 
<RY OF CULTU 
ISININ 
PANTII. Co. III. § 125, 126.] 
THE AFFIX KHAL. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
1994.17 
वार्तिकस् ॥ इववको वक्तव्यः ॥ 
125. The affix 'gha' as well as 'ghan comes after the verb 'khan' (to dig), (when the word to be formed is an appellative related to the verb as instrument or location). 
The affix t has been read into the sutra by force of the word al Thus iti: or 19: 'a spade, a hoe'. 
Vart.-The affix s also comes in this sense after the verb T. Thus STTTT+3=1C: 'a spade'. The indicatory showing that the final portion called fe should be elided. 
Vart.-The affix 3c also comes in the same sense: as CT: 'a spade', Vart.--So also the affix ans af prefa: 'a spade'. Vart.--So too the affix as secta *: 'a spade'. 
ईबद्दुःसुषु कृच्छाकृच्छ्रार्थेषु खल ॥ १६ ॥ पदानि ॥ ईषत्-दुस् gy, - 23-ig, un 
वृत्तिः ॥ ईषत दुस् सु इत्येतेषूपपदेषु कृछाकृछार्थेषु धातोः खल् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
126. In the sense of hard and difficult' or 'light and easy', the affix 'khal' is added to a verb, when 'îshad', and 'dur and 'su' are combined with it as upapadas. 
The anuvșitti of the phrase "when related as instrument or location' ceases with this aphorism. The word a means heavy, and at has the forco of conveying that sense. The word sasa means light, easy'; and the words 
T and y convey that sense. Thus 07** Haar me: 'a mat is made easily by you'; so also geht: 'made with difficulty'; yt: 'made with ease'. Simi larly suguta: 'eating pleasantly'; gais: and ytas 
Why do we say 'after 8 &c.'? See moses : 'the nat which is made with difficulty'. 
Why do we say 'when meaning 'hard or light'? Observe tua a small work'. 
Of the affix at, the letter and are indicatory ; causing the in sertion of a nasal (technically called 35 augment, VI. 3, 67); and regulates the accent (VI. 1. 196). The augment I will be added in the subsequent sutra, the thus having no work in this sira. 
ITT YF: n 29 llogifa 1 -maiti, TV erit, ( 845-5-uy, ) 
वृत्तिः ॥ भवते करोतेच धातोर्य यासंख्य कर्तरि कर्मणि चीपषदेचकारादीपदाचिषु सस् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
.GOVERNME 
TRY OF CULTU 
ANISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
THE AFFIX TUOH. 
[Br. III. Or. III. $ 127-1304 
सस्कृति मंत्रा 
सवय जयते 
मा 
व सरकार 
बार्तिकम् ॥ कर्व कर्मणोशव्यर्थयोरिति वक्तव्यम् । 
127. The affix khal' comes after the verbs bha' and 'kri', when the upapadas in composition with them are 'agent' and object' respectively, preceded by the words 
Ishad' &o. in combination with them, meaning hard or light'. 
Thus frEITT wa 'being enriched easily'; gaida wat 'to be enriched with difficulty'; स्वायकरो देवदत्तो भवता 'Devadatta can be made rich by you easily': 
Vart.--It should be stated that the agent and object in composition should be, as if they ended in the affix fea (V.4 50). Compare III. 2. 56 and III. 2,57. &. Therefore we do not have it here स्वादेयन भूयते or साढेवन सुभूयते ॥ 
बातो युच्॥ १८॥ पदानि ॥ प्रातः, युच, (ईषदुःसुषु, कृच्छा 
वृत्तिः ॥ कृच्छाकृच्छार्थेषु ईषदादिपपदेषु अाकारान्तेभ्यो धातुभ्यो युच् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
128. The affix 'yuch' comes after roots ending in long Sâ'. (when ishad', 'dur' land 'su' are combined as upapadas, in the sense of easily or with difficulty). 
The word ईषद् &c. are to be read into this subra, not so the words कर्तु कर्मण &c. This supersedes the affix खल. Thus ईषत्वानः सोमो भवता 'the soma juice can be lightly drunk by you'; दुष्पान: 'difficult to be drunk'; सुपान: 'easy to be drunk'. इपदानो गोर्भवता the cow can be given with ease by you'; दुर्दाना, सुहान: &c. 
छन्द सि गत्यर्थेभ्यः ॥ १२॥ पदानि ॥ छन्दसि, गति-मर्येभ्यः, (ईषदुःसुषु, कृच्छू कृच्छ्रार्थेषु, युच) ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ ईषदादिषु कृच्छाकृच्छा धूपपदेषु गत्यर्थेभ्यो धातुभ्यश्छन्दसि विषये गुच् प्रत्यय भवति। 
129 The affix 'yuch, comes in the Chhandas, after roots having the sense of 'to go', when the word 'Ishad' dc. meaning 'lightly' or 'with difficulty' are in composition with such 
verbs. 
This debars the affix खस्. Thus सूपसदनोऽग्निः । सूपसदनमन्तरिक्ष | See T.S. 7.5.20.1 
अन्येभ्योऽपि दृश्यते ॥ १३० ॥ पदानि ॥ अन्येभ्यः, अपि, दृश्यते, (गत्यर्येभ्यः, युच) ॥ 
वृत्तिः॥ श्रन्येभ्योऽपि धातुभ्यो गत्यर्थेभ्यश्छन्दसि विषये युच प्रत्ययो दृश्यते । बार्तिकस् ॥ भाषायां शासियुधिशिषिषिभ्यो युज् वक्तव्यः॥ 
130. The affix yuch' is seen to come in the Vedas, after verbs also, than those meaning 'to go'. 
GOVERNMENT 
ULTURE. 
STRY OF CUL 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
B 
RUI.CH. III. § 131.] 
PRESENT TENSE AFFIXES 
1772 
Thus gst 77 gang Tut; so also ya # garg gå in (Rig. Veda. X. 112. 8). 
au Vart.-In the modern Sanskrit, the affix 'yuch' comes after the verbs TIT, T, U, y, and yt; as gurga: 'Dubsâsanah'; gåtum: 'Duryodhanah';&GT, GGOT: and 99: 
adhtareata airalagt n P38 agitat 11 adatat with adana-na, ar, (à facafa) a 
वृत्तिः ॥ वर्तमानसनीपे भूते भविष्यति च वर्तमानाहातोर्वर्तमानवत्प्रत्यया वा भवन्ति । 
131. The affixes which are employed when the sense is that of present time, may, optionally in like manner, be emplo. yed when the sense is that of past or future time not remote from the present. 
The words cits and Tratat are the words with the same signification, the latter being derived from the first by adding the affix tue. This affix is added with a self-descriptive force, without making any modification in the meaning. We learn thus incidentally from Pâņini's using the word arou, that the affix sag also comes with a self-descriptive (svârtha) force, and the words ngaca &c. are thus formed. 
The affixes which begin with sâtra III. 2. 123 ( 78) and end with III. 8. 1 (STICU Uga,) are affixes which come in denoting the present time. These affixes come also with the force of the past or future time, when the sense is that the action has just taken place, or will immediately take place.. Thus, to the question er açats atfe'when didst thou come Devadatta', it may be replied, either #7111581f 'I come now'; or satsa alla i fare know me even to have come'; or 4*4*'I have now come'; or wtea1972: "I have come now. So also to the question et ea facafe 'when will you go Deva datta', it may be replied, either ** &# 'I go now' or vapaaa ai fate or eveatfr or warfen &c. 
The phrase "in like manner" (aa) has been employed to indicate com plete resemblance; that is to say, with whatever qualifications, the affixes have been enjoined to denote present time, namely, with whatever bases (ngfa), and words in compositions (3992), and restrictive significations (Tata), certain affixes have been enjoined ;--the same affixes under those conditions and those circumstances, only will denote also immediate future and recent pasta Thus TTT by rule III. 2. 128 comes after the prakritis s and to in forming present participles; this aflix, to denote past and future, must come only after and 2, and so on. Thus cars, #14, asfcco (III. 2. 136) &c Why do we say 'not remote from the present, ( 
w y ? This rule will not apply when distant future or distant past is intended to be expressed 
24 
URE 
N OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
VERNMENT ON 
OF INDIA 
TAE AFFIX LRIT. 
[Br. III. CH. III. $ 132, 1339 
सांत मंत्रान्य 
As TETET TE 'he went day before yesterday to Pataliputra'; ao 
fasafa 'he will go in a year'. 
One may say that "the word w can denote by itself nothing but the present tense, and it is because it occurs in a sentence in connection with other qualifying words, that it is made to denote any other time, and it is a well-known fact that a tenge which a sentence as a whole may indicate, has no bearing on the question as to what tense a verb must take, when we are preparing it for taking a grammatical tense ; and hence the present sâtra is superfluous”. To such we reply that the present sûrta and those that follow are not meant for those who know the proper idioms of Sanskrit; but for those only who do not know this. 
Dr. Bohtlingk translates this sätra thus:- Whatever is near to the present time, may be expressed as a present tense'. 
saraf waasa 1937 il arfer II HTETIT, wraa, , (facafa, aaaaaa) | 
कृतिः ॥ भविष्यति काले भाशंसायाँ गन्यमानायां पातोर्या भूतवत् प्रत्यया भवन्ति चकारा au 
132. The affixes which are employed, when the sense is that of the past time or of the present time, may, optionally, in like manner, be employed, after a root in denoting future time, when hope is expressed. 
The word 'optionally is understood here also. The phrase 'not remote from the present' is not valid in this aphorism. The word seat means the wish or expectation of getting an object not yet obtained, and consequently this can refer only to future dime. The force of is to draw the word 
a from the last sätra in this aphorism. This sâtra has been thus put by Mr. Apte:-" When hope is expressed in a conditional form, the Aorist ( ), the Present, or Simple Future is used in both the clauses to denote a future time. Thus उपाध्यायश्चेदगमत् or आगतs, or जागच्छति or जागमिति वा रते ध्याकरणमध्यागीमहि, or अधीतबन्त: or अधीस or मध्येज्यामरे if the teacher were to come, we should read gramntar'. 
This construction is possible only when the past tense is expressed by (Aorist); and pob by at or fee. For y denotes past time in general, while us and fac denoue particular forms of past time; (see III. 2. 110, 111 and 115). The phrase ware making an analogy with time in general, will not therefore, refer to fere or which refer to past time in special. 
Why gay 'whon hope is expressed'? Observe unfawufa 'he will come 
fanana nan asuran Peraya,uz, (TTF1RD), 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
AT OF INDIA 
BAIT.. CA. III. S 133-135.] 
PROHIBITION OF GIOOND FUTURE. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
TEET 
efTufegat T Shaf arat watea saaat va fer u 
133. When the word “kshipra' (quickly) or its synonym is in construction with the verb, the future affix, Lrit' is employed after the root, when "hope' is expressed in a conditional form. 
- This supersedes the last rule by which Aorist could also have been employed. By the present rule the Second Future only can be employed. Thus ভায়নষিদলানলিভানি (or ঘাঘথিয়ানঃ-Apts.) মি ব্যায্য ভালই 'if the teacher were to come soon, we shall soon learn grammar'. 
By force of the word aun in the aphorism, we take the synonyms of for also, such as s', ty, cafcat, &c. 
An objector might say, "the use of the word Te in the sû tra is redundant; for Future tense is the natural tense to be used, whenever hope is indicated. Sätra III, 3. 132 was merely an exception to this rule; so that the present sûntra re-enacting the general rule, ought to have been worded thus; - furuva 'not so when a word expressing quickness is employed'; for such a rule deber ring the past tenses given by III. 3. 132, would have, of necessity, given scope to the Future tense which is the natural tenge to express hope". To them we say, that there are two future tenses, ut and gc By specifying y we mean that ug should not be employed even where it would otherwise have come, such as in the following: 4 fundar to-morrow we shall learn soon'. 
sraigtaga fac 11 B u ugtfe n shtatet-qua, fers 11 वृत्तिः॥ आशंसा येनोच्यते तदाशंसावधन तस्मिन्नुपपदे धातोर्लिङ्मत्ययो भवति । 
134. The affix of the Potential is employed in de. noting Futurity, after a root, when the upapada in composition with it, is a word expressing 'hope'. 
This is also an apavada of rule III. 3. 132, and teaches the employ. nent of the Potential with a future force. Thus অবাঘা মুখীলাভী, মুম্বায়ক ও itu 'if the teacher will come, I hope, you will study with diligence'. This being a subsequent rule, will apply even when the words expressive of 'quick negs are in composition. Thus carta fuí ta 'I hope, you will learn soon'. 
So also, अवकल्पये शुक्तोऽधीयीय, &c. 
Tyaga forumaragat: 11 34 arfer T, aaa, faut-at-qatarat: a 
fu saanaa nuufafua wafa fenaar 
w 
a t 135. When constant continuance of action or a near Past or Future is meant, "the Past and Future are not denoted as taught in III. 2. 111 and III. 3. 15, through 
ARE 
GOVS 
GOVERNMENT 
Y OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
ENT OF INDIA 
PROHIBITION OF SECOND FUTURE. 
[Br. 111. CH. III, 
186. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
ex 
W PRE 
94173.17 
the Irr perfect and the Second Future, but through the Aorist and the First Future. 
The affixes € (Imperfect Past) and gg (First Future), have been or dained to come, when past time not belonging to the current day, and future time not belonging to the current day, are respectively indicated. The present sútra prohibits these two affixes. The word atrast: means 'performing an action with continuity'; an ia means 'not remoteness of time, immediate ness, without the intervention of anything of the same genus'. Thus iacuta भूशनन्नमदात् (not अददात) 'he gave food throughout his life'; भृशमन्नं दास्यति 'he will give much food'. यावज्जीवं पुत्रोध्यापिपत् throughout his life he taught', or यावज्जीवन wafatafa 'throughout his life he will teach'. In both these cases the Aorist and the Second Future are used instead of the Imperfect and the First Future. 
So also when recent past or immediate future is meant, the Aorist and the Second Future are employed, instead of the Imperfect and the First Future. This at teafaxirar, Tarung Tatatatran or ratly or iCT 'during the full-moon that has just past, the teacher consecrated the fire, or performed the soma-sacrifice or gave a cow'. Here the Aorist is for the Imperfect. T TAT 
$siteit, warg a ratatutega or a yoqa, or 1 grega 'on the next new-moon day, the teacher will perform the fire sacrifice or the soma-sacritice, or he will give a cow'. Here the Second Future is employed instead of the First Future. 
The double negative aan 'not non-to-day' implies the proper cor responding tenses which indicate adyatana. 
ufatufa waigiaga sarfema u 23€ 11tgifer u watafa, Waigua, acfera, (maaaaa) 
वृत्तिः ॥ भविष्यति काले मर्यादावचनेऽवरस्मिन् प्रविभागेऽनदातनवत् प्रत्ययविधिन भवति ॥ 
136. The Futurity is not expressed, as taught in III. 3. 15, through the Second Future, but through the First Future, when a statement is made of a limit on this (avara) side of another place. 
The phrase nana is valid in this sůtra also. The two conditions of the last aphorism, namely, 'continuity of action' and 'immediateness', how ever, do not apply here. Thus atsaucataract strefagare Haut similareasta mtuara, a 2 797*: 'on this side of the road from the city of Kosâmbi to the city of Pataliputra, there we will eat rice, and there we will drink saktu'. 
Why do we say 'in denoting future time'? Observe asteata spre Fraga DET ETT T1 TT nie 'on this side of the road that leads from the ciby of Kosambi to the city of Pataliputra, we read together &c. 
Why do we gay 'when signifying limib? Observe su vaftafe 
TURE - Gov 
TRY OF CULTO 
RNMENT OF 
DISININ 
OF INDIA 
BESTII. CH. IIl. S 137.] 
PROHIBITION OF THE FIRST FUTURE. 
FI 
GTR 
TUGUETET Eat asuttaga ERC, Tay grateHere the First Future is employed 
Why do we say 'when the word wat is in construction'? Observe uitstheart att riefagara ata 1ari TFETISTICÍ 71FTET &C. 
The examples of limit given in this aphorism, refer to local limit; in the subsequent sâtras examples will be given as to the limit of time and some difference will be observed therein. 
tafazi HITTA II 239 n agafa l T-fan , ,-:-1117,(facufa,aqifraga, atrenq,,79T Taa) 
वृत्तिः ॥ कालमर्यादा विभागे सत्ववरस्मिविभागे भविष्यति कालेज्नदातनवत् प्रत्ययविधिन भवति, न वेदहोरात्रसम्बन्धी विभागस्तेषां च विभागे प्रतिषेधः॥ 
137 The Second Future is employed instead of the First Future, in denoting Future time not belonging to the current day, when the word 'avara' is used together with a word expressing division of time, but not when it is a word giving the sense of 'day' or 'night'. 
The whole of the last sätra should be read into this. The difference between this and the last sûtra is, that sa tra III. 3. 136 referred both to the limit of space and time, while sûtra 1II. 3. 137 refers to the limit of time only: moreover with regard to time, there is exception with regard to the portions of day and night. The yoga-vibhága, the separation of this sûtra from the last, is for the sake of subsequent aphorisms. Thus atst TGTTTT 
CATATUETTTIIFTET SETETIT'in the month of Chaitra, the year after nexb, we shall read together'; aaret tegiat we shall eat rice then &c. 
This construction is, of course, only valid in denoting future time, otherwise not. Therefore not here : योऽयं वत्सरोऽतीतस्तस्य बदवरमाग्रहायण्यास्तन युक्ता s afe 'in the month of Chaitra, the year before last, we read together'; 
amethysaæfe'we ate together &c. 
Why do we say 'limit? Observe as facafe: 17 # T EACHT ग्रहायण्यास्वत्र युक्ता अध्येतास्महे-वनोदनं भोक्तास्महे । 
The limit must be 'on this side, é. e., at side'. With the st side limit, this rule will not apply. With the word or, this construction is optional. See the next sûtra. 
Why do we say 'when not divisions of day and night'? There are three sorts of counter.examples in this case; as, atst F# S rait aetaisai Ura: or atsa' Fiugit 
s a isatte: or 75 ficer wet TUT: UTETIT TEKT ga as grate: Here Lut or first future has been employed and nob the Second Future 
GOVERNME 
TURE 
GON 
Y OF CULTUA 
MINISTRY 
OF INDIA 
LRIN IN THE FUTURE. 
[BK. ILI CH. III. $ 138. 189. 
Ger 
सरकार 
atfer i faren pas ni agrfor u arfer, farat, (# fatufa, utgrava, Frafawia, YETITATTU) 11 
grasa maafarfa in afa sfatufa a cere afania faristea anafafaf wafa, 
aut afata: 0 
138. Optionally so, when a declaration is made with regard to that side of a limit of time, 
The whole of the last aphorism must be read into this: The sâtra will then stand thus: The Second and the First Futures are optionally both em. ployed in denoting future time, not belonging to the current day, instead of the First Future alone, when the word is used signifying a limit of time on that side of a fixed period, provided that this word does nob give the sense of day or night". 
This rule allows an option when the time refers to the ot side of a starting limit. Thus atst aut surat aea TT CTETUTATENT TT watum or speare e 'we will read together in the month of Chaitra, the year after next'. 
All the counter-examples given under the last aphorism, are also valid here by substituting the word instead of sat. 
fosfatas fakufaantal per a agafat #f5 fufa, T3, fat-sifayet, (facafa) 1 
वृत्तिः ॥ हेतु हेतु सतोलिकित्येवमादिकं सिको निमित्तं, तत्र लिङ् निगिरी भविष्यति बाले at wafa, farfauet TUTTI 
139. Where there is a reason for affixing 'Lin' the aflix 'Lrin' is employed in the Future tense when the non-comple tion of the action is to be understood. 
The words 'in denoting future time' are here. The reasons for the affix fare are such as cause and effect &c. mentioned in sûtras III. 3. 156 and 157 &c. The ye is called the conditional tenge. "It comes in the conditional sentences in which the non-performance of the action is implied, or where the falsity of the antecedent is implied as a matter of fact. It usually corresponds to the English Pluperfect Conditional, and must, in Sanskrit, be used in both the an tecedent and the consequent clauses", - Apte's Guide. 
Thus gafarmacut act greenfeeza'if there had been good rain, then there would have been plenty of food; or if there were to be good rain then there would be plenty of food'. It is implied that there was not good rain por consequent plenty: or that the occurrrence of good rain is dubious, and the desirable consequence equally so. 
So also bere, geam terme ve qataforma 'if he were to go by the right side, the carriage would not be upset'; of H E T Www GURE - GOVE 
VERNMENT 
ev OF CULTUR 
MINISTR 
EMU IJÉ Oh. III. § 140..) 
THE AFFIX ERIN. 
सायमदजयत 
**Pasta 'if he were to call Kamalaka (which he will not), the carriage would not be upset'; সীমাহন ফান্য ভুল যা স্বীথ যৰি you would eat food with clarified butter, if you (were to come to me (but you will not come)'. 
All these sentences refer to future time. The non-upsetting is a future contingency and is an effect the cause of which is the calling of Kamalaka.' The speaker--having apprehended the cause and effect, and having also learned from other sources that such an effect will not take place, that is to say, that Kamalaka will not be called, and the carriage will be upset-- has employed this conditional tense to express his idea. The whole sentence ufe 9767 &c. really gives this sense: --That both actions, the calling' and the non-upsetting', which are subjects of a future time, and which are related as cause and effect, will not be completed; that neither Kamalaka will be called, nor the impending fate averted from the carriage. The sû tra may also be thus rendered according to Professor Bohtlingk:-In a conditional sentence, which would require a Potential according to III. 3. 156, is used, if the sense is tbab of Future time, the Conditional Tense, when the action is not complete. 
và pul gyo il ucrfo n ma, , (fagfafa, as, क्रियाति पती॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ भूतेष काले लिनिमित्त नियातिपत्ती सत्यार लङ्प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
140, And (where there is a reason for affixing Lin', the affix 'Lrin' is to be employed, when the non-completion of the action is to be understood) if the sense is that of past time. 
The whole of the last aphorism is understood in this. The last sâtre enjoined 94 in the Future tense; this sûtra ordaing it in the Past, the Condi. tional tense having both these significations. The reasons for affixing for are given in sû tras III. 3. 152 and those that follow it. In sûtras III. 3. 141 and those that follow, as far as III. 3. 162, optional rules for the employment of the Conditional tense will be given. Thus:- TT wereya 1saraf 
: Grae funt iurif, feat gets facut, arsimua, m , n var vra: 
I saw your son, wandering about in search of food, I saw also a twice-born in search of a Brahmana (whom he would feast); if he (your son) had been seen by him (the twice- born), then he would have been fed; but as a matter of fact, he has not boen fed, he went by a different road'. 
The conditional sentence ofę u am gotswfavad aetsütuga is employed under circumstances set out above. It refers to a past bime, there 18 the relation of cause and effect existing, one being in search of food, and another in search of a guest to feed; and the action is not completed; boob taking different roads, did not come across each other. 
ORE - GOVE 
CULTURE 
NISTRY OF C 
ERNMENT OF 
OF INDIA 
THE AFFIX LAT. 
[BK. III. OH. 111. $ 141 142 
कृति मंत्रान 
770 
utarat: 1188p nustfa 11 at, si-a cìt:, (ya, fosfor fra, fautfagut) n 
वृत्तिः ॥ उताप्योः समर्थ योलिङिति वक्षयति प्रागेतस्मात् सूत्रावधेर्यदित ऊर्ध्वममुक्रमिख्यामा, तत्र भूते शिनिमित्त क्रियातिपत्तो लुङ्वा भवतीत्येतदधिकृतं वेदितव्यच ॥ 
111. From this point as far as sûtra III. 3, 152 (the whole of the following sentence is to be taken as exerting a governing influence on the sû tras that follow: where there is a reason for affixing 'Lin', the 'Lrii may be) optionally (emplo yed in denoting past time, when the non-completion of the action is to be understood). 
All the words within brackets must be supplied from the previous sûtras to complete the sense. This sûtra consists of three words ar 'optionally, 91 as far as' and sarat: (the sûtra III. 3 152). The words ar + + form at by the rules of conjunction. The particles in this aphorism has the force of limit exclusive and not that of limit inclusive. The optional use of the conditional tense will be illustrated in the following aphorisms, where, in addition to the special tenses to be employed by those rules, we may employ the conditional also under those very circumstances, in the alternative, pro vided that the non-completion of the action is understood. Prof. Bohtlingk translates this aphorism thus: " optionally so, in connection with up and safe, the conditional tense may be employed”. 
Teiutasfuttat: nguruugtfern etuf, at fascát:,n fee or tetap **#171218 feneattivaatafaticaat wafa u 
142. The affix Lat' is employed after a root, when it has in composition with it the words 'api' or jâtu', the sense implied by the sentence being that of 'censure'. 
The word of means 'censure', 'blame'. The atfix 70 has been enjoined to come with a present siguification, and would not have come to denote time in general, which, however, it does here, for here the Present tense is employed in preference to the tense required by the time of the action, which is totally excluded. Hence the present stra. 
Thus far art a fazla 'even your honor sacrifices (or sacri. Good or will sacrifice) to a Sadra'; wg as party rafa Tetat, st TRET possibly your honor sacrifices for a Sûdra'; the sense implied being that such conduct on the part of those men are blameworthy. 
In the present case, there being no occasion for the application of fas. of course, we cannob employ to denote the non-completion of the action 
RE 
GOVER 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
जयते 
III. $ 143, 144.] 
THE AFFIXES LIN AND LRIT. 
06 
So also she or sig utui zuufy Pie ! you abandon (or abandoned or will abndon) your wife'! 
faHtut Fafe fan puso ustre a fantur, ata, fès, 7, (TETIT, ae, atacant:) 
वृत्तिः ॥ कायंशब्द उपपदे गर्दायां गम्यमानायां धातोलिड्प्रत्ययो भवति, चकाराल्लन । 
143. The affix "Lii' as well as Lat' is optionally employed after a root, when the word 'katham' is in construction with it, and censure is implied. 
The word 'censure' is understood, and by we draw at from the previous søtra into this. By using the word 'optionally' in the aphorism, it is indicated that this rule does not exclude the application of the alternative teuses which would otherwise bave been required by the time of the action. It is not total exclusion like the last. Thus ** * T qua Troha or Tryfa or utofacata 'Indeed, how your honor can or will) sacrifice for a Sûdra'. 
So also 777 as part T rafai, 
y a or angiąTIT ! Here there is an occasion for the application of the Potential mood (TE; therefore when we intend to express non-completion of action in the past time, we can optionally employ the Conditional also (TE). As 71 
THUT TT sur facut or ac Iudeed, why did your honor (attempt to) sacrifice for that Sûdra (in vain). 
Under similar circumstances, in denoting future time, the Conditional (9) must invariably be employed (III. 3. 139); as, ya wafanu: 'why will you (attempt to give up your duty'. 
fepaa faseet u per ut azifa u mea, faset, (TT हायाम्, बोताप्योः) 
वृत्तिः॥ किंवृत्तउपपदे गर्दायां गम्यमानायां धातोलिलटी प्रत्ययो भवतः ॥ 
144. The affixes Lin' and 'Lfit' come after a verb, when the interrogative words like kim' dc, are in composition with it, and censrue is implied. 
Here also the Potential and the First Future are employed in preference to the time required by the action. 
The word censure' is understood here; not so, however, the word optionally'. This excludes all other tense-affixes. The repetition of the word fos in this sûtra, is for the sake of excluding we, whose anuvritti would also have run into this sutra, h.d we taken the anuvritti of free from the Isab sübra, instead of repeating it. Thus att ar ft fara, fafegefa who wili censure Hari? 
URE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
E CULTURE 
ASTRY OF CU 
NT OF INDIA 
THE AFFIXES LIN AND LRIT. 
Bk. III. CH. III.1 1450 
78 
.17 
जसरकार 
In the Past tense, when the non-completion of action is implied, we may optionally employ the Conditional (75); and in the Future tense, under similar circumstances, we must employ the Conditionl necessarily; as wat वृषलो यं तत्र भवानयायिज्यत 'who is the Sudra for whom your honor did sacrifice (in vain). This sûtra may be rendered thus also:-" In connection with an Interrogative Pronoun, when censure is implied, may be employed the Poten tial or the First Future". 
alam acarreansfa u poy ni ugifer o anfat-sy wati, fang, safa, (fragt, foreact, atarat:) n 
वृश्चिः ॥ किंवृत्तेऽकिंवृत्ते चोपएदेऽनवलपत्यमर्ष यो तोलिङ्लूटो प्रत्ययो भवतः ॥ 
145. When it is to be expressed that some body holds that something is not likely to take place, or is not to be tolerated, the Potential and the First Future are employed, even without the Interrogative Pronoun. 
The anuvšitti of the word 'censure' ceases The word wan fa: means 'impossibility, not to be believed'. The word sau: means 'not endorable or not to be tolerated'. This excludes all other tenses, the Potential and the 2nd. Future coming in preference to all other tenses required by the time of the action. In the Ivandva Compound 1972 , the word waaf: ought to have stood as second member of the compound as it contains larger number of syllables than the word 0 (II. 2. 14). The, non-complianoe with rule II. 2. 14. indicates that the rule of CU, I. 3. 10). does not apply here, which would otherwise have applied--the sense of the sutra then being that the Potential should be employed when the act is not likely to occur, and the 2nd. Future to be used when the act is not to be tolerated'. This is not, however, the interpretation wbich we should put upon the sâtra. 
Thus 12Ufa, auf, 7 gü, 29 WTTT # 99 799 or afava 'I do not believe, or think it possible or trust that your honor sacrifices (or sacrificed or will sacrifice) for a Sadra'. atfer a wara qual 
or wefatafar 'i can not tolerate that your honor does (did or will) crifice for a Sûdra'. 
When past time together with the non-completion of the action is to be expressed, we may optionally employ the Conditional (75), but necessarily 40, when Future time is to be expressed. Thus a 
7 17 99 waterfatur 'I do not believe that your honor did or will sacrifice for a Sûdra. 
fofkarang Ta en ugifera forferdea69, , ( W 
a iti, alatait:) त्तिः ॥ किंकिलास्त्यभूपपदेषु अवकृप्त्यमर्षयोर्धातोलुट्प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
URE 
GOV 
GOVERNMEN 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY O 
ENT OF INDIA 
1. BO 
C H. III. $ 146, 147.1 
THE AFFIX LIN. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
कृति मंत्रा 
रत सरकार 
C 
146. The affix "Lrit' (the First Future) is used after a root, when the words 'kimkila' or those having the sense of 'asti (he is) are in construction with it, (when the action is not likely to occur, or is not to be tolerated). 
The word within brackets must be supplied from the last aphorism. The whole word fins is to be taken as an upapada and not the word fx and fara separately. This word expresses anger. The words having the sense of asti are अस्ति , भवति and विदाते । This rule supersedes the Potential (लिङ्). Thus faifone or sufea or wafa or faaa 12 as watt qa gtsfatafa, - parfa, 'Is it possible that your honor will (or did or does) sacrifice for a Sûdra ? I can not believe or tolerate it'. 
As there is no occasion for fee here, we cannot have the Conditional (TT) required by rule III. 3. 141. 
Another example is न श्रद्धे न मर्षये वा किंकित त्वं शूदान्नस् भोयसे I do not believe or can tolerate that thou shouldst eat the food of Sudra'; sufea wafa faqa uyat fəsafe 'Is it possible that thou shouldst go to a female Sûdra'. 
Graagtas 11 999 li agra II Cita-gt:, fue , (qas radat: atalar:) 
TFT sig afgegaat Tih a ndaru twatufafaguèt Wafa वार्तिकर ॥ जातुयदोलिविधाने बदायदोरुपसंख्यानम् ॥ 
147. The affix Lin' comes after a root, the words 'jâtu' and 'yat' being in construction with it, when the sense is that the action is not believed to be likely, or is not to be tolerated. 
This excludes the First Future or 'Lșit'. a T Want To graag, or T**T# hart arat TT, TET, * auf 
Vart.-The words wit and fg should be enumerated along with the words wrr and यत् in this rule. As यदा or यदि वा स्वादशो हरि निन्देन्नाबकल्पयामि 
af 'neither do I think, nor do I tolerate that one like you should blas pheme Hari'. 
Here also when the non-completion of the action is implied, the Condi tional (Tt) is necessarily employed in denoting future time, and optionally 80 in denoting past time. As पातु, यत, यदा or यदि त्वायो हरि निन्देह निदिध्यत् 
Taratha, # ufaar 'neither do I believe, nor do I tolerate that one like you did attempt to blaspheme Hari'. ufę uf. Tegem utg7** ma sfa thiau yrgita fante if you had felt (which you clearly have not) the fra. grant smell of her breath, would you have had any liking for this lotus'? 
URE 
Govs 
GOVERNMEN 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
OF INDIA 
The AFFIX LIN. 
(BK. III. CH. III. $ 113.150. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
757TT:n pus magtfn 25a-at:, (anucundat:, 
fe: 0) 7999 yetadreceitam and # hufatia crear wafa u 
148. The affix Lin' comes after a root, the words fyachcha' and 'yatra' being in construction, when the sense is that the action is not believed to be likely, or not to be tolerated. 
This supersedes the First Future. The separation of this aphorism from the previous one, is for the sake of the rules that follow. The rule 1. 3. 10 does not also apply hore. Thus yeu TJ at rahat yat: 9, HuaThe 'I do not think, nor can I tolerate that thou wilt do so'. 
The Conditional (TE) will also be employed under its own proper con ditions as shown in the last aphorism. 
Titui un gyen açtfa TE91, 7, (95907t:, fag atatet:) 
efar: 85277 gautauroutufatia uzadt vafa gefart 740latuta u 
149. The affix "Lin' comes after a root in all tenses when the words 'yachcha' and 'yatra' are in composition with it, provided that censure is implied, 
The governing force of the words anavaklipti and amarsha ceases. This debars all other tense-affixes. Thas यच्च or यत्र तता भवान् वृषलं याजवेत् सुद्धी 98: Tagy:, TEPAT, Het galtzaaa 'we blaine you who being an opulent, old Brâhmaņa (who ought to know better) officiate as a sacrificial priest for a Sadra, O! It is improper' ! 
When the non-completion of the action is indicated, the Conditional tende must be employed under the rules given in III. 3. 139-140-141. As you or e tre fare: or afrętars, Tetat 'we censure that you should (have attemp ted to) blaspbeme Hari', &C. 
fetare ngyon agafar u fazta tî, 7, (45TTTT: foc, atatot:) fu 
e nfastara naama walfa sneh wafa 
150. The affix "Lin' comes in all tenses after a root, when used with the words 'yachcha' and 'yatra' and the sense implied is that of 'wonder. 
The word f or means 'wonder, astonishment, strangeness &c. This debars all the other tense-affixes. Thus asa a a a a a ar you this is a wonder that you should sacrifice for a Sûdra'. 
URE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
STRY OF CUL 
MINISTRY 
IT OF INDIA 
III. $ 151, 152.] 
THE AFFIX LIN. 
When the non-completion of the action is indicated, the Conditional is employed under the rules III. 3. 139, 140 and 141. Taus saadaa 45 or TS TO US Trva: or surfaca: 'it is a wonder that you should (have attempted to) perform a sacrifice for a Sadra'; s ataa tea or Ta za ug Farafta: 'it is a wonder that you should (hereafter attempt to make a Sadra perform a sacrifice. 
Na muut yg lugtf lll ga, ae, sya, (fazteta वृत्तिः ॥ शेषेउपपदे चित्रीकरणे गन्यमाने धातोलमत्ययो भवति वदिशब्दश्चेन्न प्रयुज्यते ॥ 
151, In all other cases, when wonder is impli ed by other words than 'yachcha' and 'yatra', the affix Lrit' is employed after a root, except when the word 'yadi' is used. 
In all other cases, that is to say, in cases where the words you or Tz are not employed, as well as where the word of is not used, the First Future is used in preference to the Potential. 
Thus siunt, fast, ugyan syut 7 valamittaufa, Trust 77# EIGTET TU sa 'it is wonderful, strange and astonishing that the blind man should ascend 
mountain, or a deaf person should read grammar'. 
Not so, when the word af is employed. Thus saat afer Orseola' wonder, if he study. 11i Tie yota 'a wonder, if he eat'. 
. As there is, in this case, no oecasion to employ the Potenial, we cannot employ the Conditional as directed in sûtras III. 3. 139, 140 and 141. 
Tata:ggetütfus ut 4 ll açta il 37-FCT:, dut:, 
लिङ॥ 
efeso ga sfogat: uagtatagnett wafan 
152. The affix 'Lii' comes after a verb in all tenses, when the words 'uta' and 'api', both having the same meaning, are in composition. 
This excludes all the other tense-affixes. The meaning which is com mon both to ua and safe is that of a r 'assuredly, certainly, surely, really, Thus ca gaia 'certainly he does'; suusata 'assuredly he does'; sartata 'cer. tainly he studies (will study &c.)'; w atata 'surely he studies &c. 
Why do we say 'when they mean certainly' ? Observe sa i efecufa will the stick fall? safe pri ureufa 'he shuts the door. Here wa is employed in asking questions, and are with y means 'bo shut. The option allowed by rule 
14. 3. 141. ceases. Hereafter the Conditional (5) must invariably be used even 10 indicating Past action, when action is not completed, and there is reason for the employment of fat (Potential). In indicating Futare time, of course, er 
URE 
GOVE. 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
NMENT OF IN 
OF INDIA 
THE AFFIX LIN. 
(BK III C. III. § 153 
TUR 
. 
सरकार 
must necessarily be employed as before. Henceforward therefore, no option is allowed bats must be employed where sûtras III. 3. 139 and 140 require it. 
rataças eftafa 1843 n vettura-vaca, safa, (fog) 
TFT cafera aufeaty, TT TT TT77, afer trasfer दुपपदे धातोर्लिङ्प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
153. The affix Lin' comes after a root, in expressing or making known of a wish, except when the word 'kachohit' is in composition with it. 
The phrase Fraga means the expression of one's wish. This debars all other tense-affixes. As matysita W17=Swart # soita Hart 'it is my wish that yeu will eat'. . 
Why do we say 'except the word for t'? Observe mieraitafa a wat wisatata for a fear i fortfay zai ysärin afsarataragraat # I hope thy mother is living, I hope thy father is living, I ask thee, O mârâvit ! (Parrot), I hope that Pârvari is living'. 
संभावनेलमिति चेत् सिद्धाप्रयोगे ॥ १५४ ॥ पदानि ॥ संभावने, a, afa, ha, fag-uuta ( fag) 
वृत्तिः ॥ संभावनं, क्रियासु योग्यताध्यवशानंशक्तिश्रद्धानन, तदिदानीमलमर्येन विशेष्यते, तच्चत् ta, satu faati Hafa, fagtutt rart faiat, fagtatantsautti, et fagi, यत्र गम्यते चानचासो प्रयुज्यते, तदीडशे सम्भावनोपाधिकाथै वर्तमानाडातर्लिङ् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
151. The affix 'Lin' is employed after a root, when the expectation (of a person or thing being able or competent to do or suffer the action denoted by the verb) is implied (or expressed by any other word used along with them) than 'alam. 
The word fag is understood here. the word #419 means supposi tion and expectation in the power or ability of another to perform any action. This word is here qualified by the sense of the word . The word sa means 'adequate', so that the above-mentioned it must be completed, full and true, i.e., realised. The phrase fogta a qualifies sai, and means 'if the non employment or omission of ai is valid or unobjectionable. When is that unob. jectionable, when the sense of sai is implied by the sentence, but this word itself is not used ? The Potential Mooil is employed when the expectation is of the kind above described. This rule debars all other tense-affixus. Thus safe wua focar farata 'I expect he will break even the hill with his head; ufq tu. 
ta I expect you will eat away even a drona of cooked food'. Why do we use the word 'competent to do'? Observe, fueuerat 
GOVERNMENS 
SURE - Gov 
ay OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
ENT OF INDIA 
. 
BR. HI CH. III. $ 155, 156.] 
et PETE 
545 
THE AFFIX LIN: 
aaga AT tratafa Thy I expect Devadatta who is living in a foreign country, will some day go back to bis country'. Here though 'expectation' is expressed the idea conveyed by ya, namely, the power to do something or adequacy to do is not present; and hence the Future is enıployed instead of the Potential. 
Why do we use the phrase fagtata 'when the actual result does not take place' ? Observe, sia caçat preae facafa 'Devadatta is in a posizion to kill the elephant, and he will carry it out also'. 
Under similar circumstances, in past and future times, when non-com pletion of action is indicated, the Conditional teuse ( ) must be invariably used in preference to every other tense. Professor Bohtlingk translates the sa tra thus: "The Potential is employed when it is expressed that someone is believed to be capable of doing something, pre-supposing that the actual per formance of the action does not take place'. 
विभाषा धातौ सम्भावनवचनेऽयदि ॥१५५ ॥ पदानि ॥ विभाषा, erat, paraa-aaa, ait, (wraa, sarafa, da, fagtata,fasn वृत्तिः ॥ सम्भावनवचने धातावुपपदे यच्छन्दवर्जिते धातोर्विभाषा लिङ् प्रत्ययो भवति 
155. The affix Lin' is optionally employed after a verb when it bas another verb which expresses 'expectation', in construction with it, but not so when the word 'yat' is used. 
The whole of the last sâtra qualifies this sûtra; the 'expectation' indi. cated here being of the kind mentioned in the last sûtra and governed by the conditions laid down in that aphorism. The word by which an 'expectation' is expressed such as संभावय शपि, or अपिनाम, is called संभावन वचन. This sutra enjoins an option where by the last a phorism, there would have been necessa rily the Potential Tense. Thus सम्भावयानि भुजीत or भोक्षयते भवान् I expect you will eat'; anexarfer ysaita or a watt I hope you will eat'; cü ysaita or Mua vart 'I believe you will eat'. But no option is allowed, and the Poten. tial must necessarily be used, when the Word u is employed, As Straatfir ug ysuita att 'I expect you will eat'. 
The sutra may also be rendered thus. "The Potential is not necessari ly employed where there is in connection with it a verb in the sense of 'to hold as possible', but not when he is employed." 
agegaafds n pye il ucifer za gaat:, fac u वृत्तिः ॥ हेतुभूते हेतुमति चाथै वर्तमानाद्धातोर्लिङ् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
156. The affix 'Lin' is optionally employed after both those verbs which express the condition and it consequence, 
URE • Gove 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY OF 
RNMENT OF 
OF INDIA 
THE AFFIXES LIN AND LOT. 
[BK. III. CA. III SU 
The word tg means 'cause or condition and for meana 'consequence or effect'. This supersedes all other tense-affixes; in other words, in condi tional sentences in which one statement is made to depend upon another as its reason or ground, the Potential is used in both the antecedent and the con sequent, otherwise called the protasis (a)and a podosis (@ge), the former con taining the condition or ground of argument, and the latter the conclusion based upon it'. Tous : una arara 7*7 paluaa 'if he go by the right side, the cart will not be upset'; of F *T Hig=UHET Tupac 'if he calls Ka malaka, the cart will not be upset'. Here 'going by the right side' is the protasis (CT), and 'not-upsetting the apodosis (@Tha). 
This is an optional use of the Potential; we inay use the Second Future in the alternative; thus दक्षिणेन चेद् यास्यति न सकटं पर्या भविष्यति 'if he goes by the south, the cart will not be upset'. 
The word fawrat 'optionally used in the sû tra immediately preceding is also understood here, 
Though the anuvritti of fas could have been taken from the last aphorisms, its repetition here is for the sake of pointing out the particular time, namely, the Future, in which the Potential should be employed. There fore it is not employed in the following sentences: yata and 'he kills, therefore he flies'; a fa afa wafa 'it rains, therefore he runs'. 
It, of course, follews that when the non-completion of the action is indicated, the Conditional (76) should be employed, under these very circum stances. See examples under stra III. 3. 139. 
ing facata in 249 ni agafa a seg, face wat in 
Tras regiu Travac vratrezalet négat wafa afTumagagfa a FTTI 
157 The affixes Lin' and 'Lot' are employed after a Toot, when another verb having the sense of wishing 'in construc tion with it. 
This supersedes all other tense-affiges. When words expressiug wish', such as TC, FT, &c., are used, the Potential or Imperative is used; thus serfst w or uiua yuta wart or m Wait I wish, desire or pray that your honor may eat. 
Vart. It is only when a desire is expressed that Potential or Im perative should be employed and not merely when the verb to wish' or its Bynonyms are in composition. Therefore the Potential or Imperative are not used here: et ta 'wishing, he does', 
The satra may be rendered thus: 'I connection with a verb in the Bonge of 'wishing the Potential or the Imperative may be employed'. URE - GOVE 
GOVERNMEN 
OF CULTURE 
MENT OF INOS 
THESमत्रा 
सत्यम्य मयते 
BRAMYIT, CA. III. § 158-160.] THE AFFIX LIN. 
समानक केषु तुमुन् ॥ १५८ ॥ पदानि ॥ समान-कत केषु, तुमुन्, 
तसरकार 
दृषिः ॥ इच्छार्थेषु धातुषु समानकर्तृ के पपदेषु धातास्तुमुन् प्रत्ययो भवति॥ 
158. The affix tumun comes after a verb, when another verb meaning 'to wish is in construction, provided that the agent of both the verbs is the same. 
Thus इच्छति, वष्टि or वांति भोक्तुम् 'he desires to eat'; कामयते भोक्तुसु 'he wishes to eat': farnir afar IT sefa desires to obtain for her husband the Pinaka-handed God Siva.' 
But why do we say 'when the agent of the Infinitive and the verb are the same? We can not say देवदतं भोक्तम् इच्छति यजदत्तः: "Yajnadatta wishes Devadatta to eat'; for here the agents of yer and are not the same. We 
must say, भुज्जानम् instead of भोक्तम् ।। 
Why do not we use it. here:-इच्छन् करोति 'wishing, he does'? Because the Infinitive is never found in such constructions. In other words, the Infinitive in ga is employed when both the verbs have the same agent. 
लिङ च ॥ १५ ॥ पदानि लिङ, च, (इच्छार्थेषु, समानकत केषु)। वृतिः॥पच्छायेषु समानकर्व केषु धातुपपदेषुधातलिङ्प्रत्यया भवित 
159. The affix 'Lin' is used after a verb when verbs meaning 'to wish' are in construction with it, and the agent of both the verbs is the same. 
Under similar conditions, with words implying wish", the Potential is used in the sense of the Infinitive; Thus ut gfa yaæfa 'he wishes that he may eat'; wutlaatsafa 'he wishes that he will read.' 
When the non-completion of the action is implied, the Conditional must be employed under rule III. 3. 139. 
इच्छार्थेभ्यो विभाषा वर्तमान ॥ १६॥ पदानि ॥ इच्छा-अभ्यः विभाषा, वर्तमाने, (लिङ्)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ इच्छायेभयो पातुभ्यो वर्तमाने फाले विभाषा तिप्रत्ययो भवति । 
160. After roots meaning to wish, the Potential (Lin) is optionally used in denoting the present time. 
This ordains fas where there would have been otherwise ce. Thus जति or इच्छेत् be wishes'; बष्टि or पश्यात् ; कामयते or कानयेत । 
विधिनिमन्त्रणामाणाधीष्ट संग्रन्नमार्थेनेषु लिङ् ॥१६॥पदानि । | विधि-निमंत्रण-भामंत्रण-अधीष्ट-संप्रश्न-प्रार्थमेषु, लिङ्॥ 
तिः ॥ विघ्यावार्येषु धातोर्लिङ्प्रत्ययेष भवति । 
TURE - GOU 
TRY OF CULTU 
MINISTRY 
VERNMENT OF 
OF INDIA 
TEE KRITYA AFFIXES. 
[BK. III. Or. III. $ 161, 162, 
सत्यमेव जयते 
28 
4.5173 
161. The affix 'Lin' comes after a verb, when the agent either commands, invites, permits, politely expresses a wish, asks questions, or prays. 
The word fafu: means 'commanding or directing a subordinate'; forgat 'means giving invitation'; 79T means 'expressing permission to do as one likes'; seits means 'to politely express a wish'; #AT means 'a question'; and surat means 'a prayer'. 
This excludes all other tense-a flixes. Thus: - (1) gata 'let him make the mat'; 7 mart 
s a 'you come to the village'; 
(2) and (3) TT Hate ysofta 'you will or may dine bere'; TT Taru sreta here you will or may sit'; 
(4) suutstreit wara Tu Tigha 'we wish that you should con descend to invitiate this boy'; 
(5) fu 7 ma nata sa ? 'Sir, what shall I learn, the Grammar or the Logic ? 
(6) wafa sie witáta 'this is my prayer that I should learn Grammar. 
site unge agita nit, 7, (fafar-fra -HT sute- -atatag n 
हुत्तिः ॥ लोदप्रत्ययो भवति धावोर्विघ्या दिध्वर्येषु । 
162. The affix 'Lot' also is employed after a root in the sense of commanding, &c. 
The Imperative Mood is employed also under the circumstances men tioned in the last aphorisra. The division of this aphorism from the last, is for the sake of subsequent sû tras in which the anuvritti of ste only ruas and not those of others. Thus: 
(1) arag att sitg 'make the mat'; IT SITEET I (2 and 3) 13 Wat teate 'there you are invited to, or you may, sib'. (4) gatuant surat 'you will teach, I hope, the son'. (5) for an a o sa 'Sir what shall I learn, the Veda or the Logic'? (6) wala na U 
w ego "this is my prayer that I may learn the Grammar, or that I may learn the Prosody'. 
nafareturny matn 03 nuenfer u fu-stfararo rey, FRIT,, ( site) 
y a , rurayanafacte, fafangae u काणा बसवर्येषु धातोः पत्यसंसका प्रत्यया भवति । 
URE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
STRY OF CUL 
ISINIW 
XT OF INDIA 
BE11. CA. III. $ 163, 164.] 
THE AFFIX LIN. 
1777 Tra 
163. The affixes called 'Kritya', and the affix "Lot' come also after verbs, in the sense of direction, granting per mission, and proper (particular) time. 
The word du means 'direction'; gaat: means “permission to do as one likes'; Saat means "arrival of appropriate occasion or time for the doing of an action'. The force of is to introduce the word att into this aphorism. Thus waar : sites, ass, fit or at 'you must, (may, or it is proper time for you to make the mat'. 
So instead of the Passive Potential Participles, for such the Kritya affix (III. 1. 95 &c.) may properly be called; we may have the Imperative also. Thus ita HE 'you must (may or it is the appropriate time to) make the mat'. 
It might be asked 'Why the kritya affixes are enjoined to come with the force of direction, permission &c'. They have been ordained most gener ically to come in denoting action in the Abstract (7a) and object (9) and a fortiori they will come in denoting the senses of direction, permission &c; for the latter are but a species of action. If you say that ate being ordained in these special senses, will on the principle, that an apavada or special rule ex cludes an utsarga or general rule within the jurisdiction of such special rule) exclude kritya affixes; we would reply, that keritya affixes will not be exclud ed, for the rule of non-uniform affixes (111. 1. 94) will apply'. 
To this objection we answer 'the special mention of the word kritya in this sûtra, indicates the existence of the following maxim : 
"The rule of non-uniform affixes (III. 1. 94) does not necessarily apply in all cases after sâtra III. 3, 94 treating of primary a fixes by which feminine nouns are formed'. 
Q.-What is the difference between the word forfe and ? Some say fare means a precept enjoining something for the first time; while a means mere direction'. 
faz pieautarde ni per uogifor a fac, , tea-it faa, (aufrai-utstag, fight, IT) 
fara efeq namaig tanigrammasinigratfe Heydt vafa WETTETUT प्राच 
164. The affix Lin' (as well as the 'Kritya' and 'Int') ia used (under similar circumstances in the sense of direction, per mission dc.) when the time is future by a Muhûrta (48 minutes or an Indian hour); (or the Potential may be used as well when it signifies at this very moment), 
CURE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
THE AFFIX TUMUN. 
(BK. III. OH II1. S 165-107 
407 सरकार 
The words #r &c. of the last sû tra must be read into this. The force of is to introduce the words at and site from the last sâtra, into this. Thus अव जुब टुपरि मुहर्तस्य भवता खलु काट कर्तव्यः, करणीयः, कार्य:, or भवान् खलु कटं कुर्यात (Potential) or its (Imperative). You may make the mat after an Indian hour'; or you must &c.', or 'it is proper time for you to make a mat just now'. Compare III.3.3. 9. 
स्मे लोट् ॥ १६५॥ पदानि ॥ स्मे, लोट् , (गैषातिसर्गप्राप्तकालेषु, अवनौहर्तिके) 
वृत्तिः॥ स्मशब्दउपपदे वादिषु गम्यमानेपूर्वमोहूर्ति केऽर्थे वर्तमामाद्धातो ट्प्रत्ययो भवति॥ 
165. The affix "Lot' comes after a verb, when the word 'sma' is in composition; (when the sense is that of direction' permission) &c. and referring to time future by a Muhurta... 
This supersedes the Potential (fax) and Potential Passive Participles (कृस्या). Thus ऊर्वच मुहूर्ताद् भवान् कटं करोतु म, ग्रामं गच्छतु स्म, माणवकमध्यापयतु म 'you (may, must or it is proper time to) make the mah, or go to the village, or teach Manavaka just now'. 
अधीष्टे च ॥ १६६ ॥ पदानि ॥ अधीष्टे, च, (स्मे, लोट ) ॥ अन्तिः ॥ स्म शब्दउपपदेऽधीष्टे गन्यमाने धातोर्लोट् प्रत्ययो भवति॥ 
166. And when 'wish' is meant (the Imperative may be used when the word 'sma' is in composition with the verb). 
The word et is understood here. The word aate has already beon explained iu sâtra III. 3. 161. This rule supersedes the Potential. Thus st कम राजन गायावक्षनध्यापय or अङ्ग म राजन्नग्निहोतं जुहुधि 'OIKing! I wish that you teach the boy or make Agnihotra sacrifice'. 
कालसमयवेलासु तुमुन् ॥ १६ ॥ पदानि ॥ काल-समय-वेलासु, 
इत्तिः ॥काशादिपपदेषु धातोस्तुनुन्प्रत्ययो भवति॥ 
167. The affix 'tumun' comes after a root, when the words 'kâla', 'samaya', and 'vela' (all meaning time) are in com position, 
Thus कालो भोक्तर 'time to eat'; समयः खलु स्नानमाणने सैबितु it is time to bathe end take food'; वेला भोक्तुस् 'time to eat'. In short, Infinitive in तुमन् may Deused with words meaning time'; as अवसरोऽयमात्मानं प्रवाचितुस् 'this is, indeed, the time to show myself. 
Why do not we use the Infinitive here? at uefa Marfar bime de 
ORE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY ON 
BOM ITIL, OH. III. $ 168-170.] 
THG AFFIX NINI. 
651 
सरचव जयते 
G A 
vouis all creatures'. The sense of direction &c', is understood in the stra; 80 when direction &c' is not meant, the Infinitive will not be used, 
Why do not we use the Infinitive here, Ateit r ea 'proper time to eat'? Because, by the rule of non-uniform affixes (III. 1. 94), we can use also the affis Eye (by which the word TETU is formed). As we have already said in sûntras III. 3. 168 that after sûtras III. 1, 113 and forward, namely, in other sûntras than those treating of feminine affixes, the rule of III. 1. 94 may be employed as an Anitya or a non-universal rule. 
15 f m a ni agita on fee, aff, ( 
T a ta) वृत्तिः ॥ यच्छन्द उपपदे काणादिषु धातोलिङ् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ - 
168. The affix 'Lin' comes after a root, when the word 'yad' is in composition, and the words 'kâla', do, occur in cons truction. 
This ordains the Potential and supersedes the Infinitive in tumun'. l'hus was, wert, aat ar TG HUTT ysuita 'it is time that your honor shonld take your meals'. 
8 mua 1 PEC I OGTfu, q-at, (fas ) afa: t artarse certa ar prat: naugh Suat wafeau 
169. The affixes 'kritya', and the affix trich' are added to a root, when fitness as regards the agent is implied, (as well as the affix lin'). 
The force of is to introduce the Potential (fax) into this, from the last. Thus भवता खलु पान्या बोडव्या वामा Or वहनीया, (kritya); or भवान् खलु कम्बया बोडा (trich); or TT at alt (lin) 'your honor is it to marry the girl'. 
Why specifically enjoin 'kritya' and 'trich' in the sense of fitness? They being enjoined universally, would a fortiori, be applied when fitness is to be de noted ? Because the fas being specially enjoined to denote fitness, and being an Apavada, would have debarred Icrítya and trich, which being universal affixes, would give way. Nor can we, to prevent this contingency, take shel. ter under rule III. 1. 94 of 'non-uniform affixes', for we have seen that that rule is not universaliy valid. 
pratyavaruutfuft: 1 990 n ugtfe II STAT44-571 Furat: fufa: a 
yfa: o yauwafafue grafafue eftara satru frucar wafers 
170. The affix nini' is added to the root in denoting agent, showing that there is some 'necessity' 
URE - GOVE 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
JERNMENT OS 
TOF INDIA 
The AFFIX LIN. 
[BK. III. CA. III. S 171, 112, 
TU 
2B 
or indebtedness or obligation on the part of the agent in connection with the action denoted by the verb. 
Thus aut na 'must be done'. The compounding here takes place by II. 1.72. So also ta frat 'ought to be given a hundred'; aga erit; furcen 
at &c. 
TUTTE I 999 n acufan :, 7, (Iatatatuat:) ofer: 1 T 479 SCULT 1917Trataifayautufatxaran 
171. The affixes called 'kritya' also come after a root when the sense to be indicated is that of 'necessity or obligation'. 
Thus waar u watt 4: maas, watas, mits or gren: 'you ought to make the mat'; waar u gradu, as, &c, 'you ought to pay a hundred'. 
Q. Where is the necessity of this aphorism? The kritya affixes, being enjoined universally without any limitation would, of course, come under these special circumstances also. 
A.--They would be excluded by the special affix fuff of the last satra, which comes especially with the force of 'necessity' and 'obligation'. 
Q.--Not so, for fefe eomes in denoting the agent' (waf, while kritya denotes the 'action' (Pita) and the 'object' (*); so their scope being different, how can one supersede the other? 
A-Well, to remove this objection, some say, thab kritya words like o, fu &. (III. 4. 68) which especially refer to the agent, are the proper ex. amples to be given under this aphorism; and not examples of kritya-formed words in general. 
The foc am 992 n uatror n strah, fere, , ( at:) fan afara wiequ faenaar wafa Tetra ITTO 
172. And the affix 'Lin as well as the “kritya' affixes come after a verb, when the sense is that of 'capa bility' 
The word 'capability' qualifies the root so that the sense of capability must be inherent in the root. Thus waar y act cours, agotas, ap: (kritya). or wure Tot 'you can carry the load. 
Though kritya-affixes would have come in this sense, even without any special rule, for they are general affixes, their special mention in this gübra is to guard against their being superseded by far, for rule III.1.94 is nob universally valid. 
sifafa fasetetu 999 u ugifer o farfa, fuziteta afu w fá foisa **tratfefe get weet waato 
COVERNMENT 
TURE - Gov 
OF CULTURA 
NT OF INDIA 
. BOTIT. CH. III. $ 173-175.] 
THE AFFIX LUN. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
173. The affixes 'Lia' and Lot' come after a verb by which 'benediction' is intended. 
The word stita means the wish to obtain an object which one desires, a blessing, an expression of one's good wishes. The foç here referred to is what is known as the state or the Benedictive tense. Its conjugation is differeno from the conjugation of the ordinary fax which we have called the Potential or Optative ; as faz panig waty or for sitag wart 'may you live long'! 
Why do we say 'when denoting benediction'. Observe for stafa aaaa Devadatta lives long'. 
क्तिचत्तौ च संज्ञायाम् ॥ १४ ॥ पदानि ॥ तिच-क्तो, च, संज्ञा , (sifafa) 
वृतिः ॥ शाशिषि विषये धातोः क्तिच तो प्रत्ययो भवतः सदायेन चेल्संवा गम्यते ॥ 
174. The affixes "ktieh' and 'kta' are employed after a root, when benediction is intended, provided that the whole word so formed, is an appellative, 
The affixes therefore, 'give the sense of the agent, with the addition that the action is simply the object of a prayer of some one who wishes that that may be the action of that agent, the sense being simply appellative.' Thus afra:=agara 'a weaver' (lit. may he weave); arias or afa:=sgata (VI.4.45) wealth or gift'; y fas=vaata 'success; for=yata 'respect'. These are exam ples of words formed by the affix fani Of words formed by in this senge, we have açm=earca aug: 'Devadatta (lit. may the Gods give him). Though the affix has already once been generally ordained, its repetition here is to prevent its being superseded by fe. They of my is qualifying only, dis tinguishing it from fem &c. and is useful in sûtra VI. 4. 39. 
#1f6 gen 294 nugtfor l ife, I grasa gate Heat wafa 
175. The affix 'Lun comes after a verb when the word 'mân' is used in connection with it. 
This sets aside all other tense-affixes. As a rata 'let him not do WTY te 'led him not take'. 
How have we then the Imperative and the Future tenses in the follow irentence instead of the Aorisb ? मा भवतु तस्य पापं ना भविष्यति। This sentence i against good usage. Or, we may explain it by saying that there is another 
which has not the indicatory and with that 7, other tenses may be used. he augment is elided after the prohibitive particle wr, by VI. 4.74 
MRE 
GOV 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY ON 
VERNMENT ON 
OF INDIA 
THE ATFIX LAN. 
[BB. III. CH. III. $ 176. 
. 
सावदायत 
सरकार 
स्मोत्तरे लड्च ॥ १६ ॥ पदानि ॥ स्म, उत्तरे, लङ्च, (माङि, 
वृत्तिः ॥ शब्दोत्तरेसायुएपदे धातोर्लङ् प्रत्ययो भवति चकाराल्लुङ् ॥ 
176. When the word 'mân' is followed by 'sma', the affix "Lai' as well as Lui' may be employed after a verbal root. 
By a we introduce e into the aphorism. Thus tew atta or stutt let him not make'; भास्म हरत र हात 'let him not take'. 
URE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
ENT OF INDIA 
संस्कृति मंत्राल 
सत्यमेव जयते 
ल सरकार 
शोइन agatisrar ugd: ure: 1 
BOOK THIRD. CHAPTER VI. 
laaaah aaaT: n p nocifer il TIG-Fural, NETUT: 1 
fall preagfai gra-ut wiga-qrus, faufaeumta, afer afa sautem अपि प्रत्यया साधवो भवन्ति ॥ 
1. When there is a syntactical relation between the senses of the verbs, the affixes are valid, even in denoting time other than that for which they have been specifically enjoined. 
The above sû tra is thus translated by Professor Bohtlingk-"Words formed with affixes stand, (in reference to the time) in closer relation to the verb (with which they are allied)". Thus III. 2. 85 has taught that words like sufragt utfors have a past significance, e. e., they denote a person who has already performed the ceremony of Agrishotoma. According to the present sâtra, in spite of this past significance, inherent in the word, one may use this word with a future tense, whereby it is reduced to a future-denoting word. Thus safarganet går afwat means 'to him a son will be born who will perform the said Agnishtona sacrifice'. 
The above is not a literal translation but rather an adaptation. The literal translation will be somethieg like this. "Affixes are employed in de. noting relation (av) between the seuses of verbs". The word uiga do is a Genitive Compound meaning 'relation of root'. The word 73 'root' is figure atively used for virus 'sense of root'; so that the above compound means 're lation of the senses of roots'. In other words, the relation between the roots should be that of qualifier and the qualified. When there exists such a rela tion between the senses of two verbs, namely, that of qualifier and the thing qualified, then the affizes may be employed in denoting other times than that specifioally ordained for them. In other words, to quote from the Guide to Pênini: "It is to be observed' that when primitive words are joined with verbs so as to qualify them, the time of the verbs being mainly the time that con trols the sentence, any time denoted by the primitive affixes, by which the former words have been formed will be subordinate to and regulated by, but need not correspond to the time ef the verbs, so far as the form of those words is concerned." 
27 
URE - GOVE 
Y OF CULTUR 
ANMENT OF 
AMO 
OF INDIA 
THE AFFIX LOT. 
[BK. III. CE. NOS 
सरवमया मयत 
तसरकार 
(Thus ন ম বয়মে ‘living there, he saw'; একি লীলাভ সং আদিল 'to him a son will be born, a performer of the Agnishtoma sacrifice'; gas he: at mfwat 'he will be to-morrow maker of the mat'; *77faguatata o 
Here, though the time of the action of living denoted by an is present, (III. 2. 124), this action is present only in relation to the action of seeing, and though because the latter action is past, the former action also is past with refer ence to the speaker or writer, this circumstance does not affect the form of at, which therefore may ramain as it is. In other words, affixes are related direct ly to the root, and not to the whole sentence'. 
Similarly the word wongtutet is formed by an affix (III. 2. 85) denoting past time, while the word w at is in the Future tense. Now, this link ing together of a word in the Past tense with a word in the future is a valid usage. Here the time of the qualified verb wfaat does not affect the special time of the qualifier Agnishtomayají. 
Q. Why has the word atau been repeated in this sûtra, when it was moderstood in this form III. 1. 1 ? Ans.---The repetition for the sake of indica ting that affixes which are not ordained to come after roots (717), but which are enjoined to come after nouns &c. such as Taddhita affixes, are even valid in other tenses than those in which they have been specifically enjoined when related to a verb. Thus t eta 'he was possessed of a cow'; TT mfuar 'he will be qossessed of a cow. Here the Taddhita affix #TT is added to the noun ar 'cow', with a present sigdification (V. 2. 94), the word 140 meaning 'who has cows' or 'in which there are cows. This word me, however, is related and validly so, to the words rate and fear-one in the past tense and the other in the Future. 
क्रियासमभिहारे लोट् लोटो हिस्वी वा चतध्वमः ॥२॥ पदानि॥ fakat- AETT, e, alet, fe-eit, 1, , epit:, (1970) 
per afwerfafupi arataigralafanzutt Wafa gagiê, HT101 अपवादः तस्य च लोटो हिरवा इत्येताबादेशी भवतः, सध्यासुभाबिनस्तु वा भवतः॥ 
2. When the (frequency or) repetition of an action is indicated, the affix 'Lot' is added to the root, and the verb is repeated. And the affixes 'hi' and 'sva', or the affixes 'ta' and dhyam' are the substitutes of Lot'. 
Professor Bohtlingk translates this as follows: "When the repetition of an action is expressed, the Imperative is used, and though the second person singular is used, it may also stand for the second person plural," 
The phrase game of the last sâtra is understood here also. The fre quency or repetition of an action is called wwfacts This word qualifies the henge of the original. In other words, "wben the sense of frequency &c. is unger. REGOVE 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
MENT OF IN 
EM III. CH. IV. & 3.] 
THC AFFIX LOT. 
SI 
सत्यमद जयते 
slood in connection with the action, this sense not being included in that of the verb, as it may be in the case of a verb from frequentative roots." 
This Imperative mood is employed in all Tenses and Persons in connec. tion with all mood. But this peculiar use of the Imperative is confined to the 2nd. person singular and plural Parasmaipada(ft and a,;and 2nd. person singular and plural Atmanepada (eu and sat). In other words, "the Imperative second person (Parasmaipada and Atmanepada) is repeated, though the subject of the main verb be different any the verb be in and tense." Thus gatit anti 
at gaifa 'he cuts repeatedly', as if some one was always calling out to him 'cut thou, cut thou'. yatfe gatetata cat gras or a goffa 'they cut often and often'. So also लुनीहि लुनीहीत्येव त्वं लुनासि, युवास लुनीथः or यूयं लुनीय thou or you two or you all cut repeatedly' as if some one was calling out to you 'cut you, cut you'. 
So also gaita gada go gate, we af, starala &c. 'you cut I cut, he has cut repeatedly', as if some one was calling out to us 'cut ye, cat ye'. Similarly with Atmanepada roots; as witcarattaaaaa, at wataa. staa &c, 'he or they study hard' as if some one was calling out to them study 
thou, study thou'. 
So also putea fereafreda y te &c. Similarly in every tense, mood and person; as, sertsariteazuargata, wiatual, ata 
The Intensive verbs in Ts also have this meaning of frequency, but there the verb is not repeated, as the sense of frequency there is inherent in the Verb; in this case we must repeat the verb to express frequency. See VIII. 1.4. 
This use of the Imperative is not found in Literature (Bohtlingk), but in Marathi. 
समुच्चयेन्यतरस्याम् ॥३॥ पदानि ॥ समुच्चये, अन्यतरस्याम्, (ante, ritet, ferat, at, gsart:) 
afa: u 19 faharaanigaranteaf site waar wafer, acu eat freut. यादेवी भवतः ॥ 
3. The affix "Lot' is similarly added to the root op tionally, when several themes follow one after another. 
In this case also the terminations of the second person singular and plural Atmanepada and Parasmaipada are employed, namely, ft, ea, or o and Eau Thus WIEGWE THE USINE ETT afpumatatu afa or Taca, or rasta 
Similar examples can be formed as is in the last aphorism; only the Im perative is not donbled as in the last case. 
Similarly reiste, Ta tta, foartacuata, or yaranara or rasvaa 'be or they two or they all learn, learning Prosody, learning Grammar, learning Nirukta'. 
This being an optional rule, we have these formy alco; sul t a, 
GURE - Gov 
GOVERNMENT 
INISTRY OF 
ENT OF INDIA 
LUNLAN AND LIT 
IBK III. OE. IKI.6. 
सावजयते 
छन्दोऽधीते, निवतामची, इत्येवायणधीने, मावधीयावे, इनेऊधीयते । बन्दोधीने, व्याकरणनधीचे, निक्षतामधीबे, इत्येव त्वमधीये, युवामाधीयाचे, सूयनधीध्ये। छन्दोघीये व्याकरणमधीये, नियतमधीयाल्ये वाहनधीये, भावागधीनी, वशमधीमहे ।। 
यथाविध्यनुप्रयोगः पूर्वस्मिन् ॥४॥पटानि॥पथा-विधि, अनु प्रयोगः, पूर्वस्मिन् ॥ 
पुतिः ॥ पूर्वस्मिन् लोविधाने धयाविध्या प्रयोग भवति॥ 
4. In the first case (comprised under sâtra III. 4. 2) the same verb must be used in the subsequent clause, as the verb which was put in the Imperative mood. 
The examples have already been given under sutra III. 4.2. we cannot say atfe t egatt farfer; we must use a verb from the root 'to cat Such as gafa, &c. So also sortatetta takes ita only after it and not asynonymous verb like पठति &c. 
समुच्चये सामान्यवचनस्य॥५॥ पदानि। समुच्चये, सामान्य-व अमस्य॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ द्वितीये सो विधाने सगुच्चये सामान्यावाचस्य पातारनुप्रयोग कर्तव्यः ॥ 
5. In the second case (III. 4. 3) where many actions are spoken of together, the verb that is made to follow, should be such as has the sense common to all those verbs. 
Thus जोदनं भुङ्क्षव, सम्पिव, घाना खादेत्येवायमभ्यवहरति 'he takes his meals, onting rice, drinking saktu, and tasting fried corn'. Here the verb शभ्यवहरति bas a sense common to all the verbs in the Imperative mood. The object of taking the second verb, having the senses common to all the antecedeno verbs, is to prevent the repetition of all the previous ones. In the secular vernacular, the brevity, however, is often not approved. 
छन्दसि लुडललिटः, ॥६॥ पदानि । छन्दसि, लुङ-लङ-विदः, (धातुसमतान्ये) ॥ 
प्तिः ॥बन्दसि विषये धातुसम्बलो शपु कालेषु लु शिष्टः प्रत्यया भवन्ति । 
6. In the Vedas, the Aorist, Imperfect and Perfect are optionally employed in all tenses, in relation to verbs. 
The words चातुसमाध and अन्यतरस्यास् are understood here also. By saying optionally, other tense-affixes may be similarly employed. 
Thus देवी देवेभिरागम (Rig.I.1.5.) 'OGod Agni! come hither with the GadaH re the Aorisbaरगमत् has the force of the Imperative. ये भूतस्य प्रवेवर 
TURE - GO 
OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY ON 
VERNMENTO 
[ 
III. OF. IV. $ 7-9) 
THE AFFIXES SE &o. 
सरचमवजयत 
संस्कृतिमा 
4.भारता 
सरकार 
8 utsat : 'I make salutation &c. &c'. (Rig. X. 85. 17) Here we is Aorist (राजू) and has the sense of the Presents 
So also अग्निमदा होतारमवणीतायं यजमान Here is used instead of लद । So also नया मणार अद्य नियते । Here सिट is nsed instead of खट। 
लिङर्थे लेट् ॥ ७॥ पदानि ॥ लिङथे, लेट, (छन्दसि, अन्यतर स्याम्॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ लिये बन्न लिङ्ग विधीयते, विध्यादिहेंतु हेतुनतोलिङित्ये वनादिस्त छन्दति विवगे उच्चतरस्यां लेट् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
7. The affix "Let' is optionally employed in the Vedas, wherever the Potential can be used.. 
Thus in the sense of 'command' &c., at may be employed instead of fax. This is called the Vedic Subjunctive and is peeuliar to the Vedas only. Thus जाषिषत (Rig. II, 35. 1) 'may he make us beautiful', बारिषत (Rig. I. 25. 12) may he increase'. warfa fagyt (Rig, VII. 25. 1) 'may the thunder. bolt fall'. arfa (Rig.v.37.5) 'may he become. So also नन्दिपत्, नेता, नेषत्, तक्षिषत, उदधिं च्यावयाति। 
उपसवादामेडूयोश्च ॥८॥ पदानि ॥ उपसंवाद-माशंकयोः प, (बंदसि, लेट) 
वृत्तिः॥ उपसंवादे शाशंकायां च गन्यमानायां छन्दसि विषवे सेट् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
8. Where a contingent promise (a reciprocal agree ment), or apprehension is implied, the affix Let' is employed after a root, in the Chhandas Literature. 
The word sweat means 'reciprocal agreement, contracting to do'. Thus यदि ने भवानिदं कुर्याद् अहमपि भवत इदं दास्यामि If you do this for me, I will give this to you'. Agreements like these are ealled उपसम्वाद ; while guessing or in ferring the result from a cause is called TUET ‘apprehension or fear'. 
Thus हमेव पशूनानीमै । मदना व वो ग्रहा गृह मन्तै ॥ मद्देवत्यान्येव वा पापाण्यु च्यात ॥ नेग्जिमायन्यो (or नेब्जिलायन्स्यो) नरकं पनाम ॥ (Nir, I. 11. Bohtlingk)=जियापरीन परकपास शाशंक्यते॥ All the above examples have the sense of Potential, but the Subjunctive (Let) must be employed necessarily in these senses and not option ally, which anuvritti was understood in the last sûtra. 
तुमथै सेनसेशसेनक्सकसेनध्य मध्यनकाध्यकध्ये नशध्यन्तवै तवेङ-तवेनः ॥॥ पदानि ॥ तुमथै, से-जैन-बसे-असेन-कसै-कसैन-मध्य-साध्यैन् कध्ये बाध्यैन-शध्ये शध्यन् तवै-तवेङ-तवेगः, (छन्दसि)॥ 
तुमोऽस्तुनः, तत्र कन्दसि विषये घातक सयादयः प्रत्यया भवन्ति । 
9. In the Vedas the following affixes come 
FURE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
KRY OF CULTI 
MINISTRY 
XT OF INDIA 
THE AFFIXES LIN AND ISAYAI. 
(Bk. IIL:CH. IV. 
10. 
"after roots with the force of the affix 'tumun', viz:- 'se', 'sen', fase', 'asen', 'kse', kasen', adhyai', 'adhayin', 'kadhyai', 'kadhyain', 
sadh yai', sadhyain', 'tavai', 'taven' and 'taven'. 
In the Vedic literature the Indinitive is for ined by the above 15 affixes. These, when stripped of their indicatory letters, will be found to consist of the followiug five affixes :- 1) =ā, T and a # (2) = yet and s o (3) vasa, ya, mea, mai, ma and veit # (4) ad u (5) aa=aac and aati 
The difference in the affixes is made by four indicatory letters, viz. TC, and i The forces of , T and have already been explained ; the indicatory makes the word take the udatta accent on the first syllable (VI. 1. 197). Thus ais acute (III. l. 3; E has acute on the first syllable of the word (VI. 1. 197); we has accent of the affix (III. 1. 3); sway throws the accent on the first syllable of the word; the indicatory # makes the numbers 11 and 12 Sârvadhâtuka, and the root takes the proper Vikaraṇa of its class before these affixes; while before aa, the acute falls both on the arst syllable and the last syllable simultaneously (VI. 1. 200, VI. 2. 51). 
Before going to give examples of these affixes, let us explain what is meant by the 'the sense of the affix T'I The word is here cquivalent to #ta or 'action"; for the pratyayas or affixes, to which no meaning has been as signed in grammar, convey the meaning of the bases to which they are added. Thus no special meaning having been attached to Tut, it will convey the mean. ing of the root to which is is added, i. e., it will denote the 'action of the verb, or Infinitive mood. (1) - 7:0 (2) 7-aaraa' TUTTT Rig. V. 66. 3). (3 and 4) i and - Tastatata (Rig. III. 36. 10). So also mà U17 utaa' (Rig. X.57.4), With at the word will be ta'ao (5) - 1 (6) 1- faaf (Rig. V.59.3). It has not the fara accent (VI. 1. 197) which would huve given us fwa (7 and 8) qui, sur a TTER (9) --*avait sigasi (Rig. VI 60. 13). (10) 450-(11 and 12) 
# T 
r g (Rig. IV. 27.5); the accent however is on fa 5 (Rig. VI. 60.13). (13) aa-sfato ad (14) mag-a aral sa wife wa Rig. X. 184, 3) (15) aara (Rig I. 46. 7); a (Rig I. 85. 9), ha e 
û efeca sa faca u pe noeifar u så, afica, saferca, (Taal, sfe) u 
fue afect feaa wer fauteua wafe facin 
10. The words 'prayai', 'rohishyai' and 'avyathishyai' are irregular Vedic Infinitives. 
URE - GOVE 
OF CULTURE 
QNMENT OF IN 
LSINI. 
ByII. CH. IV. $ 11-14.] 
THE AFFIXES TAVAI &C. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
निय भारत 
सरकार 
Thus (1) प्रवै देवेभ्यो मही (Rig. I. 142.6); प्र+या+कै= प्रथेप्रयातुन(2) पानी षधीनां रोहिये । रह - इज्य = रोहिये = रोहणाय । (3) + व्यथ् + इज्य = अव्यथिज्य = शव्यथनाय । 
दृशे विख्ये च ॥११॥ पदानि॥ दृशे, विख्ये, च, (तुमर्थे, छन्दसि)। वृत्तिः॥ द्वशे विख्ये इत्येतो बन्दसि पिपात्येते ॥ 
11. The words drise' and vikhye' are ano malous Vedio Infinitives. 
Thus दृशे विश्वाय सूर्यस (Rig. I. 50. 1) = द्रष्टुम् । विख्येत्वा हरामि = विख्यातुम् । 
शकि णमुलकमुलौ ॥१२॥ यदानि ॥ शकि, णमुल-कमुली, (तुमथै, छन्दसि)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ शनोती धातावुपपदे बन्दास विषये तुमथै गलकाबुल इत्येतो प्रत्ययो भवतः ॥ 
12. The affixes namul' and 'kamul' are added to roots in the Chhandas to form Infinitives, when they are governed by the verb 'sak' (to be able). 
Of the affix Ty the real affix is se; the letter T causes vriddhi (VII. 2. 115 ; and a regulates the accent (VI. 1. 193). So also of कमुख, the letter prevents guna and vriddhi substitution (I. 1. 5). 
*Thus अग्निं वै देवा विभाजं नाशक्नुवन् 'the Gods were not able to divide Agni विभज+मुल = विभाज = विभक्तुम । So also अपलुपं नाशकन्, instead of अपलोतम् । 
ईश्वरे तोडनकसुनौ ॥ १३ ॥ पदानि ॥ ईश्वरे, तोसुन्-कसुनौ, (तुमर्थे, छन्दगि) 
वृत्तिः ॥ ईश्वरशब्द उपपदे हन्दसि विषये तुमय धातोस्तोबुन्कसुम्प्रत्ययो भवतः । 
18, The affixes 'tosun'and kasun' are added to roots in the Chbandas, to form Infinitives, when the words 'iśvara' is in composition. 
Thus ईश्वरोऽभिचरिती-शभिचरितुर । ईश्वरो बिलिख: विलिखितुस । ईश्वरो वितृहः विदितुम् । 
कृत्यार्थ तवैकेन्केन्यत्वनः ॥ १४॥पदामि ॥ कृत्य-श्रथै, तवै-केन केन्य-त्वनः, (छन्दसि)। 
वृत्तिः कल्याणामों भाषणार्मणो, बस्मिन् कृत्याचे छन्दति विषये तवैकैन्न्य त्या हत्ये. से प्रत्यया भवन्ति ॥ 
14. The affixes tavai,' ken, kenya' and tvan are added to roots in the Chhandas, in the sense of the Kritya affixes.' 
The force of kritya affixes is to denote'action' (wa) and 'object' (**). Thus शम्नेत - मतव्यतपरिधाव= परिधातव्यन; गाणगानागादिसा दिहशेवयः (Rig. 
ARE 
GOVE 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
WENT OF IND 
OF INDIA 
THE AFFIX KABUN. 
[BK. IV. CA. III. $15 
सत्यमेव जयते 
सरकार 
1.146.5)दिशितव्यस; शुषेण्यः = शुभूषितव्यम् ; पात्वंम् ; (Rig. I. 10.2) कर्तव्यमा 
The affix aât was mentioned in sâtra III. 4. 9 also; there it has the force of the Infinitive, and here that of the Passive Participle, For its accept, see VI.1.200; 2.51. 
अवचक्षे च ॥ १५॥ पदानि ॥ प्रवचने, च, (कृत्याथै, छन्दसि)। त्तिः ॥ श्रवपूर्वाञ्चधिक समप्रत्ययो निपात्यते ॥ 
15. The word 'avachakshe' is an anomalous passive participle in the Vedas. 
Thus रिपुणा नावषो (Rig. IV. 58.5) = गावख्यातव्याचा जय+च+रण शवयों। The sûtra II. 4.54 is not applied here. 
भावलक्षणे स्थणकृञ्वादिचरिङसनिजनिभ्यस्तोसुन् ॥१६॥पदानि।। भाव-लक्षणे,स्या-इण-कृज-वदि-चरि-हु-तनि-जनिभ्यः,तोमुन, (कृत्यार्थे,छन्दसि)। 
वृत्तिः ॥ भावो लक्ष्यते येन तस्मिन्न वर्तमानेभ्य स्थादिभ्यो पातुभ्यश्वन्दसि विषये नये मोजुन प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
16. The affix tosun' comes in the Vedas after the following verbs, when mere name of the action is indicated, viz: 
sth. (to stand), 'in' (to go), krin' (to make), vad '(to speak), $char(to walk), 'hu' (to sacrifice),' tam' (to grow tired) and 'jan' (to produce) 
These are also Infinitives. The phrase regraf is not to be read into this sutra. The word भावलमण 'qualifies the sense of the root (भावो पापयते येग). Thus, स्था-सा संस्थातोर्वेदा सीदन्ति = आसमाप्तः सीदन्तिा इण-पुरा सूर्यसयोदेतेराधेयः। कृज - पुरा बस्वानामपाको बद-पुरा प्रवदितोरनी ग्रहोवव्यम् । घर-पुरा प्रचरितीराग्नीधीये होतव्या (Gopatha. Brahmana II. 2. 10) --सा होतोरणमस्तिष्टति सत्-शा समितोरासत (Taith. Br.I.4.4.2) जन्-मा विजानितो सम्भवाम Taitt. S. II 51.5). 
सृपितृदोः कसन् ॥ १७ ॥ पदानि ॥ सुपि-तृदोः, कबुन्, (तुमर्य, (छन्दसि)॥ 
उत्तिः ॥ सृपितृदो स्वोर्भावलोऽर्थे वर्तनागयोश्चन्दसिविषये तुमय कसुरमत्ययो भवति । 
17. In the Vedas, the affix kasun ' comes afaer the Terbesrip' (to creep) and 'trid' (to injure), in the sense of Infinitives indicating name of action. 
Thus विसृपः । पुरागरस्य धिसूचः (Yaj. I. 28.); शातूद : (Rig: VIII. 1. 12); पुरा मातृदा (Rig. VIII. 1. 12). These words are Indeclinable by I. 1.40. 
अलंखल्बोः प्रतिषेधयोः प्राचांकत्वा ॥१८॥ पदामि।। अल-खल्वो प्रतिषेधयोः, प्राचां, कृत्वा ।। 
URE - GOVE 
GOVERNMENT 
RY OF CULTU 
NT OF INDIA 
V. B 
IJ.CH. IV. 
18, 19.] 
THE AFFIX KTVA. 
ERICS 
वृत्तिः॥ अल खलु इत्येतया प्रतिषेधवाचिनोरुपपदयोर्धातो वा प्रत्यया भवति ॥ 
..18. According to the opinion of the Eastern Gram marians, the affix ktva' comes after a verb, when there are in combination with it, the words alam ' and 'Khalu,' expressing the sense of prohibition. 
The anu vritti of the words 'in the Vedas &c.' does not extend further. Thus we cut do not make'; va raat' do not drink ; ara feat do not weep, O girl 1 
Why do we say' when there are and 9'? Witness # ref: do nob make.' Why do we say when expressing prohibition'? Observe agres 
decoration.' 
The phrase ' in the opinion of the Eastern Grammarians 'shows that it is an optional rule. Therefore we have sacan do not weep.' Or if rule III. 1. 94 be applied, then the use of the word alaf is for the sake of merely showing respect (pâjârtha); the rule could have stood withont it. 
उदीचां माङो व्यतीहारे ॥१ला पदानि॥ उदीचां, माङः, व्यसी FIT, (Feat) n 
वृत्तिः ॥ माङो धाताळतीहारे वर्तमानादुदीचामाचार्याणां मतेन सवाग्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
19. According to the opinion of the Northern Gram marians, the affix 'ktvâ' is added to the root'men' (to exchange), when the sense is that of interchange, (though the action denoted by the former word is not prior to the action denoted by the latter word). 
Thus sofaen ora 'having offered an exchange, he asks'att ar =X+17+ FIT= +*+*+T(VI. 1. 45 and 71)=9* + f (VII. 4. 40). This is an optional rule, as the phrase according to the northern 'indicates. So we have in the alternative, fearson having asked he exchanges and this is the more general use of itva; namely, it comes after that verb which is concerned about a time anterior to that of the other; see rule 21. The present sâtra is an exception to III. 4. 21. 
The root is has been exhibited in the sutra as 75, with the vowel at instead of t. This indicates the existence of the following Paribhasha : 
"A root, which, when destitute of anubandhas, ends in either , 1, must not be cousidered to have ceased to end in either , , or, when an anubandba has been attached to it. By this Paribhasha aq must be peggnudl ed as ending in #, and as therefore it may be substituted for the vowel a (VI. 1.45), even while y remains, ag does assume the forin it and is consequently by the prohibition set in sâtra 1. 1. 20, forbidden to be termed 
28. 
IRE - GOVE: 
GOVERNMENT 
STRY OF CUL 
NT OF INDIA 
THE AFFIX KTVA. 
[BB. II. Or. IV.S 
CR 
.संस्कृति 
गर सरकार 
atracuta en gon agafar li 97-517-uta, 7, (cat) yfa o gara ara 7 tê watu a TEET vrat: wat saat afa 
20. The affix ktvâ' is added to a root, to denote what is situate on that (para) side or on this (avara) side of some thing. 
The situation on the the other side and spar' this side, is called परावरयेग Thus अप्राध्य नदी पर्वतः स्थित: "the mountain is situate without having reached the river, i, en, on this side of the river, the river being on the other side. Here the word waa is qualified by the word as which is the point from which the situation is taken; and which in this case, is on the other side of the mountain. Similarly swasta y vaat fegat 'the river is situate on the other side of the mountain.' Here the relation between the mountain and the ‘river' is of spat and 
In other words sa The gerund of a root may be used to imply the situation of a thing with reference to the situation of another spoken of as the agent of the action denoted by that root and of the action denoted by another verb or primitive word used along with the gerund; though the action referred to in the ger und is nos prior to the other"-G. P. 
ant: galatan agfa n gara-ait:, gerare, (rar) 
वृत्तिः ॥ समान का बये त्वर्थयोस्तत्र पूर्वकालेधात्व. वर्तमानाद्धातोः क्त्याप्रत्ययो भवति । arranu sedi suatu wafura **tu rea g a cena 3 
21. When two actions have the same agent, the aflix ktva' comes after that verb which takes place in a time anterior to that of the other (i. e. the Absolutive in 'tva' refers to that action which precedes in time). 
Thus Year Tufa 'having eaten he goes'; at Tufa 'having drunk, he 
goog. 
The role is not confined to the case of two verbs: thus, FEUT, fear, an, Trat Tata 'having bathed, drunk, eaten and given, he goes.' 
Why do we say having the same agent'? When the agents are different, the gerund eannot be used, but the Locative Absolute construction will have to be used to express the same sense. Thus ymarfa 
fa Ram: the 'Brahmana having been fed, Devadatta goes." 
Why do we say which denotes prior action? For, if the actions are co-eval, the gerundial construction will not be employed. Thus wufa eura She goes and chatters.' 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
RNMENT OF 
OF INDIA 
GL 
BRET 
JA IV. S 22, 23.] 
THE AFFIX BS KTVA AND NAMUL. 
र सरकार 
Vart.-The phrase FIETOTIGT cafufa, a rufa 'he sleeps, with his mouth open, and laughs with his mouth closed', is valid, though the atlix 2017 is not added to the verb denoting prior action. 
sanitare una u ugtfatu aralarâ, ug,, ( Tehari, Tama) 1 
Eft: et surtsafaltese migratoga seua wafa u 
22. The affixes namul' and 'ktvâ' come after a root, when re-iteration is to be expressed. 
The phrases 'when the agent of both the verbs is the same' and 'after the verb whose actions occurs first in time' are to be read into this sûtra to com plete the sense. The force of is to introduce the affis ar into this sûtra. The affixes let va and namul express 're-iteration' then only when the verb is doubled, and not singly. See rule VIII. 1. 4. Thus #ra 70 qua 'having eaten repea tedly, he goes'; similarly year y cat To Trafa 'having drunk repeatedly he goes'. 
u sasa u 3 ulagafar 7, off, Funca, (Teat, TYT) 
TTEN TEETTTe at: manugant retet waats teie aren 
23. The affixes "ktvâ' and 'namul' are not added to & root, when the word 'yad' is used, in a simple sentence, which does not depend upon another to complete the sense. 
The word waiat means 'inter-dependence' or the inability of a word, phrase or sentence, to indicate the intended sense in the absence of another word, phrase, or sentence. In other words, when there are two actions one prior and another subsequent and they complete the sense of the sentence, without standing in need of any other verb; in such a case, ktud and namul are not used, when the word yad is in composition. This sûtra prohibits the affix Kuva also, though the affix namul is in immediate context. Thus te a 
ere, uuwa na: da, having eaten, he cooks; having read, he sleeps'. 
But when there is inter-dependence or GTET, we have a great a, eta u aa: TITO Professor Bohtlingk translates it thus: "In connec. tion with of the above-mentioned Absolutives will not be applied, unless the two verbs required one more as complement." 
faturangayag ni Terra feriet, -4 gay, (9 *:, ga arê, wala 
त्तिः ॥ जने प्रथम पूर्व इत्येतेषूपपदेषु समानकर्व कयाः पूर्वकाले धातो त्याणशुखौ मस्ययो विभषणा भवतः 
GOVERNA 
OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY OF 
RNMENT OF IN 
OF INDIA 
THE AFFIX NAMUL. 
[BK. III. CH. IV. $121.26. 
सस्कृति मन्त्रा 
सत्यम्वाजयते 
777 
24. The affixes 'ktvâ' and 'namul come optionally after that verb which denotes the prior action, when both verbs have the same agent, provided that the following words are in composition :-'agre', 'prathama' and 'pûrva'. 
This is an Aprápta-vibhasha The word 're-iteration' is not understood here. Thus i, sur, gå at ito at aafa 'having first eaten he goes'. 
By using the word 'optionally' it is indicated that the regular Tenses, such as the Present &e., may be employed also. Thus sê ye aa: qafa 'he eats first and then goes'. 
Q.-The affixes of Lat (Present tense) &c. would have been applied by the rule of TSUET (111. 1. 94); why then use the word 'optionally'? 
Ans.---The very use of the word 'optionally' in this sû tra indicates the existence of this Paribhash :-"The rule III. 1. 94 has no concern with the affixes ktud and namul, when both these affixes are enjoined at one and the same time by a single rule". 
Therefore, we cannot apply III. 1. 94 and use the affixes Lat &c., when *re-iteration' is meant. That is the exclusive province of cat and TT 
Why is not here the Upa pada compounding by rule II. 2. 20? For an answer to this, see the commentary on II. 2. 20. Had only in been enjoined by this sátra, and not eat also, then we conld bave formed the 59€ 99, for such is the force of the word ca in that sâtra. 
T ha: u 113411 ucifferentiati, 
वृत्तिः ॥ कर्मण्युपपदे कृमो धाता मु प्रत्ययो भवति शानोगे गम्यमाने । 
25. The affix 'kbamuñ' is added to the verb 'kri' (to make), when a word in the accusative case is in construction with it, if the sense intended implies 'abuse'. 
Of the affis 992, the efficient portion is 579; the indicatory inro dnces the augment (VI. 3. 67). Thus att hittatura 'he reviles him as thicf, 6. e., he calls out in abuse 'thou art a thief, thou art a robber, &c. &c.? The person is not really made a thief, but making him a thief is to express one's indignation 
Fargf# T L 11 uerfil Eatef, T . ( :) !! वृत्तिः ॥ स्वाद्वय धूपपदेषु कृजों सगुल् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
26. (When the actions, signified by the verbs i and another have the same agent), the affix namal' is added to the verb 'kri (which is concerned RE - GOVED 
CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
ERNMENT OF 
BOL. u. IV. $ 27.] 
TAE ATRIX NAMUL 
सत्यमेव जयते 
सरकार 
about a time anterior to that of the other), provided that a word signifying 'sweet' is in composition. 
The words within brackets are to be read into the sû tra by anuvritti from III. 4. 21. Thus TaigETT or gavate ye 'he eats, having made his food sweet or seasoned'. 
In the sûtra, the word fage is used ending with a T. It is an anom. alous form, and indcates that a must be added to the upapadas in these cases the object served by this form being that role IV. 1 44, by which feminine of words like farg ending in is formed by long &, does not apply here. Thus EUTETT BeaTaTTT YET= EHITETT JUTTE Y Here though yart is feminine, the attribute is still care and not fareto 
It might be said 'why not use the previous affix CyT? That will solve all difficulties ; and will give us the augment y To this, however, there is a fatal objection. The augment T will, no doubt, come in the last example, but it will not come when the word to be formed is an Indeclinable (VI. 3, 67), such as, when the sense is of the affix fea and all chvi-ending words are Indeclin ables (I. 4. 61). Therefore, the affix wys will not remove the difficulty in the following case ; स्वाद्वीं स्वाही कृत्वा जुङ्क्ते = स्वादुकारं भुक्ते 'he eats, having first sweetened what was not sweet before'. 
By applying rule III, 1. 94, we have the affix in the alternative. Thus Euty meat YETU All these affixes form abstract nouns (Ita) as they have the sense of the affix IT (III. 4. 16). In connection with Tyt, the Instru mental case can not, however, be used, i. e. we cannot use the Passive cons truction ; e. 9, cart'a TUT sa eaqay will be wrong. 
प्रत्यथैवंकथमित्यंशिद्धाप्रयोगश्चेत् ॥२॥पदानि॥ अन्यथा-एवं. 97-C, fg gut, a, (8, TT) . 
वृत्तिः ॥ अन्यथादिषूपपदेषु कृजो णमुल प्रत्ययो भवति सिद्धाप्रयोगश्चेत्करोतेर्भवति ॥ 
27. When the words 'anyatha' (otherwise), fevamo (so), 'katham' (how) and 'ittham' (thus) are compounded with the verb, then 'namul' comes after kri' (to make), if it be such that its omission would be unobjectionable, 
When is the non-employment of st vaild? When the same sentence will remain correct by omitting i e. when without employing it, the same idea will be expressed. Thus U 17, ante, e or gua y 'he cats otherwise, he eates so, how does he eat, or he eats thus'. In fact, the sentenco squad is equivalent to aut 
Why do we say 'if the non-employment would be valid? Witness 
KURE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
STRY OF C 
MINISTA 
NT OF INDIA 
THE AFFIX NAMUL. 
BK IH CH. IV.SRO 30.1 
सत्यद जयते 
RTUT hear fact ya he eats, having turned his head aside. Here ys could not be spared. 
यथातथ घोरसूयाप्रतिवचने ॥ २८॥ पदानि ॥ यथा-तथयोः, - सूया-प्रतिवचने, (कृजः, णमुल) ॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ यथा तथा शब्दयोरुपपदयो कृजो भुल प्रत्ययो भवति, असूया प्रतिबचने गम्यमाने 
28. The affix 'namul' is added to the root kri' (to make), the words ‘yatha' and 'tatha' being compounded with it, when angry reply is made : (if the omission of 'kļiñ' is unobjec tionable). 
When one questions or replies in indignation, displeasure or anger, then is this construction valid. Thus तथाकारं भोक्षये, किं तवानेन I will eat in that way; what is that toyou'? Similarly यथाकार भोध्ये, किं तवानेन । 
Why do we say when an angry reply is made'? Observe यथाकृत्वाऽहं r aar maa zuufu 'in what way I will eat' that thou wilt see'. 
Why do we say 'when the omission of would be valid' ? Witness स्थाकृत्वा शिरो मोक्षये कि तवानेन 'what is that to you, in what way turning my head I will eat'? 
कर्मणि दूशिविदोः साकल्ये ॥९॥ पदानि ॥ कर्मणि, द्रशि-विदोः, साकल्ये, (णमूल)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ कर्मण्युपपदे साकल्यविशिष्टऽर्थे हशिविदोत्विोणमुल प्रत्ययो भवति । 
29. When the object is compounded with it, the verb 'dris (to see), or,vid' (to know,' takes the affix 'pamul', to denote the total number of such objects. 
Thus कन्यादर्श वरयति he woos every girl that he sees, res, all the girts soen' werd opgefa 'he feeds as many Brahmanas as he knows, i. e, all'. 
Why do say 'when denoting the total number of such objects'? Observe are great parafa 'having seen the Brâhmaṇa he feeds hinn'. 
यावति विन्द जीवोः ॥ ३०॥ पदानि ॥ यावति, विन्द-जीवोः, 
वृत्तिः ॥ यावच्छवद उपपदे विन्दतेजीवतेश्च मामुल प्रत्ययो भवति । 
30. The affix namul comes after the verb 'vid' (to get and 'jiv', (to live), when then the word "yâyat'is combined with them. 
As agad y he eats all that he gets'. awata 'he studies as long as he lives, i. e, throughout his life'. 
URE 
GOVE 
or OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
NMENT OF A 
OF INDIA 
P 
IL.CH. IV. $ 31-33.] 
THE AFFIX NAMUL. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
तपुरका 
चदिरयोः पूरेः ॥ ३१॥ पदानि ॥ चर्म-उदयोः, पूरेः, (कर्मणि, रामल॥ 
वृत्तिः॥ चर्मोदरयो कर्मणोल्पपदयोः पूरयतेमुल् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
31. The affix namul' comes after the verb (pûr (to fill), when the words charman' and 'udar' are compounded with it as objecte 
Thus उदरपूर भुक्ते 'he eats so as to fill his belly'? चर्मपूर स्तृणाति 'he spreads 80 as to cover the skin.' 
वर्षप्रमाण जलोपाचास्थान्यतरस्याम् ॥३२॥ पदानि॥ वर्ष-प्रमाणे, ऊ-लोपः, च, शस्य, अन्यतरस्याम्, (कर्मणि, णमुल ) ॥ 
वृत्तिः॥ पूरयते ताजुल प्रत्ययो भवति जलापश्चास्य पूरयतेरन्यवरस्यां भवति चुहायेन चेहर्षस्य प्रमाणमियत्ता गम्यते ॥ 
32. The affix 'namul comes after the verb 'pûr' (to fill)' when the word so formed expresses a measure of rain-fall; and optionally the long 'a' of this pur' is elided. 
Thus otsuak or even agtaa: 'it rained filling up small puddles (lit. the impression made by the foot of the cow on the soil).' stargt or starsi gatas it rained filling up all furrows.' 
Why have we used the word JET ‘of this pûr' in the stra? The long Ti of it is to be elided, and not the long , if there be any, of the upapada. Thus मूषिकाबिलपूरं or भूषिकाविलनं वृष्टो देव Here the long s of vis not shortened. 
चेले कूनोपेः ॥३३॥ पदानि॥ चेले, कनोपेः, (कामणि, णमुख, वर्ष प्रमाणे)॥ 
त्तिः ॥ नूयो शब्दे उन्दने च, अनारण्यन्ताद्धातोश्चेलार्थेषु कर्मसु उपपदेषु णाल प्रत्यकर भवति वर्षप्रमाणे गम्यमाने ॥ 
33. The affix pamul' comes after the causative of the root 'knûy' (to wet), when there is compounded with it a noun denoting clothing,' in the accusative case, as an upapada, if the whole word so formed expresses a measure of the rain-fall. 
The verb wife is the causative root formed from the simple root to wet. Thus चेलकोपं वृटो देव: or पखसोपं or बसनको &c. it rained so as to web the clothes.' 
निमूलसमूलयोः कषः ॥ ३४॥ पदानि ॥ निमूल-समूल्योः , कषः (कर्मणि, णमुल)। 
GOVERNMENT 
CULTURE. 
INISTRY OF 
NT OF INDIA 
THE AFFIX NAMUL 
[BK. III. CH. IV.SE 
लय भारत 
वृत्तिः ॥ निमूल समूलशब्दयोः कर्नवाचिनो रुप पदयोः कषे ताश मुल प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
34. The affix 'namul comes after the verb 'kash' (to rub), when the words 'nimûla' and 'samûla' are compounded with it in the accusative case. 
Thus निमूलका कषति 'he serapes down to the roots'; समूलका क्षपति 'he serapes up to the roots.' In fact, the gerund of the roof and the root itself denote the same thing; the whole sentence निमूलकाषंकपति being equal to निमूलं afe. From this sûtra up to sâtra III. 4. 46, the subsequent verb governing the previous-word, must be derived from the same root from which the gerund is derived; see sûtra III. 4. 46. 
शुष्कचूर्णरूक्षेषु पिषः ॥ ३५ ॥ पदानि ॥ शुष्क-चूर्ण-रुक्षेषु, पिषः, (कर्मणि णमुल)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ शुष्कादिषु कर्मवाचिधूपपदेषु पिता मुल् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
35. The affix 'namul' comes after the verb pish' (to grind), when the words 'sushka' (dry), 'chûrna' (powder), and 
rûksha' (dry), in the accusative case are compounded with it. 
Thus yegua fanfy=* fuafu 'he grinds it dry'; zau' fearg 'he grinds to powder'; à faa fe 'he grinds it dry,' Here also an appropriate verb from the same root fer must be used to govern the gerund. 
समूला कृतजीवेषु हनकृनहः ॥३६॥ पदानि ॥ समूल-भकृत जीवेषु, हन-कृज-ग्रहः, (कर्मणि, णमुल ) 
वृत्तिः ॥ समूल अकृत जीव इत्येतेषु शब्देषु कर्मसूपपदेषु ययासंख्यं इन कृज् गह बत्येतेभ्यो धातुभ्यो गजुल प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
36. The affix 'namul comes after the verbs 'han' (to kill), 'kri' (to make) and 'grab' (to seize), when the words 'samâla.' 
akrita' and 'jiva' in the accusative case are respectively compound ed with them. 
Thus सुमलपातं हन्ति (VIII. 3.32and54) 'he destroys so as to tear up by the roots, 2. e., he totally extirpates'; s amt utta he does a thing which was not done bofore'; a oft Tetra 'captures him so as to preserve his life, 
e captures him alive. Here also appropriate verbe from the same roots are used to govern the gerund. 
कारण हनः ॥ ३७॥ पदानि ॥ करणे, हनः, (गमल)॥ वृत्तिः । करण अपपदे हातामुल् प्रत्ययो भवति॥ 
37. The aflix namul comes after the verb 'ban, 
URE. GOVE 
VERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
T OF INDIA 
SBROSCH. IV. S 38, 39.] 
THE AFFIX NAMUL. 
when a word in the Instrumental case is in composition with it. 
Thus girtua are grea (VII. 3.32 and 54)=ufua afe fra 'he strikes the Vedi with the band'; icara få fra 'he strikes the ground with the foot.' Readıng this sûtra along with III. 4. 48, we find that it here does not mean 'to kill, and the further difference between this aphorism and that is, that in the case of this sû tra a cognate verb from the same root must be used, as the gerund; not so in sâtra III. 4 48; or this sûtra may be for the sake of forming Invariable compounds with the upa padas, such as cara 
According to Pâ tanjali, this affix comes after et under this aphorism, even when I means 'to injure'; thus counteracting rule III. 4. 48, by anticia pation, and in opposition to the general principle of interpretation enunciated in rule 1. 4.2 Thus fara yfer 'he kills with the sword'; vrata fra 'he kills with arrows." 
Rule III. 4. 46 applies bere also, and an appropriate verb from the same root is employed to govern the gerund. 
Faza foa: 135 # agtfa i Faga, fou:, (FTÔ, TET) इति ॥ स्नेहनवाचिनि करण उपपदे पिवेतिर्णिमुल प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
38. The affix 'namul comes after the verb 'pish' (to grind), when a word in the Instrumental case denoting 'liquid' is in composition. 
Thus tråd foafe= foafy (VI. 3. 58.) 'he grinds with water', aga fenfu 'he grinds with oil.' Here also III. 4. 46 applies, and an appropriate verb from the same root is employed to govern the gerund. 
Ea afanat: n o 11 CGTAT II gea, afa-ugti, (atâ, 
fe: o priatfefore you wauagatiata ega tit hafa w 
39. The afix 'namul comes after the verbs varti (causative of vrit) and “grah,' when a word denoting 'hand, in the Instrumental case, is in composition 
Thus geaaa, mada or aina gaufa=Fear aaafa he revolves by the hand.' So also, ac fautET Terra he takes him by the hand 's go futice, ETTET &C 
Here also rule III. 4. 46 applies and appropriate verbs from the same roots must be employed to govern the gerund, 
| á TSC: It go | T T t à, gái, ( H , C ) fat u eagfafa ar autê gaufarus mear wafa 
29 
URE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTUR 
. MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
THE AFFIX NAMUL. 
[Br. III. C. IV. S 40-43. 
• संस्कृति मंत्रा 
सत्यमेव जयते 
सरकार 
40. The affix inamul' comes after the verb 'push' (to feed), when a word in the Instrumental case, having the sense of 'sva' is in composition. 
The word ca means 'self,' kinsmen' and 'property.' Thus fait gertfa 'he feeds himself', staan, orare, faqatat, rare, waart, taigi &c. See I. 1. 68. Rule 46 applies here also. 
funt : 11 xp al acta 11 sapratā, 19:,(THT) era: u sfuertafargue nelagfararigt gett hafa u 
41. The affix 'namul' comes after the verb.bandh'(to bind), when a word expressing location is in construction with it. 
Of course, rule III 4. 46 applies here also, and the gerund must be gov erned by a verb from the same root bandh. Thus haru menifa 'he binds to the wheel ; 789 Tatía he binds in a snare'; giaque peutfa 'he binds in the 6st.' 
wenia= utawafa 1 
HEITTE 11 8 11 ustfa I SOTT. (alet:, Tha) वृत्तिः ॥ संज्ञायाम् विषये वध्नातिार्णमुल् प्रत्ययो भवति॥ 
42. The affix 'namul' comes after the verb bandh' (to bind) when the word so formed denotes an appellative. 
Thus - Teatfa 'he binds in the manner called krauncha bandhan or "heron-knot.' aftaran Teata or ag: 'he binds or is bound in a 'peacock knot,' safata : 'bound in a knot called attálíká bandhan.' 
All the above, lorauncha-bandhan &c. are names of various sorts of bonds or knots. The rule III. 4. 46. also applies here. 
ufsfaguita fragt: 1143 11 ugefa unafi, cita-96 ut, fat, (a) 
वृत्तिः ॥ जीबपुरुषया कर्तृवाचिनोरुणपदयो यथार्सख्यम् नशिवहो त्योर्णमुलप्रत्ययो भवति । 
43. The affix 'namul' comes after the roots 'nas' (to perish) and 'vah' (to carry), when the words 'jiva' (life) and 'puru sha' (person) expressing the agent of these verbs, are respectively in construction with them. 
Thus utara wafa=start wrafa 'perishes, so that his life perishes, i. e., dies away'; gewart atfe 'the man carries', i, e., the man becoming a servant, é enrries another on him = पुरुषः प्रेख्यो भूत्वा वहति । 
Why do we say when denoting an ageub'? Observe, naa ne destroyed by life'; gerus 'carried by a man. 
URE 
GOVE 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY ON 
JERNMENT ON 
VI. 
u. IV.S 44-46.] 
THE AFFIX NAMUL. 
सत्यमवाजयते 
178 
The gloryct: 1 yy n utför nya, gfa-git, (niki, 
वृत्तिः ॥ कर्वशब्दे कर्तृवाचिन्युपपदे शुषिपुरोत्विोणमुल प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
44. The affix 'ramul comes after the roots 'sush' (to dry), and 'pûr' (to fill), when the word ûrdhva,' denoting an agent, is in composition with them. 
Thus Girauta guafar qu: = stå youfa 'the tree is dried up while it is still standing Compare agtea itaquaqfayta: 'or wither like the up-heaved grass drying up' (Bhatti. III. 14); Fragt gua 'is filled full to the brim.' Rule III. 4. 46 applies here also. 
guara Fallsyn orfan Jaia, fu, (a , TTG ) . 
Tie noua siguva Tater wife wrata za staar wafa u 
45. The affix 'namul comes after a root, when an object or an agent, denoting similitude, is in composition with it. 
The word 'agent' is read into the sůtra, by virtue of the word ‘also. That with which any thing is compared is called it or 'object of comparison or similitude.' As gafaatat fafyay gat 'water was kept as ghee would be kept.' Jay WTTT farea: 'was kept as gold. The force is that of va; thus vafoutue fafea:=yafaa fafya: 1 So also when the object of comparison is as agent; thus, a FE: 'he perished like a goat.' So also 75 , Ca +, &c, 
afeg wafacupunt: nye n usifat nu-afg, यथा-विधि, अनुप्रयोगः ॥ 
fers a forma atika mitai, vaq qafqaguara wafa a 
46. The same verb should be employed after the gerunds formed from the verbs "kash' &c; as the verb from which the gerund is derived. 
From sâtra III. 4. 34 up to sâtra III. 4. 45. a verb from the same root must be employed in the subsequent part, as anuprayoga, from which the gerund in namul was formed. This rule has been illustrated in the examples under the previous aphorisms. 
The present is a restrictive or niyama rule. This chapter deals with effixes employed in denoting syntactical relation between two verbs (19 
997:) See III. 4. 1: so a gerund in namul, would, of course, be followed by some verb as an uprayoga ; the present sa tra declares that the other verb must be from the same roob as the gerund, 
$ 
TURE 
GOU 
MINISTRY 
ex OF CULTUS 
JERNMENT OF 
OF INDIA 
THE ATFIX NAMUL. 
[BK. III. CH. IV. 
47-49 
सत्यमेव जयते 
मालय . भार 
भारत सरकार 
उपदंशस्तृयायाम्॥४॥ पदानि ॥ उपदंशः, तृतीयायां,( णमुल ) ॥ बुत्तिः॥ दश दशने, अस्माद्धातोषपूर्वाततृतीयान्त उपपदे णमुल प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
47. The affix 'namul' comes after the root dans' (to bite) preceded by the preposition 'upa'; when a word ending with the third case-affix is in composition with it. 
The Upapada sam cisá is optional in this case (II. 2. 21). Thus tao. पर यम भुङ्क्त or मूलकेनोपदंशम भुङो 'he eats after having relished the food with radish.' Similarly भाद्रकोपदंशस or भाई केणोपदंशम् 'relished with ginger.'' 
The words मूलक &c. in the above examples are the 'objects' of the verb उपदंश and instruments' of the verb भुज । 
By the rule of बासरूप (III. 1.94t the affix सवा (or its substitute ल्या) may be optionally used, wherever we may use the affix गामुल । Thus मूलकेनो. पदश्य भुक्त। 
हिसार्यानां च समानकर्मकाणाम् ॥४॥ पदानि हिंसा-अर्थानां, च, समान-कर्मकाणां, (णमुल, ततीया यां)॥ 
वृत्तिः॥हिंसा प्राण्युसघात:, वर्थानां धातूनामनुप्रयोगधातुनां समानकर्मकाणां तृतीयान्व उपपदे णमुल् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
2 48. The affix 'na mul' comes after roots having the sense of 'hins' (to strike), when the object of this gerund is the same as the object of the main verb, and when the noun with which it is compounded ends with the third case-affix. 
Thus ataray at: caufa 'he collects together cows, beating them with aolub. The compounding is optional (11.2.21.) Thus we have also दण्डे नो. पपातम् | Similarly with other verbs having the sense of हिंस; thus, दण्डताड or दरोग वाडया 
Why do we say 'when the object of the gerund is the same as the object of the main verb'? When the objects are different, Ty will not be employed. Thus जोर दण्डेनोपहत्य, गोपालको गाः काल यति having beaten the thief with the club, the cowherd collects together the cows.' 
सप्तम्यां चोपपीडरुधकर्षः ॥ ४॥ पदानि ॥ सप्तम्यांच, उप पीड-रुध-कर्षः, (तृतीयायां, णमुल ) ॥ 
तिः॥ उपपूर्वक पीडधकर्षेभ्यः सप्तम्यन्त उपपदे चकाराततृतीयान्स उपपदे णमुल् प्रत्ययो भवति॥ 
49. The aflix 'namul' comes after the roots 'pid' (to press), 'rudh' (to obstruct), and “krish' (to draw). 
DE · GOVED 
ov OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
VERNMENT ON 
IN III. CH. IV. § 50-52.] 
THE AFFIX NAMOL. 
575 
सत्यमेव जयते 
when they are preceded by the preposition 'upa', and when they are compounded with nouns ending with the 7th case-affix or the 3rd case-aflix. 
The phrase "3rd case-affin' must be read into the sûtra by virtue of the word I Thus it a 'he sleeps pressing on his sides'. The com pounding is optional (II. 2, 21); so we have in the alternative, prateadet or afzutguy 
So also intet (or ai gativa or Tatudy) TTS FUITTfa 'he stations the cows so that they are all in the fold’, থাযথ or অ্যালুঘ or অাখিলীফ 4 ) Wai: Taufa I It is Bhvadi go here, and not Tudâdi. 
FATHTI u yon gafa u garut, (Egi, watatui, TH) 
fe: u FATTTT 7 tarai gatatag atencatafariT HETłt wafa u 
50. (The affix 'namul' comes after a root, when a word in the Locative or Instrumental case is in composition with it), and when immediate contiguity is intended, i, e., 'to fall together by the ears'. 
The word parafa: means 'immediate contiguity'. Thus SWE (or UT ET Ortat) gwa 'having closely caught each other by the hair, they fight'. Similarly हस्तग्राहम or इस्तेष ग्राहम् or इस्तै हिस्; so also यष्टिनाहर taking a stick'; ET TIE &c. see II. 2. 21. 
Jath Tuyp u usifa n , T, (qatatet, varat ; T) . 
fa: 1 740#19 galanya tafatt ta seuar afar a 
51. The affix 'ņamul comes after a root, when a noun in the Instrumental or Locative case is in composition with it, and when measure of length is intended. 
The word wat means 'length or extension'. Thus gurgita (gaya anty or gustata ) afisat fara 'he cuts pieces of the lenth of two fingers'. See II. 2. 21. 
sarçra utaatutyuya al agtfor n suigra, uituerai, 
ger: #ucturaf a t seta wargt meer wafan 
52. The affix pamu)' is added to the root, when a noun in the Ablative case is in composition, and when 'haste' is intended. 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
NMENT OF A 
OF INDIA 
THE AFFIX NAMUL. 
[BK III. CH. IV: $ 56,154. 
संस्कृति मंत्राल 
27 
.417 
The word Titeat means haste, hurry' Thus saiteure (or Tatt Eur) wafa having risen from bed, he runs away'. That is to say, he runs with such a haste that he does not perform even the necessary ablutions &c, but as soon as he rises from the bed, he runs off. Similarly TyiT* : fuafa 'he drinks milk from a hole in the vessel', he being in such a baste, that he does not care to drink from the proper aperture. भ्राष्ट्रापकर्षमपूपान् भक्षयति 'he eats cakes hot from the frying pan', not waiting til they are placed on a dish. 
Why do we say when meaning hurry' ? Observe, ya IGFATT tegfa 'having risen from the seat, he goes'. Here 'haste' not being intended, the affix Wet (FIT ) is employed. See II. 2. 21. 
द्वितीयायां च ॥ ५३ ॥ पदानि ॥ द्वितीयायां, च, (परोप्सायां, 
fase featura give digui aratai valitaadt hafa u 
53. The affix 'pamul' comes after a verb, when a word in the Accusotive case is in composition, and when 'haste' is intended. 
Thus यष्ठिनाहन (or यष्टि ग्राहस्) युध्यन्ते they fight, having taken up sticks'. That is, they are in suche haste to fight, that they do not tarry to take up the proper weapons, offensive and defensive, but engage in fight with anything that is at hand, such as sticks, stones &c, Similarly sites HIER ON 
खारेग्धवे ॥ ५५ ॥पदानि॥ स्वाङ्गे, अध्रुवे द्वितीया, णमुल ) ॥ perfase waa eutratfe fer igatorer er watega senar wafa # 
54. The affix 'namul comes after a root, when a word in the Accusative case is in composition, signifying the limbs of one's own body, when the limb is such that its loss will not destroy life. 
Thus fait aufa 'he narrates, throwing his eye-brows (glancus) about in all direction'. suffin waufa 'he prattles, having closed the eyes'. 
The eatyf word is "a word denoting a thing which not being liquid or gaseous, and being capable of being perceived by the senses, and not being one produced by a change from the natural state, exists in a living being, or though found elsewhere actually or at any particular time, had previously been known as existing in only a living being, or is found to hove actually, (not figuratively) the same relation to the being it is in, as a similar thing has to a living being." 
The word sy means 'non-vital organ', or a limb which even being cut off does not necessarily destroy life. Therefore, we cannot use the affix GOVERNMEN 
ULTURE 
OF CULTUS 
MINISTRY ON 
ENT OF INDIA 
BERI. CH. IV. $ 55, 56.] 
THE AFFIX NAMUL. 
• 
सत्चमिव जयते 
कृति मंत्रालय 
Tgl in the following, as head is not an sa limb:--sfeu foc: rafa 'he narrates, having trhown the head on one side.' Compare VI. 2. 177. 
ofa fehcantau yy 19şifa u aferentziata, 7, (Falk, fgatarut, TET) 
Te sfigata faiFarfafu featurra un vârst sett vafa 
55. The affix ‘ņamul' comes after a root, when a word in the Accusative case denoting a limb of one's own body, which is completely afflicted by the action, is in composition. 
The word ufaf ITT means 'completely hurt or affected. Thus st wfada or guida goa = fagt: itsura: 'they fight so as to afilict their whole bosom.' So also fur:or fatisfaasi 
The difference between this and the last sûtra consists in this, that this âtra applies even to vital organs, such as 'breast,''head' &c.; while the last aphorism applies 'non-vital organs' only. 
fafaruraufçeret aromatea araut: 119€ 11 actfot un fafar-afa-ufe-Frgi, TH17917- 
5 2TA19hT:, (featuri, e FT) afete a featura una famafevat yig-a7 Ti w ala saranê strêta ar att#tato 
56. The affix 'namul comes after the verbs 'vis' (to enter), 'pat' (to fall), 'pad' (to go) and 'skand' (to leap), when a word in the Accusative case is in composition, and when the sense denoted is that of complete pervasion and total absorption. 
The word satiæ (or &71H1) means the full and complete pervasion of the substances with the actions (denoted by the verbs fum, &c). The word Strüat means 'assiduous performance of any action, or absorption into it. In other words, 'frequency of an action is staat. The word saif therefore refers to the noun (in the accusative case) and star to the verb (such as vis &c). These two words have the same significance here as the words fua and are in sûtra VIII. l. 4, and by the application of that rule, both the noun and the verb require to be repeated. That rule, however, will not apply here, when there is compounding by II. 2. 21. But when there is no compounding, (for rule Ile 2. 21. makes composition only option al) then there is repetition of the noun if warg 'all' is meant; and of the verb, if praat .frequency or assiduous per formance is meant. Thus erogarea, (or auguma or engage wtea, 'having entered the house, he sils down,' meaning either, having en. 
PURE • GOU 
MINISTRY 
ERNMENT OF 
ay OF CULTUA 
THE AFFIX NAMUL. 
[BK. III. CB. IV95% 
रकृति मंत्रालय 
.4179 
477 
tered every house in succession, he sits down,' or 'having repeatedly entered the house, he sits down." 
Similarly with the root , we may have three examples as in the last, and so also with the roots पद् and स्कन्द । Thus गेहानुप्रपातनास्ते (or गेहं गेहमजुप्रपातमस्ते or गेहमनुप्रपातमनुप्रपातमास्ते।; गेहानुप्रपादमास्ते (or गेहंगेहमनुप्रपाद or गेहमनुप्रपादमनुप्रपादम्); traesent (or trace or 6-79€ ), 
Why do we say 'when the sense is that of all or frequency? Observe agafaza Em 'having entered the house, he eats.' 
Q.-By sâtra III. 4. 22, namul would have been valid, when abhikshna was meant; and abhilishna and a seva mean the same thing, i e., 'frequency.' Why then ordain namul again, by the present sûtra, in the sense of a seva ? If you say, "we repeat it, in order to prevent the coming of the affix mar", that is not so. For at would come by aTsatu rule; (see III. 1. 94 and III. 4. 47). 
A.The repetition is for the sake of Upapada-samasa with a word in the acousative case. Under rule 22, there was no upapada, while in the present case there is an upapuda. 
Professor Bohtlipgk translates this sû tra thus :-"fam, , , and in composition with an accusative, from the absolutive gerund in (namul), when one wishes to express that every object of that name is completely affec ted by the action, or that the action is constantly repeated in that object." 
अस्यतितषोः क्रियांतरे कालेषु ॥ ५५ ॥ पदानि ॥ अस्यति-तपोः, at, arg, (faturat, TheT) 
Fa: nefat watufa fenticats, futa90414*, fonuna graü aratata पतिवृषिभ्यो द्वितीयान्तेषु कालवाचिधूपपदेषु णमुल् प्रत्यया भवति । 
57. The affix 'namul' comes after the verbs 'as' (to throw) and trish' (to thirst), when it is intended to express an intermission of the action denoted by the root, provided that a word in the accusative case denoting time, is in composition. 
The word fierac means the interval between two actions. Thus are or gueTETY TY: 79ta 'he gives drink to the cows, after an interval of two days, i e. every third day.' So also para or gata 7: Tufa 'having kept the cows thirsty for two days, he makes them drink, That is to say, having given them a drink today, he gives them another drink after an inter val of two days'; &o. 
Why do we say 'after the verbs and IT'? Because the affix uyal will not be applied after other roots, though the sense be that of interval of time. Thus que having fasted for two days, he eate.' 
f 
GOVERNMEA 
TURE.GA 
MINISTRU 
NISTRY OF C 
ENT OF INDIA 
IV. S 58, 59.1 
THE AFFIXES RTVA AND NAMUL. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
संस्कृति 
Why do we say 'when denoting an intermission of action'? Observe STETTUNUT : ; here there is no intermission in the action of 'going.' 
Why do we say 'denoting time'? Observe TFT TIT: gryfa allow ing an interval of eight miles to pass, he gives drink to the cows, i. e., he wa 
ters the cows at every eight miles.' Here the interval is that of 'space' and not of 'time,' and henee the atfix is fit and not TITI 
arerurf faraat: 11 ya nagitau aifa, artefar-agt:, (fattui, V ) 0 . 
वृत्तिः ॥ नामशब्दे द्वितीयान्त उपपदे धादिहेश्य धातर्ण मुल् प्रत्ययो भवति॥ 
58. The affix ‘ņamul' comes after the roots adis' and 'grah,' when the word 'nâman' (name) in the Accusative, is in composition. 
Thus tęHTT'he mentions it, telling his name.' ETTETE Forgafa Che calls me by taking my name (i. e. by my name).' 
Y TÀSTâateurà a: ciugat u yer u ugtfa u shoqe, 9 fa-heulat, :, cargatu 
वृत्तिः॥ नव्यब उपपदेज्यथाभिप्रेताख्याने गम्यमाने करोते तवाणमुली भवतः॥ 
59. The affixes 'ktvâ' and 'namul come after the root 'kri' (to make), when an Indeclinable word is in composition with it, and the meaning is the communication of anything in a disagreeable or undesired way. 
The word gawattat means literally to denote the expression of that which is not really intended', ie, a manner not suited to the proper communication of that news, such as communicating a bad news in a loud voice and good news in a low voice. The compounding being optional, the affix mat may be replaced by Fr. Thus we have three formglata: gheu, 
mas neat, or want. Thus if one had communicated an agreeable news like the birth of a son in a low voice, the other may retort "foafe ate te arte me or can3"; and so, if one bad communicated an unpleasant news as ब्राह्माण कराया गर्भिणी in a lond voice, the other may reply "कि तर्हि वषलोच्चैःकृया, ge: eu, or yo u r" (See II. 2. 22 for compounding.) 
Why do we say 'communicating in an undesired manner' ? Observe geageassa gare stra: 1 Here only that is added. Why have we repeated war in this sûtra, when in this chapter, by the rule of a ** (III 1.94), Ict vá would have presented itself in the alternative? The repetition is for the sake of samasa or composition, by the application of II. 2.22. The repetition 
20 
GOVERNME 
CULTURE 
MINISTRI 
AUSTRY OF C 
NT OF INDIA 
580/ 
KOVA AND NAMUL. 
[BK. III. Ch. (IV.S 60-61. 
संस्कृति प्रदान 
सत्यमेव जयते 
तरकार 
of ayt is for the sake of the subsequent sutras, into which the apuvritti of ktvá and namul runs concurrently. 
fazlouvat n fon uzifa n faifa, autot, (na, garatra geit) 
वृत्तिः ॥ विर्यशब्द उपपदै कृजः रुवाणनुलो प्रत्ययो भवतोऽपवर्ग गम्यमाने ॥ 
60. The affixes 'ktva' and 'ramul' come after the root 'kri, when the word 'tirvak' is in composition in the sense of 'carrying to the end, 
The word af means completing or finishing.' Thus far alla, विर्यककृत्वा ar तिर्थक्कारं गतः समाप्य गतs having completed, he went away.' 
Why do we say 'when meaning completion'? Observe fata Feat A19 : 'having placed the wood obliquely, he went away.' Here Ty is not employed. See II. 2. 22 for compounding. The word frafa is the locative of the word-form तिर्यप, and not of the word तिर्यच् । Other examples are : एतदोश् (V. 3. 5); weet 17(I. 1. 12). 
खाड़े तस्प्रत्यये कृम्वोः ॥ ६१॥ पदानि ॥ वाड़े, तस-प्रत्यये, rati, (rat- 
u t) वृत्तिः ॥ वस्प्रत्यये स्वागवाचिगि उपपदे करोतेर्भवतेश्य धातो: तवाणमुली प्रत्ययो भवतः ॥ 
61. The affixes 'ktya' and 'na mul' are added to the roots 'kri' (to make) and 'bhû' (to become), in composition with a word denoting a member of one's own body, when the affix 'tas' is joined thereto. 
The word ei has already been defined in gûtra III, 4. 54. The svánga word in the present case must be such as should end in the affix ae a tad lhita affix technically called afe and afaa (V.3. 78 &c). Though here there are two roots a and y, and there are two affixes to be applied, 1. e, mat and a; yet the rule of 'respective allocation' (I. 3. 10) does not apply here. Both rhe affixes are applied to each of the roots. Thus gua: meu a: or guas 
at ras or ypas retas. Similarly qua: ya: fagfa or yea: rear fagfa or Tea भावं तिष्ठति। 
Why do we say a word denoting a limb of one's own body? Observe शवत:कृत्वा गतः । 
Why do we say 'ending in the affix तस्'? Observe मुखीकृत्य गतः, मुखी : 
Why do we use the word 'the affix'? If ax is not an affis, but a verb the rule will not apply. Thus sê aafa=gua: 'throws in the mouth.' With this y so formed, we cannot apply the rule. Thus gaat cat a: 1 
GOVERNM 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
NMENT OF IN 
SL 
E 
TI, CH. IV. 3 62, 63.] 
THE AFFIXES SE &c. 
स्कृति मंत्रा 
सत्यमेव जयते 
माल सरकार 
rapidari 5500 o gifa TT-ET-F#-IRÉ, sal-gat, (mat:, war-wait) a 
वृत्तिः ॥ नाधार्थप्रत्यये शब्दे व्यर्थ उपपदे कृभ्योर्धात्वोः तवाणमुली प्रत्ययो भवतः ॥ 
62. The affixes ‘ktvâ' and 'ņamul are added to the roots 'kşi and bhù', when a word ending in the affix 'nâ' (V. 2. 27) or in an affix having the force of dha' (V. 3. 42), or having the sense of the affix 'chvi' (to make or to become something with it had not been before, V. 4, 50), is in composi. tion. 
Two words wat 'various' and fan 'without' are formed by the affix 71 (V. 2. 27); affixes having the force of e are , , va and 91 (V. 3. 42 to 46) which are added to numerals in the sense of 'part' or fold' &c. The force of chvi has already been explained. 
Thus অলানা লা জ্বলা অলঃ = লানা ক্ব যঃ Similarly লাল ফুল or লা লান্ধা गत: | So also बिमा कृत्य, बिना कृत्वा or विना कारं गतः | So alse नाना or बिना भूय-भूत्वा or Ora Ta: With words fora ed by yr and cognate affixes, we have: GHT or 9 
T-car511-77-year or a ta:t But not so in format, TT NET 
Why do we use the word 'affix (FIRIT) in the sû tra? Without it, the elltra would have run thus: 913 souh, and then any word, having the sense of at, which has the force of 'except', 'various' or the sense of at which means 'part or fold', when in composition with or W. would have taken the afix aign and mar. But that is not so. Thus the words for 'except' and Tu 'separately' have the sense of 'and o respectively; as feat Keat, or you meer 
Why do we say 'when the apa pada has the force of the affix chvi? Observe a gear sig for a: 
The word so in tute qualifies only the term ut, and not a, for there are no other affix having the sense of wt, which is a single affix taught in V. 2. 27, while, as shown above, there are other affixes having the force of a The composition optioually takes place by II. 2. 22. 
asutfu ya: neznucifer al goalfa, y":, (Fratret) वृत्तिः ॥ तूष्णी शब्दउपपदे भवतेर्धातोः वाण मुली भवतः॥ 
63. The affixes 'ktva' and 'namul' are added to the root 'bhû', when the word 'tûshnim (silently) is in composition. 
Thus muuta, Tout put, or getay 'having become silent. The repetition of in this sûtra, shows that the anuvritti of does not run into it and altogether ceases. 
URE - Gove 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
UT OF INDIA 
THE AFFIX TUMUN. 
[BK. III CH. IV. 
V.5. 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
सत्यमेव जयते 
trasurgatret 1188 u zifa il strafa, aigutta, (ya:, re- T) 11 
f: u a utta Hautaturgata sartuat aa: u 
64. The affixes ‘ktva' and ‘ņamul come after the root 'bhû', when the word 'anvak', in the sense of being favourably disposed, is in composition, 
The word geitra means 'agreeable, friendly or favourably disposed, or doing according to the wish of another'. Thus नन्वगभूय-अन्वगभूत्वा or अन्वग् w he is favourably disposed'. 
Why do we say 'when meaning friendly'? Observe sgrantyear fagfa 'he remains behind', 
***STATUTTHAHETpteig G9Tn €4 UÇifari T-77--32T-TE-TH-44-57-53-28T, -süg, 
वृश्चिः ॥ शकादिपपदेषु अस्त्यर्थेषु वा धतु मात्रात तुमुन् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
65. The affix 'tumun' is added to every verb, when another verb having the sense of suk' (to be able), 'dhrish' (to make bold), jñâ' (to know', 'glai' (to be wearied), 'ghat' (to strive), 'rabh' (to begin), labh' (to get), ‘kram' (to set about), 'sah' (to bear), Warh' (to be pleased or to condescend), and "as (to be), is in construction. 
The use of the Infinitive in gut formed by this rule, differs from that given in sûtra III3. 10. In that sätra the Infinitive had the force of purpose and here there is no such force. Moreover in this case there is an upapada in consturuction, though that upapuda is a verb; in rule III. 3. 10, there was no such upapada. 
Thus umf * 'I am able to eat'. Similarly waifa-Tarafa-uca ora--ma-- fa- af-or faga wat he knows', he is wearied, he strives, he begins, he gets, he proceeds, he bears, he con descends or he is, to eat'. 
This sûtra presents a kootty point. Bhattoji Dikshita says worT fear anya wara trata i. e, the sâtra gives roots from us to y and roots having the same sense as so 'to be'. But this is hardly consistent with the almost overwhelming evidence of usage. According to Dikshita's interpre. tation, ia 'to be able cannot be used with the Infinitive, but atatia fuae. fooru (S. 4) orfatnequa t inya (M. 3.) are instances from a standard author; similarly fas 'to know' cannot be used with the Infinitive; but w a 
ETET (R. VI 30) is as good an instance. We must, therefore, suppose 
URE .GOV 
FCULTURE 
MINISTRY OF 
VERNMENT OS 
BREMII, CH. IV. § 66-68.] 
TAE KRITYA AFFIXES. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
9.417 
BER 
that the sû tra indicates the existence of an interpretation connecting so with all the preceding roots; otherwise we shall have to condemn as wrong, all sich constructions as those given above. Taking this view I have interpreted the sâtra, connecting go with all the above roots.-- Aptes Composition. 
quifuata nel TCIT U Tutfa-avag, 09 sig, (717) u 
वृत्तिः ॥ पर्याप्तिवचनेज्वलमर्थपूपपदेषु धातोस्तुमन् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
66. The afix 'tumun' comes after a verb having in composition with it, 'alam' and its synonyms, when these words expressl to be capable of something.' 
The word watfx means 'capability, ability, fulness. Thus fargarit Tate aftagum: Th#: (Hitopadesa) 'who is able to avoid that which is stamped Lon his forehead.' 7 Tyt fe am Kumara II. 56) 'bis penance is able to burn the worlds.' safe À faya: aa afegia, (Vikramorvasil2) 'I have power to know every thing.' y nata: : ugat 'skilful in eating. 
Another interpretation of the sûtra is "the affix tumun is added to a verb, when it has in composition with it, the word saffror sax or a synonym of alam having the sense of paryapti. Thus Tatat sen, sqa , vitafat 
Why do we say 'having the sense of capability'? Observe watat! 
Why do we say 'having the meaning of '? Observe watat The word uw in the preceding sûtra has not the sense of war in that aphorism. With the sense of step, the present sâtra will apply: as vauna TO 
aft ha 11 €9 ni açtfrit aft, a वृत्तिः वातसंजका प्रत्ययाः कर्तरि कारके भवन्ति ॥ 
67. The affixes called 'krit' are used in the sense of an agent. 
The words formed by krit affixes have the sense of agency; when no other special sense has been assigned to them by any rule, then this rule will apply, and fix the force of the affix. This rule will not, therefore, apply to kril affixes like eya (III. 2. 5 and 6) to which a special sense has been assigned, but affixes like nga and Ty &c. (III. 1. 133). Thus the means a 'doer', mert 'an agent'; 75€: 'one who causes happiness'; ist 'who seizes'; va: who cooks.' 
भव्यगेयप्रवचनोयोपस्थानीयजन्याप्याव्या पात्या वा॥६॥५०॥ 407-09- -rautatu-1124-1812at:, at, (watt) u 
yf: # Houtga: ragt: saft af farvisaram 
68. The words 'bhavya,' 'geya,' 'pravachaniya, 
ARE GOV 
ISTRY OF CUL 
ERNMENT OF 
SINIW 
OF INDIA 
THE LA AFFIXES. 
[Br. III. CH. IVU. 69/ 
. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
'upasthâniya,' 'janya,' 'âplâvya' and 'âpâtya' may optionally be used to denote the agent. 
These words are formed by kritya affixes and therefore by rule III. 4. 70, they would generally denote an action in the abstract, and the object, but not the agent. The present eûtra, however, makes them denote optionally the agent also. In the alternative they denote the action-name and the abject also. Thus you may mean 'existed,' 'existence,' or 'one who exists'; a means 'a singer,' 'a song,' or 'singing'; sapato means 'one who explains,' 'what ought to be explained,' or 'an explanation'; Juarat means 'who waits upon,' "what ought to be waited upon or served,' or waiting upon or attendance'; us= sat or a means 'one who gives birth, i. e., a father,' birth' or 
what is born'; rara= migaset or gitarata means 'who immerses,' one 'im mersing,' or 'what ought to be immersed'; FITICU = surcacast or Fâa means what falls upon' falling upon,' or 'what onghi to fall upon.' Thus har tag: Tixat the boy is the singer of the Sâma'; or arfer arada 11f the boy ought to sing the Sama'; प्रवधनीयो गुरु: स्वाध्यायस्य the guru is the expounder of the lesson'; aaT TETT FUTETT: 'the lesson onght to be explained by the teacher'; speuratarsaaret git: 'the pupil is the servant of the teacher'; Thema: fusta TT: 'the teacher ought to be served by the pupil.' 
for atâ 1n *: 1€cuucifa 1 , af, T, giá, s, viên đi, (acc) 
fer: T: fate wafea, 79107a aft, w aat wigviT wa fra, 37 Crama itu 
69 The tense-affixes called 'la' are used iu denoting the object and the agent; and after intransitive verbs, they denote the action as well as the agent. 
The term means the ten affixes known as ac, faz , &c.; is the common element of them all; and these affixes when stripped of all indicatory letters, leave behind only the letter which is thus common name for them all. The # in the sûntra, is the nominative plural of By the word in the sûtra, we draw in the word af or 'agent' from the last sûtra into this. The force of these tense-affixes, when placed after transitive verbs is to denote the onject and the agent; and when placed after intransitive verbs, is to denote either faction' (a) or it may denote the 'agent.' 
The verb itself denotes the action; to be or to do, generally; or to be or to do, in a particular manner. In the active voice the affix marks the agent; in the passive voice of a transitive verb, it marks the object; but 
in the passive form of an intransitive verb, the action itself. Thus waa uut a n the village is gone to by Devadatta'; bere a of a deuotes the object 
URE. GOVE 
STRY OF CUL 
RNMENT OF IN 
BROMI. ČA. IV. § 70.] 
THE KRITYA AND KTA AFFIX IS. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
and is in passive construction. eura # qaça: 'Devadatta goes to the village'; here the affix far of teara denotes the agent, and the sentence is in active con suruction. The verb te being a transitive verb, can take both the active and passive constructions or, to use the Sanskrit technical phraseology, the tense affixes, after transitive verbs, denote the agent and the object. They can never denote wa or action after transitive verbs, that is, transitive verbs cannot be us d impersonally. Let us now give examples of Intransitive verbs; Freya eachait is seated by Devadatta'; the verb teua here denotes merely wa or 'action. In other words, we may call this an impersonal construction. s a auca: Devadatta sits'; here the verb sea denotes the agent or is in the active voice. 
Professor Bohtlingk translates the stûra thus :-"A finite verb expresses the agent as well as the object; but the Intransitive verbs denone, in addition to that, the Impersonal idea of the action." The word 978 means action consi dered in the abstract. 
autta hithauet: 1 ge n agefa u aut:, ya, -- payt: 1 
yfes u aata viat: Tv997: multa STUCT wafa 
70. The affixes called 'kritya' and the affix 'kta' and those that have the sense of 'khal,' have only these last two senses, namely, an action and an object (bhava and karma). 
The word auts 'of those two' refers to pra fan Impersonal act,' and *, 'object. The word wa 'only' is used in the sûtra to exclude the word 'agent' from it. Thus waca: vet waar 'the mat must be made by you'; 1975 vuit aar 'the rice must be eaten by you.' Here the affix aca has the force of denoting the object; we may, therefore, call it the Potential Passive Participle affix. So also arfgaat naar 'thou must eat'; ufaasi waar 'thou must lie down.' Here the sense of the affix as being that of the action soself, which being Im personal, is in the singular number, as it is one only, and neither male nor fe male, there is, from the nature of the case, a singular affix, and the neuter gen der is employed. 
Similarly the affis denotes both the object and the action; at a aat 'the mat is made by you'; y tgat waar 'the rice is eaten by you.' Here at is used with the force of denoting the object and may be called the past pas sive participle. 
Similarly a may be used in denoting the mere act; sferei wat 'you sat'; fuel a you lay down.' 
Similarly the affixes having the sense of war (III. 3. 126) denote both 
GURE 
VERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
UT OF INDIA 
THE AFFIX KTA. 
[BK. III. CH. IV. $ 
सत्यमेव जयते 
the object and the Impersonal act. In the following examples the affixes denote the object; funt: set waar 'this mat is made, by little at a time, by you'; th: 'what is made with ease'; Tta: 'what is made with difficulty.' In the following examples the affixes denote the act. irritaHa waar and carga paari 
After transitive verbs, the kritya the kta and the khalartha affixes only depote the object, but never denote the ota or 'an Impersonal action,' 
sifa#fr : fi ll 98 gafat u wifeft, og aft, 7, (Hrâ, *#fr) 
gra: u stíga fra: mit fafya: Tufc wafa, hitta JUTATE # : 
71. The affix 'kta' also denotes the agent when it expresses a beginning of an action. 
The word semafor means 'the beginning of an action' or when the action signified by the roots, is intended to be expressed merely as having been simply begun. The force of in the sûtra is to indicate that even when the beginning of an action is intended to be expressed, the th may be used to denote the act and the object as well. Thus at: ce a here the agent is dencted प्रकृतः कदा देवदत्तेन; here the object is denoted. प्रकृतम् देवदत्तेन; here mere action is denoted, Similarly प्रभुक्त प्रोदनं देवदत्तः (agent); प्रभुक्त शोदनो देवदत्तेम (object); ya qacta (act), 
7 ayin faite au75eutsfarcze 11 93 11 - far l a#-*#**-faa-aite FUT-184-24-99-58-uta fare:, 7, (e, ac, Ta, 5H TT) 
fe: unit yigits -a: ftaufe-459 T: **cafewafa, HITTEI77 प्रासंचभावकणोः ॥ 
72. The affix 'kta' is employed in denoting the agnet as well as the act and the object, after verbs implying motion, after intransitive roots, and after the verbs 'ślish' (to embrace), 'si' (to lie down), 'stha'(to stand), 'as' (to sit), 'vas' (to dwell), 'jan' (to produce), 'ruh (to mount) and 'jri' (to grow old). 
The phrase "the act and the object' has been added into the sâtra by virtue of the word 4. Thus at e at T 'Devadatta is gone to the village' (agent); 414 as 'the village was gone to by Devadatta (object); 17e are 
Devadatta went (act). The past participle forms from Intransitive verbs denote the agent and the act only; or in other words, they are used imperson ally and in the Active voice, but never in the Passive voice or denoting the obiect. Thus tware 'you were wearied' (agent), are wear object); sifaau URE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
TRY OF CU 
(BWIL. CA. IV. $ 73, 74.] 
THE AFFIXES KTA &c. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
तिसरकार 
*7T *you sat' (agent), sfaa vurar (object); sefeat you want you embraced the teacher' (agent), sufragt TT: wat 'the guru was embraced by you' (object), Sfatet waar you embraced (act); goufaat To HUTT 'you lay near the guru' (agent), quafaat ya: wuar (object), curta saar (act); sufegat you ফয়া (agent), ভ ঘদ্দিন ও সমমা (object), ভঘঘিন বলা (act) ; ভাবিনী অব ফাযাত্ব 
(agent), Jarfaat ya: waar (object), surf waar (act); safar Tv HATT (agent), staticat ya: Waat (object), wafua wat(act); swarrat tu sifaru (agent), sarar rita arufast (object), wear it (act); it to wart (agent), 
STT TT waat (object), it waar (act); goitif avait aucu: (agent), wuuta guatach (object), gant acta (act). The verbs fear &c, become tran sitive with ce. tain prepositions or upasargas, hence they have been mene tioned here. Otherwise there was no necessity of mentioning them separate ly; as they, being intransitive verbs, when without prepositions, would be In cluded in the word akarmaka of the sûtra. 
gratuita facra II 33 11 geifa il gray. at, jagran वृत्तिः ॥ दाशगोपनी शब्दौ सम्पदाने कारो निपात्येते॥ 
73. The word dasa' and 'goghna' are irregularly formed, and the affix in these denotes the idea of the Dativa or Recipient, 
The word gw comes from the roob ang 'to give' by adding the afiz 97 under rule III. 1. 134. This being a gara word would have other wise denoted the agent by rule III. 4. 67 of this chapter. The present sutra makes it denote the recipient or have the force of the dative case. Thus 4120 means 'to whom something is given i.e. & servant'. Similarly goghna does not mean the killer of cow' but the on whose coming the cow is killed in order to give him, that is to say, a guest'. It is this irregularly-formed word goghna which is made applicable to the priests, guests, sons-in-law &c, and not the re gularly-formed word goghna which means 'a killer of cow' or a 'Chandal'. Thus 
=prufa aed; s = g' ti qua 
भीमादयोऽपादाने ॥ ४॥ पदानि ॥ भीम-धादयः, अपादाने। fa T TU: TEET syarata fa creuzau 
74. The words 'bhîma' &c. are irregularly formed and denote ablation. 
These words are formed by Unálé affixes. Thus far (Un. 1. 145, 148); 1+9 + = (Un. I. 148) &c. By the next sâtra, Umádi worde do not denote ordinarily the recepient and the ablation. 
The present sûtra makes them do so in the case of af words. The following is a list of Bhimadi words -- , otom, urn: (Un. III. 82), 2, 
31 
URE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
ev OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
THE AFFIX ETA. 
[BK. III. CH. IV. 
सरकार 
(Un I. 7), fa: (Uņ. IV. 45), ta: (UTM. IV. 217), ESTti, ti, t i, 53, or 72: (Un. II. 61), TT (Un. II. 62) aufa: 1 
UE419 Taça: 1194nggitan at UT, 7, sura:1 fa: U SUTĘ: TETT RTISTITICITÉATIU7*1947 wafa un 
75. The words formed by “Uņâdi affixes denote other ideas than these two, i. e., recepient and ablation, 
The Unádi affixes being a subdivision of krit affixes, would have, by rule III. 4. 67, denoted the agent. By the present sûtra they are made to de note the object, the instrument and the location also. The word arrut has been used in the sûntra in order to include the word sampradána also. For had the sâtra been wait, only the Apádna kárala would have been excluded, as being the nearest; but not so the Sampardána káraka. Thus afsatsat=ufe: (Un. IV. 120),agriculture i. e. what is ploughed' (object); afga qfarag: Uņ. I. 69) 'a thread is e. what is drawn out', gafla aes (Un. IV. 145) a way i.e. what is established'; ia= (Un. IV. 145) 'skin' (in which they live). 
misfarw shoanfaatuaaTATTHU: 11 96 11 Ugifat 11 :, full, vitou-fa-studETii=:, (:, na, fruft) 
faz u sitsanfannaeinfatti sit fafea: atsfuata wafa vattTMEN sterrena: mutafuatay, m as aga nafratag, a w arfar. aig 
76. The affix 'kta' which is ordained after roots denoting fixedness (to cling to a place), motion and taking, gives the sense of location as well. 
The verbs denoting site or 'persisting in a place' are Intransitive verbs, The word pratyavasåna means 'eating' also; the force of in the sà tra is that the affix kta expresses other relations algo. Thus after verbs denoting 'fixed ness' or dhrauvyártha it denotes the agent, the act and the location; after verbs denoting ‘motion' is gives the sense of agent, object, act and location; after verbs denoting 'taking or eating', it has the sense of object, act and location. Thus sstraat aaT: 'Devadatta sat'; sifaad aa 'sitting by him (act); Tufuat this was their seat' (location); urat qucat 7 Devadatta went to the village' (active); यातो देवदत्सेन शामः (passive); यातं देवदयेन (abstract); इदमेषां यातम् this is their 
place of going' (location); मुक्त श्रीदनी देवदत्तेन (passive); भुक्त मोदन देवदत्तः (active); 2 9 m (abstract); tai yen location); w at: stat a: The मा in भुक्ता and पीता has the force ofमतुप (IV.2.85) भुक्तमेषामस्ति or पीतमेषामस्ति । 
U 11 99 H te nu ufuaeaawans, area a facatut dead agaBy U 
c. GOVER 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY ON 
NMENT OF IND 
CINDIA 
Ce. IV.77, 78.] 
उस्कृति मंत्रान्त 
SUBSTITUTES OF LA. 
सचिम नवल 
तिसरकार 
77. In the place of 'la' will be substituted the affixes which we shall announce hereafter. 
- Thus sû tra consists of one word et meaning of a'. It is an adhilcára sûtra. The word vet is the genitive singular of a, the sin being for the sake of pronunciation. The 7 means the ten affixes: a present, fac perfect, Je first future, le second future, att imperative at Vedic subjunctive, a imperfect, fe potential and benedictive, Te aorist, et conditional. Six of these tenses have indicatory T, and four have indicatory ! 
Professor Bohtlingk translates this sâtra thus : _In the following sâtras the word T should be supplied to complete the sense, i. e., the phrase 'in the 
lace of all those endings which are known as the Personal endings of various senses and moods, and are known in their totality as a 
নিম্বিলিত বাঘাঘলুলিব্দিছি U 95 n ugifer o fau-az-fm-fera-e77-5-for-a4-47-27-sat-ph 
TE-AIU17--e-afe-uite, (WET) 1 
वृत्तिः । लस्व तिवादय आदेशा भवन्ति । 
78. The following are the substitutes of la':-tip,' “tas, jhi; sip thas, tha; “mip, “vas, mas; “ta” – tâm, jha'; 
thâs,' â thâm,' dhvam'; 'it,' 'vahi,' mahin. 
These are the well-known Conjugational-affixes, called also Personal endings, and are ordained generally after all the ten tenses. But as a matter of fact; they undergo various additions and alterations in the different tenses. Some of these changes have already been mentioned before; see sê tra II. 4.85, III. 1. 33, &c. Others will be mentioned hereafter. It is only in the present tense or wa that the affixes as above given, may be applied to the root, in some cases, without any alteration. 
The sin far, fag and fry is for the sake of accent (III, 1.4); the z in te for distinguishing it in the sutra ratsa (111. 4. 106); and the sin fee for form ing the Pratyahára fae which is the general name of the above 18 conjuga tional or personal affixes, Stripped off their indicatory letters, the following table shows the conjugational affixes as added under various tenses : 
PEDIENT TENSE.- €! Parasmaipada. 
Atmanepada Sing Dual. Plural. 
Sing 
Dual. Plural. 1st. pers. नि 2nd. 
यस 
शावे 
Srd. 
) 
URE - GOVE 
STRY OF CULT 
MINISTRY 
CRNMENT OF 
OF INDIA 
THE TENSE AFFIXEST 
BK. III. CH. IV. 
18. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
AA 
ताच 
AU 
जाये 
IMPERFECT OR FIRST PRETERITE.--UGI Parasmaipada. 
Atmanepada. Sing. Dual.. Plural. Sing. Dual. Plural. lat. pers. 58 
नाहि 2nd. 
थारु 
वाया Brd. 
वान् 
লন। प्रस्त POTENTIAL OR OPTATIVE-विधिशिल। 1st. pers. या 
विधि 2nd. यासू यावर यात 
ईथास् ईयायास Brd. यात यावाचू 
ईयावा IMPERATIVE-लोट् । Tab. pers. आणि 
धाम 
प्रावहै शाम 2nd. 
आथा 3rd. 
धातार 
नन्तासु PERFECT OR SECOND PRETERIT..--FC 1st.pors. 
वी 2nd. थ 
नयुसू 3rd. 
जावे FIRST FUTURE OR DEFINITE FOTURE.-लुट् । Isbapers.तालिमबावसातास्मस । वाहे तावडे वामहे 2nd. तासितास्थसतास्था 
नासाये মাত্র 3rd.तावारी 
SECOND FUTURE OR INDEFINITE FUTURE. 1st. pers. Eurfa स्याबस् स्यामस् 
स्यावहे 
स्थान स्यसि 
स्यथस् 
स्थध्ये 3rd. स्थति 
स्यन्ति। स्यते स्येते 
स्यन्ते AORIST OR THIRD PRETEBITE. 
LT ist.pers. सच 
स्म 
स्वहि महि 2nd. 
स्तन 
साधान 
ध्वसु 3rd. वीत 
सुर 
साता PREGATIVE OR BENEDICTIVE.-बाशीलिङ्। 1sb. pers. यास 
वास्थ 
बीच ব্যাক্তি ফীল 2nd. बा बास्तम् बास्त 
चीष्ठास बीयास्यार রীত্ব Brd. यात यावा पासुस् 
सीधास्तासु जीरन् CONDITIONAL. -ला। Ist. pers. स्वस् 
स्यावहि 
स्थानाहि 2nd. 
स्यवर 
त्ययास स्येथाम् स्यध्वन 3rd, स्यत् स्यता 
स्वेता 
तासे 
तार 
2nd. 
....: EEEEEEEE 
Ish. pers. च 
स्व 
स्वाच् 
REGOVA 
GOVERNMEN) 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
ENT OF INDIA 
SL 
सस्कृति मंत्रान" 
. $ 79-82.] 
SUBSTITUTION IN TAL PERFECT. 
लय 
भारत' 
तिसरको 
टित धात्मनेपदानां टेरे॥ 9 ॥ पदानि ॥ टितः, सामनेपदा नाम्,, ए, (लस्य)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ तितो खकारस्य स्थाने यान्याल नेपदानि तेषां टेरेकारादेशी भवति ॥ 
79. The substitute 'e' replaces the last vowel, with the consonant that follows it, of the 'Atmane pada' substitutes of that 'la' which has an indicatory 't.' 
The e or the tense-affixes that have an indicatory are six :--a, सिद्, लु, लट्, लोन, लेट् । In these tenses the final portion called टि of th: Atina. nepada affixes is changed into ए| Thus a becomes , शाताम् becomes शाते, का becomes &c, as shown in the foregoing table, 
The affixes शानच्, and कानप् are also Atmanepada affixes, Why are not their finals changed in to m as in पचमान, यजमान: ? Because the word शालने serai in the sutra refers by context to the Atmanepada afixes included in the pratyahara विङ्। 
थासस्से॥०॥ पदानि ॥ थासः, से, (लस्य, द्वित:) ॥ वृत्तिः॥टितो लकारस्य यस्यास्तस्य शब्द प्रादेशी भवति । 
80. The word 'se' is the substitute of thâs' in those tenses that have an indicatory t.' 
In the six tenses already mentioned in the last sutra, the Atmanepada TE is replaced by ê, as we have already shown in the preceding table. Thus पचने, पेचिये, पतासे, पक्षयसे । 
लिटस्तझयोरेशिरेच ॥६॥पदानि लिटः, त-कयोः, एश, इरेच॥ वृत्तिः ॥ बिडादेशयोस्समायोर्यथासंरख्यमेशरेच् इत्येताबादेशी भवतः॥ 
81. The words 'es' and 'irecho are the substitutes of "ta' and 'jha' respectively in the Perfect tense. 
The y of oz indicates that it replaces the whole of the affix a (I. 1.55) The w of इरेच is for the sake of accent (VI. 1. 165). Thus पेचे, पेचाते पेपिरे See the foregoing table of tenses for the Atmanepada. 
परस्मैपदानां गलतुसुस्थलथुसणलवमाः ॥२॥ पदानि ॥ परस्मै पदानां, जल-अतुस-उस-थल-प्रथुम-त्र-णाल-व-मा:, (लिटः)॥ 
त्तिः ॥ लिहादेशानां परस्मैपदसंज्ञकानां ययासंख्यं तिवादीनां पालादया पवादेशा भवन्ति । 
82. In the room of the Parasmaipada affixes, the following are substituted in the Perfect tense: 
nal (5) 
thal (थ) 
pal (7) Dual. 
atus (अतुः) 
athus (शा) Plural. 
us (:) 
ma () 
Sing 
REGOVE 
OVERNMENT 
MISTRY OF CUL 
MINISTRI 
NT OF INDIA 
INDIA 
THE AFFIXES OF THE IMPERATIVE. 
[BK. III. OF. IV. S 83-85. 
. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
जसरकार 
The indicatory o in गल and यत् is for the sake of accent (VI. 1. 193). The indicatory is for the sake of causing वृद्धि (VII. 2.25.) Thus पपाणा, बेपतुः, पेयुः, पेचिय or पपक्य, पेचयुः, पेच, पपाच or पपच, पेचिव पेधिम। 
विदो सटो वा ॥३॥ पदानि ॥ विदः, लटः, वा,(परस्मैपदानां, गलतुसुस्थलधुसगलवमाः)॥ 
वृत्तिः॥ विद ज्ञाने, अस्माद्धातोः परेषां सडादेशानां परस्मैपदामा सादयो नव विकल्पे मादेशा भवन्ति ॥ 
83. The above nine affixes of the Perfect tense are optionally added in the Present tense also after the verb 'vid.' 
Thus: Singular. वेद or वेत्ति वेत्य or वैटिस द or वेनि Dual. विदतुः or वित्तः विदयुः or वित्यः वि or विद्य: Plural. विदुः or विदन्ति विद or विस्य बिद्ध or विद्गः 
ब्रवः पञ्चानामादित नाहोब्रवः॥४ापदानि॥ ब्रवः, पञ्चानाम्, पादितः, माहः, ब्रुवः, (परस्मैपदानां, णलतुसुस्थल, लटः, वा)। 
वृत्तिः॥ युवः परस्य व परस्मैपदानां पंचानामादिभूवानां पंचव गजादय शादेशा भवन्ति, तत्सन्नियोगेन च दुव शाहशब्द शादेश भवति॥ 
84. Instead of the first five tense-affixes, in the Present tense coming after the verb 'brû' (to speak), there may optionally be the affixes of the Perfect; 'dha' being, at the same time, the substitute in the room of brû.' 
Thus t 'he says'; wted: 'they two say'; wigthey say?; He thon sayst'; आइयुः 'you two say'; the rest like as shown below : 
Singular. आह or वीति प्रात्य or बबीषि Dual. 
शाहतु: or अतः आइयुः or बथ: Plural. शाहु or अवन्ति अथ 
The word mica: 'first' is used in the sûtra to indicate that the substi bation should not take place in the case of the last four affixes. The repetition of the word wat in the sûtra indicates the original expression which is to be re placed, and shows that this change occurs in the Parasmaipada affixes only. 
लोटो लड्वत् ॥८५ पदानि लोटः, लङवत् ॥ दृत्तिः ॥ लोटो शमवतकार्य भवति ॥ 
85. The personal endings of the Imperative are as those of the Imperfect. 
This is an afdeu subra; as in the there are the affixes alt, a, a, and a, so also in the wोटू। Thus पता, पतस्, पचत, बचाव, बचाम । 
बबीपि 
CURE • Goya 
GOVERNMEN 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY OF 
BIA IIICh. IV. S 86-88.] 
SUBSTITUTION IN THE IMPERATIVE. 
पति मंत्रालय 
सत्यमेव जयते 
X 
777 
Q-If att is like 75, why have we not the augment , stre, or the substitution of yr for f (see III. 4. 111) in the case of site also ? 
A.---The at of sútra III. 4. 83 is understood in this sû tri also, so that the analogy between uite and is a limited analogy and does not make all the rules which are applicable to , equally applicable to give also. 
95: 11 € II açta 11 T:, 7:, (ata:) 11 gra: u utategut HICET TATTeat walau बार्तिकस ॥हिन्योक्त्वप्रतिषेधो वक्तव्यः॥ 
86, In the Imperative, 'u' is substituted for 'i'. 
Thus fa becomes y, afa becomes weg as have already been given in the above table. 
Vårt.---Prohibition must be stated in the case of affixes fe and for of ng 1 In the case of these two affixes, the is not changed into 5, either because they have been so taught in the sâtras, or because the ot of sûtra III. 4.83 is understood here also and makes this rule an optional rule of limited scope as in the last sûtra (sufega fant). Thus yag, 
In fact, this sûtra is confined to fa and for only, and does not apply to fe to which the next sâtra applies. 
agf59 II 09 11 a:, fr, afaa, 7, (IC:) 11 tra: o terece are reunient wafa 
87. In the Imperative, 'hi' is substituted for 'si', and this has not the indicatory 'p' of 'sip', i. e., it is acutely accented. 
The substitute being like the original expression (1. l. 56), fe substitii ted for fog would have been a fra affix, but for this sûtra, which clearly states in its latter portion that this fe is not to be regarded as having an indicatory 
Thus लुनीहि पुनीहि, राध्नुहि, तपहि; and as this affix is अपितु, rule 1.2.4 makes it feu also, and thereby no guņa takes place. 
at fa s ofa u ar, fa, agafaa, etc:) n tra: u sieun efo face feugat atstugafa u 
88. In the Vedas, the substitute 'hi' is optionally treated as not having an indicatory 'p 
The result is that in the Chhandas the second person singular of are has two forms as starfs or statis; gyfer or garfu, fr being substituted for fe in the Vedas, by rule (VI. 4. 103) as in the following verse: 
W. TUTTès entratatraca aya'tfafagiai JOTETETT'Titrega masafafanu 
-Rig 1. 189. 1. Yajur Veda. 40. 16. 
VRE • GOVA 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
SUBSTITUTION IN THE IMPERATIVE. 
[BK. III. CH. IV. S 80-93. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
9777 278 
#Fice i ugn #i, FT, (ma) 11 yfa: u turenet affraan wafa un 
S9. In the Imperative, 'ni' is substituted for the affix 'mi'. 
This supersedes the rule relating to the change of Tinto 8, and the rule of lopa ; see the table; thus vetfor, oferi 
M a: 11 de 11 Ema II 15, yai, (:) 11 afer: te grafy VATTET 
S y argot wafa u 90. In the Imperative âm' is substituted for what would have substituted otherwise 'e' by III. 4. 79. 
This relates to the Atmanepada affix t. In the Atmanepada, wie is substituted for in the Imperative; see the table; twart, vary. Wara 
gatxut a negn de i 9-aikui, a-yat, (te:, ya:) u জিয়ঃ ফৰোমায় যত জঘিল যা যথার্থভজ আ ম মুনাৰায়ী 
91. For such an 'e' coming after 's', is substituted T', and for that coming after 'v, is substituted 'am', in the Imperative. 
Th s supersedes the site substitution of the last sûntra. Thus, for a we have , and for så we have vat; see the table; thus vea, 48901 
Sagwa fasiCInterfonare, mar, foa, 7, (uit:)n yfers are vrefronung HUEUTETTU afer stangrui fogafar u 
92. In the Imperative 'at' is the augment of the affixes the first person and the termination is as if it had an indicatory 'p'. 
This is clear. Thus in the Paragmaipada, we have sarfe, wr, 779 0 Thus werfer, acata, *Turk; eta, warat, and 
Ta Ê 11 e nucifa il ga:, :, (C, 34#) ufarsu aiguafowa Tarte attest wafan 
93. The 'ai' is substituted for 'e' forming part of the affixes of the first person of the Imperative. 
I his relates to the Atmanepada alix. Thus samura, stara, 
But the resulting from gandhi, is not to be changed into 2. Thus uute + =va, 2 + = +Hare, no doubt, the belongs to the Ina perative by VI. 1. 85, being the substitute of of anda. But this is not to be changed into a on the maxim that this is the result of a se rule, for 
TURE.GA 
av OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
ERNMENT ON 
BIM III. CH. IV. § 94-97..] 
ELISION OF 'I'. 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
सत्यमेव जयते 
रतसपकार 
the role of sandhi (VI. 1. 87), is a. बहिर rule, while the present sutra is an अन्तरङ्ग rule; because of the following Paribhasha, असिद्ध बहिरङ्गमन्तरङ्गे 'that which is Bahiranga is regarded as not having taken effect, when an Antaranga rule is to be applied. 
लेटो उडाटौ ॥ ४॥ पदानि ॥ लेटः, अट-नाटी॥ वृत्तिः ॥ लेटो डाटांवागनौ भवतः पर्यायेण: ॥ 
· 94. The augments 'at' and 'at' are added to the personal endings of the Vedic Subjunctive. 
The augments ye and said are not to be added at once, but by turns. Thus जुष्+सिप् +अ+1=जोषिषत, वारिषत; मान्दिषत; similarly पत्+शाद+ति= पतावि; staarfai See III. 1. 34 for the addition of fag in the above. 
मात ऐ॥५॥ पदानि ॥ प्रातः, ऐ, (लेट:) वृत्तिः ॥ लेट् सम्बन्धिन प्राकारण्य ऐकायादेशो भवति ॥ 
95. In the Subjunctive, 'ai' is the substitute of â' in the first and second person dual of the Atmanepada. 
Thus पनौते, मन्त्रयैथे, करवैते, करवैये। Why is not the augment या changed into a ? Because otherwise the rule enjoining te would be superfluous. 
वैतोऽन्यत्र ॥ ६॥ पदानि वा, ऐतः, अन्यत्र (लेटः)। 
वृत्तिः॥ लेट सम्बन्धिन एकारस्य पाखेकारादेशो भवति अन्यत्रेत्यानन्तरो बिधिरपेषयते। भात से इत्येतद्विषचं बर्जयित्वा एत से भवति ॥ 
96. In the Subjunctive, 'ai' is optionally the substie. tute of'e' in other places than those mentioned in the last sûntra. 
Thus शये, ईशै, &c, in the following exampless-समाहानि शय, बहनेक पशूनानीशै,नदया सब वो ग्रहा गृह्मान्तै, भवत्यान्येव वा पात्रात्युच्चान्त | And in the alternative we have simply y, as बन च ते मनो दश च दघसउत्तरस। 
• Why do we say 'in other places than those governed by the last shtra' ? Observe मन्त्रयैते, मात्रयैथे। 
इतश्च लोपः परस्मैपदेषु ॥६॥ पदानि॥ इतः, च, लोपः परस्मै पदेषु, (लेट:) 
वृत्तिः ॥ लेट संबंधित कारस्य परस्मैपदविषयस्य लोपो भवति वानुवृत्त पनवणमपिसावतिक 
97. In the Parasmaipada affixes the 'i' is optionally elided in the Subjunctive, 
The at of the last sätra is understood here also. Thus fasa (Rig. II. 35.1). तारिषत् (Rig. I. 25.12), मन्दियत् । In the alternative, it is not elided as vatra faga (Rig. VII. 25. 1). Ev ala The of re,aft and wife of the Atmanepada are not elidede 
39 
URE.GOV 
TRY OF CULTUA 
MINISTRY 
NERNMENT ON 
SUBSTITUTION OF 'Tas', 'Tuas', &c. 
[BR. III. CH. IV. $198.101. 
संस्कृति मंशा 
सत्यमेव जयते 
सयभार 
स उत्तमस्य ॥ ॥ पदानि ॥ सः, उत्तमस्थ, (लेटः, वा, लोपः। वृत्तिः ॥ लेट् सम्बन्धिन उत्तमपुरुषस्य सकारस्य वा खोपो भवति ॥ 
98. The 's' of the first person is optionally elided in the Subjunctive, 
AS करवाब Or करवाया, करवाम or करवामः The first person is used in the sû tra to indicate that the r is not elided in any other person, 
नित्यं ङितःलाप नित्यं, डितः, (लस्य, उत्तमस्य, सः, लोपः ॥ अतिः॥डितो लकारस्य ये उत्तमस्तस्य नित्यं सकारस्य लोपो भवति । 
99. There is always elision of the 's' of the first person of the affixes that come in the room of that 'la' which has an indicatory '1.' 
The tense-affixes having indicatory डू are four, namely, ला, लि , लु and I \ In their case, the elision of is not optional as was the case in the last sûtra, but compulsory. See the table already given. In other words, in the Imperfect, Potential, Aorist and Conditional, the is elided in the 1st person. Thus soara, Y The word freu 'always' is used in order to stop the anuvritti of the word 'optionally." 
इतश्च ॥ १० ॥ पदानि ॥ इतः, च, (डितः, नित्यं, लोपः,लस्य)॥ मुन्तिः ॥ किल्लकारसम्बन्धिन इकारस्य नित्यं लापो भवति ॥ 
100. And there is elision of the 'i' of that Parasmai pada affix which is the substitute of a 'la' having an indicatory ..' 
Thus, for fa we have 7, for fa we have , &c, as in the above table. The rof Atmanepada is, however, nob elided, because the anuvritti of Paras maipada is understood here from sâtra III. 4. 97. Thus you, surut, but अपचाबहि and अपचामहि । 
तस्थस्थमिपां तान्तंतामः ॥ १०१ ॥ पदानि ॥ तस-थस-थ-मिपाम्, तां-तं-त-मामः, (डितः)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ डिल्लकारसम्बन्धिनां चतुर्णी यथासंख्यं तानादय आदेशा भवन्ति । 
101. The affixes tâm,' tam,' 'ta' and 'âm' are the substitutes of the four affixes 'tas,' 'thas 'tha' and 'mip' respeo. tively, of any la' which has an indicatory po' 
This we have shown in the above table. Thus wait, m at, अपचत, अपच, अपातास, अपाक्तम, अपाक्त, अपाच । 
लिङस्सीयुट् ॥ १०२ ॥ पदानि । लिङः, सीयुत् ।। अतिः॥ शिकादशाणी सीयुडानमो भवति । ORE • GOVE. 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY OS 
T OF INDIA 
BASILI. Cu. IV. $ 102-104.] 
THE AUGMENT YASUT. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
4999. 
परतरकार 
102. The personal endings of the Potential and the Benedictive take the augment 'sîyut'. 
The g of age is indicatory and shows that this augment is to be pla ced before the affixes (1. 1. 46). The u is for the sake of pronunciation; this rule applies to the Atmanepada affixes. In the Potential, the of this aug ment is elided by VII. 2. 79, and the t also, before a personal-ending begin ning with a consonant, is dropped according to VI. 1. 66. In this way, we have ta, thalamu, and by III. 4. 105, TITI In the Benedictive, the augment retains its full form, only so far as it is not geverned by VI. 1. 66. Thus 
ite, vetateary vetri 
यासुट परस्मैपदेषदात्तो ङिच्च ॥ १०३ ॥ पदानि ॥ यासुट , re-u@g, FÇIT:, fea, , (fat:) 
वृत्तिः ॥ परस्मैपदविषयस्य लिडो यामुडागमो भवति सीबुटोऽपवादः सचोदातो भवति, डिच्च॥ 
103. When the Parasmaipada affixes of the Poten tial follow, then 'yâsut' acutely accented, is their augment, and the termination is regarded as having an indicatory 'i'. 
The debars atge; the ye_of age is indicatory; the real augment is 18. All augments being anudatta, the present sûtra therefore especially uses the word udâtta to show that this augment is an exception to the general rulo. Though face has an indicatory , and therefore by the rule I. 1.56, its substi tutes would also be regarded as having an indicatory , the repetition of the word fea in this gâtra shows the existence of the paribhâsha "that the be longing to a does not influence its substitutes;" in other words, the substitutes of 275, fae, and are not to be regarded as having an indicatory (76 
Tufcurierat wafa). In the Potential, the 2 of Tige, is elided by VII. 2. 79. So we get the forms gula, gaiare, and by applying III. 4. 108 nnd VI. 1. 96, gy . For the Benedictive fac the following sa tra applies. 
façıfatfu il poy Il açtfr nl fora, arrafa, (f6:, TIT, ET17:) 
ufo ufafe at fa aT UTGITT ward quiere: faggalam 
104. The augment 'yâsut' comes after that lin' also which denotes benediction, and it is acutely accented, and the substitutes of this liñ' are as if they had an indica tory 'k'. 
The fee of this sâtra refers to the personal affixəs of the Benedictive mood and not to the augment aige, for that would have been unnecessary, 
GOVERNMENT 
ULTURE. 
TRY OF CULTI 
• MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
THE AUGMENT SUT. 
[Bk. III. CH. IV. $ 106-107. 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
सत्यमेव जयते 
being already fra by the last rule. fra and fat are equal in prohibiting guņa and vriddhi, but fea is distinguished from faz inasmuch as fes causes the guņa of IT (VII. 3. 85), and also there is distinction between them with regard to the change of semi-vowel to vowel (VI. 1. 15 and 16). Thus yeqia. TET16715. अषयाजः, and जागर्यात. जागर्यास्तान and जोगर्यातु: In the Potential, वच्यात (no samprasarana); in the Benedictive, sara (vocalisation). So also uituta in the Potential. 
the H goy ni Euro II ET, 19, (fas:) | पुतिः ॥ भास्य विकादेशस्य रन्नित्ययमादेश भवति ।। 
105. The affix ran' is the substitute of jha' in the "Lii' (Potential and Benedictive). 
The win other places, is replaced generally by a (VII. 1. 3.), but in far, it is replace by . Thus varu, JOTT, TUTTI 
yetsa goe II Uçta Il Ci, a, (fas:) . yfers u fuerauea testemuner wafan 
106. Short 'a' is the substitute of 'i' of the Atmane pada first person singular in the Potential and Benedictive. 
Thus T, TIT, 70, rotto 
Q.-In the attra, the word ta is used, and the final a belongs to the farfer, therefore by rule I. 3. 4, this is not indicatory; why is it made so ? 
A.-This a is not any portion or member of the substitute wc; it is added to s merely for the sake of euphony. 
The te refers to the sea a affix of the first person singular; and not to the augment on the strength of the maxim अर्यवग्रहणे नानयकस्य । A combination of letters capable of expressing a meaning denotes, whenever it is employed in grammar, that combination of letters in so far as it possesses that meaning, but it does not denote the same combination of letters void of & meaning, 
ge faat: il pogol GIFT II GT, fa-ft:, (fa) 1 चिः ॥ पिकू संबधिनीस्तकारयकारयो बुडागमा भवति॥ 
107. The augment 'sut' is added to the affixes 'ta' and tha' when part of the affixes of the Potential and Benedio tive, 
The letters a and u are the objects to which the augment se is to be added; provided that the a and are the initial of the afixes employed in fae 
Ibe augment Age is applied to fax as sucb; in other words, fuq is 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY ON 
VERNMENT 
T OF INDIA 
संस्कृति मंत्रान 
BK-II. . IV. § 108-110.) 
SUBSTITUTION OF "Jar'. 
599 
there the seat, but in the case of Tz, fag is not the storit, but a and are the sottof The scope of tye and ge, being thus different, one does not debar the other. 
In the sutra, the word fa is used; the of far is merely for the sake of pronunciation, Thus te, gutareare , getti, TaTEUTE I In the Po tential, the x is elided by VII. 2. 79. 
e un 11 ugifer on #, (es:) n वृत्तिः ॥लिकादेशस्य के आदेशो भवति ॥ 
108, In the Potential and Benedictive, jus' is the substitute of 'jhi,' the ending of the first person plural Parasmai pada. 
This debars sa (VII. 1 3); thus yagi, ałT: 4 
fernanifafçrepengecufat- 
sya-fafçxa:,,(hy वृत्तिः ॥ सिचः परस्य अभ्यस्त संबकेभ्यो वेत्तेश्चोत्तरस्य जुमादेशो भयति ॥ 
109. (In those tenses which are marked with an indicatory 'i') 'jus' is the substitute of jhi,' when it comes after an Aorist in ‘sich,' or the Imperfect of a reduplicated verb, or the root 'vid' (to know). 
This applies to tenses having other than that of fat namely, the खाand लुङ् 
fer is comployed in forming the first Aorist. The reduplicated verbs, as well as the verb fag, form their third person plural in TT, in the tenses other than fax, and those that take for The word fear of sutra III, 4. 99, is under stood here also; and therefore this rule is restricted to the Imperfect (75) of the reduplicated verb. Thus of fay, we have sig's, seras 1 Similarly, after the Imperfect of the reduplicated verbs, we have চলাকান্ত, অভিযু, মা ভায্য ঃ। In the case of fag, we have ufag: 
ITT: 11 goli açta o strat, (ya, far) T: o fT4 st16TTEUTET TEET M aret vafa e 
110 (When 'sich' is elided), jus' is the substitute of 'jbi,' after an Aorist stem which ends in long '." 
The fur is elided by rule (II. 4. 77). Thus sags, sayt, weyi ı In other words, in those cases, where fou is elided by rules II. 4. 77, 78 and 79, 
only yg is the substitute of For where the verbs end in long sri In other words, this sutra restricts the scope of the last sûtar, by wbich after every fry, असू was to replace कि। 
The Fresent sâtra says that after verbs in which fou has been elided, 
URE 
Govs 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY ON 
RNMENT OF 
OF INDIA 
SALVADHATUKA AFFIXES. 
[BK. III. CH. IV. S 
सरवमय जयते 
17 
y does not replace for in the case of any other verb than that which ends in long y; it is thus a niyama rule. 
Thus, by rule II. 4. 77, fax is elided after the verb y but as y does not end in long y, its 3rd person plural Aorist vill not be in y! Thus, TTTT Here, by the last rale, and on the maxim that though fhuis elided, yet its force remains (T. 1. 62); TT would have replaced fi; but the present sûtra prohibits that. But where the fer is not elided, thore, of course, it does come. Thus ante, g': 
15: IFTIUG 189911 açıf 5., STIFTTET, (! T, 17:) 17 
वृत्तिः ॥ शाकारान्तादुत्तरस्याङादेशस्य को सादेशो भवति शाकटायनस्याचार्यस्य नतेन ॥ 
111. In the opinion of Sâkatâyana only, jus' is the substitute of jhi, in the Imperfect of the roots which end in a long ! 
• Thus wys, wg: In the alternative, we have it and warto 
Why is it repeated here, when the context would have supplied this word; for the sûtra, applies to fea tenses, of which being dealt with in the last, would leave 75 only to be dealt with by this aphorism for no other fea tense (like fac or 75 ) can end in <r? The repetition shows that the rule applies to those affixes which come after 75 as us, and not to those which come after another terse which is treated like Thus it is treated lilce 93, but for the purposes of this rule, site would not be so treated. Thus the fe of ate will not be changed into yt by III. 4. 109. Thus faşug, STUT facra The word sa has been used in the sû tra for the sake of the subsequent stûra. 
faqauppinggiran 9, 7, 95, stCTATET, 
W चिः॥ द्विषः परस्य लडादेशस्य को सादेशो भवति शाकटायनस्याचार्यस्य मतेन ॥ 
112. In the opinion of Sakatầyana only, jus' is the substitute of jhi' in the Imperfect after the verb 'dvish' (to hate). 
Thus safeg: 1 But according to others, sofauti 
facfuaaranas pp3 il gen fas-fara, atanga m yet a fare: fware heute eragin vafa u 
113. All personal endings (III 4.78) and all affixes with an indioatory 's,' are called 'sarvadhâtuka, 
Of rourse, this applies to the affixes which have been already treated before, namely, the affixes which relate to verbal roots and not to afga affixes &c. Thus, cafefe, ofarfa, , 13 fat and was are exceptions, 
RE 
GOVER 
CULTURE : 
RY OF 
RNMENT OF IN 
GL 
BIMA, ILI CH. IV. § 114-116.] 
ARDHADHATUKA AFFIXES. 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
सत्यमेव जयते 
24.4176 
रत सरकार 
Siege 9: 1188 ur nifer sigurn, a: 11 
वृत्तिः ॥ ति शिवश्च वर्जयित्वाऽन्यः प्रत्ययः शेषो धातुसंशब्दनेन विहित जाईधातुसंतो wafa e 
114, The remainder. i. e., the affixes other than tin, and those with an indicatory 's' subjoined to a verbal root, are called 'ardhadhâtuka.' 
Thus the affixes T, TT, TTET &c. are runiga affixes as in the following words-लविता, लवितुर, लविवव्यर। Here the augment इद् is added because of these affixes being called ardhadhátu ka by VII. 2. 35. 
The word wat: whose anuvritti began with sâtra III. I. 91, is undere stood bere also. So that the affixes in relation to the verbal roots get the name of sarvadhatula and árdhudhatuka; the a fixes applied to nouns do not get these names. Thus the case-affix *OTT when added to the noun T, is not called an árdhadhatuka afix, and therefore we have Fare, f*: &c. Had these aflixes been árdhadhatuko, they would have caused the guna of the base (VII. 3. 84). Similarly the affixes ea and ar in the words and and guar are not árthato dhát uka affixes. Had they been go, there would have been the insertion of the the augment = (VII. 2. 35). 
Similarly in sâtra III. 1.5 the affix T is used without changing the sense, after the roots Ty, fast and for But as this affix is added without the enunciation of the word grat: as it is in sûtra III. 1.7. this is not called ardhadhútuka, and does noi take the augment te, as yuri 
faculty offer a fuc, (HIGIJAU) u वृत्तिः॥लिडादेशस्तिकाईधातुकतंत्रो भवति॥ 
115. The personal endings of the Perfect are also called 'ardhadhâtuka.' 
This debars them from being called sárvadhatuka and, being drdha dhátuka, some of them take the augment se ; as afor, afer Moreover by their being árdhadhátula they do not admit of the Vikaranas Te &c. 
So from sa (ET, VI. I. 45) we have wa; here the st is elided by VI. 4 64, the affix being treated as árdhadhátula; similarly qua froni 
fastfarfa ngpen agafau fos, farfa, ( a) u greu afufe fat i fare scurgar wafaa 
116. When the sense is that of Benediction, the sub stitutes of 'lin' are called "årdhadhâtuka', i. e., the personal endings of the Benedictive are 'ardhadhâtuka'. 
This debars these affixes from being called sárvadhátula. Being árs ahadhátuka they take the augment t and before these affixes the root does 
TURE. 
Y OF CULTU 
MINISTRY 
CRNMENT OF 
OF INDIA 
e 
)SARVA & ARDEADĦATUKA AAFFIXES. 
[BK III CA. IV. 
117. 
सत्यमेव जयते 
71 
94. 
73 
not take the Vikaranas &o. Thus from the root to cuo,' we have in the शाशीलिङ, लबिसीष्ट; and from the rooty to purify,' पविषीष्ट. But in the विधिलिङ (Potential), we have the proper Vikaranas &c. as gitari, gaitata i 
THUTT II 29 11 Ugif I fe, JHTUTII सृत्तिः ॥ बन्दसि विषये उभयथा भवति सार्वधातुकमार्द्धधातुकंचा 
117. In the Vedas this distinction of 'sarvadhâtuka' and ardhadhâtuka is not always maintained, and the afixes are promiscuously employed. 
In the Vedas, there is no hard and fast rule about sárvadhátula and áruha thátula affixes. Sometimes the fag and fua are treated as if they were årdhadhátuko. Thus weg zat geaa: Here the affixes of the site are treated as árdhadhát uka and consequently there is the elision of the fur by rule VI. 4.51; the proper form of this word would be in Sometimes ar. dhadhátuka affixes are treated like sarvadhútuka affixes; as fafcaf; here the affixes of the fat are treated as sárvad hátnke and so there is the Vikarana tu and the er is changed into ai Thus, fa+*+ 16 +=fa +9+9+- ? (III: 1.74) 
fæ+7+*+ ** (VI. 4. 87)=fayfa?Similarly, great. The fag is some times treated in the Vedas both as sarvadhátuloa and árdhadhátula at one and the same time; as gut u Tali Here, by treating the affix as sárvadhátulcre, there is elision of in the fas VII. 2.79) and by treating it again as árdhadhátula, the st of an is changed into i So also in cafea the affix is treated as sárvadhatuka and there is no substitution of x for sy as required by II. 4. 52. 
Printed by S. Abdul Majid, Ad the Upper India Press Allahabad. 
URE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
सत्यमेव जयते 
कृति मंत्रान्त्य 
भारत सरकार 
BOOK IV. 
THE 
ASHTADHYÁYÍ OF PÁNINI. 
TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH 
BY 
SRISA CHANDRA VASU, B. A.,, 
Provincial Civil Service, N. W. P. 
Hermes. 
PUBLISHED BY SINDHU CHARAN BOSE, 
at the Panini Office, 
1896. 
(All rights reserved.) 
URE .GOV 
OVERNMENT 
RY OF CULTUA 
MINISTRY 
ENT OF INDIA 
सत्यमेव जयते 
la 
en 
1778051 
TO THE 
Hon'ble Sir John Edge, Bt., Q. T... 
CHIEF JUSTICE OF THE NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES, 
THIS WORK 
15 
WITH HIS LORDSHIP'S PERMISSION, AND IN RESPECTFUL APPRECIATION OF HIS LORDSHIP'S SERVICES TO THE CAUSE OF ADMINISTRATION OF 
JUSTICE AND OF EDUCATION 
IN 
THESE PROVINCES, 
Pedicated 
BY HIS LORDSHIP'S HUMBLE SERVANT 
THE TRANSLATOR 
URE . Govo 
GOVERNME 
06 CULTURA 
MINISTRY ON 
OF INDIA 
सस्कृति मंत्राल 
सत्यमेव जयते 
तिसरकार 
PREFACE. 
CINCE the advent of the British rule and the peace and prosperity that have 
followed in its train, and especially since the foundation of the Arya Samaj and the Theosophical Society, India has witnessed a glorious revival of her ancient literature, in which is embodied some of the highest systems of philosophy and religion of the world. Our schools and colleges are annually turning out hundreds, nay thousands of scholars, who have entered upon the study of Sanskrit literature, and have thus learnt to appreciate the beauties of that classic language. Many Europeans too are taking pains to have some knowledge of the immortal literature embodied in this ancient language. Very few of them, however, have the opportunity of studying the language with that deep insight and fulness of comprehension with which it was and is mastered by the Pandits of the old school. To understand properly Sanskrit language, and especially that portion of it in which are locked up the highest aspirations of the ancient Aryan hearts, vis., the Vedas, the Brâhmanas, the Upanishads, &c., it is absolute ly necessary to have a complete knowledge of the Grammar elaborated by 
Panini. 
Further, as a master-piece of close reasoning and artistic arrangement, it ought to be an object of study to every one who wants to cultivate his intel lectual powers. In fact, what the Geometry of Euclid has done towards the logical development of the western intellect, the Ashtadhyâyî of Panini has done for that of the Sanskrit scholars. No one who has studied this book can refrain from admiring it. It has evoked admiration even from the Sanskrit Savants of the West. Professor Max Müller thus gives his opinion about the merits of this excellent Sanskrit Grammar :-"The Grammatical system ela orated by native Grammarians, is in itself most perfect, and those who have ested Panini's work will readily admit, that there is no Grammar in any 
nguage, that could vie with the wonderful mechanism of his eight books of Grammatical rules." 
Unfortunately, however, for our college and school students, and also or that vast majority of English-educated gentlemen, whose number is daily on he increase, and who depend for their knowledge of what is contained in Sans 
at books, on English translations of Sanskrit authors, no translation of this mportant work exists in English. To supply this want, we have undertaken 
translate Panini's aphorisms, as explained in the well-known commentary, called the Kâsika. Though it is not a close translation of the whole of the Kâsika, 
may be regarded as a free rendering of the most important portions of that book. We have closely followed this commentary, explaining it where neces sary, and in short, making the work a help to the student, desirous of studying the Kasika in the original. 
GOVERNM 
CULTURE 
MINISTRY ON 
WENT OF INDI 
OF INDIA 
सत्यमेव जयते 
रत सरकार 
( 
ii 
) 
The work when completed would, it is estimated, cover nearly two thousand pages. It would not therefore be possible to complete it and publish it as a completed work within a short time. We have on that account thought it expedient to publish the work in parts, that it might be of great advantage to our readers and a matter of great convenience to the publisher. The Ashta dhyâyt, as indicated by its name, is divided into ashta Adhyâyas, i. e., eight Books. Each of these Books again is divided into four padas or chapters. It has thus been found expedient to publish the work in 32 parts which are available to our subscribers only, and, when four parts are out, to have them bound in one volume available to the non-subscribing public as well as to our subscribers. 
The rates of its subscription for the complete work published in eight Books or 32 chapters are as follow : 
(Indian) Rs. 20-0-0 in advance, including postage. (Foreign) s. 2-0- 
0 1 Price per set of 4 parts bound in one volume, i. e., one Book or Adhydya, including postage--Rs. 3 (Indian) ; 6s. (Foreign). 
- Any encourager of Sanskrit learning subscribing for ten or more copies of this work will be thankfully registered as our Patron and his name will be made immortal with that of the book by giving it a prominent place in the front of the book when it is completed. 
Our hearty thanks are due to the Honourable E. White, C. S., Director of Public Instruction, N.-W. P. and Oudh, for his kindly subscribing for 10 copies of our work, and to all those gentlemen who have hitherto subscribed for any number of copies or in any way encouraged us in our undertaking. 
Pånini Office, 
THE PUBLISHER. Allahabad. S URE.GOV 
GOVERNMEN 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
OF INDIA 
स्कृति मंत्रालय 
सत्यमेव जयते 
74. 
78 
रतसरकार 
131 
अथ चतुर्थाध्यायस्य प्रथमः पादः। 
BOOK FOURTH. 
CHAPTER FIRST. 
AAO 
Truauicera Il 1 Tera Il 1-sty-uraufesenta वृत्तिः ॥ अधिकारोऽयम् । यरित अर्ध्वमनुक्रमिष्याम आपञ्चमाध्यायपरिसमाताप्रातिपरिकारित्येवं तहेदितव्यम् ॥ 
1. (From this point forward as far as the end of Book Fifth, whatever we shall treat of, should be understood to come), after what ends with the feminine affixes 1, or BTT, or after a Nominal stem. 
This is an 'adhikâra' aphorism pure and simple. It simply consists of terms which other aphorisms, in order to complete their sense, are under the necessity of borrowing. In other words, this sûtra points out the base Tera to wich the affixes beginning with a treated of in the next sâtra, and ending with him (V. 4. 151), are to be applied. 
The sûtra consists of three words. The term is a common name for the three affixes , y, and all The term ry, is the common name for the three affixes aru, erg and T11 These are feminine affixes and are taught from sútra 4 to 65 of this chapter. The word grafech means 'a Nominal stem' and has been defined in sûtra I. 2. 45, 46, i. e. that which is possessed of a meaning, not being a root or an affix; or what ends with a Krit or a Tad dhita affix. The word Forgatagreata is a Samâhâra-dvandva or Collective aggregate of these three words. 
0. All affixes are placed after the base (See Sätra III. 1. 2); the affixes treated of in the last Book were to be placed after the root ('dhâtu'); the remaining affixes taught in Books Fourth and Fifth, will therefore, be placed after all such bases era which are not roots (dhâtu); and such bases remaining are prâtipadika and feminine words. What is then the necessity 
IRE - GOVE 
GOVERNMEN 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY ON 
OF INDIA 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
CASE AFFIXES. 
[BK, IV. CH. D. $ 
77 
.4175 
भारत सरकार 
of making this sætra, when these prâtipadika &c., are the only bases left to us to apply the affixes taught herein-after ? 
A. To this we reply, the necessity of making this sûtra arose from the following considerations: that the word zorg gradientet slouid qualify the words ' ,' the letter 57, 63TEETTITE', and '79, wherever used in the following sûtras. So that, where a rule says: "let such an affix be applied to a Vșiddha word,” we must understand it to mean, “let such an affix be applied to a Vșiddha word which is a prátipadika, or which ends with 'ni' or 'ap'; and not to every Vșiddha word.” The principal aphorism, besides the present, which regulates the application of Taddhita affixes, is IV. 1. 82, which declares :-"The taddhita affixes, on the alternative of their being employed at all, come after the word that is signified by the first of the words in construction." Thus IV. 1. 157 says;—"The affix it is added, according to the opinion of Northern Grammarians, in the sense of descendant, after a word which is entitled to the designation of Vriddham, provided it does not end with a Gotra affix." Thus the idea, 'the son of Amragupta,' may be expressed either by the phrase "STE TAFUTeca'; or by adding the affix phiñ' to the first of the word in construction, viz, 'âmraguptasya,' which is a Vșiddha word (1. 1.73). But can we apply the affix phiñ' to the first of the word in construction in the following, ITILDEVAATTE, because the word jîânâm' the genitive plural of jña', is a Vriddha word ? Certainly not, because the word 'prâtipadikât' must be read into this sûtra IV. I. 157, and the affix "phin' should be added after that Vriddha word which is in its crude form also a Vțiddham, and not that which becomes Vșiddham only in construction. Now the prâtipadika of jnânâm' is 'jña', the latter is not a vriddham, therefore, the rule does not apply to it. So also the word 'jñâ' is a vriddham in its prâtipadika state; but in the following phrase, it loses its vriddha nature; Ta Tirt ' meaning the son of two wise Brâh man ladies'. Still the affix phiñ' must be added to the word jñyor', because its prâtipadika is a vsiddha word. (2) Similarly the word ' G' (sátra IV. I. 160; the affix phiñ is applied diversely to a non-vșiddha word, according to the opinion of the Eastern Grammarians') must be qualified by the word 'pratipadika'; otherwise it would lead to similar incongruous results as in the last aphorism. (3) Similarly the word op in Sûtra IV. 1.95 (the affix ya is added after a word which ends in the letter 3') must be qua lified by the word prátipadika'; that is to say, the word in its crude-form must end in s, and not necessarily when it is in construction. If it were not so; then the affix will apply only to the word 'ne' in fretta1971, but will not apply to the words 'क्षयोः', or दक्षानाम्' in the phrases " दक्षयोरपत्यम्' or 944' But the affix 'e' applies to all these three words, 
URE - Gov 
ov OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
RNMENT OF IN 
OF INDIA 
** BEAV.CH. I. §. 1 ] 
THE CASE AFFIXES. 
"कृति मंत्रालय 
4777 
(4). Similarly the word aerie' in IV. 2. 44, (the affix el is added to a word which has the grave accent on its beginning), must be quali fied by the word prátipadika. That is, the word in its crude form must have the grave accent on its initial, though in construction, it may or may not have grave accent. Otherwise, the affix z will apply to the words : and r' which in construction are anudâttâdi as in care facta' 
et fare:' (VI. I. 168); but which in their crude-forms (914, 05) are udâttâdi. And conversely, the affix 'TET,' will not apply to the word CHAT' which in construction is udâttâdi, as, in Fichte:," but which in its crude-form is anudâttâdi. 
(5). Similarly the word ' :' in IV. 4. 7, (the affix 'st' is employed after words consisting of two vowels, when the sense is that of crossing), must be qualified by the word prâtipadika. That is, the word in its prâtipadika state must consist of two vowels, though in construction it may consist of more than two syllables. Otherwise, this affix will not apply to the word geat in the phrase en qual', while it will apply to the words 'वाचा' and 'त्वचा' in the phrases, 'वाचा तरति,' 'वचा तरति'. But this is undesirable. 
Q Why have we employed the word 'hy-ap' in the aphorism? Is not the word prâtipadika wide enough to include the words ending with the feminine affixes, by virtue of the paribhâshâ:-"A prâtipadika denotes, whenever it is employed in grammar, also such a crude-form as is derived from it by the addition of ar. affix denoting gender." ? 
A. Not so. The paribhâsâ you quote applies to that case, where there is a rule, relating to an individual word-form, given in the Sâtra itself. In other words, "this paribhasha is applicable when a word is employed in grammar which either denotes prâtipadikas generally (as the word 'prâtipadika' does in this sûtra) or denotes a praticular prâtipadika, (such as the words gret, ara, 
a, ara, and stea, in II. 1. 67).” That is, in II. 1. 67, the masculine form yuva, also includes the feminine : but not so every-where. Moreover the words, &, s have been employed in the Satra, in order to make the Taddhita affixes applicable to feminine words ending in long (1) or long BTT (379). Thus the feminine of ', and 'ERUT is, it, and Ergoft', the feminine of 'खडा' and 'माला' is 'खवा' and 'माला' | After these words we can apply the Taddhita affix tel: as heat', EFTTOTETT,' Ugrat', and 'ACTAT' !! 
Now, had we not used the word 'hy-âp' in the Sotra, and wished to express the same idea as is done, say, by the word "kalitara,' we could not have got this form at all. 
GOVERNMENS 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
UT OF INDIA 
स्कृति मंत्रान्नु 
THE CRSE AFFIXES 
[BK. IV. CHIO2) 
9.178 
तिसरकार 
Q. The word is takes on by IV. 1. 42; to which when ato is added, the vowel is shortened by VI. 3. 43; and we shall get the form Elenare ! Why do you then say that the Taddhita affixes could not be applied, but for the Words hy-ấp ? 
A. To this we answer, that by the rule of vipratishedha, the Taddhita would have debarred the feminine. Thus, when feminine alone is meant and not comparison, we shall have moret; and when comparison alone is meant and not feminine, we shall have atesat; but when both feminine and comparison are meant, then would arise the difficulty; and according to the general maxim, the Taddhita would have debarred the feminine. But by using the word ny-âp, it is shown that first the feminine affixes are to be added, and then the com parison making affixes. 
स्वौजसमौट्छष्टाश्यांभिस्ङेभ्यांभ्यस्ङसिभ्यांभ्यस्ङसोसामूङयोस्सुए ॥२॥ TETA II G-T-SIFT, TH-STIC-TE, T-927-FATE, .-2271-9TE, ETÊ-221-22761, 3e site-15, is-sire-gg ( gurcunfaurarz) वृत्तिः ॥ ज्याप्प्रातिपदिकातू स्वादयः प्रत्ययाः भवन्ति ॥ 
2. (After what ends with the feminine termina tions st or saty, or after a Nominal stem the following case affixes are employed for declension) : 
Singular, 
Dual. 
Plural. 
I st. su (s) 
au 
jas (as) 2nd. am 
aut (au) sas (as) 3rd. tâ (a) 
bhyâm 
bhis ne (e) 
bhyam 
bhyas Sth. nasi (as) 
bhyâm bhyas 6th. nas (as) 
âm 7th. ni (1) 
OS 
sup (su) In the above affixes, letters like zin y are 'anubandhas' employed either for the sake of facility of pronunciation, or as distinguishing marks. The final g is employcd for the sake of forming the pratyahara y, which is the collective name for the above 21 case-affixes. The force and meaning of these affixes have already been explained in a former part of this work; and therefore, need not be repeated here. We shall now give examples of the application of these affixes to words formed by डी, as, कुमारी; by डी as, गौरी; by डीन् as शाहरवी; by टाप् as खड्डा; by डायू as बहुराजा; and by चाप् as कारीष 
Toket; and lastly to a prâtipadika, as, gari 
4th, 
OS 
URE • GOVE 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
ERNMENT OF 
OF INDIA 
संस्कृति मंत्राल 
BRAIN.CH. I. $ 3] 
THE CASE AFFIXES. 
मालय , भारत 
रत सरकार 
कुमार्यों 
2nd 
कुमार्च 
खवा 
खट्वे 
4th 
कुमारी। Singular 
Dual 
Plural 
1st कुमारी 
कमार्यः कुमारीम् 
कुमार्यों 
कुमारीः 3rd कुमार्या 
कुमारीभ्याम् 
कुमारीभिः 4th 
कुमारीभ्याम् 
कुमारीभ्यः 5th कुमार्याः 
कुमारीभ्याम् 
कुमारीभ्यः 6th कुमार्याः 
कुमार्योः 
कुमारीणाम् 7th कुमार्याम् 
कुमार्योः 
कुमारीषु 
खवा। 1st 
खट्दाः 2nd खवामू 
खड्वे 
खद्राः 3rd खदया 
खद्वाभ्याम् 
खट्वाभिः खट्वायै 
खवाभ्याम् 
खदाभ्यः 5th 
खवायाः 
खदाभ्याम 
खड्डाभ्यः 6th 
खदायाः 
खड्दयोः 
खट्वानाम् 7th खटायाम् 
खद्वयोः 
खवासु 
हषद। 
Ist 
दृषदो 
दृषदः 2nd दृषदम् 
दृषदौ 
तृषदः 3rd 
वृषदा 
दृषद्भ्याम् 
वृषभः 4tn वृषदे 
दृषभ्याम् 
दृषद्भ्यः .5th वृषतः 
दृषद्भ्याम् 
वृषभ्यः 6th 
दृषदोः 
वृषदाम् वृषदो 
वृषत्सु The words गौरी and शारिवी are declined like कुमारी ; and बहुराजा and कारीषगन्या are declined like खदा।। 
स्त्रियाम् ॥ ५३॥ पदानि ॥ स्त्रियाम्॥ वृत्तिः॥ अधिकारोयम् । यदित ऊर्ध्वमनुक्रमिष्यामः स्त्रियामित्येव तवेदितव्यम् ।। 
3. When feminine nature is to be indicated, the affixes which we shall treat of hereinafter must be employed. 
This is an adhikâra sâtra pure and simple. The phrase 'when feminine nature is to be indicated', must be read in all the following aphorisms upto 81 inclusive. The anuvritti of the word 'pratipadika' should be read into this sutra, from the first satra, not so, however, the anuvritti of the words "डी-आपू'; for we are now going to form words by the application of डी and ST9 affixes, 
दृषद 
7th 
दृषदः दृषदि 
CULTURE. 
MINISTRY 
RNMENT OF 
OF INDIA 
THE FEMININE AFFIXES. [ BK. IV. CH. 1. $) 
संस्कृति मंत्राल 
भारत सरकार 
अजाद्यतष्टाए ॥ ४॥ पदानि ॥ अजादि-अतः-टाए (स्त्रियाम् ज्याप्रा०)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ अजादिभ्यः प्रातिपरिकेन्योऽकारान्ताच प्रातिपदिकात स्त्रियां टाप् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
4. The affix Try is employed to indicate feminine nature, after the Nominal-stem 'aja.' &c, and after the stems ending in short अ॥ 
Of the affix are, the letters and a are ta, the real affix is still The letter r indicates that the affix has anudatta accent (III. I. 4) ; the letter ट् is employed to distinguish this affix from me and gro il 
The words अज&c, are given below. Thus अज'a he goat,' अजा 'a she goat'. The words ending in short 87 are such as, at whose feminine will be देवदत्ता॥ The word अत् is used in the aphorism, the indicatory t shows (I. I. 70) that the short अ having one matra should be taken ; and not the long आ॥ Pratipadikas that end in long आ, such as कीलालपा or शुभंया (III. 2.74) do not form their feminine by taking at, but are both masculine and feminine. Thus, tiet: entet 41: argoft 'the auspicious-going, nectar-drinking Brâhmâni'. Had the feminine of such words been formed by ato, then the case-affix a of the nominative singular would have been elided after them (VI. I. 68). 
Following are the words belonging to the file class : 1. अज अजा 2. एडक एडका 3. कोकिल कोकिला 4. चटक चटका 5. अश्व अश्वा 6. मूषिक माषिका 
N. B. The above words denote jâti' or kind and though they end in short s in the masculine, they would have taken, but for the present sûtra, the affix'nish' (IV. 2. 63) in the feminine. 
7. बालबाला 8. होड होडा 9, पाक पाका 10 वत्सवत्सा 11 मन्द मन्दा12. विलात विलाता 
N. B. The above six words are descriptive of age, and though they end in short st in the masculine, but for the present sâtra, they would have taken the affix 'डी' (IV. I. 20) in the feminine. 
13. पूर्वापहरण, पूर्वापहरणा; 14. अपरापहारण अपरापहारणा; 
N. B. These two words are formed by the affix re, and being fel, would have taken डीप (IV. I. I5) but for this sutra. 
15,संफल, 17. अजिमफल, 19. पिण्डफल, 
संफला; 
अजिनफला; पिण्डफला; 
16 भराफल 18, शणफल, 20. विफल, 
भरक्षाफला; क्षणकला; 
GOVERNMENT 
RY OF CULT 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
B 
संस्कृति मंत्रान 
IV. CH. I. 9.41 
THE FEMININE AFFIX CTO 
1770 
भद्रा 
N. B. The above words ending in 'phala' would have taken the affix nish (IV. I. 64) but for their enumeration in the 'ajadi' class ; 'T ot' when a Dvigu Compound forms its feminine as fhat; when a Bahuvrîhi Com pound, its feminine is fast 
21. AYCY, 
सत्पुष्पा; 22. grangot, gregaat; 23. T°5964, 
ontos969; 24. T96, T ETT; शतपुष्प, 
STAT959T; 26. gayoq, एकपुष्पा; The above words ending in gou would have taken ņish by IV. 1. 64. 27. 1 
B. N. But the feminine of his met when the meaning is 'the wife of a sudra'; so also when the word yg is compounded with the word Art as, महाशूद्री 'a woman of 'महाशूद्र' class'. 
The term 'HET T' is applied to the caste of Abhiras: and this com pound word would have taken the affix 'ety' by the rule of tadanta vidhi given in I. 1. 72, but for the vârtika, viz 'TAT FTAET gaf sla:' It might be objected that the tadanta vidhi cannot apply here on the strength of the following maxim :-“That which cannot possibly be anything but a prâtipa dika does not denote that which ends with it, but it denotes only itself”. Therefore, the word 'sûdra' which cannot be anything but a prâtipadika, does not denote 'mahâ-sûdra'. This objection is futile: the very fact of this vârtika indicates by implication (jñâpaka), that with regard to the application of the feminine affixes, the tadanta-vidhi is valid and does apply. Thus we have the forms like अतिधीवरी अतिपीवरी and अतिभवती 
28. $0 $ 29. STUTE EGUTET 30. Parantaraan 
N. B. The above words end in consonants and would not have taken art but for their being included in the aire class. 
31. Fire FETET 32. E fag 33. #ETH TEETAT 
B. N. The above words denoting matrimonial realtion would have taken the affix 'nîsh' by IV. 1. 46. 
34. Tos STACT The word 'můla preceded by the negative particle nan, would have otherwise taken 'nish' by IV. 1. 64. 
TIETO 19 II Cerâ II 29-28T:, frg, (FETTA GTCOTO) वृतिः ॥ ऋकारान्तेभ्यो नकारान्नेभ्यश्च प्रातिपदिकेभ्यः स्त्रियां डीप् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
5. The affix era is employed, in forming the femi nine, after Nominal stem ending in or in l. 
Of the affix , the letter & is taken in order to make a common term with so and sta; and the is taken to distinguish ti from those 
URE - GOVEA 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
THE FEMININE AFFIX 
11 
(BK. IV. CH. 
तिसरकार 
affixes; the real affix is $1 Thus, they ;-f. chor; -f. pant; EPOSEL -f. fogait; 9179,-f.gfraft II 
fall & ll Tifa il sfiai, st, ( ferui sîg) ! वृत्तिः ॥ उग् इत् यत्रसंभवति यथा कथंचित् तमुगिच्छब्दरूपं, तदन्तात् स्त्रियां डीप् प्रत्ययो भवति ।। वार्तिकन् ॥ धातोरुगितः प्रतिषेधोवक्तव्यः ॥ . वार्तिकम् ।। अंचते श्वोपसंख्यानम् ॥ 
6. And after what has an indicatory'uk' (5, # or ) the affix ata is employed, in denoting the feminine. 
The 3oh is a pratyâhâra meaning , te and Wherever it is possible to make these letters indicatory, in whatever way it may be, that word-form is called aforati That which ends with such a word is meant here. A pratipadika pure and simple. not formed by an affix, may be spora, thus the pronoun was among the sarvanâmas: an affix may be fora as the affixes Thug and Ty, and therefore, the words formed by these affixes will be afora; similarly a letter may be forct as a meaning a in VI. 4. 127, (" is the substitute of the final of an inflective base ending in staa &c") 
Thus, 97 honored' sir.-. aar 'madam'. Applying the rule of tadantavidhi, we have a -staat 'most exalted lady'. Similarly 9 (formed by adding To III. 2. 124), forms the feminine qaret, the a comes by VII. I. 82. So also usteet 'a female sacrificing'; sa vaat'a mare', 
Vårt: Prohibition must be stated in the case of verbal roots having an indicatory 'uk'. Thus the roots a 'to fall down', 'to fall down' have indicatory ; and we get from these roots, the paâtipadikas like serat and quart, (III. 2. 76). The area anguft, quan alguir u Here, the feminine is not formed by adding डीप् । 
Vårt:-The prâtipadikas ending with the verb 'anchu', however, take the affix a l As, rit, tareft, etait 11 
ETETT T Elle | Terra li qa:, t, 57, (ferent etg) | निः॥ वन्नन्तायातिपदिकातू स्त्रियां डीप् प्रत्ययोभवति रेफश्चान्तादेशः ॥ वार्तिकम् ॥बनो न हशः ॥ 
7. The affix 'V' is added, in forming the feminine to the stems that end in the syllable ara, and is the sub stitute of the final of such syllable. 
Thus धीवन (Unadi IV.IUS), धीवरी a female artisan'; पीवन् ।.पीवरी 'a young woman, a stout woman', si f. 
S night' (a+aaT III. 2.75) lit. that which destroys light. So also ingat ! 
VRE 
GOVE 
VERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY ON 
OF INDIA 
Belv.Ch. 18 101 
संस्कृति मंत्राल 
701 
759.4179 
777 
Words ending in an are formed by the affixes gaat, (III. 2. 103) pro and are (III. 2. 74). These words end in a and consequently would have taken on even by IV. 1. 5; the necessity of the present sútra arose in order to teach the change of into t in case of words ending in a 11 
Vârt:-If the affix an is ordained to be added to a word ending in F1, (a letter of ga pratyahaha), and is thus immediately preceded by a soft consonant then this rule does not apply, that is to say, there is neither the application of the affix sig nor the change of a into t!! Thus area is both masculine and feminine as, सहयुध्वा ब्राह्मण: or ब्राह्मणी 'a Brahman brother or sister in arms'. In real the wat is preceded by which is a letter of a class, but as ay is not ordained to be applied to me but to y, and we get the indirectly by guna, the vârtika does not apply to such a case. Hence are all 
पादोऽन्यतरस्याम् ॥८॥ पदानि ॥ पादः, अन्यतरस्याम् (स्त्रियां डीए)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ पावन्तात् प्रातिपदिकावन्यतरस्यां स्त्रियां डीप् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
8. The affixung' is optionally employed in the feminine, after a Nominal-stem ending with word 'pad.' 
The word grę becomes grę when final in certain Bahuvrihi compounds (V. 4. 140). Thus farra is both masculine and feminine, or it may optionally form its feminine by long (stg). In the latter alternative, the form will be favét, the word are being replaced by to by VI. 4. 130, (as read with I. 4. 18). Similarly forrt or forget ; qaste or retu 
ater II 11 qera llarg, lê, ( ferui yrg: ) 1 वृत्तिः ॥ ऋचिवाच्यायांपादन्तात् प्रातिपदिकात स्त्रियां टाप् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
9. The affix any is employed in the feminine, after a Nominal-stem ending with the word 'pâd', when the word denotes a verse of the Rig-Veda. 
This debars iTu Thus faer = ca a Rik verse consisting of two quarter verses'; similarly FETTET TEST, Pgoqeru Why do we say "when denoting a Rik verse"? Observe fréttr Devadatta (a woman) having two feet'. 
a una faenere: 11 80 11 qera Il a, TT, Text:,(fara ) 1 वृत्तिः षट् संज्ञकेभ्यः स्वस्रादिभ्यश्च प्रातिपरिक यः स्त्रीप्रत्ययो न भवति ।। 
10. The feminine affixes are not employed after the stems called 'T' (I. 1. 24), and after area' &c. 
This prohibits all feminine affixes that would otherwise have present ed themselves. Thus 959 ITOU: the five Brâhmani ladies'. So also , TT, TT &c are feminine as well as masculine. The following words belong to the 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
VERNMENTO 
NT OF INDIA 
सत्यराते 
कृति मंधान्य 
डीप्॥ 
[ BK. IV. CHAMS 
भारत सरकार 
Svasradi class :-स्वसा 'a sister', दुहिता'a daughter'; ननान्दा 'a husband's sister', star'a husband's brother's wife', Arar'a mother', raa: 'three'. ga: 'four'. 
मनः ॥ ११॥ पदानि ॥ मनः (ङीए स्त्रियां)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ मनन्ताप्रातिपदिकात् डीप् प्रत्ययो न भवति ।। 
11. The affix sia is not employed after a Nomi nal-stem ending in the syllable मन् ।। 
By IV. 1. 5, prâtipadikas ending in #7 would have taken the affix डीए, in as much as they end in a ; but the present sutra prohibits that. Thus सामन् ‘a string' is both neuter and feminine; and is declined as follows:-I. S, तामा; d. दामानौ, pl. लामानः ॥ Similarly पामा, पामानौ, पामानः ॥ 
Here by using the term wa we mean words formed by an affix whose effective element is a, such as the affix af (Uņâdi IV. 144) in the words सामन् (दो+भनिन्) and पामन्; as well as words which end in मन् which does not re present an affix. This is done on the strength of the following paribhâsha : अनिनसमन ग्रहणान्यर्थवता चनर्थकेन च तदन्तविधि प्रयोजयन्ति ॥ “Wherever अन् or इन or अस् or मन्, when they are emyloped in grammar denote by I. I.72 something that ends with अन् or इन् or अस् or मन् , there अन्, इन्, अस्, and मन represent these combinations of letters both in so far as they possess, and also in so far as they are void of, a meaning.” Therefore, words like सीमन् and अतिमहिमन्, where मन् is not an affix, but an integral part of the word, are also governed by the pre sent sutra. Thus, सीमा, सीमानौ, सीमानः अतिमहिमा, अतिमाहमानौ and अतिमहिमानः ॥ 
अनो बहुव्रीहेः॥१२॥ पदानि ॥ अनः, बहुव्रीहेः, (स्त्रियां ङीप् न)॥ वृत्तिः। अनन्तात् बहुव्रीहेः स्त्रियाम् डीप् प्रत्ययो न भवति ।। 
12. The affix to is not employed to denote the feminine, after a Bahuvrihi compound ending in STT II 
This refers to those Bahuvrihi compounds in which the penultimate is not elided. Of the Bahuvrihi compounds which lose their penultimate letter, it is optional to employ this affix or not; as it will be taught in IV. 1. 28. Thus सुपर्वन् 'possessed of beautiful joints' is both masculine and feminine. As सुपर्वा, सुपर्वाणो, सुपर्वाणः; so also सशर्मा, सुशर्माणो and सुशर्माणः॥ In these cases the penuti mate अ of वन् or मन् is not elided. See VI. 4. 137. 
Why do we say "after Bahuvrihi compounds”? Because after any other compouds, this rule will not apply. As आतराजन् is an Avyayibhava compound, its feminine will be strast il 
डाबुमाभ्यामन्यतरस्याम् ॥ १३॥ पदानि ॥ डाए, उभाभ्यां, अन्यतरस्यां, (मनः अनोबहुव्रीहेः स्त्रियां)॥ वृत्तिः॥डाप् प्रत्ययो भवति उभाभ्यां मनन्तात्मातिपरिकारनन्ताच बहुव्रीहरन्यतरस्याम् ।। URE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY ON 
NT OF INDIA 
BK IV/CH. I. 9..14] 
379 
13 The affix stu comes optionally after both these, viz.the Nominal-stem ending in H7, and a Bahuvrihi compound ending in Talli 
Of the affix sty, the letter indicates that the affix is to be added after the elision of the f (I. 1. 64) of the base. Thus ra+ 319=911 + 3TI = PTAT, This being an optional rule we have I. S Ttar , Thor qarat, pl, Trat: or TART: ; similarly with erar, as, frat, er or start, Frar: or #ra: 18 
So also in Bahuvrihi compounds ending in 977. As : TEISIT, 
EU or abusar, ECTSIT: or ETSITT: cate, 
बहुतक्षे or बहुतक्षाणी, TEAer: or TETETT: II Why do we say "optionally" ? So that the option may apply to sútra IV. I. 7 also; i. e. when a pratipadika ending in a , which can be regarded as ending in 377, is a Bahuvrihi compound, then the change of a into and the application of an are optional we may apply the affix gry instead. As : बहुधीवा or बहुधीवरी ; बहुपीवा or वहुपीवरी ।। 
STEYGara II 8811 Gta II STT STASTE I वृत्तिः॥ यरित ऊर्ध्वमनुक्रमिष्यामोऽनुपसर्जनादित्येवं तवेदितव्यम् ।। 
14. The following rules apply to a Nominal-stem which is not a subordinate term in a compound. 
This is an adhikara aphorism pure and simple, and has governing force upto IV. 1. 77: and prohibits the application of affixes to 'upasarjanas'. That is to say, whatever we shall treat of hereafter, sis to be understood to apply to such terms only, which are not u pasarjana or a subordinate term in a compound. ( I. 2. 43). Thus the next sûtra declares "the affix nîp is added in forming the feminine after what ends in short st, if the affix with which it ends has an indicatory , & c." Thus the word TT is formed by the affix a (III.) 2. 16), and ends in Sr. The feminine of this word will be formed by a as कुरुचरी, similarly मद्रचर-मद्रचरी । But if these words being the last members of a compound, are treated as upasarjana (I. 2. 43), then they will not take the affix are in the feminine. Now in a Bahuvrihi compound, all the com ponent members are upasarjana, (II. 2, 35); therefore, the feminine of such compounds will not take डीयू ॥ Thus, बहुकुरुचरा Or बहुमद्रचरा मधुरा | Similarly IV.I. 63 savs, "the affix re is added after words denoting jati" as, t, The In But where these words are upasarjana, 'nish' will not be added : as, aga aren ag TT TUTTI 
As a general rule, tadanta-vidhi (I, 1, 72) does not apply to compounds; but the present sutra indicates by implication that the tadanta-vidhi applies to compounds for the purposes 
URE • GOV 
GOVERNMENT 
OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
ENT OF INDIA 
1 
(BK. IV. CH. 1, $15 
75.17 
भारत सरकार 
of the application of feminine affixes. For had it not been so, there would have been no necessity of making the present sâtra ; for a rule applicable to a simple word as such, would not have applied to it when it was part of a compound-whether subordinate (upasarjana), or principal (pradhana). But the present sûtra indicates that the tadanta-vidhi does apply, if the word does not become a subordinate member, but is regarded as the principal member, of a compound. 
The feminine of his or her will be arohird or Forchtet, in as much as the second member here is pradhâna : the word 'kumbha-kâra' being formed by 37 (III, 2, I ), and thus making it possible to apply it by IV. 1. 15. The affix sur referred to in the next sutra refers to the kțit-affix STUI (III. 2. 1), as well as to the Taddhita affix str 11 
टिड्ढाणद्वयसजूदनज्मानच्तयप ठक ठकक्करपः ॥ १५ ॥ पदानि ॥ 17-6-31U-3791-PTFE-FET-HET-TT-30-691-5T-: ( TT: ferar 
TO) वृत्तिः ॥ टिशविम्यः प्रातिपरिक यः स्त्रियां डीप प्रत्ययो भवति । वार्तिकम् ॥ नानीकक्ख्युनतरुणतलुनानामुपसंख्यानम् ॥ 
15. The affix era is added, in the feminine, after the Nominal-stems ending in short st, if the affix with which it ends has an indicatory z, or if the affix be , or su, or 3731 or द्वयसच , or दनच् , or मात्रच् , or तयए, or ठक, or ठञ् or कञ् or FTTT II 
The word sa: 'ending in short a' is understood here by anuvritti from IV. 1.4; and qualifies the affixes above-mentioned, wherever neces sary. This debars the affix zty of IV. 1. 4. We shall give example of each seriatim (1) Thus, m., bart f., ad m., A TT , (T+g= +$; the final = is elided by VI. 4. 148.) The word kuru-chara is formed by 2 (III. 2. 16), of which is indicatory. 
Q. It might be objected, "why is not the affix to added after the words qar, formed by the affix n (III. 2. 124) in as much as this affix is a substitute of me, and because he has an indicatory , therefore, its sub stitute will also be supposed to have an indicatory (I. 1. 57)." 
A. To this we reply, 'the affix me is not fea as it has two indicatory letters, and a 
Q. If that be so, affixes like he should also be called no fea affixes, as they have also two indicatory letters. 
A. To this we reply, that if age be not regarded fear, then the indicatory of me finds no scope any where: as the indicatory of has its scope in stra III, 4. 79. Therefore, the feminine of part will be a Similarly, the indi 
URE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
ENT OF INDIA 
BK. IV.CH. I. S. 15 ] 
STOI 
799. 
catory of augments will not cause the application of the affix atg; thus Treat for 11 Here the feminine of car is formed by sir and not . This is indicated by sûtra IV. 3. 23, which says "augment is added to the affixes go and gag". If the of a could have made the affix fer for the purposes of this present sûtra ; the anubandha had been unnecessarily added to the affixes 3 and go in the above. 
(2) Of words ending in 7 we have, m, frcoret f. atquiaft so also f. waaat. The stands for the affix 7 ; and it is replaced by go (VII. 1.2). Thus Fotf+6 (IV. I. 120)= FTOT + PET = Trgofa! (VII. 2. 118). There is no affix which is merely without any indicatory letters; and denoting the feminine; the only affix, as said above, is geh | Therefore, the following maxim does not apply here :-"When a term void of anubandhas (indicatory letters) is im ployed in grammar, it does not denote that which has an anubandha attached to it", and we cannot say that the of this sûtra refers to the anubandha-less 
of V. 3. 102 which is always Neuter. 
(3) Of words in stor, we have already said that the affix spor here refers to both the Kțit and the Taddhita affix 'an'. Thus with the křit affix 'an' we have etter and Friehrt (III. 2. 1), the feminine of which is anret and potard 11 With the Taddhita affix 'an' we have sprauta (IV. 1. 92), the feminine of which is sirgo Sometimes words formed by the addition of the affix u are operated upon as if they were formed by Tom II Thus wiá, arqat are the feminine of it and ange (IV. 4. 62), sometimes words formed by u are not so treated, as posT, ATET (IV. 2. 57). 
(4) Words formed by 975 as sirce f. ireeft, siregra, f. streyrat, (IV. 1.86). Though by IV. 1.73 the affix a would have come after the words ending in 87, the re-employment of this affix in the present sutra is for the purpose of preventing the application of the affix at which would have presented itself by IV. 1. 63; that is even when jâti' is indicated, 'nish' is not to be employed here. 
(5) The three affixes TE, and AnTy are added by V. 2. 37; as, Forat, ett starft 'reaching to the thigh'. Similraly staraut, stigasit, sirgarah 
() So also with words formed by ago (V. 2. 42). As quaefit of which the parts are five' so also taraft 11 
(7) So also with words ending in 5* (IV. 4. I) as, Stiftent 'a female dicer', arinant. The s is replaced by se (VII. 3. 50). 
(8) Similarly with words ending in (V. 1. 18): as, parafurent elegant. The affixes se and 1 are separately enumerated in this sûtra, in order to exclude the affix at &c. For had the word = merely been used, then it would have meant all the three affixes , Ja and , which is not desired, 
URE 
Goy 
OVERNMENT 
RY OF CULTUA 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
वामदाजय 
fra 
[BK. IV. CH. 
D 
7.4777 
जसरकार 
(9) Similarly with words ending in 2 (III. 2. 60) as, orgaft, argair 1 
(10) So also with words ending in 79TT (III. 2. 163) as gaaft ‘swift', 7470 
Vårt :- In addition to the foregoing, there should have been the enumeration of the affixes and may (IV. 1. 87) and faia (IV. 4. 59) and Tga (III. 2. 56) and of the words our and aga 'a youth. Thus erufr a fe male', greft'a male', irritant 'a female spear bearer', proientut 'enriching ; तरुणी or तलुनी 'a young woman'. 
TTT II & II TEIGTII TET:, 7, (feri sorg ) | वृत्तिः ॥ यजन्ताञ्च प्रातिपदिकात् स्त्रियां डीप प्रत्ययो भवति । वार्तिकम् ॥ अपत्यग्रहणं कर्तव्यम् ॥ 
16. The affix erg is employed, in denoting the feminine, after a Nominal-stem ending in 'T' (IV. 1. 105). 
Thus tref + gruppsef +$ (VI. 4. 148)= 7+$ (VI. 4. 150)= starf ‘a female descendant of Garga'; so also arcait 11 
Vårt :- This rule applies when the affix y denotes a descendant, and not otherwise. Therefore { will not be applied to form the feminine of Ta of +33 (IV. 3. 10). Its feminine will be car living on or relating to an island'. 
The separation of this sûtra from the last, (for the affix could well have been included in the same), is for the sake of the subsequent aphorisms, in which the anuvșitti of up only runs and not of others. 
at 5 warga: 1 891 Gall grei, :, TET:,( Tot: ferri ) it बृत्तिः॥प्राचामाचार्याणां मंतन यान्तात् स्त्रियां ष्फः प्रत्ययो भवति स च तद्धितसंज्ञः ॥ 
17. In the opinion of the Eastern Grammarians, the affix shpha' is employed after what ends with the affix 
yan', and it is to be regarded as a Taddhita affix. 
of this affix 6m the letter or is indicatory (I. 3.6), and shows that the words formed by this affix will take 'mish' (IV. 1.41). The feminine nature is here manifested by these two affixes jointly, viz by 'shpha' and 'nish. The object of saying that shpha' is to be regarded as a taddhita affix, is that the word so formed may get the designation of prâtipadika (I. 2. 46). The affix $ is replaced by the substitute ST127 (VII. 1. 2). Thus pro +60156 + = 172 poft ; so also arterit I This being an optional rule, we have in the alternative, गार्गी and वात्सी ।। 
The word aa "every where ", of the next sûtra is to be read into this, by a process inverse to that of anuvritti, in order to prohibit the applica 
ARE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
BEV. Cl. I. S. 191 
डीपू॥ 
संस्कृति मंत्राल 
मालय .भारत 
तिसरकार 
tion of those rules even which would otherwise debar this. Thus IV. 1.75 says:-'the affix चाप comes after आवश्य' | Here आवय ends in यज्ञ, and by IV. I. 16, the word staat would have taken the affix nîp: IV. 1.75 debarred this. But according to Eastern Grammarians, here also the affix 'shpha' will be added. Thus आवव्यायनी ।। 
सर्वत्र लोहितादिकतन्तेभ्यः ॥ १८॥ पदानि ॥ सर्वत्र, लोहितादि कतन्तेभ्यः, (यजः स्त्रियांष्फ) वृनिः ॥ सर्वत्र लोहितादिभ्यः कतपर्यन्तेभ्यो यजन्तेभ्यः स्त्रियां ष्फः प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
18. The aftix shpha' is invariably added in the feminine after the words beginning with lohita' and ending with 'kata', when they take the affix yan. 
The words लोहित &c. are a subdivision of Gargadi class (IV. I. IOS), The present sûtra makes the application of the affix 5, compulsory while it was optional in the last. The word ma refers to the independent pratipadi ka कत in the said subdivision, which follows immediately after the word कपि, and not to the word machia of the same class, where the word ma is not an independent full nominal-stem but a member only. Thus लोहित्यायनी, शांशित्यायनी बाभ्रव्यायणी॥ 
Karikd कण्वात्तु शकलः पूर्वः कतादुत्तर इष्यते। 
पूर्वोत्तरौ तदन्तादी फाणौ तत्र प्रयोजनम् ॥ For the purposes of the application of sफ and अण, the word कल which is enumerated in the Ganapatha after the word कण्व (See IV. I. IOS) should be regarded as if it stood immediately before कण्व and after कत॥ Thus we have शाकल्यायनी (with eफ), and शकलाः with अण, meaning शाकल्यस्थम grat: 'the pupils of Sakalya'. 
कौरव्यमाण्डूकाभ्यांच ॥१९॥ पदानि ॥ कौरव्य-माण्डूकाभ्याम; च, (स्त्रियांष्फ)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ कौरव्य माण्डूक इत्येताभ्यां स्त्रियां का प्रत्ययो भवति ।। वार्णिकम् ॥ कौरव्यमाण्डूकयोरासुररुपसंख्यानम् ॥ 
19. The affix 'shpha' is added, in the feminine, after the words कौरव्य and माण्डक। 
The word कौरव्य is formed by adding the affix ण्य to the base कुरु (IV. 1. 151); this word, ending in 37, would have formed its feminine by ETT (IV. 1. 4), but for the present sûtra. So also by IV. 1. 119, the word tog is formed by stur added to qua; and the feminine of mândûka would have been formed by nip (IV. I. 15), but for the present aphorism, which supersedes that affix. Thus कौरव्यायणा, माण्डूकायनी ।। 
How do you expain the form कौरवी in the phrase कोरवी सना। 
URE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
T OF INDIA 
stot 
[ BK. IV. CH. OS. 24 
सत्यमेव जयते 
सरकार 
We explain it by saying that erat is not the feminine of Chinez; but of enca, formed by adding tot to be by sûtra IV. 3. 120. 
Vårt:--The word start should be enumerated along with kauravya. and mând ûkya. Thus sietat ll The word araft is formed by the affix gan added to the word tyT; the word 'âsuri' would, therefore, have taken the affix STU in forming the further derivative (IV. 2. 112). But according to the opinion of Patanjali, the word, asuri' should form its further derivative (called also ETTA) by taking the affix 5 (IV. 2. 114). Thus sraita: 46: (qa 1 ) - 
erera TyÀ II 20 11 qera II TIET, TÀ, ( ferti sry) वृत्तिः॥प्रथमे वयसि यत्मातिपदिकं श्रुत्यावर्तते ततः स्त्रियां डीप् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ वयस्यचरमइतिवक्तव्यम् । 
20. The affix ' ' is employed, in the feminine, after a Nominal-stem ending in en and denoting early age. 
The word 22: means the condition of the body as dependent upon time; such as, youth, old age &c. Words expressive of early age form their feminine by f, though ending in 3 | Thus, Share 'a girl. Foreira 'a young girl'cent 'a she-kid'. 
Why do we say denoting early age?' Observe farfar an old woman'; qu'an old woman'. Why do we say ending in 3? Observe fag, which is both masculine and feminine. 
Vårt :- The sâtra should have been TTÀ TUTET 'words expressive of not old age'? Thus amet 'a young woman', facolt 'a young woman'. These words denote the second stage of life, and not the first, i, e, they denote women who have attained their maturity. 
How do you explain the form met 'a girl'? This is an exception, and Panini himself uses the word 'kanya showing that it is a valid form; as in sûtra IV. I. 116. 
The words like an 'an infant girl that does not know how to lie down properly' iraqiqahr a female infant whose feet are still tender and red' do not directly, but metaphorically, express age, and hence are not governed by this rule. 
ferit: 31 grla il faut, ferui 19 ) वृत्तिः ॥ द्विगसंज्ञकात् प्रातिपदिकात स्त्रियांडीप् प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
21. The affixer comes in the feminine after a Nominal-stem ending in short st, which is a 'Dvigu' compound. 
Thus दशपूली, पञ्चपूली ॥ But we find त्रिफला 'the three myrobalans', because this is one of the words spoken of as 's &c' (IV. 1. 4). 
URE • GOVE 
OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
WERNMENTO 
. B 
y 
CH 1 $ 23.1 
सत्यमेव जयते 
सरकार 
अपरिमाणविस्ताचितकम्बल्ये योनतद्धितलाक ॥ २२॥ पदानि ।। अपरिमाण farea- a-franci197, , iga-eron, (Gry fast:) ! वृत्तिः ॥ अपरिमाणन्ता विगोविस्ताचित कम्बल्यान्ताच तद्धितलुकि सति डीप् प्रत्ययो न भवति ॥ 
22. The affix gry is not employed, when a Taddhita affix is elided, after a Dvigu compound ending in a word not denoting a mass or measure ; or in 'bista', cachita', and 
kambalya'. 
This debars 'nîp' which otherwise would have presented itself by virtue of the last sútra. The words forra: 'a weight of gold equal to 80 Rakti kas', tha 'a measure of 10 cart-loads or 80,000 tolahs'; and earl: 'a mea sure', all denote measure; and are the only words expressing measure to which this rule applies. The word gitarut means 'measure', as distinguished from our 'a Numeral', See V. 1. 19, &c. 
Thus self is a Dvigu compound, meaning ‘purchased for five horses.' Here the Taddhita affix 5 (V. 1. 37) giving the sense of purchased with has been elided by V. 1. 28. This compound does not end in a word denoting parimâņa techincally so called or a measure. The feminine of this word will not be formed by Ang but by art, thus, sapat 'a female purchased for five horses'. 
The words denoting 'time' or 'number' are not words denoting 'mea sure' as understood in this sûtra by the word 'parimâņa'. Thus, farat, 'a two years old female child', fatasf 'a three years old female child' (V. 2. 37 Vart.) So also fata 'a female purchased for two hundreds', similarly Ferwer w So also with the words frta &c. As fiftear 'purchased for two bistas', ferrar, Elftar, qanerar, 
f eet, and foreigami, &c. 
Why do we say 'not ending in a word denoting a Parimâna or a 'measure?' Observe geant, airsoft "a female purchased for two or three adhaka". Here âdhaka means a measure equal to 7 ib. 1 1 oz. avoir. 
Why do we say 'when a Taddhita affix is elided'? In Samahara Dvigu' compounds, the affix 'nîp' will apply. Thus sarft an aggregate of five horses', so also getreff: 
Frogtata a 11 23 11 Tetra Il 105-fata, ara, ( farit: are as for 
Ta ) - वृत्तिः॥ काण्डशब्शन्ता विगोस्तद्धितलुकि सति क्षेत्रे वाच्ये डी प्रत्ययो न भवति ॥ 
23. The affixa is not employed after an adjectival Dvigu compound, ending in the word '08', where the Tad dhita affix is elided, when the compound means a field. 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
ANMENT OF IN 
OF INDIA 
सत्रमेय जयते 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
11 
[ BK. IV. CH. 1.5 25. 
4.417 
तिसरकार 
Thus f 'T THI: 'a division of a field of the measure of two kân das.' Here, the word f rog is a Dvigu compound ending in 'kânda'; the Taddhita affixes denoting measure enjoind by V. 2. 37, have been elided by the vårtiku 'TAK TOT PETUTTGCH given under the same sútra. The feminine, therefore, of this word will not be formed by 'nîp' but by Ety; so also F TET T FF: 11 
The term 'kânda' is a word expressive of non-measure; and, therefore, the prohibition contained in the last sûtra applies to it; the present sâtra is made to regulate this prohibition. That is to say, the prohibition contained in the last sûtra is not universally applicable in the case of Dvigu compounds ending in 'kânda'; it applies to cases where the compound refers to superfici al land measure. Therefore we have, fehlost tsy: 'a rope two kândas long '; fitusi 155: 'a rope three kândas long'. 
पुरुषात्प्रमाणेऽन्यतरस्याम् ॥ २४॥ पदानि ॥ पुरुषात, प्रमाणे, अन्यतरस्याम, (fatt: afgdglasTT ) II वृत्तिः ॥ प्रमाणे यः पुरुषशब्दस्तदन्ताद विगोस्तद्धितलाक सति अन्यतरस्यां न डीप् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
24. The affix (fra' is not optionally employed after a Dvigu compound, where the Taddhita affix is elided, when the compound ends in the word 'purusha, referring to measure. 
Thus figuur or fagear gifer 'a mote two purusha wide' so also forget or a &c. The present sûtra ordains an option where IV. 1. 22 would have made the prohibition universal. Why do we say 'when referring to measure? Observe fat 'a female purchased in exchange for two males; No option is allowed here. Where the Taddhita affix is not elided, the present rule does not apply. Therefore in Samahāra Dvigu we have छिपुरुषी or त्रिपुरुषी। 
बहुव्रीहेरूधसो ङीष् ॥ २५॥ पदानि ॥ बहुव्रीहेः, ऊधसः, ङीष् (स्त्रियां)॥ वतिः ॥ ऊधस शब्दान्तात् बहुव्रीहः स्त्रियां डी प्रत्ययो भवात ॥ 
25. The affix 'r' is employed, in the feminine, after a Bahuvrihi compound ending in the word ûdhas an udder'. 
Thus the Bahuvrîhi compound of tos 'a bowl' and a will be ghost ya; then the final of adhas is replaced by the substitute 3796 (V. 4. 131); thus we have ZUŠTya; which would have been liable to the rules IV. 1. 12, 13, ante; the present sútra enjoins 8c instead. Thus shoshaft (VI. 4. 134) 'a woman with full bosom'; qraft a cow with udders like jars'. 
Why do we say after a Bahůvrihi compound'? Observe FIAT 5: = TR ANTTT: (II. 2. 4) which is a Tatpurusha compound. 
KURE GO 
VERNMENT 
OF CULTUR 
TWINISTRY ON 
UT OF INDIA 
BKTV. Ch. 1. & 27. ) 
gif 
ति मंत्रालय 
02 
4777 
The Sâtra IV. 1. 28 also is debarred in this case: for though the pen ultimate is elided by the VI. 4. 134, yet rule IV. 1. 28 does not apply here. 
The substitution of stay for the final of a takes place only then, when the feminine nature is to be expressed and not otherwise. Therefore in the masculine we have HETETT 7512: the big-bosomed cloud'. 
संख्याव्ययादे डौं ॥ २६॥ पदानि ॥ संख्या-अव्यय-आदेः, डीए ( बहुव्रीहे 
TE: ferri) 11 वृत्तिः ॥ संख्यादेरव्ययादेश्व बहुव्रीहरूधस्शब्दान्तात् डीप प्रत्ययो भवति । 
26. The affix ETT comes in the feminine, after a Bahuvrîhi compound ending in 'ûdhas', beginning with a Nu meral or an Indeclinable. 
This sûtra ordains 'nîp', where by the last sútra there would have been 'nîsh'. Thus +4 +37a8+ TT (V. 4. 131 )= aeft 'having two udders'; so also sufi,'having three udders'. The above are Bahuvrihi com pounds beginning with a Numeral. Similarly start 'many-uddered .; flat 'having no udders.' 
Why do we say 'beginning with'? So that the rule may apply to compounds like f oreft and Ferretereft, in which the words 'dvividha' and 'tri vidha', though not Sankhyâ are words which begin with a Sankhya. 
दामहायनान्तांश्च ॥ २७॥ पदानि ॥ दाम-हायनन्तातू, च, (स्त्रियां डो संख्या agare:) बृत्तिः ॥ संख्यादबहुव्रीहे मिशब्दान्ताडायनशब्दान्ताच स्त्रियां डीप् प्रत्ययो भवति ।। वार्निकम् ॥ हायनो वयसि स्मृतः ॥ 
27. The affix iq comes, in the feminine, after a Bahuvrîhi compound beginning with a Numerel, and ending with the words dâman 'a rope', and hầyana a year'. 
The word Tan was liable to be operated upon by three rules, by, IV. 1. 13 ordaining sig, by IV. 1. Il prohibiting totally the affixing of tq and IV. 1. 28 ordaining nip optionally: the present sâtra ordains nịp to the exclusion of all those rules. As fart'a (mare) bound by two ropes! Fereft II 
Similarly ran would have taken long epr by IV. 1. 4, this ordains long Thus fecerea tivo years old girl)', Fereraroft: Theizu 
Vårt : The word 'hâyana' must denote ‘age', for the purposes of this sutra. Therefore we have no nîp here :-FrTAT TOT 'a hall of two years ex istence'. So also fateraler and are 11 Moreover in these latter cases the is not changed into t; for when run denotes Cage', it is then only that the is changed into op and not otherwise, 
GOU 
GOVERNMENT 
RY OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
रकृति मंत्रालय 
डीप् ॥ 
[ BK, IV. CH. I.S30 
सालय भारत 
तिसरकार 
अन उपधालोपिनोऽन्यतरस्याम् ॥ २८॥ पदानि ॥ अनः, उपधा-लोपिन:-अ न्यतरस्यां (बहुव्रीहे डीए) वृत्तिः ॥ अनन्तो यो बहुव्रीहिरुपधालोपो तस्मादन्यतरस्यां डीए प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
28. The affix e optionally comes after that Bahuvrîhi compound, which ending in the syllable 377 loses its penultimate अ॥ 
Thus Trustą is a Bahuvrihi compound ending in ta; in applying nip, it loses is penultimate by VI. 4. 134 (अल्लोपोऽनः there is elision of अ of अन् when a bha affix follows). Thus बहराज्ञी ' having many kings'. In the alterna tive, when hip is not added, we may add the affix डाए by IV. I. I3. Thus बहु राजा, बहुराजे, बहुराजाः ॥ Or we may apply the prohibition 'contained in IV. I. 12 and have बहुराजा, बहुराजानौ, बहुराजानः ॥ when the penultimate is not elided we cannot apply the affix sto at all: in cases of such compounds there are only two forms of the feminine noun as सुपर्वा, सुपर्वे, सुपर्वाः or सुपर्वा सुपर्वाणी, सुपर्वाणः ॥ That is to say we apply IV. I. I3 and 12 only; for in the case of सुपर्वन् &c. rule VI.4.137 prevents the elision of the penultimate न्; (न संयोगारामनन्तान, there is not elision of the st of at when it comes after a conjunct consonant ending in a or म) 
नित्यम् संझाछन्दसोः ॥ २९॥ पदानि ॥ नित्यं, संशा, छन्दसः ( अनउपधा लोपिनोऽन्यतरस्यां डीए) वृत्तिः ॥ अनन्ताबहुव्रीहरुपधालोपिनः संज्ञायां विषये छन्दसि चनित्यं डीप् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
29. The affix 579 necessarily comes in the Chhan das and in forming Names, after that Bahuvrîhi compound which ending in the syllable अन् loses its penultimate अ॥5 
This is an exception to the last rule; for while that enjoined the op tional, the present enjoins the compulsory application of the affix # Thus सुराज्ञी 'the city called Surajni'; अतिराज्ञी 'the city of Atirajni'. Similarly in the Chhandas we have गौः पञ्चतामी, एकानी, विदानी 'a cow having five udders, one udder, or two udders'. एकमूर्धा समानमूीं। 
केवलमामकभागधेयपापापरसमानार्यकृतसुमङ्गलं भेषजाच ॥३०॥ पदानि ।। केवल-मामक-भागधेय-पाप-अपर-समान-आर्यकृत-सुमङ्गल-भेषजात, च, (संझाछ न्दसोः ङीए स्त्रियां)॥ वृतिः।। केवलादिभ्यः प्रातिपदिकेभ्यः संज्ञायांछन्दसि विषये स्त्रियां डीप् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
30. The affix y necessarily comes in denoting the feminine, after the following Nominal-stems when em ployed to express a Name or in the Chhandas :-केवल, मामक, भागधेय, पाप, अपर, समान, आयकृत, सुमङ्गल and भेषज ॥ OF 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
VERNMENT O 
NT OF INDIA 
BK. IV. CH. I. $ 32.] 
11 
02 
लय भारत 
FT The phrase CIFIT : of the last sû tra is understood here also. Thus anant in the Chhandas, as opposed to an in the ordinary language, when not denoting a Name ; so also मामकी and मामिका ; भागधेयी as मित्रावरुणयोर्भाग trait and PTÈTAT ; qrot and 1 ; 379ů as garsyHTETET ESTÀ; (Rigveda I. 1. 13) and TT; Taraft Frost and Fural; rent and it ; i (Rigveda X.85.33) सुमङ्गला ; भेषजी and भेषजा॥ सुमङ्गल takes डी also by IV. I. 4I, as belonging to Gaurâdi class No. 86. 
TATTETETT 11 38 11 ora Il TÀT:, 57, ETTEIT, (FEIT GEET: Sg ) 1 वृत्तिः ॥ जविषयादन्यत्र संज्ञायां छन्दसि च रानिशब्दातू डीप् प्रत्ययो भवति ।। afTchi 11 Strategraathehu 
31. The affix ato comes after the word in the Chhandas, and in denoting a Name, except when the affix 
re (nominative plural) is added. 
Thus ar rot get, affar: (3rd pl); (Rigveda X. 127. 1. I. 35. I) but in the nominative plural we have tri, the regular plural of the word arfer, as in the sentence Street TTT:, instead of 17541: 
Vårt :--According to Katyayana, risp is not added, not only when we apply the nominative plural termination ; but in all other terminations beginning with stat also. Thus UFT AFISET ; here in the accusative singular case also the sig is not employed. 
But how do you explain the form 74: in the following fafaces agrosaru : ; This 'ratrya' is the nominative plural of 'râtri' which is formed by the feminine affix nîp; and not by nîsh. The forms evolved by adding T or TT are one and the same, except with regard to accent; that formed by nish has udatta accent on the final : the other has it on the initial. The word he is formed by the krit affix Faro (Un. IV. 67), and therefore, it is a word which is governed by IV. 1.45 because it is a word falling in Bahuvadi class, by virtue of the general subrule "a word ending with the vowel g of a křit affix, other than it belongs to Bahuvadi class; some say that every word ending in y, if it has not the force of the affix fent belongs to this class". Therefore it takes sig in forming the feminine. 
अन्तर्वत्पतिवतोर्नु ॥ ३२॥ पदानि ॥ अन्तर्वत्-पतिवतः, नुक् ॥ सृत्तिः । अन्तर्वत पतिवतोर्नुग भवति डीप च प्रत्ययः॥ 
32. The augment is added to the words raaa and ciaac, when the affix zig is added to form the feminine. 
This sátra points out the base and teaches the addition of the auga mental When this augment is added, (and it must be added at the end, 
RE • GOVEA 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY O 
VERNMENT O. 
T OF INDIA 
sig 11 
[BK IV CH 
3 331 
77122861 
by sůtra I. 1. 46), the forms become sten and gracz; and these words must take nsp by virtue of IV. 1. 5, if not by this sûtra. Thus we have अन्तर्वनी and पतिवनी ॥ This irregular formation of the feminine is employed only then, when the sense of the words so formed is 'a pregnant female' and 'one whose husband is living' respectively. Therefore we have not the above forms in the following :-प्रथते त्वया पतिमती पृथिवी; here the word पतिमती qualifies the word great and has not the sense of having the husband living', therefore its formation is regular. Similarly when the sense is not of a preg nant female', the feminine will not be stradeft ; in fact there will be no affix ing of वत् (मतुप् ). Because मतुए is added to words possessing certain attribute, as described in V. 2. 94, while the word sat has the sense of location, and can never be in apposition with the sense of strea “having" as required by V. 2.94. The word staat would not therefore take HET! It does so irregularly by this sûtra. The # is changed to a by VIII. 2. 9 in 97 The change of to a in graad is however irregular. 
The augment gak is optionally added to these words in the Vedas : as aradat or greater TTT!! qraqat or granat a FUTTET II 
YAITTÉT 11 33 11 TET@ Il get:, :, T OM, ( ferui ) वृत्तिः॥पतिशब्दस्य नकारादेशः स्त्रियां विधीयते ।। 
33. The substitute 7 replaces the final of ufa before the feminine affix tg, when the word so formed means 
a wife, who takes part in the sacrifices of her husband'. 
Thus qfa ari 205 The feminine Tat means legitimate wife, she who is entitled to take part in the sacrifices of her husband. The word ToT is an Instrumental Tatpurusha compound and means "related through sacrifice!! i. e. who shares the fruits of and is entitled to participate in the sacrifices of her husband. But when the sense is not that of 'wife', the feminine of gra will be पति as ग्रामस्य पतिरिय ब्राह्मणी 'this Brahmani is the head or mistress of this village'. If the word wat means 'the wife who takes part in the sacrifices of her husband', it cannot be applied to the wife of a Sûdra, for a Súdra cannot per form a sacrifice, a fortiori not his wife? The term qat is, however, extended to the wife of a Sûdra also, by analogy, as the marriage of a Sûdra also takes place by offering sacrifice to Fire and making it a witness. 
fararerater 13811 Tera il faTTTTT, Fyekt (ory:, ferui, sgue TET) वृत्तिः ॥ पति शब्दान्तस्य प्रातिपदिकस्य सपूर्वस्थानुपसर्जनस्य स्त्रियां विभाषा नकारादेशी भवति जी 
URE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY OF 
ENT OF INDIA 
Bev. CH. I. $ 371 
सिस्कृति मंत्रान्न 
TO 
77 
34. In forming the feminine with the affix erg, T is optionally the substitute of the final of grâ, when the latter is preceded by another word. 
The word agafa means when the word ma is not an upasarjana, but stands at the end of a compound. Thus Gra: or Taucît; Franta: or preciou This is an example of aprâpta-vibhâshâ. Because it is free from the limita tions of 'yajña-sanyoga' of the last sûtra. Why do we say when it is preceded by another word ? Observe para sa AFT, 'this Brahman lady is the mis tress of the village.' Here the feminine is grą and not cát il 
FARIETTERING II 34 II ETA I GM, PC-CY, वृत्तिः ।। सपल्यादिषु नित्य वत्युनकारादेशो भवति डीप तु लभ्यत एव ।। 
35. In forming the feminine with the affix sig, the word fa always takes the substitute q, in the words like 'GET' and the rest. 
This enjoins the necessary and not optional substitution of a for the final g of qra, before the affix at, in the cases of certain words. The word 'nitya' is used in the aphorism for the sake of precision. Thus erat, Tavat The compound of the following words with gant are governed by this rule: I EHF 'equal 2 gan 'one', 3 ft 'hero', 4 foos 'a cake', 5 ra brother 6 gs 'a son', and 7 are 'a slave' (this only in the Chhandas ). 
Tanda II 38 II E II ganar:, Dar, (receri ) वृत्तिः ॥ पूतक्रतशब्दस्य स्त्रियामैकारादेशो भवात डीप् प्रत्ययः॥ 
36. In forming the feminine, the letter is the substitute of the final of the word gaand, when the affix cq is added. 
Thus gokareit 'the wife of Patakratu'. This and the two succeeding sútras, are in a way more intimately connected with IV. I. 48, in asmuchas the sense of the feminine words must be that of 'wife of', otherwise these sutras will not apply. Thus if the meaning is not that of 'wife of, the word gaania: will be both masculine and feminine as well, meaning 'she by whom sacrifices (fa) are sanctified (gar:). 
वृषाकप्यग्निकुसितकुसीदानामुदात्तः ॥ ३७॥ पदानि ॥ वृषाकपि-अग्नि-कुसित 
prerai, e17: ( et ferdi ) हृत्तिः ॥ वृषाकप्यादीनामुदान ऐकायदेशो भवति स्त्रियां डीप च प्रत्ययः । 
37. In forming the feminine with the affix sro the letter û having udatta accent is the substitute of the finals of 19, Th, grea and guia ! 
URE : GOVE. 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
XT OF INDIA 
संस्कृति मंत्राल 
[BK. IV. CH. I. $ 39 
170 
The words tenta and gira have udatta accent on the middle vowel (Phit Sû II. 19), the feminine of these has udâtta, however, on the final. The words 'agni' and the rest have the udatta on the final (Phit sû l. 1) their substitute i will necessarily be udatta, by the rule of sthânivat bhava, even if the present sûtra had not explicitly declared it to be so. Thus graharat (Rig Veda X. 86. 13) 'the wife of Vțishakapi', spateit, (Rig Ved. I. 22. 12) the wife of 'Agni', arterit 'wife of Kusita', thereft 'the wife of Kusidai. The present rule only applies when the sense of the feminine word is that of 'wife of'. Otherwise we have tarat: at 'the women Vțishakapi' and not 
aurat !For the accent of the word ay, See VI. 1. 203. 
Harta II 3€ || TEIPT II AFT:, sit, T, (sqre: ferristo) वृत्तिः ॥ मनुशब्दात् स्त्रियांडीए प्रत्ययो भवति औकारश्चन्तादेशः ऐकारचोदातः॥ 
38. In forming the feminine with the affix is optionally the substitute of the final of #g, (as well as the udâtta tu 
The phrases y and get are understood. The force of ar is to make the substitution optional. Thus we have three forms, मनायी or मनावी or मनु:, all meaning the wife of Manu. The word na has udatta accent on the first vowel, as it is formed from on by the affix 3 (Uņ I. 10), which by Uņ I. 9 is treated as having an indicatory 7, and affixes having indicatory { throw the accent on the first syllable. (VI. I. 197) 
वर्णादनुदात्तात्तोपधात्तोनः ॥ ३९॥ पदानि ॥ वर्णाद्, अनुदात्तात, तोपधात्, a, a: ( Graferill वृत्तिः ॥ वर्णवाचिनः प्रातिपदिकावनुताचान्तानकारोपधावाडीप् प्रत्ययो भवति, तकारस्य च नकारादेशी ara il वार्तिकम् ॥ पिशङ्गादपसंख्यानम् ॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ असितपलितयोः प्रतिषेधः ।। वार्तिकम् ॥छन्दसिक्कमित्येके ॥ भाषायामपीष्यते ॥ 
39. The affix ata is optionally employed after a Nominal-stem expressive of colour, ending in a gravely accent ed vowel, and having the letter as its penultimate letter: and the lettera is substituted in the room of all 
Thus of a 'variegated'; the feminine is car or oft variegated', so near or or black', rear or groff 'green'. All these words have udatta accent on the first vowel either by Rule VI. 1. 197 (satearraraan "word formed by affixes having an indicatory or have udatta accent on the first vowel”,:) 
GURE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
Y OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
ENT OF INDIA 
IV:CH. I. $ 40. ] 
• 
because these words are formed by the Uņadi affixes ga (Un III. 86) and 
at ( III. 93), or by the Phit sûtra II. 10 (quai otrafareta "of words expressive of colour and ending in qut, or fa or for a, the udatta accent falls on the first vowel"). 
Why do we say "expressive of color'? Observe TETT, Earl These words are also acutely accented on the first syllable, by rule VI. 2. 49 (TTFERTETETT: "the first word retains its natural accent in a compound of a gati word with a word formed by the affix kta"). But as these words do not express color, their feminine does not take nîp. 
Why do we say "ending in a gravely accented vowel?” Observe what 'white.' Here though the word expresses 'color', yet it has acute (instead of grave ) accent on the final (by rule of Phių sutra I. 21 garerai "the words ghfita &c. have udâtta on the final”). 
Why do we say "having the letter af as its penultimate letter"? Other wise the affix nîsh will be employed in forming the feminine. 
The words for the application of this rule must end in the letter 3 in the masculine. Otherwise this rule will not apply. As FETIESETT a black Brahmaņi woman'. Here fatra is a word expressive of color, it has a penul timate 7, has anudâtta accent on the final (VI. I. 197 ) as it is formed by the affix tel; but as it does not end with 37, its feminine is not formed with nip. 
Vårt :-The affix nîp comes also after the word frag; as, ferit 'of tawny color. 
Vårt :-There is prohibition in the case of the words street and grea; as strear 'black' and gresar 'grey'. 
Vårt :-According to some, the substitute a replaces the final of these two words that and qfsa in the Vedic literature. As fa (Rig Veda IX. 73. 29); Tha (R. Veda V. 2. 4). According to some authorities, these latter forms are valid in literature other than the Vedic :-As utat TOTEUTHIEFERAT 
अन्यतोङीष् ॥ ४०॥ पदानि॥ अन्यतः, ङीष् , (वर्णादनुदात्तात् स्त्रियां)॥ वृत्तिः । वर्णवाचिनः प्रातिपदिकानुदात्तान्तात् स्त्रियां डीप प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
40. The affix to is employed in the feminine after every other word expressive of color and ending with an anudatta accent. 
The word as of IV. 1. 38 does not govern this sutra. The word sten: means in other cases than those governed by the last aphorism 1. e. after words which have not a as penultimate. The difference between nip and iish affixes consists in accent, the former being gravely accented (111. .4) and the latter acute, Thus EÉT, rhift, a ll 
4 
URE 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
NERNMENT ON 
TOF INDIA 
डी 
॥ 
[BK. IV. CH. IN$ 
When the word does not express color, this rule does not apply. As ogr'a bed-sted. 
When the world does not end with a gravely accented vowel, this will not apply, as, कृष्णा , कपिला ॥ 
षिदगौरादिश्यश्च ॥४१॥ पदानि ॥ ब-इतू-गौर-आदिभ्यः, च, (स्त्रियांडी)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ विनयः प्रातिपदिकेन्यो गौरादिभ्यश्च स्त्रियां ङीष् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
41. The affix org is employed in forming the femi nine after words ending with affixes which have an indicatory 
and after the words pirt and the rest. 
Thus by Sutra III. I. I45 (शिल्पिनि वुन् ) the affix वन is added to a root, to form noun of agency, denoting an artist, The feminine of the words so formed, will take fiish. As, नर्तकी an actress', खनकी 'a digger'; रजकी 'a dyer'. So also the words गोर &c; as गौरी, मत्सी। The following is the list of words belonging to Gauradi class. 
1गौर, 2 मत्स्य, 3 मनुष्य, 4 शृङ्ग, 5 पिङ्गल 6 हय, 7 गवय, 8 मुकय, 9 ऋष्य, 10 पुट, 11 तुण 12 गुण, 13 द्रोण; 14 हरिण, 15 कोकण, (काकण,) 16 पटर, 17 उकण, (आमल) 18 आम लक, 19 कुवल, 20 बिम्ब, 21 बदर, 22 फर्करक (कर्कर) 23 तार, 24 शर्कार, 25 पुष्कर, 26 शिखण्ड, 27 सलए 28 शकण्ड 29 सनन्द 30 सुषम, 31 सुषव 32 भालन्द 33 गडुज, 34 पाण्डश 35 आढक, 36 आनन्द, 37 आश्वस्थ 38 सृपाट, 39 आखक (आपच्चिक), 40 शाकुल, 41 सूर्य (सूर्म) 42 शूर्प, 43 सूच, 44 घूष (पूष) 45 यूथ, 46 सूप, 47 मेथ, 48 वल्लक, 49 धातक, 50 सल्लक, 51 मालक, 52 मालत, 53 साल्वक, 54 वेतस, 55 वृक्ष (वृ. स)56 अतस, 57 उभय.58 भूग, 59 मह, 60 मठ, 61 छेद,62 पेश, 63 मेह, 64 श्वन 65 तक्षन् , 66 अनडुही, 67 अनाही, 68 1 एषणः करणे । 69 देह, 70 देहल, 71 काकादन 72 गवादन, 73 तेजन, 74 रजन, 75 लवण, 76 औदाहमानि (औशाहमानि) 77 गौतम (गो तम) 78 पारक, 79 अयस्थूण (अथःस्थूण) 80 भौरिकि,81 भौलिकि, 82 भौलिङ्गि,83 यान 84 मेध, 85 आलम्बिा, 86 आलजि, 87 आलब्धि,88 आलक्षि, 89 केवाल, 90 आपक.91 
आरट,92 नट, 93 दोट, 94 नोट, 95 मूलाट, 96 वातन, 97 पोतन, 98 पातन, 99 पाठन (पानट) 100 आस्तरण, 101 अधिकरण, 102 अधिकार 103 अग्रहायणी (आग्रहायणी) 104 प्रत्यवरोहिणी 105 सेचन, 106 सुमङ्गलात्संज्ञायाम् । 107 अण्डर 108 सुन्दर, 109 मण्डल, 110 मन्थर, 111 मंगल 112 पट, 113 पिण्ड, 114 षण्ड, 115 ऊर्द, 116 गुई, 117 शम, 118 सूड़, 119 औड (आई) 120 हद (हर) 121 पाण्ड,122 भाण्डल (भाण्ड) 123 लोहाण्ड, 124 कदर, 125 कन्दर, 126 करल, 127 तरुण, 128 तलुन, 129 कल्माष, 130 बृहत् , 131 महत्, 182सोम, 18 सौधर्म। 134 रोहिणी नक्षत्र । 135 रेवती नक्षत्रे । 136 बिकल, 137 निष्कल 138 पुष्कल । 139 कटाच्छ्रोणिवचने । पिप्पल्यादयश्च । 140 पिप्पली, 141 हरितकी (हरीतकी) 142 कोशातकी, 143 शमी, 144 बरी, 145 शरी, 146 पृथिवी, 147 क्रोष्टु, 148 मातामह, 149 पितामह, 150 सुगेड, 151 सुब, 152सूर्य, 153 सकलूक. 154 आलिगि, 155 पावन, 156 एत, 157 विटक, 158 भट्ट, 159 बहन, 160 कन्द, 161 कण ॥ 
N.B.---The word in though denoting color, is finally acute by virtue of this sátra ; the word TET &c. being jati words having a penultimate a would 
E. GOVER 
VERNMENT 
OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
IV:CH. I. $ 42.] 
संस्कृति मंत्राल 
रत सरकार 
not have taken nip (IV. 1. 63) but for this satra; ra and 7877 would have tak en ETC (IV. 1. 13), poput is formed by fee and would have taken nîp (IV. 1. 15) coaja selle pruft'a balance, a probe'. a would take nin also by IV. 1. 73. Similarly it may be shown why the several words have been included in this list. By the vartika ATETT T given under IV. 2. 36, the affix 37THF in Aarais treated as having an indicatory | The word Aranha will take it because it is Fat; its inclusion in the list of Gaurâdi indicates that the rule of shq application, because a word is ind, is not universal (STEET: FATOTT SIT) Therefore we have forms like egt &c. 
जानपदकुण्डगोण स्थलभाजनागकालनीलकुशकामुककबरादू वृत्त्यमानवपनाकात माधाणा स्थौल्यवर्णानाच्छादनाऽयोविकारमैथुनेच्छाकेशवेशेषु॥४२॥ पदानि ।। जान G-TE-TUT-F16-7761-2757-2713-o-o -eta-ecran, 9-Tha-tet TTBTHÍCHT-STTT-forcar-of-977715591691-Teichriyasi-a gaty (fer TIETT) II : 
वृत्तिः ॥ जानपदादिभ्य एकादशभ्यः प्रातिपदिकेभ्य एकादश वृत्यादिष्वर्थेषु यथासंख्य डी प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
42. The affix gît is employed after the eleven words “janapada' &c. in the sense of profession' &c. respec tively; i. e. after the words 1. FAT 2. Tous, 3. Tiut, 4. Fra 5. HIST, 6. am, 7. , 8. siis, 9. 10. Ty, and Fat; the affix Elu is employed when the sense is that of 1.'profession or liv ingo 2. 'a bowl', 3. 'a sack or vessel for keeping grain', 4. 'a na tural spot of ground'; 5. 'a cooked food or rice-gruel', 6. 'stout, 7. black-coloured', 8. 'blue-coloured other than cloth', 9. a plough-share', 10. a libidinous female', 11. 'a fellet or braid of hair', respectively. 
Thus strate a profession', otherwise n e, the difference being in accent only. For this word is formed by adding the affix spot to janapada, by sûtra IV. 1. 86, as it belongs to Utsadi class of words: in forming the feminine the affix it will be added in this latter case, thus throwing the acute accent on the first syllable. 
(2) So also posî bowl-shaped vessel', otherwise FET 'a name of Durga'. (3) siruft'a sack' rarang since affus otherwise stort, a particular name. (4) Ferrante a place not prepared by artificial improvement'; otherwise fantas F E STOT, II (5) frst 'cooked', otherwise *TSIT, ( 6 ) FTTT 'a stout wo man', otherwise STTTT!! The word when a guna-vachana word i. e. a word expressive of quality, in the sense of 'stoutness', takes the affix nîsh in the feminine; otherwise 2TC when expressing general qualities. When it is a jati 
GOVERNMEN 
TURE - GO 
OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
[BK. IV. CH. I. $ 44 
स्कृति मंत्रालय 
भारत सरकार 
vachana word it takes are under all circumstances. (7) art a black-coloured female', otherwise to 'cruel' (8) ait 'a blue-coloured animal or indigo' The word starostaat in the sûtra is rather too wide, it should be confined to the two senses above indicated i. e. when it applies to a plant called indigo or to animals'. Such as artit, or art T59T; or when it denotes appellative as fretul In other cases we have sitet 'a blue-coloured cloth'. (9) haft 'a plough share', otherwise chat 'a rope or a kind of grass' (10) FThant 'a libidinous or lustful woman' otherwise it a woman desirous of wealth. (11) **t 'a fillet or braid of hair', otherwise that 'mixed, variegated'. 
TUTTET SITHT 11 83 | TETAT II TOTTA, TIH (FETETT STO) 11 वृत्तिः ॥ शोणशब्दायाचामाचार्याणां मतेन स्त्रियां ङीष् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
43. The affix it is employed in the feminine according to the opinion of the Eastern Grammarians, after the word शोण॥ 
Thus Troft or sirop Tsar'a red or bay mare'. By Phit Sutra II. 10 referred to already in IV. 1. 39 the udâtta in to falls on the first syllable, and by IV. 1. 40 it would have taken to always; but the present sûtra makes a niyama rule and restricts the application of sia according to the opinion of Eastern Grammarians only, and not of others. 
वोतो गुणवचनात् ॥४४॥ पदानि ॥ वा, उतः, गुण वचनात् (स्त्रियां ङीष्) वृत्तिः । गणवचनात् प्रातिपदिका उकारान्तात् स्त्रियां वा ङीष् प्रत्ययो भवति । बार्तिकम् ।। वसुशब्दाद गुणवचनान् डीवायुतत्तार्थम् ।। वा०॥ खरुसंयोगोपधात्प्रतिषेधो वक्तव्यः ॥ 
44. The affix zîr is optionally employed in the feminine after a word ending in short 3, and being expressive of a quality. 
The word ura : means what expresses quality: i. e. "words not being words formed by primitive or secondary affixes, or other words entitled to the name of sankhya or sarvanaman, or jâti, or compound words, pro vided they are words denoting qualities and capable of being used as adjec tives qualifying substantives as the word Te is, not as the word ay, which though it expresses a quality, cannot be used as an adjective." (Guide to Panini). Thus from ea dexterous', we have get or TE: (without a feminine affix); so s: or gêr 'soft'. Why do we say 'ending in a short z'? Observe STÍGITU BE this Brahmana lady is pure! Why do we say "expressive of a quality?" Observe trg: 'a mouse' (both masculine and feminine). 
Värt :-After the word as when expressive of a quality, the affix nip is employed in the feminine; in order to make the first syllable acutely ac 
TURE • GOU 
GOVERNMENT 
OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY ON 
NT OF INDIA 
BR. IV. CH. I. $46] 
डीए॥ 
लिय. भारत 
cented. As, वस्वी॥ वसु is formed by उ (Vn I. I0) and is adyudatta because the उ is नित् ॥ O Vart :-Prohibition must be stated after the word te, and words though ending in short उ, have conjunct consonant as penultimate. As खरुरियं ब्राह्मणी 'a Brahmani who chooses her own husband'. Similarly पाण्डु is both gender, as ण्ड is a conjunct consonant. As पाण्डुरियं ब्राह्मणी ॥ 
The word Guņa ļot: 'quality' has been thus defined : 
सत्वे निविशतेपैति पृथग जातिषु वृश्यते । 
आधेयश्चाक्रियाजश्च सोऽसत्वप्रकृतिर्गुणः ॥ बवादिभ्यश्च ॥४५॥ पदानि ॥ बहु-आदिभ्यः, च, (स्त्रियां वा-ङष्)ि ॥ वृत्ति ॥ बहु इत्येवमादिभ्यः प्रातिपदिकेभ्यः स्त्रियां वा ङीष प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
45. And the affix site is optionally employed in the feminine after the words ag and the rest. 
As बहुः or बही ॥ The following are the words belonging to the Bahva di class - 
का 1 बहु, 2 पद्धति, 3 अञ्चति, 4 अङ्कति, 5 अंहति, 6 शकटि, (शकति), 7 शकिः शस्त्रे, 8 शारि, 9 वारि, 10 राति 11 राधि, 12 शाधि, 13 अहि, 14 कपि, 15 यष्टि, 16 मुनि, 17 इतः प्राप्यंगात्। 18 कृतिकारादक्तिनः । 19 सर्वतोऽक्तिन्नर्थादित्येके। 20 चण्ड, 21 अराल, 22 कृपण, 23 कमल, 24 विकट, 25 विशाल, 26 विशङ्कट, 27 भरुज, 28 ध्वज, 29 चन्द्र भागान्नद्याम् (चन्द्रभागा नघाम) 30 कल्याण, 31 उदार, 32 पुराण, 33 अहन्, 34 क्रोड, 35 नख, 36 खुर, 37 शिखा, 38 बाल, 39 शफ, 40 गुद ॥ आकृतिगणोऽयम् ॥ तेन। 43 भग, 44 गल, 45 राग इत्यादि ॥ 
The affix nîsh also comes optionally after words ending in short being the names of the limbs of animals; as, धमनिः or धमनी ॥ So also after the vowel of a krit affix, not fint (III. 3. 94), as tít or trait il Some say that the feminine affix nish may come after any word ending in s, if it has not the force of the affix fix 11 The word as is a guņa-word and would have option ally taken nîsh even by the last sûtra, its specification here is for the subse quent sâtra, by which it necessarily takes nîsh in the Chhandas. It is an Ákritigana 
नित्यं छन्दसि ॥ ४६॥ पदानि ॥ नित्यं, छन्दसि, (बहादिभ्यः स्त्रियांडीए)॥ वृत्तिः॥ बह्वादिभ्य श्छन्दसि विषये नित्यं स्त्रियां ङीष् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
46. The affix zra is always employed in the Vedic literature, in forming the feminine of the words ag and the rest. 
Thus बहीषु हित्वा प्रपिवन् ॥ Here बही is the name of a herb. 
The word Fiest'always' is used in the aphorisin, more for the sake of the subsequent søtra, which it governs than for this sûtra. For the word 
at • GOVER 
TRY OF CULT 
VERNMENT O 
NT OF INDIA 
ON 
जयते 
संस्कृति मंत्राल 
1 
[ BK. V. CH. I.1948 
.417 
भारत सरकार 
"optionally' does not govern this, and the aphorism even without the word 
nitya'? would have been a necessary rule and not optional: for BTTTTHETALUTET नित्योबिविः सिद्धः, योगारम्भश्विन्त्य योजनः । 
CT 11.89 || ETG II Yer:, , (acre FACUT FETTI STOT) 1 वृनिः॥ छन्दसि विषये स्त्रियां भुवो नित्ये डी प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
47. The affix Sty is always employed in the Chhandas in forming the feminine, after the word y ll 
Thus ferat, staft, Fiat, at 
But why not so in the case of FETTO? Because it ends in long , while ferait &c. are feminine of FET &c. ending in short Jil In fact the word 37: "after a word ending in short 3" of Sûtra IV. 1. 44 governs this also. The word : is the ablative case of irregularly formed by the substitution of 393; this form being confined to sâtras only. 
पुंयोगादाख्यायाम् ॥४८॥ पदानि ॥ पुंयोगातू-आख्यायां, (स्त्रियां ङीषं)॥ वृत्तिः॥ पुंयोगाद्धेतो ययातिपदिकं स्त्रियां वर्चते पुस आख्याभूतं तस्मान् डील प्रत्ययो भवति ।। वात्तिकम् ॥ गोपालकादीनां प्रतिषेधः ।। वात्तिकम् ।। सूर्यादेवतायां चाव वक्तव्यः॥ 
48. The feminine affix to comes after a word when it expresses the name of a wife in relation to her husband. 
Relation (yoga) with a male (puns) is called Gürt II Thus the wife of store an astrologer' is called act, so also Afar the wife of a chief minister', met "the wife of a chief'; qarf &c. Thus the word sur means an astrologer, a calculator or a mathematician; and the wife of such a person will be expressed by the word opent 1 But if a woman is herself an astrologer &c, she will be called stat ( by aTT) &c. Therefore when matrimonial rela tion is not denoted, this sûtra will not apply. 
Why do we say 'in relation to a husband'? Observe two women of the names of Devadattâ, and Yajñadattá, not wives of Deva datta and Yajñadatta.' 
Why do we say "treat or a name"? The word formed will be the name of a woman whose husband is possessed of the quality denoted by the word, and not that the woman possesses that quality. In the case of a woman, therefore, the word is merely a Name or a Designation, and has no reference to the etymological meaning of the word. Moreover, the omission of the word Sierra would have made the søtra ambiguous, for the phrase 9 am also means 'an effect produced by union with a man' such as pregnan cy. And words areer and ar would have required & and not 31 1 OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
Bk. IV: Ch. 1. $ 49 ) 
633 
411 
Vårt :-Prohibition must be stated in the case of words like Truien and the rest. Thus craicant the wife of a cow-herd'. 
Vårt :- The affix or comes after all in denoting the wife of Sûrya, when she is a celestial being. As auf "the celestial wife of the god Sûrya', while at will denote a human wife of Sûrya, such as, Kunti &c. The affix Erre makes the word acutely accented on the final: for the word gray has acute on the initial, and had to been only prohibited and no specific affix ordained, then erg would have applied, and it would have left the accent unchanged. Hence a distinct affix erg is ordained. 
इन्द्रवरुणभवशर्वरुद्रमृडहिमारण्ययव यवनमातुलाचार्याणामानुक॥४९॥ पदानि॥ G-TEUT-HET-270-28-25--STTUIT- - -AITG-3[ETRIOTIT, 31/09, (fatti 319) इत्तिः ॥ इन्द्रादिभ्यः प्रातिपदिकेन्या स्त्रियां डीप प्रत्ययो भवति भानुक चागमः ॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ हिमारण्ययोर्महत्वे ॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ यवादोषे॥ वा०॥ यवनालिप्याम् ॥ वा०॥ उपाध्यायमातुलाभ्यां वा ।। वा० ॥ आचार्यावणवेच ॥ वा०॥ अर्यक्षत्रियान्यांवा ।। वा० ॥ मुगलाच्छन्दसि लिच्च ।। 
49. The augment sech is added to the Proper Nouns ges, TET, A, T, , and y, and to the words.fe# 'snow', अरण्य 'a forest', यव 'barley', यवन 'a Yavana', मातुल - a maternal uncle', and start 'a preceptor', before the fe minine affix any 
The present sätra teaches two things, the addition of the augment spraak (STT) and secondly the feminine affix A1 Out of the above words, in case of those about which matrimonial relation is desired to be expressed, i. e. the Proper Nouns up to 3, the present sútra teaches only the addition of the augment igen, for in their case, the affix at would follow by force of the preceding Sutra. In the case of the remaining words, it teaches both these things. 
Thus इन्द्राणी 'the wife of Indra', वरुणानी the wife of Varuna', भवानी the wife of Bhava', tot 'the wise of Sarva', groft the wife of Rudra', asílat 'the wife of Mrida'. 
Vårt :-Of the words fex and 703, there is the augment sa in the sense of greatness. Thus farat 'a glacier, much snow', shtograf 'a great forest'. Otherwise these words are always Neuter and never take feminine. 
Vårt :-After the word ya barley' the feminine affix and the aug. ment are added in the sense of fault. The fault consists in its imitating barley 
. GOVERNME 
CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
संस्कृति मंत्रान 
सत्यमेव जयते 
11 
[ BK. IV. CH. Moto 
1774 275 
while not being a barley. In fact the word denotes a new and inferior sort of grain. Thus erat " a kind of grain, oat". 
Vårt :-After the word 947, the affix and the augment are added in the sense of handwriting. Thus erat 'the written character of the Yavanas 
Vårt :-Of the words pratos 'a maternal uncle', and syrare a pre ceptor, when the feminine affix comes to express the wife thereof, the augment 31+ is optional. Thus Agoraft or Arget the wife of a maternal uncle' s ararit or greatest 'the wife of a preceptor', 
Vart :--And there is not the change to the lingual or of the dental az of the augment आनुक (VIII. 4.2)after the word आचार्य | Thus आचार्यानी or B et the wife of a preceptor. 
Vårt :-After the words sp and nita this rule applies optionally : when the matrimonial relation is not intended but the word retains its own sense. Thus 37efruft or set the female of the Arya or Vaishyâ class', efteroft or after a female of the Kshatriya class'. When matrimonial relation is to be expressed, then only sro is added. As steif the wife of a Vaishya', erat 
the wife of a Kshatriya'. 
Várt :- In the Chhandas, the affix sta with the augment stralen is added to the word ; and the affix is treated as if it had an indicatory ! The force of the indicatory is to make the vowel preceding the affix, take the acute accent (VI. 1. 193 fara). Thus tefria Taf Tiger (Rig Veda X. 102. 2). 
sareanturgataIl go i Erê li prarat, ftu-yala, (feri sto) वृत्ति । कीतशब्दान्तात् प्रातिपदिकात् करणपूर्वात् स्त्रियां डीष् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
50 The affix sig is employed in the feminine after a compound word ending in shra, the first member of the compound being the name of the means wherewith the thing is bought. 
The word o n means that compound in which the afor or 'means' is the first member. Thus creare a female bought in exchange for cloth', so also takreft a female bought in exchange for dress'. 
Why do we say "when the first member of the compound is the mame of the means"? Observe grekrar 'well purchased', erritar 'ill-purchased'. But why is not the affixate employed in gartar in the following verse : सा हितस्यधनकीता प्राणेभ्योपि गरीयसी 'she purchased in exchange of riches is more dear to him than life. Here the word ala has first taken the affix era form 
GOVERNMENS 
ULTURE. 
STRY OF CU 
MINISTON 
IT OF INDIA 
si 
• 
BeTV CH. I. S. 52] 
हात मंत्रालय 
ing star and then this feminine word is compounded with The general rule is गतिकारकोपपदानां कृद्भिः सहसमासवचनं माक् सुबुत्पनेः “Gati, Karakas and Upapadas are compounded with bases that end with Kțit-affixes, before a case termination or a feminine affix has been added to the latter". The word u itar is an exception, founded on the diversity allowed by achtü ENTE 
m1 (II. 1. 32). 
तादल्पाख्यायाम् ॥ ५१॥ पदानि ॥ तादू, अल्पाख्यायाम्, (करणपूर्वात ङीष Fergi II 
वृनिः॥ करणपूवात्प्रातिपदिकात् नान्तदल्पाख्यायां डीए प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
51. The affix cho is employed after a compound Nominal-stem in which a name denoting the means wherewith, is the first member, and the second member is a word formed by the Participle t, when the sense is that of 'a small quantity'. 
The word ei tot gafat preceded by a noun denoting the means where with', of the last sûtra governs this also. The participle in the must be pre ceded by a noun in the instrumental case, and the sense conveyed by Fh, to the action should give the sense of little', in connection therewith. The seler 
L of the sûtra qualifies the whole word. Thus stufator: 'a sky covered slightly with clouds', Tafarret graft'a dish slightly covered with soup'. 
Why do we say when the sense is that of little'? Observe Torah DEVOT“ a Brâhmanî lady covered with sandal essence ?" 
agaie adigetET 11 42 11 Erfar Il Tgie:, T, Fa-seura, (ra FEAT ETC) | 
वृत्तिः ॥ बहुव्रीहिर्योऽन्तोदात्तस्तस्मात् स्त्रियां डी प्रत्ययो भवति ।।. वार्तिकम् ॥ अन्तोदात्ताजातप्रतिषेधः ॥ वा०॥ पाणिगृहीत्यादीनामर्थ विशेषे ॥ वा० ॥ अबहुनसुकाल सुखादिपूर्वानिति वक्तव्यम् ॥ 
52. The affix is employed in the feminine after that Bahuvrihi compound, which ending with a word formed by the affix o, has an acute accent on the last syllable. 
The word ital of the last aphorism governs this also. This sûtra applies to those Bahuvrihi compounds in which the first member is a svänga word. But if the antecedent member is not a svänga word, then the applica tion of the rule is optional. As safe ait 'having a rent on the temporal bone', reaft'having a rent on the thigh' eff (PTFACHTHEIT), charger 1 By II. 2. 36 Vârt surgaretleser: q , the Nishthâ stands in the second place, otherwise by II. 2. 36 it ought to have formed the first member of the 
GOVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
(GT 
(BK. IV. CH. 1.553 
7 
.11 
गिरल सरकार 
compound. The words i &c. are jâti words, and by VI. 2. 170, the acute is on the final. 
Why do we say "after a Bahuvrihi compound ?” Observe graaigar which is an Ablative Tatpurusha compound (11. 2. 38). The compounding is by II. 1. 32, and it has acute on the final by VI. 2. 144. 
Vårt :-Prohibition must be stated in the case of the participle in born', which is also acutely accented on the final. Thus ASTIAT a female who has cut her teeth ;' Tisitar a female whose breast has been developed'. See II. 2. 36 Vart. 
Vart:-In the case of words groteggiat &c, the affix is employed in certain senses only. Thus forretat'a wife'; (PETG TheIT:Tforu); but grfurtetar 'a woman whosc hands have been taken, but not before the sacred fire, a concubine &c.' 
Vårt:-Exception must be stated in the case of compounds, the ante. cedent member of which is any one of the following words :-5, 77, 8, words denoting time, Te &c. Thus Tigar, shar, Taal, tastar, TRETCFIAT, gurar or f:errar &c. 
Bahuvrihi compounds get acute accent on the final syllable when they fall under the rules VI. 2. 170 and the following. 
ET gelat 1143 11 qera ll 37-rain-generat, at, (alerta क्तात बहुव्रीहे. स्त्रियां ङीष्)। 
वृतिः॥ अस्वाङ्ग पूर्वपदादन्तोदात्तात् क्तान्ताद् बहुव्रीहेः स्त्रियां वा डीप प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ बार्तिकम् ॥ बहुलं संज्ञाछन्दसोरिति वक्तव्यम् ।। 
53. The affix is optionally employed in the feminine after a Bahuvrîhi compound ending in Fi, having acute accent on the final, the antecedent word not being a word denoting a part of the body. 
The words staTETTIIT and art govern this sútra. This aphorism lays down an option, where by the last aphorism, it would have been compul sory. Thus testa, is a word having acute accent on the final (VI. 2. 170), but as the first portion of this Bahuvrihi is not a Svânga word, but a jati word, its feminine will be शाजिग्धी or शाब्रजग्धा ।। So also पलाग्दुभक्षिती or पलाण्डु. भाक्षिता and सरापीती or सुरापीता ॥ 
Why do we say when the first member of the compound is not a svanga word'? Observe gjere, faff which admit of only one form, 
If the final is not acutely accented, the rule will not apply. As er and gear which are not acutely accented on the final (See VI. 
IRE 
GOVE 
COVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
Brony. CH. I, §. 54 ] 
JENT OF INDIAN 
Ste 11 
संस्कृति मंत्र 
सत्यमेव जयते 
2. 170), because the first member is a word denoting dress or 37 377, which is especially excepted from the scope of rule VI. 2. 170. 
Vårt:-Diversely in the Chhandas and in Names. As target or creat 
FaluargüIRITAL 119811 Elfa II Fellata, T, ETETI L, S TEMÀT7-3977, (ar ferui sî वृत्तिः ॥ स्वांगंयदुपसर्जनमसंयोगोपधं तदन्तात्यातिपाहिकात स्त्रियां डीए प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ अंगगावकण्ठेभ्य इति वक्तव्यम् ॥ ni 54. And the feminine affix he comes optionally after what ends with the name of a part of the body, when the word is a subordinate member in a compound, and has not a conjunct for its penultimate letter (i. e. the final s is not preceded by a double consonant). 
The Anuvritti of the words Teata, irrare-ritararat does not extend to this aphorism. But the anuvșitti of the word an optionally' does extend to this Sutra. Thus चन्द्रमुखी or चन्द्रमुखा, अतिकेशी or अतिकेशा ॥ The word भति केशा is a Tatpurusha compound meaning अतिक्रान्ता केशान, and केश is upasarjana by I. 2. 44 
Why do we say “what ends with the name of a part of the body"? Observe Tagar 'having much barley'. Why do we say "subordinate in a compound"? Witness ferer "without crest" (where the fact is not subor dinate or epithetical). Why do we say "not having a conjunct for its penulti. mate letter"? Witness Tolent, grafi 
Vårt :- This rule applies to a compound ending with the word T, TTT and as, though in all these, the penultimate is a double consonant. Thus 
ut or TANT; graft or TTTT, 
R ahuot or fest il The word FAPT has a technical meaning as given in the following verse : 
अयं मूर्तिमल्खाकं प्राणिस्थमविकारजम् । 
अतत्स्थं तबदृष्टं चेत् तेन चेत् तत्तथायुतम् ।। " A word denoting a thing which not being a fluid, is capable of being perceived by the senses because of its having a form, is svånga; it must exist in a living being, but not produced by a change from the natural state ; or though found elsewhere actually, had previously been known as existing in only a living being, or is found to have actually the same relation to the being it is in, as a similar thing has to a living being 
TURE • GOU 
COVERNMENT 
OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY ON 
NT OF INDIA 
सखम्ज 
यत 
डीए॥ 
[ BK. IV. CH. .. 
सालय भारत 
त सरकार 
नासिकोदरीष्टजयादन्तकर्णशृंगाञ्च ॥ ५५ ॥ पदानि ॥ नासिका-उदर-ओष्ठ जधा-दन्त-कर्ण-श्रृंगातू, च, (स्वांगात स्त्रियां वा डीए)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ नासिकायन्तामातिपादिकात स्त्रियां वा डीए प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ वार्चिकम् ॥ पुच्छाचति वक्तव्यम् ॥ वार्चिकम् ॥ कबरमणिविषशरेभ्योनित्यम् ।। वा०॥ उपमानापक्षाच पुच्छाच ॥ 
55. And the feminine e comes optionally after compounds ending with नासिका 'a nose,' उदर belly,' ओष्ठ 'lip' जंघा 'leg', दन्त a tooth', कर्ण 'ear', and Yङ्ग 'horn'." 
This is an exception to the last and the succeeding sûtra. Some of the words above given are either such which have a conjunct penultimate letter, and thus beyond the scope of IV. 1. 54; or they are polysyllabic words and thus covered by IV. I. 56. Though this rule is an exception to 54 and 56; yet it is qualified by IV. I. 57. Thus तुङ्गनासिका or तुगनासिकी, तिलोरी or तिलोतरा, बिम्बोष्ठी or बिम्बोष्टा, दघिजंघी or दीर्घजंघा, समदन्ती or समन्ता, चारुकर्णी or चारुकर्णा, तीक्ष्णशृङ्गी or तीक्ष्णशृङ्गा॥ 
Vart :--So also after the word पुच्छ 'tail'. As कल्याणपुच्छा or कल्याणपुच्छी ।। 
Vårt :-The affix nish comes necessarily and not optionally after compounds of पुच्छ with कबर, मणि, विष and शर | As, कबरपुच्छी a peahen मणिपुच्छी, विषपुच्छी, 'a scorpion' and शरपुच्छी॥ 
Vårt :-So also the feminine affix nish is necessarily employed after the words ye and gas when used as a simile or as objects of comparison. As उलूकपक्षी सेना, उलूकपच्छी शाला ।। 
नक्रोडादिबह्वचः ॥५६॥ पदानि ॥ न, कोड-आदि-बहु-अचः, (स्त्रियां ङीष)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ क्रोडाबन्तात् बह्वजन्ताच प्रातिपदिकात् स्त्रियां डीप प्रत्ययो न भवति ॥ 
56. The feminine affix Font does not come after a Nominal-stem which denoting a part of the body, belongs to the class HET 'the flank &c, of a horse', nor when the word is a stem of more than two syllables. 
The class als &c. is akriti-gana, that is a class of words constituted by usage. The following are some of the examples:-Asahar TETET, ETT खरा, कल्याणीखा, कल्याणवाला, कल्याणशफा, कल्याणगुदा, कल्याणघाणा॥ So also सुभगा, सगला, &c. Of the case where the word ispolysyllabic, the examples are सुजधना, पृथजघना, महाललाटा, ॥ The word क्रोडा is feminine itself, and in the Bahuvri hi the feminine sign of the first member is elided by pungvad-bhava, and its is shortened to me because it is an upasarjana (I. 2. 48), 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY ON 
ERNMENT OS 
BIOSV.CH. I. S. 60.] 
डीप्॥ 
1030 
सत्यमेव जयते 
कृति मंत्रा 
रसरकार 
सहन विद्यमानपूर्वाञ्च ॥५७॥ पदानि ॥ सह-न-विद्यमान-पूर्वातू, च, (स्त्रि यां ङीष् न) वृत्तिः ॥ सह नञ् विद्यमानइत्येवं पूर्वात् प्रातिपदिकात् स्त्रियां डीए प्रत्ययो न भवति ॥ 
57. The affix TT does not come in the feminine after a Nominal-stem denoting a part of the body, when the word is subordinate in a compound, preceded by the word FT 'with', नज 'not', or विद्यमान ' having'. 
Thus सकेशा, अकेशा विद्यमानकेशा ॥ So also सनासिका अनासिका or विद्यमान TITET II The last example shows, that the present rule governs also IV. I. 55 ante : as well as IV. I. 54 
नखमुखात्संज्ञायाम् ॥ ५८॥ पदानि ॥ नख-मुखातू, संज्ञायां, (स्त्रि वृत्तिः ॥ नखमुखान्तात्मातिपदिकात्संज्ञायां स्त्रियां विषये डीए प्रत्ययो न भवति । 
58. The feminine affix sta is not employed after नख, and मुख, when (the word at the end of which they stand) is a Name. 
Thus शूर्प + नखा,= शूर्पणखा, Surpanakha the sister of Ravana'. The न is changed into ण by VIII. 4.3(पूर्वपात् संज्ञायामगः ) ॥ So also वजणखा, गौरमुखा, कालमुखा &c. Why do we say when denoting a Name? Witness ताम्रमुखी कन्या 'a copper-faced damsel', or चन्द्रमुखी 'moon-faced 
दीर्घजिह्वी च छन्दसि ॥ ५९॥ पदानि दीर्घजिह्वी, च, छन्दसि ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ दीजिह्वी इति छन्दसिविषये निपात्यते ॥ 
T 59. The form दीर्घजीही 'long-tongued' is irregul arly formed in the Chhandas. 
The word दीर्घजीही is the feminine of दीर्घजीह but as the latter has a conjunct consonant for its penultimate, the feminine affix er would not have applied to it by IV. I. 54. The present aphorism enjoins & II Thus tiesire in the sentence दीर्घजीही वै देवाना हव्यमले। 
The word g 'and' in the aphorism is used in order to draw in the word UST from the last, so that the word dirgha-jihví is always a Name. Moreover by using the feminine form dîrgha-jîhvî in the sûtra, it is indicated that the application of is necessary and not optional, as was the case in the last sûtras. 
दिक्पूर्वपदान डीए ॥६०॥ पदानि ॥ दिक-पूर्वपदातू, डीए, (स्त्रियां)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ दिक् पूर्वपराप्रातिपदिकान डीप, प्रत्ययो भवति । 
60. The feminine affix डीप comes after a Nominal stem which is preceded by, a word signifying direction. 
RE • GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY OF 
T OF INDIA 
245 
[ BK. IV. CH. I. 392 
7 
. 
177 27 
17 
This aphorism over-rules all the rules and prohibitions contained in sätras 54 to 58. Whereever by those rules there would have been Âg, the present enjoins q instead. Though the form will be the same, the differ ence will be in the accent; the affix at being anudatta (III. 1. 4). Thus মাভী or সহজ, সাভাৰিজী or জানাবন্ধা, But not so in মান্ধা ; or মার্জীভ or grarear because these words do not take it (by IV. I. 56), therefore they never give occasion to the application of roll The sûtra ought to be read as if it contained two rules (1) the affix 19 comes after a compound the first member of which is a word denoting direction and the second is a svânga word or is the word a s &c. the penultimate not being a conjunct consonant, (2) but it is not added to Compounds ending in ars &c. or in a word of more than two syllables. In other words the søtra may be translated " is the substitute of at when the first member is a word denoting direc tion". Therefore the affix to will come only there, where else the affix t would have come and not otherwise. This is the reason why the anuvšitti of is taken in the next sâtra (IV. 1. 61) and not that of Ar! 
a : II & II Tra il are, ( ferri) वृत्तिः॥ वाहतात्मातिपदिकात् स्त्रियां ङीष् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
61. The feminine affix she comes after a Nominal stem ending with the word are il 
The anuvfitti of A is to be taken in this aphorism and not that of , though the latter was nearer. The word te is formed from the root ang with the affix foe (III. 2. 64). The word Te is never found alone, but as ends of compounds, hence we apply the rule of tadanta, and have translated it by saying a "word ending in vâh.” Thus faceret 'sustaining the demon. This form is thus evolved :-forca +976 +19=fącz +58 +972 +37 (VI. 4. 132 TTE TE, Uth is the samprasarana of vâh, when this is a bha)= 4+ 56+ (VI. 1. 108) org' after a samprasarana if a vowel follow, the form of the prior is the single substitute');=freare (VI. I. 89 regte 'vriddhi is the single substitute when eti, edhati or oth follow'). Similarly gret'a young heifer train. ing for the plough.' . 
ugrasátra ATTRA I RI Tall Feft-streeft, gra, nr II वृत्तिः ॥ सखी अशिधी इत्येतोशब्सडीषन्तौ भाषायां निपात्यते ॥ 
62. The forms fruit and atrásaft are irregular forms ending in af found in secular (or vernacular as opposed to (Vedic) Sanskrit. 
Thus erf ruft, and arfer: ferreale = wff # Why do we say 
ARE - GOVE 
VERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
T OF INDIA 
BK. IV. CH. I. S. 641 
डीए॥ 
in vernacular Sanskrit? Observe सखा सप्तपदी भव and अशिशुमिव मामयं शिशुराभिम न्यते॥ 
Sometimes we find these forms in the Vedas also, though rarely, as आधेनवो धुनयन्तामशिश्वी ।। सखी सप्तपदी भव ॥ 
जातेरखी विषयादयोपधात् ॥ ६३॥ पदानि ॥ जातेः, अस्त्रीविषयात, अयोप धातू, (स्त्रियां डीए) वृनिः॥ जातिवाचि यत्मातिपरिकं नच स्त्रियामेव नियतमस्त्री विषयमयकारोपधंच तस्मात् स्त्रियां डीप प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
वार्तिकम् ॥ योपधप्रतिषेधे य गवय मुकय मत्स्यमनुष्याणाम् प्रतिषेधः ॥ 
63. The feminine affix TT comes after a word denoting a jâti or species when it does not express in its original meaning a feminine, and which moreover has not the letter y for its penultimate. 
The word sfat was defined under Sûtra I. 2. 52. Thus m et 'a hen'; सूकरी 'a she-hog', ब्राह्मणी 'Brahmani'; वृषली 'a woman of the Sudra caste', नाडायनी 'a woman of Nadayana class', argoft 'a Chârâyani', anet 'a woman of Brahmans who read the Katha', Tieft 'a woman of the class of Brahmans who read the Rig Veda'. 
Why do we say "expressive of a játi”? Observe yog 'shaven' ( where the word expresses not a jâti but a quality). Why do we say "not invariably feminine"? Witness aferent 'a fly' (supposed to breed without a male). Why do we say "not having the letter Q for its penultimate?" Witness क्षत्रिया a female of the Kshatriya class'. 
Vart :-In excluding words that have the letter e as penulti mate, there is not involved the exclusion of the following words which have a penultimate य ) viz, गवय 'the Bos Gaveans', हय 'horse', मुकय 'a sort of ani mal', मत्स्य 'a fish', and मनुष्य 'a man'. Thus गवथी, हयी, मनुषी, (VI.4.150 इलस्तद्धि AF 'there is elision of the of a taddhita affix coming after a consonant when long ई follows') मत्सी॥ The Q of matsya is elided by the vartika मत्स्यस्य ज्याम्' See also VI. 4. 149. All these words are also included in the class गोरादि (IV. 1.41.) and would have taken er independently of this vârtika, 
Another definition of jati is :-- 
प्रावर्भावविनाशाभ्यां सत्वस्य युगपतगुणैः । 
असर्वलिंगां बह्वर्या तां जात कवयो विदुः ॥ (See translation under I. 2. 52) पाककर्णपर्णपुष्पफलमूलवालोत्तरपदाच ॥ ६४॥ पदानि पाक-कर्ण-पर्ण-पुष्प फल-मूल-चाल-उत्तरपदात्, च (स्त्रियां डी)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ पाकादि उत्तरपवाजातिवाचिनः प्रातिपतिकात स्त्रियां डीए प्रत्ययो भवति । पुष्पफलमूलोतरप दात तु यतानेष्यते तरजारिषु पन्यते ॥ यथा सत्याकाण्डमान्तशतकेभ्यः पुष्पान् ।। 
ORE - GOVE 
VERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY ON 
NT OF INDIA 
( 
THI 
कृति मंत्रालय 
[ BK. IV. CHADO . 66 
संभस्त्राजिनशण पिण्डेभ्यः फलात् ।। मूलान्ननः ।। 
64. And the feminine affix at comes after the Nominal-stem expressive of jâti, followed by the following, qon 'cooked', 'ear', qui leaf', goo 'flower', 75 fruit', 55 'root', and are 'youth'. 
Here the affix applies to words which in their original sense denoted females and therefore were not provided by the last sútra. Thus straurant rouif, s quif, sieguot, Freitna part, and Trail 
When, however the affix it is not intended to be applied to com pounds ending with , gc, and am, then those compouds will fall under Ajadi class (IV. 1. 4); such as 961, 375146T, ETTEIT, TFT &C. 
Cat E ata: 11 & Il quâ lla:, EltT-sıra:, (feuil वृतिः ।। इकारान्तात्यातिपदिकान्मनुष्यजातिवाचिनः स्त्रियां ङीष् प्रत्ययो भवति ।। वार्तिकम् ।। इन उपसंख्यानमजात्यर्थम् ।। 
65. The feminine affix 19 comes after a Nominal stem ending in short z denoting classes or races of men. 
Thus staat 'women of Avanti', at 'women of Kunti', reft Da kshi'. Thur 18 +597 (IV. 1. 171) 3119=e4l: 'men of Avanti'. In the fe minine this affix by IV. I. 176 is elided. Eteft "the female descendants of Plaksha". Why do we say "ending in short ? Witness faz 'Vaishya', yra Darat'. Why do we say “of men"? Witness aff: 'partridge'. Though the anuvritti of the word stra could have been read into this aphorism from IV. 1, 63, its repetition here indicates that ay is to be applied even when the penultimate letter is Q Thus औरमयी॥ 
Vart :- This rule applies to words ending in the taddhita affix (IV. 2. So ) though they do not denote a jati Thus figurat Arafat | The affix here referred to is the quadruply significant affix taught in IV. 2. 80 and ordained to come after a TH &c, and does not denote ä jâti. 
a: Il && I QET N 3.5, 3a:, (HEUTGITT: feu) 11 gfti i artreratera: Saya FETS TETT A II at ll ToerissareITAE ATELI 
66. After a Nominal-stem ending in short 3, not having the letter T as its penultimate letter, and being ex pressive of races of men, the affix in the feminine is e. 
The anuvșitti of the words custa and speirut should be read into the søtra to complete it. Thus it a female of the country of the Kurus 
a: "a Brahmani of the class of the fallen Brahmans so called", fratry: "a woman of the Jivabandhu class": URE • GOVE 
VERNMENTO 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
K OF INDIA 
B. IV. Ch. I. $ 68. ] 
Thus 3 + 2 = arroa: IV. 1. 172, and this affix is elided by IV. 1. 176 in the feminine. 
The indicatory letter in 3 is to distinguish this affix in Sutras like TEUTT: (VI. 1 175), for had the affix been enunciated merely as 5, then the Satra VI. 1. 175 would have run as of Erat and the sense would have been ambiguous, for we could not have known what affix was particularly meant there 
The long is taught to debar the affix ay, for a short 7 would have also given the form ai ( 376 +3=m) The long therefore, indicates that the affix , enjoined by V.4 154, in Bahuvrihis, will not apply in the feminine forms murau: and the like, by the rule of vipratishedha. 
Why do we say "not having the letter & as its penultimate"? Wit ness arouff 'a woman of the class of Brahmanas versed in the Yajur Veda'. 
Vårt:-The affix . comes under similar conditions after words denoting non-animate jati, except the words ts3 &c. Thus trg: 'the bottle gourd'; ht: 'the jujube tree.' Why do we say "non-animate"? Witness 
are: 'a kind of lizard.' Why do we say "except the word rajju &c." Witness (sy: 'rope'; 6: cheek' &c. 
बाहन्तात्संज्ञायाम् ॥ ६७ ॥ पदानि ॥ बाहु-अन्तात्, संज्ञायाम, (स्त्रियां ऊङ)॥ निः॥बाहुशब्दान्ता प्रातिपदिकात्संज्ञायां विषये स्त्रियामूङ् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
67. The feminine affix 55 comes in denoting a Name, after a Nominal-stem ending with the word ang Il 
Thus sans: 'Bhadrabâha'; S te: &c. Why do we say in "ex pressing a Name"? Observe Tag: 'a woman having rounded hand' which is an attributive word. In other words, when the compound is a name, s takes long in the feminine. 
agafell erat let, T, (ferat 58) fa: 1 Tem FTTT Yaara पार्तिकम् ॥ श्वसुरस्योकाराकारलोपश्च वक्तव्यः ।। 
68. The feminine affix e comes after the word 4T 'lame'. 
As got a female lame'. 
Vårt:--The feminine affix is added to nyet, and thereby there is elision of the letter and of the letter at of the word. As : 'mother-in law' This debars the punyoga Fe of IV. I. 48. 
RE 
GOVED 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
सिकति मंत्रा 
सत्यमेव जयते 
तसा 
[ BK. IV. CH. 1. 572 
ऊकत्तरपदादौपम्ये ॥ ६९॥ पदानि ।। ऊरु-उत्तरपदातू, औपम्ये॥ वृत्तिः ॥ जरूजरपदात्प्रातिपदिकादोपश्ये गम्यमाने स्त्रियामूङ् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
69. The feminine affix he comes after a stem end ing in a when comparison with something (expressed by the first term) is meant. 
Thus कवलास्तम्भोरू: a female with thighs like plantain-stem'. नाग नासोरू: 'a female with thighs like the nose of an elephant'; करभोरूः 'a female with thighs like the ulnar or tapering fleshy side of the hand. 
Why do we say "when expressing an object of comparison"? Wit ness वृत्तोरूः स्त्री'a woman with round thighs. The word करेणुकरोरु "thigh like the proboscis (कर) of an elephant (करेणु)" is a poetic irregularity in the following विचकर च करेणुकरोराभिः॥ 
सहितशफलक्षणवामादश्च ॥ ७॥ पदानि ॥ सहित, शफ, लक्षण, वामादेःच॥ वृत्तिः ॥ संहित शफ लक्षण वाम इत्येवमादेः प्रातिपदिकादूरूचरपदात् स्त्रियामङ प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ वार्षिकम् ॥ सहितसहाभ्यां चति वक्तव्यम् ॥ 
70 The feminine affix 35 comes in the Vedas after the word ऊरु when the words सहित 'accompanied or joined', शफ 'a hoof', लक्षण amark,' and वाम handsome' precede it. 
This aphorism applies, when no comparison is intended. As áreare: 'a female whose thighs are joined (e.g. from obesity).' शफोरू: 'whose thighs are put together like the two hoofs on a cow's foot,' लक्षणोरू: whose thighs are marked,' arats: 'with handsome thighs.' 
Vart:-So also with the words सहित and खह. As सहितोरू: and सहोरूः॥ कट्टकमण्डल्वोश्छन्दसि ॥ ७१ ॥ पदानि ॥ कदु, कमण्डल्वोः, छन्दसि॥ वृत्तिः॥ कशब्दात्कमण्डलुशब्दाच्च छन्दसि विषये स्त्रियामूड प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ गुग्गुलुमधुजतुपतथालूनामिति वक्तव्यम् ।। 
71. The feminine affix 55 comes in the Vedas after the words कट्ठ 'tawny, and कमण्डलु a water pot.' 
Thus कश्चवै सुपर्णी च ॥ मास्मकमण्डलू शूद्राय स्यात् ।। 
Why do we say “ in the Vedas." Witness कद्र : and कमण्डलुः ॥ 
Vart :-So also after the words गुग्गुलु, मधु, जतु and पतयालु : ॥ Thus गुग्गलूर, मधू:, जतू :, and पतयालूः ।। 
संज्ञायाम् ॥७२॥ पदानि ॥ संज्ञायाम्। वृतिः॥ कडकमण्डलुशवाभ्यां संज्ञायां विषये स्त्रियामूङ प्रत्ययो भवति । अच्छन्दोथ वचनम् ।। 
72. The feminine affix ऊङ comes in denotinga Name, after the word कदु and कमण्डल. 
URE - Gove 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
JERNMENT . 
OF INDIA 
BEAV.CH. I. $ 73.] 
tau 
सत्यमेव जयते 
सरकार 
This rule applies to other than Vedic forms. Thus er: 'a female named Kadrû wife of Kaśyapa', E: 'Kamandala'. Why do we say "in denoting a Name"? Observe 3: 'the tawny color.' 4 5m: 'a water-gourd.' 
TESTETT II 13 | UGT I SEG, TET:, GTT II EFT: 1ESATE=isyahat trianreza: fedi 17 ezit te u 
73. The feminine affix feat comes after the words Fra and the rest, and that which ends with the affix 9757 II 
Thus triaft. a Sarngrava woman', creet 'a Kapatava woman'. So also after a word formed with the affix 3 (as ordained in S. 86, and 104 &c. of this chapter), as, an 'a female descendant of Bida'. stráf 'a female des cendant of Urva'. This sûtra applies to words expressing jâti or kind. In other words, this aphorism debars the affix gry of IV. 1. 63 &c. where it came after jâti-vâchaka words; but it does not debar that a which is employed in describing the relation of wife, such as, the sic of IV. 1. 48. 
The difference between stand sta consists in accent only, the resultant forms otherwise being the same. The words formed by ata will have udåtta accent on the first syllable for cynieria (VI. 1. 197 a word end ing with an affix having an indicatory or has udatta accent on the first syllable') : while the word formed by ste will have acute accent on the affix. Thus are a female descendant of Bida', and 'the wife of Baida'. 
The following is a list of Sârngaravādi class words: 
I unitat, 2 fil929, 3 prouca, 4 OTETU, 5 , 6 Taa | These words are formed by the affix stor the first four being formed by the stor of (IV. 1. 83 ) from शंगरु, कपटु, गुग्गुलु and ब्रह्मन् ; the word गौतम is formed from गोतम by the etut Of IV. I. 114. This word is also included in Gaurâdi class IV. 1. 41.7 hogosu, 8 HELT, 9 SATI, 10 STIHEIII ərarenal These are formed by 
(IV. I. 123) except kâmandaleya which is formed by <A (IV. 1. 135). 12 TERZITET, 13 552 II These are formed by 5 of IV. 1. 101 and IV. 1. 99, and denote castes or Gotra. 14 hangter is also formed by T (IV. 1. 123). 15 104 16 शव्य are formed by ज्या (IV. I. ITI). 17 एहि, 18 पर्येहि are formed by इन added to st+'to try', and The +377 + 8 (Uņ IV. 117 € era275) 19 971Pateg is for med by (IV. 1. 105). 20 sirara is formed by T (IV. 3.76). 21 %, 22 T51M, 23 7905: are jâti words. 24 aprrat, 25 TITAT W These take it when denoting a Name. These words are formed by the affix Harg, and are conse quently for, and should have taken Arg (IV. 1. 6). This ordains sia 
Q. The word viror is formed by and t is formed by E (IV. I. 95), both are âdyuddatta owing to s (VI. 1. 197). When aT is added, the accent remains unchanged, for matup being ma is anudatta (1. 1. 4). There 
ARE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
ENT OF INDIA 
[BK. IV. CH. Uşk74 
स्कृति मंत्रालय 
सवमवजयते 
* 
fore whether sig be added or fr to these words, it makes no difference in the accent, for they remain adyudatta. Where is the necessity of including these two words in this list. 
Ans. To this we reply sieg Free Fara For had these words taken at of IV. 1. 6, then the long $ would have been optionally shortened before the affixes Et &c. by VI. 3. 45. But by taking siq the shortening is compulsory (VI. 3. 43), and not optional. Because the or in the sûtra sro (VI. 3.45) has the force of the word ara, and means the new words formed by adding to gra words, by enunciating the word grita are optionally shortened. Therefore IV. 1. 6 where the word gita is used is governed by this rule of optional shortening, and not the words formed by si ti 
26 7 27 TT. The word would have taken to by IV. I. 5, and 7 would have taken as it denotes a jâti. These words take vșiddhi before Ha, the form being tre in both cases. 
TEST | 04 | Teta ) 5., TTY II वृत्तिः ॥ यङन्ताप्रातिपदिकात् स्त्रियां चाप् प्रत्ययो भवति । ज्या ज्यश्च सामान्यग्रहणमेतत् ।। 
IITE 26: II 
74. The feminine affix ag coms after a stem which is formed by the affix ज्यङ् or ज्यङ्॥ 
The affix 5 here denotes and includes both the affixes ses (as taught in S. 171 of this chapter) and 675 (See 78) as it is the common element of both. Thus maar 'a woman of the race of Ambashthya', aratat 'a woman of the race of Sauvirya', een a woman of the race of Kausalya'. 
Similarly व्यङ formed words, as, कारीषगन्ध्या, वाराह्या; बालाक्या। 
Vart: The affix y comes in the feminine after a word ending with the affix or when the letter immediately precedes such yan. As teraz 'a female descendant of Sarkaraksha', maaar'a female descendant of Patima shya', Trente a female descendant of Gokasha'. These words belong to Gargâdi class (IV. 1. 105), and by sutra 16 would have taken til 
The of the affix te is for the sake of forming a common term with any and art ; and the regulates the accent making the final acute (VI. I. 163). The word aga is included in Kraudâdi list (IV. 1. 80) and takes the augment was in the feminine, and hence it would have taken are by force of the present sutra and need not be included in the Vartika. There is no Samprasarana of the 3 when ger or fa is added to this word (VI. 1. 13), the form being trentaargt: and not eget a 
STRITT II Del Tefa II TTSATT, T, (famig)# वृन्तिः ॥ भावव्याध नियां चाप् प्रत्ययो भवति।। 
PURE - GOVE 
GOVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY ON 
ENT OF INDIA 
उस्कृति मंत्रालय 
--CH. I. 878.] 
TADDHITA-AFFIXES. 
मालय ,भारत 
75. And the feminine affix ETT comes after the word आवट्य॥ 
The word wat belongs to Gargâdi class (IV. 1. 105) which after taking य, would have taken डीए (IV. I. I6). Thus आवश्या 'a female descendant of Avata'. But staregrerat will be the proper form according to the Eastern Grammarians. See aphorism IV. 1. 17. 
तद्धिताः ॥७६॥ पदानि ॥ तद्धिताः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ अधिकारोऽयम् । आपञ्चमाध्यायपरिसमाप्तयाँनित ऊर्ध्वमनुक्रमिण्यामस्तद्धितसंज्ञास्ते वेदितव्याः॥ 
76. The Taddhita-affixes are treated of here after. 
This is an adhikâra or govering sútra. Up to the end of the Fifth Book, all the affixes that will be taught, are to be understood to have the name of Taddhita. Thus the affix fa taught in the very next sútra. As युवतिः. The word so formed is called Pratipadika. The word तद्धिताः is in the plural number, and not exhibited in the singular, like the words प्रत्ययः (III. I. I) &c; and it, therefore, indicates that it includes also affixes which are not especially taught in this book. Such as पृथिव्य आनौ ॥ अग्रादि पश्चाद् डिमच् ॥ As पार्थिव, अग्रिम, आदिम, पश्चिम | See Vart IV. 3. 23. The word Taddhita is used in Satras like कृतद्धितसमासान I. 2. 46. 
यूनस्तिः ॥ ७७॥ पदानि ॥ यूनः, ति॥ वृत्तिः ॥ युवनशब्दामातिपदिकात् स्त्रियां निःप्रत्ययो भवति । स च तद्धितंतज्ञो भवति ॥ 
77. The feminine affix fã comes after the Nominal stem gert and this affix gets the name of Taddhita. 
As gara: 'a young maid'. By IV. 1. 5, she would have been other wise employed, the present sätra debars it. The word yait ending in g does not take the affix of IV. 1.65, for the affix fer itself is a feminine-making affix though a Taddhita: or the word y may be regarded as a non-jati word and hence IV. 1. 65 would not apply. 
अणिोरनार्षयोर्गुरूपोत्तमयोः व्यब् गोत्रे ॥ ७८॥ पदानि ॥ अण् होः अना योः, गुरुपोत्तमयोः, व्यङ्, गोत्रे ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ गोने यावणिनी विहितावनाषौं तरन्तयोः प्रातिपरिकचोर्गुरूपोशमयोः खियां ष्यडादेवो भवति । निर्दिश्यमानस्यादेशा भवन्तीत्यणिमोरेव विज्ञायते ॥ उत्तमशब्दः स्वभावात् निप्रभृतीनामन्त्यक्षरमाह उत्तमस्थ 
समीपमुपोचम, गुरुः उपोत्तमं यस्य तद्गुरूपोसमं प्रातिपदिकम् ।। 
78. In Patronymics used in a narrower sense (counting first from the grand-child), which are formed with the affixes stur and a, the feminine is formed by substituting 
RE-GOVE 
VERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
• संस्कृति मंत्रा 
GJE 11 
[ BK. IV. CH. 1. 379 
PERE 
रत सरकार 
(43) for the hand of those affixes and adding the long STT under IV. 1. 74; provided that they do not denote Rishi clans, and have a prosodially long syllable preceding the last syllable, 
The wording of this aphorism requires a little analysis. It consists of five words: (1) STUST: 'of spot and 8' (2) Target: 'of non-rishi' (3) Tea Ortar: 'having a heavy vowel as upottama i. e. last but one,' (4) 65 'the sub stitute is shyan' (5) 'in denoting gotra.' That is to say, the gotra affixes pro and get are replaced by cys before the feminine affix y, in those words which denoting non-rishi gotras, have a heavy vowel as last but one. The word uttama meaning last letter, being formed by the superlative affix tamap, implies that the word must be of at least three syllables. Therefore, the pre sent sâtra does not apply to forms like erret &c. . 
Of the substitute out the letter or and are indicatory, the real affix is a, the letter differentiating this affix from it and the letter & affording a common hold for both. In forming the feminine we shall have to add y by IV. 1. 74. Thus antrazt having the smell of dung-cake', is the name of a person. In forming a patronymic from this word, we add the affix sur 1 
Thus antea +STO (IV.1.92) Replace this affix by sy and we have 
n o II * : gives us Tapia II Similarly with words taking the affix € (as taught in sutra अतइञ् IV. 1.75): as वाराहि gives us वाराह्या, so also बालाक्या ।। 
Why do we say 'of stor and t'! Witness & CoT from a HITT II Here the word TTTT belongs to freire gana, and therefore by IV. 1. 104, it would take the affix stat in forming gotra patronymic: this affix 872t is not replaced by 5, and the feminine is by long (IV. 1. 15); for though, its last vowel but one is heavy, it is a non-rishi gotra word, yet it does not fulfil the other condition of taking the affix sur or 
Why do we say of non-rishi gotras'? Witness queret and anaeft i Why do we say 'whose last vowel but one is heavy'? Observe siquiat and arreau Why do we say 'denoting Gotra ?' Witness stie egoft born in Ahi chhatra', fuchsit born in Kanyakubja. 
गोत्रावयवात् ॥ ७९ ॥ पदानि ॥ गोत्र-अवयवातू (स्त्रियां प्या)। वत्तिः ॥ अणिमारित्येव । गोत्रावथवा गोत्राभिमतः कुलाख्याः पुणिकभुणिकमखरमभतय, स्ततो गोत्रे वि हितयोरणिोः खियां ध्यादेशो भवति । 
79. After a word denoting a non-principal gotra, is the substitute of u and or, in the feminine, even though the syllable preceding the final be not prosodially long. 
URE • GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
SL 
BEPV.CH. I. 581] 
व्यड्॥ 
सस्कृति मंत्राल 
सचमव जयते 
तिसरकार 
The phrase अणिजोः of the last sutra governs this also, not so, however, the word अगरूपोचमः ॥ The phrase गोत्रावयव means insignificant or non-famous gotras. i.e. names of kulas i. e. कुलाख्या, such as families like पुणिक, भाणक, मुखर which are not famous and are not included in the gotra list. Thus ftruerer, भौणिक्या and मौखर्या ॥ 
The word stage in the sûtra has various significations, one sense being separate from', another being part of', and 'individual members' &c. If the last sense be taken, then we can evolve forms like देवदच्या याज्ञरत्या ॥ These forms may also be explained by taking them as belonging to the alzare class of the next aphorism. In short, those who wish to apply this aphorism to 'the immediate descendant', such as the son or daughter', and not to a gotra descendant, which means a grandson and down ; can also do so. 
In fact the word गोत्रावयव is equal to अवयवगोत्र or अप्रधानगोत्र and is a karmadharaya samasa, namely gotras not enumerated in the प्रवराध्यायः॥ These are, however. technically called कुल ॥ 
क्रौड्यादिभ्यश्च ॥ ८०॥ पदानि ॥ कौडि-आदिभ्यः, च, (स्त्रियां ष्यङ्) वृत्तिः ॥ कौडि इत्येवमादिभ्यश्च स्त्रियां ष्यड् प्रत्ययो भवति । अगुरूपोतमार्थ आरम्भः । अनणिमर्थक्ष ।। 
80. The affix cre comes in the feminine after the words siis and the rest. 
This rule applies even where the syllable next to the final is not heavy, and even where the word does not take the affix Spor Or Tor 11 In fact tug is not a substitute here but an augment. Thus tsar a female Krauļi", लाडवा 'a female Ladi'. The following is the list of Kraudadi words : TAI कौडि, 2 लाडि, 3 व्याडि, 4 आपिशालि, 5 आपक्षिति. These are formed by इस (IV. I.9526 चौपयत, चैटयत (वैटयत), 8 सेकयत (शकयत)9 वैल्वयत (वैकल्पयत्), These are formed by the affix TOT I 10 arrafar. This is formed by with the substitute अकङ् (IV. I. 97) added to सुधात ॥ II सतयुवत्थाम् The word सूत takes व्यङ् when denoting a grown-up maiden as सूत्याः ; otherwise सूता' daughter', formed by दाए, or सूती by डी denoting a jati. I2 भोज क्षत्रिये ॥ This debars डीए of jati as भोज्याः , otherwise arm as भोजाः(भोजयति). 13 चौतकि, 14 कोटि, 15 भोरिकी, 16 भौलिकि, 17 शाल्मलि, 18 शालास्थलि, 19 कापिष्ठलि, 20 गौकश्य (गौलक्ष्य)। All these except the last are formed by , the last is formed by up of Garg adi class. 
दैवयशि शौचिवृक्षि सात्यमुनि काण्ठेविद्धिभयो, ऽन्यतरस्याम् ॥ ८१॥ पदानि ।। 
दैवयशि, शौचिवृक्षि, सात्यमुनि, काण्ठेविद्धिभ्यः, अन्यतरस्याम्॥ वृत्तिः । देवयक्षि शौचक्षि सात्यमानि काण्ठेविद्धि इत्येतेषामन्यतरस्यांज्या प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
81. The affix 64g optionally comes after the words देवयशि, शौचक्षि, सात्यमुनि and काण्ठेविद्धि 
REGOVS 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
T OF INDIA 
(CT (BK. IV. CH. 1982 
PREDE 
A RULE OF TADDHITA 
तिसरकार 
These words end in the affix , and the word gotra is not understood in the sútra. In the case of gotra descendants, the substitute shyan would have come by IV. 1.78. but whereas by that sätra it would have been com pulsory, the present aphorism makes it optional. But if the satra be taken to apply to immediate descendants' as opposed to gotra descendants, then this is a new rule altogether and not a rider to IV. 1. 87. In the alternative when 
5 is not added, te will be added by rule IV. 1. 65 ante. Thus aurat or qazit, so also airagear or diferent, freegal or preta, torent or postarat 11 
Fetai TeAET II 11 TETT II FACET, TETATC, a II वृत्तिः ॥ प्रथमप्यधिक्रियते, समर्थानामिति च, प्रथमारिति च वेति च, स्वार्थिकमत्ययावधिश्चायमधिकारः। प्रागदिशो विभक्तिरिति यावत् । स्वार्थिकेषु यस्योपयोगो नास्ति, विकल्पोपि तवानवस्थितः, के चिन्नित्यमे व भवन्ति । लक्षणवाक्यानि:-तस्थापत्यं, तेन रक्तं रागात, तजभव, इत्येवमादीनि भविष्यन्ति । तेषु सामथ्य सति प्रधमनिर्दिष्टादेव विकल्पेन प्रत्ययो भवतीति वेरितव्यम् । समानामिति निर्धारणे षष्ठी। समर्थानां मध्ये प्रथम प्रत्ययप्रकृतित्वेन निर्धार्यते।। 
82. The Taddhita affixes, on the alternative of their being employed at all, come after the word that is signified by the first of the words in construction in an aphorism. 
All the three words, viz. (1) marfat of the words in construction' (2) guara "after the first ; (3) a 'on the alternative', exert a governing in fluence on the subsequent aphorisms, up to the aphorisms which leave to the words their own denotation : that is to say, up to the end of the second chapter of the fifth Book ; before the beginning of the sâtra quesit Farm (V. 3. I). The present sútra as a whole, of course, has no applicability to the affixes which leave to the words their own denotation (Fala); for the latter affixes are in many cases compulsory and not optional, as are the affixes to be taught hereafter in Book Fourth and the first and second chapters of Book Fifth. 
These affixes will come after the word, that is signified by the first of the words in construction, in an aphorism. Thus IV. 1. 92 declares TEUT veug his son'. Here the first word is met 'his', therefore, the affixes forming the patronymics will come after the word signified by his': i.e. after the word in the genitive case. As 'quirigeirsing 'the son of Upagu'. Here the affix er comes after the word Tou which is the first word representing tasya" in the genitive case in the sentence zicea ni Similarly in the sutra Terra (IV.2.1); here the first word is , therefore, the affix will be added to the word in the instrumental case in a sentence representing the word ma by which', as TETT * = 1972, 'Kashaya is a cloth, coloured 
URE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
AT OF INDIA 
SL 
SIV. CH. I. 5. 83 ] 
STUT 11 
सरकृति मंत्रा 
2 
.75 
by Kashaya'. Similarly in sûtra 77 7: there staying' (IV. 3. 53.) here the first word is at, there', in the locative case, therefore the affix will be option ally added to the word in the locative case in a sentence, representing the word at 'there': as an 17:= ara:"who stays in Srughna'. 
The word erara is the genitive plural of alf, and the force of the genitive is that of specification or ‘nirdharaña':-i. e. 'among the words in construction, the first is specifically pointed out as the prakriti or base, to which the affix is to be added'. Why do we say "among the words in con struction"? Witness 2 Ting TFT the blanket of Upagu; the son of Devadatta'. Here the two words stiintei are not in construction, for उपगोः governs कम्बलः, and अपत्य is governed by देवदत्तस्य॥ Why do we say “after the first"? So that the affix may come after the first word qır: in the genitive case, and not after 379ct which is in the nominative case, Why do we say " in the alternative"? Because the same idea may also be express ed by a sentence ; thus we may say TriTe', instead of the Taddhita formed word 31144: 11 The same idea may also be expressed by a compound word (samâsa); as 39599h 'the son of Upagu'. In fact, the samâsa rule here is not superseded by Taddhita-rule, as it otherwise would have been by I. 4 2. because the anuvșitti of Bratara is understood here : so that in the alter native when the Taddhita affix is not employed, the samâsa rules will find scope. 
This sûtra has been thus rendered by Dr. Bohtlingk: " when hence forth the meaning is specified in which an affix is to be added, then one should know that the rule applies to the first of those words which are associated with one another in sense, and that the affix is optional”. 
प्रादिव्यतोऽण् ॥ ८३॥ पदानि ॥ प्राक् , दीव्यतः अण् ॥ वृत्तिः ।। प्राग्रीव्यत्संशब्दनाद थानत अर्वमनुक्रमिष्यामोऽप्रत्ययस्तत्र भवतीति वेदितव्यम् ।। 
83. The affix yu should be understood to come after whatever we shall teach hereafter upto the aphorism tena dîvyati &c. 
Up to aphorism IV. 4. 2, the affix 370 has a governing influence, except where it is specifically superseded by any particular rule. This aphorism may be looked upon either as an adhikâra sâtra or a paribhâshâ sâtra or a 
vidhi sútra. The application of this aphorism will be illustrated throughout the next three chapters. Thus in IV. 1. 92 TEATTEETT we read the present aphorism and add the affix to in the sense of his son'. As fiqra: 'the son of उपगुः'; कापटवः 'the son of Kapatu'. 
This affix has various meanings, such as, a patronymic (IV. 1. 02), 
CURE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
av OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
• संस्कृति मंत्रा 
NYA. 
[ BK. IV, CH. 1. s. 
रित सरकार 
coloured with (IV. 2. I), sidereal time (IV. 1. 3), revealed sâma-veda (IV. 1. 7), covered car (IV. 2. 10) &c. 
अश्वपत्यादिश्यश्च ॥ ८४॥ पदानि ॥ अश्वपत्यादिश्यः, च ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ अश्वपत्यादिभ्यः प्रातिपदिकेभ्यः माग्दीव्यतीयेष्वर्थेष्वण् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
84. The affix stu comes after the Nominal-stems agvapati' &c, in the various mentioned senses taught anteced ently to tena divyati &c. 
This is an exception to the next aphorism, by which the affix og would have come after words ending with 'pati. The present sâtra enjoins अण् instead. Thus अश्वपति+अण् = आश्वपतम् (VII. 2 II7 तद्धितेष्वचामारे when a Taddhita affix follows with an indicatory or u, there is vșiddhi in the room of the first vowel among the vowels'). The r of पति is elided by VI. 4. 148 यस्योंति च where long ई follows, and when a Taddhita affix follows, there is eli sion of the r or ई, or a or आ, of a blha'.) 
The following is a list of words belonging to sugeance class : 
1 अश्वपति, 2 ज्ञानपति, 3 शतपति, 4 धनपति, 5 गणपति, 6 स्थानपति, 7 यज्ञपति, 8 राष्ट्रपति, 9 कुलपति, 10 गृहपति, (पशुपति) 11 धान्यपति, 12 धन्वपति, 13 बन्धुपति, 14 धर्मपति, 15 सभापति, 16 प्राणपति, 17 क्षेत्रपति ।। 
दित्यदित्यादित्यपत्त्युत्तरपदापण्यः ॥ ८॥ पदानि ॥ दिति, अदिति, आदित्य, प ति-उत्तरपदातू, ण्यः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ दिति अदिति आदित्य इत्येतेभ्यः पत्युत्तरपदाच प्रातिपस्किात्याग्दीव्यतीयेष्वर्थेषु ण्यः प्रत्ययो भवति।। 
वात्तिकम् ।। यमाचेति वक्तव्यम् ॥ वार्चिकम् ॥ वाङ्मतिपितृमतां छन्दस्युपसंख्यानम् ।। वार्तिकम् ॥ पृथिव्या भाजी ॥ वार्षिकम् ॥ देवायसनी॥ वार्चिकम् ॥ बहिषाष्टिलोपश्च ॥ वार्निकम् ।। ईककच ॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ ईकन छन्दसि॥ बार्तिकम् ।। स्थानोकारः॥ वार्चिकम् ॥ लोमोपत्येषुबहषु ॥ वार्चिकम् ।। सर्वत्र गोरजादिप्रत्ययप्रसङ्गे यत् ।। वार्चिकम् ॥ ण्यारयोर्थविशेषलक्षणादपवादात्पूर्वविप्रतिषेधेन ॥ 
85. The affix to comes, in the various senses taught here-in-after antecedently to tena dîvyati &c, after the Proper Names, Diti, Aditi, and Aditya ; and that which has the word aa at its final member. 
Thus ferater to the son of Diti.' stract: 'the descendant of Aditi', आदित्यम् ' sacred to Aditya. Similarly with words ending with पति, as प्रजापति प्रय-प्राजापत्यं ; so also सेनापत्यम् ॥ 
Vart:-Soalso after the word यम;as, थाम्यम् ।। 
Virt:--In the Chhandas, after the words वाच, मति and पितृमत् ।। As वाच्यम् (Vs, 13,58.) मात्यम् and पैतृमत्यम् ।। URE • GOVE 
GOVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY ON 
NT OF INDIA 
1. BOV. CH. I. S. 85] 
ta 10 
सत्यमय जयत 
9. 
ल सरकार 
Vatr :-The affixes 37 and 3 come after the word great w Thus yreret +37=uita; great +372 = qtfira 11 The resulting forms are the same, but the feminine of the former will be rear by IV. 1. 4, and that of the latter great applying IV. 1. 15. 
Vårt :- The affixes and si come after the word aa 'a god'. As सेव्यम् or देवम् 'divine'. 
Vårt :--There is elision of the fe of afg, and there is the affix g; as afga+TL= ET: 'external'. Vårt :--and the affix it may be employed. As afgTT + $777=arta: 'external'. (VII. 2. 118 Fanta T, there is vriddhi of the first vowel when the Taddhita affix has an indicatory a). Vårt :-In the Chhandas it takes the affix hy as atien: the difference being in the accent (VI. 1. 197). 
The word azt is an srozat, and the above vârtika declares that its fè portion is elided. This very fact indicates by implication, that the fe of other Avyayas need not necessarily be elided before those affixes, before which the base is called T bha. In fact the following vårtika urma (the fe of the avyaya base is elided) given under sàtra VI. 4. 144 (the fe of the base bha is elided when a taddhita affix follows) is not a universal rule. Thus from the avyaya strut we get arrat &c; here the sê is not elided. 
Vart :-Of the word Feraz the fe is replaced by st as STUTEYTA: 11 
Vårt :-The fè of ha is replaced by st in the plural when the patro nymic affixes follow; as grirar, TTAT: U Why do we say in the plural number? Witness sigana:, FIA: (IV. 1. 99). 
Vårt :-When an affix beginning with a vowel presents itself after the word , let the affix za be substituted for it. Thus what is descended (or produced, &c) from it is expressed by seun (VI. 1. 79). Why do we say ' beginning with a vowel'? Ovserve गो-यो हितं or आगतं = गोरूप्यम् and गोमयम् ।। 
Vårt :-These affixes ou &c, taught in this sûtra will come to the exclusion of all the other affixes hereinafter taught, which are employed in especial senses. Thus stor is employed especially to denote a descendant. But after the words rera &c stor will not be employed, but out, as ea" a descendant of तिति'. So also वानस्पत्यम् = (वनस्पतीनाम् समुहः), to the exclusion of IV.2.2016 In fact the rule fagrar qichitatu (I. 4. 2) does not hold good here. 
If that be so, how do you explain the forme: ! This word is not directly formed from the word rera but from fecit, the feminine of the word fara, formed by the affix sty (IV. I. 45, the word rera being formed by the Krit 
and therefore it will take sit in the feminine). To the feminine word found is added u and we get cas ll The Paribhasha safas 
fare 
(a rule of grammar which applies to a masculine applies also 
IRE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
अ 
॥ 
[ BK. IV. CH 
सत्यमेव जयते 
सरकार 
to the same word in the feminine) is not of universal application, as this very illustration shows. Others consider the form 79 as incorrect, as not to be found either in the Mahâbhâshya or any Vârtika. 
उत्सादिश्योऽज्ञ ॥८६॥ उत्स-आदिभ्यः, अञ ।। वृत्तिः॥ उत्सादिभ्यः प्राग्दीव्यतीयेष्वर्येष्वा प्रत्ययो भवति । अणस्तरूपवादानां च बाधकः ॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ ग्रीष्मादच्छन्दसीति वक्तव्यम् ॥ 
86. The affix 7 comes after the word JEH &c. in the various senses taught antecedently to tena-dîvyati &c. 
This debars the affix stor taught in IV. 1. 83 as well as the especial affixes here-in-after taught. Thus उत्स+मझ = औत्सः, औरपानः ॥ The following is the list of words belonging to gain class. 
1 उत्स, 2 उदपान, 9 विकर, 4 विनद,5 महानद 6 मदानस, 7 महामाण, 8 तरुण, 9 तलुन । 10 वष्कयासे। 11 पृथिवी, 12 धेनु, 13 पंक्ति, 14 जगती, 15 त्रिष्टुप्, 16 अनुष्टभ, 17 जनपद, 18 भरत, 19 उशीनर, 29 ग्रीष्म, 21 पीलुकुण, । 22 उत्स्थान देशे । 23 पृष 
श, 24 भल्लकीय, 25 रथन्तर, 26 मध्यदिन, 28 बृहत, 28 महत, 29 सत्त्वत, 39 कुरु, 31 पञ्चाल, 32 इन्द्रावसान, 33 उष्णिह, 34 ककुम, 35 सुवर्ण, 35 देव, 37 ग्रीष्मावच्छन्दसि ॥ 
Vårt :--The word och in the above list, takes this affix, when it does not mean'a metre of prosody'. Therefore it is not so here : #saft fegg. The Graishmi Tristup metre'. But श्रेष्मः ‘belonging to summer. The word छन्दस here means 'metre', and not Veda. The word बष्कयाऽसे-बष्कय असे, the phrase असे meaning असमासे, (स being the name given to समास by Ancient Gram marians). Thus the compound will be गोबष्कयिः॥ The Paribhasha अहणवता प्रातिपदिकेन तरन्त विधिप्रतिषेधः does not apply here. Therefore, tadantavidhi ap plies here and we have आधनवम् (अधेनूनाम् समूहः)॥ The word उदस्थान takes अञ् when meaning a 'place': as SİTEEYTETT : ; otherwise strefyra: 'the son of Udasthana. The word yaa takes 97 when meaning a share,' otherwise it will take अण, as पार्षतोडशः॥ 
स्त्री प्रसाश्यां नञ् नजी भवनातू॥८७॥ वत्तिः ॥ धान्यानां भवने इति वक्ष्यति । तस्य प्रागित्यनेनैव संबन्धः प्रागभवनसंशब्दनार्थास्तेषु ती शु. वात्सूशब्दाच यथाक्रम नझसजी प्रत्ययो भवतः॥ 
87. The affixes for and Erst come after the words it and ga respectively, in the senses specified in the apho rism reckoning from this one as far as “dhânyânâm, bhavane kshetre khan" (V.2.1). 
Thus ar +731= ory' feminine.' The sense of the affixes taught in ghe Fourth Book, and Chapter I of the Fifth Book, are various. Therefore 
URE • GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY ON 
NT OF INDIA 
PRIV:CH. 1. §. 88 ] 
LUK IN DVIGU 
सत्यमेव जयते 
सरकार 
the word ÊT UTAL will have all those various significations; thus, it will mean either withi (IV. 3.53) 'existing in females,' or afori : (IV. 2. 37) 'a collec tion of females; or it-23718 (IV. 3. 74) 'what has come from females'; or Birazit fea (V. 1. 5) 'suitable for females' &c. 
Similarly cat =dent masculine, or existing in males, or a collec tion of males, or what has come from males, or suitable for males &c.' 
These affixes, however, are not to be employed in the sense of the affix aq taught in V. I 115. For Panini himself uses the form ger (and not TTET) in sûtra VI. 3. 34, thus indicating by implication (119) that in the sense of वतू, the affix स्नञ् is not to be used. Thus स्त्रीवत् ॥ The forms स्त्रीत्वं, Fatet, grå and great are exceptional. See V. I. 121. The e of ye is elided before tre by VIII. 2. 23. had it not been elided, one affix at would have been taught in the sutra, and not two. 
FES TE Il cell netra II FETT, 35, 37 II वृत्तिः ॥ विगोर्यः संबन्धी निमित्तत्वेन तद्धितः प्राग्दीव्यतीयो ऽपत्यप्रत्ययं वर्जयित्वा तस्य लुगभवति ॥ 
88. A Taddhita affix, ordained to come on account of the relation of the words being that of a Dvigu compound, is elided by luk, when it has the sense of the various affixes taught antecedent to tena dîvyati &c, but not so, the affix having the sense of a Patronymic. 
The phrase fritega: of IV. I. 83 governs this aphorism also, and not the phrase भवनात् of the last. Thus पञ्चसु कपालेषु संस्कृतः पञ्चकपालः 'pre pared in five cups.' Similarly Eulehte: “prepared in ten cups." frate: 'he who studies two Vedas.' faa: "who studies three Vedas." Here the affixes denoting dea (IV. 2. 16), and stea (IV. 2. 59) have been elided. Why do we say "not so when the affix denotes a Patronymic."? Observe generer: 'a descendant of two Devadattas.' era: 'a descendant of three Devadattas, Here the patronymic affix is not elided, though the compound is a Dvigu. 
Why do we say "when it has the sense of the various affixes taught antecedent to tena divyati ?" Observe area: 11 
The Dvigu compound with the sense of a Taddhita affix is formed under II. I. 51. The affix will not, therefore, be elided where it does not give rise to a Dvigu compound. Thus gorareat=ser! Or the genitive case in four: may be taken as sthâna-shashthi, the sense being there is the substitution of 35-elision in the room of Dvigu,' the word Dvigu being here taken by metonymy for the affix which gives rise to Dvigu. Of course, when two words have blended into a Dvigu compound, the affixes will not be elided 
TURE - GO 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
LERNMENT OF 
OF INDIA 
संस्कृति मंत्रान 
सरचम 
GOTRALUK-ELISION 
[BK. IV. CH. 1. Se 
27 
.417 
रत सरकार 
after such a word, because it becomes a prâ tipadika like others, as farangre !! If so, how is the affix elided in to ena: =45979: ? This is not so ; there is no Taddhita added, and the word quere can never be analysed into 95209earn raha:, 11 If the latter sense is to be expressed, we must use a sentence, and no single word. In fact three are the only valid forms, and they arise without adding of any Taddhita affix to पञ्चकपाली, viz पञ्चसु कपालेषु संस्कृतः, पञ्चकपाल्लयां संस्कृतः, and पञ्चकपालः (a Samahāra Dvigu). A Samahara and a Taddhitârtha Dvigu of these are analysed in the same way, while the third पञ्चकपाल्याम् संस्कृतः will always remain a वाक्य and never give rise to a Taddhita. 
How do you explain the non-elision of the affix in त्रैविद्यः, पाचनः and षाकुलः ? The word त्रैविद्यः does not mean तिस्रो विद्या अधीते but व्यवयवा विद्या, farger, Erfagreta= | Similarly 975€: dose not mean ere erg : but qera Tarn : = :, Fe 277: =117: 11 So also with green 11 
Why the affix is not elided in garzi PE SITA=TTupaceru, or veturite 479? Because the elision of those affixes only take place which begin with a vowel 
jasa II e II tra i più, siga, se il वृत्तिः । यस्कादिभ्यो गोत्रइत्यादिना येषां गोत्रप्रत्ययानां लुगुक्तस्तेषामजादौ प्राग् दीव्यतीये विषयभूते Sasura II 
89. The luk-elision of Patronymic (Gotra) affixes in the plural, which have been enjoined by Sutras II. 4. 63 and the rest, is prohibited, when the affix has an initial vowel, and it has the sense of the various affixes taught antecedent to tena divyati &c (IV. 4. 2). 
Thus the plural of use is urt: (II. 4. 64). But the disciples of stori: will be formed by the affix 5 (IV. 21. 114) which is a pragdîvyatîya affix. and for the purposes of adding this affix the base will be considered to be trg: as if there was no elision. Thus amouf: +3 = Tvar: (VII. 1. 2 and VI. 4. 151), and not mirant Similarly care:, BT Tatar, Barrufer disciples of Vatsyas, Atreyas, Khârpâyanas.' 
Why do we say " " i. e. "when the Gotra affix is elided"? Observe hara, UECH W Here the affix denoting "fruit" is elided by a by Sutra IV. 3. 163. Then when the prâgdivytiya affix stor is added, the luk-elision is maintained. Thus the fruit of ac is aan; from which area belonging to or coming from the jujube-fruit.' 
Why do we say “having an initial vowel”? Observe STTTETTE गर्गरूप्यम and not गार्गरूप्यम ; and गर्गमयम् ; and not, गार्गमयम्॥ Here the affix रूप्य, 
TURE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
Y OF CULTUA 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
SL 
संस्कृति का 
TV, CH. I. S. DO. ] 
YUVAN-ELISION. 
657 
a prâgdîvyatîya affix taught in sûtra IV. 3. 81 does not begin with a vowel; therefore it is added to stop and not spoed Similarly the next affix Hurg (IV. 3. 82). fit Why do we say " when it has the sense of a prâgdivyatîya affix"? Thus stufazir fegatutreffer who is fit for the Gargas'. Here the affix 3 (V. 1. I) has the sense of suitable for that', as taught in Sutra V. 1. 5 not one of the prâgdîvyatiya senses. Hence the luk elision is maintained. 
The Gotra-affixes are taught to be elided in the plural only: and when after such supposed elision a Singular or Dual Person is intended, this rule will still apply and there will be no elision. Thus fare will form its Gotra derivative by 573 (IV. 1. 104) as Fare + 3731=ara: 1/ The plural of are will be rater: by the elision of # One yuvan or two yuvan descendants of these farer: will be formed by the affix ga (IV. 1. 95), for the application of which the word ferer: will be supposed not to have lost its 379, therefore a will be added to da, thus arę +99; then this gst is elided by II. 4. 58. The resultant form is ara:, der l! The many descendants (in the plural) of one ara: or two are: will be farer: 
ya g 1180 11 qera Il yra g* (341) वृत्तिः ॥ भाग् दीव्यत इति वर्तते । अचीति च । मागदीव्यतीयेऽजादौ प्रत्यये विवक्षिते बुद्धिस्थेऽनस्पन्ते एव युवप्रत्ययस्य लुग भवति। तस्मिन्निवृत्ते सति यो यतः प्रामोति स ततो भवति ॥ 
90. There is luk elision of the Yuvan Patronymic forming affix (IV. 1. 163) when a prâgdîvyatîya affix begin ing with a vowel is to be added. 
The elision of the Yuvan affix must take place mentally; having done which, we should then look out for the proper Prâgdîvyatîya affix to be added to the word-form thus remaining. Thus the Patronymic (Gotra) of TETET: is f lera: (IV. 1. 95) formed by adding The Yuvan form of the latter (by Sútra IV. 1. 150) will be relea: # When we intend to add a Pragdivya tiya affix to this last word, (e. g. an affix having the sense of "the pupils of”;) we should first mentally elide the Yuvan affix U (IV. 1. 150) from this word फाण्टाहत ॥ Having done which we get the form फाण्टाहति; and it is with regard to this form TTEC that we should search out what is the proper pupil-denot ing affix: and that by sâtra IV. 2. 112 is STOTII Thus Prefa+St = retent: 'the pupils of Phântâhritas! Had we in the first instance applied the pupil denoting affix to the Yuvan word Freted, such affix would have been 3 and not stop, for the latter is ordained for those cases only where the word ends with the Gotra affix (IV. 2. 112). 
Similarly the Patronymic of riad is oara (IV. 1. 25). The 
GOVERNMENT 
TURE - Gov 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY ON 
NT OF INDIA 
FOR 
YUVAN-ELISION. 
[ BK, IV. CH.I.S. 92 
Yuvan of t h is path: (IV. 1. 148). The pupils of Bhagavittika will be protetti: by adding the affix stu (IV. 2. 112). 
Similarly the Patronymic of rate is achiura formed by f (IV. 1. 154). The Yuvan of narra is aanremate formed by the affix 5 (IV. 1. 149). The word denoting the pupils of generate will be formed by adding 5 (IV. 2. 114) not to this word, but to mentera I Thus achteraffer: 1 
Similarly the Patronymic of chiq35mre is this state: (IV. 1.95). The Yuvan derivative of the latter will be hillys FIATT; (IV. I. 151). The word denoting pupils of the कापिजलाद्य will be कापिञ्जलानाः (IV. 2. 112). 
Similarly Patronymic from ग्लचुक is ग्लुचुकायनिः (IV. I. 160), the Yuvan of the latter is parenterat: (IV. 1. 83); the word denoting the pupils of the latter is arguar: by (IV. 2. 112 formed from prehrana) Why do we say "an affix beginning with a vowel"? Observe फाण्टाहृतरूप्यम् rnd फाण्टाहृतमयम् ॥ Why do we say "a Pragdivyatîya affix"? Observe traffiante fed = taifa 1 (See the last Sûtra). 
फकफिनोरन्यतरस्याम् ॥ ९१॥ पदानि ॥ फक-फिनोः, अन्यतरस्याम् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ फफिमोर्यवप्रत्ययोः प्राग्दीव्यतीयेऽजादौ प्रत्यये विवक्षितेऽन्यतरस्यां लुग् भवति ॥ 
91. There is optionally luk-elision of the Yuvan affixes Te and fast when a Prâgdîvyatîya affix beginning with a vowel is to be added. 
By the last sûtra, all Yuvan affixes were told to be elided. The present sûtra declares an option in the case of the Yuvan affixes and f1. Thus the patronymic of rot is Tro (IV. 1. 105); the Yuvan of step is formed by 7. (IV. I. 101) peteret: 1 The word denoting the pupils of Gârgyâna will be traiter or fruftaran:; pratar: or atcerata: 11 Similarly of the affix 767 (IV. 1. 156). Thus from e, the Patronymic is Teh (IV. 1. 112). The Yuvan of the latter is erritara (IV. I. 146). The pupils of Yâskâyani will be called it or talet: !! 
GETTARI YETGII TRI-TITEL II वृत्तिः॥ अर्थनिर्देशोयं, पूर्वैरुत्तरश्च प्रत्ययैरभिसंबध्यते । तस्येति षष्ठीसमर्थादपत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे थथाविहितं प्र त्ययो भवति, प्रकृत्यो भवति प्रकृत्यर्धविशिष्ठष्षष्ठया| ऽपत्यमात्रह गृह्यते॥ 
92. The affix tu mentioned in IV.1.83 and those which follow it denote the descendant of some one'. 
This sûtra points out the meaning of the affixes; and it refers to the affixes that have preceded, beginning from STI (IV. 1. S3) e. g. BTU, 3, &c and to the affixes that follow. The affixes herein taught have the force of denoting descendant, when they are added to the word in construction which 
TURE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
Y OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
ENT OF INDIA 
CH. I. $ 93. ] 
GOTRA-AFFIX. 
त मंत्रालय . 
74. 
78 
is in the genitive case. The translation given by Dr. Ballantyne of this aphorism is :-"Let the affixes already mentioned or to be mentioned come optionally in the sense of the offspring thereof, after what word ending with the sixth case-affix and having completed its junction (with whatever it may require to be compounded with), is in grammatical relation there to". 
Thus we may either use the sentence squirreth; or by adding stut (IV. 1. 83) to the word " (which has the 6th. case-affix in construction in the above sentence), form situra: “the offspring of Upagu". Baga: (IV. 1, 84) 'the offspring of apparata', erat: (IV. 1.85) 'the offspring of Diti' AT: (IV. 1. 86) “the offspring of Utsa”. EUT: (IV. 1. 87) 'the offspring of a woman". dfa: (IV. 1. 87) 'the offspring of a man'. 
The Universal sutra vez(IV. 3. 120) will include this stuee also for the word इदम् may be applied to any-thing like अपत्य, समूहः, विकारः, निवासः &c. Since by that rule IV. 3. 120 370. &c, may be applied in the sense of apatyam also, what is the necessity of this present sûtra ? The present sûtra is made in order to debar those affixes like , (IV. 3. 114) which debar the affix अण् &c in the case of तस्येवम् ॥ How can an अशेषिक affix debara 
forn affix ? The gears affixes &c are treated like itrack for this purpose. Thus these affixes BTT (IV. 1. 83-87) debar the 5 in the Vriddham under certain circumstances. Thus भानोरपत्यं = भानवः, so also श्यामगवः from श्यामगुः (ATAT STÄTSFE) 11 
Kårikå TÉGE#agra auarit ena Har! 
P उत्सर्गः शेष एवासी वृद्धान्यस्य प्रयोजनम् ॥ went til s3 || वृत्तिः । अपत्यं पौत्रप्रभृति गोत्र, तस्मिन् विवक्षित भेदेन प्रत्यपत्य प्रत्ययोत्पतिप्रसङ्गे नियमः क्रियते। गो वे एक एव भवति, सर्वेऽपत्येन युज्यन्ते । 
93. The one and the same affix is employed when a more distant descendant, how low so-ever, is to be denoted. 
The word Gotra is defined in Sûtra IV. I. 152 and means the offspring beginning with the grandson. There would have arisen the application of a separate affix in denoting the descendant of every one of such persons; the present sutra declares a restriction. Thus the son of Jof: is (IV. 1. 95). The son of TTT: (or in other words the grandson of stof) is arref: (IV. 1. 105). This is formed by a Gotra affix. Now the son of urreal: will also be called strefi, no new affix will be added. In fact, in denoting the Gotra descendants how low soever, the affix at will be added to the word so, though there may be several intermediate descendants. Thus the sútra restricts the application of the affix. Or in another view of the matter, it may be said to restrict the 
URE 
GOVE 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
RNMENT OF 
OF INDIA 
संस्कृति मंत्राल 
ger 
PATRONYMIC 
[BK. IV. CH. 1. 395 
II 
et 
18754 .410 
777 
base to which the affix is to be added. Thus the son of stref will be for med by adding the affix a not to the base per (which would have been the case were IV. 1.92 strictly applied), but to the base of IT So that one base is to be taken and adhered to throughout, in applying Gotra affixes. 
गोत्राबून्यस्त्रियाम् ॥ ९४॥ पदानि ॥ गोत्रातू, यूनि, अस्त्रियाम् ॥ वृत्तिः॥ अयमपि नियमः यून्यपत्ये विवक्षिते गोत्रादेव प्रत्ययो भवति, न परमप्रकृत्यनन्तरयुवभ्यः ॥ 
94. When a descendant of the description denot ed by Yuvan (IV. 1. 163) is intended to be expressed, a new affix is attached, only after what already ends with an affix marking a descendant as low at least as a grandson (gotra): but in the Feminine the word is not termed Yuvan, and no new affix is added. 
This is also a niyama or restrictive rule. Thus the Yuvan of spoof is pra for: (IV. 1. 101). Similarly arterToT:, ETSITTT:, TATUT:, sirga:, FICT : | 
Why do we say "but in the Feminine the word is not termed Yuvan"? Observe erit which is the feminine of Tret: (Gotra) as well as of ETTEOT: (Yu van). Similarly eft feminine of great and retrelor: II In short, Yuvan affixes are not added in the feminine. If it is intended to denote a feminine descen dant of the kind Yuvan, the feminine word formed by Gotra affix will denote such a descendant also. 
What is here prohibited i. e. is the term Gotra superseded by the term Yuvan? If it is a niyama rule, there will be no niyama with regard to the feminine, as the prohibition is contained in the same sentence. Therefore in the feminine, the Yuvan affix will not get the designation of Gotra, because Gotra-name is debarred by Yuvan Name. Therefore the sûtra should be divided in two, e. g. ire ufo Terzit para (2) astfelur (1) After a Gotra formed word a new affix is added in denoting a Yuvan descendant, (2) but not so in the feminine. In fact the name Yuvan is prohibited in the feminine, therefore, the feminine will be known Gotra always and never by Yuvan. 
Ta TT II वृतिः ॥ तस्यापत्यमित्येव । अकारान्तात्मातिपदिकादिञ् प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
95. The affix TT comes after a Nominal-stem which ends in short s, in denoting a descendant. 
This debars अण् (IV. I.83). Thus दक्षस्थापत्यं = दाक्षिः 'descendant of Daksha'. Why do we say short ar (for this is the force of the letter at added to st, by I. 1. 69 and 70)? The descendant of Tiu: or harar: (words which end in long st) will not be formed by the affix 37 
URE 
GOVE 
GOVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
TAINISTRY ON 
NT OF INDIA 
BEIN CH. I. S97.] 
स्कृति मंत्रालय 
The descendant of दशरथ by this sutra is दाशरथिः, but the form दाशरथ formed by अण is also met with. As “प्रदीयताम् दाशरथाय मैथिली" 'Give Sita to the son of Dasaratha.' 
बाह्वादिभ्यश्च ॥९६॥ पदानि ॥ बाहु-आदिभ्यः, च ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ बाहु इत्येवमादिभ्यः शब्देभ्योऽपत्ये इश् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ वार्चिकम् ॥ संभूयोम्भसोः सलोपश्च ।। वा०॥ बाह्वादिप्रभृतिषु येषां दर्शनं गोत्रभावे लौकिके ततोन्यत्र तेषां प्रतिषेधः ॥ वा० ॥ संबन्धिशब्दानां च तत्सदृशात्मातिषेधः ॥ 
96. The affix इञ् is added in the sense of a descen dant, after the words — Bahu' &c. 
Thus area: "a descendant of the clan of Bahu." The words 'Bahu &c, either do not end in short 3T, thus making the last rule inapplicable; or if they end in short 37, then some other rule would have prohibited the applica tion of 9. Hence the necessity of the present sûtra. 
This is a class of words recognizable only by the form (PDSTOT). 
1 बाह, 2 उपबाह, 3 उपवाकु, 4 निवाकु, शिवाकु, 6 वटाकु, 7 उपनिन्दु ( उपधि तु) 8 वृषली, 9 वृकला, 10 चडा, 11 बलाका, 12 मूषिका, 13 कुशला, 14 भगला (छग ला) 15 धुवका, 16 धुवका, 17 सुमित्रा, 18 दुर्भित्रा, 19 पुष्करसह 20 अनुहरत, 21 देवश मेन्, 22 अग्निशर्मन्, 29 भद्रशर्मन्, 24 सुशर्मन्, 25 कुनामन्, 26 सुनामन्, 27 पञ्चन्, 28 स मन्, 29 अष्टन, 30 अमितौजसः सलोपश्च, 31 सुधावत्, 32 उदञ्चु, 33 शिरस्, 34 माष, 35 शाराविन्, 36 मरीची, 37 क्षेमवद्धिन्, 38 शङ्खलतोदिन, 39 खरनादिन, 40 नगरमर्दिन्, 41 प्रा कारीदन्, 42 लोमन्, 43 अजीगत, 44 कृष्ण, 45 युधिष्ठिर, 46 अर्जुन, 47 साम्ब, 48 गह, 49 प्रान्न, 50 राम,51 उदडू,52 उदकः संज्ञायाम, संभूयाम्भसोः सलोपश्च, 54 वृक, 65 वडाल,56 सलक ॥ आकृतिगणोऽयम् ॥ तेन । 57 सावकिः 58 जाधिः 59 ऐन्दशर्मिः 60 आजधनविः इत्यादि । 
Vart :-The words बाहु &c must be Proper Names, being heads of Gotras from whom clans take their name: otherwise the affix i will not be applied. Thus the son of a private person called are will be arga: 11 
Tårt :--The operations to be effected upon words denoting relation are prohibited with regard to the same word-forms when denoting Proper Names. Thus the offspring of meaning 'father-in-law' is better, but when it means a person called Svasura, then the derivative will be श्वाशुरिः ॥ 
The in the sůtra indicates that other words not included in the list also take this afix. Thus जाम्बिः, ऐन्द्रशर्मिः, आजधेनविः, आजबन्धविः, औडुलोमिः ।। 
सुधातुरकाच॥९७॥ पदानि ॥सुधातुः अकङ्,च॥ इत्तिः ॥ सुधातृशब्दापत्ये इस प्रत्ययो भवति तत्सन्नियोगेन च तस्याकडात्यो भवति ।। वात्तिकम् ॥ व्यासवरनिषारचण्डालबिम्बानामिति वक्तव्यम् ।। 
URE - GOVE 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
IERNMENT OF 
OF INDIA 
77 
[ BK. IV. CH. I. $ 98 
97. The affix gst is placed after the word sudhatri in denoting the descendant, and the ag of sudhâtri is replac ed by the substitute the befere this affix, 
Thus सुधातुरपत्यम् =सौधातकिः - the descendant of Sudhatri.' 
Vart :-The substitute अकङ् replaces the finals of व्यास, वरुड, निषाद, posts and rice when the Patronymic Ft is to be added. Thus aeteren, बारुडाकि नैषादकि, चाण्डालकिः, बैम्बकिः ।। 
गोत्रे कुजादिभ्यश्च फञ् ॥९८॥ पदानि ॥ गोत्रे, कुञ्जादिभ्यः, च फर ॥ चूचिः ॥ गोत्रसंज्ञके ऽपत्ये वाच्ये कुंजादिभ्यश्चफज्ञ प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
98. The affix "chphañ' comes after the words "Kuñja’ &c, when a remoter descendant (called Gotra) is to be denoted. 
This debars 2 Of the affix the letter st is for the sake of distinguishing this affix from the affix ; such as in sútra V. 3. 113, by which the words ending in affix 768 take the further affix a (SU), in order to form a complete word. The letter T of this affix causes Vriddhi (VII. 2. 117). Then remains which by sútra VII. 1. 2, is replaced by strugu Thus + 91= +37749+ s h irt. This is not a complete word as yet. We must add a by sûtra V. 3. 113. Thus the full word is misse 
the grandson or a lower descendant of Kunja' dual of it is spree, plural is alsfar:; the affix 54 being elided by II. 5. 62, in the plural, it being an affix of the ताज class (IV.I. 174). Similarly ब्राधायन्यः, ब्राधायन्यौ, ब्रानायनाः ।। 
Why do we say when a Gotra descendant is to be denoted ?" Observe tist: the son of Kunja". Here is added by IV. 1.95 in denot ing immediate descendant. There is difference in the accent of these words, in the different numbers. Thus in the singular and dual, the accent will be regulated by the latter of the affix y which is added in those numbers. But this affix being elided in the plural, the accent there will be regulated by the letter of t That is to say, in the singular and dual, the udatta will fall on the first syllable (VI. 1. 197); in the plural, it will fall on the last syllable (VI. 1. 164). 
The word off of this sutra governs the succeeding sâtras up to aphorism IV. I. 112: so that all the affixes taught in these fifteen sûtras denote grandsons or descendants lower than that. 
1 , 2 , 3 , 4 en 5 STUT, 6 , 7 TE, 8 , 9 DET, 10 , 11 Fr, 12 , 13 Fhay, 14 The, 15 TETT, 16 fra, 17 Ti TURE 
GOVO 
GOVERNMENT 
OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY OF 
NT OF INDIA 
BK. IV. Ch. I. STOO.] 
फक्॥ 
लिय. भारत 
नडादिश्यः फक्॥९९ ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ नड इत्येवमादिभ्यः प्रातिपदिके यो गोत्रापत्ये फक् प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
99. The affix फक comes, in denoting aGotra des cendant, after the Nominal-stems 75 and the rest. 
Thus नाडायनः (नड + फक् = नाड+ आयन VII. 2. IIS and VII. I. 2). Simi larly चारायणः “ the grandson or a lower descendant of Nada or Chara". But the son of 75 will be gifs: (IV. 1. 95).. 
The word शलंकु is changed to शलंक before this affix. Thus शालकायनः ।। The word aircisi: occurs in the class II. 4. 59, the Yuvan affix is, therefore, elided after it, thus शालंकि: is a common name for "father' and 'son'. It takes इश by IV. I. 96, as belonging to Bahvadi class which is an Akrti-gana. The word अग्निशमन् takes फक् when denoting the वषगण gotra,e.g. आमिशायणः= वार्ष्ण गण्यः ; otherwise the form will be आग्निशमः ॥ The word कृष्ण will form काष्र्णायनः when a Brahmana is meant ; otherwise काठिणः, so also राणायनः= वासिष्टः, other wise राणिः ॥ The word क्रोष्टु is changed to क्रोष्ट as aौष्टायनः ॥ 
1 नड, 2 चर, (वर) 3 बक, 4 मुंज, 5 इतिक, 6 इतिश, 7 उपक, 8 एक, 9 ल मक। 10 शलंकु शलईच। 11 सप्तल, 12 वाजप्य, 13 तिक। 14 अग्निशमन्वृषगणे। 15 प्राण 16 नर, 17 सायक, 18 दास, 19 मित्र, 20 द्वीप, 21 पिङ्गर, 22 पिङ्गल, 23 किंकर, 24 कि इल, 25 कातर, 26 कातल, 27 काश्यप (कुश्यप) 28 काश्य, 29 काल्य (काव्य) 30 अज, 31 अमुष्य (अमुष्म ) 32 कृष्णरणो ब्राह्मणवासिष्ठे। 33 अमित्र, 34 लिगु, 35 चित्र, 36 कुमार, 37 कोष्ट क्रोष्टं च । 38 लोहं, 39 दुर्ग, 40 स्तम्भ, 41 शिशफा, 42 अग्र, 43 तृण, 44 शकट, 45 सुमनस, 46 सुमत, 47 मिमत, 48 ऋच, 49 जलंधर, 50 अध्वर, 51 युगंधर, 52 हंसक, 53 दण्डिन्, 54 हस्तिन, 55 पिण्ड, 56 पंचाल, 57 चमसिन्, 58 सुकृत्य, 59 स्थिरक, 60 ब्राह्मण, 61 चटक, 62 बदर, 63 अश्वल, 64 खरप, 65 लङ्क, 66 इन्ध, 67 अख, 68 कामुक, 69 ब्रह्मदत्त, 70 उदुम्बर, 71 शोण, 72 अलोह, 73 वण्डप, 74 जतू, 75 अश्वक, 76 वान व्य, 77 नाव्य, 78 अबजत, 79 अन्तजन, 80 इत्वरा, 81 अंशक, 82 याम, 83 काम, 84 बात ।। 
हरितादिश्योऽञः॥१००॥ पदानि ॥ हरित-आदिश्यः, अञः॥ वृतिः ॥ हरितादिर्बिदायन्तर्गणः । हरितादिभ्यो ऽमन्तभ्योपत्ये फक् प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
100. The affix फक comes after the words हरित&e, when they end in the affix sToT (IV. 1. 104). 
The words era &c, form a subdivision of rae class, which class by IV. 1. 104 takes the affix si in forming Gotra words. Thus the Gotra descendant of हरित will be हारित (हरित+अझ), The son of हारित will be formed by this sutra. and not by IV. 1. 95. Thus हारित+फक-हारितायनः “the son of Harita or the great-grandson of Harita". In fact, the force of the affix # of this Satra is that of a Yuvan affix, though it is taught in the chapter of Gotra affixes ; because according to the general rule IV. 1. 98 one Gotra affix can be only added to a word, and the word Erica being already formed by a Gotra affix 
URE - GOVE 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
MENT OF INDIA 
सत्यमा 
फक्॥ 
[BK. IV. CiH.I. S. 103 
दत मंत्रालय । 
'भारत सरकार 
or will not take again another Gotra affix 57 Therefore, it is here a 
Yuvan-affix. 
यमिञोश्च ॥ १०१॥ पदानि ॥ यञ्-इओः, च, (फक्) ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ यजन्तादिनन्ताच्च प्रातिपदिकादपत्ये फक् प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
101. The affix फक is added in denoting a descen dant after a Nominal-stem ending in the affixes यज्ञ and इञ्॥ 
The e of this sûtra has, like that of the preceding sâtra, the force of a Yuvan affix, since it is to be added to words formed by the Gotra affixes 23 and इञ॥ Thus गर्ग+ यज्ञ (IV. I. I05)= गार्ग्यः ॥ गाये+फक् = गाायणः ॥ दक्ष + इश् = दाक्षिः; दक्षि+ फक् = दाक्षायणः ॥ It is not every word which ends in यज्ञ or इ which takes the Yuvan affix 707 ; but only that word where the affix or $37 has the force of a Gotra affix. Thus the affix gst is added by IV. 3. Io to denote proximity to a sea. As द्वीप+ यज्ञद्वैप्यः॥ This word will not take the affix फक॥ Similarly by IV. 2. 80 the affix इis added to the words सुतंगम &c, the force of the affix being चातुरर्थिक | Thus सौतंगमिः. This word will not take the affix फक्॥ 
शरद्वच्छनकदर्भादूभृगुवत्साग्रायणेषु ॥ १०२॥ पदानि ॥ शरद्वतू, शुनक, दी तू, भृगु, वत्स, आग्रायणेषु (फक)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ गोत्र इत्येव । शरबत् शुनक दर्भ इत्येतेभ्यो गोत्रापत्ये फक् प्रत्ययो भवति यथासंख्यं भृगुवत्सामा यणेष्वर्थेष्वपत्यविशेषेषु ॥ 
102. The affix the comes in denoting a Gotra descendant after the words 'saradvat', 'sunaka', and 'darbha', when they denote the descendants of Bhrigu, Vatsa and Agrâyana respectively. 
Thus शारद्वातायन: भार्गवः otherwise शारद्वतः (formed by अम्) शौनकायनः = वात्स्यः ; otherwise शानकः, दार्भायणः-आग्रायणः, otherwise दार्भिः, (formed by इन IV, 1.95). 
The words to and belonging to FETELE class would by IV. 1. 104 have taken the affix sur in denoting Gotra, the present sâtra prohibits that in certain cases and enjoins instead. 
द्रोणपर्वतजीवन्तादन्यतरस्याम् ॥ १०३॥ पदानि ॥ द्रोण, पर्वत, जीवन्तातू, अ न्यतरस्याम् (फल)॥ वृतिः ॥ गोत्रइत्येव । द्रोणादिभ्यः प्रातिपदिकम्यो गोत्रापत्यऽन्यतरस्यां फक प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
103. The affix comes, in the sense of a Gotra descendant, optionally after the words Drona,' 'parvata,' and jivanta. 
GURE 
GOVE 
GOVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY OS 
ENT OF INDIA 
SI 
Bilv,CH. I. 5 Iò4 ] 
प्रकृति मंत्रालय 
til 
777 275 
Good This debars s of IV. I. 95. Thus द्रोणायन: or द्रोणिः, पार्वतायनः or पार्वतिः Sapatea: or area: 11 
The affix 5 is employed in denoting a remote (gotra) offspring and not an immediate descendant or son. How is then 3737UTAT the son of Drona, called द्रौणायनः and not द्रौणिः in the phrase "अश्वत्थामा द्रोणायनः "? The 
TOT here does not refer to the Droņa of the Mahabhârât, but to some ancient founder of a clan of that name, and his descendants were called TTTT: 11 In modern times, by an easy error, Aśvatthâmâ was called Drauņâyana, owing to the similarity of sounds. 
sammarTë fagieFTIST 11 808 Erê ll Stafa Barcet, fagi foto, 3 1 
वृत्तिः ॥ गोत्रइत्येव । बिरादिभ्यो गोत्रापत्येऽअप्रत्ययो भवति । ये पुनरत्रानुषिशब्दाः पुत्वात्यस्तेभ्योऽनन्त रापत्य एव भवति । अनुष्यानन्तर्यइत्यस्यायमर्थः, अनृषिभ्योऽनन्तरे भवतीति ॥ 
104. . The affix it comes after the words 'Bida' &c, in denoting a remote (Gotra) descendant: but after those words of this class which are not the names of ancient sages, the affix 314 has the force of denoting immediate des cendant. 
This Sûtra consists of four words: spare" non-Rishi or not being the name of a sage"; strapael in expressing an immediate descendant." fertia "after Bidâdi words " 377 " the affix 379." Thus of the words falling in Bidadi class, the words like TT son,' are daughter,' TEE sister-in-law' are common nouns and not names of Rishis. When the affix stl is added to these words, it has the force of denoting immediate descendant. Thus +3722=17: 'grand-son.' crea +37=ETETT: "daughter's son.' But when added to other words which express the names of Rishis, the affix s makes the Gotra des cendants. Thus fa&+39=ara: 'the grandson or a descendant lower than that of Bida. 
How in a context relating to Gotra affixes, we come to this two fold meaning of this satra? To this we reply, that the phrase s ented a should be thus construed. The word 'anfishi' is in the ablative case, the case affix being elided. The word staat is the same as 37 at the affix te being added without change of significance. Therefore the words like 17 &c. denote the immediate (anantara) descendant of ga &c, and do not denote a remote descendant (gotra), nor a descendant in general. Therefore, the above phrase means :-'after a Bidadi word which is not the name of a Rishi, the affix an is added in denoting an immediate descendant.' 
URE 
GOVS 
OVERNMENT 
Y OF CULTUR. 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
11 
[ BK. IV. CH. 1. 104, 
संस्कृति मन 
WHETST. 
*9777 278 
Q. Another way of explaining the phrase is this, the word 'ânantarya' is equal to 'nairantarya'='uninterrupted succession. Therefore, where there is an uninterrupted succession of Rishis between the first name and the person to be designated by a Patronymic, there the affix 'añ will not be added. Thus the word 2772270 belongs to the Bidâdi class. "Indrabhu' a seventh descendant of Kasyapa, will not be denoted by any formed with us, because between 
L and 239, there is an unbroken series of Rishis, but by sth of IV. 1. 114. Therefore the following phrase will be valid इन्द्रभूः सप्तमः काश्यपानाम् ॥ For अञ् is elided in the plural by II.4. 64, but ht297ra is plural of er 99 formed with the general patronymic stur of IV. I. 114 and hence not elided. 
A. This explanation is not to be preferred, merely in order to explain the word काश्यपानाम् in इन्द्रभूः सप्रमः काश्यपानाम् ॥ The general Patronymic काष affix STUI of IV. I, 114 is not debarred by this I Therefore erat with 977 will denote , which may also be denoted by agere formed with storil For had the above explanation been correct, then fer alla the grandson of Kusika could never be called arah: (formed with st), for both Gâdhi the father of Viśva mitra, and Kuśika the grand-father were Rishis. 
In denoting an immediate descendant or a descendant in general, the Rishi words fare &c, will take other appropriate affixes. Thus farę forms afe'a descendant of Bida' by IV. 1. 96 yst and not by SEGETUT of IV. 1. 114, because fare is supposed to belong to the Akştigana of Bâhvâdi. 
1 fat, 2 , 3 244, 4 ara, 5 TOTT, 6 39474, 7 fahmla, 8 (f i) 9 Favarat, 10 faqor (featu) 11 *[T, 12 gevat, 13 ferah 14 3 
AFT, 15 mart, 16 , 17 77 (97) 18 , 19 999, 20 fary, 21 furg, 22 siroth, 23 Sa, 24 urah, 25 straha, 26 A, 27 ans 28 
, 29 surgut, 30 fta, 31 fehera, 32 UF, 33 a y ( ) 34 tar 1, 35 fatus, 36 T, 37 greaty, 38 fa, 39 Tafrat (terat) 40 Tigt, 41 farra, 42 aC, 43 , 44 F5T, 45 , 46 1915, 47 g, 48 gaf, 49 97, 50 grea, 51 7FT,1 52 qraft 
T I 53 Fan, 54 55, 55 garerah ! The word war in the above list is replaced by T when taking the affix atau Thus puréET TOURETT: (the son of a Brâhmana begotten on a Sudra woman, who though married to the Brâhmaņa is met 'a strange woman' owing to the great difference of race). 
The word परस्त्री occurs in मनुशतिकादि (VII. 3. 20) and कल्याण्यादि (IV. 1. 126) classes also. Therefore when the sense is 'a son begotten on another's wise' who is also called meat, the form will be TIETOAT:, with double vřiddhi of both members by VII. 3. 20: which does not take place in the case of 9TETTU 
URE - GOVs 
GOVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
BK. TV CH. I. S. 106] 
GOTRA यज्ञ॥ 
चालय 
4.भारत 
गर्गादिभ्यो यञ् ॥ १०५॥ पृत्तिः ।। गोबइत्येव । गर्गादिन्यो गोत्रापत्ये यञ् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
105. The affix erst comes, in the sense of Gotra descendant, after the words Garga' &c. 
Thus tips:, 'the grandson or a still lower descendant of Garga', so also वात्स्यः &c. PH1 गर्ग, 2 वत्स,। 3 वाजासे । 4 संस्कृति, 3 अज, 6 व्याघ्रपान, 7 विदभुत, 8 प्रा चीनयोग, 9 अगस्ति, 10 पुलस्ति, I1 चमस, 12 रेभ, 13 अग्निवेश, 14 शंख, 15 हाट, 16 शक, 17 एक, 18 धूम, 19 अवट, 20 मनस, 21 धनंजय, 22 वृक्ष, 23 विश्वावसु, 24 जर माण, 25 लोहित, 26 शंसित, 27 बम, 28 वल्गु, 29 मण्डु. 30 गण्डु, 31 शंकु, 32 लिगु, 33 गहलु, 34 मन्त, 35 मंक्षु, 36 अलिगु, 37 जिगीषु, 38 मनु, 39 तन्तु, 40 मनायी, 41 सनु, 42 कथक, 43 कन्यक, 44 कक्ष, 45 तृक्ष (वृक्ष) 46 तन, 47 तरुक्ष, 48 तलुक्ष, 49 सण्ड, 50 वतण्ड, 51 कपिकत, 52 कत, 53 कष, 54 भत, 55 कुरुकत, 56 अनडुह, 57 कवि, 58 पुरु कुत्त, 59 शक्ति, 60 कण्व, 61 शकल,62 गोकक्ष, 63 अगस्त्य, 64 कुण्डिनी 65 यज्ञवल्क, 66 पर्णवल्क, 67 अभयजात, 68 विरोहित, 69 वृषगण, 70 रहूगण, 71 शण्डिल, 72 वर्णक (चणक) 73 चुलुक, 77 मुइल, 75 मुसल, 76 जमदग्नि, 77 पराशर, 78 जतूकर्ण (जातूकर्ण ) 79 महित, 80 मन्त्रित, 81 अभ्मरथ, 82 शर्कराक्ष, 83 पूतिमाष, 84 स्यूरा, 85 अदरक (अररक) 86 एलाक,87 पिङ्गल, 88 कृष्ण, 89 गालन्द, 90 उलूक, 91 तितिक्ष, 92 भिषज (भिषज्) 93 भिष्णज, 94 भडित, 95 भाण्डत,96 वल्म. 97 कित, 98 चिकिरिखत, 99 देवहू, 100 इन्द्रहू, 101 एकल, 102 पिप्पल, 103 वृहदग्नि, 104 सुलोहिन, 105 सुलाभिन्, 106 उक्थ, 107 कुटिगु, 108 संहित, 109 पथ, 110 कन्यु, 111 श्रुव, 112 कर्कटक, 113 रूक्ष, 114 प्रचूल, 115 बिलम्ब, 116 विष्णुज ॥ 
The word en is found in the filigarre sublist of this class. It ought to take sफ after बञ् in the feminine by IV. I. 18, how then the form मानवी in मानवी प्रजा? The affix यञ् comes in denoting a Gotra offspring, but in denoting a descendant in general, this affix will not come, and hence no shpha also. If so, then why the immediate descendant of जमदमि is called जामदग्न्यः which is a Name of Parasuram the son of Jamadagni, or why Vyâsa the son of Parasara is called पाराशर्यः? These are exceptions formed by गोत्र रुपाध्यारोपः i.e. by superimposing of Gotra-form on these. Their proper apatya forms are by कष्यण (IV. I. II4) i.e. जामदग्नः and पाराशरः ॥ 
मधुबभ्रोर्ब्राह्मणकौशिकयोः॥ १०६॥ पदानि ॥ मधु, बम्रोः, ब्राह्मण-कौशिकयोः (यञ्)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ मधुशब्दावच शब्दाच गोत्रापत्ये थम् प्रत्ययो भवति ययासंख्य ब्राह्मण कौशिके वाच्ये॥ 
106. The affix यञ् comes, in the sense of a Gotra descendant, after the words are and try when the words so formed mean Brâhmana' and 'a Kausika' respectively. 
Thus माधव्यः = ब्राह्मणः 'Brahmana.' Otherwise माधवः "son of Madhu." बाश्रव्य-कैौशिक: Otherwise बाभ्रवः ।। 
URE.GOV 
OF CULTURE 
. MINISTRY 
ERNMENT ON 
OF INDIA 
GOTRA GT 10 
(BK. IV. CH 1. 9. 108/ 
•संस्कृति मंत्रा 
The word wat belongs to the Gargâdi class, so it would have taken yan by the last sûtra also. The present sûtra declares a restriction, viz. Ty takes 
21 only then when calles is denoted. Its being read in the Gargâdi class serves another purpose : as it belongs to the sub-classs cheatre, the rule IV. I. 18 becomes applicable to it; so that its feminine is formed by th. Thus 
Tercatat o In fact, it would have been better, if in the body of the Ganapa tha, instead of writing ay alone, there was ay hi Toh I It would have saved the repetition of it in the present sûtra. 
कपिबोधादाङ्गिरसे ॥ १०७॥ पदानि ॥ कपि, बोधातू, आङ्गिरसे ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ कपिबोधशब्दाभ्यामाङ्गिरसेऽपत्यविशेषे गोत्रे यञ् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
107. The affix ' comes in the sense of a Gotra descendant, after the words are and are, when the special descendants of the family of Angiras are meant. 
Thus ita + 9 = filcy: the grand-son or a still lower descendant of * Kapi' of the family of Angiras.' So also are: 0 
Why do we say of the family of Angiras ? Observe atga: (IV. 1. 122) " the gotra-descendant of Kapi" so also inre: formed by you because it is a Non-Rishi word or because it belongs to Bahvâdi (IV. 1. 96) class. 
The word or occurs in Gargadi class. The present sûtra declares a restriction i. e. the 'yan' is to be applied only when Angirasa descendant is meant. It is included in the Gargâdi class also for the purpose of apply ing IV. I, 18. Thus theatre "grand-daughter or a still lower descendant of Kapi." 
ETUSZT II Poell Tera Il tausta, , ( Trà, T) वृत्तिः ॥ आङ्गिरस इत्येव । बतण्डशब्दाताङ्गिरसेऽपत्यविशेषे गोत्रे यञ् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
108. The affix yo' comes in the sense of a Gotra descendant, after the word cars,' when meaning a descen dant of Angirasa. 
Thus aer: = stirrats, otherwise arque: 
The word a s occurs both in the Gargadi class (IV. 1. 105) and in the Sivadi class (IV. 1. 112). It would have taken both affixes and sur The present sâtra declares that when it means an Angirasa, then acos will not take srur of the farate class : and when it does not mean Angirasa, then it takes both these affixes e. g. Tret: and as: any descendant of Vatanda. 
a fare il go ! : Il free 13tspreia fora 
EW 
URE - GOVE. 
GOVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
ENT OF INDIA 
IV. CH. I. §. 110 ] 
स्कृति मंत्रालय 
GOTRA 6911 
74.17 
109. The affix Toy' is luk-elided in the feminine after the word aavet' when meaning a female descendant of Angirasa. 
Thus from 745: we get TA®ET in the masculine. In the feminine the is elided by luk, and we have ara GT+1a (IV. 1. 73)=agost "a female descendant of Vatanda of the clan Angirasa." Why do we say "of Angirasa?" Observe Graft formed with 'shpha' under lohità di rule (V. I 18). When 
aus takes BTT under Sivadi class, its feminine is argost 11 Though the word is formed with spot yet in the feminine, there is not the substitution (IV. 1.78), because Vatanda is a Rishi-Name. 
Tags: ar ll go 11 वृत्तिः॥ भाङ्गिरस इति निवृत्तम् । अश्वादिभ्यो गोत्रापत्ये फञ् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
110. The affix comes, in the sense of a Gotra descendant, after the words staa &c. 
The anuvřitti of angirasa does not extend to this aphorism. Thus 37451-72=5727-1-37147(VII. 1. 2)= 3TR4a: (VII. 2. 117) 'the grandson or a still lower descendant of Aśva'. Similarly ratan: There are some words in this class which already have taken a patronymic affix, e. g, ru, Sea, and 97175 After these words the affix of course has the force of a Yuvan affix. The word strate is formed by sh+6 (IV. 1. 122), a=fare (a Rajar shi)-1-526 (IV. I 171), and STEW=355 +358 (IV. 1. 105). The word takes phan only when it denotes an Atreya, as gitara, otherwise her: with 
IT or ra: with gru 1 The word sra takes 'phan' only when the offspring of a male is to be denoted, as STFETTİ= Siara: but saat stei with 77 The word nie takes 'phan' when denoting a Bhâradvaja, as BTITUTA, otherwise it will take the affix ya, which will be elided by II. 4. 28, leaving the form ota: 11 
The words 7TTST BETT of the above list mean that when a person born in Atri Gotra is adopted by a person belonging to Bhâradvaja Gotra, then the affix is to be added, he of course is an Atreya but gets a new Gotra of Bhâradvâja. Thus T STA, otherwise the form will be patst: with efar of IV. I. 104. 
1 372 344 3 4 767 5 fax 6 gz 7 leur 8 out (Cat) 9 GOST 10 TE Il faz 12 3 13 og 14 arca 15 sfoca 16 59 17 Trä 18 TOT 19 TRT 20 raut 21 sirain 22 7 23 fare 24 FFC 25 26 & 27 mar 28 fe 29 of 30 
214 31 y 32 33 arriti 34 FTTETT 35 e 36 719 vr 37 1 38 38 39 40 are 41 97 42 rear 43 fareig 44 FTS 45 FT 46 47 47 TT 48 TETE 49 x 50 ( ) grea 51 & 52 ASU 53 ġe str 54 og 55 e 56 a 57 galu 58 59 
GOVERNMENT 
TURE - GO 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY ON 
NT OF INDIA 
GOTRA फर॥ 
[ BK. IV. CI. I. .4ta 
सस्कृति मंत्रान 
सालय .भारत 
तिसरकार 
(मनस्) प्रान्त 60 वन 61 आत्रेय भरवाजे 62 भरद्वाज आत्रेये 63 उत्स 64 आतव 65 कितव 66 बद 67 धन्य 68. पाद 69 शिव 70 खदिर 71 भण्डिक 72 मीवा 73 कुल 74 काण 75 नड 76 वीक्ष्य, 77 वह, 78 खेड, 79 नत्त 80 ओजत, 81 नम ।। 
भर्गावैगर्ते ॥१११॥ वृत्तिः ॥ भर्गशब्दावपत्ये विशेषे गर्ते गोत्रे फळ प्रतत्यो भवति ।। 
111. The affix 'फ' comes in the sense of a Gotra descendant, after the word vol, when the meaning is a 
Traigarta. 
Thus sperreror: = itera: ; otherwise unët: (IV. 1.95). शिवादिभ्योण ॥ ११२॥ पदानि ॥ शिव-आदिभ्यः, अण् ॥ वृतिः ॥ गोत्र इति निवृतम् । अतः प्रभृति सामान्येन प्रत्यया विज्ञायन्ते । शिवाविभ्योऽपत्येऽण प्रत्य यो भवति॥ 
112. The affix tu comes in the sense of a descen dant, after the words fata &c. 
The anuvritti of the word in (IV. 1. 98) does not extend to this sätra. The affixes taught hereafter are generic patronymic affixes. The afhx अण् debars इम् &c, Thus शिव-।-अण् = शैवः a descendant of Siva'. Similarly पौष्ठः ॥ 
The word 'a carpenter' occurs in this class; being a common noun denoting an artisan, it would have taken the affix Fr by IV. 1, 153; the present sutra prevents that. It does not, however, prevent the application of ण्य ordained by IV. I. I52. Thus तक्षन- अण्=ताक्ष्णः ॥ तक्षन--ज्य-तापण्यः ॥ The or is elided by VI. 4. 134, The word tot occurs in this class, as well as in Sub hrádi class IV, 1.123) and Tikâdi (IV. 1. 154). There are thus three forms of this word :---गांगः ; गांगायनि: and गांगेयः ॥ The word विपाशा occurs in this class as well as in Kulijadi class (IV. 1.98) It has thus two forms : वैपाशः and 
पाशायन्य: with chphan.. 
The affix spor will come after a word consisting of two syllables, when it is the name ofa river: the affix हक् (IV. 1. 121) would have debarred the तन्नामिक अण of (IV. 1. 113) in case of patronymics formed from river names. However, it is not so, because of this prohibition. The Patronymic from the river name निवणी would be formed by भण् (IV.I.113), as पैवेण : but this is replaced by त्रिवणः ।। 
1 शिव 2 प्रोष्ठ प्राष्टिक चण्ड अभ6 भरि7 लण्ड 8 कुगर 9 ककुम् (ककुभा) 10 अन. भिमलान 11 कोहित 12 सुख 13 सधि 14 मुनि 15 ककुत्स्थ 16 कहोड 17 कोइड 18 कस्य 19 काय 20 शेध 21 कपिजल (कुपिजल) 22 खंजन 23 वतण्ड 24 तृणकर्ण 25 पारिटूर 26 जलसूत 27 परिल 
FURE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
BrTV. CH. I. S. 1141 
PATROATHIC अण ।। 
28 पापक 29 पिष्ट 30 हैहय 31 पार्षिका 32 गोपिका 33 कपिलिका 34 जटिलिका 35 बधिरिका 36 मंजीरक 37 38 मजिरक 39 वृष्णिक 40 खंजार 41 खंजाल 42 कर्मार 43 रेख 44 लेख 45 आलेखन 46 विश्ववण 47 रवण 48 वर्तनाक्ष 49 ग्रीवाक्ष 50 विटप 51 पिटक 52 पिटाक 53 तक्षाक 54 नभाक 55 ऊर्णनाभ 56 जरत्कारु 57 पृथा 58 उत्क्षेप 59 पुरोहितिका 60 सुरोहितिका 61 सुरोहिका 62 आय श्वत (अर्यश्वेत) 63 सुपिष्ट 64 मसुरकर्ण 65 मयूरकर्ण 66 खर्जुरकर्ण 67 खदूरक 68 तक्षन् 69 ऋष्टिषणे 70 गंगा 71 विपाश 72 यस्क 73 लह्य 74 द्रुह्य 75 अथःस्थुल 76 तृणकर्ण (तण कर्ण) 77 पर्ण 78 भल न्दन 73 विरूपाक्ष 80 भूमि 81 इला 82 सपत्नी 83 यचो नद्याः 84 त्रिवेणी विवणं च ।। 85 गोफिलिक, 86 रोहितिक, 87 कबोध, 88 गोभिलिक, 89 राजल, 90 तडाक, 91 वडाक, 92 परल || It is an आकृतिगण ॥ 
अवृद्धाभ्यो नदीमानुषीभ्यस्तन्नामिकाभ्यः ॥ ११६॥ पूचिः॥ वाईयस्थाचामाविस्तवाद्वम् । अवृद्धाभ्यः इति शब्दधर्मः । नरीमानुषीभ्य इत्यर्थधर्म, स्तेनाभेदा यकृतयो निर्दिश्यन्ते । तन्नामिकाभ्य इति सर्वनामा प्रत्ययप्रकृतेः प्रत्यवमर्शः । अवद्धानि यानि नदीनां मानुषीणां च नामधेयानि तेभ्यो ऽपत्येऽण् प्रत्ययो भवति । उको ऽपवादः ।। 
113. The affix अण comes, in the sense of ades cendant, after words which are the names of rivers, or women, when such words are not Vriddham words; and when they are used as names and not as adjectives. 
The word Vriddham in the sâtra, does not mean the technical Pat ronymic of that name as defined in other Grammars and used in Sätras like IV. I. 166, but means the Vriddham as defined in this Grammar i. e. a word whose first syllable is a Vriddhi letter (I. I.73). The word अवद्धाभ्यः shows the orthography of the word to which the affix is to be added. The word नदी मानुषीभ्यः declares the meaning of that word and both attributes refer to one and the same base, i. e. orthographically the base should have a Vriddhi letter in the first syllable, and etymologically it should denote a man or a river. The word तन्नामिकाभ्यः applies both to the base and the affix. 
Thus यमुना-यामुनः 'a son of the Yamuna.' ऐरावत ' son of the Iravati.' पैतस्तः 'son of the Vitasth.' नामवः 'son of the Narmadda.' These are all names of rivers, Similarly शौक्षितः 'son of Sikshita ' चन्तित ' son of चिन्तिता'। 
Why do we say 'when not a Vriddha word? Observe चान्द्रभाग्यावा अपत्यं - चान्द्रभागेयः; so also वासवदतेयः formed by डक (IV.I. 120). Why do we say being 'names of rivers or women.' Observe roure and waatu: Why do we say "when it is a name?" Observe sfruara 377= ira: 'the son of a beautiful woman.' 
(IV. I. 120) is the general affix by which patronymics are formed from feminine bases. The present sûtra is an exception to that 
ऋष्यन्धकवृष्णिकुरुयश्च ॥ ११४॥ ऋषि, अन्धक, वृष्णि, कुरुभ्यः य॥ वृत्तिः ॥ ऋषयः प्रसिद्धा वसिष्ठाक्य । अन्धका वृष्णयः कुरव इति वेशाण्या । मष्यादिकुर्वन्तेभ्यः प्रास परिक यो ऽपत्थे ऽणप्रथयो भवती, मोऽपवाद । 
URE 
GOVE. 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
UT OF INDIA 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
PATRONYMIC STT 11 
[BK. IV.CH. 1.8. 115 
तिसरकार 
114. The affix sur comes, in the sense of a des cendant, after a Nominal-stem denoting the name of a Rishi, or the name of a person of the family of Andhaka, Vrishni, and Kuru. 
This debars the affix at The Rishis are like Vasishtha, Viśvamit. ra &c. Thus aifter, TTT: 1! So also reach:, TET: being persons belong ing to the family of Andhaka ; and area:, ITE: being persons belonging to the family of Vţishội, and thes, ereqa: being persons belonging to the family of Kuru. 
The word sra is the name of a Rishi, in forming its Patronymic, the present sûtra enjoins art; but IV. I. 122 enjoins cf; thus there being a con flict, we apply the maxim of interpretation contained in I. 4.2. So that the Patronymic of are will be formed not by stor but by F1 Thus Tir: Similarly th a person of Andhaka family, forms its patronymic sjaal: IV. 1. 152 by oz; and not by STOT, so also aganu 'son of Vaishvaksena' a per son of Vrishni, family; so also haza: 'son of Bhîmasena' a person of Kuru family. 
Note.-The words or sabdás are eternal ; how is it then that rules applying to them should be made dependant upon their occurring in particular families or not, when families themselves are non-eternal? In other word, how a rule affecting a permanent object is con ditioned by an impermanent adjunct? To this, some reply that Pânini has by mere coincidence (and not as cause and effect) classified certain definite number of words as belonging to certain families, and then the rule made applicable to them. Moreover a permanent object is some times designated by an impermanent object : as the permanent time is designated by the name of Saka. Others say that the families of Andhaka &c., are also permanent, and the words Nakula'.Sahadeva' &c., found therein are, of course, permanent. 
ATC GETETTÉHG Tatar: 11 884 11 qera llarg:, 5a:, UT, #4, 95, Tara: 11 वृत्ति । मातृशब्दारसण्यापूर्वात्संपूर्वाद्रपूर्वाचापत्ये ऽण् प्रत्ययो भवति, उकारवान्तादेशः । 
115. The affix au comes in the sense of a descen dant, after the word mâtri when it is preceded by a Numeral, or by the words or 7; and the letter is substituted for the final ste of matri. 
Thus from freg we have targe: * son of two mothers i. e. son of one and adopted by another." fore+Stor = 14+3+3=HTE+7++(I. 1. 51.) Similarly created, afts, and starat: 
This satra is made in order to teach the substitution of short for the OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
ONMENT OF IN 
OF INDIA 
ABOV. CH. I. S. 118 ] 
PATRONYMIC STOT 
भारत सरकार 
w of Ata ; for the word at would have taken the affix stor by the general rule IV. 1. 83. The sûtra contains the word gerer: in the feminine gender, show ing by implication that the rule applies where the word rę denotes female. Thus समिमीते =संमातृ ' he who measures together'. Its patronymic will be सांमात्रः 'son of a fellow-measurer'; because here the word मातृ does not mean 'mother', but a 'measure'. Nor the word erfarg'barley measurer' will be affected by this rule. Why do we say “when preceded by a Numeral &c." Observe सौमात्र: 'son of Sumatri'. The word वैमात्रेयः is formed by IV. I. 123 as belonging to Subhrâdi class. 
कन्यायाः कनीन च ॥ ११६॥ वृत्तिः ॥ कन्याशब्दारपत्येऽण् प्रत्ययो भवति डकोपवादः । तत्सन्नियोगेन कनीनशब्दआदेशो भवति ॥ 
116. The affix su comes in the sense of a descen dant, after the word कन्या, and when this affix is added, कनीन is the substitute of Kanya.'. 
Thus कन्याया अपत्यं =कानीन: 'the son of a virgin' viz Karma or Vyasa'. This debars the gh of IV. I. 121. The word of means a virgin, the son of a virgin is produced by immaculate conception. मुनिदेवतामाहात्म्यात् या पुंयोगेऽपि न कन्यात्वं जहाति, यथा कुन्ती, यथा सत्यवती ॥ 
विकर्ण, शुङ्ग, च्छगलाद्वत्सभरद्वाजात्रिषु ॥ ११७॥ पदानि ॥ विकर्ण, शुक्र, छगलात, वत्स, भरद्वाज, अत्रिषु॥ वृत्तिः ॥ विकर्णशुङ्गच्छगलशब्वेन्यो यथासंख्यं वत्सभरद्वाजाविष्वपत्यविशेषेष्वणप्रत्ययो भवति॥ 
117. The affix आण comes after the words विकर्ण, शुङ्ग, and छगल, when the sense is a descendant of the family of Vatsa, Bharadvaja and Atri respectively. 
Thus वैकर्णः = वास: otherwise वैकणिः॥ शौङ्गः = भारद्वाजः, otherwise शौकि। छागलः = आत्रेयः, otherwise छागलिः 
In some texts the word for is used and not for 1 The former being a feminine word, its Patronymic will be sirku:, by IV. 1. 120 when it does not 
mean a descendant of भरद्वाजः॥ 
पीलाया वा॥१९८॥ वृन्तिः॥ पीलाया अपत्ये वाण प्रत्ययो भवति । 
118. The affix अण् comes optionally after the word die in denoting a descendant. 
The word from being the name of a female would have taken at by 
TURE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
or OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
PATRONYMIC ET 
[BK. IV. CH. I. ST21 
नालय , भारत 
तसरकार 
IV. 1.113; but this stor would have been prohibited by IV. 1. 121 as it is a dissyllabic feminine word. Hence the necessity of the present sûtra. Thus पैलः or पैलेयः 'son of Pila.' 
ढक च मण्डूकात् ॥ ११९ ॥ वृत्तिः ।। मण्डूकशब्दावपत्ये ठक् प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
119. The affix ढक comes optionally in the sense ofadescendant after the word मण्डक as well as the affix अण् ॥ 
Thus we get three forms, मण्डुक+उक् = मांडूकेयः; मंडूक + अण् = माण्डूकः; म. डूक+इ = माण्डुकिः ॥ 
स्त्रीभ्यो ढक ॥१२०॥ वृत्तिः ॥ स्त्रीग्रहणेनं टाबारिप्रत्ययान्ताः शब्दा गृह्यन्ते । स्त्रीभ्योऽपत्ये उक प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ बडवाया वृषे वाच्ये ॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ अण कुञ्चाकोकिलात्स्मृतः ।। 
120. Words ending in the feminine affixes take the affix in forming their Patronymic. 
The word at in the aphorism means 'words ending in the feminine affixes टाप् &c.' That is, words ending in long आ and t of the feminine. Thus विनता+डक्वै नतेयः (IV. I. 2). So also सौपर्णेयः “Son of Vinata or Suparnt". But ऐडविड: and दारदः formed by अण meaning sons of इडविड and परद, for though these words are feminine, they do not end in feminine affixes. 
Vårt :-The affix on comes after a when meaning it Thus बाडवेयः वृषः "bull." Here dhak' has not the patronymic force. The patrony 
mic will be वाडव: "the son of amare.' 
Vårt :-The feminine words use and femr take the affix sur in forming the patronymic. Thus क्रौञ्चः “the son of a curlew." कौकिलाः “the son of a cuckoo.' 
द्वचः॥१२१॥ पदानि ॥ द्वि-अचः (स्त्रीभ्यां ढक)॥ शृतिः ॥ यचः स्त्रीप्रत्ययान्तापत्ये डक् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
121. The affix 'ढक' comes in the sense of a descendant, after a word ending in a feminine affix and con sisting of two vowels. 
Thus सत्ताया अपत्य - दात्तेयः 'son of Datta', गौपेयः “son of Gopt". This debars the spot of IV. 1. 113. 
Why do we say having two vowels ' Observe areason of nat', which is a trisyllabic word, and not dissyllabic. 
इतश्चानिञः ॥ १२१॥ पदानि ॥ इतः, च, अन् इनः ॥ वृत्तिः॥ चकारी ब्यच इत्यस्यानुकर्षणार्थ । इकारान्तायातिपदिकारनिप्रसादपत्ये हा प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
URE .GOVA 
OVERNMENT O 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
OF INDIA 
N BE IV. CH. I. 3125] 
GOTRA ढक् ।। 
122. The affix 'ढक' comes, in the sense of a descendant, after a dissyllabic Nominal-stem ending in short इ, but not, however, after a word ending in the patronymic affix इञ्॥ 
The anuvřitti of 'strî' does not extend to this aphorism. The force of the word 2 in the sûtra is to draw the anuvștti of the word at of the last sutra. Thus आत्रयः the son of Atri'. नैधेयः the son of निधिः'। 
Why do we say " after a word ending in short "? Observe arter: "son of दक्ष" | Here दक्ष though a dissyllabic word, yet ends in अ॥ 
Why do we say 'not ending in the patronymic affix 51'? Observe TETU: 'son of atret' Here though there is a dissyllabic word ending in short इ, it does not take the affix ढक् for t here is the affix इन (IV. I. 95.); so also ESTATTETA: 11 Why do we say 'having two vowels? Observe Arga: "son of Fre" 
शुभ्रादिश्यश्चः ॥ १२३ ॥ पदानि ॥ शुभ्र-आदिभ्यः, च (ढक्) वृत्तिः ।। शुभ्र इत्येवमादिभ्यः प्रातिपादक यो ढक प्रत्ययो भवति। 
123. The affix 'ढ' comes in the sense of a des cendant after the stems शुभ्र &c.. 
This debars par and other affixes. The word in the sûtra shows that some words not occuring in the list of Tute may take the go, as it is an 
आकृतिगणः ॥ For though the words गंगा, पांडव are not in the list, we find still forms like गांगेयः, पाण्डवेयः &c. 
Thus शुभ्रस्यापत्यं = शोभ्रेयः॥ 
1 शुभ्र, 2 विष्ट पुर (विष्टपुर) 3 ब्रह्मकृत, 4शतद्वार, शलाथल, (शलाचल) 6 शलाकाभ्र, 7 लेखानु, (लेखाभ्र), 8 विकंसा, (विकास), रोहिणी, 10 रुक्मिणी, 11 धर्मिणी, 12 दिश् , 13 शालूक, 14 अजवस्ति, 
शकाधे, 16 विमात, 17 विधवा, 18 शुक, 19 विश, 20 देबतर 21 शकुनि, 22 शुक्र, 23 उम्र, 24 ज्ञातल (शतल) 25 बन्धकी, 26 सकण्ड, 27 विनि, 28 अतिथि, 29 गोवन्त, 30 कुशाम्बा, 31 मकष्टु, 32 शाताहर, 
ॐ पवष्टुरिक, 34 सुनामन्, 35 लक्ष्मणश्यामयोर्वासिष्ठे। 36 गोधा, 37 कृकलास, 38 अणीब, 39 प्रवाहण, 10 भरत (भारत) 41 भरम; 42 मृकण्डु, 43 कपूर, 44 इतर, 45 अन्यतर, 46 आलीड, 47 सुरन्त, 
सुदक्ष, 49 सुवक्षस्, 50 सुदामन्,51 कद्र,52 तुद, 53 अकशाय, 54 कुमारिका, 55 कुठगरिका, 186 किशोरिका,57 अम्बिका, 58 जिह्याशिन्,59 परिधि, 60 वायुदत्त; 61 शकल, 62 शलाका, 6 खडूर, 64 कुबेरिका, 65 अशोका, 66 गन्धपिङ्गला, 67 खडोन्मना, 68 अनुवष्टिन्, (अनुद्राष्टि) 69 जरातिन्, 70 बलीवर्दिन, 71 विद्य, 72 वीज,73 जीव, 74 श्वन, 75 अइमन, 76.अश्व, 77 अजिर 78 शतावर, 79 शलाका, 80 कृकसा, 81 भरत,82 मयष्ट, 83 ककल, 84 स्थूल, 85 मकथु, 86 यमष्टु, 87 कष्टु, 88 मृकण्ड, 89 गुद, 90 रुह, 91 कुशरिका, 92 शवल, 93 अजिन ॥ 
विकर्णकुषीतकात्काश्यपे॥१२४॥ पदानि ॥ विकर्ण, कुषीतकात काश्यपे। वृत्तिः ॥ विकर्णशब्शनकुषीनकशबहाच काश्यपे ऽपत्यविदोषेखक प्रत्ययो भवति। 
10 
GURE 
GOVE 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
NMENT OF IN 
OF INDIA 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
PATRONYMIC ढक्॥ 
[BK, IV. CH.I... 127 
मालय .भार 
124. The affix ढ comes after the words 'Vi karna' and 'Kushîta', when they mean the descendants of 
Kasyapa. 
Thus वैकर्णेयः and कौषीतकेयः = काश्यपः; otherwise we have वैकणिः and कोषा सकिः formed by IV. I. 95. 
भ्रुवो वुक् च ॥१२५॥ पदानि ॥ भ्रवः, वुक,च (ढक्) वृतिः ॥ 5शब्दादपत्येढक् प्रत्ययो भवति, तत्सन्नियोगेन च बुगागमः । 
125. The affix 'ढ' comes in the sense of a des cendant, after the word and the augment qe is added when this affix is to be applied. 
Thus भू+ डक् = भू+बुक् + ढक (I. I.46)= भ्रव + उ = प्रौवेयः (VII. I. 2) कल्याण्यादीनामिनङ् ॥ १२६॥ पदानि ॥ कल्याणी-आदीनाम्, इन॥ वृत्तिः ॥ कल्याणी इत्येवमादीनां शब्दानामपत्ये ढक् प्रत्ययो भवति, तत्सनियोंगेन च इनडादेशः ।। 
126. The affix 'ढ comes in the sense of a descendant, after the words कल्याणी &c. and the substitute इनङ् takes the place of the final of these words before this affix. 
In the case of those words in this list which end in a feminine affix, the present sútra teaches merely the substituion of gas, for they would have taken the affix co by IV. 1. 120. But in the case of other words, the Satra teaches both the substitution of इन and the addition of ढक् । 
Thus कल्याणी + ढक कल्याणिन् + डक्=कल्याणिनेयः 'son of Kalyani.' सुभगा+ डक = सुभागिन् + ढक -सौभागिनयः ॥ Similarly दागिनेयः ॥ In these last two words, there is Vriddhi of both the initial vowel and the second vowel sy of 7. This is done by the special rule VII. 3. 19. 
1 कल्याणी, 2 समगा, 3 दुर्भगा, 4 बन्धकी, 5 अनदृष्टि, 6 अनसृति (अनसृष्टि)7 जरती, 8 बलीवीं, 9 ज्येष्ठा, 10 कनिष्ठा, 11 मध्यमा, 12 परस्त्री। 
कुलटाया वा ॥१२७॥ पदानि ॥ कुलटायाः, वा (ढक) वृत्तिः ॥ कुलटाया अपत्येढक प्रत्ययो भवति, तत्सन्नियोगेन च वा इनडादेशो भवति । भादेशार्थ वचन प्रत्ययः पर्वणेव सिद्धः। 
127. The affix 'ढ' comes in the sense ofa descendant, after the word rest, and is optionally the substitute of the final before this affix. 
The word met means literally one who wanders (1) from one family (कुल) to another, i, e. an unchaste woman. This sutra is made to teach substitution only, for at would have taken on by the general rule IV. I. 120, Thus कुलटा + उक् = कुलटिन्+क्कोलटिनेयः or कोलटेयः 'son of an unchaste woman.' This word grieger being a word denoting contempt, will take also the affix tek by IV. 1. 131. Thus mer: 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
SL 
संरक्रात मंत्रा 
Ch. I. § 131.) 
PATRONYMIC आरक् ।। 
.17 
TE OFTTT UTEE 11 822 11 TEFT II 377@TIT:, Trafo | वृत्तिः ॥ चटकाया अपत्ये ऐरक् प्रत्ययो भवति। वार्निकम् ।। चटकाचेति वक्तव्यम् । वार्तिकम् ॥ स्त्रि यामपत्ये लुग्वक्तव्यः ।। 
128. The word 796 takes the affix ore in form ing the patronymic. 
Thus treat: 'son of Chataka'. 
Vårt:--So also after the masculine word 7 | Thus cent: 'son of Chataka' 
Vårt :-In forming a descendant denoting a female, there is luk-eli sion of the affix. Thus the female descendant of Cent will be root, the arg being added as belonging to Ajâdi class IV. 1. 4. 
TETETT 7 PR8 II OGIA Il TTTT:, al वृचिः॥ गोधायाँ अपत्ये दक् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
129. The affix 'o' comes in the sense of a des cendant after the word TT II 
Thus FTTT+=ITTER: 1 Of the affix 'dhrak', the letter 7 is replaced by ra (VII. 1. 2), i causes Vriddhi (VII. 2. 118) and makes the udatta accent fall on the final (IV. 1. 165). Thus the real affix is yet, but the x is elided by VI. 1. 66 and so the affix that is actually added is gell 
This word at occurs in the Subhràdi class IV. 1. 123, also, thus it takes the affix' dhak' as well. Thus crea: 11 
IT TOGETH 11 Boll act@ I STa, erara (TTTTTT:) ! वृतिः ॥ गोधाया अपत्ये उदीचामाचार्याणां मतेन आरक् प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
130. The affix STCE!, comes in the sense of a descendant after the word TIET,' according to the opinion of Northern Grammarians. 
Thus orart: ll It might be objected that the stron contains the letter at unnecessarily, for a would have served the purpose as well, because it ends in long at already. The objection is valid in the case of telt, but the very fact that Panini uses this affix ren, shows by implication, that there are other words also which take this affix, and in whose case the affix ek would not suffice. Thus the words to and qus also take this affix, as 
ETT, qrert: The mention of the name of Northern Grammarians is for the sake of showing respect only. 
tritar i 8388 a Il GT , ET (G ) 11 
ARE 
GOVED 
NERNMENTO 
Y OF CULTUR 
. MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
GOTRA ढक॥ 
[ BK. IV. CH. I.8135 
•संस्कृति मंत्रा 
सरकार 
वृत्तिः ॥ क्षुद्रा अङ्गहीना धर्महीनाश्च । अर्यधर्मेण तदभिधायन्यः स्त्रीलिङ्गाः प्रकृतयो निर्दिश्यन्ते । क्षुद्राम्यो बापत्ये क् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
131. The affix 'क' . comes optionally, in the sense of a descendant, after the feminine words denoting mean objects. 
The anuvritti of me is to be read in this sútra, and not of ra, though the latter immediately precedes it. The word Tat means those who are defective or wanting in any bodily limb or organ, or who are low in social status and religious principles. This sûtra debars of which would come in the other alternative. Thus काणेरः 'the son of an one eyed woman', or काणेयः, सासरः or दासेयः 'son of a female-slave'. 
पितृवसुश्छण् ॥ १३२॥ पदानि ॥ पितृप्वसुः, छण ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ पितृष्वसूशब्दपत्ये छप्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
132. The affix 'छण' comes in the sense of a des cendant, after the word 'पितृ-वस'. 
This debars अण् ॥ Thus पितृष्वसृ+ छण् = पैतष्वतीयः the son of the father's sister'. The छ of the affix is replaced by ईय ।। 
ढकिलोपः॥ १३६ ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ पितृष्वसुरपत्यप्रत्यये ढकि परतो लोप भवति ॥ 
-133. The final vowel of 'पितृ-ध्वस्' is elided when the affix 'ढक', in the sense of a descendant, is added. 
Thus पितृष्वस+डक-पैतष्वसेवः॥ This sutra indicates by jnapaka that the word पितृष्वस takes the affix 'dhak also. 
मातृष्वसुश्च ॥ १३४॥ पदानि ॥मातूष्वशुः च (छण, ढकि लोपः)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ पितृष्वसुरित्येतरपेक्षते, पितृष्वसुर्यवक्तं तन्मातृष्वसुरपि भवति । प्रत्ययो कि लोपश्च ।। 
134. So also, after the word "Actre' the affix 'छण' is added, and the final is elided when 'ढक्' follows, in forming patronymics. 
The Satras IV. I. I32, 133 above apply to मातृष्वसू also. As मातृष्वतीयः or मातृष्वसेय: the son of a mother's sister'. 
चतुष्पान्द्रो ढ॥१३५॥ पदानि ॥ चतुष-पादभ्यः, ढम्॥ बत्तिः ॥ चतुष्पादभिधायिनीभ्यः प्रकृतिभ्योऽपत्ये ढमत्ययो भवति ॥ 
135. The affix 'ढ' comes in the sense of a des cendant, after the bases denoting quadrupeds. 
This debars अण् &c. Thus कमण्डलु + ढम् - कामण्डलेयः (IV. 4. 147, the 3 being elided before t) Soalso शौतिजोहयेः and जाम्बयः from शिविबाहु and जन्तु॥ 
IRE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
ex OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
BR. IV. CH. I. S140] 
GOTRA ढकम् ॥ 
679 
गृष्टयादिश्यश्च ॥ १३६॥ पदानि ॥ गृष्टि-आदिश्यः, च (ढ)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ गृष्टयादिभ्यः शब्देऽभ्योपत्ये ढप्रत्ययो भवति । 
-136. The affix 'ढ' comes, in the sense of a descendant, after the words 'die' &c. 
This debars अण् and ढक् &c. Thus गायः; हाय ॥ The word गृष्टि when it means 'a cow' will of course get the asfix cs by the last Satra. The present sûtra applies when it does not mean a four-footed animal, but means 'a woman who has one child only'. 
1 गृष्टि, 2 हृष्टि, 3 बलि, 4 हलि, 5 विधि, 6 कुद्रि, 7 अजवस्ति, 8 मित्रयु। राजश्वशुराद्यत् ॥ १३७॥ पदानि ॥ राज-श्वशुरात्, यत् ॥ वृत्तिः राजनश्वशुरशब्दाभ्यामपत्ये यत्प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
2137. The affix यत् comes in the sense of the des cendant, after the words 'राजन' and 'श्वशुर'. 
This debars अण् and अञ् respectively. Thus राजन्यः ( IV. 4. 168) 'a person of Kshatriya class'. This is the special meaning of the word; it does not mean the son of a Râjâ.' The word TTT: will mean the son of a King.' So also श्वशुरर्यः 'son of the father-in-in-law.' 
क्षत्राद्घः ॥ १३८॥ वृत्तिः ॥ क्षत्रशब्दावपत्ये घ; प्रत्ययो भवति॥ 
138. The affix 'gha' comes, in the sense of a des cendant, after the word 'Kshattra.' 
Thus क्षत्रियः 'a Kshatriya.' This is also a class name. The son of क्षत्र will be enê: !! The affix e here should not be confounded with the technical घ which means the affixes तरण and तमप् (I. I. 22). 
कुलात्खः ॥ १३९॥ वृत्तिः ।। कुलशब्दान्तात् प्रातिपदिकात्केवलाचापत्ये खः प्रत्ययो भवति । 
139. The affix kha' comes, in the sense of a descendant, after the Nominal-stem 'kula' and a compound word that ends in 'kula.' 
In the next sútra, it will be taught that the word as when not preced ed by any other word, takes the affixes 'yat' and 'dhakañ.' That indicates by implication that the present sútra applies to the simple word om and to the words ending in कुल also. Thus कुलीनः, आब्यकुलीनः, श्रोत्रियकुलीनः॥ 
अपूर्वपदादन्यतरस्यां यड्ढको ॥ १४॥ पदानि । अपूर्वपदान्, अन्यतरस्यां. यत, ढकजी 
PURE - GO 
GOVERNMENT 
OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
ENT OF INDIA 
PATRONYMIC ब्यत् ।। 
[BK. AV.CH. I.S 144 
•संस्कृतिमा 
मानय .भा 
भारत सरकार 
a.no 
वतिः ।। अविद्यमानं पूर्वपदं यस्य तदपूर्वपदं, समाससंबन्धिनः पूर्वपदस्थाभावेन कुलशब्ो विशेष्यते । अपू र्वपदाकुलशब्दावन्यतरस्यां यतू डकञ् इत्येतौ प्रत्ययो भवतः । ताभ्यां मुक्ते खोपि भवति ॥ 
140. The affixes 'यत्' and 'ढकज' come optionally after the word 'kula,' when it is not preceded by any other word which gets the designation of pada (I. 4. 14). 
The word state means when the word 'kula' is not the last member of a compound. Thus ocul, chieseron: 11 By the use of the word 'optionally,' we get the affix ख also. Thus कुलीनः ॥ The word कुल्यः has udatta on the first syllable (VI. I. 213). 
The word ge has been defined in l. 4. 14. The word te is not apada. Therefore बहुकुल will take these affixes. Thus बहुकुल्यः , बाहकुलेयकः and बहुकुलीनः॥ 
महाकुलाद खजौ ॥ १४१ ॥ पदानि ॥ महा-कुलात, अञ, खऔ, ॥ वृतिः ॥ अन्यतरस्यामित्युनवर्तते । पक्षे खः। 
141. The affixes 'अञ्' and 'खञ्' come option ally after the word 'mahâkula.' 
Thus माहाकुलः, माहाकुलीनः and महाकुलीनः ॥ The last is formed by the affix ख of IV. I. 139. 
विष्कुलाइढक ॥१४२॥ पदानि ॥ दुष्कुलान्, ढक् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ तुष्कुलशब्दावपत्य तक प्रत्ययो भवति। 
142. The affix 'ढक' comes optionally, in the sense of a descendant, after the word 'dushkala.' 
Thus àraiden: By the force of the word optionally' we get & also. Thus दुष्कुलीनः ।। 
स्वसुश्छः ॥ १४३॥ पदानि ॥ स्वसुः, छः॥ वृतिः ।। स्वसूशब्दादपत्य छ : प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
143. The affix 'chha' comes in the sense of the descendant, after the word स्वसृ॥ 
This debars shut it Thus weite: 'the sister's son.' भ्रातुऱ्याच ॥ १४४॥ पदानि ॥ भ्रातुः, व्यत्, च ॥ पतिः॥ भ्रातृ शब्शदपत्ये व्यत् प्रत्ययो भवति । चकाराच्छश्च ।। 
144. The affix vyat' also comes, in the sense of a descendant, after the word 'भ्रातृ॥ 
By the force of the words in the satra, we get the affix as well. 
URE - GOV 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
(CT 
BISTV. CH. I. $ 147.] 
PATRONYMIC UT II 
मालयमा 
भारत सरल 
This debars अण् ।। Thus भ्रातव्यः or भ्रात्रीयः 'the brother's son'. The तू of व्यतू regulates the accent, making it svarita. 
व्यन्सपत्ने ॥१४५॥ पदानि ॥ व्यन्, सपते (भ्रातुः)॥ हात्तः ॥ भ्रातशब्दात् व्यन्प्रत्ययो भवति समुदायेन चेदमित्रः सपन उच्यते ।। 
145. The affix 'vyan ' comes after the word 'भ्रातृ' when the sense is that of an enemy'. 
The word a means 'enemy! The sense of descendant is not connoted by this affix. The difference between 7 and 6217 is in accent (VI. I. I85 and VI. I. I97). Thus पाप्मना भ्रातव्येण "by the sinful enemy". भ्रातृष्य: कण्टकः “ the enemy is a thorn". 
रेवत्यादिश्यष्टक् ॥ १४६॥ पदानि ॥ रेवती-आदिश्यः, ठक् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ रेवतीत्येवमादिभ्योऽपत्ये ठक् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
146. The affix 'get' comes, in the sense of a des cendant, after the words रेवती &c. 
This of course debars ढक &c. Thus रेवती+ ठक् =रैवतिक: the son of Revati'. So also आश्वपालिकः (VII. 3.50) 
_1 रेवती, 2 अश्वपाली, 3 मणिपाली, 4 द्वारपाली, 5 वृकवञ्चिन्, 6 वृकबन्धु,7वृकमाइ, 8 कर्णग्राह, 9 दण्डग्राह, 10 कुक्कूटाक्ष, 11 (ककुदाक्ष) 12 चामरगाह, 
गोत्रस्त्रियाः कुत्सने ण च ॥ १४७॥ पदानि ॥ गोवस्त्रियाः कुत्सने, ण, च (ठक)। वृत्तिः ॥ अपत्यं पौत्रप्रभृति गोत्रं गृह्यते । गोत्रं या स्त्री तदभिधायिनः शब्दादपत्ये णः प्रत्ययो भवति चकाराक्च, कुत्सने गम्यमाने । पितुरसविज्ञाने मात्रा व्यपदेशोपत्यस्य कुत्सा॥ 
147. And when contempt is to be expressed, the affix o comes, in the sense of a descendant, after a feminine word denoting a Gotra-descendant. 
By the force of the word च in the shtra we get the affix छक् also. When one's father is not known, and he is called by a name derived from his mother, it casts a slur upon his legitimacy; hence such an epithet is a shee or 'a defamatory or contemptuons epithet. Thus tuif is a female gotra-descen dant. Her son will be called गार्गः, as गार्गः जाल्मः ॥ So also गार्गिकः॥ Similarly the son of ग्लुचुकायनी will be ग्लौचुकायनः and ग्लौचुकायनिकः॥ 
This affix being added to a Gotra word has the force of a Yuvan affix, 
Why do we say 'a Gotra descendant'. Observe कारिकयो जाल्म: (formed by डक IV. I. I20). Why do we say 'female descendant? Observe औपगवि र्जाल्मः ।Why do we say when contempt is meant ? Observe गार्गेयो माणवकः which is to be explained as गार्या अपत्यं पुमान् युवा भवति ।। मातामहारुपलक्षणार्थोय प्रयोग इति नास्ति कुत्सा॥ 
TURE 
GOVE 
GOVERNMENT 
OF CULTUR 
SAINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
संस्कृति मंत्र 
सत्यमेव जयते 
GGTRA फिम् ।। 
[ BK. IV. CH. I. S180 
लिये भारत 
वृद्धाक्सौवीरेषु बहुलम् ॥ १४८॥ पदानि ॥ वृद्धातू, ठक्, सौवीरेषु, बहुलम् ॥ वृतिः ॥ वृद्धासौवीरगोत्रादपत्ये बहुलं ठक् प्रत्ययो भवति कुत्सने गम्यमाने ॥ 
Karik भागपूर्वपदो वित्तिर्वितीयस्तार्णबिन्दवः ।। 
तृतीयस्त्वाकशापेयो गोत्राद्वग्बहुलं ततः॥ 
___148. When contempt is to be expressed, the affix 'उक' is diversely added in the sense of a descendant after a Vriddha word denoting Sauvîra Gotras. 
Thus भागवित्तिकः "the son of Bhagavitti'. So also तार्णबिन्दविका formed from तृणबिन्तु + अण (IV. I. 83) तार्णबिन्दवः, and then adding ठक् ॥ In the alterna tive we have the affix फक् (IV. I. I01) as भागवित्तायनः, so also ताणबिन्दविः॥ The word अकशाप belongs to Subhradi class IV. I. I23 : and forms भाकशापेयः, his son will be आकशापेयिकः or आकशापयिः॥ Of course, when contempt is not ex pressed, we have भागवित्तायन: only. 
The operation of this sûtra is, in fact, confined to the three words भागविति, तार्णबिन्दव, and आकशापेय as given in the karika. 
Q. What is the necessity of using the word Vrddha' in the sutra, for the anuvritti of the word 'gotra' is understood in the sûtra, and a Sauvîra class Nominal-stem formed with a Gotra affix will necessarily have a VỊddhi letter in its first syllable? The word Vrddha is employed in the sûtra to stop the anuvịtti of farzt:; for had 'Vrddha' not been used, then with the anuvrtti of irs from the last sûtra, there would have come the anuvịtti of feret: also, but by using 'Vriddha' the anuvrtti of 'Gotra' only is taken, and not that of 'striyah'. 
Why do we say " of the Sauviras"? Observe strasfer: 11 Why do we say in denoting contempt'? Observe भागवितायनो माणवकः | Why do we say 'diversely'? The word indicates the anomalous nature of these four sutras IV. 1. 147 to 150. Thus the first of these viz IV. 1. 147 only denotes contempt, the last of these viz IV. I, 150, denotes "Sauvîra' only and not contempt; whilst the middle two namely IV. I. 148 and 189 denote both * contempt' and 'Sauvira'. 
फेरछ च ॥ १४९॥ पदानि । फेः, छ-च (कुत्सने-सौवीरेषु)॥ वृत्तिः॥ फिजन्तातूमातिपदिकातूसौवीरगोचारपत्ये छः प्रत्ययो भवति चकाराट्ठक कुत्सने गम्यमाने ।। 
Karika यमुन्दश्च सुयामा च वार्ष्यायणिः फिमः स्मृताः। 
सौवीरेषु च कुत्सायां ही योगी शब्दवित् स्मरेत् ।। 
189. When contempt is to be expressed, the affix छ (as well as the affix ठक) comes in the sense of a des TURE 
GOVA 
GOVERNMENT 
OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
( BÊN. CH. I. . Í SI 1 
" 
•भारत सम 
भारत सरकार 
cendant, after a Nominal-stem ending in the affix for and denoting a Sauvîra Gotra. 
Thus the son of a will be crazarara: formed by the affix f59 (IV. 1. 154) as this word belongs to Tikâdi class. The son of Yâmundâyani will be either thereaftet: or gravetarach: il 
But when contempt is not to be expressed, the son of Tuerat: will be reference: 11 Thus STHETIFT+ST=There +o(II. 4. 58)=ETARETAG: II 
So also when persons of Suvîra country are not meant, g is not added. Thus ähteet: 11 
The ñ: of the sůtra refers to 16 and not to 12, for a stem formed by foran will not have a Vriddhi letter in the first syllable and will not be called Vriddham'; and the anuvsitti of this word is understood in the stra. 
According to the Kârikâ, three f or stems, all belonging to Tikadi class, are only governed by this sutra viz यमुन्द, सुयामा and वार्ष्यायाणिः ॥ The son of at is Vârshyâyaņi. 
फाण्टाहृतिमिमताभ्यां णफिी ॥ १५० ॥ पदानि ॥ फाण्ढाहति-मिमताभ्यां-ण Mooit ( Freriy) 11 वृत्तिः ॥ फाण्टाहतिमिमतशब्दाभ्यां सौवीरविषयाभ्यामपत्ये णफिनौ प्रत्ययौ भवतः ।। 
150. The affixes Of and for come, in the sense of a descendant of a person belonging to Suvîra country, after the words Phântahriti and Mimata. 
This debars 4 By the rule of composition in II. 2. 34, the word fra consisting of less syllables than ottaa, ought to have been placed first. Its not being placed first in this sútra indicates, that Satra I. 3. 10 does not apply here. So that both the affixes or and in are applied to each of these words, and not one to each respectively, Thus_moetea: or FRETENT यनिः; मैमतः or मैमतायनिः ।। 
When not denoting Sauvîra Gotras, we have metal and Harem: (by T See IV. 1. 101 and IV. 1.99). The word 947 belongs to Nadadi class. (IV. 1. 99). 
Fate : 11 353 11 TETET STEST:, or: 11 f: ll 36 aast: arenārsta CI TEPTI 
151. The affix up comes, in the sense of a descend ant after the words 'Kuru' &c. 
Thus +09 = 2: So also : u The word 55 takes the affix wa by IV. 1. 172, so that the form that is evolved both under the present 
URE · Goya 
OVERNMENT 
KRY OF CULTU 
MINISTRY 
ENT OF INDIA 
[ BK, IV. CH. . . 
. 
• 
7 
.178 
satra and sû tra 172; but the difference in these two words is this. The word entre formed by the og of IV. 1. 172, loses its affix in the plural, because ox, of IV. 1. 172 is a Tadrâja affix (see II 4. 62): but the word error formed by the present sâtra retains its affix in the plural. As one ! The word to occurs in the Tikâdi class (IV. 1. 154), and it takes as such the affix it. As कौरव्यायणिः।। 
The word ETT occurs in this class and it means the caste known as Rathakara. Rathakâra is a caste a little lower than the twice-born. See Yajñyavalkya Smriti, V.95. But when the word Toit means a person who makes chariots, that is an artisan, it will take the affix oz not by this Satra, 
but by the succeeding sútra. 
The word nieraft occurs in this class. Its derivative will be here: 15 There will not be punvadbhava as required by VI 3. 34. &c. For had there been punvadbhava, then by the diga, all Bha bases will become punvad before a taddhita affix except all Therefore itaft += lata + At this stage rule VI. 1. 144 will appear and cause the elision of fe and we shall have केश्--ण्य-कैश्य ॥ But this is not the form desired, hence the word कोशनी is read with the feminine affix in the list. 
The word takes this affix in the Vedic literature. Therefore, the form are in the modern Sanskrit is incorrect. 
The word aThey occurs in this class. With the exception of accent, it s treated in every other respect like a word of Kaņvâdi class, a subdivision of Gargadi (IV. 4. 105). Thus disciples of aTaTezT: will be formed by the affix STU (IV. 2. 111). As a Tezi + Stotramy: (VI. 1. 105). The plural will be IXTATUT: (11. 4. 64). The feminine gender will be arrest (IV. 1. 16) or arrestrenat (IV. 1. 17). The Yuvan will be TATUA: (IV. 1. 101). So also it will take 
Tu when the sense of collection &c is expressed (IV. 3 127): as anATUITE LI But as to accent, it will not be like Kaņvâdi words, for while those words being formed by the affix will have udâtta on the first syllable (VI. 1. 197) the accent of वामरथ्य will be governed by ण्य ।। 
1 , 2 apr (TST), 3 T, 4 BTTT (8TTACH ), 5 tahrt, 6 are ee, 7 Uts: efTa, 8 , 9 faria (fa), 10 #119 , 11 Ton (or art) 12 STATUT, 13 fogat, 14 mrr, ( a ), 15 yrs", 16 arale, 17 ETĀrcuftia, 18 TUE , 19 aft, 20 , 21 S T ( FSTT ), 22 YT, 23 gt, 24 yaht (Tech), 25 T. 26 , 27 , 28 cm, 29 Ogelt, 30 gura, 31 serata, 32 
33 a , 34 erjanta, 35 45 , 36 TERTT*, 37 TC, 38 Taha, 39 TE, 40 , 41 arra, 42 streta", 43 en 44 45 47, 46 fost (gafest ), 47 amareer 
P 
4 is a Vartika ). 18 fefTet, 49, rh, 50 Fhroach bi graferi, 52 arst, 53 TIET. 
URE 
GOVE 
GOVERNMENT 
OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
BR IV. CH. I. S. 154] 
फि 
॥ 
सालयमा 
सेनान्तलक्षणकारिण्यश्च ॥ १५२॥ पदानि ॥ सेनान्त, लक्षण, कारिभ्यः, च (ण्यः)॥ 
वात्तः ॥ सेनान्तात् प्रातिपदिकाल्लक्षणशब्दात् कारिवचनेभ्यश्चापत्ये ज्या प्रत्ययो भवति । कारिशब्दः कारू णां तन्तुवायादीनां वाचकः ॥ 
152. The affix 'ण्य' comes in the sense of a des cendant, after a Nominal stem ending in sena,' after the word ‘lakshana,' and after words denoting artisans. 
The word afilit means 'handicrafts, such as weavers, barbers, potters &c. Thus करिषण्या हारिषेण्यः, लाक्षण्यः, तान्तवाय्यः, कौम्भकार्य, नापित्यः ।। 
उदीचामि ॥ १५३॥ वृत्तिः । सेनान्तलक्षणकारियो ऽपत्ये इम्प्रत्ययो भवति उदीचा मतेन ॥ 
153. According to the opinion of Northern Gram marians, the affix 'इज' comes in the sense of a descendant, after the words ending in senâ,' the word lakshana,' and words expressing artisans. 
Thus कारिषोणः, हारिषणिः, लाक्षणिः, तान्तुवायिः, कौम्भकारिः ॥ As to the word तक्ष्ण 'carpenter.' See IV. I. 112. It will have araut: and ATRON:, but will not take इन॥ The word नापित being aVriddha, non-gotra word, will take फि under IV. 1. 157 according to the Northern Grammarians, as aligara: Il 
तिकादिभ्यः फिझ॥१५४॥ वृतिः ॥तिक इत्येवमादिभ्यः शरेयोऽपत्ये फिञ् प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
154. The affix 'फि ' comes, in the sense of a descendant, after the words तिक&c. 
NA Thus कायनिः, कैतवायनिः ॥ The word वृष occurs in this class. In taking this affix, it adds an intermediate य as वार्ष्यायाणः ॥ The word कौरव्य occurs in this class, and denotes a Kshatriya: because it is immediately preceded by the word औरैश-उरसा शेते उरशः क्षत्रियः, his son will be aurasa with, अw which ends in an affix denoting a Kshatriya (IV. 1. 168). But the word oftea formed by the affix oy of IV. 1. 150 will take the affix 7 and not for of this Satra. See II. 4.58 and 68. 
तिक, कितव, संज्ञा, 4 बाला (बाल) शिखा, 6 उरस् (उरदा),7 शाब्ध (शाय) 8 सैन्धव, यमुन, 10 रूपय, 11 ग्राम्य, 12 नील, 13 अमित्र, 14 गौकश्य15 कुरु (कर) 16 देवरथ, 17 तैतल (तैतिल) 18 औरस (औरश), 19 कौरव्य, 20 भौरिकि, 21 भौलिकि, 22 चौपयत, 23 चैव्यत, 24 शीकयत (शैकयत) 25 तयत, 26 वाजवत (वाजवत K.) 27 चन्द्रमस, 28 शुभ, 29 गार, 30 वरेण्य, 31 सुपामन्, 32 भारद्ध (आरटय), 133 वाका, 34 खल्यका (खल्या; खल्य) 35 वृष, 36 लोमक, उपज (उदय) 382 
ARE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
[BK. IV. CH. 157 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
सत्यमेव जयते 
तिसरकार 
ज्ञ, 39 सुयामन्, 40 ऋश्य (कष्य), 41 भीत, 42 जाजल, 43 रस, 44 लावक, 45 वजबद, 46 वसु, 47 बन्धु, 48 आवन्धका (as well as आबन्धका). 
कौसल्यकाार्याश्यां च ॥ १५५॥ पदानि ॥ कौसल्य-कार्मार्याश्यां च (फिञ्)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ कौलल्यकार्मार्यशब्दाभ्यामपत्ये फिञ् प्रत्ययो भवति ।। वार्तिकम् ॥ दगुकोसलकारच्छाग वृषाणां युट् ॥ 
155. The affix फिञ् comes in the sense of a des cendant after the words Kausalya, and Kârmârya. 
This debars इस ॥ Thus कौसल्यायनि: and कामार्थायाणिः ॥ These words, how ever, do not mean the son of कौसल्य or कार्मर्य," but they mean “ the son of कोसल, and कार," because of the following Vartika 
Vart:-The words दगु, कोसल, कमारी, छाग and वष take the augment युट before the affix फिम ॥ Thus दागव्यायनिः, कौसल्यायनिः, कामार्यायनिः, छाग्यायनि: and वा 
ायणिः ॥ 
अणो द्वयचः॥१५६॥ वृतिः ।। भणन्ता व्यचः प्रातिपदिकादपत्ये फिञ् प्रत्ययो भवति ।। वार्षिकम् ॥ यदादीनां वा फिञ् वक्तव्यः ।। 
156. The affix 'phin' comes, in the sense of a des cendant, after a dissyllabic word ending in the affix 'अण'. 
This debars इन ॥ Thus कात्रीयाण: 'son of Kartra,' हात्रायाणिः 'son of a Hartra.' 
Why do we say “which ends in the affix अण"? Observe दाक्षायणः son of Dakshi' (IV. I. 101). Why do we say a dissyllabic word ? Observe औपगवि: 'son of औषगव' । 
Vart-The pronouns tyad &c.' optionally take the affix फिर or अण।। Thus स्यावायानः or त्यातः, थादायनि: or यादः, तादायनि; or तादः ॥ 
उदीचां वृद्धादगोत्रत् ॥ १५७॥ पदानि ॥ उदीचां, वृद्धात, अगोत्रात् (फिञ्)॥ वृतिः ॥ वृद्ध यच्छब्दरूपमगावं तस्मारपत्ये फिञ् प्रत्ययो भवति उतीचामाचार्याणां मतेन ॥ 
157. According to the opinion of Northern Gram marians, after words with a Vriddhi in the first syllable, when it is not a Gotra-name, the affix "phin' is employed in the sense of a descendant. 
Thus आम्रगुमायानि: “ son of आम्रगत," ग्रामरक्षायणि: "son of ग्रामरक्ष'॥ नापिता wa: son of a barber.' This latter is formed in spite of IV. 1, 152, because rule 
1.4.2 applies here, 
Why do we say 'according to the opinion of Northern Grammarians' Observe strani: Why do we say after a word having a Vriddhi in the first syllable? Observe याज्ञदत्तिः 'son of यज्ञदत्त' Why do we say not beingal Gotra-name? Observe site:# 
TURE 
GOVO 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY ON 
AT OF INDIA 
2. V. CH. I. S. 160] 
सत्यमेव जयते 
• संस्कृति मंत्रा 
रतसरकार 
वाकिनादीनां कुक्च॥१५८॥ पदानि ॥ वाकिन-आदीनां, कुक-च (फिश)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ वाकिन इत्येवमादिभ्यः शब्दे योऽपत्ये फिञ् प्रत्ययो भवति सत्सन्नियोगेन चैषां कुगागमः ॥ 
158. The augment क (Kuk) is added to the words Vâkina &c. when the patronymic affix 'phiñ' follows. 
This वाकिनकायनिः, गोरधकायनिः॥ This debars इञ् &c. But if the anu vritti of zelai is read into this aphorism, then it becomes an optional rule. In that case we have in the alternative :--वाकिनिः, गारेधिः॥ 
1 वाकिन, 2 गौधेिर (गारेध K.) 3 कार्कष (कार्कय K), 4 काक, 5 लङ्का, 6 चर्मिव मिणोर्नलोपश्च ॥ 
पुत्रान्तादन्यतरस्याम् ॥ १५९ ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ पुत्रान्तात्प्रातिपदिकाद्यः फिप्रत्ययस्तस्मिन् परभूते ऽन्यतरस्यां कुगागमो भवति पुत्वान्तरस्य ॥ 
159. The augment 'कुक्' optionally comes after a stem ending with the word pûtra, when the patronymic affix 'phin' follows. 
The anuvsitti of the words "according to the opinion of Northern Grammarians when the word has a Vriddhi in the first syllable" must be read into this sûtra. Of course, a word ending in t cannot be a Gotra-word, for a Gotra word means à grandson or a still lower descendant. Hence a word ending in a having Vriddhi in the first syllable will take the affix na by IV. 1. 157; the present aphorism only rules that it takes the augment and optionally. 
Thus we have three forms :--गार्गीपुत्रकाथणि: or गार्गीपुत्रायणिः or गार्गीपत्रिः॥ So also वात्सीपुत्रकायाणिः, वात्सीपुत्रायणिः and वात्सीपुत्रिः॥ 
प्राचामवृद्धात्फिन्बहुलम् ॥ १६०॥ पदानि ॥ प्राचाम, अवृद्धात्, फिन्, बहुलम् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ अवृद्धाच्छब्दरूपादपत्ये फिन् प्रत्यया भवति बहुलं प्राचां मतेन ॥ 
160. According to the opinion of Eastern Gram marians, after a stem not having a Vriddhi vowel in the first syllable, the affix "phin' is diversely employed in the sense of a descendant.ind 
Thus ग्लुचुकायनि: or ग्लौचुकिः 'son of Gluchuka', ॥ अहिचुम्बकायनि: or आहि चुम्बिः ॥ Why do we say, “ not having a Vriddhi in the first syllable"? Ob serve राजदन्तिः ॥ The words माचाम, बहुलं and अन्यतरस्याम् all denote optional rules, so the employment of any one of them would have here sufficed. Why two are used in this sûtra viz. af and go ? The mention of Grammarians is made as a token of respect, and to is used to express the non-uniformity of the stra construction. In some places this affix ha is not at all added, as erat, 
URE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
v OF CULTUA 
MINISTRY 
T OF INDIA 
GOTRA AND YUYAN. 
[BK. IV. CH I.163 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
सत्यमेव जयते 
भारत सरकार 
मनोजातावभ्यती षुक् च ॥ १६१ ॥ मनोः-जाती, अञ-यतौ, पुक च ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ मनुशब्दम् यत् इत्येतो प्रत्ययो भवतस्त-सन्नियोगेन पुगागमः समुदायेन चेजातिर्गम्यते ॥ 
Karika अपत्ये कुत्सिते मूढे मनोरोत्सार्गकः स्मृतः । 
नकारस्य च मूर्द्धन्यस्तेन सिद्धति माणवः ॥ 
161. The affixes 9 and come after the word Manu', and the augment ya is added when these affixes follow, provided that, the whole word so formed denotes a class name 
(jati). 
Thus मनु+एक+अञ्=मानुषः " 
aman or man-kind". So also मनुष्यः formed with gril These affixes here have not the force of Patronymics, hence they are not dropped in the plural, as मानुषाः "men". When the descen dant is to be expressed, we have the affix अण् as मन+अण= मानव: 'son of Manu', as in मानवी प्रजा॥ So also the word माणव, there न is changed into ण and denotes the descendant of Manu, with the sense of contempt as well as dullness implied. 
अपत्यं पौत्त्रप्रभृति गोत्रम् ॥ १६२॥ वृत्तिः पोत्नप्रभृति यदपत्यं तद्गोत्रसंज्ञं भवति ॥ 
162. A descendant, being a grandson or a still lower offspring, is called Gotra. 
When an offspring, with reference to a person, is the son's son of that person or lower than that, it is called Gotra. Thus the son of 'Garga' will be 
FT:, and the son or grandsons &c of mrrif: with reference to Garga will be गार्थः॥ Similarly वात्स्यः ॥ 
Why do we say 'a grandson or a still lower descendant? The im mediate descendants or the son will not be called Gotra. Thus tili, trêt: 11 
जीवति तु वंश्ये युवा ॥ १६३॥ पदानि ॥ जीवति, तु, वश्य, युवा (अपत्यं-पौत्रम भृति)॥ वृत्तिः॥ अभिजनप्रबन्धी वंशः । तत्रभवो वंश्यः पित्रादि, स्तस्मिन् जीवति सति पौत्रपभृत्यपत्यं युवसंज्ञ भवति ॥ 
163. But when one in a line of descent beginning with a father (and reckoning upwards) is alive, the descen dant of a grandson or still lower descendant is called Yuvan only. 
The word it means an urinterrupted series of family descent-or fa line'. One who occurs in such a line, like father &c, is called Tu When such 
IRE • GOVE 
QY OF CULTUA 
VERNMENT OS 
MINISTRY 
OF INDIA 
:CH. I. S. 164 ) 
YUVAN 
470 27 
a vansya is alive, then the descendant of a grandson &c is called Yuvan. The phrase पौत्रप्रभृत्यपत्य in the sutra should be construed as पौत्रप्रभृतेर् यत् अपत्यम, "He who is the descendant of a grandson &c' In the last sûtra, however, this phrase पौत्रप्रभृत्यपत्यं was properly. construed by putting the word पौत्रप्रति in the case of apposition with stena meaning "a descendant being a grandson &c." Thus the word Yuvan will be applied to a person who is at least fourth in the order of descent, from the propositus with reference to whom the derivative is made. Thus stör: being the head, we have står: 
röf: (son or putra) 379427- re: (Gotra) 
l uftot:(Yuvan) if Gârga or Gârgi &c be alive). The force of the word 7, in the sâtra is that it will be called Yuvan only, and not Gotra as well. 
Ara T FRIE II 88811 CEIPT II rafi, 51, FIRTIE ( Firafa-319 garaaye) || वृत्तिः ॥ भ्रातरि ज्यायसि जीवति कनीयान् युवसंज्ञो भवति पौत्रप्रभृतेरपत्यम् ॥ 
164. When an elder brother is alive, the younger brother gets the title of Yuvan, being the descendant of a grandson &c. 
Even when a js: like father &c is not alive (and a brother is not vansya), the younger brother gets the designation of yuvan, when the elder brother is alive; thus: 
stof: (dead 
T: (dead) T&: (dead) 
STTET: 
गाायणः 
The word er: is confined to ancestors like father &c, so a brother can never be a vansya, because he is not the source from which the other brother arises. This satra applies to cases when Varisya is not meant. Thus Gârgyâyņa ia the name of the younger brother with reference to the elder brother, Gârgya; similarly Vatsyâyana, Dákhsayaņa, and Plâkshayaņa. 
वान्यस्मिन् सपिण्डे स्थविरतरे जीवति ॥१६५ ॥ पदानि ॥वा, अन्यस्मिन, स fous, racat, rara ( TT-grat tufa hat) वृत्तिः ।। भातुरन्यस्मिन्सपिण्ड स्थविरतरे जीवति पौत्तमभतेरपत्य जीवव्व युवसंज्ञ वा भवति ।। 
CURE 
GOL 
GOVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
• D 
YUVAN 
[BK. IV. CH. I. $ 
ata * 
. 
रत सरकार 
165. The living descendant of a grandson &c is called optionally a Yuvan, when a more superior sapinda other than a brother is alive. 
The sapinda relationship extends up to seven degrees. The word kufert means 'superior, and FUERAT is comparative and means 'more superior', that is to say, superior both by degree of descent and by age. The word strata is again read in this aphorism, though there is the anuvfitti of sirara also from IV. 1. 163. This fraia of the sûtra qualifies the word descendant, the raia which is understood by context qualifies the word sapinda thus : 
Garga (dead) 
Gârgi (dead) Gargi (alive 
Gârgya (alive) Gârgya (dead) 
Gârgyâyna 
or alive. 
Gârgya ) Here the uncle or the brother of a grand-father being alive, the des cendant is optionally called Yuvan or Gotra. 
TERIT TETTH. Il pe @ I really , 7, TSIRITAT (TT-TET) IT वृत्तिः ।। अपत्थमन्तर्हित वृद्धमिति शास्त्रान्तरे परिभाषणाद्गोत्रं वद्धमित्युच्यते । वृद्धस्य युवसंज्ञा वा भव ति पूजायां गम्यमानायाम् । संज्ञासामर्थ्याद्गोत्रं युवप्रत्ययेन पुनरुच्यते ॥ 
166. The Gotra is sometimes optionally regarded as Yuvan, when respectful reference to him is intended. 
The word Vriddha is another term for Gotra. As at ar tiefratop: or opposy"you honored Gargyâyana or Gárgya". This sûtra is in fact a Vartika and not a sâtra of Pâņini. Similarly ay maaar: or aterT, FT MET ETETT ajur: or arfer: 11 
Why do we say 'when respectful reference is intended? Observe, apa: and erra: u The definition of Vriddham as given by other Gramma rians is 379 Hafen TEEN 
On Fa ll 888 | Tarian ya:,, -( Ti-yat ) 1 वृत्तिः ॥ कुत्सायां गम्यमानायां सुनो या युवसंज्ञो भवति ।। 
167. The Yuvan is optionally spoken of as Gotra, when contemptuous reference to him is intended. 
Thus strat stea: or sport Firs: 11 When contempt is not intended, the only form is terror: This is also a Vartika and not a satra, 
GOVE, 
OVERNMENT 
RY OF CULTUA 
MINISTRY 
ENT OF INDIA 
BEV. Ch. I. $ 169. ) 
kila PREL 
279 
1977 
1 
Grade Ticaretger II 882 11 Ia II Gray Toata lume वृत्तिः॥ जनपदशब्दो यःक्षस्त्रियवाची तस्मादपत्ये ऽञ् प्रत्ययो भवति ।। वार्निकम् ॥ क्षत्रियसमानशब्शज्जनपरशब्दात्तस्य राजन्यपत्यवत् ।। 
168. The affix stat comes in the sense of a descen dant, after a word, which while denoting a country, expresses also a tribe of Kshatriyas. 
Thus T15317: 'the son of Panchala', so also fearan: and aeg! are Kshatri yas who live in that country. Of course, when the word is only expressive of Kshatriya, but not of the name of a country, 37 will not be used but stor the difference being in the accent. Thus glata: the son of Drůhya'; üret: 'the son of Puru.' Why do we say when it expresses Kshatriyas ? Observe TEHOTELI 9517eaga=Tafes, (IV. 1. 95) 'the son of Panchâla a Brahmana'; so also Tere: 11 
Vårt Let the same affix, which comes when the sense is that of the progeny, be added to a word denoting a country named after Kshatriyas, to denote the king thereof. Thus tarHL TET=wisara: the king of the Ksha triyas called Pañchâla or of the country of Pañchâlas'. So also avai, the king of the Kshatriyas or of the country of Videha'. 
The words Pañchâla &c.originally are names of Kshatriya tribes only, secondarily they have been applied to the country inhabited by those tribes, because the Taddhita affix denoting the country inhabited by them, is elided by IV. 2. 81. Thus the same word per comes to denote the Kshatriya tribe as well as the country called Pañchâla. It will make practically little differ ence to consider words like Pañchâla &c. as original (not derivative) name of countries as well as of Kshatriyas. In fact, Påņini himself considers them in the same light in this sútra, and does not think them to be derivative words, in spite of his own sûtra IV. 2. 81. These words when denoting a country are always in the plural, as quart, in denoting the Kshatriya, they are in the singular 
Area 
T R T 11 888 Erê Il Pica-archi, a (75T) वृत्तिः॥ साल्वेयगान्धारिशब्दाभ्यामपत्ये ऽ प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
169. The affix sist comes in the sense of a descend ant after the words Salveya' and 'Gandhari'. 
Both these are names of countries and denote also Kshatriyas as well. Therefore, by sûtra IV. 1.171 they having a Vriddhi in the first syllable, would have taken the affix 'yan', the present sâtra enjoins 'añ' instead. Thus ut : the son of Salveya, or the king of Salveya', : 'the son of Gândhari 
12 
GOVERNMEN 
TURE - Go 
ev OF CULTUS 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
सत्यमेव जयते 
HTभारत 
ज्यङ्॥ 
[ BK. IV. CH. I. SAT 
or the king of Gandhari?' The vartika under Sutra IV. I. 168 given above applies here also, i.e. the affix denotes also 'thc king there of 
यमगधकलिंगसूरमसादः ॥ १७०॥ पदानि ॥ द्वयच्-मगध-कलिंग-सूरमसात अण (जनपदशब्दातू-क्षत्रियात्)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ जनपरशब्दात् क्षत्रियाभिधायिनो यचो मगध कलिङ्ग सूरमस इत्येतेभ्यश्चापत्येऽणप्रत्ययों भवति ॥ 
107. The affix FUT comes, in the sense of a des cendant, after dissyllabic words, and the words Magadha', 
Kalinga' and Sûramasa', when they are the names of countries as well as of Kshatriyas. 
This debars अञ्॥ Thus आंगः, वांगः; मागधः, कालिङ्गः, and सौरमसः the son as well as the king of Anga, Banga, Magadha, Kalinga and Suramasa.' Similarly पौण्ड्रः, सौमः ॥ The Vartika 'तस्यराजनि' given above applies to this also, as आंगो राजा, गान्धारो राजा &c. 
वृद्धत्कोसलाजादाभ्यन् ॥ १७१॥ पदानि ॥ वृद्ध-इतू-कोसल-अजादात,ज्यङ् (जनपदशब्दातू-क्षत्रियातू)॥ वृत्तः ॥ जनपदशब्दातक्षत्रियादित्येव । वृद्धाच्च प्रातिपदिकारिकारान्ताच कोसलाजादशब्दायां चापत्ये ज्य प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
वार्तिकम् ॥ पाण्डोर्जनपदशब्सत् छत्रियाड् ज्यण वक्तव्यः ॥ 
171. The affix 5275' comes in the sense of a descendant, after a word having a Vriddhi in the first syllable, and after a word ending in short s, and after the words 
Kosala' and 'Ajada', when they are the names of countries and Kshatriyas. 
This debars अम् ॥ Thus, to give example of Vriddha words, आम्बष्टपः Greta: 'the sons or kings of Ambashtha and Sauvira'. Similarly to take words ending in short s, we have seeg: and cracy: 'the son or kings of Avanti and Kunti'. These are words ending in short 1 So also creat: and stra:, which are neither Vriddhas nor end in short s॥ 
Vart:-The affix 'dyan' comes after the word 'Pandu' when it is the name of a country as well as of a Kshatriya tribe. Thus areas, otherwise it will be gisa: 11 See IV. 1.74 
कुरुनादिश्यो पयः ॥१७२॥ पदानि । कुरु-नादिभ्यो, ण्यः॥ वृतिः ॥ जनपदशब्दातमल्लियास्त्येिव । कुरुशवान्नादिभ्यश्च प्रातिपक्केिभ्योण्यः प्रत्ययो भवति । 
172. The affix ण्य conics after the word Kuru', and a word beginning with a when these words denote a country, being the name of a Kshatriya tribe also. OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
ENT OF INDIA 
Sir. IV. CH. I. S174.] 
TADRAJA 
This debars 'an' and 'an'. Thus cartout, #qta: the son of Kuru and Nishadha'. The affix denotes the king there of ' also, as कौरव्यो राजा | How do you explain the form नैषधोहति चेदघम्? This is an archaic or Vedic form. 
How then in सनैषधस्यार्थपतेः सुतायां? This is a poetic license. 
साल्वावयवप्रत्यग्रथकलकूटाश्मकादिञ् ॥१७३॥ पदानि॥ साल्वावयव-प्रत्यग्रथ कलकूट-अश्मकात, इञ्॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ जनपदशशत क्षस्त्रियादित्येव ।। साल्वावयवेभ्यः प्रत्यमथकलकूदाश्मकशद यश्चापत्ये इश प्रत्ययो भवति॥ 
Karikd उदम्बरास्तिलखला मद्रकारा युगन्धराः। 
भुलिङ्गाः शरदण्डाश्च साल्वावयवसंज्ञिताः॥ 
173. The affix t comes in the sense of a descen dant, after a word which denotes any subdivision of the coun try of Salva ; and after the words - Pratyagratha', 'Kalakuta', and Asmaka', when these are names of countries and of Kshatriya tribes. 
The word rear is the name of a Kshatriyâ woman, her son will be साल्वेयः (IV. I. I2I) formed by ढक; also साल्वः formed by अण् ॥ The dwelling place of साल्व will be also साल्व: which is the name of a country. 
The sub-divisions of the country called fra are six, viz Udumbarah, Tilakhalah, Madrakarah, Yugandharah, Bhulingah and Saradandah. The patro nymic from these will be : औदुम्बरिः,तैलखलिः,माद्रकारिः, यौगन्धरिः,भौलिङ्गि and शारदण्डिा So also the affix in' will be added to the words 'Pratyagratha' &c. As प्रात्यप्रथिः, कालकूटिः and आश्मकिः ॥ The affix has the force also of the king there of'. As औदम्बरो राजा॥ According to Mahabhashya, the words Busa, Ajamidha, and Ajakanda also take this affix, as बौसा, जमीडिः and आजकन्दिः ॥ 
ते तद्राजाः ॥ १७४॥ वृत्तिः ॥ तेनास्यस्तद्राजसंज्ञा भवन्ति । 
174. These (viz the affixes अञ् IV. 1. 168&c) are called Tadraja('the king there of') affixes. 
The affixes treated of in these six sätras 168 to 173 are called Tadrâja. The pronoun refers to these only and not to all the affixes treated of before S. IV. 1. 168 ; for they have the special designation of Gotra and Yuvan see II. 4. 62. The illustrations of these have already been given under each of the above six aphorisms. 
कम्बोजाल्लुक ॥१७५॥ पदानि ॥ कम्बोजातू-लुक (तद्राजस्य)। वृतिः ॥ कम्बोजात् प्रत्ययस्य लुग भवति । वात्तिकमा ।। कम्बोजाविभ्यो लग्वचनं चोल/पार्थम् ।। 
URE 
GOVE. 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
सत्यमेव जयते 
TA 
TADRAJA 
[ BK. IV. CH. I. $ 177 
175. After the word 'Kamboja', there is elision by "luk' of the Tadrâja affix. 
Namely the affix s131 which would have come after the word IST because it denotes a country as well as a Kshatriya tribe, is elided. Thus 
17 . The king of Kamboja'. 
Vårt :-It should be stated rather after Kamboja and the like ', because we find the affix elided after Chola' &c. Thus the king of Cholas'. So also a : To, a: 11 
स्त्रियामवन्तिकुन्तिकुरुभ्यश्च ॥ १७६ ॥ पदानि ॥ स्त्रियाम, अवन्ति-कुन्ति-कुरु RT, T II वृत्तिः ।। अवन्तिकुन्तिकुरुशब्देभ्य उत्पन्नस्य तद्वाजस्य स्त्रियामभिधेयायां लुग्भवति ॥ 
176. In denoting a feminine name, the Tadrâja is elided after the words Avanti, Kunti and Kuru, 
That is to say the affix'nyan! (IV. 1. 171) after the word "Avanti' and Kunti', and the affix'nya' after the word 'Kuru' are elided when the word to be formed is the name of a female. Thus अवन्ती, कुन्ती and कुरू: 'a daughter or princess of Avanti, Kunti or Kuru'. The word ge takes 55 in the feminine by IV. 1. 66. Why do we say 'in denoting the feminine'? Observe Tartu, Tag: and hitreet: 
STTET U povell gera u STTT:-ET (regra, 5) 11 कृतिः ॥ भकारप्रत्ययस्थ तगाजस्य स्त्रियामभिधेयायां लुग्भवति ।। 
177. In forming the feminine of a word which ends in the masculine in the Tadrâja affix 37, the affix is luk elided, 
Thus m. archa, f. mat; m. arg.j. All The word sa: of the stra should not be construed by the rule of tadanata vidhi (I. 1.72), If so con strued it will mean "a Tadraja affix ending in an is elided". There have been taught five Tadraja affixes, namely 'an ()', 'an ()','nyan (@', 'nya (T)' and Fin (): Of these the first four all end in 87; therefore all these four affixes should be elided in the feminine. But this is not the meaning of the author for had it been so, there would have been no necessity of the previous satra, for then the present satra would have covered the case of 'Avanti', Kunti' and Kurul. But the very fact of this sátra IV. I. 176 indicates by strach, that the tadanta vidhi does not apply here. Therefore, the feminine of 
aga is op , of art is erefter 
URE - GOVE 
GOVERNME 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY ON 
ENT OF INDIA 
B.iV. CH. I. 8178.] 
TADRAJA 
नप्राच्यभर्गादियाँधेयादिश्यः ॥ १७८॥ वृत्तिः ॥ प्राच्य यो भर्गादिभ्यो यौधेयादिभ्यश्चोत्पन्नस्य लुज भवति । अतश्चेत्यनेन स्त्रियां लुक प्राप्तः प्रति पिद्धति । 
178. The Tadarâja affix is not elided in the fe minine, if it forms the names of the Kshatriyas of the East, 
or it comes after the word 'Bharga' &c and 'Yaudheya' &c. 
This sútra debars the elision of the Tadrâja affix a (required by the last satra). Thus पांचाली, वैदेही, आंगी, वांगी, मागधी these being all Eastern people dwelling in countries east of the Sarâvati river. Similarly of pf &c. Thus भार्गी, कारुषी, कैकेयी ॥ So also of यौधेय &c. Thus यौधेयी, शौभेयी and शौक्रेयी ॥ 
The Tadrâja affixes taught above are five, but besides these there are others taught in the fifth Adhyaya (V. 3. II2 to II9). The word यौधेय is formed by such an affix (V. 3. 177 373). The present rule, therefore, indicates by impli cation, that the rule of elision contained in IV. 1. 177 applies not only to the Tadrâja affixes taught in this chapter, but to the Tadraja affixes taught in V. 3. 112 to 119. Thus the Tadraja affix sporin (V. 3. 117) added to qt &c. is elided in the feminine : e. g. m. पार्शवः पिx, m आसुरः f असुरी-&c. 
1 भर्ग, 2 करूश (करूष), केकय, 4 कश्मीर, 5 साल्व, 6 सुस्थाल, 7 उरस (उरश and उरस).8 कौरव्य. 
71 यौधेय, 2 कौकेय, 3 शौभेय, 4 ज्यावाणेय (थावाणेय), धौर्तेय (घातयः धातय) 6 भिगर्त, 7 भरत, 8 उशीनर, 9 वार्तेय ।। 
GURE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
T OF INDIA 
SL 
संस्कृति मंत्रान 
सत्यमेव जयते 
ओ३म् । 
अथ चतुर्थाध्यायस्य द्वितीयः पादः। 
BOOK FOURTH. CHAPTER SECOND. 
तेन रक्तं रागातू॥१॥ वृत्तिः ।। तेनति तृतीयासमर्थाद्रागविशेषवाचिनः शब्दागन्तमित्यतस्मिन्नर्थे यथाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति । 
1. The affix अण् already ordained (IV. 1. 83 ) comes after the name of a colour in the sense of "colored thereby". 
The verb a means to change white into another color. That by which a thing is coloured is called रागः 'color'. तेन 'by which', i. e. after a word in the instrumental case in construction, being the name of a particular colour. Thus कषायेण रक्तं वस्त्र काषायम् 'a cloth coloured of a dull red'. So also मांजिष्ठम्, कौसुम्भम् ॥ 
Why do we say रागात "after the name of a color"? Observe वदलने रन्तं वस्त्रम्, here the affix अण् will not come after the word 'Devadattena', for though it is in construction in the instrumental case, yet it is not the name of a colour. 
In the sentence "काषायौ गर्दभस्य कर्णी, हारिद्रौ कुकटस्यादौ" the words काषाय and este are used metaphorically. 
From this sûtra up to IV. 2. 12 inclusive, the affixes are to be added to the word which is in the instrumental case in construction in a sentence (IV. 1. 82): as in the last chapter, the affixes were added to a word in the genitive case. 
लाक्षा रोचना शकल कर्दमाट्टक् ॥२॥ पदानि लाक्षा, रोचनाशकल. कर्दमातू, ठक्॥ वृत्तिः । लाक्षादिभ्यो रागवचने यस्तृतीयासमर्थे यो रक्तमित्येतस्मिन्नर्थे ठक् प्रत्ययो भवति। 
बार्तिकम् ॥ नील्या अन् वक्तव्यः॥ वा०॥ पीतात् कन वक्तव्यः॥ वारिद्रामहारजनास्थामप्रवक्तव्य 
URE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY ON 
ENT OF INDIA 
BK. IV. CA. 1. 94] 
2. The affix yeu comes, in the sense of colored thereby, after the words lákshâ, rochanâ, sakala, and kardama, (which being names of colours, are in the instrumental case in a sentence). 
This debars अण् ॥ Thus लाक्षाया रक्तं वस्त्रं = लाक्षिकम् , so also रोचनिकम् , srehto on and ateTAchh !! 
- According to the opinion of Patanjali, the affix stut also comes after शकल and कर्दमः । Thus शाकलम् and कार्दमम् ॥ According to Mahabhashya the words to and art do not occur in the sûtra, but are given in the Vârtika. 
Vart:--The affix अन् comes after नीली: as नील्या रक्तं = नील वस्त्र। Vart:-The affix aa (I. 3. 8) comes after fia, as otaa t ofan 
Vârt:--The affix 9 comes after ret and FERT, as ETEL and Ater ATTEL 1 
PETETUT : nr: 113 11 वृत्तिः ॥ तृतीयासमर्यान् नक्षत्राविशेषवाचिनः शब्दात् युक्त इत्येतस्मिन्नर्ये यथाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति । योसौ युक्तः, कालश्चेत्स भवति ।। 
3. The affix stu already ordained 1V. 1. 83 comes after a word in the instrumental case in construction, which is the name of a lunar mansion, to signify a time connected with the asterism. 
A time is said to be connected with an asterism when the moon is in conjunction with any one of such asterism. Thus gez, facen, 21 &c are lunar asterisms, when the moon is in any one of these asterisms, then the affix is added to the name of such asterism in order to denote time of such conjunction. Thus get + 370=: (VI. 4. 149) e. g. A uf: " the night in which moon is in Pushya". So also preft : ; ITTF 'the month in which the moon is full in Pushya i. e. December. so also ATETHE 'the month Magha' &c. 
Why do we say To connected with the asterism'? Observe - मसा युक्ता रात्रिः ॥ Why do we say काल time'? Observe पुष्येण युक्तश्चन्द्रमाः ॥ 
galeatoll! | Tata Il Gyfat Il वृत्तिः ॥ पूर्वेण विहितस्य प्रत्ययष्य लुब् भवति अविशेष। 
4. The affix above ordained is elided by lup, when there is no specification. 
That is the affix enjoined by the preceding aphorism is elided if no specification is to be understood of a particular portion of time such as 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
ENT OF INDIA 
स्कृति मंत्रान 
Stor II 
[ BK. IV. CH. 1. $7 
49.41 
7751 
night &c. Thus stu: get: 'to day belongs to the asterism Pushya' meaning that to-day the moon is in conjunction with Pushya; but by 'to-day' neither the day time in particular nor the night time in particular is meant, but both alike. The time is day and night, when there is no specification of such time, whether it is day or night, then there is elision. 
संज्ञायां स्त्रवणाश्वत्थाभ्याम् ॥५॥ वृत्तिः ॥ श्रवणशब्दाववत्यशब्दाचात्पन्नस्य प्रत्ययस्य लब भवति संज्ञायां विषय ।। 
5. The affix above ordained is elided by lup, after the words Sravana and Asvatha, when the whole word so formed is an appellation, and there is specification of time. 
Thus श्रवणा रात्रिः, अश्वत्थो मुहूर्त: "the night called Sravana ; the Muharta called Asvattha". The affix being elided by 'lup', why should not I. 2. 51 apply here? We should say tur: uf: and not Tura: The reason is that ata or is an irregularly formed word, as Panini himself uses it in sútra IV.2. 23. Why do we say 'when it is a Name or Sañjña? Observe straoft or eft : 1 
gay: 11 e il Tata Il grad- Il वृत्तिः ॥ नक्षत्रचन्द्वात्तृतीयासमायुक्ते काले छः प्रत्ययो भवति विशेषे चा विशेष च। 
6. The affix comes after the Dvandva com pound of the names of lunar mansions, when it is in the instrumental case in construction, to signify time connected with the asterism whether there be a specification or not. 
Thus far TFT, Fouraghe: #So also when there is no specification : as अय राधानुराधीयम, अद्य तिष्यपुनसंवीयम् ॥ The affix here in these two last cases is not elided, though there is no specification of time, because the present sûtra, being a subsequent sûtra, will debar IV. 2.4 which ordains lup (1. 4. 2). 
FAH IN वृत्तिः॥ तेनेति तृतीयासमीर वृष्टं सामेत्यतास्मन्नर्थे बयाविहितं प्रत्यया भवति, यद् दृष्ट साम चत्तद्भवति ।। 
7. The affix stur (IV.1. 83) comes, after a word in construction in the Instrumental case, in the sense of seen the thing seen by the one whose name is in the Instrumental case, being the Sama Veda. 
Thus i ETA"the portion of the Sama seen by (or reveal. ed to) Kruncha." So also arren, P TER 
cu atat ll th: 
URE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY ON 
T OF INDIA 
• BROY. CL. II.89) 
ढक । 
तस्कृति मंत्राल 
सत्यमेव जयत 
वृत्तिः ॥ कलिशब्दातृतीयासमर्थात् दृष्टं सामेव्येतस्मिन्नर्थे ढक् प्रत्ययो भवति॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ सर्वत्राग्निकलि यांढरवक्तव्यः॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ दृष्टे सामान अण् वाडिद्भवतात वक्तव्यम् ।। वार्चिकम् ॥ जाते चार्थे योन्येन बाधितः पनरविधीयते स वा डिद्भवतीति वक्तव्यम् ॥ वाचिकम् ॥ तीयादीकक स्वार्थे वा वक्तव्यः ॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ न विद्यायाः॥ वार्चिकम् ॥ गोत्रादकवरिष्यते ॥ Karika दृष्टे सामनि जाते च विरण्डिा विधीयते । 
तीयादीकक न विद्याया गोवादकवदिष्यते ॥ 
8. The affix ढक comes, in the sense of Sama Veda seen, after the word Kali', being in the instrumental case in construction. 
This debars मण॥ Thus कलिना दष्ट साम-कालयं॥ "The Sama Veda revealed to Kali". This sûtra is really a Vârtika and not a sútra of Pânini. 
Vart:-The affix dhak' comes always after अग्नि and कलि; not mere ly in the sense of Sama-Veda seen. Thus अग्निना दृष्टं साम = आग्नेयम् 'the Sama Veda revealed to Agni'. अग्नौ भवं आग्नेयम् 'who stays in Agni' (IV. 3.53) अग्ने रागतं ."what has come from Agni" = आमेयम् (IV. 3.74) &c. Similarly कालेयम् mear.s 'the Sama-Veda seen by Kali, he who stays in Kali, what has come from Kali &c., 
Vårt: The affix stor is optionally treated as if it had an indicatory when the sense is that of Sama-Veda seen. Thus उशनसा दृष्टं साम= ओशनसम् or BTT (the force of feą being to elide the fè portion; VI. 4. 143). 
Vart:--The affix अण in the sense of 'born', is optionally treated as डितू, provided that it be that अण which being debarred by IV. 3. II, is re ordained by IV. 3. 16. The affix sto governs all sůtras up to IV. 4. 2 by force of IV. I. 83.; but it is debarred by of IV.3. II, and is re-ordained in IV. 3. 16. Thus शतभिषजि जातः- शतभिषः or शतभिषजः ।। 
Vârt:--The affix she comes, optionally, without changing the sense, after words ending in तीय ॥ Thus वैतीयीकम् or द्वितीयकम्, तीयीकम् or ततीयकम् ॥ 
Vârt:--Not so when it qualifies fear, as faatar or galar faen i 
Vårt: -The affix 73 IV. 3. 126 has the force of “Sama-Veda seen" when it comes after a Gotra-word. This औपगवकम् or कापटवकम् 'the Sama Veda seen by Aupagava, or Kâpațava'. The affix at comes after a word denoting a Gotra or Charana. 
वामदेवाइ, ड्यड्, ड्यौ ॥९॥ पदानि ॥ वामदेवातू-ड्यत्-ज्यो॥ वृत्तिः ॥ वामदेवशब्दात् तृतीयासमाद वृष्ट सामेत्यस्मिन्नर्थे उधत डब इत्येता प्रत्ययो भवतः ।। Karika सिद्धे यस्येतिलोपेन किमर्थं ययती डितो। 
ग्रहणं माऽतवर्थ भूधाम व्यस्य नअस्वरे ॥ 13 
GOVERNMENT 
TURE • Go, 
v OF CULTUA 
MINISTRY 
ENT OF INDIA 
सत्यमेव जयते 
KIT 
रत सरकार 
[ BK. IV. CH. II $ 11. 
9. The affixes on and get come in the sense of the Sâma-Veda seen, after the word Vâmadeva, being in the Instrumental case in construction. 
This debars अण् ॥ Thus वामदेवेन दृष्टं साम - वामदेव्यं or वामदेव्यं ॥ The indicatory in dyat' shows that u has svarita accent (VI. 1. 125). 
Q. What is the use of the indicatory ? 
Ans. The final syllable is elided when a fet affix is added, by VI. 4 143. 
Q. The final of area would have been elided without making this affix fea, by the rule VI. 4. 148, then what is the use of making this affix fs? 
Ans. Well, the author here indicates by jñapaka, the existence of these two maxims of interpretation, viz. Paribhashas fataa EU FT Fratohter when a term void of anubandhas is employed, it does not denote that which has an anubandha attached to it". तदनुबन्धकग्रहणे नातदनुबन्धकस्य “when a term with one or more anubandhas is employed it does not denote that which, in addi tion to those, has another anubandha attached to it". 
For had 2 and te been only taught instead of dya' and dyat', then by rule VI. 2. 156 the final of such word, with the negative particle sf, would take udatta on the final, but that is not the case. Therefore area is not finally acute, but has acute on the first syllable, taking the accent of the Indeclinable (VI. 2. 2). As the 
facit, tit: Il Soll ETÀ II T IT: TY: 11 वृत्तिः ॥ तेनेति तृतीयासमर्थात्परिवृत इत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे यथाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति, योसौ परिवृतो रथश्चेत्स ATTET I 
10. The aflix sur comes, after a word in the Instrumental case in construction, in the sense of surround ed' the thing so surrounded being a chariot'. 
Thus TEU figai tur:=ta: "a chariot surrounded with cloth". So also at , TÁT: Why do we say 'the thing so surrounded being a chariot?' Observe वस्त्रेण परिवृतः कायः 'the body surrounded with cloth the word परिवृत means covered from all sides. The affix will not be used if the chariot is not completly surrounded. As ota: Tregt yt: 11 
पाण्डुकम्बलादिनि ॥११॥ पदानि ॥ पाण्डु-कम्बलातू-इनिः॥ वृत्तिः पाण्डुकम्बल शब्दात् तृतीयासमर्धातू परिवृतो रथ इत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे इनि प्रत्ययो भवति । 
11. The affix erat comes after the word mogen , being in the third case in construction, in the sense of 
surrounded', the thing so surrounded being a chariot'. 
ARE 
GOVE 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY ON 
ERNMENT OF 
OF INDIA 
H BENCH. II. S 14] 
अण। 
संस्कृति मंत्रान्नु 
सत्यमेव जयते 
मंत्रालय . 
रित सरकार 
This debars अण | Thus पाण्डुकम्बली रथः 'a carriage covered with a white woolen blanket'. The word graças means the housing of a royal elephant. The form पाण्डकम्बलिन् would have been obtained by the affix इनि of V. 2. 115, the present sûtra is made in order to debar the affix stor 11 
द्वैपवैयाघ्राद ॥ १२॥ पदानि ॥ द्वैप-वैयाघ्रातू-अञ्॥ वृत्तिः ॥ हीपिव्याघ्रयोर्विकारभूते चर्मणी द्वैपवैयाघ्र, ताभ्यां तृतीयासमाभ्यां परिवृतो रथ इत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे ऽम् प्रत्ययो भवति॥ 
12. The stat comes after the words 'dvaipa' and vaiyâghra' being in the third case in construction, in the sense of 'surrounded', the thing so surrounded being 'a chariot'. 
Thus tha greaat Ty: = 9: 'a car covered with a tiger's skin'. So also वैयाघ्रः॥ This affix अज्ञ debars अण, the difference between these two being in accent only. 
कौमारापूर्ववचने ॥ १३॥ कौमार-अपूर्व-वचने ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ कौमारं इत्येतदप्रत्ययान्तं निपात्यते ऽपूर्ववचने ॥ 
कौमारापूर्ववचने कुमार्या अविधीयते । 
अपूर्वत्वं यदा तस्याः कुमार्या भवतीतिवा ॥ 
13. The word · kaumara' is irregularly formed by adding the affix TU, when meaning virginity'. 
Thus कौमारो भर्ता अपर्वपति कुमारी मपपन्नः 'the husband of a virgin'.i.e. one whose wifewas given to him in marriage while she was a maid (not a widow). So also कौमारी भार्या=कुमारी अपूर्वपतिः पतिमुपपन्ना “a virgin wife" i. e. a wife who is taken in marriage while she was a maid (not a widow). In both these cases the word refers to the woman. 
The word chart is formed by adding stor to part 1 Thus carefa a: कौमारः। तस्य स्त्री कौमारी भार्या ॥ 
तत्रोधृतममत्रेभ्यः ॥ १४॥ पदानि ॥ तत्र-उधृतम, अमत्रेभ्यः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ तति सप्तमीसमर्थादमत्रवाचिनः शब्दावधृतमित्येतस्मिन्नर्थे यथाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति । 
14. The affix अण already ordained (IV. 1.83) comes in the sense of 'placed thereon' after words denoting Vessels, when such words are in the locative case in construc tion. 
LThe word तत्र means, "thereon' i.e.a word in the seventh case in cons truction, अमत्र means " vessels' : उद्धृतम् means 'placed', or literally the refuse 
TRY OF CULT 
MINISTRY 
RNMENT OF A 
OF INDIA 
पलाई जयते 
यत्। 
[BK. IV. CH. I. $17 
• संस्कृति मन 
भारत सरकार 
of dinner'. Thus शरावेषद्धतः-शाराव ओवनः “boiled rice placed on a dish.” So also माल्लिकः, कार्परः ॥ 
Why do we say "after a word denoting vessel" ? Observe पाणावद्धृत STTT: 'boiled rice placed on the hand'. 
The word तत्र, denoting 'a word in the locative case in construction', governs the six subsequent sâtras upto IV. 2. 20 inclusive. 
स्थण्डिलाच्छयितरि व्रते ॥१५॥ पदानि ॥ स्थण्डिलातू-शयितरि-व्रते ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ स्थण्डिलशब्दात्सप्तमीसमर्धात् शयितर्यभिधेये यथाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति, समुदायेन चव्रतं गम्यते॥ 
15. The affix Stur already ordained (IV. 1. 83) comes after the word Foros being in the seventh case in construction, in the sense of a sleeper thereon', and the whole word so formed denotes 'a person performing a vow'. 
Thus स्थण्डिले शयितुं व्रतमस्य:स्थाण्डिलः 'a person who has taken the vow to sleep on the bare ground' i. e. an ascetic or a Brahmachari. 
Why do we say 'vow'? Observe स्थण्डिले शेते ब्रह्मदत्तः "Brahmadatta sleeps on the bare ground', not as a matter of vow, but of necessity or plea sure. The word ga means a 'vow or an observance ordained by religious codes'. 
संस्कृतं भक्षाः॥१६॥ पदानि ॥ संस्कृतम्-भक्षाः॥ वृन्तिः । तत्रेति सप्तमीसमर्थात्संस्कृतमित्येतस्मिन्नर्थे यथाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति यत्संस्कृतं भक्षाश्चत्ते भवन्ति ॥ 
The affix su comes after a word ending in the locative case, to denote 'what is prepared therein' if that which is so prepared be 'granular food'. 
Thus ris FREESTT TETT = Ter: 'a cake fried in the pan'. Similarly at: कौम्भाः ॥ Why do we say if it means food"? Observe पुष्पपुटे संस्कृतो मालागुणः । 
शूलोखाद्यत् ॥१७॥ पदानि ॥ शूल-उखात्-यत् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ शुलशब्दादखाशब्दाच सप्तमीसमर्थात्सस्कृतं भक्षा इत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे यत् प्रत्ययो भवति 
17. The affix ma comes in the sense of prepared food, after the words & and got ending in the locative case. 
This debars अण् (IV. 1. 83). As शूले संस्कृत = शूल्यं 'roasted on a spit' i. e. meat. So also can'flesh boiled in a pot'. 
दद्धष्ठक् ॥१८॥ पदानि ॥ दधः-ठक्॥ वृत्तिः ॥ दधिशब्दात् सप्तमीसमर्थात्संस्कृतं भक्षा इत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे ठक् प्रत्ययो भवति ।। URE • GOVE. 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY OR 
T OF INDIA 
(BK, 
CM. II. $ 21. ] 
37071 
2013 
a 291 
रत सरकार 
18. The affix e comes, in the sense of prepared food, after the word dadhi' ending in the locative case in construction. 
Thus quâ difta = Erre made of coagulated milk'. This form will be evolved by IV. 4. 3, but the area formed by that rule means TET E i. e. anything prepared or seasoned with curd; while the fire of this sútra means 'curd itself seasoned with salt or, pepper'. 
उदश्वितो ऽन्यतरस्याम् ॥ १९॥ पदानि ॥ उदश्वितः, अन्यतरस्याम् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ उदश्विच्छब्दात् सप्तमी समर्थात् संस्कृतं भक्षा इत्येतस्मिन्नर्थेऽन्यतरस्यां ठक् प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
19. The affix zx comes in the sense of prepared food', optionally after the word gefsaa ending in the locative case in construction. 
Thus iteru (VII. 3. 51), or afterpay by To II BUTTECTII Roll TENA II I C IL वृत्तिः ॥ क्षीरशब्दात्सप्तमीसमर्थात्संस्कृतं भक्षा इत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे ढम् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
20. The affix t comes in the sense of prepared food', after the word "Kshîra' ending in the locative case in construction. 
This debars अण् ॥ Thus क्षारे संस्कृताः= रेयी यवागू: 'milky gruel'. सास्मिन्पौर्णमासीति संज्ञायाम् ॥ २१ ॥ पदानि ॥ सा-अस्मिन्-पौर्णमासी-इति संज्ञायाम् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ सोत प्रथमासमर्थात् अस्मिन्निति सप्तम्यर्थे यथाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति, यत्चत्पथमासमर्थ पौर्णमा सी चेद्भवति ॥ 
21. The affix su comes after the name of a full moon-night, to denote the division of time in which the night falls. 
The word a means 'that'. It is in the nominative case, therefore by IV. 1. 82 it means that "after a word in the first case in construction". sfera 'in it' i. e. in the sense of a seventh case. Guaratia “if the word in the first Case in construction is the name of a full-moon night". The word gra after 
Turareft is used for the sake of clearness. The word ciste does not occur in the original sâtras of Panini ; but is added by a Vartika; and means 'if the word so formed is an appellative', i. e. if it is the name of a month, a half month and a year. The whole sätra therefore literally translated means " the affix sur already ordained (IV. 1. 83) comes in the sense of a 7th case affix, after a word in the ist case in construction, if that word is the name 
URE - GOVE 
GOVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY ON 
NT OF INDIA 
[ BK. IV.CH. ILS 23.1 
सत्यमेव जयते 
कृति मंत्रान्त 
of a full-moon-night, provided that the whole word so formed is an appella tion of a month, a half-month or a year".. 
Thus पौषी पौर्णमासी अस्मिन् =पोषो मासः 'the month Paus i. e. that month in which the moon is full in the asterism Pushya'. Similarly पौषऽर्द्धमासः and पौषः संवत्सरः॥ But not so in the following पौषी पौर्णमासी अस्मिन् दशरात्रे, because daśarâtra is not a month or a fortnight or a year. 
The words fa and are have the same force here, namely, they make the word an appellative. The word rArL added to the sđtra by the Vartika is a redundancy, 
The word पौर्णिमासी is formed by adding अण to पूर्णमास ॥ Or it may be evolved in this way:-पुर्णो माः- पूर्णमाः, पूर्णमास इयम् पार्णमासी ॥ The word माः means "moon". 
आग्रहायण्यश्वत्थाढक् ॥ २२॥ पदानि ॥ आग्रहायणी, अश्वत्थात्-ठक् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ सास्मिन्पौर्णमासीति सर्वमनुवर्तते । आग्रहायणीशब्दादश्वत्थशब्दाच प्रथमासमापौर्णमास्युपाधि का अस्मिन्निति सप्तम्यर्थे ठक् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
22. The affix ठक comes in the sense of the loca tive case after the words agrahầyanî' and 'asvattha' ending in the first case-affix in construction and being the name of a full-noon night. 
The words artfehacarerarailag of the last sútra govern this also. This debars अण्॥ Thus आग्रहायणिको मासः - the month called Agrahāyanika i. e. in which the moon is full in the asterism of Agrahāyana. Similarly आश्वस्थिकः॥ 
विभाषा फाल्गुनीश्रवणाकार्तिकीचैत्रीभ्यः ॥२३॥ पदानि ॥ विभाषा, फाल्गु नी, श्रवणा-कार्तिकी-चैत्रीभ्यः॥ वृत्तिः॥ फाल्गुन्याश्यः पौर्णमासीशब्दास्तेभ्यो विभाषा उक् प्रत्ययो भवति, सास्मिन् पौर्णमासीति संज्ञाया मित्येतस्मिन् विषये ॥ 
23. The affix optionally comes after the words 'Phalguni', Sravana', 'Kartiki' and 'Chaitri' being the names of full moon nights, the whole word so formed being a Name denoting a division of time (a month, a fortnight or a year) in which the moon is full. 
Thus फाल्गुनः or फाल्गनिकः, श्रावणः or श्रावणिक, कार्तिक: or कार्तिकिकः, चैत्रः or चैनिकः ॥ This optionally ordains उक् instead of अण् । 
सास्य देवता ॥ २४॥ पदानि ॥ सा-अस्य, देवता॥ बृत्तिः ॥ सति प्रथमासमीदस्योति षष्ठवर्थे यथाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति, यतमयमासमर्थ देवता चेत् सा भवति ॥ 
URE. GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRYA 
NT OF INDIA 
BEEN. Ch. II. $27.] 
त मंत्रालय . 
भारत सरकार 
24. The affix sro (IV. 1. 83) is added to the name of a deity when someting is to be spoken of as his. 
सा="after a word in the Ist case in construction' अस्य "in the sense of a sixth case'. देवता 'if the word in the first case is the name of a deity'. Thus इन्द्रो देवताऽस्य = ऐन्द्रम् 'oblation sacred to Indra'. Similarly आदित्यम् 'oblation belonging to Aditya'. So also बार्हस्पत्यम्, प्राजापत्यम् ॥ Why do we say "after the name of a deity"? Observe, कन्यादेवताऽस्य, no affix is added to कन्या ॥ In the sentnces ऐन्द्रोमन्त्राः and आग्नेयो वै ब्रह्मणोदेवतयात the affix is added by analogy. 
The whole phrase साऽस्य देवता governs up to sutra IV. 2. 35. Though the word स was understood in this sutra by anuvritti from sutra IV.2. 21, its repetition is for the sake of indicating that the anuvšitti of sit does not extend to it. The affix ordained by this sâtra has the force of indicating 'lord of oblations like Purodasa &c offered in a sacrifice'. 
कस्यतू ॥२५॥ पदानि ॥ कस्य, इत् ॥ वृत्तिः।। कस्य इकारादेशो भवति प्रत्ययसन्नियोगेन ॥ 
25. The short s is the substitute of the final अ of क, when the affix is added., 
Thus क+अ = कि+अ =के+अ = कायं “oblation sacred to Ka". As कायं हविः, कार्यमककपालं निर्वपेत् ॥ 
शुक्रादू घन् ॥ २६ ॥ पदानि । शुक्रात्-धनू ॥ वृतिः ॥ शुक्रशब्दात्सास्य देवतेत्यस्मिन्नर्थे घन् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
26. The affix Etat comes in the sense of “that its deity", after the word 'Sukra. 
This debars अण (IV. I. 83). Thus शुक्र+घन् = शुक्रियम् हविः (VII. I. 2) 'an oblation belonging to Sukra'. Thus शुक्रियोऽध्यायः ॥ 
अपोनप्नपान्नप्तभ्यां घः ॥२७॥ पदानि ॥ अपः नप्त, अपाम् नपतृभ्याम् घः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ अपोनप्त अपान्नप्त इत्येतान्यां घः प्रत्ययो भवति सास्य देवतेत्यस्मिन्विषये ॥ 
27. The affix घcomes after the words 'aponaptri" and 'apannaptri', in the sense of that its deity'. 
This debars अण॥ Thus अपोनत्रियं हविः or अपांनस्त्रियम् ॥ The words अपोनपात and अपांनपान are the names of two deities ; these words irregularly assume the form ending in a when the affix is to be added. 
छ च॥ २८॥ पदानि ।। छ,च॥ वृत्तिः ॥ अपोनप्तृ अपान्नप्त इत्येतान्या छकारः प्रत्ययो भवति सास्य देवतेत्यस्मिन्विषये। वार्तिकम् ॥छपकरणे पेङ्गाक्षीपुत्वारिभ्य उपसंख्यानम।। वार्तिकम् ॥ हातरुद्राच्छवघश्च ।। 
URE • GOVE 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
NMENT OF A 
OF INDIA 
यत् । 
[ BK IV. CH. II. 32 
संस्कृति मन्त्रा 
सत्यमय जयते 
भारत सरकार 
28. Also Chha' is added to Aponaptri' and 'Apannaptri' in the sense of that its deity'. 
The affix 5 also comes in the sense of "that its deity" after the word Aponaptri and Apannaptri. This debars अण ॥ Thus अपोनपत्रीयं or अपान्नप्त्रीयम् 
oblation sacred to Aponapât or Apânnapât'. This is made a separate sútra, in order to prevent the application of rule I. 3. 10. For if it was included in the last, the sutra would have run thus: “ The affixes u and छ come after Aponaptri and Apannaptri", the meaning of which according to maxim I. 3. To would have been “ the affix घ comes after Aponaptri, and छ after Apanna ptri". . But this is not what the author intended. Hence two distinct sûtras. 
Vart :-The affix छ comes after the words पैंगाक्षीपत्र &c. As, पेंगाक्षी पुत्रीयम्, तार्णबिन्दवीयम् ॥ 
Vart :-The word शतरुद्र takes u and छ both : e. g. शतरुद्रीयम् and शतरुद्रियं ॥ 
महेन्द्राद घाणी च ॥ २९॥ पदानि ॥ महेन्द्रातू, घ, अणी च॥ वृत्तिः ॥ महेन्द्र शब्दात घाणौ प्रत्ययौ भवतः, चकारच्छश्व, सास्य देवतेत्यस्मिन्विषये ॥ 
29. The affix घ, and अण as also the affix छ, come after the name Mahendra, in the sense of this its deity". 
As महेन्द्रीयम्, महेन्द्रियम् and माहेन्द्रम् 'oblation sacred to Mahendra'. सोमाद् व्याण ॥३०॥ पदानि ॥ सोमात, ट्यण ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ सोमशब्दाद् व्यणप्रत्ययो भवति सास्यदेवतेत्यस्मिन्विषये ।। 
30. The affix ट्यण् comes after the name "Soma', in the sense of this its deity". 
This debars ago 11 The or of or causes Vriddhi. The z causes the affixing of डीप in the feminine. Thus सौम्य हविः, सौम्य सूक्तम्, सौमी ऋक् ॥ सौम्य+ डीए (IV. I. 15)= सौम्+ ई (VI. 4. 150)=सौमी ॥ 
वायवृतपित्रुषसो यत् ॥ ३१॥ पदानि ॥ वायु-ऋतु, पितृ-उषसः, यत् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ वाय्वादिभ्यः शब्वेभ्यो यत्प्रत्ययो भवति सास्य देवतेत्येतस्मिन्विषये॥ 
31. The affix यतू comes after the names Vayu', Ritu'. Pitri' and Ushas', in the sense of “this its deity". 
This debars अण | As, वायव्यम्, अतव्यम् , पित्र्यम् and उषस्थम् ॥ The form पित्र्यम् is thus evolved पितृ + यत्-पित्+री+यत् (VII. 4. 27)= पित्र्यम् (VI. 4. 148). 
The ruza has udatta on the first syllable by VI. 1. 213. 
द्यावापृथिवीशुनासीरमरुत्त्वदनीषोमवास्तोष्पतिगृहमेधाच्छच॥ ३२॥ पदानि ।। धावा, पृथिवी, शुनासीर, मरूत्वदू, अनी-पोम, वास्तोष्पति-गृह, मेधात्-1-छ, च । 
PURE 
GOV 
GOVERNMENT 
TRY OF CULT 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
BR. IV.CH, II. S. 35. 
मलय . भारत 
वृत्तिः॥ द्यावापृथिव्यादिभ्यश्छः प्रत्ययो भवति सास्य देवतेत्यस्मिन्विषये ॥ 
32. The affix छ comes also in the sense of this its deity', after the names Dyâvâ Prithivi', Sunâsîra', 'Ma ruttvat','Agnishoma', 'Vastoshpati' and 'Grihamedha'. 
This debars अण् &c. Thus द्यावापृथिवीयम् or यावापृथिव्यम् belonging to the Gods Heaven and Earth'. शनासीरीयम् or शुनासीर्यम् ‘belonging to Suna (Wind) and Sira (Sun). मरुत्वतीयम् or मरुत्वत्यम् ॥ अग्निषोमीयम् or अग्निषोम्यम् ॥ वास्तोष्पतीयम् or वास्तोष्पत्यम् ॥ गृहमेधीयम् or गृहमेव्यम् ॥ 
अग्नेढेक् ॥ ३३॥ पदानि ॥ अग्ने, ढक्॥ वृत्तिः ॥ अग्निशब्दाद ढक् प्रत्ययो भवति सास्य देवतेत्यस्मिन्विषये ॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ प्रारदीव्यतीयेषु तद्धितार्थेषु सर्वत्राग्निकलिभ्यां ढग्वक्तव्यः ।। 
33. The affix 66 comes in the sense of this its deity', after the name Agni. 
Thus अग्निदेवताऽस्य = आग्नेयोऽष्टकपालः ॥ Vårt:--The affix 'dhak' always comes after the words Agni and Kali, in the various senses of the affixes called Prâgdivyatîya. See IV. 2. 8. 
कालेभ्यो भववत् ॥ ३४॥ पदानि ॥ कालेभ्यो-भववत् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ कालविशेषवाचिभ्यः शब्देभ्यो भववत्प्रत्यया भवन्ति सास्य देवतेत्यस्मिन्विषये। कालाढमिति प्र करणे भवे प्रत्यया विधास्यन्ते ते सास्य देवतेत्यस्मिन्नर्थे तथैवष्यन्ते, तदर्थमिदमुच्यते ॥ 
34. After words expressive of time, the affixes denoting who stays there' (IV. 3. 11 to IV. 3.53), come also in the sense of this its deity'. 
Thus by IV. 3. II (read with IV. 3.53), the affix उञ् comes after the words expressive of time, in the sense of who stays there! The same affix will also come in the sense of साऽस्यदेवता॥ Thus मासे भवं =मासिकम् (मास+५= मास 
इकVII.3.50); अर्द्धमासिकम्, सांवत्सरिकम्, वासन्तम् (IV. 3. 16), प्रावृषेण्यम् (IV.3. 17): meaning monthly', 'half monthly', 'annual', 'vernal', and 'rainy'. The words will also mean 'an oblation sacred to a month i.e.' as मासो देवताऽस्य मासिकम् ॥ &c. 
महाराजप्रोष्ठपदा ॥ ३५॥ पदानि ॥ महाराज-प्रोष्ठपदात, ठञ् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ महाराजशब्दापोष्ठपदशब्दाच ठम् प्रत्ययो भवति सास्य दवतेत्यस्मिन्विषये ॥ बार्तिकम् ।। ठमकरणे तदस्मिन्वर्ततइति नवयज्ञादिभ्य उपसंख्यानम् ।। वार्तिकम् ॥ पूर्णमासावण ॥ 
35. The affix y comes, in the sense of this its deity', after the words "Mahârâja' and 'Proshthapada'. 
Thus महाराजो देवताऽस्य =महाराजिकम, प्रोष्ठपदिकं ।। 
14 
RE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURS 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
तस्य समूहः। 
[ BK. IV. CH II. S. 37 
भारत सरकार 
Vårt :--After the words F F &c the affix 5st comes in the sense of that exists in it'. As नवयज्ञोऽस्मिन् वर्तते =नावयक्षिकः कालः ॥ So also पाकयज्ञिकः &c. 
Vart :-After the word पूर्णमास, the affix अण् comes in the same sense. As पूर्णमासोऽस्यां वर्तते - पौर्णमासी तिथि: 'the day in which the full-moon occurs.' 
पितृव्यमातुलमातामहपितामहाः ॥ ३६॥ पदानि ॥ पितृव्य-मातुल-मातामह, पितामहाः॥ वृत्तिः ।। पितृव्यादयो निपात्यन्ते ॥ वार्चिकम् ।। अवेर्दग्धे सोढदूसमरीसचोवक्तव्याः॥ वार्चिकम् ॥ तिलान्निष्फलापिज्जपेजो प्रत्ययो वक्तव्यो। वार्तिकम् ॥ पिज्जश्छन्दसि डिच्च ॥ 
36. The words pitrivya, a father's brother', "matula, a mother's brother', 'matamaha , a mother's fa ther and pitâmaha, a father's father' are irregularly formed. 
We can infer from these forms, what were the affixes, having what indicatory letters, employed in what sense and coming after what cases of the base. Thus if any rules need be formed, we may ennunciate the following rules :-पितृमातृभ्यां प्रातरि व्यड् डुलचौ “the affixes व्यत् and डुलच् come respectively after the words pitri and mâtri in the sense of his brother. Similarly the second rule will be ताभ्यां पितरि डामहच, मातरिषिच्च 'and the affix damahach comes, in the sense of their father; and their feminine is formed as if the affix had an indi catory | Thus पितृव्यः, मातुलः, पितामहः (f. पितामही), मातामह (f. मातामही), 
Vart :-The affixes सोड, दूस, and मरीसच come after the word अवि, in the sense of milk'. As अवेर्दग्धम् = अविसोढम् or अविसम् or अविमरीसम् ।। 
Vårt :- The affixes 1955 and 5 come after the word fa, in the sense of fruitless. As निष्फलस्तिल-तिलपिञ्जः and तिलपेजः॥ 
Vårt :--The affix 1953 is treated like fsa in the Chhandas. As तिल्पिज्जः ॥ 
तस्य समूहः ॥३७॥ पदानि ॥ तस्य, समूहः ।। वृतिः ॥ तस्येति षष्ठीसमर्थात्समूह इत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे यथाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ वाचकम् ॥ गुणादिभ्यो ग्रामज्वक्तव्यः ।। 
37. An affix is added to a word, when the sense is a collection thereof'. 
The affix अण् (IV.7.83) already taught, is added to a word in the 6th case in construction, in the sense of collection. What is the example of this P In order to apply the affix st, we must apply it to those words only, to which the special rules hereinafter taught do not apply. In other words, the affix stor is added in the sense of collection thereof, to a word which denotes a conscious being, which has udatta accent on the first syllable, which 
GOVERNMEN 
CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
BK. TV. CH. II. S. 39] 
तस्य समूहः । 
मालय . भारत 
रित सरकार 
does not end with a Gotra-affix, and which is not a word specifically men tioned in the subsequent sûtras. For, a word expressing a non-conscious being, will take the affix ठक् by IV. 2. 47, a word having anudatta on the first syllable will have the affix 37. IV. 3. 44, a Gotra word will take 7 IV. 2..39 and especial words like केदार &c take यज्ञ &c. Making all these exclu sions, the example we get is :-काकानां समूहः = काकम् 'a collection of crows' बाकम् ॥ The phrase तस्य समूहः of this aphorism governs all the subsequent sûtras up to sâtra IV. 2. 51 inclusive. 
Vart:-The affix ग्रामच् comes after the words गण् &c. As गुणग्रामः 'a collection of qualities', करणग्रामः &c. The following is some of such words: गुण, करण, तत्व, शब्द, इन्द्रिय, &c. It is an akritigana. 
भिक्षादिभ्योऽण् ॥ ३८॥ पदानि ॥भिक्षा आदिभ्यः, आण ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ भिक्षेत्येवमादिभ्यः शब्दे योऽण प्रत्ययो भवति तस्य समूह इत्येतस्मिन्विषये ॥ 
38. The affix sur comes, in the sense of collec tion thereof', after the words bhiksha' &c. 
The repetition of the word stor in this sûtra, though its anuvšitti was here, is for the sake of removing the operation of any obstructing rule. 
_Thus भिक्षाणां समूहः = भैक्षम् 'what is collected in the shape of alms'. So also गर्भिणी+अण् = गर्भिण्+अण् (the masculine form of a Bha is substituted, when a Taddhita affix follows without an indicatory ढ, भस्याढे तद्धिते) = गर्भिणः (VI. 4. 164). In the case of gain, the word however is not changed to its masculine form. Thus युवतीनां समूहः = यौवतम् 'a collection of young women'. 
1 भिक्षा, 2 गर्भिणी, 3 क्षेत्र, 4 करीष, 5 अङ्गार, 6 चर्मन् (चर्मिन् according to some texts) 7 सहल, 8 युवति, 9 पदाति, 10 पद्धति, 11 अथर्वन, (also अर्वन् K.) 12 दक्षिणा, 13 भूत, 14 विषय, 15 श्रोत्र. also 16 धर्मिन् 
गोत्रोक्षोष्ट्रोरभ्रराजराजन्यराजपुत्रवत्समनुष्याजादू वुञ् ॥ ३९॥ पदानि ॥ गोत्र, उक्ष, उष्ट, उरभ्र, राज, राजन्य, राजपुत्र, वत्स, मनुष्य-अजादू-वुञ्॥ वृत्तिः ॥ गोत्रादिभ्यो बुञ् प्रत्ययो भवति तस्य समूह इत्येतस्मिन्विषये ॥ वात्तिकम् ॥ वृद्धाचोति वक्तव्यम् । 
39. The affix बुर comes in the sense of 'collection thereof', after a word denoting a patronymic, and after 'uk shan', 'ushtra', 'urabhra', ' rajan', 'rijanya', ' rajaputtra" 
vatsa', 'manushya' and 'aja'. 
The word Tit is used here in its popular and not technical sense, meaning any descendant or offspring. Thus औपगवकम् , औक्षकम् , (VI.4, 144) औदकम्, औरनकम, राजकम, (VI. 4. 144) राजन्यकम् , राजपुनकम्, वात्सकम्, मानुष्यकम, आजकम, ॥ The final य of मनुष्य and राजन्य is not elided when the affix अक् is added (VI. 4. 150) 
Go 
GOVERNMENT 
Y OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
तस्य समूहः । 
BK. IV. CH. II. 
4.1 
पनपते 
मनालयमा 
सरकार 
Vart:-Also after the word वृद्ध; e.g. वार्द्धकम् 'a collection of old men'. केदाराद्यञ्च ॥४०॥ पदानि ॥ केदारातू, यञ् च ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ केदारशब्दाद् यज्ञप्रत्ययो भवति, चकाराद् बुञ् च, तस्य समूह इत्येतस्मिन्विषये ॥ वातिकम् ।। गणिकायाश्च यवक्तव्यः ॥ 
40. The affix या as well as the affix वुञ्, comes after the word केदार, in the sense of ' collection thereof'. 
This debars उक् of IV. 2.47. Thus केशराणाम् समूहः = कैरार्यम् or कदारकम् ॥ 
Vart:-The affix यञ् comes after गणिका e.g. गाणिक्यम् ॥ ठम् कवचिनश्च ॥४१॥ पदानि ॥ ठञ् कवचिनः, च ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ कवचिन्शब्दाञ् प्रत्ययो भवति तस्य समूह इत्येतस्मिन्विषये ॥ 
41. The affix gw comes, in the sense of 'collection thereof', after the word 'Kedâra', and also after the word Kavachin'. 
Thus कावचिकम् (VI. 4. 144); and कैारिकमू. We read the anuvritti of केदार in this Sutra, by virtue of the word च 
ब्राह्मणमाणववाडवाद्यन् ॥ ४२॥ पदानि ॥ ब्राह्मण, माणव-वाडवातू-यन् ।। वृत्तिः ।। ब्राह्मणादिभ्यः शब्देभ्यो यन्मत्ययो भवति तस्य समूह इत्येतस्मिन्विषये ॥ वार्षितकम् ॥ यन्त्रकरणे पृष्ठापसंख्यानम् ॥ वातिकम् ॥ अहः खः क्रती ।। वास्तिकम् ॥पर्धा णस्वक्तव्यः॥ वात्तिकम् ॥ वाताठूलः ।। 
42. The affix यनू is added, in the sense of 'collection thereof, after the words 'brahmana', mânava', and 'yâdava'. 
The indicatovy 7 of makes the word take udatta accent on the first syllable (VI. I, I97). Thus ब्राह्मण्यम, माणव्यम्, वाडव्यम् । 
Vårt:-Also after the word yg e. g. 78: it 
Vart:--The affix ख is added to अहन, in the sense of a 'sacrifice'. e.g. भहीनः a collection of days of sacrifice'. Otherwise the form is आड़: by अञ् see IV.2.45. 
Vart:-The affix णस् comes after पशु, e.g. पार्श्वम् 'a collection of axes'. The final 3 of ra is not changed by guna into sit before the affix, because the word Tat is treated as a pada-word (I. 4. 16) and not a Bha-word. 
Vart:--The affix जल is added to वात e.g. वातूल: a collection of winds or a mad-man'. 
ग्रामजनबन्धुसहायभ्यस्तल् ॥४३॥ पदानि ॥ ग्राम, जन-बन्धु-सहायेभ्यातल् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ प्रामादिभ्यस्तल्पत्ययो भवति तस्य समूह इत्येतस्मिन् विषये ॥ वात्तिकम् ॥ गजाश्चेति वक्तव्यम् ।। 
ARE - GOVE 
OF CULTURA 
SAINISTRY 
ENT OF INDIA 
- 
BirV. CH. II. $45] 
सादजयते 
तस्य समूहः । 
हात मंत्रालय 
लय . भारतस 
43, The affix 'tal' comes, in the sense of 'collection thereof', after the words 'grioma', 'jana', 'bandhu' and 'sahaya'. 
Thus that 'a collection of villages'. The words ending in an are all feminine. So also जनता 'a collection of persons', बन्धुता 'a collection of rela tives', and सहायता 'a collection of allies'. 
___Vart:--The affix 'tal comes after गज also e. g. गजता 'a collection of elephants'. 
अनुदात्तादेरञ्॥४४॥ पदानि ।। अनुदात्तादेः, अञ् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ अनुदात्तादेः शब्द प्रत्ययो भवति तस्य समूह इत्येतस्मिन् विषये॥ 
44. The affix अ comes, in the sense of 'collection thereof', after the words having anudatta on the first syllable. 
Thus कपोतानां समूहः = कापातम्, मायूरम, तैत्तिरम् ॥ खण्डिकादिभ्यश्च ॥ ४५ ॥ पदानि ॥ खण्डिकादिभ्यः च ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ खण्डिका इत्येवमादिभ्यः शब्देभ्यो ऽम् प्रत्ययो भवति तस्य समूह इत्येतस्मिन्विषये ॥ 
Karika, अप्रसिद्धिरनुदात्तादेः कोऽर्थः क्षुद्रकमालवात् । 
गोत्रावु न च तोत्रं तदन्तान्न च सर्वतः॥ ज्ञापकं स्यात्तवन्तत्वे तथा चापिशलेविधिः । 
सेनायां नियमार्थ च यथा बाध्येत चा बुना। वात्तिकम् ॥ क्षुद्रकमालवातूसेनासंज्ञायाम् ॥ 
45. The affix अञ् comes, in the sense of 'collection thereof' after the words Khandika &c. 
This sâtra applies to words having anudatta on the first syllable, and being names of non-living things. e.g. खाण्डिकम, वाडवम् ।। 
The word क्षुद्रकमालवं is included in this list. It is a Dvandva com pound of two words go and arca, denoting tribes of Kshatriyas. The Tadraja affix 3751 (IV. 1. 168) is elided after the first, and see (IV. 1. 171) after the second word which is a Vriddham. When these two words form a com pound, the acute falls on the final (VI. 1. 223), the initial of this compound is therefore, anudatta : and therefore by the last sutra IV.2.44, this word would have taken ; where is the necessity of its being included in this list?. It is to exclude the of IV. 2. 39 which comes after a Gotra word, But will not the subsequent अ (IV. 2. 44) debar the preceding बुञ् (IV. 2. 39) by the rule of paratva ? Moreover, a collection or aggregate of two Gotra words will not be called Gotra, as an aggregate of countries is not called a "country' for the application of janapada rule, as काशिकोसलीयाः does not tale वुर and there will not apply tadanta vidhi to the compound word क्षुद्रकमालव, which ends in a gotra word ?. To this we reply, that the fact of the inclusion 
URE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
ON [ BK. IV. CH. II.S. 
तस्य समूह। 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
मानय भारत 
भारत सरकार 
of this word in the list, is an indication of the existence of these two rules : (1) that affix supersedes a subsequent affix in cases of conflict. Thus 
आपगव and कापदव are anudattadi words because formed by अण् (III. I. 2), and require therefore अञ् by IV. 2.44, but तुम् supersedes it, and we have औपगव कम् and कापटवकम् ॥ The second rule is: (2) that in सामूहिक affixes there is tad antavidhi in spite of the prohibition contained in vârtika under I. 1. 72. As वानहस्तिकं, गोधेनुकम् ॥ The complete sentence in the Ganapatha is क्षुद्रकमालवात् सेनासंज्ञायाम् , the first portion denotes the existence of the above two rules, the second portion Far &c restricts the application of the rule. The affix is added when it is the name of a सेना 'army' and not otherwise. - As क्षौद्रक मालवी सेना, otherwise क्षौद्रकमालवकं ॥ The existence of above corollaries is proved by the sutra of the Grammarian Apisali also धेनुरनजि ठकमुत्पादयति 'the affix 5 comes after ea in denoting collection thereof, when not preceded by the negative particle 78', therefore, when preceded by any other word, the affix will apply. 
1 खण्डिक (खण्डिका K.), 2 वडबा, 3 क्षुद्रकमालवात्सेनासंज्ञायाम् (a Varttika to 4,2,45), 4 भिक्षुक, 5 शुक, 6 उलूक, 7 श्वन, 8 अहन, 9 युगवरत्र, (वरत्रा V. 1.; युग, वरचा K.), 10 हलबन्ध (बग्धा). 
चरणेभ्यो धर्मवत् ।। ४६॥ पदानि ॥ चरणेभ्यः धर्मवत् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ चरणशब्दाः कठकलापादयः, तेभ्यः षष्ठीसमर्थेभ्यः समूहे धर्मवत् प्रत्यया भवन्ति । वास्तिकम् ॥ चरणाद्धर्मानाययोरिति ॥ 
46. After the name of a Vedic School, the affixes which denote the rule of that School, come also in the sense of collection thereof'. 
The Vedic Schools or Charanas are like कठ, कलाप &c. The affixes de noting the rule of the School are those taught in Sutra IV. 3. 126 &c. The, word धर्म does not occur in the Sutra IV. 3. 126, or any where else, but it oc curs in the following ishti under that Sutra:-चरणद्धर्मानाययोः॥ Thus कठानां धर्म - काठकम, so also कठाना समूहः = काठकम् ॥ Similarly कालापकम् , छान्दोग्यम्, औधिक्यम् and आथर्वणम् ॥ 
अचित्तहस्तिधेनोष्टक ॥४७॥ पदानि ॥ अचित्त-हस्ति-धेनो-ठक् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ अचि साथै यो हस्तिधनुशब्दाभ्यां च उक् प्रत्ययो भवति तस्य समूह इत्येतस्मिन्विषये ॥ वातिकम् ।। धेनोरना इति वक्तव्यम् ।। 
47. The affix ठक comes, in the sense of 'collec tion thereof', after the names of things without consciousness, and after hasti' and dhenu'. 
This debars अण् and अम्॥ The अपूपानां समूहः आपूपिकम् ॥ The affix क is replaced by इक (VII, 3.50) or क (VII. 3. 50), Thus हास्तिकम, धेनुकम, शाप कृलिकम।। ORE • GOVE. 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY OF 
NT OF INDIA 
BENV. CH. II. S. 51] 
तस्य समूहः । 
तसरकार 
Vart: -Not so, if the word ga is preceded by the negative particle नम् ॥ As आधेनवम्॥ (See IV. 2. 45). 
केशाश्वाभ्यां यञ्छावन्यतरस्याम्॥४८॥ पदानि ॥ केश-अश्वाभ्याम् अन्यतरस्याम् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ केश अश्व इत्येताभ्यां यथासंख्यं यज्ञ छ इत्येता प्रत्ययौ भवतो ऽन्यतरस्यां तस्य समूह इत्येतस्मि नू विषये ॥ 
48. The affixes 'yañ' and 'chha' come optional ly in the sense of collection thereof', respectively after the words केश and अश्व ॥ 
Thus केशानां समूहः = कैश्यम् or कैशिकम् (IV. 2.47), अश्वानां समूहः = आश्वम् (IV.I. 63) अश्वीयम् ॥ 
पाशादिभ्यो यः॥४९॥ पदानि ॥ पाशादिश्यः यः वृत्तिः॥पाशादिन्यो यः प्रत्ययो भवति तस्य समूह इत्येतस्मिन्विषये ।। 
49. The affix 'ya' comes, in the sense of 'collec tion thereof', after the words पाश &c. 
Thus argur, quae &c. These words are feminine. 
1 पाश, 2 तण, धूम, 4 वात, 5 अङ्गार, 6 पाढल (पाटलका K.), 7 पोत, 8 गल,9 पिटक, 10 पिटाक, 11 शकट, 12 हल, 13 मट (नड K.), 14 वन. also 15 बालक. 
खलगोरथात् ॥५०॥ पदानि ॥ खल-गो-रथात-य॥ वृत्तिः ॥ खलगोरथशब्देन्यो यः प्रत्ययो भवति तत्य समूह इत्येतस्मिन्विषये ॥ 
50. The affix 'ya' comes in the sense of collec tion thereof', after the words 'Khala', 'Go' and “Ratha'. 
Thus खल्या, गव्या and रथ्या ॥ These three words have not been includ. ed in the Trutre class, in order that rule IV. 2. 51 should apply to them. 
इनित्रकट्याचश्च ॥५१॥ पदानि ॥ इनि-त्र-कट्यचः, च॥ वृत्तिः॥ खलगोरथशब्देभ्यो यथासंख्यम् इनित्र कव्यच इत्येते प्रत्यया भवन्ति तस्य समुह इत्येतस्मि विषये ॥ 
वार्तिकम् ॥ खलादिभ्य इनिर्वक्तव्यः॥ वात्तिकम् ॥ कमलादिभ्यः खण्डच् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ वात्तिकम् ॥ नरकरितुरगाणां स्कन्धच् प्रत्ययः ।। वात्तिकम् ।। पूर्वादिभ्यः काण्डः प्रत्ययो भवति । 
51. The affixes 'ini', 'tra' and 'katyach' come in the senses of 'collection thereof', respectively after the word khala', 'go' and 'ratha'. 
Thus खलिनी, गोत्रा, रथकव्या । 
Vart:-The affix इनि comes after the words खल &c. Thus डाकिनी, कुण्ड लिनी, कुटुम्बिनी॥ 
URE 
GOVE 
GOVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
MENT OF INDIA 
तस्य समहः । 
[BK. IV. CH. T1J554 
विस्कृति मंत्राल 
सत्यमेव जयते 
Vart:--The affix खण्डच comes after the words Kamala &c. As कमल खण्डम, अम्भोजखण्डम् ॥ कमल, अम्भोज, पद्मिनी, कुमुर, सरोज, नलिनी, कैरविणी belong to this class. These are आकृतिगणः ॥ 
Vari:--The affix स्कन्धच् comes after the words नर, करि, and तुरङ्ग ॥ As, नरस्कन्धः, करिस्कन्धः and तुरङ्गस्कन्धः॥ 
Vart:-The affix काण्ड comes after the words पूर्व &c. Thus पूर्वकाण्डम् , तृणकाण्डम् , कर्मकाण्डम् ॥ 
विषयो देशे ॥५२॥ पदानि ॥ विषयः, देशे। वृत्तिः ॥ समूह इति निवृत्तम् । षष्ठीसमर्थविभक्तिरनुवर्तते । तस्येति षष्ठीसमर्थ विषय इत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे य थविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति, योसौ विषयो देशश्चेत्स भवति ॥ 
52. The affix STU (IV. 1. 83) comes after a word in the sixth case in construction, in the sense of any body's sphere', if a country is indicated by such sphere. 
The anuvritti of FAE: (IV. 2. 37) does not extend further : but the anuvritti of तस्य (IV. 2.37) is to be read into it. The whole shtra thus becomes तस्य विषयो देशे 'his sphere-in denoting a country'. The word विषय 
sphere, topic' has many significations. Sometime it means an estate, as विषयो लब्धः , a village has been acquired'. Some time it means an object of per ception, as चक्षु विषयो रूपं 'color is the object of sight &c. Therefore the word 
a has been used in the Sútra, in order to fix the particular meaning of the word विषय॥ 
Thus farfrat facit agt: = 7: The country within the sphere of the Sibi'. So also afre: &c. Why do we say if a country is meant'? Observe देवदत्तस्य विषयोऽनुवाकः ॥ 
राजन्यादिभ्यो वुम् ॥ ५३॥ पदानि ।। राजन्यादिभ्यः, वुञ् ॥ ऐतिः॥राजन्यादिभ्यः शब्देभ्यो बुम् प्रत्ययो भवति विषयो देशइत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे । 
53. The affix got comes after the words rajanya &c, in the same sense. 
This debars अणू ॥ Thus राजन्यानां विषयो देशः राजन्यकः, वायनकः॥ It is an माकृतिगणः ॥ 
1 राजन्य, 2 आवृत*, 3 बाभ्रव्या, 4 शालङ्कायन, हेवयात (देवयातव: देवयान), 6 अनीड,7 वरत्रा, जालंधरायण, 9 राजायन , 10 तेलु*, 11 आत्मकामेय, 12 अम्बरीष पत्र, 13 वसाति, 14 बेल्ववन. 15 शैलूष, 16 उदुम्बर, 17 तीव, 18 बैल्वज (बल्वज) 19 
आर्जुनाथन, 20 संमिथ, दाक्षि, 22 ऊर्णनाभ. 23 मामीत, 24 वैतिल, 25 वात्रक, ।। 
भौरिक्याद्यषुकार्यादिभ्यो विधल्भक्तलौ ॥ ५४॥ पदानि ।। भौरिक्यादि, ऐषु कार्यादिश्यः, विधल, भक्तलो॥ 
MRE 
GOVE 
GOVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY ON 
GL 
• BEV. CH. II. S55) 
अण। 
कृति मंत्राल 
भारत सरकार 
वृत्तिः ॥ भौरिक्याविन्य ऐषुकार्याविश्यम यथासंख्यं विधल् भक्कल इत्येती प्रत्ययौ भवतो, विषयो देश इत्येतस्मिन्विषये ॥ 
54. The affixes vidhal' and bhaktal' come respectively after the words Bhauriki', and 'Aishukàri &c' in the sense of 'sphere of country'. 
This debars अण ॥ Thus भौरिकिविधः, वैपेयविधः &c. ऐषुकारिभक्तः, सारस्या यनभक्तः &c. 
1 भौरिकि, 2 भौलिकि, 3 चौपयत*, 4 चैटयत (चौव्यत), काणेय, 6 वाणिजक,7 वालिकाज्य (वाणिकाज्य: वालिज, वालिज्यक), 8 सैकयत (शैकयत.), 9 वैकयत. 10 वैपेय. 
1 ऐषुकारि, 2 सारस्यायन (सारसायन), 3 चान्द्रायण, 4 याक्षायण, 5 धाक्षायण (बघायण), 6 औडायन, 7 जौलायन, 8 खाडायन, 9 दासमित्रि, 10 दासमित्रायण, 11 शौद्रा यण (शौद्राण), 12 दाक्षायण, 13 शायण्डायन*, 14 ताायण, 15 शौभ्रायण, 16 सौवीर, 17 सौवीरायण , 18 शयण्ड, 19 शौण्ड, 20 शयाण्ड, 21 वैश्वमानव, 22 वैश्वधेनव, 23 नड (नद) 24 तुण्डदेव, 25 विश्वदेव (विशदेव and वैश्वदेव), 26 तापिण्डि.27 शौण्डि, 28 सायण्डि, 29 अलावत, 30 औलालायत. 
सोस्यादिरितिच्छन्दसः प्रगाथेषु ॥ ५५॥ पदानि ॥ सः, अस्य, आदिः, इति छन्दसः-प्रगाथेषु॥ वृत्तिः ॥ स इति प्रथमासमर्थरस्यति षष्ठपर्थे यथाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति, यत्प्रथमासमर्थ छन्दश्वेत्तरादि वति, यत्ततस्येति निर्दिष्टं प्रगाथावेत्ते भवन्ति ॥ 
वातिकम् ॥ छन्दसः प्रत्ययविधानेनपुंसके स्वार्थ उपसंख्यानम् ।। 
55. The affix अण (IV. 1. 83) added to the names of Metres, indicates a Pragatha beginning therewith. 
The words of this sutra require a little explanation. स: that'i.c. a word in construction in the first case. TFF its' i. e. this gives the meaning of the affix. Sifa: 'beginning'; this qualifies the base or prakriti. The word इति is added for the sake of precision. छन्दसः 'after the name of a metre'. This points out the base. प्रगाथष in the sense of Pragatha'. This qualifies the meaning of the affix. To put it in other words, the sâtra means that the affix 97T is added to the name of a metre, when that metre is the beginn. ing of a Pragatha, and the whole word so formed means a Pragatha beginn ing with that metre. Thus crn is the name of a metre, adding sur to it we get in which means "a Pragatha beginning with the metre Pankti". Simil arly भानुष्टुभः, जागतः &c. 
Why do we say "beginning"? If the metre is in the middle or end of a 'Pragatha' the affix will not be employed. Why do we say after the 
15 
URE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
USTRY OF CU 
NT OF INDIA 
[ BK IV.CH. II. S. 501 
सत्यमेव जयते 
तमंत्राम 
पाल सरकार 
name of a metre'? The affix will not be added to a word which is in the beginning of a Pragatha. Why do we say 'in the sense of a Pragatha'? The affix will not be added, if the metre is the beginning of an Anuvâka &c and not of a Pragatha. Pragatha is the name of a particular kind of Mantra or Hymn, यत्र छे ऋचौ प्रगथनेन तिस्रः क्रियन्ते, स प्रगायनातू पकर्षगानात् वा प्रगाय इत्युच्यते ।। 
Vårt:-The affix stor is added to the name of a metre in a self-des criptive sense without changing the meaning of it; and the word so formed is in the neuter gender. As, त्रैष्टुभम् 'the metre Trishtubha', जागतम् &c. 
संग्रामे प्रयोजनयोदूधृभ्यः ॥५६॥ पदानि ॥ संग्रामे, प्रयोजन, योभ्यः ॥ वृत्तिः॥ प्रयोजनवाचिभ्यो योढवाचिभ्यश्च शब्देभ्यः प्रथमासमर्थेभ्योऽस्योत षष्ठपर्थे संग्रामेऽभिधेये यथ. विहितं प्रत्ययो भवति॥ 
56. The same affix star indicates, when it is added to a word which denoteseither the object of a battle or the war rior of a battle, a battle fought for that object or by that warrior as a leader. 
The phrase FisFT is understood here; showing that the word in con struction to which the affix is to be added must be in the first case: and must be the name of the fobject" प्रयोजनः, or of the “warrior" योद्र॥ The whole word so formed must denote a battle. Therefore, the word 19 gives the meaning of the affix. 
This भद्रा प्रयोजनमस्य संग्रामस्य = भाद्र: "A battle fought for Bhadra". So also सौभाद्रः “a battle fought to gain Subhadra". Similarly अहिमाला योद्धारोऽस्य संग्रामस्थ =आहिमाल: battle led by Ahimala warriors' So also स्थान्दनाश्वः, भारतः॥ 
Why do we say in the sense of a battle?" Observe सुभद्रा प्रयोजनमस्य तानस्य 'Subhadra is the object of this gift'. Here no affix is added. Why do we say after a word denoting anobjectora warrior? Observe, सुभद्रा प्रेक्षिकाऽस्य संग्रामस्य। 
तदा प्रहरणमिति क्रीडायां णः ॥ ५७॥ पदानि ॥ तत्-अस्याम, प्रहरणम, इति-क्रीडायाम, णः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ तदिति प्रथमासमावस्यामिति सप्तम्यर्थे णः प्रत्ययो भवति, यत्तरिति निर्दिष्टं प्रहरणं चत्तद्भवति, यवस्थामिति निर्दिष्ट क्रीडा चेत्सा भवति ।। 
57. The affix or added to the name of a weapon, indicates a game played with that weapon. 
The sutra literally translated means: that is the weapon in this, denot ing play; the affix v is added 'ie, to a word in the first case in construction, 
RE 
GOVE. 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
WIR 
BK. IV. Ch. II. $59. ] 
717 
denoting the name of a weapon ; o is added to denote a play. Thus fos: Tecumeni altrai =PST"a game played with sticks". So ÄTET "a game played with fists". 
Why do we say 'a weapon' ? Observe APT quhet Stars 'the garland is an ornament in this play. Here no affix is added to im l Why do we say 'in denoting a game? Observe:-05: JETOT FEAT Farare 'the sword is the we apon in this army'. These words are as a rule in the feminine gender (IV. I. 4 and 15), the feminine being formed by 3TT II 
F: FreTi facuta st: 1 4611 GTGT II ET=T: ETT-SETIH frent-afa-st: !! वृत्तिः ॥ घजन्तारिकथावाचिनः प्रथमासमास्यामिति सप्तम्यर्थ स्त्रीलिङ्गे मा प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
58. The affix , added to a noun of action ending in the affix ga, denotes an action occurring in that. 
These words are also feminine. The meaning of the words of the aphorism is:-- : "after a word ending in the affix '; E 'that', stelt in it', the feminine gender shows that the word is also feminine. Refer "action"; this qualifies the sense of the affix. To put it in other words, the sûtra means, "After a word ending in Est, expressing an action, being in the ist case in construction, the affix is added in the sense of a 7th case-affix, the resultant word being in the feminine gender". 
Thus श्येनपातोऽस्यां वर्तते-श्यनंपाता, so also तेलंपाता॥ The nasal is added by VI. 3.71. Thus itaqrar girar'a chase with hawks to bring down or fell the prey. TTTT FTUT "an oblation to the ancestors in which sesamum is thrown". 
The repetition of fresti in this sûtra, though its anuvșitti could have been obtained from the last sútra, indicates that this is a general rule, and not one confined to "games" only. Thus queTaSi furada = Tuna Part; मौसलपाता तिथिः ।। 
fra ag 1148 11 far l af-serat--a ll वृस्तिः ॥ तरिति द्वितीयासमर्थावधीते वेद इत्येतयोरर्थ योर्यथाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
59. The affix tu (1V. 1. 83) comes after a word denoting 'some subject of study', in the sense of "who has studied that or who understands that' 
In others words, the sâtra means that the affix is added to a word in the accusative case in construction, denoting a person who studies or knows, that. As gestra = STEE: 'who studies Prosody'. Taktor: (VII. 3. 3) 'who knows grammar'. So also eh, an 'who knows the causes'. Sreca, stara: il 
URE • Gov 
VERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
OF INDIA 
ON 
रावधान 
(BK. IV. CH. 1860. 
भारत सरकार 
The word aa is repeated in this sûtra, in order to show a distinction between one who studies and who understands. 
ऋतूकथादिसूत्रान्ताक् ॥ ६०॥ पदानि ॥ ऋतु-उक्थादि-सूत्रान्तातू-ठक् ॥ वृतिः॥ ऋतुविशेषवाचिभ्य उक्थादिभ्यश्च सूत्रान्ताच उपत्ययो भवति तदधीते तदेत्यस्मिन्विषये । अणोपवादः ॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ सूत्रान्तादकल्पावरिष्यते ॥ वार्निकम् ॥ विद्यालक्षणकल्पान्तादिति वक्तव्यम् ॥ वार्षिकम् ॥ विद्या च नाक्षत्रधर्मसंसर्गत्रिपूर्वा ॥ वार्चिकम् ॥ आख्यानाख्यायिकोतिहासपुराणेभ्यष्ठरवक्तव्यः ।। वार्षिकम ॥ अनुसूर्लक्ष्यलक्षणे च ॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ इकन्पोचरपरात् ॥ वार्चिकम् ॥ शतषष्ठेः षिकन् पथो बहुलम् ॥ 
60. The affix ठक comes in the sense of 'one who studies or one who understands', after the name of a sacrifice, after 'uktha &c', and after a stem ending with the word 'sûtra'. 
This debars To Thus praefaren: 'who understands or studies Agnishtoma Sacrifice'. वाजपेथिकः, औकथिकः, लोकायतिकः, वातिकमात्रिकः,साग्रहसूत्रिकः ।। 
Ishti:-If a word ending in 'sutra', begins with the word 'Kalpa', the affix अण् is added and not ठक्. Thus: काल्पसूत्रः 'who studies Kalpa-shtra'. 
Vart:-This affix comes after words ending in विद्या, लक्षण and कल्प, as वायसविधिकः, साविधिकः, गौलक्षणिका, आश्वलक्षणिक, मातृकल्पिकः, पाराशरकल्पिकः ।। 
Vart :-Not so if the word विद्या is preceded by the words अङ्ग, क्षत्र, धर्म, संसर्ग and जि. As अंगविद्यामधीते :आज विद्यः, क्षाविद्यः, धार्मवियः, सांसर्गविद्यः, विद्यः ।। All these are formed by अण् and not क्॥ 
Vårt :--The affix it comes in the same sense after names of stories (भाख्यान), narratives (आख्यायिका), and after the words इतिहास and पुराण | As यावक्रीतिका, याविका, वासवरचिकः, सौमनोत्तरिकः, ऐतिहासिक, पौराणिकः॥ 
Vart:--The affix a comes in the same sense, after words beginning with सर्व, and स, and after Dvigu compounds. As सर्ववेदः, सर्वतन्त्रः, सवार्तिकः, ससंग्रहः, द्विवेदः पंचव्याकरणः ॥ 
Vart:-The affix ठक comes in the same sense after the words अनस, लक्ष्य, and लक्षण; As अनसूर्नामग्रन्थ स्तमधीते-आनुसकः, लाक्षिका, लाक्षणिकः ।। 
Vart :--The affix fena comes in the same sense after a compound word ending in पद्; as, पूर्वपरिकः।। 
Vart :- The affix comes diversely in the same sense, after the compound words शतपथ, and शष्टिपथ. As शतपथिकाशितपथिकी IV. 1. 4I), षष्टिप fra: (f. cferaft). By the force of the word diversely' we get the affix 37, as 
शासपथ: and षाष्टिपथः ॥ 
1 उक्थ, लोकायत, 3 न्याय, न्यास, पुनरुक्त,6निरुक्त, 7 निमित्त, 8 रि पणा, 9 ज्योतिष (विपी, ज्योतिषि) 10 शनपत, 11 अनुकल्प, 12 यज्ञ, 13 धर्म, 14च. 
URE - Gove 
OVERNMENT, 
A 
v OF CULTUR 
SININ 
NT OF INDIA 
ABK. TV. CH, II, $ 641 
मालय भारत 
वी, 15 कमेतर, 16 लक्ष्ण, 17 संहिता, 18 परकम (पद । कम) 19 संघ संघात । also संघट) 20 वृत्ति, 21 परिषद *, 22 संग्रह, 23 गण, 24 गुण (गुणागुण st, गण, गुण), 25 आयुर्वेद. 26 अनुगुण. 
क्रमादिश्यो वुन् ॥ ६१॥ वृत्तिः ॥ कम इत्येवमादिभ्यः शब्दे यो बुन्प्रत्ययो भवति तदधीते तदेत्यस्मिन्विषये ।। 
61. The affix it comes, in the sense of “who studies or who knows”, after the words Krama &c'. 
This debars अण् ॥ Thus क्रमकः (VII. I. I) पदकः &c. The words 1 क्रम, 2 पर, 3 शिक्षा, 4 मीमांसा, 5 सामन् belong to this class. 
अनुब्राह्मणादिनिः ॥ ६२॥ पदानि ॥ अनु, ब्राह्मणात् इनिः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ अनुब्राह्मणशब्दाशिनः प्रत्ययो भवति तदधीते तदेत्यास्मिन्विषये ॥ 
62. The affix 'ini' comes in the sense of “who studies or who knows", after the word 'anubrahmana'. 
This debars Full The word saarelu means 'a book in the imitation of or similar to a Brahmana book'. He who studies an अनुब्राह्मण is called अनु ब्राह्मणिन्, which word is thus declined :-अनुब्राह्मणी, अनुब्राह्मणिनौ, अनुब्राह्मणिनः &c. The affix इनि also has the force of मतुप, and by Sutra V. 2. 115 अत इनि ठनौ, this word STAATETUT might have taken both the affixes çfa and 54 in the sense of मतप; but as a matter of fact, it only takes इनि in that sense. 
वसन्तादिश्यष्ठक् ॥ ६३॥ पदानि ॥ वसन्तादिभ्यः, ठक् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ वसन्त इत्येवमादिभ्यष्ठकप्रत्ययो भवति तदधीते तदैत्यस्मिन्विषये । अणोपवादः ।। 
63. The affix ya comes in the sense of “who stu dies or who knows", after the words vasanta &c.' 
This debars अण् ॥ As, वासन्तिकः 'who studies the book relating to Spring'. वार्षिकः &c॥ 1 वसन्त, 2 वर्षी, शरद, 4 हेमन्त, शिशिर, 6 प्रथम, 7 गुण, 8चरम, 9 अनुगुण, 10 अपर्वन्, 11 अर्श्वन 12 ग्रीष्म, 
प्रोक्ताल्लुक्॥६४॥ पदानि ॥ प्रोक्तातू-लुक्॥ वृत्तिः ॥ मोक्तप्रत्ययान्ताव येतवेदित्रोरुत्पन्नस्य लुग्भवति ।। 
64. After the title of a work, which is named after the Announcer thereof, the affixes denoting “who stue dies or who knows that " are elided by luk'. 
This sūtra may be rendered in the following way also :-" There is y of these affixes after a word ending with an affix denoting announcer". The affixes denoting site or the first propounder are taught in IV. 3. 101 &c. Thus पाणिनिना प्रोक्तम्-पाणिनीयम् the system of Grammar enounced by Panini', 
GURE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
Y OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
(a 
स्कृति मंशान 
OPE 
Tih-LUK-ELISION. 
[BK, IV. Ch. 11. 566. 
21 
.17 
17 
पाणिनीयमधीते-पाणिनीयः, so also आपिशलः ॥ The difference between the word mfurafat meaning the system of Grammar, and toata formed with 7o, meaning whostudies that Grammar, would consist in the accent, and the formation of the feminine. Asquiurafrer sa i For had there been no elision expressly enjoined by this sútra, in forming the feminine, ta would be required by IV.1.15, as the word would end in Tot; and the accent of the word would be finally acute (STOT being acute by the universal rule of affix-accent III. 1. 3). But when the affix is elided, the feminine is formed by ETT, the accent is on the middle, owing to the 3 affix, (Phiț Su II. 19) 
सूत्राच कोपधातू ॥६५॥ पदानि ॥ सूत्रात्-च-कोपधात्-(लुक) वृत्तिः ।। सूत्रवाचिनः ककारोपधादुत्पन्नस्य प्रत्ययस्य लुग्भवति ।। वार्चिकम् ।। संख्याप्रकृतोरीत वक्तव्यम् ॥ 
65. The affix denoting who studies that or who knows that” is elided by luk, after the title of a sûtra work, having a as penultimate. 
Thus we is the title of Paņini sâtra. Those who study we will be called also srech, as TERT: Croatian: those who study, the Ashțaka'. So also 
TEAT Tarim:, ferat: FTTHET: 11 
Vårt:-The elision takes place only where the title is formed by a numeral: as in the examples above given. Thus Herau Hafta = HETTEGis so also a tte: 1 
Why do we say 'having a for its penultimate"? Observe reqafia =A : 11 This sátra applies, of course, to those words which are not formed by affixes denoting in or the Announcer, 
GEISTEMA = argano II & II tar Il gratarga--a-fat TOT-ara 2 gf: 
H UHTET I geifer BETUT TUTA aratata Tara!! 
66. The affixes denoting the announcer, when added to Chhandas and the Brahmanas, express this relation only. 
The word sit is to be read into this satra. The force of the affixes denoting announcer (IV. 3. 101), when used after a word denoting a Vedic Text or a Brahmana, is that of expressing "one who studies" or "one who knows". afegerfor means "this relation", i.e. the subject treated of in this section, namely, the relation of stay or are u In other words, the affixes, which ordinarily denote fannouncer', have the force of "one who studies or one who knows" when added to Veda-Text or Brahmanas. That is, a jih affix should not be added to a Veda or a Brahmana, except when an apa or 
URE · Gove 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY ON 
NT OF INDIA 
BR. . Cu. II. 3 67. ] 
rat 
-9771 
14.17 
areg affix follows it, and as such latter affixes are always elided by IV. 2. 94, it follows that a ith affix when added to a Veda or a Brâhmana, means "he who studies or knows the Veda anounced by". In fact there is no affix which can denote merely the announcer of a Veda, perhaps because the Vedas are eternal and no one can be its announcer only, but must be one who has studied it and known it, in order to qualify him to promulgate it. 
Thus from the word 75, the name of a Veda-Text, we get her: meaning those who study or know Katha Veda'. The word is thus formed. To the word as we add the affix fufa denoting announcer, by IV. 3. 104 : then we elide it by IV. 3. 107, leaving the bare word it, then we add fer, which again we elide by IV. 2. 64. 65-I-FUTTET = 24-1-0 (IV. 3. 107); 25-1-3TOT = 45 (IV. 2. 64) Plural Far: "those who study the Veda announced by Katha". 
Other examples to illustrate this sûtra are: fer: (IV. 3. 101) 'who study the Veda announced by Muda'. Gora:, ara : (IV. 3. 104) TSH faa: (IV. 3. 106) “who study the Veda announced by Pippalada, Richâva, or Vâjasaneya". Similarly with words denoting a Brâhmana-Text. Thus: atiesa: (IV. 3. 104), atafat: (IV. 3. 105), Trearatat: (IV. 3. 105) tafa: (IV. 3. 105) " who study the Brâhmaņas announced by Tândya, Bhallava, Satyaya. na, or Aitareya". 
Why is the word Brahmana which is also Chhandas, used separately in this sûtra ? In order to include only a certain limited number of Brâhmana Texts to the benefits of this rule, and not all. Thus it will not apply to the Brâhmana announced by Yajnyavalkya. Thus a gift DIGITTE याज्ञवल्क्यानि | Similarly सौलमानि | These Brahmanas being of recent origin, the presumption of eternity does not apply to them, See IV. 3. 105. 
The word meaning "and" is employed in the sútra. It has the force of applying this rule to some other cases not specially mentioned in the sútra. Thus it will apply to some Kalpa Texts and Sutra Texts also. Thus eht 19:, chaht: "who study or know the Kalpa texts announced by Ka śyapa or Kusika' so also sútra: as, Traut Fera: "the Bhikshus who study the Satras promulgated by Parasara". FCTT ET:. ahat, at: &c. 
Why do we say "Chhandas and Brahmanas"? Because the gif affix after any other word will have its own significance, pure and simple; as, पाणिनीयं व्याकरणम् ॥ पैङ्गीकल्पः ।। 
The Quadruply significant affixes. Teftarefa esta 
uerfa 1 azi-fa-raag तत्-नानि । वृत्तिः । तदिति प्रथमासमर्थातस्मिन्निति सप्तम्यर्थे यथाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति, यत्प्रथमासमर्थमस्ति चत्तान अवति, यदस्मिन्निति निर्दिष्ट देशभेत्स तन्नामा भवति । 
GOVERNMEN 
TURE . 
ay OF CULTUA 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
सत्यमेव जयते 
DIS 
arget=-57 
['BK. IV. CH. 11. 569 
रत सरकार 
67. (An affix is placed after a word expressive of anything) in the sense of_"that thing is in this"—the place taking a name therefrom. 
The words of this aphorism require a detailed examination. a 'that', i. e. the word in construction to which the affix is to be added must be in the nominative case. HEL"in this”--this gives the meaning of the affix; orta "is" this qualifies the sense of the base. yra is added merely for the sake of distinct ness, serving the same purpose as quotation marks in modern writing. estatalita "a country having that name"; this qualifies the sense of the affix. The sense is:--"the affixes already taught or to be taught, come after a word being in the nominative case in construction, in the sense of the location, when the whole word so formed denotes the name of a country in which that thing exists”. 
This sûtra and the three subsequent sûtras are in fact one, though divided into four, for purposes of convenience. The affixes having the sense of these four sûtras,are called station "quadruple significants". 
Thus उदुम्बरा अस्मिन् देशे सन्ति = आदम्बर: Audumbara--the country in which there are glomerous fig trees. Similarly art, raa: &e. all these words are formed by the universal affix stl (IV. 1. 83). 
This sûtra debars the aquifor affixes. a falleen all a- 
full वृत्तिः ॥ तेनेति तृतीयासर्यान्निवृत्तमित्यस्मिन्विषये यथाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
68. After a word in the third case in construction, an affix is added, in the sense of completed by him', when the whole word so formed is the name of a country. 
The phrase agt af of the last sútra governs this and the two sub sequent sútras. By these four sútras the names of countries are formed from various substantives. Thus 
traiterraaft 7tét "the city of Kausambi, completed by Kusamba". Similarly arrat hier "a mote completed by a thousand (gold coins) or persons". A place is named after the means or the person, by which or through whom it is established. 
तस्य निवासः ॥६९॥ पदानितस्य-निवासः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ तस्येति षष्ठीसमर्यान्निवास इत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे यथाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति देशनामधेये गम्यमाने। 
69. After a word in the sixth case in construction, an affix is added, in the sense of his dwelling-place'; the whole word expressing the name of a country. 
The sätra literally means "his dwelling place'. A place is some times named after the people whose habitation it is. Thus 19:"the country of IRE 
GOVE. 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
ANI 
ENT OF INDIA 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
LK. IV.Ch. II. $ 72,) 
qat 
-97 
723 
the Sibis", sitfee: II ala eT: = arrara: 1! The word para नौयां। 
अदूरभवश्च ॥ ७॥ पदानि ॥ अदूरभवः-च॥ वृत्तिः॥ पूर्वा समर्थ विभक्तिरनुवर्तते । तस्येति षष्ठीसमर्थावदूरभव इत्यस्मिन्नर्थे यथाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति॥ 
70. And lastly a place is named after whatever is found near it. 
In this aphorism the word, to which the affix is to be added, is not shown. The word gee must, therefore, be supplied from the last sûtra. It means, therefore, "an affix is added to a word in the genetive case in cons truction, in the sense of not far off” the whole word being the name of a place. Thus विदिशाया अदूर भवं वैदिशम् is the city in the neighbourhood of which the river Vidiśâ flows. So also anal 
The has the force of combining the sense of all the three previous aphorisms with this; so that the four sútras 67, 68, 69 and 70 form but one complete sútra, and the meaning denoted by these will be understood in the subsequent aphorisms. 
siiast II og II alla Il sp:-37571 वृत्तिः । उवर्णान्तालातिपदिकाधयाविहितं समर्थविभक्तियुक्तारम् प्रत्ययो भवति, तदस्मिन्नस्तीत्येवमादि वर्थेषु । अणोपवादः ॥ 
71. The affix stat comes after a stem ending in 3 or 5, (in the four-fold senses given above). 
This of course debars the universal affix ST (IV.1. 83). Thus E43 from arg'a tribe of Kshatriyas'; math from mera, and thensa from egu But from a we have quaat 'the river Ikshumatî, named after the sugar canes near it'. Here we add the affix 711 taught in the subsequent sútra IV. 2. 85, which debars atst by the rule of a subsequent debarring the prior when both are of equal force (I. 4. 2). The affix a governs the six sutras upto IV. 2. 77. The difference between 3724 and to consists in the accent. 
AT TEETH II II te u rat:-1-57-37516-(3) वृत्तिः ॥ बहज्ञ अङ्गं यस्यासौ बह्वजनो मतुप तदन्तामातिपदिकारप्रत्ययो भवति चातुरर्थिकः । अणो. Tue: 0 
72. The affix e comes in the quadruple sense after a word which ends in the affix hoy, and whose stem is polysyllabic. 
The word F is a compound of it meaning literally 'many vowels' i.e. polysyllabic, and of af: meaning stem. A word which, exclusive 
16 
URE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
चातुरार्थक अञ्॥ 
[BK. IV. CH. I.375 
of the affix मतुए, consists of more than two syllables, takes the affix भञ्।। This debars अण्॥ Thus ऐषुकावतम्, सैधूकावतम् ।। 
Why do we say "after a polysyllabic stem"? Observe आहिमतम् यावमतम् ।। Here though the word अहिमत् ends in the affix मतप, yet the अङ्ग or the stem viz. अहि, is a word of two syllables only, hence these words take अण in form ing names of countries. In fact, the word a qualifies the word 975, as it stands without the affix hay, and not the word inclusive of that affix. There fore मालावतां निवासा-मालावतम् by अण। 
बहुचः कूपेषु ॥ ७३॥ पदानि ।। बहुचः-कूपेषु-(अञ्)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ बह्वचः प्रातिपदिका प्रत्ययो भवति चातुरार्थिकः कूपेष्याभिधेयेषु ।। 
73. The affix 57 comes in the quadruple sense, after a polysyllabic Nominal stem when a well' is to be designated. 
HThis debars अण, Thus दीर्घवरत्रेण निवृत्तः कूपः = दैर्घवरत्रः “a well completed by Dirghavaratra". So also कापिलवरत्रः॥ 
उदक् च विपाशः ॥ ७४॥ पदानि ॥ उदक्-च-विपाश:-(अ)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ विपाश उत्तरे कूले ये कूपातेष्वभिधेयेष्वश् प्रत्ययो भवति चातुरर्थिकः ॥ 
74. The affix pt comes in the quadruple sense, after any Nominal stem in denoting 'a well' situated on the northern bank of the river Vipâsâ. 
This debars stor; and it applies to all words whether polysyllabic or not. Thus दात्त: "a well completed by Datta", गौत: &c. 
Why do we say on the northern bank"? Because if a well is situate on the southern bank of the river Vipasa, then the affix stor will apply as ear: and :, the difference being in the accent. This sutra illustrates the refined distinctions drawn by the author, and the importance attached to accents in former times. 
संकलादिश्यश्च ॥ ७५॥ पदानि ॥ संकलादिभ्यः-च-(अ)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ संकल इत्येवमादभ्यो ऽम् प्रत्ययो भवति चातुरर्थिकः । भणोपवादः॥ 
75. The affix TT comes after the words sankala &c, in the above four-fold sense. 
This debars अण्॥ The word संकल: is equivalent to संगतः कलः ।। Thus मांकलः, पोष्कलः &c. 
संकल, 2 पुष्कल, 3 उचम*, 4 उडुप, 5 उप (उसूप), 6 उत्पुट, 7 कुम्भ, 8 निधान (विधान), 9 सबक्ष, 10 सुस्त, 11 सभूत, 12 सुपूत , सुनेश, 14 सुमङ्गल, 15 सुपिङ्गल, 16 सूत", 17 सिकत (सिकता), 18 प्रतिक (पूतिका पूतीकी), 19 पूलास, 20 कूलास, 51 पलाश, 22 निवेश, 23 गवष, 
URE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY ON 
ENT OF INDIA 
SL 
BKIV CH. II. S78.] 
चातुरर्थिक-अण् । 
मियान्नय . 
24 गम्भीर, 25 इतर, 26 आन्*, 27 अहन्, 28 लोमन्, 29 वेमन्, 30 वरुण (चरण), 31 बहुल, 32 स योज, 33 अभिषिक्त, 34 गोमत, 35 राजभृत, 36 भल्ल, 37 मल्ल*, 38 माल. also 39 शर्मन्, 40 गृह, 41 भूत. 
स्त्रीषु सौवीरसाल्वप्राक्षु ॥ ७६॥ पदानि ॥ स्त्रीषु-सौवीर-शाल्व-प्राक्षु-(अञ्)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ ज्याप्रातिपदिकार प्रत्ययो भवति चातुरार्थिकः सौवीर स्त्रीलिङ्गे देशे वाच्ये साल्वे प्राचि॥ 
76. So also when the place is situate in the lands of the Sauvîra, or Sâlva or of the Eastern people ; and the word in these cases is always feminine. 
The word सौवीर &c, are attributes of देशेतन्नानि (IV. 2.67) : so also the word स्त्रीष ॥ Thus दावामित्री “the city founded by Dattamitra" (in Sauvira). So also वैधूमाग्नी (in Salva) काकन्दी, माकन्दी. माणिचरी, जारुषी (in Eastern countries). 
सुवास्त्वादिभ्यो ऽण् ॥ ७७॥ पदानि ॥ सुवास्त्वादिभ्यः (अण)॥ वृत्तिः ।। सुवास्तु इत्येवमादिभ्यो ऽण् प्रत्ययो भवति चातुरर्थिकः ।। 
77. The affix अण comes after the words सुवास्तु &c in the four-fold sense. 
This debars the affix 3 which would have otherwise come by IV.2,71 and 73. Thus सुवास्तोरदूरभवं नगरं सौवास्तवम् ॥ So also वार्णवम् ॥ The use of the word अण, though its anuvritti came from IV. I. 83, is for the sake of indicating that this sûtra debars sûtra IV. 2. 85. Thus gitarrat et II 
1 सुवास्त, 2 वर्ण, 3 भण्डु, 4 खण्डु (कण्डु), सेवालिन् (सेचालिन्), 6 करिन, 7 शिखण्डिन्, 8 गर्त, 9 कर्कश, 10 शकटीकर्ण (शटीकर्ण), 11 कृष्णकर्ण (कृष्ण), 12 कर्क, 13 ककन्धुमती (कर्कन्धू), 14 गोह (गोह्य and गाहि), 15 अहिसक्थ 16 वृत् ॥ 
रोणी॥ ७८॥ पदानि ॥ रोणी-(अण)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ रोणीशब्दादप्रत्ययो भवति चातुरार्थिकः ॥ 
78. The affix au comes after Tür in the fourfold sense. 
This debars star of IV. 2. 74. This sûtra consists of one word groft in the nominative case. As a general rule all words to which affixes are to be added are put in the ablative case in these sâtras. The fact of this ex ceptional treatment of the word ruit indicates that this word takes to under all circumstances, whether alone, or forming part of a compound. In fact, the nominative case in this satra is a very ingenious explanatory artificiality. Thus रौणः, आजकरोण: or सैहिकरोणः 
कोपधाच ॥ ७९ ॥ पदानि ॥ कोपधात्-च-(अण)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ ककारोपधाच प्रातिपदिकावणमत्ययो भवति चातुरार्थिकः ।। 
URE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
RYON 
NT OF INDIA 
संस्कृति मंत्रान 
सत्यहि 
चातुर्थिक-बुञ् &c. 
[ BK. IV.CH. IIS80. 
सालय भारत 
तिसरकार 
79. The affix अण् comes in the fourfold sense after a stem having & for its penultimate. 
This debars अञ् which would have come by IV. 2. 7I and 73. Thus कार्णच्छिद्रिक कूपः॥ कार्णवेटकः ॥ कार्कवाकवम् , त्रैशङ्कवम् ॥ 
वुञ्ण्कठजिलसेनिरढण्ययफफिजियकक्ठको ऽरीहणकृशाश्वश्यकुमुद काशतृणप्रेक्षाश्मसाखलङ्काशबलपक्षकर्णसुतङ्गमप्रगदिन्वराहकुमुदादिभ्यः ॥८॥ पदानि ।। वुअ-छए-क-ठच्-इल्-श-इनि-र-ठ-ण्य-य-फक्-फि-इन-व्य-कक्-ठको अ रीहण-कृशाश्व-ऋश्य-कुमुद-काश-तुण-प्रेक्ष-अश्म-सखि-सङ्काश-बल-पक्ष- कर्ण-सुत श्रम-प्रागदिन्-वराह-कुमुदादिभ्यः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ नात्यः सप्तदश प्रत्यया, अरीहणादयोऽपि सप्तवथैव प्रातिपरिकगणाः । भादिशब्दः प्रत्येकमाश संबध्यते । तत्र यथासख्यं सप्तदशभ्यः प्रातिपदिकगणेभ्यः सप्तदश प्रत्यया भवन्ति चातुरर्थिकाः॥ यथाः (1) अरीहणादिभ्यो बुम प्रत्ययो भवात ।। (2) कृशाश्वादिभ्यछण्प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ (3) कश्यादिन्यः कः प्रत्ययो भवति ।। (4) कुमुदादिभ्यष्ठप्रत्ययो भवति ॥ (5) काशादिभ्य इला प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ (6) तृणा विभ्यः शुः प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ (7) प्रेक्षादिभ्य इनिप्रत्ययो भवति ॥ (8) अश्मादिन्यो र प्रत्ययो भवति । (9) सख्यादिभ्यो डम् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ (10) संकाशादिभ्यो ण्य प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ (11) बलादिभ्यो यः प्र त्ययो भवति॥ (12) पक्षादिभ्यः फक् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ (13) कर्णादिभ्यः फिञ् प्रत्ययो भवति ।। (14) सुतङ्गमादिभ्य इम् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ (15) प्रगदिन्नादिन्थो ज्यः प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ (16) वराहा दिभ्यः कक् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ (17) कुमुदादि यष्ठक् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
80. In the above four senses are added the follow ing 17 affixes after the following 17 classes of words respec tively : 
I. बुज्ञ (= भक) after भरीहण &c. 2. छण (ईय) after कृशाश्व &c. 3. क after पश्य &c. 4. उच् (इक) after कुमुद &c..इल after काश &c. 6. स (or श) after तण &c.7.इनि (इन) after प्रेक्ष &c. 8.r after अश्मन् &c. 9. उन्न (=एय) after सखि &c. 10. ण्य (घ) after संकाश &c. II. य after बल &c. I2. फक् (=आयन) after पक्ष &c. 13. फि (=भायनि), after कर्ण &c. I4.इश् (ह) after सुतंगम &c. 15. ज्य (य) after प्रगदिन् &c. 16. क् (क) after वराह &c. 17. ठक् (क) after कुमुद &c. 
The above affixes &c. are applied to the above classes of words, fe is to be added to every one of the above seventeen words. The first part of the sutra upto en gives the seventeen affixes, and the latter part gives the seventeen word-class. The allotment or assignment of affixes is made by 13. I0. 
The examples of the above are :-- 
(1) मौरीहणकम, दोषणकम् (2) कार्याधीयः, मारटीयः, (8) कश्यकः, व्यबोधकः, (4) कुमुस्किम, दारिकम (5) वार्शिलम, कार्शिलम्, (6) तृणर्सः, नडर्सः, (प्रेक्षिन, हलाकिन्, (8) अश्मरैः, (9) सखियम, सांखिदस्तेयम्, 10 सांकाश्या, काम्पियन, (11) बल्यः, कल्यम्, (12).पा सायणः, सौषायणः, (13) कार्णायनिः, वसिष्ठायनिः, (14) सौतहामिः, मौनिचिति, (15) माग (16) वाराहकम, पालाशकम् , and (17) Lastly कौमुदिकम् ॥ 
RE 
GOVE, 
VERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
AT OF INDIA 
BKIV. CH. II. 880] 
चातुरार्थिक--बुझ &c ॥ 
मत मंत्रालय 
The word fatis will be seen, by referring to the above lists, to occur in three classes viz अराहणादि,(36), कुमुदारि(14),and वराहादि (3), Moreover it is gover ned by thegeneralaffix stut also in thequadruple sense, according to the opinion of Patanjali. And because it occurs in the Truthe class (IV. 2. 82), therefore this universal stur (IV. 1. 83) will be elided after it. As we have already shown before under I. 2. 5I when शिरीषवन was formed from शिरीषाः ॥ 
1 भरीहण, 2 घण, दुहण*, 4 भगल, 5 उलन्द, 6 किरण, 7 सांपरायण, 8 क्रोष्ट्रायण, 9 औ ट्रायण*, 10 गायन, 11 मैत्रायण, 12 भास्त्रायण, 13 वैमतायन (also वैमत्तायन), 14 गौमतायन (गो), 15 सौमतायन, 16 सौसायन, 17 धौमतायन*, 18 सौमायन*. 19 ऐन्द्रायण*, 20 कोन्द्रायण", 21 खाडायन, 22 शाण्डिल्यायन, 23 रायस्पोष, 24 विपथ, 25 विपाश, 26 उद्दण्ड, 27 उदञ्चन, 28 खाण्डवीरण (खाण्ड ), 29 वीरण, 30 काशकृत्ल (कश.), 31 जाम्बवत (वन्त), 32 शिशपा, 33 रैवत (रेवत), 34 बिल्व (बैल्व K.) 35 सुयज्ञ, 36 शिरीष, 37 बधिर, 38 जम्बु, 39 खदिर, 40 सुशर्मन् (सुशर्म K.), 41 इलत*, 42 भलन्दन*, 43 खण्डु , 44 कनल (कलन), 45 यज्ञदत्त*. 46 सार, 47 वैगायण (sic) and 48 खाण्डायन. 
गग-1 कृशाश्च, 2 अरिष्ट, 3 अरिश्म (भरीश्व), 4 वेश्मन्, 5 विशाल, 6 लोमश*, 7 रोमश*, 8 रोमक, 9 लोमक, 10 शबल, 11 कूट, 12 वर्चल*, 13 सुर्वचल*, 14 सुकर, 15 सूकर, 16 प्रतर (प्रातर), 17 सदृश, 18 पुरग, 19 पुराग, 20 सुख, 21 धूम, 22 अजिन, 23 विनत (विनता, वनिता), 24 अवनत, 25 विकुब्यास (v. 1. कुविद्यास ; विकुघास), 26 पराशर*, 27 अरुस, 28 अयस्*, 29 भौग ल्य, 30 यूकर (मौहल्याकर). 31 रोमन् , 32 बर्बर, 33 अवयास and अथावस् 
1ऋश्य, 2 न्यग्रोध, शर (शिरा), 4 निलीन, निवास, 6 निवात, 7 निधान, 8 निबन्ध (v.1. निबन्धन : निबद्ध), 9 विबद्ध, 10 परिगूढ, 11 उपगृढ, 12 असनि, 13 सित, 14 मत*, 15 वेश्मन, 16 उत्तराश्मन्, 17 भश्मन् , 18 स्थूल, 19 बाहु (स्थूलबाहु), 20 खदिर, 21 शर्करा, 22 अनडु, 23 भरडु*, 24 परिवंश, 25 वेणु, 26 वीरण, 27 खण्ड, 28 दण्ड , 29 परिवृत, 30 कर्दम, 31 अंशु. 
1 कुमुद, 2 शर्करा, 3 न्यग्रोध, 4 इक्कट (इकट, उत्कट), सङ्कट, 6 कङ्कट, 7 गर्त 8 बीज, 9 परिवाप, 10 निर्यास*, 11 शकट*, 12 कच*, 13 मधु*, 14 शिरीष, 15 अश्व*, 16 अश्वत्थ, 17 बल्बज, 18 यवाष, 19 कूप, 20 विकङ्कत, 21 दशमाम. 22 कण्टक, 23 पलाश, 24 त्रिक, 25 कत. 
1 काश, 2 पाश (वाश), 3 अश्वत्थ, 4 पलाश, 5 पीयूक्षा (पीयूष), 6 चरण, 7 वास, 8 नङ, 19 वन, 10 कर्दम, 11 कच्छूल*, 12 कङ्कट, 13 गुहा, 14 बिस (विश and विस), 15 तृण, 16 कपूर, 17 
पर्वर*, 18 मधुर*, 19 अह (गृह) 20 कपित्थ , 21 जतु, 22 शीपाल:: 23 नर, 24 कंटक. 
1 तृण, 2 नड, मल*, 4 वन, पर्ण, 6वर्ण, 7 वराण*,8बिल*, 9 पुल ,10 फल, 11 अर्जन, 12 अर्ण, 13 सुवर्ण*, 14 बल, 15 चरण, 16 दुस. 17 जन, 18 लव. 
प्रेक्षका, 2 हलका (फलका), 3 बन्धुका. 4 ध्रुवका, क्षिपका 6 न्यग्रोध, 7 इकट (इर्कट) कट (कर्कटा), 9 संकट, 10 कट*, 11 कप, 12 बुक , 13 पुक, 14 पुट*, 15 मह (महा), 16 परि बाप*, 17 यवाष (d.i. यवास),18 धुवका*, 19 गत*, 20 कूपक (कूपका) 21 हिरण्य*.22 बुधका, 23 सुकटा, 24 मङ्कट, 25 मुक. 
1अइमन् , 2 यूथ (also शुष), 3 ऊष (रूष and रुष), 4 मीन, 5 नद, 6 दर्भ, 7 वृन्द, 8 गुद, खण्ड, 10 नग. 11 शिखा, 12 कोट (काड), 18 पाम (पांम!), 14 कन्द, 15 कान्द , 17 गह, 18 गुड , 19 कूण्डल , 20 पीन*.21 गह* 
URE - GO 
OVERNMENT 
Y OF CULTUA 
MINISTRY 
AT OF INDIA 
चातुरर्थिक चुन् &cn 
[ BK, IV. CH. IT. 
लय भारत 
जसरकार 
1 सखि, 2 अग्निदत्त, 3 वायुदत्त, 4 सखिदत्त, 5 गोपिल (गोहित and गोहिल), 6 मल्ल 7 पल (भल्लपाल st. भल्ल, पाल), 8 चक्र (चर्क), 9 चक्रवाक , 10 छगल, 11 अशोक, 12 करवीर, 18 वासव", 14 वीर*, 15 पूर*, 16 बज*, 17 कुशीरक*; 18 सोहर (शोहर; सोकर), 19 सरक (सकर), 20 सरस, 21 समर*, 22 समल, 23 सुरस, 24 रोह, 25 तमाल, 26 कदल, 27 सप्तल, 28 चक्रपाल, 29 चक्रवाल, 30 वक्रपाल, 31 उशीर ।। 
1 संकाश, 2 कम्पिल, 3 कश्मीर (कश्मर), 4 समीर, 5 सरसेन (शर), 6 सरक*, 7 सूर*, 8 सुपान्थन् (rightly सुपथिन), पन्थ (सक्थ!) च, 9 रूप (यूथ), 10 अंश, 11 अङ्ग , 12 नासा*, 13 पलित*, 14 अनुनाश*, 15 अश्मन्, 16 कूट, 17 मलिन, 18 दशौं, 19 कुम्भ*, 20 शीषे*, 21 विरत (चिरन्त; बिरत!), 22 समल*, 23 सीर*, 24 पजर*, 25 मन्य*, 26 नल*, 27 रोमन*, 28 लोमन् , 29 पुलिन*, 30 सुपरि*, 31 कटिप, 32 सकर्णक*, 33 वृष्टि*, 34 तीर्थ, 35 अगस्ति, 36 विकर*, 37 नासिका, 38 एग, 39 चिकार, 40 विरह, 
1 बल, 2 चुल (बुल), 3 नल*, 4 दल*, 5 वट*, 6 लकल*, 7 उरल*, 8 पुल , 9 मल , 10 उल, 11 डुल, 12 वन, 13 कुल, 14 तुल, 15 कवल, 
1 पक्ष, 2 तुक्ष', 3 तुष, 4 कुण्ड', 5 अण्ड, 6 कम्बलिका (कम्बालक), 7 वलिक", 8चित्र 9 अस्ति', 10 पथिन् पन्य च (also पान्थायन), 11 कुम्भ, 12 सीरक (सीरज), 13 सरक, 14 सकल (सलक), 15 सरस, 16 समल, 17 अतिश्वन् (स्वन्). 18 रोमन्, 19 लोमन्, 20 हस्तिन् , 21 मकर , 22 लोमक, 23 शीर्ष', 24 निवात', 25 पाक", 26 सिंहक, 27 अंकुश', 28 सुवर्णक, 29 हंसक (हंसका), 30 हिंसक, 31 कुत्स", 32 बिल, 33 खिल, 34 यमल, 35 हस्त, 36 कला, 37 सकर्णक (सकण्डक), 38 अश्मन्, 39 अस्तिबला 
1कर्ण, 2 वसिष्ठ, 3 अर्क, 4 अर्कलूष (लूष), पिन (दुपद), 6 आनडुह्य (अन), 7 पाञ्चजन्य, 8स्फिज, 9 कुम्भी, 10 कुन्ती, 11 जित्वन् (जित्व), 12 जीवन्त (जीवन्ती), 13 कुलिश, 14 आण्डी बत (आण्डीवत), 15 जब, 16 जैत्र', 17 आनक, 18 अलुश, 19 शल, 20 स्थिरा॥ 
1सुतंगम, 2 मुनिचित (चित्त), विप्रचित (चित्त), 4 महाचिच*5 महापुत्र, 6 स्वन , 7 श्वेत, खडिक (गडिक)9 शुक्र, 10 विग्र, 11 बीजवापिन्, 12 अर्जुन, 13 इवन, 14 अजिर, 16 जीव, 16 खण्डिन , 17 कर्ण , 18 विग्रह*, 
1 प्रगदिन, 2 मगदिन्, 3 मददिन, (शरदिन्), कविल (कलिव), खण्डित (खडिव), 6 गरित (गदिव),7चूडार, 8 भडार (मार्जार), 9 मन्दार", 10 कोविवार । 
1 वराह, 2 पलाश, 3 शिरीष, 4 पिनद्ध, 5 निबद्ध,6 बलाह*, 7 स्थूल (स्थूण), 8 विदग्ध, 9 विजग्ध, 10 विभग्न, 11 निमग्न, 12 बाह, 13 खदिर, 14 शर्करा, 15 विनद्ध, 16 विरुद्ध, 17 मूल॥ 
कुमुद, 2 गोमय, 3 रथकार, 4 दशग्राम, 5 अश्वत्थ, 6 शालमलि (ली), 7 शिरीष, 8 मुनि स्थल, (स्थूल), 9 कुण्डल, 10 कूट, 11 मधूकर्ण, 12 घासकुन्द , 13 शुचिकर्ण, 14 मुचुकर्ण, 15 कुन्द ।। 
जनपदे लुप् ॥१॥ पदानि ॥ जनपदे लुप्॥ वृत्तिः ॥ देशे तन्नानीति यश्चातुरार्थिकः प्रत्ययो भवति, तस्य देशविशेषे जनपरेऽभिधेये लुबभवति ।। 
81. The name of a kingdom is formed by the lup elision of these affixes, (when the name of the people without the change of number and gender, is at the same time the name of the kingdom). 
The words within bracket in the above sâtra are added by the read ing together of this sutra with sutra. I. 2.5L. Dr. Otto Bohtlingk the learned 
CURE • GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
EK TV. CH. II. $83) 
ELISION OF चातुरार्थक ।। 
भनयमात 
translator of Pâņini in German, has done so, and I think this addition is necessary for the elucidation of the sûtra. The aphorism literally means : . (The quadruply significant affix) is elided, when the place (देश) to be named is a kingdom (जनपद). Thus पंचालानां निवासो जनपदः = पंचालाः! So also कुरवः, मत्स्याः, अङ्गाः, वङ्गाः, मगधाः, सुदाः, पुण्ड्राः ॥ 
Why is there no lup-elision of the affix in the following examples :. औदुम्बरो जनपदः 'the Kingdom in which there are fig-trees'. वैदिशो जनपदः &c? Because here the words औदुम्बरः and वैदिशः are not names of Kingdom, but are used merely as epithets. In fact the phrase para is understood here also. 
वरणादिभ्यश्च ॥ ८२ ॥ पदानि ॥ वर्णादिभ्यश्च ॥ बृत्तिः ॥ वरण इत्येवमादिन्य उत्पन्नस्थ चातुर्थिकस्य प्रत्ययस्य लुब् भवति ।। 
82. Also after the word arco &c, the affix denoting locality becomes elided, but the number and gender are not changed. 
After the words वरण the quadruply significant affix is elided by हुए । The origination of this rule is for the sake of what is not a kingdom (or जनपर), to which the last rule applies. Thus वरणानामतूरभव नगरं वरणाः “the city (nota kingdom) not far from the place Varana", So slso शृङ्गी, शाल्मलयः ।। 
The word in the sâtra implies that this rule applies even to words other than those which are given in the list of वरणादि ॥ As कटकबदरी a city near to bitter Badari tree". 
वरणा, (वरण), 2 शगी, 3 शाल्माल, 4 चण्डी*, शयाण्डी',6 पर्णी, ताम्रपर्णी, गार (पूर्वो गोरो, पूर्वेण गोती, अपरेण गोरी), 9 आलिङ्गधायन, 10 जानपदी (जालपदी; जालपद) 11 जम्बू, 12 पुष्कर, 13 चम्पा*, 14 पम्पा*, 15 वल्गु", 16 उज्जयनी (उज्जयिनी), 17 गया, 18 मथुरा, 19 तक्षशिला, 20 उरसा (उरशा) 21 गोमती', 22 वलभी*,23 कटकबदरी (with कन्दुक), 24, शिरीषा: 25 काञ्ची, 26 साण्डी, 27 वणिकि, 28 वणिक, Is an आकृतिगण ।। 
शर्कराया वा ॥८३॥ पदानि ॥शर्करायाः-वा (लुप)॥ वृत्तिः ।। शर्कराशब्दादुत्पन्नस्य चातुरार्थकस्य प्रत्ययस्य वा लुन् भवति । 
83. Optionally after the word शर्करा, the quadruply significant affix is lup-elided. 
Why do we say "Optionally"? The word erat occurs in the classes - सावि (2) and वराहादि (14) (IV.2.80 classes 4 and I6), and must necessarily take the affixes 57 and taught therein: for had itnot taken those affixes absolutely, their would have been no necessity of inserting this word in those classes. The present rule, therefore, teaches by implication, that the word rehat takes the general affix stus, besides the above two especial affixes, denoting locality 
ARE - GOV 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
W PRE 
चातुरार्थिक मतुक॥ 
[BK IV. CH. IIAS. 86.1 
लय भारत 
And when the word takes this universal affix (IV I.83), there the option is allowed, not otherwise. Thus शर्करा+अ = शार्करम्, शर्करा+मण लम् = शर्करा ।। 
ठक्छौ च ॥४॥ पदानि ॥ ठक्-छो-च॥ वृत्तिः ॥ शर्कराशब्दाद्वक् छ इत्येतो प्रत्ययौ भवतश्चातुरर्थिकौ ॥ 
84. The affix ठक् and o come after the word शर्करा in the quadruple sense. 
Thus of the word rent there are altogether six forms denoting locali ty, namely two formed by this sutra, two by the last, and two by the sutra IV. 2. 80. Thus शर्करा, शार्करम्, शर्करिकम् (formed by उच), शारकम् (formed by कक), शार्करिकम् (formed by उक), and शर्करीयम् (by छ). 
नद्यां मतुए ॥८५॥ पदानि । नद्यामू-मतुप्॥ वृत्तिः ॥ नद्यामभिधेयायां मतुष्प्रत्ययो भवति चातुरर्थिकः॥ 
85. The affix age is added in denoting a river. When the name of a river is to be designated by something which is found near it, we add the affix मतुए (मत् and वत्). Thus उदुम्बरावती, मशकौवती, वीरणावती, पुष्करांवती, इक्षुमती, द्वैमती॥ See VI. 3. 119 by which the w is lengthened in these words, and VI. 1. 219 by which the udatta is placed on this vowel. See VIII. 2. Io by which मत् becomes वत् ॥ 
The affix ay is not however employed in forming the river-names भागीरथी and भैमरथी, which are formed by भण् added under IV.2.68. 
मध्वादिश्यश्च ॥८६॥ पदानि । मध्वादिभ्यः-च।। वृतिः ॥ मधु इत्येवमादिभ्यः शब्देभ्यो मतुष्प्रत्ययो भवति चातुर्सथकः ॥ 
86. The affix मतुए is added to the words मधु&e in the four senses given above. 
The origination of this rule is for the sake of what is not a river. As मधुमान, विखवान् &c. 
मधु,2 बिस, 3 स्थाणु, 4 वेणु, कर्कन्धु,60मी,7करीर (किरीर)8 हिम, 9 किशरा, 10 कार्याण (शर्पणा)11 मरुतू, 12 वाली',13 शर, 14 इष्टका, 15 मासुति, 16 शक्ति, 17 भासन्दी, 18 शकाल, 19 शलाका, 20 भामिषी (भामिधी) 21 इक्षु, 22 रोमन, 23 रष्टि (मुष्टि हष्टि) 24 रुष्य 25 तक्षशिला, 26 खड (खडा) 27 बट, 28 वेट (वेटा) 29 रम्य, 30 कक्षा, 38 मरुव, 32 दावाट, 
कुमुदनडवेतसेभ्यो ड्मतुः ॥ ८७॥ पदानि ॥ कुमुद-नड-वेतसेभ्यः-ड्मतुए । वृत्तिः॥ कुमुद नड वेतस इत्येतेभ्य शब्दभ्यो ड्मतम् प्रत्ययो भवति चातरार्थिकः॥ वास्तिकम्। महिषायोति वक्तव्यम् । 
87. The affix चतुए comes after the words कुमुद, नड and rar, in the above four senses, and the final of these words is elided before this affix. 
URE - GO 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
JERNMENT OF 
OF INDIA 
| BK. TV CH. II. S.91] 
चातुरार्थिक-कुक्। 
1731 
मालय . भारत 
Thus कमद्वान्, नवान, वेतस्वान् ।। 
Vart :-So also after the word महिष, as महिष्मान् ।। नडशादाड्डलच् ॥ ८८॥ पदानि । नड-शादातू-डुलच् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ नडशादशब्दाभ्यां इलच् प्रत्ययो भवति चातुरर्थिकः ॥ 
88. The affix şey comes after 5 and se in the four senses given above, the final of the words being elided. 
Thus नड्डलम् and शादलम् ॥ शिखायां वलच ॥ ८९॥ पदानि ॥ शिखाया-वलच् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ शिखाशवाहलच प्रत्ययो भवति चातरार्थकः । यथासंभवमर्थांबल्धः ।। 
89. The affix चलच् comes after the word शिखा in the above four-senses. 
Thus शिखादलम् “the city Sikha-vala' lit. 'crested as a peacock'. The word शिखा takes वलच by V. 2. III, the affix having the same force as मतुएँ V.2.94, ('whose it is' or in whom it is'). That वलच should be distinguished from the present, in as much as, the latter is employed in making names of locality, not so the affix taught in Book V. 
उत्करादिश्यश्छः ॥ १०॥ पदानि | उत्करादिश्यः-(छ:)। वृत्तिः । उत्कर इत्येवमादिभ्यश्छः प्रत्ययो भवति चातुरर्थिकः॥ 
90. The affix , comes after the words उत्कर &c, in the four senses: 
As उत्करीयम्, शरीयम् ॥ 
1 उत्कर, 2 संफल, 3 शफर, 4 पिप्पल, 5 पिप्पलीमूल, 6 अम्मन्, 7 सुवर्ण (सुपर्ण ) 8 सलाजि न, तिक, 10 कितव, 11 अणक, 12 त्रैवण", 13 पिचुक, 14 अश्वत्थ, 15 काश, 16 क्षुद्र (शकाक्षत्र st. काश, क्षुद्र) 17 भस्वा, 18 शाल, 19 अन्या, 20 अजिर (अजिन ) 21 चर्मन्, 22 उत्क्रोश, 23 क्षान्त (शान्त) 24 खदिर, 25 शर्पणाय, 26 च्यावनाय, 27 नवाकव (नैव, बक) 28 , 29 वृक्ष 30 शाक*, 31 पलाश, 32 विजिगीषा*,33 अनेक, 34 आसप, 85 फरल,36 पर*, 37 अर्क, 38 गर्त, 39 अग्नि, 40 वैराणक*, 41 इंडा, 42 अरण्य, 43 निशान्त', 44 पर्ण, 45 नीचा यक', 46 शंकर, 47 भवरोहित, 48 भार", 49 विशाल, 50 वेत्र, 51 अरोहण , 52 खण्ड, 33 वातागर 54 मन्त्रणाई', 55 इन्द्रवृक्ष, 56 नितान्त वृक्ष, (नितान्तावृक्ष; निसान्त, वृक्ष) 57 आम्रवृक्ष. 58 सणव,59 भन्य, 60 मऊँच, 61 भर्जुनवृक्ष, 
नडादीनां कुक च ॥९१॥ पदानि ।। नडादीनाम्, कुक्-च (छः)। वृत्तिः ॥ न इत्येवमारीना कगागमो भवति, छश्च प्रत्ययश्चातुरार्थिकः । यथासंभवमर्थसंबन्धः ।। वातिकम् ॥ कूञ्चाया हस्वत्वंच । तक्षन्नलोपश्च ।। 
91. The augment comes after the words &c, when the affix 5 follows in the above four senses, 
URE • Govs 
OVERNMENT 
Y OF CULTURE 
T OF INDIA 
(от [ BK. IV. C1. II. 3. 92 
. संस्कृतिमा 
gratiafar & hi 
. 
78 
तिसरकार 
To the words 5 &c. the same affix is added, with the insertion of a after the stem. As 75 ++=75anti; eraian, &c. 
The words Far and 77977 belong also to this class. In the case of set the long vowel is shortened, and in the case of art the 7 is elided : e. g. कुचकीयम्, तक्षकीयम् ॥ 
195, 294, 3 faca, 4 or, 5 , 6 aaa, 77, 8 o18, 
9 a, 10 , 11 an (5571) 67 9, 12 FTSTT T7192. 
Toll 911 TT I STÛ II वृत्तिः ॥ शेष इत्यधिकारोयम् । थानित ऊर्वे प्रत्ययाननुक्रमिष्यामः, शेषेऽर्थे ते वेहितव्याः ।। 
92. The affixes taught hereafter, have senses other than those mentioned above. 
The suffixes that will be taught now have senses other than those already taught in the previous aphorisms. "Let a meaning, other than those of which progeny' (IV. 1 92) was the first mentioned, and the quadruple signification', the last, be called ite or the remainder '—and in that remainder of senses, too, let there be the affix stot &c. Thus free visible' viz. colour which is apprehended by vision' from TETT; T : 'audible' viz, sound, from "T, Birurare: treated of in Upanishad' i. e. soul, rie: from , 'ground on a stone'i. e. flour of a fried corn, at ridden in by four person' viz, a cart; TITEL 'who is seen on the fourteenth day of the moon' viz a goblin ; sfraces: pounded in a mortar' viz. barley : 54: drawn by horses' viz. a chariot. (Adapted from Dr. Ballantyne's Laghukaumudi). 
The regulating influence of the expression 19"in the remainder" ex tends from this aphorism forward as far as IV.3. 134. The affixes , &c taught hereafter, do not come in the sense of progeny' &c, but they have, every one of them, all the senses of sura 'being born' (IV. 3. 25), :(IV. 3. 101), Sta: (IV. 3.74) &c. : (IV. 3. 89), &c : &c (IV. 3. 38). 
Thus året: means "born in Srughna (IV. 3. 25), or done in Srughna, or bought in Srughna, or obtained in Srughna, or skillful in Srughna (IV. 3. 38), or abundant in Srughna (IV. 3. 39), or suited to Srughna (IV. 3.41), or staying in Srughna (IV. 3. 53), or what has come from Srughna (IV. 3.74) or which has its rise in Srughna (IV. 3.83), a road leading to Srughna (IV. 3.85) a messenger going to Srughna (IV. 3.85), a gate facing Srughna or from which men go out to Srughna (IV. 3. 86) a book relating to the History of Srughna (IV. 3. 87), an inhabitant of Srughna (IV. 3. 89), a person whose ancestral home is at Srughna (IV. 3.90)" 
trerar are sa SR Tafall Tg- 
a a -e-eit त्तिः ॥ राष्ट्र अवारपार इत्येतान्या यथारख्यं पखावित्येती प्रत्ययो भनसः ।। URE 
GOVA 
VERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
XT OF INDIA 
BRERN. CH. II. 895] 
शष-AFFIXES. 
लिकति मंत्रालय 
मालय .भारत 
वार्तिकम् ॥ विगृहीतादपीष्यते । वार्तिकम् ॥ विपरीताच ॥ 
93. The affixes gha and kha are respectively add ed after the words try and starter II 
The affix इe is substituted for घ, and ईन for ख (VII. I. 2). Thus राष्ट्रियः 'born &c. in a country', अवारपारीणः 'who or what goes or extends to both banks'. 
Vårt:-The affix a comes also when the words start and art are taken separately; as well as when compounded inversely: e. g. अवारीणः — belonging to this bank of the river', 'पारीण: ' belonging to the other bank', पारावारीण: "belonging to the other bank as well as to this'. Here as well as in several of the subsequent aphorisms, merely the stems and their appropriate affixes are given ; the sense of these affixes are those of being born' &c. to be taught hereafter in IV. 3. 25 and sûtras that follow it. 
“There shall now be mentioned derivatives which end with those affixes the first whereof is घ, and the last where of are शु (IV.3.24), with specification of the original term to which the application of those affixes is appropriate; and their varieties of meaning, such as being produced there from' IV. 2. 25, and the like, shall be mentioned ; and the declensional cases in connection with which the affixes are appropriately applicable". (Dr. Ballan tyne's Laghu Kaumudi). 
ग्रामाद्यखौ ॥ ९४॥ पदानि ॥ ग्रामात, य-खी॥ वृत्तिः ॥ ग्रामशब्दाद्य खर इत्येतो प्रत्ययो भवतः॥ 
94. The affixes य and खञ् (ईन) come after the word 'grâma'. 
As ग्राम्य and ग्रामीणः, "a rustic'. कत्रचादिभ्यो ढकञ् ॥९५॥ पदानि ॥ कति-आदिभ्यो-ढका ॥ वृत्तिः॥ कत्रि इत्येवमादिभ्यो ढकन प्रत्ययो भवति । वार्चिकम् ॥ कुल्याया यलोपश्च ॥ 
95. The affix ढका (एयक) comes after the words कत्रि &c. 
As कात्रयकः, ओम्भेयकः &c. 
1 कवि, 2 उम्भि, 3 पुष्कर, 4 पुष्कल, 5 मोदन, 6 कुम्भी, कण्डिन, 8 नगरी (नगर) 9 मा. हिष्मती, 10 वर्मती, (चर्मण्वती) 11 उख्या, 12 ग्राम, 18 कुडचाया (कुल्याया) यलोपश्च, 14 वऊजी, 15 भक्ति 
कुलकुक्षिग्रीवाश्यः श्वास्यलङ्कारेषु ॥ ९६॥ पदानि ॥ कुल-कुक्षि-ग्रीवाभ्यः, श्व आस-अलङ्कारेषु॥ 
TRE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
सत्यमेव जयते 
सरकार 
शेष-AFFIXES. 
BK. IV. CH, II. 3. 99.1 
वृन्तिः ॥ कुलकुक्षिग्रीवाशब्दे यो यथासंख्यं श्वन् असि अलंकार इत्येतेषु जातादिष्यर्थेषु ढकम् प्रत्ययो भवति॥ 
96. The same affix ढकञ् is added to the words कुल, कुक्षि and ग्रीवा, when the whole words so formed mean respectively, 'a dog', 'a sword' and 'an ornament'. . 
The force of the affix, as already told above, is to denote 'producer &c. (IV. 3. 25&c): but the whole word has specific significance. As कौलेयकः =a dog (lit. pertaining to a family); कोक्षेयक: %3a sword (lit. remaining in a sheath), मेवेयकः= a necklace. When not having these meanings, the regular derivatives from these words are formed by अण् as, कौला, कौक्ष: and मेवः ।। 
नद्यादिभ्यो ढक् ॥९७॥ नद्यादिभ्यः, ढक॥ वृत्तिः ॥ नदी इत्येवमादिभ्यो ढप्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
97. The affix ढक (एय) comes after the words 'nadi' &c, in the remaining senses (i. e. IV. 3. 25. &c). 
Thu नादेयं, 'pertaining to a river', माहेयम् earthen', &c. 
1 नहीं, 2 मही, 3 वाराणसी, 4 श्रावस्ती, 5 कौशाम्बी, 6 वनकौशाम्बी (वनको) 7 काशपरी" 8 काशफरी (फारी) 9 खादिरी, 10 पूर्वनगरी, 11 पाठा (पावा ) 12 माथा ( मावा) 13 शाल्वा (सा. ल्या) 14 सावा, 15 सेतकी (वासेनकी) 16 वडबाया वृषे. 17 दाल्वा, 
The word पूर्वनगरी occurs in the above list. Its derivative will be पौर्व नगरेयम् ॥ But some say, it is composed of three words पूर-वन-गिरि and they apply the affix to each of them separately. As पोरेयम, वानयम् and गरेयम् ।। 
दक्षिणापश्चात्पुरसस्त्यक्॥९८॥ पदानि ॥ दक्षिणा, पश्चात, पुरसः, त्यक्॥ वृत्तिः ॥ दक्षिणा पश्चात् पुरस् इत्येतेभ्यस्त्थक् प्रत्ययो भवति शेषिकः ॥ 
98. After the words 'dakshina', 'paschat' and'puras' the affix tyak' (य) is added in the remaining senses. 
As errore: 'pertaining or produced in the south'; qua: occidental, पौरस्त्य; 'oriental'. 
कापिश्याः ष्फ ॥ ९९॥ पदानि ॥ कापिश्याः, एफक ॥ कृतिः ॥ कापिशीशब्झतू फक् प्रत्ययो भवति शेषिकः ॥ पाशिकय ॥ बाहल्युपिदिभ्यश्चेति वक्तव्यम् ।। 
99. After the word 'Kapisi', the affix 'shphak' is added in the remaining senses: (the feminine being formed by S IV. 1. 41). 
Thus कार्पिशायन मधु, कापिशायनी द्राक्षा liquor, 
RE 
GOVE 
GOVERNMENT 
TRY OF CULTY 
MINISTRI 
NT OF INDIA 
si 
1 BK, IV. CH. II, S. 101. 
TC-AFFIXES. 
133 
Vart:-So also after reres, she and af as, Tiarat, sileteaft, grgraaf u This debars atst of IV. 2. 125. 
TEENTHE GESULT II pooll ETA II TFT:-The-91U-7-(676) II कृत्तिः ॥ 
रशकदारण प्रत्ययो भवति, चकारात्ष्फक्च शैषिको ऽमनुष्येभिधेये ॥ 
100. After the word in the same affix 'shphak'as well as the affix sty is added, in the remaining senses, when the meaning is a non-human being. 
As राङ्कवो गौः or राङ्कवायणो गौः but रावको मनुष्यः (IV. 2. 134). 
9. The word tan belongs to changtre class (IV. 2. 133); and when a human being is to be denoted, then by IV. 2. 134, it will take the affix 37, and when a non-human being is to be designated, then it will take stor by rule IV. 2. 133; then where is the necessity of the present sûtra by which spot is enjoined when a non-human being is to be designated ? To this the reply is that the force of the negative affix in amanuysha is that of a; i. e. ST#7621 =HTOJ ATO: "a being like man, but not man". The word 7 3 does not mean 'anything which is not a man'. For had this been its meaning, then a blanket is also a thing which is not a man, and in denoting a blanket, we should add 676; but we never do so. When blanket is to be denoted we add Stor of IV. 2. 133, as a "a woolen blanket". When we want to denote a living being other than man, then we add stor and son of this sûtra. The BTT is repeated in this sûtra, for the purpose also of showing that otherwise 
अण would have been debarred by the special affix फक ॥ 
The word en is the name of a country, it would have taken fur under the universal rule IV. 1. 83, but this is debarred by all of IV. 2. 125, and og is debarred by 57 of IV. 2. 119, and 5 is debarred by star of IV. 2. 132, as it has an as penultimate, the present sâtra debars that and ordains for and o n 
धुप्रागपागुदकमतीचो यत् ॥ १०१॥ पदानि ॥ धु, प्राग्-अपाग-उदक्-प्रतीचो T ! वृत्तिः॥ दिव प्राच अपाच उदच् प्रत्यच् इत्येतेभ्यो यत्प्रत्ययो भवति शैषिकः । 
101. After the words 'div', 'prách', 'apach', 'udach' and pratyach, the affix ya is added in the remaining senses. 
Thus f an, Teen, Tre , gereza, (IV. 4. 130) and ware For accent see VI. 1. 213. When these words are used as Indeclinables, and de note time, they take also the affixes 'tyu' and 'tyul', e. g, TT E (IV. 3. 25). 
The word 97917 means south. 
Fortgah Il PORN @ Il ForIT: 30 II सात्तिः ।। कन्थाशब्दाठक प्रत्ययो भवति शौषिकः ।। 
URE - Govs 
GOVERNMEN 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
ST 
सरवर्गव जयते 
• संस्कृति मात्र 
सरकार 
शेष-AFFIXES. 
[ BK. IV. CH II. S. TOA 
निया 
102. After the word — Kantha', comes the affix ठक् in the remaining senses. 
As कान्थिकः ॥ वर्ण वुक् ॥ १०३॥ पदानि ॥ वर्णी-वुक् ॥ वृत्तिः ।। कन्याया इत्येव । वर्णी या कन्था तस्या बुक् प्रत्ययो भवति शैषिकः ।। 
103. To the same stem is added the affix बुक when it treats about some thing which is to be found in the land of Varnu. 
The Varņu is the name of a river, and the country near it is also called Varņu, the affix denoting country being elided by IV. 2. 81. Thus कान्थकम् ॥ 
अव्ययात्त्यः ॥ १०४॥ पदानि ॥ अव्ययात-त्यम् । वृत्तिः ॥ अव्ययातू त्यप् प्रत्ययो भवति शैषिकः ।। Karika अमेहक्वतसित्रेभ्यस्त्यविधिर्यो ऽव्ययात्स्मृतः । 
निनिभ्या धुवगत्योश्च प्रवेशो नियमे तथा । वार्तिकम् ॥ त्यब्नेधुवे ।। वार्तिकम् ॥ निसो गते॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ आविसश्छन्दसि ॥ वार्चिकम् ॥ अरण्याण्णोवक्तव्यः॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ दूरादेत्यः ॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ उत्तरादहम् ।। 
104. The affix 'tyap' comes after an Indeclina ble, in the remaining senses. 
This rule is too wide. The affix egg is restricted to the following Indeclinables:-अमा ‘together', इह ·here', क 'where', those that end in तास (V.3.7) and a (V. 3. 10). As अमात्यः a minister', इहत्यः, कुत्यः, ततस्त्यः , तत्रत्यः &c, 
Why do we say 'its application should be restricted'? Observe: औपरिष्टः, पौरस्तः, पारस्तः formed from the Indeclinables उपरि, पुर, and पार; moreover, the Indeclinables, that are Vriddha (i. e. having sit, f and sir in the first syl lable), take the affix छ in the same sense. As, आरातीय ॥ 
HONVart:-The त्य' is added toनि , in the sense of "fixed" as, नित्यम् 
धुवम् ॥ 
Vårt:-The eg is added to fare in the sense of 'going. As Freq: "Chandalas &c who have gone out of the caste", 
Vari:-The त्या is added to the word आविस् in the Vedas: As, भावि एवो वढते ॥ 
Vart:-The affix , comes after अरण्यःe.g. आरण्याः सुमनसः ।। Vart:--The affix एत्य comes after दूर, e.g.रेत्यः पथिकः ।। Tarti-The affix आहर comes after उत्तर e.g, भोत्तराहः ॥ 
URE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY ON 
NT OF INDIA 
सत्यमद जयते 
IBK. IV. CH, II. F. I07] 
शेष-AFEIXES. 
ऐषमोह्यः श्वसोऽन्यतरस्याम् ॥१०५॥ पदानि ॥ ऐषमस-ह्यसू-श्वसो-अन्यत रस्याम्॥ वृत्तिः ॥ ऐषमस् यस् श्वस् इत्येतेभ्यो ऽन्यतरस्यां त्या प्रत्ययो भवति शैषिकः ॥ 
105. The affix cho is added optionally after the words 'aishamas', 'hyas', and 'svas'; in the remaining senses. 
E As ऐषमस्त्यम् or ऐषमस्तनन् (IV. 3. 23), हयस्त्यम् or ह्यस्तनम् (IV 3. 23); श्वस्त्यम् or श्वस्तनम् (IV. 3. 23) or शौवस्तिकम् (IV. 3. 15). The word 'svas' takes the aug ment ge also, hence the above three forms. 
तीररूप्योत्तरपदादौ ॥ १०६॥ पदानि ॥ तीर-रूप्य-उत्तर-पदातू-अ-औ ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ तीरोत्तरपदात् रूप्योचरपराच प्रातिपदिकाद्यथासंख्यमञ्ज इत्येतो प्रत्ययो भवतः शेषिकोः ।। 
106. The affix it comes after a word ending with art, and the st comes after a word ending with 627; in the remaining senses. 
This debars अण् ॥ Thus काकतीरम, पाललतीरम, वार्करूप्यम्, शैवरूप्यम् ॥ The words formed by 975, take the affix sig in the feminine (IV. 1. 15); those in take the affix टाप् (IV. I. 4). The sutra is not enunciated as तीररूप्यान्तात्, for had it been so, the affix would apply to agacy also, where 5is final, but cannot be called uttara-pada, as 'bahu' is not a pada but is an affix V. 3. 68. Therefore, we have argareta formed by storin 
दिक्पूर्वपदादसंज्ञायां अः ॥१०७॥ पदानि ॥ दिक्-पूर्वपदात, असंज्ञायाम्-अः ।। वृत्तिः ॥ असंज्ञायामिति प्रकृतिविशेषणम् । दिक्पूर्वपदामातिपदिकादसंज्ञा विषयात् मा प्रत्ययो भवति शोषिकः॥ 
107. The affix st comes in the remaining senses, after a word preceded by another that signifies direction', provided the compound is not a Name. 
To a stem, whose first member is a word denoting direction, and which is not a Name, the affix 5 is added, forming the feminine in sr The word असंज्ञायाम qualifies the fbase'. This debars अण् ॥ Thus पर्यशाला+ज =ire: (VI. 4. 148, VII. 2. 117) who is in the eastern hall. Similarly साक्षिणशालः, आपरशालः ॥ 
Why do we say when not a Name"? Observe, from the word पूर्व कामशमी (II. I. 5o) we have पूर्वएकामशमः (VII. 3. 14), The example illustrates, how first a compound of Tatpurusha kind is formed by the words पुव+ब कामशामी: Ishukamshami-in-the-East"; the whole being the name of the city. 
GOVERNMEN 
TRY OF CUL 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
संस्कृति मंत्रान 
1 
[BK. IV. CH, II. S 110 
Then when the Taddhita affix is added to this word, the first vowel is not vřiddhied, as is the general rule VII. 2.117; but the first vowel of the second member of the compound is vșiddhied, viz the letter of Tehrastof by rule VII. 3. 14. Similarly signTATT: "who is in Ishukamashamî-in-the-West". 
The word 'Ge' is used in the søtra for the sake of percision, for had the sûtra been fachgaraazirut, there would rise the doubt, whether the the word-form fear was meant, or words denoting fees were meant. In fact the Fagfary is debarred by the use of the word # For had it meant faen; the rule would have applied to words like fesursi: &c. 
GESET I goc ll TTGT 
I T -31st if वृत्तिः । दिकपूर्वपदान्मद्रशब्दार प्रत्ययो भवति शैषिकः।। 
108. The affix 31ST is added to the word Ag, pre ceded by a word denoting direction ; in the remaining senses. 
Thus पौर्वमद्रःद्री ; आपरमद्रः द्रिी Here contrary to the examples in the preceding sútra, the initial vowel is vriddhied by VII. 3. 13 which makes a special exception in the case of the word 
उदीच्यग्रामाञ्चबहाचोन्तोदात्तात् ॥ १०९॥ वृत्तिः ॥ दिग्ग्रहणं निवृत्तम् । उदीच्यग्रामवाचिनः प्रातिपदिका बह्वचोऽन्तोदात्तात् भन् प्रत्यया भवति STA: 
109. The affix atst comes in the remaining senses, after a word consisting of more than two syllables, having udatta accent on the final, being the name of a village of the peoples of the North. 
The governing force of the word Feet ceases here. The 3r debats poru Thus a 997, streaga 
Why do we say "village of north-folk"? Observe #ryte formed by Dur; difference in accent. 
Why do we say "consisting of more than two syllables"? Obseve sr- sta 
Why do we say "being oxytone ? Observe Erharai Here er is udatta by VI. 1. 194, taking for accent. 
प्रस्थोत्तरपदपलद्यादिकोपधादण ॥११०॥ वृर्तिः॥ प्रस्थोत्तरपदात् पलद्यादिभ्यःककारोपधाच प्रातिपदिकारण प्रत्ययो भवति शैषिकः।। 
110. The affix au comes, in the remaining senses after a word ending with steu, after the words weet &c, and 
URE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
SAINISTRY ON 
NT OF INDIA 
BK TV.CH. II. $ 111.) 
aran-9701 
07 FET 
after a word having a penultimate F, whether these words ex press villages of North folk or not. 
This debars the fs of the last aphorism. Thus H FT:, Agatha, testi, prikaz:, fah, furaha il 
In the class Paladyâdi, those words which denote villages of arren, will not take stor røg affix of IV. 2. 117, but will take the affix pot of this rule. Such as the words ofrgt and staat al 
The word straat occurs in Paladt class, and consequently it does not take the affix (IV. 2. 123) which it would otherwise have taken by reason of its being a Vșiddha word ending in long & u 
Tle word area has a penultimate ah, but it is recited in Paladi class, showing that it does not take the affix 5 of IV. 2. 114 though it is a Vriddha word. 
The affix stot is repeated in this sû tra, (though its anuvšitti comes from IV. 1. 83), in order to exclude the application of any rule which might have debarred the general storil 
lgoet, 2 FE, 3 , 4 argia, 5 afisate (Hot ) 6 Tete ( rear ) 7 F1 anta, 8 chat, 9 aralin, 10 arter, 11 shot, 12 tenait (taat), 13 eftet, 14 T TÀ, 15 saat, 16 quat, 17 lat ( a ) 18 a ny, 19 Fenataan 11 
कण्वादिभ्यो गोत्रे ॥ १११ ॥ वृत्तिः ।। गोत्रमिह न प्रत्ययार्थो न च प्रकृतिविशेषणं, तहयेव संबध्यते, कण्वादिभ्यो गोत्रे यः प्रव्ययो विति तस्तदन्तेभ्य एवाश् प्रत्ययो भवति शैषिकः॥ 
111. The affix tu comes after the patronymics formed from va &c. 
Here the word die does not qualify the sense of the base, nor does it give the sense of the affix. It simply ineans "that after a word ending with the affix which has been ordained after the words Kativa &c, in denoting a Gotra or Family-name; the affix stot is employed in the remaining senses." This debars the affix 5 (IV. 2. 114). Thus eroar: "the pupils of Kâņva". frater: (IV. 1. 105). 
Why do we say "when denoting Family-names ?" Thus the word chat, when it means in Tarsret, forms its secondary derivative area by 6 11 
The Kaņva-class is a sub-class of Gargadi. The Family names from * and frame are are and strahaa by rule IV. 1. 105. To this, the aflix stor is added. 1983+370= 1: (VI. 4. 148 and VI. 4. 152). 
STT I S211 TETET I gr, -(STU) II हाता॥ गोत्रेय इन विहितस्तवन्तारमातिपदिकारणप्रत्ययो भवति शेषिकीः ।। 
18 
URE • GOVE 
VERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
AT OF INDIA 
SL 
af90-51 
[ BK. IV. Ch. II. $ 114 
112. After a Family-name formed by 1, the affix su is added in the remaining senses. 
This debars stor n Thus from a we have Patronymic eriet, from which ETAT: "the pupils of Dakshi"; T&T:, FIECHT: 1! The final ş is elided before STOT by VI. 4. 148. 
Why do we say 'denoting a family-name'? Observe TFTA:, a word formed by g of IV. 2. 80, not denoting a family, but having the four-fold sense of IV. 2. 68-70. The further derivative from this will be arazitate by 
(IV. 2. 114). 
ETET: Etag II 883 11 TEIG II 7-STTT:, 1821-710g( Tur) वृश्चिः॥ ह्यचःप्रातिपदिकामाच्यभरतगोत्रादिमन्तादणू प्रत्ययो न भवति ॥ 
113. The affix sur is not however added to a word which, though ending in the Patronymic afflix go, con sists of two syllables, when it is the family name of Eastern people or of Bharata. 
This sůtra debars for which would have come by the last sâtra. The result being, that the words answering to the description given in this apho rism, form the F derivatives by the affix 5 (IV. 2. 114). Thus creatur:, Chirsitar: from the II Why do we say "consisting of two syllables"? Observe पान्नागाराः formed by अण from पान्नागारि ॥ 
Why do we say "when it denotes the family-names of East folks or Bharata"? Observe: Ter: from Tier II 
Q. How do you form tratta when by rule IV. 2. 116, the proper form would be ohtralt or ahlilaht? 
Ans. The word entrer of sâtra 116 refers to a country because it occurs with fe, while the chiriat of the example under the present aphorism is a l'amily-name. 
The Bharatas belong also to the East-Folk or Prachyas. Their sepa rate mention here indicates by Jñapaka or inference, that whereever Prâchya is used in these sûtras, it does not include the Bharatas. See. II 4.66. 
1873: 1888 gua II GT-5: II मुस्तिः ।। वृद्धात्प्रातिपदिकाच्छः प्रत्ययो भवति शैषिकः ।। 
114. After a word called Vriddha, the affix is added in the remaining senses. 
The word fry does not govern this sûtra. This is a general rule. The Vriddha is defined in I. 1. 73 &o. This debars op 1 Thus from di we 
RE - GOVEA 
TRY OF CULT 
MINISTRY 
VERNMENT O 
NT OF INDIA 
BK TV CH. II, STI6 ] 
शैशिक--उज ॥ 
मालय, भारत 
have गार्गीय (VI. 4. 148 & 152). So also वात्सीयः, शालीयः, मालीयः ।। 
This rule being a subsequent one, debars the following preceding rules, in case of conflict of rules (I. 4. 2) I. The rule relating to Indecliin ables (104), 2. The rule relating to words ending in art and Face (106) 3. The rule relating to Villages of North-folk (109), 4. The rule relating to penultimate क (IIO), Thus. 
पण इह-इहत्य; but आरात्-आरातीयः करवतीर-कारवतीरम्: bnt वायसतीर-वायसतीरीयः चणाररूप्य-चाणाररूप्यम्; but माणिरूप्य-माणिरूप्यकः (IV. 2, 21) शिवपुर-शवपुरम्; but वाड वर्ष-वाडवकर्षीयः, निलीनक-नैलीनकः ; but औलूक-और्चुकीयः॥ 
भवतष्ठक्छसौ ॥ ११५ ॥ पदानि ॥ भवतः, ठक्-छसौ ॥ बृत्तिः ॥ भवच्छब्दाद् वृद्धातू ठक्छसौ प्रत्ययो भवतः शेषिको ॥ 
115. The affix gh and Est come after the Vriddha word waa, in the remaining senses. 
The word 9 is a Vriddha word because it belongs to tyadâdi class (I. I. 74). This rule debars छ of the last aphorism. In the affix, छस्, the final aT is indicatory, showing that the word aa before this affix gets the de signation of Pada पर (I. 4. 16). Thus भवत् +ठक् = भावल्कः; भवत्+छस् भवदीयः ।। 
But when the word aan is not treated as Vriddha, then it takes the general affix अण्; as भावतः॥ This is the case when भवत् is derived by affix ing शतृ to भू॥ 
काश्यादिभ्यष्ठनिठौ ॥११६॥ पदानि ॥ काश्यादिभ्यः-ठ-मिठौ।। वृत्तिः ॥ काशि इत्येवमादिन्यष्ठञ् जिद् इत्येती प्रत्ययौ भवतः शैषिको । वार्तिकम् ॥ आपरादिपूर्वपदाकालान्तात् ॥ 
116. The affixes ठञ् and मिठ come, in the remain ing senses, after the words flat &c. 
In the affixes and जिक, the t is replaced by इक, the other letters are anubandhas. The form in both cases will be the same, but there is a dis tinction in the feminine. Those formed by ठञ् will take डीप (IV. 1. 15), the others will take टाप (IV. I. 4)Thus काशिका or काशिकी, बेदिका or बेदिकी। 
The word acra is to be read in to this sûtra. Those words in the list which are not a will take the affixes, by virtue of being so classified. 
The word 9971: occurs in the list of words. It gets the designation of बुद्ध by I. I.75. Thas देवदत्तिकः॥ But when it is the name of a Vahika village, it is not a Vriddha word. The secondary derivative then will be रेवदत्तः ॥ 
0. In the Mahâbhâshya it is said that a Proper name is optionally 
of - GOVER 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY O 
ERNMENT OF 
OF INDIA 
सत्यमेव जयते 
शौषिकम् ॥ 
[ BK. IV. CH, ITatta 
सरकार 
treated as a Vriddha, and it gives example of देवदत्तीयाः or देवदत्ताः ॥ So then देवदत्त is a Vriddha word and will take these affixes, 
Ans, No. In that very passage of Mahâbhâshya it is further stated that the option in the case of Proper: Names is allowed only for the purposes of the application of the affix ? (IV, 2. 114) and not the affix xər and ull 
Vårt :--This affix comes after compound words ending in re and preceded by भापत, ऊर्व and ; as आपत्कालिकी or का, और्धकालकी or °का, तातून कालिकी or का ।। 
1काशि, 2 चेवि (वैदी ) 3 सांयाति , 4 संकाह, 5 अच्युत, 6 मोदमान (मोहमान) 7 शकुला इ, 8 हस्तिक, 9 कुनामन्, (कुरामन्, 10 किरण्य, 11 करा, 12 गोवासन (गोधाशन) 13 भारङ्गी*, 14 अरिंदम, 15 अरित्र*, 16 देवदत्त, 17 वशग्राम (वासनाम) 18 शौवावतान (सीधावतान) 19 युवराज, 20 उपराज, 21 देवराज, 22 मोदन*, 23 सिन्धुमित्र, 24 दासमित्र, 25 सुधामित्र*, 26 सोममित्र", 27 छ। गमित्र*, 28 सधमित्र*, 29 मापारिपूर्वाशत् (आपन, ऊर्ध्व, सद) कालान्तातू, 30 संज्ञा, 31 भौरिकि, 12 भोलिङ्गि, 33 सर्वमित्र, 34 साधुमित्र ।। 
वाहीकग्रामेभ्यश्च ॥११७॥ पदानि ॥ वाहीक मामेभ्यः च, (ठञ् बिटी)। वृत्तिः॥ वाहीकग्रामवाचिभ्यो वृद्ध यष्ठ निवौ प्रत्ययौ भवतः शैषिको । 
117. The affixes is and मिद come, in the remain ing senses, after the Vriddha words denoting the villages of Vahika. 
The word Ter is to be read into this satra. This debars the affix छ (IV. 2. II4), Thus हाकालिकी or शाकलिका, मान्यविकी or मान्थविका ॥ 
विभाषोशीनरेषु ॥११८॥ पदानि ॥ विभाषा-उशीनरेषु (ठञ्-ठिी)। वृत्तिः ॥ उशीनरेष ये वाहीकग्रामास्ताचिभ्यो वृद्धभ्यः प्रातिपदिके योविभाषा उमिठी प्रत्ययो भवतः ।। 
118. The affixes or and fare come optionally in the remainipg senses, after Vriddha words denoting Vâhîka villages situated in Usînara. 
Thus आह्वजालिकी, लिका and लीया; so also सौदर्शनिकी, सौदनिका and सौर दर्शनीया॥ 
ओर्देशे लग ॥ ११९ ॥ पदानि ॥ ओर, देशे, ठा। पुत्तिः ।। उवर्णान्तात् देशवाचिनः प्रातिपदिकातू ठभू प्रत्ययो भवामि शोषिकः ॥ 
JAN119. The affix , comes in the remaining sensea, after a Nominal-stem denoting a locality and ending in उ॥ 
The phrase 'ara' does not govern this søtra. For had it been understood in this aphorism, there would have been no necessity of repeating it in the next. 
Thus षारकर्षकः, शावरजम्बुक: Why do we say देशे dengting a count try'? Observe Tag: the pupils of a formed by small ARE 
GOVE, 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
सत्यमद जयत 
STAR. IV. Ch. II. S122] 
शैषिक बुञ् ॥ 
In the previous sutras, the anuvritti of sy and is both were current; hence the repetition of 7 in this sû tra, because we could not take the anuvritti of C from the last sutra without drawing the anuvritti of मित् ॥ 
वृद्धारपाचाम् ॥ १२० पदानि ॥ वृद्धात्-प्राचाम-(ठञ्)। वृत्तिः ॥ ओर्देश इत्येव । उवर्णान्ताद् वृद्धामागदेशवाचिनः प्रातिपदिका प्रत्ययो भवाति शैषिकः ॥ 
120. The affix t comes in the remaining senses after a vriddha word endding in 5 and denoting a locality of the East-folks. 
The phrase भोर्देश is here understood. Thus भाडकजम्बुकः, शाकजम्बुकर जापितवारका ॥ 
The affix 5 would have been valid by the last sûtra also, the present sætra makes a fan or restriction, showing that in the case of words denoting places of East, the rule applies to those words only, which are Vriddha. There fore it does not apply to मलवास्तु, from which we have मालवास्तवः ।। 
धन्वयोपधादवु ॥१२१ ॥ पादानि ॥ धन्व-य--उपधात्-तुम्॥ वृत्तिः ॥ धन्ववाचिनी यकारोपधाच देशाभिधायिनो वृद्धात्प्रातिपरिका वा प्रत्ययो भवति शोषिकः ।। 
121. The affix gg comes in the remaining senses, after a vriddha word denoting a locality, which has the letter 7 as its penultimate, and after a vriddha place-namo denoting a waste or desert place. 
The words art and get are understood here. The word u means A waste or desert. Thus gizi, mai are examples of yll Similarly सांकाश्यकः and काम्पिल्यक: are examples of a penultimate. 
प्रस्थपुरवहान्ताच॥ १२२॥ पदानि ॥ प्रस्थ-पुर-वहान्तालू-च-बुज)। वृत्तिः ॥ प्रस्थपुर वह इत्येवमन्तादेशवाचिनः प्रातिपदिकार वृद्धावर प्रत्ययो भवति शेषिकः ।। 
122. The affix gsr comes, in the remaining sensos, after a Vriddha word denoting a locality and ending with मस्थ, पुर or वह. 
म This debars , (IV. 2, 114). Thus मालामस्थकाः, नान्दीपुरकः, कान्तिपुरकः, पैलु. वहकः, फाल्गनीवहका।। 
The words ending in gt would have taken the affix gor by the next s@tra also, but as that sutra is restricted to the countries of the East, this stra is general in its scope, 
रोपधेतीः प्राचाम् ॥१२३॥ पदानि ॥र-उपधा-ईतोः-प्राचाम् । वृत्तिः ॥रोपधावीकारान्ताच्च भागदेशवाचिनो वृद्धावञ् प्रत्ययो भवति चोषिकः॥ 
URE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY ON 
NT OF INDIA 
(a 
कृति मंत्रान्य 
Trg 7770 
[BK. IV. CH. II. 125. 
TEST 
. 
78 
7 
123. The affix gr comes in the remaining senses, after a Vriddha word denoting a locality of the East-folk, the word having a penultimate T or ending in 1 
This debars 51 Thus grefyzat, 1 7 :11 So also with words ending in ft As, alat i , Alnet-Arch: (VI. 4. 148). 
Why do we say 'of the East-folk'? Observe er Tihara: formed by 5. The in ga in the sûtra is for the sake of distinctness. 
tagasi 1878 11 TETA II GT-ac-97CTET: T-(est) 1 वृत्तिः ॥ वृद्धाजनपदवाचिनस्तदवाधिवाचिनश्च प्रातिपदिकाबुम् प्रत्ययो भवति शैषिकः ।। 
124. The affix get comes in the remaining senses, after a Vriddha word denoting an inhabited kingdom, or a limit of such kingdom. 
The phrases era and that are understood here, being qualified by जनपर and तदवधि ॥ This debars the affix छ॥ Thus आभिसारकः and आदर्शकः are examples of जनपद ॥ And औपुष्टक: and श्यामायनकः from औपुष्ट and श्यामायन two uninhabited countries, are illustrations of staterary 
The Try or limit of an inhabited country or are must be a country and not a village. This is so, in order to prevent, by anticipation, the appli cation of 5 by IV. 2. 137 to words like forf which is an arid desert: as Sparere: 11 The word aaf means either the boundary of that (599) " or " that which itself is a boundary ". 
अवृद्धादपि बहुवचनविवायत् ॥ १२५॥ पदानि ॥ अवृद्धातू-अपि-वहुव वन faqgra-(as) बत्तिः॥ अवृद्धा वृटाच जनपदात् तदवाधिवाचिनश्च बहुवचनविषयात्प्रातिपरिकाद् वुञ् प्रत्ययो भवति GF: ! 
125. The affix qst comes in the remaining senses, even after a word which is not a Vriddha, and which is always plural, when it denotes an inhabited country or a limit of such country, as well as after such Vriddha words. 
The words say and art are to be read into the aphorism. This debars y and To Thus from 979T:, 781: and hiot: which are non-Vșiddha Kingdom denoting words, always having a plural form, we have sig, 15* and a Similarly staret: and 3731er are non-Vriddha always plural words, denoting boundary of kingdom; we have from them per free and str 
pan: The affix will apply, of course to Vriddha te word by the last sútra. though these be always plural in form. Thus Tarn and 3 from erat: and 
URE • GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
ov OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
Bte. IV. CH. II. S127) 
शोषिक-बुजू ।। 
745 
जाम्बाः ॥ So also to Vriddha words denoting limit of a Kingdom : कालंजरा: कालंजरकः, वैकुलिशाः-वैकुलिशकः ॥ 
The word fara is used in the sûtra to indicate that the word should be plural in essence, having no corresponding singular form. . Therefore the rule will not apply to वर्तन्यः plural of वर्तनी॥ The derivative from it will be वार्तनः ॥ 
The word sur is used in the sâtra to indicate that Vriddha-words which would have taken as by the last sâtra are not debarred by this sútra, when they are plural in form. This debarring would have taken place, by the rule of interpretation known as a foglalt; but for the use of the word अपि ॥ This maxim or nyaya is thus explained in Padamanjari :-पूर्वसूत्रे हि जनपदसामान्ये वृद्धातू व विहितः, यथा ब्राह्मणसामान्ये दधिदान; इह तु बहुवचनविषयेविशेषेऽवृद्धार बुर, यथा कौण्डिन्ये तक्रदानं, ततश्च बहुवचनादपि वृद्धाद वृभिप्राप्ते आरभ्यमाणोऽवृद्धा वुञ् वृद्धा वनो बाधकः स्यादित्यपि शब्दन समुच्चीयते इत्यर्थः ॥ 
कच्छाग्निवक्तगतॊत्तरपदात् ॥ १२६॥ पदानि ॥ कच्छ-आग्नि-वक्त्र-गर्त्त-उत्तरप दात्-()। वृत्तिः ॥ कच्छायुत्तरपदाद देशवाचिनः प्रातिपदिकाच्चाद् वृद्धावृद्धाचवुझ प्रत्ययो भवति शैषिकः।। 
126. The affix at comes in the remaining senses after a word, whether Vriddha or not, denoting a locality and having as its second term the words kachchha', agni', 
vaktra' and 'garta'. 
This debars छ and अण्॥ As दारुकच्छकः, पैप्पलीकच्छकः, काण्डामकः, वैभुजामकः ऐन्द्रवक्तूकः, सैन्धुवक्त्रकः, बाहुगर्तकः and चाकगर्तकः ॥ 
The word gerne in the sutra should be read with every one of the words कच्छ &c. 
धूमादिभ्यश्च ॥ १२७॥ पदानि ॥ धूमादिभ्यः-च-(बुआ)। वृत्तिः ॥धूमादिम्यो देशवाचिभ्यः प्रातिपदिके यो बुञ् प्रत्ययो भवति शोषिकः ।। 
127. The affix वुञ् comes, in the remaining sens es, after the words dhûma &c, denoting country. 
This debars Stop &c. Ersteri, gruse: &c. The word grerat occurs in the list. It would have taken वम् by IV. 2. I2I as it has य as penultimate. Its mention here shows that it need not denote a locality for the application of this affix. Similarly the words free and Tra being names of stage would have taken tot by 1 24 ante; here in this list, therefore, they do not denote country. Thus विदेहानां क्षत्रियाणां स्वं वैदेहकम् “ the property of Videha Kshatriyas". Soalso आनर्तकम् ॥The word समुद्र occurs in the list. It takes the affix when the 
URE - GOVA 
OVERNMENT 
ev OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
शेषिक-युद्ध। 
(BK IV. CH. II. 1$. 1291 
सरकार 
derivative word means a 'ship' or a 'sailor'. Thus सामुद्रिका नोः and सामुद्रको मनुष्यः ॥ Otherwise not : सामुद्रम् “ Oceanic water". 
1 धूम, 2 षडण्ड (खण्ड and खण्ड) बाशदिन, 4 भर्जुनाव (आर्जुनार) माहकस्थली; 6 आनकस्थली*, 7 माहिषस्थली*, 8 मानस्थली (माषस्थली) 9 अदृस्थली*, 10 मद्रकस्थली*, 11 समुद्र स्थली, 12 दाण्डायनस्थली, 13 राजस्थली, 14 विदेह, 15 राजगृह, 16 सानासाह, 17 शष्प, 18 (शिष्य) 18 मित्रवर्ध (मित्रवर्ध; मित्र, वल) 19 भक्षाली*, 20 मद्कूल, 21 माजीकूल (आज्जीकूल) 22 याहाव, 23 पाहाव, 24 संस्फीय (संहीय)25 बर्बर, 26 वर्च, 27 गर्त (वर्चगर्त) 28 आनर्त, 29 माठर, 30 पाथेय, 31 घोष, 32 पल्ली (वल्ली) 33 आराज्ञी, 34 धार्तराज्ञी, 35 आवय, 36 तीर्थ (भवयात तीर्थ) 37 वालातूसौवीरेषु, 38 समुद्रान्नावि मनुष्ये च, 39 काक्ष, 40 अन्तरीय (अन्तरीप) 41 श्रीप, 42 भरुण, 43 उज्जयनी, ( उज्जयिनी) 44 पहार*, 45 दक्षिणापथ, 46 साकेत. 47 घोषस्थली, 48 भक्षास्थली, 49 गर्नकूल, 50 मानवल्ली, 51 सुराज्ञी॥ 
नगरात्कुत्सनप्रावीण्ययोः ॥ १२८॥ पदानि ॥ नगरात्-कुत्सन-प्रावीण्ययोः-(बुश) दृस्तिः॥ नगरशब्दाबु प्रत्ययो भवति शैषिकः कुत्सने प्रावीण्ये च गन्यमाने ।। 
A. केनायं मुषितः पन्था गाये पक्ष्मालिधूसरः ? B. इह नगरे मनुष्येण || A. संभाव्यतएतन्नागरकेण ॥ चौराहि नागरका भवन्ति | A. केनेर लिखितं चित्रं मनोनेत्रविकाशियत् ? B. इह नगरे मनष्येण ।। A. संभाव्यतएतन्नागरकेण ॥ प्रवीणा हि नागरका भवन्ति ।। 
128. The affix est comes after the word 'nagara' in the remaining senses, when censure or praise is implied. 
The word getrof which is equivalent to face or blame or censure'; and praia which means you " dexterity", qualify the sense of the affix. 
Thus arro: 'a knave, a cunning person, or a skillful person'. The word literally means 'a town-born, or town-bred', but by the usage of language, it always denotes a person having the vices or virtues of a town, such as a thief or an artist. 
Why do we say "when censure or dexterity is implied"? Observe नागराः ब्राह्मणाः 'the Nagara Brahmanas". 
अरण्यान्मनुष्ये ॥ १२९ ॥ पदानि ॥ अरण्यात-मनुष्ये-(बुग)। कृत्तिः ॥ अरण्यशब्दावुञ् प्रत्ययो भवति शैषिको मनुषधेऽभिधेये।। पातिकम् ॥ पथ्यप्यायन्यायविहारमनषध हस्तिष्विति वक्तव्यम्।। 
129. The affix Est comes, in the remaining senses, after the word tu, in the sense of a man. 
This debars the affix m. Thus भारण्यकः मनुग्धा a forester'. 
Vårt :.It should be stated rather that the affix 7 is added to pro in the sense of 'a way' a lesson, or doctrine (Upanishad)' 'a maxim''a play or game' a man' and 'an elephant. Thus आरण्यक पन्याः , अध्याय, न्याय: बिहार, मनुष्य का हस्ती॥ 
URE - GOVE 
VERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY ON 
NT OF INDIA 
सत्यमेव जयते 
कार 
BR. IV. CH. II. $132] 
शोषक अण॥ 
747 
ium Vart :-Optionally when the sense is that of a cow-dung as आरण्याः or भारण्यका गोमयाः॥ 
- Why do we say 'when having these senses'? Otherwise the affix will be अण. As आरण्याः पशवः ' wild beasts'. 
विभाषा कुरुयुगन्धराश्याम् ॥ १३०॥ पदानि ।। विभाषा-कुरु-युगन्धराश्याम-(वुत्र) वृत्तिः ॥ कुरु युगन्धर इत्येताभ्यां विभाषा वुझ प्रत्ययो भवति शैषिकः ॥ 0 
130. The affix get comes optionally in the re maining senses, after the words Kuru', and 'Yugandhara. 
Thus कौरवकः or कौरवः, बौगन्धरकः or गौगन्धरैः ॥ These words denote जनपद or inhabited countries, and therefore by sâtra IV. 2. 125 they would always have taken the affix . The present sûtra makes the application of a optional and not obligatory. The word ghs occurs in the list of the class (IV. 2. 133). By virtue of its being so classified, it will take any also. And when it means man or something found in men, it will take necessarily, not optionally, the affix बुञ् by virtue of sutra IV. 2. I 34. As कौरवको मनुष्यः, कोरवक मस्थ हसितम् ॥ This aphorism therefore, teaches option regarding कुरु with these restrictions, while it teaches option absolutely with regard to the word युगन्धरः ।। 
मद्रवृज्योः कन् ॥ १३१॥ पदानि ॥ मद्र-वृज्यो:-कन् । वृत्तिः ।। माजिशब्दाभ्यां कन् प्रत्ययो भवति शैषिकः ॥ 
131. The affix कन् comes in the remaining senses, after the words 'madra' and 'vriji'. 
This debars 3, though the words denote inhabited countries. Thus मद्रक: born in Madra', जिकः ।। 
कोपधादण ॥ १३२॥ पदानि ॥ क-उपधात्-अण। वृत्तिः ॥ ककारोपधात् प्रातिपदिकारण प्रत्ययो भवति शैषिकः ।। 
132. The affix stu comes in the remaining senses after a word denoting a place and having the letter & as its penultinate. 
This debars 7 in the case of words which denote Fate or inhabited countries. Of course the words which do not denote जनपद, will have taken अण् even without this rule. Thus आर्षिक: "born in ऋषिकाः"So also माहीषिकः ।। 
The affix str will apply even when the word ends in 3, and would have otherwise taken as by IV. 2. 119. Thus tea1ch "born in 1" The word पेशे is understood in this sutra. 
कच्छादिभ्यश्च ॥ १३३॥ पदानि ।। कच्छादिश्य:-च-(आण)। बत्तिः ॥ कच्छ इत्येवमादिभ्यो दशवाचिभ्योऽणप्रत्ययो भवति । 
19 
URE - GOVE 
GOVERNMENT 
ex OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
शेषिक-बुत्र। 
[ BK. IV. CH. II. S. 15. 
लय भारत 
ल सरकार 
133. The affix tu comes, in the remaining senses, after the words kachchha &c denoting places. 
The word en is understood here. This debars as &c. Thus males, सैन्धवः, वार्णवः &c. The words कच्छ &c. are not invariable plural words, because by the next sûtra, it is shown that these words may signify men and their habits &c. The word faglig occurs in this list. It would have taken stor by the last sûtra also, because it has an as its penultimate. Its mention in the list is for the sake of the subsequent sûtra by which it takes an also under certain conditions. 
Palकच्छ, 2 सिन्धु, 3 वर्ण, 4 गन्धार, 5 मधुमत्, 6 कम्बोज, 7 कश्मीर, 8 साल्व, 9 कुरु, 10 अ नुषण्ड (अणु, अण्ड, खण्ड) 11 द्वीप, 12 अनूप, 13 अजवाह, 14 विजापक, 15 कलूतर (कुलून)16रा ॥ 
मनुष्यतत्स्थयोवुञ् ॥ १३४॥ पदानि ॥ मनुष्य-तत्स्थयोः वुञ् ॥ वृत्तिः॥ मनुष्ये मनुष्यस्थे च जातादो प्रत्ययार्थे कच्छादिभ्यो वम् प्रत्ययो भवात ॥ 
134. The affix ag comes after the words kachchha &c. in the senses of born &c. when the meanining is a 'man' or what exists in man'. 
This debars अण ॥ Thus काच्छक: a man born in Kutch'. काच्छकमस्य हसितं जल्पितम् | His joke or talk is of Kutch or a Kutch-laughter'. काच्छिका चडा ।। Similarly सैन्धवको मनुष्यः, सैन्धवकमस्य हसितं जल्पितम, सैन्धविका चडा ।। 
Why do we say "when meaning man or what exists in man?” Ob serve काच्छो गौः The cow of Kutch'. सैन्धवो वार्णवः ॥ 
अपदाती साल्वात् ॥ १३५॥ पदानि ॥ अपदाती-साल्वात्-(वुञ्)॥ वृत्तिः । अपहातावेव मनुष्ये मनुष्यस्थे साल्वशब्दाद् वुञ् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
135 The affix Tr comes after the word are in the senses of being born &c when denoting a man or what exists in man, provided that it does not mean a foot-soldier. N The word साल which occurs in the कच्छादि class, would have taken त by the last sûtra, when the sense was that of a man or some human attribute. The present sutra makes a restriction. Thus सालको मनुष्यः, सालकमस्य हसितं जल्पितं &c. But सालः पतिव्रजाति 'the Salva foot soldier goes.' 
गोयवाग्वोश्च ॥ १३६॥ पदानि ॥ गो-यवाग्वोः-च-(ब)। वत्तिः ।। गवि यवाग्वां च जातादौ प्रत्ययार्थे साल्वशब्दात् बुज् प्रत्यया भवति शैषिकः ।। 
136. The affix got comes in the remaining senses of being born &c, after the words uig, when the word signi fies a cow' or a barley gruel'. 
URE - GOVE. 
OVERNMENT 
TRY OF CUL 
MINISTRI 
NT OF INDIA 
KUVACH. II. S. 138] 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
grach 
This debars sto of IV. 2. 133. Thus ergo in the cows born in Salva". Erat Jat: the barley gruel of Salva'. In other cases we have Era II 
गतॊत्तरपदाच्छः ॥ १३७ ॥ पदानि ॥ गर्त्त-उत्तरपदादू छः । वृतिः ॥ गतॊत्तरपरादेशवाचिनः प्रातिपदिकाच्छः प्रत्ययो भवात शौषिकः ।। 
137. The affix y comes in the remaining senses after a Nominal-stem denoting a place and having the word stá as its second term. 
This debars To The word et is to be read into the sûtra. This rule being a subsequent one debars the affixes Ty and ag of sûtra 117 ante. Thus 
Firmaizi, mutation, Farrealen born in porcupine's hole &c'. The word 371097 is used in the sûtra, so as to prevent the application of the rule to a word which ends in yah, but is preceded by the affix ae, as areTTH 11 Here ze is an affix (V. 3.68) and not a pada. 
TETETT 11830 || Tarat 11 tel@:--(3:) ! वृत्तिः । गह इत्येवमादिभ्यः प्रातिपदिकेभ्यश्छः प्रत्ययो भवति शैषिकः॥ 
138. The affix 3 comes in the remaining senses after the words gaha &c. 
This debars Spur &c. Thus teta: , belonging to a cave'. razrzftan: &c. 
In the list of गहादि occurs the following “मध्यमध्यमं चाण चरणे". It means “The word sy becomes changed into 6377 when the affix 5 is to be added. Thus A-: ) But when the sense is that of a Veda-school or Charana, the affix stor is added instead of as frezar:"! The word 274 here has the restricted sense of the middle of the earth', and not any middle generally. Thus मव्यमीयः means पृथिवीमध्ये भवो ॥ So also when the affix अण् is applied in the case of qur, it has the sense of aute of sàtra IV. 3 89 and not all the other senses. Thus TET: TEOT:, Ta siretsar, Teir thT: "three Charañas dwell in the East, three in the West, and three in the Middle". The words fuae and quaa: occur in the list. They have the affix , but before the affix छ the स् of तस् is elided. Thus मुखतीयम् and पाश्वतीयम् ।। 
The augment anar is added to stay and at before the affix Jl As 37 कीयम्, परकीयम् ॥ The same augment is added to the word देव also as, देवकीयमा ।। 
The affix sur comes after the words or &c. No list of such words is given. It is an stratur: Thus uztea, arun, sittatuetter, Tech Photo &c, 
ORE .GOV 
GOVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
AINISTRY OF 
T OF INDIA 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
शौषिक-छ। 
[BK. IV. CH ILAS.tat 
भारत सरकार 
1 गह, 2 अन्तःस्था, 3 सम, 4 विषम, 5 मध्य मध्यमं चाण् चरणे 6 उत्तम, 7 अङ्ग, 8 वङ्ग, 9 मगध, 10 पूर्वपक्ष, 11 अपरपक्ष, 12 अधम शाख 13 उत्तमशाख, 14 एकशाख, 15 समानशाख, 16 समानग्राम, 17 एकग्राम, 18 एकवृक्ष, 19 एकपलाश, 20 इतन, 21 इश्वनीक ( इधुनी) 22 अवस्यन्दन ( अवस्यन्दी and अवस्कन्द ) 23 कामप्रस्थ, 24 खाडायन (शाडिकाडायनि; खाडायनि and खाण्डायनी) 25 काठे रणि (कावरणि and कामवेरणि) 26 लावेरणि, 27 सौमित्रि*, 28 शैशिरि, 29 आसुत्*, 30 देवशर्मि (देवशर्मन् ) 31 भौति, 32 आहिसि, 33 आमित्रि, 34 व्याडि, 35 बैजि (वैरजि), 36 आध्यश्चि, 37 आ नशंशि, 38 शौङ्गि, 39 आमिशनि, (अग्निशमन् ) 40 भौजि, 41 वाराटकि (आराटकि), 42 बाल्मीकि, 43 क्षेमवृद्धि (क्षेमवृद्धिन् ), 44 आश्वत्थि, 45 औग्राहमानि*, 46 ऐक, 47 बिन्दवि, 48 दन्ताय , 49 हंस*, 50 तन्त्वन, 51 उत्तर, 52 अनन्तर (अन्तर ), 53 मुखपार्वतसोर्लोपः (also मुखतीय and पार्श्व तीय), 54 जनपरयोः कुक् च (also जनकीय and परकीय), 55 देवस्य च, 56 वेणुकादिभ्यश्छण.57 भासुरि, 58 सौवि, 59 पारकि. It is an आकृतिगण ।। 
प्राचां कटादेः॥१३९॥ पदानि॥ प्राचाम-कटादेः। वृत्तिः ॥ माग्देशवाचिनः कटादेः प्रातिपदिकाच्छः प्रत्ययो भवति शैषिकः॥ 
139. The affix छ comes in the remaining senses, after the words beginning with a denoting the places of the 
East-folk. 
The word af is understood here also. The word of the sutra qualifies देशे | This debars अण्॥ Thus कटनगरीयम्, कटघोषीयम्, कटपललीयम् ॥ 
राज्ञः क च ॥ १४०॥ पदानि ॥ राज्ञः-क-च-(छ:)॥ वृत्तिः ।। राज्ञः ककारश्चान्तादेशो भवति छश्च प्रत्ययः ।। 
140. The letter क is the substitute of the final of the word Tires, when 3 is added. 
This sâtra only teaches substitution; for it would have taken छ by IV.2. II4. Thus राजकीयम् ॥ The word देशे does not govern this sutra, not being appropriate. 
वृद्धादकेकान्तखोपधात्॥१४१॥ पदानि ॥ वृद्धातू-अक-इक-अन्त-खोपधातू-(छः) वृत्तिः॥ बद्धाद्देशवाचिनो इक इक इत्येवमन्तात् खकारोपधाच्च प्रातिपदिकाच् छ प्रत्ययो भवति॥ 
141. The affix छ comes in the remaining senses after a Vriddha word denoting a place and ending with or इक, or having a as its penultimate. 
The word must be read into the satra. This debars the top of Sätra 132 ante: as well as the affixes ordained by Sûtras 117 and 123. 
Thus अक:-मारोहणकीय द्रौघणकीयम् ॥ इका-आश्वपथिकीयम्, शाल्मलिकीयम् ।। खोपधान:-कौटिशिखीयम्, आयोमुखीयम् ।। 
URE • GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY ON 
T OF INDIA 
RIV/CH. II. S. 145. 
रिक्रति मंत्रान 
शोषिक छ। 
१. भारत सर 
तिसरकारम 
Vart:---The words सोसुक &c. are also governed by this rule though they end in उक | Thus सोसुकीयम्, मौसकीयम, ऐन्द्रवेणकीयम् ।। 
कन्थापलदनगरग्रामहदोत्तरपदातू ॥१४२॥ पदानि ।। कन्था-पलद-नगर-ग्राम हद-उत्तरपदात्-(छ)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ कन्थाद्युत्तरपदादेशवाचिनो वृद्धाप्रातिपदिकाच् छः प्रत्ययो भवति शौषिकः ॥ 
142. The affix 3 comes in the remaining senses after the Vriddha words, having the words kantha, palada, nagara, grâma and hrada, as second terms. 
This debars the other affixes such as 55 and ĝe of 117 ante Thus दाक्षिकन्यीयम् , माहिकिकन्थीयम् , दाक्षिपलदीयम् , माहिकिपलीयम् , क्षिनगरीयं, माहिकिनगरीयम्, दाक्षिमामीयम्, माहिकिग्रामीयम, दाक्षिदीयम्, माहिकिहदीयम् ।। 
पर्वताच्च ॥ १४३॥ पदानि ॥ पर्वतात्-च-(छ:)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ पर्वतशब्दाच् छः प्रत्ययो भवति शैषिकः ॥ 
143. The affix y comes after the word gera in the remaining senses. 
This debars अण्॥ Thus पर्वतीयो राजा “the hill-king". पर्वतीयः पुरुषः the hill man'. 
विभाषा ऽमनुष्ये ॥ १४४॥ पदानि ।। विभाषा-अमनुष्ये-(छः)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ पर्वतशब्दाच् छः प्रत्ययो भवति वाऽमनुष्ये वाच्ये॥ 
144. The affix छ optionally comes in the remaining senses after the word yad when it does not denote a man. 
Thus पर्वतीयानि or पार्वतानि फलानि 'hill fruits', पर्वतीयमुदकम् or पार्वतमुत्कम् 'hill water'. 
Why do we say अमनुष्ये 'not-human? Observe पर्वतीयो मबष्यः where there is no option allowed. 
कृकणपर्णाद्भारद्वाजे ॥१४५॥ पदानि ॥ कृकण-पर्णातू-भारद्वाजे-छ:)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ कृकणपणशब्दाभ्यां भारद्वाजदेशवाचिभ्यां छः प्रत्ययो भवति शैषिकः॥ 
1145. The affix छ comes in the remaining senses after up and go when denoting the country of Bharadvaja. 
The word en is understood here also. The word TTTS does not here mean Gotra, but country. Thus shiuifera and quifema 
Why do we say "denoting country of Bharadvâjas?" Observe anterior, पार्णम् &c. 
• GOVER 
aY OF CULTUA 
• MINISTRY 
NMENT OF IN 
INDIA 
मस्कति मंत्रास 
सत्यमेव जयते 
तिसरकार 
ओ३म् । अथ चतुर्थाध्यायस्य तृतीयः पादः । 
BOOK FOURTH. 
CHAPTER THIRD, 
युष्मदस्मदोरन्यतरस्यां खञ्च ॥१॥ पदानि ॥ युष्मद्-अस्मदो-अन्य-तस्याम खञ्च ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ युष्मदस्मदो ख प्रत्ययो भवति शैषिक: चकाराच्छश्च ।। 
1. The affix at also comes optionally in the re maining cases, after the words 'yushmad' and 'asmad.' 
The regulating power of the word eat ceases. The word 7 indicates that the affix may be छ' as well. The word "optionally" shows that the gene ral affix stor may also be employed. Thus there are three affixes, q, 5 and अण, and hence there being no equal enumeration, the rule of mutual corres, pondence (I. 3. 10) does not apply. 
The words and she are Vriddha, as they belong to Tyadadi class (I. I. 74), and would have taken छ by IV. 2. II4; the present sutra en joins three affixes for each. Thus युष्मन्-।-अण् = शुष्माक+अण (IV. 3. 2)= यौष्माकः शुष्मन्- छ- युष्मद्-।-ईय- युष्मदीयः (VII. I. 2). युष्मद्ना-ख - युष्माका ईन (IV.3.2.)= योष्माकी णः (VII. I. 2, and VIII.4. 2). So also आस्माकः, अस्मदीय; and आस्माकीनः ।। 
तस्मिन्नणि च युष्माकास्माकौ ॥२॥ पदानि ॥ तस्मिन् अणि-च-युष्माक-आ स्माको॥ वृत्तिः ॥ तस्मिन्नित साक्षाद्विहितः ख निर्दिश्यते न चकारानुकृष्टश्छः । तस्मिन्खभि अणि च युष्मदस्म होर्यथासंख्यं शुष्माक अस्माक इत्येतावदिशौ भवतः॥ 
2. When this affix खा is added and when अण is added, then युष्माक and अस्माक are the substitutes of युष्मद् and 
अस्मदू॥ 
The pronoun alma refers to the visible affix en and not to the under stood affix छ which was drawn into the last sutra by the word च॥ 
Why does the rule of mutual correspondence (I. 3. 10) not apply here, there being two affixes, two words, and two substitutes? This, however, is not E 
GOVER 
VERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
Bk. TV. CH. III. S.5] 
शेषिक-यत् । 
रालय भारत 
done, because the sâtra can be divided into two separate aphorisms: as (1) तस्मिन् खान युष्मदस्मदोर्युष्माकास्माको भवतः (s) ततोऽणि च ॥ i. e. (I , when खi is added, सुष्माक and अस्माक are the substitutes of युष्मद् and अस्मद् respectively (2). So also when stor follows. 
As for illustrations, see the preceding Sutra, e. g. थोषमाकीणः, आस्माकीन: with खम्, and यौष्माकः and आस्माकः with अण ॥ This substitution does not take place when छ is added, as युष्मदीयः and अस्मदीयः॥ 
तवकममकावेकवचने ॥३॥ पदानि ॥ तवक-ममको-एकवचने॥ वृत्तिः ॥ एकवचनपरयोर्युष्मदस्मदोस्तवक ममक इत्येतावादेशौ भवतो यथासंख्यं तस्मिन्खनि अणि च परतः॥ 
3. In expressing one individual, तवक and ममक are the substitutes of 'yushmad' and 'asmad' respectively,when खञ् and stur follow. 
As arachitat: 'belonging to thee', ARHIT: "belonging to me.” are and मामकः ॥ But when the affix is छ, the form will त्वदीयः, मदीयः. 
The word aatia should not be construed as meaning the affix of the singular number, as the affix gt! Because the affix of the singular is always elided (लुक्) after these words, and by rule I. I. 63, there will not be the application of this rule. This difficulty is, however, got over by explaining the word एकवचने as equal to एकार्थे । 
अर्धाद्यत् ॥४॥ पदानि ॥ अर्धातू-यतू ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ अर्धशब्दात् यत् प्रत्ययो भवति शैषिकः ॥ 
4. The affix ya comes after the word & in the remaining senses. 
This debars अण् ॥ Thus अयम् belonging to half.' 
Vart:-When it has a prior term the affix ठञ् is used. As बॉलयाकम्, (बल्यथवस्त = बालेयं)॥ गौतमार्टिकम् ॥ 
परावराधमोत्तमपूर्वाञ्च ॥५॥ पदानि ॥ पर-अवर-अधम-उत्तम-पूर्वात-च॥ वृत्तिः ।। पर अवर अधम उत्तम इत्येवंपूर्वाचार्धात् प्रत्ययो भवति शैषिकः ।। 
5. The affix यत् comes, in the remaining senses, after the word 'ardha', when preceded by 'para', avara', 'adh ama', and 'uttama'. 
Thus परायम्, अवरायम् , अधमाद्यम्, उनमार्धम् ॥ 
0. Why do we say mia preceded by'? Its use seems to be super ducus. If the sutra stood as परावराधमोत्तमेम्यः, it would have given the same sense. For the stura being supplied from the last sútra, the whole sutra 
URE - Gove 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
su 
संस्कृति मंत्री 
Sirac-3311 
BK. IV. CH. III. $. 7.1 
गरत सरकार 
would have been परावरधिमोत्तमेभ्योऽधात् यत् which must mean preceded by para &c." 
A. The words and stat have meanings other than that of fee or direction. As gi grei 'highest pleasure.' 37ai Te 'lowest pleasure.' There fore, when these words y and at denote direction, then by the subsequent rule, the affix would have been always 5 and all. The employment of the term go in the sûtra, prevents the application of the affix og even when the words denote direction. 
According to the Vârtika aaaie given under the last sâtra, the word spa preceded by any word would have taken , hence the necessity of this sûtra ordainig an, when the first terms are qe &c. 
fenauer ST II & II etê go-gå-TETE-797-T II वृत्तिः ।। दिक्पूर्वपदावधान्तात्मातिपदिकात् ठञ् प्रत्ययो भवति चकारायच्च शैषिकः ॥ 
6. And the affix ist also (as well as t) comes in the remaining senses after the word "ardha,' when the prior term denotes a direction. 
By 7, the affix it is also used. This debars 3TUT ! Thus cara af feu, rer or FETOTTAGE 1 
The word te is used in the sâtra in order to prevent ambiguity. Had the sútra stood merely as peenart 557, it might have meant(I.1.68), Ardha preceded by the word fem takes us also', for then Fantara would have applied, and raré 
a: would have taken the affix. 
ATT ETT 9 Trêt ll AH-1997-year-377- चिः॥दिकपर्वपदादित्येव । ग्रामैकदेशवाचिनो जनपदैकदेशवाचिनश्च प्रातिपदिकाहिकपूर्वपदादबान्ताद 
TEÁT 97: TGR Gargaret 11 
7. The affixes et and gs come in the remaining senses after the word "ardha', preceded by a word denoting direction, when a particular portion of a village or an inhabi ted country is meant. 
The phrase reengagera is to be read into the sûtra. This debars !! Thus इमे खलुस्माकं ग्रामस्थ जनपदस्थ वा पौर्वार्धाः or पौर्वाधिकाः " Those verily belong to the eastern half of our village or country". So also erreur: or EreToTT विकाः॥ The word पौर्वार्दाः प्रामस्य पूर्वस्मिन्नः भवा: and is a Taddhitartha com 
pound. 
मध्यान्मः॥८॥ पदानि ।। मध्यातू-मः॥ afer: a . eewara Rua: 11 वार्तिकम् ॥ आदचोति वक्तव्यन् ।। वारिकम् ॥ अवोधसोर्लोपश्च ।। 
URE.GOV 
GOVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
ENT OF INDIA 
BELV. CH. III. § 11 ) 
irách-ET 
4.17 
1778 777 
8. After the word en there is the affix # in the remaining senses. 
... This debars To As TTH: "middlemost" 
Vårt :-So also after the word STIĘ I As stea: "Adam, or born in the beginning". 
Vårt:-So also after the words stan and style, the final # being elid. ed. As 344, 372749 il 
37 Eiga II SI FIG II 34-FITETER I ITET: II STEFTT: teyit para FTTETTETETISTEO Straler geare 
9. The affix 7 comes in the remaining serises after the word 'madhya', the meaning being 'fit' or 'proper.' 
The word nigra a means 'equity, propriety, right, fit'. As arfare rra EFT To 784. "the proper piece of wood--neither too long nor too short ". ia 
rahu: "the fit Grammarian, neither too refined nor too dull”. H e "a proper wife". 
TUIGEUS TE l go ll TETAT I STTTT-TTTHES 4-75T 11 वृत्तिः॥ समुद्रसमीपे यो द्वीपस्तस्मात् यम् प्रत्ययो भवति शैषिकः ।। 
10. The affix tat comes, in the remaining senses, after the word aa, which is near the sea. 
The word gitt occurs in the list of Kachchhadi (IV. 2. 133), and would have taken eror; and by sutra IV. 2. 134, it would have taken as also. The present sûtra debars both those affixes, when the word at means BagAG ON 'near the sea 
Thus 1674 living on or relating to an island' As a pasarst 
Why do we say anh? Observe 94 or (IV. 2. 133 and 134), The word 'anu-samudra' is an Avyayibhava compound (II. 1. 15). 
ATGICIST IN TETET Il T all वृत्तिः॥ कालविशेषवाचनः प्रातिपदिकात ठञ् प्रत्ययो भवति शैषिकः ।। 
11. The affix got comes in the remaining senses after the words denoting time. 
This debars stor II The affix 5 which comes after Vriddha words is prohibited by this sûtra. Thus Fra: 'monthly' GATE, 'bi-monthly's FITER: 'annual'. 
The words which denote time even indirectly, also take this affix, As razagroziart The word as governs all the subsequent sutra's upto 25. (91T TITT:). 
SURE • GO 
COVERNMENT 
OY OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
स्कृति मंत्राना 
सावमय जयत 
सरकार 
शेषिक-उच्। 
[ BK. V. CH. IITTई 
श्राद्ध शरदः ॥१२॥ पदानि ॥ श्राद्ध-शरदः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ शरच्छब्दात् ठम् प्रत्ययो भवति श्राद्धे ऽभिधेये शैषिकाः ।। 
12. The affix yet comes in the remaining senses after the word शरद, when expressing श्राद्ध ॥ 
This debars अण् (IV. 3. 16). The word श्राद्ध means the funeral ob lation'; and not श्रद्धावान् पुरुषः 'a faithful or believing person'. Thus शाररिक श्राद्धं 'the autumnal Sraddha'. When not meaning "Sraddha', it will be शारदम् ।। 
विभाषा रोगातपयोः ॥ १३॥ पदानि ॥ विभाषा-रोग-आतपयोः (उञ)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ रोगे आतपे चाभिधये शरच्छब्दाद्वम् प्रत्ययो वा भवाति शैषिकः॥ 
13. The affix zer comes optionally in the remain ing senses after the word grę when expressing illness or heat. 
Thus आरक्किो रोगः 'the autumnal disease', शारविक आतप: - the autumnal heat or sunshine'. 
Why do we say “when denoting sickness or heat"? Observe, शारद राध 'the autumnal curd'. This ठञ् debars the ऋतु अण् (IV. 3. 16). 
निशाप्रदोषाभ्यां च ॥ १४॥ पदानि ॥ निशा-प्रदोषाभ्याम्-च (उम्)॥ वृत्तिः॥ निशाप्रोषशब्दाभ्यां विभाषा ठञ् प्रत्ययो भवति शैषिकः । 
14. The affix ठञ् comes optionally in the remain ing senses after the words nisâ ', and pradosha'. 
This makes optional, where by sûtra IV. 3. II ante, the would have been obligatory. Thus नैशम् or नैशिकम् 'nocturnal'.. प्रावशेषम् or प्राोषिकम् ।। 
श्वसस्तु च ॥१५॥ पदानि ॥ श्वस:-तुट्-च-(ठ)॥ वृत्तिः॥ व शब्दाद्विभाषा ठम् प्रत्ययो भवति, तस्य च तुडागमो भवति ॥ 
15. The affix est comes optionally in the remain img senses after the word श्वस् and it takes the augment तु ।। 
The word we takes the affix art by sûtra IV. 2. 105. This sûtra ordains 37 0 When free from the scope of these rules, it takes tyu and tyul affixes also by IV. 3. 23. Thus श्वसना-नुट्-।-ठञ् शौवस----इक (VII. 3. 3) 3 शोवस्तिक "belonging to to-morrow or ephemeral". Otherwise श्वस्त्थः and श्वस्तनः ।। 
संधिवेलायतुनक्षत्रेभ्योऽए ॥ १६॥ पदानि ।। सन्धि-चेलाद, ऋतु-नक्षत्रेभ्यः, अ ॥ वृतिः ॥ सन्धिवलादिन्य ऋतुभ्यो नक्षत्रेभ्यश्च कालवृतिभ्योऽण प्रत्ययो भवति शैषिकः॥ 
16. The affix sur comes in the remaining senses, 
URE - GOVE 
-OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY O 
NT OF INDIA 
MBIT. TV. CT, III. $19) 
शैषिक-ठ॥ 
after the words — sandhi-vela' &c, and the words expressing 
season' and 'asterism.' 
The word Tot is to be read into the sutra. All the words must be expressive of time. This debars 53 | The repetition of stor debars 5 also in the case of those words, which are Vșiddha in this list (IV. 2. 114). Thus (I) सान्धिवेलम्, सान्ध्यम् (2) गैष्मम, शशिरम् (3) तैषम, पौषम् are examples of sandhivela season and asterisms respectively. 
The affix atot is added to & TEC when denoting 'fruit' and 'festival, as सावत्सरं फलं or पर्व । 
1 संधिवेला, 2 संध्या, 3 अमावास्या, 4 त्रयोदशी, 5 चतुर्दशी, 6 पञ्चदशी, पौर्णमासी,8 प्रतिपत, 9 संवत्सरात्फलपर्वणाः ।। 
प्रावृष एण्यः ॥ १७॥ पदानि ॥ प्रावृषः-एण्यः॥ वृत्तिः॥ प्रावृषशब्दादेण्यः प्रत्ययो भवति शैषिकः । 
17. The affix que comes in the remaining senses after the word प्रावृष् ॥ 
This debars the top of the last sûtra, though 'pravřish' is a season denoting word. Thus प्रावृषेण्यो बलाहकः “the cloud belonging to the rainy season." 
वर्षाभ्यष्ठक् ॥ १८॥ पदानि ॥ वर्षाभ्यः-ठक् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ वर्षाशब्दाढक् प्रत्ययो भवति शैषिकः॥ 
18. The affix ठक comes in the remaining senses after the word वर्षा || 
This debars अण of IV. 3. 16. Thus वार्षिकमनुलेपनम् । The क has the force of साधु &c of IV. 3.43 here. 
छन्दास ठञ॥१९॥ पदानि । छन्दास-ठ)॥ वृतिः ॥ वर्षाशब्च् छन्दसि विषये ठञ् प्रत्ययो भवति शैषिकः ।। 
19. In the Chhandas, the word varsha' takes the affix gor in the remaining senses. 
This debars ठक्. The form will be the same, but there will be differ ence in accent. As नभश्च नभस्यश्च वाषिकावृतू॥ The word here means "month," i. e, Nabha and Navasya are two rainy months. 
वसन्ताच॥२०॥ वसन्तातू-च-(उ)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ वसन्तशब्दाच छन्दास विषये ठम प्रत्ययो भवति शाषका ॥ 
GOVERNM 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY ON 
NMENT OF IN 
OF INDIA 
SL 
शैषिक अण्॥ 
[BK. IV.CH. HIN231 
रत सरकार 
20. In the Chhandas, the affix gsr comes in the remaining senses after the word 'vasanta.' 
This debars अण (IV. 3, 16). Thus मधुश्च माधवश्च वासन्तिकावृतु ।। हेमन्ताच॥२१॥ पदानि । हेमन्तातू-च-(ठ)। वृत्तिः ॥ हेमन्त शब्दाच् छन्दास विषये उन प्रत्ययो भवति शैषिकः ॥ 
21. In the Chhandas, the affix Est comes in the res maining senses, after the word : hemanta.' 
This debars अण (IV. 3. 16). Thus सहश्च सहस्यश्च है मान्तकावृतू || The mak ing of two separate Sûtras of 20 and 21, is for the sake of the subsequent sûtra, in which the anuvritti of word $477 only is taken, 
सर्वत्राण च तलोपश्च ॥ २२॥ दाने ॥ सर्वत्र-अण-च-तलोपः-च॥ वृचिः ।। हेमन्त शब्दावण प्रत्ययो भवति तत्सन्नियोगेन चास्य तकारलोपः ॥ 
22. The affix su comes always after the word 'he manta,' and (before this affix) the letter ñ of hemanta' is 
elided. 
Thus हेमनस् वासः "wintery residence.' हैमनमुपलेपनम् ।। 
The word is used to show that the satra applies in the Chhandas as well as in the secular literature. 
The word हेमन्त will take अण by sutra IV. 3.16 as हेमन्ती पङ्क्तिः but there is no elision of there. Thus there are three forms a: (IV. 3. 16), हेमान्तकं (IV. 3. 21) and हैमनम्। 
सायंचिरंप्राद्धेप्रगेव्ययेश्यष्टयुट्युलौ तु च ॥ २३॥ पदानि ॥ सायम्-चिरम-प्रा खे-प्रगे-अव्ययेश्यः-ट्यु-ट्युलौ-तुट्-च-॥ वृत्तिः ॥ सायमित्याविभ्यश्चतुभ्योऽव्यये यश्च कालवाचिभ्यष्टय दुबलोस्तस्तयोस्तुट्च । वार्तिकम् ॥ चिरपरुत्परारिभ्यस्नो वक्तव्यः॥ वार्चिकम् ॥ प्रगस्य छन्दसि गलोपश्च ।। बार्तिकम् ॥ अग्रपश्चाडिमच् ॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ अन्साचोति वक्तव्यम् ॥ 
23. After the words First at eve', 'for a long time', प्रा in the fore-noon', प्रगे 'at dawn', and after In declinables expressing time, there are the affixes स्यु and ट्युल and their augment is तुट् ॥ 
The word Art is understood here also. Thus are--23 = T12-1---= सायंतनम् (VIL. I. I) belonging to the evening'. चिरंतनम्, lasting', मारणेलनम् "what is of the forenoon', प्रागेतनम् “what is of the early morn". 
The word ard is a word ending in and is an Indeclinable. These 
TURE - Go. 
AVERNMENT 
OF CULTUS 
MINISTRY 
AT OF INDIA 
BK IV Ch. III. S25] 
तत्रजात-अण् । 
नालय, भारत 
affixes would also come by virtue of its being an Indeclinable, after that सायं ।। The present and is derived from the root # by adding the affix ep It always ends in when these affixes are added. The word fare always ends in म् प्राणे and प्रगे always end in ए॥ 
As regards Indeclinables, the examples are FNTTTH 'belonging to the night'. दिवातनम् ‘belonging to the day'. 
Vart :-The affix a comes after the words चिर, परुत् and परारि | As चिरत्नम्, परुत्नम् , and परारित्नम् ॥ 
Vart :--The ग of प्रग in elided in the Chhandas before this affixa. as, प्रत्वम् ।। 
Vart :--The affix डिमच comes after अग्र, आदि and पश्चात् ; as, अग्रिमस्, आदिमम् and पश्चिमम् ॥ 
Vart :-So also after अन्त, as, अन्तिमम् ॥ 
1 The defference between tyu and tyul is in accent, Thus Erra and सायन्तन, चिरन्तन and चिरन्तन, प्राणेतन and प्रातन, प्रगतैन, प्रगेतन, दिवातन and दिवा तन, रोषातन and दोषातम ॥ 
विभाषापूर्वाहापराह्नाभ्याम् ॥ २४ ॥ पदानि ॥ विमाषा-पूर्वाह-अपराह्वाभ्याम् (टुय-टुयली-तुर-च)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ पूर्वाणापराणशब्दाभ्यां विभाषा टुघटुवली प्रत्ययौ भवत, स्तुद् व लयोरागमः ॥ 
24. Optionally after the words gerig and state, there are the affixes ट्यु and ट्युल and their augment is तुद् ॥ 
In the alternative उज्ञ of IV. 3. II also occurs. As पुतिनम, अपराहणतनंम् with tyu, or पाहिणिकम् आपराहिणकम् with thain. With tyul, we have वाहतनं and STOTEUTTA II The sign of the locative is not elided by rule VI. 3. 17. When the word is taken as incapable of having the case-affix, we have, पूवाहणतनं or पूर्वाणतनः ॥ 
तत्रजातः॥२५॥ पदानि ॥ तत्र-जातः ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ अणादयो धाग्यश्च प्रत्ययाः प्रकृतास्तेषामतः प्रभूत्यर्थाः समर्थविभक्तयश्च निदिय॑न्ते ॥ तत्रेति सप्तमीसमाजात इत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे यथाविहित प्रत्ययो भवति । 
25. The affixes ordained above or here after, come after a word in the 7th case in construction, in the sense of 
born or grown or originated there or then'. 
The affixes अपा &c. घ &c. have been taught, but no particular sense was assigned to them. See IV. 2. 92. This sûtra gives one of the senses, and also declares the particular case in which the stem must be, to which the affix is to be added. Thus aasia:=5* + stor = arg: born in Srughna'. So also माथरः born in Mathura', औत्सः 'born in Utsa', औदपान: born in Udapina's 
URE - Gove 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY ON 
T OF INDIA 
संस्कृति मंत्रालय 
तत्रजात-बुन् । 
[ BK IV. CH. III$ 29.) 
तिसरकार 
राष्ट्रियः (IV. 2.93), अवारपारीणः (IV. 2. 93) शाकलिकः (IV. 2. II7), ग्राम्या (IV. 2. 94), ग्रामीणः (IV. 2.94), कात्रेयकः (IV. 2. 95) औम्भेयकः (IV. 2, 95). 
प्रावृषष्ठप्॥२६॥ पदानि ॥ प्रावृष:-ठम् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ प्रावृशब्दात्सप्तमीसमर्थाजात इत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे ठय् प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
26. After the word मावृद् being in the 7th case affix, there is the affix yg in the sense of produced therein. 
This debars एण्य of sutra IV. 3. 17. The u of उप is for the sake of accent. प्रादृषि जातः= प्रावृषिका 'produced in the rainy season'. 
संज्ञायां शरदो वज॥२७॥ पदानि॥संज्ञायां-शरदा:-वा॥ वृत्तिः॥ शरच्छब्दात्सप्तमीसमर्थाज्जात इत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे वुञ् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
27. The affix gsr comes after the word 5 in the 7th case-affix, in the sense of born therein,' the whole word being a name. 
This debars भण॥ Thus शारदका दर्भाः "the grass called Saradaka', शारदका HRT: the pulse called Saradaka.' 
Why do we say संज्ञायां? Observe शारदं सस्यम् 'the autumnal crop.' 
According to some, the word carei governs all the succeeding stras up to IV. 3. 38. 
पूर्वाहापराहणाामूलप्रदोषावस्करादू वुन् ॥ २८ ॥ पदानि ॥ पूर्वाहण-अपरा हर्ण-आर्द्रा-मूल-प्रदोष-अवस्करादू-वुन् । वृत्तिः॥ पूर्वाहणादिभ्यः शब्दभ्यो कुन् प्रत्ययो भवति तत्र जात इत्येतस्मिन्विषये संज्ञायां गम्यमानायाम् ॥ 
28; The affix gt comes in the sense of born therein' after the words पूर्वाहण, अपराहण, आर्दा, मूला, प्रदोष, and 
अवस्कर, the whole being aName. 
Thus पूर्वाणकः, अपराणकः This debars IV. 3. 24. आकः, मूलकः ॥ This debars अणू of IV. 3. 16. प्ररोषक: This debars ठम् of IV. 3. 14. अवस्करकः This debars the general अण् affix. 
When it is not a Name, the other affixes are employed. पथः पन्थ च ॥ २९॥ पदानि ॥ पथ:-पन्थ-च (बुन्)॥ वृत्तिः॥पथिशब्दावुन् प्रत्ययो भवति वा तत्र जात इत्येतस्मिन्विषये ॥ 
29. The affix वुन् comes after the word पथ, in the sense of 'produced therein', and thereby in the room of पथ, the substitute is पन्थ ॥ 
Thus पथि जातः पन्थकः produced in the way.', 
.GOVERNM 
ON OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
OF INDIA 
विमवजयत 
BR. IV. CH. III. $33.] 
तघजात अण। 
761 
This debars the अण् ।। अमावास्याया वा ॥३०॥ पदानि ॥ अमावास्यायाः-वा-(बुन)|| वृत्तिः ॥ अमावास्याशब्दावन् प्रत्ययो भवति वा तत्र जात इत्येतस्मिन्विषये ।। 
30. The affix it comes optionally after the word amâvâsyâ, in the sense of born therein'. 
This debars अश् of IV. 3. 16. Thus अमावास्यकः or आमावास्यः ॥ This affix बुन् is applied to the word अमावस्य also, on the maxim एकदेशविकृतस्यानन्यत्वात् "That which has undergone a change in regard to one of its parts, is by no means in consequence of this change, something else than what it was before the change had taken place". Thus अमावस्यकः or मामावस्यः॥ 
अच॥३१॥ पदानि । अ-च॥ वृत्तिः ॥ अमावास्याशब्दादकारः प्रत्ययो भवति तत्र जात इत्येतस्मिन्विषये।। 
31. And the affix अ also is added to the word amavasya, in the sense of ' born therein'. 
__This adds a third affix to the or and अण् already given. Thus अमा वास्यः, अमावास्यकः, आमावास्यः॥ So also after the word अमावस्थ, as अमावस्या, अमा धस्यकः and आमावस्यः ॥ । 
सिन्ध्वपकराभ्यां कनू ॥३२॥ पदानि ॥ सिन्धु-अपकराभ्यामू-कन् । वृत्तिः॥ सिन्धुशब्दादपकरशब्दाच कन् प्रत्ययो भवति तत्र जात इत्येतस्मिन्विषये। 
32. After the words 'sindhu' and 'apakara', there is the affix ft in the sense of born therein'. 
The word feest occurs in the Kachchhâdi class and takes to and I (IV. 2. 133); and अपकर would have also taken अण under the general rule. 
This sutra debars these affixes. Thus सिन्धुकः, अपकरकः॥ 
अणी च ॥३३॥ पदानि ॥ अण-अौ-च॥ कृस्तिः ॥ सिन्ध्वपकरशब्दाभ्यां यथासंख्यमणमा प्रत्ययौ भवतस्तत्र जात इत्येतस्मिन्विषये।। 
33. And the affixes 20 and come respectively after the words sindhu' and 'apakara', in the sense of pro duced therein'. 
Thus सैन्धवः and आपकरः ।। श्रविष्ठाफल्गुन्यनुराधास्वातितिष्यपुनर्वसुहस्तविशाखाषाढाबहुलाल्लुक् ॥ ३४ ॥ पदानि ॥ श्रविष्ठा-फल्गुनी-अनुराधा-स्वाति-तिष्य-पुनर्वसु-हस्त-विशाखा-अषाढा-ब हुलात्-लुक्॥ वृत्तिः ॥ नविष्ठादिभ्यः शब्द यो नक्षत्रस्थ आगतस्य जाताथै लुग भवति ।। बातम् ॥ लुकप्रकरणे चित्रारेवतीरोहिणीभ्यः स्त्रियामुपसंख्यानम् ।। 
URE - GOVS 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
सयमावत 
तत्रजात-लुक्॥ 
[ BK. IV. CH. IN $ 30. 
सरल सरकार 
वात्तिकम् ॥ फल्गुन्यषाढाभ्यां टानौ वक्तव्यो। वार्तितकम् ॥ श्रविष्ठापाटाभ्यां छणपि वक्तव्यः ।। 
34. The affix denoting born therein' is elided by luk, after the words 'sravishtha', 'phalguni', 'anuradha', 'svati', ' tishya', punarvasu', ' hasta', 'visakha', fashiadha.', and bahula' all denoting asterisms. 
The feminine affixes are also elided after these words by I. 2. 49. Thus अविष्ठासु जातः = श्रविष्ठः 'produced under Sravishtha'. So also फल्गनः, अनराधः, स्वातिः, तिष्यः, पुनर्वसः, हस्तः, विशाखः, अषाढः, बहुलः ।। The 'Bahula' is another Name of the asterism en frent it 
Vart:-So also the affix is elided after the asterisms चित्रा, रेवती and रोहिणी when the word is feminine. Thus चित्रायां जाता 'a woman produced under Chitra' will be called FETI! So also taat, tricoft II The feminine affix which would have been elided after the two words Revatî and Rohiņi, by I. 2. 49. is reordained by IV. 1. 41, because these words belong to Titre class. 
Vårt: The affixes & and art come respectively after tar and अषाढी in forming the Feminine derivatives. As फल्गुनी (IV. I. I5) and अषाबा।। The difference is in accent and meaning. 
Vart: The affix छण also comes after 'Sravishtha' and 'ashadha' As श्राविष्ठीयः and आषाढीयः ॥ 
स्थानान्तगोशालखरशालाच ॥३५॥ पदानि ॥ स्थानान्त-गोशाल-खरशालातू 
वृत्तिः॥ स्थानान्तायातिपदिका गोशालशब्झत्खरशालबाब्दाजातार्ये प्रत्ययस्य लुग् भवति । 
35. There is luk-elision of the affix denoting born therein after a word ending in "sthâna', and after the words 
gosala' and kharasala'. 
Thus गास्थाने जातःगोस्थानः, अश्वस्थानः, गोशालः, खरशालः ॥ वत्सशालाभिजिदश्वयुक्छ्तभिषजो वा ॥ ३६॥ पदानि ॥ वत्स-शाला, अभिजि सू-अश्वयुक्-शतभिषजो-बा (लुक)॥ मृतिः॥ वत्सशालादिभ्यः परस्य जाताथै प्रत्ययस्य लुग्वा भवति ।। 
36. There is optionally luk-clision of the affix denoting - born therein' after the words 'vatsasala', 'abhijit', "asvayuk', and 'satabhik'. 
AS वत्सशालायां जात:- वत्सशाल' or वात्सशाला, अभिजितू or आभिजितः, अश्वयुक् or आश्चयजः, शतभिक or शतभिषजः॥ The two words वत्सशाल and वत्सशाला are both to be taken. These are all diversities of arms as used in the next sâtra. URE 
GOVE 
GOVERNMENT 
OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
Br, IV. CH. III. S. 41] 
संभूते। 
लिय भारत 
नक्षत्रेश्यो बहुलम् ॥३७॥ पदानि ॥ नक्षत्रेश्य:-बहुलम् (लुक)॥ वृत्तिः । नक्षत्रेभ्य उत्तरस्य जातार्थे प्रत्ययस्य बहुलं लुग्भवति ॥ 
37. There is diversely luk-elision of the affix denoting 'born therein ', after an asterism. 
_Thus रोहिणः or रोहिणः (IV. 3. 16) मृगशिरा or मार्गशीर्षः (IV. 3. 16). 
कृतलब्धक्रीतकुशलाः ॥ ३८॥ पदानि ॥ कृत-लब्ध-क्रीत-कुशलाः ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ सप्तमीसमर्थात्कृतादिश्वर्थेषु यथाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
38. An affix (one of those already taught) comes after a word in the seventh case-affix, in the sense of done there', 'obtained there's bought there' ' dexterous therein'. 
Thus era: may mean "done in, or bought in, or obtained in, or skill ful in Srughna". So also the words माथुरः, राष्ट्रियः ।। 
प्रायभवः ॥ ३९॥ पदानि ॥ प्राय-भवः॥. वृत्तिः ॥ सप्तमीसमर्थान ड्याप्रातिपदिकात्यायभव इत्येतस्मिन्विषये थथाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
39. After a word being in construction in the 7th case, an affix (one of those ordained already) comes in the sense of generally found therein'. 
The word is: means something less than all i. e. abundant. Thus सौनwhat is abundant or mostly to be found in Srughna',सुन्ने प्रायेण बाहल्येन भवति. So also माथुरः, राष्ट्रियः &c. 
This sàtra may appear to be superfluous as being covered by the more comprehensive sutra तत्रभवः (IV.3.53). If प्रायभवः be explained as अनि त्यभव: i.e. what sometimes is to be found and sometimes not, still it will make little difference. 
उपजानूपकर्णोपनीवेष्ठक् ॥४०॥ पदानि ॥ उपजानु-उपकर्ण-उपनीचे:-ठक ।। पतिः। उपजान्वादिभ्यः शब्दभ्यः सप्तमीसमर्थेभ्यः प्रायभव इत्येतस्मिन्विषये ठक् प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
40. The affix ठक comes in the sense of mostly to be found there,' after the words 'upajầnu,' 'upakarna," and upanîvi,' being in the 7th case in construction. 
This debars अण &c. Thus औपजानुक, औपकर्णिकः औपनीविकः । संभूते ॥४१॥ पदानि ॥ सम्भूते॥ वृत्तिः ॥ सप्तमीसमर्थान् ड्याप्रातिपरिकात संभूतइत्येतस्मिन्नर्थ यथाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
41. After a nominal-stem or a word ending in the feminine affix sit and ag, being in the 7th case in construe. 
21 
URE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
FCULTURE 
MINISTRI 
AT OF INDIA 
कृति मंत्रालय 
3H-affix 
[ BK, IV. CH. III. S. 43. 
tion, an affix comes in the sense of adapted therein.' 
Except the word 'adapted' which is the meaning of the word wa, all the other words of the sûtra have been supplied from the previous aphorisms. The word na does not mean in this sûtra 'origin' or 'existence', for the word fra and 7 already express that notion. It here means 'suitableness' 'adequacy' i.e. अवक्लप्तिः and प्रमाणातिरेकः ॥ 
Thus g ara = fis: "what is suited to the country of Srughna.' So also माथुरः, गाष्ट्रियः ॥ The word तत्र is understood here also. 
TUIGCT || 82 || Tetê il para-ost 11 वृत्तिः॥ कोशशब्दाद ढङ्ग प्रत्ययो भवति तत्र संभूतइत्यस्मिन्विषये ॥ 
42. The affix at comes after the words atat in the sense of adapted to that. 
This debars अण ॥ Thus को संभूतं = कौशयं वस्त्रम् 'silken clothes.' 
The word een means "cocoon.' CHITT: may literally therefore mean anything suited to the cocoon, and may apply to the caterpillar as well as to the silk made out of cocoon. The word alate is however ate and means 
silken.' Nor does it mean 'suited to the sheath,' as a sword, though kośa means 'sheath' also. This sûtra would have been more properly placed after IV. 3. 134, under the heading of faror rather than of #19: 11 
In fact after the sûtra rot-73T (IV. 3. 159), the addition of ETETET would have been more appropriate. 
कालात्साधुपुष्प्यत्पच्यमानेषु ॥४३॥ पदानि ॥ कालातू-साधु-पुष्प्यत्-पच्यमा 
वृत्तिः॥ कालविशेषवाचिभ्यः सप्तमीसमर्थेभ्यः साध्वादिष्वर्थेषु यथाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
43. An affix comes after a word denoting time, being in the 7th case in construction, in the sense of being good,''flowering' or ripening therein'. 
Thus हेमन्ते साधु: हेमन्त: what is good or pleasant in autumn' as हैमन्तः STT: STETEA I So also agra goalca=qTeu amar: 'vernal creepers i. e. which flower in spring! HT: TIC: 11 So also Te Tera = Elicat: ca: "the grains that ripen in autumn'. ETSATT: 'the barley that ripens in summer'. 
This sûtra teaches the base and the sense of the affix. It does not directly teach the affix. The above illustrations are examples of the affix ator &c. 
TÀ 88 yaralga, TII वृत्तिः ॥ कालादिति च । सप्तमीसमर्थात्कालवाचिनः प्रातिपदिकाकु यथाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति । 
GOVERNMENT 
TURE - GOU 
CRY OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
BEIV. CH. III. S. 48 ] 
संस्कृति मंत्राला 
यमण। 
मालय, भारत 
भारत सरकार 
44. An affix comes after a word denoting time, being in the 7th case in construction, meaning ' sown there in'.. 
Thus हेमन्त उप्यन्ते = हेमन्ता यवा: ' the barley sown in autumn.' प्रैष्मा बीहयः ।। 
The separation of this sûtra from the last, is for the sake of the sub sequent sûtra in which the anuvșitti of ca only goes, which could not have been the case had this word been included in the last sútra. 
आश्वयुज्या वुञ्॥४५॥ पदानि ॥ आश्वयुज्याः , वुम् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ आश्वयुजीशब्दात् वुअ प्रत्ययो भवति उत्तेर्थे । 
45. The affix वुज comes in the sense of 'sown' after the word आश्वयुजी॥ 
This debars उम् ॥ Thus आश्वयुज्या मुप्ताः = आश्वयुजका माषा: the pulse sown in Aivayuji.' It is the name of the full-moon in the Asterism of Asvini. Asvayuj and Asvini are the same. Some texts read अश्वनी instead of अश्विनी ॥ 
ग्रीष्मवसन्तादन्यतरस्याम् ॥४६॥ पदानि ॥ ग्रीष्म-वसन्तातू-अन्यतरस्यामू (खु )॥ वृत्तिः ॥ ग्रीष्मवसन्त शब्दाभ्यामन्यतरस्यां बुर प्रत्ययो भवति उप्तेर्थे ॥ त्वंणोपवादः ।। 
46. The affix gh comes optionally after the words 'grishma' and ' vasanta', in the sense of 'sown'. 
_This debars अण् (IV. 3. 16). Thus zष्मम् or श्रेष्मकम् सस्यम् the crop sown in summer'. वासन्तम् or वासन्तकम् ॥ 
देयमृणे ॥४७॥ पदानि ॥ देयम्-ऋणे॥ वृत्तिः ॥ सप्तमीसमर्थात्कालवाचिनः प्रातिपक्किाइयमित्येतस्मिन्नर्थे यथाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति थर देयमूर्ण चेत् तद् भवति ॥ 
47. After a nominal stem being in the 7th case in construction, denoting time, an affix comes in the sense of 
being then due'; provided that the thing due be debt'. 
Thus मासे यमणं =मासिकं "a debt due in a month'. आर्द्धमासिकम्, सांवत्स रिकम् ॥ Why do we say ऋणे it being a debt'. Observe मासेत्या भिक्षा where no 
affix is added. 
कलाप्यश्वत्थयवबुसादवन ॥४८॥ पदानि । कलापि, अश्वत्थ, यव, बुखात,बुन् । वृत्तिः ॥ कलापि अश्वत्थ यववस इत्येतेभ्यः कालवाचिभ्यः सप्तमीसमर्थेभ्यो देयमृणमित्येतस्मिन्नर्थे वन् प्र त्ययो भवति ॥ 
48. The affix gat comes in the sense of debt then dne' after the words कलापिन, अश्वत्थ, and यवबुस denoting time 
PURE - GOS 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY ON 
NT OF INDIA 
su 
सस्कृति मंत्री 
व्याहरतिमृगः ।। 
BK. IV. CH. III.S.51.] 
तसरकार 
and being in the 7th case in construction. 
The words aparatit &c are words which indirectly denote time. Thus the time in which the peacocks mate and make noise is called corta The time in which the aśvatha tree fructifies is called 975954: The time in which barley is thrashed out is called यवबुस - barley-chaff? Thus कलापि निकालयमणं-कलापकम् 'adebt to be paid when the peacocks make noise (i.e. mating or rainy season) tails.' अश्वत्थकम् and यवबुसकम् ॥ 
ग्रीष्मावरसमावुश् ॥ ४९॥ पदानि ॥ ग्रीष्म-अवर-समात्, वुञ् ॥ वृत्तिः ।। ग्रीष्मावरसमशब्दान्यां बुञ् प्रत्ययो भवति देयमृणइत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे ।। 
49. The affix gsr comes in the sense of debt-due' after the words 'grîshma' and 'avarasama'. 
KARE This debars the अण and ठ॥ Thus मीमध्यमृणं =श्रेष्मकम् ॥ So also भावरसमकम् ॥ This affix causes Vriddhi, while वुन् would not have done it. Hence the separate affix. The word wat is synonymous with an 'a year'. The word भावरसमकम् means either आगामिनां संवत्सराणामाधवत्सरे देयम् or अतीते वत्सरे देयं यद्यपि न श्चम् ॥ 
संवत्सराग्रहायणीभ्यां ठंडच ॥५०॥ पदानि ॥ संवत्सर-आग्रहायणीभ्यां-ठ झच॥ वृत्तिः ॥ संवत्सरामहायणीशब्दाभ्यां ठञ् प्रत्ययो भवति, चकाराद् वुऊचदेयमृणमित्येतस्मिन्नर्थे । यात्र्तिकम् ॥ संवत्सराफलपर्वणोरिति पश्यते ॥ 
50. The affix ठञ् also (as well as वुञ्) comes after the words 'samvatsara' and 'agrâhâyanî' in the sense of "debt due.' 
Thus संवत्सरे देयमणं = सांवत्सारकं, and सांवत्सरकं ।। आग्रहायाणकं or आग्रहायणकं ।। 
The word संवत्सर occurs in Sandhiveladi Class (IV. 3. 16) and takes भण् when 'fruit' or 'festivity' is meant. The present sûtra enjoins Tst when 
debt' is indicated. 
व्याहरति मृगः ॥५१॥ पदानि ॥ व्याहरति मृगः ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ कालवाचिनः सचमीसमर्थात्प्रातिपदिका व्याहति मगः इत्येतस्मिन्विषये यथाविहितं पत्ययो भवति ।। 
51. An affix comes after a word in the 7th case in construction, denoting time, in the sense of who then wanders', and the word so formed refers to a wild beast. 
Thus निशायां व्याहरति मगः नैशः " an animal that wanders at night."So also grea: or grea: (IV. 3. 14) 'a brute that yells in the morning,' 
URE - GOV 
GOVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
T Bk. IV. CH, III. F. 54. 
तत्रभव-यत् ॥ 
सालय, भारत 
Why do we say मृगः 'a beast ? Observe निशायां व्याहरति उलूकः ॥ Here there is no affixing. The word baietre also means 'to make noise.' The Sutra may, therefore, also be translated as : "After a word denoting time, an affix (IV. I. 83) comes in expressing a wild beast who makes noise at that time". 
तदस्य सोढम् ॥ ५२॥ पदानि ॥ तद्-अस्य-सोढम् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ तदिति प्रथमासमर्थात्कालवाचिनः प्रातिपदिकादस्येति षष्ट्यर्थे यथाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति यतूमय मासमर्थ सोडञ्चेत्तद्भवति ॥ 
52. An affix comes after a word in the 1st case in construction denoting time, in the sense of this is his habit or endurance'. 
The word कालात् is understood here also. तव= that : सोठम् -जितम् or भभ्यस्तं "endured or habituated". Thus निशा सहचरितमध्ययनं -निशा “reading by night". तत् सोढमस्य छात्रस्थ =नैशः or नैशिकः 'a student who is habituated or enured to reading by night'. So gretiga: or gret: 11 
तत्र भवः ॥५३॥ पदानि ॥ तत्र, भवः ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ तत्रेति सप्तमीसमर्थान् ज्याप्रातिपदिकाव इत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे यथाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति । 
53. An affix comes after a word in the 7th case in construction, in the sense of who stays there'. 
The anuvritti of great ceases. The sense of a here is 'existence', and not that of birth': because the sense of birth' is taught in sûtra at जातः (IV. 3. 25). Thus, सुग्ने भवः = सौनः “who stays in Srughna". माथुरः, राष्ट्रियः॥ 
The repetition of an in the sûtra though its annuvritti could have been drawn from the previous sůtras, is for the sake of stopping the annu 
vritti of तदस्य ॥ 
दिगादिभ्यो यत् ॥ ५४॥ पदानि ॥ दिगादिश्यः यत् ॥ वृत्तिः । विश इत्येवमादिभ्यः प्रातिपदिकेभ्यो यत्प्रत्ययो भवति तत्र भव इत्येतस्मिन्विषये॥ धार्मिकम् ॥ उदकात्संज्ञायाम् ।। 
54. The affix at comes in the sense of who stays there', after the Nominal stems दिक् &c. 
This debars अण् andछ| As दिशि भ विश्यमू lying in a particular quarter', वर्म्यम् ॥ 
The words at and start which ordinarily mean mouth' and 'hip! respectively, have not this meaning when this affix is to be added. They must refer to non-corporeal or abstract objects. As Er who stays in the van of the armybसेनाजघन्यन् 'who stays in the rear of the army, In 
URE 
Gove 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY ON 
NT OF INDIA 
सत्यमेव जयदे 
तत्रभव ज्य॥ 
[ BK. IV. CH III. S. 58. 
लिय भारत 
तसरकार 
fact, the words 'mukha' and 'jaghana' here mean the 'van' and the 'rear' of an army. The word 38ch takes this affix, when the word so formed is a 
Name. As उत्क्या = रजस्वला, otherwise we have औदको मत्स्यः ॥ 
1 दिश, 2 वर्ग, 3 पूग, 4 गण, 5 पक्ष, 6 धाय्य (धाय्या) 7 मित्र, 8 मेधा, 9 अन्तर, 10 पथि , 11 रहस्, 12 अलीक, 13 उखा, 14 साक्षिन्, 15 देश*, 16 आदि, 17 अन्त, 18 मुख, 19 जघन, 20 मेघ, 21 यूथ, 22 उदकात्संज्ञायाम, 23 न्याय, 24 वंश, 25 वेश (विश) 26 काल, 27 आकाश, 28 
अनुवंश.॥ 
शरीरावयवाच ॥ ५५॥ पदानि ॥ शरीर-अवयवातू-च॥ वृत्तिः। शरीरावयववाचिनः प्रातिपदिकात् यत्प्रत्ययो भवति तत्र भव इत्येतस्मिन्विषये। 
55. The affix t comes in the sense of 'what stays there after a word denoting a part of the body. 
This debars अण् ॥ As दन्तेषु भव- दन्त्यम् 'dental i. e. what stays there, कर्यम्, भोध्यम् ॥ So also पारे भव = पद्यं (VI. 3. 53), नासिकायां भवं = नस्यम् ।। 
दृतिकुक्षिकलशिवस्त्यस्त्यञ् ॥५६॥ पदानि ॥ दृति-कुक्षि-कलशि-वस्ति-अ स्ति-अहेः ढञ्॥ वृत्तिः ॥ इत्यादिभ्यः प्रातिपदिके यो ढञ् प्रत्ययो भवति तत्र भव इत्येतस्मिन्विषये ॥ 
56. The affix a comes in the sense of 'what stays there', after the words driti'. 'kukshi', 'kala.si', vasti' asti' 
and 'ahi'. 
Thus दातेयम् what stays in a leathern bag', कौक्षयम्, कालशयम, वास्तेयमा, भास्तेय and आहेयम् ॥ आहेयम् is the name of a poison. The word अस्ति is a noun and not a verb here. Its use as a Noun is to be seen in phrases like sfeeft गौः, अस्तिमान् = धनवान् ।। 
ग्रीवाभ्योऽण च ॥५७॥ पदानि ॥ ग्रीवाभ्यः-आण-च॥ वृत्तिः । ग्रीवाशब्दावणप्रत्ययो भवति चकाराड्डऊच, तत्र भव इत्येतस्मिन्विषये ॥ 
57. The affix stur also (as well as 7T) comes after the word 'grîva' in the sense of 'what stays there'. 
This debars यत् (IV. 3.55) ग्रीवासु भंव-अवेयम् or अवम् ॥ The word ग्रीवा means blood vessels, and as they are many, the word is used in the plural in the sutra. 
गम्भीरायः ॥५॥ पदानि ॥ गम्भीरातू-यः ।। वृतिः।। गम्भीरशब्दाद ज्या प्रत्ययो भवति तत्र भव इत्येतस्मिन्विषये अणोपवादः ।। पातिकम ॥ बहिर्देवपञ्चजनेभ्यश्चति वक्तव्यम् ॥ वार्तिकम् ।। चतुर्मासात् यज्ञे यो वक्तव्यः॥ 
58. The affix se comes in the sense of 'who stays there', after the word 'gambhira'. 
PURE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
SL 
PADO 
B. IV. CH. III.S60] 
तत्रभव-ज्य ।। 
नालय, भारत 
This debars अण् । गम्भीरे भवं गाम्भीर्यम् 'gravity'. 
Vart:-So also after बहिः, देव and पंचजन. As बास्यम्, देव्यम् and पांचजन्यम् ।। The final of afer is elided by the vârtika under IV. I. 85. The word 'daivya' could be also formed under another Vârtika of the same. 
Vart: The affix fiya comes after chaturmasa in the sense of a sacri fice; as, चातुर्मास्यानि वतानि, चातुर्मास्यो यज्ञः, otherwise चातुर्मासः॥ 
अव्ययीभावाच ॥ ५९॥ पदानि ॥ अव्ययीभावात्-च (ज्यः)॥ वृत्तिः। अव्ययीभावसंज्ञकात् प्रातिपदिकाच्च ज्यः प्रत्ययो भवति तत्र भव इत्येतस्मिन्विषये ॥ 
59. After an Avyayibhava Compound, the affix ज्य is employed, in the sense of 'who stays there.' 
This debars 370 11 The affix su however, does not come after every Avyayibhava Compound, but only after the words included in the list of परि मुखादि as given in the Ganapatha. . 
Thus परिमुखं भवं = पारिमुख्यम्, So also पारिहनव्यम् ॥ Not so औपकुलम, the word उपकुल not belonging to the class परिमुख ॥ 
1परिमख, 2 परिहनु, 3 पर्योष्ठ, 4 पर्युल, 5 औपमूल, 6 खल, 7 परिसीर, 8 अनसीर, 9 उपसीर, 10 उपस्थल, 11 उपकलाप, 12 अनुपथ, 13 अनुखड्ग, 14 अनुतिल, 15 अनुशीत, 16 अनमाष, 17 अ नुयव, 18 अनुशुप, 19 अनुवंश, 20 अनुगङ्ग, 21 प्रतिशाख, 22 अनुसाय॥ 
अन्तःपूर्वपदा ॥ ६०॥ पदानि ॥ अन्तः-पूर्व-पदात्- ठं॥ वृत्तिः । अव्ययीभावादित्येव । अन्तःशब्दो विभत्त्यर्थे समस्यते । तत्पूर्वपदाव्ययीभावाम् प्रत्ययो भव ति तत्र भव इत्येतस्मिन्विषये ॥ 
वात्तिकम् ॥ समानशब्दा वक्तव्यः ।। वार्तिकम् ॥ तदादश्च ॥ वा०॥ अध्यात्मादिभ्यश्च ।। 
घा०॥ ऊर्ध्वदमाञ्च ठञ् वक्तव्यः ।। वा०॥ अर्वदेहाच॥ 
वा०॥ लोकोत्तरपदाच।। बा०॥ मुखपार्श्वशब्दाभ्यां तसन्ताभ्यामीयः प्रत्ययो वक्तव्यः॥ वा० ।। जनपरयोः कुक्च ।। 
वा०॥ मध्यशब्दादीयः॥ बा०॥मणमीयौ च प्रत्ययौ वक्तव्यो। 
वा०॥ मध्यो मध्यं दिनण् चास्मात् ॥ वा० ॥ स्थानो लुग्वक्तव्यः॥ 
वा०॥ अजिनान्ताच॥ Karika समानस्य तदावेश्च अध्यात्मादिषु चेष्यते । 
ऊर्ध्वरमाच्च देहाच लोकोचरपरस्य च ।। मुखपार्श्वतसोरीयः कुग्जनस्य परस्य च ॥ ईयः कार्योथ मध्यस्य मणमीयौ प्रत्ययौ तथा । 
मध्यो मध्य दिनण चास्मात्स्थानो लुगजिनाचथा। 
60. After an Avyayîbhâva compound, having the word star as prior term, the affix or is employed, in the sense of who stays there.' 
URE - GOVA 
VERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
T OF INDIA 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
तषभाव-उ। 
[BK. IV. CH. IT.662. 
मालयमा 
तारत सरकार 
This debars अण् ॥ Thus आन्तवैश्मिकम्, आन्तर्गे हिकम् ॥ Vart:-The affix comes after समान, as समाने भवं सामानिकम् ॥ 
Vart :-So also after a word beginning with समान, as, सामानमामिकम्. सामान वेशिक. 
Vert:-So also after the words अध्यात्म, &c as, आध्यामिकम, आधिदैविकम्, माधिभौतिकम् ॥ The class अध्यात्मादि is Akritigana. 
Vart:-So also after अर्धन्दमः as, और्वन्दमिकः ॥ The word ardhva' is a Synonym of अर्ध्वम् ।। 
Vart:-So also अबव्ह, as मौर्श्वदेहकम् ॥ 
Vart:-So also after a compound having the word nie as second term , as, ऐहलौकिकम् , पारलौकिकम् ॥ 
Vart :--The words मुख and पार्श्व ending in तस्, take the affix ईय; as, मुखतीयम्, पार्वतीयम् ॥ 
Vart :--The affix ईय comes after जन and पर with the augment कुक, as जनकीयम्, परकीयम् ॥ 
Vart :--Tne affixe comes after मध्य, as, मध्यीयः ॥ 
Vart:-So also the affix मण and मीय come after मध्य; As, माध्यमम्, माध्यमीथम् ॥ 
Vart:-So also the affix दिन (दिनम् in Padamanjari) comes after मध्य, whereby it becomes मध्यम् as माध्यन्दिनम् in माध्यान्दन उपगायति॥ 
Vårt :-There is luk-elision of the affix after the word FRITET, as, भश्वस्थामा। 
Vårt :-So also there is elision after the words ending in sist, as बृकाजिनः, सिंहाजिनः 
प्रामात्पर्यनुपूर्वात् ॥६१॥ पदानि ॥ प्रामातू-परि-अनु-पूर्वात ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ प्रामशब्दान्ताव्ययीभावात्सरि अनु इत्येवंपूर्वाञ् प्रत्ययो भवति तत्र भव इत्येतस्मिन्विषये ॥ 
61. After the word 'grâma', preceded by 'pari' or anu', (the whole being an Avyayibhava), there is the affix ठञ् in the sense of 'who stays there'. 
This debars अण् ॥ Thus पारिवामिकः, भानुपामिकः ॥ जिवामूलाङ्गुलेश्छः ॥ ६२॥ पदानि ॥ जिवामूल-अगुले:- छः॥ चिः ।। जिह्वामूलशब्दावगलिशब्दाचछः प्रत्ययो भवति तत्र भव इत्येतस्मिन्विषये। 
62. After the words "jih vâmûla', and 'anguli' there is the affix 3 in the sense of what stays there! 
REGOVE 
VERNMENT 
ov OF CULTUS 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
BK. IV. Ch. III. 366.] 
तत्रभव-अण॥ 
सालय, भारत 
This debars यत् (IV. 3.55). Thus जिह्वामूलीयम्, मंगुलीयम् ॥ वर्गान्ताच॥६३॥ पदानि ॥ वान्तातू-च (छ) वृतिः ॥ वर्गशब्दान्ताच्च प्रातिपदिकाच छः प्रत्ययो भवति तत्र भव इत्येतस्मिन्विषये अणोपवादः ॥ 
63. After a word ending with varga', the affix छ is employed in the sense of what occurs there'. 
This debars अण् ।। As कवर्गीयम्, चवर्गीयम् ॥ अशब्दे यत्खावन्यतरस्याम ॥ ६४॥ पदानि ॥ अशब्दे-यत्-खो-अन्यतरस्याम् ॥ वृतिः ॥ वर्गान्तादित्येव । शब्वादन्यस्मिन्प्रत्ययार्थे वर्गान्तात्मातिपदिकादन्यतरस्यां यतखो प्रत्ययो भवतः॥ 
64: After a word ending in varga', but not meaning a letter or word', the affixes ta and er are option ally employed, in the sense of 'who stays there'. 
As वासुदेववर्म्यः (by यत्), वासुदेववर्गीणः, (by ख), and वासुदेववर्गीयः (by छ)। युधिष्ठिरवर्यः वर्गीणः or °वर्गीयः ॥ 
Of course, when the word means 'Ta' it takes one affix only i. e. 5; as कवर्गीय वर्णः 'a letter belonging to a class'. 
कर्णललाटात्कनलंकारे ॥६५॥ पदानि ॥ कर्ण-ललाटातू-कन् अलङ्कारे॥ वृतिः ॥ कर्णललाटशब्दाभ्यां कन् प्रत्ययो भवति तन्त्र भव इत्येतस्मिन्विषयेऽलङ्कारेऽभिधेये॥ 
65. The affix that comes in the sense of what occurs there', after 'karna' and 'lalât', the word denoting an ornament. 
This debars यत् (IV. 3.55). Thus कर्णिका 'an ear-ring', ललाटिका ॥ 
Why do we say 'denoting an ornament, ? Observe as 'what is in the ear', ललाव्यम् ॥ 
तस्य व्याख्यानइति च व्याख्यातव्यनाः ॥६६॥ पदानि ॥ तस्य-व्याख्याने इति-च व्याख्यातव्यनानः॥ वृचिः॥ तस्येति षष्ठीसमर्थात् व्याख्यातव्यनामः प्रातिपदिकान्याख्याने ऽभिधेये यथाविहित प्रत्ययो भव ति तत्र भवे च ॥ 
66. After the name of a subject of commentary, an affix comes in the sense of 'its commentary', as well as, in the sense of 'what occurs there'. 
That by which a thing is explained is called een 'commentary'. The name of a thing explainable is called व्याख्यातव्यनाम॥ After such a name, being in the 6th case in construction, the affix is added. The affix means तस्थव्याख्यानं as well as corta, the latter being read into the satra by virtue of all 
Thus सपां व्याख्यानः-सोपो ग्रन्यः 'Saupala book on the explanation of case affixes'. So also ass: 'Tainga--a Commentary on Verbal affixes' anta: Karta--a Commentary on krit affixes'. सोप &c. may also mean सुप्स भव &c. 
22 
RE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
XT OF INDIA 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
सत्यमेव जयते 
17 
are sufera 11 
[BK. IV. CH. III. 8 68 
Why do we say SEATT 521-: ‘after the name of the thing explainable'? The thing to be explained must be a Book, therefore, the affix will not apply to the name of a city &c. For example, if a model be made to describe the city of Pataliputra, such a model will not be named after Pâtaliputra by the addition of affix. Thus hat is a modal giving a description of Pataliputra. This will not be called Pâtaliputram. 
The anuvritti ofa and safera runs simultaneosly in all the subsequ. ent apavada sûtras, and hence we have read the anuvritti of Ha into this satra also. 
E DIĘTTEET / 819 Telft II :-Tralarda ys 11 वृत्तिः ॥ बबचो व्याख्यातव्यनानः प्रातिपदिकावन्तोदानाद्भवव्याख्यानयोष्ठम् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
67. The affix at comes in the senses of 'staying' and 'a commentary, after a polysyllabic word having udâtta on the final, (the word being the name of a thing to be explained). 
This debars Torill Thus arcu a commentary of the rules of changes of # and a into and o'llagraran a commentary on (777) udatta and anudatta (TTT) The radicals Tequea and arra are acutely accented on the final by the rule of a compound having accent on the final (VI. 1. 169) 
Why do we say TET: 'polysyllabic? Observe Fiya, 75 &c. A word of two syllables will take 54 (IV. 3. 72). So the counter example must be of words of one syllable. 
Why do we say 'having acute accent on the final? Observe giffah from fireat II This word has acute accent on the initial by the rule of Gati accent (VI. 2.49) 
sheet II C Il qua il pre-, () वृतिः॥ ऋतुभ्यो यज्ञेभ्यश्च व्याख्यातव्यनामभ्यः प्रातिपदिके यो भवव्याख्यानयोरर्थयोष्ठञ् प्रत्ययो भवति॥ 
68. The affix at comes, in the senses of 'occurring', and 'a commentary', after the name of a work to be explained, provided that such work relates to a kratu or a yajna. 
This debars que ll Kratu :-57Tam: 'a commentary on a work on Aginshtoma sacrifices? astrich, TTSTETIC: il yajña:--Teheiratet:, arauran: 11 
This sútra refers to words which are not antodatta. The words 'vâja peya' and 'rajastya' are acute in the middle. 
The words and a mean generally the same thing i. e. 'a sacrifice, but the separate mention of implies that the rule applies to yajñas other than Soma-yajñas because the word "kratu' is technically applied to Soma-, sacrifices only. Thus T raian, gritaran: URE - GOVE. 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY ON 
T OF INDIA 
u 
BK. IV. CH. III. $ 711 
Fidearena sa 
773 
The sætra is in the plural to prevent the application of the affix to the word-forms 'kratu' and 'yajña' (I. 1. 68). 
313Meretet: ll. € | GTGT I STEJT -Tel-RW, (5) i वृत्तिः । ऋषिशब्दाः प्रवरनाभधेयानि तेभ्य ऋषिशब्देभ्यो भवव्याख्यानयोरर्थयोष्ठञ् प्रत्ययो भवति 
69. The affix get comes after the name of an ex plainable work called after a Rishi, in the senses of 'occurring therein' or 'a commantary thereon', when it refers to an Adhy aya only. 
• The word er is the name of tar and those Rishis are only meant whose names are in the Pravara list. The word so formed means always an Adhyâya or Chapter of the work. The phrase su EITTSTA: is understood in this satra, hence the word wat means "a work the author of which is a Rishi". 
Thus afhEFT ETIEN ETT ET ET=aTeighs atz: “Vasishthika-a chapter containing commentary on Vashishtha". Ta 'a chapter of com mentary on Visva mitra'. 
Why do we say meaning chapter'? Observe greet 11 ATĪStagesTaTT TT II 90 11 ugla II GTISTET-gtierara-GT II वृत्तिः । पौरोडाशशब्दात्पुरोडाशशब्दाच भवव्याख्यानयोरर्थयोः ष्ठन् प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
70. The affix gt comes in the senses of 'occurring therein' and 'a commentary thereon, after the words 'paurodása and purodasa'. 
The verses on the purification &c of Purodaśa' a sacred cake', are called artists, the commentary on such paurodāsa mantras will be called trist 1975:. Its feminine will be guerreront (IV. 1. 41). A book on Purodaśa cake is called GÜISTET; a commentary there on will be gisteren: f. girstTRE (IV. 1. 41). The g of the affix indicates that the feminine is formed by A (IV. 1. 41). The commentary here refers to the 'mantras' or verses relating to Purodasa, and not to the sacrifice. 
Reacuit ll og U TEIG I Fag-ta-TUTT II वृत्तिः ॥ छन्दः शब्सनवव्याख्यानयोरर्थयोर्यदणी प्रत्ययो भवतः ॥ 
71. The affixes a and Tu come in the senses of occurring therein' and a commentary thereon', after the word Chhandas. 
This debars 37 of the following sútra. As geare: Or STT: 
URE - Gove 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRYA 
T OF INDIA 
वत आगत ठक्॥ 
[BK IV. CH. III. S. 75. 
1495 सरकार 
यजृब्राह्मणप्रथमाध्वरपुरश्चरणनामाख्याताट ठक् ॥ ७२॥ पदानि ॥ यच् ऋतू-ब्राह्मण-रक्-प्रथम-अध्वर-पुरश्चरण-नाम-आख्यातातू-ठक॥ वृत्तिः ॥ धादिभ्यः प्रातिपदिकेन्यो व्याख्यातव्यनामन्यो भवव्याख्यानयोरर्थयोष्टक् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
72. The affix ठक comes in the senses of 'oecurring therein' and a commentary thereon', after a word of two syllables, and a word ending in short , and the words brah 
mana', 'rik', 'prathama', 'adhvara', 'purascharana', 'nama', 'akhyata' and 'namakhyata', being the names of explainable works. 
This debars अण् and उम्॥ I. Dissyllabic:-ऐष्टिका, पाशुकः॥ 2. End. ing in a:-चातुर्योतकः, पांचहोतृकः॥ So also ब्राह्मणिकः, आर्चिकः, प्राथमिक, माध्यरिकः, पौरश्वरणिका, नामिकः, आख्यातिकः, नामाख्यातिकः ॥ 
अणगयनादिश्यः ॥७३॥ पदानि ॥ अण-ऋगयनादिभ्यः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ गयनादिभ्यः प्रातिपदिकेन्यो भवव्याख्यानयोरर्थयोरण प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
73. The affix stu comes in the senses of'occurring therein'and'a commentary thereon' after the words'rigayana'&c. 
This debars उज, ठक् and छ॥ मार्गयनः, पाडव्याख्यानः ॥ 
The repetition of stor in the sûtra, though the annuvřitti of this affix was coming from before, is for the sake of preventing the application of any subsequent apavada rule to the words in this list. Thus वास्तुविद्यः ।। 
1ऋगयन, 2 पदव्याख्यान, 3 छन्दोमान, 4 छन्दोभाषा, छन्दोविचिति, 6 न्याय, 7 पुनरुक्त, 8 निरुक्त, व्याकारण, 10 निगम, 11 वास्तुविद्या, 12 क्षत्रविद्या, 13 अङ्गविद्या, 14 विद्या, 15 उत्पात, 16 उत्पाद, 17 उज्याव, 18 संवत्सर, 19 मुहूर्त, 20 उपनिषत् , 21 निमिन, 22 शिक्षा, 23 भिक्षा, 24 छन्दो वि जिनी 25 व्याय.॥ 
तत आगतः॥ ७४॥ पदानि ॥ ततः, आगतः॥ वृतिः ॥ तत इति पञ्चमीसमर्थावागत इत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे यथाविहित प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
74. An affix (IV. 1. 83 &c) comes after a word being in 5th case in construction, in the sense of what has come thence'. 
Thus सुशावागतः सोध्नः 'what has come from Srughna'. माथुरः, राष्ट्रियः। ठगायस्थानेभ्यः॥७९॥ पदानि ।। ठक-आयस्थानेश्यः॥ वृत्तिः॥ आय इति स्वामिग्राह्यो भाग उच्यते स यस्मिन्नुल्पयते तायस्थानम् । आयस्थामवाचिभ्यः मा तिपदिके यठक् प्रत्ययो भवति तत भागत इत्येतस्मिन्विषये॥ 
75. After a word denoting sources of revenue, there is the affix # in the sense of come thence! 
GOVERNMEA 
CULTURE : 
MINISTRY 
AT OF INDIA 
सत्यमेव जयते 
BK. IV. CH. III. S78] 
तत आगत-उत्र॥ 
The word sprt means what is the share appropriated by the lord. The source of आय is called आयस्थान ॥ 
This debars अणू and छ| Thus शौल्कशालिकः 'what is derived from custom house'. आकरिकम् 'revenue derived from mines'.. 
The plural in the sûtra prevents Svarupavidhi (I. 1. 68). शुण्डिकादिभ्यो ऽण ॥ ७६ ॥ शुण्डिकादिभ्यः-अण् । वृत्तिः ॥ शुण्डिक इत्येवमादिभ्यः प्रातिपदिकेभ्यो ऽण प्रत्ययो भवति तत आगत इत्येतस्मिन्विषये ॥ 
76. The affix आण comes in the sense of thence .come', after the words शुण्डिक &c. 
This debars ठक् ॥ Thus शौण्डिकः 'excise-revenue'. कार्कणः ।। 
The repetition of stor serves the same purpose as in IV. 3. 73, are बाधनार्थम् ॥ As भौदपानः ॥ 
1 शुण्डिक, 2 कृकण, 3 स्थण्डिल, 4 उदपान, 5 उपल. 6 तीर्थ, 7 भूमि, 8 तृण, 9 पर्ण.॥ विद्यायोनिसंबन्धेभ्यो वुञ् ॥ ७७ ॥ पदानि ॥ विद्या-योनि-संबन्धेश्य:-वुज् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ विद्यायनिकृतः संबन्धो येषां ते विद्यायोनिसंबन्धाः॥ तवाचिभ्यः शब्देन्यो बुरा प्रत्ययो भवति तत आगत इत्येतस्मिन्विषये ॥ 
77. The affix वुञ् comes, in the sense of thence come,' after a word denoting a person connected through the relationship of learning or family origin. 
Persons related (sambandha) through learning (such as teacher and pupil), or through blood (yoni, e. g. father and son) are called ferie FET: 11 Words denoting such persons take the affix 7. This debars u and y. Thus उपाध्यायादागतमू औपाध्यायकम् 'knowledge derived from a spiritual teacher:' शेष्यकम्, भाचार्यकम् ॥ So also योनिसंबन्धः as मातामहकः 'wealth derived from a maternal grand-father.' पितामहकः, मातुलकः ॥ 
ऋतष्ठम् ॥ ७८॥ पदानि ।। ऋत:-ठञ् ॥ दतिः ॥ विद्यायोनिसंबन्धेभ्य इत्येव । ककारान्तेभ्यः प्रातिपदिके यो विधायोनिसंवन्धवाचिभ्यष्टम् प्रत्या यो भवति तत आगत इत्येतस्मिन्विषये ॥ 
78. The affix gsr comes in the sense of 'come thence, after a word ending in short, and denoting a person related through learning or blood. Do This debars Thus होतुरागत होतृकम 'derived from Hotri.' पातकम् ॥ So also of blood, as:-भ्रातृकम, स्वासूकम्, मातृकम् ।। 
The a in ser is for the sake of facility of pronunciation, there being no such word ending in long sell 
OF. GOVEO 
TRY OF CULTI 
MINISTRY 
VERNMENT OG 
OF INDIA 
संस्कृति मंत्राल 
Fara Fall 
[ BK. IV. CH. IIAS ST. 
479.17 
7771 
When the words do not denote relationship through learning or blood, this affix is not employed. As, 
E TTI fuga II 9 11 alfa II rag:- - II वृतिः॥ पितृशब्दात् यत् प्रत्ययो भवति चकाराद्वञ्च तत आगत इत्येतस्मिन्विषये ॥ 
79. The affix ya as well as tot comes, in the sense of come thence,' after the word "pitri.' 
Thus fogarna rogant or rsin(VII. 4. 27. and VI. 4. 148) paternal--i.e. wealth inherited from father.' 
TATE SEC I Coll Tula II TAC-3199 Il वृशिः ॥ गोत्रप्रत्ययान्तात्यातिपदिकादत्मत्ययविधिर्भवति तत आगत इत्येतस्मिन्विषये ॥ 
80. After a word ending with a patronymic affix, the rule of affix in the sense of thence come,' is like that relating to the affix denoting its mark.' 
The word art in the sutra does not mean the technical Gotra of Grammar, but a descendant-denoting affix in general. The affixes denoting er are taught in IV. 3. 126 and 127. The affix I of IV. 3. 126 which comes after Gotra words, in the sense of this is his,' is refered to in this sûtra, not merely the affix for of IV. 3. 127, denoting, this is his mark.' 
Thus TET : =sirgura: 'the mark belonging to the descendants ofUpagu. So also कापटवकः, नाडायनकः, चारायणकः || The same words will also denote come there from' as atiqa 3110L=site. Chlqe , igre 
reu (formed by 7s IV. 3. 126). 
Similarly are:, trofe, TAT: formed by art of IV. 3. 127 mean not only the mark belonging to the Vaidas, thc Gargyas, the Dakshis,' but also that which comes from the Vaidas &c. The word aa has the force of complete similarity,' as in area TTT (IV. 2. 34), TŪTI (IV. 2. 46). 
हेतुमनुष्येभ्योऽन्यतरस्यां रूप्यः ॥ ८१॥ पदानि ।। हेतु-मनुष्येभ्यः,अन्यतरस्या - :| वृत्तिः ॥ हेतुभ्यो मनुष्येयवान्यतरस्थां रूप्यः प्रत्ययो भवति तत आगत इत्येतस्मिविषये। 
81. The affix Freyr denotes that which from some thing has originated, when it is added to a word denoting 
cause,' or to the name of a man viewed as a cause. 
The word area is used meaning 'men as causes.' ta means cause or instrument. Thus A T&=745 or an by of IV. 2. 138 meaning 
what proceeds from a like cause.' So also 
f 
o r fast! So of men 
URE 
Gove 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY ON 
T OF INDIA 
BK. IV. CH, III. $83.1 
प्रभवाते॥ 
मंत्रालय 
भारत सरप 
म 
also देवदत्तरूप्यम् or देवरनम् (IV. I. 83) 'what originates with देवदनः', यज्ञदनरूप्यम् or यज्ञदनम् ॥ 
The word egasijaut: is in the plural in the sûtra, indicating that sva rupavidhi (I. 1. 68) does not apply here. 
In denoting FT, there is employed the Instrumental case as taught in II. 3. 23 : and, according to the jnapaka in the present sutra, the Ablative case may also be employed in denoting a T, 11 Or the use of the ablative case in the sense of हेतु, may be explained by II. 3. 25. 
मय च ॥ २॥ पदानि ॥ मयट्-च॥ वृत्तिः ॥ हेतुभ्यो मनुष्येभ्यश्च मयद् प्रत्ययो भवति तत आगत इत्येतस्मिन्विषये॥ 
82. After a word denoting a cause or a man viewed as a cause, there is the affix 'mayať in the sense of 
come thence'. 
Thus सममयम, विषममयम, देवदत्तमयम, यज्ञदत्तमयम् ॥ 
The a of my indicates that the feminine of these words are formed by कीए (IV. I. I5), as, सममयी॥ The separation of this sutra from the last is for the sake of preventing the application of the rule of mutual correspondencc (1.3. To) which would have been the case had the rule stood as हतुमनुष्येभ्योऽन्यतरस्या रूप्यमयटौ।। 
प्रभवति ।। ८३॥ पदानि ॥ प्रभवति॥ वृत्तिः॥तत इत्येव । पञ्चमीसमर्थान् ड्याप्रातिपदिकात्प्रभवतीत्येतस्मिन्विषये थथाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति।। 
83. After a Nominal-stem which is in the 5th. case in construction, an affix (one of those already taught) comes in the sense of what appears for the first time'. 
The word na: is undersood in the sůtra. The word quare means what manifests itself, or appears for the first time. Thus हिमवतः प्रभवति हेमवती « The Haimavati", a name of the Ganges, meaning which manifests itself for the first time or appears in the Snowy Range, its source being unknown'. So also शारदी “The Daradi" i.e. the Indus appearing for the first time in Dar distan. The word gaafa has not the sense of segít, because that is included in सत्र जात:; it therefore means प्रकाशते, प्रथमतः उपलभ्यते, the source or origin be ing unknown. 
विदूरामयः॥४॥ पदानि ॥ विदूरात्-व्यः॥ निः॥ विदूरशहा ज्यः प्रत्ययो भवति ततः प्रभवतीत्येतस्मिन्विषये ॥ Karika 
वालवायो विरं च प्रकृत्यन्तरमेव वा। न वै तनेति चेहब्याजिखरीवापाचरेत् ।। 
RE-GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
av OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
(CT [ BK. :V. CH. III. 86 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
सत्यमेव जयते 
STTHHS THG 1 
AGB 
84. The affix y comes, in the sense of 'what ma nifests itself there', after the words 'vidûra'. 
This debars अण्॥ Thus विदूरात प्रभवति-वैदूर्यः a kind of gem found at Vidūra'. The gem as a matter of fact is not found at Vidūra, but in a moun tain called araretli Vidûra is the city where the rough stone is worked upon, In other words, it may be said that the affix is really added to amar, when the latter word is replaced by fat; such substitute being only shown in the sútra, the appropriate sthâni (vâlavâya) being left to inference. Or the word Vidūra may denote both the city as well as a mountain. If it be said that there is no mountain known as Vidûra, then we say that the Grammarians call Valavâya by the name of Vidûra, as the merchants call Benares by the name of Jitvarf. 
agrosta oftarent: 11 CG Tetat ll TE-arossfat-97-gauit: 11 वृतिः ॥ तरिति द्वितीयासमर्थान्गच्छतीत्येतस्मिन्विषये यथाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति योऽसौ गच्छति पन्याश् चेत् स भवति दूतो वा ॥ 
85. An affix (IV. 1. 83 &c) comes after a word, being in the 2nd case in construction, in the sense of 'what goes thereto', provided that, that which goes, is a road or a messenger. 
Thus itestä = : "a road or a messenger that goes to Srughna." So also ATYT: 1 The road may either lead to Srughna, or being in Srughna, be used for going. 
Why do we say farzaht: "meaning a road or a messenger". Observe TË TESTET Erref: 'he goes to Srughna for his own sake'. 
Frithra git# II e II Tera Il s164-FGTH -ETCHII वृतिः। द्वितीयासमर्थाभिनिष्क्रामतीत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे यथाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति यत् तदभिनिष्क्रामाति बार 
HET II 
86. An affix comes, after a word in the 2nd case in construction, in the sense of a door which looks towards that'. 
Thus are: a gate which looks towards Srughna',-as a gate of Kanyakubja. So also ATYT, tigan 
Objection. The sutra would have stood better as suasana of art, for by using stafaraf, you make the word me as if it was a being endowed with sense. 
Ans. This objection may be answerd by saying that the gate is the well-known instrument ( acu) to the action of AST: and an instrument may be used as an agent to a verb: as Eruara nga'the sword cuts nicely." 
८.GOVER 
OF CULTURE 
TAINISTRY ON 
VERNMENT OF 
NT OF INDIA 
ABK. IV. CH, III. S. 88] 
कृते मन्ये॥ 
सालय भारत 
W Why do we say द्वारमा “when it is a gate"? Observe सुजमभिनिष्क्रामति पुरुष: 'a person faces towards Srughna'. 
अधिकृत्य कृते ग्रन्थे ॥ ८७॥ पदानि ॥ अधिकृत्य-कते-ग्रन्थे। वृत्तिः ॥ तरिति द्वितीयासमर्थावधिकृत्य कृतइत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे यथाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति यत्तत्कृतं मन्यो स भवति ।। वार्तिकम् ॥ लुबाख्यायिकार्यस्य प्रत्ययस्य बहुलम् ॥ 
87. An affix comes after a word in the 2nd case in construction, in the sense of 'made in relation to any subject, when the thing made is a 'book.' 
. The word अधिकृत्य means 'aiming at ' 'alluding to, referring to.' Thus सुभद्रामधिकृत्य कृतोमन्थः = सौभद्रः 'Saubhadra or a book relating to the history of Subhadra.' So also गौरिमित्रः, यायातः, किरातार्जुनीयम् ॥ 
Why do we say अन्ये 'when meaning a book ? Observe, सुभद्रामधिकत्यक्तः FIETTT: 'a palace built in memory of Subhadra'; where there is no affix, 
Vart:-The affix is elided diversely when the book is a story. Thus वासवदत्तामाधि कृत्य कता ऽऽ ख्यायिका वासवदत्ता “Vasavadatta, a story relating to Vasavadatta." सुमनोगरा, उर्वशी ॥ Sometimes the elision does not take place, as भैमरथी॥ 
शिशुक्रन्दयमसभद्वन्द्वेन्द्रजननादिश्यश्छः ॥ ८८॥ पदानि ॥ शिशु-भन्द-यमस भ-वन्द्व-इन्द्र-जननादिभ्यः-छः ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ शिशुक्रन्दादिभ्यो द्वितीयासमर्थेभ्यश्छ। प्रत्ययो भवति अधिकृत्य कृते मन्ये ॥ अणापवादः ॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ इन्द्र देवासुराादिभ्यः प्रतिषेधः ॥ 
88. The affix छ comes in the sense of a book made relating to a subject, after the following words in the 2nd case in construction, viz sisukranda,' 'yamasabha, the Dvandva 
compounds, and the words 'indra-janana' &c. 
The word तर (IV.3.85) and अधिकृत्य कृते अन्ये should be read into the sutra. This debars अण्॥ Thus शिशुक्रन्दीयः 'a book treating of the crying of infants.' थमसभः 'a book relating to the court of Yama'. ADvandva-Compound: as, भमिकाश्यपीयः, श्येनकपोतीयः, शब्दार्थसंबन्धीयम् प्रकरणं, वाक्यपदीयम् ॥ 
There is no list of our words. They are akritigaņa, and must be determined by usage. Thus इन्द्रजननीयम्, प्रद्युम्नागमनयिम् &c.t 
Vart : Prohibition should be stated in the case of the Dvanda-Compounds सेवासुर &c. As देवासुरम् the book of the wars of the Gods and Demons.' राक्षोसरम गोणमण्यम् ।। 
23 
TRY OF CULT 
MINISTRY O 
ENT OF INDIA 
सात्वमयसयत 
74 
सोऽस्थाभिजनः ।। 
BK. IV.CH. III.S.91.1 
जसरकार 
The words Faroe and The might have been included in the inchoate class France It The separate enumeration of these words in the sutra, is merely for the sake of amplification. 
सोस्य निवासः ॥४९॥ पदानि ॥ स:-अस्य-निवासः। वृत्तिः ॥ स इति प्रथमासमर्थावस्येति षष्ठपर्थे यथाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति यत्प्रथमासमर्थ निवासश्चेत्स भवति॥ 
89. After a word in the 1st case in construction, an affix comes in the sense of this is his dwelling place' 
The word a shows that the word to which the affix is to be added is in the nominative case. 9TET 'his' shows that the meaning of the affix is that of a genitive case. निवासः, shows that the first word in construction must signify a dwelling place. Fars means "a country i. e. where a person lives (nivasanti asmin)”. 
ध्नो निवासोऽस्य- लोध्न: 'a present dweller of Srughna', माथुरः, राष्ट्रियः &c. अभिजनश्च ॥९॥ पदानि । अभिजन:-च॥ वृत्तिः ॥ सोस्येत्येव । स इति प्रथमासमर्थावस्येति षष्ठयर्थे यथाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति यत्प्रथमासमर्थमभि जनश्चेत्स भवति॥ 
90. After a word in the 1st case in construction, an affix comes in the sense of this is his mother-land'. 
The difference between wate: and TFT: is this. Where a person lives himself for the present, that is his fate or dwelling-place. Where his ancestors (अभिजनाः) have lived, that is his अभिजन 'native country, home or ancestral abode', Thus सोनः a person whose ancestral home is in Srughna', माथुरः, राष्ट्रियः ॥ The separation of this sutra from the last is for the sake of the subsequent satra, in which the anuvritti of 'abhijana' only runs. 
आयुधजीविभ्यश्छः पर्वते॥९१॥ पदानि ।। आयधजीविश्य:-छ:-पर्वते॥ वृत्तिः ॥ सोस्थाभिजन इति वर्तते । आयुधजीविश्य इति तारणे चतुर्थी, पर्वतइति प्रकृतिविशेषणम् । पर्वतवाचिनः प्रथमासमर्थादभिजनावस्येति षष्ठवर्ये छः प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
91. The affix छ comes after a word denoting mountain, in the sense of this is his mother-land', when it is a person who lives by arms. 
The word rustat means a person who earns his livelihood by arms. The phrase सोऽस्याभिजनः is to be read into the shtra, Thus हदगोलः पर्वतोऽभिजन एषामायुधजीविनां हिदोलीयाः the mercenary soldiers whose ancestral abode is the Hridgola mountain'. So also अन्धकवीयाः, रोहितगिरीयाः ।। 
Why do we say आयुधजीवियः?Observe आक्षोश ब्राह्मणाः "the Brahmanas whose native place is Rikshoda mountains". Why do we say 'mountains'? Observe. सांकाइधका आयुधजीविनः॥ 
GOVERNMENT 
TURE • Go 
RY OF CULTUA 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
[ BK IV. CH. III. S. 94. 
सौऽस्याभिजन-ज्य ।। 
शण्डिकादियो ज्यः ॥ ९२॥ शण्डिकादिश्या, ज्यः॥ वृत्ति; ॥ शण्डिक इत्येवमादिभ्यः प्रातिपदिकेन्यो ज्यः प्रत्ययो भवति सोस्याभिजन इत्येतस्मिन्विषये । अ णोदरपवादः॥ 
92. The affix ऽय comes in the sense of this is his native-land', after the words शण्डिक &c. 
This debars अण &c. Thus शाण्डिक्थः, सार्वसेन्यः &c. 
1 शण्डिक, 2 सर्वसेन 3 सर्वकेश, 4 शक, शट, (सर), 6 रक, 7 शङ्ख , 8 बोध. सिन्धुतक्षशिलादिभ्यो ऽणजी ॥९३॥ पदानि ॥सिन्धु-तक्षशिलादिश्यः, आण अजो॥ वृत्तिः ॥ आदिशब्दः प्रत्येकमभिसंबध्यते । सिन्ध्वादिभ्यः प्रातिपदिक यस्तक्षशिलादिभ्यश्च यथासंख्यमणमौ प्रत्ययौ भवतः सोस्याभिजन इत्येतस्मिन्विषये ॥ 
93. The affixes U and 3 come respectively, after the words Sindhu' &c and Takshasila' &c in the sense of this is his native-land'. 
Thus सैन्धवः, वार्णवः ॥ 
Many of the words occurring in Sindhu-class, are found in Kachchh adi class (IV. 2. 133) also. Those words would have taken STT by sůtra IV. 2. 133. The present sutra prevents the affixing of बुज्ञ (IV. 2. 134) to those words under circumstances mentioned in sutra IV. 2. 134, when the further significance of STÍHFT: is added to them. 
So also वाक्षशिलः, वात्सोद्धरण: &c. 
1 सिन्धु, 2 वर्ण, 3 मधुमत, 4 कम्बोज, 5 साल्व, 6 कश्मीर, 7 गन्धार, 8 किष्किन्धा, 9 उरसा (उरस), 10 दरद ( दरद ), 11 गान्दका (गब्दिका ), 12 कुलून, 13 दिसा.॥ 
1 तक्षशिला, 2 वत्सोद्धरण, 3 कैर्मेदुर (कौमेदुर), 4 ग्रामणी, छगल*, 6 कोष्टुकर्ण (कर्णकोष्ठ), 7सिंहकर्ण (सिंहकोष्ठ), 8 संकुचित, 9 किंनर, 10 काण्डधार (काण्डवारण), 11 पर्वत*, 12 अवसान, 13 बर्बर, 14 कंस, 15 सरालक.. 
तूदीशलातुरवर्मतीकूचवाराड्ढक्छण्डश्यकः ॥९४॥ पदानि ॥ तूदी-शलातुर वर्मती-कूचवारातू, ढक्-छण-ढा-यकः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ तद्यारिभ्यश्चतुर्व्यः शब्दे यो यथासंख्य चत्वार एव ढक छण ढ यक् इत्येते प्रत्यया भवन्ति सो स्थाभिजन इत्येतस्मिन्विषये। अणोपवातः ।। 
94. After the words तूदी, शालातुर, वर्मती, and कृचवार, come respectively the affixes ढक, छण, ढ, and यक in the sense of this is his native land'. 
This debars अण् ॥ Thus तौदेयः, शालातुरीयः, वामतयः and कोचवायः॥ भक्तिः ॥१५॥ पदानि ॥ भक्तिः ॥ त्तिः ॥ समर्थविभक्तिः प्रत्ययार्थश्वानुवर्तते । अभिजन इति निवृत्तम् । स इति प्रथमासमर्थावस्थेति पाच थे यथाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति, यत्प्रथमासमर्थ भक्तिश्चेत्तद्भवति ॥ 
URE 
Gov 
OVERNMENT 
Y OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
siSea Hi-T 1 
[ BK. IV. CH II 98 
"176 EUR 
95. An affix (IV. 1. 83) comes after a word in the first case in construction, in the sense of this is his object of veneration or love'. 
The word for in the sûtra means 'serving',' worshipping' or 'loving'. 
Thus ag aftrag: 'a person who is loyal to Srughna'. So also TYT:, trgy: &c. 
The anuvřitti of the word 97: ceases. The word #: and we should be read into the sutra. 
अचित्ताददेशकालाक् ॥ ९६॥ पदानि ॥ अचित्तातू, अदेश-कालात, ठक् ॥ T: 11 Tahtmealarmiertarea gratitetengah wafa HIFI ftcafarergh; भणोपवायः॥ 
96. After a word denoting a thing not having consciousness, but not being the name of a country or time, the affix gs is employed, in the sense of this is his object of devotion or love'. 
This debars so; and also. Thus strFTET = rafga: 'a person who loves cakes'. Eesti, grafen: 
Why do we say 'not having consciousness'? Observe : 11 Why do we say not being the name of a country'? Observe arg: Il. Why do we say not denoting time'? Observe on who loves Summer'. 
FETTIGIC&st Il gull na li &TT , TT II 17:11 True Storer Hafa ETTES Torreuafera facãi sporgere: 
97. The affix zer comes in the sense of this is his object of veneration', after the word AGITTET | 
This debars for 11 As ATETITS: 'who loves or serves the Maharaja'. The difference between this as and the sm of the last aphorism, is in accent only. 
वासुदेवार्जुनाभ्यां धुन् ॥९८॥ पदानि ।। वासुदेव-अर्जुनाभ्याम्, वुन् । efter: u rejett 3ATET TEHETÜT ETT ETTET TE TTATT I STORTTUTTO II 
98. The affix t comes in the sense of this is his object of veneration,' after the words 'Vâsudeva' and Arjuna. 
This debars छ and अण् ॥ Thus यासदेवकः, भर्जुनका।। 
Q. The word aratea being the name of a Kshatriya would have taken by the next sútra, and there is no difference here between er and a why then include the word en in this satra P 
o GO 
GOVERNMENT 
TURE 
STRY OF CULO 
MINISTRI 
NT OF INDIA 
BK. IV. CH. III. S. 100 ] 
ESEL 
- 
4.418 
H A . The word area here is the name of God (in which all dwell mare 
f ) and not the designation of a Kshatriya. 
By the general rule of compounds (II. 2. 34) a word of fewer vowels is placed first, and so Arjuna ought to have been placed first. The not doing so in this sätra indicates (jñâ paka) the existence of this rule that a word denoting an object of reverence is placed first.' 
Filtrererretzt gegst 11 88 11 qera Il TT& 
T renti-ach 
Efer: 11 Terreau: turgaransfagaratit TEA TST TETT atafa FTTELY ffirafenbaar 
I SPUITTE: 11 
99 The affix gt comes diversely, in the sense of this is his object of veneration,' after a word denoting Gotra or a Kshatriya. 
This debars stor and y. Thus: 10 "who loves or serves &c Gluchukayani.' So also sirgah:, ilgaa: 11 Kshatriyas :- 
:, AP#927, grae: 11 
The word strear in the satra indicates that the words should be the names of well-known cr famous Kshatriyas, and not of any body who is a Kshatriya by profession. 
The word ge shows the non-universality of this rule. Thus qtfora Tra=offerata:, refra: 11 
The word it does not mean here the Grammatical Gotra, but a word formed by a patronymic affix in general. 
जनपदिनां जनपदवत्सर्वे जनपदेन समानशब्दानां बहुवचने ॥१०॥ पदानि । जनपदिनाम, जनपदवत, सर्वम्, जनपदेन, समान, शब्दानाम, बहुवचने ॥ FET: Il parer à Età soet rasera T 577994rë para gua: gare tirea 
Tegara 
100. Of words denoting Princes (lit. who are lords of janapada) the base and affix meaning this is his object of veneration'are the same, in every respect, like those of a word denoting kingdom, provided that, the Prince-denoting words have, inthe plural,the same form, as the kingdom-denoting words. 
The words of this stra require a detailed analysis. Tagant gen. plural of afer meaning lord of an inhabited country' i. e. Khsatriya Princes, ora 'in the plural', T T ATT Terat the same form as the jana pada denoting word', ut in every thing is like jana-pada'. In other words, after those bases denoting Kshatriya Princes which in the plural have 
TURE - Gove 
OVERNMENT 
GY OF CULTUA 
MINISTRY 
UT OF INDIA 
a 
EU 
[BK. IV. CH. III. . tot 
.संस्कृति मन 
7 
. 
the same forms as the names of the countries, the affix in the sense of veneration will be the same as will come after a janapada word.' Now the affixes denot ing fh as regards stTye words are given in Sätras IV. 2. 124 &c. and those affixes will apply here. Thus 3750 3799T TTEJ =9T13: formed by 937 of Satra IV. 2. 125, meaning 'who loves the country of Angås ' Similarly argani, ETTER: 
Fue: 11 
Similarly syn: TTET FEDTET=9157: formed by the same affix 71, with this difference of meaning who loves the Kshatriyas called Angâs'. So 
:, Ere: &c. 
Why do we say 'of Kshatriya Princes'; (janapadinâm). Observe, पंचाला ब्राह्मणा भक्तिरस्य = पांचालाः ।। Here the general affix अण् is employed. 
The word as is used in the sútra to show that not only the affixes are the same, but the bases to which the affixes are added will be the same. In the plural, the Kshatriya and the Janapada bases have the same form, but in the singular and dual, the forms of Kshatrya-bases are different. Thus TTFETTÜ=sing. A: (IV. 1. 170) dual, AgT pl. : The form Agt: denotes both the Kings or Kshatriyas of Madrâs' as well as the country called Madrâs'. Thus मद्रो भक्तिरस्य-मद्रकः ॥ So also in the singular and dual, मद्राः will be the base to which the affix will be added. Thus माद्रो भक्तिरस्य मानौ वा भक्तिरस्थ 
- मद्रकः॥ Similarly वार्य (from जि IV. I. ITI), as, वायर्यो वा भक्तिरस्य वाज्यौँ वा भ fhey = arsa: 11 
Why do we say $17997 FATT TETTEL 'the word having the same sound as the janapada word'? Thus wapt ATE:, ar T a tea=picata: il Here Paurava and Anushanda have not the saine sound. 
The word aaqa is used in the sutra, to indicate, that, though the fram Toer or the similarity of word-form', occurs in the plural number only, yet this atideśa rule applies to the same words in the singular and dual also. For in the plural, the form will be same, because there the Tadrâja affix is elided; but in the singular and dual, the Tadraja affix is not elided, and therefore, the word denoting a principality and the word denoting a prince will not have the same form; but this rule applies there also. As : or art TETE 
I PO# Tera II TF II वृत्तिः ॥ तेनोत तृतीयासमायोक्तमित्यस्मिन्नर्थे यथाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
101. After a word in the 3rd case in construction, an affix (IV. 1. 83 &c). comes, in the sense of 'enounced by him. 
The word it means for 'preeminently spoken' It should be distinguished from the word ineaning 'done or made. For the sense of a 
URE 
GOVO 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY ON 
NT OF INDIA 
सत्यमेव जयते 
BK. IV/CH. III. $ 102] 
T 
-591 
785 
has been already taught in the sû tra mà (IV. 3. 16). Thus stogter TT TOT GIFT=Arut Fa: 11 gruritza 'the system of grammar enounced by Paņini STTTTTAL, FIT Tecall on "Works like Chhandas which were made (na) by nobody, but which were promulgated (1177) from time of time by inspired commentators, may be quoted as examples of the application of this sûtra. Or it may apply to the case of a book whose author is another, but whose promulgator or expoun der is another. In short, speaking roughly, ji is a 'revelation', and 7: is a 'composition', one a revealer or prophet, the other an author. 
According to some, this sûtrą is almost a superfluity. They argue thus: The word dit is formed by adding to a and means 'to lecture' 'to teach', and also the 'means of such teaching &c. In the first sense of 'lectur ing or teaching', the affix is not found. For in every village there are persons who teach or lecture upon Katha, Kalâpa &c. For example ETTÄ may be such a lecturer, but we do not say THT TITR =iterefl Moreover, where we find this affix employed, it is with regard to Books, for which the rule en Tir is sufficient. If it be said that it sbould be taught for the Chhandas : that is also unnecessary, as the Vedas are not ma but eternal, the agent only remem. bers them. If it be said, it refers to the sense of the Vedas, the same objection applies as to the first. But the letter of the Veda is not eternal, it is the sense that is eternal. Therefore the Rishis who revealed, for the first time, at the beginning of a Kalpa, the sense of the Veda, in appropriate language will be called its promulgators, and the works so revealed will be named after such Rishis, as erach, Florach and Teal This sútra, however, is confined to those cases where the author of the book is one person and its promulgator is another : as माथुरी वृत्तिः ॥ 
तित्तिरिवरतन्तुखण्डिकोखाच्छण् ॥ १०२॥ पदानि ॥ तित्तिरि-वरतन्तु-खण्डिक Stra-GU II वत्तिः ॥ तित्तिर्यादिभ्यः शब्देभ्यश्छण प्रत्ययो भवति तेन प्रोक्तमित्येतस्मिन्विषये । अणोपवादः ॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ शौनकादिभ्य छन्दसीत्यत्रास्यानुवृत्तेश्छन्दोधिकारविहितानां च तद्विषयतेष्यते ॥ 
102. The affix yu comes in the sense of 'enoun ced by him', after the words "tittiri', 'varatantu', 'khandika', and 'ukha'. 
Thus f ar those who learn (IV. 2. 64) the Veda enounced by Tittiri'. argaarar, arrosetat:, sireiar: 
According to Kasika this is confined to the Chhandas only. There fore it will not apply to secular blokas, as rareries 1: The word Chnandas is drawn from sútra IV. 3-106, and are ar from IV 266. 
URE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
सत्यसयत 
कृति मंत्राय 
तेन मोनं णिनि ॥ 
[ BK, IV. CH. III. S104 
काश्यपकौशिकाभ्यामृषिभ्यां णिनि ॥ १०३॥ पदानि ॥ काश्यप-कौशिकाभ्याम, ऋषिश्याम,णिनिः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ काश्यपकौशिकशब्दाभ्यामृषिवाचिभ्यां णिनिः प्रत्ययो भवति तेन प्रोक्तमित्येतस्मिन्विषये । छ स्थापवादः॥ 
103. The affix णिनि comes in the sense of 'enounc ed by him', after the words — Kasyapa' and Kausika' when denoting Vedic Seers. 
This debars 5. The up of forfa is for the sake of Vșiddhi (useful in the subsequent sutra). This is confined, like the last, to the Vedic works. Thus काश्यपिनः those who study (IV. 2.64) the Kalpa enounced by Kasyapa', कौशिकिनः॥ Why do we say “Vedic Sages"? Observe इदानीन्तनेन गोत्रकाश्यपन प्रोन-काश्यपीयम् a work enounced by a modern Kasyapa,-one belonging to the Gotra Kasyapa : not a Rishi'. 
कलापिवैशम्पायनान्तेवासिभ्यश्च ॥ १०४॥ पदानि ॥ कलापि-वैशम्पायन-अ न्तिवासिभ्यः,च (णिनि)॥ वृशिः ॥ कलाप्यन्तेवासिनां वैशम्पायनान्ते वासिनां च थे वाचकाः पादास्तन्यो णिनिः प्रत्ययो भवति ते मा भोक्तमित्येतस्मिन्विषये । अणोपवायः ।। 
Karika हरिद्ररेषां प्रथमस्ततश्छगलितुम्बुरू। 
उलपेन चातुर्येन कालापकमिहोच्यते ॥ भालम्बिम्बरका प्राचां पलङ्गकमलादुनो। ऋचाभारुणिताण्डवाश्च मखमीयास्त्रयो ऽपरे ।। श्यामायन उदीच्येषु उक्तः कठकलापिनोः । 
104. After words denoting the pupils of 'Kalâpi, and Vaisampâyana,' the affijx furra is employed in the sense of 'enounced by him.' 
This debars stor and ou There are four words which express pupils of Kalapa: as, हरिद, छगली, तुम्बुरुः, उलपः॥ There are nine words expressing pupils of Vaisampayana: as, आलम्बि, पलक, कमल, चाभ, आरुणि; ताण्ड्य, श्यामायन, कट, कलापी॥ 
Thus Errefoot: 'those who study (IV. 2. 64) the works enounced by Haridru.तवारविणः, भोलपिनः and छगली takes dhinuk IV. 3. 1090मालम्बिनः, पालङ्गिनः, भारुणिनः, आचर्चाभिनः, कामलिनः, ताण्डिनः, श्यामायनिनः ॥ The affix is elided after कठ (IV. 3. 107), and is replaced by or (IV. 3. 108) after reft II 
The pupils must be direct ones, and not pupil of pupils. For had that been the meaning, Kalâpi being a pupil of Vaisampayana, the words pupils of Vaisampayana' would have included the 'pupils of Kalapi. But that is not so, the word Kalâpi being separately mentioned in the sútra. So 
TURE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
सत्यमेव जयते 
BK. IV, Ch. III. 106.] 
तेन प्रोक्त-णिनि ।। 
also Katha is a pupil of Vaisampâyaņa, and Khadayana is a pupil of Katha and had the sůtra applied to pupil's pupil also, then the affix fora would have applied to tellsretat also. But that is not the case, Khâdâyana being mentioned in Saunakadi class. (IV. 3. 106). 
The word चरकः means वैशम्पायनः, hence चरकाः means pupils of वैशम्पायनः ।। पुराणमोक्तेषु ब्राह्मणकल्पेषु ॥ १०५ ॥ पदानि ॥ पुराण-प्रोक्तेषु-ब्राह्मण-कल्पेषु (णिनिः)॥ वृतिः ॥ प्रत्ययार्थविशेषणमेतत् । तृतीयासमात्यो णिनिः प्रत्ययो भवति यत्रोक्तं पुराणोक्तावनाम णकल्पास्ते भवन्ति ॥ 
105. The affix furiêt comes in the sense of enounce ed by him,' after a word in the 3rd case in construction, when it denotes a Brâhmana or a Kalpa-work enounced by ancient sages. 
This sútra further gives the sense of the affix. grror means Ancient Sages.'equivalent to पुरातण. Of Brahmana literature,the examples are,शान्यायमिनः, एतेरायणः ॥ Kalpa work : as पैङ्गीकल्पः, भारुणपराजी॥ 
E Why do we say पुराणमोक्तषु 'announced by ancient sages.? Observe याज्ञवल्कानि ब्राह्यणानि, माश्मरथः कल्पः ॥ (VI. 4. 15I) Yajnavalkya &c being sages of 
modern times. The तद् विषय affix (IV. 2.66) will not also apply to these, be cause the word go in IV. 2. 66 is restricted to trust of the present satra. 
शौनकादिश्यश्छन्दसि ॥ १०६ ॥ पदानि ॥ शौनकादिश्या-छन्दसि-(णिनिः)॥ वृणिः॥ शौनक इत्येवमादिभ्यो णिनिः प्रत्ययो भवति तेन प्रोक्तमित्येतस्मिन्विषये छन्दस्यभिधेये। छाणो. रपवादः॥ 
106. The affix fora comes in the sense of enounc ed by him', after the words aitas &c, in denoting Chhandas. 
Thisdebars g and अण॥ Thus शौनकेन प्रोक्तंमधीयते - शौनकिनः who study (IV.2.64) the Chhandas enounced by Saunaka.' वाजसनेयिनः &c. 
Why do we say 'in denoting Chhandas'? Observe et tentar ferent the orthography of Saunaka.' 
The word as occurs in this list. This must always be taken as a compound for affixing this affix. After the single word 78 the affix is elided (IV. 3. 107). Thus कशागभ्यां प्रोनामधीयते काठशाग्निः॥ 
शौनक, 2 वाजसनेय, 3 शारिव, 4 शापेय (सपिथ), 5 शापेय (शाखेय), 6 खाडायन, 7 स्तम्भ (स्कम्भ), 8 स्कन्ध, 9 देवदर्शन, 10 रज्जुभार, 11 रज्जुकण्ठ, 12 कठशाउ, 13 कषाय (कशाय) 14 तल*, 15 ण्ड*, 16 पुरुषांसक (पुरुषासक), 17 भश्वपेज (अश्वपेय), 18 साझाव, 19 स्कन्द, 20 वरसाठ, सलवकार, 
24 
URE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
Rate. 
तेनप्रोक्त-ढिनुक्॥ 
[ BK. IV. CH. III. I09 
तमंत्रालय 
भारत सरकार 
कठचरकाल्लुक्॥१०७॥ पदानि ॥ कठ-चरकात्-लुक्॥ वृतिः॥ कठचरकशब्दाभ्यां परस्य प्रोक्तप्रत्ययस्य लुग् भवति । कठशब्दावशम्पायनान्तवासिभ्य इति णिने श्वरकशब्दारयणः ॥ 
107. The affix denoting "enounced by him' is elided, by luk-substitution, after the words Katha and Charaka. 
Tom The word कट would have taken णिनि as it is a वैशम्पायनान्तेवासी word : and Te would have taken the affix STUH Both are elided. Thus sher: who study the Chhandas enounced by Katha'. चरकाः &c. 
The word 'Chhandas' qualifies this sutra, Observe काठगः चारकाः श्लोकाः॥ 
कलापिनो ऽण् ॥८॥ पदानि ॥ कलापिन:-अण् ॥ बृनिः॥ कलापि शब्दादण प्रत्ययो भवाति तेन प्रोक्तमित्येतस्मिन्विषये।वैशम्पायनान्तेवासित्वागिणनेरपवादः वार्णिकम् ॥ नान्तस्य दिलोपे सब्रह्मचारिपीठसर्पिकलापिकुथुमिततलिजाजलिजाङ्गलिलाङ्गालिशिलालिशिख डिसूकरसमसुपर्वणामुपसंख्यानम् ॥ 
108. The affix comes in the sense of enounc ed by him ', after the word Kalâpî. 
This debars णिनि of IV. 3. 104. Thus कलापाः 'who study the workk enounced by Kalapi'. 
The word कलापाः is thus formed :-कलापिन् + अण्॥ Here comes in force Sutra VI. 4. 144 which declares that इन of कलापिन् should be elided before the taddhita affix. This elision is, however, debarred by sutra VI. 4. 164 which declares that words ending in the affix 57 retain their form when stor not denoting a progeny follows. Therefore it would have retained its i but for this Vartika, 
Vaart:--The pe portion of the following words is elided when a Taddhita follows :-सब्रह्मचारिन्, पीठसर्पिन, कलापिन्, कुथुमिन्, तैसिलिन्, जाजलिन्, जाङ्ग लिन्, लाङ्गलिन्, शिलालिन्, शिखण्डिन, सूकरसमन्, सुपर्वण्॥ Thus ईन् being elided, we have कलापाः ॥ 
छगलिनो ढिनुक् ॥ १०९॥ पदानि ॥ छगलिन:-ढिनुक्॥ वृतिः॥ छगलिनशब्दाद डिनुक प्रत्ययो भवति तेन प्रोक्तमित्येतस्मिन् विषये । कलाप्यन्तेवासित्वाणिनेर पवारः ।। 
109. The affix ढिनुक् comes in the sense of 'enoune ed by him', after the word 'Chhagalin'. 
The word of being a word denoting the pupil of firdt would have taken णिनि (IV. 3. 104). This debars that, Thus छागलायनः 'who study the Chhandas enounced by Chhagali'. 
URE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
av OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
AT OF INDIA 
BK. TV.CH. III. HI12] 
तेनैकदिक् ॥ 
पाराशर्यशिलालिश्यां भिक्षुनटसूत्रयोः ॥ ११०॥ पदानि ॥ पाराशर्य-शिलालि भन्याम्-भिक्षु-नट-सूत्रयोः (णिनि)॥ वृतिः ॥ णिनिरिहानवर्तते, न दिनक् । पाराशर्यशिलालिभ्यां णिनिः प्रत्ययो भवति तेन प्रोक्तमित्येतस्मि दिषये॥ 
110. The affix णिनि comes in the sense of 'enoune ed by him', after the words Pârâsarya and Silalin, the works enounced being Bhikshu-Sûtra and Nata-Sûtra respectively. 
The affix fufe is to be read into the sûtra and not feel The FATTTT and part are works treating of the duties of the religious mendicants' and नट: 'jugglers, dancers'. 
Thus पाराशर्य+णिनि = पाराशर+णिनि (VI. 4. 152)=पाराशरिन्, “the treatise of Parasarya on the duties of Bhikshus'. Similarly शैलालिन् ॥ These words, of course, have the additional sense of 'he who studies the works so enounced by Parasarya and Sailalin'. See IV. 2. 66. As पाराशरिणो भिक्षवः, शैलालिनो नदाः ।। According to some, it always expresses this relation (तद्विषयता IV. 2.66) and hever a giat alone. These are treated metaphorically as Chhandas. 
Why do we say denoting Bhikshu and Nața Sûtras '? Observe पाराशरम, शैलालम् ॥ 
कर्मन्दकृशाश्वादिनिः ॥ १११॥ पदानि ॥ कर्मन्द-कृशाश्वातू-इनिः॥ वृतिः ।। भिक्षुनटसूत्रयोरित्येव । कमन्दकृशाश्वशब्दाभ्यामिनिः प्रत्ययो भवति । अणोपवादः ॥ 
111. The affix gra comes, in the sense of 'enounc ed by him’, the thing enounced being Bhikshu Sutra and Nata-Sûtra, after thu words Karmanda' and Krisâsva'. 
Thus कमलिनो भिक्षवः, the mendicants who study the Bhikshu-sutra of Karmandin'.charraaat TeT: 'the actors who study the Nata Sätra of Krisâśvin. 
Otherwise कामन्दकम् and काशाश्वम् ॥ See IV. 2.66. 
तेनैकदिक ॥११२॥ पदानि ॥ तेन-एकदिक। "वृतिः ॥ तेनेति तृतीयासमादेकदिगित्येतस्मिन्नर्थे यथाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
112. An affiix (IV. 1. 83 &c) comes after a word in the third case in construction, in the sense of 'in the same direction with that.' 
The word ten fech means geen rechi. e. a common direction. Thus सुदाम्ना एकत्किसौदामनी विद्युत् “a lightening, literally that which is in the same 
the Sudaman. So हेमवती, लककी , पैलमली। The repetition of a though it could have been supplied by anuvritti from IV.3. IOI, is for the sake of indicating that the anuvritti of the छन्वम् 
GREGOVA 
GOVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
UT OF INDIA 
मत मंत्रालय 
कृते अन्ये॥ 
[ BK IV C 
भारत सरकार 
which regulated all the preceding ten sutras, does not extend to this aphorism, and therefore the afeguar of IV. 2. 66 which was applied in those sutras does not apply here, 
तसिश्च ॥ ११३॥ पदानि ॥ तसिः, च॥ 
Fivid वृभिः ॥ तसिध प्रत्ययो भवति तेनैकदिगित्येतस्मिन्विषये। पूर्वेण घादिषु अणादिषु च पामेष्वयनपरः प्र. त्ययो विधीयते॥ 
113. The affix are comes in the sense of 'in the same direction with that.' 
This ordains another affix in addition to the previously taught sto &c &c. The words formed by this affix are Indeclinables (I. I. 37). Thus हिमवतः "in the same direction as Himavat.' पीलमूलतः, सुदामतः ।। 
उरसो यश्च ॥११४॥ पदानि ॥ उरसो-यत्-च॥ वृत्तिः । उरः शब्दायत् प्रत्ययो भवति चकारानसिच, तेनैकदिगित्येतस्मिन् विषये ॥ 
114. The affix यत् as well as the affix तसि comes in the sense of 'in the same direction with that,' after the word उरस्। 
Thus उरसा एकपिम् = उरस्य or उरस्तः ॥ The तास is read into the sutra by force of the word च ॥ 
उपशाते ॥ ११५॥ पदानि ॥ उपज्ञाते॥ वृत्तिः ॥ तेनेत्येव । तृतीयासमर्थादुपज्ञातइत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे यथाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति । 
115. After a word in 3rd case in construction, an affix is employed in the sense of discovered by him'. 
Knowledge acquired by oneself without being taught is called उपक्षातं, i.e. an intuition or self taught knowledge. Thus पाणिनिनोपज्ञातं = पाणिनीयम् अकालक व्याकरणं the law of Grammar discovered by Panini'. So also काशकृत्स्नम् गुरुलाघवन, भापिशलम् दुष्करणम्॥ Compare II. 4. 21. The Panini's Grammar is called भकालकं as it does not define काल or tenses; गुरुलाघव is the name of the sciences of wealth (यत्रोपायाणां गौरवं लाघव चिन्त्यते॥ The word Duskarana is the name of a Grammar, so-called because of the technical term occurring in it. Some say it means कामशासाः॥ 
कृते ग्रन्थे॥११६॥ पदानि।कृते-ग्रन्थे। वृत्तिः ॥ तेनेत्येव तृतीयासमर्थात्कृतइत्येतस्मिन्नये यथाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति, बनकृतं अन्योरस भवति।। 
116. An affix comes after a word in the 3rd case in construction, in the sense of made', the thing made being 
a book's 
PURE • Gol 
GOVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
सत्यमेव जयते 
BH..IV. CH. III. SIT91 
तेनकृतसंज्ञायां-अञ्॥ 
on 
Thus वररुचिना कृताः- वाररुचाः श्लोकाः ‘the verses composed by Vara ruchi'. So also हैकुपारो मन्थः, भैकुराटो अग्यः, जालूकः ॥ 
Why do we say 'a book'? Observe astea grare: 'the palace made by Taksha'. 
That which one originates is called man: and is therefore an art', while knowledge of laws &c. that already exist, but are discovered for the first time by some one, is called उपज्ञातं ॥ 
संज्ञायाम् ॥११७॥ पदानि ॥ संज्ञायाम् ॥ वृत्तिः । तृतीयासमर्थात्कृतइत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे यथाविहित प्रत्ययो भवति समुदायेन चेतूसंज्ञाज्ञायते ॥ 
117. An affix comes after a word in the 3rd case in construction, in the sense of 'made by him', when the whole word is a Name. 
Thus मक्षिकाभिः कृतम् =माक्षिकम, कार्मुकम्, सारघम्, पौक्तिकम् ॥ All these are names of honey', literally made by a bee', मक्षिका, सरघा and पुत्तिका meaning a bee'. मक्षिका+अ = माक्षिक (VI. 4. 148). The anuvritti of “अन्य" does not, of course, apply here. 
कुलालादिभ्यो बुञ् ॥ ११८ ॥ पदानि । कुला-लादिश्यः, वुञ् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ तेन कृते संज्ञायामिति चैतत्सर्वमनुवर्तते । कुलालादिभ्यो बुझ् प्रत्ययो भवति तेन कृतमित्येतस्मि नर्थे संज्ञायां गन्यमानायाम् ।। 
118. The affix gsr comes in the sense of 'made by him', after the words Kulala &c. the whole word so form ed being a Name. 
Thus कौलालकम् 'a porcelain' lit. 'made by a potter', So also वारु 
1कलाल, 2 वरुड, पण्डाल, 4 निषाद,5 कार, 6 सेना, 7 सिरिध्र (सिरिन्ध्र), 8 सैरिन्ध्र (सेलिय), देवराज,10 परिषद् (पर्षद), 11 वधू, 12 मधु* 13 रुरु, 14 रुद्र, 15 अनडर, 16ब्रहमन् 17 कुम्भकार, 18 श्वपाक, 19 धव.॥ 
भद्राभ्रमरवटरपादपादञ् ॥ ११९ ॥ पदानि ॥ क्षुद्रा-भ्रमर-वटर-पादपात,अञ्। वृतिः ॥ तेन कृते संज्ञायामिति सर्वमनुवर्तते । क्षुद्रादिभ्यो ऽम् प्रत्ययो भवति तेन कृतइत्येतस्मिन्विषये सं ज्ञायां गम्यमानायाम् । अणोपवादः ॥ 
119. The affix sit comes after the words 'kshu dra', bhramara', 'vatara', and 'pâdapa' in the sense of 
• made by him, the whole word being a Name. 
This debars gut, there being difference in accent between gur and अ ॥ Thus शुद्राभिः कृतम् =क्षाम् honey lit made' by a small bee' So also आमरम, वाटरम् and पादपम् ।। 
URE - GOVE 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY ON 
VERNMENT O. 
OF INDIA 
सत्यमेव जयते 
तस्येदम्----यत् ॥ 
[BK. IV. CH. III ST22. 
तिसरकार 
तस्येदम् ॥ १२१॥ पदानि ॥ तस्य-इदम् ॥ वृतिः ॥ तस्येति षष्ठीसमर्थादिदमित्येतस्मिति षये यथाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवत्याणादयः पञ्च महोत्सर्गाः । पादयश्च प्रत्यया यथाविहितं विधीयन्ते ।। 
वार्तिकम् ॥ बहेस्तरणि च॥ वा० अग्नीधः शरणे रण भं च ॥ वा०॥ समिधामाधानेषेण्यण ॥ 
120. After a word in the 6th case in construction, an affix (IV. 1. 13 &c) comes, in the sense of this is his'. 
The five universals अण &c. (IV, I. 83) and the affixes घ&c. (IV. 2.93) come in this sense. Thus उपगोरिम् = औषगवम्, 'of Upagu'. कापटवम्, राष्ट्रियम्, अवारपाराणं ॥ The affixes, however, do not come, when the word governed by the possessive case, is अनन्तर &c. Thus देवदत्तस्यानन्तरम् ॥ In short the thing possessed must be property, village, kingdom or men. 
Vart:-The verb वह takes तु (तण and तृच्) and अण् preceded by an इद् As, सवोढः स्वं-सांवहित्रम् ॥ 
Vart :--The affix र comes after अग्नीधः, in the sense of house', and the base gets the designation of भ| As अग्नीध्रम् ॥ The word अग्नीध being treated as a Bha and not as a Pada, the ध is not changed to a (VIII. 2. 39). 
Vart :-The affix 'shenyan' comes after समिधा, in the sense of placing. Thus सामिधेन्यो मन्त्र: 'the verses (recited while) placing the fuel on fire', सामिधेनी (IV. I. 41) ऋक् ॥ 
रथावत् ॥ १२१॥ पदानि ॥ रथातू-यत् ॥ वृतिः ॥ रथशब्दाद्यत् प्रत्ययो भवति तस्येदमित्येतस्मिन्विषये। अणोपवादः ॥ वार्तिकम् ॥ रथसीताहले यो थावधावति तदन्तविधिरुपसंख्यायते ॥ 
121. The affix यत् comes after रथ, in the sense of this is his.' 
This debars अण्॥ Thus रथस्ये = रथ्यम 'belonging to the chariot-i.e. wheel or the axle.' The word 723 is confined to describe the parts of chariot. This rule applies also to compounds ending with रथ, as, परमरथ्यम, उत्तमरथ्यम because of the Vartika रथसीताहले यो विधी, after रथ, सीता and हल in applying the affix 27 there is tadanta-vidhi. 
पत्रपूर्वाद ॥ १२२॥ पदानि ॥ पत्रपूर्वात-अञ्॥ वृत्तिः ।। पत्रपूर्वाद्रथशब्दाइञ् प्रत्ययो भवति तस्यदमित्येतास्मन् विषये ॥ 
122. When preceded by a word denoting 'a draught animal', y takes the affix is in the sense of this is his." 
This debars यत् ।। Thus आश्वरथ चनं the wheel of a horse-cart.'औष्टरथम् ॥ गाभार्थ ।। 
The word ut means that by which any one goes' or a draught-animal, like camel. It is formed by the affix ga (III. 2. 182). URE • GOVEA 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
सत्यमेव जयते 
BK.INCH. III. $ 126.] 
तस्थेदम् बुम्॥ 
793 
पत्राध्वर्युपरिषदश्च ॥ १२३॥ पदानि ॥ पत्र-अध्वर्यु-परिषदः, च ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ पत्रं वाहनं तहाचिनः प्रातिपदिकादध्वर्युपरिषच्छब्दाभ्यां चामत्ययो भवति तस्येदमित्येतस्मि विषये, ऽणोपवादः ।। 
बार्तिकम् ।। पनाहाये॥ 
123. After a word denoting a draught-animal, and after the words 'adhvaryu' and 'parishad, the affix अ is added. 
This debars अण || The पत्र means वाहन | When the sense is that of a thing to be carried, then is added to a word denoting 'a draught-animal.' Thus अश्वस्यहम् वहनीयम् = आश्वम् a load to be or suited for being, carried by horse. So also औष्ट्रम् , गादभम् ॥ So also आध्वर्यवम् and पारिषतम् ।। 
हलसीराद्वक् ॥ १२४ ॥ पदानि ॥ हल-सीरातू-ठक् ॥ वृत्तिः ।। हलसीरशब्दाभ्यां ठक् प्रत्ययो भवति तस्येदमित्यस्मिन्विषयेऽणोपवादः ॥ 
124. The affix ठक comes in the sense of this is his,' after the words 'hala' and 'sîra.' 
Thus हलस्येदम् = हालिकम्, सैरिकम् ।। द्वन्द्वान् वैरमैथुनिकयोः ॥ १२५॥ पदानि ॥ द्वन्द्वात्-वुन-वैर-मैथुनिकयोः ॥ वृनिः॥ इन्द्रसंज्ञका वुन् प्रत्ययो भवति तस्येदमित्येतस्मिन्विषये, वैरमैथुनिकयोः प्रत्ययार्थविशेषणयोः । अणोपवादः॥ 
वार्तिकम् ॥ वैरे देवासुरादिभ्यः प्रतिषेधो वक्तव्यः॥ 
125. The affix at comes in the sense of this is his', after Dvandva compounds of words denoting mutual enmity', or 'matrimonial relationship 
This debars अणू and छ। Thus of 'enmity' बाभ्रव्यशालङ्कायनिका, काकोलू किका॥ Similarly of married couples as, अनिभरद्वाजिका, कुत्सकशिकिका ॥ 
The Dvandva compounds of words denoting natural enemies will be singular neuter by II. 4. 9. Their secondary derivatives, however, are feminine. 
Vart :-Prohibition must be stated of the word देवासुर &c. As देवासरम् ।। राक्षोऽसुरम् वैरम् ॥ 
गोत्रेचरणादवञ् ॥१२६॥ पदानि ॥ गोत्र-चरणातू-बुज॥ वृत्तिः ॥ गोत्रवाचिभ्यश्वरणवाचिभ्य प्रातिपदिकम्यो वुञ्प्रत्ययो भवति तस्येदमित्येतस्मिन्विषये, ऽणोपवारः।। 
126. The affix it comes, in the sense of this is his', after the words denoting Family-names or names of Vedic Schools. 
This debas अण as well छ| Thus gotra:--ग्लोचकायनकम, औपगवकम् ॥ According to Patanjali, the word " which ordinarly means Vedic School, 
URE 
GOVER 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MAINISTRY ON 
ENT OF INDIA 
That STO II 
[ BK. IV. CH.III. $127 
जसरकार 
means here duties or doctrines (dharma), and traditions (âmnaya). Thus trai & STIFTTT ST=The 'the dharma-Sutras or the tradition belonging to the school of Kathas'. So also atara, 1977, cercano 
FTTEGROEST H U 1881 l gefa II FIT-TE-Tung-375-47*T Fai, su 11 
fe: il enfey steaereffa aquastare gl i agricot Teqür Hafa मित्येतस्मिन् विषये। पूर्वस्य बुनो ऽपवादः ॥ IF I OTETT & II 
127. The affix sur comes in the sense of this is his', after a Patronymic word ending with the affix T, TU or TT, the words so formed expressing a multitude, a mark or a sign. 
The word jy means 'congregation'. The word nor and should be distinguished. por means a mark which is the property of that person and forms a distinguishing feature of that person, as faut learning' is a Fut of the clan of Bidas, the Bidas being famous for learning. The word og is a mark which shows that the thing so marked is the property of another : as a mark on a cow showing to what person or clan that cow belongs. The at though occurring in a person or thing does not belong to that person or thing, as the mark of a cow does not belong to the cow, but the fort is a mark which belongs to the person or thing wherein it is found. 
This sátra debars got of the last aphorism. 
Vårt :-The word om 'a cow-pen', should also be read along with era &c. Thus the words so formed denote four things (1) congregation, (2) mark (3) sign (4) a hamlet or cowpen. This being so, the rule of mutual correspondence according to order of enumeration (I. 3. 10) does not apply. 
Thus Epp (IV. 1. 104)- : 'a congregation, or mark or sign or a hamlet of the Bidas'. q era (IV. 1 105) 772 +Stop=rår: (VI. 4. 148, 151) "a congregation, or a mark, or a sign or a hamlet belonging to the Gârgyas ? 
L (IV. 1. 95) +79T = erem: (VI. 4. 148) 'a congregation &c of the Dakshis? 
The or of spor could not serve the purpose of Vriddhi here, for all the words to which this affix is added, have Vriddhi by virtue of the affixes et, upst or far in which they end. The sT would have served the purpose as well, so far as Vriddhi is concerned, but ToT is used to show that the feminine is formed by h (IV. 1. 15), Thus arril It further prevents gaar in compounds (VI. 3. 39), as, ore fautsertrag: i, e. fararthanarcot ap for ar garfer au 
TURE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY ON 
NT OF INDIA 
: BERV.CH. III. S. 130] 
तस्येदम-ज्य ॥ 
कृति मंत्रालय 
भारत सरकार 
शाकलाद्वा ॥ १२८॥ पदानि ॥ शाकलात्, वा ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ शाकलशब्दात्संघादिषु प्रत्ययार्थविशेषणेषु वाणप्रत्ययो भवति तस्येदमित्येतस्मिन्विषये । वुमो पवादः ॥ 
128. The affix su optionally comes, in the sense of this is his congregation, mark, sign or hamlet, after the word शाकल॥ 
This debars बुञ्॥ Thus शाकलेन प्रोक्तमधीयते - शाकला: (IV. 3. 1OI and IV. 2. 64), शाकलानाम् संघः = शाकलः or शाकलकः (IV. 3. 126) meaning 'a congregation, &c of the students of the science revealed by Sakala.' 
छन्दोगौथिकयाशिकबड्चनटायः ॥ १२९ ॥ पदानि ॥ छन्दोग-औथिक याशिक- 
बच-नटात, ज्य: ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ संघाल्यो निवृत्ताः, सामान्येन विधानम् । छन्दोगादिभ्यः शब्देन्योज्या प्रत्ययो भवति तस्येदमित्ये तस्मिन्विषये। बुमणोरपवादः ॥ 
A 129. The affix set comes in the sense of this is his Law or Tradition,' after the words 'chhandoga, aukthika,' 
yâjnika,'bahvricha' and 'nata.' 
The anuvšitti of ry &c ceases. The se debars shot and roll The phrase चरणाधमानाययोः from sutra IV. 3. 126 is understood here and applies even to the word नटः ॥ 
Thus छन्दोगानां धर्मो वा ऽऽ मनायो वा छान्दोग्यम् 'the Law or Tradition peculiar to the Chhandoga.' So also औथिक्यम, याज्ञिक्यम्, बाहवृच्यम् and नाव्यम् ।। 
Not having this sense we have : छान्दोगं कुलम् 'the family of Chhandoga.' न दण्डमाणवान्तवासिषु॥१३०॥ पदानि ॥न, दण्ड-माणव, अन्तवासिषु॥ वतिः ॥ दण्डप्रधाना माणवा दण्डमाणवाः, अन्तेवासिनः शिष्या, स्तेष्वभिधेयेषु बुध् प्रत्ययो न भवति ॥ 
130. The affix gsr is not used after a Family-name, when it denotes a 'beginner pupil', and ' a boarder pupil.' 
ER The word दण्डमाणवाः means a little naughty boy (माणव), the only means of instilling knowledge in whom is the rod (खण्ड), or whose principal sign of 'studentship is the danda' and nothing intrnisic. i. e. amere beginner. The न is changed to ण in माणय by IV. I. I6rkarika, अन्तवासिनः are pupils or boarders who live in their teacher's house. The word 'gotra' is understood here. Thus OTETT: "the junior or the senior pupils of Dakshi'Art: So also ftraher अण्डमाणवा अन्तवासिनोवा ।। 
रैवतिकादिभ्यश्छः ॥ १३१॥ पदानि ॥ रैवतिकादिश्यः, छः॥ वृत्तिः ॥रैवतिकारिभ्यः प्रत्ययो भवति तस्येदमित्येतस्मिविषये ॥ 
TURE - GO 
OVERNMENT 
ev OF CULTUA 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
तस्य विकारः ॥ 
BK. IV. CH. III. S.134 
मिालय .भा 
भारत सरकार 
131. The affix 5 comes in the sense of 'this is his', after the words farão &c. 
All these words end with Gotra affixes, and require est (IV. 3. 126), this ordains छ' instead. Thus रैवतिकीयः, स्वापिशीयः &c. 
परेवतिक, 2 स्वापिशि, 3 सैमवृद्धि, 4 गौरग्रीवि (गौरग्रीव), 5 औदमेधि (औदमयि), 6 औद वापि (औदवाहि), 7 बेजवापि. 
कौपिजलहास्तिपदादण ॥ १३२॥ पदानि ॥ कौपिजल-हास्तिपदात्-अण ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ कौपिज्जलहास्तिपत्शब्दाभ्यामण प्रत्ययो भवति तस्येदमित्येतस्मिन्विषये । गोत्रवुमोपवादः ॥ 
132. The affix STU comes in the sense of this is his', after the words kaupinjala' and 'hastipada'. 
This debars बुध् (IV. 3. 126). Thus कौपिज्जला, हात्तिपरः ॥ This satra is really a Vârtika. 
आथर्वणिकस्येकलोपश्च ॥१३३॥ आथर्वणिकस्य, इकलोपः, च ॥ बत्तिः ॥ अणित्येव । आथर्वणिकशब्दारण प्रत्ययो भवति तत्सन्नियोगेन चेकलोपः, तस्येदमित्येतस्मिम्वि बथे । चरणोपवादः ॥ 
133. The affix आण comes, in the sense of this is his', after the word “âtharvanika', and the penultimate 'ika' is elided. 
This debars qभ (IV. 3: 126). Thus आथर्वणिकस्यायम् = आथर्वणो धर्म आम्ना zirent "the Atharvana i. e. the Law or the Tradition of the Atharvanikas". The phrase चरणात धर्माम्नाययोः is understood here. This sutra is also a vartika, 
तस्य विकारः॥१३४॥ पदानि । तस्य, विकारः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ तस्येति षष्ठीसमर्थाधिकार इत्येतस्मिन्विषये यथाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति । 
134. An affix (IV. 1. 83 &c) comes after a word in the sixth case in construction, in the sense of 'a modification thereof'. 
The word rasite means the change of condition of the original. The word 7, though its aunivritti could have been supplied from the previous satras, has been repeated here, in order to show that the governing force of a (IV.2.92) does not extend further. The affixes taught, therefore, under शेष (IV.2.92&c). such as घ,ख &c. have not the sense of तस्य विकार ।। 
No affix has been tanght here in this sútra: the general affix stor (IV. I. 83) therefore will come in this sense, as well as the affixes to be taught hereafter. To give an example under this satra, we must take such a word which is not governed or provided for, by the subsequent satras, That is the 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
VERNMENT OF 
OF INDIA 
| BK. IV.CH, III. $. 136 
aralarragat:--ATUT 11 
49.1 
word must not denote a living animal for to it 37 (IV. 3. 154) applies; it must have udâţta on the first syllable, for an anudâttâdi will have 97 (IV. 3. 140); it must not have a Vriddhi vowel st, Ê, or sit in the first syllable, to which 
€ (IV. 3. 144) applies; and it must not be a word specifically mentioned in any one of the following aphorisms. Thus it applies to the words 375 and HEAT formed by ATT (Uņ IV. 146, 145) and to grant formed by faon (V.4. 39) which are âdyudatta owing to fara accent. Thus szai felirt: =STEHT: !! The fa is sometimes elided. (VI. 4. 144 Vârt) As syr: II So also FHT: and arraian: it 
अवयवे च प्राण्योषधिवृक्षेभ्यः ॥ १३५॥ पदानि ॥ अवयवे, च, प्राणी-ओषधि TEHT: वृत्तिः ॥ प्राण्योषधिवक्षवाचिभ्यः शब्वेभ्यः षष्ठीसमर्थेभ्यो ऽवयवे यथाविहितं प्रत्ययो भवति चकारादि ETT TII 
135. An affix comes after a word denoting an animal, a herb and a tree, in sixth case in construction, in the sense of this is its part', (as well as this is its modifica tion'). 
By the words in the sútra, the phrase a fart: is also read into the sûtra. 
Thus fata FahSTTTT atria: (IV.3.154)# So also rTT:, aller: 'a modification, product or part of a peacock &c-viz a fan &c.' So also sirarer: as, fáa 'product of Murva i. e. ashes or the stalk of Murva'. So also get, as, préri meaning "the stalk or the ashes of Karira tree". 
In the subsequent sutras, both the words Fahrt and stay have governing force. But after words which denote non-animals, non-plants or non trees, the affixes have only the sense of fagre il This is a rather unique case of double anuvritti, not co-extensive in every respect, 
बिल्वादिभ्यो ऽण् ॥१३६॥ पदानि ।। बिल्वादिभ्यः, अण| वृत्तिः ॥ बिल्व इत्वेवमादिभ्यो ऽण प्रत्ययो भवति विकारावयवयोरर्थयोः । यथायोगममयदोरपवादः । 
136. The affix for comes in the sense of its mo dification or its part, after the words fe &c. 
ad u Thus ara: 'the modification or part of Bilwa.' The word traat: occurs in this list. It would have taken 'an' by the next sätra also: its inclusion in the class of Bilwadi is for the sake of prevent ing the application of g to this word. 
1 Farez, 2 ste, 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 757,8 , 9 ayat. 10 agreft 11 area: 12 , 13 zért 
GOVERNMENT 
TURE - GO 
V OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
कात धान्य 
तस्यविकारावयवयोः--भम् ॥ 
[ BK. IV. CH III. . 
. 
सयभारत 
जसरकार 
कोपधाच ॥ १३७॥ पदानि ॥ क, उपधात्-च (अण)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ ककारोपधायातिपरिकादण् प्रत्ययो भबति यथायोगं विकारावयवयोरर्थयोः। अञोपवायः ।। 
137. After a word having was penultimate, the affix stu comes, in the sense of modification or a part, or both, as appropriate. 
This debars अञ्. Thus तऊ तार्कवम्, तित्तिडीक, तैत्तिडीकं माण्डूकम्, दारूकम् माधूकम् ।। The word तितिडीक &c have acute on the middle (Phit Su. II. 16), 
अपुजतुनोः धुक् ॥ १३८ ॥ पदानि ॥ त्रपु-जतुनोः-पुक् ॥ वृत्तिः ।। त्रपुजतुशब्दाभ्यामण् प्रत्ययो भवति विकारे,तत्सन्नियोगेन तयोःषुगागमो भवति।ओरञोपवादः ।। 
138. The affix zu with the augment got comes in the sense of its modification,' after the words 'trapun' and 
jatun'. 
This debars अ (IV. 3. 139). As, पुणो विकारः = पापुषम् ; जातुषम् “ modi fication of tin and lac.' In these words denoting non-organic beings, the sense of अवयव is not denoted by the affix. 
ओर ॥१३९॥ पदानि ॥ ओ:-अञ्॥ तिः॥ उवर्णान्तात्मातिपदिकादम् प्रत्ययो भवति विकारावयवयोरर्थयो, रणोपवादः॥ 
139. The affix to comes after a word ending in short 3, in the sense of 'modification or part,' (provided that the word has not grave accent on the first syllable). 
Thus देवदारवम्, भाद्वारबम् ॥ The words देवदारु and भरदार are ady-udatta owing to Phit Su. II. 14 (पीतवानाम्-the trees denoting soft timber trees have acute on the first). 
अनुदात्तादेश्च ॥ १४०॥ पदानि ॥ अनुदात्तादेः, च (अ)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ अनुदात्तादः प्रातिपदिकादम् प्रत्ययो भवाति विकारावयवथोरर्थयो, रणोपवादः ॥ 
140. The affix अ comes in the sense of modi fication or part', after a word having anudatta accent on the first syllable. 
This debars अण् ॥ Thus हाधित्यम्, कापित्थम, माहित्थम् ॥ The word बंधिस्थम is an upapada-samasa of re+ Fe, the a being changed to ; and it is finally acute by कनुत्तरपद प्रकृतिखर ।। 
पलाशादिभ्यो वा ॥ १४१॥ पदानि ॥ पलाशादिश्यः-चा (अ)| शिः॥पलावारिभ्यः प्रातिपदिकम्यो वा अप्रत्ययो भवति विकारावषयोरर्थयोः ॥ 
P ya 
URE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
Bk. IV CH. HI. S. 1431 
विकारावयवयोः--मयद ।। 
141. The affix अञ् comes optionally in the sense of 'modification or part', after the words gotat &c. 
Thus पॉलाशम् or पालाशम् so also खाँदिरम् or खादिरम्, यौवासम् or यावासम् ।। 
This sûtra is an example of prapta and aprâpta vibhâsha. The words पलाश, खदिर, शिंशपा and स्यन्दन being gravely accented on the first syllable, the affix 97 was obligatory by the last aphorism. This makes it optional, and is prâpta-vibhasha. In the case of others it is aprâpta- vibhâsha. 
1 पलाश, 2 खदिर, 3 शिशपा, 4 स्यन्दन (स्पन्दन), 5 पूलाक", 6 करीर, 7 शिरीष, 8 यवास, 9 विकडूत. 
शम्याष्ट्रल ॥ १४२॥ पदानि ॥ शम्याः -लम् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ शमीशब्दाद् दलञ् प्रत्ययो भवति विकारावयवयोरर्थयोः । अमोपवादः ॥ 
142. The affix or comes in the sense of its modification or part', after the word शमी. 
This debars अझ ॥ Thus शामीलं भस्म, शामीली बुक (IV. 1.60). मयडैतयोर्भाषायामभक्ष्याच्छादनयोः ॥ १४३॥ पदानि ॥ मयट्-वा-एतयोः, भा षायाम, अभक्ष्य-आच्छादनयोः॥ वृत्तिः॥प्रकृतिमात्राहा मयत् प्रत्ययो भवति भक्ष्याच्छादनवर्जितयोर्विकारावयवधोरर्थयोर्भाषायां विषये बथायथं प्रत्ययेषु प्राप्तेषु ।।। 
143. The affix मयट comes optionally after any base, in those two meanings of product and part, in secular language, when neither food nor clothing is spoken of. 
Thus अइममयम् or आइमनम् (IV. 3. 134)' मूर्वामयं or मौर्यम् (IV. 3. 135). 
Why do we say team'in secular language'? Witness area: argitar यूपः स्यात् ।। 
Why do we say when neither food nor clothing is spoken of '? Observe मोहः सप: 'a soup made of kidney beans'. कापासम् आच्छादनम् ।। 
Why the word matt: 'in those two meanings' is used in the sđtra, when by context, the words feet and 19t were to be read into the stra? Its use indicates that the special affixes, such as taught in IV. 3. 135, 136 &c 
natakednisobv Thus कपोतमयम् or कापीतम् (IV.3.135), लोहमयम् or लौहम् ॥ 
नित्यं वृद्धशरादिभ्यः ॥ १४४॥ पदानि ॥ नित्यम्, वृद्ध-शरादिभ्यः (मय)॥ तिः ॥ भाषायामभक्ष्याच्छादनयोरित्यय । वृद्धे यः प्रातिपदिक यः शराविभ्यशाभक्ष्याच्छादनयोर्विकारावय पार्भाषायां विषये निली मयट प्रत्ययो भवति । 
TURE - Go. 
OF CULTUA 
MINISTRY 
CRNMENT OF A 
OF INDIA 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
सत्यमेव जयते 
विकारावयवयोः-मयट् ॥ 
[ BK, IV. CH. III. S. 184 
मालय भारत 
तसरकार 
144. The affix मयट् comes in the sense of its pro duct or part, when neither food nor clothing is spoken of, in variably after Vriddha words, and after TT &c. 
Thus after Vriddha-आम्रमयम्, शालमयम्, शाकमयम् ॥ After शरादि words : बारमयम्, हर्भमथम्, मृन्मयम् ॥ 
Why do we use the word fact: 'invariably' in the sûtra, when by the mere fact of making a separate sutra, the affix would be obligatory.? The affix a, according to Patanjali comes invariably after words of one syllable. That is done by using the word नित्य in the sutra. Thus, वड्म यम्, सदमयम्, वाङमयम् ।। 
1 शर, 2 दर्भ, 3 मृत, 4 कुटी. 5 तण, 6 सोम, 7 बल्वज (वल्वज). गोश्च पुरीषे ॥ १४५॥ पदानि ॥ गोः, च-पुरीषे ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ गोशब्दात्पुरीषे ऽभिधेये मयद् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
145. affix मयट comes after the word गो in the sense of its dung.' 
| Thus गोमयम् 'cow dung'. Dung' is neither a modification nor a part of cow. Therefore this separate sútra for 11 Why do we say meaning its dung'? Observe Tat – milk. The affix g here comes in the sense of product or part. (IV. 3. 160), though strictly speaking 'milk' also is not an Havayava' or a vikara' of गो॥ 
पिष्टाच॥ १४६॥ पदानि ॥ पिष्टातू-च॥ वृतिः ॥ पिष्टशब्दान्नित्यं मयट् प्रत्ययो भवति तस्य विकार इत्येतस्मिन्विषये, ऽणोपवावः । 
146. The affix मयट invariably comes in the sense of its product or part, after the word पिष्ट॥ 
This debars अण्॥ Thus पिष्टमयं भस्म ॥ Otherwise अण, as पैष्टी सुरा in the sense of तस्येवम् ।। 
संज्ञायां कन् ॥ १४७॥ पदानि॥संज्ञायां-कन् । वृश्चिः। पिष्टशब्शकन् प्रत्ययो भवति विकारे संज्ञायां विषये । मयटोपवादः।। 
2147. The affix कनू comes in the sense of product, after the word foe, the whole word being a Name. 
This debars मयट | As पिष्टकः ।। बीहेः पुरोडाशे ॥१४८॥ पदानि ॥ वीहे:-पुरोडाशे (मयट्)॥ तिः ।। बाहिशब्दान्मय प्रत्ययो भवति पुरोडाशे विकारे। बिल्वाद्यणोपवायः॥ 
148. The affix मयट comes after the word बीहि in the sense of a Purodasa.' 
GOVERNMENT 
TURE - Gou 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY ON 
NT OF INDIA 
SI 
Y Bk. TV, CH. III. S 102] 
विकारावयवयोः-मयद् ॥ 
लिय. भारत 
This debars अणु (IV. 3. 136). Thus ब्रीहिमयः पुरोडाशः 'a sacred cake made of barley.' Otherwise त्रैहम् ॥ 
असंज्ञायां तिलयवाभ्याम् ॥१४९॥ पदानि ॥ असंज्ञायाम, तिल-यवाभ्याम् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ तिलयवशब्दाभ्यामसंज्ञाविषये मयत् प्रत्ययो भवति विकारावयवयोरर्थयोः । 
149. The affix मयद comes in the sense of its pro duct or part,' after the words tila' and 'yava'--the whole not being a name. 
Thus तिलमयम्, यवमयम, ॥Why do we say असज्ञायाम "it not being a Namer" Observe तैलम् ‘oil,' यावकः formed with कन. (यावादिभ्यः कन् V. 4. 29) 
द्वयचश्छन्दसि ॥१५०॥ पदानि ॥ द्वयचः-छन्दसि (मयट्)॥ वृत्तिः । यचः प्रातिपदिकाच् छन्दास विषये मयत् प्रत्ययो भवति विकागवयवयोरर्थयोः।। 
150. In the Chhandas, after a dissyllabic word, the affix que comes in the sense of its product or part. 
This ordains fue in the sacred literature also, secular literature being dealt with in IV. 3143. Thus पर्णमयः, दर्भमयः, शरमयः in the following यस्य पर्णमयी जहूर्भवति, दर्भमयम् वासो भवति, शरमयम बर्हि भवति ॥ 
नोत्त्वबर्द्धबिल्वात् ॥ १५१॥ पदानि ।। न-उत्वत्-वर्द्ध-बिल्वात् (मय)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ उत्त्वतः प्रातिपदिकाब बिल्वशब्दाभ्यां च मयत् प्रत्ययो न भवति ।। 
151. The affix मयट does not come in the Chhandas after the dissyllabic words, having a short vowel 3 in them, nor after the words 'vardhra' and 'bilwa.' 
Thus मौज्ज शिक्यम् from मुज्ज by अण् ॥ गात चक्रम्, वाी बालप्रथिता भवाति, बेल्वो ब्रह्मवर्चसकामेन कार्यः ।। 
The word slet means 'having 57 or short u (I. 1.70)' The rule does not apply to words containing long ऊ, as भूममयान्यभ्राणि ॥ The वत् in उत्वत् shows that the rule applies not only to words ending in , but also to words having 3. Had at not been used, the tadanta-vidhi would require the application of the rule to words ending in , but not to those which had in any other part of their form. So that the prohibition applies to वेणु also, as वैणवी यष्टिः (IV. 3. 136). 
The word मज्ज isady-udatta by तृणधान्याना (Phit II. A and therefore it takes the universal अण (IV. 3. 134). The word गमत् is formed by the affix उ plus the augment मट् (मारुतिः, मोमुच Un 1. 94 and 95), and is finally acute, and therefore it takes 37 by IV. 3. 140, and forms are This word has 
PURE - GO 
GOVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
AINISTRY OF 
NT OF INDIA 
प्रकृति मंत्रान्त 
विकारावयषयोः--अम् ॥ 
[BK. IV. CH. IIT Sto 
"भारत सरकार 
acute on the final also, as तस्या एतं गार्मत चरं निर्वयेत् ॥ The word पर्व is ady udatta by Phit II. 19. and therefore takes 7, the feminine being formed by गप् (IV. I. I5). 
तालादिभ्योण् ॥ १५२॥ पदानि ॥ तालादिश्यः, अण् ।। वृत्तिः ॥ तालादिभ्यः प्रातिपदिकेभ्यो ऽण् प्रत्ययो भवति विकारावयवयोरर्थयोः । मयडादीनामपवादः ॥ 
152. The affix sur comes in the sense of its pro duct or part', after the words tâla &c'. 
This debars मयद &c. Thus तालं धनुः, बाहिणम् , ऐन्द्रालिशम् ॥ 
1 तालाद्धनुषि, 2 बाहिण, इन्द्रालिश, 4 इन्द्रादृश, 5 इन्द्रायुध, 6 चय (चाप, वर्ग), 7 इथा माक,पीयूक्षा. 
जातरूपेभ्यः परिमाणे ॥ १५३ ॥ पदानि ॥ जातरूपेभ्यः-परिमाणे (अ) ॥ वृत्तिः ।। जातरूपं सुवर्णम् । बहुवचननिर्देशान्तबाचिनः सर्वे गृह्यन्ते । जातरूपवाचिभ्यः प्रातिपरिक यो उणू प्रत्ययो भवति परिमाणे विकारे । मयडाहीनामपवादः ॥ 
153. The affix अण् comes after a word denoting | 'gold', when the sense is a weight or measure. 
The word strany means 'gold'. It is used in the plural in the satra, indicating that all words synonymous with gold are to be taken. 
This debars मय &c. Thus हाटको निष्कः, हाटकं कार्षापणम् , जातरूपम्, ताप मीयम् ।। 
Why do we say ' meaning a measure'. Observe यष्टिरिय हाटकमयी ।। प्राणिरजतादिभ्यो ऽञ् ॥ १५४॥ प्राणि-रजतादिभ्यः-अञ्॥ वृतिः॥ माणिवाचिभ्यः प्रातिपदिके यो रजतादिभ्यश्वाम् प्रत्ययो भवति विकारावयवयोरर्थयोः । अणादी मामपवादः ॥ 
2 154. The affix अञ् comes in the sense of its pro duct or part', after words expressing living beings, and after रजत&c. 
This debars aror &c. The affix at has been ordained to come after those words that have anudatta in the beginning. This sútra applies to words other than those having anudatta in the beginning, 
Thus:-कापोतम् , मायरम, सैलिरम् ; राजतम् , सैसम् । लौहम् , &c. In the class रजतादि those words like रजत, कण्टकार &c, which have anudatta on the beginning and would have taken अम् by IV. 3. 140, have been enumerated to prevent the application of a to them. 
रजत, 2 सीस, 3 लोह, 4 उतम्बर, नीप (नीच, नील), 6 मारु, 7 रोहीतक (रोहितक), 8 वि भीतक, पीतवार (वापीत राह), 10 सालारु, II विकल्टक, 12 कष्टकार, TURE - GO 
OVERNMENT 
GY OF CULTUA 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
III. S156] 
विकारावयवयोः अत्र ।। 
सदन 
• संस्कृति मंत्र 
मंत्रालय 
भारत सरकार 
जितश्च तत्प्रत्ययात् ॥ १५५॥ पदानि ॥ जितः-च-तत्-प्रत्ययात् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ अजित्येव । तदिति विकारावयवयोरर्थयोः प्रत्यवमर्शः । नियोविकारावयवमत्ययस्तरन्तात्मातिप विकार प्रत्ययो भवति विकारावयवयोरेव । मयटोपवादः ॥ 
155. The affix stat comes in the sense of its pro duct or part', after a word which ends with an affix having an indicatory such affix denoting 'its product or part'. 
The affixes having indicatory 57 denoting product or part, are sti? (IV. 3. 139), दलम् (IV. 3. 142), अम् (IV. 3. 154) बुञ् (IV. 3. 157), डर (IV. 3. 159), अर, थम् (IV.5. 168). When a tertiary derivative of a word ending with these affixes is to be made, the affix अ is used. Thus दैवतरवस्य विकारोऽवयवो वा-देवशरवम् ; so also साधित्थम्, पालाशम्, शामीलम, कापोत औष्ट्रकम, ऐणेयम, कांस्यम् , पारशवम् ॥ 
Why do we say भितः? Witness बैल्वमयं. Here नयद is used after बेल्व and the derivative is formed by अण् of IV. 3. 136. So also बैदमयम् ।। 
क्रीतवत्परिमाणात् ।। १५६ ॥ पदानि ॥ क्रीतवतू-परिमाणात् ।। वृत्तिः ॥ प्राग्वतेष्ठमित्यत आरभ्य क्रीतार्थ ये प्रत्ययाः परिमाणादिहितास्ते विकारेऽतिविश्यन्ते । परिमाणात क्रीत इव प्रत्यया भवन्ति तस्य विकार इत्येतस्मिन्विषये । अणादीनामपवादः ॥ 
156. After a word denoting 'a measure', the affix expressing 'its product or part' is the same as the affix having the sense of purchased. 
The affixes taught in V. 1. 18 &c are the affixes that have the force of क्रीत (V. I. 37). These affixes come also after words denoting measure (V. I. I9). The same affixes are employed to denote विकार, after words denoting परिमाण ॥ This debars अण् &c. Thus निष्कन क्रीतम् = नैष्किकम् (V. 1. 20); It will denote vikara also, निष्कस्य विकारः = नैष्किक: formed by ठक (V.I. 20). As शतेनक्रीतं = दात्यं or शतिकम् (V. I. 21), so शतस्य विकास = शल्यः or शतिकः by उन् and थत् (V.I. 21), सहोणक्रीतं-साहस्रम् (V. I. 27) so सहलस्य विकार:= साहल (V. I. 27 by भण)। 
The word 9 in aflata indicates that the similarity is complete throughout. Thus Sätra V. 1. 28 also applies, by which the affix is elided. Asहिसहस्रा: or द्विसाहनः (V. 1. 200 हिनिष्क: or हिनष्किकः॥ The word परिमाण in this sutra includes संख्या the numerals' also ; while the technical word परिमाण does not include sankhya. See IV. 1. 22 and V. 1.19 &c. The similarity extends even to the elision of affix (V. I. 28) as, द्विसहलः, हिसाहसः &c. 
उष्ट्रावुझ ॥ १५७ ॥ पदानि ।। उष्ट्रात, बुञ्ज । हानः ॥ उष्ट्राब्दातून प्रत्ययो भवति विकारावयवयोरर्थयोशाग्यशोषवारः।। 
26 
MRE 
GOVE 
GOVERNMEN 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY O 
NT OF INDIA 
सस्कृति मंत्राम 
फले लुक॥ 
[ BK, IV.CH. HIINS 162 
157. The affix est comes in the sense of its product or part', after the word 'ushtra. 
This debars अम् (IV. 3. I54). उष्ट्रस्य विकारोऽवयवो वा औष्ट्रकः ।। उमोर्णयोर्वा ॥ १५८ ॥ पदानि ॥ उमा-ऊर्णयोः-वा (बुञ)॥ वृतिः ।। उमाशब्दादूर्णाशब्दाच वा बुर प्रत्ययो भवति विकारावयवयोरर्थयोः । 
158. The affix at comes optionally in the sense of its product or part, after the words उमा and ऊर्णा. 
HThus औममू or औमकम्, और्णम् or और्णकम् ।। एण्या ढम् ॥ १५९ ॥ पदानि ॥ एण्याः , ढन् । वृत्तिः ॥ एणीशब्दाद ढम् प्रत्ययो भवति विकारावयवयोरर्थयोः । प्राण्यञोपवादः ॥ 
159. The affix at comes in the sense of 'its pro duct or part,' after the feminine word guft il 
Thus ऐणेयं मांसस् 'the flesh of a female black deer. But एणस्य मांसम् = ऐ णम् 'the flesh of a male deer', formed by अज्ञ।। 
गोपयसोर्यत् ॥१६०॥ पदानि ॥ गो-पयसोः, यत् ॥ वृत्तिः॥ गोपयः शब्दाभ्यां यत् प्रत्ययो भवति विकारावयवयोरर्थयोः ॥ 
160. The affix यत् comes in the sense of its pro duct or part, after the words गो and पयस् । 
Thus गव्यम् (VI. I. 79), पयस्थम् ॥ द्रोश्च ॥ १६१॥ पदानि ॥ द्रोः, च ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ शब्वायत्प्रत्ययो भवति विकारावयवयोरर्थयोः । भोरशोपवादः ॥ 
161. The affix it comes in the sense of its pro duct or part after the word 'dru.' 
This debars अ (IV.3.139). Thus छ+यत द्रव्यम् (VI. I.79), भाने वयः ॥ १६२॥ पदानि ॥ माने-वयः ।। वृत्तिः ॥ शब्यान्माने विकारविशेषे वयः प्रत्ययो भवति । यतोपवादः ।। 
162. The affix वय comes in the sense of its pro duct,' after the word 'dru,' the word meaning a measure.' 
This debars यत् ॥ As दुवयम् a measure.' फले लुक् ॥१६३॥ पदानि ॥ फले, लुक्॥ वृत्तिः। विकारययवयोरुपन्नस्य फले साहिशेष विवक्षिते लग् भवति॥ 
URE - GOVE. 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY ON 
NT OF INDIA 
BK.TV.CH. III. S166.] 
मंत्रालयमा 
163. The affix denoting 'product or part' is elided by luk, when such product or part is a fruit.'. 
Thus आमलक्याः फलं = आमलकी+मयद् लुक्= आमलकं 'the fruit of Myrobolans.' So also वदरम् ॥ The fruit is a “ product" as well as a "part" of a fruit-bearing tree. 
प्लक्षादिभ्योए ॥ १६४॥ पदानि ॥ प्लक्षादिभ्यः-अण् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ फलइत्येव । प्लक्षादिभ्यः प्रातिपदिकेभ्यः फले विकारावयवत्वेन विवक्षिते ऽण प्रत्ययो भवति । भ भोपवादः॥ 
164. The affix stu comes in the sense of its pro duct or part, it being a fruit,' after the word 'plaksha &c.' 
This debars अञ् ॥ Thus प्लाक्षम्, नैथयोधम् ॥ 
1 प्लक्ष, 2 न्यग्रोध, 3 अश्वत्थ, 4 इङ्गुदी, 5 शिग्रु, 6 रुरु, 7 कक्षतु (कर्कन्धु, कर्कन्तुकतु) 8 बृहती.॥ 
जम्बा वा ॥ १६५॥ पदानि ॥ जम्बा:-वा (आण)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ फलइत्येव । जम्बूशब्दात्फले ऽभिधेये वाऽण् प्रत्ययो भवति । अञोपवादः॥ 
165. The affix अण comes optionally in denotinga fruit, after the word jambû'. 
This debars अम्॥ Thus जम्बु+अ = जाम्बवं as जाम्बवानि फलानि ॥ But when the general affix अम् is added, it is elided by IV. 3. 163. As जम्यू+भम् (IV. 3. 139)= जम्बु, as जम्बूनि फलानि (VI.4.8)॥ 
लुप च ॥ १६६ ॥ पदानि ॥ लुप-च।। वृत्तिः॥ वेत्येव ! जम्बाः फलेभिधये प्रत्ययस्य वा लुब् भवति । युक्तबहावे विशेषः॥ वान्तिकम् ।। लुप्पकरणे फलपाकयुषामुपसंख्यानम् ॥ बार्तिकम् ।। पुष्पमूलेषु बहुलम् ।। 
166. The affix denoting fruit is optionally elided by lup after the word jambu'. 
The word ar is understood here. The difference between luk' and 'lup' elision is that in the case of 'lup', there is concordance of gender and number. See sutra I. 2.5I. Thus जम्ब+अमूलुप - जम्बू, as, जम्बः फलं ।। Optionally जम्मा फल - जम्ब फलं, or जाम्बवं ।। 
Vårt :-There is lup-elision of the affix denoting fruit, after the words expressing deciduous plants which wither away as soon as the fruit ripens: Thus ब्रीहिः-त्रीहयः, थवाः, माषाः, मुझाः, तिलाः॥ 
Vart :-Diversely so when the affix denotes flowers and roots. मासकायां पुष्पं-मलिका, नवमल्लिका जातिः; so also विदार्या मूलं-विवारी अशी 
MRE 
OF CULTURA 
VERNMENT 
MINISTRY 
IT OF INDIA 
सत्यमेव जयते 
• संस्कृति मंत्रा 
छ--यत् लक॥ 
[ BK, AV. CH. III. 1681 
त सरकार 
In the above example there is concordance. By using diversely', this con cordance does not sometime take place. As पाटलानि पुष्पाणि, शालानि मूलानि ॥ So करम्बं पुष्प, अशोकम्, करवीरम्, बैलानि फलानि &c. 
हरीतक्यादिश्यश्च ॥१६७॥ पदानि ॥ हरीतक्यादिभ्यः-च॥ वृत्तिः ॥ हरीतकी इत्येवमादिभ्यः शब्दभ्यः फले प्रत्ययस्य लुब् भवति । लुकिमाते लुपो विधाने युक्तवडावे बीप्रत्ययश्रवणे च विशषः ॥ 
167. The affix denoting fruit' is elided by लुप, after the words Harîtaki' &c. 
Here also there is concordance (I. 2. 51), As हरीतक्याः फलं = हरीतकी instead of हरीतक॥ So also कोशातकी, नखरजनी | According to Patanjali, the concordance is with regard to gender only, the number will be governed by the sense, as हरीतकी फलं, हरीतक्यः फलानि ॥ 
हरीतकी, 2 कोशातकी, 3 नखरजनी (नखररजनी) 4शष्कण्डी (शाकण्डी) 5 दाडी, 6 होडी, 7 श्वेतपाकी, 8 अर्जुनपाकी, 9 द्राक्षा, 10 काला, 11 वाक्षा (ध्वाक्षा) 12 गभीका (गर्गरिका) 13 कण्टकारिका, 14 पिप्पली*, 15 चिञ्चा* (चिम्पा), 16 शेफालिका, 17 दडी.॥" 
कंसीयपरशव्ययोर्यजनौ लुक् च ।। १६८॥ पदानि ॥ कंसीय-परशव्ययोः, यत्र अनौ, लुक्-च॥ वृत्तिः ॥ प्राक्क्रीताच्छेन कंसीयः । उगवादिन्यो यत् । परशव्यः । केसीयपरशव्यशब्दाभ्यां यथासंख्य य अनौ प्रत्ययो भवतस्तस्य विकार इत्येतस्मिन्विषय, तत्संनियोगेन च कंसीयपरशव्यथोलुंग भवति ॥ 
168. The affixes यज, and अञ् come respectively in the sense of its product', after the words 'kansîya' and 'paras avya', and there is luk-elision (of the 3 and te affixes of those words). 
The word कंसीयः is formed by छ (V.I.I), and परशव्य is formed by adding थन् (V.1.2). These affixes छ and यत् are elided when the afffixes यञ् and अञ् are added. Thus कंसीय+यम्-कंस+यञ् = कांस्यः so also पारशव from परशव्य thus परशच्य+अभू-पर+अ =पारशवः ॥ 
The words a mean there shall be elision'. Of what? Certainly not of the primitive, for ek is never applied to the elision of a base, but of an affix only (I. I.61). It follows therefore that the elision is of the affixes of कंसीय and परक्षाव्य ॥ Now these words have two affixes, thus. To the root कम् is added first the Unâdi affix # (UņIII.62)and we get ae; next to aid is added छ. So also to पर+शु is added the affix 3 (Un I. 33) and we have परशु, to which is then added ya and we have 475753 The question arises, should these affixes स and T be also elided. The answer is ino'. The word प्रातिपदिकात of IV. I. I is understood is this sutra; so the clision will take place of those affixes orly 
GOVERNMENT 
OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
ENT OF INDIA 
* BARCH III S 168. ] 
5-aa 
! 
भारत सरकार 
which follow a pratipadika. But a and 3 are added to a Dhatu and not a pratipadika, hence those affixes are saved from the operation of 6 11 
The word grato being gravely accented on the first (VI. 1. 185) would have taken by IV. 3. 140. The present sûtra teaches the elision only of its affix at, stą being already obtained. 
Q. The final 3 of effet and career will be elided by VI. 4. 148 before these taddhita affixes, and after such elision, the final y will be elided by VI. 4. 150, where is then the necessity of this sûtra ? 
A. The final y will not be elided, because VI. 4. 150 will apply only then, when an affix beginning with long s follows, which is not the case here. 
GOVERNMENT 
TURE - GOL 
OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
सावमालयन 
भारत सरकार 
ओ३म् । अथ चतुर्थाध्यायस्य चतुर्थः पादः । 
BOOK FOURTH. CHAPTER FOURTH. 
प्राग्वहतेष्ठ ॥१॥ पदानि ॥ प्राक्-वहतेः, ठक्॥ वृचिः ॥ तहति रथयुगप्रासङ्गमिति वक्ष्यति । प्रागतस्मावति संशध्दनाद्यानर्थाननुक्रमिष्यामः, एक प्रत्य यस्तेश्वधिकृतो वेदितव्यः॥ 
वार्चिकम् ।। उप्रकरणे तदाहोते माशब्दादिभ्य उपसंख्यानम् ॥ वा०॥ माहोमभूतादिन्यः ॥ वा०॥ पृच्छतौ सुस्नातादिभ्यः ॥ वा० ॥ गच्छतो परदारादिभ्यः ॥ 
1. The affix 3 comes as a governing affix, in the senses enumerated hereafter up to sútra IV. 4. 76. 
This is an adhikāra sutra. The affix ठक् bears rule from this one for ward to the sutra तबहति &c. Thus in the next sutra it is said ; “After a word in the third case in construction, in the sense of "who plays, digs, con quers, or is conquered." Now this sûtra is incomplete. We must read the word into it. Thus seefeate = simfera: " who plays with aksha-a dicer.' अक्ष+उक्आक्षिका (VII. 3. 50), 
Vart:-After the words माशर &c, the affix thak' comes in the sense he said that.' Thus #72187 gegre = frafsch: who says 'don't make noise,' prete शाहिदकः।। This is the case of an affix added to a sentence. 
Vart:-So also after प्रभूत &c in the sense 'he said': as प्रभूतमाह-प्राभूतिकः, creffen: u These are examples of affixes added to an adverb. 
Vart:--So also after सुस्नात &c in the sense 'he asks, as, सस्नातं पृच्छति सोस्लातिक “Who asks, have you bathed well". साखजिकर, सौखशायनिकः ।। 
Vart :-So also after परदारा &c in the sense of "he goes to, or commits adultery with': as परदारान् गच्छति पारवारिकः, गौरुलाल्पिक || The word सल्प here refers to“wife". 
तेन दीव्यति खनति जयति जितम् ॥२॥ पदानि ।। तेन-दीव्यति-खनति-जयति 
सन्धिः ॥ नेति सतीयासमथाई वीव्यति खनति जयति जितमित्येतेपर्थेषु उक प्रत्ययो भवति । 
URE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
संस्कृति मंत्राल 
BK. IV. Ch. IV. $5.] 
atra-TI 
809 
. 
2. The affix 5 comes after a word in the third case in construction, in the sense of, 'he plays ', 'he digs', 'he conquers' or he is conquered'. 
Thus shercare = STIETET: 'who plays with dice-a dicer'. ETTE: 10 Spazit Tafa = Strin, Greene:, Sertaa = 3TITTER:, tetista = FTOT I ETT 11 
Though the rule is couched in universal terms, yet the affix does not come after every instrumental case. Thus Taal will not give rise to any affix, for the word elfe: is not found in usage having this sense. So also siteul era gives rise to no affix. Though the verbs 'divyati' &c, are in the 3rd Person Present Tense, Singular number, the derivative is not limited by these conditions. Thus stiera and ITT: are also valid, and so also भक्षैरदीव्यत् will give also आक्षिका; so also आक्षिकस्त्वम् आक्षकोऽहम् ॥ Though ina sentence the verb is generally the principal word (@herter), here owing to the Taddhita affix, the instrument is taken as the principal. 
CHO CH || 3 | Net || Ca (35) वृत्तिः ॥ तेनेति तृतीयासमर्थात्संस्कृतमित्येतस्मिन्नर्थे उप्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
3. The affix e comes after a word in the third case in construction, in the sense of 'refined thereby'. 
The word ikonoa means 'refining or enhancing the quality of a thing Thus un FRED=green 'refined or made tasteful by curd'. So also create ATTE 11 
The separation of this satra from the last, is for sake of the next sätra, in which the anuvșitti of rand only runs, 
yaTTEIGU 11 8 11 TETIG Il Face-OTTET-TU II वृणिः ॥ कुलत्थशब्दारककारोपधाच्छब्दाच प्रातिपदिकावण् प्रत्ययो भवति संस्कृतमित्येतस्मिन्विषये। उकोपवावः ।। 
4. Ofter the word 'kulattha', and after words hav ing a penultimate , the affix stor is added in the sense of 
refined or prepared therewith '. 
This debars ठक|| Thus कोलत्यम् , तेतिडीकम्, राईभकम्, the two latter bed ing examples of words ending in anul 
acalla Il tua ni asra (Ta) II वृभिः ॥तेनेति तृतीयासमर्थात् तरतीत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे ठक् प्रत्ययो भवति।। 
5. The affix 3 comes after a word in the third case in construction, in the sense of he crosses +1 over the waters'. 
RE-GOVEA 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
भाकपात्-ठल ॥ 
[ BK. IV. CH. INSI 
Thus काण्डप्लवेनतरति=काण्डप्लविका, भोडुपिकः 'who crosses with a raft'. गोपुच्छाञ्॥६॥ पदानि ॥ गोपुच्छातू-ठञ् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ गोपुच्छशब्दाद् ठमत्ययो भवति तरतीत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे ठकोपवादः ।। 
6. The affix ii comes after the word 'gopuchchha', in the sense of he crosses thereby'. 
The difference between 8 and is in the accent. Thus Huragan II नौयचष्ठन् ॥ ७॥ पदानि ॥ नौ-द्वयचः-ठन् । वृत्तिः ॥ नौशब्दात् यनश्च प्रातिपदिकाद् छन् प्रत्ययो भवति तरतीत्येतस्मिन्नर्थेः । ठकोपवादः ॥ Karilla आकत्पिपादर्भस्त्रादिभ्यः कतीदसूत्राच। 
अवासथाकिशराः पितः षडेते ठगधिकारे॥ 
7. The affix 37 comes after the word oft and after bases having two syllables, in the sense of 'he crosses there 
with'. 
This debars 9! Thus grai atra=Arfa: 'a sailor'. So also after dissyllabic words : as, घटिका, प्लविकः, बाहुकः ।। 
The sin ga in the sâtra is not part of the affix, but comes through sandhi rules. The feminine of : being Tart II In fact the indicatory occurs in these søtras only IV.4. 9, 10, 18, 53 and 74, in this book. 
चरति ॥८॥ पदानि ॥ चरति (ठक्)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ तेनेति तृतीयासमर्थाचरतीत्येतस्मिन्नथे ठक् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
8. After a word in the third case in construction, comes the affix ge in the sense of he goes on by means thereof'. 
The word चरति means both to go on and to eat. Thus यध्रा चरति-दाधिकः who gets on, with being fed on curd, EITECT : 'who travels by an eliphant'. काकटिकः॥ 
आकर्षान्छल ॥९॥ पदानि ॥ आकर्षात-ठल्॥ वृतिः॥आकर्षशब्दात् ष्ल प्रत्ययो भवति चरतीत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे । कोपाहः ॥ 
9. The affix ge comes in the sense of 'he goes on, by means there of after the word rakarsha.. 
This debars . The is for accent (VI. 1. 193). The of here is a part of the affix, contrary to what it was in sûtra 7 ante. To remove the doubt where is the part of an affix, and where it is not, the following mre monic verse has been composed : "आकर्षित पादमस्त्रातिभ्यः कुसीबसूशाच्च, भावसथा 
COVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
ENT OF INDIA 
सत्चमटजयत 
HER. IV, CH, IV.. 12] 
तेन चरति--म् ।। 
किक्षरावःषितः षडेते ठगधिकारे॥ In the six Sutras 9, IO, I6, 31,74, and53, the affix es have indicatory sh.' Here er being st, the feminine is formed by ste (IV. 1.41). Thus आकर्षेण चरति आकर्षिक आकर्षिकी॥ भाकर्ष is a touch-stone by which gold is tested. 
पदिश्यः ष्ठन् ॥ १०॥ पदानि ॥ पदिश्यः, छन् । दृभिः ॥ पर्प इत्येवमादिन्यः ष्ठत् प्रत्ययो भवाति चरतीत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे । कोपवादः॥ 
10. The affix ठनू comes, in the sense of the goes on, by means there of' after the words 'parpa' &c. 
This debars उक; the n of छन् is for accent (VI. I. 197), and s for डीए (IV. I. 4I). Thus पर्पिकः पिपिकी, अश्विक अश्विकी ॥ परिका परिकी॥ The पार is changed to पद before this affix (VI. 3.52). 
1 पर्प, 2 भश्व, 3 अश्वस्थ, 4 स्थ, 5 जाल, 6 न्यास, 7 व्याल, 8 पादः पच॥ श्वगणाञ्च ॥११॥ पदानि ॥ श्वगणात, उज्, च॥ वृत्तिः ॥ वगणशब्वा प्रत्ययो भवति, चकारात् ष्ठन्, चरतीत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे ठकोपवादः॥ 
11. The affix ठञ् as well as the affix छन्, comes after the word श्वगण, in the sense of the goes on by means there of' 
This debars s| Thus श्वगणेन चरति = वागणिक: 'who lives by dogs'. 1. वागणिकी। ठन्, गणिकः श्विगणिका॥ 
The form carotfuten: is evolved by the breach of rule VII. 3. 4. Thus or +31 11 Here by VII. 2. 117, requires Vriddhi of er oft II But rule VII. 3. 4 says that instead of Vriddhi, the letter off comes before a in the case of sy &c. The proper form, therefore, would have been giratoren: # The irre gularity is, however, explained by saying that the prohibition contained in VII. 3. 8 which applies when a is followed by , applies also to follow ed by उम्॥ In fact, the rule VII. 3.4does not apply, whenever the word श्वन् is followed by an affix beginning with the letter | 
वेतनादिभ्यो जीवति ॥ १२॥ पदानि ॥ वेतनादिश्यः, जीवति ॥ वृत्तिः॥ तेनेति तृतीयासमर्थ यो वेतनादिन्यः शब्दे यो जीवतित्येतस्मिन्नर्थ ठक् प्रत्ययो भवति। 
12. The affix a comes in the sense of he lives thereby', after the words 'vetana &c', being in the third case in construction. 
who lives upon wages-a menial servant In the case of the word wafug the affix applies to the compounds, as w to the wordsforming the compound, Thus धानुदाण्डका, धामुष्का, सण्डिका 
at 
URE 
GOVE 
GOVERNME 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
MENT OF IN 
OF INDIA 
CT BK. IV.CH. IV.S. Tod 
तेन हति-धन् ॥ 
1 वेतन, 2 वाहन (वाह ), 3 अर्धवाहन (अर्धवाह), 4 धनुर्दण्डः 5 जाल, 6 वेश (बेस), 7 उपवेश (उपवेष, उपवेस), 8 प्रेषण, 9 उपवस्ति ( उपस्ति ), 10 सुख, 11 शय्या, 12 शक्ति, 13 उपनि पद, 14 उपदेश, 15 स्फिज (स्फिज ), 16 पाई, 17 उपस्थ , 18 उपस्थान, 19 उपहस्त, 20 बज. ॥ 
वस्नक्रयविक्रयान् ॥ १३॥ पदानि ॥ वस्न, क्रय, विक्रयात्, ठन् । वृतिः ।। वस्त्रक्रयविक्रयशब्दाभ्यां तृतीयासमर्थान्यां उन् प्रत्ययो भवति जीवतीत्येतस्मिन्विषये । उकोपवादः।। 
13. The affix 5T comes in the sense of he lives thereby' after-the words 'vasna', 'kraya', and 'vikraya', being in the 3rd case in construction. 
This debars TF! Thus atita siara = arrini: 'who lives by hire--hire ling'. In the case of 7 and fake the affix is applied to the words separately, as well as to their compound. Thus क्रयविक्रयिकः, क्रयिकः, विक्रथिकः a trader', 
आयुधाच्छ च ॥ १४॥ पदानि ॥ आयुधातू, छ, च ॥ कृत्तिः ॥ आयुधशब्दाच्छप्रत्ययो भवति, चकाराच जीवतीत्येतस्मिन्विषये ।। 
14. The affix 3 as well as yr comes in the sense of he lives thereby', after the word “âyudha'. 
Thus आयुधेन जीवति = आयुधीयः (formed by छ), or आयुधिकः (by ठन्) 'a mercenary soldier'. 
हरत्युत्सङ्गादिभ्यः ॥१५॥ पदानि ॥ हरति, उत्सङ्गादिभ्यः ॥ वृत्तिः॥ तेनेत्येव । उत्सङ्गादि वस्ततीयासमर्थेभ्यो हरतीत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे ठक् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
15. The affix 75 comes in the sense of 'he con veys thereby', after the words utsanga &c. being in the third case in construction. 
The word etia means to take away to or cause to reach another place'. Thus TTEET : 'borne upon the hip! sirgim: "borne or transported on a raft'. 
1 उत्सङ्ग, 2 उडुप, 3 उत्पुत (उत्पत), 4 उत्पन्न , 5 उत्पुट, 6 पिटक,7पिटाक, 8 उडप. भस्त्रादिभ्यः ष्ठन् ॥ १६॥ पदानि ॥ भस्त्रादिभ्यः, छन् । वृत्तिः ।। भरत्येवमादिभ्यस्तृतीयासमर्थ यो हरतीत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे ष्ठन्प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
16. The affix yo comes, in the sense of he con veys", after the words bhastra &c' being in the third case in construction, 
Thus sur la = 6: "who conveys by means of a leathern bag, a carrier". The feminine will be we (IV. 1. 41). So crech: f. street u The URE • GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY O 
ENT OF INDIA 
'T BE IV. CH. IV. S. 19 
तेन निर्वृत्ते-ठक॥ 
सात मंत्रान 
मालय . भारत 
word te means a leathern bellows by which the iron is heated, or a leathern bag in which grain &c,. is carried. 
1 भस्वा, 2 भरट, 3 भरण (भारण), 4 शीर्षभार. 5 शीर्षेभार, 6 अंसभार, 7 अंसेभार.॥ विभाषा विवधवीवधात् ॥ १७॥ पदानि ॥ विभाषा, विवध, वीवधातू॥ वृत्तिः॥हरतीत्येव । विवधवीवधशब्दाभ्यां तृतीयासमर्थाभ्यां विभाषा ष्ठन् प्रत्ययो भवति॥ 
17. The affix get comes optionally in the sense of he conveys', after the words 'vivadha', and vîvadha', being in the third case in construction. 
In the alternative, the general affix zu will apply. Thus faran Bara =विवधिकः .विवधिकी; So also विधिक f. वीवधिकी | When the affix is ठक, we have वैवधिक: in both cases, the feminine being वैवधिकी॥ 
The word fequ and arqy are synomyms both meaning "a piece of wood carried on the shoulders to carry loads, on the road.' विवधिकः meaning 'a carrier of loads, a pedler'. The real sutra is विभाषा विवधातू, the Kasika has added are from a Vârtika. 
अणकुटिलिकायाः॥१८॥ पदानि ॥ अण, कुटिलिकायाः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ हरतीत्येव । कुटिलिकाशब्दात् तृतीयासमर्थादण् प्रत्ययो भवति हरतीत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे । 
-18. The affix अण comes, in the sense of he con veys', after the word screar in the third case in construction. 
Thus कुरिलिकया हरति मृगो व्याध = कौटिलिको मग: a deer which carries (or entices away) into crooked ways'or'a hunter who hunts by coming stealthily on his prey'. कुटिलिकया हरति अङ्गारान् = कौटिलिकः कारः 'a blacksmith,-who carries burning coals on an iron forge'. 
The word niech means 'crooked motion, and the iron-forge of the blacksmiths'. 
निवृत्ते ऽक्षयूतादिभ्यः ॥ १९॥ निवृत्ते, अक्ष, छूतादिभ्यः ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ तेनेत्येव । अक्षयूतादिभ्यस्तृतीयासमर्थेभ्यो निर्वृत्तइत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे ठक् प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
19. The affix ठक comes, in the sense of comple ted thereby' after the words 'akshadyllta &c', being in the third case in construction. 
(Thus अक्षयूतेन निर्वनम् = आक्षतिक वैरम् enmity-which was growing but has been completed by gambling. So जानुपहतिकम् ।। 
I अक्षत, 2 जानुप्रहत (प्रइत), 3 जयाप्रहत (प्रहूत), 4 जयाप्रहत*, 5 पावस्वेदन, 6 कण्टकमर्दन, 7 गतानुगत*, 8 गलागत, 9 यातोपयास, 10 अनुगत.॥ 
REGOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
NT OF INDIA 
तेन संसृष्टे-ठक्॥ 
[ BK, IV. CH IV. 1. 22. 
कृति मंत्रालय 
निय.भारत 
गरत सरकार 
वर्मनित्यम्॥२०॥ पदानि ॥ त्रे,मप, नित्यम्॥ बृत्तिः ॥ निवृत्तइत्येव, द्वितः क्विरित्ययं त्रिशब्दो गृह्यते । पन्तान्नित्यं मप् प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
20. The affix hg comes always after the words ending in the affix , the in sense of 'completed thereby', 
The नि here refers to the affix ktri' (III. 3. 88). Thus the root डुपच् takes it and forms ofera, which is not a complete word, but must take the augment मप, to form a full word. Thus पच्+किन+मए पक्तिमम् 'what is completed by being cooked'. So from डुवwe have व+किन+म = उम्निम (VI. I. I5): from डुकृर we have कृत्रिमम् ॥ 
The word fear in the sætra indicates that the affix ferat never comes singly by itself, all words ending in 'Ktri' are invariably followed by म also. In fact ay way be regarded as an invariable augment of the affix 'Ktri'. 
Vårt :-After a word ending in an affix denoting "condition', the affix इमए is added. Thus पाकेन निर्व- पाकिमम् (पच् + घम् III. 3. 181-इन), so त्यागिमम् , सेकिमम्, कुहिमम् ।। 
अपमित्ययाचिताभ्यां कक्कनौ ॥२१॥ पदानि ॥ अपमित्य-याचिताभ्याम, कम् 
वृत्तिः ॥ निर्वचइत्येव । अपमित्ययाचितशब्दाभ्यां यथासंख्यं का कन् इत्येतो प्रत्ययो भवतो, निर्वृत्तइत्ये. तस्मिन्नर्थे ।। 
21. The affixes kak' and 'kan 'come respective ly after the words 'apamitya' and 'yachita', when the sense is that of completion. 
Thus भापमित्यकम् ' debt', and याचितकम् 'a thing begged for use. The word अपमित्य is formed from the root मा with the prefix अप, and the suffix सवा (III. 4. 19). The Fat is changed to rely, and substituted for STT (VI. 4. 70). The word is an Indeclinable, and therefore the anuvritti of does not run here. 
संसृष्टे॥२२॥ पदानि ॥ संस्कृष्टे, ठक। निः ॥ तेनेत्येव । तृतीयासमर्थात्संसृष्टात्येतस्मिन्नर्थे ठक् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
22. The affix yon comes, after a word in the third case in construction, when the sense is ' mixed therewith.' 
The word is understood here. The word erge means unification, mixing &c. Thus ना संसृष्ट-वाधिकम् 'smeared wlth curds.' मारिधिकम्, शाईवेरिकम् पपलिकम्॥ The word 'sanskrtam' (IV.4.3) and sansrshtam ' should be distinguished. The former refers to a case where by the combination of two things, a something better is produced ; no such idea of bettering is to be found in संतृष्ट ।। 
GOVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY ON 
NT OF INDIA 
BPV.CH. IV. S. 27 ] 
वर्तते ॥ 
संस्कृति मंत्रान 
लिय भारत 
तसरकार 
चूर्णादिनिः ॥ २३ ॥ पदानि ॥ चूर्णत, इनिः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ चूर्णशब्दादिनिः प्रत्ययो भवति संसृष्टे । ठकोपवादः ।। 
23. The afix इनि comes after the word 'churna when the sense is 'mixed therewith.' ope This debars ठक् ॥ Thus चणे : संसृष्टा = चूर्णिनो ऽ पूपाः 'cakes sprinkled with powder.' चार्णनो धानाः ॥ 
लवणाल्लुक् ॥२४॥ पदानि ॥ लवणात, लुक्॥ वृत्तिः ॥ संसृष्टइत्यनेनोत्पन्नस्य उको लवणशब्दाल्लुग् भवति । 
24. The affix ठक meaning mixed therewith', is elided by luk, after the word lavana.' 
Thus लवणेन संशष्टः- लवणः ' mixed with salt.' as लवणः सूपः 'soup mixed with salt. So लवणं शाकं, लवणा यवगः (I. I. HI). The लूक elision takes place when the word gut is used as a noun, and not as an adjective. 
मुदगादण् ॥ २५॥ पदानि ॥ मुद्गात, आण ॥ वृतिः ॥ मुझशब्दावण प्रत्ययो भवति संसृष्टइत्येतस्मिन्विषये। ठकोपवादः ।। 
25. The affix अण comes after the word 'mudga,' when the sense is 'mixed therewith.' 
This debars ठक | Thus मौज ओदनः 'rice mixed with mudga-pulse.' मोमो बवागूः॥ 
व्यञ्जनैरुपसिक्ते ॥२६॥ पदानि ॥ व्यञ्जनैः, उपसिक्ते (ठ)। वृतिः ॥ तेनेत्येव । व्यञ्जनवाचिभ्यः प्रातिपदिके यस्तृतीयासमर्थेभ्य उपसिनाइत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे उक् प्रत्ययो भवति।। 
26. The affix ठक् comes, after a word denotinga condiment, being in the third case in construction, when the sense is 'sprinkled therewith.' 
Thus sधा उपसित-दाधिकम् 'sprinkled with curd, सौपिकम, खारिकम | Why do we say 'denoting a condiment? Observe उदकेनोपसिक्तं ओदनः ॥ 
ओजः सहोम्भसा वर्तते ॥ २७॥ पदानि ॥ ओजः, सहः, अम्भसा-वर्तते (उद)। सृत्तिः ॥ भोजसू सहस् अम्भस् इत्येतेभ्यस्तृतीयासमर्थेभ्यो वर्ततइत्यर्थे ठक् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
27. The affix e comes in the sense of 'it exists, after the words ojas, sahas,' and 'ambhas' being in the third case in construction. 
Thus भोजसा वर्तते औजसिकः शर: 'a hero' lit. possessed with energy. Soalso:- साहसिक: a thief.' आम्भासिकः a fish.' 
URE - GOVE 
GOVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
ENT OF INDIA 
यच्छति गर्थय॥ 
[RE. IV. CH. IASE 
सत्यमेव जयते 
ल सरकार 
तत्प्रत्यनुपूर्वमीपलोमकूलम् ॥२८॥ पदानि ॥ ततू, प्रति-अनु-पूर्वम, ईप-लोम 
सचिः॥ तदिति द्वितीया समर्थविभक्तिः। प्रति अन इत्येवंपूर्वेभ्य ईपलोमकूलशब्दे यो द्वितीयासमर्थेभ्यो ब तहत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे उक् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
28. The affix ठक comes, in the sense of it exists,' after ipa, loma, and kula,' preceded by 'anu' and 'prati,' the word being in the second case in construction. 
The word are shows that the words must be in the second case in cons truction. The verb gaat is intransitive, how can it take an object, and how can it be in construction with an objective case? The words in the accusative after the verb adà are not its objects, but are used as adverbs qualifying the sense of the verb, and adverbs are always put in the accusative case. Thus प्रतीपं वर्तते =प्रातीपिका (प्रतिगता आपो ऽस्मिन्, the आ changed to ई V. 4.74 and VI. 3.97) retrograde i. e. 'which is unfavourable. So आन्वीपिका "favorable.' प्रतिलोमिकः " inverse' आनुलोमकः 'direct.' पातिकूलिकः, आनुकूलिकः The tivo words प्रातीपिक and 
भान्वीपिक mean unfavourable' and 'favourable' respectively. 
परिमुखं च ॥ २९॥ पदानि ॥ परिमुखम, च (ठक्)॥ वृणिः॥ परिमुखशब्दाद् द्वितीयासमर्थावर्ततइत्यस्मिन्नर्थे ठक् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
29. The affix ठक् comes in the sense of it exists.' after the word 'parimukha,' being in the second case in con struction. 
Thus परिमुखं वर्तते-पारिमुखिकः being before the face, being near or pre sent'. 
The word in the sutra implies that the affix applies to other words also not mentioned. As पारिपाईिवकः ।। The word. परिमुख is an Avyayibhava compound (II. I. I2). If परि has the force of exclusion (I.4.88), then पारिमुखिकः will mean 'a servant who always avoids the face of his master FIAT बर्जयित्वा यः सेवको वर्तते," and if परि means all round, then the word will mean " a servant who is always in the presence of his master-थतः स्वामिनो मुख ततस्ततो वरीते" 
प्रयच्छति गद्यम् ॥ ३०॥ पदानि ॥ प्रयच्छति, गाम् ।। वृत्तिः॥ नशित द्वितीयासमर्थात्मयच्छत्तीत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे ठक् प्रत्ययो भवति, यत्तदवितीयासमर्थ गीचे सद्भवति ।। 
या। वृद्धवृधुषिभायो बक्तव्यः ।। 
30. The affix comes after a word in the second case in constrution, when the sense is 'he gives', the motive being mean. 
CURE - GOVE. 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY O 
NT OF INDIA 
BK. IV: CH. IV. 833] 
तरक्षात-ठक्॥ 
सालय भारत 
Thus fervi teegfa=rator: 'a usurer who gives for the sake of double' i, e, who charges cent per cent interest. The word got means restore 'for the 
sake of double'. Similarly EuroTCH: 11 
Vart: The word वृद्धि is changed to वृधषि before this affix. As, विं प्रयच्छति वाषिकः 'a usurer' 'who gives for the sake of increase' Or the word कृषि may be taken as a separate word synonymous with वृद्धि ।।। 
Why do we say गर्यम् 'with a mean motive? Observe दिगुणं प्रयच्छति अधर्मणः 'the debtor gives double'. 
कुसीददशैकादशात् ष्ठन्छचौ ॥ ३१॥ पदानि ॥ कुसीद, दश, एकादशात,ष्ठन् ठचौ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ प्रयच्छति गर्यमित्येव । कसीद वृद्धि, स्तदर्थ द्रव्यं कुसीदम् । एकादशार्था दशा, दशैकादशशब्देनो च्यन्ते । कुसीददशैकादशशब्दाभ्यां यथासंख्य छन् ष्ठज् इत्येतो प्रत्ययौ भवतः ॥ 
31. The affixes ga and ga come respectively after the words 'kusîda' and 'dasaikâdasa', when the sense is he gives for a mean motive'. 
The word aneirę means 'interest. The lending of ten (aa) on a condi tion that the borrower will pay eleven (एकादश) after a month is called दशैकादश This sátra debars 5* The difference between the two affixes g7 and yr is in the accent (VI. 1. 197 and 163). Thus enite +87= walaan: fem. spirent (VI. 1. 4I). So दशैकादशिकः fem की। 
उञ्छति॥३२॥ पदानि | उञ्छति॥ वृतिः ॥ तदिति द्वितीयासमर्थादञ्छतीत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे उक् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
32. The affix ठक comes, after a word in the se cond case in construction, when the sense is who gleans that'. 
Thus बदराण्युञ्छतिवादरिकः 'who picks up jujubes'. श्यामाकिका, काणिकः।। Topick up every grain (कण) fallen on the ground is called उञ्छ । 
रक्षति ॥३३॥ पदानि ॥ रक्षति॥ वृत्ति । तरिति द्वितीयासमर्थाद्रक्षतीत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे ठक् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
33. The affix ठक comes after a word in the second case in construction, when the sense is 'he aids or protects that'. 
Thus समाज रक्षति--सामाजिक aspectator', lit.who aids an assembly by his presence'. So also सांनिवेशिकः ।। 
IRE · GOVE 
VERNMENTO 
ay OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
T OF INDIA 
सत्यमेव जयते 
धावति-ठक्॥ 
[BK. IV. CH. IV. 36 
गीय भान 
भारत सरकार 
शब्ददरं करोति ॥ ३४॥ पदानि ॥ शब्द-दर्दुरम,करोति ॥ बान्तः ॥ तरिति द्वितीयासमर्थान्यां शब्दईरशब्दाभ्यां करोतीत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे ठक् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
34. The affix za comes after the words "Sabda' and - dardura', being in the second case in construction, when the sense is who makes a sound or a croaking.. 
Thus शब्दं करोति-शाब्दिकः 'who makes a sound i.e. a Grammarian, So greiter: 'who makes a croaking noise like a frog (dardura)'i. e. a potter. 
पक्षिमत्स्यमृगान्हन्ति ॥ ३५॥ पदानि ॥ पक्षि, मत्स्य, मृगान्, हन्ति (ठक्)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ तदित्येव । पक्ष्यादिभ्यो द्वितीयासमर्थेभ्यो हन्तीत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे ठक् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
35. The affix yo comes after the words in the second case in construction denoting birds, fishes, or wild beasts, when the sense is 'who kills that'. 
-Thus पक्षिणा इन्ति = पाक्षिकः a bird-killer'. The affix applies not only to the word-forms पक्षि &c, but to words denoting birds &c. (See I. I. 68). Therefore, we have forms शाकनिका, मायूरिका, तैत्तिरिकः ॥ So also with मत्स्य, as, मात्स्यिकः, मैनिकः, वाफरिका, शाकलिकः ॥ So also with मृगः, as, मार्गिकः, हारिणिकः, सीक रिका, सारङ्गिकः॥ 
परिपन्थञ्च तिष्ठति ॥ ३६॥ पदानि ॥ परिपन्थम्, च, तिष्ठति॥ वृत्तिः ॥ परिपन्य शब्दात्तदिति द्वितीयासमात्तिष्ठतीत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे ठक् प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
36. The affix e comes also in the sense of "who stays", after the word 'paripantham', the word being in the second case in construction, 
Thus परिपन्थं तिष्ठति =पारिपन्थिकः यः पन्यानं वर्जयित्वा तिष्ठति, यो वा पन्यानं व्याप्य rasta 'a thief' lit.“who stays at roads, a high way man". The in the satra indicates that the sense of a who kills of the last, is to be connected with this sutra by the conjunction and'. Thus परिपन्यं हन्ति = पारिपन्थिकः ॥ 
The phrase "being in the second case in construction' is understood in this satra, why has then the word gftratu been shown in the second case in the sutra, for it is a mere superfluity? No, it shows the secular form of the word. The word परिपन्य is synonymous with परिपय, the latter, however, having other senses also. 
माथोत्तरपदपदव्यनुपदं धावति ॥ ३७॥ पदानि ॥ माथ-उत्तरपद, पदवी, अनुप दम, धावति ॥ 
TURE • GO 
Y OF CULTUS 
MINISTRY 
WENT OF INDIA 
Br. IV. CH. IV. S. 40] 
ग्रहाति--ठक् ॥ 
वृत्तिः ।। माथशब्दोचरपरात्मातिपदिकात्पदवी अनुपद इत्येताभ्यां च धावतीत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे उक् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
37. The affix ठक comes, in the sense of "who runs”, after a word having are as its second term, and after the words padavî' and 'anupada'. 
Thus दण्डमार्थ धावति = दाण्डमाथिका 'who runs on a high way'. So also शोल्कमाथिकः ॥ Similarly पारविकः, आनपदिकः ॥ The word माथ means a way'. 
आक्रन्दाञ्च ॥ ३८॥ पदानि ॥ आक्रन्दात, ठ, च॥ वृत्तिः ॥ आक्रन्दन्त्येतस्मिन्नित्याक्रन्दो देशः । अथवा ऽऽक्रयतइत्याक्रन्द, आर्तायनमुच्यते । विशेषाभावा बयोरपि ग्रहणम् । माक्रन्दशब्दाचारिति द्वितीयासमर्थाद्धावतीत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे ठञ् प्रत्ययो भवति, चकारा द्वक् ॥ 
38. The affix gsy as well as a comes after the word 'âkranda', being in the second case in construction, in the sense of 'who runs'. 
The word 91 means 'a place where persons weep' e. g. a battle field. It also means 'weeping' 'invoking' &c. The difference between ठक and उज़ is in the accent. Thus आनन्द धावति=आक्रन्दिकः or आँऋन्दिकः, f. आक्रन्तिकी 'a person who runs to a place where cries of distress are heard'. 
पदोत्तरपदं गृह्णाति ॥ ३९ ॥ पदानि ॥ पद, उत्तरपदम्, गृह्णाति (उक्)। वृत्तिः ॥ पशब्द उत्तरपदं यस्य तस्मात्पतरात्तरपरशब्दात् तरिति द्वितीयासमर्थात्गृह्णातीत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे ठक प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
39. The affix ठक् comes in the sense of who takes', after a word having 'pada' as its second member, the word being in the second case in construction. 
Thus पूर्वपदं गहणाति-पौर्वपदिक, so also भीत्तरपतिकः ॥. The word उचरपद is used in order to prevent the application of the rule when ta is preceded by the affix बहु॥ 
प्रतिकण्ठार्थललामं च ॥४०॥ पदानि ॥प्रतिकण्ठ, अर्थ, ललामम, च॥ वृत्तिः ।। प्रतिकण्ठार्थललामशब्दे यस्तरिति द्वितीयासमर्थेभ्यो गृणातीत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे उच्च प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
40. The affix ठक comes in the sense of 'who takes' after the words pratikantha', "artha', and lalama' being in the second-case in construction. 
Thus प्रतिकण्ठ गहणाति-पातिकण्ठिकः॥ Soalso आर्थिकः, लालामिकः ॥ The word प्रतिकण्ठ here is an Avyayi-bhava meaning कण्ठं कण्ट प्रति, and not प्रतिगतः कण्ठप्रतिकण्ट, for to the latter no affix isadded. 
28 
URE • GOVE 
VERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
• MINISTRY O. 
T OF INDIA 
SI 
सस्कृति मंत्रान 
समवायान समवैति-ज्य॥ 
BK. IV. CH. IV.'.44.1 
निय भारत 
भारल सरकार 
धर्म चरति ॥४१॥ पदानि ॥ धर्ममू-चरति (ठक)॥ वृत्तिः॥ धर्मशब्दात्तदिति द्वितीयासमर्थाचरतीत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे ठक् प्रत्ययो भवति ।। वार्निकम् ॥ अधर्माचेति वक्तव्यम् ।। 
41. The affix ठक comes after the word - dharma', being in the second case in construction, in the sense of who practices that'. 
- Thus धर्मम् चरति=धार्मिकः " religious". So also आधर्मिकः “ irreligious, undutiful", by a Vartika. 
प्रतिपथमति ठश्च॥४२॥ पदानि ॥प्रतिपथ, एति.ठन-च॥ वृत्तिः ॥ प्रतिपयशब्दाद् द्वितीयासमर्थाद एतीत्यस्मिन्नर्थे उन् प्रत्ययो भवति, चकाराठ्ठ च ॥ 
42. The affix as well as a comes after the word 'prati-patham', in the second-case in construction, in the sense of who goes'. 
Thus प्रतिपथमेति-प्रेतिपथिक: or प्रातिपथिकः "who goes along the road " the ठक् causes Vriddhi (VII. 2. II8) whilst ठन् does not, 
समवायान् समवैति ॥४३॥ पदानि ॥ समवायान, समवैति (ठक)॥ वृत्तिः ।। समवायवाचिभ्यः शब्देभ्यस्तदिति द्वितीयासमर्थेभ्यः समवैतीत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे उक् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
43. The affix ठक comes after words in the second case in construction, denoting combination, in the sense of who assembles there'. 
The word are means "combination, collection &c'. The word समवायान् is in the plural number in the sutra, indicating that the svarupa-vidhi (I. 1.69) does not apply; the affix being applied not only to the word-form समवाय but to its synonyms also. समवैति means coming totgether. Thus समवा थान् समवति= सामवायिका 'who assembles in an assembly'. So also सामाजिक: सामू हिकः, सान्निवेशिकः॥ 
परिषदो ण्यः ॥४४॥ पदानि । परिषदः, ण्यः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ परिषदो ण्या प्रत्ययो भवति समवायान्समवतीत्येतस्मिन्विषये। ठकोपवादः ॥ 
44. The affix vy comes after the word parishad' in the sense of 'who assembles there', 
This debars उक्॥ Thus परिषदं समवेति = पारिषयः fone present in a council, an assessor, a councillor'. 
सेनाया घा॥४५॥ पदानि । सेनायाः, वा (ण्यः)॥ वृशिसेनाशवान वा व्यः प्रत्ययो भवति समवायान्समवेतीत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे ठकोपवावः ॥ 
PURE - GON 
GOVERNMEN 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
ENT OF INDIA 
SL 
I BETV CH. IV. S. 48 
तस्य धर्म्यम् ॥ 
मालय .भारत 
45. The affix ut comes optionally in the sense of who assembles there,' after the word senâ. 
This debars उक which comes in the alternative. Thus सेना समवैति = pa: or erraten: 'a soldier, a member of an army'. 
संज्ञायां ललाटकुक्कुट्यौ पश्यति ॥४६॥ पदानि॥ संज्ञायाम, ललाट, कुक्कुट्यो पश्यति (ठ)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ ललाटकुक्कुटीशनाम्यां तदिति द्वितीयासमर्थाभ्यां पश्यतीत्येतस्मिन्नर्थ उक् प्रत्ययो भवति संज्ञा यांविषये॥ 
46. The affix ठक comes in the sense of "who sees that,' after the words 'lalâta' and 'kukkutí', in second case in construction, the whole word being a Name. 
Thus ललाटं पश्यति = लालाटिकः ' a non-attentive servant' lit. 'who always looks at the fore-head of his master from a distance, keeps himself aloof, does not come near to perform any work.'. So also कौक्कुटिकः a religious mendic ant, a Bhikshu.' The space of ground over which a hen can fly without fall ing, is to be understood here by the word oont u In other words, a small space of ground, for hens cannot sustain their flight for a long distance. Therefore, owing to the smallness of space, the mendicant walks looking down over the ground, and hence he is called कौक्कटिकः ॥ The word also means a hypocrite 
with down-cast eyes.' 
तस्य धर्म्यम् ॥४७॥ पदानि ॥ तस्थ, धर्म्य (ठक्)। वृतिः ॥ तस्यति षष्ठीसमर्थात् धर्म्यमित्येतस्मिन्नर्थे उक् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
47. The affix 'ठक comes after a word in the sixth case in construction, in the sense of its usage'. 
The word means 'usual,' relating to custom? The word are shows the case of the word. Thus शुल्कशालाया धर्म्य = शौल्कशालिक 'the custom-house laws or usages. So also आकरिकम, आपणिकम्, गौल्मिकम् ॥ 
आण महिष्यादिभ्यः॥४८॥ पदानि ॥ अण-महिष्यादिभ्यः॥ इनिः ॥ महिषीत्येवमादिभ्यो ऽण प्रत्ययो भवति तस्य धर्म्यमित्येतस्मिविषये। उकोपवाहः ।। 
48. The affix su comes in the sense of its law,' after the word 'mahishi' &c. 
P This debars thak. Thus महिण्या धर्य = माहिषम् the usages of queens.' So पाजावतम् ॥ 
1 महिषी, 3 प्रजापति, प्रजावती, 4 मलेपिका, विलेपिका, 6 अनुलेपिका, 7 पुरोहित, गणिपाली, 9 अनुचारक (अनुवारक), 10 होत, 11 यजमान. 
GOVERNMENT 
URE 
GOVE 
OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
तस्कृति मंत्रान 
सदस्य पण्यम-ठक्॥ 
[ BK. IV. CHIVES.611 
मालय, भारत 
रत सरकार 
ऋतो ऽ ।। ४९॥ पदानि ॥ ऋतः, अञ् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥कारान्तात्मातिपदिकार प्रत्ययो भवाति तस्य धर्म्यमित्येतस्मिषये । ठकोपवादः ॥ वार्निकम् ॥ नराधेतिवक्तव्यम् ॥ वा०॥ विशसितुरिड्लोपश्च ॥ वा०॥ विभाजयितुर्णिलोपश्च ।। 
49. The affix अञ् comes in the sense of 'its. law, after a nominal-stem ending in ऋ॥ 
This debars उक्॥ Thus पातु धर्म्यम् = पौत्रम् the office of a Potri.' औझात्रम् Fthe office or duties of an Udgatri.' Padamanjari gives the example of होत्रम् = होतु धर्म्यम् under this sutra, though the word होतृ occurs in the list given in the preceding satra. The Hotri of the preceding sâtra means a Ritvik, here it means an invoker. 
HVart:-So also after the word नर : As नरस्य धया नारी॥ 
Vart :-So also after the word विशासित, the इद् affix being elided. Thus विशसित+अञ्= वैशस्त्रम् ॥ 
Vart:--So also after the word विभाजयित, its णि affix also being elided, Thus विभाजयित+अ = वैभाजित्रम् ॥ 
अवक्रयः॥५०॥ पदानि ॥ अव क्रयः (ठक)॥ वृनिः। तस्येत्येव । षष्ठीसमर्थाव्वक्रय इत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे ठक् प्रत्ययो भवति । अवक्रीणीत ऽनेनेत्यवक्रयः ।। 
50. The affix ठक comes in the sense of its tax,' after a word in the sixth case in construction. 
The word अवक्रय means 'Government-tax,' 'price, wages,' 'rent' &c, coming from the root भवक्री to purchase. Thus शुल्कशालाया अवक्रयः = शौल्कशालिकः So also आपणिकः, गौल्मिकः, आकरिकः ।। 
Are not धर्म्य (IV. 4.47) and अवकय the same? No. Dharmya is a legal due, and religious; while an 'avakraya' may be a tax exacted from a people by oppression, and so transgressing dharma. 
तदस्य पण्यम्॥५१॥ पदानि ॥ तद्, अस्य,पण्यम् ।। वृतिः ॥ तरिति प्रथमासमादस्योति षष्टवर्थे ठक प्रत्ययो भवति यत्तपथमासमर्थ पण्यं चेत्तद्भवति ॥ 
51. The afix ठक comes in the sense of this is whose saleable commodity,' after a word in the first case in construction denoting the thing to be sold. 
Thus अपूपाः पण्यं अस्य-आपूपिकः 'a cake-vendor.So also शाकुलिकः, मौकिक:&c. 
लवणाञ् ॥५२॥ पदानि ॥ लवणात, ठम् ।। वारीः ॥ लवणशध्दा प्रत्ययो भवति तदस्य पश्यमित्येतस्मिन् विषये। ठकोपवादः ॥ GOVERNMENT 
TURE • GO 
OF CULTUR 
WINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
BBCoO. CH. IV. 8.56] 
तदस्य शिल्पम्-अण् ॥ 
सत्यमेव जयते 
लिय .भारत 
(त सरकार 
52. The affix zar comes, in the sense of this is whose saleable commodity,' after the word "lavana.' 
This debars ठक, the difference being in accent. Thus लवणं पण्यमस्य लावणिकः 'a salt-vendor.' 
किशरादिभ्य छन्।॥५३॥ पदानि ॥ किशरादिभ्यः, छन् । वृत्तिः।। किशर इत्येवमादिभ्यः ष्ठन् प्रत्ययो भवति तदस्य पण्यमित्येतस्मिन्विषये। कोपवादः ॥ 
53. The affix it comes in the sense of this is whose saleable commodity,' after the words 'kisara' &c. 
This debars ठक् ॥ The word किशर &c all denote perfumes. Thus किशराः पण्यमस्य-किशरिकः f किशरिकी (IV. I 41), नरदिकः निरदिकी। 
1 किसर (किशर), 2 नरद, 3 नलद, 4 स्थागल*, 5 तगर, 6 गुग्गुलु, 7 उशीर, 8 हरिद्रा, 9 ह. रिद, 10 पर्णी*, 11 सुमङ्गल, 12 हरिद्रायणी. 
शलालुनो ऽन्यतरस्याम् ॥ ५४॥ पदानि ॥शलालुनः, अन्यतरस्याम्॥ वृत्तिः ।। शलालुशब्दावन्यतरस्यांष्ठन् प्रत्ययो भवति तवस्य पण्यमित्येतद्विषये। कोपवादः । पक्षेसोपि भवति॥ 
54. The affix ष्ठन् comes optionally, in the sense of this is whose saleable commodity' after the word 'salalun'. 
This debars of which comes in the alternative. This is a kind of sweet scent. Thus शलाल पण्यमस्यशैलालका शिलालुकी॥ In the alternative 
with ठक्, शालालुक; f. शालालुकी। 
शिल्पम् ॥५५॥ पदानि ॥ शिल्पम् (ठक)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ ततिति प्रथमासमादस्योति षष्ठपर्थे ठक् प्रत्ययो भवति यत्तप्रथमासमर्थ शिल्पं चेचजनात॥ 
55. The affix 3ch comes in the sense of this is whose Art,' after a word denoting Art, in the first case in construction. 
Thus fare ferChef=hreren: "a drummer", "an expert in playing on mridanga drum". So also पाणविकः, वैणिकः ॥ 
मड्डुकझर्झरादणन्यतरस्याम् ॥५६॥ पदानि । मड्डुक, झर्झरात्, अण, अन्यत रस्याम् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ मड्डुकझझरशब्दाभ्यामन्यतरस्यामण प्रत्ययो भवति तदस्य शिल्पमित्येतस्मिन्विषये। ठकोपवादः ।। 
56. The affix sur comes optionally in the sense of this is whose Art', after the words madduka', and 
jharjhara'. 
This debars ठक् which comes in the alternative. Thus मडकवादनं शिल्पा मेस्य माड्डुक: Or माड्डाककः, SO झाझरः and झाझरिकः ।। 
.GOVERNME 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
तदस्य मतिः--उक्॥ 
[ BK. IV. CH, IV. SA6d 
सत्यमेव जयते 
प्रहरणम् ॥ ५७॥ पदानि ॥ प्रहरणम् (ठक) वृत्तिः ॥ तवत्येत्येव । तदिति प्रथमासमीदस्येति षष्ठमर्थे ठक् प्रत्ययो भवति यत्तत्प्रथनासमर्थ प्रहरणचे तवति॥ 
57. The affix ठक् comes in the sense of this is whose weapon', after a word denoting 'a weapon', and being in the 1st case in construction. 
Thus असिः प्रहरणमस्थ = आसिकः 'a swordsman'. So मासिका, चाक्रिकः, धानुष्कः॥ 
परश्वधाञ् च ॥५८॥ पदानि ॥ परश्वधात्, ठ, च ॥ वृचिः ।। परश्वधशब्दात् प्रत्ययो भवति, चकारात् उक्॥ 
58. The affix za as well as to comes in the sense of "this is whose weapon", after the word परश्वध ॥ 
This affix son is added by 7, the difference being in accent. Thus पारश्वधिकः or पारश्वधिकः ॥ परश्वध means 'an axe'. 
शक्तियष्ट्योरीकक् ॥ ५९॥ पदानि ॥ शक्ति-यष्ट्योः , ईकम् ।। वृत्तिः । शक्तियष्टिशब्हाभ्यामीका प्रत्ययो भवति तदस्य प्रहरणमित्येतस्मिन्विषये । ठकोपवादः ।। 
59. The affix ईकक comes in the sense of "this is whose weapon", after the words 'sakti' and 'yashti'. 
This debars उक्॥ Thus शक्ति प्रहरणमस्थ = शाक्तीकः, So also याष्टीकः ॥ आस्तिनास्तिदिष्टं मतिः ।।६०॥ पदानि ॥ अस्तिनास्ति-दिष्टम्-मतिः (ठक्) । वृत्तिः ॥ तवस्येत्येव । तदिति प्रधमासमर्थेभ्यो ऽस्ति नास्ति दिष्ट इत्येतेभ्यः शब्दे यो ऽस्येति षष्ठपर्थे ठक प्रत्ययो भवति यत्तत्वथमासमर्थ मतिश्चेत्तद्भवति ।। 
60. The affix ठक comes in the sense of this is whose belief', after the words 'asti', nasti and 'dishta'. 
Thus streTATATEU = strega: 'who believes that It is' i. e. a here after. मास्तिकः whose belief is that there is no Here after', an athiest. दैष्टिकः 'whose belief is that it is fate', a fatalist, fe = 'fate'. 
The affix does not apply in the sense of belief in general, but to a par ticular sort of belief. Thus परलोकोऽस्ति इति यस्य मतिरस्ति स आस्तिकः, an Astika is he who believes that the Hereafter is. Contrary to him is a Trener: who does not believe in a Hereafter. A person who believes what is demonstrated by proof, and nothing else, may also be called दैष्टिकः 'a positivist'. These various other senses are to be found from dictionary and general literature. 
URE - GOVE. 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
AT OF INDIA 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
CH. IV. 863] तदस्य कमाध्ययनवृत्तम्--ठक् ।। 
शीलम् ॥ ६१॥ पदानि ॥ शीलम् (ठक)॥ वृतिः ॥ तदस्येत्येव । तदिति प्रथमासमादस्यति षष्ठपणे ठक् प्रत्ययो भवति यत्तताथमासमर्थ शील चे. वति ॥ 
61. The affix e comes in the sense of whose habit is this', after a word in the first case in construction. 
Thus अपूपभक्षणं शीलमस्य=आपूपिकः 'one whose habit is to eat cakes'. Similarly शाकलिका, मौतककः ॥ The act of eating, and its habit are qualities understood in the sense of the affix. 
छन्त्रादिभ्यो णः ॥ ६२॥ पदानि ॥ छन्नादिभ्यः, णः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ छत्र इत्येवमादिभ्यः प्रातिपदिकेभ्यो णः प्रत्ययो भवति तदस्य शीलमित्येतस्मिन्विषयेोठकोपवादः॥ 
62. The affix o comes in the sense of whose habit is this', after the words chhatra &c'. 
This debars ठक् ॥ Thus छत्रं शीलमस्य = छात्रः 'a pupil', lit, whose habit is to cover (chhadan) the defects of his master'. The word fert occurs in the list. It must always be prefixed by some upasarga ; thus आस्था, संस्था, अवस्था &c. 
According to Patanjali छात्र means a pupil, because, गुरु छत्रवत् गुरुणा शिष्य श्छन्नवत् छादयः “a preceptor is like an Umbrella, the preceptor covers or protects the pupil like an umbrella". Or शिष्येण च गुरुश्छत्रवत् परिपाल्यः 'a pupil ought to maintain or protect his Preceptor, as an Umbrella '. 
1 छत्र, 2 शिक्षा प्ररोह (पुरोह), 4 स्था (आस्था, संस्था, अवस्था), बुभुक्षा, 6 चरा, 7 तितिक्षा, 8 उपस्थान, 9 कृषि (कषि), 10 कर्मन्, 11 विश्वधा, 12 तपस, 13 सत्य, 14 अनृत, 15 विशिखा*, 16 विशिका (शिबिका), 17 भक्षा*, 18 उदस्थान*, 19 पुरोडा (8)", 20विक्षा, 21 चु क्षा*, 22 मन्द्र. 
कर्माध्ययने वृत्तम् ॥६३॥ पदानि कर्म, अध्ययने, वृत्तम् (ठक)। वृत्तिः ॥ तदस्येत्येव । तदिति प्रथमासमादस्येति षष्टयर्थे उक् प्रत्ययो भवति यत्नपथमासमर्थ कर्म चे द्वरामध्ययनविषयं भवति ।। 
63. The affix ठक comes, in the sense of this is his act, occuring in study" after a word in the first case in construction, if such a word is an act (karma) which has occurred (vrittam) in study (adhyayana). 
Thus एकमन्यवध्ययने कर्मवत्तमस्य =ऐकान्यिका 'apupil who commits one (एक) error (sala) in reading' &c. literal translation being something like "one errorist". Similarly वैयन्यिकः यन्यिक &c. He whose, in recitation, at the time of examination, there is the occurrence of one mistake or false reading, 
TURE 
GOVE 
GOVERNMENS 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
संस्कृति मंत्र 
सत्यमेव जयते 
तहम्नै दीयते नियुक्त 
[BK. IV.CH. IV. 866 
परत सरकार 
is called ऐकान्यिकः ॥ So who commits two mistakes is called वैयन्धिकः ॥ In short, in giving explanatory analysis of taddhita words like getica &c, the 
whole phrase अध्ययन कर्मवृत्तम् must be employed. 
बहुचपूर्वपदाच् ॥ ६४॥ पदानि ॥ बहुच्, पूर्व पदातू, उच् ॥ वृत्तिः ।। बह्वच् पूर्वपदं यस्य तस्माद् बह्वच्पूर्वपदावातिपदिका उच प्रत्ययो भवति तदस्य कर्माध्ययने वृत्त मित्येतस्मिन्नर्थे । उकोपवादः ॥ 
64. The affix उच् comes, in the sense of this is whose act occurring in study', after a compound having a polysyllabic word as a prior member. 
This debars उक्॥ Thus :-द्वारशान्यानि कर्माण्यव्ययने वृत्तानि अस्थ= द्वादशा Fee: 'an examinee who commits twelve mistakes in his reading'. So threar यिका, चतुर्दशान्यिकः॥ The word अन्यत् in these sutras means the 'error', especi ally in accent, i. e. he who makes an accent Tater which ought to be udatta, or vice versa, 
हितं भक्षाः॥६५॥ पदानि ॥ हितम्-भक्षाः (ठक्)। वृतिः ॥ तवस्येत्येव । तदिति प्रथमासमर्थावस्येति षष्ठवर्थे ठक् प्रत्ययो भवति यत्तत्प्रथमासमर्थ हितं. चेत. जवति तच भक्षाः॥ 
65. The affix zer comes after a word expressing food, in the first case in construction, in the sense of “this is wholesome diet for whom". 
The words त and अस्य (IV.4.51) are understood., The word हितं governs dative (II. 3. 13, Vart). But the sutra is तस्य हितं भक्षाः, the word अस्य being in the genitive case, how is this? Here she should be changed to dative viz. तदस्मै हितं भक्षाः this for whom is wholesome diet'. The best way however, to remove this objection is to read sutras 65, and 66 in this wise : 65 हितं भक्षाः तस्मै and दीयते नियुक्तं ॥ Thus अपूपंभक्षणं हितमस्मै आपूपिकः 'He for whom cake is good food' i. e. who eats cakes with benefit, or who is fond of cakes. So also , Araicha: 11 In analysing these taddhitas, such as आपूपिकः &c, the word हितं or its synonym, and a verb denoting eating should be employed. 
तदस्मै दीयते नियुक्तम् ॥६६॥ पदानि ॥ तत्-अस्मै-दीयते-नियुक्तम्-ठक ॥ वृत्तिः । तदिति प्रथमासमर्थात् अस्माइति चतुर्थ्यर्थे ठक् प्रत्ययो भवति यत्तत्पथमासमर्थ तबेदीयते नि 
66. The affix ठक् comes in the sense of “ to whom this is to be given right fully", after a word expressing the thing to be given, in the first (tad) case in construction, the force of the affix being that of a dative (asmai). 
TURE • Go 
OF CULTUR 
WERNMENT 
MINISTRY 
OF INDIA 
तस्कृति मंत्रान्त 
BK IV CH IV 8 68. ] 
तदस्य दीयते 
4.4178 
HE The word दीयते नियुक्त means नियोगेन i.e. अव्यभिचारेण दीयत to be given by.appointment or rightfully'. Thus ST MISTE FATTTT d=37TSITEER: 'a Brâhmana always entitled to occupy the foremost seat at dinner. So also stigioa: 'entitled to get cakes', santoso: il Some say that the word Free means नित्यं always'. According to them आपूपिक would mean अपूपा नित्यमस्मै 
era 'to whom always cakes are given. 
TUTTHIETTE GITT II & II Trig II TUTT-HIET-31Tca, ETI NI वृत्तिः॥ श्राणाभांसोदनशब्दम्यां टिठन् प्रत्ययी भवति तदस्मै दीयते नियुक्तमित्येतस्मिन्नर्थे । ठकोपवादः । 
67. The affix fase comes in the sense of 'to whom this is to be given rightfully', after the words stor and HIEÇa 11 
This feo debars 57 | The g of fe is for the sake of pronunciation, the x indicates that the feminine is formed by A (IV. 1. 15). Thus FIT ga=stforen: f. strierent who is entitled to get rice gruel. So also attiren: f. titirfarat il 
The difference between so and fez is in accent, the former having udatta on the final (VI. 1. 165), the latter on the initial (VI. 1. 197). The feminine of om and feat will both be formed by zio (IV. 1. 15). Now the affix resembles for both in accent (VI. I. 197) and in feminine (IV. I. 15). Why was not s used instead of fea, for it would have produced exactly the same forms ? True, as regards the words to and free the affix a might have been employed instead of feal According to some, however, the affix fast applies to ater and treat separately also. But y cannot be applied to sprea as it would cause Vriddhi (VII. 2. 117) which att does not. Thus sjefen=prera:, f. reftat o With the form would have been sirahan: which is not wanted. 
The word To is a Past Participle () of st to cook.' The or is not changed to as required by VI. 1. 27. This is an anomaly. The nistha is changed to U (VIII. 2. 43). The form wat is also found, as in VI. 1. 36, and the regular form is a = eitto (VI. I. 27). 
F IGUTATTFITH II & Il yra ll TC-TU-STRETCRITET! पतिःभक्तशब्दादण् प्रत्ययो भवत्यन्यतरस्यां तदस्म दीयते नियुक्तमित्येतस्मिन् विषये डकोऽपवादः ॥ 
68. The affix su comes optionally after the word bhakta in the sense of to whom this is to be given right fully.' 
This debars a which comes in the alternative. Thus the age fr=16: In the alternative than a regularly fed' i. e, a retainer. 
29 
TURE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
Y OF CULTUA 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
व्यवहराते ठक्॥ 
[ BK. IV. CH. V572 
सत्यमेव जयते 
भाजय भारत 
रत सरकार 
तत्र नियुक्तः॥ ६९॥ पदानि ॥ तत्र-नियुक्तः(ठक)॥ वृत्तिः । तत्रेति सप्तमीतमान्नियुक्त इत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे उक प्रत्ययो भवति । नियुनो ऽधिकृतो व्यापा रित इत्यर्थः॥ 
69. The affix gay comes, in the sense of appointed there,' after a word in the seventh case (tatra) in construc tion. 
Thus शुल्कशालायां नियुक्तः शौल्कशालिक: 'a superintendent of custom-house.' So also आकारकः, आपाणकः, गौल्मिकः, सैवारिका | The word तत्रनियुक्त is a Tat purusha compound formed by II. I. 46. The word niyukta here has a differ ert meaning from that in IV. 1. 60, hence its repetition here. 
अगारान्तान् ॥ ७० ॥ पदानि ॥ अगारान्तात्, ठन् । इनिः ॥ अगारशब्दान्तात्मातिपदिकाट्टन् प्रत्ययो भवति तत्र नियुक्त इत्येतस्मिन्विषये । उकोपवादः ।। 
70. The affix El comes in the sense of "appointed there," after a word ending with 'agâra.' 
This debars | The difference is in accent and want of Vriddhi. Thus देवागारे नियुक्तः = देवागारिकः, कोष्ठागारिका, भाण्डागारिकः ।। 
अध्यायिन्यदेशकालातू॥७१॥ पदानि ॥ अध्यायिनि-अदेशकालातू (ठक)॥ वृतिः ॥ तत्रेत्येव । सप्तमीसमर्थाददेशवाचिनः प्रातिपदिकादकालवाचिनश्चाध्यायिन्यभिधेये ठकू प्रत्ययो भवति॥ 
71. The affix ठक comes in the sense of “who stu dies there," after a word in the 7th case in construction, de noting an improper place or time. 
The word writers means the time or place of study, which is pro hibited by sacred institutes. अध्यायिन् means one who studies. Thus श्मशानेऽधीते-इमाशानिक who reads in a funeral ground.' चतुष्पाथकः 'who stu dies where four roads meet. So also चतुर्दश्यामधीते- चार्तुदीशकः, 'who reads on the 14th lunar day. So also आमावास्यकः ॥ 
Why do we say 'improper time and place? Observe algsuta, gari ऽधीते।। 
कठिनान्तप्रस्तारसंस्थानेषु व्यवहरति ॥७२॥ वदानि ॥ कठिन-अन्त, प्रस्तार संस्थानेषु, व्यवहराति (उक)॥ 
वृत्तिः ॥ तत्रेत्येव । कठिन शब्दान्तात्सप्तमीसमर्थात् मस्तारसंस्थानशब्दाभ्यां च उक् प्रत्ययो भवति व्यवहरतीत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे । 
72. The affix, ठक comes, in the sense of who transacts business there in,"after compounds ending in 'kathina 
URE - Gov 
GOVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY ON 
ENT OF INDIA 
* BRAV. Ch. IV. $ 75.] 
स्त मंत्रालय . 
तहति--यत् ।। 
and after 'prastâra' and 'sansthana,' being in seventh case in construction. 
Thus वंशकठिने व्यवहातिवांशकठिनिकः 'whose occupation is in a bamboo thicket.' or who does what is proper to be done in such a place' i.e. तस्मिन्देशे या क्रिया यथानुष्ठेया तां तथैवानतिष्ठेति ॥ So also वाधकठिनिकः || So also मास्तारिका, सांस्थानिकः॥ 
निकटे वसति ॥७३॥ पदानि ॥ निकटे-वसति (ठक)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ निकटशब्हात्सप्तमीसमर्थावसतीत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे उक् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
73. The affix ठक comes in the sense of who dwells', after the locative word 'nikata.' 
This rule applies in forming epithets, denoting such persons, who are allowed under the Sacred Institutes, to dwell near human habitations. Thus 
आरण्यकाः are those ascetics who are ordained to dwell in forests, at least two miles away from human habitations. Tancar: are those ascetics who are allowed by the rule of their Order to live near human habitations. Thus निकटे वसति 
नेकटिकः 'an ascetic." 
आवसथात् ष्टल् ॥ ७४॥ पदानि ॥ आवसथात्-ठल ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ तत्रेत्येव । आवसथशब्दात्सप्तमीसमर्थात् वसतीत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे ष्ठल् प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
74. The affix yo comes in the sense of who dwells there,' after the word "âvasatha' in the seventh case in construction. 
The of ga is for accent (VI. 1. 193), the F is for it (IV. 1. 41). Thus आवसथे वसति आवसैथिकः 'who dwells in a house' i.e.a domestic person as opposed to an ascetic. The feminine will be staruant ! So far was the scope of so as ordained in IV. 4. I. Henceforward other affixes will be ordained. 
प्रागधिताद्यत् ॥ ७५॥ पदानि ॥ प्राग-हितात, यत् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ तस्मै हितामिति वक्ष्यति । प्रागेतस्माद्धितसंशब्दनाद्यानित अर्ध्वमनुक्रमिष्यामो यत्मत्ययस्ते वधिकृतो वेदितव्यः । 
75. In each aphorism from this one forward to ' tasmai hitam' (V, 1.5), the affix यतू bears rule. 
Thus in the next satra तदहति रथयुगमासङ्गम we must read the affix यत् ।। स्थ्यः, गुग्यः, प्रासङ्गवः ॥ 
तद्वहति रथयुगप्रासङ्गम् ॥ ७६॥ पदानि ।। तदू-वहति-रथ-युग-प्रासङ्कम् (यत)। वृत्तिः ॥ ततिति द्वितीयासमर्थेभ्यो रथयुगमासङ्गे या वहतीत्येतस्मिन्नथ यत्प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
TURE 
- GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
T OF INDIA 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
Terrain 
[ BK. IV. CH. IV. ,8 
तिसरकार 
76. The affix t comes in the sense of what bears it', after the words "ratha', yuga', and 'prâsanga', being in the second case in construction. 
Thus i Telg = F297: what bears a car' a carriage-horse. Similarly s'a yoke-bearing ox', sterol: 'being trained in a break'. Tag is a piece of wood placed on the neck of colts, at the time of breaking. This rule applies to compounds ending with ratha, as, qCATRE I See IV. 3. 121, 123 also. That which carries will be called 'carrier' or are therefore TETET IT will get the affix at by IV. 2. 120, read with IV.3.121. Its special mention here indicates that the affix will come, even after Dvigu compounds and will not be elided by IV. 1. 88. Thus ET TET TEIT = freq: 11 The tadanta-vidhi applies to this word as we have shown under IV.3, 121. The word teet has been already formed by the krit affix (III. 1. 121), that ry differs from the present, in accent when the word takes the negative particle, for that was by us and this is by , and therefore by VI. 2. 156, 9481 will be finally acute when formed by T The word get must mean the portion of a car' for the application of this rule, and not a cycle of time &c. Therefore not here U T TrsTT alco T II 
ETT TSCAT III eta Ilgt:-ta-onal वृत्तिः ॥ तहतीत्येव । धुर इत्येतस्मात् द्वितीयासमर्थावहतीत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे यत् ढक इत्येतो प्रत्ययौ भवतः।। 
77. The affix Ja and Go come in the sense of "what bears it', after the word 'dhura' in the second case in construction, 
Thus धुरै वहति=धुर्यः (formed by यत् ) the lengthening ordained by VIII. 2. 77 is prevented by VII. 2. 79 because yr is Bha-stem, or ere: (formed by UT VII. 1. 2)'a beast of burden'. This sûtra might have stood as yer , for u would have been read into it from IV. 4.75. 
खः सर्वधुरात् ॥ ७८ ॥ पदानि ॥ खः-सर्वधुरात् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ तबहतीत्येव । सर्वधुराशब्दाव द्वितीयासमावहतीत्येतस्मिन्नर्थेखः प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
78. The affix kha' comes in the sense of what bears it', after the word sarva-dhurâ', being in accusative construction. 
Thus eryti tafar a fror: (VII. 1. 2). The affix applies to other compounds also ending in धुर, e.g. उसरधुरीणः, दक्षिणधुरीणः ॥ The word सर्वधुर isa compound of aat +90 (II. 1. 49), the samâsânta s being added by V.4.74. The word y being feminine, the whole compound would be feminine by II. 4. 26. The word aura in the sâtra should not be taken, therefore, as regulac 
UREGO 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY ON 
NT OF INDIA 
DIV: CH. IV. $ 821 
संज्ञायां-यत् ॥ 
स्कृति मंत्रान 
निय भारत 
तसरकार. 
ing the gender, for though it is in the masculine gender, the affix comes after the feminine word. In fact that in the sûtra should be taken as a nominal stem or pratipadika equal to सवधुरा ॥ 
एकधुराल्लुक् च ॥ ७९ ॥ पदानि ॥ एक-धुरातू-लुक् च ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ तबहतीत्येव । एकधुराशब्दाद्वितीयासमर्थाचहतीत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे खः प्रत्ययो भवति तस्य लुग्भवति। 
79. The affix kha' comes in the sense of what bears it', after the word 'eka-dhura,' in the second case in construction, and the affix is optionally elided also. 
The elision is optional. Thus एकधुरां वहति = एकधुरीणः or एकधुरः ॥ The compounding is taddhitartha (एकां धुरं वहति) to which is added the samāsanta अ, and then the affix ख ॥ 
शकटादण् ॥ ८०॥ पदानि ॥ शकटातू-आण ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ तबहतीत्येव । शकटशब्दाद् द्वितीयासमर्थाबहतीत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे ऽण् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
80. The affix अण comes in the sense of what bears it,' after the word 274€ in the second case in construc tion. 
Thus शकटं वहति= शाकटः 'an ox' i. e. what bears a car. This could be evolved by तस्येदम् अण् as शाकटस्य वोढ= शाकटः ॥ The specification indicates that tadanta-vidhi applies here, as I Teri Tera = 12:, and the affix is not elided (IV. I. 88). 
हलसीराक् ॥८१॥ पदानि ॥ हलसीरातू-उक् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ तबहतीत्येव । हलसीरशब्दाभ्यां द्वितीयासमर्थाभ्यां वहतीत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे ठक प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
81. The affix 3 comes in the sense of what bears it,' after the words 'hala' and sîra,' in the 2nd case in construction. 
Thus हलं वहति-हालिक: a ploughman सैरिक: a plough ox. The ठक् would have come by IV. 3. 124, the specification shows tadantavidhi and non elision, as हालिकः, सीरिकः ॥ 
संज्ञायां जन्याः ॥ ८२॥ पदानि ॥ संज्ञायाम-जन्याः (यत् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ तबहतीत्येव । जनीशब्दादू द्वितीयासमर्थावहतीत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे यत् प्रत्ययो भवति समुदायेन चेस झा गम्यते ॥ 
82. The affix यत् comes in the sense of what bears it after the word 'janî,' being in the 2nd case in con truction, the whole word being a Name. 
URE - Govo 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTUR 
NIINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
वशं-गतः॥ 
[ BK. IV. CH. IV. 861 
सत्यमेव जयते 
कृति मंधाना 
रत सरकार 
Thus जनीं वहति = जन्यः 'a friend of a bridegroom, fem. जन्याः 'a brides maid. The word srit means 'bride.' Frar lit. means 'what bears the bride' i. e, who carries the coy bride to the bride-groom at the time of play &c.. 
विध्यत्यधनुषा ॥ ८३॥ पदानि ॥ विध्यति-अधनुषा (यत्)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ तरिति द्वितीयासमर्थात् विद्धतीत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे यत् प्रत्ययो भवति न चेद्धनुष्करणं भवति ।। 
83. The affix यत् comes in the sense of what piere es it, after a word in the accusative case in construction, pro vided that, it is not a bow, with which anything is pierced. 
Thus पादौ विध्यन्ति-पंधाः (VI. 3.53) शर्कराः, 'what pierce the feet' i.e. pebbles. ऊरयाः कण्टका: 'thorns' i. e. what pierce the thigh, 
Why do we say “provided it is not a bow, अधनुषा"? Observe पादौ विष्यति धनुषा, no affix is added here. This exclusion of धनुष indicates that the act of piercing must be such as not to be done by a bow &c. Therefore the affix does not apply to cases like these चौरं विष्यति, शविष्यति ॥ 
धनगणं लब्धा॥८४॥ पदानि ॥ धन-गणम्-लब्धा (यतू)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ तदित्येव । धनगणशब्दाभ्यां द्वितीयासमाभ्यां लब्धेत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे यत् प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
84. The affix यतू comes in the sense of who obtains it,' after the words 'dhana,' and 'gana,' being in the second case in construction. 
Thus धनं लब्धा=धन्यः, so also गण्यः ॥ लब्ध is formed from लम् by तन, hence it takes the accusative. 
अन्नाण्णः ॥ ८५॥ पदानि ॥ अन्नातू-णः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ अन्नशब्दात्तरिति द्वितीयासमाल्लब्धेत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे णः प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
85. The affix up comes in the sense of 'who obtains it,' after the word 3-1, in the second case in construction. 
Thus अन्न लब्धा-भान्न: fed' 'who has obtained food.' वशं गतः ॥६॥ पदानि ॥वशम्-गतः॥ वृत्तिः॥ वशशब्दात्ताति द्वितीयासमर्थात् गत इत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे यत्प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
36. The affix Tal comes in the sense of gone, after the word vasa, control' being in the second case in construction. 
Thus वंशगतः वैश्यः 'come under control' i.e. subdued i.e.adependant or servant, वशःकाम इच्छा तो प्रात: ie. परेच्छानुगामी ।। ARE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY ON 
NT OF INDIA 
BR. IV. CH. IV. 8 90.] 
गृहपतिना-ज्य ॥ 
पदमस्मिन् दृश्यम् ॥ ८७॥ पदानि ॥ पदम-अस्मिन्-दृश्यम् (यत्)। वृत्तिः ॥ निर्देशादेव प्रथमा समर्थविभक्तिः । परशब्दात्प्रथमासमर्थात् दृश्याथोपाधिकादस्मिन्निति सप्तम्यर्थे यत्प्रत्ययो भवति । 
87. The affix it comes in the sense of in it is visible,' after the word "pada,' being in the first case in con struction. 
Thus पर दृश्यमास्मन् = पद्यः कर्दम 'mud' lit. soft mud in which foot-mark can be seen at every step. It describes mud which is neither very hard nor very fluid, but having sufficient consistency to take the impression of the foot. So gar: giza: 'dust' for insit also the impression of the foot can be seen. It also means 'the foot-path.' The word वृश्यम् means शक्यते द्रष्टुम् this being the force of the kritya affix 'ya' in दृश ॥ 
मूलमस्याबार्ह ॥८॥ पदानि ॥ मूलम्-अस्य-आबाहि-(यत्)॥ वृत्तिः ।। मूलशब्दात्प्रथमासमर्थाताबहीत्येवमुपाधिकादस्योति षष्ठ्यर्थे यत्प्रत्ययो भवति । मूलमेषामाबर्हि ॥ 
88. The affix यतू comes in the sense of whose root is eradicated,' after the word 'mûla,' being in the first case in construction. 
The word आबर्हि from वृहू "to up root,' means 'uprooting,' = उत्पाटनं ।। मूलमेषामावर्हि - मूल्याः 'a kind of pulse' e.g. माषा। मझाः ॥ These cereals cannot be harvested without uprooting the whole plant. According to Padamañjari the word should be safe and not rate, with a a and not a 
संज्ञायां धेनुष्या ॥ ८९॥ पदानि ॥ संज्ञायां-धेनुष्या-यत् ॥ वृत्तिः ।। धेनुष्येति निपात्यते संज्ञायां विषये । संज्ञाग्रहणमभिधेयनियमार्थम् ।। 
89. The word धेनुष्या is irregularly formed, being a Name. 
This word is formed by adding go and 7 to 1 It has udatta on the final. धेनुष्या means that cow (धेनु) which is given to a creditor in dis charge of a debt or as a pledge to satisfy the debt from her milk. It is also called पीतदुग्धा॥ As धनुष्यां भवते दामि ॥ 
गृहपतिना संयुक्त ज्यः ॥१०॥ पदानि ॥ गृहपतिना-संयुक्त-व्यः । वत्तिः ॥ निर्देशादेव ततीया समर्थविभक्तिः । गृहपतिशब्दातृतीयासमर्थात्संयुक्तइत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे ज्यः प्रस्य यो भवति ॥ 
90. The affix el comes in the sense of joined with', after the word grahapati' in the third case in cons truction. 
URE - GOVE. 
VERNMENT 
ev OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
UT OF INDIA 
[BK. IV. CH. IV. $91 
. संस्कृतिमा 
14779.178 
तसरकार 
Thus rufaar hafi = TIETET: 'the Gârhapatya Fire': i. e. a Fire parti cularly consecrated by the Householder. The word isirut of the last sutra should be read into it, thus TT&TT: means a particular Fire, and not every thing relating to a guía II The Fire in which husband (grihapati), together with or joined with his wife, performs sacrifice is called Gârhapatya. That sacrifice cannot be perforined in Dakshinagni. Or that fire in which Gțihapati hymns are recited is called Gârhapatya. 
नौवयोधर्मविषमूलमूलसीतातुलाभ्यस्तार्यतुल्यप्राप्यवद्ध्यानाम्यसमसमित सम्मि ng llegil na arqi-et-f49-45-70-effar-JaipT:-ari-act-tc 
16-arpa-FH-EAT-EITHAT ll af: || atratigazi sgt: 75azīt secara rulfacader ICI JA TEIT Part 1 
91. The affix to comes after the words of a boat', वयस् 'age', धर्म 'merit', विष 'poison', मूल 'a root', मूल 
capital', at 'a furrow', and TET a balance', in the senses respectively, of “to be crossed”, "like", "attainable ", " to be put to death”, “to be bent down", "equivalent to", "united with” and “equally measured ". 
The words in the above must be all in the Instrumental case in cons truction, for the sense of the affix shows that it should be so. Thus. 
I. Ta arraroa water' 'a river', lit what can be crossed by a boat. 2. TE JET:= 'a friend', lit. one alike in age. 3. tur autem what is attainable through dharma. Could not this 
form have been evolved by the next sûtra areatina (IV.4. 92)? . No, y formed by that aphorism means 'what is consistent with dharma' 'what is just'. The present el refers to the fruit', the 
other to the act'. 4. Fagu :=ratar: 'who deserves to be put to death by poison'. 5. Trapuheen "price" lit. or to be overpowered or bent by the root". 
The word wrz (which is formed from the root a 'to bow' by the affix out contrary to rule III. 1. 98 which reguired 7), means # 
i 'what ought to be overpowered': hence per means the price, worth, cost', because articles like cloth' &c are produced by the out-lay of stock or capital (H); 'price' being a thing which, because it is capital plus profit, is superior to capital, and thus by 
price or mâlyam, the capital or mula is overpowered. 6. * *:= 'purchasable lit, equivalent to capital? e. g. cloth : 
i, e, equivalent acquisition resulting from the employment of capital, 
GOVERNMENT 
TURE 
. 
av OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
BHV. CH. IV. S. 93] 
छन्दसो-यत् ।। 
17. सीतया समित= सीत्यं 'a field'. lit. 'measured out by furrows' according 
to Dr Ballantyne. The word समितं is equivalent to संगतं 'united with according to Kâsika. aftesi therefore literally means 'a ploughed -field'i. e. 'what is united with furrows'. The affix will apply also to 
words ending with सीता, e.g. परमसीत्यं, उनमसीत्यं, दिसात्यं ।। 8. तुलया सम्मितं = तुल्यम् “equal" lit. ' meted by the balance'. सम्मित means 
समानं, सदृशं ।। 
Note :-The fruits of good deeds, like happiness &c, which are attainable or prapya through 'dharma', may be said also dharmad anapetam because an effect must have a cause Hence arises the doubt as to what is the difference between this and the next sâtra. The anapetam' in the next sâtra means the fulfilling or following the Law established by the Shishthas, and has no reference to its fruits. Because the effect of dharma is to destroy dharma--i. e. the fruits in the shape of happiness &c lessen, and ultimately extinguish the dharma. Therefore, the fruit of dharma, which is to be taken in this sâtra, as referred to by the word pràpya, is diametrically opposed to the practising of dharma, referred to by the word anapeta of the next sûntra. 
धर्मपथ्यर्थन्यायादनपेते ॥ ९२॥ पदानि ॥ धर्म-पथि-अर्थ-न्यायातू-अनपेते(यत्)। वृत्तिः ॥ निर्देशादेव पञ्चमी समर्थविभक्तिः। धर्मादिभ्यः पञ्चमीसमर्थेभ्यो ऽनपेतइत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे यत्पत्य यो भवति ।। 
92. The affix यतू cemes in the sense of 'not deviat ing therefrom', after the word - dharma,' 'pathin,' 'artha' and 'nyâya' being in the ablative case in construction. 
The ablative construction is inferred from its employment in the sůtra itself. Thus धर्मादनपेतं =धयम् 'just' ' not deviating from merit. Similarly पथ्यम् ॥ शास्त्रीयात पथो यत्नपेतं तत् पथ्यं, न तु तस्मादनपेतइचोर: 'wholesome diet,' अर्यम् 'fit, नाय्यम् 'just, suitable. The word संज्ञायां (IV 4.89) governs this sutra also, and hence the derivatives must have the above meanings. 
छन्दसो निर्मिते ॥ ९३॥ पदानि । छन्दसा-निर्मिते (यत्)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ प्रत्ययार्थसामर्थ्यलम्या समर्थविभक्तिः । छन्दः शब्दातृतीयासमानिर्मितइत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे यत्म त्ययो भवति । 
93. The afix यत् comes in the sense of ' made,' after the word 'chhandas,' being in the Instrumental case in construction. 
Thus छन्दसा निमितः = छन्दस्यः 'made at will.' The word छन्दस् is here synonymous with gest'will, wish, desire, fancy' &c, and does not mean 'metre OrVeda.' 
30 
. MINISTRY 
JERNMENT OF 
ev OF CULTUR 
OF INDIA 
यत् ।। 
[ BK. IV.CH. IV..97 
संस्कृति मंत्राल 
सत्यापत 
मालय भारत 
रित सरकार 
उरसो ऽण् च ॥ ९४॥ पदानि ॥ उरसः, अण, च ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ उरः शब्दातृतीयासमान्निर्मित इत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे ऽण प्रत्ययो भवति चकारायच ।। 
94. The affix sur as well as to comes after 'uras', in the 3rd case in construction, in the sense of 'made. 
The यत् is drawn into the sutra by the particle च ॥ उरसा निर्मितः=औरस 'own son not adopted, lit. produced. through the loins.' With यत् the form will be greet: 11 These words denote son, and not anything produced from the loin, because the word संज्ञायां (IV. 4. 89) governs this shtra also. 
हृदयस्य प्रियः॥९५॥ पदानि ॥ हृदयस्य-प्रियः (यत) बृत्तिः॥ निर्देशादेव समर्थविभक्तिः । हृत्यशब्दाषष्ठीसमर्थात् प्रिय इत्येतस्मिन्नणे यत्प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
95. The affix यत् comes in the sense of 'loved, after the word 'hridaya,' in the genitive case in construction. 
The construction is shown by the aphorism itself. Thus हृदयस्य प्रियः हृद्यः *pleasant to the heart. e.g. हृद्यो देशः, हृयं वनम् ॥ But we cannot say हृयः पुत्रः, the word संज्ञायां (IV. 4.99) governs this sutra also, and thus restricts the meaning of the word. 
बन्धने चर्षों ॥ ९६॥ पदानि ॥ बन्धने-च-ऋषी (यत)॥ वृनिः॥हल्यस्येत्येव । बन्धन इति प्रत्ययार्थः । तद्विशेषणमृषिग्रहणम् । बयते येन तबन्धनम् । हृदयश वाषष्ठीसमर्थाबन्धने कषावभिधेये यत् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
96. The affix यतू comes in the sense of a bond, after the word 'hridaya', being in the genitive construction, when the word denotes a hymn'. 
The word geeu is understood in the sâtra. The word at gives the sense of the affix and is qualified by the word I That by which a thing is bound is called in The word is means here the Veda or the Vedic hymn. Thus हृदयस्य बन्धनमृषि-हयः 'the Mantra by which the heart of another can be brought under one's control',i.e.a वशीकरण मन्तः ॥ 
मतजनहलात करणजल्पकर्षेषु ॥ ९७॥ पदानि ॥ मत-जन-हलात, करण-जल्प कर्षेषु (यत)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ मतादिभ्यस्त्रिभ्यः शम्येभ्यस्तिष्वेव करणाविषुर्थेषु यथासंख्यं यत् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
97. The affix यत् comes after words "mata', jana', and "hala', in the senses respectively of means', gossip', and drawing', the words being in the sixth case in construction, 
URE 
GOM 
GOVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
UT OF INDIA 
MAILIV. CH. IV.S. ION 
तत्र साधुः॥ 
P सरकार 
Thus मतस्य करणं = मैत्यः the means of acquiring knowledge'. जनस्य जल्पः = जैन्यः 'a rumour'. हलस्य कर्षः= हैल्यः 'ploughed'. So also बिहल्यः, निहल्यः, the tadanta vidhi applies रथसीताहलेभ्यो यद्विधौ ।। 
तत्र साधुः ॥९८॥ पदानि ॥ तत्र-साधुः ॥ वृतिः॥ तत्रेति सप्तमीसमर्थात् साधुरित्येतस्मिन्नर्थे यत्प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
98. The affix यत् comes after a word in the loca tive construction, in the sense of excellent in regard there to'. 
Thus सामसु साधु-सामन्यः (VI. 4. 168) conversant with the Sama-Veda'. So also वेमन्यः, कर्मण्या, शरन्यः &c. The word साधु here means प्रवीण, or योग्य 'ex pert' and 'fit', and does not mean उपकारक 'a benefactor or a good person'. 
When the sense is that of good', the sutra तस्मै हितम् (V. I. 5) will apply. 
प्रतिजनादिश्यः खा ॥९९॥ पदानि ॥ प्रतिजनादिश्यः-खम् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ प्रतिजनादिभ्यः शब्देन्यः खञ् प्रत्यये भवति तत्र साधुरित्येतस्मिन्नर्थे । यतोपवादः ।। 
99. The affix खi comes in the sense of 'excellent in regard thereto', after the word 'pratijana' &c. 
No This debars यत् ॥ Thus प्रतिजने साधुः = प्राति जनीनः (VII. I. 2) 'suitable against an adversary', or 'who is excellent for every person'. So also yi tortai, सांयुगीनः ॥ 
1 प्रतिजन, 2 इदंयुग, 3 संयुग, 4 समयुग, 5 परयुग, 6 परकुल, 7 परस्यकुल, 8 अमुष्यकुल, 9 सर्व जन, 10 विश्वजन, 11 महाजन, 12 पञ्चजन.॥ 
भक्ताण्णः॥१००॥ पदानि ॥ भक्तातू, णः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ भक्तशब्दाण णः प्रत्ययो भवति तत्र साधुरित्येतस्मिन्विषये । यतोपवादः ।। 
100. The affix , comes in the sense of 'excellent with regard thereto', after the word 'bhakta '. 
This debars यत् ; thus, भक्ते साधुः = माक्तः शालिः - rice' lit. suitable or excel lent for food. भाक्ता स्तण्डुलाः॥ 
परिषदोण्यः ॥ १०१॥ पदानि । परिषदः, ण्यः ।। वृत्तिः । परिषशब्हाण ण्यः प्रत्ययो भवति तत्र साधुरित्येतस्मिन्विषये। यतोपवादः ।। 
101. The affix ण्य comes in the sense of 'excellent with regard thereto', after the word 'parishada'. 
This debars यत् ॥ Thus परिषदि साधुः पारिषद्यः॥ The affix ण is also employed here. Thus the TUT = Tritora: 'one versed in the affairs of a coun cil''a minister 
TURE 
GOVA 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY ON 
OF INDIA 
कृति मंत्राद्ध 
तन्त्र साधुः-य॥ 
[ BK. IV. CH IV. S. Roy 
सरकार 
•भारत सास 
कथादिभ्यष्ठक् ॥ १०२॥ पदानि ॥ कथादिभ्यः, ठक् ।। वृत्तिः॥ कयादिभ्यः शब्दे यष्ठक् प्रत्ययो भवाति तत्र साधुरित्येतस्मिन्विषये । यतोपवातः ।। 
102. The affix zer comes in the sense of excellent with regard thereto', after the words 'kathâ' &c. 
Thus कथायां साधुः =काथिकः (कथा+ उक् = कथ+ उक् VI. 4. 148=काथ् + इक VII. 2, II6) 'a narrator of stories'. So वैकथिकः &c. 
1 कथा, विकया, 3 विश्वकया*, 4 संकथा*, 5 वितण्डा, 6 कुष्ठविद् (कुष्ट विन्, कुष्टचित्) 7 जनवाद, 8 जनेवार, 9 जानोवाद* (1) 10 वृनि, 11 संग्रह (सग्रह ), 12 गुण, 13 गण, 14 आयुर्वेद. ॥ 
गुडादिश्यष्ठञ् ॥१०३॥ पदानि ।। गुडादिभ्यः, ठञ् ॥ वृत्तिः ।। गुडादिभ्यः शब्वेभ्यष्ठञ् प्रत्ययो भवति तत्र साधुरित्येतस्मिन्विषये । यतोपवावः ॥ 
103. The affix ठञ् comes in the sense of 'excellent with regard thereto', after the words 'guda &c.' 
This debars यत् ॥ Thus गुडे साधुः = गौडिकः 'sugar-cane' lit. 'excellent in making sugar'. So कौलमाषिकः 'a kind of pulse' lit. 'excellent for making gruel. Ehh: 'barley' lit. suitable for making saktu. 
1 गुड, 2 कुल्माष, 3 सक्तु, 4 अपूप, 5 मासौदन, 6 इक्षु, 7 वेणु, 8 संग्राम, 9 संघात, 10 संक्रा म*, 11 संवाह, 12 प्रवास, 13 निवास, 14 उपवास.॥ 
पथ्यतिथिवसतिस्वपतेढ ॥१०४॥ पदानि ॥ पथि-अतिथि-वसति-स्वपतेः 
वृत्तिः ॥ पथ्यादिभ्यः शब्द-यो ढन प्रत्ययो भवति तत्र साधुरित्येतस्मिन्विषये । यतोपवादः ॥ 
104. The affix उi comes in the sense of 'excel lent with regard thereto', after the words 'pathi', 'atithi', 
vasati' and 'svapati'. 
This debars यत् ॥ Thus पथि साधुः = पाथेयम् (VII. I. 2) 'provision for journey'. आतिथ्यम् hospitality', वासतेयं habitable' as वासतेथी रात्रिः, स्वापतेयम् * wealth, property'. 
सभाया यः ॥ १०५॥ पदानि ॥ सभायाः, यः॥ वृत्तिः ।। सभाराशयः प्रत्ययो भवति तत्र साधुरित्येतस्मिन्विषये यतोपवादः ।। 
105. The affix eva comes after the word "sabha! when the sense is 'excellent with regard thereto.' 
This debars यत् the difference being in accent (III. I. 3, and VI. I, 185) Thus सभायां साधुः = सभ्यः - refined 'lit. fit for society. 
ढश्छन्दसि ।१०६॥ पदानि ॥ढः, छन्दारी॥ वारी । सभाशब्दाइ ढः प्रत्ययो भवति तत्र साधुरित्येतस्मिन्विषये छन्दास । यस्यापवावः ।। 
URE - GOV 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
— BETV. CH. IV. F. 110 ] 
भवे छन्दसि ।। 
कृति मंत्रालय 
106. The affix 6 comes in the chhandas after the word 'sabha, in the sense of 'excellent with regard thereto.' 
This debars य| Thus सभेयः in सभयोस्य युवा यजमानस्य वीरो जायताम् leta refined, youthful hero be born to this sacrificer'. 
समानतीर्थे वासी ॥ १०७॥ पदानि ॥ समानतीर्थ, वासी (यत)। वृत्तिः ॥ साधुरिति निवृत्तम् । वासीति प्रत्ययार्थः, समानतीर्थशब्दात्तत्रोत सप्तमीसमर्थाद्वासीत्येतस्मिन्नथै य मत्ययो भवति ।। 
107. The affix यत् comes in the sense of 'resident, therein', after the word "samâna-tîrtha', in the locative cons truction. 
The anuvritti of साधु: now ceases. The word तीर्थ means here गुरु Preceptor'. Thus fara afre aret=Fareed: (VI. 3. 87)-'a fellow-student', who both dwell under the same preceptor. 
समानोदरे शयित ओ चोदात्तः ॥ १०८॥ पदानि ॥ समान-उदरे-शयितः, ओ च-उदात्तः (यत)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ समानोवरशब्दात्सप्तमीसमर्थाच्छयित इत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे यत्प्रत्ययो भवति ओकारचोदात्तः॥ 
108. The affix यत् comes in the sense of 'who sleeps,' after the word “sâmânodara' in the locative construc tion, and the udatta falls on the letter ओ॥ 
The word शयित: is equal to स्थित: "remain'.. Thus समानावरे शयितःस Hrarea uterine brother'i. e. who has slept in the same womb. See VI. 3. 88. 
सोदराद्य ॥१०९॥ पदानि ॥ सोदरातू, यः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ सोरशब्दात्सप्तमीसमर्थात् शयित इत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे यः प्रत्ययो भवति । 
109. The affix य comes after the word 'sodara,' in the sense of who sleeps,' the word being in the 7th case in construction. 
By sutra VI. 3. 88 समान is optionally changed to a before the word उदर when यत् follows. Thus समानोदरे शवितःसोईयः॥ Here ओ is not udatta, as it was in the last; the udâtta here falls on 
भवे छन्दसि ॥११०॥ पदानि ।। भवे-छन्दसि ।। वृत्तिः॥ तत्रेत्येव । सप्तमीसमर्थाद्भव इत्येतस्मिन्नर्थ छन्दसि विषये यत्नत्ययो भवति । अणादीनां घादीनां 
110. The affix ra comes in the Chhandas, after a word in the locative case in construction, in the sense of 'what stays there.' 
URE - GOVE 
OF CULTURE 
18/ SININ 
NMENT OF IN 
OF INDIA 
भवे-यन् ।। 
[ BK. IV. CH. IVAg. 114 
सत्यमेव जयते 
जियारत 
परत सरकार 
This debars अण, घ&c (IV. 3,53). Those affixes also are employed in the alternative, there being much latitude of grammatical rules in the Vedas. Thus the words : and farged in the following hymn of the Yajur Veda (16. V. 38): नमा मेध्याय च विदुत्याय च | All the sutras henceforward up to the end of the chapter, are Vedic sûtras, the word gere being understood in them all. The word भवे governs all the sutras up to IV. 4. II8. 
पाथोनदीभ्यां ड्यण ॥ १११॥ पदानि ॥ पाथ:-नदीभ्याम्-ड्यण् । वृत्तिः ॥ पायशब्दानदीशब्दाच डपण प्रत्ययो भवति तत्र भव इत्येतस्मिन्नथे । यतोपवादः ॥ 
111. The affix इयण comes in the Chhandas, in the sense of what stays there,' after the words 'pathas' and 'nadî,' wherby the last vowel, with the consonant following, is elided. 
This debars यत् ॥ Thus पाथसि भवः = पाथ्यः, so also नायः॥ As in the following hymns: तमुवा पाथ्यो वृषा, चनो दधीत नायो गिरो मे॥ पाथः means firma 
ment. 
वेशन्तहिमवश्यामण् ॥ ११२॥ पदानि ॥ वेशन्त-हिमवत् भ्याम, अण् ॥ वृत्तिः । वेशन्तशब्शद्धिमवच्छब्दाचाण प्रत्ययो भवति तत्र भव इत्येतस्मिन्विषये । यतोपवादः ॥ 
112. The affix stur comes in the Chhandas in he sense of what stays there' after the words 'vesanta' and 'himavat.' 
This debars यत् ॥ Thus वैशन्तीभ्यः स्वाहा, हैमवतीभ्यः स्वाहा ।। स्रोतसो विभाषा ड्यड्ड्यौ ॥११३॥ पदानि । स्रोतसः विभाषा, व्यतू-ड्यो । वृत्तिः । स्रोतशशब्दारिभाषा डधत् डच इत्येतौ प्रत्ययौ भवतस्तत्र भव इत्येतस्मिन्विषये । यतोपवादः ॥ 
118. The affixes ड्यत् and ड्य come optionally in the Chhandas in the sense of what stays there,' after the word 
srotas', and before these affixes the final syllable sret of srotas iselided. 
This debars यत् which comes in the alternative, As खोतसि भवः = स्रोत्यः or are the difference being in the accent (III. 1. 3 and VI. 1. 185). The anubandha s causes the elision of अस् of सोतस् ॥ When यतू is added the form is स्रोतस्यै॥ 
सगर्भसयूथसनुताद्यन् ॥ ११४॥ पदानि ॥ सार्भ-सयूथ-सनुतात, यन् ॥ वृत्तिः॥ सगर्भसयूथसनुतशब्देभ्यो थन् प्रत्ययो भवति तत्र भव इत्येतस्मिन्विषये । यतोपवादः ॥ 
114. The affix यनू comes in the sense of what stays there,' after the words 'sagarbha,' sayûtha' and sanuta." 
URE - GO 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY ON 
T OF INDIA 
BETV.CH. IV. S 118] 
लिय. भारत 
रतसरकार 
This debars on the difference being in accent (VI. 1. 197). Thus अनुभ्राता सगर्व्यः 'a younger brother'. अनुसखासयूथ्य: 'a younger friend'. So also यानः सन्त्यः उत वा जिघन्तु thief lit. 'who stays in a concealed place', sanuta meaning 'concealed' (see Rig Veda II. 31.9). The word समान is always changed into स in the Chhandas (VI. 3.84). 
तुग्रात् धन् ॥ ११५॥ पदानि ॥ तुग्रातू, धन ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ तुग्रशब्दात् घन् प्रत्ययो भवति तत्र भव इत्येतस्मिन्विषये । यतोपवादः ।। 
115. The affix घनू comes in the Chhandas in the sense of 'what stays there,' after the word, tugra.' 
This debars थत् ॥ Thus तुम्रियः as स्वमग्ने वृषभस् तुप्रिजणां॥ Which assumes the form तुष tugrya also. As आवः शमम् वृषभं तरयासु (Rig Veda I. 34, +5) Tugrya meaning 'sunk in the waters'. The word ge means 'food, firma 
ment, sacrifice and varishtha'. 
'अनाद्यत् ॥ ११६॥ पदानि ॥ अग्रात्-यत् ॥ हात्तः ॥ अग्रशब्दायत् प्रत्ययो भवति तत्र भव इत्येतस्मिन्विषये। 
116. The afffx ra comes in the Chhandas in the sense of 'what stays there', after the word "agra', 
Thus अग्रे भवं =अग्यम् ॥ Why this separate rule, for यत् would have come after stor by the general rule IV. 4. 110? The repetition is to show that wat is not debarred by g and 5 of the next sûtra, which would have been the case, had this sutra not existed. 
घच्छौ च ॥ ११७॥ पदानि ॥ घच-छो-च॥ वृतिः॥ अयशब्दायत घच्छौ प्रत्ययो भवस्तत्र भव इत्येतस्मिन्विषये। 
117. The affixes ghach'and 'chha' come in the Chhandas in the sense of what stays there', after the word 'agra.' 
Thus अन्यम् (by यत्), अनीयम् (by छ) and अप्रियम् (by घच्). And अप्रियम् (by धन्) from IV. 4. II 5. See R. V. I. 13. 10 (Sayana) इहत्वष्टारमप्रियम् ॥ 
समुद्राभ्रादूघः ॥ ११८॥ पदादि ॥ समुद्र-अभ्रातू-घः॥ वृत्तिः ॥ समुद्रसदारभ्रशदाच धः प्रत्ययो भवति तत्र भव इत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे । यतोपवादः ।। 
118. The affix 'gha' comes in the Chhandas in the sense of what stays there', after the words samudra' and 'abhra'. 
TURE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
संस्कृति मंत्रात 
तदस्मै दीयते नियुक्तं ॥ 
[BR. IV. CH. IV. 8 122 
भारत सरकार 
This debars यत् ।। Thus समद्रियः and अभ्रियः, as in समुद्रिया अप्सरसो मणीषि णम् and नानदतो अभ्रियस्येव घोषाः॥ The word 'abhra' being a word of fewer syllables than 'samudra' ought to have come first. Its coming as a second member is an irregularity. 
बर्हिषि दत्तम् ॥ ११९॥ पदानि ॥ बहिषि-दत्तम् (यत्)॥ वृत्तिः ॥ भव इति निवृत्तन् । बर्हिः शब्दात्सप्तमीसमर्थादत्तमित्येतस्मिन्नर्थे यत् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
119. The affix e comes in the Chhandas in the sense of "given', after the word - barhis' in the 7th. case in construction. 
The anuvritti of तत्र भवः ceases. Thus बर्हिष्येषु निधिषु प्रियेषु ॥ R. V. IO. I55 दूतस्य भागकर्मणी॥१२०॥ पदानि ॥ दूतस्य-भाग-कर्मणी(य तू)॥ -वृत्तिः ॥ निर्देशादेव समर्थविभक्तिः । दूतशब्दातू षष्ठीसमर्थाडागे कर्माण चाभिधेये यत्नत्ययो भवति । 
120. The affix to comes in the Chhandas after the word "dûta' in the genitive case in construction, in the sense of its share' or 'its duty.' 
Thus Teat the share of a messenger or the work of a messenger'. As यत्ते अग्ने दूत्यम् ॥ According to VI. I. 213, the accent will be दूत्यम्, but the accented Text reads aretatt 
रक्षोयातूनां हननी ॥ १२१॥ पदानि ॥ रक्षः-यातूनाम-हननी (यत)॥ वृत्तिः ।। निर्देशादेव समर्थविभक्तिः । रक्षःशब्दयातुशब्दाचषष्ठीसमर्थाद्धननीत्येतस्मिन्नर्ये यत्प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
121. The affix t comes in the Chhandas in the sense of killer', after the words 'raksha' and yâtu' in the sixth case in construction. 
That by which anything is killed is called it! Thus tea and यातव्य meaning that which kills the demons called Rakshas and Yatus', As याते अमे रक्षस्या तन: i.e. रक्षसां हननी 'O Agni thy bodies are killers of Rakshas'. Soयातव्याः तनूः॥ The word is in the plural as a mark of respect. 
रेवतीजगतीहविष्याभ्यः प्रशस्ये॥१२२॥ पदानि । रेवती-जगती-हविष्याझ्यः प्रशस्ये॥ वृत्तिः ॥ रेवत्यादिभ्यः षष्ठीसमर्थेभ्यः प्रशस्ये वाच्ये यत्प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
122. The affix यतू comes in the Chhandas in the sense of praising' after the words revatî', jagati' and 
havishya' in the 6th case in construction. 
The word gerea means get 'praising, extolling', formed by adding the Kritaffix क्यप् to the root, with the force of भाव or condition', Thus खत्यम, जगत्या URE - GOVE 
OVERNMENT 
Y OF CULTURA 
MINISTRY 
NT OF INDIA 
BK IV CH IV $ 125.) 
and हविष्यम् 'praising of Revati, Jagati or Havishya'. The word हविष्यम् is thus formed हविषे हिता= हविष्याः things fit for offering'ie. butter &c, (हविष् + यतूV.I. 4) हविष्यानाम् प्रशंसनं हविष्यम् (हविष्य+यत् IV.4.122 = हविष्य+ यत् the final अ being elided by VI. 4. 148= हविष+ यत् the Q being elided by VIII. 4.64). 
असुरस्य स्वम् ॥१२३॥ पदानि ।। असुरस्य, स्वम् ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ असुरशब्दाषष्टीसमर्थात्स्वामित्येतस्मिन्नर्थे यत्प्रत्ययो भवति । अणोपवादः ॥ 
123. The affix 7 comes in the Chhandas in the sense of property', after the word ' asura' in the 6th case in construction. 
This debars अण्॥ Thus असुर्थम् ' belonging to the Asuras'. As असुर्य वा एतत् पात्रं यच्चक्रधृतं कुलालकृतम् this vessel made on a wheel by a potter belongs to the Asuras'. असुर्य देवेभिर्धायि विश्वम्॥ See Maitr S. I, 8.3 
मायायामण् ॥ १२४॥ पदानि ।। मायायामू-आण ॥ वृनिः ।। असुरशब्ाषष्ठीसमर्थान्मायायां स्वविशेषे ऽण् प्रत्ययो भवति । पूर्वस्य यतोपवादः॥ 
124. The affix अण् comes in the Chhandas in the sense of 'glamour', after the word "asura' in the 6th case in construction. 
This debars यत् ॥ भसुरस्य माया=आसुरः feminine आसुरी॥ As आसुरी माया स्वधया कृतासि ॥ 
तद्वानासामुपधानो मन्त्र इतीष्टकासुलुक् च मतोः ॥ १२५॥ पदानि ॥ तद्वान आसाम-उपधान:-मन्त्र-इति-इष्टकासु-लुक-च-मतोः॥ वृत्तिः ।।तहानिति निर्देशादेव समर्थविभक्तिःमतुबन्ताम्रातिपदिकात्पथमासमर्थारासामिति षष्ठपर्थे यत्म स्ययो भवति । यत्पथमासमर्थमुपधानोमन्त्रश्चेत्स भवति । यत्तदासामिति निर्दिष्टमिष्टकाना भवन्ति । लक चमतोरिति प्रकृतिनि साइतिकरणस्ततश्चेशिवक्षा। तद्वानित्यवयवेन समतायो व्यपदिश्यते।। 
125. The affix यतू comes in the Chhandas, aftera nominal stem, in the 1st case in construction, ending with the affix 'matup', when the sense is this is their mantra of putting up", provided that, the things put up are bricks: And the affix matup is elided by luk. 
This sutra reguires analysis. तहान is formed by adding मतुप to सतू mean: ing 'having that, and refers to a noun formed by the affix 9 The word मासाम् is genitive plural fem.of इदे meaning of them'; the pronoun refers to the word इटका।। The word उपधान means 'putting up, and technically means 'used as a Mantra in the putting up of sacrificial bricks, pots &c' a "sacred hymn" gear bricks'. The whole sutra means "the affix 'yat is 
31 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY OR 
UT OF INDIA 
कात मंत्रालय 
[BK. IV. CH. IV 8-127. 
१.भारतमा 
the force of a genitive (âsâm), after a word which ends with matup (tadvân), and denotes a mantra used in putting up of sacrificial objects; when such mantra refers to bricks: and when this affix yat is added, the affix matup is elided'. Thus TEFL is a Mantra containing the word | The bricks put up or collected (eriaa) with the recitation of tafarl Mantra, will be called qaret (Tefal + = a + L the affix TT (HET) being elided=767, fem ET) Thus Tor FIT Trahe collects Varchasya bricks i. e. on which Varchasvan mantra has been pronounced'. So तेजस्या उपदधाति ॥ So पयस्याः , Taar: 11 
Why do we say TTT? The affix is not to be added to the whole Mantra. Why do we say, STUTT putting up'? The affix is not to be added to other Mantras such as those used in praying etc. e. g. TFITTFUTAT Fra 37 EFECTIFT, here there will be no affix. Why do we say Mantra ? Observe starsuri EF STATE these bricks are collected with hand having fingers', here there will be no affix. Why do we say gEHTE ? Observe T ETETT HAT Trai Ch a , here there will be no affix, the thing collected being potsherds and not bricks. 
STDAFTAU II gg & ll 3T1THT-TU 11 . वृत्तिः ॥ अश्विशब्दो यस्मिन्मन्लेऽस्ति सोश्विमान् । अश्विमच्छब्दादण प्रत्ययो भवति । पूर्वस्य यतोपवादः । 
126. The affix su comes in the Chhandas, after the words asvimân, to denote bricks put up with the Mantra con taining the word Asvin, and the affix matup is elided. 
Thus अश्चिमानुपधानो मन्त्र आसामिष्टकाना=आश्विन: fem. आश्विनीः॥ The word is thus formed 377ATT+ 374= 3712 + 3to the matup being elided IV.4. 125 = 37 श्चिन् + अण् VI. 4. 164= आश्विन ॥ Thus आश्विनीरुपदधाति 'he collects Avin bricks i. e. bricks at the time of collecting which Mantras containing ervan were uttered. See Yajur Veda Tait S. 5. 3. 1. I. 
वयस्यासु मूओं मतुए ॥ १२७॥ पदानि ॥ वयस्थासु-मून:-मतुम् ।। वृत्तिः॥ वयस्वानुपधानो मन्त्रो यासांता वयस्यास्तास्वभिधेयासु मा मतुप् प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
127. The affix 'matup' is added in the Chhandas, to the word 'murdhanvať, in expressing bricks collected with the Mantra containing the word 'vayas'. 
The word te means the bricks, the Upadhâna mantras of which con tain the word a ll The affix #4 debars 2 1 A mantra which contains both the word वयस् and मूर्धन, that Mantra is both वयस्वान् and मूर्धन्वान् ॥ Now in denoting sacrificial bricks put up with such a mantra, the affix ga would have come by IV. 4. 125 after both these words area and All The present 
TURE • Go 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY ON 
T OF INDIA 
V. 
129.] 
5 and 2011 
तिसरकार 
sútra ordains wat after a Thus saatsuura 'he colleets Mûrdhanvatî bricks'. The words aetar: and amaracet: denote the same object. See VI. 1. 176. 
Why do we say a y ? The affix 'matup' will not be added to ‘mûrdhan', if the Mantra contains only the word 'mûrdhan' and not 'vayas' also. In that case teret: will be the form, meaning bricks collected with the Mantra containing the word al', while at: means 'bricks collected with the Mantra containing the words mûrdhan and vayas'. 
The søtra contains the word gefa ablative singular of all It ought to have been maa:, for the affix matup is added to that, the TT being elid ed then by IV. 4. 125. The author has mentally elided the affix act, and shown in the aphorism the last stage of the word to which wou is to be added. 
Heae Ataaran: 11 996 11 ie II ATO-ATH-: (T) | वृत्तिः ॥ यस्मिन्नर्थे मतुमिहितस्तस्मिश्छन्दसि विषये यत्प्रत्ययो भवति मासतन्वोः प्रत्ययार्थ विशेषणयोः । वार्चिकम् ॥ मासतन्वोरनन्तरार्थेवा ।। वार्तिकम् ॥ लुगकारेकाररेफाश्च वक्तव्याः॥ 
128. The affix e comes in the Chhandas with the force of matup, after a word in the first case in construction, the word so formed meaning a month or a body. 
This debars the affix way and those having the sense of 74 Thus A Te fale SFAT ATE= Fa: 'the month of clouds'i. e. June-July. So also HEFT:, 976: 1462:, being the names of the months Pausha (Nov-Dec), Phal guna (Feb-March) and Vaisakha (April-May). The word toet: is thus form ed:--- + = Far+AT (VI. 4. 146)= A : (VI. 1. 79) 'the month of honey'. Similarly silsier atat: 'the bodies full of vigour'. 
Why do we say " in denoting a month or a body"? Observe Ayhet पात्रेण चरति, here मतुप is used, 
Vårt :-The affix za is optionally employed when the sense is'im mediately after'. As acaruara Tahtalara 2T = A25]: or ATT HIE: 11 
• Vart :-Sometimes the affix is elided, and sometimes the letters 37, ande serve the same purpose as this affix. Thus तपः or तपस्यः, नभस नमस्यः ETETT OG EFT:, all in the neuter gender in the Chhandas. Sometimes 7 serves the same purpose, e. g. Ti ATET, THE || Sometimes y, as THT:. Some times re. g. Ta ATET: 11 
i llgre il vett Il aft:-9 il वृत्तिः ॥ मधुशब्दान्मत्वर्थे ञः प्रत्ययो भवति चकारायच।। 
129. The affix s as well as a comes with the force of matup, in the Chhandas, after the word en 
URE • Gove 
OVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY OF 
OF INDIA 
यल्--ख॥ 
[ BK. IV. CH. IT 7.81 
सत्यमेव जयते 
रकार 
भाजय भारत 
Thus arta: or fro: 11 Sometimes the affix is elided, as y, all thes mean the month of Vaisakha. So also माधवाः, मधव्या and मधुः meaning ताल body. 
ओजसो ऽहनि यत्खौ ॥ १३०॥ पदानि ॥ ओजसः-अहनि-यत्-खौ ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ मत्वर्थ इत्येव । ओजः शब्दान्मत्वर्थे यत्खौ प्रत्ययो भवतोऽहन्यभिधेये। 
130. The affixes Ta and come with the force of matup, after the word 'ojas', when a day is meant. 
Thus ओजस्यम् or ओजसीनं-अहः the day' lit. full of heat. वेशोयशआदेर्भगाधल्॥१३॥ पदानि ॥ वेश:-यश:-आदेः-भगातू-यलू। वृत्तिः ॥ मत्वर्थइत्येव । वेशोयशसी आदौ यस्य प्रातिपदिकस्य तस्माबेशोयशादर्भगान्तात्मातिपदिकान्म त्वर्थे यल् प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
131. The afffix यल comes in the Chhandas, with the force of matup, after the word bhaga, having the words 
vesas' or 'yasas' in the beginning. 
The of sa shows that the accent falls on the vowel preceding the affix (VI. I. 193). Thus वेशोभगो विद्यते यस्य सवेशोभग्यः 'strong-fortune' so also ETETT STUT: 'famous-fortune'. The word art means 'strength': HU means 'for tune, desire, effort, greatness, virility and fame. The word वेशोभग: may be taken as a Dvandva compound of वेशस् 'force' and भगः 'fortune.' The wod agitarz: would then mean 'possessed of power and fortune'. 
सच ॥१३२॥ पदानि ॥ ख-च॥ वृतिः॥ वेशीयशादर्भगान्तात्मातिपदिकान्मवर्थे खः प्रत्ययो भवति । योगविभागो यथासंख्यनिरासार्य उत्तरार्थश। चकाराद्यत् ॥ 
132. The affix a also comes after the words 've sobhaga' and yasobhaga.', in the Chhandas, with the force of matup. 
Thus वेशोभगीनः and यशोभगीनः ॥ This sutra has been separated from last in order to prevent the application of the यथासंख्य rule (I. 3. 10). For had the sutra been वेशोयश आदेभंगार यल्खौ , as it occurs in Siddhanta Kaumudi, then the affix यल् would apply to वेशोभग, and the affix a to यशोभगः which is not what is intended. Another reason for making it a distinct aphorism is that the anuvritti of a runs in the next sutra, not so of यल ।। 
पूर्वेः कृतमिनयौ च ॥१३३॥ पदानि ॥ पूर्वेः-कृत-इन-यो-च।। वृत्तिः ॥ मत्वर्थ इति निवृत्तम् । निर्देशादेव समर्थविभक्तिः । पूर्वशब्दात मृतीयासमाकृतमित्येतस्मिन्मय इन य इत्येती प्रत्ययो भवतः । चकाराख च ।। 
URE 
Goy 
GOVERNMENT 
ISTRY OF CUL 
(3 MIV. CH. IV. 137] 
य॥ 
संस्कृति मंत्रा 
विमरजयत 
१.भारत 
सरकार 
133. The affixes इन and य as well as a come in the sense of made by them', after the word purva' (fore fathers) 'in the Instrumental case in construction. 
The T is read into the sûtra by force of the word 7; the anuvritti मित्वर्थ ceases. Thus पूर्वैः कृतं = पूर्विणः 'made by the ancestors' i.e.a road. So also पूर्व्यः and पूर्वीणः ॥ The word पूर्वैः in the plural means पूर्व पुरुषाः "past gener ations, ancestors". These words occur generally in the plural, and mean "roads widened by the forefathers.". Thus fra: TFTTT: gfarar: Il So also, घेते पन्थाः सविताः पूर्व्यासः ( Rig I. 35. II) Another reading of this sutra is पुर्वैः कृतमिनियोच; the affixes then will be इनि (इन्), and य; and a will be drawn in by virtue of ep The examples then will be grea; 3rd pl. glarer: (with g), as पथिभिः पूर्विभिः, or पूर्वीणैः (ख), or पूयः (4) 
अद्भिः संस्कृतम् ॥ १३४॥ पदानि ॥ अद्भिः-संस्कृतम् (यत्)॥ वृनिः॥ निर्देशादेव समर्थविभक्तिः । अपवादात्तृतीयासमर्थात संस्कृतमित्येतस्मिन्नर्थे यत्प्रत्ययो भवति । 
134. The affix va comes in the Chhandas in the sense of sanctified', after the word 'apas' in the 3rd case in construction. 
Thus अप्यम् 'offering purified with water'. As यस्येदमय हविः॥ The case of construction is indicated in the sûtra itself. 
सहस्रेण समिती घः॥१३५॥ पदानि ॥ सहस्रेण-संमिती-घ॥ वृत्तिः ।। निर्देशादेव समर्थविभक्तिः । सहस्रशब्दात्तृतीयासमर्थातसम्मिताइत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे घःप्रत्ययो भवति । 
135. The affix "gha' comes in the Chhandas, in the sense of like ', after the word sahasra', in the 3rd case in construction. 
The case of construction is indicated by the satra. Thus सहसेण संमि तः सहस्रियः like unto thousand As in the following verse:-सहस्रियासोऽप नोर्म 
भयमग्निः सहलियः The word संमित means तुल्य equal to, Some read the word art instead of almar, but the meaning will be the same. 
मतौ च ॥ १३६॥ पदानि ॥ मती-च ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ मत्वर्थे च सहसवाद धः प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
136. The affix gha' comes in the Chhandas with the force of matup, after the word 'sahasra'. 
AS सहसयस्य विद्यते सहशियः॥ This debars the मत्वर्थ affixes विनि and इनि and stor of V. 2. 102 and 103. 
सोममर्हति यः॥१३७॥ पदानि ॥ सोमम-अहंति-यः॥ बना निशादेव समर्थविभक्तिः । सोमशब्दाद्वितीयासमावहतीत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे या प्रत्ययो भवति ।। 
URE 
GOVE 
OVERNMENTO 
OF CULTUR 
MINISTRY 
घand य॥ 
[BK. IV. CH. IV. $ 1411 
स्कृति मंत्राल 
मंत्रालय का 
137. The affix य comes in the Chhandas, after the word 'Soma', in the second case in construction, when the sense is that of who deserves that'. 
Thus सोममर्हन्ति = सौम्या ब्राह्मणा: “The Brahmanas who deserve Soma" i. e. honorable and learned, and worthy of performing sacrifices. The differ ence between an and is in accent. 
मये च ॥ १३८॥ पदानि ॥ मये-च (य)॥ वत्तिः॥ सोमग्रहण, यश्चानुवर्तते । मय इति मयडर्थो लक्ष्यते । सोमशब्दान्मयडथै यः प्रत्ययो भवति । आ गतविकारावयवप्रकृता मयडर्था ॥ 
138. The affix य comes in the Chhandas, after the word "Soma', with the force of the affix mayat. 
The force of the affix मयद is that of ततः आगतः (IV. 3.74 and 82), विकारावयव (IV. 3. 134 and 143) and प्रकृत (V.4.21). The case in construction 
will vary according to the sense. Thus सोम्यं मधुः पिबन्ति = सोममयः मधुः ।। 
मधोः॥ १३९॥ पदानि ॥ मधोः (यत्)॥ वृत्तिः॥ यशब्दो निवृत्तः । मधुशब्दान्मयडथै यत् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
139. The affix यत comes in the Chhandas, after the word 'madhu', with the force of the affix mayat. 
- Thus मधव्यान् स्तोकान् = मधुमयान् ॥ वसोः समूहे च ॥ १४०॥ पदानि ॥ वसोः-समूहे, च ॥ वृत्तिः ॥ वसुशब्दात्समूहे वाच्ये यत्प्रत्ययो भवति चकारान्मयडथै च । यथायोग समर्थविभक्तिः ॥ वात्तिकम् ॥ अक्षरसमूहे छन्दसः स्वार्थउपसंख्यानम् ॥ वा० ॥ वसुशब्दादपि यवक्तव्यः । 
140. The affix Te comes in the Chhandas after the word vasu', when a collection is meant, as well as with the force of mayat. 
Thus वसव्यः-समूहः 'a collection'. 
Vart:-The affix 'yat' comes without changing the sense, after the word 1 when reference is made to the collection of letters. Thus the word छन्दस्थः in the following sentence : “सप्तादशाक्षरछन्दस्यः प्रजापतियज्ञो मन्ने विहिता". The 17 letters here referred to being ओ श्रावय, four; अस्तु श्रीषद्, four; यज, two; ये यजा महे five; and वषट् twou 
Vårt: -The affix a comes after an without changing the sense. As हस्ती गृहीतस्य बहुभिर्वसव्यैः॥ Here वसन्यः is equal to वसुभिः॥ Similarly अमिरीशे वस व्यस्य-वसो॥ 
नक्षत्रादूघः॥१४१॥ पदानि नक्षत्रात, घः॥ बत्तिः ॥ नक्षत्रशब्दावधः प्रत्ययो भवति स्वार्थे । 
IRE • GOVE 
GOVERNMENT 
OF CULTURE 
MINISTRY 
ENT OF INDIA 
SIV: CH. IV. 8144.] 
तातिल ।। 
संस्कृति मंत्राल 
सत्यमेव जयते 
मालय, भारत 
141. The affix 'gha' comes in the Chhandas after the word 'nakshatra', without altering the meaning. 
The anuvritti of समह does not extend to this shtra. Thus नक्षत्रियेभ्यः स्वाहा = नक्षत्रेभ्यः स्वाहा ॥ 
सर्वदेवात्तातिल ॥१४२॥ पदानि ॥ सर्व, देवातू, तातिल्॥ वृत्तिः ॥ सर्वदेवशब्दाभ्यां तातिल प्रत्ययो भवति छन्दसि विषये स्वार्थिकः ॥ 
142. The affix 'tâtil' comes in the Chhandas after the words — sarva' and 'deva', without altering the 
meaning. 
As सर्वतातिः and देवतातिः in the following hymns : “सविता नः सुवतु सर्वतातिम् and प्रदक्षिणिदेवतातिर्मुराणः ॥ 
शिवशममरिष्टस्य करे ॥ १४३॥ पदानि ॥ शिव,शम, अरिष्टस्य, करे (तातिल्)। वृत्तिः ॥ करोतीति करः प्रत्ययार्थः । तत्सामर्थ्यलभ्था षष्ठी समर्थविभक्तिः । शिवादिभ्यः शब्देभ्यः षष्ठीसमर्थे भ्यः कर इत्येतस्मिन्नर्थे तातिल प्रत्ययो भवति ॥ 
143. The affix 'tâtil' comes, in the Chhandas, after the word 'siva', 'sam', and 'arishta' in the sixth case in construc tion when the sense is 'he does'. 
The word करः is equivalent to करोति formed by अच् (III. I. 134) 
This shows that the construction must be genitive. With a krit-form ed word, it has accusative force, as, शिवस्य करः = शिवं करोति॥ 
Thus शिवस्य करः शिवतातिः, So शतातिः and अरिष्टतातिः॥ As यानः शन्ताती भवथो सदाशुषे (Rig I. II2. 20) शंताती being dual of शन्तातिः, and meaning सुखस्थ कर्तारी; so also अथो अरिष्टतातये ॥ 
भावे च ॥१४४॥ पदानि ॥ भावे-च (तातिल)॥ वृन्तिः ॥ भावे चार्थे छन्दसि विषये शिवादिभ्यस्तातिल् प्रत्ययो भवति । 
144. The affix tâtil' comes in the Chhandas, after the words 'siva', sam' and 'arishta', being in the 6th case in construction, the sense being that of condition. 
Thus fre 19:=faraana: 'the condition of blissfulness'. Teatra: 'the state of happiness or peace', areata: 11 Here these words have the force of Verbal nouns.