
THE HISTORY AND CULTURE 
OF THE INDIAN PEOPLE 


<SL 


THE VEDIC 
AGE 


GENERAL EDITOR 

R. C. MAJUMDA.R 

M.A., PH.D., E.R.A.S.B. 


Ex Vice-Chancellor and Professor oj History 
Dacca University 


•1, V' : 

I 


Hon. Head of the\ 
Bharatiya 



m mmmM 

m ; ; ' 


ASSISTANT EDITOR 

A, D. PUSALKER 

M.A., LL.B., PH.p. 

Assistant Director and Head of the 


Department of Sanskrit 
Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan 


M- 


w 


j , 1 

M 


LONDON 


m 

Ik ’ ■k- 
m : . >-N Dhr 






s 


"IVjffi 4 '>»p 




GEORGE ALLEN & UNWIN L' 1 


C 








FIRST PUBLISHED IN 1951 
SECOND IMPRESSION I952 

This book is copyright tinder the Berne Convention. 
Apart from any fair dealing for the purposes of 
private study, research, criticism or review , as 
permitted under the Copyright Act, igii, no 
portion may be reproduced by any process without 
written permission . Enquiry should be made to 
the Publishers 


ro. ov \ . 'H&f h 


c 


0 ^^ 

.' jr.vl / ’™m* k 

P*.' ~ ! r’ 


liitf 




||i|; 


Hb! 


/ . ■ • 

1 ,. E 


vu* 


/ * aI 

s,„. ■ # .A 

* op esjuc •' 


I '"r" :/ 


1 ’S* 1 j 1 / 

'• ;; - v -rnf- 


cv r^i ; 








: ift 

ftHiea 


i 


All rights reservedj 

♦ 

PRINTED'TlSr GREAT BRITAIN 
m 11 point Old Style type 

yy UNWIN BROTHERS LIMITED 
WOKING AND LONDON 








JUH IST/fy 



FOREWORD 

by K. M. MUNSHI, b.a., li..b., m.c.a. 

(■ President , Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan) 

f he course of my studies I*had long felt the inadequacy of our so-called 
ldjan histories. For many years, therefore, I was planning an elaborate 
.dry of India in order not only that India's past might be described 
her sons, but also that the world might catch a glimpse of her soul 
m Indians see it. The Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, an educational society 
lich I founded in 1938, took over the scheme. It was, however, realized 
y in 1944, when my generous friend Mr. G. D. Birla, one of India’s 
xbremost industrialists, lent me his co-operation and the support of the 
Shri Krishnarpan Charity Trust of which he is the Chairman. As a result, 
tlie Bharatiya Itihasa Samiti, the Academy of Indian History, was 
formed with the specific object of preparing this-series, now styled The 
History and Culture of the Indian People. 

The Samiti was lucky in securing the services of Dr. R. C. Majumdar, 
formerly Vice-Chancellor of Dacca University and one of India’s leading 
historians, as full-time editor, and of Dr. A. D. Pusalker, a. young and 
promising scholar, Assistant Director of the Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, 
as assistant editor. A large number of Indian scholars of repute have 
lent their co-operation to the scheme. Professot H. G. Rawlinson has 
been good enough to undertake the, task of revising the. MS. Messrs. 
George Allen and Unwin, Ltd., rendered my work easy by undertaking 
its publication, despite difficult publishing Conditions in England. To all 
of them I owe a deep debt of gratitude which I hasten Xo acknowledge. 
The General Editor in his introduction has given the point of view 
the scientific historian, to which category the contributors belong. My 
7 n work for the past thirty-five years.has Iain in the humbler sphere 
weaving historical romances and literary and cultural studies out of 
aterials so heroically salvaged by Indian and European scholars. As 
esult 1 have seen and felt the form, continuity and meaning of India’s 
st. History, as I see it, is being consciously lived by Indians. Attempts 
complete what has happened in the past form no small part of our 
idem struggle; there is a conscious as well as an unconscious attempt 
, any life to perfection, to join the fragments of existence, and to 
iver the meaning of the visions which they reveal. It is not enough, 
fore, to conserve, record and understand what has happened: it is 
sary also to assess the nature and direction of the momentous forces 
•ng through the life of India in order to app- 'date the fulfilment 
1 they seek. 


7 





FOREWORD 

therefore, I defined the scope of hi: 

1 the true sense of the word, the work must be the 
story of the people inhabiting a country. It must be a record of their life 
from age to age presented through the life and achievements of men 
whose exploits become the beacon lights of tradition; through the 
characteristic reaction of the people to physical and economic conditions ; 
through political changes and vicissitudes which create the forces and 
conditions which operate upon life; through characteristic social insti 
tions, beliefs and forms; through literary and artistic achievements 
through the movements of thought which from time to time helped 
hindered the growth of collective harmony; through those values whi ... 
the people have accepted or reacted to and which created or shap Iff , 
their collective will; through efforts of the people to will themselves in 
an organic unity. The central purpose of a history must, therefore, 
to investigate and unfold the values which age after age have inspire*., 
the inhabitants of a country to develop their collective will and to express 
it through the manifold activities of their life. Such a history of India 
is still to be written.” 

I know the difficulties which beset the path of any enterprise which 
seeks to write such a history. In the past Indians laid little store by 
history. Our available sources of information are inadequate, and in so 
far as they are foreign, are almost invariably tainted with a bias towards 
India's conquerors. Research is meagre and disconnected. 

Itihasa, or legends of the gods, and Pur ana, legends of origin, had 
different spheres in the ancient literary tradition of India. But later, 
both came to 1 mean the’same thing, traditional history. The Kali Yuga, 
the current Iron Age, was considered too degenerate a period to deserve 
recording. The past was only cherished as. the pattern for the present 
and the future. Works by ancient Indian authors which throw light on 
history are few. Religious and literary sources like the Purdnas and th< 
Kavyas have not yet fully yielded up their chronological or historic 
wealth. Epigraphic records, though valuable, leave many periods u 
related. 

Foreign travellers from other countries of Asia and from Europe, lil 
Megasthenes of Greece, Hiuen Tsang of China, Al-Masudi of Arab 
Manucci of Venice, and Bernier from France, have left valuable glimps 
of India, but they are the results of superficial observation, though the 
value in reconstructing the past is immense. Chroniclers ifi the courts 
the Turk, Afghan or the Mughal rulers wrote “histories’" which, in sr 
of the wealth of historical material, are partially legendary and parti 
laudatory. The attempts of British scholars, with the exception of 
wherever they have taken these “histories” as reliable source-books, 
hindered rather tha* helped the study of Indian history. Sir H. M. E 
the foremost of s - for instance, has translated extracts 



e years ago, 
be a history ir 




WMSfijJr 



FOREWORD ■ ( 

gafi and Arabic "histories” with a political objective, viz. to makeV 
se his own words, "the native subjects of British India more sensible 
of the immense advantages accruing to them under the mildness and 
'equity of the present rule. . . .” So high an authority as Dr. Maulana 
Nadvi, in his Presidential Address at the “Early Medieval India” Section 
of the Seventh Session of the Indian History Congress, expressed the 
verdict of modem scholars, that both the selection and translation of 
these extracts have not been honest. But unfortunately, Elliot’s volumes 
became the source-book for most of our modern histories of Medieval 
India. As a result, they do not present a true picture of India’s past, 
nor do they explain how Indians resisted the Turk, Afghan and Mughal 
incursions, how they reacted to the vicissitudes through which in con¬ 
sequence they passed, and how a Renaissance sprang up out of the 
impact of Indian with Persian and Turkish cultures. . 

The treatment of the British period in most of our histories is equally 
defective. It generally reads like an unofficial report of the British con¬ 
quest and of the benefits derived by India from it. It does not give us 
the real India; nor does it present a picture of what we saw, felt and 
suffered, of how we reacted to foreign influences, or of the values and 
organizations we created out of the impact with the West. 

The history of India, as dealt with in most of the worlp of this kind, 
naturally, therefore, lacks historical perspective. Unfortunately for us, 
during the last two hundred years we had not only to study such his¬ 
tories but unconsciously to mould our whole outlook on life upon them. 
Few people realize that the teaching of such histories in our schools and 
universities has substantially added to the difficulties which India has 
had to face during the last hundred years, and never more than during 
recent years. 

Generation after generation, during their school or college career, were 
told about the successive foreign invasions of the country, but little about, 
how we resisted them and less about our victories. They were taught 
to decry the Hindu social system; but they were not told how this system 
came into existence as a synthesis of political, social, economic and 
cultural forces; how it developed in the people the tenacity to survive 
catastrophic changes for millennia; how it protected life and culture in 
times of difficulty by its conservative strength and in favourable times 
developed an elasticity which made ordered progress possible; and how 
its vitality enabled the national culture to adjust -its central ideas to 
new conditions. 

Readers were regaled with Alexander’s short-lived and unfructuous 
asion of India; they were left in ignorance of the magnificent eriipire 
1 still more enduring culture which the Gangetic Valley had built up 
the time. Lurid details of intrigues in the palaces of the Sultans of 
;lhi—often a camp of bloodthirsty invaders—are given, but little light 

9 




FOREWORD 


<SL 


htoWn on the exploits of the race of heroes and heroines who _ 
anes resisted the Central Asiatic barbarians when they flung them¬ 
selves on this land in successive waves. Gruesome stories of Muslim 
atrocities are narrated, but the harmony which was evolved in social 
and economic life between the two communities remains unnoticed. The 
Mutiny of 1857—the British name for the Great National Revolt—gave 
the readers a glimpse of how the brave foreigner crushed India; it is only 
outside the so-called historical studies that the reader found how at the 
time patriotic men of all communities in most parts of India rallied round 
the last Mughal Emperor of Delhi, the national symbol, to drive out the 
hated foreigner. 

The multiplicity of our languages and communities is widely advertised, 
but little emphasis is laid on certain facts which make India what she 
is. Throughout the last two millennia, there was linguistic unity. Some 
sort of a lingua franca was used by a very large part of the country; 
and Sanskrit, for a thousand years the language of royal courts and at 
all times the language of culture, was predominant, influencing life, 
language, and literature in most provinces. For over three thousand years, 
social and family life had been moulded or influenced by the Dharnia- 
Sdstra texts,, containing a comprehensive code of personal law, which, 
though adapted from time to time to suit every age and province, 
provided a continuous unifying social force. Aryan, or rather Hindu 
culture (for there was considerable Dravidian influence) drew its inspira¬ 
tion in every successive generation from Sanskrit works on religion, 
philosophy, ritual, law and science, and particularly the two epics, the 
Mahdbharata and Rd.md.yana, and the Bhd^avala, underwent recensions 
from time to time, and became ' the one irresistible creative force which 
has shaped the collective spirit of the people. Age after age the best of 
Indians, from the mythical Vasishtha to the modern Gandhiji, found self- 
fulfilment in living up to an ideal of conduct in accordance with a code 
of life which may be traced back as far as the Upanishads. 

The British conquest and the benefits of British rule are generally 
described in histories in “Rudyard Kipling" style. The impact of western 
culture, however, came in the wake of the British connection. In our 
histories we completely lose sight of how this impact awoke the sleeping 
giant to a consciousness of its ancient strength and modern possibilities; 
how under the influence, of European ideas and British demociatic tradi¬ 
tions, the Collective Spirit, without losing its grip over the essentials of 
its culture, adjusted itself to modern conditions, creating new intellectual 
and artistic movements and making the democratic traditions of Grea* 
Britain its own; how, under the European concept of nationals 
Arya-Dharma (Indian Culture) slowly broadened out into a powei 
neo-nationalism seeking a secular democratic state, Indian in concept 
and technique. 


xo 



FOREWORD 


<SL 


■y . school of historians believed that imperialism of the mili- 

anstlc Political type was unfamiliar to this “mystic land." But the 
n-yan conquest of India, which forms the subject matter of Vol I of 
this senes, was as much militaristic-political as religious and cultural. 
T f msteat of treatmg by dynasties, stress is laid on the rise and fall of 
imperial power, Magadhan sovereignty and Satavahana imperialism 

nEn* 6 Tf ^'V° -f' D ' 320 (VoL H) were ’ for the a 8 e - outstanding pheno¬ 
mena. If the territory involved, the population affected, and the heroism 

and power of organization displayed and the cultural activities pursued 
are taken into account, the Classical Age, a.d. 320-750 (Vol. Ill) which 
»aw the empire of the Guptas and of Sri Harsha, was one of the cul¬ 
minating points in history. The age between a.d. 750-1000 (Vol IV) 

saw the empire of the Pratlharas, the Rashtrakutas and the Palas 

Between a.d. 1000 and 1300 (Vol. V), the Paramaras and the Cholas 

Wbfr^n emPire ? ; f differ " nt ^ates struggled for imperial power; the 

consSir^truhM. ** "*** *“ '«» rts * 

lhe nse of the Turkish Power under Ala-ud-din Khilji founded a new 

nooTi .t aM 6 Vri m r th& Sultanate of Delhi > widch tasted from 

at Delhi fVnl Vt! I526 ~ I7oy the Mughals held sway 

at Ddh! (Vol VII) when the world witnessed one of the most magnificent 

1818 Tvofvi 1 1T !i: ^ arath f SUpremacy ’ which lasted 1707- 
before^t S’ ! 1 f ° Ut the downfa11 of the Mughal Empire, but 
before it could consolidate its power, the British stepped in British 

domination from 1818-1947 (Vols. IX and X) was a period of coISete 
u qcction but it saw the national resurgence which, on August 15 1047 

“wThSw U ?‘ Uli ' SeCUrCd non-violeiit means(VJto 

saw the birth of a Renaissance which gave fresh vitality to all that India 

stood for in history. These militaristic-political movements in India were 

of tZZ SG Z V !f r0US ° r W ° rIdly than Similar movements in other parts 
of the world in the corresponding age. To say that the country was lost 

history ^ 3 al the tUne W ° Uid be t0 ignore the s - alien ^ facts of 

Idle role of alien invasions in the history of India, hitherto exaggerated 
c cives to be reduced to its appropriate proportions. India like most 
other countries has had its foreign incursions, which, like Mahmud of 
Ghazni s raids between a.d. 999 and 1024, glittering episodes from the 
^ iders point of view, were at best only shaping influences. Of foreign 
. quests, which changed the course of history and the texture of life 

InW 6 ’ her v-T rC ° nly three - First > tfie Aryan ^quests in pre- 

ture Second *the a?r essential pattern of national life and 
, Second, the Turko-Afghan conquests, which introduced Islamic 

..ence into India, and added new colours to the pattern of life. These 

lquests, however, soon lost their character of foreign military occupa- 


II 




'me 


FOREWORD 

for the conquerors threw in their lot with the country and prod 
of its best rulers and its most powerful political organizations, 
so-called Muslim period, scientifically the Turko-Mughal period, domino. .A 
the country for about four centuries roughly from a.d. 1300 to 1700. 
Third, the British occupation from 1818-1947, perhaps the only period 
of foreign rule in the sense that the country was governed essentially 
by foreigners from a foreign country and in foreign interests. It brought 
in its wake contact with Europe, a new awakening and a new cultural 
synthesis. 

But during all this period the vitality of the race and culture, altered 
from time to time in direction and objective, expressed itself with 
unabated vigour in resistance* movemen t s, military, political, and cul¬ 
tural. The History of India is not the story of how she underwent foreign 
invasions, but how she resisted them and eventually triumphed over 
them. Traditions of modem historical research founded by British scholars 
of repute were unfortunately coloured by their attitude towards ancient 
Egypt, Greece and Rome, which have a dead past and are, in a sense, 
museum exhibits. A post-mortem examination of India’s past would be 
scientifically inaccurate; for every period of Indian History is no more 
than an expression in a limited period of all the life forces and 
dominant ideas created and preserved by the national culture, which are 
rushing forward at every moment through time. The modern historian 
of India must approach her as a living entity with a central con¬ 
tinuous urge, of which the apparent life is a mere expression. Without 
such an outlook it is impossible to understand India, which, though a 
part of it has seceded in search of an independent existence, stands 
today three hundred and fifty million strong, with a new apparatus of 
state, determined not to be untrue to its ancient self, and yet to be equal 
to the highest demands of modem life. 


12 


CONTENTS 


Foreword by K. M. Munshi 
Preface by R. C. Majumdar 
Abbreviations 

BOOK I. INTRODUCTION 

I. Indian History, its nature, scope and method 
by R. C. Majumdar, m.a., pii.d., f.r.a.s.b. 

Formerly Vice-Chancellor and Professor of History in the Uni- 
versity of Dacca 

II. Sources of Indian History 
by R. C. Majumdar 

i Ancient Period. A—Literary Sources. B—Archaeology (I. 
Inscriptions. II. Numismatics. III. Monuments). C—Foreign 
Accounts (Greek Writers. Chinese Travellers. Arab Writers) 

2. Mediaeval Period 

3. Modern Period 

III. Archaeological Explorations and Excavations 

' by the late Rao Bahadur K. N. Dikshit, m.a., f.r.a.s.b. 
Formerly Director General of Archaeology, Government of India 

Decipherment of the Brahmi Script. Beginnings of Archaeological 
Survey. Establishment of Archaeological Department. Regular 
and Systematic Excavations (Mohenjo-daro, Punjab and N.W.F.P., 
Kashmir, United Provinces, Bengal). Prehistoric remains in 
Gujarat (Bombay, Mysore, Madras). Explorations in Greater India 

IV. The Geological Background of Indian History 

by D. N. Wadia, m.a,, b.sc., f.g.s., f.r.g.s., f.r.a.s.b., f.n.i. 
Special Adviser to the Government of India 

1. The Setting of the Stage for Early Man in India 

2. The Indo-Gangetic Alluvium of the Plains of North India 

3. Human cave-dwellers of India: Their animal contemporaries 

4. Laterite cap of the Peninsula and Soil Deposits 

5. Changes in the River Systems of North India during the human 
epoch 

6. The Great Prehistoric River of Northern India 

7. The Deserts of Western India: The Rann of Cutch 

8. The meteorological influence of the Himalaya Mountains 

9. Earthquakes and Volcanoes 

10. Late earth-movements and local Alterations of level 

13 



misT Rt , 



CONTENTS 

V. The Geographical Background of Indian History 

by R. C. Majumdar 

i. Physical Features (I. The great mountain wall. II. The Plain 
of Hindustan. III. The Plateau: A—The Deccan Plateau, B—The 
Coastal Region, C—The Central Indian Plateau). 

2 Influence of Geography upon History. Division into several 
P° Ltical and cu lt ur al units. India, a distinct geographical unit. 
Meet of physical features, Indian Colonization. Effect of climate 

VI. Flora and Fauna 
Part I, The Flora 

by G. P. Majumdar , m.sc., ph.d.(leeds) 

Professor of BotanyJn the Presidency College, Calcutta 

1. Forest Vegetation; its types 

2. Freshwater Vegetation 

3. Cultivated Vegetation 

Part II. The Fauna 
by B . K. Chatterji , m.sc. 

•Lecturer in Zoology in the Presidency College, Calcutta 

1. The Vertebrates. Mammals. Birds. Reptiles. Batrachians. 
Fishes. Lower Chordates 

2. The Invertebrates. Molluscs. Arthropods. Echinoderms 


<SL 


90 


107 


BOOK II. THE PREHISTORIC AGE 

VII. Palaeolithic, Neolithic and Copper Ages 

by II. D. Sankalia, m.a., ll.b., ph.d. (London) 

Professor of History in the Deccan College Post-Graduate and 
Research Institute, Poona 

1. Palaeolithic Age (I. First Inter-Glacial Age. II. Second Inter- 
Glacial Age and Early Soan Industry. III. Third Ice Age and Late 
Soan Industry. IV. Third Inter-Glacial Age; Chauntra Industry. 
V. Fourth Ice Age Tools) 

2. Mesolithic Age 

3. Neolithic Age 

4. Copper and Bronze Age 

5. Iron Age 

VIII. Race-Movements and Prehistoric Culture 

by 5 . K. Chatterji, m.a., d.litt. (London), f.r.a.s.b. 

Khaira Professor of Indian Linguistics and Phonetics in the Univer¬ 
sity of Calcutta 

Six main races with nine sub-types. Evolution of Common Indian 
Culture. Contribution of (a) the Negroid or Negrito, (b) the Proto- 
Australoids, (c) Dravidian-speakers. Synthesis of the Aryan and 
non-Aryan Culture' 


123 


141 


14 


lmsTft 



/ 


CONTENTS 

The Indus Valley Civilization 


p 



by A. D. Pusalker, m.a., lljb., ph.d. 

Assistant Director and Head of the Department of Sanskrit, 
Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan 

1. The Town (Buildings. Drainage. The Great Bath) 

2. Social and Economic Life (Food. Animals. Dress. Ornaments. 
Toilet Articles. Household Utensils. Games. Conveyance. Weight 
and Linear Measures. Medicine. Weapons, Tools, and Implements. 
Trade and Commerce. Classes of People) 

3. Arts, Crafts, and Industries (Figures. Seal-engravings. Statues. 
Spinning and Weaving. Pottery. Seals. Precious Stones and 
Metals, Shell, Ivory, and Faience) 

4. Religion (Mother Goddess. Siva. Animal Worship. Worship 
of Tree, Fire, and Water) 

5. Funerary Customs 

6. The Indus Script 

7. The Antiquity of the Culture 

8. Authors of the Indus Civilization 

9. Extent, Connections, and Survivals of the Indus Civilization 


BOOK III. THE ARYANS IN INDIA 

X. The Aryan Problem 


201 


by B. K. Ghosh, d.phil. (Munich), d.litt. (paris) 

Lecturer in Philology in the University of Calcutta 

Original home of the Indo-Europeans. Earliest trace of the Indo- 
Iranians. Lithuanian, the most archaic of Indo-European 
Languages. No case for original home in Europe. Scandinavia 
not the original home. Tripolje culture. Brandenstein's theory 
of the Original Home. Relation between Indo-European and non- 
Indo-European languages 

Appendix—India, the original home of the Aryans by S. Srikantci 
Sastri , Professor Maharaja's College, Mysore 

XI. Indo-Iranian Relations 218 

by B. K. Ghosh 

Cleavage between the Aryans of India and Iran. Antagonism 
between the Worshippers of Daiva-gods and Asura-gods. Reforms 
of Zarathustra. Pre-Zarathustra Iranian Culture essentially the 
same as Vedic 


XII. Vedic Literatures—General View 
by B ; I< Ghosh 


225 


(I. Rigveda. II. Samaveda. III. Yajurveda. 


15 





CONTENTS 

Aryan Settlements in India 
by A. D. Pusalker 

1. Geographical Names in the Rigveda 

2. The Tribes in the Rigveda 

3. The Period of the Later Saihhitas, Brahmanas, Upanishads 



and Sutras (I. Geographical N^inies, II. The.Tribes) 


XIV. 


BOOK IV, HISTORICAL TRADITIONS 


Traditional History from the Earliest Time to the Accession 
of Parikshit * 
by A. D. Pusalker 

x. Sources of Information 

2. Chronological Scheme of Traditional History according to the 
Purapas 

3. Pre-Flood Traditions and Dawn of History 

4. Flood and Manu Vaivasvata (c. 3100 b.c.) 

5. Yayati Period (c. 3000-2750 bc.) (I. The Lunar Dynasty. 
II. The Solar Dynasty. III. Brahmana Families) 

6 . Mandhatri Period (c. 2750-2550 b.c.) (I. The Solar Dynasty. 
II. The Lunar Dynasty) 

7. Parasurama Period (c. 2550-2350 b.c.) (I. The Bhrigus. II. The 
Haihayas. III. Other Lunar Dynasties. IV. The Solar Dynasty. 
V. Brahmana Families) 

8. Ramachandra Period (c. 2350-195° B - c ') C 1 - The Solar Dynasty. 

11. The Lunar Dynasty. III. Brahmana Families) 

9. Krishna Period (c. 1950-1400 b.c.) (I. The Pafichalas. II. The 
Pauravas. III. The Yadavas. IV. The Eastern Anavas. \ . The 
Solar Dynasty) 

10. The Bharata War (c. 1400 b.c.) (I. The Kauravas and 
Pan^avas. II. The Bharata War) 

xi. Comparative Value of the Vedas and the Puranas as Sources 
of Traditional History 

12. The Expansion of the Aryans and Aryan Culture 
Appendix I: Development of different dynasties 
Appendix II: Genealogical Tables 


XV. 


267 


Traditional History from the Accession of Parikshit to the end 
of the Barhadratha Dynasty 
by A. D. Pusalker 

1. The Pauravas 

2. The Kosalas 1 " ; ' 

. ;.o{' .\t.*!.;i ii.ii (I > !/c- 

3. Magadha 

4. Other Kingdoms 

16 


319 


CONTENTS 


PAGE 


BOOK V. THE AGE OF THE RIK-SAMHITA 

XVI. Language and Literature 333 

by B. K. Ghosh 

1. Language (Not homogeneous. Artificial. Rehandling of original 
texts. The Verbal system. Tenth Man^ala distinctly later) 

2. Literature (Yaska's classification of Vedic hymns not quite 
satisfactory. Hymn to Ushas. Spirit of the hymns. Hymn to 
Parjanya. Martial hymns. Dialogue-hymns. Frog-hymn. Dana- 
stuti. Aprl-hymns. Funeral-hymns. Philosophical hymns) 

XVII. Political and Legal Institutions 352 

by V. M. Apte , m.a., ph.d. (cantab.) 

Professor of Sanskrit in the Karnatak College, Dharwat 

1. 'Political Institutions (Monarchy. Sabhd and Samiti. Ptfrohita) 

2. Administrative Organization (Grama) 

3. Law and Legal Institutions (Individual ownership of Land) 

XVIII. Religion and Philosophy 360 

by V. M . Apte 

1. Mythology (I. Origin. II. The Nature and Classification of 
Gods. III. The Celestial Gods. IV. The Atmospheric Gods. 

V. The Terx*estrial Gods) 

2. Sacrifice 

3. Philosophy 

4. Ethical and Spiritual Thought 

XIX. Social and Economic Conditions 384 

by V. M . Apte 

1. Social Condition (I. Family Life. II. The Caste System. 

III. Marriage and the Position of Women. IV. Education. 

V. Amusements and Entertainments. VI. Food and Drink. 

VII. Dress and Decoration. VIII. Knowledge of Medicine and 
Sanitation) 

2. Economic Condition (I. Agriculture and Cattle. II. Trade 
and Commerce. III. Occupations and Industries. IV. House¬ 
building and Means of Transport, etc.) 


BOOK VI. THE AGE OF THE LATER SAMFIITAS 

XX. Language and Literature 403 

by B. K. Ghosh [Section 4 by V. M. Apte) 

1. The Language of the Sariihitas (I. Samaveda. II. Yajurveda. 

III. Atharvavecla) 

2. The Samhita Literature (I. Atharvaveda, Arrogance of the 
Brahmanas, Coronation hymn, Bhumi-sukta, the National Anthem 
of Vedic India, Magic and Charms, Hymn to Varuna. II. Yajur¬ 
veda) 

3. The Brahmanas (I, Language, II. Literature) 

4. The x\ranyakas 


17 


B 


CONTENTS 

Political and Legal Institutions 
by V. M, Apte 

1. Political Theory (Origin of Kingship. Growth of royal power. 

Sabha and Samiti) 

2. Administrative Organization (Royal Officials. Taxation) 

3. Law and Legal Institutions (Evidence. Criminal law. Civil law. 

Civil procedure. Ownership of Land) 

XXII, Religion and Philosophy ^n8 

by V. M, Apte 

1. Atharvaveda (Magic Formulae. Philosophical hymns) 

2. The Samaveda and the Yajurveda Samhitas and the Brahmanas 
(Grand Sacrifices. Groups of priests. The‘Gods. Ethical Ideas. 

The conception of Heaven and Hell. The Circuit of Birth and 
Death) 

3. The Aranyakas 

XXIII. Social and Economic Conditions 449 

by V. M. Apte 

• 1, Social Condition (I. Family Life. II. The Caste System. 

III. Marriage and the Position of Women. IV. Education. 

V. Amusements and Entertainments. VI. Food and Drink. 

. VII. Dress and Decoration, VIII. Knowledge of Medicine) 

2. Economic Condition (I. Agriculture and Cattle. II. Trade 
and Commerce. III. Occupations and Industries. IV. House- 
Building and Means of Transport) 


BOOK VII. THE AGE OF THE UPANISHADS AND SUTRAS ' 

XXIV. Language and Literature 467 

by M. A. Mehendale, m.a., ph.d. 

Professor of Sanskrit in S. B. Garda College, Navasari, Bombay 

1. The Upanishads (Chronological classification. Composed 
mainly by the Kshatriyas. Principal teachings. The doctrines 
of Atman and Brahman. Transmigration) 

2. The Sutras (I. Siksha. II. Kalpa. Srauta-sutra. Grihya-sutra, 
Dharma-siitra. Sulva-stitra. Date of the Kalpa-sutra texts. 

III. Vyakarana. IV. Nirukta. V. Chhandas. Vt. Jyotisha) 

3. Language (I. The Upanishads. II. The Sutras) 

XXV, Political and Legal Institutions 482 

by V. Af. Apte 

1. Political Theory (Principle of Dharma. Life and duty of king. 
Position of the Brahmana in the State. Paris had) 

2. Administrative Organization (Taxation. Village) 

3. Law and Legal Institutions (Beginnings of Civil and Criminal 
Law. Judicial tribunals. Punishments. Rules of Inheritance. 

Title to Property, Rate of Interest) 

18 





by V. M. Apte 

1. The Upanishads (Protest against ritual. Identity of Brahman 
and Atman. Prana. The transmigration of the soul. Ethical 
concepts. Fundamental doctrines) 

2. the Sutras (The Srauta sacrifices. The Grihya ritual. Meaning 
and nature of sacrifice. Different classes of priests. Magic and 
rituals. Ethical concepts) 

XXVII. Social and Economic Conditions 
by V. M. Apte 

1. Social Condition (I. Family Life. II. The Caste System. 
III. Marriage and the Position of Women. IV. Education 
V. Manners and Morals, Habits and Customs. VI. Amusements 
and Entertainments. VII. Food and Drink. VIII. Dress and 
Decoration. IX. Health and Hygiene) 

2. Economic Condition (I. Agriculture and Cattle. II. Trade 
and Commerce, Arts and Industries. III. House-building and 
Means of Transport) 

Bibliographies 

Appendix 

Index 


527 

541 

546 






LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 


betiveen pages 176 and 177 

PLATE 

I. Corbelled Drain, Mohenjo-daro 

II. Great Bath, Mohenjo-daro 

III. Jewellery—Necklaces, Mohenjo-daro 

IV. Personal Ornaments, Mohenjo-daro 

V. Arts and Crafts, Mohenjo-daro 

VI. Statuary, Harappa and Mohenjo-daro 

VII. Seals, Mohenjo-daro 

VIII. (1) Fractional Burial, Mohenjo-daro 
(2) Model Animal, Mohenjo-daro 


MAPS AND PLANS 

1. Map of India, showing types of Forest Vegetation 
and Botanical Regions of India page 544 

2. Prehistoric and Vedic India page 545 


PREFACE 

by R. C. MAJUMDAR, m.a., ph.d., f.r.a.s.b. 

• * 

The genesis of this work and its scope and nature have been explained 
in the Foreword. But it is necessary to add a few words about its general 
planning. After having decided that the work would consist of ten volumes 
of approximately five hundred pages each, it was not an easy task to 
distribute the subject-matter among them on a basis which would be both 
equitable and rational. It has been hitherto customary to divide Indian 
history into the Hindu, Muslim and British periods, and assign equal 
space to each. TlTe Cambridge History of India has set its seal of approval 
upon this plan, which has also been adopted by the Indian History 
Congress for its projected history of India. But it can hardly be regarded 
as equitable. Looking at the matter from a broad standpoint, it would 
be difficult to maintain that the 4,000 years of pre-Muslim India, of the 
history and culture of which we' possess a definite knowledge, though 
in brief outline, should rank in importance as equal with that of the 
Muslim period of about 400 or 500 years, or the British period of less 
than 200 years. It is true that we possess more historical material for the 
later ages, but if we are to judge by that standard alone, the British 
period should have twice or thrice the number of volumes assigned to 
the Muslim period. After all, the contribution of different ages to the 
evolution of national history and culture should be the main criterion 
of their relative importance, though the space devoted to each should 
also be largely determined by the amount of historical material available. 
There is, no doubt, a dearth of material for the political history of ancient 
India, but this is to a large extent made up for by the corresponding 
abundance for the cultural side. Taking everything into consideration we 
have modified the hitherto accepted plan, and have allotted nearly half 
of the entire work to the Hindu period. 

Some difference will also be noticed in our conception of the beginning 
and end of the Muslim period. It is usual to regard the accession of 
Qutb-ud-din to the throne of Delhi in a.d. 1206 as the commencement 
of this period, and some historians even include within it the period of 
Ghaznivite supremacy in the Punjab two centuries earlier. It should be 
remembered, however, that the major part of India remained under Hindu 
rule almost throughout the thirteenth century a.d. and the same was 
also largely true of the century following the death of Aurangzeb. To 
include these two centuries under the Muslim period can therefore be 
hardly regarded as historically accurate. 

These difficulties can best be overcome by avoiding altogether the terms 

23 


PREFACE 




and Muslim. As a matter of fact, one may rightly ques 
e reasonableness of designating historical periods by the religious 
denomination of the ruling dynasties. In that case, in order to be con¬ 
sistent, we should style the third period of Indian history Christian rather 
than British. This is sufficient to demonstrate the absurdity of the present 
system of nomenclature, deep-rooted though it has become. We have 
accordingly divided Indian history into three chronological periods— 
Ancient, Mediaeval, and Modern—which are generally adopted for the 
history of Europe. 

In the case of Europe, the overthrow of the Western Roman Empire 
by the irruption of barbarian hordes, which brought about the dis¬ 
appearance of classical learning, is taken to be the dividing line between 
Ancient and Mediaeval pSTiods. In the case of India, there is no general 
agreement on this subject, but the onslaught of Islam, accompanied by 
a marked decadence of culture and the disappearance of the creative 
spirit in art and literature, seems to mark a.d. iooo as the beginning of 
the Mediaeval Age. 

The decline of the Mughal Empire and the growing power of the 
European nations in Indian politics may be reasonably regarded as 
marking the end of one and the beginning of another epoch in Indian 
history, and hence the eighteenth century has been taken as the com¬ 
mencement of the Modern Period. In Europe the Modern Period dates 
from the overthrow of the Eastern Roman Empire and the subversion 
of the age of faith and tradition by the awakening of humanism through 
the agency of the revival of classical learning. On this analogy one might 
be inclined to include the eighteenth century within the Mediaeval rather 
than the Modern period. But the political considerations referred to above, 
especially the establishment of the British power on a solid basis, are 
strong arguments in favour of dating the beginning of the Modem Period 
from the eighteenth century rather than the nineteenth. 

For reasons given above, neither the thirteenth nor the eighteenth 
century a.d. has been included within what is usually described as the 
Muslim Period. The first is taken as a part of a long period of protracted 
struggle for political supremacy, both between the Indians and foreign 
invaders and among the Indians themselves, which ultimately ended in 
the next century in favour of the Khiljis. So far as the eighteenth century 
is concerned there is no doubt that the Marathas were the leading 
political power in India. These two volumes have been styled accordingly. 

So far by way of explanation of the general division into three broad 
periods—Ancient, Mediaeval, and Modem—and the titles given to 
Volumes V and VIII, which mark a great departure from current practice. 
It must be remembered, however, that while specific dates had to be 
assigned to each volume for the sake of precision and accuracy, they 
should not be strictly equated with the title given to it. The period 

24 


MIN lsr/f y 


PREFACE 



ratlin. supremacy, for example, cannot be said to cover exactly 
leTyears a.d. 1707 to 1818, but nevertheless these have been taken to 
be the limiting dates of Volume VIII, which bears that title, because they 
mark definite events of great importance connected with the central 
theme, viz. the death of Aurangzeb which facilitated the growth of the 
Maratha power, and the Third Maratha War which put an end to the 
Maratha supremacy. 

The same is more or less true of the other volumes and the justification 
for the titles and dates will be discussed in the preface of each. For the 
present we may confine our attention to the present volume. Although 
it is entitled the Vedic Age it begins from the dawn of human activity in 
India, so far as it is known to us. Being the first volume of the series, it 
contains an introductory section dealing with certain general topics 
bearing upon the history of India as a whole. As there are some special 
characteristics which distinguish Indian history from that of other 
countries, it has been thought desirable to explain at the very outset its 
meaning and methods of approach as well as the nature of the material 
from which it has been reconstructed. The first three chapters have been 
devoted to this subject. The nest three deal with the background of 
Indian history, geological, geographical and biological. These chapters, 
particularly the first and third, may appear too technical for the historical 
student, and some may even regard them as too elaborate for a treatise 
on history at all. But a knowledge of these topics is essential for a proper 
understanding of the evolution ©f Indian culture, and being written by 
acknowledged experts, these two chapters, it may be hoped, will place at 
the disposal of the reader adequate information on difficult but relevant 
subjects, which it would not be possible for them to acquire except by 
the patient study of bulky volumes of a highly technical nature, which 
few would be disposed to undertake. 

The next section, which may be regarded as the beginning of history 
proper, deals with the period before the Vedic Aryans settled in this 
country. This, however, involves certain assumptions which are not 
unanimously accepted. Some scholars hold the view that India was the 
original home of these Aryans, and that there cannot be any question of 
their immigration into this country. Some have referred the Aryans to such 
hoary antiquity—tens of thousands of years ago according to more than 
one theory—that there can be no question of any historical period prior 
to them. 

Similarly there is a divergence of opinion regarding the question whether 
the Indus valley civilization was pre-Aryan or post-Vedic. In the present 
state of our knowledge no dogmatic answer can be given to these questions, 
and there is no theory that is likely to meet with general acceptance. 
Even our own contributors do not agree on these points. Dr. Pusalker, 
who has written on the Indus Valley Civilization, is inclined to regard 

25 



PREFACE 




t-'jis not fundamentally different from the Aryan, and possibly post 
dr'Rigvedic culture, while Dr. B. K. Ghosh and Dr. S. K. Chatterji, who 
have written on the Aryan and pre-Aryan peoples, take the opposite view. 
Such differences are inevitable in a co-operative undertaking of this kind. 
It has not been thought advisable to suppress these individual view¬ 
points, but cross-references have been given in order to impress upon 
the readers that such questions do admit of different answers and to 
enable them to judge for themselves the cogency of the arguments on 
which different theories are based. 

It has been the constant attempt of the Editor, by free and frank 
discussions, to reconcile the different points of view as far as practicable, 
and where complete agreement was unattainable, to have them presented 
in a manner which wouj^l convey the impression that they are not 
dogmatic assertions of contradictory views, but alternative solutions, each 
equally valid, of the problem concerned. Beyond that the Editor did not 
choose to go, by way of forcing a definite solution of an admittedly con¬ 
troversial problem. It has been thought better to risk even a seeming 
inconsistency among the different parts of the book rather than convey 
a false idea of a general agreement of views where no such unanimity 
really exists, or is possible under the present circumstances. 

The third section is devoted to a general consideration of the Indo- 
Aryans. It begins with a detailed discussion of the chief problems con¬ 
cerning them, viz. their original home, the date and route of their 
immigration into India, the antiquity of their chief literary production, the 
Rigveda, and their relations with the Iranians with whom they must have 
lived in close and intimate contact long after their separation from the 
other branches of the Indo-European family. These are some of the most 
intriguing problems on which opinions differ widely, and an attempt has 
been made to present the different viewpoints, with emphasis on the one 
which appears to be most reasonable in the light of the evidence available 
to us. Although few scholars today believe India to be the original home 
of the Aryans, this theory has naturally a sentimental appeal to Indians, 
and has therefore been discussed in some detail in an Appendix to 
Chapter X. 

The fourth section deals with the political history”of the period. It 
has been customary hitherto to rely for such knowledge only on the few 
scattered historical notices contained in the Rigveda. Pargiter’s attempt 
to reconstruct a continuous historical narrative from the data, particularly 
the royal genealogies, contained in the Puranas and the Epics, has been 
systematically ignored in historical works, even in the comprehensive 
Cambridge History of India. But, in spite of obvious shortcomings, 
Pargiter’s theories cannot be altogether discarded even on their merits, 
and the fact remains that they offer the only fair basis on which the 
ancient political history of India can be built up. So instead of being 

26 


PREFACE 




tent to glean a few isolated facts from the Rigveda, as has hith 
een done, we have tried to trace a brief outline of the traditional history 
of early India on the lines laid down by Pargiter. This must not, of 
course, be confused with history proper, but it possesses none the less 
great value of its own, both as a tangible framework for connecting a 
number of well-authenticated facts, and as a basis for further investigation 
of our historical knowledge of this obscure period. Pargiter has at least, 
successfully demonstrated that it is a mistake to regard such great 
historical figures of antiquity as Puru, Mandhata, Nahusha, Yayati, 
Kartavlrya Arjuna, etc., as mere fanciful and mythological names, and 
any theory which gives them some sort of historical setting cannot but 
be regarded as of great value to students of Indian history. 

In spite of the limitations of our knowledge of the political history of 
the period, there can be no doubt that its chief interest and importance 
lie in the picture of culture and civilization offered by the vast field of 
Vedic literature. Whereas everything else is but vaguely known, we 
possess nearly full information about the growth and gradual evolution 
of the Indian civilization from the well-marked stratification of the mass 
of literature, collectively known as the Vedas. It is also a matter of 
general knowledge that this civilization is the common basis on which 
succeeding generations of diverse races and localities have built up the 
imposing structure known as the Hindu civilization. This would explain 
why this volume has been entitled The Vedic Age, and detailed study 
has been made of it in three different sections, corresponding to the three 
well-marked stages of the evolution of Vedic literature. 

There is a general agreement among scholars about the chronological 
sequence of Vedic literature: the Rik-Samhita representing the earliest 
stage, the other Samhitas and Brahmanas the next, and the Upanishads 
and Sutras the concluding one. But while these chronological divisions 
are, broadly speaking, accurate, it is to be noted that they are to some 
extent overlapping, and it is difficult to draw an absolutely rigid line 
of demarcation between them. It is likely, for example, that some portions 
of the Atharva-Samhitd are as old as, if not older than, portions of the 
Rik-Samhita, and some of the oldest Upanishads certainly reach back 
to the Brahmana period. Nevertheless the general outlook of the three 
different categories of literature is sufficiently distinct to label them as 
belonging to three successive chronological periods, and they have been 
dealt with accordingly in three separate sections. 

It is, however, a difficult problem to assign definite dates to the three 
literary stages of the Vedic period. In spite of extravagant theories about 
the antiquity of the Rik-Samhita, the view that it received its present 
form about 1000 B.e. has much to commend itself. Though mainly based 
on philological grounds, as enunciated in Chapter XII, this theory finds 
unexpected support even from Indian traditions. For some of the kings 

27 


UWtSTf?) 



PREFACE 


_ to in the Rik-Samhitd seem to be identical with those mentioV^ 
royal genealogies and occupying a low place in the dynastic list. 
Further, as Pargiter has pointed out, “the Epic and Puranic tradition 
unanimously and repeatedly declares that the Veda was arranged by 
Vyasa,” who flourished about the time of the Bharata War, which has 
been dated between 1500 and 1000 b.c. by many scholars. Whatever 
we might think of this date, it is important to remember that along 
with the doctrine that "the Veda is eternal and everlasting,” there are 
also ancient traditions to the effect that it was compiled by Vyasa not 
long before the great Bharata War. The view that dates the Rik-Samhitd, 
in its present form, to about 1000 B.c., cannot therefore be regarded as 
absolutely wide of the mark and altogether without any basis of support 
in Indian tradition. But ife» must be remembered that although the 
Rik-Samhitd might have received its final shape in about 1000 B.c., some 
of its contents are much older, and go back certainly to 1500 b.c., and 
not improbably even to a much earlier date. 

There is no doubt whatsoever that the oldest Upanishads are pre- 
Buddhist, and some of them at any rate belonged to the seventh 
century b.c., if not earlier still. The®later Samhitas and Brahmanas 
accordingly may be placed, generally speaking, in the ninth and eighth 
centuries b.c. These dates are of course only provisional and are set 
down here as merely working hypotheses. 

No precise date can be assigned to the end of the Vedic Age, for the 
Sutras and Upanishads, representing the last stage of Vedic literature, 
contain texts of varying antiquity. While, as mentioned above, some of 
them are probably as old as the seventh century b.c. ; - if not older still, 
others are probably as late as the third or fourth century b.c. Although, 
therefore, the Vedic Age cannot be regarded, strictly speaking, as having 
come to an. end in 600 b.c. with which this volume closes, this date has 
been selected mainly for two reasons. In the first place, the sixth 
century b.c. saw the rise of Buddhism, Jainism, and other religious sects 
heralding that Protestant movement which was destined to bring to an 
end the unquestioned supremacy of Vedic religion and culture. Secondly, 
our knowledge of political history becomes more precise and definite 
from the sixth century b.c., and we can clearly perceive how the stage 
was gradually set for the rise of the great Magadha empire which con¬ 
stitutes the most distinguishing feature of the succeeding period. 

Although the age of the Sutras and Upanishads extends beyond 600 B.C., 
culturally it is a direct offshoot and a continuation of the earlier Vedic 
civilisation, and reflects no special characteristic of the later era, such as 
we find in the Epics, Puranas, or Buddhist and Jaina literature. It has, 
therefore, been included in the volume dealing with the Vedic Age even 

in disregard of the strict limitations of chronology. 

This volume attempts a picture of what may be regarded as the dawn 

28 



PREFACE 

indu civilization. To continue this metaphor, we may say that the 
next two volumes reflect its full morning glory and noonday splendour; 
in the fourth volume we come across the shadows of the declining day, 
while dusk sets in with the fifth'. Then follows the darkness of the long 
night, so far as Hindu civilization is concerned, a darkness which envelop- 
it even now. This gives a broad idea of the distribution of the first five 
volumes of this series. 

The Editor takes this opportunity of offering his sincere thanks to 
the contributors of this volume for their hearty co-operation, and to 
Professor H. G. Rawlinson for having kindly revised the MS. 

He notes with great regret that one of the contributors, Rao Bahadur 
K. N. Dikshit, late Director-General of Archaeology, Government of 
India, passed away while the book was in the press, and takes this 
opportunity to convey his condolence to the bereaved family. His death 
has been a serious loss to Indian Archaeology. 

The Department of Archaeology, Government of India, has kindly 
supplied us with photographs for which we express our hearty thanks 
to the authorities. 

Some amount of repetition or overlapping is inevitable in a book of 
this kind where different authors deal with literature and the philosophical, 
religious, and social ideas mainly derived from it, and where the different 
chapters are closely related to one another. 

The system of transliteration adopted in this volume is that followed 
in the Epigraphia Indica. The geographical names have been spelt as 
in the Imperial Gazetteer, with a few exceptions such as “Krishna” 
for "Kistna,” “Narmada” for “Narbada.” Diacritical marks have not 
been used, as a rule, in geographical names and oriental words with an 
English suffix (Puranic, Rigvedic, Brahmanical, etc.) except to indicate 
the long a sound (a). In the word Aryan, however, the a has not been 
lengthened as it may now be regarded as almost a naturalized English 
word. 

In addition to footnotes, general references have been added at the 
beginning of some chapters in order to indicate books or articles in 
periodicals which have been extensively used or frequently referred to 
in the body of the text. No footnotes have been given in Chapter II as 
all the works cited therein will be dealt with in detail in subsequent 
chapters. 

A Bibliography has been added for the convenience of those readers 
who wish to make special studies of any particular topic. As most of 
our knowledge regarding the history and culture of the Yedic Age is 
derived from Vedic literature, and a large number of secondary texts 
also deal with the period as a whole, a General Bibliography has been 
given at the end which covers the topics dealt with in Books IV, 
V, VI, and VII. Generally speaking the Bibliography is selective in 

29 





PREFACE 


(St 

3 doMeJ 


acter and does not aim at giving an exhaustive list of works 
'ject. The only exception to this is the Bibliography to Chapter IX 
- ' ere an attempt has been made to give a list of all important contribu- 
hons on the Indus Valley civilization, as the subject is comparatively 
new and controversial in character, and it is difficult to assess the proper 
value of the different theories. As copious footnotes have been given in 
many chapters, important references indicated therein have not been 
included. 


30 


ABIA. 

ABORI. 

AE. 

AIHT. 

Ait. Br. 

AJA. 

AL. 

Anthrop. Soc. 

Jub. Vol. 
AP. 

Ap. Dh.S. 

Ap. §.S. 

ASI. 

ASS. 

AV. 

Bau. Dh.S. 
Bau. S.S. 
BDCRI. 
BEFEO. 

BIR. 

BMFA. 

Br. 

Brill, 

BSOS. 

BV. 

CAG. 

CAH. 

CAI. 

Chan-d. 

Chhand. 

CHI. 

Comm. Vol. 

CR. 

CS. 

Cult. Her. 
Dh. S. 


ABBREVIATIONS 

Annual Bibliography of Indian Archaeology, Leyden. 
Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 
Poona. 

Ancient Egypt, London. 

Ancient Indian Historical Tradition, by F. E. Pargiter. 
Aitareya Brdhmana. 

American Journal of Archaeology, Philadelphia. 
Altindisches Leben, by H. Zimmer. 

Anthropological Society of Bombay, Jubilee Volume. 

Aryan Path, Bombay . 

Apastamba Dharma-sulra. 

Apastamba Srauta-sutra, 

Annual Report of the Archaeological Survey of India. 
Ananddsrama Sanskrit Series, Poona. 

Atharvaveda. 

Baudhdyana Dharma-sutra. 

Baudhdyana Sr autd-sutra. 

Bulletin of the Deccan College Research Institute, Poona . 
Bulletin de VBoole Frangaise d*Extreme-Orient, Hanot . 
Bharatiya Itihdsaki Ruparekhd {in Hindi), Vol. I, by 
Jay a Chandra Vidyalankar. 

Bulletin of the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston. 

Brdhmana. 

Brihaddranyaka Upanishad. 

Bidletin of the School of Oriental (and African) Studies, 

• London. 

Brdratiya Vidyd, Bombay. 

Cunningham's Ancient Geography of India, Ed. by S. N. 
Majumdar. 

Cambridge Ancient History. 

Chronology of Ancient India, by S. N. Pradhan. 
Chanhu-daro Excavations, 1933-36, by E. J. H. Mackay. 
Chhandogya Upanishad. 

Cambridge History of India. 

Commemoration Volume . 

Calcutta Review, Calcutta. 

Current Science, Bangalore. 

Cultural Heritage of India. Published by Sri Ramakrishna 
Centenary Committee, Calcutta. 

Dharma-sutra, 


3 1 



Gau. Dh.S. 

GD. 

Geol. Mag. 

Gr. S. 

Harappa. 

Hari. 

HASL. 

HIL. 

HIP. 

HOS. 

HSL. 

IA. 

IAL. 

IC. 

IHQ. 

ILN. 

Ind. Antiquities. 
Ind. Sc. Congress. 
Ind. Stud. 

IP. 

JA. 

JAHRS. 

Jai. G. S. 

JAOS. 

JASB. 

JBHS. 

JBHU. 

JBORS. 

JGIS. 

JGRS. 

JIH. 

JISOA, 

JMU. 

JOR. 

JRAI. 

JRAS, 


ABBREVIATIONS 

Dynasties of the Kali Age, by F. E. Pargiter. 

Epigraphia Indica, Delhi. 

Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics, Ed. by J. Hastings . 
Gautama Dharrna-sutra. 

Geographical Dictionary of Ancient and Medieval India, 
2nd Edn., by N. L. Dey. 

Geological Magazine . 

Grihya-sutra. 

Excavations at Harappa, by M. S. Vats. 

Harivamsa {Bombay Edition ). 

History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, by F. Max Muller. 
History of Indian Literature. 

History of Indian Philosophy, Vol II, Creative Period , by 
S. K. Belvalkar and R. D. Ranade. 

Harvard Oriental Series, Cambridge, Mass. 

History of Sanskrit Literature, by A. B. Keith. 

Indian Antiquary, Bombay. 

Indian Art and Letters, London. 

Indian Culture, Calcutta. 

Indian Historical Quarterly, Calcutta. 

Illustrated London News, London. 

Studies in Indian Antiquities, by H. C. Raychaudhuri. 
Indian Science Congress. 

Indische Studien, by A. Weber. 

Indian Philosophy, by S. Radhakrishnan. 

Journal Asiatique, Paris. 

Journal of the Andhra Historical Research Society, 
Rajahmundry. 

Jaiminiya Grihya-sutra. 

Journal of the American Oriental Society. 

Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, Calcutta. 

Journal of the Bombay Historical Society, Bombay. 
Journal of the Benares Hindu University, Benares. 
Journal of the Behar and Orissa Research Society, Patna. 
Journal of the Greater India Society, Calcutta. 

Journal of the Gujarat Research Society, Bombay. 

Journal of Indian History, Madras. 

Journal of the Indian Society of Oriental Art, Calcutta. 
Journal of the Madras University, Madras. 

Journal of Oriental Research, Madras. 

Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute of Great 
Britain and Ireland, London. 

Journal of the Rbyal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and 
Ireland, London. 



32 


THE VEDIC AGE 

BOOK ONE 

INTRODUCTION 




jgF- i tf!V* * IT 1 

I • \ dMIi 

\&u 


\ yjfi, 

■ / U 

V * 

-■la 


Vjjv 


OF ED 1 


■WiiMMPf 


i’KJ' 





& 


INDIAN HISTORY, ITS NATURE, SCOPE AND METHOD 

inhabiting those lands. An artificial continuity is no doubt md 
ained in these two countries, and the link with the past is not altogether 
snapped, as in the cases of Egypt and Mesopotamia. Nevertheless, the 
difference can only be regarded as one of degree and not of kind; and 
neither Greece nor Italy offers a parallel to India, in respect of either 
antiquity or continuity of civilization. 

To this difference may be added the present position of India. Her 
political subjection and lack of material power have relegated her to a 
position of marked inferiority in the eyes of the world. Both these causes 
have affected the study of the history of India in more ways than one. It 
has not been easy, for instance, to bring a detached scientific spirit to bear 
on the study of "the history of India. This spirit, which so conspicuously 
distinguishes European writers of the history of Egypt and ancient 
countries in Western Asia, is not seldom lamentably absent while they 
deal with the history of India. The reason is not far to seek, and may be 
traced to a psychological instinct or political prejudice. The India of 
today has cast its shadow on the past, and few writers have been able 
to disentangle the two and view each of them in its true perspective. 
The political history of India, even of ancient times, has been almost 
invariably viewed through the spectacles of the eighteenth and nineteenth 
centuries. V. A. Smith, the well-known historian of ancient India and a 
distinguished member of the Indian Civil Service, never concealed his 
anxiety to prove the beneficence of the British Raj by holding before 
his readers the picture of anarchy and confusion which, in his view, has 
been the normal condition in India with rare intervals. To him, as to many 
others before and after him, ancient Indian history after the death of 
Harsha-vardhana was merely a pathetic tale of political chaos and 
internecine struggles, pointing to the inevitable moral: “such was India / 
and such it always has been till the British established a stable order.’’ J 
Sometimes the pendulum swings to the opposite extreme, and Indian 
writers seek to find in ancient India a replica of the most advanced 
political institutions of the West. From isolated phrases of doubtful import 
they conjure up a picture of a full-fledged modern democracy and even of 
an up-to-date parliamentary form of government. This is a counterblast, 
from the Indian side, to the inveterate belief of European writers in 
undiluted autocracy as the only form of government that ever prevailed 
in India. To them “Oriental despotism” is an article of faith that colours 
their whole outlook. Some have also inherited the classical idea that 
wisdom and enlightenment were always a sort of monopoly of the West, 
and the East, comparatively as backward as she is today, must have 
acquired all the elements of higher culture"from the West. 

The squalid poverty of modern India colours the outlook on economic 
conditions in ancient and mediaeval times. Even enlightened historians 
find it difficult to accept the view that Indians built ships and navigated 

39 





THE VEDIC AGE 


seas, for no better reason than that modem Indians show such 
Irsion from, and ineptitu de for, maritime activities. Such instances 
may be multiplied to almost any extent. There are no doubt exceptions, 
but one cannot deny, or overlook, the broad fact that Indian history has 
suffered much from an instinct to read the present into the past. 

The opposite danger of reading the past into the present has been no 
less a potential factor in distorting the history of India. To many the 
most glaring imperfections and even the most degrading features of 
modern Indian social life are sanctified by antiquity. They have a tendency 
to judge everything they see before them, not by its present form and 
effect, but by a reference to what they conceive to be its original character, 
and the part it is supposed to have played in building up an ideal society 
in the phst. This almost necessarily leads to the . artificial creation of a 
golden age which rests mainly on imagination and iatmtion, independent 
of historical evidence. This intellectual support of false doctrines arid 
trad institutions in the name of India’s past often proceeds from a 
perverted form of patriotic sentiments or an inborn sense of national 
pride. In either case it is a wrong interpretation of Indian history, and 
what is worse, such interpretation is often devised as an instrument for 
consecrating all deep-seated prejudices. 

The student of Indian history must avoid these pitfalls and follow 
the modem method of scientific research. Our aim should be the dis¬ 
covery of the truth, and nothing but the truth, and in order to attain 
this goal we must apply our minds fearlessly and without prejudice 
and preconceptions to the study of all available evidence. We should 
properly sift these data by all rational methods, handle them in the spirit 
of a judge rather than an advocate, and formulate our conclusions only 
as far as they permit us to do so. We may not achieve definite results 
in many cases, and final and decisive conclusions would probably be few 
and far between. But it is better to plead ignorance, express doubts and 
put forward alternative possibilities rather than definitely uphold a 
view on meagre and insufficient grounds. We must be particularly on 
our guard where any such view is likely to evoke strong sentiments and 
passions, or affect the interest of any class or community. The history 
of India’s past touches the present life of India on many points, and we 
may legitimately expect the one to guide and control the other. This 
makes it all the more difficult, especially for an Indian writer, to take a 
detached view of the history of India and approach it in a purely scientific 
attitude. Nevertheless the difficulty, great as it is, must be overcome, and a 
proper critical spirit should be cultivated, if we are to read aright the story 
of India’s past and correctly understand its implications for the future. 

We have so far dealt with the peculiar difficulties that confront us 
in the study of Indian history in view of its continuity. Another obstacle, 
also of a somewhat special character, arises.from the nature of the evidence 

40 


<§L 



INDIAN HISTORY, ITS NATURE, SCOPE AND METHOD 


St 


which the study must necessarily be based. The different classes 
evidence and their nature, scope and value will be discussed in detail in 
the next chapter. But some general points must be noted here in order 
to indicate both the limitations and the specific directions of our study. 

The first thing to remember is that for the longest period of Indian 
history, viz.,' from the earliest time down to the Muslim conquest in the 
thirteenth century a.d., a period of about four thousand years, we possess 
no historical text of any kind, much less such a detailed narrative as we 
possess in the case of Greece, Rome, and China. The history of ancient 
India resembles, therefore, that of ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia. In all 
these cases it has only been possible to reconstruct the skeleton with the 
help of archaeological evidence discovered in comparatively recent times. 
This history differs radically from what we normally im deist and by 
the word. It is mostly a string of names and incidents, often with wide 
gaps, and almost always wrEhout that fullness of detail which enables 
us to trace the causes and consequences of specific events, examine the 
various forces at work in their true perspective, mark the general ten¬ 
dencies of the epoch, explain the inner causes of the rise and fall of 
kingdoms and empires, or the progress and decay of races and nations, 
and determine the exact relation between the different elements of the 
body politic or the different aspects of life and society. These and many 
other features which make history a social science in the real sense of 
the term are lacking in the history of ancient India, more or less to the 
same extent as in that of other ancient civilizations that flourished in 
Egypt or Western Asia. 

But there is one very important difference. Ancient India has bequeathed 
to us a vast treasury of texts which represent the intellectual and literary 
activities of more than two thousand years and cover a wide field. The 
earliest literary work, the Samhita of the Rigveda, is at least three thousand 
years old and may be even considerably older. A continuous stream of 
literature flowing since that remote age, widening in course of centuries, 
and embracing almost all fields of human endeavour excepting political 
activity, throws a light on the civilization of India such as we do not meet 
with in cases of other ancient cultures. This mass of literature deals : 
with philosophy and religion, including ethics, ritual, and ceremonial; 
cosmogony, cosmology, geography, astronomy, and the allied sciences; 
political and economic, doctrines and practices; and, in a minor way, 
with almost all branches of secular life. It includes, besides a mass of 
religious texts, purely literary works such as epics, lyrics, Kavyas (poems), 
dramas and prose romances, as well as biographies and folk tales. This 
literature is as bulky in volume as it is varied in its contents. Although 
it does not help us very much in reconstructing the political history of 
ancient India, it throws a flood of light on, and enables us to trace the 
various stages in the development of, culture and civilization in ancient 

4i 


THE VEDIC AGE 


(st 

mMJlJM 


^udia, such as is not possible in the case of ancient Egypt, Western^ 
and China, and even Greece and Rome. 

This fact must be borne in mind in any approach to the study of 
ancient Indian history. We should not expect any critical and detailed 
narrative of the political events, or a proper estimate of the life and 
character of great historical personages of whom we catch but flitting 
glimpses in the moving panorama of the history of two thousand years 
that passes before our eyes in a haze of mist or gloom. The galaxy of 
kings, generals, and statesmen which crowd, for instance, the canvas of 
the history of Greece and Rome, the moving stories of their lives and 
activities, the surging mass of internal and external forces that shape 
the destiny of the state and set it going, sometimes in slow evolution and 
sometime^ in revolutionarj^ardour, and the ebb and tide of national 
glory from age to age with its intense human appeal and great lessons 
for posterity—all these and many other factors which form the spell of 
the history of Greece and Rome do not constitute the main force or the 
chief interest of ancient Indian history. That these elements were not 
lacking in the evolution of Indian history is proved by the occasional 
glimpses of great men and great events*; of the same genre. But these are 
mostly shadows, without that glow and colour which endow them with 
life and spirit. Hence the picture is dull and lifeless and, being devoid 
of general interest, makes no passionate appeal to human mind. 

But though admittedly deficient in this respect, Indian history is 
abundantly rich in its delineation of the progress of the human mind 
and society from its earliest infancy to a comparatively mature state. 
Other civilizations must have passed through the same or similar stages, 
but we lack the means to trace them in such fullness of details. In no 
other case, for example, can we go back to the dim beginnings of those 
intellectual and moral ideas which appear to us in full maturity in the 
shape of a set form of religion, theology, and philosophy. Thanks to the 
vast mass of Indian literature, we can not only do this but follow, in a 
general way, the long , and tortuous ways which human civilization, 
at least in a large part of the world, has had to pursue in its weary and 
tedious onward march for thousands of years. This constitutes a claim 
for universal interest which should not be less keen than that inspired by 
the political history of Greece and Rome. 

The genius of each considerable group of humanity is perhaps adapted 
more to one kind of end than to another. It has been argued that the 
Indians had a bent of mind which looked more to the inner self than the 
outer body, to matters spiritual rather than the material world. 
In the absence of a fuller knowledge of the political history or secular life 
of ancient India, it is difficult to set the final seal of approval to this 
view, although it is very generally held. But so far as available evidence 
goes, there cannot be the slightest doubt that Indian civilization manifests 

42 





mtST/fir 



NDIAN HISTORY, ITS NATURE) SCOPE AND METHOD 

in a way and a form very different from that with which we a.h 
Jniliar in the rest of the world. We have consequently to approach the 
history of India in a different spirit, and adopt a different scale of values 
in order to appraise her culture and civilization. The wars and conquests, 
the rise and fall of empires and nations, and the development of political 
ideas and institutions should not be regarded as the principal object of 
our study, and must be relegated to a position of secondary importance. 
On the other hand more stress should be laid upon philosophy, religion, 
art, and letters, the development of social and moral ideas, and the 
general progress of those humanitarian ideals and institutions which form 
the distinctive feature of the spiritual life of India and her greatest con¬ 
tribution to the civilization of the world. 

Nevertheless, the political history of each period, as far as it is known 
to us, must be the starting point of our study, as it forms the backbone 
of history. Its function may be compared to that of the skeleton in a. 
human body which gives shape and distinctness to the mass of flesh and 
skin and marks it with the stamp of individuality. 

The greatest handicap in the treatment of the history of ancient India, 
both political and cultural, is the absence of a definite chronology. The 
dates of political events and of the vast mass of literature which forms 
the basis of cultural study are but imperfectly known, and the farther 
back we recede, even a close approximation of these dates becomes more 
and more difficult and uncertain. This gives scope for endless discussions 
and wide differences of opinion. We experience a similar difficulty in 
the interpretation of data, as they are often vague and meagre. It is 
not always possible, and in many cases neither desirable nor profitable, 
in a general comprehensive history of India, to review the different 
standpoints, and the historian is often obliged to adopt one particular 
view, as against others, with or sometimes even without brief reference 
to them. For minute discussions of the merits of conflicting views the 
reader must be referred to special treatises or articles in journals. Great 
care should, however, always be taken to distinguish clearly the known 
from the unknown, and the doubtful from the certain, and to indicate, 
as far as possible,-the range of our ignorance and uncertainty. Ignorance 
may not be bliss in historical studies, but it is certainly folly to be 
wise where wisdom is based on imperfect knowledge and serves merely 
as a cloak for dogmatism. As the following pages will show, the path 
of the historian is beset with difficulties, doubts, and uncertainties; 
he has often to advance laboriously through dubious tracks and not 
seldom loses them altogether. His task frequently resolves itself into 
weighing one set of doubtful evidence against another in order to arrive 
at what appears to him to be the most reasonable conclusion. More often 
than not, such theories are all that he can offer. The historian, no less 
than his readers, must clearly recognize the provisional nature of these 

43 


miSTffy. 


THE VEDIC AGE 



btheses and be ready to see them modified or upset and replaced 
ers with the discovery of fresh data. They are slender but necessary 
foundations on which the history of India has been built up in the past 
and has to be built in future. 

The observations hitherto made apply more particularly to the ancient 
period of Indian history. With the beginning of the next period the 
situation is considerably improved by the existence of a series of 
chronicles, dealing with the history of India from the foundation of the 
political power by foreign Muslim invaders up to the eighteenth century 
a.d. These chronicles include detailed narratives of contemporary events 
as well as compilations of past history from older sources now lost to us. 
They canriot be regarded as an absolutely authentic account or impartial 
review of historical eventsfbut supply ample data for the reconstruction 
of the history of the period. Both in scope and value they are comparable 
to the chronicles and historical treatises in Europe of the same period. 
Unfortunately these historical texts concern themselves primarily with 
the events and fortunes of the principal Muslim ruling dynasties, and dwell 
only very” incidentally on the history of the smaller states, specially the 
Hindu kingdoms. Nor, with a few exceptions, do they throw much light 
on the life of the people at large outside the royal courts. Although, 
therefore, there is a great advance in our historical knowledge over the 
earlier period, and in some cases we have got a pretty good historical 
account, it is, generally speaking, neither as definite nor as full as our 
modern historical sense would demand, m spite of the valuable additional 
help that the historian gets from other sources such as the archaeological 
evidence, official documents, contemporary literature, accounts of foreign 
travellers, etc. Nevertheless it would be unjust to deny that from about 
1200 a.d. India possesses a written history which would not suffer very 
much in comparison with the history of contemporary Europe, and might 
differ from it in degree, but not in kind. It is a fairly good and detailed 
history, but of kings and states, not of the country and the people. 

The thirteenth century a.d. may be regarded as a broad dividing line 
in Indian history in more than one sense. The sovereign power passed 
into the hands of foreigners who belonged to alien races and professed a 
new religion of somewhat militant type. The establishment, for the first 
time, of two diverse systems of culture and civilization led to a definite 
cleavage'between the rulers and the ruled such as India had never known 
before. Indian history gains in content and becomes richer in detail, but 
loses unity of treatment. The stories of the ruling powers grow in 
volume, but we know little of the lot of the ruled who formed the vast 
mass of the people. 

The first three or four centuries of Muslim rule in India form a very 
important period of transition. The foreign rulers and the new religion 
with its exotic culture took a long time to take root in the soil. But we 

44 


Qt 


mt$r#y. 



DIAN HISTORY, ITS NATURE, SCOPE AND METHOD 

tile reliable knowledge of the struggle for independence and thd 
5s by which the resistance of the people was broken down. Of the 
early reaction of Hinduism towards Islam, and the process by which the 
latter gradually made headway in this land of conservatism and orthodoxy, 
we know even less. The Muslim chroniclers, our sole source of information, 
generally speaking, record only a series of cheap military victories over 
the rebellious or recalcitrant infidels, and these are looked down upon 
as merely hewers of ’wood and drawers of water whose life and fortunes 
are hardly of any consequence to them. They would have us believe that 
the triumphant banner of Islam merrily floated from one end of the land 
to the other, and nothing else counted in the country. 

But this is merely one side of the picture, and that of the lion painted 
by himself. We know that there was always a Hindu India, side by side 
with Muslim India, and it again asserted itself, both in politics and culture, 
in the fullness of time. It was not dead, but lay dormant in the early 
centuries of the foreign rule. The history of the Hindus, except in South 
India and Rajputana, during this period is, however, almost a blank page. 
The scanty remains of their literature throw some faint light on the 
social and religious changes that came over them, but the little that we 
know merely casts into greater relief the depth of our ignorance. 

Light dawns again in the sixteenth century. The establishment of the 
Mughal power ushers in a new period of Indian history in which our 
knowledge of India as a whole is much fuller, and we begin to see things 
in their true perspective. The vision of a new India, built upon the only 
stable foundation of the love and confidence of the ruled and the fusion 
of the two great cultures, now emerges in clear light. History, though 
it still continues mainly to be the court history of the Muslim rulers, 
begins to visualize India as a whole, and takes note of Hindu India. 
The rosy dream of a politically united India, on a common cultural basis, 
is soon shattered, but Hindu India comes to stay and the historian no 
longer loses sight of it. The balance is restored and the unity of Indian 
history is securely established. In spite of many vicissitudes, we can trace 
the fortunes of India as a whole through the pages of history. This unity 
of treatment is never lost in later times. 

It is not necessary to dwell at length upon the modern history of India. 
Strictly speaking, it offers no peculiarities, in respect of sources of infor¬ 
mation or method of treatment, save and except the restrictions imposed 
by political considerations. The archives of the British Government are 
gradually being thrown open, and the Indian states also have recently 
adopted a more liberal policy in this respect. Contemporary historical 
documents are ample, though they have not yet been worked out as 
fully or as independently as one could have desired. 

It will be hardly any exaggeration to say that Indian history, in a 
comprehensive sense, has so far been neither written nor even conceived 

45 



Ml NtSTfy 



THE VEDIC AGE 


<8L 


m a proper spirit. A clear grasp of the subject is generally lacking. An 
attempt has been made above to analyse the different factors that account 
for this lamentable state of things. We have also tried to indicate the true 
spirit in which the study of Indian history should be approached, the 
inherent defects and shortcomings imposed by lack of materials, and the 
likely dangers and pitfalls which the historian should avoid. 

The observations made above would also convey some idea of what the 
“History of India*' means to its readers; what they might legitimately 
look for, and what they are likely to miss; the proper value they should 
attach to different aspects, and the profit they may derive from them; 
the resemblances as well as the differences which it offers to the history 
of other countries; and lastly, the extent to which the interest of the 
subject is confined to the particular region and people of whom it treats 
or concerns a wider range of humanity. 


46 


mtSTfiy. 



SOURCES OF INDIAN HISTORY 


<SL 


r>f Asoka form a class by themselves, and contribute largely to our know¬ 
ledge of the history of the period and the spirit that animated one of the 
greatest men that, ever sat on a royal throne. No other inscriptions make 
even a near approach to them in point of interest or historical importance. 

One form of alphabet is used in all these records, excepting two groups 
in the north-west, which are written in an altogether different script. The 
latter, known as Kharoshthi, was obviously derived from Aramaic and, 
like the Semitic alphabet, was written from right to left. It continued in 
use in the north-western corner of India for many centuries, but vanished 
without leaving any trace behind. 

The scrip t ftp which 'all' the other inscriptions of Asoka were written 
is known as Brahmi, and is written.jrp.in left to right. It is the earliest 
form of Indian writing known to us, and from it have been derived, by slow 
evolution through ages, all the Indian characters current today, including 
Tamil, Telugu, and Kanarese. When the records of Asoka first came to 
notice towards the close of the eighteenth century, their script was 
as much an enigma to all as in the fourteenth century a.d., when the 
Emperor Firuz Tughluk brought a pillar with Asoka’s inscription to 
Delhi, and made a vain attempt to have it read by the Indian Pundits. 
The deciphering of the ASokan inscriptions by Prinsep (described in 
detail in the next chapter) is one of the romances of archaeology com¬ 
parable to those associated with the discovery of the clue to the hiero¬ 
glyphics and cuneiform writings* It was accomplished in a.d. 1837, and 
in course of the next fifty years Indian epigraphy was placed on a firm 
footing. By the devoted and patient labour of a number of scholars the 
different types of Indian scripts were thoroughly studied, analysed, and 
classified, and a scientific basis laid down for Indian palaeography, which 
has made it possible to correlate them to different ages and localities. 
Apart from their intrinsic interest as historical records, the A&okan 
inscriptions have thus proved of great value as the starting-point ef 
epigraphic and palaeographic studies in India. 

The inscriptions of the post-A&okan period may be broadly divided 
into two classes, official and private. The official records are in most cases 
either praSastis, i.e. eulogies of kings written by their court-poets, off 
land-grants. The most famous example of the former is furnished by the 
long record of Samudra-gupta engraved on an Asokan pillar, now in the 
Allahabad forfeit describes in great detail the personal qualities and the 
military achievements of the . grga^ Gupta, emperor and forms the cfiief 
document of his memorable reign) (The age of the imperial Guptas is aow 
justly regarded as the Golden Age of India. 'But all memories of it . and 
even the very name of Samud ra-gupta —the Indian Napoleon—wh® laid 
the foundations of the Gupta empire, were lost to Indian traditio® The 
Allahabad pratasti has preserved from oblivion the name and -tame of 
this great hero and, along with a number of other inscriptions, fiarms the 

53 





misT/ty 



<SL 


THE VEDIC AGE 

Ai ,ain basis of our knowledge of the Gupta period\TJie, Gwalior firasasti o| 
Bhoja has similarly thrown a flood of light on the imperial Pratiharasf 
another forgotten dynasty of ancient India,) 

Among other prasastis, supplying valuable historical information, may 
be mentioned that of king Vijayasena of the Sena dynasty of Bengal 
engraved on a slab of stone found at Deopara. Its nominal object is to 
record the building of a temple by Vijayasena, but it is almost wholly 
devoted to a p anegy ric of the great king, recording his victories and 
achievements in the most high-flown language. The Aihole inscription 
of Pulakehn II, the Chalukya king, belongs to exactly the same type. 

By far the largest number of official documents are charters conveying 
the sale or gift of lands. These aje mostly engrav ed on copper-plates, though 
in very rare instances they are also, found on stone pillars and in temples. 
{These charters define the boundaries of the lands and specify the object 
and conditions of the grant, often enumerating other interesting details 
such as the price of land, the mode of its measurement, exhortations to 
future kings not to confiscate the grants, and quotations from the scrip¬ 
tures threatening severe punishment after death for those who■ violate 
the grants in any way. 

Interesting though these details are in many ways, they do nqt contain 
much that is of historical importance. But by a formal convention, 
fortunately followed in many if not in all cases, these charters begin with 
a s6rt of royal pra&asti which gives a short account of the donor’s family 
for several generations, and describes in greater detail the life and achieve¬ 
ments of the ruling king. These formal and introductory portions in the 
land-grants have supplied us with invaluable historical material. Some¬ 
times, as in the'Chola inscriptions, this, introductory part runs to a very 
great length, and forms.a valuable historical document by itself. Very often 
this portion was wholly or partially stereotyped in the royal archives and 
used, in several grants. Sometimes the portion was independently engraved 
on copper-plates and these were kept ready in the office, so that when 
occasion arose, only the details of the grant had to be added to make 
them formal charters. In short, this historical part had little organic 
Connection with the grant itself, and may. be regarded as a praiasti pre- 
fl-xed to it. 

These prasastis were composed by court-poets or other royal officials, 
and one would naturally hesitate to take them at their face value. There 
is undoubtedly a great deal of exaggeration in the effusions of the poets. 
It p customary for them to endow their patron-kings with all the ideal 
virtues and to represent them as the rulers of the whole world girdled by 
. the hour oceans. Such general expressions must be discarded as of no 
- historical value. But greater value attaches to the specific enumerations 
of campaigns, victories, and conquests; for these documents were, public 
property, and their authors would be justly exposed to ridicule if they 

54 





SOURCES OF INDIAN HISTORY 

iade categorical statements without any basis whatsoever. Of cour: 
they were expected to exaggerate the achievements of their masters, but 
even such exaggeration implies a substratum of fact. A great deal of 
caution is therefore needed to assess the proper value of the claims made 
on behalf of a king, and they should be checked by all possible means. 
Such checks are furnished by the statements made on behalf of the rival 
kings, and sometimes welcome corroboration is afforded by independent 
evidence. 

In cases where the inscriptions are engraved on rocks or objects not 
easily portable, their find-spots become of great importance as indicating 
the territorial jurisdiction of the king. Sometimes the records of vassal 
chiefs and finds of coins corroborate the claims of territorial conquests. 
By these and other means it is almost always possible to make legitimate 
inferences from these documents about the achievements of the kings. 

The official d i ()(;umeuts, .however, form only a very small proportion of 
the inscriptions. By far the larger majority are private recor ds. They cover 
a wide range, from a short votive inscription of two or three words 'to 
pompous poetical compositions glorifying an individual or famiiy.(Thejl 
throw light on various aspects of society even where they do not directlyl 
contribute to political history. A good many are engraved on images of 
gods and religious buildings, recording pious donations. These constitute 
the chief means of fixing the dates of these images and buildings, and have 
been of incalculable help in tracing the evolution of art and religion, and 
determining their general condition in any specified period. Similarly the 
language and style of the inscriptions have been of immense value to*the 
linguistic and literary history of India. I he evidence of the inscriptions, 
taken in mass, is unerring in these respects. If we..analyse, for example, 
the 1500 or more inscriptions prior to the Gupta age that have so far 
come to light, we find an overwhelmingly large number—more than 95 
per cent—written in Prakrit and concerned with non-Brahmanical 
religious sects, mainly Buddhist and Jain. The proportion is almost just 
the reverse in favour of the Sanskrit language and the Brahmanical 
religion, if we take the inscriptions of the period subsequent to the Gupta 
age. Even allowing for all accidental factors, this one fact betokens a 
sweeping change in the life of the people both in respect of the religious 
ideas and the medium of literary expression. 

These inscriptions also throw important light on political history. 
Many of them refer to ruling kings otherwise unknown, and some of 
them even supply dates, either in regnal years or in a specified or un¬ 
specified era. This has been a prolific source, of the constant addition to 
our historical knowledge, though where supplementary evidence is lacking 
we know little more than the royal name, his approximate date and the 
location of his kingdom. But even such scraps of information, pieced 
together, have enabled the historian to reconstruct a clear outline of the 



misr/fy 



THE VEDIC AGE 


Sl 


tory of a locality or even of a definite period, of which little 

:nown before. . 

In a few cases the private records throw more direct light on the political 

history of India, as they emanate from persons closely connected with a 
royal family. We have, for example, interesting records of families whose 
members for generations held high offices like ministers or geneials. In 
others the importance of an individual is indicated by the office he held, 
or the part he played in the affairs of state. These inscriptions, though 
issued by or in honour of private individuals, therefore incidentally give 
us a great deal of information about the kings and political condition of 

the time. . . , , , . 

On the* whole it may be said without any hesitation that the epigraph ic 

records of ancient India have been the principal source of our information 
regarding the political history, and have also proved to be of great value 
by supplementing literary evidence in regard to the social, religious, and 
economic condition of India. 


mm 


2. Numismatics .— r Next to the inscriptions, coins are the most important 
source of the history of ancient India. Many thousands of these have come 
to light. Hoards have been unearthed in different parts of the country— 
a single hoard sometimes yielding many thousands and m ivic.ua 
specimens have constantly been found on or near the surface of ancient 
sites. Most of them at first passed into the hands of private individuals, 
but a number were recovered by scholars or acquired by public institutions. 
There is no doubt, however, that quite a large proportion was melted or 
otherwise lost to antiquarian study, and this deplorable state of things 
is unfortunately still going on. A systematic study and collection of coins 
has been possible only in cases of regular archaeological excavations. Mot 
only were many coins, otherwise acquired, lost to us, but no systematic 
record lias been kept of the provenance of those which have survived. 
This has been a serious handicap to the scientific study of the coinage, 
as much of the historical importance of a coin is lost if we cannot deter¬ 
mine the exact locality of which it formed the currency. 

The importance of numismatics for the study of the economic condition 
of a country is too obvious to need a detailed consideration. Here we shall 
only indicate how coins have helped us to reconstruct the political histoiy 

^TheSSSs^of India bear only figures, devices, or symbols, but 
with few exceptions, no legends* These coins were sometimes cast m dies, 
bid more often the symbols were punched on the metallic pieces. Some¬ 
times there are many symbols, punched at different times They wp 
most probably deliberately stamped by the issuing authority in^ order 
tTgua^ntee their genuineness and value. These authorities might have 
been kings or states,, but also certainly mcluded individual merchants, 

i 56 



RCES OF INDIAN HTSTORY 


jorations, and similar bodies, for the idea of a state 
coins was yet unknown. In the absence of legends, 
‘llot the different coins to these different categories, 
figures and symbols, once familiar to the people using 
. Ho longer clear to us, though some of them are familiar 

tr _ _ 


or well-known conventional designs/Various suggestions have 


;Cls or weil-Known wiivtuuvu« -- oo ; 

n rni.de regarding their significance, but tKey are highly speculative 
jid resu on no secure foundations!.. Apart from conveying some vague 
religious \ ideas and artistic conventions these coins do not supply any 
historical) information. The. rare legends on them refer to the mercantile 
corporations which issued them. 

It is fiot till after the Greek invasion that we come across coins with 
the name's of kings clearly engraved on tb«*~-^cepting, perhaps, a few 
coins of the time of Alexander, the mostAportant series of sucn-Woms were 
those issued by the Greek rul^t/actria who ultimately conquered tne * 
Puniab and North-We«m Frontier. The artistic excellence of these coins 
has ne^meen surassed in India, and the portraits of kings and other 
figures on them show Hellenistic art at its best. These coins of the Graeco- 
Bactrians set a new fashion and may be said to have revolutionized Indian 
numismatics. The most important feature added to Indian corns from 
this time forward was the name, and sometimes even the portrait, of the 
sovereign who issued them. How greatly it has helped our. knowledge of 
political history will be apparent from the fact that it is from these coins 
alone that we know of nearly thirty Greek kings and queens who ruled 
in India The classical writers have referred to only four or five of them, 
but not only were the names of the rest unknown to them, but even the 
very memory of the Greek domination over a corner of India for nearly 
two centuries was absolutely lost. This remarkable historical episode, 
interesting alike to Greece and India, came to the knowledge of the 
world after nearly two thousand years, by the discovery of those fine 
series’of coins—of gold, silver, and copper—which now adorn many 
public museums in Europe and India. 

The coinage of the Greeks was imitated by the Scythian and Parthian 
invaders who followed in their footsteps, and although the execution of 
their coins is far inferior, they are equally important for historical purposes. 
Here, too, the coins alone have enabled us to reconstruct an outline of 
their history, and recover the names of quite a large number of their 
rulers. One branch of the Scythian invaders, who settled permanently in 
Gujarat and the Kathiawar Peninsula, issued coins which not only gave the 
name of the ruling king and that of his father, but very often also the date 
in the well-known Saka era. This has enabled us to reconstruct the history 
of the Western Satraps—as these rulers are called—for a. period of more 
v than three hundred years. With the exception of a few inscriptions and 
literary references, which otherwise would have been of little help, the 

57 





THE VEDIC AGE 


<sl 


'/Coins have been the sole source of our information , 
the Sakas and the Parthians that entered India af. 
the Maury an Empire. The Kushanas who followed t 
a large number of coins, but the history of this dynasty 
tlier sources. 

si he coins have also been the principal source of our informa uon 
gar ding the various Indian states—both monarchical and reputolicai. 
that flourished during the same period. Most of them, like the Malavas 
Yaudheyas, the Mitra rulers of Panctf/la etc., are almost exclusively 
known from their coins. In other cases, like the Satavahanas of the; Deccan, 
the Puranic account is corroborated, corrected, and supplemented by 
their coins and inscriptions^ 

The. Guptas, who founded the greatest empire in India after the 
Mauryas. jcr«uea a large variety t fine coins. Although we know a great 
of their history from epigraphies^ the coins form an important 
additional source of information. 

With the downfall of the Guptas the numismatio V i(iencs:<<?h^‘«c*o be 
an important source of history. Isolated coins, here and there, have no 
doubt proved to be of great value, but they seldom afford us material 
information not otherwise available. Jt is a curious fact that coins of even' 
great emperors like Harsha or ruling dynasties like the Chalukyas, 
Rashtraku tas, Pratiharas and Palas, not to speak of lesser kings and 
dynasties, are either unknown or of little significance.) 

3 * Monuments.—In addition to coins and inscriptions w;e have other 
antiquarian remains, such as buildings or parts thereof, statues of stone 
or metal, terra cotta, ornamental and decorative fragments, pottery, and 
various other objects of a miscellaneous character. They are of great 
importance in tracing the history and evolution of Indian art. The art 
of a country is generally regarded to be a fair index of its culture, and 
it throws light on some higher aspects of its civilization which cannot 
be easily understood from other souregg). The remains of Indian monu¬ 
ments have thus considerably helped towards a proper appreciation of 
the life and spirit of ancient India. 

In addition to individual monuments,' sometimes we have the vast 
remains of an ancient city laid bare before us. Some of them, like those 
of Mohenjo-daro and Harappa, have opened before us an altogether new 
type of civilization, reaching back to an age of which no memorials 
in India were known before. This has carried back the antiquity of Indian 
culture and civilization by several thousands of years and opened up a 
new vista of its history, character, and association with the outside world. 

It has also transformed .our ideas of the origin of Indian civilization. We 
can no longer derive from the simple fact of the Aryan migration the 
complex structure of later Indian civilization, but must look for more 

58 





SOURCES OF INDIAN HISTORY 

one source which fed the mighty stream. Even in concrete matters 
our ideas have undergone great changes. As an instance may be cited the 
origin of the. Brahml script (used in the Asokan records) which, as 
noted above, is the parent-stock from which all Indian alphabets have 
been derived. 

Scholars have almost unanimously held the view that Brahml was 
derived from a foreign source, though they widely differ about its identity. 
But more than five hundred seals have been discovered at Mohenjo-daro 
which contain a species of pictorial writing. This has not been deciphered 
yet, but the probability of the Brahml alphabet being derived from it is 
now being seriously considered. Similarly the deep-rooted conviction that 
Indian art originated from a foreign source not much earlier than the 
third century B.c.„ has been considerably shaken by the discovery at 
Mohenjo-daro of finely carved stone figures of the third millennium B.c. 
which would not unfavourably compare with the statues of the classical 
period in Athens. The archaeological excavation of the Indus valley ite 
still at its infancy, and we may look forward to its continuation a^ 
opening up a biilliant chapter of Indian history as yet unknown or even 
undreamt of.T 

Coming down to historical times, the systematic excavations of ancient 
sites like the city of faxila or the monastic establishments at Sarnath 
(near Benares) have thrown light upon various aspects of life of which 
there is little or no record in literature. Such excavations, as will be noted 
in the next chapter, have been few and far between. Still, meagre though 
t hey are, compared with the vast extent of the country, these archaeolo¬ 
gical excavations have enabled us to realize some interesting aspects, of 
Indian civilization which would have been otherwise unknown. 

C. Foreign Accounts 

In addition to literature and archaeological remains we have .another 
interesting, source, of information in the accounts left by foreign writers, 
t he earliest among them are the two Greek writers Herodotus and 
Ctesias, both of whom myst have derived their information indirectly 
through Persian sources^ierodotus gives some useful information along 
with a great deal of fairy tales, but the account of Ctesias largely consists 
of incredible fables,.'Far greater interest attaches to the writings of 
those Greeks who accompanied Alexander to India, and the account of 
Megasthenes, who lived for some time in the court of Chandragupta 
Maurya as an ambassador of Seleucus. Though these works are mostly 
lost, much has been preserved in books, based upon them, written by 
later authors. These accounts contain a great deal of information that is 
both interesting and authentic, but they suffer from the defects inherent 
m the writings of foreigners, ignorant of the language and customs of the 
country. While great importance naturally attaches to what they recorded 



THE VEDIC AGE 

personal observation, we must treat with great 
1 on others’ reports or hearsay evidence. Due allowance must also 
be made for the necessarily limited circle within which a Greek must have 
moved in India, and his natural proneness to see everything through 
Hellenic eyes and distort or Exaggerate anything that was strange or 
unfamiliar to him. It would,, be foolish to belittle the importance of the 
classical accounts of India, but if would be equally unwise to put implicit 
faith in every tiling contained in them. 

Special reference must be made to the classical writers who have 
elucidated the geography and natural history of India. The earliest of 
them is the anonymous author of the Periplus of the Erythraean Sea, He 
was a Greek, settled in Egypt, who made a voyage to. the Indian coast 
about A. i). 80 and left a record of its ports, harbours, and merchandise. 
This short account, full of interesting information, is worth its weight in 
gold, as it has preserved from oblivion a phase of the trade and maritime 
activity in ancient India, otherwise unknown. Ptolemy wrote a geo¬ 
graphical account of India in the second century a.d. on scientific lines. 
His data being derived from secondary sources, he has fallen into numerous 
errors, and his general conception of the shape of India is also faulty in 
the extreme. Nevertheless the attempt was praiseworthy and has supplied 
valuable information. The same may be said of Pliny’s account of Indian 
animals, plants, and minerals written in the first century a.d. There were 
also many other writers of a later date. 

These classical accounts, most of which have been translated into 
English by J. W. McCrindle, were generally prompted by a spirit of 
exploration of unknown lands, and reflect great credit on their authors 
and,,the scientific spirit of the age in which they lived, the same spirit was 
displayed a few centuries later by Arab sailors and merchants, some of 
whom, like Sulaiman and A 1 Mas’udI, have left brief records of India. 
The gap in the interval between the two periods is filled by Chinese 
writers, both chroniclers at home and pilgrims who visited India. 

The writings of the Chinese travellers to India form a valuable supple¬ 
ment to the classical accounts. Three of them, Fa-hienjiif th century a.d.), 
Hiuen Tsang, and I-tsing (seventh century a.d.) are better known than 
others, and have recorded their experiences in fairly bulky volumes which 
are happily preserved in their original forms and have been translated 
into English. All three spent a number of years in India and learnt its 
language, and the first two travelled widely almost all over the country. 
In these respects they had an undoubted advantage over the Greek . 
travellers. But unfortunately for the historian of India, these eminent 
Chinese visitors were all devout Buddhist monks, whose journey to India 
was merely a pilgrimage to holy lands, and whose outlook was purely 
religious. Neither Fa-hien nor I-tsing refer to secular matters, except very 
incidentally, nor do they even mention the name of the king or kings 

60 


<§l 


: their accounts 






**t*smi 



SOURCES OF INDIAN HISTORY 

dominions were visited by them. Hiuen i sang is not so circum¬ 
scribed, but gives some interesting information about his royal patron 
Harsha-vardhana and other contemporary kings of India.. He also briefly 
refers to the politi c a l ,condition of the kingdoms through which he passed, 
and devotes an entire chapter to a general account of India. These, are, 
no doubt, very valuable, but they form duly a very small part of his 
extensive records which, like those of Fa-hien and I-tshigl, are otherwise 
devoted to a minute and detailed description of Buddhism in India—its 
ritual and practices, sanctuaries and memorials, sects and doctrines, 
scriptures and traditions. 

The Chinese travellers have rendered a great service by depicting the 
state of Buddhism in India. But devout pilgrims as they were, their 
intense religious faith impaired to a certain extent their rational instincts 
and power of impartial observation. We must therefore be on our guard 
against accepting as literally true all their statements, especially those 
which concern the Buddhist faith in any way, even when based on 
personal observation. Their judgment on men and things was warped, 
if not vitiated, by an absolute and implicit faith in the superiority of 
Buddhism, and the too intimate, if not exclusive, association with men 
and institutions connected with that religion. Buddhism alone loomed 
large in their eyes, everything else taking a subordinate and almost an 
insignificant place. Such an attitude is hardly compatible with recording 
an account that may be regarded as strictly historical. 

From the eighth century a.d. India attracted the attention of the Arab • 
writers. Apart from the account of the Arab merchants and sailors, the 
Indian borderland finds prominent mention in Arab historical chronicles 
on account of the political aggrandisemeht of that militant nation which 
culminated in the conquest of Sind e,arly in the eighth century A.D. Two 
and a half centuries later the Ghaznavid Turks followed in the footsteps 
of the Arabs and carried the banner of Islam far into the interior of India. 
India now figured prominently in the Muslim chronicles. The best foreign 
account of India that this age produced was written by Abu Rihan, better * 
I known as Albcruni, a contemporary of Sultan Mahmud of Ghazni. While 
the ruthless conqueror was harrying India by fire and sword, destroying 
and plundering its cities and temples, the great Arabic scholar engaged 
himself in studying the culture and civilization pf the country. Jde learned 
Sanskrit and studied its different branches of literature. iXhe bulky 
volume which he wrote is in many respects the most rational and com¬ 
prehensive account of India ever written by a foreigner until modern times. 
He is singularly free from religious enthusiasm, bordering on fanaticism, 
and the racial superiority-complex which mark the'Muslim writings of 
the age. \ He patiently laboured hard to acquire knowledge of Indian 
society and culture in a laudable spirit of quest for truth, and brought 
to his task a liberal and rational mind enriched by profound knowledge, 

61 





THE VEDIC AGE 

markable for his age) But from the point of view of Indian hisi 
Alberuni’s great work, highly valuable though it is, suffers from 
serious defects. In the first place, he says little or nothing of the political 
condition of India. Secondly, his account rests primarily on his study of 
Indian literature, and is not based on personal observations. In other 
words, he saw India, not with his own eyes, but through literary works. 
Alberuni gives an admirable survey of the mathematics, physics, chemistry, 
cosmogony, astronomy, astrology, geography, philosophy, religious rites, 
customs, social ideas, etc., of India, but we feel at almost every step— 
and he does not conceal the fact—that he is merely reproducing what he 
read about these things in books written by Indian authors dead and 
gone long ago, and drawj little or no inspiration from the living India 
of his age. 


2. THE MEDIAEVAL PERIOD 
(THIRTEENTH TO EIGHTEENTH CENTURY) 

Albefuni’s work closes a long series of accounts written by foreigners 
about ancient India. Two' centuries later the Muslim Turks established 
their political supremacy over India, and introduced the art of compiling 
chronicles recording the political events of the country. The earliest 
work of this kind, T&ogMrizNqsiri.hl'.. Minhaj-niJ-difi, composed in the 
middle of the thirteenth century a.d., traces, the history of Muslim rule 
in India from the very beginning with such fullness of detail as the author 
could derive from a patient study of all the materials available to him. It 
was followed by other works at regular intervals among which the following 
deserve special mention: Ta’rikh-i-Firuz ShahT by Ziya-ud-din Barani 
and Shams-i-Siraj ‘Afif; Gulshan-i-Ibrahiml by Muhammad Qasim 
lirishta; Atn-i-Akbari and Akbar-nama by Abu’l-Fazl, Tabaqdt-i-Akban 
by Nizam-ud-dln Ahmad, and Muntakhab-ut-Tawdrlkh by ‘Abd-ul-Qadir 
Budauni. 

Ihere are besides a number of other works dealing with general history 
as well as provincial states or particular individuals. A fair idea of the 
nature and extent of these works may be had from that excellent compen¬ 
dium— The History of India as told by its own Historians —compiled by 
Elliot and Dowson, in which an attempt has been made to coyer the 
history of the whole period by extracts (in an English translation) from 
indigenous historical texts. 

The autobiographies of the Mughal emperors Babur and Jahangir, 
and the biographies of other emperors, kings, and various grandees form 
a valuable supplement to regular historical works. A part of the official 
correspondence, both of the Central Government and of the various 
provinces and subordinate states, has also been preserved. 

62 




SOURCES OF INDIAN HISTORY 


&1 despatches or the letters of military commanders, governors, 
and diplomatic agents are valuable sources of information, and often 
give accurate dates and details not available from any other source. 
Mention may also be made of court diaries and news-reports. These 
contain reports of the occurrences and sayings at the Public Durbars of 
Delhi and provincial courts which were taken down by men specially 
employed for the purpose by subordinate rulers or important officials. 
These form valuable materials for the reconstruction of the history of the 
period, and the monumental work Ain-i-A kbari gives a most detailed and 
comprehensive picture of the complex administrative machinery set up 
by the great Mughal emperor. The bardic chronicles of the Rajputs form 
an important class of historical documents concerning the Hindu states 
of Rajputana. It is unnecessary to dwell at length on these familiar 
sources of history, as they will be reviewed in detail in later parts of this 
work. 

The archaeological evidence of the period, highly valuable from the 
point of view of the history of art, ceases to be of as much special impor¬ 
tance as in the ancient period for .the purpose of political history. The 
coins of the early rulers with their dates and mint-marks, as well as 
inscriptions, often supply valuable additional information, particularly 
in respect of provincial history which is not so fully dealt with by the 
Court historians. But they are at best valuable supplements, and save 
in rare instances, not the sole or even principal sources of information. 

The accounts of foreign travellers are also an important, though 
supplementary, source for the history of this period. Oas.jof.the earliest 
is, Marco Polo who. visited. India and other parts of Asia towards the close 
of the thirteenth century a.d. He doesnot, however, tell.us much of the 
political history. The most important in this respect is Ibn Batuta, an 
African Muhammadan, who spent several years in the court of Muhammad 
Tughluq. He returned to his native country in a.d. 1349, after twenty-live 
years of travel, full of adventures, in various parts of Asia. He has left a 
vivid account of India of his time whose general accuracy there is no 
reason to dispute. Another important traveller was Nicolo de’ Conti, the 
Venetian, in the fifteenth century.. A number of other European travellers 
in the fifteenth and sixteenth..centuries have left interesting information 
about various parts of India, particularly the powerful kingdom of 
Vijavanagar For the Mughal period the voluminous writings of European 
travellers, including reports of Jesuit missionaries, and official despatches 
of the Portuguese, French, and English trading settlements, supply a mass 
of authentic information. • . 

For the second period (a.d. 1200-1800), therefore, the historian of India 
is no longer hampered by lack of material 'as in the first or earlier period. 
He can trace the main outline of the political history with essential 
details, and has not to piece together fragmentary data from coins and 

63 




mtsr/fr 



THE VEDIC AGE 


(St 

fficffiW 


^..^^xiiscriptions by a tedious and laborious process. His principal difficulty 
is to sift the truth from a mass of data which sometimes contradict one 
another, and to assess correctly the statements of historians which are 
nob infrequently coloured by passions and prejudices. But these are 
difficulties which are common to historians of all ages and countries. 


3. THE MODERN PERIOD 

It is unnecessary to say much on the materials for the history of the 
modern period, as they present no unusual features. It should be em¬ 
phasized, however, that state-papers, i.e. contemporary official documents, 
now take the chief place aiSdng these materials, as in the case of European 
countries. Such state-papers are not altogether wanting for the Mughal 
period, but they are, comparatively speaking, few in number and play 
a minor role in the construction of the history of the period. From the 
eighteenth century they increase in volume and importance, and the 
Peshwa'S Daftars may be cited as a striking example. With the establish¬ 
ment of the British ascendancy these state-papers form the most elaborate 
and valuable source of information. The servants of the East India 
Company in India had to keep very detailed written records of their 
transactions and deliberations for the perusal of their masters in England, 
and this fortunate circumstance has undoubtedly increased the mass of 
documents which supply abundant historical material of first-rate impor¬ 
tance. The correspondence of the various Indian States among themselves 
and with the British is also very valuable. These materials have been 
partially lost, but a great deal has been preserved and is now kept in the 
Imperial Records Office in Delhi and the India Office in London. The 
Records Office in Delhi has been recently reorganized, and proper arrange¬ 
ments have been made for making the records available to students of 
history and helping their study by means of classification, indexing, and 
printing select documents. Numbers of important state papers in Provincial 
Record Offices, Indian States, and in private possession are also gradually 
coming to light. These and other materials, to which detailed reference 
will be made in due course, have considerably facilitated the task of the 
historian of modern India. 


64 


CHAPTER III 


GENERAL REVIEW OF 
ARCHAEOLOGICAL 
EXPLORATIONS AND 
EXCAVATIONS 

In every country the historian is dependent upon the archaeologist 
for information about periods to which written records do not go back. 
This particularly is the case in India, where practically the entire history 
of the pre-Muslim period is built up on the study of materials recovered 
by the investigator and excavator during the last century and a half. 
The splendid achievements of Indian culture throughout the ages were 
unfortunately not matched by a* sense of historical and geographical 
accuracy, and except for the metrical chronicle of Kashmir, no other 
sober history is available for the whole sub-continent. The Muslim period 
witnessed a marked interest in the recording of contemporary history, and 
occasionally an exceptional monarch such as Fxruz Shah Tughluq (1351- 
1388) even made an attempt to explore and preserve ancient relics such as 
the inscribed pillars of Asoka, but without any tangible result. The study 
of Indian antiquities was, however, initiated in Bengal soon after the 
establishment of British power by scholars like Sir William Jones, who 
founded the Asiatic Society of Bengal in .1784. At first, only linguistic 
and literary researches occupied the Society’s attention. With the turning 
of the century, a comprehensive survey of the country was started under 
the orders of the East India Company, and Dr. B uchanan Hamilton 
was the first explorer who carried out this task first in Mysore and 
Southern India, and then in North Bengal, Bihar, and Assam, in the 
second decade of the nineteenth century. His report contains the earliest 
notices of Indian antiquities, and these are recorded with great accuracy 
and sound judgment. In Western India the caves of Ajanta, Elephanta, and 
Kanheri were also discovered and described before the turn of the twenties. 

The labours of these pioneers brought to light a number of ancient 
inscriptions recorded on rocks and pillars, but these were written in a 
script, which no one could read. They thus remained a sealed book to 
scholars till their mystery was solved by Targes.JPrin sep i n 18^7. Prinsep, 
who was then Secretary of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, has left an 
interesting account of this great discovery. It is a romance of archaeology 
fit to rank by the side of the decipherment of the hieroglyphic, and 

65 


E 






THE VEDIC AGE 

iform scripts. For seven years, we are told, Prinsep spread befq^ 
every morning, the estampages of the inscriptions collected from 
ifferent parts of India and wistfully gazed at the unknown alphabets 
which concealed the mystery of India’s past. At last the numerous short 
votive records on the famous stupa at Sanchi gave him the key. How 
he hit upon it, almost by a lucky chance, may best be told in his own 
words, as recorded in Volume VI of the Journal of the Asiatic Society oj 
Bengal (pp. 460-77, 566-609). 

“In laying open a discovery of this nature, some little explanation 
is generally expected of the means by which it has been attained. Like 
most other inventions, when once found it appears extremely simple; 
and as in most others, accident, rather than study, has had the merit 
of solving the enigma which has so long baffled the learned. 

“While arranging and lithographing the numerous scraps of facsimiles, 
for Plate XXVII [i.e. the Sanchi inscriptions] I was struck at their all ter¬ 
minating with the same two letters, p _L* . Coupling this circumstance 
with their extreme brevity and insulated position, which proved that 
they could not be fragments of a continuous text, it immediately occurred 
that they must record either obituary notices, or more probably the 
offerings and presents of votaries, as is known to be the present custom 
in the Buddhist temples of Ava; where numerous dhwajas or flag-staffs, 
images and small chaityas are crowded within the enclosure, surrounding 
the chief cupola, each bearing the name of the donor. The next point 
noted was the frequent occurrence of the letter fa , already set down 
incontestably as s, before the final word: now this I had learnt from the 
Saurdshtra coins, deciphered only a day or two before, to be one sign 
of the genitive case singular, being the ssa of the. Pali, or sya of the 
Sanscrit. ‘Of so and so the gift,’ must then be the form of each brief 
sentence; and the vowel a and anuswdra led to the speedy recognition 
of the word danam (gift) teaching me the very two letters, d and n, most 
different from the known forms, and which had foiled me most in my 
former attempts. Since .1834 also my acquaintance with ancient alphabets 
had become so familiar that most of the remaining letters in the present 
examples could be named at once on re-inspection. In the course of a 
few minutes I thus became possessed of the whole alphabet, which I 
tested by applying it to the inscription on the Delhi column.” 

Prinsep then applied, with success, the Sanchi alphabet, as he called 
it, to the Buddhist group of ancient coins and to other inscriptions, 
particularly those on the lats, meaning the Asokan Edict columns, in 
Upper India, and gave an analysis of the alphabet. Next, by the applica¬ 
tion of the alphabet to the inscriptions on the celebrated ASokan pillars 
at Delhi and Allahabad, he gave detailed readings and interpretations 
of these inscriptions. Thus was the master-key of the ancient Brahmi 
alphabet, discovered. 

66 




ARCHAEOLOGICAL EXPLORATIONS AND EXCAVATIONS 


Insep’s great discovery ushered in a new era by lifting the veil fro: 
the earlier Indian inscriptions, and laid the foundation of research in 
Indian history and practically every branch of Indian archaeology. 
Hereafter it became possible to evaluate each discovery and assign it 
to its proper period by a systematic study of contemporary' writings. 
Scholars like Fergusson, Cunningham, Dr. Bhau Daji, and Dr. Rajendra 
Lai Mitra handed on the torch lighted by Prinsep, and built up the 
foundations of our present knowledge of Indian architecture, Indian 
geography, Indian coins and other branches of Indology during the 
next generation. 

The first official step taken by the Government of India was the 
appointment of General. Alexander Cunningham as Archaeological 
Surveyor to the Government in 1862. This was due to the initiative of 
Lord Canning, who for the first time.realized that the British Government 
had a duty towards India in rescuing from oblivion her splendid heritage 
of the past. The choice of so genuine a lover of Indian antiquities as 
General Cunningham for this pioneer work of exploration and research 
was very happy, and the record of his devoted labours for nearly half 
a century, extending over a vase field covering almost every branch 
of knowledge, is in many ways unique. Starting with the data supplied 
by the Greek historians and the Chinese travellers, he laid the foundations 
of an exact knowledge of ancient Indian geography by personal investiga¬ 
tions and an almost uncanny gift of spotting and identification of ancient 
sites. His unrivalled knowledge of Indian coins, particularly those of 
the north-west, laid the foundation of Indian numismatics, which still 
has to depend upon his published works in certain branches. Many of 
his speculations and conjectures may not have been confirmed by subse¬ 
quent research, wit this can be excused in a pioneer who covered so 
much new grounj .1 fh half a dozen different fields. Such digging as was 
attempted.i;^,t -places like Bodh Gaya, Bharhut, Sanchi, Sarnath, and 
fax® cannot fee considered as systematic excavation, but we must 
rqni^Tiber that the science of archaeology had not then developed any- 
wfiere else beyond quarrying for sensational finds. 

After Cunningham’s retirement, followed a period of nearly fifteen 
years in which no clear archaeological policy was laid down or followed, 
although Dr. Burgess and his colleagues were able to publish excellent 
volumes on the results of the Surveys, mostly of Western Indian caves 
as also in Southern India. Provincial surveys on a very limited scale 
and without any central direction or support could accomplish little, 
but in the closing years of the last century, Lord Curzon, the Viceroy 
of India, ushered in a new era for Indian archaeology. He accepted the 
encouragement of research and the promotion of archaeological study 
as a duty and obligation which Government owed to this ancient country 
and established a Central Department of Archaeology. Thereafter, the 

67 


§L 




THE VEDIC AGE 


itkll-i 


jirse of archaeology has been fairly continuous, though subject 
periodic stimulation and depression. 

The Department contained several keen and sound Sanskrit scholars 
of various nationalities, notably Dr. Vogel, Dr. Stein, Dr. Bloch, and 
afterwards Dr. Spooner, all of whom were very much interested in archaeo¬ 
logical exploration; but none of them had the benefit, of taking actual 
part in the work of excavation as Dr. Marshall (afterwards Sir John), 
the newly appointed Director General of Archaeology, had in Greece 
before his appointment. His direction and guidance soon proved to be 
of the greatest benefit to Indian archaeology, and not only did the 
European officers of the Department hereafter take a share in the work 
of excavation, but young Indian probationers were enlisted for training 
as they were eventually^*) replace scholars from abroad. In the first 
few 3 ears (1903-12) the programme of excavation largely centred round 
such famous Buddhist sites as Sanchl, Samath, Kasia (Kusiriagara) 
and Sahet Mahet (Sravasti). City-sites like Charsadda (Pushkalavati) 
near Mardan, Bhita near Allahabad, Basarh (Vaisali) near Muzaffarpur, 
and Rajgir the ancient capital of Magadha, were also touched but not 
persisted in, although they yielded Sufficient finds of great importance 
for the reconstruction of cultural history. The reason lor this, as explained 
by Sir John Marshall himself, was that the researches of the earlier 
generation of archaeologists had thrown more light on Buddhist anti¬ 
quities, and besides there was a greater chance of making some spectacular 
finds in the Buddhist sites than in the more extensive city-sites where 
it is difficult to locate spots of special importance. Buddhist sites, 
generally clustered around lofty stupas and readily recognizable from 
their configuration, are certainly easier to excavate and there is greater 
probability of making such sensational finds as, for example, the relics 
of the Buddha enshrined by Kanishka in the stupa near Peshawar city. 
At Samath, the famous lion capital of an ASokan pillar and the great 
sculptural wealth of the Gupta empire were among the sensational 
discoveries made. 

The idea of bringing to light the successive cultural periods of Indian 
history by regular excavations at city-sites was entertained about 1912, 
when Sir John Marshall took up his work at Taxila which was to continue 
for over two decades. At Pataliputra (Patna) Dr. Spooner began in 1913 
his examination of the ancient Mauryan capital which was to continue 
for a number of years, thanks to the liberality of Sir Ratan Tata who 
provided the entire funds. Unfortunately the latter site, being water¬ 
logged and buried deep under alluvium, did not yield proportionately 
large results. Strangely enough, some of the most striking finds came 
from the lower levels exposed in the course of sewage operations and 
foundations of modern buildings. The excavations at Taxila, on the 
other hand, have yielded steadily growing material which has fulfilled 

68 



'/ARCHAEOLOGICAL EXPLORATIONS AND EXCAVATIONS 


Expectations raised by a city-site situated on the main highway 
from the north-west, forming, as it were, the crucible in which Indian 
culture was blended with that of other races coming from that direction 
during the three or four centuries on either side of the Christian era. 
The most comprehensive operations ever carried out at any single site 
in India are those at Taxila, where about a dozen sites have been excavated 
within an area of some 25 square miles, embracing three separate cities 
and half a dozen large Buddhist establishments. The earliest city going 
back to the Mauryan period is that under the Bhir mound, which was 
superseded by the second and most important city at the site of Sirkap, 
founded by the Indo-Greek rulers and inhabited during the Indo-Greek 
and the Saka periods. The wealth of finds, mainly from the second city, 
that enriches the museum established on the site makes it i he most 
attractive archaeological collection in the country. 

While the lay-out of the Mauryan city was irregular and the construction 
unimpressive, the second town, with its regularly arranged streets and 
lanes and well-built houses with spacious rooms and courtyards, is one 
of the best preserved ancient cities, the relics found being among the 
most representative and valuable dug out anywhere in India. Among 
the religious sites at Taxila the most prominent and extensive is the 
Dharmarajika stupa, said to have been founded by the great Atioka 
and built over during successive ages and surrounded by scores of smaller 
stupas, chapels, and large monasteries. Some of the retreats for the 
Buddhist monks perched on the neighbouring hillocks, such as those 
at Jaulian, Kalawan, and Mohra Moradu, provide ample evidence of the 
flourishing state of Buddhism in the palmy days of Taxila, which came 
to an end at the close of the fifth century a.d. with the invasions of the 
Huna hordes. 

World War I interfered with the progress of exploration, as it was 
not possible for the Government to spare funds for scientific research. 
However, the Royal Asiatic Society of London sanctioned a small grant 
for the excavation of the great Buddhist site of Nalanda, and this enabled 
Dr. Spooner to commence work in 1917 which continued unabated for 
nearly two decades. Besides the complex of stupas, temples, and monas¬ 
teries brought to light in the course of these excavations, Nalanda has 
yielded unique bronzes and sculptures of great artistic merit' as well as 
inscriptions which have thrown a flood of light on the history of Northern 
India and the development of Buddhism in Eastern India. The main 
building here shows signs of having been enlarged and rebuilt no less 
than seven times, and some of the monasteries show at least three periods 
of occupation and reconstruction. Nalanda lias been the main centre of 
archaeological work in Bihar since it was taken up nearly thirty years 
ago. Rajgir (ancient Raj agriha) has also yielded some remarkable finds, 
notably from the site known as Maniyar Math, but no large-scale examina- 

69 







ion of this ancient city, one of the earliest historical capitals of Ii 


as yet been attempted. 


THE VEDIC AGE 



An epoch-making discovery which changed the course of Indian 
Archaeology and pushed back Indian antiquities from the Buddhist 
to prehistoric times was made in 1922-23 when Mr. E. D. Banerji, 
excavating the ruins of a Buddhist establishment at Mohenjo-daro in 
Sind, lighted upon certain inscribed seals with pictographic characters 
which were till then known only from the site of Harappa in the Punjab. 
The full significance of the discovery was not apparent till two years 
later, when a comparison of the finds from both the sites convinced 
Sir John Marshall that they belonged to a prehistoric civilization far 
earlier than any known so far. Although at first labelled Indo-Sumerian, 
owing to its obvious affinities with the Sumerian civilization of the third 
millennium b.c., the newly discovered civilization was subsequently 
renamed after the Indus Valley, as it was found to be its main habitat. 
The discoveries stimulated public interest in Indian Archaeology to an 
unprecedented degree, and the Government of India began to finance 
liberally, schemes of archaeological exploration and research in the dif¬ 
ferent parts of India. For about seven years from 1924-25 the Government 
grant for exploration gradually rose until it reached the figure of two 
and a half lakhs which has been the high-water mark in this country. 
For this the discoveries at Mohenjo-daro are mainly responsible, and 
under that name is epitomized the progress of Indian Archaeology during 
the last two decades. 

Preliminary' excavations were carried on at a large number of sites 
in Sind and archaeological explorations were extended even to distant 
parts of Baluchistan (see Map 2). But these subsequent researches have 
failed to shed any considerable light on the manner in which this well- 
developed city civilization of the Indus Valley sprang up, as if from 
nowhere, and also about its equally inexplicable disappearance without 
leaving any considerable traces of its survival in the Indus Valley or 
its surrounding regions. Some seven epochs, either slightly earlier or 
slightly later than the main stream of culture presented by Harappa 
and Mohenjo-daro, have been identified, but all of them together do not 
help to bridge the wide gulf between this chalcolithic civilization and 
that of the historic period which flourished in the upper and middle 
Gangetic basin from the middle of the first millennium b.c. This indeed 
is one of the most important tasks before Indian archaeology, and 
demands a great deal of patient and systematic work over a number of 
years. Field research of this type cannot be attempted by compartment 
but will require an all-India organization with ample resources at its 
back and co-operation of various regional units. 

The initial success of the Archaeological Department of the Govern¬ 
ment of India induced many of the Indian States to open their own 



Archaeological explorations and excavations 

eological Departments. We shall now review the position regardini 
x loration in each province and important state. In the province of 
Sind, which leaped into prominence with the Indus Valley discoveries, the 
record of archaeology is still very meagre, apart, from the Indus Valley 
finds. Besides a few Buddhist stupas and monasteries, mostly assignable 
to the Gupta period as at Mirpur Khas, none of the remains can be 
assigned to a period earlier than the Arab invasion in the eighth century. 
One reason for this must have been the gradual desiccation of the lower 
Indus Valley. The main interest of the province will therefore vest in 
the large number of sites of the prehistoric period, scattered over its 
western half, which have not. yet been adequately explored. 

In the North-West Frontier Province the great Buddhist sites of 
Sahr-i-Bahlol, Takht-i-Bahi, and Jamalgarhi have yielded valuable 
treasures. They fill the local museum at Peshawar, which is naturally 
the most important for the Graeco-Buddhist school of Gandhara. The 
whole district of Peshawar teems with mounds which are being fast 
levelled by cultivators to the great detriment of science. 

In the Punjab, Harappa and Taxila have been the most important 
centres of archaeological works sc far. The province, however, possesses 
very interesting possibilities of exploration in the earlier phases of culture. 
The I)e Terra expedition, which came to study the Ice Age in Kashmir 
and the Punjab foot-hills, brought to light important palaeolithic in¬ 
dustries in the Soan valley which constitute the earliest relics of the Stone 
Age in the north. The find of a small isolated site of the Indus period 
near Rupar in the Sutlej Valley, coupled with the presence of a number 
of mounds in the submontane region of Ambala, gives the hope that 
further interesting discoveries concerning the extension of the Indus 
Valley culture and its survival may be made in this region. 

Kashmir, the beautiful valley in the lap of the Himalayas, is the only 
part of India for which, as noted before, an indigenous written history 
is available for the pre-Muslim period. The task of identification of the 
many historical places mentioned in Kalhana’s Chronicle fell to Sir 
Aurel Stein, who successfully accomplished it and thereby laid the 
foundation of his world-wide fame as an explorer and archaeologist. 
When the Government of Kashmir opened an Archaeological Department 
in 1922, it turned its attention to the ancient sites, and eventually some 
of these were excavated, the result being in most cases a confirmation 
of Stein’s painstaking examination of Kalhana. 

The most interesting remains discovered are those of a Buddhist 
settlement of the Kushana period at Harwan (ancient Shadahradvana) 
consisting of a stupa and monasteries on a hill slope with unique terra¬ 
cotta plaques ornamenting the walls. Ushkar or Huvishkapura was 
another early Buddhist site (named after the well-known Kushana 
emperor) where investigation brought to light an early stupa built in 

71 


feL 




THE VEDIC AGE 

eighth century. Other sites where excavation was carried out 
rihaspur, Avantipur and the well-known Martand, all belonging to 
the period from sixth to ninth century a.d. 

The United Provinces, constituting throughout the historic period 
“the middle country” (MadhyadeSa) or the heart of the Indian sub¬ 
continent, hold the key to the solution of many a problem concerning 
the development of Indian culture. The vestiges of human occupation 
from the earliest times to the present day can be recognized here in the 
shape of mounds representing such famous cities of old as Mathura, 
Varanasi, Sravasti, KauSambi and Ahichchhatra. Mathura and its 
neighbourhood have yielded to the digger the largest number of sculptural 
treasures, but systematic excavations in the modern sense have not been 
attempted on a proper scale. The small antiquities from the ancient 
site of Kausambi, picked* up by casual visitors, are more artistic and 
more numerous than those found anywhere else. 

It is by systematic work on the city mounds that Indian archaeology 
can hope to lay the foundation of a more comprehensive knowledge of 
Indian antiquities. Such work was commenced at the site of Ahichchhatra 
in 1941-42 and continued for three seasons, with the object of separating 
and classifying the different strata of buildings and studying the finds 
associated with each cultural layer. As a result, the pottery, terra-cottas, 
and minor antiquities found in the excavation of the ancient cities of 
Northern India can now be assuredly relegated to definite historic periods 
such as Maurya, fsuhga, Kushana, Gupta and Medieval, on the reliable 
basis of archaeological stratification instead of merely on grounds of style. 
One great desideratum to which attention has been drawn by critics 
from abroad is the absence of a properly classified corpus of Indian 
pottery through the ages. For this, ample material has now been collected 
from the Ahichchhatra excavation and from other regular excavations, 
though on a smaller scale, carried out at such sites as Rajghat (Benares), 
Mathura, and one or two sites in the Punjab and north-west. The 
continental nature of the civilization of North India makes it inevitable 
that in each of the main periods the standard form adopted by the 
craftsmen of the central parts should be the guide for other regions, 
no doubt with local variations. In certain special periods such as the 
Mauryan, when the Imperial influence radiated from the capital, it has 
been found that the special black glazed ward must have been centrally 
manufactured and specimens exported to outlying districts. 

Apart from this the characteristic grey ware of the f-mrvga period, the 
variety of forms prevalent in Kushana times, and the beautiful decorated 
pottery of the Guptas can now hardly be mistaken, although they may 
have been manufactured in places as distant from each other as the 
Punjab and Bengal. The value of the accurate dating of pottery, which 
is the most abundant material found in surface explorations, has now 

72 



;haeological explorations and excavations ^ 

ueeii sufficiently realized, and this opens the way to a better approxima- k 
tion of the age of surface remains in the absence of such datable materia 
as coins and inscriptions which are not. always forthcoming. 

In Bengal archaeological excavation has added a new chapter o 
the cultural history of the province where relics of the pre-Muhammac an 
period were almost non-existent on the surface. This was at the great 
site of Paharpur in the Rajshahi district which took the best part of a 
decade to excavate and preserve. Here the most remarkable find is the 
gigantic Buddhist establishment consisting of a towering central temple 
rising in terraces and surrounded by a vast quadrangle of monastic cells. 
The plan of the temple showing a grand square cross with projections 
between the arms, and the scheme of decoration of the walls by rows of 
terra-cotta plaques interspersed by fine stone images, have tarown a 
flood of light on the early history of art and architecture in Bengal. 
Some work has also been attempted at Mahasthana, the site of ancient 
Pundravardhana, and at Bangarh, ancient Kotivarsha, two important 
cities of North Bengal. The latter work, conducted by the University 
of Calcutta, constitutes the only attempt made by an Indian University 
in the field of excavation, which has been thrown open to non-official 
effort by virtue of an amendment of the Ancient Monument Preservation 
Act passed by the Central Legislature in 1933. The casual removal of 
earth for erecting military establishments during World War II has 
brought to light many remains of ancient structures in the Mainamati 
Hill near Comilla. A preliminary survey indicates that they are the 
remnants of Buddhist establishments comparable to those of Paharpur, 
but no systematic excavation has yet taken place in this region. 

In the provinces of Assam and Orissa the efforts of archaeologists 
have so far been confined to the investigation of standing monuments 
and existing ruins. 

The Central Provinces and Central India constitute the richest held 
for epigraphical discoveries, but no systematic excavation of ancient 
sites has so far been attempted in the Central Provinces. In Central 
India good work has been carried on in Gwalior State where the remains 
of the ancient cities of VidUa (Besnagar), Padmavatl (Padam-Pawaya), 
and Ujjain have been excavated by the state archaeological department. 
The great site of Sanchl in Bhopal has been well excavated by Sir 
John Marshall. There is a great scope for the detailed investigation of 
remains, both of the historic and prehistoric periods, particularly in the 
basin of the Narmada river which has already yielded remains of 
palaeolithic and microlithic industries. 

In Rajputana, the late Sir Aurel Stein’s examination of the dried bed 
of Hakra (ancient Sarasvati) has brought to light a number of pre¬ 
historic sites in the Bikaner and particularly Bahawalpur States. Syste¬ 
matic excavation in Rajputana is confined to Jaipur where the ancient 

73 



THE VEDIC AGE 


,§L 


i^s of Bail at, R^irh, an cl Saniljliar have yielded a large numb^ 
rfi tiquities, including hoards of punch-marked coins and terra-cotta 
figurines. Bairat has a unique circular temple of the Mauryan times, 
and Rairh appears to have been a flourishing metallurgical centre and 
trade mart. The most extensive site in Jaipur is the city of Nagar or 
Karkotnagar, now represented by extensive mounds recently taken up 
for excavation which, if carried through, is sure to shed light on the 
history of the Malava tribe whose capital it was. 

An important undertaking, recently initiated by the Archaeological 
Department and now taken over by the Ancient History Department 
of the Deccan College Research Institute, Poona, is the expedition which 
has investigated the prehistoric remains in Gujarat. This expedition, 
undertaken at first with a^iew to determine the relation of the paleolithic 
and neolithic remains found in the Sabarmati valley by Bruce Foote, 
the pioneer of Indian prehistory, has succeeded in bringing to light at 
Langhnaj, near Mehsana, Baroda State, skeleton remains in an advanced 
stage of calcination in association with microlithic implements. The 
success of the expedition has induced help from the Tata Trust fund, 
and the further continuance of the work by a non-official body like the 
Institute is thus assured. Minor excavations at various ancient sites 
such as Anhilpur, Patan, Amreli, and Mul Dwaraka were carried out by 
the Archaeological Department of the Baroda State. 

In the Province of Bombay the prevalence of trap throughout the 
Maharashtra area accounts for the paucity of stratified accumulations 
at ancient sites. In portions of the Karnatak district of Bijapur recent 
examination of the surface has brought to light the existence of several 
strata going back to the pre-Mauryan age. Recent work at the ancient city 
of Kolhapur has also yielded considerable material of the Satavahana 
and later periods, incidentally throwing light on contacts with Rome. 

The most important centres of Satavahana power were in the Deccan, 
and it is there that we must look for further extensive evidence of culture 
in the Satavahana period. The Hyderabad Government has conducted 
excavations in the ancient capital of Paithan (Pratishthana) and more 
recently at Kondapur in the Bidar district. I he latter site is a veritable 
mine of antiquities which include numerous specimens of all types such 
as terra-cotta and stucco figures, coins and medals numbering several 
thousand, and pottery. The material discovered here and at the great 
site of Maski has not yet been adequately studied, and it is essential that 
it should be properly published if its scientific value is to be enhanced. 
Thp Archaeological Department of the Hyderabad State, started in 
1915, has recently taken up the programme of archaeological exploration 
and excavation, and it may be confidently hoped that its work will be 
commensurate with the great importance of the remains situated in the 
dominions. 


74 


mtsr#y c 


V“V—\ 

• / ^.A%\ 

/ wm \ %\ 

[ 2f* " CHAEOLOGICAL EXPLORATIONS AND EXCAVATK 

e led the way among Indian States in archaeological 




tion by starting a regular department over sixty years ago. At first the 
activities of the Department were concentrated on a survey of the 
epigraphic material in which the state abounds, and orswhich the history 
of the dynasties that ruled Mysore is almost wholly based. Latterly 
some attention has been devoted to the excavation of ancient sites of 
which two have proved to be of very great value. The site of Chandravali 
near Chitaldrug was excavated in 1928 and shows several strata of 
occupation in which the Satavahana period seems to be most important. 
Brahmagiri, in the northernmost part of Mysore, shows not only the 
relics of the Maury an town of Isila, but also those of later historic periods, 
and, what is more, was founded on earlier settlements of microljthic age. 

In the Madras Presidency, the vast number of existing temples and 
inscriptions have absorbed the main attention of the Archaeological 
Survey. Although the number of sites of every period are numerous, 
excavation has so far been attempted only in some of the Buddhist 
sites in the northern districts and the well-known prehistoric burials 
at Adichanallur in the extreme south. Of the Buddhist sites the most 
important are those in the Krishna valley in which the local rulers of 
the Ikshvaku dynasty seem to have patronized art in a larger measure 
than any of their predecessors. Many ancient monuments before the 
organization of the Archaeological Department, such as the Amaravati 
stupa in the Guntur district, had already been wellnigh destroyed by 
villagers and other vandals and cheir sculptures distributed among dif¬ 
ferent museums, including the British Museum. Recently the discovery 
of an important site at Nagarjunikonda has to some extent made up for 
the loss. Systematic excavation has brought to light another group of 
stupas and monasteries, arranged in a characteristic manner, which have 
yielded a vast number of sculptures and inscriptions. The site is beautifully 
situated in the Krishna valley and was anciently known as Srl-Parvata. 
A local museum has been built on the spot for housing the sculptures and 
architectural specimens unearthed. Some work was done recently at 
the site of Virampattanam, near Pondicherry, the seaport in which, 
as in many other south Indian sites, evidences of commercial contacts 
with Rome during the Imperial period are abundant. The problem of 
Megalithic burials in South India is vast and complicated, and much 
damage has already been inflicted by ill-advised digging on the graves 
associated with stone circles, urn burials, sarcophagi, etc., which occur 
over extensive areas in Southern India. At Adichanallur a large number 
of antiquities, including iron swords, daggers, gold and bronze diadems, 
bronze vessels and animal figures, etc., were found, along with a large 
amount of recl-and-black polished pottery, forming the accompaniments 
of the burials. 

The whole subject has now been assiduously studied and we can expect 


75 



THE VEDIC AGE 



results of these studies to throw light on the movement and_ 

tent of different types of people in the Peninsula. The entire field of 
palaeolithic, neolithic, and megalithic as well as iron age cultures in 
Southern India is so vast, and transcends in interest investigations 
relating to the historic periods, that it is likely to form a major preoccupa¬ 
tion for several years. The states of Southern India, including Travancore, 
Cochin, and Pudukottai, have each its own contribution to make to this 
subject, not to speak of the larger states of Hyderabad and Mysore. 

No account of the activities of Indian exploration can be complete 
without reference to the work carried out in what may be called Greater 
India. The most brilliant work carried out by the late Sir Aurel Stein 
constitutes the greatest achievement that can fall to the lot of a single 
scholar and explorer. Sir Aurel Stein’s activities-were spread over a very 
wide field, including Baluchistan, Iran, and the border lands of India. 
But his most famous explorations were conducted in Chinese Turkistan. 
In the course of the several expeditions which Sir Aurel Stein carried out 
for the Government of India, he discovered numerous relics of the ancient 
civilization which developed in the region. These have been preserved 
in the dry sandy wastes and show the highly important part which 
India played in the Far East, and the way in which Indian cultural 
influences were spread there. The state of preservation of the fresco 
paintings in the Buddhist temples, wooden, silk, and paper documents, 
and other perishable objects is remarkable. These objects, recovered 
from Central Asia, have been carefully brought back and preserved in 
a special museum erected at New Delhi by the Government of India. 

In Burma, which formed part of India till ten years ago, activities 
were mostly confined to the centres of Prome,Pegu, and Pagan. Excavation 
has been generally confined to opening up small mounds lying in 
abundance at these centres, particularly Prome, marking the sites of 
old stupas or temples. The earliest finds are those at Prome in which 
Indian influence is very prominent. Although Hlnayana Buddhism and 
the Pali tradition have, now acquired a great hold on Burmese Buddhism, 
it is clear that a large proportion of the earlier colonizers were followers 
of the Mahayana sect and the Brahmanical religion^, and it was not till 
a comparatively later period that the Hxnayana triumphed over its rivals. 
Bilingual inscriptions from Prome show the language of the old Pyu 
inhabitants side by side with Sanskrit. At Pagan excavations have brought 
to light a number of finds belonging to the eleventh and twelfth centuries, 
when modern Burmese culture may be said to have originated. At this 
period Burma was subject to a great deal of influence from India, especially 
Bengal, in sculpture, painting, terra-cotta, and architecture. It has now 
been well established that the planning and scheme of decoration of 
Burmese temples and pagodas is based on Indian prototypes developed 
in the alluvial plains of Northern India for centuries. 

76 



^CHAEOLOGICAL EXPLORATIONS AND EXCAVATIONS 

I Malay Peninsula exploration work has not proceeded on a largtj^ 
stdit,’, out whatever has been done shows a strong Indian influence in the 
beginning of cultural history. The existence of the great Sri-Vijaya King¬ 
dom in Indonesia, and its paramount influence over the islands in the 
Netherlands Indies, has now been clearly established by researches. 
The great monuments in Java, belonging to the Brahmanical as well as 
Buddhist faiths, such as the Barabudur, Chandi Sewu, and Chandi Lara- 
Jongnang amply demonstrate the extent of Indian culture. Lastly, 
reference may be made to the researches and explorations of the French 
archaeologists in Indo-China which have thrown a flood ol light on Indian 
colonies of Champa (Annam), Kambuja (Cambodia), and Dvaravati 
(Siam), and led to the discovery of such monuments as Angkor yat and 
Angkor Thom of world-wide fame. 

In Ceylon there is yet a vast field for exploration and excayation, 
but work so far has been mainly confined to the ancient capitals of 
Anuradhapura and Polonnaruwa. Originally European scholars were in 
charge of the work, but a properly trained Ceylonese scholar has now 
been appointed Archaeological Commissioner, and he is responsible for 
the excellent work done at the hill site of Mihintale stupa which is reminis¬ 
cent of Sanchl. Several of the religious sites at Anuradhapura have received 
attention, but the vast remains of the ancient city have not yet. been 
tackled. A large number of smaller sites in the south of the island have 
yet to be explored, specially for prehistoric remains in which Ceylon seems 
to be particularly rich, and a good beginning has been made in this 
direction by the Director of Museums in Ceylon. Of all countries bordering 
on India, Ceylon is the most intimately connected with her culture both 
in the prehistoric and historic periods, and it is but natural that research 
in both countries should go hand in hand in close co-operation. 

Afghanistan has in several periods of its history formed part of India, 
and some of its most striking remains, as at Hadda, testify to the influence 
of Buddhism in that country. Some of the most important contributions 
to early Indian Epigraphy and Numismatics were based on finds made 
in Afghanistan. Recently a French mission conducted a series of excava¬ 
tions at Begram. and other places which have thrown considerable light 
on its Indian connections. 

In conclusion it may be observed that while archaeological exploration 
has been placed on a fairly strong foundation in this country and much 
has been achieved so far in bringing to light and interpreting first-rate 
material for the reconstruction of India's ancient history, a good deal 
yet remains to he done, and it would require the unabated efforts of 
generations of properly equipped archaeologists to bring the task to a 
reasonable state of completeness. While interest in the subject should be 
progressively widened throughout the length and breadth of this country, 
it is necessary that proper co-ordination should be established and much 


77 





THE VEDIC AGE 

jre financial support assured. Above all it is essential that a strai 
Centre should foster and guide the activities of workers throughout the 
country- Indian unity, as exemplified throughout its history, is all the 
more necessary in the study of India’s past, and any compartmental 
treatment is bound to result in stagnation. Through the immensity 
and diversity of India there runs a thread of unity which must be kept 
in view in any attempt to organize work for the systematic investigation 
of the past, and it is hoped that this consideration will never be lost 
sight of. 


78 



mtST/fy 


CHAPTER I 



THE GEOLOGICAL 
BACKGROUND OF INDIAN 
FI I STORY 

It is a truism that the course of human history in a region is, in a 
considerable measure, shaped by its physical and geographical features, 
which, in turn, in the ultimate, are determined by the geological history 
the region has passed through in the dim vista of time. Five thousand 
to ten thousand years ago North India must have offered to the early 
settlers from Asia, whatever race they belonged to, or from wherever they 
came, a congenial habitat, in pleasing contrast to the arid and inhospitable 
steppes of the Aralo-Caspian region;* or the rugged mountains of the Iran- 
Afghanistan-Turkistan plateau. This migration to a quite new physical 
environment could not but have influenced and largely shaped the trend 
of history and civilization of the races involved. 

Of the three natural physical divisions of India, as we shall see in the 
sequel, the part which was most suitable for human occupation and to 
function as the nursery of civilization is the great central tract of the 
Indo-Gangetic plains. Here, were present all factors favourable for life 
—climate, food-supply, water, and vegetation. This vast expanse of 
flat alluvial plains of high fertility, watered by a number of perennial 
rivers, deriving their fertilizing waters from the snows of the Himalayas, 
must have attracted hordes of migratory peoples in successive waves 
from many parts of Western and Central Asia. The great alluvial plains 
of India extending from Sind through northern Rajputana, Punjab, 
U P., Bihar, and Bengal to Assam, an area of over 300,000 square miles, 
must have offered, as the centuries passed by, an exceedingly delectable 
home to early man long before the earliest beginnings of recorded history. 
But the geological beginnings of the sub-continent of India, as we know it 
today, date back to an antiquity of which it is difficult to give a concept 
save in terms of astronomical figures of years. 

(Human history, proto-history, and archaeology begin where the last 
chapter of our planet’s geological history ends. Man’s existence on earth 
dates a long time behind the oldest known records’of authentic archaeology, 
but fragmentary documents of his life in various regions of the earth, of 
Iris slow progress in culture and industry, and the relics of his contem¬ 
porary animals lie buried in the top layers of the earth’s crust—the strata 

79 


W! HtSTfty, 




THE VEDIC AGE 

logy which form what has been called its Sub-Recent period, T 
ackground of the history of all human races on earth is this zone of 
strata in the upper crust or shell of the earth’s body, laid down in surface 
deposits, river valleys, deltas, lake-basins, glaciers, etc. In these are 
preserved traces of the existence of man and of the physical and climatic 
conditions of the time; they are designated in general as the Pleistocene 
system, representing the last epoch of the third and latest division of 
geological time, the Cainozoic Era. 

A full account of the Pleistocene under these heads is luckily preserved 
in India; it is of great value as linking up prehistory with the geological 
history of a large section of southern Asia. It was this age that saw the 
completion of the main outlines and relief of the earth as we see it today 
—its seas and continents, mountains, plateaux, and plains; though 
climatically the world had yet to witness one of the greatest revolutions, 
viz. the gradual freezing of the northern regions culminating in what is 
known as the Ice Age. 


INDIA IN THE PLEISTOCENE PERIOD 

X. The Setting of the Stage for Early Man in India 

Pleistocene geological records found in India form an extensive and 
varied storehouse of materials for the last million years or so, immediately 
preceding the Recent and Sub-Recent epochs. They carry the human 
records forward to so late a date as the Neolithic (circa 10,000 years B.c.). 
In terms of years the Pleistocene dates back, according to modern estimates, 
to one million to two million years. The formations enumerated below 
have an important bearing on man’s prehistory as they contain in them 
numerous documentary relics entombed in the form of his skeletal remains, 
his artifacts and other proofs of his handiwork, industry, and culture. It 
is in these that the key to the stages of human evolution might be 
found. 

The principal Pleistocene and Sub-Recent remains in India may be 


classified as follows:— 


(i) Deposits of the Ice Age in India: Glacials of Outer and Middle 
Himalayas. 

(ii) The Indo-Gangetic alluvium of the plains of North India. 

(iii) The older alluvium of the peninsular rivers; high-level river 
terraces of the Himalayan valleys. 

(iv) Old Lake Deposits (Karewa Series) of the Upper Jhelum Valley 
in Kashmir. 

(v) Cave Deposits: Human cave-dwellers and their animal con¬ 
temporaries. 

(vi) Laterite Cap of the Peninsula: Loess and soil deposits. 

80 







fife GEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND OF INDIAN HISTORY 


Changes in the river-systems and drainage of North India. 

(viii) The Desert of North India: the growth of desert conditions. 

(ix) Late Earth Movements, volcanoes and earthquakes. 

Interesting glaciological investigations have been made in the Kashmir 
Himalayas and in the Karakoram by a number of explorers and naturalists. 
The Central and Eastern Himalayas have not received the same attention. 
It is, however, well known that throughout these mountains grooved 
and polished rock-surfaces, produced by the scouring action of the 
glaciers, occur at elevations above 6,000 feet, whereas the present limit 
of Himalayan glaciers is 13,000 to 15,000 feet. Numerous lakes and 
rock-basins of Kashmir, Ladakh, and Kumaon directly owe thqjr origin 
to the action of glaciers now no longer existing. Four distinct phases of 
glaciation, separated by three inter-glacial intervals, have been recognized 
in Kashmir by their moraines. 

Whe ther India, south of the Himalayas, passed th rough an Ice Ag e 
hagj been a much-discussed sub ject. It must be understood, however, 
that the presenFzonal distribution of climate being assumed, we cannot 
look for the presence of ice even on”the highlands of South India, because 
a refrigeration which can produce ice-caps in the latitudes of Europe 
would not be enough, to depress the temperatures in India beyond that 
of the present temperate zones. But some indirect evidences of con¬ 
siderably lowered temperature are observed in the increased humidity 
and a succession of cold pluvial periods having affected the distribution 
of several cold-loving species of animals and plants then living in India. 
This enables us to explain the occurrence today of some Himalayan 
temperate flora and fauna in such isolated centres as Mt. Abu, Parasnath, 
in the Nilgiris and even in the mountains of Ceylon, and their absence 
throughout the intervening plains of India. 

Man was contemporaneous, in N.W. India probably, with the two 
later glacial advances, as some late discoveries tend to show. De Terra 
records the presence of implements worked by man in deposits in the 
outer ranges of Kashmir and in the Soan valley, belonging approximately 
to the second Glacial. He correlates the European Chellean and Acheulian 
with the early Soan cultures and dates this as Mid-Pleistocene. 

2, The Indo-Gangetic Alluvium of the Plains of North India 

As noted above, by early Pleistocene time, the dominant features of 
India's geography had taken shape, and the country had acquired almost 
its present form and its leading topography except that the land in front 
of the newly upheaved Himalayas formed a great'longitudinal depression, 
complementary to the rising mountains, and parallel with them. This 
trough, at first occupied by salt-water lagoons, gradually freshened, arid, 
receiving constant influx of detritus from the high ground above it, from 

81 


F 






umsrffy 




THE VEDIC AGE 

reds of descending streams, began rapidly to be filled by the 
the Himalayas. This long-continued vigorous sedimentation loading 
a narrow, slowly sinking belt of country, the deposition of the debris 
keeping pace with the subsidence, has given rise to the great Indian plains. 
The continuous upheaving of the mountains must, have rejuvenated the 
streams, multiplying their sediment-depositing power. Thus these plains 
have come to acquire the simplest geological structure, the alluvial 
filling a large structural basin in the framework of India. 

The greater part of the Indo-Gangetic plains is built up of very late 
alluvial flood deposits of the rivers of the Indus-Ganges systems, borne 
down from the Himalayas and deposited at their foot. But most of this 
terrain became firm and dry enough to be habitable for man only some 
5,000-7,000 years ago. Bxfited beneath this mantle of clay and sand are 
valuable geological records linking up the Deccan with the Himalaya 
system. Its geological structure, composition and history therefore possess 
no great interest though, humanly speaking, it is of the greatest economic 
as well as historical importance. It has no mineral resources, but its agricul¬ 
tural wealth and fresh underground water stored in the more porous and 
coarser, strata, accessible by ordinary wells and tube-wells, are the highest 
economic asset of India. Though devoid of records other than those of 
the yesterday of geological time, these alluvial plains are the stage of 
the main drama of Indian history since the Aryan occupation. 

The area of these plains is 300,000 square miles, covering the most 
thickly populated and the most fertile part of India. The total thickness 
of the alluvium consisting of beds of clay, silt, and sand is not ascertained, 
for the deepest borings (for water down to about 2,000 feet) have not 
reached the bed-rock. There is a considerable amount of flexure and 
dislocation at the north margin of the trough, where it passes into the 
zone of the parallel boundary faults at the foot of the Himalayas, This 
structural strain explains the well-known seismic instability of this part 
of India, it being the belt encompassing the epicentres of the majority 
of the known Indian earthquakes. Many of the river courses of the plains 
have undergone great alterations. These rivers are bringing enormous 
loads of silt from the mountains and, depositing it on their beds, raise 
them to, and even above, the level of the surrounding flat country through 
which the streams flow in ever-shifting channels. This has been the history 
of many of the rivers of the plains. The deltas of the large rivers are 
mostly constructed within prehistoric times, though their surface and 
outline have undergone material changes during the last few centuries. 
The Indus and Ganges deltas each cover about forty thousand square 
miles. 

The extensive alluvial tract of Gujarat on the west coast is of the same 
age as, though quite unrelated to, the Indo-Gangetic system. Its con¬ 
stitution shows that it is not wholly the work of the rivers, but that in 

82 





GEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND OF INDIAN HISTORY 


ting the combined agency of river, estuarine and marine coast 
Sitions has operated. 

these ancient alluvial deposits are of value in the study of early and 
middle Pleistocene as they are characterized by the presence of some of 
the earliest undoubted traces of man’s existence in India, and furnish 
an easily accessible field to the student of early human culture in India. 

The alluvial plains of the Narmada and Tapti are remarkable as lying 
in deep rock-basins at over 500 feet elevation above the present beds of 
these rivers. Scattered in the clay, sand, and gravel beds are bones of 
the buffalo, horse, bear, an extinct species of rhinoceros, hippopotamus, 
elephant, and crocodile. A chipped stone hatchet, fashioned out of quartz¬ 
ite rock, was discovered in 1872, buried in the steep face of a gravel 
terrace of the Narmada at a site eight miles north of Gadawara. This is 
the earliest prehistoric relic of man discovered in India and is regarded as 
of the pre-Chellean Age. This fact suggests the settlement of the Narmada 
valley by an early palaeolithic race. Another valuable relic, also believed to 
be of genuine human workmanship, was discovered in a terrace of the upper 
Godavari at a level of about twenty-five, feet above the present bed of 
the river . It is a knife fashioned out of an agate flake, 2 \ inches long, the 
sharp cutting edge of which is blunted by long usage. From the association 
of human remains with large mammalia which differ from the existing 
Indian fauna in some material respects, the age of these implements can 
be taken to be Lower Pleistocene. The distance in time of these animals 
from their present-day descendants gives us some measure of the antiquity 
of the human settlements on the Narmada and the Godavari. 

Various alluvial deposits of the Jurnna-Ganges rivers and their tribu¬ 
taries are somewhat newer in age and have been assigned an antiquity 
intermediate between the Narmada-Godavari beds and the Mid-Pleisto¬ 
cene, from the evidence of fossil-bones and the few artifacts that have 
been found in them. Lately signs of the existence of palaeolithic man have 
also been obtained from the valleys of the Tungabhadra and the Orsang. 
Recent discoveries since 1935 in the valleys of the Scan (near Rawalpindi) 
and in the Sabarmatl of north Gujarat of interesting suites of stone 
tools, axes, scrapers, and choppers also throw light on the length of the 
epoch that intervened between the palaeolithic and the commencement 
of historic time. 

3. Human Cave-Dwellers of India: Their Animal Contemporaries 
But few caves of archaeological interest exist, in India and out of these 
only one group has received'the attention of palaeontologists and been 
subjected to systematic exploration. The oniy.ones that have been sys¬ 
tematically investigated and yielded data on Pleistocene cave life are the 
group of small caves (Billa Surgam) near Banaganapali in the Kumool 
district. From the stalagmitic floor a large assemblage of bones has been 

83 


(fiT 

•uojJLj 



THE VEDIC AGE 

e out, belonging to a mixture of Recent and Sub-Recent spiQj 
a monkey, a hyaena, several cats, bear, a small equus, mongoose, 
bat, squirrel, a shrew, rats, small deer, gazelle, wild boar, along with 
an extinct type of rhinoceros, wild boar, civet-tiger and giant pangolin. 
Palaeontologists have assigned to this fauna a horizon near to the Upper 
Pleistocene top of the Palaeolithic. Among the human implements 
found in the Billa Surgam caves are numerous bone tools, very few stone 
tools being so far recorded. These are referred to the middle or upper 
Palaeolithic. 

The Kurnool caves help to present a fragmentary picture of the land 
life that prevailed in India just prior to the time when man began to 
domesticate animals for his own use. This life bridges the gap between 
the end of the Siwalik, a period of maximum development of the higher 
mammalian species, and the beginning of the Neolithic, when man 
began to take to pastoral and agricultural pursuits. 

Since early Siwalik times there has been a more or less constant inter¬ 
course between East Africa, Arabia, Central Asia and India maintained 
by the migrations of herds of mammals. Pilgrim has stated that the mag¬ 
nificent assemblage of land mammals we witness in the later stages of 
the Siv/aliks was not truly of indigenous Indian origin. According to him 
it is certain that it received large accessions by migration o.t the larger 
quadrupeds from Egypt, Arabia, Central Asia, and. even from distant 
North America by way ot land bridges across Alaska, Siberia, and 

Mongolia. « . 

There seems little doubt that our races of domestic animals are the direct 
descendants of the post-Siwalik species through the greatly decimated 
population that inhabited the Kurnool caves and the basins of the Nar¬ 
mada and the Godavari. The Siwalik ancestry of the Indian camel and 
the buffalo is beyond anv doubt, whilst the short-horned and humped 
cattle of India had as their progenitors the Bos primigenius of the Siwalik 
through Bos nomadicus of the Narmada age. With a varied and abundant 
animal population as their co-denizens in the fertile and well-watered 
plains of North India it is no wonder that early man in India was among 
the first to tame some of the more prized varieties for companionship 
and domestic service. ^ 

4. Laterite Cap of the Peninsula and Soil Deposits 

Among the geographical, geological, and geophysical factors which have 
influenced the course of history in India and governed the distribution 
of large bodies of population over its surface, the peculiar formation, 
laterite, is of importance. In many ways its influence was the opposite 
to that' of the Indo- Gangctic alluvium, for whereas the country covered 
under this geological formation invited man’s settlement and provided 
a hospitable base for sustaining life, the laterite rock terrains are generally 

84 




GEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND OF INDIAN HISTORY 

/comparatively sterile expanses of hard ground, difficult to till 
in surface and underground water resources, and drove man to 
easier conditions of existence. 

5. Changes in the River Systems of North India during the Human Epoch 

The hydrography of North India for a considerable portion ot the 

Pleistocene epoch was profoundly different from what we find today. 
Few changes in the physical geography of India during early historical 
times and in Sub-Recent a.ge have been so well proved as the changes 
in the river-systems of northern India. Following the great geographical 
revolution of the later Tertiary ages the old drainage lines of northern 
India have been radically altered and anew drainage system superimposed 
The number, volume, and direction of the majority of the units of this 
drainage bear evidences of these changes, which in some instances, 
amounted to a complete reversal of the direction of flow of a principal 
river such as the Ganges. 

The drainage pattern of Peninsular India is of great antiquity and has 
s persisted more or less unchanged since the early Gondwana era..On the 
’ other hand the northerly drainage of the Deccan, flowing to the shores 
of the Himalayan Sea (the Tethys) in Gondwana times, was completely 
disorganized in the beginning of the Tertiary, and subsequently during 
the late Tertiary and post-Tertiary all its main lines were buried under 
the 200 mile wide belt of alluvial plains of the north from Sind to Manipur. 
The present valley system of northern India, one of the youngest hydro- 
graphic systems of the world, has inherited nothing from the old, it being 
an entirely superimposed drainage, with no relations whatever to the 
old river-courses. 

6. The Great Prehistoric River of Northern India 

Ample evidence is found on the subject of the common ancestry of 
the Brahmaputra, Ganges, and Indus rivers, their reversal and capture 
before attaining their present state which has influenced the course of 
Indian history at many a turn and corner. It was the notable pre¬ 
historic river, named the “Siwalik river" by Pilgrim, that flowed from 
the head of the Sind gulf to the Punjab and thence along the foot of the 
embryonic Plimalaya chains, through Simla and Nainital to Assam. 
Post-Siwalik earth movements in North-West Punjab brought about a 
dismemberment of this river system into three subsidiary systems: 
(1) The present Indus from North-West Hazara; (2) The five Punjab 
tributary rivers of the Indus; (3) The rivers belonging to the Ganges 
system which finally took a south-easterly course. 

The severed upper part of the Siwalik River became the modern Ganges, 
having in course of time captured the transversely running Jumna and 
converted it into its own affluent. The transverse Himalayan rivers, 

85 


§L 




uiNisr^ 


THE VEDIC AGE 

: : N- : Alaknanda, Karnali, Gandak, and Kosi, 

the oldest water-courses of North India, continued to discharge their 
waters into this new river, irrespective of its ultimate destination, 
whether it was the Arabian Sea or Bay of Bengal: During Sub-Recent 
times some interchange took place between the easterly affluents of 
the Indus and the westerly tributaries of the Jumna by minor shifting of 
the water-shed, now to one side now to the other. There are both physical 
and historical grounds for the belief that the Jumna during early times 
discharged into the Indus system, through the now neglected bed of 
the Sarasvati river of Hindu tradition, its present course to Prayag being 
of late acquisition. 

The Punjab portion of the present Jhelum, Chenab, Ravi, Beas, and 
Sutlej have originated fr ojp the uplift of the topmost stage of the Siwalik 
system and subsequent to the severance of the Indus from the Ganges. 
The Potwar plateau-building movements could not but have rejuvenated 
the small rivulets of southern Punjab, which until now were discharging 
into the lower Indus; the vigorous head-erosion resulting from this impetus 
enabled them to capture, bit by bit, that portion of the Siwalik river 
which crossed the Potwar on its westerly course to the Indus. Ultimately 
the head waters, joining up with the youthful torrents descending from 
the mountains, grew in volume till they formed the five important rivers 
of the province, having their sources'in the snows of the Great Himalaya 
Range. The western portion of the broad but now deserted channel of 
the main river, after these mutilating -operations, has been occupied today 
by the puny, insignificant stream of the Soan, a river out of all harmony 
with its great basin in the enormous extent of the fluviatile deposits with 
which it is choked. 

7. The Deserts of Western India: The Rann of Catch 

The origin of 40,000 square miles of the Rajputana desert with its 
curiously worn and sand-blasted topography is attributed, in the first 
instance, to a long continued and extreme degree of aridity of the region 
combined with the sand-drifting action of the south-west monsoon 
winds, which sweep through Rajputana for several months of the year 
without precipitating any part of their contained moisture. A certain 
proportion of the desert sand is derived from the weathered debris of 
the rocky prominences of this tract, which are subject to thct'great diurnal 
as well as seasonal alterations of temperature characteristic of all arid 
regions. The daily variation of heat, and cold in some parts of Rajputana 
often amounts to 100 degrees Fahr. in the course of a few hours. The 
seasonal alteration is greater. This leads to a mechanical disintegration 
of the rocks, producing an abundance of loose debris, which there is no 
chemical or organic action (humus) to convert into soil. 

The Rann of Cutch .—Once an inlet of the Arabian Sea and now a saline 

86 


wliich are really 




UWlST/f 



GEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND OF INDIAN HISTORY 


Q 

k. 


iy plain scarcely above sea-level, its sandy metal enclosing deep 
pockets of millions of tons of pure salt, the Rann of Cutch bears signs of 
late geological alterations of level caused by earth movements and owes 
its present condition to the geological process of the Pleistocene age. 
From November to March, the period of the north-west monsoon, the Rann 
is a barren tract of dry salt-encrusted mud, presenting aspects of incon¬ 
ceivable desolation. During the other half of the year it is flooded by 
waters of the rivers that are held back owing to the rise of the sea by 
the south-west monsoon gales. A very little depression of this tract 
would be enough to Convert Kathiawar and Cutch into islands. On the 
other hand, if depression does not take place, the greater part of the 
surface of the Rann will be gradually raised by the silts brought by the 
river with each flood, and in course of time converted into an arable 
tract, above the reach of the sea, a continuation of the alluvial terrain 
of Gujarat. 

8. The Meteorological Influence of the Himalaya Mountains 

The Rajputana desert conditions have thus accentuated with time, the 
water action of its few streams being too feeble to transport to the sea 
the growing masses of sand. But that the Indian desert is not of greater 
extent, or that it shows no tendency to expand in girth is due to the 
meteorological influence exerted by the Himalaya range. It has protected 
northern India from the gradual desiccation that has overspread Central 
Asia from Khorasan in eastern Persia to Mongolia since early historic 
times, and the desert conditions that inevitably follow in the heart of 
a continent. 

9. Earthquakes and Volcanoes 

Earthquakes .—The Peninsula of India is a region of great geological 
stability and is remarkably immune from seismic disturbances of any 
intensity. But in the extra-peninsular India the recorded ear V 
since even late historic times form a long catalogue of tragedi 
well-authenticated generalization that the majority of Indian e 
have originated from the great plains of India, or from the) 
tracts. 

Of the great Indian earthquakes recorded in the last 
and of which some accounts can be traced, the best kr 
1720; Calcutta, 1737; Eastern Bengal, 1762; Cutch 
1885; Bengal, 1885; Assam, 1897 (one of the most di r 
recorded in world history); Kangra, 1905; North ' 

Baluchistan, 1935. The area encompassed by the? 
weakness and strain caused by the severe crur 
within recent times. The structurally disturb 
not yet attained stability of quiescence. It f ' 

87 





THE VEDIC AGE 



.<pake belt which traverses the circumference of the earth east to westr 

Irom Japan through the whole breadth of Eurasia across the Atlantic 

and the North American continent to California. 

Volcanoes .—There are no living or active volcanoes anywhere in the 

Indian region today. A recently extinct volcano lies far on the west 

border of India in the Nushki desert of Baluchistan—the large extinct 

crater of Kohi Sultan. The Malay line of living volcanoes—the Sunda 

Chain—some of the most active volcanoes of the recent age, if prolonged 

to the north, would connect a few dormant or lately extinct volcanoes 

belonging to this region. Of these the most important is the now dormant 

volcano of Barren' Island, to the east of the Andaman island group. 

The last time it was observed to be in eruption was early in the nineteenth 

• * - 

century. 

io. Late Earth-Movements and Local Alterations of Level 

Though movements of the mountain-building kind have not visited 
the peninsular part of India for an immense length of geological time, 
there have been a few late vertical movements of secular upheaval and 
depression, some of these of considerable amplitude, involving uplift or 
sinking of large crust-blocks, while others were of minor or local type. 
Of these, the later minor alterations of level recorded within the Pleisto¬ 
cene concern us here. Within these times an appreciable elevation of the 
peninsula, exposing portions of the submerged coastal plains as a shelf 
or platform round its east as well as west coasts, is the most notable. 
Such “raised beaches’’ are found at altitudes varying from a few feet to 
150 feet in many places on the Malabar and Coromandel coasts, while 
marine shells are found at several places some distance inland far above 
the level of the tides. Marine and estuarine deposits of post-Tertiary 
age are met with on a large scale towards the southern extremity of the 
Deccan. Besides these evidences of a rather prominent uplift of the penin- 
1? re are also proofs of minor, more local alterations of level, 
tion and depression. The existence of beds of lignite and peat 
ges delta, the submerged forest discovered on the east coast 
1 of Bombay and peat deposits near Pondicherry are proofs 
ward movement. Evidences of upheaval are seen in some 
ig the coasts, low-level raised beaches on various parts of 
recent marine accumulations above tide level, 
forest of Bombay is nearly twelve feet below low-water 
■t below high water; here a number of tree stumps 
~>ts in situ, in the old soil. On the Tinnevelly coast 
ment of old land surface is seen slightly below 
1 dicherry, 240 feet below ground-level, a thick 
rile in the Ganges delta layers of carbonized 
nit twenty miles from the coast of Mekran 


88 



CHAPTER VI 




FLORA AND FAUNA 

i. THE FLORA 

The vegetation of a country depends on, and to a large extent is 
determined by, its geographical and climatic features, and India stands 
in a very favourable position with respect to both these conditions. 

"There is no part of the world better marked off by nature as a region 
by itself than India. It is a region indeed full of contrast in physical 
features and in climate.” The extraordinary varieties in its physical 
features have been described above. The climate also varies from “torrid 
to arctic, from almost absolute aridity to a maximum of humidity.” 
It is greatly influenced by the monsoon winds and the distribution and 
orientation of the mountain ranges and their altitude. The annual rainfall 
varies prodigiously in different parts of India from 450 inches in the 
Khasi Hills of Assam to about three inches in the deserts of Sind and 
Rajputana. Its temperature also shows enormous variation with the 
changes of seasons. At some places during summer months it records 
130 degrees or more in the shade and in winter it goes down many degrees 
below freezing point. 

The soils of India, like its climate, comprise almost all the different 
types found elsewhere in the world. The alluvial soils of Assam, Bengal, 
the United Provinces, the Punjab, Rajputana, Sind, Gujarat, the 
Godavari, Krishna and Tan jore districts of Madras and the eastern and 
western coastlands of the Deccan, are important, for agricultural crops 
and have made India essentially an agricultural country. The Deccan trap 
and the regur or black cotton soils of the greater portion of the Bombay 
Presidency, Berar, western parts of the Central Provinces and Hyderabad, 
in the valleys of the Tapti, Godavari, Narmada, Krishna and parts of 
Kathiawar, and the western portion of Central India, are very favourable 
to the cultivation of cotton, jowar (great millet), wheat, linseed and gram. 
The crystalline and laterite (red) soils of Madras, Mysore, the south-east 
portion of the Bombay Presidency, the eastern half of Hyderabad, parts 
of the Central Provinces, Orissa, Chota Nagpur, western borderland of 
Bengal, parts of eastern Rajputana and the Bundelkhand region of 
Central India are fertile when dark coloured,'and infertile when they 
are light coloured and sandy. 

India’s contiguity to bordering countries has been responsible for 
the migration of a large number of plants from China, Tibet, Siberia, 

107 



THE VEDIC AGE 



iaya., Europe and South Africa, and they form the exotic elements 


of the flora of India. The number of recorded species of flowering 


plants comes to about 17,000 under 176 families, and there are about 
600 ferns and fern allies, 3,000 mosses and 178 liverworts. According 
to Chatterjee, 38 per cent of the flowering plants of India are exotic. 

From their exhaustive and critical studies of the Indian flora Hooker 
and Ihomson observe that “India contains representatives of almost 
every natural family on the globe . . . and it contains a more general 
and complete illustration of the genera of the other parts of the world 
than any other country whatsoever of the equal or even of considerably 
larger extent.” 1 

Indi? is so extensive and varied a country that for a closer study of 
its vegetation it has beeiyjpcessary to divide it into three botanical areas 
and six provinces. The three areas or regions are: the Himalayan, 
Eastern, and Western. The Himalayan represents a “rich tropical, 
temperate and alpine flora with forests of conifers, oaks, rhododendrons, 
and a profusion of orchids”; the Eastern, “a few conifers, manv oaks 
and palms with a great preponderance of orchids”; and the Western 
“has only one conifer, no oaks, few palms and comparatively few 
orchids.” The Himalayan flora has in common many European genera; 
the Eastern, many Chinese and Malayan; and the Western, European, 
Oriental, and African. 

These three botanical areas are subdivided into six botanical provinces, 
based on their climate and physical characters, namely (1) the Eastern 
^Iimalaya, (2) the Western Himalaya, (3) the Indus Plain, (4) the 
Gangetic Plain including the Sunderbans, (5) Malabar, and (6) the Deccan, 
each characterized by its own flora. 

It would be beyond the scope of this chapter to go into details of the 
vegetation of these provinces, but in order to give an idea of the immensity 
of India's vegetable wealth a brief enumeration of the principal types 
of vegetation is given below. 

1. Forest Vegetation: its types 

India is very rich in forests; as a matter of fact forests cover more 
than one-fifth of its total area. The forests of India supply valuable timber, 
firewood, essential oils, resin, turpentine, lac, dyeing material, tanning 
material, myrobalans, sources of paper pulp and other materials of 
commerce and industry. 

According to the variation in climate, altitude, and habitat the forest 
vegetation of India is divided into five types: (1) the Evergreen, (2) the 
Deciduous, (3) the Dry, (4) the Hill, and (5) the Tidal'or Littoral. 

. The Evergreen .—The dense and luxuriant Evergreen flourishes where 
the annual rainfall is over 80 inches and contains trees of many important 
families, such as the Dipterocarpaceae, Guttiferae, Annonace®, Meliaceae, 


108 


FLORA AND FAUNA 



iraceas, Sapotacese, Euphorbiaceae, and the Palmae. They include 
many species of great economic value, such as ebony, teak, rosewood, 
ironwood, bamboos, the jaman, the neem, and tamarind. In the Carnatic 
Evergreens the families Ebenace^e, Sapotaceae, Capparidacese, Rham- 
naceae and Myrtaceae predominate. 

The sea-shores are skirted with coconuts; the villages are surrounded 
with groves of betelnuts and talipots; cassia, pepper, and cardamom 
flourish wild in the jungles and form staple products of export. Sandal¬ 
wood is found in the outskirts of Malabar. Nutmeg, coffee, and tea grow 
in the hill slopes, and cinnamon flourishes in this region. Ar to car pus, 
calophyllum , cedrela , dalbergia , dipterocarpus , and others occur in plenty. 
In Assam forests bamboos, palms, ficus, cycas, ferns, and others grow in 
abundance. 

The Deciduous. —The Deciduous occupies the larger part of the Deccan 
and is also known as the Monsoon Forests. Trees are large-sized and form 
very remarkable timbers, such as teak, sal, padauk, redwood, sandal¬ 
wood, anjan, species of Terminalia, Chloroxylon , Swietenia, Diospyros, 
Acacia , Albizzia, and others. Of palms, Phoenix sylvestris and Borassus 
flabellifer grow gregariously. The chief bamboos are Bambusa arundinacea 
and Dendrocalamus strictus; ferns and their allies are rare in these forests. 

The Dry. —The Dry forests are found in the desert regions of Sind, 
Raj put ana, and the Punjab, and the plants are characterized by thick 
and fleshy stems and leaves and mostly consist of thickets of shrubs and 
a few stunted trees; many of them are leafless. The chief families are the 
Leguminosse, Taraaricaceae, Rhamnaceae, and the characteristic trees 
are: the Jhand , various species of Tamarix , Capparis, Salvadora, Acacia , 
Phoenix sylvestris, Zizyphus, etc. 

The Hill. —The Mountain or Hill forests are found in South India 
above 5,000 feet and in the Himfilayas above 3,000 feet altitude. The 
trees are Evergreen, of which the following are the most conspicuous: 
oak, picea, deodar, pines, firs, chestnut, walnut, maple, elm, ash, birches, 
laurels, pyrus, poplar, rhododendron, and species of abies. The prominent 
families of these forests are the Coniferse, Cupuliferae, Sapindaceae, Laur- 
aceae, Magnoliacese, Salicaceae and Urticaceae. Indian Bladder-nut and 
Lilac, Rosa webbiana , moschata, and eglanteria , Parroltia $p„ the 
mountain ash, the bullace and the common hawthorn are peculiar to 
the Western Himalayas. Species of magn olia, musa t palms, pandamis, 
bamboos, orchids, cycas, and ferns abound in the Eastern Himalayas. 
Beautiful herbaceous plants like anemone, aconites, violets, primulas 
and balsams abound. The alpine zones contain species of rhododendron, 
junipers and associations of dwarfish herbaceous plants, such as species 
of Rheum , Arenaria , and Saussarea. Both in the Eastern and Western 
Himalayas about 4,000 flowering species under 147-160 families, 230- 
250 ferns and their allies with eight tree ferns have so far been recorded. 

109 








THE VEDIC AGE 

'he Littoral. —The Littoral forests are found in the deltas oi 
anges, the Mahanadi, and the Indus, and also to some extent in the 
regions washed by the high tide and salt water. They are rich sources 
of fuel. The whole of the Sunderbans is named after the Sundri (Heritiera) 
trees. The prominent families of these forests are: Rhizophoraceae, 
Gramineae, Cyperaceae, Typhaceae, Euphorbiaceae, Verbanaceae and the 
two palms, namely, Nipa fruticans and Phoenix paludosa. In many 
places Avicennia, Nipa, and Aegialitis form assoc&tions; Suceda maritima, 
Acanthus ilicifolius, Sonneratia apetala, Ceriops roxburghiana, Bruguiera 
gymnorhiza, Aegiceros major, and others are some of the dominant species 
of these regions. These forests are popularly known as the Mangrove 
Forests, 


2. Freshwater Vegetation 

About 160 flowering species form the common water or marsh 
vegetation of India. The beautiful white, blue, and red water lilies, and 
their allies, the magnificent white and red lotuses, Euryale ferox, a relative 
of the Victoria regia, and Limnanthcmum with clusters of white flowers 
lend charm and beauty to the fresh water lakes, pools, ponds, and other 
inland waters. Nymphcea alba, Caltha, and others occur in the lakes of 
Kashmir. Species of Lenina, Wolfia, Pistia stratiotes, water hyacinth 
(recently introduced), bladderworts, and Ceratophyllum are conspicuous 
free floating aquatic plants, while water-chestnut, Ipomoea sp., water- 
ferns, and many others are amphibious. Vallisneria, Hydrilla, Ottelia, 
Najas, Char a, etc., form extensive floor vegetation in shallow water¬ 
courses. The Podostemonads are regarded as the most remarkable of 
India’s freshwater flora in the rapid streams of hill slopes. 

3. 'Cultivated Vegetation 

An account of the vegetation of India will be incomplete without 
some notice of the large varieties of her cultivated vegetation. As India 
extends, both horizontally and altitudinally, from the tropical to the 
temperate zones, cultivated crops of these zones all over the globe are 
being, or can be, grown successfully in India. Crop vegetation in India, 
as in other countries, is distinguished into four general types, namely: 
(1) the Hill, (2) the Wet (Monsoon), (3) the Dry (Winter) and (4) the 
Irrigational. 

The total area of cultivable land in India is about 450 million acres, 
and of these nearly 285 million acres are actually under cultivation! 
The following is a bare account of the principal crops and their distri¬ 
bution in India. These are classified under six major heads, namely: 
(1) the Cereals, (2) the Pulses, (3) Sugar-cane, (4) Oil seeds, (5) Fibre crops, 
and (6) Plantation crops. 


no 



FLORA AND FAUNA 


Trials .—The cereals comprise rice, wheat, millet, barley, and maiz 
first two being the principal cereal crops. 

Rice is cultivated in Bengal, Madras, Bihar, the United Provinces, 
Orissa, the Central Provinces, Assam, Bombay, and Sind, and covers 
about 70 million acres. Wheat is grown in about 35 million acres, and the 
principal wheat-growing provinces of India are the Punjab, the United 
Provinces, and the North-West Frontier Province. Millet is extensively 
grown in Madras, Bombay and part of Hyderabad. There are two principal 
kinds; jowar (Andropogon sorghum) and bajra (.Pennisetum typhoideum ), 
and the total area under millet cultivation comes to about 63 million 
acres. Barley is grown only over a comparatively small area in the Ganges 
basin of the United Provinces, Bihar, Peshawar, and Central Kashmir. 
Maize in small quantities is cultivated more or less all over India, but 
in larger quantities in the United Provinces, Bihar, Nepal, and the 
Punjab both in the plains and hills. 

Pulses. —This important group includes gram, lentils, peas, arhar, 
and many species of Phaseohcs , and the total area under cultivation 
approximates to 50 million acres of which grain alone occupies between 
15--17 million acres. Gram is mostly grown in the Punjab, the United 
Provinces, Bihar, the Central Provinces, Bombay, Hyderabad, and 
Mysore; lentils in the Central Provinces,Madras, and the United Provinces; 
and peas and other pulses in many parts of India. 

Sugar-cane. —India is regarded as the original home of sugar-cane and 
the present area under its cultivation exceeds four million acres. The 
most important sugar-cane growing provinces are the United Provinces, 
the Punjab, Madras, Bengal, Bihar, and Bombay. 

Oil Seeds. —The importance of oil seeds is very great. Not only do they 
constitute an essential element in the diet of every Indian, but they are 
also in great demand for the manufacture of vegetable ghee, perfumeries, 
varnishes, paints, lubricants, candles, soaps, and other similar products 
of commerce. The principal oil-yielding crops of India are rape and 
mustard, ground-nuts, linseed, castor-seed, sesamum seed, etc. 

The cultivation of rape and mustard is confined to the northern parts of 
India, in the United Provinces, Bengal, the Punjab, Bihar, and Orissa over 
an area of about six million acres. Ground-nut is grown over eight million 
acres chiefly in Madras, Bombay, Hyderabad, the Central Provinces, 
and Chota Nagpur. The area under linseed crop is about three and a half 
million acres distributed over the Central Provinces, Bihar, Orissa, the 
United Provinces, Bombay, Bengal, Hyderabad, and the Punjab. 
Sesamum is grown in almost all the provinces of India, but mainly in 
Bombay, Madras, and the Central Provinces". Castor oil plants as a 
principal crop are grown in Madras, Hyderabad, Bombay, and the 
Central Provinces. Coconut oil is derived from the copra of coconuts. 

Fibre Crops. —Cotton, jute, and hemp are the principal fibre crops. 

ru 


§L 




MIMSTft, 




THE VEDIC AGE 

ndia. Of these, cotton occupies 25-27 million acres, jute 2.18 milk 
hemp 0.6 million acres. Cotton is a dry-region crop and is grown in 
Bombay, the Central Provinces, Berar, the Punjab, Madras, the United 
Provinces, Bengal, Hyderabad, Baroda, Raj put ana, Sind, and Mysore. 
Jute cultivation is restricted to Bengal, Assam, Bihar, and Orissa. Two 
varieties of Hemp , the Sunn and the Roselle, are grown in Bombay, the 
Central Provinces, the United Provinces, and Madras, and to a small 
extent in the North-Western Himalayas and Sind. 

Plantation Crops. —The principal plantation crops are: tea, coffee, 
tobacco, rubber, indigo, opium-poppy, condiments and spices, fruits 
and vegetables including root crops. The area under tea cultivation in 
India is about 0.82 million acres in the hill slopes of Assam, Bengal, 
Bihar, Madras, the Punjab* the United Provinces, Cochin, Mysore, and 
Travancore. Coffee cultivation is restricted mainly to Mysore, Madras, 
Coorg, Cochin, and Travancore, the total area under coffee being about 
0.2 million acres .Tobacco was first introduced to India in 1508, and the 
best tobacco is now grown over ij million acres in Bihar, Bengal, 
Madras, Mysore, Bombay, the Punjab, and Hyderabad. Rubber is mainly 
grown in Travancore, Madras, Coorg, Cochin, and Mysore. Indigo 
cultivation is confined to the Ganges valley, and Opium-poppy in 
Bihar and the United Provinces. Condiments and spices are grown 
mostly in South India and Assam over an area of 2 million acres. 
India's fruits and vegetables , including root crops, cover an area approxi¬ 
mately of 4.5 million acres and include grapes, oranges, apricots, pears, 
apples, bananas, mangoes, litchis, pine-apples, papaya, guava, water 
melons, and others. The coconuts provide delicious drinks and nutritious 
food, and are a source of copra and coir. 

Before concluding this brief account of Indian vegetation, specific 
mention should be made of three trees which have figured in Indian 
vegetabledore and literature since Vedic times: the banyan ( Ficus 
bengalensis) , the pipal (Ficus religiosa), and the salmall (. Bombax mala - 
baricum). The banyan with its spreading branches and prop roots, the 
pipal with its wealth of hanging leaves constantly fluttering in the wind, 
and the towering ^almali, a blaze of scarlet flowers in early spring are 
distinctive features of the Indian landscape. 


2. THE FAUNA 


On account of the great diversity of climatic and physical conditions 
in a vast country like India its animal life is so remarkably varied and 
abundant that it is beyond the scope of the present chapter to give even 
a general account of the characteristic features of its fauna. We therefore 
propose to confine our attention mainly to the vertebrate animals; for 

112 



FLORA AND FAUNA 

the invertebrates are far greater in number and variety the 
rates are better known and more beneficial. 


i. The Vertebrates 

Amongst vertebrates, the mammals constitute the highest group and 
are of special interest as these include man himself. In India, mammals are 
well represented. Only the duckbill and spiny ant-eaters and the pouched 
mammals such as kangaroos and the opossum do not occur in India. 
Amongst the man-like apes only the hoolock gibbon is found in India. 
This occurs in large troops in the dense forests of Assam and adjacent 
areas. Ihe monkeys are represented by a number of species and include 
the langurs or hanuman monkeys, which have become famous by being 
connected with the story of the Hindu epic-—the Rdmdyana. These 
occur practically over the whole of India. The lemurs in India are 
represented by the slow loris occurring in the forests of Assam and the 
slender loris living in the forests of South India. 

The various groups of land carnivores are well represented in India. 
Most of them, particularly the larger ones, constitute the big game 
for hunting. Amongst these, the Indian lions are at present restricted 
to the forests of Kathiawar peninsula. The tigers are widely distributed 
throughout India—in the snowy Himalayas, in the evergreen forests 
and dry open jungles as well as in swamps of the Sunderbans. The panther 
or the common Indian leopard, the beautiful Himalayan snow leopard, 
the skin of which is in great demand in the fur trade, and the cheetah 
or the hunting leopard are the other large carnivores. 

The smaller carnivores of the cat-group include, besides the various 
forms of cats, the civets, the mongooses, and the hyaenas. The other 
carnivores include the wolves, jackals, wild dogs, foxes, as well as the 
bears, weasels, and otters. 

Ihe hoofed mammals constitute an important group of animals. 
Because of the immense usefulness of many a member of this group, 
these play an important part in the economic life of human beings. 
The hoofed forms are either even-toed or odd-toed. The odd-toed forms 
are the horse and asss, the rhinoceros and the elephant. Rhinoceros in 
India is represented at the present day by the single race of one-horned 
forms, which is now restricted to Assam and the swamps and' grassy 
jungles of low hills in parts of Nepal. The elephants and the horses are 
both notable for the part they played in the numerous battles fought 
on Indian soil in the early days of history. The even-toed forms include 
the cattle, sheep and goats, deer, gazelle and antelopes, and the boars 
and pigs. The cattle in India include, besides domestic forms, the bison 
and the wild buffalo. 

The sheep and the goats are chiefly Himalayan. The goats include the 
Himalayan form—the Asiatic ibex and the Nilgiri wild goat or the South 

113 H 




THE VEDIC AGE 


<SL 


Indian ibex. The several races of deer found in India live in more or less 
thick jungles. These include the barking-deer, the barasingha or swamp- 
deer, the sambar, the spotted-deer or chital and the hog-deer. Another 
race found in the high altitudes of the Himalayas is the hornless dark 
brown musk-deer, dhe male of this race bears beneath the skin of the 
abdomen a gland, the secretion of which is known as musk, reputed 
for its various uses especially for medicinal purposes. The mouse-deer 
or the Indian chevrotain is another hornless race of very small size. The 
black buck, the only representative in India of antelope, has beautiful 
spirally-twisted horns. The Nilgai is an inhabitant of open forests whereas 
the four-horned chousingha lives in the forests in the hilly tracts of 
peninsular India. The chinkara or Indian gazelle lives in the deserts 
whereas the pigmy-hog occurs in the forests, of Eastern Himalayas. 
Pig-sticking or spearing wild hog from horseback is a favourite sport 
in India. 

The insectivores include tree-shrews, hedgehogs, moles, and shrews. 
The rodents include the squirrels and marmots, jerboas, rats and mice, 
porcupines and hares. 

The scaly ant-eater or Pangolin is common in India. 

The bats include chiefly the large frugivorous flying foxes and the 
small insectivorous bats. 

The whales and dugongs are marine animals and are occasionally 
found near the Indian coasts. The dolphin and the porpoise occur in the 
rivers. 

The bird life of India has attracted considerable interest due to its 
remarkable variety and wide range of distribution. The distribution of 
birds in India is not, however, homogeneous. Migration of birds is a well- 
known fact, but in India the migratory birds are few in number and the 
few that migrate into the Indian region come from the north only. 

The familiar birds which are commonly found around human habitations 
include the crows, tM house mayna, and the house sparrow. The crows 
include the common house crow and the jungle crow. The ravens are 
larger in size than the jungle crows. The jackdaws and rooks found in 
Kashmir and parts of north-west India are winter visitors from the 
northern region. The jackdaw has a musical and melodious call and it 
makes a delightful pet. Of the various maynds found in India the house 
mayna shares with the crow the distinction of being the most familiar 
and best known bird. 

The magpies are beautifully coloured birds usually living in forests. 
These birds are very noisy and their call is harsh and unpleasant. Iits 
are small birds inhabiting chiefly the forests. The babblers and thrushes 
are gregarious birds feeding on the ground. They are noisy chatterers 
par excellence. Warblers are small birds usually living in open grassy 
tracts or sandy ground. The red-vented bulbul is a common garden 

1x4 



FLORA AND FAUNA 

r&ughout India. It is reputed for its cheerful call notes. The well- 
known Indian robin is the dayal , one of the best songsters. The shama is 
another famous singing bird of India. The familiar pleasant call notes 
of pee-ou-a produced by the golden oriole or the mango-bird in the mango 
season are heard in gardens as well as in forests both at dawn and at 
sunset. There are many fly-catchers, which are usually small birds. Another 
familiar bird is the king crow which is frequently found to chase crows. 
It is a common sight to find this bird perching on telegraph wires beside 
the railway lines. The weaver birds are noted for the curious flask-shaped 
nests they make. Tailor birds are well known for their habit of sewing 
two leaves together with a piece of grass as a receptacle for their nests. 
Munias are smaller birds than the robins and are familiar cage birds. 
Besides the parrots with green plumage and long tails which are well- 
known as cage birds throughout India, the hill maynd is a notable cage 
bird with wonderful powers of imitating the human voice. Swallows and 
larks are usually winter visitors. These generally sing while on the 
wing. The woodpecker is a familiar bird in India. It has a long beak 
with the repeated strokes of which it removes bark and rotted wood 
from tree trunks exposing termites, ants, beetles and their larvae on 
which it feeds. Amongst the barbets which are usually grass green in 
colour and frugivorous in habit, the most familiar form is the Indian 
coppersmith found in most Indian gardens and is known by its repeated 
metallic call like the tap of a small hammer on metal in a monotonous 
manner for some minutes. Some of the buntings which are common in 
winter are notorious for causing damage in cornfields. The blue jay or 
roller is one of the best known Indian birds seen in gardens and orchards. 
With the end of winter it rolls in the air and with harsh screams declares 
the advent of the spring. 

The kingfisher represents another group of common Indian birds. 
This has a beautifully coloured plumage. The hombill is a forest bird 
with a broad casque over the large curved beak. It is reputed to be the 
Garuda of the Hindus. The hoopoe is found throughout India and is noted 
for its loud hoots repeated two or three times. The common Indian 
swifts are famous as producers of edible nests. The nightjars are well- 
known for their peculiar notes in the earlier and later parts of the night 
resembling the strokes of a hammer on a plank. They are considered of 
evil omen. 

The cuckoos include several forms and all lay their eggs in the nests 
of other birds. The call of the common Indian cuckoo is described as 
bou-kota-ko. The hawk cuckoo, commonly known as the brain-fever bird, 
is reputed for its monotonous call notes in the Hot season, each repeated 
note being higher in the scale. The Indian koel is another familiar bird, 
frugivorous in habit and commonly found from March to July. Its call 
consisting of two syllables is familiar to everyone in India. The male is 

US 



THE VEDIC AGE 


<SL 


^T^v^ossy black and the female brown and spotted. Koel lay eggs in the 
nests of the crows. 

The owls are all nocturnal in habit. They feed on variotis small animals 
particularly the squirrels, rats, and mice which cause damage to crops 
and are therefore greatly beneficial to agriculture. It is probably for 
this reason that the owl is associated with Lakshmi—the goddess- of 
wealth. 

Indian birds of prey include the vultures, the different forms of eagle, 
the various kites, the falcons, the hawks, the sikra, the buzzard, etc,, 
usually birds of larger sizes. 

The pigeons, including the Blue Rock pigeon and the doves, are common 
throughout India whereas the sand grouse is common in open sandy 
tracts feeding on the ground 

The game birds in India include a variety of forms. Those living on 
land include the pea and jungle fowls, the pheasants, partridges, quails, 
etc. The pea fowls are famous for their splendidly coloured plumage arid 
peculiar habit of being noisy at the approach of rain. The red jungle fowl 
is essentially a forest bird and is regarded as the ancestor of all domesti¬ 
cated poultry. The common quail is well known as a bird for sport, a 
favourite delicacy for the table and a cage bird for fighting. The common 
. grey partridges are usually captured with decoy birds and are favourite 
cage birds. Morning and evening the wild ringing notes of tit-ee-roo of 
these birds are amongst the familiar bird sounds of India. 

' Of the aquatic game birds the moorhen is widely distributed. Another 
one is the familiar water cock or Kora. This is often tamed for fighting. 
Others include the jacana and the snipes. 

Amongst the cranes, the well-known form is the Sarus crane. The gulls 
are generally found in sea coasts but also occur along with the terns 
about inland waters. The spotted-billed pelican is purely a water bird 
seldom seen on land. Other familiar aquatic birds are the common 
cormorants and the snake birds. The brown dipper is an aquatic bird 
characteristic of the hill streams of the Himalayas. 

Ibises, storks, herons, and spoonbills constitute a well-known group 
of Indian birds. . * 

Other notable birds living about well-watered regions include the 
ducks, the pochard, and the grebes. The Brahminy ducks commonly 
known as chakha and chakhi are found in pciirs. 

Reptiles .—The crocodiles and the snakes are the most notable animals 
amongst the reptiles, which also include the lizards, and the tortoises 
and turtles. The crocodiles which are of particular interest as attacking 
human beings are represented by the, freshwater broad-snouted form 
known as the mugger and by the estuarine crocodile. Crocodiles are often 
bunted for their skin which fetches a high price. Besides these, one finds 
the gharial—a purely fish-eating river crocodile. 

n6 



FLORA AND FAUNA 

jj forms of land tortoises in India are few in number. The shells o^ 
prettily marked. The freshwater tortoises are herbivorous and 
edible. Of the turtles, the freshwater forms are carnivorous and aggres¬ 
sive. The carapace in these is covered by a soft skin. 

The lizards in India are remarkably numerous. These include geckos, 
chameleons, skinks, monitors, etc. The chameleons are common in the 
forest regions of peninsular India. These are well known for their capacity 
to change colour. The skin of the monitor or varanus is in great demand 
and there is a considerable trade in varanus skin. 

The snakes in India have attracted much attention because of the 
large number of deaths amongst human beings and domesticated animals 
caused by bites of poisonous ones. India is the only country in the world 
where almost all the forms of known snakes occur. The -worm-like sub¬ 
terranean typhlops are the smallest known snakes. The largest living 
snakes found in India are the pythons and boas. The common non- 
poisonous snakes are the rat snakes oridhaman, the carpet snakes, the 
grass snakes, and the water snakes. Amongst the venomous snakes in 
India the commonest form is the cobra with the hood unmarked or 
marked either with a single large ocellus or with two ocelli connected 
together by a curved line. There is also a black variety of cobra. Another 
deadly poisonous snake is the krait. This includes the banded ones with 
alternate bands of black and yellow. The large-sized king cobra is known 
to be extremely fierce and aggressive. The other poisonous snakes in 
India are the various forms of vipers. These have broad flat heads and 
are without hoods. 

Amongst the snakes two forms deserve special mention. The tree or 
whip snake is a beautiful slender snake usually of green colour frequently 
seen in trees, bushes, and creepers twined round the stems. Another 
one is the beautifully coloured kalnagini. Though its name implies its 
deadly venomous character, it is in fact a non-poisonous snake and is 
frequently reared as a favourite pet. The so-called double-headed snake 
carried by snake charmers has a blunt tail which is occasionally mani¬ 
pulated and furnished with glass eyes to assist in the delusion. 

The Batrachians.-x-The frogs and toads representing the tailless 
batrachians are common throughout India in ponds, streams, and all 
damp places. Of the tailed batrachians only the Indian salamander is 
found in India. The apodous forms include the worm-like burrowers. 

Fishes. —India is remarkable for its abundant fish fauna which 
accounts for the large section of its population depending on fishes as 
the staple protein diet. The fishes exhibit a considerable diversity in 
their structure and habits due to the great variety of habitats in which 
they live. Besides living in inland rivers, streams, ponds, and marshes, 
they are found in the estuaries as also in the coastal regions and open 
seas. The marine forms occasionally migrate upward into the estuarine 

117 


THE VEDIC AGE 



<SL 


^.■waters and similarly certain fluviatile forms pass down into the estuarine 
waters. Many fishes behave as larvaecidal agents. Use of such fishes 
against the growth of mosquito larvae plays an important role in the control 
of malaria—one of the prevalent diseases in India. 

Amongst the cartilaginous fishes, which abound in Indian seas, some 
of the sharks and rays occasionally ascend large tidal rivers. The high 
nutritive value of the shark liver oil has opened up an exceedingly 
important, trade in the fishing of sharks. The dried fins of both sharks 
and rays are exported to China while the flesh of some forms is regarded 
as a delicacy by certain people, chiefly of the poorer classes. 

Amongst the bony fishes the most important are the carp. These are 
inhabitants of freshwater and many of them, particularly the major 
carp, bring high prices as edible fishes. Smaller carp are found in rivers 
and streams in large numbers. The scaleless cat fishes are well represented 
in India. Amongst the Indian herrings which include several coastal and 
estuarine fishes, the most important fish is the hilsa, the flesh of which 
is highly flavoured. Amongst the perch which occur in India in fairly 
large iiumbers, the most valuable and largely used food fish is the 
bhekti of . Bengal which grows to a weight of 200 pounds. Others, which 
are reputed as good edible fishes, include the freshwater iorms such as 
nandus, the estuarine or coastal forms such as the mango-fish, the 
mackerels, pomfrets, tunny, and the mullets. The notopterid chitals 
represent a well- known group of very compressed fishes. They are highly 
prized as good edible fishes due to the rich content of fat. Remarkable 
in India is the occurrence of the air-breathing fishes including the snake¬ 
headed fishes, the climbing perch, the scaleless fishes such as singhee 
and magur and the snake-like cunchia. These are found in every region 
where there is accumulation of water. 1 lie re are several forms of flat 
fish in India. In the hill streams the sucker fishes occur. The globe 
fishes, pipe fishes, and the sea horses are a few other interesting forms 
found' in the estuarine and coastal regions. Peculiar fishes of the estuaries 
and mud flats of the coastal region are the mud skippers. The flying 
fish which inhabit the open seas are common about India. 

Lower Chordates .—The lower chordates, including the balanoglossus, 
the sea-squirt, and the amphioxus are not uncommon in the seas around 
the coasts of India. 

2. The Invertebrates 

The invertebrate group comprising the less-known forms of animal life 
is in no way less important than the vertebrate one nor less remarkable 
in variety and numbers. Many invertebrate animals are directly beneficial 
to man whereas many others are harmful, injurious, and cause extensive 
damage to life and property. Many invertebrate animals provide articles 
used for commercial purposes and on these are based various industries 

118 


iMNlSTff 


FLOKA AND FAUNA 



The invertebrates constitute an enormously large section of 
and only a few of the more important forms of the different, 
groups are mentioned below in order to complete this sketch of the fauna 
of India. 

The molluscs or shelled animals are well represented in India. They 
are found in estuaries, in fresh waters, in coastal waters as well as in the 
open seas around. The bivalved mussels as well as various forms of snails, 
including the apple snails, are found in ponds. Many gastropods of both 
shelled and naked varieties and the squids, cuttle fishes, octopus, and 
nautilus are inhabitants of the seas. The gastropod shells commonly 
known as cowries are reputed for their use in the past as exchange money. 
The blowing of chanks or conches is associated with sacred ceremonies 
and there has developed a good trade in the way of preparing bangles 
from chank for the women folk of India. The molluscan shells provide 
materials for road construction and are used in the preparation of lime. 
The oysters are used as articles of food and provide the source for the 
development of pearls. The pearl oysters are found in the coastal seas. 
Pearl fishing was a highly developed industry in ancient India and 
there is a great possibility of this trade in future. 

The arthropods- forming the largest group of animals are well repre¬ 
sented. Various forms of prawns, shrimps, and lobsters, different types 
of crabs and the numerous small crustaceans occur in fresh waters, in 
estuaries, on sandy beaches, and in the seas. Amongst insects, in India 
are found the various forms of ants, wasps, hornets, honey bees, the 
cockroaches, white ants, numerous forms of butterflies and moths, the 
glow worms, mosquitoes of different types, locusts, grasshoppers, dragon 
flies, various forms of beetles, fleas, etc. Some predatory insects such as 
the praying mantis are beneficial by feeding upon injurious forms. The 
honey bee is of great benefit as producer of honey and wax. Some of the 
mosquitoes, certain flies and the fleas, are definitely harmful and in¬ 
jurious and they act as transmitters of diseases and agents in spreading 
sources of infection. The locusts are the most well known among those 
which cause extensive damage to crops, whereas the silk moths and the 
lac insects are but two instances where these produce valuable industrial 
and commercial materials. In India, where there is an abundance of 
vegetation, the insects, particularly the butterflies, play an important 
role in bringing about pollination and the dispersal of seeds. Peripatus— 
a form intermediate between the segmented animals and the arthropoda— 
is found in the forests of the hilly tracts of Assam. The centipedes and 
millipedes are common throughout India. The scorpions and spiders are 
represented by various forms. In the coastal seas of India the king crab 
is found in fairly large numbers. 

Echinoderms, or the groups of animals including the star fishes, the 
various urchins, etc., are all marine and found in the seas around the 

119 


>f 




THE VKTUC AGE 

asts. Of the segmented animals, the earthworms and the leeches' a 
various types, including the large-sized cattle leech, are found all over 
India. The burrowing segmented form known as the nereis is found in 
the shallow coastal seas. Sponges occur chiefly in the seas but freshwater 
sponges are not uncommon in inland waters such as ponds. The coelenter- 
ates occur in abundance in the seas surrounding the Indian peninsula. 
These include the medusae, the jelly fishes, the sea anemones, etc. The 
skeleton, which is present in many of these, especially of the sea anemones, 
forms the different types of beautiful coloured corals including the precious 
red corals. The worms are represented by the round worms and by the 
flat worms, including the various tape worms. Most of these are parasitic 
on other animals, especially the vertebrates, and pathogenic, causing 
diseases. Various wheel animMeulae occur in ponds and other freshwater 
regions. The protozoa or the unicellular animals include a large number 
of forms. Some of these such as the malarial parasite, the leishmania, 
the entamoeba, cause serious diseases in human beings and often bring 
about the death of the victim. Others, such as trypanosoma, babesia, 
coccidia’, cause diseasesof domesticated cattle and fowl and thus lead to huge 
losses of property. There are numerous free-living forms and also many 
parasitic forms which are however not pathogenic. 


Introductory Essay to the Flora Indica, p- 91. 


120 



BOOK TWO 

THE PREHISTORIC AGE 






CHAPTER VII 


PALAEOLITHIC, NEOLITHIC 
AND COPPER AGES 

I. PALAEOLITHIC AGE 

We have comparatively very scanty data on Early Man and his environ¬ 
ment. Surface finds from the Punjab, Rajput&na, Gujarat, Central India, 
Central Provinces, Karnatak, Mysore, South India, Bihar, Assam, and 
Bengal testify to the widespread existence of man who fashioned rough 
stone implements mainly of quartzite. 1 These were similar in shape and 
make to those known to be palaeolithic tools in Europe, but as in a 
majority of cases their stratigraphic relation was not known, they could 
not be assigned to a definite geological age. Recent researches have, 
however, contributed materially to our knowledge of Early Man in three 
or four provinces of India. 

We begin with the Punjab. Except for the fact that it was one of the 
earliest homes of the Aryans, nothing definite was known about its first 
settlers, prior to the glacio-archaeologic work of the Yale-Cambridge 
Expedition in 1935 . 2 It is now more or less established that Early Man 
first entered the foothills of the North-West Punjab, the area traversed 
by the Soan, Haro, and other rivers within the Indus-Jhelum Doab, and 
comprised within the Rawalpindi and Attock districts of the Punjab 
and Jammu in Kashmir State, at the end of the First Inter-Glacial 
Period and the beginning of the Second Ice Age in the south-west 
Himalayas. Human existence is tesfified to by the presence of large 
flakes which are found embedded in fan-shaped boulder gravels of this 
period (T t ) in the Siwalik foothills and plains in North-West Punjab, 
Punch, and Jammu. „ 

1. First Inter-Glacial Age 

Though the earliest implements of man have come from the immediately 
succeeding stratum, viz. the Boulder Conglomerate zone of the second 
glacial epoch, it would seem that rhan had actually inhabited the area 
almost at the end of the First Inter-Glacial stage. The conditions for 
existence were not particularly favourable either for mammals or men 
in the Second Ice Age, to the first phase of which the Boulder. Con¬ 
glomerate stratum is assigned. The climate was not only coldf ar ’ 
stormier, but the rainfall was heavier than today, as the deeply 

123 






THE VEDIC AGE 

vels and implements show. In fact only a few rolled bones of bqyfl 
d proboscideans are found in this deposit. 

So far implements have been found in the Boulder Conglomerate at 
five sites. Tlrree of these—Kallar, Chaomukh, and Malakpur—are in 
the valley of the Jhelum and its tributaries, the fourth site is near Adial 
on the Sohan (Soan), and the fifth on the Tawi, a tributary of the Chenab 
near Jammu. 

All the implements are made of quartzite and are in a worn condition. 
The upper surface is usually unflaked except for one or two small irregular 
scars. The under surface, having flat bulbs, but prominent cones, must 
be the primary flaked surface and has a large plain, unfaceted striking 
platform at angles varying from ioo degrees to 125 degrees. No retouch 
is visible except on one find from Kallar. The edges are broken, whether 
by use or naturally cannotTe said .3 

Typologically as well as stratigraphically this earliest Punjab industry 
differs from the rest and hence it is called the Pre-Soan industry, to 
distinguish it from the later industry most of whose sites are on the Soan. 

2. Second Inter-Glacial Age and Early Soan Industry 

The Soan itself has two,distinct groups. The early Soan and late Soan. 
Tools of the former group are found in Terraces T c and T, and later 
gravels mostly along the Indus. These have been observed at Khushalgarh, 
Makhad and Injra and at Gariala on the Haro river south-east of Attock. 

Geologically these terraces are assignable to the Second Inter-Glacial 
Stage. This interval is believed to be very long, when the climate was 
drier, but owing to continued uplift of the Pir Panjel range, as evidenced 
by the tilted plains near Chaomukh and Jammu, there was great erosion. 
This may have destroyed the evidence of the rich contemporary fossil 
fauna without which man, whose existence is revealed by numerous 
sites, could not have lived in the area. 

Unlike the Pre-Soan tools, the early Soan tools are made from varieties 
of fine-grained quartzite as well as fine smooth greenish-grey Panjal trap. 

Patination and the state of wear divide these tools into three groups, 
which may be called A, B, C. Group A is the. earliest and is heavily 
patinatedV deep brown or purple and much rolled. Group B is deeply 
patinated\ke A but unworn, and Group C is less patinated and fairly 
fresh. 

Among all these groups there are pebble tools, scrapers and flakes, 
the first-named predominating. There is evidence of typologic develop¬ 
ment towards smaller and neater forms, but it does not synchronize 
with the stratigraphic evidence. 

The pebble tools are all prepared from smooth, rounded rolled pebbles 
and mall boulders. These, when further subdivided, give us (a) flat- 
and lb) rounded, pebble tools. 

124 






f PALAEOLITHIC, NEOLITHIC AND COPPER AGES 

cliscoidal cores often with a patch of cortex in the centre of one 
or both surfaces arc also found in this group. These cores are similar to 
fhe Clactonian and early Levalloisian forms. 

There are two kinds of flakes. The first has a high-angled plain platform 
and, though similar to the Early Soan B, is neater and better and more 
primarily flaked. In the second kind, much smaller, the angle is low and 
the platform unfaceted. While there is evidence of use, on these tools 
there is very little of secondary flaking. 

The Soan valley has also yielded other types of tools, probably of the 
Second Inter-Glacial Age, though they are rolled and occur in the gravels 
of the Third Glacial phase. These tools comprise hand-axes, cores and 
flakes, and a couple of crude cleavers. Typologically, very much rolled 
hand-axes are assigned to the Abbevillian or Lower Acheulian, and the 
less rolled, with more regular outline and neater step flaking, to the 
middle Acheulian. 

Mention must be made of the few flakes which show typical Acheulian 
technique with plain platforms and parallel primary flaking, and one or 
two showing signs of crude retouching. 

3. Third Ice Age and Late Soan Industry 

Between the Early Soan and Late Soan industries intervened the 
Third Ice Age, and the latter are assigned to this period. During this 
glaciation which was comparatively less extensive, a vast amount of 
loessic (wind-borne) silt was deposited over the Potwar, a phenomenon 
which is attributed to the interaction of several factors: accumulated silt 
owing to inundation, erosion, mountain glaciation, arid violent dust 
storms. Since the Late Soan tools come from the basal Potwar gravel 
and loess which is attributed to the Third Ice Age, it is suggested that 
Early Man had witnessed the beginning of these dust-storms in the Punjab 
where they are an annual feature in the summer nowadays. 

Few fossils have been found in these huge loessic deposits. 4 But it is 
suggested that vegetation must have been more abundant in plains and 
the fauna may have been similar to that of the Narmada valley, where 
remains of horse, buffalo, straight-tusked elephant, and hippopotamus 
were discovered in association with Early Palaeolithic tools. However, 
the Potwar loess (perhaps its upper horizon) has yielded twelve types of 
fossil invertebrates, molluscs (fresh water and land) and gastropods. 

The Late Soan industrys is stratigraphically and typologically divisible 
into two groups. In Late Soan A some specimens are worn. Both pebble 
tools and flake and core tools occur, but the latter outnumber the former. 

Among pebble tools, a form which appears late in Early Soan, viz. 
a “side scraper”-like implement, made on a roughly oval pebble, with 
cortexed butt on one side and flaking along the opposite side, and a wavy 
straight or convex edge is common. 

125 




THE VEDIC AGE 





ee other earlier forms are also found. But a new type is seen in a 
form where a small ovoid pebble is intentionally broken at an oblique 
angle to produce a flat base. Two or more flakes are struck upwards frc v 
the under-surface on the side that makes an acute angle with the base.. 
$ome specimen^ exhibit retouch on the edge. 

There are many forms of cores. Flakes are of two types: (i) simple, 
and (2) with retouched edges. 

Late Soan B tools are found in a deposit of wind-borne silt above the 
gravel of the Third Glacial Age. They are fresh and unworn.6 

Mainly two types of cores occur, one of which was already noticed 
in Late Soan A. 

Flakes again are generally of the Levalloisian type. Ihey are mostly 
blades or elongated flakes, aed a few triangular or oval. 

4. Third Inter-Glacial Age: Chauntra Industry 

So far the only tools met with were pebble tools and flakes. But at a 
few sites, particularly at Chauntra on the Soan river, some totally different 
kinds of tools 7 were chiselled out from a gravel which may be of the Third 
Inter-Glacial Age. This was again a period of stream erosion, as a result 
of which the river beds were deepened, and lakes emptied. Mountain uplift 
also must have taken place. However, as in earlier stages, there are few 
evidences of loessic deposits. 

5. Fourth Ice Age Tools 

Pebble tools and flakes found at D'hok Pathan near Pindi Gheb on the 
$il river, a tributary of the Soan, are supposed to be later, possibly of 
the Fourth Glacial Age. The tools which include pebble tools, cores and 
unfaceted flakes are “regarded as representing a late, localized industry 
of peculiar facies, showing marked similarities, in a greatly developed 
form, to the Early Soan industries of the Indus region.” 

Early Man thus seems to have inhabited the Punjab from the end of 
the First Inter-Glacial period onwards right through the succeeding 
three glacial and two inter-glacial periods. As no human remains have 
been found along with the implements, it is impossible to say whether 
the same race witnessed such great climatical changes, and ultimately 
produced the fine hand-axe and flake industry noticed at Chauntra, or 
other races came at different periods, or the old and new races lived 

together. . 

The evidence detailed before indicates that pebble and flake industries 
developed together in the same area alongside the Abbevillian-Acheulian 
hand-axe industries. In the former pebble tools become smaller and neater, 
and the flakes of Clactonian facies—crude, unfaceted and devoid of inten¬ 
tional primary flaking—are later associated with neater forms such as 
Levalloisian type and have regular and convergent primary flaking, 
faceted platforms, and fine retouching, if any. 

126 









PALAEOLITHIC, NEOLITHIC AND COPPER AGES 

hand-axe industry is for the first time associated with the Scan 
flake and pebble industry at Chauntra, and here alone it reaches its acme, 
flowering into a fine late Acheuiian type. 

On the basis of this contact, for which the evidence is so far slight, 
De Terra has said that Early Man entered the Punjab together with his 
hand-axe industry from the south. 

After the Punjab conies Rajputana where stray, mostly surface finds 
have been made. The few Rajputana specimens come from Jaipur, Bundi, 
and Indargarh.8 These are generally of quartzite, but reddish-brown 
sandstone accounts for one specimen. Among the tools two types of 
hand-axes are visible. One is pointed ovate and the other is ovoid. It is 
roughly chipped and called “Boucher’’ by Coggin Brown. 

Rajputana leads us to Gujarat. Here, as elsewhere, only surface finds 
were made in the last century. But since the discoverer—-Bruce Foote 
—had given good clues together with an excellent study of the stratigraphy 
of the Sabarmati valley, the task of obtaining stratigraphical evidence 
was comparatively easy. And it was obtained by the I'irst Gujarat Pre¬ 
historic Expedition.9 During its survey of the middle reaches of the 
Sabarmati. a distance of over xoo miles from Hadol in the north to Delwad 
in the south, five more palaeolithic sites were discovered. Of these the 
most important were Hadol, Pedhamli, and Ghadhara; of lesser importance 
Phudera, Aglod, Hirpura, Kot, and Warsora. 

The implements are mostly fresh and a few only rolled or semi-rolled, 
with worn-out edges and flake scars. Typologically they comprise: (x) 
hand-axes (including sub-types), (2) cleavers, (3) scrapers, (4) flakes, and. 
(5) pebble tools. 

No clear evidence of sequence corresponding to the succession of the 
three or two main phases of the old alluvium, viz. the gravel conglomerate 
and the reddish silt, is visible in the industry. For the two main typologie 
features of the industry, which from the predominant tool type has to 
be called hand-axe industry, are evident in practically all types of tools 
from the lower stratum. Thus there are: 

(a) Tools with irregular line, rough ‘step’ flaking, and pebble cortex 
at the butt-end or over part of both the 'surfaces. 

(/;) Tools with regular outline, wavy edges, comparatively smooth 
“step” flaking and no pebble cortex or the cortex patch at a definite 
place. 

While this is generally true, there are three specimens—two hand-axes, 
one pear-shaped, and the other very thin, perfectly symmetrical ovate, 
and an U-shaped cleaver—from the upper part of. the reddish silt which 
are so fine as to suggest a late typologie evolution corresponding to the 
uppermost phase of the alluvium. 

Typologically these three varieties of hand-axes bear close resemblance 

127 



THE VEDIC AGE 




-Q (i) the Abbevillian—Early Acheulian, (ii) the Middle Acheulian, 

(iii) the Late Acheulian industries of Madras and the Punjab as well 
as those of Europe, and similar sequences observed in the Nile Valley and 
the rest of Africa. 

A site bearing similar cultural products was discovered by the ex¬ 
pedition in the Orsang valley at Bahadarpur. Here the gravel is loose 
and uncemented and is approximately at a height of twenty-five feet 
from the present river bed, and underlies deposits of black cotton soil 
and brownish silt. The top of the gravel yielded a few finds of quartz 
and quartzite. Unlike the Sabarmati specimens, the majority of the 
Orsang tools are roiled or semi-rolled and a few only fresh. I ypologically 
these comprise (a) hand-axes, ovate, and pear-shaped, ( b) flakes, one of 
which is a definite blade, aq^l (c) pebble tools. 

The Karjan, a tributary of the Orsang and Narmada, has also given 
a similar promise of the Old Stone Age culture. Here tools, hand-axes, 
U-shaped cleavers, of Vaal technique, beautiful discoids and pebble 
tools o f 'o have been found. 10 

W proceed to the Uppeir Narmada Valley, where stratigraphical 

data the existence of Early Man are available. Unfortunately even 
now a complete idea of this stone industry cannot be formed, as the 
specimens found by the Yale-Cambridge Expedition are not fully de¬ 
scribed. However, the expedition succeeded in establishing the relationship 
of a middle Pleistocene fauna with an early Palaeolithic industry, a relation¬ 
ship which was so far presumed on the strength of a solitary tool an 
ovate hand-axe from a site at Bhutara and fossil mammalian remains. 
Stratigraphic correlation is also attempted between the Punjab and 
the Central Indian Pleistocene on geologic and archaeological evidence.” 

The Narmada Valley has given a glimpse of the various types of 
industries—Early and Late Soan and the Abbevillian and the Acheulian 
hand-axe-cleaver. At some localities there is a mixture of the different 
types, whereas at one locality near Narsinghpur the Late Soan seems to 
replace the Acheulian culture. De Terra, however, would tentatively 
suggest that the Narmada "lower group represents the true Acheulian and 
early Soan, and the upper group the Late Soan Industry.” If this were 
really so, the two Narmada gravel groups could be correlated with the 
Terrace,, Terrace,, Terraces 3 _ 4 of the Punjab. Whether it was actually 
so or whether the various industries flourished simultaneously, the gravels 
belonging to one geologic age, can be determined only by further research 
and collection of fuller data. 

The rest of the evidence in Central India and the Central Provinces 
consists of surface finds collected in the last century from Saugor, Damoh, 
Rewah, and Bundelkhand.” In this region, which is the meeting-place 
of the three great geological formations, viz. the quartzite (which has 
principally developed on the west, in North Gujarat, and Rajputana), 

128 




ALAEOLITHIC, NEOLITHIC AND COPPER AGES 


,Jtone (in Central India), and the trap (which extends from thek 
plateau towards the south), tools of all these materials are found. 
Typologically the tools are similar to those of Rajputana and North 

Gujarat. ' 

Further east a few finds have been reported from Bengal, oxhar, ana 
Orissa, from Paloncha, on the eastern outskirts of the Hyderabad State, 
and from Hyderabad itself. 1 ; So far Bengal had given few palaeoliths 
but recently a large number has' been discovered at Kuliana, in 
Mayurbhanj State (Orissa). l! t Ihe tools are of quartzite and include. 


(a) Pebble tools, some of which resemble crude hand-axes, and others 
cleavers. There are also choppers, ovate forms and awl-like pointed 
tools, 

(b) Core tools, both faces worked. 


South of the Vindhyas, after the Narmada Valley, the next important 
region is the Konkan coastal strip and the Deccan plateau. Little work 
was done in the latter, because of its peculiar geological formation. How¬ 
ever, fossil fauna of the middle Pleistocene period was found at Mungi 
and Nandur Madhmeshwar in the Godavari valley. At the former site 
an agate flake was noticed in the same stratum. Following up these clues 
the present writer and his associates have been carrying out a systematic 
survey of the valley. It has yielded small flakes, blades, and cores of agate, 
jasper, chalcedony, bloodstone, and trap/; but no hea.vy tools like hand- 
axes or choppers. 

Rude stone implements have been reported from the vicinity of 
Bombay since 1880. Much of this early work is, however, mere surface 
collection and not well illustrated. Slight but important is the notice by 
Todd 16 of Palaeolithic industries in the Salsette Island north of Bombay. 
Here at Borivli, Kandivli, and other suburbs he discovered tools com¬ 
prising hand-axes, cleavers, flakes, blades, and microliths. It appears 
that hand-axes and cleavers were found only at Kandivli. Here no less 
than six strata were observed. Scrapers, cores, and choppers were found 
in “Lower Clay” and over its “top,” forming the lowest stratum over the 
rock. Overlying this May there is a deposit of reddish-brown gravel. In it 
were found many implements of Chellean and Clactonian type, and on 
its top, implements of Clactonian type in mint condition, as well as 
late Acheulian types. The Konkan, with its sequence of industries, thus 
promises to be one'of the key areas for understanding the evolution of 
Stone Age cultures in Western India. 

It is likely that similar early palaeolithic culture flourished in the 
region lower down, in Southern Konkan and eastwards above the Ghats 
in the Karnatak area. Foote found an extinct type of rhinoceros and 
hand-axes in the hard kankar cemented shingle bed of the Bennihalla, 
a. tributary of the Malaprabha in the Dharwar district, and also in the 


129 


UWtSTffy 



THE VEDIC AGE 



bed of the Malaprabha itself in the Bijapur district. These tools 
are large ovate hand-axes and cleavers of quartzite, very much resembling 
similar tools from the Konkan and the Sabarmati. 

Foote also found a few palaeoliths in the Mysore Karnatak.‘7 Some 
he found "scattered on the pale quartzite sliingle bed capping the high 
ground south-eastward of the town of Kadur” and also at Nyamti, 
sixteen miles south of Shimoga; others from the laterite debris near the 
villages of Nidaghatta and Lingadahalli south of Sakrapatna. Two of 
the latter are of white quartz, all the rest of quartzite. The quartzite 
specimens are mostly patinated. There are no cleavers, the hand-axes 
are of oval, ovoid, and triangular types. Discs and discoids are also found. 
No palaeoliths have been reported further south on the Malabar coast. 

In contrast to these scanbpnotices of palaeolithic finds on the west coast 
of India, the east coast area with the suitable material from the Eastern 
Ghats has proved very rich in these finds. Barring the southern extremity, 
viz. the Tinnevelly district and some gaps from West Godavari district 
to Ganjam in the north, palaeoliths have been found from most other 
districts, viz. Madura, Trichinopoly,,North and South Arcot, Chingleput, 
Chitoor, Cuddapah, Anantpur, Bellary, Nellore, Kurnool, Guntur, and 
Krishna, of the Madras Presidency. Of these North Arcot, Chingleput, 
Cuddapah, Bellary, and Kurnool districts yielded the largest number. 

In the Madura district the finds were collected "from a shingle bed 
in the alluvium of the Vaigai, on the left bank of the river, immediately 
north of Madura town”; in the Tanjore district from the "laterite deposit 
■lying to the south-east of Vallarn and south-west of Tanjore city”; in the 
Trichinopoly district "from the laterite forming the plateau east of 
Ninniyur, forty-five miles north-east of Trichinopoly town”; in the 
Bellary district “on the surface of the shingle fans lying along the foot 
of the copper mountain south of Bellary town,” also from the Halakundi 
shingle fans and other sites; in the Cuddapah district from "thin spreads 
of laterite gravel,” Rayachoti Taluk ; in the North .Arcot district "in 
connection with laterite gravels”; in the Chingleput district in the laterite 
conglomerate at various places; in the Nellore district "mostly washed 
out of the laterite gravels resting on the gneissic rocks”; in the Maneru 
valley; in the Kurnool district “in the valley of the Khunder near Roodrar 
in lateritic gravels, in the Guntur and Krishna districts "from the high- 
level gravels” at Ippatam and Oostapalli on the Krishna. 

The above review shows that the laterite beds in south-east India are 
implementiferous. But since Foote had not worked out the stratigraphy 
completely, nor indicated the typological relation between the finds 
from the laterite gravel and other gravels and the surface, the value of 
his large number of finds is mainly typological and not so much cultural. 

'This want has been to some extent supplied by Cammiade’s work in 
the Kurnool and Krishnaswami’s and Paterson’s work in the Chingleput 


130 



PALAEOLITHIC, NEOLITHIC AND COPPER AGES 

Cammiade in collaboration with Burkitt has given a correlation 
sequence of industries and stratigraphy with that of climatic 
changes in south-east India. 18 

According to these authors the tools can be stratigraphically and typo- 
logically divided into four main groups which synchronize with two dry 
and two semi-humid periods, the first two alternating with two pluvial 
periods. Tools found in the laterite pebble bed in the Bhavnasi gravels at 
Krishnapuram (78° 73' and 15 0 4 °'), 011 the western entrance of 
the Atmakur Dornala Pass, “in the derived quartzite pebble bed” 
on the Ralluvagu and Yerra-konda-Palem (79° 10-15' and 15 0 40-45') 
on the eastern entrance of the same pass, in “the derived laterite” 
bed on the bank of the Sagileru, .at Giddalur (78° 55' and 15 0 22-23') near 
the Nandikanama Pass, and from the upper part of the laterite overlying 
the gneiss basal bed at Gundla Bhrameshvaram, a little to the south of 
the Krishna, constitute the earliest series comprising hand-axes (of 
quartzite) rather roughly flaked, slightly rolled, and stained with laterite; 
whereas tools from the superimposed layer of red alluvial clay at Krish¬ 
napuram constitute the second series comprising mostly flakes, and a 
few neatly made hand-axes (of quartzite, sandstone, and chalcedony). 
Tools of series three and four comprise microlith-like and microliths 
respectively. 

The work of Krishnaswami 1 ? and Paterson 20 has still further advanced 
our knowledge of the palaeolithic industries in the Chingleput district. 
Tire former discovered tools in the pre-laterite Boulder Conglomerate at 
Vadamadurai, whereas the two together observed a system of four terraces 
in the Korttalaiyar Valley, the laterite conglomerate of the Terrace T g at 
Att irampakam yielding, as it did to Foote, numerous palaeoliths, typo- 
logically similar to those from the main detrital laterite overlying the 
Boulder Conglomerate at Vadamadurai. 

The technical stages of two series of tools from the Boulder Conglomerate 
have been described in European terminology as representing the 
Abbevillian and the earliest Acheulian; that of the tools from the laterite 
gravel as resembling the middle Acheulian; and that from the layer 
above laterite as “probably upper Acheulian. ” 

The hand-axes and cleavers from the Attirampkkam laterite are 
considered to be Late Acheulian or, according to Krishnaswami,. Late 
Acheulian, Micoquian, and Levalloisian. The Madras Museum abounds 
in collections from other districts: Cuddapah, Nellore, Anantpur, and 
Kurnool. Of these the collections made by Manley* 1 from Nellore and 
Drummond from Kurnool deserve mention. 

From the above review it would appear that practically every part of 
India except the great Indo-Gangetic plain has given traces of its hoary 
an tv v. But excepting a few areas, nowhere is the stratigraphical 
of the Stone Age cultures worked out. Until this is made 

• W : AAV ■ 




mailable, it would be hazardous to opine in what part of India Earl} 


the vedic age 



Originated, and what the exact relation 22 is either in time or between 
the Stone Age cultures above reviewed. The accepted geological antiquity 
of. and the favourable climatic conditions on the eastern coast of South 
India, and the reported finds from the pre-laterite Boulder Conglomerate 
at Vadamadurai would, however, give ground for a view that Early Man 
in India originated in South India, and migrated towards the Punjab 
at the close of the First Ice Age. 


2. THE mesolithic;. AGE 


The cultures which succeed the Palaeolithic in Europe and certain 
parts of Africa exhibit certain definite features. On the correlation of 
these with stratigraphic sequence obtainable at a few sites, two main 
cultural stages have been recognized: (i) The Transitional or the Mesolithic; 
(2) the Neolithic. The old. glacial conditions had more or less gone and 
Europe experienced a long dry spell. With the climatic changes the flora 
and fauna also changed, and most probably a new race of people entered 
Europe. Culturally, however, this new race was still in the hunting stage. 
It did not produce food. And above all the implements used were primarily 
of stone, though bone was also used. 

But the nature of these tools is absolutely different. These are extremely 
small, about an inch or so in length. The technique of making them is 
also different. Hence they are called microliths or pygmy tools. Except 
a few Tardenoisian sites in France, and a few in England, most of these 
implements'have been found from the surface, on loessic mounds, or in 
sandy areas. 

Such microliths have been found in practically the whole of India. 
Footed noticed them from almost all the districts of South India, including 
Tinnevelly, Hyderabad State, Gujarat, Kathiawar, Central India, Central 
Provinces, and Chota Nagpur, whereas subsequent workers have dis¬ 
covered them in Cutch 2 4 and the Punjab 2 5 . But unlike Europe, these were 
all surface collections. In the absence of stratigrapliical evidence or 
other cultural objects from well-conducted excavations it is not possible 
to assign the microliths in all these areas to a mesolithic period. In some 
instances microliths appear in dolmens with iron implements; in others 
with pottery which can be dated to the fourth century B.C. Thus in 
different regions, according to their geographical situation and cultural 
development, microliths have been in use as forming composite tools and 
weapons at widely different periods. These might extend from the meso¬ 
lithic to historic times. 

Small but systematic excavations at the site of Brahmagiri (Cl ’ • "v 
district, Mysore) and at Langhnaj (Mehsana Taluk in Qujai 


132 



PALAEOLITHIC, NEOLITHIC AND COPPER AGES 

It d evidence to show that at least at these two sites the microlithk 
belong to the mesolithic cultural phase. 

At Brahmagiri both neoliths arid microliths appeared at the five-foot 
level, but later, at eight feet only, microliths were found. 26 So it is 
suggested that at this site, called Roppa after the nearest village, micro- 
neolithic culture, comparable to the Campignian of France, flourished. 
Whether it is so old in point, of time cannot be determined, for it yet 
remains to be proved stratigraphically, as has been shown in Europe, that 
such cultures are post-Quaternary, and earlier than true Neolithic. 

Almost similar is the case with notices of microlithic cultures in the 
rock-shelters in the Mahadeo Hills at Panchmarhi 2 7 and at Uchali, 28 
near Naushahra in the Punjab. At the latter site microliths were found 
in association with neolithic-like pottery and skeletal remains of Homo 
sapiens, which were in very friable condition. At the former site pottery 
was found in the. first few inches, but below it, a foot deeper, there was no 
pottery at all. Dr. Hunter who conducted the excavation thought the 
culture to be pre-Neolithic, whereas on the evidence of paintings on the 
rock, it is surmised that the culture cannot be older than the "Second 
century b.c. It must be said that Major Gordon , 2 9 whose study of the 
paintings is indeed scholarly, has not pointed out any .stratigraphies! or 
cultural relationship between the paintings and the microliths. It is quite 
possible that potsherds, which Dr. Hunter found on the surface, belong 
to the earliest or some phase of the paintings, but that there is no con¬ 
nection between the paintings and fnicroliths. 

Excavations in the loessic mounds at Langhnaj, 3 <> as well as at Hirpura 
Northern Gujarat, have recently brought to light a rich microlithic 
Potsherds usually occur up to the first three feet from the 
along with microliths and a few fossilized (calcified) remains of 
s. Deeper, up to six to seven feet, only microliths, in association 
lumerous bone splinters, including a number of large bones of animals 
. as ribs, shoulder blades, astragalli, humerus, tibia, teeth, and parts 
>f jaw, fish vertebrae, skeletons of lizards, and other many hitherto 
unidentified remains) together with seven human skeletons (one intact, 
and the rest more or Jess incomplete) have been found. 

From the total absence of metals, relative rarity of pottery, and the 
almost complete calcification of human and animal remains .(which is 
by the way remarkable when compared with similar finds so far made 
in India from historic and proto-historic sites, and Sub-Recent deposits 
in the Potwar loess) it is probable that the Gujarat microlithic culture 
is of considerable antiquity. 

Racially these human skeletons show Hamitic Negroid characteristics, 
and hence might have been of people akin to those in North-East Africa 
and also proto-Egyptians. These folk lived on small hillocks and drew 
their water supply from the hillock-girt inundation lakes. They were 

*33 


Qt 

hOi-i 



irimajrily hunters and subsisted on such game as the cow, buffs , 


THE VEDIC AGE 



horse, ox, sheep, goat, rats, fish, and crocodile. They must have used 
jungle fruits and other forest products, but so far we have not found any 
remains of these in the shape of stones, etc. 

The crouching posture in which the skeletons have been found leaves 
no doubt that they were deliberately buried, with a definite idea of orien¬ 
tation. Out of seven skeletons four have their head facing the west, and 
^the remaining three, one of which is that of a young woman, have their 
head facing the east. Large stones—pebbles of quartzite and. portions 
of querns of sandstones—had something to do with the burial ceremony. 
For these are usually found near the head of the skeletons. The dog also 
must have played an important part in the life of these people, as so far 
two almost complete skeletons have been found near the human remains, 
whereas the rest of the animal remains consist of isolated fragments 
only. 

Whatever the age or ages to which the xnicroliths in India be ultimately 
assigned as a result of further research, the present collections, par¬ 
ticularly those made in Gujarat, can be typologically classified in the 
following groups, each having several varieties or sub-divisions: 

(i) Rectangular blades. 

(ii) Crescent blades. These are primarily one-edged, the back side 
being made purposely blunt. 

(iii) Scrapers. These are mostly thin, fiat pieces with one side more 
sloping that the rest and edged. 

(iv) Points. 

(v) Cores. 


3. THE NEOLITHIC AGE 


The neolithic cultural phase in India is so far indicated by one v 
main constituents, namely, stone tools. These, unlike those of the earlie. 
cultures, bear unmistakable signs of polish, either all over the tools, 
or at the butt-end and the working end, or only at the working end. 
The material is also different. While the palaeolithic man seems to have 
preferred fine-grained quartzite, the mesolithic chalcedony, and other 
silicate varieties such as jasper, chert, and bloodstone, the man of this 
age liked to fashion his tools out of fine-grained dark-green trap, though 
there are examples of diorite, basalt, slate, chlorite schist, indurated 
shale, gneiss, sandstone, and quartzite. 

How, when, and by whom was this culture introduced, and the earlier 
replaced, cannot be said for want of suitable data. Polished stone imple¬ 
ments have a very wide distribution. They have been found in several 
districts of South India, but particularly Bellary, Mysore and Hyderabad 


*34 



PALAEOLITHIC, NEOLITHIC ANI) COPPER AGES 


"Central India, Central Provinces, Bundelkliand, Gujaxat, Kashmir, 
West* Bengal, Chota Nagpur and Orissa. Like the microliths, these tools 
have also teen found in funerary monuments along with iron objects. 
So they seem to have gone over well into the Iron Age and early historic 

periods. _ 

However, as in the case of microliths, excavations at two or three sites 

in India have shown that these polished stone implements or drilled 
hammer stones antedate the Iron Age. The first site is Brahmagiri, 
mentioned above. Here the neoliths stratigraphically lie betow the early 
Iron Age and historical cultures, and above the microliths. 

At Langhnaj, again, a large pierced hammer stone of quartzite with 
splayed hole from either side, and the front part of a polished celt have 
been found.3 1 The celt has a broad rounded point and smooth, polished, 
biconvex surfaces; the other end is broken. I he splayed holes and the 
absence of vertical drilling in stone tools, particularly hammer stones, 
are regarded a characteristic of the Neolithic Age in Europe, while the 
second implement recalls similar implements of neolithic type from 
South India and Bengal. Typologically these would be the only neolithic 
tools from Gujarat. For the large majority, classified by Foote as neoliths, 
are really microliths. And if other sites yield results similar to those 
obtained so far from Langhnaj, then the Gujarat microlithic culture will 
have to be assigned to a mesolithic period. 

Excavating a megalithic monument at Burzahom in Kashmir De 
Terra found neolithic celts below a chakolithic (?) layer in post-glacial 
loess associated with hard grey hand-made pottery decorated with 
incised designs.3 2 

The neolithic celts in India which have been so far illustrated 33 may 
be classified into the following types: 


!SL 


(x) Triangular outline with rounded corners, slightly convex working 
edge, the sides converging into a pointed but round butt end (Coggin 
Brown, PI. V. i, 9, 13, 15, 19) polished all over on both sides (PI. VI. 
x, 4, 8, 11, 14; VII. 2, 3, 4). 

(2) Cylindrical or elongated oval, convex edge, sides converging into a 
pointed butt end, biconvex sides, polished all over on both sides 
(PI. V. 5, 8, 10; VI. 10, 3). 

(3) Broad edge, with rounded corners, sides slightly tapering but ending 
in a broad convex butt end, surfaces unpolished (PI. V. 20). 

(4) ., Oval and ovate, one end convex, the other pointed, polished all 

over (PI. VII. 5). 

(5) Chisel-Iilce triangular, almost straight edged .sides converging into a 
rounded point (PL VII. 1; IX. 6). 

(6) Long, thin, slight convex edge, tapering sides, but broad straight butt. 

(7) Convex edge, slightly tapering sides. 


*35 




THE VEDIC AGE 

Tin and pointed, rounded sides, broad butt polished all over 

12 ). 

Hammer stones: 

1 . Round without any bole. 

IT. Round or oval (PI. VI. 7) with a hole in the middle splayed from both 
sides (PI. VI. 9; VII. 6). 

The above gives a very rough and tentative idea of neolithic tools in 
India. It needs to be improved by a scientific classification of the col¬ 
lections in the Indian Museum, Calcutta, and Government Museum, 
Madras, and in the museums at Mysore and Hyderabad. 

Mucji has been said about neolithic culture. According to some scholars 
the people of this age understood the use of fire, made pottery, cultivated 
grain and domesticated ani»ak. But as these theories are based on surface 
finds alone, no definite conclusions are possible until positive evidence is 
furnished by further excavations. The same remark applies to the views 
of those who would refer to this age the cinder-mounds, rude drawings 
in caves, as well as the so-called cup-marks or “small hollowed depressions 
in the rocks,” sometimes regarded ds a system of writing.34 It, is highly 
questionable whether all these really belonged to the Neolithic Age, and 
hence no detailed account has been given of them. 


4. THE COPPER AND BRONZE AGE 

When metals began to be used is very difficult to say in the absence of 
stratigraphic sequence of cultures, and for want of unanimity of opinion 
on the age of the Rigveda and later texts which refer to a metal 1 — ayas — 
interpreted either as copper or iron. Until the discovery of the Indus 
culture (which is treated in detail in Chapter IX) the only evidence for 
the presumption of a Copper Age in India consisted of surface finds, 
mostly from the Ganges-Jumna Doab. Recently some finds have been 
made at Kallur in the Hyderabad State and a few copper and bronze 
weapons, tools, and vessels have been found in dolmens and other 
sepulchral monuments from Nagpur, Hyderabad, Madura and Mysore. 

In spite of a few stray finds of copper or bronze weapons, tools, and 
vessels from South India, it would appear that Copper or Bronze Age 
cultures principally flourished in North India, in the great alluvial 
plains, stretching from the Arabian Sea to the Bay of Bengal. And it is 
traces of these that off and on turn up in the Ganges-Jumna Doab, the 
Punjab, and Sind.35 

The raw materials—copper—for the tools could be had, as has been 
shown recently by Piggott, from the copper ore deposits in Riijputana 
and Chota Nagpur, and Singhbhum in Bihar, and Orissa. The finds from 

136 



*\ PALAEOLITHIC, NEOLITHIC AND COPPER AGES 


oards, the largest of which was from Gungeria, consist of too' 
and ornaments, such as axes, swords, daggers, harpoons, and 

rings. 

Excluding the solitary socketed axe-edge from the upper levels of 
Mohenjo-daro, all the axes so far found are “variations of the most 
primitive form of metal axe, called usually ‘the flat axe’ or ‘blade axe’.” 
These have been grouped into five classes by Piggottsfi according as they 
have parallel or tapering sides, straight or rounded butt, straight or 
convex cutting edge and are shouldered, elongated, etc. 

All the swords found in the hoards from the Ganges valley, notably from 
batehgarh, near I 1 arrukhabad, as well as at Kallur in the Hyderabad 
State, are practically of one type. The hilt and blade are cast in one mould. 
The blade is leaf-shaped, having a slight but distinct mid-rib. The hilt has 
antennae. 

So far there is a single example of a dagger from an unknown locality. 
It is of the same type as the sword. The hilt and blade are of one cast; 
the blade leaf-shaped and ribbed, the hilt has a common butt, with forth- 
jutting angle. 

The harpoons provide a most interesting evolutionary series. Two or 
three main types are distinguished. 

(a) The most primitive form has a rough blade with bilateral barbs, 
slight mid rib, a simple tang with one or more holes below the lowest 
pair of barbs. 

(b) More advanced form in which the blade becomes a separate 
element, the barbs are placed below it, but still resemble in shape those* 
of type a. 

(c) The blade is now leaf-shaped, and the barbs curved, and twice 
the size of the other examples. 

Besides these there are a few copper "riugs,” a couple of bent tools, 
with a “celt-like” flat and “human-ligure-like” objects, and stylized 
lunate axe or Iance-heads.37 

Whence and how did these copper or bronze weapons come to the 
Ganges valley? A definite answer cannot be given but it is suggested by 
Heine-Geldern38 that the prototypes of the simple celt-like axes, as well 
as the various types of swords, daggers, and harpoons can be traced back, 
through Iran, to the Caucasus and Danube valley, where these tool types 
existed at least before 1200 b.c. Hence he is of the opinion that in these 
stray copper or bronze objects, we have traces of the migration route of 
the Vedic Aryans. Piggott. is also inclin'd to the same opinion, though he 
would ascribe the harpoons, a product of nvef-ihe culture, to a group of 
food-gathering tribes who, living pimarily on fis'ihing, acquired a know¬ 
ledge of metal working from some rentre of higher cuil U re and transformed 
their characteristic hunting weapons accordingly. Ht ow this culture- 

*37 


§L 





THE VEDIC AGE 

debt ac t could have taken place has been shown by Heine-Geklerr 

ks that the forepart of the most advanced harpoons of the Ganges 
valley may have been influenced by the javelin heads from Transcaucasia. 

This culture is supposed to be posterior to that of the Indus Valley 
because in the latter, besides the continuance of the use of stone tools— 
the blades, etc,, resembling larger microliths—the copper tools and 
weapons are of the simplest type. The harpoons and the sword are so far 
absent and the flat, broad-edged axe-head is obviously a copy of the 
Palaeolithic U-shaped cleaver and the Neolithic celt, a fact which can be 
demonstrated by typological studies, but not yet by stratigraphic sequence 
of cultures. 


5 . .THE IRON AGE 


The only evidence so far for assuming the transition from Copper and 
Bronze or Stone Age culture to the Iron Age has come from megalithic 
monuments such as dolmens, cromlechs, cairns, and menhirs. These have a 
very wide distribution in India.39 They have been found almost all. over 
South India, Kamatak, the Deccan, Central India, Central Provinces, 
Orissa, Bihar, Assam, Eajputana, Gujarat (very few), and Kashmir. 
Only a few have been systematically excavated. This is enough to show 
that these monuments belong to different periods—from the late pre¬ 
historic to historic periods. 

The Kashmir (Burzahorn) megalith is assigned to a neolithic period.4° 

The Ranchi monuments,u some of which are credited to the Asuras by 
the present-day Mundas, yielded such a mixed assortment of finds as 
polished stone tools, carnelian beads, wheel-made pottery, copper and 
bronze objects, copper and gold ornaments, and even iron slags, that it is 
impossible to date the monuments to any one age. 

The Rajputana monuments also yielded earthen vessels with lids, 
containing partially burnt human bones, skeletons in flexed position, 
microlith-like flakes, etc. 

Monuments south of the Vindhyas, those in the Hyderabad^ and 
Mysore States ,43 and in the rest of South India ,44 particularly the monu¬ 
ments examined by Rea at Adittanallur, in the Tamraparni valley 
(Tinnevelly district), at Perombair (Chingleput district), at Kaniyam- 
pundi (Coimbatore district) and Perungulam (Malabar), have also pro¬ 
duced evidence of a varied stage of cultural development, which must 
not have been uniform even in peninsular India. Along with beautiful 
thin-walled red and black pottery" of different types, and huge thick-walled 
ones, are often found mhcrolithic flakes of agate, or crystal, carnelian 
beads, neolithic celts, and tools anl weapons of iron and, at times, of 
copper or bronze. 

If it is difficult ; m our present limited knowledge, to trace the transition 

138 


rtlNlSTj? 



PALAEOLITHIC, NEOLITHIC AND COPPER AGES 

Stone or Copper Age to the Iron Age through these megalithic 
Ifnents, it is no less difficult to understand the purpose and types of 
hese monuments themselves. Most of these are funerary, connected with 
the disposal of the dead. But it has also been shown that megalithic 
monuments in Assam were connected with fertility rites and ancestor 
worship,45 Different motives have thus contributed to the raising of these 
megalithic monuments. To unravel these and weave a cultural pattern 
out of the separate threads is the great task of Indian archaeology. But 
unless the monuments are studied scientifically no conclusions as to their 
true nature, age, and origins can be formulated. 47 

1. Das Gupta, H. C., Bibliography of Prehistoric Indian A ntiquities, 1931. 

2. See De Terra, H., and Paterson T. T., Studies on the Ice age in India and the 
A ssociated Human Cultures, 1939. pp : . 301-uo. 

3. Ibid., Pl. XXXI, A and PL XXXIII. 

4. But the reason De Terra and Paterson assign, {op. cit., p. 275) viz. "The wind- 
borne nature of the silt, and its high percentage of lime," which is supposed 
to be unfavourable to the preservation of bones, does not seem to be correct. 
For in almost exactly similar soil, a fairly fossilized human skeleton and 
animal remains have been recently found in Gujarat. Cf. NIA , April 1944, an d 
Preliminary Report of the Third Gujarat Expedition, Poona, 1943, 

3. De Terra and Paterson, op. cit., PI. XXXIX-XLIl. 

6. Ibid., PI. XLII. . 

7. Ibid., Pl. XLIII. 

8. Brown, J. Coggin, Catalogue of Prehistoric Antiquities in the Indian Museum 
at Calcutta, 1917. 

9. Sankalia, H. D., Investigations into Prehistoric Archaeology at Gujarat, Sri- 
Pratapsimha Maharaja Rajyabhisheka Grarithamala, Memoir No. IV, Baroda, 
1946. 

10. Ibid., Pl. XII. 

ix, De Terra, op. cit., p. 314. Full details of every layer are not given. 

12. Brown, op. cit. 

13. Ibid.', and Foote, Notes on Ages and Distribution, 1916. 

14. According to the brief summary given by Chattopadhyay, K. P., in JR 
X., pp. 97 - 8 . 

15. BDCRI, IV. 1-16. 

16. JRAI, LXIX, pp. 257-72, Pl. XIV. 

17. For this and the succeeding paragr 
but ion, 1916. 

18. Cammiade and Burkitt, Antique 

19. Krishnaswami, V. D., Pnhj 
Sciences, Madras, 1,938). 

20. De Terra and Paterson, <■': 

21. See Aiyappan, Manley <?. 

22. For a provisional corr 
world, see Paterson, " 

23. Foote, op. cit. 

24. Gordon, JRASBL, V 

25. De Terra, op. cit., p 

26. Krishna, M. H., Mys 

27. Hunter, Nagpur Uni 

28. De Terra, op, cit., pp 

29. Gordon, Art and L 

30. Sankalia, op. cit. 

Preliminary Rep 

' 



[y .$a nkalia and Karve, Report of the Third Gujarat Prehistoric Expedition, I 


THE VEDIC AGE 



^ 1 945* 

32. De Terra and Paterson, op: at., pp. 233-4 an d Pl. XXIV. 

33. The two main works are Brown's Catalogue, and Foote's Notes on Ages , etc. , 
and Catalogue Raisonne, and Catalogue Madras Museum', see also Das Gupta, 
Bibliography, which deals with finds made up to 1930-31. For later notices 
see annual Reports of the Mysore and Hyderabad Archaeological Departments. 

34. Cf. CHI, I, 613-4. 

35. These notices were first collected and commented by Smith in I A, XXXIV, 
229 if. and XXXVI 53 if.; Brown used these in his Catalogue (1917E brought 
up to date by Das Gupta, Bibliography (1931); reclassified by G. N. Mukherjee 
in 1HQ, Vol. XI, p. 522; and some items commented by Heine-Geldern ( JISOA , 
IV, 87-115) and Piggott (“Prehistoric Copper Hoards in the Ganges Basin," 
Antiquity, 72, December, 1944). 

36. Piggott, op: cit . 

37. Smith, op. cit .; POC. IV, 1928, pp. 729-34. 

38. Heine-Geldern, op. cit. 

39. Das Gupta, op. cit.,. for notices up to 1930-31. Later notices are. mostly in the 
Reports of the Mysore (1932 and 1940, 1941, 1942, 1943) and Hyderabad 
Archaeological Departments (1937-40), A SI, and BDCRl. 

40. De Terra, op. cit., pp. 233-4, PL XXIV and Kak, Ram Chandra, Ancient 
Monuments of Kashmir, p. m, PL XLIII; cf. also The Progress of Science in 
India during the Past Twenty Five Years, .1938, pp. 309-13. 

41. Roy, S. C., JBORS, 1/ 229 % H, 61-77. 

42. Hunt, JRAI , LIV, p. 140 ff. 

43. Mysore Arch, Rep., op. cit. (See note 35 above.) 

44. Rea, AS.I, 1902-03; 1904-05, p. 41; 1908-09, p. 92 ; A SI Southern Circle, 
iaio-11, p. 12, 19x3-14, p. 43 and 1914-15, p. 39. Catalogue of Prehistoric 
Antiquities from Adickanallur and Perumbair, 1915, and Richards, JRAI, 
LIV, p. 157 ff. 

45. Hutton, JRAI, LIT, 55 ff. and 242 ff. and LVI, jxi 

46. For a tentative classification of megalithic—mostly funerary—monuments, 
known up to 1923, .see" Ghurye, MIA, VI, 26-57; 100-39; Aiyappan's recent 
summary in Proceedings of the Science Congress, 1945, Presidential Addresses, 
is useful. 

. The writer is indebted to Rao Bahadur K. N. Dikshit, the Director General of 
'haeology in India for having gone through the chapter and making a number 
ggestionif 


i t 


‘f- 


i 


} 





CHAPTER VIII 


RACE MOVEMENTS AND 
PREHISTORIC CULTURE 

age (and somewhat difficult of explanation) that skeletal remains 
6 . I he n j n Xxadia, particularly in the prehistoric and early historical 
Of the abc|?, e so scanty. This lack of material has not allowed us 
India. A sma ? certainty about racial movements in ancient times, 
traces of the ement or reconstruction of movements of peoples in 
of Cochin am /T three or even two thousand years ago, is bound to 
Nfmas of Ao hypothetical, and based on or inferred from the present- 
Ti,p wution only. Race is not, of course, synonymous with language; 
out when a language was becoming characterized as a distinct type in 
a particular area and among a particular people in prehistoric times, it 
formed an important cultural expression of that people, and as such a 
connexion between the two is justified, always bearing in mind the great 
fact that language is after all but a secondary expression of culture and 
that it is largely transmissible from people to people. 

Racial anthropology, dealing with the physical features of a people, 
has sought to analyse the various elements which have contributed to 
build up the population of India, irrespective of what cultural ethnology 
has to say about languages and cultures. Various views were advanced 
by diverse anthropologists about the racial elements in the population 
of India. Until recently, the view that occupied a position of prestige 
as a sort of official pronouncement on behalf of the Government of India 
was that put forward by the late Sir Herbert Risley. 1 

This view, adopted in official publications and accepted very largely 
both in India and outside India without any questioning, divided the 
people of India, quite arbitrarily, with both insufficient data and im¬ 
mature science (not wholly free, it might also be suspected, from political 
bias), into seven broad groups, labelled as Mongoloid, Indo-Aryan, 
Dravidian, Mongolo-Dravidian, Aryo-Dravidian, Scytho-Dravidiari, and 
Turko-Iranian. An Indian anthropologist like the late Rama Prasad 
Chanda made a more systematized essay based on both anthropometric 
data and early tradition as preserved in ancient Indian literature towards 
a determination of the various racial elements in Jndia. 3 

The next advance in this direction was made in 1933 by Dr. J. H. 
Hutton 3 when a statement as to the race-cum-language-and-culture 
sequence in India was proposed which took note of the advance made in 

141 



THE VEDIC AGE 



tropology and ethnology since 1900. According to this view, w<* 
advent of the following peoples in India from the outside (no 
kind of man originated on the soil of India, all her human inhabitants 
having arrived originally from other lands, but developing within 
India some of their salient characteristics and then passing on outside 
India), their names being given in an approximate order of the : 
arrival: J 


one 


(1) Negritos, brachycephalic Negroids from Africa, the oldest 

to have come to India, now surviving in the Andaman Isla- ct PP ears ) 
they have retained their language) and in Malaya; and trad ycephallc 
seem, to occur among the Nagas in Assam and among cer + f> rea -t ei 
South India. an d Orissa, 

(2) “Proto-Australoids*” black, dolichocephalic, platyi and in Coor £ 

an early offshoot of the Mediterranean race, who cr nachycephals 
Mediterranean area (Palestine). The Melanesians appeal 11 *‘ t 

racial basis of this early Mediterranean Proto-Australoid'* n 

_ t • r , • c . , .. ^ .,.1 . 


modifications from other races both inside and outside India. ~ " 4 ' 1ves 


(3) Early Mediterraneans, leptorrhine dolichocephals, who brought 
earlier forms of the Austric speech. 

(4) Civilized or Advanced Mediterranean, leptorrhine dolichocephals, 
who became the “Dravidians” in India. 

(5) Armenoids—-“a specialized off-shoot from the standard Alpine 
stock”—brachycephalic—probably came with the Civilized Mediter¬ 
raneans (“Dravidians”) and spoke their language. 

(6) Alpines—brachycephalic, leptorrhine: found in Gujarat and Bengal; 
earlier than Vedic Aryans, but probably speaking Aryan dialects. 

(7) Vedic Aryans, or Nordics, leptorrhine dolichocephals who brought 
the Vedic Aryan (Sanskrit) speech. 

(8) Mongoloids, brachycephals: not important for the greater part 
of India, as they touched only the northern and eastern fringes. 


Finally, the most recent and authoritative view has been put forward 
by Dr. B. S. Guha, Director of the Anthropological Survey of India.4 
In his newest work ,5 giving a useful resume of the whole question, 
Dr. Guha has signalized “six main races with nine sub-tvpes ” as 
follows: 


1. 

2. 
3 - 


The Negrito. 

The Proto-Australoid. 

The Mongoloid, consisting of: 

(i) Palaeo-Mongoloids of (a) long-headed and 

(b) broad-headed types. 

(ii) Tibeto-Mongoloids. 


142 



“RACE MOVEMENTS AND PREHISTORIC CULTURE 

Mediterranean, comprising: 

(i) Palaeo-Mediterranean, 

(ii) Mediterranean, and 

(iii) the so-called Oriental type. 

5. The Western Brachycephals, consisting of: 

(i) The Alpinoid, 

(ii) The Dinaric, and 
It is strai Armenoid. 
of Early Mr 0r dic. 

tToostuht! races, (1) the Negrito is all but extinct on the soil of 
and nnv an oup of Negritos is still surviving in the Andamans, and 
India com P ito race have been found among the Kadars and Palayans 
‘in w, te Travancore Hills, the Irulas of the Wynad, the Angami 
dav situ;’- 1 :>sam and some of the Rajmahal Hill tribes in Eastern Bihar. 
. . Negritos appear to have been suppressed and absorbed by other 
races which followed them, particularly the Proto-Australoids (2). 

(2) The Proto-Australoids appear to have come from the West, and 
to have become characterized in India. They survive in a good many 
aboriginal peoples of present-day India, although more or less mingled 
with other peoples. A branch of the Proto-Australoids passed on to 
Australia in very ancient times, and the “Austronesian peoples 
(Indonesians, Melanesians and Polynesians) have a good deal of the 
Proto-Australoid element in them. Throughout the greater part of India 
the Proto-Australoid peoples still live as the lower castes or sections of 
the Indian people. 

Of the various (3) Mongoloid groups, (1) the Palaeo-Mongoloids, sub¬ 
divided into two types, (i)(a) with a peculiar head-form resembling doli- 
chocephal, occurring “as the more ancient stratum of the population 
and forming “a dominant element in the tribes living in Assam and the 
Indo-Burmese frontiers’’ and (i)(b) with round heads, found among the 
less primitive tribes in Burma and in the Chittagong Hills, appear to 
repre? t a less developed group of this race. The (ii) Tibeto-Mongoloids 
are a more pronounced and advanced Mongoloid type, and they are 
found in Sikkim and Bhutan, and “must have infiltrated from Tibet in 
comparatively later times.’’ 

(4) The Mediterranean peoples also represent several strains or types, 
all long-headed. We have in the first instance (i) the Palaeo-Mediter¬ 
ranean type, medium-statured dark-skinned and of slight build: this 
is found largely in the Kannada, Tamil and Malayalam tracts, (ii) The 
true Mediterranean or European type, taller and fairer than the Palaeo- 
Mediterraneans, occurs in the Punjab and Upper Gangetic Valley, and 
is supposed to represent the civilized pre-Aryan, "Dravidian” people 

143 



THE VEDIC AGE 



Northern India which became Aryanized in language and contributed 
largely to the evolution of the Hindu people and culture of North India, 
(iii) The third Mediterranean strain, the so-called “Oriental” one, com 
monly miscalled the Semitic or Jewish, with a pronouncedly longish 
nose and fair in skin, is found in the Punjab, in Sind, in Rajputana ar 1 
in Western U.P., and it occurs also not unusually enough in other pa 
of India. / 

The various (5) Brachycephal groups really form sub-groups oople 
single physical type, and they appear (or at least their prototype \ where 
to have evolved in the Central Asian mountain regions. Braclof them 
peoples, both Alpine and Dinaric, appear to have spread ovesn tribes in 
part of India, the Dinaric type being well-marked in Be ! 
in Kathiawar, and in the* Kannada and Tamil countri apparently 

it occurs in its purest form. In Gujarat the Alpin bm the east 
show a greater predominance. Broad-head elements are be in their 
West Coast of India, excepting in Malabar; they are not reigin, with 
Telugu country. Early brachycephalic groups also established themsc* ... 
in or passed through the Ganges Valley, as far as the delta, leaving traces 
or drifts in Central India, Eastern U.P. and Bihar; another line of migra¬ 
tion is found along the Himalayas, from Chitral and Gilgit. to Western 
Nepal. The Parsis of Bombay are a lately arrived brachycephalic group 
allied to the Armenoids—they present a contrast to the long-headed 
Iranian Zoroastrians (Gabrs or Guehres) still living in Persia. 

Finally, we have the (6) Nordic Aryan-speaking group of India, who 
gave to India its Aryan speech, and by their organization, imagination 
and adaptability helped to bring about a great cultural synthesis leading 
to the foundation of the Hindu civilization of India. These Nordics seem 
to have been characterized in the Eurasian steppe lands and they entered 
India some time during the second half of the second millennium b.c. 6 
Nordic elements are strong in parts of the North-West Frontier of 
India, particularly along the upper reaches of the Indus and along its 
tributaries the Swat, , the Panjkora, the Kunar and the Chitral rivers, 
and in the south of the Hindu Kush range. In the Punjab and Rajputana 
and in the Upper Ganges Valley Nordic elements are present (although 
more and more mixed with other racial elements as we proceed further 
to the east), particularly among the higher castes or groups; among 
certain sections elsewhere in India, the Nordic type predominates, e.g. 
among the Chitpavan Brahmans of the Maratha country. The original 
Nordic type is supposed to have been tall, fair-skinned, yellow or golden¬ 
haired and blue-eyed: such a type seems (from such meagre literary 
evidence as is available) to have characterized the true Aryans of ancient 
times, but owing to miscegenation and to climatic conditions the com¬ 
plexion of the body and the colour of the hair and the eye have been 
modified or eliminated by natural selection to light brown or brown 

144 




ACE MOVEMENTS AND PREHISTORIC CULTURE 


black (for the hair and the eyes), although light-eyed people 
are not uncommon among the Nordic long-heads in India, scattered as 
they are all over the country. 

Dr. B. S. Guha has thus summed up the racial distribution for India 
as a whole: “It must be clearly understood that no rigid separation is 
Possible as there is considerable overlapping of types. From a broad point 
of vew, however, a Nordic territory in north-western India, mixed with 
Mediterraneans and Orientals, can be distinguished from a territory 
in P„riasulaK India containing the older Palaeo-Mediterranean element. 
On both sides of this are the domains of the Alpo-Dinarics, mixed no 
doubt with othir types. The primitive darker elements have come in 
everywhere and, with, blood from other strains, chiefly Palaeo-lV|,editer- 
ranean, they constitute the lower stratum of the population. The Mon¬ 
goloids occupy, the. submontane regions of the north and the east, but 
various thrusts from them have gone deeply into the composition of the 
people.”" 

It has not yet been established that a particular racial type, by the mere 
fact of some pronounced or subdued racial characteristic which it possesses, 
must necessarily or inevitably have its mental and emotional outlook 
or attitude pre-decided. In other words, it cannot be asserted that there 
must be an ineradicable racial character. But on the other hand the 
economic milieu, and the special training which the mind and the emotions 
receive in an organized or corporate body of men, create a framework of 
civilization or ordered life which commonly finds an expression in the 
language of that body of men: and hence we are more justified in speaking' 
of language cultures than of racial cultures ; and we must also consider 
that from the beginning of recorded history racial inter-mixture has 
proceeded apace, leading to a profound modification of any special race- 
type in its most ancient and pristine form. The six different main types 
of humanity, with their various ramifications, as discussed above, which 
have gone to make the people of India, are now included within one or 
the other of four distinct speech-families: viz., the Austric (Kol or 
Munda), the Tibeto-Chinese or Sino-Tibetan, the Dravidian, and the 
Indo-European (Aryan). Even in some cases the economic milieu trans¬ 
cends the diversity of language and language-culture, and tones down 
very largely, within a given economic area, the more aggressively pro¬ 
minent or more easily noticeable special cultural traits that go with 
language—religion, social usage, customs, etc. Thus in Cliota Nagpur, 
in spite of diversity of language the Dravidian-speaking Oraons and the 
Austric (Kol)-speaking Mundas are within the fold of a common culture; 
and in Central Europe, the Indo-European-speaking Germans and Slavs, 
in spite of their pronounced linguistic diversity although within the 
same family, and the entirely distinct Finno-Ugrian-speaking Magyars, 
share a common type of economic and cultural life. The same observation 


145 


K 



misTfff 



THE VEDIC AGE 


<SL 


-an be made about the Indo-European-speaking Armenians and Ossetes, 
the Ural-Altaic-speaking Azarbijanis and the Caucasic Georgians arid 


others in the Caucasus regions. 

So, too, for India as a whole, a more or less common type of economic 
life based on agriculture and taking shape within the limits of India 
forming a single geographical unit, combined with a large-scale commii’,- 
ling of different races building up a common history, has been respon'ible 
for the gradual modification of what doubtless existed in most ayyient 
times as distinct racial types and distinctive language-cult'ires, end has 
led to the evolution, as a result of a more or less conscious movement, 
of a common Indian type and a common Indian culture. In this culture 
of India, after at lea^ two and a half millennia of close interaction, the 
original genetic differences in the four language-families obtaining in 
India from prehistoric times have largely converged towards the evolution 
of a number of common traits. 

It will not be possible at the present moment to make a definite 
pronouncement about the mental and spiritual environment of the various 
types of man in their primitive stage, when they came into India, although, 
through a close study of the question, taking all help from anthropology, 
religiology, linguistics, sociology, prehistoric archaeology, and other 
human sciences we may make some near enough guesses about their 
material culture and the contributions they made to the common store¬ 
house of Indian life and Indian civilization, both in the material and the 
mental and emotional sides. In this way we can bring to light the basis 
on which Indian civilization rests in all its aspects, material, mental, and 
spiritual, and its genesis will enable us properly to appreciate and under¬ 
stand its subsequent evolution and transformation. 

We have to begin with the Negroid or Negrito people of prehistoric 
India, who were its first human inhabitants. At the present day the 
Negritos have practically vanished from the soil of India. Originally 
they would appear’to have come from Africa through Arabia and the 
coast-lands of Iran and Baluchistan. They were in the eolithic stage of 
culture, and they appear to have been food-gatherers rather than food- 
producers. In India, the Negritos would appear to have been either 
killed off by the later immigrants, more advanced than themselves, 
notably the Proto-Australoids, or absorbed by them. They survive in 
a few primitive tribes in South India, and traces of the Negrito have 
been found in the Nagas of Assam. Beyond India, they passed on to 
Malaya, where Negrito tribes still survive, and even further into the 
distant islands of Indonesia, like the Philippines, and into New Guinea. 
Within the Indian domain, they are found in a few hundred Andamanese 
in the Andaman Islands, where they have still kept up their own 
language. Their settlement in the Andamans shows a certain advance 
in culture, as they must have crossed the sea in their small dugouts, 

146 


fv 


M'N/Styp 



ACE MOVEMENTS AND PREHISTORIC CULTURE 

tifi.es to their skill as well as courage and imagination; and 
ae to be acquainted with the bow and arrow, and the blow-pipe, 
probably from the Proto-Australoids, unless they invented these them¬ 
selves. Except in the case of the Andamanese, the Negritos who survive 
in India and Further India (including Malaya) at the present day speak 
verywhere debased dialects of their more civilized neighbours. The 
ginal Negrito speech of India, whatever it was, seemingly survives 
' ndamanese, which, as a language or dialect group stands isolated. 
" r to their very primitive state, the Negritos do not appear to have 
vthing of importance to the civilization of India, 
ants or traits, judging from some racial types depicted 
upta and post-Gupta India (as in Gupta, sculpture and 
escoes), seem to have survived to a very late period; 
.been almost wholly eliminated. It has been suggested 8 
.a the/icMSvtree, associated with fertility and with the souls 
and some ideas about the Path of the Dead to Paradise 
avenging demon, which are widespread in Southern 


an 


. uead, 
guarded by 

Europe, Africa, and Oceania, and partly also India, might welt have 
come from the Negrito people. 

Situated as they were, the Negritos were not in a position to influence 
the languages which came to India subsequently. At least two other 
linguistic strata covered up Negrito speech—the Austric and the 
Dravidian, before the Aryan language arrived, so nothing from Negrito 
speech had much chance of coming®into Aryan. But it may be that here 
and there a word indicative of some object, some element from the flora , 
or the fauna of India, has survived, although in a much altered form, 
being passed on from the Negrito language through the Proto-Australoid 
or Dravidian dialects to Indo-Aryan. One such word may be the Bengali 
and Oriya badud, bddadi ~ “bat”: the basic element would seem to be 
*b&A, which was extended by the addition of the pleonastic affix— ada— 
plus the feminine and diminutive affix-? from Old In do-Aryan TAa; 
and with this *bdd, otherwise unexplained, may be compared Andamanese 
wdt-da, imt-da, wot, wdt = "bat” and the element pet, wet, met, wed, wdt, 
wM in some of the* aboriginal languages of Malaya and Indo-China 
belonging to the Austro-Asia tic branch of the Austric family. (some of 
which are spoken by the Negrito tribes of Malaya), e.g . tra-pet, sa-pet, 
ham-pet, sa-met, ha-met, ka-ivet, ka-wed, gan-at, kat < *ka-wat, kawa 
< *ka-wat, not. 

The Proto-Australoids, who appear to have come after the Negritos, 
and that, too, from the West, have furnished one of the basic elements 
in the population of India. There were, as it would appear, numerous 
lines of migration of this race from the west and east through India, 
and the Proto-Australoid type was modified both within and beyond by 
admixture with other peoples, notably the Negritos and the Mongoloids; 

147 



THE VEDIC AGE 



afta, as a result, we have, it would seem, the Kol or Munda type in r 
Mon-Khmer type in Assam, Burma, and Indo-China, the Nicoba?ese 
Hf the Nicobar Islands, and the Indonesian, Melanesian, and Polynesian 
types in the islands of the Indian Archipelago and those of Melanesia 
and Polynesia. All these congeries of mixed peoples extending from the 
extreme north-west of India, throughout the whole of India, Burmr 
Indo-Cliina and Malay Peninsula into the islands of the Indian Arc 1 
pelago (Indonesia and those of Melanesia, Micronesia, and Polyne: 
in a word, from Kashmir to Easter Island—-have a Proto-Aust- 
element; and the languages they speak have been for 1 
common traits which warrant their inclusion within r 
family The researches of Pater W. Schmidt have estabb 
Family of Language!??' which is found to have two man 
(i) the Austronesian, under which come the closely a 
Melanesian, Micronesian, and Polynesian languages, and ^ 

Asiatic, which embraces the Kol or Munda speeches oj 
Nicobarese, and the Mon-Khmer speeches of India (Assam), Burma, and 
Indo-China. 

As things stand, the original Austric speech, which took different 
forms under diverse conditions within this vast area over which it spread, 
would appear to have been brought from the west by the Proto-Austra¬ 
loids; and in its original form (as the ultimate source of both the Austro- 
Asiatic and Austronesian branches) it could very well have been character¬ 
ized within India. Outside India, the Proto-Australoids passed on to 
Australia, where their language and culture took a definite form which 
was quite isolated and distinct from that of the Austro-Asiatic and 
Austronesian peoples. 

After the Melanesian and Polynesian types in ethnology and language 
came to be established, it would appear that there were back-washes 
of immigrations of Melanesians and Polynesians into India, which brought 
in certain new cultural contributions from these peoples; and these 
Melanesian and Polynesian immigrants would appear to have now become 
totally assimilated into the mass of the Indian population. From the 
Melanesians, the custom of disposal of the dead by exposure, communal 
houses, head-hunting and a canoe cult appear to have been introduced 
into India. The introduction of the outrigger canoe and of the coconut 
into India may have been due to the Polynesians. 

The Proto-Australoid’s contribution to the primitive culture of India, 
it has been thought, included the following matters: pottery, which would 
appear to have been unknown to the Negritos; neolithic development of 
the palaeolithic culture of the country; the use of the boomerang and 
of the blowing-gun; and ideas of totemism in religion. Hoe and digging- 
stick cultivation, followed at least in some parts of the country by terrace 
cultivation of rice, may have originated on the soil of India in the hands 

148 





LTURE 

been advanced 
it the language 

r ■ T -- r i»" r -" T 1Trr " i -- l .---j-__ . , ... P| B|| _from vvlxidi the 

current Austro-Asiatic and Austronesian languages have descended_can 

o a certain extent (apart from some prehistoric implements and arti- 
ts9 which can be ascribed to- the Proto-Australoids) be reconstructed 
igh linguistic palaeontology, along lines which have proved to be 
cessful in the case of the primitive Indo-European cultural milieu. 
istetter has, in his brilliant papers oh Indonesian, essayed 
? rot only the primitive Indonesian speech (which comes 

x onesian branch of Austric) but also the natural and 
•d of the speakers of Primitive Indonesian.*® For Austric 
;‘^s a whole, at least for the Austric speech world of 
une ol'-ifi'¥&Sligati0J.'i has been started by Jean Przyluski, 

. *tiii approval and support of Sylvain Levi, Jules Bloch, and others.” 

In studying certain non-Aryan elements in the Indo-Aryan speech 
Ain its different periods—non-Aryan• elements which are not Dra vidian— 
Przyluski found out that these belonged to the Austro-Asiatic speeches 
as they were current in India. At the present day, Austro-Asiatic dialects 
belonging to the Kol or Munda group only are spoken on the soil of India, 
and only one speech of the Mon-Khmer group is current in Assam, viz, 
Khasi. while other Mon-Khmer speeches are found in Burma and Indo 
China. But from a study of the Ahstric words found in Indo-Aryan it 
would appear that dialects allied to both Kol and Mon-Khmer were- 
current in India during the oldest period of contact between Indo-Aryan 
and Austric, and possibly also speeches more closely connected with 
■ Austronesian (Indonesian specially) within the Austric family. However, 
from these non-Aryan (and non-Dravidian) loans which are from Austric,' 
we can make some guesses as to the nature of the culture-world which 
the Austric-speaking or Proto-Australoid peoples presented vis-a-vis the 
Aryan-speaking invaders from the West. 

The words from Austric borrowed by Indo-Aryan refer in the first 
instance to items in the special flora and fauna of India not known to 
the Aryian-speakers; naturally enough, then, they also refer to culture 
| plants known to the Austric-speakers, and to some of their culture objects 
and ideas. Thus, the Aryans came into Iran (and possibly also into India) 
with a knowledge of barley and wheat among cereals: their word for 
“barley,” yam in Sanskrit, is of Indo-European origin (— Greek zea 
I-E *yezm -), and that for “wheat” (Sanskrit godhuma, Persian ganclum 
< Iranian *gandhuma) is of unknown origin. For “rice,” the oldest word 
in Indo-Aryan is vrihi, which has Iranian affinities (e.g. Persian birinj, 
gurinj, Old Iranian Pasto write, whence Greek oruza, briza) and 

which may be connected with the Dravidian (Tamil) arichi <*arki, argi. 

149 



RACE MOVEMENTS AND PREHISTORIC CU 

Proto-Australoids; and this would appear to have 
;ely in the extra-Indian lands of south-eastern Asia. 
The bases of Proto-Australoid culture—assuming tha 
of the Proto-Australoids was the primitive source-speech 








THE VEDIC AGE 

.. the New Indo-Aryan languages the common word for 
a .^dival, chawal, chaul, and this would appear to be based on a Mic 
ndo-Aryan chdmala (cf. the Old and Middle Indo-Aryan forms charm, 
d-chdma) meaning “rice” as well as “food, ’ and this chdma-la, in its 
original sense of “food,” might be very well connected with the Ivol or 
Munda roof jam, “to eat.” 11 

Certain common fruits and vegetables may similarly be presumed 
have been cultivated by the Austric speakers, as their Sanskrit and 
Aryan names are of Austric origin: the banana (Sanskrit haclali, ho 
coconut (nankela), betel ( tdmbulu ), the brinjal. or cgg-pl 
the pumpkin ( alabu ), the lime (mtnbuka), the rose-app 
and also cotton (kar^dsa, karfiata) and silk-cotton (' 

The domestic fowl (krikavdka, *kurkuta > kukkuta), ^ 
as an expletive in the Atharva-Veda, compare Kol 
beside Dravidian mayil as in lamil),. the cl&phfuxt (indiun b 
some breed of horse or pony ( *sdda , as in Sanskrit sadin— “rider" / ap* 
to have been known to the pre-Aryan peoples of India speaking Austric. 
The Austric speakers supplied to Indo-Aryan its common word for/ 
“arrow” (b&na), and for “stick” and "phallus” or "the phallus symbol,” 
both from a word meaning originally “stick,” and then “digging-stick 
for ploughing” (lakuia, laguda, lihga: laiidd in NIA-- Bihari), and these 
show two noteworthy aspects of the cultural life of the Austric speakers 
which had their repercussion on that of the Aryan speakers . l 3 

Some of the fundamental bases of Indian civilization on the material 
side would thus appear to be the gifts cf the Austric-speaking Proto- 
Australoid people: the cultivation of rice, the raising of some important 
vegetables, the manufacture of sugar from the cane, and the use of the 
betel vine in life and in ritual; the habit of counting on the basis of twenty 
(Bengali kudi, Hindi kodi), and probably also the use of turmeric and 
vermilion in religious ritual and social life (e.g. in marriage), combined 
with some notions of future life (survival of the soul after death, and the 
germs of the idea of transmigration) and some mythological and religious 
as well {ft romantic notions and stories appear to have come from the 
same source. Weaving of cotton cloth was also an Austric or Proto- 
Australoid invention; and probably the Proto-Australoids were the first 
people to domesticate and train the elephant, 

Certain magico-religious rituals, e.g. the removal of the evil eye by 
the rite known in Northern India as nichhawar or bar an, which have a 
strong place in Hindu society, would seem, to be o! Austric origin. 1 he 
idea of taboo would seem to be another trait derived from the mentality 
of the Proto-Australoids (or Austric speakers) in prehistoric times, when 
Arya and Nishada —the Aryan and the dark-skinned Austric dwellers 
in the forests—first met in the Punjab: Sylvain Levi has drawn our atten¬ 
tion to the fact that the Atharva-Veda word tdbuva was connected with 

150 





/RACE MOVEMENTS AND PREHISTORIC CULTURE 


(uc„5>ilyncsian word tapu or tabu by A. Weber in 1876 and by Bartl 
later on; and it is likely that the word passed on with the Proto-Australoid 
immigrants into Austronesia, the distant Polynesian islands, while in 
India it was borrowed in the Atharvaveda. Cosmic and creational myths 
and ideas as they had originated among the pre-Aryan Austric-speaking 
peoples of India were adopted into the cosmopolitan or composite Aryan- 
non Aryan or Hindu religion and legend, while these made their steady 
wav pto the oceanic regions of the Pacific through the islands of Indonesia 
wiili i' - '- o*’-'Tiding Proto-Australoids. Certain remarkable agreements 
between the'cc smo S on y °* tbe Polynesians and that of the Nasadiya 

hymn of the Rig™' 2 < X ' "1° ol ta 

■L enumeration <* by the phases of the 

which was earlv a Jo P ted b y the Hmdu P e0 P le P robabl y simultaneously 
with its formation £nd has stiU been retained in tbe sacred or religious 
(ritualistic) calendar ofTKe Hindus, is again an Austric custom which 
survived in Polynesia; even the old Austric names for two of the phases 
of the moon, which are still found in the Polynesian group of Austronesian, 
were adopted in India by Sanskrit {rate == "full moon,” and kuhu = 
"new moon”). 11 ! It has also been suggested that the Sanskrit name of 
at least one constellation is of Austric origin, viz.. maipka = ‘‘the 
Pleiades,” the present-day Polynesian form of which is matariki. 

The culture-world of India has thus among its material and other 
ideological bases some fundamental things derived from the Austric 
speakers, assuming that they were also, in their pure state, Proto-Austra¬ 
loid in race, which became fully characterized on the soil of India. That 
would be only natural, as this racial element forms one of the most 
important in the present-day Indian people, as anthropologists tell us, 
the masses or the lower classes throughout the greater part of India 
being largely of this stock. The bedrock of Indian civilization is agriculture, 
and that, in all likelihood in connexion with the cultivation of rice, goes 
back to the Austric Proto-Australoids of India. The germs of the idea of 
transmigration which has been so potent a force in Indian thought, 
religion and life, would probably go back to this source: also some of tbe 
fundamental cults and rituals. 

In the domain of myth and legend, a number of Austric notions and 
tales appear to have survived in the myths of the Puranas and of the 
popular Hinduism. The legends of the creation of the world from an 
egg or eggs, of the Avatdras or incarnations of Vishnu, e.g. that of the 
tortoise incarnation, of the princess smelling of fish ( matsya-gandhd ), 
of the Nagas as serpent spirits of the waters and the underworld, and 
many more, which do not form part of the Aryan or Indo-European 
inheritance in Hinduism, and do not seem to have come from the 
Dravidian world either, can reasonably be expected to have been derived 
from the Austric or Proto-Australoid world. 


JSL 


151 



THE VEDIC AGE 


<SL 


All these have been more or less distorted or transformed in the Sans¬ 
krit Puranas, in the traditions surviving among the Austric-speaking tribes 
of the present day, or in popular Hindu folklore of today. The use of a 
rude block of stone as a symbol of the divinity is also Austric—it may 
also have been Dravidian in addition. Some fairy or folk tales woulf 
also go back to the same source. Zoomorphic deities appear also to J e 
survivals from Austric or Proto-Australoid totemism which also was 
reinforced by the Dravidian cults possessing a similar character (eg the 
Ndgas or snake deities, the tortoise, the makara or crocodjj; ^monkey 
god, Gane£a with his elephant’s head, etc.). 

It would be too much to try to appraise the stamj ^j ie original 
Proto-Australoid character upon that of our masses of the present day, 
but from the character of the present-day Kol or ;^ U nda peoples of 
Eastern India, and of the peoples like the Oraons who.,-* cultural milieu 
is that of the Kols although they are Dra vidian-speakers, wo m ay be 
allowed to formulate this Austric inheritance. The Austric temperament 
was pre-eminently gregarious; it was superstitious and to some extent 
timid, though not cowardly in face of dangers it could understand. 
Cheerfulness and love of simple music and gaiety came naturally to the 
Austric temper even in the midst of hard labour: and it was not over¬ 
sensitive to physical discomfort. There was a touch of erotic abandon in 
it, but along with that there was a great respect for convention which 
put the rein on licence. As a sympathetic student of the aborigines of 
Chota Nagpur, W. G. Archer, has said of the Oraons, who live within 
the same economic and cultural atmosphere as the Mundas, Santals, TIos, 
and other agricultural Kol tribes: “A few notes should be added on 
Oraon ‘character/ To the earliest observers a capacity for cheerful hard 
work was the. most notable character of Oraons; and a sturdy gaiety, 
an exu/. :ion in bodily physique and a sense of fun are still their most 
obvious qualities. These are linked to a fundamental simplicity—a ten¬ 
dency to see an emotion as an action, and not to complicate it by post¬ 
ponement or cogitation . . . The final picture is of a kindly simplicity 
and a smiling energy.”^ 

In discussing the Austric or Austro-Asiatic speakers of India and their 
contribution to the make-up of the Indian people, mention should also 
be made of the theory of the Hungarian scholar William Hevesy (Hevesy 
Vilmos, Wilhelm von Hevesy, Guillaume de Hevesy), recently put forward 
in some books and papers in German and French, combating Pater W. 
Schmidt’s theory of an Austric family of languages divided into two 
groups, Austronesian and Austro-Asiatic (the latter including the Kol 
or Munda languages of India) A Hevesy has challenged Pater Schmidt’s 
view that the Munda or Kol peoples speak dialects which are members 
of the Austro-Asiatic branch of Austric: be denies the existence of an 
Austric speech family, and he proposes quite a different affinity for the 

152 



RACE MOVEMENTS AND PREHISTORIC CULTURE 

Munda languages, viz., Finno-Ugrian. Hevesy’s views were put 
forward for the first time in 1930, but so far they have met with neither 
any general or wide acceptance nor a thorough or systematic refutation. 
According to Hevesy, Munda or Kol belongs to the Finno-Ugrian speech- 
tyroup, under which come Magyar or Hungarian, Finn in its various 
fleets, Esth of Esthonia, Lapp of Lapland, and Vogul, Ostyak, Zyrian, 
DraV a k> Cheremis, .Mordvin and Samoyed of Russia and Siberia. Hevesy 
the A es that there was a prehistoric invasion of or immigration into 
■Drnwllk Knnio-Ugrian or Ugrian tribes from the Eurasian plains to 
to the south of e Ural Mountains, and the Mundas or Kols with their 
Ll h lth hi hom a mixture of these Ugrian? with the earlier peoples 
rintre ,nd the Negritos and the Proto-Australoids. Hevesy bases 

Bravidian patched" J oi " ts <*<*««*»* be ‘ ween ““ 

a b r . -nd the Finno-Ugrian speeches on the other—points ot 

u h w \vhicli have not been aamit'teu'UUv any competent, linguistician 

.rid' is equally at home in Kol and in Finno-Ug-rrian (and such a person 

would be exceedingly rare to find). The points of 'cultural similarity 

between the Kols and the Finno-Ugrians as proposed by Hevesy are not 

convincing. There might have been an Ugrian influx into India, in very 

ancient times, but there is nothing positive to establish it. 

The Austric linguistic zone has been conjecturally extended further 
to the west of India by Jean Przyluski and others, who see in the 
Sumerian speech of Chaldea a language allied to primitive Austric. 
Przyluski has even seen an Austric substratum in Indo-Iranian: certain 
words like Sanskrit vdla — Persian bal “hair,” Sanskrit bhishaj — Avestan 
biSaz “doctor,” “healing,” as connected with Sanskrit visha “poison,’’ 
etc., Przyluski explains as being from the Austric, which would appear 
to have influenced Iranian also. 16 * But this, too, cannot be described as 
satisfactorily established. We may admit the possibility of Sumerian 
and Austric being related, for we have to remember that the Proto- 
Australoids, who are supposed to have been the original speakers of 
Austric, were a very ancient offshoot of the Mediterranean race, and 
as such in their trek to India where they became specially characterized 
they may have left some of their tribes on the way, or some of their 
kinsmen might earlier have preceded them and had established themselves 
in Mesopotamia, to become the Sumerians who built up the basic culture 
of that part of the world. But even then it seems that India was the centre 
from which the Austric speech spread into the lands and islands of the 
east and the Pacific; and the theory that there is actually an Austric 
Family of Languages in its two groups of Austronesian and Austro-Asiatic, 
as propounded by Pater W. Schmidt, may be said to hold the ground 
still. 

The Austric Proto-Australoids were spread over the greater part of 
India. In the Indus and Ganges valleys, when the Aryans first met them, 

153 


THE VEDIC AGE 




were known as Nishddas, and their dark skin and snub noses Were" 
in ridicule by the fair and straight-nosed Aryans. The masses of 
agricultural Austrics in the North Indian plains from Afghanistan to 
Eastern Bihar gradually became Aryan-speaking, roughly between 
c. 1500 B.c. (about when the first Aryan invasion or land immigration 
into India took place) to c. 600 b.c., a little before the time of the Buddhas 
but even in the time of the Buddha, pockets, large or small, of r* 
Aryan (Austric and Dravidian) speakers still remained throughout an d 
tract. We find, for example, in the Buddhist Jatakas, tnentiy. ms ‘ ooubtless 
villages where they still employed the Chandala tongue, a probability that 
from which is given—^ iligili —in the Chitta-sambhuta til we find the 
the contact of Aryan and Austric, and through large 'ppa and Mohenjo- 
speakers abandoning their native speech, the Aryan ?Sught to read Old 
affected, in phonetics, in vocabulary, in morphology u jt is highly 
The question of vocabulary, ,'.'as said ofrtore, has been taken up SQY. 
and beginning with the ’ pioneer researches of Jean Przyluski in this fibiL. 
we are gradually being enabled to find to what extent Austric vocables 
have found a place in Indo-Aryan in its three stages of Old, Middle, and 
New Indo-Aryan. Place-names in Nprth India (and undoubtedly also 
in the Deccan and South India) show Austric elements, thus indicating 
the presence of Austric speakers in the localities with these names. A 
name like Ganga is in all likelihood of Austric origin, and it appears to 
have meant just “a river” as in its,modem Bengali equivalent gang = 
“river, channel.” Original Austric speakers form a substratum in Burma, 
Tndo-China and South China also, and the Indian Ganga, gang, the Indo- 
Chinese Khong as in Me-khong, and the South-Chinese Kiang < *Kang 
< *Ghang (as in Yang-tsze-Kiang and a dozen other river names) all 
of these can very well be from the same old Austric word, now lost to 
most of the Austric tongues. 

We may next take into considerata. n the cultural world of the Dravidian 
speakers with special reference to its contribution to the formation of the 
ancient Hindu world. Anthropologists, as noted before, assume at least 
three varieties or modifications of the Mediterranean race as having come 
to India, and all of these would appear to have been speakers of Dravidian, 
at least in India—the Palaeo-Mediterraneans, the Mediterraneans proper, 
and the so-called “Orientals.” They were all long-headed, and they came 
to India with a fairly high level of civilization, As contrasted with the 
Pioto-Australoids or Austrics, whose culture was mainly a village cut me 
based on agriculture, these Dravidian-speaking Mediterranean peoples 
(in their various ramifications) in India were responsible for cities and a 
city culture—for a real civilization, in the true sense of the word, including 

international trade. . 

The Dravidian speeches of the present, day stand apart in a group oy 
themselves, and although structurally they agree with some other speech 


154 



RACE MOVEMENTS AND PREHISTORIC CULTURE ? 

_ es (e.g. with the Ural-Altaic family, which includes the Altaic 
’speeches like Mongol, Turki, and Manchu on the one hand and the Ural 
or Finno-Ugrian speeches like Magyar, Finn, Esth, Lapp, Ostyak, Votyak, 
Zyrian, Cheremis, Samoyed, etc., on the other, in both Ural-Altaic and 
Dravidian possessing the same “agglutinative” structure in word-forma- 
on), in their roots, words, and affixes they do not agree with any current 
up of languages. There are fundamental points of difference between 

idian and all the other speech-families which are current in India_ 

nstric, the Sino-libetan and the Indo-European (Aryan). The 
ues now form a solid bloc in the Deccan and South India 
the sixteenth latitude; and between the twenty-fourth 
titudes, apart from the massive bloc of Telugu in the 
rst and that of Kannada in the west, there are large 
ike Gondi, Kui, and Oraon which have been broken 
^.eAt deal by the mlAtJiioa-of the Aryan dialects. 

~>ut there is evidence, both indirect and meet, that in Central India, 
in North India, and in Western India, and possibly>lsoo' lnTLastern'A^iua, 
Dravidian was at one time fairly widespread. In Baluchistan we have 
the bloc of th'e Brahui speech, which is Dravidian; and it is quite conceiv¬ 
able that the Brahui area is just a surviving fragment of a very wide¬ 
spread Dravidian tract which extended from Baluchistan and Sind through 
Rajputana and Malwa into the present-day Maratb.fi country and the 
Dravidian lands of the south, and which also extended north and north¬ 
east in the Punjab and the Ganges'valley, and possibly also north-west 
through Afghanistan into Iran. 

Survival of Dravidian vocables in the place-names of Northern India, 
interpretation of the references to non-Aryan peoples or tribes in Vedic 
and other ancient Indian literature, the presence of a strong Dravidian 
element in the Aryan language from the Vedic downwards, the gradual 
"Dravidization” in spirit of the Aryan language leading to a very large 
approximation of the Modern or New Indo-Aryan languages to the 
speech-habits of Dravidian, the Dravidian character of a good deal of 
the extra-Indo-European elements in Hindu religion, ritual and thought, 
mythology and legendary history, and the discovery of a Mediterranean 
type in the people of the Upper Ganges Valley—-all these are strong 
evidences in favour of an assumption that Dravidian speakers were 
largely to be found in the Punjab and the Upper Ganges Valley also; 
and toponomy and cultural survivals would point to an extension of the 
Dravidian speakers further eastward into Bengal, although here the 
long-headed Austrics and a brachycephalic people seem to have largely 
intermingled. In the North India plains, more than anywhere else, the 
Dravidian and Austric peoples appear to have been living side by side: 
probably there was at first a Dravidian element ruling over the Austric, 
and this was leading to a cultural and racial fusion. 

155 



MINISr* 




THE VEDIC AGE 

h/e want of a solid bloc of Dravidian speakers or of Austric spe 
the Punjab and Upper Ganges Valley—the fact of the land being 
inhabited by peoples of these two different language-cultures gave to 
the Aryan speech with its own culture-world its greatest opportunity, 
so that within a few hundred years after the Aryan language had been 
established in the Punjab, it could spread as far as eastern Bihar, oustir 
the earlier pre-Aryan speeches, and gaining greater momentum as 
area extended east and south. 

We are not absolutely certain that the city-builders of Harare 
Mohenjo-daro in South Punjab and Sind, whom the Aj 
encountered, spoke Dravidian, but there is a balance of 
they did. This mattei*cannot be proved or disproved > 
clue to the script in the hundreds of seals found at Hara 
daro and other sites. The Rev. H. Heras, S.J., has 
Tamil in these seals from the South- U'A^rb and Sind; Dm 
improbable that in epirapns from a culture-age going back to, 

3 i»oo ^Tor, o&huld be found a language which is not much older 

than a.d. 500. For although the oldest of the Chen-tamizh or Old Tamil 
works in their original form may go back to the centuries round about 
the time of Christ, the language which is found in them is considerably 
later. Moreover, we have to take note of the fact that Old Tamil in its 
phonetics represents a very much decayed form of the primitive Dravidian 
speech, which—or something like which—can alone be expected to have 
been in use in the third millennium b.c., the approximate date for the 
Mohenjo-daro culture. For example, the word Tamil itself: tamiz, it has 
been very conclusively established, was pronounced *damiz in the early 
centuries of the Christian era, and earlier, in the first half of the first 
millennium b.c. it was in all likelihood *dramiza, which was adopted into 
Sanskrit as Dramila, Dramida, Dravida before the Christian era. All other 
attempts to read right away, with the help of Sanskrit for instance, the 
South Punjab and Sind seals need not be taken into serious consideration. 

The Aryan invaders or immigrants found in India two groups of peoples, 
one of which they named the Ddsas and Dasyus, and the other Nishddas. 
The Dasa-Dasyu people evidently had ramifications or extensions in 
Iran as well: we have in the soink-east: of the Caspian the Dahai people 
noted by the Greeks, and Daha is but the Iranian modification of Ddsa; 
and in Iranian the word dahyu (whence Modern Persian dih) was in use, 
meaning “country” or “the countryside,” which would only appear to 
have been originally a tribal name, the Iranian equivalent of the Indo- 
Aryan dasyu, generalized to mean the “country” only. In India the 
words ddsa and dasyu changed their meaning—as names of the enemies 
of the Aryans offering them resistance, who were frequently enough 
conquered and enslaved, and these words came respectively to mean 
"slave” and “robber.” The two names appear originally to be related, 

156 



RACE MOVEMENTS AND PREHISTORIC CULTURE 

|Mng from a root or base dels or das: the words may after all b 
or Indo-European in origin—cf. Sanskrit ddsati "follows up”, and 
dy equivalents of this Indo-Aryan root occur in other Indo-European 
guages.Weshouldnote similar semantic changes in Europe; how the Slav 
ional appellation Slavu (meaning “glorious, noble”) came to be trans- 
med into the word slave (as in English), and how the Celtic tribal name 
:ae became *Walx- or *Walh- in Germanic, and then came to signify 
foreign people,” and gave rise to names like Wales, WaUachia, 
''land (= "Italy,” in German) and names of peoples like Welsh 
Ddsa-Dasyu (= Daha-Dahyu) people would appear to 
;i at least Eastern Iran through Afghanistan to Northe¬ 
astern India—Punjab (and probably the Western or 
lley) and Sind—when the Aryans came into India, 
ism from the Rigveda that the Aryans were conscious 
,iew country whuu v came to India. This was certainly^ 
.o cue fact that they did not hncl any appreciable difference in the 
non-Aryan people they encountered in India from the non-Aryan people 
they knew in Eastern Iran. It is also equally likely that racial and cultural 
fusion (including linguistic influencing) had commenced between the 
Aryan and the Dasa-Dasyu peoples 166 outside the soil cf India itself—in 
Iran, in all likelihood. The Vedic speech 16 * already shows a number of 
words which are non-Aryan words with Dravidian affinities, and shows 
at least in its phonetics a profound modification on the lines of Dravidian 
by adopting or developing the cerebral sounds (t d n l sh ) which are so 
distinctive of Dravidian. 

When the hypothesis of an Aryan invasion and occupation of India 
was first proposed some four generations ago, it was believed that the 
white-skinned, blue-eyed, and golden-haired Aryans, like their kinsmen 
of Northern Europe, entered India from the plateau of Central Asia, 
which was then a land of romantic mystery, came to this land of the 
black-skinned non-Aryans, made an easy and matter-of-course conquest 
of them, and imposed upon an inferior race or races their superior religion, 
culture, and language. It was believed that all the better elements in 
Hindu religion and culture—its deeper philosophy, its finer literature, 
its more reasonable organization, everything in fact which was great 
and good and noble in it—came from the Aryans as a superior white 
race; and whatever was dark and lowly and superstitious in Hindu 
religion and civilization represented only an expression of the suppressed 
non-Aryan mentality. This view is now being gradually abandoned. 
It has been generally admitted, particularly after a study of both the 
bases of Dravidian and Aryan culture through language and through 
institutions, that the Dravidians contributed a great many elements 
of paramount importance in the evolution of Hindu civilization, which 
is after all (like all other great civilizations) a composite, creation, and 

157 


4 


wmsTfy 


0 



THE VEDIC AGE 


Sl 


/mat in certain matters the Dravidian and Austric contributionO-L. 
deeper and more extensive than that of the Aryans. The pre-Aryans 
Mohenjo-daro and. Harappa were certainly in possession of a high 
mater ial culture than what the semi-nomadic Aryans could show. 

The assumption that the Mohenjo-daro and Harappa people spoke 
primitive Dravidian speech accords best with the subsequent trend 
Indian history and civilization. From various aspects, a Mediterrar 
origin of the Dravidian people, its religion and civilization, appec 
find good support. Reference may be made in this connexion to t» 
culture of Harappa and the ancient cities of Sind desert 
chapter. On the positive side, the cult of Siva and t' 

Yoga-appear to have been characteristic of the religious 
of Sind and South Punjab. The Aryans knew of a Sk’ 

Pita —and of an Faith Mot her —Prithvi Mata —but t’_ 
vague nature deities, who merely I J<U‘" the falling of tta. 
sky to help earth to produce com and fruits. The Kols (e.g. the ^ 
had similarly a Sun god {Sin Bonga) and a Moon goddess (Kf-inda Chando) 
who were the great Father and Mother deities in the Kol pantheon. But 
the Dravidian,$ had a.conception of the forces of Life and of the Universe 
in the forms of a Great Mother Goddess and her male counterpart a 
Father God, and this conception, which was more profound, more mystic, 
more all-embracing and more deeply philosophical as well as more poetic 
than the simple Aryan idea of a material Sky Father and an equally 
material Earth Mother, the Dravidians appear to have brought to India 
from their original homeland in the islands of the Aegean and the tracts 
of mainland along the iEgean Sea—Greece and Asia Minor. Ma or Kubele 
(Cybele) and Atthis, or Hepit and Teshup, the great Asianic Mother 
Goddess and bather God, the former having as her symbol or vehicle 
the hon, the latter the bull, form undoubtedly one of the bases on which 
the oiva-Uma cult of Hindu India grew up. 

From linguistics, it can be reasonably assumed that the oldest form 
of the word Tamil or Dravida (which we can trace) was probably *Dramila 
or * Dr ami za, We find that the Lycians of Asia Minor, a pre-Inclo~European 
Mediterranean people, called themselves in their inscriptions (written in 
then own speech in a script allied to the ancient Greek) Trnimili. 
Herodotus has noted that the Lycians originally came from the island of 
Crete, and that in Crete the pre-Hellenic Asianic people were known by 
a name which the Greeks wrote as Termilai . It would not perhaps be too 
much to assume that some at least of the Dravidian speakers of India 
who came ultimately from the Eastern Mediterranean tracts brought 
with them one of their national or tribal appellations 'Termilai — 

1 . rinmili Dramiza, which became transformed into the modern name 
Tamil by the middle of the first millennium a.d. In South Sind, the 
Greeks noted a people called Arabitai: they might very well have been 


158 



Ace movements and prehistoric culture 


speakers in the fourth century B.c., and the name suggests 
one which the Telugus apply to the Tamilians —A ravalu:^ < and Arava 
explained scholastically as the Sanskrit word ci-rava speechless, 
celess,'' suggesting the unintelligibility of lamil as a language for the 
ugus. Be that as it may, the culture-world presented by Dravidian 
-mil) linguistic palaeontology gives a fairly high background of civiliza- 
, which can be compared with what has been unearthed at Mohenjo- 
mcl other places, and with such indirect references to non-Aryan 
Art\ ' * ilization and non-Aryan milieu as can be found in the 
In 1856, Bishop Caldwell gave the following sketch of 
vilization of the Dravidians from the evidence of the 
ig the early Tamilians *7 (I give the Tamil words within 
nglish words): The Tamils or Dravidians “had kings 
an \ who dwelt in 'strong houses' (koffai, araf : and ruled 
districts of country’ (»%*)• They had 'mins* ’ (pttlavan) 
;.o recited ‘songs’ (cheyyul) at ‘festivals’ (kwWam, t avi?a ); and they 
seem to have had alphabetical characters (ezuu'A written (varai) with a 
style (iraku) on palmyra leaves (olai), and a bundle of leaves was called a 
‘book’ (etu) ; they acknowledged the existence of God, whom they styled 
Kd or king—a- realistic title little known to orthodox Hinduism. They 
created to his honour a ‘temple' which they called Ko-il, God s house 
(koyil kdvil). They had 'laws’ and ‘customs’ (kaltala.%, pazakkam) , but 
no lawyers or judges. Marriage existed among them. They were acquainted 
with the ordinary metals, with the exception of ‘tin,’ ‘lead and zinc, 
with the planets which were ordinarily known to the ancients (e.g. vellt - 
‘Venus,’ chevvay = ‘Mars,’ viyazam = ‘Jupiter’) with the exception o 
‘Mercury’ and ‘Saturn.’ They had ‘medicines’ (manmtu), ‘hamlets {fialli) 
and ‘towns’ (ur, fettai), ‘canoes,’ ‘boats,’ and even ‘ships’ (small decked 
coasting vessels— tonl, otam, valiant; kappal, patavu), no acquaintance 
with any people beyond the sea, except in Ceylon, which was then, perhaps, 
accessible on foot at low water; and no word expressive of the geographical 
idea of ‘island’ or ‘continent.’ They were well acquainted with agriculture 
(cy— ‘plough,’ velan-mai ‘agriculture’), and delighted m war. 1 hey 
were armed with ‘bows’ {vil) and ‘arrows’ (ampu), with ‘spears’, (vel) and 
‘swords’ (veil). All the ordinary or necessary arts of life, including spinning 
(mil), 'weaving' (ney) , and 'dyeing' [nitam) existed among t lem. uy 
excelled in ‘pottery,’ as their places of sepulture show.’ The late I rofessor 
P. T. Srinivasa Aiyangar (Iyengar) compiled a remarkable work, 1 in 
which, on the basis of native Dravidian words m Old 1 amil, he has given 
us a most detailed survey of the type of culture m all its ramifications 
which obtained among the Primitive Tamil, or Dravidian people before 
they began to come under the influence of the Aryan speech and culture. 

Hindu tradition is vaguely conscious of Hindu religious ideas and 
philosophy, practices and ritual falling under two great categories— 


<SL 


159 



THE VEDIC AGE 

Nigama stands for the Vedic, i.e. the pure 
world of ideas, centring round what has been Ccilled the Vedic ban 
kanda, the practical religion of Vedic inspiration in which thei homa 
fire-sacrifice to the gods of the Vedic world forms the most notewor 
thing, Agama indicates what may be described as the Tantric and Pura 
domain of religion and ritual, and it includes yoga as a special for# 
mystico-religious ideology and practice. Pure Nigama religion is * 
we see in the great Vedic sacrifices which are still performed iron 
to time. Agamic religion and ritual is largely influenced 1 
or Vedic, but it forms a world apart. 

In ordinary Hindu usage, there is a good deal of con 
the fwo. Take, for example, the distinctive Plindu ,r ; 
by which we mean the worship of an image or a syr 
by treatings^ atter, after it has been consecrated, a s a Xk 
and bringhT .-fore it, as before a living being, cooked food, . 
ornaments, and v ther offerings which are usable by a man, and showm o 
grateful worship by offering to it flowers, the produce of the earth, and 
incense, and by waving lights in front of it and playing and singing- 
before it. This is something which is quite different from the Vedic rite 
of the homa , in which a wood fire is lighted on an altar and certain offerings 
of food in the shape of meat and fat, butter and milk, cakes of barley, and 
soma or spirituous drink, are offered to the gods, who are not at all 
symbolized by an image, but are supposed to dwell in the sky and to 
receive these offerings through the fire. 

The characteristic offerings in the pujd rite, viz. flowers, leaves, fruits, 
water, etc., are not known to the homa rite, except in instances where it 
has been influenced by the pujd . It has been suggested with good reason 
that pujd is the pre-Aryan, in all likelihood the Dravidian, form of 
worship, while the homa is the Aryan: and throughout the entire early 
Vedic literature, the pujd ritual with flowers etc. offered to an image or 
symbol is unknown. The word pujd , from a root puj , appears, like the 
thing it connotes, to be of Dravidian origin also. This word or root is not 
found in any Aryan or Indo-European language outside India. Professor 
Mark Collins suggested^ that the Sanskrit word 'pujd (from which the 
root puj was deduced later) was nothing but a Dravidian pu ''flower 0 
plus root *ge "to do" (palatalized to je), which is found in Tamil as chey, 
in Kannada as ge and in Telugu as die: pujd < *pu-ge, *pii~je, *pii-che 
was thus a "flower ritual," a "flower service," a pushpa-karma , just as 
homa was described as pasu-karma or religious service entailing the 
slaughter of an animal. Jarl Charpentier of Sweden derived pujd from a 
Dravidian root pusu meaning "to smear," as the smearing of sandal- ( 

paste or blood forms an important item in the pujd ritual. But the use 
of blood, to be smeared over a piece of stone representing a god or spirit— 
the blood of a sacrificed animal being later replaced by red paint like 

160 




nwsrff 



ACE MOVEMENTS AND PREHISTORIC CULTURE 


tiilion—would appear more to be an Austric or Proto-Australoic 
than Dravidian. 

n any case, the pre-Aryan, and in all likelihood Dravidian, origin of 
; most noteworthy ritual of a finished Hindu religion, would appear 
be quite reasonable to assume. In the present-day texture of Hindu 
/'j'.ure and religion the warp appears to be Dravidian and the weft 
- j: u a. Pujd with flowers, leaves, and water was, so far as the first Aryans 
•, . ' ime to India were concerned, an alien rite, a local native usage, 
<T)° ?f- apy^ved, much less adopted, by the Brahmanas and others 

V,|\ 1C ;iixied tc be true Aryans. But “Greece captured her captor . 

. K .live or local cults and creeds did not die—on the other hand the 
° Fjjioma largey became moribund, being kept up artificially imong 
braced groups of Brahmanas and Kshatriyas, and the pujd came to 
. 'me its preset^important place in the religious life of the mixed Hindu 
yvr.iiple whisl resulted from the fusion of the Aryan and the non-Aryan. 
wll \e first conscious attempt to give the imprimatur to pujd as a rite, 
which is to be taken sympathetically, we find in that great work of syn¬ 
thesis in Hindu thought and life, the Bhagavad-Gitd of the Mahabharata, 
which would appear to have been compiled round about the age of Christ; 
although through certain surreptitious rites like kaka-bali or offerings 
to crows and other birds, something analogous to the pujd was being 
given a place in the Grihya or domestic rites of the blue-blooded Aryan 
householders. The Gita passage (IX. 26) runs thus: 


§L 


patram pushpam phalam toy am yo me bhaktyd prayachchhati, 
tad — aham bhakty-upahritam — asndmi prayatdtmanah: 


“If. anyone offers me with devotion a leaf, a flower, a fruit, and water, 
I receive that, offered in devotion by the person whose soul is discip¬ 
lined.” 


The context makes it clear that here we have an apology for non- 
Vedic worship vis-d-vis the Vedic fire-sacrifice: this verse, in fact, 
forms the great charter for the pujd ritual within the milieu of Vedic 
Brahmanism. 

The acceptance of pre-Aryan (Dravidian). ritual meant also the 
acceptance of the conception of the divinity and of the mythological 
figures of the gods and goddesses which were current among them. In 
mediaeval and modern Hinduism, certain divinities stand paramount 
like 5 -iiva and Uma, Vishnu (specially in his incarnations of Rama and 
Krishna) and Sri, together with some other gods and goddesses of a 
secondary character who claim the homage of the people like Hanumant, 
Ganesa and Sitala. The popular gods of the* Vedic Aryans—Indra, Agni, 
Varuna, Soma, Surya, Ushas, Pushan, Parjanya and the rest—gradually 
recede into the background, and a group of more puissant and more personal 

161 L 


THE VEDIC AGE 



Sl 


,g0as, more profound and cosmic and more philosophical in thei: 
ception, the Puranic gods of Hinduism headed by Siva-Urna and 
Vishnu, become established. As it has been said before, &iva and t 
are in all likelihood fundamentally of Dravidian origin, and as si 
they are the Indian modification—and philosophic sublimation—of 
great Mother-Goddess and her consort of the Mediterranean peojQ 
The name Siva has been explained as being at least partly of Dravi^t 
origin: in Tamil, for instance, Sivan (Chivan ) means red, and the di^- me 
was known to the early Aryans as NUa-lohila ‘The Red One ^Ygamic 
(throat)'* (referring to the legend found in the Purarr-S of la bC 
and unquestionably mentioned in Rigveda, (X. 136, vr), of Sm tw(sen 
drunk up the world poison and preserved it in his thr^t which l , - • - 
marked with blue for this). Sambhu , another comm o'! name or e^^ ' 
of Siva, has been compared with the Tamil chcmf/u W iembu mea 
“copper," i.e, “the red metal." Siva and the Vedic Rudik have 
identified: it is just likely that the name of the Red God of the Dratiii.^ 
speakers, the most important divinity in their pantheon, was first ren¬ 
dered’ into the Aryan speech as *Rudhra, and then this name was easily 
identified with an already existing Aryan Storm God, the father of the 
Maruts or the Storm Winds, whose name Rudra in Aryan meant quite 
a different thing-—“the Roarer" (from root rud ) 20 The name Umd recalls 
Md , the Great Mother of the Asianic and East Mediterranean peoples: 
and Durgd , as one of the commom epithets of the Mother Goddess Uma, 
we can compare with Trqqas , a deity mentioned in the Lycian inscriptions 
of Asia Minor. 21 Vishnu is partly Aryan, a form of the Sun-God, and 
partly at least the deity is of Dravidian affinity, as a sky-god whose 
colour was of the blue sky (cf. Tamil, vin “sky" and the Middle Indo- 
Aryan or Prakrit form of Vishnu, which was vinhu, venhu ) 22 Sri is, 
to start with, an Aryan divinity, the Indian counterpart of the Goddess 
connected with the harvest or corn and with wealth, beauty, and well¬ 
being, whom we find in the Italic world as Ceres among the Latins. 
But in her association with Vishnu, as Gaja-lakshmi for instance, she 
is indigenous and pre-Aryan . 2 3 Krishna (in Prakrit Kapha , in Tamil 
Kannan) is a demon opposed to Indra in the Rigveda; according to 
P. T. Srinivasa Aiyangar, he represents, partially at least, a Dravidian 
God of Youth, who has later been identified with Vishnu as an incarnation 
of his. 

Another Dravidian God of Youth and youthful powers, of bravery and 
war, was Murukan , who in the composite Puranic mythology became 
Kumar a or Skanda , the son of Siva. *4 Ganeia , the. elephant-headed 
demon who was to be appeased at the outset of any function to avert 
supernatural hindrances, remained such a demon with the Mahayana 
Buddhists, but with the Brahmanical Hindus he was transformed into 
the benign god who removes obstacles and who typifies wisdom. The 

162 



RACE MOVEMENTS AND PREHISTORIC CULTURE 


naracter of the god as having an elephant-head shows his native 
"in, i.e. pre-Aryan origin, 
ae phallic symbol of Siva, the linga, appears to be, both in its form 
name, of Austric or Proto-Australoicl origin. We should remember 
t the mysterious upright conical stones set up on the ground (like the 
mnhirs in the Celtic areas in Europe) were very much in evidence as 
cui objects among the Mon-Khmers and the Kols, and these bore a 
resenolance to the digging stick used among them as a primitive plough; 
and Joji Przvluski has shown, as it has been noted before, how the 
words IPga, lakuta, laguda, languid are of Austric origin. But the figure 
of Siva as the great Yogin, seated in yogic meditation, as Virupaksha 
or “the terrible One,” as Pasupati or "the Lord of Animals, or Souls,” 
as Urdhva-lmga or "the One with the erect creative force,”—in fact, all the 
deeper and more philosophical traits in the conception of Siva appear 
to i .ve been- known among the Mohenjo-daro people, as shown by the 
ve y important seal with the figure of a divinity who can only be identified 
with Siva of later times. 2 5 And assuming that the Mohenjo-daro and 
Harappa people were Dravidian speakers, this would be only arlother 
corroboration of the Siva idea and the Siva legends being of Dravidian 
origin: only this symbol, of the Linga in the gaun-patta or yoni being 
derived to some extent from the Austric menhirs, which survived till 
recently in the Munda sasan-diris or family burial stones. 

Zoomorphic divinities, or the lower animals as typifying the forces 
of nature and supplying symbols or figures for the supernatural or the 
godhead, appear to have been known to the Aryans only to a limited 
extent. Thus Indra and other powerful gods have been compared with 
bulls or rams, and Agni with the horse, and there is also the divine horse 
named Dadhikravan in the Veda. But the extent to which zoomorphic 
deities came into prominence in Puranic Hinduism is. something note¬ 
worthy, rivalling the ancient Egyptian pantheon in this respect. The 
submerged totemism of the Proto-Australoids possibly was the oldest 
and most powerful source of influence for this, and the worship of the 
Nagas or serpentine deities and water spirits would appear to have come 
from the Proto-Australoids. Garuda as the vehicle bird of Vishnu is 
partly a divine eagle— Suparna—oi the Aryans and partly of Dravidian 
or Mediterranean origin; the name would appear to be Dravidian (cf. 
Tamil kazu "kite, eagle”). The sacredness of the ox and the cow may 
have some Aryan elements in it, but the honour paid to the cow among 
the Iranian Aryans might be, at its basis, of Dasa-Dasyu origin, as much 
as in India. 

The great zoomorphic deity of India is of course Hanumant, the so- 
called Monkey-God. His greatness has no ddubt been added to in later 
times by the Bhakti school of mediaeval Hinduism, which saw in him 
an ideal devotee of Rama, God incarnate as the hero of the Rdmdyana 

163 





THE VEDIC AGE 




jend. But in popular belief throughout the greater part of In 
'’^Bengal alone his worship is not so intensely popular), he is some 
more than a simple Bhakta or devotee. He is a fertility deity, who g 
children to barren women; and he is the helper at need and rerm 
of obstacles. It seems, as F. E. Pargiter's significant research 26 into' . 
name of Hanumant warrants us in assuming, that there was a grat 
Monkey-God who obtained the worship of the pre-Aryan peoples (naiely 
Dravidians) of India, and whose name was in the Dravidian speed just, 
“the Male Monkey" (in Tamil, Ay-manti). The Aryan speakes" came 
to know this god, arid his name was at first translated into tin Aryans’ 
language as Vrishd-kapi. His worship was slowly entering by tie back¬ 
door among the Aryan speakers through contact with the Dravidians, 
and this was resented by a certain element among the Aryan people * but 
others were acquiescing in the introduction of thjs “native" cult. An 
echo of this ideological conflict we find in the Vrishd-kapi v ^ymn c the 
Rigveda (X. 86). But Vrishd~kapi became admitted into the newly luTi ed 
Aryan-non-Aryan pantheon, and his original Dravidian name An-manti, 
as in Tamil, was then Sanskritized into Hanumant , and under this name 
he is still a powerful deity in popular Hinduism, the sublimation of his 
character by BhakU adding but fresh lustre to his pristine popularity 
as a strong helper in need and remover of distress, the rough and ready 
god of a primitive people. 

The extent to which the Aryan religion has been modified by Austric 
and Dra vidian contacts is sufficient indication of the profound influences 
exerted by the latter in the evolution of the Hindu religion, There has 
been a widespread racial mixtiue, as anthropology has indicated. In 
culture, speaking in the Indian way, one may say that over twelve annas 
in the rupee is of non-Aryan origin. The bases of Indian economy—food 
(rice or wheat or millet with pulses or lentils as relish, milk products 
like ghee and curds, vegetables, occasionally a little goat or mutton, 
and fish and oil of various sorts where milk is not. common, as opposed 
to the Aryan meal of barley cakes and meat and butter), dress (unsewn 
cotton cloth worn in three pieces as dhoti or sari i.e. loincloth, dupatfa or 
shawl, and head-cloth or turban, in place of the woollen garments of the 
Aryans), and dwelling, are pre-Aryan; our way of thinking is un-Aryan-— 
the syntax of the later Indo-Aryan dialects agrees more with that of the 
Dravidian languages than with that of Vedic and of the extra-Indian 
Indo-European languages; our counting and computation is largely on 
the basis of eight, which is Dravidian (Mark Collins has explained om- 
pattu the Tamil word for “nine" as being really the Aryan una “one 
less" plus Tamil pattu “ten," and the Telugu tommidi as really meaning 
“broken ten" thus suggesting that, eight was the common number in 
computation), combined to some extent with counting by tens, which is 
Aryan, and to a slight extent on the basis of twenty as the highest number, 

164 


M WtSTfy 



MOVEMENTS AND PREHISTORIC CULTURE 


, ,^ 4 ustric (as Jean Przyluski has shown), Many of our social 
Anns and conventions (e.g., certain usages regarding prohibited 
in marriage, and customs like a wife being on familiar terms 
ir husband’s younger brother but regarding his elder brother as 
rer) and a good many of our wedding and other customs (e.g. t it 
,, known as stn-cicham with its attendant paraphernalia of the 
produce of the earth arranged in a winnowing fan, the use ot 
ic and vermilion in the wedding ritual, the employment of the 
* and betel-leaf in many of our ceremonies) are of non-Ary an 
a a fairly extensive element from the Austric and the 
ages in our Indo-Aryan speech: the number—at least 
stric, and some four hundred and fifty for Dravidian as 
■ his Kannada Dictionary —seems to be on the way to 
ur knowledge of this matter is deepening and widening, 
xietics, indo-Aryan, Austric and Dravidian have converged 
„ ur less to a common Indian sound-system. Despite a number ol 
noteworthy differences due to original diversity of race and speech and 
to climatic and economic. conditions, the bases of Indian pre-Aryan 
(Austric and Dravidian) life and culture, modified by the language and 
ideology of the Aryans, and later by the ideology of Islam, still remain, 
and they form- a specifically Indian background for a civilization and 
an outlook that may be described as pan-Indian. 

The discovery of Mycenaean artifacts in Greece has proved the truth 
of what the great explorer of Aigean culture, Sir Arthur Evans, had 
suspected, that a good deal of the heroic legends of Greece as well as of 
the legends of their gods and goddesses was of pre-Hellenic, i.e. pre- 
Indo-European, Aegean or Mediterranean origin, and these were simply 
Hellenized by being rendered into the Indo-European language of the 
Greeks as soon as this language became established on its new territory. 
The stories of the Iliad and the Odyssey and of CEdipus and other heroes 
were according to this view of Aigean origin, and this has been corrobora¬ 
ted, in spirit at least, for some other connected legends. A similar thing 
appears to have taken place in India. Myths and legends of Gods arid 
Heroes current among the Austrics and Dravidians, long antedating 
the period of Aryan advent in India (c. 1500 b.c.), appear to have survived 
the Aryan impact and to have been rendered into the Aryan language 
in late and garbled, or “improved,” versions, accommodating themselves 
to the Aryan God- and Hero-worlds; and it is these myths and legends 
of gods, kings, and sages which we largely find in the Puranas. The Rama 
legend looks like a blend of three distinct stories without any historicity 
put together at different times (the Ayodhya intrigue and the banishment 
of Rama, the abduction of Sita and her recovery by Rama, and the 
episode of the monkey princes), and seems to have grown up in Eastern 
' India, with an Austric background; but later it was re-edited as a 

165 


<SL 



THE VEDIC AGE 


rational 


JL 


poem within the gorgeous framework of the compost 
highly complex Hindu civilization of 2,000 years ago. The Mahal: 
story, on the other hand, which developed in the Midland (prese 
Western United Provinces and Eastern Punjab), would appear to e 
a good deal of the legends, traditions, and history of the Aryans 
as of the mixed Aryan-non-Aryan peoples, and was created cons 
as the national poem of a new Hindu nation of mixed origin 
into one people under Brahmana guidance. Viewed in this ligr 
pre-Vedic antiquity of a number of heroic tales and legenckand ch 
“histories’' as being really pre-Aryan, possibly Dravidian, 
understood, as cases of rendering in the Aryans’ langur 
material. 

On the ideological plane, the synthesis of the Ary; 1 
mentalities and attitudes towards life has given rise c 
as unconsciously to a common set of ideals which are active; 
or are subscribed to, by the greater part of Indian humanity, aha t,_. 
ideals are along the 'following lines: a sense of the unity of all life through 
its being an expression of an Unseen Reality, which is both immanent 
and transcendent; a desire for synthesis, to combine apparently dis¬ 
connected or discordant fragments in life as well as experience in their 
proper place in an essential unity; a rigid and intransigent adherence 
to the intellect while seeking to harmonize it in the higher plane with 
the emotions and with the mystic sense; a recognition of the sorrows of 
life, leading to a sincere attempt to*go to the root causes of these with 
a view to remove them from the life of the individual, the community, 
and the whole of humanity; a desire to attain to the Unseen Reality as 
the solution of all evil and suffering through the ways of knowledge, of 
mystic realization by discipline, faith, and devotion, and of disinterested 
service; a sense of the sacredness of all life which is sought to be maintained 
by passive non-injury ( ahimsa), by intellectual pity ( karuna ), and by 
practical charity and well-doing ( maitn ); and an acceptance of all spiritual 
experiences as true and as. inevitable, and a tolerance for all of these so 
long as they do not interfere with the rights of others. A broad toleration 
which is the result of a wide understanding, and the doctrine of “live and 
let live’’—these characterized, or formed the bedrock of the civilization 
of India; and this attitude was the result of this civilization being in its 
origin a complex harmony of composites, where there has not been any 
consciously active or successful struggle to maintain the racial, linguistic 
and cultural superiority of one of the component elements over the others. 

The speakers of the Austric, Dravidian and Indo-European Aryan 
tongues, racially Proto Australoids, Mediterraneans, Nordics, Alpines, 
and Dinarics, made up the Indian people and built up the civilization of 
India. After this civilization had taken its definite colour and its special 
orientation, by the middle of the first millennium b.c. another new 

166 


m&STffy 



ACE 


MOVEMENTS AND PREHISTORIC CULIURE 


and culture-language element came into India—the Mongoloid Smo- 
an speakers—the Kiratas; but they touched only the fringe of India 
e north and the north-east, and their influence was but local, and not 
much significance. According to a Tibetan tradition 'ery *- )U 11 

lue, the Tibetans first settled in Tibet during the time of the Buddha. But 
was over a thousand years after that, in the seventh century a. d , that 
came in active contact with India—ah India which was already 
dvanced in her composite. Aryan-non-Aryan culture. J he various 
"hetan bribes were in a very primitive and backward condition, 
»t have much to give to the Indians, of AustrioDravKLian- 
nd origin. There is a Mongoloid stratum in the Himalayas 
immediately to the south, in Assam, in North and East 
• evolution of Aryan languages like Gorkhali or Nepali, 

. .>ii - ? ese, some Sino-Tibetan (Tibeto-Burman) influence 
aggested. The 6Kno-Tibetan peoples, at least those among them 
xO could benefit by their conn^ with. Indian culture, thoroughly 
imbibed it and, like the Newars of Nepar — u ev became fully Indianized. 
It is only where they are remote frqpi the Aryan-s'pxo a king Indians that 
they are able to maintain their separate identity a m-ap,. but their 
absorption into an Aryan-speaking Indian body-politic is 
whether in Nepal or in Bengal or in Assam. But in the process of their 
becoming completely Indianized, they are sure to make at least some 
temperamental contribution to the Indian populations of the north and 
the north-east, if not much in the way of the material or spiritual; and 
it is for the future to disclose what line this Kirata, this Indo-Mongoloi 
or Mongoloid contribution to Indian mentality and culture will take.’? 


<SL 


6 . 


i.. The Census of India, 1 901. 

2 Indo-Aryan Races, I, Rajshahi, 19x6. 

S 'tte &SSS.K to n. emm jf.M* Vto. 1. 

4 Part III (1935); An outline of the Racial Ethnology of India, Calcutta, I 937 - 
, Racial Elements in the. Population, No. ** of “Oxford Pamphlets on Indian 
Affairs," Oxford University Press, Bombay, 1944 - 
For a detailed discussion on these points, cf. Oh. A. 

Racial Elements in the Population, p. 26, 

The Census of India> 1930 Report, Part I, p. 443 * 

CIMatfrHari by Renward Brandstetter, Lucerne, 1908. Brandstetter’s linguistic 
papers on Indonesian are available in English translation by C. O. Blagden 

it So'me^Ahetaportant papers in this connection have been translated from 
French into English by Dr. P. C. Bagchi with add tional notes and papers in his 
Pre-Aryan and Pre-tiravidian in India (Calcutta University, ]? 29 \f Tr •, 

12 s. K. Chat ter ji, “Two New Indo-Aryan Etymologies m the ZII, Band 9, 

^Pri-Aryal and Pre*Dravidian in India-, J . Przyluski, “Hippokoura 
et Satakarni" (IRAS, 1929, pp. 274-9; English translation in JAHRS, 
Vol. IV. Part I, 1930); S. K. C hatter ji, "Non-Aryan Elements in Indo-Arvan 

(JGIS, HI. 42)! 

167 


9 

10 


*3 




THE VEDIC ACiE 


(st 

: / a /k3X_J 


16a 


16b 
16c. 


1.7. 

18. 

19. 

20 . 


21 . 


. 22 , 

2 3 ' 
24. 


P. Mitra, "A Vedic Night of the Moon in Polynesia,” Calcutta Oriental 
Vol. I, July, 1934. ^ * 

W. G. Archer, 7 he Blue Crave, the Poetry oj the Oraons (London, 1940), 

A resume of Hevesy’s views has been given by Dr. Biren Bonneriee in 1C 
pp. 621-32. • 

. j. Przyluski, “Eraprunts anaiyens en Indo-aryen,” Z.e Monde Oriental , Vol 

(1934). 140 if- 

'• For Dasa-Dasyu, of. also Ch. XIII. 

Fhe Vedic speech, would seem to have been written down in a sort of J> 
Brahmi as an adaptation of the pre-Aryan Harappa and Mohenjo darp 
for the Aryan language in the tenth century b.c., when “Vyasa,” contem 
ot the Mahabharata battle, could compile the Veda books f ■crr\ t:l- - 
mass of oral religious literature current among the Aryans—an< 
to a tradition preserved by Al-Biruni, rediscovered for the Hir 
(Fgr different views about the date of the Mahabharata bat 
Comparative Grammar of the Dravidian Languages , third ed 
Pre-Aryan Tamil Culture, Madras, 1.930. 

Dravidic Studies, NgjyU (University of Madras), pp, 59 
P. T. Srinivasa Aiyangar (Iyengar), Life in Anr**” J 1 ndia 
Mantras (Madras, 1912), p. 125; Dravidic $*>’**•**, No. Ill, pp. 61-^ 

S. K. Chatterji, "Dravidian Origins and the Beginnings of Indian Civilizaw 
(MR, Dec. 1924, p. 679). 


P. : ,T. S, Aiyangar, g'P- Ci *-> P* I2 ^» 
Dravidic Studies >"Ad. Ill, p. 62, 


Dravidic Studif* - ■* a 

Cf. also Prr ~ Ar y<*n Tamil Culture. 


% 


Ci. O- ~ tX - 


2 7 , 


j-LAS, 1913, p. 400. 

v v T v r f taS /-? r Ind °-Mongoloids, see Kasten Ronaow in Le Monde Oriental 
Vol. XXX (1936), pp. 90-169. 


168 




misr/fy 



h THE INDUS VALLEY 
«>< CIVILIZATION 

far ii',: ' • , 

Sino- 1 .,,, 

and. they did ncy as 1922, early Indian history had little actual remains 
Aryan affinities ahe meagre palaeolithic and neolithic finds, described 
and in the tracts id the Piprahwa relic was the oldest object of which the 
Bengal; and in tbury b,g.) could be approximately determined. The 
Bengali and A.an history and culture as gleaned from Vedic literature 
has been ^’supposed to go beyond the second millennium before Christ. 
wJi the archaeological discoveries at Harapph, Mohenjo-daro and other 
localities (see map No. 2) in the Indus valley have pushed back this limit., 1 
at a single stretch, to 3000 B.C., if not to a still remoter period, and India 
can now lay claim to the honour of being a pioneer of civilization along 
with Sumer, Akkad, Babylon, Egypt, and Assyria. 

The fascinating story of the excavations at various places in the Indus 
valley has been told above (Ch. Ill) and we shall now try to reconstruct 
a picture of the culture and civilization that flourished in this region from 
the remains found principally at Harappa and Mohenjo-daro. 

1. THE TOWN 

A visitor to the ruins at Mohenjo-daro (the city of the dead) 1 is struck 
by the remarkable skill in town-plan ning a n d sani tation displayed by the 
ancients, and, as an English writer has observed, ‘‘feels himself surrounded 
by rui ns of some present-day working town in Lancashire.” The city was 
entered from the north and south by the First Street, which is amply wide 
for both wheeled traffic and pedestrians. East Street, which is the main 
thoroughfare through the ruins is wider than First Street, The junction 
of these two is nicknamed *‘Oxford Circus’ ‘ by archaeologists. 

The city .was the creation of careful forethought and planning, as is 
indicated by the striking regularity of the. divisions, the successfully 
aligned str eet s, the orientation of all principal streets to the points of the 
Compass, t he correspondence of the houses and public buildings with the 
orientation of thoroughfares, etc. Streets varied from qJE cet to 34 feet in 
width and ran straight sometimes as far as half a mile. They intersected 
at right angles dividing the city into square or rectangular blocks. Inside 
this square or oblong, the area is intersected by a number of narrow lanes 

169 




THE VEDJC AGE 



zyUprovrded with houses; Each lane has a public well, and most. of the r 
- have each a private well and a bath. Nowhere was a building ah 
encroach on a public highway as in Sumer. The angles of the sr 
by-Ways appear to have been rubbed by pack-animals, and the come 
some buildings were rounded off in order that loads might not be dislo 
i he city had an elaborate drainage system consisting of horizcmta 
vertical drains, street drains, soakpits, etc., which is described lat, < ot ° t 
The industrial and commercial quarters as well as the lowly ^ll^orar)' 
artisans and shopkeepers and the palatial mansions of thcV.-.*eh.« floating 
• be distinguished among the ruins. The general impress! Vyasa, according 
dcmoaatic bourgeois economy'.’ asTu. Crete. ' c£ xlv)* ’ 

The architecture of Mohenjo-daro, in general, is plation (1913). p- 03. 
rather solid than beautiful. There are no sumpt uous t 
npr monument al tom bs as on.i^eTSlile.' In contrastTo b, in the Age 0 j the 
absence of round columns, recessed "doofirays, and semi-circuit 
The true arch was unknown and the corbelled arch and square or rectaiVj/ 
lar columns were used instead. The aim in the Indus Valley was to make 
• life comfortable and luxurious rather than refined or artistic. 

Harappa is larger in extent than Mohenjo-daro, and had a longer span 
of life, but presents nearly the same features. Wells at Harappa are rare 
as compared to Mohenjo-daro. 1 * The most remarkable and largest building 
at Harappa is thg..jQjxatiixamry.,. measuring ,169 feet by fegt, which 
comprises fwo similar blocks with an aisle, 23 feet wide, between them, 
ach block has six halls, alternating regularly with five corridors, and 



sach hall is further partitioned into four narrow divisions. Another dis¬ 


covery at Harappa is the workmen’s, quarters,,, which comprise fourteen 
small houses built in two blocks separated by a long narrow lane. Each 
house is open on all sides, rectangular, and consists of a courtyard and 
two rooms. 

At the hill sites in the narrow corridor between the Indus and the 
Kirthar range, excavated by Mr. Majumdar, bricks were never used as at 
Mohenjo-daro, Harappa, and other sites. Hill-side houses were made of 
/ stone at, the base up to a height of two to three feet. Mud, reed, and wood 
were used in building superstructures. No fortifications were discovered 
at Mohenjo-daro and Harappa; on the outskirts of Ali Murad arid Kohtras 
were found fortified palaces made of stone, which was but rarely used in 
the plains, not being easily available there. At sites around Lake Manchar, 
people. Jived in pile dwellings. 

In building walls, pavements, bath-rooms, drains, wells, etc. burnt 
brick, possibly made from ordinary alluvial soil, was lavishly used. Sun- 
dried brick was used only for foundations, packing of terraces, etc. Bricks 
are ordinarily rectangular in shape, well made, and excellently preserved. 
Even at the lowest levels we find well-made bricks which would be a credit 
even to a modern brick-maker. Wedge-shaped bricks were invariably used 


170 






fro.. 


Mohe 


THE INDUS VALLEY CIVILIZATION 

/ con sttu< wells, and were made in a mould. Sawn bricks were 
^•ed in ba«ns to ensure evenness of floor. Curved bricks,’ which were 
iorv.iWing of bins and lining of wells, have hitherto been found 
<v> .o .p^.u-daro. None of the bricks have grooves or depressions. B rick 
i S' en "found at Mohenjo-daro. The colour of the bricks ranges 
' ^ % to bright red. ' 

S, N Afferent layers have been recognized in the excavations at 
" ro. The antiquities in all these levels are homogeneous, the 
onlv po. ^ )f ^fierence being the deterioration of masonry in the later 
occupation of tfiP cities - Mud mortar was generally used as a cementing 
material In drai? 3 ’ where more strength or binding force was required, 

‘ lime and gypsum mort f. were; used. The joints in some of the brickwork 
■ SQ fine that ev J % a tllln cannot be inserted m them. Occasionally, 

bitumen was'used A water-proofing 

FouMatv ' liS were carrle( i *° considerable depths and crude brick was 
vi ..or infilling. Buildings were erected on artificial mud platforms as a 
precaution against floods to which ancient Sind was subject. 

In most walls bricks were laid in th$ English Bond method, in alternate 
headers and stretchers, care being taken to break the joints. A filling of 
clay or rubble was used between the faces in very thick walls in order to 
economize bricks. In most cases the vertical alignment of buildings is 
marvellous, indicating that a plumb bob or a similar instrument was used. 
This was done by placing each course a little back from the course below 
or by employing specially moulded* bevelled edged bricks. Walls sur¬ 
mounting pavement were wainscotted with bricks laid on edge standing 
3 feet above the flooi level. 

The buildings thus far unearthed in the Indus Valley fall into three, 
main classes: (i) dwelling houses, (ii) larger buildings, and (iii) public baths. 

There is much variation in the size of dwelling houses. The smallest 
have no more than two rooms, while the largest are so vast as to rank 
almost as palaces. Outside walls of the dwelling houses were severely 
plain. 

Ordinarily there was an entrance from the street side. The houses were 
quite commodious, divided into well sized rooms, containing wells and 
bath-rooms, and provided with covered drains connected with street 
drains. The open court was the basic feature of house planning in the 
Indus Valley, as in Babylon. The courtyard which was usually paved with 
bricks laid flat was surrounded by chambers, and doors and windows 
opened into it. The kitchen was placed in a sheltered comer of the court¬ 
yard, and the ground floor contained store rooms, well chambers, bath, 
etc. Every house had a separate bath-room, placed at the street side, \ 
paved with carefully laid burnt: bricks, which sloped to a corner containing 
the drain carrying off waste water. Vertical drain pipes suggest that baths 
were constructed on the upper storeys also. Doors were possibly made of . 

171 





THE VEDIC AGE 




d and were placed at the ends of the walls, not in the 
...Juses very rarely had windows in their outer walls. Possibly t 4 •- 
lattices were used as windows or ventilators at the top of the w q ri ■ 
ways, made of solid masonry, are found in nearly every house. w 

built straight and steep, with treads unusually narrow and high /" 
cases, the stairways led to the upper storeys wbich contained % A ^ 
and the living and sleeping apartments. Roofs were flat i-q 
wood. It appears that no latrines were ordinarily provided, v % . n , 

situated at the top. Door less chambers in some houses 'n 0 cl riouslv 
’been taken to be cellars, or cess pits for latrines, or sleeri^g a/ ,artments 
/ or solid foundations as a precaution against floods, or treasure rooms */ 
Practically every house had its own well, and public we p s were pi acet i 
between two houses, w ij; h a pavement of burnt brick s i 0 p ex j ^own 

to a drain at one corner. Two wells have a square ccp.ii* 3 t j K; an( j 
two.are elliptical in shape. Soine form of windlasses appears, u >, a ye been 
used for drawing water. s 

I The elaborate drainage system is a unique feature of the Indus Valley 
Civilization, the like of which has not yet been found in any other city of 
the same antiquity. Below principal streets and many lanes ran a main 
drain, i to 2 feet deep, covered with brick or stone, and provided with 
sumps and inspection traps at regular intervals. Individual house drains, 
each one with its own sump pit, opened into the street drains, which in 
their turn opened into great culverts emptying into the river. All soak 
pits and drains were occasionally cleared by workmen, and drains were 
provided with manholes at intervals for cleaning. Ttas ejabotate, drainage 
system, like the town-planning, constitutes anotablepqint of difference 
with Sumer, where the inhabitants had, in most cases, vertical pottery 
drainage shafts beneath their courtyards, but these had no outlet. 

As regards larger builcliilgs, some, which were "earlier indicated as 
temples, were later taken to be khans. With the possible exception of the 
building housing the Great Bath, no building has yet been cleared which 
can definitely be called religious. The great structure near the Stupa, 

I with extra-thick outer walls, has been named the Collegiate Building, and 
probably housed some high official, the high priest,* or a college of priests. 
A pillared hall, 80 feet square, divided into long corridors interspersed 
with low benches having even seats, has the chief seat at right angles to 
the corridors. It may probably have served for a public assembly. 

The Great Bath, which has been taken to be a part of a vast hydropathic 
establishment is “a swimming bath on a scale which would do credit to a 
modern seaside hotel.”? The overall dimensions of the building housing 
it are 180 feet by 108 feet. The actual bathing pool, measuring 39 feet 
by 23 feet with a depth of 8 feet, is situated in the middle of a quadrangle 
having verandahs on all sides. At either end, there is a raised platform and 
a flight of steps, with another platform at the base of each flight of steps. 

172 





WHIST ,iy 


THE INDUS VALLEY CIVILIZATION ^ 

; made of bricks laid on edge, and the walls have been made 
by employing specially trimmed brick in gypsum mortar with 
damp proof course of bitumen. There is a vaulted culvert, 
ches high, at the south-western corner, which could fill and 
fie tank. On three sides at fhe back of the verandahs are various 
roc md galleries. There is a spacious verandah with small rooms at 
the ; hern end. There are six entrances to the building containing the 
bath. mnot be definitely stated whether the Great Bath was used 
entirely - *lar purposes or for religious ceremonies. 

Near the Vwejit corner of the Great Bath is a hanvmmi or hot air 
bath. It has nber of rectangular platforms of brick about 5 feet high, 

having a se P vertical chases sunk in their sides. There is another 

similar buil Mohenjo-daro which shows that the Indus peoplef 

understood „ |V . 'pie of the hypocaust and had Turkish baths. Another 
bath-room _ < .ablishment consisted of two rows of bath-rooms separated 
byariarrow passage, each bath-room having a stairway, a narrow door¬ 
way and carefully paved floor. According t® Dr. Mackay, these ablution 
places were meant for the priests, while the Great Bath was fox the j 
general public. 

The careful town-planning, adequate water supply, and efficient 
drainage system presuppose an advanced state of civic authority. Lamp- 
posts at intervals indicate the existence of street lighting. Ihere was also 
a watch and ward system for different quarters, and large caravanserais 
and public store-houses were provided. That the sanitation was well 
looked after is seen from the rubbish heap consisting of broken pottery, 
ashes and humus found in deep trenches outside the city. Irees and 
plants were allowed to grow in the enclosures. The later levels of the city, , 
however, show the decline of civic authority, as buildings were erected j 
in a haphazard manner, there were encroachments upon lanes, and 
potters were quartered in the city. 

2. SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC LIFE 

All the skeletons unearthed at Mohenjo-daro belong to the chalcolithic 
period and may be taken as representative of an urban population. 
Craniological tests reveal the presence of four racial types at Mohenjo-daro, 
viz., (i) Proto-Australoid; (ii) Mediterranean; (iii) Mongoloid and (iv) 
Alpinoid (ante, Ch. VIII). The cosmopolitan character of the population 
in a place like Mohenjo-daro with easy land and water communications is 
quite natural. It was evidently the meeting ground of the people from 
different parts of Asia. Sculptural representations also speak of the 
mingling of diverse races. 

Only a country capable of producing food on a large scale, and the 

173 





THE VEDIC AGE 



presence of a river sufficiently large to facilitate transport, irri, 
trade, can give rise to cities of this size.j The large number 
querns found in the excavations indicates cultivation on an 
scale. Though little is yet known about the actual methods of ag 
adopted by the people, the examination of the specimens of wh 
barley found in the ruins shows that they were not of the wild ifesj 
The same variety of wheat is cultivated in the Punjab today. 1 unit 
of weight indicates that rice was also grown .4 |The date palm ' id an 
article of diet as is shown by the stones foundj 

I Besides wheat, barley, and rice, milk, too, must have bf important 
item of food, and doubtless vegetables and other fruits >es the date 
were included in the dietary^ /Tarappa cultivated pea? esamums> 
In addition, animal food was eaten, including beef, mu rk, poultry, 

the flesh of the gharial, ttirtle and tortoise, fresh-riy i . d dried fish 

from the sea, and also shell fish) /The half-burnt shells and of these 
animals found in houses, lanes, and streets definitely indicate that + h.ey 
were articles of diet/ 

( Animals were both domesticated and wild. Ac;?b|l skeletal remains of 
the Indian humped bull, the buffalo, the sheep, th V \phant, the pig, and 
the camel have been recovered, the Indian hump e o x, or “Brahmani 
bull,” is frequently represented on the seals. It s eems to hav cHjeen-a 
sacred animal, as it is today. Bones of the horse have also been found, 
but not far below the surface. There is some difference of opiniorTonlhe 
subject, but on the grounds to be subsequently statecjf, it seems reasonable 
to suppose that horse was known to the Indus peoplt/./ The cow was 
known, and so probably was the lion./Clay models of toys indicate that 
the Indian bison, the rhinoceros, the tiger, the monkey, the dog, the bear, 
and the hare were known to the inhabitants. The donkey was known, and 
among smaller animals may be included the mongoose, the squirrel, the 
parrot, the peacock, and the domestic fowl. Harappa knew of the domestic 



As regards dress, no actual specimens of ancient clothing have been 
discovered and we have to depend on the indications supplied by figurines 
and statuary. One alabaster statue shows that two garments were worn. 
A shawl-like cloth, worn over the left shoulder and under the right arm 
so as to leave the right arm free, formed the upper garment. The lower 
garment resembled modern dhoti and was worn quite close to the body. 
Female attire did not differ from that of the male. Garments were of 
cotton and perhaps of wool, and possibly they were sewn, as would appear 
from the needles found at the site. 

With regard to the various fashions of hair-dressing, we know more 
about male styles because the head-dresses worn by the female figurines 
prevent the hair from being seen. It is likely that women had a plait tied 
with a bow at the end, a favourite way of dressing the hair in modern 


174 










misTfr 



( SL 


a. 

met. 
a sh 

in the 

is passed iuiu. 
round the neck t 
are the prominen 
oblique eyes, in o 
full eyes, and fid' . 

lie and mesa*",' ,a , 3,1 
q- wr> „■ lorehead was 

ire made of coils of gt 


."71 

■S VALLEY CIVILIZATION 

f lus was either parted in the middle and 
idy by a woven fillet; or was coiled in a ring 
ai side tings concealing the ears, or were 
5 a P| aited J ock was carried forward from 
ned m again and was secured by a fillet, 
of a filet or was coiled in a knot with 
mostly of gold, silver or copper. Men 
t iem along with the upper lip, which 


ess for ornaments, men and women, 
\ cs with them and all known 
-tuized for manufacturing various 
lead-dress. Small cones of gold 
were worn or 


whether any nose-ornaments were ,*vJo.i. aclCCS 

having pendants in the middle with anurin. .jtvs ui ueads of various 
shapes and materials artistically arranged using spacers and terminals. 
Finger-rings were plentiful, and bangles and bracelets were commonly 
used. Materials for bangles and bracelets were gold, silver, copper, bronze, 
faience, shell, and pottery. Gold And silver bangles were penannular in 
shape with their hollows filled with a fibrous or a lac core. A bracelet with 
six strings of globular beads is an excellent specimen of workmanship. 
Girdles, of which two fine specimens have been found, were worn round 
the waist. Anklets of the type still used by hill women round the Simla 
Hills were worn. Various stones such as carnelian, steatite, agate, chalce¬ 
dony, jasper, etc., were pressed into service in the manufacture of beads 
which evince fine workmanship and technical skill on the part of the 
lapidary. Of the various ornaments mentioned above, men wore fillets, 
necklaces, finger-rings, and armlets. A yellow steatite pectoral was 
probably the insignia of office of a priest. 

We can also form some idea about the toilet and cosmetics of the 
people. The "vanity case" found at Harappa, with its combination of 
piercer, ear-scoop, and tweezers, invites comparison with similar finds 
from Ur, Kish and Khafaje, both types showing the same peculiar 
construction of the looped head. Toilet jars were made of ivory, metal, 
pottery, and stone. Small faience vessels having four compartments were 
used for keeping expensive perfumes or cosmetics. It appears that the 
ladies at Mohenjo-daro knew of the use of coUyrium, face-paint, and 
other cosmetics. Small cockle shells containing a red ochre rouge, lumps 
of green earth, white face-paint and black beauty-substance show that 
the belles in ancient Sind attended to beauty and toilet culture.. It is 
interesting to note that Chanhu-daro finds indicate the use of lip-sticks.5 

- : ■ ! 75 


wmr/ffr 



the v kdi c ac 


__(Senate of lead, a facc-pamt may abo ha 

ointment or taiMmh. metal ” d * 


<SL 


“nk rounded and polisbed werepr 
metics. There were small toi et tabl^ I 

articles on the dressing-table included 

shape, and combs of different shapes ] 
probably worn in the hair. '.Razors o 
served for the toilet of the male. 

Various household articles have 
were made of pottery, stone, shell, 
bronze appear to have replaced stc 
ments. Pottery supplied for the ki 
rubbers,, cake-moulds, diapers, 

" ’ 'ties, heaters.' 


’ are 
i the 
y and 


pered with sand 
of the specimens 
brick, and terra- 

: th arrangements 
•j;rs, fc. . A 


sels, which wem ,, r g| e y 
stands figure among artum... 
V made of shell. There were needles, 

_,, __ . SSyfish hooks, chisels, etc., made of bronze 

or copper, tile first two also in ivory. Blocks of lead were probably used 
as net-sinkers. 


01 ^ 

awls, axes, saWs, iiuKtc.., 


Chairs, bedsteads, and stools were used to decorate the drawing room. 
Possibly there were wooden beds like charpais, and stools were made oi 
wicker work and mats of reeds. There were lamps of copper, shell, and 
pottery. A pottery candlestick found in the ruins indicates that candles, 
probably made of wax or tallow with wicks of cotton, played their part 
in illuminating the houses at Mohenjo-daro. 

Marbles, balls, and dice were used for games. Marbles were used as 
playthings both in Sumer and Egypt. 1 hat dicing was a common pastime 
just as it was in Vedic times is indicated by the large number of dice 
unearthed. Both cubical and tabular specimens are found, the latter being 
the commoner. Unlike the oblong pieces in common use in India at present, 
they are usually cubic in shape like the European dice; but the arrange¬ 
ment of numbers differs from the European system (where the sum oi 
points on any two opposite sides amounts to 7), 1 being opposite to 2, 
3 to 4, and 5 to 6. The tabular dice, invariably made of ivory, have three 
sides marked with numbers 1,2, 3 and the remaining side is decorated with 
longitudinal lines. Of the seven pieces found at Harappa, four bear markings 
like those of Mohenjo-daro; on two are marked 1 opposite to 2, 3 to 4, and 
5 to 6; and one has markings like the modern dice (i.e., 1 opposite to 6, 
2 to 5, and 3 to 4). Thus there were three different ways of marking dice in 
the Indus Valley. It is not certain whether the throwing of dice constituted 
a game in itself. Possibly dice were used in conjunction with board games, 
as two incomplete specimens of game boards of brick have been found. 
-Some fiat models of fish in ivory appear to have been used in some game. 

176 








. 

sis 


t;hte&#:^|. m,"% . 

'&{;#■■ ■VVtV.p’J.-Ki : ■; ; 

;■ ’;. !iffijjfc ri$|^ 

.■■ -A;’;•■;,r' : .-; ; ;/:.; 

lit • ' kvIpfLS, l <* M V A ^ ^ ' 5 4 ; fid *;• 4 ft j^'f’» 

T.^.pleA i ( r; V- H\iS' ■ rt& v .• , n-i fv, mw {ir;'; - it nr. 

" Mi**# n *', • (‘5 ^'^4* X '/i ,>n 

’ •■ i.%> ':^'C*'0'^i'!- i -' . 3*'".U 1 • V'' - 1 V, fyVi $'l ’’•, ^T} i,H: ' '■'. ■).£ V::.'• ’,''■ i.-’.l 

• ; ' v 'v / -'VS'^V* n 


<s 


i«KP< 


* U S weiv tyji.uiuu playthings. The toy carts are pari* 

-ug as being among the earliest representatives of wheeled ve 
Known to us. Usually toys were clay models'of men, women, and an 
whistles, rattles, etc. There were also toy birds provided with stock legs ’ 
small animals climbing up a pole, and figures with movable arms The 
bull with a nodding head worked by a stiff fibre, and a monkey-like 
anunal with movable arms figure among the more ingenious toys. Complex 
toys like figures moving up) and down a string whose progress could be 
accelerated by manipulating a cord were also manufactured. 

Bullock-carts were the chief meansof conveyance. In.addition to models 
of carts found afi Mohenjo-daro similar to the farm carts in common use 
at present in Sind and the Punjab, a copper specimen has been found at 
Harappa, which looks like an ekka of the present day, with a canopy for 
protection from the sun and rain. It thus appears that the ancients also 
used the same type of the bullock cart as is found in modern Sind, which 
was probably drawn by two animals yoked to a pole. Bullock carts with 
a gabled roof over a wooden frame were also in use. 

Weights have been found in large numbers, and range from large 
specimens which had to be lifted with a rope to very small ones used by 
jewellers. Cubical weights seem to be by far the most common. Some 
small weights of dark grey slate resemble the barrel-shaped weights of 
Elam and Mesopotamia, and are more accurate and consistent than those 
of Susa and Iraq. The sequence of ratios is binary in the case of the smaller 
weights as at Susa, and decimal in the case of larger ones. There is no 
evidence of a sexagesimal system. The unit weight has the calculated 
value of '8750 gins, the largest weight being 10970 gms. The most fre¬ 
quently discovered weight is one of 13-64 gms. .which stands in the ratio 
ot .16 to the standard unit of weight indicating the dominance of the 
number 16 in Indian culture. 6 It appears that a strict control was exercised 
over the maintenance of the proper standard of weight. The poor used 
ordinary pebbles as weights. 


177 


M 


<3L 


% 

1 



^ c+iOty "'CAO'Jk , jtxic*A 

jumer used both the decimal ana tu>; beA.agesimal sysn. 

;cimal system originated independently in the Indus Valley, i. 

lu .have yielded a fragmentary measure, a bronze rod, 1-5 inches long, 

broken at both ends, bearing four complete divisions accurately marked. 
It seems to have been based on the* standard cubit of 20-62 inches which 
was widely used in the ancient world. Thus, the Mohenjo-daro and HarappS 
measures indicate that both the foot and cubit systems were current 
simultaneously in the Indus Valley. 

Of the medicines used by the people we know but little. Pieces of a 
coal-black substance forming a dark-brown solution of water have been 
identified with Silajit, which is known to be a specific for dyspepsia, 
diabetes, diseases of the liver, rheumatism, etc. Several cuttle fish bones 
have been found stored in pottery. Cuttle bone is internally used 
as an appetiser, and externally in diseases of ear, eye, throat, 
and skin. The horns of the deer and antelope (and possibly also 
of the rhinoceros) were valued for their medicinal qualities. Coral and 
leaves of the nim tree (azadirachta indica) were possibly used as medicines. 
All these specifics are still prescribed in ayurvedic medicine, and thus the 
origin of the indigenous medicinal system of India may be traced to the 
Indus Valley Civilization, 

Abundant specimens of weapons, tools, and implements have been 
discovered. Weapons of war or the chase were axes, spears, daggers, bows, 
arrows, maces, slings, perhaps catapults, and swords, made generally 
of copper or bronze. Blade axes resemble the early specimens found at 
Susa. Spear heads are thin and broad, without the strengthening mid rib, 
and with a tang instead of a socket. The daggers and knives are generally 
long and leaf-shaped, some with a single edge and others with two. Arrow 
heads are thin, flat pieces of copper with long narrow barbs and no tang. 
Maces were made of alabaster, sandstone, limestone, or hard green- 
coloured stone, and the pear-shaped mace, resembling th&vei '*vc^°ns 
from Elam, Mesopotamia, and Egypt, was most common. Swords are 

178 



THE INDUS VALLEY CIVILIZATION \5 

erably thickened in the middle, but have blunt points suggesting 
that they were not used for thrusting. A kind of scale armour prepared 
from thin domed pieces of copper perforated with two minute holes was 
•T' rn as * ot ^protection, and the shield was probably used for defensive 
,^ e . eposes. 

fD ‘ U ance heads, chisels, celts, axes, adzes, and saws figure among the tools 
mplements. Axes are either long and narrow or short and broad: the 
being probably used for cutting wood. A single specimen of a 
3 adze-axe is known, which can be compared to some 
as us region. The cutting edge of the saw is semi-circular 
toothed edge is wavy. Toothed saws ***exc unknown 
es of antiquity. 

benjo-daro maintained r-L.se c^nact with the outside 
v, import ot various metals, precious stones, and other 
me Indus Valley had connections with Southern and Eastern 
mcna, Kashmir, Mysore, and the Nilgiri Hills, as also with the countries 
immediately to the West and Central Asia (see below, p. 184). Evidence 
as to relations with Sumer is overwhelming, arid trade contacts were 
maintained with Egypt and Crete. The representation on a seal of a 
mastless ship, with a central cabin and a steersman seated at the rudder, 
indicates that the people of the Indus Valley were acquainted with mari¬ 
time vessels. The boat has a sharply up-turned prow and stern similar to 
the archaic representations on Early Minoan seals, cylinders of Sumer, and 
the Pre-Dynastie pottery of Egypt. Dr. Mackay thinks that the Indus 
Valley was in touch with Sumer and Elam by the sea route also. Mohenjo- 
daro thus appears to have been a great inland port carrying on trade with 
> Ur and Kish, probably also with Egypt. 

The remains unearthed at Mohenjo-daro demonstrate the existence of 
different sections of people who may be grouped into four main classes, 
the learned class, warriors, traders and artisans, and finally manual 
labourers, corresponding roughly to the four Varnas of the Vedic period .7 
The learned class probably comprised priests and physicians, astrologers, 
and sorcerers. According to archaeologists there is practically no vestige 
of the fighting classes; but the existence of “palaces” with ancient founda¬ 
tions, of substantial swords showing that some of the people were well 
armed, of watchmen’s quarters at Mohenjo-daro, and of ancient fort walls 
at other sites in Sind, points to a class similar to the Kshatriyas, whose 
duty was to protect the people. A commercial class and various artisans 
such as the mason, engraver, shell-worker, weaver, gold-smith, etc., formed 
the third class. Domestic servants and manual labourers like leather- 
workers, basket-makers, peasants, fishermen, etc.., belonged to the last 
class. 


179 




THE VEDIC AGE 


(si. 


3. ARTS, GRAFTS, AND INDUSTRIES 

There is very little sign of art for art’s sake in the Indus Valley. Tfife-^ 
is no trace of ornamentation in houses and public buildings, loc^z y s ^ 
weapons, vessels, etc., are quite plain and practical, but lack subtle gi 
Even the painted pottery has commonplace designs. Specimens of ai 
to be sought only in figurines, seals, amulets, and other small obie- 
figurines are well baked, and some of them are painted in r 
of. human figures are female, and they are nude except fc 
rouiivt the Join*. Animal figures are found in large numb' 
squirrel and monkeys are made in faience, and a turtle 
horned bull is realistically portrayed as. on the seals, 
steatite is quite life-like and resembles the English mastin. 
small carvings, presumably used as amulets, are most charming, 
little squirrels in faience (Pi. V. 1) not a couple of inches high, sitting up 
with.tails erect and munching something from beneath their fore-paws; 
little monkeys (PI. V. 2) with a worried expression, almost identical to 
what is so noticeable on the faces of their descendants today; and perhaps 
most delightful of all, a bead carved with three monkeys (PI. V. 3) sitting 
round in a circle, clasping one another's waists with their arms, the 
exquisite bronze figure of an aboriginal dancing girl (PI. V. 4-6) with 
her hand on the hip, in an almost impudent posture, is a noteworthy 
object. Her hands and legs are disproportionately long and she Wears 
bracelets right up to the shoulder. The legs are put slightly forward with 
the feet beating time to the music. “Though more impressionistic in style 
than the stone sculptures, this figure, which is cast in one piece, astonishes 
one by the ease and naturalness of its posture.” 8 

Of the seal engravings the best are those of such animals as the humped 
bull, the buffalo, and the bison, which the artist had an opportunity of 
studying at first hand. The humped bull is frankly realistic and spirited, 
and in its portrayal the artist has tempered realism with breadth of 
treatment and restraint. The buffalo is very effectively shown with, a 
slightly raised head, displaying its great horns in the act of bellowing. The 
bison with powerful arched shoulders and relatively small hind quarters 
is quite lifelike. The blue faience tablet, depicting a deity seated cross- 
legged on a throne with a kneeling devotee on either side and a snake 
behind, “serves well to illustrate how instructive and illuminating a back¬ 
ground this new-found prehistoric art of India is likely to supply to the 
later art of historic India.” The best of the engraved seals are master¬ 
pieces of the engraver’s art, as vivid in their drawing as they are skilful 
in execution, which could only have been turned out by people possessed 
of marked artistic ability and great technical skill. 

Statuary is rare, only a few specimens being found. Statues were cut 

180 



THE INDUS VALLEY CIVILIZATION VS 

^Comparatively soft stones, grey and yellow limestone, alabaster, 
met steatite. A steatite male head looks like an attempt at portraiture 
PI. VI. 3). The figure is draped in a shawl, decorated with trefoil patterns, 
/Inch is worn over the left shoulder and under the right arm. The eyes 
re long, and half closed in a yoga attitude. The nose is well formed and of 
~ size; the mouth is of average size with close-cut moustache and 
and whiskers; the ears resemble double shells with a hole 
The hair is parted in the middle, and a plain woven fillet 
the head. An armlet is worn on the right hand and holes 
■uggest a necklace. The noticeable features in all statues 
t cheek-bones, the thick, short, sturdy neck, and narrow 
intrast to the Sumerian statues, which have round and 
’ ishy lips. The heads are brachycephalic, dolichocepha- 
.icraniaL 

statuettes from Harappa have revolutionized the current ideas 
about early Indian art (PI. VI. 1, 2). In both, there are socket holes in 
the neck and shoulders for the attachment of head and arms, made in 
separate pieces. In the red-stone torso, the frontal pose is adopted, the 
shoulders are well backed, and the abdomen slightly prominent. In the 
opinion of eminent art critics, for pure simplicity and feeling nothing to 
compare with this masterpiece was produced until the great age of Hellas. 
The other statuette represents a dancer standing on the right leg with the 
left leg raised in front, the body above the waist and both arms bent 
round to the left. The pose is full of movement. The neck is abnormally 
thick; possibly it may represent Siva Nataraja, or the head may have 
been that of an animal. The anatomical faithfulness in these statuettes is 
striking. Specimens of art in lapidary work are found in the remarkably 
well-made stone beads, specially those of clear and clouded agate, red 
translucent carnelian, etc. An instance of the considerable skill exhibited 
in the manufacture of stone beads is one that was made of five segments 
of chalcedony and deep red carnelian, which were cemented together to 
imitate a bead cut out of a piece of regularly veined stone. 

From the discovery of many spindles and spindle whorls in the houses 
in the Indus Valley it is evident that spinning of cotton and wool was very 
common. That both the rich and poor practised spinning is indicated by 
the whorls being made of the expensive faience as also of the cheap pottery 
and shell. No textiles of any description have been preserved in the Indus 
Valley owing to the nature of the soil. A close and exhaustive examination, 
in the Technological Laboratory, of the pieces of cotton which were 
found attached to a silver vase, shows the specimen to be a variety of the 
coarser Indian cotton, cultivated in upper India today, and not of the 
wild species. Some more specimens of woven material adhering to various 
copper objects have also been found to be mostly cotton, but some were 
bast fibres. There is no indication from the ruins as to the existence of 

181 


THE VEDIC AGE 



JM, which is largely grown in India at present and was known in ancie 
Elam and Egypt. The purple dye. on a piece of cotton has been taken tt 
have been produced from the madder plant. Dyers vats found on the sit- 
indicate that dyeing was practised. 

The Indus Valley pottery consists chiefly of very fine wheel-mad 
wares, plain pottery being more common than the painted ware y 
with designs. In marked contrast to the delicate thinness 
Iranian and Mesopotamian wares, the Indus Valley potter’ 
utilitarian. 

The. clay used was the alluvium from the Indus, tern 
generally containing fine particles of mica or lime. Most, 
are wheel-turned, very few being hand-made. Pottery, 
cotta were fired in kilns wTiich were circular in shape 
for heating underneath a floor provided with flues. 

The plain ware is usually of red clay, with or without a fine rea 
“slip.” It includes knobbed ware which is a curious type ornamented wita 
rows of knobs. Imported Indian vases of this type have been found at 
Tell Asmar. Tire black-painted ware has a fine coating of red slip on which 
geometric and animal designs are executed in glossy black paint. Poly¬ 
chrome pottery is rare and mainly comprised of small vases decorated 
with geometric patterns in red, black, and green, rarely white and yellow. 

Incised ware also is rare and the incised decoration was confined to the 
bases of the pans, always inside, and ,to the dishes of offering stands. Egg¬ 
shell pottery, locally known as Kagzi, is of exquisitely delicate workman¬ 
ship and is absent in Susa and Babylon. Perforated pottery has a large 
hole at the bottom and small holes all over the wall, and was probably 
used for straining liquor. 

Pottery for household purposes is found in as many shapes and sizes 
as could be conceived for daily practical use. Straight and angular shapes 
are the exception, and graceful curves the rule, with the Indus Valley 
pottery. Miniature vessels, mostly less than half an inch in height, are par¬ 
ticularly so marvellously executed as to evoke the admiration of visitors. 

Chanhu-daro appears to have been a manufacturing centre of toys, 
judging from the large number unearthed there. Pottery rattles, gaily 
decorated, and model pottery carts in various shapes with humped oxen 
are exceedingly common. Pottery rattles are so substantially made that 
hardly a broken specimen is found. There is a wide variety in the types 
of toy cart. 

Seals discovered in the various strata constitute one of the most in¬ 
teresting features of the finds. Hitherto over 2,000 seals have been re¬ 
covered from the various sites. Steatite, faience, ivory, and pottery are 
the materials used for manufacturing seals. 

Stamped seals were invariably made of steatite, which came from 
Aravalli. Steatite was cut into shape with a saw, after which the boss was 

182 


Mt NIST/fy 



THE INDUS VALLEY CIVILIZATION 


he boss was then rounded off after the groove by a knife and 
nished off with an abrasive. The designs appear to have been cut by a 
burin. The body was first carved before outlining other parts. Inscriptions 
were added later. Almost all seals were coated with a smooth glossy glaze, 
'featite was hardened by heating. 

eals are of various sizes and shapes, the most popular shape being 
re or oblong, with a pierced hump at the back for suspension, and a 
o decorated with exquisite designs, generally of animals, and with 


e decorated with exquisite designs, generally of animals, and with 
pictographic script. The inscriptions on the seals, however, 
we any connection with the figures on them, as the same 
mnd in company with completely different inscriptions. 
m, which is found in Crete, Cappadocia, Troy, Susa, 
..at in Babylonia or Egypt, appears on particular types 
. indicates their religious use or significance. Though cylinder 
■wre universally used in Sumer, only three specimens have so far 
been found in the Indus Valley, having purely Indian devices. 

A number of small steatite tablets recovered from the lowest lewis at 
Harappa, having almost identical legends, are considered as receipts by 
Dr. lTunter .9 

There are square or rectangular copper tablets, with an animal or 
human figure on one side and an inscription on the other, or an inscription 
on both sides. The figures and signs are carefully cut with a burin. These 
copper tablets appear to have been amulets. 1 ® Unlike inscriptions on seals 
which vary in each case, inscriptions on copper tablets seem to be associa¬ 
ted with the animals portrayed on them. 

It has generally been assumed that the designs on the Indus Valley 
seals, like those on the cylinder seals of Babylonia, were of a religious 
character and showed that the people were animal-worshippers. The 
commonest animal appears to be the so-called unicorn or antelope, resem¬ 
bling a bull, but without a hump, and a single protruding horn shown in 
profile. In front of the unicorn is placed a curious object, the lower portion 
of which is a bowl-like receptacle, with an upper part resembling a cage. 
Probably both the animal and the object have a ceremonial significance 
connected with the principal deity of Mohenjo-da.ro. The pther animals are 
the short-horned bull, the Brahmani bull, the elephant, the tiger, the 
rhinoceros, the gharial, and the antelope. A flat-bottomed low manger or 
trough appears on some seals, and it is seen only before wild animals. The 
short-horned bull, the buffalo, and the rhinoceros are very carefully and 
realistically portrayed. The tiger with an open mouth and protruding 
tongue sometimes gazes at a tree on whose branches a man is perched. 
Alongside there appear mythological creatures and composite animals, 
such as human figures with bull’s ears, horns, hoof, and tail; or a horned 
tiger; or a urus-like animal with additional heads of antelope and short- 
homed bull; or a most fantastic abortion, a curious human-faced animal 

183 




Jkrfaking of the characteristics of a goat, a bull, a tiger, and an elephant 
One circular seal shows six animal heads radiating from a boss. 

The uses to which seals were put at Mohenjo-daro are uncertain and 
have been the subject-matter of various conjectures. The large variations 
in the inscriptions speak against their use as money. Reversed writing < 
qq per ce nt of these objects becomes inexplicable if they are takei 
amulets, and the projecting boss at the back disproves their use for 
purpose. Their use in other countries indicates that they were star 
some plastic material like clay in order to authenticate 
the mouths of jars or doors. Owing to their fragile no 
impressions have been found of only a few specimens. T< 
were probably used for some specific purpose. Their lar 
fact that they have beerfTftund in the houses of the . 
indicate that the inhabitants attached great importance u, 
probably every citizen carried one on his person. fh.e attempts 
seals to replace the legend after cutting it indicate that after the death 
of the original owner of the seal, it was taken by another by making 
appropriate changes in the inscription. 11 

Among semi-precious stones used for ornament, amazon and amethyst 
came from the south, and lapis lazuli, turquoise, and jadeite from the west. 
Rajputana and Kathiawar supplied plasma, agate, jasper, and blood-stone. 
All these were used for manufacturing beads, regard being paid to then 
colour-scheme, size, and markings. Great technical skill is displayed in the 
manufacture of beads. The holes in the-cornelian beads are well polished 
and testify to the great skill in boring such hard stones. Some unfinished 
beads of agate show that they were shaped and smoothed before being 
bored, for the translucency of the polished stone helped the lapidary in 
drilling straight. The accuracy of chert weights shows that the people 
were proficient in the working of flint, agate, gneiss, and other hard stones. 

The gold used in the Indus Valley appears to have come from the gold 
mines at Kolar and in the Anantapur district. Different kinds of beads 
of gold were variously made by soldering cup-like pieces together or iy 
casting or by beating out and soldering together. Bangles were made ot 
thin sheets of gold with the metal slightly overlapping on the inside. 
Afghanistan, Armenia, and Persia range among the probable sources oi 
ctftmr tamp vlnhiilar silver beads were cast or beaten out. Ear-rings were 




THE INDUS VAI-LEY CIVILIZATION 


<SL 


legged in' 
nose whicl 
suggested 
Indo-Aryai 
in the Rif 
antheor 


■fnze were cast by the cire -perdue process. Eyes of needles and awls were 
formed either by drilling holes close together and then breaking the in¬ 
tervening material, or by bending the head over as in some pre-Sargonic 
needles at Kish. Copper and bronze finger-rings were generally made of 
V hied wire. Lead was extensively mined in ancient India, and Ajmer may 
supplied lead to the Indus Valley. It is significant that the people of 
W ^ r ndus Valley were not conversant with the metallurgy of iron. 

Lvvo as*. ex (-^ ns ] ve ]y x 1S ecl especially in the making of ornaments and 
Most of the shell might have come from places along the 
d the Persian Gulf. Mussel shell was also fairly common 
used as a spoon. Oliva was worn as an ornament and had 
attached to it. Cockle shells were probably used, as 
to hold cosmetics. Mother of pearl is conspicuous by its 
ue it was used by the Sumerians for inlay. Shell was apparently 
Jw( V in large quantities. The manufacturers experienced great diffi¬ 
culties in cutting shell. Columella was first hollowed out by means of a 
saw and a hammer, and the tubular piece remaining was sawn into brace¬ 
lets. Beads of different shapes and pieces for inlay work were made out of 
the columella, and the whole of the shell was utilized. The comparative 
paucity of ivory objects may possibly be due to the sanctity attached to 
elephants. The wild elephant, which is totally extinct in North-Western 
India at present, probably roamed in Sind and the Punjab in the third 
millennium B.c. At that period the climate of the Indus valley, if we may 
judge by the flora and fauna, resembled that of the Ganges delta today. 
Though no true glass has yet been unearthed, the art of glazing appears to ’ 
have been practised. Vitrified paste and faience were used for glazed work. 
Faience was extensively manufactured in the Indus Valley and is found 
at all levels. Ordinary articles of faience are composed of a white or a 
greyish paste, granular in appearance, coated with a glaze, which has now 
faded to a light blue or green. Great skill in glazing is exhibited in a pottery 
bead covered by two coloured glazes, brown and white, which was first 
taken to have been made of glass. 


4. RELIGION 

No buildings have so far been discovered in the Indus Valley which 
may be definitely regarded as temples, and even those doubtfully classed 
as such have yielded no religious relics. There are no shrines, altars, or 
any definite cult objects. It is indeed curious that the Indus finds do not 
include any positive religious material, for religion has always played a 
dominant part in ancient cultures, and especially in India, where it was 
the prime factor moulding the lives of people for ages. All that we have to 
rely on for reconstructing the religion of the people is the testimony of 

185 







THE VEDIC AGE 





m are (mj 
e elephant, 
l etc. The 
n taken as 
lesticated 
aals wei 


seals, sealings, figurines, stone images, etc. In spite of the meagrenes 
of the material the light it throws on ancient religion is invaluable. Hen 
we can only refer to a few leading ideas. . 

The first in point of importance is the cult of the Mother Goddess, A 
number of figurines of terra-cotta, faience, etc., portray a standing ar>- IO 
semi-nude female figure, wearing a girdle or band round her loins, wioV c!ir) > 
elaborate head-dress and collar, occasionally with ornamental cheek c iCiant 
and necklace; sometimes the ear-ornaments are like caps susp?" Kejl 
either side of the head. Some of the figures are smoke-stain 
sible that oil, or perhaps incense, was burnt before them 
goddess might hearken favourably to a petition. 12 Figurir 
in the Indus Valley have been discovered in many co' 

Asia between Persia and'the Aegean, and also round w t 
village shrines in South India. These figures are rightly takei. 
the. Mother or Nature Goddess. There is no reason to believe that ' mcR > 1 
of the Mother Goddess originated in Anatolia or any other particuM; 
couiftry because the concepts of the motherhood of God and of the divinity 
of Nature are quite common among the primitive peoples of the world, 
and are. wide-spread and deep-rooted in India. I2a The Mother Goddess is 
represented, in every village as the tutelary deity [grama devald) and is 
known under various names, such as Mata, Amba, Amnia, Kali, KaraK, 
fete., sometimes to be dreaded, sometimes warding off,evil spirits, imparting 
fertility, etc. It may be mentioned that the Rigveda refers to Prithvi 
and Aditi which are akin to the Mother Goddess. 

An interesting sealing from Harappa shows a nude female figure, 
turned upside down, with out-spread legs and a plant issuing from the 
womb. The reverse side has a man with a sickle-shaped knife in hand and 
a woman seated on the grourjd with hands raised in supplication. Ob¬ 
viously this depicts a human sacrifice to the Earth Goddess, portrayed on 
the obverse with two genii. A similar figure of the Gupta Age has been 
discovered in the United Provinces with a lotus issuing out of the neck of 
the goddess. Perhaps the sealing represents a river gushing out of the 
goddess’s womb. 1 ! The representation of a figure standing in the bifurcated 
branch of a pipal tree also appears to depict the Mother Goddess. To 
this goddess the worshipper brings, a goat, probably for sacrifice, and a 
number of people standing in the lower register seem to be taking part 
in the sacrifice. The Pipal free is still held to be sacred in India, but not 
associated with the cult of the Mother Goddess. The goat sacrifice lias 
survived in the worship of Sakti, another form of the Mother Goddess, in 
which the sacrifice of animals is the most characteristic feature. It is still 
uncertain whether the female deity represented by pottery figurines was 
regarded as a virgin goddess or as the consort of the male god on the seal 
amulets. 

V: Among the male gods the most remarkable is a three-faced deity wearing 

186 








THE INDUS VALLEY CIVILIZATION 


__.led head-dress, seated cross-legged on a throne, with penis erecfus, 

and surrounded by elephant, tiger, buffalo, and rhinoceros, with deei 
appearing under the seat. It wears a number of bangles and has a pectoral 
round the neck, and an inscription of seven letters appears at the top 
° 1 . VII. 4). This representation has at least three concepts which are 
ally associated with Siva, viz., that he is (i) trtmiikha (three-faced), 
'aiupali (lord of animals), and (iii) YogUvara. or Mahayogi. The first 
nec-ts arfe apparent from the seal itself. The deity is sitting cross- 
nasana posture with eyes turned towards the tip of the 
mces the Yogiivara aspect of the deity. It. has been 
re scholars^ that this Siva-cult was borrowed by the 
the Indus culture, but as there is a reference to Siva 
„st ',14* Siva may not be a later intruder in the Hindu 


more seals of Siva have been found in the course of further 
■ excavations (PI. VII. 5, 6). The deity is always nude save for a cincture 
round the waist, and has a horned head-dress. In one seal the dejty is 
three-faced and seated on a low dais, while the second has one* face in 
profile; both have a sprig of flowers or leaves rising from the head between 
the horns. This sprig suggests that the deity so ornamented is a vegetation 
or fertility god--another link with Siva, who personifies the reproductive 
powers of nature. A horned archer dressed in a costume of leaves 
(PI. VII. 7) displays the divine hunter aspect of Siva. 

It thus appears that Siva was one of the principal deities of the people 
along with the Mother Goddess. His worship was, however, not merely 
iconic^, but also phallic, as would appear from the presence of a large 
number of conical and cylindrical stones. These conical and..cylindrical 
stones probably symbolize fertility, and are'connected...with the cult of 
Siva as Liiigas. Many scholars - find a contemptuous reference in the 
Rigveda to phallus worship, and regard it as a veiled allusion to the 
religious customs of the pre-Aryan people of the Indus Valley , but it has 
been suggested by others that the passage in question simply alludes to 
sensuous or lustful persons.^ 

Small ring st on es suggest that the worship of the Yoni, the female 
symbol, of generation, was also, prevalent, though not to such an extent 
as IjAga worship. It is, however, possible to take the group of ring stones 
as pedestals or bases of pillars. Hence until the linga and one of the ring 
stones are found in close association, the question, of the prevalence of 
phallic worship cannot be definitely settled. The Vedic religion, it may be 
observed, was originally aniconic, the worship of icons arising at a later 
stage. 

That animal worship or zoolatry formed part of the religious beliefs of 
the people is indicated by the representations of animals on seals and 
sealings, or in terra-cotta, faience, and stone figurines. The animals fall 

187 


THE VEDIC AGE 




three groups: (i) mythical animals, e.g. a semi-human, semi-bo 1 
^ture, attacking a horned tiger resembling Eabani or Enkidu in 
Sumerian mythology; or, complex animals, with the heads of different 
animals attached to a central boss, which may possibly be an attempt to 
bring together the representations of various deities; (ii) ambiguor 
animals, which are not completely mythical, like the strange unict 
accompanied with manger or incense-burner; or animals figuring as off) 
genii. The frequency with which the unicorn appears haS been t r 
indicate that it was the tutelary deity of the city* Last 
actual animals, including the rhinoceros, the bisoii, the ti 
the buffalo’, the humped bull or zebra, the short-horn 
feeding troughs which appear before some of these b 
symbolizing food offerings «to beasts which could r t . 
indicating the animals as objects of worship. Some of these * 
regarded as the vdhana or vehicles of the gods. The bull, for ins... 
closely associated with Siva. It may be suggested that the limesto., 
statugs of animals resting on rectangular plinths represent gods in their 
animal form. Possibly the unicorn has some connection with the boar 
incarnation of Vishnu, which is said to be &ka-innga (one-horned). 

/ Apart from their use as pictographic signs, no birds appear on seals or 
other amulets. It seems, however, that the dove was looked upon as 
/sacred, as some of the pottery models on little pedestals exactly resemble 
• those found at very early sites in .Mesopotamia, where.The. ..dove., was 
! regarded, as sacred to the Mother Goddess. 

, The worship of tree, fire, and water also seems to have been in vogue. 
The existence of tree worship is evidenced by the representations on 
several seals and sealings. The most interesting of these depicts the 
frtiw/a-horned deity standing nude, with long hair, between two branches 
of a tree with the half-kneeling figure of a worshipper with long hair, 
armlets, and horns, behind whom is a composite animal; in the lower 
register appeaf-seven, standing figures, with dresses down to the knees, 
in procession (PI. No. VII. 8). The leaves of the tree appear like those 
of the pipal. Some sealings from Harappa show trees enclosed by a 
wall or a railing. It cannot at present be stated definitely whether tree 
: worship pertained to trees in their natural state or to their indwelling 
'spirits. 

v i ‘ Rectangular aisles, separated from each other by long walls, suggest 
the Vedic sacrificial altar of a rectangular shape (agnisdld paved with 
bricks), in which offerings were made to Fire and other gods.' 6 

Though no direct evidence has been found to river worship, the impor¬ 
tant part played by water in the daily life of the Indus people, as indicated 
by the elaborate arrangements for bathing and the Great Bath, seems to 
show that ceremonial ablutions formed a feature of their religion. The 
Great Bath has been suggested as the temple of the River-God. The 

188 



THE INDUS VALLEY CIVILIZATION 


probably represented the river Indus. The cult of the gharial 
..*,lves in Sind even today. 

The representations, on some seals, of Svastika and the wheel, which; 
re the symbols of the sun, suggest that the sun was not represented 
'.thropomorphically but symbolically. Svastika and the cross appear to 
eligious or magical symbols as in Babylonia and Elam, 
om a faience tablet showing a seated deity with a worshipper on.) 
side and a hooded cobra over the head, it appears that some form| 
i was practised. 


5. FUNERARY CUSTOMS 


,.ice with regard to the customs about the disposal of the 
.. the ancient Indus Valley is yet far too meagre for any definite 
conclusions, and though Harappa records more ample material, it relates 
to a period subsequent to the occupation of Mohenjo-daro. 

Three forms of burial have been found at Mohenjo-daro, viz., complete 
burials, fractional burials, and post-cremation burials. Complete burial 
means the burial of the whole body, ceremonially performed in various 
forms, along with the grave furniture, offerings, etc. About 30 skeletons, 
evidencing complete burials, have been found in different groups. Some 
of these appear to have been victims of accidental death. All these 
burials appear, on stratigraphical evidence, to relate, to the declining 
years of Mohenjo-daro. 

Fractional burial represents a collection of some bones after the exposure 
of the body to wild beasts and birds. Five such burials have been found, 
the best specimen being an urn containing a skull and some fragmentary 
bones, along with a number of earthenware vessels, and a variety of small 
objects including baiis, beads, shell spoon, bits of ivory, and miniature 
vessels (PI. VIII. 1). Human bones are not found in all specimens, probably 
because after exposure bones were ground to dust before interment. 

Post-cremation burials have been inferred from large wide-mouthed 
urns containing a number of smaller vessels, bones of animals, and of 
birds or fish, and a variety of small objects, such as beads, bangles, 
figurines, etc., sometimes mixed with charcoal ashes. These are generally 
found underneath a floor or a street. Fluman bones are seldom found, these 
generally being the bones of lambs, goats, etc., as bones are hardly neces¬ 
sary for post-cremation burials The uniform character of the urns, quite 
distinct from the domestic varieties, as also the offerings in the form of 
objects of special interest to the departed, and the burial of these urns 
within dwelling houses or in close proximity, leave no doubt as to their 
being burial urns. These have been discovered at six places in Mohenjo- 
daro, distributed among strata of all periods. 

189 



umsTify 



’r-m 


the vedic: age 
6. THE INDUS SCRIPT 


<SL 


I he Indus, script lias been characterized by most scholars as picail 
g aphic, but save for a small number of signs representing birds, fish, etc 
a;ul varieties of the human form, the rest bear more or less a conventir 
character. Originally pictographic, the signs, as we know them 
become standardized, but not so conventionalized by usage as t ’ 
become mere stereotyped summaries like the cuneifon 
Mesopotamia. During all the centuries of Mohenjo-cb 
the script presents no development in the form of the 1 
is found in one stage only, so that we cannot trace it 
pictographic to the ideographic or phonetic, or its latei 
any of the scripts of India. 

I he most remarkable features of the Indus script are its ckn. 
straight rectilinear character, and the extent and variety of its 'signs.- 
Admirable ingenuity is displayed in modifying the signs by the addition 
of strokes or accents, and in combining one sign with another in the form 
of conjunct®. 1 he large number of signs precludes the possibility of the 
script being alphabetic. It was mainly phonetic, most of the signs appa¬ 
rently standing for open or closed syllables, and the remainder functioning 
as determinatives or ideograms. Nearly 400 distinct signs have been 
listed from the script so far. 

brom the recurrence of certain characters, the facing of the animals 
ana a few other indications, it has rightly been inferred that the direction 
of writing is from the right to the left, though in a very few inscriptions 
the direction is from left to right. In legends covering two or more lines 
the direction is boustrophedon. 

There are resemblances between some characters in the Indus script 
ana those in the Sumerian, proto-Elamite, Hittite, Egyptian, Cretan, 
yprio e, anc hiriese scripts. Similarities have also been traced with 
ne senof the Easter Islands, and the Tantric pictographic alphabets. 
All these scripts are possibly interrelated, but only up to a certain point. 

dome aj oars even claim the Brahmi to have been derived from the 
Indus script. 

^ * s not passible, in the present stage of our knowledge, to determine 
the language op the script. Some scholars take it to be Sanskrit and others 
f s ra vidian. In their attempts to decipher the script several scholars 
“' X1 taken for granted the identity of the Indus language with, one or the 
o ler of the known languages or their prototypes.'7 In connection with 
die resemblances of the Indus signs with other scripts, Rao Bahadur 
1 vshit observes that the resemblance with Sumerian and proto-Elamite 
signs presages a close connection, at least in the formative stages; simi- 
lanties with the Egyptian and Chinese pictographs are superficial, and 

190 



THE INDUS VALLEY CIVILIZATION 

script developed independently on Indian soil. 18 With regard 
interpreting the script in terms-.of the Dravidian equivalents, it 
ry be stated that we have nothing to rely on as to the original or the 
>to-Dravidian language; the language could not have been static 
-ing these 5,000 years. l8a Much more extensive research in Southern 
1, moreover, will be necessary before definite links can be forged 
en the later stages of the Indus Valley civilization and the dawn 
nation in Southern India. 

■t our disposal is sufficiently large, but despite earnest 
'ars no real light can be thrown on.the subject which 
acceptance. In the absence of a real solution that would 
y and every investigator, all attempts to decipher the 
rely an academic interest. The Indus Valley had trade 
w~mer and Elam, and Indus seals have been found at the 
Yces. It is likely that some bilingual inscription, turned up by 
t e spade of the archaeologist in Iraq, will give us the right clue to the 
decipherment of the Indus script. 

7. THE ANTIQUITY OF THE CULTURE 

Despite its definite individual characteristics, the Indus Valley civiliza¬ 
tion is not isolated and unique, but has sister civilizations elsewhere, with 
several outstanding common features, which indicate its contemporaneity 
with the western city cultures in Mesopotamia. At none of the sites in the 
Indus Valley has iron been found, which gives us the lower limit of the 
age of the civilization, as iron was known everywhere in the Middle East 
in the latter half of the second millennium b.c. The civilization that we 
find in the Indus Valley is still of the chalcolithic age displaying remarkable 
similarity with the Second Pre-Diluvian Culture of Elam and Mesopo¬ 
tamia, and the proto-historic period of Sumer ( c. 2750 B.c.). 

Excavation has brought to light seven different layers of buildings at 
Mohenjo-daro, which have been assigned to three periods, viz. Early, 
Intermediate, and Late. Earlier layers lie submerged under subsoil water. 
The.ptiase of the Indus Valley civilization found at Mohenjo-daro and 
Harappa is known as the “Harappa Culture.” Explorations in Sind have 
brought to light three different “cultures,” viz., those of Amri, Jhukar, 
and Jhangar, the first of which preceded and the last two followed the 
Harappa culture. Chanhu-daro displayed traces of Jhukar and Jhangar 
cultures in the upper levels. 

On the analogies of Troy and Rome, normally a period of one thousand 
years should be assigned for the occupation of the seven cities of Mohenjo- 
daro; but as the decay at Mohenjo-daro was much quicker on account of 
the imminent danger of floods (of which we get evidence), and as the 

191 









THE VEDIC AGE 

occupation of the cities was much more rapid as seen from thl 
^fbrmity of antiquities in all layers, a period of only 500 years har to 
assigned for the whole strata. As, however, the civilization is alre nu 
a developed stage, roughly a period of 1000 years has been allottecrc 
the antecedent evolution. 

The latest settlement of Mohenjo-daro has been attributed to 2750 
so that the occupation of the seven cities ranges between 3250-27«f 

( This rough dating, however, has been brought down by a few r 
by the find of various Indus Valley objects in datable 
and Mesopotamia. 

An Indus seal confined to the Late Period at Moher 
at Eshnunna in layers pertaining to 2600-2500 b.c. 
period atTJohenjo-daro peaches back to about 2800 
however, has been found at Ur in a tomb which is not olao. „ 

Dr. Frankfort’s discovery of cylinder seals of Indian origin at 
and of a green steatite vase depicting a Brahmani bull at Tell Agrab can 
back the date of the Indus Valley civilization to about 2800 B.c, The 
seals of the Indus Valley type found in Mesopotamia by Dr.-Gadd indicate 
2800 B.c. as the upper limit of the Harappa culture. Dr. Fabri places the 
main culture period at Mohenjo-daro between 2800-2500 b.c. on the 
evidence of a pottery jar with a Sumero-BabyIonian inscription found at 
Mohenjo-daro. 20 A comparison of the plain and painted ware in the Indus 
Valley with similar specimens at Sumer, Elam, and Egypt shows the Indus 
Valley civilization to have flourished about 2500 b.c. Ceramic evidence 
shows that the earliest stage of the Indus Valley civilization is represented 
at Amri, which may go back to 3000 b.c., followed by the Harappa, 
Jhukar, and Jhangar cultures. 

On a careful consideration of all available material for the age of the 
Indus civilization, some of which has been indicated above, it appears 
that the main culture period at Mohenjo-daro or the "Harappa culture” 
ranged between 2800-2500 B.c. Though it must have had a long history 
of antecedent development before it reached the stage we meet, no idea 
of that period can be had, as the lowermost strata cannot be reached at 
Mohenjo-daro, Harappa, jhukar, or Chanhu-daro, because of subsoil 
water. The civilization for all we know may well reach beyond 3500 b.c. 
The uppermost layers of Chanhu-daro, as suggested by Dr. Mackay, can 
be assigned to 2300-2200 B.c., whereas the lower strata go back to 
2600-2500 B.c. The culture period of the Indus Valley civilization, as 
revealed by its finds, thus seems to have lasted roughly from c. 2800 to 
2200 B.c. The cultures at different sites in the Indus Valley are to be 
placed between these two extreme dates. 


192 



8. AUTHORS OF THE INDUS CIVILIZATION 

The only definite material available with regard to the authorship of 
lue Indus Valley civilization is the human skeletons and skulls found 
IndLng the ruins. As mentioned above, these show that the population of 
betwenjo-daro was heterogeneous and comprised at least four different 
of civiltvpes, viz. Proto-Australoid, Mediterranean, Alpinoid, and Mongo- 

The material iijo-daro population is, however, generally believed to 
attempts by schofisted of the Mediterranean type, which has been de¬ 
may find general te, p. 143 ff.). The craniological evidence speaks not only 
stand the test of < elements, but also of free racial mixture, 
script will hav< scientific precision in this respect can be expected in 
relations w'jj, , as the artists were not anthropologists. Whatever 
latter Evidence is supplied by the statuary confirms the craniological 

riience as to the existence of different races. 

The anthropological and statuary evidence does not aid us in pointing 
at the authors of the civilization. There has been quite an amount of 
speculation among scholars and archaeologists with regard to the ascrip¬ 
tion of the authorship of the Indus civilization to any particular race. 
Words like Aryan and Dravidian which primarily denote linguistic groups 
have been indiscriminately used in an ethnic sense in this connection. 
Thus the authorship has been ascribed to Drayidians, Brahuis, Su merians, 
Panis, Asuras, Vr a ty a s, Vahikas, Dasas, Nagas, Aryans, etc. 21 

The majority view prefers to hold the authors of the Indus civilization 
as speakers of “Dravidian” (ante, p. 156). So far, however, as the funeral 
customs are concerned it is impossible to ascribe the Indus Valley culture 
to the “Dravidians,” among whom burial was the prevalent form of 
interring the dead. Further, excavation in the south has hitherto revealed 
no traces of the Indus Valley civilization. 

The Brahuis., though speaking a Dravidian language, are of. Turko- 

Iranian..origin, and are ethnically quite distinct from the various. 

peoples speaking Dravidian languages in Central and Southern India.' 
There is no definite evidence to support the Brahui authorship of the 
Indus culture., 

We know nothing definite as to the racial features of. the Sumerians.^ 
They were, no doubt, in close contact with the Indus Valley in"ancient/ 
days, and probably formed part of the population at Mohenjo-daro; but/ 
there is nothing to credit them with the authorship of the Indus culture. 

As regards the Panis, Vr atvas. Vahikas-Asuras.. Dasas, and Nagas. we.' 
have no material to identify them with any of the known races. 

Sir John Marshall has compared the Vedic civilization with that of the 
Indus Valley and has found that they are quite distinct; and as the entry 
of the Aryans into India, according to his view of the date of the Rigveda, 

193 


N 





THE VEDIC AGE 



<SL 


subsequent to 1500 b.c., more than a thousand years after the last 
vestige of the Indus Valley civilization disappeared, he cannot think of 
the Aryans in connection with the Indus Valley civilization. 

Now the presumed age of the Rigveda is really no barrier to the Arya 
authorship of the Indus culture (if other evidence proves that hypothec’ 
for, in the first instance, that age is not known with even an approxi/B.c., 
degree of certainty, and secondly, because the Rigveda can safely betfb b.c. 
to have represented a period long posterior to the advent of theenturies 
into India. As to the existence of the Aryans in the I? ’Strata in Sumer 
early a period as the age of the Indus culture, it is hel 
evidence of skeletal material, that the Aryans formed tjo-daro was found 
population of these days. 22 that the early 

Various arguments have been advanced by. Sii Joi A similar seal, 
to prove that the Indus Valley civilization was quite ^ 1^2150 b.c. *9 
earlier than, the Veclic civilization. One of his principal argument Asmar 
the borrowing of the 5 iva cult of Mohenjo-daro by the Vedic A xf'& 
has been noted above. Among others may be mentioned the absence of 
the horse and presence of icons. As regards the first, Dr. Mackay takes 
the m odel animal illustrated in PI. VIII. 2 to represent a horse, and has 
conjectured that the Indus Valley people probably knew the horse at 
about 2500 B.c. at the latest. The finds of saddles in some of the lowest 
strata at Mohenjo-daro, and the representation of the horse in the Indus 
Valley art seem to prove that the horse was known . 2 3 As to the second, 
it is true that the Vedic religion was aniconic to a very great extent. But 
it is not unlikely that the Rigveda represents an earlier phase of the 
culture found in the Indus Valley. The use of icons in the Indus Valley, 
as seen in the phallic cult, probably followed in the wake of Siva worship 
in the Rigveda . Later on, owing to contact with alien or non-Aryan 
elements, some concepts such as phallic worship, magic and charms, etc., 
were perhaps incorporated in the comprehensive Hindu religious system. 
Similarly, the Mother Goddess (Aditi and PrithvI in the Rigveda) and Siva 
were developed in the period of the Indus Valley by synthesis and fusion 
with non-Aryans. There was thus a co-mingling of cultures, Vedic and 
non-Vedic, and for the authorship of the composite Indus Valley civiliza¬ 
tion, we need not look to any particular race. 

Although Sir John Marshalls view is now generally accepted, some 
scholars still regard the Vedic civilization as older than that of the Indus 
Valley. It is impossible, at the present state of our knowledge, to come to 
any definite conclusion, but it has to be admitted that there is no con¬ 
clusive evidence against the view that ascribes the authorship of the 
Indus Valley civilization to the Rigvedic Aryans, and regards it as a 
logical corollary, a lineal descendant, of the culture described in the 
Rigveda. But even then the authorship of the Indus Valley civilization , 
cannot be ascribed to any particular race, as every element in the diverse 

194 





WWSTff 



THE INDUS VALLEY CIVILIZATION 


in contributed its share to the civilization. Even assuming t:ha 
w /edic civilization was earlier, we must remember that during the' 
?riod that intervened between it and the Indus Valley civilization, the 
'edic religion was incorporating many alien and non-Aryan features such 
. phallus worship, Naga worship, magic and spells, etc., and was already 
tending to become comprehensive, composite and all-embracing, harmpni- 
sing different cOnstituenreTeme nts and catering to the needs of the various 
strata. -^-"Vl not, therefore, be correct to ascribe the authorship of the 
Indus Valley ... ..Iture to the Aryan or any other particular race. It repre¬ 
sents the synthesis of the Aryan and non-Aryan cultures. The utmost \ 
that we can say is that the Rigvedic Aryans probably formed an important j 
part of the popr - uce in those days, and contributed their share to the J 
evolution of tb ’us Valley civilization. 


*SL 


9. . EXTENT, CONNECTIONS, AND SURVIVALS OF THE 
INDUS CIVILIZATION 

The very fact that M.ohenjo-daro and Harappa, the first two prehistoric 
sites excavated in the Indus Valley, although about 400 miles apart, 
present a homogeneous culture, shows that the civilization was neither 
local nor regional, nor confined to any restricted area. Subsequent 
excavations in a large number of other sites have brought to light pre¬ 
historic antiquities representing the identical civilization, and these 
indicate that Mohenjo-daro and Harappa do not mark the extreme limits 
of its extent. The late Mr. N. G. Majumdar’s exploration in Sind revealed 
various settlements of the Indus Valley civilization in many places in 
Sind, from the modern Hyderabad, 60 miles north-east of Karachi in the 
south, to Gujo, VijriQt, and Jacobabad in the north, forming a long chain 
of mounds between the present course of the Indus and the foot-hills of 
the Kirthar range. The annexed map (No. 2) shows that these prehistoric 
sites follow the old lines of communication bet ween southern and northern 
Sind through the hill range. Chanhu-daro, over a hundred miles south-east 
of Mohenjo-daro, and'Amri, the same distance down-stream from Mo¬ 
henjo-daro, are important sites at which the same civilization has been 
found. On the west bank of the Indus, Lohumjo-daro, Ali Murad, Jhukar, 
Ghazi Shah, Alor, etc. are the principal sites from which several objects 
of the Indus culture were recovered. Further west, Sir Aurel Stein’s 
explorations have proved the extension of the Indus Valley civilization 
to Dabar Kot, Snr Jangal, and Periano Ghundal in Northern Baluchistan 
and Kulli and Mehi in Southern Baluchistan. According to Stein, Shahi 
Tump marks the outpost of the Indus Valley civilization.H 

Terra-cottas recovered at Buxar and at Pataliputra (Patna) indicate 
the extent of the cultural influence of the Indus Valley eastward . J 5 In the 

195 




THE VEDIC AGE 

Jhazipur and Benares districts were found pictographs, camelian beacT 
and objects exactly similar to those found in tlie Indus Valley. There ai 
various ancient sites in the United Provinces in the Gangetic basin fro 
which relics of copper civilization have been reported. 

Kotla Nihang Khan, near Rupar on the Sutlej in the Ambala distr 
below the Simla hills, about 220 miles due east of Harappa, also records 
finds typical of the Indus Valley sites. 

1 Thus the Indus Valley civilization seems to have embrn^-' whole 
of Sind and the Punjab, the bulk of Kathiawar, a par. of the coastal 
region, the valleys of North-West Frontier province, and a part at least 
of the Gangetic basin. 26 

The extent of the Indus Valley civilization indicat s its connections 
practically with the whole of Northern India, and-in f st, with all the 
contemporary cultures. Immediately the discoveries m '.Indus Valley 
were published, Sumerologists came forward with affinities of me Indus 
Valley civilization with Sumer, and at the outset the Indus Valley cmhza- 
tion was designated Tndo-Sumevian. But despite its close contact with 
ancient Sumer, the Indus Valley civilization has peculiarities of its own. 
It has recently been shown that the similarities between the two cultures 
have been over-emphasized and the differences overlooked. At any rate 
there is an overwhelming mass of evidence showing that a flourishing 
trade, probably through the land routes in Baluchistan, existed between 
the Indus Valley and Sumer in ancient times. Numerous seals of Indian 
design and workmanship have been found at various Sumerian and 
Elamite sites. Importations from Sumer recovered in the Indus Valley, 
however, are comparatively very few. A white marble seal, an engraved 
steatite vessel, an etched carnelian bead, a model ram, an adze axe, and 
small pottery rings used as net-weights have been recorded as probable 
importations from Sumer, indicating trading intercourse. The most im¬ 
portant piece of evidence testifying to the influence of the Indus V alley 
bn Sumer is the fashion of hair-dressing adopted by Sumerian women 

from the Indus Valley. 2 7 , , 

For associations with Egypt, however, we have to depend only on 
indirect connection suggested by certain objects and moths. No definite 
object of Egyptian workmanship has been found in the Indus valley, noi 
has any Egyptian site recorded an Indus Valley object. Segmented beads 
and hemispherical terminals of necklaces, bull-legged stools, small model 
beds with recumbent female figurines, female figurines suckling a child, 
faceted beads, fiy-shaped beads, cord designs, candle stands and mussel- 
shell-shaped spoons, are among the various objects that link the Indus 
Valley and Egypt. The borrowings appear to have taken place through 

Sumer and Elam as intermediaries. . , . , 

Though Stein’s researches clearly show that the population of Balu¬ 
chistan was far greater than it is now, and that various land routes through 

196 







THE INDUS VALLEY CIVILIZATION 

an were extensively used in ancient times for trade purposes, it 
•obable that the Indus Valley people also used sea-routes, 
of corroborative evidence. 

sealing with the survivals of the Indus Valley civilization, we 
n ?ider the causes that led to its decay and disappearance. The 

prog, e desiccation of the lower Indus Valley was the main cause of 
the e ‘Ration of the Indus cities. The growing danger of floods was 
certains .• ispo^sible for the evacuation of Mohenjo-daro. The Indus floods, 
however, cannot account entirely for the desertion of the Indus settle¬ 
ments, though pok jsibly climatic changes were an important reason. There 
is a remarkable de arth of means of defence both structural, such as walls, 
turrets, etc., and chanical, such as weapons, etc,, and it is probable that 
these rich, ring d cities, with their unwarlike mercantile population, 
were sacked acting tribes, some of whom may have been Aryans. 

The skele .. iound at Mohenjo-daro bear out this conjecture. A similar 
fate overtook the palace of Minos at Crete. 

The discovery of the Indus Valley civilization has pushed back the 
history of India to the period 3000-2500 B.c. if not earlier still. It is 
generally believed that there is a hiatus in Indian culture of at least 1000 
years, up to c. 1500 b.c. when the Aryans set foot in India. It will be shown 
later (Ch. XIV) that according to the traditional history of the Hindus as 
recorded in the Puranas, ancient history ends with the Mahabharata war, 
which was fought in c. 1400 b.c., and goes back to the period immediately 
after the Flood. As Mohenjo-daro culture is a post-Flood, event, we may 
hold that there is a continuity of historical traditions right from the 
Mohenjo-daro period down to the Mahabharata war, and these grow more 
and more reliable as we come to later times ending in the Gupta Age 
(fourth century A.D.). 

Punch-marked coins, with their symbols reminiscent of the Indus 
Valley script, and with their standard of weight conforming to the weight 
system at Mohenjo-daro, constitute an important survival of the Indus 
Valley dating from before 400 b.c. The die-struck and cast varieties of 
ancient Indian coins appear to be indebted to the Indus Valley for their 
form. Some of the motifs, designs, shapes, and forms found in the pottery 
and terra-cotta objects at Mohenjo-daro and Harappa find their counter¬ 
part in the objects discovered in the Punjab and the North-West, be¬ 
longing to the early centuries before the Christian era. In the field of 
religious symbols, it may be suggested that the horn-crown on the, 
head of Siva Pakupati in the Indus Valley has survived as a symbol, 
of great significance in the nandipada, and the images of Siva as 1 
Dakshinamurti and of Buddha as Yogi are due to the influence of the ’ 
Indus culture. 

These instances indicate that there was probably no complete break 
or hiatus after the Indus Valley civilization. 

197 



THE VEDIC AGE 

GENERAL REFERENCES 

Mack AY, E. J. H.: Further Excavations at Mohenjo-daro. Two yds 
Majumdar, N. G.: Explorations in Sind , MASI , No. 48. Delhi, 1 
Marshall, Sir John; Mohenjo-daro and the Indus Civilization. . 
London, 1931. 

Vats, M. S. : Excavations at Harappa. Two vols. Delhi, IQ 4 °* 





M 


1. 


The name Mohenjo-daro has been variously interpreted to mean :nounci 

of the dead" (Moh. Ind.. p. 1), "the mound of the confluence" (,:■>> I 93«» 

(Makan-jo-Daro, p 'i or me mound 


) or 


; Mariwal a, Ancient Sind, p. 9* 


8 . 

9 . 

10. 

11. 


of the dead x — t ,, 

p. 456, fn. i)„ "the mound of the killed 
of Mohan." 

1a. Harappa, p. 13. 

2. Moh. Ind., p. 274 (Mackay), 274, fn. 2 (Marshall) 

3. Carleton, Buried Empires , p. 151. 

4. Childe, New Light, p. 209; Dikshit, Preh. Civ., p. 25. 

4a. Harappa, p. 6. 

5. Mackay, BMP A , XXXI%, p. 91; cl. Chan-d., p. 235. 

6. Cf. Chan-d., pp. 236 if. 

7. Cf. Dikshit, JFVM. Cp., pp, 

Carleton, Buried Empires, p. 154. 

Script, p. 32. 

Dr. Hunter regards them as coins or stamped ingots— JRAo, 1932, p. 474. 

Dr. Thomas suggests that the seals served the combined function of seal, amulet, 
and ex voto (JRAS, 1932, p. 460), and Dr Hunter states that they were used 
for stamping unbaked clay to be carried outside the city with the offerings 
(JRAS, 1932, p. 471). 

12. Mackay, / RSA , 82, p. 218. Venkateswara refers to these as Dipalakshnu figures 
’ on account of their analogy with later metal figures in South India holding oil 

in hand (Cult. Her., Ill, p. 60). „ 

12a. Cf. Ch. VIII, p. 158, for the suggestion that the idea of the Mother Goddess 
was imported by the Dravidians from the West. 

13. Cf. Childe, New'Light, p. 222. 

14. Cf. Ch. X, below, p. 203, and Ch VIII, above, p. 161. 

14a. RV, II. I. 6; 33. 9; X. 92. 9; Mookerji, POC, VIII, p. 452. 

15. Cf. Pusalker, Prdchyavdni, I, pp. 29-31. 

16. Cf. Viswanatha, Racial Synthesis in Hindu Culture, p. 26. : 

17. For Indus Script, See Moh. Ind. (Chs. XXII, X.XIII) and Articles by hdjn, 
Heras Hertz, Hevesy, Hrozny, Hunter, Meriggi, Otto, Petrie, Piccoli, Fran 
Nath, Ross, Sankarananda, Sastri and Waddell in the Bibliography. 

18. Preh. Civ., p. 46. 

18a. See ante, £h. VIII, p. 156 

19. Carleton, Buried Empires, p. 145 
IC, III, pp. 663-73; CS, VI, p. 435, 

For different views on the authors of the Indus Culture, see MohInd. 
(pp 107-12) and articles by Banerji, Banerji-Sastn, Bhandarkar, Cadell, 
Chanda, Chatterji, Heras, Keith, Law, Mari walla, Mookerji, Pusalker, Venka- 
teswara, Sankarananda, Sarup, Sastri, Shembavnekar, Sur, and Waddell in the 

Bibliography. xr ___ r ' . 

22. Datta, Rigvedic Culture of the Prehistoric Indus, foreword, p. XXV; Chaudhun, 


20. 

21. 


CR, June 1945. 

Cf. Childe, New Light, p. 210. 

JRAI, 64, p. 193- 

2«t IBHS* HI, Pp. 187-91. , VT , 

26. It is suggested that the civilization extended southward into the Hyderabad 
State the Karn&tak, the Nilgiris, the Tinnevelly district and even as far as 
Ceylon (JIH, XVI, p. 12); but the evidence is far too meagre to justify the 
inference. 

Cf Carleton, Buried Empires, p. 161. 

198 


23 

2 4 

25 


27 


BOOK THREE 

IE ARYANS IN INDIA 

‘ v ; . 1 


,^>*5 




'HE ARYAN PROBLEM 

Florentine merchant Filippo Sassetti who, after five years* 
stay • t 583-1588), declared for the first time that there existed 
» between Sanskrit and-some of the principal languages 
°* Euroi this relation is due to origin from a common source 

Was sup in 1786 by Sir William Jones in his famous address 

the ty of Bengal. He thus established the common origin 

of a nu. jguages such as Greek, Latin, Gothic, Celtic, Sanskrit, 

Persian, etc., to which the scholars have given the name Indo-European 
or Indo-Germanic, and therewith laid the foundation of the Science of 
Comparative Philology. The third and the final step in formulating the 
Aryan problem was taken by Max Muller , who declared in emphatic 

terms: f ‘A ryan T in scientific l anguag e, jfc utterly inapplicable^tp race..It 

means language and nothing but janguage; ^ncl if we speak of Aryan 
race at all, we should know that it means no more, than X.T.Aryan 
■spSgfch:”' This purely linguistic formulation of the problem was, however, 
never fully accepted by the learned or the laity. On the contrary, a 
romantic reaction, which identified language with race, set in soon and 
was given powerful expression by Penka who declared language to be 
"the organic product of an organism subject to organic laws." 2 The 
linguistic world of the last century was thus sharply divided into two 
schools of thought, as old as the Greeks of the classical age, who also 
were unable to decide whether language is a phusis (inborn quality) or 
' merely a thesis (acquired habit ).3 Today Muller’s school is dominant, no 
doubt, but Penka’s is yet far from discredited, for it is now realized that, 
though by no means determined by race, yet, as a social phenomenon, 
a language can assume its particular aspect only within a particular 
society, and that in those very early times, when the original Indo- 
European language was gradually taking shape, such a particular society 
ctjpld have been based only on racial affinity, purely cultural bonds 
being out of the question. In fact, at the beginning, every natural language 
must have been confined within a not too large racial group- though 
it by no means follows that there could not have originated more than 
6m?T&y a S e within one racial group at the beginning. It is clear, there¬ 
fore, that ie race-question, if rightly understood, is by no means irrelevant 
to the AryaS ro ^ em - Only it is necessary to remember that the racial 
group, within 1 ™ 0 * 1 tlie primitive Indo-European language originated, 
may have itself 2?Pt ec * a non-Indo-European language in course of its 

201 










THE VEDIC AGE 



tlOtl 

oth er ’ 

-.ortant 

quite 

ativeiy 

onti^ eTit ’ 

0 i that 

out 

j-Ugrian 


:ory, or may have altogether passed out of existence. Ou 
fore be a double task: to try to identify anthropologically 
geographically the primitive racial group within which the 
European language, as reconstructed by Comparative Phil 
originated. 

There being—in spite of Penka and his schools—no org? 
between language on the one hand and race and geography 
our method cannot but be empirical. And the obviously m 
empiric fact about the known Indo-European language 
a large number of them are crowded together within 4 
small space of Europe, covering practically the whc 
whereas outside Europe, instead of a compact bod 
speech-family are found only scattered members of i 
it were, in single file, between the Semitic and the * 
linguistic areas, and ending, at least in the age of <me eailiei^ Rigveda, 
in the region of the Punjab. 1 he geographical distribution of the idioms 
of the Indo-European speech-family, therefore, does suggest that the 
original home of the Indo-Europeans is to be sought rather in Euiope 
than in Asia. Moreover, of all the living Indo-European languages of the 
present day, it is Lithuanian, and not Sanskrit (even if considered a 
living language) or any of its daughter dialects, that has kept closest 
to the basic idiom reconstructed by Comparative Philology. 

These two fundamental facts make a strong prima facie- case against 
the theory that India was the original home of the Aryans, t his view, 
though highly favoured at one time, 5 has not many supporters now, 
though some Indian scholars still tenaciously cling to it. Their views and 
arguments have been summarized in the Appendix. Ihe reader will find 
a refutation of some of them in course of this chapter. But while no 
definite conclusion about this much-debated problem can yet be reached, 
it may be reasonably urged that had India been the original home of 
the Aryans 6 they would have certainly tried fully to Aryanize the whole 
of this sub-continent before crossing the frontier barriers in quest of 
adventure. 

The fact that the whole of South India and some parts of North India 
too are to this day non-Aryan in speech is the strongest single argument 
against- the Indian-home hypothesis, especially as the existence of, a 
Dravidian speech-pocket (Brahui) in Baluchistan clearly suggests that 
the whole or at least a considerable part of India was onginally non- 
Aryan in speech. The cerebral sounds of Sanskrit which sharply distin¬ 
guish it from all the other Indo-European speech-families ;ll( rj(itling 
Iranian, are best explained as the result of Austric an Dravidian 
influence on the language of the incoming Aryans. Could,; be proved 
that the language of the prehistoric Mohenjo-daro cultu was Sanskrit 
or proto-Sanskrit, then indeed it might have been posjj{ e to argue that 

202 



THE ARYAN PROBLEM 



.a the evidence to the contrary India was the original home of 
, for there is no definite proof of the existence of an Aryan 



guage outside India previous to the age of the Mohenjo-daro 
it the Mohenjo-daro seals being still undeciphered, we cannot. 


M vC ',oolars hold the view that the Vedic culture was fundamentally 
differei from that of Mohenjo-daro, and later in date. This question has 
been d. pssed above, 8 but special stress may be laid on one point. On 
the evidence of a well-known plaque discovered at Mohenjo-daro, Sir Jolm 
Marshall teclared that the cult of Siva-Pa&upati (— Rudra) was bor¬ 
rowed by the Vedic Aryans from the Mohenjo-daro culture. Now, it is 
hardly af accident that precisely this Rudra—and no other deify—is 
iAgardec'in Vedic cult and religion as an apotropaeic god of aversion— 
t:b tfe 1 ;-ed but not adored .9 Offerings to all other gods are sacrificed 
into the fnc, but those to Rudra and his servants (Rudriyas) are simply 
deposited at cross-roads or various forbidding places. 10 Rudra and the 
Rudriyas are, therefore, in every respect analogous to the Theoi 
Apopompaioi of Greece, the gods of the pre-Hellenic autochthonous 
population of that country. 11 Should not the Rudra gods, too, be regarded 
in the same way as gods of the pre-Aryan population of India? But to 
admit that would be to confess that the Mohenjo-daro people were not 
Aryans. It is true, as noted above, that Sir John’s view is not accepted 
by all. 12 But if the oldest traceable civilization of India be regarded as 
of non-Aryan inspiration, the conclusion becomes almost, irresistible that 
the Aryans had come to India from outside. 

But why consider the Mohenjo-daro civilization to be the oldest 
traceable civilization of India? What is there to prove that the Aryan 
culture of Rigvedic India was not older than the culture represented by 
the ruins of Mohenjo-daro? Thus arises the great question of the age 
of the Rigveda, which, however, in the present context can but be touched 
in passing on the background of the general problem of the first emergence 
of the Aryans into the light of history. 

From a purely linguistic point of view the Rigveda in its present form 
cannot be dated much’ earlier than iooo B.c. The language of the Rigveda 
is certainly no more different from that of the Avestan Gathfis than 
is Old English from Old High German, and therefore they must 
be assigned to approximately the same age; and the relation between 
the language of the Gcithas and that of the Old Persian inscriptions of 
the sixth century b.c. cannot be better visualized than by comparing 
the former with Gothic and the latter with Old High German. Now, if 
the inscriptions of the Achaemenid emperors of Iran were composed in 
Old High German, what would be the date assigned to Ulfilas’ Gothic 
Bible? Surely something like iooo b.c. This then would be the approximate 
date of the Gathds of Avestan—with which the Rigveda in its present 


203 



THE VEDIC AGE 


<SL 


it 


, irm must have been more or less contemporaneous. Thus L 
linguistic considerations we get for the Rigvedic language, a ^ 
us, an approximate elate of 1000 B.c.' 1 ! Although the culture 
by it be considerably older, it can hardly be pushed , £ k 

siderablymefore 1500 b.c. The Rigvedic language, with its 
1000 B.C., therefore, furnishes the terminus ad quem and the Mbm daro 
culture of about 2500 B.c. the terminus a quo of the first Aryan vasion 
of India. In order to ascertain the extra-Indian (as shown above original 
home of the Aryans we shall now discuss the earliest datable traces ol. 
their eastern tribes (the Indo-Iranians) and then try to foll<w up the 
indication of those traces further back. / 1,3 

The earliest indubitable trace of a definitely characterized Ir^-hanian 
language of the Indo-European family is to be found, as is w« known, 
in the names of the four *Vedic gods Mitra, Varuna, Indra -no. cite 
Nasatyas (in slightly different forms) occurring in records of treaties, 
discovered at Boghaz-koi, between the Hittite king Shubbiluliuma and 
the Mitanni king Mattiuaza of about 1400 b.c. ‘5 It is very significant 
that the determinative "god” in the plural has been placed before each of 
the two names Mitra and Varuna, for the purpose of this plural deter¬ 
minative' could have been only to suggest that the two names formed 
a Dvandva compound—just as in Vedic Sanskrit.^ Yet it will be wrong 
to conclude from these names that the language from which they were 
borrowed was nothing but our Vedic Sanskrit, and to regard the minor 
differences 1 7 as due solely to the inadequacy of the Akkadian syllabary 
used by the Hittites. For the numerals ( aika , tera, panza, satta), occurring 
in a manual of chariot-racing composed in the Hittite language by a 
Mitannian author named Kikkuli, likewise discovered at Boghaz-koi, 
clearly point to an archaic Indo-Iranian dialect which was not yet fully 
characterized either as Indo-Aryan or as Iranian. 

On the other hand it is equally difficult to accept the view of the writer in 
the Cambridge Ancient History that here we have in the fourteenth century 
B.c. the undifferentiated Indo-Iranians "who at a later period formed 
these two important Indo-European stocks.” 18 For if the forefathers of 
the Vedic Aryans were still in Cappadocia in the fourteenth century B.c. 
on their march towards India, there would be no time left for them to 
forget all their previous history before giving the final form to the 
Rigvedic hymns not later than 1000 b.c.: it really cannot be proved that 
the Vedic Aryans retained any memory of their extra-Indian associations, 
excepting perhaps a camouflaged reminiscence of their sojourn in Iran .‘9 
But Boghaz-koi is not the only place yielding definite proof of the 
existence of an archaic Indo-Iranian speech-form about 1400 B.c. The 
clay tablets with Babylonian cuneiform script discovered at EI-Amarna 
in Egypt 10 have revealed the fact that numerous dynasts with Indo- 
Iranian-looking names (such as Artamanya, Arzawiya, \ asdata, Suttarna, 

204 



THE ARYAN PROBLEM 


M 6 :;,,apwhich. no specifically Indo-Aryan or Iranian feature is perceptible), 
wore rating in Syria about the same time.** Linguistic evidence der 
from regions as distant from each other as Cappadocia and y nd > 1 ■ 
f^!definitely proves that about 1400 B.c. there existed in tho^regions 
archaic Indo-Iranian speech-forms which are undoubtedly older than t re 

oldest Avestan or Sanskrit known to us. , _ 

But it is possible perhaps to reach back still larther. About 17(10 . . 

Babylon fell into the hands of the Kassites who are kn°wn to have used 
the word “tunas” to designate the sun.** This is the oldest attestc 
word of definitely Indo-Iranian stamp which was perhaps borrowed by 
the Kassites from the Indo-Iranians before they dispersed from their 
common homo, as sorted hy HmWd,. B* 

solitary word of Indo-Iranian origin cannot be regarded as ad ^ . 
proof of the existence of Indo-Iranians in western Asia already m I 
eighteenth century b.c. Nor does the joint testimony of this word and 
the Indo-Iranian names of the Syrian dynasts of the fifteenth con ury B. . 
warrant the assumption that the Indo-Iranians. already as a speedy 
characterized Indo-European tribe, entered Asia from ®brbpe over the 
Caucasus, and after occupying Iran pushed on farther to the Punjab, 
as was held by Hirt.u For even though the general movement a. the 
Indo-Europeans in'Asia might have been from west to east, yet it should 
have been quite possible for some Jndo-Iranian-speaking tn es o sweep 
ovf^r western Asia, in n back-surge of invasion. 

This is precisely the view expresled by Eduard Meyer* 5 who, on 
historical grounds, has tried to show that the point- from which the 
Indo-Iranians began to spread .eastward into the Punjab anc westwaic 
into the Mesopotamian world, is to be sought somewhere m 
nf the Pamir plateau.* 6 What Eduard Meyer urges against Hurt ,s.theory 
Ss with 'ouotiS- ••mere are, however, very grave difficulties m the way 
of accepting this theory. Precisely those regions 111 which according to 
this theory,"these (Indo-Iranian) tribes should have settled down at first 
- and wlfidi in the historical period should have been the theatre of 
their activities—should then have been so completely evacuated by them 
that not a single trace 6 f them was left behind. For among the numerous 
personal and place-names handed down to us from Armenia up to the 
end oLthe Assyrian age there is absolutely nothing Indo-European, and 
even the frontier mountains of Media are inhabited by non-Indo-Iraman 
tribes:*it is quite apparent that the Indo-Iranian Medes have here 
gradually pushed forward from the east and attained supremacy. On the 
other hand although positive proof is whol packing, it is quite impossible 

(o Sr the »< £ 

Aryan culture beginning therewith—any date later than i 5 | •- 

This theory of a westward migration of the Indo-Iranian^ from their 
common home, so ably presented by Eduard Meyer** to explain the 

205 




THE VEDIC AGE 




ipparently simultaneous beginning of Vedic culture in India an^, 
tppearance of Aryan princes in Mesopotamia (Mitanni), Syria, and 
Palestine about the middle of the second millennium B.c., was shared also 
by 01denberg 5 '9 and Keith. 3 ° Johannes Friedrich, too, at least conceded 
the possibility of a westward movement of a small body of Indo-Iranians.3 1 
Most emphaticoon this point is, however, WiU^hnikand.feO§teip, who says 
—•without however offering any new argument of his own—“fece. ..can 
ha.no. doubt that alsp Indians (probably Vedic Indians) hayOvcd in 
Further Asia. ”3* On .the whole it, is quite, clear that the Indo-Iranians 
advanced not only into India but also sprea d westward from their common 
home (hat was situated probably in the Pamir region (Meyer) or in. 
Russian Turkestan (Herzfeld). And the dispersal of the Indo-Iranians 
from their original home should have begun about 2000 b.c., since the 
Indo-Aryans had become-eompletely Indian izedwheri the Rigvedic culture 
started on its course as a distinct product of the Indian soil about 1500 b.c. 
Starting from this we shall now discuss the larger problem of the original 
home . 0.1 the Indo-Europeans. 

With the possible exception of Luvian, of which we know very little, 
ffittite is the oldest known Indo-European dialect.33 Yet, Cappadocia 
^ in Asia Minor, the seat of this oldest attested (from about 1900 u.c.)34 
I Indo-European language, cannot claim to have been the Indo-European 
l original home; for, as Gotze 3 S has shown, the pre-Hittite Assyrian com¬ 
mercial colonies of Cappadocia, after an uninterrupted flourishing existence 
of about one thousand years, canie to an abrupt end about 1950 b.c., 
apparently due to Hittite invasion. The Hittites, therefore, came to 
f Cappadocia from outside, but they could not have come from very far, 

1 I° r ibe earliest, theatre of Indo-European historical activity could not 
: have been too distant from the Indo-European original home, 
i The date I 95 ° B.c., practically certain for the Hittite invasion of Asia 
(Minor, is of great importance for Indo-European pre-history, for the 
| Indo-Iranians, too, should have reached their common home (in the Pamir 
'region or - in Russian Turkestan, see supra) about that time, since to 
account for the beginning of the specifically Indian Vedic culture about 
1500 b.c. no date much later than 2000 B.c. can be postulated for the 
occupation of their common home by the Indo-Iranians. 

Now if the two oldest known Indo-European tribes, the Hittites and 
the Indo-Iranians, appear about the same time (c. 2000 B.c.) in 
Cappadocia and Central Asia respectively, then it will be reasonable to 
conclude that the original home whence both the Hittites and the 
Indo-Iranians came was in013 or less equidistant from Cappadocia and 
Central Asia. Hence follows that neither India nor Central or Western 
Europe could have been the original Indo-European 1 jme.36 

I r ° r our problem it is now of capital importance to enquire from which 
direction the Plittites entered Asia Minor. On. the ground of similarity 

206 




THE ARYAN PROBLEM 


prehistoric ceramics of about 2800 B.c. discovered in Eastern 
Anatolia and Macedonia, Gotze concluded that the Indo-European 
Hit rites" entered Asia Minor from Europe 37 ,. after crossing the straits.38 
But this theory does not, and cannot, explain why in the historical 
period the Hittites were settled not in Western but in Central and 
Eastern Asia Minor, and it is not without reason that Eduard Meyet 39 
suggested instead that they came from the east. 

Of the other Indo-European languages of Asia, special importance, for 
the Aryan problem, attaches to Tocharian—a late attested (from the 
fifth to the tenth century a.d.) Centum language of Eastern Turkistanri 0 
of which the relation with other Indo-European languages and the basic 
idiom has been fully discussed in a remarkable article by Professor 
Benveniste. 4 * Before the discovery of Tocharian it was possible to 
maintain—in spite of the fact that the Galataeans (Celts) invaded and 
occupied Asia Minor in the third century B.c.—that on the whole all 
the Centum languages are to the west and all the Safam languages are 
to the east of the Vistula, and on the basis of this seemingly correct 
! observation .Hirt<* built up his ingenious theory that before their final 
dispersal the Indo-Europeans should have been settled on both sides of 
that river, which itself was apparently the main cause of the Sahm- 
Centwn dialect-split.« Now, however, after the discovery of Tocharian, 
Hirt’s theory can no longer be maintained. For Benveniste has shown 
that Tocharian, which like Hittite had been characterized as a distinct 
dialect even before the Safam-Centum split had taken place, was originally 
at home far to the east of the Vistula. 

Of the Indo-European languages of Europe, Lithuanian, as already 
stated above, is certainly the most archaic. Organically, as a definitely 
characterized Safow-language, it must be considered of later origin than 
Hittite and Tocharian, and yet in external appearance (flexions and 
endings) it. looks older than even these. This apparent contradiction can 
be explained, so far as can be seen, only on one hypothesis: it is necessary 
to insist that it is a hypothesis pure and simple and nothing more: an 
Indo-European group bodily came to Lithuania after th e Satm-Centum 
dialect split, and there in the backwoods started a long but uneventful 
national life in practically complete isolation, affording their language 
little opportunity to change and progress, while to all the other Indo- 
Europ^an-speaking wu&ljuv-a came not so much the Indo-Europeans 
themselves as their languages. In o+her word though Schmidt's wave- 
theory of the spread of dialects should be for the other Indo- 

European dialects, yet, so far as Lithu A concerned, we should 
accept Schleicher’s older family-tree them 

This is frankly speculative, but never .ess we shall have to accept 
it, unless we refuse to face the problem And if we accept it we shall 
have also to admit that the Indo-European original home could riot have 


207 




THE VBDIC AGE 

ven very far removed from Lithuania, for bodily movements of pd 
er long distances could not have been possible in those early times 
excepting over a long period of clash and contact with alien races and 
speeches, as the result of which the language of the immigrants could not 
but have been profoundly modified .45 It is necessary to remember in this 
connection that the Lithuanian speech-area of mediaeval Europe extended 
much farther to the east than it does today. And the fact that Lithuanian 
loan-words in Finnish are more numerous than the Slavic ones in that 
language clearly suggests that in prehistoric times the Lithuanian speech- 
area extended much farther still to the east, perhaps separating the Slavs 
from the Finns, as suggested by Hirt> 

Ihe oldest attested Indo-European language of Europe, namely Greek, 
is frankly an import from outside. As Hall47 aptly says: "Like Sanskrit, 
Greek, with all its entirety Indo-European syntax and grammar, has a 
vast non-Indo-European vocabulary. The reason was the same in both 
cases. In both lands the invading Wiros (i.e. the Indo-Europeans) found 
a previously existing non-Aryan race with which they mingled, the 
Hindus with the Dravidians, the Greeks with the Minoans, and in both \ 
cases, while the language of the conqueror prevailed, that of the conquered 
supplied innumerable names and words to its vocabulary. In both coun¬ 
tries the conquered race continued to exist side by' side with the con¬ 
querors, the dark Dasyus with the fair Aryans, the dark Minoans with the 
fairer Hellenes.” It is generally admitted today that the rulers of 
Mycenaean Greece of the fourteenth and the thirteenth centuries b.c. 
were not of Greek stock and did not speak Greek. The first Greek-speaking 
people of Greece were the Achaians, who appeared on the scene about 
1200 b.c. after the decline of the Mycenaean - civilization, and adopted 
Mycenaean cultured The Indo-European speaking tribes should there¬ 
fore have entered Greece for the first time only about 1200 B.c.49 But 
there is nothing to tell us from what region precisely the Greek tribes 
came. 

Thus the most archaic (Lithuanian) as well as the oldest attested 
(Greek) Indo-European language of Europe fails to make out a definite 
case for an European original home of the Aryans. The other European 
languages of the same family need not be discussed for a solution of the 
Aryan problem from the linguistic point of view, for they are all violent 
variations of the original Indo-European iw^Gularly uermanfc and 
Celtic. In spite of this inc ivenient tori a Germanic home theory ha s been 
always very popular- napy eminent European scholars for iacial 

reasons. It is argued by hat the interior of the Germanic countries 

—particularly Scandinavia rmot be proved to have been ever occupied 

by an alien race. If yet the manic tribes have always spoken an Indo- 
European tongue—so it is ass ted, because it is impossible to prove the 
contrary—then it will have to be assumed that Indo-European speech 

208 


ttWfsr^ 



THE ARYAN PROBLEM 


^ nto existence on Germanic soil, and that is to admit that German 
or some Germanic country was the original home of the Aryans. 5 ° This 
is in a nutshell the chief argument put forward by protagonists of the 
Germanic home theory. The inspirer of this school of thought was Penka, 
who passionately protested against the tendency of ethnologists to accept 
meekly the findings of philology.S 1 Penka’s attitude is, however, irrational. 
The Aryan problem, as formulated by Max Muller, is a purely linguistic 
one, and it can be connected with ethnology only in the restricted 
sense explained at the beginning of this chapter. But the primary 
significance attached to the term "Aryan” by Penka is the physical type 
represented by the Scandinavians! It is not to be wondered, therefore, 
that starting with this assumption Penka succeeded in proving, at least 
to his own satisfaction, that Scandinavia was the cradle-land of the 
Indo-Europeans. 5 * 

Modern supporters of Penka’s theory have altogether dropped the 
linguistic argument and tend to concentrate on prehistoric archaeology. S3 
Thus the West Baltic coast has been regarded as the home of the Aryans, 
chiefly on the ground that the oldest and the simplest artifacts of the 
period following the palaeolithic age, as well as tasteful and technically 
perfected stone implements, are found there in abundance .54 But it has 
been rightly pointed outss that in that case the equally numerous and 
handsome stone artifacts of New Zealand would be an evidence for the 
high antiquity of Maori culture. Much stress was again laid on the 
geometric patterns on prehistoric pottery in Central Germany which were 
regarded as of Indo-European creation. But apart from the validity of this 
assumption, the discovery of similar patterns on the prehistoric pottery 
of South Russia, Poland, and Tripolje (Ukraine) which were older than 
those of Germany negatives the theory of an original Aryan home in 

Germany. 56 

Indeed, the antiquity of Tripolje pottery, which may be dated in the 
third millennium b.c., has induced Nehring to formulate the view that 
Tripolje culture is the culture of the original Indo-Europeans, and in his 
opinion “the Indo-European original home lay indeed also in South 
Russia, but extended far beyond to the west. ”57 That it could not have 
comprehended any part of Western Europe is pretty certain, for 
H. Giinterts 8 and F. R. Schr 6 der 59 have shown that Western Europe 
is one of those areas that were Aryanized last. Pokorny, too, by applying 
his substratum theory that a later language is always fundamentally 
modified by the older language over which it spreads,came to the 
conclusion that “as the original home of the Indo-Europeans before the 
dispersal of the tribes (c. 2400 b.c.) should be regarded the wide 
stretches of land between the Weser and the Vistula and beyond these 
up to White Russia and Volhynia.” 61 

The region indicated by Nehring as the Indo-European cradleland is 

209 


§L 


o 



THE VEDIC AGE 



rather too wide, but from the present-day standpoint of T 36 ftp* 

.. ■? Separative Philology it would be absurd to think that the original Indo- 
Europeans “must have lived for long in a severely restricted area," as 
Giles 62 was inclined to believe. Striking isoglosses 6 3 clearly show that 
various movements must have taken place among the different Indo- 
European tribes before they finally parted company. Brandenstein’s 
researches (see below) are in this regard of capital importance. Nor can 
it be doubted that the later Indo-Europeans, even before final dispersal, 
had ceased to be racially homogeneous, and therefore the question whether 
the Indo-Europeans were blondes or brunettes cannot be regarded as 
strictly relevant. In recent times the Aryan problem has been hopelessly 
mixed up with the race question by European scholars of a certain school 
of thought, who, failing to achieve their object with the help of linguistics 
and archaeology, have adopfed racial anthropology as their chief weapon 
of battle. Starting with the assumption that blonde hair was the chief 
characteristic of the Indo-Europeans they have naturally chosen Germany 
as the Indo-European cradle-land, and adduced as proof, in support of 
their theory, various facts such as that in Greek mythology Apollo has 
been called blonde and some prominent Romans (such as Cato the Censor 
and Sulla) have been described as “red-haired” or “golden-haired” by 
Plutarch. It hardly needs to be pointed out that red hair was regarded 
as something unusual and exceptional by the Greeks and Romans, and 
for that reason only attracted public attention in Greece and Rome. 
Blonde hair was known also in India. In fact, the grammarian Patanjali 6 **. 
declared blonde hair to be one of the essential qualities in a Brahmana. 
True Brahmanas, therefore, should have been blondes in the pre-Christian 
era. And yet India, the land of the Brahmanas, has never been claimed 
as the Indo-European cradle-land by the racial theorists! 

The new line of research opened up by Brandenstein 6 5 is concerned 
chiefly with applied semasiology. He proceeds chiefly on the assumption 
that it is possible to draw definite conclusions about, the cultural evolution 
of the primitive Indo-Europeans and their prehistoric seats of settlement 
from a study of the stocks of words they should have possessed at different 
stages, and also by examining the changes of meaning undergone by those 
words. Brandenstein shows first that Indo-Iranian reveals an older stage 
of semasiological evolution than that reflected in all the other Indo- 
European dialects put together, and from this he draws the reasonable 
conclusion that the Indo-Iranians were the earliest to separate from the 
main body of Indo-Europeans, and that the other tribes continued to 
live together for some time after their departure. Indo-European of the 
period previous to the secession of the Indo-Iranians he calls Early Indo- 
European, and Indo-European of the period posterior to that secession. 
Late Indo-European. The Early Indo-European vocabulary, in Bran- ■ 
denstein’s opinion, reveals a steppe-land at the foot of a mountain-range 


210 



THE ARYAN PROBLEM 


original home which, he thinks, can be no other than the north- 
fern Kirghiz steppe to the south of the Urals. As for Early Indo- 


European flora, there cannot be found the name of a single plant that 
is typically European, and the fauna of this period comprised mammals 
like the elk, otter, wild boar, wolf, fox, bear, etc. 

I he later Indo-European vocabulary, however, reveals quite a different 
land and quite different plants and animals. In the place of words 
associated with dry steppe-land now crop up a number of vocables 
which clearly suggest swampy tracts, and now appears for the first time 
also the idea of bridges—suggesting settled residence; on the other hand 
words denotative of fauna and flora of this period point to the territory 
immediately to the east of the Carpathians. Brandenstein therefore con¬ 
cludes that the undivided Indo-Europeans lived originally in what is now 
the Kirghiz steppe, from where the Indo-Iranian tribes moved eastward 
and the other tribes, at a later date, westward. The westward-moving 
tribes, however, were split up into two groups by the Rokytno swamps, 
so that some of them struck north to be differentiated later into 
Nordics, and others advanced into Ukraine and from there farther to 
the south and the west. 

It would be senseless to claim that every detail of the itinerary of the 
Indo-European tribes chalked out by Brandenstein is, or can be correct 
But it is significant that the results obtained by him by applying his 
altogether new method should point to approximately the same locus 
as is indicated by the evidence of history, philology, and archaeology. 
Indo-Eurqpean pre-history, as reconstructed by Nehring and Branden¬ 
stein, is by no means identical, but neither are the two mutually exclusive 
Ihe main difference is that Brandenstein takes as an interim home of 
the west Indo-European tribes practically that very region which in 
Nehring s view should have been the Indo-European cradle-land 
We shall now conclude this chapter with a brief examination of the 
evidence of the non-Indo-European language-groups on the Aryan prob¬ 
lem. Similarities between Indo-European and Finno-Ugrian language- 
groups are so striking* that they cannot be brushed aside as cases of 
mere fortuitous coincidence; but on the other hand it would be conceding 
too much to them to postulate on their evidence an organic relation of 
distant common origin. The conclusion in any case is irresistible that 
Indo-European and I'inno-Ugrian had influenced each other in very early 
times. Ihe original seat of the Finno-Ugrians was, however, in Central 
Russia. And it is significant that from purely ethnographical considera¬ 
tions, too, Flor 6 7 came to the conclusion that "genetically considered the 
Uralians are, in many cases, the zone of origin of numerous Indo-European 
cultural phenomena.” 

Some such historical—not organic or genetic—relation between early 
Indo-European and early Semitic is hard to deny in face of the numerous 


2X1 



"'''"Sr*, 


THE VEDIC AGE 
points of similarity (if not identity) 

y in the endings of nominative, accusative, and genitive singular , 68 
in certain elements of dual and plural formation, 6 !) and perhaps also in j 
nominative and accusative singular of the pronominal flexion. 7 ° He even 
categorically declared that “the Semites did not radiate from Arabia as 
is assumed by most Semitists, but came to Arabia from a northern seat 
either through Asia Minor or over the Iranian plateau .’’? 1 2 3 4 

Moller’s theory has indeed not been generally accepted by the scholarly 
world, but it is no longer possible to deny today that there must have 
been at least historical contact of some sort between Early Indo-European 
and Early Semitic. This is important, for if the primitive Indo-Europeans 
had on the one hand contact with the Finno-Ugrians of Central Russia 
and on the other with the Senates, then the region that naturally detaches 
itself as the probable Indo-European cradle-land is no doubt South 
Russia, specially as Indo-Finnic relations were decidedly more intimate. 

The evidence of linguistic palaeontology need not be considered in detail, 
since Schrader did that with masterly thoroughness in diis well-known 
works;72 but it is important to remember that the region to which he 
assigned the Indo-European original home after his epoch-making 
researches' is also South Russia. The argument that has been most per¬ 
sistently levelled against Schrader is the 5.0-called beech-argument: since 
the beech was known to the Indo-Europeans, it is argued, their original 
home must have been “to the west of a line drawn from Konigsberg 
in Prussia to the Crimea and continued thence through Asia Minor ,”73 
for the beech does not grow to the east of that line. But there is absolutely 
no certainty that the Indo-European word Hhagos, from which the 
English word “beech” is very probably derived, also signified the thing 
designated by this English word “beech.” Moreover, the word for “beech” 
seems to have been confined only to the western Indo-Europeans, for 
there is no trace of it in any eastern dialect if the late Kurdish word 
buzl* is left out of consideration. In spite of the enormous increase in 
knowledge since the days of Schrader it would be best, therefore, to adhere 
to his conclusion that South Russia, more than any other region, can 
claim to be regarded as the cradle-land of the Aryans (==• Indo- 
Europeans). 

1. Collected Works, New Impression, 1898, Vol. X (The Home of the Aryas), p. 90. 

2. Origines Aricae, 1883, p. 6. 

3. See Plato's Cratylus and Christ's Geschichte der Griechischen Litteratur, fiinite 
Auflage von Withelm Schmid, erster Teil, Miinchen 1909, P- 6 39 - 

4. Fenka's own arguments are of only historical interest today and need not be 
discussed. The chief exponent of Penka's theory of the Germanic home of the 
Indo-Europeans in modern times was Gustav Kossinna. A brief summary of bis 
theorv has been given by Gordon Childe (The Aryans, pp. 166 ff.). It may be 
mentioned that most of the articles on Indo-European origins in the Hirt- 
Festschrift (Heidelberg, 1936) are from Kossinna's school. 

212 


pointed out by Moner 






12 

13 


r 4 . 


15 . 

16. 

17. 


18. 

19. 

20. 

21. 


22. 

23- 

24. 

25. 

26. 


27. 


28. 


THE ARYAN PROBLEM 

* y U P i n Europe since it was discovered that Sanskrit does not give the 
ttudst picture of the original Indo-European, 

In this chapter the word "Aryan” has been used in the sense of "Indo-European/' 
. For Mohenjo-da.ro cf. Ch. IX. 

. Ch. IX, p. 194. 

in the oldest ritual texts every care is taken not to mention directly the name of 
this terrible god. He is indirectly referred to as "this god” or "the god whose 
name contains the word bhiita ox paiu A> (i.e., Bhiitapati, Pa&upati). The name 
occurring in a Rigvedic verse (II, 3. 1) was purposely pronounced as Rudriya (Ait. 
By., Ill, 3. 9-10). From the curious remarks made in A it. By ., Ill, 3. 10 it also 
appears that the reading of RV, II, 3. ic was originally abhi ndk, e tc.', but it was 
later altered so as not to give Rudra a pretext to rush to the place of sacrifice. 
Arbmari in his dissertation on Rudra (Upp. ala, 1922) has made it probable that 
in respect of this god the later ritual texts give a more faithful picture of the 
popular beliefs of the Rigvedic age than the Rigveda itself. 

See Keith, RPVU, HOS., Vol. 31, p. 145. Precisely the same was the attitude 
of the Greeks towards their apotropaeic foreign goddess Hekate (see Nilsson, 
Greek Religion, p. 204). 

See Jane Ellen Harrison, Prolegomena to the Study of Greek Religion second 
edition, pp. 8 ff. 

Cf. Ch. IX; pp. 187, 193 ff. 

This date of the Gathds and their author Zarathustra has been maintained— 
against indigenous Iranian tradition—by Ed. Meyer who declared it to be one 
of the incomprehensible things in history that anyone should consider Zara- 
thustra's patron Vistaspa to have been the same person as the father of Darius I 
So also Bartholomae, Zarathustras Leben und Lehre , pp. For full literature 

on this point up t6 1932 see Die Iranier in Kultiirgeschichte des Allen Orients 
(Arthur Christensen), p. 213. 

Walther Wiist who in recent times has tried most to push back the age of the 
Rigveda admits nevertheless that the Mohenjo-daro culture is hot Indo-European 
and must have passed away before the Atyans occupied India (WZKM XXXIV 
PP- J 73 > 190). Cf. the views of Dr. S. K, Chatterji in Ch. VIII p 157 ff 
s « e 1919 , PP* 367 ffd Forrer, ZDMG, 1922, pp. 234 ff.; CHI, < 

See Arthur Christensen, op. cit., p. 209, fn. 6. 

E.G., Skt. Indra but Hit. In-ta -ra \ Skt. Vanina but Hit. U-ru-van-a . The se g°ds 
were worshipped not by the indigenous Mitanni people who were nc/ n ~ Incl °- 
European in speech, but by their Aryan rulers known as Maryanni J-Ee word 
matyanm may be connected with Rigvedic manta 
Vol. II, p. 13. y 

See next chapter. 

See Eduard Meyer, Geschichte des Altertums, third edition Vol 1 § 468. 

These names have been fully discussed by Mironov in Acta Orie$ ali <*> Vol. XT, 
pp. 140 ff. For a helpful criticism of Mironov’s equations and eetymologies see 
Keith, Woolner Comm, Vol,, pp. 137 ff. 

See Eduard Meyer, op. cit., Vol. I, § 456. 

Iran in the Ancient East, 1941, p. 182.' 

Die Indogermanen, Vol. I, p, 118. 

Geschichte des Altertums, II, 1, second edition, 1928, p. 35. 

Die same view has been expressed much more emphatically also by Herzfeld 
(op, cit., pp. 191-2) only with this difference—which is perhaps a necessary 
corrective to Meyer's theory—that the original Jndo-Ira-man common home 
was situated in Russian Turkestan and not in the Pamir region. 

To admit that Vedic culture began about 1500 b.c. does not of course mean that 
the Rigvedic language as known to us is to be dated so early. On the contrary 
it suggests that the Rigvedic language assumed its pr esent form at a considerably 
later period, probably about 1000 b.c., as suggeste d above on linguistic grounds 
Bor the first time in SB A, .1908, pp. 14 ff., then again in KZ, 1909 p p . 1 ff ’ 
and often later; Freiherr von Eickstedt, as equated by Nehring in his Studien 

2X3 


mtsr/fy 



THE VEDIC AGE 


<SL 


3i* 


32 , 

33 - 


45 


zur indogermanischen Kultur und Urhcimat , p. 227, considers Kazakstan to have 
been the common home of the Indo-Iranians; but he does not seem to have taken 
into consideration the possibility of a back-surge of the eastern Indo-Europeans, 

29. JRAS , 1909, pp. 1095 ft. 

30. Modi Memorial Volume , 1930, pp. 81 if. Some scholars have expressed the view 
that the Aryans of Mitanni were Indians pure and simple; cf. Jacobi, JRAS , 
1919* PP- 72* ft, Jensen, SB A, 1919, pp. 467 fi, Sturtevant, Yale Classical 
Studies , I, pp. 213 ff. 

See Ebert's Reallexikon der V or geschichte, Vol. I, 1924, p. 137. But Friedrich has 
adopted a non-committal attitude in this regard in his article “Das erste Auf- 
treten der IndogermaneiP’ in Hirt-Festschrift, Vol. II. 

Hirt-Festschrift, Vol. II, p. 37. 

See my article in IC, XI, pp. 147-60, particularly pp. 155-6; cf. also Johannes 
Friedrich, Geschichte der Indogermanischen Sprachwissenschaft, II, 3, p. 42. 
.Nehring’s speculations about the Luvians (Studien zur Indogermanischen 
Kultur und Urhcimat , p. 37) are inconclusive; his assertion that the earliest 
culture of Troy (c. 3000 b.c.) was certainly Indo-European (loc. cit.) seems 
to be an unproved assumptfbn. 

34. Sturtevant, A Comparative Grammar of the Hittite Language, p. 29. 

35. Kultur geschichte des Alien Orients, dritter Abschnitt, erste Lieferung, 1933, p. 76. 

36. Schachermeyr, too, admits that the Hittites probably entered Asia Minor about 
2000 B.c. ( Hirt-Festschrift , Vol. I, p. 234). 

Kulturgeschichte des Alien Orients , dritter Abschnitt, erste Lieferung, p. 48, 
Schachermeyr, Hirt-Festschrift, Vol. I, p. 235. 

Reich und Kultur der Chetiter, p. 234. 

For a pretty complete survey ;:f the problems connected with Tocharian, see 
Schwentner, Geschichte der ».IMogermanischen Sprachwissenschaft , zweiter Teil, 
funfter Band, Lieferung 2, Leipzig, 1935. 

41. See Hirt-Festsckrift, Vol. II, pp. 227-40. 

, Die Indogermanen, Vol. I, p. 183. 

The split is caused by the difference in the treatment of certain k and £ sounds. 
Certain dialects keep these sounds but others change them into sibilants. 

The theories associated with the names of Schleicher and Schmidt will be found 
explained in many text-books and need not be discussed here. 

also Hirt, Die Indogermanen, Vol. I, p, 125. Niederle most emphatically asserts 
tha^. t j ie Lithuanians are still living in their original home on the Baltic (Manuel 
de l . 4niAniJA.tJ Tnrm> T • FfisfnriR n r A 


37 - 

38 . 

39 - 

40. 


42 

43 

V , 

44 - 


49 


Antiquity Slave , Tome I; Bistoria, p. 13). 

46. Op. * p J2I, 

47. Bronze ^g e Q Yee ce, p. 288. 

48. Op. cit , p 2 ^g Some scholars, however, still maintain that the Mycenaeans 
were identical with the Achaians and therefore spoke Greek. 

It is important to remember that the Akaivasha (™ Achaians ?) are mentioned 
for the first -time in 1229 b.c. in the Egyptian records, and the Danauna (-Horn. 
Danaians?); j n H q 2 b.c. ( see Gordon Childe, The Aryans, pp. 72-73). Meillet 
seems to h ave considered the Akaivasha of the Egyptians, the Ahhijava of the 
Hittite te: ctSj ttle Achai(v)oi of Homer and the Achivi of the Latins to have been 
one and tj ie same people (Aperpu d'une Hisloire de la Langue Grecque, third 
edition, icu 0 , p. 57). Cf. also Schwyzer, Griechische Grammatik, Vol, I, p. 46. 
Practicably all. that can be said in favour of a Germanic home will be found in the 
two volumes of th e Hirt-Festschrift Heidelberg, 1936. 

Origines Aricae, p. 3. 

It is curious to note that both Penka (Op. cit., p. 56) and Tilak (see his Arctic 
Home in the Vedas independently of each other, arrived at the conclusion that 
the original home of* the Aryans was situated in the polar region. Penka depended 
on the evidence of Odyssey X, 81--6, where short nights are spoken of. In the 
Vedic literature there a. r e indeed passages which may suggest that the Vedic 
Aryans actually knew of the never-setting polar sun. For instance, Aitareya 
Brdhmana , II I. 4. 6: sa va es.ha na kaddchana % stam eti no f deti, etc. But it is quite 
dear that the author of the Aitareya Brdhmana is here only speaking of an 


50. 


51- 

52 - 


214 







THE ARYAN PROBLEM 

Gnomical discovery—remarkable for the age—that the sun actually 

not "rise” or "set.” ' 

53. The racists apart, whose chief preoccupation is to try to prove that the Indo- 

Europeans were of Nordic stock. 

54. Much, Die Heimat der Indogermanen im Lichte der urgeschtchlhcnen Forschung , 

second edition, 1904. . 

55. Gordon Childe, Wiener Beitrdge Zur iMlturgeschichte mid Lvngimtih , Jahrgang 
IV, Die Indogermanen und Germanenfrage, 1936, p. 526. 

36. Hivt-Festschrifti Vol. I, pp. 19, 24, 37. Rosenberg, Kultur sirdmungen in Euro-pa 
zur Steinzeit, Kopeiihagen, 193T, pp.11 ffi 

57. So Nehring, Studien zur indogermanischen Kultur und Ur heimat, pp. 97 > 59--6' 1 

58. Ur sprung der Germanen, p. 120. 

59* Germanentum und A tteuropa, p. 166. 

60. SubstraUheorie und Urheimat der Indogermanen . Mitteilungen der Anthropolo- 
gischcn Gesellschaft, LXVI, 1936, pp. 69-91. 

61. Quotation by Pittioni, Wiener Beitrdge zur Kulturgeschichte und Linguistik, 
jahrgang IV, 193b, p* 53 *■ 

62. CHI, L 66. 

63. "Isogloss" means "a linguistic innovation common to two or more groups of the 
same family of languages.” 

64. Mahabhashya ad Panini II, 2.6: gaurah lucky dckdrah kapilah pihgalakeia ity 
-^endn~api abhyantardn bvdhmanye gundn kurvanti. 

65. Die erste indogermanische Wanderung, Wien, 1936. Brandenstein's ingenious 
theory of an early Indo-European home in the Kirghiz steppe and a later Indo - 
European home in eastern Poland has not been, accepted by Nehring [Studien 
zur indogermanischen Kultur und Urheimat, p. 28, fn.) who has promised 
(foe. cit.) to give.his reasons for rejecting Brandenstein’s theory in a future 
publication. 

66. Hirt, Die Indogermanen, Vol. I, p. 72; Nehring, Studien zur indogermanischen 
Kultur und Urheimat, pp. 21-2. 

67. Hirt-Festschrift, Vol. I, p. 124. 

68 . KZ, Vol. XLII, pp. 175-9. 

69. Vergleichendes indogernianischscmitisches Worterbuch, pp. xiiif. 

70. See Albert Schott, HirF Festschrift, Vol. II, pp. 93-4. 

71. Vergleichendes indogennanischsemitisches Worterbuch, p. xvi. 

72. Sprachvergleichung und Ur geschichte, second edition, Jena 1890; Reallexikon 
der Indogermanischen Altertumskundc, second edition by Nehring in two vols., 
Berlin and Leipzig, 1917-1929. 

73. So Giles, CHI, 1 , 68. It is difficult to find a single positive argument in favour 
of Giles' Hungarian home theory. 

74. According to Bartholomae (Indogermanische Forschungen, Vol. IX, p. 271) this 
Kurdish word may be connected with "beech." 


APPENDIX 1 


The theory of the indigenous origin of the Aryans has been advocated 
by a number of scholars. MM. Ganganath Jha has tried to prove that the 
original home was the Brahmarshi-deSa.* D. S. Triveda suggests that 
the original home of the Aryans was in the region of the river Devika 
in Multin.3 L. D. Kalla advocates the claims of Kashmir and the Hima¬ 
layan region. 4 The various arguments in favour of this view may be 
summed up as follows: 

x. There is no evidence to show that the Vedic Aryans were foreigners 

215 



THE VEDIC AGE 


<SI, 


nat they migrated into India within traditional memory .(.Sufficient 
aterary materials are available to indicate with some degree of certainty, 
that the Vedic Aryans themselves regarded Sapta-Sindhu .as their original 
lio n]g) (clevakrita-yoni or devanirmita-deia). 

Migrating races look back to the land of their origin for centuries. The 
Parsis in India remember their origin after eight hundred years. The 
ancient Egyptians and the Phoenicians remembered their respective lands 
qf origin even though they had forgotten their location. The Vedic Aryans, 
if at all they came from outside, therefore, must have lived in the Sapta- 
Sindhu so many centuries before the Vedic period that they had lost all 
memory of an original home. 5 

2. The linguistic affinities are not positive proofs of Aryan immigration. 
The Vedic Sanskrit lias the largest number of vocables found in the 
Aryan languages. These are*preserved in the languages of the Sanskritic 
family in different parts of India even when there has been inter-racial 
contact for centuries. On the other hand, if the pre-Vedic Aryan language 
was spoken in different parts of Europe and Asia where the Aryans had 
settled before coming to India, how is it that only a few vocables are left 
in the present-day speech of those parts, while the largest number of 
them is found in the distant places of ultimate settlement and racial 
admixture in India ? On the contrary this disparity can easily be explained 
if the pre-Vedic was the language of the homeland of Aryans and the 
other Aryan languages came into .existence as a result of the contact 
between migrating Aryans and non-Aryan elements outside India and 
Persia. 6 

3. The Vedic literature is the earliest extant record of the Aryan mind. 
How is it that in the course of their journey to the Sapta-Sindhu the 
Aryans left no such record elsewhere? This absence of literary records in 
other countries cannot be explained away by a hypothesis that the Aryans 
only reached a high stage of cultural evolution in India. But we can 
satisfactorily explain it if we suppose that the Aryans migrated from 
India, and the migration being only of the superfluous population of 
roving tribes without great cultural development, they could not impart 
the literary and cultural tradition to the countries in which they ultimately 
settled .7 

4. The sacrificial rituals had long been established before the com¬ 
pilation of the Samhita. Therefore the home of Soma, the Mujavant. or 
Munjavant hills in the north of the Punjab, indicates the locality from 
which the sacrificial rituals developed. 8 

5. It is often argued that Lithuanian being the most archaic in the 
Aryan family of languages, Lithuania is likely to be the original home of 
the Aryans. But a language remains archaic even when the persons using 
it are unprogressive; or if they remain in a locality where no fusion is 
possible with races speaking other languages; or if they develop a highly 

216 



THE ARYAN PROBLEM 


/technique for preserving and using archaic forms, lhe fits 
"conditions are probably responsible for the archaic character of 
Lithuanian. 9 

6. It is argued that; the tiger, a native of the Bengal swamps, is not 
mentioned in the Rigveda, but the place of honour is given to the lion. 
Similarly the elephant, mentioned as the mrigahastin, shows that it. was 
a novelty. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 These arguments do not carry much weight in view of the 
fact that the Harappa civilization of the Indus Valley shows little trace 
of the lion (supposed to be common in the desert of Eajputaria) but is 
fully conversant with the worship of the tiger and the elephant as 
indicated by the seals. If in about 3000 bx. the elephant and the tiger 
were so well known in the Punjab, it is absurd to suppose that they 
disappeared so completely as not to be mentioned in the Rigveda in 
c. .1500 bx. The word mriga-hastin is merely a poetic term, and does not 
imply novelty. In the same way the word fiarvatagiri, used for a mountain 
in the same Rigveda , clearly does not mean that mountains were strange 
to the Vedic* peoples. Again it is said that rice is not mentioned in the 
Rigveda . Even so, salt is never mentioned in the Rigveda. Can we conclude 
that the consumption of salt was unknown in the Rigvedic times? Rice 
seems to have been unknown in the Harappa civilization also. This only 
proves that ymz (barley) and wheat were the staple cereals of North-West 
India. 

7, The geographical data of the Rigveda, as analysed in Ch. XIII, 
clearly show that the Punjab and the neighbouring regions constituted 
the home of the people who composed these hymns. There is no good 
ground for the belief that they or their ancestors lived in any other 
country. 


§L 


1. This Appendix is based on a long note on the subject prepared bv Prof. S. 
Srilcanta Sastri and most of the arguments are advanced by Mr. K. M. Munshi 
in Glory that was Gurjavadeta, I, Section II. 

2. Achdrya Pushpdnjali (== D. It. Bhanclarkar Comm. Vo!.), pp. 1-2. 

3. A BOR I, XX, 48 ff. 

4. POC , VI, 723-4. 

5. Munshi, op, bit., 46. 

6. Ibid., 81. 

7. Ibid. , 82. 

8. Cf. KHDS , II, Part I, pp. ii~i6. 

9. Munshi, op, cit., 83. 

10. CHI, I, Si. 


217 


CHAPTER XI 


IN DO-1 RAN IAN RELATIONS 

It has been shown in the preceding chapter that the undivided Indo- 
Iranians, as suggested by their already specifically characterized Satgm 
dialect, must have left their original Indo-European home after the Hittites 
and the proto-Tocharians, but before any other Indo-European tribe. 
After some wanderings they settled down in what may be called the 
Indo-Iranian original home which was situated in the Pamir region 
(Eduard Meyer) or more pffibably in the plains of the Oxus and Jaxartes 
(Ernst Herzfeld). The latter says: “From time immemorial, at least from 
the third millennium down to the middle of the second, the Aryans 
inhabited, as an undivided ethnical group, the vast plains of the Oxus 
and Jaxartes, the land Eranvej of the two rivers Vahvi-Datiya and 
Ranha.” 1 It is also quite clear that the Aryan principalities appearing 
about 1400 b.c. in Mesopotamia and Syria were “the successful creation 
of a group of condottien and their troops who had detached themselves 
from the main body, while the wandering tribes passed through eastern 
Iran towards India,” 2 

The undivided Indo-Iranians must have passed a long time in their 
Central Asian common home, for here grew up a specific Indo-Iranian 
culture and religion that may be reconstructed, at least partially, by 
comparing the Veda, with the A vesta. Before the occupation of the 
Iranian plateau by tribes from the Indo-Iranian original home, the 
high land, to all appearance, was the seat of a culture that was probably 
matriarchal, and the people worshipped snake-gods like the primitive 
non-Aryans of India. It is very probable, therefore, that the pre-Aryan 
cultures of North-West India and Iran were of the same spirit and 
origin. 3 

This old cultural link between pre-Aryan Iran and pre-Aryan India, 
instead of being strengthened as a result of the migration of the Aryans 
into these two countries, as could be normally expected, was to all 
appearance completely severed, for there is nothing to show that the 
Vedic Aryans of India maintained an active cultural relation with their 
brethren in Iran. 

In the earliest days the Aryans of India must have been connected 
with the Aryans of Iran, either as friends or as foes, but “actual historical 
contact cannot be asserted with any, degree of probability .”4 The two 
peoples turned their backs upon each other as it were, and developed 
their distinctive civilizations apparently without the least mutual 

218 




INDO-IRANIAN RELATIONS 

icfi, although in language, 5 culture, and religion their similarity 
ti^SBftiest period was little short of identity. When later in histor 
under the Achaemenids, Greeks, Bactmns, and Sakas, the Iranians 
and the Indians were forced to meet as citizens of the same empire, they 
met as complete strangers, not as cousins of the same family. 

Geographical barriers are no doubt to some extent responsible for 
this apparent mutual oblivion, as also the fact that from the Indo- 
Iranian common home the pre-Indians and the pre-Iranians expanded 
in two almost opposite directions. All this, however, cannot explain the 
complete cessation of cultural contact between Iran and India even as 
early as the Rigvedic age. The Iranians had retained a distinct memory 
of the Indo-Iranian common home (Eranvej) in their mythology, but 
the Indo-Aryans, who must have developed their distinctively Indian 
Rigvedic culture about 1500 B.c. at the latest, have nothing to say on 
this point. It is indeed difficult to get away from the idea that Jfie silence 
maintained by the earliest. Vedic Indians on Iran and the.Iranians was 
at least partly intentional, for some of the geographical names prove 
beyond doubt that the period of immigration had not been so long as 
to have completely obliterated all memory of the land they left behind. 
Thus the names Rasa, Sarasvati and Bahlika, not to speak of others, 
must have been brought to India from Iran by the Aryans and applied 
to two Indian rivers and one Indian province .7 The reticence maintained 
by the Vedic Aryans about immigration from Indo-Irania was, there¬ 
fore, at least partly intentional, for otherwise it would seem that those 
parts of the Rigveda in which possible or probable Iranian names occur, 
were composed already in Iran, as Hillebrandt actually suggested. 8 

Incompatibility of some sort between the earliest Aryans of India and 
Iran has to be assumed to explain this camouflaged indifference,, and it 
is also clear that this incompatibility was the cause of their divergent 
movements from their common home and ultimately destroyed "the 
cultural unity between Iran and India of the pre-Aryan days. Seeds of 
such incompatibility which later developed into mutual hostility can be 
clearly seen already in the oldest Aryan religion and cult of these two 
countries. The primitive Indo-European religion recognized only nature- 
gods (sky, sun, wind, etc.) and a fire-cult .9 But already the,undivided 
Indo-lranians knew a soma-cult beside the older fire-cult, anil abstract 
deities 10 beside the older nature-gods. Indo-Iranian society had there¬ 
fore ceased to be culturally homogeneous even before the forefathers 
of the Indian and Iranian Aryans parted company, and it is hardly 
to be doubted that their parting was more the effect than the cause of 
the cultural contrast revealed in religion. The old Indo-European term 
*deivo (= Indo-Iranian *daiva) was apparently considered inappropriate 
for the new abstract and ethical deities, and a new term, A sura, perhaps 
borrowed from a higher civilization, 1 ' came to be used as their designa- 

2x9 




THE VEDIC AGE 


<SL 

vasuie 


fion. Varuna was the chief of these ethical deities just as Indra was 
chief of the older nature-gods. 11 

The fact that about 1400 B.c.. in the well-known treaty-record 
discovered at Boghaz-koi, the .Daiva-gods Indra and Nasatya appear 
side by side with the Asura-gods. Varuna and Mitra, clearly suggests, as 
Christensen^ has pointed out, that the antagonism between the worship¬ 
pers of the Daiva-gods and the As«/«-gods—which is the central feature 
of early Indo-Iranian history—had not yet broken out. But it was in 
full blast long before the advent of Zarathustra whose Gathas should 
be dated about 1000 b.c. on linguistic grounds, as shown in the preceding 

chapter. .. 

The antagonism between the worshippers of the new gods and the old 
must have been one of the main causes of the estrangement and subsequent 
secession of those Aryans wfio later conquered India, but their antagonism 
was not confined to the field of religion alone. Christensen 1 ! has suggested 
that the Aswra-religion was practised by the more cultured and steadier 
elements of the primitive Indo-Iranian society whose chief occupation 
was *agriculture and cattle-breeding, while the older Daiva-x eligion 
continued to find favour with the more vigorous but less civilized portions 
of the people to whom the primitive predatory habits were more con¬ 
genial: the former were content to remain behind in Iran, but the latter, 
urged by the spirit of adventure, advanced farther east and at last entered 
India But all of those who remained, behind were not A sura- worshippers, 
nos: all of those who braved the hardships of the forward march into 
India were adherents of the Daiva- religion. The DaiVadnscription of 
Xerxes *5 discovered in 1035 , clearly shows that even so late as the fifth 
century B.c. £>«w«-worship had to be forcibly suppressed within the 
Achaemenian empire. And in India we meet with the curious situation 
that in the oldest period all the great gods received the title A sura as a 
decorative epithet, though later it came to be used exclusively as a term 
of abuse. In innumerable passages in the Brahmanas the Aswas have 
been represented as superior to the Devas in the arts of civilized life, 
and both in Vedic 16 and Puranic tradition they are regarded as the cider 
brothers of the gods. They are as far above the Dasas and Rakshasas 
as the Devas themselves. 

All things considered, it seems difficult to deny that along with the 
great horde of DmVa-worshipping Aryans came to India also a culturally 
superior strong minority of A worshippers, whose cult and religion 
was slightly different from that of the former and who were for that 
reason ceaselessly cursed and condemned by the \ edic Aryans, more 
out of jealousy, it would seem, than out of contempt hor if the Vedic 
Aryans intentionally suppressed all reminiscence of the Inclo-Iiama 
original home, as suggested above, would they not also have suppressed 
the memory of the A sura-worshippers in the same way it they could. But 


220 



IN DO-IRAN IAN RELATIONS 


afey could not., because some A. sw#-worshippers were physicall 

present among them. . 

The earliest Indo-Aryan society, too, like the earliest Indo-Iranian 
society, was therefore not quite homogeneous culturally. It was pre¬ 
dominantly---but not exclusively— Duivic, while the conte mpoi ary 
Iranian society was predominantly Asuric. After a period of conflict and 
adaptation there was peace which proved successful to the extent that 
even the foremost of the Daiva- gods, namely Indra, not only came to 
be regarded as an Asura in the oldest parts of the Rtgveda, but was also 
credited with possessing mdyd, which was a special property of the 
Asuras and probably signified “magical power.” 1 ? It is hardly an accident 
that in Hindu mythology the architect of the gods is an A sura whose 
name is Maya: the rude Darm-worshippers apparently regarded the 
superior arts and crafts of their rivals as achieved by magic. 

In spite of the Daiva- bias of the Indians and the A sura-bias of the 
Iranians their culture and religion continued to be essentially the same 
till the advent of Zarathustra in Iran. Zarathustra’s position is more or 
less analogous to that of the Buddha in India and Orpheus in Greece, 
both of whom protested effectively against the ceremonial slaughter of 
animals in the name of religion, but not by far so vehemently as Zaia- 
thustra. 1 ® In his Gathas Zarathustra condemns in bitter terms the 
orgiastic festivities at which the Daiva- worshippers, inebriated with 
Soma, offer bloody sacrifices to their gods, extinguishing amidst shouts 
of revelry the life of the innocent bull. 1 ? It is clear that the ritual practices 
against which Zarathustra directed his homilies closely resembled those 
of the Vedas. A large number of common cult-words such as haoma 
(= soma), zaotar .(— hold ), athravan (= atharvan ), manthra (= mantra), 
yazata (= yajata ), ya&na (= yajnd ), azuiti (=*= dhuti), etc., and also the 
whole sacrificial cult, leave no doubt that Vedic and Avestan ritual 
are of one and the same origin.* 0 Evidently, the Zarathustrian reform 
could not materially alter the essentially Vedic character of the Soma 
cult cherished in Iran from ages before his time. 

In the field of religion and mythology, however, Zarathustra was more 
successful. But here, too, the points of similarity are striking enough to 
prove previous identity. The ceremony of U-panayana is practically the 
same in the Veda and the Avesta, and in both the conventional number 
of gods is the same, namely thirty-three. Both in the Veda and the Avesta 
the picture of the gods is primarily that of an heroic Aryan warrior riding 
in a chariot drawn by powerful steeds. Like the Vedic, gods those of the 
Avesta too hold up the sky to prevent its falling down, and image- 
worship is equally unknown in the Avesta and .the Veda. Varuna, like 
his Avestan opposite number Ahura, assisted by Mitra (Avestan Mithra), 
is the supreme guardian of moral law, and the conception of cosmic 
order is represented in both by the same abstract deity, the Vedic 


pL 





THE VEDIC AGE 


'HL 


ihi *== Avestan A§a. 2t Even the notorious discrepancy between^the 
edic and Avestan Indra will disappear if the history of this god, as 
reconstructed by Benveniste and Renou, 22 is kept in view. Their ingenious 
theory may be summarized as follows: In the Indo-Iranian epoch there 
were two different gods, Indra 2 3 and Vritrahan (vritra = resistance, 
vntrahak = resistance-breaker). Indra was nothing but a concrete per 
sonalization of mere physical prowess, known in. the legends of most 
primitive civilizations, but he was too Daivic to .suit the taste of the stem 
reformer Zarathustra who did not hesitate to send him to Hades. But 
the Lord Resistance-breaker, i.e. Vri#ragna, whose function it was to 
break the resistance put up by evil, continued his glorious career within 
the Iranian pantheon. Indra and Vritrahan were united in the same 
person only later in the Vedic age. In short, Vedic Indra is the Indo- 
Iranian Indra (mentioned at Boghaz-koi) plus Vritrahan, whereas Avestan 
Indra is the Indo-Iranian Indra minus Vritrahan. There is no discrepancy, 
therefore, between Vedic Indra and Avestan Indra if it is remembered 
that the history of Indra is in reality the history of two different gods 
wh.6’ influenced each other in two different ways in Iran and India. 

Ihe Nasatyas who in the Boghaz-koi inscription are mentioned side 
by side with Indra and Vanina also appear in the A vesta, though as a 
demon 2 '} like Indra, and even the minor Vedic god Apam-napat is repre¬ 
sented in the Avesta by a god of the same name. To the Vedic Gandharva 
corresponds the Avestan Gandarowa, and to the Vedic Kri^anu the Avestan 
Eorosani.^s In the Veda, Yama, tlie son of Vivasvat, is the ruler of the 
dead, in the Avesta, Yirna, the son of VIvanhant, is the ruler of paradise. 26 
Examples can be multiplied to show that in spite of the Zarathustrian 
reform, the Iranian religion continued to be much the same as before. 
On the whole it seems that Zarathustra’s reform was not so much a 
break with the past as a determined and partly successful effort to re¬ 
assert the principles of the old Asura religion by ridding it of all Daivic 
contaminations. 2 ? This is suggested pointedly by the curious fact that 
not content with consigning to Hades the prominent Daiva -gods like 
Indra, he changed the name also of the chief A sura-god Varuna into 
Ahura Mazdah. 28 That Zarathustra dropped the name while retaining 
and raising to the highest honour the personality of this god is apparently . 
because in the previous age—at the time of the Boghaz-koi tablets at 
any rate—he had lived in the corrupt company of the Daiva -god Indra. 
For a similar reason Zarathustra avoided the word Baga “god” of Indo- 
European origin, though it occurs in the pre-Zaratbustrian parts of the 
Avesta and in the Old Persian inscriptions , 2 9 for an Indo-European 
word of religious connotation could not but have Daivic associations. 

So long as it was believed that the Gathas, because oldest in language, 
give also the oldest picture of the Aryan civilization of Iran, it was by no 
means possible to see that the society described in the Veda and the Avesta 


222 




INDO-IRANIAN RELATIONS 

initially the same. But it has now been fully established that the 
civilization of the Gathas is a later reformed civilization of Iran, of which 
a much older phase is reflected in the Yasts, particularly the so-called 
heathenish. Yaks, i.e. the Yasts which have suffered least from Zara- 
thustrian revision. 3 <> And the culture reflected in these pre-Zarathustrian 
heathenish YaSts is essentially that of Vedic India. The very Haorna- 
cult, which is rightly regarded as the chief indicator of Indo-Iranian 
cultural unity, is not only pre-Zarathustrian but definitely anti-Zara- 
thustrian, and could be retained in the post-Zarathustrian religion of 
Iran only because the prophet—clearly out of policy—did not specifically 
mention Soma in prohibiting intoxicating drinks: from this omission it 
was argued by Avestan theologians that all other intoxicants are impure, 
but not Haoma. 3 * Benveniste has demonstrated that the Persian religion 
of the Achaemenian age, as described by Herodotus, agrees not at all 
well with that of the Gathas, but shows significant points of similarity 
with the Vedic religion. 3 * 

The notorious difference in burial customs between Iran and India 
entirely vanishes on scrutiny. The custom of exposing dead bodies in 
daknias, which is unknown in India; was riot of Persian origin, but a 
Median custom confined to the Magi. It became the customary funeral 
rite of Iran only in the Arsacidan age, and is mentioned for the first time 
in the Videvdat, a product of the Arsacidan period. The Achaemenian 
monarchs, whose Zarathust rianism cannot be seriously doubted, were 
placed in elaborate grave-chambers- after death, and it is nowhere recorded 
that the corpse of any one of those mighty emperors had been thrown 
to birds and beasts .33 

The ancient Aryan culture of Iran was thus hardly distinguishable 
from the ancient Aryan culture of India. And that is as it should be, for 
both were derived from one and the same Indo-Iranian culture. 


1. Iran in the Ancient East , 194T, p. 190. 

2. Op.-cit., p. 192. 

3. Op. cit., pp. 11, 177. 

4. Ved. Ind., I, p. 505. 

5. Linguistic affinity between the earliest Aryans of India and Iran has been 
discussed by the present writer in Linguistic Introduction to Sanskrit, pp. 26-47 
and 1 C, VII, pp. 343~59* 

6. For the history of later Indo-Iranian relations see CIII, I, pp. 323 £f. 

7. See Vedic Index under these three names. Zimmer was even of opinion that 
Vedic Rasa directly refers to Iranian Ranha, i.e. Jaxartes ( AL, p. 16). 

8. Ved. Myth., first eel., Vol. I, pp. 99 ft; Vol. Ill, pp. 372-8. Older attempts to 
read Iranian history and geography in the Veda have been briefly dealt with by 
Jackson in CHI, Vol. I, pp. 322 ft, and more recently by Keith in Woolner 
Comm. Vol . (1940). 

9. Cf. the fires of the Prytaneia in Greece, Vestal firfc of Rome, Garhapatya fire 
of India (Keith, RPVU, II, pp. 625-6). 

10. Like Vedic \Rita = Av. ASa (to be pronounced ary a, from aria). 
i t. As I have suggested elsewhere (IC , VII, p. 339). this term is probably nothing 
but the personal designation of the tutelary deity of Assyria used as a generic 

223 




12 


*3 

14 

15 

16 

T 7 


18 


19 

20 , 

21 . 

22 . 

2 3 * 

2 4 . 

2 3 * 

26. 

27. 

28. 

29. 

30 . 
3 1 ' 
32. 

33 - 


THE VEDIC AGE 

n ^2 e j7 the Indo ‘T ranians who must have come in direct or indirect cJWarrr 
with the Assyrians during the period of Kassite ascendancy, for the Kassites 
on the one hand borrowed from the Indo-Iranians the word surya and on the 
other conquered Assyria. Of. Thomas, JRAS, 1916, pp. 362-6. " 

Varupa was originally a nature-god no doubt, since the equation Skt. Varuna ~ 
Gr . Ouranos lias to be accepted (see Keith, 1 C, Ill, p. 421). Yet the natural 
oasis ol this god had been usurped by Dyaus pita = Zeus pater already in 
ndo-European times, and as a result he became a pronouncedly ethical god. 

V arupa s associate Mitra, too, was originally a nature-deity—a'sun-god—as I 
have tried to show before (IC, III, p. 63), but he too had to lose his natural basis 
to the more powerful Surya. 

KuUurgeschichte des Alien Orients, p. 211. 

Op cit., pp. 211-12 

See Sukumar Sen, Old Persian Inscriptions, pp. 148—^6 
See Keith, RPVU, II, p. 457. ^ 4 5 "■ 

. See 1 C, V II pp. 61-62. Benveniste has shown that the conception o i Mdva, 

Y meal ^s of which Indra and his Iranian opposite number Vri 0 rag.ua could 

assume different forms at will, dates from the Tndo-Iranian epoch (Vrtra et 
VrQragna, pp. 32 ff., 194). ~ ' 

* tra ? i i lori WGuld mak e Zarathustra more or less a contemporary of 

Buddha and Orpheus (if, as is generally thought, they were historical persons), 
but according to Eduard Meyer ( Geschichte des A Iter turns, second edition, third 
volume p. no fn. 3) it is an inexplicable thing that anybody should think so. 

1 hat Eduard Meyer was light can be hardly doubted, although weighty opinions 
have been raised against his view. The mention by Assurbanipal about 700 b.c. 

. As.sara Mazag along with seven good angels and seven bad spirits is a clear 
indication of acquaintance with the reformed Zarathustrian pantheon (see 
° tiJ r P* ls impossible therefore to suggest that the Kavi ViStaspa 

mentioned m the A vesta as the patron of the prophet was no other than the 
father of Darius I (522-486 b.c,), for in that case the Zarathustrian pantheon 
could not have been known m Assyria in the days of Assurbanipal 
bee Christensen, op. cit., p. 220. 

See Hillebrandt, Rituallitteratur, § 2. 

See footnote 10. 

In Vftra et VrSragna, Paris, 1934. 

I he name of this god is to be derived from Hittite innar —"strength.” 

Ayestan Nadnhaiihya, to be pronounced Nohaithya. 

To be pronounced KriSani. 

See Macdonell, VM, §5. 

I expressed a different view in IC, VII, p. 338. 

Darmesteter has aptly said that Ahura Mazdah is no more different from Varuna 
than Zeus is from Jupiter (SEE, IV, p. Hi). 

See Herzfeld, Altpersische Inschriften, p. 106. 

See Christensen, op. cit., pp. 214 ff. 

Op. cit., p. 229. 

Persian Religion, .Ratanbai Katrkk Lectures, Paris 1929, pp. 32 ff. 

See Herzfeld, Iran in the Ancient East, 1941, pp. 216—17. 


224 



MtA HSTq* 




CHAPTER XII 


VEDIC LITERATURE 
GENERAL VIEW 


Our knowledge of the Indo-Aryans is based on the evidence of Vedic 
literature, of which the chief constituents are the four collections known 
as the Rigveda, Samaveda. Yajurveda, and Alharoaye&a, Not a single work 
of the Vedic period can be accurately dated. On linguistic grounds the 
language of the Rigveda, the oldest Veda, may be said to be of about 
iooo B.c., 1 but its contents may be—and certainly are in the oldest parts-— 
of much more ancient date, and its latest parts, resembling Atharvanic 
charms, are as surely of much later origin. This Rigveda is neither an 
historical nor an heroic poem, but mainly a collection ( samhita ) of hymns 
by a number of priestly families, recited or chanted by them with appro¬ 
priate solemnity at. sacrifices to the gods. Naturally it is poor in historical 
data. The Sdmaveda hardly counts at all as an independent text (see 
below). The Samhitas of the Yajurveda, if the Brahmana portions of the 
schools of the Black Yajurveda are left out of account, are nothing but 
collections of short magic spells ■ used* by a certain class of priests at the 
sacrifices. For the history of the Indian people of the Vedic age the 
Atharvaveda is certainly the most important and interesting of the four 
Samhitas, describing, as it does, the popular beliefs and superstitions 
of the humble folk, as yet only partly subjugated by Brahmanism. 

Next to the Samhitas are the Brahmanas, an arid desert of puerile 
speculations on ritual ceremonies. They mark the lowest ebb of Vedic 
culture. The Upanishads were at least partially the result of a popular 
protest against the soulless ritualism of the Brahmanas, as was also the 
rise of sects like the Vaishnavas, Jainas, Buddhists, etc. In the Sutras 
Brahmanical orthodoxy fought and lost its last battle against these 
forces of religious liberalism before merging itself in the synthetic national 
religion of India in the pre-Muhammadan era, i.e. Hinduism. A brief 
survey of the Samhitas, Brahmanas, and the Srauta-sutras™ is given 
here to indicate the nature and extent of these texts, reserving for later 
chapters their linguistic and literary valuation. 


i. THE SAMHITAS 


r. Rigveda 

Of the various recensions of the Rigveda known in tradition only one, 
namely the Sakala recension, consisting of 1,0x7 hymns of very unequal 


225 


p 




THE VEDIC AGE 



g th * has come down to us apparently complete, and it is this SakaL 
recension that is meant when one speaks of the “Rigveda,'’ though we have 


parts of two other recessions of the Rigveda, namely the Vaiakhilya 
(xi hymns, usually placed in the middle of the eighth Mandala of the 
Sakata recension) and the Bashkala (36 hymns in the Aundh edition of the 
Rigveda, the so-called Khila-suktas, most of which are evidently spurious 
fabrications, inserted at various places in the Sakala text). Why 
fragments—and only these fragments—of the Vaiakhilya and Bashkala 
recensions have been handed down to us is quite clear: they had definite, 
though minor, roles to play in the ritual (as proved by later ritual texts 
in the case of some of them), and therefore had to be preserved. 3 
Originally the ritual varied, not only from school to school but also from 
family to family, 35 but later in the Rigvedic age a- system of ritual with 
minor variations, generally recognized by all the principal schools and 
priestly families, had been built up, for which the texts collected in the 
Sakala school were accepted en bloc, but in which there always remained 
not a few loop-holes provided by the continually expanding ritual, and 
these loop-holes had to be stopped with Rik-mantras drawn sometimes 
from other recensions. 

^ Now, if the existing fragments of the non-Sakala recensions of the 
Rik-Samhitd owe their survival apparently only to the fact that they 
were utilized in ritual by priests of the Sakala school3—and indeed no 
other plausible reason can be suggested for the anomalous survival of 
these non-Sakala Rik-texts—then the important question arises: should 
not the preservation of the whole Sakala recension itself be attributed 
to the same cause? This question has doubtless to be answered in the 
affirmative.4 AH the hymns accepted into the Samhita must have possessed 
intrinsic ritual significance at the time of their acceptance. 

Later, however, the ritual changed, and not a few of the hymns of the 
Samhita in consequence lost their proper viniyoga, but not their position 
in the Samhita which had become sacrosanct and therefore unassail¬ 
able^ 3 

The Rigveda is not—as it is often represented to be—a book of folk 
poetry; nor does it mark the beginning of a literary tradition. Bucolic, 
heroic, and lyrical elements are not. entirely absent, but they are sub¬ 
merged under a stupendous mass of dry and stereotyped hymnology 
dating back to the Indq-Iranian era, and held as a close preserve by a 
number of priestly families whose sole object in cherishing those hymns 
was to utilize them in their sacrificial cult. Of natural outpourings of 
heart there is not much to be found in the Rigveda, for the hymns were 
part of an elaborate ritual which gradually came to be regarded as capable 
not only of persuading but also of compelling the gods to do the bidding 
of the officiating priests. This magico-religious attitude of mind found 
tullest expression later in the MImamsa philosophy in which the gods >■ 

226 


VEDIC LITERATURE — GENERAL VIEW 



\yqp*l retained only in name and the ritual itself came to occupy the place 



One hymn of three verses 5 and three verses of three other hymns 6 
have not been divided in the Padapatha by Sakalya, who must have been 
dead when Yaska wrote 63 and therefore lived before 600 b.c. This is 
important, for it shows that hymns and verses could have been added to 


the Rik-Samhitd. even after the date of Sakalya, for it is clear that Sakalya 
would not have left the hymn and the verses in question undivided if 


they had formed an integral part of the Samhita in his time. The formation 
of the Rik-Samhitd, as we know it today, had therefore not been quite 
complete even so late as the time of Sakalya. On the other hand, there is 
nothing to tell us when the task of collecting the hymns into a Sarifhita 
was started. 

Most of the hymns were not composed as such, but were mechanically 
manufactured out of fragments of a floating anonymous literature,? and 
the process of manufacturing hymns in this manner must have continued 
for a long time. The fact that there are Mantras cited by Pratikas in the 
Brahmanas of the Rigveda which do not occur in our Samhita clearly 
shows that at the time of these Brahmanas recently adopted or freshly 
manufactured Rik-verses were considered good enough for utilization in 
ritual, but were yet denied a place in the Samhita. 8 It is impossible to 
imagine, however, any stage in the development of the Rik-Samhitd. at 
which a demand for new Mantras was not present, for the ritual in which 
they were intended to be used was all the time growing in complexity 
and expanding in range—and therefore demanding new Mantras at every 
step.* 8 There is indeed much to be said in favour of a ritual tradition 
advocated by Hillebrandt?—which in his opinion was independent of the 
literary tradition of the Rik-Samhitd known to us, and which contained 
hymns all of which need not have been included in the latter. 10 

There is at all events no doubt that the texts constituting the Puroruchas, 
Nividas, and Praishas for the ritual are of pre-Samhita date, and that the 
Praiiga-suktas, Apri-suktas, etc., were composed directly with an eye 
to application in ritual.” All things considered, it seems best to conclude 
that the hymns constituting the $ik-Samhitd, though certainly not always 
composed or manufactured directly for the sacrificial ritual, yet owe 
their inclusion in the Samhita, which guaranteed their preservation, 
wholly to the fact that at some time or other the ritual offered a place 
to each of them. 

The division of the whole Samhita into ten Mandalas, and the number 
and arrangement of hymns in these Mandalas, are not at all arbitrary. 
It is hardly an accident that the number of hymfts contained in the first 
and the last Mandalas is exactly the same, namely one hundred and 
ninety-one. The kernel of the Rik-Samhitd is, however, constituted by 
the so-called family-Mandalas, i.e. the six consecutive Mandalas from 


227 


^■istwn 



THE VEDIC AGE 


,§l 


■ second to the seventh, each of which is supposed to have been comp* 
iA particular family of priests. The hymns of these family-Mandalas 
are often composed of tristichs (Irichas )—evidently because in ritual, as 
a rule, groups of three verses, and not whole hymns or single verses, are 
used. The eighth Mandala is known as the Pragatha-rnandala, for the 
verses in mixed metres known as Pragathas, indispensable for the Udgatri- 
ritual, are drawn mostly from this Mandala. The ninth is most pro¬ 
nouncedly a ritual Mandala, for in it were collected all the hymns addressed 
to Soma Pavamana, 12 which were originally included in the other 
Mandates. The first Mandala falls naturally into two parts: the first fifty 
hymns have the Kanvas as authors like the eighth Mandala and are 
arranged according to principles obtaining in that Mandala (see below), 
but the rest are arranged ii^ the manner of the hymns of the family- 
Mapdalas. The tenth Mandala is manifestly a later addition, often Athar- 
vanic in character—yet not so late that the few Pavamana-hymns origi¬ 
nally belonging to it could not be transferred to the ninth Mandated 
I he principle governing the original arrangement of hymns in the 
family-Mandalas seems to have been determined by three considerations— 
deity, metre, and the number of verses contained in the hymns con¬ 
cerned. *4 Each farnily-Mandala opens with a. group of hymns dedicated 
to Agni, immediately followed by another group addressed to Indra.'S 
Then follow' in each family-Mandala groups of hymns dedicated to various 
gods, the relative positions of these groups being determined on the 
whole in the descending order according to the number of hymns 
contained in each, or, when such groups contain each an equal number 
of hymns, in the descending order according to the number of verses 
contained in the fust hymn of each group. It follows as a necessary 
corollary to this rule that if in a farnily-Mandala several deities have 
as their shares only one hymn each, then these single hymns should be 
put at the end of the Mandala and arranged in descending order according 
to the number of verses contained in each. Within each deity-group 
the order of hymns is determined chiefly by metre, again in the descending 
order, the hymns in Jagati coming first and those in Gayatri coming last. 
These are in brief che laws governing the arrangement of hymns in the 
family-Mandalas—laws re-discovered in our age by Bergaigne and en¬ 
dorsed by Oldenberg. 16 These laws cannot, of course, be rigorously 
applied to the text of the Rigveda as we find it today. Yet, when a re¬ 
division of the hymns is made on the plausible grounds suggested by 
Bergaigne and Oldenberg, it is found that exceptions' to these laws are 
surprisingly few. And it leaves no doubt that the redactors of the family- 
Mandalas had in mind a comprehensive plan—the advantages of such a 
plan are obvious—according to which every single hymn in this large 
collection could occupy only one particular position and no other. 

The plan of the eighth Mandala is altogether different. Here the hymns 

228 



VEDXC LITERATURE—GENERAL VIEW 

^arranged primarily according to the deities invoked in them as 
family-Manc;lalas .‘7 The principle followed seems rather to have 
been primarily to group together all the hymns of each individual author, 
and then to arrange the hymns of each such group into sub-groups of 
hymns addressed to particular deities; and that in such a manner that 
the verse-numbers of the first hymns of these sub-groups'would be in a 
descending order. This peculiarity of the eighth Mandala, together with 
the fact that most of the hymns in Pragatha metres are found in it, does 
suggest—but by no means proves—that the eighth Mandala was sub¬ 
joined at a later date to the kernel constituted by the family-Mandalas. 1 7 a 
But there is positive reason to believe that there was a time when the 
eighth Mandala was actually considered to be the last in the Samhita, 
for why eise should the Valakhilya-hymns be thrust into the eighth 
Mandala and not added after the tenth? Also the simple fact that the 
eighth Mandala is followed by the ninth strongly suggests the same 
thing, for since the latter consists almost exclusively of Pavamana- 
hymns combed out of the other Mandalas, it could have been constituted 
as a separate collection only after them, and consequently after the efghth 
Mandala also. It should not be forgotten, however, that the ninth Mandala 
is of a comparatively later date only as a separate collection, but not in 
contents. Why it was considered necessary to assemble in a separate 
collection only the hymns addressed to Soma Pavamana and no other 
deity is perfectly clear, for while the hymns addressed to other deities 
were primarily the concern of the tlotri-priests, those invoking Soma 
Pavamana were originally meant exclusively for the Udgatri-priests— 
who therefore should have taken the initiative in collecting the Pava- 
mana-hymns in a separate book. 18 And since the Udgatri-priests were 
Saman-singers and not simply Mantra-reciters like the Hotri-priests, it 
is not to be wondered at if the hymns contained in the Udgatri-Mandala 
are arranged, as they actually are, according to metres, the chief concern 
of the redactors of this Mandala having been apparently to group together 
hymns composed in the same metre. 

From the above survey it will be clear that all attempts to establish 
a relative chronology of the first nine Mandalas of the Rigveda cannot 
but be futile.^ That the tenth Mandala is later in origin than the first 
nine is, however, perfectly certain from the evidence of the language. 20 
But it is also certain that the whole of the Rik-Samhitd, including the 
tenth Mandala, had assumed practically the same form, in which we find 
it today already before the other Samhitas came into existence. 21 


2. Samaveda 

As regards the Samaveda™ it is necessary always to keep in mind that 
the word satnan means "melody,” and that the Sama-Samhita is nothing 
but a collection of melodies. Certain texts are, of course, included in 


22Q 




THE VEDIC AGE 

'a® is known as Samaveda, but the role of these texts in the Sdma^cf 
.is altogether secondary—in fact analogous to the part played by musical 
notes in music. The texts used as musical-notes in this Veda are more¬ 
over almost wholly drawn from the Rik-Samhitd. According to the figures 
given in the Aundh edition of the Samaveda, of the 1,603 verses (not 
counting the repetitions) of this Veda only 99 (again not counting the 
repetitions) are not found in the Rik-Samhitd .*3 The literary and historical 
value of the Samaveda is, therefore, practically nil, though its importance 
for the Sonra-ritual cannot be overestimated. 

The text part of the Samaveda serving merely the purpose of musical 
notes, every melody could theoretically be chanted on every verse. Yet 
this' freedom seems never to have been actually taken in the ritual. 
Rather the ritual demands j. hat particular melodies should be chanted 
on particular verses. It is the double task of assigning particular melodies 
to particular verses and particular verses to particular melodies that 
has rendered so complex the Samaveda which is, needless to say, a purely 
ritual Samhita. The complexity of the whole system has become still 
more enhanced on account of the fact that, on the one hand, the same 
sdman can be chanted on different verses, and on the other, different 
saffians can be chanted on the same verse. In the language of the ritual 
texts, the verse on which a sdman is chanted is called a Yoni, “source.” 
This suggestive term, used already in the Brahmanas, clearly shows that 
it had become conventional in ancient India to regard the verse as the 
source of the melody, 2 4 even though of text and melody one can never 
be the source of the other. The Samaveda proper, i.e. the Arctuka, is 
nothing but a collection of 585 Yonis. The Purvarchika, together with 
the Aranyaka-Samhita and the Uttararchika, represents the text-part, 
of the Samaveda. The Gramageyagana, the Aranyageyagana, the Ohagana 
and the tjhyagana 2 5 together constitute its song-part. 

The Purvarchika records only verses (Yonis) to each of which corre¬ 
sponds a single sdman (melody) named after the seer who is supposed to 
have discovered it, and these sdnians corresponding to the verses of the 
Purvarchika are registered in the Gramageyagana and the Aranyageya¬ 
gana. The Yonis of the Purvarchika are divided into three parts: Nos. 
1-114 are verses addressed to Agni; Nos. 115-466 to Indra; and Nos. 
467-585 to Soma Pavamana. The Uttararchika, on the other hand, 
record's mostly tristichs (trichas) or distichs ( pragMhas ) 26 occasionally 
also complexes of more verses, but never single verses as in the Purvar¬ 
chika. Now, generally the first verse of a Tricha of the Uttararchika is 
found to occur among the single verses (Yonis) of the Purvarchika , 2 7 
and when such is the case it is to be understood that the melody belonging 
to that particular Yoni of the Purvarchika has to be chanted on the 
whole of the corresponding Tricha of the Uttararchika. In actual chant, 
however, no verse can retain its original form. Therefore it is not sufficient 

230 



VEDIC LITERATURE—GENERAL VIEW 


to indicate which verse has to be chanted in which melody. It 
Cssary further to indicate what modifications a verse will have to 
undergo when chanted in a particular melody. To indicate the actual 
forms assumed in chant by the tristichs of the Uttararchika is the purpose 
of the Ohagana, which thus gives the melodies of the Gramageyagana 
in their final ritual form. The 0 hyagana does the same for. the melodies 
of the Aranyageyagana. 28 

3. Yajurveda 

The Yajurveda is, if possible, even more pronouncedly a ritual Veda, 
for it is essentially a guide-book 2 9 for the Adhvaryu-priests who had to 
do practically everything in the sacrifices excepting reciting the Mantras 
and chanting the melodies. 3 ° And since variation is more natural in 
manual work than in recitation and chanting, we actually possess 
today—not merely in tradition as is mostly the case with the other 
Sarhhitas—no less than six complete recensions of the Yajurveda, of 
which two (Madhyandina and Kanva) 3 ° a constitute the White Yajurveda, 
and the rest (Taittiriya, Kathaka, Maitrayani and Kapishthala) the 
Black Yajurveda.:? 1 

The fact that the Goputha-Brdhmana (I. 29) in citing the first words 
of the different Vedas quotes in the case of the Yajurveda the beginning 
of the Vajasaneyi-Sarhhita 3 2 may suggest that the White Yajurveda 
represents the original tradition of which the Black Yajurveda with all 
its recensions is a later variation. But the truth should rather be just 
the opposite, for it is hardly possible that Mantra and Brahmana, 
kept separate as in the White Yajurveda tradition, should have got 
.mixed up at a later date. It is generally assumed, therefore, that the 
Bl’ack Yajurveda, with Mantra and Brahmana mixed up throughout, is 
older than the White Yajurveda in which the Brahmana was separated 
from tire Samhita, perhaps in imitation of the Rigvedic model. In the 
Taittiriya-Brahmana, too, which is merely a continuation of the 
Taittinya-SarhAJtd (but not necessarily later than it for that reason), 
and which, too, owas jts origin as a. separate treatise to the influence of 
the Rigvedic tradition.f 33 Mantra and Brahmana have not been separated.34 
It is a peculiar feature of the Taittiriya texts that the Samhita and the 
Brahmana of this school supplement each other in such a way that each 
seems to presuppose the other. 

The relative chronology of the extant versions of the Black Yajurveda 
has long been, an interesting but unsolved problem .35 Language in this 
case fails to/ provide a dependable criterion, for, in spite of inevitable 
unimportant linguistic peculiarities of each, all of them may be said to 
speak in/ the same language.3 1 ' The treatment of the Rigvedic Mantras 
in the Sarhhitas of the Black Yajurveda is interesting: the Kathaka and 
the Maitrayani in this respect often agree with each other against the 

231 


,pL 



THE VEDIC AGE 



<SL 


veda and the Taittinya ,37 which should indicate, if Oldenberg’s well- 
own theory is true that slavish conformity to Rigvedic text is a sign 
of comparative lateness of Yajurveda-Samhitas, 3 * that the Kathaka- 
K apish thala-Maitrayani may have been older than the Taittinya. As 
regards the Brahmana-parts of the Taitiinya-Samhitd, Keith.39 has 
shown that they are later than the older first five Panchikas of the 
Aitareya-Brdhmana and older than the Satapatha-Brdhmana, but 
anything more precise about their relative or absolute date cannot be 
hazarded. 

If slavish conformity to the text-tradition of the Rigveda is indicative 
of comparative lateness, then the Samhitas of the White Yajurveda 
must be regarded as comparatively late, to judge them by the Rigvedic 
verses quoted in them, as amply demonstrated by Olden berg. 4« Moreover 
the Vajasaneyi-Samhitd lacks that general uniformity and homogeneity 
which pervades not only the whole of the Taittiriya-S amhitd but extends 
also to the Brahmana and the Aranyaka of the Taittinya School. Of the 
forty odd Adhyayas of the Vajasaneyi-Samhitd, it is quite evident that 
the last, twenty-two were added later-* 1 gradually to a basic text consisting 
of the first, eighteen. As a rule only the formulas found in the first eighteen 
Adhyayas occur also in the Taittiriya-Samhitd, while those of the last 
twenty-two are met with in the Taittiriya-Brdhmana.v The next three 
Adhyayas (XIX-XXI) give the Mantras of the SautramanI, a sacrifice 
performed to expiate the sin of excessive indulgence in Soma, and the 
following four (XXII--XXV), those of the horse-sacrifice. The remaining 
fifteen Adhyayas (XXVI-XL) are expressly called Khila in the ancillary 
literature. 43 

4. Atharvaveda 

The A tharvaveda is utterly different from the other three Vedas disc - ’ 

above, for though an effort was made at a comparatively late '/ 0 
absorb it within the sacred Srauta-literature by furnishing, it l!°maiily 
with a Srauta-sutra with the significant designation 'Vaitana-sutra ,44 
yet it was never accorded full recognition in the ri+caal of the Soma-cult, 
and to the last it remained essentially what it ii^as from the start—a 
prayer-book of the simple folk, haunted by ghosts and exploited by 
Bra.hmins .45 In its present form the Atharvaveda is v certainly the latest 
of the four Samhitas, but in contents it is by no mean's so, for there can 
be no doubt that Bloomfield 4 6 was perfectly right in characterizing the 
Atharvaveda as follows: “On the whole the Atharvaveda is the bearer of 
old tradition not only in the line of the popular charms; but also to some 
extent, albeit slight, its hieratic materials are likely to be the product 
of independent tradition that has eluded the collectors of the other 
Vedas, the Rigveda not excepted.” At the same time, however, it is quite 
clear that the hymns and charms of the Atharvaveda were collected in 

232 



VEDIC LITERATURE —GENERAL VIEW 

ita and handed down to the present day only because the Bra* 
ritual gradually extended its sway over profane superstition, 
and by degrees granted a grudging recognition even to frankly magical 
incantations that were originally doubtless of non-Brahmanical inspira¬ 
tion. This is proved strikingly by the Khila-hymns of the Atharvaveda, 
the so-called Kuntapa-suktas, of no particularly sacred character, which, 
as Bloomfield has amply demonstrated,47 were nevertheless retained and 
handed down in tradition, apparently only because they were indispensable 
for a popular cult that had succeeded in wringing recognition from the 
circle of sacerdotes. 

The Samhita of the Atharvaveda is now before us in two recensions, 4 * 
the Saunaldya recension ,49 and the Paippalada recension. 5 ® It is the 
Sauna My a-Samhita that is usually meant when the Atharvaveda is 
mentioned in ancient or modern literature. But the earliest references 
seem to have been to some other (probably Paippalada) recension. 
Patanjali’s statement on Panini V. 2. "37 to the effect that the text of the 
Angirases consists of twenty chapters may apply to both the recensions, 
since each consists of twenty Kandas, but the initial verse of the 
Atharvaveda as quoted by PatanjaU and also in the Gopatha-Brahmana 
is not the opening verse of the Saunaklya recension,o but of the 
Paippalada text.* 7 - 

Of the twenty Kansas of the Atharvaveda ,53 the last one is manifestly 
a later addition manufactured almost wholly out of borrowings from the 
Rigveda to serve as a manual for the priest called Brahmanachchhamsin 
who had a definite, though minor, role to play at the Soma-sacrifice.54 
Moreover the Kuntapa-suktas of this Kanda are without any Padapatha, 
and nothing parallel to them can be found in the Paippalada recension- 
showing that they had been given a place in this late Kanda of the Saih- 
hita at a very late date. In fact, the nineteenth Kanda ends with a 
significant prayer which strongly suggests that the Samhita at one time 
was considered to end with it. But there are reasons to believe that the 
nineteenth Kanda itself is a late compilation, for its hymns, though 
found in the Paippalada recension, are scattered throughout that text. 
Both the nineteenth and the twentieth Kandas have been ignored in the 
Prati§akliya of the Atharvaveda. The eighteenth Kanda, consisting of 
four funeral hymns, should also be regarded as a later addition, for its 
contents are absent in the Paippalada-recension. The seventeenth Kanda, 
consisting of only one hymn of purely magical contents, is a curious 
anomaly, and must be regarded as a late accretion, though partly appear¬ 
ing also in the Paippalada text. The most interesting of all the Kandas 
is the fifteenth, composed not in verse but in typical Brahmana prose, 
and devoted to the mystic exaltation of the Vratya. Probably this Vratya- 
kanda was the first of the additions successively made to the original 
text of the Atharvaveda which has come down to us in two recensions. 

233 



THE VEDIC AGE 


<SL 


re is no reason to doubt the antiquity and authenticity of the other 
Kandas of the Atharvaveda. 


2. THE BRAHMANAS 

The Brahmanas are, if possible, ritual texts of an even more pro¬ 
nounced type than the Samhitas, for though the hymns and charms of 
at least the Rigveda and the Atharvaveda need not all have been of ritual 
origin, there is no room for any doubt in the case of the Brahmanas that 
the sole object of their authors was to speculate on and mystify, but 
hardly to explain, minute details of Brahmanical sacrifices. The duties 
of the Hotri-priests, who had 4 o recite the Mantras- of the Rigveda at the 
sacrifices, have been luxuriantly speculated upon and mystified by the 
authors of the Brahmanas of the Rigveda, those of the Udgatri-priests 
in the Brahmanas of the Sdmaveda, etc. All that is found in the Brah- 
manas that is not directly concerned with ritual is, strictly speaking, 
irrelevant and unnecessary from the view-point of their authors. 

The Aitareya and the Kaushitaki (or Sdhkhdyana) are the Brahmanas 
of the Rigveda, and of them the former is older in date and bigger in 
bulk, but the latter is richer in contents. But the Aitareya itself is plainly 
a composite work, its first five Panchikas being older than the last three. 
Similarly, only two Brahmanas of the Sdmaveda have been preserved, 
namely the Jaiminiyatf and the Tandy a-maha-Brahmana, the latter 
also known as the Pahchavimsa-Brahmana on account of its twenty- 
five chapters, to which a supplementary chapter was added that somehow 
came to be regarded as an independent treatise with the singular designa¬ 
tion “Shadvlmia-Brdhmana.” The Jaimimya-Brahmana is indeed one 
of the most interesting works of the later Vedic literature, and rivals in 
importance the Satapatha-Brdhmana 5 ® of the Yajurveda, for in elucidation 
of the details of ritual the authors of these two Brahmanas have intro¬ 
duced numerous stories,, mostly of an aetiological character, which 
nevertheless throw welcome light on social conditions. Regarding the 
relation between the two recensions of the Satapatha-Brdhmana, namely 
Madhyandina and Kanva, Caland has expressed the opinion that both 
existed from the very beginning, but later the Kanva-recension was 
influenced by the other .'7 

It is also clear at the same time that neither the Madhyandina nor the 
Kanva recension of the Satapatha-Brdhmana has beery handed down to 
us in its original redaction, for quotations from the Salapatha in early 
literature are often missing in both the recensions. Moreover, it is certain 
that the Brahmapa in both its recensions is a composite work. For though 
Yajnavalkya Vajasaneya is the authority most frequently quoted in the 
Satapatha, yet in both the recensions there are five Kandas (Kandas 

234 



k 


VEDIC LITERATURE—GENERAL VIEW 


in Madhyandina corresponding to Kandas VIII-XII in Kanva) 
ing with the construction of the fire-altar, in which the authority 
quoted is Sandilya and Yajnavalkya has not been mentioned at all. It 
ren uns still to mention only one of the more important Brahmanas, 
nai ly the Goprttha-Brahmana of the Atharvavedw consisting mostly of 
s ^ v y modified quotations (without acknowledgment) from other 
st 3s. It gives the impression of being so late that Blooinfields 8 declared 
il > be more recent than even the Srauta-sutra (Vaitana) and the 


lya-sutra (Kaurika) of the Atharvaveda . 


3. J HE SRAUTA-SUTRAS / 

Puerile speculation on the minutiae of ritmal, so much in evideice 
in the Brahmanas, developed in the direction of pure speculation in the 
Aranyakas and Uparishads. Wintermitzs* has truly said/that “it is often 
difficult to draw the In v betweem the Aranyakas and, the Upanishads.” 
Only it is necessary to 1 oer that it is no less difficult to dra\# the 

line between the Brahmanas and the Aranyakas. Among the Srauta- 
stitras, too, there is at least one text, namely the Baudhciyana Srauia- 
sutra , which it is difficult not to regard as a late Brahmana. Thus a fine 
line of demarcation between Brahmana, Aranyaka and Srauta-sutra is 
out of the question. Yet it would be correct to say that the speculative 
spirit developed in the Brahmanas in connection with ritual ceremonies 
tried to burst its irksome fetters in the Aranyakas, and in some of the 
Upanishads attained the stage of as complete an independence as was 
ever witnessed by man. The Aranyakas and Upanishads, 60 though 
nominally connected with the Brahmanas, should rather be regarded as 
the beginning of purely speculative thinking in India. Much more closely 
connected with the older Vedic literature (Samhitas and Brahmanas) 
are the Srauta-sutras, and to a lesser extent, the Grihya-sutras. 61 

The Srauta-sutras describe 6 * the ritual sacrifices in a language that is 
both vigorous and prophetic in brevity, but is also utterly unintelligible 
for that very reason. No greater contrast can be imagined than that 
between the Brahmanas and the Srauta-sutras, though the subject of 
treatment is the same in both. Both are obscure, but for different reasons: 
the Brahmanas, because of loose thinking, and the Srauta-sutras, because 
too much is taken to be understood in them. Moreover the £rauta-sutras 
isolated the common and special features of the sacrifices arid cleverly 
dealt with them as if they were digits of number, and that by itself must 
be regarded as an intellectual achievement of "no mean order. 6 3 Truly 
scientific spirit is unmistakably reflected in the Srauta-sutras, albeit 
the subject to which this spirit was applied was still magic pure and 
simple . 6 4 


235 



THE VEDIC AGE 

The Srauta-sutras of Asva'-ayana and Saiikhayana belong tOl®. 
SRigveda, which means that the ritual duties of the Hotri-priests fn-ve 
been presented in them id a systematic form. But some of the verses 
quoted by Pratlka in the Sdnkhdyana Srauta-sutra cannot be foiud in 
the Sakai a- recension of the Rik-samhita,&> and so it is surmised t) f^it 
was affiliated to the Bashkala-Sakha and not to the Sakala-iakha ■ the 
Rigveda. As regards the Brahmanas, its affiliation is to the Katu fii 
and not the AUareya-Brdhmana. Of its eighteen chapters, the last P, 
though not necessarily of later origin, were a later addition, deafi°y 
the Mahaveda, popular festival that was given a Brahmai 
complexiai at a latter date. The Asvaldyana Srauta-sutra, on the o er 
hand, is affiliated to the Sakala-Sakhfi of the Rik-Samhita, land the 
Ailareta-Brahinana. Of' these two Srauta-sutras of the Rigveda, 
Sarkhayana's should be the older, for its language in sorre places is 
.Ike that of the, Brahmanas. flbe principal Srauta-sutrarof the Sdmaveda 
are those of Latydyana and Dredhydyana, the nrst affiliated to the 
Kauthuma-sakha and the latter to this Ranayahva-6akha. A remarkable 
feature of the Laiydyana Srauta-sutra is P 3 udras, Nishadas, and 

Vratyas have not been treated in it as accursed human beings as is 
generally the case in other Vedic texts. 66 

The Apastamba Srauta-sutra of the Black Yajurveda, belonging to the 
Khandikiya school of the Taittiriyas, is in many respects the most im¬ 
portant work of this genre, for no other single work gives such an ample 
(though by no means complete) description of the Vedic sacrifices; but 
the numerous quotations from other ritual texts found in it suggest that 
it should not be placed too high in date. The Satyashadha Srauta-sutra 
is a particular recension of the Apastamba Srauta-sutra. The Apastambins 
seem to have been prejudiced against the Kanvas and Kasyapas, for their 
Srauta-sutra (XIII. 7. 5) forbids the giving of presents to them. The 
oldest and the most archaic of all the known Srauta-sutras is certainly 
the B -<dhdyana Srauta-sutra pi also of the Black Yajurveda. In style 
it stf Resembles a Brahmana in most respects, and according to tradition 
it ’ ,dngs to the Khandikiya-school like the Apastamba Srauta-sutra. 

T’ /White Yajurveda is represented in the Srauta-hutra literature by the 
■iAtfayana Srauta-siitra, of which a striking feature is that three of its 
Adhyayas (XXII-XXIV) are devoted to Samavedic ritual. Among the 
teachers cited by name in it are found some of the Black Yajurveda. 68 

Lastly, the Atharvavedins too got their Srauta-manual in the shape 
of the Vaitdna-sutYa —anomalously enough, for the Atharvaveda has, 
strictly speaking, nothing to do with Srauta-ritual, But since the Sarhhita 
of the Brahmanachchhamsin, one of the priests participating in Soma 
sacrifices, came, to be appended to the Atharvaveda 6 9 the way was appar 
ently opened thereby for the despised Atharvavedins to make inroa< 
into the protected field of Srauta-ritual. The result of this novel experi 

236 




VKXHC L fTERATU.RE—-GENERAL VIEW 


is the Vaitdna-sutrcL But as Bloomfield has observed, “it is not 
the product of practices in $rauta-ceremonies which have slowly and 
gradually developed in a certain high priestly school, but a somewhat 
conscious product, made at a time, when the Atharvavedins began to 
feel the peed of a distinctive $rauta-manual to support their claim that 
the Atharvaveda is a canonical Veda of independent and superior 
character." 7 ° Strictly speaking, the V ait an a Sutra is the £>rauta-Sutra 
only of the twentieth Kancla of the Atharvaveda and not of the whole 
of it. And since this Kan$a is nothing but the Samhita of the Brahma¬ 
nachchhamsin, the Vaitanasutra may quite appropriately be called the 
Srauta-sutra of the Brahmanachchhamsin. It may be noted that only 
18 verses? 1 of the twentieth Kan<;la of the Atharvaveda have not been 
assigned viniyoga in the V ait ana-sutra. 

1. See supra, p. 203. 

1 a. The Upanishads and the Grihya-sutras are not being taken into consideration 
in this chapter, for they are related more intimately to the post-Vedic than to 
the Vedic. literature proper. They will be discussed in later chapters. 

2. It was pointed out long ago by Oldenberg (Prolegomena, p. 508) that not only 
the Valakhilya-hymns, but also the Suparna-hymns, the oldest of the Khila- 
suktas, had a definite place in ritual according to tradition. According to the 
Annvakan ukr aman 1 36, the Bashkala-Samhita contained 1025 hymns, in its 
additional eight hymns being included seven Valakhilyas and the Sarhjhana 
(Oldenberg, Prolegomena, p. 494). Difference between the three recensions 
thus lies only in the Khilas. 

2a. This is why we have six "family Mandalas” in the Rigveda. This point has 
been fully demonstrated by Bergaigne., 

3. Strictly speaking, the Rigveda that we know is the Sai&irlya redaction of the 
Sakala recension of the text. 

4. All the Vedic scholars, however, excepting Leopold von Schroder, who assigned 
a place in ritual even to the dialogue-hymns (Mysterium und Mimas in Rigveda, 
p. 36), have answered this question in the negative, though not all with equal 
emphasis. 

4a. It has to be remembered, however, that some special lands of ritual formulas 
such as the Praisha and Nivid-mantras, though indispensable for ritual from 
the earliest period, have nowhere been collected in a Samhita. 

5. RV, I, 190. 

6. RV, VII. 39, 12; X. 20. x; X. 121. 10. 

6a. Because Yaska (VI. 28) when referring to him uses the perfect tense (chakdra). 

7. This is definitely proved by the material collected in Bloomfield’s Rigveda 

Repetitions . * 

8. See on this point particularly Oldenberg, Prolegomena , p. 367. 

8a. Thus, when as a result of the growing complexity of the Srauta-ritual an 
additional assistant of the Hota (nominally of the Brahman) had to be included 
among the usual band of priests in the person of the Brahmanachchhamsin, a 
new Samhita too had to be created for him which was appended at a very late 
date to the Atharvaveda, forming its last Kan(Ja (Oldenberg, dp. cit., p. 347; 
Das Vaitdnasutra des Atharva-veda, iibersetzt von W. Caland, p. vi). 
Bezzenbergers Beitrdge , Vol. VIII, p. .195. 

Hillebrandt’s theory has been criticized—not quite fairly in our opinion—by 
Oldenberg (Prolegomena, p. 519). Variant readings of Rik-texts in later ritual 
literature should not, however, be taken as proof in support of Hillebrandt’s 
theory, for the variations might have been due to intentional alteration of the 
Rik-texts to suit the ritual practices of a later age. 

See Scheftelowitz, Die Apokryphen des Rgveda, p, 9. 

237 




9 

10 


11. 


THE VEDIC AGE IHI 

It is not at all right to say—as Winternitz does (H%L, 1, p. 58)—that 
Mandala "contains exclusively hymns which glorify the drink of Soma, and are 
dedicated to the god Soma." In fact there is not a single hymn in the ninth 
Mandala dedicated to the god Soma, Such hymns are found only in the other 
Mandalas—for the simple reason that the Soma-hymns of the ninth Mandala 
are dedicated solely to Soma Pavamana and not to Soma. 

13. This point has been particularly stressed by Oldenberg, Prolegomena, pp. 252-3. 

14. Authors' lists given in ancillary literature (Anukramanis), though containing 
many apparently spurious names, are on the whole quite trustworthy and 
fully in conformity with the internal data of the hymns. For a different yiev/ on 
this poin t see Winternitz, op. cit., p. 58. 

15. This systematic reversal of the natural order of the gods is not without signifi¬ 
cance. Indra is undoubtedly the most powerful god in the Vedic religion, but. in 
Vedic ritual Agni may claim the first place—since no sacrifice is possible without 
fire. This again goes to support the view that the redactors of the Rik-samhita 
were, guided chiefly by considerations of ritual. 

16. Prolegomena , p. 192. 

17. The eighth Mandala too may totalled a family-Mandala, since the authors are 
mostly of the Kanva family, but authors of other families are also frequently 
mentioned. Nor can it justly claim to be the Pragatha-mandala as it does, for 
the majority of its hymns are in non-Pragatha metres, and hymns in Pragatha 
metres are present also in other Mandalas. 

17a. That is to say, all the fanfily-Man<Jaias might have been constituted out of the 
then existing material in one day or in one minute, but the eighth Mandala, of 
which the most essential part is manifestly its large number of Pragatha-hymns 
which originally should have been distributed—-not necessaril)' equally—among 
all the farnily-Mandalas (like the Aprl-hymnsl), could be constituted only 
after the family-Mandalas. 

18. See Oldenberg, Prolegomena, p. 250. 

19. Attempts galore have, however, been made to achieve the impossible, the last 
and the most elaborate attempt being Wiist’s Stilgeschichie xtnd Chronologic des 
Rgvedct (Leipzig 1928) in which previous literature on this problem has been 
fully indicated. 

20. CL below, Ch. XVI. 

21. Oldenberg, Prolegomena , p. 328. 

22. By "Samaveda” is to be understood the Kauthuma-^akhS. of this Samhita, 
with which perhaps the Samhita of the Kanayanlya-6akha was identical. The 
Jaimimy a-Samhita has been edited by Caland. 

23. Readings of this large number of common passages are, however, not identical 
in both the Vedas. Ludwig, after an elaborate comparison of all these passages 
(Der Rigvcda, Vol. Ill, pp. 83 ff.) came to the conclusion that in many passages 
the Samaveda has actually retained the original reading and not the Rigveda. 
But Ludwig's theory has been severely criticized by Oldenberg (. Prolegomena , 
pp. 288 ff.). 

24. Much as it was conventional to regard the PadapaTha as the source of the 
Samhita-text. 

25. The Ohag&na and. Ohyagana are not regarded as canonical. 

26. By "Pragatha" are meant complexes of two verses of which the second is a 
Satobrihati and the first either a Brihati or a Kakubh (see Rihprdtisdkhya, 
XVIII. 1). In actual application, however, every Pragatha has to be artificially 
expanded into a Tricha. 

27. Quite a number of Trichas of the Uttararchika, however, have nothing to 
correspond to them in the Purvarchika.: that is because all of them are chanted 
uniformly on the Gayatra-melody composed on the well -known Savitrx-mantra 
[tat savitur = varenyam, etc.). On the other hand, many Yonis of the Purvar¬ 
chika are without a correspondent verse in the Uttararchika: this is perhaps 

* because the sacrifices at which the Samans concerned were chanted were not 

Soma-sacrifices (see Caland, Panchavim&a-Brdhmana, Translation, Introd., 
pp. x-xi). 



238 


MINIS r/) 



VEDIC LITERATURE—GE NERAL VIEW 


5 M chronological relation between the Purvarchika and the Uttararchika has 
been always one of the chief problems facing Vedic scholars, but the problem 
seems insoluble. See on this point particularly Caland, op. cit., pp. xiv if. and 
Suryakanta, Riktantm, pp. 23 if. where previous literature on this important 
problem has been indicated. 

29. Yajurveda-texts are by no means guide-books in the sense that any person by 
studying them can form a picture of the ritual ceremonies dealt with in them. 
In fact even by studying the relevant portions of the Samhitas, Brahmanas, 
and Sutras in the light of the commentaries it is not possible to reconstruct fully 
the duties performed by a single priest at one of the great sacrifices, for all these 
texts proceed on the assumption that the ritual is already known to the reader 
in all its details. Only the late Pacidhatis may be regarded as guides for the 
uninitiated, but, of course, they contain much that is not Vedic. 

30. Already in the Rigveda the Adlivaryu is called snhastya and madhupayi (X. 41.3) 
in contrast to the Hotri who is called suvach (X. no. 7) and sujihva (I. 13. 8 ). 

30a. Regarding differences of reading between these two, see Caland, Kdnva- 
Satapatha , Introd., p. 91. 

31. Formerly it used to be tacitly assumed that the Sukla-Yajurveda is so called 
because Mantra and Brahmana are not mixed up in it as in the Krishna-Yaj ur¬ 
veda. But it is more probable that the redactors of the former claimed to have 
collected in it only the iukldni yajuniski "white or pure Yaj us" (Ved. Ind., 
II, p. 183) already mentioned in the Brihaddranyakopanishad VI. 4.33—'whence 
the names "White Yaj urveda" and, as a contrast, "Black Yaj urveda." 

32. As pointed out long ago by Max Muller, HASL, second edition, i860, p. 453, 
and emphasized by Weber, HIL, p. 106 fn. 

33. See Keith, IIOS, XVIII, p. Ixxvi, Certain sections of the TaiUinya-Brahmana , 
such as those on human sacrifice (III. 4) and Nakshatreslitayah. ( 1 .5) are certainly 
of later origin. 

34. The same applies, mutatis mutandis , also to the Taittifiya Ay any aka. "The 
Sutras do not recognize any distinction between the A rany aka, the Brahmana, 
or the Samhitd as regards their Brahmana portions" (Keith, ibid., p. Ixxvi). 

35. Schroder in his preface to the Maitrayani Samhitd indeed tried to prove the 
priority of the Kathaka and Maitrayani recensions; but failed to convince any 
one. 

36. Keith arrived at this conclusion regarding Taittiriya, Maitrayani, and Kathaka 
(see HOS, XVIII, p, xcvi). As regards the Kapishthala, see Oertel, Zttr Kapis- 
thala-Katha-Samhitd, Munchen, 1934. 

37. See Keith, op. cit., p. lxxvii. It should be noted that the Kapishthala, which is 
closely related to the Kathaka, agrees with the latter to cjiffer from the Rigveda 
in 64 cases,jand agrees with the Rigveda to differ from the Kathaka in 45 cases 
(Oertel, op. cit., pp, 9 If.). 

38. Prolegomena , p. 319. 

39. Op. cit., p. xcix. This applies, pari passu, also to the Brahmana-parts of the 
other Samhitas of the Black Yaj urveda. 

40. Prolegomena , p. 318. Caland also says "there can be no doubt whatever that the 

White Yaj urveda is on the whole younger than the Black Yaj urveda" (Kanva 
Satapatha, Introd,, p. 92). • 

41. They are not, of course, for that reason of later origin. 

42. See Eggeling, SBE, XII, p..xxx. 

43. For further details about the Vdjasaneyi-Samhitd, with which the Samhita of 
the Kanva-school is practically identical, see Weber, MIL, 107 if. 

44. The word Vaitdniha signifies Srotriyas maintaining three fires (see Hillebrandt, 
RitualliUeyatiiv, p, 69). 

45. Bloomfield’s excellent monograph on the Atharvaveda —liker which unfortunately 
there is as yet nothing on any one of the other Samhitas — oilers practically 
everything that a student of the Vedic literature might wish to know about 
the Atharvaveda. The section on the Atharvaveda in this chapter is mainly 
based on Bloomfield’s monograph (published in the Grundriss). 

46. Op. cit., p. 50. 


<SL 


239 




THE VEDIC AGE 


"48. For other recensions, see Bloomfield, op. cit., p, 12. 

49. Published many times. 

50. Edited by Raghu Vira. 

51. As pointed out by Weber, Tnd. Stud., XIII, p. 433. 

52. As surmised already by Bloomfield, op . cit., p. 40. 

53. Always the Saunakiya recension is to be understood unless the Paippalada is 
specifically mentioned. 

54. See footnote 8a. 

55. A complete edition of this important text by Raghu Vira is now appearing from 
Lahore. The most interesting parts of it were published by Caland in his 
“Auswahl.” For details about it see Caland, Over en uit het Jaimmtya-Brdhmana . 
Some parts of the Jaimintya Brdhmana were published for the first time by the 
present writer in his Collection of Fragments of Lost Brdhmanas { Calcutta, 1933). 

56. ' Of which the Madhyandina recension was published long ago by Weber and the 

Ka#va recension has been published by Caland (the first volume in 1926 and 
the second in 1940) from J,ahcy;e. 

57„ Caland, Kanva-^atapatha , Introd., p. 90. 

58. Op. cit., p. 102. Bloomfield’s view appears to be the right one, but it is opposed 
by Caland (Vaitana Sutra, p. iv). 

59. H 1 L, 1 , p. 234. 

60. A convenient account of them has been given by Winternitz, op. cit., pp. 225 ff. 

61. The Dharmasutras retained only a nominal affiliation to particular Vedic 
schools. 

62. Or rather prescribe, for the style is throughout prescriptive, and not descriptive. 

. This characteristic of the Srauta-sutras is shared also by the Grihya and D harm a- 

• r sutras. The Brahmanas, however, are truly descriptive. 

63. To a lesser extent this method was followed also in the Grihya-sutras. 

64. The following brief account of Srauta-sutras is mainly based on Hillebrandt, 
Ritual litteratur, § 7. 

65. These Pratikas have been collected by Hillebrandt in his edition of iclnkk. 
dr. $., Vol. I, p. 628. 

66. A Sudra can be killed at will according to Ait. Br., VII. 29. 4. 

67. This is the opinion also of Winternitz, op. cit., p. 278. 

68. See Weber, NIL, p. 139. 

69. See footnote 8a above. 

70. Op. cit., p. 16. 

71. According to the computation of Caland ( Vaitana-Sutva, p. viii). 




240 


CHAPTER XIII 

ARYAN SETTLEMENTS IN 

INDIA 

i. GEOGRAPHICAL NAMES IN THE RIGVEDA 

Although it is difficult to arrive at any definite conclusion regarding 
the original home of the Indo-Aryans, we are in a somewhat better 
position in respect of their early settlements in northern India and gradual 
expansion over the whole of this area. For here the evidence of Vedic 
literature comes to our aid, and fortunately the earliest part of it., the 
hymns of the Rigveda, contain abundant geographical data. It is a 
reasonable presumption that the geographical names which figure promi¬ 
nently or frequently in these hymns indicate regions which were familiar 
to their authors, and were scenes of the early activities of the Aryans. 
Names less prominent or frequent might be either outside settlements 
of the Aryans or the border regions inhabited by non-Aryans. It must 
be remembered, however, that the Rigveda is not a geographical manual 
and its various recensions have not come down to us in a complete form. 
It would, therefore, be unsafe and hazardous to draw any inference from 
the silence of the Rigveda. The non-mention of any locality in the hymns 
cannot be construed as evidence, one way or the other, unless, of course, 
it can be proved to be of such importance as to be inexplicable except 
on the hypothesis of want of knowledge. 

In order to ascertain the extent of the Aryan settlements in the period 
of the Rigveda, we should, therefore, consider the references to mountains, 
rivers, localities, countries, tribes, and kingdoms contained in the hymns. 
Courses of rivers, especially in the Punjab, have considerably changed 
in the course of the last three or four millennia. Their names have 
also varied in different times. There is, therefore, some difference of 
opinion with regard to the identifications of the rivers mentioned in 
the Vedic texts. The same is the case regarding the location of the 
various tribes and countries that figure in the Vedic texts, as their 
boundaries were subject to constant modifications and they were known 
by different names in different periods. But in spite of these difficulties 
it is possible to form a fair idea of the location of quite a large number 
of them. 

As regards mountains, only the Himalaya is directly mentioned in the 
Rigveda, Mujavant, one of its peaks, being referred to as the source of 

241 0 








3 



Soma. According to Zimmer, this peak was probably on tlxe south-west 


THE VEDIC AGE 


of the valley of Kashmir. 

Rivers have all along played an important part in the lives of the 
Hindus, and even in the Rigvedic age they were esteemed as deities, 
presumably on account of the immense benefits they conferred on 
humanity. Out of thirty-one rivers mentioned in the Vedic texts, about 
twenty-five names occur in the hymns of the Rigveda alone. In the 
celebrated Nadistuti (X. 75), the Rigveda enumerates several streams most 
of which belong to the Indus system. 

Outside the rivers in the Indus basin, are mentioned Ganga, Yamuna, 
Sarasvati, and Sarayu. Ganga does not appear to be a well known or 
even important stream in the period of the Rigveda. Yamuna has been 
mentioned thrice in the Rigveda, which refers to the great victory of 
Sudas and the Tritsus on the Yamuna in the famous Ddsardjna. The 
Sarasvati is the river par excellence ( Naditamd , RV, II. 41. 16), and 
occurs most frequently in the Rigveda. It seems to have been the holy 
stream of the Vedic age. In the enumeration of rivers in the Nadistuti 
(X. 75. 5) Sarasvati comes between the Yamuna and SutudrI, and is 
generally identified with the modern Sarsuti, which is lost in the desert 
at Bhatriair. Roth, Zimmer, Griffith, and Ludwig hold that in many 
passages of the Rigveda the Sindhu is meant by the Sarasvati. 1 It may 
be observed in this connection that it is possible that the Sarasvati was 
as large as the Sutlej in the Vedic age, and actually reached the sea, 
as the Rigveda (VI. 61. 2, 8; VII. 95. 2) describes it as going to the ocean. 
The Sarasvati was the first of the Vedic rivers (II. 41. 16) and it's banks 
witnessed the development of the Vedic sacrifices. 

The Drishadvatl, which occurs many times along with the Sarasvati 
as an important stream, is identified by some with the Ghaggar and by 
others with the modern Chittang. 2 Between the Sarasvati and Drishadvatl, 
flowing past Thanesar, was the Apaya (RV, III. 23. 4), a small tributary 
of the Sarasvati. The Gomatl has been identified by some scholars with 
the Gomatl, which meets the Ganges to the east of Benares, and this 
identification may be accepted in so far as the later Samhitas and 
Brahmanas are concerned. The Gomatl of the Rigveda as mentioned 
in the Nadistuti is, however, placed between the Rubha and Krumu.| 
Hence, its identification with the Gom.al, a western tributary of the 
Indus, seems more reasonable. Sarayu, on the eastern bank of which 
Chitraratha and Arna were defeated by the TurvaSa-Yadus, appears to 
be the modern Sarju in Oudh, as suggested by Zimmer and others .3 The 
identifications by Ludwig with the Krumu (Kurram) and by St. Martin 
with the united course of the Sutudri (Sutlej) and Vipa6 (Beas) are 
difficult to accept. 

Then we pass or. to the five streams, viz. the Suttldri, Vipai, Parushni, 
Asiknt, and Vitasta, which give the Punjab its name and, united together, 


242 



ARYAN SETTLEMENTS IN INDIA 



ijfew 0 o the Indus. The Nadistuti omits the Vipa6 and inserts the 
Marudvridha between the Asikni and Vitasta. The Sutudri is the most 
easterly river of the Punjab identified with the modern Sutlej. True to 
its name, it has considerably changed its course even during historical 
times. Vipai, “fetterless,” is the modern Beils, which has also changed 
its course considerably. Tts non-mention in the earlier Vedic literature 
except in two Aigwda-hyrrms, coupled with its absence in the NadistUii- 
hymn, supports the hypothesis that it was of small importance. 

Parushni, the modern Ravi, was an important stream which played 
a decisive part in the Ddsardjna (battle of the ten kings), by rising and 
drowning the enemies of Sudas. Asikni, known later as the ChandrabMga, 
is the modern Chenab in the Punjab. Finally comes Vitasta, the most 
westerly of these five rivers, known today as Jhelum. Roth and Zimmer 
consider that the Marudvridha mentioned in the Nadistuti (X. 75. 5) 
denotes the combined waters of the Asikni (Chenab) and Vitasta (Jhelum) 
down to its junction with the Parushni (Ravi), and Chakladar accepts 
this view.4 Stein, however, rightly places the Marudvridha in Kashmir, 
identifying it with Maruwardwan, a small Kashmirian stream flowing 
from north to south which joins the Chenab on its northern bank at 
Kashtwar .5 Yaska identifies the Arjikiya and Sushoma, mentioned after 
the Vitasta in the Nadistuti, respectively with the Vipas and the 
Sindhu. 6 

Now we turn to the western tributaries of the Indus. The Rasa has 
been identified with the Jaxartes, a stream in the extreme north-west 
of the Vedic territory. The Kubha is the modern Kabul river which flows 
into the Indus a little above Attock and receives at Prang the joint flow 
of its tributaries, the Swat (Suvastu) and Garni. The Krumu or the 
Kurram and Gomati or the Gomal are tributaries of the Indus meeting 
it further south. The Susartu and Svetya appear to have been the tribu¬ 
taries of the Indus above the Kubha, whereas the Mehatnu, Krumu;* and 
Gomati are the three tributaries below the Kubha .7 The Suvastu, as 
already stated, is the Swat, a tributary of the Kubha, which itself is a 
tributary of the Indus’. The word Suvastu, signifying “fair dwellings,” 
seems to indicate that there was an Aryan settlement along its banks. 
Hariyupiya, the scene of the defeat of the Vrichivants by Abhyavartin 
Chayam&na (RV, VI. 27. 5) h*>s been taken either as denoting a place 
or a river. As a place-name Harappa has been suggested as the modern 
name of Hariyupiya. 8 Many other lesser streams have not yet been 
identified with any degree of certainty, and -are not mentioned here. 

In conclusion, we must consider also the implication of the term 
Saptasindhavah as used in the Rigveda. The term means a definite country 
in Rigveda, VIII. 24. 27, whereas at other places seyen streams them¬ 
selves are intended. According to Max Muller, the p ’’ \n rivers are the 
five rivers of the Punjab along with the Indus and ‘ vati. Ludwig, 

243 





THE VEDIC AGE 



assen, and Whitney substitute Kubha for the Sarasvatl and think that 
originally the Oxus also must have been one of the seven, Considering that 
the Rigveda mentions the Kubha (Kabul), Gomatl (Gumal), Krumu 
(Kurram), Suvastu (Swat), etc., which lie to the west of the Indus, it is 
possible that the Rigvedic people knew of the existence of the Oxus. 
The reasonable view, however, appears to be to take the seven streams 
to be the Indus, the five streams of the Punjab and the Sarasvatl. 

We may thus conclude that the extent of the country as reflected in 
the hymns is, Afghanistan, the Punjab, parts of Sind and Rajputana, 
the North-West Frontier Province, Kashmir, and Eastern India up to 
the Sarayu. 

This conclusion is confirmed by another consideration. That the Vedic 
people had not yet. penetrated into the swampy jungles of Bengal may 
be inferred from the absence of the mention of the tiger in the Rigveda 
which assigns the premier place to the lion. 811 

There is a difference of opinion among scholars as to the part of India 
where the bulk of the Rigveda was composed. Max Muller, Weber, Muir, 
and others held that the Punjab was the main scene of the activity of 
the Rigveda, whereas the more recent view put forth by Hopkins and 
Keith is that it was composed in the country round the Sarasvatl river 
south of modern Ambala .9 Brunnhofer, Hertel, Busing, and others, 
however, argue that the scene of the Rigveda is laid, not in the Punjab, 
but in Afghanistan and Iran. 10 These and other theories need not be 
discussed in detail. Keith has rightly observed that "conclusions can be 
drawn only with much caution. It is easy to frame and support by 
plausible evidence various hypotheses, to which the only effective objec¬ 
tion is that other hypotheses are equally legitimate, and that the facts 
are too imperfect to allow of conclusions being drawn.” 11 

As the names of the rivers in the Rigveda show that the Vedic people 
knew the whole of the Punjab and occupied the best part of it, there 
is no need to suppose the bulk of the hymns to have been composed either 
in Iran or in the Ambala district. 

It is a controversial question whether the Vedic tribes in the days of 
the Rigveda had reached the ocean and had knowledge of sea navigation. 
Keith and many other European scholars hold that there is no clear 
indication in the Rigvedic period that ocean and sea navigation were 
known. 1 * Max Muller, Lassen, Zimmer, and the authors of th a Vedic Index 
on the other hand assert that ocean was known to the Rigvedic people .*3 
This seems to be the more probable view. The Sarasvatl is stated to have 
reached the sea {above, p. 242), and the hymns X. 136, 5 an ^ 6 seem 
clearly to refer to the western and eastern oceans. References to the 
treasures of the ocean and to Bhujyu’s story appear to allude to marine 
navigation. The towiedge of high tide can be inferred from Rigveda, 
j 4 s. 3. All references indubitably prove that the Rigvedic people 

244 





ARYAN SETTLEMENTS IN INDIA 


knew the sea, but were mariners and had trade relations with 
ie outside world. 




2. THE TRIBES IN THE RIGVEDA 

The whole of the territory known to the Vedic settlers was divided 
into a number of tribal principalities ruled normally by kings. The 
Daiardjna or the battle of the ten kings is an important historical event 
alluded to in various hymns of the Rigveda, and as many of the important 
tribes and personalities figured in this famous battle, it is worth while 
outlining the conflict. Sudas was a Bharata king of the Tritsu family 
which was settled in the country which later came to be known as 
Brahmavarta. At first Visvamitra, a scion of the KuSika family of the 
Bharatas, was the priest of Sudas, and led him to victorious campaigns 
on the Vipa£ and Sutudrl. Visvamitra, however, was dismissed later by 
Sudas, who appointed Vasishtha as his priest, probably on account of 
the superior Brahmanical knowledge of the Vasishthas. Thereupon a long 
and bitter rivalry ensued between the two priests, and in revenge 
Visvamitra led a tribal confederacy of ten kings against the Bharatas, 
the federation consisting of the five well-known tribes Puna, Yadu, 
Turvala, Anu, and Druhyu, along with five of little note, viz. Alina, 
Paktha, Bhalanas, $iva, and Vishanin : In the bloody and decisive struggle 
on the Parushni, the Bharatas emerged victorious, utterly routing the 
confederacy, of whom the Anu and Druhyu kings were drowned, and 
Purukutsa of the Purus met his death. There was another battle that 
Sudas had to fight in which the three non-Aryan tribes, Ajas, Sigrus, and 
Yakshus had united under king Bheda; but these new assailants also 
met with the same fate and were defeated with great slaughter on the 
Jumna. The location of these tribes, along with their activities in the 
period of the Rigveda, will now be considered in the order of their 
importance as far as possible. 

The Bharatas, who” gave their name to the whole country, are the 
most important of the Rigvedic tribes. They were settled, in the Rigvedic 
age, in the region between the Sarasvati and Yamuna. The Bharatas 
appear prominently in the Rigveda in relationship with Sudas and the 
Tritsus, and are enemies of the Purus. Their princes sacrificed on the 
Sarasvati, Drishadvatl, and Apaya, i.e. Kurukshetra of later times. Their 
military prowess in the Rigvedic age, displayed in their successful cam¬ 
paigns both against the Aryans on the west and the non-Aryans in the 
east, is matched by the superiority of their cult and ritual practices which 
seem to have attained prominence and supremacy m a later period. 
Visvamitra is referred to as a Bharatarshabha and a KauSika, so that 
he belonged to the Kusika family of the Bharatas. 

245 



THE VEDIC AGE 


<SL 


he exact relation of the Tritsus and Bharatas cannot be determined 
and there is a sharp difference of opinion among scholars on this subject. 
The Tritsus occupied the country to the east of the ParushnI. Both being 
enemies of the Purus, Ludwig’s identification of the Bharatas and Tritsus 
appears to be correct. Oldenberg, however, takes the Tritsus to be the 
priests of the Bharatas, thus identifying them with the Vasishthas, 
whereas according to Geldner, the Tritsus were the royal family of the 
Bharatas, which appears to be the most probable view. Zimmer’s theory 
representing the Tritsus and Bharatas as enemies is clearly untenable. 
The Tritsus and their kinsfolk the Bharatas were at war with the various 
tribes on both sides of the ParushnI and Yamuna, as already stated. In 
post-Rigvedic times, however, they coalesced with the Purus, their erst¬ 
while enemies, to form the Kuru people of later times. The Rigveda 
refers to the Srinjayas as being the allies of the Tritsus. The Tritsus 
apparently had hereditary kings to rule over them. One of them, Divodasa, 
surnamed Atitliigva, was a great conqueror, who successfully fought 
against the Purus, Yadus, and TurvaSas on the one hand, and against 
Sambara, the Dasa king, the Panis, etc., on the other. Sudas, the son 
of Pijavana, was a descendant of Divodasa; his exploits in the Dasarajna 
and against Bheda have been referred to. He was not only a famous 
warrior, but also a great scholar and composer of hymns. 

The Purus have been mentioned in the Rigveda along with Anus, 
Druhyus, Turvasas, and Yadus, Though defeated in the Dasarajna, the 
Purus were a very important tribe in the days of the Rigveda. They were 
closely connected with the Tritsus and the Bharatas, and lived on either 
side of the Sarasvatl. The unusually large number of kings of the Purus 
suggests the importance of the tribe. The various names indicate the 
following genealogy of the Puru kings: Durgaha—Girikshit—Purukutsa 
—Trasadasyu. Purukutsa is mentioned as a contemporary of Sudas and 
a conqueror of the Dasas; a son Trasadasyu is said to have been born 
to Purukutsa at a time of great distress, probably indicating his death 
or capture in the famous Dasarajna .'4 The mention of Sudas or Divodasa 
and Purukutsa or Trasadasyu in a friendly relation in some passages of 
the Rigveda suggests the union of the Tritsus, Bharatas, and Purus to 
form the Kurus. The name "Kuru” is not directly mentioned in the 
Rigveda, but the amalgamation of these rival tribes in later Vedic period 
under Kuru is implied by the name KuruSravana of a king of the Puru 
line as shown by his patronymic Trasadasyava (RV, X. 33. 4). 

Connected with the Kurus were the Krivis, a comparatively unimpor¬ 
tant tribe who possibly lived on the Sindhu (Indus) and the Asikni 
(Chenab), and later moved to the east across the Yamuna to the land 
later known as Panchala. The insignificance of the Krivis in later literature 
as compared with the importance of the Panchalas is probably due to 
the fact that the later Kuru-Panchala alliance included not only the 

Z46 




WHISTffy 



ARYAN SETTLEMENTS IN INDIA 

fatas and other tribes but Krivis also. The Satapalha Brahmana asserts 
that Krivi was the older name of the Panehalas (XIII. 5. 4. 7). 

Closely allied with the Tritsus was the tribe of the Srinjayas who lived 
in their neighbourhood, probably in Panchala. Hillebrandt locates the 
Sr ip jay as to the west of the Indus, and Zimmer, on the upper Indus. As 
their allies the Tritsus were in the MadhyadeSa, the authors of the Vedic 
Index rightly suggest that the Srinjayas. may well have been a good deal 
further east than the Indus. Daivavata, a king of the Srinjayas, is cele¬ 
brated as victorious over the TurvaSas and the Vrichlvants. Daivavata’s 
sacrificial fire is referred to, and Sahadevya Somaka is mentioned in this 
connection. Prastoka, a Srinjaya, has been lauded along with Divod’asa. 
Turvasas were the common enemies of the Srinjayas and Bharatas. 

The Anus, Druhyus, Yadus, and Turvasas were the allies of the Purus 
against the Bharatas. These five, according to Zimmer, are the “five 
peoples’’ (Panckajandh) of the Rigveda. The expression “five peoples’’ 
occurs under various names in the Rigveda and later Vedic literature. 
Who exactly are indicated by the five is not quite certain.>> 

Among the tribes who were hostile to Sudas, the Druhyus, TurvaSas, 
and Anus lived between the Asikrix and ParushnI. The names Yadu and 
Turvasa normally occur together in the Rigveda. These two closely allied 
tribes lived in the southern Punjab and probably further south. Hopkins 
regards Turvasa as the name of the Yadu king 76 but the evidence for 
this is not conclusive. Zimmer identifies Turvasas with Vrichlvants, but 
the passages merely show that they were allies. The name TurvaSa 
disappears from later Vedic literature, possibly because they became 
merged in the Panchala people. 

The Matsyas in the epic age lived to the west of the gurasertas of 
Mathura, i.e. in modern Alwar, Bharatpur, and Jaipur, which was 
probably their home also in the Rigvedic age . 1 7 

The Ajas, gigrus, and Yakshus were probably the eastern people. They 
are generally regarded as non-Aryan, though there is no definite infor¬ 
mation on this point. 

The Pakthas, BhalS'nases, Vishanins, Alinas, and givas were the five 
frontier tribes. The Pakthas lived in the hills from which the Krumu 
originates. Zimmer locates them in eastern Afghanistan, identifying them 
with the modern Pakthun. South of the Pakthas stretched the Bhalanases 
for whom Zimmer suggests east Kabulistan as original home. The Vishanins, 
so-called probably because their helmets were horn-shaped or ornamented 
with horns, were, like their allies, a tribe of the north-west, located farther 
down between the Krumu and the Gomati. North-east of Kafiristan has 
been suggested as the location of the Alinas, who were* closely allied with 
the Pakthas, and were certainly the enemies of Sudas, and not his allies, 
as thought by Roth. The givas lay between the Sindhu and Vitasta in 
the Vedic period. 18 


247 


THE VEDIC AGE 


Now we turn to the other tribes which have not been directly men¬ 
tioned as participants in the DcUarajna, or in any of the wars waged by 
Sudas. 

The Chedis, who dwelt probably between the Yamuna and the 
Vindhyas, had a very powerful king named Ka&u who is said in a 
Danastuti (VIII. 5. 37-39) to have made a gift of ten kings as slaves 
to his priest. The Puranic literature represents the Chedis as an offshoot 
of the Yadus. 

The Usinaras are mentioned in the Aitareya Brakmana as dwelling in 
the middle country along with the VaSas and the Kuru-Panchalas. There 
is nothing to support Zimmer’s conjecture that the U&lnaras in the 
Rigvedic times lived farther to the north-west, and it is reasonable 
to suppose that in the RigvecJic period also they lived in the middle 
country. 

The Gandharis, one of the frontier peoples, lived to the extreme north¬ 
west of India. The good wool of the sheep of the Gandharis has been 
referred to in the Rigveda (L 126. 7). According to Zimmer they were 
settled in the Vedic times on the south bank of the Kubha up to its 
junction with the Indus and for some distance down the east side of the 
Indus itself. 

Ludwig and Weber find in certain Rigvedic passages which mention 
Prithu-Parsavah (RV, VII. 83. 1: meaning “with large ribs/' or “with 
broad axes'") a reference to the Plithus and Par&us, i.e. the Parthians 
and the Persians, The meaning and sense in the passages, however, 
require the word Par&u to be taken as “ribs." In a passage of the 
Rigveda (VIII. 6. 46) Yadu is brought into special connection with the 
Parsus. It cannot, however, be definitely stated that the ParSus were 
Persians. 

The Paravatas occurring in several passages of the Rigveda have been 
rightly taken as a people on the Yamuna on the strength of the mention 
of the Sarasvati in their connection (RV, VI. 61. 2) as also of their 
location there in the Panchavimia Brdhmana. Their location on the 
northern borders of Gedrosia, as proposed by Hillebrandt and Geldner, 
does not appear to be correct. 

The Kikatas occur in the Rigveda (III. 53. 14) as a people under 
Pramaganda's leadership and hostile to the singer. Zimmer, on Yaska's 
authority, takes these people as non-Aryams and locates them in the 
country later known as Magadha. Weber accepts the location but takes 
them to be Aryans, though at variance with the other Aryan tribes. 

The Panis are often mentioned with the D&sas and Dasyus as the enemies 
of the Aryans. Though opulent and rich, the Panis never worshipped the 
gods or rewarded the priests. They have been described as selfish, non¬ 
sacrificing, with hostile speech, greedy like the wolf, niggardly, of cruel 
speech, Dasyus, Dasas of inferior status. They were cattle-owners and 

248 


Ml MSfo 



ARYAN SETTLEMENTS IN INDIA 

-^toiribus cattle-lifters, and in some passages definitely figure as demons 
who withheld the cows or waters of the heavens. Vala, whom Indra 
pierced when he robbed Pani of his cows, appears to be their patron 
God. Bribu is mentioned as one of their kings. The question of the 
identity of the Paiiis has not yet been settled with any degree of certainty. 
The words Panik or Vanik, Panya, and Vipani, found in Sanskrit, suggest 
that, the Panis were merchants par excellence in the Rigvedic age. The 
Pan is have been variously identified with an aboriginal non-Aryan people; 
with Babylonians (on the strength of the word Bekanata); with Patmans, 
the Dahae and other Iranian tribes; and with non-Aryan caravan traders. 
They might have been the Aryan sea-traders who spread the Aryan 
culture to the west. 

Derived from the same root {das, “lay waste’' or “waste away’’) winch 
originated the word Dasyu, the Dasas have been described as the enemies 
of the Vedic people, sometimes of a demoniac character; but many 
passages speak of them as the human foes of the Aryans. They lived 
in fortified towns [ayasih pur ah) and were divided into clans ( viiah ). 
Dasavarna has been alluded to a number of times, and the Dasas are 
said to be black-skinned {krishnatvach ), noseless or flat-nosed [anas) and 
evil-tongued (mridhravdch), some of these epithets being shared in common 
with Dasyus. In the Rigveda, Dasa is not so reproachful a term as Dasyu. 
As Dasa in later literature became a synonym for slave, it can plausibly 
be said that originally the term was applied to captives in war who were 
enslaved. Hillebrandt and others identify the Dasas with the Dahae of 
Iran, l8a as they place the scene of activity of the Rigveda in Arachosia, 
where they locate the Sarasvati. 

The Dasas owned considerable wealth, and Ilibria, Dhuni, Chumuri. 
Sambara, Varchin, Pipru, etc., have been mentioned as individual Dasa 
kings, some of whom later received demoniac attributes, and were regarded 
as celestial foes of Indra and other gods. The Kiratas, Kikatas, Chandalas, 
Parnakas, Simyus, etc., were Dasa tribes who mostly inhabited the 
Gangetic Valley and fought the Bharatas in their advance to the east 
and south-east. 

Though in many passages the term Dasyu is applied to supernatural 
enemies, there is no doubt that in several passages the term designates 
human foes. The main difference between the Dasyus and the Vedic 
Aryans appears to be religious. The Dasyus were rite-less ( a-karman ), 
indifferent to the gods ( a-devayu ), without devotion {a-brahman), not 
sacrificing ( a-yajvan), lawless {a-vrata), following strange ordinances (anya- 
vrata), reviling the gods {,ieva-piyu ), etc. Some-of these epithets have 
been applied also to the Dasas, as compared to whom they are less 
distinctively a people, as no clans ( msah ) of the Dasyus have been 
mentioned. Zimmer and Meyer think that the original meaning of the 
term Dasyu (and Dasa) was “enemy,” which later developed into “hostile 

249 



THE VEDIC AGE 


<SL 


country” with the Iranians, while the Indians extended the original 
signification of “enemy’' to include demon foes. That to the Rigvedic 
bards there was not much difference between the Dasas and Dasyus 
would be evident from their sharing some epithets in common, and also 
from some persons being described both as Dasyu and Dasa, etc. 

The Asuras are generally referred to as enemies of Vedic people and 
of their gods, but some passages use the term in a good sense. One 
probable explanation of this has been hinted at before. 1 ? Another, sug¬ 
gested by Bhandarkar, is that the hymns in. which Vedic deities receive 
the appellation Asura were composed by seers of Asura stock who had 
embraced the Aryan religion, and the deprecatory passages were composed 
by Aryan seers antagonistic to- the Asuras. 20 The enmity between Aryan 
and Asura increased in the post-Rig vedic period. 

It is indeed difficult to identify the Asuras with any of the ancient 
people. Sten Konow takes them to be non-human. Banerji Sastri con¬ 
siders the Asuras as immigrants from Assyria, the followers of the Asura 
culfwho preceded the Aryans in India and were the authors of the Indus 
Valley civilization. Bhandarkar takes the Asuras to be the Assurs or 
Assyrians and suggests that the Satapatha Brahmana refers to the Asura 
settlements in Magadha or South Bihar. 

The Rakshas does not indicate any definite tribe; according to the 
authors of the Vedic Index it normally refers to demons in early Vedic 
literature, and is applied to human foes only metaphorically. The Pisachas 
also likewise are not a tribe in Vedic literature though in later literature 
it is the designation of a tribe. 

As a result of the above survey we may briefly indicate the position 
and extent of the tribal settlements referred to in the Rigveda. Roughly 
speaking the extreme north-west was occupied by the Gandharis, Pakthas, 
Alinas, Bhalanases, and Vishanins, some of whom probably contained 
non-Aryan elements. In Sind and the Punjab were settled the Sivas, 
Parous, Kekayas, Vrichivants, Yadus, Anus, TurvaSas, and Druhyus. 
Further east towards the region of the Madhyade£a were the settlements 
of the Tritsus, Bharatas, Purus, and Srinjayas, the eastern-most part 
being in the occupation of the Kikatas. The Matsyas and Chedis were 
settled to the south of the Punjab in the region of Rajputana and 
Malwa. It may thus be reasonably concluded that the Aryan settlements 
during the period of the Rigveda were practically co-terminous with 
the extent of the geographical knowledge of the period, as mentioned 
above. 


250 




3. THE PERIOD OF THE LATER SAMHITAS, 
BARHMANAS, UPANISHADS, AND SOTRAS 


i. Geographical Names 

We may form a fair idea of the Aryan settlements in the post-Rigvedic 
period, by utilizing the geographical data of the later Vedic texts and 
following the same line of enquiry as in the last two sections. 

The word Samudra in later Vedic texts generally, if not invariably, 
means the sea. The reference in the Saiapatha Brahmana (I. 6. 3. 11) 
to the eastern and western oceans probably suggests that the Arabian 
Sea and the Indian Ocean were known to the people of that period. 

Trikakud (i.e. having three peaks), as the name of a mountain in the 
Himalayas, has been identified with modern Trikota. Krauhcha, which 
occurs only in the Taittinya Aranyaka (I. 31. 2), has been identified with 
that part of the Kailasa mountain on which Manasa Sarovara is situated. 21 
Mainaka is mentioned in the same text as a mountain in the Himalayas. 
Though not directly mentioned, Vindhya has been definitely alluded to 
in the KaushUaki Upanishad by the term “southern mountain.” 

Turning to the rivers, the most striking fact is the disappearance of 
the Sarasvati. The place where the river vanished in the desert was 
known as Vina^ana (Patiala District), and it reappeared at Plaksha 
Prasravana at a distance of forty-four days' journey from Vina£ana. 

Naturally enough, the rivers further to the east find a prominent men¬ 
tion in this period. Reva, the name of the Narmada, which occurs only 
in post-Vedic literature, is traced by Weber in the word Revottaras found 
in the Satapatha Brahmana; but the interpretation is doubtful. The 
Sadanira has been mentioned in the Satapaiha Brahmana (I. 1. x. 14 ff.) 
as the boundary between the Kosalas and Videhas. Some lexicographers 
have identified it with the Karatoya, but according to the Vedic Index , 
it is too far east. Weber and Eggeiing identify it with the Gandak, and 
Pargiter with the Kapti. Though the Mahdbhdrata (Cr, Ed. II. 18. 27), 
by placing the Sadanira between the Gandak and Sarayu, distinguishes 
between the Sadanira and Gandak, the Vedic Index pronounces the 
identification of the two as “probably correct.” 23 

later Vedic texts mention various place-names which can be 
identified with reasori&Me certainty. Parichakra, mentioned in the 
Saiapatha Brahmana (XIII. 5. 4. 7 ) as the name of a Panchala town 
wh^re king Kraivya Panchala performed his horse-sacrifice, has been 
identified by Weber with the later Ekac'hakra which was near Kampila 
Asa^dlvat is the title of the capital c Tanemejaya Parikshita where 
the 'horse for his famous A£vamedha w: nd (Sat. Br. t XIII. 5. 4. 2; 

Ait. Br., VIII. 21). It was apparently in ukshetra. It was probably 

identical with Nagasahvaya (Hastinaj hich was abandoned by 

251 






THE VEDIC AGE 


(si, 


^.ichakshu, a descendant of Parikshit, on its being washed away by the 
Ganges, and the capital was removed to Kau£ambi . 3 3 Kamplla, found 
in the Satapaiha Brdhmana, has been identified with modern Kampil on 
the old Ganges between Budaun and Farrukhabad. Naimisha forest, 
mentioned as being clearly of special sanctity, has been identified with 
Nimsar at a short distance from .the Nimsar station of the Oudlx and 
Rohilkhand Railway. The Taittinya Aranyaka (V. I. i) mentions the 
Marus as the JJikara (heap) of Kurukshetra. 1 his can be identified with 
the later Marusthala (Maru deserts) as it stood in the relation of Utkara 
to the sacred altar Kurukshetra. The existence of Kausambi which plays 
an important part in the life of king Udayana Vatsaraja can be inferred 
from the word Kausambeya in the Satapatha Brdhmana (XII. 2. 2. 13). 
The town has been identified with modern Kosam on the Yamuna. 

The later Vedic literature refers to the three broad divisions— 
Brahmavarta or Aryavarta, MadhyadeSa, and Dakshinapatha. There is 
also a five-fold division with the enumeration of the residents therein 
which we come across for the first time in the Aitareya Brdhmana 
(VIII. 14), though it has, in a way, been anticipated by the Athafvaveda 
(XIX. 17. 1. 9). The -Aitareya Brdhmana divides the whole country into 
five parts, viz. 1. Dhruvd Madhyama Pratishthd dU or Madhyadesa or 
middle country, 2. Prachidii or the eastern quarter, 3. Dakshinddis or 
the southern quarter, 4. Pratichidis or the western quarter, and 5. 
Udichidis or the northern quarter. The extent and limits of these divisions 
cannot be defined with any degree of plausibility. 

2. The Tribes 

The status, formation, and nomenclature of the various tribes men¬ 
tioned in the Rigveda underwent considerable changes during the period 
under review. Many of the old tribes disappear, pale into insignificance, 
are merged into others, or are known under new names, and many fresh 
tribes rise into prominence. The five premier tribes of the Punjab, the Pur us, 
Anus, Druhyus, Yadus, and TurvaSas recede into the background. I he 
Purus, as already indicated, have along with the Bharatas amalgamated 
with the Kurus who occupy the territory these two tribes held, and along 
with their allies, the Panclialas, are the pre-eminent people in the period. 
The Bharatas as a tribe disappear, but the fame of their kmgs *=> not 
lost to the texts of this period. Bharata DaVihshanti and Satrapta are 
mentioned as famous kings and performers of the Asvamedha, and 
Bharata kings are spoken of a.s winning victories over the Kasis anc. 
Satvants and as performing sacrifices on the Ganga and the Yamuna. 

The Kurus along with P? ralas, VaSas and Usmaras occupied the 
Madhyadesa. The Kurus d appear as a people in the Rigveda, but 

Kuril forms part of the r * king, Kurusravana, mentioned therein. 

The Atharvaveda (XX. i- j) speaks of the Kuru king 1 ankslut m 


252 








ARYAN SETTLEMENTS IN INDIA 


_ reign the Kuru kingdom flourished exceedingly. Reference is 
le to his descendant Janamejaya who performed an ASvamedha d 
. -divat, probably Hastinapura “of later days. The Kuru kingdom 
n nly corresponded to modem Thanesar, Delhi, and the Upper 
Gangetic Doab .*4 

The Panchalas, the close allies of the Kurus as indicated by their joint 
name, were also a composite tribe. The name does not appear in the 
Rigveda, but the Satapatha Brdhmana states that the older name for 
the Panchalas was Krivi which is found in the Rigveda. Weber and 
Geldner suggest that the Panchalas represent the five tribes of the 
Rigveda ; but this is not very probable according to the authors of the 

Vedic Index. 2 5 ' . 

We hear very little of the Pafichalas alone apart from the Kurus. Their 

,r s Kraivya and !§ona Satrasaha are spoken of as having performed 
the . ,svamedha, and another king Durmukha is said to have conquered 
the whole earth. One of their kings Pravahana Jaivali appears as a 
philosopher king in the Upanishads. 

The Vedic texts do not know of north Panchfda and south Panchala 
which we come across in the M ahdbhdrata and the Puranas; evidently 
the Panchalas had extended their country by conquests in post-Vedic 
times. The territory of the Panchalas roughly corresponded to the 
Bareilly, Budaun, Farrukhabad, and adjoining districts of the United 

Provinces. 26 5 

The Kuru-Panchalas are the people pan excellence in the Brfihmaiia 
period, and they are referred to as a united nation. At one time the 
Kuru-Panchalas are said to have had one king. The mode of sacrifice 
of the Kuru-Panchalas is spoken of as the best, and their Biuhmanas 
gained .eminence and fame in the period of the Upanishads. I he Kuru- 
Panchala kings, the models for others, performed Rajastiyas and set out 
on their victorious raids in autumn and returned in summer. Speech is 
said to have been best spoken there, and the Samhitag and Brahmanas 
seem to have taken their definite form among the Kuru-Panchalas. 

We have seen that/the Srinjayas were closely allied with the Tritsus 
in the Rigvedic age. The Satapatha Brdhmana (II. 4. 4. 5) supports this 
view by stating that the Kurus (who were the successors of the Tritsus, 
Bbaratas, and Purus in post-Rigvedic age) and the Srinjayas had one 
Purohita. The Satapatha Brdhmana (XII, 9. 3. 1 ff.) further refers to a 
historical incident relating to this clan. The Yajurveda Samhitds refer 
to the Srinjayas 1 naving suffered ome iserious loss due to some ritual 
error, though wWat exactly befell them s not mentioned. 

Vitakiavya, mentioned in the Rigv> 4 a (VI. 15. 2, 3) along with 
TBharadvaja and, as a contemporary of Sudas, may have been a king 
of the Srinjayas. In the Atharvaveda (V? 137. 1), he appears as connected 
with Jamadagni and Asita; but this legend has probably little value. 

. 253 





THE VEDIC AGE 

Vitahavyas are said to have come to ruin because they devd 
a Brahmana’s cow ( AV , V. 18. io-ii; 19. 1). 

The Va£as and USnaras, as stated earlier, were dwelling in the middle 
country with the Kuru-Panchfilas. The G op at ha Brdhmana which speaks 
of the Vasas and UDinaras as united (I. 2. 9) regards them as northerners 
(II. 9). These Usinaras according to Weber were the forefathers of the 
later Kasis and Videhas . 2 7 The Kanshitaki Upanishad (IV. 1) connects 
the VaSas also with the Matsyas. The country of the Vasas, who later 
came to be known as Vatsas, was situated round about Kausambi, their 
capital. 

The Sibis were intimately associated with the Usinaras. The A itareya 
Brdhmana (VIII. 23. 10) refers to Amitratapana, a king of the Sibis. 
Rigveda X. 179 has been ascribe by the Anukramam to Sibi Ausinara. 
Sivapura, which has been identified with Ssibipura mentioned in a Shorkot 
inscription, 28 is referred to by Patanjali (IV. 2. 2) as situated in the 
northern country. The £ibis inhabited the Shorkot region in Jhang in 
the Punjab lying between the Iravati and the Chandrabhaga. 

The Matsyas appear in connection with the VaSas in the Kaushitaki 
Upanishad and with the Salvas in the Gopatha Brdhmana t (I. 2. 9). Their 
king Dhvasan Dvaitavana, who performed the sacrifice at the lake 
Dvaitavana, is included in the list of Asvamedhins in the Satapatha 
Brdhmana (XIII. 5. 4. 9). According to the Manusmriti (II. 19; VII. 193) 
the Matsyas were included in the Brahmarshide^a. 

The Salvas are mentioned in the Satapatha Brdhmana (X. 4. 1. 10). 
The Mantrapatha indicates their location near the Yamuna, and it is 
not likely that they were in the north-west in Vedic times. The epic 
associates the halvas with the Kuru-Panchalas, and they occupied 
probably what, is now the modern Alwar state. 

The name Ikshvaku occurs but once in the Rigveda (X. 60. 4) where 
it denotes a prince. The Satapatha Brdhmana knows Purukutsa as 
Aikshvaka (XIII. 5. 4. 5), so that some scholars take the Ikshvaku line 
to have originally been a line of princes of the Kurus, wdio were on the 
Sarasvati in the Vedic period, whereas Ikshvaku is connected with 
Ayodhya and the eastern, peoples. 

Kosala and Videha do not appear in the earlier Vedic literature, being 
first mentioned in the Satapatha Brdhmana (I. 4. 1. 10 ff.) which relates 
the story of the spread of the Aryan culture. Videgha Mathava, the king 
of the Videhas, accompanied by his priest (btamu • Rahugana, is Spoken 
of as carrying the sacrificial fife the bank of t he Sarasvati over 
Kosala (Oudh) eastwards acrc» s the Sadanira, and as establishing a 
settlement which was known as Videha (I irhut) after the tribal flanK>.e of 
Mathava. The story preserves tie tradition that, the Videhas received ■ 
their culture from the west, that Kosala was Brahmanized before Videha, 
that the country as far as the Salanira was conquered in one sweep, and 

254 


ARYAN SETTLEMENTS IN INDIA 

lat'ltte progress was checked for a while after which Videha was founded 
across the river. The later division of Kosala into the northern and 
southern is not known to the Vedic literature. 

Para-Atnara-Hairanyanabha, the Kosala king, is spoken of as the 
performer of an Aivamedha {Sat. Br., XIII. 5 - 4 - 4 )- The close connection 
between, the Kosalas, Videhas, and Kasis is indicated by the fact that the 
thr-e had the same Purohita acting for them (Sahkh. Sr.S. XVI. 29. 5). 
It appears, however, that the Kosala-Videhas were allied tribes and that 
there was some difference and rivalry between these and the Kuru- 
Panchalas. The Brahmanism was not as strong in Kosala as among the 
Kuru-Panchalas. The Videhas rose into eminence later through their 
philosopher king Janaka who was a leading patron of the Lpanishadic 
doctrines. 

Kasi, along with Kosala and Videha, came into prominence only in 
later Vedic age. The KaSis and Videhas were closely connected on account 
of their proximity, and Weber suggests that these two together constituted 
the Usinaras, 2 9 This, however, cannot be accepted, as the Usinaras dwelt 
in the middle country. Ka£i and Kosala are also found together. 'Ih.eie 
is the story of the defeat of Dhritarashtra, king of Kasis, by Satanlka 
Satrajita, a Bharata king, resulting in the giving up of the kindling of 
the sacred fire down to the time of the Satapatha Brdhmana (XIII. 5.4.19). 
The relations of these eastern people with the Kuru-Panchalas appear 
to have been anything but friendly. Political conflict and cultural difference 
are said to be the probable causes of the rivalry between the two sets. 

Still farther off from the old centre of Vedic culture were the Magadhas 
who make their appearance only in later Vedic literature, and are regarded 
throughout as of little importance. Magadha corresponds roughly to 
southern Bihar. The name occurs for the first time in the Atharvaveda 
(V. 22. 14), where a wish is expressed that the fever may visit the 
Gandharis, the Mujavants, the Angas and the Magadhas, the first two 
being northern people and the latter, people of the east. In the Vratya 
hymn (A V, XV. 2. 1.-4) the Magadhas are associated with the Vratyas. 
The Yajurveda includes Magadha in the list of victim's at Purushamedha. 
Zimmer regards Magadha referred to in the Atharvaveda and Yajurveda 
as a member of the mixed caste born of a Vaiiya and Kshatriya. But 
the fact that the Sutras and the Aitareya Aranyaka mention Magadha 
as a country shows that in the period of the Yajurveda and Atharvaveda, 
Magadha meant a resident of the country and not a member of the 
mixed caste—an outcaste born of Pratiloma marriage. The authors of the 
Vedic Index account for the fact of Magadha being a minstrel in later 
days by assuming Magadha as the home of minstrelsy, bards from which 
visited more western lands. 3 ° This class has been taken by later Smriti 
texts as belonging to a separate caste, inventing a story of the inter¬ 
marriage of castes for their origin. The dislike of the f Magadhas, which 

255 




THE VEDIC AGE 


<SL 


ay go back to the times of the Rigveda, was probably due to their not 
being wholly Brahmanized. 

The Angas, unknown to the Rigveda, are mentioned in the Atharvaveda 
(V. 22) as noted above. There is nothing in the Vedic texts to indicate 
their location beyond, the fact that they were people of the east ; bat as 
in later times their settlements were on the rivers Son and the Ganges, 
it may be presumed that their earliest seat also was in the same region. 
They have been associated with the Magadhas in some texts. There is 
no evidence in Vedic literature for Pargiter’s view that the Ahgas and 
Magadhas were non-Aryan peoples that came overseas to eastern India.3 1 
Oldenberg, however, thinks that these tribes were the earlier Aryan 
immigrants. Confirmation for this may be found in the Puranic evidence 
which speaks of the Ikshvakus and Videhas being of the same stock and 
as inhabiting the country since Rigvedic times. 

The Magadha is brought into close connection with the Vratya in the 
mystical hymn of the Atharvaveda where he is celebrated as a type of 
the .supreme power in the universe. The Yajurveda includes the Vratya 
in the list of victims at Purashamedha (human sacrifice). The Vratyas 
were regarded as outcastes, and the Atharvaveda, Panchavimki Brahmana, 
and the Sutras describe a certain rite intended to secure for them admis¬ 
sion into the Brahmana fold. The Vratyas were a nomadic tribe ( Vrata) 
and neither studied the Vedas, nor ploughed the land, nor traded. Their 
nomad life is further suggested by their going about in rough wagons, 
with herds of goats, wearing turbans and wielding a particular kind of bow. 

Because the later Dharmasutras describe the Vratya as an outsider, 
a man of mixed origin and of peculiar dress and habits, Roth, Whitney, 
Bloomfield, Chanda, and others regard the Vratya as non-Aryan. The 
early Vedic texts do not support this view. The Vratyas, though un¬ 
initiated, spoke the speech of the initiated. Their speech, though Aryan, 
had apparently resembled Prakrit rather than Vedic Sanskrit, as they 
softened hard consonants. The Sutras mention arhants and yaudhas 
among the Vratyas, corresponding respectively to Brahmanas and 
Kshatriyas in the Brahmanical hierarchy. These particulars, coupled with 
the fact that they were allowed to become members of the Brahmana 
community by performing a specific ritual, evidently show that the 
Vratyas were not non-Aryans but were Aryans outside the sphere, of 
Brahmana culture. 

Their location cannot be indicated with certainty. Their life and habits 
would suggest them to be nomadic western tribes beyond the Sarasvati. 
There are, however, certain indications in the Sutras which definitely 
connect the Vratyas with the Magadha so that the conclusion that some 
Vratyas were dwellers in Magadha is irresistible. 

Vanga, from which Bengal proper receives its designation, is not found 
in early Vedic literature. The Aitareya Aranyaka (II. i. i) mentions 

256 



ARYAN SETTLEMENTS IN INDIA 


Vagadhas, and Cheras as birds, which probably means that thej£ 
Vyere^non-Aryans speaking languages not intelligible to the Aryans. 
Vagadha in the text appears to be a misreading for Magadha, as both 
were neighbours. Vangas were residents of Vanga or Eastern Bengal. 1 he 
name also occurs in the Baudhayana Dharma-sulra. 

The tribes mentioned above occupied the first two of the five divisions, 
viz. the Middle and Eastern regions, mentioned in the Aitareya Brahmana. 
In the Dakshinadii, or the Southern region, Satvants alone are mentioned 
in the Aitareya Brahmana. But besides them there were vidarbhas, 
Nishadhas, and Kuntis. 

The Satvants have been mentioned as the name of a people belonging 
to the south who were the subjects of the Bhoja kings, lhese people 
were, subjected to regular raids by the Bharatas, and the Satapatha 
Brahmana (XIII. 5. 4. 21) refers to the defeat of the Satvants by king 
Bharata who took away their horse prepared for the A6vamedha. I he 
Satapatha Brahmana (VIII. 5. 4. 11) further indicates that these Satvants 
lived near Bharata’s kingdom, i.e. near the Ganga and Yamuna. They 
seem to have moved farther south by the time of the A itareya Brahmana 
which places them in the southern region beyond the Madhyadesa, probably 
beyond the river Chambal (Charmanvati). 3 3 The Puranas corroborate 
the close relation of the Bhojas and Satvants who have been spoken of 
as the offshoots of the Yadu family. 

Vidarbha is known through its king Bhima, mentioned in the Aitareya 
Brahmana (VII. 34) as having received instruction about the substitute 
for the Soma from Parvata and Narada. The Vidarbha kingdom was said 
to be famous for its special breed of licfmds, which killed tigers (jaim. 
Up. Bra. II. 440). Vidarbha, as is well known, corresponds to modern 
Berar. Lassen places Vidarbha along the Satpura hills to the north-west 
of Berar .33 The Upanishads refer to Bhargava, a sage of Vidarbha, as 
a contemporary of Asvalayana and to Vaidarbhi Kaundinya. Kundina, 
the capital of Vidarbha, has been identified with the modem Kaundinya- 
pura on the bank of the Wardha in the Chandur taluk of Amraoti .34 

The Satapatha Brahmana (III. 3. 2. 1, 2) mentions the term Naishidha 
as an epithet of Nada, a king of the south. The later form of the name 
is Naishadha. The Nishadhas, residents of the Nishadha country, were 
qu he distinct from the Nishadas with whom they are often confounded. 
“Nishada” was a general term used for a non-Aryan tribe, whereas the 
Nishadhas, in all probability, belonged to the Aryan fold. King Nala of 
Nishadha is a celebrated figure in the Mahabharata and the Puranas. 
The location of the Nishadha country is not known with certainty, though 
it may be assumed to be contiguous to Vidarbha^ 

Under the Pratichyas or Westerners come the Nichyas and Apachyas, 
as also Bahikas and Ambashthas. The Nichya occurs as the designation 
of certain tribes of the Punjab and Sind. Nothing is known about the 


257 


R 




THE VEDIC AGE 




mchyas. The Bahikas are spoken of as people of the west of the Punp 
in the Satapatha Brahmana (I. 7. 3. 8) which refers to their calling Agni 
by the name of Bhava, as distinct from the Prachyas who called it fsarva. 
The Ambashthas, corresponding to the Abastanoi. of Arrian, who were 
settled on the lower Asikni in Alexander’s time, are referred to in the 
Aitareya Brahmana (VIII. 21). Their king is stated to have been con¬ 
secrated with the Aindra Mahabhisheka. They were probably in the 
Punjab in Vedic times. 

Finally we come to the Udichyas or Northerners, among whom are 
the Uttarakurus, the Uttaramadras, Mujavants, Mahavrishas, Gandharis, 
Bahlikas, Kevins, Kekayas, and Kambojas. 

The Udichya dialect was celebrated for its purity; hence Brahmanas 
'flocked to the north for purples of study. The northern dialect resembied 
that of the Kuru-Pafichala, and the superiority of the Brahmanas of the 
north is indicated by the victory of one of their spokesmen over a Kuru- 
Panchala Brahmana in a debate. The celebrity enjoyed by the north in 
academic matters is further corroborated by the fact that Taxila became 
a famous seat of learning, and classical Sanskrit was first developed in 
Kashmir.35 

The Uttarakurus, along with the Uttaramadras, are located beyond 
the Himalayas. Though regarded as mythical in the epic and later 
literature, the Uttarakurus still appear as a historical people in the 
Aitareya Brahmana (VIII. 23) which states that one Janantapi Atyarati 
was anxious to conquer the country of the Uttarakurus, called the 
land of the gods. Zimmer places the Uttarakurus in Kashmir to the 
north of Kurukshetra, and probably they were an offshoot of the 
Kurus. 

The Madra people were divided into two sections, the Uttara (Northern) 
Madras and the Southern Madras or the Madras proper. The Uttaramadras 
alone appear in early Vedic literature, and they dwelt, as already stated, 
beyond the Himalayas, probably in the land of Kashmir. The mention 
of Madragara Saungayani as an ancient Vedic teacher shows the Madras 
as experts in Vedic learning, a fact which is confirmed by the Satapatha 
Brahmana winch states that sages of Northern India repaired to the 
Madra country to study the Vedas The Brihaddranyaka Upanishad refers 
to Kapya Patanchala as living among the Madras. The territory of the 
Southern Madras roughly corresponds to Sialkot and its adjoining 
districts in the Central Punjab which were known as the Madrade£a as 
late as the time of Guru Govind Singhs In Buddhist times the Madras 
dwelt between the Chenab and Ravi. 

The Mujavants have been mentioned in the Atharvaveda along with the 
Mahavrishas, Gandharis, and Bahlikas as dwelling far away and to whom 
fever is to be relegated. The Yajurveda also speaks of the Mujavants 
as a distant people. If the people took their name from Mujavant, a 

258 




ARYAN SETTLEMENTS IN INDIA 

in in the Himalayas, which seems to be quite likely, they were 
-tribe in the Himalayas. 

The Mahavrishas appear to be northerners in the vicinity of the other 
tribes along with whom they are mentioned, though their exact location 
cannot be ascertained. The Chhandogya Upanishad places king Raikva- 
parna in the Mahavrisha country, and the Jaimimya Upanishad Brahmana 
mentions Hritsvasaya as the king of the Mahavrishas. 

The Gandharis, referred to in the, Rigveda, are mentioned also in the 
Atharvaveda (as already stated) and in the Srauta Sutras. They appear 
apparently as a despised people in the Atharvaveda. In later times, 
however, the angle of vision of the people of the MadhyadeSa changed, 
and Gandhara became the famous resort of scholars for instruction in 
the Vedas and Vidyas. The Aitareya Brahmana (VII. 34) mentions 
Nagnajit, a king of Gandhara, among Vedic teachers who propagated 
the Soma cult, which shows that Gandhara was not excluded from Vedic 
Aryans. From the various references to Gandhara in Indian literature 
it appears that the boundaries of the country varied at different periods 
in its history. 

The Bahllkas, mentioned /dong with the three foregoing peoples, were 
a contiguous northern tribe, their name also suggesting “the outsiders.” 
Roth and Weber were inclined to place this tribe in Iran, but there is 
no need to assume any Iranian influence, for we find that Bahllka is the 
name of a Kuru prince (Sat. Br., XIIs* 9. 3. 3).37 
Kesin is the name of a tribe found in the Satapatha Brahmana (XI. 8. 4. 6) 
where their king is said to be studying how to avert a bad omen at the 
sacrifices. They were probably a branch of the Panchalas. 3 8 

The Satapatha Brahmana (X. 6. 1. 2) and the Chhandogya Upanishad 
(V. 11. 4) mention Asvapati, king of the Kekayas, as a man of learning 
who instructed a number of Brahmanas. The Kekayas in later days were 
settled in the north-west between the Sindhu and the Vitasta, and 
probably occupied the same territory in the Vedic age. According to the 
Puranic tradition the Kekayas were descended from Anu ,39 which is 
confirmed by the fact -that the Anus of the Rigveda dwelt in the same 
territory in which we find the Kekayas. 

The earliest mention of Kamboja occurs in the Varhsa Brahmana of 
the Samaveda where a teacher Kamboja Aupamanyava is referred to. 
The sage Upamanyu, mentioned in the Rigveda (I. 102. 9), is in all 
probability the father of this Kamboja teacher. From the fact that 
Kamboja Aupamanyava is stated to be a pupil of Madragara, Zimmer 
infers that the Kambojas and the Madras were close neighbours in north¬ 
western India. The speech of the Kambojas is referred to by Yaska as 
differing from other Aryans, and Grierson sees in this reference the 
Iranian affinities of the Kambojas ;-t° but the fact that Kamboja teachers 
were reputed for their Vedic learning shows them to have been Vedic 

259 


THE VEDIC AGE 




. ..y ang , so that Kamboja was an Aryan settlement. Later on Kambojas 
settled to the north-west of the Indus, and were the Kambujiyas of the 
old Persian inscriptions. 

There is some difference of opinion as to the location of the Kambojas. 
Rhys Davids places them to the extreme north-west of India, S. K. 
Aiyangar and P. N. Banerji in a country near Sind, Raychaudhuri in the 
Rawalpindi and Peshawar districts, Smith along the mountains of Tibet 
or Hindu Kush, and Eliot in Tibet or its border. The latest attempt 
at locating the Kambojas is by Jayachandra who, after discussing the 
problems afresh, identifies Kamboja with Badakhshan and the Pamirs, 
and-Motichandra has further supported the identification.^ 

There are various other minor tribes mentioned in Vedic texts, but 
we know very little of thera .43 

Finally, we come to the semi-Aryan, non-Aryan and barbarous tribes. 
The Aitareya Brahmana mentioned the Andhras, Pundras, Sabaras, 
^Pulindas and Mutibas as being Dasyus, i.e. outcastes living on the borders 
of the Aryan settlements. These people are said to be born of the fifty 
eldest sons of VKvamitra through their father’s curse on their refusal 
to accept the adoption of Sunahsepa. They were thus outside the Aryan 
fold. The Andhras, Sabaras and Pulindas are known from the Mahabhdrata 
to have been tribes of the Deccan. 

The Andhras originally lived between the Krishna and the Godavari.« 
Andhras in modern times are the Telugu-speaking people of the Deccan. 

The Pundras, whose name occurs also in the Sutras, have been located 
in Bengal'and Bihar by the Mahabhdrata. They were situated in North 
Bengal and gave their name to their capital town Pundravardhana. I he 
Pundras are probably the ancestors of the Puros, an aboriginal caste 

in Bengal. 45 c 

The exact location of the Sabaras is not known. They can be identified 
with the Suari of Pliny and the Sabarae of Ptolemy and are probably 
ancestors of the Savaralu or Sauras of the Vizagapatam hills, the 
Savaris of the Gwalior territory and the savages on the frontiers of 
Orissa. 4 $ 

" The name of Pulindas does not appear in the parallel list given in the 
Sdnkhdyana Srauta-sutra. They are found along with the Andhras at the 
time of A£oka. Their capital, according to the Mahabhdrata, probably lay 

to the south-east of the Bhilsa region. 

The territory of the Mutibas has not yet been located. Raychaudhun 
thinks it not altogether improbable that the Muchipas, a variant of 
Mutibas, are the people who appear in the Mdrkdndeya Parana under the 
designation of Mushika, and locates the latter on the banks of the river 
Musi on which Hyderabad now stafids .47 

The name Mlechchha, found in the Satapatha Brahmana, is usedun the 
sense of a barbarian in speech who uses “he’lavo" for herayah. Ibis 

260 


ARYAN SETTLEMENTS IN INDIA 



sH\ 4 ihat these barbarians were Aryan speakers who employed a Prakri* 
of speech. 

The Nishada mentioned in the later Samhitas and Brahmanas appears 
to be, not the name of any particular tribe, but the generic term for 
non-Aryan tribes who were not under Aryan control. Nishadas have been 
distinguished from the other four Varnas. Weber considered the Nishadas 
to be settled aborigines. The Smritis explain the Nishadas as the off¬ 
spring of a Brahmana father and a Sudra mother. The epics represent 
the Nishadas as having their settlements in the Vindhya and Satpura 
ranges, and it seems that during the post-Rigvedic period also they 
inhabited mountainous tracts. 

The Rigveda repeatedly refers to the attacks on the aborigines. They 
are called Krishna-tvach (black skins) metaphorically. Kuyavach (evil 
speaking), a demon slain by Indra, probably personifies the barbarian 
opponents. Mridhravach (speaking insultingly) is also similarly used for 
denoting barbarians in the Rigveda. If Balbutha, called a E)asa, were the 
son of an aboriginal mother or an aboriginal himself, his reference as 
giving gifts to the singer indicates the establishment of friendly relations 
between the Aryans and Dasas. 

The above review of the Aryan settlements would make it clear that 
the period of the later Saihhitas, Brahmanas, Upanishads, and Sutras 
is characterized by a spirit of adventure and expansion, and the advancing 
Aryans were spreading in every direction, colonizing the east, south, and 
north. The Gangetic Doab was completely occupied by the Aryans and 
the adventurous Bharatas and Videghas led expeditions along the 
Yamuna, the Sarasvati, and the Sadanlra, Towards the east Kosala, 
Videha, Magadha, and Anga came under Aryan occupation during this 
period. In the north and the north-west, we come across the Uttarakurus 
and the Uttaramadras, Bahllkas, Mahavrishas, and Mujavants, showing 
the expansion along Kashmir and the Himalayas. Towards the south the 
Vindhya appears for the first time in the Kaushitaki Upanishad (II. 8), 
and the Kuntis and Vitahavyas seem to have penetrated further south, 
and the Narmada and Vidarbha also were within the Aryan fold. 

The disappearance of the Sarasvati referred to in the Panchavuhsa 
Brahmana (XXV. io. 6) is an important geographical landmark in this 
period. The main centre of the life of the period is Kurukshetra in the 
country of the Kuru-Panchalas, bounded by the Khandava on the south, 
Turghna on the north, and Parinah on the west. It is noteworthy that 
the sphere of civilization is gradually shifting eastward and its localization 
in the region to the east of the land of five, rivers is an accomplished fact. 
The Punjab and the West not only recede in importance, but the tribes 
of the west " looked upon with disapproval in the Satapaiha and 
Aitarev'- <,as. There has been a change and regrouping of tribes 

of ' jeriod, and many new tribes emerge during this period. 

261 






THE VEDIC AGE 

Bhaxatas do not occupy the premier position, but are merged in the 
Kurus who, with their allies the Panchalas, are the tribe par excellence. 
With Va£as and USnaras, the Kuril-Panchalas occupy the Madhyade£a. 
The Uttarakurus and the Uttaramadras lay to the north beyond the 
Himalayas, and Satvats to the south. To the east Kosala, Videha, 
Magadha, and Ahga rise into prominence. The Andhras, Pundras, Mutibas, 
Pulindas, and Sabaras, as also the Nishadas, are the outcast tribes which 
were not fully Rrahmanized. 

The territory comprised within the sphere of Aryan influence down to 
the period of the IJpanishads may thus be roughly described as the whole 
of India to the north of the Narmada, and some regions even to the 
south of that river. 

GENERAL REFERENCES 

Macdoneix, A. A., and Keith, A. B.: Vedic Index . Two vols. London, 1912. 
Oldenbejrg, H.: Buddha (Eng. Translation by W. Hoey). London, 1882. 
Zimmer, H.: AUindisches Leben. Berlin, 1879. 

1. Hillebrandt ( Ved . Myth., I, pp. 99 ft; III, pp. 372 If.) thinks that it is Arghandab 
in a few places. 

2. Macdonell, History of Sanskrit Literature, p. 142; Keith, CHI, I, p. 80. 

3. AL, p. 17; Chakladar, MR, Jan. 1930, p. 41; Raychaudhuri, Ind. Antiquities , 
P- 5 i- 

4. Zur Litteratur und Geschichte des Weda, pp. 138 ff.; AL, pp. 11, 12; MR, Jan. 

1930, p. 41. * 

5. JRAS, 1917, pp. 93-6; Raychaudhuri, Ind . Antiquities, p. 51. 

6. Nirukta, VI. 26; IX. 26. 

7. Law, Rivers, p. 10. 

8. Ray, JBORS, March, 1928. 

8a. For arguments against this view, of. Ch. X, Appendix, p. 217. 

9. Cf. Ved . ind., I, p. 468; CHI, I, p. 79n.J; Hopkins, JAOS, 19, pp. 19-28; Keith, 
CHI , I, p. 79; Winternitz, H 1 L, I, p. 63; Pischel and Geldner, Ved. Stud., II, 
p. 218; III, p. 132. 

10. Brunnhofer, Arische U*zeit, 1910; Hertel, Indo-Gewi. Forschung, 41, p. 188; 
Hiising, MAGW, xlvi; Hillebrandt, Ved. Myth, I, pp. 98 ff.; Cliilde, Aryans , 
p. 32; Winternitz, HIL, I, pp. 63-4. 

11. CHI, I, pp. 78-9,. 

12. CHI, I, p. 79. 

13. SEE, XXXII, pp. 61 ff.; Indische Altertkumshunde, I, p. 833; AL, pp. 22 ff.; 
Ved. Ind., II, p. 432. T 

14. RV. TV. 42. 8, 9 and Sayaria's Commentary, 

15. The Ait. Br. takes the five to be gods, men, gandharvas,and apsarases, snakes, 
and the fathers, whereas Yaska thinks that gandharvas, fathers, gods, asuras, 
and rakshasas are meant. Aupamanyavas and Sayana hold that the four 
varnas and the Nishadas made up the five. Roth and Geldner take the expression 
to indicate the people of the whole earth. 

16. JAOS, 15, pp. 258 ff. 

17. Cf. Dutt, Aryanisation of India, p. 104. 

18. Banefji Sastri , JBORS\ 12, p. 253. 

18a. The Dasas and Dasyus have been fully discussed above in VIII, p. 156. 

19. See Ch. XI, p. 219. 

20. Some Aspects of-Ancient Indian Culture, p. 34. 

21. Dey, GD, p. 104. 




262 



ARYAN SETTLEMENTS IN INDIA 


38 . 

39. 

40. 
4E 
42. 
43- 
44" 
45- 
46. 

47* 


nd. } II, p. 422. 
chaudhuri, PHAI , p. 20. 

Ibid. 

Ved. Ind I, p. 469- 

Ray chaudhuri, PHAI, p. 59* 

Ind. Stud., I, pp. 212-3. 

El, 1921, p. 16; Majumdar, CAG, p. 669. 

Ind, Stud., I, pp. 212—3- 
Ved. Ind., II, p. 1x7. 

JR AS, 1908, p. 832: 

Rjiychaudlcmil, PHAI, p. 76. 

Gf. Law, Tribes , p. 100. 

Ray chaudhuri, PHA I, p. 74. 

Franks, Pali und Sanskrit , pp. 88, 89. 

Raychaudhuri, PHAI, p. 54, 

Vahlika and Valhika appear as valiants of Bahlika. The * lahabhdrata and the 
Pur&nas locate the tribe in the neighbourhood of Gandhara and Punjab. 
Bhandarkar identifies the Keris with the Kassis or Kassites {Some Aspects of 
Ancient Indian Culture, p. 3). 

Pargiter, A 1 HT, pp. 109, 264. 

JRAS, 1911, pp. 801-2. 

Cf. Law, Tribes, pp. 2-3. 

JUPHS, XVI, pp. 43-6. 

Such e.g., are the Ru&amas, Sviknas, Spares, Karaskaras, Saphalas, etc. 

ZD MG, 56, pp. 657 ff. 

Bhandarkar, ABORT, XII, pp. 104, 105. 

Raychaudhuri, PHAI, p. 79; Dutt, Aryanisation of India, p. 69. 

PHAI, p. 80. 


<SL 


263 


BOOK FOUR 

HISTORICAL TRADITIONS 


CHAPTER XIV 


TRADITIONAL HISTORY 
FROM THE EARLIEST TIME 

TO THE ACCESSION OF 

PARIKSHIT 

I. SOURCES OF INFORMATION 

Our sources for the traditional history from the earliest times to the ! 
accession of Parfkshit are mainly the Puranas, though the Mahabharata 
and the Ramdyana occasionally give dynastic lists and deal with 
traditional accounts. General observations on the Puranas and the 
Epics will be found in the next volume. Here it is intended to give only 
a brief introductory note dealing with the historical value of the 
Puranas. 

The Puranas, in their present recension, can hardly be placed earlier 
than the Gupta period. Thus they received their final form more than 
2,000 years after the earliest events related by them. Besides this distance 
in time, the traditional account, contained in the Puranas, is vitiated 
by exaggeration, mythological details, pronounced religious bias, and the 
divergences in the texts of the different Puranas. These have been sub¬ 
jected to various modifications, revisions, etc. at different periods and 
no “definite” text of the Puranas is available. In spite of these obvious 
defects the Puranic account may not be regarded as wholly unreliable. 

It is likely that the royal genealogies and ancient ballads of kings and 
heroes were preserved from very early times by the Sutas. It is expressly 
laid down in the Vayu Purana (I. 31-2) that “the Sfifa’s special duty, 
as perceived by good men of old, was to preserve the genealogies of. gods, 
rishis (sages), and most glorious kings, and the traditions of great, men.” 
These accounts probably formed the basis of the original Purana, from 
which the genealogical texts of the existing Puranas were ultimately 
derived. Pargiter holds, on the basis of Indian tradition, that this original 
Purana was composed more or less about the sanje time when the Vedic 
texts received their final form. 1 Although this view may be justly 
questioned, the existence of a Purana text at a very early age is not 
improbable. 

In any case there is hardly any doubt that the royal genealogies in 

267 


imST/fy 



THE VEDIC AGE 



Pur anas embody many genuine historical traditions of great antiquity 


^which have not been otherwise preserved. It has also been pointed out 
by Pargiter that the Puranic account is corroborated in many respects 
by Vedic texts, which contain contemporary historical data. A compara¬ 
tive study of the Puranas and the Vedic texts shows that the former, 
though reduced to writing at a comparatively lat e period embody the 
eari l caditional history, and ini ieir material is old and valuable. 


j When we find Puranic accounts corroborated by the Vedic evidence, \ 
| it is but legitimate to take their testimony as valid even in matters on 
\ which the Rigveda is silent. 

' That the kernel of both the Rdmdyana and the Mahabhamta embodies 



historical facts is also now generally accepted. 151 The. epic details, em¬ 
bellishments, exaggerations and*flights of fancy, evident in the Rdmdyana I 

and the Mahabhamta, have been kept distinct from the Puranic account * 

of traditional history in this chapter. Besides their central story, the 
Rdmdyana and the Mahdbhdrata contain some dynastic lists and accounts. 

The Great Epic itself implies that it was composed after the Puranas. 

The genealogical accounts in the Mahdhhdvata are peculiar in that they 
are partly in, prose and partly in verse, and do not appear to be ancient. 

The Rdmdyana genealogy of the solar dynasty runs counter to the 
Puranic genealogy; but as the latter has been corroborated by other 
authorities, the Puranic genealogy is to be accepted in preference to 
that in the Rdmdyana. 


2. CHRONOLOGICAL SCHEME OF 
TRADITIONAL HISTORY 
ACCORDING TO THE PURANAS 


The Bharata War is the central landmark in Indian traditional history, 
and the fixing of the date of that event will give us a starting point in 
settling dates of events occurring before and after it. We shall, therefore, 
first of all, try in brief to determine the date of the Bharata War. 

According to the Aihole inscription of Pulakesin II (seventh ceuntry 
a.d.) the Bharata War took place in 3102 b.c., which is the starting 
point of the Kaliyuga era according to the astronomical tradition re¬ 
presented by AryabhataA b But Fleet has pointed out that the reckoning 
was not founded in Vedic times; it was first started abo 1 



after the time for purposes of calculation, and was 


astronomers before Aryabhata. 3 Another school ol Hindu astronomers 
and historians, represented by Vriddha-Garga, Varahamihira and 
Kalhana, places the Bharata War 653 years after the Kaliyuga era, 
i.e. in 2449 B.c .3 These two schools thus present conflicting views, and 

* 268 









APITIONAL HISTORY FROM THE EARLIEST TIME 


__ "are based on a hypothetical reckoning of a late date, we can 
„. iV Jy attach much importance to them. 

Astronomical references in the Mahabharata itself about the position 
of the Nakshatras and planets have been utilized for determining the 
date of the war. But, the same data have yielded various divergent 
results.'* As a matter of fact, the statements in the Epic are conflicting 
and self-contradictory, so that in order to arrive at some conclusion it 
is necessary to reject certain statements or their implications as later 
interpolations or mere exaggerations. No satisfactory and acceptable 
result can be arrived at from these data. 

On the basis of the Puranic tradition about the number of kings that 
flourished in different dynasties between king Adhislmakrishna (great- 
grandson of Janamejaya) and the coronation of Mahapadma Nanda, 
Pargiter places the Bharata War in c. 950 b.c. According to him 26 
reigns intervened between these kings, and allowing a period of 18 years 
per reign, and taking the accession of Mahapadma in 382 B.c., the period 
of Adhislmakrishna would be (26 x 18 -j- 382 =) 850 b.c. And adding 
a hundred years for the reigns of intermediate kings between Yudhish- 
thira and Adhislmakrishna Pargiter arrives at (830 + 100 =») 950 B.c. 
as the date of the Bharata War .5 

Pargiter’s date is contradicted by the statement in the Puranas and 
the Mahabharata that between the birth of Parikshit and the coronation 
of Mahapadma, there elapsed a period of 1,015 (or 1,050) years.* This 
brings the date of the Bharata War to (1015 + 382 =) 1397 b.c. Though 
the number of kings mentioned in the Puranas during this period does 
not appear to be correct, as it gives an abnormally high average regnal 
period per generation, the figure mentioning the period (viz. 1015 or 
1050) seems to represent a fairly reliable tradition, especially as the date 
it gives for the Bharata War (c. 1400 B.c.) is corroborated by a considera¬ 
tion of the Vamsavali list of teachers. We may, therefore, take c. 1400 
b.c. as the provisional date for the Bharata War, and the event must 
have taken place between this date and 1000 b.c. in round numbers; 

Now working backwards from the earlier date, the age of Manu 
Vaivasvata, who flourished, according to the genealogies prepared on 
the basis of traditional accounts, 95 generations before the Bliara-ta 
War, can be put as (95 X 18 + 1400 ==) 3 I£o b.c., taking one generation 
to average 18 years (as we have to deal with very long genealogies ex¬ 
tending over 90 generations, we would be erring on the side of caution 
if we assumed 18 years as the average reign). This date, viz. 3110 b.c., 
curiously enough, approaches 3102 b.c. which has-been taken as the 
beginning of the hypothetical Kali age for astronomical calculations. 
There is no doubt that the date 3102 b.c. signifies some important and 
epoch-making event in the traditional history of India. If it denotes the 
period of the beginning of the rule by Manu Vaivasvata, that means 

269 


THE VEDIC AGE 




that it stands for the date of the Great Flood recorded in the Satapatha 
Brdhmana and other accounts, at which Manu was the saviour of 
humanity. The devastating Flood undoubtedly was the most important 
landmark in the history of the ancient world, and common flood legends 
suggest that the same event has been described in Indian, Hebrew, and 
Babylonian accounts. The Flood in Mesopotamia is generally held to 
have occurred about 3100 B.c. 6a The Flood in India probably also occurred 
at the same time, and the date 3102 b.c., supposed to be the beginning 
of the Kali era, may, therefore, commemorate this event. 

The year 3102 b.c. thus represents the age of Manu, the first traditional 
king in India. Yayati, who is fifth in descent from Manu and figures also 
in the Rigveda, thus flourished (18 x 5 —) 90 years after Manu or in 
(3x00 — 90 =) 3010 B.c. Mandhatri, coming after twenty generations, 
has to be placed in (3100 — 20 X 18 =) 2740 b.c. The period of Ariuna 
Kartavirya, ViSvamitra, Jamadagni, Parasurama, and Harischandra can 
be put between (3100-31 x 18=) 2542 b.c. and (3100-33 x 18 —) 
2506 b.c. or roughly between 2550 and 2500 b.c. Sagara of Ayodhya 
and Dusliyanta and Bharata of Hastinapura flourished between (3100- 
41 x 18 =) 2362 b.c. and (3100-44 x 18 — ) 2308 b.c. or roughly between 
2350 and 2300 B.c. Rama flourished 65 generations after Manu, i.e, in 
(3100-65 x 18 — ) 1930 b.c. or roughly in 1950 b.c. and the famous 
Da^arajna war which occurred about three or four generations after 
Rama, in c. 1900 b.c. These dates will, of course, have to be lowered 
by 400 years if the Bharata War is placed in c. 1000 B.c. 


3. PRE-FLOOD TRADITIONS AND 
THE DAWN OF HISTORY 


Like the dynastic lists in Sumer and Egypt, the Indian lists also record 
pre-diluvian dynasties, though as may naturally be expected in such 
accounts, there is a large mixture of myths and legends. They begin 
with the mythical king, Manu Svayambhuva, who is said to have been 
bom of Brahma, and had from Satarupa, the half-female form of his 
body, two sons, Priyavrata and Uttanapada, and three daughters. These 
daughters are the themes of very elaborate legends which connect them 
with the gods, sages, sacrifices, etc. Svayambhuva Manu, also known as 
Viraj, was the lord of the first Manu cycle. 

The V dy u Pur ana mentions Ananda as a Brahma (supreme ruler) 
who was a predecessor of Manu Svayambhuva. This Ananda is said to 
have established the Varnas (castes), formulated their duties, and also 
established the institution of marriage; but these fell into abeyance in 
a short time and were revived by Manu Svayambhuva. 7 Manu Svayamb- 
huva's capital lay on the bank of the river Sarasvati. He is said to have 


270 




RADITIONAL HISTORY FROM THE EARLIEST TIME 

6 d all enemies and became the first king of the earth. Man 
Svlxochisha, the second Manu, was the son of Svayambhuva’s daughter 
Akuti. Priyavrata, the eldest son of Manu Svayambhuva, is said to be 
the first of the Kshatriyas. Three of his sons renounced the world in child¬ 
hood in order to perform penance, and became Manus in the next Man- 
vantaras. These were Uttama, Tamasa, and Raivata, respectively the 
third, fourth, and fifth Manus. 

Uttanapada, the second son of Svayambhuva Manu, had three sons, 
Dhruva, Kirtivat, and Uttama. The story of the celebrated boy devotee 
Dhruva, who, on account of the insult offered him by his step-mother, 
the favourite queen of Uttanapada, left the world for penance and secured 
boons from the Lord Vishnu, is well-known to every devout Hindu. 
Dhruva was succeeded by Prachinagarbha. Chakshusha in this line was 
the sixth Manu. His grandson Vena was a very wicked and tyrannous 
king. There was a general rebellion against him and he was deposed and 
killed. His son Prithu, celebrated as the first consecrated king, from whom 
the earth received its name Prithvi, was enthroned his successor. He 
levelled the whole earth, clearing it of ups and downs, and encouraged 
cultivation, cattle-breeding, commerce, and building of cities and villages. 
The oath that he had to swear would compare favourably with the oath 
any constitutional sovereign of England has to take. 8 Fifth in descent 
from Prithu was Daksha, whose daughter’s grandson, Manu Vaivasvata, 
saved humanity from the deluge which occurred at this time. 


4. THE FLOOD AND MANU VAIVASVATA 
(c. 3XOO B.C.) 

The earliest and the shortest Indian account describing the flood is 
found in the Satapalka Erahmana, and there are later embellished versions 
in the Mahabharata and the Puranas .9 According to the Satapatha 
Brahmana, when Manu was washing his hands in the morning, a small 
fish came into lus hands along with the water. The fish sought protection 
from Manu, saying, "Rear me, I will save thee.” The reason stated was 
that the small fish was liable to be devoured by the larger, and it required 
rotection till it grew up. It asked to be kept in a jar, and later on, when it 
outgrew that, in a pond, and finally in the sea. Manu acted accordingly. 
The fish forewarned Manu of the forthcoming flood, and advised him to 
prepare a ship and enter into it when the flood came. The flood began to 
rise at the appointed hour, and Manu entered the ship. The fish then 
swam up to him; he tied the rope of the ship to its horn, and thus.passed 
swiftly to the yonder northern mountain. There, Manu was directed to 
ascend the mountain after fastening the ship to a tree and disembark 
after the water had subsided. Accordingly, he gradually descended, 

271 





THE VEDIC AGE 
slope of the northern mountain i: 

cent. The waters swept away all the three heavens, and 
Manu alone was saved. 

Manu Vaivasvata. is said to be the originator of the human race, and all 
the dynasties mentioned in the Puranas spring from him. He framed 
rules and laws of government, and collected a sixth of the produce of the 
land as a tax to meet administrative expenses. 

Manu is stated to have been the father of nine valiant sons, besides the 
eldest, who is represented to have had a dual personality as the male Ila 
and female Ila. There is a great divergence in the names of the nine sons 
and their order in the different accounts. According to the collated text, 
suggested by Pargiter, 10 the names are: Ikshvaku, Nabhaga, Dhrishta, 
Saryati, Narishyanta, Prariisu, Nabhagodishta (or Nabhanedishtha), 
Karusha, and Prishadhra. Of these sons only four are important as being 
the originators of important lines. Ikshvaku, the eldest, had his capital at 
Ayodhya, and his son Vikukshi founded the Aikshvaka. (or the Solar) 
line. The location of the Nabhagas, descended from Nabhaga, is uncertain. 
They probably reigned in the midlands of the Gangetic Doab, and included 
Rathitara from Whom came the Rathitaras who were Kshatriyan 
Bralimanas. The Nabhaga dynasty played practically no part in tradi¬ 
tional history, and probably disappeared under the early Aila conquests. 
From Dhrishta came the Dharshtaka Kshatriyas who probably ruled 
over Vahika in the Punjab. Nothing further is known about them. Then- 
social position is interesting to the student of social history as they are 
sometimes called Brahmanas, sometimes Ivshatriyas and sometimes 
even Vaisyas, indicating the fluidity of castes at this period in our history. 
Saryati was the founder of the Saryatas who ruled in Anarta. The 
Saryatas were one of the earliest Aryan tribes to come in contact with 
Gujarat, which received its ancient name from Anarta, the son of 
Saryati. There is much confusion about the genealogy of Narishyanta, 
some accounts stating the Sakas to be his descendants. N othing is known 
about the descendants of Prarh^u. Nabhagodishta settled in north Bihar, 
and established the Vaisala dynasty which ruled at Vaiiali identified 
with Basarh 11 (Muzaffarpur district). From Karusha came the Karushas, 
the determined fighters, who occupied the Karusha country the region 
round the modern Rewali and eastwards to the river Son. Prishadhra 
was excluded from any share of the earth because he killed his guru s 
(preceptor’s) cow. 

From Ila, as the female, who married Budha, was born Pururavas, 
the originator of the Aila (or the Lunar) dynasty. From the Ailas sprang 
various dynasties such as the Kanyakubjas, \ adavas ^Haihayas, Andha- 
kas, Vrishnis), Turvasus, Druhyus, Anavas, Panchalas, Barhadrathas, 
Chedis, etc. 

From Ila transformed into a Kimpurusha named Sudyumna, sprang 

272 



hence the 
ol Manu's des 




5 called Manoravataranam 





RADITIONAL HISTORY FROM THE EARLIEST TIME 


tfuTSaudyumnas—his three sons Utkala, Gaya, and Vinatasva, who 
respectively ruled over the Utkala country, Gaya, and the eastern regions 
including the northern Kurus. The Saudyumna kingdoms were annexed 
by the Anavas and Kanyakubjas. 

The early disappearance of the dynastic lists of the kingdoms established 
by Karusha, Nabhaga, Dhrishta, Narishyanta, Pramsu, and Prishadhra 
seems to be due to the victorious campaigns led by Pururavas, Nahusha 
and Yayati of the Lunar dynasty, who displaced all these kingdoms and 
expanded the Paurava realm. 


5 - 


THE YAYATI PERIOD 
(c. 3000-2750 B.C.) 

i. The Lunar Dynasty 

Pururavas Aila, Ila’s son through Budha or Soma, was the progenitor 
of the celebrated Lunar dynasty. Though the seat of the government of 
the Ailas and the scene of their later activities have been placed at 
Pratishthana 11 by the Puranas, the origin of the Ailas, according to 
these texts, seems to be connected, with the Himalayan region. 

Pururavas is said to have ruled over the seven islands and performed 
a hundred Asvamedhas. The story of Pururavas and UrvasI is too well 
known to be dealt with here. 1 la However, towards the end of his reign, 
Pururavas is said to have been intoxicated with power and declared war 
on the Brahmanas, robbed them of their jewels, and coveted the golden 
sacrificial floor of the Naimisha sages, who were performing sacrifice. 
The sages in revolt killed him and installed his eldest son Ayu on the 
throne. Pururavas was the contemporary of Ikshvaku of the Solar 
dynasty. The Aila kingdom developed quickly under Pururavas. Being 
checked in their expansion to the north by the powerful kingdom of 
Ayodhya and to the south by the war-like Karushas, the Ailas extended 
their sway eastward and north-westward into the Gangetic Doab and 
Malwa and Eastern Rfijputana. The expanded realm was divided among 
Pururavas’s two sons, Ayu and Amavasu. 

Ayu continued the main line at Pratishthana, and Amavasu-, to whose 
share fell the northern territories in the mid-Gangetic Doab, founded the 
Kanyakubja dynasty. Ayu was friendly towards the Rishis and Brah- 
manas. His marriage -with Prabha, the daughter of a Danava king 
SVarbha-uu, 'indicates that he held catholic views and was a conciliator 
between Aryas and Danavas. Ayu had five sons, only two of whom were 
important. The eldest, Nahusha, succeeded Ayu in the main line at 
Pratishthana, while the second, Kshatravriddha, established himself at 
Kasi in the east. 

Nahusha was a famous king, a great conqueror, the first man to establish 


273 




THE YE.DI.C AGE 



<SL 


theatre on the earth. The Mahabharata story of his securing the kingdom 
of Indra, and of his subsequent fall therefrom on account of his arrogance 
and ill-treatment of Agastya, runs counter to many well-established 
synchronisms and is obviously a later invention.His son and successor 
Yayati is mentioned in the Puranas and the Mahabharata as a Sanirdt 
(emperor) and a great conqueror who extended his kingdom far and 
wide. He reduced all MadhyadeSa west of Ayodhya and Kanyakubja 
and north-west as far as the Sarasvatl. He also brought under his sway 
countries towards the south, south-east, and west of his territory. The 
Puranas and the Mahabharata give a detailed account, of Yayati’s marriage 
with Devayam, daughter of Usanas-Sukra, the great Bhargava rishi, 
and Sarmishtha, daughter of king Vrishaparvan of the Asuras. Yayati’s 
marriage with Devayam being the -pratiloma marriage, reprehensible 
according to later customary law, some excuses have been invented in 
justification of it. 

Yayati had five sons. Devayam bore two, Yadu and Turvasu, and 
Sai'hiisht.ha three, Arm, Druhyu, and Puru. Yayati divided the king¬ 
dom among his five sons, placing the youngest son Puru to continue 
the main line, ruling over Madhyadesa, the southern half of the Ganges- 
Jumna Doab, with its capital at Pratishthana. The main Lunar line 
hereafter came to be known as Puru Variisa or the Pauravas after Puru. 
There is a great divergence in the Puranas regarding the territories 
assigned by Yayati to his sons. Pargiter’s collated text ‘4 suggests that 
Yadu, the eldest son, was given territories towards the south-west 
embracing the country watered by the rivers Gharmanvati (Chambal), 
Vetravati (Betwa) and Suktimati (Ken). Turvasu got the south-east 
territory (round Rewah). To Druhyu was assigned the west, i.e. the 
country west of the Yamuna and north of the Ghambal. Anu received 
the north, i.e. the northern portion of the Ganges-Jumna Doab. 

By the time of Puru, the Ailas had thus established seven kingdoms, 
viz. Pratishthana, Yadava, Turvasu, Anava, Druhyu (i.e. the kingdoms 
of the five sons of Yayati), and the kingdoms of Kanyakubja and Kaii. 
Puru, though the youngest, got the ancestral kingdom of Pratishthana 
through obedience to his father. He was succeeded by his son Janamejaya. 

The Kanyakubjas and Eaiis, the subsections of the Lunar dynasty, 
are not noted for any remarkable achievements or personalities during 
the period under review. Yadu, the eldest son of Yayati, founded the 
Yadavas, the first Lunar dynasty to rise into prcwinerice. They first 
destroyed the Rakshasa power in Gujarat-Kathiawar, who overthrew 
the Saryatas there. Only Kroshtri and Sahasrajit, among Yadu’s -jnns, 
are important, for with them the Yadavas branched off respectively 
into the Yadavas and Haihayas. 

Yadava Chitraratha, .about twelfth in descent from Yadu, was the 
contemporary of the Paurava king Matinara. Gauri, the daughter of 

274 



2 TRADITIONAL 


HISTORY FROM THE EARLIEST TIME 


Itfidfiira, was married to Yuvanaiva II of the Solar dynasty of Ayodhya! 
nd their son Mandhatri, king of Ayodhya, married Binduinati, the 
daughter of Sa 4 abindu, son of Chitraratha. Both Chitraratha and Sasa- 
bindu were great kings. The Yadavas first developed a great kingdom under 
Sasabindu, which included the territories of the Pauravas and Turvasus 
on the east and the Druhyus on the north. 

2. The Solar Dynasty 

Now we turn to the Solar dynasty which comprises the three lines of 
Ayodhya, Videha, and Vaisala, and the Saryatas. These are the only 
branches that are important out of the lines produced by the nine sons 
of Manu. 

Ikshvaku, the eldest of Manu’s sons, was the first king of Ayodhya, 
and Manu gave him Madhyadesa. According to the Puranas, Ikshvaku 
had a hundred sons of whom Vikukshi the eldest, Nimi, and Danda 
were most famous. Vikukshi, also named Sa. 4 a.da, succeeded Ikshvaku 
in the Ayodhya. kingdom, and Nimi founded the Videha line. The Dandaka 
forest is said to have been named after Danda or Dandaka, the third son 
of Ikshvaku. 

Paraiijaya or Puranjaya, the son of Vikukshi, received the appellation 
Kakutstha on account of his being borne away by Indra, in the form of 
a bull, on his head (kakud) on the battlefield. $ravasta, the son of Yuvan- 
asva and sixth in descent from Kakutstha, is said to have founded 
Sravasths which later became the capital of north Kosala. Of his grand¬ 
son Kuvalasva, a wild legend is current explaining how he received the 
alternative name Dhundhumara. Kuvalaiva is said to have marched 
against an Asura, Rakshasa or Daitya named Dhundhu near a shallow 
sand-filled sea in the Rajputana desert in order to rescue a sage named 
Uttanka. He destroyed the subterranean quarters of the Asura and put 
an end to his fiery home. This legend probably suggests that Kuvala 4 va 
subjugated the Asuras and aboriginals to the west and in the southern 
parts of Rajputana and spread Aryan culture in those lands. Dr. Law 
sees a reference to a natural phenomenon in this legend. He conjectures 
that, the subterranean retreat of the Asura was really a small volcanic 
pit near the western sea-coast causing occasional earthquakes, and 
emitting smoke, ashes, and fire. Kuvalaiva, by digging up the earth, 
first brought on volcanic eruptions destroying the army in flames and 
smoke; but later on a subterranean water channel rushed into the 
volcanic pit and extinguished it for ever.' 6 According to Pargiter this 
legend alludes to a shallow sand-filled sea in Rajputana. which formed the 
limit of Aryan advance towards the south .*7 Kuvalasva’s eighth descen¬ 
dant was YuvanaSva II, also known as Saudyumni. A grotesque legend 
is told about the birth of a son to the king himself out of his left rib as 
a result of his drinking the holy sacrificial water intended for his queen. 

275 




THE VEDIC AGE 

e child was nursed by Indra with the nectar exhaled from his tffri 
whence it .came to be known as Mandhatri. 

The other branches of the Solar dynasty may be briefly referred to. 
The Videhas sprang from Ikshvaku’s son Nimi, also known as Yideha. 
Nimi dwelt in a town named Jayanta and the capital was Mithila, said 
to have been named after his son Mithi. The Videha line of kings came 
to be known as Janakas on account of this Mithi J'anaka. 

The Vahalas, though descended from Nabhanedishtha (or Dhrishta, 
son of Nabhaga and grandson of Mann), came to be called such 
retrospectively from the name of king Visala who founded ViSala or 
VaiSall as his capital. Bhalandana and Vatsapri are named as the first 
two kings. Bhalandana, who was a great sacrificer and a valiant and 
universal conqueror, is said to have become a Vaisya. 

The Saryatas originated from Saryati, the son of Manu, and played 
but an unimportant role in traditional history. Saryati, who is said to 
have offered his daughter Sukanya in marriage to Chyavana of the 
Bhrigu family, was succeeded by his son Anarta. The Saryata dynasty 
was short-lived and was destroyed by the Punyajana Rakshasas. The 
history of the Saudyumnas has been referred to above (p. 272). 

3. Brahmana families 

Brahmana families also play important roles in traditional history, 
and we may take note of contemporary Brahmana families in the different 
periods of traditional history. The Brahmana families claim descent 
from eight mythical rishis (sages), called mind-born sons of Brahma. 
There are also other fabulous accounts which seek to explain their names 
on the basis of etymology inventing fanciful stories. Out of the eight 
Brahmana families, i.e. Bhrigu, Angiras, Marichi, Atri, Vasishtha, 
Pulastya, Pulaha, and Kratu, the last three did not produce true 
Brahmana stocks. Pulastya was the progenitor of the Rakshasas, Vanaras, 
Kinnaras and Yakshas. From Pulaha came Kimpurushas, PiSachas, 
goblins, lions, tigers and other animals. Kratu, according to most accounts, 
had no wife or child, and remained celibate, but some accounts make the 
Valakhilyas his offspring. The remaining five, however, were not assigned 
equal antiquity. The Bhargavas, Vasishthas, and probably Ahgirasas 
appear to have been the earliest Brahmana families. The Atris and 
Rasyapas (from Marichi) originated later. 

The Bhrigus or Bhargavas claim descent from the primeval rishi 
Bhrigu. Chyavana and Sukra are the earliest Bhrigus mentioned in the 
Puranas. Sukra was connected with the Daityas, Danavas, and Asuras 
as their gum, and was the rival of Brihaspati, the guru of the Devas. 
Sukra’s daughter Devayani married Yayati, the Puru king, and bore 
him Yadu and Turvasu. 

The Vasishthas in Puranic accounts claim to have a mysterious origin, 

276 


Ml UlST/f 



tADITIONAL HISTORY FROM THE EARLIEST TIME 

/'descended from Mitravaruna in the present Manvantara. Some 
accounts make the first Vasishtha one of the ten mind-born sons of 
Brahma in the Svayambhuva Manvantara. 

The Vasishthas have been connected as hereditary priests with the 
kings of Ayodhya from the earliest times. The Puranas mention a 
Vasishtha in connection with Ikshvaku and his sons Vikukshi-£a 4 ada 
and Nimi. 

Though the Atri clan was an ancient one vying in antiquity with 
the earliest Brahmana families, the earliest individual member of the 
Atri family to be referred to in traditional history is Prabliakara, who 
is said to have married the ten daughters of Bhadrasva (or Raudrasva), 
an early Paurava king. From Prabhakara’s ten sons descended the best 
Atreya Gotras. 

Marichi’s son Katyapa, the progenitor of the Kasyapas, is made a 
Prajapati or identified with Kasyapa, the creator of all beings and the 
father of the gods and Asuras. 

Besides these ancient families, there were other Brahmana stocks 
such as Visvamitras and Jamadagnis, which did not claim primeval 
antiquity, and which emerged in traditional history at a later period. 


6. THE MANDHATRI PERIOD (c. 2750-2550 B.c.) 


r. The Solar Dynasty 

We now turn to the next period, the central figure in which is 
Mandhatri, son of Yuvanaiva, of the Ikshvaku famity. The Yadava 
empire under Sasabindu (p. 275) was rivalled by the Ayodhya kingdom 
under Mandhatri (p. 276), a famous king, a chakravartin and a samrdt. 
According to the Puranic accounts, Mandhatri Yauvanasva, an Aikshvaka, 
was a great chakravartin. He was the son of Yuvanasva and Gauri, the 
daughter of Matinara of the Pauravas. Pie was considered the fifth 
avaldra (incarnation) of Vishnu. He was a great sacrificer and is said to 
have performed a hundred Asvamedhas and Rajasuyas. His gifts and 
charities are eulogized and songs praising him have been handed down 
from very ancient times. He is mentioned as a king of very wide sway, 
magnanimous and giver of cows. Mandhatri married Bindumati, daughter 
of Sasabindu of the Yadavas. He had three sons, Purukutsa, Ambarisha, 
and Muchukunda. His sister (daughter or granddaughter) Kaveri married 
Jahnu of the Kanyakubjas. 

The account of his birth from his father’s side and being called 
Mandhatri because of what Indra said at the prince’s birth (math dhcltd, 
i.e. the child will suck me), invented evidently to explain his name, is a 
late fabrication fashioned with great ingenuity. Mandhatri is said to 
have obtained half the throne, of Indra and conquered the whole earth 

277 


THE VEDIC AGE 


m. 


in one day. He extended his sway over the neighbouring Paurava and 
Kanyakubja realms, and also conquered the Druhyus and the Anavas 
in the north-west. He probably spared the Yadava s w'ho were related 
to him, but conquered the Haihayas in the Deccan. Mandhatri was 
succeeded by his eldest son Purukutsa. 

Purukutsa continued the conquests of his father. The Nagas induced 
Purukutsa to destroy the Mauneya Gandharvas who had despoiled 
them. They gave him their princess Narmada, and he rescued them from 
the Gandharvas. This shows the extension of the Aryan culture towards 
the river Narmada and the land of the Nagas who were probably 
aborigines or primitive peoples. 

Muchukunda., the third son of Mandhatri, was a famous king. The fable 
connecting him with Kalayavana and. Krishna is an anachronism. 1 ® 
Pie built and fortified a town on the Narmada between Paripatra and 
Riksha mountains. Muchukunda’s supremacy, however, did not last 
long, and the Haihaya king Mahislxmant conquered that town and named 
it Mahishmati. The Ayodhya kingdom declined after Purukutsa, and 
some of the kingdoms of the Lunar dynasty again rose into prominence. 

2. The Lunar Dynasty 

The Paurava realm appears to have lain prostrate at the time of 
Mandhatri, for he is said to have sacrificed on the Yamuna, and crossing 
the Paurava kingdom he conquered the Druhyu king, who was pushed 
from R&jpUtana to the borders of the Punjab by the Yadava king 
Sasabindu. It was probably SaSabindu, the Yadava king, who conquered 
the Paurava realm, and the Haihaya king Bhadrakenya traversed it to 
reach Benares. There arose no king of eminence among the Pauravas 
for generations after Yayati and Puru, so that the kingdom dwindled 
down, and the neighbouring kings absorbed parts of it till the Paurava 
kings were reduced to mere kings in name, and probably lived out in 
exile, as would appear from the account of Dushyanta who was with 
Turvasu Marutta, son of Karandhama. 

The Kanyakubja kingdom appears to have been overrun by king 
Mandhatri in course of his conquest of the Druhyus. The suzerainty of 
Ayodhya over Kanyakubja was, however, short-lived, and Jahnu brought 
Kanyakubja into local prominence. Jahnu married the granddaughter 
of Yauvana&va (i.e. Mandhatri). 

The Haihayas (of the Yadava branch of the Lunar dynasty) continued 
to prosper in their region south of Malwa, and as noted above, Mahish- 
mant (one of their kings) founded the town Mahishmati. His successor, 
king Bhadrakenya, was an aggressive monarch who conquered the 
Paurava realm. He also extended his sway eastwards into the Kaii 
territories, conquered the kingdom, occupied Benares and reigned tfiere. 
The Benares king Haryasva tried to recover it, but was killed by the 

278 


RADITIONAL HISTORY FROM THE EARLIEST TIME 

is and his son Sudeva also was overpowered. Later, Benares is 
said to have come under the possession of Kshemaka Rakshasa from 
whom it was subsequently recovered by Durdama of the Haihayas. 
The occupation by Rakshasas indicates the devastation of the country 
by war resulting in its occupation by the rude tribes from the forest. 

The Anavas also grew in power. King Mahamanas, seventh in descent 
from Anu, extended the sway of the Anavas towards the east and the 
Punjab; and the bifurcation of the Anavas under his two sons U&inara 
and Titikshu shows the extent of his conquests. 

USinara established a kingdom on the eastern border of the, Punjab, 
which was divided among his five sons. iSibi succeeded to the throne at 
Multan; from Nriga, who established a separate kingdom in the present 
Montgomery district and the northern parts of Bikaner, sprang the 
Yaudheyas; Nava was the originator of the kings of Navarashtra; rulers 
of the city of Krimila came from Krimi; and Suvrata started the 
Ambashthas, probably in the eastern Punjab. Sibi Ausinara, however, 
was the most prominent among Uslnara’s sons, and the Si bis sprang 
from him. fsibi conquered practically the whole of the Punjab except the 
north-west corner, and established through his sons four kingdoms of 
(i) the Vrishadarbhas, also known as Sibis, in the home territories of 
Multan, (ii) the Sauviras in Sind, (iii) the Kekayas in the modern districts 
of Gujarat and Shahpur between the Jhelum and the Chenab, and 
(iv) the Madrakas, with their capital at Sakala (modern Sialkot), in 
the Lahore division of the Punjab and the Jammu province in Kashmir. 

Titikshu moved eastward and crossing Videha and VaiSall came down 
to the. east and founded a new kingdom in east Bihar where ruled the 
Saudyumnas. This new kingdom was known as the "Kingdom in the 
East," which later developed into the five kingdoms of Anga, Vanga, 
Kalinga, Pundra, and Suhma, divided among Bali’s five sons. 

Lastly we come to the Drahyus. As the result of the successful cam¬ 
paigns of SaSabindu, Yuvanaiva, Mandhatri, and Saibi, the Druhyus 
were pushed back from Rajputana and were cornered into the north¬ 
western portion of the Punjab. Mandhatri killed their king Angara, and 
the Druhyu settlements in the Punjab came to be known as Gandhara 
after the name of one of Angara’s successors. After a time, being over- 
populated, the Druhyus crossed the borders of India and founded many 
principalities in the Mlechchha territories in the north, and probably 
carried the Aryan culture beyond the frontiers of, India. 

7. THE PARASiJRAMA PERIOD (c. 2550-2350 b.c.) 

The whole of the age which has been designated the P?,ra£urama 
period comprising about twelve generations (till the rise of king Sagara 

279 



THE VEDIC AGE 

dynasty) was dominated by the Haihayas and 
the Bhrigus in turn. There is practically nothing worth recording in 
the Paurava line during-this period which shows a great break till the 
time of Dushyanta who came after Sagara. 

i. The Bhrigus 

The Bhrigu-vamsa or the Bhargavas, the family to which Parasurama 
belonged, dwelt in Anarta (Gujarat). After the Saryatas perished and 
Western India was dominated by the Haihayas, the Bhrigus became 
associated with the Haihayas. King Kritavirya of the Haihayas is said 
to have bestowed great wealth on the Bhargavas who were his priests. 
On refusal of the Bhargavas to return it, Kritavlrya’s descendants ill- 
treated them and used violence against them so that they fled into 
Kanyakubja in the MadhyadeSa for safety. Chief among the Bhrigus 
was Richika, son of Orva, a famous Rishi skilled in archery, who cherished 
great wrath towards the Haihayas. In order to wreak vengeance on the 
wicked Haihayas, the Bhargavas engaged themselves in collecting arms 
and sought marital alliances with the Kshatriya ruling families. Richika 
sought in marriage Satyavatl, the daughter of king Gadhi of Kanyakubja. 
The king did not approve of the match and evaded it by demanding an 
almost impossible price in the form of a thousand black-eared horses. 
Richika, however, fulfilled the condition and married Satyavatl. 
Jamadagni, the celebrated Rhrigu sage, was born of this marriage. He 
was thus ViSvamitra’s sister’s son. 

Jamadagni became skilled in archery and arms and made an alliance 
with the ruling family of Ayodhya by marrying Renuka, daughter of 
Renu, a junior king in the line. Jamadagni was not a militant Rishi but 
followed peaceful avocations. 

When the Haihaya king Kartavirya came to his hermitage with his 
army, Jamadagni treated him with right royal hospitality through the 
help of his celebrated divine Kamadhenu (wish-giving cow). On Jama- 
dagni's refusal to part with the cow, Kartavirya forcibly seized her; 
but the Yavanas, produced from her body, defeated Kartavirya. 
Subsequently, Kartavirya destroyed the hermitage and carried away the 
sacred cow. 

Four or five sons were born to Jamadagni, of whom Rama (or Para¬ 
surama), though the youngest, was the greatest among the Bhrigus. The 
Puranas represent Parasurama as an incarnation of Vishnu. He is said to 
have been born during the period of interval between the Tretd and Dvdpara 
Yugas. The Mahabharata, however, refers to him as ah incarnation only 
in two late passages.^ ParaSurama is represented as a very great warrior, 
skilled in all weapons, especially in archery. The Parasu (battle axe) was 
his special weapon, on account of which he came to be called ParaSurama 
in distinction from Rama Dasarathi. The slaughter of the Kshatriyas 

280 




Ayodhya of the Sola 


MINIS Tfty 


' Go ^X . 

cr\ > . ' ; j .* <. ■ ■ 

|V 

Traditional history from the earliest ti 

y-cme times, and ridding the earth of the Kshatriyas are said 
the principal feats of ParaSurama. 

The Bhrigu-Haihaya conflict started after Kartavlrya (Arjuna or 
Sahasrarjuna) raided Jamadagni’s hermitage in the absence of Rama, 
molest" > he old sage and forcibly took away the sacred cow (as already 
stated), iri revenge, Rama lopped off Arjuna’s arms and slaughtered him 
like an ordinary animal. Thereupon, on the advice of Jamadagni, Rama 
set out on a pilgrimage for the expiation of the sin of killing Arjuna. 
During the absence of Parasurama, Arjuna’s sons slew Jamadagni 
when he was in deep meditation. This enraged Rama to the extreme, 
and he declared a vendetta not only against the Haihayas, but against 
the Kshatriyas in general, and is said to have rid the earth of the Kshat¬ 
riyas twenty-one times. At regular intervals after the birth of fresh 
Kshatriyas, Rama restarted his campaign and slew all of them. Rfuna 
filled a number of lakes at Kurukshetra with the blood of the Kshatriyas. 
As the result of these raids, some Kshatriyas fled to the mountains or 
hid themselves among the women-folk. Only Rikshavan of the Pauravas, 
Sarvakarma of Ayodhya, Brihadratha of Magadha, Chitraratha of Anga, 
and Vatsa of K 4 £i are said to have escaped from Rama’s slaughter. 20 
All this, indeed, is an exaggeration. It appears that on the strength of 
the matrimonial alliances of the Bhargavas with the ruling families of 
Kanyakubja and Ayodhya, and also of the growing discontent due to 
the devastating raids and consequent unpopularity of the Haihayas, 
Rama organized a -confederacy of various kingdoms including Vaisall, 
Videha, Kasi, Kanyakubja and Ayodhya which fought the Haihayas 
on various battlefields. These are probably referred to by the annihilation 
of the Kshatriyas twenty-one. times. As the result of this all-round attack 
from all fronts, ihe Haihayas, for a time at least, must have suffered a 
serious setback. 

Rama is said to have retired to the forest for penance in order to atone 
for his sins after each slaughter. Finally, to rid himself of the sin, he donated 
the whole earth to Kasyapa. lo free the earth from any possible future 
attacks from Rama, Kasyapa banished him from the earth which now 
belonged to him. Rama then wrested from the sea the west coast and 
colonized it. The whole of the west coast from Bhrigukachchha (Broach) 
down to Cape Comorin retains association with Parasurama. 

According to the genealogical tables, Parasurama is several generations 
prior to the period of Rama (son of Dasaratha) and the Pandavas; yet 
he has been brought into connection with these heroes in the Rdmdyava 
and the Mahahhdmta. Thus he is said to have appeared before Rama 
after his marriage with Sita, advised Balarama and Krishna with regard 
to a suitable site for safety against the raids of Jarasandha, to have been 
the preceptor of bhlshma, Drona, and Karna, to have fought against 
Bhlshma, to have advised Duryodhana not to fight the Pandavas, etc. 

281 





THE VEDIC AGE 



<SL 


iese are clearly instances of anachronism as the result of the anxiety 
of the writers of the Epics to establish contact of their heroes with the 
great Bhargava. In order to get over these obvious anachronisms a theory 
was promulgated, at a later date, that Parasurama was cJmanjvva 
(immortal). 

2. The Haihayas 

After the death of Purukutsa, the kingdom of Ayodhya lost its 
paramountcy in Upper India and the Haihaya branch of the Yadavas 
gradually began to extend its sway from the west, penetrating to the 
east and north, as noted above (pp. 278 ff.). Reference has already 
been made to Kritavxrya and his son Arjuna, a great monarch, samrdt, 
and chakravartin who, during his long reign, extended the Haihaya 
sway far and wide and raised the Haihaya power to great eminence. 
Arjuna is known by his patronymic Kartavirya and also as Sahasrarjuna 
(thousand-armed). The thousand arms ascribed to Arjuna were possibly 
his fleet of a thousand ships. Arjuna propitiated Dattatreya, a sage 
regarded as an incarnation of Narayana, and star ted his career of conquest 
which at once carried the Haihaya empire to great prominence and 
supremacy. He fought the Karkotaka Nagas who occupied Anfipa (terri¬ 
tories near the mouth of the Narmada), captured Mahishmati and made 
it his capital. Kartavirya also defeated Ravana who invaded his terri¬ 
tories, brought him captive and subsequently released him. He appears 
to have led his victorious campaigns from the mouth of the Narmada 
to as far north as the Himalayas, since in one of his raids he is said to 
have come across the hermitage of Apava Vasishtha in the Himalayas 
and burnt it,, as a consequence of which he was cursed. Arjuna is said to 
have conquered the whole earth, and performed a number of sacrifices. 

Arjuna’s conflict with Jamadagni and Rama, to which we have already 
referred, occurred towards the end of his long and prosperous reign. 

Barring his relations with Apava Vasishtha and Jamadagni, which 
show Arjuna in an unfavourable light as inimical to the Brahmanas, 
he is always the subject of high praise and encomium in epic works. 
He is described as an ideal monarch unparalleled in penance, charities, 
learning, and virtues, who conquered the whole world and ruled it with 
perfect justice. It is only his connection with the Bhrigus that has been 
responsible for painting the ideal monarch in the blackest colours. His 
victories show that he carried the banner of Aryan conquest far and 
wide, and that Mahishmati on the Narmada was an outpOst of the 
Aryan colonies of those days. 

Mr. Karandikar, after a thorough study of the Puranas, has suggested 
quite a different interpretation of the Sahasrarjuna episode. 21 According 
to him, the Bhrigus were great navigators and expert mariners who 
controlled the maritime trade between India and the western vrorld, 

282 


jmdkoetupied the coastal line on the Arabian Sea. They amassed a great 
fortune through their trade with foreign countries. The reason of the 
Bhrigu-Haihaya conflict was that Arjuna did not wish that the Bhrigus, 
who were agents of the foreigners, should thrive at the cost of the 
people. He wanted to keep the trade and commerce of the Indian people 
under the control of an Aryan state, for the Bhrigus were more self- 
seekers than patriots. Arjuna sought the help of the Atris, who were equally 
expert ship-builders, and who built for him a fleet of a thousand ships 
or a ship with a thousand oars (making Arjuna Sahasrabahu, i.e. 
thousand-armed). Karkofaka Naga, Ravana arid others who were 
defeated by Arjuna were seeking some opportunity to wreak vengeance 
on him. Arjuna’s effort at getting control of the sea-trade was an eyesore 
to the Bhrigus, and further fuel was added by Arjuna's deman cling back 
the wealth he had bestowed on the Bhrigus. Para&urama led the opposition 
with the aid of the parties defeated by Arjuna, killed him, and destroyed 
the Haihaya power. The annihilation of the Kshatriyas twenty-one 
times is interpreted as the destruction of the population in the Narmada 
region a number of times in order to wipe out the memory of the popular 
king Arjuna. On the devastated Haihaya realm Parasurama founded new 
cities, and colonized some tracts in the west coast, founding Surparaka 
which became the centre of trade. The result of Paraiurama/s activities 
was to divert the trade from the hands of the Aryans in the north to the 
Dravidians in the south. 

Whatever wemight think of the above interpretation there is no doubt 
that as the result of the Bhrigu-Haihaya conflict the Haihayas received 
a great setback. But they soon recovered from their reverses, and again 
extended their power in Northern India. Arjuna had many sons of whom 
the chief was Jayadhvaja who reigned in Avanti. Surasena, another son, 
appears to have been associated with Mathura, while Sura, the third 
Son, probably was connected with Surashtra. Jayadhvaja’s son Tala- 
jangha had many sons, of whom the chief was Vitihotra. The Puranas 
state that the Haihayas formed five groups, viz. Vltihotras, Saryatas, 
Bhojas, Avantis, and Kundikeras all of whom were collectively called 
Talajanghas ” Of these, Vitihotra and Tundikera or Kurujikera were in 
the Vindhyan range; the Saryatas were in Western India, Bhojasnear the 
Aravalli hills, and Avantis in Malwa. They carried their raids not only 
against the kingdoms of the MadhyadeSa but e ven against Kanyakubja, 
Kosala, and Kaii. The Kanyakubja kingdom appears to have succumbed 
to these raids. The Haihayas killed Haryasva of Kaii in a battle in the 
Ganges-Jumna Doab, but met with reverses later on, and the Vitihotra 
prince on the Benares throne had to seek refuge with a Bhargava sage. 
After this, the Haihaya dynasty practically came to an end, and the king 
became a Brahmana. 

The kingdom of Ayodhya, considerably weakened after Miindhatri 

283 


mtSTfty 


THE VEDIC AGE 



(§ L 

ation or 


d Purukutsa, was attacked by the Haihayas with the co-operation 
the hardy and semi-barbarous tribes (called Sakas, Yavanas, Kambojas, 
Paradas, and Pahlavas) from the north-west. This co-operation indicates 
that the intervening kingdoms between Ayodhya and the frontier 
countries were overthrown by the Haihayas. Bahu (or Asita according 
to the Ramayana), king of Ayodhya, had to leave the throne and seek 
refuge in the forest where he died near the hermitage of Aurva Bhargava. 
His queen gave birth to a son in the forest who was named Sagara and 
was educated by Aurva Bhargava. As we shall presently relate, Sagara 
was the greatest king of the Solar dynasty during this period and recovered 
his lost kingdom with the help of the Bhargavas. Vaisali and Vidisa also 
were attacked by the Haihayas and Vidisa probably was under Haihaya 
occupation. Tradition, however, suggests that the Haihaya conquests 
towards the east were checked by the Vaisala kings. 

The Haihayas thus were engaged in making continual raids and over¬ 
throwing kingdoms; they, however, did not found any kingdoms in the 
countries overrun by them which lay devastated and fell an easy prey 
to the attacks by wild tribes. 

3. Other Lunar Dynasties 

The Yadavas: Contemporaneous with king Sagara of Ayodhya was 
Vidarbha of the Yadavas, who sought peace with the Ayodhya king, 
advancing south-westward, by offering his daughter Kesini in marriage 
to the latter. King Vidarbha then retired towards the Deccan into the 
country named after him, leaving the whole of northern India to ack¬ 
nowledge the suzerainty of Sagara. After Sagara’s death, the Yadavas 
of Vidarbha extended their authority northward over the Haihaya 
country. The three sons of Vidarbha founded three sub-lines. Kratha or 
Bhhna, the eldest, continued the main line. The second son Kaisika 
became king of Chedi and founded the Chedi line .»3 The location of the 
territories of the youngest son Lomapada has not been given. 

The Anavas: The Anava kingdom in the east founded by Titikshu 
appears to have been considerably expanded by the time of king Bali of the 
Anavas, a contemporary of Sagara, and was subsequently divided among 
his five sons, Anga, Vanga, Kalinga, Pundra, and Suhma, who were 
begotten by the sage Dlrghatamas Mamateya on queen Sudeshna at 
Bali’s request. The capital of Ariga was Malini, four miles west of 
Bhagalpur. Separated from Magadha by the river Champa, Ahga comprised 
the modern districts of Bhagalpur and Monghyr. Vanga was further east 
corresponding to the modern Dacca and Chittagong Divisions. Pundra 
was Northern Bengal. Suhma comprised the Burdwan Division, and 
Kalinga, the sea-coast of Orissa including the Northern Circars. 

Kanyakubja: A few generations after Jahnu, came KuSika the originator 
of the Kusikas. KuSika’s son from PaurukutsI, Purukutsa’s descendant 

284 



If Tradition al history from the earliest time 


eyre the sixth degree, was Gadhi. Gadhi is described as an incarnation^ 
Tdra, which probably means that he had an alternative title such as 
Indra or one of his synonyms. Gadhi’s daughter Satyavatl, as already 
stated, was given in marriage to the Bhrigu sage Richika Aurva. Through 
Richika's favour, Gadhi had a son VKvaratha or Vi&vamitra who is a 
prominent figure in ancient legends. Convinced of the superiority of 
the spiritual, power of Brahmanism by being worsted in his attempts to 
deprive Vasishtha of his sacred cow, he resolved on attaining Brahmanism, 
and set out for austerities after renouncing his kingdom. Eventually, 
he succeeded in winning recognition as a Brahmana or Brahmarshi 
even from Vasishtha. Then, Visvamitra is said to have championed the 
cause of Satyavrata Trisanku in opposition to Vasishtha, and raised 
Trisanku to divine celebrity. Further, Visvamitra is saicl to have 
harassed Harischandra, Tri£anku’s son, in order to test Vasishtha’s 
praise of him as unrivalled in virtues. Visvamitra, again, is said to have 
slain Sakti and other Vasishthas through Saudasas, i.e. descendants 
of Sudas. Then Visvamitra is spoken of as having adopted SunahSepa 
as a son whom he saved from being offered as a substitute victim for 
Harischandra’s son Rohita. Visvamitra further appears in connection 
with Rama of Ayodhya, and also as father of Sakuntala who was married 
to Paurava Dushyanta and gave birth to the celebrated emperor Bharata. 
The Pur anas further show that the rivalry between Visvamitra and 
Vasishfha is not only endless but hereditary. 

It appears that the Puranas combine the various accounts of different 
Vi&vamitras and roll them into one. For instance, Visvamitra, the father 
of fsakuntala, Visvamitra, the contemporary of Rama, and Visvamitra, the 
contemporary of Harischandra, Jamadagni, Sunahsepa and of Sudas, 
Kavasa Ailusha and the Da£arajna were quite distinct personalities. 
The heroes of different episodes, relating to widely distant ages, have 
been unified into a single personality in the Puranas, and this has caused 
a good deal of chronological confusion and genealogical chaos. 

Visvamitra, the Kanyakubja king, w'as related to Jamadagni and 
Parasurama. It is therefore likely that the Kanyakubja kingdom helped 
the confederacy raised by Parasurama against the Haihayas. Visvamitra 
ruled for some time, and as the result of his discomfiture at the hands 
of Vasishtha, relinquished his kingdom and left for austerities in'a forest 
leaving his family in a hermitage near Ayodhya. Visvamitra saved 
Sunah£epa, son of Ajigarta, who was being sacrificed as a substitute for 
Rohita, son of Harischandra, and adopted him, after renaming him 
Devarata. Visvamitra’s sons did not accept Devarata’s headship, and 
so Visvamitra cursed them to become Mlechchhas such as Andhras, 
Pundras, and Sabaras. Ash taka probably succeeded Visvamitra on the 
Kanyakubja throne. 

KMi: Pratardana (the son of Divodasa) or his son Vatsa extended his 

285 



THE VEDIC AGE 


<SL 


■way further, and annexed the country around KauiambI which came to 
be named the Vatsa country. Vatsa’s son Alarka regained the capital 
Varanasi from the Rakshasas who had occupied the city since the days 
of BhadraSrenya and re-established it as the Ka6i capital. Alarka had a 
long and prosperous reign. 

4. The Solar Dynasty 

Ayodhya: After the rise of the realm to great heights in the reigns of 
Mandhatri, Purulcutsa, and Trasadasyu, the empire appears to have 
remained, if at all, merely in name, and we do not meet with any important 
king till we come to Trayyaruna, Saty avrata-Trisanku, and Harischandra. 
Satyavrata-Triianku is the subject of numerous fantastic tales in the 
Puranas . 2 4 Being expelled by his father at the instance of his family 
priest on account of some excesses, the prince is said to have led the 
life of a Chandala wandering in the woods on the banks of the Ganges 
for twelve years. Trayyaruna died in the meanwhile, but TrRanku was not 
recalled. There was a great famine lasting for nine years during the time 
of Trisahku’s exile. While in the forest, TrRahku supported the family 
of Visvamitra which was starving, when Visvamitra, after renouncing 
the kingdom, had gone to the forest to perform penance. Visvamitra 
learnt of the generosity of the prince after his return, and in gratitude, 
as also in order to defeat his antagonist Vasishtha, got Trisanku installed 
on the Ayodhya throne. Trisanku was succeeded by Harischandra, the 
embodiment of truth. He was a samrdt and is said to have performed the 
Rajasuya. The story of Harischandra, whose truthfulness was put to 
very severe tests by Visvamitra, is well known. Hariichandra’s son 
Rohitais said to have built RohitapuradS Rohita’s younger son Champa 
built Champapurl near Bhagalpur in east Bihar. Sixth in descent from 
Harischandra was Bahu. Sagara, so named because he was born with 
the poison which his step-mother administered to his mother, was born 
posthumously to Bahu in the hermitage of the sage Aurva. Sagara was 
taught archery by the sage Aurva, who specially instructed him in the 
celebrated Agneyastra. The foreign tribes, who came in the train of the 
Haihayas (ante, p. 283.fi) and settled down in Ayodhya, were called 
Kshatriyas. They respected Brahmanas, observed Brahmanic rites and 
rituals, and retained Vasishtha as their priest, They remained in 
possession of Ayodhya for over twenty years till Sagara attained maturity. 

Sagara had to pass through MadhyadeSa and Central India to lead 
an expedition against the Haihayas. After destroying them Sagara led 
bis conquering hordes against their hardy outlandish allies, the bakas, 
Yavanas, Kambojas, etc. He would have completely crushed them but 
for the intercession of his priest Vasishtha with whom they sought refuge. 
Sagara then let them off after imposing on them certain signs of symbolical 
defeat and disgrace; the Sakas were made to shave only half their heads, 

286 



ALITIONAL HISTORY FROM THE EARLIEST TIME 


<SL 


5jas to have their heads completely shaved, Paradas were forbidden 
to shave or trim the hair of their heads, and Pahlavas to shave their 
beards, thus rendering them unfit for Vedic ceremonials. 26 The story 
seeks to interpret, in the manner of the Puranas, the peculiar customs of 
these peoples who were becoming Kshatriyas under the priestly guidance 
of the Vasishthas. Sagara's name is connected with the ocean ( sdgara) 
in a fantastic legend which states that the ocean became Sagara’s son. 2 ? 

Sagara subjugated all contemporary powers and was the emperor of 
the whole of the north. The only important kingdoms to survive Sagara’s 
onslaughts appear to be Videha, Vaisali and Anava in the east, the 
Vidarbhas and the Yadava branch on the river Chambal in the south, 
KaAi in the Madhyade 3 a and Turvasus in the hilly tracts of Rewah. 
Sagara’s eldest son Asamafijas, being cruel to the citizens, was discarded, 
and the latter's son Aririumant succeeded him. 

Vatiffi: Karandhama, king of VaiSali, is said to have been besieged 
by a confederacy of kings whom at last he defeated. He also rescued his 
son Avikshit, who was captured by the king of Vidisa (probably a Haihaya 
chieftain) and his allies after a great conflict, and dealt them a severe 
blow. Marutta, one of the sixteen universal monarchs of antiquity, was 
born to Avikshit from ViSala, daughter of the VidiSa king. Marutta 
was a ceaseless and tireless performer of sacrifices. He had thousands of 
vessels, sacrificial utensils, etc., made of gold. Despite his great valour, 
Marutta had immense troubles from the Nagas. He was determined to 
exterminate them completely by setting^ fire to their habitations, though 
they took refuge with his father; but, when the Nagas restored to life 
the Rishis killed by them by means of herbs and by sucking out the poison, 
he let them off. According to Pargiter, these enemies were really the 
Haihayas, and Maratta deserves credit, for ending the Haihaya aggressions 
permanently in the east. 28 

5. Brdhmana Families 

As noted above, the Bhrigus or Bhargavas practically dominated the 
whole epoch, and Richika, Jamadagni, ParaSurama, and Agni Aurva 
were the prominent Bhargavas. 

Ayasya is the first Angiras mentioned in traditional history, and he 
officiated as a priest at the sacrificial ceremony of offering Sunahsepa as 
a victim in the reign of HariAchandra of Ayodhya. The Angirasas are 
found in connection with the VaiSala kings as their hereditary priests. 
USija Angiras was the priest of Karandhama and Avikshit, and two of 
his sons, Brihaspati and Samvarta officiated for Marutta Avikshita. 
Uchathya, the eldest son of Usija, had by his wife Mamata a son named 
Dlrghatamas, who was born blind. Dirghatamas was expelled for gross 
misconduct and set adrift in the Ganges, where after floating some distance 
downstream, he was rescued by king Bali of the Eastern Anayas. At 

287 



THE VEDIC AGE 





^, .vs desire, he begat five sons on Bali’s queen, as mentioned above 
(p, 284). Dirghatamas is later said to have regained his sight. Towards 
the end of his life, Dirghatamas consecrated king Bharata of the 
Pauravas. Brihaspati had a son Bharadvaja, who moved to Kasi and 
became priest 'to king Divodasa. His son Vitatha was adopted by Bharata 
and he continued the Paurava line. 

Datta Atreya, who was propitiated by Hailiaya Arjuna, was the only 
prominent figure among the Atris. 

Devaraj Vasishtha was a priest of the Ayodhya kings during the 
reigns of Trayyaruna and Satyavrata. His descendant officiated for the 
foreign Sakas, Yavanas, etc. and later became priest to Sagara. Another 
Vasishtha was Apava, in the Himalayas, whose hermitage was burnt 
by Hailiaya Arjuna. 

KaSyapa, who officiated as priest at the sacrifice of Rama Jamadagnya 
and to whom the latter donated the whole earth, is the earliest Kasyapa 
mentioned in traditional history. He is later said to have expelled Rama 
from the earth as noted above (p. 281). 

The only historical figure among the Agastyas is the Agastya who 
married Lopamudra and was a contemporary of Alarka, grandson of 
Pratardana of Kasi. 

With the wars of Parasxirama and Sagara described above, the Krita- 
yuga, according to the Puranas, came to an end. As the result of these 
wars, the old kingdoms of the Pauravas, Kanyakubjas, Druhyus, and 
Anavas in the Punjab gradually disappear. The \ adavas recede into 
the Deccan, while the Haihayas are completely routed. The eastern 
kingdom of VaiSali, Videha, Ayodhya, Kasi and the Anavas in Bengal 
continue to exist during the next period. 


8. THE RAMACHANDRA, PERIOD (c. 2350-1950 b.c.) 
x. The Solar Dynasty 

There was some setback to Ayodhya after ’Sagara’s death. Sagara 
was succeeded by his grandson A1 usuinant., The dynasty again lose to 
prominence under Amsumant’s second successor Bhagiratha, and the 
latter’s third successor Ambarisha Nabhagi. Bhagiratha is included in 
the list of sixteen famous kings and is celebrated as a chakravartin and 
a samrdt, as also one who gained fame by his gifts of cattle. He was a 
devotee of Siva. Pie is reputed to have brought down the sacred river 
Ganges (which is known as Bhagirathi after lnm ) 2 9 from the heavens, 
through the power of his penance, in order to liberate his ancestors 
cursed by Kapila. The fable perhaps indicates that Bhagiratha was 
the originator of the worship of the Ganges, or more plausibly, it may 
have some reference to the canals dug by him from the Himalayas. 

288 



ADITIONAL HISTORY FROM THE EARLIEST TIME: 

Jsfia W as a powerful monarch, and in his reign Ayodhya rose int 
prominence. The legends about his connection with the Bhagavata cult 
and the DvadaSI vow are later creations. His third successor was 
Rituparna who figures in the well-known Nala episode. 3 ° Rituparna’s 
son Sudasa has been identified with the Vedic Sudas of the Ddiarajna 
by some scholars; but beyond mere similarity of names, there is nothing 
in support of this identification. Around Sudasa’s son Mitrasaha has 
grown a cluster of wild and fantastic legends, invented perhaps to explain 
his second name Kalmashapada. The king is said to have served human 
flesh through mistake to his preceptor Vasishtha who doomed the king 
to become a Rakshasa; but on realizing that the king was not at fault, 
the sage limited the duration of his curse to only twelve years. The king, 
in his turn, prepared to curse his guru, but at the intercession of his 
queen, threw the wawfra-charmed water over his own feet, because 
throwing it on the ground would have rendered the earth barren for 
years. But the charmed water turned his feet into stone, which led to 
his being called Kalmashapada. 3 1 After Kalmashapada resumed,, his 
natural state, he had, on account of a curse, to raise issue from his 
wife by a Niyoga or levirate union with Vasishtha. ASmaka, the son 
of the union, founded the city Paudanya. 3 * Astnaka had a son named 
Mulaka, who later came to be called Narikavacha because it is said he 
sought, protection among the women-folk through fear of Parasurama. 
But Parasurama flourished generations before Asmaka, and the story 
has no chronological value. Probably it refers to the disturbed state of 
the. kingdom after the days of Kalmashapada when his successors were 
weaklings, and during this period, when the Bharatas and Panchalas 
were at the height of their power, the Ayodhya kings appear to have 
suffered reverses as the result of which Mvilaka was to be brought up in 
secret. It appears that there was a bifurcation in the Ayodhya line for 
some six or seven generations after Kalmashapada’s time. The two 
lines, however, were united in a single monarchy under Khatvanga, 
also known as Dillpa II. He was a great samrdt and a cfmkravartin, and 
is said to have helped the gods in their fight against the Asuras. He was 
a great devotee of Vishnu, and had a son named Raghu. The Ikshvaku 
dynasty came to be called Raghuvamsa on account of this celebrated 
Raghu. He conquered the whole earth and performed the Visvajit- sacri¬ 
fice. Being an ideal monarch, Raghu has been called the first king of 
Ayodhya. Raghu was succeeded by his son Aja, the consort of the 
Vidarbha princess Indumati, to whom was born Daiaratha. Dasaratha 
was a valiant and all-conquering monarch who led his victorious cam¬ 
paigns throughout the length and breadth of North India, and spread 
the Aryan culture far and wide. The Yadava contemporary of Dasaratha 
was Madhu who had consolidated the Yadava kingdom, and the con¬ 
temporary Pauravas held at least four states in the Ganges-Jumna 

289 


T 




THE VEDIC AGE 

f> ^6ab, with the north Pahchala branch specially prominent. The Kosal; 
kingdom at the time of Da£aratha was bounded on the east by Videha, 
Vaisali and Anga; the Vatsa country which formed part of Ka6i lay to 
its south; it was bounded on the west by the Paurava principalities of 
north and south Pahchala, the main Hastinapura realm, and one more 
Paurava kingdom between north Pahchala and Kosala. The region 
south from the Jumna up to Gujarat and beyond the Vindliya and the 
Satpura mountains was under Yadava domination with the emperor 
Madhu at the helm. 

Besides his three principal queens, viz. Kausalya, Sumitra and Kaikeyi, 
Da£aratha had a number of other wives. Da£aratha had married Kaikeyi 
on the stipulation that the son born of her was to succeed him. He had a 
daughter Santa whom he gave in adoption to the .Anga king Lomapada. 
Being without an heir for a long time, Da£aratha performed Putraka- 
meshti (rite for securing male issue) on the advice of Vasishtha under 
the guidance of Rishya&rihga, who was married to Santa. As a result, 
four sons were born to Da£aratha, viz. Rama to Kausalya, Bharata to 
Kaikeyi and Lakshmana and Satrughna to Sumitra. Rama and Laksh¬ 
mana obtained instruction in the science of archery from Visvamitra 
and they helped him in the performance of a sacrifice by vanquishing the 
horde of Rakshasas that disturbed him. Then Visvamitra took the princes 
to Mithila, where Rama fulfilled the conditions and was married to Sita. 
It is later on when DaSaratha proposed to instal Rama as crown prince 
that the main story of Rama, as recorded in the Ramayana, may be said 
to begin. 33 

The story of Rama is particularly important as it brings South India 
definitely into view for the first time. Various have been the theories and 
interpretations about the Ramayana , and the text of the epic has been 
subjected to interpolations and additions in every stage of its career. 
But despite its accretions, mythological and fabulous legends, etc., the 
text can be made to yield, historical facts. When preparations were made 
to instal Rama, the eldest son, as heir apparent, palace intrigues set in, 
and his step-mother Kaikeyi secured through DaAaratha the banishment 
of Rama along with Sita and Lakshmana to the Danclaka forest for four¬ 
teen years. Dandaka in these days was a great impenetrable forest save 
for a few patches here and there occupied by Aryan adventurers. Rama 
first went to Prayaga and from there south-west to the region of Bhopal, 
whence he proceeded south across the Narmada and then probably 
to the Chhattisgarh district, where he dwelt for ten years. Thereafter 
he went south to the middle of the Godavari in the province called 
Janasthana, which was a colony of the Rakshasas, who had intercourse 
with their kingdom in Ceylon. The Rakshasas ill-treated the Munis 
(sages) and Rama espoused the latters' cause and killed a number of 
Rakshasas. In revenge Ravana, the Rakshasa king, carried away Sita 

290 



Pi JMaditional history from the earliest time 
_ G&yton. Rama proceeded south in quest of Sita, came to lake Pampa 



and Rishyamuka Parvata, where he made friends with Sugriva, the 
king of the Vanaras, who was expelled by his brother Valin. Rama killed 
Valin and reinstated Sugriva on the throne. With the aid of the Vanara 
army and chiefs, Rama invaded Ceylon, defeated the Rakshasas, killed 
Ravana and recovered Sita. He placed Bibhishana, younger brother of 
Ravana, on the throne in Ceylon and returned to Ayodhya. 

Bharata acted as regent during Rama’s exile. Rama was crowned after 
his return to Ayodhya, and reigned prosperously for many years. 

The story of Rama, divested of its miraculous, fabulous, incredible 
and mythological elements, clearly indicates that he was a great king who 
spread Aryan ideas and institutions into regions far and wide. "Rama’s 
rule” is still proverbial for the Golden Age. 

Rama’s younger brothers ruled over different provinces. Lakshmana 
had two sons, Angada and Chandraketu, and they were assigned two 
countries in Karapatha-desa near the Himalayas, with their respective 
capitals at Angadiya and Chandrachakra. Bharata apparently got fhe 
Kekaya kingdom which was the province of his mother, and also 
Sindhu, i.e. Upper Sind. His two sons, Taksha and Pushkara, conquered 
Gandhara from the Gandharvas, and founded respectively Taksha^ 
and Pushkaravati;34 Satrughna fought the Satvata-Yadavas on the w( or 
of the Jumna and killed Madhava Lavana, son of Madhu. He establist o{ 
his capital at. Madhupuri or Madhura re-naming it as Mathura., and 
son Subahu reigned there. Rama had two sons, Kusa and Lava, bornd 
Sita in the hermitage of Valmiki after Rama had deserted her in deference' 
to public opinion. Kusa succeeded Rama in the Ayodhya kingdom, 
while Lava got the northern portion of Kosala with Sravasti as capital. 

These collateral kingdoms, however, appear to have come to an end 
soon. The two Gandhara states are not mentioned any further, and 
probably were amalgamated by the neighbouring Druhyus. Satrughna’s 
sons were expelled from Mathura by the Yadava king Bhima Satvata, 
and Mathura became a Yadava principality. No further account is given 
of the territories of Lakslimana’s sons nor of Lava’s kingdom. Ayodhya 
sinks into insignificance hereafter in traditional history, the chief roles 
being played only by the Pauravas and the Yaclavas. 

Videha: Siradhvaja, the father of Sita, was one of the most celebrated 
of the Janakas. King Sudhanvan of Sankishya demanded the. hand of 
Sita in marriage from Siradhavaja, but the latter killed Sudhanvan in 
a fierce battle and installed his own brother Kuiadhvaja on the Sankishya 
throne. Siradlivaja’s daughters, Sita and Urmila were married respectively 
to Rama and Lakshmana, sons of Dasaratha. and Kusadhvaja’s daughters 
Mandavi and Srutakirti, respectively to Bharata and Satrughna. 

Vaisdli: Marutta’s son Narishyanta is said to have performed a grand 
sacrifice, and he was a great donor. His son Dama was a great warrior 


291 



THE VEDIC AGE 




Who won a Daiarna princess after defeating rival kings in a 
arhvara. A few generations after Dama came Trinabindu, who is 
said to have ruled during the third quarter of the freta Age. 
Trinabindu married Alambusha and. had a son Vriala and a daughter 
Ilavila. Ilavila was given in marriage to Pulastya, and their son 
was Visravas Ailavila. Vriala is credited with the foundation of the 
capital Vriala, and so this kingdom came to be called Vaisali (a name 
hitherto used in anticipation). Pramati or Sumati, the last name in the 
list, was a contemporary of Da§aratha. 

2 . The Lunar Dynasty 

Pauravas: Dushyanta, the Paurava hero, appears to have flourished 
about a couple of generations subsequent to king Sagara of Ayodhya. 
Dushyanta was adopted as heir by the Turvasu king Marutta who had 
no son, so that the Turvasu line merged into the Pauravas. The central 
power of the Ikshvakus became weak after Sagara’s death, and Dushyanta 
took that opportunity of recovering his ancestral kingdom. Dushyanta 
also revived the dynasty and hence is styled its Vamsakara. He married 
Visvamitra’s daughter Sakuntala who was brought up in the hermitage 
of one Kanva of the Kasyapa family, and his son was the celebrated 
prince Bharata. 

Bharata, also known as Damana or Sarvadamana, performed a number 
of sacrifices on the Ganges and the Jumna with the aid of Dirghatamas 
Mamateya. He also sacrificed on the Sarasvati He was a great conqueror 
and samrdt with a wide sway. He extended his dominions northward 
and his territories stretched from the Sarasvati to the Ganges. The Paurava 
dynasty came to be called Bharatas after the time of Bharata. It was 
probably during Bharata’s regime that the headquarters of the state 
were shifted from Pratishthana to the city, called later Hastinapura, 
after his successor Hastin. According to some accounts, Bharata gave 
his name to our country which was henceforth called Bharatavarsha. 
Bharata was disappointed in his sons and killed them. He propitiated 
the Maruts in order to obtain an heir and they, gave him Brihaspati’s 
son Bharadvaja as an adopted son. Bharadvaja’s son Vitatha, however, 
succeeded Bharata. Hastin, the fifth successor from Bharata, had two 
sons Ajamidha and Dvimidha under whom the Paurava realm extended 
and fresh kingdoms were founded. Ajamidha, the elder, continued the 
main line at Hastinapura and Dvimidha founded the Dvimidha dynasty 
in the modern district of Bareilly. Ajamidha had three sons, viz. Riksha, 
Nila, and Brihadvasu. On Ajamidha’s death, the main Paurava realm 
was divided among these sons, Riksha succeeding his father at Hastin¬ 
apura in the main line, which remained the Paurava line, and Nila and 
Brihadvasu founded what later came to be known respectively as the 
north Paficliala and south Panchala dynasties.15 

292 




mm 


RADITIONAL HISTORY FROM THE EARLIEST TIME 

country came to be known as Panchala from the five sons of 
Bhrimyasva (the sixth successor from A j amid ha.) who were jocosely 
nicknamed "capable” tyancha alam). The Panchalas, thus, were a branch 
of the Bharatas. The name suggests an amalgamation of five tribes, 
and there has been some speculation as to which particular tribes went 
to form the Panchalas. The Panchala kingdom was divided between the 
five sons of Bhrimyasva, each of them receiving a small principality. 
Mudgala, the eldest, founded an important branch. Vadbryasva, the 
grandson of Mudgala, extended the kingdom, and his son Divodasa 
further augmented it. Pargiter and other scholars identify this Divodasa 
and his descendant Somadatta-Sudasa with their Vedic namesakes, the 
latter of whom was the chief participant in the celebrated battle of ten 
kings.3 6 

Yadavas: Kratha-Bhima continued the main Yadava line of Vidarbha, 
and KaiSika, his younger brother, was the progenitor of the Chedis. 
The most important king of Yidarbha was Bhimaratha, father of the 
celebrated Damayanti, who was married to Nala of Nishadha. Madbu, 
who came about ten generations after Bhimaratha, appears to have 
consolidated the small Yadava principalities into which the Yadavas 
were divided before him. Madhu’s son Lavana was killed by Satrughna, 
who installed his own son Subahu in Mathura. But Subahu was ousted 
by Bhima Satvata, son of Satvat. who was Madhu's fifth successor. 

Eastern Anavas: We do not know any particulars about the kings in the 
Aiiga genealogy till we come to Lomapada, who is placed seventh in the 
genealogical list. Lomapada was a well-known archer and a great friend 
of king" DaSaratha of Ayodhya, the father of Rama. Lomapada was 
childless and adopted Santa, the daughter of king Dasaratha. Santa was 
married to Rishyasringa who performed the Putrakameshti sacrifice for 
Lomapada as the result of which Lomapada got a son named Chaturanga. 
Lomapada’s great-grandson Champa gave the name Champa to the 
Anga capital, which was till then known as Malim. 

Kim: King Alarka, who finally drove the Rakshasas from Benares 
and re-established his capital there, is said to have been born to 
Ritudhvaja (another name of Vatsa) from Madalasa. Alarka was a 
spiritually-minded king and relinquished the kingdom in favour of 
his brother when the latter invaded it. Alarka was succeeded by his son 
Sannati. 

3 . Brdkmana Families 

Among the Bhargavas during this period, appears Valmlki of the 
Rdmdyana, who was called Prachetasa. 

The father of Sakuntala was an important Vifwamitra in this period, 
and another appears as the contemporary and rival of Vasishtha, the 
priest of Mitrasaha-Kalmashapada. 

- . 293 


m,sTtr 



With the coronation of Rama as king of Ayodhya after the destruction 
of the Rakshasas began the Dvapara age which ended with the Bharata 
War. During this period it is only the Panchalas, Pauravas, and Yadavas 
that prominently figure in traditional history, while Ayodhya and others 
sink into the background. 

x. Panchalas 

The North Panchala power rose into prominence during the reign of 
Sudasa who made extensive conquests. He defeated the Paurava king 
Saihvarana and conquered his kingdom..'Sudasa was succeeded by his 
son Sahadeva and grandson Somaka, but the fortunes of the Panchalas 
waned after the time of Sudasa. Saihvarana, the Paurava king, had 
recovered his territory probably from Somaka, and later, king Ugrayudha 
of the Dvimidhas killed the North Panchala king (probably the grand¬ 
father of Prishata) and annexed his realm. Prishata, the exiled North 
Panchala claimant, sought refuge in Kampilya of South Panchala. 
Ugrayudha then attacked the Pauravas after Ssantanu’s death, but was 
defeated and killed by Bhlshma, who restored Prishata to his ancestral 
kingdom of Ahichchhatra. Drupada succeeded his father I rishata in 
North Panchala. Drona, a fellow student, whom Drupada had insulted, 
defeated the latter with the aid of the young Pandu and Kuru princes 
who were his .disciples. Out of both the North and South Panchalas 
which he thus conquered, Drona kept North Panchala for himself and 
gave South Panchala to Drupada. The Somakas and Srinjayas, the 
remnants of the Panchalas, appear to have joined Drupada as they 
accompanied him in the great Bharata War. Drupada performed penance 
in order to get a son who would avenge his defeat bv Drona and kill 
him, and Dhrishtadyumna was born as the result. The Panchalas played 
a very important part in the age of the Bharata War. I he Pandavas 
married Draupadi, the Panchala princess, daughter of Drupada, and the 
Panchalas were the staunch supporters of the Pandavas. 

Brahmadatta seems to have been an important king among the South 
Panchalas Tradition connects him with the revision and rearrangement 
of Vedic and exegetical texts. He fixed the Kramapatha of the Rigveda 
and of the Atharvaveda, and his minister Kandarika. of the Sdmaveda. 
Brahmadatta’s great-grandson Janamejaya Durbuddlu, the last king, 
was a tyrant and was killed by Ugrayudha of the Dvmudbas, and the 
dynasty came to an end. 

2 . Pauravas 

As noted above, the Panchala king Sudasa overthrew Samvarana, 

294 



.^/traditional history from the earliest time is 

Paurava king. The latter fled to Sind and then recovered his king¬ 
dom through Vasishtha’s help.37 Samvarana had by Tapati a son named 
Kuru, who was a renowned king raising the Paurava realm to great 
eminence. Kuru is said to have sacrificed at Prayaga which indicates 
that he extended his sway up to that place after subduing the inter¬ 
vening South Panchala territory. Kurukslietra and Kurujahgala, the 
cultivated and uncultivated portions, respectively, of Kuru’s territory, 
have been regarded by Pargiter as being named after this Kuru. .3* Kuru 
was celebrated for his righteous rule, and Kurukshetra was regarded as 
a religious place. He was so much esteemed that his successors were 
called Kurus or Kauravas after him, the term sometimes being applied 
also to the people of the realm. 

There is some confusion in the Puranic texts with regard to Kuru s 
immediate successors. The collated text39 suggests that Kuru had three 
sons, Parikshit, the eldest, Jahnu, and Sudhanvan. Parikshit had 
Janamejaya as his son, and the latter’s sons were Srutasena, Ugrasena, 
and Bhimasena; but nothing further is said about them. The accounts 
then pass on to Jahnu’s son Suratha and his descendants, who thus 
appear to have continued the main Paurava (or Kuru) line. The succession 
of Jahnu’s son Suratha on the main line indicates that Janarnejaya’s 
branch lost the sovereignty. A story is told how Janamejaya lost his 
throne.4° Janamejaya injured the sage Gargya’s son and was cursed by 
Gargya. Indrota Daivapa Saunaka performed a horse-sacrifice foi him, 
which absolved him of his sin, but he could not recover his sovereignty 
and hence his three sons do not appear in the accounts. 

The line of Sudhanvan, the youngest son of Kuru, bifurcated into the 
Chech and the Magadha branches, founded by his fourth successor Vasu. 
The kingdom held by the main Paurava line appears to have declined, 
and there was no ruler in this line to revive the Kautava fortunes till 
the time of Pratlpa, who was a famous ruler. Pratipa had three sons, 
Devapi, Bahlika, and Santanu. The eldest Devapi was a leper, and hence 
could not become a ruler. The second Bahlika resigned in favour of 
gantanu, who thus succeeded Pratlpa. The epic gives various legends 
about Santanu. Santanu married Ganga, and Bhishma was born to them. 
Bhishma, whose original name was Devavrata, vowed to remain celibate 
all his life and renounced his right to the throne in favour of his younger 
brothers in order to enable his father to marry Satyavatl. Bhishma is a 
celebrated figure in the galaxy of Indian heroes. He was a great warrior, 
an able administrator and well versed in politics, science of war, etc. 
Ugrayudha of the Dvimidhas attacked the Kauravas but, as noced 
above, Bhishma killed him and reinstated Brishata, the son of the late 
ruler of North Panchalas, whom Ugrayudha had driven out. 

To Santanu were born Chitrangada and Yichitravirya from Satyavatl. 
Chitrangada was killed while fighting against the Gandharvas and 

295 




THE VEDIC AGE 


<SL 


, icliitravlrya succeeded him on the throne. But Vichitravirya died 
young without leaving any issue, and the queen of Vichitravirya had 
through Niyoga (levirate) two sons from Vyasa, viz. Dhritarashtra and 
Pandu. Dhritarashtra, the elder, being born blind, Pandu was crowned 
king of Hastinapura while the veteran Bhishma looked to the affairs of 
state. Dhritarashtra married Gandhari, and had by her a hundred sons, 
chief of whom were Duryodhana, DuMasana, etc. Pandu married Kunti 
or Pritha, daughter of Kuntibhoja and an aunt of Krishna, and 
Madri, sister of Salya, the Vahika king. After his marriage with Madri, 
Pandu started on his campaign of conquest. He vanquished the 
DasSrnas, the kings of Mithila, Kaii, Suhma, and Pundra and extended 
the Kuru dominions.4 1 While engaged in hunting, Pandu killed a sage 
in the form of deer and was cursed, in repentance , Pandu left his kingdom 
and went along with his wives to the Himalayas for performing penance. 
There Kunti gave birth to Yudhishthira, Bhlma, and Arjuna who are, 
in reality, said to be respectively the sons of Varna, Vayu, and Indira; 
and Madri, to the twins Nakula and Sahadeva from the Alvins. Pandu 
died in the hermitage, and Madri burnt herself along with him on his 
funeral pyre. Thereafter, Kunti returned to Hastinapura along with the 
five sons. Dhritarashtra assumed the reins of government in the meanwhile 
and appointed Yudhishthira, the first-born among the Kuru family, as 
the crown prince. T. hough the sons of both Dhritarashtra arid Pandu 
were Kauravas, the term was restricted to the sons of Dhritarashtra, 
and Pandu's sons were called Pandavas. 

Chedi and Magadha: Vasu, the fourth successor of Sudhanvan, conquered 
the Chedi kingdom from the Yadavas and founded a dynasty there, 
whence he obtained the epithet Chaidyoparichara (overcomer of 
Chaidyas). His capital Suktimati lay on the river Suktimatl (the Ken). 
Vasu was a samrdt and a chakravartin and extended his sway over adjoining 
Magadha, and possibly over Matsya also. He had five sons, among whom 
he divided his territory, establishing them in separate kingdoms. Magadha 
came as the share of his eldest son Brihadratha. KuSa was given 
Kausambi, Yadu had Karusha, and Pratyagraha got Chedi. Probably 
the last son got Matsya which adjoined Chedi in the north-west. 

With Brihadratha establishing himself in Magadha, with Girivraja as 
his capital, and founding the famous Barhadratha dynasty, Magadha 
becomes a prominent factor in traditional history. Jarasandha in the 
Barhadratha line was a veiy powerful king, and under him Magadha 
rose to great prominence. He extended his territories as far away as 
Mathura, where Kaihsa, the Yadava king, who was his son-in-law, 
accepted his suzerainty. Kamsa tyrannized over his people and was 
killed by Krishna who placed Ugrasena on the Mathura throne. Enraged 
at this, Jarasandha led many a campaign against Krishna and the 
Bhojas of Mathura, defeating them several times. Though the Yadavas 

296 




TRADITIONAL HISTORY FROM THE EARLIEST TIME 


coyfd withstand Jarasandha for a time, they decided to migrate in 
bodv south-westward as they were afraid of a complete rout, at his hands. 
They then established themselves in the west coast with their head¬ 
quarters at Dvaraka under Krishna. Jarasandha was killed by Bhima, 
the Pandava, and his son Sahadeva became an ally of the Pandavas. 

\ Yadavas 

The large Yadava kingdom ruled .over by Bhima Satvata was divided 
among his four sons, Bhajamana, Devavridha, Andliaka, and Vrishni. 
Bhajamana’s descendants appear to have attained no distinction. 
Devavridha was connected with the river ParnaSa (Banas in West Malwa), 
and his descendants were the Bhojas of Marttikavata, apparently in Salva 
country around Mount Abu. Andhaka, who reigned at Mathura, had 
four sons, but only Kukura and Bhajamana are important. From Kukura 
were descended the Kukuras who formed the main dynasty down to 
Kairtsa. Bhajamana’s descendants were known as Andhakas, and they 
ruled somewhere near Mathura. An important king in the line was 
Kritavarma, the son of Hridika, who fought on the side of Duryodhana 
arid was one of the three on the Kauravas’ side who survived the Bharata ^ 
War. Thereafter, he went to Dvaraka and later was killed by Satyaki 
in the fateful fratricidal struggle that brought the downfall of the 
Yadavas. Vrishni had at least four sons, the eldest and the youngest 
having the same name Anamitra. From .them arose numerous families. 
From Anamitra or Sumitra, the eldest, was bom Nighna, and his sons 
Prasena and Satrajit succeeded him. Satrajit is a well-known figure in 
the Syamantaka legend connected with Krishna, and was the father of 
Satyabliama, one of the eight principal queens of Krishna. Devamidhusha 
in the line married an Ikshvaku princess named Aimak! and a son named 
Sura was born to him. From Sura and his queen, a Bhoja princess named 
Marisha, were born ten sons and five daughters including Vasudeva 
who was the eldest, and Fritha, Srutadeva, and 5§ruta6rava. Pritha was 
adopted by the old king Kuntibhoja from whom she came to be known 
as Kunti. She married the Paurava prince Pandu, and was the mother 
of the cider Pandavas. Srutadeva married a Karusha king named 
VriddhaSarml Srutashava was given to the Chedi king Damaghosha, 
and Stfuj)-’ ' • was born to them. Vasudeva married the seven daughters 
(DevakI, of king Devaka of the Kukuras, and Balarama and Krishna 
were the sifts of Vasudeva. Vasudeva’s daughter Subhadra married 
Arjuna, the Pandava, to whom Abhimanyu was born from her. Abhi- 
manyu’s son was Parikshit who occupied the Hastinapura throne after 
the Bharata War. The descendants of Anamitra, the youngest son of 
Vrishni by Madri, are called Sainyas through his son Sini. Satyaki and 
Yuyudhana were born in this family. 

Ahuka among the Kukuras had, by a Kasi princess, Devaka, 

297 


THE VEDIC AGE 



<SL 


grasena, and other sons. Devaka had four sons and seven daughters 
(Devald, etc.). Krishna was born of Devakl. Ugrasena had nine sons and 
five daughters, Kamsa being the eldest. Kamsa usurped the throne 
after imprisoning his father. Vasudeva was his minister. Kamsa killed 
seven children of his cousin Devakl, relying on a prediction that her 
eighth issue was destined to be his slayer. Krishna and Balarama were 
brought up in Gokula and Vrindavana. Krishna killed Kariisa and 
reinstated Ugrasena on the Mathura kingdom as already stated. 

Krishna being the central figure in this epoch, we shall briefly deal with 
his life and, historicity.! 2 Krishna was born in the prison cell at Mathura, 
but immediately after birth was removed to Gokula on the other side of 
the Jumna with the aid of the prison warders and others who were dis¬ 
satisfied with the tyrant Kamsa.. He was brought up in Gokula as the 
child of Nanda and YaSoda, whose daughter was substituted for Krishna 
and was later killed by Kamsa. As a child, Krishna appears to have been 
endowed with extraordinary gifts and passed through many adventures. 
His childhood was spent in Gokula and various incidents connected 
with his youth are recorded in the Puranas and other texts. The 
incidents are presented in the garb of myths and miracles, but there may 
be a real basis for some of them. A few years after Krishna’s birth, the 
cowherds left Gokula on account of an onrush of ferocious wolves and 
settled in Vrindavana, where Krishna subjugated Kaliya, a Naga chief, 
and ordered him to leave the place with his tribe. In Vrindavana, in place 
of the usual Indrayajna, Krishna established the practice of worshipping 
nature. Krishna's extraordinary exploits, widespread popularity, and 
great fame reached the ears of Kamsa, and he planned to kill, through his 
wrestlers, the Vrishni princes Krishna and Balarama, after inviting them 
to Mathura to visit his court and attend a wrestling bout. Krishna 
and Balarama, however, killed the prize fighters. Krishna then slew the 
tyrant Kamsa himself, and re-instated Ugrasena on the Mathura throne. 
Thereafter, Krishna and Balarama left for Kasi for their education, but 
had to return soon on account of the invasion of Mathura by Jarasandha, 
the Magadha king, who was enraged at Kamsa’s death, the latter being 
his son-in-law. Jarasandha’s invasions were resisted for some time, but 
finally the Yadavas decided to leave Mathura in a body and settled in 
Dvaraka on the west coast. 

Krishna appears for the first time in the Mahabhdrata story at the 
Svayamvara of Draupadi. He was a friend and counsellor of the Parulavas, 
and his sister Subhadra was married to Arjuna. King Jarasandha of 
Magadha was killed by Bhima under Krishna’s directions. At the 
rdjasuya performed by the Pandavas,^ Krishna was offered the first 
worship. This enraged the Chech king Sisupala who heaped vile abuse 
upon Krishna and was killed by him. After the period of the Paridavas' 
exile was over, Krishiia acted as their emissary of peace to Duryodhana, 

298 




TRADITIONAL HISTORY FROM THE EARLIEST TIME 

his efforts at conciliation proved futile. In the great Bharata W 
Krishna offered his personal help as a charioteer to Arjuna, while Ins 
army joined the Kauravas. Krishna helped the Pandavas a number of 
times during the great war. In fact it was mainly, if not solely, due to the 
important part played by Krishna in the great war that the Pandavas 

emerged victorious, . 

Krishna returned to Dvaraka after Yudhishthira was installed on the 
Hastinapura throne. He revived the stillborn child of Abhitnanyu’s 
widow Uttara, later known as Parikshit. The last meeting of Krishna 
and the Pandavas was at the latter’s ASvamedha. Towards the close of 
Krishna’s life there was a fratricidal struggle among the Yadavas in winch 
practically the entire Yadava males were destroyed. Then Krishna 
sent a messenger to Hastinapura inviting Arjuna to come to Dvaraka 
and look after the women and children, and asking them to accompany 
Arjuna, Krishna retired to the forest. Arjuna came to Dvaraka, took with 
him the remnants of the Yadu family, and installed Vajra, the only 
surviving grandson of Krishna, on the throne of Mathura. Krishna, 
when in deep meditation, was hit by the arrow of a hunter who mistook 
him for a deer. Thus passed away one of the grandest figures in ancient 
India. There is now a general consensus of opinion in favour of the 
historicity of Krishna. Many also hold the view that Vasudeva, the 
Yadava hero, the cowherd boy Krishna in Gokula, the counsellor of 
the Pandavas, and the great philosopher of the Bhagavadgita, or in short 
Krishna of the Puranas and Krishna of the Mahabhdrata were one and 
the same person .43 The deification of Vasudeva Krishna as an incarnation 
of Vishnu must be dated before the period of the Mahdbhashya (i.e. 
second century b.c.). 

4 . Eastern Anavas 

Under the suzerainty of Jarasandha, king of Magadha, Anga came to 
be ruled for some time by Karna, who was a faithful ally of the Kauravas, 
and one of the principal actors in the Great Epic of India. Among the 
galaxy of epic heroes Karna occupies a very high position, and his real 
worth has not been fully appreciated as he is looked at with prejudice 
on account of his becoming a staunch supporter of Duryodhana. Ill-luck 
seems to have pursued Karna from his very birth, when he was deserted 
by his mother Kunti, as he was born, when she was still a maiden, from 
the Sun God. He was thus in reality the eldest of the Pandavas, but 
being brought up by a Suta, he met with slights and insults at every 
stage in his life. His so-called low birth came in the way of his being 
ranked as fit to compete with Arjuna. Duryodhana at once crowned him 
the king of Anga, and thus began a cordial friendship which made Karna 
the strongest supporter of the Kauravas, whose every cause he cham¬ 
pioned with thorough wholeheartedness. Karna met with his end not 

- 299 




THE VEEIC AGE 


se he was beaten, nor on account of his being inferior to Arjun 
in any way, but he was the victim of his own greatness, and destiny was 
always against him. He is indeed a unique hero who should be admired 
for his magnanimity, unflinching devotion to the cause he championed, 
valour, skill, and truthfulness. Vrisliasena was the eldest of the sons of 
Karna; but along with his five brothers, he was killed in the Bhaiata 

War. ■ ■ & .is'JiJIliP 1 WSf 

5. The Solar Dynasty 

After Rama’s time, Ayodhya plays no important part in traditional 
history. Kuh, Rama's son, who became the ruler of south Kosala with 
his capital at KuSasthali, appears to have extended the Aryan culture in 
the Vindhya regions. The story of Kura’s marriage with a Naga princess 
shows how he spread the Vedic culture among the aborigines. The next 
important figure after Kusa is Hiranyanabha Kausalya who is described 
as a disciple of Jaimini from whom he learnt the science of Yoga. The 
last. Solar king of the pre-Bharata War period was Brihadbala who led 
the Ayodhya forces against the Paindavas. Though Bhima conquered 
him before the Rajasuya, Brihadbala was subsequently subjugated by 
Karna and hence he fought at the head of the Kaurava forces. Brihadbala 
was killed by Abhimanyu in the Kurukshetra war . 


pL 


10. 


THE BHARATA WAR (c. 1400 b.c.) 


1. Kauravas and Pdndavasw 

All the young Kuru princes received training in arms from Kripa and 
Drona, where Asvatthaman and Karna were their study-mates. Bhima 
and Duryodhana specialized in club-fighting and wrestling, Nakula and 
Sahadeva in fencing, Yudhishthira in chariot fighting, and Asvatthaman 
in magic arts. Arjuna was not only the best archer but excelled all in 
every respect. But Karna was Arj una’s equal in archery. On completion 
of their training, Drona demanded as his fees the defeat and capture of 
the Panchala king Drupada who had insulted him as his co-student. 
The Kuru princes marched against Drupada and vanquished him. Drona 
made peace with Drupada by leaving South Panchala to him and taking 
North Panchala for himself. Dhritarashtrci’s sons,, through jealousy, 
set on foot various plots in order to destroy their cousins, but the 
Pandavas escaped unhurt through all these traps. After their safe escape 
from the lac house at Varanavata, the Pandavas started on a journey 
in the guise of Brahmanas. They came to Kampilya, and on Arjuna s 
successfully accomplishing the feat imposed as a test in the Svayamvara 
of princess Draupadi of Panchala, daughter of king Drupada, she became 
the common wife of the five Panclava brothers. Hearing of the successes 

300 






RADITIONAL HISTORY FROM THE EARLIEST TIME 




Pandavas, Dhritarashtra called them back to Hastinapura an 
gave them the Khandava-Prastha desert. The Pandavas founded 
Indraprastha and made it their capital. Owing to breach of a self-imposed 
rme, Arjuna went on a voluntary-pilgrimage for twelve years during 
which he contracted marital alliance with Chitrangada, princess of 
Manipur, and Subhadra, the Yadava princess, sister of Krishna. The 
Pandavas burnt down the whole of Khandava jungle, saving the life 
of Maya Asura, who in gratitude erected for them a wonderful assembly 
hall. Then Yudhishthira decided to perform a Raj asuya sacrifice as the 
emblem of sovereignty. As a preliminary to the sacrifice, the other four 
Pandava brothers set out on conquering the whole earth. King Jarasandha 
of Magadlia was their greatest opponent and challenger, and under the 
advice and guidance of Krishna, Bhlma killed Jarasandha in a duel. 
Jartisandha’s son Sahadeva was installed on the Magadha throne and 
he became an ally of the Pandavas. Bhima, Arjuna, Nakula, and Sahadeva 
led campaigns respectively towards the east, north, west, and south. 
The descriptions of these conquests throw much light upon the countries 
and peoples of the days of the Mahabharata, though at places there are 
myth and anachronism. Numerous kings including the Kauravas were 
invited to the Rajasiiya, and Krishna was offered the first worship therein. 
The Chedi king Sriupala objected, and in the quarrel that followed, was 
killed by Krishna. It was after the Rajasuya when Duryodhana was 
inspecting the Sabha or Assembly Hall built by Maya that the seeds of 
the Bharata War were deeply sown. The rapid rise of the Pandavas was 
an eyesore to the Kauravas and they hit upon a plan to oust them from 
their kingdom. Taking advantage of the Ksliatriya code of conduct that 
one should not refuse, when invited for a duel or for a gambling-match, 
Duryodhana called on Yudhishthira for a game of dice, in which the latter 
staked everything including Draupadi, and lost it. The denuding of 
Draupadi occurred after this game of dice. Prom hot words, the princes 
were coming to blows, but old Dhritarashtra let off the Pandavas. Soon 
afterwards the second game of dice was played in which the stake was 
that the loser should spend twelve years in the forest, and the thirteenth 
incognito. The Pandavas lost this game also, and had to leave for the forest. 
Draupadi accompanied them. During the thirteenth year, the Pandavas 
stayed in the Matsya country in disguise. There they helped the Matsya 
king Virata against the attack of the Kauravas. Virata’s daughter 
Uttara was married to Abhimanyu, the son of Arjuna. After completing 
the full period, seeing that, war was inevitable, each party tried to enlist 
as many sympathisers as possible. Krishna himself sided with the 
Pandavas but his forces fought on the side of the Kauravas. Salya was 
won over by Duryodhana. Drupada’s priest was sent to the Kauravas 
on behalf of the Pandavas for negotiations, and finally Krishna himself 
went as an ambassador of peace. But Duryodhana was adamant and 

301 


THE VEDIC AGE 



War 


.rented to part with even a particle of earth. Thus began the Great Vt ar 
which may be regarded as the greatest event in the prehistoric age of 
India and forms the theme of the Great Epic Mahdbharata. 

2. Bhdrata War 

The epic gives a long list of princes on each side. The Kauravas had 
eleven divisions under them as against the seven of the Pandavas. Towards 
the east, out of the old Magadhan empire, only western Magadha ruled 
by Jarasandha’s son Sahadeva was on the Pandava side. All the rest, 
viz. eastern Magadha, Videha, Aiiga, Yaxiga, and Kalinga, which were 
under Karna, joined the Kaurava forces. The Kiratas under Bhagadatta, 
ruler of Pragjyotisha, also were under the banner of the Kauravas, so 
that practically the whole east supported them. In Madhyadesa, the 
rulers of Vatsa, Kaii, Chedi, Karusha, Dasarna, and Panchala figured 
among the supporters of the Pandavas, while Brihadbala, king of the 
Kosalas, went to the opposite camp. Ihe Yadavas were divided in their 
allegiance. Krishna was the non-combatant adviser of the Pandavas and 
Balarama remained neutral, if uyudhana and Satyaki, among the 
Vrishnis and Y'adavas, came to the Pandavas, while Nila of Mahishmatl, 
vinda and Anuvinda of Avanti, Kritavarman of the Bhoja-Andhaka- 
Vrishnis, Vidarbha, Nishada, and Salva supported the Kaurava forces. 
In the Punjab and the north-west, Jayadratha of Sindhu-Sauvira who 
was the brother-in-law of the Kauravas, Sakuni of Gandhara, Su&arma 
of Trigarta, Kekaya, Sibi, Salya of Madra (related to the Pandavas), 
Vahlika, Kshudraka, Malava, Sritayu of the Ambashthas, and Suclak- 
shina of the Kambojas, were in the Kaurava army; only Abhisara, which 
formed the south-western part of Kashmir is said to have joined the 
Pandavas. Thus, the Pandavas' supporters were Panchalas, Matsya, 
Chedi, Karusha, Western Magadha, Kasi and south-western Yadavas. 
Under the Kauravas came practically the whole of eastern India, the 
whole of north-west, Kosala, Vatsa, and Surasena in the Madhyadesa, 
and Mahishmatl, Avanti, and Salva in the west. In short, broadly speaking, 
the Madhyadesa and Gujarat stood for the Pandavas and the rest, viz. 
east, north-west, and western India, opposed them. The Pandava army 
encamped near Upaplavya, the capital of the Matsyas; and the Kaurava 
forces were gathered near Hastinapura, Last minute efforts were made 
for an amicable settlement, but the negotiations proved futile, and the 

great battle was fought on the famous field of Kurukshetra. 

Dhrishtadyumna, son of Drupada, was appointed the Commander-in- 
Chief of the Pandavas and Bhlshma led the Kauravas. The two hosts 
were bound to follow certain rules of war traditional among the Kshat- 
riyas. Only opponents of equal birth and armed with the same kind of 
weapons were to fight each other. None was to fight without first 
challenging his opponent. Those engaged in personal combat with another, 

302 



R AD ITION AL HISTORY FROM THE EARLIEST TIME 


a,..-a .nose who surrendered, as well as the fugitives and non-combatants 
were to be spared. The venerable Bhlshma commanded the Kaurava 
forces during the first ten days of war. It was only through the arrows 
discharged by Arjuna against Bhlshma under the cover of Sikhandin 
(whom Bhlshma did not fight, Sikhandin being originally a woman) 
that on the tenth day Bhlshma fell down headlong from his chariot. 
Drona was consecrated the next commander, and he carried on the 
fight till the fifteenth day. Abhimanyu was killed on the thirteenth day 
and Ghatotkacha, the demon son of Bhlma, on the fourteenth. Drupada 
and Virata were killed by Drona on the fifteenth day, and finally that 
evening Dhrishtadyumna killed Drona, while in deep sorrow on hearing 
the false news of the death of his son Asvatthaman. Kama was the next 
commander. His turn lasted only for two days during which Bhlma 
tore open DuMasana’s breast. Kama was killed by Arjuna. Salya became 
the commander on the eighteenth or the last day of the battle. He was 
killed by Yudhishthira by about mid-day, while Sahadeva killed Sakuni. 
The entire host of the Kauravas was thus completely annihilated and 
Duryodhana fled to a pond where the Pandavas challenged him. In the 
club-fight against Bhlma Duryodhana’s thighs were smashed and he 
dropped down-bleeding. Duryodhana appointed Asvatthaman as the 
last commander who, with the help of the other two survivors from 
among the Kaurava heroes, viz. Kripa and Kritavarman, stealthily 
entered into the Pandava camp at night and slaughtered the surv tying 
Pandava princes and Dhrishtadyumna while asleep. With the death of 
Duryodhana perished ail the male members of his large family except, 
his old and blind father. The Pandavas emerged victorious, but besides 
the five Pandava brothers, Satyaki was the sole survivor on their side. 
Thus the victory, though complete, was won at a very high cost. 

The Kuru line being extinct with the death of the hundred sons of 
Dhritarashtra, Yudhishthira became king of the Kurus and ruled at 
Hastinapura. Later on Yudhishthira performed a horse-sacrifice on 
Vyasa's advice in order to purge liimself of all sins. Arjuna was placed 
in charge of the horse and the sacrifice was completed with due ceremonial. 
Dhritarashtra retired to forest with Gandhari after a few years and was 
consumed in a forest conflagration. Yudhishthira, however, did not 
reign long. Some years after the Bharata War, the Vrishnis and Yadavas 
of Gujarat perished in fratricidal strife and Krishna died. Arjuna was 
sent to bring the survivors of the Yadavas, but on his way back he was 
attacked and defeated by the Abhiras. Arjuna returned to Hastinapura 
with Krishna’s grandson Vajra, and placed him at the head of the people 
who followed him from Dvaraka. Thereafter'Yudhishthira abdicated and 
retired to the forest along with his brothers, placing Parikshit, Arjuna’s 
grandson, on the throne. 

The accession of Parikshit marks the beginning of the Kali Age, as the 



303 


Bvapara Age is said to have closed with the Bharata War. In the 
Puranic accounts also "the past” ...ended, and "the future” began, at 
the close of the Bharata War which was an epoch-making event in the 
annals of the country. The dynasties of the Kali Age in the Puranas 
begin with the accession of Parikshit, though some begin their accounts 
after Adhisimakrislina, fourth in descent from Parikshit .45 
The traditional accounts do not state how the family feud in the Kuru 
family was turned into an all-India affair, so that every ruling dynasty 
of any note during the period, howsoever far from Kurukshetra, is 
represented as having participated in the war. The non-mention of the 
Bharata War in later Vedic Literature does not necessarily disprove 
its historicity. For one thing, it was a purely political contest, and hence 
naturally did not interest the authors of the BrahmanasA 6 An argumentum 
ex silentio is seldom conclusive. Again the Pandus, according to traditions, 
were not a body of strangers, but were scions of the Kuru family. The 
very significance of the term Pandavas, as distinct from the Kauravas, 
was forgotten soon after the war, and the term Kurus alone survived. 
Though the Mahdbhdrata, in its present form, is a late production, the 
kernel of the story takes us back to the period between T400 and 1000 
b.c. when, as noted above, the battle was probably fought. The 
Aivalayana Grihyci-sutra (III. 4- 4 ) refers to the Bharata and the 
Mahabharata, and Sdnkhdyana Srauta-sutra (XV. 16), to the disastrous 
war of the Kauravas. Panini refers to the heroes of the Bharata War as 
already objects of worship. All these clearly prove the antiquity of the 
story of the Mahabharata. 


11. COMPARATIVE VALUE OF 
THE VEDAS AND THE PURANAS 
AS SOURCES OF TRADITIONAL HISTORY 

There is a difference of opinion among scholars as to the comparative 
value of the Vedic texts and the Puranas in regard to the historical 
data supplied by them. Keith is excessively sceptical about the historical 
value of the. Puranas and is doubtful regarding the historicity of any 
event which is not explicitly mentioned in the Rigveda. Pargiter goes to 
the other extreme and gives more weight to the Puranic tradition than 
to the Vedic evidence, which he styles as the tradition of the Brahmanas 
who possessed no historical sense. The so-called Kshatriya tradition, 
however, is hardly an unpolluted source of history. Priority of date and 
comparative freedom from textual corruption are doubtless two strong 
points in favour of Vedic texts. The evidence of the Puranas, on the 
other hand, cannot be ruled out altogether, because despite a good deal 

3°4 



TRADITIONAL HISTORY FROM THE EARLIEST TIME 

at is untrustworthy in them, they alone contain something like a 
continuous historical narrative, and it is absurd to suppose that the 
elaborate royal genealogies were all merely figments of imagination or a 
tissue of falsehoods. 

But the theory which pronounces the Puranas as representing Kshatriya 
tradition as distinct from, and superior to, the Brahmana tradition 
contained in the Vedic texts, does not appear to be correct. The theory 
is mainly based on two assumptions: (i) that the heroes of the legends 
and stories in the Puranas are Kshatriya kings who mostly do not figure 
in Vedic. literature, and (2) the transmission of their history was entrusted 
to Sutas of Kshatriya origin. There is hardly any foundation for these 
beliefs. The Suta was not a non-Brahmana but a venerable sage. As 
regards the so-called Kshatriya traditions, there have never been in 
India two such water-tight compartments as the Brahmana tradition 
and the Kshatriya tradition. Even in the works distinctly assigned to 
Kshatriya tradition by Pargiter, we find the glorification of the Brahmanas, 
and the so-called Brahmanic literature abounds in Kshatriya legends. 
The Puranas themselves assign a comparatively small portion to 
genealogical accounts, the genuine Kshatriya tradition according to 
Pargiter; their main bulk deals with Vedic and Brahmanic lore. More¬ 
over, the Puranas follow the Vedic religion and take pride in styling them¬ 
selves as the "fifth Veda.” The earliest reference to the Puranas, as ob¬ 
served by Keith, is for a point of Brahmanical lore and not for a point of 
genealogy or history .47 Again, even according to Pargiter, the Puranas, 
as we have them now, are undeniably a Brahmanic compilation; so no 
part of it can be distinguished as Brahmanic or Kshatriya tradition.4 » 
It would perhaps be more correct to say that these are not two distinct 
sets of tradition, but both are Brahmanical traditions, though produced 
under different environments and with different aims and objects. 

Moreover, it may be observed that there is no irreconcilable contradic¬ 
tion or conflict between the Vedic texts and the Puranas. The Rigveda, as 
we have it, is a Kuru-Panchala product; naturally, therefore, the kings 
belonging to those clans play prominent roles in it, and others find but 
incidental mention. Kings, who are mentioned in the Vedic texts but 
are not found in the Puranic traditions, were possibly princes and chief¬ 
tains of smaller dynasties, not preserved in the dynastic lists in the 
Puranas. There is also the possibility of the same person being referred 
to under different names in the two sets of traditional accounts. Some 
of the kings mentioned in the Rigveda can be fitted in the gaps in the 
Puranic lists. The Rigveda, no doubt, offers the proper corrective to the 
Puranic lists, but, when we find Puranic accounts to be corroborated by 
the Vedic evidence, it is legitimate to take their testimony as valid even 
in matters on which the Rigveda .is silent. The proper procedure for the 
writing of traditional history is to take into account the joint testimony 

305 



u 



THE VEDIC AGE 


XL 


ie Vedic and Puranic texts wherever available, and to try to bring" 
iarmony into the apparently conflicting texts. The evidence of the 
Puranas in these matters needs very careful consideration. 

A critical examination of the Puranic texts and Vedic literature reveals 
the fact that the Puranic genealogies in some cases refer to the same 
persons figuring in the Vedic literature. The Puranic data about some, of 
the royal dynasties, kings, and Brahrnana families find confirmation in 
Vedic literature, and there is n.o basis for the view that there are hardly 
any points of contact between the Vedic and Puranic tradition. Here 
we shall briefly refer to the important persons who appear in both Vedic 
literature and the Pur<Lnas. 

The Rigveda mentions Yayati as an ancient sacrificer and a son of 
Nahusha, and he is also known as a seer of some hymns. But his con¬ 
nection with the Lunar dynasty or with Puru, Anu, Druhyu, Yadu, and 
Turvasu, as told in the Puranas and l ahcibharata, is not found in the 
Vedic texts, and hence Macdonell and Leith condemn the epic tradition 
as »“inaccurate .”49 

The names of the above five sons of Yayati, however, occur in the 
Rigveda as .those of ancient tribes. The Word Yadu occurs several times 
in the Rigveda as the name of a king and his tribe. He is closely associated 
with Turva£a and once with Druhyu, Anu, and Puru. The Mahabharata 
and the Puranas indicate this association by making Turvasu the full 
brother of Yadu, and Anu, Druhyu, and Puru, his step-brothers. The 
Rigveda also indicates the close connection of Yadu and TurvaSa with 
north-western India. The five tribes Yadus, Turvasas, Anus, Druhyus, and 
Purus represent, according to one view, the Vedic Pafichajanas. The 
Rigveda or Vedic literature does not corroborate the Puranic relationship 
of Yayati, son of Nahusha. with these five princes, though Yayati, the 
son of Nahusha, as noted already, is well known to Vedic texts. The 
Purus appear in the Rigveda as the enemies of Sudas and they dwelt on 
the Sarasvati. It appears from the Rigveda that the Purus had sometimes 
friendly and sometimes inimical relations with the Tritsus to whom 
Sudas belonged. There is nothing to show any connection between Vedic 
Puru or Purukutsa and Puranic Puru, son of Yayati. 

The Solar king Mandhatri appears to have been referred to as Mand- 
hatri YauvanaSva in the Gopatha Brahrnana, the identity being further 
strengthened by the fact of both being the sons of Yuvanaiva.s 0 

The interpretation of the famous Ddsardjha (battle of ten kings) of 
the Rigveda in traditional history supplies us with many interesting and 
important synchronisms, and the importance of the problem demands 
treatment at some length. 

We have already seen that Mudgala, the eldest of the five Panchalas, 
was the founder of the main branch of the north Panchalas, and among 
his descendants were Vadhryasva, Divodasa, Mitrayu, Maitreya Soma, 

30 6 / 



RADITIONAL HISTORY FROM THE EARLIEST TIME 

„ i, Chyavana Panchajana, and Sudasa or Somadatta. There is no 
consistency among the different texts with regard to these names, Sudasa 
being in some Puranas replaced by Somadatta. Despite these difficulties, 
Pargiter and other scholars identify Divodasa and Sudasa in these lists 
with their namesakes in the Rigveda and see in the account of Samvarana 
in the Mahdbharatas 1 the reference to the battle of ten kings in the 
Rigveda which resulted in the defeat of the Puru king. 

Pargiter points out that Mudgala, VadhryaSva, Divodasa, and Srinjaya 
are mentioned in the Rigveda hymns. Chyavana is probably meant in 
one hymn and his other name Panchajana is no doubt, a misreading of 
Pijavana. Sudasa is called Sudas Paijavana. The A itareya Brdhtnana 
says that Sahadeva was descended from Srinjaya, and one hymn (RV, 
IV, 15. 7-10) says that Somaka was his son. The hymns agree with the 
genealogies in all these particulars. Chyavana was a great warrior and 
his son Sudasa extended his dominions. They probably conquered the 
Dvimidha dynasty and the south Panchalas, as there appear to be gaps 
in the genealogical lists of these dynasties at this period.5* 

According to Pargiter, “Sudas drove the Paurava king Samvarana 
of Hastinapura. out, defeating him on the Jumna. His conquests stirred 
up a confederacy, of the neighbouring kings to resist him—Puru (Sam¬ 
varana), the Yadava (the Yadava king of Mathura), the Sivas (Sivis, 
who were Anavas), Druhyus (of Gandhara), Matsyas (west of Surasena)] 
TurvaSa (the Turvasu prince, apparently in Rewa) and other smaller 
states. Sudas defeated them in a great battle near the Parushqi (Ravi), 
and Puru (Samvarana) took refuge in a fortress near the Sindh’u (Indus) 
many years ."53 

It may be stated at the outset that despite many differences between 
the Vedic account on the one hand and that given in the Mahdbhdrata 
on the other, it is undisputed that the heroes of the Ddsardjna flourished 
at the period which has been assigned to Sudasa-Somadatta of the 
not ill. Panchala, line and to Samvarana and Ivur 11 of the Paurava line. 
Dr. Pradhan has arrived at the same conclusion of the identity of Vedic 
Sudas with the 1 uiichcda .>ndnsa after independent enquiry starting on 
different synchronisms.54 It has also been shown that Kuru and Sam¬ 
varana were contemporaries of Tura Kavasheya whose father Kavasha 
Ailusha figured in the Dd&arajna .55 The discrepancies that we notice in 
the Vedic account and the accounts in the Puranas and the Mahdbhdrata 
only show that traditional history, though based on a kernel of historical 
facts, is not only not infallible but inaccurate at times, and its credibility 
requires to be tested in the light of contemporary Vedic evidence. The 
details of the Ddiardjha as given in the Rigveda ho doubt are a first-hand 
contemporary account. The accounts in traditional history were pieced 
together out of the remnants of ancient tales, legends, etc. at a laj;er date 
when memories of actual events were but faint and inaccurate. 

307 




THE VEDIC AGE 


<SL 


Now, apart from the fact that the geographical boundaries donot 
concur in the Vedic and Puranic accounts (as will be shown presently), 
it will be seen that there are many particulars that apparently speak 
against the proposed identification. In the first place, though the 
Rigveda mentions Mudgala and Srinjaya, it does not indicate any relation¬ 
ship between them and Sudas. Secondly, the Rigvedic Sudas is distinctly 
called the son of Pijavana whereas the Puranic Sudasa had Chyavana- 
Panchajana for his father. Yaska, Mahdbhclrata and Manu know Pijavana 
to be the father of Sudas, and hence the Puranas cannot be said to have 
mistaken Panchajana for Pijavana as suggested by Pargiter.5<> It seems 
that the title Panchajana has been given to Sudasa in his capacity as the 
leader of the five tribes. Further discrepancies are found in the non¬ 
mention in the Rigveda of the important tribes of the period according 
to the Puranas such as the Satvatas, the Bhojas, the Videhas, the 
Ikshvakus, etc., either among the allies or among the adversaries of 
Sudas. Among the tribes mentioned in the Rigveda as participating in 
the Ddsarajna, furvasas, according to traditional history, had long ceased 
to exist, having merged in the Pauravas. The Tritsus, who were the 
principal helpers of Sudas according to the Rigveda , are not to be found 
at all in the Puranic tradition. Matsyas, one of the opponents of Sudas 
in the Rigveda , emerge in traditional history only nine generations after 
Sudasa. The Puru adversary of Sudas has been named Purukutsa in 
the Rigveda whereas according to traditional history he comes to be 
Samvarana of the Pauravas. It is further curious that the Mahdbharata 
does not mention Sudasa by name at all, but refers to him only as 
Pafichalya (a king of the Panchalas), The scene of the battle has not been 
mentioned in the Mahcibhdrata or the Puranic texts. The Rigveda represents 
the battle to have been fought on the banks of the Parushnl. This location 
of the conflict, however, seems to be most difficult, if not quite impossible, 
if we consider the territories occupied by the different members of the 
confederacy at the period, according to traditional history. The Druhyus 
were occupying Gandhara at the time, and it is difficult to see how they 
could be interested in or affected by the conflicts pf people far away from 
them. The Turvaias, as already stated, did not exist at the time; and 
even if they did exist, as suggested by Pargiter, it is difficult to comprehend 
how they marched off over 500 miles from the Karusha country to parti¬ 
cipate in the exploits of a remote king. The geographical knowledge of 
the period of the Rigveda (as seen in Ch. XIII) did not extend much 
beyond the Ganges and Jumna or Sarayu to the east, and only up to the 
Vindhyas in the south; but the period of Sudasa in traditional history, 
which comes after that of Dasaratha and Rama, indicates knowledge 
of practically the whole of India. The truth underlying these discrepancies 
between the Vedic and the Puranic and Mahcibhdrata accounts seems to 
be that the Puranic tradition "is patching up its genealogical fabric from 

308 



TRADITIONAL HISTORY FROM THE EARLIEST TIME 


lever shreds of floating knowledge it comes across without any means 
checking. ”57 This does not certainly mean that the Vedic and the 
Puranic Sudasa were, quite distinct personalities. When we take into 
consideration that the Vedic and traditional accounts agree admirably 
with regard to the chronology of the period of the conflict, it appears 
certain that the similarity of names is not a mere coincidence. There are 
serious discrepancies, no doubt, when we come to the locations and 
political environments of the different participants in the conflict. But the 
mistake is due to the lack of definite knowledge on the part of chroniclers 
of traditional history. It may also be observed that the Mahdbhdrata 
account simply refers to the driving out of the Paurava king Sariivarana 
from his kingdom by the king of the Panchalas. At the distance of time 
between the Ddiarajha and the composition of the Mahdbhdrata, the 
chroniclers remembered only the utter rout of the Paurava king at the 
hands of a Panchala king. 

Another important problem is the identity of Janamejaya Parikshita 
mentioned in the Vedic texts and in the Puranas and the Mahdbhdrata. 
The Puranqs and the Mahdbhdrata refer to two Janamejaya Parikshitas, 
one an ancestor of the Pandavas (being grandson of Kuru), and the second, 
a successor of the Pandavas (grandson of Arjuna). 

Qn account of the similarity of patronymic as also of the names of 
his brothers, the earlier janamejaya is confused with the later Janamejaya 
and thel e has been transference of tradition. 

The A \tareya and the Satapatha Brahmana enumerate Janamejaya as 
the perfumer of the ASvamedha sacrificed? The very fact that Bhlshma 
narrates the story of Janamejaya's ASvamedha to Yudliishthira as an 
ancient legend clearly shows that the ASvamedha referred to was 
performed by the ancestor of the Pandavas, and proves that a Janamejaya 
Parikshita before the Pandavas’ time was a real person and not a shadowy 
igure as Dr. Raychaudhuri would have ns believe. 59 The descendant of 
the Pandavas is credited with the performance of the Sarpasatra and 
not an Asvamedha. The- ASvamedha started by the later Janamejaya 
was not completed. 60 The Brahmanas further mention Tura Kavasheya 
as the priest who anointed Janamejaya with Aindra Mahabhisheka, 
and Tura Kavasheya can be proved to be ct ntemroiangovs with 
Janamejaya, the ancestor of the Pandavas. Kad ,ia Ailusha, father 
or grandfather of Tura, was drowned in the DSiem 1 ha, so that he was 
a senior contemporary of Kuru, son of Sariivarana, y r 'o lived during the 
Ddiarajha period. 61 janamejaya, who was the grandk ;> of Kuru, was 
thus contemporaneous with Tura. This sacrifice, with Then Kavasheya 
as priest, was performed for celebrating the’ attainment, of imperial 
status by Janamejaya and not for atonement of any sin. The Satapatha 
Brahmana refers to another sacrifice performed by Janamejaya Parikshita 
with the aid of Indrota Daivapa Saunaka for ridding himself of a 

309 


<8L 



THE VF.DIC AGE 

which is described as Brakmahatyd (killing of a Brahmana). 6 * 
s and the Mahabhdruta do not associate Janamejaya, the 
descendant of the Pandavas, with any guilt. That the ancestoi was the 
person alluded to is dear from the fact that the story of the sin of 
Janamejaya is told by Bhlshma, and therein Janamejaya is accused of 
unwittingly killing a Brahmana.'d This also proves that Indrota Daivapa 
Saunaka flourished generations before the Bharata War. I he Harivamsa 
refers to Janamejaya's killing the son of Gargya for insulting him, as 
the result of which Gargya cursed him.d The ASvamedha performed by 
Indrota Daivapa Saunaka was to purge Janamejaya of this sin. The 
incident of the chariot of Yayati related in the same story, which states 
that the chariot continued in the Paurava line till the period of Janame¬ 
jaya, and after him was transferred to Vasu Chaidyoparichara, eighth 
descendant from Kuru, clearly shows that the reference in the story is 
to the ancestor of the Pandavas. The chariot then passed on to the 
Magadhas and came to Krishna, after Jarasandha was killed. 6 5 All these 
preceded Janamejaya Parlkshita, the descendant of the Pandavas, 
and hence the allusions clearly refer to the ancestor of the Pandavas. 
The Harivamsa clearly indicates that the Asvamedha story relates to 
the earlier Janamejaya by making Janamejaya (the descendant of the 
Pandavas) the auditor of the story which is told by Vaisampayana, yder 
adds that there were two Janamejaya Parikshitas among the Pampas. 66 

The references in the Vedic texts thus clearly prove the existence 
of a Janamejaya Parlkshita who was an ancestor of the Pandavas, and 
the grandson of Kuru. lhe peace and plenty in the Ivuru realm alluded 
to in the Atharvaveda 6 7 and in the Brahmanas, came as the result of 
Kuru’s extensive conquests, and his son Parikshit and grandson Jana me¬ 
jaya continued the good work started by Kuru. Janamejaya’s heincms 
crime, however, deprived him and his successors of their kingdom whicl 1 
passed on to the younger branch (as already stated) and che Pailkdiita. 
suffered extinction. The Brihadaranyaka Upanishad refers to the vanished 
glory of the Parikshitas and enquires as to their state in the next world. 68 
To that the reply is given that they must have attained the state to 
which performers of Asvamedha sacrifices are eligible. 

These and other co-ordinations of the incidents and persons mentioned 
in traditional history and the Vedic texts clearly show that the two 
traditions are neither independent nor contradictory; that the traoitional 
history has its basis in facts and is not the product of imagination; that 
traditional history has mostly preserved ancient tradition; and that 
when supported by Vedic texts its evidence is unimpeachable. No excuse 
is therefore needed for the somewhat long historical account, given above, 
on the basis of Epic and Puranic tradition. It has been customary for 
the writers of Indian history to confine themselves, so far as the political 
history of the period is concerned, to the few isolated facts gleaned from 

310 





Traditional history from the earliest time 



the Vedic texts. But we must not forget that “the Vedic literature 
confines itself to religious subjects and notices political and secular 
occurrences only incidentally so far as they had a bearing on the religious 
subjects.” As Pargiter has very pertinently observed: “Ancient Indian 
history has been fashioned out of compositions, which are purely religious 
and priestly, which notoriously do not deal with history, and which 
totally lack the historical sense. The extraordinary nature of such history 
may be perceived, if it were suggested that European history should be 
constructed merely out of theological literature. What would raise a 
smile if applied to Europe has been soberly accepted when applied to 
India.” 681 

The force of these remarks is undeniable and no student of Indian 
history should ignore the legendary element in the Puranas and Epics. 
It is necessary to remember that, for reasons stated above, we cannot 
accept those traditions as genuine historical facts so long or so far as 
they are not corroborated by contemporary texts or other reasonable 
evidence. Until then we can treat them only as traditional- history. But 
such traditional history has its value, and is in any ease a necessary 
preliminary step for the discovery of genuine history. 


12. THE EXPANSION OF THE ARYANS 
AND ARYAN CULTURE 


In one respect, however, it seems difficult to accept the traditional 
account without a great deal of reserve. This is the geographical back¬ 
ground of the Aryan conquest of India as described in the Puranas. 

The Puranas say nothing about the original home of the Aryans. 
The scene of traditional history opens in India, with the division of the 
territoiy, comprising the whole of North India extending in the east 
up to Orissa, among the ten sons of Manu, the first king and the common 
ancestor of the ruling families in India {ante, p. 272). 

From this starting point, the traditional history enables us to trace 
the progress of Aryan advance during the four Ages—Krita, Treta. 
Dvapara, and Kali. Kings Sagara, Rama, and Krishna are said to have 
flourished respectively at the end of the Krita, Treta, and Dvapara 
Ages, so that the Krita Age covers roughly 40 generations, Treta 25 
generations, and Dvapara 30 generations (cf. App. II). The Kali Age 
set in after the Bharata War. 

By the end of the Krita Age, we find the Aryans in occupation of 
the whole of North India including Sind and Kandahar in the west, 
and Bihar and West Bengal in the east. In the south, Gujarat, Kathiawar, 
the Western Coast south of Bombay and Berar were colonized by the 





THE VEDIC AGE 


'HL 

mdhya 


ans, and their southern limits had extended beyond the Vine 
and the Narmada down to the Tapti and the Satpuras. 

While Parasurama is general!}' associated with the creation of 
Surparaka near Bombay, a stanza in the Mahabharata shows that it 
was colonized earlier by Jamadagni . 6 9 Parasurama is credited with the 
Aryanization of the whole of the western coast of Bombay, especially 
the Konkan, the Karhata, the Tulava, and the Kerala. The traditions, 
at any rate, indicate the important role played by the Bhargavas in 
the colonization of the Deccan. 

The Aryan occupation during the Treta Age extended further east 
and south, embracing, in addition to the territories occupied in the 
Krita Age, Orissa, Assam, Chhota Nagpur, Central Provinces, and some 
parts further south. The southern territories of Janasthana, Kishkindha, 
and also Lanka came under the sphere of Aryan influence during the 
days of Rama. 

By the time of the Bharata War (c. 1400 b.c.) which marked the close 
of,the Dvapara Age, the Aryans had expanded over the whole of India, 
and even beyond its frontiers in the west. 

This traditional account of the Aryan expansion is, however, in conflict 
with the evidence of the Vedic texts. As has already been shown in 
Ch. XIII, there are good grounds to suppose that by the time the 
Rigveda was composed, the Aryans had not penetrated much further 
into the interior beyond the frontiers of the Punjab and Rajputana. 
If we remember that the Rigveda did not probably receive its final form 
long before the end of the so-called Dvapara Age, its testimony is 
decidedly fatal to the geographical views assumed in the Puranas. 

But the Rigvedic evidence does not stand alone. We have an account 
of the spread of the Aryan culture in the Brahmana period in the story 
of Videgha Mathava {ante, p. 254). This, as well as the fact that Kosala 
and Videha do not appear in the earlier Vedic literature, but are men¬ 
tioned for the first time in the Satapatha Brahmana, and the contemptuous 
references in the Atharvaveda and the Sutras indicate that Magadha and 
Vanga were then outside the pale of Aryan culture. All these leave no 
doubt about the general correctness of the assumption that the Aryans 
had not advanced beyond the middle region of Northern India till after 
the end of the age represented by the Vedic Samhitas, i.e. at a time 
when most, if not all, the traditional royal dynasties dealt with in this 
chapter had ceased to exist. 

It is worthy of note that even the Smriti texts quote verses defining 
Aryavarta or the land of the Aryas as co-extensive with Northern India. 
As to the expansion of the Aryan culture to the Deccan and South 
India, the evidence of Panini’s Ashtddhyayi and Katyayana’s Vartikas 
on Panini, seems to be fairly conclusive. The only country in the Deccan 
South of the Narmada mentioned by Panini is ASmaka, whereas Katya- 

312 






TRADITIONAL HISTORY FROM THE EARLIEST TIME V s 

knows Pandya, Cliola, and Kerala. This shows that the Aryans 
came into contact with these South Indian peoples during the time 
intervening between Panini and Katyayana, i.e. some time between the 
sixth and fourth centuries b.c. 6 9» Yet the Puranas and the Rdmayana 
would have us believe that the whole of South India, including Ceylon, 
was colonized by the Aryans or brought under their sphere of influence 
by the time of Ramachandra in the Treta Age! 

It is impossible to rely upon the traditional account as recorded in 
the Epics and Puranic texts, at least in respect of those particulars 
which are so flatly contradicted by the evidence or earlier texts—an 
evidence which is all the more valuable as it is based upon incidental 
notices not likely to be fabricated in order to serve any preconceived 
notion. Whatever we might think therefore of the kings and dynasties 
mentioned in the traditional account, we can hardly accept, without 
demur, the location of their principalities as described in the Epics and 
the Puranas. 

It might be argued that many of the. royal dynasties mentioned in 
the traditional account were not Aryans. This is not unlikely, for evidence 
is gradually accumulating (cf. Chs. VIII, IX) that a fairly developed 
culture and powerful kingdoms flourished in India before the Aryans. 
But such a theory goes definitely against the traditional account which 
represents all ruling families, described above, as descended from the 
common ancestor Manu. 7 ° 

At the same time the existence of non-Aryans may be easily inferred. 
For besides the descendants of Mann who established dynasties all over 
India, traditional history mentions Rakshasas, Vanaras, Asuras, Daityas, 
Danavas, Nagas, Nishadas, Dasyus, Dasas, Putin das, Sakas, Yavanas, 
Kambojas, Paradas, Pahlavas, etc. who appear to have been outside 
the Aryan fold. The Rakshasas were aborigines who were hostile to the 
Brahmanas, while Vanaras, another aboriginal tribe, were allied to the 
Brahmanas. Asuras, Daityas, Danavas, and Nagas denoted peoples of 
different cultures in various stages of civilization ranging from the rude, 
aboriginal, uncivilized tribes to the semi-civilized races, offering strong 
resistance to the spread of Aryan culture. There appear to have been 
three stages in the description of the hostile tribes of Asuras, Danavas, 
Daityas, and Rakshasas in Puranic accounts. Originally, these denoted 
human beings, but as they were generally the enemies of the Aryans, 
these names came to mean alien and hated, hostile or savage men. Later 
on, these names became terms of opprobrium and abuse which led to 
the attribution of evil characters to these peoples. Even certain Aryan 
kings were termed Danavas or Asuras due to thcfir evil character. Finally, 
these terms came to be associated with demoniac beings and were used 
synonymously with demons. The Nagas appear to be partially civilized 
people. The Nishadas, Dasas, Dasyus, Pulindas, and Kiratas were mostly 

3 X 3 



THE VEDIC AGE 




;^a;]bbrigmal, rude, savage tribes in a very primitive stage of civilization. 
AH these tribes lived in hilly tracts, and some of them were cannibals. 
The Nishadas, also known as Mlechchhas, were according to ancient 
■traditional views a mixed race of Aryan origin bom from a Brahmana 
male and a Sudra female. 7 1 They are associated with the hills of Central 
India and the Vindhyan tracts. They had also settlements in the Vat- 
sabhumi and, further east, near Allahabad. The Pulindas, Sabaras, 
Mutibas, etc. were the aboriginal tribes of the south. The Pulindas were 
connected with the north also. The Kiratas had settlements in Assam 
and Nepal. The Sakas, Yavanas, Kambojas, Paradas, Pahlavas, etc. 
were foreign tribes from the west, but they were evidently absorbed among 
tire Kshatriyas. Pandya, Chola, and Kerala dynasties in the south claimed 
descent from the Lunar Turvasus. 

' But whatever we might think of the geographical and ethnical back¬ 
ground of the traditional account, it perhaps reflects more accurately 
the. method and process of Aryan colonization in India. One distinguishing 
feature of the Aryan expansion, as described in it, deserves special mention. 
The Aryans extended their sway and colonized fresh lands not by 
conquest alone with the aid of big armies. The colonization was also 
effected by small bands of adventurous Brahmanas and Kshatriyas 
from different Aryan kingdoms, who went to new countries and, after 
clearing the jungles and making the tracts habitable, set up hermitages 
and residences there. The territories surrounding the Aryan-occupied 
Madhyadesa, the Vindhyas and Vidarbha, were colonized in this fashion. 
The Aryans colonized under the leadership of Kshatriya tribes, and 
new settlements were named after these tribes. The speed of Aryan 
expansion was necessarily slow where they received opposition from 
the aborigines or semi-Aryans or non-Aryans, as in the case of then- 
eastward progress. 

Rama of Ayodhya is made to play a very important part in the 
expansion of Aryan culture in the south. It was probably on account 
of the signal service attributed to him in colonizing the Deccan, and 
spreading the Aryan religion far in the south and rendering it free from 
the harassment of aggressive and semi-barbarous tribes, that he has 
been included among the incarnations of the god Vishnu. This expansion 
of Aryan culture in the south was the result of the hearty co-operation 
of the Brahmana and the Kshatriya in carrying the banner of Aryaniza- 
tion. The Brahmana missionaries who accompanied the Kshatriya 
conquerors, introduced the essentials of Aryan culture and tradition 
to the masses, converted the principal figures, and paved the way for 
social and cultural contact by allowing high-born Aryans to marry 
with non-Aryans. Agastya, the pioneer among the Rishis to erect a 
hermitage in the trans-Vindhyan regions, preceded Rama by generations; 
but he paved the way for later adventurers. The story of Agastya reveals 

3i4 




-TRADITIONAL HISTORY FROM THE EARLIEST TIME 


lportant part played by the Brahmanas in the spread of Aryan 
civilization over southern India. The ancient. Rishis undertook missionary 
enterprise and helped in the propagation and diffusion of the Aryan 
culture by their active efforts, often at considerable risk to their lives. 
They moved in large numbers to distant lands, and performed sacrifices 
and observed religious rites in their new settlements. Their genuine 
missionary spirit, coupled with their peaceful character, not using any 
force nor resorting to retaliation despite provocation, helped in creating 
a favourable atmosphere for the reception of the Aryan religion. The 
Rishis mixed with the aborigines and civilized them. The Aryan spirit 
was kept alive by the Brahmana, not by the Kshatriya; but, "without 
the protection of the chief, the Brahmana was powerless; and it was not 
the Brahmana’s peaceful penetration, but the military exploits of the 
chief that enthralled the popular imagination.”? 2 Rama’s expedition, 
as described in the Rdmayana, did not put the non-Aryans of the south 
under the political subjugation of the Aryans, but it brought the southern 
territories of the Vanaras and Rakshasas as protectorates under .the 
sphere of Aryan influence,73 and was mainly responsible for bringing 
these peoples under Aryan influence. 

. The contribution of the Yadavas in carrying the banner of Aryan 
culture over large tracts of land in the south-west and in Rajputana, 
Gujarat, Malwa, and the Deccan, which came under their .occupation, 
needs special mention. It was due to the activities of the Yadavas that 
these regions were brought under the Aryan way of life. The peculiar 
feature in the career of the Yadavas is the considerable mixture they had 
with the non-Aryans, though they trace their descent from Pururavas 
through Yadu. This fact coupled with the possible looseness in the obser¬ 
vance of the Aryan Dharma led the Epics and Puranas to call the Yadava 
branches Asuras, and to class them with the tribes of the extreme north¬ 
west and west among the Nichyas and Apachyas. The fact that they 
mixed freely with the non-Aryans, with whom they had marital relations 
and some of whose customs they incorporated, facilitated the Aryanization 
of the so-called outsiders, and thus spread Aryan culture far and wide. 
Krishna of the Yadavas, well known as a politician, warrior, and religious 
cher, was a national hero, who was regarded as an incarnation of 
.shnu. He held liberal and catholic views and his doctrines helped in 
the spread of Aryan ideas among the so-called Sudras. 

Whatever we might think of the historicity of Rama and Krishna, 
as depicted in the above accounts, they may not unreasonably be regarded 
as true types of Aryan heroes who were pioneers in the spread of Aryan 
culture and colonization all over India. 


< 81 . 


315 


MINIS 


iS#w 


THE VEDIC AGE 


GENERAL REFERENCES 

Kirfel, W.: Das Parana Pancalaksana. Bonn, 1927. 

Pargiter, F. E.: Ancient Indian Historical Tradition . London, 1922. 
Rangacharya, V.: Pre-Musalman India, vol. IL “Vedic India/' Part I. 
Madras, 1937. 


1. AIHT, pp. 30, 54. 

1 a. Some, however, do not attach any historical value to the story of the Rdmdyaria 
(cf. e.g. Cli. VIII, above, p. 165). 

ib. El, VI, pp. 11, 12. 

2. JRAS, 1911, pp. 479 fi., 675 ff. 

3. BrihatSamhita, XIII. 3; Rdjatarangim. I. 48-56. 

4. Rai, PIHC, IV. p. 115 (3140 b.c.); Triveda, JIH, XVI. iii (3137 b.c.) ; Vaidya, 
HSL, IV. pp. 4-8' (3102 b.c.) ; Abhyankar, A BOR I, XXV. pp. 116-36 
(3000 b.c.); Sen Gupta, JRA SB (L) /III. 101 ff.; IV. •393*#. (2449 b.c.); Karan di- 
kar, POC , XII. Summaries part II, pp. 6-8 (1931 b.c.) ; T)eb, JASB, XXL > 
pp. 211-20 (1400 b.c.) ; Daftary, POC , XII. Summaries Part II, pp. 8-12 
(1197 b.c.); Pradhan, CAT, pp. 262-9 (1151 b.c.). 

5. AIHT , pp. 179-83. 

6. ,Cf. AIHT , p. 179; DKA, pp. 13-22; 67-9; 58, 74. 

6a. Woolley, Ur of the Chaldees (Pelican), pp. 23-4. 

7. Vdyu P., 21. 28; 8. 160-7; 57. 39-41, 56. 

8. Mbh, XII. 59. 106-8. 

9. Sat. By., I. 8. 1. 1-6; cf. SBE, XII. pp. 216-8, Mbh {Cr. Ed.) III. 185; MatsyaP., 
t. 11-34; 2. 1-19; Bhdgavata P., VIII. 24 ff.; IX. 1 fif. 

10. AIHT , p, 84, n. 2. 

11. JRAS, 1902, pp. 267-8; Majumdar, CAG, pp. 507-8; Dey, CD, p. 17. 

12. Pratishthana has been identified with Pihan, a village near Prayaga (Allahabad) 

—-Jayachandra, BIR, pp. 128-9. 

12a. For the Rigvedic hymn on the subject, cf. Ch., XVI. 

13. Mbh (Cr. Ed.), III. 176-8; (Bom. Ed.), XIII. 99-100. 

14. AIHT , p. 259, fn. 7. 

15. Sravasti has been identified with modern Sahet Mahet on the Rapti in the 
district of Gonda in Oudh (Dey, GD, p. 1.89), Cf. also Majumdar, CAG, p. 469. 

16. Tribes in Ancient India, p. 121. 

17. AIHT, pp. 260-1, 

18. Padma P., VI. 189.73; 273.51-7°; Brahma. P., 196. 16-197.5; Vishnu P., 

V. 23. 26-24, 5; Hari, II. 57. 43-63. 

.19. Mbh , XII. 339. 84, 103-4; cf. Sukthankar, ABORT, XVIII. p. 48. 

20. Mbh, XII. 49. 76-83. ‘ 

21. In the Nava Kdf. (Marathi Daily of Bombay) in the year 1932-3. 

22. Matsya P., 43. 48-9; Vdyu P. t 94.51-2; Kirfel, PPL, p. 420.50. 

23. Chedi comprised the land between the Chambal and the Ken on the southern 
bank of the Jumna corresponding to modern Bundelkhand. Cf. Dey, GD, p. 48; 
Majumdar, CAG, p. 725. 

24. Kirfel, PPL, pp. 317-23. 

25. Rohitapura has been identified with Rohtas in the district of Shahfibad in 
Bengal. Dey, GD, p. 170. 

26. Vdyu P., 88. 146-1. 

27. Vdyu P., 88. 144-63; Brahma P., 8. 52-71. 

28. AIHT, p. 268. 

29. The name Bhagxrathi is applied to the stream which originates from Gangotrl 
and Gomukha, and joining Bhilahgana at Tehri meets Alakananda, the main 
stream of the Ganges, at Devaprayaga. Jayachandra, BIR, p. 150. 

30. For the Nala episode, cf. Mbh (Cr. Ed.), III. 50-78. 

31. Mbh (Cr. Ed.), I. 166-73 gives another account. 

316 






TRADITIONAL HISTORY FROM THE EARLIEST TIME 


idanya (Potana in Mbh, Cr, Ed., I, 168. 25) is the Potana or Potali of . 

. c jjutakas (Raychaudhuri, PH A I, p. 121). It has been identified with Faith an or 
Pratishthana on the north bank of the Godavari, 28 miles to the south of 
Aurangabad—Dey, GI), pp. 157, 159. 

33. For the account of Rama we 'have mainly x*elied on the Rdmdyana. 

34. Ancient settlements of Taksha&ila are found near the Bhir mound near Shahdheri 
which lies 20 miles north-west of Rawalpindi (Marshall— Guide to Taxila), 
Pushkaravatl may be identified with Charsadda near the confluence of the 
K,ubha and Suvastn, 17 miles north-west of Peshawar. 

35. North Pahchala, called Ahichchhatra, comprised the modern Rohilkhand 
district in the U.P., and had its capital at Ahiclichatra identified with modern 
Ramnagar (Dey, GD, p. 2). South Panchala, which incorporated the old kingdom 
of Kanyakubja, consisted of the districts of Agra and Cawnpore with its capitals 
at Makandl and Kampilya (modern Kampil, 28 miles east of Fatehgarh—- 
Dey, GD, p. 88). 

36. The problem of the Dd&arajna (battle of ten kings) has been discussed in 
section 11 of this chapter. 

37. Mbh (Cr. Ed.), I, 89. 31-43. 

38. AIHT, pp. 76, 281. 

39. A HIT, p. 113, in. 9. 

40. Hari, 1. 30.10-14; Vdyu P., 93.21-26; Brahma P., 12. 9-15; Brahmdnda P., 
Ill, 68. 20-26; also Mbh, XII, 150-52; cf, Arthaidstra, Mysore, 1919, p. 11. 

41. Mbh (Cr. Ed.), I, 105. 7-22. 

42. The life of Krishna lias been reconstructed on the basis of the old and authentic 
Puranas, the Harivamia and the Mahdbhdraia .—See Munshi, Glory that was 
Gurjaradeha, I, pp. 120-24. 

43. Cf. Munshi, Glory that was Gurjaradeia, I, pp. 111—27. 

44. The account of the Kauravas and the Pancjavas has been based on the Mahd- 
bhdrata. In spite of epic embellishments, the kernel of the story may be 
regarded as historical. 

45. Similarly some Puranas begin the "future" about a century after the Bharata 
War. (Pargiter, AIHT, pp. 51-4.) 

46. AIHT, pp. 283-4. 

47. JRAS , 1914, p. 1027. 

48. JRAS, 1913, p. 889. 

49. Ved. Ind., II. p. 187. 

50. Gopaiha Brdhmana, I. 2. 10 ff; Ved. Ind. II p 133 

51. Mbh (Cr. Ed.), I. 89. 31-43. 

52. AIHT, p. 120. 

53. AIHT,. p. 281. 

54. CAI, pp. 83-98. 

55. BV, II. pp, 72-76. 

56. Niruhta, II. 24, 25; Mbh, XII. 60. 39; Manu, VII. 41; Pargiter, AIHT, p. 120. 

57. Ghurye, POC, IX. p. 950. 

58. Ait. Br., VII. 27; VIII.' 21; Sat. Br., XI. 5. 5. 13; XIII. 5. 4. 1-4. 

59. Mbh, XII. 150. 2; PH A I, p. 12. 

60. Bari, III. 2.5-6, 28-9; 5.11-7, - 

61. Cf. BV, II. pp. 72-6. 

62. Sat. Br., XIII. 5. 4. 1 ff. 

63. Mbh, XII. 150. 3. 

64. Hari, I. 30. 

65. Hari, I. 30.6-16. 

66. Cf. Hari, 1. 32. 100-1, 105. 

67. A V, XX. 127.7-10. ~ ' 

68. Brih. Up, III. 3. 

6 8 a. AIHT, p. v. 

69. Mbh (Cr. Ed.), Ill. 86. 9. 

6 ga. Cf. IX R. Bliandarkar— Charmichdel Lectures, 1918, pp. 6-7. 

.317 


§L 


ViONO 0 



THE VEDIC AGE 


©Ion fifed" 


71 

72 

73 


Pargiter, however, infers from the traditional account that the kings belonged 
to three different stocks or races of which the Ailas were the Aryans, the 
Sauclyumna stock, the Mun^a race and its branch the Mon-Khmer folk in the 
east, and the Manva stock (i.e. the remaining descendants of Mann), the 
Dravidians (AIHT, p. 295). Traditional history associates the Ailas or the 
Lunar dynasty with the Himalayas. Pargiter, therefore, interprets the tradi¬ 
tional accounts as stating that the Aryans came into India from the Himalayan 
regions (ibid., pp. 297 ff.). But the term Aryan is not confined to the Ailas 
alone; it comprises all the so-called stocks enumerated by Pargiter. There is 
absolutely no differentiation between the Solar and the Lunar dynasties as 
regards status or dignity. 

Manu, X. 8. 

Kennedy, JIMS, 1915, p. 516. 

Cf. Viswanatha, International Law in Ancient India, pp. 25, 45; Racial synthesis 
in Hindu Culture, p. 9. 


318 


CHAPTER XV 

FROM THE ACCESSION OF 
PARIKSHIT TO THE END 
OF THE BARHADRATHA 
DYNASTY 

The Puranas have preserved a list of the kingdoms that flourished at the 
end of the Bharata War and continued till they were all absorbed by the 
great Nanda empire of Magadha in the fourth century b.c. In addition 
to the kingdom of Magadha, ruled at first by the Barhadrathas, and then 
by other dynasties, the Puranic list refers to the Pauravas, Aikshvakus, 
Pafichalas, Kasis, Haihayas, Kaliiigas, A&nakas, Maithilas, Shrasenas 
and Vitihotras. The area embracing these states comprised the eastern 
part of North India, the middle country, and some parts towards its west; 
but the countries further west and north-west have not been referred to. 
Of the various dynasties mentioned, the Puranas deal in some detail 
only with the Pauravas, Aikshvakus and the dynasties of Magadha, but 
give merely the number of kings in the case of other contemporary 
dynasties. The detailed history of the period recorded in the Puranas is 
thus confined more or less to the region now represented by the United 
Provinces and South Bihar. 1 


i. .THE PAURAVAS 

The first Paurava king after the Bharata War was Parikshit, son of 
Abhimanyu, and grandson of Arjuna. Parikshit was well-versed in the 
science of duties of kings and was endowed with noble qualities. The 
story of the conquests of Parikshit or of the prosperity of the Kuru 
kingdom during his reign, recorded respectively in the Puranas and 
Atharvaveda, seems to relate to an earlier king of that name. 

The Kuru kingdoih over which Parikshit ruled extended from the 
Sarasvati to the Ganga according to epic tradition. It corresponded to 
modern Thanesvar, Delhi, and the upper Gangetic Dodb.' 1 The Kaliyuga era 
is said to have started in the reign of Parikshit after the death of Krishna, 
and Parikshit is reported to have chased away the Kali out of his kingdom, 
which merely indicates his excellent and benign rule. It is said that one 

3i9 



THE VEDIC AGE 


<SL 


.y when lost in a forest, while hunting, Parikshit met a sage and asked 
him the way. The sage was observing a vow of silence and did not reply. 
Being angry Parikshit placed a dead snake round the sage’s neck and 
went away. The sage’s son cursed Parikshit, and foretold that within a 
week the king would be bitten to death by Takshaka, king of the snakes. 
Despite the king’s elaborate precautions, the curse had its effect and 
Parikshit died of snake bite on the appointed day. This mythical story 
seems to suggest a genuine historical fact. The rise of the Nagas in 
Gandhara has already been referred to. It appears that taking advantage 
of the weakened condition of the Pauravas as the result of the Bharata 
War, Takshaka. king of the Nagas, marched against Hastinapura and 
king Parikshit evidently died in his attempt to check their attacks. 

Parikshit’s son Janamejaya was a minor when he was installed king. 
Jo avenge his father’s death Janamejaya invaded Takshasila and 
slaughtered countless Nagas. It was only through the intercession of 
Astika that Janamejaya stopped this slaughter. Takshaka appears to 
ha.ve escaped safely. The conquest of Taxila in the extreme north-west 
indicates that the intervening Madra or Central Punjab also was under 
the control of Janamejaya. The slaughter of innumerable Nagas has been 
mythologized into tjiff Sarpasatra (snake-sacrifice) of Janamejaya where 
serpents fell as oblations into the sacred fire through the spell of the 
Mantras. 3 Janamejaya was a powerful and strong monarch and he re¬ 
established the Kuru dominion. After conquering Taxila and uprooting 
the Nagas, Janamejaya appears to have made Taxila Ms headquarters 
for some time. The story of the Mahabharata was recited to Janamejaya 
at Taxila by VaiSampayana.4 Asvapati of Kekaya was a contemporary 
of Parikshit anS'Janamejaya. When Janamejaya subjugated Gandhara, 
Asvapati Kekaya, whose territory lay to the east of Gandhara, probably 
accepted Janamejaya’s suzerainty. Asvapati was famous for his good 
government and philosophical knowledge. It is not definitely known 
whether ASvapati was a title or a personal name, but it seems to be more 
likely that it was the title of the rulers of Kekaya. 

Kakshasena, a brother of Janamejaya, seems to have established a 
separate kingdom. From the references in the Panchavimia Brahmana 
which states that Driti, apparently priest of king Abhipratarin, son of 
Kakshasena, performed a sacrifice in Khandava, in which lay Indra¬ 
prastha, 5 it appears that the junior branch resided at Indraprastha. A 
further reference to the ‘‘Abhipratarinas’’ (i.e. descendants of Abhipra¬ 
tarin) in the same text as “the mightiest of all their relations” 6 suggests 
that the junior branch excelled the other branches of the Kurus. The 
Kuru kings at Indraprastha continued to rule there long after the de¬ 
struction of Hastinapura and the migration of the senior branch to 
Kausambi.7 

Janamejaya was succeeded by his son Satanika, who married a princess 

320 



TIONAI, HISTORY FROM THE ACCESSION OF PARIKSH 1 

Fidelia. To Satanlka was born Asvamedhadatta who was succeeded 
jy ms son Adhisimakrishna. None of these descendants have been defi¬ 
nitely referred to in the Vedic texts and the exact relationship of some 
Kurus mentioned in the Yedic texts is not clear. It appears that Satanika 
was the contemporary of Ugrasena Janaka of Vi deha, and ASvamedha- 
datta of Pravahana Jaivali of the Panchalas, both of whom were philo¬ 
sopher kings . 8 In the reign of Adhisimakrishna, when Divakara was 
ruling in Ayodhya and Senajit in Magadha, the Puranas are said to have 
been recited for the first time in the twelve-year sacrifice in the Naimi- 
sharanya forest on. the river Gomatl in Ayodhya. Saunaka officiated as 
the head sacrificer and to him were recited the Mahdbhdrata and the 
Puranas as handed down by the Sutas.9 Thus there seems to have been a 
collection and edition oAhe traditional accounts for the first time, on the 
occasion of the Naimisha sacrifice. The lists of dynasties and kings that 
subsequently ruled were recorded in the future tense as if they were 
prophecies. The Matsya and Vciyu begin their “future kings’’ after the 
time of Adhisimakrishna. 

During the reign of Nichakshu, the son and successor of Adhisima¬ 
krishna, the Kuru kingdom appears to have passed through severe 
calamities. The-capital Hastinapura. was washed away by the Ganges . 10 
The devastation of crops in the Kuru country by locusts (or hail-storms), 
mentioned in the Chhdndogya Upanishad ,« is also possibly to be referred 
to this period. The famine brought on by locusts was probably followed 
by heavy downpour flooding the country. Consequently not only Hastina¬ 
pura but the whole of the northern Doah was seriously affected. The Kuru 
people evacuated and migrated in a body over 300 miles down-stream and 
settled in Vatsabhumi, with KaiGambI (modern Kosam on the Yamuna 
near Allahabad) as their capital. This wholesale migration, according to 
Pargiter, was due to the pressure from the Punjab . 11 But the explanation 
given in traditional accounts, coupled with the locust menace, satis¬ 
factorily accounts for the migration. The Vatsas, it may be recalled, were 
under the Paurava king of Kasi.'i and sided with the Pandavas in the 
Bharata War. 

The history of the Paurava kings of KausambI is obscure. The Puranas 
?ive only a list of twenty-three kings after Nichakshu, up to Kshemaka, 
the last in the line. Among them Satanika and his son Udayana are 
interesting and important figures, Satanika, also styled Parantapa, is said 
to have attacked Champa, the capital of Anga, during the reign of Dadhi- 
vahana.u Udayana succeeded his father on the Vatsa throne. According 
to Buddhist accounts, Udayana was born on the same day as the Buddha. 
Whether we accept it or not, there are good grounds. to believe that 
Udayana was contemporaneous with the Buddha and also with Pradyota 
Mahasena of Avanti and AjataSatru of Magadha. His history will, there¬ 
fore, be more appropriately dealt with in the next volume. 

321 


x 


THE VEDIC AGE 

2. THE KOSALAS 

The Puranas give a list of 31 Ikshvaku kings of Kosala beginning with 
Brihadbala who was killed in the Bharata War. His sixth descendant 
Divakara was a contemporary of the Paurava king Adhisimakrishna. 
This Puranic list serves as a typical instance of the confusion brought 
about by jumbling together different historical traditions at a late 
date. For this genealogical list of the Ikshvaku kings of Kosala includes 
the names of Sakya, Suddhodana, his son Siddhartha and the latter s 
son Rahula, immediately before Prasenajit, who is known from Buddhist 
sources as the son of Mahakosala and a contemporary of the Buddha. 
Without, therefore, relying much on this inaccurate and incomplete list 
we may glean a few interesting facts about Kosala from the Buddhist 
literature. 

It appears from the Buddhist account that the Kosala kings had their 
capitals at Saketa and SravastI in addition to Ayodhya. Ayodhya was 
probably the earliest capital followed by Saketa, and Sravasti was the 
last. Ayodhya was a town on the river Sarayu. Saketa is often taken 
to be identical with Ayodhya, but the separate mention of both as 
existing in Buddha's time suggests that they were possibly adjoining 
cities like London and Westminster .>5 Sravasti (in Pali SavatthI) has 
been identified with Sahet-Mahet, on the south bank of the Rapti on 
the borders of the Gonda and Bahraich districts of the United Provinces. 
In Buddha’s time, Ayodhya had sunk into comparative insignificance but 
the other two figured among the six great cities of India. I he Buddhist 
works mention some kings of Kosala whose names are not found in the 
dynastic lists. 16 

We learn from the Buddliist accounts that there were frequent wars 
between the neighbouring kingdoms of Kosala and Kasi and there was 
continued rivalry for supremacy between them. It appears, however, that, 
sometimes friendly relations prevailed between Ka£i and Kosala and 
there were matrimonial alliances, and probably the countries at times 
were under a common ruler who came at the head either by conquest or 
by inheritance. 1 ? The Vedic texts indicate the close association of these 
two states by the phrase Kasi-Kosala. In their struggle for supremacy 
sometimes KaAi and sometimes Kosala emerged victorious. Though the 
Kasis appear to have succeeded in the beginning, the final victory went 
to the Kosalas. The results of these contests, as recorded in the Buddhist 
literature, can be grouped in four successive stages as has been suggested 
by Dr. Law. 18 

The canonical legend in which Erahniadatta, the powerful king of 
Kaii, in his campaigns of conquests, defeated the weak Kosalan king 
Dighiti, marks the first stage in the Kasi-Kosaia struggle. Brahmadatta 

322 






fAL HISTORY FROM THE ACCESSION OF PARIKSHI 



the execution of Dighiti and his queen who were captured 


irf the Kasi realm living in disguise. Then the Kosala prince Dighayu 
gained confidence of king Brahmadatta, was raised to the position of a 
general, and was reinstated on the Kosalan throne on account of his 
generosity in not killing Brahmadatta in revenge. In the second stage, 
illustrated in the Rdjovdda Jdtaka, both Kasi and Kosala appear as 
equally powerful realms flourishing side by side, respectively under 
Brahmadatta and Mallika. The Kasi ruler followed the religious principle 
of conquest of wrath by kindness, whereas the Kosala king adhered 
to the strong administrative principle of treating hard with hardness and 
soft with softness. The Mahastlava Jdtaka brings out the third stage, in 
which the Kosala king took advantage of the good nature and religious 
tendencies of the Kaii king and invaded the neighbouring kingdom. 

The final stage marks the total absorption of the Kaii kingdom under 
the Kosala king Mahakosala, who lias been mentioned as the sovereign 
of both Kasi and Kosala. From the fact that the Buddhist records do not 
refer to contests between Kosala and any other tribe or state, it would 
appear that the gradual absorption of the clans and tribes in the northern 
part of Kosala was effected without any important battle, campaign, 
or siegeT9 The contact $ Kosala with Kasi, however, as we have seen, 
resulted in a struggle lasting for generations with varying fortunes till 
Kaii was completely subjugated by the Kosala king Kariisa, who appears 
to have been a predecessor of Mahakosala or the great Kosala. Mahako¬ 
sala was the father and immediate predecessor of Prasenajit (in Pali 
Pasenadi). Dr. Raychaudliuri is inclined to identify Hiranyanablia 
mentioned in later Vedic texts with Mahakosala.™ Mahakosala gave his 
daughter KosaladevI in marriage to the Magadhan king Bimbisara. The 
fateful sequel of this marriage will be described in the next volume. 


3. MAGADHA 


We have already seen.in the last chapter that the Barhadratha dynasty 
ruled in Magadha at the time of the Bharata War, and that Jarasandha, 
the first great emperor of Magadha before that war, was succeeded by his 
son Sahadeva, who became an ally of the Pandavas, and was killed in the 
war. After Sahadeva, his son Somadhi became king at Girivraja, at the 
foot of which Rajagriha, the ancient capital of Magadha, grew up. The 
old site of Rajagriha corresponds to modern Rajgir in the Patna district. 
Senajit, the sixth successor of Somadhi, was a contemporary of the 
Paurava Adhisimakrishna and Kosala Divakara. Ripunjaya, the twenty- 
first in descent from Somadhi, is stated to have been the last king of the 
Barhadratha dynasty. Ripunjaya is said to have been killed by bis minister 
Pukka, (variants: Su°- Mu°- or Punika, Pulaka) who then installed his son 


■ 323 


THE VEDiC AGE 


adyota on the throne. The Pradyota dynasty, according to the Puranas, 
lasted for five generations covering a period of 138 years, and was sup¬ 
planted by Sisunaga who, after placing his son to rule over Kasi, fixed his 
capital at Girivraja (or Rajagriha). 21 Bimbisara and Ajatasatru appear 
in the Puranic lists as fifth and sixth in descent from Sisunaga, who 
founded a new royal dynasty, called the SsaRunaga. 

But the Puranas have distorted history, and most of the above state¬ 
ments regarding the events following the death of Puranjaya are contra¬ 
dicted not only by the testimony of other Sanskrit sources and Buddhist 
accounts, but by the Puranas themselves. Here, as in the case of Kosala, 
genuine historical facts have been wrongly jumbled together, and it 
appears that the independent lists of the dynasties of Pradyota, Sisunaga 
and Bimbisara have been placed in a false sequence and supplied with 
imaginary connecting links. 

That the Pradyotas ruled at Avanti would be evident from the state¬ 
ment in the Matsya Pur ana itself, 3 * and we have no reliable evidence that 
there was any Pradyota dynasty of Magadha. The first Pradyota was a 
contemporary of Bimbisara of Magadha according to Pali accounts, and 
a co-ordination of the Puranas with other Sanskrit literature also supports 
the same conclusion; but the Puranas separate Pradyota and Bimbisara 
by about ten generations. If Sisunaga destroyed the fame of the Pradyotas, 
he must come about four or five generations after Chanda Pradyota, the 
first king of the Pradyota dynasty. Sisunaga has been placed as the 
progenitor of the Bimbisara family by the Puranas, whereas the Pali 
accounts rightly place him four or five generations after Pradyota (and 
hence also Bimbisara, his contemporary) and xnake him the founder 
of a dynasty that succeeded the dynasty of Bimbisara. 

The Puranas themselves in a way indicate the posteriority of SiSunaga 
to Bimbisara as they include Varanasi in Sihmaga’s dominions, 3 3 be¬ 
cause Bimbisara and Ajatasatru were the first to establish Magadha 
domination in Kasi. The hostility between Avanti and Magadha, again, 
to be met with for the first time in Ajataiatru's reign. There is no trace 
of it during the period of Bimbisara, and hence Sisunaga who supplanted 
the Pradyotas must come after Bimbisara and Ajatasatru. The probable 
reason for placing fekmaga before the Bimbisara-Ajatasatru group 
appears to be that Sisunaga had his capital at Rajagriha, and as Udayin 
was credited in the Puranic accounts with the removal of the capital to 
Pataliputra, 3 4 it was thought by the ill-informed Puranic chroniclers of 
a late date that Sisunaga came before Udayin. But the statement in the 
Malalankaravatthu that Rajagriha lost its rank as a royal city from the 
time of Sisunaga indicates that iSisunaga flourished after the palmy days 
of Rajagriha, i.e. the period of Bimbisara and Ajatasatru. Si-hmaga 
probably chose the old capital Rajagriha as Iris headquarters in order to 
meet the attacks from Avanti on that part of Magadha. 

324 



ilTIONAt HISTORY FROM THE ACCESSION OF PARIKSHI 1 


/may thus hold that the Barhadratha dynasty in Magadha endec 
Ripunjaya who was probably killed by his minister, and was suc¬ 
ceeded by Bimbisara. The history of this famous king who laid the founda¬ 
tions of the greatness of Magadha will be related in the next volume. 


4. OTHER KINGDOMS 

In addition to the three important kingdoms of Magadha, Kosala, and 
Vatsa, mentioned above, several others flourished during the period 
following the great Bharata War. But their history is little known, and 
we have to rest content with a few casual notices, gleaned from different 
sources. Beginning from the west we have the Panchala kingdom, the 
total number of whose rulers from the Bharata War up to Mahapadma 
Nanda is given as twenty-seven in the Puranas though no names are 
mentioned. 

Parichakra, Kampilya (or Kampila) and Ahichchhatra are the im¬ 
portant cities in Pailchala that have been mentioned in the Vedic and 
Puranic texts. Reference has already been made to the first two cities. 
Ahichchhatra has been identified with a ruined site of the same name 
near modern Ramnagar in the Bareilly district. The city was still con¬ 
siderable in extent when visited by the Chinese pilgrim Hiuen Tsang in 
the seventh century. 

Reference has already been made to the division of the Panchala into 
north and south during the reign of king Drupada. A Jataka story seems 
to suggest that a Chedi prince went to the north and formed the Uttara 
Panchala kingdom with colonists from the Panchala and Chedi countries.** 
The Aitareya Brdhmana (VIII. 23) represents Durmukha as a universal 
monarch who made extensive conquests in every direction and was 
anointed by Brihaduktha. 

Probably the Durmukha. (Dummukha) of the Brahmanical and Budd¬ 
hist accounts is identical with Dvimukha of Panchala, who, according to 
Jain tradition, was a Pratyeka Buddha. Some accounts associate the 
name of Brahmadatta, a legendary king, with Panchala. 

We have next the kingdom of Surasena with its capital at Mathura on 
the Yamuna. Surasena (modern Muttra district including some of the 
territory still further south) before the period of the Bharata War was 
under .the occupation of the scions of the Yadu family. The Puranas 
mention twenty-three Surasenas after the Bharata War up to the period 
of Nanda, but no dynastic lists are available. , 

To the south of 3 urasena lay Avanti. Avanti roughly corresponds to 
central Malwa, Nimar and the adjoining parts of the Central Provinces.* 6 
The capital of the state was also known as Avanti or Ujjayim, identified 
with modem Ujjain on the Sipra, a tributary of the Chambal. Ujjayim 

325 



THE VEDIC AGE 


<SL 


r as a very important city in ancient India both politically and commer¬ 
cially, and it is rather strange that, the rulers of so famous a city have not 
been directly mentioned in the Puranic accounts. It is probable, however, 
that the twenty-eight (according to some Pnranas twenty-four) Haihayas 
(the descendants of Yadu) who are said to have ruled after the Bharata 
War were really the rulers of Avanti. For it may be recalled that the 
Av antis were one of the five branches of the Haihayas. 2 7 According to 
some scholars the twenty Vxtihotras who are mentioned in the Puranas 
as having ruled after the Bharata War, were kings of Avanti.*7 8 But no 
definite information is available regarding the history of Avanti after 
Yinda and Anuvinda, -who flourished at the time of the Bharata War. 
When we next hear of Avanti, more than five centuries later, it was under 
the Pradyotas, as has been related above. 

Special importance attaches to the kingdom of Videha as it was a 
great centre of culture and learning, fhe Videha dynasty, or the race of 
the Janakas according to Puranic accounts, ended with Kriti, who has 
been identified with Kritakshana, son of Bahulasva, the ruler at the time 
of the Bharata War.** But as we find mention of Janakas of Videha even 
after the period of Yudhishthira, the identification of the last of the 
Janakas does not seem to be correct as is rightly pointed out by 
Raychaudhuri.*9 Kriti may reasonably be identified with Karala (Janaka) 
the Vaideha, mentioned in the Arthasdstra, who is said to have perished 
along with his kingdom and relatives on account of his violation of a 
Brahmana maiden.! 0 This story is confirmed in the Buddhist accounts, 
which make Kalara the last of the line. 

Ihe great king Janaka of Videha, and the sage Yajnavalkya, from 
whom he learnt Bfcihmavidyd (spiritual knowledge), are famous names 
in Indian history, but their chronology ds uncertain and there might have 
been more than one pair bearing these names. It appears from the Mahd- 
bhamta that one Janaka was ruling over Videha at the time of Janamejaya, 
son of Parikshit, and 5 vetaketu, son of Uddalaka, a prominent figure in 
Janaka’s court, attended Janamejaya’s snake sacrificed 1 The philosopher 
king Janaka of the Upanishads was a contemporary of Yajnavalkya and 
A£vapati, king of the Kekayas, but unfortunately both Yajnavalkya and 
Asvapati are also family names, just, like Janaka, so that no chronological 
deductions can be drawn from this synchronism. Dr. Raychaudhuri 
places the Vedic Janaka, whom he takes to be the father of SIta, after the 
date of Janamejaya Parikshita, the descendant of the Pandavas.3* This 
identification goes against many well-established synchronisms in tradi¬ 
tional history and fails to account for the period of Rama and the subse¬ 
quent Ikshvakus in the scheme of history. 

There is, however, no doubt that one pair of Janaka, the philosopher 
king, and Yajnavalkya flourished after the period of the Bharata War, 
as Satanika, the successor of Janamejaya, is said to be the disciple of this 

326 




ITIONAI. HISTORY FROM THE ACCESSION OF PAR I KSfi( 

valkya who was himself a disciple of Vaiiampayana. Ugrasena mi 
ably be the personal name of this Janaka, though this name does 
not occur in dynastic lists .33 It may be noted that the fame of the Janakas 
of Videha, both before and after the Bharata War, rests more on their 
patronage of learning, culture, philosophy, and spiritual attainments 
than on their martial exploits or sacrifices. Kings of Videha usually 
maintained friendly relations with neighbouring states and formed 
matrimonial alliances with different contemporary ruling families. 

The degeneracy in character of the last monarch, as already stated, 
brought the Videha dynasty to an end, and the overthrow of the monarchy 
was followed by the rise of a republic. This political revolution in Videha 
is one of the important events during this period. In Buddha’s time the 
Videhas, along with the Lichchhavis of Vaisali and other clans, formed 
a powerful confederation known as the Vajjis. The Kaii people apparently 
had a hand in the overthrow of the Videhan monarchy, as frequent 
struggles between Kaii and Videha have been referred to in an earlier 
period. Perhaps a junior branch of the royal family of Kasi established 
itself in Videha.34 The Puranas mention twenty-eight Maithilas as having 
ruled after the Bharata War. They were probably rulers of Videha. 

The traditional accounts contain no information about the kingdom of 
Kaii after the Bharata War beyond mentioning that there were twenty- 
four Kaii kings down to the period of the Nandas. The Kasis, being conti¬ 
guous to the Kosalas and Videhas, naturally had some connections with 
these states. The later Vedic texts mention Kasi-Kosala and Kaii-Videha 
together, stating also that sometimes these had the same king and a 
common Purohita, which indicates the close contact that subsisted be¬ 
tween these three states, Kasi, Kosala, and Videha .35 

The ill-feeling and rivalry between Kaii and Kosala which is indicated 
by Buddhist texts has already been referred to in connection with the 
Kosalas. The Assaka Jataka testifies to the extension of the Kaii suze¬ 
rainty to Potali in the kingdom of Assaka in Southern India. Kaii, the 
capital of the state, was the premier city in all India, extending over 
twelve leagues as compared to seven leagues which was the extent of 
Mithila and Indraprastha> On account of the importance of the city of 
Kaii or Benares, it was the coveted prize of the neighbouring states. 
According to the Puranic account, during different periods in its history, 
Kaii came under the sway of three successive suzerain powers of Northern 
India—the Pauravas of Vatsa, the Ikshvakus of Kosala and the kings of 
Magadha .37 In the interval between the decline of Vatsa and the rise of 
Kosala, Kaii appears to have enjoyed independence under its famous 
king, Brahmadatta, who conquered Kosala, possibly about a century 
and a half before Buddha’s time. 

Tp the east of Magadha lay Aiiga. It has already been stated (p. 321) 
that Satanika, the father of Udayana of Kauiambi, attacked Champa, 

327 



THE VEDIC AGE 


<SL 


W capital of Dadhivahana, king of Anga who, according to Puranic 
accounts, was the son of Anga. The Jain tradition represents Dadhiva- 
haiia’s daughter Chandana or Chandrabala as the first female to embrace 
Jainism shortly after Mahavira’s death. In the confusion consequent on 
Satanlka's invasion of Champa, Chandana fell into the hands of a robber, 
but she is said to have maintained the vows of the order throughout. Aiiga 
seems to have been on terms of hostility all along with its neighbouring 
state of Magadha, and at one time included parts of Magadha, as would 
appear from the mention of Rajagriha as a city of Anga. The Anga 
suzerainty would also be evident from the defeat of king Bhattiya of 
Magadha by king Brahmadatta of Anga. But the Anga kingdom lost its 
independence when Bimbisara, son of Bhattiya, avenged his father’s 
defeat and killed the Aiiga king Brahmadatta, annexed the capital 
Champa., and continued there as viceroy till he left for Rajagriha on his 
father’s death. 3 8 Bimbisara later converted Anga into a separate province 
and appointed his son AjataSatru (Kunika) as governor with headquarters 
at Champa. 

The existence of several other kingdoms during this period is known to 
us, but we know: hardly anything about them. The Puranas refer to 
thirty-two rulers of Kalihga, and twenty-five of the Asmaka kingdom, 
but do not give any other details. There were also the kingdoms of 
Gandhara and Kamboja in the west, but they do not come into prominence 
until somewhat later. There were probably other kingdoms of which we 
do not even know the names. 

On the whole, the history of India, during the period of 400 or 800 
years following the Bharata War, according as we place that event in 
xooo or 1400 b.c., is only known to us in vague outline. All that we can 
say definitely is that Northern India was divided into a large number of 
states and, so far as our knowledge goes, no paramount power arose 
within this long period which could effectively exercise its. supremacy over 
all or even a large number of them . We can dimly discern the struggles for 
supremacy, and even the ideal of imperialism, so strongly stressed in the 
Mahabharata, was by no means absent, but we do not note any sub¬ 
stantial progress towards the political unification of India. 

1. The omission of the states in the Punjab and the north-west is significant, and 
probably indicates that these states were seriously affected by the disorganization 
consequent on the Bharata War. W 6 find the wild tribe of the Nagas, who were 
probably inhabiting Gandhara, suddenly rising to power and taking possession 
of Takshasila. They also invaded the Paurava kingdom, which had become 
feeble, and reached up to Hastinapura where they killed the Paurava king 
Parikshit. 

2. PHAI, p. 20. 

3. The Sarpasatra mentioned in the Panchavimsa Brahmana at which one Jana- 
mejaya is said to have officiated as a priest is quite distinct from the Sarpasatra 
instituted by king Janamejaya, as it was for securing preservation and well¬ 
being of the serpents, whereas the epic Sarpasatra was for the destruction of 

. 328 




&TIONAL HISTORY FROM THE ACCESSION OF PARIES FI l| 


Serpents (Patch. Br., XXV. 15. 3; Ved. Ind., I. 274). Raychaudhuri regarck. 
-nie epic account of the SavpasalYci as having no historical basis, but accepts the 
conquest of Taxila by Janamejaya as a historical fact (PHA I, 30-31). But the 
Brahmana passages on which he relies for support (Ait. Br,, VIII, 21; Sat. Br., 
XIII. 5. 4. 1-3) relate to the universal conquests of janamejaya, the predecessor 
of the'Pandavas, and are stated in connection with his horse-sacrifice. Janame¬ 
jaya, the descendant of the Pandavas, also started a horse-sacrifice, but it was 
not completed on account of some technical difficulties ( Hari , III. 2. 5-0, 
28-29; 5, 11—17), and hence janamejaya who is said to have performed horse- 
sacrifices must certainly be his ancestor. 

4. Mbh, XVIII. 5. 34. 

5. Punch. Br., XXV. 3. 6; XIV, 1. 12. 

6. Punch. Br., II. 9, 4. ..... ,, 

7. Raychaudhuri, PHAI, p. 3 &- According to Pargiter, “the principalities on the 
Sarasvati and at Indraprastha disappeared, and Hastinapura remained the 
outpost of the Hindu kingdoms of North India" (AIHT, p. 285). 

Pargiter, AIHT , pp. 3#8, 330. 

Pargiter, DKA, pp. 1, 4, 9-10, 15. 

DKA, p. 5. 

Chhandogya Up., I. 10. 1: Matachihateshu Kurushu . . 

AIHT, p. 285' 

Pargiter, AIHT, pp. 269-70. 

JASB, 1914, p. 321. 

Rhys Davids, Buddhist India, p. 39. # _ 

Such as Sagaradeva, Bharata, Angirasa, Ruchi, Suruchi, Pratapa, Mahapratapa, 
Sudarsana, Maha?ammata, Muchala, Kalyaija, Satadhanu, Makhadeva, Sadhina. 
Law, Tribes, p. 127. 

Ibid., pp. 125-^7. 

CHI, I, p. 180. 

PHAI, p. 89. 

Pargiter, DKA , pp. 18-22. 

Matsya P., 272. 1: BrihadvatheshvatUeshu Vitihotreshv * Avantishu ; Pulakah 
svaminam hatvd svaputramabhishekshyati. 

Cf. Matsya P 272. 6; Vdrdnasydm sutam sthdpya. 

Ci. Matsya P., 272. 6; Vdyu P 99. 319. 

Law, Tribes, p. 32. 

Raychaudhuri, PHAI, p. 122. 

Gf. Matsya P., 43. 48-9. 

. JBORS , 1915, p. 10. 

AIHT, pp. 9b, 149 , 330 . 

PHAI, p. 69. 

Arthaiastra, Mysore Ed., 1919, P* n. 

Mbh (Cr. Ed.), I. 48. 7; cf. III. 13;;. 16, 19; also III. 135. 21-3. 

IMA I, p. 47 - 
Mbh (Cr. Ed.), HI. 134. 1. 

PHAI , pp. 71-2. . 

Sankhdyana $S\xvi, 29. 5; Baudhdyana SS, XXI, 3; Gopatha Br., i, 2. 9; Law, 

Tribes , p. 127. 

Cf. Jataka Nos. 515 (Sambhava), 489 (Suruchi) and 545 (Vidhurapan<Jita). ; 
CHI, I, p. 31b. 

Hardy, Many,al of Buddhism, p. 163 n. 


8 . 

9- 

10. 

11. 

.12. 

x 3* 

14. 

15. 

16. 

r 7 . 

18. 

19* 

2Q. 

21 . 

22 . 

*3- 

24. 

25. 

26. 

, 27. 

27a 

28. 

29. 

30 . 
31 - 
32 

33- 

34- 

35- 

3b. 

37- 

38- 


3II 





<SL 


BOOK FIVE 


THE AGE OF THE 
RIK-SAMHITA 


m r 




HI 


XVI 

LITERATURE 

I he language of the Rigveda is the oldest known Indo-Aryan language. 
In several respects, 1 it is true, its specific characterization has gone 
further than that of the oldest forms of Iranian speech known to us. 
But that does not warrant the assumption that the Rigvedic language 
is later than Gathic Avestan. For the innovations differentiating the 
language of the Rigveda from that of the Avesta are for the most part 
not such as may be expected to develop in course of normal and gradual 
evolution, but are rather'suggestive of a violent deflection from the 
natural course. Thus the normal and natural tendency of all the known 
Indo-European languages has been to spirantize the occlusives either 
through an overdose (as in Germanic) or through an underdose (as in 
Celtic) of expended expiratory energy; but the language of the Rigveda, 
instead of spirantizing the Indo-Iranian occlusives, has on the contrary 
occluded a number of Indo-Iranian spirants, eliminated some, and re¬ 
tained only the surd sibilants. I he appearance of a whole series of 
cerebrals, unknown in any other Indo-European dialect, points, likewise, 
rather to violent deflection than to gradual evolution. Similar violent 
deflection from the normal course of evolution cannot, however, be 
pointed out in Iranian. It would, therefore, be wrong to consider the 
innovations of both Avestan and Sanskrit in the same light, or to draw 
any conclusion as to their relative chronology from a comparison of those 
innovations. 

Regarded from this point of view, it would moreover seem that the 
whole problem of Indo-European phonetics requires restatement and 
reconsideration. It has been always tacitly assumed that Sanskrit, which 
possesses so few spirants, gives the truest picture of Indo-European 
consonantism; but that is, at the best, an unproved hypothesis. What 
is an incontestable fact is that a strong spirantizing tendency was present 
already in the basic Indo-European language, and that this tendency, 
already in the later Indo-European epoch, caused the emergence of a 
whole new series of palatals out of the velars. 

Moreover, in all the better known Indo-European dialects of the 
historical age, the number of spirants is much larger than in Sanskrit. 
And when we add to all this the further consideration that in actual 
pronunciation the true occlusive—which is in each case an ideal norm 
between the results of the expenditure of too much and too little 
xpiratory energy—is hardly ever heard in any language, then perhaps 

333 




CHAPTER 


LANGUAGE AND 



the vedic age 


<SL 


ii'would seem obvious and necessary to consider the imposing system 
of occlusives registered by Sanskrit grammarians not as a faithful picture 
of the original state of things in the basic Indo-European, but as the 
result of later variation. 

It is not too much to suggest that also the sonant aspirates, which are 
found in no other Indo-European dialect, are but the Indian version of 
Indo-European sonant spirants. It appears, therefore, that not only the 
Indo-European vowel-system has been fundamentally transformed in 
Sanskrit, as is universally recognized to-day, but also that, at least in 
one respect, namely in respect of spirants, Sanskrit consonantism has 
innovated no less. And this holds good for the oldest recorded form of 
Sanskrit, namely the language of the Rigveda. 

The Rigvedic language is hieratic, and therefore to.some extent exclusive 
and artificial; but it is on that account by no means an instrument of 
mere suggestion without any power of direct and forceful expression, 
as is the case, in a great measure, with Classical Sanskrit. On the contrary 
in pithiness it excels even the Latin of the Classical Age. lhat is largely 
because the Rigvedic poets strove throughout to present a complete idea, 
though not, always a complete sentence, in every verse-foot {pdda). Pddas 
of this kind, usually of eight to twelve syllables, were naturally not easy 
to construct, and, therefore, ready-made Pddas have often been repeated 
in the Rigveda with or without any material variation, though not so 
indiscriminately as were the Homeric verse-fragments in the Iliad A 

The verb generally used in the Rigveda to express the art of versification 
is taksh, which literally means “to hew.” Just as a carpenter, by applying 
the art of his trade, constructs beautiful pieces of furniture, so does the 
poet —kdru (literally: “manual worker”)—manufacture beautiful verses 
and hymns with which to win the favour of the gods, either for himself, 
or more frequently, for his patron. Such hymns were regarded directly 
as gifts of gods ( devatta ). It is clear that verse-making had already become 
a recognized profession in the Rigvedic age, and also that this profession 
had become a monopoly of the priestly classes. In the hands of the 
professional verse-makers Rigvedic poetry attained an amazing degree 
of technical perfection, but true poetry could not and did not. flouiish 
in the Rigvedic atmosphere, surcharged as it was with a spirit of bargaining 
between gods and men. Poetry of a high order springs either from absolute 
self-surrender, or from absolute individualism. But the spirit of Rigvedic 
poetry always oscillates between these two extremes, without ever attain¬ 
ing the highest altitude of either. Barring the all-pervading element of 
ritualism that has deadened its life, Rigvedic poetry therefore strikes the 
reader as intensely human, though not as actually sublime. With these 
few preliminary remarks about Rigvedic language and literature, we shall 
now proceed to a more detailed analysis of both. 


334 



MtSfQy 



LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


x. LANGUAGE 


<SL 


In its phonetic structure the Rigvedic language shows practically the 
same sounds as the Classical Sanskrit, the only notable exceptions being 
i- and Ih, which take the place of intervocalic d and dh in the Rigveda. But 
the frequency of the sounds is not the same in the Rigveda and in Classical 
Sanskrit. The relative frequency of r and l in Rigvedic and later language 
is highly interesting. In the older language, l is of rare occurrence, but 
it extends its sphere more and more at the expense of r, and it is well 
known that in the Prakritic stage some dialects of eastern India had 
completely eliminated r. It is also well known on the other hand that 
in ancient Iranian every Indo-European / had become an r. During the 
intervening period, of which roughly the first half is covered by changing 
and living Sanskrit ,3 r lost more and more ground to l. In the later 
portions of the Rigveda, l is eight times as frequent as in the older parts, 
and in the Atharvaveda it is seven times as frequent as in the RigvedaA 
Thus it is clear that increase of Tin frequency went hand in hand with 
the progress of the Aryans towards the east. In a passage often repeated 
in the Brahmanas it is said that the Asuras suffered defeat at the hands 
of the gods because they mispronounced the word arayah as alayah.5 This 
would suggest that in the later Vedic age, when the'word asura had lost 
its original meaning and became a general term of opprobrium, the 
propensity of the easterners to pronounce l for r was noticed and frowned 
upon by the orthodox Aryans. Or it may mean that the Asuras referred 
to were none but those of the incoming Aryan tribes who, being of a 
particular group with its particular phonetic laws, not only retained 
unchanged the Indo-European l, but also made it the representative of 
Indo-European tf In short, the behaviour of l and r in the Rigveda 
suggests as clearly that the invading Aryans were not quite homogeneous 
in speech as the increase of l at the expense of r suggests increasing 
eastern influence on the Vedic language. 

That the Rigvedic language was not quite homogeneous is proved also 
by its lack of uniformity in regard to Fortunatov’s law. According to this 
law, Indo-European l, when followed by dental occlusive or s, disappears 
after cerebralizing the following sound, whereas Indo-European r under 
similar circumstances remains. Thus in Skt. jathara-, the -th- is derived 
from Indo-European - Ith - (cf. Gothic kilthei), and in Sk t. bhdshate, the 
sA- is derived from Indo-European -Is- (cf. Lithuanian balsas ); but in 
Skt. vart- vars-, the r in the sound-group -rt- and -rs- (both of Indo- 
European antiquity, cf. Lat. verto, Gr. ersB) has not disappeared. These 
and other similar examples seem to prove Fortunatov’s law; but there 
are exceptions. Indo-European l -f dental has clearly developed into -rt- 
in Skt. jartu- which is a side-form of jathara-, and is, like it, connected 


335 




THE VEDIC AGE 

...Jh Goth, kilthei, and in Skt. karshu, which is connected with 
tdlson, the / of the Indo-European consonant group -Is- has not disappeared 
as Fortunatov’s law would have it, but has become r. De-occludization 
of some occlusives in the Rigveda shows that this characteristic of the 
Prakrit dialects was latent also in the oldest Sanskrit. Thus we find h 
for dh in the verbal ending -hi for -dhi, in hita from dhd-, in griha from 
*gridha, etc.; h for bh in graft-, a side-form of grabh-] h for gh in hanti 
(cf. ghnanti), in arh-, a side-form of argh-, in dah from dhagh -, etc. 

Apart from these significant details which seem to challenge the claim 
of the Rigvedic language to have been a homogeneous one, there are 
others which definitely prove that to some extent it was also artificial. 
Thus it can hardly be an accident that in the Atri-Mandala (fifth) there 
is not a single infinitive form in -tu; the Kanvas, the reputed authors 
of the first and the eighth Mandalas, seem to have intentionally avoided 
using infinitive forms in -turn and -tavai\ the Vasishthas, the authors of 
the seventh Mandala, show a similar aversion to absolutives in -tvd and 
-tvdya. Moreover, perfect forms like yamatur (VI. 67. 1) and skambhathur 
(VI. 72. 2), without reduplication, must be regarded as purely artificial 
momentary formations like the non-reduplicating second person dual 
perfect takshathur (X. 39. 4), formed perhaps in imitation of the third 
person plural preterite takshuy (II. 19. 8), which in that case must have 
been mistaken for a perfect-form as Wackernageb has suggested. This 
also proves in a striking manner that the language of the earlier Mandates 
was already in danger of being misunderstood when the hymns of the 
tenth Mandala were being composed. 

Intentional imitation of the earlier parts of the Rigveda in the later 
parts is clearly proved in the case of the group of hymns X. 20-26, the 
author of which “has emphasized his dependence on earlier tradition by 
prefixing to his own group the opening words of the first hymn of the 
first book.” 8 At any rate, parts of the earlier Rigveda must have become 
part of the ritual tradition at the time of the author of the hymn X. 181, 
for he mentions the fact that the Rathantara-saman is chanted to a 
couplet composed by Vasishtha (VII. 32. 22-23), and the Brihat-saman 
on another composed by Bharadvaja (VI. 46. 1-2). 

On the whole, however, the language of the first nine Mandalas must 
be regarded as homogeneous, in spite of traces of previous dialectal 
differences, particularly in the treatment of r and l, and of faint sugges¬ 
tions of particular mannerisms of different composer-families. With the 
tenth Mandala it is a different story. The language has here definitely 
changed. The difference in language between the earlier Mandalas and 
the tenth would have appeared in its true proportions if the texts con¬ 
cerned had been written down at the time they were composed and 
handed down to us in that written form. 

The fact, however, is that the text-tradition of the Rigveda was stabilized 

336 



LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 

•iparatively late date, and fixed in writing at a much later epoch. 
The result has been not unlike what would have happened if the works 
of Chaucer and Shakespeare were put in writing and printed for the first 
time in the twentieth century: in short the text of the Rigveda as handed 
down to us is, in various details, not only different from what it actually 
was, but to some extent also screens the differences that mark off the 
languages of the earlier Mandalas from that of the tenth. 81 The evidence 
of the metres, which, inter alia, demand a heavy penultimate in verse-feet 
of ten or eleven syllables but a light one in those of eight or twelve ,9 
clearly proves that the actual pronunciation of the word pavaka must 
have been pavaka in the Rigvedic age, but the fact has been completely 
suppressed in the traditional text. Similarly, on the evidence of the 
metres, the word chhardis seems to have been without an r in the Rigveda, 
and very probably the redactors of the Rik-sarhhitd in some passages 
intentionally altered chhadiS into chhardis for reasons that cannot now 
be ascertained. 10 

Apart from these and other sporadical instances of misrepresentation, 11 
the text of the Rigveda has in various respects undergone a fundamental 
rehandling that has to no small degree altered its original character. In 
the original text, there was hardly ever sandhi between the end of a 
verse-foot and the beginning of another, as is clearly indicated by the 
evidence of metres, but the final redactors have systematically joined 
them in sandhi wherever possible, 111 though they did not apply their 
misguided zeal to cases of non-sandhi within the verse-foot. The appli¬ 
cation of abhini hi la- sandhi (absorption of an initial a- into a final -e or -o) 
is in this regard highly interesting. Whether within a verse-foot or between 
two verse-feet, the abhinihita-sandhi in almost all its instances has to 
be dissolved in reading. But the fact is that this sandhi is found in the 
written text regularly between two verse-feet (i.e. where it should not 
have taken place at all), but within the verse-foot its occurrence is 
-regular and facultative, seemingly without any principle. Similar, 
though not quite the same, is the case also with the other kinds of 
vowel -sandhi in the Rigveda, such as kshaipra (i.e. the change of a 
preceding vowel into the corresponding semi-vowel, before a dissimilar 
vowel) and Praslishta (i.e. coalition of two similar vowels into a long 
>ne), for they too have to be dissolved in reading, often within the v-erse- 
foot and practically always between two verse-feet. But semi-vowels 
which are not the result of kshaipra-sandhi have also to be very often 
dissolved (iyadipurana). 

The evidence of metre shows, moreover, that not seldom a short vowel 
has to be inserted in reading between a consonant- and an r immediately 
preceding or following it in the same word (thus indra has often to be 
read indara). This inserted vowel sometimes reveals flexional forms which 
therwise would never have been discovered. Thus apparently the stems 

337 


v 




THE VEDIC AGE 

-i, -u, -n take the endings -yoh, voh, and -roh respectively in 
d locative dual as in the classical language, but readings restored with 
the help of the metre clearly show that the normal ending in the Rigvedic, 
age was dissyllabic in each case: the traditional text has adopted these 
monosyllabic endings, evidently under the influence of the later language. 12 
The case of long ri is rather peculiar. As a rule it is found in the written 
text only in those forms which are palpably similar to other forms with 
other long vowels; thus pitrin is written with long n because palpably 
similar forms such as muriin or sddhun show a long vowel. Otherwise 
the short ri in the Rigveda represents also the long ri. Thus in dridha 
the short ri stands for long ri that is demanded both by grammar and 
orthoepy. Frank cases of Prdkritism are jyofis from dyut-, ushtdndm >3 for 
ushtrandm, lithira for drithira, sure duhita (I. 34- 5) f° r siiro duhita 
(VII. 69. 4), etc. On the other hand, words like nida (from *ni-zd-a), 
dulabha (from *duz-dabh-a), shodasa (from *shash-daka) , etc., could have 
been formed only at a pre-Vedic stage of the language. 

Such a pre-Vedic stage is suggested also by forms of the so-called 
flexion forte of a number of i-stems and M-stems, found only in the Rigveda 
and certainly of Indo-European antiquity.^ Vowels of dissyllabic value 
are a precious relic of Indo-European antiquity, the commonest case 
being the ending -dm in the genitive plural which has often to be read as 
,adm. The use of a verb-form in the singular number when the subject is 
' a plurality of neuter things was the normal rule in the. original Indo- 
European of which ample evidence is found in other Indo-European 
dialects, but in the Rigveda we have only one sure instance of this usage, 
namely dhrishnave dhiyate dhand (I. 81. 3)- 
The verbal system revealed by the Rigveda is infinitely more complex 
than that of Classical Sanskrit, and yet what we find is a drastically 
simplified form of what it was in the basic Indo-European language. Thus 
the original thematic ending -0 in the first person singular has beei 
preserved only in thirteen subjunctive forms ,*5 but in other subjunctiv 
forms of the first person singular it was extended by -ni that came to be 
associated with it already in the Indo-Iranian epoch. The active ending 
in the first person plural seems to have been -tries in the original Indo- 
European on the evidence of Greek and other languages, but the ancient 
Iranian dialects know only -masi ',* 6 in the Rigveda both, -masi and -ma.. 
occur side by side, the former being more than five times as frequent 
as the latter; in the Atharvaveia -mas becomes commoner than -masi, 
and in the classical language -masi disappears altogether. The augment 
has retained in the Rigveda its original character of an independent 
preverb, and as such is very frequently dispensed with when the past 
sense is clear from the context. The forms thus obtained are either of 
the indicative or of the injunctive mood, almost equal in number in the 
Rigveda, the injunctive forms being in about one-third of their occurrence 

338 




LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 

by the prohibitive particle mdM In the classical language thd 
;an be dropped only when in construction with this prohibitive 
particle. The perfect is not necessarily a tense of the past as in Classical 
Sanskrit, but is merely suggestive of the fullest, amplitude of action. It 
pronouncedly suggestive of past action only when preceded by adverbs 
<e pura “formerly,” but it can also be governed by particles like 
nunam “now.” 

On the whole the Rigvedic verb expresses more the modes and aspects 
of action than the time of occurrence, if the augment, which was not 
an integral part of the verb, is left out of consideration. The subjunctive 
mood is in full bloom in the Rigveda, but it was completely eliminated 
from the classical language. On the other hand, the optative, though not 
so popular as the subjunctive in the Rigveda, has been retained 
hroughout. The future tense which was in origin a desiderative present 
is in the Rigveda still in the process of changing its role. It is still in 
beginnings, and the Rigveda forms a future stem only from fifteen roots, 
'he language of the tenth Mandala represents a distinctly later stage of 
Rigvedic language. 18 Hiatus, which is frequent in the earlier Rigveda, 
.read}' in process of elimination here. Stressed i u cannot in sandhi 
changed intoy v in the earlier parts, but in the tenth Mandala they 
The ending -dsas in nominative plural is half as frequent as -as in 
«ju v. Rigveda taken as a whole, but its number of occurrences is dispro¬ 
portionately small in the tenth Manclala. Absolutives in -tvdya occur only 
here. The stem rat- is inflected in one way in the first nine Mandalas, 
and in another in the tenth ,'9 and in the inflexion of dyau-, too, the 
distribution of strong and weak forms is much more regular in the earlier 
Mandalas. The. Prakritic verbal stem kuru- appears only in the tenth 
Mandala for the earlier krinu-. Many words appear for the first time in 
the tenth Mandala or are shared by it only with the interpolated parts 
of other Mandalas. The old locative form pritsu, adjectives like girva-gas 
and vicharshani, and the substantive vili do not occur at all in the tenth 
Mandala, though in the earlier Mandalas they are quite common. The 
particle siwt, which is unknown in. the Atharvaveda, occurs fifty times in 
the first nine Mandalas but only once in the tenth. Words like djya, hdla, 
''■ohita, vijaya, etc., occur for the first time in the tenth Mandala, as also 
.he root labh-. Words shared with the tenth Mandala only by the inter¬ 
polated parts of other Mandalas, the Valakhilyas, and unmistakably late 
hymns are loka (for earlier uloka which is a haplology for uruloka ), mogha, 
visarga, gup- (a back-formation from gopa ), etc. And words which occur 
mostly, though not exclusively, in the tenth Mandala and these parts, 
are sarva, bhagavant, prana, hridaya, etc. The archaic particle i of pro¬ 
nominal origin, for which the Padapatha throughout wrongly reads im, 
does not occur at all in the tenth Mandala, and the particle im, which 
s only less archaic than i, occurs in it only about half a dozen times. 10 

339 




THE VEDIC AGE 

forms like dakshi, adukshat, etc., 21 which are the results of the action 
a pre-Vedic phonetic law,** only one, namely dudukshan, occurs in the 
tenth Mandala. It is unnecessary to dilate any further on the language 
of the Rigveda. 

2. LITERATURE 

The Rigvedic literature is not less colourful. The earliest attempt to 
classify Vedic hymns systematically according to contents is to be found 
in Yaska’s Nirukta (VII. 1-2). Stating first that the stanzas are either 
indirectly addressed (paroksha), directly addressed (pratyaksha), or are 
self-invocations (adhyatmikt), Yaska proceeds to specify the characteristic 0 
and cite instances of the various types of hymns. There are, to begii 
with, hymns in pure praise of the deity without any prayer, as, f 
instance, the Indra-hymn I. 32, bearing unmistakable characteristics 
a popular ballad :*3 

1. The heroic deeds of Indra shall I proclaim, the deeds 
that the thunder-wielder performed first. 

He slew the dragon, freed the waters, slit the bowels 
of the hills. 

2. He slew the dragon resting on the hill. 

Tvashta had forged for him the shining thunder, 

Arid the waters springing forth rushed towards the ocean, 
like cows lowing (at the sight of their calves). 

8. Like a broken reed there he lay. 

Over him flowed the waters gladdening hearts; 

Those whom Vritra held beleaguered by his body— 
at their feet now he lay. 

11. As Dasa-wives stayed the waters guarded by the dragon, 
like the cows restrained by the Panis: 
the watery pit which was sealed,—that he opened by 
slaying Vritra, arid released the waters. 

15. Indra is the monarch of all that move and rest, 

the thunder-wielder is monarch of tame and horned animals: 

He indeed is ruler of all the peoples; 

like a felly round the spokes of a wheel he protects all. 

Mantras of the second type, according to Yaska, are those in which 
the poet prays for favours without praising the deity. It is significant \ 
that Yaska cannot cite a single Mantra of this type out of the Rigveda, 
but adds that they are plentiful in the Yajurveda. Oaths and imprecations / 
constitute the third type according to Yaska, and he cites as instance 
Rigveda VII. 104. 15: "May I die to-day if I am a sorcerer or if 1 haw 
'* 340 








LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 

% take a man’s life by sorcery, but may be, too, who falsely calleL 

4 nPa sorcerer, bewail the death of ten grown up sons.” Fourthly, according 
to Yaska’s classification, there are hymns containing objective descriptions 
of particular states, and, significantly enough, he cites as a specimen the 
cosmogonical hymn X. 139: “Then there was neither death nor immor¬ 
tality, etc.” In the fifth category are included by Yaska the Mantras 
expressive of apprehension, such as X. 95. 14: “The benevolent god may 
fly forth to-day and never return.”^ Lastly, according to Yaska, there 
are hymns of which the purpose is to administer censure or praise, and 
as an illustration he cites that unique hymn, namely X. 117: 

1. Hunger was certainly not meant as a means of death by the gods. 

For also him who has eaten his fill, death befalls in various 
forms; 

The wealth of the liberal is never exhausted, 

But the stingy person never finds a friend. 

2. He who though possessing food, to the broken and begging destitute, 

' approaching him, refuses a morsel, 

And hardens Ms heart against him even though he had served him 

before, 

he too, likewise, never finds a friend. 

3. He indeed is a patron who gives to the beggar, 

longing for food, wandering and thin. 

Who then readily responds to his call to arms, 
and also thenceforward becomes his friend. 

4. He is no friend who does not give to the friend 

—to the comrade asking for food; 

Let him turn away from him, with him there is no shelter, 
rather seek shelter with a generous stranger. 

5. Let the wealthier person be generous to the applicant; 

let him take a longer view ; 

For life rolls on like the wheels of a chariot, 

wealth comes now to one, now to other. ' 

6. The food earned by the fool is in vain, 

truly say I that it is death to him; 

He feeds no comrade nor a friend; he eats alone and also 
bears the burden of his sins alone. 

7. Only when ploughing does the plough-share produce food; 

only by walking can a distance be covered; / 

A Brahmana who can speak is preferable to one who cannot, 

A liberal friend should be better than an illiberal one. 


The hymn is packed with noble sentiments, and its every word is 
charged with vigour. Yet it should not be forgotten that the hectoring 

34* 



THE VEDIC AGE 


^eloquence of this energetic priest was probably directed mainly tojhe 
purpose of frightening the wealthy into ceding a part of their wealth to 
the Brahmanas especially, and not to the poor of every class, for o 
genuine sympathy for the poor there is not much in the Kigveda. 

Yaska’s brief and purely formal classification of the contents of the 
Mantra-texts is, however, anything but satisfactory. It is true tha. ie 
main body of the hymns contains praises or prayers or both. But from 
the literary point of view they should best be regarded as lyrical poems 
adapted to the purpose of ritual. Of these the hymns addressed to 
Heaven’s daughter Aurora (Ushas) are perhaps the oldest and certa -iiy 
K^wifnl TViov have something of the lyric beauty and love 



invoked by the Rishis : 


i. Light, us up with happiness, O Ushas, daughter of heaven, 

with great lustre, O radiant one, with wealth, 0 bountiiul goddess. 
5. .Like a fair maiden comes Ushas, gladdening (3.U), 

she comes awakening four-footed beasts, and makes the birds ri 


into the a 


9. O Ushas, shine with shimmering radiance, O daughter of heaven, 

bringing us ample happiness, as you shew your light upon the dan 

sacrmce 

10. The breath and life of the whole world is in you, 

O noble one, as you shine forth; 
as such, 0 resplendent one with towering chariot, 
give ear to our cry, O bestower of various gifts. 

11. 0 Ushas, win then (for us) the prize that is admired among human 

With, that, hasten to the sacrifices of your worshippers, 
the sacrificers who are chanting your praises. 

14, Whoever were the Rishis of old that invoked you 
for protection and support, 0 noble one. 

Yet accept our hymns and bestow on us a gift in token 
of your satisfaction, O Ushas, with brilliant lustre. 




LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 



TCVaruna, however, this sentiment is already in the horizon. The hymn 
to this god by Kurina Gartsamada (II. 28), for example, opens in the 
usual flattering tone: 

X. May this (hymn) addressed to Aditi’s son who is wise and 

self-supreme excel all the existing (hymns) in greatness; 

The god whom it is exceedingly pleasant to worship,— 
of that affluent Vanina do I beg glorious fame. 

But the tone soon changes, and adulation turns into admiration for god- 
created cosmic harmony: 

4. Aditi’s son unleashed them (i.e. the rivers) and 
started them on various paths, 
the rivers course along in obedience to Varuna’s ordinance; 

Never released are they, nor ever tired, 

like birds they swiftly fly in never-ending course 


{lit. round the earth) 


5. Loosen the bond of sin like a girdle, O Vanina; 

We shall fully conform to the rule of equity you have ordained. 

May not the thread snap while I am still weaving my prayer-song, 
may not the measuring-rod break out of season. 

6. Avert terror from me, O Varuna, 

be kind to me, as a righteous ruler. 

Release me from anguish, as a calf from the rope; 
not even for a moment can I live away from you. 

7. Do not strike us, Varuna, with the weapons which, in your search, 

0 Asura, destroy those who commit sin. 

May we not have to bid adieu to light; 

loosen the hold of the envious on us, so that we may live: 

That virtue is its own reward, and, as a spiritual quality, is incommen¬ 
surable in terms of material advantage, does not seem to have been realized 
by the Rigvedic poets. The spirit of the people that peeps through the 
thick veil of ritual pedantry is one of gladness, aspiring ever for more, 
never knowing rest or contentment. Absence of evil is not what they 
pray for most. Their supreme desire is to triumph over poverty and 
resistance. Their chief god is Indra who does not possess a single spiritual 
rait. But their minds are fresh, and, therefore, deeply impressed b5' the 
violence of natural phenomena. Atri's hymn (V. 83) to Parjanya (the 
storm-god) is perhaps the most striking example; 

2. He strikes down the trees, he strikes afso the Rakshasas, 

the whole world is afraid of (Parjanya) carrying mighty arms. 

Even the sinless quake before the bull-like god, 

when Parjanya, thundering, strikes the evil-doers. 


343 




THE VEPIC AGE 



" 3. Like the charioteer lashing forward his horses by the whip 
does he announce the messengers of rain. 

Lion’s roars from a distance are heard, 
when Parjanya renders rainy the sky. 

4. Winds blow fast and lightnings flash, 

plants shoot up and heaven swells; 

Quickening showers fall for all 

when Parjanya gladdens the earth with his seed. 

7. Roar and thunder, sow the seed, 

come flying hither in squelching car; 

Turn downward the skin unbound, 

so that be levelled high lands and low. 

Hymns of this type are unique in world literature, for nowhere else can 
the deification of natural phenomena be so clearly perceived. 

Martial spirit is well reflected in hymn VI. 75, though, evidently, 
it is not a real war-song, but rather a magical incantation supposed to 
secure victory in battle: 

1. Like a thunder-cloud becomes his face 

when the mailed warrior plunges into the thick of battle. 

Be victorious without being injured in body, 

may the strength of the armour protect you. 

2. By the bow we’ll win the cattle, by the bow the battle, 

by the bow shall we win the mighty struggles. 

The bow destroys the enemy, 

by the bow shall we conquer the regions. 

3. As if to whisper the string nears the ear, 

holding in embrace its dear friend (the bow); 

Stretched on the bow it lisps like a girl, 
this string, that helps on to victory. 

The din of battle is always in the background "of the Rigvedic stage, 
but the poets, being for the most part priests, failed to give anything 
like a true picture of it. Yet, sometimes, the priests themselves were 
present on the battle-field. The Bharata-army succeeded in crossing the 
rivers Vipa 4 and Sutudri only when Visvamitra by his eloquence persuaded 
them to lower their level. The colloquy between the priest and the rivers 
(III. 33) is quite interesting. Says Visvamitra: 

3 To the most motherly stream have I come, 

the broad and propitious Vipas have we reached; 

One the other licks like the mother-cow her calf, 
as in the same bed they follow their course. 


344 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


be taken in so easily, the rivers ask suspiciously: 

4. Swollen thus with a flood of milk 

do we flow along the god-created bed; 

Our course, once in flow, can not be stopped : 
with what object does the sage invoke us? 

And Vrivamitra comes pat with his request: 

5. Stop in your, course a moment, O true ones, 

listen to my Soma-sweet speech; 

An ardent prayer to you I address; 

seeking help Kusrka’s son invokes you. 

The rivers at last agree and express their consent with the words: 

10. We shall do as you say, 0 poet, 

since in cart and chariot you have come from afar; 

To you shall I stoop as the mother swelling (with milk to her child), 
like a maid her lover shall I obey you. 

The most famous and interesting of the dialogue-hymns contained in the 
Rigveda is the one (X. 95) in which the mortal Purtiravas tries but fails 
to persuade the nymph UrVasi to continue to live with him. The lure of 
paradise is too much for the fickle female. She leaves her mortal lover, 
and her last words (verse 15) are cruel and cynical, though not unsym¬ 
pathetic : 

Pururavas, do not die, do not perish (?) 

Let not the cruel wolves devour you; 

The friendship of woman is never indeed firm, 
for they are hyenas in heart. 

t These dialogue-hymns may be regarded as dramas in embryo (not 
necessarily for the stage). In most cases they are obscure. But there is 
nothing to justify the theory*?-that the verses,were,once connected by 
rose narratives now lost. The dialogue-hymns, though'-in roost cases 
dearly of secular origin, must have been utilized in some sort of ritual 
drama, for otherwise it is difficult to explain their inclusion in the 
Saihhita. . 

Though Rigvedic poetry is predominantly lyrical, the Samhita contains 
not a single hymn that may be called a love-poem. In the Atharvaveda, 
too, we have only love-charms. This is difficult to explain, specially when 
so many different types of hymns of non-religious origin are included in 
the Rigveda. One of them is the well-known and oft-quoted satirical 
rog-hvr’- (VII. 103): 



345 


THE V E 3D IC AGE 

1. Hibernating throughout the year 
like Brahmins observing a vow, 

Animated by the divine Par j any a 

the frogs are now croaking loudly. 

2. When heavenly showers fall on them, 
lying in a pond like shrivelled skins, 

Like the lowing of cows for their calves, 
sound the voices of frogs in unison. 

3. When showers fall on longing creatures 
and slake their thirst at the start of the rainy season. 

With rapture in the voice, like the son his father, 
they greet each other without cessation. 

» • • . • «* 

5. One repeats the word of another, 

like students echoing the voice of the teacher; 

Together they form a chorus, 

when at rain-fall loudly they croak. 

Another remarkable hymn of non-religious origin is the merry song by 
5 isu Ahgirasa (IX. 112) with the refrain "flow O Soma for India's sake": 

1. Diverse indeed are our aims, 

different are the tasks of men. 

The builder seeks for cracks, leeches for the sick, 
and priests are greedy for sacrifices. 

2. With seasoned timber of ancient trees 

and the feathers of birds, 

The goldsmith seeks those who possess gold, 
ready with his furnaces and precious gems. 

3. A bard I am, my father a leech, 

and my mother is a grinder of com; 

Diverse in means, but all wishing wealth, 
equally we strive for cattle. 

The fourth and concluding verse is coarse in expression, ioreshadowi 
verses of the same brand in the Atharvaveda. This hymn is of particula 
importance also for the light which it throws upon the caste-system in the 
Rigvedic age, for it shows clearly that professions were not yet determined 
by birth. But there was already a fully developed class-system dating 
from the Inclo-Iranian epoch, as is unavoidable in every society that has 
outgrown the savage state; and inevitably the professions in the Rigvedic 
class-system already showed a distinct tendency to become hereditary, 
Dasa princes like Sambara, Dhuni, Chuirmri, Pipru, and Vardan have 
been actually mentioned by the Rigvedic poets, but it is signi f tha 

34 <> 




LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 



S^6plile, Indra himself has been made to combat them on his own 
iitStive and not in course of rendering merely routine assistance to 
Aryan chiefs. 56 For it shows that even in the heyday of Rigvedic culture 
there was no longer a living memory of the first encounters with the 
aboriginal races.u At the time of the Battle of the Ten Kings (ddsarajnd), 
however, which is the central event of the history of the period (ante, 
p. 245) when the Aryan tribes began to feel themselves secure enough 
to indulge in the luxury of fighting each other, Indra is invoked only 
to render aid, but not to lead the onslaught. This significant difference 
in the treatment of previous and contemporary events would seem to 
suggest that the priestly poets of the Rigvedic age were not without a 
semblance of historical sense. 

On the other hand, the hymns, which in the absence of anything better 
are taken to be historical poems, namely the Ddnastutis (psalms in praise 
of munificence), are generally made-to-order pedestrian compositions 
without any historical data of real value. Generally they are sets of three 
to five verses appended to a hymn of the usual type. Only one hymn 
(I. 126) is entirely a Danastuti, and that one is perhaps the worst in the 
Rigveda : 

1. No bad hymns am I offering by exerting my intellect 
In praise of Bhavya ruling on the Indus, 

Who assigned to me a thousand sacrifices, 

The incomparable king desirous of fame. 

2. A hundred gold pieces from the fame-seeking king 
Together with a hundred horses as a present have I received, 

I, Kakshivant, obtained also a hundred cows from my master, 
Who exalted thereby his fame immortal up to heaven. 

3. Dark horses given by Svanaya, and 

Ten chariots carrying slave-girls fell to my share; 

Followed a herd of sixty thousand cows. 

All this as sacrificial fee did Kakshivant receive at the end of the 

session. 

4. Forty ruddy horses of the set of ten chariots 
Are heading the column of a thousand cows; 

Fiery steeds decorated with pearls 

Have the Kakshivants and Pajras received. 

5. After the first gift, I received 

Three chariots and eight cows capable of nourishing even a rich 

patron 

For you, my good relations, who, as clan-fellows, 

Driving in chariots, hankered for fame. 28 

This dismal hymn ends with two more verses notable only for their 

347 




THE VEDIC AGE 

^T^treme obscenity. It is in these Danastutis 
^appears in its worst aspect in the Rigveda. 

Scarcely less debased than the Danastutis are the Apri-hymns, 2 9 manu- 
factured artificially for employment in animal-sacrifice. Every priestly 
family has its own Apri-hymn, and all of them (ten altogether) are con¬ 
structed in the same pattern. Eleven different deities and deity-groups 
in as many different verses have been invoked in each Apri-hymn in the 
same order. Only in regard to the second deity there is evident uncertainty, 
for in four Apri-hymns it is Tanunapat, in four other Nara£amsa, and in 
the first two Apri-hymns we find as second deity 7, both Tanunapat and 
Naraiamsa, each with a verse for himself. Moreover at the end of the 
second Apri-hymn, there is a special verse invoking Indra. Thus the first 
Aprl-hymn consists of twelve, the second of thirteen and each of the rest 
of eleven verses. The Apri-hymns, though of no literary' value, are of 
immense importance for the history of Vedic religion. They prove con¬ 
clusively that also in the oldest period, as at later epochs, ritual had 
never been fully standardized. There is no reason to doubt that these 
hymns were actually used at animal-sacrifices as tradition maintains. 
But there is nothing in the Apri-hymns to suggest that in the Rigvedic 
period the animals sacrificed were regarded as substitutes for the sacrifices 
themselves as was the case in later ritual;*9 a 

The funeral hymns too seem to have been composed specially for ritual 
purposes, but they contain truly noble sentiments. As cremation and 
burial were both in vogue, we have both burial and cremation hymns. 
But the character of the respective hymns leaves scarcely any doubt that 
burial was the earlier custom. It is significant that the deceased, if a 
man, still holds a bow in his hand, which the priest takes away from 
him at the time of burial with the words (X. 18. 9): 

The bow I take from the hand of the deceased 
for our power and glory and strength: 

Even there where you lie may we as good heroes 
repulse all the attacks of the foes. 

The martial spirit of the Vedic Aryans finds truest expression in this 
verse. Even at the moment of death the thought supreme in their rnindf 
is that of war. Twice in the Rigveda man has been called mrityubandhu 
"regarding death as a relation." The Rigvedic Indians were passionately 
fond of life, but they were not afraid of death. A gentler but more 
sophisticated spirit is revealed by the cremation-hymn X. 16: 

I. Do not burn him, Agni, do not scorch him either, 
do not tear asunder his skin or body; 

When you have devoured him, Q Jatavedas, 
then do you send him on to the Fathers. 

348 



<SL 

that Brahinanical greed 






LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE >3 

When you have devoured him, O Jatavedas, 
then do you give him over to the Fathers; 

When he reaches the other world of the dead, 
then may he obey the will of the gods. 

3. Let the eye go to the sun, let the breath go to the wind; 
to heaven or to earth according to their desert; 

Or to waters go, if that is your lot, 

or set you up in the plants with your limbs. 

The last verse is of special interest for various reasons. Pantheism of 
a primitive variety is discernible in. the first line. The second line suggests 
the idea of retribution though as yet far short of the philosophical 
doctrine of Karma. Belief in a life after death is also revealed in this 
verse, but there is no suggestion as yet of belief in hell or rebirth. The 
first occurs only in the Atharvaveda, and the second clearly appears for the 
first time in the Upanishads. 

Quite a number of philosophical hymns are contained in the Rigveda, 

, and they have been often discussed and translated. 3 0 An important point 
to note in this connection is, however, that the terms mdyci and rupa — 
on which hinges the whole of later Vedanta philosophy—have been used 
already in the Rigveda precisely in their Vedanta sense. 3 * “Rupa” in the 
Rigveda never signifies real form, but only the transient and deceptive 
appearance ; and “mayd” in most passages has been used to signify only 
that occult power by means of which the deceptive appearance can be 
assumed or discarded. 3 * If the doctrine of may a and rupa is the essence 
of Vedanta (end of Veda), then it may as well be called Vedadi (beginning 
of Veda). 

Nowhere in ancient literature have the gods been more concretely 
conceived as in the Rigveda, but the same Rigveda also reveals the fact 
that already there were some who would not believe in the existence even 
of Indra, the most concrete of the Vedic pantheon. Quite in the strain of 
“O God, if there be a God,” a poet in the Rigveda makes this astonish¬ 
ing remark (VIII. 100. 3) : 

Chant the hymn, striving for strength, 
unto Indra the truthful, if indeed he exists. 

One says to other, “Indra does not exist, 
who has him seen? whom shall I praise?” 

But in the next verse is heard already the voice of Krishna in the 
Bhagavadgiid. For Indra replies: 

Here am I, look at Me, O singer,' 
all beings I excel in greatness; 

Behests of the cosmic order magnify Me, 

for I rend the worlds when I am bent on rending them. 

349 




wt wi 


THE VEDIC AGE 


The Rigvedic conception of concrete gods will be dealt with more 
in Chapter XVIII. 


(fiT 

: Mly 


3- 


4. 

5 - 

6 

7* 

8 . 

8a 


9 . 

10. 


11. 


12. 

I 3* 

14. 

* 5 - 

16. 

*7- 

18. 

19. 
2.0. 

21. 

22. 
* 3 * 

24. 

* 5 - 


As, for example, the rise of the cerebral series and the levelling of short diph¬ 
thongs. . • t 

Gilbert Murray says of the Iliad : “We often find, too, that descriptive phrases 
are not used so accurately to fit the thing described. They are caught lip ready 
made from a store of such things: perpetual epithets, front halves of lines, back 
halves of lines, whole lines, if need be, and long formulae. The stores of the poets 
were full and brimming. A bard need only put in his hand and choose out a well- 
sounding phrase. Even the similes are ready-made/’ ( The Rise of the Greek Epic , 
second ed., p. 258.) All this may be maintained, mutatis mutandis , also of 
Rigvedic poetry. ' . . n 

In the days of Panini, whom I place in the fifth century b.c., Sanskrit was still 
a living language of some sort. But in the days of the grammarian Patafijali 
it must have become more 01 less like Latin in mediaeval Italy. In any case, 
Sanskrit had ceased to be a living language long before the days of Asoka. 
Cf. Keith, HSL, pp. 8-17. 

See Wackernagel, Altindische Grammatik, I, § 191c. 

I take this to be the meaning of the well-known passage: te’sura helaya helaya 
iti pardbabhuvuh. 

Cf. Wackernagel, op. cit., I, § 192c and § 193 a. 

Ibid., p. xv. See however Macdonell, Vedic Grammar, § 482c. 

CHI, I, p. 77. 

„ Thus in sandhi the final -n has been throughout reduplicated after a short 
vowel when the following word begins with a vowel. But in the older parts the 
reduplication fits in with the metre only in those cases in which the final -n 
had been originally followed by a consonant. (See my Linguistic Introduction to 
Sanskrit , p. 57.) 

See Rikprdtisdkhya, XVII. 39. 

If chhardis is etymologically connected with Engl, shield, as it is supposed to 
be, then of course the r-form must be regarded as original. But this etymology 
is anything but certain. 

It must be clearly understood that the written text, everywhere and in every 
case, truly represents the text as it was when it was finally fixed. It is misleading 
only in the sense that it does not everywhere give the text in its original form. 
See pidenberg, Prolegomena, p. 372, fn. 2. 

For the few instances of non-sandhi between Padanta and Padadi in the 
written text though sandhi was possible, see Rikprdtisdkhya, II. 60 ff. 

See Wackernagel, op. cit., Ill, § 22b. 

The form in which the word has been handed down is ushtrdndm. Non-cerebrali- 
zation of n however shows that in actual pronunciation it was ushtdndm. 

See my Linguistic Introduction to Sanskrit , pp. 131-2. 

See Macdonell, Vedic Grammar , p. 314, fn. 2. 

See Thumb, Handbuch des Sanskrit, § 425 Anm. 

Macdonell, ibid., § 413b. 

On this point see particularly Oldenberg, Prolegomena, pp. 268 - 70. 

See Wackernagel, op. cit.. Ill, p. 214. 

Ibid., p. *>19. 

Collected in Rikprdtisdkhya , IV. 98. These archaic forms, too, have been through¬ 
out misrepresented in the Padapatha. 

See my Linguistic Introduction to Sanskrit , p. 45. 

Without trying to be literal, I have tried in these translations to convey the 
sense of the original as accurately as possible. 

So this much-discussed, but still obscure, verse has been translated by Lakshman 
Sarup, The N;ighantu and The Nirukta, English trans., p, 114. 

Suggested by Oldenberg, ZD MG, XXXIX, pp. 52 if. 


350 




.. imsr# 



28. 

29 . 

29a 


3°- 

3 E * 

32- 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE yj 

one Dasa chief, however, namely Balbutha, had adopted Aryan culture^ 
gM even patronized Brahmana singers (see Rigveda , VIII. 46. 32). 

This is a fresh argument in favour of dating the first Aryan invasion of India 
earlier and not later than the middle of the second millennium b.c. 

The fifth stanza is obscure; only a literal translation has been attempted. 

A brief account of the Apri-hymns has been given by Max Muller, HASL , 
second edition, revised, pp, 463-7. 

. In. later Vedic ritual, the animal sacrificed is throughout regarded as a surrogate 
victim which the initiated person has to immolate in order to obtain release 
•from his vow. 

See Wiuternitz, HJL, I, pp. 97 ft 

It is curious that this fact has not yet been properly emphasized by any modern 
investigator. 

Also in the A vesta the word maya has a similar meaning, but the point 
has yet to be properly investigated. 


35 * 



CHAPTER XVII 

POLITICAL AND LEGAL 
INSTITUTIONS 

I. POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS 

, As a general rule, monarchy was the system of government prevailing in 
this age. The term Raj an, king or chieftain, is of.frequent occurrence in 
the Rigveda. The country which the Vedic Aryans occupied was split up 
into numerous tribal principalities. One passage of the Rigveda (I. 126. 1) 
speaks of a king living on the bank of the Sindhu, and another (VIII. 21. 18) 
refers to a king Chitra and other nobles as residing in the neighbourhood 
of the river Sarasvati. Ten kings are described as having fought in the 
historic battle against Sudas (ante, p. 245). In the Ddnastutis and else- 
1 where, a very large number of raj as are also mentioned. These passages 
I leave no doubt that the form of government was normally monarchical, the 
tribe as a political unit being under a single ruler. This, of course, is to be 
expected from the patriarchal organization of Aryan society and from the 
state of constant warfare with their neighbours (aboriginal and not rarely 
Aryan), which was a normal feature of the life of the Vedic Aryans. 

But in the Rigveda we come across terms which in later times were 
undoubtedly applied to non-monarchical constitutions. Thus we have 
references to the gana with the ganapati or jyeshtha- (elder) at its head. 
The last probably corresponds to the jetthaka of the Pali texts, and it is 
not impossible that there were even in this early period, the germs of the 
republican states of the type we meet with in early Buddhist times 1 
(cf. vol. II, ch. I). 

The passages cited above also show that, generally speaking, the king¬ 
doms were small in extent and were units of a single tribe. Whether the 
confederacy of the Five Tribes who attacked Sudas actually involved a 
system of political organization or some sort of political collaboration 
cannot be definitely determined. But it is not altogether unlikely. One 
passage in Rigveda (VIII. 5- 3 ®) speaks of king Kasu making a gift of ten 
kings to a Rishi (sage) and other passages (II. 41. 5; V. 62. 6) represent 
Mitra and Varuna as occupying a spacious palace with a thousand pillars 
and a thousand gates. Even allowing for poetic exaggeration, the descrip¬ 
tion postulates the existence of a royal palace of imposing proportions, 
and necessarily presupposes a fairly large kingdom that could boast of a 
capital capable of accommodating a palace of such dimensions. We have 

352 









POLITICAL AND LEGAL INSTITUTIONS 

.. Jan to admit: that the size of some kingdoms at least was large enough 
to enable the rulers to command that affluence which is so often described 
in the Danastms. 2 The presents conferred by the kings on their priests 
were gorgeous, ahlgle, and varied. They consisted of cows numbering 
thousands at times, of horses, chariots, blocks of gold, dresses and beauti¬ 
fully attired female slaves. Hence the wealth possessed at least by some 
of these rulers was considerable. 

Further, it is interesting to note that we meet with the expression 
Samrdt, which meant an “emperor” in later days, and also the idea of a 
universal monarch ( viivasya bhuvanasya raja) 3 

' In any case, fhe king occupied a position of high dignity and supremacy 
which was emphasised by a formal consecration and laudatory hymns. 
He wore a gorgeous robe, and his palace, whatever its dimensions, un¬ 
doubtedly surpassed in grandest: the common dwellings of the people. 
On the whole the Rigveda leaves no doubt that the king was no longer 
merely a leader of a primitive tribe, bjt occupied a position of pre¬ 
eminence which was deliberately distinguished in all possible ways from 
the rest of the people. 

' Jhe lines of kingly succession that we can trace in th« RV raise the 
presumption of hereditary kingship , as the norm b] Sv ” V** there is 
clear evidence that when the situation demanded it - (settle¬ 
ments) who constituted the rdshtra (national unit; CQ ’ \ e ct ^worthy 
monarch of their own choice from among the men*- -■ ^ fal f'-v 1 - 
oi of the nobility (the mjanyas). Qeldner 4 holds thaibers o/ ' 
that are generally cited to establish the selection t p as . tt %tor 
rhents merely indicate their formal sanction of -‘i f, ^ 
very fact of this formal sanction pro 
was exercised by the sjiH ; ’ 

. Two a cn 





I 


THE VEDIC AGE 

^ ou P of . the P eo P le for th,: discharge of tribal (i.e. political) business and 
was presided over by the king. The sabha, a more select bc^y was i ess 
popular and political in character than the samiti. Although the’fiinrtimrs 
and powers of sabha and samiti cannot be exactly defined, numerous 
passages referring to them clearly indicate that both these Assemblies 
exercised considerable authority and must have acted as healthy checks 
on the power of the king. Great importance was attached not only to 
concord between the king and the Assembly, but also to a spirit of harmony 
among the members of the Assembly. The last hymi, of the Rv-’veda 
invokes such unity in solemn and beautiful language : 

“Assemble, speak together; let your minds be all. 6 f one accord, 

The place is common, common the assembly, common the mind so 
be their thoughts united. 

One and the same be your resolve, and be your minds of one accord 
“United be the thoughts of all that may happily agree.” 

The r' tka .^ or \ty -was also materially curbed by the power and 

prestige o/ .p^bhU^ who accompanied the king to battle (p. 344) 

and helpy 7 u' r - prayers and spells, and the influence of the priesthood 
' 1,v * r v d ,, Ddnastutis bear indirect testimony. The cases rJ L 
t - which tiviitra are noteworthy in this connection. Special 
. ° -yisva made to the following verses (RV, IV. 50. 7-9).- 

* ’ Sr, \ 

^rs all imposing forces with his valout 
Urahrnana priest) well 
the first 




POLITICAL AND LEGAL INSTITUTION? 

was no attempt at the extermination of the. conquered oes. The process 
of .amalgamation of the invaders with the conquered abrigines took the 
form of intermarriage and the absorption of the h * nt0 ^ ie f° urt “ 
(and Occasionally into the third) varti ‘von.smal ’class*;' / ■‘b translation o 
the word dasa. by "slave” has^ei to the misconception that the conqueret. 
aborigkk, both male and female, "were enslaved.”* Dasa does mean a 
“life-long ^rvant,” but the horrors associated with the term ‘ slavery 
are not to , thought of in this connection. Similarly the so-called female 
sbes k«sks), captured or received as gifts by kings, were life-long servants 
.(signed generally to the harems of kings in later times. 1 here is, however 
no recorded instances in the RV or later literature of the harsh or cruel 
treatment of a dasa or dost, which is generally associated with slavery. 

A he protection of the people was the sacred duty of the king. In return 
ffi expected and received loyai-obedience from his subjects. 1 he word 
halt occurs several times, in the RV in the sense of a tribute or offering 
to a god (I. 70. T v. i. io, etc.). In the sense of a tribute to the king it is 
met with ja the compound bali-hrit, "paying tribute” (VII. 6. 5 ; X.I73-6). 
The, tributes were probably received in kind from the subjects. VV .ietlier 
these were voluntary or involuntary, and thus amounted to a kind o 
indirect taxation, is a debatable point. The truth, seems to be that the 
tribesmen who were led to victory and safety by their ruler voluntarily 
showered presents on their leader; and that these became more or less 
regular and periodical in times of peace and to that extent less voluntary. 
There seems to be little doubt, however, that the hostile tribes defeated 
in battle were forced to pay some kind of bait or tribute to the victor. 
There thus seems to be in existence taxation, both of the voluntary and 
involuntary type, in the days of the Rigveda. If in a simile in RV, I. 65. 4 
the king is described as “devouring the people,” it is not to be understood 
in the sense of "oppression of the people” but rather his living on them. 
The king was not the owner of the land. Even when the Danastutis speak 
of generous gifts by the kings to the priests, they are normally articles of 
personal property rather than land. 

The king was pre-eminently the war-lord and RV gives us some ider ,ol 
the mode of war fare. The king and his nobles (the rajanyac 
fou from chariots, and the common people on foot. 

•• tvpesmay be inferred from the 

7 rlpnn 




THE VEDIC AGE 

mention is max of the use of cavalry in war. As to the actual mode of 
warfare, all we infer from passages like RV, II .12. 8 is that a bo^jj ol 
foot-soldiers notched along with the charioteers, the two .together/con¬ 
stituting the a < 5 ^. Ii"Sayna^Jnterpretation of X. 142. 4 is accepted, 
then besides ordinary wars of defence'’2/1 .cqnquest, raids into neigh¬ 
bouring territory were frequent arid normal for winning booty \yich the 
king shared with the people. Ramparts or forts {pur), which w* d either 
of stone or metal ( dyasi' pur), and sometimes consisted of ar en< %sure 
protected by a palisade consisting only of a hedge of thorn or a row f 
stakes, were used as places of refuge against attack in times of war. The 
method of laying siege in RV days was probably by setting fire to the 
surrounding palisades or walls (VIJ. 5. 3). But mention is also made of 
par ckarishnu [lit. moving fort) which 'pray be a sort of engine for assaulting 
strongholds. Reference has been made above (pp. 344-5) to hymns 
breathing a martial spirit. 


2. ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATION 

r • . 

Ihe “Five Peoples” (pa-kcha fanah) was perhaps a comprehensive term 
■for the Vedic Aryans {ante, p. 247). These five peoples were split up into 
numerous tribes, the tribe being the political unit (as mentioned above). 
Ihe Vts (a term the various senses? of which have puzzled many scholars) 
played a vital part in the political organization. 

In a political sense, the members of a tribal unit were the visah con¬ 
stituting the rashly a (or tribal kingdom). Below the vis came the grama 
or village, which was the basic administrative unit. Reference is also 
sometimes made to jana, another unit whose precise nature is not known. 8 
Ihe administrative organization was essentially rural in conception. The 
grama was practically self- contained, and had for purposes of defence a 
fortified enclosure {pur) on ari eminence. These enclosures, as mentioned 
above, were made of stone (sometimes probably also of iron) and had 
many walls. Towns with wooden walls or palisades and ditches all round 
■’•'known, but played practically ho part iii the .-economic- 
They figured only in the defensive warfare of thy v die 
ecupied (it seems) during emery*'*-' ' 











POLITICAL AND LEGAL INSTITUTIONS 


[larged civil functions in times of peace, ranking higher than the 
gramani. In the description of the Ddsarajna fight (VII. 18. n) Sudas is 
said to have overthrown "the twenty-one tribes (janan) of the kings or 
folk of the two Vaikarnas.’’ It is probable that they were a joint people, 
the Kuru-Krivis. It is doubtful, however, whether this aggregate of 
twenty-one janas represented a political and administrative organization 
higher than a jana. 

Of the various functionaries of the king, the most important appear to 
be the Purohita and the Senanl referred to above. The king probably 
appointed a large number of priests to perform the sacrifices and other 
sacred rites. There are also references to spies (spata) who were apparently 
engaged by him, as in later days, to secure information about the kingdom 
and the people. We also hear of diitas or messengers who were undoubtedly 
the principal means of communication between the different states. The 
king had no doubt other officers, but we have no detailed knowledge of 
them. 


3. LAW AND LEGAL INSTITUTIONS 


The regular word for law or custom in the RV (I. 22. 18; 164. 43, 50; 
ill. 3. 1; 17. 1; 60. 6; V. 26. 6; 63. 7; 72. 2, etc.) is Dharman, but there are 
”ery few data as regards the administration of justice or the code of law 
ed. We can only infer from later practice that the king administered 
’> the assistance of legal advisers including the Purohita.. 
glary, highway robbery, and cheating (chiefly at gambling) 
e crimes recorded, cattle-lifting at night being a very frequent 
e of brother and sister was looked upon as incest. Tying the 
stake was a common form o 'Punishment. The epithet saia- 
, ~ e < the price of whose blood was one, hundred (coins)” shows 
Uya, i.e. "on era of wergeld ( Vairadeya ' or blood-money was probably in 
hat the syst as death was one of the punishments fe, r theft in later times, 
orce. Where > in the Rigvedic age. The aim seems rather to have been the 
.t was not st f the person wronged. 

igges's that a heated paraiu (axe) i-'sed as an ordeal is 
*y. III. 53 - 22, and J.udwig*° thinks that RV, I. 158. 4 ft, 
mas having been subjected to the fir e and water or( j ea ls! 
(ausible suggestions, though no defi n jte conclusions are 


/itn 
, bur 
,.ong th 
one. Marriag 
criminal to a 


satisfaction 
Geldne 
•ufer^- 


quently mentioned in the RV though in a metaphorical 
ty of passages where it occifrs. In t . ebtedness seems to 
.own com aon. Ihere was a sped Prm rinam s ^. w - 
debt. The loan (nna) thus was the , contract known 
defly, at gambling. A debtor was puni.^p, with a period of 

357 

v v 


uwtSTfy 



THE VEDIC AGE 


<a L 

~paaa) 


itude to the creditor and was bound by the creditor to a post (dru-paa 
to bring pressure on him for payment. Some kind of reference to a rate : 
of interest or instalment of principal may be traced in one passage, but 
this is not certain. The interest was presumably paid in kind. The right 
of a father to adopt is clearly recognized, though a Vasishtha hymn dis¬ 
approves of the practice, 

The land was probably owned by individuals and families, and the 
proprietorship was vested in the father, as head of the family. It is not 
certain whether the sons had any share in the land of the family during 
their father’s lifetime. If there were several sons, they could easily secure 
new allotments, if necessary, because as fresh land could be easily obtained, 
the problem was not, in any sense, an acute one. 

The individual ownership of land is, however, .a debatable point. The 
RV supplies the following data. A piece of ploughland is indicated in the 
by the words urvard and kshetra (I. 127. 6; IV. 41. 6; V. 33. 4; 
VI. 25. 4; X. 30. 3; 142. 3, etc.). A passage (I. no. 5) shows that fields 
were carefully measured from which it follows that individual ownership 
in land for cultivation was recognized, The same conclusion follows from 
VIII. 91. 3 in which Apala refers to her father's field urvard as a personal 
possession. This conclusion agrees well with the use of epithets like 
urvard-sd, urvard-jit, kshelrd-scl “winning fields,” and the mention of 
fields in the same context as children (IV. 41, 6). 

Nothing definite can be averted as to whether a grown-up son continued 
to stay with his father, his wife becoming a member of the father's 1 
hold, or whether he established a house of his own. Variatir 
custom probably explain discrepant statements in this jns 
Similarly, we do not know whether the son was granted a sj con 
land after marriage, or whether he acquired it only after pecial 
death. But we must not f° rm an exaggerated estimate of t father 

the father over a son, r;° longer a minor, because RV. I. 7c: fi e control of 
that the sons might divide then father's property in his I0 suggest* 
X. 85. 46 gives a hint that the age<j father-in-law passed undo, old a g e , am 
of his son's wife, '^he suggestion that separate holcliBg%^ r the contro 
early as the Rigvedic da Y s is confirmed by the name of the de; existed a. 
pati (Lord of the Fi.^ Id ) to be underwood as the god presif y kshetrasya 
field. over each 

1. This view has bee 11 put forward by Dr. C. Raychaudhv 
of India (Macmilla 1 *^ Co.), P- 2 3 9 « 

2. For D&nastutis, cl■77* A 

3. Advanced History H P* 2 9 - 

Ved. Stud., II, 30 . , TTT 

Translation of th 'gveda, III, pp. 

CHI, I, p. 85. - ' „ , 

(j) a geographic O'pnse, the term means settlement oi c 
group of these settlle gf? or colonies probably made up i) Cl 

'm s> ' 358 

hor' 





POLITICAL AND LEGAL INSTITUTIONS 


9 ' 

10, 


next footnote). (2) Politically the visah were the subjects who consti- 
the rashtra and who, foregathering in a formal assembly, could in an 
emergency unseat an incapable ruler or set the seal of approval on the corona¬ 
tion of a worthy one. (3) In a socio-religious sense, the vUalr represented the 
third class of Aryan society engaged in agriculture and commerce. (4) No 
wonder that in some passages, it should have the fourth or general sense of 
"people/ 1 

Sometimes Vis, jana and even grama are used almost synonymously. But 
grama was normally a smaller unit than the vti or jana. The relation between 
these two is not quite clear. Dr. H. C. Raychaudhuri observes as follows: "In 
some Vedic passages there is a clear contrast between the two, and Iranian 
analogies seem to suggest that the Vii is a sub-division of a jana, if the latter 
may be taken as a parallel to the Iranian Zantu. It is also to be noted that the 
Bharatas are referred to as a single jana, but when the word VU is used in 
reference to them, we have the plural Visah possibly pointing to the existence 
of a plurality of such units” ( Advanced History , p. 29). 

Ved . Stud., II, 159. 

Translation of the Rigveda, IV, 44. 


<SL 


359 


CHAPTER XVIII 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


As has already been indicated above (Ch. XII), the different part;.' 
of the Rigveda-Samhitd were composed at different times, and it should 
be regarded, not as a single text by one author, but rather as a whole 
literature accumulating for centuries, a library, as it were, in the making 
for years. Nay, although the hymns of the Rigvedu represent, in the main, 
the product of that period of intellectual activity when the Aryans found 
their way into India from their original home, it is not beyond the realm 
of probability that some of them were composed, or at least existed m 
the minds of the Aryan poets, even before they entered India. It is thus 
possible that a few stanzas or even hymns are reminiscent of the 
meteorological and astronomical conditions that obtained thousands of 
vears ago, somewhere outside India. No wonder then, that we shou d 
find in the Rigveda thoughts, beliefs, and pract that one would associate 
with the most primitive grades of society a nth. an unsophisticated 
age side by side with an elaborate sacrifici! achnique and advanced 
metaphysical speculation indicating the de ; est apprehension of the. 
godhead and its relation to man. The view, therefore, that the state of 
religious belief in the RV is a product of priestly effort and amounts to 
wholesale syncretism is as wrong as the one that it presents us with 
nothing else but a naive outpouring of the primitive religious conscious¬ 
ness. 

i. MYTHOLOGY 

I. Origin 

Let us therefore draw up a clear picture of the religious conceptions 
and philosophical thoughts revealed in poetic garb in the RV, in the 
order of their evolution, as far as possible, before attempting to label, 
define or classify them. The RV poets were deeply affected by the 
apparently mysterious working of the awe-inspmng forces of nature. 
Their hymns reflect in places that primitive attitude of mind which 
looks upon all nature as a living presence, or an aggregate of animated 
entities The luminaries who follow a fixed course across the s ~y arc u 
devas (lit. , the shining ones) or gods. Naturally the sense of the dependena 
of human welfare on the powers of nature, the unexplained myster_ ^ 
of whose working invests them with* almost a supernatural 01 di .. 
character, finds its expression in various forms of worship. 

At the same time, the attempt of the human mind, more poetic tbs 

a6o 



RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 

lc, to account for the various forces and phenomena of nature 
which man is confronted, leads to the rise of myths. When the 
imagination interprets a natural event as the action of a personified 
being resembling a human agent, a myth is born. The creative fancy 
of the Rigvedic poets goes on adding new touches to the picture, so that 
a natural phenomenon ultimately appears as a drama of human passions 
and not as an unintelligible and chaotic happening. The stage of 
anthropomorphism is thus reached. Although Rigvedic mythology is not 
as primitive as some scholars once believed it to be, in no other literary 
monument of the world do we come across this primitive phase of (he 
evolution of religious beliefs which reveals to us the very process of 
personification by which natural phenomena developed into gods. The 
myths that have grown up around a deity are in many cases transparent 
enough to keep the physical basis almost in full view all the time. The 
name of the god often hides but little. Nevertheless, in cases where such 
a clear view of the original nature of a god is not possible, the etymological 
equations of comparative mythology have not proved to be the reliable 
guides that they were once supposed to be. 

The closely allied mythology' of the Iranians is illuminating at times, 
but mythological affinities are not as numerous as one would, be led to 
expect from the striking linguistic affinity of the oldest form of the 
Avesta. with the Rigvedic dialect ih vocabulary, metre, syntax, diction, 
and general poetic spirit, the reason being the considerable overhauling 
of mythological conceptions in Iran by the religious reform of Zara- 
thustra (ante, p. 221). The Rigyeda is a monument of Indo-European 
mythology and, in this respect; is equalled in importance only by Greek 
mythology. The Rigvedic mythology thus forms a connecting link between 
the later Indian phase of religious beliefs and the Indo-Iranian as well 
as the earliest Indo-European phase. 

We now turn to the lines of mythological evolution within the Rigveda, 
In the hymns to the Dawn, the Sun and the Fire, among others, we are 
face to face with the corresponding physical phenomena exercising 
directly their beneficent powers. The process of personification next 
makes gradual progress, and the personified phenomenon is deified, and 
thus emerge the concrete figures of Ushas, Surya, and Agni with whom 
the poet holds, as it were, direct communion. We are not so fortunate 
in the case of the greatest figures of the Rigvedic pantheon, namely 
Varuna and Indra, regarding whose physical basis no certain conclusions 
have yet been arrived at. But in the case of a large number of Rigvedic 
gods, we .re able to trace the original forces or events in Nature. Where 
the p mification does not dominate the conception, the name of the 

defi- Identical with that of the natural phenomenon, as in the case 

and Siiry'a. Where the names differ, the personification has 
advanced to the stage of anthropomorphism and apotheosis. 

361 




THE VEDIC AGE 


<SL 


lie number of gods is now on the increase, the increase being due either 
to some striking attribute abstracted from the concrete personality of 
a deity and founding the conception of a new deity which develops 
independently, as in the case of Savitri, or to an abstraction (like 
Visvakarman) taking up a concrete form later through association with 
some cosmic function or natural power. 


2. 'I he Nature and. Classification of Gods 

Although the divine rank thus got swollen, there is no fixed order of 
seniority among the gods, as in a pantheon, in the strict sense of the 
term. Far too many functions, powers, and offices arc held in common 
by two or more deities. There is a sort of communism or democracy 
among them, though it is not thorough-going or consistent.,' and for ^ 
this “the belief in individual gods alternately regarded as the highest” '' 
(i.e. Henotheism or Kathenotheism as Max Miiller has named it) 
responsible, lhe particular deity that the poet happens to be invoking 
monopolizes, for the time being, all the attributes. The god is addressed 
for the moment as if he were the greatest and even the only god. Almost 
in the same breath, however, (in the very next stanza or hymn) this 
mighty god is described as dependent on others. 

In fact, the joint exercise of various powers, functions, and notable 
deeds by two or more or all the gods is almost a favourite theme in the 
Rigveda hymnology. In a thoroughly impartial spirit, the mutual co¬ 
operation, interdependence, and subordination of the various deities in 
pairs or larger groups is often described. There is hardly a god in the 
Rigveda so insignificant as not to receive homage from others not 
excluding the highest. “Henotheism,” in the strict sense of the term, 
is not to be thought of because the divine host of the Rigveda is not a 
pantheon (technically speaking) with an acknowledged overlord. Various 
explanations have been offered to account for this apparently inconsistent 
evaluation of divine ranks and dignities in the Rigveda. It has been urged, 
for example, that the inconsistency may be due to the partiality of a 
particular Rishi or Vedic Sakha to a particular god. (But the force of this 
argument is considerably weakened by the large number of Rigvedic 
repetitions and (on the whole) their even distribution throughout the 
text. As Bloomfield observes, "no theory as to the character and origin 
of the Rigveda can pass by these facts. They mark the entire mantra - 
literature as in a sense epigonal and they forbid pungent theories about 
profound differences between the family books, their authors, and their 
geographical provenance.” 1 

It has also been contended, as MacdonelI‘ a points out, tha.' 
frequent hymns addressed to the VUvedevas or All-gods, all t! 
even the lesser ones, are praised in succession, and that as the g 
of the Vedic hymns was composed for the ritual of the Som 

362 


n the 
.ivt+ies, 



RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


which included the worship of almost the entire pantheon, the technical 
priest could not but know the exact relative position of each god in 
that ritual.” This explanation rests on the unwarranted assumption 
that the ritualists of a later age, when sacrificial technique was enormously 
developed, had to, and could, preserve very scrupulously the mythological 
values of Rigvedic poetry. 

Another approach to the problem of introducing order and system 
into this apparent chaos has been through classification, iheie is, first 
of all, the traditional classification hinted at in RV, I. 139- 11 an( f followed 
by Yaska, giving us a triple divisions of the Vedic gods corresponding 
to the three orders, namely, terrestrial {prithivisthdna), aerial or inter¬ 
mediate (antarikshasthana or madhyamasthana ) and celestial ( dyusthdna ). 
PrithivI, Agni, Soma, Brihaspati, and the rivers belong to the lust order, 
Indra, Aparh-napat, Rudra, Vayu-Vata, Parjanya, Apali, and Matarisvan 
to the second; and Dyaus, Varuna, Mitra, Surya, Savitti, Pushan, 
Vishnu, the Adityas, Ushas, and the Asvins to the third. I his classif ication 
is founded on the natural basis which the deities represent, and is thus 
the most practical and least open to objection (comparatively speaking). 
RV, X. 158. 1, which invokes Surya, Vata, and Agni for protection from 
heaven, air, and earth respectively, is apparently the lead followed by 
the predecessors of Yaska whose views are quoted in the Nirukta, and 
who hold that there are only three representative deities, Surya in heaven, 
Vayu or India in air and Agni on earth, each of these having various 
appellations according to differences of function. 

The division is overlapping and not very clear-cut, as Tvashtri and 
PrithivI are assigned to all the three spheres, Agni and Ushas to the 
terrestrial as well as the aerial spheres, and Varuna, Yarna and Savitri 
to the aerial as well as the celestial ones. Another and a less satisfactory 
division is the historical one, into Indo-European, Indo-Iranian, and 
Indian deities, based on the age of the mythological creation. But the 
data as regards the dates and periods of many gods is insufficient and 
the available accounts of Germanic, Slavonic, and Celtic mythologies 
are defective. A division into prehistoric, transparent, translucent, 
opaque, and abstract or symbolic gods, based on the stages of personifica¬ 
tion which the deities represent, introduces the subjective element, owing 
to want of finality regarding etymologies and interpretations, - and 
involves difficulties as regards clear lines of demarcation. A classification 
according to relative greatness may derive support from RV, I. 27. 13. 
But the difficulties of determining relative greatness arc almost insuper¬ 
able (VIII. 30. 1 contradicting I. 27. 13) and only a few tentative con¬ 
clusions are possible. For example, Indra, the'mighty warrior, and 
Varuna, the supreme moral ruler, stand out pre-eminent above the rest. 
Agni and Soma-—the two ritual deities—should come next, but Indra, 
Agni, and Soma are the three most popular deities judging by the 

363 


THE VEDIC AGE 



frequency of the hymns addressed to them. The statistical stariaa 
provided by the number of hymns dedicated to the gods and the frequency 
of the mention of their names is also not a sure guide. 

Before we sum up the general features of Rigvedic religion, we shall 
pass under review the class-characteristics of the gbds of the Rigvedic 
pantheon, and the individual characteristics of the more important 
among them. The gods are usually stated to be thirty-three in number, 
divided into three groups corresponding to the three divisions of the 
Universe as mentioned above. The gods are described as born, though 
not all simultaneously, and yet they are immortal. This immortality is 
either taken for granted or is a gift from Agni and Savitri, or is the result 
of the drinking of the Soma. In appearance they are human, the parts 
of their bodies (such as their arms or tongue) being identified poetically 
with the phenomena of nature, such as rays or flames. They travel 
through the air in cars drawn generally by steeds and occasionally by 
other animals. The food of men, such as milk, grain, and flesh, becomes 
the food of the gods when offered in the sacrifice, and is partaken of by 
them either on the grass kept ready for their reception at. the place of 
the sacrifice or in the heaven where the god of fire carries it to them. 
The exhilarating juice of the Soma plant constituted the favourite 
drink of the gods. On the whole, the gods are benevolent, the only one 
with malevolent traits being Rudra. Splendour, strength, knowledge, 
possession, and truth are their common attributes. As a matter of fact, 
they have so few individual or distinctive traits, that a riddle hymn 
like VIII. 29 is possible, wherein each stanza describes a deity by its 
characteristic marks, leaving its name to be guessed. The identification 
of one deity with another and the invocation of deities in twos, threes, 
or even in whole groups has helped to add to this vagueness of outline. 
The gods subdue the forces of evil and regulate the order of nature, 
which they themselves follow and enforce on mortals. They reward the 
righteous and punish the sinful. 

3. The Celestial Gods 

We now turn to the individual deities and give a brief survey of their 
noteworthy characteristics in the order of the spheres to which they 
belong. The oldest among the gods of heaven, going back to the Indo- 
European period, and identical with the Greek Zeus, is Dyaus, a 
personification of the sky, a personification which, however, clid not 
advance beyond the idea of paternity. He is called a ruddy bull 
bellowing downwards, a poetic description, probably, of the colour of 
lightning, the fertilizing power of rain and the thunder of heaven. 
The image of the beautiful star-studded sky of the night is obviously 
called up when Dyaus is once compared with a black steed bedecked 
-;i h pearls. Dyaus is generally paired with Prithivi, the earth, in the 

3<M 


GION AND PHILOSOPHY 
, the Universal Parents, who 

The comparatively small number of hymns addressed to Vanina 
hardly does justice to his importance in the R V. The personification has 
so far advanced that his physical basis remains obscure. It has been sugr 
gested that the word varuna-s is probably the same as the Greek word 
Our anas (sky) though phonetic difficulties make the identification un¬ 
certain. Varuna is the upholder of the physical and moral order symbolized 
in rita with which he is more intimately connected than any other god. 
The Varuna hymns which are predominantly ethical and devout in 
* tone give us the most exalted poetry in the Rigveda. 1 He is a king and 
a universal monarch having a golden abode in heaven which is lofty 
and firm, and has a thousand columns and doors. He wears glistening 
garments. He has spies whom none can deceive. He is predominantly 
called the Asura, who rules by means of his mdyd which means “occult 
power” (applicable in a good sense to gods, and in a bad sense to demons). 
By this power he sends forth dawns and makes the sun (who is also 
described as his eye) traverse the sky. He supports heaven, earth, and 
'r. He, with Mitra, is most frequently invoked as a bestower of rain. He 
igulates the seasons'. Neither god nor mortal may violate his ordinances. 
Varuna’s special connection with the waters is unmistakable. He is 
a regulator of the waters and causes the rivers to flow. If the ocean 
does not overflow, although the rivers constantly pour into it, it is 
due to the mdyd of Varuna. He is above all the dhritavratu, the upholder 
of ordinances such as the fixed paths of the luminaries across the sky. 
He stands out pre-eminently as the moral governor among all the deities. 
The fetters {paias) with which .he binds sinners are characteristic of him 
in this capacity. In every hymn to Varuna, there is a prayer for forgiveness 
of sin. 

There is uncertainty regarding the physical basis of the idea of Varuna. 
The view generally held is that it is the encompassing sky. This original 
conception, it is supposed, goes back at least to the Indo-Iranian period 
since Ahum Mazdah (the wise spirit) of the Avesta agrees with the Asura 
Varuna in character, though not in name. In the opinion of the present 
writer, Varuna in the RV is pre-eminently the All-Pervader, the All- 
Encompasserj the All-Enveloper—an aspect fully agreeing with his name 
vhich appears to be derived from the root vri (“to cover”or “encompass”). 
This All-Encompassing character is in keeping with his lordship over 
he twin spheres of light and darkness, of Night as well as Day, and with 
lis position as supreme ruler ( samraj) of the physical and moral world 
and as the custodian of rita. This rita, which like a wheel circumscribes 
.he universe, regulates it, and keeps it in place, is yiram’s pdsa and 
has for its physical basis the belt of the zodiac from, which no lumh'r 
leva) may deviate and the penalty for transgression whereof is er 

365 


are celebrated ini 


§L 



RE LI 

id Dyavaprithivi 

ins. 




THE VEDIC AGE 


<SL 


ment by the shackles of non-rita or darkness and death, This is one side 
of the All-Encompassing character of Vanina. Another and a more 
important side (unfortunately missed by most scholars) is Vanina's 
overlordship of the Waters (< dpah) which are far more intimately con¬ 
nected with him in the Rigveda than is generally supposed. The researches 
of Warren 3 and of Tilak4 establishing the cosmic character of these Waters 
have not received the attention they deserve. They may be summed 
up as follows: 

(i) The Waters are both terrestrial and celestial. The attributes of 
the latter in the Rigveda cannot all be satisfactorily accounted for on 
the hypothesis that they are rain-waters. (2) The release of the Waters 
and the breaking forth of the dawn or the emergence of light are described 
as simultaneous events (I. 164. 51). (3) In fact.,, the movement of the 
Waters and the spreading forth of the rays of light originate from the 
same source and follow the same path (of rita) simultaneously. (4) These 
Waters are described as moved upwards by Inclra when set free for 
movement, simultaneously with the luminaries, after the killing of 
Vritra (II. 15. 6; I. 80. 5; I. 32. 12, etc.). Their downward moveme* 
is, of course, described, as in VIII. 69. 11 where the seven rivers are sa 
to flow into the jaws of Vanina as into a surging abyss or ocean. (5 
The Universe is said to have consisted of nothing but undifferentiatec 
Waters in the beginning (X. 82. 6; 129. 3). These Waters are coeval with 
the universe (X. 30. 10).,. (6) The cosmic circulation of the celestial waters 
and the simultaneity of the free flow of the Waters and the rising of the 
Dawn are stated unambiguously in the A vesta (Vendidad XXL 4- 5; 
Yasht VI. 2, 3; etc.). (7) This theory of the cosmic circulation of the 
Waters is not peculiar only to Indo-Iranian mythology, but is found in 
Greek and Egyptian mythologies also. In other words, the celestial waters 
or watery vapours which pervaded the regions above, below, and around 
the earth were supposed by the Rigvedic poets to be the stuff out of which 
the universe was created,') and were, like the ether of modern scientists, 
the medium of the transmission of the light of the luminaries. 

A completely satisfactory explanation of the Rigvedic account of 
Varuna as the All-Pervader follows from his rulership of these Cosmic 
Waters. If Varuna in later mythology sank to the position of an Indiax 
Neptune, it was among other causes also due to the original sense o 
the Afiah (Waters) as “Cosmic Waters” in the Rigveda being lost sight of 

Mitra is so closely associated with Varuna, that only one hymn (III. 59 
is addressed to him alone separately and his individual character canno 
be definitely established. His distinctly peculiar epithet is Ydlayaj-jana 
the “bestLrrer* ofNthe people,” because lie marshals people into activitj 
he great Aditya. Mithra is a sun-god, the guardian of faithfulness. 

'u Avesta, and Rigvedic evidence points to Mitra as a solar deity 

366 


MINIS 



RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


inspect of a benevolent power of nature as suggested by the name 
tra which originally meant “an ally.” 

Surya is the most concrete of the Solar deities, the name (which 
designates the orb of the Sun as well as the god) showing that his character 
as a luminary was always present to the mind of the poets. As the all- 
seeing god, he is often called the eye of Mitra, Varuna, Agni, and other 
gods. I he dawns produce Stirya and he is said to be the son of the goddess 
Aditi and of Dyaus. He is a ruddy bird or eagle that flies through space. 
He is cognate with the Avestic hvare, “sun,” who has swift horses and 
who is the eye of Ahura Mazda. 

Savitri is pre-eminently a golden deity. His eyes, arms, hands, and 
tongue are golden; so are his car and its pole. He diffuses golden 
splendour. He removes evil dreams and drives away demons and sorcerers. 
In the famous Gayatrl stanza (III. 62. 10), which has remained the sacred 
morning prayer of the Hindus for more than two thousand years, he 
is invoked to confer his splendour on, and stimulate the thoughts of, 
the worshipper. When Savitri is said to shine with the rays of the sun, 
to urge the sun or to announce men as sinless to the sun, he is evidently 
distinguished from Surya, as in RV, VII. 63. But there is a large 
number of passages where it is difficult to distinguish between the two. 
T he poets love to play on the name of the god, derived as it is from sii, 
to stimulate. It is to be noted that he is connected with evening as well 
as with the morning time. 

Ptishan is a god with a very vague personality, the anthropomorphic 
details being very few. He has a beard and braided hair. His chariot is 
drawn by goats and he carries a golden spear, an awl, and a goad. His 
favourite food is Karambha (“gruel”). He is connected with marriage 
in the wedding hymn (X. 85). He acts as the envoy of Stirya with his 
golden aerial ships, and as a charioteer drives downward the golden 
wheel of the sun. He is a guardian of the roads, the deliverer, par excellence, 
fiom danger, and takes care of cattle. Aghrini (“shining”) is an exclusive 
epithet of his. \ ery probably, he was originally a solar deity standing 
for the beneficent power of the sun manifested chiefly in its pastoral 
aspect. 

The only prominent anthropomorphic trait, nay, the main characteristic 
of the nature of Vishnu a minor deity in the RV —is his three steps 
which give him the exclusive epithets uru-gdya (“wide-going”) and 
uru-krama ("wide-stepping”). Two of his steps are visible, but the third 
or highest is invisible, far beyond the flight of birds, and is like an 
eye fixed in heaven, shining brightly down. Since he is described as 
setting in motion, like a revolving wheel, his ninety -steeds (davsl 
with their four names (seasons, an evident alius' 
hundred and sixty days of the solar year), Vi; 

Personification of the activity of the sun, whose 

367 


<SL 


THE VEDIC AGE 


three divisions of the universe, namely, earth, air, and heaven, is referred 
to in his three steps. Indra is the only deity most closely associated 
with him. 

The word aditi is primarily a noun meaning “non-binding,” “bendless¬ 
ness,” from diti “binding,” derived from the root id “to bind.” Hence 
as a goddess, Aditi is naturally invoked to release her worshipper from 
bondage. This original meaning of unpersonified “freedom” seems to 
survive in a few passages of the RV, Now the Adityas are several times 
described as aditeh putrah (“sons of Aditi”), and this expression may have 
meant in the pre-Vedic age simply “sons of freedom'’ (like sahasah putrah 
= “sons of strength”) and probably described a prominent quality of 
Vanina and the other Adityas. Macdonell 6 wonders, “But how are we 
to account for so early a personification of such an abstract idea, and in 
particular for Aditi becoming the mother of the Adityas?” The explana¬ 
tion probably is as follows: Aditi is also unmistakably connected with 
light in the RV. Vanina—the Aditya—is connected prominently and 
almost exclusively with rita; so is Aditi, This rita has for its physical 
basis the belt of the Zodiac (as mentioned above). Now the devas, the 
lights of'heaven, seemed to the ancients to recover their freedom from 
the clutches of darkness and to restart on their bright career from a fixed 
point in the east, lying on the belt of the Zodiac or the Rita. This point in 
all probability was Aditi. No wonder, the luminaries suddenly emerging 
thus into freedom and light (emerging in other words into life itself) from 
this fixed point (Aditi) received the epithet “sons of Aditi.” Diti was 
the exactly opposite point on the path of the Zodiac in the west, where 
the lights went out. It will not be necessary on this theory to suppose? 
that the name of Diti as a goddess was merely an antithesis to that of 
Aditi, formed from the latter to express a positive sense, as sura , “god,” 
was later (by false etymology) evolved from asura “demon.” It is to be 
noted in this connection that none of the wind or storm gods are called 
Adityas. The latter are all gods of light. Six Adityas are enumerated 
once (II. 27. 1), the number being stated as seven and even eight in the 
last books of the RV. Among the Adityas, Varuna, Mitra, and Aryaman 
are Indo-Iranian in origin, while Bhaga, Daksha, and Arh^a seem to be 
deified abstractions. The sun is probably the seventh Aditya, and Mar- 
tanda the eighth, whom Aditi casts off and brings back (X. 72. 8, 9), 
is very likely the setting sun. 

In the case of Ushas, the goddess of Dawn, the personification is slight, 
the poet never losing sight of the beautiful physical phenomena behind 
the deity. Gaily attired like a dancer with a garment of light, she rises 
fh r . « as t and exhibits her graces. She is ever-youthful, being born 

; ough ancient. Her association with the sun is naturally 
' lover, but as she precedes him, she is also said 
! he sister of the night. She is also associated 

368 




RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY V 

s already noted above (p. 342) the Dawn-hymns are among the 
most poetic of the RV, 

From the point of view of the number of hymns addressed to them 
and also otherwise, the twin deities, known as the Alvins, are the most 
important after Itidra, Agni, and Soma. They are matutinal deities, 
their connection with light being well established. Except in two or 
three passages, they are assumed .everywhere as inseparable. Their paths 
are said to be golden. Basra (wondrous) and nasatya are their most peculiar 
and frequent epithets. They are particularly associated with honey 
(madhu), which they desire, drink, carry on their car, and dispense to 
the bees and mortals. They are also fond of Soma. Their golden car, 
fashioned by the Ribhus, is sometimes drawn by one or more buffaloes 
or by a single ess ( rdsabha ). Their sister is probably the Dawn. They are 
associated with Surya who is either the sun conceived as a female or 
the daughter of Surya. They are the two husbands of Surya whom they 
carry in their car. They arc above all succouring divinities, the deliverers 
arid rescuers, par excellence , from distress. They are divine physicians 
with several legends of miraculous cures to their credit. 

Their physical basis has been a puzzle from the days of Yaska till 
to-day. The Alvins probably date from the Indo-European period; 
in character if not in name. Some think that they represent the morning 
twilight—half-light and half-dark. The Alvins, who are sons of Dyaus 
{diva nap at a ■= Lettic dewa deli = Lithuanian dewo sunelei), who ride 
through the sky with their steeds, and have a sister, greatly resemble 
the two Lettic God's sons, who come riding on their steeds to woo the 
daughter of the sun, either for themselves or for the moon, and the Twin 
Horsemen of Greek mythology, the sons of Zeus and the brothers of 
Helen. The name of Surya, suryasya duhild , corresponds to the Lettic 
sautes meita. The succouring activity of the Alvins finds a parallel in 
the feats of the Lettic God's sons as well as in those of the Greek 
Dioskouroi, particularly in their character as rescuers from the ocean, 
delivering the,daughter of the sun or the sun himself. Another plausible 
theory is that which considers the Alvins as the morning and evening 
stars. The astronomical fact that the latter are not two but one is no 
serious objection, as the identity of the two stars was recognized long 
after the physical basis of the Alvins was forgotten. The invariable 
reparation of the two stars, whereas the ASviris appear both together 
hi the morning, is an objection that can be explained, if we remember 
triad the Alvins are spoken of separately in a passage or two, and that 
the Alvins are invoked sometimes in the morning and evening, thmwh 
sunset plays but little part in Vedic worship- Webers opinion* 

Alvins represent the two bright stars Castfdr and Po* x 
twin constellation of the Gemini receives strikij. 
heories of Tilak advanced in his Orion a;dd The A y 

nu. > 

369. 


WtttSffiy 



THE VEDIC AGE 



as Tilak says ,9 the sacrifice or the year once commenced with Actiti 
at the vernal equinox in or near Punarvasu, i.c., in the twin constellation 
of the Gemini, and if we are to assume that there are reminiscences in 
the Rigveda of the year-long day and night of the Arctic regions, then 
the twin Stars, Castor and Pollux, represented by the Asvins, would 
herald the Arctic Dawn appearing after the long Arctic night or at the 
beginning of the year. But as the Arctic theory is far from being accepted 
by scholars, the morning and evening star theory remains the most 
plausible theory advanced so far. 


4. The Atmospheric Gods 

Indra, the favourite national god of the Rigveda, has the largest number 
of hymns, nearly 250, i.e. about one-fourth of the-total number of hymns 
in the RV, addressed to hirq. 9 a He has more myths woven around him 
and a more developed anthropomorphism on the physical side than any 
other god. He isr'not a purely Indian creation and his name is pre-Indian 


(a demon in the A vesta).9 h The cosmic aspect of his nature as the liberator 


of the Waters is older than the martial one, which seems to have developed 
to the detriment of the former aspect. His physical proportions and 
powers are stupendous, almost cosmic. His arms bear the Vajra, his 
exclusive weapon, though he also carries a hook and wields the bow and 
arrow. He is a car-warrior (Ratheshtha), whose golden car is drawn by 
two steeds. He is more addicted to Soma, which stimulates him to battle, 
than any other god, the epithet somapd “Soma-drinker,” being character¬ 
istic of him. His father is Dyaus according to some passages, Tvashtri 
according to others. Agn is his twin brother, most often conjoined with 
him as a dual divinity. The Maruts are his principal and constant allies, 
the epithet mandvant being peculiar to him. The essential myth, forming 
the basis of his nature and repeated frequently and with variations, is 
the Vritra myth. Accompanied by the Maruts and exhilarated by Soma, 
he attacks Vritra, often called the AM (serpent). He smashes Vritra 
who encompasses the Waters, and so deserves the exclusive epithet 
apsu-jit “conquering in the Waters.” In this struggle, which is constantly 
renewed, he also pierces the mountains and releases the pent-up waters, 
like imprisoned cows. The demons, whom Indra throws down, dwell 'j 
on the parvata or giri (mountain or cloud?) and an adri (rock) is said to 
encompass the Waters. The clouds containing the Waters are figured, 
as fortresses [pura) of the aerial demons, described either as autumnal 
or as made of iron or stone, and as 90, 99 or 100 in number. He is, there¬ 
fore. characteristically called the fort-destroyer ( purbhid ) but his exclusive 
( epithet is “ Vpitrai-slayer” (Vritra-han). 

of ’’u Waters is simultaneous with the winning of light, 
oendently of the Vritra fight also, he is said to have 
wn or the sun, and made a path for the latter. Th 


37 o 


*dep 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 




mentioned with the sun and dawn must be understood to be _ 

~ iteming beams. The gaining of Soma is also associated with the winning 
of the cows and the sun and with the Vritra fight. His connection with 
the thunderstorm is indicated when he is said to have created the 
lightnings of heaven and directed the flow of the Waters downwards. 

The cosmic actions usually attributed to all the gods are attributed 
to him also. His particular achievement is that he settled the quaking 
mountains and plains.' 

As the destroyer of demons he is naturally the favourite god of battle 
invoked more often than any other god by warriors. He protects the 
"Aryan Colour” and subjects the blackskins—the Dasyus. He is so 
generous to his worshippers that maghavan "bountiful” is almost an 
exclusive epithet of his. 

Besides the Vritra-myth, other minor stories are also related of him, 
such as "shattering the car of Ushas and stopping the steeds of the 
sun”. Some of the stories have an historical element also, as when he is 
said to have aided Spdas. 

Indra, with his physical superiority, his excesses in eating and drinking 
and his cruelty in killing his own father Tvashtri, forms a marked contrast 
to Varuna, the upholder of moral order. 

The true character of Indra can be understood by ascertaining that 
of Vritra, his opponent. The indigenous commentators and a number of 
scholars look upon Vritra as the demon of drought, confining the waters 
within the clouds. A more reasonable view is that 1 a he was originally 
a frost and winter demon from whose grasp the waters have to be 
wrenched free every year, that thunderstorm and rain are not the only 
natural basis of the Vritra myth, and that the geographical and climatic 
environments in the later home of the Vedic Indians only helped so to 
revise the original myth as to render very plausible the interpretation 
of the mythological figure of Indra as the god of the thunderstorm. 
In support of this view may be stated the following facts: 

(i) Thunderstorms or rains are hardly mentioned in the Indra-Vritra 
myth and the clouds play quite a minor part in it. (2) As the waters 
released by Indra are described as running like horses in a race, rain¬ 
water could not be meant, as it does not flow horizontally nor could 
races be imagined as run vertically. (3) As the Vajra is described as 
made of ore, it is not certain that it means a thunderbolt. (4) If Indra 
is the god of the thunderstorm, then the god Parjanya will be a super¬ 
fluous figure. (5) The parallels in Indo-European mythologies suggest 
that the description of the Vritra fight originated not in India but in 
a country w'here the hideous winter lies on land and water, and that 
the Vritra myth came with the Aryans from Kashmir or the north- 
vestern countries into the Punjab. (6) As the midday libation is specially 
•..served feu India and the l\faruts, Indra very probably represents 

37i 


t m 


THE VEPIC AGE 


mythologically the sun at the zenith. In all probability, therefore, Indra 
was originally a god of light. 

We pass over the minor atmospheric gods like Trita Aptya, Aparh 
Napat, MatarLvan, Ahi Budhnj^a, and Aja Ekapad, and turn to Rudra 
who, though a subordinate deity in the R V, is interesting from the 
point of view of later mythology. He has braided hair and a brown 
complexion. He wears golden ornaments and a glorious necklace 
(nishka). He is the father of the Maruts whom he brought forth from, 
the shining udder of Prihii. He is fierce like a terrible beast and is called 
a bull as well as the ruddy boar of heaven. He is exalted and mightiest 
of the mighty. He is the lord [hand) and father of the world. He is easily 
invoked and auspicious ( siva ), but in many passages is looked upon as 
malevolent. He is implored to save his worshippers from his bolt which 
destroys cows and men. Dread of his wrath and shafts is frequently 
expressed. The beneficent side of his character, however, comes out in 
other passages. His two exclusive epithets jaldsha (cooling) and jalcisha- 
bheshaja (possessing cooling remedies) suggest his healing powers. He is 
the great physician. The physical basis is not certain. It. is suggested 
that the storm in its destructive aspect may explain the malevolent 
side of his nature, while the fertilizing and purifying function of the 
thunderstorm may well be the basis of his healing and beneficent, powers 
(see also pp. 162, 203). 

The Maruts—the storm-gods—form an important, group of deities 
(gana, sard has), numbering thrice sixty or thrice seven. They are the 
sons of Rudra and Prisni, the cow (representing the mottled storm cloud?), 
also of Vayu, and are sometimes described as self-born. They are all 
brothers of equal age, having the same birthplace and abode. They are 
golden, ruddy, and self-luminous and are associated with vidyut, 
particularly having the epithet lightning-speared ( rishti-vidyut ); the 
cars on which they ride gleam with lightning. Among their personal 
decorations, such as helmets, mantles, garlands etc., armlets and anklets 
are peculiar. They make a loud noise, represented by thunder and 
the roaring of the winds, and as such are pre-eminently the singers 
of heaven, their songs inspiring Indra. Their chief function is to ■shed 
rain which is figuratively called either milk, honey, or ghi, and which is 
connected with the thunderstorm. At the same time they produce light 
and make a path for the sun. They are the constant allies of Indra, in 
whose company they are addressed as “priests,” their songs representing 
hymns of praise. Indra achieves all his exploits in their company. Like 
Rudra, they are invoked to avert lightning, the arrow and the bolt 
from the worshippers, and also to bring healing remedies. 

Vayu and Vata (wind) are almost interchangeable terms; when 
distinguished, the former is chiefly the god, the latter the element. Ti 
name “Parjanya” means literally “rain-cloud” which, when personifie 

37 2 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 

a water-skin or a pail. Parjanya is also described 
a bull that quickens the plants and the earth. 11 

As regards Apah (the waters), the personification is only incipient. 
They are mothers, wives, and goddesses who bestow boons. They are 
celestial as well as terrestrial, and the view has been mentioned above 
(in connection with Varuna) that the celestial waters were probably 
looked upon as an ether-like medium on which the luminaries made their 
fixed journeys along the Zodiac {vita), and that the blocking of them by 
Vritra was supposed to prevent the rise and movements of these lumin¬ 
aries, thus causing long darkness. As the waters are invoked as apo in 
the Avesta, their deification is pre-Vedic. 

5. The Terrestrial Gods 

Agni, a personification of the sacrificial, fire, presents in its conception 
the household life of the Veclic Aryans, and is second in importance 
only to lndra whose conception presents their external life of struggle 
and conquest. The anthropomorphism of the physical appearance of 
Agni is naturally very slight. He is butter-backed, and flame-haired, 
and eats the oblations with his tongue. Wood or ghi is his food, and 
melted butter his beverage, though he is invited also to drink, the Soma 
with other gods. He is nourished three times a day. Although he is invoked 
to partake of the sacrificial offerings himself, he is more prominently 
the mouth by which the gods eat the sacrifice. His splendour is naturally 
his most prominent quality. He shines by day and night, He is called 
“smoke-bannered' 7 (« dhuma-ketu ) and is said to be supporting the sky 
with his smoke as with a post. He is a charioteer of the sacrifice and 
brings the gods in his golden lightning car. He is said to be the son of 
heaven (Dyaus) and also of heaven and earth. Indra, with whom he is 
more closely associated than with any other god, is called his twin brother. 

There are various myths about his births, forms, and abodes. He is 
daily produced from the two kindling-sticks (arants), which are called 
his parents or mothers, and therefore he is ever young, though ancient. 
He is called the “son of strength," probably because of the strength 
required to kindle the fire, the ten fingers (called maidens) being.exercised 
in the process, Agni's origin in the aerial waters is often referred to. As 
the Son of Waters (Apdm napdt) he has become a separate deity. He 
is also said to be born in the highest heaven and was brought down from 
heaven by Matari&van (the Indian Projyietheus). This is his third origin— 
the celestial one. The three-fold nature of Agni is a favourite topic with 
RV poets; his heads, bodies, stations, splendours and births are each 
threefold. He is the earliest representative of the famous Indian trinity, 
and yet sometimes he is called dvi-janman (“having two births") from 
' \e point of view of a two-fold division of the universe into heaven and 

irtb. 




tomes an udder, 


373 


THE VEDIC AGE 



is connection with domestic life is a special feature. He is the only 
grihapati (master of the house), the atithi (“guest”), and a kinsman of 
men. He is the (lute ("messenger”), par excellence, appointed by gods 
and men to be an oblation-bearer. 

As the central figure of the sacrifice, he is called variously ritvij, vipra, 
purohita, adhvaryu and brahman and is thus the divine counterpart of the 
earthly priesthood. He is pre-eminently “omniscient” or “one who knows 
all created beings” ( jatavedas ). The funeral hymn (X. 14) distinguishes 
between the havya-vdhana form of Agni (the conveyor of offerings) and 
the kravyad form of Agni, that burns the dead body on the funeral pyre. 

Even in the Indo-European period, the sacrificial fire was a well- 
known institution, as offering gifts to the gods by casting them into 
fire was customary among the Italians and Greeks. In the Indo-Iranian 
period a vast ritual has already developed around the sacrificial fire 
which is personified and worshipped as a beneficent god. 

Rigvedic mythology is dominated by two all-pervading figures, the 
Sun and the Eire. There are but few deities in the Rigvedic pantheon 
that cannot be explained (though this may not be necessary) as mani¬ 
festations of either the one or the other. Now the sun is regarded as a 
form of Agni (VII. 2. 1) and Agni is said to be born as the rising sun in 
the morning. This ultimate unity underlying the divine diversity may 
provide a solution of many a puzzle in Rigvedic mythology. 

Brihaspati, also called Brahmanaspati (lord of prayer), has but few 
physical features, and these are the usual ones ascribed to all other gods. 
Like Agni, he is both a domestic priest and a brahman priest and the 
generator of all prayers. He is identified with as well as distinguished 
from Agni. Being often invoked with Indra (some of whose epithets like 
maghavan and vajrin he shares), he is drawn into the Indra myth of 
the release of the cows. Thus he has no homogeneous character, combining 
in himself, as he does, martial as well as priestly elements. As the divine 
brahman priest, he seems to have been the prototype of Brahman, the 
chief of the later Hindu triad. On the other hand, as the lord and creator 
of brahman, which played an important part in the later ritual and 
finally became the supreme principle in Vedanta philosophy, the god is 
very interesting from the point of view of the later religious and philosophi¬ 
cal development of India. 

Next in importance to Indra and Agni comes Soma, because the 
Soma sacrifice was the centre of the Rigvedic ritual. As the Sonia plant 
and its juice were ever present before the Rigvedic poets, the anthropo¬ 
morphism is less developed than that of Indra or Varuna. The weapons 
of Soma such as the bow, his car, and his team are described. An entire 
book—the ninth--is devoted to Soma (the deity and the plant) and the 
preparation of the Soma juice. The amsu (shoot or stalk) is pound 1 
between stones called adri. The pressed juice, in the act of passing throu 

374 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 



ter of sheep's wool, is called pavamana (or pundna) '‘flowing clear/’ 
The juice thus purified and as yet unmixed is called iukra or 6 uchi (bright), 
also Buddha (pure). This filtered Soma next flows into jars (kalasa) or 
vats (drona) where it is mixed (technically “cleansed") with water and 
milk to sweeten it. The Soma has three kinds of admixture (a§ir), with 
milk (go), sour milk (dadhi) or barley (yava) . The admixture is poetically 
described as a bright robe. Soma is thus pressed three times a day; the 
morning libation is the first drink of Indra, the midday one belongs 
to him exclusively, while the evening pressing is for the Ribhus. The 
admixture of Soma brings him into a special relation with the Waters, 
who are called his “mothers" or “sisters." Soma is also the lord of streams. 

The exhilarating power of Soma is appreciated. It is a divine drink 
conferring immortality on gods and men. It is called amrita, the “draught 
of immortality." Soma has curative powers also. As a deity, Soma is a 
wise seer, a poet, who stimulates thought and inspires hymns. The fact 
that Soma invigorates Indra in his fight with Vritra is repeated so often 
that Indra’s exploits and cosmic actions come to be attributed to him. 

Like the corresponding Haoma in the Avesta, Soma grows on the moun¬ 
tains, but his true origin is said to be in heaven, from which he was brought 
to earth by an eagle. Soma is a king ; the lord of plants or lord of the wood 
(vanaspati). In a few of the latest hymns of the RV , Soma is mystically 
identified with the moon. 

The preparation and offering of the Soma was a feature of Indo- 
Iranian worship. There are numerous similarities between the Soma and 
the Haoma (Avestan) cults. The belief in an intoxicating beverage of the 
gods, a kind of honey or mead, may probably go back even to the Indo- 
European period. 

Among the remaining terrestrial deities, Prithivi is so closely associated 
with Dyaus, that generally they are celebrated conjointly, Dyaus being 
never lauded alone in any hymn, while Prithivi alone is invoked only 
in one short hymn of three stanzas (V. 84). The personification is so 
slight that the attributes are mainly those of the physical earth. Certain 
rivers are also lauded, the most important among them being the Saras- 
vati in whose case the personification has made greater progress than in 
the case of the other rivers like the Sindhu (Indus) and the sister streams 
of the Punjab, namely Vipai (Beas) and Sutudri (Sutlej), 

The progress of religious thought in the RV is discernible in the transi¬ 
tion from the concrete to the abstract and in the rise of abstrari 
the earlier and the larger class of which originated from epithe" 
to one or more of the older deities, like Tvashtri, P t 
smaller class consists of personifications of abstract r 
'wrath), Sraddha (faith), etc. Goddesses play a very 
lie only notable exception being that of Ushas. 
litra-Vamna and Dyava-prithivi (dual compound' 

. 375 





THE VEDIC AGE 



In the dual) are a special characteristic. Groups of deities, like the Maruts 
(a large group associated with Indra, Agni, ajid Soma), the Adityas 
(a small one, with Varuna as chief), and the Vasus 1 have been already 
mentioned. An all-embracing group is that of the Visvedevas (the All¬ 
gods). A few divinities there are of the tutelary order, like Vastoshpati 
(lord of the dwelling), Kshetrasya-pati (lord of the field), and Sita (the 
furrow). 

Various features of the earth’s surface such as mountains, besides 
rivers and waters and plants, and artificial objects like sacrificial 
implements and weapons are also deified, in addition to the great 
phenomena of nature. 

The Demons, often mentioned, are either the. aerial foes of the gods 
like Dasas or Dasyus (Asuras occur in the later parts of the RV only) 
or constitute a lower class of terrestrial goblins, commonly called 
Rakshasas or a species designated by the term ydtu or Yatudhana. 
Magical practices are dealt with in about a dozen hymns in the tenth 
Mandala which treat of augury or spells against poisonous vermin, 
diseases, a child-killing demon, enemies in general, and rival wives. 
Incantations to preserve life, to bring on sleep, and to procure offspring 
are found in X. 58-60; VII. 55, and X. 183 respectively, while the well- 
known Frog-hymn (VII. 103) (ante, p. 345) is supposed to envisage frogs 
as magical bringers of rain. The first four out of the so-called funeral 
hymns (X. 14-8) (ante, p. 348) are addressed to deities who control life 
after death. ) 

Some of the significant aspects of Rigvedic mythology may now be 
summed up thus: 

(1) The principal phenomena of Nature, conceived as alive and 
represented in anthropomorphic (not rarely in theriomorphic) shape, 
were the objects of worship. (2) The so-called simple primitive side of 
Nature-Worship may be supposed to be reflected in the adoration of 
plants, trees, and mountains. (3) A great god like Indra is sometimes 
conceived as a bull, or the Sun as a horse, but totemism in the sense of 
the actual direct worship of animals, or the belief in an animal ancestor, 
is not to be thought of. Vritra (the drought-demon), tor example, is 
conceived as a snake, but the snake receives no worship. (4) Whether 
fetishism is to be read into a reference to an image of Indra, and whether 
the worship of idols or images of gods was known to the Rigveda, are 
^ which no certain conclusions can be reached. 


2. SACRIFICE 


/onder that the humanized gods of the Rigveda shoul 
veaknesses and be susceptible to flattery and gift 

376 



RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 




leal was certain to win divine favour. Thank-offerings were know: 
fgh the feeling of dependence was there, and though the surrender 
of one’s property and possessions became ultimately the mark of deep 
affection for God, it was the definite hope and expectation of rewards 
that chiefly inspired the offering oi prayers and oblations in the Rigveda. 
But who was to carry the offerings from earth to the gods in heaven? 
Very naturally the fire, with its towering flames and ever-rising smoke, / 
already deified as Agni (as Atar by the Iranians), was thought of as an I 
intermediary and messenger and as a bearer of oblational offerings from/ 
men to gods. The sacrificial fire is, in fact, an Indo-European institution,} 
as the Romans the Greeks, and the Iranians also had the custom of 
offering gifts to the gods in fire. In the Indo-Iranian period already an 
elaborate ritual, in the keeping of the priestly class, is found developed 
around tb«J sacrificial fire. 

In the Rigveda, the sacrifice is yet only a means of influencing the- 
gods in favour of the offerer, and it is doubtful whether in this age the 
conception of gods as subject to control by the worshipper, if he only 
knev the correct means, was developed, and whether the selection of the 
horie as a sacrifice was motivated by the belief that thereby the swift 
steed—the sun—regained strength and favoured the worshipper. As 
regards the more mystic view of the sacrifice as a sacrament, the common 
meal of the priests on the sacrificial victim may only be looked upon as 
a bare hint in that direction, because though the priests believed that 
this meal brought them into a special relationship with the god who by 
sharing it with them acquired in part the same nature as themselves, it 
is doubtful whether they deemed themselves to be consuming the victim. 
It may be noted in this connection that union or companionship with 
the gods (I. 125. 5) or with the sun is vouchsafed to those who give 
liberally or those who are generous with the sacrificial fees. 

If we remember that the Rigveda-Samhitd is composed of earlier and 
later portions, it will be easy to understand how, on the one hand, a 
large number of the hymns arose independently of all sacrificial ritual, 
although many of these were used later on for sacrificial purposes, and 
how, on the other hand, many other hymns were from the first intended 
for nothing but sacrificial songs and litanies. Two varieties- of this 
sacrificial cult are to be noted in the main, as follows: 

(1) Certain hymns and verses of the RV were usedas bene yic^tions 
and prayers at birth, marriage, and other occasionfof &aib / Jif e> a t 
funerals and ancestor-worship, as well as at ceremonie, for en sur j n g f.j ie 
fertility of the cattle and the growth of the'fruits <f the field. These 
ceremonies, called grihya karmdni, were, as a rule, associated with 
sacrifices of the simplest type, viz. burnt offerings (i.e. offerings of milk, 
-rain ,ght, or flesh thrown into the fire). At these, the householder himself 


who was assisted, if necessary, 


by one 
3 77 


single priest, the Brahman) 




THE VEDPC AGE 


Sl 


iated as the sacrificial priest and the single fire of the domestic hee 
served as the altar. These simple sacrifices which every one, rich or 
poor, performed according to fib. means, consisted chiefly of prayers 
(the first stage of the Vedic religion. In addition to these and a few 
incantations in the tenth Mandala which represent popular religion 
consisting of spells to defeat rivals, to prevent and cure diseases and to 
repel noxious animals, we have (2) the grand sacrifices, especially in 
connection with the Soma-cult relating to Indra, which could only be 
undertaken by aristocratic and wealthy men (maghavan), and especially 
by the kings. An extensive sacrificial area with three altars for the three 
sacred fires, and a multitude of priests headed by four chief priests who 
received liberal payment ( dakshind) for the joint performance of numerous 
elaborate and intricate rites and ceremonies on behalf of ifie yajamana 
(sacrificer) who did very little himself, characterized th^se 5 rant a 
sacrifices. The hymns of the R V are much occupied with the Sosna ritual. 
Animal sacrifices are indicated by the apn-suktas, and the horse- 
sacrifice ( asvamedha ) was undoubtedly performed. The Purusha-^fjkta 
does not describe an actual human sacrifice, but merely preserves, in 
all probability, the memory of it, as it was performed in prehistoric 
times, because the Sunahsepa hymns of the Rigveda (I. 24-30 a n d 
IX. 3) are not exactly related to the Sunah£epa legend of the Altar ey a 
Brdhmana which is probably reminiscent of human sacrifice in pre¬ 
historic times. 


3. PHILOSOPHY 

It has been generally held that the Rigvedic religion is essentially 
a polytheistic one, taking on a pantheistic colouring only in a few of 
its latest hymns. Yet a deeply abstract philosophizing crops up un¬ 
expectedly in some hymns as a reminder of the long journey made from 
primitive polytheism to systematic philosophy, through the stages of 
naturalistic polytheism, monotheism, and monism. 

The plurality of gods could not satisfy the intellect of the Rigvedic 
seer’- One god was therefore identified with another, or gods were invoked 
in pairs or conjointly in groups of three or more. Systematization took 
the for, u or e classification of the gods into different categories or of 
the ama ^ a ®aon of them all into one comprehensive group of the 
“All-gods. ” Thi systematization was but a step forward towards the 
more logica J monotheism. There cannot be more than one supreme and 
unlimited Be ing. The appearance of what Max Muller calls henotheism 
is due to this unconscious urge towards monotheism imperfectly moulding 
polytheistic tenancies and thus presenting an inconsistent picture 
When “individual gods are alternately regarded as highest," a larg 

378 



RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


<SL 


er of attributes, personal characteristics, and functions become 
common to all the gods, the merging of all these qualities into one divine 
figure becomes easy, and thus polytheistic anthropomorphism evolves 
into a kind of spiritual monotheism. 

But the Rigveda betrays discontent even with this monotheist ic develop¬ 
ment and the single supreme anthropomorphic deity that should follow 
oritrtxf. R V, I. 164. 4 asks “Who has seen the first-born, when the boneless 
bhumi re the one with bones ? Where is the life, the blood, the self of this 
questio(universe) ? Has anyone approached the knowing one'to ask this 
affir ms?! ?” As if in answer to this question, verse 46 of the same hymn 
though that the central principle was the sexless sat (the “real”) which. 
Yam a. one, was called by various names, Indra, Mitra, Varuna, Agni, 
wh^h ( Matarisvan, etc. Thus, in some of the late hymns of the Rigveda, 
is refteCesignate indifferently the Supreme or Absolute as “He” or “It,” 
yith in'.ed the usual vacillation between monotheism and monism met 
ition hall philosophies. In the opinion of the present writer, the trans- 
uncons'm monotheism to monism was effected smoothly and almost 
As mei nisly, owing to the growing influence of the conception of Rita. 
and ye zoned above, the primary sense of Rita, appearing alongside of, 
physic: dearly distinguished from, its secondary sense or senses, is the 
motion 3ne. Rita is the path of the Zodiac within which the apparent 
naksha f the devas (luminaries) are confined and which is dotted by the 
govern No wonder that the devas are said to be born in Rita and 
order 1 by it. Rita next comes to denote very naturally the cosmic 
“order w prevailing in nature. In the moral world, the word designates 
world rough the meanings “truth” and "right,” and in the religious 
concer order” takes the form of sacrifice or rite. The way to the later 
: of the Absolute, which is impersonal and is designated by the 
as sat or brahman, has been paved by this abstract conception 
hich looks like the earliest crude precursor of the Absolute 
Vedanta. 

)lem of the origin and nature of the world-stuff is a philoso- 
and is not neglected by the Rigvedic poets. RV, X. 190 
t from heat ( tapas) were produced rita and satya ; then night, 
and samvatsara (year) were produced in succession. RV, 
/s that sat was produced from asat. From the mythological 
w, each one of the gods in turn is said to be the creator of 


neuter 
of Ri 
of th 
Th. 

phict 
tells us 
the ocr 
X. 72. v 
point of 


the uniy > the universe being sometimes looked upon as the finished 
product c he carpenter’s and joiner's skill. For example RV, X. 31. 7 
asks “Wlu was th e WO od, which the tree, ou-t of which they fashioned 
heaven anc ea rth?” RV, X. 121 takes up the problem of creation on a 
mouotheisti level and tells us that Hiranyagarbha arose from the great 
waters, per a ding the Universe, and thus created the world out of 
eternally p -existing matter. But X. 129—the well-known Nasadiya 

379 


THE VEDIC AGE 


<SL 


ivmn—describes creation from the highest monistic level. “In the 
beginning, there was no ‘Non-existent/ because this creation arose there¬ 
from, nor the ‘Existent,’ because its usual manifestations—the Firmament 
or the heaven beyond it—were not then. The One breathed by itself, 
breathless, and there was nothing beyond it. There was no death then; 
how could there be anything immortal then? There was no light which 
could give us distinctions like night or day." Thus is suggested the highest 
philosophical truth that we cannot characterize the Absolute If being 
of the inadequacy of our categories. Tapas is the wanning up otication 
into existence, whereby is developed from the Absolute the impon-ego. 
of the primary antithesis, namely the opposition of ego and re mind 
The hymn further tells us that Desire {Kama), the germ of tl '■•o the 
betraying self-consciousness, is the bond binding the existenf an/one 
non-existent. The doubt expressed at the end as to whether of -tie 
knows the truth about creation is a beautiful expression ights of 
ignorance of the wise. This hymn rises to the breath-taking h*ymn to 
monism and leaves behind the dualistic metaphysics of the ned the 
ViSvakarman (X. 82) wherein we are told that the Waters cont carman, 
primordial germ—the floating world-egg from which arises Vi&i world, 
the first-born of the universe—the creator and maker of t makes 
The Nasadiya hymn, in the terminology of modern philosopl neither 
nature and spirit both aspects of the One, the Absolute, which 
the self nor the non-self. ficable 

The word may a in the RV generally denotes “occult power”, ndered 
in a good sense to gods and in a bad sense to demons, and may 1 b But, 
by the English word “craft”, having a similar double applic 
as noted above (p. 349), in X. 54. 2 it is used in the sense of ' 

“show,” thus forestalling later Vedanta philosophy. It ma 
affirmed, however, that the Rigvedic tendency is towards a na 
not monistic idealism, towards which the general spirit of Ind 
was soon to drift. If X. 72. 2 says that the “existent” was prc 
the “non-existent,” all that is meant is that the manifest aro 
of the non-manifest. If being or non-being is postulated 
principle, it is strictly from the point of view of the world of 
Instead of the five elements of later philosophy, the R 


on” or 
safely 

ealism, 
ought 
- from 
n out 
re first 
irience. 
stulates 


only water as the primordial element or matter, from whk ‘ e ot ^ ers 
gradually evolve. In the Purusha-Sukta (X. 90) the body of Purusha 
is said to be the original material, as it were, out of whi die world 
is made. The gods are the agents of creation, the act of 1 ation is a 
sacrifice, and the Purusha is the victim. Although anthro l) rpoiphism, 
pushed to the last limit, is responsible for the greatness of^bd and the 
unity of world and God, being described in terms of the gigantc dimensions 
of the Purusha, the hymn X. 90 is a sort of crude allegory d the theory 
of creation from the One Absolute found in X. 129. Only, her the Supreme 

380 



RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 

2comes the active Purusha—the begetter as well as the begotten: 
“From the Purusha Virat was born, and from Virat again the Purusha,” 

(X.90.5). 


4. ETHICAL AND SPIRITUAL THOUGHT 

As the Rigvedic Aryans were full of the joie de vivre , they were not 
particularly interested in the life after death; much less had they any 
special doctrines about it. We can therefore glean only a few notices 
of the life beyond, that are scattered throughout the Rigveda. 

Two separate pathways along which all moving creatures travel, 
namely the path of the Fathers and that of the gods and mortals, are 
spoken of in X. 88. 15, and it is supposed that there is a reference here 
to the way to the other world. Companionship with the Sun and the gods 
and immortality are highly prized goals (X. 107. 2; I. 125. 5). After his 
death, a man is supposed to enter the kingdom of Yama (who and his 
sister Yainl were primeval twins). Yama was the first of \the mortals 
who died and discovered the way to the realm over which he rules and 
which is the destination of the subsequent dead. I he spirits of the 
departed ones are supposed to go through ishtapurta to this paradise, 
where Yama and the Fathers live in the midst of the joys of immortality, 
and the spirits are material enough to enjoy such pleasures as the drinking 
of Soma, milk, honey, and surd, as also music. This is hardly surprising, 
as the goal of all human endeavour is to become like gods. This heaven 
is reached through sacrifices and worship of the gods. The spirit is 
endowed with a shining form in heaven (X. 14. 8). 

Hell is represented as a place of punishment for evil-doers ( avratas ). 
This is characterized as low and dark (X. 152. 4)- as a kind of pit 
(IX. 73. 8). There is, however, no sordid picture of hell and its terrors. 
In our search for any reference, implicit or explicit, to rebirth or trans¬ 
migration, we come across only a few doubtful passages. According to 
RV, i. 164. 30, “the soul (jivah) of the dead one moves in its own power, 
the immortal one having a common origin with the mortal one (the 
body).” But this translation is not certain. The reference in RV, X. 15. 2 
to Pitris who reside in the earth-region or in the dwellings of men need 
not imply belief in the soul as a ghost revisiting the haunts of men, but 
may only be the germ of the idea of the acceptance of the funeral 
(Sniddha) offerings by them which became so famous at a later time. 
RV, X. 16. 3 exhorts the soul of the dead to go over to heaven or earth, 
to the waters or to the plants, along with all its physical parts. But is this 
going over a rebirth? In X. 58 the departing spirit of a dying person is 
called back from Yama, from heaven, earth, the quarters, the sea, the 
waters, the sun, the dawn or the mountains, i.e. from wheresoever it 

V 381 




O \ V 

g V ■" ■' 

y THE VEDIC AGE 

may have gone to. So we may conclude that only the germs of the 
conception of rebirth were there, and these developed either naturally, 
or through the influence of ideas current among the original tribe's with 
whom the Aryans came into contact. 

RV, VII. 86. 6 and 88. 5, 6 clearly show that the consciousness of sin 
(anrita, dgas y enas) was recognized. Sin resulted from the violation of 
ritti or “order” ill the moral sphere (i.e. of “truth” and “right”) as well 
as in the religious one (i.e. of sacrifice or rite), or of the commands of God. 
In the unalterable law of good or bad effects, flowing from good or bad 
conduct, are to be found the first germs of the law of Karman (that most 
outstanding characteristic of Indian thought)—binding on gods and 
mortals alike. Offering prayers and performing rites, living in short 
in perfect harmony with the will of God—this was the ideal moral life 
according to the RV. Man owes some duties to his fellow-beings also 
(X. 117). jRV, V; 85. 7 tells us that an offence against a friend, neighbour, 
or comrade,, or even a stranger is a sin (agas). Adultery, witchcraft, gam- 
bling, drinking, senselessness, and self-deception are ranked as deviations 
from the moral life. The view, therefore, that the so-called uncertainty 
of the fate of the evil after death is a vagueness characteristic of the 
comparative indifference to morals, and that if gods are extolled as true 
it is not an assertion of ascertained truth, is wrong. 

On the whole a very optimistic outlook on life is revealed in the hymns 
of the i?F. Not that the Rigvedic Aryans do not desire immortality 
(amritatva) or the company of the gods in heaven. As we have seen above, 
there are many hymns and stanzas which raise questions and posit answers, 
all inspired by the eternal quest of the human heart for a solution of 
life’s problems. These hymns betray a metaphysical streak and a flair 
for cutting the Gordian knot of philosophy—seeds which were to blossom 
later into the wild yet beautiful garden of the Upanishads. But the 
joys and pleasures of this world interest them deeply. Thus the Rigveda 
is full of prayers for long life, freedom from disease, heroic progeny, 
wealth, power, abundance of food and drink, the defeat of rivals, etc. 
There is no trace of pessimism in the thoughts of the Rigvedic sages. 
Whether life was a reality or illusion, substance or shadow, they want 
to enjoy it to the full. They do not seem to subscribe to the doctrine that 
life is a misery, which can only be ended by eradicating desire or vdsana, 
the cause of the ever-recurring cycle of births and deaths—a doctrine 
developed later by the Buddhists and found in the Vedanta. The religious 
thought, therefore, betrays a practical streak. The worship of the powers 
of Nature is sincere but utilitarian, and do ut des is quite openly the 
theory of all sacrifice and homage. 

GENERAL REFERENCES 
Macdonell, A. A.: Vedic Mythology (Strassburg, 1897). 

382 




RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 
Ma Repetitions , Preface, p. xviii. 

2^ Cf. Ch* X.VI, p. 343. For a beautiful hymn in the Atharva-^veda, cf. Ch XX, 

^ Paradise Found (Tenth Edition, 1893) Fart "V, Ch. V, pp. 250 60. 

4. The Arctic Home in the Vedas, p. 233-96. _ , T . w Manu . 

5. RV, X. 121. 1 and 3 ff. See also § at. By XI. 1. 6. 1; Ait Br I. 1, and Ma 1 

smriti, 1.9. 

6. FAf, p. 122. 

7- I'M, P- I2 3- 

8. JMdC-. Stud., 5. 234. 

9. Onom, p. 205. .f t 

9a. For some specimens, cf. Ch. XVI, pp. 340 if. 

io b Zimmermaii, '/I Second Selection of Hymns from the Rigveda (Second Edition 
1922), Appendix IV, pp. Cl ff. 

11. Cf. the hymn to Parjanya quoted in Ch. XVI, pp. 343-4- 



383 



CHAPTER XIX 


SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC 
CONDITIONS 

I. SOCIAL CONDITION 

i. Family Life 

I he foundation ot social life was the patriarchal family. In Rigveda 
(I. 24. 12 15 and V. 2. 7), where we find the rudiments of the Sunahiepa 
story, a kind of absolute control by parents over children is suggested. 
That family discipline was strict is illustrated by the case of Rijra£va who 
was deprived of his sight as a punishment by his father (I. 116. 16). 
Similarly in R V, X. 34,4 we are told how the insolvent gambler is disowned 
by his parents and brothers, in front of his creditor. This does not mean 
that, the relation between the parents and children was not generally 
one of warm affection; for a father is looked upon as the type of all that 
is good and kind. The wedding hymn (X. 35) indicates that the newly- 
married wife rules over (or wins by her love?) her brothers-in-law and 
even over her husband's parents although she herself entertains a feeling 
of respect for them. This is clear evidence of joint family life. That under 
certain circumstances this joint family included the wife's mother is 
suggested by X. 34. 3 where the gambler complains that "his mother-in- 
law hates him." After the death of the father, the eldest son took charge 
of the family. 

A notable feature of the etiquette of the Rigvedic age was the great 
store set on hospitality. The frequent epithet of Agni, viz., Atiihi, the 
beloved guest in human abodes, takes for granted the affection and 
respect generally shown to a guest. No wonder that in later literature 
detailed descriptions of the merits of hospitality should occur, and that 
hospitality to a guest should be elevated to the rank of a religious duty, 
as one of the fi ve great daily sacrifices ( pancha- mahdyajflas ). 

2, The Caste System 

The elaborate institution known as the Caste System among the Hindus 
in India may almost be said to be without a parallel in the world, although 
there is hardly a country where classes or orders of society or grades of 
social distinction of some kind or other are not met with. A common 
origin, name, tutelary deity, occupation, and ceremonies generally 
distinguish one homogeneous caste-group from another, but to-day caste 
is rigidly fixed by birth, and exclusive commensality and connubium b 

384 


SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC CONDITIONS 

tween the members of a caste-group to the exclusion of all others are its 
I fundamental and outstanding characteristics. Further, the conception of 
impurity communicable to a higher caste by contact with a lower one 
underlies this fissiparous tendency, and has resulted in the untouchability 
( >f the so-called Sudra, who by popular error is almost identified with the 
Aahchama, or one outside, the framework of the Chaturvarnya. Again, in 
',lace of the four original varnas or class-groups, there are today thousands 
of caste divisions and sub-divisions, and the number is still growing. This 
unique development of an ordinary social phenomenon naturally invests 
its history with a special importance. 

The extent to which caste had been developed in the age of the Rigveda 
Samhita has formed a subject of keen controversy among scholars. 1 The 
uncertainty regarding the exact interpretation of the basic words and 
phrases in the Rigveda, and the relative chronology of the various relevant 
passages scattered throughout that Veda, make it difficult to arrive at any 
conclusion that is likely to meet with general acceptance. We shall, there¬ 
fore, state first of all in detail the most widely accepted version—in a 
-sense, almost the recognized version—of the development of caste in the 
Rigveda, contenting ourselves with only a brief statement of divergent 
vietws. Much confusion will be avoided, if we keep in view the fact, generally 
agreed to, that the development of caste has been a progressive one, and 
that fwe should not expect *ln the Rigveda Samhita the picture of the Caste 
SysteW which is presented even in the Yajurveda Samhitas. 

There are various speculations in later Brahmanical literature regarding 
the origin of castes. The most common is that which represents the 
Brahmanas, Kshatriyas, VaiSyas, and Sudras to have been created 
respectively from the head, breast or arms, the thighs, and the feet of the 
Creator. An echo of this is found in a hymn of the RV (X. 90), the famous 
Purusha-sukta, which describes the mythical legend of the sacrifice of a 
primeval giant called Purusha, the ideal "Man” or World-Spirit. The 
relevant passage has been translated thus:» 

"When (the gods) divided Purusha, into how many parts did they cut 
him up? What was his mouth? What arms (had he) ? What (two objects) 
are said (to have been) his thighs and feet ? The Brahmana was his mouth; 
the Rajanya was made his arms; the being (called) the Vai£ya, he was his 
thighs; the Sudra sprang from his feet.” 

This passage refers to the first three Castes not as sprung from, but 
as identical with, the mouth, arms and the thighs of the Creator. But in 
spite of this difference many regard this hymn of the RV as the earliest 
exposition of the later Brahmanical view, and regard the essential features 
of the Caste System as existing even in the earliest Aryan society in 
India. 

This theory has been challenged by many scholars whose views may be 
briefly stated as follows: 




385 


BB 






THE VEDIC AGE 


The evidence of the Purusha-sQkta, an admittedly late hymn, is not 
valid for the bulk of the Rigveda, which was produced by the as yet un- 
Brahmanized tribes of Vedic Indians living in the Indus region and the 
Punjab. The Caste System was developed only later, when a section o \ 
these Vedic tribes migrated farther east. The term Varna (lit., Ary a,, 
colour) is used in the Rigveda of all the three highest castes of later time£ s 
being contrasted only with Dasa (the dasyu-varna or' 'aboriginal colour’ k’ 
The terms "Rajanya,” “Vai6ya” and "Sudra” occur only in the Purusha/ 
sukta, the term “Brahmana,” also, being rare in the Rigveda. The term 


fl 


Kshatriya,” of which “Rajanya” is an earlier variant, occurs but seldom 


in the Rigveda. The term “Brahman” denotes “a priest by profession” only 
in some passages, while in others it denotes any person who was distin¬ 
guished b} r genius or virtue, or one who, for some reason, was deemed 
specially receptive of the divine inspiration. 

The transition from the casteless, though classified, society of the bulk 
of the Rigveda to the elaborate Caste System of the Yajurveda is to be 
traced to the complication of life resulting from the further migration 
of the Vedic Aryans from the Punjab to the east. The necessity of carryiiyg 
on a'ceaseless fight with, and the conquest of, the aborigines called for 
an organization of the. conquering people by the merger or fusion of ptbtty 
tribes into centralized kingdoms. Thus emerged the powerful monarch, 
while the lesser tribal princes, deprived of their royal rank, sank ho the 
position of nobles. The monarchy, moreover, needed now a standing 
armed force, prepared to meet all eventualities, such as resisting the 
sudden incursions of native or other Aryan tribes and quelling revolts 
on the part of the subdued aborigines. This standing ar my was naturally 
recruited from the ranks of the nobility of tribal princes and the chief 
armed retainers of the king. This is the genesis of the warrior class. At the , 
same time, the “people” of the Aryan masses, secure in the protection 
afforded by the warrior class, ceased to take interest in military matters 
and settled down to a peaceful life devoted to agriculture, pastoral pursuits, 
trade, and industry; They constituted the third class, the Vi£, later called 
“VaiSyas.” " .. j 

Side by side also grew a distinct community of priests. In the earlier 
period, not only the householder but even the petty prince could offer 
sacrifice to the gods for himself and his people, the ritual being very 
simple. But when the size of the kingdom grew and military and adminis¬ 
trative affairs kept the hands not only of the king but also of the warrior 
class full, while, at the same time, the ritual tended to become more 
complicated and elaborate, the need was keenly felt of a hieratic order, 
composed of the more intellectual elements among the non-fighters who 
could dedicate themselves, undisturbed by the distractions of war or 
peace, to the faithful and exact performance of the highly developed ’ 
ritual, and to the preservation (by word of mouth) of the traditional 


386 







SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC CONDITIONS 

jrmulke and sacred hyranology of the Aryans, a heritage in part at least 
from almost prehistoric times. 

As regards the fourth class, the Sudra is mentioned for the hist and only 
time in the "Purusha-sukta.” But dasyu and ddsa are known to the 
Rigveda, both as aborigines independent of Aryan control and as con¬ 
quered slaves. The latter may reasonably be supposed to represent the 
Sudras of the later texts. But not all the defeated aborigines could be 
absorbed as slaves in the royal household or in the houses of individual 
owners. There must have been whole villages of the aborigines, though 
under Aryan control. The term “Sudra” was evidently applied to the 
inhabitants of these villages as well as to the wild hill tribes/hich lived 
by hunting and fishing and acknowledged the overlordship of their Aryan 
neighbours. In course of time it included even dasyu-varna (or dark- 
skinned) people who remained beyond the pale of the Aryan state and 
who were virtually excluded from the religious and ritual cult of the 
Aryans. The development of the Caste System in a rigid form, with 
strictly hereditary and mutually exclusive caste-groups, did not take 
olace till the time when the Vedic Aryans had settled down in the Middle 
country and were already Brahmanized enough to look upon the inhabi¬ 
tants of the North-West—the home of the Rigveda —as uncivilized Vratyas 
because they did not follow the strict Caste System. 

The view summed up above may be regarded as the one now generally 
accepted by scholars. According to -.this recognized version, in the earliest 
society represented by the bulk of the Rigveda, there were probably 
different classes and professions, but none, not even the priestly and the 
warrior classes, were hereditary; the warriors were drawn from the people 
at large; and any person with the requisite qualifications could officiate 
as a priest. 

This view is not, however, accepted by some whose arguments may be 
briefly stated thus: (i) The main, if not the earliest part of the Rigveda 
was, in all probability, composed not in the Punjab but in the east, in the 
country kter known as the MadhyadeSa or Brahmavarta. So the argument 
based oi| the non-Brahmanical character of the Vratyas of the Indus and 
the Punjab becomes pointless. (2) The term Brahmana, "son of a Brahman 
>r priest,'” suggests that the priesthood was normally hereditary. There 
s no definite instance of a person other than a priest exercising priestly 
unctions. Nor was this feasible, as the priesthood, even in the Rigveda, 
•‘stinguishes within its fold a vast number of sub-groups of spe<;- a p s ts 

d experts. (3) The power of the Purohita over the king in the Ri^uc-ccu, 
ivable from the fact that the correct performance of the sacrifice de- 
ded (he services of a hereditary priest, is nearly as great as in the 
'.igyedic age. (4) The Rigveda knows of a ruling class—the Kshatriya 
-who, as a class of nobles, are appropriately named in the Purusha-sukta 
"Raj any a’’ or "men of kingly family.” As kingship was normally 

387 




misTfy 



THE VEWC AGE 



ijjsi'editary, the Kshatriyas were also in all probability a hereditary 
The Sudras were admittedly a separate group; so all the elements of the 
Caste System were in existence in the age of the Rigveda. (5) There are 
glimpses in the Rigveda of a threefold (VIII. 35 - 16-18) or fourfold 
(I. 113. 6) division of the people, corresponding to the well-known three 
upper or all the four divisions of the Caste System. (6) I he existence of 
similar classes among the Iranians, namely priests, warriors, agriculturists, 
and artisans, makes it very probable that by the time of the Rigveda the 
four classes had developed into hereditary caste-groups, owing to the 
contact of the Arya-vama Aryans with the dark-skinned aborigines, and 
the necessity this imposed on Aryan society of reorganizing its whole 
structure. 

Although there is great force in some of these objections, it must be 
conceded that they are not strong enough to upset the recognized version. 
The existence of the four classes in Avestan literature certainly argues 
for the existence of somewhat similar classes in Rigvedic society, but 
much stronger positive evidence is necessary to establish that these classes 
were hereditary. 

Further, the term Brahmana, son of a priest, occurs very rarely, ant 
the word Brahmaputra, in the same sense, is found only once. I his, when 
contrasted with the numerous references to Brahman, seems to indicate 
that there was no idea of a hereditary priesthood in the earlier Vedic 
period. 

On the whole, it is difficult not to agree with the views, propounded 
long ago by Muir, that the Brafimanas (far less the Kshatriyas or Vatfyas) 
did not constitute an exclusive caste or race, and that the prerogatives of 
composing hymns and officiating at the services of the gods were not 
regarded, in the age of the Rigveda, as entirely confined to men of priestly 
families.3 The same thing was equally, or perhaps more, true of the minor 
professions, as the hymn, quoted above on p. 346, refers to the father, 
mother and the son following three different vocations in life, viz. those 
of a poet, a grinder of corn, and a physician. The heredity of occupation 
was, therefore, not yet a recognized principle, far less an established tact. 
The’utmost that can be said is that there were recognized professions like 
priesthood, or distinctions of nobility, and these had in many cases <1 
tendency to become hereditary, but, as in other countries or societies, 
their ranks might have been recruited from all sections of the community. 
Of the other essential features of the Caste System, viz., prohibition 0 
interdihing and intermarriage, no such restriction is even remote 
hinted at in the hymns of the Rigveda. 


3. Marriage and the Position oj Women { 

The frequent mention of unmarried girls like Ghosha, who grew up '■ 
the houses of their parents (I. 117. 7; X. 39. 3; 40. 5), the references to tt 

388 






SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC CONDITIONS 


its worn by maidens at festival occasions in order to win lover* 
LZ3. ix; VII. 2. 5), to a youth's courtship of the maiden he loves 
(I. 115. 2), to the lover’s gifts (I. 117. 18), to their mutual love (I. 167. 3; 
IX. 32. 5, etc.) and to the spell (VII. 55. 5, 8) by which a lover hopes to 
lull the whole household to sleep while he visits his beloved—all this 
evidence speaks in favour of the custom of girls normally marrying long 
after they had reached puberty. Some of the passages mentioned above, 
but not all, may refer to the hetaera class as existing in Vedic society. The 
marriage ceremony also supports this view, as it is presumed to be imme¬ 
diately followed by consummation (X. 85. 29 ff.). 

The restrictions on the field of choice in marriage were few. Marriage 
conne c t ion s with..the dasyu-varna people, with whom the Aryans..came 
into conflict in India, were probably prohibited. Among Aryans only the 
marriages of brother and sister (X. 10), and of father and daughter were 
banned. 

There seems to have been considerable freedom on the part of young 
persons concerned in the selection of a wife or husband, as they generally 
married at a mature age. There is no clear evidence that the consent of 
the parent or brother was essential; The latter appeared on the scene after 
the parties concerned had come to an understanding, and their participa¬ 
tion as well as that of the "wooer” (vara) in the formal "wooing” was a 
mere formality, though it was an essential preliminary to the marriage 
ceremony. 

The uncomplimentary references to some sons-in-law (VIII. 2. 20; 
I. 109. 2) suggest that in some cases a bride-price was paid by a not very 
desirable son-in-law. Similarly when girls had some physical defect, 
dowries, it seems, had to be given (VI. 28. 5 ; X. 27. 12). When Vimada 
carried off Purumitra’s daughter against his will, but probably with the 
consent of the daughter (I. 112. 19; 116. 1; etc.), we have an admixture 
of those elements which led to the formulation, later, of the Gandharva 
and Rakshasa forms of marriage. 

A hymn in RV (X. 85)—which may be called the wedding hymn—- 
gives us some idea of the oldest marriage ritual. The bridegroom and 
party proceed to the bride’s house (X. 17. 1), where the well-adorned 
bride remains ready (IV. 58. 9) to join the marriage-feast. The guests are 
entertained with the flesh of cows killed on the occasion (X. 83. 13). The 
ceremony proper now commences. The bridegroom grasps the hand of 
the bride and leads her round the fire (X. 85. 36, 38). These two acts con¬ 
stitute the essence of the marriage and the bridegroom is now the husband 
who takes her by the hand ( hasta-grdbha: X. 18. 8). The bridegroom nc 
takes the bride home in a car, in a wedding procession (X. 85 
24-27, 42). Then follows the consummation which is signi' 
the purification of the bride’s garment (X. 85. 28-30, 35). 

Perfect harmony and happiness are prayed for in corn 

339 


Sl 



THE VEDIC AGE 

(it is hoped) will be long enough to bless the couple with sons and 
■^sons (VIII. 31. 5-9; X. 34. 11; 85. 18, 19, 42 ff.). X. 85. 46 describes the 
newly married wife as taking up a most respected position as the mistress 
of her new household, wielding authority over the husband’s father, 
brother, and unmarried sisters. This verse envisages the case (very 
probably) of the marriage of the eldest son in the family,, when the old 
father has retired from active life. The authority exercised must have been 
more or less the rule of love. The wife participated regularly in the 
sacrificial offerings of her husband. 

The fulfilment of the desire for offspring, and male offspring in particu¬ 
lar, was the chief aim of marriage. Abundance of sons is constantly prayed 
for along with cattle and land, but no desire for daughters is expressed. 
This desire for a son is natural in a patriarchal organization of society. 
The son alone could perform the funeral rites for the father and continue 
the line. Sonlessness was as much deplored as poverty (III. 16. 5). The 
adoption of sons was recognized, though not favoured (VII. 4. 7,-8). 

There is very little evidence of the prevalence of the custom of Sati or 
widow-burning in the Rigveda, though we may detect, a semblance or 
reminiscence of this ancient custom in X. 18. 8, where the widow is asked 
to descend from the funeral pyre of her dead husband on which she was 
first made to lie. The only safe conclusion would be that the practice, even 
if known, was not widely prevalent, or at best was confined to the Rajanya. 
class, if Indo-Germanic parallels are a correct guide. Rigveda, X. 40. 2 and 
X. 18. 7, 8 point to the practice of requiring a childless widow to cohabit 
with her brother-in-law until the birth of a son. This niyoga is a kind of 
1 short-term levirate. These passages\(and I. 124. 7 also which mentions a 
\ garta-ruh) are clear evidence that the remarriage of widows was permitted 
' in certain circumstances, though there is no clear or definite reference to 
it in RV. 

The Rigveda certainly permits polygamy (I. 62. n; 71. 1; .104. 3; 
105. 8; 112. 19; 186. 7; VI. 53. 4; VII. 18. 2; 26. 3; X. 43. 1; 101. 11, etc.), 
though monogamy may have been the rule (I. 124. 7; IV. 3. 2; X. 71. 4). 
Whether monogamy developed from polygamy" in the Rigvedic age as 
Zimmer* thinks, or whether polygamy is secondary as Webers believes, 
cannot be decided. Probably polygamy, though allowed, was practically 
confined to the Rajanya class. Polyandry is not referred to anywhere in 
the Rigveda. The few passages in the wedding hymn (X. 85- 37 > 3 ®) * n 
which “husbands” (plural) are spoken of in connection with a single wife 
can be explained on a mythological basis. Female morality maintained a 
' r h standard, the same degree of fidelity not being expected from the 

few doubtful references to lovers and love-making ( 1 . 134 * 31 
raha-suh, “bearing in secret” is mentioned in II. 29. 1 
Ira is referred to as the “castaway” (j>ardvrji or paravrikU 

39 ° 





SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC CONDITIONS VS 

presumably as the offspring of illegitimate love. It is difficult to accept the 
view of Pischel and Geldner 6 that Ushas is the characteristic hetaera, nor 
are hetaera: referred to when women are described as going to the samana, 
though the dancer (nritu) may have belonged to that class. The so-called 
incestuous intercourse between father and daughter in the story of 
Prajapati (X. 61. 5-7), and between brother and sister in the dialogue 
between Yama and Yarn! (X. 10) can be satisfactorily explained (in the 
opinion of the present writer) on a mythological or astronomical basis. 

Women had to be under the protection of some guardian or other; for 
example, in the care of their fathers until marriage, of their husbands after 
marriage, and of their brothers if not married; still, they enjoyed much 
freedom. They did not always remain indoors, but moved about freely; 
they publicly attended feasts and dances, and there are references to 
“fair ladies flocking to festive gatherings.’' 


4. Education 

In the Rigveda, there is no explicit reference to the ceremony of Upana- 
yftta or Initiation {lit., the drawing near or leading forth of a boy for study 
under the teacher) which is regarded as of such great importance in 
la ter ages. But all primitive people have some kind of ceremony, signifying 
the formal, admission of an adult youth to membership of the tribe, and 
we may infer from the closely parallel Indo-Iranian ceremony of Navjot 
that the elements of this ceremony probably existed in the Rigvedic age 
and even earlier. 

The Frog-hymn (VII. 103) quoted above, on p. 346, gives us a glimps 
of the educational system (if system it can be called) of the Rigvedic ag 
The fifth verse gives a picture of the earliest Vedic school by the compare 
of the croaking of the frogs to the chorus of voices heard when a tear, 
recites the Veda, section by section (parvan ), and the pupils repea' 
words after him. The first verse of the hymn suggests through a ? 
that this concerted school recitation sprang into life suddenly, at a : 
time (the opening of the monsoon?), because frogs raising their 
inspired) voices at the opening of the monsoon after lying low f 
rest of) the year are compared to Brahmanas, conforming to tin 
annual routine (vrata). Evidently the entire instruction was oral' 

Debates are also referred to (X. 71). The word “ Brahmacharii 
technical sense of a “religious student” is found in X. 109. 5. ' 
was not rarely also a teacher, his son taking lessons from him a\ 
few neighbouring students. That thqr'sharpening of the intell 
as the development of character, in the Brahmacharin was 
seen from the celebrated Gayatrl verse (III. 62. 10) wb 
^avitri for a stimulation (a whetting) of the intellect; 

While there is no doubt that the instruction was orally 

39 1 




THE VED1C AGE 

very debatable point whether the. art of writing was known at all |s 
It is a well-known fact that no actual specimens of alphabets have 
been discovered in India which can be definitely dated before the fourth 
century b.c. Consequently most of the scholars are of opinion that the 
art of writing was unknown in ancient India. Btihler sought to prove that 
the Indian merchants learnt this art in Western Asia and introduced it 
in their country some time about the eighth century B.c. This view, which 
regards the most ancient alphabet of India (the Brahmi alphabet of 
ASoka’s inscriptions) as derived from the North Semitic types of the 
ninth century b.c., now holds the field. But the discovery of the numerous 
seals at Mohenjo-daro, with pictographic writing (Ch. IX, p. 190) has put 
an altogether new complexion on the whole question. It is now believed 
by many that the Indus script formed the parent-source from which the 
oldest Brahmi alphabets have been derived. Some are even of opinion 
that when the Rigveda was finally arranged in its present form it was 
written in a script which formed an intermediate stage between the Indus 
script and the ASokan alphabet. If we accept the old theory of Btihler, we 
have to presume that the vast Vedic literature was composed and pre¬ 
served by oral transmission alone—a stupendous feat of memory which 
appears to be almost miraculous. On the other hand, if we believe that 
these voluminous texts were committed in those old days to writing, we 
are faced with the problem of writing materials, of which we definitely 
know nothing. The whole thing is shrouded in mystery which canriot 
be solved until more definite facts come to light. 


Amusements and Entertainments 

Music, both vocal and instrumental, was well known. The Frog-hymn 
I. 103. 7-8) refers to the musical chanting of Brahmanas engaged in 
extraction of the Soma juice. Different vocal sounds are carefully 
'■sed in that hymn and elsewhere. Singing is often mentioned as 
ed to different ends, such as “chanting,” "reciting,” "hymning,” 
mong instruments we find reference to the vina (lute or string- 
rent), vdna (flute or wind-instrument), and the drum. The dancing 
ens is mentioned. Probably, men also danced, as is implied in a 
X. 76. 6. The dialogue-hymns of the Rigveda. have been the 
nirce of many theories regarding the earliest form of the drama 
15). One theory is that they are relics of old mysteries from Inclo- 
times. Dr. Keith? holds that dramatic spectacles, religious in 
were known in the Rigvedic age. The chariot-race was a 
irt and source of entertainment, and the race in general is the 
lerous similes and metaphors in the Rigveda. The fascination 
gambling and the ruin caused by addiction to it, is ofte r 
1 is actually the subject-matter of a hymn (X. 34). 

392 



SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC CONDITIONS 



Milk and its products, chiefly ghrifa (ghl or clarified butter), formed 
the principal ingredient of food. Grain (yava) was parched or ground into 
flour with a mill-stone and then mixed with milk or butter, and finally 
made into cakes. Vegetables and fruits were eaten in large quantities. 

Meat also formed a part of the dietary. The flesh of the ox, the sheep, 
and the goat was normally eaten, after being roasted on spits or cooked 
in earthenware or metal pots. Probably meat was eaten, as a rule, only 
on occasions of sacrifice, though such occasions were by no means rare, 
the domestic and the grand sacrifices being the order of the day. This ex¬ 
plains why horse-flesh was eaten only at the horse-sacrifice to gain the 
strength and swiftness of the horse. The cow receives the epithet aghnya 
(not to be killed) in the Rigveda, and is otherwise a very valued possession. 
It is difficult to reconcile this with the eating of beef, but we may get some 
explanation if we remember the following: (x) Firstly, it was the flesh of 
the ox rather than of the cow that was eaten; a distinction was definitely 
made, (ii) The flesh of the cow was (if at all) eaten at the sacrifices only, 
and it is well known that one sacrifices one’s dearest possession to please 
the gods, (iii) Even in the Rigveda, only Vasds (barren cows) were sacri¬ 
ficed. For example, .Agni is called in VIII. 43. xi as vasdnna. The ex¬ 
pression “ atithinir gah” (cows fit for guests) in X. 68. 3 implies the same 
distinction. 

Milk, drunk warm as it came from the cow, was a favourite drink. 
Though the Soma juice, in Rigveda, appears exclusively as a sacrificial 
drink (as “Haoma,” it was prepared and similarly celebrated in the Indo- 
Iranian period), it must have been a very popular inebriating drink in the 
original home of the Aryans. It had three kinds of admixture, with milk, 
sour milk, and yava. In the Eigvedic period, surd was the popular drink, 
extremely intoxicating as compared to the Soma which, though mildly 
inebriating, was an invigorating beverage. Surd was probably distilled 
from grain. It is condemned as “leading people to crime and godlessness.” 
Madhu, though often used to denote “Soma” or milk or any sweet food 
or drink, has also the sense of “honey” in the Rigveda. 

7. Dress and Decoration 

The dress (vasana or vastra) consisted of two garments according to 
the strictly Rigvedic evidence, namely the visas (or “lower garment” in 
a narrow sense) and the adhivdsa (aii “over-garment” or an "upper gar¬ 
ment"), though in the days of the later Sarifliitas, the nivi (or under¬ 
garment) came to be used in addition. The Maruts wear deer-skins, and a 
muni (X. 136. 2) is clad in skins or soiled garments. 

The atka (a "garment”) appears to be described as woven and well- 

ting, though the real meaning is doubtful. Woollen clothing was in 

393 






THE VEDIC AGE 


<SL 


.ogue. A sort of mantle or cloak ( drdpi ) is often mentioned. A kind of 
embroidered garment (fieSas) seems to have been used by female dancers 
(I. 92. 4, 5; II. 3. 6, etc.). A special garment was worn by the bride at the 
marriage ceremony; it was later given to a Brahmaria and is called 
vddhuya. The Maruts are described as wearing mantles adorned with gold. 
There was a general fashion for dressing well as may be inferred from words 
like suvdsas (well-clad) and suvasam, and there were garments of different 
colours too. There is no clear evidence of any differentiation between male 
and female dress. 

Several ornaments are mentioned in Rigveda. The Karnasobhana was 
“an ornament for the ear,” apparently for the use of men (VIII. 78. 3) 
and that it may have been a gold ornament is suggested by I. 122. 14 
which refers to a deity as gold-eared (hiranya-karna). The Kurim (X. 85. 8) 
was some kind of head-ornament worn by females, specially brides. The 
same may be said of nyochanl (X. 85. 6), a bride’s ornament. Khddi was 
a kind of ring, worn as an armlet or an anklet (I. 166. 9; VII. 56. 13). 
Nishka was a gold ornament worn on the neck, and we shall presently 
see that it must have been of a size suitable for its use also as a sort of 
currency. Mani was some kind of jewel (whether “pearl” or “diamond” 
is not certain) worn round the neck (I. 122. 14). Rukma was an ornament 
worn ort the breast (II. 34. 2, 8). Garlands were often Worn by men desiring 
to appear to advantage (IV. 38. 6; V. 53 - 4 > etc.). One hymn (X. 184. 3) 
refers to the ASvins as “lotus-wreathed.” 

The hair were kept combed and oiled. The use of the word “ opaia ” 
indicates that plaits were worn by women in dressing the hair. There are 
undoubted references to the custom of wearing the hair in braids or plaits. 
A maiden had her hair made in four plaits (X. 114. 3). It seems from the 
descriptions of Rudra and Pushan that men also wore their hair plaited 
or braided, and the Vasishthas were noted for wearing their hair in a plait 
or coil on the right (VII. 33. 1). The beard and moustache are mentioned, 
but shaving is referred to (X. 142. 4). Most probably Kshura means 
"razor” in the Rigveda. 




8. Knowledge of Medicine and Sanitation 
The physician is often mentioned with respect for his skill. Miraculous 
cures are ascribed to the twin-gods, the Alvins, who are the great healers 
of diseases and experts in the surgical art. Among diseases Y akshma is 
frequently mentioned (I. 122. 9; X. 85. 3 1 I 97 - 12 ■ r 37 - 4 < i~6). 

It denotes “illness” in general, and probably "consumption” in particular, 
rendering the body emaciated. IX. X§2. 1 speaks of a physician wanting 
to cure a fracture in a way which seems to indicate that the practice of 
medicine was already a profession. The entire hymn X. 97 is addressed 
to the Oshadhis (the plants) with special reference to their curative powers. 
So herbs and plants figured prominently in the materia medica of t 1 

394 





SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC CONDITIONS 


period. Prayers for long life are pretty frequent. .1 he legends illustrating 
the reputed healing powers of the Asvins give us an idea of the general 
ailments and bodily mishaps. They are divine physicians who restore eye¬ 
sight and cure the blind, sick, and maimed (VIII. 18. 8; 22. 10; I. 1*6.16; 
X. 39. 3). They rejuvenate the sage Chyavana (I. 1x6. 10) and revive the 
sage Rebha when drowned and given up as dead. They give a cooling and 
refreshing draught to Atri Saptavadhri when suffering from suffocation. 
They cure Paravrij of blindness and lameness, and when the leg of Vripala 
is cut off in battle, they replace it with an iron one The last instance 
proves that a kind of primitive surgery was practised. 


2. ECONOMIC CONDITION 


1. Agriculture and Cattle 

Agriculture made real headway during the Rigvedic age, although the 
practice of ploughing can be traced to Indo-Iranian times. The operation 
of tilling the soil meant (as now) the cutting of furrows in the field with 
the wooden ploughshare drawn by bulls, the sowing of seeds in the 
furrows thus made, the cutting of the corn with the sickle, the laying of 
the bundles of corn on the threshing-floor, threshing, and finally sifting 
and winnowing. Irrigation was known, and helped cultivation. I he exact 
nature of the grain which was thus grown cannot be ascertained. It was 
called Yava and may have been “barley” as it was understood to be in the 
later Samhitas. Rice was not cultivated until a later period. 

The Rigvedic Aryans were primarily a pastoral people and naturally 
cows and bullocks were their most valued possession. These constituted 
the chief form of wealth and the only original dakshina (sacrificial fee). 
The word "dakshina” in fact is an adjective meaning “right,” or "val¬ 
uable,” with an ellipse of go (cow), because the sacrificial fee was a cow 
placed “on the right side” of the singer to be rewarded. Similarly one of 
the words for "fight” was gavishti “a search for cows.” The name of 
Aghnyd (“not to be killed”), applied several times to the cow, shows that 
the cow was coming to be regarded as a sacred animal. This feeling of 
sanctity of the cow can be traced even to Indo-Iranian times. Cows were 
kept in stalls during the night and in the heat of the day. They were 
allowed to roam freely in the pastures at other times, and were milked 
three times every day. The cow returning from the pasture-land in the 
evening and licking her calf fastened by a rope was one of the most 
gladdening sights, and the lowing of the mileh-kine the most musical 
sound to the Rigvedic Aryans. There are even special terms like "sva-sara” 
for the time of the grazing of the cows in the morning, and sam-gava, for 
'fee time when the grazing cows are driven home together for the milking. 
The Rigveda is aware of the dangers to which the grazing cows were liable. 


395 




THE VEHIC AGE 



l 


as being lost, falling into pits, breaking limbs, and being stolen. "wkt- 
of cattle were marked, probably to indicate ownership. Bulls and 
oxen were regularly used for ploughing and drawing carts. That the 
cow should give warm or cooked milk was a standing wonder. That the 
dark or red cow could give shining white milk was little short of a miracle! 
(VIII. 93. 13) 

2. Trade and Commerce 

There are clear references in the hymns (I. 56. 2) to trading in distant- 
lands for profit. The prayers and oblations offered for “gaining a hundred 
treasures” (III. 18. 3) are also probably those of merchants seeking 
divine aid for success in trade. Apart from trade with foreign countries, 
or alien tribes, there must have been quite an extensive inland trade, but 
no definite details are available. Haggling in the market was, however, 
well-known. 

The exchange of commodities on the principle of barter seems to have 
been in vogue, but cow had already come to be regarded as a unit of value 
(IV. 24. 10). There might have been other recognized units of value. Great 
importance attaches to one such unit called nishka. It meant originally 
a gold ornament of the shape of a necklace or a necklet (\ . 19. 3)- Vixen, 
however, in I. 126. 2 the poet celebrates the receipt of a hundred nishkas 
with a hundred horses, as a gift, he could hardly be referring to a hundred 
necklets. So it probably came to be used as a sort of currency even during 
the Rigvedic age. 

Booty in battle was one of the sources of wealth to the State, and 
consisted chiefly of flocks and herds. In individual economy, dowry and 
bride-price played no small part. Movable property could change hands 
by gift or sale which amounted to barter. Land was not an article of 
commerce, and does not seem to have presented any problems in con¬ 
nection with the transfer of immovable property in the case of the family 
or of the individual. The population being scanty and scattered over wide 
areas, fresh land could be easily obtained, if needed by a family which 
had grown to a very large size with several sons.*The rivers of the North- 

West are referred to as yielding gold. . . 

Whether any sea-borne trade was carried on during this age is a mucli 
disputed question, as already noted above (p. 244). The view that the 
Rigvedic Indians took part in ocean-shipping is opposed on the following 
grounds: (1) The nan (boat or ship) was, in the majority of cases, merely 
a boat or “dug-out” for crossing rivers, and there may have been large 
boats in use for crossing the broad rivers of the Punjab, lhese boats were 
so simple in their construction that only the paddle or oar (antra) needed 
for propelling them is mentioned. There is no mention of masts or sails, 
of rudder or anchor. Thus the Vedic Indian was not much of a navigably 
(2) Metaphors used by a people familiar with the ocean are lacking m ae 


396 




SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC CONDITIONS 


(3) The numerous mouths of the Indus are ignored, although 
.hat river was the convenient natural outlet to the sea. Against these 
arguments must be set down the following facts: (1) I he Rigveda mentions 
men who go to the ocean ( samudra ) eager for gain (I. 56* 2; IV. 35 * 6) and 
samudra cannot be explained away in these passages as standing tor 
the very broad and wide stream of the lower Indus. (2) There are some 
allusions to a trade more extensive-than that implied by boats for crossing 
rivers. (3) Verses I. 116. 3 ff. tell us that the Alvins rescued Bhujyu in 
the ocean with a ship of a hundred oars (iatdritra). A ship of this type 
could be needed only for a sea-voyage. (4) X. 136. 5 refers to eastern 
and western oceans.” These passages, in the opinion of the present writer, 
clearly indicate that sea-trade was carried on during this age. 


3. Occupations and Industries 

Some of the important professions and vocations of this period have 
been incidentally referred to above. The Brahmanas or the priestly class 
dedicated themselves to the highly specialized occupation or profession 
of officiating at the sacrifices and preserving the sacred hymnology of the 
Aryans by conducting Vedic classes. The Kshatriya or Rajanya class had 
taken to the fighting profession. Members of the third—the VaiSya class 
naturally took to agriculture, cattle-breeding, and other pastoral pursuits, 
and the various arts, crafts/ and industries. The lowest, the hudra class, 
was engaged in service of all kinds. But, as noted above, the classes weie 
not irrevocably bound up with specific occupations. Many Raj any as are 
found among the poets of the Rigveda , and members of the three higher 
classes were not rarely promiscuously engaged in cattle-breeding, during 
times of peace, and in fighting, during times of war. Money-lending was 
practised chiefly by the VaiSyas, but also occasionally by Br ahmanas. 

It appears from the large number of similes and metaphors drawn from 
the art of fashioning chariots for war and race, and carts for agriculture 
and transport, that carpentry was an honoured profession, the carpenter 
being also a wheelwright and joiner. He did all sorts of work in wood, and 
even carved work of a finer type was not beyond his skill (X. 86 . 5* 
I. 161. 9; III. 60. 2). The worker in metal smelted ore in the furnace using 
the wing of a bird as a bellows to fan the flames. Household, utensils like 
kettles were made of metal (ay as). What metal the ay as was is uncertain. 
It may have been either copper, bronze, or iron, if we suppose that the 
word is consistently used in the same sense; but it is also possible that it. 
is used in more senses than one. Its colour is to be inferred from the 
epithets used with it, such as "reddish.” As the use of copper precedes 
that of iron in the development of civilization, ayas may have indicated 
"copper” or its alloy "bronze”; but this is by no means certain, and iron 
may have been known. Earthenware and wooden vessels were used for 
purposes of eating and drinking, along with those of metal. I he art of the 


397 



THE VEDIC AGE 

ner (charmamnd in VIII. 5. 38) and the use of hide are well known? 
Ox-hide was used to manufacture bowstrings, thongs (to fasten parts of 
the chariots), reins and the lash of the whip (VI. 75.11; 1 .121. 9; VI. 47, 26; 
46. 14; 53. 9, etc.). It was also placed above the boards on which the Soma 
was pressed with the stones. It is not unlikely that skin bags were also 
made with it (X. 106. 10). Among the home and cottage industries may 
be mentioned sewing, the plaiting of mats from grass or reeds, and the 
spinning and weaving of cloth, chiefly done by women. Among the other 
professions may be mentioned those of the dancer, both male and female, 
barber (V aptri) and vintner. It is noteworthy that those who practised 
these professions were not looked upon as inferiors in the age of the 
Rigveda, 

Hunting as a sport and profession was known and must have been 
practised by the Rajanya class, chiefly with the aid of practised pro¬ 
fessionals. Nets and pitfalls were the normal instruments of capture, and 
the bow and arrow was also employed. Birds were caught in nets, and 
antelopes (rifya) in pits. There are some obscure references to the capture 
of boars and buffaloes ( gaura ). The lion was caught in traps. The Rigveda 
is an important source of our knowledge of hunting in early times. The 
butcher’s profession was also probably known, as the services of a Samitri 
(in the sense of “one who cuts up”) were probably needed at animal 
sacrifices (I. 162. 9; II. 3. 10; III. 4. xo, etc.). 

There is no distinct reference to the specific occupation of slaves. They 
probably assisted their Aryan masters who did not think it beneath their 
dignity to practise all the arts and crafts needed by society. 

4. House-Building and Means of Transport 

Although it is suggested that some kind of a distinction between villages 
and towns is indicated m I. 44. 10 and 1x4. 1, city-life is not much in 
evidence. The village was a group of houses, built near each other for 
purposes of safety, and was surrounded by some kind of a hedge as a 
protective barrier against enemies and wild beasts. It is difficult to de¬ 
termine the exact sense in the Rigveda of pur which later meant a town. 
It seems to have been an earth-work fortification, protected by a 
palisade or stone wall. The frequent mention of the capture or destruction 
of such strongholds indicates that they were numerous and scattered all 
over the country, and that they could be easily erected like the stockades 
made by primitive tribes all over the world. The pur or earth-work fortifi¬ 
cation may either have been part of the village or just outside it, to be 
resorted to in times of emergency. It was called autumnal, probably 
because the emergency arose generally in autumn, when raids from neigh¬ 
bouring tribes became possible at the end of the monsoon, or the emer¬ 
gency was in the shape of a flooding of the plains owing to the rising of 
rivers in autumn. 


398 


SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC CONDITIONS 

were made of wood, the beams ( vamia ) being made of 
(also vamia). The so-called strongholds or forts probably had a series of 
concentric walls. 

The conception of Pushan as the guardian of the pathways gives 
occasion for the numerous references to all kinds of transport and means 
of communication such as carts (anas) and chariots (ratka) on land and 
ships on the sea. The Alvins are credited with ships (or conveyances) 
moving through the air (antanksha), which come uncannily near the 
modern conception of airships. 

The chariots and carts were drawn by oxen, mules, or horses. The 
chariots of the rich were drawn by two and sometimes even four horses. 
Riding on horseback was also much in vogue. Names of various parts of 
chariots occur very frequently in the RV hymns, and indicate a consider¬ 
able improvement in their construction over the primitive types. Travelling 
was fairly common. Prayers are offered to the gods (VII. 35. 15) to "give 
broad paths to travel,”—paths that should be straight in direction and 
thornless (X. 85. 23). A solemn prayer to Indra for the safety of the 
journey (III. 53. 17-zo) gives many interesting details of a cart driven 
by oxen in which- the journey was made. 

The references to artificial waterways such as kulya in III. 45. 3 and 
" khanitrima aft ah" in VII. 49. 2 make it certain that some kind of an 
irrigation system was known. Wells artificially made are contrasted with 
springs. Such wells were covered, and are described as unfailing and full 
of water. The water was raised by a wheel to which a strap with a pail 
attached to it was fastened. These wells could be used for irrigation 
purposes, when the water was led off into broad channels (RV, I. 55. 8; 
X. iqi. 6, 7; 102. 11; VIII. 69. 12; 72. 10). 

1. There is a voluminous literature on the origin and antiquity of the Caste System 
in India, to some of Much reference will be made in the bibliography. For the 
views mentioned in this section see CHI , I, pp. 92 ff.; Muir, Original Sanskrit 
Texts , Vol. I; N, K. Dutt, Origin and Growth of Caste in India. In an article 
entitled: "Were Castes formulated in the Age of the Rigveda” in BDCRI, 
II, 34 ft'., the present writer has sought to prove that the formulation of castes, 
if not the Caste System, was already a fait accompli in the age of the Rigveda. 

2. Muir, op. oil., p. 10. 

3. Op. cit., pp. 263 -4, 280. 

4. AL t p. 323. 

3. I ml. Stud., V, p. 222. 

6. Ved. Stud., I, pp. xxv, 196, 275, 299, 309; II, pp. 120, 154, 179, etc. 

7. SD, p. 16. 




399 


BOOK SIX 


THE AGE OF THE LATER 
SAM II IT AS 



cc 





LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


i. LANGUAGE OF THE SAMHITAS 

I. Samaveda 

A language ceases to change only after death, and so the language of 
the Rigveda, even though hieratic and therefore to some extent artificial, 
did change in so far as it was a form of living speech at the same time. 
The earliest traceable stage in its course of change is that marked by the 
variant readings of the Mantras of the Rigveda contained in the Samaveda. 
In many cases these Samaveda- variants show forms which, however, 
seem to be archaic in comparison with the corresponding forms in the 
parallel Rik-mantras, and "therefore it was argued, particularly by Lud¬ 
wig, 1 that, at least in some cases, the Samavedic readings should be 
regarded as retaining the original text. But the question is, whether 
these apparently archaic forms were not the result of conscious efforts on 
the part of the redactors of'the Samaveda to strike an archaic effect. 1 
Almost all such forms in Samavedic parallel passages occur elsewhere 
also in the Rigveda, and none of them needs to have been derived from 
a pre-Rigvedic stage of the language. Without entirely denying the 
possibility of an original reading having been retained in some cases 
only in the Samaveda, it is only fair to conclude therefore that there is 
no compelling reason to consider the Samavedic text-tradition as superior 
to that of the Rigveda, specially as, even according to Ludwig's notion ,3 
the instances of older forms are more numerous in the text of the 
Rigveda. 

Moreover, the older forms in the passages of the Rigveda are on the 
whole not at all such as might have been planted in the text with a view 
to artificially producing an archaic effect, though that may be held of 
some of the older forms appealing in the Samavedic readings! Thus 
vakshatu in SF, II. 9. 1.16. 3 (— No. 1809) is indeed of older stock than 
yachchhatu in the parallel passage RV, VIII. 34. 2. But it would be wrong 
to conclude therefrom that the Samaveda in this case represents the 
older and perhaps the original reading, for such a view of the situation 
cannot but lead to the absurd position of considering all the Rigvedic 
passages containing forms like vakshatu to be older than all the Rigvedic 
passages containing forms like yachchhatu. In fact, the sporadical occur¬ 
rence of particular late forms cannot prove the lateness of the texts con¬ 
taining them, be those texts Rigvedic or Samavedic, for early and late forms 

403 


THE VEDIC AGE 


of nearly all categories have been used side by side in every period of the 
age of the Sarhhitas. A real change in the linguistic habits of the speakers 
concerned can be postulated only when the instances of variation point 
to a general tendency. Such general tendencies can, however, be clearly 
perceived in the variant readings of the Sdmaveda, and they point in¬ 
variably to a later stage of development. Thus the archaic genitive 
singular feminine form avya-h has been in all cases changed into avydh 
in the Samavedic variants. The enclitic particle im of pronominal origin 
which was visibly going out of use already in the Rigvedic language, 
occurs also in some passages of the Sdmaveda, but it is significant that 
in some others the reading has been so altered as to eliminate it; thus 
abhim ritasya of RV appears as abhy ritasya in SF, payasem as pay used, 
utcm {—uta im) as utim. Similarly, there is a pronounced tendency in 
the Samavedic variants to eliminate dissyllabic vowels as a result of 
which Rigvedic akshdr and prdh had to become aksharat and paprdh in 
the Sdmaveda. The archaic absolutive ending -tvi occurs only in two of 
the Rik-ve rses repeated in the Sdmaveda, but in both this -tvi has been 
changed into -tva. Accented i does not in Sandhi change into y (in spite 
of graphic forms) in the first nine Mandalas of the Rigveda, but it does in 
the Sdmaveda. In consequence, vi asema devahitam (R V, I. 89. 8) had to 
become vy dsemahi devahitam (SF. II. 9. 3. 9. 2. f& No. 1874) in which 
the loss of a vowel through Sandhi had to be made up for by replacing 
asema through later asemahi that does not at all occur in the RigvedaA 

2. Yajurveda 

Next to the Samhitas of the Rigveda and the Sdmaveda are to be 
ranked, from the linguistic point of view, in chronological order, the 
Mantra-portions of the Black Yajurveda, which in their turn are clearly 
older than the Vdjasaneyi-Samhita which should perhaps be dated earlier 
than the Atharvaveda. 5 Regarding the language of the Mantra-portions 
of the Taittiriya-Samhitd, Keith has shown 6 that it represents a stage 
intermediate between the Rigvedic language jmd the language of the . 
Brahmanas, though resembling the former much more closely than the 
latter. The same may be said also of the language of the other three 
Sarhhitas of the Black Yajurveda, for linguistically the Mantra-portions 
of all the four schools are really homogeneous, and therefore must be 
assigned to approximately the same age. Without making proper dis¬ 
tinction between Mantra and Brahmana portions, Schroeder tried to 
prove the superior age of the b/Laitvayani Samhitd oh linguistic grounds, 7 
but his arguments are unconvincing. The fact that the root stigh- of 
Indo-European antiquity occurs in Indian literature only in the 
Maitrdyani-Sarhhitd cannot of course prove the antiquity of the 
Maitrdyani-Samhita itself. Nor can the other peculiarities of the language 

404 





LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


<SL 


of the Maitrayanl and the Kathaka pointed out by Schroeder be accepted 
as proof of greater antiquity. The root khyd- appears in the curious form 
ki&r in Maitrayanl, Kathaka and Kapishthala, but that is no sign of 
antiquity as Schroeder was inclined to believe. It simply shows that in 
the dialects represented by these texts the semi-vowel y in khyd- became 
spirantic in pronunciation, and as such it points rather to a comparatively 
later age. Similarly, these three show the form playate for Taittiriya 
prdyate which is certainly older. The periphrastic verb-forms utsddaydm 
akar, prajanaydm akar and pavayam kmy at, specifically mentioned by 
Panini 8 as characteristic of the Vedic language, actually occur in the 
Maitrayanl, but cannot prove it to be older than the Taittiriya, for the 
formation is riot a primary one, as Keith 9 has justly pointed out, In 
microscopic details little differences can no doubt be observed in the 
four known Samhitas of the Black Yajurveda, but the general structure 
of their language is absolutely the same. 10 Equally extreme rarity of 
narrative perfects in all the Sariihitas of the Black Yajurveda 1 ' 1 is not 
only an additional proof of their essential contemporaneity, but also 
assigns them chronologically to the oldest period of the Vedic prose. In 
fact, in this respect the language of the Black Yajurveda is distinctly 
more faithful to the Indo-European basic idiom than the language of the 
Rigveda itself, for the narrative perfect, certainly not of Indo-European 
origin, is much more in evidence in the latter. 12 

The Mantra portions of the Taittiriya-Samhitd, that are independent 
of the Rigveda, mark a stage of distinct advance towards the normal 
language of the Brahrnanas. Thus -ebhih for -aih, -d for -ena, -dsah for 
-ah and -d for dni are steadily diminishing in the Mantra-portions (and 
completely disappear from the Brahmana parts). 1 ! Similarly, the verb 
in the independent IVlantra-parts of the Taittirlya-Samhitd shows a definite 
tendency to eliminate the Rigvedic endings -niasi, -thana and -tana. 
The future is a rarity in the Rigveda, but it is common in the Taittiriya 
and there is perhaps even an instance of periphrastic future (lut), namely 
anvagantd.n a While the later gerundives in -tavya and -anlya do not 
yet occur in the Taittirlya-mantras, the older ones in -ayya and -tva 
have almost completely disappeared in them. Lastly may be mentioned 
as occurring in Taittiriya-mantra the much discussed but still unex¬ 
plained verb-forms dhvanayit and ajayitM As for the Vdjasaneyi- 
Samhitd of the White Yajurveda, even its oldest parts (Adhyayas I- 
XVIII) are certainly later than the Mantra-portions of the Taittiriya. 
In the treatment of Rigvedic Mantras it shows much less independence 
than the Black Yajurveda and conforms rrmeh more to the Rigvedic 
text-tradition. As a result, the Kanva school of the Vajasaneyins has 
adopted the peculiarly Rigvedic sound l for intervocalic d also in its own 
Samhita. In language, the Vdjasaneyi-Samhitd does not differ from the 
trahmanas.H* 


405 




THE VEDIC AGE 


<SL 


Atharvaveda 

A linguistic appraisal of the Atharvaveda is unusually difficult, for 
very old things have been described in it sometimes in very late language, 
but at the same time it also offers forms that would be regarded as 
archaic even in the Rigveda. This can perhaps be best explained on the 
assumption that though no less old than the Rigveda in contents, the 
Atharvaveda was codified and canonized so late that the redactors con¬ 
sidered it necessary to re-dress it in an artificial garb of hieratic solemnity. 
At any rate, it is clear that the redactors of the Atharvaveda had in¬ 
herited a long tradition of Mantra literature of which all the parts seemed 
to them to be equally old, and which, therefore, they used indiscrim¬ 
inately in dressing up the Atharvan text. The basic language of the 
Atharvaveda is, however, not too unlike, say, the Sanskrit of the gram¬ 
marian Patanjali, and is on the whole not difficult to understand, excepting 
where the text consists of purely magical incantations, which the authors, 
as is everywhere the case with similar compositions, intentionally tried 
to make obscure. 

About one-seventh of the material of the first nineteen of the twenty 
Kanfias' of the Atharvaveda is drawn from the Rigveda, and in these 
Kanfias Rik-mantras often appear with significant variants. The twen¬ 
tieth Kanfia, the Samhita of the Brahmanachchhariisin as we have 
called it, consists, however, wholly of Mantras drawn from the Rigveda 
which appear here without a single variant reading, and among them 
are contained also Mantras from Valakhilya-hymns/S as, for instance, 
the first two of the four verses of AV, XX. 51 are identical with Val. 
I, 1-2, and the second two with Val. II. 1-2. 16 However interesting in 
other respects, the twentieth Kanda is therefore quite valueless from 
the linguistic point of view. Linguistically interesting and important are 
only those Rik-mantras (drawn mostly from the tenth Mandala) which 
are scattered in the other Kanfias, for in them a general trend towards 
the later language is distinctly perceptible.^ Thus the later absolutive 
ending -tva often replaces Rigvedic -Ivdya or -tin (e.g. hitvd for Rigvedic 
hitvdya and bhutvd for Rigvedic bhutvi). Forms of instrumental plural in 
-ebhih and -aih are equally current in the Rigveda, but in the Atharvaveda, 
against 263 cases of -aih there are only 53 of -ebhihA The root grabh- 
becomes grah- in the Atharvaveda when followed by suffixal -n-, thus 
producing forms such as grihndmi (for Rigvedic gribhnami) that are the 
only forms current in later Sanskrit. The word syona is always trisyllabic 
in the Rigveda, but in the Atharvaveda it is in most cases dissyllabic as 
in the later language. The Rigvedic form panthdh in nominative plural 
gives way in the Atharvaveda to the classical form panthdnah on the 
analogy of adhvanah (from adhvan), and it is remarkable that in AV, 
XIV. 1. 34a (== RV, X.' 85. 23a) panthdh has been replaced by panthdnah 
even to the detriment of metre. 1 ? But it is not in the variants of Ri 1 

406 


mNisr^ 



LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


■ alone that the late character of the language of the Atharvaveda 
Sealed. The vocative singular masculine of stems in -vams always 
ends with -vah in the Rigveda (e.g., chikitvah from chikitvdms-), but in the 
Atharvaveda it already assumes the classical form in -van (e.g:, chikitvan ); 
and the vocative singular masculine of wmrf-stems is almost always in 
-vah in the Rigveda, but in the independent passages of the Atharvaveda 
it is always in -van* « as in later literature. As instances of Atharvavedic 
innovations in verbal flexion may be mentioned that in the Rigveda the 
subjunctive middle ending in the second person singular is -a.se, (e.g. 
vardhdse), but in the Atharvaveda it is -asai (e.g,, naydsai) as also in the 
Brahmanas; similarly the parallel ending in the third person singular is 
-ate in the Rigveda excepting in one form, but in the Atharvaveda and 
later it is exclusively -atai (e.g., ir ay ate in RV, but irayaiai in AV ). 21 
The only instance of periphrastic perfect in the Mantra-texts 32 is gamaydm 
chakdra in AV, XVIII. 2. 27, and the earliest occurrence of periphrastic 
futures is to be found perhaps in the form anvaganta 3 3 a in A V, VI. 123. 
1-2. And again it is the Atharvaveda and no other Mantra-text that 
contains gerundives in -tavya and -ariiya, e.g., himsitavya [AV, V. 18. 6) 
and dmaniraniya (AV, VIII. 10. y)M 
These are the more important features of the Atharvavedic language 
that stamp it definitely as the latest of the Mantra-texts linguistically, 
and the metrical and non-inetrical parts of the Atharvaveda are composed 
in apparently the same language.^ At the same time, however, some of 
the words specially characteristic of the Atharvaveda, such as hvaydmi, 
sarva( as compared with viiva), rajju, etc., are of prehistoric origin 36 and 
therefore would seem to argue for it a very high antiquity. 


2. THE SAMHITA LITERATURE 


1. Atharvaveda 

From the view-point of contents, there can be no doubt that the typically 
Atharvanic charms and incantations are the product of a primitive 
culture not far removed from, the dawn of human civilization. Mantras 
of this type are not altogether wanting in the Rigveda, but, being.essen¬ 
tially a £rauta Mantrapatha for priests whose chief concern was the 
cultivation of Soma ritual it could not include many of them, since the 
whole Soma ritual was strictly hieratic. The Mantras of the Atharvaveda 
on the other hand were meant for application at the humbler Grihya 
sacrifices of the common people evolved round the plain and simple 
primitive fire-cult. But the priestly classes, in course of time, got the 
control of the originally non-Brahmanical Grihya sacrifices, and, naturally, 
also compiled a Mantrapatha for these. This Grihya Mantrapatha is the 
Atharvaveda. 


407 



THE VEDIC AGE 




-■ THE VEDIC AGE 

The Srauta Mantrapatha, i.e., the Rigveda, was compiled by the 
for the priests, and partly for their social superiors, the princes and 
potentates. The tone of the Rigveda, therefore, even where the Mantras 
are not directly addressed to the gods, is mainly one of begging and 
persuading. But the tone of the Atharvaveda is altogether different. Here 
the Bralimana priest is addressing his social inferiors from whom he 
need not turn off the shady side of his character. Thus in the hymn on 
the ‘‘Brahmana’s wife” ( Brahmajaya ) the priest has demanded a remarkable 
privilege for his class (AV, V. 17. 8): 

Even though there were ten non-Brahmana previous husbands of 
a woman, 

The Bralimana alone becomes her husband if he seizes her hand. 2 7 

It is significant that the verses immediately preceding and following 
this verse occur also in the Paippalada-Samhita, and seven of the verses 
of this hymn constitute the Rigvedic original (X. 109) of which it is an 
expanded version. But this particular verse, planted in the hymn to 
serve an obvious purpose, Occurs neither in the Rigveda nor in the 
Paippalada. The point has been still further emphasized in the following 
verse (A V, V. 17. 9): # 

The Brahmana indeed is the husband, neither the Rajanya, nor the 

Vaisva, 

This the sun goes on proclaiming to the five tribes of men. 

The burden of the other verses of this notorious hymn is, however, not 
the Brahmana’s preposterous claim to other men’s wives, but threats 
and curses on those who would dare to molest the Brahmana’s wife, e.g. 
(verse 12):— 

Not on his couch reclines a wife bringing a hundred (as dowry?) 

In whose kingdom the Brahmana’s wife is restrained throtlgh ignor¬ 
ance. 

Not only the Brahmana’s wife, but also his property was sought to be 
protected by a similar appeal to people’s superstition. 18 Thus in the next 
hymn (AV, V. 18) we are told (vv. 9-10):— 

Brahmanas have sharp arrows and missiles, 
the volley they hurl is not in vain; 

Pursuing with fervour and with fury 
they cast him down from afar. 

They that ruled a thousand 
and were ten thousands,— 

Those Vaitahavyas were defeated 

for having devoured a Brahmana’s cow. 

408 




LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


BL 


trick becomes ridiculous when it is suggested in all seriousne 
'way of averting the ill omen of a twinning animal, that one of the 
twin calves should be made over to a Brahmana (AV, III. 28. 2). Most 
amusing, however, is the long hymn (A V, XII. 4) in fierce denunciation 
of those who fail to bestow on Brahmanas their barren cows. 

The Brahmana's supposed privileges have thus been shamelessly asserted 
in the Atharvaveda, and of his obligations there is hardly any mention. 
Thus in AV, III. 58 the Brahmana, it is true, is praying for glory instead 
of wealth, but he cannot help adding: “so that I may be dear to the 
bestower of Dakshina (sacrificial fee).'' To the Brahmanas of the Athar¬ 
vaveda it was evidently more important to be dear to the bestower of 
Dakshina than to be dear to the gods. Nor were the Mantras of the 
Atharvaveda primarily meant for those sacrificial sessions ( sattras) at 
which there was neither Yajamdna nor Dakshina. 

The community in which the Atharvan priest ordinarily moved was no 
doubt the society of the poor and ignorant villagers, to meet the demands 
of whose primitive superstitions was his principal professional business. 
But as even the highest and the mighty in the land were not above those 
superstitions, the Atharvan gained access even to the rulers of the 
country, and in fact came to be recognized as the king’s alter ego in the 
role of his Purohita. How the Atharvan alone of the various types of 
priests came to occupy this enviable position is quite clear. While the other 
priests were adepts in the higher Srauta-ritual of which the solemn 
ceremonies were performed only at intervals or on special occasions, the 
Atharvan had to advise the king on trivial events of his daily life, such 
as a cough {AV, VI. 105), sleep (AV, IV. 5), nightmare (AV, VI. 45), etc., 
and therefore had to be constantly in attendance on him. *5 Who else 
in these circumstances could be the king’s chief adviser? Moreover, were 
not the king’s victories due to the effective prayers of his Purohita? 
A king’s Purohita actually says in the Atharvaveda (III. 19):— 

1. Sharpened is this prayer of mine, 
sharpened is my manly strength; 

Sharp and imperishable be their rule 
whose victorious Purohita I am. 

4. Sharper than the axe, 

and sharper than the flame, 

Shar per than the thunder of Indra 
are those whose Purohita I am. 

1 1 M 

Since an Atharvan priest was by custom the king’s Purohita it is but 
natural that an elaborate hymn of coronation—at which, also according 
+ o later ritual, the Purohita was the chief functionary—should be included 
’ the Atharvaveda (IV. 8):- 


409 


THE VEDIC AGE 




i . Being sets milk in beings, 

he has become the lord of beings; 

Death attends his coronation, 
let this king accept this royalty. 
2. Stride forward, do not falter (?) 
stern corrector, rival-slayer. 

Approach, 0 benefactor of friends, 
may you be blessed by the gods. 


The hymn also refers to the custom of treading on a tiger-skin at corona¬ 
tion :— 


4. As a tiger on tiger-skin 

stride unto the great quarters; 


Let all the people and heavenly waters 
rich in milk desire you. 


There is also a similar hymn intended for recital at the election of a 
king, (AV, III. 4):- 

1. To you has come the kingdom, with splendour rise forward; 

as lord of the people, sole king, rule; 

Let all the quarters call you, O king, 

may all wait on you and pay you homage. 

2. Let the people choose you for kingship, 

let these five divine quarters (choose you); 

Rest at the summit and pinnacle of your kingdom, 
and from there share out riches to us. 

That the king had sometimes to be elected, though kingship was generally 
hereditary, is clearly suggested by the last verse. The exact form of 
government, however, cannot be ascertained from the Mantras of the 
Atharvaveda. But that the people were happy and proud of their mother¬ 
land is perfectly clear from the splendid Bhumi-sukta (AV, XII. 1) 
which might have been the national anthem of Vedic India3»:— 

1. Truth supreme and right, formidable, consecration and penance, 

holiness and sacrifice are sustaining the earth; 

May she, the mistress of all that was and will be, the earth, 
make for us extensive space. 

2. (She who ordains) freedom from restraint among men, 

whose are the hills and streams equally numerous (?) 

Who bears herbs of various virtues— 
may she, the earth, spread and prosper for us. 


410 







LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


Hi 


ii. 


12 . 


45 * 


56 . 


On whom are the ocean and the river and the waters, 
on whom have sprung food and the peoples. 

On whom quickens this that breathes and stirs— 

^ may that earth grant us cattle and also food. 

She who in the beginning was water in the ocean, 
whom the sages followed (?) by means of occult power, 

Ihe earth, whose deatliless heart, encompassed in truth, rests in 
highest heaven— 

may she confer glory and strength on our excellent state. 

Let your hills and snowy mountains 
and your forest be pleasant, 0 earth ! 

On the earth, brown, black, red, and multiform, 
firm and extended, by Indra defended, 

I have stood unconquered, unsmitten, uninjured. 

What is your middle, O earth, what your navel, 
what refreshments arose out of your body, 

Instal us in them and be towards us gracious; 

Earth is the mother, and I am her son; 

Parjanya is the father, may he grant us plenty. 

May the earth bearing peoples of various speeches 
and of customs varying according to their homes. 

Grant me wealth in a thousand streams 
like a steadfast and unresisting milch-cow. 

What villages, what forests, 
what assemblies are on the earth, 

What congregations and councils, 
there may we speak in praise of you.3' 


Q 


The hymn runs up to sixty-three verses, and at the end, the poet, dis¬ 
solving in rapture and gratitude, pours out his heart in these simple 
words:— 

63, 0 mother earth, settle me down 

and kindly make me well-establish-^ •' 

In concord with heaven, O sa 
settle me in splendour and glory. 

rmber of Vvmn=* ^ one Atharvaveda are on the borderline of magic 
i politics.3* As example may be cited AV, VII. 12:_ 

1. May the assembly and the council* 8 protect me, 
the two daughters of Prajapati in agreement; 

May he whom I meet seek to help me, 
may I speak pleasantly at the meeting, O fathers: 

4H 





THE VEDIC AGE 


<SL 


3. Of these seated here together 

I take away splendour and discernment; 

Of this whole gathering, 0 Indra, 
make me the possessor of fortune. 

Of the same type, but much more elevated in tone, is the oft-quoted am 
justly celebrated charm for securing concord (AV. III. 30):— 


1. Like in heart, of like intent, 

non-hostile do I make you; 

One another you should love, 

as the cow loves her new-born calf. 

2. May the son do the father’s will. 

and be of one mind with his mother. 

May wife to husband honeyed words 
and peaceful always speak. 

3. May not brother his brother hate, 

or sister her own sister; 

In full accord, with duty same, 
should they speak words gently. 

6. Same be your drink and common your food, 
to the same yoke together I bind you, 
Worship Agni together in harmony 
like spokes round the nave of a wheel. 


Far more numerous are, however, the charms of a homelier sort. House 
and home, field and river, grain and rain, cattle and horses, trading and 
gambling, journeying and returning, serpents and vermin, furnish the 
special themes for these prayers and charms.”33 Thus A V, I. 13 is a charm 
to conciliate the goddess of lightning: 

x. -Homage be to your lightning, homage to your thunder, 

Hom^e to your bolt which you hurl at the wicked. 

2. Homage to y«m, child of stream, from which you gather he? 
Take pity on ou,.r K-vlies, and to our children be kind. 

Protection against fire is supposed to be achieve p,«ms of the c, 

(A V, III. 21) which begins thus 


Fires that are in the waters, 
in Vritra, in man, and in stones, 


Who have entered the plants and the trees, 
to those fires be this oblation. 


412 



Mm'm 8k ■'■ 

LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 
i is secured by means of the cha)j m AV, III. 24: 

4. As a fountain of a hundred jefc§ ( 

of a thousand jets, unexhausted. 

So is this our grain 
of a thousand jets, unexhausted. 

5. Collect, O with hundred hand^ 

pile, O with thousand hand: 5) 

Bring about the amplitude hei e 
of what was and will be don s . 

ppp, charm was applied evidently at the time of gathering corn. The 
^arm for sowing seed is A V, VI. 142 :— 

1. Shoot up and multiply by your own strength, o barley. 

Fill (?) all the vessels, may not heavenly thunder Uw+roy you. 

2. Where we appeal to you, the divine barley that listens to u. 

There shoot up like the sky, be unexhausted like the ocean. 

3. Unexhausted are your attendants (?), unexhausted be your heaps, 

Unexhausted those who give you, and also those whom you consume. 

Very curious are the so-called Mrigara-sfiktas (AV, IV. 23-29), the first 
and last verses of each of which occur also in the Black YajurvedaM in 
connection with a Mrigareshti, of which these are obviously a further 
elaboration. Each of these hymns (they cannot be called magical charms, 
though they are used as such) is addressed to a separate deity, and every 
verse of each of them ends with the refrain: “let him (or do ye) free us 
f r pm distress.” Rudra has been invoked in a long hymn (XI. 2), and as 
i s usual in prayers to this god, has not been asked to confer boons, but 
or ly not to injure. The various names applied- to the god in this hymn 
n .turally call to mind the §atarudriya. 34 a 

Least savoury of the magic charms of the Atharvaveda are those of 
w itchcraft ( abhichdra ) and the like which constitute the Angiras part of 
phe Sainhila. The purpo.se of some is defensive, but the majority of them 
are offensive in purpose and directed against human enemies. Evil spirits 
are firstly called upon to come out in the open and proclaim their real 
character, for, as soon as they do that, they lose their dangerous power 
of doing injury. The metal most effective against the demons is lead, 
which therefore plays a prominent part in these hymns. 

Low and primitive morality speaks in these hymns. But there are 
also hymns pregnant with noble sentiments. For instance, the famous 
hymn 35 to Varuna {A V, IV. 16):— 

T. The mighty lord on high our deeds, as if at hand, espies; 

The gods know all men do, though men would fain their acts dis¬ 
guise. 




413 





THE V.EDIC AGE 



2 . Whoever stands, whoever moves, or steals from pla ce to p i ace> 

Or hides him in. his secret cell—the gods his movemei, ts t ra ce.' 
Wherever two together plot, and deem they are alone > 

King Vanina is there, a third, and all their schemes are known. 

3. This earth, is his, to him belong these vast and boundless s j.j es • 
Both seas within him rest, and yet in that small pool he l es 

4. Whoever far bey on d the sky should think his way to wing, 

He could not the re elude the grasp of Varuna the king. 

His spies, descending from the skies, glide all this world arouT 1( j. 
Their thousand e y es all-scanning sweep to earth’s remotest bc, u nd. 

5. Whate’er exists, in heaven and earth, whate’er beyond the skie.. 
Before the eyes of Varuna, the king, unfolded lies. 

The ceaseless ^nikings all he counts of every mortal’s eyes, 

He wields -tuis universal frame as gamester throws his dice. 

Atharva 1 ' v ' a i c poetry has reached, its peak in this hymn. But to gain 
iaew of the Atharvaveda, the other side of the picture should n< 
only not be ignored, but should rather be kept more in mind. Thus there 
are two’ imprecations (VII. 95. 96) directed against the kidneys of an 
enemy. The purpose of the hymn VII. 70 is to frustrate the enemy’s 
sacrifice, as is disclosed by its very first verse:— 

Whatever that one offers with mind, speech, sacrifice, oblation and 


Yajus— 


That offering of his let Nirriti in concord with death destroy before it 
has taken place. 

Most typical of the hymns of this genre are perhaps those with the refra’j n 
"he who hates us, whom we hate" (e.g., AV, II. 19-23). Along w;^ 
charms for victory, longevity, cure from fever, etc., we find also charr ls 
for winning the heart of a maid, e.g., AV, II. 30:— 


1. As the wind shakes the grass 
So I shake your mind, 

So that you may desire me, 
That you may not go away. 

4. What was within, be that out, 
What was out, be within; 

Of the maids of every sort 
Seize the mind, O herb : 


That magical charms of this sort were not applied exclusively in con¬ 
nection with extra-conjugal love is, however, clear from a similar charm 
(VII. 37) put in the mouth of a newly married bride who admonishes 
her groom with these words (accompanied by corresponding act):— 
With my garment produced by Manu do I surround you. 

So that you be mine alone, and never even discourse of other women. 


414 




LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


rannical passion has been aptly likened by another poet in th 
Atharvaveda (III. 25. 2}'' to “an arrow, winged with longing, barbed with 
love, and whose shaft is unswerving desire” (Bloomfield). 

Quite a number of medicinal charms are included in the Atharvaveda. 
The chief malady that was sought to be treated magically is takman 
(this term does hot occur outside of the Atharvaveda). From the symptoms 
described it is almost certain that it was nothing but malarial fever. 
The plant Kushtha is mentioned as potent in fighting takman, but whether 
as medicine, or as amulet, is not quite clear. It is interesting to note that 
in one hymn (V. 22) takman has been asked to seize the Sudra and the 
Dasi or to go away to the Mujavants or “to the Valhikas further beyond,” 
and in the last verse the author says quite maliciously that he is sending 
takman to the Gandharis, Ahgas and Magadhas "like one sending a 
treasure to a person.” That the Atharvaveda should contain charms 
against snake-bite is quite obvious. One of them (V. 13) deserves special 
mention not. only as marking perhaps the lowest bathos of Atharvavedic 
witchcraft but also on account of the word tdbuva occurring in its tenth 




verse 


Not tdbuva, not tdbuva, yes you are tdbuva; 
The poison is made sapless by tdbuvaA 6 


The word tdbuva of this vers6 was connected with “taboo” by Weber, 
though not without hesitation, and in the same hesitating manner the 
etymological equation tdbuva = “taboo” continues to be accepted or 
rejected to the present day. 3 <> a 

Of isolated typical hymns of the Atharvaveda, mention should be 
made of the one (XL 5) in mystic exaltation of the Brahmachdrin, from 
which it is quite clear that the institution of Brakmacharya as described 
in the later Grihya-sutras was fully established already in the age of the 
Atharvaveda. 37 Similar mystic exaltation, in typical Brahmana-prose, of 
the Vratya (be., new convert to Brahmanism) is the theme of the entire 
fifteenth'Kanda, in the fifth Paryaya of which Rudra under various 
designations (Sarva, Bhava, liana, Paiupati, Mahadeva) has been 
mentioned as guarding the various quarters for the Vratya. Remarriage 
of widows3» is taken for granted (vv. 27-28) in the long hymn {A V, 
|X. 5) on the expiatory power of the offering of Panchaudana (i.e., a 
goat and five rice-dishes). The two hymns, V. 20 and 21, are the most, 
important battle-charms in the Atharvaveda, and they might have been 
used also directly as battle-songs. Regarding the apocryphal Kuntapa- 
suktas, it should be noted that Parikshit, probably of the Kuru-dynasty, 
has been mentioned in the first of them» as a king in whose kingdom 
the people were prosperous. From the literary point of view the most 
interesting is the seventh Kuntapa which is nothing but a Vedic nursery- 
song with the refrain: “not there is that, O maid, where you think.” 

415 


THE VEDIC AGE 

Yajurveda 

As for the Yajurveda , the Sainhita portion appears in an extended 
form in the latest of the Yajurveda-Samhitds, viz., the Vdjasaneyi- 
Sarhhitd, of which only the earlier parts, in practically the same form 
and language,^ but not necessarily in the same order, appear in the 
Saihhitas of the Black YajuvvedaA 1 From the view-point of literature 
and contents, therefore, a survey of the Vdjasaneyi-Samhitd, as given 
by Winternitz,42 suffices for the Mantra-parts of the whole Yajurveda. A 
fresh survey of the same literature need not be attempted here, especially 
as the ultimate literary value of the Ya jus-mantras is nil. Yet it may be / 
mentioned in passing that in the Satarudriya section (Adhyaya XVI) of 
the Vdjasaneyi-Samhitd the terrible god has been invoked under various 
designations, the result, no doubt, of the aversion to uttering directly 
his real name that can be perceived already in the Atnarvaveda . I he 
most interesting, however, is the section on Purushaniedha (Aahyaya 
XXX), where, in the language of ritual symbolism, the various then 
existing classes and castes have been mentioned, which, according to 
Weber,43 point to a period of unrest and turmoil 


3. THE BRAHMAN AS 

1. Language 

The Brahmana literature is vast and varied, but also dry and repulsive, 
excepting where, leaving their proper subject which is mystical and 
puerile speculation on ritual practices, the Brahmana authors cite illus¬ 
trative examples from social life, invent aetiological myths to serve as 
the basic principle to all imaginable concrete facts, or simply narrate 
mythological or semi-historical stories, sometimes in the form of ballads .44 
The prolixity of the Brahmana-authors is sickening, and yet the texts 
are not at all perspicuous, in spite of their huge bulk in some cases. But 
the language with its even rhythm is not without a beauty of its own, 
strangely like that of the early canonical texts in Pali. The Satapatha- 
Brdhmana and the Jaintintya-B/dhtnana, however, show a fully developed 
literary style. This is important, for it is much, more difficult to develop 
a literary style in free prose than in verse, and is possible only after 
considerable literary culture. 

The Brahmana texts, together with the prose parts of the Atharvaveda 
and the Yajurveda , are perhaps "the only genuine prose works which the 
Sanskrit, as a popular language*: ..has produced. 1 '^ Brbadly speaking* 
the language of the Brahmanas is homogeneous. At the same time, how¬ 
ever, every one of the older Brahmana texts has its own minute linguistic 
peculiarities. Panini's grammar offers a unique criterion by which to 
judge them. It cannot be proved that Panini was acquainted with the 

416 





LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


or the Brahmanas of the White Yajurveda , 4 ® though he certainl 
„,] the other Sariihita-texts known to us, as well as the Aitareya- 
BrdhmanaM Now, to explain this curious fact it cannot be reasonably 
argued—as is often done—-that though the White Yajurveda was consider¬ 
ably older, yet Panini had no personal knowledge of it for the good mason 
that it was produced in eastern India; for Panim certainly knew the 
TaHlinya-Samhitd, a product of the south, and the Maitrdyanl-Sammia, 
a product of the west, though he himself was at home in the north. His 
apparent ignorance of the White Yajurveda therefore must be regarded 
as'a proof of the latter’s comparatively late origin. But it. also proves 
that for a composite picture of the language^ of the Brahmanas one 
m yy confidently arP eal to P&jini- For details, however, which prove the 
older BrahinarVs to be much older than Panini, special studies are 


IL 


necessary. . „ ,, , ,, ,, , 

Nothing is more characteristic of Brahmana prose than the sub¬ 
stitution of the ending -at for -ah, both in abiative and genitive singular 
0 f feminine stems (e.g., bhwmyai for bhumyah). Forms in this anomalous 
-ai occur already in the prose parts of the Atharvaveda, but oftener in 
the Mantras of the Yajurveda, and very frequently in the Brahmanas. 
In the Jaimimya-Brdhmana, this -ai has even completely supplanted the 
usual -dh,w but it does not occur at all in the Satapatha-Brdhmana of the 
Kanva-recension.50 The an- steins are very often endingless in locative 
singular in the Rigveda, and not a few times also in the Atharvaveda, 
but" in Brahmana prose ahan and atmanV are the only two endingless 
locatives in living use. 5 * In its verbal system, too, the language of the 
Brahmanas is in many respects sharply distinguished from that of the 
Mantra-texts. The loss of augment is here restricted practically to pro¬ 
hibitive constructions with md, as in the classical language ,53 and the 
so-called injunctive too is found in Brahmana prose hardly ever except 
after this prohibitive md. 54 The subjunctive finds its place, not in narra¬ 
tive, but in direct speech. 54 E Faint traces of gerunds in -am can be found 
already in the Rigveda, 55 but they are quite common in the Brahmanas, 5 ® 
and past active participles in -tavant, quite unknown in the Rigveda, but 
quite common in the later language, begin to appear furtively in them .57 
The suffix -aka with the meaning of a present participle is a marked 
characteristic of the language of the Brahmanas, 5 » as also the infinitive 
in -toh in construction with iivara .59 The use of rupam kri- in the sense of 
"to. become” is a peculiar feature of Brahmana syntax>o 

In the use of the tenses of the past the Brahmanas show much more 
precision than the Rigveda. The aorist is rarely,used in them outside of 
direct speech, and in narration the tense of the past used in the Brah¬ 
manas is normally the imperfect,, but not unoften also the perfect.® 1 
The perfects with a heavy reduplication have regularly a present meaning, 
but other perfects are used as often or oftener also in narrative past, 61 * 

417 


DD 


THE VEDtC AGE 



ap# the frequency of this narrative perfect is rightly regarded as a 
of comparative lateness of the texts concerned. 62 Panini’s rules about the 
tenses of the past are not applicable to Brahmana prose, but it is curious 
to note that of the few narrative perfects occurring in the Brahmana- 
por tions of the laittinya-Samhitd not a single one has been used to 
relate personal experience—so that in this respect at least they are fully 
in accord with Paninean grammar 6 3 The periphrastic perfect with fcri- 
as auxiliary, of which the earliest occurrence in the Atkarvaveda has been 
noted above, is fairly common in the Brahmanas, but that with as- is 
extremely rare, and no form with bhu u«: be quoted at all. 6 * In this , 
respect, too, the language of the Brahmanas ic j n essential agreement, 
with Panini who permits only kri-, though already Katyayana. and 
Patanjali twisted the meaning of the relevant Sutra of »anini so as to 
include also 6M- and as -. 6 5 On the whole, the language of the Brahmanas 
is more precise in expression than that of the Mantra-texts, t r id as a 
living and forceful form of speech it is infinitely superior to the monstrous 
prose of the classical writers. 6 ® 

2. Literature 

The literature of which this language is the vehicle is, however, arid 
and dismal, and could have been the product of only.a very primitive 
intelligence. And yet it was in the age of the later Brahmanas that the 
older °Upanishads were composed, and Panini’s peerless grammar- 
perhaps the highest product of ancient Indian scientific thought 6 7 —was 
written. It is clear that the intellect and mentality revealed by the exten¬ 
sive Brahmana texts was the monopoly of the cabalistic priests of the 
later Vedic age, and not a characteristic of the enlightened sections of 
the people. As “literature” the Brahmanas, digressive portions apart, 
may prove to be of interest only to students of abnormal psychology. 68 
At the risk of a little exaggeration it may perhaps be maintained that 
all that is noble and beautiful in Hinduism was foreshadowed already 
by the Rigveda, and all that is filthy and repulsive in it, by the Brahmanas. 
The morality of the Brahmana texts is no higher than that of primitive 
medicine-men. Thus in connection with the Mahavrata sacrifice most 
immoral and obscene acts are enjoined to be performed in the presence 
of pious spectators. 6 ? The grasping greed of the Brahmin, so much in 
evidence already in the Atkarvaveda, has passed all bounds in the Brah¬ 
manas. Here the Brahmin coolly claims that in every dispute between 
a Brahmin and a non-Brahmin the judgment should be given in favour 
of the Brahmin.7» With a cheerful disregard of other people’s interest a 
Brahmana author has declared that a murder is no murder if the victim 
is not a Brahmin!? 1 And another declares with the same cool confidence 
that the Sudra is yathdkdmavadhya, i.e., one who can be killed at will. 7 - 
Scarcely less repulsive than this mentality of the Brahmana authors 

418 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 

g prolixity. Lack of logic they tried to compensate for 
by repeating ad nauseam the same insipid thought. Hence the inordinate 
bulk of some of the Brahmana texts. But when no reasonable limit is 
set to a book, it is bound to take in much that is irrelevant, and it is 
these irrelevant portions of the Brahmanas that are of interest from the 
view-point of literature. The true stuff of the Brahmanas is dismal. If 
in the ritual it is required to move a cup an inch from east to west, the 
Srauta-sutras will simply state that and nothing more. But a Brahmana 
is almost sure to spin out a whole paragraph in “elucidation” of this 
act that may very well be as follows: “The cup should be moved from 
east to west, because the sun moves from east to west. He who moves the 
cup from east to west moves, therefore, also the sun, and thus conquers 
the world of heaven. It is moved an inch, because an inch is the twelfth 
part of a foot. And the foot is a metre. The Jagati-metre has twelve 
syllables. In that he moves the cup an inch which is the twelfth part of 
a foot he therefore moves the metres.” This sounds strange no doubt. 
But, all the same, this is the stuff of which the Brahmanas are made. 
Everything else that is found in the Brahmanas is, strictly speaking, 
’irrelevant. 73 

In these irrelevant portions, however, may be found pieces of truly 
literary composition, though never of a high order. They are of various 
genres. Firstly, there are the Gathas or narrative verses, composed in a 
language more archaic than the average language of the Brahmanas, 
but less so than that of the Samhitas.74 Then there are interesting legends 
like that of the Great Flood,75 but most of them are frankly aetiological. 
Quite a number of beautiful stories are contained in the Brahmanas in 
which the gods indulge in pranks with the mortals much in the fashion 
of their Olympian compeers;? 6 It is very characteristic of the Brahmana 
authors that sin is generally regarded by them as a physical defdement.7? 
But genuine devotion to truth is not wanting. Thus when Arana AupaveSi 
in his old age was asked by his relations to establish ritual fires and 
become an Ahitagni, he shuddered in horror and replied that he doesn’t 
dare, for an Ahitagni has to control his speech and can never speak an 
untruth, since “worship, above all, is truthfulness.”? 8 That by truth the 
Brahmana authors meant more than mere accuracy in speech is clearly 
suggested by the story of a dispute between mind and speech that was 
settled by Prajapati in favour of mind on the ground that speech is the 
messenger and imitator of the mind.79 As regards speech concrete, the 
Brahmanas clearly state that the speech of the country of the Kuru- 
Panchalas is the best. 80 And abstract speech ( ndrban ) has been connected 
with form ( rupa ) in a Brahmana text 81 quite in the manner of later 
philosophy. The daily performance of the five Mahdyajhas (offerings to 
gods, to beings, to the Fathers, the study of the Veda, and charity), the 
corner-stone of orthodox Hindu sociology, has been enjoined for the first 

419 





THE VEDIC AGE 

me in a Brahmapa text. 8ia The doctrine of reward and retrilnrtion" 
after death for good and evil done during lifetime is also mentioned 
clearly in the Brahmana texts , 82 but the doctrine of rebirth is conspicuous 
by its absence, though the possibility of re-death in the world of the Fathers 
has been recognized already, *3 and further that during sleep life tempor¬ 
arily separates from the bod.y. 8 4 

If treatment of women is a criterion of civilization, then the civilization 
of the Brahmana texts can expect only an adverse verdict from posterity. 
In the Rigvedic age, the newly married wife used to be greeted with the 
words: “you should address the assembly as a commander, ” 8 s but the 
Brahmana authors, after identifying the woman with Mirriti (i.e. evil ), 86 
declare that “the woman, the Sudra, the dog, and the crow are falsehood 
(. Anrita ).” 8 7 Marriage by purchase must have been common—if not the 
rule—in the age of the Brahmanas, for in deprecation of a faithless wife 
a Brahmana text says: “she commits an act of falsehood who though 
purchased by her husband goes about with others .” 88 There was no 
question of women freely addressing assemblies in this age, for the same 
text 8 9 lays down that women should not attend meetings, in evety 
respect the culture of the priestly classes was at its lowest ebb in the age 
of the Brahmanas. But it was still alive, though confined within a small 
coterie. The Upanishadic seers vitalized it again, but gave it an altogether 
different form. 


4 . THE ARANYAKAS 

The Aranyakas (“Forest-texts”), the concluding portions of, or 
appendices to, the Brahmanas, are so called (it is generally supposed) 
because their contents are of so secret and uncanny a nature that they 
would spell danger if taught to the uninitiated, and had therefore to be 
learnt in the forest and not in the village. They are concerned neither with 
the performance nor with any explanation of the sacrifice, but with its 
mysticism and symbolism. They form a natural ^transition to the (Jpani- 
shads, the oldest of which are either included in or appended to the 
Aranyakas, the line of demarcation being not always easy to draw. The 
Aranyakas and Upanishads by themselves, and not the system of 
pliilosophy based on them, were originally called “Vedanta” (literally, 
the concluding portions of the Veda)—a title applicable to them in 
more senses than one as follows:— 

(x) From the point of view of relative literary chronology, they stand 
at the end of the Veda. ( 2 ) As the most obtruse and mystical of the Sruti 
works, they were naturally taught to the pupil towards the close ol tin 
period of his apprenticeship with his Guru. ( 3 ) Ihey formed the end ot 
the daily Vedic-recital. 


420 



LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE ^ 

Asyomponeiit (and concluding) parts of the Brahrnanas, the Aranyakas^ 
some Upanishads) are found attached to as many Sakhas (Vedic 
schools) as the Brahrnanas belong to. The Aitareya Aranyaka is appended 
to the Aitareya Brdhmana of the RV. It consists of five books which 
are looked upon and designated as five separate Aranyakas. The first 
deals with the Soma sacrifice from the ritual point of view. The second is 
intermixed with theosophical speculations on Prana and Purusha, and is 
Upanishadic in character, the last four chapters actually forming the 
Aitareya Upanishad. The third book contains allegorical and mystical 
meanings of the Sariihita, Pada, and Krama texts (Pathas). The last two 
books contain miscellaneous matter, such as Mahanamm verses and 
details about the Nishkevalya Sastra, to be recited in the Mahavrata, 
and are attributed to A^valayana and Saunaka—two Sutra authors. The 
Sdhkhdyana or Kaushitaki Aranyaka is the concluding portion of the 
Kaushitaki Brdhmana of the RV and agrees very closely with the 
Aitareya Aranyaka in its contents. It consists of fifteen chapters of which 
3 to 6 constitute the long and important Kaushitaki Upanishad. In 
the Black Yajurveda, the Taittiriya Aranyaka is only a continuation of 
the Taittiriya Brdhmana. It consists of ten chapters or prapathakas 
(commonly called Aranas), 7 to 9 constituting the important Tait- 
tiny a Upanishad. The tenth chapter called Mahdndrdyana Upanishad 
is a very late addition to the Aranyaka. In the White Yajurveda the 
fourteenth book of the Satapalha Brdhmaria is in name only an Aranyaka — 
the Brihaddranyaka —the last six chapters of which constitute the 
celebrated Upanishad of that name and the major part of the so-called 
Aranyaka. 

For the Samaveda, the only Aranyakas are the first Aranyaka-like 
section of the Chkdndogya Upanishad, which belongs probably to the 
Tdndya-Mahd-Brdhmana and the. Jaiminiya Upanishad Brdhmana 
which is nothing but an Aranyaka of the Jaiminlya or Talavakara school 
of the SF and comprises the well-known Kena (or Talavakara) Upanishad. 

It is not necessary to discuss here the contents of the Aranyakas, as 
the principal ideas contained in them will be dealt with in the chapter 
on religion and philosophy (Ch. XXII). 


1. Der Rigveda, Band III, p. 92. 

2. See Oldenberg, Prolegomena, p. 274. 

3. Ibid., pp. 92-3. 

4. For further instance of evidently intentional alteration of Rigvedic passages in 
the direction of later forms in the Samaveda, see Oldenberg, op. cit., pp. 277-81. 

5. See Keith, HOS, XVIII, p. clxv. 

6. Op. cit., pp. cxl ff. 

7. See his Mattrdyani Sariihita, Vol, I, pp. xiv-xviii and Vol. II, pp. viii-x. 

8. Ill, 1. 42. 

9. Op. cit., p. xcv. 
to. Ibid., p. xcvi. 

II. Ibid., p. xcvii. 


421 


THE VEX)IC AGE 



See Wackernag'el, Altindische Grammatik, VoL I, p. xxxi. 
See Keith, op. cit., pp. cxl ff. 


<SL 


X3a. This form, probably with the same function, occurs also in the Atharvaveda 
(see below). 

14. See Whitney, §§ 1048, 904b. 

14a. The Mantra portions of the Yajurveda are devoid of literary value, and there¬ 
fore will not be discussed further in this chapter. For social and political history, 
however, these portions are very important and in that connection they will 
be discussed in other chapters. 

15. The ten Kuntapa-suktas (regarded as Khilas) placed towards the end of the 
twentieth Karuja are curiously analogous to the Valakhilya-hymns of the 
Rigveda, also placed towards the end of what was originally perhaps the final 
Mapidala of the Rigveda. 

16. A curious fact that seems to have escaped notice so far is that the last hymn of 
the Atharvaveda (XX, 143) consists of RV, IV. 44 (seven verses) followed by 
RV, IV. 57. 3 and RV, VIII, 57. 3 (~~ Val.IX, 3). ‘Does it show that when the 
twentieth Kan(Ja was put together the genuine Rik-samhitd was supposed to 
conclude with the Valakhilya verse RV, VIII. 57. 3 which the final redactors 
of the A thavvaveda wanted to put at the end of their Samhita also ? If this is 
conceded, then it will be possible to argue further that the twentieth Kancja of 
the Atharvaveda was constituted not long after the composition of the Aitareya 
Brdhmana , which, as pointed out above, knows only eight Valakhilyas. Why 
the penultimate verse also, like the final one, should be the third verse of a 
fifty J seventh hymn of the Rigveda is difficult to say. At any rate, this numerical 
identity can be hardly fortuitous. It is striking to note that originally it might 
have been easily the last verse of the fourth Masala of the Rigveda, though in 
the present text it is the third verse of the penultimate hymn of that Mandala. 
Thus the final verse of the Atharvaveda was probably also the final verse of the 
original Rik-Sanihitd, and the penultimate verse of the Atharvaveda might have 
been the last verse of its first half. Was it the intention of the final redactors of 
the Atharvaveda in putting these two verses at the end to emphasize in their 
usual mystical manner that their work was now doubly complete ? 

17. See Oldenberg, Prolegomena, pp. 320 ff. 

18. Wackernagel, Altindische Grammatik , Vol. Ill, § 52a. 

19. Op: cit., p. 308. 

20. See Ibid., pp. 238, 301. 

21. See Macdonell, Vedic Grammar, p. 322. 

22. Macdonell, op. cit., § 496. 

23. Macdonell, op. cit .,1 540. - , . , ... 

23a. The same form occurs also in Taitt. Sam, V. 7, 7.1, but there too it is not quite 

clear whether it has been used actually as a periphrastic future. 

24. Op. cit., § 581a-b. ■ ■ ■ 

25. A complete list of the non-metrical passages of the Atharvaveda has been given 

by Lanman, EOS, Vol. VIII, p. 1011. 


26. See Bloomfield, The Atharvaveda, p, 

27 


47* 


In rendering passages of the Atharvaveda I have, as far as possible, followed 
Whitney's translation, though it is wooden and purely etymological; for what¬ 
ever it may be in other respects, it is at least literally correct. 

28. Compare in this connection also A V, XII, 5. 3 ff. 

20. It is probably due to this exalted office of king’s Purohita that the Atharvan - 
priest, under the designation “Brahman,” became the supreme supervisor also 
at the great Srauta-sacrifices • of his noble patron, in consequence of which the 
Atharvaveda itself came to be known as the Brahmaveda. Various scholars have 
expressed various opinions as to the inter-relation between, or the identity 01, 
the Atharvan, the Brahman, and the Purohita (see specially Bloomfield, op. cu., 
§ 34, and Vedic Index under “Purohita” and “Brahman”). The theory suggested 
here seems, however, to offer the best explanation. , . 

30. The grandeur and beauty of this hymn has been completely destroyed by 
Whitney in his etymological translation. 

422 



32. 

32a 

33 * 

34 * 

34^ 

35 - 


36. 

36a 

37 * 

38. 

39 - 

40. 


41. 

42. 

43 * 

44. 


45. 

46. 

47 * 

48. 

49 - 

5 °- 


54* 


52. 

53 * 

54 * 

54a 

55 * 

56. 

57 * 

58. 

59 - 

60, 


61. 
61 a. 

62. 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 

iis verse contains important terms of indefinite political connotation. I have 
provisionally accepted them here in the following senses: sabha == assembly, 
samgrama -= congregation (Whitney: host), saniiti = council 
See Bloomfield, op. cit , § 54. 

, Sabha and Samiti , for the constitutional importance of which cf. pp. 353, 4 2 9* 
Op. cit., § 57 - 

See Whitney-Lanman’s preface to IV. 23; Bloomfield, op. cit., p. 82. 

, Taiitiriya-Samhitd, IV. 5; Vajasaneyi-Samhita, XVI. 

The translation given here is taken from Muir's metrical rendering of the hymn 
which reproduces the spirit and meaning of the original much more accurately 
than Whitney's wooden and etymological translation. 

Whitney’s translation is much different. I take it that ghed (gha id) of this verse 
is the positive counterpart of ncd (na id). 

. See above, th. VIII, pp. 150-1. 

It is characteristic of Atharvavedic loose thinking that in v. 18 of this hymn 
Brahmacharya has been recommended not only for women, but also for animals. 
The Rigveda recognizes levitate, but remarriage of widows is not directly 
mentioned in it. Cf. Ch. XIX, p. 390. 

See Vedic Index under "Pariksb.it." 

The linguistic differences discussed earlier in this chapter are hot important 
enough to make out a case for distinct dialect for any one of the Samhitas of 
the Yajurveda. 

See supra, Ch. XII. 

HIL, I, pp. 171-87. 

1 IIL, pp. no-ri. 

Perhaps the best exposition of the Brahmana literature will be found in La 
doctrine du sacrifice da ns Us Brahman as by Levi and Die Weltanschauung der 
Brdhmana-texte by Oldenberg. 

Eggeling, SBE, XII, p. xxv. 

See Paul Thieme, Pdnini and the Veda, pp. 73-6, where previous literature 
on this problem has been indicated. 

See IJebich's genial monograph Pdnini, ein Beitrag zur Kenntnis der indischen 
Liter alur und Grammaiik. 

But not for syntax. 

Wackernagel, Altindische Grammatik, Vol. Ill, § 13d. 

The Kanva-Satapatha in this regard thus differs no t only from the Madhyandina- 
Satapatha, but also from all the other Brahmanas. See Caland, lntrod. to 
Kdnva-Sat., p. 65. 

Again it is interesting to note regarding the Saiapatha-Brahmaria that the 
locative singular of w-s terns "has nearly always the -i in the Kanva-recension, 
but,is formed by the Madhyandinas nearly always without case sign." Caland, 
op. cit., p. 38. 

Wackernagel, op. cit., Vol. Ill, § 143d. 

Whitney, § 587b. 

Whitney, § 563. 

. See Keith, HOS, XXV, p. 87. 

Whitney., § 995a. 

On this -am see particularly Rendu, Mdmoire de la SocUU Linguistique de Paris f 
tome XXIII, ,1935, pp. 359 -92. 

Whitney, § 960. 

Wliitney, § 1180. 

Wliitney, § 984c. 

Whitney, § 268a. This need not be surprising, for the original meaning of rupa 
was "assumed form" as in the Rigveda. The literal meaning of > up am kri was 
thus "to assume a changed form," i.e. "to become." 

See Delbriick, Altindische Tempuslehre, p. 128. 

The different values of the perfect in Vedic literature have been thoroughly 
discussed by Renou in his La Valeur du Parfait, Paris, 1925. 

See Keith, HOS, XXV, p. 86. 


423 




THE VEDIC AGE 


68 . 

69. 


70. 

71. 

72. 


<SL 


73 ' 


74 * 


75 * 

76 . 


77 ' 

78. 

79 * 

80. 

81. 
81a. 

82. 

83. 

84. 

85. 

86 . 

87. 

88 . 
89. 


See Keith, HOS , XVIII, p. eliv, fn. 1. 

See Whitney, § 1073. 

See Liebich, op. cit p. 80. 

See also Keith, f/OS, XVIII, p. clvii. 

It should not be forgotten that until the nineteenth century Europe could not 
produce in the field of grammar and philology anything that can bear com¬ 
parison with P&nini's Ashtddhydyi. 

I cannot but agree on this point with Leopold von Schroder (Indiens Literatnr 
■u-nd Cultur ? p; i 14). 

See Keith, RPVU, p. 351. It should not be forgotten, however, that the Maha- 
vrata was originally a popular folk-festival over which the Brahmins merely 
threw a mantle of ritual sanctity. 

Taittiriya-Samhitti IX, 5. n. 9. 

Satapaiha-Brahmana, XIII. 3. 5. 3. 

Aitaveya-Brdhwana , VII. 29. 4. It should not be forgotten however that in the 
orthodox Mlmamsa-school of interpretation such passages are taken to be mere 
rhetorical exaggerations (Arthavdda). That they really are exaggerated state 
meats and must not he taken literally is quite obvious, though, strangely 
enough, most of the non-Indian scholars have taken even such statements to 
be literally true,. Passages of like import are quite common also in the Mann - 
smriti , but nobody has ever suggested that in the Smiga period the treatment 
prescribed by Mann was actually meted out to the Sudras. There is no reason 
to doubt that the Brahmana-passages, like those about Brahmins and Sudras 
referred to here, were mere Arthavddas from the very beginning. But since the 
mind of a man can be measured also by the exaggerations he is in the habit of 
making, these Arthavdda-passages cannot be ignored in estimating the moral 
outlook of the Brahmana authors. 

The relevant portions, though devoid of literary value, are not without interest 
for social history. Thus from our hypothetical Brahmana-passage it is possible 
to infer that the Brahmana authors thought that the sun moves from, east to 
west, and that they knew that a jagati-pada consists of twelve syllables. 

The most famous narrative in Gathas is the SunahSepa-legend in the Aitareya - 
Brahmana, V II, 13-18. As it is not possible to do justice to the truly literary 
compositions contained in the Brahmanas within the space available here, only 
a few of their salient features will be indicated. For a fuller account, see Wmter- 
nitz, op. cit., pp. 187 ff. 

Satapatha-Brdhniana, I, 8.1. * 

See for instance, the story of Saryata Manava and his daughter Sukanya in the 
Saiapatha-Brahmana , IV. 1. 5. 2. This story appears also in the Jaiminlya - 
Brahmana. See Caland, Auswuhl , pp. 251-2, and my Collection of Fragments of 
Lost Brdhmanas, pp. 23-29. 

See Keith, RPVU, p. 245. 

Satapatka-Brdhmana, II. 2. 2. 20., 

Taittirfya-Samhita, II. 5. 11. 4; Satapatha-Brahmana, I. 4. 5. &~ii. 

See Ved. Ind., II., p. 279. 

Taittiriya-Brdhmana, II. 2. 7. *. 

, Satapatha-Brahmana, XI. 5. 6. 1 ff. 

See Keith, RPVU, p. 474. 

Op. cit., pp. 57 ' 2 ~ 3 - 
Satapatha-Brahmana, III. 2. 2. 23. 

RV, X. 85. 26: vaiini ivam vidatham dvadasi. 

Maitrayam-Samhitd, I. 10. n. 

Satapatha-Brahmana, XIV. 1. 1. 31. 

Maitrayam-Samhitd, loc. cit. 

Op. cit., IV. 7. 4 : tasmat pumdmsah sabhdm ydnti, na stnyah. 


424 


CHAPTER XXI 

POLITICAL AND LEGAL 
INSTITUTION'S 

i. POLITICAL THEORY 

The lack of a spirit of inquiry into the rationale of social and political 
instit uions is generally regarded as a singular characteristic of oriental 
civilization including the Indian. Thus an eminent scholar 1 writes: 
"To the early Eastern mind, the fact that a thing existed was sufficient 
of itself to show its right to be. Thus was effectually excluded all possi¬ 
bility of inquiries as to the relative perfection, or justification for the 
existence of, de facto social and political institutions.” But this view is 
not wholly accurate. For the dim beginnings of speculation regarding 
the origin of kingship, the raison d'etre of the state, the status and relation 
of different classes in society and the justification of the same, together 
with other cognate problems, can be clearly traced in the literature 
even of the early period with which we are dealing. Unfortunately, as this 
literature, our only source of information, is wholly sacerdotal in character, 
the theories and speculations are presented in a theological and meta¬ 
physical environment. It is, however, important to note, that instead of 
passively accepting whatever existed in state or society, there was an 
active effort to trace the origin of institutions and offer an explanation 
of how things came to be what they were. It is a reasonable presumption 
that if the secular literature of the period had been preserved, we would 
have, come across more rational theories based on logically grounded 
belief rather than on faith or dogma. 

The political theories are sometimes discussed in connection with the 
gods, whose thoughts and activities are, however, so much akin to those 
of men, that no great stretch of imagination is required to interpret the 
views as equally, or really, applying to human affairs. This is best illus¬ 
trated by the fundamental question of the origin of kingship .This 

definitely forms a subject of speculation in the literature of this period, 
and the Brahmana texts anticipate writers on polity of a later period by 
clearly formulating the question, "how is it that the king who is one rules 
over so many subjects.” There are various replies to this question, and 
it is interesting to note that they form the germs of the more elaborately 
propounded views of later times. The first in point of importance is the 
view put forth in the Aitareya Brahmana (I. i. 14 ). It is said that the 

425 





THE VEDIC AGE 


<SL 


•'•gods and demons fought with one another, but the gods were defeated. 
The gods said: ‘It is because we have no king that the demons defeat us, 
so let us elect a king.’ They elected a king and through his help obtained 
complete victory over the demons.” As Dr. Beni Prasad has very rightly 
observed,* "here the kingship originates in military necessity and derives 
its validity from consent.” Though appearing under the thin disguise of 
divine affairs, there can be hardly any doubt that it is a very rational 
view of the origin of kingship which prevailed among, a class of political 
thinkers of the period. 

A somewhat similar view appears in another garb in fie same Aitareya 
Brahmana (VIII. 4. 12). The story is told with reference tt Indra’s king* 
ship. “The gods headed by Prajapati said to one another,'this one ho" 
among the gods the most vigorous, the most strong, the most vaVnant, 
the most perfect who carries out best any work (to be done). Let us feistal 
him in the kingship.’ ” Here, again, the kingship originates in election 
and common consent, based on the possession of the highest qualities by 
the chosen candidate. 

But side by side with these rational views we find also the theory of 
the divine origin of kingship, which figures so prominently in later 
political literature. The germ of this has been traced by some scholars 3 
even in the Rigveda (I V. 42), in the hymn attributed to the Puru king 
Trasadasyu, who exclaims, “I am Indra, I am Varuna,” and again, "on 
me (the gods) bestow those principal energies (that are) characteristic of 
the Asuras.” But this may be explained as an expression of personal 
vanity rather than the formulation of a political theory. In the later 
Samhitas and the Brahmanas, however, the divinity of tjje king is put 
forth as a general, doctrine. The king is declared to have gained identity 
with Prajapati by virtue of the Vajapeya and Rajasuya Sacrifices .4 The 
Satapalha Brahmana (V. 3. 3. 12) definitely declares: "He the Rajanya 
is the visible representative of Prajapati (the lord of creatures): hence 
while being one, he rules over many.” The Taittinya Brahmana (II. 2. 
10. 1-2) tells the story how Indra, originally the most inferior among 
the gods, was created their king by Prajapati, and received from him 
both the royal symbol and lustre. This is another illustration of the 
application of secular ideas to the realm of gods. But although the king 
is raised to the rank of God, the human origin is not lost sight of, and 
he is never regarded as divine by virtue of hereditary descent .5 

Reference may be made in this connection to a short passage in 
Satapatha Brahmana (XI. 1. 6. 24): "Whenever there is drought, then 
the stronger seizes the weaker, for the waters are the law. Although 
somewhat enigmatic and mystical, it seems to foreshadow. the later 
theory of the "state of nature” resulting in anarchy and confusion, which 
led to the foundation of state and monarchy. 6 

The beginnings of these political speculations were evidently inspired 

426 


y 



POLITICAL AND LEGAL INSTITUTIONS 

apicl increase, in number as well as in size, of the Aryan kingdom 
and the consequent growth of the power and majesty of the 
ruling chiefs who had mostly outgrown the stage of tribal leaders and 
become territorial monarchs. As we have seen above (p. 261) the Aryans 
had, during this period, spread over nearly the whole of Northern India 
and established a large number of states. If the Puranic traditions, 
recorded in Ch. XIV, have any' value, we must hold that there was a 
keen .struggle for supremacy among these states, and some of them at 
any rate occasionally became very powerful by annexing neighbouring 
king doms. But even apart from Puranic traditions we have the evidence 
of the Vedic texts testifying to the amalgamation of early Rigvedic 
tribes into moi'e powerful political units. The Purus and the Bharatas 
became united under the name Kura; the Turva&as and the Krivis 
became the Panchalas; and lastly there are clear hints about the amal¬ 
gamation of these two into a Kuru-Pafichala group. 

Besides, the descriptions of the A&vamedha and Rajasuya sacrifices 
ih the texts of this period show that ambitious kings strove to be all- 
p pwerful by extending their sway over neighbouring kingdoms, and seem 
tc$ imply the existence of fairly large kingdoms. Keith ,7 however, is of 
tj he opinion that although some of the tribal kingdoms of the Rigvedic 
t days had probably grown in size through amalgamation and expansion, 
There were no great kingdoms-even in this period and no empire as such, 
'ijfih.e fact that kings are often described in the Atharvaveda as fighting 
with their cousins ( bhratrivyas ) or with their non-Aryan enemies, has 
’been taken to confirm this view. This is, however, hardly conclusive. 
' On the other hand the Aitareya Brdhmana tells us that kings in the east 
were called samrdts (emperors?), those in the south bhojas, those in the 
north virats and those in the famous middle country (eastern Punjab 
and western U.P.) merely rajans, and that titles like ekarat and sdrva- 
bhauma could be claimed by a king who had conquered the kings in all 
the four directions. These specific references to imperialism, the flamboyant 
accounts of the imperial grandeur of kings who performed the A^vamedha 
or the, ceremony of royal consecration, and the titles like "conquerors 
of the whole earth” assumed by them on these occasions, indicate the 
existence of large kingdoms and occasionally also of empires, even if 
we make full allowance for obvious poetic exaggerations. There is a 
fairly long list in the Aitareya Brdhmana of kings who had received the 
royal consecration at the Rajasuya, and in a general way the list agrees 
with that in the Satapatha Brdhmana of those who had performed the 
horse-sacrifice. The very multiplicity of these "imperial” monarchs, 
each one of whom strides forth in the ceremony as a conqueror in all the 
four directions, perhaps shows that the performance of the Rajasuya ipot 
nnseldom represented royal aspirations rather than actual conquests. 

-une of the details of the Rajasuya ceremony are, however, worth noting 

427 


UWtSTQy 


THE VEDIC AGE 



a 

iressea 


v . embodying the religio-political theory of those days: The Icing is dressea 
in rich royal robes and is anointed formally by the priests. He then sets 
his foot on a tiger’s skin which is symbolic of his having becorne as power¬ 
ful as the tiger. He next carries out a mimic cattle-raid, takes up formally 
the bow and arrow and takes a step in each of the four directions—a 
step symbolic of Ms conquest of that quarter. He then plays, formally, 
a game of dice in which it is pre-arranged that he commands the win¬ 
ning throw and becomes a victor. 

As the Satapatha (XII. 9. 3. 3) and Aitareya (VIII. 12. 17) Brdhmanas 
speak of a dasa-pumsham rajyam (a, kingdom of ten generations) and as 
royal descent can be traced in several other cases, the monarchy may 
be said to be normally hereditary. The term rdjaputra, wMch can be 
interpreted as "king’s son” in the majority of its occurrences in the 
texts of this period, bears testimony to the same fact. Occasionally, 
however, a king was selected by the people though the choice was pro¬ 
bably restricted to the royal family or at best to members of the noble 
dans. The election of kings is clearly referred to in certain passaged* 
(AV, I. 9; III. 4; IV. 22), but they are interpreted by Geldners asindicating 
the purely formal approval of the king’s occupation of the throne by t he 
subjects (vi£) rather than a selection, in all seriousness, of the king b y 
the cantons (vii). Nevertheless it is certain that in emergencies, people 
had the power of selecting one member of the royal family in preference 
to another who was incompetent (Ch. XVII, p. 353). 1 

But whatever we might think of the election of kings as a means o f 
popular control over them, there is no doubt that the people continued 
to play an important part in politics. Thus particular stress is laid on the? 
necessity of concord between the king and his electors in a passage in 
the Atharvaveda (III. 4) which, by the way, is a clear testimony of the 
prevalence of the system of election of the kings. Besides, it is held by 
some scholars that an essential part of the coronation ceremony was a 
solemn oath taken by the king to the effect that if he opposed the people, 
he might lose all the merit he had accumulated in his life. 10 But it is 
doubtful whether the question here is of opposing (lit., oppressing) the 
people or the priest by whom the oath was administered. 1 ® 3 

There are hymns in the Samhitas and Brahrnanas to celebrate not only 
the coronation of kings but also the return of exiled kings. This implies 
that the people had the power to punish kings, if an emergency arose, 
by banishing them. Then in the Tandy a Brahniana (VI. 6. 5) a sacrifice 
is mentioned whereby the officiating Brahmana could help the i aisy r as 
(the subjects) to destroy the king. Royal power was, it is true, gradually 
consolidating itself, but even a long and unbroken descent could not 
save a. king from the wrath of his subjects. For example, the Spfijayas 
expelled their king Dushtaritu Paumsayana from the kingdom, in spite 
of hi.s ten generations of royal descent. 

428 


: 



marriage v 
the gotra 
toman* 


;al and legal institutions 

in the affairs of states was exercised, as in the 
i the two popular Assemblies, sabhd and samiti 
These are also referred to in the latex Samhitas 
which indicate an effective exercise of authority 
. administration but also over the person of the 
.-tervent prayer put in the mouth of the king: “May 
sabhd, the two daughters of Prajapati, concurrently 
Agnificant to note that this passage describes the popular 
.o ao issues of the same Prajapati, from whom the king, according 
to the theory of his divinity, derives all his power and authority (ante, 
p, 426). Thus both monarchy and the popular assemblies are placed on 
the same footing as divine institutions according to Satapaiha Brdhmana. 
Other passages 1 * in the literature of this period also indicate that the 
king took particular care to be in the good grace of the assemblies and 
the loss of their favour and support was regarded as a dire calamity for 
him. 

We have no detailed knowledge of the working of the Sabhd but may 
glean a few particulars about it from isolated references. This term also 
denoted the ‘‘assembly-hair which was used for serious political work 
as well as for dicing* social intercourse, debates, and entertainment. 
When the assembly (sabhd) met, a sacrifice was offered in the assembly- 
hall on behalf of the assembly, the fire used being called Sabhya. I he 
Maitrdyanl Samhitd (IV. 7. 4) tells us that women did not attend the 
sabhd , which is but expected as women did not take part in political 
activity. The same Samhita mentions sabhd in the sense of the court 
house of the village-judge—the Gramya-vadin—who is referred to in all 
the Samhitas of the Yajurveda . From the use of the terms sabhdsad and 
sabhdehara in the very probable senses of ‘ assessor” and “member of the 
law-court 0 respectively, it appears that the sabhd met more often for 
the administration of justice than for political discussion, A sabhd-pati , 
/‘lord of the assembly/ 1 is mentioned in the Samhitas of the Yajurveda , 
and the Taiitiriya Brdhmana (III. 7* 4 6 ) speaks of a sabhd-pdla probably 
in the sense of “a guardian of an assembly-hall.” The sabhd thus appears 
to be an active institution housed in a place where legal rather than 
political business was more often transacted, and which also served as 
the venue of social gatherings and games. It is difficult to distinguish 
clearly between the functions of the sabhd and the samiti from the 
available evidence. All that can be said is that discussion and decision 
on policy of all kinds as well as legislation constituted the main business^ 
of the samiti, which was a larger body, whereas judicial work, which l 
could also be. transacted by the samiti , fell chiefly within the. purview of l 
the sabhd , though the latter had the right to discuss political matters j 
also. ■' 

In spite of the popular assemblies, the king’s power was on the increase. 

429 





THE VEDIC AGE 


Pi 



This was no doubt due to the growth of large ft 
evolution of an official hierarchy in place of ti band's life. 

The king’s main function was the protection of ‘adually, 

and it was recognized that this required firmne. d more 

In the absence of any authoritative principle, 

hostility, tacit or avowed, was the normal relation 

the king had necessarily to be a great war-lord, ei 

military resources. These requisites of kingly office are re 

of the Atharvaveda (VI. 87-8) which addresses a new king' w . 

"Here be you firm as a mountain and may you not come down. Be 
you firm here like Indra; remain you here and hold the realm. 

"Firm is the heaven, firm is the earth, firm is the universe, firm are 
the mountains, let the king of the people be firm. 

"Vanquish you firmly, without falling, the enemies, and those behaving 
like enemies crush you under your feet. All the quarters unanimously 
honour you, and for firmness the assembly here creates you .”»3 

This evplytion of kingly power, put of sheer political necessity, made 
further progress by the enunciation of his d ivinit y. The Saiapatha Brah¬ 
mana, a strong exponent of this theory, upholds the doctrine that by 
performing certain rites in the Rajasuya sacrifice the king becomes not 
only exempt from punishment but also the lord of the law .*4 But these 
extreme theoretical assumptions were hardly applicable to real life. 
The actual instances of expulsion of the king, referred to above, belie 
these canonical statements. Besides, one fundamental principle which 
characterizes the political thought of the Hindus is the conception of 
I Dharma or Sacred Law which sustains the universe and to which both 
the king and all sections of the community owe allegiance. The sages, 
not the king, had the power to interpret this law which was included in 
the Sacred Canon, and it was the clearly recognized duty of the king to 
abide by, and give effect to it. The moral and spiritual sanctions behind 
this Sacred Law were a sufficiently powerful motive, more than we can 
possibly imagine today, for restraining the wilful exercise of authority 
by the king. The Brihaddranyaka Upamshad, which forms a part of the 
Saiapatha Brahmana, clearly enunciates this great principle, though it 
was more elaborated at a later age. In assessing the true character- 
beneficent or otherwise—of kingly rule in this age, we must, take note 
of the high intellectual qualifications of the kings. Though Kshatriyas, 
they were as well-versed as, if not more than, the Brahman as in the 
Vedas and Upanishads. They took great interest in philosophical discus¬ 
sions. They not only patronized learning, but were themselves teachers 
and had even Brahmana disciples, although it was not normal for a 
Brahmana to learn from a Kshatriya. Such highly cultured kings must 
have generally proved benevolent rulers. A memorable piece of advice 

430 




miSTjfy 



a ■ ■ :.v. .'.v ih 

■ 1 ^llip 1 • ^ p -. *•' $ 




'pVi.k 


<SL 




;j 


• r ; 






kkvt • h\*t\ \m\t 


developmt 

the officer:, ■<.,■. \ >;:•: ,<.; 

fipre a &».. 

distributor < 

to the model 

belonging to tl. 

according to tij, • 

authority u.mg 

were probably more 
In addition to the abo\v n.. 
towage at the Rajasuya, as given in tiu. 
others who were not merely courtiers but alsd jpuuu^ -a*: 
this gives us a general idea of the various administrative departure. 
There is above all the EufeUit a who was something like an Archbishop 
and also a counsellor of the king. Next comes the Suta. The Suta, whi&b 
literally means a “Charioteer/’ raises a curious question. Was he mer Iy 
the "coachman” by appointment to His Majesty? This appears impro^jg 
from the very important role the Suta plays as a herald or yfistrel in 
the propagation and popularization of heroic and epic Prtry in later 
times. It is not unlikely that, originally a charioteer, /e Suta was an 
employee to whom naturally fell the task of relieving thbqredom of the 
king or warrior , whom he drove on long marches and great Stances, by 
entertaining and encouraging him with stories and especiy heroic 
legends. This fits in very well with the important part that chain, 
are supposed to play, chiefly in wars, but not rarely also in peace. The? 
had a facile tongue and a fund of stories and worldly wisdom. One nee< 
but remember the vital part played by the charioteer in the Bhagavadgii 
After the Suta, we find mention of two other officials, viz., theJSj 
grahltri, the treasurer, and the Akshavapa, the Superintendent of die: 

431 




MINIS/-/j, 







meters* 


<SL 


jailed 
of the 
purse of 
ie gods in 
.igh status 

V>: .v- m ' •; ■ Brahuvana 

xor to both 

jewel-offering 

g the sin com¬ 
es or castes in 
j P 1 v e dure proves 
i royal servuA,, had 
,.ac aid nobility by birth. 16 It is 
0 .^wcn of a solid hierarchy of officials and 
- 6 a.uz,d.acm ot the machinery of administration, 
isolated references give us some idea of the great power and influence 
of this official nobility. Thus the Suta and the GrarnanI are designated 
1 ring-makers (rdja-krit) while a list of eight persons, said to he Virus 
hief supporters or defenders) of the king, comprise, in addition to his 
ou£K son » anc * brother, the Purohita, the Suta, the Graman'i, the 
•g-ghattr and the Saihgrahitri.* 8 

The destptions of the RajasQya (royal consecration) in the later 
Samhitas anrBrihmanas depict the king as the “ Protector " of the 
people in aeral and of the Brahmanas in particular. In return for this 
protect'"** 1 ® king is allowed to live on the (income of the) ViS (the 
sn v- :.)J 9 For discharging this duty efficiently, the king had to fight 
not only in defence of his realm but also to conduct offensive war, which 
was generally undertaken in the season of dew (i.e. at the end of the 
monsoon) and in which he had to "sack cities." He led the fighting host 
i battle in person, with the Senani (army-leader) working under his 
ection, and had the right to a share of the booty of war after a victory, 
e Purohita ensured the king’s safety and victory in battle by his 

432 




POLITICAL AND LEGAL INSTITUTIONS 

prayets, spells, and charms, and this is in keeping with the role of the 
Purohita in peace as the regular adviser of the king. 

For the maintenance of the machinery of administration which pro¬ 
tected the people in war and peace, the king had the right to receive 
contributions and loyal service from his subjects. Though in origin these 
may have been voluntary they soon assumed the form of tribute [Bali), 
a kind of taxation that seems to have been meant in the reference to 
"the share of village, horses and kine” in the Atharvaveda (IV. 22. 2). 
The very frequent description, in the texts of this age, of the king as the 
"devourer of the people," is perhaps not to be understood in the sense 
of a "fleecing of the people" by the king, but as indicating that the royal 
household and the king’s retinue were maintained by the contributions 
of the people in the form of food-grains and other necessaries of life 
(ante, Ch. XVII, p. 355 ). 

The incidence of taxation, however, did not. fall equitably upon all 
classes of people. As the members of the royal family, the nobility and 
the Kshatriya class generally assisted the king in war, it is but natural 
that this right of maintenance should also be claimed by them. The 
Brahmanas also claimed to be exempt from the normal exercise of royal 
authority, particularly in respect of taxation. In the Rajasiiya ceremony/ 
the priest tells the assembled people: “This man is your king, Soma isj 
the king of us Brahmanas.”* 4 This passage is then applied to justify the\ 
Brahmana’s exemption from taxation. How far this exemption was carried' 
in actual practice it is difficult to say. But it appears that on the whole, 
the main burden of the taxation fell on the "people," who pursued peace¬ 
ful occupations, such as agriculture, cattle-keeping, the arts, crafts, 
industries, and trade. The texts often describe the “people” as forming 
the backbone of royal power. 


<SL 


3. LAW AND LEGAL INSTITUTIONS 

The Satafatha Brahmana (V, 4. 4. 7) tells us that the king wields the 
rod of punishment ( Danda j, but is not subject to it. He himself, as a rule, 
appears to have administered criminal justice. That he was assisted by 
assessors is probable, though not certain. At any rate, in his absence, 
he could delegate his jurisdiction to a royal officer, because the Kiifhaka 
Samhita (XXVII. 4.) mentions the Rajanya as an Overseer ( adhyaksha ) 
when a Sudra is punished. Among the crimes enumerated or otherwise 
recognized are, theft, robbery, adultery, incest, abduction, the killing 
of an embryo, the killing of a man, the slaying of a Brahmana (whir 
alone amounts to murder proper and is expiable by the performance 
an ASvamedha), drinking intoxicating liquor, and treachery, punish 
by death. Petty offences in the village seem to have been left to 

433 




THE VEDIC AGE 

^™**myavadin or “village judge” for disposal. The view* 1 that thereVas 
increase of crime during this age because Rudra is hailed as the protector 
of thieves does not appear to be correct. 

It is curious that even a minor bodily defect such as the possession of 
bad nails, or the violation of a purely conventional practice was looked 
upon as a crime. But we should remember that, the implicit belief in 
rebirth, and the fixed notion that for every defect or mishap in this life 
a person himself is responsible through actions committed either in this 
life or in a past one, can explain a number of anomalies in the judicial or 
social code of the Hindus. This is often forgotten when the charge of an - 
inhuman and brutal outlook is preferred against their legal and social 
structure. That the sense of justice was high is seen from the record of 
long discussions over a case where a child is accidentally run over and 
killed by the king and the Purohita driving in a chariot. The matter is 
referred for arbitration to the Ikshvakus who gave the judgment that 
an expiation was due. Private vengeance was also permitted to serve 
the ends of justice, though the crudities of such a procedure were held 
in considerable check by the system of Vairadeya “wergeld”—“the 
money (in the form of a hundred cows, for example) to be paid for killing 
a man as a compensation to his relatives.” 

For evidence, eye-witnesses were more important than informers. 
Ordeals were also probably looked upon as valid tests of innocence or guilt. 
The Chhandogya Upanishad (VI. 16.1-2), while explaining how “Truth has 
the power of saving a man even from death,” says: "When an alleged 
thief is brought handcuffed to the place of trial he is asked to catch hold 
of a heated axe. If he has not committed the theft, he covers himself 
with the glory of truth, does not burn his fingers, and is set free as an 
innocent person, but if he is guilty he is burnt on the spot.” 

The punishments for crime were rather severe. If a thief was caught 
red-handed, death or the cutting off of hands was the penalty; in milder 
cases, binding to posts and the return of stolen goods sufficed as punish¬ 
ment. 

As regards civil law our knowledge is mainly confined to the ownership 
of land, succession, and partition of property. Individual property 01- 
individual ownership in land for the purposes of cultivation is recognized. 
This individual tenure of land turned out to be (in actual practice and 
fact, if not in legal theory) tenure by a family, rather than by an individual. 
In this sense must be understood “the conquests of fields” so often referred 
to in the Sariihitas. Communal property in the sense of "ownership by 
a community” or "communal cultivation” is, however, unknown. It is 
mt natural that a family should live together, with undivided shares ih 
?. land. With settlement and peaceful occupation of the country, in- 
itance of land and partition were inevitable, and therefore rules about 
inheritance of landed property must have been in force even earlier 

434 




POLITICAL AND LEGAL INSTITUTIONS 



The word “Daya” has already come to mean in this age “inheritance” 
in the sense of “a father’s property which is to be divided among his 
sons either during his life or after his death,” In a legal sense, the property 
of the family is the property of the head of the house, usually the father. 
The Taittinya Samhita (III. i. 9. 4) has the famous episode of Manu’s 
division of property among his sons. Nabhanedishtha was excluded from 
the inheritance, but as a compensation was taught how to appease the 
Angirasas and secure cows from them. An important aspect of this account 
is that the property divided was movable property and not land, and 
that cattle rather than land was the foundation of wealth, because cattle 
could be and were used individually, whereas land could not be freely 
disposed of. In the Aitareya Brdhmana version of the story, the sons 
are said to have made the division, leaving to Nabhanedishtha only the 
care of their aged father. Does this suggest that the sons were legally 
owners with their father? The evidence however seems to be in favour 
of the rule of patria potestas , whereby the father owned the property. 
The sons, when grown up, might claim the property and induce the 
father to divide it, but this cannot amount to the doctrine that every 
child on birth had a legal share in the property. The legend of 3 unahsepa 
points to the developed patria potestas of the father. As regards the 
division, preference was shown to the elder son if it took place after the 
death of the father; during his lifetime, the preference was usually shown 
to the elder son but not rarely to another (Panchavim^a Brdhmana , 
XVI. 4. 4). Women were excluded from inheritance or partition. Neither 
they nor the &Mras had any right to property. There is not much informa¬ 
tion available regarding the legal relations of husband and wife after 
marriage. The husband in till probability claimed the wife’s dowry and 
earnings, if any. The Satapatha Brdhmana (IV. 4. 2. 13) says that women 
own neither themselves nor an inheritance. 

Original acquisition of chattels was brought about by taking possession 
of them when found on one’s own land or on unoccupied land, provided 
no one else claimed earlier ownership of them. They could be transferred 
by gift and barter or sale. The only contracts known were those in regard 
to the business of money-lending. The Ddsas and Basis did most of the 
labour for which ordinary workers would have to be hired. The artisans 
and skilled workers of the village received fixed remuneration from the 
villagers and not payment for each separate piece of work. 

As regards civil procedure, voluntary arbitration appears to be the 
earlier form of judicial procedure, in which the plaintiff (the prainin ), 
the defendant (abhi-pra&nin) and the arbitrator or judge (prasna-vivdka) 
figured, as the three appear in the list of victims at the Purushamedha 
in the Vdjasaneyi Samhita (XXX. 10). It is uncertain whether assessors 
were palled in. The jhdlri is very probably a technical legal term for a 

435 





THE VEDIC AGE 

„.tness in civil transactions. Ordeals were but rarely used for dect 
civil disputes, but. their use as an evidence in civil law is proved by the 
case o,f Vatsa who demonstrated his purity of descent by walking through 
fire without sustaining any injury. The oath, though not mentioned as an 
independent instrument of evidence, must have formed part of the ordeal 
declaration when there was an occasion for it. 

Finally we may discuss the legal aspect of the question of the owner¬ 
ship of the land vis-d-vis the king, as far as it is reflected in the texts 
of this age. Land was originally acquired when it was occupied by Aryan 
tribesmen among whom the apportionment must have taken place later. 
When the tribal chief assumed the status of a king, he controlled all 
transactions regarding land. When the Satuputhu Brdhniana (VII. x. x. 8) 
tells us that the Kshatriya gives a settlement to a man with the consent 
of the people, it implies that separate holdings existed. The conception 
of the absolute royal ownership of ail land does not seem to have arisen 
during this age. “Grants’’ of land only implied transfer of privileges 
regarding revenue but no ownership. Similarly when the king granted to 
his favourites his royal prerogatives over villages, the “grant” is to be 
understood as the transfer of privileges in fiscal matters. That a gift of 
land in the sense of “the conferring of ownership” was^looked upon as 
unconstitutional may be inferred from a story in the Satapatha (XIII. 
7. x-15) and Aitareya (VIII. 21.8) Brcihmanas that when king Visvakarman 
offered the earth (probably a piece of land) to his officiating priest, the 
eartli refused to be given. Such gifts of land probably constituted a 
violation of customary law. The king certainly had the power to expel a 
Brahmana or Vaisya (there is no mention of the Kshahxya) from Ins 
land, but this power drew its sanction not from Ms ownership of the land 
but from his sovereignty, and was recognizee only as a royal prerogative. 

GENERAL REFERENCES 

Dr. U. Ghoshal, A History of Hindu Political Theories [ 1923) . 

I)r. Beni Prasad, Theory of Government in Ancient India (1927). 

!. Willoughby, Political Theories of the Ancient World , p. 14- 

2. Op . tit., p. 15. 

3. Ghoshal, op. cit., p- 27. , Q * 

, $at. Br., V. 1.3. 4.; 1.4-2-; 2 - *• 2.1.24.; 2. 2. 14-15- 2 - 5 - 3 -* 3 - 4 - 3 -- 

4.3. 27.; Taitt . Sam., i. 8. 16.. 

5. Sat. Br ., V. 3. 3. 12. Ghoshal, op. cit., p. 33. 

6. k shal, op. cit., pp. 41-2, 

7. v. I I, p. 130. 

8. One of these is quoted in Ch. XX, p. 410. 

9. Ved. Stud., 2,303. , _ ... T r Q 

10. Beni Prasad, op. cit., p. 17. Jayaswai, Hindu Polity, U-, 27-3. 

Tat BfTIV.’ i 5 °4. 1-6.; Cf. also A V, VII. 12, quoted in Ch. XX, pp. 411-12. 

12. A V, VI.'88. 3.; VII. 12. 

13. For other hymns of this nature cf. Ch. XX, p. 4x0. 

436 



mt$T» 



POLITICAL AND LEGAL INSTITUTIONS 


<SL 


15 . 

16. 

I?. 

18. 

IQ. 

20 . 

21 , 


■t. Br., V. 4. 4. 7.; 3. 3. 9. .Ghoshal, op. cit p. 40. Dr. Beni Prasad, however, 
thinks that "the lordship of the law " here means the "lordship of justice" 
(op. cit., p. 19). 

The ceremony is described with slightly varying lists of officials in Sat. Br., 
V. 3. 1.; Tmtt. Sark., I. 8. 9.; Taitt. Br., I. 7. 3. 

Dr. Ghoshal thinks that the official nobility took the place of the old nobility 
of birth (op. cit., p. 30). 

Sat. Br., III. 4. 1. 7.; XIII. 2. 2.18. 

Panchavirii§a Br., XIX. 4. 

Ait Br., VIII. 12. 17. 

Sat. Br., V. 3. 3. 12.; 4. 2. 3. 

CHI, I, p. 135. 


437 



CHAPTER XXII 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 

i. THE ATHARVAVEDA 

For our survey of the evolution of religion and philosophical thought 
in the post-Rigvedic age we may begin with the Atharvaveda as it has 
preserved an aspect of primitive religious ideas-which are not to be found 
in the other Vedic texts. 

1 he oldest name of the A V in Vedic literature is Atharvangirasah, that 
is, “the Atharvans and the Angirasah." The two words denote two 
different species of magic formulae: atharvan is "holy magic bringing 
happiness' - and angiras is “hostile or black magic." The former includes 
among others formulas for the healing of diseases, while the latter includes 
curses against enemies, rivals, malicious magicians, etc. These two kinds 
of magic formulae then form the chief contents of the AV* but these 
ancient magic songs which were originally popular poetry appear in the 
Samhita in a Brahmanized form because of the priestly outlook of the 
compilers, which betrays itself in the similes and epithets. The gods are 
the same as in the RV, Agni, Indra, etc. But their characters have 
become quite colourless, ail being invoked as “demon-destroyers,” and 
their natural basis is utterly forgotten; The theoSophical and cosmogonic 
speculations of the AV indicate a later stage of development than that 
in the RV. It contains more theosophic matter than any other Samhita. 
The philosophical terminology is of an advanced type, and the pantheistic 
thought is practically the same as in the Upanishads. There is, of course, 
a magical twist given to the philosophical hymns. For example, 
AV, IV. 19. 6 employs the conception of asat, “the non-existent," as 
a spell to destroy enemies, demons, magicians, etc. 

Above all, the principal aim of the Atharvaveda is to appease (the 
demons), to bless (friends), and to curse, and as such it did not find much 
favour with the priesthood, who excluded it from the sacred triad—the 
threefold lore. This was, however, a later development. At their origin, 
magic and cult both have an identical aim—the control of the trans¬ 
cendental world. They have this essential unity of purpose. There soon 
comes a time, however, when the priest who pays homage to the gods 
parts company with the magician who is in league with the demons. It 
is a remarkable fact, however, that in spite of this aversion to the Veda 
of magic, the ritual texts which describe the great sacrifices do incor¬ 
porate exorcism-formulas and magic rites* whereby the priest can destroy 

438 



Ml mr/fy 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 

whom he hates and who hates him,” and the law-book of 
Manu (XI. 33) sanctions the use of exorcism against enemies. 

As Dr. Winternitz 3 points out, “many of these magic songs, like the 
magic rites pertaining to them, belong to a sphere of conceptions which, 
spread over the whole earth, ever recur with the most surprising simi¬ 
larity in the most varying peoples of all countries. Among the Indians 
of North America, among the Negro races of Africa, among Malays and 
Mongols, among the ancient Greeks and Romans, and frequently still 
among the peasantry of the present-day Europe, we find again exactly 
the same views, the same strange leaps of thought in the magic songs 
and magic rites, as have come down to us in the A lharvaveda of 
ancient India. There are, then, numerous verses in the Atharvaveda, which, 
according to their character and often also their contents, differ just as 
little from the magic formulas of the American-Indian medicine-men and 
Tartar Shamans as from the Merseburg magic maxims, which belong to 
the sparse remains of the oldest German poetry.” The AV then is unique 
among the texts of this age—the Samhitas and Brahmanas—as an 
important source of information regarding popular religious belief, not 
so far modified by priestly religion as to be unrecognizable in its original 
form. 

Occasionally, we come across hymns like IV. 16, which look like 
a patchwork of old and new material. The first half of IV. 16 describes 
the power of the Almighty, the omniscience of God, in language of such 
impressive beauty, that as a piece of literary art it has hardly any equal 
in the whole of Vedic literature,4 and yet the second part is an exorcism- 
formula against liars. This is a case (not rare) in the A V where a fragment 
of older poetry breathing genuine religious fervour has been dressed up 
as a magic formula. 

There are hymns of a philosophical import in the AV though they 
are inspired more by practical considerations than by a longing for the 
Ultimate Reality. The hymns definitely presuppose a high level of meta¬ 
physical thought. There is some exaggeration in the opinion of Winter- 
nitz ,5 that there is in these hymns more of the mystery-rnongering so 
characteristic of the magician than the search for truth that distinguishes 
a philosopher, and that they do not represent even a transitional stage 
between the creative thought of the philosophical hymns of the RV and the 
philosophy of the Upanishads. The idea of a supreme God like Prajapati, as 
the creator and preserverof the Universe, and that of an impersonal creative 
principle (which form the two chief doctrines, of the Upanishads), and 
some technical terms such as “brahman,” “tapas," “asat,” are met with 
in the Atharvaveda. The conception of Rudra-^iva in the AV certainly 
represents a transitional stage between the conception of Rudra in the 
RV and the systematic philosophy of Saivism in the Svetdivatara 
Upanishad. Original or otherwise, profound philosophical ideas do crop up 

439 







THE VEDIC AGE 



ow and then in the A V. Kala or Time as the First Cause of all existence 
(XIX. 53. 5, 6) is a truly philosophical notion, but round it. are woven 
metaphors that give a mystic turn to the great idea (XIX. 53). Similarly 
Prana (Breath) and Kama (Love) are described as First Causes in XI. 4 
and IX. 2 respectively. The Rohita hymns (XIII. 1-4) contain a sublime 
glorification of the “Red One’’ (the genius of the sun) as a cosmogonic 
power. Alongside of this are found mystical fancies such as the exaltation 
of the sun as a primeval principle under, the guise of a Brahmacharin, 
and the glorification of the Ox, the Bull, the Cow, and the Vratya, each 
being alternately looked upon as the Highest Being, in XI. 5; IV. n, 
IX. 4, X. 10 and XV respectively. AV, X. 2 is but an imitation of the 
philosophical hymn X. 121 of the RV and treats of the realization of 
Brahman in man, from the physical aspect. A V, XI. 8 suggests the idea 
of Brahman as the First Cause of all existence and of the oneness of man 
with the world-soul. Reference has already been made above (p. 410) 
to the long hymn (XII. x) to Mother Earth, which is acclaimed as one 
of the most beautiful productions of the religious poetry of ancient India. 
Though classified as a cosmogonic hymn, there is not much philosophy 
in it, but a relieving feature is that it contains no trace of mysticism and 
thus rises to the sublime heights of religious poetry. 

It must be admitted that the Atharvaveda religion, being thus more 
popular than priestly,, formed a transitional stage to the idolatries and 
superstitions of the ignorant masses, rather than to the sublimated 
pantheism of the Upanishads, and further that it led to magic being 
confused with mysticism. 

It is generally held that the religion of the A V is only an amalgam 
of Aryan and non-Aryan ideals achieved after the advance of the Aryans 
into India. According to this view 6 the Vedic Aryans, as they advanced 
into India, came across uncivilized tribes worshipping snakes, serpents, 
stocks, and stones, but instead of destroying these barbarian neighbours 
or allowing themselves to be swamped by them, the Aryans absorbed 
them. This spirit of accommodation naturally elevated the religion of 
the primitive tribes but degraded the Vedic religion by introducing into 
it sorcery and witchcraft. In the opinion of the present writer, this view 
is not wholly correct. Magic and religious cults, having an identical aim 
in the beginning, namely, the control of the transcendental world, have 
parted company in the A V exactly as they have done in the religions 
of most peoples in the world, though there is no denying that such 
a process of separation was considerably helped by the Aryan contact 
with the natives of India, who had their own worship of spirits and stars, 
trees and mountains, and other superstitions. 


44° 



RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 

THE SAMAVEDA AND THE YAJURVEDA 
SAMHITAS AND THE BRAHMANAS 

With the Samaveda and Yajurveda we enter a new world, as it were. 
The atmosphere is pervaded now by the. smoke of the sacrifice and the 
incense of the ritual. The sacrifice dominates everything. These two 
Sarhhitas have been compiled strictly from the point, of view of their 
use at the sacrifice. They are, indeed, nothing more than text-books— 
song-book and prayer-book—for the practical use of two of the four 
principal priests, the Udgatri and Adlivaryu. No account of the religion 
of this period can be understood in its proper perspective unless we 
follow the broad lines along which the institution of the sacrifice developed 
in this age. 

The simple ceremonial of the domestic ritual which any individual, rich 
or poor, priest or laymarf, could perform in his own home may be reason¬ 
ably supposed to be the starting point of the sacrificial cult. The single 
fire of the domestic hearth was the altar at which burnt offerings were 
presented, to the accompaniment of appropriate prayers. There were daily 
and periodical sacrifices, such as the morning and evening offerings, the 
New r - and Full-moon sacrifices and the four monthly or seasonal sacrifices. 
This domestic fire was also the blazing divine witness, propitiated by suit¬ 
able oblational offerings accompanied by appropriate prayers, to a number 
of domestic ceremonies that endowed with religious sanctity various events 
in the life of a family, such as birth, marriage, other occasions of daily 
life, funeral, ancestor-worship, house-building, cattle-breeding, and farm¬ 
ing. The domestic fire was also the centre of magic rites which were 
calculated to avert diseases and unpropitious omens, as also the centre 
of exorcisms and rites for love-magic, etc. A very large number of the 
songs and spells of the Atharvaveda naturally fit in, most admirably, into 
the framework of these domestic rites, as a substantial part of these 
partakes of the nature of magic rites. In these, what may be called the 
domestic varieties of the sacrificial cult, the householder himself generally 
officiated as the sacrificial priest, but he might call in the “Br.ahman,” 
if he needed assistance. 

But even in the age of the Rigveda, as noted above (p. 376), the cult 
of the Grand Sacrifices, especially the Soma sacrifices, was gradually 
developing by the side of the cult of the domestic rites, described above. 
They were, however, so elaborately developed and systematized during 
the period under review that the Samaveda and Yajurveda Samhitas have 
been compiled solely for use at these Grand Sacrifices. A regular science 
of sacrifice has now been evolved and forms the sole topic of the Brahmana 
texts. Three sacred fires instead of one were necessary for these Grand 
Sacrifices, and altars for these were erected on a vast sacrificial place set 

441 


THE VEDIC AGE 



<SL 


according to rules and to the accompaniment of an elaborate ritual. 
A formidable array of priests, divided into four groups headed by four 
chief priests, was required for the correct performance of the extremely 
complicated ritual and elaborate ceremonial which were the sine qua non 
of the Grand Sacrifices. The Yajamdna (sacrificer) had practically nothing 
to do but to give liberal fees to these priests. These Grand Sacrifices were 
called “£rauta” or “based on Sruti," in the sense that the description 
pi their theory and practice was also embodied in the Sruti literature, 
i.e. the Samhitas and Brahmanas, whereas the domestic (Gfihya) sacrifices 
referred to above were called Smarta (based on Smriti or “memory”) in 
the sense, that they are described only in the Grihya-sutras which fall 
into Smriti literature which has no divine sanction and i9 authoritative 
only in so far as it embodies the tradition derived from ancient sages. 

The titles and functions of the heads of the four groups of priests are: 
(i) The Hotri or “Invoker” who was to praise the gods and invoke them 
to the sacrifice and whose duty it was to form the canon (gaslra) for each 
particular rite of the Soma sacrifice by selecting, from the hymns of the 
Rigveda ; the verses applicable to it and to recite them; (2) the Udgatri 
or “Chapter” who sings chants ( sdman ), accompanying appropriately the 
various stages of the preparation and presentation of the sacrifices, 
especially the Soma sacrifices; (3) the Adhvaryu or “Performer,” who 
executes all the sacrificial acts, muttering simultaneously the prose 
prayers and the sacrificial formulae ( yajus ); (4) the Brahman or “High 
Priest/’ who as the general superintendent vigilantly guards against any 
error or deviation from the correct performance of the sacrifice and 
protects the sacrifice from danger by repeating sacred formulae by way 
of expiating for any error done. The Brahman has to be well versed in 
all the Vedas, but the Hotri has to be conversant only with the Rigveda , 
from which he takes the Ydjycis (sacrificial verses) and the anuvdkyds 
(invitatory verses). Similarly the Udgatri has to be well versed in the 
Samaveda Samkitd only, to master the melodies and the song-verses with 
which they are connected, and to sing the stotras, consisting of song- 
stanzas, i.e. stanzas or richah which are made t'b bear certain melodies. 
or sdmans. Finally, the Aclhvaryu priest has to be proficient only in the 
Samhitas of Yajuroeda as he mutters the prose formulae and prayers 
called Yajus and the verses ( richah) collected in it for his use. 

Like the two Samhitas mentioned above, the Brahmanas also treat 
of the sacrificial liturgy The age represented by them all is an age of 
forms, concerned more with the externals of religion than its spirit. 
Mechanical sacerdotalism is the religion now. Symbolic significance is 
attached to even the smallest minutiae of ceremonies that are purely 
external (ante, p. 419). Every prayer that accompanies a rite asks for 
some worldly gain. 

Nevertheless there is an interesting substratum of popular religion, 

442 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


tricate and-elaborate ritual of the sacrifice. The Rajasuya. 
of royal consecration must have had once an appeal to 
the festive instincts of the people. The Vajapeya is characterized by a 
chariot race which must have been originally the main element and which 
must have always made a great hit with the people. The ritual of the 
Mahavrata, which is probably a reminiscence of a very popular primitive 
celebration of the winter solstice, plays a notable part in the Gavamayana, 
the year-long Sattra. The horse-sacrifice is fundamentally the elaboration 
of a simple rite of sympathetic magic. Above all, however, the building 
of the altar for the sacred fire is the one rite which, though a simple one 
in ancient times, has been so worked over by the priests that it reflects 
in a mystic sense almost a new conception of the unity of the universe and 
the mode of its preservation. The Brahmanas record, as an ancient practice 
no longer current, the slaying of a man during the building rite in order 
to secure the permanence of the structure. The only plausible explanation 
of the disproportionate importance and treatment claimed by this rite 
is the one given by Eggeling? that the building of the fire-altar symbolizes 
the reconstruction of the Universe in the shape of Prajapati, the full 
significance of which will be explained later. 

There is no longer the spontaneity or simplicity of religious feeling that 
is associated in a large measure with the sacrifice in the age of the Rigveda. 
Although the theory of the sacrifice is superficially “I give thee (O God) 
that thou mayest give,” there is so little faith in it., that sympathetic 
magic dominates the entire sacrificial system. The priest has arrogated 
to himself such powers in this regard, that, he could ruin (if he pleased) 
even the patron for whom he officiates by deliberately committing errors. 
The efficacy of the ritual depended on the correct pronunciation of the 
mantras recited, because it was their sound rather than their meaning 
that was credited with power. The viniyoga or liturgical application of 
the RV hymns to the details of the sacrifice had no relation to their 
meaning. So ludicrously theoretical was the development of the sacrificial 
cult that the list of sacrificial victims in the Yajurveda texts includes 
human beings as well. 

As the sacrifice is the only power that counts and could bend even 
the gods to the will of the sacrificer, the old gods are not of much con¬ 
sequence now. As a result some of the minor deities of the Rigveda have 
either disappeared or exist in name only. Prajapati (as “Lord of 
creatures”) is the main subject of theosophical speculation in the 
Brahmanas, but he is not “a god of the people” as Rudra is. This is 
indicated by the number of litanies addressed, to the latter in the 
Yajurvedic Samhitas, and the attention devoted to him in the Aitareya. 
Kaushitaki and Salapatha Brahmanas. Rudra as Bhutapati is a dread 
figure, who (we are told in Aitareya Br.) usurped the dominion of 
Prajapati over all cattle, when the latter committed incest with his 

443 




THE VEDIC AGE 


(St 

nsMiMM 


;hter. He appears at the sacrifice in black raiment and claims^ 
fcrificial victim. This Rudra is (in all probability) not merely a develop¬ 
ment of the Rigvedic Rudra, but an adaptation of him by amalgamation 
with a popular god, an aboriginal god of vegetation, closely connected 
with pastoral life. He is thus the ‘‘great god” (mahadeva) and has already 
received the appellation ‘‘Siva” (the "Auspicious One”) which became 
later his chief name. Next to Rudra comes Vishnu, constantly identified 
with the all-important sacrifice and therefore rising to a high position. 
Probably he was prominent enough to claim the undivided allegiance of 
some localities while Rudra was worshipped in others. Narayana and 
Vishnu are brought into relation in the Taittmya Amnyaka. In other 
respects, there is little change in the Rigvedic pantheon. Gandharvas, 
Apsarases, Nagas, etc., are raised to a semi-divine rank. Snake-worship 
(borrowed probably from the aborigines) and the mechanical motif of 
the "Devasura” battles make their appearance now. Monotheism is being 
advocated. "Brahman,” from meaning the "prayer-verses and formulae” 
in the Veda, containing secret magic power by which man seeks to bend 
divine beings to his will, came next to mean the trayi vidyu or “a col¬ 
lection of these prayers and formulae in the three Vedas”; then "the 
first created thing,” because the trayi was supposed to be of divine origin 
and because the superhuman (nay super-divine) sacrifice was contained 
in. and therefore derived from the trayi ; and finally (in this period) came 
to signify the "creative principle”—the cause of all existence. Such an 
evolution of meaning was possible because, in this age, the divine origin 
and authority of the Vedas is accepted without question. In thePurusha- 
sukta {RV , X.. 90) the act of creation is treated as a sacrifice completely 
offered ( sarva-hut ) from which the three Vedas arose. The Sataj>atha 
Brahmana (XI. 5 . 8. r ff.) version, of this doctrine is that the Self-existent 
breathed out the Vedas. The so-called authors of the Vedas are just 
inspired seers ( Rishis ) to whom the divine revelation was communicated. 
The doctrine that sabda or “articulate sound” is eternal has thus an 
important correlation to the fact that the Vedas were transmitted by 
word of mouth, from teacher to pupil, in unbroken succession through 
untold generations. The Vedic tradition, considered sacred and infallible, 
must necessarily embody the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but 
the truth. But the early Vedic texts are not always consistent. This 
enabled later the votaries of the most diverse doctrines to quote texts 
from the Vedas in their support, and although philosophy became 
scholastic as a result, one advantage was that a reliable basis—-the 
unfailing intuition of the most ancient inspired seers—was available to 
the Indian thinkers. 

There are many creation-legends in the Brahmanas which are a strange 
admixture of metaphysical thought with disconnected explanations of 
sacrificial rules. The majority of them generally begin with the narration 

444 





y 

''i'tlia 


religion and philosophy 


Wj&japati practised austerities through self-torture and mortification I 
as a preparation for the task of creation, but there are passages m the 
Brahmanas where Prajapati himSelf is looked upon as created and \v. - 

the starting point of creation is either the primeval waters or Brahman 
or the Non-existent. Desire is the germ of existence, the motive \ 

° ThaUde is a duty and a responsibility is the central ethical teaching 
of the Brahmanas. Man is born with certain nnas or debts which be in st: 
discharge in his life. He has a debt to pay to the gods to the 
to the manes, to men, and to the lower creatures. And he discharges 
these debts, if he worships the gods, studies the Veda, performs funoral 
ceremonies, is hospitable, to guests, and offers oblations to the Elites. 
Thus there is no lack of high moral sense and noble sentiments, be^ 
lessness must characterize all our actions. The Brahmapas have a remark¬ 
able sacrifice—the Sarvamedha- wherein everything is to be sacrificed, 
to attain the freedom of the spirit. Prayer and good works constitutc 
godliness, which is the first requisite of a good life^ Inithfulncss 1 
utterance and action is the foundation of moral life. There am hints pi 
the Brahmanas that excessive ritualism was bringing on a reaction, l a 
example, knowledge rather than sacrificial gifts or asceticism is val , 
in the Satapatha Brahmana (X- 5- 4 -_i 6), although asceticism ^ a Jso held 
up as a great ideal elsewhere (Taittinya Brdhmana, III. 3}- ' Y 

that confession implying repentance somewhat mitigates the guilt is seen 
in the Satapatha Brdhmana. Inner purity was insisted on, as much a* 
external purity. Truth, performance of dharma (duty), respect for parents, 
love of fellow-beings, and abstinence from theft, adultery, and murder 

were the sine qua non of a good life. _ , . ,, 

The description of heaven in the RV is only elaborated in the t 
Samhitas and Brahmanas. The essentials are the same. The Atharvaveda 
tells us how the dead man is conducted upwards by the Maruts with 
gentle breezes fanning him until he recovers his complete body and meets 
the Fathers who reside in the company of Yama. Ihe idea that the dead 
in heaven are nourished, by the piety of the relatives on earth is also 
found in the AV. Such nourishment may either be buried with the dead, 
so that the grains of corn and sesame, so buried, may turn into wish-cows 
in heaven, or the nourishment may be c,mveyed through subsequent 
offerings. This is indeed the germ of the later braddha idea. Ihe Rigveda 
conception of nirriti as a place of darkness in which the lummanes are 
lost has been developed by the Atharvaveda into a naraka-loka ( hell ) 
which is the abode of female goblins and a place of utter darkness. 
The Satapatha, the Jaitnimya and Kaashitaki Brahmanas add their own 
touches to this horrid picture of hell. The two paths—one of the Devas 
and the other of the Pitris—are naturally mentioned, as they have been 
already foreshadowed in the RV. The theory of metempsychosis does 

' 445 


WHIST/fy 


THE VEDIC AGE 

to have been very clearly formulated in the Samhitas 
though the doctrine that the agony of death is to be endured 
not once only but repeatedly as one may die repeated deaths in the next 1 

world, prepares us for the very important part that the theory plays in ' 

the Upanishads where the conception of repeated deaths is merely trans¬ 
ferred from the next world to the present. The idea of reward and 
punishment, after death, in exact correspondence to the good and bad 
deeds of a person in this life, has gained a firm hold in this period. The 
attainment of immortality and the company of the gods in the heaven— 
a highly ennobled form of earthly life perpetuated in surroundings of 
bliss—is the deeply cherished aim of, and incentive to, the practice of ' 
piety and good works in this life. 

I his is a considerable advance over the view of the Rigveda. There, 
immortality in the abodes of the blessed—the region of milk and honey— 
is assured to knowledge and virtue, whereas not much thought is given ! 
to the fate of the sinner who is apparently condemned to the complete 
obliteration of his personal existence. Now, however, the wicked are 
described as being born again in the next world (along with the good) 
suffering the punishment which their misdeeds bring upon them. That 
man is the architect of his own fate” becomes a perfect truth according 
to this theory. And the supreme merit of philosophical thought in this 
period is the development of the doctrine that reward and punishment are ^ 
not eternal. This is but a logical development. How could the limited good 
or evil that men can do in the brief span of a single life on earth bring 
on endless pleasure or pain in the next world ? Hence follows the theory 
that penance and atonement can purify and absolve the soul from guilt • 
and exhaust the period of suffering. The Brahmana doctrine; that what- / 

ever food a man consumes in this world in return consumes him in the | 

next world ( Satapatha , XII. 9. 1. 1) is but the transfer from the physical 
to the moral plane of the law that action and reaction are equal and 
opposite. Similarly, the enjoyment of the rewards, which is^in exact 
measure to the good deeds performed, must some time come to an end. 

Thus there is the prospect of rebirth again for both the pious and the 
wicked. So arises the wonderful conception of a beginningless and endless " j 
circuit of birth and death; the so-called samsara or “bondage of life and = 

death,” culminating in that unique conception of ultimate happiness f 

which is much higher than that of a life in heaven. It is a conception of I 

freedom from samsara, which is the true moksha (release) or absolution. j 

First desire and then its fulfilment is a vicious circle/and the only escape | 

from it is desirelesgness induced by true knowledge. This, however, is 
the main doctrine of the Upanishads and is only adumbrated in this 
period. For example, when the Satapatha Br. asks the seeker for truth 
to meditate upon the Self, made up of intelligence and endowed with 
a body of spirit, a form of light, and an ethereal nature, the doctrine lias 

446 




ppear 
man as, 







RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 



a'speculative but none the less ritual background. Similarly, the building 
of the fire-altar is (as mentioned above) symbolical of the reconstruction 
of the Universe, in the shape of Prajapati. If we now bear in mind the 
two sets of mystical equations: (i) Prajapati = Agni = divine counter¬ 
part of the human sacrificer; and (2) Prajapati = Time == Death (in the 
final analysis), we can understand that the human sacrificer becomes 
Death (in a mystic sense) and thus raises himself above death to everlasting 
bliss. In this process the true nature of Prajapati and of the sacrificer 
is revealed as Intelligence. This same doctrine reappears in another form 
in the Upanishads as we shall see later. 


3. THE ARAN YAK AS 

The excessive ritualism of the Brahmanas produced a natural reaction. 
The Aranyaka texts are themselves virtually an admission that the 
correct performance of a compulsory ritual, that had developed to enor¬ 
mous proportions in the Brahmana period, could not be expected from 
all, young and old, from residents of villages and towns as well as from 
those who resided in the forest. There were again some parts of the 
sacrificial lore which were of- an occult and mystical nature and which 
could be imparted to the initiated only in the privacy of the forest. The 
Aran yak as do not lay down rules for the performance of sacrifices, nor 
do they comment on the ceremonial in the Brahmana style. They are 
mainly devoted to an exposition of the mysticism and symbolism of the 
sacrifice and priestly philosophy. Meditation, rather than performance, is 
the spirit of their teaching, and they naturally substitute a simpler cere¬ 
monial for the complicated one of the Brahmanas. We cannot definitely 
say whether the theory of the Asmmas was deliberately formulated by 
Brahmanism with a view to accommodate the new doctrines that were 
raising their heads against the older canon of the Brahmanas and the 
philosophy of the sacrifice. 8 But it must be admitted that the Aranyakas 
or "Forest-texts” came in exceedingly handy, as ideally suitable Vedic 
texts for the daily study of the forest-hermits, as distinguished, on the 
one hand, from the student and householder who could do justice to the 
cult of the Vedic sacrifice set forth in the Brahmanas, and on the other, 
from the ascetic who could dedicate the rest of his life to the contem¬ 
plation of Brahman—the Absolute expounded in the Upanishads. 

Important service was rendered by the Aranyakas when they stressed 
the efficacy of the inner or mental sacrifice as distinguished from the outer 
or formal sacrifice, consisting of oblations of rice, barley or milk. They 
thus helped to bridge the gulf between the "way of works” ( karma -- 
mdrga), which was the sole concern of the Brahmanas, and the “way 
of knowledge” (jndna-ma^a) which the Upanishads advocated. The 

447 


Ml Htsr# 



THE VEDIC AGE 


<SL 


Aranyakas further lay down (Jpdsanas (or courses of meditation) upon 
certain symbols and austerities for the realization of the Absolute, which 
by now had superseded the “heaven” of the Brahmana works, as the 
highest goal of the devout. These symbols form the link between the 
Brahmanas and the Upanishads as they are borrowed from the sacrifices. 
Finally the compromise between the two “ways” of karman and jndna 
was consummated when karman was made subsidiary to, and a prepara¬ 
tory stage for, j-Siana in the Aranyakas and Upanishads. 

1. For specimens of these hymns cf. Cli. XX, pp. 411-15. , 

2. Cf. Samkhayana Gr. S., I. 248. 

3. Hit, I, p- 128. 

4. For the English translation of the hymn cf Ch. XX, pp. 413-14. 

5. MIL, I, p. 150. 

6. Cf. IP, T, pp. ixSff. 

7. SBE, XLTII, pp. xiv-xxiv. 

8. Belvalkar and Ranacle, HIP, II, p. 84. For further elucidation of this topic see 
Ch. XXVI. 


448 






CHAPTER XXIII 


SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC 
CONDITIONS 


i. SOCIAL CONDITIONS 


1. Family Life 

The very use of the term kula, which does not occur as an uncompounded 
vord before, the period of the Brahmanas, suggests a system of individual 
amilies, each consisting of several members, under the headship of the 
ither or eldest brother to whom belongs the kula (originally “home or 
ouse of the family,” then by metonymy “the family” itself). As distin- 
uished from gotra it seems to mean the undivided family living under 
one roof. 

The case of the sale of Sunahsepa in the Aitareya Brdhmana (VII. 12-18) 
suggests that the son was under the absolute control of the father, but 
the story may only reflect the horror evoked by the father’s heartless 
treatment of his son. The father as a rule did not arrange the marriage 
of his son or daughter (Jaiminiya-Upanishad-Brahmana, III. 12. 2). The 
relationship between father and son was one of great affection. The kissing 
of a grown-up son on the head on important occasions as a token of love 
is a custom found in Sdnkhdyana Arartyaka. Adoption was resorted to, 
not only in the absence of natural children, but also to secure the addition 
of a specially qualified member to the family, as in Visvamitra’s adoption 
of Surnihsepa. 

Certain special terms show that it was considered improper for, younger 
brothers and sisters to marry before their elders. The brother and his wife 
played the part of guardians of the sister in the absence of the father. 
Quarrels between brothers are mentioned. The family was sometimes large 
enough to include the great-grandfather as well as the great-grandsons. 
Among relations are mentioned the wife’s brother, the sister’s son, the 
cousin (bhrdtrivya), the maternal uncle, etc. 

An entire hymn in the Atharvaveda is devoted to the praise of hos¬ 
pitality (IX. 6), and the Aitareya Arayyaka.jfeb fays stress on it. The 
guest-offering is an integral part of the <My ritual of the household. 

2. The Caste-System 

The term varna is used definitely in the sense of “caste/ withor 
reference to colour, in this age. Il e system of Caste, whose beginnim 
h >'<)V be traced in the broad fourfold classification of society in the Rigvo 


449 





THE VEDIC AGE 



e (ante, pp. 384 ff.j., developed during this period in various direi 
any causes contributed to the rise of sub-castes and other caste-divisions. 
Guilds of workers tended to crystallize into castes, as occupations became 
more or less hereditary; as examples we may cite the chariot-makers, 
the smiths, the leather-workers, and the carpenters. The peculiar family 
constitution or the golra tradition, whereby exogamy as,well as endogamy 
regulated marriage connections, and whereby a man should normally 
marry a woman of equal birth, i.e. within his caste, but not qf the same 
gens or within the gotra, was another factor in the development of com¬ 
plications and distinctions in the Caste-System. The original race-feeling 
or the contrast which the Ary a varna (Vedic Aryans) felt between them¬ 
selves and the Dasyu-varna (aborigines), and-which was sought to be 
mitigated by the incorporation of the conquered population into thf 
framework of Aryan society by admitting them into the fourth class o 
caste, left its mark in the shape of the rule of hypergamy, whereby a 
Aryan could marry a Sudra wife but the Siidra never an Aryan wife’ 
The same rule was also gradually applied in marriages between the thre 
Aryan classes, and while a Brahmana would normally marry a Kshatriya 
or a Vaitya girl, and the Kshatriya, a Vaisya girl, the male of a lower class 
could not ordinarily marry a girl of a higher class. This peculiar feeling 
as to mixed marriages is fundamental to all caste-divisions, and may be 
looked upon as the third factor in caste-elaboration during this age. 

As has been noted in Chapter XIX (p. 397), it was the third caste- 
group, that of- the Vaisyas (called also vis or viiya), which by virtue of 
its occupations came into the closest touch with the fourth caste-group, 
that. of the Siidras. The latter was continually receiving accretions from 
the conquered aboriginal population and could not therefore keep up its 
cultural purity to the Aryan level. There arose, therefore, the necessity 
of clearly distinguishing the Aryan Vaisya from the Sudra who was a 
doubtful Aryan. An evidence of this precaution is seen in the variants 
of caste-names for the last two groups, namely as Ary a and Sudra, found 
in some passages in the Taittiriya, Kdthaka, Vdjasaneyt, and Atharvaveda 
Samhitds. 

Along with their functions and duties, the privileges and status of the 
four castes were being differentiated minutely in the religious and social 
spheres. The Satapatha Brahmana- prescribes varying sizes of funeral 
mounds for the %ir castes. The deities to whom victims of the different 
castes are c.(tiered in the H'tr.ushamedha are different. Different degrees 
of politer ,ess are noticed in the trades of address prescribed for the four 
castes. . 

The -Sidra class was naturally thl hardest hit in these invidious dis- 
nclions, but the texts are not consistent in the position they assign to 
If, for example, the Satapatha (III T - 10) sa y s that a Sudra is not 
rthy of being addressed by a consecrated person, ihe stories or 

450 



SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC CONDITIONS 


•aKama jfebala arid Janasruti in the Upanishads show that the 
teaSung of philosophy was not withheld from him. The Sudra cannot 
milk the co N f° r Agnihotra-milk according to the Kdthaka Samhitd 
(XXXI 2) Tut the Satapatha Brahmana (V. 5. 4. 9) gives the Sudra 
. • i ace * in t ie Soma sacrifice, and the Taittinya Brahmana prescribes 

formulae for establishing the sacrificial fire for the rathakdra also who 
was coui^M a Sudra. The 'Aitareya Brahmana, however, lays down 
tiw ,.ost reactionary doctrine. It describes the Sudra as yathdkdma- 
vadhya (fit to be beaten with impunity), who could be expelled at will 
and who is always the servant of another. It is also declared that the 
Sudra has no rights of property as against the rdjanya, especially the 
king. How far these extreme views were actually followed in practice it 
is difficult to say. 

The Vaisya class (Fif) was engaged in agriculture, pastoral pursuits, 
industry, and trade, and paid tribute to the king and the nobles, in 
return for the protection given to them. A late passage (VII. 29. 3) in 
the Aitareya Brahmana gives rather a low estimate of him with 
reference to the Kshatriya, when it says that “he is to be lived on by 
another and to be oppressed at will.” Although things might not have 
been really so bad as this, there is no doubt that the position of the 
VaiSya was steadily deteriorating in this age. 

The Kshatriya class was composed of the king s relations, his nobility, 
his retainers and other chiefs of petty/ states. They (ought for the protection 
of the country and maintained peace. They t * ••< •( . ed revenue in kind from 
the people or masses (the VaiSyas mainly) during war. For their normal 
or peace-time subsistence some. :>i ti: in vfere probably granted villages, 
because the Gramani seems to have Been more often a nominee of the 
king rather than a popularly elected officer, and probably the post was 
hereditary in such e; Cithers had their lands cultivated by tenants. 
In war, they the people, who fought alongside them. 

While it is glA^ilpr'^ognized that the Brahmana and the Kshatriya 
have undoubte 4 lfi^«: : edence over the Vaisya and Sudra, there is not the 
same unanimity.Ay Inspect of the relative position of the first two. 1 The 
more common Ai/nv is that the Brahmana is superior to the king, as 
recorded in thi. ■'djdsaneyi Samhitd (XXI. 21) and the Satapatha, Aitareya 
and PahchaviyAa Brahwanas. The Brahmana is dependent on the king 
{Satapatha Br. ,1 243. 3) and takes a lower seat by his side, but is superior 
to the king. A Kshatriya can never get along without a Brahmana while 
a Brahmana can nay, the power of the Kshatriya is derived from the 
Brahmana ( 4 dkipatha Br. IV, 1. 4. 6; XII. 7. 3* 12). On the other hand, 
the Kafhaim^tyfxkita (XXVIII. 5) says that the Kshatriya is superior t 
the Brahm; ,i)v ; while the Aitareya Br. (VII. 29) rates the Brahmana ra 
low, descritfi?^ i.im as a receiver (of gifts), a drinker (of Soma) a* 
slaved at will (by th.e king). Though this is not the o 


e 


liable to be ly. 


451 





r iew of this age it explains some facts very satisfactorily; t j le f act f Qr 


THE VEDIC AGE 



example, that many kings were seers of hymns and sacrifice^ an( j some 
of them were even instructors of Brahmanas in the Brahmanu a j ] ore 
Brahmanas are contrasted with the members of the tliree 0 th er castes 
as the privileged eaters of the oblation. According to sonv scholars the 
Brahmanas were divided into two classes—the Purob.itas 0 f ^ 
who guided their employers by their counsel, and the oric iartr 
priests, who led quiet lives, 2 In the view of the present writer these wd 
not Separate classes as such. Any one of the ordinary priests could come 
into contact with the king when they were engaged in some great festival 
and could be selected for the post of Purohita, if found pre-eminent and 
distinguished for his learning. The post remained hereditary, only if the 
son was as well qualified as the father. Imprecations against royal 
oppressors of Brahmanas in the Atharvaveda and the statement therein 
that kings that persecute the Brahmanas do not prosper, suggest on the 
one hand that the persecution of Brahmanas was not unknown, and on 
the other, the gradual consolidation of the prestige of the priesthood. 
Even though a passage in the Aitareya Br. (VII. 29. 4) exalts the Raj any a 
above the Brahniana whom (it says) the former can control, the references 
to the visah only, as the subjects of the king (Tcindya Brdhmana ), suggest 
that the Brahmana class received preferential treatment and enjoyed 
certain privileges and exemptions denied to the other caste-groups. The 
greed hud cunning of the Brahmanas and many prerogatives claimed by 
them are reflected in Aiharvaveda and other texts (ante, pp. 408, 418), 
but they may not be a true 'picture : .of the class as a whole. There can 
be hardly any dbubt that many of them deserved the highest position 
in society by their character and intellect 

The most glaring evil of the caste-system, namely the doctrine of the 
impurity communicated by the touch or contact of lower castes (known 
as "untouchability” today),'|iad not yet reared its a, Ay. *ead. Restrictions 
on inter-dining are known, bi\t not on the basis of cicac -Chpat importance 
is attached to purity of descent in the Sainhitas Brahmanas, but 
there are instances of Brahmanas of impure descent such as Kavasha, 
Vatsa, and Satyakama Jabala. On the whole it is quite clear that 
caste had not yet become a rigid system, and none of tt-v three factors 
which definitely characterize it today, viz., prohibitib’u. ;;d qnter-dining 
and inter-marriage, and determination by hereditary d^ept, was yet 
established on a secure basis. 


3. Marriage and the Position of Women f \ . 

There are evidences that marriage did not normally take pkice before 
>rty. As regards restrictions on marriage, it was bar^qk.^thin the 
of agnates and cognates, but the Satapatha BrdhM'tP) 3* 6) 


narriages within the third or fourth degree on either • I hough 


452 






SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC CONDITIONS 



hiti the gotra was not explicitly prohibited, marriage outside * 
iist have been more frequent. Brothers and sisters were not 
■?re their elders; so the order of birth was generally respected. 
The IS' a: of a widow was allowed, as seen from the Atharvaveda IX. 

5, 27 > ygamy undoubtedly prevailed. The Maitrdyam Samhita 

Hientio ten wives of Manu. the king has four wives, the mahishi 
(the o chief wife), the favourite one (vdvata), the parivriktl or the 

negle-^e (o' rig to the absence of a son?), and the pdldgalt (daughter 
of 5art official .). The instances of Kavasha and Vatsa, as well as that 
oi jinasruti in tbm Chhandogya Upanishad, who offers his daughter in 
marriage to a Bral lana, indicate that hypergamy was permitted during 
this period. The w, , wedded first must necessarily have claimed all the 
privileges of a wife in the religious and social life of the couple, but the 
two wives of Yajjnavalkya were apparently on a footing of equality. The 
verses from the Atharvaveda quoted above (p. 408) indicate the prevalence 
of polyandry. Conjugal morality generally stood on a high level, but 
the infidelity of the wife was certainly not unknown. The ritual of the 
Varunapraghasa (in the Maitrdyam Samhita and the Saiapatka and the 
Taittinya Brdkmcmas), in which the wife of the sacrificer is questioned 
as regards her lovers, is evidently a rite to expiate unchastity (even 
pl?.:unic or purely mental) on the part of the wife. The son of a Kumdnputra 
(son of a maiden) is mentioned in the Vdjasaneyi Samhita which refers 
also to illicit unions of £uclras and Aryas, both male and female. But all 
these may be looked upon rather as exceptions that prove the rule of 
a high standard of ordinary sexual morality. The metronymics in the 
lists of teachers in the Brihad&ranyaka Upanishad may be explained as 
the relic of an ancient sociological feature rather than as evidence of 
recognized immorality. After all the society is human, and while we 
should not entertain highly exaggerated notions of unfailing chastity 
during the age, disproportionate importance need not be attached to 
isolated cases, or peculiar and exceptional customs and institutions. 

The sale of a daughter was known, but viewed with disfavour. Dowries 
were generally given. The various types of marriage detailed in the later 
law books had not been formulated as yet. The story of Chyavana in 
+hc Jaiminiya Brdhmana is an instance of the gift of a maiden for Services 
rendered. The elements of the marriage ceremony described in the 
marriage-hymn of the Rigveda are reproduced without much change in 
the corresponding Atharvaveda-hynm, which adds only one important 
feature, which later became essential, namely the bridegroom causing 
the bride to mount a stone before grasping her hand. The poetic picture 
of an ideal family life in which the newly-wedded wife becomes the 
mistress of her husband’s home, as depicted in the Rigieda, holds true 
for the texts of this period also, and this ideal was possibly often realized. 
The term paint regularly applied to the wife in the Brahmanas is indicative 


453 



vrauv 



THE VEDIC AGE 


<SL 


of her equal share in the social and religious side of the hr 
while the terra jdyd refers only to her conjugal position 
however, she lost this important position, as a priest was me 
employed to offer the oblations in certain ceremonies instea 
This deterioration of her status arid dignity went so far 
woman being classed with dice and wine, as one of the th 
(Maitniyani Samhitd, III. 6. 3). On the whole, judging fr¬ 
ill the Taittinya (VI. 5. 8. 2) and the Kdthaka Sa^ntds, 
clearly that woman, who .held a high position in the , -ge of the iff™ 
Samhitd, had fallen on evil days in this age (ante, Ch. WX, p. 420). 

It is true that sometimes high praise is showered in her in the texts 
of this period. Thus it is said that she is half her , usband and com¬ 
pletes him (Satapatha Br.V. 2 . 1. 10). But in spite of rthis praise she 
not allowed to take part in political life, by attending the assembly 


e wife. 
■suit in 
evils 
r ences 
?ears 


is 


like men. According to the Ailareya Brdhmana (III. 24. j), a good woman 
is one who does not talk back. In the Satapatha, there is actually the rule 
that the wife should dine after her husband. The relative position of the 
two sexes is reflected in the keen desire for male progeny. This may be 
regarded as natural in a patriarchal society where relationship was 
recognized through the father. But this natural predilection exceeds all 
bounds of propriety or morality vrhen we read in the Aitareya Btfflmana 
(VII. 15) that a daughter is a source of misery and a son alone can be 
the saviour of the family. The Atharvaveda (VI. n. 3) also deplores the 
birth of daughters. 

The Atharvaveda (XVIII. 3. 1) merely refers to the ancient practice 
of sail (widow-burning) and the Rigveda does not countenance it. So it 
appears that this custom was not very prevalent during the Vedic age. 
The Vedic texts also tacitly admit the non-existence of the custom, by 
discussing the question of widow re-marriage, which is permitted by some 
texts and prohibited by others. 

4. Education 

With the development and elaboration of the institution of the sacrifice 
and the.growth of a vast literature connected with it, the problem of 
the preservation of this literature became very acute, particularly because 
during the age under discussion the whole of it (the Samhitas and 
Brdhmanas, including the A ranyakas and U-panishads appended to them) 
was looked upon as Sruti or revealed literature. The Vedic literature 
must therefore have formed the chief subject of instruction and the vital 
part of education. Naturally, then, the process of imparting the know¬ 
ledge of the sacred hymnology and sacrificial ritual must have become 
more and more systematized during this age. Literary education was 
transmitted only orally, i.e. by word of mouth from teacher to pupil. We 
find an echo of this system in the famous frog-hymn of the Rigveda, 

454 


SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC CONDITIONS 


xqSf^cl (above (ante, p. 346). The art of writing was very probably known 
to the Vedic Indians ,3 but that it played no part in the educational 
system of ancient India is accepted by all. 

The Atharvaveda (XI. 5) refers to a brahmachdrin (Vedic student) 

athering sacred fuel for fire-worship and bringing alms (begged from 

bor to door) to the teacher. There are also prayers in the AV for 
liturgical employment at the ceremony of Initiation ( Upanayana ). 
Svddhydya or the daily portion or lesson of Vedic study is referred to 
in the Samhilds of the Yajurveda. In the Kdthaka Samhita, a rite for the 
benefit of one who, though not a Brahmana, has recited or studied the 
vidyd, is mentioned, and the well-known fact that Kshatriya kings like 
Janaka were not Only keen students of the Vedas, but also great philoso¬ 
phers renders it almost certain that members of the Kshatriya and VaiSya 
castes received the sacrament of the Upanayana and went through part 
(at least) of the period of studentship, although normally the Kshatriya 
would study the art of war. Vedic study, service to the teacher, and 
chastity were the principal duties of a brahmachdrin. The fairly detailed 
description of the Upanayana as a sacrament ( samskara ) in the Satapatha 
Br. (XI. 3. 3.1--7) includes all the essential features of the same sacrament 
and life of studentship which are treated at length in the Grihya-sutras, 
such as: (1) The formal acceptance of the pupil by the teacher at the 
request of the former; (2) the entrusting of the pupil to the care of 
certain deities; (3) the vows and duties to be discharged by the pupil 
while residing at the house of the guru, such as: putting fuel on the fire, 
sipping water, and begging alms; (4) the dress of the pupil consisting 
of the ajina, the girdle, etc. The description of young Angirasa teaching 
his elders, in the Tdndya Br. (XIII. 3. 23-4), and the stories of 
Nabhanedishtha and Bharadvaja in the Aitareya and Taittinya 
Brdhmanas, give us a vivid picture of the educational system of those 
days, with its insistence on truthfulness, observance of duty ( dharma ), 
devotion to the dchdrya or guru (preceptor) and to one’s parents, 
hospitality, faith, and generosity. The Taittinya Aranyaka even antici¬ 
pates some minute directions of the type given in the Grihya-sutras, 
such as: the pupil should not run while it is raining, nor urinate in water, 
nor bathe naked, etc. 

Women probably took part in the intellectual life of the society, but 
we have no such definite reference in the later Samhita and Brahmana 
texts as we get in the Upanishads. From the Taittinya Samhita (VI, 
1. 6. 5), the Maitrdyani Samhita (III. 7. 3) and the Satapatha Br., we 
know that women were taught to dance and to sing, which appear to 
be recognized feminine accomplishments. 

Among subjects of study figured arithmetic, grammar, and prosody 
(Tdndya Br.). Language was obviously an important subject of study, 
since Northerners are mentioned as experts in language and grammar. 

455 


THE VEDIC AGE 


There was then no system of state education. The Brahmana teachers 
taught students of the three higher castes at their houses, giving them 
free board and lodging. In return, the pupils served the teacher and 
gave him fees ( gum-dakshind ). That the education in this Home University 
was not merely literary, but also included physical and moral training 
is seen from the hard daily routine of the pupil and the code of mora 
conduct prescribed for him, while residing with the teacher. 

The existence of Vedic schools in this age, that is, even before the 
establishment of Sutra -charanas, is clear evidence that even in these 
early times, centres of Vedic learning presided over by a celebrated Vedic 
teacher were scattered all over the country. The Samaveda Sutras refer 
to Brahmana -charanas (schools) and as many as fifteen charanas of the 
Vajasaneyins are known, including the Kanva and Madhyamdina ones 
that have survived. The only Sariihita-c/wnwws known are those of the 
Bashkalas and Sakalas for the Rigveda Samhitd. The separate Samhita- 
and Brahmana -charanas originated owing to a difference in the texts of 
the Samhitas and Brahmanas respectively. Whatever we might think of 
Max Mtiller's theory of the origin of Sariihita- and Brahmana -charanas, 
it is important to note that numerous Vedic schools existed all over the 
country. The example of the assembly of the learned in the court of Janaka 
shows that debates (philosophical and literary) were often held under 
royal auspices. 

5. Amusements and Entertainments 

Music, both vocal and instrumental, and dancing continue to be among 
the amusements of this age.4 The Samaveda is a standing monument 
to the wonderful skill and originality of the ancients in the science of 
vocal music. Several professional musicians are known, and the variety 
of instrumental music in vogue can be inferred from the types of musicians 
enumerated, such as lute-players, flute-players, conch-blowers, drummers, 
etc. Among the musical instruments known are the aghdti (cymbal) to 
accompany dancing (RV and A V), drums, flutes, and lutes of various 
types, and the harp or lyre with a hundred strings (vdna). Many other 
instruments, of which we cannot form an exact idea, are also named. 

The fsailusha, included in the list of victims at the Purushamedha in 
the Vajasaneyi Samhitd, probably means an "actor" or "dancer.” There 
is a theory that a precursor of the later classical drama existed in this 
period, support being lent to this view by the supposed reference to the 
Nata-sutras in Panini. 

How deeply racing (especially chariot-racing) had entered into the 
popular scheme of entertainment is seen from its ritual transformation 
into a ceremony which, by sympathetic magic, secures the success of the 
sacrificer. The essential part of the Vajapeya ceremony is a chariot-race, 
in which the sacrificer is made victorious. Horse-racing was a favourite 

456 



SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC CONDITIONS 


< 81 . 


a'lim^etfxent. A semi-circular course and prizes for such a race are men¬ 
tioned in the Atharvaveda. A formal race is also a feature of the Rajasuya 
ritual. Dicing was another popular amusement. The number of dice, the 
method of dice-playing, and the names of the throws are all described 
in detail in the various texts of this period. A ritual game of dice is played 
at the Agnyadheya and the Rajasuya ceremonies. So gambling is probably 
sought to be restricted by elevating racing and dicing to the rank of 
religious ceremonies. It is interesting to note that a varhia-nartin, pole- 
dancer" or “acrobat/' is mentioned in the Yajurveda. 

6. Food and Drink 

Various eatables are mentioned in the texts of this period. 1 he apupa 
is a cake mixed with ghi (clarified butter) or made of rice or barley, 
odana is a mess, generally of grain cooked with milk. Special varieties 
are those made with water, milk, curds or ghi, and beans, sesame or 
meat, and named appropriately, such as “tilaudanci," etc. A porridge 
made of grain, barley or sesame unhusked, slightly parched and kneaded, 
is called Karambha . Rice cooked with milk and with beans is mentioned 
in the Satapatha Brdhnana and the Vdjasaneyi Samhitd. Fried grains 
of rice were known. Barley-gruel ( yavdgu ) and decoctions of other grains 
are also referred to. 

Meat-eating seems to be fairly common, as in the Rigvedic age. I he 
Satapatha Brdhmana prescribes the killing of a great ox or goat in honour 
of a guest. Generally meat was eaten on the occasion of some ceremony 
or other, but such ceremonies were performed almost every day. Its use 
is forbidden during the observance of a vow. It appears that the killing 
of cows gradually came into disfavour. The normal meat-diet consisted 
of the flesh of the sheep, the goat and the ox, the usual sacrificial victims. 
What man ate, he offered to the gods. 

Among the chief products of milk may be mentioned clotted curds 
(amiksha) , sour milk [dadhi) , fresh butter (nava-nUa ), payasya or curds 
consisting of a mixture of sour milk and hot or cold fresh milk, butter, 
mixed with sour milk ( prishad-cijya ), phdnta , creamy butter or the first 
chtted lumps produced by churning, and finally vajina , a mixture of 
hot fresh nUk with sour milk. This formidable list of milk-products 
and their nixtures shows the great popularity of milk as a drink. 

Surd, an intoxicating spirituous liquor already known in the Rigvedic 
age, is often mentioned. Though tolerated as an ordinary drink (the drink 
of the people in the sabha), it is often condemned as leading to quarrels 
and as seducing men from the path of virtue like dicing and meat-eating 
( AV , VI. 70. 1). The Sautramani sacrifice is of the nature of an expiation 
or penance for an indulgence in surd . The method of its preparation cannot 
be ascertained. Probably it was prepared from fermented grains and 
plants. It was kept in skins. The Yajurveda Samhitds mention a beverage 


457 



THE VEDIC AGE 


<SL 


galled niasara, which appears to have been a mixture of rice and syamaka 
with grass and parched barley, etc. Madhu primarily means "sweet” as 
an adjective, and so denotes any sweet food or drink such as the Soma 
or milk. The sense "honey,” though known in the Rigveda, is only now 
its most definite sense, and there are taboos against its use by students 
and women under certain circumstances. 

Already in the Brahmana period, the real Soma plant was difficult 
to obtain, and so substitutes were being allowed. B'or example, the 
1 ahchavithsa Brahmana (IX. 5 - 3 ) suggests that if pntikd, a substitute 
for the Soma, cannot be procured, arjundni may be used as a substitute 
for the Soma. In the Yajurveda, the plant is ceremoniously purchased 
before it is pressed. The plant was sometimes subjected to the technical 
process of dpydyana (causing to swell) by being steeped in water, thus 
increasing its yield of juice. These few details, culled from the texts of 
our period supplement the almost exhaustive description of the prepara¬ 
tion of the Soma which can be gathered from the Rigveda {ante, p. 374). 

7. Dress and Decoration 

Or ha-sutra (woollen thread) is repeatedly mentioned in the later 
Sarhhitas and Brahmanas, but urnd denoted not merely sheep’s wool but 
probably goat’s hair also. Clothes were generally woven of sheep’s wool. 
The fondness of the Vedic people for ornamental or embroidered garments 
was as keen as in later periods. The dress in this period seems to 
have consisted of three garments—an under-garment (mvi), a garment 
proper ( vasas ), and an over-garment (adhi-vasas), like a mantle or cloak. 
The Satapatha Brahmana describes the set of sacrificial garments as con¬ 
sisting of a silk under-garment (tdrpya), a garment of undyed wool, an 
over-garment and a turban ( ushmsha ). The turban was worn by men as 
well as by women, A royal head-gear or turban is worn at the 
Rajasuya and Vajapeya ceremonies by the king. The turban of the Vratya 
is referred to. The “sandal” or "shoe" was made of boar-skin {Satapatha 
Br). The combination of dandopdnaha ("staff and sandals”) is mentioned 
in the Kaushitaki Brahmana. Skins were used as clothing. The frequent 
use of the variant terms for “warp” and “woof” shows the great develry- 
rnent of the art of weaving garments. 

The pra-ghdta or closely woven ends of a cloth to which is attached 
the trimming, fringe, or border of a garment [dasd] is mentioned. The 
Sahkhdyana Aranyaka (XI. 4) refers to a garment of (dyed with?) saffron. 
But uncoloured woollen garments are also mentioned ( Satapatha Br.). 
From the manner of wearing the sacred thread outside, can be inferred 
the manner of wearing the over-garment which probably passed over 
the left shoulder and under the right arm. The Satapatha Brahmana 
(XI. 5. 1. 1) has an interesting legend to explain why man alone wears 
clothes. So none but the ascetics could go naked. 

458 





mw 


SOCIAL 


|p mm, 

AND 


ECONOMIC CONDITIONS 


ib Taittinya Brdhmana mentions an article called Stfmgara, probably 
an ornament made of a fragrant substance. Salall, the quill of the 
porcupine, is used now for parting the hair and anointing the eyes. 
The Sankha or conch-sjiell"is.used as an amulet (AV). The late Shadvimia 
Brdhmana (V. 6) mentions the pearl .( Vi-muktd ). A jewel (mani) strung 
on a thread was worn round the neck as an amulet. The prd-kdia, an 
ornament of metal or a metal mirror, is often mentioned in the Brahmanas. 
The pra-vatba ,.in the Atharvaveda (XV. 2. 5, 9, etc.) probably means an 
ear-ring,. A. nishka of silver (an ornament worn round the neck) as worn 
by the Vratyas is mentioned in the Pahchavimsa Brdhmana. 

8. Knowledge of Medicine 

The inclusion of a physician in the list of victims at the Purushamedha 
in the Vdjasaneyi Sarhhitd (XXX. 10) and Taittinya Brdhmana (III, 4. 4. 1) 
shows that the profession of the physician had already become well 
established. But whereas the profession was held in high esteem in the 
Rigveda —the ASvins being called “physicians”—a dislike for it seems to 
•'ive developed in this age, because in some Samhita and Brahmana 
, ,:ts of the Yajurveda , the Asvins are looked down upon because as 
• iysicians they have to mix too freely with men. From the Atharvaveda 
one can say that although their treatment of diseases is somewhat primi¬ 
tive, consisting as it does of the use of herbs in combination with spells and 
of water—-remedies Indo-European in character—their knowledge of 
pathology is anything but elementary. The Atharvaveda enumerates quite 
a large variety of diseases and the demons supposed to cause them. 
Takrnan (a kind of fever) is the subject of five hymns of the A tharvaveda 
and is also often mentioned elsewhere. But it is in the Atharvaveda that 
its symptoms are described in detail (ante, p. 415). Consumption, scrofula, 
dysentery, boils, swellings, convulsions, ulcers, rheumatism, headache, 
jaundice, cramps, eye-diseases, senility, fractures and wounds, bites of 
snakes and other harmful insects, poison in general, lunacy, and leprosy 
are the diseases mentioned in the AUharvaveda . The use of sandbags to 
Stop bleeding is interesting. The practice of dissecting animals at the 
sacrifice was a great help to the knowledge of anatomy which was 
developed to an appreciable extent. Finally may be noted an interesting 
remark in the Sankhayana Brdhmana (V. 1) that “sickness is particularly 
prevalent at the junction of the seasons”—a very accurate observation 
indeed. 


r 


2. ECONOMIC CONDITION 


Agricultur , ,, 

4 ife and Cattle 

vrccordine* 

Maitrdyant ' *° va ri° us ' texts, such as the Atharvaveda , Vdjasaneyi , 
~ ’ \ Taittinya , and Kdthaka Samhitds, and the Taittinya and the 

459 




THE VEDIC AGE 



<SL 


Satapatha Bnihmanas, six, eight, twelve, and even twenty-four oxen were 
used to drag the plough which must have been large and heavy. The 
oxen were yoked and harnessed with traces and guided by the goad of 
the ploughman. The furrow (sitd) is often mentioned. The value of the 
natural manure of animals in the field was very much appreciated (AV). 
Dung ( sakril) and dry cow-clung (kansha) are often mentioned. The 
plough is described as having a smooth handle, well-lying and lance- 
pointed (paviravat ). There is a special name kvnasa for the ploughman 
or cultivator of the soil. The Atharvaveda gives the credit of introducing 
the art of ploughing to PrithI Vainya, but ploughing is constantly referred 
to in the texts of this period as practised by the Vedic Aryans, the Vratyas 
who were outside the pale of the Vedic religion being described as not 
cultivating the soil. The Satapatha By. enumerates the various operations 
of agriculture, as “ploughing, sowing, reaping, and threshing.” The ripe 
grain was cut with a sickle. From the Taittirlya Samhitd and other texts 
we gather that yava (meaning "barley” now) sown in winter was har¬ 
vested in summer, that rice sown in the rains ripened in autumn, and 
that beans and sesamum planted at the time of the summer rains ripen 
in winter. Wheat was known and is distinguished from rice (vrihi) a 
barley. Groats (saktavah) made of wheat-grain are mentioned. Cultivatie' 
suffered from the usual pests—the moles that destroyed the seed and the 
other creatures that harmed the tender shoots. Evidently to prevent these 
and similar evils the cultivators used charms at the. time of both sowing 
seed and gathering corn (ante, p. 413). Similar other spells in the 
A tharvaveda to avert drought and excess of rains show that these 
inevitable mishaps threatened agriculture then (as now) in spite of some 
sort of a system of irrigation that sought to minimize its evil effects. 

Draft-oxen were generally castrated. Female draft-cattle also were 
used. A four-year-old ox or cow ( turyavdh ) is mentioned in the I aittiriyu, 
Maitrdyam, and Vajasaneyi Samhitds. The milch-cow ( dhenu ) is con¬ 
trasted with the bull, and there are special terms for cows, oxen, and 
calves of different ages, for cows barren or otherwise and in various stages 
of growth and motherhood, as well as for a coW with a calf substituted 
for one of her own which had died. 

A fairly long hymn in the Atharvaveda shows the reverence inspired 
by the cow, and the death penalty prescribed for cow-killing outside te 
sacrificial enclosure tells the same tale. Pasture-lands were ca’ -'lly 
looked after, and large sheds or stalls were erected for accommodating 
cattle. On the whole, the cows were taken extremely good care of. The 
origin of the sanctity of the cow lay in the inestimable valued the cow 
for purposes other than eating, and the occasional mythologi, cU \min #d 1 
tion of the cow with the earth or Aditi helped the process whici “ 
in the full- fledged deification of the cow in later times. 


460 





SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC CONDITIONS 
de and Commerce 

Vaisyas (sreshthins), who had acquired wealth in trade or agri¬ 
culture, and who were probably the headmen of guilds, are often referred 
to. That money-lending was a flourishing business is indicated in various 
ways. Kusidin is a designation of the usurer in the Satapatha Br., and 
Kustda has the sense of a “loan” in the Taittinya Samhita. The rate of 
interest is not specified. No regular system of currency or coinage appears 
to have been introduced yet, as no coins definitely belonging tp this 
period have been unearthed and no specific and undoubted reference to 
coins occurs in the literature of the period. The mdna is a measure of 
weight equivalent to the Krishnala \ i.e. the berry of the gunjii) which 
was a unit of weight. The satamdna, a piece of gold equivalent in weight 
to a hundred Krishnalas, must have been in use as currency among the 
merchants. The nishka also had become by now a unit of value in addition 
to the old-time unit, the cow. The profession of the merchant was often 
hereditary, as the term vdnija (“son of a vanij") in the sense of a merchant 
shows. The haggling of the market, already known in the Rigvedic age, 
had now become such a pronounced feature of commerce that a whole 
hymn of the Afharvaveda (III. i|| aims at procuring success in trade 
through clever bargaining. Garments, coverlets, and goatskins are among 
the articles of commerce and market commodities (A V). 

The sea was undoubtedly known and there was probably some amount 
of Sea-borne trade. In the texts of this period, samudra is frequently used 
in the definite sense of the "sea.” The Aitareya Brdhtnana speaks of the 
“inexhaustible sea” (V. 16. 7) and “the sea as encircling the earth.” The 
eastern and western oceans (mentioned in the Satapatha Brdhmana) are 
probably references to the Indian Ocean and the Arabian Sea. 

a. Occupations and Industries 

The principal occupations and professions and the various arts and 
| rafts were distributed among, and assigned to, the various groups of 
. eople in accordance with the scheme of the caste-system, which had 
now taken root in Vedic society and was being elaborated and com¬ 
plicated by the rise of mixed castes. For example, agricultural and pastoral 
pursuits were mainly in the hands of the Vaisyas. The professions of 
teaching and officiating as priests at the sacrifices (Srauta or Grihya) 
were- confined to the Brahmanas. The fighting profession was mainly the 
monopoly of the Rajanya or Kshatriya class. Service of all kinds—menial 
or otherwise—fell to the lot of the fourth class—that of the Sudras. This 
is but a rough distribution, and the division was not rigidly adhered to, 
a member of one caste not rarely following the occupation of another. 

Although hunting did not form the chief source of livelihood of any 
particular class, it was practised for procuring sustenance and for the 
protection of herds and flocks from wild beasts; and it was also occa- 

461 




THE VEI)IC AGE 



Mdnally indulged in as a pastime and sport, chiefly by members of the 
Raj any a class, as in the Rigvedic age (ante, p. 398), Among the victims 
at the Punisha-medha are found many curious technical names of persons 
maintaining themselves on hunting and fishing. Birds were caught in nets 
(jdla) and the net was fastened on pegs (AV, X. I. 30; VIII. 8. 5). 

Fortunately a very comprehensive list of the professions, occupations, 
arts, crafts, and industries of this period is to be found in the list of 
victims at the Purusha-medha as given in the Vdjasaneyi Samhitd (XXX) 
and the 1 aittiriya Brdhmana (III. 4). The anu-Kshattri, a special type 
of attendant on the doorkeeper or on the charioteer, the ana-char a, an 1 
attendant in general, a drummer, a worker in thorns cut up and used . 
to plait mats, a smith, a ploughman, an astrologer, a cow-killer (or 
butcher?), a herdsman, a maker of bow-strings, a carpenter, a gatherer 
of wood, a fire-watcher (ddva-pa), a hand-clapper, who presumably scared 
away birds from the fields by making a noise, a female embroiderer or 
a basked- maker, a jeweller, the yoker and unyoker of horses, the maker 
of surd, an elephant-keeper and a worker in gold-all these figure in the 
list of victims in the Purushamedha. In the other texts of this age are 
mentioned a few additional callings, viz., a ferryman or poleman, a washer¬ 
man (mala-ga ), a menial (purusha), a potter, a usurer or money-lender, 
a blower, a barber, a boat-propeller, a cook, a messenger, and a footman 
running by the side of a chariot. To this multiplicity of occupations must 
be added the arts and crafts mentioned in Chapter XIX, as there, was 
no appreciable break in the economic life of the Vedic Aryans from the 
age of the Rigveda Samhitd down to the age of the Brdhmanas , save 
that there was a more extensive knowledge and use of different kinds 
of metals. 

4. House-Building and Means of Transport 

The "House” (harmya) was large enough to contain not only a large 
family, but also pens for cattle and sheep, and evidently had many room^ 
with a special place for the Garhapatya fire which was kept cr^tinuouslf 
burning. The door with a fastener is often mentioned. -Hbus< 
were generally built of wood as in the Rigvedic period. The method of 
constructing them is not definitely known. Probably four pillars w^re 
erected, propped up by beams leaning against them at an angle. Fjbs 
of bamboo-cane (vam 6 a), a ridge, and a net or thatched covering .over 
the bamboo ribs probably made up the roof. Grass in bundles was, xised 
to fill in the walls which were finished with read work. The dhana dhdni 
("treasure-house”) mentioned in the Taittinya Aranyaka (X. 67) pr; 0 babb 
indicates a special type of room or house. The Atharvaveda mei^tioF 
patninam sadana or a part of the house called women's quarters. A .ser s 
with a pillow or cushion or coverlet, a bed, and a couch are among thb 
articles of furniture mentioned. 


462 



SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC CONDITIONS 


egards means of transport, the draft wagon {anas) is distinguished 
from the chariot ( raffia. ) used for war and sport. The axle-box of a con¬ 
veyance is mentioned. Since the Atharvaveda (XV. 2. 1) mentions vi-ftatka, 
a rough vehicle used for bad tracks, it can be inferred that there were 
some well-made roads. The wagon was drawn by oxen generally, but 
riding of horses and elephants was in use. Ships and boats plying on 
rivers and seas were a popular mode of transport. 


1. For a detailed discussion on the relation between the Brahmanas and Kshatriyas 
in this age, cf. Ghoshal, History of Hindu Political Theories, pp. 44-52. 

2. Ved. Ind., II, p. 255; CHI, I, pp. 127-8. 

3. Cf. the author’s paper '‘The spoken words in Sanskrit Literature” ( BDCRI , IV). 
Cf. also Dr. S. K. Chatterji’s view {ante, p. 157). There is, however, a sharp 
difference of opinion on the antiquity of the art of writing in ancient India 
(ante, p. 392). 

4. These three are referred to as the threefold Silpa in the KausMtaki Brdhmaria. 


463 


BOOK SEVEN 


THE AGE OF THE 
U PAN ISH ADS AND SUTRAS 


CHAPTER XXIV 




LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


x. THE UPANISHADS 


The word upanishad is derived from the root "upa-ni-sad” which means 
“to sit down near some one.’’ This no doubt refers to the pupil’s sitting 
down near his teacher at the time of instruction. The prefix “ upa ” may 
also be taken to connote the pupil’s "approaching” the teacher to request 
him to impart his doctrine. The word in course of time gathered round it 
the sense of secret communication or doctrine which was imparted at 
such sittings. Later on the word also came to be applied to the texts 
which incorporated such doctrines. 

'he number of treatises called Upanishads is quite large, but some of 
in are not quite as old as the others. The oldest Upanishads are partly 
ncluded in the Aranyakas or the "forest texts” and partly appended to 
them. As a branch of Vedic literature even these texts are regarded as 
“breathed out” by Brahman and only “visioned” by the Vedic seers. 
The Upanishads are usually called Vedanta, or “the end of the. Veda,” 
not only because they came at the end of the Vedic period, or that they 
were taught at the end of Vedic instruction, but also because the later 
philosophers found in them the final aim of the Veda. 1 

As noted above (Ch. XX, p. 421), some of the Upanishadic texts in 
fact form the component parts of the Brahmanas. These are the Aitareya 
Upanishad, the KausMtaki Upanishad, the Taitlinya Upanishad, the 
Mahdndrayana Upanishad, the Brihaddr any aka Upanishad, the Chhdn- 
dogya Upanishad, and the Kena Upanishad. All these Upanishads, with 
the exception of only the Mahdndrayana Upanishad, belong to the 
earliest stage in the development of these texts. They are very, much 
akin to the prose of the Brahmanas and are certainly older than Buddha 
and Panini. 

The second category of the Upanishads represents a slightly later stage, 
but even these are pre-Buddhistic. They distinguish themselves from the 
first category in their form which is mostly or entirely metrical. Then, 
again, these texts have very often come down to us as independent 
texts. To this category belong the Katha, the Svetdivatara, the Mahanqrd- 
yana, the ha, the Mundaka and the Prnsna Upanishads. Though these 
texts also expound the Vedanta doctrine, they are not altogether free 
from Samkhya and Yoga view-points. 

The Maitrayaniya Upanishad which is attributed to a school of the 


467 



THE VEHIC AGE 


arvaveda 


B/ack Yajurveda and the Mandukya Upanishad of the Atharvavt 
jelong to the post-Buddhistic period. Their language, style, and contents 
show a later origin, and the great philosopher Sankara does not mention 
them. But due to their connection with certain Yedic schools they may 
be styled, together with the twelve mentioned above, as Yedic Upanishads. 

The remaining Upanishads which have come down to us either 
independently or in larger collections have very little connection with 
the Veda. Some of them contain very little that may be called philoso¬ 
phical, and some are more akin to the Puranas and the Tantras than 
to the Veda. According to their purpose and contents the non-Vedic ( 
Upanishads may be divided into six categories: (i) such as present 
Vedanta doctrines, (2) those which teach Yoga, (3) those extolling the 
ascetic life, (4) those which glorify Vishnu as the highest deity, (5) those 
which give the same position to Siva, and (6) the Upanishads of the 
Sarktas and other minor sects. Some of these, like the Jabala Upanishad 
quoted by Sankara, the Paramahamsa Upanishad, the Subala Upanishad 
quoted by Ramanuja, the Garbha Upanishad, the Atharvasiras Upanishad 
already mentioned in the Dharma-siitras as a sacred text, and 
Vajrasuchikd Upanishad may perhaps belong to a greater antiquity 1 
the rest. All these Upanishads are generally called the Upanishads of th 
Atharvaveda, perhaps because it was easier to refer them to that Veda, 
their connection with the other Vedas not being easily demonstrable, 
and because the Atharvaveda itself was shrouded in comparative obscurity 
and mystery. The total number of the Upanishads is very large, and 
one of the latest, the Muktikd Upanishad, enumerates 108 Upanishads 
classified according to the four Vedas. 

The position of the Upanishads at the end of Vedic literature should 
by no means be taken to indicate that the intelligentsia of the period 
began to interest itself in philosophical speculations only when they 
got wearied of their earlier ritualistic activities. The Upanishads are 
in fact the legitimate development of that scepticism, the earliest traces 
of which are found even in the Rigvedic hymns. Though these treatises 
mark the culmination of the earlier line of investigation into the nature 
of the ultimate reality, yet, due to the nature of their subject matter 
and the genuine spirit in which the enquiry is carried on, they also con¬ 
stitute a beginning in this direction. The spirit of their contents being 
anti-ritualistic, 2 it may be quite legitimate to suppose that the earlier 
philosophical activity originated with those outside the pale of the 
priestly class. 

It is also evident that the Kshatriyas took a leading part in this new 
line of enquiry. They had now secured a firm footing in the land by 
defeating the non-Aryans and, as noted above (Ch. XXI. p. 430), obtained 
a high status and pre-eminent position in society as ruling chiefs and 
high administrative officials. We can easily guess how' the intellige 

468 




WiNfsr/jy 



LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


§L 


fiyas with their restless mentality had grown jealous of th 
xmanas and attempted to gain a tactical superiority over them by 
assigning a deeper significance and meaning to the very sacrificial rites r 
which were elaborately developed by them as the principal element in 
their religion. That the early philosophical thoughts in the Vedic literature 
had their origin in the intelligent interpretation, which was sought to 
be put on what might otherwise appear as meaningless Vedic ritual, is 
abundantly clear. The various discussions between the Kshatriyas and 
the Brahmanas recorded in the Upanishads leave no reasonable doubt 
about it. 

This supposition is completely borne out by the evidence we gather 
from the Vedic literature. The references in the Brahmana texts already 
inform us that the members of the warrior class had betaken themselves 
to enquire into the true significance of sacrifice. The story of king Janaka 
of Videha and the sage Yajnavalkya, which appears in the eleventh 
book of the Satapatha Brahmana, is the most instructive in this respect. 

It shows no doubt the superiority of the warrior-intellect over the priestly 
e, at least in some isolated instances, but it also proves that even 
men the warriors as a class were regarded as intellectually inferior to the 
priestly class (who had as it were appropriated the monopoly of thinking), 
and as such were not always expected to interfere in inteUectual matters. 
But when we come to the Upanishads we find that the members of the 
non-priestly class grew more and more inquisitive into the true nature 
of the world. Thus in the Chhdndogya Upanishad (IV. 1--3), Raikva, a 
“Brahmana” not by caste but by his knowledge, instructs king Janasruti. 
The same Upanishad (IV. 4) shows Satyakama Jabala, of dubious descent, 
to be a worthy recipient of knowledge as he does not swerve from the 
truth. The king Pravahana instructs the Brahmana Gautama in the 
new doctrine of transmigration ( Chhdndogya , V. 3, etc.). This story, 
together with the one in which king Asvapati Kaikeya instructs five 
Brahmanas in the doctrine of Atman ( Chhdndogya , V. xi ff.), shows that 
these two doctrines which did not go well with Brahmanical theology 
were first conceived arnOng the warrior class. 

The principal contents of the Upanishads, at any rate of the more 
important among them, are philosophical speculations. The philosophers 
of the Upanishads are actively interested in an earnest enquiry into the 
ultimate truth that lies behind the world of creation .3 They have variously 
expressed their findings in the identity of Brahman—that highest 
principle which manifests itself in the motley of creation and which 
c ceives all things back at the time of dissolution—and Atman which is 
die individual self. This has been pointedly recorded in the famous 
dictum of identity “ tat ham asi” where “tat” meaning “that,” stands 
for Brahman, and through it the universe, and “ ham ,” meaning “thou,” 
for Atman or the individual self. 

469 



THE VEDIC AGE 


<SL 


-'Zp' To quote the words of an Upanishadic sage on tlxe point: 

“This my Atman in my inmost heart is smaller than a grain of rice, 
or a barley corn, or a mustard seed, or a millet grain. . . . This my Atman 
in my inmost heart is greater than the earth, greater than the sky, greater 
than the heavens, greater than all spheres. In him are all actions, all 
wishes, all smells, all tastes; he holds this All enclosed within himself; 
he speaks not, he troubles about nothingthis my Atmafi in my inmost 
heart, is this Brahman. With him, when I depart out of this life, shall I 
be united. For him to whom this knowledge has come, for him, indeed, 
there exists no doubt. Thus spake Sandilya, yea, Sandjlya.”* 

The famous story of Uddalaka Aruni and his son Svetaketu shows us 
how in that period the learning of the Vedas, without learning that 
doctrine “by which that which is unheard becomes heard, unthought 
becomes thought, and unknown becomes known," was regarded as 
futile. This doctrine was expounded by the father to his son. We are told 
that originally only the Existent was here without a Second. It then 
developed into the material world by itself. With Atman it penetrated 
into all beings, and therefore when a man dies he is united again with + 
Existent. As the juices collected by the bees lose consciousness of. then 
diversity, similarly all the creatures when combined in the Existent 
lose consciousness of the multiplicity of their forms in the univeise, just 
as from the invisible quintessence of the seed springs up the huge fig-tree, 
so also from the minute ultimate reality proceeds the diverse world; just 
as the salt dissolved in water cannot be seen and yet its presence can be 
felt by taste, similarly the Existent, though invisible, is present m the 
world and can be realized by the consciousness of “tat tvani as? . s the 
true nature of Atman is explained in the Chhdndogya Upamshad not as 
the Purusha in the eye or in the reflected image, not as the spirit that 
roams in the dreams, not even as the soul in the dreamless and profound 
sleep, but as the immortal and intelligent spirit in man.6 

The ethical doctrine of KarUan, connected with the doctrine of trans¬ 
migration, is beautifully developed in the Brihaddranyaka Upamshad. 
With pointed examples the doctrine is thus set forth:— 

“. . . Just as an embroidress undoes a small portion of a piece of 
embroidery, and out of it creates a different, quite new and more beautiful 
design, so man, when he has stripped off his body and has rid himself of 
non-knowledge, creates for himself a different, quite new and more 
beautiful form, that of the spirit of an ancestor or of a Gandharva, of a 
Brahman or of a Prajapati, of a god or of a man, or that of that some 
other being. . . . As he has acted, as he has lived, so he becomes; he 
who has done good, is born again as a good one, he who has done evil, 
is born again as an evil one. He becomes good through good action, baa 
through bad action. Therefore it is said: ‘Man here is formed entirely 
out of his desire, and according to his desire is his resolve, and according 

470 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 

he performs the action, and according to the performance 
of the action is his destiny/ ”7 The ethical basis of the Upanishadic 
doctrine as expressed in the simile “As water does not stick to the leaf 
of a lotus-flower, so evil action does not stick to him who knows this 
(that the Self is Brahman)” (Chhandogya, IV. 14. 3) is not to be construed 
to mean that the knower was given all laxity. The simile rather shows 
that the knower was regarded as inherently incapable of evil actions. 

The spirit of sincerity permeates throughout these philosophical chapters 
1 Indian literature. The knowers are as earnest in their search after 
ruth as the ignorant are anxious to know what is beyond. Their eager 
quest is expressed in the Brihaddranyaka , I. 3. 28: “From the unreal 
lead me to the real. From darkness lead me to light. From death lead me 
to immortality.” All distinctions of caste, social status and earthly power 
ar e set aside when the highest knowledge is to be sought. The story of 
N-ichiketas who prefers the knowledge of the ultimate reality to the 
pleasures of long life, long progeny and immense wealth and power is 
tkte best illustration to the point. 8 Says he:— 

“Ephemeral things! That which is a mortal's, 0 End-maker, 

Even the vigour (tejas) of all t 1 ' powers, they wear away. 

Even a whole life te slight indeed. 


—This, in truth, is the boon to be chosen by me . . . 

This thing whereon, they doubt, O Death: 

What there is in the great passing on—tell us that!” 

This earnest desire to know the truth above all is quite in keeping with 
what was regarded as the highest object of life in those days, viz., seeking 
union with the Brahman. No work, however good, could help in effecting 
this union. The only means to achieve it was to realize the identity of the 
soul with the Brahman .9 This growing indifference to the pleasures of 
the world and belittling them when compared to the supreme joy to be 
^rperienced in the unity with the Brahman, however, laid the foundation 
of the profound pessimism which pervades later Indian thought and 
literature. 

The enormous power which these philosophical poems have exercised 
over the minds of Indians for centuries together is not so much due to 
the fact that they were regarded as divipe revelation, but because 
, . these old thinkers wrestle so earnestly for the truth, because in 
their philosophical poems the eternally unsatisfied human yearning for 
knowledge has been expressed so fervently/' The Upanishads do not 
contain "superhuman conceptions,” but human, absolutely human 
attempts to come nearer to the truth—and it is this which makes them so 
valuable to us. As to the influence of the Upanishads on humanity 

47 1 






THE VEDIC AGE 



■kt large we may do no better than quote the view of a distinguished 
European scholar:— 

"‘For the historian, however, who pursues the history of human thought, 
the Upanishads have a yet far greater significance. From the mystical 
doctrines of the Upanishads one current of thought may be traced to the 
mysticism of the Persian Sufism, to the mystic-theosophical logos-doctrine 
of the Neo- Platonics and the Alexandrian Christians down to the teachings 
of the'Christian mystics Eckhart and Tauler, and finally to the philosophy 
of the great German mystic of the nineteenth century, Schopenhauer.” 1 '' 


2. THE SUTRAS 


The word sutra, by which a special class of literature is designated _ 
originally means ‘‘a thread.” Secondarily it denotes that type of literature 
which is made up of short sentences running through a topic like a thread, 
A sutra has thus come to mean a short rule, in as few words as possible, 
giving a clue to the learning stored in a particular topic forming a part 
of a particular book. Both by their form and object the Sutras form a class 
by themselves. The system of oral instruction which formed the basis of 
education in those days very probably necessitated this peculiar fashion 
of summarizing the entire exposition to help its easy memorizing. It is 
also not improbable that the intricacies of Vedic ritual, which Were to 
be scrupulously observed in every small detail, contributed to a certain 
extent to the development of this form of literature. If, therefore, a non¬ 
initiate finds here clarity sacrificed at the altar of brevity, it is only 
natural. But the definition of a Sutra clearly says that a Sutra should be 
brief in form but at the same time unambiguous in its meaning ( svalpdksha- 
ram — asandigdham . . .). 

The class of literature which comes under this head does not form: 
part of the Veclic literature, but is in close association with it. It is not 
the Veda, a divine revelation, but. the Vedanga, “the limbs of the Veda, 
constituting works of human authorship. Though these Vedafiga® 
include a number of exegetical sciences like Siksha (phonetics), Kalpa 
(ritual), Vyakarana (grammar), Nirukta (etymology), Chhandas (metrics), 
and Jyotisha (astronomy), all of them have not come down to us in the 
sutra style. These six Vedangas refer to the six subjects that help the 
proper understanding, recitation, and the sacrificial use of the Vedas. 
Taken as a whole, therefore, the Sutra form of literature is post-Vedic, 
as is also shown by its language. In contents, however, they may be traced 
back to the period of the Brahmanas which occasionally deal with ety¬ 
mology, grammar, and astronomy alongside the ritual. Though some of 
the exemplars of this literary activity are later in date, the period which 
typifies this aphoristic literature may be taken to be pre-Buddhistic. 


472 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 

The traditional list enumerating the six Vedangas assigns the first 
place to Siksha or the science of phonetics. The word originally means 
only “instruction,” and then specially such instruction as is imparted for 
the correct pronunciation, accentuation, etc., of the Vedic texts. These 
works are therefore closely related to the Samhita texts, but in a way 
they are related to the ritual also; for in the performance of a sacrifice 
the correct recitation of the mantras has as much importance as the 
correct order of the sacrificial acts themselves. The Taittinya Upanishad 
(I. 2) mentions this Vedanga for the first time, and the Sutra texts 
belonging to it are at least as old as the Kalpa-sutras. 

The oldest text-books dealing with this science are the Pratisakhyas 11 
which, as their name suggests, belonged to every Sakha or recension of a 
Vedic Samhita. Thus we have at present a Rigveda PratUakhya ascribed 
to fsaunaka, perhaps a later revision in verse form of an earlier Sutra 
'•ext, a Taittinya PrdMsdkhya Sutra, a Vajasaneyi Prdtisakhya Sutra 
scribed to Katyayana, and an Atharvaveda PratUakhya Sutra, supposed 
to belong to the school of the Saunakas. The Pahchavidha Sutra shows 
the manner in which the Samans are to be sung at the sacrifice, and the 
Pushpasutra, a kind of PratUakhya, is meant for the Uttaragana of the 
Sdmaveda. All these works! instruct the students in the correct pro¬ 
nunciation, accent, euphonic changes which the sounds undergo in the 
composition of words, and such other topics as come under Vedic phon¬ 
etics. 

These texts are the earliest specimens, if we exclude the occasional 
excursions of the Brahmana texts in this field, of the activities of Indians 
in the science of linguistics. Moreover the rules with which they have 
fixed the manner of the Samhita recitation have helped in the accurate 
preservation of these texts even to the detail of a syllable. We need not 
doubt that the Rigveda-Samhitd, as we find it in our printed editions of 
today, is in any way different from the one which Saunaka learnt centuries 
ago from his teacher. 

Of later origin and of much less importance are some short treatises on 
phonetics ascribed to such important persons as Bharadvaja, Vyasa, 
Vasishtha, and Yajnavalkya. The VyasaSiksha, which is directly con¬ 
nected With the Taittinya PratUakhya, is comparatively older than the 
other works of similar nature. The Pdniniya-iikshd may be old in its 
contents though its present form is rather late. 

Closely related to the Vedanga literature, though not actually forming 
part of it, are the Anukramanis or “lists” or "catalogues.” To Saunaka 
are ascribed the catalogues of the Rigveda hymns as well as of their 
Rishis, their metre, and their deities. The Sarvdnukramanl of Katyayana 
is a work in the Sutra form giving for the Rigveda the first words of every 
> jymn, the number of verses, the name and the family of the hymn’s 

473 




THE VEDIC AGE 


Rishi, the deities, and the metre. The Brihaddevatd, ascribed to Saunaka, 
gives in a metrical form not only a catalogue of the gods worshipped in 
the different hymns of the Rigveda, but also myths and legends connected 
with these deities. The work, on account of its antiquity, is therefore 
important from the point of view of the development of narrative litera¬ 
ture in India. The Rigvidhdna, again ascribed to Saun aka, gives in a form 
similar to that of the Brihaddevatd the magic power that one can obtain 
by reciting the hymns or the verses of the Rigveda. 

2. Kalpa 

The oldest Sutra works are the Kalpa-sutras which deal with the ritual 
and are thus directly connected with the Rrahmapas and the Aranyakas. 
According to the subject-matter dealt with they are divided into two 
branches, the Srauta-sutras and the Grihya-sutras. The former deal with 
the great rites taught in the Brahtnanas and involving the services of a 
number of priests, whereas the latter teach the domestic sacrifices and 
other duties in the daily life of a householder. The former are so calk, 
as they are based on Sruti, but both the Grihya- and the Dharma-Sutras 
are called Smarta, as they are based on Smriti (tradition). 

The Srauta-sutras teach the laying of the three sacred sacrificial fires, 
the new and full moon sacrifices, the animal sacrifices and the Soma 
sacrifice with its manifold varieties. These texts are highly valuable, 
not only for the understanding of the cult of the sacrifice, but also for 
the study of the history of religion. 

The Grihya-sutras on the other hand cover a comparatively wider 
field, since they give instructions regarding the various ceremonies 
that are to be performed at the different stages in the life of a person. 
The order of arrangement in a Grihya-sutra is determined by its subject- 
matter which refers to the ideal life of a householder. Most of them, begin 
with the marriage ceremony and then go on to describe those that are 
connected with the birth of a child, beginning with the ceremonies 
performed at the time of conception. The various other ceremonies such 
as Annaprdsana (first taking of rice), Chuddkarana (tonsure), Upanayana 
(initiation), etc., are then described in the order of their natural sequence, 
the funeral rites naturally coming at the end. There are thus described 
a large number of domestic customs and usages, and in this respect the 
value of the Grihya-sutras to the student of ancient folk-lore can never 
be over-estimated. These customs have their parallels in the manners 
and customs of the other Indo-European peoples, a fact which goes to 
prove that “the relationship of the Indo-European peoples is not limited 
to language, but that these peoples, related in language, have also 
preserved common features from prehistoric times in their manners 
and customs.” 11 

The Grihya-sutras also describe the five “great sacrifices,” i,e. tj e 

474 




LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 

sacrifices to the gods, demons, fathers, man and the Brahman. 
The first three of these comprise the simple offerings of food and a libation 
of water, whereas the “sacrifice to man” is nothing but hospitality shown 
to a guest, and the “sacrifice to the Brahman” constitutes the daily 
study of the Veda. Further, these texts also deal with the customs and 
ceremonies connected with such occasional and seasonal functions as 
house-building, farming, gardening, and digging of tanks and wells, as 
also the magical rites that are designed to ward off evil omens (e.g., if a 
dove or owl sits on the house or the bees make honey therein) or to cure 
the ailing of disease, and love magic. Connected with the funeral rites 
are also the ancestral sacrifices ( sraddhas ) which by their importance 
soon developed into special texts known as the $r addhakalpas. In spite 
of the minor differences in detail the Grihya texts show a remarkable 
uniformity in the household ritual of the orthodox Aryans in those days. 
With regard to the Grihya and Srauta ceremonies Max Muller observes 
iat . . though the latter (i.e. Srauta) may seem of greater importance 
the Brahmans, to us the former will be more deeply interesting, as 
disclosing that deep-rooted tendency in the heart of man to bring the 
chief events of human life in connection with a higher power, and to give 
to our joys and sufferings a deeper significance and a religious sanctifica¬ 
tion.” 1 ! 

The third class of text-books which are perhaps a continuation of the 
Grihya-sutras are the Dharma-sutras dealing with the customary law 
and practice. The difference (between the Dharma- and Grihya-sutras) 
is that ‘.'the weight in the Dharmas is laid on the wider relation of man to 
the state, so that those sections which deal with the family become 
condensed and subordinate.”^ They enumerate the duties of the castes 
and the stages in life ( asrapta ) in great detail. We also find here the 
beginnings of the civil and criminal law. The important subjects covering 
the civil law are taxes, inheritance and the position of women. Under the 
latter come assaults, adultery, and theft as the principal topics. It must 
be noted that the rules of punishment are largely based upon caste-con¬ 
siderations, so that for having committed the same offence, a Brahmana 
may pass unscathed, hut a Suclra may even receive capital punishment. 
The differences of opinion that are noticeable in the different texts 
are due, partly to differences in their age and locality of origin, and 
partly also to the various schools in which these texts were studied. 

The fourth allied group of the Sutras is that of the Sulva-sutras which 
are directly attached to the Srauta-siitras, The word Sulva means “a 
measuring string,” and these texts give minute rules regarding the 
measurement and construction of the fire-altars and the place of sacrifice. 
They may thus be regarded as the oldest books on Indian geometry. 

The Srauta- and the Grihya-sutras are also of great value from the 
point of view of the correct understanding of the Vedic passages. These 

475 


MINIS Tff 




THE VEDIC ACE 

tras, besides giving instructions for the mechanics of the rituaf 
enjoin the use of certain Vedic mantras for recitation. It is true that 
very often the mantras show little connection, except perhaps the verbal, 
with the sacrificial acts which they are to accompany; but sometimes 
they do supply a clue to the correct explanation of a prescribed text. 
Such mantras are included either in full or in part in the body of the 
Sutra texts and thus exhibit their connection with certain Vedic schools; 
for the Sutras belonging to a particular Sarhhita would quote passages 
from that particular Sarhhita only with some initial words, but the full 
text of the mantras taken from other Samhitas. The Gobhila Grihya-sutra, 
however, eschews all such mantras and puts them in a special prayer- 
book called the Mantrabrahmana, and the Apastarnbiya Grihya-sutra 
does the same in the Mantrapatha. 

Of all the different Vedic schools only the Baudhayana and the 
Apastamba schools, belonging to the Black Yajurveda , give under thf 
general title of Kalpa-sutra all the four types of Sutra texts mention* 
above. The uniformity which runs through them makes it quite proba 
that Baudhayana^ and Apastamba were themselves actual author's of 
these two Kalpa-sutras. The schools of Bharadvaja which give us the 
5rauta and the Grihya-sutfa and those of Satyasha<;lha Hiranyakesin 
which give us the Srauta-, Grihya- and the Dharma-sutra are both in 
close relation with the school of Apastamba. To the Maitrdyani-Samhitd 
belong the Srauta-, Grihya- and the Sulva-sutras of the Manava school 
and also the Kdthaka Grihya-sutra. 

Of the other Vedic schools we do not get, at any rate at present, a 
Kalpa-sutra comprising all the four types of Sutras referred to above. 16 
Whether they existed at one time or not is a moot point. Thus to the 
White Yajurveda belong a Kdtyayana Srauta-sutra, a Pdraskara Grihya- 
sutra and a Kdtyayana Sulva-siitra. The Asvaldyana and Sdhkhdyana 
Sratita- and Grihya-sutras belong to the Rigveda . With the Sdmaveda 
are connected the Ldpydyana and Drdhydyana Srauta-sutras and a Jsrauta- 
and Grihya-sutra of the Jaiminiya school. The Grihya-sutras of Gobhila 
and Khadira also belong to the same Veda. The Atharvaveda gives a 
Vaitdna Srauta-sutra and Kaiisika-sutra. The former is of a very late 
date and is tacked on to the Atharvaveda in order to bring it in line with 
the other Vedas. x 7 The latter, however, is much older in date and in 
character is only partly a Grihya-sutra, for it deals with magical rites 
also. 

The Sraddhakalpas and Pitrimedhas dealing with the ancestral sacri¬ 
fices have been already referred to above. Some of these texts, however, 
are quite late productions. The important texts belonging to this category 
are the M dnava-irdddhakalpa and those belonging to Saunaka, Palppalada, 
Katyayana, and Gautama. Of the Pitrimedha-sutras we have those of 
Baudhayana, Hiranyakesin, and Gautama. 

476 



wnisr^y. 



LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


post-Vedic ritual literature belong the Paririshtas or “addenda” 
which elaborate in greater detail some of the rites that are briefly 
mentioned in the texts to which they are appended. Of these, the 
GrihyasamgraharParisishta and the Karmapradipa attached to the 
Gobhila Grihya-sutra are more important. The Paririshtas belonging to 
the Atharvaveda are equally important since they throw valuable light 
on such subjects as the magical practices, omens, and portents. The 
Prdyaschittasutra which deals with the expiatory rites is one of the oldest 
Pari&ishtas. 

Still later are the Prayogas, Paddhatis, and the Karikas dealing very 
elaborately with some special rites such as the marriage customs, burial 
of the dead, and sacrifices to the manes, but they do not belong to this 


<SL 


It is difficult to assign any precise date to the Kalpa-sutra. texts. The 
dates of the principal Srauta-sutras (viz., those of Apastamba, Aivaiayana, 
Taudhayana, Katyayana, Sankhaj/ana, Latyayana, Drahyayana and 
xtyashadha) and some, of the Grihya-sutras (A&valayana, Apastamba, 
etc."), have been fixed between 800 and 400 b.c. The Dharma-sutras of 
Gautama, Baudhayana, Vasishtha and Apastamba have been placed by 
eminent scholar# like Biihler and Jolly between the sixth and fourth (or 
third) centuries b.c., though others assign a somewhat later date. But 
although none of the extant f)harma-sutras is older than 600 b.c., there 
is no doubt that there were works of this class belonging to an earlier 
period. For not only the oldest text, viz., Gautama Dharma-sutra , probably 
belonging to sixth century B.c., refers, both directly and indirectly, to 
other works of this class, but even Yaska’s Nirukta seems to allude to 
them. On the whole the Kalpa-sutras may be roughly placed between 
the eighth and third centuries b.c . 18 


3. Vydkarana 

The only representative that has come down to us of this Vedanga is 
the AshtadhydyT of Panini, which belongs to a later period. The Vedic 
grammar in this work receives only a, sectional treatment at the hands 
of Panini, his principal object being the description of the *' bhdshd 
the ordinary language of the people, and not the sacred language of the 
“seers.” The earlier exegetical works in this field are lost to us. The 
Unddisutras teaching the formation of nouns from roots, and the Phit~ 
sutras dealing with accent, are the representatives of the earlier treatises 
in the field of grammar before Panini. The greater number of words 
explained by the UncUisutras are Vedic, and Professor Max Muller observes 
that ”... originally the Unddisutras were intended for the Veda only, 
and that they were afterwards enlarged by adding rules on the formation 
of non-Vedic words .’^9 


477 



Of this Vedahga connected with etymology we have the sole repre¬ 
sentative in Yaska’s Nirukta. It appears that some centuries after the 
composition of the Satiihitas, these texts began to be unintelligible, and 
to facilitate their understanding it was deemed necessary to have lists 
of rare and obscure words. These lists were styled the Nigkanhis, and 
Yaska’s treatise is a commentary on such lists, prepared not by himself 
but by his predecessors. Yaska certainly had forerunners in this field 
who commented on such lists, but none of their works has come down 
to us. 

5. Chhandas 

The literature comprising this Vedahga on metrics is equally meagre. 
The Niddnasutra in ten Prapathakas belongs to the Samaveda and deals 
with metre as also with the component parts of the Samaveda. It hat 
been ascribed to Patanjali by some ancient teachers. Pihgala’s work c 
metrics is regarded by the indigenous tradition as a Vedahga of tn„ 
Rigveda and Yajurveda. But it is a late work belonging to the early post- 
Vedic period since it deals with the Vedic as well as non-Vedic metres. 

6. Jyotisha 

There is no work available at present dealing with ancient astronomy 
in the sutra style. The Jyotisha-Vedahga is a later work of a practical 
utility. It gives some rules for calculating and fixing the days and hours 
for the different sacrifices. It is really unfortunate that the earlier works 
of this Vedahga as also of others should have been lost to us. Some of the 
astronomical theories and mathematical calculations worked out by the 
Vedic Aryans are really startling, considering the age and surroundings 
in which they originated. But at present the only source is the Vedic 
Samhitas and the Brahmapas, particularly of the Yajurveda, from which 
we may derive our knowledge of these. 


3. THE LANGUAGE 

1. The Upanishads 

The language of the Upanishads is more akin to the Classical than to 
the Vedic Sanskrit. The following traces of the older usage are, however, 
noticed now and then: (a) Nom. Plural in "asas” of nouns ending in 
“a” ] “janasah ” (Katha , I. I. 19); ( h ) Nom. Plural in "a” of neuter nouns 
ending in “a": “tri cha iaid tri cha sahasrd ” (Brih. III. 9.1); ( c ) Instru. 
Sing, in “a” of Fem. nouns ending in "a”: “ deshd ” (Ckhdnd. VI. 13. x); 

478 


uwtsr/fy 



LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 

(Kafka, II. 6. 9; Sve. III. 13); (d) Nom. Plural in “Is” of FemV 
nduflsending in “ 1 ” \‘mdnushih” (Taitt. III. 10, 2); (e) Loc. Sing, without 
' termination of nouns ending in “an”: “akshan” (Brih . II. 2; 2); “Atman” 
(Brih. II. 3. 6; Kafka, II. 4. 1); “vyoman” (Taitt. II. 1); (/) the. older 
form of the pronoun “tat” namely "tyat” (Brih. II. 3. 1). 

A peculiar practice of employing the Dative in place of Gen.-Abla. 
of some Fern, nouns ending in “a” or “i,” as also of the pronouns “tat,” 
“etat” and “yat" is noticed in the Upanishads: Thus we get “tesham 
samkliptyai” (= Abla.) “varsham samkalpate” ( Chhdnd . VII. 4. 2); 
“bhiityul na pramaditavyam' (Taitt. I. 11. 1); “etasyai devatdyai saytijyam 
jayati” (Brih. I. 5. 23); “jdydyai kamaya jdyd priyd bhavati” (Brih. II. 
4. 5); “vlndyai tu grahanena sabdo grihUo bhavati' (Bnh. IV. 5 - I0 ) I “lasyai 
vdchah prithivi sarifath” (Brih. I. 5. “Asyai vidyutah sarvdni bhuidni 
madhu” (Brih. II. 5. 8); “yasya priyo bubhushed yasyai vd” (.Kausht, 
II. 4). 

In the case of the Verb, older Moods like the Subjunctive and the 
Injunctive have almost fallen into disuse. They are met with only as 
exceptions in the older Upanishads, i.e. the Brih. and the Chhdnd. thus 
we get “asat” (Brih. V. 3. 1); “ichchhdsai” (Brih. VI. 1. 10); “prdpam” 
(Brih. V. 14. 7) and "upa sidathdh" (Chhdnd. VI. 13. 1). Imperative 
forms in “kit” standing for the third person sing, are found twice in 
Brih.: “ayam tyasya raja 1 ''rdhdnam vipdtayatdt" (Brih. I. 3. 24) and 
“abhayam tvd gachchhatad Ydjnavalkya" (Brih. IV. 2. 4). I he Atmane 
and the Parasmai Packs are not yet definitely restricted to certain roots 
as in the Classical language and so we get forms like ‘ adhyeti, adhyeshi 
(Chhdnd. V. ix. 2. 6); “adhihi” (Chhdnd. VII. % 1); “ manvani ” (Chhdnd. 
VIII. 12. 5); “aikshat” (Kafka. II. 4. x). Irregular present forms like 
“bhimjdmah” (Chhdnd. IV. 12. 2); “ krinvate” (Sve. II. 7); perfect forms 
like “ pasparsuh” (Kena. 27); passive forms like “ vyasiryat” (Chhdnd. 
V. 13. 2) and “ parimuchyanti” (Murid. III. 2. 6) are also occasionally 
met with. As in earlier Vedic Sariihitas, prepositions are sometimes 
separated from their verbs: “para asya bhrdtrivyo bhavati” (Brih. I. 3. 7); 
“ud asmdi prdndh kramctnti” (Brih. II. 1. 11); “anu md sadhi” (Bnh. 
IV. 2. 1); “d cha gachchheyuh upa cha nameyuh” (Chhdnd. II. 1. 4). 

Sandhi has become pretty regular so far as prose passages are con¬ 
cerned. A few irregularities of the Sandhi are found in the metrical portions. 

The Upanishadic language is characterized by a few features whose 
presence is due to the need of conveying dry philosophical ideas with 
ease and clarity. Some of these are: (1) Abundant use of simple homely 
similes and metaphors; (2) repetition of an idea almost in the same words 
and expressions to ensure firm grasp and recollection; (3) use of riddle¬ 
like expressions which a man loves to master and reproduce with a feeling 
of superiority; (4) description of minute details to create and sustain 
interest; (5) short stories to attract attention before introducing a dry 

479 



THE VEDIC AGE 

ilosophical discussion; and (6) corroboration of a philosophical concept 
by means of popular beliefs and facts to excite curiosity and create faith. 

2. The Sutras 

As has been already noticed, the Sutra works are written in a peculiar 
terse style which may be traced to the prose of the Brahmanas; for 
these latter texts are usually written in short sentences, almost entirely 
without the use of relative and conditional clauses. The Sutras, however, 
employ long compounds and gerunds to economize the use of syllables. 
It may be said on the whole that the language of the Sutras approaches 
very near to the norm set up by Panini. Herein too are to be found 
occasionally words and forms belonging to the Vedic period and also 
some Prakritisms and solecisms. Yet the language of the Sutras does not 
show the same latitude as is evinced in the epic language. 

In phonology a possibly.change of ‘Vi” > ‘V’’is exemplified in “ anika" 
(<“ rmka” ?) (Ap. Dh. S. I. 6. ig. i). The change of "n"> "n” so 
peculiar to the MIA stage may be witnessed in “ndma” (Ap. S.S. X. 
14. 1), “enam” (Ap. S.S. XIV. 27. 7), “ anulepana” (Ap. Dh. S. I. 3. 
ix. 13), etc. Some confusion between the sibilants is met with in "vastyan” 
for “ vaslydn” (Kau. S. 4. 15); "parkin" for "pdmsu" (Kau. S. 27. 18, 
29. 21). The MSS of the Kaidika-sutra frequently write “ts" for "chh”: 
Thus we get avatsudya for avachhddya" (Kau. S. 24. 10). Occasionally 
y written for j as in yunaymi ’ (Kau. S. 3. 1). Then again Tainil- 
Malayalam for "d” is found in “ Kdrali ” (Jai. G. S. I. 14). 

The dat. sg. of fem. nouns in "a," "i" and "it" has an ending "-ai” 
as in dakshinayat” (Ap. S.S. II. 8. 3). The instr. sg. " vidyd ” occurs in 
Ap. Dh. S. I. 11. 30. 3. In the same Sutra II. 1. 1. 17-18 "dam" is used 
in singular, fhe shortening of a long vowel before terminations is found 
in patmbhis" (Ap. S.S 14, 15. 2), "grdmanibhis’’ (Ap. S.S. 20. 4. 3). 
The Brihaddevata (II. 8, 12, III. 92) gives “ patnayah ” as nom. pi. The 
nom. pi. "gdh" is found in Ap. S.S. 10. 26. 7. The loc. sg. in "-an" of the 
bases ending in "-an" is available in "ahem" (Ap. S.S. 9. 2. 1), "Mman” 
(Ap. S.S. 6. 28. 20, Js.au. S. 72. 42), "dhdman’ 1 ' (Bau. S.S. 10. 3o, etc.), 
“channan” (Bau. S.S . 6. 28, 15. 17). 

fhe forms adaddti (and dadali”) for “adaHe” occur in the Vaik- 
hdnasa Smdrta Sutra 9. 2. 4, etc. The unaugmented forms occur very 
often in the Brihaddevata ; cf. ” bodhayat ” (IV. 115), "sidat" (IV. 113), 
etc. The ^optative in "-ita" is also met with, cf . "dayita" (Ap. S.S. 5. 
25. 18), prakshalayita Ap. Dh. S. I. 1. 2. 28), " dharayita" (Mdnava 
G. S. I. 1. 10), "kdmayita" (Bau. S.S. II. 1), "upanayita" (Kau. S. 17. 
31. 31, etc.). The opt. pi. "-Iran" is found in “ upakalpayiran" (Bau. 
S.S. 25. 12). 

Absolutives in -am, a peculiarity often observed in the Brahmanas, 
are found in such instances as " anavakrdmam ” (Ap. S.S. II. 13. 7), 

480 



• SOI, 


LANGOAGE and literature 

’,am” ( Bau. S. S. II. g), “ayujakdram” { Hiranyakeii Pitrimedha 
Sdtfa 2. i). Other irregular forms of absolutives are “schotya" (Km. 
S. 53. 18), “kshipya” ( Kau. S . 30. 18). “ iyajya ” (Agnivdya G. S. 3. 11. 2), 
" sdntvya” (Bnhaddevatd , IV. 3), “ samgnhitvd ” (Bphaddevatd, II. 48). 

In sandhi also occasional departure from tjie'grammarian’s norm is 
found in the removal of hiatus by crasis in “patnya’hjalau’' from “pat- 
nya(h ) anjalau” (Km. S. 6. 17), “ daivateti ” from “daivata iti” < “daivate 
iti” (Kan. S. 6. 34, etc.). 

1. Winternitz, HIL, I. p. 234. „ .. .. 

2. Mundaka Ufanishad (I. 2. 7.) declares sacrifices as unsafe boats and the 
fools who cling to it go again to old age and death. 

3. “What is the cause ? Brahma ? whence are we horn ? Whereby do we live ? And 
on what are we established ? Overruled by whom, in pains and pleasures, do we 
live our various conditions, 6 ye theologians ?” Svetdsvalara Upanishad, I. x. 
Tr. by Hume;, Thirteen Principal Upanishads , p. 394. 

4. Chhandogya, III. 14. Tr. by Winternitz, HIL, I, p. 250. 

5. Chhandogya, VI. 1 fL; also cf. the BrihadSranyaka, II. 4. 

6. Chhandogya, VIII, 7-12. 

7. Brihaddranyaka, IV. 4. Tr. by Winternitz, HIL, I, p. 259. 

8. iiathaka Upanishad, 1 . 20 ff. Tr by Hume, Thirteen Principal Upanishads, 
pp. 344 f. 

9. A hath Brahma asmi (Brihadaranyaka, I. 4. 10). 
xo. Winternitz, HIL, l, p. 266. 

11. The origin of the PiatMahhyas is thus accounted for by Max Miiller. “During 
the Brahmana period the songs of the Veda were preserved by oral tradition 
only, and as’ the spoken language of India had advanced and left the idiom of 
the Veda behind as a kind of antique and sacred utterance, it was difficult to 
preserve the proper pronunciation of the sacred hymns without laying down a 
certain number of rules on metre, accent, arid pronunciation in general. The 
necessity, however, of such a provision could hardly have been -felt until certain 
differences had actually arisen in different seats of Brahmanic learning.” 
IIASL, second edition, p. 117. 

12. Winternitz, HIL, I, p. 274 and fn. 2. 

13. HASP, second edition, p. 205. 

14. Hopkins, CHI, I, p. 229. 

15. Dr. Winternitz points out that Baudhayana is sometimes called a pravachana- 
kSra, and that pravachana is perhaps the term for a literary type which comes 
midway between the Brahmanas and the Sutras. See HIL, I, p. 278, fn. 3. 

16. For a detailed account of the Srauta-sutras, cf. Ch. XII, pp. 235. ff. 

17. This point has been discussed above, in Ch. XII, p. 236. 

18. K BIDS, I, pp. 8-9; SBE, II, XIV, Introduction. 

19- Op. cit., p. 151. 



481 


HH 


§L 

CHAPTER XXV 

POLITICAL AND LEGAL 
INSTITUTIONS 

i. POLITICAL THEORY 

The political and legal ideas of the period are presented to us, in a collected 
form, in the Dharma-sutras. This is a distinct advantage, as hitherto we 
had to depend for them merely on isolated passages scattered in the 
different Samhitas and Brahmanas. Although none of the existing Dharma- 
sutras is probably older than 600 B.C., they are no doubt based on earlier 
works of this class and have preserved strata of earlier thought. It is 
remarkable that the older Dharma-sfitras are singularly free from the 
revolutionary ideas in religion associated with Buddhism and other 
heterodox or sectarian religious sects, and do not contain any trace of 
the great territorial kingdoms which arose in India in the fifth and fourth 
centuries b.c. We are, therefore, justified in treating the Dharma-sutras 
as reflecting the ideas of the closing period of the Vedic Age. 

The Dharma-sutras do not contain any systematic exposition of legal 
principles and political doctrines such as we find in the Dharmasastras 
and Arthasast'ras of the later age. Nor does their conception of law and 
politics conform to our present ideas on the subject. As we shall see later, 
they "cover far more than law and do not cover the whole of law." As 
regards politics they view' the state or society as an organic whole, in 
which the different elements, such as the king and the people, play their 
part according to Dharma or Law, imposed or at least sanctioned by the j 
Divine Will. Life is also regarded as a whole without any sharp dis¬ 
tinction between public and private, or individual and collective. As a 
matter of fact the collective organization of society dominates over 
the idea of individual persons. Each individual has his duty and respon¬ 
sibility, rather than rights and privileges, fixed by law and custom, and 
this applies as much to the king as to his meanest subject. lEach man 
has a recognized function, which he inherits as a member of a/group rather 
than selects of his own accord. To perform this functio;,, successfully 
is his highest object in life, a duty not merely political, social and moral, 
but also religious in character. For on this depends n0 (- on iy his well- | 
being in this life, but also his salvation in the next world. . Like the modern 
collectivist theories (such as Fascism) this view raises '^society above 
individuals, and strikes at the very root of personality or inurHvidualitv 

482 




POLITICAL AND LEGAL INSTITUTIONS 

is an important difference. For the allegiance here is not to 
any party or political principle, but to Dharma conceived as an eternal 
and immutable Law or Order, which is divine in character and does not 
emanate from human will. 

Such is the background against which the State is conceived in the 
Dharma-sutra. It lays down the duty of the king and the people, and does 
not worry about the rights of the latter and checks against the tyranny 
of the former. For failure to do his duty the king is sure to be visited 
with adequate penalties both in this world (by way of expulsion) and 
the next. This was considered to be a sufficient deterrent, and we do 
not hear of the popular assemblies called sahhd and samili which in 
days of old regulated the affairs of state and controlled the power of 
the king. 

A comprehensive view is, however, taken of the life and duty of a king. 
A high intellectual and moral discipline and military training are pre¬ 
scribed for him. “He must be fully instructed in the threefold (sacred 
sciences) and in 'logic, and learn the management of chariots and the use 
of the bow; he shall be holy in acts and speech, pure, and of subdued 
senses.” He shall not live better than his gurus and ministers. His essential 
functions and duties are “to protect the castes and orders in accordance 
with justice,” and “to take measures for ensuring victory,” specially 
when danger from foes threatens the kingdom. His duty of affording 
“protection to all created beings” is very liberally interpreted. He must 
support the learned Brahmanas and the poor and needy of all classes, 
and none in his realm must suffer hunger, sickness, cold, or heat, be it 
through want or intentionally. He must be impartial towards his subjects 
and do what is good for them. It is further laid down that "that king 
only takes care of the welfare of his subjects in whose dominions, be it 
in villages or forests, there is no danger from thieves.” That this was no 
mere pious wish but conceived as a fundamental duty of the state, would 
appear from the injunction that if the stolen property is not recovered 
he shall pay its value out of the treasury. 1 Save and except the legal 
taxes the king was not authorized "to take property for his own use 
from the inhabitants of his realm” ( Vas. Dh. S. XIX. 14). The taxes 
were regarded as “pay” received by the king for protecting his subjects. 
It amounted to one-sixth (of their incomes or spiritual merit) {Ban. Dh. S. 
I. 10. 18. 19). 

The high position of the Bralimana in the State is indicated by several 
injunctions. According to Gautama (VIII. 1) “a king and a Brahmana 
deeply versed in the Vedas, the'se two uphold' the moral order in the 
world.” It is also declared (XI. 1) that the king is master of all, with the 
exception of the Brahmanas. The Brahmanas were also exempt from taxes. 
The Purohita or domestic' priest exercised high power and privileges 
and the king was also to “take heed of that which astrologers and inter- 

483 



THE VEDIC AGE 


..■■■l.jMl.lK 

'-'prefers of omens” told him, for “the acquisition of wealth and security 
depended also upon that.” 

The king had to act in religious and many other matters according to 
the advice of the Purohita. An interesting aspect of the dependence of the 
king on the Purohita even in military matters is seen in ritual literature. 
The Purohita guarantees success to the king’s arms by his prayers. The 
view of Geldner* that these prayers were offered in the sabhd or assembly- 
house, while the king fought on the battle-field, is not countenanced by the 
Grihya-sutras. It is true that the Sdnkhdyana Grihya-sutra lays down that 
Vedic recitations were not to be carried on in any army-camp, but ritual 
actually steps forth on the field of battle, and the result is rather amusing. 
In the Aivaldyana Gtihya-siitra (III. 12) we find that when a battle is 
beginning,” the Purohita stands to the west of the king’s chariot and 
mutters appropriate mantras from the Rigveda while he makes the king 
put on his armour and hands over to him bow and quiver, lhe Purohita 
also recites mantras over the horses, when the king actually starts for 
battle, and also when he ties to the king’s arm the guard (by which the 
arm is protected against the bow-string). He then mounts on the royal 
chariot and the king repeats the mantras, while driving, touching the 
drum, and, finally, shooting off his arrows. It is also laid down that the 
king “should commence the battle in the formation invented by Aditya 
or by Usanas.” It would almost appear that the ritual even dictated 
military tactics to the king, 

The influence of the Purohita in moderating the autocratic zeal of the 
king cannot be lost sight of in any appraisal of the political theory of 
those days. The number of priests at the court of a king may be many, 
but there is only one Purohita. Nay, one Purohita may even do sex vice 
for more than one king, for example Jala Jatukarnya was the Purohita 
of the kings of Ka£i, Videha, arid Kosala, according to the Sdnkhdyana 

Srauta-sutra (XVI. 29. 5 )- . 

We also hear of an influential body of Brahmanas forming a Panshad. 
Although its chief function was to advise the king on intricate and disputed 
points of law, it was probably a general body of'advisers on all matters, 
religious, political, and judicial. For in a Sutra of Panini (V. 2.112) the 
king is called Parishad-bala (one whose strength lies in Parishad), and we 
definitely hear of administrative functions exercised by Parishad in later 
times. This Parishad was composed of at least ten (Brahmanas), viz., 
“four men who have completely studied the four Vedas, three men belong¬ 
ing to the three orders (a student, a householder, and an ascetic), one who 
knows the MImamst, one who knows the Angas, and a teacher of the 
sacred law.” These men must be “well instructed, skilled in reasoning, 

and free from covetousness .”3 . 

The term Parishad has an interesting histoiy. In the Upamshads 1 
means “a gathering of specialists discussing problems of philosophy”; 

484 






POLITICAL AND LEGAL INSTITUTIONS 

ie Gobhila Gnhya-sutra (III. 2. 40) it means a council sitting round a 
teacher. The use of this name in the Dharma-sutras for an advisory body 
of the king in judicial and probably also administrative affairs, is perhaps 
significant: of the changed conception of state and society, to which 
attention has been drawn above. 

The Dharma-sutras usually view the king as the primitive ruler of 
a petty state, There is a rule, for example, in Gautama (V. 30-31) that 
a Madlmparka (a mixture of curds and honey) should be offered to certain 
relations, if they come after a year, but to a king, who is a Srotriya 
(proficient in the Vedas), as often as he comes. But if the king is not a 
Srotriya, only a seat and water should be offered. Again a king was to 
make way for a Srotriya (Gau. Dh. S. VI. 25), a Brahmana (Ap. Dh. S. 
II. 5, ii, 5-6) and a Snataka (Vas. Dh . 5 . XIII. 59). Further, Gautama 
(XII. 43) implies and Apastamba (L 9. 25. 4) expressly says that, a king 
shall personally strike a thief with the cudgel carried by the latter. 

These passages convey the idea of a petty chief. But there are others 
which indicate the greatness and majesty of the king. According to 
Apastamba (II. 10. 25. 2-15) he “shall cause to be built a town, a palace, 
with a hall in front of it, in the heart of the town, and an assembly- 
house at a little distance from it,” The palace hall served as a guest¬ 
house, and provided rooms, a couch, food, and drink. The assembly-house 
was used for the purpose of playing dice, and men of the three higher 
castes were allowed to play there. Even this picture shows that the 
king was a homely ruler and did not occupy an isolated position of grandeur 
and majesty, such as is indicated by the pompous details of the Rajasuya 
and A 4 vamedha sacrifices described at great length in the Srauta-sutras. 
The king was, of course, entitled to the homage of all except the Brah- 
manas and wielded great power and authority. There is one rule which 
throws considerable light on the status and position of the king. According 
to Vasishtha (II. 49. 50) all interest on moneys lent ceases to accrue on 
the death of the king and until the coronation of the new king. This is 
probably a recognition of the principle that the king represents the state, 
and all state-regulations derive their power and authority from him alone. 
This is an abstract principle of great importance, but we do not find its 
logical application in any other instance. 

That kingship had come to be normally hereditary in the period 
of the Sutras is seen from the tendency to associate the king's son in the 
monarchy—a tendency which has already received ritual sanction. The 
Asvaldyana $rmta~$utra> for example, in its description of the Rajasuya 
(IX. 3) tells us that the Hotri narrates the dkhyana of 5 >unah£epa to the 
anointed king seated with his son and ministers on a golden seat. That the 
monarchy was occasionally elective is at the same time shown by the 
legend in the Nirukta (II. 10) of the Kuru brothers, Devapi and Santanu, 
which, though of doubtful character as a legend, retains its value as 

485 



THE VEDIC AGE 



^.idence of the contemporary practice of selecting, as king, one member 
of the royal family to the exclusion of another less suitable in an 
emergency. The field of selection could also extend to the entire nobility. 

The Sutra VI. 2. 59 in Panini shows that a Brahmana could sometimes 
become a king. Again the sacrifices prescribed in the Srauta-sutras for 
an oppressed and disgruntled Rajanya or VaiSya to acquire supreme 
power suggest that kingly power was not very stable and kingship was 
not confined to the royal family. 

The insecurity of royal power during this period is also illustrated by 
the many references to kings expelled ( apn-ruddha ) from their kingdoms 
and striving to regain their sovereignty by means of spells {Kauiikct- 
sutra, XVI. 30). 


2. ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATION 

The duties of the king, briefly sketched in the Dharma-sutras, give us 
for the first time some definite idea of the scope of administration. His 
supreme duty, as noted above, was the protection of the people, and 
maintenance of the rules of Caste and Order. As a corollary to this, he 
must punish the thieves and other criminals as well as those who stray 
from the path of duty laid down in the Sastras. His authority and juris¬ 
diction thus extended practically over the entire activities of his subjects. 
One of his most important duties was to decide legal disputes. He was to 
protect the interests of a minor until he attained majority. He was also 
to support learned priests, the widows of his soldiers, those who are 
exempt from taxes (to be specified later) and Brahmacharins. He must 
preserve fruit-bearing trees. He must make an equal division of the 
booty secured in battle and distribute it equitably among those who 
shared the risks of war with him. He must prevent the use of false weights 
and measures. 

For carrying on the administration the king appointed a regular hier¬ 
archy of officers. According to Apastamba (II. to. 26. 4) the king ''shall 
appoint men of the first three castes, who are pure and truthful, over 
villages and towns for the protection of the people." These officials were 
to appoint subordinates possessing the same qualities. I hey were to 
protect the towns and villages from thieves and must be made to repay 
what is stolen within their jurisdiction. These passages, though brief, 
hold out the picture of a regular administrative machinery which was set 
up for the security of life and property. 

One of the most important branches of administration was that for the 
collection of taxes. The texts do not make it quite cleai whethti tin 
same officials who protected the towns and villages also collected taxes, 
or if there were others specifically employed for the purpose. But in any 

486 



^d£se the long list of taxable commodities shows a developed state of 
administrative organization. We come across a general statement that 
the king was entitled to a sixth part of the income or spiritual merit of 
his subjects (Bau. Dh. S. i. 10. 18. i; Vas. Dh. S, x. 42). But Gautama 
(X. 24-35) gives a long list of ta^es, viz., one-sixth, one-eighth, or one- 
tenth of the agricultural produce, the variation probably being due to 
difference in the quality of land, one-fifth of cattle and gold, one- 
twentieth of merchandise, and one-sixtieth of roots, fruits, flowers, 
medicinal herbs, honey, meat, grass, and firewood. The artisans and other 
manual workers had to do one day’s work every month for the king, and 
there were similar rules in respect of owners of ships and carts. One-tenth 
was levied on goods imported by sea (Bau. Dh. S. 1. 10. 18. 14). Certain 
categories of persons were exempted from taxation. The list is a fairly 
large one and is differently given in the different Dharma-sutras, this 
lack of uniformity being a general feature with respect to most of the 
topics treated. Exempt from taxation, according to Apastamba (II. 
10. 10. 26. 10-17), are a learned priest, women (according to Vasishtha, 
only special categories of them like unmarried girls, wives of servants, 
widows who have rejoined their families, etc.), ascetics, students, infants, 
old men, the blind, dumb, deaf, and diseased persons, and Sudras who 
live by washing the feet. To this list Vasishtha (XIX. 23) adds one who 
f has no protector, and a servant of the king. 

As regards military matters, the king must be always prepared for 
war. He should lead his fighting hosts personally to battle, and be brave 
and fearless in the field. Very noteworthy is the high ethical standard 
of the rules of battle. The use of poisoned weapons is strictly prohibited. 
One must not kill those who are helpless, ask for mercy, or offer sub¬ 
mission by eating grass like "cows” (which was the ancient equivalent 
of the "white flag”). 

The village was the basic administrative unit. The inhabitants of the 
village may be roughly classified into four groups. First may be men¬ 
tioned the Brahmanas and tile Kshatriyas who did not cultivate the land 
themselves, but some of whom had a proprietary interest in it by virtue 
of royal grants. Secondly there were the cultivating owners, mostly 
Vaiiyas. To the third group belonged various artisans such as the chariot- 
makers .(; ratha-kara ), carpenters (takshan), smiths (karmdra) and others 
who formed the bulk of the village population. Lastly there were the 
Sudras and other labourers who tilled the soil or did other menial'work 
as day-labourers. All equally were under the authority of the king, and 
had to render tribute in various forms, such as food or service, either to 
the king or to such members of the royal family or household who paid 
a visit to the village. The head of the village was the Gramam (leader 
of the Grama) who discharged military duties in times of war and civil 
duties in times of peace. Whether the post of the Gramam was hereditary, 

487 




THE VEPIC AGE 



and whether the officer was nominated by the king or elected bj 
village council, cannot be definitely stated. The varying local customs 
make it likely that all these modes of appointment in the case of a 
Gramam were current in different parts of the country. The royal officials, 
mentioned above, who are said to have protected villages or towns, 
probably acted as police-officers and were different from Gramwits. 

Another official named in the Sutra texts of this age (as also in the 
Sarhhitas and Brahman as), is the Sthapati. From the fact that the 
Srauta-sutras of Katyayana (I. i. 12) and Apastamba (IX. 14.12) mention 
a Nishada-sthapati, the word may be understood in the sense of “Gover¬ 
nor.” Other passages in the same Srauta-sutras, however, point to the 
"Chief Judge.” It is very likely that the Sthapati combined in his office 
both the executive and judicial functions. 


3. LAW AND LEGAL INSTITUTIONS 

As we have seen above, there is no clear evidence in the earlier age of 
organized criminal justice administered by the king or by a judicial 
tribunal, and the prevalence of the system of wergeld (vaira-deya) rather 
suggests that the injured party took the law into it's own hands. It 
is in this period that we for the first time meet with the theory that a 
crime is a disturbance of the public peace and that, therefore, the penalty 
for the crime in the shape of fine must be paid to the king or to a Brah 
mana authorized by him. Similarly it is in the Dharma-sutras that we. 
find the real beginnings of civil and criminal law. But as already noted 
above, the conception of law was very different from that of the present 
day. There was no code of positive law emanating from the authority 
of the king. The Veda, the tradition (Smriti), and practice of those who 
know (the Veda) are said to be the threefold sources of law (each evi¬ 
dently being superior to the one mentioned later), and "if authorities of 
equal force are conflicting, either may be followed at pleasure” ( Gau. 
Dh. S. I. 1-4). This obviously left a great deal to be settled by usages, 
conventions, precedents, and customs. No wonder, therefore, that the rules 
and customs of different castes, communities, families, and localities are 
expressly recognized as having the force of law. It is also laid down that 
the communities (vargaS) of “cultivators, traders, herdsmen, money¬ 
lenders and artisans have authority to lay down rules for their respective 
classes” and a right to expound them in the royal court of justice (Gau. 
Dh S. XI. 20-22; Vas. Dh. S. I. 17). 

Further, many activities of social and religious nature, which lie beyond 
the jurisdiction of a modern law-court, are brought within the scope of 
law, and penance and loss of caste a.re prescribed as penalties both for 

488 



POLITICAL AND LEGAL INSTITUTIONS 


of this nature (e.g., eating the flesh of forbidden animals, neglect 
:ie Vedas, drinking spirituous liquor, incest) as well as for heinous 
crimes such as theft, homicide, causing abortion, adultery, etc. (Ap. 
Dh. S. I. 7. 21. 8 fl; Gau. Dh. S. XXII). In some cases, penance and loss 
of caste are imposed in addition to other punishment, but in others they 
alone are prescribed, and penance is supposed to wash off the guilt of 
even the most heinous crimes like adultery with a teacher’s wife or drink¬ 
ing spirituous liquor, for which, death by a painful process is also laid 
down as an alternative punishment (Ap. Dh. S. I. 9. 25. 1-10). 

That, the king himself personally administered civil and criminal 
justice appears from certain indications in the Sutras ( Gau. Dh. S. XII. 
43). The administration of justice was to be regulated by the Vedas, the 
Dharmaiastras, the Ahgas, and Puranas (Gau. Dh. S. XI. 19), due regard 
being paid to local and family usage or (in other words) to the laws of 
districts, castes, and families which the king must learn from those who 
in each case have authority to speak (Gau. Dh. S. XI. 20-22). It seems 
to have been permissible for the king to delegate his judicial authority 
or at least the supervision of punishments to a royal officer or a Rajanya 
who could act as an adhyaksha (overseer). Difficult cases were referred 
to the Parishad whose composition has been mentioned above. When 
it failed to arrive at any satisfactory solution in doubtful cases, the 
king referred the matter to a Srotriya or Brahmana of high learning 
(Gau. Dh. S. XXVIII. 50). The theory of danda (“the rod of punish¬ 
ment”) as the symbol of penal powers vested in the king had now fully 
developed. 

Under criminal law, assault, theft, and adultery are the main general 
topics discussed in the Dharma-sutras. The Nirukta (VI. 27) gives a list 
of seven sins (“crimes”) among which the slaying of a bhruna is mentioned. 
Bhruna is generally interpreted as “embryo,” but later tradition takes it 
to mean “Brahmana’’ also. The killing of a Brahmana alone is murder— 
the most heinous crime. The Vasishtha Dharma-sutra mentions cases of 
manslaughter where “the slayer commits no crime by killing an assas¬ 
sin” (III. 15-18). The Apastamba Dharma-sutra (I. id. 28. 1-3) discusses 
and defines “theft” as follows: “He who under any conditions whatsoever, 
covets (and takes) what belongs to another commits a theft (according to 
Kautsa, Harita, Pushkarasadi and Kanva), but. some exceptions are 
noted by Varshayani. For example, food for a draught-ox or seeds ripening 
in the pod, if taken only in moderate quantities, do not constitute theft.” 

The punishment for theft is rather severe, sometimes even death. 
The thief with loosened hair and carrying' a cudgel presents himself 
before the king. The king with his own hand hits him with that very 
cudgel. If the thief dies, he atones for his sin. The thief may expiate his 
sin also by throwing himself into a fire or starving himself to death; but 
if he is forgiven by the king or if the king fails to strike him, the guilt 

489 



THE VEDIC AGE 


<SL 


aite on the king. It appeal's that this punishment of death became opera¬ 
tive only when the thief was caught red-handed. - 

Generally speaking, physical chastisement or expulsion from the 
country was the penalty for crimes. The lines of the later age are known, 
but had not yet become systematized. Caste-interest is a factor in the 
regulation of the severity of the punishment. Whereas, for example, a 
Sudra would receive capital punishment with confiscation of his property 
for homicide or theft, a Brahmana would only be blinded. For abuse 
(or defamation) the amount of the fine varies with the caste of the offender 
and the offended party. With the gradual reduction of fines, according to 
the descending scale of caste of the offended, a Brahmana goes scot-free 
if he abuses a Sudra; but “a Sudra who intentionally reviles twice-born 
men by criminal abuse, or criminally assaults them with blows, shall be 
deprived of the limb with which he offends” ( Gau. Dh. S. XII. x). In 
general the discriminatory penalties and punishments laid down for the 
Sudras make painful reading (Ap. Dh. S. II. xo. 27. 9, 14-15, etc.), and 
even if we assume that they were not usually resorted to in practice, 
they .throw a lurid light on the arrogance of the upper classes and the 
helpless condition of the down-trodden lower grades of society. Some 
relics of barbarous punishments are preserved in the Dharma-sutras such, 
for example, as those prescribed by Apastamba for adultery (I. 9. 25. 
1-2; I. 10. 28. 15). The penalties prescribed for deserting a wife are also 
rude and primitive. The husband has to put on an ass’s skin, with the 
hair turned outside, and beg in seven houses, saying, “Give alms to him 
who forsook his wife.” That shall be his livelihood for six months (Ap. 
Dh. S. I. 10. 28. 19; see below, Ch. XXVI, p. 501). A drinker of spirituous 
liquor is to drink boiling liquid until he dies (Ap. I. 9. 25. 3). One 
redeeming feature, however, should be mentioned. Gautama (XII. 17) 
prescribes that if a learned man offends, the punishment shall be 
very much increased. How one wishes that this very salutary principle 
were extended to considerations of caste, so that the discriminatory 
penalties would be just reversed! 

The law of manslaughter shows that in spite of the public organization 
of criminal justice during the Sutra period, the system of private vengeance, 
moderated by the wergeld ( vairadeya ), was still in force. Thus although the 
crime of murdering a Brahmana is too heinous to be expiated by a wergeld, 
one thousand cows constitute the wergeld for killing a ICshatriya, one 
hundred cows in the case of a Variya, and ten cows for killing a Sudra 
(Ap. Dh. S. I. 9. 24. 1-4). The cows are apparently to be a compensation 
to the relations of the murdered man so that they may not press for the 
punishment of death to the offender. Over and above this payment to 
the relations, Baudhayana (I. 10. 19. 1. 2) prescribes the payment of a 
bull to the king, probably partly as appeasement for the infringement of 
his peace, and partly as reward for his intercession with the relations. 

490 


^ )?, POLITICAL AND LEGAL INSTITUTIONS 

| ctp&jig other Aryan nations, too, this method of compensation 
murder is found. The Apastamba Dharma-sutra (II. 5- H. 3) a l° ne mentions 
ordeals, but in a very general way. 

Though dharma or law (civil and criminal) is properly the sphere of 
the Dharma-sutras, we find occasional notices of certain legal topics in 
Sutra texts earlier than the Dharma-sutras. The Nirukta (III. 4) says 
that women were not entitled to partition or inheritance, and uses the 
technical term ddydda “heir,” the term ddya being established so >n after 
the Rigveda in the sense of “inheritance” or "a share of the father’s 
property which is divided among his sons either during his life or after 
his death.” Similarly the Sdnkhayana Srauta-sutra (XV. 27. 3) refers to 
“inheritance” in the tecunical sense. The Grihya-sutras again refer to 
courts of justice in connection with the vasikarana rite which aims at 
secretly winning over the court and the assessors or jurors to one’s side. 
Failing this, the rite would seek to deprive the judge of the power of 
speech (so that no judgment could be delivered). The Grihya-sutras 
also touch upon legal matters incidentally, as when they state the rule 
that one of the occasions for kindling anew the domestic fire is the time 
of the division of the inheritance, or the rule that the site of a house 
should be undisputed property. 

Detailed rules of inheritance of landed property occur for the first time 
in the Dharma-sutras. A few typical and illustrative rules alone may be 
cited. Sapinda males (those related within six degrees) are heirs in default 
of near relations like sons, and Sakulyas (remote relations) inherit in 
default of Sapindas. The widow is not entitled to inheritance, though, 
according to some authorities, the wife’s share consists of her ornaments 
and gifts from relations. According to Apastamba, a daughter inherits 
only in default of sons, teacher, or pupil. The king inherits in default of 
these, who are all expected to keep the spiritual good of the deceased in 
view while spending the inheritance. Very possibly, and more often than 
not (though not necessarily), the division of property took place during 
the lifetime of the owner, rather than after his death. 

Some authorities hold that among sons only the eldest one inherits. 
Apastamba Dharma-sutra (II. 6. 14. 7) refers to a local law whereby the 
eldest son receives (in some countries) gold or black cattle or the black 
produce of the soil(?), in other words the best chattel. But the rules in 
the Dharma-sutras are not consistent in this matter, and it is laid down 
also that the. father may divide equally among all his sons. 

Whereas earlier authorities are content wij.li the mention of the vague 
term “sons” in the matter of inheritance, it is the latest. Dharma-sutras 
like that of Vasishtha which give a classification of the “twelve” sons 
into two groups, (1) the heirs and kinsmen, and (2) kinsmen but not 
heirs, in the manner of the later formal law-books. 

The whole matter of inheritance is rather vague, there being no universal 




491 


THE VEDIC AGE 

l it. Different rules are given by the various texts and legal 
authorities, and they were evidently authoritative in different localities 
or families. 

Lost property is to be proclaimed by a crier, and if the owner does not 
turn up within one year, the king takes it giving a certain percentage 
(25 per cent) to the finder, unless the latter is a Brahmana, who keeps the 
whole of it. All treasure-troves belong to the king, but the rules are not 
unanimous on the point, and whereas, according to one authority, any 
finder gets one-sixth, according to another authority, if the finder be a 
learned Brahmana, the king shall not take it (Fas. Dh. S. III. 13-14). 

Title to property can be established by documents, witness, and pos¬ 
session. If the documents are at variance, the'evidence of old men and of 
guilds and corporations may be called in ( Vas. Dh. S. XVI. 10-15). I he 
categories of property which are not lost, even though enjoyed by others, 
are interesting; viz., a pledge, a boundary, the property of minors, an 
(open) deposit, a sealed deposit, women, the property of a king (and) 
the wealth of a Srotriya. So women are property. Eight other kinds of 
property which have been enjoyed by another person lor ten years are 
lost to the owner (Vas. Dh. S. XVI. 17-18). The king himself is the trustee 
of the property of a minor. 

The legal rate of interest is roughly the equivalent of fifteen per cent 
per annum; but the influence of caste is noticeable even in this matter, 
and different rates of interest are payable by different castes. Neither a 
Brahmana nor a Kshatriya may become a usurer. The lending business, 
therefore, was a sort of monopoly of the Vaisyas. 

1. For the duties of the king enumerated above, cf. Gautama Dh. S. X, XI, and 
Apastamba Dh. S. II, 10, 25, 10-15. 

2. Ved Stud., II. 135. 

3. The constitution of the Parishad is laid down, with slight variations, in Gau. 
Dh. S. XXVIII, 48-49; Vas. Dh. S. III. 20; Bau. Dh. S. I. 1. 1. 7-8. 


49 2 




miSTfiy 



<SL 


CHAPTER XXVI 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


I. THE UPANISHADS' 


Long before the period of the Brahmanas, the thought-ferment which- 
culminated in the rich philosophical speculations of the Upanishads had 
come to the surface in certain RV -hymns (X. 129, etc.) which express 
doubts concerning the efficacy of the priestly cult and the current belief 
in gods. The philosophical hymns of the AV and some portions of the 
YV Samhilds carry on (though only in a symbolic form) the tradition 
of these sceptics and doubters, who were certainly not the priests. Not 
only in the Upanishads but also in the Brahmanas, there is clear evidence 
of the fact that kings and warriors share the honours, if not the monopoly, 
of the intellectual and literary harvest of these days with the Brahmanas 
who had to go to them very often for instruction. Nay, even women and 
people of doubtful parentage took part in this intellectual life and very 
often possessed the highest knowledge. It was probably these non-priestly 
circles opposed to the Brahmanic way of works (Karma-marga) that 
formed the chief recruiting ground for forest hermits and wandering 
ascetics, who kept aloof from the sacrificial ceremonial of the Brahmanas 
by renouncing the world and followed the “way of knowledge’’ (Jnana- 
mdrga). Buddhism represents, very probably, one fruit of such protestant 
. activity. It was in the nature of things impossible that the Brahmanas 
should be confined to the opposite camp and, as noted above (Ch. XXII, 
p. 447), their supreme genius for compromise and adjustments of differences 
probably led later to the formulation of the wonderful theory of A dramas 
or different stages of Aryan life. (1) In the first one lives with a teacher 
and learns the Veda as- ». Brahmachdrin; (2) as a householder ( Grihastha) 
he next founds a household, begets children and himself offers sacrifices 
(grihya and drauta) or has them offered : (3) when grown old, he leaves 
his house and village for the forest, where as a Vdnaprastha (forest-hermit) 
he offers only a minimum sacrificial service and devotes himself mainly 
to meditation upon the mystical and symbolical significance of the 
sacrifice. The Aranyakas, as noted above, are eminently suitable to the 
hermits as text-books. The oldest Upanishads speak of these A dramas 
only as three types or branches of life, but not as successive stages. It 
is only in the late Upanishads, the Great Epic, and the Dharma£astras, 
that the theory of successive stages of life is formulated and.is developed 
further by the addition of a fourth stage, that of the Samnydsin who gives 


493 


THE VEDIC AGE 


"up even sacrifice, in fact, all good works, and as an ascetic, renounces 
the world to meditate on the Absolute (Brahman), with a view to realize 
it or achieve union with it. In the early period, the last two stages 
probably formed a single stage. Anyway, the unbelievers in ritualism 
who preferred the Jhdna-mdrga to the Karma-mdrga of the priests were 
completely placated by this scheme, which allowed them scope in the 
last two stages or Asramas. 

If one single doctrine were to be selected from the old Upanishads as 
representing the quintessence of Upanishadic philosophy, and if we were 
asked to sum it up in one sentence, that sentence would be: “The universe 
is Brahman, but the Brahman is the Atman.” The conception of the 
world-soul, A tman, has developed from that of the world-man (in the 
i?F), and the earlier conception of the personal creator, Prajapati, has 
grown into the Upanishadic one of the impersonal source of all being, 
namely Brahman. The tw’O streams meet in the following manner: Atman 
in the RV is “breath”; in the Brahmanas it comes to mean "self” or 
“soul,” and through the identification of the Pranas (vital airs), which 
are supposed to be based on the Atman, with the gods, an Atman comes 
to be attributed to (and pervades) the universe (as in the datapath a Br. 
XI. 2. 3), the conception having already attained to a high degree of 
abstraction. On the other hand, Brahman (neuter), which in the RV 
means only "prayer,” or devotion, in the oldest Brahmanas, signifies 
already "Universalholiness" as manifested in prayer, priest, and sacrifice; 
from this to the holy principle animating all nature in the Upanishads 
is but a short step. This word "Brahman" epitomizes, as it were, the 
whole evolution of religious and philosophical thought in India. This 
unity of Brahman (the cosmic principle) and Atman (the psychical 
principle) or (in other words) the identity of the individual Atman with 
the world -Atman expressed by the Upanishadic dictum “tat tvam cist'’ 
(“Thou art That”), is very tersely explained byDeussen:* "The Brahman, 
the power which presents itself to us materialized in all existing things, 
which creates, sustains, preserves and receives back into itself again all 
worlds, this eternal, infinite, divine power is identical with the Atman, 
with that which, after stripping off everything external, we discover in 
ourselves’as our real most essential being, our individual self, the soul.” 
The Upanishads, piling, as they do, metaphor on metaphor on this 
conception, are unceasingly struggling to help an understanding of the 
true nature of the pantheistic Self. Ajatasatru explains to Gargya BalakU 
that the true Brahman is to be sought only in the knowing and intelligent 
Spirit ( Purusha ) in man, i.e. in the Atman (the self) out of which emanate 
all worlds, all gods, all beings. The Atman thus takes the place of the 
more personal Prajapati as a creative power. The beautiful dialogue 
between Yajnavalkya and Maitreyi (Brihadaranyaka Up. II. 4) expresses 
the doctrine that the Atman is one with the Universe and that everything 

494 




RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


j/only in so far as it is the cognitive self. No wonder, one of the late 
Jpanishads (Svetcihatara IV. io) should contain the notion (which in 
later Vedanta became so prominent) that the material world is an illusion 
{may a), produced by Brahman as by a conjurer (may in ). 

Prana plays an important part in the psychology and metaphysics of 
the Upanishads. Prana is breath of life, life, or life-principle. In the 
singular Prana is a frequent appellation of the Atman. A. favourite theme 
with the Upanishads is a description of this Prana, which is identical 
with the intelligent Self, and of its relations to the Pranas (plural), i.e. 
he organs of the soul (breath, speech, sight, hearing, and the organ of 
linking). The reciprocal action between these organs of the soul and the 
corresponding five forces of Nature—wind, fire, the sun, the quarters of 
heaven and the moon—is also often touched upon. This explains the 
frequently recurring psychological fable of the quarrel among the Pranas 
regarding seniority. This Prana doctrine is also responsible for much 
poetic speculation on the vicissitudes of the individual Atman in the 
conditions' of waking, sleeping, dreaming, and death, and its wanderings 
in the Beyond, up to the point of its emancipation, i.e. complete absorption 
in the Brahman. Thus, in a passage of poetic beauty, unsurpassed perhaps 
in the literature of the world, the Brihadaranyaka Up. (IV. 3-4)4 tells 
us of the fortunes of the,soul and incidentally develops the doctrine of 
the transmigration of souls, and in close connection with it, the ethical 
doctrine of Karman (action) which, with the infallibility of a law of 
nature, must produce its consequences (its reactions on the ethical plane 
must be equal and opposite?) and regulate the new birth, which thus 
depends on a man’s own deeds and makes man truly "an architect of his 
own fate.” This is the germ of the Buddhist doctrine which, while denying 
the existence of soul altogether, allows Karman to continue after death 
and determine the next birth. The Chhandogya Up. gives us the most 
detailed account of this theory of transmigration. The forest-ascetic, 
equipped with knowledge and faith, enters after death the devaydna (the 
path of the gods) which leads to absorption in (i.e. oneness with) Brahman 
or deliverance. The householder who performs sacrifices and works goes 
by the pitriydna (the path of the Fathers) to the moon, where he abides 
till the consequences of his actions are exhausted, and then returns to 
earth, where he is first born as a plant and then as a member of one of 
the " dvija ” (or three higher) classes. This is a kind of double retribution, 
first in the next world (which is traceable to a survival of the old Vedic 
belief about future life), and then by transmigration in this. The wicked 
are born again as outcastes, dogs, or swine. The Brihaddranyaka 
(VI. 2. 15-16) gives a similar account. The Kaushitaki Up. (I. 2-3) gives 
a somewhat different itinerary, according to which, after death all go 
first to the moon. From here, some go by the path of the Fathers to 
Brahman, while others return to various forms of earthly existence from 

495 


pL 



THE VEDIC AGE 




man to worm. The earliest form of this theory is found in the Satapat 
Brdhmana which speaks of repeated births and deaths in the next world, 
both for the man who has correct knowledge and performs a certain 
sacrifice, resulting in his attaining immortality, and for the ignorant 
defaulter, who ultimately becomes the prey of death. In the Upanishadic 
version, the rebirth takes place in this world. So it is not necessary to 
suppose (though it may not be impossible) that the theory was picked 
up by the Vedic Aryans from the animistic views of the aborigines. Some 
hymns of RV (X. 16. 3; 58. 1-12) contain hints of animism. 

A very sound ethical idea underlies the Upanishadic doctrine, of th 
AtmanS the logical and beautiful conclusion of which must be that 
is the Universal Soul which we love in each individual, and that the 
recognition of this Atman must lead to love for all creatures. But it. is 
the doctrine of Iiarman that represents the preponderance of the moral 
element in the Upanishads as compared’to the Brahmanas. Nevertheless, 
moral precepts are met with in a few passages only as, e.g., in the famous 
Taittiriya Upanishad (I. xi) inculcating truthfulness, duty, etc., and in 
the Brikaddranyaka Up. (V. 2) preaching self-restraint, generosity, and 
compassion. The reason is not far to seek. The highest object—union 
with Brahman—is attainable only by cognition, by. giving up non know¬ 
ledge, i.e. all works good and bad. Sacrifices and pious works can only 
lead to newer births, but knowledge alone lifts one above the maze of 
Samsdra to the One and Eternally True. This conception of “knowledge” 
or “cognition” has evolved out of “the knowledge of some secret doctrine 
or other sacrificial science” on which insistence is laid in the Brahmanas 
and Aranyakas. The longing for this true knowledge, leading to the 
disregard of all pleasures, finds poetical expression in the legend of 
Nachiketas {ante, p. 471) in one of the most remarkable and beautiful 
Upanishads, the Kathaka, but in the Maitrdydmya Up. (I. 2-4), one of 
the latest, it leads to an utter contempt of the world and that pessimistic 
trait of thought which recurs so often in the Buddhist as well as later 
Indian literature. The fact is that although at bottom the old Upanishads 
are not pessimistic, describing as they do Brahman and Atman as 
dnandamaya (“consisting of joy"), belief in the unreality of the world 
must ultimately lead to contempt for it. 

Thus we find in the Upanishads vigorous and creative philosophical 
thought clothed in the language of poetry. No wonder they make a 
powerful appeal to the heart and the head. The thinkers seek earnestly 
for the truth and so their thoughts become a fervent expression of the 
ever unsatisfied human yearning for knowledge. All the philosophical 
systems and religions of India, heretical or orthodox, have sprung up 
from the Upanishads. The theological-philosophical systems of Samkara, 
Ramanuja and others are founded on the Veddnta-Sutras of Badarayana 
which in their turn are reared on the doctrines of the Upanishads. 

496 




RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


has already been made above (pp. 471 ff.) to the profound 
influence exercised by the Upanishads on human thought outside India. 

We may now represent a few fundamental tenets of the Upanishads 
j n f'he form of propositions 6 in the manner of Deussen. (l) The Atman 
is till knowing subject and as such can never become an object for us 
and is therefore itself unknowable It can only be defined negatively. 
When iaier Vedanta defined it as being , thought, and bliss (sach-chid- 
dnanda) on & e kasis of the frequent references to these separate elements 
scattered in & older Upanishads, it is nothing but a negative charac¬ 
terization, l> cause being is rather a not-being in an empirical sense, 
thought is" tl e negation of all objective being, and bliss is the negation 
of all sufficing. (2) As the Atman is the metaphysical unity expressing 
itself in a’ 1 empirical plurality—a unity found only in our consciousness— 
it is the sP le reality. To know the Atman is, therefore, to know everything. 
There is really no plurality; there can be no becoming; “change is a 
- mere nan ie. (3) The pantheism of the Upanishads is but a compromise 
between die two opposite points of view—the metaphysical one which 
does rni recognize any reality outside of the Atman, i.e. consciousness, 
and th< empirical one according to which a manifold universe exists 
external to us. The Atman being the Universe, it remains the sole reality 
although the universe is, real. But what distinguishes Upanishadic 
pantheism from that of Europe is the subtle distinction made by the 
Upanishads when they state that the universe is in God, but never that 
the universe is God. God (or Atman) is transcendent as well as immanent. 
f ( 4 ) Thus when it is stated that the universe is the Atman, the identity 
remains very obscure. This obscurity was sought to be removed by 
borrowing the well-known empirical category of causality and representing 
that the Atman is the chronologically antecedent cause and the universe 
is its effect, its creation. 


2. THE SUTRAS 


Sid( ; by side with the high philosophy of the Upanishads, laying stress 
on j. aowledge and meditation as the means to emancipation, we find 
° n , itinuance of the old sacrificial rituals of the Brahmanas throughout 
the°T ■ >er i°d under review. The &rauta- and Grihya-Sutras (ante, p. 474) 
aV g pur chief sources of information regarding the ritualistic religion of 
age, and some important features of the rituals described in them 


ar< 


s noted below. 


As a rule, the Srauta sacrifices required the use of three fires. The 
,uwnber of priests was sixteen or seventeen, not counting the actual 
performers of minor ritual acts such as the slaying of the animal victims 
and other menial functions in a fairly complicated ritual. Prayers to more 

497 


11 




THE VEDIC AGE 


than one god—nay, a very large number of gods—accompanying the 
ritual acts, were another characteristic. Sometimes, as in the Apr! litanies, 
the order of the deities invoked was the same whatever the families that 
addressed them. Among the sacrifices, some are the norm ( praknlis ) wjich 
others (the vikritis) follow as a model. For example, the new and full Aiobn 
sacrifices serve as the norm for a sacrifice of the Ishti type and xor the 
animal sacrifice in its form as offering to Agni and Soma. ?j ie latter 
becomes the norm for other and more elaborate aniryal sacrifices. 
Agnishtoma is the prakriti or norm of the Soma sacrifice i a a u -varia¬ 
tions including the Dvadasaha, while the Sattras are based on the latter. 
Among the details of performances in every sacrifice some a- e subsidiary 
(anga) and common to many sacrifices, while others (pradhana, are special 
or peculiar to it only. A peculiarity of the Soma sacrifice is 1% singing 
of the Samans or melodies based on verses of the Rigveda, each 0 f which 
could be sung to different melodies. When, however, more than one verse 
is sung to one melody, we have a Stotra usually made up of triplets 
or Pragathas. The Stoinas further are forms or ways of chanting Stotras, 
of which there are numerous varieties. The Stotra is followed by* Jhstra 
which is a recitation of the Hotri or his assistants. Broadly speaking, 
there are two types of Srauta sacrifices, the Soma sacrifices characterized 
by the singing of the Samans, and the Haviryajnas marked by the 
absence of Saman-singers. The animal sacrifice is midway between the 
two. It does not employ the Saman-singers and so should be deemed,,a 
Haviryajna, but, on the other hand, is a vital part of the Soma sacrificed' 
The Grihya or domestic ritual 4 * is so called because it centres round 
the domestic fire or the fire which is established in the home and is 
maintained by the householder. It was the duty of the householder and 
his family, including wife, son, daughter, and pupil, to see that it was 
kept constantly burning and alive. If it ever went out, it had to be 
rekindled ceremoniously by friction, or borrowed from the house of a 
wealthy person or of the performer of many sacrifices. The normal 
occasions for the establishment (with proper ceremony) of the domestic 
lire were marriage, the division of property of the family, the samdvartona 
("the return of the student after the completion of his period of st udent¬ 
ship”), the death of the head of the family (when the eldest son ki U( ji cc i 
a new fire), and a continuous break of twelve days in the mainte r nan rp 
of the fire. As a rule, the householder himself performed the fi° r h es tic 
sacrifices, the wife being allowed to act for him, if necessary, an the 
morning and evening libations and at the evening. Bali. The employment 
of a Brahman is optional, though he must be requisitioned at t he 
Sulagava (spit-ox) and Dhanvantari sacrifices. When the householder d( icl 
not call in the Brahman, a straw puppet or a sunshade and garmefu 
were placed on the vacant seat in the south which would have been 
occupied by the Brahman if he were employed. The marriage formulas 

498 




RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


§L 


gere^muttered by the bridegroom himself if he were a Brahmana, 
otherwise by the Brahmanas on his behalf. In the offerings to the gods 
the position of the sacrificer’s sacred thread was over the left shoulder 
and under the light arm-pit, but exactly the reverse in the offerings to 
the Pitris. The domestic offerings receive the name “pcika ’ in distinction 
from the Srauta. Pdka means “cooked food/' or as an adjective, '‘simple.” 
Whatever the original sense (and neither is unsuitable), the term is 
comprehensive enough to include offerings of milk, curds, melted butter, 
rice, barley, sesame, barley-gruel, porridge, and even the flesh of animals, 
though these were offered on very rare and special occasions. Varieties 
of butter (butter at various degrees of temperature) are used, the butter¬ 
offering being of a simple type. The fore-offerings and after-offerings, the 
kindling-verses or instruction-formulae (nigadas) and the invocation of 
the Ida which are well-known features of the Srauta offerings are con¬ 
spicuous by their absence in the Pdka (“simple” or “baked”) offerings. 
The few occasions for an animal sacrifice are marriage, offerings to the 
manes and the guest-reception. The only special animal sacrifice is the 
Sulagava (spit-ox), which inclines more to the Srauta type. 

^jLt is necessary to make a few general observations on certain important 
aspects of the Vedic sacrifice and the element of magic in the ritual. It 
is impossible to accept the view that all worship of the gods is to be 
traced to the cult of the dead, being but an imitation of the mode of 
providing for the dead. The human worshipper, realizing his weakness 
arid utter helplessness, leans, as it were, for support on the all-powerful 
gods—a support which he seeks to canvass by the offering of gifts. This 
is the essential nature of the Vedic sacrifice. This divine help and the 
power of magic were both invoked through the sacrifice, in the inevitable 
struggle with the forces of evil or the demons. Magic and religion are 
never confused in the Vedic religion. The fear of the living for the dead 
plays an important part in the cult of the dead, but it must be remem¬ 
bered that there is no direct fear of the spirit of the dead, to whom no 
hostile nature is attributed. It is rather the fear of death—the fear of the 
great change—that has affected them. This explains why the whole cult 
of the dead in Vedic ritual is marked by love and deep regard for the 
dead ancestors, and why providing nourishment for them is a matter 
that claims the respectful attention of the living all his life. 

Keith thinks that “in the Rigveda a#d in the later period alike, the t 
cult of the gods is marked by the absence of any temple or house of the \ 
gocl, even of the simplest kind.” 7 This view may, however, be justly \ 
questioned. If by “temple” we understand “a sacred place set apart for 
purposes of worship and devotion to a deity,” then the agnyagdm 
(Gobhila Grihya-sutva , I. 4. 5) or fire-temple, inside or outside which halt 
oblations could be offered, is such a temple. A god’s house is mentioned 
in the Grihya-sutras along with a forest as the place where a student 

499 




THE VEDIC AGE 


isecrto^ 


Serving the Mcchdnanwnvrata is to fast. When a Snataka is advisee 
'go round “god’s houses” (keeping his right side to them), if they are 
met with on the way, temples seem to be meant. Ihe truth is that 
though temples probably existed, they played no important part in the 
ritual of the sacrifice, the essence of which lay in an invocation of the 
god to come to the place of the sacrifice and to partake of the food and 

drink there kept ready for him. , 

If the hymns of praise, the music, and the dance in the ritual can be 
understood as fitting reception for the god invited, other features such 
as chariot-racing, dicing, archery, ribaldry, mimic fights, etc., can be 
explained better as examples of the employment of sympathetic magic 
than as part of the entertainment provided for the gods. Such magic 
elements abound in the Vedic sacrifice. 

Offerings are made in the hope of favours expected from the deity. 
The god accepts the offerings and becomes strengthened, and the pros¬ 
perity of the sacrificer is in proportion to the prospering of the god.‘1 his 
theory of the sacrifice results in an exchange of gifts, but the initiative 
in this exchange generally comes from the worshipper rather than from 
the god. That is to say, there are only a few thank-offerings (comparatively 
speaking) in the ritual of this age or the earlier ones. The Asvalayana 
Gnhya-sutra (IV. x. x ff.) prescribes the offering of a Soma or animal 
sacrifice, when a person, who has established the three sacred fifes, falls 
ill and then leaves his residence and goes out of* the village to bring 
pressure on the three fires; he naturally takes these fires with himself 
and they cure their worshipper, being eager themselves to go back to 
the village. The view of Keith 8 that vows of the kind, “Do this 
and I will offer to thee,” are not common in the Vedic religion 
is not quite correct, and is probably based on the absence of explicit 
statements. But the offering of first-fruits, the sacrifice offered on the 
birth of a son or on the acquisition of a thousand cattle, and the least 
to the dead at the marriage ceremony should perhaps be accounted as 
thank-offerings. The subtle distinction that the keeping of a promise (to 
offer a sacrifice), explicit or implicit, is not a tllank-offering is not legi¬ 
timate in Vedic religion. 

I Gradually, however, the belief in the magic power of the sacrifice grows 
to such an extent as to overshadow and ultimately eclipse the belief m 
/the efficacy of the good-will of a deity. In the organization and elaboration 
of sacrificial ritual, during this and the Brahmana age, a particular mental 
outlook is noticeable, which construes the sacrifice as a potent weapon 

of magic. , , , - 

The magic power of the sacrifice could be employed to wash away sin. 

To take but one example out of many the Kdtydyana braula-sutra 
(XIX 5 13) tells us that in the Sautramani offering, a vessel containing 
a special preparation is made to drift away on water with the sins of the 

500 




I 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 



p^ 0 nn ers . The sin is treated like a disease, and the concept of this sin 
or evil is comprehensive enough to include errors in the sacrifice, un¬ 
common occurrences in the home or outside, and all unaccountable 
phenomena of Nature. The Praya^chitta (or expiation) offerings, overlaid 
with magic practices of a simple kind, and culminating in gifts to the 
priests, occupy a very large space in the Sutras, both Srauta and Grihya. 

The purifying power of a public confession and the usefulness of a 
warning to Others of the identity of the sinner may be elements of belief 
in some strange and peculiar practices connected with the removal of 
sir, such as the proclamation by the husband of his sin against his wife, 
while begging for alms clothed in an ass's skin (see ante, p. 490). The 
murderer drinks out of the skull of the murdered man, puts on the skin 
of a clog or an ass, and lives on alms, confessing his guilt before all. These 
practices are mentioned in the Dharma-sutras of Apastamba, Gautama, 
and Baudhayana, as also in the Pdraskara Grihya-sutra. 

We need not discuss here at length the problem of the original theory 
of the sacrifice—whether the magic art of perpetuating the life of the 
herds and of vegetation, and even of man, was the essence of the sacrifice, 
and whether the gift-theory was original or secondary. We may only 
note that when the Kausika-sulra (XIII. 1-6) prescribes a magic rite in 
which portions of the bodies of some animals and human beings, such 
as a lion, a tiger, a Ksliatriya and a Brahmacharin, are to be eaten to 
acquire certain qualities, not totemism but the conception of sacramental 
communion is hinted at. Similarly the idea of a common meal as a means 
of producing harmony is clearly seen in the same Sutra (XIII. 6). The 
rule in the Grihya-sutras that nothing is to be eaten without making 
an offering of a portion of it, is but an illustration of the conception of 
communion. When the newly-married couple share food together from 
an offering made by the husband, we see an instance of the belief in the 
community produced by the sacrifice. But the theory that the sacrifice 
is a communion of men, both among themselves and with the god, 
whether through the direct rite of eating with him or as a sacrament 
through eating a victim which has become impregnated in some measure 
with the deity, is not enunciated in the formulae of the ritual. . 

The important role played by the fire in a sacrifice is too obvious to 
be emphasized. The fire is the intermediary who conveys the sacrifice 
to the gods arid at the same time an effective means of chasing away 
evil spirits. The all-important position of the fire in the domestic ritual 
is evidenced by the fact that the fire is a witness to, and sanctifier of, 
every domestic sacrament or rite, and receives an oblation or prayer at 
every important stage of the ritual. The cathartic function of the fire 
is to be seen in the burning of the grass covering the altar at the end of 
the offering, lest, imbued with a superhuman character, it should harm 
anyone by contact. The omentum is burnt before being offered to other 


L 


501 






THE VEDIC AGE 


§L 


deities, evidently with a view to purifying it and imparting to it an agree¬ 
able savour. 

// The fire-offering, however, was not the only type of offering. Food for 
'the dead was placed in pits according to an ancient and universal custom. 
Gifts to water*deities were naturally thrown into the waters and the 
offerings to Rudra and other demoniac figures may be deposited in ant¬ 
hills or hung on trees or merely thrown in the air. 

A comparison of the Srauta ritual with its three fires with the Griliya 
ritual with its one lire suggests some interesting hypotheses regarding 
the origin of this triad of fires. Certain ceremonies are common to both 
the cults, such as the morning and evening Agnihotra and the new and 
full moon sacrifices, the difference being one of elaboration only. Certain 
cereal and animal offerings are also common to both the cults. Every 
householder had to keep one fire in the house to carry on (mostly by 
himself) the domestic cult. The kings, the nobles, and the rich people 
who could afford it, maintained the three fires, employing a number of 
priests for the performance of the Srauta cult. The family rites as such 
must be performed only in the domestic fire, while the Soma sacrifice 
cannot be performed without the triad of fires. The name Garhapatya 
(“of the householder’') of one of the three Srauta fires suggests that the 
latter three have developed out of the one domestic fire, because like the 
domestic fire the Garhapatya alone was continually kept, the other two 
—the Ahavaniya and Dakshina—being derived from it when necessary. 
A man going on a journey takes formal leave of the Garhapatya first, 
which is another point of contact with the ceremonial of the domestic 
fire. The Ahavaniya is the fire for the actual offering and the Garhapatya 
for cooking the food to be offered to the gods; the Dakshinagni, by its 
place in the south, was, in the beginning, probably intended to drive 
away the evil spirits, and later, to receive the offerings intended for such 
spirits and for the fathers. 

As a rule the sacrifice is for an individual, the Yajamana (“sacrificer”), 
who provided the “sinews” of the sacrifice and the gifts for the priests. 
There is only one exception to this rule, namely the Sattras or “sacrificial 
sessions,” lasting for a year or longer, where the entire host of officiating 
priests are themselves the sacrifices, it being taken for granted that 
all are Brahmanas. The merit of the offering in these Sattras belongs 
to all the sacrifices, while any error or evil done belongs to the perpetrator 
only. 

As Agni is the Purohita as well as Hotri priest in the Rigveda , the 
Hotri was the most important priest in those days. Later on, with the 
elaboration of the ritual, the Purohita, who was the superintendent or 
overseer of the sacrifice, became a different priest from the Hotri and 
called the Brahman, to whom the duty of superintending the whole 
sacrifice was naturally assigned. In the Srauta-sutras of Sankhayana, 

502 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


laj/ana, and Katyayana, the list of priests is as follows: the Hotr: 

Agnidh, the Adhvaryu, the Brahman and the Upavaktri 
(who appears in place of the Prasastri in the otherwise identical list in 
the Rigveda) and the Achchhavaka (who is later admitted to a share 
in the Soma). Another passage of the Katyayana Srauta-sutra (IX. 8. 8 ff.) 
gives another list in connection with the morning pressing of the Soma: 
the Hotri, two Adhvaryus, two Prasastris, Brahman, Potri, Neshtri, and 
Agmdhra. The second Adhvaryu becomes the Prati prasthatri and the 
second Prasastri becomes the Achchhavaka later. The Hotri originally 
combined the two functions—the performance of the offering and the 
recitation of the accompanying mantra —but the functions were later 
separated. In the ritual text-books of our age, two kinds of offerings are 
to be distinguished—the yajatayah in which there is one reciter and 
performer, i.e. the Adhvaryu, so called because his manual duties are 
the more important, and the juhotayah in which there is the Hotri to 
recite and the Adhvaryu to perform the manual acts. The Hotri recites 
a variety of verses but, in a large number of offerings, only two types 
of verses, the Puronuvakya which invites the god to be present at the 
offering intended for him, and the Yajya which is recited just when the 
Adhvaryu is about to throw the offering into the fire. He also recites 
the Nivids, which are inserted in the hymns and are invitations to the 
god, with a bare enumeration of his titles, to come and intoxicate himself 
with the Senna. Although, in their present form, the NiVids are later than 
the Rigveda, they are, in essence, the oldest form of the invitation to the 
gods, from the point of view of the evolution of the liturgical employment 
of rubrics in the ritual. The Adhvaryu is in charge of the practical per¬ 
formance of the various manual acts of the ritual and has to mutter 
a certain number of formulas, normally in prose, to the accompaniment of 
the performance. He was assisted by the Agnidh, whose main duties were 
concerned with the kindling of the fire. The Hotri, the Adhvaryu with 
his assistant, the Agnidh, and the Brahman, the general overseer, sufficed 
for the minor sacrifices and the new and full moon offerings. For the 
animal sacrifice, the • Hotri required an assistant named variously 
Upavaktri or Prasastri or Maitravaruna, and for the Soma sacrifice, the 
services of the Potri and the Neshtri were requisitioned. The Brah- 
manachchhamsin, in the ritual of our period, is but a Hotraka or an 
assistant of the Hotri. The position of the Brahman enumerated in the 
list given above becomes all-important in this age. He recites practically 
nothing. He takes his seat by the chief fire-altar and is engaged in general 
supervision. He makes good every flaw irt the sacrifice by his silent 
meditation. The Udgatri, Prastotri and the Pratihartri were Saman-singers, 
whose chants fall into two classes. One is composed of those addressed 
to Soma Pavamana and based on verses mainly drawn from the ninth 
Mandala of the Rigveda. The other class consists of chants addressed to 

503 


<SL 


misrfi 



THE VEDIC AGE 


<SL 


ititf ordinary gods to whom libations are offered at the three pressings 
of the Soma. The chant based on certain Rik-verses is followed up imme¬ 
diately by the Hotri's recitation of those very Rik-verses. This correspon¬ 
dence or parallelism is insisted upon in the ritual. For the Soma sacrifice, 
as many as sixteen priests are prescribed, the Kaushltakins even pre¬ 
scribing a seventeenth. 

In the ritual of this age, the choosing of the priests (; ritvigvarana) 
has become a well-developed formal ceremony. The sacrificer and the 
invitees both satisfy themselves as to the worthiness and qualifications 
of the other party, before extending and accepting the invitation; An 
interesting feature of the formal questions and answers used in the 
ceremony is the care taken by the priests to see that they are not invited 
because other priests who had been employed had struck work for some 
reason, leaving the sacrifice unfinished. The sacrificer has to be a member 
of one of the three higher castes. His duties in this age are very light. 
He repeats certain formulae, throws the offerings into the fire, and 
observes certain restrictions along with his wife. Above ail, it is he who 
pays the Dakshina (fee), appropriate to each sacrifice. 

We may now briefly refer to the relation of magic to this ritualistic 
religion^ Magic is not earlier than religion, though they are inextricably 
blended in India. As has been noted already (ante, Ch. XXII, p. 438) the 
Atharvaveda is the first book that makes use of magic mixed up with 
theosophy, though it is. priestly and not purely popular magic. In the 
Rrahmanas magic practically pervades the whole ritual. The transition 
is best exemplified in the changed conception of the sacrifice, which was 
originally an appeal or prayers to the. gods, but became the supreme 
power in the universe controlling even the gods and granting all wishes. 
The potencies to be treated by magic are both personal or actually alive, 
and impersonal, i.e. spirits. The means of magic are the words and figures 
or representations of things which are used, either as substitutes for, or 
in addition to the articles connected with, the objects of magical treat¬ 
ment. Special times, such as evening or night, and places such as grave¬ 
yards or cross-roads are prescribed. The chief source-books for our. 
information regarding magic are the Atharvaveda and the Kauiika-sutm 
belonging to that Veda, the Sdmavidhdna Brdhmana, the Rigvidhdna , the 
Parisishtas of the Atharvaveda arid other minor texts. 

The averting of evil influences is accomplished by propitiation, or 
banishment by any means fair or foul, such as the use of water for 
washing them off, the use of noise, the holding of a staff, and the gesture 
of shaking off and transfer of the evil to someone else. The use of amulets 
is recognized as an excellent means of protection. Mimetic magic, the 
magic spell, and even the magic sacrifice are all known and prescribed 
in the Sutra texts. The theory of divination is known, and a variety of 
means is employed. Omens are drawn from the movements of animals. 

504 



M,N,S %X: 



RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 

interpretation of dreams.is also an interesting feature of Vedic magic, 
and experts in the interpretation of omens are known. The ordeal is 
nothing more than an application of the theory of divination. Although 
not many characteristic and essential practices of the later Yoga philosophy 
are traced in ritual literature, the fivefold divisions of breaths or vital 
airs is known. Perspiration is induced in the Diksha- ceremony, as a means 
of awakening the ecstatic state, but the various sitting postures familiar 
to the later Yoga are not known. 

it would appear from the above discussion that religion'- thought 
during the period under review does not, on the whole, preset. a very 
consistent picture because of the contradictory legacies it was heir to. 
The polytheism of the Samhitas had narrowed down to Upanishadic 
monism. At one end was sacrifice and ritual, at the other was the abstruse 
and profound philosophy of the Upanishads. The conception of rebirth 
was inextricably mixed up with ideas of a happy heaven and a horrid 
hell. Spiritual barrenness of the people at large was the natural result. No 
wonder formulae, observances, and sacraments became the order of the day! 

But even though only sacrificial rites and duties are found systematized 
in the Kalpa-sutras, ethical purity was not neglected and indeed was 
regarded as the sine qua non in the path of Karman. Inner ethical virtues 
such as purity, perseverance, forbearance, and kindness to all were 
prescribed along with religious rites by the Gautama Dharma-siiira 
(VIII. 20-23) for example, and are even ranked higher than mere ritualistic 
ceremonial. Self-restraint is the mother of all virtues and is to be cease¬ 
lessly cultivated in this life, since the present life is but a preparation 
for the real, happy life after death. Here we find the doctrine "Man is 
the architect of his own fate,’’ in the truest sense of the phrase. This 
Karman discipline does not rule out desire as the motive power of action. 
Only it is focussed on the acquisition of happiness in a future life. Dharma 
(religious merit), Artha (the acquisition of wealth), and Kama (the 
enjoyment of the present life) are the Purushdrthas ("human values" or the 
"aims of man"). Worldly aims and efforts to secure them are not scorned 
but harnessed to the fulfilment of higher aims in the next life. Dharma 
bears fruit in a future life and is extra-empirical in its technical aspect, in 
the sense that it can be ascertained only from a divine or traditional code. 




I. 


For a general account of the Upanishads, and particularly their chronological 
classification cf. Ch, XXIV, 

2. The Philosophy of the Upanishads, p. 39. 

3. Kaushltaki Upanishcul , IV, and Bvihaddvanyaka Up. II. 1. 

4. Cf. Ch. XXIV, pp. 470 if. 

5. Some quotations from the Upanishads on this subject are given in Ch. XXIV 
p. 470. 

6. Cf, Deussen, Op. cit., pp. 396 ff. 

6 a. For an account of these rituals, cf. Ch. XXIV, pp. 474 ff. 

7 . RPVU, p. 258. 

8. Op. cit., p. 260, In. 5. 

505 




CHAPTER XXVII 


SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC 
CONDITIONS 

i. SOCIAL CONDITIONS 

I. Family Life 

The family life was the framework on which society rested, and the 
Grihy a-sutras that deal with the domestic sacrifices and other duties 
performed by the householders supply valuable information regarding it. 

As in the age of the Later Samhitas and Brahmanas, the family was 
normally a joint one with the most senior married member or house¬ 
holder as the head. But partitions often took place as the rules in the 
Grihya-sutras regarding the kindling of the domestic fire show. Among 
the occasions mentioned there for fresh formal kindling are the division 
of the inheritance or the death of the head of the family, in which case 
the. eldest son kindled it. Seniority in age constituted an important 
claim for respect in the family. The directions about the Vaisvadeva-bali— 
one of the daily domestic sacrifices—that it need not be repeated every 
time the food was cooked, and that it may be offered from the kitchen 
of the chief householder or from that of the member whose food was 
ready first, show that the joint family was big enough to necessitate 
cooking at different kitchens. The fact that a rite is prescribed for one 
desirous of a large family shows that the people liked to have many 
children. Male additions to the family were preferred to female ones. 
An interesting formality in the family life of these days is the manner 
in which the father greeted the children in the house after his return 
from a journey, the mode of greeting being different for male and female 
children. The high sense of responsibility and duty expected to be shown 
by the head of the family towards the other members is seen in the 
Grihya-sutra rule that he was to take his food only after feeding all the 
children and old persons, as well as any female residing under his pro¬ 
tection, and any pregnant lady in the house. The respect and authority 
that the father commanded is shown by the fact that the Dharma-sutras, 
describing in detail the acts of courtesy which a son owed to his father, 
mention that he is allowed to. eat the remnants of his father’s food. The 
father on his part is expected to be kind. The heartless conduct of the 
father in the story of Sunahsepa is condemned in the Sankhayana Srauta -, 
siilra. The spiritual succession from father to son is almost taken for 

506 




SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC CONDITIONS 


the Upanishads. The gradation of the relations in a family 
is given, as it were, in the Chhdndogya Upanishad (VII. 15. 2), where 
father, mother, brother, and sister are mentioned in succession. 


2. The Caste-System 

The period of the Sutras witnessed the gradual hardening of the caste- 
system in general and the deterioration of the position of the Vaisyas 
and Sudras in particular. We can trace this process step by step if we 
follow the evidence of the three broadly distinguishable chronological 
strata in the Sutras, namely (1) the Srauta-sutras with which may be 
conveniently considered the evidence of the Sutras of Panini also; (2) 
the Grihya-sutras; and (3) the Dharma-sutras. 

From the evidence of the Sahkhayana Sraiita-sutra which records that 
the Vajapeya sacrifice—a sacrifice of which the chariot race forms an 
integral part—was at one time a sacrifice for a Vaisya as well as a priest 
or king, it is clear that the position of the VaiSya is deteriorating now 
and Caste distinctions are hardening. The power of the Brahmanas is 
growing. They are exempt from taxes and could, on occasions, be kings, 
but Kshatriyas could hardly become priests. The prestige and influence 
of the Purohita in the state, are considerable. Panini’s division of the 
Sudras into niravasita and aniravasita shows that certain degraded Sudras 
with unclean habits like the Nishadas were forced to reside outside the 
limits of the village or town. The Sudra was denied the privilege of 
samnyasa (“renunciation”). The rdshtra or nation consisted only of the 
three higher Castes, the Sudras being excluded from it. Although some 
Caste-sections were degraded, it is not quite certain if the Mixed Castes 
had arisen in this period. 

The Grihya-sutras clearly differentiate the status, occupations, obli¬ 
gations, duties, and privileges of the four principal Castes in matters 
both spiritual and secular. A different age is prescribed for each of the 
three higher castes for the various sacraments, such as the Chudakarana 
(the tonsure ceremony of the child) and the Upanayana (“initiation”) 
ceremonies. One is not sure whether these different prescriptions were 
adjustments necessitated originally by the differences of mental calibre 
and moral fibre in the various caste-groups (for the Upanayana ceremony, 
for example). Different seasons are also prescribed for the different 
castes. The differentiation extends even to such minor things as the 
girdle, the staff, the skin, and the garment to.be used by the student, 
and the Upanayana mantra to be recited by him. The story is the same 
with regard to most of the sacraments such as the naming of the child, 
the building of a house, marriage, and even such unessential matters as 
anulepana or salving which is part of the sneina ceremony signifying the 
completion of the period of studentship. Even in the giving of gifts, the 

507 



THE VEDIC AGE 



ste determined the nature of the gift as much as the financial con 
of the giver. 

The Brahmanas in particular have now become a well-organized 
priesthood. Among their special duties and privileges are the study and 
the teaching of the Veda, sacrificing for themselves and others, and the 
receiving of gifts. The feasting of learned Brahmanas to invoke their 


Jl V/y,VA T AJ.4.^ v Vj 

blessings is, without exception, laid down as the concluding feature of 
every sacrament, d hat this feasting was originally more a disinterested 
homage to the noble qualities of the spiritually-minded Brahmanas, 
than a sop to a worldly-minded priesthood, is clear from the rules that 
the invitee must not be a relative and that the invitations must not be 
arranged in a bargaining spirit. The general trend of the Grihya-sutra 
prescriptions is that if the privileges of a Brahmana were many, he 
deserved them, and inspired respect and confidence as much by his high 
ethical standard as by the responsibilities and duties he owed to the 
other classes. 

The Rajanya or Kshatriya class, among the rest, came closest to the 
Brahmana class in power and prestige, the two together being as it were 
the moral and material props of society. It was but natural that the 
cultural and social status of the Variyas should gradually deteriorate, 
because by virtue of their occupations, namely agriculture, cattle-breeding 
and commerce, they came into close contact with the Sudras. But the 
popular notion that the Vaisya class had very little in common with the 
two higher classes in religious and sacramental matters is erroneous, 
though it has crystallized in the Bhagavadgtta verse (IX. 32) which puts 
women, Variyas, and Sudras in one and the same category of people to 
whom eligibility to absolution through Bhakti (devotion) is conceded by 
the Lord. According to the Grihya-sutras, when the domestic fire is to 
be kindled for the first time, it may be borrowed from the house of a 
Vaisya rich in cattle, or from the house of one who performs many 
sacrifices, be he a Brahmana, a Kshatriya or a VaiSya. 

When we come to the Sudras, however, we find that a wide gulf Separates 
them from the three higher classes. The mixture" of non-Aryan elements 
was probably responsible for this, as the word Arya has a racial as well 
moral connotation in this period and meant practically “reborn,” 


as 


0,0 lUVJ-O-* v-w****'-'-- - X , 

that is, a member of the three higher castes. The privilege of performing 
the sanctifying sacraments (excepting that of marriage which took place 
in his case without the recitation of mantras) is denied to a Sudra, and 
this was at once the cause and effect of his low position. But the Sudra 
was certainly not a pariah. He enjoyed the status of a regular member 
ol the household, and as a servant he was employed in all departments 
of the household not excluding the kitchen. 

If the Upanayana ceremony was neglected for three generations in a 
whether Brahmana, Kshatriya or Variya—the members became 

508 


family- 


SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC CONDITIONS 


oljlea^ts whose very sight was inauspicious and who probably lived 
outside the village or town. But the Vratya-stoma ceremony of expiation 
and penance could secure for the outcasts readmission into the Aryan 
fold. Thus the horrors of an age-long and irremediable outcasting were 
unknown in the days of the Grihya-sutras. 

The Dharma-sutras show that caste distinction has outstripped its 
proper limits and has even invaded the field of civil and criminal lav 
(ante, pp. 489 ft.). The legal rate of interest and fines were graded according 
to the castes and a jSudra received capital punishment for a crime like 
homicide for which lighter punishments were awarded to members of the 
higher castes. The contact of the three Aryan castes with the Sudras 
through inter-marriage was bound to lead to the rise of mixed castes, 
and the difference of occupations must have resulted sooner or later in 
an increase in the number of such mixed castes. Whether the mixed 
castes had arisen as early as the period of the later Samhitas is not certain. 
The enumeration of different classes or categories of victims in the 
Burushamedha chapters of the White Yajuryeda, for example, may refer 
to different professions rather than castes. Similarly, for the period of the 
Srauta-sutras and Panini, all that can be said is that certain caste- 
sections were degraded, but for the period of the Grihya- and Dharma- 
sutras the existence of Mixed Castes cannot be doubted. The anuloma 
type of marriage, sanctioned by the Sutras, whereby a member of higliei 
caste could take unto himself a wife or wives of the lower castes, in addi¬ 
tion to one of his own caste, must necessarily lead to new caste-division.?, 
although in the beginning, for some time, the rule that the progeny of 
such anuloma unions belonged to the yarn a or caste of the fathei ai rested 
such a tendency. The Dharma-sutras give the names of the mixed castes 
that arose not only as a result of the permitted anuloma marriages, but 
also as a result of the prohibited pratilorna marriages (where the husband’s 
caste was lower than that of the wife) which apparently took place not 
rarely. The Vasishtka Dharma-sutra (XVIII. 1), for example, tells us that 
the offspring of a Sudra male and a Brahmana female becomes a Chdnddla 
who was to be treated as an outcast. The sacramental directions of the 
Grihya-sutras raise an interesting problem in this connection by mention¬ 
ing rarely, if ever, the mixed castes. The rules seem to be framed only 
for the Brahmana, the Kshatriya, and the VaiSya. One can understand 
that the progeny of pratilorna marriages should be excluded from the 
sacraments, but if anuloma progeny was also excluded, then a very large 
number of people would be denied the spiritual benefit of the sacraments 
Apparently the Afastamba Gnhya-sutra is of this view when it omits all 
reference to the ralhakdra (the offspring of an anulorn^ marriage) in its 
upanayana rules. The Baudhdyana Gr^ya-sutra, whicn includes to 
rathdkdra in the initiation rules, seems to reflect the earlier view. The 
following stages may, therefore, be distinguished in the treatment of the 

509 



THE VEDIC AGE 


'SL 


fixed castes in the Sutra period front this sacramental point of view. 
In the earliest, perhaps the progeny of anuloma marriages was absorbed 
in the father's varna and thus became eligible for the sacraments as a 
Brahrnana, Kshatriya, or VaiSya. The next stage was probably reached 
when some important intermediate castes, like that of the rathakdra , 
received a separate treatment in the sacramental rules. The third stage 
is reflected in the exclusion of the rathakdra and other mixed castes from 
the sacraments. 

It has to be recognized, however, that the caste-system even in this 
period had not become as wooden and exclusive as it is now. Inter-dining 
and inter-marriage (in the anuloma form) were not prohibited, though it 
is difficult to decide whether and how far change of caste was permis¬ 
sible. Even outcasts who had performed the prescribed penances could 
be readmitted to the Aryan fold. Nor were the castes so strictly separated 
or ramified into so many caste-divisions as obtain today. We see in the 
Dharma-sutras the beginning of the formal theory of defilement resulting 
in the taboo of all contact on the part of a pure man of the upper castes 
with ari impure man, namely, a mefnber of the lowest caste. For example, 
we see in the Dharma-sutras of Vasishtha, Gautama, and Apastamba 
the idea of impurity communicated by the touch or contact of inferior 
castes, which is reflected in the purification rendered necessary in the 
case of contact with a Siidra and implied in the prohibition of eating in 
company with m&n of lower castes. 

3. Marnage and the Position of Women 

As already mentioned above, the anuloma system of marriage (he. 
between a male of a higher and a female of a lower caste) prevailed in 
this period. The low status of the Sudra wife is reflected in the directions 
given in the Srauta-sutras that a sacrificer is allowed to cohabit with a 
savamd wife (of the same caste as his own) but not with the Sudra one. 
The rules of Panini regarding Abhivddana (salutation as a mark of respect 
to elderly persons in the house) sKow that the presence of wives of the 
lower castes (especially the Sudra one) in a family and the consequent 
inevitable association of the higher caste ladies with them in the house 
has brought down the general level of womanly culture and led to a 
deterioration in their social status. 

Among the Grihya-sutras, only the Asvaldyana Grihya-sutra, and most 
of. the Dharma-sutras, mention eight forms of marriage. Of these, two call 
for an explanation, viz., the paisdcha, in which a girl is carried off while 
her relatives are sleeping or are indifferent, and the rdkshasa in which the 
girl is abducted after a fight with her relatives. Probably the names of 
these marriage forms are derived from the names of the tribes among 
whom those peculiar marriage customs prevailed. That such immoral 
practices should be dignified as “forms” of marriage may be due to the 

5io 



T#l NlSftfy 



SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC CONDITIONS 

not to deny some kind of a social status to the unfortunate girl- 
victim and her progeny, once the regrettable occurrence had taken 
place and was beyond recall. The Grihya-sutras give detailed rules regard¬ 
ing the proper seasons for marriage, the qualifications of the bride and the 
bridegroom, and the various stages of the marriage ceremony. The bride 
should not be a sapinda relation .of the bridegroom's mother nor belong 
to the same gotra as his own. The bridegroom should be a young man with 
intelligence, character and good health, and should, above all, come 
from a good family. 

The various stages of the marriage ceremony are as follows: (i) the 
wooers formally go to the girl's house; (2) when the brides father has 
given his formal consent, the bridegroom performs a sacrifice; (3) early 
in the morning of the first day of the marriage celebrations the bride is 
bathed; (4) a sacrifice is offered then by the high priest of the bride's 
family and a dance of four or eight women (not widows) takes place as 
part of the Indr dm karman ; (5) the bridegroom then goes to the girl's 
house and makes the gift of a garment, unguent, and mirror to the bride 
who has been bathed as mentioned already; (6) the Kanyd-ptciddna or 
the formal giving away of the bride now takes place, followed (7) by the 
Pdni-gmhana, the clasping of the bride's right hand by the bridegroom 
with his own right hand; (8.) the treading on stone; (9) the leading of j:he 
bride round the fire by the bridegroom; (10) the sacrifice of fried grains; 
and, the most important ceremony of all, (n) the saptapadi (the couple 
walking seven steps together as symbolic of their lifelong concord) follow 
in due order. Finally the bride is taken in all ceremony to her new house. 
It must be taken for granted that the offering of oblations to the fire and 
the feasting of Brahmanas take p>lace at every important stage in this as 
in other ceremonies. 

As regards the age of the bride, the prescriptions of the Grihya-sutras 
differ. The older texts which describe the consummation of marriage as 
the Chahirthi-kannan, or the ceremony of the fourth (night immediately 
after the marriage), evidently imply that the bride is of mature age. 
The more modern Grihya-sutras and the Dharma-sutras, however, lay 
down the rule'that the bride should be nagmka (lit., naked), i.e. one who 
has not yet had her monthly period or one whose breasts are not yet 
developed. Evidently the only reasonable explanation of the incongruity 
is that the'earlier practice is reflected in the older texts. 

The prevalence of polygamy is implied in the anuloma system of 
marriage. The elements of bride-price (sulka) p.re discernible in the Asura 
form of marriage, where the father of the bride is gladdened with money, 
and there are hints of a dowry in the Brahma and Daiva forms of marriage 
where the father gives away the daughter after decking her with orna¬ 
ments. 

The prayers and rites of the ceremony dearly indicate that matrimony 

5 11 






THE VEDIC AGE 

was a holy bond, and not a contract, and that progeny (especially male 
progeny) was the goal of marriage. As in the preceding age, the birth of 
a daughter was not welcome, and this fact in a way reflects the compara¬ 
tively inferior position of women in society. All the sacraments, except 
that of marriage, are performed in the case of women without the recitation 
of Vedic mantras, and the Upanayana is not performed for them. 

The woman, however, held an honoured position in the household. 
That a life of merriment, song, and dance was not denied to her is seen 
from certain sacraments in which women are asked to dance and sing. 
I he presence of women who are not widows is particularly desired in 
marriage and other sacraments, ihe Gob hi! a Grihya-sutra allows the 
option that the wife may offer the morning and evening oblations in place 
of the husband, because “the wife is as it were the house.” That there 
were wives who desired to keep their husbands under control is clear 
from a rite prescribed for the purpose. 

Since the Dharma-sutras treat of the widow’s right in the property 
of her husband, the possibility of the general prevalence of sail is ruled 
\ out. The Vasishtha Dharma-sutra speaks of the remarriage of widows 
\ under certain circumstances, and the son of a remarried woman is one 
pf the twelve sons enumerated in the Dharma-sutras. So the remarriage 
<?f widows was not as strictly prohibited as it appears to have been in 
Ihter days, In the marriage rules of the Dharma-sutras local customs were 
Recognized. The Baudhdyana Dharma-sutra, for example, states that 
marrying the daughter of a maternal uncle is a southern custom. The 
custom of niyoga (levirate) or appointment of widows is recognized by 
the Dharma-sfltras which give detailed rules laying down the circum¬ 
stances under which it is permissible. Some of the later Dharma-sutras, 
however, condemn it. 

On the whole the Dharma-sutras take a more lenient attitude towards 
women than the Smritis of a later age or the customs and practices of the 
present day. Baudhayana (II. 2. 4. 6.) quotes the injunction, which also 
pccurs in the Manu-smriti (IX. 81), that “a barren wife should be aban¬ 
doned in the tenth year, one who bears daughters (only) in the twelfth, 
one whose children (all) die in the fifteenth, but she who is quarrelsome 
without delay.” But Apastamba (II. 5. 11. 12-14) forbids the husband to 
take a second wife unless the first wife has had no male child or neglected 
her religious duties. According to Vasishtha (XXVIII. 2-3) a wife shall not 
be abandoned ‘‘even though she be quarrelsome or tainted by sin, or have 
left, the house, or have suffered criminal force, or have fallen into the 
hands of thieves.” Even a wife, who has committed adultery, becomes 
pure and is taken back by her husband after she has done proper penances 
( Vas . Dh. S. XXI. 8-10). As noted above (Ch. XXV, p. 490), Apastamba 
(I. 10. 28. 19) imposes severe penalties on a husband “who unjustly 
forsakes his wife.” On the other hand “a wife who forsakes her husband 

512 




SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC CONDITIONS 



^ instance where the law or custom accords more favourable treatment 
to the wife than to the husband Again, "a father who has committed a 
crime causing loss of caste must be cast off, but a mother does not become 
an outcast for her son.” Similarly, the male offspring of outcasts are 
(also) outcasts, but not the females, who may be married, even without 
a dowry, by a twice-born (Vas. Dh. S. XIII. 47. 51-53). It is interesting 
to note that according to Baudhayana (IV 1. 15-16) “if a damsel has 
been abducted by force and has not been wedded with sacred texts, she 
is to be treated like a maiden and may be lawfully married to another 
man." Lastly, there is a general agreement among the Dharma-sutras 
that a grown-up maiden, if not given in marriage in proper time by her 
father, may choose her own husband after waiting for three years (or 
months). At the same time the general principle is already enunciated 
in the later texts that “the males are the masters of women.'* “Their 
father protects them in childhood, their husbands protect them in youth, 
and their sons protect them in age; a woman is never fit for independence" 

( Vas. Dh. Si V. 1-2 ; Bau. Dh . S. II. 2. 3. 44-45). 

4. Education 

The Upanishads are a living testimony to the high intellectual attain¬ 
ments of the age. The stories of 5 vetaketu Aruneya and Satyakama 
Jabala in the Chhdndogya Upanishad and the well-known passage in the 
Taittinya Upanishad (I. 11J containing instruction ( amddsana ) given to 
the student at the end of his studies show that the educational system 
maintained the high standard and lofty ideals of the preceding age (ante, 
p. 469). Some special features of the educational system are prominently 
brought out in the Upanishads, We find, for instance, that the highest 
position in society is willingly yielded to the intellectual aristocracy. 
Kshatriya kings like Janaka were famous for their learning, and respect 
was paid to them by all including the Bralimanas. There are many in¬ 
stances on record where even the Brahmanas learned the sacred know¬ 
ledge; particularly philosophy, from the Kshatriyas. The story of Aruni, 
in the Brihaddranyaka Upanishad , shows that even old men became 
pupils. But the most pleasing feature is the frequent reference to women 
teachers, many of whom possessed the highest spiritual knowledge. 
The famous dialogues between Yajnavalkya and his wife Maitreyi (Brih. 
IV. 5) and Gargi Vachaknavx (Brih. III. 6. 8) show the height of intel¬ 
lectual and spiritual attainments to wliichr a woman could rise. The 
stories of these noble and gifted ladies stand in sad contrast to the later 
age when even the study of Vedic literature was forbidden to women under 
the most severe penalty. 

The Upanishads contain several lists of subjects of study, and these 
give 11s a good idea of the wide range of knowledge in those days. One 

513 


KK 



THE VEDIC AGE 




:ch list 1 mentions not only Veda, Itihasa, Purana, and spiritual know¬ 
ledge (Brakma-vidyd), but also grammar, mathematics (. Rdsi ), chronology 
(Nidhi ), dialectics (Vakovakya), ethics ( Ekdyana ), astronomy, military 
science, science of snakes, and knowledge of portents (Daiva). There are 
a few more branches of knowledge mentioned in this list whose exact 
scope or nature cannot be defined, such as Pitrya (science relating to the 
manes), Deva-vidya (etymological interpretation of divine names or 
knowledge of gods), Bhuta-vidya (demonology or science of elements), 
and Devajana-vidyd (dancing and music or mythology). It is extremely 
unfortunate that we have no texts preserved regarding many of these 
subjects. But the list shows how a very comprehensive view of education 
was developed at the close of the Vedic Age. It also demonstrates that 
the six subjects comprised in the Vedahgas, to which a detailed reference 
has been made above (Ch. XXIV, p. 472), formed only a small portion 
of the curriculum of study, and not the whole of it, as is popularly 
believed. 

The Sutras give us a detailed account of student-life, which com¬ 
menced with the upanayana (initiation). This ceremony, the essential 
features of which have been described above (Ch. XXIII, p. 455), in all 
probability originally signified the formal reception of an adult youth as 
a regular member of the (Aryan) tribe, a custom that prevailed among 
all primitive people. But, as described in the Grihya-sutras, it is dominated 
by priestly interest, and this is not unnatural, as in this age, education 
was entirely under the control of the priestly class, and upanayana meant 
also the formal initiation into an educational career of boys of the three 
higher castes, at the ages respectively of eight, eleven, and twelve. 
The youth to be initiated wears a new upper garment or skin (which is 
to be that of a deer, goat or cow, according to his caste), a lower garment 
of a suitable colour, a staff of the prescribed length, and a .threefold 
twisted girdle. According to some Grihya-sutras he wears a sacrificial 
cord also. This equipment constitutes the educational uniform, as it 
were, of the youth. 

Moral training formed the very pivot and the backbone of the edu¬ 
cational system, and development of character was the one ideal that 
dominated it. The numerous vows and observances obligatory on the 
pupil ( Brahmachdrin ) after the upanayana , which was a kind of initiation 
by the Guru (teacher) into a new spiritual life, entailed on him the most 
rigorous discipline for a prescribed period, during which he was to live 
religiously as a student in the house of his teacher. His daily routine is 
begging alms, collecting fuel, looking after the sacrificial fires, tending 
the house (of the teacher), learning, and practising austerities. The 
maintenance of chastity was obligatory on the Brahmachdrin . Thus the 
ancient universities were residential, and a more perfect tutorial system 
was followed than is possible in any modern university, the pupil being 

5*4 



SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC CONDITIONS 

the observation of the Guru all the twenty-four hours. The daily 
begging of alms, on which the student lived, was for the inculcation of 
“plain living and high thinking,’’ and had probably little or nothing to 
do with the financial status of the pupil or of the teacher with whom he 
resided. Attention may be drawn in this connection to some interesting 
practical and thoroughly human aspects of the educational system of 
this age as reflected in the Taittinya Upanishad (I. n). After the ad¬ 
monition “let the acharya, the parents, .etc., be your gods” comes the 
frank admission that the preceptors, as human beings, may have their 
weaknesses, but it is not these but their good points that have to be copied 
by the pupils. A very practical streak is revealed in the advice to the 
pupil to continue the family-line by marrying and begetting children, 
to attend to kuiala or well-being (in a worldly sense), to make gifts and 
practise charity, for fear (bhaya) of public opinion or out of shame 
(■hriyd ), if not out of the generosity of the heart. 

The intellectual side of education was developed through the numerous 
subjects of study referred to above. Naturally more particulars are given 
of the study of the Vedic literature. It centred round the preservation 
by means of recitation, of the Veda of the particular Sakha to which the 
pupil and the teacher belonged, or of as many Vedas as could be mastered 
by the student. Memory was a specially valued faculty and was most as¬ 
siduously cultivated. The period of studentship is normally fixed at twelve 
years or until the pupil has mastered the Veda, though it may extend to 
much longer periods such as twenty-four or twenty-eight years, nay even 
for life in exceptional cases. The extent of the daily lesson is described, 
among others, in the Grihya-sutras of the Rigveda. The pupil is to recite 
either the hymns belonging to each Rishi or each Anuvaka of the short 
hymns (A shudra-Suktas) or an Anuvaka or one verse in the beginning of 
each hymn. This option was a very useful and practical concession which 
enabled students, who did not aspire to become Vedic scholars, and 
(probably and chiefly) students of the Kshatriya and Vaisya castes, to 
fulfil nominally their duty of learning the Veda. The Grihya-sutras proceed 
on the assumption that all the three higher castes are to go through a 
period of studentship, but more often than not, the Kshatriya studied 
the art of war and the elementary knowledge of administrative functions. 
There are, however, traditions regarding the Kshatriyas studying phil¬ 
osophy and having taken a prominent part in the evolution of the doctrine 
of Brahman. As for the Vaisyas it is unlikely that they were engaged in 
the intellectual life of the day, and at least in their case, this very practical 
device of a nominal fulfilment of the duty of Vedic study was very useful. 

A student who knew the first and last hymns of a Rishi or of an Anuvaka 
was, by a sort of fiction, considered to have known the whole portion 
belonging to that Rishi or the whole Anuvaka. 

The rite prescribed for victory in debates shows that literary debates 





:re very common and were held in special assembly-halls which used 


THE VEDIC AGE 



to be crowded. 

The Vedic term commenced with the updkannan (inauguration) 
ceremony which was performed some time during the bright fortnight of 
the month of Sravana (July-August) when the herbs appear, or during 
the rainy season. The Vedic study then went on for four months and a 
half or five months and a half or six months, at the end of which came 
the utsarga (discharge) ceremony which formally closed the first term in 
the month of Pausha or Magha. After this there is a break -of study for 
five or six months (this appears to be the long vacation of the ancient 
University), or according to the Dharma-sutras, the Vedas may be studied 
during the bright fortnight and the Vedaiigas during the dark one. This 
almost year-long recitation Was subject to numerous interruptions 
(anadhydyas) or “no-lesson” intervals, the special occasions for which 
were births and deaths, portents, miracles, lightning, thunder, rains or 
eclipses, and the. normal occasions for which were the 14th and 15th 
days of the two fortnights, the last days of the seasons, etc., The large 
number of these interruptions is not surprising, as the ancients held that 
it was better that there was no recitation at all, rather than that a slight 
error should creep into it, get repeated in the transmission by word of 
mouth, and later become an integral part of the Veda itself. The preser¬ 
vation of the Vedic literature by a meticulously correct and scientific 
method of recitation, down to the minutest part of it, viz., the syllable, 
was their chief concern, because in the beginning, Vedic texts were not 
available in a written form and even later were not usually reduced to 
writing. Impure places were to be avoided for the recitation. Personal 
purity and good health were also essential conditions for study. After 
the completion of the whole course came the ceremony of samdvartana 
after which the student, now called a sndiaka (i.e. one who has taken a 
ceremonial bath marking the termination of his studentship), can either 
enter upon the married state and found a household or (in exceptional 
cases) remain celibate, his principal duty being now the management 
and support of his family from which he was so long absent. 

The samdvartana, however, does not spell the end either of Vedic 
study or of moral training. The sndiaka can carry on both either in the 
role of a teacher or student. The svadhyaya or daily recitation of Vedic 
texts is part of the fivefold daily routine, consisting of the performance 
of the five mahdyajhas (Great Sacrifices), of the married sndtaha in the 
capacity of a householder, and comprises portions not only of the Saih- 
hitas, Brahmanas, and Kalpa-sutras, but also of the Gathas, Naraiarhsis, 
Itihasas, and Puranas. In the Dharma-sutras of Vasishtha and Apastamba 
there is an inhibition against learning a language spoken by barbarians 
and the study of sabda-idstra (philology) is condemned in the Vasishft, 
Dharma-sutra (X. 20). 


516 



SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC CONDITIONS 


teacher is the central figure, the very pivot of the education^ 
stem with which the State had very little to do. He introduces (upa-ni) 
the boy to studentship, and is in sole charge of his moral, mental, and 
physical upbringing. The teacher, who was a sndlaka, provided in his own 
house for the boarding and lodging of a certain number of pupils, and 
received from them, in return, daily service during the period of student¬ 
ship and, at the end of it, gifts voluntarily given by the pupils. Though, 
thus in a measure, the teacher was compensated for his labours, the 
relationship between the teacher and pupil was in no sense mercenary, 
but sacred and almost spiritual. Very often the father himself was the 
teacher, and the student received education at home. The teacher was 
the friend, philosopher, and guide to the pupil. The initiation of the boy 
into studentship by the teacher marked, as it were, his second birth 
(in a spiritual sense), whence the term dvija (“twice-born") was applied 
to the three higher castes, who only had the privilege of upanayana. 
The pupil was to show the very greatest respect to the teacher. It was 
not, however, merely a one-sided discipline. The teacher also observed 
certain vows and rules while he taught. 

That physical training was an integral part of the educational scheme 
is clear from the unmistakable trend of the numerous prayers for the 
grant of vigour and strength that form part of the upanayana ceremonial 
The begging of alms, morning and evening, the gathering of fuel-sticks, 
and the manual labour involved in the worship and tending of the fire 
made for sufficient hard work or exercise for the student. The recitation 
of the Vedic texts was a strenuous vocal exercise. But the prdndydma 
or control of breath, which formed part of the daily sandhyd (morning, 
noon, and evening prayers) adoration, was not only an ideal exercise for 
the lungs, but also one that penetrated to all parts of the body as any 
careful student of Yogic exercises can testify. Lastly must be noted the 
fact that the danda-praddna (handing the staff to the initiated boy) was 
a regular ceremony, and the staff was certainly an excellent weapon for 
self-defence. 


5. Manners and Morals , Habits and Customs 
Hospitality not only continues to be recognized as a binding social 
obligation, but is raised to the status of a religious duty, for an offering 
of food to the guest attains to the rank of a sacrifice as one of the five 
daily mahdyajnas —the atithi-yajna or “guest sacrifice"—which the 
householder must perform. There is a formal definition of an atithi or 
guest, and an authorized list of important guests, which includes a teacher, 
a Ritvik (an officiating priest), a king, a sndtaka, a father-in-law, and a 
son-in-law. Though a guest could arrive at any time, it was understood 
that a wedding and a sacrifice were the recognized (or official) occasions 
for their reception in the grand style. A seat (or a special enclosure, if 

517 





THE VEDIC AGE 

guest is persona grata), water for washing the feet, argha 
water for sipping, and the madhuparka (a mixture of curds, honey, and 
ght) are first offered to him. After this, food containing meat is to be 
offered to him, and if the occasion is a special one (such as a sacrifice or 
a wedding), a cow is offered and it is for the guest to have it killed for 
him or to set it free. 

The Grihya-sutras, while prescribing the code of conduct for a snataka, 
give ns a fairly detailed account of the manners and etiquette of those 
days. Only a few rules can be cited here. A scentless wreath is not to be 
worn. Girls must not be subjected to banter or ridicule. Walking or 
bathing naked or running without sufficient justification are prohibited. 
There is a taboo on certain words in the language of a snataka ensuring 
linguistic purity. 

Great insistence is laid on moral purity. Self-restraint is the keynote 
of the ethical code prescribed for the householder. Human nature, of 
course, is the same in all times and climes, and warnings against the 
faithlessness of companions, pupils, servants, and wives are conveyed 
indirectly through rites prescribed for their prevention. Purity of mind 
is as much inculcated as purity of body. Abstinence of all kinds and 
respect for elders and for self are valued qualities. 

The. ancient Indians did not cultivate cleanliness as a mere habit. 
They had developed a passion for it. The sipping of water (dchimana) 
and washing of feet are insisted on everywhere as a preliminary to any, 
even the most trivial, ritual act. The pavitrakas (strainers or purifiers 
made of grass), the use of which is so marked in the ritual, are symbols 
of purity and cleanliness. If a bird befouled the person of a snataka, or 
an unknown drop of water fell on him, mantras were to be recited by way 
of expiation. The habit of early rising is also well cultivated. 

Life in this age was so thoroughly ritualized that it is difficult to dis¬ 
tinguish habits from sacraments. Thus the many rites prescribed for 
the safety and good health of the mother and child, before and after 
delivery, may be looked upon as records of remarkable usages also. 
The rite of Simantonnayanu or parting of the hair in the middle in the 
fourth or seventh month of pregnancy is an interesting custom. The 
child is given two names of which one is to be kept secret. The occasional 
counting of years, not from birth but from conception, is a practice that 
has a parallel in the Buddhist ordinances. The Grihya- and the Dharma- 
sutras recognize the force of local custom, and allow it to modify or some¬ 
times even override some of their rules. The father’s greeting to the 
son, when either of the two has returned from a journey, which takes the 
form of smelling or kissing him on the head, is also a notew'orthy custom, 

6 . Amusements and Entertainments 

As in the preceding age, dancing, and both vocal and instrumental 

518 


SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC CONDITIONS 


m$Mc, were well cultivated. In the Slmantonnayana ceremony mentions 
above, the wife is asked to sing a song merrily, and in the marriage cere¬ 
mony the bridegroom sings a gdthd after the treading on the stone by the 
bride. The vogue of the musical recitations of the Sdmaveda is responsible 
for the rule in the Gobhila Grihya-sutra that the Vamadevya gdna may 
be sung, by way of a general expiation, at the end of every ceremony. 
The lute players are asked to play the lute in the ceremony of ‘‘parting 
the hair/' and four or eight women (not widows) perform a dance in the 
marriage ceremony. The restrictive rule that a sndiaka is not to practise 
or enjoy a programme of instrumental or vocal music or dance, shows 
their popularity. It seems that the game of dice was looked upon as a 
popular entertainment, since a common gaming hall is one of the official 
public buildings of a town. 

The reference in the M ctitrdyantya Up uni shad to a nata (actor) changing 
his dress and painting himself proves the popularity of dramatic shows 
in this age. 

7. Food and Drink 

Rice and barley were evidently the staple articles of diet as they were 
to be offered into the Grihya fire every morning and evening. Wheat was 
probably not eaten daily, as it is mentioned but rarely. Beans (mdsha), 
kidney beans (: mudga ), mustard seed ( sarshapa ), and sesamum were 
known. 

Milk and its products were very liberally used (ante, p. 457). The various 
forms of butter (due to its varying temperature) were distinguished for 
purposes of the ritual as: clarified ( say pis ), melted (ajya), and solid 
(ghrita) butter. Among other esculent things may be mentioned honey and 
kshdra-lavana (saline food), which is supposed to be an irritant and an 
excitant, and therefore to be eschewed in the interests of celibacy. 

The culinary art was fairly well developed. The different processes or 
operations through which the grains passed before being cooked or eaten 
are indicated in words like akshata-dhdna (unbroken grain), Id]a (fried 
grain), and saktu (ground grain). Washing the rice-grains, husking them, 
baking them, and sprinkling ajya over them, and then taking them out 
of the oven are the different stages mentioned in the preparation of a 
sthalipaka . The preparation of a Purodasa (sacrificial cake) implied 
great skill iri baking as it was baked on a pan with varying number of 
hollows (resembling saucers) which gave a variety of forms to it. An 
Apupa was a cake baked on a flat vessel. Boiled rice (odana) eaten with 
ghi, milk-rice (payasa) which seems to be d preparation very much akin 
to dudha-pdka so popular in Gujarat now, krisam (boiled rice mixed with 
sesamum seeds), dadhimantha and madhn-mantha (cooked ground grains 
mixed with curds and honey respectively), and rice and barley gruel are 
other preparations known. The scum of boiled rice made a very light 

519 






THE VEDIC AGE 

id food. Vegetable food (sdfta) is mentioned as a substitute ’for fleSir 
( mdmsa ). 

But people in this age were by no means vegetarians. They ate flesh 
freely, not excluding even beef which was prohibited later owing to the 
growing reverence for the cow. Flesh-food must be served to the BraJr- 
majias invited to a Sraddha dinner, vegetable food being allowed only in 
its absence. Similarly in the ceremony of the first feeding of the child 
with solid food, among the-'various foods enumerated in order of merit, 
the flesh of a goat, partridge, or,another, (specified) bird, and fish come 
first, boiled rice mixed with gk% coming last. Similarly food offered to 
a guest of consequence mu§i not be without flesh. The merit of vegetarian 
diet is, however, recognized in the rule that a student should abstain 
from flesh.. 

In spite of condemnation in the earlier texts (ante, p, 457) and severe 
penalties laid down in the Dharma-sutras, surd continued to be a favourite 
intoxicating drink. The four or eight women who give a dance at the 
marriage ceremony are to be regaled with food and surd . In the Anvasih 
takya cefemony, surd is to be offered along with the pinda offerings to 
female ancestors. The Srauta ritual is naturally full of references to the 
Soma drink in the numerous Soma sacrifices, and the Grihya ritual in the 
fitness of things ignores it. 


8. Dress and Decoration 

Two pieces of clothing—one the uttanya or upper, and the other the 
Antanya or lower—constituted the dress proper (the simple two-piece 
suit) of males and females; the lower garment being put on first and then 
the upper one. If one could afford only one garment, then a part of the 
lower garment may be turned into and worn as an upper garment. In 
the case of a student, the skin of a deer or goat made a very holy upper 
garment. The dprapadiha pata, mentioned by Panini, is a garment that 
reached down to the ankles. A longish piece of cloth wrapped round the 
head in the fashion prescribed by local custom constituted the ceremonial 
head-wear or turban. The same piece could be used informally to veil 
the head. Red turbans and clothes were used for magic rites and silk 
ones (kshauma) for sacrificial purposes. 

Woollen blankets were in use. In the list of garments prescribed for the 
upamta (the initiated boy) figure cotton, woollen, linen, and hempen 
cloth. Silk was also used (as there is a reference to the silk-worm giving 
silk). Upper garments were dyed with the juice of lodhra flowers or with 
madder or indigo. Black clothes were also worn (as they are forbidden 
for one practising the Sakvara vow). The colour scheme of dyed garments 
prescribed for the upamta is interesting; reddish yellow, light red, and 
yellow for the Brahmana, the Kshatriya, and the Vai£ya respectively. 

520 



•''.'■•I:' 1 ':’ V ; v'A'S^k'v 


SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC CONDITIONS 

of washing was, of course, known, though a particular sanctity 
to a brand new (ahata) garment. 

. ‘ of garments, a turban, ear-rings, shoes, a bamboo staff, and an 

umbrella complete the full dress (of a sndtaka, for example). The danda 
(staff) is not only a weapon of defence in the ordinary sense, but also a 
magic wand for warding off evil. The staff of the upcmtta boy was to be 
of palaia, bilva, or nyagrodha (or udumbara) wood, according to his 
caste. It had to be of a standard height. In one Grihya-sutra (the 
Ahaldyana) there is an invocation to the shoe not to pinch. So shoes 
have had a tendency to pinch in all times and climes! 

Iwo important sacraments—th e Chudd-karman or tonsure ceremony 
for the child, and the Goddna or the ceremony of hair-cutting at the age 
of sixteen or eighteen—give us a clear idea of development of the tonsorial 
art as known and practised in those days. Among the details of the 
Chudd-karman are the use of a mixture of hot and cold water to moisten 
the hair, the tangled locks of which are disentangled with a porcupine’s 
quill—the hair-comb of the ancients—the anointing of the hair with 
fresh butter, the holding of a mirror before the boy, the use of the razor 
(with a copper or wooden handle) which makes a sound while it is being 
plied by the barber on the head, and the leaving of a lock or locks ( Chudd ) 
according to local custom'or family usage. A layer of Knsa grass is kept 
ready to receive the hair that is cut off. In the Goddna ceremony, the 
beard and the hair, both on the head and under the arm-pits, are shaved 
and the nails clipped. Generally a top-lock was kept, as a clean-shaven 
head was not fashionable. The Aivalayana and Sdnkhdyana Grikya-sutras , 
strangely enough, prescribe both these rites for girls. Probably local 
custom determined what quantity of hair was to be kept and in what 
fashion, in the case of both boys and girls. The Simantonnayana ceremony 
(of parting the hair of a pregnant woman mentioned above) clearly 
shows that the two (shaving) ceremonies did not much affect the growth 
of hair on a girl’s head. Does this ceremonial parting of the hair in preg¬ 
nancy suggest that unmarried girls and married women who were not 
mothers did not part, their hair but merely brushed it back ? 

It is noteworthy that the toilet and make-up of the ancient Indians 
were not as simple as we fondly imagine. Collyrium [anjana), an eye- 
salve, and other salves for anointing the body before the bath and the 
nose and mouth after the bath, sthdgara (a fragrant application) (see 
ante, p. 459), a bath-powder, and ground sandalwood are among the 
toilet requisites mentioned in connection With the '‘bath” ceremony 
which entitles a student who has completed his studies to become a 
sndtaka (graduate) and settle down as a householder by marrying if 
he so chooses. Garlands and kundalas (an ear ornament) are put on after 
the sndna (bath). Three gems strung on a woollen or linen cord make at 
once an ornament and a charm for a bride when tied round her body. 

521 







THE VEDIC AGE 


<SL 


„„ perforated pellet of sandal or Bddara wood, overlaid with gold and 
worn round the neck, and a Bddara-mani or pellet of Bddara- wood tied 
to the left hand, are among the other known ornaments worn by both 
males and females without distinction. 


9. Health and Hygiene 

A keen desire to live a long and healthy life of a hundred years was the 
natural outcome of the optimistic and robust outlook which the ancient 
Indians had on life. Their healthy slogan was “prevention is better than 
cure.” Consumption seems to have been a notorious affliction. Epilepsy 
(.Kumar a or Apasmara), to which children were particularly liable, was 
very much dreaded, and its popular name Svagraha indicates that it was 
supposed to be a seizure or attack by a dog-demon. Among the symptoms 
are stiffness of the body and much crying aloud. Another peculiar illness, 
to which again boys were particularly susceptible, was named Samkha 
in which the patient utters tones resembling the sound of a hathkha 
(conch) when blown. These diseases were sought to be cured by propitia¬ 
ting the demons by means of rites and ceremonies which afford a glimpse 
into the curious superstitions and magical belief of the period. From the 
number of rites prescribed during the period of pregnancy, it seems that 
a safe delivery was a matter of great concern. Headache and poisonous 
bites are among the minor ailments receiving ritual treatment. 

That there were centenarians is seen from the rules in the ceremony of 
Udakaddna or the offering of water libations to the deceased, t asts are 
so often recommended in the ritual that the inference becomes irresistible 
that the ancient Indians were fully aware of their beneficial effects on 
health. 

A knowledge of hygienic principles may be inferred from many a rule 
in the Grihya-sutras. Cleanliness is most stringently enforced and the 
free use of water is recommended at every step in the ritual for cleansing 
purposes. A regular daily bath is insisted on. Floors are to be swept, 
sprinkled over with water, and smeared with' cow-dung. There is a 
peculiar mixture prescribed for smearing the floor and walls of the lying- 
in chamber, which must have been an effective disinfectant. A. sndtaka 
is not to spit or eject phlegm in the neighbourhood of water, that special 
places were, set apart to receive dirt, accumulated waste, and sweepings 
is seen from the direction to offer a hedi on such heaps of sweeping. 
Easing was to be done on ground covered with grass and not on the 
bare ground. That cow stables and cemeteries were located outside the 
village or town is seen from the rule which enumerates them among 
landmarks in a journey along with a forest, a boundary-tree, etc. 


522 


•MINtsr^- 


SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC CONDITIONS 

2. ECONOMIC CONDITION 

i. Agriculture and Cattle 

The fact that there is a domestic rite synchronizing with each stage 
in the agricultural life of the people, and practically none associated 
with urban life, shows that, the Indians of those days lived mostly in 
villages, and that the village agriculturist, was the true representative 
of ancient India. There are rites for putting the bulls and oxen to the 
plough, for sowing, and for honouring Sttd (lit., the “Furrow”) or the 
Goddess of Agriculture. There is a sacrifice offered to Kshetrapati or the 
Lord of the Field. The Agrayana sacrifice is the religious ceremony of 
partaking of the first fruits of the harvest. There are further sacrifices 
signalizing the other agricultural operations such as threshing, the reaping 
of the crop, and putting it into the barn. 

Rice and barley seem to be the staple crops from the reference to the 
two harvests~T~that of barley in the hot season and of rice in autumn. 
From the direction to the snataka to live on the gleanings of uncultivated 
corn it may be easify inferred that there were extensive stretches of 
uncultivated land and forest, and wild rice and grains used to grow on 
untilled tracts. That a cultivated field was measured by the quantity of 
seeds that could be sown in it is seen from the term prdsthika in Panini, 
applied to a field that accommodated a prastha- full of seeds. 

The cattle were an invaluable possession. /‘Make us rich in cows" is 
almost the burden of the mantras that accompany the various Grihya 
rites. All the three higher classes were engaged in cattle-keeping in their 
own way. There are ceremonies like the Sulagava and the Baudhyavihclra 
for propitiating Rudra and his hosts, so that they may avert evil from 
cattle and the fields. Cattle served, in a way, as the standard of value 
or as a medium of exchange, because kings kept their own herds and 
gave away thousands of cows as dakshind (sacrificial fees). The Ddrshadvata 
sacrifice,’described in the Srauta-sutras, is virtually a description of the 
tending of the cows of a Brahmana in Kurukshetra for one year. The 
Grihya-sutras prescribe a number of minor rites on the following occa¬ 
sions :— 

(1) When the cows are led to the pasture lands; 

(2) When they run about; 

(3) When they return; and 

(4-5) before, and after, their entry into the cow-pen. 

The Srauta-sutras prescribe sacrifices for the acquisition and recovery of 
lost cows. Prayers and rites for prosperity in cattle and their good health 
abound in the Grihya-sutras. There is a ceremony for cattle-breeding 
called Vrishotsarga on the release of a (stud-) bull among the cows. 

523 





THE VEDIC AGE 

hmd, a wasting disease affecting cattle, was very much dreaded.'Tt 
was a custom to brand the cows. 

But the cows were not prized merely as property. A feeling of reverence 
for them is rapidly growing. A suspension of study ( anadhyaya) is ordered 
in the presence of cows that have eaten nothing. Persons riding in a 
chariot are to do homage to a cow, if met with on the way. Paradoxically 
enough, in the eyes of the ancient Indians, this veneration of the cow is 
not only not inconsistent with the cow-sacrifice prescribed in funeral 
ceremonies, on the occasion of a guest-rcception, or the Sulagavd (spit- 
ox) sacrifice, but is, in a sense, responsible for it. Nevertheless, the feeling 
of reverence for the cow went on steadily gathering volume, and the rule 
for sacrificing a cow was often relaxed by the admissibility of an alterna¬ 
tive or substitute ritual whereby the cow was saved. 


smw 


2. Trade and Commerce, Arts and Industries 

There is a rite called panyasiddhi (ensuring success in trade) in which 
a portion of the particular article of trade is cut off and sacrificed in 
the fire with the prayer: "If we carry on trade to acquire (new) wealth 
by means of our (old) wealth, may Soma . . . prosper that." {Hiran- 
yakesi G. S. 1 .15.1). The Variya class was engaged in trade and commerce. 
The Sutras of Panini refer to imports from the north and his vamsadi 
gana mentions several forest-products such as Vanda, Kulaja, Ikshu 
(sugar-cane) and Madya (liquor). The Grihya-sutra rule that the relations 
of a deceased person are not to cook in the house, but to buy food during 
the period of the death-impurity, shows that food could be bought either 
from public eating houses (?) or private individuals. A system of coinage 
or currency was probably in vogue, though quite a large volume of trade 
was managed by way of exchanges in kind. Panini mentions coins like 
Pana, Kdrshdpana, Pdda, and Vaha and measures and weights like 
Adhaka, Achita, Pdtra, Drona, and Prastha. But, as noted above, 
Panini’s date is uncertain, and he probably belonged to a period later 
than 600 b.c. . 

Implements and vessels of copper, iron, stone, and earthenware are 
mentioned and must have been locally manufactured. Golden spoons 
and brass gongs were in use. Silver was also known. Upper and lower 
millstones, mortar and pestle, cups, ladles, dishes, spoons, and swords 
were required for domestic as well as ritual use. Baskets made of leaves 
are referred to. Katas or rush mats made of Vuina. grass were offered 
as seats for the married couple. The varieties of cloth worn were cotton, 
linen, woollen, silken, and hempen. That spinning and weaving were 
daily occupations of the people is clear from the rule that the initiated 
boy is to put on a garment spun and woven on the same day, and from 
the prayers offered to "Goddesses who spun and wove” (Apastamba 

524 



SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC CONDITIONS 


<SL 


IV. xo. io). A Chdtfa or spindle is mentioned. A flourishing dyeing 
industry may be inferred from the prescription of garments of different 
colours for the initiated boy . 

Many of the occupations, professions, arts, crafts, and industries have 
been already incidentally referred to in the previous sections (also cf. 
ante, Ch. XXIII, pp. 461-2). We may notice here the profession of the 
butcher, who was so indispensable in the animal sacrifice that there was 
actually a priest called Samitri who did the necessary slaughtering to 
the accompaniment of sacred verses. Manual labour was so highly 
prized that it was compulsory for a student as well as a householder 
(snataka). 


3. House-building and Means of Transport 

The fact that the Gjihya-sutras include the ceremony of house-building 
among sacraments to be performed by the rich and the poor alike, leads 
to the obvious inference that in those days of vast open spaces and long 
stretches of jungle, a site for a house and building materials were available 
to a poor man of the three higher classes at a nominal cost. The site 
should be undisputed property. It should be non-saline and with trees, 
herbs, or at least grass, growing thereon. It should not be hollow or 
undermined and be of the colour prescribed for the particular caste. 
From the directions given, we gather that a spacious house contained an 
assembly or drawing room, a provision-room, and a resting or retiring 
room, with a nursery and privy standing detached from the main building. 
Measuring the site, digging the pits for the posts, two of which were 
erected in each of the four directions, setting up the door-jambs and the 
gable, putting up the beams and the grass or thatch on the roof, 
are some of the operations detailed. The position of the main door is 
carefully specified. The setting up of the water-barrel—evidently an 
arrangement for water supply—is part of the house construction. The 
repairs and renovation of the house are to be effected every year with 
ceremony about the same time as the Divdli holidays of the Hindus. 
From the directions to erect huts arid enclosures in the course, of a day, 
it seems these could be improvised with ease. The consecration ritual for 
ponds, tanks, wells, covered reservoirs of water, and gardens, shows that 
these were public works for general use though they seem to have been 
constructed by individuals rather than by the state; for the ritual is of 
the domestic type. 

Bridges, roads, cross-ways, and squares where four roads meet are 
referred to. Among the means of transport may be mentioned the very 
popular, light two-wheeled wooden carriage (ratha). Horses and oxen 
(even cows occasionally) were the common draught animals, the elephant 
being employed for a state journey or a procession. Horses, asses, camels, 

525 




THE VEDIC AGE 

■^xid elephants were ridden for purposes of travel. Rivers were crossed' Ey" 
rafts and boats, and if necessary by ships. 


Qt 

•ssecl 


i. The list is given in Ckhandogya, 7. 1, 2 and is repeated several times in the 
following sections. The interpretation of the technical terms denoting different 
branches of knowledge is not always easy. Max Muller takes Brahtna-vidyci 
as three of the Vedangas (viz., &ikshd , Kalpa, and Chhatidus) ; Devajanci-vidyd 
as “the sciences of the genii, such as the making of perfumes, dancing, singing, 
playing, and other fine arts”; Pitvya as “the rules for the sacrifices for the 
ancestors”; and the Veda of the Vedas as grammar ( SBE , 1 , pp. 109—10), 


526 



GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 

I. ORIGINAL SOURCES 

(A detailed account of the literature of the age has been given in Chapters 
XII, XVI, XX, and XXIV. A select list of important texts, with translations, 
is given below. Further accounts of the individual texts will be found in 
Wintemitz History of Indian Literature , vol. 1 and the other Histories of Litera ¬ 
ture mentioned in section II, B of this bibliography.) 

Aitareya. Aranyaka: Text ASS. No. 37, Poona, 1898. Ed. with a trans. by 
A. B. Keith. Oxford, 1909. 

Aitareya Brdhmana: Ed, Th, Aufrecht. Bonn, 1879. 

Ed. K. S. Agashe. Poona, 1896. 

Trans, by. Keith. HOS, Vol. XXV. Cambridge, Mass., 1920. 

Apastambiya Dharmasutra: Ed. by G. Biihler (Bombay Sanskrit Series), 1892, 
1894. ' 

Apastamb'iya Srautasutra: Ed. by R. Gar be. Calcutta, 1882-1902. 

Arsheya Brdhmana: Ed. by A. C. Burnell. Mangalore, 1876. 

Ahaldyana Gphyasutra: Ed. A. G. Stenzler. Leipzig, 1864. 

Atharvaveda: Ed. R. Roth and W. D. Whitney. Berlin, 1S56. 

Ed, with S&yana’s Comm, by S. P. Pandit. Bombay, 1895-8. 

Trans, by W. D. Whitney. Cambridge, Mass., U.S.A., 1905. 

Trans, in part, M. Bloomfield. 5 BE, Vol. XLII. Oxford, 1897. 

Baudhayana Dharmasdstra: Ed. by E. Hultzsch. Leipzig, 1884. 

Baudhayana Grihyasutra: Ed. by R. Sbama Sastri. Mysore, 1920. 

Baudhayana Srautasutra: Ed. by W. Caland. Calcutta, 1904--23. 
Brihaddranyaka Upanishad: Ed. with trans. by 0 . Bohtlingk. Leipzig, 1889. 
Chhdndogya Upanishad: Ed. with trans. by 0 . Bohtlingk. Leipzig, 1889, 
Daivata Brdhmana: Ed. by Jivananda Vidyasagara. Calcutta, 1881. 

Gautama Dharmasutra: Text ASS, Tr. SBE, II. 

Gopatha Brdhmana: Ed. by Rajendralal Mitra and FI. Vidyabhushan. Calcutta, 
1872. 

Kapishfhala Katha Samhitd: Ed. by Raghu Vira. Lahore, 1932. 

Kdthaka Samhitd: Ed. by Von Schroeder. Leipzig, 1900-11. 

Kdtydyana Srautasutra: Ed. by Vidyadhara Sarma. Benares, 1933-7. 
Kaushitaki Brdhmana: Ed. by E. B. Cowell. Calcutta, 1861. 

Trans, by Keith. FIGS, XXV. Cambridge, Mass,, 1920. 

Khddira-Grihyasutra: Ed. by A. Mahadeva Sastri and L. Srinivasacharya. 
Mysore, 1913. 

Maitrdyani Samhitd: Ed. by Von Schroeder. Leipzig, 1881-6. . 

Nirukta: Ed. with Durgacharya's Comm, by V. K. Rajavade. Poona, 1921-26. 

Fid. and trans. by L. Sarup. Two vols. Lahore. 

Panchavimsa Brdhmana: Ed. by A. Vedantavagisa. Calcutta, 1869-74. 
Pdraskara Gfihyasutra: Ed. by Gopal Shastri Nene. Benares, 1926, 

5^7 




THE VEDIC AGE 

'igveda: Samhita and Pada text with Sayana's Comm. Ed. by F. Max Muller 
(second edn.). 1890-2. 

Samhita and Pada text with Sayana's Comm, critically edited by Vaidika 
Samsodhana Mandala, Poona. Four vols. 1933, etc. 

Trans, by H. Grassmann. Leipzig, 1876-7; R. T. H. Griffith. Benares, 1896-7; 
in part, by Max Muller. SEE. vol. XXXII, Oxford, 1891, and H. Oldenberg, 
SBE, Vol. XLVI. Oxford, 1897. 

Sdmaveda: Ed. with trans. by Th. Benfey. Leipzig, 1848. 

Ed. by Satyavrata Samasrami. Calcutta, 1873. 

Samavidhana Brdhmana: Ed. by A. C. Burnell. London, 1873. 

Samhitopanishad Brdhmana: Ed. by A. C. Burnell. Mangalore, 1877. 
Sdhkhdyana Aranyaka: Ed. by Friedlander. Berlin, 1900 (I—II); E. B. Cowell. 
Calcutta, 1861 (III—VI); A. B. Keith. Oxford, 1909 (VII-XV). 

Trans, by A. B. Keith. London, 1908. 

Sdhkhdyana Srautasutra: Ed. with Comm, of Varadatta-suta Anartiya and 
Govinda, by A. Hillebrandt. Calcutta, 1886-9. 

Satapatha Brdhmana: Ed. by A. Weber. London, 1885. 

, Trans, by J. Eggeling. SBE, XII, XXVI, XLI, XLIII, XLIV. Oxford, 
1882-1900, 

Shadvinvsa Brdhmana: Ed. by Jivananda Vidyasagara. Calcutta, 1881. 

Ed. by H. F. Eelsingh. Leyden, 1908. 

Taittirlya Brdhmana: Ed. by R. Mitra. Calcutta, i855~7°* 

Taittiny a Samhita: Ed. by A. Weber. Berlin, 1871-2; with the Comm, of 
Madhava, Calcutta, 1854-99. 

Taittiny a Upanishad: Ed. with Comm, of Sankara. ASS, fifth edn. Poona, 1929. 
Vdjasaneyi Samhita: Ed. with Malhdhara’s Comm, by A. Weber, London, 1852. 
Vam’sa Brdhmana: Ed. by A. C. Burnell. Mangalore, 1873. 

Ed. by A. Weber. Ind. Stud , IV, pp. 371 ff. 

Vasishfha Dharmasutra: Ed. by A. A. Fiihrer. Bombay, 19x6. 

Yajurveda: See Taittiriya Samhita, Kapishthala-Katha-Sariihita, Kathaka 
Samhita, Maitrayani Samhita and Vajasaneyi Samhita. 

Translations of Collected Works 

1. The principal Upanishacls have been translated by F. Max Muller in SBE, 

I, XV, and by R. A. Hume in Thirteen Principal Upanishads. Oxford, 
1921. 

2. The Grihya-sutras of £ankhayana,Asvalayana,Paraskara, Khadira,Gobhila, 

HiranyakeSin and Apastamba have been translated by H. Oldenberg 
in SBE, XXIX and XXX. 

3. The Dharma-sutras of Apastamba, Gautama, Vasishtha and Baudhayana 

have been translated by G. Buhler in SBE, II and XIV. 


II. MODERN WORKS 

A. Histories of Ancient India (which prominently deal with the Vedic Age ). 

1. Cambridge History of India. Vol. L Cambridge, 1922. 

2. Dxjtt, R. C.: History of Civilisation in Ancient India. London, 1893. 

528 



GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 

, Radiiakumud : Hindu Civilisation. London, 1936. 

4. Oldenburg, H.: Ancient India (second edn.). Chicago, 1898. 

3. Rapson, E, J.: Ancient India. Cambridge, 1914. 

6; Ra yc h. A [ jo hUR i, H. C. : Political History of Ancient India (fourth edn.). 
Calcutta, 1938. 

B. Histories of Literature 

1. Farquhar J. N.: An Outline of the Religious Literature of India. Oxford, 

1920. 

2. Frazer, R. W.: Literary History of India. London, 1898. 

3. He&ry, V.: Les Literatures de Unde. Paris, 1904. 

4* R-vNe, P. V.: History of Dharnuisdtra. Three vols. Poona, 1930, 1941, 1946. 
5 * Macdqnell, A. A.: History of Sanskrit Literature. London, 1900. 

Ay. Max Muller, F.: History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature (second edn.). 
London, i860. 

7. Olden®rg, H.: Die Literatur des alien Indien. Berlin, 1903. 

8 . Pischel, R.: Die indische Literahtr y {( Die OrientaUschen Literaturen,'* 

Die Kultur Gegmwar, I, yii. Berlin und Leipzig, 1906. 

9. Vaidya, C. V.: History of Sanskrit Literature , voL I: Sruti (Vedic) Period. 

Poona, 1930. 

10. Weber, A.: History of Indian Literature (Eng. Trans, by J. Mann and Th. 

Zachariae) (second edn.). London, 1882. 

11. W internitz, M.: History of Indian Literature (Eng. Trans, by Mrs. S. 

Ketkar), vol. I. Calcutta, 1927. 

C. General Works 

.1. Iyengar, P. T. S,: Life in Ancient India. Madras, 1912. 

2. Kaegi, A.: The Rigveda. Trans, by R. Arrowsmith. Boston, 1886. 

3. Macdonell, A. A. and Keith, A. B.: Vedic Index. London. 

4. Muir, J.: Original Sanskrit Texts. London. 

5. Oldenberg, H.: Rigveda forschung. Berlin, 1905. 

6. Pischel, R. and Geldner, K. F.: Vedische Studien. Stuttgart, 1889-1901. 

7. ROTH, R.: Zur Littemtur und Geschichte des Veda. Stuttgart, 1846. 

8. Von Schroeder, L r Indiens Literabur und Kultur. Leipzig, 1887. 

9. Zimmer, H.: Altindisches Leben. Berlin, 1879. 



529 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


CHAPTER III 

Archaeological Explorations and Excavations 

1. The publications of the Archaeological Survey of India, viz.: 

Reports by Cunningham (23 vols.). 

Annual Reports and Reports of Circles (since 1902-3). 
Memoirs (67 vols.). 

New Imperial Series . 

2. Archaeological Survey Reports of Indian States (Baroda, Gwalior, Hyderabad, 

Mysore, Jaipur, etc.). 

3. Gumming, Sir John: Revealing India's Past (London, 1939). (It gives a 

complete bibliography of Archaeological publications up to 1939.) 

4- Oikshit, Kv N.: j 1 he Progress of Archaeology in India in the past 25 years. 

5 ^ Dikshit, K. N.: An Outline of Archaeology in India (included in “An Out¬ 
line of the Field Sciences of India-' published by the Indian Science 
Congress, Calcutta, 1937). 

CHAPTER IV 

The Geological Background of Indian History 

1 Brown, j. C.: Catalogue of Pre-historic Antiquities in the Indian Museum 
at Calcutta , Simla, 1917. 

2. Burrard, Sir S. G. and Heron, A. M.: The Geography and Geology of the 

Himalaya Mountains. Delhi, 1932. 

3. Cunningham, A.: Ancient Geography of India. Trubner, London, 1871. 

4. De Terra, H. and Paterson, T. T.: Studies on the Ice Age in India and 

Associated Human Cultures. Carnegie Inst., Washington, 1939. 

5. Foote, R. B.: “Discovery of Pre-historic Remains in India/' Geol. Mag. 

London, I. X, 1873. 

6. Hayden, Sir H. N.: “Relation of the Himalayas to the Indo-Gangetic 

Plain and the Peninsula.” Rec. Geol.Surv . Ind.,v ol. XLIII, Pt. 2,1913. 

7. Mitra, P.: Prehistoric India. Calcutta University, 1927. 

8. Oldham, C. F.: “The Lost River of the Indian Desert,” CR> vol. LIX, 1874. 

9. Oldham, R. I).: “The Structure of the Indo-Gangetic Plains/’ Mem. Geol. 

Su-rv. Ind,, vol. XLI.I, 1917. 

10. Pilgrim, G. E.: “The Siwalik Primates and Their Bearing on the Question 

of Evolution of Man.” Rec. Geol. Surv. Ind ., vol. XLV, 1915. 

11. Wadia, D. N.: Geology of India. Macmillan, London (third edn.), 1939. 

12. Wadia, D. N.: “Post-Tertiary Hydrography of Northern India.” Naif. 

Inst. Sc. Ind.y vol. IV, 4, 1938. 

530 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


CHAPTER V 
The Geographical Background of Indian History 
Imperial Gazetteer of India. Oxford, 1907-9. 

Holdigh, T. IT.: India (Regions of the World Series). Oxford, 1905. 

Holdich, T. H.: The Gates of India, London, 1910. 

Mackinder, LI. J.: Eight Lectures on India. London, 1910. 

Morrison, C. A.: A New Geography of the Indian Empire. London, 1909. 

CHAPTER VI 
I. Flora 

1. Biswas, K.: Presidential Address. Sec. of Botany, Ind. Sc. Congress, 1943. 

2. Bart, B. C. : Agriculture and Animal Husbandry in India. Silver Jub. 

Session, Ind. Sc. Cong., 1937. 

3. Calder, C. C.: An Outline Vegetation of India. Silver Jub. Session. Ind. Sc. 

Cong., 1937. 

4. Chatterjee, D,: "Studies in the endemic flora of India,’ 7 JRASB(S), 

V, 19 ff. 

5. Das Gupta,'A.: Economic and Commercial Geography, 1941, 

6. Hooker, J. D.: A sketch of the flora of British India, 1904. 

7. Hooker, J. D.: Imperial Gazetteer of India, vol. I (Botany), 1909. 

8. Hooker, J. I), and Thomson, J.: Introductory Essay to the Flora Indica 

1855* 

2. Fauna 

1. Fauna of British India. 

2. Gharpurey, K. G., Lt.-Col. : The Snakes of India. Bombay, 1937. 

3. Imperial Gazetteer of India, vol. I. 1909. 

4. Rao, H. S.: An Outline of the Fauna of India. Calcutta, 1937. 

5. Salim Ali.: The Book of Indian Birds. Bombay, 1941. 

6. Whistler, Hugh: Popular Handbook of Indian Birds. London, 1935. 

CHAPTER VII 

Palaeolithic , Neolithic and Copper Age 
(Cf. also Bibliography to Ch. IV.) 

1. Brown, J. C.: Catalogue of Pre-historic Antiquities in the Indian Museum 

at Calcutta, 1917. 

2. Cammiade, L. A., and Burkitt, M. C.: "Fresh Light on the Stone Age in 

South-east India/ 7 Antiquity, IV (1930, pp. 327-39). 

3. Chakravarti, S. N.: The Pre-historic periods in India. JUB, X, Part I 

(1941). 

4. Chakravarti, S. N.: "An Outline of the Stone Age in India." fRASB(L) 

X, pp. 81-98, J K h 

5. Das Gupta, H. C.: "Bibliography of Prehistoric Indian Antiquities/’ 

JASB, XXVII, 1931, No. 1. 



531 



THE VEDIC AGE 

aliks of India and Early Man/' Early Man . 1939. 

7. De Terra, Hellmut, Movius and Hallam L.: “Research on Early Man 

in Burma/' Transactions of the American Philosophical Society, vol. 32, 
Part iii (1943), pp. 343 - 5 * 

8 . Foote: Indian Prehistoric and Protohistoric Antiquities , Notes on their 

and Distribution , 1916. 

9. Ghurye, G. S.: ‘*Megalithic Monuments,'' NIA, VI, pp. 26-57, 100 -39. 

10. Karve and San kali a : Preliminary Report of the Third Gujarat Expedition, 

Poona, 1945. 

11. Rea, A. R.: Catalogue of Prehistoric Antiquities from Adichanallur and 

Perumbair, 1915. 

12. San kali A, H. D.: Investigations into Prehistoric Archaeology of Gujarat , 

Sri-Pratapsimha Maharaja Rajyabhisheka Granthamala, Memoir 
No. IV; Baroda, 1946. 

See also Proceedings of the Science Congress, Archaeological Reports 

(see under Ch. III). 

CHAPTER VIII 

Race Movements and Prehistoric Culture 

x, Anderson, J. D.: Peoples of India . Cambridge, 1913. 

2. Bagchi, P. C.: Pre-Aryan and Pre-Dr avidian in India. Calcutta University, 

1929. 

3. Baines, A.: Ethnography. Strassburg, 1912. 

4. Caldwell: Comparative Grammar of the Dravidian Language. 

5. Caldwell: The Census of India (Reports for 1901,1911, 1931 >. * 93 *, * 94 *)• 

6. Chanda, R. P.: The Indo-Aryan Races . Rajshahi, 1916. 

7. Chatterji, S. K.: “Non-Aryan Elements in Indo-Aryan/' JGIS, II, 42. 

8. Chatterji, S. K.: “Dravidian Origins and the Beginnings of Indian 

Civilization .” MR, Dec, 1924. 

9. Crooke, W.: The Tribes and Castes of the North- West Provinces and Oudh. 

Calcutta, 1896. 

10. Guha, B. S.: An Outline of the Racial Ethnology of India. Calcutta, 1937. 

11. Guha, B. S.: Racial Elements in the Population (Oxford Pamphlets on 

Indian Affairs, No. 22; Oxford University Press, Bombay, 1944)* 

12. Iyengar, P. T. S.: Pre-Aryan Tamil Culture. Madras, 1930 

13. Risley, H. H.: Tribes and Castes of Bengal. Calcutta, 1891-2. 

14. Risley, H. H.: The People of India (second edn.). London,.1915. 

15. Thurston, E. and Rangachari, K.: The Castes and Tribes of Southern 

India. Madras, 1909-10. 

For a full descriptive bibliography on the question of non-Aryan elements 
in the civilization of India, cf. Constantin Regamey, “Bibliographic Analytique 
des Travaux relatifs aux Elements anaryens dans la civilization, et les langues 
de llnde” in BEFEO, vol. 34, 1935. PP- 429-566. 

532 




6 . De Terra, H.: “The Siw 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 

CHAPTER IX 
The Indus Valley Civilization 


6. 

7 - 

8 . 

9- 

ID. 

11. 

12 . 

13 - 

14. 

15 ' 

16. 

17 . 

18. 

IQ. 

20 . 

21 . 

22 . 

23- 

24. 

25 - 

26. 

27. 


Apte, D N.: Hindi-Sumeri Sanskriti (in Marathi). Poona, 1928. 

Aeavamuthan, T. G.: Some Survivals of the Earappa Culture. Bombay, 

Ayyar, R. S. V.: The Indo-Sumero-Semitic-EUtite Problems. Madras, 1932 

Banerji, R. D.: "Dravidian Civilization." MR, Sept. 1927 pp \04-r4 ' 
Nov. 1927, pp. 552-9. y /> n ■ j <f 

Banerji, R. D.: "The Indian Affinities of the Ainu Pottery.” TASB XXJ IT 
pp. 269-72. J J ’ ’ 

Banerji-Sastri, A.: Asura India. Patna, 1926. 

Banerji-Sastri, A ;: ‘‘Remains of a pre-historic civilization in the Gangetic 
Valley. JBHS, III, pp. 187-91. 8 

BEAS Af EY ' vvvw he Script of Mohenjo-daro, Harappa and Easter Island.” 
Man, XXXVI, No. 199. 

Bhandarkar, D. R.: "Siva of prehistoric India.” JISOA, V, pp. 74-7. 

Bhandarkar, D. R.: Some Aspects of Ancient Indian Culture. Madras, 1940. 

Billimoria; N. M. : "Excavations of prehistoric places in Sind ” JSI1 S' 
II, pp. 9-17. ‘ J ’ 

Billimoria N. M.: "The Script, of Mohenjo-daro and Easter Island.” 
ABU hi, XX, pp. 262-75. 

Brown, W. Norman: "The Beginnings of Civilization in India.” I AOS 
HX, bupp,, pp. 32-44. 1 

Cadell Sir P.: "Who are the Descendants of the People of Mohenjo-daro ?” 
Av.throp. Soc , Bom, Jub. Vol. , pp. 20-30. J 

Carleton, P.: Buried Empires. London, 1939. 

Chanda, R. P.: “The Indus Valley in the Vedic Period." MAS I No 21 
Calcutta, 1926. ’ ‘ 0 

CHANDA, R. P.: "Sind Five Thousand Years Ago.” MR, LII, pp. 151-60 

CHA V D *n 3 - ,wicr SU x 7 iVal °r f , the P#Storic Civilization of the Indus 
\ alle>. MAST, No. 41. Calcutta, 1929. 

Chaudhuri, N. M : "The Pamirian Alpines in the Indus Valley in Chalco- 
hthic Times.” CR, June, 1945. J 

Chaudhury, N. C.: Mohenjo-daro and the Civilization of Ancient India with 
reference to Agriculture. Calcutta, 1937. 

Child®, V. G.: New Light on the Most Ancient East. London, N.Y., 1934. 

Dikshit , K. N.: Prehistoric Civilization of the Indus Valley. Madras, 1939. 

Ehrenfels Baron Omar Rolf: "The Indus Civilization and Ethnographic 
Research in the Mediterranean Basin.” fSHS, IV, pp. 90-8. * 

FAbri, C. L.: "The Age of the ‘Indus Valley Civilization’." CS, VI, pp. 433-6. 

I'Abri, C. L.: "Un element mesopotamian dans l’art de l’lnde ” [A 
CCXVII, pp. 298-302. J ’ 

FAbri, C. L.: Exploration of prehistoric mounds in Baluchistan ” ABIA 
1929, pp. 14-8. 

FAbri, C. L.: "Latest Attempts to read the Indus Script." IC, I, pp. 50-6. 

533 


THE VEDIC AGE 


28. FAbri, C. L.: “Mesopotamian and Early Indian Art.” Etudes d } orientalisme, 

Paris, 1932, pp. 203-53. 

29. FAbri, C. L.: “The Punch-marked Coins: a survival of the Indus Civiliza¬ 

tion.” JRAS, 1935. pp. 307-18. 

30. FAbri, C. L.: “A Sumero-Babylonian Inscription discovered at Mohenjo- 

daro . IC, HI, pp. 663-73. 

31. Frankfort, H.: Archaeology and the Sumerian Problem. Chicago, 1932. 

32. Frankfort, H.: Cylinder Seals. London, 1939. 

33. Frankfort, H.: “The Indus Civilization and the Near East. ASIA, 1932, 

pp. 1-12. 

34. Friederichs, H. F.: Der Alte Orient . 1933. 

35. Friederichs, H. F., and Muller H. W.: “Die Rasseneiemente im Indus-Tal 

wahrend des 4. und 3. vorchristlichen Jahrtausend und ihre Verberei- 
tung.” Anthropos, XXVIII, pp. 383-406. 

36. Gadd, C. j.: “Seals of Ancient Indian Style found at Ur.” PEA, XVIII, 

pp. 1-22. 

37. Ganguly, K. K.: “A Note on the Nose-ornament in Mohenjo-daro.” IC, 

V, pp. 342-3. 

38. Goetz, H.: Epochen der indischen Kultur . Leipzig, 1929. 

39. Gordon, D. H. and Gordon, M. E.: “Survivals of the Indus Culture.” 

JRASB(L), 1940, pp. 61-71. 

40. Guha, B. S.: “New Light on the Indus Valley Civilization.” SC, IT, pp. 49 f. 

41. Hargreaves, H.; “Excavations in Baluchistan, 1925.” MASI, No. 35, 

Calcutta, 1929. 

42. Heras, H.: “Chanhu-daro and its Inscriptions,” St. Xaviers College Mag., 

m Feb. 1937. 

43. Heras, H.: “Further Excavations at Mohenjo-daro.” NR, Jan. 1939, 

pp. 64-75. 

44. Heras, H.: “Karnatalc and Mohenjo-daro.” KHR, IV, pp. 1-5. 

45. Heras, H.: “The longest Mohenjo-daro Epigraph.” JIH, XVI, pp. 231-8. 

46. Heras, IL: “Mohenjo-daro—The most important archaeological site in 

India.” JIH, XVI, pp. 1-12. 

47. Heras, H.: “Mohenjo-daro, the People and the Land.” IC, III, pp. 207-20. 

48. Heras, H.: “The Numerals in the Mohenjo-daro Script.” NIA, II, 

pp. 449 - 59 ' 

49. Heras, H.: “The Religion of the Mohenjo-daro People according to the 

Inscriptions.” JUB, V, pp. 1-29. 

50. Heras, H.: “A supposed Sumero-Babylonian Inscription discovered at 

Mohenjo-daro.” IHQ, XIII, pp. 697-703. 

51. Heras, IL: “Two Proto-Indian Inscriptions from Chanhu-daro.” JBORS , 

XXII, pp. 308-20. 

52. Heras, H.: “Tree Worship in Mohenjo-daro.” Anthrop. Soc Bom., jub. 

Vol., pp. 31-9. 

53. Heras, H.: “Were Mohenjo-Darians Aryans or Dravidians?” JIH, XXI, 

PP* 23-33. 

54. Hertz, A.: “The Origin of the Proto-Indian and the Brahma Scripts.” IHQ, 

XIII, pp. 389-99. 









BIBLIOGRAPHY 


*SL 


56 

57 

'58. 

59 ' 

60. 

61. 

62. 

63. 

64. 

es¬ 

se. 

67. 

68 . 

69. 

70. 

71. 

72. 

73 - 

74 - 

75 - 
76. 

77 - 

78. 

79 - 

80. 

81. 


HAvesy, G. de: .'Sur une Ecriture Oceanienne paraissant d’origfne 
neolithique. Eullctin de la Society Prehistorique. Francaise ioaa 
PP- 433 - 49 - ’ 

H£vesY, G. de: “On a Writing Oceanique of Neolithic Origin'' (Eng 
Version.) J1H, XIII, pp. r-17. b v f ‘ 

Hevesy, G. de: "Osterinselschrift und Indus-schrift.” OLZ XXXVII 
pp. 665-73. 

Hrozny, B.: 0 Nejstarslm Stehovdni Ndrodit A 0 Problems Civilisace 
Proto-Indicke. Praha, 1939. 

Hunter, G. R.: “Mohenjo-daro—Indus Epigraphy.” JRAS, 1932, pp. 466- 

Hunter, G. R.: The Script of Harappa and Mohenjo-daro and its Con¬ 
nection with other Scripts. London, 1934. 

.. Jayaswal, K. P.: “The Punch-marked Coins: a survival of the Indus 
Civilization." JRAS, 1935, pp. 720 f. 

Jayaswal, K. P.: “The Wikramkhol Inscription.” I A, LXII, pp. 58-60. 

Joseph, P.: "The Extent and Influence of the Indus Civilization.” TOR 
XI, pp. 246-50. 

Keith, A. Berriedale: "The Aryans and the Indus Valley Civilization ” 
Ojha Vol., Sect. I, pp. 58-66. 

Keith, Sir Arthur: "The Ancient Mesopotamia of India,” ILN, Dec. 19 
1931, pp. rooo-4. 

Law, N. N.: “Mohenjo-daro and the Indus Civilization.” THQ, VIII 
pp. 121-64. 

Luders, IT.: “Philologie, Geschichte and Archaeologie in Indien.” ZDMG 
N.F., VIII, pp. 1-20. 

LOders, H.: “Die Ausgrabungen von Mohenjo-Daro.” ZDMG, NS XIII 
p. 22 f. 

Mackay, E. J. PL: “Arts and Crafts in the time of Mohenjo-Daro.” I AT 
XHI, pp. 73-89. 

Magkay, E. J. IT.: "Bead Making in Ancient Sind.” JAOS, LVII 
pp. 1-15. 

Mackay, E. J. H.: Chanhu-daro Excavations (1935-36). New Haven, 1943. 

Mackay, E. J. H.: "Early Culture at'Chanhu-Daro.” Discovery, Sept iqhv 
pp. 286-9. ' ■ 

Mackay, E. J. H.:•“Excavations at Chanhu-Daro in 1935-36." APIA , X, 
pp. 20-4. 

Mackay, E, J. H.: "Excavations at Chanhu-Daro.” /RSX, 1937, pp. 527-45. 

Mackay, E. J. H.: Further Excavations at Mohenjo-Daro. 2 vols. Delhi, 1938. 

Mackay, E. J. H.: "Further Links between Ancient Sind, Sumef and Else¬ 
where.” Antiquity, V, pp. 459-73. 

Mackay, E. J. H.: The Indus Civilization. London, 1935. 

Mahirchand, Bherumal: Mahan-jo-Darof Karachi, 1933. 

Majumdar, N. G.: “Explorations irj Sind.” MAST, No. 48. Delhi, 1934 . 

Marshall, Sir John: Mohenjo-Daro and the Indus Civilization. 3 vols. 
London, 1931. 

Meriggi, Von P.: “Zur Indus-Schrift.” ZDMG, 1934, X II, pp. 198-241. 

535 





THE VEDIC AGE 



85 - 


86 . 

87. 


88 . 

89. 

90. 

91. 


92. 

93 - 


94. 

95 - 

96. 

97. 

98. 


99. 

100 


101 

102 
103 


IO4. 

XO5. 

I06. 


107. 

108. 


jtra, Panchanan.: "Racial and Cultural Interrelations between In 
and the West at the Dawn of the Age of Copper.” IHQ, X I, pp. 699-709. 

Morgan, J. De.: Prehistoric Orientate. 3 vols. 1925-7. 

Muj 1 fr H. W. and Heinz, E. F.: “Die Rassenelemente in Indus Anthropos, 
Band XXVIII. Wien, 1933 - 

Otto, E.: “Die Indus-Schrift. Ihre Entzifferangs-und Einordnungsversuche.” 
Zentralblattfur Bibliotek, Wesen. LIII, Heft 3. PP- 109-14. 

Petrie, Sir Flinders: “Mohenjo-daro." AE, June 1932. 

Piccoli, G.: “A Comparison between signs of the ‘Indus Script’ and Signs 
in the Corpus Jnscriptionum Etruscraum.” IA, LXII, pp. 213-5. 

Pran Nath: “The Scripts on the Indus Valley Seals, I and II. IHQ, VII, 
Suppl., pp. 1-52: VIII, Suppl., pp. 1-3 2 - 

Pkan Nath.: “The Script of the Indus Valley.Seals. JRAS, i 93 B PP- 
671-4. 

Pran Nath.: “Sumero-Egyptian Origin of the Aryans and the Rigveda. 
JBHU, I, pp. 303-58 

PrashAd, B.: “Animal Remains from Harappa.” MAS/, No. 51. Delhi, 
1936. 

Prashad, B.: “Cattle of the Indus Valley Civilization.” CR, Jan. 1935. 

Pusa'lker, A. D.: “Authors of the Indus Culture.” ABORT, XVIII, 
pp. 385-95. 

Rawunson, H. G. and Venkateswara, S. V.: “The.Indus Valley Civili¬ 
zation: Two Views." AP, 1934, pp- 84-90. 

Ross, A. S. C.: “The Direction of the Mohenjo-Daro Script.” MIA , II, 
pp. 554 — 8 . 

Ross, A. S. C.: "The Numeral Signs of the Mohenjo-Daro Script.” MAST, 
No. 57. Delhi 1938. 

Roy, Binode Bihaki: “Harappa and the Vedic Hariyupia. JBORS, XIV, 
pp. 129 f. 

Sankarananda, Swami: Rigvedic Culture of the Pre-Historic Indus. Vols. 
I—II. Calcutta, 1943, 1944. 

Sarkar, S. S.: “Disposal of the Dead at Harappa.” SC, III, pp- 632-4. 

Sarup. L.: “The Rigveda and Mohenjo-Daro.” POC, VIII, 1-22, also, 
1 C, IV, pp. 149-^68. 

Sastri, S. Srikantha: “Proto-Indian Ceramics.” IHQ, XVI, pp. 511-23. 

Sastri, S. Srikantha: Proto-Indie Religion. Bangalore, 1942. 

Sastri, S. Srikantha: "Studies in the Indus Scripts.’ QJMS, XXIV, 
pp. 224-30; 335 - 42 - . ^ „ 

Sastri, S. Srikantha: “Hieroglyphic Hattili and Proto-Indie Scripts. 
j BV, IV, pp. I-I 7 - 

Shembavnekar, K. M.: “The Identity of the Indus Valley Race with the 
Vahlkas.” IHQ, XII, pp. 477 “ 8 4 - 

Speiser, E. A.: "On some important Synchronisms in Prehistoric Meso¬ 
potamia.” AJA, XXXVI, pp. 465-71. 

Speiser, E. A.: Mesopotamian Origins. Philadelphia, 1930. 

Stein, Sir Aurel: "An Archaeological Tour in Waziristan and Northern 
Baluchistan.” MASI, No. 37, Calcutta, 1929. 





BIBLIOGRAPHY 


te in, Sir Aurel.' Archaeological Reconnaissances in N or th~ TV ester ft India 
and South Eastern Iran. London, 1937. 

no. Stein, Sir Aurel: ‘'An Archaeological Tour in Gedrosia." MASI, No. 43. 
Calcutta, 1930. 

nr. Stein, Sir Aurel : "An Archaeological Tour in Upper Swat and Adjacent 
Hill Tracts." MASI , No, 42. Calcutta, 1930. 

112. Stein, Sir Aurel: "The Indo-Iranian Borderlands: Their Prehistory in 

the Light of Geography and of Recent Excavations." JRAI f LX 1 V 
pp. 179-202. . 

113. Sur, A. K.: "Indian Script Palaeontology." CR, 1933. pp. 261-5. 

114. Sur, A. K.: "Origin of the Indus Valley Script." IHQ, IX, p. 582. 

115. Thomas, E. J.: "Interpretation of the Indus Seals. ’THQ, XVI, pp. 683-8. 

116. Thomas, F. W.: "Mohenjo-Daro and the Indus Civilization." TEAS, 1932 

PP- 453~66. (Review.) 

117. Vats, M. S.: Excavations at Harappa. 2 vols. 1940. 

118. Venkateswara, S. V.: "The Antiquities of Harappa and Mohenjo-Daro." 

AP, 1930, pp. 11-15. 

119. Waddell, L. A.: The Aryan Origin of the Alphabet; Disclosing the Sumero - 

Phoenician parentage of our letters ancient and modern. London, 1927. 

120. Waddell, L. A.: The Makers of Civilization in Race and History. London, 

1929. 

I2i„ Woolley, C. L. : The Sumerians, 1928. 

122. Woolley, C. L.: Ur of the Chaldees. London, 1929. 


CHAPTERS X, XI 

1 he Aryan Problem and Indo-Iranian Relations 


x. Brandenstein : Die erste indogermanischen Wanderung , Wein. 1936. 

2. Childe, V. G.: The Aryans. New York, London, 1926. 

3. Christensen, A.: Kulturgeschichte des alten Orients. 

4. Giles, G. P.: Articles in Encyclopaedia Britannica (Aryans, Indo-European 

Languages). 

5 * Herzfeld, E.: Iran in the Ancient East . 1941. 

6. Hirt-Festschrift: Heidelberg. 1936. 

7. Hirt, H.: Die Indogennanen, ihre Verbreitung, ihre Urheimat, uni ihre 

Kultur . Strassburg. 1905 and 1*907. 

8. Jackson, A. V. W.: Notes and Allusions to Ancient India in Pahlavi Litera¬ 

ture, etc. Festschrift Ernst Windisch (pp. 209-12). 

9. Meyer, E.: Geschichte des Altertums. 

10. Much, M.: Die Helmut der Indogermanen in Lichte der Urgeschichtlichen 

Forschung. Jena, 1904. 

11. Nehring: Studien Zur indegermanischen Kultur und Urheimat. 

12. Reinach, S.: VOrigine des Aryens . Paris, 1892. 

13. Spiegel, F. : Die arische Periode und ihre Zustande. Leipzig, 1887. 

14. Schrader, O.: Reallexikon der indogermanischen Altertumskunde. Strass¬ 


burg, 1961. 


537 




THE VEDIC AGE 



L 


15. SiSIrader, 0 .: Sprachvergleichung und Urgesckichte. Jena, 1906-7. (Eng. 

trans. by F. B. Jevons under the title Prehistoric Antiquities of the 
Aryan Peoples. London, 1890.) 

16. Schrader, 0 .: Die Indogermanen. Leipzig, 1911. 

17. Taylor, I.: The Origin of the Aryans, London, 1889. 

18. Tilak, B. G. : Orion. 

19. Tilak, B. G.: The Arctic Home in the Vedas. 


CHAPTERS XIII-XV 


Aryan Settlements in India and Traditional History 
(For Original Sources see under General Bibliography.) 
MODERN WORKS 


1. Banerji Sastri, A.: A sura India, Patna, 1926. 

2. Bhandarkar, D. R. : "Aryan Immigration into Eastern India. ’ AB 0 R 1 , 

XII, pp. 103-16. 

3. BhanDarkar, D. R.: “Lectures on the Ancient History of India,” Car¬ 

michael Lectures, 1918. Calcutta, 1919. 

4. Bhandarkar, D. R.: Some A spects of Ancient Indian Culture. Madras, 1940. 

5. Chakladar, H. C.: “Aryans in Eastern India in Rigvedic Age." MR, Jan. 

1930, pp. 40-44- 

6. Chakladar, H. C.: “Eastern India and Aryavarta.” IHQ, IV, pp. 84-101. 

7. Cunningham, A. : The Ancient Geography of India. Ed. by S. N. Majumdar. 

Calcutta, 1924. 

8. Das, A. C;: Rigvedic India. Vol. I. Calcutta, 1921. 

9. Dey, N. L.: The Geographical Dictionary of Ancient and Mediaeval India 

(second edn.). London, 1927. 

10. Dikshitar, V. R. R.: "Anthropo-Geography of Vedic India.” JMU, x6, 

pp- 23-37- 

11. Dikshitar, V. R. R.: “Aryanization of East India (Assam).” IHQ, XXI, 

PP- 29-33- 

12. Dutt, N. K. : Aryanization of India. Calcutta, 1925- 

13. Kirfel, W.: Das Purdna Panchalakshana. Bonn, 1927. 

14. Law, B. C.: Rivers of India. Calcutta, 1944- 

15. Law, B. C.: Tribes in Ancient India. Poona, 1943. 

16. Pargiteh, F. E.: Ancient Indian Historical Tradition. London, 1922. 

17. Pargiter, F. E. : Dynasties of the Kali Age. London, 1913- 

18. Pradhan, S. N.: Chronology of Ancient India. Calcutta, 1927. 

19. Rangacharya, V.: "Pre-Musalman India,” vol. II, Part I. Vedic India. 

Madras, 1937. 

20. Stein, M. A.: “Indo-Iranian Borderlands.” fRAI, LXIV, 179-202. 

21. Stein, M. A.: "On Some River Names in the Rigveda.” JRAS, 1917, 

pp. 91-9. 

22. Woolner, A. C.: “The Rigveda and the Punjab.” BSOS, 6, 549-54. 


538 


M!N©W 



CHAPTERS XII, XVI, XX and XXIV 
Language and Literature 

(See Histories of Literature under General Bibliography.) 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 



x. Arnold, E. V.: Vedic Metre. Cambridge, 1903. 

2. Bloomfield, M.: The Atharvaveda. Strassburg, 1899. 

3. Furst, A.: Der Sprachgebraiich der alteren Upanishads. G 5 ttingen, 1915. 

4. Hru; ebrandt, A.: Ritual—Litteratur. Strassburg, 1897. 

5. Macdoneix, A. A.: Vedic Grammar . Strassburg, 1910. 

6. Wust, Walter : Stilgeschichte imd Chronologic des Rigveda. Leipzig, 1928. 


CHAPTERS XVII, XXI, and XXV 
Political and Legal Institutions 
(For Original Sources see under General Bibliography.) 


x. Basu, P. : Indo-Aryan Polity. London, 1925. 

2. Beni Prasad: Theory of Government in Ancient India. Allahabad, 1927 

(Chs. I; II). 

3. Dikshitar, V. R. R.: Hindu Administrative Institutions . Madras, 1929. 

4. Ghoshal, U. N.: A History of Hindu Political Theories . London, 1923 

(Chs. I, II). 

5. Ghoshal, U. N.: History of Hindu Public Life . Part I. Calcutta, 1945. 

6. JayaswaL, K. P.: Hindu Polity. Calcutta, 1924. 

7. Jolly, J.: Recht und Sitte. Strassburg, 1896. (Eng. trans. by Dr. B. K. Ghosh 

under the title: Hindu Law and Custom. Calcutta, 1928.) 

CHAPTERS XVIII, XXII, and XXVI 
Religion and Philosophy 

(For Original Sources see under General Bibliography.) 

1. Barth, A.: The Religions of India. London, 1882. 

2. Barua, B. M.: A History of Pre-Buddhistic Indian Philosophy. Calcutta, 

1921. 

3. Bergaigne, A.: La Religion VSdique. Paris, 1878-83. 

4. Bloomfield, M.: The Religion of the Veda. New York, 1908. 

5. Das Gupta, Dr. S. N.: History of Indian Philosophy. 

6. Deussen, F.: The System of the Vedanta (Eng. trans.). Chicago, 1912. 

7. Deussen, P.: Philosophie des Veda , Leipzig, 1894. 

8. Deussen, P.: Die Philosophie der Upanishads. Leipzig, 1899. (Eng. trans. 

Edinburgh, 1919.) 

9. Hillebrandt, A. : Vedische Mythologie. Breslau, 1891-1902. 

10. Hopkins, E. W. : The Religions of India. Boston, 1895. 

11. Keith, A. B.: Religion and Philosophy of the Veda and Upanishads. Cam¬ 

bridge, Mass., 1925. 


539 


Ml »isr/fy 



THE VEDIC AGE 


*SL 


i6. 


*Jacponell, A. A.: Vedic Mythology. Strassburg, 1897. 

Monier-Williams, ML: Religious Thought and Life in India. London, 1891. 
Oldenberg, H. : Die Religion des Veda. Berlin, 1894* 

Radhakrishnan, Sir S.: History of Indian Philosophy. 2 vols. London, 
1923,1927. 

Ranade, R. D.: Constructive Survey of the Upanishadic Philosophy. Poona, 
1926. 


CHAPTERS XIX, XXIII, and XXVII 


Social and Economic Conditions 


(For Original Sourc.es see under General‘Bibliography.) 


Thought. 


2. 


3* 


4* 


Aiyangar, K. V. Rangaswami: Ancient Indian Economic 
■ Benares, 1934. ' ^ 

AItekar, A. S.: Education in Ancient India (second edn.), Benares, 1944. 
Apte, V. M*: Social and Religions Life in the Gfihya Sutras. Ahmedabad, 
1939* 

BAnerjee, S.: Hindu Law of Marriage and Stridhana. Tagore Law Lectures. 
Calcutta, 1896. 

5. Rasu, P. : Indo-Aryan Polity. London, 1925. 

6. Das, S. K.: Economic History of Ancient India. Calcutta, 1925. 

7. Jolly, J.: Reekie und Sitte, Strassburg, 1896. (English trans. by Dr. B. JL 

Ghosh under the title Hindu Law and Custom. Calcutta, 1928.) 

8. Samaddar, J. N,: Economic Condition of Ancient India , Calcutta, 1922. 

9. Sarkar, S. C.. Some Aspects of the Earliest Social History of India. London, 

1928. 

The Caste-System 


1. Baines, A.: Ethnography. Strassburg, 1912. 

2. Dutt, N. K.: Origin and Development of Caste in India. Vol. I. London, 1931* 

3. Gait, E. A.: "Caste" in ERE, III (19™). 

4. Ketkar, S. V.: The History of Caste in India. Ithaca, N.Y., 1909; London, 

1911. 

3. Muir, J.: Original Sanskrit Texts , vol. I. 

6. Olden berg, H.: In ZDMG , LI, pp. 267-90. 

7. Senart, E.: Les Castes dans Vlnde. Paris, 1896. 

8. Weber, A.: Indische Studien, X. 


540 


APPENDIX 

CHAPTER IX 

In the absence of any definite vestiges of a system of fortification in the Indus 
Valley excavations so far, it was naturally assumed that the Indus Valley 
civilization was politically and socially far ahead of the contemporary civiliza¬ 
tions in the West, and had developed "a democratic bourgeois economy 1 ' 
(ante, p. 170) devoid, of citadel rule. Recent excavations in Harappa, however, 
besides supplying other valuable data, have shown that the Indus Valley 
civilization had its fortifications and was as militant arid centralized as any 
of its day (Ancient India, No. 3, pp. 61 ft). 

In the mound towards the West at Harappa, rising 50 feet above the level 
of the plain, high projecting masses of decayed mud-brick indicate the presence 
of former defences. Recent digging has shown that a defensive wall with a 
basal width of 40 feet and a height of upwards of 35 feet, built of mud-bricks, 
stood on a great rampart 10 to 20 feet high consisting of mud and debris with 
a mud-brick core. The wall, externally revetted with a facing of baked brick, 
was reinforced at intervals by rectangular towers or salients representing an 
elaborate system of enfilade. There were probably two gateways, one on the 
western side and the other at the northern end, the latter representing the 
main entrance. The defences fall into three main periods of construction: the 
original baked brick revetment was rebuilt after a long period of weathering 
and other damage, and the north-west corner was considerably thickened. This 
new work was built with complete bricks, unlike the older work which was 
constructed largely of brickbats. During the next period, the north-west corner 
was reinforced by an additional salient, and two entrances of the western 
gate system were wholly or partially blocked. Finally, roughly-built dwellings, 
constructed above a layer of debris and associated with the intrusive ceramic 
of a later period, came to occupy the western terraces. 

The cuttings across the defences enable us to trace the origin, development 
and decline of the Harappa culture. It appears that after a preliminary occu¬ 
pation of the apparently unwalled town, associated with a variant or alien 
culture, the Harappan people built a citadel with imposing defences. These 
were reconditioned after a considerable time during the heyday of the Harappa 
culture, when craftsmanship w&S its height. The period of decline is seen 
in the further reinforcement of the reconstructed fortifications and the blocking 
of a gateway, indicating that the city was on the defensive. Finally, a part 
of the site, above layers of the debris, was occupied by inhabitants of an alien 
culture. 

situation of Harappa and Mohenjo-daro, pre-eminent among numerous 
prehistoric sites between the Arabian Sea and the foot of the Simian Hills, 
already indicated that the Harrappa civilization was of a centralized type 
similar to those in Sumer and Egypt. In both, the detached mound on the 
west is the hi ghest and most imposing in the site, roughly a parallelogram 
in shape, approximately 400 yards long and 200 yards wide. The mound at 
Mohenjo-daro is known as the stupa mound and includes such remarkable 
structures as the Great Bath, Collegiate Building, and the Pillared Hall, which 
find no parallel elsewhere in these cities. It may reasonably be assumed that 
the mound w?,s a centre of religious or administrative life on a large scale. 

541 


THE VEDIC AGE 



<SL 


ounterpart of this mound at Harappa, almost identical in size and 
'orientation, is not a mere coincidence, and the assemblage, in its close vicinity, 
of a serried line of barracks or cooly quarters, working platforms and granaries, 
suggests a centralized and disciplined citadel rule. Whether the government 
was in the hands of a priestly order, as was often the case in Sumer, or of 
a ruler of royal standing, it is not yet possible to say. 

Dr. Acharya considers Mohenjo-daro, with its irregular shape, to correspond 
with the Dronaka fortress of the Manasara’s plans (B. C. Law Volume , Part IT, 
p. 281). It is not yet definite whether the fortifications surrounded the entire 
area of the town or were confined only to the west. In the latter case, the 
probable reasons may be that the important buildings were grouped on that 
side and that the villagers feared attacks from the west. 

Recent excavations of a cemetery of the Harappa culture present yet another 
analogy between the cities of the Indus and the Euphrates. The dead were 
buried in an extended position with their heads towards the north, and 
surrounded by large quantities of pottery of normal Harrappan type. Grave- 
pits were 10 to 15 feet in length, to '10 feet in width, and were dug to a 
depth of from 2 to 3 feet from the contemporary surface. The grave furniture 
occasionally included toilet objects, besides pottery and personal ornaments. 
In some graves were found a few decayed animal bones besides a human 
skeleton. There was one coffin-burial, at present unique in India, but common 
at Ur, Kish and other places in Mesopotamia in the third millennium b.c. 
The skeleton, enclosed in a reed shroud, was placed within a wooden coffin, 
7 feet long and 2 to feet wide. The presence of a lid is suggested by streaks 
of sticky black substance running over the toes, and the use of preservatives 
is inferred from the light green substance found over and around the body. 
This burial, no doubt, represents the customary mode in Sumer during con¬ 
temporary and previous epochs; but it is not yet known whether this isolated 
burial was of an Indian or of a Sumerian merchant in India. 

It may be mentioned that Dr. Wheeler does not include "post-cremation 
burials" (ante, p. 189) as a method of the disposal of the dead in the Indus 
Valley, "since," according to him, "there is no evidence whatsoever that these 
have anything to do with human burial" {Ancient India, No. 3, p. 83). 


SELJECT BIBLIOGRAPHY (1946-1948) 

1. Barua, B. ML: "Indus Script and Tantric Code." B. C. Uw Vol me, 

Part II, pp. 461-7. 

2. Barua, B. M.: "Trends in Ancient History." CR. t Feb. 1946, pp, 79-93, 

3. Heras, H.: Min-Kan . Bombay, 1947. 

4. Mack AY, E.: Early Indus Civilizations. London, 1048. 

5. Piggott, S.; " 1 he Chronology of Prehistoric North-West India." Ancient 

India , No. i, pp. 8-26. 


542 


misr/fy 



INDEX 


<of Indus Valley peoples, 174 
see also Food 
Dighay 11,323 
Dighiti, 322-3 
Dihang, river,, 94 
Dikshit, Kao Bahadur, 190 
Dillpa II, 289 
Diuaric race, 143-4 
.Dipper, Brown, 116 
Dtrghalaraas, 287-8 
Divakara, 321-2 

Divisions of country, in Vedic literature, 
Divodasa, 246, 293, 306-7 
Doab, Ganges-Brahmaputra, 94 
Ganges-Jumna, 94 
Indus -1 heb im, 123 
Dog, and mesolithic burials, 134 
Domestication of animals, 84 
Drainage system, Indus Valley, 172 
Drama, 392, 496, 519 
Draupadi, 300-1 
Dravidian speech-family, 145 
Dravidians, 142, 143, 154 

and Indus Valley civilization, 193 
press, in Brahman as, 458-9 
j^pin Sutras, 520-1 
in Vedic age, 393 
of Indus Valley peoples, 174 
Drishadvati, river, 242 
Driti, 320 

Drona, 294, 300, 303 ' 

Druhyu(s), 245, 24.7, 252, 274, 278-9, 

3 ° 7 > 3° 8 
Drummond, 131 
Drupada, 294, 300, 3 ° 3 . 3 2 5 
Dry forests, 109 
Ducks, 116 
Dutriasana, 303 
Durdama, 279 
Durmukha, 325 
Duryodhana, 300 ff. 

Dushfarltu Paurbsaya.ua, 428. 
Dushyanta, 270, 292 
Dust-storms, 125 
Dvapara age, 294, 31 1 
Dvaravati, 77 
Dvimldha., 292, 3°7 
Bvimukha, 325 
Dvyairaya-kavya, 49 
Dyaus, 363, 364 
Dyavaprithivi, 365 

Eabani, 188 
Eagle, 116 
Earth Mother, 1:58 
movements, 88-9 
Earthquakes, 87-8 
East Indies, 103 
Echinoderms, 1 19-20 
Education, in Brahmanas, 454 ~ 6 
in Rigveda, 391-2 
in Sutras, 513-17 
■'•‘.v '• --w.. 443 ' 


252' 




306, 


Elam, 179, W 
El-A mania, 204 
Elephant, 113, 217 

in Indus Valley civilization, 185 
Elephanta caves, 65 
Eliot, 260 

Elliot and Dowson, 62 
Enkidu, 188 

Eranvei, 218-19 

Eshnunna, 192 
Ethics, see Morality 
Evans, Sir Arthur, 165 
Everest, Mount, go 
Evergreen flora, 198-9 
Evil eye, 150 

'Fabri, Dr., 192 
Fa-hien, 60-1 

Faience, in Indus Valley, 185 
Falcon, it6 

Family, in Brahmanas, 449 
in !Rig vei ?a, 353 * 3 8 4 
in Sutras, 506 ff. 

Fatehgarh, 137 
Father Gods, 158 
Fauna, palaeolithic, 125 
Fergusson, 67 
Fibre crops, in-ia 
Ficus , cult of, 147 
Figurines, Indus Valley, 180 
Finnish language, 208 
Finno-Ugrian speech family, 153. *55 
Fire, domestic, 4981 5 °h 
sacrificial, 374 > 377 > 

Fir 112 Shah Tughluq, 53 . 65 
Fishes, 117-18 

Five Rivers of Punjab, 85-6, 93-4 
Flake incl ustries, 12 4 ff, 

Flat fish, 118 
Fliet, 268 

Flood, Great, 270, 271-2 
Flor, 211 
Fly-catchers, 115 
Flying fish, tx8 
Food, in Brahmanas, 457 “ 8 
in Sutras, 5 i$~zo 
in Vedic age, 393 
Foote., Bruce, 74* 127, 129-32 
Forests, 108-10 
Forts, 356 

Fortunatov’s law, 335 
Frankfort, Henri, 192 
Freshwater vegetation, no 
Friedrich, J., 206 

Frogs, 1x7 

Fruits, 112 r r 

Funeral hymns, VeoF, 34 8 ~9 
Furniture, in Brahmanas, 462 
Indus Valley, 176 
in Upanishads, 495-6 
Future life, in Brahmanas, 445-6 
in Rigveda, 381 

riahre r dd 







THE VEDIC AGE 


d , 2 & Q , 285 
^ajpfaeans, 207 
ambling, 392; see also Dicing 
Game birds, 116 

Games, in Indus Valley civilization, 176 
Gana, 352 

Gandak, river, 86, 91, 94, 251 
Gandhara, 279, 302, 307, 308, 320, 328 
Gandharis, 248, 258 
Gandharva, 222 
Gape6a, 162 

Ganga, river, in Rigveda, 242; see also 
Ganges 

Ganges, river, 94, 97, 103 
Bhaglratlia and, 288 
origin, 85-6 
reversal of flow, 85 
valley, 100 

,, „ Bronze Age finds, 136-8 

Ganjam, 130 
Gargl Vachaknavi, 513 
Gargya, 3x0 
Gargva Balafci, 494 
Gariala, 124 
Garo hills, 91 
Gariida, 163 
Gastropods, 1x9 
Gathas, 203, 220-3 
Gauda, 1 ox 
Gaudavaho, 49 
Gauri, river, 243 
Gauri Sankar, see Everest 
Gantama, 483, 485, 487 
Gayatrl, 367, 391 
Gazelle, 114 

Geldner, 246, 248, 253, 428 
Genealogies, Vedic and Furanic, 306 ff. 
Germanic home theory of Indo-Europeans 
208-9 

Ghadhara, 127 
Ghaggar, river, 242 
Gharial, 116 
Ghatotkacha, 303 
Ghats, Eastern and Western, 95-6 
Ghazi Shah, 195 
Ghazipur, *96 
jibbon, ri3 
jiddalur, 131 
Giles, 210 
Gilgit, 144 
river, 93 
in vraja, 323-4 
glaciers, Himalayan, 81 
Bass, in Indus Valley civilization, 185 
loats, 113-14 
Godana, 521 

Godavari river, 83, 96, 101 
^ods, classification, 362-4 
Dravidian elements, i6x ff. 

Father and Mother, 158 
^gra, river, 94 

1, use in Indus Valley civilization, 184 
al, river, 92, 242-3 
L t, river, 242^-3 


Gordon, Major, 133 
Gorkhali/167 
Gotra, 450 
Gdtze, 206, 207 
Graeco-Bactrians, 57 
Gram, 107, i n 
Grama, 356 

Gramani/431, 451, 487-8 
Grebes, 116 
Greek language, 208 
Grierson, 259 
Griffith, 242 
Gphastha, 493 
Grihya-siitras, 474-7, 497 ff. 
Ground-nuts, in 
Grouse, sand, 116 
Guebres, 144 • 

Guha, B. S., 142, 145 
Gujarat, 51, 57, 74, 82-3, 87, 98, 144 
monolithic culture, 133-4 
Northern, 100 
palaeolithic man, 127-8 
Prehistoric Expedition, First, 127 
Gujo, 195 

Gulshan-i-Ibrahlml, 62 
Gumti, river, 94 
Gundla Bhrameshvarara, 131 
Gungeria, 137 / 

Giintert, H., 209 
Guntur, 130 

Gupta art’ Negrito elements, 147 
Guptas, coins, 58 
pottery, 72 
Gwalior, 97 
archaeology in, 73 


<SL 


Hadda, 77 
Hadol, 127 

Haihaya(s), 274, 278-80, 282-4, 287, 319 
326 ^ J 

Hair styles, in Indus Valley civilization, 
174-5, 196 * 
in Vedic age, 394 
Hakra, 73 
Halakundi, 130 
Hall, 208 

Hamilton, Dr. Buchanan, 65 
Hammira-kavya, 49 
Hammiramada-mardana, 51 
Hanuman monkey, 113 
Hanumant, 163-4 
Haorna cult, 223, 375 

Harappa, 58, 70-1/156, 158, 169 ff., 243, 
541; see also Indus Valley civilization ’ 
“Harappa culture/' 191-2 
Hardwar, 94 

Hari^chandra, 270, 285-6 
Harivamsa, 310 
Hariyupiya, 243 
Haro, river, 124 
Harpoons, Bronze Age, 137 
Harsha-charita, 49 
Harsha-vardhana, 58, 61 
Harwan. 71 










TNDEX 


x 




Hjlsbnapura, 251, 253, 292, 302, 32CW 
Hawk, 116 
HcineGeldern, i 37 ~ 8 
Hemachandra, 49 
Hemp, 112 

Henotheisxn, 362, 37 s 
Hepit, 158 
Heras, Rev. EL, 156 
Herat, 92 

Herodotus, 59, * 5 8 i 223 
H.eron, ti 6 
Herring, It8 
Hertel, 244 

Herzfeld, 205-6, 218 
Hevesy, W., 152-3 
Hill forests, 109 
Hillebrandt, 219, 227, 247-9 
Hilsa, 118 
Himalayas, 90-3 

and earthquakes, 87 
fee Age in 81-2 

Hlnayana Buddhism, in Burma, 76 
Hindu Kush, 90, 92 
Hindustan, Plain of, 93*74 

Hiranyanabha, 323 
Hirpura, 127, 133 
Hirt, 205, 207-8 
Hittite language, 206-7 > . 

Hittites, 204 ft, 218 

Hioen Tsang, 47- 8, 51, 60-1, 325 

Hog, 114 

Horn a, 160 

Hoofed animals, T13 

Hooghly, 94 

Hooker, 108 

Hoopoe, 115 

Hopkins, 244, 247 

Hornbill, i 15 

Horse, 113 

and Indus Valley civilization, .194 
Hospitality, in Brahmanas, 449 
in Rigveda, 384 
in Sutras* 517 
Hotri, 442, 502-3 

Household implements, Indus valley, 
Houses, in Indus Valley culture, iji- 
in Brahmanas, 462 
in ‘Rigvedic age, 399 
in Sutras, 525 
Huna inscriptions, 69 
Hunter, Dr., 133, 183 
Hunting, in Brahmarias, 461-2 
in Rigveda, 398 
'Busing, 244 
Hutton, J. H., 141 
Huvishtapura, 71 . 

Hyderabad (Deccan), archaeological 

174 

palaeolithic man, 129 
Hyderabad (Sind), 195 
Hypergamy, 450, 433 * 5°9 

Ibis, 116 
T bn Batuta, 63 


176 

•2 


<8L 


sites, 


11a, 272 

Immortality, 446 

Implements, of Indus Valley culture, 179 
Xndargarh, 127 
Indigo, 112 

Indo-China, 77, 103-4 
Indo-Europeans, original home, 202 if. 
Indo-European speech family, 143, 201 
Indo-Iranians, early traces, 204 ff. 
original home, 218 
relations, 218-24 
Indonesia, 77, 148 
Indonesian speech, 149 
Indra, 221-2, 349; 3 & 3 > 37 °~ J 
Indraprastha, 301 • 3?o, 32.7 
Indrota Daivapa baunaka, 309-10 
Indus, river, 93~4 
origin, 85-6 
source, 93 
Indus valley, to 

Indus Valley culture, 70, 71, 169 If.; see als< 
lylohenjodaro 
authors of, 193~5 
connections, 196-7 
decline, 197 
extent, 19 5*^ 
fortification in, 541 
script, 190-1, 202-3 
survivals, 197 

Industries, in Veclic age, 397 ~ 8 

Inheritance, in Sutras, 491-2 

Injra, 124 

Insectivores, 114 

Insects, 119 

Interest rates, 492 

Inter-Glacial I, 123 

Invaders, Indian reaction to, 104—5 

Invertebrates, 118-20 

Ippatam, 130 

Iran, early, see Indo-Iranians 
plateau of, 90™ 1 
Irrigation, in Rigvedic age, 399 
Irulas, 143 
Isila, 75 

I-tsing, 60-1 

Ivory, use in Indus Valley culture, 185 

Jacana, 116 
Jackdaw, 114 
Jacobabad, 193 
Jahangir, 62 
Jahnu, 278, 295 

Jaina-RSjatarahginl, 51 
Jaintia hills, 91 
Jaipur, 127 

archaeological sites, 73—4 
Jala Jatukarnya, 484 
Jamadagni, 270, 277, 280-1, 312 
Jamalgarhi, 71 
Jammu, 123 
Jana, 356-7 

Janaka(s), 255, 276, 326-7, 455 - 6 * 469, 5*3 
Janamejaya, 274 
Janameiaya Durbuddhi, 294 

20Q-T 








WlST/fy 



xvv 


THE VEDIC AGE 



_ >ruti, 453 
„ arasandha, 296, 29 8, 301, 310, 323 
Ja takas, 1 54 
Jaulian, 69 
Java, 77 

Jayartes, river, 218, 243 
Jay, Blue, 1x5 
Jayachandra, 260 
Jayadhvaja, 283 
Jayadratha, 302 
Jayasimha, 49, 31 
J ha, Ganganatli, 215 
Jhangar culture, 191-2 
Jhelum, river, 86, 91, 93* 243-3 
Jhukar, 193 
culture, 191, 192 
Jo tiara) a, 51 

Jones, Sir 'William, 65, 201 
Jowar, toy, in 
J umna, river, 85-6, 94 
jungle fowl, 116 

ustice, administration of, 337, 429, 433 
488 ft. 
ute, 112 

'otisha-vedanga, 478 




Kabul, river, 92, 243 
Kadars, 143 
Kadur, 130 
Kagzi, 182 

Kailasa, Mount, 93, 94, 251 
Kaimur range, 97 
KaiSika, 284, 293 
Kakshasena, 320 
Kala, 440 
Kalara, 326 
Calawan, 68 

Calhana, 49-51, 71, 268 
Kali age,, see Kaliyuga 
<ali Sindh, river, 94 
CaliAga(s), ioi , 279, 284, 302, 319, 328 
ialinjar, 97 

valiyuga era, 268-70, 303-4, 311, 319 
Calla, L. D., 215 
'allar, 124 
allur, 136-7 
almashapada, 289 
ulnagini, 117 
Kalpa-shtias, 474-7 
Kama, 440 

Kamboja(s), 258-60, 314, 328 
Kambuja, 77 
Kampil, 252 
ICampIla, 252, 325 
Kampilya, 325 

Kamsa (Yadava king), 296, 298 
Kamsa (king of Kosala), 323 
KanaresO script, 53 
Kanclianjangha, 90 
Kandahar, 92 
Kandivli, 129 
Kangra, earthquake, 87 
fanlieri caves, 63 
anishka, 50, 68 


Kanyakubja, 273-4, 277-8, 283-5 
Karakoram range, 81, 93 
Karala Janaka, 326 
Karandhama, 287 
Karandikar, 282 
Karatoya, ri ver, 251 
Karjan, river, 128 
Karkofaka Naga, 283 
Karkotnagar, 74 
Karman, 382, 470, 495 
Karna, 299, 302-3 
Karnali, river, 86 
Kan;ia t a, 101 
Karnatak, 74, 129-30 
Kartavirya, 281 
Kafuna, 166 
Karfisha(s), 272, 302 
Kashmir, 49-31, 215 
archaeological sites, 71-2 
earthquake, 87 
glaciation, 81 
plateau, 91 
Kasia, 68 

Ka£i(sj, 254-5, 274, 278, 283, 285-6, 293, 
302, 310, 322, 327 
Kassites, 205 
Kasu, 352 

Ka$yapa(s), 276, 281, 288 
Kathaka Upanishad, 496 
Kathiawar, 57, 87, 98 • 

Katmandu, 91 
K&tyayana, 312, 418, 473 
Kaundinyapura, 257 
Kauravas, 295, 300 ff. 

KauSambT, 72, 232, 254, 320-1 
Kaushitaki IJpanishad, 495 
ICavasha, 453 
Kavasha Ailfisha, 307, 309 
Kaveri, river, 96, 101 

Keith, A. B., 206, 232, 244, 304-6, 404, 427 
499 

Kekaya(s), 258-9, ±79, 302 
Ken, river, 94 
Kerala, 313 
Ke&ms, 258-9 
Khafaje, 175 
KharoshthI script, 53 
KhasI hills, 91, 107 
KhafvaAga, 289 
Khila-suktas, 226, 

Khirthar mountains, 90, 92 
Khunder, river, 130 
Khiislialgarh, 124 
Khyber Pass, 92 
Klkafas, 248-9 
Kikkuli, 204 
Kimpurushas, 276 
King crow, 1x5 
Kingfisher, 115 
Kings, 352 ff. 
election, 428 
in Dharmasuiras, 483-6 
in later Samhitas, 426-7 
succession, 353 






INDEX 



. . .. Hiz steppe, 2 ii 
-Smkau rhiicft 51 
Kish, 175, 179, 185 
Kistna, river, see Krishna 
Kite, x 16 
vKittel, 165 
Knowledge, 496 
Koel, 115 
Kohi Sultan, 88 
Kohtras, 170 
Koiar, 1 $4 
Kolhapur, 74 
Kols, 100, 158 
speech, 145, 149-53 
type, 148 
Kondapur, 74 
Itonkan, 96, 129 30 
Konow, Sten, 250 
Kora, 116 

Korttaiaiyar valley, 131 
Kosala(s), ioi, 254-5, 262, 283, 290, 302, 
312, 322-3, 327 

KosaladevI, 323 
Kosam, 252, 321 
Kosi, river, 86, 91, 94 
Kofc, 127 
Kotlvarsha, 73 
Kotla Nihang Khan, 196 
Krait* 117 

Kratha (Bhlma), 284, 293 
Kratus, 276 
Krauncha, 251 
Kami, 279 
Krimila, 279 
Kripa, 300, 303 
KrKami, 222 

Krishna, 162, 296-9, 302, 311, 315 
Krishna, 130 
river, 96, 101, 130 
river, valley, 75 
Krishnapuram, 131 
Krishnaswami, V. !>., 130-1 
Krita age, 311 
Kritakshana, 326 
Kritavarma, 297, 302 
Kritavarman, 303 
Kritavlrya, 280, 282 
Kriti, 326 
Krivis, 253 
Kroshtp, 274 
' Krurau, river, 242-3 
Kshatriya tradition, 304 if. 

Kshatriyas, annihilation by Kama, 281, 283 
and colonization, 314-15 
in Brahmarias, 451, 508 
in Upanishads, 468-9 
Kshemaka Rakshasa, 279 
vshemaka of Kausambi, 321 
'shudraka, 302 
Xubha, river, 243-4 
Kui, 155 
Kukura, 297 
tula, 356, 449 
Ktiliana, 129 
Kulli, t95 

T ^nmaon, glaciation in, 8x 


I > | 

Kumarapala, 49, 51 
Kumarapala-charita, 49 
Kunar, river, 144 
Kundikeras, 283 
Kundina, 257 
Kunti, 296,7297 

Kuntis, 261 ; 

Kurnool, 130, 131 
caves, 83-4 

Kurram, river, 92, 242-3 
Kuru(s), 246, 252-3, 262, 295, 303, 309-10, 
319 ff., 427 ; 

Kurujarigala, 295 
Kurukshetra, 261, 295, 302 
Ku£a, 291, 296, 300 
Kusadhvaja, 291 
Kushanas, coins, 58 
pottery, 72 
Kudika, 284 
Kusinagara, 68 
Kuvala&va, 275 

Lac insects, 1x9 
Ladakh, glaciation, 81 
Lakshmana, 290-1 
Land-grants, 53-4, 43 6 
Land ownership, 358, 434-6 
Langhnaj, 74, 132-3, *35 
Langur, 113 
Lark, 115 
Lassen, 244, 257 
Lafa, 101 

Laterite, 84 -5, 107 

Lauhitya, river, 94 

Lava, 291 

Lavana, 293 

Law, Dr., 275, 322 

Law, in Dharmasutras, 482 tf. 

Legends, pre-Aryan, 165-6 
Lemurs, 113 
Lentils, in 
Leopard, 113 

Levalloisian tools, 125-6, 131 
Level, changes of, 88-9 
Ldvi, Sylvain, 149-50 
Lihga, 163, 187 
Lingadahalli ,130 
Linseed, 167, in 
Lion, 113, 217 

Lithuanian language, 202, 207-8, 216 

Littoral vegetation, no - 

Lizards, 1 17 

Locusts, 119 

Lohumjo-daro, 195 

Lomapada, 284, 290, 293 

Loris, 11.3 

Ludwig, 242, 243, 246, 248, 353, 403 
Luh.it, river, 94 

Xmnar dynasty,' 273-5, 278-9, 284-6, 292-3, 
3°6 

Lushai hills, 91 
Luvian, 206 
Lycians, 158 

Ma, 158 

McCrindle, J. W., 60 




THE VEDIC AGE 


nell, A. A., 306, 368 

E. J. H„ 173, 178-9, 192, 194 
Mackerel, 11S 
Madhu, 289, 293, 458 
Madhupur jungle, 89 
Madhyadesa, 72 
Madra, 302 
Madrakas, 279 
Mach as (tiibe), 258 

Ma \as presidency, archaeological sites,75 
palaeological finds, 130 
Madrf, 296 
Madura, 130 

Magadha, 101, 296, 302, 312, 319; 323-5, 328 
Magadlias, 255, 262 
Magic, in Atharvaveda, 438-9 
in sacrifice ritual, 499 ff,, 504-5 
Magpies, 114 

Mahabharata, 48, 166, 268-9, 274, 281, 
300 ff., 306 ff., 320-1 
war, 197 

Mahadeo hills, 95, 133 
Mahakosala, 322-3 
Mahamanas, 279 
Mahanadl river, 96 
Mahapadma Nanda, 269, 325 
Maharashtra, 74', 101 
Mahasthana, 73 
| Mahavrata, 443 
Mahavfishas, 258-9 
1 Mahayana Buddhism in Bur in a, 76 
Mahl, river, 98 
Mahishmant, 278 
Mahishmati, 278, 282, 302 
Mahmud of Ghazni, 61 
Maikal range, 95, 97 
Mainaka, 251 
Mainamati hill, 73 
Maithilas, 319, 327 
Maitrayapiya Upanishad, 496 
Maitreya Soma, 306 
Maitrl, 166 
Maize, 111 

Majumdar, N, G., 170, 195 
Makhad, 124 
Makrari coast, 92 
Malabar, 144 
coast, 88, 96 . 

Malakpur, 124 
Malaprabha river, 129-30 
Malava(s), 58, 74, roi, 302 
Malay Peninsula, Xndiaji influences, 77 
Malaya, 104 

Negritos in, 146-7 
Malayalam country, 143 
Malini, 284 
Mallika, 3Z3 
Malwa plateau, 97, 100 
Mammals, 113-14 
migrations of, 84 
Manaar, Gulf of, 97 
Manasa Sarovara, 25 
Manasarowar, lake, 93 
Manasasarovara, lake, 93 
Manchar, lake, 170 
MSndhatri, 270-2, 276, 277-9, 306 


Maneru valley, 130 
Mango-bird, 115 
Mango-fish, 118 
Mangrove forests, 110 
Manipur plateau, 91 
Maniyar Math, 69 
Manley, 131 
Manslaughter, 490 
Manu Raivata, 271 
Manu Svarochisha, 271 
Manu Svayarabhuva, 270-1 
Manu Tatnasa, 271 
Manu Uttama, 271 
Manu Vaivasvata, 269-70, 271-2 
Maori culture, 209 
Marathas, 100, 104 
Marichis, 276 

Marriage, in Brahmanas, 452-4 
in Rigveda, 388-91 
in Sutras, 510 ff. 

Marshall/Sir John, 68, 70, 73, 193-4, 203 
Mart and, 72 

Marudvjidha, river, 243 
Marus, 252 
Marusthala, 252 
Maruts, 370-2 
Marutta, 287, 292 
Maruwardwan, river, 243 
Maski, 74 
A 1 Mas’udi, 60 
Matariivan, 363 
Mathura, 72, 307, 325 
Matsya(s), 254, 302, 307-8 
Mattiuaza, 204 
Maurya empire, 102 
Maya, 340, 380, 495 
Mayna, 114-15 
Mayurbhanj, 129 

Measurement Systems, Indus Valley, 178 
Media, 205 

Medicine, in Brahmanas, 459 
in Indus Valley culture, 178 
in Sutras, 522; 
in Vedic age, 394-5 
Mediterranean race, 142-4, 154 ff. 
Megalithic burials, S. India, 75 
remains, 138 
Megasthenes, 59-60 
Meghna, river, 94 
Mehatnu, river, 243 
Mehi, 195 

Mekran, submergence, 88-9 
Melanesians, 142, 148 
Menhirs, 163 
Merutuhga, 51 

Mesolithic man, remains, 132 ff. 
Mesopotamia, 153, 191-2 
Metal ware, in Sutras, 524 ■ 
working, in Rigveda, 397 
Metals, introduction of, 136 
Metempsychosis, in Brahmanas, 445-6 
Meyer, Eduard, 205-7, 218, 249 
Micoquian industry, 131 
Micro! iths, .132 
Mibintale, 77 
Milk products, 457 


556 







INDEX 


fhj> 


<SL 


M 0 et, nr 
great, 107 

Mlmamsa philosophy, 226 
Minhaj-ud-din, 62 
Mirpur Khas, 71 
Mitanni, 204 
Mithila, 276, 327 
• Mitra, Dr. Rajendra Lai, 67 
Mitra (Mithra), 221, 363, 366-7 
Mitra rulers (Panchala), 38 
Mitrasaha, 289 
Mitrayu, 306 
Mlechchhas, 260-1, 314 
Mohenjo daro, 58, 59, 7°> *35, *56, 158, 
169 fi. 

age of culture, 19 t -- 2 
arts and crafts, 180-5 
buildings, 170-2 
economic life, 179 
funerary customs, 189-91 
population, 172 
religion, 185-9. 
social life, 172-9 
I Mobra. Moradu, 69 
Mo Her, 212 
Molluscs, 119 
Monarchy, 352-3, 386 
Moneylending, 461, 492 
Mongoloids, 142-3, 167 
Monism, 379 
Monitor lizard, 117 
Monkey-god, 164 
Monkeys, 113 
Mon-K timers, 148 
speech, 149 

; Monotheism, 378 - 9 > 444 
Monsoon forests, 109 
Moorhen, 116 

Morality, in Brahmanas, 445 
in Sutras, 505, 5x8 
■fffi Mother Goddess, 158 

in Indus Valley culture, 186-7, 194 
Motichandra, 260 
Mountain forests, 109 

t Mo use-deer, 114 
1;; Muchipas, 260 
11 Muchukunda, 278 
Mud Skippers, 118 
'• Mudgala, 293, 306-8 
^ Muhammad Qasim Firishta, 62 
Muhammad Tughluq, 63 
m Muir, J., 244, 388 
, Mujavant, 241, 258 
hills, 216 

• M 1.1 1 I.) waraka ,74 
rMula Pass, 92 
t Miilaka, 289 

Muller, F. Max, 201, 209, 243-4, 475 
Mullet, 118 
■fi'Miiltan, 215 

M 1 ida speech-family, 145, 149- 53 
145, 148 
Mungi, 129 
115 

Makhab-Lit-Tawarikh, 62 
hidabad, 94 


163, 


WM 

si- 


Murukan, 162 
Mushika, 260 
Music, in Brahmanas, 456 
in Sutras, 518-19 
in Vedic, age, 392 
Musk-deer, if3 
Mustard, m 
Mutibas, 260, 262, 314 
Mycenaean artifacts, 165 ' 

Greece, 208 -m, 

Mysore, archaeological sites, 75 
plateau, 96 

Myths, pre-Aryan, 165-6 
proto-Australoids and, 151 
in Rigveda, 361 

Nabhagas, 272 
Nabhagodishta, 272 
Nabhancdishtha, 272, 276, 435 
Nachiketas, 471, 496 
Naga hills, 91 
worship, 189 
Nagar, 74 

Nagarj unikoiida, 75 

Nagas, 142-3. Mb, 278, 287, 313, 320, 328 

Nagasahvaya, 25.x 

Nahusha, 273-4, 3°6 

Naimisha forest, 252 

Nakula, 296, 300 

Nalanda, 69 

Names, brought from Iran, 219 
Nanda Devi, 90 
Nandas, 319 
Nandikanama pass, 131 
Nandu, xi.8 

Nandur Madhmcshwar, 129 
Nanga Parbat, 90 
Narikavacha, 289 
Narishyanta (son of Mttnu), 272 
Narishyanta (son of Marutta), 291 
Narmada, river, 73, 83, 95, 97, 98, 251, 279 
valley, palaeolithic man in, 128 
Narsinghpur, 128 
Nasatyas., 222 
Nava, 279 
Navarashtra, 279 
Navasahasahka-charita, 49 
Navigation, in JRigveda, 244 
Nayachandra, 49 
Negrais, Cape, 91 
Negritos, 142-3, 146-7 
language survivals, 147 
Nehring, 209, 21 x 
Nellorc, 130-1 

Neolithic man, remains, 134 If. 

Nepal, 51, 91, 144. B >7 
Nepah. 167 

Nereis, 120 
New Guinea, 146 
New Zealand, 209 
Newars, 167 
Nichakshu, 321 

Nlchyas, 257 , 

Nicobarese, 148 
Nidaghatta, 130 
Nightjar, 115 


ain 








THE VEDIG AGE 


fi 


_ 292, 302 

Nilapurana, 50 
Nile Valley, 128 
Nilgai, 114 

Nilgiris, 81, 95>- 96, 101 

Nimi, 275-6 

Nimsar, 252 

Ninniyur, 130 

Nirukta-Vedanga, 478 

Nishada(s), 154, 156, 257, 261-2, 302, 313 

Nishadhas, 257 

Nishka, 394.. 396, 461 

Nizarn-ud-din Ahmad, 62 

Nordics, 142-5, 211 

North-West Frontier Province, archaeo¬ 
logical sites, 71 
Nriga, 279 
Nushki desert, 88 
Nyamti, 130 

Occupations, in Brahmanas, 461-2 
in Bigveda, 397-8 
Ocean, in Brahmanas, 461 
in post-I^igvedic period, 251 
in Itigveda, 244, 396-7 
Officers, royal, 357, 431-2, 486 
Oil seeds, 11 i 

Oldenberg, H., 206, 228, 232, 246, 256 
Oostapalli, 130 
Opium poppy, 112 
Optimism, in Rigveda, 382 
Oraons, 145, 152, 153 
Qrdeals, 357, 434, 436 
Oriole, Golden, 115 
Orissa, 73 

palaeolithic man, 129 
Orissa hills, 96, iox 
Ornaments, in Brahmanas, 459 
in Indus Valley culture, 175 
in Vedic age, 394 
Orsang, river, 83, 128 
Owls, 116 

Oxus, river, 218, 244 
Oysters, 119 


Padam-Pawaya, 73 

Padas, 334 

Padma, river, 94 

Padmagupta, 49 

Padma vat I, 73 

Pagan, 76 

Paharpur, 73 

Pahlavas, 314 

Paithan, 74 

P 5 ka offerings, 499 

Pakthas, 245, 247 

Palaeolithic man, remains, 83, 123 

Palaeo-Mediterraneans, 143 

Palas, 58 

Palayans, 143 

Palghat gap, 96 

Palk Strait, 97 

Palms, 109 

Paloncha, 129 

Pamirs, 90, 205-6, 2x8 

Panchajanal?., 247, 356 


ff. 


Pailchajanas, 306 

Paflchala(s), 58, 246-7, 253, 262, 293-4, 302 
306, 3x9, 325, 427 
origin of name, 293 
Panchamarhi, 133 
Panchanad, see Five Rivers 
Panchavirhsa Brahmana, 320 
Pandavas, 296, 300 ff. 

Pandu(s), 296, 304 
Pandya, 101, 313 
Pangolin, 114 

I^anini, 304, 312, 405, 416-18, 477, 524 

Panipat, 100 

Papis, 248-9 

Panjkora, river, 144 

Pantheism, in Upanishads, 497 

Panther, 113 

Paradas, 314 

Pci rah jay a, 275 

Parasnath, 81 

ParaSurama, 270, 280-2, 285, 289, 312 
Paravatas, 248 

Pargiter, F. E., 48, 164, 251, 256, 267, 269, 
*75, 3 ° 4 > 305 , 307 » 308, 311 
ParichakrS, 251, 325 
Parihaspur, 72 

Parlkshit, 269, 295, 303-4, 310, 319-20, 4x5 
Parishad, 484 
Parriishtas, 477 
Par j any a, 363, 372-3 • 
hymns to, 343-4 
Parnakas, 249 
Parrots, 115 
Parsis, 144 
ParSus, 248 
Parthians, coins, 57 
Partridge, 1x6 
Parusfinl, river, see Ravi 
Pastimes, Indus Valley culture, 177 
Pataliputra, 68, 195, 324 
Patan, 74 

Patafijali, 2 to, 233, 254, 406, 478 

Paterson, T. T., X30-1 

Patkoi hills, 91 

Patna, see Pataliputra 

Pauravas, 274, 277-8, 294-7, 3x9-21 

Peafowl, 116 

Pearl fishing, 119 

Peas, 111 

Pebble tools, 124 ff. 

Pedhamli, 127 
Pegu, 76 
Pelican, 116 
Penka, 201, 202, 209 
Perch, 118 

Periano Ghundal, 195 
Peripatus, 119 

Penplus of the Erythraead^m, 60 
Personification, 361, 375 “ 6 f| 

Perumbair, 138 
Perungulam, 138 
Peshawar, 92 
museum, 71 

Phallic worship, in Indus Valley culture, 
187 

Philippines, 146 


558 






INDEX 


shphy, in Atharvaveda, 439 -40 
yupj/pan isbads, 469-71 
; netics, 333 ft:, 473-4 
PJhudera, 127 
Pigeons, 116 

Piggott, Stuart, 136, 137 
Pig-sticking, 1.14 
Pijavana, 308 
Pilgrim, 84 

Pillars, Asokan, 52-3, 65-6 
Plflgala, 478 

Pipal tree, 112, 186, 188 
Piprahwa relic, 169 
Pir Panjel range, 124 
Pigachas, 250, 276 
Plaksha Prasravana, 25 1 
Plantation crops, tlx 2 
Plants, flowering, 108 
Plateau, Indian, 9,5-8 
Pleistocene period, 80 ft. 

Pliny, 60 
Plough, 40 
Pochard, 116 
Pokorny, 209 
Polo, Marco, 63 
Poloimaruwa, 77 
Polygamy, 390, 51 1 
Polynesians, 148 
Pomfret, 1 r 8 

Pondicherry, peat deposits, 88 
Potali, 327 

Pottery, classification, 72 
Indus Valley culture, 182 
introduction, 148 
Potwar, river, 86, 123 
Prabhakara, 277 
Prabandha-Chintamani, 51 
Prabandha-ko^a, 5r 
Prachlnagarbha, 271 
Pradhan, Dr., 307 
Pradyota, 324, 326 
Pradyota Mahasena, 321 
Pragjyotisha, 302 

Prajapati, 426, 429, 439, 443, 445, 447, 

Prajya Bh&tta, 51 

Pramati, 292 

Prapa, 440, 494-5 

Prasad, Beni, 426 

Prasastis, 53 -4 

Prasenajit, 322-3 

Pratardana, 285 

Pratlhara dynasty, 54, 38 

Pratikas, 227 

Pratlpa, 295 

Pratisakhyas, 473 

Pratishthana, 74, .273, 274 

Pratyagrata, 296 

Pravahapa, 469 

Pravahana Jaivali, 321 

Prayag, 86 

PreSoan industry, 124 
Prey, Birds of, 116 
Priests, sacrificial, in Sutras, 502 ff. 
Primitive tribes, surviving, 100 
Prinacp, James, 53, 65-7 
Prishadhra, 272 




Prishata, 294-5 
Prithi-Vaiiiya, 460 
FpthivT, 186, 363, 364, 375 
Prithu (Maim), 271 
Frit bus, 248 
Ppithviraj a -charita, 4 9 
PrithvlrajA-vij aya, 49 
Priyavrafca, 271 
Prome, 76 

Property, law of, 434-5, 492 

Proto-Australoids, 142-3, 147-54 

Proto-Egyptians, 133 

Protozoa, 120 

Provinces, botanical, 108 

Przyluski, J„ 149, 153-4, 163 

Ptolemy, 60 

Piija, 160-1 

Pulahas, 276 

Pulakegin II, 54 

Pulastyas, 276 

Pulika, 323 

Pulindas, 260, 262, 313-14 
Pulses, in 

Punch, 123 

Pimdra(s), 261-2, 279, 284 
Pundravardhana, 73 
Punishments, 357, 433-4, 475, 489-90 
and caste, 509 
Punjab, archaeology in, 7r 
early man in, 123 ff, 
microlithic culture, 133 
plain, 94, 97 
province, 100 
rivers, 85 -6, 93-4 
Pur, 356, 398 

Puranas, 48-9, 151-2, 165, 267 ff. 
historicity, 304 ff. 

Purohita, 354, 431-3. 45*. 4 8 3 ~ 4 > $o2 

Puros, 260 

Puru, 274, 306-7 

Purukutsa, 246, 278, 306, 308 

Pururavas, 272, 273, 315, 345 

Purus, 245-6, 252 

Purusha, 380-1, 385 

Pfishan, 363, 367, 399 

Pushkalavatl,,68 

Pushkara, 391 

Python, X17 

Pyu, 76 

Quail, ii6 

Quartzite implements, 123 ft. • 

Race, and language, 201-2 
classification of Indian peoples, 141 ft'. 
Racial types, Mohenjo-daro, 173 
Racing, 392, 456-7 
Raghii, 289 
Rahula, #22 
Raikva, 469 
Rainfall, 107 
Rairh, 74 

Rajagriha, 69-7°. 323, 324, 328 
Rajaputra, 428 
Rajas, 352 
Raja^ekhara, 51 


<SL 


550 





THE VEDIC AGE 


.^uya sacrifice, 426-7, 430-3, 443 
^_^atarangii;i, 49-5 1 

Rajendra Chola, 102 
Raj ghat, 72 
Rajgir, 68, 69, 323 
Rajmahal hills, 97 
Rajmahal Hill tribes, 143 
Rajput chronicles, 63 
Rajputana, 63, 97 * 100 
archaeological sites, 73-4 
megalithic monuments, 138 
palaeolithic man, 127-8 
desert, 86-7, 92 
Rajputs, 100, 104 
Rakshas, 250 
Rakshasas, 290, 3 * 3 > 3*5 
Ralluvagu, 131 

Rama, 270, 290-1, 294, 311, 3 I 4“ I 5 
legend, 163-6 
ParaSurama, 280-1 
Rama-charita, 49 
Ramapala, 49 

Ramayaiia, 49, 113, 268, 281, 290 

Ranchi, 138 

Ranha, river, 218 

Rape, hi 

Rapti, river, 251 

Rasa, river, 243 

Rashtrakutas, 58 

Ras-Mala, 51 

Rathltaras, 272 

Ratnins, 432 

Ravana, 282-3, 290 

Ravi, river, 86 , 93 , * 4 *~ 3 , 3 ° 7~ 8 

Rawalpindi district, 123 

Rayachoti, 130 

Raychaudhuri, El. C., 260, 309, 323, 326 
Rea, 138 

Rebirth, doctrine of, $%i -2 
Red hair, 210 

Regions, geographical, 98 ft. 

Regur soil, 107 

Religion, Dravidian influence, 161-4 
Indo-Iranian, 219 
m Indus Valley culture, 185-9 
Vedic, 159-60 
Renou, 222 
Reptiles, 116-17 
Republics, 352 
Reva, river, 251 
Revottaras, 251 
Rewah, 128 
Rhinoceros, 113 
Rice, hi, 151, 217 
Richika, 280, 285 

Rigveda, 157, 162, 164, 186-7, * 93 ~ 4 > 2 ° 3 ” 4 i 
217, 219, 225 - 9 » 3 l2 > 352 4 2 6 h. 

classification of hymns, 340 ff. 
geographical names, 241-5 
historical value, 305 ff. 
language, 333 
place of composition, 244 

tribes in, 245-5° 

BijraSva, 384 
Riksha, 292 
Ripufijaya, 323, 325 


<SL 


Rishis, 314 -15 
Risley, Sir Herbert, 141 
Rita, 365. 379 / 3 8 * 

Ritual, Aryan and Dravidian, 160-1 
Ritudhvaja, see Vatsa 
lUtuparna, 289 
River worship, 188-9 
Rivers, in post-Rigvedic period, 251 
in Vedic texts, .241-4 
of North Indian plains, 82 
of North India, changes in, 85-6 
Robin, 115 
Rodents, 114 
Rohita, 286 
Rohtas, 97 

Rokytno swamps, 211 
Roller, 115 

Rome, contacts with, 74 » 75 
Roodrar, 130 
Root crops, 112 
Roppa, 133 

Roth, 242-3, 247, 256, 259 
Rubber, 112 

Rudra, 162, 203, 363* 3 ^ 4 , 37 ** 439 / 443~4 
Rupa, 349 
Rupar, 71 

Russia, South, as home of Indo-Europeans, 
209, 212 

Sabarae, 260 
Sabaras, 260, 262, 314 
Sabarmati, 130 
river, 83, 98 
valley, 74, 127 
Sabha, 354 - 5 / 4 * 9 , 4 8 3 
Sacrifice, in Rigveda, 376-8 

in Samaveda and Yajurveda, 441-2 
in Sutras, 497 ~ 5°5 
Sadamra, river, 251 
Sadiya, 94 

Safed Koh mountains, 90 
Sagara, 279, 284, 286-7, 311 
of Ayodhya, 270 
Sagileru, river, 131 
Sahadevi, 294, 296-7, 3 °°~ 3 , 3 ° 7 , 3*3 
Sahasrajit, 274 
Saliet Mahet, 68, 322 
Salir-i-Bahlol, 71 
St. Martin, 242 

Sakala recension of Rigveda, 226-7 

§akalya, 22 7 

Sakas, 57-8, 272, 314 

Saketa, 322 

Sakti, 285 

Sakuni, 302-3 

Sakuntala, 285 

§akya, 322 

Salamander, 117 

6almali, 112 

Salsette Island, 129 

Salt, 21.7 

Salva(s), 254, 302 
Salya, 3°*“3 
Samans, 498 
Samati, 292 




INDEX 


Buddhism, 61, 493 
in Afghanistan, 77 
in Burma, 76 
at Taxila, 69 

Buddhist sites, archaeological, 68 
Madras, 75 
Buffalo, early, 84 

Buhler, 392 ... 

Buildings, of Indus Valley civilization, 
170-3; see also Houses 
Bulbul, 114-15 
Bundelkhand, 97, 100, 128 
Bundi, 127 
Buntings, 115 
Burgess, Dr., 67 

Burial customs, Iran and India, 223 
Indus Valley, 189, 342 
Burials, mesolithic, 134 
Burkitt, 131 

Burma, archaeology in, 76 
Burzahom, 133, 138 
Buxar, 195 
Buzzard, 116 

Caland, W., 234 
Calcutta, 94 
earthquake, 87 

University, Excavations by, 73 
Caldwell, Bishop, 159 
Cambay, Gulf of, 96-7 
Cambodia, 77 
Camel, 84 
Camraiade, 130-1 
Camplgnian culture, 133 
Canning, Lord, 67 
CanoesS, 148 

Cappadocia, 204-5, 206 
Cardamom hills, 95. 96, 101 
Carnivora, 113. 

Carp, xi8 

Carpentry, in Rigveda, 397 
Carts, in Indus Valley civilization, 177 
m ijigveda, 399 % 

Caste, in Br&hmanas, 449-52 
and criminal law, 509 
in A vestas, 388 
in Rigveda, 384-8, 397 
in Sfttras, 507-to 
Castes, mixed, 509 
Castor oil. in 
Catfish, 118 
Cattle, 113 

in Brahmanas, 460 
early, 84 

in Rhgveda, 395-6 
in Sutras, 523-4 
Caucasus, 137 
Cauvery, river, see Kaveri 
Cave-dwellers, 83-4 
Celts, in Asia Minor, 207 
neolithic, 135 
Central Highlands, 95 

India, archaeolo^' 'al sites. 


Centum-satem split, 207 
Cereals, m 
Cerebrals, 333 
Ceylon, 96-7, 159 

archaeological sites, 77 
Rama in, 291 
Chachnama, 51 
Chakladar, 243 
.Chakshusha, 271 
Chaiukyas, 58, 101 
Cham bal, river, 94 
Chameleon, 117 
Champa. 286, 293 
Champa, 77, 293, 321, 3 2 8~9 
Chand Bardai, 49 
Chanda, 256 

Chanda, Rama Prasad, 141 
Chanda Pradyota, 324 
Clian^ala speech, 154 
Chandalas, 249 
Chandana, 328 
Chandi Lara-Jongnang, 77 
Chaodi Sewu, 77 
Chandrabala, 328 
Chandrabhaga, river, see Chenab 
Ckandragupta Maurya, 102 
Chandraketu, 291 
Chand ravali, 75 

Chanhu-daro, 171, 175,. ^2, 191-2, 195 
Chaoraukh, 124 

Charpentier, Jarl, 160 „ 

Charsadda, 68 

Chatter jee, 108 

Chattisgarh plain, 96 

Chaulukyas, 51 

Chauntra industry, 126-7 

Chedi(s), 248, 284, 296, 302 

Cheetah, 113 

Chellean tools, 129 

Chenab, river, 86, 93, 242-3 

Chen-tamizh, 156 

Chera(s), iox, 257 

Chhandogya Upanishad, 321, 434, 469, 470- 
L 495/513 

Chhandas-Vedahga, 478 
Chin Hills, 91 
Chinese travellers, 60-1 
Chingleput, 130-1 
Chinkara, x 14 
Chital, 1x8 
Chitoor, 130 

Chitpavan Brahmans, 144 
Chitral, 144 
Chitral, river, 92, 144 
Chitrahgada, 295 
Chitraratha, Yadava, 274-5 
hittagong Hills, 143 
Chittang, river, 242 
Chola, 101, 313 
Chola inscriptions, 54 
kings, 103 
Chorda fees, 118 
Chota Nagpur, xoo 

95, 97 

,114 



Ml Nisr/f 


THE V EDIC AGE 



Chuda-karman, 521 
Chunar, 97 
Chyavana, 453 

Chyavana Pahchajara, 307, 308 
Clactonian tools, 1^5, 126, 129 
Classes, social, in Indus Valley civilization, 
179 

Cleanliness, 518, 522 
Climate, 107 
effects, 104 
Clothing, see Dress 
Cobra, 117 
Coconut, i i2, 148 
oil, in 

Coeienterates, 120 
Coflee, 112 
Coimbatore Gap, 96 
Coins, 56-8, 63, 67, 461, 324 
Colgong, 97 

Collins, Mark, 160, 164 
Colonies, Indian, 103-4 
Columella shell, 185 
Comilla, 73 

(1 >Communion, in sacrifice, 501 
Comorin, Cape, 96 
Condiments, 112 
Conti, Nicolo de', 63 
Coorg, 144 
Copper age, 136-8 
Coppersmith, Indian, 1x3 
Corals, 120 
Cormorant, 116 
Coromandel coast, 88, 96 
Cosmetics, in Indus Valley civilization, 
* 75-6 

in Sutras, 521 
Cosmogonic myths, 131 
Cosmogony, Vedic, 379 
Cotton, 107, 112 
Counting system, 164 
Cow, cult of, 163, 395, 460, 324 
Cowries, 119 
Cranes, 116 

Creation, 379-80, 444-5 
Crete, 158, 179, 197 
Crocodiles, 116 
Crops, 110-12, 523 
■ Crov **4 
Cru^ ceans > IT 9 
; > Cry^tHine soils, 107 
l Cte&s, 59 
Cuckoo, 115 
; Cubiapah, 130, 131 

ChK, proto-Australoid elements, 151-2 
• - Cult-words, Indo-Iranian, 221 
Cultivable land, area, no 
Cultivated plants, 1x0-12 
Cultivation, proto-Australoids and, 148 
ilture elements, Dra vidian, 158 ,ff. 

Negrito, 147 

oroto-Australoid, 148-51 
•tures, language and racial, 145 
mingharn, Gen. Alexander, 67 
>-marks, 136 

3Q6, 461, 524 


<SL 


Cutch, earthquake, 87 
Rann of, 86-7, 98 
submergence, 89 
Cybele, 158 

Dabar Kot, 195 
Dadhivahana, 321, 328 
Daftars, 64 
Dahae, 249 
Daityas, 313 
Daiva-gods, 220-1 
Daji, Dr. Bhau, 67 
Dama, 291 
Damoh, 12 8 - 
Danastutis, 347, 352 if. 

Danavas, 313 
Dancing, 392, 456, 518-19 
Daiidaka, 275, 290 
Danube Valley., 137 

Dasarajfia, 242, 243, 245-6, 270, 306, 307, 
. 309 , 347 

Da^iaratha, 289-90, 293 
Dasas, 156-7, 249-50, 313, 354-5 
DaSariia, 302 

Dasyus, 156-7. 249-50, 313, 354-5 

Datta Atreya, 288 

Davids, T. W. Rhys, 260 

Dayal, 115 

Dead, cult of, 499 

Debts, 357-8 

Deccan, archaeological sites, 74 
College Research Institute, 74 
colonization of, 312, 3x4 
drainage pattern, 85 
plateau, 95-7, 100-1 
Deciduous flora, 109 
Decimal system, 178 
Deer, 114 
Delhi, 100 
earthquake, 87 
Deltas, Ganges and Indus, 82 
Del wad, 127 

Demons, in Rigveda, 376 
Deopara, 54 

Desert, Rajputana, 86-7 
De Terra, H., 8r, 127, 128, 135 
expedition, 71 
Deussen, 494, 497 
Devapi, 295, 485 
Devaraj Vasishtha, 288 
Devarata, see Sunalriepa 
Devavridiia, 297 
Devika, river, 215 
Dharma, 430, 505 
Dharmarajika stupa, 69 
Dharma-sixtras, 475, 482 fl, 501 
Dharsh takas, 272 
Dharwar district, 129 
Dhaulagiri, 90 
Dhok Pathan, 126 
Dhrishfa, 276 

Dhrishtadyumna, 294, 302-3 
Dhritarash fra, 296, 301 

TNV. o *7T 




C 5 f|: 

alin- 


- JTkamsoja 


Showing local &tribai names 
in Vedic literature and the 
Chaicolithic sites in Sind 


M PAKTH ’.^i 


(MAHAyniSA^. 


•^DRUHYU 


Chaicotithic Sites .... A 


faVASA/ 


turghma 


^Se^an avn^-^Tpi p i ansha 

amb** 

SALVAS Os 
..HATSYA 

__g 

SAT VANT ' 


rksna 

kar* 4 . 


‘ChenhuDaro! 

>Xeia Kahu-jo-Oaro 

^ 1 aMimmimLL 


»sh* ^ 
fcvtlri* 


• ' -. , 
































































N> j 

i 

’ N. 





Map i 



























































INDEX 


..pastanoi, 258 
Abbevillian, tools, 125, 128, 131 
'Abel ubQadir Budauni, 62 
Abhimanyu, 303 
1 Abhipratarii), 320 
Abhlras, 303 
Abhis&ra, 302 

Absolute, the, 379; see also Brahman 
Abu, Mount, 81 
Abu ' 1 -Fazl, 62 
‘V" Ethan-; see Alberuni 
iaians, 208 

heulian industries, 125, 127-9, 131 
am's Bridge, 97 
•hisimakrisluja, 269, 304, 321 
ihvaryu, 442, 5°3 
dial, 124 
//dicbanallur,75 
"Mditi, x86 
jidittanallur, 138 
fe dityas, 3 ^ 3 , 3^ 

Miegean lands, 158 . 

fghanistan, archaeological sites, 77 
j ' plateau, 191 
f ■" ffrica, 103, 128 
; Sama and nigama, 160 

• , odr? /sM 38 , 3x4 

ni, 363, 3/^ „ 4 
;iildh, 303 

^nCult^ure, in Bra^K rnanas> 459-60 
in Kig|vedic age, 39>_6 
. in Sutras, 523-4 

pjioto-A.ustraloids and, 151 
AhichchhJatra, 72, 325 
Ahirhsa,J 166 
Ahura, 4.21 

Ahura If/Iazdah, 222* 365 
\ihole Inscriptions, 54, 268 
iksWaka dynasty, 272; see also Ikshvaku 
kshv? aku(s), 318 

bu*dynasty, 272 ; see also Lupar Dynasty 
■tdra Mahabhisheka, 309 
i-i-Akbari, 62, 63 

ireya Brahmapa, 307, 309, 325, 425-8, 
431, 435-6; see also Brahruanas 
rar, P.T.S., 159, 162 


Alberuni, 61-2 

Alexander the Great, 57 * 59 , 9 * 

Ali Murad, 170, 195 
Alinas, 245, 247 
Allah bund, 39 

Alluvial plains, N, India, 81-3 
soils, 107 
Alor, 195 
Alpines, 142 
Alpinoidsb M 3 , *44 
Amaravati stupa, 75 
Amavasu, 273 
Ambala, 171 

Ambarisl.a Kabhagi, 288' . 

Ambashthas, 2 57 . 258, 279 , 3 ™ 

Amphioxus, 118 
Amreli, ' 4 
Amri, 195 

culture, 19 b A 92 
Am^umant, 287, 288 
Anamitra (father of Sim), 297 
Anamitra (Sumitra), 297 
Ananda (Brahma), 270 
Anantajjmr, 184 
Anantpi r, 1*30, 131 
Anarta, 276 

Anava(s», 274, 278-9, 284, 299-300, 307 
Eastern, 293 . . 

Ancient Monument Preservation Act (1933}, 

Andaman Islands, 142-3, 146 
Andamanese, 146-7 
Andhal a, 297 
Andhra 3), 101, 261, 262 
Anga(s), 256, 262, 279, 284, 293, 299, 3 ° 2 , 
327^-8 

Ahgada, 291 
Au & ~>nd Nilgas, 143 
Angara,. 

Ahgiras&s, 276, 287 
Angkor Thom, 77 
Angkor Vat, 77 
Anhilpur, 74 

Animal worship, in Indus Valley civiliza¬ 
tion, 183, 1.87-8. 

. A Ani.mfvb- 









INDEX 


jymns, 34B 
Arab historians, 61-2 
travellers, 60 
Arabia, 21.2 
Arabitai, 158 
Arachosia, 249 

Arakan Yoma, 91 _ 

Aranyakas, 235, 420-1, 44778. 

Aravalli, 182 
range, 97 

Arbitration, 435 i ^ ^ 

Archaeology, Central Department of, 67, 
70 

Archer, W. G., 152 
Arcot, 130 
Arisiihha, 51 
Arjiklya, river, 243 
Arjuna, 296, 299, 300 it. 

Axjuna Kartavfrya, 270^ 281-3 
Armenia, 205 
Armenoids, 142-3 

Arrian, 258 _ ,, 

Art, in Indus Valley civilization, 1 Hi it. 
Arthropods, 1x9 
Aruni, 5x3 
Aryabhata, 268 
Aryavarta, extent,,312 
Aryan invasion, date, 204 
occupation, stages, 31 x ff. 
speech-family, 145 
Aryans, and Dasa peoples, 156 - 7 ' 
indigenous origin theory, 215-17 
and Indus Valley civilization, i 93~4 
in Mesopotamia and Syria, 218 
original home, 202 ff. 

Asamafljas, 287 
AsandXvant, 251, 25.3 
Ascetics, 493-4 

Ashtaka, 285 

Asiatic Society of Bengal, 65 
Asiatic Society of London, Royal, 69 
Asikni, rber, see Chenab 
Asita, 284 

A6maka(s), 289, 312, 319, 3 28 
ASoka 52—3, 69, 102 
Asn "las, 447, 475 > 493~4 
Assan, 51, 73, 143 
earthquake, 87 
a egahthic monuments, 139 
Assamese language. 167 

ser blies, "Lr, ? ' 3 - 4 - ‘ ,Q * 4 °3 



Atmakur Dornala pass, 131 
Atman, 469-70, 495-? 

Atris, 276-7, 283 
Atthis, 158 
Attirampakam, 131 
Attock district, 132 
Australia, 143, 148 

Australoids, proto-, 5^ Proto-Australoids 
Austric speech-family, 145, 148-54 
Austro-Asiatic languages, 148 
Austronesian languages, 148 
Au stronesians, 1 4 3 
Avanti(s), 101, 283, 302, 3 2 4 “* 6 
Avantipur, 72 \ 

A vesta, 221-2, 333 , 366* 388 ; 

Avlkshit, 287 
Axes, Bronze Age, 137 
hand, 127-9 i 

Ayas, T36, 397 
Ayasya, 287 

Ayodhya, 273. 2 75 . 2 77 ~ 8 . 282-4, 286-7, 
288-9, 322 
Ayu, 273 


Babblers, 114 
Babur, 62, 105 
Babylon, 205 
Bactria, Greek rulers, 57 
Radarayana, 496 
Baghelkhand, 97 
Baghmatl, river, 91 
Bahadarpur, 128 

Bahawalpur, archaeological sites, 73 

Bahikas, 237-8 

Bahllka(s), 258, 259, 395 

Bahu,. 284, 286 

Bairat, 74 

Bajra, hi 

Balachandra, 51 ' 

Balanoglossus, 118 
Balarama, 298, 302 
bait, 355 , 433 
Bali, 284, 287-8 
Ballala, 49 

Baluchistan, 70, 76, 155, ?$6 
(West), earthquake, 8" 
plateau, 91, 94 
Bamboos, 109 
Bapabhatta, 49 
Banaganapali, 83 
Banerji, P. N., 260 ^ 

B^nerji, R. T>., 70 








miST/fy 



Chuda-karman, 521 
ChunSr, 97 
Chyavana, 453 

Cbyavana Panchajara, 307, 308 
Clactonian tools, 125, 126, 129 
Classes, social, in Indus Valley cr 
179 " .j 

Cleanliness, 518, 522 
Climate, 107 
effects, 104 
Clothing, see Dress 
Cobra, 117 
Coconut, 112, 148 
oil, 111 

Coelenterates, 120 
Coffee, 112 
Coimbatore Gap,- 96 
Coins, 56-8, 63, 67, 461, 524 J$w 
‘ Col&hg, 97 
Collins, Mark, 160, 164 
Colonies, Indian, 103-4 
Columella shell, 185 
Comill a, 73 

^Communion, in sacrifice, 501 JR 
‘ Comorin, Cape, 96 ||Jf 

Condiments, 1 1 2 

Conti,; Nicolo de', 63 Ap 

Coorg, 144 '§m\ 

Copper age, 136-8 ft 

Copper smith, Indian, 115 WM'i 
Corals, 120 

Cormorant, t.i 6 ' ife 

Coromandel coast, 88, 96 
Cosmetics, in Indus ValleJ^/ 

175-6 - EKX 

in Sutras, 521 ||p. J 

Cosmogonic myths, 1 ‘ff'rUi 

Cosmogony, Vedic, 379 rj- 

Cotton, 107, 1 12 j||p 5 j 

Counting system, 164 
Cow, cuit of, 163, 395 , 460, j 52 u| 5 § 

Cowries, 119 Bfes 

Cranes, 116 

Creation, 379-80, 444-5 
Crete, .158, 179, 197 
Crocodiles, 116 f: 

Crops, 1 r 0-12, 523 $ 

r ' Cirov 11 4 ft- 

Cru‘ ,ceails > 1 r 9 , f 

Cr^Uine^oils, 107 f 


. Ct es is, 59 

Cudlapab, 130, 131 
Ctpc, proto Australoid elenj 
Cult-words, Inclo-Iranian, S 
Cultivable land, area, no jj 
'ultivated plants, 110-12 | 
ultivation, proto-Australo 
llture elements, Dravidia 1 
Negrito, 147 | 

Droto-Australoid, 148-53 
■tures, language and rae 
lninghain, Gen. Alexari 
)-rnarks, 136 | 

?q6, 461, 524 I 


ap x 





















4 <> i. u 

. prl hymns, 34H 
Arab historians, 61-2 
travellers, 60 
Arabia, 212 
Arabitai, rs8 
Arachosia, 249 
Arakan Yoma, 91 
Aranyakas, 235, 420-T, 447-0 
Aravalii, 182 
range, 97 

Arbitration, 435 , ■ . r ^ 

Archaeology, Central Department of, by, 
70 

Archer, W. G., 15 2 

Arcot, 130 

Arisimha, 51 

Arjiklya, river, 243 

Arjuna, 296, 299, 3 Go 

Arjuna Kartavirya, 270* 281-3 

Armenia, 205 

Arinenoids, 142-3 

Arrian, 258 

Art, in Indus Valley civilization, 181 it 
Arthropods, 119 
A rani, 51.3 

Aryabhata, 268 
Aryavarta, extent, .312 
Aryan invasion, date, 204 
occupation, stages, 311 ff. 
speech-family, 145 
Aryans, and Dasa peoples, 156—7 , 
indigenous origin theory, 215-17 
and .Indus Valley civilization, I 93"~4 
in Mesopotamia and Syria, 218 
original home, 202. ff. 

Asaraafijas, 287 
Asand'ivant, 251, 253 
Ascetics, 493-4 
Ashtaka, 285 

Asiatic. Society of Bengal, 65 
Asiatic Society of London, Royal, 69 
Asik.nl, rh er, see Chenab 
Asita, 284 

A^maka(s), 289, 312, 319,:3*8- 
A§oka 52-3,69,102 
Asrs nas, 447, 475 ; 493~4 
Assart 51, 73 ; 443 
earthquake, 87 
n egalithic monuments, 139 
Assamese language, 167 

ser. blies, '"•’Dr, »v' 3 —4. '* " ,Q * 


Atmakur-Dornala pass, 131 
Atman, 469-70, 495-7 
Atris, 276-7, 283 
Atthis, 158 
Attirampakam, 131 
Attock district, 132 
Australia, H 3 » *4 8 
Australoids, proto-, see Proto-Australoids 
Austric speech-family, 145, M 8 ~54 
Austro-Asiatic languages, 148 
Austronesian languages, 148 
Austronesians, 143 
Ayanti(s), 101, 283, 302, 324-6 
Avantipur, 72 

Avesta, 221-2, 333, 3 ^x, 3 &PJ 3 88 
Avikshit, 287 
Axes, Bronze Age, 137 
hand, 127-9 
Ay as, 136, 397 
Ayasya, 287 

Ayodhya, 273, 275, 277-8, 282-4, 286-7 
288-9, 322 
Ayu, 273 


Babblers, 114 
Babur, 62, 105 
Babylon, 205 
Baciria, Greek rulers, 57 
Badarayana, 496 
Baghelkhand, 97 
Baghmatr, river, 91 
Bahadarpur, 128 

Bahawalpur, archaeological sites, 73 
Bahikas, 257-8 
Bahlika(s), 258, 259, 295 
Bah lx, 284, 286 ' 

Bairat, 74 
Bajra, in 
Balachandra, 5 1 
Balanoglossus, 118 
Balarania, 298, 302 
baity 355 ; 433 
Bali, 284, 287-8 
Ballala, 49 

Baluchistan, 70, 76, 155, 196 

(West), earthquake, 8 r 

plateau, gt, 94 
Bamboos, 109 
Banabhatta, 49 
Banaganapali, 83 
Batierji, V. N., 260 ' . 

_1: c> -n 





THE VEDIC AGE 


yana, 476, 513 
es, raised, 88 
# from Mohenjo-daro, 184 
. river, 86, 93, 242 
:h-argument, 212 
3, 119 
gram, 77 
diary, 130 

.enares, 97, 196, 278-9, 293, 327; see also 
Ka6i 

Bengal, 94, 100 
archaeology, 73 
Drayidian element, 155 
earthquakes, 87 
influence on Burma, 76 
p&laeological finds, 129 
Bengali language, 167 
Bernihalla, river, 129 
1 Benveniste, Prof., 207, 222, 223 
■ Rergaigne, 228 
Besnagar, 73 
Betwa, river, 94 
Rhadrasrenya, 278 
Bhagadatta, 302 
BMgadugha, 431 
Bhagavad-Gita, x6i 
Bhaglratha, 288 - 
BhagiratM, 94 
;» Bha jamana, 297 
I Bhakti, 118 
I Bhalandana, 276‘ 

Bhalanases, 245, 247 
Bhandarkar, 230 
Bhanrer range, 97 
Bharadvaja, 288, 292 
r Bharata (brother of Rama), 290-1 
' harata (son of Dushyanta), 292 
marataof Hastinapura, 270 
iharatas 245-7, 252, 262 
bharata var, 300 ff. 

date, 268-7° 

BharatavarJia, 105 
Bharat! San&ti, 105 
fiiargavas, 276 280 
harhut, 67 
'attiya, 328 
vnasi, 131 
s, 100 

xa., 296, 300 ft. 
ia Satvata, 291, 2?3 
aratha, 293 
noimd, 69 

' 3P2-3 


Bijapur, 74, 130 

Bikaner, archaeological sites, 73 

Biihaiia, 49 

Billa Surgam, 83-4 

Bimbisara, 323-5, 328 

Birds, 114-16 

Black cotton soil, 107 

Bloch, Dr., 68 

Bloch, Jules, 149 

Blonde hair, 210 

Bloomfield, 232-3, 235, 237, 256, 362 
Boa, 117 

Boats, in Rigveda, 396 
Bodh Gaya, 67 
Boghaz-koi, 204, 220, 222 
Boiari Pass, 92 

Bombay, palaeological finds, 129 
submerged forest; 88 
province, archaeological sites, 74 
Borivli, 129 
Bos primigenius, 84 
Botanical areas, 108 
Boulder Conglomerate, 123-4, 131 
Brachycephals, 143, 144 

Brahmacharin, 455, 493, 514 
Brahmadatta, 294, 322-3, 325, 327-8 
Brahmagiri, 75, 132-3, 135 
Brahman, 374, 440, 444, 469-70, 494-6 
Brahman (priest), 442 
Brahmanas (texts), 225, 234-5 
contents, 4x8-21 
language, 416-18 
religion in, 442-7 
social life in, 449 ff. 

Brahmanas (caste) and Aryan expansion 
S. India, 315 
in Brahmanas, 451-2 
in Dharmasutras, 483-4 
in Upaiiishads, 467 
in Sutras, 508 

Brahmana families, 276-7, 287-8, 293 
tradition, 305 ff. ^ 

Brahmaputra, river, 94 
ancestry, 85 
deflections, 89 
source, 92 
valley, 91 

Brahmarshi-desa, 215 

Brahml script, 53, 59, 66, 190, 392 

Brahui, 155, 193, 202 

Brandenstein, W., 206, 210-n 

Brandstetter. P , 14^ & 

BrV- 





INDEX 


SiyMa, 225, 229-31, 456 
guage, 403-4 
religion in, 441-2 
Sambhar, 74 
Samgrahltri, 431 

Sariihita, 216 ' 

Samhitas, see Vedas, Atharvaveda, Kigveda, 
Samaveda, Yajurveda 
Samiti, 354 - 5 * 4 2 9 * 4 s 3 
Samnyasin, 493 
Samrat, 353 
Saiivsara, 446 
Samudra-gupta, 53, 102 
Sariivarana, 294, 307-9 
Sanchi, 67, 68, 73 
inscriptions, 66 
Sandilya, 235 
Sannati, 293 

Sanskrit, 106, 142, 201-2 
of Sutras, 480-1 
of Upanishads, 478-80 
Vedic, 333 ft. 

Santals, 158 
Santanu, 295. 4 8 5 
Sapta-Sindhu, 216 
Saptasmdhavaft; 243-4 
Sarasvati, river, 73, 86, 242, 244, 251, 261 
Saraswati, 94 
Sarayu, river, 242 
Sarju, river, 242 
Sarsuti, river, 242 
Sarnatli, 59, 67, 68 
Sarpasatra, 320, 328-9 
Saryatas, 272, 274-6, 283 
6aryati4 272, 276 
Saiabindu, 275, 277-9 
Sassetti, Filippo, 201 
Sastri, Banerji, 250 
Satanika, 320-1, 326, 328-9 
Satapatha Baahmana, 309, 312, 426-30, 

432, 436, 469, 496; see also Brahmanas 
Satavabana period, 74, 75 
Satavahanas, 58 
Satem-eentum split, 207 
Sail, 390, 454 * 5 ™ 

Satpura mountains, 94 
Satrajit, 297 
Satrtigbna, 290-1 
Sattras, 502 
Satvants, 257, 262 
Satyakama jabala, 469, 513 
Satyaki, 302-3 
Satyavatl, 280, 285 
Satyavrata-Tri^anku, 286 
Sandyumnas, 273, 279 
Saudyumnt, see Yuvanasva II 
Sangor, 128 
Saunaka, 473-4 
Sauras, 260 
Sauvlras, 279 
Savaralu, 260 
Savaris, 260 
Savitri, 362-3, 367 
Scandinavia, 209 
Schleicher, 207 


<SL 


:tS6, i8o> 


Schmidt, W., 148, 152, 207 
Schools, Vedic, 456 
Schrader, 212 

Schroder, F. R., 209, 404-3 
Script, Indus Valley, 190-1 
Scythians, coins, 57 
Sea, see Ocean 
Sea, squirt, 118 

Seals, from Mohenjo-daro, 59, 

182-4 

Seaports, 103 
Segmented animals, 120 
Seleucus, 59 
Semasiology, 210-n 
Semitic languages, 2x1-12 
Senajit, 321, 323 
SenanI, 356-7* 43 * ~ 2 
Sesamum, 11.1 
Shadahradvana, 71 

Shahabad pass, 97 
Shahi Tump, 195 
Shama, 115 
Shams-i-Siraj *Afif, 62 
Shark, 11S 

Shell, use in Indus Valley culture, 185 
Shillong, 91 
Shubbiluliuma, 204 
Siam, 77 

6ibi(s), 254, 279, 302 
Sibipura, 254 
Siddhartha, 322 
Side-scraper, 125 
ligrus, 245, 247 
Aikhandin, 303 
Sikhs, 104 
Sikra, 116 
Sikkim, 143 
6iksha, 473-4 
Sil, river, 126 
6ilajit, 178 
Silk, 520 

Silver, use in Indus Valley culture, 184 
Simyus, 249 
Sind, 51, 61, 70, 94, too 
archaeological sites, 71 
and Indus Valley culture, 195 
Sindhu, river, 242-3 
Sindh u-Sauvira, 302 
Sindree, 89 
Singhbhum, 136 

Sino-Tibetan speech family, 145.' 1 6 7 
Slradhvaja, 291 
Sirkap, 69 
Sisunaga, 324 
Sisupala, 301 
Sita, 290-1 
Siva, 444 
cult of, 158, 163 
Dra.vidian elements, 161-3 
m IMus Valley culture, 187, 194, 197. 2 °3 
Nataraja, t8i 
Sivapura, 254 
Sivas, 245, 247, , 3°7 
Sivis, 307 


56T 


NN 






THE VEDIC AGE 


gjpati&z^ge, 84 
•Kills, 123 
river, 85-6 
Skarda, 93 
Sky Father, 158 
Slavery, 335* 39 8 
Smarta, 442 
Smith, 260 
Snails, 119 
Snake bird, 116 
Snakes, 117 
Sna.ta.ka, 516-17 
Snipe, 116 
Soan river, 86 
industries, 124-6, 128 
valley, 71, 81, 83 
Soil, varieties, 107 

Solar dynastv, 275-6, 277-8, 286-7, 300; 

see also Aikshva'ka, Ikshvaku 
Soma, 216, 221, 363. 374 ~ 5 > 393 > 45 8 

Somadatta-Sudasa, 293, 307 
Somadhi, 323 * 

Somaka, 294, 307 
Some§vara, 51 
Son, river, 94 
Spices, 112 
Spiranfcization, 333 
Sponges, 120 
Spoonbill, 116 
Spooner, Dr., 68 
Sraddha, 445 
6r&ddhakalpas, 475 
Srauta, 442 

Srauta-sutras, 225, 235-7, 474“7 
Sravasta, 275 
£ravasti, 68, 72, 275, 322 
Sri, Dravidian element, 161-2 
Sri-Parvata, 75 
Srlvara, 51 

Sri-Vijaya kingdom, 77 
Srifijaya(s), 246, 253, 307-8, 428 
Sritayu, 302 

State, in Dharmasutras, 483 
State papers, 64 
Statuary, Indus Valley, 180-1 
Steatiteiil82 

Stein, Sir Aurel, 68, 71, 73, 76, 195, 2 43 

Sthapati, 432, 488 

Stork, ii6 

Stri-acMra, 165 

Students, Vedic, life, 514-16 

Suari, 260 

Subahu, 291, 293 

Sucker fish, > 18 
Sudakshina, 3 02 
Sud&s,245, 289., 306, 352 
Sudas Paijavana; 307-8 
Sadasa, 289, 294, 307~9 
6uddhodana, 322 # 

Sudeva, 279 
Sudhanvan, 291, 295 
Sudras, 387, 450-1 
in Sutras, 507-8 
Sugar-cane; 1 x 1 


■ 497 f * 



Sugrlva, 291 
Suhma, 279, 284 
6uka, 51 

Sukpta-klrti-kallolinl, 51 
Sukrita-saihkirtana, 51 
Sulaiman, 60 
mountains, 90 
Sulva-sutras, 475 

Sumer, Indus Valley culture and, 179, i 8 3 > 
191, 196 

Sumerian language, 153 

Sumerians, and Indus Valley culture, 193 

&unafisepa, 285, 449, 4 8 5 * 506 

Sunda volcano chain, 88 

Sunderbans, no 

Sufiga pottery, 72 

Sur Jangal, 195 

Sura, 283 

Sura, 393* 457 » 520 
Surasena(s), 283, 302, 307, 319, 325 
Surashtra, 101 
Suratha, 295 
Surma valley, 91 
Surparaka, 2 83, 312 
Surya, 363, 367 
Susa, 177-8 
Su&mna, 302 
Susartu, river, 243 
Sushoma, river, 243 
Suta, 431 
Sutas, 267, 305 
Sutlej, river, 86, 93, 242 
Sutras, 225, 235-7, 472 I?. 
language of, 480-1 
religion in, 497 ff. 

Sutudrl, river, see Sutlej 
Suvarnagiri, 102 
Suvastu, river, 243 
Suvrata, 279 

Svastika, in Indus Valley culture, 183, 189 

Svetaketu (son of TJddalaka), 326 

Svetaketu Arurieya, 513 

£vetaSvatara Upanishad, 495 

Svetya, river, 243 

Swallow, 115 

Swat, river, 92, 144, 243 

Swift, 1 15 

Swords, Bronze Age, 137 
Sylhet, 89 
Syria, 205 


Tabaqat-i-N&sir!, 62 

Taboo, 150 
Tailor bird, 115 

Taittiriya-Brahmana, 231, 426, 429, 431 

Taittiriya Upanishad, 496, 513 

Takht-i-Babi, 71 

Takmau, 414, 459 

Taksha., 291 

Takshaka, 320 

Taksha£ila, 320; see also Taxila 
Talajahghas, 283 
Tamil, 143-4, 156, i 5 8 ft- 
script, 53 
Tamraparni, 138 


S62 





■ " " ..V"' 


INDEX 



T&$dya Brahmana, 428 
Tanjore, 130 
Tanning, 398 
Tapti, xiver, 83, 95, 98 
Tardenoisian industry, 132 
Ta'rlkk-i-Flrflz Shahi, 62 
Tata, Sir Ratan, 68 
Tawi, river, 124 
Taxation, 355, 433, 483, 486-7 
Taxila, 58, 67-9, 71, 102, 258 
Tea, 112 

Teachers, Vedic, 317 
Teliagarhi, 97, 100 
Tell Agrab, 192 
Tell Asmar, 182, 192 
Tell el-Amarna, 204 
Telugu, 144, 155, r59ff. 

script, 53 
Temperature, 107 
Temple, Vedic, 499-500 
Tcrai, Nepalese, 91 
Teshup, 158 
Tethys sea, 85 

Textiles, in Indus Valley culture, 181 
Thar desert, 94, 97, 99, 100 
Theft, 489 

Theoi Apopompaioi, 203 
Thomson, 108 
Thrushes, 114 
Tibet, 93, 167 
Tibetans, 167 

Tibeto-Chinese speech family, 145 
Tibeto-Mongoloids, 142-3 
Tiger, 113, 217 
Tilak, 369-70 
Timber types, 108-9 
Tinnevelly, 130 
coast, submerged land, 88 
Tirhut, 254 
Titikshu, 279, 284 
Toads, 117 
Tobacco, 112 
Tocharian, 207 
Tocharians, proto-, 218 
Tochl, river, 92 
Todd,129 

Toilet, in Sutras, 521 

Tools, in Indus Valley culture, 179 

Tortoises, 117 

Totemism, 148, 376 

Toys, in Indus Valley culture, 177, 182 
Trade, in Brahmanas, 461 
in ancient India, 103 
in Rigvedic age, 396-7 
^ in Sutras, 524 
Transmigration, .151, 495 
Transport, in Brahinanas, 463 
in Rigvedic age, 399 
in Sutras, 525 
Trap, 107 

Trasadasyu, 246, 426 
Trayyaruna, 286 
Tree snake, 117 
worship, 188 
Trees, 108-10 
Tribal organization, 356 


Tribes, in post-FUgvedic period, 252-62 
in l^igveda, 245-50 
Tribute, 355, 433 
Trichinopoly, 130 
Trigarta, 362 
Trikakud, 251 
Trikota, 251 
Tjinabindu, 392 


Tripolje pottery, 209 
TriSahku, 285-6 


Trita age, 311 
Tritsus, 245-7, 253, 306, 308 
Triveda, D, S., 215 
Tsan-po, river, 94 
Tungabiiadra, river, 83, 96 
Tunny, 118 

Tura Kavasheya, 307, 309 
Turkestan, Russian, 206 
Chinese, 76 
Turks, Ghaznavid, 61 
Turtles, 117 

Turvaia(s), 245-7, 252, 306-8 
Turvasu(s), 274, 306-7, 314 
Tvashfri, 363 
Typhlops, 117 


Uchali, 133 
Uchathya, .287 
Udayana, 321 
Udayaprabha, 51 
Udayin, 324 
Uddalaka Aiu^i, 470 
Udgatji, 442 
Ugrasena, 296 
Ugrasena Janaka, 321, 327 
Ugrayudha, 294-5 
Ujjain, 73, 325 
Ujjayinl, see Ujjain 
Ukraine, 211 

Uma, Dravidian element, 161-2 
United Provinces, 100 
archaeological sites, 72 
Unity of India, 98 
Universal monarch, 353 
TJntouchability, 452 

Upanayana, 221, 391, 455, 507-8, 514, 517 
Upanishads, 439, 446, 467 ft. 
language, 478-80 
philosophy of, 493 if. 

Upaplavya, 302 
Ur, 175, 179, 184, 192 
Ural-Altaic speech family, 155 
Urva^i, 345 
Ushas, 363, 368-8 
hymns to, 342 
Ushkar, 71 
U&ja Ahgiras, 287 
USinara(s), 248,-254-5, 262, 279 
Uttanapada, 271 
Uttara Pafichaia, 325 
Uttarakurus, 258, 262 
Uttaramadras, 258, 262 


563 


Vadamadurai, 131-2 
Vadhrya^va, 293, 306-7 
Vagadhas, 257 









■ "fit 


THE VEDIC AGE 


302 

VahvX-Datiya, river, 218 
Yaigai, river, 13° . 

Vairadeya, 434, 4 8 $, 49 ° 

Vai£alas, 272, 276 

Vai&ali, 68, 272, 284, 287, 291-2 

VaiSampayana, 310, 320, 327 

Vaiiyas, in Brahma^as, 450-1 

Vai&yas, in Sutras, 507-8 

Vajapeya, 443, 456 

Vajjis, 327 

Vajra, 303 / . 

Valakhilya recension ot Rigveda, 226 
Valakhilyas, 276 
Valin, 291 
Vallam, 130 
Valmiki, 293 
Varasavalls, 5 1 
Vanaprastha, 493 
Vanaras, 291, 31 3 > 3*5 
VaAga(s), roi, 256-7, 279* 284, 302, 312 
Varfihamihira, 268 
Varanasi, 72, 286, 324 
Varan us, ir 7 
Varnas, see Caste 
Varuna, 220-1, 363, 365-6 
hymns to, 343 

Varunapraghasa, 453 
Vasanta-vilasa, 51 
Va6as, 254, 262 
Vasishtha(s), 245 / 276-7, 285 

Vastupala-TejahpaJa-praSasti, 51 

Vasn, 296 

Vasn Chaidyoparichara, 310 

Yasudeva, 297 

Vasudeva, see Krishna 

Vatsa(s), 285-6, 290, 293, 302, 321, 436, 

Yatsabhiimi, 321 

Vatsapn, 276 

Vayu-Vata, 363, 372 

Vedahga, 472, 514 

Vedanta, 349, 420, 467 

Vedas, 221-2, 225 fit'. 

historicity, 304 fit. 

Vena, 271 
Verse-makers, 334 
Vichitravlrya, 295-6 
Vidarbka, 2 M, 284, 302, 314 
Videgha lVlathava, 3 * 2 
Videghas, 261 

Videha(s), 254-5, 262, 275-6, 291, 3 ° 2 , 
326-7 

VidiSa, 73, 284 
Vijayanagar, 63 
Vijayasena, 54 
Vi j not, 195 
Vikramaditya, 49 
Vikramanka-deva-charita, 49 

Vikukshi, 275 
Village, in Rigveda, 398 
in Sutras, 487 
Vinaiana, 251 
Vinda, 302, 326 

Vindhya mountains, 95 , 97 3*4 

Vipas, river, see Beas 
Vipers, x 17 


( 5L 


453 


312, 


Vital}, see Maim Svayambbuva 
Virampattanam, 75 
Virata, 30X, 303 
ViS, 356 
Visala, 276, 292 
Visala, 276, 292 
Vishnu, 363, a 6 ?- 8 * 444 
Dravidian elements, 161-2 
Vishanins, 245, 247 
Visvakarman, 362, 380 
ViSvamitra(s), 245. * 7 °, * 77 * 290, 344-5 ■ 
ViSvamitra (son of Gadhi), 285-6 
Vitahavyab(s), 253- 261 
Vitasta, river, see jhelum 
Vitatha, 288, 292 
Vltihotras, 283, 319, 326 
Vogel, Dr., 68 ‘ 

Volcanoes, 88 
Vratyas, 256 
Vfichlvants, 247 
Vriddha-Garga, 268 
Vrishadarbhas, 279 
Vrishtu(s), 297, 302 
Vptra, 370-1 
Vultures, 116 
Vyakarana-Vedanga, 477 
Vyasa, 303 

Wackemagel, 336 
Warblers, 114 

Warfare, methods of, 3 $ 5 ~&, 4®7 

Warsora, 127 

Water cock, 1x6 

Waters, the, and Varuiia, 366 

Weapons, 355 

in Indus Valley culture, 178 
Weaver bird, 115 

Weber, A., I 5 *» 2 44 » 251, 2 53 ~ 5 > 259, 

261, 369 

‘Weights, in Brahmanas, 461 
in Indus Valley culture, 177 
Wells, in IJigvedic age, 399 
Wergeld, 434 > 4 88 * 49 ° 

Western Brachycepkals, 143 
Western Satraps, 57 
Whale, 114 
Wheat, 107, iti, 460 
Whitney, 244, #36 
Winternitx, 235, 439 
Women, in Brahmanas, 420, 435 , 452-4 
in Rigveda, 388-91 
in Sutras, 310 ff . 

Woodpecker , X15 
Worms, 120 

Writing, in Vedic age, 392, 455 


Xerxes, 220 

Yadava(s), 274. 277 ~ 8 . 284-6, 293- 296-7 
297-9, 302-3. 307. 315 
Yadu(s), 245. 247 . 252. 274, 290, 306, 3 I 5 
Yajfiavalkya, 326, 513 
Yajfiavalkya Vfijasaneya, 234-5 

*64 











INDEX 


<SL 


fajtirveda, 225, 231-2 
contents, 416 
language, 404-5 
religion in, 441-2 
Yakshus, 245, 247 

Yale-Cambridge Expedition, 123, 128 
Yama, 222, 363, 381 
Yamuna, river, 242 

Yaska, 227, 243, 259, 308, 340 ft., 477-8 

YaSovarman, 49 

YaSts,, 223 

Yaudheyas, 58, 279 

Yavauag, 314 


Yay&ti, 270, 274, 306 
Yerra-konda-Palem, 131 
Yoga, 158, 160 

Yoni, in Indus Valley culture, 187 
Yudhishthira, 269, 296, 300 ft, 
Yuvanasva II, 275, 279, 306 
YuyudhSna, 302 

Zain ul-Abidin, 51 

Zarathustra, 220-3, 361 

Zimmer, II., 242-4, 246-9, 255, 258-9 

Ziya-ucl din BaranI, 62 

Zoomorphic gods, 163-4 


1 'H ' Att 

„ v > 


& 

*> 

m 

/ **r , 


Yv 

Vi 


AS 




565 












9 l 

17 Central 
5 Graham 


Strek’I 

Ave.> P.O. Dharam*la 
Road, Ballard Estate 



Wellington, N.Z. : 8 Kings Crescent, Lower Hurr 


